VOLUME FIRST— PART FIRST.

EDINBURGH :

WILLIAM TAIT, PRINCE'S STREET; AND

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMAN, LONDON.

M.DCCC.XXXIIL

PRINTED AT THE BAVKATTXE CLUB PEE55 BY BALLANTTSE ASD CO.

CRIMINAL TRIALS

IN SCOTLAND,

FROM A.D. M.CCCC.LXX XVIII TO A.D. M.DC.XXIV,
EMBRACING THE ENTIRE

REIGNS OF JAMES IV. AXD V., MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS,

AND JAMES VI.

COMPILED FROM THE ORIGINAL RECORDS AND MSS.

WITH

HISTORICAL NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS,

BY

ROBERT PITCAIRN, ESQ.

WRITER TO HIS majesty's SIGNET, P.S.A. SCOT. .^VD HO.V. F.S.A. PERTH, &C.

\OLUME FIRST—PART SECOND.

EDINBURGH :

WILLIAM TAIT, PRINCE'S STREET ; AND

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMAN, LONDON.

M.DCCC.XXXIII.

PRINTED AT THE B.\UNAT\'NE CLIB PRESS BY BALLANTYNE AND CO.

TO

THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD JUSTICE-CLERK,

AND TO

THE HON. THE LORDS COMMISSIONERS

OF

THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY,

THIS FIRST VOLUME

OF

A COLLECTION

OF THE EARLIEST RECORDED PROCEEDINGS BEFORE

THE

SUPREME CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL OF SCOTLAND;

COMPILED

BY THEIR lordships' PERMISSION, AND UNDER THEIR SANCTION,
IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,

BV

THEIR lordships' OBLIGED AND FAITHFUL SERVANT,

THE EDITOR.

PREFACE.

The Editor has at length the satisfaction of having brought the
present Collection of the earliest Criminal Proceedings in Scotland,
of which authentic memorials are now preserved, to a conclusion.
This task has occupied several years of laborious exertion, which, it
must be admitted, has been severer than might at first have been
anticipated ; but, when the difficulties he had to grapple with, and
the repulsive materials from which these volumes have been compiled,
are candidly considered, it will readily be allowed that the undertaking required no ordinary exertion of application and perseverance.

It has all along been the Editor's anxious study to furnish the
PubUc with a copious selection from these ancient Records, (the earliest, perhaps, as well as the most remarkable, in this department, of
which any country in Europe can now boast,) in a scrupulously faithful and accurate manner, without using even the slightest hberty with
the phraseology or structvire of the original text. His editorial labours, therefore, have been confined chiefly to the selection of the
most remarkable Cases, and the addition of svich collateral historical

VOL. I. a

vi PREFACE.

and antiquarian illustrations as the nature of the subject seeAied to
demand, or his more important professional exertions, which, during
the whole of this ])eriod, also happen to have been of a severe and
laborious description, allowed him to make.

The present work was first suggested by the late lamented Sir
Walter Scott, whose attachment to the early history, literature,
and anticpiities of his native country are so universally known
and appreciated, that his name may now be said to be indissolubly
identified with them. The idea and plan of such a work as the
present had, many years ago, occurred to that truly great man ;
and, at one period, he had himself contemplated the j^ublication of
the most remarkable of the ancient Criminal Cases of Scotland,
combining the facts of each with all the correlative circumstances,
worked up into a popular and narrative form. From this undertaking, however, he was diverted by his numerous avocations and
literary engagements, but chiefly from the consideration that many
years must necessarily have been consumed in acquiring all the
requisite stock of materials and information, before he could commence the composition of such a work. Both previous to, and
shortly after the institution of his favourite literary Association, the
Bannatyne Club, he encouraged the Editor to attempt the publication of the present Collection ; but, being diffident of his adequacy
to so important and extensive an undertaking as had at first been
contemplated by Sir Walter Scott, it was proposed by the Editor
that he should, in the first place, carefully investigate the Kecords
and MSS. belonging to the Court, and make pretty extensive Selections from the earlier portion of the reign of King James VI., in the

PREFACE. vii

manner that appeared to liim likely to be the most accurate, and, at
the same time, the most practically useful.

These Selections were accordingly made and subjected to the critical examination of Sir Walter Scott and of Thomas Thomson, Esq.,
Deputy Clerk Kegister of Scotland, now his successor as President of
the Bannatyne Club, together Avith the outlines of the plan which
seemed to be best calculated to make the proposed Collection as
useful as possible, as a work of reference. With a few modifications?
these learned individuals concurred in advising the publication of the
work, in the form in which it is now found. The patronage of the
Lord Justice-Clerk and the Lords Commissioners of the High
Court of Justiciary, the Lord Preside>t of the Court of Session,
THE Lord Chief Commissioner of the Jury Court, Baron Hume,
and many other eminent individuals, whose names rank highest in the
profession of the Law, as well as in the literature of this country, was
liberally and readily granted in furtherance of the work.

The Bannatyne and Maitland Clubs, also, and many other literary and Antiquarian friends, having subscribed to the projected publication, the Editor felt that he could not, in gratitude, any longer
decline undertaking the remaining risk and responsibility, great
though they, from the outset, appeared to him to be. It was clear to
all, however, that no adequate compensation could reasonably be expected for the expenditure of time and labour, and the large pecuniary
advances which must necessarily be involved in the undertaking of so
very extensive an engagement, unless many of the members of the
principal Legal Bodies should come forward in support of the Editor,

viii PREFACE.

after the publication of the preHminary Parts of his projected work.
This hope, unfortunately, has not hitherto been realized.

These explanations appear to the Editor to be in some measure
called for, in consequence of his having been frequently and freely
censured by many of his friends, as if he had rashly and unadvisedly
incurred so very heavy a responsibility, and as if he had wilfully sacrificed so many years to intense application on pursuits so little likely
to yield a corresponding return for the labour and expense bestowed.
Without farther intruding on the reader's patience these personal
concerns, he trusts he has shown satisfactorily, that he had the best
grounds for expecting a more favourable resvdt. In the face of at
least the extreme probability of suffering considerable pecuniary loss,
after the time when the first two or three Parts were published, he
is conscious that he has in no wise shrunk from the fulfilment of any
part of the obligations under which he conceived and felt himself to lie
towards those who so liberally and disinterestedly came forward to support the present work, but has steadfastly brought it to a termination,
under circumstances of considerable difficulty and discouragement.

It belongs to his subscribers and to the public to judge in what
manner he has succeeded in redeeming his pledge, in faithfully laying before them these remarkable relics ; and whatever disappointment he may unintentionally have occasioned, in the discharge of
his difficult task as an impartial Editor, it will, he trusts, be imputed to no lack of zeal or industry on his part. In the course of any
voluminous work of a historical or anti(piarian cast, and especially
one of the nature of the present, which embraces so wide and vaPREFACE. ix

ried a range, it must naturally be expected that an Editor, notwithstanding the exercise of the utmost care and vigilance, must, in many
instances, fall short in affording satisfactory elucidations of obscure
historical events, local or provincial occurrences, and other incidents
of a minute description, of long forgotten superstitions, and similar
vestiges of former ages. The reader's indulgence is requested in
all such instances. Even those whose previous studies and habits
have not rendered the difficulty of conducting investigations of this
description quite familiar, will, on reflection, perceive, that much
patient industry must be exercised in ascertaining and settling even
one solitary fact, or a single obscure or controverted point.

The grave nature of a work conducted on the plan of the present,
it may be farther noticed, entirely precluded the possibility of reducing any portion of it into a " popular " form, so as in any manner to
compete, in point of interest, with works of fiction, or the lighter and
more fascinating literature of the day. Such a work may indeed still
be considered as a desideratum ; but, in the Editor's humble opinion,
it wovdd require to be executed by a master-mind, such as his who
suggested this publication. The merit of a Collection on the present
plan appears to be, that the reader should be presented with all the
facts, circumstances, and details, in the graphic and masculine language of the times when they actually occurred. All the requisite
materials are thus afforded for arriving at a sound opinion as to the
real complexion and merits of the case — and it only remains farther
for an Editor to put the reader in possession of such contemporaneous
documents and State Papers, &c., from authentic sources, as may
tend to throw additional light on the original, though frequently

X PREFACE.

obscure and quaint, Record. Prefatory notices to the various remarkable Trials, and copious explanatory foot-notes, were likewise found
to be necessary to aid the modern reader towards the better understanding of these Records ; which, being expressed in the vernacular
and now almost forgotten Scottish of centuries long gone by, evidently appeared to stand in need of occasional glosses.

It is, perhaps, hardly to be expected that the circulation of a work
so quaint and antiquated as the present should be general or widely
extended. The language alone is apt to deter many from patiently
gleaning views of the state of society and manners of these periods,
which are very imperfectly known or understood ; indeed to many
they are only familiar through the medium of works of fiction and
romance. But to the lawyer, the historian, the antiquary, and the
genealogist, especially, this compilation will be found to be of considerable practical utility, as it abounds with ample materials for the
prosecution of their favourite studies ; while, at the same time, the
more general reader will at every turn meet with varied portraitures
of national manners, customs, and the superstitions of l)ygone ages,
which might in vain be searched for elsewhere.

The reader will find in the Appendices to the several reigns, and
also scattered over the Avhole Collection, valuable Selections from the
various Public Records, and especially from those of the Privy
Council, Great Seal, Privy Seal, Lord High Treasurer's Accounts,
&c., in which are contained very important historical materials. The
Editor has also deemed it pro})cr to present a considerable body of
State Papers, Original Letters, and similar illustrative documents,

PREFACE. xi

procured from various sources, which, as will be observed, have uniformly been specified.

It would be as presumptuous, as it seems uncalled for, to attempt
an historical account of the origin and progress of the Criminal Tribunals of Scotland. These have already been so fully and satisfactorily treated of by Baron Hume and by the other Institutional writers,
that any attempt to offer new or additional remarks were equally vain
and fruitless.

On the suggestion of several friends, the binder has been directed
to preserve the annexed Notices, which were originally prefixed to
the various Parts of this work, for the purpose of exhibiting the
order and manner of publication, as well as to account for the
anomaly of postponing the printing of those Criminal proceedings
which occurred during the earlier reigns of King James IV. and V.,
and Mary Queen of Scots, till the conclusion of the series.

To render consultation of the work as easy as possible by readers
of every class, a very copious General Index has been constructed
with great care and labour, and at a considerable additional expense.

General Register House,
25^A 3Iarch, 1833.

PROSPECTUS

OF

A COLLECTION OF ANCIENT CRIMINAL TRIALS,

SELECTED FKOM THE BOOKS OI' ADJOURNAL OF THE IIIGII COURT OF JUSTICIARY OF SCOTLAND,

AND OTHER ORIGINAL RECORDS ;

BY

ROBERT PITCAIRN,

WRITER TO HIS MAJESTy's SIGNET, F.S.A. SCOT., AND HON. F.S.A. TERTH, &C.

The importance of the Records of the High Court of Justiciary in Scotland has
hitherto been very little known, excepting to the comparatively few, who have made the
investigation of the Legal Antiquities of Scotland a peculiar study. The difficulty experienced in deciphering these Ancient Registers, (which are scattered over a voluminous
collection of Court Books, &c., and are nearly unintelligible to a great proportion even of
those educated to the profession of the Law,) and the great labour and time to be expended
in examining and selecting such portions as may be useful in practice to the Lawyer, or
interesting to the lovers of History, Genealogy, and Antiquities, &c. as well as for the
more popular purpose of general information and entertainment; have hitherto prevented any attempt at a regularly Chronological Series of our Ancient Criminal Trials and
procedure.

The only portion of these valuable Records known to the public, has been imperfectly exhibited, in Collections of Abridged Cases, by Mr Arnot, and Mr Maclaurin; and
from occasional notices contained in our Institutional Writers. Mr Arnot's Abridgement
of a few remarkable Cases, was professedly prepared by him to illustrate some of the
more prominent features in the history, manners, customs, and superstitions of the people of Scotland ; and not to exhibit an accurate or satisfactory digest of those interesting
and important remains, as they are to be found in the Records. However entertaining
and instructive Arnot's Compilation may be, in other respects, it gives only a partial, and,
in many instances, far from a faithful transcript, even of the Trials of which he has presented a brief outline ; and it may be safely said, that all have received a high colouring
from his peculiar notions, both in politics and religion. Mr Maclaurin's Arguments and
Decisions, on the other hand, were collected, with a view ' to the advancement of jurisprudence, and (to) be useful also to many gentlemen not bred to the law, who are
called upon, by the constitution, to serve as jurymen.' Owing to the nature of his plan.

VI

lie has noticed only fifteen cases which had occurred before the commencement of the
eighteenth century.

The present Editor has been induced to undertake a Collection upon a more regular
plan, and on a more extended scale, than have hitherto been attempted ; and in this he
is encouraged by the liberal sanction and countenance of the Right Honourable the Lord
Justice Clerk and of the Lords CoiM.MissioxERS of the High Court of Justiciary,
who have granted free access to all Books and Papers of the Court which it may be necessary to consult. He has also been honoured by the countenance of the Right Honourable the Lord President of the Court of Session, Baron Hume, the Keeper and Commissioners of the Society of Writers to his Majesty's Signet ; and likewise of Sir Walter
Scott, Baronetj the President, and Thomas Thomson, Esquire, Deputy-Clerk Register of
Scotland, Vice-President of The Bannatyne Club ^who, indeed, originally suggested
the idea and plan of this work) ; by the support of the Members of that Club, of the
Members of The Maitland Club, recently formed in Glasgow for similar purposes, as
well as of many whose names rank high in the profession of the Law, and in the literature of the country.

The earliest portion of the Ancient Criminal Records of Scotland now extant,
commences so far back as 7th Nov. 1493, in tlie sixth year of the reign of King James
IV.; and although at that remote period, and during the subsequent reigns of King
James V. and Queen Mary, the memorials to be obtained are unfortunately brief, yet
notices do frequently occur, both highly characteristic of the state of society, and illustrative of the history, jurisprudence, literature, institutions, language, manners, customs,
and superstitions of those periods.

In the meantime, it has been arranged, that the Part to be first published, shall consist
of a portion of the many interesting and important proceedings and Trials which occurred
during the reign of King James VL ; and, after that Volume is concluded, Selections
from the earlier portion of the Record will next be printed. By adopting this order of
l)ublication, an opportunity will be afforded, for more minutely investigating and illustrating the most ancient volumes of the Record; and, if the Collection be favourably received, and other circumstances permit, it is in contemplation to extend it to the commencement of the last Reign. Copious Indices, Tables of the Justiciars of Scotland, a
Glossary of obscure Law terms, and an Appendix containing illustrations, selected from
the Records of Privy Council, the Privy Seal, and the Treasurer's Books of Scotland,
and from other original documents, will accompany or be interspersed with the Collection.

It 18 proposed, that this work shall be published in Parts, consisting of not less than
the third part of a Volume each, as speedily as may be consistent with strict accuracy,
and with the Editor's professional engagements. The impression, which is to be limited,
will be executed by Messrs Ballantyne & Company, in their best manner, from a new
fount of types, upon paper manufactured expressly for the use of this work, by Messrs
Dickinson & Company of London.

The First Part will be ready for delivery to Subscribers, early in the month of May
next. Such progress has been made by the Editor in arranging the materials collected
by him during a period of several years, that the remaining Parts will be published at
regular intervals, until the Collection is completed.

The price of each Part, which shall contain two hundred pages of letter-press, not to
exceed Fifteen shillings to Subscribers.

Subscriptions will be received by the Publishers, William Tait, 78, Prince's Street,
and John Stevenson, 87, Prince's Street, to either of whom, or any of the Booksellers
in Edinburgh, London, and Dublin, and in the principal towns throughout the United
Kingdom, the names of Subscribers are requested to be forwarded, as early as convenient, so as to regulate the extent of the impression.

General Register House,
3lst March. 1829.

VUI

NAMES OF SUBSCRIBEES

ALRKADY FOinVAKDED TO THE PUBLISHERS.

The Right Hon. Charles Hope, Lord President of the College of Justice.

The Right Hon. David Boyle, Lord Justice Clerk,

The Hon. David MoNVPENNy, Lord Pitmilly, one of the Senators of the College of Justice, &c.

The Hon. David Hume, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, &c.
• His Grace the Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry.

The Right Hon. Lord Montague.

The Bannatyne Club, (One Hundred Copies.)

The Maitland Club, (Fifty Copies.)

(Subscribed from the general Funds of these Clubs.)

Library of the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh.

Library of the Society of Writers to his Majesty's Signet.

Library of the Society of Solicitors in Supreme Courts.
. Library of the Faculty of Procurators, Glasgow.

Library of the Society of Procurators, Paisley.

MEMBERS OF THE BANNATYNE CLUB, IN APRIL, 1829.

Sir Walter Scott of Abbotsford, Bart. President.

Tlie Earl of Aberdeen. William Bell, Esquire.
Right Hon. William Adam, Lord Chief Cora- John Borthwick, Esquire.

missioner of the Jury Court. William Blair, Esquire.

Sir William Arbuthnot, Baronet. Rev. Philip Bliss, D. C. L.

James Ballantyne, Esquire. George Brodie, Esquire.

Sir William MacLeod Bannatyne. The Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry.

Lord Belhaven and Stenton. John Caley, Esquire.

George Joseph Bell, Esquire. James Campbell, Esquire.

Robert Bell, Esquire. Hon. John Clerk, Lord Eldiri.

IS

William Clerk, Esquire.

Henry Cockburn, Esquire.

David Constable, Esquire.

Andrew Coventry, Esquire.

James T. Gibson Craig, Esquu-e.

'\^'iIliam Gibson Craig, Esquire.

Hon. George Cranstoun, Lord Corehouse.

The Earl of Dalhousie.

James Dennistoun, Esquire.

Robert Dundas, Esquire.

Right Hon. William Dundas, M.P. Lord Clerk

Register of Scotland.
Henry Ellis, Esquire.
Charles Fergusson, Esquire.
Robert Ferguson, Esquire.
Lieut.-General Sir Ronald C. Ferguson.
The Count de Flahault.
Hon. John Fullorton, Lord Fullerton.
Lord Glenorchy.
The Duke of Gordon.
William Gott, Esquire.
Sir James R. G. Graham, Baronet.
Robert Graham, Esquire.
Lord Gray.

Right Hon. Thomas Grenville.
The Earl of Haddington.
The Duke of Hamilton and Brandon.
E. W. A. Drumniond Hay, Esquire.
James M. Hog, Esquire.
John Hope, Esq. Solicitor-General.
C'osmo Innes, Esquire.
David Irving, LL.D.
James Ivory, Esquire.
Rev. John Jamieson, D.D.
Robert Jameson, Esquire.
Sir Henry Jardine, Knight.

Francis Jeffrey, Esquire.

James Keay, Esquire.

John G. Kinnear, Esquire.

Thomas Kinnear, Esquire, [Treasurer.]

The Earl of Kinnoul.

David Laing, Esquire, [Secretary.]

The Earl of Lauderdale.

Rev. John Lee, D.D.

The Marquis of Lothian.

Colin MacKenzie, Esquire.

Hon. J. H, MacKenzie, Lord MacKenzie.

James MacKenzie, Esquire.

James Maidmeut, Esquire.

Thomas Maitland, Esquire.

Gilbert Laing Meason, Esquire.

The Viscount Melville.

William Henry Miller, Esquire.

The Earl of Minto.

Sir James W. Moncreiff, Baronet.

John Archibald Murray, Esquire.

William Murray, Esquire.

James Nairne, Esquire.

Macvey Napier, Esquire.

Francis Palgrave, Esquire.

Henry Petrie, Esquire.

Robert Pitcairn, Esquire.

John Richardson, Esquire.

The Earl of Rosslyn.

Andrew Rutherfurd, Esquire.

The Earl of Selkirk.

Right Hon. Sir Samuel Shepherd, Lord Chief

Baron of Scotland.
Andrew Skene, Esquire.
James Skene, Esquire.
George Smythe, Esquire.
The Earl Spencer, K.G.

John Spottiswoode, Esquire.

The Marquis of StafiFord.

Major-General Straton.

Sir John Arcliibald Stewart, Baronet.

Hon. Charles Francis Stuart.

Alexander Thomson, Esquire.

Thomas Thomson, Esquire, [Vice-President.]

W. C. Trevelyan, Esquire.

Patrick Eraser Tytler, Esquire.

Adam Urquhart, Esquire.

Right Hon. Sir George Warrender, Bart.

The A^enerable Archdeacon A\'rangham.

MEMBERS OF THE MAITLAND CLUB, IN APRIL, 1829.
The Right Honourable The Earl of Glasgow, President.

Robert Adam, Esquire.
Robert Aird, Esquire.
John Bain, Esquire.
Joseph Bain, Esquire.
Robert Bell, Esquire.
John Carrick, Esquire.
Henry Cockburn, Esquire.
James Dennistoun, younger. Esquire.
.John Dillon, Esquire, Glasgow, [Vice-President.]
James Dobie, Esquire, Beith.
Richard Duncan, Esquire.
John Eadie, Esquire, [Treasurer.]
James Ewing, Esquire.
Kirkman Finlay, Esquire.
John FuUarton, Esquire.
James Hill, Esquire.
Laurence Hill, Esquire.
John Kerr, Esqiiire, [Vice-President.]
R. A. Kidston, Esquire.
G. R. Kinlocb, Esquire.
David Laing, Esquire.
.John Gibson Lockhart, Esquire.
James Maidment, Esquire.
J. H. Maxwell, Esquire.

David Meikleham, Esquire.

William Meikleham, Esquire.

W. H. Miller, Esquire.

William Motherwell, Esquire.

Alexander MacDonald, Esquire.

William Macdowal, Esquire.

Andrew MacGeorge, Esquire.

Donald Macintyre, Esquire.

Alexander MacNiell, Esquire.

Robert Pitcairn, Esquire.

J. C. Porterfield, Esquire.

Edward Piper, Esquire.

Hamilton Pyper, Esquii-e.

P. A. Ramsay, Esquire.

William Robertson, Esquire.

Sir Walter Scott of Abbotsford, Baronet.

.James Smith, Esquire.

•John Smith, Esquire.

John Smith. Esquire, Youngest.

William Smith, Esquire.

George Smythe, Esquire.

John Strang, Esquire.

Sir Patrick Walker, Knight.

William Wilson, Esquire.

John Wylie, Esquire, [Secretary ]

XI

John Anderson, Esquire, F.S A. Scot., Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

James Anderson, Esquire, Solicitor at Law.

Charles Baxter, Esquire, Writer, Edinburgh.

Patrick Boyle, Esquire, Principal Clerk of the Court of Justiciary.

John Trotter Brockett, Esquire, F.S. A. Lond. and Newcastle.

Robert Brown, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

James Burn, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Writer to Iiis Majesty's Signet.

Charles Cowan, Esquire, Valleyfield, Pennycuik.

John Craig, Esquire, of Ballewn, Honourable East India Company's Service.

WiUiara Dallas, Esquire, Maitland Street.

James Davidson, Esquire, Keeper of the Records of the Court of Session.

James Doualdson, Esquire, of Broughton-Hall.

John Douglas, Esquire, Writer, Glasgow.

Henry Home Drummond of Blair-Drummond, Esquire, M.P.

William Pitt Dundas, Esquire, Advocate.

John Elder, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

Daniel Fisher, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Solicitor of Supreme Courts, Edinburgh.

John Eraser, Esquire, Advocate, Sheriff-Substitute and Commissary-Depute of Stirlingshire.

James John Eraser, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

John Gordon of Cluny, Esquire, M.P.

James Graham of Leitchtown, Esquire, 26, Pitt Street.

Humphrey Graham, Esquire, ^^'riter to his Majesty's Signet.

John Hamilton Gray, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Advocate.

Donald Gregory, Esquire, Assistant Secretary to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland.

Sir William Hamilton of Preston, Baronet, Professor of Universal History in the University

of Edinburgli.
Robert Handy side, Esquire, Advocate.
Alexander Henderson, Esquire, Edinburgh.

James Hill, Esquire, W.S. Keeper of the Register of Sasines, Glasgow.
James Hopkirk, Esquire, Advocate.

John Glassford Hopkirk, Esquire, LL.B. Writer to his .Majesty's Signet, Edinburgh.
Robert Jamieson, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot , General Register House, Edinburgh.
Robert Jameson, Erquire, Sheriff and Commissary-Clerk of Clackmannanshire.

Xll

James Keith, Esquire, M.D. Edinburgh.

John Lennox Kincaid, Esquire, younger of Kincaid.

Edward Lothian, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Advocate, Edinburgh.

William H. Lizars, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Edinburgh.

James MacAUan, Esquire, Writer to His Majesty's Signet.

John Mackean, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet, and Accountant.

Duncan MacNeill, Esquire, Advocate, Sheriff-Depute of Perthshire.

Charles MacDowall, Esquire, Advocate.

Mr Andrew Milligan, General Register House, Edinburgh.

Thomas M. MoiFat, Esquire, Solicitor at Law.

John Shank More, Esquii-e, F.S.A. Scot., Advocate, Edinburgh.

William Morehead of Herbertsliire, Esquire.

James Morrison, Esquire, Banker, Stirling.

William Patrick, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

Messrs Phin and Pitcairn, Writers to his Majesty's Signet.

Alexander Pitcairn, Esquire, F.S.A. Perth, General Register House, Edinburgh.

John Pitcairn of Pitcairns, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot.

Arthur Pollok, Esquire, Merchant, Glasgow.

George Woolley Poole, Esquire, Solicitor, London.

Alexander Pringle of Wliitebank, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Advocate, Edinburgh.

John Anderton Robertson, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

Patrick Robertson, Esquire, Advocate, Edinburgh.

John Sawers, Esquire, Writer, Stirling. .

Charles Kirkpatrick Siiarpe, Esquire, Edinburgh.

Thomas Sharpe, Esquire, Coventry.

John Smythe, Esquire, Advocate, Edinburgh.

William Stewart, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

•Fames Swan, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot., Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

David Thomson, Esquire, Clerk to his Majesty's Signet.

Mr Abram Thomson, Edinburgh.

Hugh Tod, Esquire, Writer to his Majesty's Signet.

Thomas Trotter, Junior, Esquire, W.S. Edinburgh.

William Trotter of Ballendean, Esquire, F.S.A. Scot.

Henry Wight, Esquire, Advocate, Edinburgh.

Richard Woolley, Esquire, Wester Dairy House, Edinburgh.

In presenting to the Public the Fikst Part of the ensuing Collection of
Criminal Trials, the Editor begs leave to acknowledge, with gratitude, the distinguished encouragement with which he has been honoured, from the first
outset of the work, and without which he could not have persevered in so laborious a task, with any degree of satisfaction or confidence.

The compilation of this work was projected for the pm-pose of giving piiblicity to the most important portions of the Ancient Records of the Supreme Criminal Tribunal of Scotland, and of jilacing beyond the risk of destruction, the
most interesting of the Causes Celehres of that Court ; materials of great value
alike to the historian and the lawyer, and possessing no ordinary attractions for
almost every class of readers. It therefore becomes necessary that all such Selections be exhibited with scrupulous accuracy and fidelity, which alone can
stamp authenticity and value on any publication of this description.

To account for the apparent meagreness of the Part now published, it may
be stated, that many of the public Records of Scotland during the minority of
King James VI. are imperfect, and have perhaps been wilfully destroyed ; for,
besides the disturbed state of the country, and other obvious causes, which might
satisfactorily account for the loss of volumes of Registers, there is but too good
reason to conjecture, that portions of the National Records were, in some instances, liurjjosely suppressed by one or other of the prevailing factions. This
circumstance has induced the Editor to be more copious in his extracts than he
would otherwise have been; as every gleaning may elucidate some historical
point, or illustrate some features of national character, customs and manners,
hithei'to but imperfectly known.

IV

At this period, the original ' Books of Adjournal,' properly so called, must
have been carelessly kept ; and the Clerk has recorded the proceedings of the
Court in a very brief and unsatisfactory manner. In many instances, the
' Minute Books' alone have been preserved, from which the projier Record of
the Court was usually framed, aided by the ' Dittays,' evidence of witnesses,
and other productions. To the Editor it therefore seemed imperative to preserve all notices of any importance, even though they should be brief. The subsequent portions of the Record are much more perfect, and they greatly increase
in interest as it advances.

'With regard to the antiquity of the language, which must at first sight
prove somewhat embarrassing, it may be remarked, that after the accession of
King James VI. to the English Crown, it gradually assimilates itself to the dialect then used in England. In no case has the ancient orthography been altered,
with the exception of the contractions, the retaining of which would have been
useless, as well as extremely perplexing to a general reader.

The earliest existing Record of Justiciaiy, during the minority of King James
VI., is preceded by this curious memorandum ; ' Nota. Fra the liinderend of
Auguft, 1568, to the fecund day of Marche, in the famin yeir, na Dyettis of Jufticiarie haldin, be relToun of the pell and Regentis being in Inglande.'

General Register House,
\st May, 1829.

The Editor has been enabled to offer to the Public, the Second Part of
the Criminal Trials, which, occurred before the High Court of Justiciary, during
the Reign of King James VI., sooner than he had anticipated ; and it is hoped,
that this Livraison will prove greatly superior, in intez-est, to the Part already
published, which embraces merely the earlier and more defective portion of the
Records, in that King's minority.

After this time, the proceedings of the Supreme Criminal Tribunal of Scotland merely begin to assume a more regular form, and the Record to exhibit a
pretty accurate abstract of the objections to the relevancy of the Indictments,
and to mark many of the other peculiarities observable in the forms and pleadings before this Court.

It is proper to notice here, that it has been the settled plan of the present
Collection, to give a scrupulously faithful view of the whole of the proceedings
which took place in each of the Cases selected, in the precise form in which these
occur in the Books of Adjoui-nal ; excepting in various minute jiarticulars, indispensably necessary to be adopted, for the sake of unity and of more lucid arrangement. No modern * Reports,' it is conceived, however accurately they miglit
be framed, could convey, whether to the Lawyer or the general enquirer, so
clearly and so forcibly, the many peculiarities which are connected with these
ancient proceedings ; and at the same time indicate the gradual steps, by which
our present system and forms have been modelled. When these are very prolix
or uninteresting, they shall no doubt be curtailed ; but this shall be done with a

IV

sparing hand, and in such a manner, as clearly to point out each of such departures from the Record.

Owing to an embarrassing hiatus in ' the Books of Adjournal,' arising through
the loss of at least one large "\^olume of the Records of the Court of Justiciary,
(from October 1591 to ]May 1590,) the Editor deemed it incumbent on him,
to make pretty extensive researches into other Public Records of Scotland, of the
same period. But, perhaps, in his anxiety to render this Collection as perfect
as his opportunities and ability permit, he may have incurred the censure of
some, whose pursuits do not usually lead them into such investigations. He
trusts, however, that the space occupied by these illustrations of National History will not be grudged, and that the extracts he has made may be generally
acceptable.

At tlie suggestion of some of his friends, the Editor has prepared, in illustration of this and the former Part, a Fac-simile plate, containing a few exact
specimens of the MSS. from which the present Selections have been formed.
Should these be generally considered as interesting, occasional Fac-similes of
Royal Letters, &c. will be delivered, with each succeeding Fasciculus of this
work.

General Register House,
Is f Jidt/, IS29.

Since the publication of the former Part of this work, the Editor has arranged
and greatly enlarged a Collection of Original Papers, formed by him during the
last two years, illustrative of the mysterious and hitherto inexplicable History
of the Conspiracy of John Earl of Gowrie and his brother, against King
James VI. ; which will be found to embrace a body of valuable and authentic
information, on every point connected with the transaction ; and a great portion of which is entirely new to the public, having been recovered from numerous Records, contemporary MSS. and similar oi'iginal sources.

So much has been written, and conjectured, on that remarkable event, that, in
presenting to the public, for the first time, correct transcripts of the various
Criminal proceedings which were instituted after the Conspiracy, it appeared to
be the duty of the Editor, to accompany them with a Collection of such authentic
Documents as are still preserved ; and for that purpose, to use every exertion, in
investigating the public Records, and all the repositories of MSS. to which he
had access. The result has been highly satisfactory ; and it is hoped, that, from
the discoveries now made, unquestionable materials are provided for elucidating
this hitherto dark passage of Scottish History.

The Editor is of opinion, that the publication of these Papers, in their original
form, is more in unison with the spirit of the present work, than had he drawn
up a fresh Narrative or Dissertation, accompanied by proofs and illustrations.
He has accordingly adopted this plan, so as to leave the reader to draw the obvious conclusion from the evidence now afforded. In every instance, the sources
from which each of the Papers has been procured are carefully noted ; as it is
essential, in matters of historical importance, to observe the minutest accuracy.

A concise and popular Account of Gowrie's Conspiracy has recently been
published, in Constable's Miscellany, Vol. XLIII., by the Reverend Mr Parker

11

LaWSON, M.A. ; to whicli reference may be made for a clear outline and detail
of the leadino- facts. The reader will also find much valuable information in Mr
Morison's ingenious and able paper, in the Transactions of the Literary and
Antiquarian Society of Perth ; where he has incontestably proved the reality
of the Conspiracy against King James VI., even from the facts then published ;
havino- brought to the examination of the subject an impartial and unbiassed
mind, with a perfect knowledge of the localities of the scene. The Editor
would particularly refer the enquirer to Mr Morison's ' Summary of the Evidence
on the Gowrie Conspiracy, with Plans of Gowrie House,' as a valuable companion in examining the history of this remarkable event.

Tlie other portions of this Number will, it is hoped, be found superior in
interest to the preceding Pai'ts.

It was intended that this Part should have been accompanied by a facsimile Plate of the signatures of the principal persons mentioned in the History of this Conspiracy, taken from Original Autographs ; but circumstances
prevent this, initil the iniblication of the next livraison. Another Plate, also,
containing a fac-simile of the Letters of Robert Logan of Restalrig, recently
discovered among the Warrants of Parliament, is in the course of being prepared.
Both will be delivered with the ensuing Part, as early in January next as possible.

The Editor has again the pleasure of acknowledging the kindness of Charees
KiRKPATRiCK SiiARPE, Esquire, who has liberally presented a curious Engraving, executed by himself, very closely resembling the original "Wood-cuts
in the curious Tract, reprinted at Part II., page 213, ' Newes from Scotland,
declaring the damnable life of Doctor Fian, a notable Sorcerer,' &c. The binder
is desired to insert this Plate in "\^olume I. to face page 213.

General Register House,
\2th Ocioher, 1829.

The Collections relative to the Conspiracy of John Eaul or Goavrie,
and his brother, are concluded in the present Part. If the Editor has indulged
in too copious Illustrations of this very remarkable historical event, he has been
led into the error by the discovery of many important original documents, which,
as he humbly conceives they tend to establish, beyond a doubt, the truth of this
much controverted point of History, he deemed it his duty to present to the
public, in this work.

Instead of attempting to sum up the evidence now laid before the Public,
taken in connexion with the numerous Histories, Accounts, and Theories, already
in print, the Editor leaves it to the reader to draw his own conclusions. He
will consider his labours amply repaid, should the future Historian be thereby
led to a clearer view of the origin, and progress, of the i-ash an J ill-advised plot
of these misguided but highly talented young Noblemen, and of the fatal catastrophe which so speedily overwhelmed them, in the premature execution of
their mad attempt.

The natural restlessness, and irritability, of King James, and the very peculiar circumstances in which, on his return to the capital, after the tragical issue of
the Conspiracy, he found himself placed, seem to^iave induced him to endeavour,
to the utmost of his power, to counteract the almost unparalleled attempt made
by the Ministers of Edinburgh ; who greedily availed themselves of this opportunity, to inflame the public mind, and to turn the tide of popular feeling in

u

favour of Goavrie, who was universally idolized by the Presbyterian party, as
their future leader, against the strenuous efforts then making, by James and the
Court, for the ijermanent restoration of Episcopacy.

The steps taken by the King, for this purpose, were most injudicious ; and they
certainly proved the ^ery means of spreading the disbelief of the Royal Narrative
more widely. To this cause alone, indeed, may be attributed the scepticism
which then prevailed, and which has so generally, even down to these times,
occupied the public mind. His Majesty's advisers, by indiscreetly attempting to
prove too much, and to leave no circumstance unexplained, afforded plausible
grounds, for the deepest suspicions of the correctness of the whole statement.
James, when too late, found this to be the case, and experienced, to his cost, the
sagacity of Domitian's bitter reflection, as recorded by Suetonius, " conditionevi
Princ'qmm miserrimam aiehat, qu'thus de Coiijnrat'wne compcria non crederetiir,
XI SI occisis!"

The noted distich, which Calderwood, in his JNIS. Church History, states to
liave existed in his times, and v^hich, he says, was painted above an ancient
Chimney-i)iece in the Castle of Ruthven, (now called Hunting Tower), may perhaps be considered as worthy of memory.

Vera diu latitant, sed, longo temporis usu,
Emergunt tandem ovm, latuere diu.

A Fac-simile Plate of the commencement, termination, and subscriptions, of
three of the Letters of Robert Logan of Restalrig, which occur at Vol.
n., page 322, accompanies this Part.

General Register House,
Q.oth January, 1830.

The present Part of this Work will, it is hoped, prove more generally attractive, being of more diversified interest, than any of the preceding portions ; and
the Editor believes he does not promise too much, when he adds, that the subsequent Parts must equally surpass the present, as well in point of curiosity as in
historical importance.

After the accession of King James VI to the English throne, the Judicial
proceedings in Scotland were necessarily conducted with greater minuteness, and
were recorded with stricter accuracy, than formerly ; for the various public
functionaries, in every department, were liable to be frequently called upon for
full reports of individual Cases ; either to gratify his Majesty's craving for whatever was new and curious, or to enable him to judge of the expediency of pardoning or condemning the unhappy persons whose fate must needs be sealed by
the unenviable exercise of his royal prerogative. To this circumstance, then, it
may perhaps be attributed, that the Records of the Supreme Criminal Tribunal
of Scotland, begin to be kept with greater clearness, and their authority and
value to be proportionally enhanced.

In Cases of peculiar importance, the Editor has always been anxious to afford
all the elucidation within the limited range of his reading and observation, by
laying before the reader such illustrations as apjieared to him necessary to the
better understanding of those Trials ; and especially, to put the reader in possession of Original and contemporaneous Papers, which generally afford the
clearest and best explanation of the many remarkable events which so frequently
occur in the course of this Work. He trusts that many of the Documents now for
the first time presented to the public, from sources not generally accessible, may
be deemed worthy the attention of the lover of History.

II

It is iniicli to bo roprcttt'd, tli.it (lio traji^ical story of the Murder of Sir
'I'lioiMAS KiNNKDY ofCiilzeaii, kiiiglit, 'i'litor of Cassillis, &e. by tlie IMuiir.s oi'
ArciiiNDiiANi',, M-liicli is now rendered ini])erislial»Ie by tlie i)en of the greiitest
livinfj; wiiter, cdiild not be inserted in the jHTScnt Part, owing to tlie cbronolof^ieal arran{>fenient ol" the book. 'I'lie l*]ditor did not. in the meantime, consider
biiiiscir ;it liix'rl y to pnblisii tiiat most extraordinary Trial as a .separate volume ;
but, lia\ itit;' iiis materials for I'.Mrr \\ in eoiisiderable forwardness, he is ready
to |uil)iisii that l'\ixe}ei(/ii.s at a mneb eariitr date than previously notified, should
siicb be the desire of tlie pnblic.

'J'lie iiicsciit Series of 'I'l'ials, diniiifi^ the reij^n of \\\\\'^ .lames \'I, will be
eompletcd in four additional I'arts, making in all nine I'arts, or three large
\'ohnnes. Owing to the dinicnlty of eolleeting the requisite materials, the pubiieatioii of llie ieatliiig trials \\liieb occurred in the reigns of King James I^'^,
King .lames \', and t^neen Mary, shall be deferred till after I'art \'1II is eireul.iled. Should the l''ditor's health, and bis i)rofessional engagements, tlieii
|)ermit, a new Series of'J'rials, modelled into the shape of Reports, and in a more
modern form than tlii' present, will be commenced. The lengtliened pleadings,
\c. (hu-iiig, and s\ibse(pient lo. the reign of Charles I. entirely i)reelude the idea
of eont inning llic \\ ork in the o/7i,>7//r// form ; Mhieli, however useful and interesting such a mode of cililing a book of this class may prove, during the earlier
period ol" the history and jiracl ici- of our ( liniinal 'I'ribunals, would be cumbrous
and useless at a more recent date, \\lu'n then" could be no e.xeuse for continuing
the obsolete, and now almost forgotten style of these pleadings, whieli could yield
no pleasure, and but little additional information, (o the general reader.

(jiKNKHAl. liK(;iSTI.li lloLSl'.,

V2Hi JprU, 1S30.

The Editor has the satisfaction of presenting the present Part rather
earlier than he had anticipated.

Since the last Fasciculus was circulated, he has been favoured \^itli communications from several individuals, who have taken an interest in the progress
of this Work, suggesting various improvements ; but he is chiefly indebted to
the Public Press, for numerous practical hints, of which, in preparing this portion of the Collection, he has amj^ly availed himself.

Amongst other alterations of the original i)lan, the prefixing of Introductory
Notices to leading and remarkable Cases, on a more extended plan than the Editor had at first deemed advisable, has now been adopted. The difficulty of collecting authentic materials for explaining and illustrating such obscure and longforgotten events, has necessarily occasioned great additional I'esearch and expense;
and had he not previously made pretty extensive inquiries relative to some of
these Trials, and especially, the extremely interesting one of Mure of ArcirINDRAYNE, this Part must have been delayed for some months longer.

In what manner these intended impi'ovements have been executed, it does not
become the Editor to judge. He sincerely wishes that this very arduous task
had fallen into abler hands ; but still has the pleasure of reflecting, that he has
spared neither time nor labour in his endeavours to make the Work as complete
as its proposed limits admit. Those who have had the greatest experience in
carrying on researches of this description, will be the readiest to make all liberal and proper allowances, for such unavoidable defects as must be expected to
accompany inquiries, in their nl^ure so very extended and obscure.

11

The very remarkable Case of the Mures of Auchindrayne is one of
such interest, that it may perhaps be fairly considered as altogether unparalleled in the annals of crime. That Trial, and the illustrative matter accompanying it, have necessarily occupied a large portion of this Uvraison ; but the Editor hopes it will prove as generally interesting, as the plots and crimes of these
extraordinary men are unequalled.

In the course of his researches for elucidating the facts and events attending
that Case, (which have been actively prosecuted during the last three years,) the
Editor fortunately discovered, among the valuable MSS. belonging to the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh, an Historical and Genealogical Account
of the principal Families of THE NAME OF Kennedy. This History illustrates,
not only the lives and characters of the actors in that shocking tragedy, but the
deadly Feuds then prevalent in Carrick, to an extent which could scarcely
have been anticipated. Had the information to be obtained from these singular
Memoirs been made use of in this Collection, it would have encroached too much
upon the limits now assigned to it, and caused the supjjression of other interesting Trials. The Editor therefore has, by the liberal permission of the Curators
of the Advocates' Library, preferred publishing the History of the Kennedies as a sejiarate work ; — and, with this view, has, for a considerable time
past, been engaged in preparing it. A limited iinjiression only has been struck
oft'; and it is expected to be completed before the first of August next.

It is trusted, that, upon the whole, this Part will be found much more generally attractive than any of the preceding ; as it abounds in historical incidents,
and in Trials of deep and universal interest.

General Register House,
19/// J/ili/, 1830.

In the period embraced by the present Part, the principal Trials, of peculiar
interest, which occurred before the High Court of Justiciary, were those against
the Roman Catholics and Jesuits, for hearing and celebration of the Mass,
for maintaining the Supremacy of the Pope, for declining the King's authority, and for devising treasonable Plots against the person of his Majesty, &c.

The Rebellion of the Earl of Orkney, and his son, also occupied a
prominent portion of the Criminal proceedings during this time ; and the Editor
has amassed a considerable collection of historical materials, illustrative of that
remarkable treason ; all of which are now, for the first time, laid befoi'e the public,
being taken from original and authentic documents.

Another Rebellion in the Western Islands of Scotland was likewise
suppressed within this time, relative to which the reader will also find that suitable
illustrations have been given.

Besides these leading Trials, a number of very remarkable Cases occur in this
Part for Murder, Fire-raising, Perjury, Slaughter and Houghing of Oxen and
Sheep, &c., Piracy, Incest, Oppression, Witchcraft, Poisoning, Subornation of
Witnesses, Uttering ' treafonable, blafphemous, and damnable fpeeches' against
the King, Fire-raising in Coal-pits, Hamesucken, Mutilation and Demembration,
Egyptians or Gipsies abiding within the realm, &c.

It is trusted that the present Number may be considered as important and
interesting as any of those forming the preceding Volumes.

General Register House,
25^/^ October, 1830.

The present Part closes this Collection of the leading Trials which
occurred before the High Court of Justiciary, during the eventful reign
of King James VI.

Part VIII. contains numerous Cases of considerable interest and novelty,
and throws much light on various public transactions, and also on many of the
private occurrences of the period immediately preceding the demise of that
monarch. There are, however, so many remarkable Trials contained in it, that
it would encroach too much on the limits of a brief notice, to recapitulate a
few of the leading Cases.

Having collected a great mass of materials, in the course of preparing the
present work for publication, the Editor has selected from them a number of
Original Papers, believing that they would be esteemed a suitable accompaniment to this concluding Volume. He has, therefore, printed them in an
Appendix, which will be found materially to illustrate many of the precedingTrials. Among others, he has been so fortunate as to have discovered the only
documents which remained to clear up the extraordinary Trial of Mr Thomas
Ross, a poor Clergyman of a very respectable family, but a maniac, who was
mercilessly put to death, under form of Law, by the special warrant of King
James VI, for writing a Pasquil against the Scottish Nation. This pasquinade,
it may here be remarked, was neither printed nor in anywise circulated by the
author, but was simply affixed to the door of St Mary's Church, Oxford ; from
which it was almost instantly taken down by a student, and delivered to the Vice
Chancellor, who transmitted it, without delay, to Court.

IV

The remainder of the Appendix will be delivered with the Introductory
Part, which embraces the Criminal procedure during the reigns of King
James IV, King James V, and Queen Mary.

The Editor does not, at present, expect to finish that arduous undertaking
luitil the month of November or December, 1831. It is his intention to prepare
accurate Indexes, which will be delivered, along with Title-pages, &c. for the whole
woi-k. When concluded, the Collection will form Three lai-ge Volumes.

In reply to several enquiries, the Editor begs to notify, that he purposes to
close this Collection of Trials with Part IX.

General Register House,
15th December, 1830

Since the publication of the Eighth Paut of this Collection, about the close
of last year, the Editor has again carefully examined the entire Books and
Papers of the High Court of Justiciary, from the earliest existing Criminal
Records, in the reign of KiNG James IV, down to the conclusion of the reign
of Mary Queen of Scots.

Although the first view of these documents presented a most discouraging
aspect, the Editor deemed it to be an imperative duty, not only to scrutinize
every vestige of information to be obtained from them, but to undertake a very
extensive and laborious examination of all the contemporary Records and other
ancient MSS. which might be expected to illustrate so interesting a portion of
the public and domestic History of this country.

The meagreness and imperfection of the historical materials of this eventful
period of eighty years, so far as they have hitherto been laid before the public,
are universally acknowledged. Eveiy attempt therefore, however feeble, which
tends to throw additional light on the Annals of Scotland, during these three
remarkable reigns, must be considered of more or less importance, according to
the authenticity and genuineness of the sources from whence the information has
been procured, and the fidelity with which it is communicated.

In the prosecution of this humble, though extremely laborious and responsible
task, the reader will find that the Editor has strictly adhered to the plan which
he originally proposed, by communicating the result of these researches in the
precise form in which the various entries are made in the Public Records.

Owing to the importance of the additional historical materials which have
been discovered by the Editor, in the prosecution of these minute researches, he
found it to be impracticable, consistently with his duty to the public, to condense
the whole of these three reigns within the narrow compass of one Part, without
at the same time entirely suppressing a great mass of valuable matter. Had he
rashly adopted such a I'esolution, the present Collection would have been
extremely imperfect and unsatisfactory, at those very periods, where, chiefly, a
store of authentic and indisputable facts, drawn from the Public Records of the
country, still i-emained to be greatly desiderated.

The concluding portion of the Trials which occurred during the reign of
King James V, and those of the eventful reign of Mary Queen of Scots,
together with historical Appendices, a copious Index, &c., will be contained in
a Supplementary Part. As the work is in a state of forwardness at press,
it is expected that the Supplement will be ready for publication in the month
of February next, which will close the present arduous undertaking.

General Register House,
Isi November, 1831.

The concluding portion of the present Collection has occupied the
anxious attention of the Editor, for a period of above twelve months beyond
the time he had been led to anticipate, when the Ninth Paut was published.

Fortunately, the Editor had, during the progress of this Work, amassed a
great variety of materials from authentic sources, illustrative of many important
events connected with the histoiy of the reigns of KiNG James V. and Mary
Queen of Scots ; which eventually have proved of much use, in elucidating
the Criminal proceedings of these reigns. Besides availing himself of these,
however, he found it necessary to consult many of the public Records, the MSS.
in the Library of the Faculty of Advocates, and other Collections of original
documents, which required a considerable expenditure of time, besides much
minute, laborious, and persevering research.

The result of these investigations is now laid before the Public ; and it is
perhaps not too much for the Editor to hope, that, in the view of rendering this
work as complete as possible, the Subscribers may concur with him in thinking,
that the additional time, thus expended, has not been altogether unprofitably
employed.

In fulfilment of the proposal made at the commencement of this arduous
undertaking, a very copious and elal)orate General Index is now given along
with this Part, which will be found to comprehend all that is practically useful
to those who are likely to consult this Collection, whether for general reading
and information, or for purposes of legal, historical, antiquarian, or genealogical
investigation.

Owing to the interest excited by the large Collections made by the Editor,
and the body of evidence which has been published in some of the former Parts of
this work, in reference to Gowry's Conspiracy, he has deemed it his duty to
render the whole still clearer and more generally acceptable, by endeavouring to
procure accurate Plans of the scene of that remarkable transaction. This he has
fortunately been able successfully to accomplish, and that, too, from the most
authentic source of information ; as his friend Mu David Morison, Secretary
to the Literary and Antiquarian Society of Perth, had occasion, a few years ago.

IV

to get drawings and ground-plans made, from surveys and sketches taken on the
spot, previous to the pulling down of Gowry House, in the year 1807, to make
way for the Prison and County Buildings, in Perth. These Plans accompany Mr
jNIorison's ingenious Dissertation, which has been published in that Society's
Transactions. The ultimate views of THE Ruthvexs and their associates, in
embarking in so hazardous a plot, will likely for ever remain as inexplicable a
mystery as liitherto ; but whatever may be considered by the future historian to
have been the probable schemes of these rash youths, it is perhaps not arrogating too much -to affirm, that the field of enquiry may now be considered as
greatly narrowed ; and that the circumstances, as well as the truth and reality
of that Conspiracy, may henceforth be considered as matters of historical
certainty.

To the politeness of Francis Grant, Esquire, S.A., the Editor is indebted for
the use of the accompanying valuable engraving of Gowry House, which was
carefully prepared, under his own inspection, from the only authentic sketch of
that memorable place which is known to exist.

With regard to the contents of this Supplementary Part, there will be
found, in addition to many curious and valuable Trials of a miscellaneous
description, a considerable accession of original histoincal materials, illustrative
of the progress of the Reformation of Religion in Scotland ; a very
important Appendix to the reign of King Jainies V., compiled with the strictest care from the valuable Records of the Privy Seal, and the Accoimts of the
Lord High Treasurer of Scotland ; proceedings against the Papists, Jesuits,
&c. ; and numerous original and interesting Documents relative to the Murders
of David Riccio and King Henry Darnley, &c., many of which are now
for the first time laid before the public.

Owing to the manner originally adopted in publishing this work, it has been
found necessary to divide the First Volume into Two Parts. Particular
directions for the Binder are printed on the back of the prefixed Title, to prevent the possibility of mistakes being committed in the aiTangeraent of the Book
into separate Volumes.

General Register House,
%oth March, 1833.

CRIMINAL TRIALS

AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE

HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

The earliest Volumes of the Criminal Recoi'ds of Scotland, now extant, are
the two ancient MSS, still preserved in the Library of the Faculty of Advocates,
Edinburgh. It is probable they had been acquired by the Curators of that
excellent institution, by purchase, at the sale of some Collector of the last centuiy,
into whose possession they must have found their way by very improper means,
at a period when such documents were considered of no imjiortauce.

Although these Volumes chiefly consist of the proceedings of the Justice-aires
of Lauder, Jedburgh, Selkirk, Peebles, Edinburgh, Dumfries, Kirkcudbright,
Air, and Wigton, yet as they abound in numerous particulars, highly illustrative
of the history, manners, and habits of those portions of Scotland during the
reign of King James IV, the Editor has considered it necessary to give at large
every remarkable Case which occurs in them.

It may be noticed here, once for all, that the Books of Adjournal and Minute
Books of the Supreme Criminal Tribunal of Scotland, as well as the Records of
the Justice-aires, &c. at these remote periods, were kept in an obscure forensic
Latin. This circumstance, added to the well-known difficulty of deciphering
the ordinary MSS. of these centuries, and the fact of the Books now preserved
being generally mere scrolls and memoranda, written with many contractions,
and evidently during the hurry of the Court proceedings, have hitherto rendered
the task of examining them, and presenting the public with the more important
cases, a labour of a peculiarly irksome and repulsive kind. Fortunately, however,
entries have in many instances been made in the forcible vernacular of the
period, and original Warrants and Letters have also been recorded, or have been
foimd, after diligent search, among the loose papers belonging to the Court.
Many of these are alike curious as specimens of our language, and valuable as
historical documents.

VOL. I. f A

2 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1488.

After deliberate consideration, it has been deemed proper, and most likely to
be acceptable to the great bulk of readers, to give a close technical translation '
of such portions of the Records as are conceived in Latin, excepting where very
remarkable phrases or terms are made use of ; but in all such cases the original
expressions are given in foot-notes. In every instance, where the vernacular is
employed, or where quotations are necessarily given, the same scrupulous fidelity
has been observed as in the subsequent parts of this work.

In Parlktmento excellent'tjfimi Principis ac domhii nqjlri metuendiffimi domini Jacobi IV Dei gracia Regis Scotontm IlhiJlrllJimi, teuto et iuchoato
apud Ediiihiirghe, die Litnejcwto die men [is Octohris, anno domini 1488.
Per CommiJ)(iriosfid)fc)ipt. vix. Colinum Comiteim de Ergile, Dominum
Campbele et Lome, Cancellarium Scocie ; Patricium Dominum Halis,
3Iagijlrum Hospicij fupremi domini nojtri Regis ; Robertum Dominum
LiLE, Magnum Jiijticiarinm Scocie ; Alexandrum Hume de eodem
Magnnm Camcrurium Scocie ; Willel:mum Kxollis P/ecepforem de
Torfichin, Thefaurarium, militcm, et midtos alios CommiJJarios in liac parte.

'^\^\y Crrasoii — a^ntrrromimining^ SnitT) X\)t (L^ugllsT), ^r, —
dfisljttnrr against Wyt iiiiig at * \\)t #idti of Stirling/

[In consequence of the loss of the early Volumes of the Books of Adjournal, it becomes necessary,
in order to render the present Collection as complete as possible, to investigate from otiier authentic
sources the proceedings whicli took place immediately after the accession of King James IV. Fortunately the Records of Parliament, of the Great and Privy Seals, and the Books of tlie High Treasurer
of Scotland, afl'ord some notices of the steps which were taken against the partisans of the deceased
King James III. These shall be given iiere at lengtii ; but as tlie leading circumstances connected
with them must of course be minutely discussed in Mr Tytler's correct and impartial History of
Scotland, it is only further necessary to lay before the reader such documents as do not fall within
the plan of that learned gentleman's truly valuable work.

James Stewart^w< Earl of Buchan, whose sobriquet, was Hearty James, was the brother
uterine of King James II. He married Margaret, the heiress of Sir Alexander Ogilvy of Auchterhouse, by whom he got tliat barony and the lieritable sberift'ship of the county of Forfar. On the fall
of Lord Boyd, in 1471, he was made Lord High Ciianiberlain of Scotland; and, in 1473, went as
ambassador to France. He was made Warden of the East Marches on his return. Having participated in ' the Field of Stirling,' he became obnoxious to the vengeance of the successful party ; but
he had the good policy to submit and sue for iiis Majesty's clemency, which he obtained, and was
received into his favour. Although he was subsequently charged with having entered into a conspiracy with John Ramsay, Lord Bothwell, and Sir Thomas Tod, in 1491, to deliver his Prince into
the hands of King Henry VIII, the circun)stance is rather unlikely, for he was no party to the Iiulen-

' Proper names and untranslated words are uniformly given in the same form as in the Record.

1 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. » 3

ture.' It rather seems to hare been a ruse on their part, to induce Henry to give credit to their plot,
and to advance the money required by them. This nobleman died before Feb. 6, 1499-1500, when
his son is styled Alexander Earl of Buchan.-

Owing to the historical importance of this and the following cases, they are given here in their original form, divested only of the usual contractions, which are extremely perplexing to an ordinary
reader.]

Oct. 6. — Quo die, Jacobo comite Buchanie fepe vocato, per fummonicionem regiam et tenorem eiufdem lub teftimonio Magni Sigilli regii defuper
directam ad relpondend. dicto domino noflro Regi, in prefenti Parliaraento,
fuper certis proditoriis actionibus in dicta furamonicione contentis, et per tenorem eiufdem : Quo Jacobo Comite Buclianie, fie fepe vocat. et non comparente,
dominj commiffarij continuarunt dictam caufam fummonicionis ad craftinum, ad
decimam horam cum coutinuacione dierum, in eadem forma et effectu ut nunc
eft, abfque preiudicio paixium.^

Oct. 7. — Continuatur ad craftinum, ut fupra.
[Coram nohilihis Domhiis Colino Comite de Ergile, Domino Campbele et Lome, CanceUario Scocie, Laurencio Domino Oliphant,
JoHANNE Domino Diiummond, Roberto Domino Lile, Andrea
Domino Gray et Johanne Domino Glammis, Comm[(Jionuriis ParUu'
menti et Jnjilciariis, S^c.']

Oct. 8, {die 3Iercurii.) — Continuatur ad craftinum, in eadem forma ut
nunc eft, abfque preiudicio partium.

\_PerJ}(premum dominum iiojlrum Regem in projiria perfonaJ]
Oct. 9, {die Jouis.) — Quo die. Jacobus Comes Buchanie cepit fe ad
Remiffionem dominj noftri Regis ante dicti, pro proditorio aggrelfu in regnum
Anglie Regi eiufdem : Ac pro proditoriis communicatione et laboracione cum
prefato Rege Anglie, pro importacione certorimi Anglicorum ad diftructionem
regni et ligiorum Scocie, et pro inftigacione et caufacione dicti Regis Anglie in
propria perfona cum fuis armis et copia virorum in regnum Scocie aduenifle :
Et pro proditoriis arte parte et confilio datis et exhibitis Andree Epifcopo
Moi'auien., Alexandro Domino Forbes, Johanni Domino Bothuile, Johanni
Rofs de Montgrenane, Johanni Murray de Tuchadam, Stephino Lokart de
Cleghorne, et Jacobo Ilommill fciffori, in Fabricacione commiffionis et certorum
Munimentorum Regi Anglie per Joliannem Dominum Bothuile et Henricum
Wyot Anglicammi delatorum, ad frangend. pacem et treugas per quondam
patrem fupremi dominj noftri Regis et Parliamentum et Regem Anglie unitas,

' See Notice preBxed to the Forfeiture of Lord Bothwell, Oct. 9, 1488. " The following

characteristic entry occurs in the High Treasurer's accounts : — 1502-3, Feb. 17. ' Item to ye King
to put in ]ie caudil, at the heving of Erie of Buquhanis fone, xiiij f.' It is probable that the King had
become god-father or sponsor for the child. ^ At the second diet the King is present in person, with a great concourse of Lords spiritual and temporal. See Acta Pari. II. 199, &c.

6 * CRIMIXAL TRIALS. A.D. 1488.

DOMIN'CM BOTHUILE, perfonaliter apprebeiifum, fi eius prefenciam commode
habere poteritis, alioquin apud Caftnim de Bothuile, et ad crucem fori burgi
noftri de Lanark, per publicam proclamacionem, ita quod huius fummonicio ad
eius noticiam verefmiiliter peruenire poterit ; quod compareat perfonaliter coram
nobis in noftro proximo Parliaraento, tenendo apud Edinburghe, die Mercurij,
octauo die nienfis Octobris proxirne futuro, cum continuacioue dierum, ad refpondend. nobis, in prefato noilro Parliaraento, pro proditoriis feductione et ductione quondam Jacobi (III) Regis Scotorum, patris noftri defuncti, contra
commune bonum rempublicam et Regni noftri, faciendo eum oppriraere luos
Prelatos, Barones, burgenfes et ligeos, per communem vendicionem et empcionem Jufticie, ad eorum finalem diftructionem ; vigore cuius, mercatores alienigine, ad regnura noftrum aduenien. erant omnino diftructi et depredati, fie quod
nulli al(ieni ?) pro refectione regni non audebant dictum regnum intrare : Ac pro
proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et affiftencia datis et exliibitis Jacobo CoMiTi
BucHAXiE, in proditoriis aggreffii et palFagio in regno Anglie : Et pro proditoriis communicacione et laboracione cum prefato Rege Axgeie, pi-o importacione certorum Anglicorum ad diftructionem regni noftri et legiorum noftrorimi :
Et pro proditorie arte et parte cum dicta Comite Bucbanie, in caufacione et
inftigacione dicti Regis Anglie, in quantum in eo fuit, ad intrand. dictum regnum noftnmi, in propria perfona, cum armis et copia virorum, pro diftructione
noftra et ligeorum noftrorum : Ac pro proditoriis ingreffli et paflagio in Anglia,
per ipfum Jobannem factis, diuerfis vicibus : Et pro proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et affiftencia datis et exhibitis AxDREE Episcopo Mouauien., Jacobo
CoMiTi BucHANiE, Alexaxdko Domino Forbes, in Fabricacione cuiufdam
Commiftionis et certorum Alunimentorum Regi Axglie, per vos Johamiera et
Henricum Wyot, Anglicanum, delatorum, ad infringend. pacem et treugas
per dictum quondam patrem noftrum et Parliamentum eius et Regem Anglie
initas, contra commune bonum et rem publicam, et ad perpetuam diftructionem
regni ; virtute cuius, guerra fuper vna parte regni noftri proclamata, et diuerfi
ligei illius partis depredati, occifi, et incendium paffi funt : Et pro proditoriis
delacione dicte Commiffionis et Munimentorum ad Regem Anglie, ad perpetuam
fubiectionern regni noftri obediencie Regis Anglie : Et pro proditoriis arte,
parte et confilio Fabricacionis cuiufdam Commiffionis, et eiufdcm miffiionis
Co.MiTi Noutiiu:mbrie et DoMixo WiLLELMO Tyldare, Anglkuuo, militi,
continen. quod ipfi virtute dicte Commiffionis et poteftatis darent Remiffiones
omnibus Scotis partem Anglicorum contra nos et fideles legios noftros capientibus : Et pro proditoriis arte, parte, et confilio datis et exhibitis dictis i^erfonis,
in caufando dictum quondam j)atrcm noftrum diuerfa Appunctuamenta et Concordias, lublcriptione maiuiali diet! quondam patris noftri fubfcrijJt., nobis tunc

1 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 7

Principi, pro communi pace et tranquillitate regni premifT. frangere et ab eifdem
refilire, que diuerfis vicibus erant promifla et per vos et (quemlibet) veftrum
fracta et non obferiiata ; racione cuius fractionis, Comites de Huntle, Erole,
Marchell et Dominus de Glammis eius opinionem reliquerunt, et ad loca propria
accefferunt : Et pro proditoriis arte, parte, et confilio datis et exhibitis dictis
perfonis, in confuleiido predictum quondam patrem noftrum ad exeund. Caftrum
de Edinburghe cum armis et copia virorum, poll diuerfa Appunctuamenta per
ipfum apud Blaknes et alubi condita per iplum fracta, ad inuadend. nos eius
filium, tunc Principera, apud Striuelin : Et fuper aliis quam pluribus criminibus et proditoriis tranfgreflionibus per ipfum Johannem contra nos et regnum
noftrum inique perpetratis, juri parend. : Ixtimax. dicto Johanni, quod flue dictis die et loco cum continuacione dierum comparuit fme non, nos nicbilominus
in premiffis, Jufticia mediante, procedemus : Et prefentes literas debite execut.
et indorfaciones earundem reddite latori : Et vos qui prefentes executi fueritis
litis ibidem dicto die, coram nobis, portan. vobifcum Summonicionis veftre teftimonium in fcriptis, pro dimiffis feu ipfos teftes. Ad quod faciendum vobis et
veftrimi cuilibet in hac parte, coniunctim et diuifim, plenariam committimus
poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio Magnj Sigilli noftri Apud Edixbukghe
fecundo die menfis Augufti, anno regni noftri primo.

Poft cuiufquidem Summonicionis lecturam, idem vicecomes probauit in prefenti Parliamento dictam Summonicionem legittime executam, per indorfacionem fuara et certos teftes in eadem indorfacione contentos, in judicio, ad hoc
inibi per ipfum productos et j urates, videlicet, Johannem Hamiltoune de Wodhall et Patricium Hammiltoune ; cuius indorfacionis fie eft tenor.

Iiidcrjhc'ioues five Executiones Sinnmonicionis Forisfacture.

The vj day of fe moneth of Angnll, the ;ere of God J'".iiij^lxxxviij qeris, I Carrik, Parfewant,
perfonaly paft to the cheif cheniis ' of Bothuile, and ])are fummond Johne Lord Bothdile to compere before our fouerane lorde, perfonaly, in his Parliament to be haldin at Edinburgh, the viij day of
October nixt tocum, with conlinuacioune of dais, to anfuere to his hienes upone all the pojiitis and
articlis and crime; of Treffoune contenit in fir otir fouerane lordis lettrez : Before thir Witnes, Johne
of Hammiltoune, Patric of Hammiltoune, Johne Baxtare, and James Echiftonne. Akd fane, one
the morne, the vij day of Augnft, I the faid Carrik, Purfewant, palt to fe merkat corle of Lanark,
and fare, be oppin proclamacioune, furamonde and wamit the faid Johne Lord Bothuile to compere, perfonaly, before our fouerane lorde in his Parliament forfaid, to anfuere to his hienes to all the
poyntis, articlis and crime; of Treffoune contenit in fir our fouerane lordis lettrez, and eftir f e tenoor
of f e fammjTi : Before thir Witnes, George Aitkynfonne, Williame Forfter, bail;eis of Lanark, Thomas Were, and Johne Mowate, with vtheris diuerfe. Ix witnes hereof I bane fet to mv Sisnet.

Quo JoHAKXE Domino Bothuile fepe vocato, vigore predicte Summonicionis et per tenorem eiufdem, ad refpondendum dicto domino noftro Regi, in
prefenti Parliamento, fuper omnibus proditoriis actionibus in dicta Summoni-
' Mansion-house, chief dwelling. O. Fr. chefmez, {chef mez, i. e. chefmaifon.)

8* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1488.

clone contentis, et non comparente, legittimo tempore diei expectato, ordine et
proceffii, continuacione dicte Summouicionis, per Dominos, Barones et Burgorum Commiffarios iuperfcriptos, hunc ufque juridice procedi, vifis et Intelleetis, Colinus Comes de Ergile Dominus Campbele et Lome, Cancellax'ius dominj
noftri Regis, et eius nomine, de fuo expreffo mandate, requifinit et peciit a dictis
Dominis, Baronibus et Burgorum CommilTariis, fua fenfiamenta et Decreta Parliamenti, penes proceffum dicti Joliannis Domini Bothuile, fi ipfe fuit culpabilis
in proditoriis accionibus pronominatis in dicta Snmmonicione contentis : Quibus
Dominis, Baronibus et Burgorum Commiffariis regni fui ftatubus deligenter et
mature auifatis inuenerunt, et vnufquifque pro feipfo deliberauit, quod dictus
DoMiXUS Bothuile fuit culpabilis in omnibus proditoriis actionibus in dicta
Summonicione contentis, excepto tempore de Blaknes. Et ideo datum fuit pro
judicio fine Laudo Foriffactiu'e, per os Alexandri Dempftar Judicatoris Parliamenti, in mode et forma fequen. in wlgari.

Judicium Jive Laudum Forisfacture.
This Court of Parliament fchewis for law, and I gif for Dome, that fForlamekle as it is fundin be fenfment of Parliament, that Johne Lord Bothuile
has committ and done TrelToune agane oure fouerane lord the King and his
realme, in all the poyntis and articlis aboune writtin, contenit in the Summondis
maid J^airappone, except the tyme of the Blaknes : That ])airfore he has Forfalt
to our fouerane lord the King his lif, landes,' ofRce3, gudis movable and vnmouable, and all vtheris his pofleffiouis pat he haid within the realme of Scotlande,
euermare to remane with oure faid fouei-ane lord, his airis and fucceffouris, for
his TrelToune and offence. And that I gif for Dome.

\^Coram Rie.gb pe/Jb)ialifer ibidem J cdente.~\

Mq\) Crf ason — dTitltj of Stirling, ^r*

[John Rods or Ross of Mountgreenan was Advocate to James III. Warrant was granted, Jul. 2,
1488, for his apprehension, and he was at the same time summoned for the traitorous pursuit of the
Prince (James IV) to beyond the Bridge of Stirling, and for there making Burnings, ' herefchips,'
and slaughters, on Jun. 10, being the day preceding the Battle of Sauchie. The Castle of Keir, to
which the Prince had retired, was at the same time burnt by the King's adherents, with the Place of
Airth, &c."

There seems to be nothing additional worthy of mention, as to the Lord Advocate's case, excepting
that he does not appear to have been restored to the King's confidence. His estates were conferred
on Patrick Huine of Fastcastle ; and James Henderson of Fordell succeeded to his important office
of Lord Advocate.]

Oct. 14, {die Martis.) — Quo die^ comparuit in Judicio Carrik Signifer,
vicecomes in hac parte, et prefentauit quandam Summonicionem regiam, fub tef-

' On Oct. li, the Parliament confirmed a grant of the Lordships of Bothuill and Creichtoun to
Patrick Lord Halis, Master of the Household; and on Oct. 17, they were erected into the Earldom
of Bothuill, he. ^ Seo Rcr/. Mag. S'uj. XH. 64;. — Treaf. Accounts. ^ This case had been

continued from time to time, from Oct. 8 preceding.

1 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 9

timonio Magnj Sigilli regij fibi directam, fuper Summonicione Johannis Ross
DE MONTGRENANE, coram prefato domino noftro Rege et tribus regni fui ftatubus ibidem congregatis ; cuius Summouicionis tenor fequitur et eft talis.

Summonicio Forisfacture contra Johaiinem Rofs de Montgrenane.
Jacobus dei gracia Rex Scotorum, Vicecomiti et Balliuis fuis de Are, iiecnon Lyonj Ilegi Armoruin, Rothiffay, RofTe, Snawdoune, Merclimonde, Heraldis ; Vnicorne, Ormonde, Cariik, Montrofe,
Signiferis ; Hectori Meldrum, Willelrao Campbele, Clauigeiis ; Syraoiii Spardouro, Donaldo Malynny
et Geoigeo Schaw, Cvirforibus, viceconiitibus nolliis in liac parte ; falutem. Mandamus nobis et precipimus, quatenus fummoneatis, legittime et peremptorie, coram teftibus, Johannem Ross de Montgrenane perfonaliter apprelienfum, fi eius prefenciam commode habere poteritis, alioquin apud Montgrenane et locum fue habitacionis, et ad crucem fori burgi noftri de Are, et ad crucem fori burgi noftri
de Irwin, per publicam proclamationem ; ita quod Lujufmodi Summonicio ad eius noticiam verefimiliter
peruenire poterit, quod compareat perfonaliter coram nobis, in noflro proximo Parliamento, tenendo
apud Edinburgbe, die Jouis, nono die menlis Octobris proxime futuro, cum conlinuacioune dierum, ad
refpondend. nobis in prefato noftro Parliamento pro fuis proditoriis arte, parte, confdio et affiftencia
datis et exbibitis Jacobo Cowiti Buchanie, Stepbino Lokhert de Cleghorne, et Thome Fothringhanio de Powry in extraportacione et duecione quondam patris noftri cum armis et copia virorum
apud Blaknefs, pro noftra et noftrorum finali diftructione, attento quod nos eo tempore prout omni alio
extitimus parati perimplere Appunctuamenta per ipfum nobis mifla, promifla, et fubfcripcione eius
manuali fubfcript., confilio eius fracta, prorupta et fpreta, quamobrem Comites de Huntle, Erole, Merfchell et Dominus Glammis eum dictum Johannem Roffe et eius opinionera reliquerunt, et ad loca propria redieruut : Et pro proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et affiftencia datis et exhibitis dictis perfonis, in
preparamento et araymento campi bellici contra nos apud Blaknes, in quo nouiter appunctuatum extitit : Et pro complicione Appunctuamentorum prius premifforum, dictus Jacobus Comes Buchanie,
Willehnus Dominus Rothuen, Thomas Fothringham de Powry, Willelmus Murray de Tulybardiu
dabantur fide-iuffores et obfides : Ac pro proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et afliftencia datis et exhibitis dictis perfonis ad prornmpend. dicta Appunctuamenta, pro communi tranquillitate pace et concordia regni inita, poftquam dictus quondam pater nofter ad caftrum de Edinburgbe peruenit : Et pro
proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et aftiftencia datis et exhibitis dictis perfonis et Andree Epifcopo
Morauien. in miffione et deftiuacione Johannis Domini Bothuile in regno Anglie ad Rege.m eiufdem, pro proditoriis importacione ipfius et ligeorum fuorum ad dillructionem noflram et legiorum
noftrorum et Corone regni Scocie fubiectionem perpetuam legiancie et obediencie dicti Regis Anglie :
Et pro proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et afliftencia datis et exhibitis dictis perfonis, in confuiendo
dictum quondam patrem noftrum ad exeund. Caftrum de Edinburgbe, cum armis et copia virorum, ad
inuadend. nos, tunc exiftentem Principem, apud Striuelin : Et pro proditoriis fugacione et profecucione noftro perfone extra ponteni de Striuelin, ibi Incendia, depredaciones et occifioiies facien, :
Necnon pro proditoriis arte, parte, confilio et afliftencia datis et exhibitis dictis perfonis, in faciendo
patrem noftrum contra nos fe eregere, ad diftructionem noftre perfone, in preparamento et araymento
campi bellici, apud Striuelin, vndecima die menfis Junij vltimi elapfi, poft diuerfas Concordias et
Appunctuamenta inter nos et patrem noftrum iiiita, ad que femper eramus, pront tunc prompti, geiiubus flexis, inter bella optulimus perimplere, et confilio fuo fracta et perturbata ; cuius confilio, cum
aliis, in inicio belli dictus quondam pater nofter campuni reliquit, et in manus riliuin perfonaruin incidit, et occifus fuit : Insuper, pro proditoriis arte, parte et confilio Occifionis eiufdem, fuis proditoriis
confilio, ductione, et gubernacione : Et fuper aliis quampluribus criminibus et proditoriis tranfgreffionibus, per ipfum Johannem Ross contra nos et reguuni noftrum inique perpetrate, juij parend. :
Intimando dicto Johanni, quod fiue dictis die et loco cum continuacione dierum coniparucrit fine non,
VOL. I. - I I?

10 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1488.

nos nicliilominus in premifTis, juflieia mediante, pvocedemus. Et prefentes literas debite executas et
Indorfaciones eaiundem reddite latori : Et vos qui prefentes exeeuti fueritis fitis ibidem dicto die
coram nobis, portantes vobifeum Summonicionis veftre teflimonium et nomina teftium in fcriptis pro
premiflis feu ipfos tefles : Ad quod faciendum vobis et veftmm cuilibet in hac parte coniunctira et
diuifira plenariam committimus poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio Magnj Sigilli noftri, apud Edinburgiie, fecundo die menfis Julij, anno regnj noftri primo.

Poll cniufqiiidem Summonicionis lecturam, idem vicecomes probauit dictam
Summonicioneni legittime executam, per fuam indorfacionem, et certos teftes in
eadem indorfacione contentos, ad hoc inibi in judicio productos et juratos, videlicet Nigellum Campbele, Hugonem Flemyn, Walterum Kide, Thomam 5oung,
Johannem Montgumery et Robertum Fergulliill de eodem ; cuius indorlacionis
tenor fequitur.

Indorjac'tones five Executiones Summonicionis Forisfacture.

The xiij dayof the monetlie of Auguft, the jcre of God (I'".iiij<'.)lxxxviij 3eris, I Carrik, Purfevvant,
and fcheref in ]iat parte, perfonaly paft to )ie Chemis of Montgrenane, and fare fummond, chargeit
and warnit Johne |ie Ros of Montgrenane to compere before our fouerane lord in liis Parliament to
be haldin at Edinburghe the ix day of the nionethe of October nixt to cum, with continuacioune of
dais, to anfuer to his hienes apone all ])e pointis, articlis and crime, of Treffoune contenit in our fouerane lordis jettrez : Before fir Witnes, William Campbele, Hew Flemyn, Thomas goung, and Walter
Kid, with vtheris diuerfe. The famniyn day, I fe faid Carrik paft to ]ie merkat corfe of Irwin,
and fare be oppin proclamacioune fummoud fe faid Johne the Rofs of iMontgrenane to compere before
our fouerane lord fe faidis day and place, to anfuere to his hienes apone the poyntis and articlis contenit in fir lettrez : Before fir Witnes, Johne of Montgumry brofer to the Lord of Montgumry,
Johne of Montgumry of Giffyn, Robert of Fergulliill of fat like, and Johne of Fergulhill, with vtheris
diuerfe. The xvj day of f e monethe of Auguft, I Carrik, Purfewant, paft to the merkat corfe of
Are, and fare be oppin proclamacioune fummond and chargeit the faid Johne the Rofs to compere
before our fouerane lorde, at day and place aboune writtin, to anfuere to all poyntis and articlis contenit in fir lettrez : Before thir Witnes, Johne Campbele of Schankiftoune, Fergufe Ferguflbune of
Kilkerane, Andro Bufljy alderman of Are, James Campbele of fe Brownfide, with vferis diuerfe. In
witnes hereof I haue fet to my Signet.

Quo Johanne Rofs fepe A'ocatus, per dictum Summonicionem et tenorem eiufdem, ad refpondend. dicto domino noftro Regi in prefenti Parliamento, fuper
proditoriis actionibus in dicta Summonicioiie coiitentis, et non comparen. legittimo tempore diei expectato, ordine et procelFu continuacionum dicte Summonicionis per Dominos, Barones, et Burgorum conimiHarios hue ufque juridice procedi, vifis et intellectis, Colinus Comes de Ergile, &c. Cancellarius dicti domini
noftri Regis et eius nomine, de luo expreflb mandato, requifuiit et peciit a dictis
Dominis, Baronibus et Burgorum CommilFariis fua fenfiamenta et Uecreta Parliamenti, penes proceff'um dicte Sumniooicionis, fi dictus Johannes Rol's de IMontgrenane fuit culpabilis in proditoriis actionibus prenominatis, et in dicta Sumiiionicione contentis : Quibus Dominis, Baronibus et Burgorum Commiftariis deligenter et mature auilatis, inuenerunt, et vnufquifque pro feipfo, deliberauerunt,
quod dictus JoiiANXES Ross fuit culpabilis in omnibus proditoriis actionibus

1 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 11

prenominatis in dicta Summonicione contentis, exceptis factis apud Abirdene: Ex
ideo datura fuit pro Judicio fiue Laudo Foriffacture, per os Alexandri Dempftar
Judicatoris Parliaraenti, in modo et forma fequen. in wlgari.
Judicium five Laudum Forisfacture.
This Court of Parliament fchewis for law, and I gif for Dome, that forfamekle
as it is fundin be fenfment of Parliament, that Johne the Ross of MontGRENANE has committ and done Treflbune agane oure fouerane lorde ]je King
and his Realme, in the pointis and articlis abone writtin, contenit in pe Summondis maid J)airapone, except ]>q wyrkingis maid at Abirdene, That ])airfore
))e laid Johne J)e Rols has forfalt to our fouerane lorde })e King, his lif, landis,
officis, gudis movable and vnmouable, and all vtheris his poffeffionis quhatfumeuer he haid within ])e realme of Scotlande, euermare to remane with our faid
fouerane lorde, his airis and fucceffouris, for his Treffoune and offence. And J)'
I gif for Dome.

l^i^i) Crmsoit.

Eodem die, Cuthberto Murray de Cokpule^ fepe vocato, per Summonicionem regiam et tenorem eiufdem fub teftimonio Magnj Sigilli regii defuper directo, ad refijondend. perfonaliter dicto domino nofti'o Regi, in prefenti
Parliamento, fuper certis proditoriis actionibus in dicta fummonicione contentis ;
et non comparend. continuatur ad craflinum videlicet decimum quintum menfis
inftantis Octobris, cum continuacione dierum, in eadem forma ut nunc eft, abfque preiudicio parcium.

2£lf fjulatiouia for ii)t tiwt StUministratioit of S"stirt»

[One of the earliest public Acts of the first Parliament of King James IV^ throws much valuable
light on the energy and vigour recommended and enforced by tlie advisers of the young King, whose
personal activity and zeal in the discharge of all the functions of the royal office are well known and
acknowledged. It is preceded by the following brief resolution,^ which, as is generally allowed, he
fulfilled even to the letter. ' It is avifit and concludit, anent the furthe putting of juftice throw all the
Realme, that our fouerane lord sall ride in proper persoune about to all his Aieris : And |)at
his Justice fall pas with his hienes, to minifler juflice, as beis thocht expedient to him and his Counfale for the tyme.'

As the future proceedings frequently refer to the discharge of the important duties intrusted to the
Lords and Barons named, it has been considered necessary to lay before the reader the particulars,
which as usual are concisely stated.]

Oct. 17. — ' Anent the ftanching of Thift, Reff, and vtheris innorraite3
throw all Jje realme, thir Lordis vnder writtin has maid faithe and gevin J)ar

' This case was continued from time to time ; but, from the imperfect state of the Records, it does
not appear whether lie was forfeited or not. The probability is that he was not, otherwise so much
dL'lay would not have been granted him. " Acta Purl. IISS, cap. 9. ' lb. cap. 8.

12 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1488.

bodily aitliis to our fouerane lord, in this his Parliament, that ])ai and ilkane of
thame fall diligently, withe all cure and befinace, ferche and feik quhar ony fic
trefpaffouris ar fundin or knawin within ])ar boundis, and tak ])ame and jullify'
J^anie, or niak J>ame be fend to our fouerane lord to be juftifiit : And J)a' fall liaue
pouere of our fouerane lorde, vnder his quhite walx, to tak and punys the faidis
trefpaffouris but fauouris, according to juflice : And als, to gif Jjarae pouere to
caufe vtheris fmale Lardis within ])ar boundis to mak faith elik wife, and to rife
and affift to \>ame in the takyne of pe faidis trefpaffouris.

Bakons appointed to search for and punish trespassers.

The Lord Halis and Alexander Hume for the 3Ierse, Lol'diane, ]>e Wardis of HadingTOUXE, LlNLITUQIf and L.IUDF.RDAILE.

The Lord Halls for Kiecudbrycut and Wiutoune.

The Erle of An'guse for the fclierefdomei of Roxburghe, Selkirk, Peblis, Lasask,

The faid Erle and the Lord Maxwell for Drumfbese.

The Lord Kennydy for Carrik.

The Schereff of Are for Are.

The Lard of Cragy for Kile.

The Lord of Montgummerry for Cunynghame.

The Erle of Leuuenax, the Lord Lile, Mathew Stewart, for Renfrew, the Monkland, Len^hey, Bothdile, Glasgh; Kilbride, Avandaile.

And the forftiid Lordis and tlie Lord of Montgummerry for Dunbartane, the Leuuenax,
Bute, and Arane.

The Schereff of Steruiline and James of Schaw for Steruelinschir.

Archibalde Edmanstoune for 3Ienteitiie and Straitiiegarthenay.

The Chancellar, the Maister of Ergile, for Ercile, ]'e half of Lorne, Knabdane, KynTYRE and COWALE.

Duncane Campbell, Neile Stewart and Ewyne Campbell, for Discuer, Toyere, GlenunaiiAR, Rannociie, Apnadvle, Glenlyoune, Glenfalloiche.

The Erle of Athole and Alexander Robertsoune for Athole.

The Lorde Drummonde for Straitherne, Blwhequhedere, and Dunblane.

The Lord Oliphant for ])e Lavvlande of fe Scherefdome of Perthe, Strathebratne, and the
bifchoprik of Dvnkeldene.

The Lord Gray, the Lord Glammys, the Maister of Craufurde for Anguse, Hie land
and Law land ; and to fitt with ])E Justicis of the Regalitej, &c.

The Erle Marciall for the Mernis.

The Erle of Huxtlie, the Erle of Erole, the Lard of Ikuerrugy fra the Months
northe fra Inuerneffe, in

The Schereff of Fiff and ]ie Lorde Lindesay for ]'e fcherefdonie of Fiff.

df oiftiturt Qi X\)t €ai1 Qi 5!tnino.i, ijis sou xiyt iHasUr of lttnno.i:,

antr EovtJ %\)\tf ifrallciJ.

[Shortly after the coronation of James IV, the leaders of the party who had unsuccessfully
opposed him while Prince, at the Field of Stirling, precipitately organized a Conspiracy against him,

' Execute them ; put them to deiith, after legal trial.

1 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 13

under the pretence of revenging the late King's death. For tliis purpose they hoisted the bloody
shirt of James III as tlieir standard, and appealed to the sympathies of the people. The attempt
appears to have been premature, and proved abortive ; for John Earl of Lennox, and Robert Lord
Lyle, the Earl Marischall, Lords Forbes and Crichtoun, with the Master of Huntley, &c. were
totally overthrown, in the month of October 1489, near Touch, at the Talk Moss, being about sixteen miles from the town of Stirling. The King, however, with singular leniency, speedily restored
them to his favour, and spared theii- estates.

Reference may be made to 3Ir Tythr's valuable Historical work' for a full account of all these
transactions, which are likewise related by Buchanan, Lesley, &c. which last authority states,^ that
' ane greit nomber of the Lennox men wer (lane, and findry of the Barronis, fie as the Lords (Lairds)
of Kilcrouicht and utheris, tane and hangit tliairfoir.'^ Sir James Balfour informs us, that this ' Laird
of Kilcreuche' was ' Chieft'e of the Galbraithes.' ^

It has been thought that the reader would prefer to have before him the King's warrant for recalling the Forfeitures which had taken place. The Act of Parliament itself may be seen in the new
and valuable Edition of the Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, printed under the care of Thomas
Thomson, Esquire, the present Deputy Clerk Register.]

Jun. 26, 1489- — Pkeceptum Regis pro extraccione procejjus Comitis
de Lettenax, Roherd Dombii L'de, et Mathej Stewart.^
Rex,

Clerk of our Registre. Wit 3e, that fforfamekle as it is now fundin
and declarit be the thre eftatis in this oiire Parliament, that Jje Procefs of Forfaltour led apone oure coufingis Johne Erle of LeueNx\x, Lord Dernely,
Matho Stewart his fone and apperand are, Robert Lord Lile, in our
Parliament haldin laft of before, in our burghe of Edinburghe, is fundin and
declarit of nane avale, as ]>e Act of Parliament maid now pairapone proportis :
It is oui'e AVill, and we charge 30W, that 36 herfore, incontinent eftir the ficht
of ]jir our lettrez, tak furthe J»e faid jjrocefs of Forfaltour of 50ur bukis of Parliament, and deliuer \>e fammyn to Jje faid Johke, Matho, and Robert, and
diftroy J)e fammyn procefs, in fie wife, ])at it be neuer fene in tyme tocum. And
this one na wife 36 lef vndone : Halding ])ir our lettre5 fubfcriuit with our
hande for 3our werrande. Writtin at Edinburghe, the vj day of Februare, the
3ere of God J".iiijMxxxix 3eris, and of our regne the fecunde 3ere.

[James R.]

Dilecto clerico noftro Magistro Ricardo Murehede, Decano Glafgueu.
Clerico Rotulorum noftrorum et Regiftri ac Confilij, &c.

' Tyller's Hist, of Scotland, IV. 345, &c. « Bannatyne Club's Edit. 4to, 1830, p. 60. ^ The

want of the Criminal Records prevents us from ascertaining who these persons were. * Annales,

I. 215. ^ This was done by Act of Pad. Feb. 5, 1489-90. Vid. Acta Pari. IL 217.

14 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1493.

LAUDIR.

CvRiA ftqyremi domini ?io/?ri Regis, {tenfa apudy hurgum de Laudir, die
Joms,Jeptmo die menjis Nov[emhns, anno 3IiUefimo) quadringentefimo
Nonogejimo tercio, coram nobilibus dorninis (Roberto domino Lyle
et LAt;REN)Tio domino Ouphant, Jnjiiciariis Jhpremi domini Regis,
ex {parte aujiruli aque de) Forthe.

Ettters t^l (^tnrral Memission,

GRANTED BY KiNG JaMES IV. TO THE INHABITANTS OF BERWICKSHIRE,

THE Merse, and Lauderdale.
James, be the grace of God King of Scottis, to all and fyndrie oure

Jufticis, Juftice clerkis, Ci-ounaris, and thare deputis, and utheris

oure officiaris, liegis, and fubditis, (quhome it) efFeris,^ qviliais knawlege thir oure
lettres fal cum, greting. For famekil as We grantit, of before, generale Remiffionis to all and lyndri oure liegis and fubditis, inhabitant the boundis of the
Sherefdome of Berwic, the Merfe, and Lawdirdale, for all crimej and actionis
comniittit be thame, in ony tyme bigane, before the day of oure Coronatioune :
And as 5it, ane pairt of oure liegis has nocht rafit thare Reniiffionis thai-eupoune :
We heirfoir, of our fpeciale grace and favouris, has Refpectit,^ Remittit, and
Forgevin, and be oure Lettres fpecialie Refpectis, Rernittis, and Forgevis for
evirmare, all and lyndri oure liegis and fubditis, inhabitant the boundis of oure
Sherefdome of Beruic, the Merse, and Lawdirdale, of quliat eftate, degre,
or conditioune thai be of, to be unattachit, unarreftit, unperfewit, unfolowit, ony
nianer of way, in all tyme3 to cum, be ony of our officiaris, liegis, or fubditis foirfaidis, for ony crime5, ofTenfis, reffis, herfchippis, flauchteris, birnyngis, murthir,
trefonis, or uthir trefpaffis quhatfumevir, committit or done ony maner of way,
before the date of oure Coronatioune foirfaide, be ony of our liegis or fubditis
forfaid. Quhairfor, We charge flraitlie and commandis 50U, all and findrie
oure liegis and fubditis forfaid, that nana of 30U tak upoun hand, to attach,
arreft, perfew, or folow ony maner of way, ony of our liegis or fubditis forfaid,
for ony crimen of trefone, ofTenfis, or trelpaffis quhatfumevii-, committit or done
be thame, or ony of thaim, in tyme5 bigane, before tlie day of our Coronatioune
forfaide, in ony tyme to cum. As 5e wil anfuer to us thareupoune, and undir
all the hieft payne, charge, and offeus that 36 or ony ane of 30U may committ or
inryn* agane our Majeftd riall,' in this prefent ; difchargeing 50U and ilk ane of
':;ou of ';our officis in that pairt, be thir oure Letres : Gevin undir oure Priv^
Sele, at Dingvale, the xxiiij day of October, the 3ere of God I", iiij'. nynty thre
3eris, and of our regne the fext 3ere.

' The words williin parentheses are supplied from similar entries. The commencement of the volume
is much decayed and destroyed by damp, &c. ^ Whom it concerns ; to whose knowledge, &c.

' Respited. * Literally run into ; incur. ^ Royal.

6 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 15

LAUDia.

Nov. 9, {dies Sahhati,^ viz. tercia dies Itineris.) — Thomas Broune, in
Langtoune, convicted of art and part of the (laughter of umq'" Thomas Achinfoune. — Beheaded." — James Broune in Langtoune was put to the liorn, &c.
for the fame crime ; and his cautioner, William Amere, fon of Robert A. in
Todrik, was amerciated in L.20 for his non-ajipearance. — (Nov. 12.) Robert
DouGAL in Langtoune was beheaded for the fame daughter.

jiamtsurlun — ^touti)rf if.

Nov. 12. — William Cokburne, fon and heir of the Laird of Langtoune, and nine others, permitted to compound for art and part of the forethought felony and ' Hamefukiu' done to Robert Sleich, his wife and children,
at the Place of Oxindeu : And alio, for Stouthreif of a bonnet and ' quhyngare'
from the faid Robert, at the fame time.

iStiHiirij: ^arrs in forliilJlint time.

W^illiam Cokburne,^ fon and heir of the Laird of Langtoune, came in
the King's will for flaying of Hares, during the forbidden time.

<^tout|)rrif from tfjt EaiiU of ^^pottisiMootr, ^r,

Nov. 13.— Symon Furde in Toftis, and Thomas Furde of Litil Harlaw, and fix others, came in the King's will, for forethought felony and ' Hamefukin' done to James Spottifwode of that Ilk, George and Adam Spottifwode, at
the Place of Spottifwode : And alfo, for art and part of the Stouthreif of three
lances from the faid perfons, at the fame time. — The Mafter of Hume and
George Hume of Wethirburne became cautioners for the fatisfaction of the Kinsr
and parties. (Amerciated L 4 each.)*

^lau ill)tn— dTorttljou g:i)t dfrloni).

James Spottisavode, junior, Adam S. and Thomas Wod, got a Remiffion for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of vmq'^ Thomas Burne, in the town
of Blythe : And alfo, for art and part of the forethought felony done to Alexander Hog. — The Laird of Spottifwood became furety for fatisfying the parties.

' Saturday or Scihhath, the Jews' day of rest. Sunday is universally translated in ancient documents, especially legal writing-s, dies Soils or dies Dmimiica. Want of attention to this circumstance
has led to frequent errors and mistatcmeuts. ^ ' Mem". Quod de bonis Thome Broune datur

in elimofina uxori et prolibus, ij. vaccas, le rov. . . conium, cum utenfdibus domino Regi pertinen.'
' This case took place on the same day with the preceding. * This fine was probably to the

King. The parties would not be so easily dealt with. It may betaken for granted that all entries
of similar ' amerciaments' and fines, in the IJecord, were merely to the Crown, in moditm jtcvna, without reference to the ' airythment' or compensation to be made to the private party, which was matter of
private negotiation or of reference to arbiters mutually chosen.

16 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1493.

LAUDIR.

J'tloni) tionc ta tf)c ilauU of 23Ii>t|).

James Spottis'\a'ODE, junior, and Robert Steill came in the King's will
for the forethought felony done to James Weddale of BIyth. The Laird of
Spottifwood became cautioner to fatisfy the parties. Amerciated L.3 for each.

jfovtti)0\ig;i)t df clout).

Nov. 14, (Jexfa dies Ithieris.) — The Laird of Spottiswode, Adam
and James, his fons, and George, his brother, came in the King's will for the
forethought felony done to William Knox and Cuthbert Forfter, at Ryecluche.
The Laird became furety to fatisfy the King and parties. Each amerciated in L.9i

* Slfflirtto jtibtnis, pro Sntnfrrtionc in ortfunio rommissa/

[The following case of a boy of eight years of age being punished by public flogging at the parish
church of Legerwood, until blood should be drawn from him, is so remarkable, that the Editor has
deemed it best to give the precise words of the Record, tlie force of which would be much weakened
by any translation. In all similar instances, wherein the ordinary technical phraseology of the Books
of Adjouraal has been departed from, he has uniformly followed the same rule.]

Nov. 14. — Quo die Thomas Gotheasoune juvenis in judicio fatebatur
Interfectionem Johannis Sinythe, filij Thome Smy' : Quapropter ordinatur per
Jufticiarium, Vicecoraes Dominus de Corfby ad hoc juratus, affligere eundem
Thomam, pro hujufmodi Interfectione, apud Ecclefiam de Ligertwode, in cujus
parochia diet. Interfectio fuit commifla, in die lolemni, ulque ad effufionem fanguinis ; quia dictus Thomas Gothrafouue commifit dictam Interfectionem in
octennio, et in hac etate non poterat ad mortem pro crimine juftificari.'

Curia Ithieris Jujlicim-ie de Jedworthe, iuchoata die Lnne, N^ov. 17, 1493.

^nttifommunins iuitf) tl)c «f nijlisl)*

Nov. 19, {die Martis, tercia die Itincris.) — Waeter Talzour ' Baro
de Haffindene,' i)ermitted to compound for Intercommuning with tlie Engliili. —
The Laird of Bucluche became furety for the entry of the laid Walter, at the
next Juftice-aire.

Crrasoitaijli) iitinij bitf) X\)t 53ulu of ^Hjaiin.

Thomas Turnebule, in Gaithoulcot, produced a Remiffion for his
trealbnably being with Alexander formerly Duke of Albany ;' and fpecially, at
the Burgh-Mure of Edinburgh.

' Brother of King James III, and uncle to King James IV; and who treasonably conspired against
his brother. After having escaped from Edinburgh Castle, in 1470, he fled to France, and was for6Jac.IV. criminal trials. * 17

JEDWORTHE.

Sntrrrommuniiia iaiti) ^rdjitialti Slrmstrans.

Walter Robsone, in Harden, came in the King's Will for Intereomrauning with Archibald Armftrang, being at the horn for the Slaughter of the
Laird of Eldmere. — Walter Ker became furety.

Crrasonnfilp firiits iMitf) fi)t Sufer of ^liiani), ^r.

Ralph Anysle produced a Remiflion for his being treafonably with
Alexander formerly Duke of Albany ; and alfo with Richard Reid, Engliflnnan,
before the date of his Remiflion : Alfo, for art and part of the treafonable
Stouthi-eif and ' Herfcliip' made at the Place of Spittale of xxiiij oxen and cows,
and vj horfes and mares, with goods and utenfils worth x'"' li.,' from the tenants
thereof.- — Andrew Ker of Fairnyhirft became furety.

Jjiiiisins in ii)t CritslisI) of Ciinrtrale.

Symon 50UNG, in Rouchlee, produced a Remiflion for art and part of
the theftuous and treafonable inbringing of the Engliflimen of Tyndale to the
' Herefchip' of Thomas Leipdene and ]\^athew Michelfoune, dwelling in Hundolee. — Andrew Ker of Farnyhirft became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Sntrrrommuniiiff '^iiiy Xlyt f I)irbrs of %t\i\n\,

Nov. 20. — Walter Scot of Edfchaw permitted to compound with the
Treafurer for his treafonably Intercommuning with the Thieves and Traitors
of Levyn.

Crrasoitafili) ftring; ioitT) tijr tSnkt of ^Itiaiti).

Patrick Mow produced a Remiflion for his treafonably being with
Alexander formerly Duke of Albany.

^orttfjouijljt dTdonij — ^toutijrrif.

William Tayt in Cesfurde-manys, and Robert Burne his coufin-german, came in the King's Will for art and part of the forethought felony done to
Thomas 5oung, by way of Murder, at the ford of Cale :' And alfo, for Stouthreif
of a horfe, a faddle, a bow, with a fatchel and purfe,^ and 20 f. being in the faid
purfe. — Sir Robert Ker, knyght, became furety. Each amerciated in 40 f.

feited, Oct. 4 of tliat year. In 1482 lie went to Enprland, swore fealty to King Edward IV, and
assumed the Title of King of Scotland. Tlie King, liis brother, sliortly afterwards forgave him ; but
he once more proved a traitor ; and, after having given up tlie Castle of Dunbar to the English, again
retired to England. On Jul. 22, 1484, he was routed at Loeliniaben ; but escaped to France, leaving
the Earl of Douglas, &c. prisoners. He was a second time forfeited, Oct. 1, 1487, and his estates
were finally annexed to tlie Crown. This turbulent Prince was killed at a tournament in Paris, in 1485.
• Ten score, L.200. ^ g^g ^Jar. 2, 1494-5. = ' Cum pera et loculo.' Pera usually

denotes a poke, budget, or bag for provisions, &c.

VOL. I. f C

18 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D, 1493.

JEDWORTHE.

John Murray, (refidiug) with Walter Ker in Cesfurde, produced a
Remiffiou for art and part of the Slaughter of William Auchinlek : Item, for
the Stouthreif of five elns of white woollen cloth from David Wodes man, during
the time of the Rebellion of Alexander Duke of Albany.

Crtason — JUitn'rommuninQ; iuitl) tfjr Btifer of laiOann — Caluns
Drisonrr anft r.vartins liansont, sVr»

Adam Kirktouxe, in Craling-mylne, produced a Remiffion for treafonable outputting and inputting, and common Theft, common Relet and common Treal'on, before the date thereof : Item, for his ti'eafonably being with
Alexander late Duke of Albany ; Item, for the treafonable carrying off of a
llioe-maker in Jedworthe' to the Englifli ; and caufmg him to be redeemed for
L.4,0. — Dand' Ker of Farnyhirft became furety to fatisfy the party,

Jjiinsins in t\)t drngllsf) aiili i^IunUniiiti: iWinto, ^r,

William Grymyslaw, at the Kirk of Haiiindene, permitted to compound for art and part of the treafonable bringing in of the Englifli of Tynedale
to the ' Herefchij)' of 100 cows and oxen, 100 flieep, 20 horfes and mares, and
fundry iitenfils, furth of Mynto : Item, for his trealbnably Intercommuning with
the Thieves of Levyn. — Walter Scot of Howpaflot became furety for fatisfying
the parties.

Coiuealiiig; * pas-ptniips* fouiili in iiftinto-i^irlt.

Nov. 21. — John Sixclark in Mynto, and four others, came in the
King's Will for ti'eafonably concealing and Stouthreif of x"" ' pas-pennys"' pertaining to the King, found in the Kirk of Mynto. — The Laird of Bethroule and
William Langlandis became their fureties.

'»'

* ?t?rrfsrf)ip' of ^?arr|)t)3f— lUsrttin^ Craltors of ilrbrn,

Walter Scot of Howpaflot allowed to compound for trealbnably
bringing in William Scot, called Gtjde, John his brother, and other Traitors of
Levyn, to the ' Herefchip' of Harehede : Item, for theftuoufly and treafonably
Reletting of Henry Scot, and other Traitors of Levyn : Item, for the trealbn-

' Jedlmiiih. "^ Andrew. ' These were likely to be ten score ' paces' or ' Nohillis

of pay s,' English fjold coins or Nohles, wliith are frequently mentioned in our old Acts of Parliament. The term pace seems to have reference to their ireiylit, q. d. Heavy Nohles, Nobles of weight.
Although found in the Khk of Minto, there is no reason to suppose they were Pace or I^aster-offerings. There is no doubt that tliis jto/e was ' treafure-trove,' accidentally turned up and concealed by
Sinclare ; and as such it belonged to the King ; who, on the other hand, could have had no claim to
pious Easter-oflerings, made in grateful remembrance of the Resurrection. See also Nov. 9, 1302.

6Jac.IV. criminal trials. * 19

JEDWORTHE.

able Stouthreif of foi-ty oxen and cows, and two hundred flieep, from the Tenants
of Harehede, at the fame time. — Robert Scot of Quhitchefter became furety for
his entry at the next Jnftice-aire.

^tout|)rrif— ^t.iu0f)trr— Cmnmon CTjrft.

Peter Hall, in Newbiggin, produced a RemifRon for theftuoufly
concealing of a target (shield) made of tanned hide," and a fword, from John
Hall and Edmund Hall, furth of Newbiggin : Item, for art and part of the
Slaughter of John Henrifoune in Lyntounlee : Ifem, for Healing fix ewes^ from
Thomas Henrifoime, dwelling in Jed-Foreft : Ifem, for the Slaughter of the
faid Thomas : Atul for common Theft, before the date of his Reraiffion. —
David Anyfle became furety to fatisfy the parties.^

QJoHN Lord Drummond, depuft/ and lieutenant of Johx Lord Glammis, and Robert Lord
LiLE, Jtijticktrs on the South parts of the Forth.']

33urntn0 of ittnnto— ^Ijcrp-sttaluttr, ^r.

Feb. 26, 1594-5, {fecunda dies Itineris.) — Gilbert Schevil, in Bethroul, produced a Remiffion for Burning of Mynto : Item, for being art and
part with Alexander late Duke of Albany : Item, for flealing fourteen flieep,
' 5owis,' (ewes,) &c. &c The Laird of Bedroule became his cautioner.

^lausljttr, ^r«

James Pilmure, in Ednem, produced a Remiffion for theftuoufly
wafl;ing of the goods of George Smythe, at the time he lay with his wife:" Item,for
the Slaughter of Alan Glafgw. — Ralph Ker became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Crrasona&Ii) finnsing: in t|)r Cl)irbrs of llrbni, ^r.

Feb. 28, [dies Sabhafi.) — Hector Laudir, brother of the Laird of
Todrig, produced a Remiffion for treafonably bringing in of Willoc Elwalde,
Rolland Elwalde, and five brethern of the Armftrangis, Traitors of Levyn, to
the ' Herfchip' of Quhitmur : Item, for art and part of the Stouthreif of V" ^
cows and oxen, and the whole houfehold goods from the Tenants of Quhitmur,
at the fame time : Ite7)i, for Treafonably bringing in the Forftaris and other
Thieves of Levyn to the Pot-Loche of Selkirk, &c. &c. — Robert Scot, fon of
Walter of Edfchaw, became furetie to fatisfy the parties.

' ' Unius tergoris corticati.' - Ovium le jOwis. ' At the end of the proceedings of tliis

Aire, there is the following entry : ' Summa totalis extractus Itineris, Vf-iij"" xv lib. xviiij f. iiij d.
(L.575, 18s. 4d.) * In Adultery, ' tempore quo concubuit cum uxore ejus.' There are numerous
entries to the same effect, both in the Criminal Records and in the Register of the Privy Seal, where
Remissions frequently occur for this offence. ^ Five score.

20 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1494-5.

JEDWORTHE.

^IauQ:|)tn- of ^iv tSrortjc ^aruplnUj, r][)iT|)Iain,

Roger La>:glandis, Sir Robert Ker, ku', and John Rntherfurd of
Edgarftonne, often called to enter Roger Langlandis to underly the law for the
Slanghter of Sir George Farnylaw, chaplain, under the pain of L.20, for which
they had become bound to the Sheriff of Roxburgh, as they confeflTed in judo-ement ; and not appearing, they were amerciated in the laid liim : And it was
oi'dained, that the laid Roger lliall be denounced Rebel at the horn ; and all his
goods to be efcheated to the King.

^laugljtrr.

Thoisias Rutherfurd, Ion of Nicholas R., denounced Rebel, and all
his goods ordained to be efcheated, for not underlying the law for the Slaughter
of Dutliac Rutherfurde. — John R. of Edgarftoune, his cautioner, amerciated
L.40 for his non-appeai-ance.

2r|)rft— ^totitfjiTif— 33rtn0nin: in tijt €i)it'oto ot Erbnt. sVr.

Mar. 2, {quarta dies Itineris.) — Alexander TuRNBULE,fon of Andrew
of Dridaue, produced a Remiffion for the theftuous Refet of Adam Howatfoune
and Robert Jakfoun in the Thefts committed by them ; and fpecially, in the
Theft of fix ewes (' '^oivis ') from James Ker, furth of Faftheuche : Item, for art
and part of treafonably bringing in the Thieves and Traitors of Levyn upon
Thomas Myddilmaft, in Ploro ; and Slaughter of his wife, and two fons, called
Ninian and John : Item, for art and part of the treafonable Stouthreif, from the
laid Thomas Myddilmaft, at the fame time, of xj horfes and mares, price 100
merks ; xliiij oxen and cows, price L.88, &c. — (the specification is so remarkable
that the remainder of the charge is given in the original terms of the Record) —
' ij lejiaiid/s armorum,' precium L.20 ; xl lib. auri et argenti ;^ fex cocliarium
argenteoi'um,^ precium 6 marc. ; una magna duodena vaforum ftaneoruni,''
precium L.7 ; fex togarura virorum,' precium L.8 ; xj togarum fubuncularum
feminearum," precium L.22 ; xij flammearum," precium L.12 ; v cadurcarum,''
precium L.IO ; v arcium," precium 50 f. ; vj lancearum,'" vj bipenium," precium
L.2, 10 f. ; 2 annidlorum aureorum,'' precium L.5 ; iij le ti/kis dejeddirbeddis,
precium L.5; xxij parium linthiaminum,"' precium L.ll ; xxij coopertorium de le
iror/et," precium L.IO; xvj lodicum," precium L.6; xx trinaclium," precium

' Suits of mail or armour. ^ Gold and silver coin. ' Silver spoons. * A great dozen

of tin or pewter flagons or vessels. ' Men's govirns. '» Women's kirtles. ' Scarfs or veils.

' Generally understood to be blankets or coverlets ; but in this instance the term seems to be figuratively used for a sort of shield or target. ■' Iland-hows. '" Lances. " Halberts or
Pole-axes ; ' Jeddart-flaffis.' '' Gold rings. " Pairs of linen sheets. " Blankets ;
worsted coverlets. " Sheets. "' Perhaps crinacUum, hair-pins, or bodkins. The Editor
never met with this word before, and he does not find it in Ducangc or the other Glossaries.

7Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 21

JEDWORTHE.

20 f. ; V gladiorum,' precium L.5 ; unius dacre core] frimiti," precium L.3 ;
ocrearuin cellarum" et aliorum bonorum utenfilium, precium L.5 ; quinque
capparum Flandrie/ precium L.2, 10 f. ; duarum telarura panni gerfij/ precium
L.IO ; trium telarum panni linej," precium L.3 ; v boxarum, precium L.2, 10 f. ;
quatuor le co^tvw, precium 26 f. 8d. ; quinque duplij camentorum biftmiti/
precium L.2, 10 f. ; trium ulnarum pauni Anglicani," precium L.3 ; trium
manitergiorum,' precium 6 f. — Robert Scot of Quhitchefter became furety to
fatisfy the parties.

jroi*tt!)oucrIjt felony— raouuKiufl—^^toutl^riet

David Tait, brother of William in Cesfurdmanys, came in will, for art
and part of the forethought felony done to Thomas ^o\mg, and cruelly Wounding him, at Cail,'" under lileuce of night; and for Stouthreif from him, at the
fame time, of his horle, laddie, bow, pair of fpurs, ' qvihin5eare,' purfe, and xx f.
of filver therein. — The faid William became furety to fatisfy the King and party.

Curia Itineris Jujlk.'ume de Liddalisdale, inclioafa Mar. 3, 1494-5.

Cfje (Qnxl of liotib^ell antr ^)t %mti of ^^Wvnlt amerciatrt, ^r.

William Elwalde. — Patrick Earl of Bothvile and Lord of Liddalifdale, and George Turnbule of Hall-Rule," Captain of Hermitage, called as lawful
fureties of the faid William, as they received him in Indenture from the Coroner;'^
and not compearing, they were amerciated in xl. — On the fame day, they wei-e alfo
amerciated for the non-appearance of eighty-five others, Elwaldis, Armflrangis,
Wighames, Crofares, viz. to the extent of L.850 ; among the reft appear Archihald Armjtrangf Cole W'lghume, 8if.

<#Iati0Tjttr— ^nttrromiminiitn; inft!) a llrfcrl.

Mar. 3, {quiuta dies Itineris."') — Robert Scot of Quhitcheftir permitted
to compound for the Slaughter of Adam Craufurde : And for Refetting, iupplying, and Intercommuning with Alexander Jardine, being at the horn The

Laird of Buckcluche become furety to fatisfy the parties.

' Swords. ^ One ddker of tanned hides. A daker of hides consists of ten skins. ^ Riding

greaves or boots. ' Flanders caps. ^ Webs of gi-ey (worsted) cloth. ^ Webs of linen

cloth. " The Editor can form no idea of the nature of tliese articles. There must surely have

been some extraordinary mistake on the part of the transcriber, in copying the items from the Dittay.
« Three elns of English cloth. " Handkerchiefs. '" See Nov. 20, 1493. i' Aula de

Roule. '2 A (.o'^ " ' Viz. tercia Martij Carnifpriicy, ' (in Le7it.)

22 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1494-5.

LIDDALISDALE.

aarsrtttitir a 3Krl)tl— ^lautjljtfi- of ti^c llaiitj of (iJlmnt.

Elizabeth Thomsoune, in Corriflieuche, permitted to compound for
Refetting Joifle Glenquhiu, being at the horn for the Slaughter of the Laird of
Elmere.

(J?.rpritsr9 of tl)C ^ivt of 3iftiiooiti)^'

SuMMA Totalis extractus de Jedwortbe, (Exceptis bonis efcaetis),
Item, pro expenfis Domini Justiciarii, tempore Itineiis,

Item, pro expenfis Domini Thesaurarii, et Abbatis de Dunfermling composiT0RUM,3 .........

Item, pro expenfis Domini Camerarii compofitoris, . . .

Item, Clericis Justiciarie, ......

fSurama Expenfai'um, Ixiij li.]
Item, pro hofpitio Domini Jufticiarij, .....

Item, pro hofpitio Domini Thefaurarij, .....

Item, pro hofpitio Domini Abbatis de Dunfermling, ....

Item, pro hofpitio clericorum, ......

Item Fratribus de Roxburgh, in elemofina Regis, ....

Item, pro firma Domus Affife, ......

[Summa hospitiorum, viij li. vj f. viij d.]

SuMMA totalis Extractus, expenfis deductis, . . . I^.V". xiiij li. xiij f. iiij d.

(Vij'. xxxiij li. except. Liddifdaile.)

Bona, 2}''ffo»t>s Itineris de Jedworthe.
Matho Gothrafone, in Mow, ...... j cow, vij gait.

Jok Wricht, in Lyntoune, ...... j mere, j pot.

David Wricht, in Lyntoune, brothir to Dik Wrycht, ... j cow, j nag.

Johne Tumbule, Sande Turnbulis brothir of Bellentyn, callit blind Johne, ij ky.

Johne Tumbule, callit Caje, in Nethir Bonecheftir, . . . iiij ky.

xv^.lxxxiij li.'

xiiij li.

xxviij li.

xiiij H.

vij li.

xxvj f. vii d.

xlf.

XX f.

XX f.

xlf.

XX f.

[Curia Itineris Jiifticiarie de Selkirk, inchoata die Mercurij, quarto die
moifis Martij, I594(-5.) Coram Johanne domino Drummonde, deputaio et Locum-tcnente Johannis domimiGlaimmvs, t'/RoBERXi domini
LiLE, Jujliciuriornm _/.' d. n. Hegis, ex parte aujlrali aqua de FortJie.']

^\)tt^ aiitj .?i)ovsr-6traIliig:,

Mar. 5. — Dauid Turnbule, fon of the Laird of Quhithope, in Ernheuch, produced a Remiffion for art and part of the Stouthreif of xiiij ewes
(' 5o«7V) from Ninian IMurray, furth of Kerfliop : Item, for Stealing a white
horl'e furth of Innerlethane, from Thomas Foreft, &c. — Walter Scot of Tufchelaw became furety for fatisfying the parties.

' Reference may be made to the Appendix to this reign, for many interesting notices connected with
the Justice-aires. ^ L.1583. ^ Tlie Compositors for each Aire were formerly appointed by the
Privy Council.

7Jac.3^3£- criminal trials. * 23

SELKIRK.

^toiitljrt if from ti)t Coixicr of ?i?oU)pnsIot, kt.

James Turnbule, brother of the Laird of Quhithoii, produced a
Remiffion for art and part of the Thift of xviij ewes furth of Bowhill, from
Robert Blacdene, in company with Walter Dalglefch : Ifem, for art and part of
the Stouthreif of iron windows,' doors, and ' crukis' furth of the Tower of
Howpaflot, pertaining to the Laird thereof.^ — The Laird of Quhithop became
fiu-ety to fatisfy parties.

33uninitr t])t l^Iarr of dfast|)nif|)— Mif?er6rl)ip* of i^anuitsrljab, ^r.

Andrew Turxbule, 'calvus' (bald), produced a Remilfion for art and
part of Burning of the Place of Faftheuch, and Stouthreif of certain horfes,
cattle, and other goods furth thereof : Ifem, for the theftuous Refetting of the
Traitors of Levyn, coming with them to the Place of Hangitfchaw ; and for
Stouthreif of eight horfes, and goods and utenfils therefrom, to the value of
p 1. — The Laird of Quhithop became furety to fatisfy the parties.

3Ucsttttntj: Ciaitors of '£t\)tn, ^r.— ^pprrssion— Sntcrrommuntncj
iiiitij tlje CEiifflisI)— ^latitjfjttr, kc.

Mar. 5. — John Scot of Dali.oriane allowed to compound for art
and part of the Reletting of John Rede and John Scot (Scot-Stow, in Tufchelaw) in his theftuous deeds ; and fpecially, the time that the faid John (Scot)-
Stow Hole a ' dri/'f (drove) of flieep from Thomas Johnfone, furth of Quhithop :
Item, for treafonably Refetting Hector Armftrang, a traitor of Levyn, in his
theftuous deeds and treafuns, &c. &:c. :^ I/em, for common Oppreffion of the
lieges, in taking and plundering them of their horfes and goods, by his own
authority : Item, for Intercommuning with the Englifli, in treafonable manner :
Item, for common Relet of the Thieves of LiddalilUaile, Edvdale, and Ewifdale :
Item, for Slaughter of one called Colthride, &c. &c. — Robert Scot of Quhitchefter
became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^:orgt--stfaltntj: from tijr €ai'\ of Slnrrus's ^erbants, ^f.

Mar. 6. — Adam Scot, in Auldinuifchop, fuffered to compound for
Stealing two horfes from the I'ervants of the Earl of Angus, coming to Ileremitage : Item, for the theftuous and treafonable Reletting of the Traitors of
Levyn in their Thefts and Treafonable Deeds, &c. &c. — Walter Scott of Howpaflot become furety to fatisfy the parties.

* ' Feniftrarum ferrearum ;' perhaps tlie phrase may denote stanclteons, or rather the strong iron
frame-work built or soldtred into the solid masonry, beyond the casement. It was not usual to glaze
iron work. 2 Walter Scot. ^ There is a long catalogue of similar crimes of no interest.

24 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1494-5.

SELKIRK.

William Clerk, at the Kirk of Ettrick,' produced a Remiffion for the
Slaugliter of Robert Hay, Gilbert Cokburne, Thomas Lovel, and Gilbert Kermichel. — David Priugil of Torwodlee became furety to fatisfy the parties.^

^rrrrpt in falmur of ^iv d)omas Curnibulr.

Justice, It is our will, and for certane confiderationis niovyng us, We charge 50U, hat je
charge nocht, nor compel our lovit knycht. Sir Thomas Turnbule, to fynd fouerte, in our Juftice
air, for fatisfactioune of party, for ony aetioune ])at he may be accufit of, committit before our Coronatioune. And ]iis Precept be 50U fene and underflandin, delyver ])e famyn agane to Jie berar.
Gevin uudir our fignet, at Linlithgw, ])e xxv day of Februare, and of oure regne Jie fevint ^ere.

[JAMES R.]

aSontJ fiy m^aUtv ^rott of Bululniirfjr.

[The following document is given here, as a specimen of the forms of such writings at this early
period. They are only occasionally inserted at length in the Record, in remarkable cases, and in many
instances contain the signatures of the parties.]

Apud Edinburghe, 3Ia/J .Tvi/J, 1498. — In prefence of ])e Lordis of Counfale,
Walter Scot of Bukcleuiche is becummyn plege and fouirte for pe entre
of Georg 5o""8'' takin by Rin3eane of Rujj'furde, Hew of Doiiglace, and ])are
complicis, furthe of Mynto tonne; contenit in a Bill of complaynt gevin in be
\)e fade Walter, Jjat he fall entir pe faide Georg joxmg, in pe next Juftice-are of
Jedvvorthe, pe thrid day of pe famniyn, till undirly pe law, apone pe actionis and
crime3 til be imput be pe faidis Rin3ean and Hew, and ])air complicis ; undir pe
pain of xl li.

[Curia Itineris Juft'iciar'te cle Peblis, inchoata die Lune, xij die menfi^
Novemhris, 1498, coram Johanne domino Drummond.]
Nov. 15, {qiiarta dies Itineris.) — John Twedy of Drummel5ARe
and five others came in the King's Will for art and jiart of the Oppreffion done
to Ofwald Portewis and Jonet Flemyn his f^joufe, in ejecting them furth of their
fet in Uvir Kingildurris. — The faid John became furety to the King and parties.
Each fined in five merks.

3iailjarous ^^jjpirssion, ^r.

Nov. 16. — Alexander Scot, in Hoptoune, allowed to compound for
Oppreffion done to Andrew Tal5our, in riding his mare to death : Item, for

' ' Apud Ecclefiam Forelle' (viz, de Ettrick.) - ' SuMArA totalis Extractus de Selkirk,

ij''.xxxv li. Suinma Exponfarum, xxxvi li. — Summa Hofpitiorum, iij li. xiij f. iiij d. — Summa totalis
Extractus, expenfis dcductis, ij' .iij li. vj f. viij d.'

IUac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 25

PEBLIS.

OpprefRon done to Thomas Elphinftoune, in ftriking his cow till flie died : Item,
for OpprefRon done to a child' of the Laird of Adamlande, in ftriking him till
he could not rife : Item, for forethought felony done to Thomas Elphinftoune,
in Manniflande, and hurting him. — William Bel, in Pehlis, became furety to
fatisfy the parties.

<#"tenltit0 out of X\)t itirfe tsi Sinurleitfjen.

David Tait, fon of Roger Tait, produced a Precept of Remiffiou for
art and part of the Stealing of a golden fignet (leal), a gold ring, two filver
girdles," nine veils' of ' lawne,' * holland-claithe,'^ and other goods, to the value
of XX li., from John Turnbule, brother of the Vicar of Innerlethane, furth of the
Kirk of Innerlethane : Item, for art and part of the Theft of xij merks of gold
and filver from Sir Williame Jurdane, furth of the faid Kirk. — David Tait of
Pryn^ became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^toutl)rtit

James Huntare and Gilbert Huntare, fons of the Laird of Polmude,
convicted of art and part of the Stouthreif of half a ' fudder' of hay from Thomas
Frefal and his brothers, furth of Nethir Myn5eane. — Walter Huntare, fon and
heir apparent of the Laird of Polmude, became furety to fatisfy the King and
party, viz. each of them v li.

austttiiTtr a Cmitor — dTirf-raisfnja:.

Nov. 18, {dies Sahbati, Jexta dies Itiueris.) — Thomas Myddilmast
of Greveftoun produced a Refpite for Refetting of James Elwalde and his
accomplices, during the time the faid perfous committed Fire-raifing and Burning
of a ' Pele'° in Bothil, together with goods and utenfils to the value of iiij*" li.'
belonging to William Hair : And for being art and part of the faid Burning of
the Place and goods forefaid, being in the hands of our lord the King for the
time, by reafon of Ward. — Sir John Hay of Snaide, kn', Sheriff" of Peblis,
became furety.

^tmitijitif of tl)t cravl of ^itcrus's Imut,

Siu William Cokbuhne of Scraling, knight, came into the King's
will for art and part of the Stouthreif of a lance from a certain man of the Earl

' Cuidam pioli. ° Or zones; ' ciugnlonim' •' Perhaps scarfs; 'Jiammearum^ * Fine

linen cloth, orisfinally imported from the Low Countries. ^ Pirn. ^ Peilh, or Peylls, were

places of strength or fortifications, generally constructed on natural or artificial eminences ; and must
have been very numerous in Scotland. The name, however, is often applied to Roman forts or custella.
They seem to have been chiefly of use to retire to in cases of sudden attack or invasion, as, from their
size and strength, they could not sustain a protracted siege. "' Fourscore pounds.

VOL. I, f D

26 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1498.

PEBLIS.

of Angus ; which had been his own lance, and was previoufly flolen by the faid
man from his fervant, the fame day.

EdwaB-D Cokburne produced a Remiffion for the Slaughter of Roger
Twedy, in company with the Laird of Hennirlande. — William Cokburne of
Hennyrlande became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^latiffljtcr— ^toutlji'tif— iHulilatioiT tnirinci; 4?avliameiit.

Sir William Cokbuune of Scraling, kn', James his brother, and John
Pattonibun, in Kingildurris, produced a Remiffion for art and part of the
Slaughter of ^^^alter Twedy, fon of John Twedy of Drava, in Peblis : I/em, for
art and part of Stuuthreif of a Iword and fliield from the faid Walter, at the
fame time : Item, the faid William and James, for forethought felony done to
Andrew Twedy, within the town of Edinburgh, during the time of Parliament ;
and for Mutilating him. — Sir William became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Jiuvniiifr of Cobaiitounc — ^Iaug:f)tfr, ^r,

Nov. 19. — William Mure ay of Newhall produced a Remiffion for
art and part of the treafonable inbringing of John Douglas, Traitor, furth of
England, the time he committed Fire-raifing, Burning, and ' Herefchip' upon
the town and lands of Covautoune ; extending in damages to the value of
jjmi i^erks and upwards, about thirty years laft bypaft : Ite7)i, of art and part
of the Slaughter of William Boware, at the fame time. — John Earl of Morton
became cautioner to fatisfy parties. — The faid William was amerciated in x I.
as cautioner for his own appearance, and xl 1. for the appearance of Alexander,
John, Thomas, and William, his fons, all of them having failed to enter."

. J-toutljrtif— Cattlr-sttaltns.

(Iter Jifjlkiarie r/t'EDiNBUuGHE, Feb. 26, 1501-2.)— William Tait,
alias Foii/c-t//oicwi/.'!.— David Pringil, in Tynneis, became furety to Mr Richard
Laufoun for his entry at the next aire of Peblis, to underly the law for art and
part of the Stouthreif of xxvj oxen from ^^'illiam Murray, furth of the lands of
Halis, in Lothian, under the pain of xl li. '

1

2000 merks. - ' Summa totalis liujus Extractus, ij'^.lxxx li.' ^ There is notLing worthy

of being noted of the proceedings of this Aire, wliieli was of sliort duration.

IUac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 27

JEDWORTHE.

[Iter Jnjlidane de Jedworthe, inchoata die Lune, ultimo die Octohris,
1502, coi-am Andrea Domino Gray, JuJficiario,f. d. n. Regis, ex part
aujlrali acpie de For/he.']

auultai), $((.

Nov. 4, {dies Veneris, tercia dies Itinens.^) — James Dauidsone, in
Sprouftoune, produced a Remiffion for the theftuous wafting of the goods of
John Cordonar, during the time he lay (in Adultery) with the faid John's wife,
Williame Cranftoune of that Ilk became fiirety to fatisfy the parties.

C|)f ilaiv^of Cabtrs nmnriatrt, ^r. ^

Nov. 6, {dies Suhhuti.) — Robert Scott, Ion of John Scot, in Dallo- Ow/vvXiui /^i

raine, called BelUt Rohin. — ^^'illiam Douglas of Caveris, furety for the faid^ciZ»/w, /^ }v<ov. /uvrS^ V
was amerciated for his not entering to underly the law.^ — Scot to enter next aix*. V-/./wca^ ^ (^,\J\J'

^toutijrcif of €>.rfu anU ?i?orsrs. (ty^Le^^h.

Walter Scot of Edilhaw produced a Remiffion for art and part of ^ W^S.

the Stouthreif of viij oxen from Robert Laudir : Item, for the Stouthreif of iiij
horfes and fundry other goods from him at the fame time. — John Scot of Valis
became furety for the fatisfaction of the jiarties

Richard Jak, junior, in Auld Roxburghe, convicted of art and part of
the cruel Slaughter of Thomas Dun. — Beheaded.

•&'

|j?orst anti ^fjcrp-sttnling — iiuniing of ?l?lii3m.instounf, ^r.

David Scot, called Lady,^ in Stirkfchawis, produced a Remiffion for
art and part of the Theft of a horfe, price xl f., and fundry houfehold goods,
value xl f., from John Spedane furth of Blakhalche : Item, for art and part of
the Theft of xl flieep (' wedderis') from John Spedane and Andrew Michelfone
furth of Blakhalche : Item, for art and part of the treafouable in-bringing of
the Robfonis, Doddis, and Charlis, Engliflunen, to the Burning of Hirdman-
■ftoune, belonging to Adam Ruthirfurde : And for art and part of the Stouthreif
of V horfes and mai't's, price xx 1., from the faid Adam at the fame time : And
for the Burning of certain corns, extending to ij'^ bolls, price of each boll 3f.
The lofs fuftained in Burning the houfes of Hirdmanftoune extending to x 1. ;''

' John Cdltliird, in Rutlierfurdf, was the same day convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter
of John Jaksone and James Jaksone, and beheaded. ' There is no mention made of the nature

of his crime. ^ See Nov. 9 and 10, 1502. ■■ It is likely there must be an enor in the Uecord

here, or that the fire had been very partial, and confined to a small part of the bams or other offices.

28 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1502.

JEDWORTHE.

Item, for art and part of the ti-eafonable in-bringing of Archibald Armeftrang,
Ninian Armeftrang, David TurnbiiU of Bonecheftir, and other Traitors of
Levin and Liddalifdale, to the Burning of the places of Thomas 5oung, Thomas
his fon, William Johnefone, and Symon Leich in Crageiid of Mynto ; and for
the Burning of feven horfes belonging to them, at the fome time ; the lofs fuftained in Burning the forefaid Houfes, and goods therein, being to the value of
xl 1. : ItejNI, for art and part of the treafonable in-bringing of the faid Traitors
to the ' Herelchip' and Stouthreif of xvj oxen and cows, iiij horfes and mares,
from the faid Tenants of Mynto, ij cows from Margaret Urd, ij mares from
Gilbert Johnefone, j mare from Symon Leiche, together with fundry other
goods to the value of xl li., plundered from the faid Tenants at the fame time. —
William Turnbull of Mynto became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Nov. 7. — George Turxbuel, in ^Vyndis, and twenty others of the
name of Turnbull, (among others Blew JoJtne.) Alan Davidfone, tawbonare,'
George Turnbull of HawrouU, Mai'k Ker of Dolphinftoune, Thomas Turnbull
of Bethroull, &c., were amerciated in xl 1. for each of thefe perfons failing to enter
and underly the law for art and part of the cruel flaughter of Robert Oliuer.

^tcalinri: .il)orsc9, Cattl?, ant( MyttT^ — lUsettiittj iUebcls, ^t,

^This portion of the Register of the Justice-aire of Jeilburgh aflords numerous instances of the
activity of tlie family of the Olivers in Stryndis, who appear to liave made the most of the recent
Michaelmas moon, the Goddess of the Borderers in their ' Herfthips' and forays ! The most interesting and curious of these entries are those which follow, though other Murders, Stouthreifs, and
' Herfchips,' to a consi<!erable extent, are also recorded.]

Dauid Oliuer in Stryndis, called Dauid na gud Preijf, produced a Remiffion for art and part of the Theft of xij oxen and cows from Sir
David Hume, kn', furth of Lawmer-mur : Item, for art and part with Thomas
and Andrew Grymiflaw in their theftuous deeds ; and for Refetting them at the
time they were at tlie horn : Item, for art and part of the Theft of a mare from
John Douglas, furth of Jedworthe : Item, for art and part of the Theft of two
horfes and a mare, price of each viij merks, from William Pary, John Jamefone
and Belly Ruffel, furth of Nefbit : Item, for art and part of the Theft of xx
flieep, price of each vj f. from George Dowglas furth of Trowis. — Andrew Ker
of Farnyhirft became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^fjrep-stralinff,

Robert Oliuer in Stryndis and David Oliuer there, produced a Re-
' Player on the tmchroun, talbron, or tabberne ; a kind of drum.

15JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 29

JEDWORTHE.

miffion for art and part of the Theft of xxxvj ewes (' 3ovvis,') xl flieep, and xxv
flieep, from "William Ker furth of Dernewik-mure. — Andrew Ker of Faruyhirft
became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^!)ttjp nnti Ccittlc-stralins — ^liiucrljtcn

Robert, John (brother of Ingram), and David Oliueu in Stryndis
allowed to compound, by virtue of a Remiffion, for art and part of the Stouthreif of ij" flieep from the Tenants of Jedworthe, Rowcaflell, Langtoune, and
BethrouU : Item, the faid Robert and John for art and part of the Theft of vij
oxen and cows fi'om Philip Ormiiloune, furth of Maxtoune : Item, the faid
Robert for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of John MofTet : Item, for art
and part of the Stouthreif of xxxiij oxen and cows, ij" ' 5owis' and ' wedderis,'
iv horfes and mares, and fundry other goods to the value of xl li., from John and
Robert Barnisfader, furth of Kelfliop : Item, for art and part of the ci-uel
Slaughter of Robert Brig, at the fame time : Item, for Treaibn of old and new.
— Mark Ker of Dolphinfloune became furety for John Oliver, to fatisfy the
parties ; and Andrew Ker of Farnyhirft for the others.

(^tfaluiij Hfeorsts anti Cattlt — ^toutljrcif, ^r.

Long John Ox.iuek, Little John O., and David O. in Stryndis,
were allowed to compound, by virtue of Remiffion, for Stouthreif of vj oxen,
price of each xxx f, &c.' ' Unius eque," precium x marc. ; unius oUe,^ precium
xxxij f ; alterius, precium xviij f. ; imius toge de Rowane-tanne,^ precium
iiij li. ; unius le hirt'dl de hndd red^ precium iij li. ; alterius fubuncle, le kirtle,
braid rede, precium iij li. ; unius toge bronej," precium xlf ; iv flamearum/
precium xxx f.' ; ij parium linthiamini,^ precium xx f ; ij lodicum,^ precium x f. ;
unius le covering, precium v f. ; quinque ulnarum pannj, lejma/e quhite,"' precium XX f ; ij lejhrkis," precium xf ; unius deploidis,'' precium xxxf ; unius
paris galligarum de carij/ai/,'' precium x f ; et aliarum rerum utenfilium ad
valorem vij li. ; a Martino Wode extra Quhitefelde : Et pro arte et parte Oppreffionis facte dicto Martino eodem tempore.' — Mark Ker (of Doliihinftoune)
and Andrew Ker of Farnyhii'ft became fureties.

Snterrommuninff, $(t, toitlj tt)t Bufee of ^Ibaiti?*

Nov. 8. — Robert Anisle (near Dolphinfloune ?) produced a Remiffion

' The rest of the enumeration is so curious, that it is proper to give it in the words of the Record.
' A mare. ^ A pot. ■■ A gown of Rouen tawny, (of orange colour.) ^ Of l)road red

clotli. ^ A brown gown. ' Veils or scarfs. * Linen sheets. " Bed-sheets.

'" 5 Elns of small (narrow) white cloth. " Shirts. " A doublet, gnajl ve/iis duplex.

^^ A pair of kersey galligqjkins, ' Ihankis,' or hose.

30* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1502.

JEDWORTHE.

for art and part with Alexander Stewart, formerly Duke of Albany, in his treafonable deeds, ' Herel'chips,' and Stouthreifs.

Robert Oi.iuer, in Luftruthir, Robert O., brother's fon of David,
James Oliiier, burgefs, and Robert ^Valche in IMervynnis-law, produced a Remiffion for art and pai't of the Stouthreif of ij*" flieep, price 100 merks, xxix cattle, price three fcore merks, four horfes, price xij 1., and fundry other goods and
utenfils, value xx 1. from John and Adam Barnisfader, furth of Kelfliop : Item,
for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Robert Brig and Adam Barnisfader
at the fame time. — Ralph Ker of Prymlydloche became furety for fatisfying the
parties.

^tout|)Vttf — ^Tjrrp antj CnttIr--stfaIin0.

Ralph Axisle, near Dolphinlloune, produced a Remiffion for art and
part of the Stouthreif of T llieep, x oxen and cows, from John Smyth, furth of
Glengelt. — Mark Ker of Dolphinlloune furety to fatisfy the parties.

^tout|)rrif in Compaiit) bjiti) t|)r ^rmstraiTgfs — jriif--misins, ^r,

HECTon Laudik, in Clerklandis, produced a Remiffion for art and part of
the Stouthreif of xl cattle from John Scot furth of Hodum-House, in company
with the Armjirangls : Item, for art and part of the Burning of the Place of
QuHiTSLAiDE,&c.&c. — John Scot in Walls became fui'ety to fatisfy the parties. —
Robert Scot of Stirkichawis alfo became his furety, for being art and part of the
Stouthreif of three fcore ' 5owis' ' from John Thomfoiie furth of Hertberne, &c. &c.

^^entcitfc of SfatI) against Xi)t (JDlibcis.

A Dome, in fait ofborowis,' gevin apove ]je Oliueuis, asfoUowis,
This Court fchawis for law. That forllimekill as Robeut Oi.iuer in ]>&
Stryndis, Dauid Oliuer |iar, Martine Oliuer ]>nv, and INIathow Oliuer ])ar, has
committit diverle Reiffis, Ilerefchijipis, Slauchtaris, and Stouthis ; ffor jje quhilkis
J)ai have takin ])ame till oure foverane lordis Remiffioun, and has refufit to fynde
fufficient fouerteis for fatisfactioime of parteis, as law will, efter ]je forme of law :
That })arfore the Sheref of Roxburcht, fall tak the fliidis Robert, Dauid, j\Iartine and Mathou, ande put ])ame in prelbne and lure keping, as he will ajii'uer,
for pe Ipace of fourty days ; at the ifche^ of ])e quhilk tenne ande cnde of xl
dais, }>e faidis Ibuirteis being unfundin, as faid is ; J)at J)e faidis Robert, Dauid,

' Ewes. ' Caution, surety. ^ Expiry, tenninatioo.

15 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 31

JEDWORTHE.

Martine and Mathow be had to J)e Gallowfe and hangit quliill J)ai be dede.
And Jjat I gife for dome.

Memd. fat ]>e faidis Robert Oliuer, David Oliuer, Martine Oliuer, ande Mathou Oliuer war deliveiit to Jie faid Sheref, incontinent cftir ]ie faide dome, to be kepit and demanit as faid is, eftir fe
forme of fe Dome forelaide.

John Faui.o, in Litildene, produced a Reniiffion for art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of David Henrifone, at the Kirk of Maxtoune : Item, for art and
part of the Stouthreif of xx oxen and cows, v horfes and mares, and T flieep,
from Alan, John, and William Heni'ifone, furth of Miirhouflaw, in company with
Thomas Grymiflaw and his accomplices, the King's Rebels and at the horn. —
George Fawlo of "Wellis became furety to fatisfy the parties. — He alio produced another Reniiffion for art and part of the treafonable taking of Thomas, John, Alan,
and Thomas Henrifone, junior, furth of Miirhoullaw, in company with the King's
Rebels, viz. the Ruthirfurdis, and carrying them to Chrillopher Milburne and
Bertholomew INIylburne, Englilli-men, and detaining them there for the fpace
of three months : And for art and part of redeeming them, viz. ' raiijhmyng' at
the rate of xx 1. Scotch money : Item, for art and part of the Stoiithreif of four
fcore oxen and cows, ij" flieep, from the faid Thomas, &c., furth of the Place of
]\Iurhouflaw, price of each cow ij merks, price of each ox ij merks, price of each
flieep iiij f., &c. &c. — ^A'alter Haliburtoune became furety to fatisfy the parties
for the ' i-anibmyng-' of the laid perfons ; and Alexander Lord Hume, for the
faid goods.

Jiriitjjiitfl: in tijr Craitors of Hfbin— 5>erescl)t}) of ^nntoutte.

Nov. 9. — David Scot, called Ladij,^ produced a Reniiffion for art and
part of the treaflbnable inbriiigiiig of the ylrm .Strang is; Traitors of Levin, to the
' Herefchip' and Stouthreif of nine fcore oxen and cows, xx horfes and mares,
and fundry other things to the value of xl merks, from the Tenants of Syntoune.
— He became furety, of confent, to fatisfy the parties.

^lautjijtff— ^toutljrcif of Cattle, ^r.

James Gray in Favvlifliope, and ^Villiam Dun in Quhitmer, produced a
Reniiffion for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Anthony Tayt : Ife7)i, for
art and part of the Stouthreif of iv horfes from the faid Antliony, at the fmie
time : Item, for art and part of the Tlieft of eight fcore of llieej) from George
Tait, furth of Pyrne, and xl flieep furth of Gaithope, &c. &c. : Item, of a horfe

' For farther notices of this worthy, see Nov. 6 and 10, 1502.

32 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1502.

JEDWORTHE.

and eighty flieep from William Clegliorne : Item, of eight fcore and fix ' hoggs"
from George Tayt and his Tenants, fiirth of Pyrne and Sithop : Item, xvij
' gayt'- from John Cleghorne : And other goods to the value of xl f. — James Ker
of Lintoune became furety to fatisfy parties.

^lausfjtn— lUsctting * .i^)ob Wyt iuntr/ anil *l3nnti t\)t man/ kt,

William Ker in Quhitmere, James Ehvande^ there, and Alexander Gray
in Grenehede, produced a Remiffion for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of
John Furde, in the town of Selkirk. Ralph Ker of Prymfydloche became furety to
fatisfy the parties. — Patrik Gray, with Ker and Elwalde, produced a Refpite
for Refetting the fons of William Elwalde, ' Hob^ ])e King,' and ' Dand' J>e man,'
in their trealonable deeds ; and fpecially, in tlie Theft of nine fcore of flieep furth
of Tweddale and Laudirdale. — James Ker of Lintoune furety to fatisfy parties.

Conrfaling: * |3aisr iJtnncis.'

Robert Lofthous" in Lyndene, Conuicted of concealing certain
* paife penneis" to the value of x merks, on his ownConfeflion. — Banished furth
of Scotland. To remove within xl days, under pain of ' tinfal"* of his life.

(f^pprrsston — ^toutljrrif — Conboratton, ^r,

Nov. 10, {dies Jovis) — Adam Douglas, and Robert, Henry, Symone,
v;^^ c»^| >».*«■ i>^<^- and George D. in Swynfyde, his brothers, permitted to compound for art and
%Ji- part of the OpprefTion done to William Colvile of Ravinnifcrag, Robert Boyd,

and John Kennedy, in taking and detaining them upon Levin,' and deftroying
iij horfes belonging to the laid perfons, at the fame time : Item, for art and part
of the Stoutlireif of a fword, a fliield, a purfe,'" and x 1. therein, from the laid
William Colvile at the fame time : Item, for Convocation of the lieges, and
coming upon Sir William Colville of Ucliiltre, in Hordane," wifliing to flay him
on forethought felony. — Ralph Ker of Prymfidloche, furety to fatisfy the parties.

^pjpiTssion Isonr to i\)t ilairti of €>rf)iltrft.

Robert and Henry Douglas, brothers, permitted to comjiound for

' Sheep of one year old. ^ Goats. ' Elwaide. ■* A familiar Border abl)reviation for

Rohi'vi, not Hidbert. ^ Andrew. ^ 'Sow Loft us. ' See Note to Nov. 21, 1493. ^ Loss.
^ A district of Lancashire, tiien infamous for its ' Trailouris and ' lyminaris,' who made numerous
raids and forays every year on tlie least protected parts of the Scottish Borders. To do justice to the
Borderers of the Scottish side, they were to the full as active as their Southern neighbours, and frequently penetrated as far as the heart of Yorkshire, and the adjacent counties. '" ' Unius IMancipij,' which jfenerally denotes a deed of conveyance, or title-deed. In the present instance, it may
be figuratively ])ut for some' sort of purse or scrip. It is more probable, liowever, that the word has
been erroneously transcribed from the Dittay by the clerk, in place of iiiar/'ujrij, (or marcupij, as it
was sometimes written,) a purse. " Harden.

15 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 33

JEDWOKTHE.

art and part of the Opprcffion done to Sir William Colvile of Uehiltre, in occupying, labouring, and manuring his lands of Farnefyde and Hardane, and taking
and keeping his Houle or Pele,^ in Hardene, without any Leafe or title of law :
Item, for the Theft of iij oxen from the faid Sir William Colvile, furth of Synlawis. — Ralph Ker of Prymfydloche became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Btstt — 3Httn'rommunincr Saiti) i\)t Slrmstranflt9, ^r>

Adam Scot, in Hawchefteris, produced a Remiflion for art and part of
the theftuous Refetting of fix fcore flieep ftolen by the Laird of Mynto from
George Ruthirfurde, furth of Langnewtoune and Sandyftanis : Item, for Refetting, fupplying and intercommuning 'with Archibald and Niniau Armftrang,
William Scot, and their accomplices, the Kiugis Rebels.

?l?rrrsrljip of ^i)"toun — ^latisTjttr, ^r,

David Scot, (callit) Lady^ produced a Remiffion, for art and part of
the treffonable in-bringing of the ' Armflrangis,' to the ' Herefchip' and Stouthreif
of nine fcore of oxen and cows, xx horfes and mares, and other goods and gear,
to the value of xl merks, from the Tenants of Syntoune : Item, for art and part
of the cruel Slaughter of Geoi-ge Newtoune and George Caveris, at the fame
tyme. — He became furet_v, with confent of party.

^|)frp-stfaltii(j— ^totitljrrif, ^r.

David Scot, (callit) Lady, produced a Remiffion for art and part of the
Stealing of three-fcore flieep (' wedderis'), price of each vj f viij d., from Rali)h
Ker, furth of BradmedoAvis : Item, for airt and part of the Stouthreif of vj oxen
and cows, and other goods and geir to the value of x merks, from William
Atkin, and John his fon, furth of Hanyng. — William TurnbuU of Mynto became
furety to fatisfy the parties,

^pprrssion tiouf to X\)t il.iiiD of <Ei:rJ)tItiTr,

John Douglas, brother to the Laird of Bon-Jedworthe, William his

brother, James Douglas in Swynfide, John, Adam,^ and John* his brothers there,"

James Douglas in Onftoune, George Douglas in Swynfide," John Davidfone in

Bank, William and George, fons of the faid John, Criftopher Davidfone, John

Riddale, junior, of that Ilk, James Davidfone, Ion of Richard, convicted of art

and part of Oppreffioun and Convocation of the lieges, and coming upon Sir

William Colvile of Uehiltre, kn', at his lands of Hardane-hede, in the year 1502.

'See Nov. 18, 1498, iVb/e. « See Nov. 6, 1502, &c, ^ ' liemi/Jio: " It was not

unusual to call two or more sons by tlie favourite family name, which often occasions much confusion
and embarrassment to genealogists, in preparing family histories. ^ ^ Remittitur per Regem.'

^ ' RemiJJio' These words are on the margin of the Record.

vol. l t e

oitusuU^.

34,* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1502.

JEDWORTHE.

Cl)f iHasttr of ^[itgus amerciated, $(c,

«-'ftA^X»^i ofc^»*W Nov. 12, {flies Sahbaii.) — Davidson, alias Grace behind him. George,

Mailer of Angus, often called to enter Davictfone, alias Grace behind him,
-^— ' prout recepit eum in Portuferio,' et in defectu executionis fui in amerciamento

eft primum Iter. — Anierciat x li.'

JSuniins X\)t ^Jlare of iUUliale, ^e ♦

Nov. 14, {dies Lnne.)— David Turnbull of (in ?) Toftis, allowed to
compound under a Reniiffion for Reffetting, liipplying, and intercommuuing
with Robert TurnbuU, called Mnricde, the Kingis Rebel, and at his horn ; and
Ipecially, at the time of the Burning of the Place of the Laird of Riddale, and
Stouthrief of twenty-four fcore of flieep, two cows, and fundry other goods and
ntenfils ; the lols fuflained in the Burning of the faid Place, and ' Herefchip' of
the forfaid goods and utenfils, from the laid Laird of Riddale, extending to 200
merks : And alio, of the Slaughter of a black horfe at the fame time, price x 1.,
pertaining to Robert Scot : Item, for art and part, along with the laid Robert
TurnbuU and his accomplices, at the time of tlie Burning of the laid Place, and
' Herefchip' of the forefaid goods. — John TurnbuU of Toftis became furety to
fatisfy the parties.

lusettiucr liicf)arti ^nnstrans, kt,

Patkik Scot, fon of Adam in Hardwodhill, produced a Remillion, for
Refetting Richard Armftrang, called Shaw, in his Thefts : and Ipecially, in
ftealing 200 llieep from David Hoppringill, furth of Fechane, in company with
Alexander Scot. — Walter Scot of Howpaflot, and Robert Scot of Stirkfchawis,
became fureties to fatisfy the parties.

^toutijreif— 3Hi-i}i1n5in0 ^ir %c\)n ii-lusiiraije, cPncrUsIjntait, i^t,

Adam Turnbull, in Hornilliole, now in Chalmerlane-Newtoune, produced
a Reniiflion for art and part of the Stouthreif of four-fcore flieep, (' wedderis,')
from Ralph Ker and William Wode, furth of Bradmedowis : Item, for art and
part of the trcafonable in-bringing of Sill John Musgrave, EngUjhman, and
for Intercoramuning with him at the faid time, in treafonable manner, &c. &c. : '
Item, for art and part of the Stouthreif of eight fcore flieep (' 5owis' and ' wedderis,') furth of Hundalifliop, &c. : Item, five fcore flieep from William Turn-

' L. B. Pcrtiforivm. Tliis sifjnifies lie leccivtHl iiiiii in Portcons, or roll. Porteous, poituass, portliouse, or poitasp, generally denoted a Breviary or Mass-hook, from its being portable ; but it was of
old chiefly used, in Scotland, to signify a Roll of Dittays or criminal Indictments, which was given up
by the Justice Clerk at ea<h Aire to the Coroner, that the parties might be duly cited. The term is
still used in practice, and ' the Porteous-lioH' is to this day regularly made up for each Circuit.
' The catalogue of crime which follows is of no interest, being petty Thefts of sheep, kc.

15Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 35

JEDWORTHE.

bull, fiirth of Aikwode, &c. : Item, three fcore ftieep (' 5owis' and ' wedderis,')
from the Abbot of Kelfo and Ralph Ker, furth of Caldfchelis : Item, of art and
part of the treafonable in-bringing of Archibald and Niniun Armjlrang, to the
Stoutbreif of ten fcore oxen and cows, and four fcore horfes and mares from
James Newtoune, furth of Syntoune. — The faid James became furety, &c.
Item, for art and part of the Stoutbreif of xvij oxen and cows, price of each 2
merks, a doublet," a fword, and xl f., two horfes, price of each 5 merks, xl flieep
(' wedderis,') price v f vj d., three fcore fheep, price of each v f vj d., from
John Quhite, furth of the Hofpital of St Leonard, near Peblis, at fundry times.
•^Walter Scot of Howpaflot became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Jiuniing of ^flfeirU— * ?t?crcscl)ip/ %zt,

Adam Turxbull, in Hornifliole, now in Chalmerlane-Newtoune, produced a RemifRon for art and part of the treafonable in-bringing of Sir John
MusGKAVE, Englijlunun, to the Burning of Selkirk and ' Ilerelchip,' and
Stoutbreif of goods therein, to the value of 1000 merks, from the Inhabitants
and tenants of the faid town. — George TurnbuU of HawrouU and Bertholemew
Turnbull in Rowflat, became fureties to fatisfy the parties.

^toutijiTif— 1!l?orgr--stfaIin(i;— lUsfttiitfl, ^r»

Nicholas Ruthirfurde produced a RemifTion for art and part of the
Stoutbreif of two hoi-fes from the Priorefs of Haddingtoune : Item, for the
Stoutbreif of a ' caldrone'^ from the wife of Richard Ruthirfurte : Item, of a cow
from Lawrence Pile : Item, for Stealing 5 horfes from the Earl of Huutlie :
Item, for Stealing a horfe from Thomas Hall. — John Ruthirfurde of Hundole,
and Thomas his brother, became fureties to fatisfy jiarties. — He alfo produced
a RemifTion for himfelf and Thomas R. in Grange, for Refetting, fupplying, and
Intercommuning with the Ruthirfurdis, the Kingis rebels.

^tf alius Worses fiom tijr Si-mt> at j^ori^anir.

Nicholas Ruthirfurde, in Hindole, prodviced a RemifTion for art
and part of the Theft of five horfes from the Kingis Army of Norhame. — John
Ruthirfurde (of Hundole ?) became furety to fatisfy the parties.

* Ht^tvtsdjip' JDf dl nstljf tidjf anb 2?au(jinflsci)aiM, ^t.

Philip Turnbull, in Qiihitbop, and David Turnbull, in Carlingpule,
produced a RemifTion for art and part of the treafonable In-bringing of the
Thieves and Traitors of Levin to the ' Herefchip ' and Stoutbreif of the goods
being in Faflbeuche and Haiigingfchaw, belonging to John Murray, &c. &c.
' ' Uiiius deploidis ;' q. d. duplex Testis. " ' Unius cacobi, le caJdrone.'

36 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1502.

JEDWORTHE.

Mesfttiitg: tT)t ' ^rnisti-aitais* ann ti)t ^o\x of tijt Jtatrt of Cuscijetalu.

Patrick Turnbull, ia Walchope, in-oduced a Remiffion for Reletting,
Supplying, and Intercommuning with Archibald and Ninian Armftrangis, and
William Scot, fon of David Scot of Tufchelaw,' in their Stouthreifs, Slaughters,
Burnings, and other crimes committed by them.

^latisTjttr— 33unTiit0 of BtnteljIU— * ^ntstiji^* of MtvttlmQl)t

—l\t5ttti\\Ci l\thtl5, kc,

Peter Turnbull, in Bonecheftir, produced a Remiffion for art and

part of the cruel Slaughter of James Ruthirfurd, fon of Adam, at the Kirk of

Hawick : Item, for art and part of fortifying of the treafonable Burning of the

Place of Bernehill, and alfo of twelve fcore bolls of oats, fix fcore bolls of bear,'

and fixty bolls of wheat, pertaining to George Ruthirfurde of Langnewtoiuie :

Item, for art and part of the ' Herefchip' of xxv oxen, xxviij cows, xvj ' 3oung

nolt,'^ and three fcore flieep, from the faid George : Ifem, for art and part of the

Burning of iij horfes, viij mares, and fundry other goods, to the value of xx 1.,

at the time of the Burning of Bernhill, pertaining to the faid George : Item,

for art and part of Stouthrief of xl oxen and cows, v horfes and mares from

John Giyniiflaw, furth of the Place of Camys, in company with the King's

Rebels, viz. being Turnbullis, and at the horn, for art and part of the cruel

Slaughter of James Rutherfurde : Ifevi, for art and part of the treafonable

In-bringing of fundry Englifli to the ' Herefchip' of Merch-cluche and Stouthreif

of iv horfes and fundry goods and gear from Robert Laudir, furth of Merecluche : Item, for art and part of taking the faid Robert at the fame time,

and detaining him in Bewcaftill, in England, until he redeemed^ himfelf : Item,

for art and part of the Stouthreif of eight fcore and fix flieep (' hoggis'),* from

George Tait and his Tenants, furth of Fichop : Item, for art and part of

Stouthreif of xvij goats, and fundry goods and utenfils, from John Cleghorne,

to the value of xl £ furth of Lethanehoip : Item, for art and part of the Theft of

xl flieep (' ^oH-is,y from Willianie Cleghorne, furth of Lethanehope : Item, for

art and part of the Burning of xxvj bolls of bear and xl bolls of oats, pertaining

to George Ruthirfurde of Langnewtoune, in his Place of Sandyfl;anis, in company

with John Turnbull of Mynto and his accomplices : Item, for art and part of

the Stouthreif of twenty four fcore flieep from the faid George Rutherfurde,

furth of the faid Place of Sandyftanis : Item, for Rcfetting, fupplying, and

intercommuning with Mark Turnbull and John Turnbull, the Kingis Rebels. —

Adam Turnbull of Bullirwell furety to fatisfy parties.

* For the fate of a future Laird of Tusciielaw, and that of the celebratedJonNNiE Armstrang,
see May 16 and 18, 1330. ' Bailey. ^ Young cattle. * Ransomed. ^ A year-old

sheep, before losing its first fleece. ^ Ewes.

15 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 37

JEDWORTHE.

JSurudtQ: anti * l^ecesc^ip * o( 3$oitIjuitfesIjtiUs.

Nov. 15, {dies 3Iartis.) — Ewmund Aumstrang,' in Liddalifdale, and
George and Hector, his brothers, there, compeared by the King's command, and
were accused of art and part of the Burning and ' Herefchip' of Borthuicfchelis,
viz. iij'^ flieep, iij""' oxen and cows, xxhorfes and mares, and fundry goods and
utenfils, to the vahxe of F merks, from Mark Ker of Dolphingftoun and the
Tenants thereof. — They found Hector and George Armftrangis, brothers, as
their fureties for fatisfying the parties.

^tealms a ^taHtoix fi-om tije (i?ail of llei)ino.t.

George Armstrang, brother of Hector, in Liddalifdale, compeared,
and was accufed of art and part, along with one called Douglas, in his Thefts ;
and fpecially, in the Theft of a brown curfour,* price xxx ' Angel Nobillis,' from
the Earl of Levinox, furth of Edinburghe. — He found Hector, his brother,
cautioner to fatisfy parties.

Robert Ruthirfurde, in Todlaw, produced a Remiffion for art and
part of the Theft of certain ' cufcheis of filk,"* flieets, linen cloths, ' fuftiane,'
'fcarfs,'" and other clothes, furth of the Kirk of Jedworthe. — Robert Turnbull
of Blindhalche became furety to fatisfy parties.

jrorttI)oiisI)t dT^Ioiti), kt.

Alexander Wyndis of that Ilk, convicted of the forethought
felony done to Philip Faula, on S' Mary's day : Item, of art and part of the
forethought felony done to the Hiid Philij), in riding to Branxhame. — Robert
Scot amerciated xl I. for his non-aijpearance to undei'ly the law,

^totit^ftfC anU Il?ei*e0f i)(p of ^xtn, ?^orses, kt.

Walter Turnbull, in Branxhame, produced a Remiffion for art and
part of the Stouthreif of eight fcore and eight oxen and cows from Patrick
Murray and John Murray, furth of Carterhalche : Item, for art and part of the
' Herefchip' of fundry goods and utenfils, to the value of three fcore merks,
from the faid Patrick and John, furth of Carterhalche : Item, for art and part
of the ' fpuil3ie' of ij horfes, price xl 1., from the faid John, furth of Carterhalche,
in company with the Traitors of Levin. — George Turnbull of Hawroull and
Robert Scot of Stirkfchawis, became fureties to fatisfy the parties.'

' See May 18, 1330, &c. ^ 300. 3 60 ; three score. « Stallion. ' Probably

cushions, on which to place their Mass-books, &c. ^ Or surplices ; ' flammearum.' ' ' Summa
Totalis Imjus Extractus (viz. Itineris Jufticiarie de Jedworthe), Ij"'.V'^ xlj li.' (L.Soil.)

h^.

>A/V/»»^V<W.

38 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1502.

SELKIRK.

Curia Ifineris Juft\ciarie,inchoata apuxl hnrguin de Selkirk, die Jovis,xxiiij
die menfis Nouemhris, 1502 ; coram Andrea domino Gray, Jufticiario, S^c.

^f)rfprstfalintj:— ^toutljrtif.

Nov. 28, {die Veneris.)— Wp^-lif-V. Scot, fon of Walter Scot of Edfchaw,
permitted to comiioimd, under a Remiffion, for art and part of the Theft of four
Icore flieep, price of each 5f., from William Ker, furth of "^ave, &c. : Item, for
art and part of the Theft of three feore flieep, from Robert Broune and John
Turnbull, furth of Selkirk, &c. : Item, for common Theft and Treafon. — James
Scot, in Aflvirk, furety to fatisfy parties. — He was likewife permitted to compound, under another Remiffion, for art and part of the Theft of three fcore
flieep, from the Abbot of Kelfo and Ralph Ker, furth of Caldfchelis. Robert
Scot of Stirkfchawis became furety to fatisfy parties. — He was alfo allowed to
compound, under a third Remiffion, for art and part of the Stouthreif of four
fcore flieep (' wedderis ') from Ralph Ker, furth of Braidmedowis, &c. — Surety
the fame as above.

'^Tiolrnt orri!pation of tl)c itanUs of Cl^iilestant.

Nov. 30, (die Salbafi.) — '\^'ILLIAM Scot, in Thirleftane, came in the
King's 'Will for art and part of breaking the King's Protection upon Sir Patrick
Crechtoun of Cranfl;oun-Riddale, in occupying and labouring his fet or affedation of Thirleftane, without a leafe, from the faid Patrick. — Walter Scot of
Buccluche furety to the King and party.'

Curia Ifineris Jujliciarie, inchoata apud hurgnrn de Peblis, die Lune, xxj die

menfis JVovcmhris, 1502.

The Laird of Horne-Huntaris-Landis being often called for fuit
and prefence due for the faid landis, and not compearing, was amerciated in
defect of fuit.'

Curia Ifineris Jujliciarie, tenta in Preforio burgi de Edinbuhghe, die
Sahhafi, quarto die menfis Fehruarij, 1502-3, corajn Andrea Domino
Grav, Jiijiiciario, (§e.

' < SuMMA totalis linjus Extractus, Pxv li.' ' ' Summa totalis hujus Extractus, lijMi.' Tliere

were no cases of any interest; Imt a number of persons were fined for not giving suit and presence, among
whom tlie instance wtiich is noticed is the only remarkable one.

15Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. • 39

EDINBURGHE.

<#lau0l)tei* ot crtjiuaiU 1K?iintai*e of ^^olmiiUe.

Feb. 4. — Gilbert Twedy, John Beres, and Andrew Chancellar. —
John Twedy of Drummel5ear, Walter Twedy in Hawmyris, and William
Twedy there, became fureties conjunctly and feverally for the entry of the faid
Gilbert, &c. at the next Aire of Peblis, on the fecond day thereof, before the faid
Jufticiar, to underly the law for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Edward
Huntare of Polmude, imder the pain of F merks for the faid Gilbert, xl 1. for the
laid John, and xl 1. for the faid Andrew. — The faid Laird of Drummel3ear
declared in Judgement before the faid Juiliciar, that he had carried the faid
Gilbert, &c. to the Tolbooth of Stirling, afterwards to the Tolbooth of Peblis,
and likewife to the Tolbooth of Edinburghe, to underly the law for art and part
of the cruel Slaughter of Edward Huntare of Pohnude ; and that they were
prepared to underly the law, where and when it fliould pleafe our Ibvereign
lord the King, for the fame Slaughter : And that the dilating of the faid matter
Ihould not tend to their hurt. L^pon which he afked an act of Court.

^latisljtrr.

George Dikisoxe, in Peblis, declared in judgement that he had formerly entered in the Tolbooth of Edinburghe, afterwards in Peblis, and again
in Edinburghe, to underly the law for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of
Symon Dikifone : And protefted, that the dilating of this matter fliould not
tend to his prejudice ; and that he was ready to underly the law, when and
where it fliould pleafe our Ibvereign lord the King : And thereupon aflced an
Act of Court.

Curia Itineris Jiijudarie, inchoata «;;«r/ Drumfkeis, die 3Iartis, Aug. 13,
1504, coram Andrea Do:mixo Gray, JujVic'iurio.

^laugljttr of a (Cfjaplatit.

Aug. 15, {tercia die Itineris.) — Robert Grersouxe, in Drumfreis,
produced a Precept of Reniiflion for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Sir
John M'brair, Chaplain, in the Town of Drumfreis. — William Douglas of Drumlangrig became furety to fatisfy parties.

idiinuno; X\)t CoUju of Sumfdts,
Aug. 17 — Gilbert Thomesone, Convicted of the theftuous taking
of merchandize from the mercliants of Dru^ifreis, at the time of the Burning
thereof : Ifevi, for art and part of the theftuous taking and concealing of xlv
flieep furth of Schellop : Item, of Common Theft, and common Relet of Theft.
— Hanged.

40 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1504.

DRUMFREIS.

Ada]m Baty, Convicted of art and part with the King's Rebels, at
the horn, being of ' Efkale' (Eflvdale), in their Thefts and Treafonable deeds :
And for favoring, fupplying and affifting them in their Thefts : And of common Treafon, of new. — Hanged.

amterfonnminiuci: ^iti) tljc * atrmstiantris* on * M^iv-€i)iivisitia^*'

Thomas Scot in Preflif-dikis came in will for Intercommuning with the
Armflrangis,the King's rebels, being at his horn,onThin-fday called ' Slir-lliurifday,'^ in the year 1504. — Sir Adam MiuTay, kn', became fiirety to the King.

Btstropinir X\)t a^iJooUs of 3loc|)mal»anf, ^r.

James Monse," near Lochniabane, came in the King's Will for deftroying the Woods of Lochmabane, Bukrig, Heichrig, Rammerflvalis, and Rowkellpark. — Gavin Murray, brother of the Laird of Cokpiile, became furety to the
King and party, iiij li.

Snttrroinnnmincj; bjitl) t\)t JDuI^c of ^Ifiani),

RoBEKT Ramsay, in Rammerfkalis, produced a Remiflion for being with
Alexander late Duke of Albany, in liis ' Herelchips' and evil deeds.

^alnton--drisI)iHS fit dost iimt*

John Pattonsoun, in Talleholme, Convicted of Fifliing (Salmon) in
the water of Annand, during the prohibited time, was amerciated in v 1. — William Jarding, called ' hruid-fuerd^ furety to the King and party.

^laugljtn- of tl)f itairti of StinSjortrn,

John Jaeding, in Sibbald-belyde, produced a Remiflion from the King,
for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Thomas Dunwedy of that Ilk, at his
Place of Dunwedy.' — Robert Brig, living with Alexander Jarding, alfo pro-

' Skyih-Thuhisday, {Muunday-Tlmrfdmj of tlie English Clmrcli,) llie Thursday before Good
Friday. It is also called lloJji Thtnjilay, which is ihe proper derivation of the term, from Y^.Jkeere
and A. S./eir, clean, pure. It ivas instituted in coniniemoration of the washing of the disciples' feet
by our Saviour ; and some have thought the English term thence originates, i. e. dies Mandati, 'Mandattttn iioi-um de vubis," he. : But it ratlier seems to take its name from the Maimds, i. e. hand- baskets,
in wiiicli the provisions, alms, and offerings to the poor were carried. - Tliis name appears to

be the same with that now known as 3/oiinsei/. It is a singular coincidence that Dr Mounsey, wlio
sprung from the lowest origin in the vicinity of Lochmabane, lived to become propiietor of the estate
of Ranimerscales, 8cc. here described. ^ The Lairds of the family of Dinjiciddie were, unliappily,

like many others in these unsettled times, subjected to the violence of their neighbours. Only eight
years afterwards, (about 1512,) ' 1 he Laird Dinwiddie was flayne in Ediidjurgh by two perfones, who
efchaped by taking the Sanctuarie of Holyroodhoufe, a faufgaird mucli reipected in thofe days.' —
Anderson's 31S. Ilist. Adv. Library. Sir James Balfour &dds, ' by the Jaudans.' — Annuks, 1. 235.

17JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 41

DRUMFREIS.

duced a Remiflion for being art and part in the commiffion of the fame crime. —
The faid Alexander Jarding became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^\auQl)ttt o( tlje aalitf ot iHousiMalU.

Thomas Bell of Curre. — The Laird of Caftehnylk being often called
to enter Thomas Bell of Curre to underly the law for art and part of the cruel
Slaughter of the Laii-d of Moufwald, under the pain of T 1., was amerciated for
his non-appearance. The faid Thomas denounced at the horn. — Stephen
JoHXSTOUNE was alfo denounced Rebel for not appearing to underly the law
for the fame crime ; and William Purdum portioner of Myddilbe was amerciated, as his furety, in xl 1.

^toiitfjrttf oi l^oisfs, ^c»

Robert Dumwedy, fon of the Laird of Dunwedy, and Gavin Johnfloune, were admitted to our fovereign lord the King's compofition, for art and
part of the Stouthreif of four horles price xl 1., two candlefticks, one goblet, with
fundry other goods worth xx 1., from Bartholomew Glendunwyne, in com2)any
with the Laird of Johnlloune and his accomplices. — Sir Thomas Kirkpatrick of
Clofbarne, kn', became fui-ety for the faid Robert ; and Adam Johneftoune of
that Ilk became furety for the faid Gavin, to fatisfy parties.

3Utstttinir ii Common r|)itf.

Nicholas Dunwedy, in Dunwedy, called Gait-fiit,^ Convicted of Refetting Adam Corry, common Theif, in his theftuous deeds. — Hanged."

^prrial airtnst, lUspttr, antj i^rottrtion to tfjr Ctnants, ^r. of i\)t
arrljbisljop of iSlastjolw, until i)is lactam from liomr,

[The following document will on all accounts be deemed interesting. It is thus entitled in the
Record, ' Ha?c eft; vera copia Refpectuacionis Epifcopi Glafguen., 8cc.' Notices of a very great many
' Specialle Refpuyttis' of this description aie to be found in the Register of the Privy Seal, but comparatively few are engrossed at length in the Register. The purpose of obtaining such Licenses was,
not only that they should serve the individuals concerned as passports in foreign countries, but that
they and their vafTals might be fully protected in their persons and properties, until a reasonable time
after their return to Scotland, (usually forty days.) This device effectually preventedthem from
being pursued criminally and put to the horn during their absence, and also operated as a bar to
judgments passing against them by default in civil cases.

Notices of some similar Protections are preserved in the Appendix to the Trials during this and
subsequent reigns.]

Aug. 28. — Specialle Respuyt in favor of the ' men, Jiin, tenentis,

' Goat foot. ' ' SuMMA totalis hujus Extractus, (viz. Itineris de Drumfreis,) I"'viiiixxxvij 1.'

(L.1887.)

VOL. I. f F .

42 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1504.

DRUMFREIS.

factouris and ferumdis' of Robert Archbijhop of Glajgoiv , and efpecialhj for
the Jlmichter of uniquldle Thomas IRuthirfurde within theAbhayofJedworthe.
James be the Grace of God King of Scottis. To all and findri oure Wardanis, Lordis of Counfale and Seffioune, Juftices, Sheriffis, Chalmerlanis, JufticeClerkis, Crownaris, and jjair deputis, Proveflis and baillies of borowis, and all
u}nris our officeris, leigis and fubditis, fpirituale and temporale, quUoine it efferls ;
to quliais knawlage thir oure Lettres fal cum, greting. Wit ye, that forfamekle as ane maift reverende faider in Gode, and our traift confalour, Robert
Archibischop of Glasgw and Commendatour of oure Abbay of Jedworthe,
is now, of oure fpeciale Licence, benevolence, and fredonie, to pals to ])E Court
OF Rome, in certane materis and chargis of ouris : And for pe fulfilling of his
Pelgramage and ujjiris errandis he has f)air ado. We have Jjairfore takin ])e faid
maift reverende fader his Metropolitane Kirk of Glalgw, ])e Dene, Clieptour,
Vicaris-generalis and Chanonis of the famyn, Jje laid Abbay of Jedworthe and
convent Jjairof, and all and findri J^e Kirkis, landis, rentis, polTeffionis, tendis,'
fructis, revenus, polTeffionis, priuilegis, rychtis, fredoinis, caftellis, towris, fortalicis, maner placis, grangis, wodis, lowis,^ fifchingis, orchatis, medois, and al
vj)ir pi'offetis and dowetis' quhatfumevir pertenyng jiairto ; his Denis, Chalmerlanis, firmaouris, factouris, procuratouris, iutromettouris, his men, tenandis, ande
fervandis, pair takis, malingis, cornis, catell, and all and findri })air guids, inovabill
and unmovabill, Iprituale ande temporale, cjuhatfumever ])ai be, within our
realme ; undir oure fpeciale protectioune, meutenans, defenfe, fuple ande faifgarde. And atoui'e,* "We have Resputt, ande be J)ir oure Lettres, in jje law
and by ])e law, fpeciale Refputis, all actionis, caufis and querelis quhatfumevir,
belanging ws or any u];ir perfone or perfonis, movit, or to be movit, aganis ))e
faide maift Reverend fader, his men, kyne, tenentis, frendis, familiaris, factouris
and fervandis : And fpecialie, ane Reverend fader in Gode, and our traift confalour, Andro Bischop of Murray, ane Reverende fader Andro Abbot of
CuLROSE, his Abbay and convent, Andro Blacader of ])at ilk, Schirris Johne
Forman of Ruthirfurde, Baldrede Blacader, knyclitis ; Adam Blacader, Johne
Heriot, Charlis Blacader, Schir Johne Scherare archdene of Rofle, Mafter Archibalde Layng vicare of Colmonel, Thomas Kennedy of Bargany his fermour,
Jonet Layng his fifter, Schir George Akinhede, Schir William Wilkinfone, Schir
•Robert his bro})ir, David Congiltoune, Malcum Blair, Dame Elizabeth Edmonftoune lady of Tullyallane, Patrik Blacader hir fone and aire, Johne Maxwell
of Nethir Pollock, Johne Maxwel his fone, Alane Stewart of Cardonalde, Patrik
Colquhyn of ])e Glene, David Brofe' of Clakmannane, kny', Johne Naper of
Merchaniftoune, Eufame Formane, Thome Huntar, William Manderftoune in
' Teinds, tythes. - Loclis, lakes. ^ Duties. * Moreover. ' Brois, Bruce.

17JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 43

DRUMFREIS.

Hertfide, Patrik Bigholme, Patrik Heriot, George Heriot his brojj', Johne Cokbiirne, Joline Bully, George Douglace of Bone-Jedvvorthe, Andro Douglas, Johne
Douglas, Robert Douglas, William Douglas, Mafter Stevin Douglas, David Forfithe of ])e Dikis, Johne Douglafe in Jedworthe, Margaret Blacader lady of Canifchallo, Johne Maxwel hir fone and aire, Johne Ralftoune of pat ilk, Johne
Maxwel of Aikinhede, Schir Johne Rankin Vicare of Girwane, Mafter Johne
Blacader Perfone of Kirkpatrik-Flemyng, Schir Patrik Blacader Perfone of Ranpatrik, David Douglace in Jedworthe, James Douglace in Vulftoune, Mafter
Thomas Murhede Perfone of Lyne, Schir Andro Marfchell his fermour, Robert
Blacader fone and apperand aire to Andro Blacader of >at ilk, George Hume of
J)e Spote, James Weir, Hew Weire his fone. Hew Weire elder, William Huchonfone, Thom Huchonfone his fone, Thome Smyth, Andro Clerkfone, Johne 5oung,
Stevin Lythgw, Johne Grahame, Lowen' Cad5eu, Thomas Tuedy, Johne Huchonfone, Peter Loky, Johne Twedy of Drummel5are, Marc Trumbill, Adam Trumbill
of Philophauche, Williame his fone and apperande aire, James Turnbule in Kirkhop, James Trumbill in Gargonno, Robert Murhede, Johne Adamfoune, Robert
Scot in Hanyng ; and all and findrie utheris his men, kyne, tenentis, factouris and
fervandis, alfe well at' ar nocht fpecefit as fpecefit, ]jair beneficeis, landis, takis,
malingis, rentis, poffeflionis and gudis, to cefe and reft fra pe day of J)e paffing
of pe faid mafte Reverend fader furthe of oure realme, quhiir his retornyne
and comyne agane in pe fame, and fourti dais paireftir. And mai'e-atoure,*
We have Exeimit,^ and be pir our letteris, fpecialie Exemis al pe perfonis abone
expremit, alle well nocht nemmit as namyt, fra al comperence to Juftice-airis,
Chalmerlanis-airis, Wardane-courtis, Seffionis, Sheref-courtis, and al uthir
Courtis, for all ])e time abone writtin. And iulikwife, We have eespuyt, and
be J)ir prefentis in pe law and by pe law, fpecialie Refputis all ]>e forefaidis perfonis and all utheris, alfe weile nocht nemmit as nemmit, quhilkis ar or fal happin
any tyme to cum, induiyn pis oure Refpuit, to be indictat, attechit or accufit
for pe ilauchtir of umquhile Thomas Ruthirfvirde, committit and done within
our Abbay of Jedworthe ; or for art and part, affiftence, rede, counfale or being
in pe fame, remanyng, or way-pafling with pe flaier or flaieris, or for lying furthe
and non-entre to our lawis fore pe fame ; or for gadering and convocatioune of
our liegis, pe faid tyme, or peireftir ; and for al cryme, actioun, and caufe pat
may be input to pame, or any of thame tharthrouch ; exceppand" pame pat flew
the faid Thomas with pair handis, to be unattachit, unarreftit, uncallit, unconvenit, unfummonit, unchalhangit, unvexit or trublit, in pe law, or by pe law, in
pair perfonis, par borowis,' landis, and gudis quhatfumevir, for oure unlawis of

' Perhaps for LowTie ; Laurence. '" As well those that (or wlio). ^ Until. ■* Furthermore. ' Exempted. ^ Excepting, saving. " Cautioners, sureties.

44 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. L'504.

DRUMFREIS.

non-comperence to owr lawis, or ony iithir maner of way for ]?e faid flauchtir,
and actionis forefaid, or any jjart or pont' J^airof, as faid is. And alfe, Refplacis and continuis pe puttin of Jjame, and ilkane of ]>a\m to our home, for nou
comperence to underlie our lawis for pe faid llauclitir, or ony pont of pe premiffis,
induring all pe tyrae of ])is our fpecialle Refpuyt. Quharfou, We charge
llratlie, and commandis all and findri oure officiaris, liegis, and fubditis forefaidis,
J)at nane of 50U tak apoune hande, til do or attempe ony thing incontrare, or
breking of pis our fpeciale Licence, protectioune, and refpuyt, for all the tyine
abone expremit, under all pe heaft pane,^ charge, and offence, ])at ge and ilkane
of 30U may committ and inrine,' aganis our maiefte, in ]>at part : Thir oure
Letteris, fra pe day of pe paffing of pe faid maift Reverend fader furthe of our
realme, quhil his retornyne and cumyn agane within pe famyn, and fourty dais
])aireftir to indure, as faid is : Providing allvais, ])at ])is our Refpuyt, nor exeniptioune, fal nocht extende to na crymis, quhilkis falbe committit eftir pe dait of
pe fame. Gevin undir our Prevay Sele, at Drumfreis, Jje xxviij day of Auguft,
pe 5ere of Gode ane Thoufande five hundrethe and foure 5eris, and of our reigne
pe xvij 5ere. And nochtwithftanding ))is oure Refpuit, We wil ])at all pe perfonis contenit in pe famyn, except Jjai }jat paffe with pe faid maift Reverend fadir,
in propir perfone, fal anfuer to al partiis apoune dettis, in quhat Court ])ai be
convenit, except oure aune propir dettis. James R.

Crtason — aieaouittimti (MausUtv ?) of tfjc EatilJ of Crajjanis,

[John Master of Montgomery (or of Eglintoun, as he is styled in the Peerages) was the
second, and then surviving son, of Hugh third Lord Montgomery, a distinguished nobleman, who had
been a strenuous supporter of the Prince at the Field of Stirling, and for his services was afterwards
created Earl of Eglintoun. The crime for which the Master was here summoned, was for the Wounding of William Cuninghame of Craigends. The Mailer of Eglintoun was killed on the streets of Edinburgh, April 28, 1320, in the memorable Feud between James^'j/? Earl of Arran and Archibaldy/a;</i
Earl of Angus, best known by the sobriquet of Cleanse the Causeway.

The authority for the nature of the crime for which the Master was charged, is the following brief
notice from Sir James Balfour's treatise, ' De jure Prcelationis Nobilium Scoiics.'* ' Item, I find
that Johne, Maifter of Montgomerie, is fummonit to underlay the lau and cenfur of Treflbne, for the
vounding of Villiame Cuninghame of Craiganis.'J

Jan. 20, 1505-6.— Quo die, Johanne Magistro Montgumry, fepe
vocato per literas Summonicionis domini noftri Regis, ad refpondend. fuper certis
proditorijs accionibus in dicta Summonicione contentis ; et non comparen. continuatur ad diem Martis, tertium diem menfis Februarij proximo futuri, cum
continuacione dierum et horarum.^

■ Point. ° Highest pain. ^ Literally in-nin, incur. * Carmichael's Tracts, p, 89.

' Acta Pari. II. 262.

17JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 45

Ms]) €vtmon*

(Jan. 20.) — Quo die, Donaldo MakraNald Bane, fepe vocato per
literas Suinmonicionis doniiui noftri Regis ad refpondend. fuper certis proditorijs actionibus in dicta Summonicione contentis ; et non comparen. continuatur
ad diem Martis, tertium diem raenfis Februarij proximo futuri, cum continuacione dierum et horarum.'

Wiisi) Crtason— aisststing IDonallJ ot tijt Sisles, $((,—ffivt--vmins
antj * l^crescljips* in 33atienoci).

[As the various Feuds, Treasons, &c. connected with the Isles fall to be treated of at large in Mr
Gregory's History of the Hebrides, it is unnecessary to enter on the subject in this place. It may,
however, be proper to remark, generally, that Macleod and Donald Ila's fathers married two sisters.
The former married Lady Katherine Campbell, in 1498, and the latter (Angus Macdonnel, natural
son and heir of entail of John Earl of Ross and Lord of the Isles), Lady Mary Campbell, the
seventh and Jifth daughters of Colin_^Vs< Earl of Argyle. In the Appendix to the Trials which occurred
during the reign of King James IV, the reader will find many interesting notices in relation to this and
other similar cases.]

Feb. 3.— Torculane (Torquill) Makcloide of the Lewis. — The
qubilk day, in Parliament, littande oure fouerane lorde the King, his thre
Eftatis the famyiae tym gaderit, Jobnne Ogilby, Scheref-deput of Inuernes, prefent ane letter of Summondis vnder pe quhit vvalx and teftimoniale of pe Gret
Sele, of J)e quhilk pe tenour foUowis, with pe tenour of pe executioune ])airof
execute be pe faide fcheref-deput.

Sitmmouicio Forisfacture Torcidani Makcloide de Leiiis.
Jacobus Dei gratia Rex Scotorum : Vicecomiti et ballivis fuis de Inuernefe ;
necnon dilectis uollris Bute, Ormonde, Siguiferis ; Dauid Tempihnane, Duncano
Riche, Jacobo Mulchete, Ricardo Broiine, Johanni Coiipare, Nuncijs, et eorum
cuilibet conjunctim et diuiiim, vicecomitibus noftris in hac parte, falutera. Mandamus vobis et precipimus, quatenus fummoneatis legitime et peremtorie coram
teftibus, ToRCULUM M'cloide de Lewis, perfonaliter, fi eius prefenciam commode habere poteritis, fm autem apud fuum proprium locum habitacionis, fi ad
eundera tutus pateat acceffus, ve alioquin apud Crucem foralem Burgi noftri de
Inuernes per publicam proclamationem, fie quod dicte Summonicionis notitia ad
eius aures deuenire poterit, quod compareat perfonaliter coram nobis feu noftro
Jufticiario, in noftro proximo Parliameuto, tenend. in pretorio Burgi noftri de
Edinburghe tercio die meufis Februarij proximo futuro, fi dies ilia juridica fuerit, alioquin proxima die juredica inde fequente, hora caufarum, cum continuatione dierum, ad refpondend. nobis feu dicto Jufticiario, pro proditorijs arte,
parte, et affiftencia factis et exhibitis Donaldo Yi,a, baftardo filio quondam

' Acta Pari. II. 262. No farther notice of this case occurs.

46 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1505-6.

Angufij de Infulis, eciam baftardi filii quondam Johannis Domini de InsuLis, capiendo fecum parte iuuadendo ligeos noftros Dominij noftri Ixsularum,
et diflruendo eofdem bellico modo, ad eff'ectum et fineni nt idem Donaldus effet
DoMiNUS dicti Dominii de Insulis : Et pro proditorio deliberaeione dicti
Donaldi Lauchlaxo Maklane de Dowart, et poll pofitione deliberacionis
eiufdem nobis, contra noftra mandata : Ac proditorie Inuafionis et Combuftionis
noftrorum ligeorum, in Bad5enach, in feflo Natiuitatis Domini in anno Domini
Millefimo quingenteffimo tercio, et aliorum noftrorum ligeorum diuerfis temporibus : Ex pro proditorijs Incendiis et Rapinis predictis et aliis diuerfis temporibus, bellico et hoftili modis factis : Ex eciam pro i>roditione facta per dictmn Torculum in offencione noftre regie maieftatis, in Rapiua et detencione a
noftris Officiariis, in executione eorimi officii, noftrarum Literarum, viz. cuiuldam
Summonicionis emanate ad inftanciam noftram contra dictum Torculum et
directe Gilpatrik Cori noftro Nuncio et ofRciario in hujufmodi execucione, existen. viceffimo feptimo die menfis vltimi elapli ; et alterius Summonicionis eciam
emanate ad inftanciam noftram directe Vicecomiti et Balliuis nofti-is de Inuernefe fuper dictum Torculum, ftiper diuerfis proditoriis actionibus, contra dictum
Torculum : Ex pro proditoriis factione et compofitione Ligarum cum diuerfis
noftris ligeis, et eciam cum noftris Rebellibus contra noftram auctoritatem regiam,
in Inuafione noftri regni et ligeorum noftrorum in diuerfis Depredacionibus et
Combuftionibus, Rapinis, et Homicidiis, et aliis ci'iminibus : Ex vlterius, ad
fiibeundum magnam Aflilam, lecundam formam accufationis et Indictamenti
defiiper conficiend. : Intiman. dicto Torculo quod fine dictis die et loco cum continuatione dieruni comparuerit fiue non, nos nichilorainus feu dictus nofter
Jufticiarius premiflis, jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedet : Et uos qui
prefentes executi fueritis fitis ibidem dicto die, baben. vobifcum Summonicionis
veftre teftimonium et boc breve : Ad quod faciend. vobis et veftrum cuilibet coniunctim et diuifim in hac parte committimus poteftatem. Daxum fub teftimonio ]\Iagni Sigilli noftri Apud Edinburgbe, decimo tercio die menfis Decembris
anno regni noftri decimo octauo.

Indot'fatio Jive Executio dide Summonicionis.
The xxilij day of ))e moneth of December, the sere of God J".V'. and v 3eris, I Johne Ogilby
Sclieref-depnt of Imiernes, pafl with tliir our foucraue lordis lettres, and foyclit Torculane MakCLOIDE of ]ie Lewis, and becaul'e I tuth noiht appreliende him perfonaly, uor ]-air was na fure paffage to mo till hisduellinge place, I paft to fe merkat corce of fe Burgh of Inuernes at xj houris befor
nwno, and jiair be oppin proclaniatioune maid at ]je merkat croce, I fummonde, vamit and cliargit the
faide Torculain Makdoid of fe Lewis to compere befor our louerane lorde )ie King or liis Juflice in
pe tolbutli of Edinburgbe, ))e thrid day of Februar nixt tocum, in )'e liour of caufe, witli continuacioune
of dais, to anfuere to our fouerane lord or iiis Juliite, for pe treafonabil art, parte and aiiillans takin
and done witli Donalde Ila, baftarde lone to Angus of J)e His, ballarde, takand pairt with him and

18 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 47

InuaJande our fouerane lordis liegis of ])E Ilis and dillioyeand tliaim, to fe effect ])at ]ie faid Donalde
fuld be LoRDE OF ))E Ilis ; and apone all punctis and articulis in ])ir our fouerane lordis lettres, and
eftir J)e forme of Jie faniyn ; and Jiis I did befor ))ir Vitnes, Johne of Chalmer, Robert Innes, Alexander Miclielfone, Joline Aucliinlek Alderman of Inuernes, Johne Cutlibert, Johne Vans, Bailies of

fe faid burgh, James Donaldfone, Alexander Anderfon, Henry Auchinlek, Paterfone, Johne

of Ruthirfurde, Sir Villiani Paterfone Perfone of Balliefkan, and Sir Jo ke Cliaplane and

Notar public, with o])eris diuerfe ; and for J)e mare vitnifling of ])is execufione I haue afKxit my fignet
to ))ir prefentis.

The quliilk execucioune was provit be ]>& faide Sclieref-deput and Lis twa witnes, ]jat is to fay, Johne of Rutherfurde and Alexander Patonefone. The quhilk
citacioune, Summondes and execucioune beande rede and lauchfully previt, as
faid is, ])e faid Toi'cule Makcloid beande oft tymes callit and uocht comperit,
lauchfuU tym of day biddin, the ordour and procefle of pe faide Summondis at
lentht fene, harde and vnderftande, and lauchfully procedit ; in pe name and
behalf of our fouerane lorde, Maifter James Henrifone, Aduocat to his hieues,
aflcit and inquirit, in his name and autorite and of his fpeciale commande, at pe
Lordis, Baronis, and Commiflariis of Burrovis, thare warde and cenfment of
Parliament, gif the faide Torcule M^cloide hade committit and done TreflTone
till our fouerane lorde and his realme, in pe punctis and articulis abone writtine : The quhilkis Loi'dis and Eftatis beande auifit, ripelye wardit and deliuerit, ])at pe faide Torcule Maccloide has committit and done opin and manifeft
Trefoune, in thir punctis efter foUoing, contenit in pe faide Summondis, That is
to fay, for the trelTonable art, part and affiftence gevin and done be him to
Donalde Yla, baftarde fone of vmquhile Angufe of pe Ilis, alfua baftarde fone of
vmquhile Johne Lord of pe Ilis, be Infurrectione and takand his part,' to pe
intent that pe faide Donalde fuld tak apone him pe KiNGis propirte, and to be
Loud of the Ilis : And for pe treffonable deliuering of pe laid Donalde to
Lauchlane Maklane of Dowert, to J)e intent forfaide. And for pe treflbnable
withhalding of him fra his hienes, and non deliuering of him in contrar pe commande of his diuerfe Lettres directe to him ])airapone. And for pe trelfonable
Reving^ and withhaldin of his hienes Lettres fra his Officiarie of Ai-mez, callit
Gilpatrik Cor, quliilk execute pe famyn apon the xxvij daye of October laft
bypafl : And for pe trelTonable (making of) Ligis and Bandis^ with our fouerane
lordis Rebellis, in treflbnable wife, as is contenit in pe Summondis befor expremit.
And tharefter it was gevin for Dome, be pe mouthe of Johne Jardin, Dempftar of
Parliament for ]je tyra, in forme and maner as efter followis :

Dome or Sentence of Forfeiture.
This Court of Parliament fchawis for law, and I gif for Dome, that Torcule
Makcloide of the Lewis has committit and done Treflbne agane our fouerane
lorde and his realme, in pe fpeciale pointis of Treflbnis and crimez forfaidis,

' The following words are deleted from the Record. ^ Taking by violence. ^ Leagues

and Bonds, binding the parties to mutual assistance in all their quarrels, &c.

48 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1505-6.

contenet in the fummondis ; for the quhilkis he has forfalt till our fouerane lorde
his life, his landis,' his gudis, offices, and all vther his poffeffionis quhatfumeiiir
he hade within \)e Realme of Scotlande or Ylis, euermar to remane with our
fouerane lorde, his aieris and fucceflbiu'is, for his treffonabile offence : And J)at
I gif for Dome.

^^laujjTjtn* of a iHrssrntjrr at ^rms — Conboratioit, kc.

(Feb. 3.) — JohnLindissayofWauchop.- — Robert Lorde Crechtoune of
J»e Sanquhare, Scheref principall of Drunifrefe, prefentit ane Lettir of Summondis
vnder jje quhite walx and teflimoniale of Ipe Grete Sele ; of ])e quliilk the tenour
foUowis, with pe tenour of pe executioune ))airof, execut be ])e faid Scheref principale.

Summoniclo Forisfactiire Johannis LlmViJfay de Wauclwp.
Jacobus Dei gratia Rex Scotorum : Vicecomiti et Baliuis fiiis de Drumfrefe,
falutem. Mandamus vobis et precipimus, quatenus fummoneatis legitime et peremptorie coram teflibus, Johannem Lindissay de Wauchop, perfonaliter,
li eius pi-efenciam commode habere poteritis, fin autem apud locum fue habitationis, fi ad eundera tutus pateat accefTus, alioquin per publicam i)roclamacionem
apud Crucem fori Burgi noflri de Drumfrefe, quod compareat perfonaliter, coram
nobis feu noftro Jufliciario, in noflro Parliamento tenend. in pretorio Burgi
noflri de Edinburghe, tercio die menfis Octobris proximofuturi, fi dies ilia Juridica
fuerit, alioquin proxima die Juridica inde fequen., hora caufarum cum continuacione dierum, ad refpondend. nobis feu dicto noflro Jufliciario, fuper iiroditoi'ijs
arte et parte crudelis Interfectionis quondam Bertholomei Glendinwyne, Officiarij
et "N'^icecomitis noflri in hac parte, et quondam Simonis Glendynwyne fui fratris
in fua commitiua, in executione fvij officij Vicecomitis noflri in hac parte, noftrafque literas haben., ad diflringendum et namandum terciam partem terrarum de "Wauchop, quondam Mergrete, fponfe quondam Johannis LindifTay,
patris ipfius Johannis pertinen. : Et pro fuis proditoriis arte et parte Conuocationis et congregationis noflrorum liegiorum, pro commiffione hujufmodi Homicidii fuper predictis Bertholomeo noflro "\^icecomite et officiario et Symone,
in executione dicti officij Vicecomitis noflri in hac parte : Ex pro fua proditoria
confectione Ligarum feu Obligationum, cum noflris fubditis, and ligeis contra

' Mar. 6, 1507-8. Charter by James IV. at Edinburgh, g^ranted ' Odoni (y) Makky in Stratlinaverne, pro fideli et gratuito fervicio Regi impeiifo, ac inportenim in refillacioue et invafione Rebellium Regis impendendo,' 8cf. of the lands of Assent and Ladochcliogitlie, in the shire of ' Inuernyfe,'
pertaining to the King, in consequence of the forfeiture of Torquel Makcloid, formerly of Lewis, for liis
lifetime, with power to let the same, &c. Beg. Mug. Sig. XIV. 464'. ■ In Sir James Balfour's

Treatise, ' De jure PraOationis Nohiliuni Scotorum,' he remarks, ' In the penult of October, in anno
1505, John Lindefay of Vaucliope ves forfaultit for the cruel Slaughter of one Bartholoniou Glendinning, Meliinger, and Simon his brother, quha ver poynding the lands or three pairts of the lands,
at the inflance of Margaret uniquhill fpoufe to Johne lies father.' Carmichacl's Tracts, p. 89.

18 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 49

DOS et noftnim regnum, in quantum in eo eft, omnino vfurpando : Ac committendo fuper noftros veros ligeos Depredaciones, Rapinas, et Incendia, proditorio modo, infra vicecomitatos noftros de Druuifrefe et Roxburgh, aliafque
regni noftri partes, in quammagnum noftre autoritatis detriinentuin, et predictorum ligeorum noftrorum difpendium et grauamen: Inuadendo regnum noftrum
hoftili et bellico modis : Ex ftiper alijs in premiffis iibi obiciendis et proponendis reraanfuris, et jure parituris : lutiman. dicto Johanni quod fine dictis die
et loco cum continuatione dierum comparuerit fine non, nos nichilominus, aut
dictus nofter Jufticiarius in premiffis, jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedet :
Et vos qui prefentes executi fueritis fitis ibidem dicto die, haben. vobifcum Summonicionis veftre teftimonium et hoc breve. Datum fub teftimonio Magni
Sigillj noftri Apud Linlithgow, vicefimo die menfis Junij, anno Regnj noftri
decirao feptimo.

Indorfatio five Executio prefute Sunimonicionis.
Tbe ferin day of Jie moneth of Julij, tlie ser of God I°.V^. & V3eris, I, Robert Lord Crichtone
OF THE Sanquhar, Sclieref principel of Drumfreis, pafl to J)e merkat croce of Drumfreis with pir
our fouerane lordis Lettres, and at ])e command of fe famyn, be opin proclaraatione, ixivavnonA Johne
Lindjay of Vauchop, to compere perfonaly befor our fouerane lord and his lordes Juftice at Edinburgh,
or quhar it fal happin ])aim to be for |)e tyme, the third day of October nixt to cum, in J^e hour of
caufe, with continuatione of dais, to anfuere to our fouerane lord or his Juftice, apone all punclis and
articulis contenit in }iir our fouerane lordis Lettres, and eftir fe tenour of ])e famyn. And this I did
befor thir Vitnefis, Robert Dal3ell, Williame Cwnynghame, James Cariutheris, Robert Makbrare,
Eduarde Crichtone, Nichol Nelfone, Dauid Gluver, and Johne Barbour: And for fe mare vitneffinge
hereof, I haf fet to my fignet, 5ere, day, and place forfaid.

In name and behalf of our fouerane lorde, Maifter James Hennrifoune, Aduocate till (his) liienes, alkit and inquii'it, in his name and authorite, and of his
fpeciale commande, at the Lordis, Barouns, and Commiffaris of Burrowis, thare
warde and cenfment of Parliament, geif the faid Johne Lindiffay had committit
and donne Treflfoune till our fouerane lorde and his Realme, in pe pointis and
artikillis abone writtin ? The quhilk Lordis and Eftatis, beande avifit riplie,
wardit and deliuerit, that ])e fade Johnne Lindissay has committit and donne
opin and manifeft (TrefToune) in thir pointis eftir following, contenit in the fade
Summondis ; that is to fay, in J^e cruel Slauchtir of vmquhile Bertilmow Glendinnowiiig, our fouerane lordis Officiare and Scherref in f)at part, and of Symone
Glendinnowiug, his bro])er, being in his cumpany, in ]>& executione of his office,
in ])e diftrin5eing of (the) thrid part of J)e landis of Wauchop, pertening to Mergrete, the fpoufe of vmquhile Johnne Lindiffay, his fader : And for the treffonabill
Convocatione and gaddering of our fouerane lordis liegis, for the committing of
the Slauchter of ]>e faidis Bertilmow and Symone, officiaris and Schereffis forfaide : And for the treffonabill raakin of Liges and Bandis, with diuerfe our

VOL. I. I G

50 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1506.

fouex'ane lordis vntrew liegis, committande iipone our fouerane loi-dis liegis RefRs,
Spul'^eis, Herefchippis,and Rafande fire, in treflbnabill wife, within Jje icherefdomes
of Drumfrefe and Roxburglie, and Invaidande his reahne and liegis in maner of
batale and treironabill wife : As is contenit in J)e faide Summondis maid J)airuppone. — And paireftir it was gevin for Dume, be the mouthe of Jolinne Jardune, Dempftar of Parliament for the tyme, in forme and maner as eftir foUowis.
Dume. — Tliis Courte of Parliament fchawis for law, and I geif for Dume,
that Johnne LindifTay of Wauchop has committit and done TrelTone agane our
fouerane lord and his realme, in ])e fpeeiale pointis and crime3 forefade, contenit
in ]je fade Summondis ; for the quhilkis he has Forfalt till our fouerane lorde
his life, his landis, his gudis, his officis, and all vj^er his polTeflionis quhatfumeuir
he hade within ])e Realme of Scotlande, euermare to remane with our fouerane
lorde, his airis, and fucceirouris for his fade treffonabill (crimes) forefade : And
}jat I gefe for Dume.

?^i0|) Crtasou.

[John Oig' Macgilleoun or Maclean of Lochbuy was the son of Hector, and grandson of
John Macgilleoun of Loclibuy, who lived in tlie reigns of King James II and III. John Oig married
a daughter of Macdougall of Loni, and was connected with the Macleods of Herries and Lewis, among
which families there had been repeated intermarriages. The Indictment is not preserved ; but it may
pretty safely be inferred that his crime consisted in being art and part with Torquil Macleod and
others, in attempting to set up the Bastard Donald de Yla as Lord of the Isles.* This case was
frequently continued ; and owing to the deficiency of the Records, it does not appear whether or not
it was insisted on. The probability, however, is, that he was restored to the King's favour. Among
other notices which occur in the High Treasurer's books, there is expended, Jan. 21, 1506-7, as
follows ' Item, to Maklane of Lochboy, xiiij lib.'^

Maclean, with his two eldest sons, are known to have been ' killed in a family Feud betwixt them
and the Macleans of Dowart.'* For the particulars of these Feuds, &c., the reader is referred to Mr
Gregory's work before noticed.]

Feb. 6. — Quo die, Johanne Makklane de Lochboy, fepe vocato per
Literas Summonicionis Domini noftri Regis ad refpondendum fuper certis Proditorijs accionibus in dicta Summonicione contentis ; et non comparen.continuatur
ad dieniMartis, tertium diem raeufis Februarij proximo futuri, cum continuacione
dierum et horarum.

Curia Justiciauie, in 'pretorio hnrgi de Edinburghe, die 31artis, xv die
Februarij, 1507, coram Andrea domino Av and ale, Jujliciario.

Feb. 15, 1507-8 — Eduard Symsoune convicted of art and part of the

^ Young John. - See Feb. 3, 1505-6. ' Compot Tlies. General Register House.

* Douglass Baronage, p. 370.

20 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 51

EDINBURGHE.

Stouthreif, by way of mummyn," under filence of night, of certain funis of money,
extending to fix fcore merks, or thereby, from Sir Donald MofTet, Chaplain, furth
of his chamber, near the Kirk of Craggy. — Hanged.

lA)i(Ireas dotninus Avandale, et Alexander Laudir, Prepofitus de Ed'mhurghe, Jujliciani et Locimi tenenfes deputafi Andree domino Gray,
Jnjliciarij Generalis.']

^\m%i)Xtx anH WttxtuiM ^^ tije ^Wt ai antitevmeffane, ^t,

Jun. 16, 1508, {die Vejieris.) — Donald Mole Makalester, convicted
of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of John Ruflell, Patrik Weddale, and
fundry other perfons at Innermeffane, and of the ' Herefchip' of their goods
furth of the faid Place at the fame time : Item, of art and part of the Stouthreif
of lundry oxen and cows from Perfone" M'^Martyne, in Kintyre : Item, o{ common Stouthreif and common Oppreffion of the lieges. — Hanged.

^toutijretf Og iuan ot * ih\nm\nmS'*

Adam Mure, Convicted of art and part of Stouthreif, by way of
' 3Itimmijng,'^ having his face muffled, under filence of night, of a certain fum
of money from Sir Donald MofTett, Chaplain, furth of his chamber, near the Kirk
of Cragy : 7/^???, of art and part of the Stouthreif of two horfes from William
Wallace, furth of Drumboy. — Hanged.

[^Alexander Comes dc Hnutlie, Jiijiiciarhis.']

C|)tft— JKesettiita 3Df)itij^0 aiilj Craitors, ^r,

Oct. 9, {die Lnne.) — Cuthbert Lauder, of Todrik, Convicted of art
and part of the Theft and concealment of two horfes from Alexander Turnbull,
furth of Braidl^ : Item, of the theftuous Refetting of Alexander Cranftoune,
common Thief, in his Thefts ; and of art and part with him therein : Item, of
the theftuous Refetting of Williame Oliver, common Thief, in his Thefts : aud
of art and part with him therein : Item, of fupplying and Intercommuning with
Symon Turnbull and Robert Turnbull, the King's Rebels, and being at his horn ;
and of art and part with the faid Rebels in their Thefts and Treafonable deeds ;
and of the Treafon done to the King and his kingdom on that account : Item, of
Common Theft and Common Refet of Theft : Item, of common outputting and

' During the festivities of the New-year, it was customary for parties to go about in disguise,
accompanied by music. They were freely allowed to enter houses and exhibit their Mtuiimhiffs or
drolleries, dancing and singing, &c. These morrice-dances have long since ceased in Scotland ; and
even the last vestige of these ' Mummeries,' the Guisards of Edinburgh, and a (ew other j)laces, have
nearly expired. The facilities wliich these licentious festivities afforded to commit robberies, induced
a severer measure of punishment, in cases of delinquencies of this dislionourable sort, whilst murderers,
&c. were allowed to compound for their atrocious crimes. * Parson. ^ See Feb. 15, 1307-8.

52 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1508.

EDINBURGHE.

inputting in theftuous and treafonable manner : Item, of common Treafon with
the faids Robert and Symon, the King's Rebels. — Drawn and Hanged, and
all their goods, moveable and immoveable, lands and poffeffions, efcheated to the
King.'

CuRTA Itineris Jujlkiarie de Kirkcudbright, Andreas Dominus Gray,

Jtijticiariiis, &,c.

(J^pjprrssing llatji) CaiUiius, ^r*

Oct. 14, {die Sahoti.) — Ninian M'^cullocht of Cardines came in the
King's will for art and part of the infraction of two Protections, granted in
favour of Elizabeth Levinox, in the occupying and labouring her third (terce
lands) of the Lands of Cardines. — He was alfo admitted to compoixnd for art and
part of the Oppreffion done to the laid Elizabeth, in ' Reiving' from her 1500
' jowis, wedderis,' and younger llieep, pertaining to her by reafon of her half,
through the deceafe of umq'° James IVrcullocht of Cardines ; and of the Stouthreif
thereof : Item, for the ' Spuil5ie' of the lands pertaining to the faid Elizabeth,
by reafon of her terce and conjunct Infeftment of the lands and barony of Cardines and Kirkmabreck ; and Stouthreif of her rents : Item, for Oppreffion done
to the faid Elizabeth, in breaking up the doors of her barn, within the faid
lands ; and for the Stouthreif of her corns and houfehold goods, extending to
xl 1. — The faid Ninian became furety to latisfy the parties.

Oct. (16?) — Martin Burnet, in S' John's Clauchane, Convicted of
common Oppreffion of the lieges, in the execution of his office." — Remitted by
the Lords.'

Common Cljtft mxti l^itluv^,

[FnoM markings on tlie margin of the Record, it appears that the Sentence originally recorded
against this infirm old Highlander had been ' Suspen.' ; which marking was afterwards deleted, and
' SuB»rERSUs' substituted ; and finally, the latter was struck out, and ' Bannitus' inserted, through
the clemency, no doubt, of his Judge or the King. It may be interesting to remark here, that the
punishment of death inflicted upon females, at this early period, and for more than two Centuries afterwards, was, universally, drowning ; and in cases of very heinous crimes, burning at the stake. It was
deemed highly indelicate and shocking to expose females to any other mode of execution than these,
until the ' Maiden' was invented, when females of rank were sometimes beheaded. Owing to the helpless
infirmity of this old man, it seems to have been considered an act of humanity to put him to death by
drowning ; but it is probable that the King, who was noted for kindness to the aged and infirm, had
ordered his sentence to be commuted to Bunishinetit.']

' There is added to this entry, ' Nota, quod omnia prescript, commiss. post datam sue RemissioDis.' ° Prol)ably as a Messenger-at-anns. ^ ' Re" per domlnos.' It md,y \)e Respited.

21 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 53

KIRKCUDBRIGHT.

MicHAELi Dow' M''al5ERache, Convicted of Common Theft and
• Pikry.'" — Banished fiirth of the Sheriffdome, becaufe he was aged and
decrepid, and was only convicted of (Stealing) * fchevis, tedderis, huikis, and
faccis :'^ — And to remove from the Shire, within eight days ; and never to return,
under the pain of death.

^laus!}ttr of tfjf ILaiib of Sal^.tll, kc,

Nov. 18, {(lie Jov'ts, quarta die Itineris.) — David Glendunwell. —
The Laird of Garrules* often called to enter the faid David, as he became furety
for his entry, under the pain of xl 1. to the King's officer, for art and part of the
Slaughter of William Dal5ell of that Ilk° and John Carmichell ; and not appearing,
he was amerciated in the faid fum. The faid David was denounced Rebel at the
horn, and all his goods were efcheated to the King.

Craiins X\)t king's Hetters, $(t,

NiNiAN M'Culloche of Cardines. — John Murray of Cokpule and
Alexander Mcculloch of Myrtoune became fureties for the entry of the faid Ninian,
along with himfelf, under the pain of 200 merks, to underly the law for treafonably taking and tearing the King's Letters, and for other crimes imputed
to him ; and not compearing, they were amerciated in the forefaid fum.

#pprrssins t\)t Hairtr of Call).

John Gokdone, of Lochinver, pi'oduced a Signature of Remiffion for
art and part of the Oppreffion done to Mr William Levinox of Caly, in detention
of the lands of Plumtoune and Trunjeartoune wafte, &c.

(J^pprfssion — .igurtins.

John Gordone, of Lochinver, and Helifius" Gordoune, in the parilliof
Kirkpatrick, produced a Signature of Remiflion for art and part of the forethought felony and OpprefRon done to Makadam, in the parifli of

KoUis, fervant of the Laird of Gaitgirthe, and hurting him : And the faid
John, for Common Opptreffion of the lieges. — The Laird of Lochinvar furety.'

' Niger, 'Dhu,' or black. ^Pickery, petty theft. ^ Sheaves, tethers, (halters, or ropes,) hooks
and sacks (bags.) * Gairlies. * See the Notes from the Privy Seal Hecoril, appended to this

reign. — ' In September, or thairby, there was a great fray betwix the Lord Maxwell and the Lord
Crighton of Sanchar, where the Lord Crighton was chafed with liis companie from Drumfreis,
and THE Laird of Dallyell and young Larde Crauchley, with dyveriis vther, were flayne.'—
Andersons MS. Hist. Adv. Library. See also Apr. 5, 1513 — Sir James Balfour also notices this
Feud in these terras : ' This 5eire, at Drumfreis, ther was a grate feight betuix the Lords MaxfwoU
and Sanquhare and tlier frindes and followars ; quherin the Lord Sanquhare was ouerthrowen, and
maney ot his frindis killed.' — Annales, H. 231. '' Elias? " At this period a considerable

54 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1508.

KIRKCUDBRIGHT.

Shilling Salmon in Ctosc--time,

JoHNE GoRDOXE, of Crago, Convicted of art and part of the flaying of
Salmon in prohibited time, in the water of Wr. Amerciated. — The Laird of
Lochinvar became furety to the King and party.'

(!^pprc06iii(j ti)t 9H)i)ot of Qinitrrrn nan's (J^ffirrr, k(,

Oct. 19. — John Magge (M'Ghie), of Plomtoune, Convicted of art and
part of Convocation of the lieges, in company with the Laird of Bomby, during
the time of the Court, at the Standande-ftaiie, in Drumdranan, held by the faid
Laix'd, in the year 1504 : Item, of art and part of the Oppreffion done to Sir
William Schankis, Monk, calling him down from his horfe during the time of
the faid Court : Aud of art and part of the Oppreffion done to Andrew Denis,
Officer of the Abbot of Drumdranen, taking and detaining him againfl his will,
until the conclufion of the laid Court. Fined vj merks. — The Laird of Bomby,
and the faid James for himfelf, conjunctly and feverally, became furety to the
King and party. ' liij li.'

Alan and John Makclelane, in Kirkcudbrycht, were fined x merks each
for the fame crime. — Peter Mur, of Bahnagachane, William Levinax, younger
of Caly, Alexander Porter, brother of the Laird of Lag, Peter Levingftoune, and
nine others, were likewife fined iiij merks each, excepting Peter Mur, who was
delivered gratis to the Sheriff. — The Laird of Bomby became furety, along with
themfelves, to the King and party.

#pp iTss ion — Hull ing: Salmon — 23urnin0 a aSHooti, kt,

William Levinox, younger of Caly, admitted to compound, by virtue
of a Remiffion, for his forethought felony and Oppreffion, done to Thomas
Mageiche at the Kirk of Girtoune, coming upon him in warlike manner, and
befieging him in theforeiaid Kirk, in the year 1504 : Item, for the Slaughter of
' rede-filche' (Salmon) in the prohibited time, in the water of Fleit : Item, for
the theftuous depredation of the Wood of Rowlkithe, and for Burning thereof.
— The Laird of Bomby furety to fatisfy parties.

^toiit|)rtlf of <J5asroni) 2ijainr — <*?pprrsston.

John Makclelane, in Kirkcudbrycht, convicted of art and part of the
Stouthreif of two ' hoghedis' of Gafgony wine from Patrick Forflcr ;'" and of the
Oppreffion done to the faid John at the fame time. — The Laird of Bomby liirety
for the King and party.

number of Cases occur against dependents of the Laird of Locliinvar, for Acts of Oppression and
Assault. He generally appears as cautioner. None of those iire of Jiny interest, saving in the instances
which hare been selected. ' ' iij 11.' is marked on the Record. - See p. * 55.

21 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 55

KIRKCUDBRIGHT.

Oct. 21, (die Sahoti.) — Dauid Kenxidy, of Cragnele, Thomas Makgermory, and Robert Park, Convicted of art and part of the Oj)preffion done to
Sir Gavin Kenydy, kn', by putting plough in his lands of Cumftoune ; and for
ploughing thereof, without any Leafe from the faid Sir Gavin : Item, for art and
part of the Oppreflion done to a fervant of the faid Sir Gavin, called Macrore,
and hurting him at the fame time. They were fined, viz. the faid David in x
merks, and the other two in v mei'ks each. — David Kennide of ... . furety to
the King and party.

<#touti)rtif of (Sasronij Miint — dforsing; t\)t Hint's Hctters —
€nttle--9tralinn: — Oppression, ^r,

[As the following Case is the only one wliere the proceedings of an Assise, at so early a period,
are fully detailed, the Editor has thought it proper to insert the original entry, in the precise terms in
which it is made in the Record. Tliis is likewise one of the few instances, which the Editor has
met with, of ttoelve persons sitting on an Assise. Assises generally consisted of eleven, thirteen, fifteen, or more persons ; but, excepting in a very few cases, they appear, from the earliest period, to
have had an odd number. The purpose of this regulation obviously was, that, in the event of an
equality of votes, for acquitting, or for finding the panel guilty, there might always be a decided
majority ; it being altogetiier inconsistent with the origin and nature of an Assise, that the Chancellor
should he allowed the privilege of a casting Vote.

The case itself is rather remarkable, and more pains than usual have, evidently, been bestowed on
the framing of the entry of the proceedings in the Record.]

AssiSA electa J'uper Do:minum de Boisiby et criminibus fibi hnpofitis.

Schir Gavane Kennedy, The Larde of Dalbaty, David Sinclar,

The Larde of Gaitgirthe, Robert Langmur, Schir Alex. M'Culloch,

The Larde of Cardinis, Johnne Crechtoune of Hartwode, Johnne Murhede of BuUes,

David Craufurde of fe Kerfe, George Langmur, Johnne Slowane of GaiToche.

Quequidem AfRfa, deligenter et mature avifati, deliberaverimt fuper nonnullis de criminibus eidem Wilelnio impofitis, ut fequitur. Wilel:mus MakCLELAXE de Bomby Convictus tuit de arte et parte rapine duarum le Jioghedis
vini Gafconie a Patricio Forftar, in Kirkcubrycht ; et de Oppreffione facta
eidem, eodem tempore : Item, de arte et parte proditorie ffinctionis unius Litere
f. d. n. Regis, capiendo Signetum ab una antiqua Litera, et affigendo Signetum
uni Litere pro relaxacione Andree domini Heres a cornu Regis : Item, de
arte et parte rapine certorum bourn a Patricio Harpar de Arkilquhade, extra
Bardrochate : Item, de arte et parte precogitate ffelonie et Oppreffionis facte
Patricio Makclelane de Myddilthi'ide, venien. fuper eum et volen. eum interficere, ex antiqua malicia : Item, de arte et parte rapine auri et argenti, extenden.
ad XX li. et ultra, pertinen. quondam D. Johanni Afchennane, Capellano, in
A.D. 1507, ultimo elapfo : Item, de parte Oppreffionis facte D. Willelmo

56 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1508.

KIRKCUDBRICHT.

(Schankis) Monacho,' profternendo five projiciendo eum extra fuum equum,
tempore detencionis Curie per ipfum Will, tente apud le Standaiide-Jlime in
Dundranane, contra voluntatem Abbatis : Item, de parte Oppreffionis facte
Audree Denis, officiario dicti Abbatis, tenendo eundem ad ferviend. in dicta
Curia, contra ejus voluntatem, ufque ad finem dicte Curie i Item, de arte et
parte Oppreffionis facte Ville de Kirkcubricht et comunitati ejufdem, in empcione vini et diverfoi'um bonorum et merchandiciaiiim, venien. ad dietam Villam et Portum de Kirkcubricht, antequam Villa et comunitas defervite fuerunt,
et contra voluntatem comunitatis ; quequidem merchandicia, vinum et alia bona,
fuftinere debuerunt dietam Villam et comunitatem : Item, de comuui 02)preffione dictis Ville et comunitati ea occafione facta : Item, de comuni Oppreffione
legiorum domini noftri Regis de aliis modis.

Super quibus crirainibus, et multis aliis criminibus de quibus Affifa minime
determinarvmt, licet in Indictamentis continebatur, et defuper dictus Will, exiftat accufatus, DoaiiNUS Justiciarius, cmn confenfu et avifamento Dominonim Compofitorum, fuorum AffelTorum, Respectuat eimdem AVillelmum ufque
ad diem crafbinum ejus accufacionis fequen. fub plegiacione iij° marc." — Et in
dicta die craftina, Plegius dicti Will., ob non introitum ejufdem, in hujufmodi
fumme amerciatus eft.^

Curia Itineris {de Wigtoune,) incJioata die L,une, xx'nj Octohris, 1508,
coram Andrea domino Gray, Jujltciario f. d. n. Regis, ex Aujlndi
aque de Forthe.

Burnfna: of J3ruinsferp anU ^litiiDtlL

Oct. 24, {die 3Iarfis.) — Gilcrist Barbour MAKKIN3E produced a
Signature of Remiffion for art and part of the Fire-raifing and Burning of
Drumfkey and Ardwell, in company with the Laird of Garthlane. — Sir Alexander MakcuUocht furety to fatisfy parties.

Curia Itineris {de Aire,) inchoata die Lune, penult. Octohris, 1508, coram

Andrea domino Gray, &c.
^tvCa ftrtlDcni ti)t iHurrs antr Cinii)n0l)amts.

Nov. 3, {die Veneris, quarta dies Itineris.) — Patrik Boyde, brother
to the Laird of Rowalloun, Neill Smyth, in Gardrum, and twenty-five others.
Convicted of art and part of Convocation of the lieges againft the Act of Par-

' See Oct. 19, 1508. 2 300O merks. ^ ' Summa totalis hujus Extractus lij^iiij^^iij li.

vj f. viij d.' (L.3083, Gs. Sd.)

21 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 57

AIRE.

liament, coming to the Kirk of Stewartoun, in company with John Mure of
Rowallan, for the Office of Pariili Clerk of the fame Kirk, againft Robert
Cunynghame of Cunynghamhede and his fervants, in the year 1508. — The
Laird of Rowallan and Andrew Arnot of Lochrig became fureties to fatisfy parties, as the Lords Ihould declare their pleafure.'

Sppvtmns t\)t ^oung ilairti of liimiit},^t,

James Mur, brother of the Laird of Rowalloun, Convicted of art
and part of the forethought felony and Oppreffion done to John Mowat, junior.
Laird of Bufby, and Andrew Stevinftoune in the Town of Stewartoun, in company with the Laird of Rowalloun. Fined v 1. — The Laird of Rowalloun furety
to the King and party.

Convocation — (J^jjprtsstng itatrn Cungns^^amijealr, kc,

Robert Cunyngham of Cunynghamhede, Convicted of art and part of
Convocation of the lieges againft the Act of Parliament, coming to the Kirk of
Stewartoun, in Convocation, againft John Mur of Rowallane and his men, for
the Office of Parifli Clerk of the faid Kirk, in the year 1508 : Item, of art and
part of the Oppreffion done to Elizabeth RolTe Lady Cunynghamhede, in occupying and manuring her third part of the lands of Cunynghamhede and Bonnalay ; and of thereby breaking the King's Protection (i. e. ^ Jauf garde') upon
her, in the year 1503 : Item, of art and part of the Oppreffion done to the
Abbot and Convent of the Monaftery of Kilwynuing, and to Hew Eai-I of
Eglintoun, their tenant, in the ' fpuiljie' of the Teind-flieaves of the lands of Myddyltoun, in the parifli of Perftoune, and of breaking the ' faufgarde' of our
fovereign lord the King upon the faid Earl of Eglintoun, in the year 1508.

Conbocation asa(nst X^t EairlJ of 2tloioaU.in»

Thomas Wallace in Clonl'che, Convicted of art and part of Convocation of the liegis againft John Mur of Rowalloun and his men, &c. Fined
according to the will of the Lords. — Robert Cunyngham of Cuynghamhede
furety to the King and party.'

^jpprcssintr Halii) CrrcPolo — * ^puibif/ ^^

Nov. 5, {die Sahoti, quiiita die Itincris.) — John Schaw of Haly, AVilliam Schaw dwelling with him, and eight others, were permitted to compound for
art and part of the Oppreffion done to Margaret Mongumry Lady Crechdow,

' ' Amerciat. xl f. pro vnoquoque,' marked on tlie Record ; which, of course, refers to the fine payable to the Crown only. ^ ' iij li. pro unoquoque.'

VOL. I. ■ t H ,

58 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1508.

AIRE.

coming to her Place, about the feaft of ' Mydfummer,' calling her goods furth
of her lioufe ; and for the ' fi)uir5ie' of fuudry of her goods at the fame time,
ilriking her lervants ; and for breaking of our fovereign lord tlie King's ' faufgarde :' Item, of Oppreflion done to the faid Margaret, in ejecting her furth of
her houfe and Place of Garclauche, calling down a Hack of hay and delli-oying
it, and alio calling down a Hack of bear,' containing leventy ' thraifis,'" and
thereby damaging the grain : Item, of lliutting up her ' gudis,'' viz. lixty-five
* Ibumes'* furth of lier faid third part, lliutting them up without ' pindande'
them in a ' pyndfalde :"^ Item, of breaking his Bond of caution to keep the
peace towards the faid Margaret, by calling a Hone out of a window, and breaking the faid Margaret's head, and ' felling' her :" Item, for common Oppreffion
of the King's lieges. — David Craufurde of Kerfe furety to latisfy the party.

^latitrljtcr.

John Schaw of Kerife produced a Remiffion for art and part of Slaughter
of John Boyde with a Hone. — David Ci'aufurd of Kerfe furety to fatisfy parties.

Cljfotofna: timn tfie WXmt of 33urnfoot— I)amr.suflun, ^r.

John Schaw of Kerife admitted to comjiound for art and part of the
forethought ffelony done to Duncan FergulToune, young Laird of Kilkerane, in
coming to his Place of Burnefute, and throwing down and breaking into the
houfes of the faid Place ; and for (forcibly) keeping the lands of Buru-fute wafte,
for the fpace of one year : Item, for the forethought felony done to Andrew Maknacht, and for ' Hamfukkin,' coming to his Place and * llabbit' his '

with ' quhingaris' and fwords : Item, for the forethought felony and Oppreffion
done to John Boyde," wifliing to Hay him at the time of the Slaughter of umq'"
M'^ilhenze. — David Ci'aufurde of Kerife furety to fatisfy parties.

^intsfviits i\)t stttlnrj: of X\)t BaiUe Couit of Canirfe.

David Crauiurdi: of Kerse, David C. younger, John Ci-aufurde
' proctour,' Thomas Galbraithe, David Campbell of Clovingall, Peter Rankin of
Schelde, William his fon, Albert Carthkert, Alan Carthker' of Drumrowane,

' A kind of barley. " A tliraivc, or thrcave, generally consists of twenty-four sheaves, including

two JFooks, or lliocks, of any kind of grain. ^ Live stock. ■* A/onm of grass seems to have

been various in different parts of the country ; e. ff. as much as one cow or five (sometimes eight or
ten) sheep can pasture. ^ Luckily, the Clerk of Court had been posed in rendering this and

many other articles into the usual Law Latin, hy which means the vernacular is occasionally introduced. ' Pindamte' the stock in a ' pyndfalde,' is what might still be properly called ^ jienning
them in a pin-fol<l.' It has no relation to po'mdiny or distraining the stock, as might at first glance
appear. '^ The words of the Record are forcible ; ' projiciendo unani lapidcm extra quandam fineftram et caput ipfius Margarete fringendo — et, in vulgari, '■'■ jeldc hir.' ' ' Obliterated iu Record.

' See tlie preceding case. '■* iiic. Cathcart.

21 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 59

AIRE.

Efplane Craufurde, and James Barbour, came in the King's will for art and part
of Convocation of the lieges, coming to the Court of the Bailliaiy of Carrik, on
occafion whereof the Bailie,' on account of the ' inconvenientis' which might
arife by ferving the Brieve of the Laird of Kilhenge,' refumed the faid Brieve ;
and thereby, for im^ieding the faid Bailie from holding his Court. — John Schaw
of Kerle furety to latisfy parties and the King. (David Craufurde of Kerfe was
amerciated 51,, and each of the others -lOf.)

^pprrssion — ?l?cTnitstifIun — Casting: a 3Soi) into ti)t jfht,

Nov. 6. — CuTHBERT RoBisouNE in Auchintebir, convicted of art and
part of the Oppreffion done to Arthur Farnlie, at his own houfe, ftriking him,
and catling his fon in the fire — Sir David Kenydy furety to the Icing and party.
(He was fined- five raerks.)

^puihit — (!?pprrsi3ln0 tljtoltr SaUi) l^omr, ^r.

Nov. 10. — Heav Eae-L of Eglixtoun produced a Pemiffion for art
and part of the ' fpuil5ie' of xij horfes, ' butis, fpurris, fuerdis,' and other goods
from Arthur Boyde, and other fervantis of the old Lady of Home, at the time of
the wounding of the faid Arthur : Ifet)/, for art and part of the Convocation of
the lieges to the number of fixty perfons, and the Oppreffion done to the old
Lady of Home, in fpuilzie of xxiiij cows furth of Gallovny : I/em, for the
Oppreffion done to the faid Ai'thui-, coming upon him and hurting him, and
taking him to the Place of Eftwode ; and detaining him therein, in prifon. —
The Earl became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Nov. 11, {die Ve^ieris, vltimo die Itineris.) — John HajMIHyltoune
in Bargany, produced a Remiffion for art and part of the fpuilzie ' certarum
menfarum Irlandie cilanidarum correorum,' corn, bear,' pots and pans,* from men
dwelling in Cregforgufe :' Item, for art and part of the ' fpuil5ie' of four horfes,
eight cows,, and four oxen from John Thorn foune, furth of his lands of Knokminfchoche. — Alexander Kennydy, young Laird of Bargany, became furety to
fatisfy the parties."

' Hew Earl of Eglintoune. - Reference may be made to the History of the Kennedies,

Edin. Quarto, 1830, in illustration of tins and all matters connected with tlie history of Carrick, and
of the numerous feuds which unhappily abounded there, until a pretty recent date. ^ A kind of barley.
< Patellas. = Carrick- Fergus ? " ' Sum ma totalis Extraetus, Ij'^iiij'lxxxix li.' (L.2489.)

60 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1508.

EDINBURGH.

Curia Jujliciarie de Edinburghe, inchoata die Lune, xxv die menjis Novemhris, 1508, coram Andrea Dojiino Gray, c^c.

^lauffljtcr— jTrloin) Iroiir to ^ix (millmw ^rott, jiim fenitrl^t

Nov. 25.— John Bikertoune of Cafche, and Archibald his brother,
Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of David Scot, near the Kirk of
Stramyglo : Item, the faid John of art and part of the forethought felony done
to Sir William Scot, junior, kn\ and his accomplices, at the fame time. — Warded
in the Caftle, by the Jufticiar.

[Alexander Comes de Huntlie et Archibaldus Comes de Ergile, Jti/twiarij.'\

Crans^jortinji Cattle to iSfnalanH — ^laiitrljter — 33ttrninjj i^t ^lace

antJ Mi\n of iltiMbj), i^t,

Jan. 26, 1508-9, {die Veneris.) — William Carruthers in Clonhede,
Convicted of treafonable outputting' of five fcore and five cows and oxen from
the Laird of Newby and his Tenants, in company with Andrew Johneftoun and
the Traitors of Levin : Item, of art and part of the Slaughter of Robert Hude
at the fame time : Item, of art and part of the outputting of xl cows and oxen
to the parts of England, and alfo of vtlier xl cows and oxen at another time, fi'om
the faid Laird of Newby and his Tenants : Item^ of art and part of the Slaughter of an infant of two years old at the fame time, in company with the faid
Andrew, &c. : Item, of the treafonable Burning of the Place and Mylne of
Newby, in company forelaid : Item, of common Treafon, common Theft, Refet
of Theft and of Traitors. — Sentence. To be drawn and Hanged : And that
he fliall forfeit all his lands and goods, moveable and immoveable, &c.

^laiig;!)tn- of Xiyt Eairti of (Slnili In ntitu:, ^t,

Patrick Dun wed y, in Eikdale, Convicted of art and part of the Slaughter of the Laird of Glendunwin ; and of treafonably going fm-th of Scotland to
the parts of England ; and of treafonably remaining in England : Item, of com,-
mon Theft, and common outputting and inputting of goods, between the kingdoms of Scotland and England. — Hanged, and all his goods efcheated as above.

3Uape of tTje (JJail of ?Lebtna.r'0 ©auffljter.

Feb. 13. — John Flemyn, fun to the Laird of Boghall. — John Lord
FlemjTig, often called (as fiu'ety) to enter the faid John to underly the law for
art and part of the Rape or Ravifliment of Margaret Stewart, daughter of

' Transporting tlie cattle to England. This crime was at all times visited with very heavy punishment ; for, during the wars with England, the Southern provinces were at any rate drained of provisions, ,
owing to the necessity of keeping considerable forces on the Borders, to watch against sudden invasion,
&c. The frequent famines in Scotland rendered such regulations expedient at all times, but more
especially during the time of war.

22 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 61

EDINBURGH.

Mathew Earl of Levinax ;i and for all action which could be imputed to hiin by
reafon of the faid Ravifliment, and intromiffion with her at the time thereof;
And not compearing, the faid Lord was fined in the penalty of 500 merks. —
John Flemyn was denounced Rebel at the King's horn, &c.

\_Andreas dominus Gray Jtijticlarius Generalis.']

Sep. 1, 1509, {die Sahbofi.) — Patrick IVrCLELLANE of Gileftoune,
Alexander Legait, Thomas ]VrClellan in Wigtoune, John IVrLyn miller, and
James JVPCulloche, were denounced Rebels, and put to the horn by public proclamation, &c., as fugitives from the law, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter
of George Frere ; and for not entering to underly the law, for the faid Slaughter,
and other crimes to be imputed to him. And this was done by Warrant of the
King, under his fign-mauual, following :
Rex,
Mest" James Henkisoun, We charge you Jmt incontinent eftir fe fycht of pis Precep, fat 56 put
Patryk Maklellane and his complices to be put to oure horne, eftir fe tenor of our dowm gyfin
upon hime, in to our towbytht of Edynbrycht : Ande pis 56 liff nocht oudon, as 5e wyl anfure to ws.

James (R).
Sep. 3, {die Lune). — They were of new denounced Rebels at the market
crofs of Edinburgh, &c.

* ^txt%t\M* — jrirc-raistiicj;— J^Iatijji)tfr t\i tfjc EaiitJs of <#intoun,

dTtntouu of tl)at M\\, ^c,

Nov. 19. — Andrew Crossar, Convicted of art and part of the Slaughter
of Robert Scot of Sintoun : 7/fw, of the treafonable inbringing of Engliflimen,
and Traitors of Levin to the ' Hex'efchip' and Burning of Blindhauche : Item,
of art and part of the Slaughter of Adam Turnbull of Chalmerlane-Newtoune,
and Adam Turnbule, called Gahirlenxeis ;^ and of in-bringing of Traitors and
Engliflimen to the faid crimes : Item, for the treafonable in-bringing of Engliflimen and Traitors to the ' Herefchip' done upon Alexander and James Chalmer :
Item, of art and j^art of the cruel Slaughter of John Feutoune of that Ilk : Item,
of art and part of the Theft of a grey horfe, and fundry other goods, from

' Lady Margaret Stewart, eldest daughter of Mathew 2d Earl of Lennox, got a charter fiom John
second Lord Fleming, her husband, of the lands of Biggar and Thankertoun, Mar. 12, 1508-9, Reg.
Mag. Sig. xv, 90. They were soon afterwards divorced, (perhaps the marriage was never regularly
solemnized), forslie resigned the lands in his favour, Oct. 26, 1516, and was then designed, ^ olim reputaUc J'ponja: dicti Joatmis.' She afterwards married Alexander Douglas of Mains; and Lord
Fleming married, for his third wife, Agnes Somerville. His first wife was Eufamia, fifth daughter of
David Lord Drummond. Lord Fleming was Great Chamberlain of Scotland, Ambassador to France,
&c., and was assassinated, while hawking, by Jolin Tweedie of Drumraelzier, Nov. 1, 152-1. — See
this Collection, Aug. 18, 1525, Apr. 7, 1529, &c. ' Ritson explains ' Gaberlunzie' to be ' a

wallet,' that hangs on the side, or loins ; and hence the word came to denote an itinerant beggar,
tinker, &c. who carries a wallet.

62 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1509.

EDINBURGH.

Thomas Bell in Baginw : Item, of common Treafon, common Refet of Theft,
common Theft, common outputting and inputting within the kingdoms of Scotland and England, in trealbnable manner. — Drawn and Hanged.

Curia Jujticiarie tenia die Jovis, Nov. xxij, 1509, Coram Andrea domino
Gk AY, Jiijliciario Generali, ethi 7/«c^ar/^Regalitatis G\?i{gwe\\.,Jpecialiter
covftitutejier Comm'iUionem JacoUGlafguen. Archiepifcopi,defuperconcefs.

J ^l.iutj:f)tn%

Alexander Lecprevik, junior of that Ilk, Alexander Cuningham,
John Alanefoun, and John Lindefay, Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of George Hammiltoun, committed upon forethought felony. — Beheaded.
AssiSA elect, et jurat. Jiiper eifdem pcrfonis.

Alexander Comes de Huntlie, Patiicius Crechtoune de Cran- Dominus de Ennoche,
JohaiinesDoininusHayde gefler, floun-Riddale, miles, Dominus de Corry,

Ad. Hepburne de Craggis, miles, Willelmus Scot de Baluery,mileB, Johannes Ramfay in Petgorno,
Alexander Lauder de . . . ,' miles, Johannes Somervile de Cambuf- Dominus de Warreftoun,
Duncanus Forfter de Skip Inclie, ncthan, miles, Dominus de Damplioy,

miles, Willelmus Douglas de Drumlan- Alex. Levingftoun de Halbiil,

Alexander Hepburne, miles, rik, Baro de Dal^el-Nefljit.

' Confratri fuo Johanni Laujone.'

JOHNNE,

I PRAY iou paffe to my Lorde, ande haife )ie bukis with 50U, anentis Jie milawis pertening to 3e
Larde of Lekprevik and his complicis, and put it furth of ))e bukis with his avife : And bring me
word as 56 do;- for my Lorde Eglintoune will not ende quhill he haf jour actis diftroit. — Item,
36 fall difcharge )nr unlawis, becaus fai have componit with my Lord Thesaurar, and he has
gevin commande. Ita eft Thomas Dicksoune.

[Robertus Dominus ErfJiin, Jiijiiciarius deputatus.']

^lausljter.

Nov. 24, {die Saboti.) — Hugh Wallace. — Cuthbert Earl of Glencarne,
often called to enter Hugh Wallace to underly the law, for art and part of tlie
Slaughter of vmq'^ George Hanimyltoime, under the pain of Ixxx li , and not
compearing, was amerciated in the laid lum : The laid Hugh denounced at the
home, and all his goods efcheated.

Hugh Lindesay, Andrew Hart, Alexander Robertfon, Robert Wight,
and Robert Bar. The Laird of Dunrod amerciated in the fums of ij*" marc,
Ixxx li., Ixxx li., Ixxx li., Ixxx li., for the non-appearance of thefe perfons for the
fame Slaughter. — Hugh, Earl of Eglintoune, Mas alio amerciated in four fums of
Ixxx li., each for non-appearance of Alexander Dalglefche, John Craumond, John
Lekprevik, and Paul Blakfurd. — And Alexander Lindefay, Younger of Corfbalket, in Ixxx li. for non-appearance of David Anderfoune, alias Davidfoune,
' Bass ? " What you do ; or, perhaps, as soon as you do so.

22JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 63

EDINBURGHE.

for the faid Slaughter. All the above perfons were denounced Rebels and put
to the horn, and all their goods efcheated.

Mem", fat my Lord Thesaurar fende' for John Laiifoune, and gart him bring fe buik oiir'^ to
my Lord (Bishop) of Abirdenis ftair ; ande gaif him command, befor my Lord of Abirdene, to put
out ]>e wnlawis aboue writtin, becaus he liad componit with fame for fe wnlawis ; and bad him tak
ane memorriall of Maijter Thomas Dik/bune, fat he had commandit, &c.

iUfsstiifftr UrjpvibrU for iTallmrj; in tiyt Uiscfjai-tje of Ijis Mniv,

Oct. 17, 1510.— John Cowpae, Meffinger.'
A PUD Edinhurghe, Oct. xe'ij, 1.510. — The quhilk day, J)e Juftice and Lordis
of Counfale Ordanis ]jat oure fouerane lordis armys* be takiu fra Johne Cowpar,
fumtyme Meffinger to our faide foverane lord ; and he to be deprivit, ande nevir
to ber armys for all ])e dayis of his life, in exenipill of uthiris : Becaus it is
undirftandin and confident be ]>& faidis Lordis, that he has faltit richt gretumlie
in the executioune of his office, in dyuerfe actionis ; and Ipecially, for his hie
contemptioune done, quhare he was warnit in jugement, J)e xvj day of October
inflant, to haue comperit J)is day before Jjaime ; he beande oftymes callit and
non comperand : That J>airfore, he falbe put in px'efoune, but' delay ; and ]jare
to remane unto J)e tyme J)at our foverane lord have declarit and fchawin his
mynd f>airintill. And for fie fulfilling hereof, the faidis Lordis has gevinfcharp
commande ande charge to Lyoun King of Akimys.

[^Andrcas domhms Ghay, Jujlldar'ms General'isP^

BTatunfj; a JSri&f to atquit a iHurUcrcr.

Nov. 4, {die Lu/ie.)—P athick Agnew, Sheriff of Wigtoun, came in
the King's will, for art and part of Ufurping his authority, Avithout Commiffion
for that effect, by putting Thomas Porter to the knowledge of an Affile, and
accufing him, 'per coloratcwijitflijicatam,"' for the Slaughter of John M'myane,
committed by the faid Thomas : And for taking ' feyis ' and money to purge
the faid Thomas of the faid Slaughter, he being guilty thereof. And ' ])er
coloratam jujlijicatam,' purging him of the faid crime. — Fined v merks.

^Iauiil)tn%

Gilbert JVrARTHUil, Convicted of art and part of the Slaughter of
umq''' John Edgar. — Beheaded.

Snttrromimnidis IjoitI) tijc CrnglisI), ^t, $it,

John Neilsoune, alias Suppit-out, Convicted of art and part of the

' Sent. - Over. ' See Dec. 6, 1510. < The Blazon or arms borne officially by each

Messenger ' at arms ;' inferring at the same time deprivation and degradation from his office. * Without. 6 It is doubtful whether ' by a coloured judgment,' or ' under colour of justice ' is meant to
be expressed here. Perhaps the phrase may imply, getting up a mock trial, in defraud of justice.

64 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1510.

EDINBURGHE.

Theft and concealment of three horfes (' naggis ') furth of Fifchuk, in company
with fundry Engliflimen,' &c. &c. : Item, of his treafonably being and remaining in the kingdom of England, without a Licence from the King or Guardian
(of the Marches) : Item, of Intercommuning with the Englifli, in theftuous and
treafonable manner : Item, of treafonable inbringing of fundry Engliflimen, at
various times, within the Kingdom of Scotland, to ' Spuil5ies,' ' Herefchippis,'
Fire-raifings, Slaughters, Thefts, &c. — Drawn and Hanged.

Cattlr-^Ualing:,

Nov. 6. — Patrik M^clellane of Gilftoune, Convicted of art and part
of the Stouthreif of xx oxen from Patrick Agnew, Sheriff of Wigtoune, and his
fervants, under filence of night. — Beheaded.

^roflamatioii for rtflulatinti: i\)t ^roreetiinaia of i\)t ^mtitt^^ixt

f The following Document (which is given literally as it appears on the face of the Record) is
highly interesting, being so minutely illustrative of the form of procedure before the Justiciars, at
the Aires held throughout the Kingdom. Although apparently framed for the Aire of Jedburghe,
there seems no doubt that this Proclamation was Circular, and addressed to every district of
Scotland, and was probably adopted by all the Sherift's and Baron-Bailies, in their Courts.

The occasional occurrence of such Papers as the present, which have evidently been preserved by
mere accident, tends to impress the mind of the enquirer with the conviction that, however brief and
disjointed the early Records of the Courts of Justiciary confessedly are, their proceedings must have
been conducted with the strictest regard to form and solemnity.

It would appear that one of the practical uses of keeping any Record, beyond a mere list of the
Cases which occureed at the Justice- Aires, was to enable the Clerks of Court to settle their Accounts
for the fines and amerciaments, &c. with the Lord High Treasurer, to whom they were answerable
for all such sums. Beyond this there seems, originally, to have been no intention of keeping a regular
record of the official proceedings of the Court, excepting the preservation of an accurate roll of those
who were defaulters, or who had been put to the Iiorn, or came in the King's will for offences committed
by them. This circumstance sufficiently accounts for the brief manner in which all the entries are
made in the early Books of Adjournal, at a time, too, when little importance was attached to the
preservation of minute evidence, or of the details of procedure in each individual case.

As all the Dittays, confessions, and depositions were dou'utlessly preserved, along with the Interlocutors of the Justiciars, the documents produced, and the Verdicts of the Assises, &c., the Clerks of
Justiciary could readily furnish Extracts and Acts of Court, when required. In the absence of these
materials, however, we have now very imperfect ideas of the precise details which took place in particular Trials. Hence the peculiar value of such documents as the following Proclamation, which has
fortunately been preserved. It may be worthy of notice, that the King himself was present during
the whole of this Aire, which indeed he bound himself to do in every instance by one of the earliest
of the Acts of his Parliament, which was passed immediately after the period of his Coronation.]

' We Command and charge, in our Soverane Lorde the Kingis name, and

' The other crimes of this individual, who was nicknamed Suppit-out, i. c. Swept out, (souppit,)
are not necessary to be specified, being of no interest.

23Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 65

JEDIVORTHE.

his Juflice, here now prefent, pat na maner of perfonis tak upon hande to invaid
ane ane uthir, for aide ffeide ' or new, now cumand to pis prefent Aire, or paffande pairfra, and induring ]>e tyme pairof, under pe pane of dede : And pat na
maner of pei-foune or perfonis beir wapinis/ except kniffis, at pair beltis, hot
alanerlie^ our Soverane lordis Houllialde, the Juftice, Conftable, Marfchell,
Compofitouris, pair men and houflialde, Shereff, Crounaris, and pair deputis,
under pe pane of efcheting of pe Wapinis, and punifing of pe perfounis beraris
pairof, as efferis. And certifieng all perfonis, pat na aide Signitouris of
Reraiffiounis, wantande pe Gret Sele, or RemifRounis nocht ordourlie procedit
be pe Selis ; pat is to fay, ffirft be pe Signet, fyne* pe Pnv6 Sele, and pe Gret
Sele, falbe admittit ; with certificatioun, quha enteris uthirwayis, pai fall nocht
be admittit. AxD pat all perfonis, jilegis ' for ony perfounis duelling within pis
flierefdome, quhilk hes committit ony Slauchtir within pis flierefdome or without,
or dilatit for art and part pairof, and als all plegis for ony perfonis duelling outwith pis flierefdoume, quhilk hes committit Slauchtir within pis flierefdome, or
dilatit for art and part pairof, pat pai enter pe perfounis pat pai ar plegis for,
now, in pis prefent Aird, till" underlie pe law, imder pe panis pat pai ar bundin'
for pair entre (fie as pe Slauchtir of Sir William Colvile of Uchdtre, John
CurmicheU, and pe Lanle of Dafyll.) Becaufe pai ar warnit lauchfullie for pe
entre of pe jierfounis, be pe Proclamatioune of pe Aire, and fummoning and
warning of all plegis to enter pe perfonis pat pai ar plegis for pair entre, as faid
is. And pat na victiialis be faulde of derrer price na" pai war viij dais befor pe
cuming of the Kingis grace to pis toune and pis prefent Aii-e, undir pane of
efchetin of pe vittalis, and puniffing of pe perfounis fellaris pairof; and pat
vittalis be broclit to pe market for redy money. And pat na lugeing nor
ftabillis be fett or takin be ony perfonis, of deri'er price nai pai war fett and
takin at utheris Juftice Airis obefor ; and quhafa dois, it falbe dittay to JufticeAire. And attoure, caflis^ and adnullis all Contractis and promittis of takin and
fettin of houfTis of derrer price nai pai war wont to be fett, in uthir JufticeAiris hald in pis burghe of Jedworthe of befor.'

Thir are ])e piincf/s'" o/pE ditte to be inquirit.

In the firft, gif " thay kene'" ony Trelbune to pE KiNGis perfoune or pe realme ?

Item, gif pair be ony Slauchtir or Murthur ?

Item, gif pair be ony ffyer-rafing or Byrnyng within pe realme ?

Item, gif pair be ony Revifmg of wemen ?

Item, gif pair be ony Thift ?

' Ancient feud. * Weapons. ^ Excepting only. * Then ; next. ^ Sureties ; cautioners.
* To. 'Bound. o Jhan. ^ Lat. co««are ; to break, &c. '"Points. "If.

" Know.

VOL. I. I I

66 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1510.

JEDWORTHE.

Item, gif ))air be ony Reif ?

Item, gif J)air be ony Reilet of Thift ?

Item, gif ))air be ony Outputtaris or Inbringaris of wtheris mennis gudis ?

Item, gif pair be ony fforthocht ffelonis or Opprelforris of Jje Kingis leigis, be

onywais ?
Item, gif Jiair be ony Refettis, fupleis, or intercommonis with ])E KiNGis

Rebellis ?
Item, gif fiair be ony Cul5ouris,' nycht-walkaris, or Sornaris ?'
Item, gif J)air be ony Wichecraift or Soflary^ wfyt in J)e realms ?
Item, gif Jjair be ony Convocationne or gadering of our foverane lordis liegis ?
Item, gif ]?air be ony ))at llais rede-filche^ in forbodin tyme, or fmoltis* in milldammis ?
Item, gif pah' be ony diftrevaris or pelaris of grene wode ?
Item, gif Jjair be ony llayaris of deyr, be llalking, within wthir Lordis parkis "^
Item, gif ])air be ony J?at manteinis opin trefpairouris ?
Item, gif })at ony wfis ffalfe-mettis,'' melbris,' or wechtis ?'
Item, gif f)air be ony pat takis Tliift-but ?'
Item, gif ))air be ony ftrikaris of ffalle mony ?

Item, gif ony perfoune bringis hame pufioini,"' and quhow ))ai wie it ?
Item, gif ony pafRs in Ingland, without pe Kingis Licenfe, in tyme of weire ?
Item, gif l^air be ony Goldlhiyth pat niakis tFalle mextioune ?"
Item, gif pair be ony Ligis or Bandis'" maid within burghe ? or gif ony biirges

ridis or routis with ony Lorde or Larde, to landward ? or gif he be bundin

to ony Larde in manrent ?
Item, gif ony ftelis halkis or hundis ?

Item, gif Jiair be ony brekaris of orchattis or doucattis," or 3ardis ? "
Item, gif })air be ony trew brekaris,'" or ony ])at fettis iipone aflTurance with

Inglifmen, in tyme of weir ?
Item, gif jiair be ony })at ftelis wthir mennis pitis'" out of ))air ftankis ?
Item, gif })air be ony diftroyaris of uthir garis ?''
Item, gif pair be ony Mutulatioun or dilinembi'ing of ony perfoune ?
Item, gif pair be ony ])at lyis with wthir mennis wiffis, and diftrois J)air gudis ?
Item, gif pair be ony hurdis fundyne wndir pe erde ? "*

' From tlie verb, to Cvhjc, to cajole. A cheat or swindler. - Who took free quarters, and spoiled
the poor and defenceless. ' Withcraft or sorcery. ■• Salmon. '■' The young fry of salmon.

" Such as ' einvvands ;' measures of length. ' Measures of capacity. * Weights. ^ Theftboot. '" Poison. " ^Mixture of metals ; alloy. '■ Leagues or Bonds. '^ Dovecots.

" Gardens. '^ Truce-breakers. "' Peats ; turf. It is likely, however, from the '■Jkinkis or

ponds being mentioned, that the word ought to have been written ^ji'cfA' or pi kis, for pikes. '" This
is likely to have been cunynguris, rabbit warrens, but improperly transcribed, '' Hoards orpq/es

found under ground.

23 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 67

JEDWORTHE.

Item, gif ))air be ony flaaris of haris in fnaw ?

Item, gif ))air be ony within burghe ])at purchefle lordfchip, in oppreffioim of
his nychtboris, or to pley with })ame at bare ?'

Item, gif ])air be ony Malt-makaris ])at fellis malt ane put to pe mark ....?"

Item, geif ))air be ony perfoun jjat has (fals or fen3eit ?) money of pe realme ?

Item, geif ony perfone brekis money without pe Kingis Licence ?

Item, geif pe Merchandis bringis hayme bul5eoun, accordin to pe Actis of Parliament, and geif pe cuftumaris and cun5eouris dois Jjair diligence jjairto,
according to pe faidis Actis of Parliament ?

Item, anentis Cordynaris, geif ]?ai fellis flione and butis and pantounis '

J)an is contenit in pe actis of Parliament, ))at is to fay, a pair of mennis *

folit flione for xij d. ; a pair of double folit flaone xviij d. ; a pair of "

ij f. ; a pair of butis vj f. ; wemen and childoris flione for viij d. pe pair, and
utheris geir accordin to Jjair pricis.

Item, geif Berkaris" fellis Jjair ledder,' according to pe faidis pricis ?

Item, geif ony Baxtaris' makis ony conventionis and gaderingis, and brekis pe

aflis 'to Jjaim be pe Officeris of pe toune ; or fl;alis pe tovme and baikis

nocht eftir Jje pricis pat is gevin ; or ellis haldis abak ande fulfillis nocht pe
famyn ?

Item, geif ])air be ony Mafl;erfull beggaris ?

Item, geif Jjair be ony nichtbouris within burghe ])at ufurpis agane'" pe Officeris
maide in burghe ?

Item, geif ony malt-makaris of Leithe, Edinburghe or uthir placis, fellis Jtair
malt, unput to pe mercat of pe burghe. And geif J)ai tak mair Jiane a boll of
beir for a chalder making ?

And geif Jjair be ony Jjat pakis, or pelis, or houfis wol, flvin, hidis, outwith pe
hede-burghe, fik as Leithe, and uther imfre Portis and placis ; or takis away
pe gudis, uncuftumyt ?

Curia Jujlkiarie de Jedburghe, inchoafa die Martis, Novemhris xvij,
1510, coram Andrea domino Gray, JvjUciariof. d.n. Regis ex jxirte
Auftrali aque de Forthe.

[The chief incident connected with this Aire, which tlie Editor recollects, is the remarkahle occurrence related by Bishop Lesley," who quaintly informs us, that ' The Ktng raid forth of Edinburgh,
the viij of November one the nycht, Weill accumpaneit, to the Watter of Roulle ; quhair he tuik divers
brokiu men, and brocht them to Jeduart ;'" of quhom fum wes juftifeit :'' And the principallis of the

' Pica or litigate at tlic bar. ' This evidently ought to have been ' oneput (m- uneput) to ye market." ' If

they sell shoes, boots, or jiaiitons (jmttens,) at mair or at greater price than is contained, &c. ' ' Singill' soled

shoes. » Pantounis. " Barkers, tanners. ' Leather. ' Bakers. » The assise set to them, &c. '° Against.
' The Original Scottish copy printed by the Bannatync Club, quarto, 1830, p. 81. "Jedburgh. " Executed.

68 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1510.

JEDWORTHE.

trubillis cum in lyning claytliis/ with nakitt fordis in tliair handis, and wyddyis' about thair neekis,'
and pat thame in the Kingis will ; qnlia wes fend to divers Caftells in Ward, with fnuliie utheris of
that cuntry men, alfo, Quhair throuchout, the Bourdouiis wes in greiter quietnes thaiiefter. The
King thairfra ^aflit to Perth, quhair Juflice-Airis wes haldin the reft of that winter.' — Sir James
Balfour contents himself with remarking, generally, that ' the King this 5eire, 1511, applays himielue quholly to the fuppreffing of Rebells, and the adminiftratione of juftice one robers, outlawes, and
fuch lyke.'^]

2.a5ji) 33ufrlniri) amnri'atfl).

Nov. 19.— Belde' Robin Scot.— The Lady of Bukcleuclie ' called as
lawful furety of Be/de Roh'm Scot, as flie received him in Indenture from the
Coroner ;' and not compearing, was amerciated the fourth day of the Aire. The
faid Robert denounced at the horn, and his goods elcheated. »

William Ker in Quhitmere, and James his brother. — Andrew Ker,
Ion of Ralph Ker of Primlydloch, often called to enter the faid William to
iinderly the law for art and part of the Slaughter of John Broune, under the
pain of 100 merks ; and not compearing, was amerciated in the faid fum : And
failing the goods of the faid Andrew, that the faid Ralph fliall be diftrained,
becaufe he bound himfelf to make his fon fufficient for the laid amerciament. —
The faid William denounced at the horn, and his goods elcheated to the King.

^lauffljtrr of ^ix ZmWmw Colbtlr of ltrf)iltrrr, fuiigljt.

Nov. 20, {die Jle/ri/riJ, quarto die Itinerin.) — George HxVLiburton,
Mark Ker of Dolphinfloun often called to enter the laid Geoi'ge to underly the
law, for art and part of the Slaughter of (Sir) William Colvile of Uchiltre (ku'),
and Richard Ruthirfurde, under the pain of 100 merks ; and not compearing,
was amerciated in the laid fum. The lltid George denounced at the horn, and
his goods efcheated to the King.

^I.iuffljtn- of t\)t Enirti of jfalafjilK

Nov. 22, {die Veneris, qidnta die Itincris.) — Andrew Ker of Gate-

' Linen clothes. ^ Halters ; literally withies, which were sometimes employed for hanging the

Border Thieves, at an early period. ^ Tiie following interesting illustration of this humiliating

practice is perhaps the most extraordinary which can now be cited : 26th Oct. 1629, ' Robert
Abroche, ane Makgregouh, ane grait lymer, quha haid bene anis or twyfe forgewin and remittit
be HIS Maiestie for his Oppreffioun, wpone houpeof aniendiment, iit he continewit llill in his knawrie : And efter thair wes mekill fearcliing maid for him in the TIielandis, and all his freindis chargit
to apprehend, come in to Perth this day, being Twyfday, ane preaching day efter fermone, and fell
doun on his kneis, and ane tow {rope) about his neck, and offerit his fuorde be the point to the
Chancellar of Scotland, quha refuifiit to accc])t of it, and comniandit the Eailleis to ward him :
Lykeas they inflantlie wardit him, and patt baith his feitt on the gade, quhair he remanit.' — Mercer
and Fleming's MS. Chronicle, Adv. Library. ■• Annates, I. 234'. ^ Bald-headed.

•^ Elizabeth, daughter of Walter Ker of Cefsford, and relict of Philip Rutherford, younger, of that Ilk.
' There is no indication of his crime.

23Jac.IV. criminal trials. • 69

JEDWORTHE.

fchaw. — James Ker of Quhitrig, and Lancelot Ker, lone of Andrew Ker, often
called, as fureties, to enter the laid Andrew, to underly the law, for art and part
of the Slaughter of John Murray of Falohill, under the pain of 100 merks, &c.
as above.

0lau(i\)tn' of tl)t ilaiiti of dTalaljilL

Thomas Scot, brother of Philip Scot of Aidichaw. — William Scot iu
Hawik, George Scot in Goldelandis, and David Scot in Quhithauche, often called
to enter the faid Thomas to underly the law, for art and part of the Slaughter
of John Murray of Faulohill, under the paiu of 100 merks ; and not comjiearing,
they were amerciated in the laid lum. And failing the goods of the faid fureties, if infufficient for the amount of the faid amerciament, that the goods of
William Scot in Fynwik, and John Scot of Hanyng, lliall be diftraiued, becaufe
they obliged themfelves to make the forefaid fureties fufficient. — Thomas Scot
was denounced at the horn, and all his moveable goods efcheated to the King.

Jjuniliitj of 3iranai)olm aiitj 9itrrum — Sntcrrommunins ijoitl)
iSrntfUsf) Craitors, tf)C Slrmstrausis, kt.

Nov. 24, {(lie Sahoti,Je.rta dies It'meris.) — John Dalglese produced
a Signature of Remiffion for art and part of the Theft of xvj cows and oxen from
John Scot : Itevi, for the traiterouslntercommuning with SymonTurnbull and his
accomplices, Engliflimen, in treafouable manner : Item, for Reletting of ^Villiam
Dalglefe,common Theif, in his Thefts ; and fpecially during the time of the Theft
of eighty llieep from Thomas Murray : Item, for treafonable inbringing of
Blade John Roicclejche^ and his accomplices, traitors of Leven, to the Burning OF Buanxham ; and ' Herefchip' of horfes, oxen, grain, and other goods,
extending to ' vj" markis :' And for the treafonable Intercommuning with the
faid Ti-aitors, in their treafonable deeds : Item, for Intercommuning with ' the
Armjlraugis' at the time of the Burning of Ancrum, and at other times :
Item, for Theft and concealing xx oxen and cows from John Scot, furth of Northhous : Item, for Refetting the faid Rebels, at the time of the Theft of four horfes
from Philij) Faulo and his neighbours, fiu"th of Quhitchefter-holme : Item, for
Refetting William Dalgles and Sijmon Dalgles, Thieves and Traitors of Levin,
in their Thefts and treafonable deeds : Item, for common Ti-eafon, common
Theft, and common Refet of Theft, before the date of his Remiffion. — And becaufe he could not find fureties to fatisfy the parties, judgment was given that
he fliould be ^V^arded by the Sheriff forty days — and if he could not find fureties
in the mean time, that he fliould be Hanged.

' RoughclifFe, or Rowcleff ?

70 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1510.

JEDWOKTHE.

Sntrironiiminiiitj bitf) a Mt'bti,

Robert Dalgles, in Howdane, produced a Remiffion for Refetting,
fupplying, and Intercommuning with John Davidjone.

lUsrttins C|)irtirs aiili iirfttls.

Thomas Dalgles, in Braidhanche, produced a Signature of Remiffion
for art and part of the theftuous Refetting of Sijmon Dalgles and his accomjjlices,
the time of the Theft of five horfes from David Hoppringle of Tynnes, price of
one of them xx merlvs, and of the reft of them xl merks : Item, for the theftuous
Refetting of Waller Dalgles and his accomplices, the time of the Theft of xvj
oxen fi'om the faid David, furth of Bochill.' — Judgment was given that he Ihould
be "Warded as above — and if he coukl not find furety in the mean time, that
he fliould be Hanged.

* '^txt$it\)\^' of X\)t itaiilr of Cruil^stoun, ^t,

Thomas and William Dalglese, in Braidhanche, produced a Signature of Remiffion for art and part of the Stouthreif and ' Herfchip' done upon
the Laird of Crukftoim and his tenants, and Stouthreif from them of Ixxj oxen
and cows, xiiij horfes, and heifers, and houfehould goods, to the value of ' xl
markis.' — Judgment given as above.

I^orse mxti Cattle ^tfaltng; — ^toutfjrtif — ' ^rrrsrljtp/

Robert Haw (Hall ?) in Hevefyde' produced a Refpite for art and

part of the Theft of four horfes and heifers, and honlehold goods to tlie value of

fifty ' markis,' from William Jacklbun, furth of Ruthirfurde : Ite»i, for art and

part of the Theft and concealment of a horle, value xx 1. from Adam Edgar,

furth of Baffindene : Item, of a laddie, ' le bridill, cadurce,^ a pare of fplentis, a

fuerde, a buklere,' price ten ' markis :' Item, * vnius fiibuncule,' uuius toge," lodicum lintheaminum,'" and other houfehold goods to the value of ten merks, from

the faid Adam, furth of his houfe, at the fame time : Item, for the Theft and

concealment of two oxen from Thomas Johnefoun and Dougall Wilfoune : Item,

of the Theft of a cow and eleven ' lioggis' ' from the Laird of Boyne-Jedworthe

and Sir Henry Vallas, &c. &c. :" Item, of the Stouthreif of five horfes and

heifers, gold and ftlver, and houfehold goods to the value of iij" merks, from

William Jackfoun, &c. &c. : Item, of art and part of tlie ' Hei'efchip' of a horfe,

lioutehold goods, and a ' bag-pipe,' price 20 merks, from George AVeyr : Item,

' Bowhill ? ''■ Heavyside. ^ It is doubtful what tliis word is intended to mean. It

primarily signifies a coverlet, and is supposed to apply to a sort of shield or target. * A woman's
kirtle. ^ Gown. '' Linen sheets. " Sheep of a year old, before shearing tlieir first

fleece. " What follows is of no interest.

23 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 71

SELKIRK.

of Refetting, fupplying, and intercommuning with the King's Rebels, being at
the horn, &c. &c. : Item, of theftuously breaking the houfe of William Rutherfurde, in Nether Ghetto. — And becaufe he could not find fureties to fatisfy parties,
Sextexce Avas pronounced, that he fliould be Warded by the Sheriff for forty
days — and if, in the mean time, he did not find fureties, that he Ihould be Hanged.

©tfovring: a iHtssntfler — (i^pprrsstou, ^r,

Dec. 6, {die lovis, xiiij die Itineris.) — Alisone Cuthbert, in Ednem,
James Tynkler, and fifty-five others refiding there. Convicted of Deforcement
and difobedience, done to John Couper' Meffenger at Arms, Sheriff in that part,
coming to the lands of Ednem with the King's Letters, for poinding James
Edmonftoun of Ednem, for a certain lum of money due to Jonet Edmeftoune :
And when the faid flieriff in that part had diflrained flieep and oxen for the
faid fum, the forefaid perfons came in warlike manner, to the number of two
hundred pertbns, and deforced the faid flieriff : Item, for OpprelTion done to the
faid .lonet, and Adam Home her fpoufe, in hindering them from labouring and
manuring her lands of Ednem, and thereby breaking the King's Letters of Protection.— Sentence. That the forefaid perfons fliall be put in fure prifons for
the fpace of a year and a day — and their lives to be at the King's will ; and all
their moveable goods to be efcheated to the King.

Crrason— !?lit anti jpait iMitl) i\)t ©tiftt of SUftaiu),

Dec. 9, {die Saloti, v/tima^ die Itineris.) — John Murray, alias UlaA
Johnne, permitted to compound for art and part with Alexander Duke of Albany,
in his treafonable deeds. — David Hoppi'ingill and Mr John Murray became fureties to fatisfy the parties.^

Curia Itineiis Jitjliciarie de Selkirk, tenia die Lune, ix Decemhris, 1510,
coram Andrea domino Gray, Jiijliciario, S^c.

©cistrtintns t\)t SSSootis in «5ttiirfe--droiest,

Dec. 11, {die Mercurij, tertia die Itineris.) — Walter Scot of Howpaflot, the Laird of Cranstoune, and thirty-four others. Convicted of
deftroying the Woods of Ettrik-Forefl. Each of them fined ' iij li.'

A great many fimilar Cafes occiu- for deftroying the Woods in Ettrick
Forest, and on the Water of Borthwick, at this time ; for which offence
many of the leading proprietors were convicted, fuch as the Hoppringills of
Smalham, Tynnes and Torwoodlee, Ker of 3are, John Murray (the Sheriff), &c.

' See Oct. 17, 1510. « Viz. xvi. ' ' Su?nma totalis hujus Extractus, I'».V«.xxvii li.'

(L.1527.) ■*

72 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1510.

EDINBURGH.

The Aire terminated on Dec. xiv, die Sahoti, being the fixth day of the Aire,
bnt there are no entries of any importance.'

CUBIA Itineris Jujliciarie de Peblis, tetita die Saboti, xiiij Decemhris, 1510,
coram Alexandko Gdthrie de eodcm, milite, Jujliciario deputato Andree
domini Gray, &f.

^lauflijUi* of a Ommoit CI)ief»

Dec. 18, {die Jovis, v die Itineris.) — Geokge Tuedy delated of art and
part of the Slaughter of William 5oung ; and being accufed thereof, the forefaid
Juflice depute, with the coimfel and advice of the Lords then fitting as AffefTors
to him, becaufe it clearly appeared that the faid William had been and was a
common Thief, as was proved by fundry of the King's Letters, under his fignet
and fubfcription-manual, for taking the faid William, &c., and that he had been
flain in the commiffion of Theft and crimes : Therefore, the faid George was
acquitted of the crime of the forefaid Slaughter ; and command was given to
the Juftice Clerk, that the faid George fliould never, thereafter, be taken or
indicted for the fanie."

CuEiA Itineris Jtifiiciarie de Edinburghe, coram Andrea domino Gray,
Jujliciario, inchoat. die Sahoti, viij Fehruarij, 1510-(11.)

Feb. 11, {die 3Jercurij, iv die Itineris.) — Gilbert Cameroun produced
a Signature (of RemifTion) for art and part of the Slaughter of John Flemyn of
Torbeddo : Item, of the Stouthreif of a fword, a ' bukler, a bonet,' and a French
crown from him, at the fame time. — John Murhede, in Bathcat, and Thomas
Douglas, in the faid parifli, became fureties to fatisfy the parties.

Dnjta-1) — 22l!tlful Crrror on aiscisr.

Feb. 12, {die Jovis.) — Alexander Bertoune, Robert Lumly, and
XV others, Affifors, Convicted by a Great Affife (Grand Jury) of Wilful Error
and rafli fwearing, finding John Laufoun, George Corntoun, Florence Corntoun,
Edmund Cokburne, and Andrew Atkin, quit and free of the difturbance ' done
to John M'ferland ;■* and finding the faid John M'ferland to be convicted and

' The ' fumma totalis' is not inserted. '^ ' Summa totalis, Extractus, Plvj li. xvj f. viij (].'

(L.I06, Ifis. 8(1.) ' ' Quittos et inimunes de pci/iirbia feu perturbucione facta.' These words

are usually rendered ' diflroulilance' iu llie old Itecords. Tlie crime was probably mutual Assault,
arisiii>( out of Feud between the Laird and the townsmen of Dumbarton. * Probably Sir John

Macfarlan of that Ilk, or of Arrochar, who, according to Douglas's Baronage, was killed at the Battle
of Flodden, and, as is understood, was knighted on the eve of the battle.

23 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 73

EDINBURGHE.

guilty of diftiu-bance done to the faid John Laufoune and his accomplices, as is
fully contained in the Roll of the Conftabulary Court ; by favor and partial
means. — Sentence. That all their moveables, as well cattle as other goods,
fliall be efcheated to the King : And that they fliall be imprijoned for year and
day, and farther, at the King's Will : And that they fliall be perpetually INFAMOUS and PERJURED.

<!i)p})rfssnifl tf)r ICairJj of i^iliDfp iHaiisi)al— laattn-p ptntJtnte Mit.

Feb. 19, {die Jovis, aj die Iti//eris.)—S\'MO^ Peestoune of that Ilk,
and John Littill, his man, came in the King's Will for art and part of the Oppreffion and forethought felony done to Archibald "Wauchope of Nudry-Marfchell and his men, making Convocation on Aug. 5, 1495, with warlike arms,
to the number of fixty perlbns, and hindering him from coming to his own
Place (of Niddry) from the Kirk of Pennecuk ; before judgement was pronounced between the faid parties by the Lords of Council.- — The Laird of Preftoune became furety to the King and partj^ for himfelf and the faid John.
(Fined x 1. and v 1.)

^ppiTSsinsi: tijt ilaiiU of Bass, ^r.

Feb. 25, {die 3Iercu>iJ, xv die Itineris.^) — Thomas Dicsoune, at the
Monaftery of Hethingtoun,^ Luke Heiiburne, and William Bracanrig, there,
came in the King's will, for art and part of the Oi)preirion done to Robert Lauder of Bafle, coming under filence of night to the lands of Quhitcaftell, and calling down the Houfe built there by the faid Robert. — The faid Thomas, &c.,
and Patrick Hepburne of Beynftoune, became fureties to fatisfy the King and
party. (Amerciated xv merks.')

Curia Itineris Jujticiarie, inchoata die Lune, xx die menjis Octohris, 1511,
coram Andrea do:mino Gray, Jvjliciario, &^c.

Cvfnsonaftl)) talung; X\)t CTnstle of 3lccI)Uoun, ^t,

Oct. 30, {die Mercurij, viij die Itinerin.) — "\^'ILLIAM Craufurde, Ibn

of AVilliara Craufurde of Lefnorys, admitted to compound for art and part of

the treafonable taking of the King's Callle of Lochdoun from Sir David Kennidy, kn', (Captain thereof,) and ' Herefcbip' and OpprefRon done to the faid

David, in ' Herefchip' of the faid Caftle : And for Refetting, fupplying, and

' This Aire lasted nineteen days, and terminated on Monday, ISIar. 3. ' Summa totalis Iiujns
extractus, vijxxxviij li. iij f. iiij d.' ' (L.738, 3s. 4d.) ^ Haddington. ' In this and all

other similar instances where the amerciament is marked, it is a fine to the King. The composition
witli the party was a matter of private settlement or reference.

VOL. I. I K

74* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1511.

AIRE.

Intercommuning with the King's Rebels, being at the horn, viz. David Craufurde (of Kerfe,) John Schaw (of Keris,) and the ' Crechtounis.' — The Laird of
Gaitgirth became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Cvfaoonafili) talunu tlje Castle of Eocpoiin.

Alan Cakthcart of Clowiynan, John Craufiirde of Drongane, and five
others,' were admitted to compound for the treafonable taking of the Caftle of
Lochdoime, as above. — Alexander Kennydy, young Laird of Bargany, furety, &c.^

€viitl ^pprrssion — ^toiitI)mf, ^"^r.

Nov. 4, {xj die It'meris) — Heav Earl of Eglintoune, Thomas Montgumry in Kilbride, John Montfoide, younger of that Ilk, and feven others, admitted to compound for art and part of Convocation of the lieges, and for art
and part of the forethought felony and Oppreffion done to John Scot, burgefs
of Irvin ; and of Stouthreif of pots and ' pannis, plattis, and pewdir wefchell,'^
from the faid Johne, furth of his houfe, extending to xx 1. : Item, for the forethought felony and OpiirefRon done to the faid John and his wife, coming to his
houfe, and cruelly flriking his wife with ' bauche ftraikis,' at the time of the
Stouthreif of the laid goods : Item, for forethought felony and Oppreffion done
to the faid John, taking him into the Tolbooth of Irvin, and conducting him to
the lodging of the faid Laird (of Montfoide ?), and detaining him there for the
fpace of fix hours againll his will ; and then conducting him to the faid Tolbooth as a Thief, and putting tlie faid John in the ' ftokkis,' and incarcerating
him therein : And for the Oppreffion done to the laid John's wife, at the laid
Tolbooth, tearing her hair, cruelly flriking her, and pulling out her hair in great
quantities. — 7'he faid Earl and the Laird of Montfoide became fureties, conjunctly and feverally, renouncing the benefit of divifion, to fatisfy the parties.*

CuKiA Itineris Jnjlkiarie de Wigtotjne, inclioata die Sahoti, viij Noveuihri.s,
1511, coram Andrea domino Gray, Jujliciario, <§c.

K\)t Coroner of Mitjton to prol2ure Btforrers in Court, $rr.

Nov. 14. — ' ]iE Justice commandit Archebald M'CulIocht, Crovnar, to
bring in jugement to morne' Heniy Nelefon, Johne Tait, William Nclejuun,
till vnderly Jje law for ])e Deforfing of our fouuerane lordis Official-," vnder J^e pane
of punifnig of him with ficlike punitioun as thai faid be pvnift.'

' Persons of no note. " Several other Cases occur at tliis Aire for tlie same crime ; but tlie

parties were of no consequence. •' Pewter vessels. ^ Tlie Aire terniiiiateil Nov. Q, xiij"

die Ilhicris. ' Summa totalis Extractus, viij'xxvj li. vj 1'. viij d.' (L.826, 6s. 8cl.) ' To bring

into Court to-morrow. " Messenger at arms.

24JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 75

KIRCUDBRICIIT.

Nov. 18, {die MercuriJ, nona die Itineris.)—^^^Y^ M'kello and
Patrick M'^kiiicrofclie. ' Med. Jjat Jje Scheref-dcput, ]\Iungo Murray, at ])e command of ])e Juftice, relaxt Nevin M'kello and Patrik M'kincrofche fra })e proces
of \(i home, and gaif |)aim J)e wand of pece,' for Jje Slauchtir of Alifoim M'gillhaffis dochtir.'"

Curia Itineris Jujiiciarie de Kiukcudbbicht, inchoata die Veneris, xxj Nov.
1511, coram Andrea domino Ghay, Jiijliciario.

Clirft from X\)t ^bijot of JDunlJf titiian*

Nov. 23, {die S(d)oti, ij die Idueri.s.) — John Story, in Dundranane,
admitted to compound for art and part of the Theft of 300 merks and a gold
chain from the Abhot of Dundranene : Ifem, for art and part with Eduard
Story, common Thief, in his Thefts ; and fpecially, the time of the Theft of a
box from the faid Abbot : Item, for treafonably going out of the kingdom, and
remaining in England : Ife?», for conmion Theft and common Relet of Theft. —
The Laird of Bomby became furety to fatisfy the jiarties.

#ppiTseion — ^triluufl a ^fjrvicr or iWrssrngn*, ^c,

Nov. 27, {die Jovis, v die Itineris.) — Master William Levinax of
Caly produced a Signature of Remiffion for being art and part of the forethought
felony and Oppreffion done by him to Roger Gordoun of Garlarg, the King's
Sheriff in that part, having the King's Letters in his hands to lummon the faid
Mr William, at the inllance of John Gordoun of Lochinvar, ftriking the feid
Sheriff in that part with a ftaff, and drawing liis ' quliin5eare' upon him : And
of art and part the contempt and treafon thereby done to our fovereign lord the
King : And of theftuoufly deftroying the "Woods belonging to the Laird of
Lochinvar. — The faid Mr William, and William, his fon and heir apparent,
became fureties to fatisfy the parties.^

♦ SUaitJ of IBrumfrrsc, at 3tammrs--ciiijn' — <#>laucr!jtfr.

Nov. 29. — The quhilk day, Johxxe Lorde Maxwell oblill him, ]jat

betuix ]3is and Candilmes nixt to cum, pat he fal plefe my lorde Secreter and his

clerk for }jair feis of pe Sells and writingis imdir pe Signet, of all pe perfonis

being at ])e Raid of Druinfrefe at Lammes-evyn, and Slauchtir committit at })at

tyme ; betuix ]jis and Candilmes nixt to cum, &c. And ])is to be extendit in pe

See Notice to Oct. 11, 1531, and Jul. 23, 1566, Note. ' ' Summa totalis Jmjus Extractiis,

vij'Iix li.' (L.759.) ' Tiiis Aire terminated Dec. 3, x die Itineris. ' Summa totalis Extractus,

vij' Ixiiij li. xiij f. iiij d.' (L.7G'i, 13s. 4d.)

76 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1512.

EDINBURGHE.

bell fonnej decret, and })at lettres be direct Jjairupoim. Domini Abirdene,

Ca.,' Ergile, EiTole, M. James Heniyfoun, Scot de Bahveiy.

Curia Itineris Jufticiarie de Ed'inhirghe, inchoata die Martis, .rxvij Aprilis,
1512, Coram Alexandro Lauder de Bhjthe, viiUte, Prepojifo de Edinhurghe,deputato Axdree domini Gray, Ji//!/cia/-ii.

John Symoxtoun of that Ilk. — Robert Men5eis of that Ilk, John
Tuedy of Drummel5ar, James Lokart of Le," and Richard Brouue of Cultermanis, were often called to enter the faid John, to underly the law for art and
part of treafonably ffabricating and making Falfe money within the kingdom ;
as they became fnreties, conjunctly and feverally, vinder the pain of 1000 merks,
renouncing the benefit of divifion : And not compearing, they were amerciated
in the faid lum.

William Inglis of Langlandhill. — Robert Men5es of that Ilk often called
as furety to enter the faid ^Villiani, to underly the law, for art and part of
treafonably making the faid falfe money, under the pain of 100 1. : And not
compearing, he was amerciated in the faid fum.

\^Andreas Dominus Gray, Jiijitciarius.~\
(Jul. 23.) — The Lairds of Symontoun and Langlandhill were Refpited
for three months, from Jun. viiij, for the above crime.

Rex,

We grant and gevis full Licens and fredome, be fir our lettres, to Johne Symontoun of
THAT Ilk and William Inglis of Langlandhill, now beand wndir accufatioxin of crime of
Treafone for ffalfe Money, to analy,' fell, and wodfet'' ]iair landis, Iieretage, and gudis, in all or in
pairt, to quhatfumeuer perfonis, as tliay fall think expedient, to furnis expeiife for puttin of pair aiiis'
in Jiair landis and Iieretage, and outredding of founds audit'' to ws be Jiair airis for conipofitionn, and
doing of ))air wtliir neidfuU erandis ; and to pafs at large quhare ]iai pleife within our realuie, without
ony arrefl or accufatioune for ]ie faid crime, for ])e fpace of Thre monethis ; to mak penny of J)air
landis and gudis, as faid is. And alfe, we gif licens to all our liegis to by'' or tak in wadlet fra tie
faidis John and William, or athir of Jiame, jiair landis or gudis ; and will and grantis ]iat fe alienatioun
and felling Jiairof falbe na caufe of recognitiouu nor forfaltour of Jiair landis, nor dangir nor lliayth
nawyis to pe byaris nor fellaris, nochtwithftanding Jiat )iai fland now wndir acculatioun of Jie faid crime
of Trel'one. And alfe, gif pe faid Johne and Williame plefis to put fair fonnis and apperand airis in
fee of pair landis, We fall reffaue refignationis jiairof, in favoin- of pair airis, or gif Confirmationis apoun
pair awin Chartcris, fafar' as is balding of Ws, in pe fickerell"' foriYie pat can be devifit. Attour,"
We, of our fpeciall favouris and grace, Reraittis and Difchargeis, for ws and our fucceflburis, in favor
of pe faidis airis, all proces of fforfaltour and of our borne, quhilk, be rigour of law, micht be led apone

' CanccUariHs, viz. Alcxiindcr Stewart, ArcMiisliop of Saint AiiJicws, natural son of King James IV by JIargaret
Boyd. He was slain at I'lodilen. '^ Lee, in Lanarl<shirc. ' Annailzie. ■■ Wadset. ' Heirs.

'Owing. ' Turcliasc; Imv. "Give. » So far. "> Surest ; securest. "Moreover.

5

25JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 77

EDINBURGIIE.

]>e faidis JoLne and William for ])e faide crime of Trefone, fa Jiat eftir ])air decefe Jiair airis may
fucceid to ))aim in J>air landis, lieretege, and giidis, and entir Jiaiito be couifable brevis of our Cliapell,'
ficlik and alfe laucbfully as and^ fai liad nocht committit Jie faid crime, nor had noclit bene wndir
accufatioun ])airof. And alfe, We grant and gevis, and for ws and our fuccellbris renuncis, quliitclamis, and difchargeis to fe airis of the faidis Johne and William, and fair affignais, all our efcheit
))at we or our fuc cefToris raycht have of Jiair faid landis and gudis for ]ie faid crime of Trefone, trif^ ]ie
procefTe Jiairof war led apoune fame ; and all ryclit, iuteres, titill, and clame of rycht, petitour, and
polleflbur fat We or our fuccelTouris hes, or ony wyfe mycht have, fairto. fat is to fay, to fe faid
Johnis airis and fair affignais, fe efcheit of his landis and gudis ; and to f e faide Williamis airis and
fair affignais, f e efcheit of his landis and gudis ; becaus f e faidis airis maid compofitioun with our The3aurar for fe famyn, and paif' foumis of mony fairfor to him in ourname. Gevin wndir our Preive
Seill, at Edinburghe, fe viij day of Junij,f e 5eir of Godl'n.V'.aud xij 5eris,aud of our regnef e xxiiij jere.

^niti fidtoftii tfjf itr.T.viMrlis anXi ti)t Crridjtoiis — J^l.iugljtn- of
tijr ilairtJ o( Uhl\^atvi(k, U)f)ilr at tijt ^avn, ^r»

[There seems to be no doubt that the deadly Feud and Slaughter, which form the subject of the
following solemn proceedings, arose out of the Battle between the Maxwells and Creichtouxs ou
the Sands of Dumfries, in the month of July, 1508. These families were indisputably the most
powerful Barons of Nithsdale, and had long been at enmity with each other. The vigorous measures
adopted by King James IV had for a considerable time restrained them from proceeding to personal
hostilities, but at length they suddenly broke out into open violence, having apparently challenged each
other to the field, to decide their quarrel by force of arms. BisJwp Lesley gives a short but striking
account of this affair, which it is thought proper to quote here. — ' Thair wes a gret gaddering the xxx
day of Julij, betuix the Lord Maxwell and the Lord Creychtoun of Sanciiar, quhairthe Lord
Creychtoun^ was chaiffit with his cumpany fra Drumfreis, and the Laird of Dolyell and the yoimg
(Laird) of Crauchlay flane, with divers utheris, quhairof thair appered greit deidly feid and bludlhed ;
bot the King tuk fie ordour, partlie be jullice and partely be aggremeut, that the hole caufe was
fuddanlye quyeted and ftanched.''^

Robert, third Lord Maxwell, fell at the fatal Field of Floddon. On the other hand, his antagonist,
Robert, second Lord Crichton of Sanquhar, ancestor to the Earls of Dumfries, survived many years.
His son, William, the third Lord Crichton of Sanquhar, was stabbed to death in the house of the
Governor of Scotland, the Duke of Chatelherault, by the Lord Sempill ; and his great grandson,
Robert, the sixth Lord, was executed at Great Palace Yard, Westminster, Jun. 29, 1612, for being
accessory to the far-famed Murder of John Turner, a Fencing-master, who had thrust out one of his
eyes, while they were practising together, with his foil.'

Sir William Douglas of Druralangrig, one of the parties more immediately concerned in the
present case, was likewise a very powerful Baron, being an ancestor of the noble house of Queensberry.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and fell at Flodden, Sep. 9, 1513.

So great a sensation did this case make, that it was evidently the immediate cause of the subsequent
' Act anent the Ileffet of llebellis,' &c., to which the reader is particularly referred.]

' Brieves from Chancery. ' \n ; if. 'If. ' Paid. ^ Sir James Balfour merely says, ' the

Lord Sanql-hare wes ouerdirowen, anil maney of his frindis liilled.' Aiuiiiks, I. 2ol. " Lislri/'s History,

Bannatyne Club's Edit, (iuarto, 1830, p. 78. " It is asserted tliat his lordship bore his misfortune patiently,

until, happening to be at the court of Henry the Great of France, the King eiuiuired ' How he had lost his eve?'
' By the thrust of a sword,' replied his lordship — * Does the man yet live?' rejoined the King. From that hour he
is reported to have determined on ])utting Turner to death — who not lieing his e*|ual, he resorted to the horrible
expedient of ass;issinatio[i, which was effected by a fellow of the name of Rohcrl Ciirti/le, who, with the assistance of
an accomplice, pistolled the unfortunate fencing-master.— See Stale Trials and Peerages, &c.

78 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1512.

EDINBURGHE.

Apud Edinburghe, xxiiij Septemhris, anno Domini I"'. V'^.xij". Sederunt Domini JuJiJeripti,

(Rege jt>rg/ewfe,)

Archibald, Erle of Akcuse, Andro, Lord Gray, Andro, Lord Avandale, *

Alexander, Erle of Huntlie, "WiLLiAar, Lord Borthuik, Robert Lauder of ye Bass, kn*. *

Archibalde, Erle of Ergile, George, Master of Angus, * Williaji Scot of BaUiery, ka*.

Maiho, Erle of Lennox, Johne, Lorde Duojionde, * John Culcjuhoun of Lusc, kn*. •

Williajie, Erle of Errole, Robert, Lord Erskine, Joune Somerwell of Camnethane,

WiLLiAME, Erle of INIarschell, Henry, Lord Sinclere, knycbt, *

Johnne, Erleof Crawfurde, George, Lorde Setoun, Adak Hepeurne of ye Craggis,

WiLLiAji, Erle of Montros, Johne, Lord Hay of Zestir, knycbt, *

Cuthbert, Erle of Glencarne, Alexander, Lorde Elphinstoun, "William Keitiie of Inuerrugy, kn*'.

Johne, Erle of Athole, Andro, Lord Heres, Robert Douglas of Loclilevin, kn*.

ANE^'Tthe Supplicatioune gevin into \y. Kingis hienes beWiLLiAMDouGLAs
OF Drumlais'Eig, defii'ing fiat ])e actioun of cryme imput to him and utheris
his men and ffrendis, for })e Slauchtir of umqhill Robert Crechtoune of
KlRKPATRiCK, fuld be put to \q deliuerance of pe Loi'dis of Counfale ; quhether,
gif Jie laide actioune fuld be jiut til ane Aflife, confidering, J)at })e faid umqhile
Robert was at our foverane lordis borne, and his Rebell ))e tyme of his flauchter? Like as, at maire lenthe, is contenit in ))e faid lui)plicatioune. And in
likewife, anent f)e Gomplant gevin in be Robert Lord Crechtoun of 3E
Sanquhar,' and pe kyn and frendis of Jje faid umquhill Robert, defyrand, Jjat
J»e faid actioun of cryme of J)e faid Slauchtir fuld be put to J)e knaulege of ane
Affife, and na fenfment^ nor deliverance to be maide be ]?e Lordis of Counfale
Jjairvpoune. The Lordis of Counsale forfaide, in prefence of })E Kingis
hienes, ])e refonis and allegations of bathe |)e faid partijs, fene, herde, and undirftande Decretis and Deliveris, j^at })e crimiuale actioun of ]5e laides Slauchtir,
contenit in our foverane lordis Lettres and Coniplante, fuld be put to ))e knawlege
of ane Aflife, befor J)E KiNGis grace, or his Juftice, crimhialie : And als,
deliveris, ])at our Sovei*ane lorde may inquire and fpere^ at his Counfale, quhere
it plefis his hienes, and caufe be difcuffit be his Counfale, quhethir gif })e faid
umquhill Robert Crechtoune was at his borne or nocht, the Lettres of Refpett
for audit dais, grantit be our fouerane lorde to })e faide umquhill Robert, and J)e
Relaxatioune of him fra ])e home, iuduring Jjat tym ; and als, Jje Lettres of J)e
denuncing of J)e faid umqhill Robert, gevin of new be ])E KiNGis grace Jiaireftir,
to denunce him of new ]je Kingis Rebell, ])e faid viij dais being pafl, and uthir
aucht dais ])aireftir following ; at lenthe fene, herde, and confiderit, })E LoRDls
foirfaide, Findis and Deliveris, ])at J)e faide umquhill Robert was Jje KiNGis
Rebell, and at his home, ])e time of his Slauchtir.

The forfaid Lord Crechtoune, and J)e Larde Drumlanrige, ar baitlie content,
J)at ])E LoRDLs OF Counsale forlaide be apoun jjis Aflife.

' The reader is refuried to tlie Appendix for minierous illustrations of tliis and many otlier Trials,
which occur in the course of the present Collection. ' Verdict. ' Ask.

25 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 79

EDINBURGHE.

[Coram/T d. n. Rege et Andrea domino Gray, ejus Jnjliciario.']

Sep. 27, {die Lime.) — The Court of Jufticiaiy, in the Cal'e between
Robert Lord Crechtoun and his men, on the one jiart, and William
Douglas of Duumlanrig and his accomplices on the other part, was continued till tomorrow, without prejudice of parties.

\^AIexaiider Lauder, Jujiiciaiius dejmtatus.']

Sep. 28, {die 3Ltrtis.) — Continued to Thurfday next, and it was publicly
proclaimed, that none of the Affife of the Lords elected thereon fliall retire from
the town, until the faid day, and deliverance (of their Verdict.)

Sep. 30. — The Lords declared as follows, having been firft fworn upon
the Affife, in the prefent caufe, and thereafter elected by the King to give counlel
to him as aforefaid.

Magna Assisa.
Archibalde, Erle of Angus, &c. (viz. tbe others above named, excepting thofe marl<ed tliu3 *,
tbey being twenty-one in all.)

Verdict of the Affijl', and Judgmetit foUowing thereon.
Anent \)e accufatioune maide apoun William Douglas of Drumlanrig,
JOHXE Fergussoune of Crugdaroche, Thomas Fergusson his fone, and ])air
complices, ffor art and pairt of ]>e Slauchtir and Murthure of umq" Robert
Crechtoun of Kirkpatrik, and cryme of Ti-elTone and Lefe-maiefte, allegit apon
Jje faid AVilliam, Johne and Thomas, and jjair complices ; Jje Lordis forfaide,
Findis and Deliveris, and confabs ])E KiNGis hienes, J)at ])e faid allegit crimes
be na Dittay : And J^at Lettres be writtin of Difcharge ; and Inhibitiouu be gevin
and direct to Juflice and Juftice Clerk, be our Ibuerane Lorde, and till all utheris
ofRciaris, J)at nane of pame tak in Dittay, attache, arreft, or accufe Jje faid
William Douglas, or his complices forfaide, for })e faide actioun, and na crime
be imput to })ame pairapovui, becaufe it was funde obefore be ])e faide Lordis, J)at
pe faid umq" Robert, ))e tyme quhen he was flane, was oure foverane lordis Rebell,
and at his home, and for uthir refonable caufe, moving Jje faide Lordis ; except
Fergy Feegussoun and RoBix Fergussoun, to quham ])is declaratioun and
confall fall nocht extende, and ])aiin to be punift, as is contenit in }je decret and
deliverance, be certane of \>e faid Lordis ])airapoune.

Sederunt, vltimo die Scptcinbris, anno doinini I'".V'.ivij.
James Aichebifciiope of Glafgw, Alexander Lauder of Blytb, (knyS) Mafter Patrik Panthere, Secretar
Andro Bffdiope of Murray, Proui'ft of Eilinhurirlin, till our foncrann Lorde,

David Bifcliope of Gajioway, Mad -r Gavane Uutubar, Ardii- Mailer Robert Forniane, Dene of
Andro Bifcbope of Carnes, dene of Sanct Androis, Glafgw,

George Bifcliope of |)e His, Mafter Gavane Douglas, Proved Mafler James Henrifoun, Juflice

Archibald Earl of Angus, &c.' of Sanct Gelis Kirk of E(K. Clerk.

John Priour of Sanct Androis,

' The remainder of tlie Great Assise l,ist mentioned follows, excepting William Kejth of Inverrugy.

80 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1512.

EDINBURGHE.

Slrt nnrnt * tijr lUssrt of lUfidlls, mti ilrrsonis firing; at our

sobrr.inr lorUis Ijornr/

The Lordis, Prelatis, (and) Baronis abone written, with avife of jjE
KlXGis hienes, hes Statut and Ordanit, Ipat becaufe of J^e Resset of Rebeleis,
and perfonis being at our fouerane Lordis horne, is gretlie vfit within this
reahne, in contrare his Lawis and diverfe Statutis maid be his hienes and his
progenitouris ; and be ])e faid Lawis and Statutis, nocht alanerly^ ]je faid
Rebellis and perfonis, being at Jje horne, fuld be punift and juftifijt' to pe deid,
bot als well pe relfettaris, fupplearis, and manteinaris of })am. And it is thocht
rycht odious and bevy to oure foverane lorde and his Lordis foirfaidis, Jjat ony
reflet, fupjile, favoui', intercommonyn or affiftance fuld be gevin to the faidis
Rebellis ; and quha )jat reffettis, fupplis, or interconimouis with pam to be punift
to pe rigoure, according to pe Lawes and Statutis made obefore. And gif ony
pei-fonis happins to committ Slauchter apone pe faid Rebellis and perfonis being
at pe horne, pe tym of pe takin or apprehending of ))ani, falbe na punct of Dittay ;
bot pe flaaris of Jjam to be revardit and thankit Jiarfore. Akd gif ony perfone
takis or apprehendis ony perfone Rebell or fugitive, at pe kingis horne, and
bringis pe famyn to his hienes or his Juftice, J)at perfone, Rebell or at pe horne,
tilP have na Remiffioun of }}E KiNGis hienes, without fpeciale confent of Jje
perfonis takaris of him ; and to be revardit be J)E Kingis grace, be pe gevin of
pe half of pe vnlaw of pe perfone fugitive, or at pe horne, or his plegeis was
imlawit or amerciat obefor, or be pe gevin of pe half of his efchet gudis, or ujjer
pairt ])airof as falbe thocht (juft) be Jje Kingis hienes. And as to pe revarding or gevin of RemifTionis till indure for pe fpace of thre 3eris nixt to cum, to
pe quhilk tyme pT. Kingis grace of his benevolence lies confentit ; and pe
remanent of ]3is Statut till indure perpetualy, or quhill it be u}?erwais divifit be
pe King, his Gret Counfale, or be pe Parliament. Item, in likewife it is Statut
and Ordanit, ])at in tym to cum, anent perfonis Rebellis, and being at pe horne,
and beis takin and apprehendit be ony of oiu- foverane lordis legis, and kepit
xxiiij liouris eftir J)at he be takin, and pe takaris or apprehendaris of him haiffand
him in fure keping, oujier'* in Caftell, his ftrenth, or ujjer fare place ; or quhar pe
takaris or apprehendaris ar maifteris of pover,'" quharthrow pe faid Rebell or
fugitive at pe Kingis horne may nocht evaide and efehape, and J)at be noturly'
knavin or vndirftand, it fall nocht be lafull to pe kepar, apprehendar, or taker of
him, nor to na u))er private perfone to lla him, bot bring hiin to pe law to be juftifiit be pe lawis of pe realme. And gif it hapnis J)at ony perfone, Rebell or fugitive at pe horn, be flane efter pe faid tuenty foure houris, he beande in firmance

' Only. '■' Executed, after legal trial. ' To. * Either. = Force. ^ Notoriously,

ptiblidy known or understood. " Sure custody ; imprisoned.

25 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 81

EDINBURGHE.

or fure keping, as faid is, Ipe flaaris of him, ujjerwayis na ' in forme of juftice and
ordour of law, be J)E KiNGis Juftice, or uj^eris havande pover of his hienes or
his Juftice, })at ))ai be reput and haldin as men-flaaris,^ exceptande, gif ony perfons, kyn, or frendis of Ipe faid perfone being Rebel!, or at pe home, wald reif ^ J)e
faid Rebell or perfone being at pe home, quharthrou he may nocht be furely
brocht to J)E KiXGis hienes or his Juftice ; and in Jjat cace, he may be lefully
flane but* accufatioune.

[3Iaf/iens Comes cle LeniuuT, ct Alexander Lauder de Bhjth, viUes, Ji/Jfic/arii
depiitati Andree Duniin'i Gray.']

aittcmptinri: to fret a IJrisoner from Bunbnr Ostlr.

Nov. 5. — EuGENius IVrcuuME, dwelling with William Lauchlanfon ;
and Andrew Williamfoun, dwelling with Alifter Rorefoun, Convicted of art and
part of the treafonable making of Bond and League with Mulmorij ^Lulwane,
in Arroche,' and one called DuncanJ'oiin, and fundry others in Lochabih and
ClaNQUHAttane, for the treafonable taking and abduction of Ferqiihard
M'^yntofche furth of the Castle of Dunbak, the faid Ferquhard being in the
faid Caftle, in prifon and ward ; and of coming to the faid Caftle to the faid
Ferquhard, for taking and carrying the faid Ferquhard furth thereof. — Hanged.

[Curia Jvjliciarie, tenia apud hurgum de Edinburghe, die Veneris, Nov.
xij, 1512, coram. Gcorgeo Domino SetounJ' dejnitato Axdree domini
Gray, J tijticiarij ex parte AuflraJi aque de Fort/ie.]

^laut|:|)ttr of tf)r llairli of <gvcrstoun,

John Dekesoune, in Grerftoune," and John, his fon, convicted of art
and part of the Slaughter of George Myddilmaft of Grerftoune, committed on
forethought and culpable felony. — Beheaded.

ASSISA.

The Larde of Haukfcliawis, Audio Glenquhonie of the Wra, Johne Elphinftoun of Hendiiftoune,

Tlie Larde of Fuidf, Rob. Cietlitoune of the Quartar, Johnne Wily of Bonytoun,

.John Portwife of Gernkirk, John Haldane, James Bioune in Peblis,

George Geddes, (jilbert Barde of PofTo, Patrik Paterfoune,

James Bail:5e of Chapelgil, Wm. Inglis of Langlaudhill, Adam Tuedy.

[Andreas doniinus Gi'ay, Jttjliciarius.']

iWurJjrr.

Nov. 23. — Hugh and Archibald Powok, and Charles Patonfoun,

• Than. = Homicides. ' Carry him ofi by force. ^ Witliout. ^ Arrocliar ?

•^ The names ' ArMlald it Matlico de Urgile et Lennox' are deleted. It is likely they had been
present, but were afterwards called away to attend the Privy Council. "" See May 31, 1513.

VOL. I. t L

82 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1512.

EDINBURGHE.

convicted of art and part of the Slaughter of David Rede, by way of Murder ;
and for their being at the horn for the faid Slaughter. — Beheaded.

ASSISA.'

The Larde of Houfloun, The Lard of Gerwefwode, The Larde of Dunlope,

The Larde of Kilbirny, The Larde of Daljell,^ The Larde of Caldwell,

Johns Nefbet of Dal^ell, Williame Dunlope, Adam Mail win,

Tlie Larde of Conifkeyth, George Cokburne, Patrik Hepburn.

Bartilnio Daljell, James Biirait,

[IViUiehniis Comes ErroUe et Alexander Lauder^ Prepofitiis de EdinhurgJic,

JujVic'iar'ij Deputati. ]

^laugijtci* of tlje 3LaiiU of Covsintouii.

[The following Case is of a kind which, unhappily, was but too frequent in the district where the
Slaughter took place, and, indeed, prevailed over a large portion of Scotland. The reader is referred
to 77(6 Hijtorie of the Kennedyis,'^ for illustrations of a similar nature ; which curious fragment the
Editor has recently published, being anxious to preserve from the risk of destruction by fire, &c. so
remarkable a memorial of the History of a populous and powerful district of this country, at no very
remote period.

Having enquired into the subject of the Slaughter of the Laird of Corsinfoune, little more information can now be obtained than what is contained in the following interesting paper, which has been
recovered from the valuable Register of the Privy Seal.'

General Remission to the Lairds of Lefnorijs and SlieUiugtomie, 8ef. for

the Slaughter of the Laird of Corfintoune.

James, be the grace of God, King of Scottis. To all and findry our Schereffis, Juftice Clerkis, Crownaris, and ])air deputis, and all vj)eris our officiaris,

liegis, and fubditis quhom it efferis, (to) quhais knawlege \\v our Letteris fall

cum, greting. Wit 5E, jjat, fforfamekle as Andro CampheU, ane of J)e principall

committaris of ]>e Slauchter of vmquhile Patrik Dunber o/' Corfintoune,

comrnittit at ]>e Kirk of CurnnoJc, wes takin and jullifijt'^ for ]>e fainmyn ; and

Duncane CampheU and John Stdle, alfua committaris of ])e faid Slauchter, ar

fugitiue fra our lavvis, and put to our home Jjairfor ; and ])e remanent of fie

pei'fonis fpecaly dilatit of art and part of }ie faid Slauchter has optenit our

Remiffioune for ])e lammyn : And becaufe J;e laid Slauchter was comrnittit at

the Kirk, one Souday, jje tyme of IMefs, quhenne jje parrochinaris war gadderit,

and ane grete multitude of fiaim ar dilatit of art and part })airof, We haue, of

our fpeciale grace, Remittit, and be ]?ir our Lettere5 frely Remittis, to WlLliajie Crawfurd of Lefnorijs, Alexander Campbell of Skellingtoune,

parrochinaris of Jje faid Kirk, and generaly to all ])e remanent of \q parrochinaris

' This is one of the few instances where the Assise consisted of fourteen or any other even number,
which was commonly avoided, in case of an equal number of Assisers voting; for the Chancellor had
no casting vote. - Robert (or William) UaUell of that Ilk ? See note to Apr. 5, 1313. •' Sir
Alexander Lauder of Blyth, knight. ' Quarto, Edin. 1831, with Illustrations and Notes by the

Editoi-. '" Beg. Seer. Sig., Vol. VI. ^ Executed ; put to death after legal trial.

25JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 83

EDINBURGHE.

Jjarof, and vtheris our liegis, being ])air aflemblit pe tyme of pe committing of pe
laid Slaucliter, all actioune and cryme J)at may be imput to ))aim, or ony of ])aim,
for pe laid Slaucliter, art or part Jjairof, and all thing ];at may ony wife follow
J^airupoun alaneily : And difchai'gis ])aim and ilkane of Jjaim for euer, be ))ir
oure Lettre5, except pe principale committaris of pe faid Slaucliter, fugitife and
at oure home for pe fammyn, and pe vthir perfonis, quhilkis war in fpeciale
dilatit of art and part Jjairof, and has optenit our Remiffionis |)airupoune, as
laid is. QuHAREFOlvE We chai'ge, flratly, and commandis 50 w, all and findry
our Jufticis, Scheriffis, Juftice Clerkis, Ci'ownaris, and J)air deputis, and all
vtheris our officiaris, legis, and fubditis forefaidis, Jjat nane of 50VV tak apoune
hand to refaiff in Dittay, arrell, accufe, follow, truble, perfew, or proceid aganis
pe faid William Crawfurd, Alexander Campbell, or ony vtheris our liegis, except
before exceptit, for pe faid Slauchter, art or part pairof, or ony thing ])at may
follow Jjairapoune in our Juftice-aris, or ony vtheris wayis, or to do ony thing
incontrare ])is our Generale Remiffioune be ony maner of way in tyme cummyng ; vnder all pe hieft pane, cliarge, and offens ]3at 5e and ilkane of ^ow may
committ and inrin ' aganis our Maieftie, in Jjat part, difcliarging ';ow all our
officiaris forfaidis, prefent and tocum, and 5our deputis of 3our officiaris" for
ever, be ])ir our Lettre5 of Generale Remit, quhilkis We will haue pe ftrenth
and effect of our Remiflioune, ficlik as and pe fammyn war gevin to })aim all
fpecially nenimit fiarein be our Lettre3 vndir our Grete Sele, without ony impediment, reuocatioune, or agane-calling quhatfumeiiir. Gevin vndir our Priue
Sele, at Edinburghe, pe fevin day of Januar, pe ^ere of God I^.Vc.xij 3eris, and
of oure regne pe xxv 5ere. [James R.]

It seems quite unnecessary to add any tiling farther to this Case, the parties concerned being so
well known.]

Dec. 6. — Robert Caaipbell of Schankilloune denounced Rebel and
put to the horn, and all liis goods efcheated, for not underlying the law for the
Slaughter of Patrick Dunbar of Corfintoune.'' — Johne Stewart of Torboltoune,
cautioner for his entry, was amerciated in 1001. ; and becaufe his goods were
not diftrainable, the goods of the Sheriff of Aire to be diflrained therefor, becaufe
he took the faid John as furety forefaid.

George and John Cami'BELL, brothers of the faid Robert, alfo denounced,
&c., as above ; and the Sheriff of Air's goods to be diflrained for 200 merks of
amerciament. — Andrew Bo^iby is alio denounced, and the Laird of Schankiftoun amerciated 401. as his cautioner. — John Campbell, Parifli Clerk of
Cumnok, replegiated by the Archbifliop of Glafgow's CommifTary (Mr Richard
Boithville) to his Regality.

' Incur ; literally run into. ^ Offices? ' See also Dec. 9, 1512.

84 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1512.

EDINBURGHE.

iHurtirr in (Jrlrinfttirsfj Castlr— 3$i-taMiT0 mavti, $(t.

Dec. 7, {(lie Jlarf/s.) — Andreav Ada]mesouxe, alias Wei/ mis, Convicted of art and part of the Murder and Slaughter of Thomas Peblis, in the
Caftle of Edinburgh : Item, of the Theft of xxvj 1. and a filver merk, at the
lame time : Item, for treafonably breaking his prifon in the faid Caftle, and
going furth of Ward. — Beheaded. His head to be put upon the Weft Port, and
his hands and feet fixed upon the Ports of the four Burghs neareft to Edinburgh.

[Jacohus Comes de Arane Dominits Hammyltoime, Jujliciarius deputatus

fpccialiter conjTdutP^

^lausljter of tfjf Jtairli of Comutouit.

Dec. 9, {die Jovis.) — James Campbell of Clevvis denounced Rebel, &c.
for the Slaughter of Patrick Dunbar of Corfintoun.' — Geoi-ge Camijbell of Cefnok,
ftirety for the faid James, was amerciated 200 merks.

Andrew Campbell in Strade, Andrew C. in Wodhead, and "William Craufurde, were alfo denounced, &c. ; and George Campbell of M^atterhede, Mathew
C. in Trinjean, George C. of Cefnok, and George Craufurde of Beaux, their
fureties, were amerciated 200 merks for each of them. The following Warrant
is engrossed in the Record.

Hex,

Clerk of oure Jufticiaiy. It is our will, anJ Ave charge jow, Jiat ,6 defeife,-* and draw
furth of our Adjornall, George Campbell of Cefnok, George Craufurd of Beaux, and Matlio Campbell, quhilkis ar unlawit as plegis for ])e non-entre of William Crawfurd, fone to William Craufurde
of Lefnoris,' James Campbell, Andre Campbell in Straide, and Andro Campbel in Wodhede, dilatit
of )ie Slachter of wmq''^' Patrik Dunbar of Corsyntoun. And alfua, ])at 53 draw furthe of our
faid buke all wper perfouns pat ar undir panis for Jie faid Slacliter, and ]>are fouerteis, and ]'at 56 defeife
paim fairof, becaus ]iai haif maid corapofitioun with ws Jiairfore. For ])e quhilk caus, we Remitt,
forgevis, and difcliargis Jie fornemmit perfonis and Jiair fouerteis of ]ie faide unlawis and panis be Jiir
prefentis, fubfcrivit with oure hande, at Edinburgh, ])e vij day of Januare, and of our regnne fe xxv
;ere. James R.

\_Ah'.ravdcr lAiudcr de Jihjth, miles, J/[/?iciari/(s deptitafits.']

(DppitSision — SSilountJintr — i^rtafeiitij a ^afe-contriict,

Jan. 8, 1512-13. — Henry Beg, Engliflimaii, dwelling in Bervik, and
Richard Barro, Englilliman, his fervant, ConA'icted of art and part of the Oppreffion done to Alexander Angus of Hoprig : And of the cruel Hurting and W^ounding of him, under filence of night, by way of Murder ; and of the concealing
thereof : And of breaking the King's Safe-conduct granted to the faid Henry, by
committing: the forefaid Hurting: and W^ounding.

1

See Dec. 6, 1512. ' Discharge, free, acquit. This word frequently occurs in Warrants,

kc. of the same period. ' He is also stated to be brother of George Crawfurd of Beaux.

25JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 85

EDINBURGHE.

ASSISA.

James Edmoftoun of Ednem, Henry Congiltoun of that Ilk, Thomas Louranfloun of that Ilk,
Alexander Moubray of Cammo, George Lile of Stannepeth, William Newtoune of that Ilk.'

IPatn'cins Crechtoune de Cranjioun-Hkldule, Jujliciarius deputatus.']

Mar. 8, [die 3Iarfis.) — Charles Murray was denounced Rebel and put
to the horn, for not underlying the law for being art and part of the cruel
Slaughter of Alexander Biglande — John Lindfay, formerly of Wauchop, now of
Barcloy, amerciated 100 merks for not entering the faid Charles, as he had found
furety to the Steward of Kirkcudbrycht, for that effect.

Ahjintes ab A(Jlfa.
William M'elellane of Bomby, William Sinclare of Auchinfranko, Richard Carnis of Barnbauchill,
Thomas Tait of Banibarrache, Ninian Gleudunwyne of Partoun, Patrick Forfler.^

212aminlriit0 tit ii)t i^iits's Ci)am6n%

Mar. 11. — John Makerak denounced at the King's horn, for not entering to undei'ly the law for art and part of Wounding Thomas Drummond, in
the King's Chamber. (On the margin,) ' Ifta denunciacio fuit de fpeciali mandato domini noilri Regis.'

\_Arc/iihcdd?/s Comes de E7-gUe, Jacobus Comes de 3Iortouu, Georgius
Domimis de Setoun, et Alexander Lander de BIyth, miles, Prepofitns de
EdhihurgJie, Jnjiiciarii deptitati, Andree Domh/i Gray, Jnfticiarn Jpec'laliter conftituf.']

^lauflijtef of m^htW of tTjat 3Hft, ^t, — ^tvCH fietlnee n itoitrg
iWn.tUDeil anU Crrnrfjtoun of ^anquljar/

Apr. 5, 1513, {die 3Iartis.) — Robert Graham of Gillelbe denounced
Rebel and put to the horn, and all his goods to be efcheated ; and James Johneftoune of that Ilk, his furety, amerciated 1001. for his not entering to underly
the law for the Slaughter and ftriking of William Dal5ell of that Ilk,'' John
Carmichell, young Laird of Carmichell, John Wej'r, John Lokky, and Robert
Bertoune ; according to the form of a Decreet Ai-bitral. '

Thomas Johnestoun of Gartno, William Johneftoun young Laird of Gartno,
David J. bi'other of John in Bartycupane, Adam Scot of Tul'chelaw, and James

' Nine other persons of no rank are also specified. '^ Six others of no note. ^ See Sep.

24- and 30, 1512, &c. * Either there must be a mistake in this Record of Justiciary or in the Peerages, as to the Christian name of this person. Wood states, that Robert Daljell of DaUeil ' was killed at
Dumfreis, in a (kirmilh betwixt Lords Maxwell and Crichton, 30th July, 1508 ;' and that Robert of
D. was witness to a Charter in 1511. — Wood's Peerage, I. 311. See also Nov. 18, 1508. ^ This
entry is very obscurely expressed. It does not appear from it which of these parties were struck, and
wliicli of them were slain ; or whether they were all struck and slain.

86 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1512-13.

EDINBURGHE.

Johneftoun of Skare, were alfo denounced Rebels, &c. for the fame crime ; and
the Laird of Johneftoun, their fui'ety, amerciated in 100 merks for each of them.
— John Johnelloune of Wamfray was amerciated 401. for not entering Edward
Mqffet of Hcu'di, who was likewife denounced, &c.

James alias Jah Baty, Andrew his brother, Ronald Graham at the Water
of Corry, and Patrick fon of Walter Graham, were denounced Rebels, &c. for
the fame crimes. John Maxwell called France, Officer' of Lord Maxwell,
was proved to be fick, and Lord JNIaxwell became furety for his entry, at the
next Juftice-aire of Dumfrefe, under the pain of 100 merks.

^Inurjljtrr of strap €>xtn,

George M'^Cullociie, fon of Archibald, Symon Makcubin,and Andrew
Akynnane, were denounced Rebels, &c. for not appearing to underly the law for
art and part of the Slaughter of nine oxen, ftraying upon the lands of Glenlufe.

George Johnestoun of Auchinlbork, and William, called Foule-durris,
were denounced Rebels, &c. for art and part of the Slaughter of Iwe Corry,
fervant of Sir Alexander Kirkpatrick, kn'. — James Johneftoun of that Ilk, his
furety, was amerciated in 200 merks, for their not entering to underly the law.

[Alexander L,atuler de Bhjth, miles, Jtijliciarius Deputatus.']

^Vaw^iyUv of X\)t i)Ouns ilairti of SIttiquanr,

Apr. 9, {die Sahhati.) — Thomas Kennedy of Bargany,' Alexander^ and
John his fons, Rolland his brother, Thomas Ferguflbune brother of the Laird of
Kilkerane, John Colvile fon of William, and fix others, were ordained to be
denounced Rebels, and all their moveables to be efcheated, for their not entering
to underly the law, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of George Kennedy,
fon and heir apparent of George Kennedy of Attiquane. — Execution of horning
delayed till Friday nixt, with confent of George K. of Attequyne. David Earl
of CaiTdlis became furety.

[Andreas Dominiis Gray, JiifUciarius, c^c]

Apr. 20, (die 3Iercurij.) — David Craufurde of Kerfe, and Thomas Corry
of Keldwode, amerciated 1001. for not entering the Laird of Bargany, who was
put to the borne along with the others.

' A Herald or Pursuivant. Tlie Wardens of ttie Marches, and many of the greater Barona, had
Heralds in llieir train, who were made use of on all solemn occasions, and especially at marriages,
feasts, and funerals, &c. ' France' was the name of this OfHcer, in like manner as Albany, Marchmont, Xcc. of the Royal Heialds. " ' Relpicitur de ]iroceli'u, cornu de mandato Regis, quia poflea
amerciatur.' ^ He is styled his ' fon and lieir apparent' in a subsequent entry.

25JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 87

EDINBURGHE.

\^Davkl Comes de CqfJilUs, Jiijticiarius deputatusJ]

^f)rrp .intr (JTattlr ^tfalins.

Ajir. 26. — Richard Pott, in Eflcdaill, convicted of art and part of the
Theft and conceahnent of four cows, from George Purwes and Roger Hunter,
furth of Carterhope : Item, of the Theft of 30 flieep from the Tenants of Carterhope : liem, of the Theft of 16 flieep from the faid Tenants : Item, of the Theft

of 50 flieep from the Laird of Halkfchawis : Item, for Common Theft. — Hanged.

Nomina Assise.
Dominus ' de Amisfelde, Dorainus de Manerftoune, Dominus de Damhoy,

Dominus de Tallo, Dorainus de Keldwode, Domiuus de Corsfurde,

Dominus de Gerwefwode, Willelmus Ker de gair, Dominus de Kirk.-

[^Geoi'g'ms Dominus Setoun, JujViciarius Dejmtatus.^

Common Cf)cft anU aarsf t of Cfjcft

May 25. — Edward Johnstoun, fone of John in Crukitmone, and John
Reid, (dwelling) with Mathew Graham, convicted of Common Theft and Common Relet of Theft. — Hanged.

Nomina Assise.
Rogerus Kirkpatrik de Knok, Robertus Neilfon de Madinpap, Willelmus Colvile de RavinnifWillelmus Cunyngham de Cra- Dominus de Bennifyde,^ crag,

ganis, Ricardus Carlile.

^Iaii3:i)tn- of X^t HaiitJ of (^rfiftoii.

May 31. — William Dekesoune, fon of umq" John Dekefoun,* convicted of art and part of the Slaughter of George Myddilmeft; of Greiftoun,'
committed by the faid William, John his father, and John his brothei", upon
forethought and culpable felony : Item, for being at the horn for the faid
Slaughter. — Beheaded.

ASSISA.

Thomas Lowis of Menner, Gilbert Berde of Poffo, Thomas Wyly of Bonytoune,

Ninian Paterfoun of Caverhill, John Elphinftoun of Hendirftoun, James Levingfloun of Girifwode,
John Caverhill of Foulage, William Were of Newtoun, JohnCarmichell,Cap' of Craufurde.*

\^Archibaldus Comes de Ergile, Jujiiciarius, ' in hac parte '^

Common C^tft anlr Creason.

Jun. 4. — Andrew Story and Thomas Gillefpy convicted of common
Theft and common Treafon ; and George Walch of common Theft. — Hanged.

' Laird. - The others are Mr James Gifferde and five tenants. 3 This is not unlikely

' Bemerfyde' (Haig), but it is very indistinctly written. Seven others (tenants) were on this Assise.
* See Nov. 12, 1.512. ^ He is called ' of Grerftoune' in the former Trial. '' Six others, in

Peblis, &c., but of no note. These lists of Assisors have been inserted in the present Collection from
the importance of preserving the names. In many instances the occurrence of an Assise of Barons
has been the sole cause of selecting the case.

88 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1513.

EDINBURGHE

As.SISA.

Andrew Ker of Feniihirft, Mark Ker of Dolphinfloune, Robert TurnbuU of Blindliauche,

Andrew M'Dowell of Garthlone, Walter Scot of Liiifelar, John Craufurde of Drongane,

John Tuedy of Drummeljeir, Walter Scot of Howpaflot, John Charteris of Amisfelde,

Thomas Cranftoun, Ralph Ker, John Charteris, his uncle.'

\_Alea;ander Lauder de Blijth, miles, Jujlkiarius deputattis.'\

Jun. 28, {die 3Iartis.) — Malcolm DrujMMONDE and his accomplices,
dilated of art and pai't of the Slaughter of GilfiJlan Crechtoun.

Absentes ab Assisa.
Andrew Murray of Abircarny, Robert Maxtoun of Cultoquhay, Patrick Scot of Mun;e,
John Moncreif of that Ilk, Robert Barclay of Stercovy, John Crechtoun of Blakburne,

David Chalmer of Strathy, John Kynnard of Inchefture, Andrew Monorgun of that Ilk,

Andrew Currur of Logymegill, Patrick Butter of Gormok, Nefe ° Ramfay of Baraf,

Hector Bruce of Col])malindy, W°^ Edmonftoun of Duntrethe, James Ilofs, fon of the Laird of
Robert Boyd of Petkindy, Thomas Spens of Kinfpindy, Craigy,

Robert Nory of Buchquhopill, John Muncreif in Little M., John Cochrane of Pitfour.^

^toutlji'tif of ^pir.iUti <!5tioUs.

Jun. 30. — Andrew Mylar, in Kingorn, amerciated for not entering
to underly the law for art and part of Stouthreif and plundering of the goods
and fliips ' harried' and taken by Thomas Chalmer and his men, belonging to
the IMerchants of Ci'ailluond and Rufto.'*

[Curia Itineris Juftkiarie de Wigtoune.'']

itotitfji'tif — ' igrrfsdjip' — lUstt, ^r.

Jul. {die Martin if die Itineris.) — Dugall and Patrick MakclenNOCHQUHEN convicted of art and part of the ' Herefchip' of four ' thraif of

corn, and four ' car-i'adillis' and ' carris' from 'William IMakdowell, furth of

Arnechene in Carrik : Item, of art and part of the forethought felony done to

Thomas Kennydy, and Hurting him : Item, the faid Dtigrdl of art and jiart of

the Theft of a cow from Little Allan M^ge, furth of Herrenwod : Item, for his

Refetting, fujiplying, and intercommuning with Thomas Kalelane and James

M'Alexander, Rebels, and at the hoi-n," &c. &c. — Hanged.

' Andrew Charteris was also on the Assise. ^ The first of this ancient family was Neffiis de

Ramsay, who flourished 1226. This Nefs was served heir to his grandfather, Oct. 5, 1507. — Dong.
Baronage, 552. In the Appendix of Extracts from the Privy Seal Records, he is called Neijblie.
'•' They were, as usual, fined L.IO each. ^ Rostock, in the Duchy of Mecklenburg, and Stralsund,
in Pomerania ? * There is reason to apprehend that some mistake has occurred in rebinding the

Volume in which these entries are contained ; and that the date of this Aire was probably about the
year 1510. No dates are mentioned by which this blunder can be thoroughly rectified. •* Several
others were Hanged for similar crimes ; and many convicted in killing of ' red-Jifche (salmon) in
close time.

26 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 89

WIGTOUXE.

{Die Mart'ts i'lj" die Itineris.) — Patrick Mur, in Wigtouu, and Nicholas
Frefle, and Thomas INIur, dwelling with him, allowed to compound for art and
part of the Convocation of the lieges, and for the forethought felony done to Sir
David Kenydy of Lefwalt, kn', coming upon him whilfl he was preparing himfelf to hold his Court upon his heritage of Lefwalt, Monybrig, and Balquhony,
in wai-like manner, with invafive arms, and hindering him from holding his
Court : Item, for art and part of the ' Herefchip' of cloaks and other goods
from the fervands of the laid Sir David, at the fame time : Item, of the breaking of the Acts of Parliament, in riding and going furth of Burgh in Convocation, in ' ronfitig,' in company with the Sheriff (of Wigtoune) : Ite^n, for contempt done to the King, in taking one called Lang 31 ke furtli of the ' flokkis,'
wherein he had been placed by Symon ]\rCriftin, Sheriff depute, for Hurting a
Spaniard. — Sir Alexander M'cuUocht became furety to fatisfy the parties.

The faid Patrick alfo compounded for ' Herefchip' and Oppreflion done to
Andrew Mure, in ' Herefchip' of liis goods bequeathed to him by his father :
Item, of five oxen from John Makclym : Item, of forethought felony done to
Symon M^criftine, in Wigtoun, by chacing him with a drawn ' quhin5eare :'
Item, for ' Herefchip' of a grey horfe from Alexander Boide : Item, of five fcore
flieep and upwards from Andrew Dunbar, furth of Dorry in INIochrum : Item,
for Common OpprefTion of the lieges : Item, for art and part of the ' Herefchip'
and Oppreffion done to Archibald Mure, Tutor to Margaret Mure, in ' Hei-el'chip'
of ten fcore bolls of victual from him, furth of Kikrane and Killegown, price of
the boll iiij f., and twenty fcore ' thrafis' of fodder, price ij d. (each.) — Sir Alexander Makcullocht became furety to fatisfy the parties.

(J^pprtssion — * ^tvtsdji}?/ $(c,

Patrick Agxew, Sheriff of Wigtoune, and Alexander Makmechane,
dwelling with him, permitted to compound for the Oppreffion done to Thomas
Makdowell and Roger M''crocliat, in caufing them to build his dikes' with their
' jjetis,'" and to plough and harrow^ his lands, in the years ISOJ-, 1505, 1506,
1507, and 1508 ; and for conniion Oppreffion thereby done to them : Item, for
the fame Oppreffions done to James Kennyde, INIariota Makkevin, &c. : * Item,
for the Oppreffion done to the faid perfons, in plundering each of them of a
' fAvyne' yearlj^ during the faid years. — The Laird of Lochinver became furety
to fatisfy the parties.

He alfo found the fame furety to compound for the ' Herefchip' of a ' jument'
(/. e. ox ufed for tillage) from John IMakrowat, in the Foreft of Buchan : Item,

' Turf fences or divisions. ^ Peats, turfs. ' ' Arare et harpicare.' ' Sixteen others.

VOL. I. t M

90 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1513.

WlGtOUNE.

for the Oppreffioii done to Thomas Makwilliam, in taking and ' harrying' from
him ten bolls of barley.

He, together Avith George Crukfliank and Thomas Mure, in Wigtoun, alfo
compounded for art and part of the Oppreffion done to Thomas Kennydy in
Wigtoun, in ' Herefchip' from him of a young riding horfe ; and for linking
the faid Thomas Kennedy.

(Oppirssinci; tije EaittJs of avliijarU anb EcsUjalt, ^r»

Nevin Agnew allowed to comjiound for art and part of the forethought
felony and Oppreffion done to Archibald M^cullocht of Ardwell and William
Adair of Kingate, coming upon them in warlike manner, wifliing to flay them,
at their own Places : Ifew, for the Stoutlireif of a horfe from John INFNelche :
Ite»i, for the Stouthreif of an ox from Gilbert Adair, furth of Athquak : Item,
for the Stoutlireif of an ox from Jonkin' M'cullocht, furth of Auchquork : Item,
for the Oppreffion done to Sir David Kennedy of Lefwalt, in calling his hay out
of his barn in Cal3ocht : Item, for the breaking of the King's Protection upon
him:^ Item, for the Stouthreif of certain ' tymmer" of two houfes, with the
windows and doors thereof: Item, for the Stouthreif of an ox from Thomas
Bell : Item, for Conunon Ojjpreffion of the lieges ; and fpecially, of the Tenants
of Lefwalt. — The Sheriff (Patrick Agnew) became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^toutl)rcif — <{i>ppvfssioii — * ^txt&tiM*'

Patrick Mure and Nicholas Frefale' permitted to compound for
Stouthreif and Oppreffiion done to James Portar of Lag, and Archibald Mure, in
the ' Herefchip' of ten fcore bolls of wheat,* price of each boll iiij f. : Item, the
laid Patridi', for Oppreffion doue to William INFclellane Laird of Bomby, by
occupying, and labouring and manuring the Crofts of the faid William, near Wigtoune, for two years pall ; and for the ' fpuiljieing' of iij 1. of annual rent of certain
lauds pertaining to him, for the faid fpace : Item, of the ' f2niii5ieing' of the farms
and profits of the faid lands from the faid William for the forefaid fpace, extending yearly to xx bolls of bear :*^ Item, for the Oj^preffion done to Andre w^ Dunbar, in occupying of his fet of Denry, in the barony of Myrtoun. — Sir Alexander
M'^cuUoch became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^jpjprrssioit — J^.imrsurluit — ^toutljrrtf, $it,

Thobias Mure, ' tal5our,'^ in Wigtoune, allowed to compound for the

' A familiar iiirUnaino, on the Borders, for John, as Joch is now. IViJhin was, in like manner,
often used for William ; Dund, or Dande, for Andrew ; Hob, for Robert ; Hob or Habbie for Ilalbert,
&c. ^ Viz. cranted to Sir David. ^ Timber ; wood-work. ^ Fraser. He and liis brother

Thomas, ' in Wigtoune,' compoimdcd for tlie stouthreif of ajumenl, or ox used for tillage, furth of
the barn of Skellore. ' ' Frumenti,' wliicli was uniformly used to denote the grain iVora which

ihe finest loaiies were made. ^ Barley.

26JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 91

■WIGTOUNE.

forethought felony done to Duncan Makke, drawing his fword, and wifliing to
flay him : Item, for the Oppreffion and ' Hamjulxkhi' done to Chriftiane Gibfoune, ftriking her and breaking up her doors : Item, for forethought felony
and Oppreffion done to a Merchant of St Andi-ews, drawing his fword, coming
upon him, and putting him to flight : Item, for the theftuous breaking up and
opening the cellar of Rankin Mur, and taking therefrom victual and other goods :
Item, for the Stouthreif of a cow from M^keyn, furth of Kerowoltok : Item,
for common Oppreffion of the lieges, common ' Brigancie," and in taking and
' reiving' from them malt, corn, and other goods. — Sir Alexander Mcculloch
became furety to fatisfy the parties.

|>rri)tntincj; a Court from liriiifl: f)rllj, ^Vr.

Patrick Agnew, Sheriff of Wigtoune, Nevin Agnew, John Adair,
Alexander M^mychin, George Crukfchank, Thomas Portar, and Patrick Agnew,
fervant of the faid Sheriff, convicted of art and part of Convocation of the lieges
with warlike arms, 'jakkis and Iplentis,' contrary to the Acts of Parliament,
and of the Oppreffion done to Sir David Kennydy, kn', coming to Lefwalt, and
hindering him from holding his Court. — Each of them fined x merks, and the
Sheriff became furety for himfelf and the others.

Oppression — .il?ou.sc^l)rraliiitg;—^touti)rrif,

Patrick Mure, in Wigtoune, permitted to compound for art and part
of the Oppreffion done to Betoun ]\rkewin, fpoufe of Gilbert M'^ke, in cafling
her goods furth of her ' mailing :'^ Item, for the Oppreffion done to Mr Richard
Akinhede, Vicar of Wigtoune, breaking up the doors of his chamber, and keeping him furth thereof : Item, for common Oppreffion of the lieges. — Alexander
]\rculloch of Mertoun became furety to fatisfy the parties.

Thomas Mure, his fervant, Nicholas and Thomas Freflile, in Wigtoun,
compounded for the above crime, and for cafling the faid Mr Richard's fervant
and his goods, over his flair : Item, the faid Thomas and Nicholas for flealing
a grey horfe.

^touti)rtif — (JDpprrssion — *3Jrici:anne.*

Thomas Fresai,e allowed to compound for the forethought felony
done to (.lohn) M'ke, mercliant in Wigtoune, and Hurting him : Item, of the
Stouthreif of his ' quhin3eare,' at the fame time : Item, of common Oppreffion of
the lieges, by way of common ' Brigancie.' — Sir Alexander M'^cuUoch of Myrtoune became furety to fatisfy the parties.

' Fr. Briganderie, equivalent to what we term Highway Robbery, &c. ' ' Afledationem.'

92 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1513.

WIGTOUNE.

^liiu0l)tfi— ^toutfjrrtf — ittutilation.

Patrick Agnew, George and George Crukfliank produced a Remiffion
for art and part of the Slaughter of Patrick IM'ke, and Thomas M'ke : Item, for
the Stouthreif of feven cows from John IVrke of Myrtouue ; Item, for the forethought felony done to the faid John and his men, and for wounding him. — The
Sheriff" became furety.

They, along with Alexander Makmechane, produced another Remiffion for
the Mutilation of iimq'° John Makke of Myrtoune of his thumb : Item, for the
Slaughter of iimq'" Patrick and Thomas Makke : Item, for the Stouthreif of
7 cows, with, their calves, from the faid John. — The Sheriff of Wigtoune furety.

Cattle-straliiicj:.

Patrick Agneav, Sheriff" of Wigtoun,' compounded for art and part of

the Stouthreif of four cows from Thomas Cunyngham, in Carrik The Laird

of Orchertoune became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^tout^iTif ftp «i" ^^uUrrn\

John Makter, formerly in Carrik, now in Pennygham, convicted of
the Stouthreif of the goods of Patrick M''Cul5ean the time he lay (in Adultery)
with Chriftian M'cord his wife. — BaKISHED furtli of the fliire of Wigtoune, and
to depart within eight days.

^toutljrrif anb Baduiifi of ffiSHooti.

John Maklumphare, in Kirkmerin, dwelling with the Abbot of
Saulefet, convicted of Stouthreif of the Wood of Garthlone, and of the barking
thereof.^ — Others were amerciated iij 1. each for the fame crime, committed in
the woods of Barrinraiier, Glenfiche, and Crofchre.

MtnTommuitinf!; iMitI) lUfiels.

John Makcoshen, in Innermellane, convicted of Intercoiimmning with
Thomas M'clellane and Neill Nelefoun, Rebels, and at the horn. Fined xx
nierks. — The Laird of Garthlone became furety to the King.

^lausljter.

Thomas Portar, convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of
John Makmyane. — Beheaded.

' The conduct of the Sheriff of Wigtoun, as exhibited in this and tlie preceding cases, affords a
melanclioly picture of tlie state of society at tliat ])eriod. Tlie liereditary Judge, and highest legal
fnnctionary in the district, appears to have vied with the most des|)erate of the IJorder thieves in the
commission of all sorts of crimes ; expecting, doubtless, that his high office and influence would si'.tliciently protect him from merited punisliment for his odious oppressions. ^ ' Remittitur quia

pauper.'

26Jac.IV. criminal trials. * 93

WIGTOUNE.

^pprrssiou — ^toutI)rcif — Conborntion.

(Die Jovin, iv die It'meris.) — Gilcrist MAKKIN5E, iu Killas, permitted
to compound for art and part of the forethought felony and ' Hamefukkiu,' done
to one M'carbere, dochter, fponfe of Andrew M'ylbride, and llriking her : Ite)7i,
for the Stouthreif of vj cows and oxen furth of Kirkm'^brek, from the Tenants
of the Laird of Ardwell : Item, for the Oppreffion done to Duncan Rrcullane in
holding goods and his wife from his fociety and company : Item, for forethought
felony done to Andrew IVPcuUocht of Ardwell, and fearching for him for his
flaughter : Item, for Convocation of the lieges in great numbers, contrary to the
Acts of Parliament, and for the forethought felony and Oppreffion done to Sir
David Kennydy kn'. drawing his fword and wifliing to flay him : Ite)ii, of common Oppreffion of the lieges, by common ' brigancie' and otherwife. — The Laird
of Killufler' became furety to fatisfy the parties.

^pprrssiiiff tl)f IStuijI) of ilSIitrtoun — ^mmrsurfeiii.

DoMiN'icK ]\rcLELLANE and Symon Makcriftin, allowed to compound
for art and part of Convocation of the lieges, and going forth of Burgli in convocation'^ to tiie Place of Myrtoun : Item, for the Stouthreif of certain oxen, horfes,
and flieep, from John M'ke of Myrtoun, at that time : Item, for the Stouthreif
of bear' and oats from the faid John, furth of his barn, and deftroying the door
of the faid barn.

The faid Sijmon was alfo permitted to compound for art and part of the forethought felony, Oppreffion, and ' Hameiukkin' done to John Kells, coming upon
him, wifliing to flay him : Item, for the Oppreffion done to M'calviu-dochter,
wife of ... . Acariane, and cruelly flriking and beating her : Item, for common
Oppreffion done to the neighbours' of Wigtoun, arrelling and troubling them
at the Courts, becaufe they would not be his men : Item, for breaking of the
Acts of Parliament, becaufe he is the Laird of Bomby's man."

The laid Dominkk allowed to compound for Stouthreif of two oxen from
Thomas Makke, furth of Torhous ; and for the forethought felony and Oppreffion done to him and his brother, at the faid time, wifliing to flay them.

They were both likewife permitted to compound for Oppreffion done to the
Community of Wigtoune, in taking the beft: merchandise coming in fliips to the
faid Burgh, and keeping thereof in their cellars : Item, for Oppreffion done to
the faid neighbours, in gathering the profits of the Town and ' burrolandis,' and
common liberty of the faid Burgh and community.

' M'Culloch of Killaissor ? - In anotlior part of tlie Record tliere is added tins translation,

' le routting.' ^ Barley. ■* ' J'iciniis,' usually translated ' niclitbouris,' i. e. inhabitants,

townsmen. ' ' Ex eo quod eft vir Domini de Bomby.'

94 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 15l3.

WIGTOUNE.

Duncan M'ke, in Wigtoune, permitted to compound for art and part
of the forethought felony done to John Murhede, in Wigtoune, and putting him
to flight (for his Slaughter) : Item, of the Stouthreif of a ' brew caldrone' from
John Wke, in Libi-ek, furth of his houfe ; and for forethought felony done to him
fimdry times, wifliing to Hay him ; and for the breaking of the King's (Letters
of) Protection : Item, for the forethought felony done to Symon M^criftin, in
Wigtoun, coming upon him for his flaughter : Item, for common Oppreflion of
the lieges, and fpecially of the Tenants of Librek, by way of common ' Brigancie :'
Item, for art and part of the Oppreffion done to John M^ke, in Librek, in cafting
down the 'dike' of his bear-croft.' — The Laird of Lochinver became furety to
fatisfy the jjarties.

29 nil nil Is in tio I! — SSifafeiug EalJo6iirroU)s.

Thoimas Makdowell, fon of Rolland in Quhitherne, Etht Robifoun,
and Robert Afchennay there, allowed to compound for art and part of the foi*ethought felony and Oppreffion done to Johnne Makke, in Librek, coming upon
him in the town of Quhitherne, and cruelly wounding him : Item, for the Mutilation of the faid John, and demembering him of an eye : Item, of breaking the
Lawburrows formerly found between the laid parties. — And the faid Roherf, for
art and part of the Ojjpreffion done to John INIakke, in Librek, in occupying and
manuring two merklands of his let in Libreck, extending yearly to Ixxx bolls of
meal and xx bolls of bear, in profits : Item, for breaking the King's Protection.

^toutTirrif from tfjf Jjisfjop of ^Ballotuap, ^^r.

Patrick Waus, of Irlalk, and William Grahaine, living with him, were
allowed to compound for the Stouthreif of fix filver ' tafles' or drinking cujds^
from the lord Billiop of Galloway,'^ near Wigtoune : Item, for the Stouthreif of
certain oxen and cows from the executors of umq'*" Mr Alexander Waufe : Item,
for the Oppreffion done to tlie Bifliop of Galloway, in ' hochin'* his oxen : Item,
the faid Patrick, for art and part of the Oppreffion done to John M*^gilwyan, in
Quhitherae, in the detention of his croft,' called Our Lady croft, for the fpace of
xij years, after he had bought the fame from M''calphin-dochter ; the annual
lofs thereby arifmg extending to five merks. — Item, the faid Patrich, for art

' Barley-field. - ' Tafraium argenti.' ^ ' Camliilecafe." This person was David Arnot,

son of John Arnot of that Ilk, hy Katharine Melvil, (laui;hter of the Laird of Carnhee, in Fife. He
was successively Archdean of Lothian, Provoll of Bothwell, and Ahhot of Canihuskenneth ; from
which Ahhary he was translated to the See of Galloway, in 1509, on the advancement of James Betfiune
to the Archhishoi)nc of Glasgow. In a few years afterwards he got the Ahhary of Tungland in
commeiidam. His stile was ' David Candidie Casje Kegifque Capellie Striuiiingen. Epifcopus.*
^ Houghing, hamstringing. * A piece of cultivated land adjoining to the dwellinghouse.

26JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 95

WIGTOUNE.

and part of Convocation of the lieges : Item, for the forethought felony and
Oppreffion done to Sir David Kennedy, kn', coming npon him at liis lands of
Lefwalt, at the time of his holding his Court, and hindei'ing him from holding
the fame : Item, for the Stouthreif of certain cloaks and other goods from the
fervants of the faid Laird, at the fame time. — The Laird of Toi'hous became
furety, along with the faid Patrick.

2Suniin0 at t\)t 43lacc of Bunsltn),

Duncan IVrKE produced a RefjHte for his being art and part of Burning
the Place of Duuflcey.' — The Laird of Lochinver became furety.

<!^PJprc5sion— ^rtVifntins a Court from ficinri; ijtltr.

NiNiAN Edgar, young Laii'd of Creaken ; Thomas AVaus, brother of
the Prior^ ; George M'cullocht, young Laird of Durchdery ; Patrick Murray,
young Laird of Brochtoun ; the Laird of Killafter-M^cuUocht ; Wchtred
Mcdowell of Mondork, and twenty others, defcribed as living with^ the Sheriff
and the Abbot of Saulfet, &c., came in the King's Will, for art and part of
Convocation of the lieges, and of art and part of the forethought Oppreffion done
to Sir David Kennedy, and hindering him from holding his Court at Lefwalt — -•
The Sheriff of Wigtoun, Duncan Makke, in Wigtoun, and Neviu Wigtoun,
became fureties for the young Laird of Creaken ; Alexander Gordoun of Auchrovv for the Lairds of Ardwell and Corfwell ; and the Laird of Gartlilone for the
Laird of Mondork and Thomas Acoltane, &c.

Jaititnti: iwxW) of iiurtiT) * in routing;/

Alexander Ahannay, brother of the Laird of Sorby and burgess of
Wigtoun, came in will for art and part of the above Convocation, &c. : Item,
for riding furth of burgh in warlike manner in ' routing,' and for thereby breaking
the Acts of Parliament. — Thomas A., in Capirnache, Fergus Mcdowell, young
Laird of Derregill, and feven others, alfo came in will for the fame crime.

Cije ilairtis of iHorljrum anft JUorJjIanJj ftnrU*

John Dunbar, of Mocluum, and Patrick Hammyltoun, of Bordland,
amerciated xl 1. each, for not appeai'ing to underly the law for all crimes to be
imputed to them.

^lausljtcr.

Patrick M'clelane, of Gilefloune, and Andrew and John M'^clelane,

' See the Appendix to this reign, for various illustrations of this treasonable crime. - Of

Whithem, George Vause ? ^ Followers, servants, and retainers.

96 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1513.

WIGTOUNE.

&c., denounced Rebels, and their cautioners amerciated 1001. for each, for their
not entering to underly the law for the Slaughter of Robert Mur.

0toiiti)itii — €att\t aula .S?orsf--str.iltng:, $ct,

John Makke, of Myrton, allowed to comiJoiind for art and part of the
Stouthreif of xij oxen from Adam M^Nele, furth of Librek ; Ife??!, for the
Stouthreif of a horfe from 'William Kennydy : Ifciii, for the Stouthreif of certain
goods of Donald ]\rgillis : Ifet>i, fur common Oppreffion of the lieges dwelling iu
Pennigham. He alfo produced a Refpite for art and part of the Burning of the
Place of Drumflcey. — Sir Gawin Kennydy became furety to fatisfy the parties.

#pprrssion — ^toutljrnf, iv^r.

AXDREAV DuXBAR allowed to compound for art and part of the common
Oppreffion done to Walter IVrcuUocht, in his farms, in the year 1505; taking
three cows from the faid 'S^^alter's mother, to remove from his farm of Corfulochquhan, and for not removing therefrom, but hindering her fervants from labouring
her fai'nis ; Ifev/, for the Oppreffion done to the faid "Walter, in occupying the
houfes of the faid farm for the fpace of four years laft paft, and deftroying her
crops (and flock), viz. to the value of fix fcore bolls of bear and oats, fifteen fcore of
flieeji, and forty cows and ' queys :' Ifem, for Oppreffion done to the faid Walter,
in taking his horfes and riding them to Kirk and market where he pleafed, and
killing one of them : Item, for the Stouthreif of the ' tymmer' of two of his
houfes, within the faid Walter's lands of Corfdochquhan : Ifeiii, for forethought
felony done to the faid Walter and his ' bird," called Patrick IVrcrache, coming
upon the faid Patrick on the road towards the Kirk, chafing him, and breaking
the King's Protection granted to the faid Walter : ItCDf, for the forethought
felony done to the ' plewmen'' of the faid Walter, coming upon them in warlike
manner with a ' lance-fi;af,' and putting them to flight ; and for hindering them
from ploughing the faid land : Ik'v/, for the Oppreffion done to John M'gilhofche,^
coming upon him, and chafing him : Ifefii, for common Ojipreffion of the lieges,
by feizing their ' befi^ial''' and otherwife. — John Dumbar of IMochrum became
furety to fatisfy the parties.

(j^pprrssiirti tl)t ^arrist nnt« ^tililjean of tTjr €\),ipt\ llonal.

Patkik ]Mukhede came in will for the Opprelfion done to the Sacrifl
and Subdean of the Chapel Royal, in the ' fpuil5ie' of the Teind flieaves of Stow.^

' Herd ; shepherd. - Ploughmen. ' Now called Mucklehose, or Maclehose. ■■ ' Aaimalia.'
' ' SuMMA hujus Extractus, k<'.lxxix li.' (L.979.)

1 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 97

APPENDIX.

APPENDIX,

ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE TRIALS WHICH OCCURRED DURING THE
REIGN OF KING JAMES IV.

I. Illustrations selected from the Register of the Privy Seal of Scotland.

The historical value of the Public Records of Scotland has long been universally admitted ; but comparatively few are qualified, and still fewer are inclined,
to undergo the extreme drudgery of wading through a mass of ancient MS.
volumes in quest of original and authentic information. The task Avhich the
Editor had imposed upon himself seemed to demand of him greater exertions
than could reasonably be expected of any author whose opportunities were less
limited. In this view, and to redeem his pledge, he has carefully examined the
entire Records of the Privy Seal, and the Accounts of the Lord High Treasurer,
so far as they embrace the period of these early reigns ; and without enlarging
on the obvious value of the new materials thus collected, he now begs to lay
before the reader the result of an anxious and careful scrutiny. In accomplishing
this desirable object, the limits of this work have necessarily been considerably
encroached on, but it is hoped no one will deem the labour mispent, or the
additional space thus occupied misemployed. The Editor only grudges that he
could avail himself, in this work, of so small a portion of the information which
these invaluable Registers afford.

The reader is once moi-e referred to Mu Tytler's truly valuable Historical
work, in illustration of such passages as do not occur in the ordinary Histories
of Scotland.

Jul. 2, 1488. — Refpite to Patrik of Dunbar, fone and apperand are to Patrik Duiibav of
Kinquhunquhave, Ferguse Mcdowell, Joliniie M., and Jolinne Smytlie, for art and parte of )ie ^laufljtcr
of vmquhile Patrik Mackowloche (M'^Culloche): For ix 5eris to cume to indure.

Oct. 19. — Precept of Remiflioune' to Huchouxe Wallace of Smetliiftoune for arte and
l)arte of Jie ^tit of certane gudis out of Jie Barony of Erliftoune, apoune Walter and MycLel
Wakmyllane, &c., vnto ]te day of cure fouerane lordis Proclaraatioune, maid at Lanark ; ]iat is to fay,
]ie xxix day of Auguft, precedand fe date fairof.

' It is to be understood that all the Remissions in the Prifi/ Sial Record which are quoted in these extracts, were
merely Precepts. The Remission was, in one sense, incomplete, until it had passed the Seals.

VOL. I. I N

98 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1495.

APPENDIX.

Oct. 19 RerailEoune to Huchoune Wallace, brojier to Jolme Wallace of Cragy, ' in

eadem forma et de eadeiii data.'

Jan. 28, 1488-9. — William Mexteth of the Kerse, Archibald of Menteth, his brofer,
Alex'' M. ' for thaim, tliair kyn, and frendis on tlie ta parte, and Robert Broisse of Arthe,
Alexander, Lucas, and Robert Broitre, for thaini and bretlier, kyne, and frendis one the tother parte,'
bound themfelves to abide by tlie Sentence of the Lordis of Council, ' tuiching Jie making of amendis
for ))e ^TaucTjtcr of unKJllJilf 5)ol)ltf, ttje 33rof5t of Slt]be, and tuiching fe making of amite, luf,
and tendiines to be liaid betuix the pairties, in tyrae to come. '

Jan. 27, 1491. — Reraiffion to Johne Tempiltoune for ]ie tljtfttofSe otutputtilT and awaytakin of f e gtlSl'S of vmquhile George Campbele of Lovvdoune, t Jjc *cl)crcf of ^rc, I'e tyme lie was
Stewart to the faid Scheref ; and fpecialy, ]ie tyme Jiat Jie faid Scheref was feyk, and for all crime,
actioune, and accufatioun pat may be imput, &c. (Apitd Are.)

Dec. 7, 1492. — Reniiffion to William Cummyng,- for art and part of the counfel and
afliftance aflbrded i)y him to Alexander Lord Gordoune, in preparing tjif dFirlB of Suil&elil
againll the King; and for all other crimes preceding this date, ' proditoria Tradicione in perfonam
Reci.s, Murthuro, Raptu mulierum, communi furto, et actione regia contra eundem Willielraum
proponenda, penes quandam boxam,'' aurum, argentum et jocalia in eadem contenta, et alia jocalia,
exceptis.'* (Apiid Ahirdciie.)

Nov. 9, 1493. — Remifllon to W1L3AME Gordoune, fone to George Erie of Huiitle, for the
^Taucjtcr of umquhile Robert Stewait, &c.

Jan. 23, 1493-4. — Remiflion to ' Eduard Tayt, for the thiftwife Brclfefltg of tijf 5S(rft of
^tuSttlailtJ, and takin away of certane gudis, gold and filver, fra Sir Wil;oame Juidane, &c.'

Feb. 15.— RemifTion to Johne Herreis, in Bercley, for Jie lUfc of rcrtant IjalltfS' owt of
Dundranane ; and binding Jie men kepand ])aini, &c. (^Apud Kirkcudbrycht.')

Apr. 27, 1194. — Rtmiffion maid to Alexander Lord Gordoun for Jie 33tvin)n0of))e Place
of Jtr^lCllBrncj&t, 111 Uurljaiu ; and for ail actioune and cryme may be imput to him tharfor, &c.
befor ])e xij day of December, 1492, Murthure and Revifching of women exceptit. (Apud Al/erdene.)

Jul. 6. — RemifTion to Johne Forster of Nudre, Henry his brujier, and Johne Lethame,
for art and part of ]ie §latltl)ttv of Will of Dundas and Duncan Dundas ; and for all v])er actionis
to |ie date hereof.

Dec. 28 — RemifTion to James Wardlaw of Ricardtoun, and John his brother, for art
and part of the ^laugljtff of William and Duncan Dundas, committed upon the caufeway of tj[)C
It^igl) Street of CrBfntmrgl), in the King's prefence. (^Apud Edhihurgh.')

Mar. 5, 1494o. — RemifTion to Robert Scot of Dalorian, and Dauid Lawder, for thare
trellbnable ^iHtciTOmimitting with diuerfe perfonis, the Kingis j^efjelll'd ; and for alTillance and
lUSctting of thaim, &c., previous to Nov. 7, 1493.

Apr. G, 1495. — RemifTion to Cuthbert Gordoune, for ])e j^a\tt)OS:\)t fctong done be him

' This Notice lias been obtaineil tVom the Ada Duminorum Concilii, a work IH■ilJtill^' under the Scottish Record
Commission. It uboinids with interesting materials. '' I'rom other entries in the Register, the Editor believes that
this person was Sir William Cmninyngot' Innerellochy (l<night), ' alias MEnrHEMONO Herald.' On Sept. 18, lj07,
he and Christian Piestoune, his wile, got a ('hartcr to the lands of Easier Cullessy, in the shire of I'ife. ^ This

iHiquestionably refers to the box containing King Jajies Ill's money and jewels, as to which so much eiujuiry was
atterward-i made. * Thouias I.owsone got a Precept in tbe same terms as the above. '' Tliis otfeuce was

always punished with severity. All the Princes of the Stuart I'amily were passionately fond of the sports of the
tield ; and Irom numerous entries in the Treasurer's Accounts, it appears that Hawks of tine breeds bore a very high
price, which were deemed of sutUcient value to be presented to Kings and X'rinces.

11 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 99

APPENDIX.

apone Duncane Makadam, in Jie burghe of Are, ]>e tyme of )>e Ayre fairof, 8cc., vnto fe xvj day of
November, 1493. (Apttd Kirkcudbrychl.)

Feb. 9, 1496-7 RemifTion to Archibald ami Johne Ogilvy, fonnis to James Lord Ogilvy

of Erie, for art and part of tbe ^laug]&tcr of vmq''' James Lindiffay, fone to Dauid L., he.

Juii. 10, 1497. — Refpite to Dauid Hume of Wedderburne, and diuerfe vjieris perfonis, to
tbe nowmerof I'(100)names,forthemaflerfull diftruetioune, l}(ntl.m(J,and carting downe of tijc ^lace
of CijurtStounf, pertenyng to Williame Wallace of Cragy : And for tbe l^nl and ^toutjjt of tbe
gudis and inficbt being in the fammyn, for pe tyme ; and for al maner of crime ]iat may be imputt to
])e faid perfonis, in fat mater alanerly. {Per fuhfcriptionem Regis.)

Aug. 7. — Remiffion to Dauid Carmychell and Johne Inglis, for arte and parte of fe cruel
^laurljtfr of vmquhile James Lindefay : And for ]iair treflonable paffinginlngland, and rommonpil
luitl) 3>ngIiSeaie«, and being at |)e Kingis home, &c. {Aprtd Norehame.')

Nov. 17. — Refpite to Patrik M'Kowloche (MacCullocb), for art and part of fe S^\\xt\}n
and Jp1aucl)tcv of vmq''" Archibald M. of Arduale, committed ' vnder filence of nycht,' &c.

Jan. 26, 1497-8. — Remiffion to Hugh Rose of Kilrawok, and eleven otbers, for art and
part of the cruel ^latig^&tf r of Alexander and John Noble, a Chaplain called Schir Maurice, and William Gawane, committed within the Kirk-yard of the Cathedral Church of Rofs. (Apiid Inuernys.')

Mar. 31, 1498. — Remiffion to Johne Nelesoune, and vther thre perfonis, duelland in CulrofTfchire, within ]ie fcherefdome of Perthe, for the jFdrtljorljt fellong done be thaim, in cumpany with
Robert Stewart, apone Sir Andro Mafoune, Abbot of Culrosse, and bis complices, at Blareball :
And for forthocbt fellony done be the faid Jobne Nelefoune apone Robert Rede, at the Abbay
of Culrofe. ' Deliberat. per Dominum,^ Patricio Blacater militi.'

May 9. — Remiffioune to Walter Buchanan of pAT Ilk, Patrik his brujier, and Jobnne
Blare, for pair inobediens and contempcioune done to pE KiNGis henes, in pe rC nianilll diuerfe tymes
(ra J)l^ ^oSttS aganis his ennemyis of SlIglailB, &c.

Jun. 12. — Remiffioune to Thomas CiAlbraithe of Balkindroche, James his biuper, and
Andro Wawane, for art and part of pe ^laurl)tcr of Jobnne Myllare.

Jul. 11. — Remiffion to Richart Were, and viij perfonis with him, for art and part of the
^laucljtcr of vmq''' NicboU Were, duelland in Halhill ; committit apoune forthocbt fellony.

Nov. 11. — Remiffioune to Cuthbert Blare, and vper viij perfonis, for ])e dTortJjOrljt ffloilg
done be )iame apone Alexander Pidcon (Punton ?) of pat Ilk," and William his fone, 8cc. {Per Julcriptionem Regis.)

Dec. 10. — Remiffion to Wil of Douglas of Caveris, and Wil and Archibald Dowglas,
for there treffonable Ulltfrcominon^JU totfl) 1>C iltbcUiS ot iLcbl'lI, he.

Jan. 20, 1498-9. — A Lettre of Remitt and forgevinnefs to Johnne of Dumbar, fone and
apperand are to Jobnne of Dumbar of Mocbrum, and to bis feruitouris, Wil3am Fleinyn, and James
Makcowloclie, and Johnne Core, quhilk war with Elizabeth Kennedy pat tyme fclio tuilt aiuap
tfrtanc tlloilf|), extending to pe fowme of xliij li. gold and filuer, a filuer fclc, and vper finall gere,
liad be bir in keping of a R(everend) fader in God, G(eorge Vans) 33tSrI)op of iSallotoaj), &c.

Feb. 14. — Remiffion to Litle Johne Rorysoun, with pe Larde of Snayde, for pe JfortJ)ori)t
ftloMi; done be him apone Donald Ferguffoun of Yle, he. (Apud Dumfre/e.)

' Viz. George Schaw, Abbot of Paisley, Lord High Treasurer, ^ There was a family in Ayrshire of the

name oi' Pilcon ; but from subsequent entries, it would appear this individual was Punton or Pontoun of that Ilk.

100 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1499-1500.

APPENDIX.

Feb. 18 Remiffion to Alexander Jarding, grandfon (' nepoti') and heir of John J. of Apilgerthe, William, his biotlier, Nicholas, fone of Humphrey J. of Bawgray, Edward J. and Nicholas,
his Ion, &c. for Jfoi'CtJjOugijt lelottg done to the fervant of Alexander Kirkpatrik and the Inhabitants OF Dryfeholme, &c. {Apud Drumfreije.)

Remiffion to JonxE Hutoune, in fe Syde, Gawine and Johns Dryfefdale, and four others,
' for ])are being aganis pE Kingis hienes in ]ie 33attrII autt iFeMltf coramittit htiXfUt ^trtUcXitt,
one Sand Barnaheis day ; and for all crimes and actionis pat may be imput to paim pairthrow, &c.
vnto fe xxvj day of Januare, 1488-(9) jeris alanerly. (^Apud Drumfrefe.) ' Spectan. Domino de
Cokpule.'

Feb. 25 Remiffion to Thom Huciionsone and Johne Carynis, in )ie Copwod, for arte and

parte of }e 33jjnij.nig of Jtotl)fcrguge, belangand to pe Larde of Bondby (Bomby,) &c. (Apud
Drumfrefe.)

Mar. 2. — Remiffion to \V1L5AME Adare of Kilhelt, and Thomas Adare, for the jFot'
t])Ot])t fcUonj) done apon Andro Mcdowell of Elrig.

Mar. 4. — Remiffion to Sir Alexander M<'culloche of Mertoune, kn^ and xxvj others,
for art and part of the JlJuvm'ng: anil ' S^crc^cjjfp' of IDunSfefp antf STviHuclI, in company with the
Laird of Garthlane (Gartliland.) (^Apud Wiytoune.)

Reniiffioune to (Sir) Alexander M'cullocii of Mertoune, and xxix vperis perfonis, for
arte and parte of tlie JSfvngng anti iUfing of SunSfecg anU SiiiiufU, ia cumpany with Jie Larde
of Garthlane, and all vper actionis done be J>ame vnto J)e date hereof.'

Mar. 13. — Remiffioune to Cuthbert Lord Kilmawris, and xx" vjier perfonis, for arte and
parte of ])e dFovtI)OcI)t fcXloilB done be Jmuie apoune Gilbert Dunlop of Haupland : And pe violent
ijUVttng of Downald Robifoune, cummand fra pE Kingis Hoifl :^ And for al vper actionis, &c. done
and committit pe tyme pai tnke pE Tolbuythe of Irwin ; and al actioune and curamyng pairapoune,
pat day except.

Apr. 5, 1499. — Remiffion to Wil^ame Trumbull of Mynto, and to Archibald T., fone to
vmq^"' Jolme T., for the ^laitcJjttr of vniq''^ Johne of Rutherfurd : And for ]iair treffonable paffing
and iK fin at) It til J) t'n ^nglanil, &c. to pe day of pe makin hereof. (Apud Striuetin.)

Aug. 18. — Remiffion to Andro Blacatar of that Ilk, and Niniane Nefbit, for the Jf Ofs
tl)OtT)t dTcIonj) done be thaim apone Philp Nesbit of Wester Nesbit, and Johne his bruper,
Patrik Nefbit in Mongols Wall, &c. : And for pe cruell ^laurjttr of vmq''' pe faid Johne Nefbit, and
Philip Nefbit in Mongols Wall, apone forthocht felony committit : And for pe jTpuljCtnjJ of pair
gudis, &c. : And of all crimes pat in onywife may be imput to thaim for the committing of the faid
Slauchter and forthocht felony, tn t^t ISingl^ palate, and refidence, quhare his hienes was personalis
prefeut : And of pe Gift to pe faid Andro and Niniane and pair airis of the efchete of all gudis, movable
and vnmovable, landis, &c. pertaining to the Kingis hienes, be the occafiou of the faid Slauchter, &c.

Nov. 6. — Remiffion to William Blakhall of that Ilk, for the ^laur]&ttv of Patrick
TaljOur alias Richartfoun, dwelling in Inuerowry, &c. (Apud Spynie.)

Feb. 3, 1499-1500. — Remiffione to Williame Hakket of Petfurane, Thome Hakket his
fonne, and Thome Lathangy, for art and part of the ^lautljtct of Robert Carnys.

Feb. 20. — Remiffion for Patrik M'Gregare, remittand hira the ^laurijtcv of vraq'^ Gillafpey M'Nelufe, &c.

' This seems to be the same with the preceding, but is entered in Scottish, &c. * Host, army ; probably in

returning from the ' Feyld committit besyde Striuelin.'

13JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * loi

APPENDIX.

Feb. 27. — A Refplt to Jhone M'Brar of Lochbo and al his complices, for ]>e ^tvidjm
of ©togn ?llanSoun : For a ^ere ; exceptand Trefone. (Per Sulijbriptionem Regis.)

A Ilefpite to Lachlane M'Lane of Doward, Johne M'Clane of Coil, Donald M'Clane
eym ' to J>e faide Laucblane, and fair complices, ' in fimili mode quo antedicta.' (Per Sub/criptionem
Regis.)

Jun. 9, 1500. — RemifTion to Gilleise Makpaule (M'Phaill) and Patrik Makbane for art
and part of the ^'laufj^tfr, ^iniKiig, lt\abi)ng, antt (0pprc53iouit vponne the Kyngis lieges, in
Lochabir.

Aug. 17 — A Letter of Gift to Adam Barde, Lochmanne,'^ of })e Gift of twa nierkis worthe
of land, Hand nixt Drongane, within ]ie fcherefdome of Are, for al )ie dais of his life ; for his ^tvilUC
of StoftmaitSrljip to (be) done as vse and cuftnm is, in tymes bigone, withe all pi-ofiittis pertenyng
]>airto.

Oct. 16 — A refpite to David Lindissay for his tressonable being with ^Icjranttcr vmq'e
ISui^e of 9H)an» &c. and for al v])er actionis conimittit be him vnto fie day of fe Kingis Coronatioune : And for fe :Sfaxi\)Oti}t dFtUonj) and ^aintgufefeiii done apon Andio Carmichell, Alex''.
Dikifoun, and Schir Johne Carmichell, Chapellan, done after )ie tynie of Jie faid Coronatioun, &c. :
' Dwatur. pro xix annis.'

Jan. l-l, 1500-1. — Protectiovme for Schir Baldred Blacater his landis and gudis, ' in
communi forma ; pro toto tempore vite fue duratur. &c.'

A Letter maid to })E Lord Drummond and Schir Williame Murray of Tulebardin,
knicht, fare kyn, men, frendis, and feruandis, for hertlynes to be had amangis paim in (tyme) to cum,
Renuncand and forgevaud to ])e faid kin and frendis of baithe Jie faid parties, al actions and crimes
of [le JSirngngtS of jT liJirk of ittoncinavtJ, and ^IaufJ)ter of ]ie Kingis liegis at )i' tyme,^ 3Sci)fe,
Mc^CttiS, and ilnttvroiniminilig with Jie perfonis beand at )ie Kingis borne for pe faid crimes, and
al vjier rnaner of actionis concerning Jiat mater, or pat may be imput to paim : Chargeand pE
Justice and Juftice Clerkis confider pe perfonis being in pe Rollis, inditit for pe actiones abone expremit belangis, and baithe the laidis partiis, and inditit pairfore, pat pai diftroy and admd pe famyn ; and
in tyme to cum, to tak nane of pe faidis perfonis in dittay, nor accufe, in judgement nor vtwithe, in
ony wife ; difchargeing ]ie faidis otficiaris of pare officis in pat parte, concerning pe faid actionis.

Jan. 23. — Remiffioun to W1L5AME Schort for pe tJifttof^SttliStl-urtton of pe gudis of Patrik
Boyis, i\}t tjimc l)c lag bit!) \)\i luiffc.^

Jan. 25. — lleniiflioun to Robert Mure, fone to Adam Mure of Caldwell, knicht, for pe
^laiujtf r of vmq''^ Patrik Boure : And for pe ^ssxtiiOtljt ftlloiTg done apone the Lard of RafTtoune.'

Feb. 20. — A Refpite and Licence to Andro Maluill to pa5 (it jJilgrtinagr to Jpaittt
UamtS tn ^alicia, &c. : To endure fra pe fecund day of March next to cum, quhil'^ his returnyn and
cumming hame again within the realme, and xl dais paireftir.

' Uncle. ' Hangman, executioner. See Dr Jamieson's Dictionary, &c. ' Old PitscoUie thus notices

this horrible affair. ' In the mean tyme the Drusimondis burnt the Kir.K of Monivaikd, qubairin \ras six scoir of
MuRRAYEs, with their wives and cbildraine; and few escaped thaiifra, hot war all aither burnt or slaine, except on
(one) David Murray. Quhilk fact the King puuisched condignlie, thairefter ; for be headed (beheaded) monie of
the principall aotouiis tbairof, at Stirling — Lin<lsai/'s Uist. JJahjcWa Edit. i. 249. Reference may be made to
Douglas's Peerage, 1st edition, voce Perth, for an ample account of this cruel and atrocious act. He adds, that
William, Master of Drumjiond, was apprehended and sent prisoner to Stiiliiiy, where he was tried, convicted, and
executed, in 1511. ' These entries are very frequent in the Records of Justiciary and Privy Council. See also

Oct. 13, 1505. Mlalstonofthat Ilk. •'Until.

102 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1501-3.

APPENDIX.

Mar. 17. — Reraiffion to Dauid Hume of Wedderburne, kn', and eight others, for art and
part of tlie ^lailgfjtrv of Jolm Lowdoune. (Apud Edinburghe.)

JNIar. 20. — Remiffion to Archibald Heslihop, vtherwais callit Sc/iir Siiythe, for )ie l^r^^rt
of iht l\uf5fffltrtlB, ]'e Kingis Rebellis, and jiaircomplicis, being at liis liorne : And for a^Sfetanrc
gevin to Jiaini, in felling of met and drini< to ])ame, Jie tyme ]'ai war at ])e home ; and al crime fat
may be iniput to fe faid Archibald in ony wife ]iairfor, alanerlie niakand fatisfactioune to ])e partiis
corapleiiieand.

May 2, 1501 Refpite to Johne of Kincaid for the ^lawtjbtci' of vmq''" David Mafone

and for all vther actionis, he. : For ane sere efter tlie date hereof.

May 11. — Remiflioune to W1L5AM Murray and George Tayt, for the 5'laucl)tfV of Archibald M'kowloche of Ardvvell, committit apon forthocht fellony, he.

Jun. 14. — Leltre to ScherefKs in tliat parte for to furamoud the Armestrangis, to the
nombir of Ixx, to compere at Selkirke, the xxj day of Junij, to vndirly the laws for the ^laurj&tf rtS
of Johnne Blacburnne, &c. : Certifying tliamo, tliat and' tliay compere nocht the faid day, thai falbe
denuncit the Kingis Rebelles, and put till his home, &c. (Per fuhjcriptionem Regis.)

A Letter to the Erle of Boithvile, as the Kingis Lieutenant, to ratSf i\yt aiSfngi^ Ictgcd
for to pafs vpoune the faidis Urmt^trangig, Rebellis, thare afliflaris, parte-takaris, and refettaris,
and to perfewe thame to deid ; and to tak thare gudes, as efchete, quliarefumeuerthai ma be fundin :
And gift' ony perfones nocht beand at the liornne beis fundin takand thare parte, tliat tliai niaa be perlewit, takin or flain, as the principallis, witlioute ony cryme to be iniput thareifore, in tyme to cum ;
And proclamatioune to be maid, that nanne of tlie Kingis lieges Refiet tliaim, or vjier wais fupport
tliame, ynder the pane of deid. (Per fuhfcriptionem Regis.)

Ang. 5, 1501. — Refpitt to Morise Buchannan, fone to Walter B. of fat Ilk, Patrik biuj>er
to ]ie faid Walter, Johnne, and Morife B. Androfoune, for art and part of J)e ^laugljtri* of vrnq'""
Johnne Dormondfoune, for Jie quhilk thai ar at oure fouerane lordis home, &c. unto the day of tiie
making of the faid Refpitt, &c. : To endure for iiij monethis nixt to cum, eftir the date hereof, and
farther, for the Kingis will to endure.^ {Perjuhfcrrptionem Regis.)

Dec. 7 — Remiffion to William Hay (Master of Errol), fon and heir apparent of William Earl of Erole, and three others, for ;Stoutljrflf of 31 ©jrf It from Sir William Keithe of Iniierpgy
kn*. — William Craufurd of Federay, Gilbert Hay, and five otiiers. alfo got Precepts of Remiffioune for the fame crime. {Apud Abirdeite.)

Mar. 2, 1501-2. — Remiflioune to James Stewart of Garthilj, for the ^laut]&trr of vmq'''
Andro Caldale, &c. to the date hereof.

Mar. 21. — Letter to Alexander Erle of Huntlie, Thomas Lorde Fraser of Lovate,
and WiLLlAME Monro of Fowlis, makand ]>ame or twa of fame; coniunctlie, ]>e faid Erie beand
ane, Commiflaris to ^ctt ])E Kingis iLantll^ of EotljallVt and iWaluillOlf, hand within the fclierefdonie of Inuernes, for ]ie terms of fyve seris, entarand at fe ternie of Witfunday nixt to cum, to trew
menne, for )ie plenyfing fairof, and expelling of brokin-mcnne furtlie of ]>o fainyn ; and to fett fe landis
of CogfatI), asSrnt.and all vfer feriiie-landis fat pertenit to fovqiull iHaIUot't< of Jlriui5,and now
being in ]}e Kingis liandis tlirow fe being of ))e faid Torquell his Rebel!, fugitive for fe lavvis, and at
his home for al Jie tyme ])at f ai fall happin to be in f e handis of his liiones, be refl'oune foiifaid ; with
power to gif a parte fairof to gude trew menne, for fair gude feruice, for f e fpace as fe faid Erle fal
think expedient for fE Kingis honour. (Apud Striueling.)

' An, if. ' 1 1th April, 1500, a. r. 1 1, Precept of Remission was granted to them for the said crime.

UJac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 103

APPENDIX.

May 23, 1502.— Remiflion was granted to Alexander Wellem of Wodwray, for his
treafonably abiBfiig fiom tljt Uin^ii MaiU at agtounc, Jf c.

May 28.— Refpitt to Alexander Lord Hume, and diuerfe vfer perfonis, fpirituale and ternporale, contenit in ]>e famyn, pare men, kynne, freyndis, allya, tennandis and feruandis : To endure
for xl dais efter ))e laid Alexandris liarae-cummyne.' (Apitd Edinhurghe.)

Sep. 14.— Refpitt and Affouerance to Ewin Alanfone for his being at ]ie Kingis home, and for
all vfer actionis, to tilin Sauflff to ^e King, his Lordis of Counsale, or to fE Erle or Huntlie,
to ^tt'rllll, or ony vper places : To endure for xx dais.

Feb. 13, 1502-3 Lettre maid to Schir Johnne Ramsay of Trarinzeane, knycht,"

makand him Capttaiie of fe Place and |palace o£ Einlttftatu, and ISepave of \e Parke, loche,
medois, warde, garding, and ;arde of pe famyn, for al Jie i'pace of nyne 5eris ; with power to mak
Conflables, jevellouris,^ portaris, and ofer officiaris nedeful fur ]>e keping of Jie laid plaice, park, loche,
medois, warde, garding and farde : For fe keping of ])e quhilkis, oure fouerane lorde affignis to fe
laid Sr (Johniie) the fovme of xxiiij li. land, ])at is to fay, ten pund land of Kyncavil, and xiiij li. land
of fe Norlhe aUirris, hand within pe loidefchip of Linlithqwfcliire, withe all dewiteis aud proffittis, as
vfer Capitanis had of before ; with power to mak fubtenandis in ])e faides landis.

Feb. 21. — Remiflion to James Marschale, for the ^laugljttr of Thomas Scherewynd,
committed four years fince. (Apud Edinhurghe.')

Feb. 25. — Refpeit to Robert Herise, fone and apperand are to George Herife of Tarrauciity,
George and Robert H. bruder and fone to the faid Robert, and Thomas Skalis, for the ©jpvtSSl'ounc
done to James Crechtoune of Frendract knicbt, in the llojtljjing' ai rfftanc \)OVit of his, &c. : To
indure for the fpace of xl dais, and faireftir induring oure fouerane lordis will, quhilP thai be warnit
of foure dais ; with this claufe, relefcheing of ])aim of ]>e home, taking of faiin to J)e Kingis pece,
and geving Jiaira of ])e wand Jiairof.''

May 11, 1503.— Refpit maid to Maister Duncane Makke, Andro Akerfane, Litil Gilbert
Makke, and Jolmne Clerk Makke, for art and part of ])e Uirntng of ]>« ?4.?ouSe aiiB place of
iBunSfeai), in cumpany with Alexander M'culloch of Mertoune, kniclit : And for art and part of
))e JftElf of certane gudis being pairin \e fammyn tym, &c. : To endure for xix jeris. Apud Kirkcudbricht, per Unas Signaturasjubfcript. per Regem.

May 15. — Refpitt for Johnne Makke of Myretgune, and fyve vferis, for art and part of
|>e 38frm'ltg of \t ?i>ouSe ailtr |)late oC IBungftfB ; and for all crime ))at may be imput to ])aim or
ony of lianif, fur je iiiid actioune of ffyre allanerly : To endure for ))e fpace of xix ^eris. (^At IVigtoune.)

Jul. 3. — RemilHon to John Stewart Makarchbald, and 59 others, for art aud part of
the 2l55t'5tancc Cjifacn by them to ^CiU ^ttinart,' in his Thefts and Stouthreifs. (^Apud Fertile.)

Aug. 11. — Precept maid to James Lorde Hammiltoune of fie ©ffi'te of ^UStvj) (Justiciary), within the boundis and ^\t of ictrailt ; with power to gefe Remiffionis aud Refpittis
to al perfonis Inhabitantis ])e fammyn, for al crimes, except Treflbune in ])E Kingis perfoune : To
endure for all the dais of his life.

Aug. 25. — Reniiflioune to Thomas Maknare for arte and parte of |)e JlJtrm'ng of \t
^OUS anto |Mace of Sililcjime : And for arte and parte of Jie ^lautj)tcf of vaiq'^' Dauid Men^eis,
Johne Meujeis, Johnne Kirkpatrik, Andro Daliell, Thomas MakcuUoche, and Thomas Myllare :

* He was frequently employed in Negotiations with Kngland between 1 4-9.5 to 1501. See lii/mer^s Padera, xii.
348, xiii, 45, (it, d2. Wuvd'n Peerage, i. 7.'j3, &c. ' Tlie lorleited Lokd liomwELL. See this Collection,

Oct. 8, 1488, &c. vol. i. p. • 4. ' Jailers. Fr.Javilleur. ' Houghing, ham-stringing. ' Until

' For the illustrations of this ceremony, see Nov. 18, 1311 ; Oct. 11, 1531, Nulicc ; and Jul. 22, 1566, Note.
' Several other Remissions were granted for the same olfeuce at various dates.

104 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1505.

APPENDIX.

And for all v])ir actionis, &c., Treffoune in Jie Kingis perfoune, Murthure, and RefFafmg of womeae
except. (Apud Edinhurghe.)

Oct. 2. — Remiffion to John Myretoun of Randlestoune, for art and part of the
dfomiile ^btltiction (' JSapttig')' of Elezabeth Sym, relict of John Elder in Kingifbernys. (Apud
Cowper.)

Nov. 2. — Remiffion to John Spens of Lathalland, for cafling down and aiStvomiig tljc
grain of Baward, belanging to Sir Andrew Wod of Largo knt ; and thereby oppressing the laid
Andrew : And for ^jjutljit of ii)t JTctnU SljfahfS of the laid grain.

Nov. 2 and li, and Dec. 10. — Reniifllons to Alexander Inglis of Tervet, Johne Mailvile of Carnbe, John bis fon, Laurence Schethun, and five others, for art and part of the <©pprcSSton
done to Thomas Butlaire of Rumgalli, in eating and dellroying certain grain belonging to the faid
Thomas. (Ajmd Cvpriim.)

Nov. 28. — Remiffion to Adam Scott in Tufchelaw for treafonably breaking Prifon, and his
Warde within the Caftle of Edinburghe. (Apud Edinbmghe.^

Dec. li. — Remiffion to Patrick Dunbare of Kilconuuhare, for i\c5etttng Patrick his
fone and heir apparent, and Fergus Makdowell, the time they were at tlje Jovn ; and for ^wtcrtom^
munilig with them. (Ajnid Striuelin.)

Sep. 9, 1504-. — Remiffion to Thomas Tayt, fone of William Tayt in the Parifli of Culvene,
for ait and part of the JJurnfng of J}avSanoc|)t J And for art and part of the ^laugi&tcr of John
Sinclare, in the year 1402 (1502 ?) (Apud Druwfrefe.')

Dec. 10. — Remiffion to Mark Ker of Dolphinstoun, and three others, for forethought
felony done to John Rutherfurd and others. (Ajmd Jedburg/ie.)

Remiffion to Robert Oliuere, called Bob with fe dog, for treafonable ^ntfrtommuning
and affifling Dauid Oliuere, called Na-gude-PreiJf, and John Oliuere, called Cugeare, being at the
horn. (Ajnid Jtdburghe.^

Jul. 20, 1505. — Refpitt maid to Vmfra Bell, and Ixxxiiij vjieris, for all maner of actionis,
crimes, and offenfis quhatfumeuer, done be faim in ony tynie bigane, on to ])e day ))ai gat ])E Kingis
grace, in his Juflice-Are of Drumfreife, immediatlie haldin eftir ])e jl^at'tl of (JFSltlialf : To endure for
fe Kingis will. (Subfcript.pcr Regem.)

Oct. 11. — Remiffion to Sir Williame Frafere of Phillorthe kn', for Refetting, fupplying, and
intercommuning with fundry of the King's Rebels. (Apud Abirdene.)

Oct. 13. — ' Preceptum Remiffionis Andree Warnoche, pro Comnruni iLittgatlont cum
ligeis Regls, et pro tfonuntint ©pprcSSt'onC racione Dicte Litigacionis : Et pro jaaptna vnius le
buge/iaff- tempore dicte Litigationis : Et pro furtiva (hllructione bonorum quondam Johannis Michel,
tempore quo coucubuit cum fua vxore, &c. (Apud Lanark.f

Oct. 24. — Remiffion to Alexander Pantoune, for the forft5ougl)t ftlonuS done by him
to Henry Forbes of Kynnellare, vmq''' Malcolm Forbes, and the Chamberlain of Arbro', and their
accomplices, at Mekle Echtfy : And for the l^uvtfng of Alexander Kay: And for art and part of
the felony and ' jiJamtSultUfn' done to the Laird of Ovvdny :* And for the forethouglit felony and

' ' liaplus,' which at this period did not signify Rape, but ' revissing,' or forcible abduction. ' This seems

to have bten some warlike instrument, a bill: apparently from O. l"r. bovi/c, bougmii, biiiih/c, which, however, is
interpreted to lie a bolt or arrow (javelin) wiih a great head. — Cotgravc. The buge-staff is likely to have been a
sort of poll-axe oi ' Jeddart-stalV.' — .See also Dr Jamiison. ' The present entry is rather singular, and it has

been thought proper to insert it as it occurs in the Kecord. .See these extracts, Jan. 23, 1500-1. ' On Aug. 10,

1511, Kannald Owdny of that Ilk, and Isobella Pantoune, his spouse, got a Charter from the Crown of the lands
and mill of Owdny, &c. Reg. Seer. Sig. IV. f. 184.

1

18JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 105

APPENDIX.

<@ppredj$t01I (lone to tlie fervants of the Laird of Tulydeft": And for Opprefling the faid Laird, and
iHutt'latfng certain calfs belonging to him : And for ^tOUtljrcU of a ilieep from David Thomfone :
And for common Oppreflion, &c. (^Apud Abirdene.)

Oct. 3L — Remiffion to Andrew Tulydeff of that Ilk, for ©T^j^xtiiioxi done by him to
William Turing of Foverne, in deftroying his ploughs and certain houfes, &c. {Apud Ahirdene.)

Nov. G. — Remiffion to Robert Arbuthnot of that Ilk, and three others, for Common
©ppveSSi'on done by them to vmq'« Elizabethe Sibbald Lady Balcony, and Sir Andrew Lundy
of Balgony, kn'. (^Apud Brechin.')

Nov. 10 — Refpitt maid to Dauid Bonare, for fe ^lauc^tcv of vmquhile Thomas Multrare
of Markinche : To endure for half a 3ere next to cum. (^Sub/cript. per Regem.)

Nor. 23. — Refpitt to Johne Maklane of Lochboy, and alj his kynne, frendis, tennandis
and feruandis, for all maner of actionis vnto fe day of jie date of fis Refpitt, and for twa monethis to
endure. (Siib/cripf. j)erTiKGEM. Apud Edinburghe.)

Dec. 18. — A Refpitt maid to Thomas Story ffor his trefTonahle paffing, Jafmait^ng, and
duelling within fe realms of SSnglantI, baithe in tyme of pece and weire, without Licence of ))E
KiNGis hienes, &c. : To endure for pe fpace of nyntene jeris next to cum. {Subfcript. per Regem.)

Jan. 4, 1505-6 — A Remitt maid to Hew Lord Montgomery, John his bruder, John Montfoid, Robert Ruffale, Walter Lyne, and Edward Maxwell, for all actioun and cryme \sA may be impute
to Jiaim of fe 3Ke55ft, and Supple, (ntcrrommcngn with fe faidis aSelJclU'iS, of ony tyme bigane.
(Sub/bn'pt. vfjiepi-a.')

Eo die. — Lettre of Remit maid to Archbald Erle Ergile, Colyne Maister of Ergil,
and xxxj vjieris perfonis, fair feruandis, for ]>e latSitt, Itttf rrommoitglT, and :$upple gevin to pe faid
iHafetrr of itlontgomcrg, George Railftoune, and James Striueling, ]>e Kingis Rebellis foirfaid.
(Sttb/cript. vtjiipra.)

Jan. 23. — Lettre maid vndir ]>e Priue Sele, direct to Laxjchlane Makgilleone of DowARD, andix vtheris landit menne within ])e Ills, ehargeand jiaim pat jiai have na intrometting nor difponyng withe ony Kirkis, fermes, nialis, proffittis pertenand to $oi)nt 3Bl)5ri&op of ^lii anV Com«
mentlatavt of fScoImcfeill, without tak or Licence of hym ; and als prayand Jiaim to help and fupple
pe faid Bifchop, his factouris and feruandis, in pe gadering and vptakin of pe farayu. (^Subscript, per
Regem.)

Jan. 29. — Lettre of Remitt maid to Donald Makranald Vane, and generally to all vper
personis, his tennandis, duelland apone his propir landis, and all bis familiaris and feruandis now
being with hym in howfliald, Remittand to him pe rancour of pe Kingis hart and all actioun pat
he has or may have again pame or ony of pame for all maner of crimes of CrcSSoim, ^lautjter,
dftrf, 9Sttf, or vper actionis or ofFenfis quhatfumeuir, committit or done be paim or ony of jiaini, in
ony tyme bygane, before pe day of pe dait heirof. (Apud Edinbiirghe, Subscript, per Regem.)
' Gratis Coraiti de Ergile.'

Feb. 22. — Remiffion to Thomas Law, junior, in Glafgw, for art and part of the JTljfft,
' vnius paris oraculorum de le curell^ cum vno annulo auri,^ et vno le pendes cinguli,^ from Ifobella
Huchonfone. (Subscript, per Regem.)

Apr. 18, 1506. — Remiffion to William Lord Borthuik and eleven others for the ^fotitj&»

' Coral mass-beads. ^ Guld ring. ' Petidanls, or hanging ornaments belonging to a zone or girdle.

See these Extracts, Mar. 11, ljOG-7.

VOL. I. -j- O

106 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1506-7.

APPENDIX.

vitl oC rcrtatlt ' ijldhii,' furth of the Mocft of (tFnUMg, pertaining to Sir Oliver Sinclare of
Rofling kn' ; and for the iHuttlattOtl of William Adamfone. {Apud Edhihurghe.)

Apr. 24. — Refpitt maid to Johne Erle of Craufurd to pas in his ptlgvtmagc to ^attct
^oljnc of SlmcaS, or vjier pairtis he5ond fey; fra his paffing furtlie of his realme quhill' his againe
cummyn in f>e fanimyn and fourety dayes paireftir. (Stibscript. per dominum Regem, apud Edinhurghe )

May 10. — Remiffion to William Brovne alias Gilliam Tawbomare for the Sifaucj^tcr of
Patrick Harpare. {Apud Edinburghe.)

May 28. — Remiffion to Gilbert Tuedy for art and part of the ^laucljtfr of CPtitoarti
Itjutltarc of poImwBr, committed fix years fince. (Apud Peblis.)

Jun. 4. — Refpit maid til Andro Wode of Largo, knycht, for ]ie JSfff of atte anftfv anlJ
faijjU fra vmq'= Johne of Bonkill, in fe fea ; and for all vfer actionis and crymis committit be him
vnto ]>e day of ]>e dait hereof. (Apud Edinburghe, per Jignatiiram manu Reg is Jubscript.\

Jun. 11 and 16. — Remiffion to Sir Symon Prestoune of that Ilk, kn', Alexander Naper,
and Robert Douglas, for art of the (@ppi'r^dton done to John Lord Somervel, and John S. : And
for art of bvralttnj tflC ISltltg;'^ Protcrtt'on, granted to them in occupying the Lands of Guttaris and
Gilmertoun : And for the §toutJ)ricf of certain horfes furth of the lands of Gilmertoun ; and for all
action, &c. (Apud Edr.)

Jun. 22. — Saufconduet maid to (Schir) Wi lliam Tyrwit, kn'., Inglisman, & xvj Inglismen
with hym, to cum in pilgratjiage to ^aittt f.iniant.'' (Suhfcript. per Regem, upiid Edinburghe.)

Jul. 1. — Remiffion to Andrew Chaxcellare, and Johne Bere, for abfcondiiig with the
' bludy-hand' with Gilbert Tuedy, after the g^laurj&tCf of CFttuavtl ftjuntarc of PolmuBf , committed by the faid Gilbert ; and for art and part thereof. (Apud Lanark.)

Jul. 16. — Refpitt maid to Donald Makewin Makkaroly of Clanlayne, for all maner
of actionis ; to endure for xl dais next after )ie next feff, of Lamraes. (Siib/cript. per Regem, aptid
Edinburghe.)

Nov. 12. — Remiffion to Adam Tornbule of BuUirwell, for Kcfiettt'ng, Supplying, and Intercommuning with SHilltam Curnliult of IWpilto, and Mark, Edward, and Walter T., his accomplices, being Rebels and at the horn. (Apud Jedburghe.)

Jan. .3, 1506-7. — Lettre of Licence made to Archbald Erle of Ergile, and Hew Lord
Montgumery to Intcrroininoun, and gif ^tiitti, fupple, and fortefy with mete and drink, George
RAlL.sTOUNEaud James Stkiueling, beand at ]>e Kingis home for ))e Kxil'ttttjj; of William Cunyngham, Crohinar of 5UenfrcU), in pe executione of his office ; and als with Johne, Master of
Montgumry, fone and apperand aire to ))e faid Hew, quhill fe next feft of Palme Sonday. (Subscript, per Regem, apud Edinburghe.)

Jan. 4. — Remiffion to Laurence Cowtis, in Ruthvene, for art and part of the treafonable
3)nSurrfct(ou against tljc ISing;, coming with Alexander, Earl of Huntlie, then Lord GorDOUNE, in an Army at iBunitettl. (Apud Edinburghe.)

Jan. 28. — Refpitt to Archibald and Johne Heriot for art and parte of J>e ^laurljttv of
vmq''' 3oI)llC dFtntounr , of tj^at 3)Ift : To endure for a ,ere ; and forjier, for fe Kingis will. (Subscript, per Regem, apud Edinburghe.)

•' Until. ^ Such Warrants were by no means infrequent at this period. Many Nobles and Lairds of Scotland also

obtained leave to go in Pilgrimage to Canterbury, (to the shrine of St Thomas a Becket,) and to France and Spain, &c.

20JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 107

APPENDIX.

Feb. 8. — Refpitt maid to Johne Kennedy of Blarequhan, kniglit, Adame Rede of Starquhite, and Maifler Vehtred Adunnale, to pas iu fair ^j^tlgrailiagr to ^anct CljomaS o£ Canttr=
6urg,' in Ingland, and S'anct Jiol)nc of ^XtttHi, tit jFrancf ; fra jiair paffing furth of |ns realme
qutiill" tbare returnyn agane in pe famyn, and xl dayis faireftir. (^Apud Edinburghe.)

Feb. 28. — Remiffion to Sir John Forman, knight, and xxiiij othere, and all other perfons
being in company with the Archbishop of Glasgow and the faid John, in the Monastery of
Jedburghe, the time of the ^laugjbtf r of Thomas Rutherfurd, for the faid Slaughter ; and for the
' l^creSCJbtp' of certain goods from the faid Thomas, committed by the faid perfons in the'faid Monastery, at the time forefaid. (Per Siynetum datum ad reqitijitioneiii domini Regis.)

Mar. 11. — Remiffion to Tho.m as Law, junior, for the ^toutljrtef ' I'wJM* /e pendes 50«e,ponderis dimedie vncie argenlV ^ from Elizabeth Huchefoune. (Apud Striueling.')

Apr. 5, 1507. — Paffport to Bernard Dromone, Trumpetter, and four others, his companions,
to come from Bononia to ferve the King with their trumpets and mufical inftruments.'' (^Sub/cripit.
per Begem apud Edinburghe.')

May 31. — Letter of Bail^ery to Johne Maister of Athole, makand him Bailee of all and
findrie fe landis, rentis, and polfeffionis with Jiair pertinentis, pertenyng to vmq'^' Alexander Robertsoune of Strowane, and now to the Kingis hienes, threw reffoune of Ward, &c. (^Subfcripf.
per RegemJ)

Jul. 6. — Remiffion to John Mt'PERsoNE, for art and part of the iJurning of iijt |3Iatt of
Siiltine, and ^omittOe committed therein, in company with Neill Stewart : And for all other
actions committed previous to Jul. 1, 1303, &c. {Apud Perthe.')

Jul. 7. — Remiffion to James Muschet of Culgartiie for the tijcftuoug llfStruttton of
the goods of James Robefoun, tlie time he lay with his wife : And for forctj^Otl$I)t fclong done to
the faid James ; and for hurting him : And for the <©ppvc:S5toil done by him to Sir John HalDAKE of Glennegafe, kn', and the Lady of Merchame, in calling down and deflroying the aqueduct of Lanerk : And for rommon #Jprc5^foit of the lieges. {Ajntd Perth.)

Aug. 18. — Refpett to Sir Johne Lundy of ))At Ilk to pas in ISilgrainage to ^antt
3o{ine of SntftiSc X and taking his ' bamys, men, tennentis, &c., under his ferme pece and fpeciall
Protectioun.'

Sep. 8. — Letter maid to Alexander Erle of IIuntlie, in ))is forme.
James, be Jie grace of God, King of Scottis. To al and findrie our officiaris, liegis and fubdittis,
&c. Forfamekil as We grantit and gaue of before to Meugret, Jie fifter of Alexandeu of Jie Ilis
OF Lochquhelcii, knycht, indurand our will, our landis of Scalpa and Torrea, with |)are pertinence,
extending to four raerkis wrocht'^ of land, lyand in Strawrochille ^' and ))e landis of Morournycht,
extending als to foure merkis wrocht of laud ; and pe landis of Vngoworrw, extending to vj'er foure
merkis worth of land, lyand in Trauternes : Quhilkis Mergret hes applyit and fubiectit hir perfone,
landis, and gudis, quheper in lauchfull mariage or afer wayis. We knaw nocht, to Donald Makcarle M.\klauchlane Done, quhilk has affiftit to oure Rebell Torkill Makclode of Lewis,
paffiiud with him, comniittand Reif, Spul;ie, and Oppreffioun apon our trew liegis ; quharfor it plefis
ws nocht ]iat ]ie faid Mergret or he haf any profit of our landis. Herefor, We haue grauntit, gevin,
and confermit, and be thir our Letteris, gevis, grauntis, and confermis pe faid tuelif merkis wrocht of

I The Shrine of St Thomas a Becket. ^ Until. ' See these Extracts, Feb. 22. 1305-6. » This is

given merely as a specimen of numerous similar entries. James IV. gave great encouragement to Minstrels, having
often from fifty to sixty in his pay at one time, as officers of his Household. He seldom travelled without Minstrels,
' Tale-Tellaris,' &c. ' Wroucht, or worth ; valoT. " Strathardale ?

108 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1508.

APPENDIX.

laund of Scalpa, Torrea, Mon-ournycht, and Wngoworro, willi far pertinence, induring our will, to
our traift coufing and counfalour, Sllf j-antttf, CFvlf of ^uittlie, %orts (Bovtsoant anB JJaitf jcnarbt,
and to his affignais, to be brukit, difponit, gevin, or aflignit be him to quhat perfonis of jie Ii.is or
aperis he plefe, ])at wil do him and ws feruice fairfor. Quharfor We charge flraitlie, and comniandis sow, all and findrie our officiaris, liegis, and fubdittis foifaid, ]iat nane of 50W tak apon haund
to lat,' flop, tnibil, inquiet, or niolefl, our faid couling or his aflignais, in J)e brouking, jofing, and vTing
of fe faid landis, induring our will, and quhill we gif our fpecial Letteris incontrare ; vndir al fe biefl
pane, and charge, and offence 56 or ilk ane of 50W may comraitt or inryne' agane our Maiefle in ])at
part. Gevin vndir our Prive Sell, at Ed"., pe viij day of September, and of our regnne fe xx ^ere.

[James R.]

Sep. 13. — Remifllon to John Lord Oliphant, and two others, for art and part of the
<@pi)l"f55ion done to John Lord Drummond, by deflroying and caftiug down the dikes between
the lands of Drvmane and Balloche: And for fovctljougjt fflong don to vinq''' John Earl of
BucHAN, done within the burgh of Perth, after the S'Xauglitfr of James Oliphant of Arquhel5ie,
committed by the faid Earl and his accomplices : And for all other Oppreflions, forethought felonies,
actions, and crimes, &c. (^Apud Edinhurghe.)

Sep. 14. — Refpitt to James Erle of Arrane, Lord Hammyltoune, at his paflTing ' in pe
realrae of Frans and vjier parteis be^onde ])e fey, on certane chargis and erandis of ouris and his awin ;
and alfe, in ^tlgramagc to ^anct Sojnt of ^tnrad, and vjier placis : We haf Jiarfor takin vndir our
ferrae pece, fpecial Protectioun, mantenance, fupple, defence, and Saufgard, our faid coufing, his men,
kyn, lirname, tennentis, &c., and in fpeciale our louittis ane Reuerend fader in God, Dauid, Bischop
OF Ergile, and James Hammyltoune of pe Schaufeild, kn',' &c.

Sep. 16. — Remiffion to John Thowless, in Brechin, for the ^latlgljtef of Alexander Meill,
committed ' on fuddantie," by the Itroke of a ' golf-club.'

Oct. 10. — ^Remiffion to Patrick Dunbar, fon and heir apparent of Patrick D. of Kilquhonquhare, and two otiiers, for the ^Iaug][)tcv of Patrick Makculloche, committed by them in the town
of Wigtoune, ten years ago. (Apud Edinburgh^.')

Dec. 18. — Remiffion to Alexander Gardin for the g'taugj&tft of John Jamefoun, within
the Fortalice of Panmure, by throwing a ftone at him, 22 years fince. {Apud Slriuelin.)

Jan. 24, 1507-8. — Protection and Refpitt to John Erle of Crawford, Lord Lindefay,
Refpittand him for all acttoniS, $v t. fia ]ie day of fe date hereof, vnto his returning within fe realme,
and xl dayis Jiaireftir.

Mar. 4. — Remiffion to John Inche for Slnttftonimunt'itg toitj) (§£orge, C?ai'X of iiotjcji,
the King's Rebel, and at the horn. (Apud Edinburghe.)

Mar. 11. — Remiffion to Johne Gordon of Lochinver for art and part of the JSftf of a
mart from John Makmulane of Arindavacht, &c. (^Apud Edinburghe.)

Apr. 6, 1508. — Refpitt to Archbald Huchonsoune of ]ie Ilys and xxviij vjieris (becaufe
of ]iair grit lawbouris, deligence, and gudeand thankfull feniice done behishienesin fe perfewing and
taittng of Stucljaiie JDunrniir 33oto«otic, ^ovk, his fone, and ISonalti iHuk iHafealfSttr, liis
Rebellis, and being at )ie home ; and for ))e bringing and deliuering of faim to be maid to his gude
grace, or to quham he ordanis fame to be deliuerit, be his writingis) for )ie ^laugljtct of vmq' Donald
Hutchonfoune, v])crwayis called Galdlanclte, bruder to ])e faid Archebald : And for all v)ieris
^lautjbfcvtS, |i)cvf5tl)ippi5, Ufvm'ngtS, JacfK^, itturt]&cn5, &c., before fe date of \\i Refpitt ; for

' Let ; hinder. * Incur.

21 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 109

APPENDIX.

the fpace of 19 5eris. Providing allwayis, fat gif hisfaid Rebellis beis nocht brocht, &c. ))is Rcfpute
to be of nane avale, &c. {Subfcript. per dominum Eegem, apud Edinburghe.')

Apr. 20. — Remiflioune to Johne Chene of Essilmost, Henry and Jobne liis bre]ier, and
Johne Balluny, for ])e fovtl)OtI)t felong done be Jiame apoune Duncane Forbes, in Jie Gallogate, within
burghe of Aberdene ; And for fe ISitlt of fwerdis and vther wapinnis fra J>e faid Duncane and his
feruitouris, ])e fammyn tyme : And for all vfer crimes, &c.

Apr. 29. — Coramiflioune to Andro Bischop of Cathnes, Ronald Alanfoune of Ylanebigerne, and Alexander M^'clode of Dunvegane, and to twa of J)aim, conjunctly, to iti ]'e landis of J>e
Hcbi^iS anlf 2i23'attii'nr£i in /Sfti), fat pertenit to Torqwyll RPclode of ])E Lewis, and now to fe
Kingis hienes, be reffone of liis fForfatour, &c. ; for the term of five 3eris. (Aprid Dunfermeli»g.\

May 30. — Licence to ' Patrik Lord Lindesay of Je Biris, and Jiione Lindei'ay of
Petcruvy, kny', his fone and apperand air, to pafs in fe realme of France, in fare ^Pilgramaje to
^anct 31)011 of i^mciiS and vferis pairtis be5ond fe fey.' To endure for fe tyme of fevin jeris.
(Apud Edinburghe.)

Oct. 17. — Remiffion to Harbert Maxwell of Kirkco.vwell, Andrew AJane, and two
others, for the ^toutljrctf of a log' from the Debateable land between the faid Harbert and John
Herijs of Maby : And for tlie treasonable ConSpfrarw made by them, in Convocating the lieges, with
John Lord Maxwell and his accomplices, upon Robert Lord Crechtone, Sheriff of Drumfreife,
and his Deputes, &c.' (^Apud Kirkciidbrycht.)

Oct. 21. — Remiffion to Thomas Buk for the trfaiSonabte ConSpiraci) committed by him in
Convocating the lieges, with John Lord Maxwell and his accomplices, against Robert Lord
Crechtoune (of Sanquhare), t\jt *5triff of SrHinfrctSf, his Deputes, friends, and fervants, and
hindering him in the execution of his office : And alfo for art and part of the ^Iattg]&tf r of William
DAL5ELL of that Ilk, and John Carmichell, W)t SfputcS of the faid Sheriff, and of others
flain at the fame time : And for all other crimes done by him, day and place forefaid : And for
<©j)j>rcS5fon done to Mr John Hucliefone, putting violent hands on him, and ^jjiiiTjic of certain teind
flieaves from him: And for the S'toutljrflC of certain oxen, to the number of four fcoie, from James
Lindefay ; And for common <!I^pprcg5i'on, $«rc» {Apud Kirkcudbri/cht.)

Nov. 3. — Remiffion to John Kennedy, fon of John Lord Kennedy, for the ^toMtJrcif
of a horfe from Fergus Fergullbne : And for the Stouthreif of another horfe from the Countess of
Erole, his mother: And for forethought felony done to Duncan Kennedy : And for JlcSftttng Sir
William Coluile of Vcuiltre, kn*, and other JScl&cIg at the horn, &c. (Apiid Are.)

Nov. 4. — Remiffion to Thomas Kennedy of Bargany for art and part of the ^tout^retf
of eight oxen from Jonnet Lokkert, relict of Henry Kennedy, &c. (Apud Are.)

Jan. 2, 1508-9. — Lettre maid to Robert Lord Crechtoun of Sanciiare, makand menfione, fat becaufe f e Kingis hienes vnderftandis, and kennis wele, fat fe faid Robert maid and fet a
Court to be haldin at Drumfreise, f e lafl day of July, for Miniflratione of jullice to certane perfonis
within f e bondis of his office ; and fat he mycht, nor durft nocht cum to f e faid Burgh to hald f e faid
Court, without warnyng, fupport, and fupple of his frendis, as well apperit fra^ Jts Sfputt'S toar
Crtiellt) slant, in fe executione of his office, and balding of bis faid Court ; and fat fe perfonis cuming
with fe faid Robert to fe fammyn, come in fe ftrenthin of him in fe executione of liis office, and
furthputtin of fe Kingis auctorite, and nane vf erwayis : That fairfor, it is fE Kingis mynde and
will, fat fe faid Robert, nor nane vf er perfone nor perfonis fat come with him to fe faid Court, be
• ' Ligni.' « See Trials, Vol. I, * 77, &c. ' From the fact that.

110* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1509-10.

APPENDIX.

attechit, areftit, or accufit be ])E Justice, Juftice Clerk, &c., for Conbotatioun of fe Kingis liegis
S'lautJjttr, Kffc, or ony vfer maner of crime or actione, committit or done be him or }>aim ])e faid
tyme, or be ony occafione or ony y]>eT thing fat mycht follow fairupone ; bot will fat fe farayn ceife
fra euer, in tyme to cum.' (Apud Saiictandrois.)

Jan. 18. Refpitt made to Thomas Lyn, burges of Edinburgh, for fe ^Iaut|)t{r of ymq'"

ScHiR Lancelote Patoxsoun, Chapellaix,^ quhilk happinnit be negligent cure and medicine
fat lie faid Thomas tuk one him to cure and hele fe faid vmq''^ Schir Lancelote of fe in6rmite of f e
o-rantgor,^ fat he was infekkit with. To endure for xix jeris. (^Sub/cript. per donmmm Regem,
apud Edinhurghe.')

May 3, 1309. — Ilefpit maid to Malcolme Mtloid of Rvsey for all maner of acttontd,
rriniCS anU offfllSiS quhatfumeuer, committit and done be him in ony tyme bigane, before fe day of f e
dait hereof, to be vnhurt, &c. for fe fpace of fex monethis nixt to cum eftirfe day of fe date hereof, and
forf er, during f e Kingis will, to f e effect fat he may in f e mentyme cum to f e King and fe Lordis
of his Consale to do his leiful erandis, without arreft or trubill in ony wife. (Subfcript.per dominum
Regem, apud Edinhurghe.)

Nov. 7. — Remiffion to Sin Henry Wardlaw of Torry', kn*, and Michael Strathenry of
that Ilk, for (ommoil ©pprrSSton committed by them : And for llcgctttltg, Intercommuning, and
fupplying Rebels at the King's hom: And for ^toutj^reff, &c. {Apud Coicpare.)

Remiffion to George Pitcarne, for <0pprt65ion and forcfljougjljt fclonu done to John
Bikertonn.

Nov. 9. — Remiffion to David Balfoure, in Petcullo, and David, his fon, for 3>ntfrrom«
intiningwith George Earl of Rothes, being at the horn, &c.

Nov. 11. — Remiffion to Walter Heriote of Burnturk, for his difobedience and contempt,
and treafonable ^hiBtng from the King's armu againSt t\)t CPligltS]&, conveened at Sutoun ; and for
all other actionis, &c. (Aptid Coirpare.)

Nov. 1-1. — Precept of Remiffion to Henry Pitcarne of Drumgy, for treafonably ^liiBfng
from the King's 3rmi) agauiSt t^t drnqliii)-

Nov. 16. — Precept of Remiffion to John Tervet of that Ilk, and Elias Tervett, his uncle,
for his difobedience and contempt in SblBtng from the King's ^inni) at S^tounc :^ And for common
©pprc^5ioit of the lieges, &c.

Dec. 2. — Precept of Remiffion to Alexander Ker of Straloche, for art and part of the
aSurm'lig of tjic plart of SSInne and |^oni£fit(t therein committed, in company with the King's
Rebels, &c. {Apud Edinhurghe.)

Feb. 2, 1309-10. — A Lettre of iStljabtlttatiount maid to Alexander Lekpreuik in fis
forme : Forsamekle as fe faid Alexander wcs accufit for art and part of fe cruell ^Iautl)tcr of
vmq''- George Hanimyltoun, and wes convict of fe fammyn be ane Affife, and faiifor Dome wes
gevin in f eTolbuth of Ed^fat f e faid Alex' fuld be danipnit to dede for art and part of f e faid Slauchter,
&c. : And now, for certane gude caufis and vther confuleracionis moving our niynde. We half Reabillit'

' See above, Oct. 17 and 21, 1508; and also Trials, Vol. I, • 77. ' This Cliurcliman seems to have been

one of the old leaven, chronicled by honest Gtorge Marioreyhanhs, thus: — ' In the jeir of God 1533, Sir Walter
Coupar, Chaiplaine in Edinhurghe, gate a pynte of vyne, a laiffe of 36 vnce vaight, a pock of aite-meill, a pynte of
aill, a schei])e hede, ane penny candell, and a faire woman, for ane -wiij penny giute.'— ylwaZ/s of Scotland, p. 5.
' Lues Venerea. * A number of others got Remissions for the same offence ; among whom are Sir Andrew

Kynnynmonthe of that Ilk, knycht; William, hisbrother; David Spensof Wolmerstoun, John Betoune of Balfour,
Alex. Lathreise of Orky, &c. ' Rehabilitated; restored. L. B. rehabililure.

23 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS, * 111

APPENDIX.

]ie laid Alex' to bis gnde fame and honour, and alfe hes maid him lauchfull, be J)ir our Letteris, to
excerfe all lauchfull dedis, in jugeraent and outwithe, and to bruke and joife all dignateis, officis,
laodis, rentis, poffeffionis, and gudis, alfe fre as he did before fe committing ]ie faid Slauchter.
(^Subfcript. per Rege.m, apud Edinburghe.)

A Licence, Protectioune, and Refpitt maid to Maister Patrik Blakater, Arcbidene of
Glafgw, to pas to fe realme of jfrnntt to htin tlft ^SttXti, and to vfer pairtis be5ond ]ie fey.
(Sub/cript. per Regem, apud Edinburghe.)

Feb. 10. — A Lettre maid to Marione of Ylis, dochter to iHaftratialtJ JJawne,' at f e inftance
and requefte of J)E Erle of Anguse, of fe Gift of foure merk land of Cortynvale, lyand in J)e lordfcliip of Kyntire, fre of all males and gerfovmes and dewiteis ; for hir life tyme. (^Apud Striuelbig.)

Apr. 12, 1510. — A Refpit maid to Lauchlane M<^gillane, his kynnifmen, familiaris, and
feruandis, faufly to cum to ])E Kingis prefence to Striuelin, or quhare it fall happen to be for ]>e
tyme, for expedicioun of his erandis ]'at be has ado ; and fwely to returae agane quhare he come fra.
To endure for xl dais. (^Apud Striuelin, Jiib/cript. per Regem.)

Apr. 19. — A Refpitt to George Lord Seytoune, gevand him Licence to pas in qubat
pairtis he plefis outwith ]<e realme, with qubat perfonis, his kynnifmen or feruandis he ILkis, for J>e
tyme : For the fpace of thre 3eris, &c. (^Subfcript. per Regem, apud Striueling.)

Apr. 22. — Adam Ruthirfurd, fone to vmq'"= George R. of Langnewtoune, got Letters of
ISej^abtlltatton, viz. Forfamekill as he wes apprehendit and takin rede-band committand i!ri)lft and
crimes apone oure liegis, and fairfor wes put in oure Caftell of Edinburgh in fermance and prefoune,
and wes kepit in oure faid Caftell be ]>e fpace of thre quartaris of ane 3ere with J)e mare^ to have bene
juftifiit' for ]ie faid Thift, and for ^Jnuci)tcxii and vper grete crimes committit and done be him of
before, ' neuertheles We movit of pete,' &c. (Sub/cript. per Regem apud Edinburghe.)

May 10. — Refpitt to Robert Elwald of Redeheuche, and nine others,* faufly and furely
to cum to ))E Kingis prefence, and faufly and furely to remane and abide for fe expedicione and
doing of fair materis, concernjTig gude reule to be bad and kepit in J)e cuntre, &c. To endure for
thre mouetliis. (Subfcripf. per Regem apud Striueli/ig.)

May 26. — A Refpitt to all and findry ]>e iTenenttS antr tnljabitantfi of ]>e landis and lordfchip of iLftltJlSBalt, faufly and furely to cum to J)E Kisgis hienes to Edinburghe, &c., concerning
gude reule to be bad and kepit within fie faidis pairtis, &c. To endure for a moneth.

Jul. 4. — Precept of Remiffion to Gillaspy Dow, (Bailee of Troutiones,) John ^Makgillemartyne, and fixty-three others, for Common ©pprr55foit of the liegis : And for JJfiScttfng, fupplying, and Intercommuning with tl)t Stng'S 98thtIS : And alfo for jfirtnaiiinq, &c. (Apud
Inueinys.)

Jul. 9. — Precept of Remiffion to George Falconare of Halkertone and Robert F. for
Common ©pprtSSt'on of the lieges, &c. (Apud Imiernys.)

Precept of Remiffion to Andrew Kyxnard of that Ilk, dwelling within the Ihire of
Inuernys, for ^uppljjing, iJcSclting, antl 355t5tantt given by hira to the King's Rebels, being
at the horn : And for all other crimes and actions, &c. (Apud Inimrnys.)

' See Trials, I. * 45, Jan. 20, 1 J05-6. * And upwards. ' Executed. ' Thre Elwalds, two

Nixsones, two Croseris, two Hendersonis, and Alexander Annestrang — On Nov. 20 thereafter, they, along with
Sym and George .\rmestrang, James Forestare, Jaffray Blaliburn, and all and sindry vtheiis, the 3lnl)abitavi3 of
JtlDtltStialc, got a Respite ' to be vnpunyst in thair persoiiis tor xix yeris,' [afiud Jedbiirt/he,) for all crimes previous
to that date.

112 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1511-12.

APPENDIX.

Jul. 15. — Precept of Remifllon to Sir James Crechtone of Frendracht, kn', and xvij
-others, for tbeii- tieafoDable ^hicntt from t|)f ^rmu at lutotin, where the King was in proper
perfon, to refill the English, &c. {Apud Edinhurghe.)

Jul. 24. — Refpit maul to ]ie Lord of Saxct Jhonis, in double forme, and to xxiiij perfonis, his houfliald men, ta jaS to tj&t Court o£ 3K011Tt, tjc iJjo^JfS,' and Tjier partis.

Nov. 27. — Commiflion to Adame Erle Boithuile, Lord Halys, and Adam Hepburne
OF Craggis, and to ]'air Bailzeis, to inbring all maner of perfonis, trefpafTouris, committaris of
quhatfumeuer crimes to{t|)fn tj^f bonnSi'S of fe fcherefdome of 9Boj-burgI)e and lordfcbip of a.iiHlis!»
Balf, and within ouy vther landis, boundis, rovmes, and Bailjerijs pertenyng to fe faid Adam Erie
Boithuile, quhilkis ar fugitive fra fe lawis : And glfe \Ki may nocht be apprehendit, fat ]>ai efchete
fair gudis, and inbring ]ie fammyn ; and gife neid beis, to Uirnt fare houfis, and slaa f aim fat beis
apprehendit ; and fe laif to Banys fe realme, fe quhilkis ar fugitiue. (Subfcript. per Regem, apud
Jedburgh.)

Jan. 12, 1510-11. — Precept of Remiffion to Thomas Murray, fon of vinq''' John Murray of
Balloche, for the ^lawgljttr of George Murray, committed xj years fmce. {Apud Edinburghe.')

Jan. 16. — Lettre of Rehabilitatioune to Patrik Mi^lellan of Gilestoune,^ fayand, fat f e
KiNGis grace Reabillis fe faid Patrik to his warldly honouris, digniteis, and vfer priuilegis, and lauchfully to fucceid to his fader and vf eris his predeceffouris, nochtnithllanding fe Dome gevin fat fe
faid Patrikis hede fuld be ftrikm fra his body, for fe 9Setf anH ^toutjc of xx*" oxin and ky fra Patrik
Agnew, Scheref of W'igtoune, and his feruandis, vndir filence of nycht, &c. {Apud Edinburghe.)

Aug. 22, 1511. — Remiffion to Patrick Lesly, fon of Andrew, for art and part of CaSttnj
Botun an» Spuiljtt of tlje piart of iJcmf.and taking the Laird of Tulydeff furth of the Place
of Ranlloune. {Apud Edinburghe.)

Oct. 15. — Precept of Remiffion to Mr William Levenax of Caly, for DtibaHtng anB
l^urtfng Roger Gordoune, llieriff in that part, who came with the Kingis letters to cite him.
{Apud Edinburghe.)

Oct. 27. — Precept of Remiffion to Robert Gordoune of Glenne, for StippTnfng anti
^^SlStanrc afforded to his brother Alexander, Refetting him and drawing him out of the realm, as a
fugitive, for the ^Taucj^tfr of John Dunbar of Mochrum. {Apud Edinburghe.)

Nov. 1. — Precept of Remiffion to Cuthbert Earl of Glencarne, and five others, for art
and part of the ^Taugjtrr of Alexander Makfarly, in Bute, &c. {Apud Are.)

Eo die — Precept of Remiffion to William Cunynghame Master of Glencarne, and
xxix others, for ISfSftting and 3)ntfrromijniiu'ng with the Kings iJtbfliS. {Apud Are.)

Nov. 19 and 28. — Refpit maid to Donald Makclauchrane' for art and parte of fe
^Taurjtcr of Robert Farguffioune of Brakanfide, and Alexander Farguffi)une, &c. To endure for 19
years, with power to f e Scherifiis of Edinburghe and Drumfreife to releifche him fra lie home, and
deliver him fe wand of pece,* &c. {Apud Edinburghe.)

Jan. 26, 1511-12. — Precept of Remiffion to George Haliburtoune for art and part of the
^Iaugi)ttr of ^iiUam Coluile of fc*r]&iltre, and Richard Ruthirfurd, &c. {Apud Edinburghe.)

' The Knights Templars had their principal establishment in the Island of Rhodes. Their possessions in Scotland were considerable, but their lands were feued out to vassals. Many considerable properties are still held of the
superiors of these ' Temple lands,' as they are called. * See the proceedings against him in Trials, I. * towards

the close of the reign of King James IV. ' Sic. See Jun. 3, 1512, of these extracts. * For explanation of

this ceremony, see Nov. 18, J511 ; Oct. 11, 1531, (^Notice); and Jul. 23, 1566, (Note.)

5

24 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 113

APPENDIX.

JuD. 2, 1512. — A Generale Remitt of })E Kingis fpeciale grace maid to fE Provest,
baljeis, confale, and comunite of StlbtrBcne antf MlmUtantii of fair landis and fredome, Remittand
haim all actiones, tranfgreffionis, crimes and offeniis quhatfumeuir, committit or done be paim before
fe date hereof, &c. in ]>e forme of fe Lettre grantit to J)E burghe of DtrKDE.

Jun. 3. A Refpitt maid, of the Kingis fpeciale grace, to Maister Alexander Kennedy,

for bis treafonable fetiiting' of ti)t BfngfS g«i5rrfpciijunt==manttaTf, fubfcriuand ane Refpitt to
Donald .M' clauchrane,'^ for ^Iaur|)ter and vfer crimes, of Jie quhilk he wes delatit. (At EdinburgJie.)

Jun. 12.— A Lettre maid to )>e 3n]babitanttS (o£) tjc 31(5 o£ 33ute an* Cutnrag, and alfe
to fe Inhabitantis of fe tovne of JaoSau, remittand faim all actionis, &c. committit and done be faim
ony tyme bigane, before Jie date hereof (Treafone in fe Kingis perfone, Murthure, Fire, and Reuilmg
of women exceptit.) At Edinburghe.

Sept. 25. — Gift to Thomas Dunwede, )ie fone and aire of vrnq'*" Thomas D. of pat Ilk, of
]>e Ward, all landis, &c. quhilk pertenit to Jie faid umq'* Thomas,^ &c.

II. Illustrations of the Reign of King James IV, selected from the Accounts of
THE Lord High Treasurer of Scotland.

[The value, in a historical point of view, as well as the extreme curiosity, of
the Accounts of the Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, is known only
to the comparatively few individuals who have found leisure, perseverance, and
opportunity to consult their truly remarkable contents ; for hitherto no connected view of them has been made public.

In attempting a brief selection from the interesting stores of information
which is to be gleaned from these Volumes, the Editor has felt it extremely
difficult to refrain from the insertion of much extraneous matter of intense
interest. The frequent deviations from the strict plan and spirit of this Appendix, in which he has indulged, will show the reader the value of the materials contained in the Treasurer's Accounts. It is hoped, however, that ample
selections may one day be printed at the Public expense, under the Record
Commission ; for no private individual can ever be expected to undertake the
labour and cost of such a work, which, however valuable in itself, could never
be expected to defray even a moderate share of the outlays which must necessai'ily be expended in the publication of such a work.

To save occupying additional space, the reader is referred, generally, to the
preceding Trials, which are more or less illustrated by the following Extracts.
For the sake of those whose pursuits have not led them to the examination of
such matters, a few brief notes are added, which, it is hoped, will prove not

' Counterfeiting, forging. ^ See above, Nov. 19 and 28, 1511. ^ Who was slain at the

Place of Dunwedy. See this Collection of Trials, I. * 40.

VOL. I. f P

114 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A. D. 1488.

APPENDIX.

unacceptable. The selections have purposely been made as diversified and entertaining as the narrow bounds of this woi'k permit.]

1488.— Item, quhen ])E King com furth o( ^snct HoJnSton, for a barrel! of aill at j>e Blakfurde, .......... xij s.

Item, for carying of clathin fra ^coiie, f ftcr ]>t Coronatt'oun, . . xv s.

Aug. 5 — Itetn, to Patrik Johnlon, to tKijt ^lanan'S of iitutjquoto, I'at plautt to pE
King, .■•.■..... vti.

Aug. 20 — Item, Quhen ])E King pad to Jtantrt'Jtc to l.e Hurt, gevin him felf xx" Vnicornis,' .......... xviij ti.

I/em, for a i)OtiiiS boclit to ]ie King at Lanerik,^ . . . x inerkis.

Item, Jie famiu tyme to 3)ol)UC of ^^rjafaj^ to fpend at his (the King's) command, xxti.

Item, in Lanerik to IDan^artS and giiScvi'S,' ... . xxxvj s.

I(em, ])E Justis^ coftis, ]>e tyme of ])e ^urc of itaiurifte, . . Ivj ti. iij s.

Sep. 1 — Item, to pure ioufi^ of 33antiltrtfc, fat had ])are gudis tane away be Johne
Stewart; at Jie Kingis commande, thre Vuicornis, . . . ij li. xiiij s.

Sep. 3 and 6 — ' Item, Quhen the King raid to ]>e Slprt of SunBtC,' various coflly dreffes
were made for him, too numerous and lengthened to admit of felection in this place.

Sep. 7 — Item, in Dundie, to t])t Sfng him felf, . . . xxviij ti.

Oct. 3. — Imprimis, for ix Coyt armouris to jie ^arroTUtg anti purcufantfe, price of ilk
peyce, fylk, gold, ayfure, and Jie makin of faim, v ti. •,Jiimma of }e ix, . . x\v ti.

Item, for tine elne and d. (one half) of haruanitc tarter^ to be Standart to ])E King,
quhen he raide to t]&e ATurc of (§If5roSi), price of fe elne xviij s. \fumma, . iij ti. iij s.

Item, for gold, ayfure, filuer, and colouris til it, and wyrkin'' of it, . vj ti. xvij s.

Item, for thre vnce of fylkis to fren3eis*' til it, price, ... xiv s.

Item, pairefter for v quartaris of tarttr to ])E Kingis Banere, price, . xxij s.

Item, for golde, filuer, ayfure, and oder colouris til it, and wyrkin, . viij ti. xviij s.

Item, for thre Bannaris to ]ie trumpatis,^ tarter, golde, filuer, and oder colouris, price of
ilk peyfle,'" with ]ie makin, v ti ; fumma of ])e thre, . . . . xv ti.

Imprimis, got for liuerayis to viij ^fitSrmcn" of ]ie Kingis, agane'^ tjbt Coioiiatfoun, for
xx| elne velwos," to be viij gownis to pe faid ^cn^mcn, price of pe elne iij ti. v s. ; fumma,

iij'^'vj ti. xij s. vj d.

Item, for xij elne of blak fatin, to be ])ame viij doublettis, price of Jie elne xxxviij s. ;
fumma, ........ . xxij ti. xvj s.

Item, for flocin and llentin" to J'e famin doublettis, . . xxvj 5. viij d.

Item, for vi eliie blak claitht to be viij pare of hose to ]iaim, price of ])e elne xv s. ;
fumma, . .... . . . . . iiij ti. ij s. vj d.

Item, for viij elne of cotonyt quliit claitht, to lyne |)e fam hofe, . x s. viij d.

Item, for makyne of fame in ^antt 3tol)nc5toun,' ' J>e fam tym, . . viij 5.

' A gold coin fiist struck in the lUign of James III, which took its name from the figm'e of an unicorn supporting a shield with tlie Scottish arms. Cardimnel says it usually weighs iS grains. ' That county has long
heen famed for the excellent breed of its horses. ^ Of Sauchie, formerly his Keeper. * ]\Iorrice-dancers.
The last vestige of these customs is to he found in Edinburgh, wliose Guisards go about witli masks, or \faiise faces,'
and shirts worn above llieir clothes, singing and asking money. The custom has almost expired, and is now entirely
confined to young boys. Their Cliristmas carols are quite forgotten. ^ The Justice. "^ This is evidently
TARTAN, which it would appear was chequered with gold, silver, azure, and other colours. ' Working.
' Fringes. " Still customary with our state-trumpets. '° Piece. " Henchmen. " Against, preparatory to. " Velvet. " A sort of lining and buckram stulf, fur stiffening the dress. ''' Perth.

2Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 115

APPENDIX.

Item, at Michelmes, agane fe parltamcnt bakliii in October, imprimis for xiij^ elne of fufteane to be doublattis to ix ^fnSmtn,' price of )ie elue, iij s.;fumma, . ij ti. vj d.

Oct. 6.— Item, to 5nglt^ 3>oi)nt ii)t dFioIfr at ]'E Kingis commande, thre royfe nobillis,^

V ii. viij s.

Nor. l.—Item, quhen the King raid to the <^mt of itawSer, fundry dreffes, &c.

Jan. 3, U8S-9.—Item, ' agane ])e Parliament baldin eftir gule,' (nine Henfemen are again
furniflied witii ' fide (lonff) gounis," ' dowblattis,' and ' boyfe.' And they afterwards get their ' Witfonda leuerrais,' confiding of ' sallow dammylt doublatis,' ' Inglis grene gownis,' and ' cayrfay hoyle.'
It is unnecefiljry to enumerate the lengthened entries, which are made at full length in the Accounts.

Feb. U.—Item, to (3tntit Mijnt }•£ Inglise Fule, at fe Kingis commande, v royfe nobillis, . . . • • • • • i^^'-

May 31.— Item, in Edinbur' to gif Doll) Doj&ne t^t iFtite of SnglanHf, ]>at brocht ij fpanSeallis to fE King, ...... x markis.

Item, to him, . . . . . . yj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Jun. — Item, to Cunnynghame ii>t Singar, at ])e Kingis commande, a demy, xiiij s.

Jul. 1. — Item, to W1L5EAM Sangstar of Lithqow, for a ^ang fitoftt" he brocht to ]>e King,
be a Precept, . . . . • • • " 11.

Jul. 10.— Item, to Dnglfe |3upartS pat come to Jie Caflell set and playt to Jie King, xij demyfie, ....... viij ti. viiij S.

Aug. 4 Item, for the expenfis maide, at the Kingis commande, vpone Deijf Lutkin^ and

his folkis, quhen thai come firft to Stirling, thair coftis in Stirling, and therefter in Lijthgow and
Edinburgh, at dyuerffe tymes, and for horfiTe to thaymc to ryd betwene, . . xij ti.

Item, for the coftis maid in Edinburghe vpon xxxvj of his folkis that wes takin in Leyih, ay
quhill thai wer juftifeit,^ ........ xxxvj ti.

Item, to the famin SenSSe nttnite," at thair way-pafling be the Kingis commande, ij t. viij s.

Aug. 31 Item, to Patrik Johnson and his fallowis ]iat ptagit a jlaj)** to )>£ King in

Lythqw,^ . . . . . . • i'j *'• ''U s.

Sep. 3. — Item, to 6tntit Doj&no, )'e Inglise Fule, Jiat brocht japis'" to ])e King, at his
commande, . . . . . . • xti.

Jan. 1, 1489-90.— 7/e»i, to })e King, in his bed," in \e mornyng (Utto ^far) x angellis, xij ti.

Jan. 6, — Item, on Uphaly da'- to ])E Kingis oifrande,'^ . . • xviij s.

Item, to ])e SKt'ng of JJrnt," pe fame da, .... . xviij s.

Feb. 22. — Item, for Spardour'= to pafle to atcHioovt, to gar provyde for the Justis" coftis,
again'' tje auve, ...... . . xs.

Item, to Ker Meflinger to pafl!e to Eancrtft, for to gar provyd for the Justis to tSc ^^''^ > ^ s.

' They were also furnished with ' Galbertis' and * hose.' ^ English John, the fool, or jester. He seems to

have been a favourite. *'' Rose Nobles, English gold coins, of the value of 36s. each, of the money then current

in Scotland. ' Of what value would not this ' Sang bwke' be now considered ! ^ 1489, Jun. 26, An

Ejibasst was sent by James IV to Denmakk, for a renewal of the ancient alliance; and also claiming damages for
injuries committed by ' Luthkin Meke (33auis1) ^Sivatc) and his complices, within our souerane lordis Walter.' —
Acta Pari. * Executed. ' An Embassy had been returned by the King of Denmark, accompanied by

a number of the Pirates, who were delivered up to be executed. It does not appear what terms were made.
^ There are many instances in the same Record of plays having been performed before the King and Court, at this very
early period, ^ At this time the Spanish Asibassador was resident at Court; and it is probable that thei'e

was another Embassy from England. "* Monkeys, apes. It is proper, however, to remark, that the word

likewise signifies trinkets or toys ; and alsojcs^s or drolleries. The King had a considerable collection of wild beasts
presented to him at different times, and probably kept a regular Menagerie for his amusement : A foiiner gift with
which GenliU John had been entrusted was two spaniels. " There was regularly an offering of this sort each

New Year's morning, and commonly a 'caudill.' ^^ Epiphany, the Manifestation of our Saviour to the Gentiles ; TvELFTH-UAY. '^ Offering. '* This personage was the King elected on Twelfth-night, being the

individual in whose portion of the cake a Sean was found. The same practice still prevails in England, hut a ring
is now used in place of the bean. See Brand's J'o]>ular Superstitions, (Ellis's Edit. ) I)r Jamicson's Diet. v. Dane, &c.
'^ One of the King's Mes.sengers-at- Arms. "■ Justiciar's expenses. "Against; preparatory to.

116 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1497.

APPENDIX.

Feb. 27.^— Item, to the King, in Edinburgbt, or* the Lordis raide to t|)c Sgre oC SLanerfS, . . . . . . . . xviij ti.

Jul. 17, 1490. — 7toH, on Sonday, iu Edinburgbt, in fE The** (Thefauraris) Innis quhen ]>e
King faw ])e procession, til 2 bim iiij Vnicornis, .... iiijti. xijs.

Item, on Monunda, ]>e niorne efter, fend til him with J)E Provest of Meffane ^ xvj Vuicomis, . .... . . . xiiij ti. viij s.

Jul. 23. — Item, on Fryda, in Dunde, to ]>£ King, to gif t]be dFrailSrbc nwnnt tj&at Jilagtt,
xx'' Unicornis, ........ . xviij ti.

Nov. 22. — Item, to Ormond to paffe in the Northland to proclame tje 9[pr(S, iij ti.

Item, to Daue Strathaivching, Justice Clerk, to paffe to reflave the dittaytbare, ii'jHJan. 1, 1490-1. — Item, to 331fnt» '^MVt^ (on ' New Yere da'), . . xviij s.

Jan. 2. — Item, for ij elne giene cayrfay,^ and iij elne cotton quhyt to ^atlttc Jfxalt, till a coyt,^
and fe makine of it, . . . . . . . xix s.

Apr. 5, 1491. — Item, to Wallasse'' fat ttWii I't gttStt'S" to Jie King, . xviij s.

Apr. 14. — Item, to |3omiin'co,^ to gif )>£ King leve to lat him blud, . xviij s.

Apr. 15. — Itetn, til a man Jiat come to Lythgow to lat ]ie King blud and did it nocht, xviij s.

Jul. 16. — /tow, to ])e ^panjcavtlS pat dansyt before pE King on ]ie cawfay of Edinburghe
before })E The^ Iwgeing, xxx Unicornis, ..... xxvij ti.

Aug. 30 — Item, to tljel^angmaitc of ^Btniurcjljt, to cum to Lythgow to hang a Theifof
Zw2«, quliilk be had '° efter to Edinburgbt, . . . . . .vs.

Oct. 24. — Item, til a fallow brocht pE King tj tooIfiS, in Lythgow, . . vs

Item, on SanctJohnnis daj, to ^gSartS pat danfit to ]ie King," . . - . . _

Jul. 24, 1494. — Item, to paffe to fummond ^ix %a\)nt ai \t SlUfo'^ of Tressone in ^mtore J and for pe expenfis of pe witnes, . . . . vj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Itetn, to fpeid pE Erse lade," to by him claithis, . . . xviij s.

Nov. 8 — Item, to pafs fra SlbcrUcnt with pe extiactis of the SStrtS to Makintosche, and
RoosE o/'^«//oc/(^o(OTie, and to M'^KYE, . . . . . xxs.

Item, to pafs to 33utc to bring pe witnes of pe execution of ^tr 3)oi)n oC %\ii luramondis, xl s.

Dec. 12, 1496. — Item, to Watschod pe Tale tellare and Widderspune pe Tale
tellare, togidder, ... . . ... xviij s.

Mar. 31, 1497.— /to«, gevin to pe Slljbot of SFilffSSouit, for his reward, at pE Kingis command, . . . . . . . . V ti. viij s.

Apr. 10. — Item, to Johne Hert, for bering a pare of Monicordis '■* of pE Kingis fra Abirdene
to Striuelin, . . . . . . . ix s.

Apr. 19. — /to«, to the tua fitbelaris pat fang ^rapStetl" to 5E King, . . ixs.

Jun. 8. — Item, to pE ]M aister of Homes man, pat brocht tithingis of ii)t 3Satcl of SuilSt, v s.

Item, ])at famin day to Stevin Nefbit, Lang I'atrik Home's man, for ficlike tithingis bringing
to pE King, ...... . . xlij s.

Jul. 6. — A number of Payments at and previous to this date were made to tjt IBuftc of jOrft and

11)? Sutl!CSof3orft(PERKiN\VAKBECK.)"' Various payments alfo regarding MoNSSE,(iHonsiHfg.)'''

' Before, previous to, ere. " Given to. ' Methven. ' Blind Harrv, the Minstrel, liad a regular pension

out of the King's Privy purse. This notice of a handsel is inserted to show the King was not uumiudful of the Minstrel.
■' Kersey. ^ These coats were party-coloured, green and white, or black and white, &c. ' The same day

another payment of xviij s. is made to Blind Harry. ** Jests, tales, L. Gesta. ^ He was one of the Minstrels. '" Carried. " About tliis time there are payments for 'playing swerdis,' * gluves,' 'justing speris,'

&c. '" Sir John Canochsqne of Isla and Kintyre, Lord of Glens in Ireland, who, witli thi-ee of his younger

sons, were executed in Edinburgh, 1500. From him descended the Earls of Antrim, &c. Reference may be made to
Mr Gretjorifs work on the Isles, in explanation of this and of all other matters connected with the Isles. '^ Highland lad. " A one stringed instrument. '^ An ancient Popular Romance. The King gave great encouragement to Tale- Tellers and Minstrels, who perpetually appear in every part of the Accounts. "' See Mr

Tytlcr^s History of Scotland for the most authentic account of King James IV. 's proceedings in relation to that
impostor. " See Transactions of llie Society of Scottish Atitiquaries.

16 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 117

APPENDIX.

Aug. l.—Item, giflFen to 1>e King to play at fe Cartis with ])E SPAN3ARTIS, at i^orfntf,' xx
Vnicornis, ....••• xvuj ti.

Aug. \a.—Item, to Robin Kere, to funiiffe fe gitnnfe J'at seid^ with fE King to tie JUatW at
Sgtoune, X Vnicornis, and xiij ti. xij s. . . . . • • xxj ti. xij s.

Auo-. 21. Item, pat famyn nycht, to Dande Doule,^ be the Kingis command, to walk * one

j)e Sandis, for to wait one ]>e SngliSe 3c]btp)3f«, ..... xviij s.

Aug. 2i.— Item, to Johnitoune, )ie Chamerlanis man, Jiat brocht tithingis of ti)e Sfealtng ^ of

t]bc 5>ngXi«m£n, • • • • • • • • • "J^-

Sept. 1. Item, to a woman with ]>e grantgore^ fair (at St John's Kirk of Dalrye, when

THE King " was ou a |3(lgi{ma5e to ' €tii\)itl)ivnt'), . • ■ . iij s. vj d.

Sept. 18. — Item, to )ie werkmen (of Dunbar) to bring hame iHotf^e and ]>e ojiir SrtaitjErf,
to gide paim fra Dalketh, ........ xxij s.

Sept. 23. — Item, (in Striuilin) giffin be ]iE Kingis (command) to tljt Sue of ^omcrjSlBc,
x Vnicornis, . . ....... ix 11.

Dec. 10. — Item, to Dauid Prat ]>e |3anntour,^ in compleit payment of ^e Altar paynting,^
as refting awand to him, . . . • • • . ij fi. ix s.

Mar. 10, 1501. — Item, to Duncane Riche, to pass to })E Maister of Anguss with pe ^or*
tofoie '° of (irsWale, • • • • • • • • • ^ s.

Apr. 10. — Item, giffin to ])e hlinti tolf ]'at bed her eyne fchorne," . . xiij s.

May 2S.—Item, to itlatSttr aMiUt'am Baniar,'^ in his pensioun of Martymes bipaft, be
command of ane Precept,'^ . - • • • • • • v li.

Dec. 28.— Item, be J'e Kingis command, to 3)oi)nt SlnacrSon, tj&at Suailtfe fcit antt j&anBtg,

xiiij s.

Item, fe famyn nycht to ]ie King, to play at ])e bylis with Johne Anderfone, fat wantis feit
and handis," . ........ xiiij i.

Feb. 5, 1502-3. — Item, to ane man to pas to pE Erle of Athole with ]ie Kingis writings,
to flop the balding of his ^tf befor fe JJingl'S JuStire ^ir, . . . . vj s.

Jun. 26, 1503. — Ile»i, to iSoitii l^uUe of Perth, be the Kingis command, iiij Fr. cr., Ivj s.

Aug. 6. — Item, to Johne Auchlek, for gilting of f e Quenis bukkilles, and bofes of J)E Quexis
bridill and hamefing fat wes inint m SalftttJ), .... iij li. ij s.

Item, to Johne Auchlek, goldfmyth, to gilt ane pair of fpuris for f e King, xv s. 6 d.

Item, for to gilt f e ISingiS tcptuve (^ttptre), ij Hary Nobles, . . iij ti. ij g.

Aug. 7. — Item, by the Kingis conimande, to Sir Johne Hume, to Banfett Inglismen, vti.

Aug. 8. — Item, fe viij day of Augufl f e King was Spou^tt,'' and giffin to him, quhilk he laid
one fe buke, vj demyis and vs quhit filuer, ..... iiij ti. vs.

' At this time the Kikg was at the Siege of Norham. A number of payments occur for carriage of guns, ' gunstanis,' * ledin pelloliis,' * irne pellol^is' (cannon-balls), &c. ^ Went. ^ A great favourite of the King's,

who seeras to have encouraged Jajies IV in Horse-racing, betting, &c. ^ Watch; icaulk, ^ Dispersion.

° Lues Venerea. On Oct. 2, foUoning, there is another payment ' to thaim that bed the grantgore in Linlithquho, and
many others occur of the same ilescription. " James IV. letuined by ' Kyle,' ' Kilmarno,' and ' Glasgo,' to ' Striuelin,' ^ There are numerous payments to him, both before and after this date. ^ In the Chapel Rotal

at Stirling. '" Porteous-Roll. '- This was likely one of James's attempts in leech-craft, to couch the eyes

for cataract. The phraseology is most ominous of evil success.' '^ The Poet. The frequent payments to

Poets, Minstrels, &c. &c. in almost every page of these Accounts, abundantly refutes the calumnious charge brought
against King James IV, for having neglected Dunbar and others. His expenditure, on the contrary, was extremely
lavhh ; and considering the state of liis finances, may safely be termed prodigal. A sliglit inspection of these interesting accounts will more than satisfy the most prejudiced reader, that such reports have arisen solely from idle surmises.
" On Dec. 20, another quarter's pension is entered, ' quhilk was peyit to him efter he com fiirlh of Ingland.'
'* This is one, out of hundreds of similar instances of the King's urbanity. Johne, however, seems to have been more
than match for his Majesty. '* This unquestionably fixes the day of the Marriage ; which, with the total disregard to Chronological detail which disfigures the pages of our earlier Historians, has been hitherto doubtful. The
Editor has, perhaps, drawn too largely on the entries under this date, but their extreme curiosity will amply plead
his apology.

1

118 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1503.

APPENDIX.

Item, to put in his tmtiiU and ))e Quenis tau»tU,i ij Fr. cv. . . xxviiij s.

Item, ))at famyne day to J.e ?§n-aXtftS, be the KiNcas commande, xl Fr. cr. xxviijti.

^ Aug. 9.— Item, ].e ix day of Auguft, efter t\)t ^TartagC,^ for xv elne claith of gold to t|)C

(lloim'tfS of ^iivri), OF Ingland, quben fclio and her dochter Lady Gray clippit the Kingis

berde, ilk elne xxij ti. . . iij'xxxti.

Item, for xv elne of damas gold, be the Kingis commande, to pe faid Statru 6rai) of IngLAND, ilk elne xij ti ' "j^lxxx ti.

Item, for v elne Inglis claith to Walter Chepman,^ ilk elne xxxiiij s. . viij ti. x s.

Aug. 10.— Item, to MAisT^. James Henrisounis^ man, of bridil filuer= of ane hors giffin
for THE QuENE, for hir hors were ijrunt t'n Balfefjtjb, .... xiiij s.

Item, to the Bisciiop of Glasgois man of bridal filuer, ficlyke, . . xiiij i.

Item, to Lord Avendales man of bridal filver, ficlike, . . . xiiij i.

Item, to Erle of Ergiles man of bridil filver of ane hors giffin to Jie King, xiiij §.

Item, to the man fat brocht the hors fra tljt IS fug ol UngtanB, v Fr. cr. iij \. x s.

Item, to J.e carturis of Leith brocht fe (SmrntS %nt « to Edinburghe fra Dalketh, xxij cartis,
'"^cartvj§ vjti. xijS.

Item, be ]iE Kingis command, giffin to James Hog for dighting of )>e fuordis, ]>at lefl^ at }ie
ffuvtiaitdig of Fastingis Evin, and for dighting of harnes, , . . xxiiij S.

Item, for xxiiij elne bollande claith giffin to J>e Archbischop of 3ork,8 be fe Kingis command, ilk elne x s. . . . . . . . . _ xij ti,

Aug. 13.— //m, to viij JtngltS ftlf nStvalt'S, be )>e Kingis command, xl Fr. cr. xxviij t.

J/m, to ).e (TrumpttiS of Siiglanti, xl Fr. cr. .... xxviij t.

Item, to ))e Siltglt'SC S'pclair that playit the fuperlalt," v Fr. cr. . . iij t. xs.

Item, to )>E Quenis foure ^TtngtralfS Jiat remanit with her, x Fr. cr. . . vij t.

Item, to ))e Inglise fMrilStralc ]iat paffit away, and the King fend for him agane, vijt.

/ton, to ])e Thre iJMcnfitralfS of ^icrtoillJ, ix Fr. cr. . . . ijt. vjs.

/few, to ])e 33erc ItBair '" of Ingland, viij Fr. cr. . . . . vt. xiis.

/fe?«, to ])E Erle of Oxfurdis tua #TfU;Strat^)5, • • . vt. xijs.

/few, to tj^t CTijrf (©BSarfe tliat PLAYIT |)E PLAY, XXX Fr. cr. . . xxit.

Item, to tjc dTibc itoiuii itlcnStralfS, xl Fr. cr. .... xxviij t.

Item, to t\)t ^ortatr of 3ingIantT, to by him ane hors, viij Fr. cr. . v t. xij s.

Item, to ]if Coffcrarr of Criiglanli, Ixxx Scottis llidaris, . . . Ixxxxij t.

Item, for ane cowp of filuer ouergilt to him,' . . . . . x t.

Aug. 21 Item, payit to John Mayne, bovvar, for Ix juStuig'- gpcvfS at \e fHarfagt, ilk pece

iij s. . . . . . . . . . . . ix t.

' Invariably practised at Marriages and Christenings, ' at hcving tlie barne.' The Accounts abound with such
offerings in every expedition of James IV. ' The enijuiiing reader is referred tor an extremely interesting and

minute contemporaneous account of the Marriage of James IV, and of the .Tourney of his Queen, Margaret,
daughter of Henrv VII of England, to Scotland, by John Young, Somerset Herald, who was an eyewitness of the
whole proceedings. LeIamVs Collectanea, IV, 258.. — See also FaiinH's Chronicles, 11,232. Hall's Chron. Lesley,
Buchanan, and Drummond. The forthcoming volume of A?r Ti/tler's History (V.), will doubtlessly give the whole
details, in his usual masterly style. ^ This is selected for the purpose of remarking, that the King was by no

means negligent iu the encouragement of the arts Cuefman was an extensive merchant and burgess of Edinburgh,
as well as the earliest Scottish Printer. It is highly probable, from the frequent occurrence of his name, that he
held some respectable Office in the Royal Household. The list from which this dress is selected, is titled ' Pro Si rvitoribus.' ' Afterwards Sir James Henderson of Fordill, King's Advocate, &c. '' Bridle money. ° In

this sense, the f;car means her baggage, &c. ' Lasted; remained. ' Thojias Savage, Canon of York

and Dean of the Chapel Royal, was consecrated Bishop of Rochester in 1492. In 1496 he was translated to the
See of London, and in 1501 to York. He was accompanied by the Bishop of Durham, William Sever, Abbot
of St Mary's, York, who had been consecrated Bishop of Cailisle in 1496, and was, in 1502, transl.ated to the See
of Durham. '■' A great many payments are made to this rope dancer and his man, who were pensioned by the

King. '" Bear-leader. " These large extracts, it is hoped, may suflice to excite the reader's curiosity

to investigate this invaluable Record. '^ Tilting, jousting.

16JAC. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * II9

APPENDIX.

Item, fex fcore fperis for Curnagfng l)e faid tyrae, ilk pece iij s. . . xviij t.

/toH, for ane Jjlaft burttouite 5pnt, • ■ . . • . vs.

Item, to Robert, Cultelar, for xxiiij ciuortli;$, xlj lang and xij fchort fuordis, pe faid tyme, for
JTurnagins, ilk pece x i. . . . . . . . . xij t.

Item, for xxx gjjere JjrtJt'S, ]'e faid tyme, ..... xxx s.

Item, for fevin fcore virales and diamandis for gpertjS, ilk pece vj d. . iij t. x s.

Aug. "28. — Item, pay it to Jolnie of Burgownis wif, for iiij elne plefance, and tua elne double
kirfp, quliilk wes tane to Jie gratbing of ])E madin, |)e day ])E Quene come in Edinburglie,' xiiij s.

Sep. 1 Item, payit to James (Dog) to cartaris and pynouris, for carying of beddis-clathes

and hingingis fra )'E Castell to ])E Abbay, and othir places, . . . xxvj s.

Item, to Jie faid James be laid doune for (Iray to beddis, and for ftrowing of ]ie Abbay close
with girfe,' fe tyme of fE mariage, ...... xxxv s.

Item, to ]ie faid James lie gaif, at diuerfe tymes, for xlij turfe^ of bent, ilk turfe iij s. vj ti. vj s.

Sep. 3. — /to«, for vij laid'' of bent, ...... xxj s.

Sep. 4. — /to«, ane pair of tyrapanes' to J)E King, .... xxiiij s.

Sep. 11. — Item, ))at famyn day be ))E Kingis command to ]'e Italiene lase fat danfit,
xxx Fr. cr. ......... . xxi ti.

Item, for v elne blew damas, to be ane goune to bir, be ]ie Kingis command, ilk elne xxiiij s. vj li.

Sep. 12. — Item, )ie xij day of September, for iiji elne rede taffetj to be tott armourt^ to tjlt
^cralBfS, the lyme of tJ)C ^ttan'agt, ilk elne xvj s. . . . . . lyj 5.

Itein, for I buke of gold, bocht in Dunde be James Rollok, to fe faid cote armouris, v ti. v i.

Item, for making of Jie faid cote armouris, .... viij ti.

Sept. 19 — Item, be ))E Kingis command, to fe SSngTf^e pauntoiir '' quliilk brocht pe figuris
of \t jEtfng, cauf en, antr pn'nrf of JnglanB, and of our (Bucnt,'' xx fr. cr. (French Crowns) xiiij ti.

Item, to ane man to pas toStreuelin for l)ata(( a^'fSand 5uorUt5,and to cum aganejiat nycht, ixs.

Oct. 24. — Item, to the ^cralBfe for ))air compoficionne of fe fgrljtt of ]iC 33arrf5 quhen CrisTOFERE TAIL50UR faught, . ..... vj t. xiij s. iiij d.

Oct. 31. — Item, in Couj)«r of dftff, the Lordis** being at t\)t ^ii^tttc ^fr Jmir, to ane
mane to pas to Lynlithq^'' to ])e King with Jie Lordis myndis anent t^t CPadc of l&ot\iti, vij i.

Item, do. ' anent tJ)C ItorH ^LfntffiSaj),' ..... vj i.

Nov. 22. — Item, to Robert, Cultellare, for xvj Suortlt'S for turiiantng, ilk pece xs viiit.

Item, to Muncur, armorar, for ane paire of cufchingis, brafes, and mending of pE Kingis
harnes, at \t JTournaiifng, v Fr. cr. . . . . . . iij t. x s.

Item, to Jobne Mayne, boware,'' for xxvij gpcrtS, .... liiij 5.

Item, for tlire rtH jSpcrtfi,'" . . . . . . . ix s.

Jan. 9, 1503-4 — Item, [lat famyne day, be Jie Kingis command to ^titiv Stojitt iHtlScgrabf,
Inoliseman, XX Fr. cr. ....... . xiiij ti.

Jan. 11. — Item, for iij elne tanne damefe to Sir Johne Miifeyrave, to ane doublet, ilk elne
xxvj s. . ........ iij ti. xviij s.

Jan. 13. — Item, for xiij day of Januar to Mailler Thomas Dikfoun, for Jie expenfe maid on Jie

' See Young's Accouut, in Ldand's Coll., before referred to. ' Dried meadow hay, or gorse. In numerous other instances it is entered as ' lasches to the chalmeris,' viz. rushes. ' Trusses, bundles. * Loads.

* Timbrels ; perhaps a pair of Kettle-drums. King James IV was an expert musician, and there are frequent entries
of various kinds of instruments having been purchased for his own use. " In Walpole's Catalogue of Painters,

an artist of the name of John Mavnakd is stated to have assisted Toreyiano, as a Painter, in the planning of the
Monument to be erected for Henry VII. Perhaps the Seal-Engraver of Henry VIII, John de JIavne, was the
same individual. The only Painter who is said by Walpoh: to have been employed by Heiu'y \\\, was John
Mabuse, or Mabuesins ,- but it is by no means likely that he could be the person. Maynard, therefore, it is thought,
was the Painter who accompanied the Marriage train, in charge of the Portraits presented by the Kino of Kngland
to his son-in-law. So far as the Editor knows, there are now no traces of liis works in Scotland. Mt is probable

that this Painter remained in Scotland in full employment for two months, for under date Nov. 10, 1603, occurs
this entry o( a propyne to ' Mtnour ye Inglise Pavntour, quhen he passit aicai/, 1 Fr. or., xxx li.' ' Privy Council.
" Bow-maker. '" The above are given as specimens of the entries of this sort, which are very numerous.

122 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1504.

APPENDIX.

Item, to Johne Forman he laid doune for mending of ])e Kingis lectdecarap,' . iiij s.

Item, to ane man quhillituke tua JITIbeffi^ in Menteth, and brocht to Edinburghe ; quhilk wer
juftifyit, viij Fr. cr., . . . . . . . , v ti. xij sAug. 9 Item, for mailieis- to ])e Kingis leg fplentis,-' . . . xx s.

Item, for ane pair leg fplentis to ))E King, ..... xHj sItem, for tua gret bulilaris bocbt to ])E King agane pe MatW of ©Sfetfale, . xxviij s.

Item, to Martin Bail5e of pe bors fcboing, be the Kingis command, . . v H.

Item, to J)e Armoraris pat brocht pE Kingis leg fplentis, of drink-filuer, . . ij s.

Item, to Sir Johne Home, . . . . . . . x K.

Item, to Andro Stewart, \t IBuftt of ?II6anMfe iax^t, vi Fr. cr. . iiijti. iiij i.

Aug. 13. — Item, in Drumfrefe, to iWcnStralfS to fe paim horfis to ©Sfettale, and fyne agane to
Drumfreife, .......... xlij s.

Aug. 14. — Item, to pE Fyparis of Drumfrife, .... xiiij s.

Aug. 17. — Item, to pe man hangit tjt iffj&cbfo at the Hullirbufs, . . xiiij s.

Item, for ane raip* to hing Jmim in, ...... viij d.

Aug. 18. — Item, to ane gyde^ to pas with Sir Thomas Alane to Edinburghe for wyne to pE
King, in ^sftBale, . . . . . . . . . ix s.

Item, payit to James Redeheuche he gaif to an Inglife man, to pas to 3tortt 33acrc for prouifione, in Canonbi), • . . • . ■ . . xv s. vj d.

Aug. 19. — Item, to ane Inglifeman brocht ane deire to pE King fra ilorSSacrf, xxviij s.

Item, to pe Priour of CarlllcS tua men that brocht prefentand mavafy" fra pe faid Priour
to pE King, . . . . . • • • . . Ivjs.

Item, to tua wiffis brocht aill to pE King, fra ^ir Jiojnc iHuSgrabc, . . xxviij s.

Aug. 20. — Item, to Hew Muureif that come to Caiioniu fra ]ie Quene,'' . Ivj s.

Item, to ^tr Sloljne ittuSgrahcS man that blew the hunting^ to pE King, . xiiij s.

Aug. 21. — Item, to pe man that hangit tljcffilfbtS in Canonbl), be the Kingis command, xiiij s.

Iteyn, to tua Inglise wemen that fang in pE Kingis pail^eouue,^ . . xxviij s.

Aug. 22. — Item, for ane hors to pe cartair that bed his hors dede at the Hullirbufs, drawand
pe pail^eounis, be the Kingis command,'" .... . . iiij li.

Aug. 23.— //ew, in Slotfimaliane tops King to play at peCartis" with JtorB IDatrc, xhj s. viijd.

Aug. 24 — Item, the King come to IDrumflCtSe furth of Eskdale, (to) the Justice and
LoRDis to pe 3)tt$ttce itlfr pair, and remanit at pe faid Air, xxiij dayis, to pE Justices expeniis ilk
day xl s, . . . . . . . • . . xlvj ti.

Aug. 25. — Item, to pE King at cartis with ICorK SaJttr, . . . vij Y\.

Aug. 31, — Item, be the Kingis command to Sir Alexander Jerdene and his men, for
pe taking of ^il) JtintlfSau and other tua with him, eftir the tenour of pe Proclamatioune, xxx ti.

Sep. 2. — Item, to James Tailjour to pas to feche tjjt UrmStrangiS to pE King, xiiij s.

Sep. 8. — Item, to pe dFctriS of BrumfrciS xiiij s.,'- and of OTtgtoune, • . xiiij s.

Sep. 11. — Item, to Johne Goldfmytli, for the turfing of the organis in ©^hbalc,''' xlij s.

/to?!, to pE PiPARis of Drumfreife, ..... xxviij s.

' Fr. Lit (Incajiip ; a portnble bed he carried with him to the field, and in all his journeys and hunting excursions.
* Flexible mfiil for the back parts and joints of the limbs. ^ Greaves. * Rope. ^ Guide. Before highroads were cut, travelling must have been, in al! senses, a serious undertaking in those lawless districts. " Malmsey wine. ' The Qi'een at that period appears to have kept up a constant and anxious correspondence with her absent
lord. *^ Hunt's up, or some favourite hunting air on the bugle. "• The royal tent ; pavilion. "* These Accounts
abound in almost every leaf willi simihu' acts of generosity and consideration for the poor and unfortunate. " Numerous entries of this nature run through the whole accounts. '^ It is unnecessary to cite each payment of this sort,

which were profusely bestowed wherever the King went. '^ The King seldom left home without preparations for

hunting, music, archery, golf, Sec, and the Organis always accompanied him, when he was to be stationary, for some
time, at any place.

17 Jac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 123

APPENDIX.

Sep. 12. — Item, to fe Franche fmyth to pE Kingis hors fhoing, fene pE King com fra Edinburgh, ......... xxviiij s. vj d.

Sep. 13.— /ton, to ^\x JSitijarS CjjanipkiiS ilrlen^tralfS,' Inglise men, that playit to fE
King, . . . . . . . • • • 1^ s.

Item, to William Cunnyngliames wif, in Drumfrelfe, for ])E Kingis bele chere,^ xti.

Sep. li. — Item, in itotjtnaljanc to ane pur man that all f e Court tuk his hay fra him, be the
Kingis command, . . . • . • • • • xs.

Nov. 16 Item, for tua dofane barrit boltis^ for ])E King, • . xvj s.

Item, for xij blent '' boltis, . . . . . • • iij s.

Item, for ane pund corfe-bow threid, . . . . • . ij s.

Item, for iij pair wyndefe cordis for corfe-bowis, . . . . vj s.

Jan. 24, 1504-5 /ton, for ane corsebow and ane water-dog to |ie King,^ . viti.

Item, ])e faid day to ane Tale Teller, that tellit Tales to ])e King,^ . . ix s.

Feb. 1 Item, to James Hog, for dichting of viij fuerdis, binding of ])air handis, agane

Faftingis Evin to fe JTiiriiaiJtltg, dichting of tber fteil fadilles with ymree, tua tre axes, and tua fpere
hedes, . . . . . . . . . . iij ti. ij s.

Feb. 2. — Item, to tjjf <&t5arfd that danfit to ])E King and Quene, be the Kingis command,
vij Fr. cr. . . . . . . . . . . iiij ti. xviij s.

Feb. 3. — Item, payit to Robert, cultellar, for vj gilt dagaris to jiE King, grathing of fe Kingis
fchapis," and couering of ])e famjTi, grathing of fuordis, fchethtis, and beltis to Jiaim, binding of fuord
handis with filk and cordis of filk to fe King, fene Mydfomer bipaft, of findry prices, as his compt
bill proportis, . . . . . . . • . vij ti. x s.

Item, to 38 faid Robert for iiij lang fuordis for tjc 33atreS/ and iiij fchort fuordis foi- CTufnaiJtng
at dTaSttriiigfeCrbi'iT, ilk pece x s., . . . ... iiij ti.

Item, for xxvj fokket hedis for pE Bar and Turnaying, . . . xxvij s,

Item, for xxiiij virales and diamandis for ju^ttlig Sptvfe, . . xij s.

Item, for Ij speris for fe faid Turnaying, ilk pece ij s., . . . v ti. ij i.

Item, for ane ax-fchac,^ ....... xviij d.

Item, for xij cotis and xij pair hofe, half Scottis blak and half quhit,^'' to xij (iHorri5) llaiT;$atr($.
be the More" Taubroneris devife, agane JfaStrrfligt^ CFblir, be the Kingis command,'- xiij ti. ij 5.

Feb. 9. — Item, to J)e Armorar that put one tj)e StfltgtS ]&arlU5, . . xiij 5.

Feb. 10. — Item, payit for vj elne grene taifeti to Pate Sinclair to aUf routr for \)\i> T)or55 at
the STonrnaptng at Fasteringis Evin, ilk elne XV s., . . . iiij ti. x s.

Feb. 23. — Item, to Alex. HerlTe to loufe fE Kingis ftope,'^ quhilk wes tane quhen he was
aiibot of 8Fitrf5ount,'* . . . . . . . vj ti. viij i. viij d.

Sep. 14. — Item, to ]'e four Staltflie #Tfn5tvaIf5, and the ^ore tauirOJiar, to fee painihors
to |9ei)Iig, ......... xxviij s.

Item, to ane Ingllfenian and ane woman that wer fpuiljeit'^ paiTand to Quhitherne, be ane

Inglifman and ane Scottis man, quhilk werjuftifeit 5airfoir, in 9!t,Ol5inaBen, . . xilij s.

1 The number of minstrels belonging to the King's honseholrl at this period, was thirtij-one. Their names and salaries are regularly stated. * Fr. entertainment ; vulgarly ' bclhj cheer.' ^ Ribbed arrows or quarrclh for his crossbows. It may, however, imply that they were hnrbtil, though that was an unusual shape for quarrells, wliich were
square in the points. Had the word been written berrit or boirit, it would signify sounding or whistling arrows.
' Mixed, of various sorts. ^ The King seems to have been hawking, almost daily, near Linlithgow, Falkland,
&c. On Nov. 15, there is a curious entry, ' Iteji, to ane man passit in ane Loch, and rasit dukis (wild-ducks) to
ye Halkis, be the Kingis command, ij s. iiij d.' The water dog was evidently to pick up the g.ame brought down by
the * boltis.' ^ Such payments are very frequent. ' Scabbards. ^ The Barrage or Lists for the Tournament. '-' H.atchet, or axe-shaft ? '" 3/t)^to/; paity-coloured ; black and white. " Woorisli or black
drummer. A Morion. " On the margin, ' .-Jfor gigaris.' " A silver drinking-cup. " This
affords a very remarkable instance of the manners of the times, and of the revels sanctioned by long usage during
the daft dat/s.' Tlie KiVg himself mingled freely in all the sports, and gained for himself the love and atlmiration of
his people, being remarkably dexterous in all amusements, games, and manly exercises. '^ Spoiled ; robbed.

124 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1513.

APPENDIX.

Sep. 17 — Item, to fe rrufttt SFttar of iSrttmfreiSe' that faug to pE King in Lochmabane, be
THE KiNGis command,^ ........ xiiij s.

Oct. 5. — Item, to thre men to pas to pE Scheref of Ed". with ^lane purinaS, quhilk was
juftefyit, . . . . . . . . . . vijs.

Aug. 2, 1506 — Item, payit to Andro Aytoun he gaif to pe men that bed Jie CPrStJemen'' fra
Striueling to Edinburghe, qubilkis \t CFrlc of ^untlo tuke, and turfit fe mannis heid,^ xiiij s.

Oct. 20 — Item, to Ruthirfurd, Meffenger, to pas to ])E Justice, to warne him of be balding
of \t afrcg, . • . . . . . . . .vs.

Dec. i\.—Item, to xxx dofane^ of bellis forftanSarfS,^ delyuerit to Thomas Bofwell, iiijli.xij s.

Jan. 1, 1506-7. — /to«,giffin to diuerfe iHengtraltS, gcbaUjmen'S, trumpttfrtiS, taubrounartiS,
fitlieTarfe, lutarijS, rlarScJaart;*, anif pfpart's, extending to kix perfonis,' . x!j ti. xj s.

Jan. 3. — Item, to ane man pailand to fE Beschop of Caithnes with fe Kingis Letteris, for
redding of fame paffit in tj)? 91 cioiS, with Maky, .... xiiij s.

Feb. 16. — Item, to JSiOJantonncS^ that fang to the King, . . xiiij s.

Item, to 68Iantomif3 that the King fechit and gert hir fing in the Qcenis chamer, xiiij s.

Feb. 17 — /to?j, to ]ic ©luetnc of JicCanongatt,' .... xiiij s.

Mar. 6. — It&n, to SSHTantoneS and her tua marrowes'" that fang with hu-, . xiiij s.

Dec. 22. — Item, for iij |3rcntit Ijuhfe to ]ie King, tane fra Snilro iHtnari';S wif, . 1 s.

Jan. 1507-8. — Item, to jie tfaft Oiufgn of \t Canongatt," . . . xiiij s.

Jan. 22. — Item, to ane 3)f Stour, be the Kingis command, . . . vs.

lum, to (giau-Stcill ilutar, . • • • . . .vs.

May 12, 1508. — Item, to Inglife Cuddy fat brocht in ane nafeit ggSe in fe clofe,'« be the
Kingis command, ...... . . xxxvj s.

Jun. 19. — Item, to i\)t Crrlc of (ffrgttt to gif to fe men that tuke f>e men fat brgnit Snirers
mf^anf, .... . . . . . vij 11.

Aug. 3. — Item, to Johne Beg, Mefllnger, to charge itortt iMaytuell and the EaiB of
3o]&nne^tottne to Ward, . . . . . . . . ix S.

Item, to aue ofer to pas to %ax'^ Crtirjtouil of ^anquj&ar,'^ with fe Kingis writing, ix i.

Feb. 9, 1511-12. — Item, to ane fallow, becaufe fE King pullit furtht his twtht, xiiij s.

Feb. 25. — Item, to Kynnard, fe harbour, for tua teith di'awiu fuitht of liis bed be fE
King," .......... xiiij s.

Feb. 27. — Item, to pas with Letteris to fummond fe jilarll ^DUlOtltounj''^ and his complices
for crymes of ilTrfSounc and ane Assise to pas fairupone, .... xiiij s.

Jun. 27, 1512. — Item, to Andro Armeflrang to pas with Letteris to ittuSgCtlf, xxviij s.

Apr. 2-1, 1513. — Item, to fummond fe EorB iHaySuelX"^ and )>e itavS of 3oJ)iU^ounr, xs.

' There are many payments to this person, who appears to have heen in great favour ■with the King. * The

King shortly after this returned to Edinburgh, and went to the North. * Highlanders. * Trussed or

packed up the man's head, to be fixed on the Ports of some burgh or castle. ^ Thirty dozen. ^ IMorricedancers. ' Ithasalready been remarked how liberal the King was in his establishment of this sort, which consisted of musicians from various countries. Besides his usual French and Italian Minstrels, he kept an Organist,
e. g. 1512-13, ]"eb. 15. ' Item, to Guilzeame, Orgauar, Frencheman, and his v complices, French Menstralis,
XKV 11. V s.' Juliane Drummond and the Italians had a payment of xxxv li, the same day for their quarter's wages.
' Wantonness. " She is elsewhere called ' the auld Queen,' and ' callit ye Queue of Mail.' '° Companions.

'' It would appear from this entry, that she was a poor maniac and a privileged pensioner. '^ A naked mask,

brought by English Cuddy, or Cuthbert, into the Palace Yard of Holyrood. " For this and the preceding entries,

see the Trials, Vol. I, ■* 77, &c. " The King's skill in surgery and leech-craft was considered unequalled in these

times, and he was extolled by contemporary writers, who assert that he was consulted by physicians and surgeons in
desperate cases. The present instancis seem to savour of fiolic only, probably arising from a foolish wager with some
of his courtiers. ".See Trials, Apr. 27, 1512, &c., Vol. I, ' p. 76. '" Robert Maxwell, son of John Lord

Maxwell, got a Charter of the Stewardship of Annandale, on his father's resignation. — Reg. Mag. Sig. xviii. 173.

1

CRIMINAL TRIALS

AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

It is an unfortunate circumstance that the regular series of the Books of
Adjournal does not commence till the 18th day of November 1524, in the
twelfth year of the Reign of King James V ; for unquestionably a variety
of very important Trials must have taken place during his minority. No doubt,
the public business of the country received a fatal shock from the disastrous consequences of Flodden-Field, and it would be long ere matters became settled after
that unhappy day, when so many of the Nobility, and the flower of the principal
families of Scotland, fell along with their King.

The Editor has endeavoured, to the utmost of his abilities, to fulfil the pledge
he made at the outset of this undertaking, by entering into a very extensive and
laborious examination of all the early Records and Collections of MSS. within
his reach, so far as connected with the objects of this present work. In his zeal to
preserve all that is important, and that bears on the history, manners, and customs of Scotland, he fears he may have encroached equally on his limits and on
the patience of the general reader, whose pui'suits, perhaps, do not lead him to
attach much value to what will be greatly prized by the historian and antiquary.
The result of these researches he now begs to submit in the illustrative Notes
and Appendix to this Reign, in the hope that they will meet with the candid
consideration of all.

What was remarked in the brief Notice prefixed to the Reign of James IV,
and to that Appendix, is equally applicable to the present portion. It may be
observed, that the Extracts from the Records of the Privy Council, which are
here given in chronological order, at the end of this and the other reigns, lie
scattered over a number of volumes, and are blended with Precepts of Charters,
Gifts, Presentations to Benefices and Offices, Legitimations, Licenses, Safe-conducts, &c. ; of which, a number of the more important papers have been selected.
To save the repetition of facts and illustrations contained in the Appendix to
this reign, the reader is referred, generally, to its contents.

126* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1524.

Curia Justiciauie Supremi domhii nojiri Regis tenfa et inchoata in Pretorio de Ediuhurghe, per honorcd/dem virum Wilelmum Scot de Bahiery,
mditem, deputatum nohUis et potentis domhii Colini Comitis Ergadie,
domini Campbel et Lome, Ji(Jliciarii Generalis Supremi domini nojiri
Regis, die Sahhati,^ xxiij" die inenjis Nouembris, anno domini M^V'xxiiy" :
Sectis vocatis et Curia affirmata.

Stistirt Clfrfe ^Ujorn into #fRrt.

Quo die, in preleucia dicti domini Jufticiarij, Nicholaus Craufurd de
OxiNGANG, Clericus Jufticiarie, tactis facrofancti Dei Evangeliis, fuum juramentum jireftitit corporale, ad fideliter miniftrand. in fuo officio Clerici Justiciarie, juxta fuam confcieneiam et difcrecionem.

^\mts,\)Ux at i\)t Hairtr of aaglanU.

Nov. 18, 1524. — Jacobus Crechtoune de Frendi-ancht, miles, fepe vocatus
ad intrandiim Robertum Stewart de Latheris, ad fubeundum legem pro
arte et parte crudelis interfectionis quondam Jacobi Stewart de Ryland ; proiit
ipfe plegius devenit pro ipfius introitu, fub pena V li. Et non comparen. in
amerciamento dicte fumme ; et quod dictus Robertus ad cornu fupi'emi domini
noftri Regis deuunciatur, et omnia bona fua, mobilia et immobilia, fuo vfui efchaetur. Et hoc redditum fuit pro judicio.^

[Jacohus Prejiotine, hnrgen. et Prefiden.^ hurgi de Ed' Jvfticiarius Deputatus.']

iHurtitr of t\)t Crrasurrr of drtitnbiusf)'

Jan. 7,1524-5, {die Sahhati.) — Thomas HAM]\iYLTOUN,called 'vnfaiiyt^^
William Were, William Were, his brothei"'s fon, and Gawin Hammyltoune, were
denounced Rebels, &c. for the Murder of Mr James Haliburtone, burgefs and
Treafurer of Edinburgh. — (Maij 11, 1525.) Weir of Stanebyris" became furety

for William, his fon and heir-apparent, and AVeir, alfo his fon, that they

fliould underly the law, on xv days' warning, for Intercommuning with Thomas
Haramyltoun and William Weir, Rebels.

Cominon Cljcft, iHurJjrr, l^.ipr, kt,

Jan. 30. — John Steill, alias Kcmpy Stedl," Adam and Richard Bell,
convicted by an Affile, and hanged for common Theft and Relet of theft, and

' See Note to Nov. 9, 1493. ■ It lias been tlionglu proper to insert the two entries wliicli occur

in the regular Books of Adjournal, altliongh perliaps immaterial in themselves, for the purpose of
affording a specimen of the manner in whicli tlie Record was then kept. ^ Provost. * Unsanctified, unhallowed. ^ His Christian name not given. See Feb. 4, 1525-(i, from whicli it would

appear he was shortly afterwards Murdered. •' Keinpy denotes a person given to strive or contend
for the mastery ; a champion (' canipioun ' in old writings), a wrestler, &c.

12 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 127

of common Murder and Rape : And for Intercommuning with tlie Englifli thieves

and traitors. Assisa.*

Alex. Kirkpatrik of Kirkraichaell, knt. Williame Bailie of Bakbe, Alexander Pennycuke,

Johne Peunycuke of that Ilk, Alex. Dalmahoy of that Ilk, Thomas Hammyltoune,

Alex. Crechtoun of Newhall, The Lard of Hanginfchaw, Johne Douglas, David Vacbe,

James Maitland of Auchingaffil, Tlie Lard of Comiltoune, Thomas Bynne of that Ilk.

33outx 61) tl)t Movticv Barons to assist ti)t iCail of ^njrus, ^r.

Apud Ed", xxvij 3IarfiJ, anno T" V'xxv", In hojpkio domini Cancellarii .
Sederunt, CanceUarius, Eplfcopus Candklecaje, Comes Angufie, Ahhates

de Ablrhrothok, Sancte Cruets, , Dominus Flemyng, Clerkus

JuJJkkme {NkJiolaus Craufurd de Oxlngang), Magijkr Adam Otterhurne.

The quhilk day, ARCHIBALD EuLL OF Anguse, in prefence of })e Loi'dis
above writtin, fwore })at he fuld lelely and treuly ferue in to THE office of
Wardanery and Lieutenentry of the Bordouris, and to ftanche Thift,
ReiflF, Slauchter, and al vtheris inconvenientis comraittit vpon our foverane lordis
trew liegis; after }je forme and tenour of ]5e Commiffioun gevin to him ]3airupone.

Comperit Andro Ker qfCesfiirde, Walter Scot of BuJecIeuche, Andro Ker
of Farnijhirjl, 3Iark Ker of Dolphinftoune, George Butherfurd of Hundolee,
and fwore })at })ey, be paim felf, kynne, freyndis, feruandis, and pairt-takaris,
and al fat ])ai may raife and ftere,^ fall lelely'' and treuly ferue Archibald
Erll of Anguse, ryde, gang, and ferue him at J)air poffible power, in to ])e
office of Wardanery and Lieutenentry, for ftanching of Thift, Reif, Slauchter,
and inconvenientis, and for Jje executione of justice, and furth-bering of the
KiNGis autorite. 77?^ Lardof Hnnthill, the Lard of BethrowU, the Lard of
WeUis, James Ker of jMerfingtone, James Murray of FaidehiU, WiUiam Kirktone, the Lard of Haldane, Walter Scott of Syntoiine, Robert Scott of Allan ehciuche, fwore to ]>e effect above Avrittin.

In prefence of ])e Lordis compei"it Andrew Ker of Cesfurde, ^Valter Scot of
Bukcleuche, Andro Ker of Fernyhirft, Mark Ker of Dolphingstoune, ]>e Lard of
Hundolee, \>e Lard of Himthill, ])e Lard of BethrowU, ]je Lard of Wellis, James
Ker of Merfingtoune, James Murray of Fawlohill, William Kirktoune, ]^e Lai-d
of Haldane, Walter Scott of Syntone, Robert Scot of AUanehalche, David Hoppringill, in Gallofchelis, Adam Scot in Trufchelaw, and Robert Scott, Tutor of
Howpajlot, and of their avne confentis has bund and oblift })ame, and ilk ane of
Jjame, to rife with pair kynne, freynds, feruandis, part-takaris, and all pat pai may
fteir, with Ai'chibald Erll of Angufe, Lieutenent, for ])e furth-putting of all

' This is the first recorded Assise in these books. It may be remarked, that the two Assises immediately following also consisted of thirteen persons. - Stir up, influence. ^ Loyally.

128 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. AD. 1525.

LiDDisDALE MENNE, EsKDALE, and EwisDALE, )jare wiffis and barnys, now
duelland within pe boundis of Tevidale, Ettrik-Forest, and boiindis adjacent J)airto, and hald Jjaim furth of pe famyne in tyme to cum. And attour' Jje
forfaidis perfonis hes bundin and oblift Jjame, and ilk ane of ))ame, foi* Jjame felf,
vndir pe jjane of tinfale^ of lyfe, land, and guddis, Jiat gyfe' oney of Jjare men,
kynnifemen, feruandis, tenentis, adherentis, affifteris, pairt-takaris, or duellis
within J)are heritagis, rovmys, bayljeryis,^ takis, or ftedings, committis ony trefpas, fie as Slachteris, Murtheris, Trefonis, Revifingis, Spul3eis, Thifts, or vjier
crymes, pe forfaidis perfonis fall bring in pe committeris jjairof befor pe faid
LlEUTENENT, or his deputis, to vndirly pe law for pe faid crimes ; Jjai beand
requirit Jjairto, vponne xx dais ; or ellis, fall within pe faid xx dayis after Jjai be
requii'it, put pe faydis perfonis, Jjare wiffis, ])are barnys, furth of pe cuntr^, and
hald ])aim furth of pe famin, and efchete J^are gudis, to be deliuerit to pe pairti
dampnagit. And J)is Band to endure quhill pe feift of Candilmes nixt to cum ;
and pe faid Act to be extendit anent Slachteris, pe committeris fairof beand put
to pe Home.

Attour, pe Lordis will and declaris J)at pe landit men and Heidifmen' of
Tevidale," Sherefdome of Selkirk, Ettrike Forrest, and boundis pairof,
now beand and abfent," [' sail obferue and keip pe famin Band, ficlyke as and {i/')
they had compeirit and obleifl thaim thairto' ] in every poynte, efter pe forme
and tenour pareof, and vndir pe panys contenit Jjairintill.

In prefens of pe Loi'dis of Counfal comperit George Lord Hume, the Lard
of Coldoinhiollis," the Lard of Polivorthe, the Lard of Craujione, the Tut our of
Wedirhurue, the Tutour of Langtoune, the Lard of Suyntone, and fuore Jjat
])ai fuld lelely" and trewly ferue Erll of Anghouse in pe officis of Wardenrie
and Lieutenery, with parae felffis, J)air kynne, freyndis, feruandis, men, tenentis,
and all J)at Jjai may raife and flere, quhen and quhat tymes J)ai falbe requirit be
him or his deputis J)airto ; or fall ryde, gang, affift, and fupld pe faid Erie, in
ftauching of Thift, reiffis, flachtaris, and \pev inconvenientis, and in pecifing of |)e
cuntr^, exercicioune of juftice, and furth-putting our foverane lordis auttorit^ :
And })airupone gaif Jjair bodely athis.

In prefens of pe Lordis of Counfale forfaid, comperit George Lord Hume, pe
Lard of Coldaineknollis, pe Lard of Polworthe, pe Lard of' Coijhy, pe Lard of
Suyntone, pe Tutour of ^Vederburne, pe Tutour of Langtone, of Jjare avn confent Band and Oblefl; parae, and ilkane of pame, to ryfe with Jjare kyne, freiudis,
men, feruandis, pairt-takaris, and all ])at will do for Jjame, with Archbald Erll

'Moreover. ^ Loss ; from the verb to <)/«e. ^ If. * Bailiaries. ^ Cliiefs, lieads of Clans.
^ Teviotdale. ' Tliere is an evident omission here. The words within brackets, which follow, are

supplied to fill up the sense, they being taken from another similar passage in this remarkable document.
' Hume of Cowdenknows. ' Loyally.

ISJac. IV. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 129

of Angus, Wardane and Lieuetenant of Jje Eift and Myddill Marchis, for pacyfing of pe cuntrd, perfewing of thefBs and tratouris, exercicioune of juftice, and
furthe-putting of ]>e cuntiy, of ])E KiXGis autorite, qiihen and alle oft as })ai
falbe requirit be him or his deputis pairto. And attour, pe forfaidis perlbnis has
inlikwyfe bundin and obleft Jjaini, and ilkane of ))aira foi* Jjaim felf, vnder pe pane
of tinfale of lyfe, landis, and gudis, gyf ony of fiair kynnifmen, feniandis, tenentis, adherentis, afifteris, pairt-takaris, adherentis,' pairt-takis or duellis within
J)air heritagis, rovmys, bail5eryis, takis or lledingis, committis ony trefpaffis,
fic as Slaughtaris, IMurthuris, Trefonis, Revifingis, Spule5eis, Theftis, or vper
crimes, the forfaidis perlbnis fall bring in pe committeris, and j^are, of before pe
faid Lieuetenent and his deputis, to vnderly pe law for pe laid crymes, Jjai beand
requirit ])airto apone xx dayis ; or ellis, fall within xx dayis eftir ])ai be requirit,
put pe faidis perlbnis, ])air wyffis, J^are barnys, furth of pe cuntre, and hald Jjaim
furthe of pe famin, and efdiete Jjair gudis, to be delyuerit to pe pairti dampnalit.
And ))is Band to endure to pe firft of Candilmes nixt to cum ; and pe laid Act
to be extendit anent Slauchteris, pe committeris fiareof beand put to pe home, &c.
Attoure, pe Lordis will and declaris, pat pe remanent of landit men and
Heidis-men ])at is duelland within )je Merse and Lauderdale pat comperit
nocht, and oblift pame in pis Act before written, fall obferue and keip pe famin
Band, ficlike as and' pai had comperit and oblift paim pairto in euery poynt,
efter pe foi'rae and tenour pareof, and vndir pe panys contenit pairintill.

Stu'jstiiction in iHnritimr Cases.

May 4, 1525. — The quhilk day comperit Williame Andirfone, burgefs
of Edinburghe, in prefens of my Lord Juftice and Lordis of Counfale, and becom cautionar and Ibuirtie for pe fchip callit ' pE fleand Gaist'' of AnsterDAIM,' pe merchandis, marinaris, and gudis being in pe famyne, now being in pe
Port and havyne of Leithe, pat pe faid fchip, merchandis, marynaris, nor gudis,
fall nocht be remouit nor tranfportit furth of pe famyne, vnto pe tyme pe pley*
be decided betuix pE skiff arts and marynaris of pe faid fchip, and pE MEiiCHANDis OF CowpER and Saxctaxdrois, and Ross Herald, before pe
Lordis of Counfale.

\_Collmis Comes Ergadle, c^., Jufticiarius GeneraUs.']

Siuistiirtion of Xiyt 35.illirs .iiiti ^fjrriff of (!?tiiiifeura!) — <!!>fftres of
^fjnMtrsi)tp of tfjr CIti) nut Cotiiitp, in Criminal iW.ittcrs»

The famyne day, in prefens of my Lordis Justice and of Counsale,

comperand James Preftoune, Prefident (Provoft) of pe burghe of Edinburghe, and

' Tliis word is repeated. Perhaps for ' adheris.' '^ As if. ' The flying ghost or spirit of

Amsterdam. * Law-plea ; litigation.

VOL. I. t R

130 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1525.

Ballies of pe famyne, one ])at ane pairt, and Patrik Barone, Sheref deput of
Edinburghe, in pe name and behalf of pe principale Sheref ])airof ; and of pair
avne fre will appointit and aggreit, in J)is wyle ; That is to fay, Quhat time
ony Theif or trefpaflbur beis apprehendit within pe fredonie and jurifdictioune of
pe burghe of Edinburghe, and beis convict of ony cryme, })at pe faid President
(Provoft) and Rallies fall vfe pF. office of Scherefschip pertenyiug to ]>air
office, in J)at caife ; and convoy ]3ame fouerly to pe place quhare Jtai fuld be juftifyt,' and remain Jjairat quliill" ])ai be dede. And inlikwife, pe faid Schereff
of Edinbui'ghe and his deputis, quhare ony Theif or trefpalTour beis apprehendit
outwithe pe fredome of pe faid burghe, and prefentit before pe Jullice or his
deputis in jugement, gif f)ai be convict, be ane Affife, of quhatlumeuer cryme,
J)at pe faid Schereffis fall vfe his office of Scherefschip pertenying to ])air office
vpone pe faid trefpalTouris, and convoy them fouerly to pe place quhare J)ai falbe
ordanit to be juftifyt, and remane Jjairat quhill J^ai be dede.

Jun. 13. — Gilbert Earl of Cassillis, David Hynde, James Mure
in Balloehtoyll, Gilbert Kennedy, ' pe Proveftis fone,' and John Montgomeiy in
Balfagart, were acquitted by an Affife of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of
Martin Kennedy of Lochland.

The Earl of Argyle prefided at all the diets of this cafe, wherein almoft
every Kennedy^ of any confequence was called, as art and part ; together with
a very long catalogue of the ufual allies and followers of the houfe of Cassillis ;
fuch as Robert Grahame of Knokdoliane, Thomas Corry of Keldwood, John Mure
of Auchindrane, Bartholomew Craufurde of Kerfe,David and Duncan his brothers,
&c., for all of whom the Earl of CaffiUis became fui-ety, that they iliould appear
and anfwer at the bar for that crime, and alfo for the Slaughter of Gilbert IVIakilwraithe.

AssisA.

Johnne Mure of Arrocbill, Walter Maxwell of Aikhede, Adam Stewart of Daldowds-,

Alexander Douglas of the Manys, James Graliarue of Bankell, George Colquhoun,

Johnne Maxwell of Stanelie, Robert Calender of Ballinchoiche, Martyne Mure of Bogend.

James Stewart of Tuedy, Johnne Striueling of Kere, kny', Johue Stewart of Halrig,

Thomas Kailfloun of that Ilk, Hew Douglas, burgefs of Ed", Thomas Abiriietljy in Glencorle.

The Earl of Caffillis afterwards compounded with the King for the unlaws

in which his followers were found liable, which muft have amounted to a very

large fum. The original Warrant is Hill preferved,^ and is given here as a

Ipecimen of fuch documents.

' Put to death, executed. B. Lat. jmtlficare. ^ Until. " For illustrations of all matters

connected with this subject, and, in general, with the Feuds, &c., of Ayrshire, Wigtoun, &c., the reader
is referred to Hijiory of the Kennedies, Quarto, Edin. 1830. ' Orig. INISS. belonging to the

High Court of Justiciary.

12JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 131

Rex,

Justice Clerk, Wit 56 our weilbelouit coufing and counfalour, Gilbert Erle of CasSILLIS, hes componit with ws for all vnlawis in ]<e quhilkis he was adiugitt, for nonentre of his breper,
and all vjieiis his freindis and feruandis, before our Jufticis or fair deputis, in our Towbuth of Edinbarghe, quhatfumeuer dais, to haue vndjrlyin our lawis for Slauchtiris and crimis quhairof ]>ai wer
delatit, contenit in our Adiornale, vnto |)e day of \ie date heirof ; and hes reffauit fra him payment for
Jie famyn, at Jie making heirof: And Difchargis him of all Jie faidis vnlawis, be }iir prefentis, for euer.
It is our will herfor, and We charge 50W, ]iat incontinent ]iir our Letteris fene, 36 draw all ]ie faidis
vnlawis furth of our iaid Adiornale bukis, and defele ' ]>e famyn, je trepand pir our Letteris for jour
Warrant. Subscriuit w' our hand at Edinburghe, fe xviij day of Junij, Jie jere of God r".V"^^.xxvj
^eris, and of our regnne fe xiij jere. James R.

^lauflljtei — ^n aiesisr UirtfttU not to trrpart from ti)c f olfiooti),
until tf)t\) ijati tit\)tv atq^nitttti or * tvliV t1)t ^annrU

Jim. 21. — William Carnys of Orchartoun, and vtheris, his complicis.
— James Johnefoun, mafer, comperit in prefence of f)e Lard of Baluery, Juftice,
fittand in Jugenient in J^e Tolbutii of Edinburghe, and Thefaurare, and faid jjat
J)e Chancillar and Lordis of Counfale commandit pe Juftice, J)at he fuld caufe J)e
Aflife chofin vpoun William Carnys of Orchax'toun, and vtheris his complicis,
delatit of pe Slauchtir of ^Villiam Langmuir, proceid, and depart nocht furthe of
])e Tolbuthe,quhil Jjai had ow])" maid J^ame quyte, or fylit fame of ])e faid Slauchtir.

^irari) — ^luntjrriiicj rjooUs from a MM^ in Eeitf).

Aug. 14. — Capitane James Cokburne, Alexander Schort, Dauid
Logane, Dauid Mufchet, Dauid Dauidfone, and Thomas Logane, convicted and
Hanged, as Pirates, for plundering certain goods and merchandize from Annand
Peirfoun, dwelling in Norway, and his mariners, out of his fliip in the harbour
of Leith. John Gardner acquitted by the Aflife.

^Iau0l)trr of SJol)" 3iortf df lemfns'— ^ iHiitor rdrastlj from i)i9
Monti of (Cautioiiarn to rittrr a^annrl.

Aug. 18. — The following curious Supplication, with the deliverance indorfed thereon, is preferved among the Warrants of Court.

' My Lordis of Counfal and Auditouris of Chekker, \iito jour 1. huimlie menis and ihewis I, jour
feruitour, George Geddes of Cutiiilhall: That quhare Williame Tuedy, ane fcolar, wes delatit
of airt and pairt of Jie Slauchter of vmquhile Johne Lord Flemyng, and is innocent Jiairof, confidering, Jie time of Jie committing of ]ie famin, he wes at J'e fcule in Edinburghe : And becaus I duell
amang his frendis, )iai follifl and tiftit' me to be fouerte for him, for his entre to Jie law: And becaus
he durfl nocht compeir, lie being innocent, for feir of his parti,* I am vnlawit for his nonentre befor
Jie Jullice ; howbeit, as I traifi, I fuld nocht haue bene reflauit fouerte, nor fuld nocht haue bene
vnlawit, confidcring I wes and is of lefs-age,"" within xv jeris, and may nocht nor fuld nocht be fouirte,

' Discharge. ' See Appendix to tliis reign, &c. ° Enticed. * Adversary; prosecutor. ' In minority.

132 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1526,

of ]>e law. Heirfor I befek ^our 1. to liaue confideratioune herof, aud gif command to ]ie Juflice
Clerk to draw me out of Jie Adioiiial, fua pat I be nocht pondit' for Jie faid vnlaw. According to
juftice, and jOur anfuer I hefeik. [Indorled] Jpud Edinburghe, xviij Augiijti, anno V'.V'^.xxu
The Lordis Ordanis, ]iat becaufe J)is complenar is of lefs-aige, ])at pairfor fe Clerk of Jufticiary
difcharge him of fe fouerte fundin be him in ])is mater, for pis vnlaw, and put him furth of his bukis.

Clericus Register. Alex. Cambust". R. Glasgu. Ja. Decanus Abd,

^IauQ:][)trr of tf)r JCatrti of ^tonriinrrs.

Feb. 4 et 12, 1525-6. — Lindsay, Rector of Colbintouiie, finds caution
(Robert Lord Lyle) for his entry before the Jufticiar, on Feb. 19, to underly the
law for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of . ... Weyre of Stanebyris.

dfniUs brttorrn tfjr Itairtig of ^iiupsfcil^ aiiis ixix\\\\\\d)nt\\.

Mar. 19-20. — John Charteris of Amysfeild, Robert and John, his
fons, Gilbert and John Greir, brothers of the Lairds of Craufurdtoun and lie,
Robert Charteris, brother of the Laird of Amysfeild, and thirty-leven others,
found caution to underly the law on May xxix, in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for
the cruel Slaughter of Roger Kilpatrick, fon and heir apparent of Sir Alexander
K. of Kirkniichaell, ku' ; Aiul for the Mutilation of the faid Sir Alexander.

Mar. 24. — Sir Alexander Kirkpatrick of Kirkniichaell, knight,
Robert, John, and William, his ions, found caution (Roger K. of Knok) to ajipear
the fame day, to imderly the law for all crimes to be imputed againit them by
John Charteris of Amysfeild. — He alfo became furety for the entry of William
his brother, Henry K. junior, and Alexander his brother, Mr Cuthbert Welllie,
and twenty-two otbei's, the fame day.

#Iau0l)ttr of t|)r Eaiitr of Iuf|)in!)eri)i).

Jun. 26, 1526. — Hugh Earl of Eglintoune, delated for art and part
of the Slaughter of Edward Cunynhame of Auchinhervy. John Lindfay of
Dunrod, his cautioner, fined for the Earl's non-appearance, in 100 1. The cautioners of Ai'chibald Craufurd of Hanyng, Archibald Montgomery Mafter of
Eglintoune, James Montgomery, brother to the Earl, Mr William Montgomery,
and others, were fined in the like furas — for their abfence. The principals were
denounced rebels.

^toutljrrif of t\)t iuns's STrtiUn-i).

Jul. 11. — Robert Bruce of Erthe, and Mr Thomas Bruce and James
Bruce of Mungowellis, his brothers, received the King's Refpite for art and
part of the Stouthreif of certain mangonels ' and Artillery coming from the

' Poinded ; distrained. • O. Fr. mangonel— An engine for slinging or darting stones, large

arrows, he. with prodigious force. They seem to have been used long after the invention of artillery.

14 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 133

Castle of Stirling to the King's Majefty, at his burgh of Edinburgh, for
the defence of his perfon : And for art and part of the Stouthreif of the King's
Letters from his Officers ; and laying violent hands upon them.

Jul. 11. — Walter Druwmond, Acquitted by an Affile of art and part
of the theft and concealment of the King's Crown from his Crown-room, with
the precious Hones therein contained, furth of the Palace or Monaftery of

HOLYROOD.'

^lautjfjtrr of tf)t EattlJ of SturijinTjaibi).

Aug. 1. — Hugh Earl op Eglintoune ; Archibald JMontgomery, his
grandfon and heir apparent ; Mr William, his fon ; and James, his brother, find
caution (Mr John Campbell of Lundy) to underly the law at the next Jufticeaire of Air, for art and jiart of the Slaughter of Edward Cunynghame of Auchinharvy.

Aug. 4. — Thomas Craufurd, heir of Auchinamys ; James Monfode, heir
of the Laird of Monfode ; John Frifell of Knok ; John, his fon ; and twelve
others, procure the Eai'l for their cautioner, that they should appear and anfwer
for the fame crime.

?&i0f) Ci'tason — dFirlU of iifTdrost — Common Wijtlt, ^t,

Aug. 9. — Jajies Elwald, Convicted for treafonably coming, in company with Sir Walter Scott of Branxhelme, kn', and Avith the Traitors and
Thieves of England and Scotland, againft the King and his Lieutenant at Melrose ; and for common Theft and Relet of theft. — Hanged.

<^IausI)tev of ti)t EairK of CtsfiuJj.

Aug. 14, — The following Warrant is pi'eferved among the Papers of the
Court. Alexander Hoppringill, in Toi'fonfe ; John, James, George, and Adam,
his fons ; James, his fifter-fou ; George Chefliolme of that Ilk, and eight others
of no note, found caution to appear on 13th.

Justice Clerk, Wit 56, it is underfland to »ii/ Lord of Aiigufe and to the Lard of Farnyher/i,
Mark Ker, and ])e laif^ of ]>e fieiidis' of Jie Lard of Cesfurd,'' that Jiir perfonis vndirwrittin, delatit
of art and parte of fe Slaucliter of the Lard of Cesfurd, ar innocent fairof, and wer uoclit at fe
committing of Jie farayn : That is to fay, William Sklater, Dutho Paterfone, William Peblis, Thomas
Peblis, Mongo Williamfone, Thomas Dickefono, Jolme Bard of Poflb, Alexander Bard, Thomas Bard,
Niniane Bard, Alex'^ Horfbruck of jiat Ilk, Johne Gyffane of Cardrono, Thomas Myddilmefl of Gre-

' James Kirkaldy of the Grange, Francis Ramsay of Foxtoun, John Rankclour of that Ilk, and others, were on
this Assise. ' The rest, or remainder. ' Blood relations. * Andrew Ker.

134 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1526.

viftoune, William Tuedy, and James Cokburne. 3e fall ])airfore draw ]>e faidis perfouis and fair
fourteis fmth of fe bukis of Adiornale, fat fai be nocht accufit nor trublit for Jie faid actioune. And
alfe, fat ^e defeife' in fe Adiornale, William Peblis, vnlawit fis lafl Monunday fornonentie of Mongo
Williamfone before fe Juflice, becaufe fe faid Mongo enterit fis Teuifday before fe Jullice, in fe
Tolbuth of Edinburgh, and hes fundin new fouerte for bis entre agane fe thrid day of fe nixt Juflice.
air of Peblis, or vpone xv dayis warning. 3e kepand pis WaiTant, fubfcriuit with ray hand, At
Edinburgh, ]>c xiiij day of Augnfl, the 3ere of God I^.V^ tuenty and fex 5eris. Wk The^.^

Aug. 17. — Robert Kilgour, Convicted of art and part of the forethought felonj% committed when vmq"' Sir John Kilgour, his brother, and he
cruelly flew John Giblbne and Thomas Wilfoue, his fervant, Aug. 12, 1526. —
Aug. 23. He was ordained by the Earl of Angus, Lieutenant of the Eaft and
South Marches, to be beheaded.^

^i(j!j CiT ason — 3lti)i)ins inar afladtst tijt Mixq^q Eieiitenants,

Oct. 24. — Andrew Crechtoune of Craufurdtovm, John Crechtoune of
Kirkpatrick, and forty-fix others, were denounced Rebels, and put to the horn,
for not appearing to underly the law for Convocatioun of the lieges in great
numbers, armed in warlike manner, &c., and coming upon Archibald Earl of
Angus, and James Earl of Arran, his Majefty's Lieutenants, near the Church of
Linlithgow, being there for the time in the King's fervice, and exercifing his
authority ; and treafonably invading them and other faithful lieges for their
flaughter and deflruction.

'es*

JiH^i) Cftason — 3HibatJiiifl: tift (irarl o( SKrian, ^c,

Dec. 19. — John Lord Lindesay of Byris. — Sir William Scot of
Balwery, kn', became cautioner for the entry of Lord Lindefay of Byris, on the
third day of the Juftice-air of Fife, or ellewhere, on xv days warning, for art
and part of Convocation of the lieges at the Burgh of Stirling, on the 1ft, 2d,
and 3d days of September laft : And for art and part of holding private Councils
at the faid burgh, on the faid days : And for art and part of the forethought
felony and invafion made at Linlithgow, on the faid 3d September, upon James
Earl of Arran and his part-takers, there aflembled for the prefervation and
defence of the King's perfon.

9[t)itiing from tlje lUiii {o( Eilitiistlale) aflainst t!)e UovXitv Cljirbrs.

[Without at all entering into the cause or consequences of the Raid here referred to, which the

Editor considers quite unnecessary in this place, the facts being so well known,^ he has thought that

' Discharge. ' Wiirielmus Tliesaurarius, viz. Sir William Siott (if Bahverie, Justice Depute ami Treasurer.

' On the margin ' Decoli.atur,' which proves that the sentence was can ieil into execution. ' See the forthcoming Volume of IMr Tytler's History.

14JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 135

the following curious extract from Anderson's MS. History of Scotland' will be as interesting to
the reader as it is highly illustrative of the manners and spirit of these troublesome times. It seems a
pretty close version of Buchanans account of the same event, but the quaintness of the Scottish
style adds much to its point.

' Thair chancit, in the beginning of this Raid,' ane thing worthie of raemorie, quhilk, for the
noveltie of the fact, I wald not pretermit. Thair was ane man of law ^ birth in Jolmne Stewartis *
ftabill and in alfe law office, ane horlTieiper. This man, eftir the Slauchter of his mailter, wandering
about and wift not quhat to do, in end, with conftant mynd, interpryfit ane heicher attempt than
accordit aither for his ftait or birth : For, pafTing to Edinburcht to the deftinat reveng' of his maifteris
death, in the way he chanced to meit with a man of lyk fortoun to himfelf, anil ane of the fervandis of
the fame Hous, and inquyrit of him, " Gif he fawe James Hararailtoune the Baflard ^ in the towne ?"
Quho confelfing lie faw hirae — " Sawe thow him (faid he) moil wnthankful cretour — and wald not
flay that moift wicked man, quho flew our guid maifler I Away I To the gallous with the I " — This
mekill fpokin, pafling furth the way, he was bent to com directlie to Court.

' Thair was in the wtter clois" of the Palace to the number of two thowfand men in amies, of
Douglass and Hammiltounes dependeris, bound to the Raid quhairof we fpak. This revenger of
his maifteris Slauchter keipit ftilP his eye and mynd upone Hammiltoun, regarding no more elfe;
quho haveing ane cloick about him, vnarmed, pafling furth of the clois, com wnder the long volt^ of
the entres ;'" the revainger, awaiting him in the obfcure and narrow throit quhair the 3etis" ar hung,
flew wpone him, and gawe him fax woundis (quhairof funi pearfid almoft to his vitall pairtis ; wtheris
James efchewed, be bowing^- his bodie and obiect '^ of his cloick), and incontinent lap " in amangis the
reft of the throng.

' Grit fture arrayfe'^ incontinent, for fum Hamiltounes fufpectit that this crnell turnes was done
be THE Douglassis, quho as 5it had not forjet"' the auld malice ; fo that the twa factiounes had
almoft fallin to it be the earis. In the end, the fture fumquhat fettiled. All men within the clois
(were) coramandit to ftand by wtheris fydis'' about the wallis of the clois. The ftryker was fund,
and the bkulie knyft' ftill in his hand. Inquyrit, " Quhairfra he com, and quhat was his buflines
thair?" Quhill as his anfueris war flowand, he was caryid to priflbune, quhair the tortur (was)
prefented vnto him. He confeftl^d, incontinent, that he had done the deid to reveng his maifteris
Slauchter, lamenting onlie that fo honeft attempt had turned to nathing. Being verrie feueirlie
tormentid, he wald not confes that ony man was in Confpiracie with him. In end, he was condamed,
caryid about the Towne naikid, and brodit'^ with hot irnes in all pairtis of his bodie. He nevir, in
word nor countenance, gave ane doUorous figne. Quhat tyme his right hand was cut aff, he faid,
" It was moir lichtlie punifchit than it defervid, ftbr that it had not obayit ane ftout ftomack ! " '

This circumstance was too remarkable to escape the attention of Leslie, who briefly says, — ' Ane

great conuentione of the Lordis being in Halyrudhous with the King, the xvij of Junij, thair com

ane lempill" lyk man, being fume tyme feruand to the Erle of Leksox; and in the mids ane

great confluence in the Abbay clofe, furiouflie and difperatlie ftmk Sir James Hammiltoln,

knycht, with ane quhing5ear in the Wambe,'" thre findry ftraiks, to the heft ;^' albeit^^ that the faid Sir

James deit nocht of thay ftraikis. The man beand fuddantlie takin, confeflit the deid, without ony

repentaunce, crying, " Fye on the feibill hand quhilk wald not do that thing the hart thocht, and wes

' Advocates' Library, Jac. V, 2.2. fol. 282, h. ' The Raid of Lidhisdaili against the Thieves, where the

Earl of Angus ' hangit 12 of tharae that war taltin, and keipit also mony for pledgis; quhome also, for that thair
freindis wald not .-ibstene from Roberie, within fewe monethis eftir, he Execut.' ' Mean; low. * John

Earl of Lennox, slain at the Field of Linlithgow. ^ Revenging. '^ Sir James Hamilton, natural son of

the Earl of Arran. ' Outer close, or inclosure. ® Ever; constantly, * Vault ; archway. '*' Entrance.

" Gates. "Bending; inclining. "Interposition. "Leapt. '^ Literally, a gi'eat rf«s< arose.

" Forgotten. " To stand side by side ; in single file. " Pricked ; thrust at. " One of low or

obscure birth ; a plebeian. '"Belly. " Hilt ; handle. '* Although; nevertheless.

136 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1527,

determinatt to do 1" And being inquyrit " Quhat he wes, and quha had caufit him to do the fame ?"
Anfuerit, " he wes ane fervand of God, fend be him to do that deid." And albeit he wes put to grite
paynes, dailie, be the fpace of ane moneth thaireftir, wald nevir gif ane uther anfuer. Thairfoir he wes
hangit, and his heid fixeit upoun the Port of Edinbwgh.'']

Jul. 29, 1527. — Richard Loud Innermeithe and James Lord
Ogiluy amerciated for not ajipearingto underly the law for remaining from the
laft Raid made by the King upon the (Border) Thieves.'^ New Letters were
ordained to be ifTued for their appearance ; and, in cafe of failure, that their
whole moveables be efcheated, &c.

^fiiUing from tijt }iovtitv l\ni^,

Jul. 29. — John Lord Gi.aimmys amerciated for the fame crime, and for
Refetting Gawyn Lyoun and others his accomplices, Rebels.

J'laiifl|)tn- of t\)t €avl of Cassillis.

Oct. 5, {die Sahhali.) — HuGH Campbell of Lowdoune, Sheriff of Air.
James Earl of Arran was amerciated 100 1. for not entering the Sheriff of Air to
underly the law for the cruel Slaughter of Gilbert Earl of Caflillis. Campbell
M'as denounced Rebel, and all his moveables ordained to be efcheated. — George
Craufurd of Lefnorijs, and William his brother, John Campbell of Cefnok, Bartholomew Craufurd of Kerfe, David and Duncan his brothers, John Craufurd of
Drongane, John and ^Villiam his fons, with a great number of others, found
caution to underly the law for this crime, on the third day of the next Jufticeaire at Air.'' — Dame Issabella Wallace, Lady Lowdoune, alio accufed
for the fame crime, was proved to be fick by Sir William Bankhede, her Curate,
and two witneires.

anibaUi'iTcj; tfjr <#f)trt(f of dTifr In a frnrrU Court.

Oct. 8. — George Ramsay of Clatty, John Betoune of Balfour, James
Betoune of Melgum, Johne Grahame of Claverhoule, and others, found caution to
underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Fife, for Convocation of the lieges to the
number of 80 perfons, and in warlike manner invading John Lord Lindesay,
Sheriff of Fife, in the execution of his office, in a fenced Court within the Tolbooth of Cowper, the doors being lliut, and the Aflife inclofed ; and for breaking up the faid doors. David Abbot of Abberbrothock obliged himfelf to I'elieve
John Wardlaw of Torry of liis cautionry. — Mu George Betoune, Rector

' Ban. Club Edit. ; 18.30 ; p. 139. ^ .Many otiiers of less note were cited for this offence,

until the year 1.528. It is unnecessary, however, to nndtiply farther instances of the like entries,
excepting wliere tlie rank of the parties renders them interesting. -* Numerous entries occur of

persons cited for this crime ; and, failing to appear, they were all denounced rebels, &c.

15JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 137

of Glafgow, dilated of the fame crime, was replegiated by the Commiuary of the
Archbifliop of Glafgow. — David Fkthy of Incheok, David Cokburne of Trettoime, and John Betoune of Balijs-craggis amerciated for non-appearance, and
ordained to be fummoned of new, &c.

Oct. 14. — JoHNE JoHNESTOUN of that Ilk, John, Andrew, and Rolland
Bell, William and Mathew Johneftoune, found caution to appear before the
Jufticiar, to iinderly the law for the cruel Slaughter and Murder of Symon
Armeftrang. James Douglas of Drumlangrig became cautioner. — Sep. 23. Failing to appear, they were all denounced Rebels, &c.

Sntcrrommuiiins toitf) tijt ^i)rnff of ^h\

Nov. 23.— William Cunynghame of Glengarnok, Mungo Mure of
Rowallane, John Hammyltone of Colmyfkeithe, James Wallace of Carnale, Adam
Wallace of Newtoune, John Foulartoune of Corfbie, and others, were amerciated
for not appearing to underly the law for Intercommuning, affifting, refetting,
and fupplying Hugh Campbell of Lowdoune, Sheriff of Air and his accomplices.
Rebels, and at the horn, &c. Their moveables were ordained to be efcheated,
&c.

anUrrrommiuiing iuitl) ti)C ^fjcrtff of ^tr,
William Cunynghame, Master of Glencairn, John C. of Caprintoune, David C. of Bertaneholme, Robert C. of Aket, William Wallace, Tutor
of Cragy, George Roffe of Hanyng, John Lokert of Bar, John Craufurd of Drongane, George Rede in Dandelly, and Quintin Schaw, Tutor of Keris, found caution to appear before the Jufticiar on Dec. 4, for Intercommuning, &c. with the
Sheriff of Air. .

3>mj)ortinti; anti WUttvins dfoi'seti Mont}}.

Mar. 14, 1527-8. — George Caball, Convicted by an Affife of treafonably importing ffalfe and fforged pennies into the kingdom from Flanders and
other places ; and of ufmg them in his merchandize and otherwife. — Sentence.
To be drawn to the gallows and Hanged until dead, and his head to be placed
on an iron pike, and fixed on the eaft gable of the Tolbooth of Dundee. His
body to be quartered, and each quarter to be fufpended by an iron chain, and
affixed upon each of the principal ports of that burgh, thereon to remain as a
perpetual example to others. All his goods, moveable and immoveable, were
ordained to be efcheated.

VOL. I. t S

138 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1528.

Jul. 28, {Ajmd Striuelii/g.) — Alexander Kennedy of Bargany,
and Hugh his Ton, John Mure of Auchindrane/ and James his brother, Gilbert
Kennedy of Kirkniichall, James K. of Blarequhane, Sir David Blacater, Curate
of Girvane, Thomas Corry of Keldwod, Thomas K. of Coiff, Alexander K., brother of James of Knokdone, Alex. K. of Glentig, William Abbot of Corfragwell,
Gilbert K. of Barmaclannochane, Mr Walter K., James K., fon and heir-api^arent
of Patrick of Drumnellane, John K., fon and heir-apparent of Gilbert of Kirkmechell, Thomas K., fon of Alex, of Bargany, Hugh K., fon of Thomas of Dunneyne, David K., brother of the Laird of Kirkmechell, Alex. K. of 5et, Thomas
K. of Dunneyne, John K. of Bennane, Mungo Eklis of that Ilk, Patrick K. of
Drumnellane, &c.' (in all leventy-five perfons,) dilated for art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of vmq'" Robert Campbell in Lochfergufs, Alexander Kirkwod,
and Patrick Wilfone.

Mr Walter Kennedy, Rector of Douglas, David his brother, James K.,
Thomas Bofwell, Sir George Davidfone, John K., William Wricht and Duncan
Makrinnyll, Chaplains, and George Berclay, Parifli-clerk of . . . ., were replegiated by Sir Robert Wemys, Chajjlain and Commiffary of Gawin, Archbifliop
of Glafgow, and found caution to underly the law for the above crime.

John Kennedy of Bardrochat, Thomas Murdoch of that Ilk, James Kennedy, brother of the Rector of Douglafs, James Makrinnyll of Barneill, and feven
others, found caution to underly the law for the fame crime, at the Juftice-aire
of Air, &c.-'

3>nterrcimminniT(j 'oiiti) a UthtL

Aug. 27- — JA]\rKs Lord Ogiluy, James Ogiluy of Cukiftoune. Dauid
Gardin of Leys, and John Ogiluy of Innerquharite, amerciated for not appearing to underly the law for Refetting, fupplying, and intercommuning with Sir
Alexander Spenfe, Monk of Cowper, his Majefty's Rebel.

iDi'orlamation to pass to tfjr Uaiti of Crmptallounf, ^r.

Procla:matiox,'' made of the Market- Crojs of Edinburgh, Sep. 10,
1528. — We do 3o\v to wit, J)at fForfamekill as ane grete pairt of our ibuerane
lordis liegis wer comm audit be his Letteris to cum to his hienes, to StriueLING, to have convoyit his grace to Edinburghe, and jjairefter to haif remanit

' Ancestor of the notorious Aucliindrane, who has been ' doomed to everlasting fame' by Sir
Waller Smtf. in liis Ayrshire Tragedy. ^ The otliers are individuals of less note. ^ Other

persons are cited for this Slaughter at subsequent diets of Court, and denounced rebels, he. * It

is certified in the Record, tiiat this Proclamation was publicly made at the market-cross of Edinburgli,
Sep. 10, 1528.

16JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 139

for Jje fpace of xx dais, oi* to haue pall quhare his grace and Lordis of his Counfale plefit. And now his grace, with avife of his faidis Lordis, has tane purpofe to remove towart Temptalloune, or v}jeris places thocht to him expedient :
Quharefor I command and charge in our fouerane lordis name all and findry his
liegis, quhilkis wer chargit be his Letteris be oppin proclamatioune of before,
pat })ai addrefs and mak ])aim reddy, bodin in })air beft wife, and be in Ipis tovne
of ])is nixt Thurifday, at evyne, pe xj day of September inftant, to pafs on Friday pe xij day of pe faid moneth with ]5E KiNGis grace and Lordis of his Counfale, quhare ])ai fal think expedient, vnder the panys contenit in his firll Proclamatioune foriaid ; and nochtwithflanding ony Letteris of Licence gevin in pe
contrare ; certifying ])aim ])at lies gottin ony lie Letteris of Licence J)at nane of
])aim falbe admittit, bot }iair efchete falbe difponit vpone. And J)at pe Tovne of
Edinburghe and Leithe furnife cariage with vittallis to pafs with f)E KiKGis
grace and his Armye, for furniffing of pe famyn as efferis ; and })ai fall haue
thankfull payment Jiairfor.

aissisting ii)t (!?avl of ^itcjtis in vafsing; ^itQt oi ^rUoarfe.

Sep. 26, (die Sahhati.) — George Nesbet of Dal5ell,' George Craw of
Reftoune, James Ramfay in Fouldene, and William Redepethe, junior, were
amerciated for not appearing to underly the law, for their riding with their
friends, tenants, and fervants, and fortifying and affifting Archibald, formerly
Earl of Angus and his accomplices, for railing the fiege of the Caflle of NewWerk ; and for art and part with him thei'ein, contrary to the King's Proclamations, &c.

antfrroimmmintr ixiiti) lUftels — 33urinns Castle of 2$roatfiri\, ^f.

Fergus M'Do-well of Frewche, Thomas M'D. of Mondork, and
Thomas Makcavat, found caution to underly the law at the next Jullice-aire of
Wigtoune, for Refetting, fupplying, and intercommuning with Archibald and
Robert Stewart, fons of the Sheriff of Bute, Rebels, and at the horn for the
Slaughter of George Tayt ; and for the Burning and dellruction of the Callle
and Place of Braidwik, in Arran, belonging to the Earl of Arran. — In a Warrant from the King which follows, dated Sep. 25, the Juftice is directed to take
caution of thefe perfons, ' becaufe of our Generale Raid now deuifit to be vpone pe
XX day of October nixt to cum, for recouering of ])e faid Caftell of Temptalloune.'

Oppression — Cliasins Seer — iWutilation, ^c.

Oct. 21. — George Ker of Lyntoune, Mr Thomas Ker of Sounderland-
' He was denounced rebel on Sep. 28.

138 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1528.

Jul. 28, {Apud StriueUug.) — Alexander Kennedy of Bargany,
and Hugh his Ton, John Mure of Auchindrane,' and James his brother, Gilbert
Kennedy of Kirkniichall, James K. of Blarequhane, Sir David Blacater, Curate
of Girvane, Thomas Corry of Keldwod, Thomas K. of Coiff, Alexander K., brother of James of Knokdone, Alex. K. of Glentig, William Abbot of Corfragwell,
Gilbert K. of Barmaclannochane, Mr Walter K., James K., fon and heir-apparent
of Patrick of Drumnellane, John K., fon and heir-apparent of Gilbert of Kirkmechell, Thomas K.. fon of Alex, of Bargany, Hugh K., fon of Thomas of Dunneyne, David K., brother of the Laird of Kirkmechell, Alex. K. of 5et, Thomas
K. of Dunneyne, John K. of Bennane, Mungo Eklis of that Ilk, Patrick K. of
Di'umnellane, &c." (in all feventy-five perfons,) dilated for art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of vmq'^ Robert Campbell in Lochfergufs, Alexander Kirkwod,
and Patrick ^Vilfone.

Mr Walter Kennedy, Rector of Douglas, David his brother, James K.,
Thomas Bofwell, Sir George Davidlbne, Jolin K., William Wricht and Duncan
Makrinnyll, Chaplains, and George Berclay, Parifli-clerk of . . . ., were replegiated by Sir Robert Wemys, Chaplain and Commiirary of Gawin, Archbifliop
of Glafgow, and found caution to underly the law for the above crime.

John Kennedy of Bardrochat, Thomas Murdoch of that Ilk, James Kennedy, brother of the Rector of Douglafs, James ]Maki-innyll of Barneill, and feven
others, found caution to underly the law for the fame crime, at the Juftice-aire
of Air, &c.'

Aug. 27. — James Lord Ogiluy, James Ogiluy of Cukiftoune, Dauid
Gardin of Leys, and John Ogiluy of Innerqidiarite, amerciated fur not appearing to underly the law for Refettiug, fupplyiug, and intercommuning with Sir
Alexander Spenfe, Monk of Covvper, his Majefty's Rebel.

itJrorlamation to pass to tijf Haiti of Ctnijitallouiif, ^r.

Proci,amation,^ mtide at the jMarkef-CrqJs of Edinhnrgh, Sej). 10,
1528. — We do 30W to wit, J)at fforfamekill as ane grete pairt of our Ibuerane
lordis liegis wer commandit be his Letteris to ciun to his hieiies, to StriueLING, to have convoyit his grace to Edinburghe, and ])aireftcr to half remanit

' Ancestor of the notorious Aucliindrane, who has been ' doomed to everlasting fame' by Sir
Walter Scott, in his Ayrsliire Tragedy. • The others are individuals of less note. ' Other

persons are cited for tiiis Slaugliter at subsequent diets of Court, and denounced rebels, ^c. ■* It

is certified in the Record, that this Proclamation was publicly made at the market-cross of Edinburgh,
Sep. 10, 1528.

16JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 139

for J)e fpace of xx dais, or to haue paft quhare his grace and Lordis of his Counfale plefit. And now his grace, with avife of his faidis Lordis, has tane purpofe to remove towart Temptalloiine, or vjjeris places thocht to him expedient :
Quharefor I command and charge in our fouerane lordis name all and findry his
liegis, quhilkis wer chargit be his Letteris be oppin proclamatioune of before,
J)at ])ai addrefs and mak ])aim reddy, bodin in ftair beft wife, and be in ]>\s tovne
of Tpis nixt Thurifday, at evyne, pe xj day of September inflant, to pafs on Friday f»e xij day of J^e faid moneth with f»E KiNGis grace and Lordis of his Counfale, quhare Jjai fal think expedient, vnder the panys contenit in his firft Proclamatioune forfaid ; and nochtwithftanding ony Letteris of Licence gevin in pe
contrare ; certifying ))aiin J)at lies gottin ony fie Letteris of Licence jjat nane of
])aim falbe admittit, bot J^air efchete falbe difponit vpone. And ])at pe Tovne of
Edinburghe and Leithe furnife cariage with vittallis to pafs with Jje Kingis
grace and his Armye, for furniffing of pe famyn as efferis ; and pai fall haue
thankful! payment Jjairfor.

^ssistino: Hjt (!?arl o( ^nrjus in ratsiitg ^itQt of j^rUjarfu

Sep. 26, {(lie Sahhati.) — George Nesbet of Dal5ell,' George Craw of
Reftoune, James Ramlay in Fouldene, and William Redepethe, junior, were
amerciated for not appearing to underly the law, for their riding with their
friends, tenants, and fervants, and fortifying and affifting Archibald, formerly
Earl of Angus and his accomplices, for raifing the fiege of the Caflle of NewWerk ; and for art and part with him therein, contrary to the King's Proclamations, &c.

antcrrommuniuQ; bjiti) lUfiels — Jiuniuis Castle of BioatJidi, i^t,

Fergus M'Dowell of Frewche, Thomas M'D. of Mondork, and
Thomas Makcavat, found caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of
W^igtoune, for Refetting, fupplying, and intercommuning with Archibald and
Robert Stewart, fons of the Sheriff of Bute, Rebels, and at the horn for the
Slaughter of George Tayt ; and for the Burning and deftruction of the Caflle
and Place of Braidwik, in Arran, belonging to the Earl of Arran. — In a Warrant from the King which follows, dated Sep. 25, the Juftice is dii-ected to take
caution of thefe perfons, ' becaufe of our Generale Raid now deuifit to be vpone pe
XX day of October nixt to cum, for recouering of pe faid Caftell of Temptalloune.'

Oppression — Ci)astns £)ecr — iHutilation, ^e.

Oct. 21. — George Ker of Lyiatoune, Mr Thomas Ker of Sounderland-

' He was denounced rebel on Sep. 28.

140* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1528-9.

hall, James Ker in Farnylee, and nine others, were amerciated for not appearing
to underly the law for art and part of the Oppreffion done to William Cokburne
of Ormiftoiine, coming to his Park of Ormiiloune nnder lilence of night, armed
with lances and other invafive weapons, breaking up the gates thereof, and with
bows and dogs chafing and wounding ' his parkit deir :' And alio, for invading
and wounding his fervants the keepers of the laid Park : And for the mutilation
of one of his fervants, called Thomas Anderfon. — New Letters were ordained to
be iffued for their appearance, under the pain of rebellion, &c.

Caution for ^arUi.ms of tijt latr iJ?arI of ^nsus,

Nov. 20. — ' George Hume of Spot comperit in prefens of \>e Lordis
of our fouerane lordis Secrete Counfale, and for pe frething^ and releving of
David Rayntoune of Bylle out of Warde furth of ])e Castell of Edinburgh, pe faid George become fouirte for him, pat he fal in al tyme cuming
lelely2 and trewly ferue our fouerane lord, and pe lord Hume, vndir pe pane of
twa thowfand merkis.'

(Nov. 22.) — ' In prefens of pe Lordis of Counfale, comperit Nicholace
Ramfay of Dalhoufly, and James Towris of Innerleyth, kny', and become cautioners and fuerteis, coniunctlie and feueralie, for Pathik Hume, brofter germane
to Alexander Hume Tutour of Wedderburne, that fforfamekill as pe faidis lordis
has chayngit pe faid Patrikis Ward furth of pe Caftell of Edinburghe, to pe
Tovne of pe famyn ; tharefor, J)at pe faid Patrik fall remane in Warde within
pe faid Tovne of Edinburghe, and nocht remove Jjairfra, nor affift to Archibald
Douglafe, fumtyme Erll of Angufe, nor his part-takaris, nor wi-ite nor fend to
pame na maner of way ; and fall keip the faid Waixle quhill he be fi'ed be }ie
Kingis grace and Lordis of his Counfale, vnder pe pane of ij" merkis. And fie
faid Patrik fall anfuer for na manis dedis hot his avne dedis.

9(6iKinir tvoxn tTje l^ost at Crmptallouiir, kt,

Dec. 16. — John Sitlingtoun of Stanehoufe, John Wilfone of Cruglin,
Alexander IVrquuchin de Dalquhit, John Ferguflbne of Cragdareauche, and fixty
feven others,^ denounced Rebels and put to the horn, for their abiding from the
King's hod and army at Temptalloune. — A number were purfued at this period,
for abiding from this army of ' Dowglas and Teujptalloune,' and the pi-evious
ai'my at Stirling.

Sntrrfommunincr 'miti) lUbds in Carrirlt, aiutr, aiiti arraiu

Jan. 15, 1528-9. — John Neiesone of Cragcaffy, and Michael and John

' Freeing ; absolvinpf. « Loyally. ' Tliey were all Galloway and Wigton Lairds —

amoiif^ tliem tlie Lairds of Balmagie, Garli(!s, Larg, Barclay. Creadiane, Torhouse, Andrew Agnevv
the Siieriff of Wigton, &c.

I6JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 141

Neilfone his coufins, were denounced Rebels and put to the horn, &c. for not
underlying the law for Refetting, Supplying, and Intercommuning with his
Majefty's Rebels, in Carrick, Bute, and Arran : And for Oppreffion done to the
Laird of Mochrum, coming to his dwelling place of Mochrum, and breaking up
the doors and windows, &c.

Cmtbocatiou cttbt lirsrs — <Dpprrssion, ^r,

Feb. 15. — AViLLiAM Anstruther, George Symmer, and thirty-eight
others, fund John Anftruther of that Ilk as thair cautioner, that they lliould
appear at the next Juftice-aire of Fife, to underly the law for art and part of
Convocation of the lieges : And for Oppreffion done to Mr David Lindefay,
and invading him for his Slaughter. And for taking and incarcerating him in
the Tower of Anftruthei', and detaining him therein againft his will.

(Feb. 27.) — John Anstruther of that Ilk, and John Strang younger
of Balcafky, fund caution to anfwer for the above crimes.

#ire--rai!3ins — 33uniin(j: of Cmislnnlr.

Feb. 25. — Patrik Charteris of Cuthilgurdy found caution (Robert
Mawll of Panmwre) for his entry befoi'e the Juftice, to underly the law for art
and part of the Fire-raiiing and Burning of the village of Cowfland, and houles
thereof : And for the plundering of certain oxen, cows, and other goods, from
the Tenants thereof, and from William Lord Ruthvene. — (Feb. 28.) John
Charteris, brother to Cuthilgurdy, and eleven others, foimd furety to anfwer
for the fame crime. — (Mar. 1.) The King granted Warrant to remit this cafe to
the Juftice-aire of P^orfar.

^lausljtfv of SoIjiT ^ovti dTlemiufl:.

Apr. 7, 1529. — John Twedy of Drummel3eare, John Tuedy dwelling
with him, Thomas T. in Olivere Caftell, David T., James T. in Kilbochoche, and
James T. in Wray, found furety (John Lord Hay of Yefter) for their ajjpearance at the Juftice-aire of Pebles, to underly the law for art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of John Loi'd Flemyng. This furety was taken by AVarrant of
the Lords of Privy Council, and with confent of Malcolm Lord Flemyng, becaufe
they were at the horn.

James Twedy junior of Drummel5eare, John Vache of Kyngiyde, David
Newtoune of Michelhill, and eight others, found caution (Sir Walter Scott of
Branxholme, knt.) to anfwer at the fame time and place for the above crime.'

' May 17, 1530, he and three others procured Letters of Refpite, and found caution to satisfy the
party at the next Justice-aire of Peebles.

142 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1529.

Creasonafili? assistdtff ti)t (Bavl of Slnsms, ^r.

Apr. 16. — Adam Nesbit of that Ilk, and Philip Nefljit his fon, were
denounced Rebels and put to the horn, and all their moveable goods to be
efcheated, for not appearing to underly the law for Refetting, Supplying, Intercomrauning, and Affiftance given and afforded to Archibald, formerly Earl of
Angus, (George Douglas) his brother, and (Archibald Douglas his) uncle. Rebels,
in their treafonable deeds.

(Apr. 21.) — David Hope and William Inglis, were Convicted by an
Affife, and Hanged for their treafonable affiftance given to Archibald, formerly
Earl of Angus, &c. as above. Item, the laid David, for art and part of the treaIbnable detention of the Caftle of Temptalloune againft our fovereign lord's
authority.

Couijocation of ti)e litge s — Ef scuing a dTclon, ^r.

Mail 5. — Robert GudeFxYLLOAv, John Jardin of Dyke, John and
Alexander Jardin, and 1 9 others, denounced Rebels, and put to the horn for not
underlying the law, for Convocation of the lieges in great number, coming upon
the Servants of Malcolm Lord Flemyng, in the execution of their office, by virtue
of Royal Letters dii"ected to him, to learch for and take Edmund Rutherfurd,
and prefent him before the Juftice to underly the law for certain crimes ; and
refcuiug the faid Edmund, &c.

Common Wi)cU, ^r.

May 5. — John Rutherford, fon of Edmund Rutherford in Auchincorthe, Convicted by an Affife of common Theft, Reletting of Theft, outputting
and inputting,&c.and Hanged. — ThomasDavidsoun Convicted and Hanged
for the fame crimes.

Caution for t\)t Haiili of 2DrumIanr(0»

Jul. 31. — ' The quhilk day James Douglas of Caveris, Sheriff of Teviotdak", in prefens of pe Lordis of Counfale, become fouertd for James Douglas
OF Drumlanrig, ]jat he fuld nocht evade nor efchew furthe of Warde out of
J7e Caflell of Edinburghe, vnder ])e pane of I"li., quhill it wer pe KiNGis plelbur.'

iloiU iWa.Th)drs Uoixti to presrnt felons to tiial, ^(,

Jul. 23. — ' In prefens of pE KiNGis grace and Lordis of Secreit Couniiik-, Robert Lord Maxwall, Wardane of pe ^Veft Marchis, tuke vpon hand
to entir Hector Scot, George Scot qf'pe Bog; and v})eris })air complices, quhais
names lalbe gevin to him in bill, committaris of j^e Slauchteris of James Patei'-
Ibuii and Williame Cleghurno in Langlandhill : And for ]>e Refe and Herfchip

16JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 143

of certane horffis and gudis at Peblis and in Tueddale, laitlie, and vpoun pe
Capitane of Edinburghe, at pe Catflak, in pe Foreft of Ettrik, before our fouerane
lordis Juftice in pe Tolbuthe of Edinburghe, vpoun pe ferd day of Auguft, for
pe faidis Letteris : Or ellis, to put jjaini out of ]je Marc he, and bald J)aim furth
of pe famine ; — and in f)at cace fal reftore pe gudis takin be Jjame or ony vjjeris
complen5eand vpone ony perfonis duelland within pe boundis of his Wardanery,
according to his Band, and fene pe date Jjairof : Prouiding alwais, ])at Jje perfonis
pat enteris falbe accufit for na thingis before pe day of pe date of his Band, and
acceptatioun paii'of '

^toutfjitif — ^ppirsstoit — ^|)rrp-straliit0.

Aug 5. — Jajies Guthry, Captain of the Caftle of Crechtoune, amerciated for not underlying the law for art and ])art of the Stouthreif and Oppreflion done to William Borthwick of Crukftoune, in ' reiving' from his fervant
and fliepherd of 100 flaeep, being at the grazings upon the lands belonging to
John Lord Hay of Yefter. New term affigned, under the pain of rebellion, &c.
— Andrew Purves and ten others found lecurity to apjiear at the Juflice-aire of
Edinburgh, to anfwer for the fame crime.

Cnnijofation — ©rnUIi,) df etiU fittiMttn tfje ItaiiUs o( (irtrmoiistoutt

anH fiilitui) - iHariscj^alL

Aug. 30. — Patkik Cockburne of Newbigging, James Cockburne of
Langtoun, Gilbert Wauchope of Nudry Marfchall, and Gilbert his fon, John
Pennycuke of that Ilk, John Lile of Stanypethe, Andrew Heriot of Trabrovne,
Mr George Hay of Myn5eane, Patrick Sydeferf of that Ilk, the young Laird of
Skowgall, and James Stewart of Cragyhall, Convicted by an Affife of art and
part of Convocation of the lieges upon John Edmonftoune of that Ilk.

George Loud Hume amerciated for not entering John Hume and ninetyeight others (chiefly Trotters, Brounfields, and Dickfons,) by virtue of the Bond
for good rule of his country, to underly the law for art and part of Convocation
of the lieges upon Gilbert Wauchope of Nudry Marfchell, in company with John
Edmonftoun of that Ilk.

Robert Lawder, the young Laird of Bafs, William Dewar of that Ilk,

Thomas Vernour of Auchindinny, and Thomas his fon, Cokburne of

Newhallj and fourteen others, were amerciated for not appearing to underly the
Law for Convocation of the lieges coming with the Laird of Nudry againll the
Laird of Edmonftoune.

Eifievatins a Ci)ief — Cafeiitfj; iTijtft ijute.

Sep. 30. — David Pollok of that Ilk found Robert Lord Maxwell as

144 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1530.

Cautioner for his entry at the Juftice-aire of Renfrew, to iinderly the law for
fetting to liberty a Thief called Stohhill out of his prifon, after having taken
Thift-hute from him.

^ssuvnitfe irtijortu i\)t Eairtrs of Stinijas antj ^«lJrs=iHariSf]^an»

Apr. 4, 1530. — ' James Dundass of J)at Ilk, in prefens of jje faid Juftice,
for him, his kynne, freyndis, feruandis, adherentis and pairt takaris, and al ]>ai
he niycht let,' AfTouerit " Gilbert Wauchope of Nudry Marfchell, Thomas
Wauchope and Jjair kynne, freyndis, tenentis, feruandis, adherentis, and pairt
takaris, vnto ]5e ix day of Maij nixt to cum ; and held up his hand hereto,^ and
band (and) oblift him to oblerue and keip ])e faid Affouerance, vnder ])e pane of
Pli. And hereupouu Jje faid Lard of Nudry afkit aue act.'

Stssisting: ^TTjitbrs antj lUfids.

May 15. — David Turxbull of Wauchope, Walter Turnbull of Howay,
John Lile of Stanypathe, Philip Nefbet of that Ilk, Patrick Lumnifdene of
Blenerne, John Edingtoune of that Ilk, and Robert Haig of Bemerfyde, denounced
Rebels, and put to the horn for not entering to underly the law, for afTiftance
given and affoi'ded to Thieves and Malefactors in violation of their Bonds.

^lauaUtcr of %oxti S^tmiw^*

Sir Walter Scott of Branxholm, kn', come in the King's will (for the
Slaughter of John Lord Fleming.)' — (May 17) He was amerciated for not
entering John Vache of Kingiyde, David Newtoune of Machelhill, and four
others, for the fame crime, who were all denounced Rebels, &c.

HtJifii) Creason — ajviittiiittr in e\\Q[\%\)\\\t\\ — Cljtft, ^r.

[A STRIKING feature of this period of liistory, was tiie disjointed state of civil society. On the
Borders, especially, the most lawless excesses were committed, almost with impunity; and at length
matters had come to sucli a pitch, that the King found it necessary to levy an army, and to march
along with them in person to these districts. It may he remarked, that the robberies and ' herefchips'
daily committed, were not confined to outlaws and desperadoes, or ' broken men,' as they were termed,
belonging to no Clan, but persons of good family joined in the general foray, and among others, the
Lairds of Hexderlaxd and Tuschelaw ^ distinguished themselves by the most reckless and
daring Treasons and Kobberies.

It is unnecessary to enlarge on this subject, which is notorious, and has long been matter of history.

According to the Editor's usual plan, however, such contemporary notices as can now be gleaned,

shall, without farther remark, be laid before the reader ; as the adoption of this method, in his opinion,

affords the most vivid picture of the transactions recorded. In Anderjbn's MS. History,'' it is merely

remarked, that ' The refl of the 3eir was moir peciabill, hot the bauldues of Tiieivis was never a

' Hinder. ' Gave assurance to. ' Snore, or gave his solemn oath. ' See Apr. 7, loiiD, &c.

' .See Way 18, 1529. " -Advocates' Library; chiefly' compiled tVoni liucliarjan, &c.

17JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 145

quliit repreffed. Qubairfor the King caufid hang, ]>e 18 of May, Williame Cokhurne of Hinderland,
and Adame Scott of Tufcfiilaiv, Theivis apprehendit, in Ed', to terrifie wtheris.' But the Original of
Bishop Lesley's^ History is rather more explicit. ' In the famyn moneth of May, the xvj day, thair
wes ane greit conventioun of the Lordis with tpie King, in Edinburgh ; and the King himfelf prefentlie
fittand in judgement. T/ie Laird of Hinderland, callit Cokburn, and Adame Scot of Tufchelaw, quha
wes callit King of Theivis, was accufet of Thift, refett and niaineteyning of Tlievis, llauchter, and
uther cryraes, and convict thairfor and lieidit ; and tlieir heidis fixit upoun the Tolbuith of Ediuburg.' "

Without citing fartlier extracts, in this place, reference may be made to the Notice prefixed to the
following article, where some interesting particulars are preserved in connexion with the fame fubject.]
]May 16. — William Cokburne of Henderland, Convicted (in prefence
of THE King) of High Treafon committed by him, in bringing Alexander
Foreftare and his Ton, Englillimeu, to the phmdering of Archibald Someruile :
And for treafonably bringing certain Englillimen to the Lands of Glenquhome :
And for common Theft, common Refet of Theft, outputting and inputting
thereof — Sentence. For which caufes and crimes he has fforfeited his life,
lands, and goods, moveable and immoveable ; vi'hich fliall be efcheated to the
King. — Beheaded.

The following Original Warrant was found among the loose papers belonging
to the Court, and is given here, as throwing farther light on the sequel to these
extraordinary transactions.

GUBERN.\T0R,

Justice Clerk, We grete 50W weill. Forfamekill as Williame Cokhurne, fone and heir of vmq'<=
Williame Cokhurne of Hinderland, hes raenit^ him to ws, ])at he is havelie hurt throu J)e haifty juftyfeing"" of his faid fader, and iForfalting of him pairthrow : And Jiairfore defyres to have Jte autentik copy
of ]JE Dome and Sentence gevin aganis his faid fader, and of all actis and proteftatiounis takin be
him at fat tyme ; fa yiat he may prouide for fum remeid ]iairin. Quharfore, je fall geif to him,
vpoun his expenffis, ]ie autentik copy of ]ie Dome, Sentence, and procefs led and gevin aganis his faid
fader in maner foirfaid, to pe effect abone writtin. As 56 will anfuere to ws ))airupoune, kepand fis
Precept for 50ure Warrant. Subscriuit with oure hand, At Edinburgh, )ie xxij day of Januar, the
5eire of God I^V^xlij jeris. James G".^

t

Mail 18. — Adam Scot of Tufchelaw, Convicted of art and part of
theftuoufly taking Blacli-malll, from the time of his entry within the Caftle of
Edinburgh, in Ward, from John Brovne in Hoprow : And of art and part of
theftuoully taking Black-ttKaU from Andrew Thorbrand and William his brother :
And for art and part of theftuoufly taking of Bhic/c-maill from the poor Tenants
of Hopcail5ow : And of art and part of theftuoufly taking Bladi-maill from the
Tenants of Elchefcheill. — Beheaded.

' Quarto, Printed for Bannatyne Club, 1830, p. 141. = Sir James Balfour also notices the

circumstance, but as is often the case in his Annals, gives a wrong date, viz. Jul. 27, and Caldencood's
MS. Church History makes the same mistake. ^ Complained. * Execution; putting to

death. ' James, Governor of Scotland, viz. James Earl of Arran, Lord Hamilton, Regent.

VOL. I. 4- T

146 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1530.

iJoiiJrr aiavons — ilrglrrt to fulfil tl)ctr BonlJs, ^f.

[It is necessary for tlie right understanding of many of the proceedings which follow, that the
reader should bear in mind the public events which gave rise to so remarkable a step as the levy of a
large Army, under the command of the King in person, for the sole purpose, apparently, of suppressing a handful of Border Thieves. In the preceding Trials, however, it has been seen that the state
of the Borders of Scotland was so lawless, and the Chiefs so refractory and turbulent, that nothing
short of the strongest coercive measures was likely to be of the least service towards restoring a better
state of society among the Borderers.

The open Treason and revolt of the Earl of Angus, and the constant jarring and jealousies
among the Barons, rendered the appointment of a Lieutenant inexpedient. It was therefore deemed
necessary, for establishing tranquillity, that the King in person, accompanied by a very strong force,
should suddeidy march towards the Borders, and quell, by the strong arm of the law, all those who
had not willingly come forward and given their Bond, with sureties under heavy penalties, to ' keip
gud re>de within their refpectiue boundis.' The particulars now drawn from the Records of the
Supreme Criminal Court are of considerable historical importance, and to the genealogist as well as
the historian, must aflbrd valuable information.

Eisliop Lesley^ gives this brief but striking narrative. After detailing the execution of the Lairds
of Henderland s.w\ Tuschelmu, he proceeds: ' The fame day the Erle Boithuell wes convict
for manteyning of thame, and for certain uther crymes ; and thairfoir wes in the Kingis will : For the
quhilkis, the King caufit Ward him in the Caflell of Edinburgh. Thairefter he wes fend in Murray ;
and lall, banieft Scotland ; fua that he travellit to Venice, quhair he remanit during the Kingis lyve
tyme. Alfua, the Lord SlaxwcU, Lord Hwiiie, Larde Baldeuch, Farnyhirjt, PoUock,"^ Johnejtoun,
Mark Ker, and uther principallis of the Bordouris, wes convict be AHyflis, and all put in
Warde ; quhair throwcht the Bordouraris keipit better reule thairefter, fa lang (as) the King wes one
life.'

Sir James Balfour,^ after mentioning the proceedings against Earl Bothwell, says, ' this fame yeir,
lykwayes, the King impriffons the Lords Maxfwoll and Home, with the Lairds of Buccleuch, Fernihur/t, Pollard* Johnjion, and Marke Ker, as Cheiffs of the Brokin men in the Borders ; and
becaulle they had winked at their willanies, and giuen them way ; quheras they, by ther pouer and
authoritey, might have rellrained them.' Anderjbn^ alfo remarks: ' The 17 day of the Callendis of
May, eftir lang difputatioun in Counfall, continewit till nicht, the King Wardit the Earle Botkmll,
Robert Maxiceil, Walter Scott, and Mark Ker, within the Caftell of Edinburglie, and all the honeft
men*^ of Marche and Teviotdaill, heir and thair throw the countrey, ftbr that he beleivid that thay
fecreitlie fould rayfe weir betuixt the realmes."'

After having perufed the preceding brief remarks, the reader will be enabled more fully to appreciate the following valuable particulars communicated in the Record.]

May 18. — The following perfons found furety to enter, when required,
before the Juftice, to underly the law for all crimes to be imputed to them :
And for which they fubmitted themfelves to the Kingis will : And alfo, for not
doing their utmoft diligence to fulfil their Bonds, &c.

' Original History from which the Latin version was translated, printed for the Bamiatyne Club,
1830. '■' It is likely that this is a mistake for ' Polwort,' (Alexander Hume.) Sir James Balfour states the name 'Pollard,' (Pollart.) ' Annales, I., 261. " Polwart. = iMS.

Advocates" Library. '' Men of substance and consideration. ' Viz. of England and Scotland,

their lawless procei'dings on the Borders, &c. There seems to have been good reason for apprehending such a result ; wliich would assuredly have occurred but for the vigorous measures thus resorted to.

17Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 147

Barons and Lairds of Roxburghe.
Rob' Scott, Tutor of Howpaflot, John Scott of Buitliaucb, George Rutlierfurde of Hundolee,

Geo. Douglas of Bone-Jedworih, John Scott of Robertoun, Nicholas Rutherfurde, his fon,

James Douglas of Cavers, Adam Kirktoun of Stewartfeild, Adam Greyraflavv of Newtoune,

Andrew Ker of Gradane, George Ormiftoun of that Ilk, William TurnbuU of Mynto,

Lancelot Ker of Gaitfchaw, John Cranltoun of that Ilk, Symon Scot of Fenyk,

Walter Ker of Cesfurde, Philip Scot of Edlchaw, George Fawlo of Wallis,

William Scot of Haffindeue, Robert Scot of AUanehalis, George Ker, Tutor of Cesfurde.

Barons and Lairds of Berwickshire.
VVal' Halyburtoune of Mertoune, Robert Franche of Thoniydykis, The Laird of Redepethe,'
William Cokburne of that Ilk, NiuianThornfydeof Eaft Nefbet, Robert Lauder of that Ilk,
Philip Nefbet of that Ilk, Sir N" Setoune of Tulibody, kn', John Swyntoune of that Ilk,

01iverEdgare,TutorofVVedderlie, Alexander Ellen of Butterdene, Jafper Cranftoune of Corfby.

John Hume of Coklaneknowis came in the King's will, for intercomniuning
with James Ker, rebel, and was Warded in the Caftle of Blaknefs. — Geouge
Lord Hume was amerciated 500 merks for not entering George Hume ofAytoune.
— Patrick Lumjiisdene of Blenerne came in will for intercomniuning with
George and Archibald Douglas, Rebels, and was Warded in the Caftle of Blacknefs. — Alexander Hume of Polwort was Warded within the Caftle of Dumbartane. — David Rayntoune of Bille was ^Varded within the Caftle of Dumbartane. — George Lord Hume was Warded within the Caftle of Edinburgh.

* WiLLiAME TuRNBULL of Mynto, in prelens of fie KiNGis Grace, and Lordis
of his Counfale, promittit, and band and oblift him, efter Ipat Alexander Berthilmow had gevin in his Supplicacioune, makand mentioun, })at Jjair wes certane
horfe and v])eris gudis ftoUin fra him, vnder filence of nycht, be certane of pe
TurnbuUis, duelland one pe Watter of Rowle, and in fpeciale, be ane callit

TurnbuU of Catlie, for quham pe faid Lard of Mynto become plege and

fouerte in pe laft Juftice-are of Jedburghe, for gude reule to be had be him in
tyme cuming : Like as his Band in pe buke of Adjornale for pe faid . . . .,
fchewin and producit Jjairvpoun proportis, J)at he ftild raak reftitucioune of Jje
faidis guidis, or tak and bring him to oure fouerane lordis lawes ; and fail3eing
Jjaii'of, to byrne his houfe, expell and hald him furth of pe cuntre.'

May 19- — The following Barons and Lairds found caution to enter before
the Juftice, on a warning of fifteen days, to underly the law for all crimes to be
imputed againft them ; viz.

Barons and Lairds of Peebles-shire.
John Lord Hay of jefler,- John Tuedy of Druramelieare,' Mr John Hay of Smeithfeild,

William Murray of Romaimofe, William Guvane of Cardrono, Patrick Portuus of Halkfchawis,
William Stewart of Trakware, William \^ache of Dawik, Alexander Tayt of Pyrne.

Tho. Myddilmaift of Greftoune, John Sandelandis of that Ilk.

' John Lile of Stanypethe also found security. ' Amount of caution, L. 1000. ^ Tiie remainder

found caution to tlie extent of 500 merks each. These sums, it will afterwards be seen, were rigorouslv exacted
from the defaulters.

148 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1530.

Barons and Lairds of Selkirkshire.
Rob. Turnbull, Tutourof Pliiliphauclie, Patrick Murray of Fawlohill, William Hunter of Polraude,'
Andrew Baroune, John Vacbe, Robert Watfone.

JNIay 20. — John Cunynhame of CaiM-intoune, Alex. C. of Luglane,
Adam Stewart of Schawtoune, Adam C. of Clavanis, and fourteen others. — Their
cautioners were amerciated for not producing them to underly the law, for art
and part of the cruel Slaughter of John Tod. — (May 21.) They were denounced
rebels, along with David Bolwell of Auchinleek, for this crime. — (May 23.) Hugh
Campbell of Lowdoune became furety for John Gibfone and eight others, to
appear and underly the law for the fame flaughter, at the Juftice-aire of Air.

jfo{tti)o\ig;i)t dftlonn mxii (f>ppi-tssion, vVr.

May 23. — William Cuxynghame of Glengarnok, David C. of Robertland, and thirty-feven of their followers, found caution to appear at the Jufticeaire of Air, to underly the law for art and part of the forethought felony and
opprefTion done to Gabriel Sympill, lying in the high-way, ' in feir of weir,' near
Ormyllieuche, awaiting his arrival, for his Slaughter, of forethought felony and
old Feud.

[Arcli/hald Earl of Ar gyle, Jujlke-Ge^ieral.']

'miMwX Cfnor tin an Slssisr.

June 25. {aptid Striueling, die ScMaf/.)— The Laird of Philloiith/
the yoimg Laird of Buchquhane,' Mr Andrew Tulydef/ Alexander Lefly of
Kincragy,' William Spens of Bodom," Patrick Keith of Inchegarnock,' Henry
Leflye of Buchauiftoune," John Chalmer," William King of Bourtry,"* Archibald
Keyth of Northfeild," James Ord in Banff,'' Andrew Bruce of Braklamure," and
William Quhite in,Aberdour,'^ found caution to appear before the Jufticiar at
Edinburgh, Aug. 5, to ' thole' a great AlTyfe for their unjuft Acquittal of John
Dempfter of Auchterlefs, and his accomplices, delated for art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of Patrick Stewart, and of certain perfons, for the Mutilation
of William Downy. — Aug. 5. They found caution to underly the law at the
next Juftice-aire of Aberdeen.

Wi)t JtaiiH of 3>o})itJ3tmin's (J^fftrs to tijc miiiff.

Aug. 9. — • The quhilk day, in prefens of ])e Kingis grace, Robert Char-

> Caution, L.IOOO. ' Alexander Fraser, who found George Gordoune of Geicht as surety for

bim to tbe extent of L.IOOO. ^ 1000 merks.

merks. ' 1000 merks. « 500 raerks.

merks. » 500 merks. " 500 merks.

* 500 merks.

5 500 merks.

6 1000

9 500 merks.

'0 1000 merks.

" 1000

'* 500 merks.

17JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 149

teris of Amysfeild, and Walter Scot of Branxliolme, kn*, become ibuerteis for
JoHNE JoHXSTOUN OF THAT Ilk, that, forlamekiU as his hienes admittit ])e
faid Johniiis Offeris gevln to his hienes, fubfcrivit with his hand, pat pal luld
entir him agane, within xv dais warnyng, quhare pe KiNGis grace plefit, or
before his Juftice, to be accufit, gif he fail5eis of ony of his Offeris : And bayth
Jje faidis Lordis has fnbfcriuit J)ir prefentis with pah handis, day and 5ere forlaid, before Jiir witnis, Robert Lord Maxuell, INIalcohne Lord Flemyng, "Williame Hammiltoune of Sanchare-Lindefay, and me, notar vnderwrittin, Avith
vj)eris diuerfe.'

netting: tbjo €i)ithtsi rsrapt from a2lfattJ»

Aug. 17. {ajmd Li//I/t/igow.) — John Lord Hay of 5ester became
in the Kingis Will, for negligence committed by Mr John Hay his brother, in
outputting Adam Nykfone, and one called Elwald, common Thieves,' given to
him in cuftody by the King, in name of the faid Lord Hay of 5efter, as Sheriffprincipal of Peebles. — The Juftice commanded him to Ward within the town
of Linlithgow, until his Majefty's will fliould be declared.

<#lauQ;f)trr of ti)t ilairU of (JTastlerarn.

Aug. 19. {apud Lhdithgoiv.) — John Kere convicted of the Slaughter
of vmq'° Archibald Levingftoun of Caftlecary. — Beheaded.

<^IauQ!)tev of t\)t llaiitf of aDuffus.

Sept. 3. — Mr Thomas Steayart, Treafurer of Caithnefs, Mr Andrew
Petre, Vicar of Wick, Mr John Irland, Sir John Symfone, A^^illiam Murray, fenior,
and Hugh Grot, chaplains, Mr John Thomfon, Rector of Olrik, Sir David Rede,
and Sir William Irwin, chaplains, found caution (John Earl of Athole) to api)ear
at the Juftice-aire of Invernefs, to underly the law for art and part of the cruel
Slaughter of William Sutherland of Dufhouie (Duffus),'" and other perfons flain
at the fame time.

^I.ititlljtti- of ti)t ILniitj of iHdtJnim,

Oct. 10. {upud Dundee.) — John Master of Forbes found caution
(John Lord Forbes) for his appearance, along with Ninian Forbes, John Caldore,

1 On Aug. 27, Mathew and William Nyksone, Robert Nobill, and Robert Ehvald, were convicted
of common theft at Linlithgow, and Hanged. ^ ' The fame ;eir of God (1529), Andrew Stuart,

Bishop of Catteynes, vpon some conceaved difpleafure whicii he had receaved, moved the Clangun to kill the Laird of Duffus in the toun of Thurfo, in Catteynes. Vpon this accident the haill
dyocie of Catteynes wes in a tumult. The Earle of Southerland did aflill the Bilhop of Catteynes
againft his adverfaries, by reafon of allyance contracted betuixt the houfes of Huntley, Southerland,
and Atholl,' &c. Sir R, Gordon's Hist, of the Family of Sutherland, p. 102.

150 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1530.

and Donald Makky, at the Juftice-aire of Aberdeen, to underly the law for art
and part of the cruel Slaughter of Alexander Setoune of Meldrum.'

On Auguft 27, the following persons were amerciated for not appearing to
enter on the Assise of John Lord Forbes, for the fame crime.

Wni. Gordoune of Aucliindone, J. Gordoune of Culquliodilftane, William Goidoun of Aucliinge,

William Lyonne of Colmelegy, Alexander Troup of Bcgidiill, John Dempftar of Ouchterlefs,

John Dempfter of Murelioufe, David Ciukfchank of Durlee, Thomas Colpland of Vdauche,

Gilbert Dalgarns of that Ilk, Patrick Meldrum of Edane, Thomas Tullo of Moncoffer,

Robert Downe of Raty, Walter Ogiluy of Cragbone, Andrew Orde of that Ilk.

The Laird of Knox, The Laird of Auchnacoy,

gtu^ htihittn CiviSxiforlisj aul) itfuneUies.

Nov. 29, {apud Perth.) — John Bryaxe and Allan Cathcart found John
Crawfurd of Drongane, and Quintine Schaw, Tutor of Keris, to appear at the
Juftice-aire of Air, to underly the law for art and part of the Theftuous ftealing
of fixty oxen and cows from James Kennedy of Blarequhanne, from his lands
of Halfpennylands, and fixty more from his lands of Schenvene.

(CmijofortJs mxH iifiinrtirs — Cattle anU %)Qxm ^teaUitg, ^t,

Dec. 5. — John Kennedy of Giletree, Patrick Mure of Cloncard, and
fifty-eight others, found James Kennedy of Blarequhanne as furety for their
appearance at the Juftice-aire of Air, to underly the law for art and part of the
theftuous Stealing, under filence of night, from John Craufurd of Kerehill and
his fubtenants, forth of his lands and dwelling of Kerehill, fix fcore oxen and
cows, ij*" flieep, and fix horfes and mares : And for common oppreflion thereby
done to the faid John and his fubtenants. — Ja:mes Kennedy of Blarequhanne
alio finds Patrick IMure of Cloncard as his furety to appear and anlwer for the
fame crimes.

aintnrommuntng: iuitl) Mtbrls.

Dec. 5. — Patrick Maxwell of Newark, William Striueling of Glorat,
Mariota Maxwell, Lady Bardowy, Andrew Striueling of Bankere,' Mai'garet,
John, and Stephen Spreull, Thomas Culquhoune of Kirktoun, and John, his
brotlicr, fund furety to ai)pear at the Juftice-aire of Dumbarton, to underly the
law for Intercommuning with Alan Ilammiltoune of Bardowy, Alan Grahame,
and Hugh Grey, Rebels and at the horn, for art and part of the Slaughter of
Alexander Hamilton, young Laird of Auchinhowy, and Keflane Williamfoun,
his fervant.'

' The Master of Forbes afterwards confessed this Slaughter on the scaffold. See his Trial, L p. 183 *
' At the same diet he also found surety to underly the law for the Slaughter of John Makcalpy, at
the same Justice-aire. ^ Ninian, Lord Ross, Jolm Cochrane of that Ilk, John Ploustoune of

that Ilk, Walter Galbrayth of Garscaddane, and George Buchanan of tliat Ilk, were amerciated for not
entering on the Assise.

18JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. " * 151

^lau0ijter of tijt mmxQ aairU of Confj.iitijr.

Dec. 15. — William Sinclare of Auchiiifrauk,' Roger Gordoune, and
George Neilfone, found furety (James Douglas of Drumlanrig) to underly the law,
at the Juftice-aire of Dumfreis, for art and jiart of the Slaughter of Harbert
Maxwell, young Laird of Conhaithe. — (Feb. 1, 1530-1, cq)/id Edhihurgh.)
James Maxwell, brother to Robert M. of Conhaithe, failed to appear and
underly the law, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of John Chalmer.
Robert Lord Maxwell, his cautioner, was amerciated 100 merks. — (Feb. 4.) He
was denounced Rebel and put to the horn.

\_Arc/i//ia/(I, Earl of Argt/Ie, J/f/Iice-Gciiera/.']

iHurUer of Saniea SJ»Slis, '^hbot of (JDiilross,

[The following Trial excited great interest at the time, and 18 thus recorded by Bisliop Lesley m.
his valuable History -r — ' Apoun tiie firfl, day of Marche, in the fame year, The Abbot of Culrose,
callit James Inglis, was creually flaine be The Lord (Laird) of Tullyallan and his fervandis ;
amangis the quhilkis thair was ane Preill, callit Sir William Louthien, quha, beand comprehendit,'
the faid Sir WiUame, one the xxvij day of the fame moneth, apoun ane publict (Tvafl'ald, in tlie toun
of Edinburgh, was degradit, the King, Quene, and a greit multitude of people beand prefent ; and
he prefentlye delyverit to the Erie of Argyle, heid Juflice : And one the nixt day thaireftir, the faide
Tullyallane and he wes heidit tliaireftir.' — Sir James Balfour'^ is not so minute, merely noticing
the circumstance thus. ' The Laird of Tnlliallane was beheidit tiie firfl, day of Marche, for killing
Mr James Liglis, Abbot of Culrqffi ; and with him a Mounck of the fame Abbey, a cheiflFe author of
the Abbot's llaughter.]

Mar. 28, 1531. — John Blacater of Tulyalloune, and William Louthiane (formerly Sir William, degraded from his orders), Convicted by an Affife
of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of James Inglis, Abbot of Culroffe, committed upon forethought felony. — Beheaded.

iBuvtirr of t]^e afibot of (Tulioes— ^anrtutiri) of Corpljcdjiu.

(Mar. 28.) — Robert Manderstoune, James Mechell, and Williame
Hutoune, were accufed of the fame Murder, and were acquitted of foi'ethought
felony at the time of the Abbot's Murder. Wherefore they were restored to
the privilege of the Sanctuary of Torphiching by the Juftice General, and judicially delivei-ed to George Lord St John, Mailer of the faid Sanctuary.

Common SDTjtft.

Mar. 28. — Patrick Dowglass, David Blynfl<ale, and Andrew Elwald,
Convicted of Common Theft. — Hanged.

' Beatrix Gordoun, his spouse, was also delated for the same crime, and pleaded sickness, Feb. 1,
1530-L ' The Original Scottish MS., from which the Latin version was compiled has recently

been printed by the Bannatyxe Club; Quarto; 1830. ^ Appri-hended ; taken. '' Annales,

\., 261. The Editor does not find the particulars of this Slaughter detailed by any of our historians,
nor can he discover the causes which led to the Murder. It is obvious, however, from the quotations
already given, that it had excited an intense interest at the time.

152 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1531.

Caution to tnttt t\)t JtaivtJ of 3$rana1)oIm in Wiavti,

Mar. 27. — Sir James Hammii.toune of Fynnert, kii', became furety
(in like manner as Robert Lord Maxwell and John Johneftoune of that Ilk
had become to the King for the entry of John Scot, fon and heir of Walter Scot
of Syntoun, and William Scot, Ion and heir apparent of Robert Scot in Allanehalche, being now in Ward within the Caftle of Borthuik,) for Sir Walter
Scot of Branxholme, hiychf, to enter him in Ward within the faid Caftle,
whenfoever it pleafes the King, under the pain of 500 merks. And the faid Sir
Walter bound himfelf to free Sir James of his caution and pledge.

Notice rtlatibf to * a^oljnuie ^[rmstrans' — Common Clirft — lUstt

of mytiX, $((,

[There have already been laid before the reader' various particulars relative to THE Border Raid,
led by the King in person. Among other interesting circumstances connected with the Expedition,
perhaps none is more remarkable than the capture and execution of the famous Johnnie Armstrang.
The Editor begs to refer to the Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border" for a general outline of the History
of the Clan or sept of AR>rsTRONG, a lawless and disorderly race, which for a long period kept both
sides of the Border in a ferment. It is only necessary to notice here, that the Chief of this Clan was
the Laird of Mangertoun. Johnnie Armstrang (commonly styled o/" G-V/wocAie) was brother to
the Laird, and resided near Langholm, in Gilnockie Tower, at the Hollows, a place still resorted to,
and highly distinguished for the romantic beauty of its scenery.

The state of the country adjoining the Borders was such that King James V considered it necessary to raise a large Army, and to proceed in person to execute vengeance upon ' the Theives and
lymmaris,' and to bind down the Barons to observe ' gude reull within thair boundis.' This he executed to such good purpose, that it is still proverbial in these districts, that for a long time after that
Expedition he ' made the rafch bufs keip the kow !'

In relation to Johnnie Armstrang, it is somewhat singular that the circumstances, as they are
detailed in the popular ballad or song, are substantially correct ; and there cannot now be a doubt that
he was most basely betrayed and put to death, even without the mockery of a form of Trial.'

As the most striking and forcible manner of laying the facts before the reader, the Editor thinks it
proper in this place to subjoin some graphic accounts, as given by early writers. The first which need
be cited is that contained in Anderson's MS.* After noticing the proceedings against Earl Bothwell,
(Src. he states as follows : —

' Himfelf (the King) about the monetli of July,' gathering togidder about aucht thowfand men,
tuik jornay to repres the Thieves. And paffing fordward with grit expeditioun, campid wpone the
watter Ewes.^ Not far fra that duelt Johnse Armestrang, ane Capitane of ane factioun of Theives.
This eompanioun was fo feirfuU" to his nichtbouris that evin Englifmen, many mylis within the contray,
payid tribut' wnto him. Maxwell himfelf feirid his power, and focht all meanes pofibill for his dillructioun. Johnne, intyfid be the Kingis fervandis, forjeting to leike a Letter of Protectioun, accorapanyed with fiftie horfmen, wnarmed, cuming to the King, liclitit vpone fum outwatches, quho alledging thay had taikin him, brocht him to the King ; quho prefentlie cawfit hang him, with a great number of his complices. The autboris of his flauchter brooted ' that he had promiled to mak certane myllis
in Scotland'" subject to England, gif he war honorid and recompenfid for the turne ; quhill as England,

' See Notices to Slay IG, and May 18, 1531. • Sir Waller Scott's Poetical Works, 8vo. 1821, I. 107, &c.

' 'About tliis tynie, tiik Kiso niardics to the fcilds with his Army, siirwayes the Borders, apprehends 46 of the
prineipallest rogues and cntlirottis, with their lea<Ier Jhone Akmestrancf, and hanges them all.' J5«/^ Annolfs,
]"261. * Advocates' Library. ' A mistake. It was in May. •' Even' interlined. ' Terrible ; an object
of fear or dread. ' Black maill. ' Bruited, reported. '° I'art of the Dcbateable land, CNtending several miles.

17JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 153

be the contrair, was verrie glaid of his death, being delyueiid of a capitall enemy. Sax of his complices
war refervid for hollagis ; and for' that the keiping of thame ftude in no fteid, after they had imprifoned them a few monethis, they cawfid execut thame alfo ; and futid new pledgis of theife that
remaynid at hame. Thay of Liddesdaill refuidng their awin howfTis, pad into England bag and
bagaidge, and be daylie iucudlounes ranfactit the contreyis lying neir vnto thame.

' Within fewe dayis eftir, the King, refTaveing hoftages for the Nobilmen, releivid themefeluis furth
of waird ; of quhom Walter Scott, to gratiffie the King, flew Bohert Johnjioim, ane verrie crewall
Thief; quhairbe he incmid deidlie feid with that Hous, quhilk coutiaewit, to the grit harme of baith
the Clanes, long eftir.'

Calderwood's account of the matter is hardly so minute,^ being as follows : —

' In the month of Julie (1331)' the Kixg went with ane Armie of 8000 men to Ewesdaile to
aprehend and punilh Theeves. John Armistrang, a notable Theefe, who had compelled the Englifli to pay him Black-male, and was terrible to the Lord Maxwell hirafelf, when he was comming
to THE King, intifid be fome courtiours, hot without a fave conduct, he was intercepted by 30 horfemen lying in an ambufli, and brought to the King, as if he had bein aprehendit by them againefl his
will. He and a great number of his companie war hanged one grouing trees. His takers, to make
him the more odious, alledged that he had promifed to raunder fo manie miles of Scotilli ground
nlxt adjacent to the Borders, hot the Englilh war well content to be ridd of him. The LiDDisDAir.
people fled into England, bot troubled the countrie with Raides.'

The accurate Bishop Lesley* gives but a brief narrative of the event. He says —

' All this fummer the King tuik greit care to paciefie the Bordouiis, and puneis the Theivis and
OpprefToures being thairon. And to that effect, in the moneth of Junij, he part, to the Bordouris
with ane great Army ; quhair he caufet xlviij of the maifl nobill Theivis, with Johne Armestrange
thair Capitane, be tane ; quha, being convict of Thift, reiff, flauchter and treaflbun, war all hangit
apoun growand treis ; and thair wes ane notabill Thiif brint, quha had brunt ane hous with ane woman
and mony her barnis^ being thairintill. Yet George Armejlrange, broder to the faid Johanny, wes
pardonit and refervit levand to tell of the reft, like as he did ; quha, within proces of tyme, wer apprehendit be the King, and puniell accordmge to thair defertis.'

But the most circumstantial and curious relation is that given by i»j<fe«a^o/'jPtocoW2e, with which
this notice shall be closed.

' To this effect he gave chairge te all Earles, Lordis, Barrones, frieholderis and gentlemen to compeir at Edinburgh with ane monethis victuall, to pas with the King to daunton the Theives of
Tevidaill and Annerdaill, with all vther pairtis of the realme. Alfo, the King deiired all
gentlmen that had doggis that wer gud to bring thame witii thame to hunt in the faidis bouudis ; quhilk
the mofl pairt of the Noblmen of the Highlandis did, fik as the Earles of Huntlie, Argyle, and Atholl,
who brought thair deir-houndis with thame, and hunted with his Majeftie. Thir Lordis with many
other Lordis and Gentlmen, to the number of tuelf thoufand men, aflemblet at Edinburgh, and thairfrawent with the Kingis grace to Meggatland, in the quliilkis boundis war flaine, at that tyme, aughteine
fcoir of deir.

< Eftir this hunting the King hanged Johne Armstrang, Laird of Kilmkie,quhi]k monie Scottis
menne heavilie lamented, for he was ane douhtit^ man, and als guid ane Chiftane as evir was vpoun
the Borderis, aither of Scotland or of England. And albeit he was ane lous leivand man, and fustained the number of xxiiij weill horfed able gentlmen with him, yitt he nevir molefted no Scottis man.
Bot it is faid, from the Scottis Border to New Caftle of Ingland, thair was not ane of quhatfoever

' In regard that; considering. ' Chcrch Hist. MS. Adv. Lib. David I. 2. 31, Vol. I. ' He follows Buchanan, &c. The date was May 1530. * Bannatyne Club Edit, printed from Orig. MS. of the Scottish
copy, from which the Latin translation was made. Quarto, 1830. ' Children. = Redoubted.

VOL. I. ■}■ U

154 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1531.

ellate bot payed to tins Joline Armftrang ane tribut, to be frie of his cumber, he was fo cloubtit in
Ingland. So, when he entred in before the King, he cam venie reverentlie with his forfaid number,
ven'ie richlie apparrelled, trullingthat inrefpect he had cum to the Kingis grace willinglie and voluntarlie, not being tane nor apprehendit be the King, he Ibuld obtaine the mair favour. But wiien the
King faw him and his men fo gorgeous in thair apparrell, and fo many braw men vnder ane tirrantis
commandement, throvvardlie' he turned about his face, and bad tak that tirrant out of his fight, faying,
' Quliat wantis yon knave that a King fould liave ?' But when Joline Arni/lrange perceaved that the
King kindled in ane furie againes him, an^l had no hope of his lyif, notwithftanding of many great and
fair oil'eris quhilk he offered to the King; that is, that he fould fuflene him felf with fourtie gentlemen, ever readie to awaitt vpoun his Majeltie's fervice, and nevir to tak a pennie of Scotland, nor
Scottis man ; fecondlie, that thair was not ane fubject in Ingland, Duik, Earle, Lord, or Barroun, bot
within ane certane day he fould bring ony of thame to his Majeflie, either quick or dead ! He, feing
no hope of the Kingis favour towardis him, faid verrie proudlie, ' I am bot ane fooll to feik grace at
ane graceles face I Bot had I knawin, Sir, that yea would have takin my lyff this day, I fould have
lived vpoun the Borderis in difphyte of King Hauie and yow baith I — for I knaw King Harie
wold doun- weigh my befl hors with gold to knaw that I war condemned to die this day !' So he was
led to the fcaffold, and he and all his men hanged. This being done, the King returned to Edinburgh the xxiiij day of Julij, and remained meikle of that winter in Edinburgh.'

The place where this execution took place is still pointed out to strangers, being at Carlenrig Chapel,
about ten miles above Hawick, on the high road to Langholm. Sir Walter Scott adds, ' the country
people believe, that, to manifest the injustice of this execution, the trees" withered away ! Armstrong
Bnd his followers were buried in a deserted churchyard, where their graves are still shown.' ^

With the following interesting extract from the Books of THE Privy Seal of Scotland, the Editor
will conclude this Notice, which has extended to a greater length than he had anticipated.

' (Jul. 8, 1530.) — Ane Lettre maid to Robert Lord Maxwell, his airis and alTignais, ane
or ma, of ])e Gift of all gudis movabill and vnmovabill, dettis, takkis, obligationis, fovmes of money,
giftesof nonentres. and v)ierisquhalfumeuer, quhilkispertenittovmquhill Johnne Arm strange, bru])er
to Thomas Armjirung of Mangertoune, and now pertenyng to our foverane lord be refoune of efchete
throw Justifying of ))e faid vraq'*' Johnne to ])e deid for Thift committit be him, &c. {At Preijiiphauche, per Signaturam Regis e< Thejimrarij maiiibus J'uhfcripl.y

It is hardly necessary to remark, that the persons who occur in the following memorandum, preserved
in the Justiciary Records, must have been taken long after this remarkable transaction.]*

Apr. 1. — John Armestrang, ' alias Blah Jok,' and Thomas his
brother, Convicted of Common Theft, and Refet of Theft, &c. — Hanged.

Oppression nnti frnutis rommittfti fai,) iWessfttsers nt aims.

Apr. 29. — JoHNE Adajisoun, David Lowry, and twenty-three others,

MefTengers at arms, ' Convict be ane Aflife, for commoun Opprefliomi done be

)jaim to our fouerane lordis liegis, in executioiin of J)air offices, mony and diuert'e

wais : And fpecialie, quhen pai mak fummondis vpone perfonis to pafs vpone

Inqueftis or Aflile, ))ai fell, takkis buddis'* and rewardis of Gentill meime, and

cauflis })aiin to abide at hame ; and in defalt of fufficient novmer, jje perfonis Jjat

' In displeasure, in a thrawin or crahbit liumour, frowardly. ° The growing trees on which

they had been hanged. ^ Minstrehy, I. 120. ■* See Trials of various of the Armstrongs,

Oct. 30, 1535, Feb. 2\, and Mar. 13, 1533-6. '■• Take gifts or bribes, corruptly.

18JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 155

rafe Letteris tynis' pe famyne and })air geir, coftis, and expenfis maid vpone J)e
famyne : And ))ai fuinmond and cauffis cum furthe povr and fimple perl'ons ))at
has na thing to gif ])ame to lat ]jaim abid at hame, quhilkis has na knaulege to
decide vpone ony doutlum materis : And for commone OppreflTouris of our
louerane lordis liegis, in taking of buddis and rewairdis, mair pan pertenis to
J)ame, be refone of executioune of J)air office.'

iHessfitger falsifjfing I)iia <J?.vmittoii — Cafttiiig; hvihts, ^f.

Androav Maksar, Meffiuger, ' Convict be ane Affife for ])e reflaveing
of our fouerane lordis Letteris fra Johne Striueling of pe Kere, kn', for to put in
his pleuche in pe landis of Kynloch, and to remove all v])eris Jjairfra ; and
reflTauit worthe xx li. for his laubouris. Quhilk executioune he grantit to haue
maid, and indorfate pe famyn vpone pe I'aidis Letteris, and put his lignete J)aii-to :
And J)aireltir, be \pei- ibllicitatioune, come in prefens of pe Lordis of Counfale,
and grantit pe faid indorfatioune, and denyit })at he maid pe Executioune. For
jje quhilk, pe laidis Lordis, herand him grant his avne falffet, gart put him in
pe Cartel of Edinburghe as ane faltour, becaus in Jjair prelens he grantit his avne
falfet, as laid is.'

iHastrrful iuibintr antr (j^jjjjirssion hv a iHrsiStnser.

Androav Mxirrav, Meffiuger, ' Convict for art and part of pe Maifterful Refe and Oppreffioune done to Johne Maxwell in pe Haltoune of Ogiluy, in
pe maifterfull refe fra him of ane blak hori'e and ane mare furth of pe Haltoune
of Ogiluy, and had pame away, and fald and difponit J)aim as he plelit.'

* Borne* against iWrssrnsfrs io|)o bjcrr * fusitifae from tijt aaljo/

WiLLiABiE Cristesounk and eleven others, being ' fugitive from the
law,' the following ' Dome,' or fentence, was pronounced againft them.
Sentence again/? the fugitive Meffengers.

' The Lords Ordanit, ]iat fforfamekill as ])e faidis perfonis quhilkis wer fugitive J>e faid day, and
comperit noclit, ])at fai haue tynt,'-' and fall tyne, fair offices, and neuer to biouk nor vfe ])e fainyni in
tyme to cum ; and ]jat oppin proclamatioun be maid at Jie Mercate croce of Ed^ one JNIononday uixt
to cum ; chargeing ])aim, ]iat nane of Jiaim exerce nor vfe ))air ofBcis in tyme cuniing, becaufe fai wer
chargeit to haue comperit befor fe Juftice or his deputis jie faid day, to haue vnderlyin ane Alfyfe,
and failjeit pairintill. And alfe, fat Letteris be writtin to charge fe faidis perfonis quhilkis wer
Officiaris, to compere and vnderly fe law, before )>e Juftice or his deputis, in fe Tolbuth of Ed'', pe
xxvij day of Maij nixt to cum, for certane ciymes to be imput to faim, vndir ]>e pane of rebellioune,
and putting of fame to fe home. And gif ony of faim beris our fouerane lordis Armis,^ or makis

' Lose. ^ Lost. ' Each Jlessengpr-at-aims had a badge called his blazon, on which was prominently

stamped the Royal Arms. This official badge, together with his baton, or ■ wand of peace,' as it was termed, he
renuired openly to produce and exhibit at all poindings, and in cases of deforcement, &c., in proof of his office. See
Nov. 18,1511; Oct. 11, 1j31. (Ao(icc); and Jul. 23, lj66 (AW), for farther particulars.

156 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1531.

Executioune of ony maner of Letteris or chargis in tyme to cum, thai falbe tane incontinent, hangit
and drawin, and demanit as oppin traytouris, and vfurperis of our fouerane lordis autorite. And that
]ie faidis perfonis be callit before our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis, fe faid xxvij day of Mali
nixt to cum, to vndirly ])e law for certane crimes to be imput to Jiarae, as faid is. Item, it is ftatute
and ordanit, fat all Officiaris jiat reflauis ony Letteris of panys or lauborrowis, fat incontinent eftir
fair executioune fairof, deliuer faim again to ]>e Juflice Clerk indorfate ; with certificatioune to faim,
fat and' |)ai faille ))airiutill, ]'at our fouerane lordis Letteris falbe tane fra fame incontinent, and (fai)
fal tyne fair officis for euer in tyme to cum.'

Fiolfitft roininittrb fij) tTje ^viov antj Conbrnt of i^ittenhjrem—

^Iciiirjljtrr.

[The prosecutions and the Feuds which are noticed in the three subsequent entries, arose from
the following circumstances, which, being illustrative of the spirit of these times, the Editor thinks it
may be interesting to state rather more fully than usual. The assignees to the tack of the mill and
eighty acres of the lands of Pittenweem, having sued before the Lords of Council, their Lordships,
with consent of John, the Prior, and Mr Robert Forman, Dean of Glasgow, the Usufructuary
of Pittenweem, ordained that Andrew Wood, and failing him, one of the King's Officers, should
gather the corns growing on the lands, until the final decision of the suit. The King's Officer (Lawrence Bickerton, a Messenger-at-Arms) attempted to serve his Letters upon the Prior, on Sep. 7th,
who directed him to delay taking any steps for cutting down the crop until the next day. In the
meantime, the Prior set off for Edinburgh ; and on Bickerton's return on the 9th, the Sub-Prior and
Convent threatened hira in the most violent manner. He reports in his Execution of Deforcement,
that they said ' fai wald deforce hira, and baid him depairt, or ellis his felt fuld be worthe xxiiij pair
of handis I' On the 11th, he again went to gather and lead in the corns, when he found the SubPrior and his servants busily engaged in reaping them, and who again threatened personal violence. He
returned on the 12th and 13tli, but there being ' hot Religiufe raenne and preiflis, hynis,' wifis,' and
barnis, quhilkis war nocht rifponfale to our fouerane lord, gef he had takin deforce,' he desired them
to send for Andrew Wood of Pittenweem, John Brown of Anstruther, the Laird of Balcasky, or some
other ' rifponfale' persons to stop him, so that he might indorse his Deforcement, and depart — which
they plainly i-efused. He therefore, on the 14tb, got William Dischinton of Ardrosse, James Sandelandis of Cruvy, and other nine persons, to assist him in the execution of his Letters, ' with xl wiffis
and fallowis, or fairby, to fcheir and leid f e faid cornis ;' when the Prior and Convent, with ' fair
complices to fe nowmer of thre hundrethe perfonis, bodin in feir of weir, wyth hagbutis, culveringis,
croce-bowis, hand-bowis, fperis, halbertis, axis, and fwerdis, come in anayit batell, wyth convocatione,
and ringing of fair commoune bell,' fell upon them, and ' fchote diuerfe pecis of artil5eari' at them.
Bickerton then formally exhibited his Letters, and required security from the Prior to the extent of
500 meiks, should he choose to retain the corns — or, on the other hand, offered the Prior security for
1000 merks, if the crop was reaped under authority of the Letters. All terms, however, were rejected
by the Prior — and on the Messenger and his party retiring, they again ' fchote artiljeary' at them,
and hurt several of them. And thus they ' maiflerfullie deforfit him, in the executioune of his office,
quharvpoun he brak his wand, and tuk witues,' &c. Tliese facts are luckily preserved in the Letters
and executions ; which, however, are by far too prolix to be inserted in this Collection.]

Oct. 11. — William Dischingtoun of ArdrofTe, James Saiidelandis of
Cruvy, Thomas Wemys of Vnthank, William Gourlaw of Kyncrag, John Lundy

' An ; if. " Hinds. ' Women.

19TAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 157

of Stratherlie, Mr Thomas Meldrum of Segy, William Lummifdene of Ardre,
John Mailuile, the young Laird of Carnbee, and forty-five others, were denounced
Rebels and put to the horn, and all their goods efcheated, for not underlying the
law for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of James Borthuik, John Anderfone,
and John Bal5eart. The refpective cautioners were, at fame time, amerciated
for their non-entry.

<j;)pprfsoion — Conboratton — Stforcins a iHcssciiarr, kc*

Alexander Swan, and above eighty others, found caution to underly
the law at the next Juftice-aire of Fife, for art and part of the Oppreffion done
to John Gourlaw, in wounding him ; for Convocation of the lieges, and forethought felony done to William Difchingtoune of Ardroffe, invading him for his
Slaughter ; and for Deforcing Laurence Bickertoun, the King's Officer.

<!^PJprrssion— iHutilatwn — Scfotrcinr]: a iHcsscnficr, ^r*

John Rowll, Prior of Pittinweme, Patrick and Bartholomew
Forman and fix other Canons, Mr Alexander Ramfay Rector of Mukkert, Sir
James Ramfay and three other Chaplains, and John Blaccader Parifli clerk of
Sawling, were replegiated by Mr John AVilliamlbun, CommilTary to the Archbilliop of St Andrews ; and found Sir John Sinclare of Dridane as his cautioner,
that juftice fliould be duly adminiftered.

Sontt 3Latjy iSIammis.

Nov. 29. — Silvester Haduane of Kelour, John Ogilvy of Balnagrow,
William Blare of Balgillo, Patrick Gardin of that Ilk, and fix others, amerciated
for not appearing, and paffing on the Affife of JoNET Lady Glammys.'

Cattle--sttaliit5.

Dec. 19. — Michael Scot Convicted of art and part of the Theft and
concealment of xxij oxen and cows from the Lord of St John's and his poor
Tenants, furth of the Lands of Falhoufe. — Sentence. To be scourged
through the burgh of Edinbiu'gh ; and afterwards led to the tron thereof, both
of his ears to be cut off; and to be Banished for the whole term of his life :
And never to return therein, under the pain of death.

VfioltntU) splHitir ainfl'9 Hetttrs from a iJtrsstnser.

Jan. 22, 1531-2. — John Lord Lile found James Betoune of Melgund
furety for his entry before the Juftice, on Feb. 2, next to come, to underly the
law for the violent feizing of the King's Letters from Cuthbert Hew, purchafed
' See Jan. 31, 1531-2, &c. and Jul. 17, 1537.

158 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1532.

upon the Slaughter of Alexander Hew, his brother ; and for detaining thereof in
defraud of law ; after being required thereto by Robert Champnay, Meffenger.

ilatrg (Slammps — ?Us(ns Ciiarms against Ijn- l^usftanti, $ct,

Jan. 31. — JoNET Lady Glammys found John Druinmond of Innerpeffery as fiu-ety for her appearance at the next Juftice-aire of Forfar, to underly
the law for art and part of the Intoxication' of John Lord Glammys, her
huftand ; and of Refetting Patrick Charteris, Rebel, and at the horn.

Feb. 2. — William Foavlartoune of Ardoch, David Striueling of Brekky,
John Bruce of Fyngatk, AVilliani Drummond of Abernyte, the Lairds of Cullerny, Parbroithe, Petfurane, Balnialthennax, Duncany, CuUuthy, Pyotftoun,
Gagy, and Roucht, Henry Ranifay of Laweris, and Alexander Drummond of
Carnock, were amerciated for not appearing to pafs on her Aflife.

Feb. 26. — William Lord Rothuexe, Lawrence Lord Oliphant, the Lairds
of Moncreiff, Tulybardin, Culluthy, Innernyti, Anftruther, Petcur, Petkindy,
Inchefture, Clatty, Gorthy, Cultoquhay, Kelly, Ouchterley (Auchterless ?), Balluny, and Thomas Berclay of Rynd, were amerciated for not appearing this day
to pafs upon Lady Glammys's Affile.'

CauUon fov ti)t mitt ferrping of ti)t ll?ouse of ^Uvintounr.

Feb. 2. — (Apud EoiNBURCrHE, i/i camera domiiii Regis infra Palucium
Juum Sancte Criicis, die Jicundo menfis Fehruarij, viz. injejio Pvrificutionin B.
Marie Virgitiis.) ' The quhilk day J)E Kingis grace, in prefens of Jje Chancellare, Bilchop of Galloway, Lord Flemyng, and diuerfe v))eris Lordes, tallit
Nicholace Craufurd, Juftice-Clerk, before him, and refTauit Alexander Home
Ibuerte for \>e lure keping of ])E House of Adrintoune, in tyme of peax,
during pe tyme of pe Takkis pat he fal happin to get ])airof of ])e Lard of
SaJJe ; fwa pat, na fait falbe imput to pe Lard of Baffe be pe Kingis grace,
anent pe keping of pe faid Houffe, induring all pe tyme of pe faid Alexanderis
Takkis ])airof.'

^pprtssion — 8:£!ounOing — itlutitation.

Mar. 23. — Daa'id Kincaid in Cottis, natural fon of David K. of Cottis,
Patrick and David, his natiu-al Ions, Thomas Robefone, Alex. \Villbn, and
Patrick Kincaid, found caution (Henry Wardlaw of Kilbabertoune) to appear
befor the Jufticiar, May 7, and underly the law for art and part of the fore-

' It is supposed timt tliis must refer to the alleged dealing of that unfortunate Lady in enchanted
drugs, filtres, poison, an<l charms, iS.c. ° This repetition of Assisers, heing all men of considerable
rank and station, suftVring themselves to be fined in default of their ap|)earance, speaks strongly in
favour of the popular feeling against the steps adopted to take away the life of Lady Glammis. See
her Trial, Jul. 17, LJ37.

19JAC. v., CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 159

thought felony and Oppreffion doue to John Petcarne, fervant to Sir James
Towris of Innerleith, kn', fettiiig upon him in the burgh of Edinburgh, and
cruelly Wounding him in I'undry parts of his body, in peril of his death : And
for art and part of felonioully Wounding and Mutilation of James Wilione in
his right arm. — Nicholas Ramfay of Dalhoufly, Sir James Sandelandis of Caldor,
kn', George Preftoun of that Ilk, William Lauder of Haltoune, Sir William Sinclare of Rollyne, kn', John Pennycuke of that Ilk, and Alex. Dalmahoy of that
Ilk, were amerciated for not appeai'ing to enter on this Affile. — May 7, Robert
Logane of Cotfeild became cautioner for their entry on Jul. 10, when the cafe
was put off till Jul. 31 and Aug. 7.

(Aug. 7.) — Sentence. David K. Warded in the Caftle of Edinburgh for the
Mutilation of Willbn, and David, junior, and Patrick alfo warded within the
Caftle. — James Wilsone and David Walter were alfo warded for Hamefuckin
and Oppreffion done to David Kincaid, junior, in the village of Dene.

^^surpation ottl)t i^ins's ^utijorttt) — Snipvisonment — 2D|^cft, ^r,

Apr. 23, 1.532. — Roger Chautekis denounced Rebel, and his goods
ordained to be efcheated, for not appearing this day to underly the law for art
and part of the Ufurpation of his Majefty's authority, in violently taking
Edwai'd Craufurd, burgels of Edinburgh, John Wilfon, his fervant, and umq''"
Robert AVardlaw, upon the Common-mure of the burgh of Edinburgh, and forcibly leading them to the Caftle of Temptalloune, and detaining them therein
in firmance : And for art and part of Reiving from them three horfis, with
laddies, bridles, &c. and 51. in money.

^ppiTsssion Uonc to ilnirtJ ot Conscltotni.

May 6. — Sir Patrick Hepburne of AVauchtoune, kn', John Hepburne, fon of Luke H., and others, dilated for art and part of the forethought
felony and Oppreffion done to the Laird of Congiltoune, Sir Henry Hay, chaplain, and others, his fervants. — The Lairds of Cragmelour and Swyntoune,
Alex. Home of Polworth, and William Dowglafs of Quhittingeame, and three
others, were fined for not appearing on the Affife. — John Hepburne was denounced Rebel, &c.

^lauffljtfr.

Jul. 3 — RoLi,ANu LiNDESAY, Alan Lokhert OF Lee, and William
Mofman, Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Ralph Weir.' —
Beheaded.

' Sir George Weir, chaplain, was replegiated by the Archbishop of Glasgow to underly the law for
the same crime. John Lord Erskin became cautioner that justice should be administered.

160 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1532.

^IaU0f)tei%

Jul. 8. — William Brothersyde Convicted of art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of Thomas Smythe. — Beheaded.

iHutilation — iWinor stnt fie ponlr ^u to tijt <#ci)ools, ^r.

Jul. 9. — John Inglis of Kilmany, Alexander his fon and heir-apparent,
John Mailuile young Laird of Carnebee, and others, dilaited of art and part of
the Mutilation of John Clerk. In confequence of the following remai'kable writing, William Inglis, a minor, was ordained ' to pafs furth of jugement without
finding of ony new fouerte to vnderly the law.'

James, be fe grace of God, King of Scottis. To our Juflice General, &c. in pat paiit, and to all
v])eris our officeiis, lieges, and fubieetis quhatfumeuev, to quhais prefens ])ir our Letteiis fal cum,
Gieting. Wit 56 ws to have fpecialie Refpett and Licenciat, and be fir our Letteris Levis and
Licenciatis our louit Williame Inglis, fone to Johne Inglis of Kilmany, to pafs in fe pairtis bejond
])e fey to }>e fculis,' with his eme^ Walter Ranifay ; and fiare to remane and abyde for ]ie fpace of vij
5eris. And Jiairfore, will jiat he be nocht callit nor accufit for )ie allegit Mutilatioun of Johne Clerk,
becaufe of his lefs-age'' and innocence he llandis in, being hot ane bame, quhom we have fene brocht
in our prefence, and vuderftandis him delatit hot of his malice, coniidering his ^outhhede. ChargeING 30W Herefore, all and findry our ofticeris, liegis, and fubieetis forfaidis, ]iat nane of ^ow tak vpone
Land to call, arrell, or jornay fe faid Williame Inglis nor his fouerteis for ])e allegit cryme forfaid,
during his away-biding and xv dayis jiairefter. Difchargeing ■:;ow of ■:;our offices in ]iat pairt, be ))ir
our Letteris. Gevin vnder our Signete, and fubfcriuit with our hand, at our Caftell of Striueling,
])e vij day of Aprile, and of our regne ])e xix •^ere. ■ [James R.]

33tiniin0 of tfjr ^Inrc ol Eag: — f I)rft — ^ppirssion, ku

Jul. 27. — Gilbert Greir, in Bardanuache, Peter and Robert Greir, his
brothers, dilaited of art and part of the Fire-raifing and Burning of the Place of
Lag, under filence of night, in company with John Bell, alias Jony, Andrew,
his brother, Rolland Bell and their accomplices, common Thieves and Traitors
of England and Liddifdaill : And for the theftuous Stealing from John Gi"eirfone of Lag, at the fame time, of a horfe and all his gudes, valued at 500 merks :
And for art and part of the forethought felony and Oppreffion done to Alex.
Caftellaw, and others, feiwants of the Laird of Lag, and cruelly Wounding them,
in peril of their lives. — Patrick, Mailer of Halis, became furety for their entry
to luiderly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Drumfreife.

a^nteiromimnuna Uoltl) X\)t <!raxi of ^fngus, ^'r»

Adam Lindesay, of Dowhill, found caution to underly the law, at the
next Juftice-air of Fife, for Refetting, Intercommuning, and Affiftance given and
afforded to Archibald, late Earl of Angus, and Archibald Douglafs, his uncle,
Traitoi's and Rebels — after their forfeiture, &c.

' Schools. - Maternal Uncle. ' Minority.

20Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 161

Aug. 8. — Robert Lekprevik' Baniflied, by Warrant of the King,
furth of the Kingdom of Scotland. He was fworn, in Judgment, to remove
within xl days, under pain of death.

Crrasonafili) 3)itterroimmuiin0 Mifi tf}t (J?ail of Snflus»

Nov. 8. — Katherixe Ruthirfurd, Lady Trakware, was denounced
Rebel, and all her goods ordained to be efcheated, for not appearing this day to
iinderly the law, for treafonable affiftance given to Archibald, formerly Earl of
Angus, George and Archibald Douglas, his brother and uncle ; and for Refetting,
fupplying, and Intercommuning with them, and daily converfing with them,
within the kingdom of England, and fecretly in Scotland, &c.

aiiitJinci: from tije Uaiti <o tf^t IWltst iBnvdjto,

Feb. 8, 1532-3. — Sy:mox M'culloch, of Myreton, and a number of
Galloway and Ayrfliire Lairds, were denounced Rebels, for treafonably abiding
from the Hoft and Army to the AVeft-Marches, towards England, with the King's
Lieutenant, on Jan. 5 laft. — Many produced certificates of ficknefs. Licences from
the King and Lieutenant, and were difcharged. — The following is a fpecimen of
the Licences which A\'ere ufually granted on fuch occalions ; —
L.iCE'SCE for 3Ir William Montgomery of Stair.
Rex,

Wje, vndirftanding ])at our louit Maister William Montgomery of fe Stare, is feik, and may
nocht mak travell witliout danger of his life ; and fat his fone and apperand are, witli his Jioulhald,
according to his eftate, is to depart to our Bordouris, withe our derrell bro]ier, James Erie of
Murray, our Grete Wardane and Lieutenent, for )ie defence of our realme, and refiftiug of our aid
inemys of Ingland : Herefore We grant and gevis Licence to ])e faid Maifter Williame to remane
and hide at harae fra Jiis our Oift and Armye, now devifit to pafs to ]ie Bordouris ])e v day of Januare
inftant, to Jie effect forfaid : And he fall incur na danger nor ftayth throw his remanyng and awaybiding fra Jie famyn, in his perfoune, landis, or gudis ; and fall nocht be callit nor accufit fairfore :
Difdiargeing all our OfKciaris prefent and to cum ; ]>at is, our Juftice, Juftice Clerk, and Thelaurare,
and all vjieris our Officiaris and Minilleris of Court ]iairof, and of Jiair officis in Jiat pairt: And for his
uon-comperance to our faid Oill and Armye, We, be ]ie tenour hereof, difchargis all calling or acculatioune ]iat may follow Jjairupoune, nochtwithlfanding ony our Letteris or Proclamatiounis maid or
to be maid to ])e conlrar : Anent )>o quhilki;', We difpenfe with, be ])ir prefentis, fubfcriuit with our
hand, At Edinburgiie, )ie fecund day of Januare, the jere of God V^.Y". xxxij ^eris, and of our
regne ).e xx jere. [J.AMES II.]

It has also been thought proper to preferve the following remarkable Act of
the Privy Council, v\ hicli is engrossed in the Books of Adjournal.

Cf)t Bfclaiatioun niaiH Oe iijt ilortjts of Ounril,
* quijnt is anr siibstanrious man.'

Apud Ed"., ix Feb., anno I'o.V'^. xwxij, in llojpkto domhil Cancellurii :

' Probably the Scottish printer. It is likely that his crime was printing and selling Heretical books.
VOL. I. j- X

162 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1533.

Sederunt, CanceUarius, Candidecafe, Camhijlnjnneth, Kynlofs ; Domini
Erflmi, Syvipill, Clericus Regijlri, Jacobus Uammiltoun, Johannes Camphell, Botulator, M. Ad. Otterhurnc, Nicholaus Crauftird, Jacobus Laufon,
et Francijcus Bothmle.

The Lordis of Counfale, for declaratioun of ]>& Actis and Proclamationis maid
be })e Kingis grace and Lordis of his Counfale, charging all Baronis, fFrehaldaris,
and vfieris fubftancius men of })is realme to cum to his Bordouris, quarterly,
for defence of ]jis realme, Findis and Declaris })at ane man, havand in his poffeffioune ane huudreth punds worth of gudis, fteilbow' and ferm of ]jat 3ere
alanerlie except, is haldin and reput ane fubftancius man ; and is haldin to
vnderly ]>e charge of ]>e Actis and Proclamacionis.

dTire^rnisiits — ailjomnau scntmrrti to ht tirobjneU.

Aim-. 26, 1533. — Jonet Andersone Convicted of art and part of Fireraifing and Burning of a byre of the Laird of Roflythe, and fixty oxen and
eleven cows therein. — Drowned."

May 12. — Henry Bikkerstoune Convicted of art and part of the
cruel Slaughter and Murder of Robert Sym, committed at Struther, in Fife, iiear
Clatty-dene : And of Stouthreif from him of certain goods, at the fame time. —
Beheaded

%tittx txam i\)t i^fng as to * Xi)t oitrour of S)"stirt=Courtis/

Jun. 16. — William, Billiop of Aberdeue,^ Treafurer, prefented the following Letter from the King ; which was ordained to be recorded.
Rex,
Justice and Juftice Clerk. Forfamekill as J)e ordour of our Juftice Courtis argretumly ' abulit, be
continuaciounis and diCcliargis Jiairof, and ficlike, be difchargeing of fouerteis for entering of peri'onis at our faidis Courtis, and of perfouis to enter to ])e famyn, difcbargeiug ))e vnlawing of fare
fouirteis, quhilkis paffis vndir our fubfcripcioune and vpirwife : We, for remade hereof, Will and alfe
Commandis and ehargis ^ow, ])at ^e, for nane our writingis, command, or priuate takinnis, mak na
continuaciounis of our faidis Courtis, nor (lop nor lat° to liald ))e famyne, nor difcharge ony fouirteis
to enter ony perfounis to our faidis Courtis and dais of law, or of ony perfounis to enter to ))e famyne ;
nor jit difcliarge )>are fouirteis and vnlawing of fame for ony our Letteris, command and cliarge
nieffage, or priuate takyne, in ony tymes cuming ; without 56 half ]ie avife and confent of our Thelaurar
exprefs fareto, be his hand writ or plane confent, vnder fe payne of tynfale '' of 5our Officis. Gevin
vndir our Signete, and fubfcriuit with our hand. At Edinburghe, ])e firfl day of Februare, and of our
regnne fe xx'' 5ere. [JAMES R.]

' Goods and ' stocking,' the property of tlie landlord, then by no means uncommon, to encouiage the industry of
the poor farmers. * The Editor has fre(|uently had occasion to remarit that this was the ordinary punishment

of females for crimes of lesser magnitude. In cases of Murder, Treason, Witchcraft, &c. women were beheaded or
BURNT at the stake, according to their rank and aggravation of the offence, Ike. ' Willi.im Stewart, son of Sir

Thomas Stewart of Minto. ' Greatly. '■• Himler; let, ° Loss; deprivation.

20JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. • 163

©estroniiis ^almon-fteljmtis on tfje 3ttibtr 39ee.

Jun. 21. — John Mangelous' in Treif, Sir John Irland, Chaplain, and
three others, delaited of art and part of the Oppreffion done to Henry Bifliop
of Whitehorn, Commendator of Duudranane and convent thereof, in breaking
their ' dooks," and Filliing in the water of Dee, under filence of night, and
deftruction of the ' fymmeris" and ' hekkis' thereof: And for ftrikiug their fervants. Robert Lord Maxwell was fined for their non-appearance, &c.

[Arc/iibald Earl of ArgyJe, JuJIice General.'\

Jul. 29. — John Lord Forbes, John Mafter of Forbes, his fon and
heir apparent, William, his brother, William F. of Corffmday, and William
Stewart of Portarftoune, find furety to appear at the next Juftice-air of Aberdeen, to underly the law for art and part of the treafonable Fire-raifing and
deftruction, under filence of night, of certain ' 'poynd-faldis^'' belonging to
George Earl of Huntlie, built of wood, for the prefervation of his cattle, in his
Foreft of Coriny.^

iHuiUrr of tijt llairir of Craisaiiis anti ijis serbant

Aug. 19. — Sir John Sympill, Vicar of Erfkin, accufed of art and
part of the cruel Slaughter of William Cunynghame of Craiganis and Robert
Alanelbune, his fervaut. — The Arclibilliop of Glafgow replegiated the pannel to
his Church Courts. — John Brilbane of Bifchoptoune became furety for the due
performance of juftice.

\^Archihahl Earl of Argijle, Juflice General.']

iHurtjrr of X\)t ilaiili of Craijianis anti i)ts srvbant.

Aug. 20. — John Lord Sympill, Robert Mafter of Sympill, his fon
and heir apparent, Gabriel S. of Ladymure, his brother, and William, his fon,*
John Stewart of Barfquyb,' John Sympill of Foulwod, John Sympill, j^oung
Laird of F.," Mathew Sympill," and a great number of others, found furety to
api^ear before the Juftice, on Nov. 17, to underly the law for the Slaughter of
the Laird of Craiganis and his fervant. — (Nov. 17.) The Juftice General appointed Robert Lord Maxwell and Thomas Scot of Pitgorno to be his deputes

' Probably a clerical error for Man5elaus, (Menelaws ?) ' Probably Crawe-dikes. ^ Sometimes written simmer; the beams on which the hechs or spars, formed like a horfe-rack, were fastened.
The heck was regulated to be of a certain width, to permit the fry and smaller fish to escape for breeders to kep]) up the stock in rivers, &c. ■* Pin-folds ; pens for sheep. ^ May 10, 1536, the
parties found caution to underly the law at the next Justice-aire of Aberdeen. ** The amount of
their caution was 1000 merks each. ' Barscube. ** 5001. each. " 1000 merks.

164 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1533.

for trying this cafe. — (Nov. 18.) A number of perlbns were denounced rebels,
and put to the horn, &c. — (Nov. 20.) The Juftices took furety of Lord Sympill,
&c. to underly the law before the Juftice, at the next Aire of Renfrew.

iHuiUti- oC tijt ^aitti of Ciaisams mitf i)is serbaiit*

Nov. 12. — Alexander Pyncartoune and John Bryntfciiele Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of the Laird of Craiganis and his
fervant. — Beheaded.

^toutfjreif — dan--(!5recrar,

Nov. 15. — Malcolm M'^coule-kere M^Gregour, Duncan and Patrick, his brothers, accufed of Stouthreif, in coiiijjany with fundry Rebels of
THE Clan Gregour, in October laft, of xl cows, from Alexander Earl of Mentethe, and William Matter of Meutethe, his fon, furth of their lands and polTeffions. Failing to appear, they were denounced Rebels, and put to the horn, &c.

^ruti firtijoeeii ti)t €imm(ii)amt5 anU ^rmpdls,

Nov. 20. — Alexander Cunynghame, fon and heir apparent of William Matter of Glencarne, Andi'ew, his brother, David C. of Robertland, Robert
C. of Auchinberry, Robert C. of Aket, and William his fon, Adam C, Tutor of
Laglane, John Campbell of Ardoch, Thomas Craufurd of Auchinamys, and
thirty others, foimd caution, (viz. the Matter of 'Glencai-ne, AVilliam C. of Glengarnok, John C. of Caprintoune, .... C. of Cunynghameheid, Gabriell C. of
Craganis, David C. of Robertland, and Robert C. of Aket,) to underly the law
at the next Juflice-aire of Renfrew, for Umbefetting the High-way, by way of
Murder, to William Lord Sympill, lying in wait for his Slaughter, with a
great company, between his Caftle of Sympill and his Place of Lovell, on the
fifth and feventh days of Auguft laft.

ijftiiti httmtn tl)f CuirniTsijiimts antr ^tniptUs,

William Cunynghame of Glengarnock, David C. of Robertland, and
Robert C. of Auchinhervy, with fixteen others, found caution to underly the
law at the fame Juftice-aire, for art and part of the forethought felony and
Oppreflion done to Robert Snodgerfe, Mark Sympill, and Patrick Young, coming
with convocation of the lieges to the number of 100 jJerfons, in warlike manner,
on the (3d ?) day of September laft, within the lands of the faid Robert, and
forcibly I'eizing and imprifoning him, &c. — The parties, both Cunynghames and
Sempills, were bound over to keep the jieace, under the pains of 5000, 2000, and
1000 marks each, according to tbeir respective ranks.

21JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 165

Mnniftst anU Milful «5rror on Assise,

Nov. 23. — Bertholojieav Herys Convicted for Manifeft and Wilfull
Error, in his procuring or being with others his colleagues upon the Affife of
John Makilrewy, James INIakgee, and John Scaillis, and declaring them to be
acquitted and innocent of art and part of the Theft and concealment furth of
the chamber of Sir James Macbraar, Chaplain, within the burgh of Durafreis,
in the month of October 1532, of a box containing 400 1. in gold, and jeivels
worth 100 1., or thereby ; together with fundry Letters, Charters, and other
evidents belonging to Thomas Macbraar, burgefs of Dumfreis, and entrufted by
him to the cuftody of the faid Sir James. — To be incarcerated for year and
day ; and farther, during the King's pleafure. All his moveables to be efcheated.

\^Archihald Earl of jlr^i/Ie, Juftice General.']

I^intriiiia; tfjr SSanilints of tlje ittardjcs, ^r* from ajijpwijeiitiius

Feb. 5, 1533-4.. — Thomas Kirkpatrik of Clofeberne, Gilbert and Cnthbert
Greir, brothers to the Laird of Lag, (John Greirfone,)\Villiam Johneftoun, alias IVylkijne, of Elthelchellis, and four others, become in his Majefty's will for Reletting,
Supplying, and Intercommuning with John Blythe and fixteen others, Sep. 27,
1533, being fervants of Sir Alexander Kirkpatrik of Kirkmichaell, kn', and all
Rebels to the King : AxD for affiftance afforded to the faid Rebels the fame
day, with Convocation of the lieges in great numbers, armed in warlike manner, and hindering Robert Lord Maxwell, Steward of Kirkcudbrycht, and
Warden of the West Marches, and Ninian Crechtoun, Sheriff of
Dumfreis, from apprehending the faid Rebels, by virtue of his Majefty's
Letters directed to them ; and thereby they could not be delivered up to juftice,
conform to the laws of the realm. The Laird of Clofljerne, Wylkyne Johneftoun,
and Cuthbert Greir were incarcerated in the Caftle of Edinburgh. The
others found furety.

[ WiUiain Earl of Montrofe, John Lord Erjlcin, Sir James Hammiltoune of
Fynuert, knight, and Mr James Laufoun, Proiofl of Edinburgh, Jufticiars
fpcciallij confituted hy Commiffion, <^c.]

i-Iaugijter of i\)t itaiiU of Craitranis anU Ijts serbaut.

Feb. 23.— John Stewart, Coufm of the Laird of Barlkib, Mathew
Sympill, fervant of the Laird of Stanlee, and James Kirkwod, dwelling at the
Kirk of Kilbarchane, Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of
William Cunynghame of Craiganis, and Robert AUanefoune, his fervant —
Beheaded.

166 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. X534.

Per/bns amerciated for being dbfentfrom the AJfife.
Alexander Drummond of Carnok, John Galbrayth of Polgave, John Grierf'one of Lag,

Mungo Lindefay of Ballull, Pat. Buchquhannane of Stanyflat, Eduard Synclare in Lefuaid,

Humphrey Galbrayth, Tutour of James Edmonfloun, uncle of the William Stewart of Trakware.
Culcreuch, Laird of Duntreithe,

Gabkiel Sympill was proved to be fick, by Sir Patrick Bryfoime, Curate
of Lochuin5eocht, and witneffes. William Lord Sympill (his brother) became
cautioner for his entry. — (Apr. 29, 1534.) Lord Sympill was fined 1000 merks
for his non-entry ; and the faid Gabriel denounced Rebel, &c. and all his moveable goods to be efcheated.

(Feb. 26.) — Robert Master of Sympill was denounced Rebel and put
to the horn, for not appearing to underly the law ; and all his moveables to be
efcheated, &c. William Lord Symiiill was fined 1000 merks for not entering his fon.

^lausijter of iXyt 2lairK of Craisanfis aitti \)\% setrbant,

Feb. 26. — WiLLiABi Lord Sympill, John Sympill, fenior in Auchlodmont, John Cunynghame junior, Robert Sympill brother of the Laird of Foulwod, Murdoch Sympill, Robert Spreull, William Crag in Syde, and Patrick,
John, and Robert, his brothers, were all acquitted by an Affife, for art and part
of the Slaughter of the Laird of Craganis and his fervant : And for Refetting,
Supplying, and Intercommuning with David Sympill, fon of the faid Lord Sympill,
John Sympill junior in Auchlodmont, William Lufe (Love), Ranald Lufe, John
Spere, and .... Gyllis, Rebels and at the horn for the faid Slaughters ; and with
others their accomplices, being alfo at the horn for the fame Slaughters.

AsSISA.

John Lord Lindefay of the Byris, The Lard of Riddale, Edward Sinclare of Drydene,

George Lord Hume, Charles Mowat of Bufbie, Williame Vache of Dawik,

Alex. Dalmahoy of that Ilk, Arch. Dowglafs of Cafchogill, Williame Murray of Romannofe,

Archibald Farnely 50ung Laird John Cranftoun of that Ilk, Robert Dowglafs of Pumfraftoune.
of Braid, James Ker of Merfingtoune,

The following perfons were amerciated for not palTing on this Affife.

Ahfentes ah AJfifa.

The Laird of Amysfeild, Andrew Ker of Grenehede, James Ker of Lyntoune, George HoppringUl
in Sanct Johnnis Chapell, Mr George Hay of Min^eane, Robert Bortliuik of Rafchaw, the Laird of
Prentado, James Bowmaker of Cardone, the Lairds of Fawfide, fenior and junior, James Hoppringill
of Tynnefs, Walter Lekky of Croy, Richard Lekky of that Ilk, Mr Thomas Ker in Sounderlandhall,
and the Laird of Howpaflot.

In confequence of tliis acquittal, the following Supplication was prefented to
THE Lords of Privy Council, and granted by their Lordfliips on the fame day.

SupPLiCATiONyoA" Gabriel Cnu>/nghame,Jon and heir of the deceafed Laird
ofCraiganis, to bring the above Assise to Trial for JVilful Error, &,c.

My Lordis of Counsale, vnto jour 1. humelie menis (complains) and fchawis we jour feruitouris,

21JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 167

Gabriel Cunynghame, fonne and air of rtnq'«^ William Cunyngham of Craganis, and fe remanent of
]>e kin and freindis' of the faid vmq'^' William. That quhair William Lord Simple and his complices,
beand putt to the knawlege of ane Afllfe, for art and part of \>e creull Slauchter of ]>e faid vmq'« William ; and for Intercommuning, mainteiuance, and refett of Jie flaaris of Jie faid vmq''= William, is quytt
be fe faid AfTyfe, wrangouflie and injulllie to our grate apperand^ feaithe and dampnage,^ confidering
his officiar and houlhaki men wis fylit.* Quharefok, we befeke 30ur 1. Jiat we may hare ane command to )>e Juftice Clerk to gif ws ))e names of ]ie perfounis quhilk pall vpoune ))e faid Affife, fua fat
we may found our actioune vpoune Jiaiin for pair Manifefl and Wilfull Errour. According to juftice,
with 50ur anfuer huimlie we befek. \^Indor/ed.'} Apud Eduubvughe, penultimo Fe'Ti anno, SfC.
xxxiij. Fiat nt petitur. J.Gude, de mandato Dominorum.

^laufllbter t^i % HaivU of Cvattranis antr l)ts scrbant*

Feb. 28. — John Sympill of Foulwod. The following perfons were
amerciated for not appearing to pafs npon his Affife for being art and part of
the fame crime.

The Young Laird of Bargany, John Leuenax of Wodhede, John Crenftone of that Ilk,

Charles Mowat of Bulbye, John Buchquhannane, fon of Eduard Synclare in Lefluaid,

The Young Laird of Gerefwod, Rob' B. of Drummakill, Thomas Makdowell in Stederig,

Robert Baillie of Gerveftoune, W"'. Edmonftouu of Duntreithe, John Houftoune of that Ilk,

\_ArchibaId Earl of Ar gyle, Jnftice-Ge7ieral.']

a^ulJirial ^rfiitiation for t\^t Compromise of rertatn Motintruio:,
iHutilation, iJnbasion, ^r.

Apr. 14, 1534. [Apud hurgum de Striueling.) — The quhilk day,
comperit in jugement before pe faid Juftice, David Somervile 30UNG
Laird of Playne, one J)at ane pairt, and David Schaw of Cammysmort,
one ]5at v])er paii't ; quhilkis wer comiiromittit, bund, oblift and fuorne be ])e
faithis and treuthis in pair bodeis, ])e Haly Euangellis tuichit, to abyde, vndirly
and fulfill })e fentence, decrete, and deliuerance of fiir perfonis vndirwritten :
That is to fay, ane nobiU and michty Lord, Williame Ei'le of Monti'ofe, Lord
Grahame, honoi-abill menne, James Coluile of Efter Wemys, Johne Striueling of
})e Kere knyS Robert Bruce of Erthe, Alexander Schaw of Sauchy, Maifter
Robert Creichtoune, Proueft of ))e College Kirk of Sanct Gele of Edinbur', and
George Schaw of Knokhill, or ony thre of Jjame, chofin for ])e pairt of Jje faid
Dauid Schaw ; Nobill and michty Lordis, Hew Lord Someruile, Alexander Lord
Levingftoune, Alexander Lord Elpliingftoun, Niniane Setoune of Tulibody kny',
Williame Lawder of Haltoune, Williame Mentethe of Weft Kerfe, Maifter
Alexander Levingftoune of Donyphace, and John Someruile of Camnethane, or
ony thre of \>ame, choftn for \ie pairt of ])e faid Dauid Someruile, JuGis Arbitratouris, and amicabill compofitouris chofin betuix })e faidis pairties to knaw
and decide : That is to say, in fpeciale anent ])e Hurting and Mutilatioune of

' Blood-relations. ^ Manifest, evident. = Loss, or hurt and damage. < Found guilty.

168 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1534.

Jje faid Daiiid Soineruile, allegeit to be committit be pe faid Dauid Schaw and
his comi)lices, and anent pe Inuafioune of pe faid David Schaw, allegit to be
committit vpone him be pe faid David Someruile and his complices, ]?at famyn
tyme ; and generally, anent all vj^eris depatis,' cauflis, querelis, actiounis and
coutrauerfiis quhatfumeuer, movit be athei' of pe faidis pairties aganis vjjeris, in
ony tymis bygane, vnto pe day of pe date heirof : And pe faidis Jugis, or ony
thre of Jjame chofin for ather^ of pe faidis pairteis, fall convene and meit in pe
Paroche Kirk of pe burcht of Striueling, pe firft day of December mxt to cum,
and tak pe faidis actionis and debatis in pmwe and vpoune ])ame, and commone^
Jjairintill ; and deliuer in pe famyn betuix Jjat day and pe fefte of pe Purificatioune
of our Lady, callit Candilmes, nixt immediatle Jjairefter following : And with
power to J)ame to proragate and contynew pe geving of fiair Sentence for fie
fijace as })ai fal think expedient : And in cace of difcord, baithe pe faidis pairteis
hes cliofm, with })air avife and confentis, ane nobill and miclity lord, Johne
Lord Erflcine, honorabill men, John Campbell of Lundykny', Mr James FouUis
Clerk of our fouerane lordis Regifter, Thomas Scot of Petgorno, and Nicholace
Craufurd of Oxingangis, Clerk of our fouerane lordis Jufticiary, ourmen,'' all
in ane voce to decide with pe faidis Jugis in pe faidis materis and debatis :
And however the laidis Jugis and ourmen, or pe maift pairt of J)ame, Decretis
and Deliueris in pe premiffes, baith the faidis pairteis ar oblift and fuorne, as
laid is, to ftand and abyde jjairat, but ^ reuocatioune, appellatioune," or reclamatioune : And gif ony of pe faidis ourmeuue fal happin to decefe in pe menetyme
of pe geving of pe Deci-ete and deliuerance in pe faidis debatis, the remanent
being one life," fal liaif power to decide and deliuer with pe faidis Jugis in pe
famyn, liclike and alfe lauchfully as ))ai wer all one life : And quhilk of pe faidis
pairteis ];at will nocht abide and fulfill pe faid Decrete and Deliuerance, eftir pe
geving ])airof, bot pafRs Jjairfx-a, the pairty nocht abidand J^airat nor fulfilland
pe famyn, fall content and pay to pe pairty kepand and abidand pairat pe faid
Decrete, pe fovme of I" li. vfuale money of Scotland, in name of pane,' for coftis,
Ikaythis, and expenfes fuflenit, and f)at fal bappin to be fuftenit be him J^airthrow, but fraude or gile.' And baith pe faid pairteis confentit and ordanit ])is
compromit to be infert in pe buke of Adiornale, and pe Clerk of Jufticiary to gif
to pame J^e autentik copiis and extractis of pe famyn.

Common Cljeft, $(t.

[It is unnecessary to specify the very numerous cases of tlie description of tlie following, which

occru- very frequently in every period of the Record. The pannels, about the period of this Trial,

were almost all Elwalds, Turnbulls, Armstrongs, and other Border Thieves, and the Record seldom

gives any detail. Where details are entered into, such cases are uniformly selected.]

' Debates, difl'erenres. ' Either, viz. each. ' Commune. ' Oversmen, umpires. ' Without.

^ Appeal. ■ In life. ' Penalty. » Honourably, without fraud or guile.

22 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 169

Sept. 30. — John Tcjrnbull, alias Black^fow, Convicted of Common
Theft, outi)utting and inputting thereof. — Hanged.

ffl23ai)l«UHnfl ti)t itairtr of |^uUrn--iW.Tiris|)aU, ^t.

Jan. 15, ISS'i-S,— Siu Patrick Hepburne of Wauchtoune, kn', Patrick
Qnhitlaw of that Ilk, the Lairds of Weft Fortoun and Efte Crag, George Sinclare
of Hiefeild,Adam,Alexander,and John Hepburne, brothers of theLaird of Wauchtoune, Patrick his fon and heir apparent, and twenty-fix others, found furety to
underly the law on Feb. 12, for art and part of ■' Umbefetting' the high-way to
Gilbert Wauchope of Nudry-Marfchell, for his llaughter.— (Feb. 12.) The Archbifhop of St Andrews repledged Mr William Hepburne, and other two Priefts,
accufed of the above crime. Thomas Cokburne of Clerkintoune, and others, were
fined for not appearing to pafs upon this Affife.

2i2ailful Crtroi* on SJssist.

Jan. 15. — Alexander Inxes younger of that Ilk, James, fon of Robert
Innes of Rothnakenzie, Thomas Urquhart, Sheriff of Cromarty, John Drumniond of InnerpefTery, and others, Avere called upon to imderly a grand Affife,
for their unjuft accpiittal of Robert Dwne of Rate, of certain points and crimes
for which he was indicted. — Their cautioners were ' unlawed ' in the funis of
500, 300, and 200 merks each, according to their refpective rank, for their nonentry this day.

Apr. 7, 1535. — Hugh Lord Somervile fund furety (William Chancellare of Quodquene') to vmderly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Lanark,
for art and pairt of the Southreif and Oppreffion done to John Tweeddale in
Carnewethe, in reiving from him two cows : And for art and part of the Stouthreif from the faid John, of all his horfes, mares, oxen, cows, and all his crops,
viz. corn, oats, ftraw, fodder, hay, togedder with all his goods and utenfils.

jfruU fit tturtn ti)t ittataenns aitti (JTlaitrannalU.

Jxni. 4. — ' The cpdiilk day, in prefence of ))e Chancellar and Lordis of
Counfale, Hector M^Gillane of Doward comperit andconfentit }iat jjefouerteis ])at were fouerteis for him of before, for his entre before ]>e Juftice })e faid
day, and he as fouerte for his tua brejjer, and ])e remanent of f)e perfons contenit
in our fouerane lordis Letteris, rafit vpone him at the inftance of ])E Clanran-

' See his Trial for Slaughter, April 24, 1536.
VOI,. I. f Y

170 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1535,

NALD, fuld fland ficlike fouerteis as J)ai wev before, vnto the x day of Junij
inftant ; efter pe forme of our fouerane lordis vjseris Letteris, vnder his fignete
and fubfcriptione-manuale, direct ])airupone to ])e Juftiee-Clerk : Axd ])at pe
faidis Letteris direct viioun him ' fuld Hand in effect, quhill pe faid day, as pai
wer of before, and he to remain within the burcht of Edinbur' in pe menetyme.'

ajntrrromiminiiis, ^r,— ilffurlftr of tijt itairlf of ^lovat,

Jul. 20. — Patrik Colquhoun and Mr Adam C, fons of Sir John C. of
Lufs, kn', and tu'enty-five others, (among whom were Andrew Cunynhame of
Drumquhaflil and William C. of Fenyk,) found furety to underly the law at the
next Juftice-aire of Dumbarton, for refetting, Supplying, Intercommuning, and
Affifling Humplirey Galbrayth, and his accomplices, Rebels and at the horn for
the cruel Slaughter of ^A'illiam Striueling of Glorat.' — Donald Macdow and fix
others denounced Rebels, &c. ; Sir John Colquhoune of Lufs and Donald M''inanys
were proved to be fick ; and Humphrey Colquhoune, Parifli Clerk of Lufs, Mr
AdamC., penfioner of Lufs, and David C, clerk, were replegiated by the Archbifliop of Glafgow.

Ab/entes ah AJJifa.

Wm. Edraonftouneof Duntvetlie, Patrik M'gregour, Walter Park of that Ilk,

John Sympill of Foulwod, James Freland of that Ilk, Wm. Flemyng of Barrouchane,

Robert Sympill, his brother, James Stewart of Ardgoware, George Flemyng of Kilmacolme,

John Maxwell of Stanelie, Geo. Montgomeiieof Skelmorlie, Tiiomas Kelfo of Kelfoland,

James Park of GilbertBeld, Ninian Stewart, Siierifl" of Bute,^ Hugh Raillloun of that Ilk.

The above perfons, and thirteen others of no note, were amerciated, for not
appearing this day to pafs upon the Affyfe.

Hnlabjfulli) trntounctncr 2tortJ <#em})in 3U(6el, ^t,

Jul. 30 — John Loud Lile, and James Soutar his fervant, put to the
horn, &c. viz. The faid James for not appearing to underly the law for Ufurjiation of his Majefly's authority, in putting certain Letters to execution againft
William Lokd Sympill, demanding caution of him to underly the law for
being art and part of the Slaughter of John Crawfurd of Pi-evik, &c., and thereupon denouncing him Rebel, caution liaviug been previoufly found by him :
And the faid Lord, for art and part of caufing his fervant to execute thofe Letters, &c.

J?toutf)rf if — i^iracu — iHurUn%

Aug. 30. — Alexander John Canochsone, Angus Elyauch his brother, Gillefpy Maktarliche his fervant, Gillefpik Donoche his fon, Makcay' of

' Reference may \n\ made to the Appendix to this reign for many illustrative circumstances.
^ William his son was among those wlio were also fined. ^ His Christian name not inserted.

23JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 171

Sanday, Maknachtene More, Officer of the Weft parts of Kyntyre, Eweyr Makcay of Aucbincrifs, Officer of Kintyre, and thirty-three others (chiefly 3£acJemjs),
were denounced Rebels, and put to the horn, &c., for not appearing this day to
underly the law for art and part of Stouthreif from Andrew Mure, citizen of
Glafgow, and bis fervants, of a fmall veflel called a ' Pickard fchip,' with goods
therein of the value of SOO 1., furth of the Port of Portcrofche : Item, for art
and part of the ci-uel Slaughter of John Mure, his fon, and other four perfons,
his fervants ; and Hurting and Wounding of the faid Andi'ew, to the hazard of
his life ; Item, for art and part of the Stouthreif and Oppreffion done to the
faid Andi'ew and his fervants, in reiving from them, furth of the Port of Lochriddene, of a great boat, and certain goods therein of the value of 50 merks :
Item, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter and Murder of two fervants of
the faid Andrew, being in the faid boat : Item, for art and part of the cruel
Slaughter and Murder of Andrew Mure, fon and heir of the faid Andrew, and
other four perfons his fervants, coming upon them whilft they wex'e fleeping in
a fmall velTel, being in the fbation or Road-ftead of Sanday, belonging to the laid
Andrew, loaded with merchandize and other goods brought from Ireland ; committed upon the 15th day of July laft : Item, for art and part of Stouthreif
from the faid Andrew, his fon and fervants, of 100 1. in money and merchandizeCattU-stralinii: — Cafeiujjijvisoners, ^f.— ^toutlfjrtif.

Oct. 30. — Chkistofher Akmestkang,' Archibald his fon, Ingram
Armeftrang, Railtoun, Robert and Archibald Armeftrang there, John Elwald,
called Laivis-JuJtiie, \A'illiam, fon of Alexander Elwald, and Robert Carutheris,
fervants to the Laird of Mangertoune ; Thomas Gray, John Forreftare, called
Schnik-buklar, Ninian Gray his fervant, Thomas Armeftrang in Grenefchelis,
Lang Penman, fervant of one called Dihhis Wille, Ninian, fon of the faid
Chriftopher, Thomas Armeftrang of Mangertoune,- and Symon Armeftrang, called Sijm the Lardc, were all denounced Rebels, and their whole goods, moveable
and immoveable, to be efcheated, &c., for not vuiderlying the law this day for
art and part of Stouthreif under filence of night, on Jul. 27 laft, from John
Cokburne of Ormiftoune, furth of his Lands of Craik, within the fliire of Roxburghe, of feventy ' drawand oxin'^ and thirty cows : And for art and part of
traitoroufly taking and carrying off three men-fervants of the faid John, being
the keepers of the faid cattle, and detaining them againft their will for a certain
fpace : Andiov art and part of the Stouthreif from them of their clothes, ' quhin-

• See notice prefixed to Trial Apr. 1, 1531 ; and also Feb. 21, and Mar. 13, 1535-6. ^ c-other of
the celebrated Jobnny Arinestrang, and Cbief of tjie Clan. ^ Oxen used for drmic/lit, siuli as ploughing, &c. From numerous other entries tliey appear to have been much used for agricultural purposes.

172 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1535-6.

3earis," purfes, and certain money therein : And for breaking of their Bonds
made to the King.

\^Sir James Coluile of Eajl Wemyss, hi*, Sir John Mcdluile of Raithe, lcn\
and William Hammiltoun of Sanquhar-Lindefaij, Juftices co?i/Iitiifed hi/
fpecial Commij]ion.'\

Snbasioii — HlJamtrsiuIun.

Jan. 24, 1535-6. — Sir Patrick Hepburne of Wauchtoun, kn', and
James Cragifwallis his fervant, Convicted of art and part of coming upon
James Siuclare, within the lands of Stevinftoune, with drawn fwords, and invading him for his Slaughter : And for forethought felony and Hamefuckin done
to the faid James, fetting upon him in the Hovife of Quarrelpittis, and befieging
him therein.^

John Martyne in the Monaflery, and Cuthbert Newtoune, were alfo
convicted of art and part of the Hamefuckin done to James Sinclare, coming
to the Houle of Quarrelpittis in company with the Laird of Wauchtoune, and
befieging him therein.

[(S/r James Uammiltoime of Fijnnert, kn', Jufice fpecially conftitidedJ]

iHiitilatiom

Jan. 26. — John Forbes of Petflego, Alexander, his fon and heir apparent, and John and William, alfo his fons, Alexander F. of Dalmanache and
John his brother, John Cawdale, fon and heir apparent of James C. of Alslone,
and feventy others, were denounced Rebels and put to the lioru, and all their
goods, &c. to be efcheated, for not appearing to underly the law for art and part
of the Mutilation of Michael Frafer, John Frafer, Mr Robert Anderfoune, "William Crawford, John Scot, John Gordon, and David Chene : And fur art and
part of forethought felony, and other crimes.

^lau0fjtrr of X\)t Itaiitj of ^rottistouitf,

Feb. 11. — Mr Robert Galbraithe found caution to underly the law
before the Juftice on Feb. 23, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of William
Crechtoune of Scottiftoune, under the pain of 5000 niorks. — (Feb. 23.) Found
caution of new, to appear on Mar. 27. — (Mar. 27, 1536.) He was replegiated
by the Archbifliop of St Andrews.

Cattle anij <^I)rti)--stf alius— 33uniuiQ: of llJoUipasIot— Creasonal)lt> asststuici; tljr airmstiongs, ^r.

Feb. 21. — Symon Armestrang,^ Convicted of art and part of the Theft

' Whingars. "- Sentence is not recorded. = See Oct. 30, 13.S5, and Mar. 13, 1535-6.

23JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 173

and concealment of two oxen from the Laird of Ormiftoune, furth of the lands
of Craik, and a black mare from Robert Scott of Howpaflot, furth of the lands
of Wolcleuche ; committed during the time he was in the King's Ward, about
Lammas 1535. Item, of art and j^art of the Theft and concealment of five
fcore of cows and oxen from the faid Laird of Ormiftoune, ftolen furth of the
faid lands of Craik ; committed by Alexander Armeftrang, called Evil-iv'tUit
Sande, and his accomplices, in company with Thomas A. alias GrenefcheUs, and
Robert Carutheris, fervants of the faid Symon, and certain Engliflimen, at his
command, common Thieves and Traitors, on Jul. 27, 1535. Item, of art and
part of the traitorous Fiue-raising and Burning of the Town' of HowPASLOT : And of art and part of the Theft and concealment the fame time of
fixty cows and oxen belonging to Robert Scot of Howpaflot and his fervants ;
committed by Alexander Armeftrang, in company with Robert Henderfoune
alias Chei/s-wame,' Thomas A. alias Grenejcheles, his fervants, and their accomplices, common Thieves and Traitors, of his caufmg and affiftance, during the
time he was within the King's ward, upon Oct. 28, 1535. Item, of art and
part of the Theft and concealment of certain flieep from John Hope and John
Hall, the King's fliepherds, furth of the lands of Braidlee in the Foreft ; ' committed during the time he was within the laid ward : Item, for art and part of
the treafonable affiftance given to Alexander Armefti'ang, called Kvill-wilUt
Sandy, a fworn Engliflunan, and fundry other Engliilimen his accomplices, of
the names of Armestrangis, Niksounis, and Crosaris, in their treafonable
acts. — Sentence. To be drawn to the gallows and hanged thereupon ; And
that he fliall forfeit his life, lands, pofteffions, and all his goods, moveable and
immoveable, to the King, to be difpofed of at his pleafure.

Common Cljfft— iHuiKn* — drirt-llnistitg:, ^r.

Mar. 13. — John Armestrang, alias Jony in Gutterholis, and Christopher Henderfon, Convicted of Common Theft, Refet of Theft, Outputting
and Inputting, in England and Scotland : And of art and part of treafonably inbringing Engliflnnen, common Thieves, and Traitors, within Scotland, and committing common ' Herefchip' and Stouthrief, Murder, and Fire-raifmg. — Sentence. To be drawn to the gallows and hanged as Traitors : And all their
goods, moveable and immoveable, to be efcheated to the King.

(Commoit C!)rft, ^t. — iHurUns — jfirr-l^aising;, ^r,

FiNLAY Johnestoune Convicted of Common Theft, &c. of old and

new. Item, of art and part of treafonably bringing the furnames of Grahamis

' It is probable that, in this instance, Farm-town only is implied. ° Cheese-belly. ' Viz. of Ettrick,

1.74 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1536.

and AiiMSTRANGis.Englilhmen, Dik the Devillis BAiRNis,conimon Thieves
and Traitors, within Scotland, committing Slaughters, Murders, Fire-raifings, and
' Herefcliips,' upon the King's poor lieges. — Sentence. To be drawn to the gallows and HANGED thereupon as a traitor ; and all his goods to be efcheated, &c.

iHuiKrr.

John Fischeaue, in Leithe, Convicted for the Murder and Slaughter
of Janet Syralbne. — Sentence. To be hanged upon the gallows: And thereaftei-, to be beheaded ; and his head to be affixed upon the gate of St Andrews.
All his goods were ordained to be efcheated.

[Sir James Colnile of Eafl Wemyss Jen'., fpec'iallij coiifiitnted hy Coinmissiofi.]

M'toiitijdtf of Citle-©rrt0 — ^ppvtssioit, ^c.

Mar. 31, 1536. — William Cokburne of Scraling,' became in the King's
will for art and part of the Stouthreif of a box, under filence of night, from
Patrick Atkin, burgefs of Edinburgh, and certain evidents therein contained,
pertaining to Alexander Crechtouu of Newhall, and in the cuftody of the faid
Patrick for the time, in the year ] 528. Item, for art and part of the Violent
occupation of the Lands of Kirkrighill, belonging to the laid Alexander, for four
years preceding Mar. 12, 1538. Item, for art and part of the Oppreffion done
to the laid Alexander in the Violent occupation of his faid lands from Mar. 12,
1533 to Whitfunday 15.:j4. Item, for art and part of the Oppreffion done to
the faid Alexander in the overthrowing of a ' faill-dyke'- built on the faid lands.
Iteni, for art and part of the Oppreffion done to the faid Alexander, in inputting
and keeping feven fcore of cattle and fixty horfes and mares in the meadow of
the faid lands, and pafturing and deftroying the faid meadow, in Auguft laft,
1535. Item, of breaking three feveral Letters of Protection granted by the
King to the faid Alexander. Item, for connnon Oppreffion done to the faid
Alexander in the preinifes.

' The following remarkable Letter from the King is taken from the original,
preserved among the Warrants of Court.
Rex,

Traist counfalouris. We grete you weill, and hes refauit 5our writingis
aneut ])e Laird of Scraling ; and thinkis 5our avise and counfel bed, anent
the publifliing of dome gevin aganis him. Quhair 30 mentione of ane Minut

' John L.mdlaw, liis soivant, was Convictod of (!«stroying tlie faill-dyke, pasturing the horses and
cattle, and iiifringinj? llio three several Letters of Pidtection. His sentence is not recorded. WlLI.IAM DvNCAx, an<l three others, his tenants, were convicted of the two last points, and Jined 10 1.
each. ' A Turf division-wall or fence, for separating one field from another.

23JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 175

send,' We liave fene nane. Therfor, We pray 3011, |)at 36 tak J)at travel to pafs
to him and declair quhovv it ftandis, fiia ])at his lyf and guddis are in our liandis.
Gif he cummis in will, We wilbe gracious to him ; ffail3eand J^airof (We) fal
caufe juftice be kepit : And pairefter J)at ^e write to vs his anfuir, as 36 will do
Vs fingular plefour. Gevin at Craufurdjone, Ipe xxix day of Marche, and of
our regne pe xxij 3eir. Ja^ies R.

(Indorsed) To our traift counfalouris, our Controllar and Thome Scot.''

^lausTjtn- of tf)r Enirb ot Connestoutt,

Apr. 2-1. — Wji.lia.m Chaxcei.lare of Quodqueue,^ Robert his brother,
and James C. amerciated iu 300 merks for not underlying the law for art and
part of the Slaughter of Thomas Bailie of Cormeftoune. Their cautioners were
Hugh Lord Somervile and Richard Broune of Cultermanys. — ' Al pir perlbnis
of pe Chancellaris, eftir pai wer vnlawit, enterit in jugement for pe faid crime,
and maid quyte^ be une Affife ])airof.'

\_Archihald Earl of Argijle, Justice-General?^

^Intirrfjter of tlje llairU of iHrltrrum.

Apr. 26. — John, Master of Forbes," John Strathauchiu, the young
Laird of Lethinturk, \\'illiam Stewart of Portarftoune, Patrick Forbes, burgefs
of Abirdene, and Robert Forbes in Sunnany, produced a Remiffion from the
King for art and part ol' the cruel Slaughter of Alexander Seytoun of Meklrura.
John Lord Forbes, George Earl of Huntlie, William Forbes of Corffinda, James,
his fon and heir apparent, and Alexander Forbes of Brux, became cautioners to
fatisfy the parties for AlFythment of the Slaughter.

33roir0in(i anti 23uniina X\yt 5Sf?otisc of Babij, Ut. — ^latisljtrr of
tUinttn men, ixiomcit, anU rljilUmi — #!'tout|)irtf — lifsettiitfi;
anti Sntnrommunincr initlj tijc iHacItintosl)CS, sUrfifls, ^r.

May 11. — James Grant of Frewchy, John Grant of Ballindalloche,
and John Grant of Culcabok, found furety to the amount of 1000 merks each,
to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire (Inverness ?) for art and part of the
aflillance given to Hector JMakiutofche and vmq'" William, bis brother, at the
time of the Befieging of the Place and Houfe of Davy, within Strathnaverne,
belonging to James Ogilvy : And for the treafonable Burning of a great part of
the Houfes and buildings thereof, and the houfes' and buildings of the tenants of
Dyke, ArdroflTere, and other lands : And for the Slaughter of women, men, and

' Sent. ' Thomas Scott of Pitpoino. ' See I, * 169. ' Acquitted. ^ See his

Trial, I, * 163, &e. He confessed his guilt of this Slaughter on tlie Scaffold. See also the concluding article of Appendix to the Trial of Jonet, Lady Glammis, I, * 193.

176 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1536.

children, to the number of twenty perfons : And for Stoiithreif and ' Herefchip'
furth of the faid Place and houfes, and from the ground of the faid lands, of all
tlie grain, cattle, victual, goods, utenfils, and houlehold Huff, to the value of
12,000 li. committed by the faids Hector, William, and their accomplices, in the
year 1534 : And for Refetting, lupplying, intercommuning, and affiilance given
and afforded to the faids Hector, William, and their accomplices, after they were
denounced Rebels, &c.

5gamesu(ftcn — (J^ppirsstitfl tije ©ean of iHuirai).

May 27. — William Douglas of Bone- Jed burgh, Thomas Macdowell
of Maccariftoune, and John Moll of that Ilk, found caution to the extent of
1000 merks each, and Robert Douglas, and Andrew IMakbrek, 300 merks each,
to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Jedburghe, for art and part of the
Oppreffion and Hamefuckin done to Mr Alexander Dunbar, Dean of Murray,
and his fervants, coming upon them under filence of night. May 26 inftant, at
11 o'clock ; they being for the time in the company and houfe of the faid Dean,
and belieging him and his fervants therein, and invading them for their Slaughter.

^pprtssioir — drtie--3Uaisiits — ^toutljreif, kt.

May SO. — Nicholas Lermonthe in Fluris, and Andrew his brother,
having obtained Refpites, found caution to fatisfy the parties, for their being
art and part of the Oppreffion done to Sibella Corfljy and James Gray, fcourging
them, and Burning their houfe : Item, for theftuously breaking a houfe in the
town of Smalem, and ftealing goods therefrom, in company with Cuthbert,
Andrew and Charles Dowglas, Rebels, Thieves, and Traitors : Item, for Oppreffion done to John Edmonftoune of that Ilk, keeping his five raerk lands of Ednem
wafte for nine years, and cruelly Wounding and Hurting his fervants : Item,
for Stouthreif and concealment of eighty Iheep furth of the lands of Raburne,
from the poor Tenants thereof.

mytiX — lUsft of Cfjtft, ^r.

Jun. 8. — John Elwald, alias Jok Vnluippy, Convicted of Common
Theft, Refet of Theft, &c.— Hanged.

^lausfjtn-,

Jul. 17. — Sir Robert Logane of Reftalrig, kn', found caution (to the
extent of 10001. Gilbert Wauchope of Nudry Marlchell, and James Foreftar of
Medowfeild being fureties,) to underly the law at the next Jullice-aire of Edinburgh, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Adam Purdy.

1

23 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 177 '

^aft l^eejjins ot tt)t ^ptP ColMtr, $t(, of ^tvt%

Jul. 24. — The Provost, Bailies, Council, Deacons of Crafts, and community of the Burgh or Perth, by their procurators, ' Band and oblift ))aim
to his hienes, })at ]jai fall faufly and furely keip, vpone {)air expenfis, ])are Spey
VoURE, and all vjjeris ftrenths and fortalices within ])e faid burgh, fra all infeftacioune, or inlowping of hoftile alTalsearis or brokin perfonis, to our fouerane
lordis obeifance, quhill his returning again within his reahne, and farthir at his
plefour ; as ]jai pe faidis Provoft, baillies, dekinnis of craft, counfale and communite of Ipe faid burghe will anfuer to his grace ]jairupoun, and vndir ])e payne
of tinfale of pair lifRs, landis, and gudis.'

HatlgCmquair not to SHiterrommunc toiti) t6t JDotislasstis.

Aug. 11. — ' John Hume of Coldane-knoUis, Williame Stewart of Trakquare, and Thomas Ker of pe ^are, are becumin pleggis and fouerteis, coniunctlie
and feueralie, for Katharine Rutherfurde, Lady of Trakqiiare,' that fcho
fall frathinfurthe^ obferue and keip gude rewll ; And in fpeciall, fall nocht write
nor fend ony writingis to pe Dowgi.assis, our foverane lordis Rebellis, now
being in Ingland, or Intercommune with thame any maner of way : And fall
enter her perfoune in Warde, in qvihatfumeuer place it fall jileife pe Kingis grace,
or his lordis Regentis in his abfence, quhen fcho beis I'equirit ))airto, vpon xv
dais warnyng, vndir pe pane of ij" li.'

(!t>pprrsstou — Violent omipatioit of a ^Mjing;*

Aug. 14. — Patrick, Lord Gray, found James Skrymgeour, Conftable
of Dundee, as cautioner for his entry before the Jufticiar on Oct. 31, to underly
the law for art and part of the Stouthreif and Oppreffion done to Sir Henry
Luvell of Ballumby, kn', on Jan. 28 lall, in the occupation of his fifliing of
Dunderviflieide, on the water of Tay, (lying to the eaft of the Caftle of Bruchty)
under the pain of 10001. — ' All ])ir perfonis chargit to compere, be pe Juftice
and Juftice-Clerk, in jugement, pe laft day of October nixt to cum, to pafs vpone
pe Assise of Patrik Lord Gray, ilk pei-foune vndir pe pane of T li.'

The Lord Saltoun, The Lard of Nudry Marfchel, The Lard of Petkinde,

The Lord Ruthuen, The Lard of Robertland, Thomas Wyntoun of StrichtThe Lord Vcliiltre, The Lard of Kelle,"' niartjTie,

The Lord Leviugftoun, Alex. Fowlartoun of ])at Ilk, The Lard of Kere.

The Lard of Newwark, The Lard of Monorgund,

' This Lady was the youngest daughter of Philip, and the sister and heiress of Richard Rutherford
of that Ilk. She was married to James Stuart, the founder of the family of Traquair (natural son of
James, Earl of Buchan), by Papal Dispensation, Nov. 9, 1305. Her husband fell at Flodden. William was their son and heir. ^ From thenceforth. ^ Probably Kelli/, in Fife.

VOL. I. j z

178 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1536.

(Oct. 31.) — ' The Lords Regentis and .Tuftice continewit ])e actioun of
cryme depending betuix ]?e Lord Gray and Lard of Ballumby to j)e thrid day
of pe nixt Jiiftice-aire of Forfare, or vpoun xv dais warning, becaufe ])e faid
Lord Gray producit in jugement before ]?ame ane Refpect' gran tit to him be ])e
Kingis grace, quhilk Jjai wald obey.'

(Jan. 16, 1536-7.) — Lord Gray was proved to be fick and unable to appear.— Roger Charteris, and five others, were put to the horn for this crime,
and all their effects to be efcheated, &c. (Apr. 17, 1537.) — They were denounced
Rebels, and put to the horn. (Jul. 12.) — Robert Fresell, Thomas Gray,
and David Lekkv, denounced Rebels for the fame crime ; And for coming to
the fifliing diverfe times, threatening his fervants, breaking and deftroying his
boats and nets, and firing at them from the Tower of Bruchty.

WatrtastitQ: ICaUn Sliiss for f)er ^lau0ljtei*, ^r.

Aug. 16. — Walter MakfarlaN found John Naper of Kilmahew and
John Buntyne of Ardoche, as cautioners for his entry at the next Juilice-aire of
Dunbertane, to underly the law for art and part of Convocation of the lieges in
great numbers, in warlike manner ; and befetting the way to Margaret Cunynghame, relict of vmq'^ Sir John Culquhoune of Luis, kn', and David Farnely of
Colmiftoune, being for the time in her company, for their Slaughter ; and for
other ci'imes.

#jpprtssioit — ^toutljrfiC of a a^aassoit, ^r.

Aug. 25. — Mariota Hume, Countess of Craufurde, ■ Patrick
Crechtoune of Camnay, and feventeen others, found caution (the Lairds of Keir
and Cranftoune), to underly the law before the Juftice, on Nov. 24, for art and
part of the Stouthreif and Oppreffion done to John Moncur of Balluny,^ infeizing fi'om him of a ' wayne,' or waggon, with four oxen and two horfes. (Nov.
24.) — They became in his Majefty's will, and found Sir John Striuelingof Kere,
kn', and John Creychtoune of Ruthvennis, as cautioners to latisfy the parties.

^latijjfjtn* of a Cljajjlaim

Sep. 20. — John, Lord Lile," and AVilliam, Mafter of Lile, his fon, and

' Respite. ^ Sister of Alexander, second Lord Hume, and widow of John, Jiffk Earl of Crawford, who was slain at Flodden, where he had a chief command. Lord Ilume led the van, along with
the Earl of Huntley, and was one of tlie few who escaped. ■' See Dec. 12, 1536. '' John,

fourth Lord Lyle, who married Grissel Betoun, daughter of David Ik'toun of Creich, and niece of
James, Archbishop of Glasgow. William, Waster of Lyle, is not mentioned in the Peerages, and
must have died previous to August 29, 1541, when John, his son, and lieir apparent, got a charter
of Novodamus of the Barony, on his father's resignation. Beg. Mug. Sig. xxvii. 188. John Lord
Lyle died without male issue, leaving only one daughter, Jean, who married Sir Neil Montgomery of
Lainsbaw, and the title thereupon became extinct.

24 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 179

their accomplices, dilated for art and part of the Slaughter of Sir John Penny,
chaplain.'

Castincr troixrn a iHill, kc,

Oct. 16 — Henry Atkinsone of Sleichhouffis, Robert Brovnefield, and
Hugh Wod came in his Majefty's will for the Oppreffion done to Elizabeth and
Alison Hume, the heirefles of Fall Caftle, and to Sir Robert Logane of Reftalrig, and Sir Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugus, their hulbands, for their interefts, in
cafting down the Mill of Hutoune, on Auguft 24 laft, and filling up the Milldam thereof : And for Stouthrief furth of the laid Mill, of the 'mylne iruis (irons)
and the mylne graithe.' Sir John Stii'ling of Keir, William Craufurd y' of Lefnorijs, and John Lile of Stanypethe became cautioners for their fatisfying the
King and parties.

J^fHiiifl Ftfttial aitU ^fittp to tljt Cuglis]^.

Oct. 20. — Patrick Brovxefield in Halfingtoune convicted of breaking
the general Proclamation, in felling of a boll of victual in England : And William HoPPRiNGiLL in Toftis, convicted of felling thirty flieep to the Englifli.
Caution was found to enter them in ward in any of his Majefty's Caftles as might
afterwards be directed.

€i)ttt o( a silbti- * ptcu*

Oct. 31. — Andrew Dempstar, convicted of art and part of the Theft
and concealment of a filver ' pece'" from the tavern of Robert Bertoune, in the
burgh of Edinburgh. — Hanged.

ittepins of tf^t Castle ot drtiunv&tmn.

Nov. 8. — Walter Ker of Cesfurde, Warden of the Middle Marches,
bound himfelf to keip the Castle of Edzearstoun, on receiving the profits
of the lands for his trouble ; and alfo to apprehend Robert Ruthirfurde, rebel.

<^lauflTjttr of tljc JtafvU of 812lestljall, .Vr.

Nov. 14. — John Bannatyne of Corehouse, Thomas his brother,
James Hammiltoun of Stanehoufe, and nineteen others, found caution to underly
the law, at the Juftice-aire of Lanark, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of
John Grahame of Wefthall, Robert and John Grahame. — Some other perfons
were denounced Rebels, &c. for not appearing.

' It is probable tliat tbe matter was compromised, as no fai'ther notices occur of this case. - 'Vnius
taffie argenti ;' a drinliing-cup ; a wassail-bowl.

180 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

^laujjijter of ti)t 3lauU of %in\)oiiQt — IVa^t (jTornfilf atiUurtiott).

Nov. 14. — Thomas Weir of Blakwod, and John Campbell, alias Cok,
found caution to underly the law, at the next Juflice-aire of Lanark, for art and
part of the cruel Slaughter of Archibald Tenent of Leuenax (now Linhoufe) :
And for art and part of Ravifliing the wife of Robert Hammiltoune, dwelling
at the Chapel of St Bride.

#pprfssin0 iTiitf SSaounKfufl: ti)t Coiinteso of CraufiirU, ^r.

Dec. 12. — John Moncue of Balluny,' and Mariota (Maij) Dowglafs, his
Ipoufe, and four others, found caution to underlythe law, at the next Juflice-aire
of Perth, for Oppreffion done to Mariota {May) Countefs of Craufurd, in breaking up the foil and ditches of her lands of Potento, and Wounding the laid
Countefs in the throat : And for common Oppreffion. — Robert Carnegy of
Kynnaird, George Arrot of that Ilk, and George Halybiu'toun of Petcur, were
amerciated for abfence from the Affife.

dfniK OftiMtnt Horti ^wmt aittj ti)t Eairtr of (iJtimonstoun.

Dec. 19. — Gilbert, William, and Thomas Hwme, came in the
King's will for Convocation of the lieges in great number, armed in warlike
manner with lances, bows, and arrows : And for art and part of the Hameluckin,
befetting of the way, forethought felony and Oppreffion done to John Edraonftoun of that Ilk, coming to his lands and heritage of Ednem, and invading him
and his fervants for their Slaughter, and cruelly Hurting and Wounding ....
Wychtman with a lance, in peril of his life. — John Hwme of Coldenknollis
became furety for the appearance of the laid Thomas Hwme at the next Jufticeaire.of Berwik.

Supplication of WiUiam and Gilbert Hume to the Lords Regents.

My Lords Regents, vnto jOur 1. Iiuimlie inenis and fchawis, we ^our feruitoniis, William
Hume and Gilbert Home : ])at quhar, we come in ])e Juftice wil, for ])e tul5e" Jiat liappynnit betuix
MY Lord Hume and |)E Lard of Edmonstonis feniandis; for fe quliilk we wer put in jie Caflle
of Edinburghe, and fair lialdin, of lang tyme bigaue ; and hes fpendit all ]iat we had, and couth get to
borrow at frendis ; and now, for fait of our neceflaris, ar in parrel of our livis : Theirfore we befeke
30ur 1., for Goddis fake, fene we ar pouer men, and hes no wjier landis nor guddis to fulleiie ws, pat
56 will cans ws to be put to liberie and fredome, Jiat we may pas among our frendis to get our mete
and drink, for our fervice ; we findand fouirtij to entir agane in J)e faid Cartel, quhenne euir je pleis,
vpoune XV dais warnyng, vnder fic panis as we may find. And 50ur anfucr huimlie I (we) befeke. —
(Indorjhl) Apud Edinburghe xvif Februarii, anno 7™ V'^xxxv)^". The Lordis Regentis Ordanis
pe Jvflice Clerk to tak ficker' fouerte of \\\ complenaris, fat fai fall obferue and keip gud reul in
tyme curayng, afer^ of faim vndir fe pane of V'' hundreth merks : And alfe, fat fai fall entir within
ward in fe Caflell of Edinburghe, or ony vfer Cartell within fe realme, quhen it plefis fE KiNGis

' See Aug. 2 J, 1536. ' A broil, scuffle, or quarrel. ^ Sure caution. « Either, each.

24Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 181

grace, or fe faidis Lordis Rkgentis in his abfence, apoune xv dais warnyng, vnder ]>e fald pane :
Quhilk fouerte beand fund, fat fe Juftice Clerk writt to ]>& Capitane, Conftable, and Keparis of fe
faid Caftell of Edinburgbe, to put fe faidis coraplenaris to liberie. — Erll of Huntley, Erll of
Montrose, Erle of Maxwell, ' Johne Banxatyne,' 56 fall tak ))e Lard of Melloftanis fouerte,
efter fe forme of fis deleas,'^ and kep pis for varrand.' Tho. Scott.^

#l)prcssttin — 3Htbasion — 21saount((ns — iHutilation*

Jan. 30, 1536-7. — Gilbert Earl of Cassillis, Fergus Makdowall of
Freuche, John Kennedy younger of Druaimellane, Alex. K. of Glentig, James K.
of Knokdone, and twenty-three others, found furety to underly the law at the
Juftice-aire of Air, for art and part of the Mutilation, bel'etting the way, fforethought ffelony, Oppreffion, and breaking the King's Proclamation in his abfence ;
and coming upon John Dunbar of Blantyre, and his four fervants, within the
burgh of Air, upon Dec. 9 laft, to the number of fifty perfons, armed in warlike
manner, cruelly invading them for their Slaughter, Wounding three fervants of
the faid John, and Mutilating two of them in the hand and thigh.

<!£>j[)))iTi3sion — iNutilation.

Hector, George, and David Dunbar, Hugh Hammiltoune, and John
Gillis, found caution to undei-ly the law at the next Juflice-aire of Aii', for art
and part of the forethought felony, common Oppreffion, and Mutilation of Peter
Rankin, coming upon him and James his brother, within the burgh of Air, upon
Dec. 8 laft, and cruelly invading them for their Slaughter, of forethought felony.

^fjftjp-stcaliitti: — Snfirtnsing; of (i!?n(jlisl)men, ^c.

Apr. 17, 1537. — Andreav Hall, called i^«^;yo«', and William Hall,
called IVanfoiine pynt'ill,^ denounced Rebels, &c. for not underlying the law, for
art and part of the Theft of certain flieep from William Dowglace of BoneJedburghe and his neighbours : And for art and part of the inbringing of
certain Engliilimen to the Place of the faid William Dowglas of Cun5eartoune,
and for art and part of Stealing certain corns furth thereof. — Perfy, Cuthbert,
and John Hall, called Wijde-Jioije, and John Bennet in Schank, found caution
to underly the law for the fame crimes, at the next Juftice-aire of Roxburghe.

* ^^irnallinja* <)f Virtual — ^dlinfl ^|)ffp to (JJntjUsijmm.

May 30 — James Riddale, burgefs of Jedburghe, convicted of art and

' The family of Bannatyne (of whom was descended the now famed George Bannatyne), long held
office as Clerks of the Court. ^ This is the only instance this phrase is used in the Record. It

is an order to delete, or blot out the old act of cautionery from their books. ' Of Pitgornio, Lord

Justice Clerk. * See Aug. 11, 1337, where it appears that these persons were afterwards slain

by the Douglases.

182 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

part of breaking the Act of Parliament in ' girnalling' of victual. Delivered
over to the Captain of Edinburgh Caflle to be kept in ward. — Andrem' RidDALE convicted, at the fame time, of Selling three fcores of flieep called
' hoggis' ' to Englillimen, contrary to the King's Proclamations. Alfo "warded.
— They both found caution, to the extent of 500 merks each, to appear before
the Juftice on 1ft, and afterwards on 11th days of June, when they were permitted to compound with the Treafurer.

J^abisl^inii: (#oiribIf 9[6tiiution,)

Jun. 10. — Thomas Kennedy, fon of Thomas Kennedy of Knokreoche,
found James K. of Blarequhanne as his cautioner, that he fliould underly the
law at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for art and part of the ' Reviffing' Kathex'ine Kenned)'', daughter of vmq'^ Alexander Kennedy, Girvane-manys.

223it!)l)oltiiiig tijr iUiits of €>vknt^ antJ ^!)ttlantJ, ^c.

Jun. 15. — Barbara Stewart, William, her brother, and eleven others,
dilated for art and part of the Stouthreif and detention from Margaret Lady
SiXCLARE" of the rents of her lands and lordfhip of Scheitland : And for art
and part of Stouthreif from the tenants and inhabitants of the Lordfliips of
Scheitland and Orknay of their marts, hides, fwine, flieep, meal, butter, oil, and
malt. Ordained to appear on Jun. 23. — (Jun. 23.) Denounced Rebels, and all
their goods to be efcheated.

33f sjtti'ns t|)e Stbliot of iHrUosr — Oppression, ^'^r.

Jun. 22. — John Hume of Coldaueknowis found caution (James Ker of
Merfingtoune) to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Berwick, for Befetting the way, of forethought felony, and for Oppreffion done to Andrew Abbot
OF Melrose, on Jun. 15, lying in wait for his Slaughter, with Convocation of
the lieges to the number of 120 perfons, between Mofs-Roploche and the IMonaftery of Melrofe.

j^toutfjirif — Opprrsston — «l2.1ountiin£«

Jun. 25. — Robert Turnbuli,, alias Fehill Hob, denounced Rebel
and put to the horn, &c. for failing to underly the law for art and part of the
violent Theft and Stouthreif from Sir Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugus, kn', furth
of his fet of the lands of Colbrandifpethe, of 20 head of cattle or ' nolt :' And
for art and part of the forethought felony and Oppreftion done to AVilliam Bell,

* Sbeep of a year old, which have not been shorn. ^ Perhaps Lady ^Margaret Sinclair, the

third daughter of George, /owrtA Earl of Caithness, and wife of William Sutherland of Duffus.

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 183

William Small, and Andrew Stevinfoune, his fervants, cruelly wounding and
hurting them with lances. — Six others were fined for not appearing to underly
the law for the fame crime.

lArc/i/bald Earl of Argyle, Jujiice General.']

Crwsouaijlt (Tonspiran) asaiitst i\)t M\\tC% Itife— Consfiiriiis i\)t
Qcstructioii of tf;e ^rottisl) ^rmn at 3JetH)ursI).

[The fate of the Master of Forbes has long been matter of History, and the details have
been recorded with more or less accuracy by Buchanan,^ Lesley,^ Sir James Balfour,^ and Pinkerton ;■* and_^/7io/, in his Collection of Criminal Trials,^ has devoted more than usual space to the
discussion of this, the introductory, Case of his Abridgement; which, however, he confuses in his ordinary manner, and colours it with his peculiar views. As Mr Tyllers History enters so minutely into
all the leading public events, it is unnecessary for the Editor to attempt even the briefest outline of
the circumstances. The only mention which it is deemed necessary to be given, iu this place, is the
following passage, taken from Caldencood's History of the Church of Scotland -^ and the reader will
find appended to the Trial three important illustrative Papers. These documents contain all that is
requisite, in the mean time, towards the formation of a clear opinion of the nature and merits of this
remarkable Case.

' John Master of Forbes," be the perfuafione of the Earle of Huntlie,^ who had leduced
one of his fervants called Strachene^ to reveale and forge a Conspirasie intendit by his Mafler,
was perfewed and convict be ane Affife, as having fonie yeers before fought, with the Douglasses,
to (lay the King. It was true he marraied the Earle of Angous his filler; hot it could not be
proven fufficientlie and clearlie, aither by Wittnefs or other evedences, that ever he had fuch a purpofe. It was knowne that the greatell pairt of the Assise war corupted be the Earle of Huntlie.
The Master of Forbes was Beheaded the 10 of Julie 1537 ; and Slrachene the revealer was
Banillied, becaufe, as was aledged, he had confealed the Treafoune maney yeeres. Ilowbeit, the
people judged not the Master of Forbes to be guiltie of that Treafoune, quhich was laid to his
charge ; yet, did they not lament for his death, becaufe he had bein guiltie of manie grivious oftences
otherwayes. The King feemed to repent of this fact foon efter, for he received one of his bretheren into Court, and the other he reftored to his brother's patrimonie, and procured to him a good
marraige.'

There is only one circumstance farther which need be noticed, viz. that the Master of Forbes, notwithstanding of his sentence, was beheaded and quartered, &c. his relations having been spared the
more ignominious part of the sentence. Wood, in his Peerage, following Arnot's account of the
matter, relates that he was hanged and quartered, &c. Leslie, however, informs us, that ' he wes
heidit and quarterit at Edinburgh, and liis heid and quarteris affist apoun the Portis' — and Balfour
says, that ' be the niediatioun of some frindis, he had that fauor to be beheadit and quartei'it.' On
the scaffold he denied the Conspiracy against the King ;'° but acknowledged tliat he deserved to

' Buchanan, xiv, 53. " Lesley, Ban. Club's Edit, p. 1.31. ^ Annales, I, 267. ' Hist, of Scotland,

Quarto, II, 3-lj. ' Trials, p 1. ° MS. Advocates' Library. ' He was the eldest son of John, stxM

Lord Forbes, by Christian, daughter of Sir .Tohn Lundin of that Ilk. Lord Forbes, as will be seen from the accompanying Papers, was also accused of the same Conspiracy, and was for a long time Warded in the Castle of Edinburgh ; but, ultimately, he received a free exculpation from every charge of guilt. He died anno loi7. * George,
fourth Eiirl of Huntley, who was slain at the Battle of Corrichie, when his army was overthrown by the Queen's
forces under the Earl of Moray, Oct. 28, 1562. ' See Jul. 20, 1537, of this Collection. '» Pitscottie says,
he ' swore vpoun the scaffold that he was innocent of these crymes of Treasoun quhairof he was convict ; but he

knew Weill it was the innocent Slauchter of the Laird of Meldrum quhilk had brocht him to thatpoynt.' Lindsay's

Chronicles, II, 353.

184 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

die for the Murder of the Laird of Meldrum.' The Editor again begs to refer the enquiring
reader to Mr Tytlers History, where, doubtless, he will find a lucid narrative of the whole circumstances connected with this remarkable Trial.]

Jul. 14. — John Master of Forbes/ ' Convictus de arte et parte proditorie
Confpirationis et abhoniinabilis ymaginationis Interfectionis et diftructionis nobiliffime perfone fereniffimi domini noftri Regis, per bumbardam fine maehinam
bellicam, le cuhcer'uig vulgariter appellat., ipfb domino Rege tune temporis in
fuo burgo de Abirdoniis exiften. pro executione et adminiftratione jufticie in
borialibus partibus fui regni, ipfius necem proditorie confpiran. et imaginan.
Item, pro arte et parte proditorie Seditionis orte infra vltimum Exekcitum
f. d. n. Regis, pro defenfione regni aduerfus arma Anglorum, fuper Limites
regni, tempore belli, apud Jedburghe expectan., proditorid Confpiran. et ymaginan. vnius partis Exercitus Scotorum diftructione, pro defenfione regni Scotie
contra perfecutiones et incurfiones veterum inimicorum Anglie apud prefat.
Limites raoram trahen., in eminentem perditionem totius diet. Exercitus Scotorum et appai'ens dampnum et deftructionem f. d. n. Regis, totius fui regni
Scotie ejufdemque reipublice. Ac pro proditoria auxilia et fupplemento prefatorum inimicorum Anglie.

Nomina Assise elect, et admiff.fuper jyrefato Johanne Magijtro Forbefs, viz.

Robertus Dominus Maxwell, Alexander Leflie de Petcapill, Jacobus Gareoch de Kilftare,
Willelmus MagifterdeGlencarne, Johan. Pantoune de Pettneddene, Georgius Leflie de New Leflie,

miles, David Duncanfone de Standand- Johannes Cvmyng de Culter,

Johannes MailluilldeRaith, miles, llanes, Karolus Dempflare,

Johannes Hume de Coldennowis, Willelmus Leflie de Boqubane, Willelmus Leflie de Coclarochy.
Georgius Craufurd de Fedderatt, Nicholaus Rofe de Auchloflin,

hAVBjive Sentkntia FoRiSFACTUiiE recMita contra prenominatiim Johunnem
Magijlrum Forhese, jier os WiUelmi Carwod fectutoris^ dicte Curie, jyrout
feqmtur in vuJgari.

It is fundin by tbe faid AfTife, that Johne Maister Forbese hes committit
art and part of J?e trelTbnable Confpiratioune and abhomynabill ymaginatioun of
\>e Slauchter and diftructioune of oure foverane lordis maift nobill perfoune be
fchott of culvvering, oure faid foverane lord being for J)e tyme in his burghe of
Abirdene, for executioune and adminiftratioun of iuftice in J)e North partis of
his realme : And for art and part of J)e treffonable feditioune rafnig amang oure
foverane lordis lall OiST and AliMY, being at Jedburghe, for defence of his
realme aganis ])E Army of Ingland, in tyme of weir; treflbnablie confpirand

' Wood s Peerage, \. 592. He got a remission under the Great Seal for the Murder of Alexander Seton of Mei.drum, Oct. 10, 1530. Reg. Mag. Sig. XXV. 364. See also various entries
in this Collection, and in the Appendix to the present reign. " The case being so remarkable,

the text is given untranslated from the Record. The Doom being inserted ' in vulgarly we have thus
the entry in both forms. "■ ' Dempllar,' q. d. doomjter, whose office it was to pronounce tlie sentence.

5

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 185

and yinaginand ])e diftructioune of ane part of J)E Army of Scotland, being
for jje defence of pe realme aganis pe perfecutionis and incnrfionis of pe auld
inymeis of Ingland, being vpone pe faidis Bordouris, in api^erand tynfall of pe
haill Army of Scotland, and apperand fli:aitb and diftructioune of our foverane
lord, his realuie, and Comnione-weill of pe famin, for pe treftbnabill help and
llippld of pe faidis inymeis of Ingland. — For pe quhilk treffonabill crimes, the
laid Johne Maifter Forbes hes forfaltit to our fouerane lord his life, landis, and
gudis, movable and vnmovable : And fall be harlyt and drawin trow pe calFay
of Edinbur', and hangit ' on pe gallouCe to pe deid, and quartei-it and demanyt
as ane traytour. And ])is I gif for dome.

Papers illustrative of the Master of Forres's Trial.

I. Judicial Challenge of the Majler of Forbes, as a Traitor and Conspirator, hy George Earl of Huntley.

At Edindurghe, pe xj day of Junij, the 3ear of God PV and xxxvij 3eris.
In' prelens of ))E KiNGis grace and Lordis of his Counsale vndirwrittin ;
that is to fay, ane maift Reverend and Reverend faderis in God, Gawyne Archibilchop of Glafgow, Chancellare, James Bifchop of RoflTe, William Bifchop of
Dunblane ; Venerabill faderis in God, David Abbot of Abirbrothok, Robert Abbot
of Halyrudehoule ; Noble and michty lordis, Hew Erie of Eglintoune, David
Erie of Craufurd, George Erie of Rothes, John Lord Erfkin, Malcolme Lord
Flemyng, Walter Lord of Sanct Johnnis, Johne Lord Lindefay, Hew Lord Someruile, Thomas Erfkin of Breching, Secretare, James Coluile of Elle Wemys,
Johne Campbell of Lundy, knychtis, Comperit ane nobill aud michty lord,"
George Erll oi^ Huntlie, &c. one pat ane parte, and Johne Maister of
Forbes one ])at vpev parte, and pare pe faid Erie delatit pe faid Maisteu (of)
Forbes to our fouerane lord of pis cryme of Trefibune and Lefe-maieftie eftir
following ; That is to fay. Ye faid Maister of Forbese had imagynit and
confpirit his hienes dede^ and Slauchter, be ane fchot of ane iinall gwne or
culuering within pe burgh of Abirdene. Quhilk cryme pe faid Maistek of
Forbes denyit, and faid it wes nocht of verite ; and ofTerit him to defend pe
famyn with his body And becaufe pe faid Erle of Huntlie allegeit pat fie
wordis vver faid to him, and pe faiaris pairof wer nocht prefent ; bot pat he fuld
bring ane landit or gentill manne ^ fayaris of pe faidis wordis to pE KlNGls
grace, to avow pat pai faid pir wordis, and'pat at the pe day nemmit be pE KiNGis
grace : And fail5eing pairof he hes tane vp pe plege.*

' Sir James Bui four, iti his quaint manner, gravely remarks, that the Master of Forbes ' had fentence to lie lianged and quartered ; but, hy the modiatione of feme friends, had the fauor to be
beheaded and quartered I' Annuks, I. 268. " Death. ^ Sic. ' This mode of

impeachment was generally done in form of a solemn challenge, in presence of the Kino and his

A^OL. L t 2 A

186 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

The quhilk mater being put to ])e avifement of >E Chancellare and Lordis
being prefent for J>e tyme, for pe odioufnes of fa heiche ane crime, and J)airwith
being avifit, and ]jai referrand J)are counfale and avife agane to his hienes,
in quliais prefens ])e faid George Erle of Huxtlie lies bundin and oblift
him, his landis and heretage, vnder pe pane of tuenty thoufand markis, to bring
pe faid landit or gentill manne, dilataris and fayaris of pe cryme forfaid, before
our faid fouerane lord or his Juftice in Edinburghe, or qubat vper place he plefis
to alTigne, pe firft day of July nixt to cum. AXD j^airfor J^e faidis Lordis of
Counfale Ordanis ane Herald, or vper ofRciare, to pafs, and command and charge
\)e faid Maister of Forbes to enter his perfomie within jje Castell of
Edinrurghe, vndir J)e pane of Trefoune ; and J^air to remane quhill pe faid
day,, or ellis ]jat he, within pe faid fpace, find fufficient cautioune' and Ibuirt^ to
pe faid Juftice Clerk, Jiat he fall compere pe faid firft day of July, before our
fouerane lord or his Juftice, to defend pe faid mater, as accordis vpoue pe law,
vnder pe pane of xx" markis : Akd alfe, to command and charge pe faid Johne
Master (of) Forbes, Jjat alfe lang as he remanis within pe burghe of Edinburghe, }iat he cum na nerrare ])E KlXGis grace bot to pe Nether boll' of pe
famyn, quhill pe faid day, vndir J)e pane of Trefoune : And gif it plefis Jje Kingis
grace to cum to pe faid burghe ony tyme within pe faid day, pe faid Johne
Maister of Forbes being within pe faid burghe, fall remane within his houfe
and lugeing during ])at tyme, and fall nocht cum furth of fie famyn fa lang as
])E KiXGis grace beis within pe faid burghe : And gif pe faid Maister of
Forbes paffis, ony tyme betuix J)is and pe faid day, furth of pe faid burghe, ))at
he cum nocht neir to J)E KiXGis grace, within thre mylis, vndir pe pane forfaid.

(Dec. 11, 1537.) — II. BoXD of Caution faken hy Warrant of the Lords of
Prill/ Council, that John Lord Forhes, and WilUam Mofter of Forbes, Jliould
not ef cape from the Cajlle of Edinburgh.

In prefens of pe Lordis Chancellar, Prefident, and Lordis of Counfall, Comperit Walter Innes of Touchis, Robert Orrok of ])at Ilk, James Foi-bes of
Carnebo, John Forbes of Drumdochty, and Williame Forbes of Ardmurdo,
become plegeis and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, renunciand pe benefice

PEERS. The challenger, after ' delating' or charging the accused person of Treason, &c., threw down
his gauge, or gauntlet, which the accused, if he denied the charge, took up ; and ' offerrit to defend
the (amyn (his assertion of innocence) with his hody.' In al)sence, or failure of sufficient proof, the
King frequently referred the matter to duel or ' Singular Corahat,' as it was then termed, exclaiming,
' Gon defend the richt !' Tiiis Contest, like many other ordeals of a similar description, was founded
on a deep knowledge of human nature ; and seemed necessary, in these barbarous times, for the wellbeing of Society. The eelf-possession and innocence of tlie one party, and the boisterous arrogance,
and confusion of the other, frequently, indeed generally, produced a termination favourable to the ends
of substantial justice. Numerous instances could easily be adduced, if necessary, of the Judicial Combat
having been authorized by Royal authority in Scotland.

' His cautioners were John Lord Forbes and John Forbes of Pitslego. ^ The Netber-Bow Port.

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 187

of diuifioun, to pe Juftice Clerk, in our fouerane lordis name, for Johke Lord
Forbes, and Williame Maister of Forbes his fone, now being within pe
Cajlell of Edinbu)', in Warde, that pal fall nocht efchew nor depart furth of
pe faid Caflell of Ed'inhur', hot fall remane fiairintill, as in fre Warde, quhill
))ai be fred furtht of pe famin be ]5E KiNGls grace, vndir pe pane of Ten thoufand markis. — Ex hoc lileglum captain fait ex mandato Dominorum Coiifdii.

(Apr. 10, 1538.) — III. Warrant to allow WdUam Majler of Forbes free
IFard u'it/iin the Town of Edinburgh.

Rex,

Justice Ci-erk, fforfamekle as We haue changit pe Ward of WiLLIAME Forbes, fonne and apperand aire of Johne Lord Forbes, now beand
in oure Cajlell of Edinburghe, to cum and remane in ward in oure Toune of
Edinburghe : Quharefor, We charge 50 w, pat incontinent eftir pe fycht hereof,
36 tak ficker fouertie and fufficient' J)at pe faid Williame fall keip and remane in
Wai'd within pe faid Toune, and haue"' him honeftlie Jiairin, and nocht to depairt
Jjairfra without our fpeciall Licence granted and had J^airto, vndir pe pane of
Ten thoufand merkis. SuBSCRiuiT with oure hand, at Edinburghe, pe x day of
Aprile, and of our regnne pe xxv 3ere.^ Jawes R.

Coii0jptrni0 tT)r 2ru'ng*0 iJcstiurtion, 61) i^oison — Crcasonal)!))
Sntcifommuninff, ^r, i»itlj Xi)t (Irarl of ^nfliis, H^t,

[One of the most remarkable passages in tlie history of the reign of King James V, is the detail
of the proceedings so rancorously adopted and put in execution against Jean or Jonet Douglas,
Lady Glammis. The Editor considers it as due to the memory of a noble, and, as he conscientiously believes, a much injured Lady, whose character has met with an undue measure of severity
from Historians, to enter rather more fully than usual into a statement of the facts of her case. It is
probable that this injustice has arisen from the circumstance of its having been usual for succeeding
writers to take for granted all statements made in the earlier Chroniclers and Historians, without
farther examination ; and thus, until 3Ir Phikertoyi and 3Ir Tijtler adopted a very different course,
errors the most glaring were perpetuated, and handed down from one author to another.

Jonet Lady Glammis was the second daughter of George Master of Angus, (eldest son of * the
great Earl,' best known by the name of ' Bell-the- Cat!) by Elizabeth, second daughter of John first
Lord Drummond. The reader may be reminded, that the undaunted old Earl of Angus, having
remonstrated against the rashness and imprudence of King James IV accepting the challenge of the
Earl of Surrey to fight, received what he deemed an unpardonable affront from his sovereign,
who taunted him for liis counsel, and proudly told liim, if he was afraid, he was at liberty to go home.
Retiring in disgust from the field of battle himself, and, as is related, with tears of indignation, he
generously left all his followers with his two eldest sons, who both fell at Flodden Field, with two
hundred gentlemen of their name. Bell-the-Cat, broken-hearted, thereupon withdrew from the world,
and died the following year, 1514, at the Priory of Whithorn, in Galloway.'

' John Forbes of Pitslego and George Meldrum of Fiwy (Fyvie), 10,000 merks. ' Behave, conduct himself.

» Aimo 1538. ' Wood's Peerage, I, 134.. Pinkettoris Hist., &c.

188 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537;

The unfortunate lady who was the victim in the following Trial, married John sixth Lord Glammis,
who (lied Dec. 12, 1527, leaving issue by her, John seventh Lord Glammis, then a youth. He was
long involved in the consequences of his mother's misfortunes,' and Elizabeth, married to Ross of
Craigie.- She appears soon afterwards to have married Archibald Campbell, who is styled by Historians
' of Kepneith.' This gentleman appears to the Editor to have been Archibald Campbell of Skippinche
(Skipnish), who was the second son of Archibald second Earl of Argyle. He obtained a Charter of
the lands and Keepership of the Castle of Skipynche or Skipnish, Aug. 13, 1311, from King James IV.'
The Editor does not recollect to have met with the title of Keijmech in any of the Public Records,
and thinks it extremely probable that Campbell of Skipnish was the second husband of Lady Glammis.
At all events, it is very unlikely that a high-born Lady of so distinguished a family as that of Douglas
would stoop to a matrimonial alliance with a small Highland Laird, unconnected with any Noble family.
It is proper, however, to state, that the Editor has no proof to adduce in support of this surmise.
Being possessed of a masculine mind, and a large measure of that undaunted courage, which so long
characterised the Douglasses, she generously, but imprudently, braved the King's Pi'oclamations, which
strictly forbid all persons, of whatever degree, from ' intercommuning' with, or giving food, raiment,
or slielter to the Earl of Angus, and other Traitors and Rebels, under pain of death.

It must be borne in mind, that Archibald, the sixth Earl of Angus, Chancellor of Scotland, who was
forfeited in Parliament, Sep. 3, 1528, along with George, his brother, and Archibald, his uncle, was
brother-german to Lady Glammis, who was closely attached to him alike by the bonds of natural
affection and ol private friendship. With the unquenchable fidelity of a sister's love, she afforded her
brothers and their uncle all the assistance in her power, and speedily drew down upon herself a portion
of the implacable vengeance which King James V had sworn against the Douglasses, it being
known that he Iiad taken a deep and solemn vow, that while he lived they should never find refuge in"
Scotland. This Nobleman, on the death of his first wife. Lady Margaret Hepburn, second daughter
of Patrick Jirst Earl of Bothwell (who died in childbed in 1313, without surviving issue), married,
Aug. 6, 1514, Margaret of England, Queen Dowager of James IV, within eleven months after
the fatal field of Flodden. The indecent haste with which this match was got up, and the ambitious
views of the Douglasses, who through this means obtained the custody of the young King's person,
in reality accelerated their downfall, by exciting against them the jealousies of a powerful faction of
the Nobility. The King having made his escape out of Angus's hands, in July, 1528, the forfeiture
of the Earl, his brother, and uncle, followed speedily after the meeting of the earliest Parliament, Sep.
4, 1528. It cannot be disguised that the violent and openly treasonable conduct of the Earl and his
faction after this period was by no means calculated to restore him to royal favour, or to reconcile him
to his injured countrymen. Having made many incursions into his native country, he retired into
England, and became a pensioner of Henry VIII, who, in 1532, settled an annuity of one thousand
merks Sterling u]>on him. The subsequent restoration of the family, after the death of Kino James
V, is well known, and the outline of the history of his after life is unnecessary to be touched upon
here, as being entirely foreign to the present subject.

So early as Dec. 1, 1528, she was summoned to answer before Parliament, along with Patrick

Hume of JUacdter, Hugh Kennedy of Girvancmani/s, and Patrik Chaitciis, for art and part counsel,

assistance, he, afforded to the Earl of Angus, in convocating the lieges for eiglit days immediately

preceding Jun. 1, for invasion of the King's person. This Summons of Treason was continued to Jan.

18, 1528-9, when the matter, so far as Lady Glammis was concerned, seems to have been dropped,

for on the next diet, Jan. 22, her name no longer appears. In a few years afterwards, on

Jul. 1, 1531, ■* we find that Gawyne Hammiltoune got a Gift from the Crown of the escheat of

' See liisTriiil, .Tul. 18, 1537. ' For some particulars of that devoted family, see this Collection, Vol. Ill,

p. 'H5, and Appendix, pp. 582 to 500. ' liciJ. May. Siij. xvii. No. 33. ■• See Extracts from the Privy

Seal Record, in the .\ppcndix to this reign, under that date.

24 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 189

all the goods, heritable anil moveable, which liad pertained to Jonet Lady Glammis, and had
been forfeited on account of her ' Intercommunyug witli our fouerane lordis Rebellis, or for ony
vfir crymes,' &c. Ou Nov. 29 of that year, Haldane of Kelour and several others were fined for not
passing upon her Assise; and on Jan. 31, 1531-2, John Druramond of Innerpeffery ' became surety
for her entry at the next Justice-aire of Forfar, for art and part of taking the life of her husband, John
sixth Lord Glammis, ' pci' intoxicaiionem,' which probably was meant to signify the employing of
drugs, charms, or enchanted potions. This shifting of the ground, in relation to the charge of crime
alleged against her, seems to have proceeded from tlie repeated refusal of the Barons to come forward
as Assisors or Jurors on her Trial, and from the fear ou the part of the public prosecutor that the
Case would break down for want of legal and satisfactory proof of her being guilty of any Treason.
Such suspicious circumstances naturally lead us to infer that her real crime was the political offence
of her being a true-hearted Douglas, and as such a contumacious despiser of the Royal tyranny,
which would attempt to force her to deny succour to her oppressed brothers and uncle, and other
' Rebels.' As Lord Glammis died Dec. 12, 1527, it is highly improbable that all legal proceedings
would be allowed by the advisers of the Crown to be totally suspended for nearly four years against
one who was, at any rate, obnoxious to the King. There were never awanting enough of officious
spies about the Scottish court to ferret out the truth of even the shadow of suspicion of crime against
those who were unhappy enough to lie under its ban ; and had tiierc been any just ground of accusation, Lady Glammis's career would have at once been cut short.

In farther corroboration of the feelings of the Barons, in relation to the innocence of Lady Glammisj
it may be stated that, ou Feb. 2, 1531-2, FuUerton of Ardoch, and a number of other Lairds, were
amerciated for refusing to pass upon another Assise, which lier prosecutors had again caused to be
summoned for her trial. And once more, on Feb. 26, Lord lluthven, Lord Oliphant, &c., were fined
for the same cause, as may be seen from the various entries, under these respective dates, in this
Collection. Owing to the imperfect state of the Criminal Records, no farther notice of this ill-used
lady can now be procured until the day of her Trial, when unprincipled Witnesses appear to have
been brought forward, who gave false testimony ; upon which the Jury were compelled to return a
Verdict of guilty, ' without any lubftanciall ground or proyf of mattir.'*

With regard to the|articles of Dittay, they are only two — treasonably Conspiring and imagining the
King's Slaughter or deftruction by poison, and treasonably assisting, snpplyins, resetting, intercommuning, and fortifying Archibald, Earl of Angus, and George Douglas, his brother. The popular
story, which originated in the blunders and fables of some of the Chroniclers and Historians of the
age of Mary and James VI, has hitherto been, that the Lady Glammis was burnt for Witchcraft !
The Records leave no room for imagining that such formed any part of the charges adduced against
her. Assuredly, had it been possible to bring forward such an accusation, we may infer that it would
have been strenuously urged against her, to secure the popular voice in favour of the King; and,
above all, it would have been jtromincntlij recorded in the Dittay, and also in her Sentence. Mr
Pinkerton, deluded by the frequent repetition of this fable, indulges himself by entering into extenuation of the conduct of James V, for sanctioning the prosecution of Lady Glammis for the imaginary
crime of Witchcraft ; and other authors, otherwise respectable, have fallen into the old vice of the
earlier Historians, who have immemorially been in the habit of perpetuating each other's errors, by
indolently taking for granted all that their predecessors had stated, without being at the pains of
examining for themselves Records and documents which were at all times within their reach.

Perhaps the fabulous story in regard to a charge of Witchckaft having been brought against

' Sir Jolin Draniinonil of InnerpclTery, third son of Sir Jolin Jtrst Lord DrummoTid, was the father of this individual, who married Margaret Stewart, Lady Gordon, natural daugliter of King Ja.mks IV, legitimated by Letters
under the Great Seal, Fcl). 1, loo8-9. " Letter from Sir 7'humus Clijf'urd to Kixc. Ilii.NKv VI 11. Mus. Brit.,

Caligula, B. iii, 187. Pinkerton's Hist. II, 318. See also this Collection, I. » 198.

190 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

Lady Glammis, may have originated in the preceding attempt to fasten upon her the pretended guilt
of taiiing away her first husband'8 life by charmed drinks or drugs. This, however, took place many
years before her execution. A more plausible reason for reporting that she dealt in Magic or Witchcraft may have been the barbarous manner of her death ; for, she having died at the stake, it is not
unlikely that the popular report, fifty years, or even a century afterwards, would be that she was ' Burnt
for a Witch.' In all cases of Treason and Murder, as well as in those of Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c.,
females of rank were invariably burnt at the stake, until a comparatively recent date, when decapitation was sometimes granted, iu pai'ticular instances. In crimes of an inferior description, such as
Theft, &c., females, and often infirm old men, were drowned. From not attending to this circumstance, and as Witchcraft was uniformly punished by burning at the stake down to the commencement
of the eighteenth century, it was natural for the more modern Historians, who were well aware of
the manner of her death, to repeat what they had met with in the pages of earlier Chroniclers, &c.

There is one circumstance which strikes the Editor as affording a very extraordinary feature in these
proceedings. The truly amiable Magdalene Queen of Scotland, who had only arrived from
France on May 10, died on July 7, 1537; which plunged the King and the nation into the deepest
sorrow. Never did a Queen-consort commence her reign under happier auspices, and with so entire
a love of all her subjects. James V had to all appearance abandoned himself to grief for her loss, and had
retired from the pleasures of the Court and from all his usual sports and employments, when suddenly,
' in the very crifis of domertic and national affliction,' tiiese rigorous proceedings were adopted and
perpetrated, with feelings of private revenge and hatred altogether abhorrent to human nature. Had
such a course been previously determined upon by tlie advisers of the Crown, certainly the time was
the worst that could possibly have been chosen ; for even had this excellent Queen survived. Lady
Glammis must either have been put to death by burning at the stake during the midst of the
festivities which followed her Marriage and Public Reception, or at the very moment of the celebration
of her Funeral Obsequies ! The whole complexion of this shocking tragedy bears such savage traces
of a furious and unmanly revenge against a noble and unprotected female, who was the only individual
of her family on whom they could lay their hands, that it can hardly be compared with any other
event, either in ancient or modern history.

The Editor need scarcely apologize for appending a few notices, which he considers as necessary
towards the full understanding and illustration of so remarkable a Trial, and so painful a passage of
the History of Scotland.]

Jul. 17. — JoNET Douglas Lady Glammys, ' Conuicta de arte et parte
proditorie Confjiirationis et imaginationis Interfectioiiis, fine diftructionis, nobiliflime perfone fereniffimi domiui noftri Regis, per peffimum veueiium lie ^wyJbne. Item, pro arte et parte proditorie affiftentie, lujjplemeriti, receptatioiiis,
intercommunicationis et fortificationis Archibaldi olim Angusie Comitis,
et Geokgii Douglas ejus fratrum, proditoz-um etrebellium, in proditorio modo.

— COMBUSTA.

Nomina Assisa electe jurat, et admiff. fnper 'prejala Joneta Domina Glammi/s, viz.
Johnnes Comes Atholie, Wil. Kirkpatrik de Kirkmychell, Johannes Mailuill de Raith, miles,

Johannes Comes Buchanie, Joh'^ Creichtoune de Ruweuiiis, Jac. Towris de Inuerleilh, miles,

Robertus Doniinus Maxwell, Jacobus Kcr de Merlingtoune, Dauid Barclay de Matheris,
Wil. MagifterdeGlencarne, miles, Gilbertus Comes de Caflillis, Johannes Edmonlloun de eodem,
Johannes Hume deColdenknowis, Willelmus Dorainus Sympill, Wil.Makrlellane, TutordeBondby.

' Letter from Sir Thomas Clifford to King Henry VIII, B. Hi., 167. Pinkerton's Hist II, 318.

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * I9I

Sententia Forisfacture reddita contra prenominatam Jonetam DomiNAM DE Glammys, jjc?' OS WiUielun Carwod, fedaforis dicte Curie, prout
Jeqnitur in vuJgari.

It is fundiu be ]3e faid Affife, That Jonet Douglas Lady of Glammys
hes commitit art and part of )je treflbnabill Confpiratioune and ymaginatioime of
}je Slauchter and deftructioun of our fouerane lordis maift nobill perfone be
poyfone : And for art and part of Jje trelTonable afBftance, fupplc^, reffett, intercommonyng and fortifying of Archibald, fumtyme Erll of Axguse, and
George Douglas, hir brether, Traytouris and Rebellis, in ti-effonabill maner.
— For ]>e qnhilkis treflbnable crimes, J)e faid Jonet Lady of Glammys hes foirfallit to oure fouerane lord, liir life, hir land is, gudis movable and vnmovable :
And ]>ai fcho fall be had to Caftell hill of Edinburghe, and ])air BRYNT in ane
fyre to \>e deid, as ane Traytour. And J)at I gif for Dome.

Papers illustrative of the Trial of Jonet Lady Glammys.
I. Narrative taken from the Hijlonj of Scotland, hij David Scott of the Inner

Temple}
The Lady Jane Dowglafs, SfC. accus'dfor Confpiring to Murder the King.
At this time, tiie Lady Jane Dowgi.ass, firter to Archibald Earl of Angus (who then liv'il an
exile in England), was the nioft celebrated beauty in the nation. She was of a middle stature, not too
fat ; her face of an oval form, with full eyes ; her complexion extremely fair and beautiful, with a
majeflick raein. Befides all thefe perfections, Ihe was a lady of Angular chaftity, her mhid wanting
none of thofe perfections a mortal creature could be capable of. H,er niodefty was admirable, her
courage was above what could be expected in her fex ; her judgment folid, her behaviour affable
and engaging to her inferiors as well as equals : And as flie was defcended from one of the moll
ancient and illullrlous Families in the kingdom (tho' at that time eclips'd,) Ihe had been married to
John Lyon Lord Glames, a moft worthy young Nobleman of noble birth, but died foon, and left
this young lady with one fon : And tho' flill mirtrefs of her perfections and a plentiful jointure, yet
continued a widow for fome years after her hufband's death. During which time, feveral of the firft
Nobility of the Kingdom had courted her ; but ihe was not (o much inclined to marry for wealth and
title, as for merit ; fo that ihe plac'd her affection on one Archibald Campbell of Kepneath, who commanded the Third Regiment in the King's Army, to whom (he was married, to their mutual fatisfaction. Mean time William Lyon, a near relation of her firft hulliand, having made violeut addrefTes
to her, and feeing that (he was married to this gentleman, became almoft dillracted upon tlie difappointment : But though he had loft her in marriage, yet did not forbear his addre(res to her in an
unlawful way, and continued to importune her to confent to his dcfigns ; which (he refented with the
ntmolt difdaiu, and told him, that (lie had treated him witli the refpect due to the relation of her

' Folio, Westminster, printed by J. Cluer and A. Campbell, in King's Street, near the Abbey, 1727. Though no
authorities are cited by the author on the margin, his account bears marks of having been collated with Drummond
of' Hawthorndfii's History, which is fuller on thesubject of this Trial than any other. From his residence in London,
he had, probably, access to State Papers, &c. i'vntn which his Narrative had been compiled. It has been deemed
advisable to print it here, as the book is but little known ; and inch-ed it only professes to be an impai-lial compilation
from previous Histories and Chronicles. ' There seems to the Editor lo be no doubt that this gentleman was

Campbell of Skipi/nclie or Shipness, as formerly surmised. See the Case of John Lord Glammts, Jul. 18, 1537.

192 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

fii-ft hufband and cliild, and not out of any regard to his own perfon or merit ; but, fince Hie found that
he had fuch dellgns, the hated the figlit of him, and alFured him that llie never would comply with
fuch abominable crimes.

This relolute denial lo dirtracted him, that he upbraided her with ingratitude for the great love he
had for her, and told her, fince he had loll fo much time in vjiii, he would ftiuly to banilh her from
his thoughts. But his violent love, or rather lufl, turn'd to as violent hatred; fo that after that he
never vifited her, but ftudied revenge. Thus his pafiionate love being fucceeded by vengeance, he took
fome time to invent a plot againft her life, which lie refolved to facrifice to his refentment : And at
laft found out the moft horrid contrivance that Hell could fuggeft. He accus'd the Lady, her hufband,
and one John Lyon, an aged Prieft, and his own near relation, of having a defign to poifon the King.
Whereupon they were apprehended and confined prifoners in the Castle of Edinburgh, their
goods feiz'd, and a ftrict charge given to the Judges of the Jufliciary to proceed to their Trials.
, Mean time the accuier, William Lyon, having too ready accefs to the King's ear, fludied all
means to aggravate the crime; and that he might difpose the King to treat them with all polfible
cruelty, he reprefented that the Family of the DoKylqffes had been always dangerous and troublefome
to Ins predecelitirs, and even lo himrelf aiid his kingdom : And reminded him of the infolent behaviour
oi Archibald Earl of Angus, brother to the prifoner, in the time of his Majefly's minority, whofe
practices were fo dangerous, that by a public Decree he was banilh'd tlie kingdom as a dillurber of
the peace of his native country : That fince that time he was become the i'ubject of King Henry of
England, his Majefly's greatefl enemy; and was now the caufe of all the Inroads made by the
ENtiLisH into Scotland : And fince he could not be reftor'd to his honours and fortune without great
difficulty, revenge had incited him to plot all the mifchief lie could againfl. the King's ])errone, and
who could be employ'd in fuch wicked defigns more true to him than his own filler, who by the ties
of blood was oblig'd to i'ecrefy; and had employ'd her in that Confpiracy, thinking that her fex, character and birth, would make her the lefs fufpected : Therefore advis'd his Majefly, that if lie had
any regard either to his intereft or fafety of liis perfon, it was uecefTary to extirpate that race, wliicli
produc'd nothing but monftrous Rebels ; and efpeeially that woman, whom, if he fpar'd, he put it in
her power to acconiplilh her wicked defigns.

■ The King, being ignorant of the malice which JVilliam Lyon bore to the Lady, order'd that (he,
her hufband, and Chaplain, ftiould be fpeedily brought to their Trial, without any regard to their birth
or characters. And t/w Lady Jane was brought to the Bar, according to cuflom, to hear what ihe
could fay for her felf. And having made particular anfwers to the quellions propos'd by the Judges,
Ihe imagin'd that her danger proceeded from her relation to the Euil of Angus ; and with the greateft
courage and confidence imaginable, fhe deliver'd the following Speech.

Lady Jane DowglaJ's Iter Defence at ihc Bar.

' Those that hate my brother are enrag'd, becaufe he is not in their power, that he might fall a
liurifice to their malice ; and they now difcharge their fpite upon me, becaufe of my near relation to
him ; and to gratify their revenge with my blood, they accui'e me of crimes which, were they true,
deferv'<l the feverell death. But, fince it is the only prerogative of God to punilh men or women for
the faults of others, which belongs to no judge on earth, who are oblig'd to punilh every one according to their pei fonal crimes, you ought not to punilh in me the actions of my brother, how blamable
foevor. Above all, you ought to confider if tlioi'e things I am accuf'd of have the leaft appearance of
truth ; for what gives the greatell evidence either of the guilt or innocence of an impeach'd perfon is
their former life. What fault could any hitherto lay to my charge? Did any ever reproach me with
any thing that is fcandalous ? Examine into my former converfation ; for vice hath its degrees as well
as virtue, nor none can attain to a perfection in either, except by long practice ; and if you can find
nothing reprovable in my conduct, how can ye believe that 1 am arriv'd all of a fudden to contrive

24 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 193

this Murder, whicb is tlie very height and perfection of impiety ? I proteft, I would not deliberately
injure the moft defpicable wretch alive. Could I then make the Murder of my Sovereign, whom I
always reverenc'd, and who never did me wrong, the fird elFay of my wickednefs ? None are capable
of fuch damnable and unnatural actions, except fuch as are in defperate circumllances, or fuch as are
hun'ied into Plots by reward or revenge. My birth, and condition of life, puts me beyond the fufpicion of the firll of this kind ; and for the latter, fince I was never injur'd by the King, how can I be
fufpected to thidl for revenge ?

' I am here accuf'd for purpofing to kill the King ; and to make my pretended crime appear more
frightful, it is given out that the way was to be by poifon. With what flrange impudence can any
accnfe me of fuch wickednefs who never faw any poifon, nor know 1 any thing about the preparation
of it ? Let them tell where I bought it, or who procur'd it for me ? Or though I had it, how could I
ufe it, fince I never come near the King's perfon, his table, nor Palace? It is well known, that, fince
my lafi; marriage with this unfortunate gentleman, I have liv'd in the country, at a great dillance from
the Court. What opportunity could 1 have to poifon the King ?

♦ You may fee by tliofe circuraflances, which give great light in fuch matters, that I am entirely
innocent of thofe crimes I am charg'd with. It is of the office of you Judges to protect injur'd innocence : But if the malice and power of my enemies be fuch, that, whether guilty or innocent, I mull
needs be condemn'd, I lliall die cheerfully, having the teftimony of a good coufcience ; and alliire yourfelves, you ihall find it more eafy to take away my life than to blaft my reputation, or to fix any real
blot upon my memory.

' This is my lafl defire of you, that I may be the fole object of your feverity, and that thole other
innocent perfons may not fhare in my misfortunes. Seeing my chief crime is that I am defcended of
the family of Dowglass, there is no reafon that they fliould be involv'd in my ruin ; for my hufband, fon, and coufin, are neither of them of that Name or Family. I fliall end my life with more
comfort if you abfolve them ; for the more of us that fufTer by your unjuft Sentence the greater will
be your guilt, and the more terrible your condemnation, when you fliall be tried at the great day by
the Almighty God, who is the impartial Judge of all flelh.'

The Jttdges reprefent the Cafe of Lady Jane to the King.
This Speech was deliver'd with fuch courage, and free from fear, that the Judges were extremely
aflonifli'd at her heroick behaviour ; and when they had confider'd what flie had faid in her own
defence, they delay'd the Sentence, and fent two of their number to the King, to reprefent to him,
that, though the Witneffes bad prov'd the Articles of Impeachment, and that according to the laws
of the land, upon the Evidence, ihe deferv'd death ; yet, upon a ferious confideration of the whole
circumftances of the matter, they could not perceive the leafl; probability of her guilt : They were
afraid left the rigour of the law in this cafe (liould prove the height of injuflice,' therefore they wiih'd
rather that equity and mercy iliould take place, it being more fafe to abfolve a criminal than to condemn an innocent perfon : That time alone could difcover the truth of the matter, by making known
the characters of thofe Witneffes who had fworn againft her, whether they were men of honefty, or
had been bribed to accufe her : That nothing was more advifable than to delay the whole affair for
fome days, which could be no danger to the King, fince thofe perfons were not to have their liberty ;
and when there appear'd any clear proof of their guilt, they might fuffer according to the liiw. As for
themfelves, they were tied up to the form and letter of the law ; it belong'd only to liis Majefty to
temper and moderate their Sentence by his clemency : Upon which account, they addrefFd themfelves
to him, fince in fuch cafes wherein the life, honour, and effects of perfons of dillinction are concern'd,
all poflible caution was neceflaiy.

> Summa j ustitia summa injuria.
VOL. I. f 2 B

19i * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

77*6 King's Anftoer to the Judges.

The King, who was naturally merciful, had eafily complied witli this requeft of the Judges, had
not Lyon (who contriv'd the hellilli plot, and then fear'd that if they efcap'd his wickednefs would be
difcover'd) prevailed with the King to return this Anfvver to the Judges: That the exercife of Juftice was a conllderabJe part of the Royal dignity, whicli he had entrufted them with when lie made
them Judges : That it belong'd to their Office to preferve the Innocent and punilh the Guilty : That
the Book call'd Regiaui Majeflatem contain'd all the forms and rules which ought to determine them
in fuch cafes : Wherefore, he gave them full power to proceed in that matter, according to juftice and
the Laws of the land ; and faid, he knew nothing that could hinder them from doing their duty like
men of judgment and honour.

Lady Jane Executed.

Witli this anfwer, thofe that were fent to wait upon the King return'd to the Exchequer, (where
the Court of Juftice then fat,) and reported to the reft of the Judges what the King had given them
in charge. Whereupon the Judges gave Sentence againft the Lady, according to the Law. She heard
the Sentence pronounc'd without the leaft figne of terrour or concern. On the day appointed for her
Execution, llie fulFer'd on the Castle-hill of Edinburgh ; where llie appear'd with fo much
beauty and little concern, that all the fpectators were fo deeply afflicted for her, that they burft out
with tears and loud lamentations for her untimely end, and were fo confident of her Innocence, that
they defign'd to refcue her: But the King's Officers and Guards being prefent, hinder'd their
attempting any thing that way.

Thus died tiiis moft noble Lady, whofe death was lamented by all that knew or beheld her, except
the moft inhuman barbarian who brought her to this lamentable end.

The next day after her death, her husband (Archibald Campbell) defign'd to make his efcape
out of the Cajtk of Edinburgh, being let down over the walls by a rope, which happening to be too
fliort, or broke, he fell upon the rocks, where he was dafii'd to pieces.

The King feem'd much concern'd after the Execution of Lady Jane and the death of her huftiand,
and caufed releafe the old Gentleman her Chaplain. But yet, the young Lord Glamis was ftill
kept in the Caftle, till after the King's death.

William Lyon confejjes his crime, and fiies from juftice.

After this moft virtuous and excellent, as well as beautiful. Lady fell a victim to her inhuman
lover, he began to reflect on his wickednefs, and was fo filfd with horror that he was not able to
endure the lalhes of his troubled confcience. He lamented his crimes when it was too late, and
having fuch confidence in the King's mercy, he confeff'd the whole matter fecretly to him. But
finding the King abhorr'd fuch wickednefs, he fled from the Court, knowing that he could not efcape
being punilh'd according to his crimes ; and departing from Scotland, he foon after died in Flanders,
in great mifery.i

II. Narrative //-ow ' IVie Hijlory of the Houses of Douglas and Angus, by
Master David Hume of Godfcroft.'

' The King's anger ftill continued againft them (the Dou(. lasses) in fuch fort, that nine years
after, in 1537, he was contented that Jeaitc Douglas Lady Glames, (who was Angus' Sifter,) fliould
be accufed by falfe Witnelfes, condemned, and execute. The point of her accufation was, that Ihe,
and her Iluiljand, (Archibald Campbell then,) and her Sonne, and an old Prieft, had gone about to
make away the King by Witchecraft. Their servants were tried and racked, but confefl'ed nothing ;
the Accufer, Jolm Lyon^ a kinfman of her firft hufband, when he faw how they were like to be

' Folio, Edin. Printed by Evan Taylor, Printer to the King's most excellent Majestie, J61-4, p. 261. * ' William' on the margin. It will be seen, from the other proceedings, that William was this person's name.

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 195

ufed, and that tiie Houfe of Glames would be ruined, repenting of what he had done, confefled to the
King that he had wronged them ; but it did no good.

' Slie was burnt upon tl)e Cq/tk-hiU, with great coniniiferation of the people, in regard of her
noble bloud, of her hufljand, being in tlie prime of lier years, of a fingular beauty, and fuffering all,
thougii a woman, with a man-like courage ; all men conceiving that it was not this fact, but the hatred
the King carried to lier brothers, that had brought her to this end. Her hufband, feeking to efcape
over the wall of the Caflle, fell, and broke his leg, and fo died. Her fonne was kept in prifon, becaufe
he was fo young that the law could not ftrike againll him.

' Others were committed to Ward, as Sir George Hume of Wedderhitrne, who was Angus his
lifter's fon, to Black-Nesse, for whom his mother, Dame Alison Douglas, coming often to entreat the
King for him, though he always ufed her courteouily, and gave her good countenance, and that almost
onely to her of all their friends : So that his language was by way of excufing, without deniall ; yet
llie could obtain nothing, till a little before his death, about the Rode of Fawla, when hee began to
miffe their service, then he fet him at libertie. His implacabilitie did alfo appear in his carriage
towards Archbald of KHj'piiidie, whom he, when he was a childe, loved fingularlie well for his ability
of body, and was wont to call him his Gray-Steel.

' Archbald being baniflied into England, could not well comport with the humour of that nation,
which he thought to be too proud, and that they had too high a conceit of themfelves, joyned with a
contempt and defpifing of all others. Wherefore, being wearied of that life, and remembring the
King's favour of old towards him, he determined to try the King's mercifulnefs and clemency. So
he comes into Scotland, and taking occaiion of the King's hunting in the Park at Stirling, he cafts
himfelf to be in his way, as he was coming home to the Callle. So foon as the King faw him afar
off, ere he came near, he guefled it was he, and faid to one of liis Courtiers, yonder is my Grey- Steil,
Archbald oi Kil/pindie, if he be alive. The other anfwered, That it could not be he, and that he durft
not come into the King's prefence. The King approaching, he fell upon his knees, and craved Pardon, and proniifed from thence forward to abftain from meddling in public affairs, and to lead a quiet
and private life. The King went by, without giving him any anfvver, and trotted a good round pace
up the hill. Kiljpindie followed, and, though he wore on him a fecret, or fljirt of mail for his particular enemies, was as foon at the Callle-gate as the King. There he fat him down upon a floue
without, and entreated fome of the King's fervants for a cup of drink, being wearie and thirftie : But
they, fearing the King's difpleafure, durll give him none. When the King was fat at his dinner, he
allced what he had done, what he had faid, and whither he had gone ? It was told him that he had
defired a cup of drink, and had gotten none. The King reproved them very lliarply for their difcourtpfie, and told them, That if he had not taken an oath that no Douglas fliould ever ferve him,
)ie would have received him into his fervice, for he had feen him fometime a man of great abilitie.
Then he fent him word to go to Leitir, and expect his further pleafure. Then fome kinfman of
David Falconer (the canonier that was (lain at Tantallon,') began to quarrel with Archbald ti\>o\iX the
matter, wlierewith the King ihtwed himfelf not well pleafed when he heard of it. Then lie commanded him to go to France for a certain fpace, till lie heard farther from him. And fo he did, and
died Ihortly after. This gave occafion to the King of England (^Hcnry VIII.) to blame his nephew,
alledging the old faying. That the King's face Jliould give grace. For this Archbald ( whatfoever were
Anguse's or Sir George his fault) had not been ])rineipal actor of any thing, nor no counfeller nor
ftirrer up, but only a follower of iiis friends, and that noways cruelly dilpofed.

' He caufed alfo execute Sir James Hamilton of Evendale, for divers reafons : Bnt that which
incenfed him moft, was his Correfpondencie and fecret trafficking and meeting with tlie bani(hed
Douglasses, efpecially with Sir George, whom lie met with in the Park-head, as the King was

196 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

informed. There was no man tbat he could bear had but received them into his houfe, but be caufed
appreliend, and execute the rigour of the law upon them. He caufed the Laird of Blackader bring
in John Nijhet of the Spittel, and made him to be execute to death, for receiving (as was alledged
at leafl) the Earl of Angiis into Iiis houfe.

' Thefe many Executions, proceeding from many Reports and Delations given to him, bred great
fufpicion in his niinde ; all the woods feemed full of Theeves. Many were put to death for the
Douglasses ; this was a token that they had many favourers : many were offended by these executions, and fo many ill-willers, by being offended. So his fufpicion againll the Nobility was daily
increafed ; his jealousy growes, cares multiply, his mind is dillurbed, which would not fuffer him to
fleep found, but troubled his head with dreames and faufies.'

III. Naiikative^)-o?« Bishop Lesley's History of ScotlancU

In tills fymmer wes tane the Lady Glammes, fifler to the Erie of Angus, and David Lyoim hir
hulband, and brocht to the toun of Edinburgh, and wer accufit and convict be ane Aflyfe for Confpiracie of the Kingis deid. And the faide lady wes brint, and hir huiband hangit thairfor.' The
Lord Glam.mes, her fone, wes convict for knawlege and Confpiracie of the famin, and thairfoir
forfaltit of his landis, and condampnit to dee. Bot becaufe he wes younge and tendir of aige, the
King fpairit his lyfF, and committed him to perpetuall prefoun ; quhair he reraainit during the
Kingis litf tyrae, in the Callell of Edinburgh.

Shortlie thaireftir, Johne Maister of Forbes, and eldeft fone to the Lord Forbes, quha had
maryit the faid Lady Glammes filler, wes accufet in Edinburgh, and convict be ane Aflyfe for the
like Confpiracie of the Kingis deid; and thairfoir wes heidit and quarterit at Edinburgh, and his
held and quarteris affixt apoun the Portis. The Lord Forbes, his fader, being fufpectit thairof, wes
halden in ward in the Caftell of Edinburglie ; bot he wes thaireftir releifit.

IV. Narrative from ' The Genealogie of the Houfe of Driimmond' Unpublished?

Another daughter of George Master of Angus, with Lady Elizabeth Drumraond, was Jean
Douglas, Lady Glamrais, married to John Lord Glammis, called to a by-name, ' Cleanfe the Caufay.' In the year 1537, flie was accufed, by fufpected witnefles, (if not falfe,) that Ihe and her fone
and fome others had gone about to take away King James the Fifth his lyfe by witchcraft; whereupon file was brunt upon the Caflle Hill of Edinburgii, with great commiferation of the people, in
regaird of her noble blood and Angular beautie, Ihe being in the prime of her age, and fuffering with
a mafculine courage, al men conceaveing that the King's hatred to her brothers had brought her to
that end.

Her fone John, who was next lord, was alio condemned and forfaulted; yet, becaufe he was a
minor, referved in prifon untill he lliould be of age to have his fentence put in execution. Bot after
the King's death, in anno I54'2, he was againe reftored to his lyfe, eftate, and honor, and was father to
John Lyon, Lord Glames, Chancellor of Scotland, whofe fone was Patrick, the firll Earle of Kinghorn,
and married to Anna Murray, daughter to John, then Laird of TuUibardine, begot upon Catharine
Drummond, daughter to David Lord Dnimmond ; this Patrick, the firll Earle, was grandfather to
Patrick, now Earle of Strathmore and Kinghorn.

' Baiinati/nc Club's Edit. 1830, p. 154. ' These unpardonable errors show strongly how little is to be relied

even on the most accurate of unr old Historians in matters of this description. A mistalie inadvertently made by
one was sun; to run through all future Histories, without examination. ' Geneai.ogif. of the House of

DaiMMONi), Quarto, 18,'jl, p, H3. Preparing for Private circulation from the Siratliallan AfSS. &c. The Editor
is indebted to the learned Gentleman who conducts the publication of this Family History, for the present extract.

24 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 197

The families lineally defcended of this Lady Glames, befydes Strathmore, are Duke Hamilton,
Earle of Caffills, Earle of Morton, Lord Spynie.

V. Narrative from Calderivood's 31S. Histonj of the Church of Scotland.

Jeane Douglass Ladie Glames, and fifter to the Erie of Angous, was indicted and convict be
ane Affife, having, with her lecond hulliand, Gilkfpick Campbell,'- her fon, ane old Preeft, and John
Lyoim, her firft hufband's kinfinan, fought to have killed the King with Poyfoun. Howbeit, they
dwelt far from Court, and nothing could be extorted from their frinds or fervents, quhich anie wife
might ferve againell them ; yit war they tortoured and committed to the Caflell of Ediuburghe.

Jeane Douglass was burnt wpon the 5 day after the beheading of the Master of Forbes.
Her death was greatlie lamented be the people, for her nobilitie, her youth, her beautie, her courage
at her death, but moll of all, becaufe it was judged that hatred againft her bannifhed brother, rather
then guiltinefs of anie crime committed, had brought her to that end. Her hulband, Gillefpick
Campbell, while he prefled to efcape out of the Caltell be a cord over the wall, the end being ihort,
he brake all his bonds,* and died. His fone, a fimple youth, fcarce lyable to fufpicioune for I'uch a
crime, was detained imprifound during the King's life ; and after, reftored to his patrimonie.

The accufer was one William Lyoim, a kinfraan. He repented, too late, of the calamitie he had
brought upon fuch a noble Houfe, be his calumnies ; and confeffed his wicked purpofe to the King.
Bot the King relented nothing notwithflanding, aither of his rigour, of the punifliment, or of the
forfaltour of the Lands.

Archibald Dowglajs of Killfpindie^ quhom be loved fingularlie for his abilitie quhen he was a child,
and called him his Grajifleele, liad come into the countrie fecreitlie, and fallen doun upon his knees
before him, and craved pardoune, quhen the King was returning from the Park of Stirline to the
Caftell ; bot the King paft by I This gave occatioune to King Henrie of England to blame his
nephew, and to alledge the commoun faying, ' a King's face fliould have grace.' The Earle of
Angous filler-fon, George Hume of Wedderburne, he committed to warde in Blacknell'e, and determined him in award ;'' till a littell before his death, that he had need of fervice atFALA Raid, quhen
the King fett him at libertie, and gave him a white horfe of rare fpeed. Bot for^ this prefent, his
wraith againfl the Douglasses was implacable.''

VI. NoTicEy>-o;« Anderson's 3IS. History of Scotland.

About this tyrae, the Ladie Glames, hir fone the Lord Glames, of 16 jeiris of aidge, hir hufband,
Archibald Campbell of Keipnech, ane harbour, and a Preift, war accuHd for Treflbnn, in the Tolbuith
of Ed'. The faid Ladie was condaniet and Brunt

Schort quhyle eftir, followid ane wther judgment,' in confideratioun of the parentadge accufid, the
novaltie of the cryme, tlie creweltie of the crymeand executioune, moft miferabiil. Joane Douglas,
filler to the Earle of Angus, Johnne Lord Glames wyff, as is in maner forfaid, was accufid that
fcho, hir hull)and, and fone was to poyfone the King, was brunt. Hir hufband being V\'airdit in
the Callell of Ed"^, thinking to brek (Waird) and com away, be ane tow,** the fame was fchort : He
fell and brak all his banes, and died.'-*

VII. Notice y>w» Sir James Salfoufs Annals.
This 3eire, alfo, the Ladv Glamise, fifter to tli£ Erie of Angus, and her hufband, Dauid Lyone^"

' Buchanan, in his History, generally designates Archiliald Earl of Argyll, GiUestpih. ' Bones. ' See

this narrated at length in Hume's History of the House of Douglas and Angus. Edin. 1743, ii, 107. * Fine for

his return, &c., for which he had forfeited his IJond. * Notwithstanding. " Caldcrwood's History of the

Church of Scotland, WS. Adv. Library. ' He precedes this brief notice by an account of Lord Forbes's Treason.
* Rope. ' Anderson's MS. History of Scotland, Adv. Library. '" Lesley's blunder repeated.

198 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537wer arrann'd for Treflbne againft the King's perfone. The Lady was brunt, and her hufband was
hangitt/ and her fone, the Lord Glamise, was forfaulted, hot his lyffe was fpared ; becauffe he,
knowing, did not reweill his mother's defeinges, and was fentenced to perpetuall piil'one.'-'

VIII. Letterj^/w« Sir Thomas Clifford to King Henry VIIU

Mr Pinkerton having repeatedly quoted this Letter in his History, as being illustrative of the
proceedings against the Master of Forbes and Lady Glammis, the Editor deemed it proper to
procure a Transcript of so valuable a document, proceeding, as it does, from the pen of such an eminent
individual as Sir Thomas Clifford. Through the polite attention of Frederic 3Iadden, Esquire, F.A.S.,
the Editor is enabled to lay before the reader all that is applicable to these Cases. Mr Madden
remarks, that this interesting Paper ' is a copy by Sir Thomas himself, inclosed in a Letter from him
to the Lord Privy Seal (Cromwell), the latter of which is dated from Berwick Castle, 26th July
(1537.) The chief object of his Letter to the King is to inform him of the King of Scots' secret
visit to Dunbar, and provision of ordnance there and at other places. In consequence of which. Sir
Thomas represents the defenceless state of Berwick, and desires aid and means of resistance in case
of attack. The only portion of the Letter which refers to the execution of the Master of Forbes,
&c., is the last paragraph.'

' As for vther newes occurrantin Scotland, on Saterday the xiiijth day of this month inftaunt, the
Maister of Forbose, fone and heir to the Lord Forbofe, was attached of Treafon againll the
KiNGis perfon ; of fuch mattir as he at his deth dyd tacke vpone hyme fat he was Tackles'" off. Howbeit, he was the fame day drawin, hedyt, and quartered in Edynburgh.

'And on Tewfday nixt followinge, the Laydy Glammes, fufler to th' eri^ of Anguysh, was
brint in Edynburgh for Treafon layd vnto hir charge againft the Kingis perfon ; as I can perceyue,
■without any fubftanciall ground or proyf of mattir.

' Ther is remaynyng in Wayrd,^ by the Kingis comaundement, the Lord Forbose, William
Forbofe, his couffine gerraayne, the Lord Glammes, the Lord of Wetherburn, Hewe Dougles, Efquier,
the Lord^ of Whytingham, Petter of Carniyghell, the Lord'' Glaybarve, Robert Dowgles, Mr Davy
Straywham,* with diuers vther.'

Cuiuralintj: tf)f StalJi) (^liimmiio's trrasona&lr Coiisjpiian) atjainst

tijc iiintj^s life, hv poison*

[The circumstances attending the following Case have already been fully explained in the preceding
Trial of JoNET Lady Glammys, which renders farther remark unnecessary in this place.

On Jun. 15 preceding, this entry occurs in the Books of Adjournal : — ' The quhilk day, Dauid,
Erle of Craufurd, Robert Dowglase of Lochlevin, the Lard of Law.mond, and
Archibald Campbell of Skipynche,^ ar becumin pleggis and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feueralie,
vndir |ie pane of ti/enti/ thowfitnd marhis, ])at fe Lord Glammys full remane in Warde, within })e
Cauell of Edinbur', and fall nocht efchaip nor efchew furth of jie famyne, quhill he haue \ie Kingis
grace Licence, vndir ]>e faid pane.'

The reader is already aware that John seventh Lord Glammys, although sentenced to be executed, was merely imprisoned during the life of King James V. He was, no doubt, but a youth at
that time ; but it was the jealous policy of the King, reckoning on the revengeful spirit of the times,
to put it out of the power of this young Lord to be tempted to avenge his mother's cause and his own,

' Both Lrxlic an<l Balfour fall into these gross mistakes. » Sir James Balfour's Aniiaks, I, 207. ' MSS.

Cotton. Itritish Museum, C'«%. I!, iii, f. 183. * Innocent ; guiltless. » Ward ; prison. "Laird.

' Laird of Glenbervy. » Stiathauchin, or Strauchaiie. " The same individual, it is believed, who married

Lady Oi.ammis, and who was killed on the rocks of the Castle of Edinburgh, in attempting to effect his escape
from ward. This entry confirms the Editor's conjecture as to this person's identity.

24Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 199

either by secret Conspiracy against his life, or by an open appeal to the King's known enemies. Notwithstanding of the public acknowledgment of the young Lord's innocence, his estates were most
unjustly annexed to the Crown, by Act of Parliament, Dec. 3, 1540. After the death of King
James V, he brought a formal process of Reduction of his Forfeiture, which was legally rescinded,
and his estates and honours were restored by Parliament, Mar. 15, 1542-3.

After his being thus restored. Lord Glaramys married Jonet Keith, second daughter of Robert Lord
Keith, and sister of V^ WWwm fo^lrth Earl Marischal ; and died anno 1538.]

Jul. 18. — John Lord Glammys, Conuictus de arte et parte proditorie Concelationis et non reuelationis proditorie Imaginationis et Coufpirationis
diftructionis nobiliffime perfone fereniffimi domini noilri Regis, per venenum
peffiinum, per dictam quondam Dominam Jonetain, ejus inatrein, confpii'at. et
imaginat., et eidem Johanni often, et demonftrat. : Et pro arte et parte cum
dicta quondam Joneta, ejus matre, in diet, criminibus proditionis.

Nomina Assise elect, jurat, et admiJJ'.J'uper prefato Johaiine Lyoun, Domino de Glammys, viz.
Robertus, Dominus Maxwell, Johan. Mailuiil de Raith, miles, Hugo, Magiller de Eglintoune,
Hugo, Dominus Somervil, Johan. Hume de Coldenknowis, Johan. Striueling de Kere, miles,

Will. Magill.de Glencarne, miles, Dauid Berclay de Matheris, Andreas, Dominus Vcliiltre,

Jacobus Gordoun de Lochinver, Gilbertus, Comes de CalTillis, Jacob. Towrisde Inuerleith, miles,
Ninian.CreichtoundeBellybocht, Georgeus, Dominus Seytoune, Alexander Frafer de Phillorthe.

Sententia FomsFACTUKE (lata aduetjiiti prcmominatitm Johannem, Domhmm
de Glammys, 2ier diet, f'cctatorem, proutfequiiiir in vulgari.
It is fundiu be ane condigne Affile, That JoHNE Lord of Glammys hes
committit art and part of \>e trefTonable conceling and nocht reueling of J)e
treflbnabill Confpiratioune and imaginatioune of pe diftructioune of oure Ibuerane lordis maift nobill perfoune be poyfoune, ymaginat and confpii-at be vrnq'"
Jonet Lady Glammys, liis moder, to quhome he confentit and was art and
part with hir ])airintill ; as at mair lenth is contenit in ]je Dittay, &c. — For ]?e
quhilk cauffis he hes forfaltit to oure fouerane lord his life, landis, and gudis,
movable and vnmovable, and fall be hangit and drawn, and demanyt as
ane Traytour.

Crrason.ilili) ronualins X\)t iHastn- of ^jTovljrs's Conspimri)

to ^lai) t!)e l^iitff,

[In the preceding Trial of John Master of Forbes, the reader has seen that John StrathAUCHIN, or Strachane, was implicated with him in the same crime. Witiiout recapitulating that
case, the Editor merely inserts a short paragraph explanatory of the matter,' which, so far as Strachane
was concerned, seems tolerably correct.

' About the time that this embaffy- was dispatch'd, the King was alarmed with many felfe reports of
Plots againft Ins life ; and fome villainous perfons took opportunity to work up the King's i'ufpicion to a belief of their horrid contrivance. The firll perfon that was facrific'd to that villainous re-

' David Scott's Hist., Folio, Westminster, 1727, p. Sit. ' Cardinal Beaton and Maxwell, who were sent

.Embassadors to France to conclude a Marriage with Mary of Lorraine.

200 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

venge was John Forbefs (Master of Forbes), ekleft fon to the Lord Forbefs, the Chief of that
Name ; a young man of great courage and good education, but had liv'd a vicious life, and had entertain'd one Straghan as a companion in liis debauchery. This Straghan took opportunity to delire the
gift of fomething from Johi Forbefs, which not being convenient for him to give, he excufed himfelf.
Upon which, Straghan was ia offended, that he flroveto be reveng'd on him ; and knowing the Earl
OF HuNTLY to be at variance with John Forbe.ss, he went to the Earl and accus'd him of having
for a long time defign'd to murder the King : And by this means found falfe evidences to fwear to
what he alledg'd, that Mr Forbefs was refolv'd to affaffinate the King, fo that by his death the
DowGLASSES might be reftor'd to their ancient poflefiions, titles, and honour. Whereupon John
Forbes was impeach'd, and by the teflimony of thofe falfe witneffes, found guilty of death by the laws
of Scotland ; and was beheaded.

' The King was fo much concern'd for this Nobleman's death, that he baniflied Straghan, and
reftor'd the fecond brother of the Lord Forbes to his brother's eftate and honour : And, in token of
his favour, made him one of his Bed-chamber; and the third brother was, by the King's intereft,
married to a lady of great fortune.']

Jul. 20. — John Stkathauchin, fon and heir apparent of Thomas
Strathauchin of Lethinturk, accufed of being a participator in the Mafter of
Forbes's treafon, having become in the King's will, the following Letter,
declaring the royal pleafure, was entered on the books of Adjournal, and fentence pronounced accordingly.

' James, be ]'e grace of God, King of Scottis. To all and fundry our lieges, and fubditis, quham
it efferis, (to) quhais knaulege ])ir our Letteris fall cum, greting : Forfamekill as Johne Strathauchin, fone and apperand are to Thomas Strathauchin of Lethinturkis, is becumin in oure will, for
arte and parte of })e trefonabill conceling, yraaginacioune and deuifing of our deflructioune and Slauchter, be vmquhile Johne Maister of Forbes, with ane culvering, and vthir trefonabill dedis and
wordis committit be fe faid vmq'' Johne; ffor fe quhilkis he was conuict and juflifyt to ]ie dede for
lie famyne. We, herefore declaring our Will and vtter mynd anent ]ie faid Johne in ]ie premifles,
be fe tenour hereof, decernis, declaris, and ordanis him to pafs and remane in Warde, be3ond ])e
Watter of Dee, in quhat pairtis he plefis, induring our will : And gif We, in proper perfoune, happenis
to refort or cum beyond ))e faid Watter, pe faid Johne to hald and outdraw him fra ws be pe fpace of
xij mylis. Chaugeing 50 w, herefore, all and fundry onr liegis and fubditis, quham it efferis, that
Dane of 50W tak vpone hand to do or attempt ony thing incoutrar violatioune or breking of )iis our
declaratioune of oure mynd and will anent \e faid Johne, concerning ]ie premifl'es ; and to fuffer him
to joife and brouk peciabiliy, and to remane be'^ond Jjo faid Watter, in W'arde, in maner forfaid, during
fe fpace forfaid, aboue writtin, vndir all Jie hieft pane, charge, and oBence Jiat ^e and ilk ane man' commit and inrin^ agane our Maiefte in fat pairt. Subscriuit with our hand, and vndir our fignete. At
Halyrudehoufe, ])e xviij day of July, and of ourregne ])e xxiiij 5ere.'

[James R.]

3Ststttut0 Xi)t Ijoai) — .IfJurtnicj: anU SSaimintrtng, ^r.

Aug. 8. — Michael Axdirsoun, John and Andrew Fortoun, and 'Walter Balwarde, amerciated for not entering themfelves to uuderly the law for art
and part of befetting the way to Mr Alexander Spens and Mr John Spens,

' Must consequently, thereby. * Literally, run into, incur.

1

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 201

brothers, the fons of David Spens of Wohnerftoune, on June 28 last ; and invading thein for their Slaughters, within the burgh of Cowper : And for art and
part of Hurting and Wounding them at fame time.

Conboratioii of ti)t %itQtsi — anibcision — asaounUiiis, kt.

Aug. 8. — Dayiu Spens of Wolnierfloun, Mr Alexander, George, Robert,
and Mr John, his fons, Andrew Spens, brother of John S. of Mariftoun, Andrew
Lindefay, fon of William L. of Pyotftoun, Sir Alexander Spens, chaiilain, and
ten others, found furety' to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Fife for art
and part of Convocation of the lieges to a great number, armed in warlike manner, and Befetting the way to George Arthe of Smetoune and his fons,^ Invading
them for their Slaughter, and cruelly W^ounding Nicholas, George, and Sir Walter Arthe, to the great effufion of their blood ; committit within the burgh of
Cowper, on Jul. 28 laft, of forethought felony.^

iHutilatioii.

Aug. 9. — John Cunynghame of Caprintoune, David BoAvell of Auchinlek, George Dowglas of Pennyland, and twenty-fix others, found caution to
underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for art and part of the Mutilation
of John Sampfoune, of the thumb of his right hand, of forethought felony.

^laiirpljtfr— Siurniiitj: of Cun^nrtoun*

Aug. 11. — Mr Robert Douglas, brother to the Laird of Bone-Jedburghe, Mr "William Ker, Rector of Auld Roxburgbe, George Ker of Lintoune,
Gilbert Ker, young Laird of Greneheid, Thomas Macdowell of Makcarftoune,
and eight others, found caution to underly the law at the next Aire of Roxburgbe, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of William and Andrew Hall.' —
(Aug. 13.) Persy Hale and others,' found caution to the fame effect, to anfwer
for the crimes formerly imputed to them ; and for the Burning of Cun3artoune.

Cr tason — a^ntnrcmintniinQ; initl) t|)t (Sail of ^nsus anti

otfjer Ciaitois,

Aug. 16. — Alexander Hume, Convicted of the treafonable Affiftance
aflbrded by bim to Archibald, formerly Earl of Angus, and George Douglas, his
brother. Traitors and Rebels to the King : And fpecially, at the time of the
Burning of Colbrandifpethe and Auldhamftokis, the faid Traitors being with

' David Spens, younger of Wolmerstoun, is one of the cautioners. - John, George, Sir Walter

(chaplain), Thomas, and Allan. ^ Other indictments against several persons followed from the

same sqnabble, unnecessary to be here detailed. ■" See Apr. 17, 1537. ' See Ibid.

VOL. L f 2 C

202 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537the Englifh Army : And for Iiiterconiniuning with the faid Rebels in a treafonable manner : And for Intercommuning with other rebels, not being traitors. —
Beheaded.

Oppression — Creasonafiln assistins ti)t C?avl of lusus, kt,

Aug. 22. — John Mathesone, junior, Convicted of art and part of the
forethought felony and Oppreffion done to John Lummifdale, dwelling in Cleghorne, coming upon him at North Berwik for his Slaughter : And for art and
part of the Oppreffion done to ^Villiam Cokburne, coming upon him in the
Harbour of North Berwik for his Slaughter, Committed after Chriftmas laft.
Iteai, for art and part of the treafonable affiftance and Intercommuning with
Archibald, Ibmetime Earl of Angus. George Douglas, Little Alexander Jardin,
William and Thomas Baty, George Downy, and others their accomplices, Rebels
and Traitors, informing them in a treafonable manner of the fecrets of the kingdom of Scotland, after the date of his Remiffion. — Beheaded.

Conrtaliiifj; t|)t ICatJi) a3lammis*s Conspivan) against tijt i^ing; —
iJoisoning t])t €ai\ of 3Uotf)CS, ^r.

Aug. 22. — John Lyoune, fenior, in Knokcany.

[T»E importance of tbis and the following Trial, as appendages to those of Lady Glammis,
8cc. demands that the Editor should extract the entries from the record literatim, so that the reader
may be in possession of the minutest facts, as they are expressed in the technical phraseology of the
period. It is unnecessary to offer any farther observations on these proceedings, which are now for
the first time made public]

Laud /?rt' Judicium Forisfactuiie datum Jupcr quondam Johannem Lyoune.
Johannes Lyoune, fenior, in Knokcany, Convictus de arte et parte
proditorie concelationis et non I'evelationis proditoi'ie et abhominabilis Confpirationis et ymaginationis diftructionis nobiliflime perfone Supremi domini noilri
Regis, per (peffimuni) venenum, vulgo le jioysone, ymaginat. et Confpirat.
I^er quondam Jonetam dominam de Glammys, ejus filivun, et eorum complices ac participes ; quibus proditoribus diet. Johannes affiftebat, fupjilementum,
fauorem et auxilium prebuit et exhibuit in eorum nequiffimis, peruerfis, et proditoriis Confpirationibus et ymaginationibus pro diftructione diet fereniffimi
domini noftri Rfx.is, per diet, proditores ymaginat. et conlpirat. : Et pro arte
et parte cum eis in eifdem. Iteji, pro arte et parte proditorii vfus et intromiffionis cum diet, peffimo veneno le poysone pro diftructione Comitis de Rothes,
in proditorio niodo, contra Statuta et Acta Parliamenti, penas in eifdem contentas incurren. et deferuien. — Plio quibufquidem criminibus et calumpniis diet.
JoiiANXns Lyoune fforisfecit fuam vitam, terras, et polfeffiones fuas quaf24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. » 203

cumque, ac omnia bona fua mohilia et immobilia domino Regi efchaet. Ex
TKAHITUK et DECOM.ATUU. — Et lioc judicium five laudum redditura et prelatum fuit per os Willelmi Carwod, fectatorem dicte Curie.

iHnlunjj .mU stllins liJoisoii — (zronceaUncj SiatJP <!3lammis*0

CrrnsoiK

Aug. 22. — Alexander Makke, Conuict de arte et parte proditorie
confectionis, introniiffionis et venditionis veneni, le poijsoue, contra Statuta et
Acta Parliameuti, penas in eildeui incurren. : Ac etiam pro arte et parte proditorie concelatiouis et uon reuelationis de diet, proditorio veneno, ipfo cognorcente
ex dicto Johanne Lyoune effectum propter quem ordinatum et emptum fuit : Et
pro arte et parte cum dicto Johanne in dictis fuis proditoi'iis actionibus. — Pro
qnibufquidem criniinibus auris diet. Alexandri ablciiidatur, et erit BAXNITUS
extra omnts partes Scotie, preter Mcecomitatuni de Abirdene ; et ibidem manebit omnibus diebus vite fue ; et quod' exibit diet. Vicecomitatum, Tub pena mortisEt hoc redditum fuit pro judicio, per diet, fectatorem.

^Iau5f)tn\

Aug. 31. — Walter Lynne, Convicted of art and part of the cruel
Slaughter of Patrick Mowat, committed on forethought felony. — Beheaded.

8Hilful (Jfrror on Sfsslse— :3)inprisoiimtiit for pear anli tian, ^'r.

Oct. 23. — Thomas Laavristoune of that Ilk, John Ramlay of
Halhoufe, Henry Wardlaw of Kilbabirtoune, and four others, were tried by a
grand jury," who found that they had ' wilfullie and manifefllie errit, periurit
and pame ielff manfworne, in purgeing and declaring of John Pexnvcuke of
THAT Ilk, Alexander, his bruthir, James Creichtoune, and James Lawlbune,
quyte and but crime,* of ]>g Mutilatioune of Roger Tuedy in Lyntoune of his
tholme'' of his right hand, thay being vpone ])e Aflile of })e faidis perfonnis in
ane Court of Julliciarie, haldin in pe tolbuith of Edinburghe, ]'e ferd day of
October, ])e 3ear of God I'^V". xxxvj 3eris ; and Jiai I'eand with pare propir ene
))e laid Rogei-is tholme fchewin before ))ame, for pe vndir part cutit away and
mutilat ; and fua, hes manifeftlie and Wilfullie enyt. Sentence. — And ))arfor, all Jjair movable gudis fall be ))e Kingis ESCHETe ; and J)ai haue incurrit J)e
NOTE of infamiti : And ])air perlbnis to be PRESONIT for ane 3eir and day,
and farther, induring J)e Kingis \ViIl.

Conijofation of X\)t licgts — ^toutljirif — Oppression,

Oct. 26. — Andrew Ker in Auld Roxburghe, \\'illiani Ker in Stok-
' Non ? '^ ' Per magnam AOifam ;' by ' ane gret Allil'e.' ■ Acquitted and free from crime. * Thumb.

204 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537-8.

ftruther, and Thomas, his fon, with fixty-five others, came in the King's will '
for art and part of Convocation of the lieges, to the number of two himdred
perfons, armed in wai-like manner, with targets," fplentis,^ and other invafive
arms, on Aug. 2 laft ; and for art and part of the Stouthreif and Oppreffion
done to Helen Ruthirfurd of that Ilk, and her poor Tenants, coming to her lands
of Hurdhoufe and Theifknowis, lying on the marches of her barony, and the
lands of Riitherfurd, and Stouthreif from her and her tenants of lixty 'fled-full'*
and fixty ' cart-fuU' of ' hader."

Jjrsrtttntj t\)t ^aixti at Slurljiuamijs for !)is ^lausljtci*.

Nov. 13. — Sir Johx Walcar, Chaplain, dilated of art and part of
Befetting the way to Thomas Craufurd of Aucliinamys, at his Fifliing of Cart,
and Invading him for his Slaughter, in company with William Lord Sempill,
and his accomplices. He was replegiated by Gawin, Archbilliop of Glafgow, to
his Regality.

^lnus|)trr of t|)c ilaiitrs of ^nrijoijot), iLcttii*, anH ^allintiroirfjt.

Nov. 15. — Colin Campbell of Auchinhovvye, Convicted of art and
part of the cruel Slaughter of Allan Hammiltoun of Pardowy, Robert Striueling
of Lettir, and Andrew Striueling of Ballindi'oicht, committed of forethought
felony, in company with Colin Campbell, younger, his fon, William Campbell,
his lervant, John Campbell, his grandlbn and heir-apparent, John Rogei-, his
fervaut, and Charles Campbell, his porter." — Beheaded.

^ftjition anU Jjnsurrection iit X\)t Buftjf) of ^tr.

Jan. 19, 1537-8. — John Craufurd of Drongane, came in the King's
will for art and part of the Sedition and Infurrcction made between the neighbours and the Inhabitants of the burs^h of Air : And for art of the common
Oppreffion of his neighbours. — William Craufurd, young Laird of lieffuoriis,
and John Lokert of Bar, became cautioners to fatisfy the King and the jiarties.

Il?amrsudun anU (Suppression of i\)t ilatrti of 33arsaui) in Slir, $tt,

Jan. 19. — Alexander Lokert, burgels of Air, Convicted of art and
part of Convocation of the lieges in great numbers, within the burgh of Air, in

' By a marking on tlie margin of the Record, it appears that Andrew Ker was fined 40 ti, William
and Thomas in 20 li. each, and the rest in 20s. each. - 'Cum cadiircis.' It is by no means

clear what is signified by this term, wliich, literally, denotes a coverlet ; but it is likely to be used figuratively for some kind of shield or targe. ^ Armour for the legs, chiefly used by horsemen.
' Sledges full. ^ Heather, heath. « Hugh Lord Somervill, Robert Bruce of Bynuing, and Hugh
Montgomery of Hessilheid, were amerciated for not passing upon this Assise.

25 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 205

Autumn laft, againft the tenor of tlie Acts of Parliament : And for art and
part of the Hameluckin and OpiJreffion done to Alexander Kennedy of Bargany,
his near neighbour, at the fame time ; coming to his houfe, within the burgh of
Air, in warlike manner, with invafive weapons, and throwing Hones at his windows and doors, and breaking and deftroying the fame. And for art and part
of the Sedition and Infurrection made between the neighbours and the Inhabitants of the burgh of Air : And for common Oppreffion of his neighbours.

Cafeincr mjptifar, ^t, — (irKctton from rrrtdin l.intis — iHurtin\

Feb. 21. — Thomas CRAUf ukd of Auchnames and Archibald Preftoune
came in the King's will for the compulfion and taking captive of Sir Thomas
Craufurd, Chaplain, againft his will, to the Place of Auchnames, and for detaining him therein in captivit)' and fubjection, for a certain fpace, uliirping thereby
his Wajefty's authority. — He alfo came in the King's will, along with Thomas
Rowaue, for art and part of the unjuft Ejection and outputting of Margaret
Lufe (Love), widow, and John Paterfon, her fon, furth of their fet of the lands
of Kibbilftoune, within the lordlliii^ of Auchnames. Hugh Montgomery of
Heffilheid, the Mafter of Glencairne, and the Laird of Robertland, became cautioners to fatisfy the King and parties. — The fame day, the Laikd of Auchnames, James, his brother, along with Preftoune and Rowane, received the
King's Refpite for the cruel Slaughter and Murder of John Quhite, committed
of forethought felony. Craufurd of Hanyng became furety for the fatisfaction
of the parties.

Crrasonnbli) assistintj S^ntes JBotifllns of iJarftljf itr.

Mar. 21. — John Tuedy, in Lyntoun, convicted of art and part of the
treafonable affiftance given to James Douglas, formerly of Parkheid : And for
art and part of ' way-putting' him ;' he being lulpected of certain crimes of
High Treafon, and fugitive for the fame ; of the afliftance, caufnig, and counfel
of the faid John. — Delivered in Ward to the Captain of Edinburgh Caftle.

SupPLiCATiox Inj Jonet Pollok, Spouje of John Tuedy?
SouERAXE Lord, vnto 30ur gracious liienes Imimlie menis and lievelie complanis and filiawis
I jOur graces feruitrice Joxet Pollok, i'pous of Jolinc Tuedy, iu Lintoun, Tliat iiuliare uiy Tad Ipous
is hevelie trublit in ^our graces Ward, in ]ie Caftell of Edinbur', for cauflis Jiat ho is innocent of, as,
will God, falbe lieireftir clerly vndirflaiid to ^our grace; and lie is (Iratly kepit in prefou, and is daily
at gret expends, and I liaf na erdly gudis to gif him, bot it' 1 beg at frendis : And laitly, my Lord of
Morton hes put me furth of my maling,* Jiat fuld haf fuflenit my fad fpous and me, and our x (ten)
bamis. Herefor, I befeke jOur 1. nobill grace to haf royth and picte' of my fad fpous, and gif command to ))e Capitan to kepe him in fre Ward, he findand ticker fouerte'' Jiat he fall nocht el'chaip nor

' Effecting his escape. ' Grig, among Warrants of the Court. ' Excepting what. ' A sm.iU piece of ground
for which mail or rent is paid. ' Ruth and pity. ° Sure caution or surety.

206 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1338.

efchew 30ur graces Ward; and I and my ten barnis fall pray dailie for profperite of 50ur nobill grace
bath in faule and body, for our liftymis. And 5 our gracious aufuer buimlie I befeke, for ])e reward of
God. — {Indorject) Apud Y^Yi^. prime Augujii, anno 1"'V''. xxxviij°. The Kingis grace Ordanis fe
Juftice-Clerk to reffaue fouerte of ]iis complenar, vndir gret panis ;' quhilk fovirte being fund, Ordanis
pe Capitane to put him to fre Ward witliin \e Caflell. James R.

Warrant from the King to put John Tuedij to liberty, S)C.
Rex,

Justice-Clerk, It is our will and we cliarge 50U ])at incontinent eftir fe ficht heirof 56 caufe
JoHNE TuEDY, now being in Warde within our Caftell of Ed"', be lettin furth of [)e famin to liberte ;
and tak fouerte of him as 56 think expedient, fat he ftill entir agane befoir our Julliee, or his deputis,
or within ony Caflell of ouris, quhen he beis requirit, vpoun xv dayis warning, vndir certane gret
panys; 36 keipand ])is for ^our WVrand. Subscriuit with our hand, At Lynlythg^', fe fecund day
of Februar, and of our regne I)e xxvj jeir (1538-9). James R.

Efastng mafeiittr punfsljtti tapitalli).

Mar. 26, 1538. — William Scot Convicted of art and part of transgrefling and breaking the Act of Parliament agaiuft Leafing-niakers, for efchewing of difcords between the King and his faithful Barons, and lieges ; incurring thereby the pains of the faid Act. — Hanged.

iHurtJrr — ^totit|)rcif.

Apr. 15. — John Henuiesoune Convicted of art and part of the cruel

Murder of Hendirfone, coining u])on him at Crukftounhauche, on the

water of Heremyte, and cruelly Murdering him : And for Stouthreif from him
of his cloathes, certain Englifli Nobles,^ and his I'word. — Hanged.

^traliiifl Sxiool from libe si)ttp.

Apr. 15. — John Cokry Convicted of art and part of the Theft and
concealment of certain wool taken off feven live flieep, under filence of night,
within the Place of Wrichtis-Houfis, near Edinburgh. — His ears cut off,
and to be afterwards scourged through the burgh.

Eorlr dTorlirs's Citasoii, ^r,

[It is extremely probable that the wretched iiidiviilual, whose piteous ' Snpplicatioune' follows, was
the person who betrayed John Master of Forbes, and who was, througli the influence of the
Earl of Huntley, the immediate cause of that young Nobleman's execution.

This document, which was found among the mass of loose papers and Warrants belonging to the
Court, is so remarkable, that it has been thought proper to preserve it in this place. The reader is
referred to the Trial of the Master of Forbes in this Collection. J '

Apr. 26. — Maist fouerane and gracious Prince onder God, Maister
D.vuiD Strathauchin,'' huemly menys, quhair I ame alluterly hereit" and

" ' I" li.' marked on the Warrant. = A coin of the value of 6s. 8d. English. ^ Trials,

I, * 183. ■■ See Apr. 2C, 1536. ^ Ruined ; literally, plundered, or ' harried.'

25JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 207

diilroyit in my gudis, throcht my expenfis lutfaftly ' making in Ward and lamit
in my perfoune, be tormenting,^ invollwyng my felf in det for furnefmg of me
and tuay feruandis ; fuay pat my wyf and x barnes ar hungerit and forfarne/
and hes tayne apoune credence/ becaus I had nay vj^erwayis to furnes of my
awyne, xxxv li. ; quhairthrocht, and in my defalt of payment })airof, canne get
nay mair, bot manne peryfe for wanting of lyvyie fiiyd/ wythout 5our gracious
hines put remeid heirto : Befeking, in maift lamentabill maner, fen fuay is, ]jat
of 3our greit meir mercy (30U) wald fuffir me to pafs hayme, ondir fic fouerteis
as pleifis 5our hienes to tak, Jjat I may caufe onder fovmes of money till enter
and onderly 5our lawis, for ony manner of crymes ; or })anne, becaufe of my
greit neceflite and pouerte, J)at 3our nobilnes wald put me wyth ony honed perfone
})at may furnes my expenfes for my feruice, onder fyclyk fouerteis, onder fowmes
]>at I fall nocht remvf, bot byde and onderly all chargis ])at may be iinput to me,
as knawis God, quhome to I comitt my haile caufe, and to ^our maift gi-atioufe
nobilnes to dispone as 50 think caufe ; quhome for, fall my daly deuocione and
prayer be for profperite baytli of faule and body. — [Indorsed.] Apud
Striuling, xxvJ'" AjyriUs anno Domini F'V'jcxjcvsij. The Kingis gi-ace
Ordanis the Capitaine and Keparis of J)e Caftell of Edinbro', to put Maister
Dauid Stradaquhine, now being in tlie faid Caftell, to libertd and fredome,
fwa })at he may pafs to Jja burght of Dunde, thai'e to remaine in Warde, induring his grace will ; fuerte being firft funding to ]ie Juftice Clei'k, and actitate in
})e bukis of Adiurnale, that he fal nocht breik his Ward of J)e faid burght, vnder
the paine of ane thowfaiid pundis ; the faid Capitaine taking ane tikat*^ fubfcriuit
with the Juftice Clark and the fouerteis funding ;' and the Juftice Clark keping
this charge for his and the faid Capitane Wari'and. James RConboratioit — SSaountiiitQ;— ^toutljirif — <!!>pprfsstou.

Oct. 2. — Richard Lauder and twelve others denounced rebels, &c. for

not underlying the law for art and part of Convocation of the lieges, to the

number of 100 perfons, armed in warlike manner: And for art and part of

befetting the way to Andrew Cunynghame, fone of Sir William Cunynghame

knt. Mafter of Glencariie : And for cruelly Wounding and Hurting him : And

for Stoutlireif from him of his fword, 'quhingar,' belt, and purfe, and certain

money therein : And alfo, for art and part of his I\Jajefty's authority in taking

and detaining James Cunynghame, fervant to the faid Andrew, and putting him

in the Stocks for twenty-four hours in fubjection and captivity, he being a free

man ; thereby ufurping the King's authority, &c.

' Truly, really. " He was put to the torture, repeatedly, to extort Confession. ' Famished,

like to perish. * Credit. ^ Necessary food or sustenance. '' Ticket, bond. " The

cautiouers found. These were Alexander Strathauchin of Brigtoune, and Henry Ramsay of Lawisk

208* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538.

CTonboratt'on — ^puihir of Ctin«3--sf)fabfs — SeaminUfnc!:, ^r.

Nov. 7 George Lord Hcjme,' Stei)hen Howat, and five others, found

caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Berwick, for Convocation
of the lieges to the number oi Jixty perfons, armed in warlike manner, upon
Sep. 10 laft, coming upon Thomas Lowry and Robert Lummifdene, and other
tenants of Stichell, whilft leading the Teind llieaves of the Abbay of Coldinghame, belonging to them by reafon of their Leafe, and ' Spuil3ie' of the faid
llieaves ; and for Hurting and Wounding the faid perfons.

lirstttiiTCi: HmUfi-rJjirbrs antj lUijrls — iBrtalunjj * X\)t JIaiiU.'

Nov. 7. — Walter Ker of Cesfurd, James Douglas of Caveris, George
Ruthirfurd of Hundole, John R. of Hunthill, and Andrew Ker of Dolphingftoune,
Convicted of art and part of the favor and affiftance afforded to Robert Ruthirfurd, George R. called Cokhurne, and John R. called Jok of the grene, and their
accomplices, Rebels and at the horn ; permitting them to pafs within their
bounds continually, for divers years pad ; For not ufing their utmofb diligence
to hinder them from committing fuudry Slaughters, Stouthreifs, Thefts and
OpprefRons upon the King's poor lieges ; nor ejecting the faid Rebels, their
wives and children, from their bounds and bailliaries, but knowingly fuffering
them to pafs within their limits, and to remain therein beyond the fpace of twelve
hours, to commit fundiy crimes during the time of their pafling and refet within
the fliire wherein they dwell : And for not concurring with tlieir friends, men,
tenants, fervants and adherents, againft the faid Rebels, and purfuing and apprehending them, that they might be delivered up to the laws, and put to death :
Nor keeping the faid Rebels furth of the faid limits ; thereby breaking, tranfgrefling and violating their Obligation and ' Band' to the King, and incurring
the pains contained in the faid ' Band.'

Msiirptitg; tfjt JTiiiitr's ,iu(|ioritt) — ^tttiiifi: a iHurUrrrr frrr.

Nov. 8. — Alexander Forbes of Brux, and Alexander Forbes of

Tolleife, found furety to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Aberdeen,

for art and part of Ufurping the King's authority, in taking and detaining John

Makanedoy, after the Slaughter of Chriftian Bowmane Lady of Bruxis, for the

fpace of four days ' red-hand' after commiffion of faid Slaughter : And for difpofhig of his goods, which belonged as an efcheat to the King : And for putting

the faid John to liberty.

' The Earl and twenty others came in the King's will for Hamesucken and Convoratioii of the lieges
to the numher of 200 men, taking the Teind-shcaves furth of the barn-yard of James Kirkealdy of
Grange, his Majesty's treasurer, and factor for the Abbacy of Coldinghanie, carrying otV and destroying seventeen chabh'rs of corn and Teind-hear (barley.) — The Lairds of Coldcnknowis, Aytoune,
and Cranstoune, became lurety for them.

1

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 209

CvfasonaMt Sintcrromnumiitfl iuitf) H)t crarl of Slnstis.

Dec. 16. — Angus Dixglay came in the King's will for art and part of
the treaibnable afTiftance, fiipply, and Intercommuning with Archibald formerly
Earl of Angus, his brother, and their accomplices, Rebels and traitors, being at
the horn ; going with the faid Rebels, and Intercommuning with them in Berwick : And for revealing and declaring to them the fecrets of the kingdom of
Scotland ; the King being then in France.

Commnutmrnt of tijt Htfontiation of llelisiou in ^totlanft —
^rrtsp — Silsiiirj ?l?nTtiral 33oofes, ^^r.

[The Criminal Records do not afford us the extent of information which might
have been expected upon the important subject of the Reformation of Religion IN Scotland ; but from them, and from the Register of the Privy Seal,
&c., very interesting notices are to be met with. The reader will find that the
Editor has amply availed himself of both of these sources. Referring generally
to the well-known and valuable Historical works of tl/e Reverend Dr M'C/ie,
Keith's and Calderwood's Church Histories, Knox's History of the Reformation,
&c., for narratives of the persecutions against the early Reformers, the Editor
shall merely annex a variety of contemporaneous and early authorities, for the
purpose of exhibiting interesting reports of individual cases, in so far as they
are illusti'ative of those proceedings which appear in other parts of this Collection. The labours of Dr M'Crie,Dr Cook, and others, who have entei'ed into
a full discussion of this remarkable poi-tion of the history of our country, have
long since met with the unqualified approbation of all who have turned their
attention to the study of Cluuxh History, whether considered as a separate
science, or as intimately connected with the political aspect of these eventful
times.

It may be advantageous to prefix to the earliest notice which occurs in the
Books of Adjournal, such Papei's as have been selected by the Editor for the
illustration of this subject ; referring the reader more generally to the other
materials which follow in the course of this work. This method may perhaps
be more practically useful than inserting them among miscellaneous documents
in a general Apj^endix.

Many readers may feel gratified by the following particulars, connected with
some of the Narratives which are given in this work.

In ' Observations upon a Household Book of King,Iames V,' by Henry Ellis, Esq.,' published in a recent volume of tbe Archaeologia, be remarks, ' The presence of the King himself at
Edinburgh,' at an auto-da-fe,' is likewise noticed on tbe first of March, 1539, ' Accufatio h(creticorum

' Archaeologia, xxii. 7. ' He returned to Linlithgow on the night of the 2d INIarch. Ibid.

VOL. 1. t 2 D

210 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538-9eteorum combujiio, apud Edinburgh Rege prefente.' He further informs us, that this happened ' when
Keller and Beverege, two Dominican friars, Sir Duncan Simson of Stirling, a priest, Robert
Forrester, a gentleman of that town, and Thomas Forest, Canon regular of St Colms on tlie Forth,
and Vicar of Dolar, in Perthshire, suffered upon the Castle-hill. A short contemporary comment
upon this event, occurs in an Oiiginal Letter from the Duke of Norfolk to Lord Cromtvell, preserved
in the British Museum, dated Berwick, Mar. 29, 1539. Complaining of the bigotry of King James
V, his Grace says, ' Dayly commeth unto me feme gentlemen and fouie Clerks, wiche do flee out of
Scotland, as they iaid, for redyng of Scriptures in Inglilhe, faing, that if they were taken, they Iholde
be put to execution. I give them gentle words ; and to fome money. Here is now in this town,
(Berwick,) and hath be a good feafon, ihe that was wife to the late Capitayne of Donhar,^ and dar
not retorne for holding our waies, as flie faithe. She was in Englonde and fawe Queene Jane.
She was Sir Patrick Hamilton's daughter, and her brother wes brent in Scotlande iij or iiij years pafl..'

The other numerous instances of persecutions, for ' Heretical opinions,'
as they were then termed, though interesting in themselves, are ah-eady fully
detailed by the authors before named, to whose works reference may be made.]

I. Narrative of the proceedings agaiitjl. David Straiion, of the Hoiife of
Lawriejlomie, Mr Norman Gourlay, and others^ ^"g- 27, 1534.

In the month of Auguft (ISS-i) the Bishops, having gotten fitt opportunitie, renewed their battel]
aganell Jefus Cluift. David Stratilox, a Gentelman of the Houfe of Lawreftoune, and Mr
Norman Gowrlay, was brought to judgement in the Abby of Halyrudhoufe.' The King him felf,
all cloathed with reid,* being prefent, grait pains war taken upon David Stratoun to move him to
recant and burn his Bill ;' hot he, ever'' flanding to his defence, was in end adjudged to the fire. He
alked grace at the King.^ The Bishops anlwred proudlie, that ' the King's hands war bound, and
that he had no grace to give to fuch as were by law condemned.' So was he, with Mr Norman,
after dinner, upon the 27 day of Aguft, led to aplacebefide the Rude of Greenfide, between Leth and
Edinbi-ug, to the intent that the inhabitants of Fife, feeing the fire, might be ftriken with terrour and
feare.

David Straitoun at the firft hated the Preelis onlie for their pride and avarice. The Bijhop of

Murray exacted of him the tenth fifli. His anfuer to his fervents' was — ' If they would have that

which his fervents had gotten, it war reafToun they fhould come and reive it quhair they gott the flock.'

And, as was conflantlie affirmed, he caufed his fervents call the tenth filh in the iea againo. Procefs

of Curling was laid aganft him ; which, quhen he contemned, he was fummoned to anfwer for Herefie.

He had bcin befor verie fluborne, and defpiled all reading, fpeciallie of good purpofTes ; now, he

delighted in nothing bot reading, allbeit he could not read him felf, and exorted everie man to peace

and concord, and to the contempt of the world. He frequented much the companie of John Arjkine,

Laird of Dun ^^ a man marvlouflie enlightned, in refpect of thefc times. When the Laird of Lawer-

' Si'e Extract from Cald. MS., Aug. 1531. Dame Katiiariuu Ilauiiltoii. * Cuhlencond's Church History,

MS. Adv. Liliniry. See also J/- CWi's Reformation, I, 3j3. P((.vcy/^(iV, p. IjO. Knox; p. 21. Sjiotswvod, p. 66.
' Their accuser was James Hay, Bishop of Uoss, Commissioner of Cardinal Beaton. ' The usual Judicial dress

in Criminal rases, which is still red. See Foxe's Sook of Martyr.i, Fol. Loud. I.j9l), p. 896. ' The form of recanting. See the close of this article, p. * 211. '^Constantly. ' PfecoWic thus relates this proceeding : 'They
condemned David Stratoun hecause he would not abjure and hurue liis faggot, quhilk they war verrie earnest to have
done; and TUE KiKii himself procuied (pleaded) for his lyft'. (juhilk the Bischopi^ graiitit, if he would burne his
faggatt, quhilk the said David n uawayes wold doe. Quhairfoir the I'/cnr (Dean I'orret, see articles II, H I, and IV,)
and he war both brunt. I know no cans quhy, bot that this David wold not pay his teindis thaukfullie to his Persone. And also Mr Normand Gidlown;/ (Gourlai/) was brunt, becaus he was in the East-land and cam home and
married ane waytf, contrair the fcume of the Pope's institutioun, becaus he wes ane Preist, to quhom it was not
permitted to marrie ; bot if lie had had ane thousand whores he had nevir beine quarrelled !' ' Fo.rc attributes
this act to Jlr Robert I.awsone, Vicar of Eglisgrig. " Afterwards Superintendent of Fife.

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 211

Jioune, being then a young man, was reading to bim upon the New Teftament, be chanced to read this
fentence of our mafter, ' he that denieth me befor men, I will denie him in the prefance of my ftatber
and befor bis Angels ;' at quhicb words, as one revived, be fudentlie cafl bimfelf upon bis kneis, and
extended his hands, and looking conltantlie with liis viffage toward |)e Heaven a reafonable time, be
burfl furth at lentb in tbefe words, — ' O Lord, I have bein wickied, and jufllie may tbow abftract thy
grace from me ; bot Lord, for thy mercies fake, lett me never denie thee nor thy truth, for feare of
death or bodilie pain !' Tlie ifl'ue declared that his prayer was not powered out in vaine.

3Ir Normaml was a man of reafonable eruditioun and knowledge, although it was joyned with
weackuefs. He bad faid tbair was no Purgatorie, and that the Pope was not a Bifliop, but an AntiChrifl, and that be bad no jurifdictioun in Scotland. James Hay, Bifliop of Rqffe, fatt in judgement,
as Commiffioner to James Beattone, {Areh)BiJliop of Sand Aiidreivs, as Mr Fox relateth.

To that diet was fummoned others alfo, of whom fome compeared in the Abbay Kirk of Halirudhoufe, abjured and publicklie burnt the Bills. Others compeared not, bot fled out of tiie countrie.
Adame Dayes, or Dales, a fliipwrigbt, that dwelt on tiie North fide of the bridge of LeitI), was one of
the number. Henrie Carnes, fkipper in Leitb, fled out of the countrie to the t'aflern Seas. Jokn
Stewart, indweller in Leith, died in exile. 3Ir William Johvjloune, Advocat, fled out of the countrie ;
retunied in the time of Governour Hammiltoune : Beid, Bijhop of Orhiay, bouglit his boufes
(being confifcat) with a fmall foume ; fo tliat it was thouglit gi-eat favour that be gott the ufe of ane
cbalmber ; bot after liis death be gott no buriall, natber in Church nor Church-yard. Mr Hendrie
Henderfone, Schooll-mafter of the Grammer Scboole of Edinbrugh, was after I'ummoned; and in the
end, for non compeareing, was condemne<l as contumax and Heretiek. He died in England. Sir
William Kirkie, Preed, whither he compeared and abjured or fled, we can find no certaintie.

Mr Fox' referreth to this time Sir James Uammiltoune of Linthgow, Sbiriff, and bis fifler, Kathrine.' Jaraes Hammiltoune was accufed as one that maintained the oppiniouns of 3Ir Patrih, his
brother, to whom the King gave counfell to depairt and not tocompeare ; for in cafe he compeared,
he could not help bim, becaufe the Bishops had perfwaded him the caule of Herelie did nowayes
apertaine to him.^ And fo James fled, was condemned as ane Heritick, bis goods and lands confifcat
and difpofed wnto others. His fifler Katharitie appeared ; and being accufed of Herefie, to witt,
' that her owne works could not fave her,' ilie granted ; and after long reafouning betwene her and Mr
John Spans the lawyer,* fhe concludit in this manner, ' Work heir, work there, quhat kinde of working
is all this ? I know perfictlie that no kinde of workes can fave me, bot onlie the works of Chrilf, my
Lord and Saviour I' The King, bearing tbefe words, turned bim about and laughed, and called her
wnto him, and caufed her to recant, becaufe Ihe was his aunt. And fo Ihe efijaped.

A woman of Leitb was detected upon this occatioun. Quhan the Midewife, in time of her labour,
bid her fay, ' Our Ladie help me !' She cried ' Cbrilte help me ! Chrifle helpe me, in whofe help I
truft, r She was alfo conflrained to recant, and efcaped without confifcation of her goods, becaufe flie
(was) married.

Tlie publict Ceremonie of recanting in tbefe times, was to beare a flFaggot of drie (licks, and
burne it publlctlie ; to fignifie that they war deftroying that quhich fhould have beine the inllrument
of their death.

II. Narrative of the proceedings agahjl Friar John Keillor, Dean IViomas

Forret, Friar John Beverage, Duncan Sim/on, and Rohert ForreJierJ'

In February, the year 1539, or, as others account, the beginning of the year, the 25 of March, 1538,
John Killor, Blak Frier, Dean Thomas Forret, Vicar of Dolor and Cliannon Regular, John

' Fere's JIartyrs, p. 895. ' ' The spouse of the Captaine of Dunbar.' — Foxe. ' Tliat it did not fall

under his prerogative. * Mr John Spens of Condy, afterwards King's Advocate. ^ Caldcrwood's Church

Hist. MS. Advocates' Library.

6

212 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538-9.

Beverage, Blak Frier, and Duncan Simpson, a Preift at Stirline, a Gentleman, called Robert
Forrester, in Stirline, war fumraoned be the Cardinall (Beaton) and the Bidiop of Dumblain.
At the day of their appearance, they were condemned to the death, without any place for recantation ; becaufe, as was alledged, they were Herefiarchs or Chief Hereticks, and teachers of Herefie ;
and efpecially, becaufe many of them were at the briildell and mariage of a Preift who was Vicar of
Tillibodie,' belide Stirline, and did eat flefli in Lent at the briddell." They were cruelly Murdered
wpon tlie Caflle hill of Edinburgli, the laft of February.'' That crueltie was ul'ed be the Cardinal, the
Chancelour, the Bilhop of Glafgow, and the inceftuous Bifliop of Dumblain.

Friar Killor fet forth the Hiftory of Chrift's paflion in form of a Commedie,'' quhich was acted
at Stirline in the King's prefence, upon Good Fryday, in the morning ; in the quhich all thingis were
lo livly expreffed, that the very fimple people underftood and confeffed that as the Preifls and obflinate Pliarilies perfvvaded the people to refufe Clu-ift Jefus, and caufit Pilate to condemn him, lb did
the Biiliops and men, called Religious, blind the people, and perfuaded Princes and Judges to perfecute fuch as profefs Chrifl Jefus his bleffed Gofpell. This plain fpeaking fo inflamed tliem thairefter,
that they thirfted ever for his blood.

The Vicar of Dolor faid to his fervant, Andrew Kirhie, tliat ' he never heard a more heavenly
fpeech all his lifetime, than out of the mouth of a Frier Killor, quhen he was imprifoned in the Caftle
of Edinburgh ;' but Andrew could not remember the words. Buchanan fayeth that 5 were burnt
at that time, 9 recaunted, and many fled out of the country, of the quhich number he him felfF was
one. The names of the recaunters we have not fet doune in our Hiltory ; only be report we hear of
Walter Cmijland, merchant in Stirline, and James WatJ'on, merchant, who burnt their faggots ;' but
as for tlie Vicar of Dolor, burnt at this time, we will fet doun a fuller Hiftorie of his life and death
than hath been yet extant.

Dean Thomas Forret, Vicar of Dolor, preached every Sunday to his parochiners the Epiftle
or Gofpell, as it fell for the time ; quhich then was a great novelty in Scotland to fee any man preach,
except a Black Frier or a Gray Frier ; tlierfor the Friers invyed him, and accufed him to the Bifliop
of Dunhell, in whofe dioceis he remained, as ane Heretick, and one that lliewed the mylteries of the
Scriptures to the vulgar people in Englifh, to make the Clergie deteftable in the fight of the people.
Tlie Bijhop, moved by the Friers' inrtigation, called the faid Dean Thomas, and faid to him, ' My
joy,*" Dean Thomas, I love you weill, and theifor I moft give yow my counfell how yow Ihall rule
and guid your felf.' To quhom Tliomas faid, ' I thank your lordlhip heartily.' Then the Bifliop
began his counfell on this maner : ' My joy, ZJeaw Thomas, I am informed that ye preach the Epiftle
or Gofpell every Sunday to your parocheners, and tiiat yow take not the cow' or upmoft cloath from
your parociieners, quhich is very prejudicial! to the Churchmen ; and therfor, my joy, Tliomns, I would
(you took) your cow and upmoft cloath as other Churchmen doeth ; or els, it is to much to preach
every Sunday, for in fo doing ye may make the people think that we Ihould preach likewayes ! But
it is enough for you quhen ye find any good Epiftle or any good Gofpell, that fetteth forth the libertie
of the Holy Church, to preach that and let the reft be !' Thomas anfvvered, ' My lord, 1 think that
none of my parochoners will complain that I take not the cow nor the uppermoft cloath, but will
gladly give me the fame, together with any other thing they have ; and I will give and communicate
with them any thing that I have ; and fo, my lord, we agree right weel, and there's no difcord among
us. And quhere your lordfliip fayeth, it is to much to preach every Sunday, indeed I think it is to
litle, and alfo would wifli that your lordfliip did the like !' — ' Nay, nay, Dean Tliomas,' faid my lord,

' Thomas Coklaw. ' See Foxr., p. 1 154!. ' Foxc adds, ' Where they that were first bound to the stake

godly and marueilously did comfort them that came bchinde.' * One of the Mysteries or Moralities, which

were so popular, among the Clergy as well as the people, during the Holidays. ^ Recanted. = My joe, a

familiar expression in use among very intimate friends. See this dialogue in Foxe, p. 1133. ' ' The mortuarie and the chrisome.' See Note at the end of the next article, p. * 211.

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 213

' let that be, for we are not ordained to preach.' Tlien faid Thomas, ' Quhere your lordlhip biddeth
me preach quhen I find any good Epillle or a good Gofpell, truly, my lord, I have read the New Teftament and the Old, and all the Epiftles and Gofpells, and among them I could never find an evill
Epiftle or an evill Gofpell ; but if your lordfliip will Ihew me the good Epiille and the good Gofpell,
and the evill Epiftle and the evill Gofpell, then I lliall preach the good, and omitt the evill 1' Then
fpake ray lord ftoutly, and faid, ' I thank God, that I never knew quhat the Old and New Teftament
was I Therfor, Dea7i Thomas, I will know no thing but my Portuife ' and my Pontificall !' Of tbefe
words arofe a proverb, quhich is common in Scotland, ' Ye are like the Bijliop of Dunkellden, that
knew neither the New nor the Olde lawe !' — ' Go your way,' faid my lord, ' and let be all thefe
phantafies ; for if ye perfevcr in thefe erronious opinions, ye will repent quhen ye may not mend it !'
Thomas faid, ' I trull my caufe be juft in the prefence of God, and therfor I pafs not much quhat do
follow therupon I' So my lord and he departed at that time. But foon after a fummond was directed,
as we have liear<l.

III. Memoir of Dean Thomas Forrett, Vicar of Dollar.

Thomas Forrett, Vicar of Dolor, was a Gentleman of the Houfe of the Laird of Forrets, in
Fife. His father was Mafter Stabler to KiXG James IV. After he had got fome beginning in the
Rudiments, he went to Culen ^ and learned his gramer, (and) be the help of a rich lady was fullained
ther at fchools. After he returned he was made a Channon in Sanct Colme's Inche, and was a
fervant Papift. Ther fell out a debate betwixt the Abbot and Channoris about their portion due
to them for their maintainance. They got the Books of the foundation that they might underftand
the better of quhat allowance was due to them every day. The Abbot took the book from them, and
gave them a Volume of Atigiijline's to read and ftudy in ftead of it. ' O happie and blefTed was that
book,' faid he many a time after, quhairby he came to the knouledge of the truth. He converted the
younger Channons ; but ' the old bottells,' he faid, < would not receave the new wine I' Therafter he
was made Vicar of Dolor. He taught his flock the ten Commandments, and fhewed them the way
of their falvation to be only by the blood of Jefus Chrift. He penned a litle Catehife,^ quhich he
caufed a poor child anfwer him, quhen any faithfull brother came to him, to allure the hearts of the
hearers to embrace the truth ; quhich indeed converted manie in the countrie about. He rofe at Hx
in the morning, and ftudied till twelve ; and after dinner till fupper, in Summer. In Winter he burnt
candle till bed-time. When he vifited aney fick perfon in the Paroch that was poor, he would carie
bread and cheefe in his goun-fleeve to the fick perfon, and give him lilver out of his purfe, and feed
his foul with the bread of life. He was very diligent in reading the Epiftle to the Romans, in the
Latin tongue, that he might be able to difpute againft the adverfaries. He would get three chapters
perquire ' in one day, and at even gave the booke to his fervant Andrexv Kirk to mark quhair he went
wrong in the rehearfing ; and then he held up his hands to Heaven, and thanked God that he was not
idle that day.

He was diverfe times fummoned before the BiJIiops of Sanct Andrews and Dunkell to give account
of his doctrine ; but he gave fuch reafonsand anfwers that he efcaped, till that cruel Cardinall David
Seton got the upper hand.

Quhen he was brought to the place of Execution Frier Harbukell^ biddeth him follow him. ' Say,
I beleave in God,' fayeth the Frier. ' I beleive in God,' fayeth he. ' And in our Lady,' fayeth the
Frier. ' I beleive as our Ladie beleavetli,' faid he. ' Say,' faid tlie Frier, ' I beleive in God and in
our Lady.' — ' Ceafe,' faid he, ' tempt me not I I know quhat I lliould fay as well as ye, thankis be to
God r So he left him, and tempted the reft after the like manor. In the mean time, while he was
faying to the people, ' I never miniftered the Sacrament but I faid, as the bread entereth into your

' Mass-Book or Breviary. 'Cologne. 'Catechism. • Off tlie boolc, /)ar coear. * Arbucltle.

214 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538-9.

mouth, Co ihall Clirift dwell by livly faith into your hearts !' — ' Away 1 away I' faid one rtandiug
befide, with his jack ' on him, ' we will have no preaching here !' Another taketh the New Teflament
• out of his bofome, and holdeth it up before the people, and crietb, ' Herefie I Herefie I' Then the
people cried, ' Burne him ! Burne him !' He cried with a loud voice, firft in Latine, then in Engliih,
' God be mercifull to me a finner !' After that, firft in Latine, then in Engliih, ' Lord Jefus, receave
my fpirit !' After that, as his manner was to end with fome Pfalms, in his prayer, he began at the
51 Pfalm, in Latine, ' Miferere mei, Deus, fectmdiim magnam tuani mifericordiam,' &c. and fo continued till they pulled the ftool from under his feet, and lb wirried"^ him ; and after burnt him.

This information Mr John Davifon receaved from his fervant Andreiv KirMe, by a Letter, quhich
lie tranflated in Latine in his Catalogue of the Scotifli Martyrs. He addeth farder, that quhen the
Pardoners would come to his Kirk, to offer pardon for money, he would fay, ' Parochoners, I am
bound to fpeak the truth unto yow ! That is but to deceave yow. Tiiere is no pardone for our fins
that can come to us either from Pojx or any other, but only be tiie blood of Chrift.

Quhen the Abbot of Smict Cohne's Incite would fay to him, ' Will ye fay as they fay, and keep
your mind to yourfelf, and fave your felf ?' — ' I thank your lordlliip,' laid the Vicar, ' ye are a freand
to my body, but riot to my foul ! Befor I deny a word that I have fpoken, ye iliall see this body of
mine blow away firft with the wind, in afhes I'

When on of the number was wirried and burnt before him, he faid, when it was told liim, ' Yea, he
was ane wylly fellow, he knew there were many Imnjiry folks coming after him, and he went befor to
caufe make readie the fupper I" Thus ended this faithful! fervant of God, invyed be the Clergie for
his good life, diligent preaching of the word, and fparing the cow and uppermoft cloatli, that is the
mortuarie and the chrilbme.-'

IV. Deane Thomas Forret/ Vicare of Doll our, brunt in Edhihnrghe.^

A lytle before this tyme one Deane Thomas Forret, Channon Regulare and Viccar of Dollour, by
fyde Striveling, a verie vprycht man and one of good lyfe and converfation, efter a nioneth or two of
imprifonment, was brought furth and acculed afore the Prelatis and Churchmen in Edenbnighe for
ium poyntes of ilerefies, (as they thocht in thofe dayes,) whereof the heads were read and proponed
by 3Ir Johne Lawder, the accufer, as folio wes. The Accufer. Fals Heretick ! Thow fayes it is not

' The /ac/i, Fr. jaque, was a kind of short coat of mail. ^ Strangled him, at the stake. 'In order

that the reader may be fully aware of this shocking exaction of the Itonian Catholic Priests, as then practised in
the case of the cortse- present, the Editor cannot do better than give Dr 31^ Cries lucid explanation. * The beds of
the dying were besieged, aiui their last moments disturbed, by avaricious Priests, who laboured to extort bequests to
themselves or the Church. Not satisfied with exacting tithes tVom tlie living, a demand was made upon the dead.
No sooner had a poor husbandman breathed his last than the rapacious ^'icar visited the family.' — ' The corpse^present was demanded by the \'icar, and seems to have been distinct from the ordinary dues exacted for the interment of
the body and deliverance of the soul from Purgatory. This perquisite consisted in country parishes of the best cow
which Itelonged to the fleccascd, and f/ic uppermost cloth or covering of his bed, or the finest of his body-clothes. The
" corp-presant kow" answei's to " the hereyeld horse," which was paid to the landlord (superior) on the death of his
tenant.' — Life of John Knox, i, 23, 310.

' And als the Vicar, as I trow, He will not faill to tak ane kow

And ul^mai^t clailh, thocht babis them ban, From ane purie selie husbandman ;

(inhen that lie lyis foi- til dc, Having small bairnis twa or thrc.

And hes thre ky withouten mo, The ^'ical■ must have ane of tho,

With the gray doke that bapjiis the bed, Jlowhcit that he be purelye cled :

And gif the wyfe do on the morne, Thocht all the babis suld be forloriie,

'I'he uther kow he cliekis away, With hir jiiire cote of roploch gray :

And gif witliin twa dayis or thru, The eldest chyld hapnis to de.

Of the third kow he will be sure, (iulien he hes all then under his cure,

And father and mother baith ar deid, lieg mon the babis, without remeid.'

Chulmtrs^s iSir D. Lytidniv/s Worhs. iii, 105.
' .\ftcr this was prepared, the Editor observes that Pitscottie liiis the same interesting account of Dean Forrel's
Trial, almost in th. same words, p. 353, &c, '^ Anderson's History of Scotland, WS. Adv. Library.

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 215

lefum to Kirkmen to tak ])air Teyndes, and oflFringes, and corfe prefentis,' thocht we liawe bein in vfe
of them conllitute be )ie Kirk and King, and allfo our Holy Father ])E Pape hes confermed ]ie fame ?
Deane Thomas Foret. Brother, I faid not fo ; but I faid it was not lefum to Kirkmen to fpend Jie
patrimonie of Jie Kirk as they doe, as on whoores, ryotous fealling, and on faire wenien, and at playing at cairdis and at dyce ; and nather Jie Kirk weill menteaned, nor Jie people inflructed in God's
Word, nether jie Sacrementa dewlie minillred vnto them, as Chryft commanded. — The Accujer. Dar
thow deny fat wliilk is oppinlie knowen in the countrey ! That thow gave againe to thy parochinaris
fe cow and )ie vpmall cloathes,- faying, thow haid no rycht to them ? — Deane Thomas. I gave them
againe to them fat haid more-' need of them then I. — The AcmJ'er. Thow fals Heretick I Thow
learned all thy parochiners to fay fe Pater nofter, pe Creed, and fe ten Commandements in Englifcb,
which is coulrare to all acts ■* fat thay fould know which we fay. — Deane Thomas. Brother, my
people are fo roode and ignorant ^ they vnderftand no Latine, fo fat my confcience moved me to pitie
there ignorance, whilk provoaked me learne them f e wordis of there falvation in Englifch ; that is,
the Ten Commandements, whilk are f e law of God, whereby tiiey mycht obferve fe fame. I teached
them the Beleeff, whereby they niycht know there faith in God, and Jefus Chryft his lone, and (of)''
bis death and refurrection (for thame). Mairover I teatched (and learned thame) the Lords owen
prayer' in fe mother tongue, to fe effect fat they fould know to wliome they fould pray, and in
whofe name they fould pray, and what they fould a(k and defyre in prayer, whilk I beleefe to be fe
paterne of all prayer. — The Acciijer faid, W'hy did thow that? By our actis and ordinances of our
Holy Father ])E Pape ? — Deane Thomas anfwered, I follow the acts of our Mailter and Saviour
Jefus Chryft, and of fe Apoftle Paule, who fayeth in his doctrine to f e Corinthians,^ that he haid
rather fpeak fyve words to f e vnderftanding and edefeing of his people, then ten thowfand in a ftrainge
tongue wliilk they underftand not. — The Accujer faid. Where finds thow that ? — Deane Thomas
anfwered, in my book heir in my fleife.

Then fe Accufer ftart with a bend ' to f e Vicare, and pulled f e book out of his hand (fleive),
holding (it) vp to f e people, saying with a lowd voyce, behold, Sirs, he hes the booke (of Herefie)
in his fleiffe, fat makis all fe din and play in our Kirk ! Brother, faid fe Vicare, God forgive yow 1
Ye could fay better, if ye pleafed, nor '" to call the book of fe Evaiigell of Jefus Chryft the booke of
Herefie ! I aflure yow, deare brother, fat thair is nothing in this buke but f e lyfe, Latter Will and
Teftament of our Maifter and Saviour Jefus Chryft, penned by fe four Evangelifts, for our wholfura
inftruction and confort. — Acciifir. Knowes thow not, Heretick, fat it is contrare to our acts and
exprefte commands, to have a New Teftament or Byble in Englifche, (quhilk is eneugli to burne the
for) ? Then the counfall of the Clargie gave fentence on him to be Brunt, for the vfeing of the fame
bulk, the New Teftament in Inglis.

For thefe, and fe lyke fentences, was he taken to f e Caftell Hill in Edenburgh and moft vnmercifullie BRUNT.

V. Naki?ative of the Proceedhigs agahiji Hieronijmus [Jerome) Ttujfel and

Wmian Kennedij.

After that this crueltie was ufed in Edinburgh upon the Caftle hill, the reft of the Bijhops behoved
to fliew them felves no lefs fervent to fupprefs the light than did the Cardinall. Tlicr wer two
apprehended in the diocie of Glafgow, Hieronymus Russell, a Gray Frier, a young man of a meek
nature, quick fprit, and good underftanding, and one (Ninian) Kenedie, quho had not paft the
eighteenth year of his age ; a man of good witt, and excelling in Scotilh Poefie." 3Ir John Lauder,

' See Note to tlie preceilins; article. - See the above-mentioned Note. ' ' More mister nor I had.'

PitscoUic. ' Pitscottie's reading is better, ' oure actis, that thay sould knaw what they say.' ^ ' Barbarous,' Pits. ° This word and the following are in Pitscottie's version. ' ' The Dominicall Oratioune.'

Pits. ' 1 Cor. chap. xiv. v. 19. ' Bound, spring. "' Than. " Knox,^. 22, says he was ' of

excellent Ingyne for Scottische Poetry.' .See also Spotsivood, 67. Keith, 9.

216 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538-9.

3Ir Andrew Oliphant, and Frier Merfman, were fent to affift the Bifliop of Glqfgow, at leaft to Itir
liim up to dip bis liands in the blood of God's ferrants. N. Kenedie, at the firft, was faint, and
wuld gladly have recaunted ; but quhen fpace was denyed to him, the Spirit of all comfort began to
work on him, the inward comfort began to burll forth, als weel in vifage as in tongue and word ; for
his countenance began to be cheerfull, and with a joyful heart and loud voice he uttered thir words
upon liis knees. ' O Eternall God, how wonderfull is thy love and mercie quhich tbow beareth unto
iiiankind, and unto me the mod miferable wretcli and cative ' above all others ; for even now, quheu
I would have denyed thee and thy Son, our Lord Jefus Chrifl, and fo have caft my felf into everlaftinn- damnation, thow, by thy own hand, hath pulled me out from the very bottom of Hell, and made
nie to feel that heavenly comfort, quliicli taketh from me that ungodly fear quhairwith before I was
opprefled. Now I defire deatii : Do quhat yow pleafe : I prail'e my God I am readie I'

Thefe Godles tyrrants, the fervants of Satan, railed upon godly and learned Hieronymus. He
anfwered, ' this is yourhoiu- and pour- of Darknefs ! Now fit ye as Judges, and we Hand wrongfully
accufed, and more wrongfully to be condemned ; but the day Ihall come quhen our innocence Ihall
appear, and ye fliall lee your own blindnefs to your everlafling confufion. Go forward and fill the
meafure of your iniquitie !

While the fervants of God thus behaved themfelves, a variance arifeth betwixt the Bijhop and the
beafts quhich came from the Cardinall. The Hi/hop laid, ' I think it better to Ipare thefe men than
to put them to death.' The dotting ^ Doctors faid, ' Quhat will ye do, my lord ? Will ye condemn
all that my Lord Cardinal!, other Bijhops, and we have done ? If fo, ye do iliew your felf enemie to
the Church and ws, and fo we will repute you, be ye affured I' The faithlefs man, aft'rayed, adjudged
the innocents to die, according to the defire of the wicked.

The meek and gentle Jerome Russell comforted the other with many comfortable fentences ; oft
faying unto him, ' Brother, fear not I More mightie is he that is in ws, than he that is in the world !
The pain quhich we fliall fuffer is fhort, and fliall be light ; but our joy and confolation rtiall never
have an end ; therfor let us llrive to enter in by that fame ftrait way quhairby our niafler and Saviour
hath entered in before ws. Death cannot deftroy ws, for it is deftroyed allready by him for quhofe
fake we fuffer ! With thefe, and the like comfortable fentences, they paffed to the place of Execution,
and triumphed over death and Satan.

Thus did thefe cruell hearts intend nothing but Murder throughout all the quarters of this real me,
fo far had that blinded and vitious man, the Prince — moft villous, I fay, for he nether fpared man,
wife, nor maid, after his marriage, more than he did befor; and had given hinifelf to obey the cruell
appetite of thefe bloody hearts — that he had made a folem vow, that none iliould be fpared that was
fufpected of Herefie, though he wer his own fon !

Ostiifi: Jioolis susprrtrtr to tic ?l?nrtiral,

Jan. 10, 1538-9. — Robert Fouestare, brother to Thomas F. of Arnofibboune/ William F., Ion to John F., burgefs of Stirling," Walter Cofland,"
David Grahame,' and James Watfoune," found furety (Alex. F. of Killemuke,
the Laird of Arngibboune, and Robert, his heir apparent, John Cragyngelt of
that Ilk, John F. and Arch. Spittell, burgeffes of Stirling,) to underly the law
' for breking of his hienes Prodamationes, in haifing and vfing of fie bukes as
ar lUfpect of Heresy, and ar defendit (prohibited) be the Kirk.'

' Caitiff. '^ Power. ' Doating. ■• Caution, 1000 merks. See the Notice prefixed to these Narratives. That which refers to Robert Forester is on p. * 210. Reference may also
be made to Dr 31' Cries works, &c. » 500 merks. ^ 600 merks. ' 300 merks.
' 300 merks.

26 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 217

iBrssen0ns--nt--anns KejjrilieU foi* ifluovance, kc,

[The oppressions and irreejularities committed by Notaries and Messengers-at-Aims, during the
reign of King James V, were frequently visited with the most exemplary punishment, and in most of
these cases, they were accompanied by deprivation of office. Frequent instances of this have already
been given in this Collection, but the Editor cannot refrain from introducing in this place, a piteous
' Supplication,' ' by one of them, to the Lords of Privy Council, as iin example of the lamentable straits
to which some of these unlucky functionaries must have been reduced, pending the necessary enquiries
into their conduct. — ' My Lordis of Counsale, vnto 50ur lordfchipis huimlie menis and fchewis I
30ur feruitour, Patrik Duncansone,' notar publict. That quhare 50ur 1. ordanit me to produce
befor 30U my prothogoll buke,^ quhilk I did ; and fenfyne,' at 50ur command, I liaue remanit in ])is
toun, and hes fallin in hevy infirmitie, and my expenfis failieit ; and, as I traifl, my gudis at harae
wafted and fperpalit,' throu my abfence, becaufe I departit fa fchortlie to ]iir pairtis, and left nane to
ouerluke ]>e famin : And albeit I Iiaue happynnit reklefly to vary in fie dait of my Inflrument, ]ie effect
jiairof is of verite ; and (I) neuircommittit lie negligence of befor, hot (am) repute and haldin in all
\ie cuntre quhare I duell, ane trew and autentice^ manne. Quharefor I befeke 50ur 1. that, for ])e
conlideratioun foirfaidis, ^e will deliuer me my faid Prothogoll, and licent me to pafs hame, fen my expenfis is failjeit, and myfelf feiklie and evill dilpofit. And 50ur anfuer huimlie I befeke. — [Indorsed.]
Apud Edinburgh, tercio Decembris, anno /"". V- xxxvij. The Lordis Ordanis ])is complenare to
compere befor Jie Juftice Clerk or his deputis and fynd fouertie, ]'at he fall compere befor our fouerane lordis Juflice or liis deputis, and vndirly Jie law for all fie crymes as falbe imput to him, ])e thrid
day of )ie nixt Juflice-aire of Jie fchire, or founer, vpoune xv dais wai'nyng, vndir Jie pane of ane
hundrethe pundis ; and jie fouertie beand fundin,' ]ie Lordis ar contenttit ]5at he depairt hame as he
pleife.']

Feb. 26, 1538-9. — JohnGairley and fifteen other Meffingers-at-Arms
Convicted of common Oppreflion of the lieges, in the falfe and unjufl exercife of
their office — fruftrating them in their juft actions, through their ignorance.

Thomas Thomsoune and fixtene others were likewile deprived of their offices
for the fame caufe.

Feb. 28. — Martyne Balkesky ' found caution to appear and underly
the law on Mar. 7 next, ' for breking our fouerane lordis Proclamatioune, in
vfing and haifing of fic bukis as ar defendit {pro//ibi/ed) be pe faid Proclamatioun,
vndir pe pane of ane thoufand pundis.' — Mar. 7. He came in the King's will,
and found Sir John Campbell of Calder, kn'. Arch"* Williamfoune, burgefs of
Edinburgh, and Robert Hoppringell, burgefs of Peebles, as his cautioners,
under the ' pane of ij" li., that he fall abide and fulfill ye Kingis grace plefour
and will.'

1 From the Original preserved among the Warrants of Court. ^ Or Robertson. ' Protocol

— an official Register, into wliich each Notary was bound to insert an exact copy of each Instrument
drawn up by him. Any vitiation of this book (which bore faith in judgment) was deservedly punished
with severity ; indeed, the oft'ence was considered as an act of Peijury. * Since that time.

^ Dilapidated, scattered. O. Fr. Eijxirpillee. Lat. Spargere. ^ Tenty ; careful. ' Walter

Ogilvie of Boyne became cautioner for him, 8 §ee Remiseion, &c. in Appendix to this reign.

VOL. I. f 2 E

218 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538.

Supplication of Martyne Balkefky to the Lords of Privy Council}
My Lordis of Couufale, vnto qour ). liiiimlie nienis and fchewis I, sour feruitour, Martyne BalKESKY, burges of Edinburgh, That quhare I wes laitlie put in ftrait Ward within ])e Caftell of Edinburghe, for quhat fait or caufe I knaw nocht ; bot allanerlie," becaule I refuifit to deliuer my MatvneBUKE to pe Officiall of Loivthiane, at his firft command ; howbeit, in ])at inftanttyme, but' ony delay,
I offerit \ie famin to him : Quhareupon I menit ' me to fE Kingis grace, and his hienes referrit lie faid
mater to my Lord Coadjulour of Sanctandrois, and declarit his niyud J'airintill to him, to be determinit
be 5our 1., conforme to juftice. Herefor, I befeke 30ur 1. to haue confideratioune (of) me ; and fen
I wes never reput ane gret trefpafl()ur, that 30 will ordand me to be Httin to fredome ; and Jiaireftir,
I fall find fufficient cautioune and fouerte, in prefence of jOur 1., to enter befor quhatfumeuir Juge,
fpirituale or temporal!, at ony terms or diet, fie as 56 pleife to fet and anfuer, for ony maner of fait fat
may be impute to me, anent ))e denying of my buke to ])e faid OflSciall. And 3our anfuer huimlie I
befeke — [Indorfed.] Apud Edinburghe, .r;^' Decembris, anno I">.V'. xxxviij. The Lordis
Ordanis fis complenare te fyiid fufficient cautioune to ]<e Justice Clerk, fat he fall compeire befor
our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis, quhen and quhare he falbe chargit, to vndirlie ]>e law for
breking of J>e Kingis grace Proclamatioune, anent fame vfand bukis difchargit be fe faid Proclamatioune, vndir fe pane ofl"'. ti. And fe faid fecuritie and cautioune beand fundin, the Lordis Ordanis hira to be relaxt furth of Ward, and put to fredome.

Mar. 17. — Fergus Makdowell of Freuche produced a Refpite from
the King for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of John Makculloche, in Mochrame, of forethought felony. — Gilbert, Earl of Caffillis, became furety to fatisfy
the parties.

(j^ppiTSiSion — ji^amrsurfuii — «rattlr--stralini3: — ^toutfjrftf, ^r.

Alexander Makculloche of Cardernes, John M'cuffe, William
Makdcalye, Gilbert M'culloche, and ..... Gilchrift, came in the King's Will
for art and part of the forethought felony and OpprefTion done to Archibald
Carnis and Henry his Ion, coming upon them with great Convocation of the
lieges, armed in Warlike manner, within the Sanctuary of the Paridi Church of
Anvethe, and cruelly Hurting and Wounding the faid Henry, to the efiiifion of
his blood ; committed upon Jan. 12 laft. Item, for art and part of the Stouthreif
and abflraction from Gilbert Regall, furth of his fet of the lands of Drummuklok
and barn thereof, 100 bolls of horfe-corn, and 20 bolls of oats ; committed within
the laft three years paft. — Delivered in Ward to the Captain of Ed'. Caftle.

The faid Alexander alfo became in will for Stouthreif from James Makane of
lixty llieej), five cows, and one mare, furth of Ardwell ; Ifem, from Thomas Makmore of a black horfe and a mare, furth of Kirkmabrek : Ife»/, from Sir Adam
Snerles, Chaplain, of feven head of cattle, furth of Camray : Item, for forethought

This Supplication had previously been presented, and deliverance passed thereon, on Dec. 16,
15.38. Reference may also be bad to tlie Notice and Papers relative to the rigorous proceedings
adopted against the early Reformers, I, * 209, &c. = Alone, only. = Without. " Complained.

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 219

felony, Opiireffion, aud Hamefuckin, done to John MakcuUoche, on his lands of
Aiichinlare : Item, for Stouthreif from him of eight oxen and a co'.v, from various
of his lands : Item, from Gilbert Ker, of a horfe : Item, for Oppreffion of the
faid John MakcuUoche, deftroying a plough, and Wounding his iervants, &c.
&c. And for common Oppreffion of the lieges. — James Kennedy of Blarequhan,
and William M'"clellane, Tutor of Bundby (Bomby), became fureties for his
fatisfying the parties, according to law.

asailfull (Srrror on Assise.

Alexander Stewart of Garulefe (Garlics), John Murray of Brochtoun, the Lairds of Garthlaud, Miretoun, Murdoch, Blairquhan, Roffie-Bonar,
the Tutor of Bondby, and others of lefs note, found caution to imderly the law
at the next Juftice-aire of the lliires where they refided, for Manifeft and Voluntary Error on Affife, declaring Alexander M'^Ctdloche of Cardernefs and his
accomplices innocent and acquitted of art and part of the Mutilation of Henry
Carnis, of forethought felony : And for declaring Fergus M'^dowell of French
and his accomplices innocent aud acquitted of the Murder of Andrew Schankis,
and fundry other crimes of Oppreffion.

^toutl^rrif anU ^ouscibitalunfj:, in time of Pague, in Ptiti), ^r.

Apr. 21, 1539. — Gilbert Blair, brother of Alexander Blair, burgefs
of Pei'th, Conftantine Ferguffoune, Sir John Luivell, chaplain. Sir Henry Eldare, and Sir William Dauidlbun, found caution to underly the law at the next
Juftice-aire of Perth, for forethought felony and Hamefuckin done to the Keepei-s
of the Gates of Perth, in time of the plague, coming upon them under iilence of
night, on Oct. 24 laft, ftriking and Hurting them in peril of their lives : And
for breaking into and plundering leveral houfes and chambers, by way of Theft
and Stouthreif.

May 22. — William Ja^niesoun, called JVantoun WUl, Convicted of
art and part of the Slaughter of John Forbes, coming upon him at Preftounjiannys, and flaying him with a ftone. — Beheaded.

^Iau0l)trr of X^t HaiiU of Curntitrrt).

[The following Case affords an illustration of the expediency of having the whole of the Warrants
and loose papers belonging to the High Court of Justiciaiy carefully examined, arranged, and bound
up for future consultation. The great mass of such documents entirely precludes the possibility of
the Editor, or any other private individual, consulting them. They have, apparently, for more than a
century, been put into bundles, without the smallest reference to date or subject; and it would certainly require many months to reduce them to order. It seems obvious, that among these Papers many
documents must exist, highly illustrative of the Criminal proceedings which took place for a great

220 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539period of time, and might even throw light upon many obscure points connected with the History of
Scotland. A number of Royal Letters and Warrants, bearing the sign-manual of King James
V, have already been found, which, it may be remarked, are seldom engrossed in the Record ; for,
doubtless, the Clerks of Julliciary could, at the time they were granted, easily refer to them when
required. In the present instance, the original scroll of the ' Dittay,' the ' Supplication,' and King's
Letter had been left in the Volume, and they have accidentally survived the changes and chances of
nearly three centuries. They are given here as a specimen of the information which we might have
expected in every Trial, had these Records been always valued as they now are.

In many Cases of the greatest importance we may still expect considerable light to be reflected from
these documents, when properly arranged.]

May 23. — James Reid Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter
of John Reid of Trumberry, coming upon him and Haying him of forethought
felony. — Beheaded.'

Dittay. — James Reid, 3e ar indict aud accufit for art and pairt of J)e felloune and cruell Slaughter of vmq'" John Reid of Trumberry, cumand vpone
him in his avin landis of Darndougall, in company with 3our fader Johne Reid,
and 5our complices, to ])e nowmer of ix perfonis, one f>e xxiiij day of Aprile laft
bipaft ; and cruellie Hew pe faid vmq''' Johne, apoun auld feid and forthocht
fellony, and be way of Haniefuckine : Jjat 36 comitit pe faid Slauchtir vpon prouifioune and foirthocht fellony, 50 being at ])e Wappin-fchawing in Are, quhen
all 50ur nychtbouris left ])air jakkis behind ])aim, je faid 36 wald nocht leif 3our
jak behind 30U, for 36 wald haue ado with 3our jak and wappinnis at hame : pat
36 comitit })e faid recent Slauchter vpoun auld feid and foirthocht fellony, 3e pe
faid James and 3our faidis complices, at Whitfunday laft bipaft, fett vpone pe
faid vmq'^ Johne, at pe Leyn-heid of pe Schaw, for his flauchter ; and quhen he
efchaipit fra 30U, and quhen J^air was ane concord and Avay dewilit to be had
betuix 30U, 3e faid ' }5air fuld be may " betuix 50U, quliill ' ane of 3our fkynnis
wes cutit.' Item, one pe Sounday before pe committing of pe laid Slachter,
50ur fader cumand fra pe Kirk of Machlyne faid to Johne Vdart, ])at he could
get na way dreffit betuix him and pe faid vmq'^ Johne, for pe heicht of his
Ibnnis : And Jjairefter 56 and 30ur faid comjilices lay continewlie on pe Mofs of
Darndougall, awaitand pe faid Johne for his flauchter, fra pe Monunday quhill
Furifday,* fiat 36 flew him : And on Jje day befoii', 36 flew his ferwandis doggis
Jjat flveyit ' 30U quhare 3e lay : And quhen 3e faw him cumand, 36, pe faid James,
and 3our bruj^er, ranne befoir 3our fader and flew him ; and 3e war hurt and
woundit in })e meyntyme, and had fled with pe remanent, war nocht 36 war
hurt, and pafllt to ane bank," and was fundin be James Logane, Sheref-depute
of Are.

' This ia the entire entry in the Record. ' For mai?; more. ^ Until. ■* From

Monday to Thursday. = Descried, detected. ^ Balk, which generally denotes a reserved

ridge, or stripe of grass between tilled lands, such as are very common to this day in many parts of
England, where each alteniate ridge is left in pasture.

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 221

Letter by King James V. to the Jitjlke, &f.

Rex,

Justice, Thefaurer, and Juftice Clerk, Ve greit 50W weill. Forfaymekill as it is hwmely raenit
to vs be our louit James Raid in Helar, that quhair pair ves ane Slauchter committit in his defens,
and becaufe our Scheref of Air-principale is frend to ]ie manne jiat is flayne, he lies fend bymme to
be juftefeit by 50W, and hes furamond an Aflife of J>e contre quhair fe allegit crynie ves committit,
bot tendis ' to tak certane priuat particular perfones pat var takkaris and conwoyaris of hymme to
^ovf to be on his Affife, and fo to put hymme to deid, he beyng innocent, be ane fufpect Affife. Our
ViLL is heirfor, and ve charg 50W, gif it be as is befoir reherfit, fat 36 fuperfeid for xx or xxx dayis,
quhill - ane infuifpeett Affife may be gottin ; and keip hymme in firmans ; or put himme vnder grit
fouerteis in fe meyne tyme. And Jiis je faill nocht to dovv, kepand ))is for 50ur warrand. Subfcriuit
with our hand, at Sanct Androis, f e xij day of Mail, and of our regnne fe xxvj 3eir. James R.

Supplication htj James Reid to the Jiijike, <§c.

My Lord Justice, Juftice Clerk, and 50ure Deputis, vnto jOure 1. huimlie menis^ and fchewis I
30ur feruitour James Reid, fone to Williame Reid in Clare : That quhare, laitlie, I wes gangand
vpouue my faid faderis maling* of Clare, perteining to my Lord of Melros, Hand in fe lordfchip
of Killfmure, within )ie fcherefdorae of Air, vefyand ' ]>e famen, and my faid faderis gudis ^ gangand
pairon, traifting na troubell of ony perfonis, bot to have levit vnder Goddis peax and fe Kingis :
Neuirtheles, Johnne Reid in Cogertoune, his wife, fonnis, and complices, to fe nowmer of ten perfonis, bodin in feir of weir, come iij mylis fra fair avne houffis, vponne auld feid and forthoct felony,
and be way of Hamefukkin invaidit and perfewit me and my faid fader and his feruandis for his
flauchter, and chaceit him and his catale and ws of his faid maling: And in fe chaceing of ws fa
hurt nie in my bak ; And quhenne we turnit agane to defend ws, fe faid Johnne, in his awin defalt,
and oure pure defence, happynnit to get ane ftraik, my vnwitting; throw ]ie quhilk he is deid, and
my inemeis and vnfrendis of verray malice allegeis fat I haue f e wyte ^ f airof, quhilk is nocht of
verite, hes callit me f airfore before your 1. to put me to cummyr' and troubill, without ony lauchfuU
or reflbnabill cans. Heirfore I befeke your 1., for Goddis fake, of remeid :'" And fen" I am ane
pouer child,'^ innocent of fe faid crime, and hes na manne to do for me, bot God and 50ur 1., and
knawis nocht fe personis fatt fuld be vpoune my Affife, that 36 avife wele quhame'' 3e put faironne ;
and caus Jiame, be fair grete aithis, declare gif ]iai be kin frendis or allia to my party or his frendis,
and hes gevin fame partial counfale in my contrare ; and do me juftice, and cauffe ane man of Law
fpeik for me, as je will haue thank reward and mereit of God, and of 50ur awin faulis fairfore. And
jOur anfuer huimlie I befeke.'*

Conbogins anU ^^ujjplnintr of fxiav asailltam HktXoww''

Rex,
Justice Clerk, 36 fall deliuer fe tua menne of Abirdene, 36 ane callit Jame Andersoune, and
fe vder Johne Mwdy, furthe of our Ward,"' quhilkis war put in f e famyne, for convoying and fuppleing of Freir Williame Kelour; fe faidis perfonis fyndand 30W fufiicient cautioune till entir

' Intends, means. ' Until. ' Complains. ' ' Mailling,' a small farm held on payment of certain

mails or rent. ' Inspecting. ^ Live stock. ' Off. ' Blame. ' Difficulties. E. Cumbir.

'** For remedy or redress. '' Since. '^ A ' puir Cheild,' a poor lad or fellow. '^ Whom.

'* There is no indorsation or ' deliverance' on this Petition — but from the fatal words ' Conuict.,' ' Decollat.,' being
twice entered in the body of the Record and on the margin, there seems no doubt of his having been Beheaded.
" Orig. among Warrants of Court. See Papers as to proceedings against suspected Heretics, Jan. 1538-9. '' A

similar Warrant was granted by the King on March 2ij preceding.

222 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539agane, ony tyme J>ai be requirit, betuix ])is and All Hallowmefs iiixt command, onne fyftene dayis
warnyng, be 30U, or fair Ordinar ;' vndir fie fowmes as 56 think expedient ; Prouiding, Jiat pe faid
John Mudy pafs nocht benorth'^ ]ie waiter of Tay, vndir fouerteis ficlyk. Subfcriuit at SanctANDROls, Jie feird^ day of Junij, and of our regne ]>e xxvj 5eir. JaiMes R.

#ppiTssion — annprisonmrnt ot ti)t Commissarn of CiTit|)nrss.

Juii. 6. — William SuTHiRLANDof Duffois' Convicted of art and part
of the taking of Sir Alexander Gray, Commiffary of Caithnefs, leading him to
the Place of Querrehvod, pertaining to the faid William, and keeping him in
ward and captivity from the vigil of Chriftmas to Saint John's day following,
he being the King's free man ; thereby iifurping the King's authority. Item,
of art and part of forcibly carrying back the faid Commiirary againft his will
from the faid Place of Qiierrelwod to the burgh of Elgin, and delivering him to
the Dean of Caithnefs, (Sir Alexander Sutherland) ; alfo thereby Ufurping the
King's authority.^ALEXANDEE, Suthirlamd and fix others were Convicted
of laying violent hands on the faid ConimifTary, in the outer bedchamber of the
Dean of Caithnefs, committed on Dec. 20 lafl : And for violently taking the
faid ConnnifTary furth of his lodgeing in the houfe of Archibald Stronoche, in
the burgh of Elgin, undir filence of night, he being in his naked bed ; and leading him to the faid Dean's chamber, and detaining him in captivity therein till
the vigil of Chriftmas, See. Item, of art of carrying him back by force from
Querrelwod to the burgh of Elgin, &c. Warded in the Caftle of Edinburgh.
Sir Ai,exander Sutherland, Dean of Caithnefs, and four other Churchmen, Mere replegiated by Patrick Bifliop of Murray. — Mr John Sutherland
and James Vrquhard of Alderue found furety to vnderly the law for the above
crimes, at the next Juftice-aire of Elgin.

tistiia a falst anij forstU Jjnstrumntt

Jun. 13. — Thomas Charteris of Kinfawnys Convicted of art and part
of ufing a tForged and ffalfe Inftrument, made by his confent and counfel, being
an acquittance or difcharge of a certain large fum of money affigned by THE
King to James Rofs his lervant, due to his Majefty by the deceafe of Alexander
Bifliop of Murray, as liis heir ; or granted to THE King by the privilege of THE
Pope. — Warded in Edinburgh Caftle, during the King's pleafour ; and all his
moveables to be efcheated.

The bcfore-nuiitioncd ])r('viovis A\'arrant corilains this clause, ' and alfua fo compeir befoir ]e
Bifchop of Ahirdvne Jiair Ordinar, quliat tyme |)ai be requirit he hiin.' ° To the northward of.

^ fourth. ' He found caution on Jun. 7, that he should remain in free Ward within the Castle

of Edinburgh, ' and nocht elcliaip nor depairt furth of J^e faid Caftell, quhill he be freid be })E KiNGia
grace, vnder |ie pain of I"'li.'

26Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 223

Supplication to the Lords of Privy Council}

Jun. 14 My Lordis of Counfale vnto 50ur 1. huimlie meuis and fhewis I 50ur feruitour,

Tlionms Chatteris of Kynfawnes, that quhair I am laitlie imput in )ie Caftell for fobir- caufis, as I
vnderftand, and lialdin in to ane houfe ; and ]ie Capitane, Conflabill and Kepars of pe Caftell will
nocht futfer my I'eruandis to cum and repair to me, to ]'e eflect fat )iai may minifter to me in meit and
drynk and all vjier neceffaris ; liowbeit, I am content to fynd cautioune fat I fall nocht evaid furth of
fe faid Caftell, vndir lie panis as 5our 1. thinkis expedient. Quhairfore, I befeik jour 1. of remeid,
and fat je will gif command to fe Capitane, Conftabill, and Keparis of fe Caftell, to put me to fre
Ward within fe faid Caftell, I fyndand cautioune fat I fall nocht evaid furth of fe famyne vnder iic
panis as ■;our 1. fall think expedient, and to fuffir my feruandis to cum and minfter to me like as vferis
fre VVardaris hes within fe faid Caftell. And jour anfuer huimlie I befeke. — {Indorjed^ Apud
Edinburghe, xiiij' " Junii anno I^V'^xxxix. Fiat vt petitiir, Cautioune being fundin to fe Juftice
Clerk, vndir fe pane of r"li.

^ufftrtntj: (Jrujjlis]^ Cfjitbrs anU Captibts to wcape.

Jul. 21. — Alexander Hepburne of Quhitfum got a Remiffion for
permitting and fuffering Clement and Robert Hall, brothers, and Thomas Pot,
Engliflimen, to depart furth of his place of Richartoun, they having been
delivered in cuftody to him as captives and Thieves. — William Cokburxe of
Chollie and Stephen Bukles came in the King's will for fuffei-ing Anthony Pot,
Englifliman, in like manner to efcape.

23rtaiung; into tijt Coijon- of (irntsitie — ^toutI)rtif, $rr.

Jul. 24. — William Cuming, Margaret Dowglafs, and four others, were
denounced Rebels, and put to the horn, for art and part of Convocation of the
lieges in great number, armed in warlike manner, coming to the place and Tower
of Ernfide, and breaking up the doors and gates thereof, and entering therein :
And for Stouthreif from Alexander Cuming, fon and heir apparent, and the
curator of Thomas Cuming of Ernfide, his father, of all the goods and utenfils
in the faid houfe : And for detention from him of the faid Place and Tower :
And for Stouthreif from him furth of the meffuage thereof, of one hundred and
fifty-fix bolls of corn, with the ftraw, eight oxen, and two horfes : And for Common Oppreffion, &c.

Hairb c( fltlacfarlnu aixH miaXttv Mattnvlm of SliUleisfije.

Jul. 27. — Duncaxk Macfari.ane of that Ilk, procured llirety to
the amount of 1000 li. in terms of the King's permiffion, contained in the following Warrant.' The cautioners were Sir Johne Campbell of Lundy, kn'. Sir

' From the Orig. among the Warrants of Court. The purpose of printing this Paper, is to show,
practically, the manner in which what was termed ' free Ward' was obtained, for the accomodation
and comfort of ])risoners, whose oft'ences were not very heinous ; and who had influence enough to
find high security, that they would not attempt to escape, if this indulgence should be granted to
them. * Trivial, trifling. ^ From Orig. among the Papers of the Court.

5

224 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539.

Johne C. of Calder, kn', Johne C. of Glenvrquhar, Colyne C. of Ardkynglas,
James C. of Lawaris, Archibald C. of Glenlioune, and Arthure C. of Ardgartlinay.

Rex,

Traist coufing and counfalour, We grete 50U bertlie weill. Forfamekill as we wrait to ^ow
of before to relTauc Duxcane Makfarlake of fat Ilk, to keip bim furely in ward, qubil 5e bad
v]>er command of ws in ]>e contrare, Now, it is our wil and raynd pat be be in fre ward witb 50W as
je tbink expedient, lie findand fouute to our Juflice-Clerk, vndir fe pane of ane Tboufand ti. nocbt to
brek ward ; quliilk gif be dois, it falbe impute na fait nor cryme to 50W. Gevin vndir oure Signet and
fubfcriuit witb oure bande, At Falkland, fe xxv day of July, and of our regnne fe xxvj 3eire.

James R.
(^Addressed) To our traifl coufing and counfalour James Lord Ogiluy.

In a short time afterwards, as appears from another Royal Warrant which is
still preserved among the Papers of the Court of Justiciary, a similar indulgence
was granted to AValteii Macfarlan or Audleish, of whom were descended
the families of Gartartan and Ballaggan, &c.' He was son of Sir John Macfarlan
of that Ilk, kn', by his second Marriage, with a daughter of Herbert, first Lord
Herries, and uncle to Duncan M. of that Ilk. The AVarrant runs thus :

Rex,
Justice-Clerk, We grete 30U weill. Tn bope fat Walter Macfarlane, now being in
fure Ward witbin oure Caflell of Edinburgh, fall caus bis frendis in Jia partis do gude feruice to ws in
it, committit to fame, We baue ordinit fe Capitane of oure faid Caflell to let bim to fre ward witbin
}ie faniin, be findand fouirte, firll, to 30U, vndir fe pane of Tbre Tboufand pundis, fat be fall nocbt
efcbew furtb of our faid Ward : Qubilk 5e faill nocbt to tak of bim ; and faireftir caufe bim be put
to fre Ward as faid is. As je will anfuer to ws fairupoune. Subfcriuit with oure band and vndir
oure Signet At Sanctandrois, 56 vij day of Augufl, and of oure regune 5e xxvj ^ere.

James R.

Another Warrant was two months afterwards addressed to the Justice-Clerk,
which, however, does not indicate the crime for which the parties were imprisoned.
It is likely the offence was of a treasonable descrijition ; at all events, it was very
serious in its consequences to the parties concerned.

Rex,

Juftice-Clerk, It is our will, and we charge 30U fat 36 reflave fouerte of Duncane M<'farlane vnder fe pane of ane Tboufand pundis, and ficlyke of Walter M'farlane vnder fe pane of
Tua Tbouliind pundis, fat f ai fall entir agane witbin ony Cailell we pleife, vpoun xv dayis warning :
And fat 3e reflaue iij or iiij perfounis, ilk ane for fair awin pairt, fouirte for f e faid Walter ; and fe
faid fouerte being fundin, fat ^e caufe fame (to be) fred furtb of Ward, and late faim pafs bame, to
f e effect ]iat fai may do ws gud feruice in our nixt Juilice-aire to be haldin in Dumbartane. And fis
je faill nocbt to do ; keipand f is our Precept for 30ur Warrand. Subfcriuit with our band, and vndir
onr Signet, At Falkland, f c tent day of October inflant, and of our regne fe xxvij 3eir.

James R.

(Oct. 13.) — Andro Lord Awendale, Henry Lord Methwene, and Sir
Johne Hammiltoune of Fynnart, became fureties for Walter M. of Ardleifche,

' See Douglas's Baronage, p. 93.

26Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 225

for 3000 li. (Oct. 24.) — Sir Joliiie Campbell of Lundy, kn', became furety for
Duncane M. of that Ilk, under the pain of 1000 li. in implement of 'the King's
Precept.

drive--mtstn(r — ajurning tijt Cobju of ^rlJorljfirfl — Pontius.

Oct. 4. — John JVrRoBEUT M'Farlene,^ Duncan Dow M'Kippoune, and
Duncan IVrKillop, Convicted of art and part of Fire-raifing and of Burning the
Town of Ardochbeg, and for common Theft and ' Sornyng.' — Hanged.

astsircjing: ti)t ^omt of ^ummn*tiain — ^laucjTjtft, ^c.

Dec. 16. — John M'Ewin M'^GILLEBREID, Gillepatrick M^ferquhar,
Tormat Mcdonald, Alexander M^gilbetoune Makane of Rafa, and fifteen others,
dilated for ' Ipe Aflegeing of Alexander Makcloid of Dunvegane in his Houfe of
Summerdaill, in pe moneth of ]\Iaii laft bipall, and Slauchter and Refe committit
be ]>anie ])at famyn tyrae vpone him and his tenentis ; and vj)eris grete crimes
contenit in ])e Letteris.' — Johne Myeloid of Myn3enes, in the Ille of Skye, became
furety for the again-bringing of the Letters duly executed and indorfed, on Mar.
6, 1539-40.

33oofes of ^tijotintaL

[The loss of the Books of Adjournal,- during an eventful period of
nine years, embracing the close of the reign of King James V, and the commencement of that of ^Iary Queen of Scots, is singularly unfortvuiate, as
many important public events are known to have taken place, and, during such
stirring times, there would doubtless be numerous Trials. All the traces now
remaining of the proceedings which took place before the High Court of Justiciary, must be gathered from the necessarily meagre notices which occur in the
' Liher Plcgiutionis J. d. it. Regis et Regine,' wherein memoranda of the Bonds
of Caution, or furety found by persons accused of crimes, were engrossed. As
will be seen, the Editor has, as usual, availed himself of all the information
which he could glean from these and other authentic sources ; but, in all those
instances, tlie authority is uniformly quoted. The narrow bounds into which
the Editor must compress this information, demand that these notices shall be

' On Jan. 7, 1539-40, Robert M'gilphatrik M'^ferlane, ' in warda exi/Fen. infra Cajlrum de Dunbertane,' found surety to undeily the law for all crimes vviiich mirrht be laid to his charge at the next
Justice-aire of Dumhartan. Tiie nature of his crime is not alluded to. - It is very probable

that there are two Volumes lost, perhaps only one. The series of Volumes, as indicated by the oldest markings, is very incomplete, and many of the Books which now remain are the scroll or jotbooks, from which, with the assistance of the Dittays, &e. the Record was afterwards made up.

VOL. L f 2 F

226 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539-40.

condensed as much as possible, leaving it to the enquiring reader to refer to the
various original sources of information indicated in this work.]

Mar. 2, 1539-40. — The quhilk day Williame Lord Sympill, of his
avne confent, fTorfamekiil as our fouerane lord of his fpeciale grace and favouris
hes grantit his Reniiflioune to Robert Maister of Sympill, fone and apparaud are to "Williame Lord Sympill, now being furth of his realme, fugitiue fra
his lawis, and at his home for certane grete crynies, Prouiding ))att he fall na
maner of way cum nor repare within Jse realmes of France nor Scotland,
without he obtene his gracis Licence and beneuolence })airto : Tharefore, ]je faid
"Williame Lord Sympill is becumen, and, be ]>e tenour of pis prefent Act, becumis
plege and Ibuirti; to oure fouerane lord, and his Juftice Clerk in his name, Jjat
pe laid Robert fall, fra pe tuenty of Marclie inftant, abfteue fra cumiug and
reforting within pe faidis realmes of Scotland and France, and all pe boundis
J)aii-of, any maner of way, without fpeciale Licence of our faid fouerane lord,
vndir pe pane of Five Thowfand pundis : And gif pe faid Robert fail';eis ony
maner of way herein, it falbe reput to him ane poynt of Trefoune, and fall incur
pe panys f»airof, and to be pvnift Jsairfor at our fouerane lordis will.'

Caufion for Soutflas of ^^arfei)rali's son.

Mar. 11. — James Earl or Morton, George Douglas of Pennyland,
John Inglis of Lauglandhill, and Mungo Inglis of Wintermure, became fureties
for William Douglas, in terms of the following "Warrant.
Rex,

Justice Clerk and jour deputis, it is our will, and we charge 50W, )iat incontinent eftir ])e
ficlit hereof je reffaue fufficient cautioune and fouirte of Williame Dowglase, fone naturale of
James Bou-tjlafejumtyme of Parhhede, ])at he fall remane with our coufing James Erie of Mortouiie,
and in his feruice, quhare he plefis, as in our Ward ; and nocht to efchew I'e farayne, vndir fe pane
of V'ti., and regifter ]ie famyne in ))e Bukis of Adiornale. As 50 will anfuer to ws pairupoune ;
kepand ))is our writing for jour Warrand. Subscriuit, with our hand and vndir our Signete, at
Edinburghc, Jie xxvij day of Fehruare, and of our regne ]>e xxvij jere. [James R.]

Caution for tijao ^ons of €umi)n(r of ^Umt,

Mar. 13. — Alexander Cuming and James his brother, fons of Alex.
C. of Alter (Altyre,) ' now being in Warde within pe Caftell of Edinbur',' found

there is this marking subsequently inserted on the margin — ' Delelur de Mandato Dotnini Guberyiatons. perfuamjubfcriptiomm manuakm etfignetum:

27 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 227

furety that they ' fall reraane be-Northe Jje Northe Watter of Eflc, in Warde,
induring our fouerane lordis will," under the pain of 1000 merks.

Caution for 3ao6crt, Cljristiita, anU ^uitfan iiflacfarlan.

May 10, 1540, {apud Dunhertane) — Robert M'feulane, ' in Ward
within ])e Caftell of Dunbertane,' found George Striueling of Glorat, John Sympill, young Laird of Fouhvod, and Donald Campbell of Ardintene, as fureties for
him (100 merks), that ' he fall obferue and keip gude reuU in tyme cuming, and
compere and vndirly f)e law, eftir Jje forme of our fouerane lordis writing direct
to fe Juftice Clerk.' — Jun. 12, {(qmd Edinburghe.) William Mafter of Glencairne became furety (1001.) for Cristina M'ferlane ; and alfo, on Jun. 30,
(300 merks) for Duncan M'ferlane, to the fame effect. They are both
delcribed as then being ' in Ward within ])e Caftell of Dunbertane.'

iToiestaUuttj mxH iUsrating;*

Aug. 6. — Peter Buntyne found caution to underly the law * for J)e
Oppreffioune done vpouue our fouerane lordis liegis, awaytand be ])e way vpone
nolt, fclieip, horfe, and catall f)at ar cvimand to faris and mercatis to be fald
)?airin, and byand J)e famin fra avnaris jjairof ; and Jjaireftir, bringand Jjame to
pe famyn mercatis, forftalland and regratand thame to our fouerane lordis liegis,
takand Jjairfor ane grete and exorbitant price, to J^e vniuerfale fkayth of J^e cuntre.' — James Geddes became in will for ' bying of xiij fcheijj ]>& faid day
cumand to J)e Houfe of ]>e Mvre, and forftalling of Jje mercate.' He found furety
that the flieep ' falbe furthcumand to |)E Kingis proffeit and behufe.'

l^itjT) Crrasoit — CveasonaliU Conspiraci) iuitl) tije 23oti£lassrs

against X\)t king's itifr.

Aug. 16. — No traces appear in the Criminal Records of the Trial of Sir
James Hammilton of Finnart, kn'. The event, however, is one so prominent
in the History of the country, and Sir James was a person of such notoriety,
that it seems projjer to preserve some brief notice in this Collection. ' The.
Baftard of Arran' was jn-inciiJal Stewai'd to King James V, and had been very
high in favour with his royal master. His character appears to have been eminently distinguished by personal valour, intrigue, and tyranny. Letters of
Legltiimdion had been granted to him so far back as Jan. 20, 1512-13 ;' and
through the influence of his father James, thejirst Earl of Arran, and the
King's personal favour and friendship, he acquired very extensive Estates.

' Other Letters were afterwards granted to himself and to Andreto and James, his natural children
by Mariot Stewart ; and also to Alexander, another natural son, Nov. 2, 1539. Reference may be
made to the Appendix for numerous circumstauces illustrative of these events.

228 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1540.

One of the greatest stains on his otherwise cruel and ambitious career, was the
treacherous INIurder of the Eari. of Lennox at the Field of Linlithgow,
Sep. 4, 1526, after that distinguished Nobleman had surrendered himself prisoner.

Without entering on a sketch of any portion of his life, which moi-e properly
belongs to tlie Historian, the Editor merely refers to the following quotation.
BisJiop Lcslei/^ also remarks, that, ' befoir his executione, he proteftit before
God, that he had not oflendit THE King ; hot afBrmit, that gif he had bene als
guid a fervant to God as he was to the King, he had not dyet fo fliamfully ;
and confeffit that he defervit that deitli, becaus he ofTendit God oftymes for
piealbur of tlie King ; and theirfore prayit every one to talk exempill of his
doingis I'

He married Margaret Lev'mgstoim, Lady of Easter Wemyss. He was executed as a Traitor at Edinburgh, August 16, 1540 ; and his immense estates
were Forfeited, and bestowed upon numerous Courtiers. In 1543, his son James
obtained a recall of the Forfeiture.

' About tlie fame tyme James Hammiltou>^, Scheref of -Lixlithgow,' aud cowfing german
to Sir James Hammiltoux (of Fixiiart, baftaiil brother to the Earle of Arrane,) com to Scotland, eftir long bauifcliincnt, quiiill as he avowid to accufe Baftard James be law, purchefllng Licence
to com in the contrey for a certane fpace ; and vndertlanding quhat dainger baith himfelf and thofe that
profeft the pure doctrine of the pure Gofpell fliule in, fend his fone to the King, being in jornay
towardis lyff, tjulio com to him befoir he boited"" and frauchtit. The man, Aifpitious of natour with
bafcbfull newis, affirmeing that it ftude him to no les nor^ his lyff, perrelous to the haill realme, wnles
he prereined* the deid be punifchment of the Tratour.

' The King, quho haidid to Fyff, fend the ;oung man back againe to the Excheker ; quhair he
commandit James Lrirmorilli, his Maifler Iloulhald, James Kirhcaldie, Grit Thefaurer, baith men of
fum lleligiouD, and Thomas Erjkine, ane earned Papeift, Secretar, to convene, willing thame to credeit that beirer as him felf ; and thairwithall tuik ane knawin ring from his finger, and fend to thame
as ane previe taikin. Tliay, confulting vpone the mater, aprehendit James Ilammiltoun, immediatlie
efter his denncr, and reddie to depairt hame to his awin hous, caryid him to the Callell, and impreifonid
him. Tliay, wnderftanding be thair exploratouris,7 that the King was moveid, vpone fute,^ to releive
liim, befydis the coninmun dainger of the contrey, ffeiring thame feluis, gif ane factius puifTant man,
ignoMiiniullie vfid, fonld efcaip fcot-frie, not ignorant how bitterlie and crewellie he wald reveng himfelf; repairing wilb all cxpediiionn to Court, agmenting all thingis alfe fufpitiouflie as thay poffibillie could, the prcfent dainger, his mifchevous naturall,'^ his ied<lie wit, and grit fubdance, perfwadit
THE KiKG iml to releive a man baith craftie and bauld, and now provockid be ignomie, vntryid.
Quhairwpoun, the King pad fird to Ed^, from thence to Seytoun, commanding in the meintyme to
prefcnt Sir James Hammiltomi of Finhurt to judgment; quhilk, according to the cvdome of the
realme appointid, he was convict and Beheidil. Eftir liis death (he was) quarterid, and his quarteris
hung wp wpoun the publict pairtis of the Towne, in Awgwfl 1340.

' Hanr.alijne. Club Edit. Quarto, p. 1 j8. ' Buchanan, Hook XIV, cap. 57, gives a .similar account of these

trans.nctions with this N'arrativi-, which is taken from Andetsiin's MS. Adv. Library. See also AViM's Hist. p. II,
and Pilsciillir, p. 38.5, &c. ' .See I'aiiiTs pretixod to Notices relative to Iteforination of Religion, .Tan. 1 1, 1538-9,

1, • iOO, &c. The Sheriff was brother of Patrick Ilammilton the Martyr, to whose execution ' the Bastard Arran'
)iad been mainly accessory. ' lioated, took ship to cross the Korth. ' Than. " rrevcuted. ' Spies,

emissaries. * Suit ; inllucnce used. • Dispositions, genius, bent

28JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 229

The crynies laid agatiis him war, that he wpon a day determinid to brek vp the Kingis Chalmer
to flay him ; (and) that he had previe conferencis with the Dowglassis, declaird enemyps of the
realme. His deatii, hecaiis of his former wickid lyff, was lamentid of verrie fewe, except of his awin
freindis and the Preiflis, who had fixt the Iioip of tiie furetie of thair liaif eftait in him.

Eflirtliis tyme, the King beganne to fufpect the Nohilitie. Solicitude pincliis his troublid mind ;
quhilk wnfettillid, was trublid in the nicht be villounes ; quhairof ana is repoirtit of, verrie notabill.
He thocht he faw Sir James Hammiltouii of Finliairt com vpone him with a naikid fword, and firft
cutid his right airme, and nixt his left from him ; and eftir he had threatned, eftir fchort fpace, alfo to
tak his lyf, he evanifchid. As he awalkid in ana fair, and reuolued vpone the event of the dream,
fchort fpace eflir, he was adverteized that baith Jiis fones war deceifid, the ane at Sanctandrois, the
wther at Striueling, on ane day, and almoft in ane hour.

^laiitj^tec at a dfiiar.

Dec. 14 — Friar. William Rothuene found Robert Robertfone of
Strowane furety for his underlying the law at the next Juflice-aire of Perth, for
art and part of the cruel flaughter of Friar Alexander Sloune.

Caution for #ir gaialtcr ^cott of 3ii-an.tl)elme, fenisljt.

Mar. 11, 1540-1. — William Earl of Glencairn, John Hume of
Coldaneknollis, George Meldrum of Fivy, James Twedy of Drummel'^eare, Mark
Ker of Littilldeane, Andrew Ker of Dolphingtoun, George Ker in Fawdounfyde,
James Ker of Merfingtoun, Ninian Creichtoun of Bellyboucht, Adam Johneftoune of Corry, and John Carmichaell of Medowflatt, became Cautioneris for
THE Laird of Branxhelme, ' now being in Warde within ])e Caftell of
Edinburghe, })at he fall remane in Warde within pe burghe of Jie famyne, and
nocht to depairt Jjairfra, without he obtene Licence of our fouerane lord, vndir
]je pane of xx". merkis.'

(Aug. 8, 15 il.)— Caution was again found, that he, ■ within viij dayis
nixt eftir he be chargit, pafs and remain in pe pairtis of Murray, and vtheris
be-Northe pe Watter of Spey, as in our fouerane lordis Warde, iuduring his
will ; and nocht to efchaip furth of pe famyne,' under the pain of 20,000 merks.
— (On the margin) — ' Deletur cle Mamlato domhie uojire Regine, per Juam
fvhjcript'ionem, tlomini Gubernatoris, et Signetnm dicte Regine.'

Cauttoit for Soijnstouit of tijat MIt.

Mar. 13. — JoHNE Johnestoune of that Ilk found caution that ' he

fall remane in Warde within J)e Tovne of Dunbertane, and Jiat he fall nocht

evaid nor efchew ])airfra, ay and quhill he get oure fouerane lordis difcharge in

J)e contrare, vndir \>e pane of x". merkis.' '

' His cautioners were William Lord Creichtoune of Sanchare ; the Lairds of Littledene, Coldaneknollis, Mersingtoun, Dolphingstoun, and Fawdounsiile, David Scot, son and apparent heir of Sir
Walter Scot of Branxhelme, kn' ; William Kirkpatrick of Kirkmichael ; William Rl'clellane of Nwntoune, Tutour of IJondby ; Alex. M'culloch of Carderness ; Adanie Johnestoune of Corrv; John
Hammiltoune, called ' John of Cliddijdale ;' John Haitlie of Mellostanes ; and Colin Campbell of
Ardkinglass.

230 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1542.

(May 3, 1541, npnd Jedbm-ghc.) — He again found caution that ' he fall
vfe and repare ane niyle about ])e Tovne of Dunbertane, as in our fouerane loi'dis
warde,' under the pane of 10,000 1. Among others of the new cautioners were
William Stewart of Trakware, John Mow of that Ilk, Walter Ker of Cesfurde,
Robert Scot of Howpaflot, and Gilbert Ker of Grenehede. — (Nov. 24 and Dec.
4.) — The King's Wan-ant was granted for again allowing him free Ward
within the lame limits, under the pain of 10,000 raerks.

Caution to pass twxi\) of tijr rtalm.

Mar. 13. — ' PATKiK Culquhoux, now being in Warde within ])e Caftell
of Edinburghe,' found Thomas Stewart of Gawftoune cautioner or furety for him,
' J)at he fall pafs furth of Jjis realme within ])e fpace of xxx dais, and remane furth
of J)e famyn at Jje plefour of Jje Kingis grace, vndir ])e pane of V. merkis.'

Caution for ti)e itairtr of Blarfuitrlrer*

May 5 and 6, 1541, {apiulJedburghe.) — Joiix Hume of Blacader found
furety that ' he fall remane within ]?e Tovne of Dunbertane, fredom }iairof, and
ane myle about the famyn, and uocht to extend ]>e boundis J)airof, quhill our
fouerane lord gif vthir command in \>e contrare,' under the pain of 20,000 1. —
His fureties were fimilar to the preceding, with the addition of William Cokburn of that Ilk, John Hoppringill of Smallcraig, George H. of Torwodlee,
Robert H. of Blyndlee, Adam Johneftoune of Corry, George Nefbett, baroune
of Dal5ell ; John Lummifdene, young Laird of Blenerne ; Andrew Haliburtoune,
young Laird of Mertoune, and Thomas Ker of 5are.

Caution for tijt ^ountr %mti of Culitrubg,

Jun. 28, 1542. — John Striueling, fon and apparent heir of John S.
of Tuliduvy, ' now being in Warde within \q Caftell of Edinburghe,' found
Dauid Kincaid of the Cottis, Conftable of the Caftle of Edinburgh, &c., fureties
that ' he fall obferue and keip his Warde within J)e burghe of Edinbur', and
nocht efchew fiu-th of })e famyn, quhill' he be fred be our fouerane lord, vndir J>e
pane of ij"^ merkis.'

(Oppression—* Colping/ dforestatlina antr l^rsratinffof iWarluts*

Jul. 7. — John Cef.ijk, in Drumcorfe, and a number of other perfons in
the fliires of Linlithgow and Lanark, found caution to underly the law for
' Colping,- Forellalling, and Regrating' and for common Oppreflion of the lieges
in buying and lolling oxen, cows, and flieep.

' Lentil. - ' Cotrpwy is a phrase still in use to denote bargaining:, bartering, or exclianging

one commodity for aiiollicr, or for money. A ' Iiorse-cowper' is a term universally employed in Scotland for one who deals in horses.

2Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 231

APPENDIX.

APPENDIX,

ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE TRIALS WHICH OCCURRED DURING THE
REIGN OF KING JAMES V.

I. Illustrations selected from the Register of the Privy Seal of Scotland.

Referring to the observations which are prefixed to the Appendix to the
preceding Reign, the Editor has merely to Remark, in this place, that in order
to save the necessity of numerous repetitions and copious Notes, he has thought
it preferable to refer the reader, generally, to the Trials, &c., most of which
will be found to be more or less illustrated by the following extracts. The
General Index, to be inserted at the conclusion of this work, must ultimately
render such references entirely unnecessary.

Aug. 23, 1515. — Ane Refpit,' maid be avife of jiE Governour," to Bonaltf of t]&e Mii of
itodjalt]^, iftn^t., and with him vther thre fcoir of perlbnis, his kynnifmen, freindis, or fervandis, for
all maner of actionis and crimes bigane, to cum and repare to Ed", or ony vjier place within ])e realme,
to comraoune with fe faid Gouernour, and do jiair eirrandis, and returne agane ; for fe fpace of Ix
dayis next to cum eftir ]>e dait hereof.

Sep. 6. — A Refpit maid to Lauchlane Makclane of Doward, and Alexander alias
Alijier Makcloid of Dunvegane, and all and findry Jiair fervandis, landit men, gentilmen, and
jemen, pat affillit and tuke part wyth Jiaim, for pair trefonable art, part, affillence, and fiipple gevin
in pe trefonable ^tgtutg anU talu'iicj of pe Ittngf^ CaStcIIid and Houfes of Carntiog and ^mu
i'k&ii^, and trefonable withhaldin of ]iaim aganes his autority and command ; for Jiair trefonable mantenance, affillence, confale, favouris, and fuple gevin be paiin to HonaXtl %\ii of ilotjaltljc, ftltnt.,
and his complicis, in pare trefonable crimes, &c. Vnto pe firft day of Januarc ni.xt to cum eftir ))e
date hereof to indure.

Sept. 23. — A Refput to Matho Maknacht of Dungenche, for arte and parte of pe
^Tauci)tff of vrnqi"^ SSoJllt of HJunljar of liflofjjfum, committit and done be (Schir) Alexander
Gordoune of Kenmure, Kny'', with quhara pe faid Matho was in cumpany : To endure for a 5ere.

Sept. 25 Refput to Alexander Lord Gordoune to cum to t{)C CSobtrnouvfji presence,

or quhare he plesis, and to pas and repas with xl or fifty men, in Jioufhald ; for pe fpace of fex mouethis
next to cum.

Oct. 26. — Refpit to Johne Erle of Levinax, Lord Dernlie, and generalie to all his kyn,
freindis, men, tenantis, and fervandis, quhaireuer pai be within pe realme, t^at aibift^ faitjfultu at

' Another Respite was granted on Nov. 8 following, in the same terms. ' John Duke or Albany.

232 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1515-16.

APPENDIX.

tijc opmfotint of tijr ^obernmiv, in }e Kingis name, and kepis lele and afald ' pairt to hym for
an maiur of artlom'S, >kc, committit or done be liym or fame in ony tyine liigane. For five seris.

Oct. 28. Lettre to Hew Erle of Eglintoune, makand him and liis affiynais ItepariJj

ouerfearis, correkaris, and luplearis of tht 3ii\c of BLitilT Conictai?, J'e dere, tunyngis " and wild beftis
being Jiairin, quhill ]iE Kingis perfyte age of xv^ere; beeaus Robert Huntare of Huntarelloune,
Fonedar of beretaee of j'e faid Ile, is noclit of power to refift ])e perfonis ])at waiftis fe famyn, without fitple and iielp, &c.

Dgc ]. RemifTion to John Makkenze of Kyntale, William Dingwell of Kyldun, and

two others, for treafonably STafeing ailB Kffptng the King's CaStIc of IBiuglualC, with the Artillery and goods tlierein, &c.

Y)ec. 7. — lii'fiiitt to Andro Retra of Balnocard, for art and part of ])e ^Tailtjjtef of
Dauid Blare ; ' committit thre jeris fyne with ]>e mare.'' For thie 5eris.

Y)ec. 11. — Relpit to James Erle of Arane, Lord Haramiltoune, with his honorable Howfhald, to cum to ]ie burglie of Ed', or ony v))er part within Jie realme, and fare to remane and tom«
nninc loi'tlj tijt SloitJ (Solrrnour, and Lordis of Counsale, and folift and do his leiffull eirrandis
he hes ado ; and fautlie and I'uirelie to pas and repas, with his faid howiliald, &c. To endure |)e fpace
of xx" days. (Subfcript. manibus Domini Gubernatoris et Dominorum Consilii, viz. ComitiBUS, Cravfurdie, Huntlie, Levenax, Rothes, Eglintoune, Cafiillis ; Dominis, Flemyng, Cancellarij,
(Epilc.) Dunblanen., Rofle, Lyndefay, Erfkyne, Maxwell, Prloris S. Andree, Abbatis S. Crucis,
Archidiaconi S. Andree et Poftulati de Duufermlyng.)

Jan. IG, 1513-16. — Lettre maid to Kateryne Fynne, for hir gude and tliankfull fervice
done in ].e f.uvgiiig, foStcvfiis, anU fusing of vmqi'^ Jie Kingis broker, aieyautftv |)n'nte of
^COtlanB, for all l>i' dayis and termes of hir lyf, of x ti., &c.

Jan. 2'J. — Refpit to Robert Elwald of Redeheuche, Williame of Lauerokftanis, his
brujier, Henry Nikloune, James Forellare in Grenehauche, and Adam Crol'er, and with Jiame vferis
xl perfonis, fare kynnifnienne, freindis, or fervandis, for all maiJfr o£ actlOlttS, &c.

Feb. 2.— Rcfpit to Dauid Ramsay, brufer to Neifche Ramfay of Bantfe, for art and part
of I'e ^laatjtcr of vnu)'' Dauid Blare,^ committit in Effindy thre seris fyne, &c.

F,.b. 3. — Letter to Robert Lord Maxwelt,, conferring on him ' fe office of ^ttiuartvg of
KirJtCllllijrutljt, and licpuig »f our CaStclT of ffrcfff, with fe landis, fyfchingis, feis, and dewiteis
perteniug fairto ; for ].e termes of nynetene 5eris, wythout ony paing^^ of males or dewiteis fairfor.

Feb. 4.— Remidion to Robert Lord Creichtoune of Sanch«uhare, James Lokart
of Ley, Edward Creichtoune in Libree, John C, brother german of umqi'^ Robert of Kirkpatryk,
Robert C, fon of unui'' John in Eliok, Patrick C, fon of umq'<' John in Carco, and feven otiiers, for
the afattgljtcr of SanirS IDouglaS, committed within the burgh of Edinburgh, on forethought felony :
And alfo to John Ha he in Gliiiquory, John H., fon of Nicholas, and Donald H. in Garglenne, for
the ^laugljtcr of .lolm Dwnc, committed within the barony of Sanquhare on forethought felony.

IVb. 8 Ri'fpi'ct to NiNi ANE (reichtoune, brufer germane to vmq''' Robert C. of Kirkpatrik,

and George C, lor j.e fovtijocljt (flon« anS ^lautljtcv of vmq'' lloiitvt jTrguSsouiu of Jjraton.
iliat, and Alexander F., brufer to vukj'^ Jolme F. of Cragdarraucht. For xix 3eris.

JEo f/ic— Remidion to George Blchquhannane, grandfon and heir apparent of Walter

B. of that Ilk, Thomas and Walter B., and Walter Blare, for treafonably aSc^ifgflig, taking, and

' .Sincere; litorally, onefold, single. " The deer and rabbits. ' See these Extracts, Feb. 2, 1513-16.

• And liirther at the Governor's pleasure. ' See these Kxtracts, Dec. 7, 1315. " Any payment of

rent, &c.

4Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 233

APPENDIX.

detaining tj&t CaStIc of IBunicrtaite from the King, and his keepers thereof:' And for JFivf
rafeing: and Burning the gates and doors of »5rCH0ft, and certain buildings within the lordlliip of the
Monastery of Kilwynning.

Mar. 6. — Remiflion to George Forman in Kihnany, fpecially named in the Signature of
Remiffion granted to John Earl of Levenax, for art and part of the treafonable JStSicging, taking,
and detaining the King's Cattle of IBttnbertanc from the King and his Keepers thereof: And for
the ^lauglbter of John Burte, committed within the hinds of Kiluieny.

Mar. 7. — Speciale Protectioune to Johne Makcane of Ardnamurchane, Alexander
Johne Caynochis-fone, Donald Makrannald Wane, Nele Maknele of Geya, Angus Johne-Dowifon of
fe Loupe, famflt'arisi anS SerbantitS to Coft'ne CFrIt of ffirgtie. To endure for fe Gouernouris
will.

Mai'. 28, 1516. — Remiffion to James Smythe, indweller in Jedburghe, for the SilaugStCC
of John Pagin, ^fagf'platitr,- committed nine months fince.

Apr. 8. — Refpect to Walter Ogiluy, and Johne Syme his fervand, for ]ie §(aut|)ttr of
Johne Piot, Crolniier ttijputc within the fcherefdome of Forfare. For thre 5eris.

Apr. 14. — Remiflion to James Makcalzene, burgefs of Edinburgh, for his trra^onablu
C?rjorttng goltf antt SiXbe r, coined and uncoined ; and for treafonably Cltpjiing anH Cutting tl)t
coin of the realm, 8cc.

Apr. 16. — Remiflion to David Kynloche, as an aflifter and participator with 9!rt|&ii)anj
©arl of SSnguS, Lord Douglas, in the High Treafon committed by him.^

Eo die. — Remiflion to Henry Andersoune, in Newale, and feven others, as afllfters and
partakers with arr]&l6ani CFarl of 3ngu5 in his treafonable facts, viz. for ?^igl) tStvtSion committed
by them againfl; t]&t SSing'S pvoptf }JCr5on, and his brother ii)t ISuftc of 3l\OSS5, perfuading and
ufing their utmofl care and diligence to take them furth of the Castle of Stirling, during their
minority, where they had been placed, and were ordained to be kept, by the advice and confent of the
Governor and three Efl;ates of the realm, in Parliament : And for all other crimes, &c.

Oct. 19. — Remiflion to David Wemis of that Ilk, and xxxiij others, for art and part of
the ^lau£]^ter of William Mofl'et, committed on forethought felony.

Oct. 27. — RemiflTion to George Haitlie of Brumehill, and Thomas Cranftoun of Doddis,
for their treafonable art, part, and '^iiiitunct given to vmq'= ^leyanttfV itorlf ^ume,' in his treafonable Inteicommuning with the King's Rebels, Thieves, and Traitors,' &c.

Oct. 28. — Letter to Robert Lord Maxwell, makand him Capttant anS Mcparc of ti)e

' James Muschet of Colgartbe, mid seven other servants of John Earl of Lennox, also got a Remission, of this
date, for the same crime. ' Hislrioiiis. He may have been a Mummer or Butfoon. The mention of ' Playarisare frequent in the old Records, Treasurers' Accounts, &c. ' Many others were Remitted for the same

offence, but, except in the cases of persons of distinction, it seems unnecessary to enumerate them. "' Alexander

Loan Home, and his brother Mr William Home, were beheaded at Edinburgh, Lord Home on 8th, and liis brother on
the following <lay, 9th October, 15IG, and their heads were affixed on the Tolbootli. As a specimen of the contempt
which our older writers seem to have entertained for chronological accuracy, Lesleij (p. 107.) mentions the 8th,
Buchanan (xiv. 7.) says the 1 1th, and his authority is lollowed by Craicfurd in his Officers of State (p. SSi.), &c.,
and Sir James Balfour (I. 2'13.) fixes the SGth day of October, 1516. PitscoUie and others do not mention any
date. The Peerages follow Lesley's authority. See "Wood's Peerage, I. 735, &c. Those wjio are most familiar with
the Chronicles, will easily recollect more serious discrepancies in matters of much greater moment. On Jul. 21,
1520, George Home, brother to the deceased Lord, came to Edinburgh with a great company, and in presence of
the Provost took down the heads of his two brothers from ' the Toll>uithe gavcll, quhair thay war fixt with iron.'
They returned on the 25th, and ' causit solempne funerall an<l obse(iuies be maid in the Black Frijers, for the saulis
of the saidis Lord liwme uad his bruder ; quhairat thair wes greit <rffcriugis and banquetis maid, and returnit hame
to thair awin dwellingis.' Lesley, 116. See also these Extracts, Oct. 12, 1528. '^ Several other Remissions

were granted for the same crime to persons of no note.

VOL. I. f 2 G

234 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1517.

APPENDIX.

CaSttll of Eoribmabane, with fe peninentis, gevand him power, portaris, and gevillouris ^ to deput,
&c.

Oct. 30. — Refpit to Lauchelane Makintoiche, and to ]>e nowmer of xl perfonis with
him, for all crimes and oftenfis committit be him or Jie faidis perfonis; and to tum antt rommownt
to(ti) tliC ^owernour anH ilorBt'S of Coun^ak, anent all materis he and ])ai hes ado ; and to pas and
repals one liorlbak or one fute furelie, without liarme, &c. To indure for ))e fpace of xl dayis next
eftir ]>e dait Jiairof. . .

Oct. 31. — RemifTion to Andrew Toichoche (of Monyvaird ?), Laird of the fourth part of
the Lands of Maggye, fpecially named in the Signature of Reraifiion of James Earl of Arran,
Lord Hammiltoun, &c., for withholding and IBttauitiig t\)t CaStlt oC S^ammtltoune againft the
Regent's authority, &c.

£o die. — RemifTion, with confent of the Governor, and tlie Ratification of the three eftates of
Parliament, to Thomas Huntare,'- for art and part of 33t)8tfging anH tafeing fijt CaStIf anU
iJIacE of (SlaSgoio, breaking and taking the King's Artillery, and warlike flores therein: And
for treafonable Convocation of the lieges, ' in feir of weir,' agaiull the forefaid Castle and town
OF Glasgow, and the lord Governor, reprefenting the perfon and authority of the King.

Nov. 8. — Refpitt to William Elwald of Larestanis (Laverockftanis), and feven others,
and generalie to all v))eris fair kinne and freindis of ii)t (illannB anH ^uriiauuS of CPltoaTH, and
als to ]iir v])er perlones fair kynnifmen, &c. for quliara J'ai war bundin and hes deliuerit plageis, viz.
James Foreflare and forty-feven others, for all maner of crimes of ffrc^OUltt, ^Iauc]&tcr, IRcffi^,
?i}crrsri)tppi5, &c. For ]ie fpace of ane ^ere.'

Mar. 12, 1516-7. — Remiffion to Alexander Makloid of Dunvegane, and all his kinfmen,
friends, and fervants, &c. for their affiftance and fupply given to ISonalB of tjjt Me$ of 31.otI)aIt]b,
knight, at the time of his being with Alexander Lord Hume, in his treafonable deeds : And for
all other crimes, offences, and actions whatfoever, without any exception.

Eo die — Remiffion to Lauchlan Makclane of Dowart, Donald Makclane, Gillewin
Maknele of Barra, DuUeife Makwidy of Vlua, Neill Makkynna of Moifnes, and Lauchlan Makclane
of Argour, and all their itin^JJlfll, &c. in the fame terms as above.

Mar. 14. — Remiffion to John Makclane of Lochboy, and all his kinfmen, &c. as above.
—On Mar. 8, he got a Gift of the rents and duties of the King's lands of CTeree, to be held by him
during the office of the Governor, for his good and faithful fervice done and to be done, and for
inbringing the King's Rents of the Southfide of Ardmurche, excepting fuch lands as pertained to John
Makcine of Ardnamurchane.

Apr. 8 — Refpitt to Alexander Trottare, and fix others, for ])alr treflbnable art, parte,
and ^iiiitantt gevin be Jiaira to vmq'^' 3lc)rant(Cr itorti ^umc, his brejier and complicis, for treafonable Confpirationis contrare pE King, his derreft coufing, Tutour and Govemour, and his realme, and
vl)eris Jiair evill dedis ; and for all vjieris trelfonable actionis, &c. without exceptioune. To indure for
)ie fpace of xix 5eris.

Apr. 24) — Remiffion to Sin William Cunnyngiiame, knt. Master of Glencarne, fon
and heir apparent of Cuthhert Earl of Glencarne, and xxvij others, for the cruel ^latigj&ttr of iWr
iHalljcU) itloiUgonun), Archibald Caldwell, and John Smyth, committed on forethought felony:
And for the ^luvtfng of Sojjn (iifla)5ftl- of) ittoiltgomtri), fon and heir ap])arent of Hugh Earl of
Eglingtoune, &c.

' Jailers. O. Vr.javilkur. ' Many otlicrs got similnr Remissions, &c for the same crimes. ' A great

number of Nyksounis, IIenuersounis, &c. got a similar lhj»iiite on Nov. 20, 151G.

12JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 235

APPENDIX.

May 18.— Refpitt to all and findry ])E Kingis liegis of ti)t Cknnijj aittl ^urnamfe ai
SrmStraitg and ffaTiOUr, and all pair kynnifmenne, freindis and feruandis, and vjieris dependand vpone
jiaim of lie CXanni^ of iLiUai^ltaTe, nolo UuellanS in ii)t J9ei)ata6Ie itanU antJ SiiaoUaf^, fat will
deliuer to ])E Gouernour fuificient plegis to remaue for gude reule, quhair ]iat falbe aflignit : To
indure for fe fpace of a 5ere next to cum.

Oct. 3. — Refpitt to Williame Borthuik of Crukstoune for ])e ^TatJtJtfr of vrnq'^
Vchtred Kincaid. To indure quhill Jie firll day of Apvile nixt to cum.

Jul. 21, 1522. — Reraiffion to Williame Cokburne, ' fon and heir apparent'^ of Williame
C. of Langtoune, for art and part of the treafonable gilaugljttV of Mv iitntjoni) ^HVttit St la
33aSti), ftnt-/ Guardian and Lieutenant within the bounds of Louthiane and Mekse: And
for affifting the committers of the faid Slaughter, after committing thereof: And for abfconding with
them, ' red-hand :' And for art and part of affifting Ymq'<= Alexander Lord Hume, &c.

Oct. 23, 1523. — Remiffion to Mr James Kynninmont for the ^laugjtet of vmqi" Alexander
Kincaid, &c.

Mai-. 18, 1523-4. — Remiffion to John Retray of Leichehill, for the ^-lauijjbtrr of Soijn
<3Lrtic^to\int of Sirufinntc.

Sep. 6, 1524 — Lettre to Robert Gib of ]ie Gift of ti)t ^ttuUt of ^tfropmattStStp' to ifjt
Kfng, during ]>e Kingis will.

Sep. 11. — Letter to Robert Lord Maxwell, and James Stewart, brother germane to
Andro Lord Avandale, ' at ]ie takin of our autoritie riall and goueniment of our realme apon our lelf,'
makand ]>e faid Robert Pttnn'palt tfajJltatie, and \>e faid James ^rt'nctj^alt iticutcnailt, for all }ie
dais of pare lifis, of our (SarBt, BattDc, ailB Cumjiang of KiEagcouriS,^ baith Fut-men and horsemen.

Nov. 14. — Refpitt to James Twedv, fone and apperand aire to John Tuedy of Drummeliare,
and to vferis xvij perfonis, for ])e cruell ^laugl)tf r of bmqlt Sioljnne ^Lortt ;ffUmsnQ, and trelfonable
Taking and ^artSonjJltg of itlaltomt ittafStrr of dJ'lemmtg, his fone and are, Jie Kingis fru man,
in priuate Prefoune : And for JSctf of certane gudis fra ]iame and Jiare feruandis, ])e famyn tyme :
For ]>e fpace of ane ^eire to indure.

Nov. 22. — Lettre to Elizabethe Lermonthe, Jie relict of vmq'"" Maister James
Wischart of Petterrow, Cltr6 of 3u^ticiarit anti StUbotate to ])e Kingis grace, and to ]>e
faid Elizabethe fmall faderles barnis, to help to put fame to proffitt, for Jie faid vmq'^' Maifter James
gude and thankfull feruice done to Jie Kingis hienes, and his derreft moder, ])E Quenis grace, of tlie
Gift of the Mariage of Johne Wifchert, fone and are of Jie faid vmquhill Maifler James ; and fail3eing
of Jie faid Johnne be deces vnmarijt, Jie mariage of ony vjier are or aris, &c.

' These words are struck out of the Record. ^ This French knight had been appointed Lieutenant and Warden
of the East Borders on the execution of the Eakl of Home, which gave great ofl'ence to the Scottisli nobility, who
naturally felt jealous of the appointment of foreigners to offices of such distinction. In the absence of the Governor,
in France, the Hovies got up a mock Shge oft/tt^ Castle of Lamjholm for the purpose of drawing out the Lieutenant.
Their plot succeeded, for De la Sastie MVlJuitbar with a pretty strong force, but fell into the hands of David Home
of Wcdderburn, who sui-prised and killed him and four other Frenchmen, and affixed his head on the Tolbooth at
DuNSE, on Sep. 19, 1517. See Lesley, p. 110 ; Balfour, i. 245 ; and P'Uscottiv, p. 307, which last author, in his
usual quaint style, informs us, that * being ane stranger, and not knawing the ground Weill, he laired his hors in ane
mos ; and thair his enemies cam vpoun him, and slew and murthered him ven'ie vnhonestlie ; and cutted atf his head
and carried with tbame. And it was said that he had long hair plett in his neck, quhilk David Home of AVedderburne knitt to his saidle-bow and kcipt it." The Scottish writers strangely disfigure the name of this distinguished
individual. He is called Bawty, De la Beaute, Bautie, and finally, old Pitscottie distances them all, by dubbing
him TiLLiBATiE ! ' Stirrup-holder. ^ Hired or waged soldiers ; troops serving for pay.

236 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1526.

APPENDIX.

Nov. 22, 152.5. Precept of a Letter to Nicholas Craufurd of Oxingangis, making

him JiU'SttCC Clfrfc.

Feb. 21. 1525-6. — Remiflion to John Keith of Ravynxiscrag, and Thomas Dalgamoche,
for their treafonably aiiiBfng from the King's anm'fS at JfloWounf , EiEfvlt, and ^ulSuap : And
for art and part of the ^Iaugl)tfr of Gawin Murray, Andrew Stratoune, William Forbes, and John
Smythlioune, &c.

May 12, 1526. — Refpett to Alexander Hoppringill of Burnhous, John H. of fat
Ilk, James and George, fones to fe faid Alexander, James H. in Newbotill, and Charles MunaV; for
]>e ^Jaugjjtcr of ymq'"" Williame Thomefone : For xix 5eris.

May 30. Refpett to .John Murray of Strowane, Dauid his broder, Jone fone of Patrik

M. in Dunfally, Andro M. of Abirochill, Williame M. fon of vmq''^' Alex. M., Johne M. fon of Dauid
of Lorhland, and Johne Moyll ^oungar, for J>e ^laugjtfrf^ of vmq''^ Newin Dewar and Dauid Phillane ;
For ]ie fpace of xix jeris.

May 31. — Refpett to Charlis Lowry for ]ie ^laugljter of vmq'' SHaUtr i3cU)Iantit5 of
tist 3Ift, &c. : For fe fpace of xix ieris.

Jun. 6. — Refpit to James Tuedy, fone and apperand air of Johne Tuedy of Drummeliai-,
Johne ))e Vaiciie of Kingfide, James Tuedy of Kirkhall, David Newtoune of Michellhill, Williame
Portuife of Glenkirk, and twelve others, for ))e ^Tautljtfrof vmq'''3)ol)n Stortt Jj^ltmung, committit
apoiie forethocht felony : For xix 5eris. (^At Striueling.)

Jul. 11. — Refpett to Johne Logane of Baluey', Walter his fone and apperand aire, Robert
L. alfo his fone, and feven others, for fair treflbnable ^^gegtncj, taking and withhalding of J)E Kingis
Caj^tfH anif fovtalftt of SuniSevtaite fra his fervandis, Keparis Jiairof, &c. : For ]ie fpace of xix
jeris.

Eo die. — Refpitt to George Buchquhannane of ])AT Ilk, and xxij vjieris, extract
furth of \e Refpitt of Johne Erle of Levinax for liis trefronabill ^SSfgtlig, taking and withhalding of our foucrane lordis (ffa^tlr auB ifortalltf of SumitrtfJie fra his feruandis, Keparis fairof.

Eo die. — Refpitt to (Schir) Johnne Colquhone of Luce, knycht, and Patrik Colquhone,
for the fame crimes.

Jun. 18. — Refpitt to Gilbert Erle of Cassilis, Lord Kennedy, &c., James and Thomas
K. his brethir. Hew K. of Girvenmanys, John, George, and Alexander his brethir, Dauid Kennedy,
eme ' to ]ie faid Erie, James K. of Knokdone, Johne K. of Giltre, Patiik Ahannay of Sorby, Berthilmo Craufurd of Kerfe, Robert, and Duncane liis bru]ier, Williame Cunynghame of Boquhanne, Robert Grayme of Knokdoleaiie, Gilbert his brufer, Johne Kennedy of Cul5ane, Gilbert K. of Balmaclannoehe,- Johne Bard of Kilhen5e, Patrik Muir of Cloncard, Johne Muir of Auchindrane, John Muir
Ills man, Jolm Muir of Wodland, Thomas Corry of Kehvod, Thomas his fone, Richert Makgee of
Myrtdune, Thomas Dauidfone of Grenane, Thomas his fone, Johne Ekiis of ]>at Ilk, James M''crynnell of Barneile, James Muir of Byngart, James Blair of Midill Auchindrane, Alexander M'douell,
Tutour of Garthlon, John Kennedy of Benone, Johne Ross of Drumgrange, Gilbert Kennedy, Jie
Provefiis fone, IVrgufe Makdowell of Freuche, and tiro hundred and llnrly-lhree others, for ]ie CrcSgonahlf ^latidjtrr of tiniqlc Conuliufi Be iHarI)cttma, Burlitnian,' in jie tyme of fe feit of our
Parliament; and for all crynie and actioune )mt may follow fairupoune : And for fe ^latltljtrr
of umq''- Martyne Kennedy, and Gilbert Makihvraithe : And for )>e SntCffOUUnonnng hjitjb our
IBticUiS being at onr liorne, &c. to ])e dait heirof. For xix 5eris to indure.

' Uiiclc. ' Ealmaclaimocliiin. ' See Jul. 1 7 fullowing.

13 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 237

APPENDIX.

Jun. 19. — Reraiflion to Robert Bertoune of Ouer Berntouue for liis trea<(onal)Ie absence
from THE King's Army with James Earl of Arrax, for rftobfri) oC tjbc CafitleS o£ l^umt anil
8Mctltieri)urne. And for his ahfence from the Army with the King auil Archibald Earl of
Angus for tafet'ng tj^t JJouScof CoTiranliiSjJctJbf, &c.

Jun. 20. — Precept of Remiflion to Sir Patrick Hepburne of Wauchtoune,Kn^, Patrick
Quhitlaw of that Ilk, John Hepburne of Weft Fortoun, William H. of Crag, Mr John H. and four
others, and James Wawane of Stevinlloune for their trcaSonalllc art and part and ^iiistnixtt given
to umq'"^ IDabiB l^ume of OTrtiDcifiurnf, his brothers, and accomplices.

,Tun. 22. — Precept of a Letter of Confirmation to Robert Lord Maxwell, of t^E ©fficfS of
^tctoarSri) of annanBcrSale and SSirfetuliirfgijt, and the iteepcr^Jtp of tlje CajStltS of ^otl)\iw
ianc anU (ITroff ; with the lands, fees, &c. thereto belonging.

Jun. 25. — Refpet to James Dowglas of Drumlanrig, James Gordoune of Lochinver, and
xxxvij v))eriB,J)airkynnifmen, freiudis,and feruandis, for arte, parte, and S^^stStante given to Sltj-anttfl"
dFortStcr, and vferis his complices, t^ijtidi mil} JTratourtS duelland apoue Etblll, in fair trelionable
dedis : And for fe ^laticJjtev of (Tljoniag JHactlellanf of 33ombj;,' committit apone forthocht felony,
within the Town of Edinburghe, &c. : For xix ;eris.

Eo die. — Letter of Gift of ]<e Efchete of |)e above perfonis to James Maitland of Auchiugaffill
and Michell Makquhan, burges of Edinburghe, coiunctlie and feueralie.

Jun. 28. — Remiflion to Thomas SiNCLARand John Hume, Bailies of Hadingtoune, and
generally, the Council and community, kc. thereof, for their trraSonablt art, part and aSSt:$taiTtt given
by them to umq''' ^ablU ?i?tnne of KBUctllJil'fiurnf, his brothers and accomplices, &c.

So die. — Refpett to Robert Lawder of Jje Basse for his trcaSonaJbTc assisting and
manteinjTig of vmq'^' IBabttI |i)umc of ffifif cBlltrburnr, being convict of Trefone, ]ie Kingis Rebell, &c. :
And gevand full Licence to ]>e faid Robert to remane at hame fia all Parliamentis, &c. and to pass in
fe pairtis beyond Sey, owper be fey or land, ony fpace and tyme he plefis ; For nyne 5eris, &c.

Jul. 1. — Refpet to James Erle of Arane, Hew Erle of Eglintoune, Andbo Lord
Avandale, Hew Campbell of Lowdoune, William Wallace, Tutour of Cragv, and
James Hammyltoune of Fynnart, knycht, with mony vjieris to ]te nowmer of V'" or Vj™ - fa
mony as ]ie faid Erie of Arane will verify, be his hand write, and niak faithe Jiairupoune, pertenis, or
ar menne or feruandes to him or Jiaim, flor )ie trtSSoiiaif e arvantng of 33attfl, 3*nSurrftttOUnf , antl
dFHlBing agan(53toimc Suite of aT6ang,$fC. aTutowr to]if Mmgi'S grace, piotcctouranB iSoueinourof his realine, cummand with ]iE Kingis auctorite, and his Baner being difplayit forjie tym, at
i3lUjlCV0Cel)lU, befiDlre ^la^gfaj J and for all cryme ])at may follow Jiairupoune : And for all vl)er
CreSont'S, ^Iauc]bten'5, &c. in ony tyme bigane, Trefone in ))e Kingis perfone, and arte and part of
fe ^laucl)ter of bniquljfle CFitoarb Cun^ngibamc of '^urljtn^&arbg alaneriie except. For ))e fpace
of xix 5eris.

Jul. 2 — Remiflion to Sir James Sandelandis of Caldor, kn', Robert Bruce of Auchinbowy, Richard Graharae, and twelve others, for the cruel ^laugliter of 3Same5 ^omcruile, committit
on forethought felony.

Jul. 9 — Remiflion to John Halkhede of Petfurane, Charles Denneft^oune, William
Spittall of Lewquhat, and twenty others, for the ^Taugi)ter of Jiojlt iSreff, committed on < fuddantie.'

' Sir James BuJfour says that he was slain by Sir John Campbell (of Calder) ; which person Lesley nonfounds
with the Laird of ' Maclane' (Makclellane. ) Annates, I, 258. Lesley, p. 136. See also these Extracts, Nov. 12,
1529. ' Five thousand or six thousand.

1

238 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1526.

APPENDIX.

Jul. 16. — Refpitt to CuTHBERT Erle of Glexcairne, Williame, Mailler fairof, James C.
hisbroder, Robert C. of Aiklieid, Robert Boyd of Portincoife, Robert C. 30ung Lard of Watterltoune,
Williame C. of Pojquharne, John C. of Capriutoune, Alexander C. of Laiglane, Edward Mure of
Middiltoune, David C. of Bertanebolme, Williame C. of Craiganis, Williame C. of Cunynghameheid,
Muniro Mure of Rowallane, Williame C. of Glengarnok, and Robert Boyd in Kilraeniok, for ]>air
trefonable art and part of SlSifgctng of ]>c CaStf II of ^tn'ucTt'ng;, in company with Johxe Duke of
Albany, fan Gouernor of )iis realme, )ie Kingis maill noble perfone being fairin, in his tendiraige:
And for jiair trefonable intrometting with ]'e Kingis perfone at ]iat tyme, in company with ])e laid
3)0J|]nr IDuRc of 3lbani), his Tutour, he being immediatlie to fuccede to him,' and noebt able' be fe
law, to have his perfone in keping : And for fair trf^onaBIe arramng oi attc dFfilB antl JJattale
aganis fe faid Jobne Duke of Albany, his Tutour, Protectour, and Govemour of his realme, and prefentand his perfon, at BfttntorSljin bfSnBe 6IaSgil) : And for fair trefonable ^iit^tin^, taking, and
Withhalding of his Cadttll of Suilftcrtanc fra his grace and his feruandis, keparis fairof. And for
all vf eris crymes of Trefone, Lefe-maieflie, actionis, transgreffionis, crymes and ofFenfis quhatsumeuer,
committit or <Ione be fe faidis perfonis, or ony of f aim, in ony tym bigane, vnto f e day of f e dait
heirof, without ony exceptioune. For fe fpace of xix jeris.

Jul. 17. — Refpett to William Lord Symple, Robert Maister Symple, Dauid and Williame, fonnis to f e laid Lord, Gabriell his brother, Johns S. in Auchinlodmont, Johne his fone, Johne
S. of Biigend, Robert S., Williame Fleming joung Lard of Baruchane, and Jobne Tyndale of fe
Laughe, and thirteen others, for f e trfSonaljIc S^IaufJittr of Covntlfus Be iVlar5tfcma,l3ucl)tman/
at fe Tolbuthe of Ed'', in tyme of Parliament, &c. For fe fpace of xix 5eiis.

Jul. 22. — Remiffion to Robert Gentilman and three others, for trciSonaBIg fovtl'fofitg antt
Bctat'nfng tijc CaStlc of ^tviutlfng, after the King bad fummoned it to be delivered up by his
Herald, he being perfonally prefeut to receive the faid Caflle, &c. (Apitd Jedbtirghe.)

Jul. 31. — Refpit to David Spottiswod for fe trefonable Coniiorattounc of our fouerane
lordis liegis, and vferis Rebellis, rratourt^anU JJnSltSmtn; Ridand throw fe realme ; ^CJfanB tl)C
Cartel! of ^tn'uilt'ng and ^Salarrof iLi'nlftljgto; arrayaiuUJattell aganis James Erle of Arrane,
ane of f e Regentis of f e realme, &c.

.\ug. 2. — Letter to James Earl of Moray', making him 3L(tutcnant<ScnfraIof tttt i2ortStnt parts of tijc Uingtlom, viz. The Shires of Abirdene, Kyncardin, Banf, Elgin, Forese,
Narne, Inuernys, and all other boujids from the North Water to Wyk in Cathnes. For five
years ; and farther at the King's pleafure.

Aug. 6. — Refpit to Johne Lindesay of Colby'ntoune, Rolland L. his broder, and four
others, for fair trefonable 9afj55ct and Dntertommoiliing with Robert Forestar and vferis, iSf;
bfHt'S aiiB Fralourfe.BucllanB bponr 3Lcbtn, in f air trefonabill dedis : And forfe cruell sTlaurijttr
of Siliniamr SLiUcfr of *tanfi)l)n'g, committit be way of Murthir, vndir fylence of nycht, in fe
Channone-gate of Ed^ : Attour Refpettis generally all liis liegis and fubditis fat hes ony wife Reflet
or Intercoramonit with f e faid Johne and his complicis, f ai being his Rebellis and at his home. For
xix jeris. — And with command to f e Scheref of Lanerk, &c. to relax ])e faid Johne, ^ic. fra f e procefs
of f e home, and reflave Jiaim to ]ie peax, and gif f aim f e wand fairof,'' &c.

Aug. 8. — Remiliiou to James Earl of Moray, Mr Mowat of Buchqulielly, Nicholas Rofs,
Ion of John Rofs of Auchloflln, and eight others, for art and part of the JUlbaSioil anB taking of

' Being the person ne-tt in succession to the Crown. ' Lat. hahilis, viz. being unfit ; incapacit.ited. ' See

Jun. 18, 1526, of these Extracts, Vol. I, p. • 236. ' For an explanation of that ceremony, see this Collection of

Trials, Oct. 11, 1531, Notice j Jul. 23, 15G6,iVo«f; and Nov. 18, 1511.

14JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 239

APPENDIX.

umq'" SteyanKtr dBnrl oi ^.xintUt, the King's Lieutenant, within the Burgh of Perthe, in company with iimq'"' William Erle of Errol, &c.

Aug. 16. — Refpet to Malcolm Lord Fcemyng, James Murray of Fawlohill, Gilbert Broune
of Thrapland, Andro Broune of Hartre, Richard B. of Cultermanis, Patrik Portuife of Halkfehaw,
Walter Huntar of Polmudo, Robert his broder, Thomas Kincaid of ]iat Ilk, James Kincaid ])e Lard
of Crympcramp, Robert K., Johne Mun-ay of Lewiuiihope, William M. of Sundhope, Johue BI. pe
gryfe, William Boyd of Bathinheucht, Robert his broder, Williame Carwod of ]'at Ilk, Williame Mur.
ray of Romannos, James Sandelandis of Boyll, and fixty others, ffor fair ti't;Sona&Ic 3)ntf rtommonpttg
with Alexander ForeJIer, Jonkin Storie, and vjieris J)air complicis, S^ligll^mcil anU STratoixrtiS, duelland vpone SttbilU ; and 3l\f SSct of Jiaim within fe lealme, f H tumt of (KHtfr, in trefonable wyfe. For
}ie fpace of xix jeris.

Aug. 17. — Commiffion of Jufticiary to Robert Lord Maxwell, conftituting him 31uSttt(ar
within the limits of his Office of Warden of tje Witii #Tart]&c5 : For five years ; and farther at the
King's plealure.

Sep. 5. — Remiffion to William Earl of Montrose, and xxix others, for art and part of
the ^latigjtcr of CJarlcS i^arrag, and others flain in his company.

Oct. 18. — Refpet to Robert Stewart of Mynto for his being with vmquhile Johne Erle
of Leuinax in ])e dFtfltt o{ Jttnlttj&gln.

Oct. 19. — Remiffion to Nicholas Ramsay of Dalhousy for the ^laugBttt of (Scovgt
ISatnSai) \)\i firotljtr ; committed upon ' fuddantie.'

Oct. 25. — Rex, We promitt faithfullyie, be )'ir our Lettres to our louit familiar Archebald
DowGLAS,' our Thefaurer, for his gude and thankfull feruice done to ws, that quhat tyme and how
fone Johne Lord Lindesay, now being vnder fummondis at oure inftance, for poyntis of Trefoune
imput to him, beis convict ))airof, and Dome of Fovfaltour gevin vpone him, his landis and gudis, that
we fall fan incontinent gyflf to ])e faid Archibald, his airris and affignayis, our hale (Sit^txt of tjjt ^afB
3>oi)ltf itoiD ^^xCBiia^ii lanSt'g anH jtiUfe; and fall infeft fe faid Archibald, his airis and affignayis, heretabillie, in all landis and annuellis with fair pertinentis haldin be fe faid Johne of ws immediatlie ; and fall prefent fe faid Archibald in tenent heritable to fe faid Johnnis vfer oure-lordis,* now
haldin be him of fame, and iall mak him be infeft of fe famyn ; and fall mak him alfua be anfuerit of
our efcheit of all ])e faid Johnis movable guidis, takkis, fteidingis, obligationis, and vjieris quhatfimieuer : And fan as now, and now as fan. We gyf be thir prefentis to f e faid Archibald, his airis and
affignayis, oure haill efcheit of f e faid Johnnis landis and gudis to be dilponit at fair plefoure, in cace
fe faid Johne beis fforfalt, as faid is. Gevin vndir our Priue Sele, and fubfcriuit with our band, At
Edinburghe, fe xxv day of October, and of our regne fe xiiij 3eir. [James R.]

Oct. 28. — Remiffion to Dauid Douglas of Pettindreiche and fifteen others for their
trtaSonablf tJtSettfng and Intercommuning with Buntan Cttntgn and his complices, Rebels and
at the horn, &c.

Dec. 27. — Remiffion to Adam Lindesay of Dowhill for ?^tg5 ffreaSoit committed by
him, by his perfuafion, labour, care, and diligence to talit tj&e i$fng and his deceafed brother ii)t
Suite of %\oii luxii) of tijc Cattle of ^tfvHng, where he had been placed with the advice and
confent of his Tutor John Duke of Albany and the three Eflates of the realm : And for treafonable
Coiiijoratton irn'tl) IBabitf ^tnnr of SMtMfrburne.his brothers, and their accomplices, Rebels and
at the horn, <S;c.

' The noted Sir Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, &c. For same notices of this remarkable person, who the King, in his youth, called his ' Grey-shill,' see Vol. I, p. * 19a. Reference may also be. made
for Hume of Goclscrqft's History. ' Over-lords, superiors.

240 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1527APPENDIX.

Jan. 10, 152G-7. — Remini9n to Dauid Balfour of Burlie and xv others for their treafonable art and part of preparing, &c. tj^c dJ'irlB of JJattIc near Stfnlitijgohj.

Jan. 19. — Remifiion to Patrick Ogiluy of Inchemertine and xvj others for being with
umq''^ JBauiB l^umc of aiUcBftirburnt, &c. (Apud S. Andream.)

Eo die Rcmiflion to Alan Jameson, for ^IjiBing from the King's ^rtny with the

Governor, at SuiiglaS, JJonRtll, and other parts t'lr tj&e iHtrjSt.

Jan. 20. — Remiffion to the Bailies and community of Dundee for 3Sntcrcontmuning
with Andrew Cariagenian, Dauid Blantire, and other JKcBcTS : And for the ^laugj^ttr of Gilbert
Lindefay.

Jan. 24. — Remifiion to William Master of Ruthuene and five others for treafonably
33t5tfging t\)t CaStlc of KotJitSSan anW 33urning t^t toion of 35ute. {Apud Balmerinoch.)

Jan. 28. — Remiffion to Walter Bonar of Kelty, and two others, for foret]&OMg]bt felony
antf ©pj|)rc55ion done by them to Andrew Rollok of Duncrowb and others his accomplices, in
coming to the Parifli Kirk of Dunnyne, and for hurting Gothrey Wilfoune, at the fame time.

Jan. 30. — Remiffion to John Ogiluie of Innerquharite and xvij otbers for iSlifting
from i\}t iJat'B at eiSfcrlt. {Apud Perth.)

Jan. 31. — Refpitt to Patrik Buchquhannane, Walteris fon, Duncane B. Waiteris fone,
Alex. B. Patrikis Ion, Joline Makintailjour, Patrik B. Johnnis fon, Patrik B. Johnne Walteris fone,
Johne Malcome of Lauyis fon, and five others, for pare trcaSonalldl art, part, ant» aSiSfStanrc gevin
be )>ame to George Buchquhannane and Robert B. and vferis fare complicis, our 9aci)tlll5, being at
our home, in fare trefonabill dedis : And for Jie trt^onabtfl rajStng of jFgrt in ]>e landis of ?lrro«tl)j
quTjtr, pertenyng to M'Farlane : And for Jie crewall ^laucj)ttr of Johne Laurencefone and certane
vferis being with him in his cumpany, committit apoune forthocht felony within fe Toune of Toughe :
And for pe Jitfff, ^puiljfc, an* ^erjjtng of Jie faid Counc of STotogSt fat famyne tyme, he. -. For
xix 5eris. {Apiul Perthe.)

Mar. 1. — Lettre to Patrik Sinclare, makand him iMat'StCf of ^Jiuittng to i\)t Btng;
and gevand him fairfore, 3eirlie, fe foume of xl ti.

Feb. 5 — Remiffion the Provost, Bailies, and community of Perth, for art and part
of the JiJurntng of tj&e yiart anB ijtmiti of Cragg, &e.

Apr. 11, 1527 Refpett to James Hammiltoun of Innerwik, Johne of Newtoune, and

four others, for fair trefonable SrraHtng of 33atcll aganis ])e Gouernour, at I{ftttcrorf»]&i'II
befule Glasqw.

Apr. 17 — Remiffion to James Stewart of Twedy for art and part of preparing the dftelD
of Uattlf near llinltt{jq[to.

Apr. 23. — Lettre to Robert Lord Maxwell, now being Wardane of JjeWest Marchis.
gevand him full power within fe boundis of his Wardanry to tafe SnqufSttlOtine bpOHC ffjlfft, Reffett
of Thevis, Slauchter, with all v]iir poyntis concernyng his poware of Wardanry, during all fe tyme
fairof, &c.

Apr. 30. — Lettre to (Schir) James Sandelandis of Caldor, kny', Ratifiand ]ie Licence
gevin to liim afore to pafs for ])e completing of his pilgrimage at ^ome: And ratifiand ficlike fe
difpofitioune maid be him of his funis Mariage, <S:c.

JNIay 2. — Refpett to Andro Galbrayth of Culcreuche and xlvj vferis, for fair trefonable
cuming aganis fE King iu array of JJatelf bejSitre Stinlitljgto,

15JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 241

APPENDIX.

May 14. — Refpett to Johne Dauidsone, burgefe of Edinburghe, for ]&alttincj furt]&t of
Mmti (£v\c of Stranr at tljt ^ttijiv=^o\u (^ort, of Edinburgh.)

Eo die — Remifllon, William Levingstoune of Kilsythe, for his treafonably coming
againft Soljn IBuftc of StH)an|), the King's Tutor, and against the Royal authority, at WiUUtori'
Jill, near tStaSgoto, liis Majefty's Standard being difplayed, &c. (Apud Striuiling.)

May IC. — Refpett to (Schir) Williame Sinclare of Rosling, kn* and viij vferis, for
fare trc5onaI)lc iJcmaning fra ^uUuau.

May 18. — Refpet to Henry Congiltouxe of ])AT Ilk and xvij vferis, for art, part, and
asst^tante gevin be fame to (george JLovtf ^ume, &c. {At Dalkeith.)

May 20. — Remiflion to William Graham, Master of Menteithe, for his treafonably
aiiitftiig from ti)c Snug at ^uXluaB, &c. (Apud Striuiling.)

May 22 — Lettre to (Schir) James Hamiltoune of Fynnart, knicht, makand him
Capitane of tje CaSteltof Bumljartane, for ix 3eris.

May 22 and 27. — Lettre to Andro Lord Avandale, in double forme, of fe Keptnc;: of tje
CaStclX of IDuuliattane ; ane of faim for Jie fpace of nyne 3eris, and ane vper for ])e fpace of six
jeris.

May 23. — Refpett to William Borthuik of Crukestoune, for art and part of pe
^laurljtf r of Vthred Kincaid.

May 25 Refpett to Williame Cunynburghe of Skowlag, for art and part of pe treafonable ^rraut'itg of aire dFicllJ aiiU JiatcU agaue ])e King, befide SLinlitljqulioiD.

May 28. — Refpet to Andro Heriot of Trabroune, and xiiij vferis, for fe famyn
actioune, &c.

Eo die — Refpet to W^illiam Douglas of Quhittinghame, and xiij vperis, for pe faid
actioune, &c.

May 31. — Remiflion to James Ramsay of Cokpenne, for treafonably SntcrcommUm'ng
tofti) (©eorgt Slortr |i?ume and his accomplices.

Eo die. — Refpet to Patrik Haliday, in ])e Barony of Cambufnethane, for pe tt°rSSonal)Ie
IXcSrtttng of vmq''= Thomas Hammiltoun, alias Viifunit : For xix 5eris.

Jun. 1. — Lettre to Hectour Makgilleon of Doward, fone and air of vmq''^ Lauchlane
M. ofDoward, chargeing ]ie Scheref of Inuerxes and his deputis and ofBciaris of pe King to
command CoTgnt (Sxlt of (frgnTc, Sir Johne Campbell of Calder, kn', his broper, pair complicis, &c.,
pat pai mak na Gifting, Couuocatioun of pE Kingis liegis, or Invafioun apone pe faid Hectour, his
kynne, freyndis, and feruandis.

Jun. 2. — Refpet to Edmond Ruthirfurde of Auchingorthe, and Johne his fone, for pe
33jbtSing' of l^tTcitC iWuvvaB, committit be pe fpace of viij jeris fyne : To endure for nyne 5eris.

Jun. 15. — Refpet to Alexander Campbell of Blairskeitiie, for pe art, part, and alfiftence gevin be him to James Erle of Arane and vmq''' Johne Erle of Lennax, in 9rraging
of aSatcll aganc %o\i\\ Sufee of Sliaitg, ^t.

Aug. 14. — Refpet to Johne Bannatyne of Corhous, and Ixiij vtheris, forjie Mutilatioune
of Walter Weir, committit vpone fudandtie.

' Forcible abduction. Rape or Ravishing, in the modern acceptation, was then termed ' Forceing.'
VOL. I. t 2 H

242 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1528.

APPENDIX.

Nor. 28. — Remiflion to William Borthuik, in Johnellounp, and ix others, foi- tieafonably
aSntercominutuiig iuitji anU ajSSt'Sting the King's JSrlicI^, ^Woti, anU aTraitovg, affording them
meat and ihink, &c. : For one year.

£o die. — Remiffion, Thomas Master of Borthuik, and ij others, for the fame crimes.

Dec. G. — Reminion to Sir William Sinclar of Rosltng, kn', for treafonably flftiBtng
from tl)t airmfi at ^ulluau.

Dec. 12. — Refpet to Alexander Mure, and four vjieris, for pair trefonable Remaning and
33i)titng fra tljt &iit aiitr ^imn ot ^ultoai) : For xix 3eris.

Dec. 22. — Lettre to Gilbert Erle of Cassillis, of all his movable gudis pertening to ))E
KiNGis grace, as his eichete, throw committing of SiHiUun ©rrour lit tl)e Scvbtlig of ailC 33rtlff,
purcheft be Williame Cunynghame of Langlane, apone pe landis of Knokgul3ane, &c.

Feb. 3. — RemilTion to Gilbert Turing of Foverne, and xj others ; Alex'' Leflie, fone of the
Laird of Petnamwne, Thomas Reid of Colleftoune, James Creichtoune of Frendraucht, and xxj others ;
Patrick Cheiie of EHilmont, and xv others ; John Forbes of Fetllego, William Hay of Laifk, and xiij
others; Gilbert Dalgarno of Garnortoune, Gilbert Gray of Scheves; James Johnftoune of that Ilk,
George Gordoune of Geicht, aiid iiij others ; Alexander Crag of Cragfintray, &c. kc, for i^IltBtng
from t|)c StrmirS at ^uTiuai.) auB JliSIcrft. (Apud Ahirdene.)

Feb. 7, 1527-8. — Remiflion to the Provost, Bailies, community, burgelTes paying ' fcot and
lot,' and their fervants, actually reilding within the burgh of Abirdene and burgh marches thereof,
for their treal'onably illjiBtncj from i\)t SlrmifS of ^ulluai) aiiH Witxh, and other Raids. {Apud
Abirdene.^)

Mar. 31, 1528. — Remiflion to Alexander Drummond, formerly of Carnok, and Alex. D.
his fervant, for treaCouable Sl55i6tanrc given to ?lrcl)ll)altl, formerly CrarX of SlugllS, his brother and
uncle, he. : And for treafonably lUbtalllig tJ)C iifng'5 Scri'ftS.

May 26. — Refpitt to Andro Hereis, bru)ier to Williame Lord Hereis, Andro Cotwart,
William Carleiil, and James Hereis, for ])e trelfonabill MafStng of dTljrC within ]ie realme, 33trni)ng
of ]'t ^Dcilc of MnoK^cljcnorJ) : ^laiuljtcr of vmq''' Patnk Hereis: And S^iitcrtommoiinng luitfi
SlngliSmtn, in tyme of Weir: For xix ^eris.

Jul. 1. — Remillion to Hugh Campbell (of Loudoune) Sheriff of Are, and xxxij
others, for their tieafonably coming againtl the Kino in ' Sctrragtt JJattcH,' near the burgh of Ktin^
Ittijliiri, on Sep. 3, 1526: And for treafonably SHjitliiig from the King's %xmiti at ^ulloao antl
WitvV : And for art and part of tlie ^Tatig|)tfr of ©lliicrt, CFarl of CaSgillia ' {Aptid StriuUing.)

Eo die. — Remiflion to John Cralfurd of Dkongane, George Campbell of Glafnok,
Dauid Cathrartof Douchray, and .John Clerk, for the fame crimes.

Oct. 12. — Rciiiiirion to \\'iLLiAM Cokburne and three others, for trcaSonallll) iUScttfng
an'D 3intcrcommunilig with Patrick Cokburne of Newbiggin, his brothers and fervants.

Eo r/ie. — Kciiiiirion to Robert Hau; of Bemersyde and John Atkinfoune, for their treafonably 33t5tfg{u2 tl;c Castle of S^ttiliiig aulf \Mntt of 3ttnlftl)qlu.-

Eo die. — Remiflion to George Cowpak, for the trfaSonaI)Ic Conboratton of the lieges witli
his Rebels and Traitors, and tl)t (FliglfjSl), riding through the kingdom of Scotland in hoftile manner,

' See Historic aflhr Kennrdien ; Edin. Quarto, 1830. /.(i7(V, liulfimr's Annals, Pinhrtoii, &c. ' See tliesc

Extracts, Jul. 31, 1 jiG. Numerous other entries occur in other parts of this Collection.

16JAC.V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 243

APPENDIX.

and 33f£ifc3titg tlir CaStIf of ^tn'iith'ng anU palace of 3ttuIit{)(iSM, and Waging Waragainft James
Earl of Arian : And for ttcaSonabli) taJu'iig Boluii ti)t J)caU5 of JOfvanticr (?arX of Syomt, ants
i«r ajUiIlfam ^onic, ijii fjiotlicr, from tljt tEolhaotij of tiie JJiucji) of CrBfiiburgl), &c.'

Oct. 28. — ' Refpitt and Saufgarde' to 'Schir Joiine Campbell of Lundy, kn*, Johne his fone
and appeiand air, Finlay C. of Corfvvell, Jolinne INPgilhauche his gudbrul)er," &c., and ]>are men,
tenncntis, &c.,' hecaufe he was ' noiu lo JjajSJi lit Oltr Stinf)a55atc and feruice to ]ie partis of dffail*
Bei'lS.' (At Sanct Androis.)

Dec. 1. — Remiffion to Andrew Sibbald and Williaine Robertfoune, for treafonably ^btBinj
from THE King's iilrmM for UfSifging t|)C iffaStlc of (STcinptaXIounc.

Dec. 28. — Rofpitt to Joiinne Dunlop, for his trealbnable art, parte, and 'Ki^iitoxitt
gerin be him to a^rcKitfjaTlJ, Sitintninc ^rle of 3nguge, his brofer and eme,^ and fare complicis.

Jan. 4, 1528-9. — Remiffion to George Lord Seytoune and vj others, for their treafonably
afiftJins from THE King's ^rniB at ^ultoau.

Mar. 3. — Remiffion to Sir Walter Scott of Branxhelme, kn', for his trcajSoiiaiilp
firtafeing KiUarii from tjit Castle of JJIafeiuSS.

Mar. 8. — Remiffion to William Carmichaell of that Ilk and three others, for art, part,
and aSdfStailfC given to artJjl'6aIt», latt CFarl of ^[iTgtlS, his brother and uncle, &c.

Apr. 4, 1529 Refpitt to Hectour Makintosche, Capitane of Clanquhattane, and

Alane Keire, for )ie trefonable art, part, and '^HiiAawtt gevin be fame to ^rrljlhalU, Sumtpmc CBrIc
of SlngtljS, his brofer, and eme, &c.

Apr. 6. — Remiffion to Patrick Hepburne, Master of Halis, for treafonable asSt'Staitrc
gtbtll to (Scorgc iLortt ji)limt, and Dauid Hume of Wedderburue, his brother, &c.

Eo die. — Remiffion to James Edingtoune, and x others, extracted from the Signature of
Remiffion of Patrick Earl of Boitiiuile, for their trraSoiial)!)) aSSfStfiig iScorgc itorli ?i?ume
and umq''' David Hume of Weddirburne, his brothers and accomplices, being the King's 9acf)C(5,
and at his horn.

Eo die. — Precepts of Ilemiffions were alfo granted to Mr William Broune, Tutour of
CoLSTOUNE, and four others, and to George Fawfide of that Ilk, for the fame crime.

Apr. 7. — Remiffion to William Douglas of Quhittinghame and James D. his fervant,
for treafonably SSntcrcommuiung, refetting, and affifting anfjlljallr, latt C?arX of SlliguS, George
D. his brother, and Archibald their uncle.

Eo die. — Remiffion to Robert Lauder of Bass, and xj others, for the fame crimes.

Eo die. — Remiffion to the Burgh of Dunbar, for the fame crimes.

Apr. 8. — Reraiffions to John Lord Hay of jester, and iiij others, and to William Hay of
Tallo, for the above crimes.

Apr. 27. — Remiffion to Mr John Bannatvne and William Flemyng, his fervant, for their
treafonable ^SSfgtanrt given to a^vri&tljalB, formcrlu Carl of angUS, George his brother, and
Archibald his uncle, and tlieir accomplices, (S:c. (Apiul Striuiling.)

Jun. 3. — Remiffion to Patrick Hume, brother-german of Alexander Hume, Tutor of Weddirburne, for all crimes committed prior to this date, High Treafon only excepted. (Apud Hadittgtoime.)

' See these Extracts, Oct. 27, 151G, Note. ' Brotlier-in-law. ' Uncle.

244 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1530.

APPENDIX.

Eo die Refpitt to James Lord Ogiluy of Erlie and xxsiij vfer perfonis, for art and

pait of ]ie aiauri)tcr of vrnq'^ Dauid Skeppar : For xix 5eris.

Jun. 11. — Refpitt to Hew Kennedy of Girvanemanyis, for Lis treafonable art, parte, and
affiftance gevin be him to 3rri)l5anr, fumtynie (Bx\t ol iTliguSf, liis eme and bro))er, and Jiare complicis: To indure for ]ie fpace of five jeris; fwa Jiat' ]ie laid Hew pa5 in d?vauntc, within twa
moncthis, and fare remane at his grace plefour. (^At Jedburghe.)

Jun. 12. — Refpitt to Johxe Mailuile, Robert Clerk, and Schir Thomas Thomfoune, for
art and part of pe ^laud&ttrfS of vniq'' %ai)n\\t SKallaiuijC- of ISctttflJ), Andro Traill, and Alexander Wemys ; committit vpoune aulB ffcCD and foirtliocht felony : For xix ^eris. (^At Jedhurghe.)

Jun. 22. — Refpett to Mathew Hammiltoune, fone to Robert H. in Mylneburne, and
Duncane Dundafs, bruper-germane to James D. of Newliftoune, for art and part of ]>e ^IaMf|)tcr of
vmq ■ aaam ilfsbrt of tljat Sift, <S:c.

Aug. 5. — Refpitt to James Grant of Freuchy, his kynnifmen and feruandis being in his
cumpany ; to |iat effect, ]iat he may cum to our solerane lord, and commoun with him and his
Thesaurer, and inafe iuai5 for outvclf antJ jjaumrnt of JiS fatJcrtS tiftti'^, and lovmes of money
quhilkis he reftit awand to our fouerane lord : For fe fpace of tua monethis nixt eftir his cuming.
(^At Striuiling.')

Sept. 20. — Letter of Licence to Dame Jonet Douglas Lady Glammis,^ and Patrick
Charteris of Cuthilgurdy to })aSg to tJjt jairtiS icionU stn, in tj^Eir |3ilgvamajjc, and vtheris
leiffull befjmes, &c.

Oct. 28. — Letter conftituting Archibald Earl of Ergyle ^tiStirc tScncval, ioitljtn tje
Inj^ok realm of *rotIanIi, and fHastcr of tjc Bing'5 |i)ou5r]^oItt ; for life. {Apud Drwnfreije.)

Oct. 30. — Remifllon to Nixian Creichtoune of Bellebocht, for treafonably ^IiiDtng
from t\)t 9^rmi) at ^ulluai) ; and for all other crimes, Treafon, he, committed within one year laft
paft being only excepted. (^Apud Driimfrei/e.y

Nov. 6. — Refpitt to JoHNE Grahame, within fe fcherefdome of Lanark, for ])e *Iaut]&trr of
vmq'"^ DamtS JLfbingStownt of ^itl^tant : To indure vnto \ie xxv day of December nixt to cum.

Nov. 8. — Remiflion to SvMON Johnestoune of Powdene, for all trtmc5 licfort tl)i5 fiatr,
Treafon, &c. excepted. (Apud Drumfreife.')

Nov. 12. — Remiflion to James Gordouse of Lochinver, and xxxix others, for the cruel
fefaugitcr of C^omaS iHafecItnanf of 33omiic.' {Apwl Qnhithome.)

Dec. 1. — Remiflion to Henry M'^culloche of Kilasere, for the S'lattgljtcr of Andrew
3Fcalloune : And for trefonably abiUfiig from l})t ^rmi) of (Tamtalloun, he. (Apitd Wigtomie.)

Dec. 6. — Remiflion to Herbert Murray, uncle of the Laird of Brochtoun, for Slbfliing
from tljt 2xm» of ramtanoun. (Apud Wigtoune.)

Jan. 11, 1529-30 Precept of Remiflion to Patrick Culquhone, fon of Robert C. of

Camftredane, for the ^Iaugl)trr of Duncan M'Alefter M'Gibboune, &c.

Jan 12. — Refpitt to James Edmonstoune of Doxtreithe, and ix vperis, for ^iiBfitg
from H)c Oist ana Urmn of ilucmptalloMne, 8cc.

* Provided ; or, on condition tliat. * Vallance. ' See her Trial, Jul. IT, 1 J37, I, * 187, &c. * Bomby.

Sec these Extracts, Jun. 25, 1520, luid other parts of this Collection.

17JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 245

APPENDIX.

Feb. 2. — Refpitt to Allane Stewart in Kirktoune, and xlij vjieris, for Jiaie trefonable
iSemaitnitg fva tlit Ot'St of ^ulluap,' &c. : For fe fpace of xj 5eiis to indure. (At Glajffw.)

Feb. 21. — Refpitt to James Grant of Freuchy, and Johne M'kinze of Kintale,
uiakand mentioune, Jiat jie faidis James and Jobnne ar to cum to ])e burghe of Edinburghe, or to ony
burgbe or part of ]ie realme, qubar it fall bappin our fouerane lord to be for ])e tyme, and ]iare to (blifl
and expeid ivith bis liienes and bis Tbefaurer, ))air lefuU erandes and befynes : And Jiairfor his grace
Refpittis Jie faidis James and Jobne (or nil maitltfl* o£ actl'oitt^ committit or done be ]iarae in ony
tynie begane, vnto ]ie day of ]>e dait beirof, and till indure vnto \>e faidis perfones returnyng to pare
cuntre, and x dayis Jiaireftir. (At Striuiling.^

Feb. 24. — Refpitt to Hectour M^clane of Dowart, bis kyn, freindis, &c. to fe noymer of
fourty perfonis, for all manner of acttoniiS, alfwele Treflbune as vferis crymes, quhill fe xxv day of
May next to cum, to commoune with ws (the King). ' This Refpitt havand flrenthe fra fe day of
fe faid Hectouris furthcuming of bis Howfe of Dowart, cummand agaitwartis to ])E Kingis grace,
quhill pe faid xx day of Maij.' ^ (At Dutide.)

Apr. 8, 1530. — Licence to William Abbot of our Abbay of Corsragwell, Commendatare
of Halywode, and Tutour to Gilbert Erle of Cassillis, bis Cheif, to pafs in France and vfer
partis be3ond fey, to do his ^ilcjrainage, &c. ; and granting a Refpite and Saufgarde to him, his kyn,
freudis, men, tenentis, &c.

May 22. — Refpitt to Thomas Makclellane of Gilstoune, and xj vjieria, for Jiare treafonable remanyng, and at hame biding fra ]ie Gift and ^^ruiM of ^oblliuai) : And for ]>e Jjlautjjtcr of
vmq'^ George Langmuir : For xix 5eris.

Jun. 12. — Refpitt to Malcome Forbes in Bulquhame, Johne his fone, and Jobnne Anderfoune, for fare S)ntcrroininonpn(]; and affifting with George Keyth, our fouerane lordis JftCicII: For
xix 3eri8. (At Scone.)

Jul. 8. — Lettie maid to Robert Lord Maxwell, his airis and affignais, ane or ma, of fe
Gift of all gudis movabill and vnmovabill, dettis, takkis, obligationis, fovmes of money, giftes of
nonentres and vperis quhatfumeuer, quhilkis pertenit to vmquhiil Siojnnt StrnrStrang,^ brufier to
Thomas Armstrang of Mayngertoune, and now pertenyng to our fouerane lord, be refoune of
efchete, tj&rolu ItuSttfiung of tjc ^at'D bmquJjtle 3)oi)nnt to tjjc SciU for JTijift, committit be him,
&c.' (At Prei/Ii/hauc/w, per Signattiram Regis et Thejaurarij Juh/cript.)

Aug. 2. — Refpitt to George Nesbett of Daljell for fe treflbnabill art, part, and STSSi'Stante gevin be him to 2rti)ii>a^l'. fum tyme ©rfc of angUS, his bruferand erne, &c. : For xix 3eris.
(At Striuiltny.)

Oct. 7. — Lettre to all and findry fe perfonis, men and wemen, Inhabitantis of LiddisDALE, gevand Jjaime fre libertc, protectioune, faculte and frcttomt to JiaSSantI rcparc to alt iHrrcatfS,
&c. and alfe full Licence and fredome to brouk and joifs peceabiUy all and fnidry Jiare auld heretage,
&c. ])ai plefand Jie Lordis of fe ground, for Jie faidis ftedingis and rovmis, as efFeris. (At Dunde.)

Oct. (). — Remiffion to the Inhabitants of Liddisdale, for whom Patrick Earl of
Boithoile gave his Bond and fecurity to exhibit, excepting George Scot of Bog and his accomplices of Crammald, dFirCsrat'SCfS, for their treafonable deeds, and (ilonj^piractf^ againfl the royall
authority, for fniJVingilig of 3afl)ClS of ^COtlanH anU ©uglisljimcn within the realme, (Src. (Apvd
Dunde.)

' A great number respited, at this time, tor the same offence. * These words are added to the Respite, which is
engrossed in the Record at full length. ^ The redoubted Johnne Armsxrakg. See Notice regarding him I, • 152.

246 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1532.

APPENDIX.

Oct. 10. — Reiniffion to John Master of Forbes and four others, for their treafonably
Abiding from the King's aniu) at ^iilJuaj) aittr ElSsvk'. And for the gifaugljtfc of 2tIe>anBtr
SifKtoimf of fWrrtrium, <S.c.' {Apud Dunde.)

Dec. 1. — Letter to Malcolm Lord Flemyng, conflituting him and Iiis heirs ^]&cnff5'
pn'itrfjjal of Curtiaate aixB ^cljlis. {Apud P.erthe.)

Dec. 9. — Reniiffion to Alexander Gray of Ballegarno, and Robert Gray in Bowhoufe,
for art and part of tlie cruel iHuttlatlon of David Cramby, junior : And for StltbaSlon of the faid
Dauid, and Dauid liis father, violently dragging them out of their houfe, under fdence of night : And
for toinmon (!!>j)pVf:S5ton, &c. {Apud Perlhe.)

Jan. -t, 1330-L — Lettre to Torkill (Torquill) Maknele, C^tif anU pn'nn'paTe of
tjjc Clan anB ^tvnamc of iHaftntTl'S, of ))e Gift of Jie mails, fermes, protiittis, and dewiteis of
all and lindiy )ie landis Jiat pertenit to vmq'"^ Gillecallum M'Nele of Gaeya, Hand within pe
Sherefdome of Terbert ; with the Nonentry and Relief, &c.

Jan. 21. — RemiflTion to John Strathauchin, fon and heir apparent of Thomas S. of Lenturk, for art and part of the cruel ^Taugbtfr of Hlf yantfCf ^nitouiic of -JtTflBntin and John
King, fon and heir apparent of William King of Bourty : And for art and part of the JJcSl'fgtng of
tj)f CaiStIc of i»(rDrtimiiii), ' ?llcrr5ti)ip,' and 'g-pufhie' of goods, and ^laugljtrr committed at
the time of the faid Siege.

Apr. 28, 1531 Lettre to Mathew Erle of Levinax, his airis and aflignais, makand fame

Capttam'S of X\)t CaStcH, ftrenthe, and fortalice of BunStrtant, for xix 3erls, begynnand at fe
feill of Witlbnday, in J)e jere 1531, &c.

Jun. 7. — Refpitt to Johnne Boyd, Chalmer-child • to Archibald Douglas, and John Boyd,
fon to Gilbert Boyd, for ]'e trefonable art, part, and SlSSl'^tanff gevin be ))ame to 9:rcI)ll)aTB fumtyme
CPrle of S^ngil^, George Douglas his brofer, and ))e faid Archibald his eme,^ &c. {At Striuiliriff.)

Jun. 8. — Reiniffion to Alexander JouN-CANiCHissoNEof Dunnevaig and Glynnis, and
three others, for their treafonable JJ^trc=raiSing anti 33unxtnCj: the houfes of the lands of l^oSntltllf,
itcucnay, Craginrljc, and fundry others within the realm, with 33lIVlungS, ^laucjStfrS, and |i^crcStJipSof the lieges, Inhabitants thereof: And for ^tgl) JTvcaSoit, &c. to this date.'

Eo die. — Reniiflion to Hector Makclane of Doward, and . others for the

fame crimes.

Jul. 1. — Lettre to Gawyne Hammiltoune and liis airis, &c. of Jie Gift of all gudis movabill and vnmovabill, dettis, takkis.Obligatiounis, gold, filuer, fovmes of money, 8iC. quhilkis pertenit
to Jonet Lady Glammis, and now pertening or onywife fall happin or may pertene to our fouerane
lord be refoune of Efchete, throw hir being fugitive fra ]ie law, and at ])e borne, or conuict for S^nttV'
rominonuiig Vuftb our Soucranc lorlri^ l^clitflis, or for ony vfir crymes, kc.^

Oct. 12. — Refpitt to Hector M'^^clane of Dowald^ (Dowart,) and to als mony as beis
with him in cumpany to ))e novmer of xl perfonis, or within, fauflie to cum to our fouerane Lord and
jieLoRDisoF CouNSALEforniaiting of gutnixiajjt^ancnt tlic rculcof tl)C tuntrr,&c.: For Ix dais
nixt to cum efter ]ie day of jie dait iieirof.

Feb. 11, 1531-2. — Refpitt to Donald Mi'Alexander M'murquhe, and xv vjiiris, being

' See his Trial for High Treason, &c. I, * 183, &c. He confessed his guilt of the Laird of Sleldnim's Slaughter
on the Scaft'old. •' Page, or groom of the chamber. • Uncle. ' See Mr Gregory's Work on the Isles.

= See I, * 1H7, Itc. « Dec. 8, 1331. Another Respite for him, 'and sa mony of his kin, &c. as he plesis to bring

with him, &c. for to commoune and treit apoune sic materis as conceruys ye weile of ye realme, and pacyfying ye
samyne :' For xl days.

20JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 247

APPENDIX.

in cumpany with Rory M'Kinze at ]>e ^InndjUt of vrnq''' Siiigbale of WHltixxn,

eommittit be him : Asd ^puljc and away-taking of ]ie faid Williamis gudis and geir at ]>e tyme of Jie
committing of ]>e faid Slauchter : And for art and part pairof and the faid Spul5e : And for all
actiouns, &c. befor fe cuming of ])e faid Rory to ourfouerane Lordis feruice, fat is to fay in the 5eire
of God I™.V'^.xxvij : For xix jeris to indure.

Sep. 1, 1532 Remiffion to John Hume of Blacater, John Nefbett in Spittale, Hector

Furd, and John Focart, fenior, his fervants, for their treafonably JJntciTOmmuilfnj, &c. witli '^idjU
buXtl, formrrll) CParl of StugtlS, his brother and uncle, and their accomplices, &c. : And alfo for
Intercommuning with and affifting our enemies ilje CFngTiSl), &c. : Provided that the faid John comes
to THE King, along with Alexander his brother, and purges himfelf of the ^laujljtev of IDablB iTal^
ronar ; and Ihews to the King, fo far as he knows, who were the flayers of the faid David. (Apud
Falkland.)

Oct. 12. — Lettre of Exemptioune to Johnne Baxnatyne, Clerk and Writar to our fouerane lordis Signet, fra all paSiSfng to onn our ©iStiS, Within, congregatiounes, and alTembleis, and
fra all walking, warding, waching, paying of taxtis, or cxtentis, within our burghe of Edinburghe or
Ttuith' in tyme cuming, during all his liftyme, &c. — he being ' now of gret age, feiklie and corpolent
in his perfoune, and hes fuflenit and as 3it fuftenis diuerfe infirmiteis in his leggis and vjier pairtis of
his body, cumin of cauld throw his ythand" and deligent lawbouris maid in our feruice in our 3iui:
tt'f C-airfe haldin in tyme of winter,' &c.

Dec. 15. — Refpitt maid to James Stewart of Cragyiiall, and ij feruandis, for J)are tvu
^onai)tU Unttrrommuni'ng and afliftance gevin to our fouerane lordis 3acbcIIt^, &c. For xix jeris.
{At Linlit/ujiv.)

Jan. 9, 1532-3. — Refpitt to Thomas Donaldsoune M°kin3e, and v vjieris, for comtnoune
jn&fft, outputting and inputting : And for art and part of pe thiftus ^ttlt'ng antt foncrling fra
George Erle of Huntlie of tertaite SopItJ JorSiS anH nurgS furth of ])e landis of Bra of Mar
(Braeniar.)

Mar. 17. — Remiffion to Archibald Earl of Argyle, and Ixxxxij others, for their trra»
fiotiafilc dFtrc^raf^tng, ioitij ijii ^tantiarti ttnfurlctf, in the 3)5lan»5 of iWulf , ffcurt (JTurrt),
and j^ovbcrnc : The King and his Council having difpenfed with the general Act, on condition
of the Earl fatisfying the kin of Donald Ballo M^auchin, Donald Crum M'^cownane, and Farquhar
M'Sevir, and others having lawful claims.' {Apud Melrofe.)

Mar. 21. — Refpitt to Alane M'clane, fone to vinq''' Lauchlane M'giljane of Doward, for
I'e trcSonahin basing of dfuvt and Birnyng of Houffis in tjje Mt of iHull : And fe ^Iauci)tti- of
.Tohnne M'gillane, lone to Johnne M. of Lochboy, and vferis : For xix 3eris to indure.

Aug. 4, 153-1. — Remiffion to James Hammyltoun of Stanehous, for his treafonably
coming ' in feir of weir,' with banners unfurled, at iStttctOVSitU, agafnSt 3oj|)n Suftc of ;Sli)an$,
Govei'nor of the realm : And for all other crimes, (excepting Treafon, &c. Intercommuning with
Archibald Earl of Angus and his accomplices, and affifting James Hammyltoun, the flayer of Thomas
Flegeare ; common Oppreffion and Brigancy, and dellroying the Woods within the lordlhip of Dowglas, &c.) {Apud Lanark.')

Dec. 5. — Remiffion to John Grant of Culcabok for certain actions committed by him,
(High Treafon, Slaughter, and Mutilation, after the making of the Act, and affillance given to Hector
Makintofche and his accomplices, being alone excepted.) {Apud Elgin.)

' Outwith. * Eident ,- constant, unremitting. ^ See Mr Gregory's History of the Isles.

5

248 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1536.

APPENDIX.

Jul. 10, 1535.— Refpitt to Joiine Charturis, fone to rmq'« Johne C. of Cuthilguidy, fof
all crimes, Trefoun in JiE Kincis perfoune alaneily except ; and to induie for v joris : Providing
allwais, pat [le faid Jobnne rtniaiK iuvtij of tijii fcalme aitU tijt i-calme o£ Snglaii*, &c. (At
Striueling.)

Jul. 26. — Refpitt to Donald M'ky and to all perfonis Inhabitaris of Jie Landis of
Strathnaverne, Atliir, Auchquhilis, and Ardurenis, within ]ie fcherefdorae of Inuernys, fov all
arttoilt5, ty^mti, &c. Trefoune in oure fouerane lordis perfoune alanerlie except: For our fouerane
lordis will to indure.

Jid. 'SS. — Remiflion to James Grant of Freuchy, and iiij others, for their treafonably
aijftiing fvom iiit ^nm'rS at ^uHuap aiitJ 8Hcrfe. {Apnd Striuiling.)

Sep. 6. — Precept of a Charter to Dauid Armstrang,' fon of Herbert, alias Habye Armftrang, of the v merk lands of old extent of Park, lying in OFiofStlailc, and iliire of Drumfreife ; proceeding upon the perfonal refignatiou of Mo&crt StofB iMayiaclI. (Jptid Cmimnald.)

Oct. 29. — Remiffion to Robert Grahame of Thornok, Adam Grahanae his brother, and
Herbert Corry, for art and part of the cruel ^laugljtcv of George Kirkpatrik, committed on foretliought felony. (Apud Striuilmg.)

Nov. 28. — Remiffion to William Kirkpatrik of Kirkmichaell^ for aSittcrcommunitrg
with Sir Alexander K. of K., kn', his father, and his accomplices, KcfitlS, &c. (Apud Drumfreije.')

Dec. 2. — Remiflion to Thomas Kirkpatrik of Cloisburne for Dntcrtomiuuntng iu(t&
latijclS, &c. (Apud Drumfreije.)

Eo die. — Lettre of Gift to Williame Lord Ruthvene of all guidis movabill and vnmovabill, he. quhilkis pertenit to (Scorgt »5ovtl)g of pat Hlft, and to Sir William Stoby, Chaplane of
Gorthy, (JFgcljftc throw being of Jie faidis perfonis fugityve fra pe law, and at pe home for ))e ^laufils
ter of JRoIjcit fHuvvai) of flclurato, itc.

Dec. 6. — Remiffion to John Greirsoune of Lag for treafonably SljiBtiig from t\)t ^rmu
at ^ulinan. (Apud Drumfreife.)

Eo die — Remiffion to Thomas Fergussoune of Cragdarroch, for all rrtmfS roiumfttcS
prior to tlji's Sate, &c.

Mar. 1, 1535-6. — Refpitt to Johne, Thomas, and James Cranstoune, breper, for art
and part of pe *Iautl)tcr of 3n1lro llcittpfti) of IBeringtount : For xix ^eris. (At Sanctandrq/e.)

Mar. 3. — Precept of Remiffion to Thomas Fotheringhame of Powry for art and part of
the ^laugljtrr of Walter F., &c. (Ajnid Falkland.)

Mar. 11. — Lettre to George Erle of Huntlie, his airis and affignais, of fe Gift of all
gudis, movabill and vnmovabill, cornis, catale, &c. gold and filuer, cun3eit and vncun5eit, jowallis, and
vjieris quhatfumeuir quhilkis pertenit to %o\}\\t dForljtS of |3ct!Slfgo, Alexander F. of Kynnaldy, his
fone and apparand air, Johne F., Williame F., Alexander F. of Dalmannoche, Johne his bra])er, Alexander, fone of David F., Patrik, fone to Johne F., Johne, fone to George F., Andro Schand in Tormare, Johne Cawdale, fone and apperand air to James C. of Aflovne, John Farare, fervand to Jie Lard
of Petilego, Duncane his fone, Thomas and Johne Hoggis, and Alexander Makferfiine, now pertenyng to our foverane lord as his efchete, throw being of fe faidis perfonis his llebellis, and at his
liorne, as fugitiue fra his lawes, for art and part of ])e cruell #TutnattO«nt, ftjurttng, anS SBUouilB^

' Sec Notice relative to Johnnie Armstranq, I, * 152 ; .ind also the Gift of his Escheat, I, * 245. " James

Kirkpatrick and xxj others got auother Remission tor the same crime.

23 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 249

APPENDIX.

lllg of Micliaell Frafer and Joline Frafer, vpowne auld ffeid and forthocht felony : And als, of fe Gift
of ])e vnlawis, in Jie quliilkis Dojltt itlaiStcr ot dforbf^ wes adiugit for nonentre of ])e faid Johne F.
of Petflego, and ]ie laid Jolme for nonentre of |)e faid Alexander his fone, and fe vjiaris perfonis,
Rebellis forfaidis, and of Johne Schand, feruand to Andro Schand, S'' Gilbert Hunter, Chaplane, and
diuerfe vjieris perfonis : And als, of Jie Gift of diuerfe vjieris vnlawis efchetis, panis of Lawborrowis,
and Ibvmes of money, as at lenth is contenit in ])e faid Lettre. (^A( Striuiling.) ' Compofitio iiij"
(4000) merkis.'

Apr. 5. — Remiffion to Thomas Fairbarne in Gordoune niyll, Alexander his brother, and
Cuthbert Cranftoune in Manys, for ait and part of the ^laiig^^tcr of ^nUvcto 33eftijfCt]& of «§irnlaiu,
&c. {Apud Stmdlinff.)

Apr. 11. — Remiffion to George Earl of Rothesse, James and John Lefley, brothers,
Andrew Balfowre of Montquhanny, William Lefley Captain of Rotheffe, Robert Lefley of Kynnard,
James and William Lefley in Hechame, brothers, Robert Arnot of Wodmylne, Walter Paterfoun of
Drummure, Patrick Balfowre in Denmylne, and forty-four others, for treafonably afil'Btlig from tjc
9vnitC5of EiHrtrft ants jrcmptallounf, &c. : And alfo, difcharging them and their cautioners of all
pains and amerciaments for not appearing; before the Jufliciars at ii)C iHonaSttrg of SttinBortS antt
3RfiBtnri)t, near the fame, committed on May 17, 1532. (Apnd Falkland.)

Apr. 19 — Refpitt to W^illiam Joiixestoune in Fouldurris, and vij v]ieris, for ]iare trefonable Rafing of Fyre williin ])e realme, and Birnyng of ])e Toune of Kirkmaquho. For xix jeris, and
forder for our fouerane lordis will to indure. (Aptid Striuiling.')

Apr. 23. — Remiffion to William Cokburne of Scarling, for treafonably SliSStSting
SabiB ^tinrc of ffiSStiiBf rliurne, &c. {Apud Slrhdling.)

Apr. 25. — Gift to Schir Patrick Hepburne of Wauchtoune, knycht, of all gudis,
movable and vnmovable, &c. quhilkis pertenit to him of befor, and now to the King, be reflbun of
efeheit throu his being Coilbltt it an S^St'St, Jan. xxiiij lafl bipaft, of certane crymes committit
vpon James Sinclare, bruder to pe Lard of Rofling, and his complicis being with him. (^At Falkland.')

May 6. — Remiffion to John Ross of Cragy, and ix others, for treafonably SlitOing frotn
tijc Svmjj at ^nlluai), &c. (Ajmd Strhiilmg.)

May 9 — Remiffion to Patrick Hepburne of Wauchtoune, kn', Patrick his fon and heir
apparent, Williame H. of Eft Crag, John H. of Weft Fortoune, Patrick Quhitlaw of that Ilk, Jolm
Carkettill of Finglenne, and fifty-feven others, for art and part of the treafonable StntnTOininuntng,
Refetting, &c. and aflifling Saui'D |t)unic of aMcUBilJmrnc, and his accomplices, the King's Rebels,
&c. (^Apiid Striueling.)

May 20. — Refpitt to George Elphinstoune, fon and apperand air to Johne Elphinftoune
of Hinderftoune, and Thomas E. his bru])er, for art and part vpoune forthocht feliouue of ])e cruell
^laucljttr of vmqi'" Thomas Mure ; committit be fame in ])e g:uHf4oune of ^litrtfcnc. For xix
jeris. (^At Striueling.)

Jul. IG. — Remiffion to Margaret Lady Sinclair, and xj others, for their treafonably
SlIitBingfrom tJjr flvniM at STtniptallount : And for Ufurping the King's authority, Conbocatfon of tlie lieges, common (©ppvtS^ton, &c. (Apwd Falkland.)

Jul. 20 — Remiffion to James Tuedy, fon and heir apparent of John T. of Drummel^eare,
and XV others, for treafonably Si^gfeting IDaSjlB^iimcof SHfillljrllUVnf, his brothers and accomVOL. I. f 2 I

250 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538.

APPENDIX.

plices : And for the ^laugjtcf o£ Jojn 3torU ;lf Icmuitg, committed upon forethought felony.
(^Apud Pitlimceme.')

Jul. 23. — Remiflion to Andrew Wod op Largo, John and Robert his brothers, Andrew
and Thomas Wod, fons of Andrew Wod in Pittinweme, Andrew Wod his fervant, Alexander Spenfe
of Lathaliane, John Lundy of Stratharlie, James iiis brother, and twelve others, for all actiottd, iSrc.
prior to this date, High Treafon excepted. (Apud Pittinweme.)

Aug. 15. — Remiflion (Schir) Johne Mailuil of Raithe, kn', James Kirkcaldy of
Grange, Williame Berclay of Touche, John Mailuil of Weflir Touche, John and Patrick K., brothers
of the Laird of Grange, and eight others, for all crimen, excepting Treafon, &c. prior to this date.
(Aptid Siriuilinff)

Aug. 28. — Lettre of Gift to Dauid Armstrang, callit Jie Lacli/, Andro A., fone and are of
vmq'"" Syraon A. of Quhitehauche, and to Mertyne A., brujier to the laid Dauid, Jiare airis and affignais, of all gudis, movabill and vnmovabill, dettis, &c. qubilkis pertenit to ])e faid vmq''= Symon, and
now to our foverane lord be refoune of ^Scljcitt, throw j'uSttlBtng of ])e faid vmq'"' Symon to t^E
Bctil for crymes committit be him. (./< Striuding.)

Sep. 1. — Refpitt to Alexander Forester, fone of Joline Forefter of pe Newtoune, for art
and part of |ie imput' cruill ^lautljtn" of vmq'*" Andro Leirmontht, citinar of Sanctandrofe : For xix
5eris. {At Abbottijhall .)

Jan. 28, 1536-7. — Refpitt to Lancelot Gray, for art and part of fe cruell ^lautljtcr of
vmqi'' Adam Purdy, faidlaire, burges of Edinburghe : And of Sfemcillbering; of William Purdy, his
brufer, of his rycht ee ; and ^poliatfouite of his fuerd ; committit and done apoune fuddante, &c. :
For ix 3eris. {At Parife, per Signaliimtn maim Regis Jubfcripl.)

Apr. 28, 1537. — Remiflion to Andrew Muxcur of Slanis, Alexander his brother, and
Andrew their baftard brother, Robert Mailuile of Hervistoune, and three others, for art and
part of the cruel ^laugljtcr oC .?ioljn Brtmme. {Jpud Montevele.y

Jun. 6. — Refpitt to Joiine Vause of Many, and Maifter Johne Gordoune, for art and part
of fe ^laucljtcr of James Lioune : And itluttlaftOUltC of Alexander Ruthirfurd, ane of ]ie JSatlU'cii
of Sthirtfcnc for ]>e tyme, Mailler Eduerd Menzies, and William Turnbull : And Bcfofttng of ]ie
^I'obcSt nnti JJailUcS Jiairof in executioune of pare office, in chargeiug of ])e Aiid Joline to pas to ])e
Tolbuthe of )'e faid Burghe, for trublance done be him : Axd for courmounc (©pprcSSt'ount done be
him and ]ie faidis Maifter Johne, Alexander (Knowis) and Williame (Gordoune), vpouue our fouerane
lordis liegis, &c. For fex monetiiis to indure.

Jul. 15. — Refpitt maid to Jonett Pyott, ]'e fpoufe of Williame Sinclare in fe Myrefyde,
for art and part of jie g'taucljtcr of vmq'<" itTafetff (Seovge itiiiBc^ag : And of j)e iMutflatfounc
of Patiik L., committit vpoune forthocht felony, and palling away with ]ie coramittaris Jiairof with Jie
bludy hand. For xix 5eris.

Nov. 7 — Refpitt to Robert Lauder of Bass, and v vperis, for ))e trfSonalitll 35ittfrcom»
inOHBIlU iuiti) 5nglfemen, in tyme of Weir, &c. For xix 5eris. {At Striuiling, ' v« merkis.')

Nov. 12. — Lettre of Gift to Archibald Erle of Argile, his airis and assignais, ane or ma
of all ])e gudis, movabill and vnmovabill, dettis, &c. quliilkis pertenit to Ciiarlis Campbell of
Baroour, and now to our fouerane lord, be refoune of CpgcJjctc, throw being of fe faid Cliarles
fugitive fra ]hi law and at ]>c home, or convict for art and part of [le ^laiuljtcr of vmq'-^- aiaitj
l^ainmuUounc of 33avt)oU)i), Robert Striueling in Cadder, and anHro ^ti'iucltng of JSanfttr.
{At Linlithgw, ' ij ' ti.')

' Imputed, nllegeJ. - Probably Montivillitirs, a tuwii in the department of Lower Seine, France.

25JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 251

APPENDIX.

Dec. 9. — Reniiffion to John Vause of Many, foi" all arttonjS, &c. committed by liira prior
to this date, Treafon, &c. only being excepted. (^Apud Falkland.')

Dec. 12. — Lettre of Gift to Robert Maister of Maxwell, his airis, &c. of all takkis,
ftedingis, and wodfettis, within ]ie Ouer parrochin of Ewis, quhilkis pertenit to vme^'- ^omoil ^rni«
Strang of ®u]&tt]&atiril, juSttfuit for certane crymes conimittit be hiui. (^At Lhdithqiu.')

Dec. 18. — Lettre of Gift to (Schir) Johnne Striueling of J)E Keir, knycht, his airis,
&c. of all )'e gudis movabill, dettis, &c. takkis, fledingis, cornis, catale, &c. quhilkis pertenit to vmq'"=
Colin Campbell of Auchiniiowie, jugttfnft for art and part of ])e Cruell ^lautljttnS of vraq^'"
i^latTt ^aimnpUoimc of 33ar»oSot't, JKobert S'lrtutltng of tjc itcttir, and Andro S. in Ballindroicht, and being at )ie home for ))e faidis Slauchteris, (excepand Jie cornis, catale, and gudis intromettit with be Johne Lord Erskin, SchereiF of Striueling, for our fouerane lordis vfe.)

Dec. 29. — Letter of Gift to Jonet Logane, relict of vmq'"' Johnne Wallace of Cragy,
in confideratioun Jiat fcho is of cure kin and blude, and hes nocht to leif vpoune, howbeit fcho wes
dotit fubflantiouflie be vmq''^ our derreft fader of gude niynd, quham God affoilze, be payment of
large fowmes of money for hir tocher : thairfoir feing now ]iat ])e landis and lortiScJt'p of Ctagg ar
fallin in oure handis be refl'oune of ES3arl(f, We, willing J)at ]ie faid Jonet be nocht alluterlie deflitute of hir leving, hes gevin, &c. fe fowme of fourty merkis of |9cnS{ounr 3eirlie, &c. (^At Linlitliqw.)

Jan 6, 1537-8. — Refpitt to Robert and Jok Hammyltoune, for art and part of ]ie ^lauf J=
ttx of %o\)nt CainjpIlclT of |3ofovtour : For six zeris. {At Linlithqw.)

Mar. 23. — Lettre of Gift to Thomas Kennedy, fone and apperand are to Alex. K. of Bargany, his aires, &c. of all gudis, movabill and vnmovabill, dettis, &c. quhilkis pertenit to vmq'' James
Kennedy in Jie Schallauch of Glentig, and now Efchete, becauie he, and Neil Boyd his feniand,
vpoune ))e ... day of Marche inftant, vpoune aitlll ffciU and forthocht felouoe, cruelly gifiu vmq''^
Patrik M<'ilivrik at Cragneil, and for irtfting of our fouerane lord his fff n^St'S ailS aiTtSttS, and for
Sfforrring of Iji'S #fifn'an'^, he.

Mar. 27, 1538. — Refpitt to Robert and Johne Ramsay, for ])are trefonabill toiltflfng of
tjje trtSoiiabill iuoitit'S atiti langagt Jntt fipoStn be fame be Nycholace Ramsay of DalHOussY of })E KiNGis grace : And for 33tSctting, fuppleing, and intercommonyng with his 3Ktfifnt5,
&c. For xix 3eris.

May 8. — Lettre to Robert Lord Maxwell, Grete Admiral!, makand mentioune, fat his
hienes hes direct him to fe pairtis of France, for fe ^tire tonboufng aitU acrumjaiiHing of Ji5
ttrrrtSt fnlToto tjc ©ucnc to tljfS \)ii rfalnit fra fe faid realme of France ; that pairfore his hienes,
willing fat his faid coufing, nor nane vjiir Capitane, gentilman, Ikipper, warmanne, or maryner, and
all vfir perfonis pafTand in his curapany in his feruice, incur ony damnage, hurt, or fkaith fairby. Will
and Grantis, and of his autorite ryal and kinglie power, for him and his fucceflburis, perpetuallie con- ■
firmis. That giff it happinnis his faid coufing, or ony of fe faidis perfonis palling in his cumpany, to
deces, or be llane ony raaner of way, in fat cayce he gevis frelie to fame, and euery of fame, fare
Wardis, relevis, and marriages, to f e vtilite and weile of fare airis, to be applyit to fe behufe of fare
airis and fare barnis, &c. {At Leyth.)

Jul. 23. — Refpitt to James Forsythe of Nyde, for art and part of fe ^lautljttr of vmqi«
Thomas Sandfurd : For xv dais to indure ; providing )iat fe faid James jjaSd furtj) of tjc rtalmt
within XV dais nixt eftir lie be chargit f airto : and nocht to returne agane within f e fammyn, qubill he
obtene his gracis Licence f airupoune.

252 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539.

APPENDIX.

Sep. 13. — Precept of Legitimation to Murdoch 3Fgilleoune and Charles M. natural
fons of 3)ohn ittarsillfouiic of Eotljiioi). {Apud Linlithqw.)

Oct. 13. — Letters of Rehabilitation to Richart Rollok, burges of Dunde, dilatit of certane
poyntis of |i^crcSp, and fl&furit .TltB Conuut I'aiiof, refloring, reponing, and reintegrating him to
his gude fame, heretage, gudis, and wardle ' lionouris, without reproche, murmur, detractioune, blafphematioune to be maid or done fairthrow to liim, in word or deid, be ony maner of way, in tyme
cuming. (^At AMrhrotltoh.)

Oct. 31 Reniiflion to Thomas Lichtoune or Vllishavin, for the ^laugliter of Andrew

Tait, &c. {Apud Falkland.)

Dec. 13. — Remifllon to Thomas Turnbull of Rawflat, for art and part of the ©pprtSSton Uonc to ffiSTinfam 5'cott of ^aSStnBanr , in breaking up a box belonging to the faid William,
in the iioule of ISlr Niciiolas Ruthirfurd, within the burgh of Edinburgh, and for theftuoufly abftracting therefrom two Letters of Reverfion of the lands of Coppitrig, with an inflrument, belonging to his wife.

Dec. 23. — Refpitt to Williame Cunynghame of Akinbar, for alt acttontS done be Urn
befor ]ie dait heirof, Trefoune, &c. except : For xix ^eris.

Jan. 13, 1538-9. — Reniiffion to JA^rES Gordouxe of Lochinver, William G. of Crauchlew, Andrew Agnew Sheriff of Wigtoune, George M'^culloche of Torhoufe, Dauid Gordoune, John
G. called JoJme of Quhithorne, William Carnis young Laird of Orchardtoune, and twelve others, for
art and part of the ^laugljttr of JTj&omaS iHacCItnant of 33oml)i), committed eleven years Mbypafl, in the burgh of Edinburgh, &c.

Jan. 24 — Precept of a Cliarter of Confirmation by James V, of a Feu Charter gi'anted by
Robert Abbot of Holyrood, to Oliuer Sinclare of Pitcarnis, and Katherine Bellendene his
fpoufe, whom failing, to James S. his natural fon,^ &c. of the Barony of Ahammer (AUhammer) alias
Quhitkirk, with the pertinents, within the conllabulary of Haddingtoune and fliire of Edinburgh ;
dated, 'apud Monafl. S. Crucis prope Edinburglie,' Jan. 17, 1538.

Feb. 16. — Remifllon to Mr Adam Ottirburne of Ridhall, for SlitBing from tljf ^rmjj
of ^tlluap, &c. {Apud Lialitliqw.')

Mar. 6 and 8. — Letters of Gift to Walter Cowsland burges of Striuiling, and Robert Cant
burges of Edinburghe, of their avne efchete gudis, perteniug to Jie Kingis grace, be refoune of CBSrIJctt,
throw being of ])e faidis Walter and Robert ^Ibiurit of ^crt^D. {At Liidithqw.)

Mar. 12. — Lettre to Martyne Balkesky'' remittand to bim \e: efchete of all his gudis, &c.
tjroto cumin lir luill of ]ie faid Martyne, befor ]ie Juftice, for breking of our fbuerane lordis ProcJaraatioune, in Ijabiug ailB b^t'lig, eftir J)e making jiairof, of tcrtaitc Jltglt'iS (^ercttcaT) Suftt'^, conteuit in pe fammyn.

Mar. 1.3 Lettre to Mr James Foulis of Colintoune, Clerk of Regifter, of ]>e Gift of

fe gudis, &c. with ]>e advocatioune and donatioune of Jie Chaplanrie, foundit at Sanct Francis
Altar, within ]ie College Kirk of Sanct Gele in Ed"., with Jie richt of )ie Patronage jiairof,
quhilkis pertenit to Johne Broune, burges of Edinburghe, now ^iil}tit throw being of ))e faid Johne
dilatit, accufit, and Sljiim't of tcrtaiu tr»mcS ant( poniitiS of ^crr%*

' Worldly, temporal. ^ lie afteiwarils got Letters of Legitimation, Jan. 13, 1338. Reg. Sicr. Sig. xii. 39.

' See Notices, &i;. reganling him, I ' iil7. ' On Apr. 7 thereafter, he also got a Gift of certain of Brouii's

tenements, &c. in Edinburgh, which had been escheated for the same cause.

27 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 253

APPENDIX.

Mar. 24. — Lettre to Johne Cowane, burges of Striuiling, and Jonet Tennent, bis fpoufe, of
fe Gift of all gudis, raovabill and vnmovabill, landis, &c. quhilkis pertenit to Williame Forester,
fone and apperand are to Johne F. burges of ]ie faid burcht, CFscJctit t]brobj abtiirattoune of Jie
faid Williame for rertaiie potjnti'iS o£ ^.tvti^, canlmit be j&t'in tti jugemeiit. {At Lhilithqw.)

Jun. 8, 1539. — Lettre of Gift to Mr Henry Lauder, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, of all
gudis movabill, dettis, takkis, &c. quhilkis pertenit to Andro Hvme oe Nynwellis, and now to
the King, be refoune of C?5tl)cte, throw being of fe laid Audro Coilljict o£ EiHilfutl C^rrour, in
ferving of fe Breif impetrate be Adam Neifbitt, fone and are of vmq'^ (Philp) Nefbitt of fat Ilk.
(At Sanctandrois.')

Jun. 17. — RemiiTion to Alexander M'Cui-loche of Cardirness, fortreafonably ^bfOtrtg
from tijt String at EMtrft. (Ajmd Fcdkland.)

Jul. 3 — Refpitt to Alane M<^Gillespik M<^Condachy of Ballemanach, for art and
part of fe ^laugljttl' of vmq'« Johne M'^kil5ich5ere-fone, &c. : For xix jeris. (At Falkland.)

Sep. 8 — Remiffion to Alexander Lokkart of Wikitschaw, and iiij others, for art and
part of the ^laurljtcr of James Hammyltoune, &c. (Ajnid StiiuiUng.)

Sep. 9. — Lettre of Gift to Helens, Agnes, Jonet, Margaret, Kalheryne, Ele5abeth, Ifobell,
and Marioune Swyntoune, dochteris to Johne S. of Jiat Ilk, coniunctlie, and ]iair airis, of all gudis
movabill, dettis, &c. quhilkis pertenit to ])e faid Johne, coilbict of i[i!9[tlfull ©rrour, &c.' {At
Striuiling. Compqfitio, I'xxxiij t. vj s. viij d.)

Sep. 19 Refpitt to Eduerd Sincler of Strome, Magnus S. of Werfettir, Johne S. of

Tollop, Williame S. of Houfe, Olyver S. of Helwra, .James Cragy of Burghe, Johne C. of Bankis,
and twenty-four others, and generally to all their kynnifmen, freyndis, &c. within pE Ilis of Orknay
AND Zetland, being with ])ame in cumpany at ])e committing of ony crymes, and art and part with
fame fairintill, in ony tyme bigane, befor fe day of dait heirof : ffor art and part of fe Coiltiocattounc
and gadering of our fouerune lordis liegis fn arrailt JSatcTI agani5 i)inciH5(n %oi}\\t (ffrlt of Catj&<
ntSc: And for art and part of fe ^lauc]&tcr of J>e gaiH bmtiuljin 3)ol)nf, his freyndis, feruandis
and pairt-takaris, being with ])ame in cumpany, at ]<at tyme : And for all vferis §Iaurl)tcvfS, ittutu
lattontS, ©pprcSSfom'S, $vC. : Trefoune in our fouerane lordis awin propir perfoune allanerlie except.
For xix 5eris. {At Striuiling.)

Sep. 21. — Lettre to Adam Lindesay of Dowhill, of fe Gift of all gudis, movabill and
vnmovabill, &c., quhilkis pertenit to Alexander Ramsay of Kynmont, <Siti)ttt throw being of
fe faid Alexander tonbtct of tije ^laiirjjtcr vpoune .... Bercley, new recentlie done. {At Falkland.)

Oct. 15. — Remiffio Thome Sinclare et Elizabeth Nesbitt, fue fponfe, pro arte et parte
iHutilatfom'5 ct Stmembratt'oni^ Robert! Hendirfoune, Be imi tsiiixnUi. {Ajmd Falkland.)

Oct. 19. — Remiffion to James Kirkcaldy of Grange, and his three brothers, for all
trimeS committed prior to this date, Treafon, &c. excepted. {Apud Falklaml.)

Nov. 23. — Refpitt to Williame Gourlay of Kincrag, Mr Andro his brufer, and three
others, for art and part of the ^laugljter of vmq'^ James Borthuik and vferis, committit at Pettinweme : For xix 5eris. {At Peblis.)

Dec. 1. — Remiffion to John Buchquhannane of Gartnavertane, for alt trimc^ committed prior to this date.

' See above, Jiui. 8, 1539, where the same offence is recorded.

254 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1540.

APPENDIX.

Dec. 24. — Remiffion to Hew Earl of Eglyntoune, Hew Mafter of Eglintoun, Neill
Montgomery of Langfchaw, Charles Mowat of Bufby, John Craufmd, brother of the Laird of Kilbimy, and twenty-eight others, for treafonably ^biBfiig from tljc 3rnTg o£ ^utSuag: And for all
crimes committed prior to this date, Treafon, &c., excepted. (^Apud Linllthqw.)

Dec. 2G. — Lettre to Maister Thomas Bellendene of Auchnowinshill (Auchnoull),
makand him eTIrrft o( our Soiicranr lorSf^ DuSttn'artt, for all ])e dais of his lyfe. {At Linlithgw.)

Jan. 3, 1539-40. — Remiflion to Thomas Huntar, for his treafonably going between JSobert
33f$I)op of iJo55,' then 3bi)ot of %?oIi)rooi(, on the one part, and 'Svt\)ibaTO, formerly ©arl of
^ngtlS, and umq^'' Archibald Donglas, his uncle. Traitors, on the other part, for the defpatch of certain their affairs. (Apiid Liidithqiv.)

Jan. 10. — Refpitt to Johne Guthre of Balnabrech for ]ie ^Tutilattounc of vmq'* Patrik Annand, &c. : For xix 5eris.

Jan. 12. — Remiflion, Alexander M''cloyd of Dunvegane,^ and xxiij others, for trea*
gonaiili) lUSrltt'iig, &c., rmq'' Sabt'lj ^unic of ffffiltlriifvfiurnt and SonalU MB of Jtocljctscljr,
knS their brothers and accomplices, &c. {Apud Linlithqu:)

Jan. 18. — Lettre to Joiine Lawsoune, makand him Curatour, gydour, and gouernour to
Patrik Neilfoun, quJiilR iS Baft, aiitr l)fS na toft to jnlJf itm Srlff ; for ]ie weile and proffeit of him
and his barnis, quhill God fend him witt and knawlege to rewle and gyde him felf, his barnis, and
guidis, and mend him of Jie faid infirmite. {At Lmlithqw.)

Feb. 11. — Refpitt to Hector M'clane of Dowart, for all crymes committitbehim in ony
tyme bigane, vnto ])e dait heirof : For xix ^eris.

Feb. 24. — Remiffion to George Meldrum of Fivy, and iiij others, for alt tVtmW committed by him prior to this date.

Feb. 28, — Lettre to Olitjer Sinclare of Pitcarnis, makand him Slajittant aiitl Brjiar
of t)[)C CaSttll and fortalice of iTf mpfallounf, for all Jie dais of his life ; with ])e landis of ])e Manis
of Temptalloune, with ])e landis of Reidfyde, medois, and cunyngaris : Payand Jjb faid Oliuer, serlie,
to our fbuerane lord P.lx merkis of male, alanerlie.

Mar. 4. — Remiflion to George Sinclare, brother-german of John S. of Blaufe, for art and
part of the ^laufiljtcr of EffiTiUiaiH Cicttjtotnif of ^cottt'gtoune.

Mar. 0. — Remiffion to Robert Ciiarteris of Lociitoune, for the ^Iau?jl)tcr of William
Chai'teris.

Mar. 10. — Remiflion to Thomas Blaire of Bathyok, for treafonably i^bfUtlTg from i\)t
5armu at ^iiltoau. (Apud Lhilithqw.)

May 27, 1540. — Ane Protectioune, Saufgarde, and Refpitt to Oliuer Sinclare of Pitcarnis, Katheryne Bellendene his fpous, Jiair men, tennentis, and feruandis : STo tnBltrC qujjfll t|)r
SaiU ©linen's rcturjlgng agailt fra iijt i^Ife, and xl dais paireftir. {At Sanctandrois.)

May 29 — Remiffion to Thomas Craufurd, Captain of Craufurd-Johne, for treafonably 9biii(jig from t\)t armi) at ;&ultoai).

' Robert Cairxcross. He was formi-rly Provost of tlie Collfgiate Churrh of Corstorpliinc and Chaplain to
Jamks V, ami held tlic> oiliro of Lord High Treasurci'. Having also obtained the Abbacy of Fearne, he resigned it
in favour of his relation, .Tamos Cainicioss, a Clerk of the See of Glasgow. ' For all matters connected with

THE Isles, reference may he made to Mr Gregory's work.

28 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 255

APPENDIX.

Jun. 4 — Remiffion to John Crummy, for trraSonablij iuitljoltftng and defending tift pa»
late antt place of ittnlitljqlo againft the King and his authority, he being piefent in proper perfon,
with difplayed banners, &c. : And for firing cannons, &c. againft the King and his company, and the
place wherein he then was, within the burgh of Linlithq^", &c. (Apud Falkland.)

Jun. 11 — Lettre of Gift to Hew Craufukd, Tone and are apperand to Laurence C. of Kilbirny, of all gudis, movabill and vnmovabill, iSrc, quhilkis pertenit to fe laid Laurence, Efchete for
tFalSefng HXiO ffenjcfng of ailC procesi of stppn'Sflig, led at his iaftance aganis Johne Cunynghame.
(' F". merkis' of Conipofition.)

Jun. 12 — Remiffion, Alexander Ogiluy of that Ilk, for treafonably Sbilftng from t]^e
<^x\\\x> at S'uTiuafi.

Jun. 12. — Remiffion to Laurence Craufurd of Kilbirny,' for treafonably ^biQint; from
tjc ictrntj) at OTerft ; and for all other crimes, Treafon excepted.

Jul. 18. — Precept of Charter to James Bannatyne, Writer to the Signet, of a tenement in
the Cowgate of Edinburgh, &c., efcheated to the King by reafon of the ^ei'e^B of fHr ^eilfg
5[8entlcrSoune, late Teacher of the High School of Edinburghe, of which he was roiibtttcti
before tj)e ^pitHual KuBge. {Apud Petlethy.)

Aug. 13. — Lettre of Gift to Oliuer Sinclare (of Pitcarnis) of all gudis, &c. quhilkis
pertenit to gifr SauiB 'j^urljCSoiIf, ^roue^t of lao^rfllj, efcheated throw being pe faid Sir Dauid
abfurtt of tcrtanc popntfSof ^ijeresu.

Aug. 16. — Remiffion to Alexander M^Alestare of LowpEand ij others, for treafonably
abttttng; from i\)t ^rmp at ^uWoloai).

Sep. 15. — Lettre of Gift to James Erle of Arrane of fe non-entres, malis, fermis, &c. of
pe lantlf^ antt 33aroitp of J^amnltouiie, &c, &c., with J)e releif ])airof quhen it falhappin. {At
Glammys.)

Eo die. — Lettre of Gift of ]>e Gift maid be Patrik Erle Bothuile, Lord Halis, to vmq'i^
{^tiiix) %amti l^ammultoun of dfljnnart, ftnntljt, of pe nonentres, males, &c. of Eftirand Weftir
Blairmukkis, S:c., in fclierefdome of Lanerk, quhilkpertenis to our fouerane lord, be refoune of Efchete
throw dForfaXtour, led vpone ]>e faid vmq'^ James for lertane ertmeS of iffreiSoune, hc.^

Eo die. — Lettre of Gift of fe Efchete of Over and Nethir Braco, Fynnart, &c. to James Erle
of Arrane, quhilkis pertenit to (^cl)ir) 3tameji ^. of dFuiinart, fenggljt, haldin be him as tenandrijs of ])e faid Erie and Alexander Schaw of Sauchquhy, and now pertenes to our fouerane lord, &c.

Sep. 26. — Remiffion to George Gorthy of that Ilk, Triftram his fon and heir apparent,
and George and John, alfo his fons, for the ^faugljtcr of Jaobert itlurrai) of Srumticiuane, &c.

Eo die. — Lettre of Gift to Robert Dury of ])AT Ilk of fe takkis and ftedingis of pe landis
of Lufcar, Eviote, Killerny, Kynnedder, &c. in regal, of Dunfermling and 111. of Fyft"; quhilkis pertenit to (Schir) James Coluile of Est Wrmys, knyght, and now to ))E King be refoune of
efchete, throw being of fe faid James convict of certane crymes of dTreSOUtl atltf ILcsfe'mateSte, &c.
{At Falkland.)

Sep. 29. — Remiffion to Walter Leslie, fon and heir apparent of Alex. L. of Kynraury, for
the ;&Iau(55ter of |9atrtcft liettrai) of Btnfianoc]^. {Apud S. Andream.)

' On Jul. 30, 1540, he obtained leave ' to sell, analie, or wodset ane part of his landis of Kilbyrnie' and ' Garnok.' ' See some notices relative to his Forfeiture, Vol. I, p. * 227.

256 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Nov. 23. — Lettre of Gift to Oliuere Sinclare (of Pitcarnis) of all gudis, &c. quliilkis
pertenit to Arcliibald Douglas of Garfchogill, Williame his fone, JohDrie D- and Jolinne Efpy, and all
vjieris ]iare complicis, Rebels, and fugityvis fra the lawis, for nocht finding foueite to vndirly ])e fammyn, for ])e art and part of Jie cruell §Iaiui)tfr of vrnqi"^^ ;fHat5tCr ^tttor ^intlal'C, |3ar^iJUne of
U llirntie. {At Ilahjrudelmuje. )

Dec. 8. — Remiflion to Robert Maule of Panmuir, for treafonably ^iitStng from tj&f
Qrmg of ^uUuaiJ.

Feb. 3, 1510-1. — Remiflion to William Stewart of Todlaw, for treafonably 9;itlj{n0
from tjjf ^rmj) at Dttliurtijt and upon fj&e iHartilfS of the kingdom, gathered quarterly for refilling of our Enemies of England, &c.

Feb. 6. — Refpitt to Johnne Mowe of ))AT Ilk, and six vferis, for art and part of fe
^latlfjltrr of Williame Burne, fone to Robert Burne in Prymfydloche, eommittit at pe Kirk of Mow :
For tbre jeris.

Eo die. — Lettre of Gift to Oliuer Sinclare of Pitcarnis and Johne Tennent of fe
Carnys of jie takkis of ]ie Kirk of Abircorne, now perteiiyng to our fouerane lord be refoune of
efcheit, throw ^ttisttfuing of vmq'>' (^rl)fr) Siamcs ^ammiiUounc, Swmtume of dFpnnart, finggjjt,
to ])e deid for certane trymes of Trefoune.' (Compofition ' V'" merkis.')

Mar. 8. — Warrant to make a third Signet, in lieu of that which icasjtolen.
Secretar, Bccaufe We vndirfland ]iat it is nccelfar pare be tijrc Small ^tgncttS for feruice in
our ^cSSfotint, 3>ilStifC«atvf5, and for oiivc aluilf illicctiom's, Our Will is heirfor, and We charge
lOu, ]iat incotinent eftir ])e ficht lieirof, :;e caufe mak ane thrid Signete, in place of it Jiat wes
flollin, to be vlit in our feruice, as faid is : And to reforme pe vperis thre Signetis, grete and fraall,
as falbe thocht expedient be jie Lordis of our Counfale. And for ])e maire fecurite of 30ur Warrand,
We ordand ]iis oure charge to be infert in Jie Bukis of our Counfale, to be extract to ^ou in forme of
Act. Subfcriuit with our hand, and gevin vndir our Priue Sele, at LiNLiTHaw, pe viij day of
Marches and of our regne pe xxvij 5eire.

Mar. 13. — Remiflion to Sir James Sandelandis of Caldor, knyght, for his treafonably
iSfStttllTg, &c. umq'"" Svt]&fiaTlJ SolugTaS of l{ll5]pUltJj) and his fervants, Traitors and Rebels at
the horn : And for taking two horfes from the faid Archibald.

Mar. 18. — Remiflion to William Lord Sympill, Robert Mafler of Sympill his fon,
Gabriel S. bis brother, Dauid and John S., and William Pencartoune, for all rrtmfS rommittcti
prior to tljl'iS tJatr, Treafon, &c. excepted. {Ajnid S. Aiidrcam)

Mar. 22. — Remiffion to Archibald Ilis, alias Archibald ]>e Clerk, Alexander M'conill
Gallicb, and twenty-eight others, for the treafonable Fire-railing and 3t}tirm'ng tijp tfaStlc of ^llatU*
fioiuiairti and boats thereat -J And alfo of the ' ^^thSt\)i^' of Utiilocliob) axitf JTroittfrnW: This
Remiflion was declared by the King to be null, unlefs they obferved good rule in time to come.

Mar. 30, 1541 Refpittto Johnne Williamsoune, and fiftyvperis perfonis, kynnifmen and

allya of vmq''' ^cffor ^TariiitoSrir for aTT attfonfg antt njjmcS eommittit be panie befor pe day of
pe dait lieirof, Trefoune in our fouerane lordis pcrfoune alanerly except : For xix 5eris to indure.

Apr. 9 — Refpitt to Alexander Banys, for art and part of ]>e ^Iaur|)tfr of ^d)it Witt'
Iiam ^tcbfrSotinr, Chaplane, eommittit vpoune pe Linkis of Kincrag, be pe fpace of ix 3eri8 or pairby. For xix 5eris. {At Striiiili?iff,)

' See I. 227. ^ See Mr Gregory's Work on the Isles.

1

29 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 257

APPENDIX.

Apr. 20. — Lettre of Tak to Oliver Sinclare of Pitcarnis, his airis and affignais, of all
and findry our foueiane lordis landis and itortlScIjfppiS of <©vSnau awt( SjftlanlJ/ and of all pe
|3lt'g, partis, boundis, and fifchingis ))airof, and all pair pertinentis ; togidder with ])e Cotl5tal)Uliir})
anil ISfJ^t'ligof tic CaStcII of DJt'rftiuan : And als makand )'e faid Oliuere, and his airis male,
Stuititti, ^t])tliSai, aUniiraUfe, and JSailU'cS of all and findry ]ie forfaidis landis and lordfchipis,
baith be fey and land : For thre ^eiiis nixt to cum eftir fe feift of Lammes laft bypafl : Payand
^erlie thre thovfand merkis, at Beltane and Lammes, be equal portionis. (Apud Striiiilhir/.)

May 24'. — Refpitt to Schir Richard Purves, Chaiplane, for pe ^TaiicJjtfr of ?l>Cltrn
J9tU)Iaittl(5, done and committit be him in his pure defens. For xix jeris. (^At Striueling.)

Jun. 4. — Refpitt to Charles Campbell of Skeringtoune, Colin C, fone of vmq'« Colin
of Auchinhowye, Williame C. and Johnne Roger, for ]iare trefonabill biding and renianyng fra our
fouerane lordis Stnnjj anil Uai'ii of ^uliuaj) : And for jie ^laucbttrtS of ?llanc ItJammnUoune
of 38avilolnf, Robert Striueling of Bankere, and Andro S. in Ballingtrocht : For xix 3eris. (^At
Strhielhiff.)

Jun. 9. — Reniiffion to John Levingstoune, fon of James L. of Waranehill, for the cruel
^Ta«g:l)tcr on forctj&ougijt fcloni; anii ' aulil dffif' of Archibald Ballie of Howgait, who
flew the faid John's father. (^Ajmd Strhiclaig.^

Jun. 14. — Remiflion to Alan Lokart of Ley, for ST&fillHg ffom tl)C Urmu at Eiiln'ft '.
And for ftlaugjttr of Ralph and Dauid Weir, &e. {Apud Striueli7ig.)

Jul. 13. — Refpect to James Sinclare, for art and part of )>e ^lattcljtfr of vraq'" OTiHtam
Crffrjtotinc of ^Cottt'StOUnc, &c. : For thre 5eris.

Jul. 25. — Lettre of Gift to Oliuere Sinclare of Pitcarnis of ))e jfHarfagt of ffHilliam
^(ncTart, fone and are of vmq''' Alexander S. of Dunbethe ; and fail5eing him be deces vnmaryt, fe
Mariage of ony vjier ane. (Conipofition ' !<■ merkis.')

Eo die. — Reniiffion to John Lindesay of Covintoune, Robert his brother, Ilarbert Johnefloune, fon and heir apparent of Harbert J. of Wefb Raw, and five others, for treafonably ^iiiilin(j
from t]&e ISaiii of eSTtrlt, &c.

Oct. 21.. — Lettre of Gift to Olyver Sinclare of Pitcarnis of Jie Efchete of Robert
Dikfoxine in Bouchrig, and feven other Dikfounis, fugityve fra )ie law and at }ie home, for pe ^lauc^^tci*
of 3>o5n anil CFiumonii (Sralianc, and two others their brothers.

Dec. 31. — Lettre of Gift to Normond Leslie, his airis, &c., of all gudis, &c., being within
Jie CaStcIl of C?5t Wisvuvi, quhilkis pertenit to James Coluile of Est Wemys, kny', Efcheit
throw being of )ie faid James fugityve fra ])e law for certane crymes of SlTrca^on anil Etr^cmaifStf,
of ])e quhilkis he wes convict in Jugement.

Jan. 1, 1541-2. — Refpitt to Schir Alexander Elisoune, Chaplane, for art and partof ])e
^laucfitcr of George Biifet, committit vpoune fuddante : For xix 5eris.

Feb. 8. — Remiflion to John Lausoune, John Scot, John Myllar, and John Scot fenior, for
their treafonably befieging and iirfaftt'ng tip the gates and doors of tl)f loilgtllCf lltlongtng to liaUTCd
(<5rti)J)t6l)Op) of ^anctanilvot^,' filuated in the Black Friar's Wynd, within the burgh of Edinburgh,
for his capture and apprehenfion, he being within the faid lodging at the time, &c. (^Apud Fcdhland.)

' See these Extracts, Aug. 31, 1542. ' James Betoun, who, according to MacFarlan's MS., was ' the sixth

and youngest son of James Beaton of Balfour, by Marjory Boswal his wife, daughter to Sir David Boswal of Balmuto.' He died in the time of harvest, 1539. Sadler's Zetlers, iTciM's Cat. of Bishops, p. 30.

VOL. I. f 2 K

258 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. L542.

APPENDIX.

Feb. 21. — Remiffion to Donald 31'^Ale.ster of Largis, in Kyntire, John his fon and heir
apparent, Rannald Boy, Archibald and John Makrannald Vane, and twenty-four others, for their
treafonably fHjtHing ffom tit UaiB of ^uTtuau: And for all other crimes, &c.

Mar. G. — liefpitt to Morise Dalrimpill, Dauid Kennedy, and Thomas Hornour, for \>e
JSebi'St'iig of S>otttt Crrirlitouitc, rallit SLaHn J»cSutounc, and having cainale daile with hir be pe
faid Morife, incontrare hir will : For six 5eris. (At Sanctandrois.)

Mar. 12. — Refpitt to Walter Portuis for ])e ^laucjjfcr of Dauid Olifer in Montcowper,
committit apoune AuUiaute be ]>e fpace of ten 5eris, or ]>airby : For six 5eris. (^At Petlethy.')

War. 16. — Lettre makand Dauid Creiciitoune of Nauchtane, Capitane Ailtr Krpare
of tTjc Ca^tfll of CrtiinljurgJ, for his lifetime — iiij' niarkis to l)e pait to him jerlie, in his fee.

Apr. 14, 1542. — Reniifllon to Andrew Murray of Blakbarony, for liis treafonable art,
part, aSSiStanrf, J^C^ct, &c. afforded to vmq'*' a:ircl)fl)anj Boiugla^, and Ifobella Hoppar his fpoufe,
the time the faid Arcliibald was JSeficT nvCB STraftor. {Apud Slriueling.)

Apr. 30. — Remiffion to Hector M^clane of Doward, Donald his brother, and John
JNPclane of Ardgoure, for IHitling from i^t liaftt of ^loltoau : And for difobedience lliewn to
David Wod of Crag, Comptroller to the King, whilfl he was in the Isles for fetting the King's
lands, and abfenting themfelves from hisprefence : And for all other crimes, &c. High Treafon alone
excepted. (^Apud Sanctandrois.)

Eo die. — Letter of Regrefs to David Pitscotty, great grandfon' and fucceffor of dftnfap
iittScottj) of jlonrartli), on the fourth part of the Haltoun of Loncardy, in the fliire of Perth, alienated by the faid Finlay to Sir Andrew Quhitheid.

May 6. — Comraiflion to Archibald Stewart, Captain of Dunnyvaig, making him
Ruler and <5o5)fntor iuitl)iu tl)£ IjounBiS of |3lei),^ with power to execute i\}t (©fSfC of g-Sertff
thereof ; during the King's pleafure.

May 10. — Commiflion to Alexander Master of Glencarne, making him Ruler and
©oiiftnor ioitit'n tJjc ijountiS of itintuve ; with power to hold ^'Ijcriff an* Du^tiriaru Courts,
&c.

Jun. 11. — Remiffion to James Nasmytii, burgefs of Linlithq"', for treafonable art, part, and
agSt'Stanct afforded to umq''' ^ir 3am{5 !i3ammntouuc of dfunnavt, ftntgljt, in his treafonable acts
and deeds. (Apud Slriueling.)

Aug. 31. — Lettre of Tak to Olyver Sinclare of Pitcarnis, his airis, &c. of the landis
and 3toril5tI)ip))t5 of (©rliliau aiiB 5SttTant(, and all j^eBlii, kc' for five seris fra ]ie feift of Lammes
1543 : Payand 5erlie 3000 merkis, at Beltane and Lammes.

Sep. L — Refpett to Gilbert Fordyce, for ])e S'lauc^ttr of vmq''' Williame Donaldfone,
alias Brounhill, committit xij seris fyne within ))e Gryrth* of Halyrudhous, apoun fudante.

Sep. 19 Remiffion to Mathew Windegaitis, for the ^fautjtcv of Robert, alias Hob,

Olyver. {Apud Cuuper.)

Oct. 2. — Refpitt to Alexander Lauder, for ]>e ^'laucljtcr of vmq" Tiiomas Broultare ;
committit rekleffie with ])e fchot of ane culvering, ane 5eire fyne or fairby : For xix jeris.

Nov. 4 Itcfpitl to Dauid Schaw, and George Dreghornc, for ]ie g'laurljtev of umquDlTe

3)olmnc ^tviuiling of Bct'r, fiiT])cl)t, &c. : For xix ^eris.

' Pronepotis. ' See Mr Gingory's work for illustrations of these and other matters connected witli thf

Isles. ' See these Extracts, Apr. 'M, 15+1. ' Saiictuai'y.

5

2Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 259

APPENDIX.

Nov. 26. — Lettre of Gift to Edwart Stewart of all gudis, &c. quhilk pertenit to Jolmne
Smithe In Smithiftoune, efchete throw Jie faid Johnis being abfent and JJtntangttg fra J'f ©tSt anS
Srm» deuifit and ordanit to pas to J^e <S6t ailK ^outi JJorifOUltS of fe realme, for expulfioune of
our aid inymeis furth of pe I'amin.

II. Illustrations of the Reign of King James V, selected from the Accounts of the

Lord High Treasurer of Scotland.

[The Editor presents here to the I'eader the result of a laborious and patient
investigation of another portion of the truly valuable Records of the Lord High
Treasurer of Scotland's Accounts. If, in his eagerness to bring to light much
important historical matter, he has erred, by collecting too many particulars,
strictly speaking, unconnected with the nature of this work, it is hoped that
even those who are least inclined for such enquiries, will readily excuse the
indiscretion. It has long been the Editor's conviction, that the real complexion
of great public events are often most clearly understood and displayed by the
investigation of such authentic sources as the public Records. The intricacy
and extent of these documents, however, are such as to discourage, or altogether
to deter, the generality of authors from even making the attempt at so serious
an undertaking.

It has been thought best merely to add a few brief exjilanatory Notes, because
the dates in general indicate the Trials illustrated by this and the preceding
Appendices.]

Jul. 23, 1515. — Item, deliuerit be Mafter George Langmure, in ]ie Compt-giffaris name, to
Alexander Chai.mour, Paynteour,' for ane hundrethe and xl panntit SlrnijS to tljt ©I)5tqut}5
of our goucrant lovti King James the Ferd," quham God allbhe, ]ns day deliuerit in Sanct
Gelis Kirk, price of ilk pece tuelf pennys,yM»i»ia .... viij ti.

I/cm, deliuerit be fe Compt-giffar to my Lord Governour, to offrr at t])t iHfSS' of ti)t
forSaia ©bitquiii, ......... xiiij i.

Jul. 29.— Item, to ane rynnare^ at^ bure ane Letter to Kethe Marfcbell, for mg JtorS
iiftargtBcTI, ....... . . xvj d.

Jul. 30 — Item, at ane eftir none, to Dauid Cameroune, Johnne Langlandis, and James Biflatt,
Officiaris, to jiaS at tit po5t with my lord Governouris %tUmi to my Lordis ChammerLANE,'' Maxwell, and to S"tn'wtTtn5, with all deligence, betuix Jiame, . . Is,

Jul. 31. — Item, to Joline Balfoure, officiare, to pafs with thre Letteris and credence'' of my
Lord Governouris, with deligence, to ]'e Lordis Erskine, Flemyng, and Lard of Keire,
for IStjiing of tljt JSuigiS gratf, ....... xiijs.

' See Mar. \o, lol7-18 of these Extracts. ' See Vol. I, p. • 120, Notes, for some similar illustrations. ' Funeral Mass and Requiem for the repose of the late King's soul. ' Runner; courier.

' That; who. " It would at tirst sight appear that this was probably John, second Lorh Fleming. Alexander,

third Lord Home, having embraced the Queen-Dowager and Angus's party long previous to this date, it might reasonably be supposed he must have been, ere this time, deprived of the otlice of Loud Great Chamberlain. By a supsequent entry, however, Aug. 23, 1515 (([. v.), it appears the Home was at that time Chamberlain. ' It was
necessary that a messenger entrusted with such important affairs should be enabled to exhibit the fullest Credentials
and the Warrant of the Governor and Privy Council.

260 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1515.

APPENDIX.

Item, to Duncan, cartar, to pafs with xxiiij lioiTis, makaml vj cartill, chargit with ttoa fuTut*
ttnj-UTuatlCf , gvn-llanis, gyn-powdir, and certane Ijacbufchis,' ovt of Ediubuighe to Jtintounc, and
returnyt fe famyn day, ilk cart on fe day ix s.,fumma, .... liiij s.

/fe;«, to ten pynouris- at bure X hacbufchis, . . . . . x s.

Aug. 2. — Item, to Johne Langlandis, officiare, for to pafs with diligence till Dunde and
FoRFARE, to tjnigf all f f n^abill jjfr^oins iiutt mii lorK tSobcrnouv, l>e ferd^ day of Auguft,< xvj s.

Item, to tiia rynnaiis, jiat palt with Letteris to Dalkeithe, Newbottill, and Leftahig, for help
of ©fill to tijc guniinS, . . ..... ij s. iiij d.

Item, to Dokane (Duncan), cartare, for xj cartis quhilkis lauborit ane hale day, tarcantf
»§uiini.)S,gun^5tani.)^, jjoiuliif, fofftn'S, anU I)tl)ir SCrtaljcvij out of the Castell and Abbay of
Edixbl RGHE to Leithe ; lauborand ane haill day, ilk cart on fe day ix s., Jumma, iiij ti. xix s.

Aug. 6. — Item, to Johne Langlandis for to pas with iiij %ttUxii to tijf ^cIjUTCfrt'S of RoxBURGHE, Berwic, Peblis, and Selkirk, to caufe ]ie Kingis liegis be in CrBinburtjljc tijt yb ttatj
of SuguSt, with XX dais victuallis — for his wagis, ..... xiiij s.

Item, to Gilbert Rutherfui'd, James Biflat, and Dauid Lowry, Meffingeris, to pas with xvj
5S,Ettfvfe for ]>e famyn caufe to Jie ^'tJjjjrtS of Forfare, Kincardin, Fyff, Dunde, Cowpare,
BerwY) Pertiie, Mentethe, Clackmannane, Stratherne, Kinross, Kile, Cunynghame,
and Renfrew, as ]ie Breuiat beris — for par wagis, . . . • . lij s.

Aug. 7. — Item, to Dauid Purves, Mafer,' for to pafs erandis of my Lord Governouris to
iijt Eoftf Safeficrc, (n 3*nglantt — for his wagis, to gud conipt,^ . . . Ivj i.

Aug. 8. — Item, to xij rartartS and xviij rartl'5 ane hundrethe and xx pnnottriS and ix gaWIJten,'' being tarcanB tj&C StrtaljCVJ) fca <!?Sinl)tlvgJDr to ^trtuclfltg, and retumand agane, in viij dais
labour, as )ie C'ouipt maid Jiairuppone beris in it, . . . . Ivj ti. xvj s. xd.

Ite)n, for jie wagis of vj horfis, and v feruitouris with Jiame, q(ll){l[ud taVCtt guiti^tailfe Jie
famyn tyme, in foure dais, ........ xlvj s.

Item, to Sande Jakfone, Duncan Smyth, and tua feruitouris with fame, to iuaft out i^t
Cartfe abufF writtin, ........ xxviij s. iiij d.

Item, ]5e famyn day, and ])e xiiij day of Auguft Jiairefter, to Dokane, cartar, Thome Brauewod,
and Johne of Cunynghani, for fyve cartis in y] dais, and to William Gogar, beand with ])ame v dais,
with anc fart, Ijifnganti with ])aim out of ©la^glo to Edin' tiua l)aiU gunituS anS aiif iiroftfn, ilk
cart one ]ie day, ix s., Jumma, . . . . . . xv ti. xv s.

Aug. 9. — Item, to Petir Gilleis, Frencheman, to pay xix pynouris quhilkis labourit in Jie Palice
a day, ilk man viij A.^ Jumma, . . .... xij s. viij d.

Aug. 10. — Item, to Ilay Herald, and a Monk of Newbottill, quhilk wes acquaint in Ingland, to pass inftl) Jtcttrn'S of my Lord Governouris to \e HLovB IBafefft, in Ingland, vj ti. vj s.

Aug. 17. — Item, deliuerit to Mathew Auchinlek, goldfmyth, to mend ])e hiltis of J)E Kingis
^luci'tf of |i)onouf, twa vncez of filuer, price of ilk vnce fourtene fchillingis ; ane ducat of wecht to
J)e giltiiig of ]ie lamyn hiltis, and ane lyclit Franche crovne for his labouris, /««?««, iij ti. xij d.

Aug. 20. — Item, to Galtere Robertfone, deliuarit to ane feruitour of ]'E Lard of Cesfurd,'
quljtlfc tome bitl) noucItirS fra \t armg to my Lord Gouernour, . . xviij s.

Item, to ane rynnare, to pas to Dunde with Letteris to ]ie Ballies Jiairof, to SjJCfU tit tj)arc
foXlitS to tDc 3rm«, . . • ..... iiij s.

' Ilagbuts, or Ilarnuebusses. ' Pioneers. * Fourth. ' Numerous similar entries Cor the expense

of couriers despatchcil to various parts of the Kingdom. ' Slacer. ' Tliis plirase often oeeurs iu the

Accounts, and seems to sii;tiify an inlerim payment made until final accounting. ' Drivers furnished with gads,

having sharp points to ijnii<l on the oxen. * The above entries are given as a specimen of this early part of the

Treasurer's Accounts, wliieh, however, are so very bulky as to prevent the possibility of any such Extracts being
given in a connected maniiec. They arc, however, very interesting, and replete with minute and curious historical
materials. " One of the Wardens of the Marches.

3 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * ogi

APPENDIX.

Aug. 23.— Item, to Johne Balfoure, meffingere, for to pafs with Letteris of Suramondis of
dJ^orfaSntouv on tijt SLort Cjfjniumcrlanf , to liis expenfis, . . . . xx s.

Aug. 2-J.. — Item, to James Wallace and Dauid Lowry, Officiaris, coijjunctlie and feueiallie,
tjre Sttttcrfe of ^Uinmonllt'5 on |)E Lord Hume and his foure brefir, and on Dand' Heriot of
Trabroune to compere )>e xxij day of October nixt Jiaireftir, to here ])ame be Jforfniut for caufis,
and ane generall Letter for Captioune — to ilkane of Jiame xiiij s., and to ane rydaud man for to pals
with faim, wele horfit, xiiij I., fumma, ...... xlij s.

Item, for )ie hyire of tua led horfis for to pafs with ])e faid Officiaris, . , xs s.

27 Ite7n, to Francheoife Ferquhare, feruitour to ^i\)ix Stlltijone SarjSl), and in liis name,

for to pay xv gunnaris for to pafs |iis day to t\)t Cattle of Similar, ilk man tua crovnis of wecht, in
part of payment of )iare wagis, to gud compt, . . . . . , xxvij li.

Sep. i. — Item, to JLuouilC |t?fraTJl for to pas to ]'e ^ortf iDaftlttrc with writingis, to his expenfis, . . . . . . . . . . iij ti. X s.

Item, to Dauid Cameroun for to j^aSjS to t|je Bai) of iTrcio, and erandis to jie StotrB I3aftft(re,
to his expenfis, ......... xlij s.

Item, to Johne Langlandis Letteris to call ]ie Lord Hume his bre]iir and pare complicez for
t\)t l^aTBfug of JJlacattr, and to leif fe famyn, deliuerit to his expenfis, and iij Witnes to pafs with
him, ........... XXX s.

IL — Item, to Dauid Lindesay,^ JJepart of iiit BingiS gract, takand fourty poundis in
penfioune, ^erelie ; deliuerit to him in pairt of pament Jiairof, to gud Compt, . . x ti.

Item, to 3Lt)ounc f^cralU for to pafs, Jie fecund tyme, erandis of my Lord Governouris in
Ingland, to ])e S.oftt Saftftfrf, to his expenfis, ..... iij ti. x s.

12. — Item, to Duncan, cartare, for his cart lauborand in rarpincj; of Strtaljtrj), JarncS, halbertis, pikkis, and fperis, vj dais betuix ])E Abbay and Jie Castell of Ed", as wes contenit in
Capitane Bukkatis' Compt maid Jiairon, ..... iij ti. xviij s. viij d.

14. — Item, to Duncan, cartare, and his marrowis' paS^antf to ^laSgh) witii xv cartill, makand
Ix horfis, forttoa tannoblltS, and for powdir and vfir^rtaljcru ; fra fe xiiij day forfaid, inclufiue, to
XX day of ])e famyn exclufiue, makand fyve dais, ilk cart on ))e day ix 's.,Jinnma, xxxiij ti. xv s.

Item, to xij feruitouris quliilkis helpit ))e famyn cartis, ilk man on Jie day viij S.,J'umma, iij ti.

15. — Item, to Dauid Cameroune, and four other Officiaris, to pafs with Ixxvij Letteris to pe
StorKfe, ^djtrrrffiS, 33aronfe, antt %1fBi5inflt '^ of jie maill parte of Jie realme, to provid for xl dais
Victualis apone iij dais warnyng ; and for certane Lordis and Hedifmen for to cum towart my Lord
Gouernour with diligens — deliuerit to ]ie forfaidis Officiaris to mak pair expenfis, and to hyre pame
horfis, becaufe pair avne horfis fum wes flane, fum wes burfyne,'' fum crukkit, fum foppit' be confideratioune, amangis paim, ....... vij ti. ij i.

16. — Item, at fyve houris in )ie morayng, to iLuouitt ^cralW, for to pafs with my Lord
GovERXouRis Letteris to pe StoriJ SaftftiVf , beand in Cadilc, to his expenfe, . iij ti. x s.

Item, to Johne Adamfbne for to pafs with tua Letteris of my Lord Gouernouris, ane to
pE QuENE, icana in 33lacatcr, and pe topir to Santt i\cr of dfcrnjil&frSt ; to his expenfis, xiiij i.

29. — Item, to Johne Adamfone, Officiare, for to pas with Mons" de Plaxis, SlmhaSSfatOUr
to tijt Sing: ot dFrantJj, and Mafter James Ogiluy to tit ®^utnc and 3tortt Baftlitrt, and fonhir^
eftii' pare directiouuis, deliuerit to his expenfis, to gud Compt, . . . xx s.

30. — Item, to ILpoune ^CraltllS totf, for fupporting of hir in pe faid Lyoxis abfens, i^canll

* The common familiar abbreviation for Andrew. ^ Afterwards Sir David Lindesay of the Mount, Lioy

King of Arms. ' One of the Frenchmen. He is called ' Johanne Bouskat, Commissioner of the Artalzery,'

Feb. i, 1315-16. ' Fellows, companions. ^ Chiefs. " ISroken-winded. ' Perhaps swopped or

swapped, i. e. exchanged for other horses, on paying a difference or consideration. ' Farther, as he might be

directed by them.

262 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1516.

APPENDIX.

tn SlnglanlJ, in v ti. ; ami )ie xx day of December fairefter to his felf v ii., makand in ])e hail x ti. in
part of pament of his fee, to gud Compt, . . . • . . x ti.

Oct. 1. — Item, to James Wallace tua Letteris of my Lord Gouernouris for t|)C JLovUfS in
^tfiUcTi'iig, i\f})an'S of \t JJi'ngB jjcrSone, for gude veule to be put in Striueling, anciit tlje
|3t5t{lciUf, deliuerit to liis wagis, . . . . . . . X s.

Oct. 11. htm, to Dowgall Campbell, deliuerit be ])E Lard of Kere in ])e name of pe

Compt-giflare, for certane expenfis fe faid Dougall maid on iHariltavtS quhilkis he had with him in
tT)C ^abrfcn, for ]>e fnpporting of Makkanis House, quhen it wes firft to be ^fgtt ic §cj)ir
BonalB ^It'S, witliin ]>e tyme of ]ns Compt, . . . xxxiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Oct. 20. — Item, to Dauid Cameroune for his pafTage with Master James Hay, before fis
day, to ^arbottiU in .^nglanlJ ; and for his pafTage )ns day with diligens and my lord GouERNovRis \\'riiiniis to tl)f Cnurnc, beand in Harbottill, deliuerit to him, . . . xlij s.

Oct. 23. — Ilcm, to tljrc EMltlUiS quhilkis come out of Tavidale to pffif ]'f f)L«utl'oune
of aire ^ummon'DiS (of dForffiturj) maid on ])E Lord Hume anlf 5t5 brttjjrr, . xx s.

Oct. 25. — Item, to Duncan Riche and certane v])iris beraris, for fait of Ofhciaris, xxvj itrttcrtjf
for fa mony Schirreffis and Stewartis of ]ie haill realme for jiuttiiig Uouiu of 3tttiluart«5tabi5,
and for vfnig of fperis, axis, halbertis, bowis, and culueringis, deliuerit to Jiar wagis, . xlij s.

Oct. 27. — Item, to Johne Balfoure and vfiris beraris to pafs to Jie ^f JfvVffBiS of DunberTANE, SxRiUELiNCi, LiTHQw, RENFREW, and Lanark, for to wame )iare fchyris for Jie ])amc<
hn'nging of tjbe iSrtaljcip out of ©laggU), xxviij s.

Oct. 28. — hem, to Duncan Riche for to pafs with my Lord Gouernouris Letteris to
Setoune, Dunglass, Fastcastell, and endlangis ]>« Coft, with diligens, for to gavf mali 33r{lj
fgrfs' ana ra5t° «!5unnu5, for nontlfrfs of tjc <!riiumj)i)ctj)r Bing of ^France gat in Stumlbaiifp,
to his expenfe, ........... . . xx s.

Oct. 3L — Item, to Hare Laufone for to pafs with diligens to my Lord Gouernour, day and
nycht, towart ^anininltounr witii j'are Writing at come fra ]ie Vnder-Capitane of Dunbar,
anent ])e it\a5fng of dFnrt I)C tJjc BfngiS iJfbdliS, for his wagis, . . . . xx s.

Nov. 4. — Item, for wax deliuerit to Dauid Anderfoune for^flnSto ftrtanc Stfttfn'S of jForfactourr, . . . . . • • • • • iiij i.

Nov. 20. — Item, for wax quhit and reid he bocht to ])E Selyis of certane Stcttcn'^ of dFofs
fattour and vjieris concernyng my Lord Gouernour, . . . . xv s.

Dec. 1. — Item, to James Neiljit, mafare, for to jpaSS iuft]& i\}t Sing of jlTann'S 9:ml)a^5ta»
tOUV to i\)t itortl Saftftt'vc, and for till vfe ]ie faid Ambaffiatouris directioune, for his expenfis, to
gud compt, deliuerit ........ xxviij s.

Dec. 6. — Item, to Patrik Reoche, mefTiugere, for to pafs with my lord Gouernouris writingis to fl)c iU'ng of dfrancf 9:niiae5(atour, hrantt iuttli tijc CBiucnc in ^arhottill, in Ingland,
for liis cxpeulis,^ ......... xxxij s.

Dec. 27. — Item, to Duncan Riche for to pafs with Writingis of tje Uing of JFrantiS Stin=
baSSiatoint^ in Ingland to Wyt ® utnc and JJtng of SnstaniiiS ConinifetonaviS.JicanlJ ht iMorrprtijr, to his expenfis and wagis, . ...... xlij s.

Jan. 31, 1515-lG. — Item, be my lord Gouernouris command, to ]ie BaiLiEisof Selkirk
to pay Jiair Taxt, fjrrauS at ll)ai toar I)rvrit ' lie ^\)t\>ii> anH il^c^tcncncf, . . xv ti.

Feb. 4 Item, to Joiianne Boulkat, alius Buhhut, Franchenian,- Commiflloner of ])e Artal-

:;ery, be my lord Gouernouris command, gevin jiairon to furnis certane cartis and raviagt of tcr-

' Beil-fires, lionfires, spe Z)r ./ajnirOTn's Dictionary for tlic origin of the term. ^ Shoot, discbaige. ' Numerous payments are niaile, which prove a constant correspondence, at this time, between the Queen, the French
Ambaasador, Sir Antliony Darsy, Sec. ' Harried, plundered. ' Sec Sep. 12, \b\i>, &c of these Extracts.

13JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 263

APPENDIX.

taiic Sctvtaljcry out of «!Haggohj antr Bunliertauc to Edixburghe, eftir his compt jiairon, inlxxxj
Franclie crownis of wecht,Jitm)na, . ....... Ixxij li. xviij s.

Feb. 18. — Item, |)at famiii nyclit, in Linlithqw, my lord Gouernour beand ]iair, to ane man
with borfe pat paflTit with clois Letteris apone fe iiycbt to iHonSV. Be flam's' to Ediubuighe, at
poll, . viijs.

Item, pat famin nycht, to ane horfinan pat paflit with clois Letteris to t])t ^djevtt o£ ^tn'*
tltltnj, at xj liouris, . . . . . . . . . . . x s.

Feb. 19. — Item, pat famin nyclit, to Hans gunnar, quhilk hyrit ane hoife to ryd to Striuiling,
at poft, for l)a'kb\i$iii antf Hanii,'' . . xij i.

Item, to Jobnne Balfoure, Officiare, to pafs to Edinburghe with clois Letteris to tlje ^mfiaS-
^atour of dFiancJf, at midnycht, ... . . . . . . x sFeb. 20. — Item, to ane man pat paflit with ane Lettir of my lord Gouernouris to Captane
Jonet, to gar tit 9rtalKri) it niobanU fra tj&c jfaiolttrlt, . . . . ij s.

Ite?/i, to ane man pat paflit to the Scheref of Striueling, with ane Letter of my lord
Gouernouris^ to gare all tjc (Byin of tjat ici)ivtht rrttiD for Ifralutn of t\jt ^rtaljcrn, iiij s.

Mar. 4. — Item, bocht and lend to tijc faj iioftftarfS aitB ilbm'^lS of tljt Kingis ailtf bmquljjlt mu Lord Dukis, his broperis, xxiiij elne of Rowane ruflat, to ht tj^auic tSoluntiS, price of ilk
elne xvj s.J^imma, ........ xix ti. iiij s.

Item, to border and cuf of pe famin gownis, iij elne weluofe, price of ilk elne, 1 s.,Jumma, vij ti. x s.

Item, to ane man pat bure ane SLfttcr of liJfSpctt to the Master of Halis for pe 3>Il?
runnujjng of t\)t ©liuaniits,* ....... iiij s.

Mar. 18. — Item, to Crifteane Cokburne, anf of tflC ^3rintt5 bmquljilc lioRftarfo, iiij elne of
Rowane ruflat and half ane elne of weluofe, to fit Jtr ailt »&OUnf , price of pe elne of ruffat xvj s., and
of pe 1 elne of weluofe, XXV s., ....... iiij ti. ix s.

Item, for xvj elne of claith, callit mylk and watter, to be iiij ^TinoS (Soluni^ anti i)iilf(5 for
Hjt SStngfS ^IllTOS, one Cena Domini, = price of ilk elne iiij l.,Jumma, . iij ti. iiij s.

Item, for pe faflbune of ])e faidis iiij gownis and hudis, . . . viij s.

Item, to ane man and horfe to turfe thame and pe faid clathis furth of Ed' to ^trtuiU'ttg, iiij s,

Item, to Henry Dempflare, quhilk gaif to pe titj SHutO^arfiS iiij purfis, and ilk ane iiij s.,
fumma, . . . . . . . . . xvj s. viij d,

Item, to ane feruitour to pas with clois Letteris to Scone, Duplyne, Aluay, Dunblene,
and Ruthvene, for pare ^t\ii to fit jJttt to ant ComnuMount^ to pa5 toitj tjt ^mfiaSSatourtS
to 5)HgTaiia, . . . . . . . . . . X s.

Item, to ane feruitour to pafs with Letteris, at pe pofl;, to my Lordis of Errole, Marschell, the Elect of Abirdexe,'' and to pe Commiflar of Abirdene, antllt tljt (Salrtrtng'* fit*
tui'y tbf CPrIt ©rroTl anii ilorlr tSoriiouiTt, ..... xiiij s.

Apr. 10, 1516. — Item, gevin to Robert Hert, to ride (to) pe (ffapttaiuS of SouglaS aiiB
!![ani))ttlloitnt,with tua Preceptis of my lord Gouernouris to caufe ]ianie cum to Sutlfiar, xiiij s.

Item, to Gilbert Reoche to pas to Ingland with Letteris of my lord (Governor), at Pofl;, to
iHoiiSr. |3Xanf5, to Annivek,' ....... xxxviij s.

' The French Ambassador. ^ Bullets; gun-stones. ^^ He was in Glasgow on tlie 21st, and in Linlithgow ou 24th. Until the next extract, Letters were continually passing between him and the French Ambassador,
&c. * The Elwalds, notorious Border Thieves. The name is now extinct. ^ See illustrations of this custom in Sir Walter Scott's Anliquary, List edition. These entries are regularly repeated annually, with additional
gowns, purses, and money for the ' Almosaris,' or the King's Bedesmen, for each year of the King's age. It is only
necessary to advert to such entries once, as the varieties which occur are generally very trifling, being chietly additional furnishings for the Bedesmen, &c. *^ Numerous other Messengers, sent for the same purpose to other
Barons, &c. ' Alexander Gordon, third son of James Gordon of Haddo, ancestor of the Earls of Aberdeen.
He died of a hectic fever, Jun. 29, 1318, having enjoyed the See only a short time.* » See Jun. 3, lol6,
" Alnwic.

264 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1516.

APPENDIX.

Apr. 15. Item, to my Lord Chancellar to gif Stortt IBaftitaviS man in the Castell,

iij Frencli crownis, ....••••• xlij s.

Apr. 23. Item, to my lord (Governor) to play with mj) %ox'ii ?Lfgat, in Sanctandross,

at ii)t 'aiit, X lycht Fr. cv\, . • ■ vij ti.

Apr. 28. Item, to my lord Gouernour to ))Tai) at tljc tlt^t,^ (cl)tii?) in Sanct JohnnesTOUNE, .......... xnij s.

Apr. 30 Item, &c. to ptap at tijt Sfec, in ix Fr. cr., . . • vj ti. vj s.

May 12. Item, to James Stewart of Ardgowane and Jolme Watfone, to pay part of rypfiiSl'S

of tilt Stngt'S grljippiS tll StinilCVtanr, be my lord Gouernouris command, to gud compt, Ixiij ti.

May 20 Item, for tjjc l)Cgtng of 33uttt'5 in tljc 3Wai),° be my lord Gouernouris command, ........ . xliiji. vjd.

.Tun. 3. — Item, witbin nycbt, to ane feruitoure J-at pafTit to Ed'', for to iStop tjc tJiaBan'ng ie=>
tufjr tljc C?i-ll i*lai-5rl)ctl anB itoiir dToritS,' in ^bivtftnt, . . • xiiij 5.

Jul. 1. — Item, to Daiiid Purvefe, for to pafs, be my Lord Gouernouris command, to Berwik with i^Honfir 3ta jfvtt *....... xxviij 5.

Jul. 21. — Item, to Johnne Adamfone, to pafs with vij rlot'S 3lctten'S^ and ane patent Sttttcr
of my Lord Gouernouris to )ie 33aronc5 auU 3Lartii5 of Jlototljfane, for ane AflTife apone tbe
jftTafStcn'S of (!!>Icnrarnc antr Mongumvj), • . . • • xvjs.

Aug. 8. — Item, to Johnne Balfour and to Biflatt, quliilk warnit tijt ItarUl^ IttrvaSt CFKuihuvqlj to vva luttJ) my Lord Gouernour, t(ul)cn Be raiH to g'tn'uding tuftlj tijt Itiiglt'Smcn to gc
THE King, . . . . • . • • • . iiij s.

Aug. 21. — Item, to the Erle of Argile, SwStfrf, rcmananti at tlje Sltrc in Sunlie'' xx
dais, ilk day xl s. . . . . . • ■ • • xl ti.

Item, to the Chancellare remanand in Dunde in lykwyfe xx dais, ilk day Ivij s.,
fumma, .... ...... Ivij ti.

/fewj, the Thesaurer remanand ficlyk, ilk day XXX s.,/«w)«a, . . xxxti.

Aug. 31 Item, to Dauid Lowry, at paffit with Letteris of my Lord Goverxouris to t^e

JtorU jHaytocIl and to tljc Hartf of CfSfurS, to feft)) tlie 33orUoun'5, at na man luld pafs to
Ingland without fpeciale Wjitiugis and Licence, ..... xxnij s.

Sep. 2i. — Item, to Dauid Lowry, to pafs with ane Letter of our fouerane Lordis, to pomiK
yyyii] iLorti's anU 3Lartt'5>ljatnti5 fta ]>t '^iixit of iWontgomni anlf lailniatoriS, on South
half Forthe, ......... xliis.

Item, to John Langlandis, to pais on North half Fortiie, to poynd xvij Lordis and Lardis
abfentis fra the faidis Affife— and deliuerit to him \e CPytratt of ii)t Utrt of Suntit to giff ]>e
Schirreff-principall, for diflrenicing of the famin, .... xxviij s.

Sep. 29. — Item, deliuerit to ])e faid Langlandis, Ixxviij letteris to gif to ]>e Lordis and Lardis
in Fyf, Stratherne, and Angouse,' to keip ])e vj and ix dayis of October in Ed', and to paSS to
tjt 33oraouri5 ]>aireftir, .......(' Pait before.')

Nov. \.—Item, to Dauid Purvefe, mafer, quhilk raid with my lordis ^ttttvii to JStvblf , luiti)
Clci'Cnrp,'* and ]>aireftir to CailcTc to Eortl SatVt, at my lordis command, . Ivj s.

Nov. 5. — Item, to ane Johne Murray, qilI)ilJt tult ^Jimonc 33uvnc, antt (quho) ves fugtlfutt,
])e half of the Efchet gevin to him, . . . . vj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

' The word is erroneously written ' clese ' in tlie Record. * Building of temporary butts for Archery,

' Sec Mar. 18 preceding. ' La Fayette, the Duke of Albany's Messenger. See PMerlon, II, 161, &c. ' A

great many iitliers dispatched. Duncan Riche was entrusted with Letters tor ' xxv Lordis.' ° These entries

occur yearly, wliere the Expenses of the Aires form part of the usual expenditure. This is given as a specimen of
the rest. ' CojirosiTOURis' also generally attended, to compound for Remissions, Respites, Escheats, &c. &c.
' Similar Letters were sent all over the kingdom. " Clarencieux, one of the English Kings at Arms. Thomas

Benolt was appointed to this oflice, Nov. 20, 1610; uhiil Jlay 8, 1334.

4 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 265

APPENDIX.

Nov. 12. — Item, to Boyntaus, fidlaie,' de mandato Domini, be Maifter Gualter, primo die

Parliament!, . . . . . • . xti.

Nov. 22.— Item, to Wallafe, quhilk raid on fe nycht to Eortf Batrt, be command of iHonSr.

3£a«iiatotf, . ......•• xsviij g.

Dec, 17 Item, to Robert Hait, to fommond EorU Ztiiix, Schirreff of Hathingtowne,

and diueife vthevis, tiu!)ilft if ptt norlit tijc »aj) off JTvclu luttl) ATonSr. Ealjaiut)), xviij i.

Jan. 3, 1516-17. — Item, to Eycht (' meffingei') to ryd agane to Coldingliam, Dwnfe, and

Lawder, for executing of our fouerane lordis Letteris on (geovge |£?oiBmc, de Mandato Guhernatoris, ... ....... xviij s.

Jan. 9. — Item, to Eicht, &c. &c. to ttX^t (fearch) antl it'lk <&tov%t Igolumr, with fouerteis,
vnder payue of Hornyng, . ....... xiiij s.

Jan. 18. — Item, in Pertbt, to Dauid Lindesay, tjt ittttgiS SUS^^tJarf, for bis Martimefs
fee,^ de Mandato, . . . . . . . . . xx li.

Jan. 19. — Item, to Clarentt mannt, quhilk brocbt ane iFiltcljC out of Ingland to Faulkland
to my lord Gouernour, . ...... xxviij s.

Jan. 27. — Item, for ]ie Chancellare Crj-pfnSfe tn tJlC ^irf of ^itl'tjc, remanand fair
xxiiij dais, ilk day iij ii., fttmma, ....... Ixiiij ti.

/to«, for ))e Justice expenfis, Jie faid tyme, . . . . . Iti.

/fem, for the Thesauraris expenfis, the laid tyme, . . . xxxti.

/few, for Lord Erskynnis expenfis, ]ie faid tyrae, .... xxxti.

Item, for ])e Justice-Clerkis expenfis, in lyk wyfe, . . . xxiiij t.

Feb. 16.— Item, gevin to Maister Gawin Dunbar, tjc SStngiS iMaStcr, to by neceffar

thingis for tijt IStitgtS Cljaincr, . . . . . • . ix ti.

Mar. 1. — Item, to James Nelliyt, fat famyn day, for expenfis of himfelf and ij ^Itihii tbat

i)t hx'Otiit out of Sunbrattan to my lord Gouernour, and had agan, . . xlij s.

Mar. 22. — Item, deliuerit to Gilbert Reaucbt, meffinger, xij Letteris to warne all the Lordis

and Barronis of the Vest land to be in Ed", at tijt Colar of Coftfeuljci'S taht'itg, qiij^tn

])E Franche Ambassatour tomt,^ ...... xxviij 11.

Apr. 23. — Ite?n, deliuerit be Mons" Labawtev to Johnne Langlandis, Letteris of our foueran lordis to fomond and tbargt all iijt SCJcbs^e anB brofet'ii men out of futiiBalc aniJ (irtSSailc
to tjair atnui runtft ; quhilk Letteris war Proclamit at fe Mercat-coriis of Roxbrociit, Selkirk,
and Jedwod, . . . . . . . . . xx s.

Item, gevin to Robert Bal5e, for fllDrtntj of tbt HovSf^ ?i}ato tn Sanitsii JToiurr of t})t
(iTaStcl, in Ed*,'* de mandato Gubernatoris, . . . . . . x s.

Item, de mandato domini, at Cragingalt, to xxv werkmen IbtranK \t ]bail itlttntttounr, viz.

. pikkis, halbartis, billis, matokkis, fpadis, fchwlis, halbrikkis, with fplenttis, fra i\)t Capitaiu'S SToior

to tjc ©oioHt-ijOUSC (Gun-houfe), an hail day and 1 half, ilk man viij d. on the day, /«/«»;«, xxvs.

Item, to xiiij pynouris, qul)tlft Brrhj ti)c Sldaljrve in t|)c CaStfll, at tic Utngfg rtinitn to

i\yva toSunf, . . . . . . . . . iij 5. viij d.

' One of tlie Ordinary Minstrels. ^ These payments occur, termly, in every account. ' A number of

splendid dresses are entered in the accounts at this period, preparatory to this grand solemnity. Offerings were made
in St Giles's Kirk, all the ' liangyn,' or Tapestry, was brought from Stirling, and extensive repairs were made on
the Palace of Holyrood. The dresses consist of ' Clayth of Gold,' * crammasy sattin,' * purpour vellous,' * blak vellous,' ' gray vellous,' ' carrowit sattin,' ' blak trailze,' ' braid blak taffatis,' and ' reid taifattis.' One of the dresses,
Blay 25th, is entered thus : ' Item, bocht fra Evatigtiist, xviij elne thre quartaris and ane half of blak vellous, to
bejAKKis, THE SECRET, and vtherishis campanzeonis hoggottonnis (fiacquetons), price of the elne xl viij s., sunnna, xlviili.
viij s. iiij d. * There are numerous other payments for trein Tverk (wooden or timber work) for the Gret Haw

wiNDois IN THE Castell,' 'gret gestis, doubill dalis, &c. for ' the Myd Chajier,' ' the Kingis keching' (kitchen),
and ' the new Court kechin,' in ' Dauldis Toure.'

VOL. I. t 2 L

266 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1517-18.

APPENDIX.

May 11. — Item, to Johne Adatnfone, quliilk raid to iJonftiU to mu EofU '^ngottSf with our
foueran Lordis letteris, . . . . • • • • x s.

May 16. — Item, to aiie manne )iat paffit to tjf CFrlt of Cvfttlfutif with my 1. Gouernouris
Letteris; quljlllt lurS Bel! or he come to Dunde,' ..... vij s.

May 17. — Item, to Jolmne Langlandis, quhilk raid with deligens, on Jje nycht, to ]ie JFnrUnnf
of tSf iHi)tIi'U iHiirfljc, to lie in Edinburgh pe xx day of Maij, with my 1. G*. Letteris, deliuerit
be iHoiiSr. ilnbnlutr, • . . • • • • . . xv 5.

Juii. 15, Item, bocht to Colene Campbell, the Kingis feruitour, nt tlje ©UEni'S rtimtii to

Ed", vj elne of grene Birgeni fettene, price of ])e elne xij s., fumma, . . iij ti. xviij s.

Item, for iij quarteris and 1 half of blak vellous to begary ]ie faid Collere cott, price xl s. viij d.

Item, for half an elne of fufteaiie to lyne the body of his cot, . . . xij d.

Item, for iiij elne of black gray to pe famin, price . . . .vs. iiij d.

Item, for making of the coit, . . . . . . . iij s.

It^m, for half an elne of Inglis reid to be CoUein hoife, . . . . x s.

Item, for lyning and making of the hoife, . . . . . ij s.

Item, for 1 bonat and 1 ruban to ])& famin, for Colin, .... xiij s.

Jun. 1 y. — Item, de mandato Dominorum, gevin to tijf SnglfSf mnn tijat ^JVfSf ntl't i\)t ClantJ
of golB coinr out of JinsInnB to the Kingis grace, in tije tfnStrU, x light crounis, . vijti.

Jul. 5. — Item, deliuerit to Johnne Langlandis ane Letter, be command of the Lordis of Confell,
to pafs for ScHiR Peter Crechtoune for Bflfttf ring of tljf®ufni5 gfrt out of ti)f EiEInrBrop.xs.

Jul. 11. — Item, Jiat famin nycht, at xj liouris lait, to ane boy of iiflOHSr. Stabnlutf, quliilk
paffit Ellwart to ])e famin effect, (viz. for ])e 33nrrontS anS tSfntlcmrnnf to bf in Edr incontinent,
Ijfil botJi'n.) . . . . . . . . . .vs.

Jul. 1-1. — Item, to StovB IBarrarfS inanuf, be command of THE Lordis of Consell, gevin
him iiij lycht crounis,yii»i?na, . . . . . . . . Ivj s.

Jul. 16 — Item, be command of the Lordis, gevin for bittalfng of t|)t 33av{t to paSSafiolut
to t]&e Wtit ^tl), quhilk come fra my lord out of 33rattanl)t, • • ■ xx ti.

Item, to Johnne Herkyll, be command of the Lordis of Coxsall, for tafeing of anf STijciff,
quliilk wes hangit one J)e Burrowmvi'e, . . . . . . . v li.

Aug. -21. — Item, to Johnne Adamfoune, quhilk raid to Peblis to fomond ant 'S.Hiit for tjbf
SLarB of CruyStoiinr, ........ xiiij s.

Item, to ti)f dFaUoncrtS tljat ^paSSit to dFrance toiti) niu itovB ©ourrnotin'S ialJu'S anU
mtvljconnfs, be his command, for all expenlis, wittualis, and fraucht, . . . 1 ti.

Aug. 28. — Item, to ])e manne ]>at brocht ])e nicrljotoniS fra tJjr itart) of ^pot to my 1. Gouerkour; and Jiairefter deliuerit tliam to tj&C dFaltonCft'S quljtUt pa^Stt to JfvailCf, for xij dais
waigis, . . . . . . . . . , . xij s.

Item, to Maister Gawin Dunbar, t\)t i{t'ngtS itTatStfr, for expenfis maid be him in
rrparaling of tijr CJjanin- in iijt qui)tlft ii)t iving Icn'S' nolo in the Castell, . iij ti.

Item, be my 1. Gouernouris Precept, gevin for fumeSding of t\)t ^cljipptS, and for cablis
and wittalis, ......... Vj '.xvij ti.

Item, gevin to my lord Gouernour, in monie, as his Precept and acquittance beris vpoune |ie
famin, at t^C Wtit ^Cj), ....... ij"'-ij' • anJ 1 tiItem, for ij t;ret lokkis and keyis, with flottis and flapillis for i\}t Singi^ Cijaincr, lit Xf
tnanauB in CingmiUav,' . . . . . . . . xij5.

' See Wouils I'peiiiije, (I, .378 ) Alexander, sixth E;irl of Crawford, is stated to have died in anno 1517. From
this entry it is likely that he died on May 14 or 15, 1518. * The chamber in which the King is taught ; the

School-room. ' This and the following entry were selected to mark the fact of the King's residence at Craig'

oJac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 267

APPENDIX.

Item, to Robene Purvefe, for fchoyne, howfis, breddil, and helteris bocht for ii)t IttngiS
rnVnlt, . . . • • • • • • xxi. vjd.

Item, for twa fmall ftok-lokkis in Cragmillaiie, . • • • v s ij d.

Item, for ij gret lokkis bocbt for ij 5ettis in Cragmyllare, be command of Mons" Labasty,
qiijicn tje Bfng loas tjbatr, • • • • • • • • ^ij s.

17.— ar^^c jrbij "aav: of ^rptrinljcr oitjt ItaliaStue.'

Oct. 6. — Item, to pe iSr^jariS of |Hon5. 'iLabn1,iioi^\rx%tinz,ex mandato D(minorum,hdoYe
Scbir James Leirraontb, . • • • • • • ■ xl s.

Dec. 26.— JTJjc ^ummoniitsof ffrfaSouite apoun aFtMirburnc.

Item, deliuerit to Dauid Loury and to Jobiine Langlandis, Meffingeris, fe ^ummoitUfS of
STrca^OUne direct apoune fe Itartf of JtiSIttJtrfrburnf, and his complices to compere in Edinburgbe
)ie xviij day of Februar nixt ])aireflir,- ...... xlij s.

Feb. 18, 1317-18 j^ttmc anil eSUtimtrfiurn, t^e itctttrg »tvfct for tjbe Kat'B in tlje

Item, deliuerit to Gilbert Reaucbe, Letteris of our fouerane lordis to baif to fe ^rljfrtfKS of
Mentetiie, Stratherne, Perthe, and Clakmannane, at^ ]ie 3torDt% 33aront5 awti "tsttjtxii
guI)<(tanf(ou5 mm iixXa nuft mg 3tora arran, lirgrnt and Liftenent, in Lauder, ])e xxj day of
Marche nixt liereftir ; vnder ]>e pane of lif, landis, and gudis, to ])aim ]iat comperit nocht,^ xxv s.

Mar. 6. — Item, to Andro Dalmaboy, ane Precept to warne all \t (Sflltflmfnm'^ ©Jt'll, witbin
fe Conftabulary of Hadingtoune and Edinburgh,^ to keip fe xvij (' xxj") day, . xviij s.

Item, to Dauid Camnieroune, 1' Lettre tofic ^pfiW to ])f 3lorB IBacrr, . . xlij s.

Item, for 1 tow of xxiiij faldome,'* bocbt to Jralu i\)t 6unni)3 iot'tj) for fe faid JSaiU^ tn t\it
Mtxit, .......... xiiij s.

Item, to (Robert) Bortbuik, piaster (Sunnarf,'" to fumyfe tbingia for \e (SuiUiyS, be command of Jie Lordis, ......... Pij ti.

10 — Item, for atlf to t?)f ESUai'tfjc (watch) Ijat n^rjit mp lorlJ JSrgnit lugft in %a\ilstx,
to ane part of the Fuitband, . . . . . . . ^''j s.

Iteyn, fat famyn nycht to jie dfrancl)? iffallianarig anB itTfiiStralfS, fjjat tooife anS plajji't all
t]&at nut]^t, in aile, . . . . . • . . . viij s.

15. — Item, ane horfe to Dauid Waiche tjint Surt Xijt ffinSmje, de mandato domini
Regentis, ......... xxviij s.

miliar. The cause of bis removal has been recorded by Bishop Lesley, who states, that ' The Quf.ne being in Ingland, heiring of the departing of the Governour furth of Scotland, returnit to Kdinbnrghe, the xvij day of Junij,
with ane quiet trayne ; bot wes nocbt admittit to vissie the King in the Castell ; quhill, in August thaireftir, btcaus
tltar ivts sum feir of the Pest in the Casteil, the King wes transportit to the Craymillar, qubair the Quene vissiet
him oftymes. Bot tharr-throurb rais ane greit suspition that he suld have bene stollin away be her into Ingland ;
and thairfoir he wes brocht againe to the Castell of Edinburcb, and wes keipit thair to the returning of the Duik.'
JBayinafyne Club's Edit. p. 100. Extraordinary precautions were accordingly adopted, and many payments are made
for articles for the King's use and diversion. See also PinkeTton, II, 168.

' Messengers were dispatched to all parts of the country, and the Session and Parliament summoned. See I,
* 235. Pinkerton, II, 170, relying on former authorities, fixes the date Sep. 19. See also Buchanan, D. xiv, 10;
Lesley, p. 110 ; Balfour, I, 245 ; and Pitscottic, 307. ^ It is unnecessary to add the other entries for summouing

Witnesses, Assise, &c. &c. They are numerous, and prove that the utmost vigilance and activity were employed to
bring the IMurderers speedilj' to justice. ^ These and the preceding notices appear to have been entered merely

as explanatory memoranda, without any reference, excepting to the subsequent expenditure in the Account. ^ That.

^ Others were sent to the various shires, &c. ^ Notifications and warnings for attendance, &c. were sent to

Lauder, Hathingtoun, and Peblis. ' A favourite abbreviation for * ane' at this period. ^ A rope of

twenty-four fathoms. ^ It is unnecessary to multiply entries of a similar description. It appears that there

were two Raids. The carters were allowed wages for ' the first Raid ix dais and vij dais furth at the vthir Raid.'
'° This person founded a great many Guns in the reigns of Kings James IV and V, all of which he quaintly inscribed
thus— (See Lesley, p. 81. Balf. Annales, I, 232, &c.)

Wachina sum Scoto, Borthuik fabricata Roberto, Jacoro Quarto Rege jubente pio.

268 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1523.

APPENDIX.

Ilem, to ScHiR JoHNNE Hammyltoune, for gatrtffrtng of ]&fs firSt 33.inlt,' and for his
gaddering of ])ame in ]ie ciintietli, in expenfis, . . . . . . x ti.

Item, to Schir Johnne Hammyltoune, for his tfoufllf jpeW, . . . Ij ti.

Item, for pe faid Schir Johnnis <j?nScnif, . . . . . vj ti. iiij s.

Item, to iij' and ix dFut niClt in J)tS 33nnB, .... iij^ and ix H.

Item, to Capitane Glenne for his trottblf pno, .... xxv ti.

/few, for his C5nicnjc, . . . . . . . vj ti.

Item, to an humireihe and ij dFut mm til j^fs JJilutf, . . . 1"= ij ti.

Item, to Capitane Glenne v deid pais,- . . . . . v ti.

Item, to ])f jfMaStrr of \\}t ^ttailjerrr, . . . . . I"" ti.

Item, for )ic iviitgtd JJaircr, in all coflagis, viz. : iiij elne of double caffattis of Turky, price of
Jie eln xx L./umma, . . ■ . . . . . . ™i i'-

Item, iiij vnce of reid and grene filk maid in fren^eis, price of )ie vnce and werkmanlchip, vj s.
viiij &,,J'umma, ........ xxvj s. viij d.

Item, for ij bukis of fyne gold, price of ]ie buk, iiij Yi,, pumma, . . . viij ti.

/to«, to t]&e ^ncittour"' for his werkmanfchip, . . , . . . v ti.

Item, for ane caife to turfe and keip fe faid Baner, . . . . .iiij s.

Item, to ])E Constable of Dunde, 33ait:tfrmnit to X\)t ISiitg,* for his fee, de mandato
Dmninorum, .... . . . . . . . . . I'' ti.

Item, ]iat famyn day to iWarrijmoilK ?l}frrolB,^ quhilk raid with tloisr SLfttfrt^ of tjc
iiortlis to itonUi'lt, in expenfis, xxx ti.

18. — Itmi, to ^fljir HoIjlTltC Hjamm^Itoilt^ dFutjJJairt, at pair agane-cumln in ^oU)tr.11),
for ])ar fupper pair, ............ xxij 5. vi d.

Item, to Capitane Glennys Fut-Band, in likewife, )iat nycht to ]iar fupper, ]iar wagis beand
Ipendit, ............... vij s.

Item, to §'cI)iTp.iiti),^ Itlcrrotti of dFritiKr, de mandato Dominorum, V^ cronis of wecht,
fumma, . . . . ........... Ixxxx ti.

Item, Jiairattour," in ane purfe of lycht cronis, . . . . . . v ti.

Item, to Schir James Hammyltoune' tiu]&i'Ift 5pas"s"tt tjjat tpmc to dFraittf, de mandato
Dominorum, for his expenfis, . . I^' ti.

May 21, 1318. — Item, for a Lettre of Summondis rafit vpoune my Slortl ISruinnTOntl for ft
bfolritct roinim'tttt nponf 3:itBro iffostj&alo, vj s. viij d.

Jun. 23. — Item, to Alexander Kerniage, mefilngei', quhilk fummond Jie CJrlf of ISotl&rs and
iHa^tCr of ittltttt^au to be in Edinburgh within iij dais nixt paireftir, vndir |)e pane of Treafounc, ............... vij s.

Item, to Cochran, ]ie %?frrolB of IDfitmarlt,' be command of ]ie Lordis, . I'^ xlv ti.

Aug, 1. — Item, to my ^torU STrraiT, Itfgtitt airt itiftntntt of tijr ^txit, be command of jie
Lordis, takand monethly in wagis, I" and 1 ti., in complete pament of fevin monethis and ane half,

' These mercenaries were then termed * Bandis of Wagtouris,' in contradistinction to the irregular troops who
were bound to perform military service, )iy virtue of Feudal tenure, &c. ^ Seemingly the pay of tive soldiers,

■who had died. ^ Probably ' Alexander Chalmour.' See Jul. 23, 151.0, of these extracts. ' The family of

Scrymgeour, Constables of Dundee, enjoyed the honourable Ofiioe of heritable Banner-bearers to the King ; which
post of carrying the Uovai- Baxner, they could only claim in the event of the King's actual presence in the field of
battle, or when his Banner was borne before his Regent. Tbt; Heritable Standard-bearer bore the great Standard
or Scotland in Battle, in all "Wars where it was ordered to be unlVrled, wliethei' the King or his Regent, or merely
his Ijientcnnnt or General, were personally present. See Apr. 30, 1523, of these extracts. ' On Jul. 22

preceding, he got for his year's fee xx li., and * for making of his expensis throcht Ingland to my lord Gouernour, 1 li.'
" Champan/.ce. ' Over and above. ' Of Finnart. ' Christiern II, King of Denmark, an .ancient

ally, had applied for a force of 1000 Highlanders to .assist him in subduing his rebellious subjects of Sweden. The
demand was parried, on the score of the disturbances which hail broken out on the Borders of Scotland, &c.

IOJac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * oqq

APPENDIX.

fra Jie firft day of October, to ]ie niyddis of Jie moneth of Maij, witliln J>e tyme of ]ns Coinpt,
I^P xxvti. : And faireftir for JLortt SJbfiid <ilr,' xxvij Yu

27. — Item, deliuerit to Robert Hart, Meflinger, a Lettre of our fouerane lordis to fnmmond
pE Erlis of Anguse and Levenox, plegis for iLorH Crtifljtount antf SLaitf of Untmlnnvtcj: for
IJffJtfng of ilaullorolufS, ilkane apone vtbir, to be in Edinburgh ]ie vj day of September nixt
cumis, . ............. xxviij s.

Sep. 4 Item, to Henry Wardlaw of Kilabertoune, for ane of his, quhilk was flayne vndir the

CRETE GwNE at ]>e JJatO of SSIcBBtrlmntc, iiij li-

[An unlucky hiatus occurs in the Volumes of the Treasurer's Accounts
between this period and the year 1523.]

Apr. 2, 1523. — Item, deliuerit to Johne Adamfone j)e Kingis Letteris, to be proclamit in
Hadingtoune, Dalkeithe, Dunbar, and vjiir places neceffar, within ye faidis boundis, Jiat all
maner of men prepare faim, in fare beft faflbne bodin, and foHoto Sat'^ttltt qujjntrcui'r tijai first
^fe onu JlSali^ of fprr, for rest'stt'ng of 3lngligmfn, x 5.

Item, to Johne Langlandis to be proclamit in Selkirk, Lauder, Roxburghe, and Forest
OF Ettrik, . . ....... xiiij s.

Item, ficlike, in Edinburgh, Linlithqw, and Peblis, . • . . x s.

29. — Item, at x houris lait, deliuerit to Robert Hait, meflinger, ane Letter fubfcriuit with ])e
Lordis, aKuertcSaiiB mu 3totli ^rraite tjat tfjf Singlts" mcu ioai* tumanti to s'rgf ISIataUer ; and
raid )iat niclit at ]ie poll to him, gevin to |ie berare, ..... viij s.

Item, ficlike Letteris to my itorK djanfcITare,^ . . . . vj s.

Item, ficlike Letteris to ]ie (SrXt of itTortoune, |!fluljattin, and to pe ItartJt'^ of Jiat quarter, . . . . . ..... iij s.

Item, ])at famyn nycht, fend Johne Langlandis to ])e JLarlf of EJtTclI'iJlvJufne, aduertefand
him jiat nil) Eorft of Strrant aiiU sutcurn'S SiilB I)at5t tjaim to l)tm, be command of iiu) HorB
<§VOio\ci^ and Lordis being in Edinburgh for ])e tyme, . . . . . vij s.

30. — Item, ]iat famyne nicht fend for tl)P 33aucr to Dunde, and for ])e Constabill'' and his
feruitouris to haift ])ame to Hadingtoune to my Lord of Arrane,' . . . vij s.

Jun. 7. — Item, fend ane clofe Lettre vnder Jie Signete to mi) itovB Cljaittcnart, fchewand,
t)at tljeSliigTtemru toav to turn, aiiU galirranlr fast, . . . . . . ij s.

Item, fend to Kynnele, for aduertifing of niu itoflf of ^rraiu, ])at the Stltglis'iurn iuav
rttmanti antt tntcvanS iuitlifn tlje rtalmc, ..... xxx d.

Jun. 10. — Item, gevin to ailjain) ?t>fralW ane Lettre, &c. to charge tlje CprTf of Stnintar to
teie fra all gnticn'ng aittf Stss'fgft'iTg of tijc ^alt'rt of ©lasgio, .... xxviij s.

Jun. 15. — Item, to ane man ]iat paft with ])E Officiale of Louthiane, Letteris to Lauder to be execut in Jie Kirk, quiiilkis Letteris war tafeiit lit tl)t gait aiilf tjf mait bos'tft aittf
flfit," . . . . . . . . . . . iij s.

' A number of other payments are made to the Coxstables of Weoderburne and Edrington, and for victualling
these Castles, &c. ^ James Beaton, Archbishop of St Andrews. ^ Pinkerlon, II, 212, calls this personage ' Gouzolles, denominated Captain of Milan.' He was joined to John /'««?'</i Lord Erskine iu the custody
of THE King, and ' with a guard of thirty-three Frenchmen was also to attend the Queen.' His appointment by
Albany excited much disgust on the part of the nobles, who saw each fresh installation of foreigners into posts of
dignity, with increased indignation. See also Oct. 16, 1329, of tliese Extracts, where he is called ' the Duke of
MiLLANE.' ' The Scrymgeours were heritable Royal Banner-bearers. See Note to Mar. 15, 1517-18, of

these Extracts. * A great many similar messengers were dispatched, unnecessary to be enumerated in this place.

' Threatened and terrified. Repeated instances of violence done to public Officers occur in these Records.

270 * CRIMINAL TRIALS A.D. 1527.

APPENDIX.

Jul. 6. — Item, ane Lettre chaigeing ]rE Comptrollare to probtBf btftuijllis" for (it)'' prr^
^oiTf£i to ))E Castell of Ed", for hrpi'iig i\)t siimtit frn 31itglismrit, . . ij s.

Jul. 16. — Item, relliniit xiij Lettens direct to all ]ie Prelatis of ])e realme, for gflTfrnIr
|3rorfssioitts to fir maitJ for tlje lurtlfarf of tjjr rrnlmr, prosprritie of our soufrnitc lortf, aitU
^urr Ijnniiif-ttttm'iTg of iiiji Itorti iSotirrnour ; for all fe Lettris fra Tay, North, . xxviij i.

Item, |>e Ttliir Ijaif on South lialf Foktue, &c. ...... xxviij s.

Sep. 20. — 'slljijfjttus" llomtiit (SufifriTittort^, xx" die menjis Seplemhris, anno domini !■".¥'.
xxiij".

Sep. 25. — Item, to Ccirrift %rraltl, de mandatv Cancellarij, quliilk tonvoyit Clarflttf,' IngHSMAN, to Dunhertaii, ........... . xl s.

Sep. 26. — Item, to ane man pat pafl with fecreit chargis of my Lord Gouernourls to 3>lTg«
Iaiit(,°- xli.

Oct. 18. — Item, to Jolinne Gourlaw to arrrst all tl)r ^cjbippt^ in itntjbt; and alfe to warne
and charge all fe IHaltmciT, haiii) of 3i.rtt]br nnB Caitnogatt, to J)auf aiU anU malt xtVn^ for tjr
Camp, ij 6.

Oct. 22. — iiTi) ilortt (Soufntour Brpartit toioart fitiu OTrrJt {die) Jouis, xxij" Octobris,
and fat famyn day deliuerit to Johnne Scrimgeour, mafer,' ane Lettre direct to fe ^cI)frffFi^ of
Perthe, Straitiiehne, Mentethe, Clakmannan, Kinross, Fife, fat all abill men within fa
boundis follow my lord Gouernour,* &c. . . . . . . xl s.

Oct. 28 — Item, ane Lettre to be execute and proclamit in Leithe, &c.^ fat iia fJortJjIaitU
men rrtuvnc ourc tjc Kffilatter, to'' fe agane cuming of my lord GouERNOUR fra fe Camp, bnttcv
tjje pane of ttci'K, . . . . . . . . . vs.

Nov. 3. — Item, deliuerit to Androu Dalmahoy, fE Lordls ansuere of tJOe C?rlc of ^WlTttfi
Bittttrc, to be fped to my lord Gouernour to f e Camp, gevin to him, . . . . x s.

Apr. 17, 1524-. — Item, deliuerit to muHortl tSvoSoffj' fe tynie of my lord Gouernouris laft
remanyng in France, Tnix'^xxiij ti. iij §. vj d.

Item, to James Crechtoune of Cranftoune-Riddale, Capitane of ))e Castell of Ed", for
expenfis maid be him apoune ]ie Sugtfntatfounc of Bonaltt of tjc 3)\ii, Patrik Wilfoune, Cammoufe, Franchenian, and diuerfe vferis being in Ward, &e. . . . xlj ti. xvs.

Aug. 25, 1525. — Item, for ane horfe to here fE Kingis fHail'"* to Peblis, gevin to Dauid
Bonar, ....... . . . xx s.

Oct. 8. — /te/«, gevin to ]e Inglisman fat broclit JJfaUji'n Tiorui'fi,'' fr6tl)i5, and 53og=coHart6,
fra tjeitingof Snglanti, ....... Ix Vnicomis.

Item, to Dauid Lowry ane Lettre to SommonS tf)C Crfc of CiauftirS, de mcindato Borninorum, xx S.

Nov. 19. — Item, deliuerit j Lettre to Dauid Cammeron to warae the Lard of Hennerland'" and Adam Skot" to fynd plegis, . . . ..... xx s.

Nov. 23. — Item, deliuerit to James Kinloch j Lettre to fomond iLovtl ©giluj) anlj \ji<i rom=
pKcfSJ to he in Ed", Dec. xij°. to vndirlye the law for Saiti'tf 6avBini5 ^laucljtcr, . xx s.

Dec. 16. — Item, deliuerit to him an Lettre to fommond ^tijix 3)amf6%?amintlton to vnderlie
\K law, .......... xiiij b.

' Clarcncicux King of Arms. See Nov. 1, 151 G, of these Extracts and Note. ' A great many warrants

were likewise dispatrhed to the ditfeient Shires and Hemcioiis Houses, to furnish all their carriage-horses and
drauHht-cixMi for the gri'ut (inns, &c. ' tentis and pailzeonis,' provision, &c. &c. ^ Macer. ' Similar Letters

were dispatched to the other Sheriirdonis. The ' I'eriaris' (ferry-men) of LErrn, KrNnnoiiN, and Qufenseeurv, were
interdicted from raising ' ony frauclit hot the auld fraucht, vnder the pane of dciil." And tenants, &c. under the
same penalty, to take only the old prices for corn, straw, &c. =• The ' Caiggearis and (ischearis of Mvsselburghe,

Gnlane,' &c. were ordered, ' tliat thai haue, ilk day, thare fische to the Camp.' " Until. ' Sec Apr. 29,

1523, of these Extracts. • Portmanteau. " Hunting Horns. '" William Cokhurne of Hcnderland. "Of

Tusclielaw. They were both executed for their crimes, on May IG and 18, 1530. See I, • Mi, &c.

14Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 271

APPENDIX.

Jan. 1, 1525-26. — Item, ]iat nycht, eftir fupper, in iiTummjjn,' . . xxti.

Item, bocht for J3cto»Scrfs' giftts", j'at famin day, of lUngi^, . • xxxj ti. iiij s.

Feb. 16. — Item, gevin to axe Ingliseman, mefTinger, Lettres of ^llSltcr to i\)t Crrlt oC

SFeStmurianttanaSoctour iilagnwS, * »«a«</"to,^ .... xxviij i.

Jun. 29 /ton, gevin for tggfs to biltfti'r t!)t CaStfU, . . . xv s. vj d.

Item, for ballis in Crummi^f tatljc-ptiuU,' quben ])e Kingis grace playt witb ])e Lord

GlAMMISE, ..... . . . . XX s.

Jul. 10. — Item, gevin to tj&t CFinprtOtin's" ptre'ctoaitll, at ])e King and Lordis command, xxx ti.

Jul. 17. — Item, gevin at ]ie Kixgis command, till piinrf ioiufs" I'at romc grctaittf apoite Jjid
grate, for rggts" tafeiit fra i>amf be his feruandis," . . . . . xxs.

Jul. 22. — Item, gevin, in Jedburglie, to fe Inglis Herrot, at fe King and Lordis command, 1 ti.

Aug. ?— /to«, deliuerit to tl)f ^raj) jFrtrt's", for Ixiii vncis 5"tlufr, s'toltiT fra tljf iStirg, aiitt
rfbflit to tiiatm in CoilfrssiouiTr ; be the Kingis Precept, to ]ie men Jiat had the faiil (iluer werk
in wed,' . . . . . . . . . . xx ti.

Aug. 7 — Item, for velnus to billtl ii)t ISl'ligtS ^UOlBc IjaittltS and to be ailC gluhc tilt ^ii
^at'rc JanU, with makin and fevin {Jhdng) filk, . . . . . xx s.

Sep. 8. — Item, to Gourley and Hoge, mellingeris, to fummoiid ])E Erle of Cassillis, jie
Lord Simpili,, and vjieris contenit in ane S'uinUTOntlis' of CvfSS'OUlt, for jiair expenfis, vj ti.

Oct. 16. — Item, to Kinloch and Echt, melfingeris, ane ^t(mnTOiTtlt£i of Crcs's'outTt apon })e
Erle OF Craufurd, ))E Lord Lindsay, and v])iris, . ... 'iij^iDec. 6. — Item, gevin to William Criftefoun, meffinger, to fomraond Witnes, vndir gretar panis,
to preif fe irf Jtiitg of iLaSuborroiot^ be ])E Lord Simpill vpoun the Lard Caldwell, xx s.

Mar. 1, 1526-7. — Item, to S)o?)it IBruininoittr, ralllt ii)t i^t'ltgts" Scmp,'' be his precept, XV ti.

Mar. 14. — Item, to the Secret a ris leruand, to geif a Inglifman ]>at broclit itfttcris fra tljr
JBufee of Jllttljf moitt 7 to the Kingis hienis, tomplntaittr oit tj&c StrmcStraitgis", Cros'ariS, and
^ffefs"01tts', with vferis, ........ iiij ti.

Apr. 19, 1527 — Item, to Petir Ra, |iat brocht writingis fra tj^f Sttftf of J^icijeutont, &c. iijti.

Item, to i\tt ^uris'e tliat gatf ti)f ifJiitg ^otilft,^ be his Precept, . . iiij ti.

Apr. 25. — Item, to a jFiiIc, raltit iStUf-motobanB,'^ at ]ie Kingis command, . xxs.

May 12. — Item, to Criftefon, meflingeii-, to SumnioilB tijc itaitl HvUroSf, his fon, and Jiair
complices, to vndirly l)e law for J>e JJijbing "' of tI)C sEttligiS M.cttcn'5, and to fummond ane Affife,
&c. . ......... xxviij s.

May 20 — Item, to James Biflait, meffinger, with a Lettre direct to Mentetii, Stratiiern,
Clakmannane, and Kynross, with iij dole Letteris to the Erle Montrose, Lordis GlamMis and Oliphant, to convene at Ed". Jie xv day of Junij, with jiair houlhaldis, to xxiOt Olt tj&f
JTijCtfllS," . . . . . . . • . .' xxxs.

Jun. 1. — Item, to Cham])nay, meffingeir, to fummond tl)C SlarB CuTIliaI[ounc to vndirly ])e
law for ])e ^lautjtrr of John Greift', ...... xiiij s.

' See this Collection, I, * 114, &c. ^ Another Jlessenger wasdispatrhed on 1st March. ' The game of

Tennis, called caitche pell, caiche, kache, &c. in the old Records, was a very favourite game at the Seoltish Court,
during this and the preceding reign. There are numerous traces of it through the whole of these Accounts. The
curious and valuable Registers o( Aberdeen also abound in similar notices. ' From another entry, on Jun. 29, it would
appear that the servants had invented a foolish sport for the young King's amusement, being a mock Assault of a
Castle, the missiles on both sides being eggs. It may easily be imagined, in what a plight both victors and vanquished would be after a cessation of hostilities. ' In pledge, or pawn. ° The King's CHAJirioN.
' On jMar. 8, his servants, who were entrusted with ten couples of * ra(-his' (liounds), got fifty pounds for their * rewardis.' Their first achievement was to worry three sheep, for which the owner, ' a pure woman,' was paid xx s.
^ The King's Wet-nurse. ^ Probably so nicknamed for his dexterity in making grimaces. *" Tearing
in pieces. " Other INIessengers were sent in ditferent directions. See notice of this Raid against the AkmSTRONGS, &c. I, *132, &c. Reference may also he made to the preceding Appendix.

272 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1529.

APPENDIX.

Jul. 25. — Item, to a Inglifman )iat broclit ittttrcS fra i\)t aKfltg of JngLintI to the Kingis
grace, . . ........ xl 6.

Item, given to William Lyell, be ])E Kingis Precept, for lunt, talc, ailtl tonie tlts'troj)it it
it's Scntnntifs at tl)c Iftiiuting, . . . . • . . vt.

Item, to James Bidit, to furamond George Borthuik of Colynelaw to vndirly Jie law
for §TaurI)trv of vmq'*' Pliilp Nefbittis dochter, ' . . . . . vii s.

Jul. 31. — Item, gevin to Dene Dauid Jamesoune, ^atri^tailf al ^It'oihotiiU, iu recompenfe of a gtU tJjanfcr StoUtn fiutl) of tJ)C ^ttiaj) of j^cluIjottiU, the Kingis hienes being pair,
be ])E Kingis Precept, . . . . . . . . xv ti.

Aug. 12. — Item, to Peter Ra, Inglifman, ]iat brocht writingis to the King fra i\)t SuUc of
3flirl)finoiili5 Contain, . . . . . . . . iijtiItem, to Crillefon, to pas to Pertlie ; William Duncan, to pas to Scliir James Hammyltoun ;
James Bi/lhit, to suiiunoiiti tt)t l.art< 3SiiltrIniti)c for ffvrssoiinr, lor i>air expenfis, xlviij s.

Aug. ? — Item, to ]ie Lard of Spot, in recompenfe of 8F if tail's flirnist J)f Jjim to tJ)C Cafis
ttHfS of |i}unif anil EffiTctltltrBlirn, and for cornis ]>at wes brint and diftroyit be )iE Lard of WedDiRBURN, for his dampnage and fcaitb ; be deliueranre of ))E Lordis of Consaill, • P' ti.

Item, to Lord Montgomery, ^iigtlCC, remanand continualie at t^f '^ixii of dJ'OVfar, ^Jfrtj),
anft Cotopav, fra fe ferd day of Januar to ])e xxiij day of Februar, to his expenfis, I' xx li.

Item, to 1)E BiscHOP of Galloway, ane of tlie CompoSitoun'g at ]ie faid Airis, Ix ti.

Item, to THE Thesaurar, and v])ir CoilipoSltottn's, for his and Jiair expenfis, tjf ittlvgiS
gratt bcaiiB UiiicrSc Btniiavts" tijatr, ...... Plxxxiiij ti.

Item, to NicHOLE Craufurd, ^ustitr^Clfrft, .... xl ti.

Item, to (Schir) William Scot of Balwery, kny*, remanand continualie, in abfence of
peJuftice, ....... . . Pti.

Sep. 6, 1529. — Item, to Dingvale, Purfevant, ]>at paft with wrytingis of )ie Lordis of Secrete
Counfale to tljc CFrlr of i^ortStinrmrrlanH, . . • • • xxxs.

Item, to Ilay, Herald, Jiat paft with the Lord Hume, for rjpffliiig; of Sol)n ?l)umc of
ISlatatf r, . . . • . • • • • '

Sop. 18 Item, to Champnay, meffinger, ])at paft with the Kingis writingis to warne ane

condigne Assise to convene ))e xiij day of Oct., betuix tlir JLoiD iBnimmfljar and tijt StorS jTIf^
miitg, .......... XXV s.

Sep. 22. — Item, deliuerit to Robert Monypenny, fmith, lane fra- Maifter Adame Ottirburn,
xvj ftane v tib. of Span^e irne, to maft pililtt^ anS inattofus" for caruiug of tj&f Canitouc tl)at past
in tjf Sstii^, price ........ iiij ti. x 5.

Sep. 24. — Item, deliuerit to Andro Edgare tua ellis of Parife blak, to be (ane cloik ?y to ])e
King, to ij.)l<f to tj)f%?iinttitg tit iHrgotlauB, price, elne, XXX s., (/i«Mw«,) . . iij ti.

Oct. 16 Item, to ane feruand of Mr Johns Chefolmis ])at prtSfittit iolui^ aiitl anolut^ to

the King, . . . . . • . • • . xxs.

/fcw, to t|&r33ullt of iHillailf,* at )>e Kingis command, . . . xli.

Nov. 24 Item, gevin to the Lord Fleming, at the Kingis command, in nranrr of tocljtr

to l)iS siistir, .....••• • iiij'.ti.

' The sum is torn out. ' It may here be remarked tliat this plirase throughout these Accounts merely denotes

the articles to be purchased (not literally taketi, which implies force) from certaiu persons. In many instances, were
this circumstance not kept iu view, an ordinary reader would infer that the King had often seized upou the
property of burgesses, &c., and had afterwards, on tlieir importunity, remunerated them for the violence he had
employed, 'i'lie (juaint language employed in these Records requires considerable attention, and a minute knowledge of the phiascology of the period, to appreciate tlieir full import. .' Under date Oct. 2 there is another
payment to the same j)crson, feu- ' twa elne pylie gray to be ane cloik to the King, xxvj s. viij d. — Item, for schoring
of the samyn, iiij d.' * It is probable that this personage was ' MY LoKD Gkosolez,' or ' Gouzollez,' who occurs
under date Apr. 29, 1523 (q. v. and Note.)

17JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 273

APPENDIX.

Jan. 8, 1529-30.— Item, for carying of t\)t ^ailjeout^' fia Peblis to iHfggotlnntf, (to
' THE Hunting') and agane, ....•• • "j !'•

Item, for ane elne and ane half of Ualh.e, for ant SOttJU of hlak ijcXuot, Tunit to(tl) claitl) o£

golK, gevin to iljt ^mbn^^iatour of Sitglanli,' . . • • • T sMar. U.—Iiem, to Thomas Quertoun (Wharton), feruand to ]>e (StU of i^ortSumintr*

XntlTS, fat come for redrefs and remanit, . . . • • • !''• ti-

/to?(, to Dauid LiNDESAY,' fat paft with him, .... xvti.

Item, to iHaliolmr t^f dFuIt, be ane Precept of the Kingis, thre elnis rufTate, price xxxtj s.
Item, fyve quarter of tref^e, price . . . • . • vj s.

Item, to THE Italiane, fat come with f e Slrt]&{titiu of ^nnctnnttrot'^, . xl ti.

Item, to JoHNE HoRSLiE, Ingliliiian, be the Kingis command and Lordis of Counfale, xxti.
Item, to Thome Marfchale, cuke, paSSaiitt toitj& tijt ^fcrrtar to DngTanif, J^vaitrjif, Malit,
itt. . ■ . . . • . • • • . xti.

/fern, to Dingvale, Herald, fat pail with the Secretar, . . . xij ii.

/few, to Anthone, talbonar, at fe Kingis command, . • • xvti.

Ite7ii, to the Secretar, 'HuiljaSSiatour, . • I™.iij<=.xxxiij li. vj §. viij d.

May 12, 1530. — Item, to Hoge, meflinger, ]iat paft in Ingland with the Kingis writingis, xij i'u
May 25.— Item, to Ormond, Purfevant, and Ergile, meffinger, to pasS in Ujt Mis', at the
King and Lordis command, • . . . . . . . xiti.

Item, to tit epgpptiam's' t]&at ttan^tt iitfore tie ISutg, in Halyrudhouse, . xl s.

Jun. 1 — Item, deliuerit to the Lard of Bukcleuch, for tJ)C tafttlisof ^Cltmait, tua elne

and half of claith of fduer, price elne ix i'l., Jiimma, .... xxij ti. x s.

Jun. 18 Ite)}i, to Hecht, (Echt, meflenger,) fat paft to the Lard of Sandelandis for

f e tJun ^rottt'S C!)fiffts', . . . . . • • • x s.

Jun. 26. — Item, xxiiij halbartis for the King, price pece vj s. viij A.,Jumma, . viij ti.

Item, deliuerit to Dauid Bonar for the Kingis grace, Xl)xt Irtatam})t bclUltS,'' ane in Striueling, ane in Ediuburghe, the tbrid in f e Wardrop of Edinbuighe, be Johnne Urummond, price xx ti.
Jul. 6. — Item, to ane Pnrfevant fat paft to Peblis, Selkirk, and vfir placis with the Kingis
Letteris, Btgtj&argrtng all iiiaiuv of j^crSom'S of ifSttttng of tje Cljctfts" gufii'S,'^ . xxi.

Item, to Iley, Herald, fat come fra the Kingis grace to gtcp tijt dFcrpis", (againft thofe)

fat paft fra the Army, &c.^ . . . . .

Jul. 20. — Item, gevyn to Gawyne Hammiltoun and his cumpany to Vjil to ittcltoSt, v ti.

Jul. 21 — Item, for twa lang malis, with twa lang braiffis to fame, to tavg tJiE Hingis 3lrit»

tatampt antr ^ttllf'' to Ij&C <©is"t, of findry prices, .... iij ti.xiiij s.

Item, for cairfay, to covir fe faid ftule fat paft to f e Oift, price . viij s. vj d.

/few, for anc SttdC'bonet,' price . . . . . . xs.

Aug. 2. — Item, to Kyntyre, Purfevant, fat paft to fe G?rlf of i^ortStinuntilanS with
directionis of the Kingis, . . . . . . . . iiij ti.

Item, to Oliphant, Purfevant, fat paft with fe faid Gawyne to fbtelroSc, • xxs.

Item, IoMarchmond, Herald, to pas with Letteris to Abeidene, to Arreift t\)t ^f$'3atl)attS
(Pirates), . . • . . . . . . . iiij ti.

' The Koyal Pavilions. These entries are noticed to mark the event of tliis great Hunting. ^ It is unnecessary to specil'y all the furnishings, among which are ' aucht dosane of poyntis,' ' vij' and ' xvij martiik skynnis,'
&c. Numerous dresses of ' gownis,' ' cloikis,' * mantillis,' &c. were made for the King at this period of ' veluot,'
' silk,' ' satyn,' &c. ' Sir David Lindesay of the Mount. ' O. Fr. Lit du camp. The King invariably

took one of these to his Hunting excursions and to the Field of Battle. ' Several similar payments. ' The

sum obliterated. ' His ' Stule of eise.' ° A great variety of similar entries at this period.

VOL. I. I 2 M

274 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1530.

APPENDIX.

Aug. 8. — Itcin, to Williame Mure, fat pad in aniiailBcrtlalc ailtt Crbt'BaTr, to waine JiE

Lardis Jiairof to bring tiT tjrtr pTtgn^ a^ane ])e xxf day of Auguft, and prtsoitntS, . xl s.

Ilem, to Williame iStiatlierne, meffinger, ])at pafl in fe Weft cuntre to funimond ane AITife,

and to ^uinmonS SamfS (liEIaTIacc of (Lanto for ffvtS^ojtf , . . . xl 5.

Item, to Johne Parduvyne, mafer, to fummond certane Loidis to be vpone ]ie itorlJ ?i?a» of

%tiitxii ^Ssis'r, \c xxv day of Auguft, ...... xxx s.

Ihni, to (jawane Hamilton, and v))ens, feiuandis of ]'E KiNcas, ]iat brod[)t X\)t Slbfiot of

iHflroSl'S srjjf ip to itl'nlftjllh), attour ' v ti. gevin of before, . . . iiij ti. x s.

Itou. gt'vin to James Gordoune of Lochinver for his Remiflioune, and v]iiris tbretty perfonis, liis kynnilinen," as |)E Kingis Precept beris, ..... I'll.

Item, to tbc JLoItmail ^ of Ed", ])at come to Linlithqw ])e xxv day of Auguft to Iiaiig tfrtane
iirjcifts", .......... xiiijs.

//<■»(, for batbuig"' of tie s"aiB (Tfififii's, ..... viij i.

Ilem, to )>E Larde of Johnestoune and Edward Maxwell, for tafttng of ant ^\)til ailXf
iiriligdig of Jiis' ijtiti to Ed", in contentatioune of P ti. grantit be ]>e Kingis grace to Jjanie, 1 ti.
Aug. 15. — 7to«, to tt)t dTranCf SmbaSiStatOUre, for his rewarde, . . ij' ti.

Item, to Agnes Quiiite, for his lugeing, |)e tyiiie he wes in Dundie, . . . iij ti.

Item, to Marciiemond, Herald, tijat past in dFranrc ttjc SvtngiS tranBis, . 1 ti.

Aug. 23. — Item, to Jjfitg (CrtiStall,* fervand, . . . . xx ti.

Aug. 29. — Item, to ane fervand of ^t\)ix WiiWiamt Crbir, Inglilmanne, tjat rotttt for
^atlu'S, . . . . . . . . . . vjti.

Item, to ane Pursevant, to pafs to convey ))e faid Inglifemanne, with tfaja ^alltiS, fend fra
])E Kingis grace to ])e faid Schir Williame, . . . . ... iiij ti.

Sept. . — Item, to ane Periewant to pafs with Letteris to Jie Larde of Bukcleuche for ])e
apprehending of Jie flaaris of Maifter Johnne Balfoure, . . . . xx s.

Oct. 1. — Item, to ane boy fat ranne furthe of Dunde to Ed", for ant Summonttis onne fe
llortr dforbcSf, . . . . . . . . . iij s.

Oct. 2. — Item, to Jie Inglis boware, for fjoluis to ii)t liitng, . . vjti.

Item, to ])E Secretare, tijf tjirar of tjis fiirSt pasSngf to 'iJomr in HmfiaESatri),*'"

vj' Ixvj ti. xiij 5. iiij d.

Item, to him fen fine, in parte of payment of ane Precept of vj' ti. . . iij' ti.

Item, to furnyfe Jie neceftaris of tjjc |3faCf of CfniptatloiUlf, be Jie Lordis Precept, xx ti.

Oct. . — Item, to Maister Johnne Bellentyne, be ))E Kingis Precept, for translating

of tDf «Iroiu)!uII," ......... xxxti.

Item, to Mathow and Arche Hammyltoune for jie CF5tI)ctc of IxOtifUf IHurraniiS nunnc of

ILOj^l), gevin to Jianie be ])E Kingis grace, and coft agane' be the Thesaurare, for . I ti.

Item, for thre cariage horfis to iXWit {\)t 9rrfSf=U)CrlliS tluljilttiS Jiang in tIjC 5H)ban, J)E

Kingis 3lJolui5, 5trroiuiS, and vjiir geir of J'e Wardrob, to Striueliiig agane Paifclie,' xviij s.

Item to Johnne Bog, to tnafe anr jiaSSagt Hounc fra tjjc (iTaStcU of 5'triucling to tj&c
^arli, . . . . ' vti.

' Ovtr and abiive. ^ This seems a very extraordinary measure, unless it can be interpreted to indicate, that

L. 100 was remitted to him of the amount of hisj Composition. ^ The Hangman, or public executiimer. See

Dr Jamirsons Diet, and Sir Walter ScoWs Novels for explanations of the term. ^ Watching. * See

Note to Jun. \(), lo'J:^, of this Appendix. '^ There is no date affixed to this and the six following entries,

which commence the accounts of * Money at the command and Preceptis of the Kingis, debursit to sindry personis.' ■ These payments continued for a considerable time. In the next account other entries are made, see

Oct. -1-, 15.31, &c. I\Iany similar traces of the King's liberal i»atron;ige of literary men are to be fuUnd in these
records. '^ Ke-purchased. " A number of other payments for transporting geir of the Wardrob, &c. &c.

These entries occur annually at Paische, or Easter, and often at Christmas, &c.

18JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 275

APPENDIX.

Nov. 2. — Item, to tje SuJse of ^IbanmS feivand fat brocht X^t grftt Jor^t to pE Kixgis
grace, ............... I''xx ti.

Item, to ]ie Franclie Avmorare ]iat come with him, . . . . . . xl ti.

Nov. 12. — Item, in Sanct Jolinnefloune, to Hoge, meffingere, to pafs tO appviSC tl)e EofK
iSfaxhtiii lauUi'S, xl s.

Dec. 18. — Item, to Adam Stewart, meffinger, to pafs to Renfrew, Kyle, Cunynghame,
&c. to inanif fov i\}t JJrinur, aittt passage t'li tljc DliS xxvs.

Dec. 25 — Item, to ane Herald, to ride fuith of Striueling to Ed", to toiiijou CarlfT,
3)ngl(5" l^cralB, to Striueling, to ])E KiNGis grace, ij ti.

Item, to ]>e faid Cavlll for his wage, with t\)t Tatf of \\)t ^'cralBtiS, on NEW-3ERE-DAY,' x ti.

Item, to him, quliillc remanit liere fra New-5ere-(]ay to |9almr ^OlllJai),'' . xl ti.

Dec. . — Item, to tlie faid Dauid (Bcmar) for xiij double banlcis of gold, quhilkis war deliuerit
to Dauid Lindesayis wyf,'' to StSi) t\)t ifltngiS garluS, J'e price of ilk hank xs. . vj ti.

Item, be Je faid Nichol Carncorfe to Dauid Lyndesay, ^eralU, iij elnis blak veluot, price
of ]ie elne Ivs., . ........... viijti. vs.

Item, to him vj elnis Paroife blak, price of Jie elne xl i.' . . . xij ti.

Feb. 9, 1530-1. — Item, to Duncan Riche, to pafs with ane ^ttmtnoiltltS of JTrfSouttC to tljc
iHfltlte of tljf Dlts', to be execute in Invernes, . . . .

Mar. 1. — Item, to Wiljame Quiiite, meffinger, to pas with Letteris to Sanctaudrois for apjirf*
lirnliins of Soj&itnf 33laliatfr of (ITuHuannitc,'^ ..... xiiij s.

jNlar. IG. — Item, to Williaine Mure, meflinger, to pafs with Letteris to ])E BiSCHOPPIS of
Sanctandrois and Brechine, to turn to Ed"^ for Brgratiatiounf of nitr ^3rft5t,'

Item, to ane boy to rynne to the Bischop of Dunblane with liclyke letteris, ij i.

Mar. 27, 1531. — Item, to Andro Hammyltoune, meflinger, to pafs with Letteris to Jie Erlis
of Ergile, Montroife, and J)e Lord Erfkin,^ to convene in Ed'' for Diistlfuing of tjbc itarlJ of ^uXlV'
nllaitr, . . . • . . . . . . xij s.

' Robene Hude.'s

Apr. 5. — Item, Jie v day of Aprile, for vj quarteris gray taffate of Jeynes, to be ane part of ])E
KiNGis iioficnc llHltllS 33antr, price of ]ie elne xiij s. viij d. . . . xxij s. vj d.

Item, for vj quartaris 5ALLOW taffaty to pe faid 33aiTri', price of fe elne xvj s. xxiiij s.

Item, for vj quartaris rede taffaty to ])e faid 3SaiIcr, price of the elne xiij s. xix s. \j d.

Item, for ane quarter quiiite taffate, to be Corfis to )>e faid 33ancr, price Jiairof, iij s. iiij d.
SuMMA of ]ie JSaner, ..... iij ti. ix 5. iiij d.

Item, at pE Kingis command, to Johnne Bog and Johne Lawfoune, to be Jiame ItberauiS to
pass luttlje tijt Bl'ngiS JaoBcne l^uKc, v elnis gray veluet, to be fame tlua ISoubltttiS, price of pe
elne iij ti. v i. . . . . . . . . . xv^ ti. v s.

Item, for vi elnis lyning fnftiane to Jiare Doublettis, price of the elne ii s. vj d. . xv s.

' The usuiil ' Largesse' given to the Heralds on each recurrence of that happy day. ^ Payments made at

same time to * Messiiigeris of Middilburghe, vij li.' — ' Habringtoune, Inglisman, June 6, vli.' — ■* the Frenche Ambassiatoure, JuL 'SO, xxxvj li. iij s. vjd.' — ' Ilorslie, Inglisman, Aug. 2, xx li.' — * Garis, Inglisman, quhilk came with
writingis fra my Lord Dacres to the King, iiij li.' — * Alex, Mure, Herald of Denmark, Aug. 2, xxxli.' ^ Other
paymetds made ' for warnyng of the cl'ntre,' and to ' provide for schippis and vthir veschell' for the ' passage to
THE I1.1S.' See Mr Gregory's work for tlie j)articulars of this Expedition. * ' Jonet Douglas.' See these

Extracts, Mar. 1537-8. A great number of similar entries occur for sums paid her for embroideries, &c. ^ This
is entered among the ' Leueratis at the Feist of Zule. ^ For the Murder of James Ingiis, Abbot of Culros,

the same day. See I, * 151. ' Sir William Louthien. Ibid, ^ fllessengers were also dispatched for the

* Lorde of ^Montgomery, the Erie of IVIortoune, and Lord Seytoune.' ^ So many notices have occurred, in the

course of this Collection, I'elative to Kobin Hood Games, that the Editor thinks the following extracts will be acceptable to all readers. Reference may be advantageously made to Brand's Popular Superstitions {Ellis's Edit.), l)r
Jamieson's Diet., and Sir Waller Scott's ^Vorks, though it may be affirmed that the present are the most iuteresting
and miuute which have hitherto been laid before the public.

276 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1532.

APPENDIX.

Item, for vj qnartaris canvefe, to ftent fare Doublettis, pe price . . ij s.

Item, for tlua Sftrrlctt JJoitrttf^ to pame, . . . . . iij ti.

Item, for ix quartaris flfrencbe gray, to be jiame tfaja )3are al ^lofef, price of tbe elne
xvi s. ...•••... . xxxviij s.

Item, for vi quartaris blew to lyne fare Hoife, . . . . vj i.

Item, for iij ebiis gray taifTety to draw fare lioife, price of fe elne xvi s. . xlv s.

SuiMMA of fis liifray, ..... xxiiij ti. xi s.

Item, to James Erskyne, t\it ittngt^ ilolitnn ^lutfe, x quarteris gray fatyne, to be him
ane Doublett, price of ]ie elne xxxiiij s. . . . . - . iiij ti. v s.

Item, for kenvefe to it, . . . . . , . xviij d.

Item, for quliyt fuftiane to lyne it with, . . . • . viij s.

Item, for makeine of it, . . . . . . . iiij s.

Item, for ane elne furage gray, to be him ane pair of hoife, price . . . xvj s.

Item, for ij elnis taffate, to draw fame and nerf ])ame, . ... xxiiij s.

Item, for half ane elne and ane nale gray fatyne to couir fe hypis of fame, price of fe elne
xxxiiij s. . ............. xix s. j d.

Item, for blew to lyne f e faid hoife, . ....... iiij s.

Item, for niakeine and cwtting of fame, . . . .... viij s.

SuiMMA of f is liftVay, .... . . viij ti. xi s. vij d.

[A great variety of other costly ' liuerayes' occur under the same date, but no mention is made
of RoBix Hood. It is probable that they were all procured on the same occasion.]

May 20. — Item, to Dauid Lyndesay, ft^craTU, be f e Kingis Precept, xiij elnis blak fatyne
to be him ane gowne, price of f e elne xxxij s. . . . . . xx ti. xvj s.

Item, for iij elnis blak weluet, to begarie fe famyne gowne, price of ]ie elne Iij s , vij ti. xvj s.

Aug. 4. — Item to Gourlaw, meffinger, to pafs to Menteithe and vthir places with Letteris to
WARNE f E Gentilmenne of fe cuntre to ii)t ButgtS Tfluntt'itg (it iHrgotlnitU,' . xx s.

Oct. 4. — Item, to Maister Joiine Ballentvne, be the Kingis Precept, fov |[)ts' tvaitjS^
latiitg of tilt (droiiiclt^, ........ xxx ti.

Item, ])airefter, to fe faid fHafStrr %(\\}\Xt, be fe Kingis command, • . vj ti.

Oct. 5. — Item, fe v day of October, to ane Inglisman (' Inglise Ambqffiatoury- fat brocht
writingis to fE Kingis grace, quiiora to his grace gaiff prefence in Kirkcaldye, . xlti.

Item, to Maifter George Foreftai- in Leith, to niak Jie faid SillglfSinaiindS rjiptnSlS, in Leith
and Kingorne, for ane day, at his cuming to f e Kingis grace, ..... xlvj s.

Oct. 19. — Item, to ane Inglisman, quliilk come with writingis to fE Lordis fra tj)r <!?rlje
of |5orfiumi)cilanB, . . • . . • . . . . . vti.

Oct. 28 Item, be ane Precept, to aitf null) failjrtt mait, in Striueling, callit Alane Stewart, in almoufe, . .......... xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, be ane Precept, to nitr ))UVf niait, (luIjntS j[)or;Se fcH our tDc Castrll luaU of ^triuc^
tllTg, and brak his iiek,-" . ........... iij ti.

Item, be |ik KiNcas Precept, to William Duncan, |lJwrrcl)aiit(, quhilk was Jiurt ill fJlBtltStfalc,
ridand, be tic fffjffi^, and his horfe tane fra him, . .... . vti.

Dec. 8 Item, to CarUn, Itlcraru off .Dnglaittf, bo ])e Lordis command, quhilk come with

writingis to ]iE Kingis grace and fK LoiiDis, ..... xxx ti.

Item, to |)c faid Thomas Scott,* (' SImljasst'ntOlir/) to be ane part of ane riding cote, iiijg elnis
blak weluett, jjiiie of |>e ein Iij s.,Jhmma, ..... xj ti. xiiij s.

' Many other nii'sscii'.'iM's sent to dift'erent parts of tlw country. " On the margin, ' Inglise Ambassiatour.'

' These entries arc seleeled to notice the generosity of Tin: KiNci, whose acts of beneficence appear in ahnost every
page of tliese Accounts. ' He is above styled one of the ' Coinraissionaris ou ye ISordouris,' along with the

Lard or Hai.wkrv, S( mir Jomnnk ('AjiriiELL of Lundy knycht, and the Lard of Amisfield. On the margin,
opposite this entry, is ' Scot, AiMBASsiATOUR.*

19JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 277

APPENDIX.

Jan. 12, 1531-2 — Item, to Dauid Blytli, purSrbitnt, to pa^ to 3tuntront with Jtrttcrts to
tJitlSing of SSnglantt, for ane Conduct to ])E Ambassiatouris, . . . xxv ti.

' 9in6a5Statourf5 tit Jfratutrf.'

Feb. 24 — Item, to Schik Thomas Erskvn of Haltoux, knyS ^ccrftarc anB ^ml)a^<
gtatour tii Jj^raiiff, to his onDiNARE expenfis in France, fe fpace off foure nionethis, ilk nioneth
eftimat to xxx'i tiayis, ilk day havand to his ordinare expenfis as faid is, viij fraiikis, ilk frank extending
to x s. vj d. in Scottis money. Summa of ])e fraukis ix'lx frankis ; fumma of Jie Seottis money
extending to ......... v'^iiij ti.

Item, to my faid ILovlJ ^Cfrftarf, be je Kingis fpeciall command, to his extraordinare,
Ixxxix Angell nobillis, pecc extending to xxxij s. \ fumma, Pxlij ti. viij s. And alfua to his extraordinare maid in finance iij'^xv frankis iiij fowfe, ilk frank x s. vj d. ;yM/«/«a of ])e frankis, in Scottis
money, Flxv ti. ixs. ^j d. Siiiiima to/iilis of ]ns extraordinare, . iij'^ij ti. xvij s. vj d.

Item, to uut JtorH JBl'ScIjopc of Ko^S, StinliaSStntour, ))e famyn tyme, to help to his furnefTing I"'lj'^ frankis, price of ilk frank, in Scottis money, x s. vj d. Summa of ]iir frankis, in Scottis,
extendis to ......... vjxxx ti.

Item, to Dauid Lyndesay, ftjcraltf, to his expenfis paffing with ])e faidis Ambassiatouris
ij'^ frankis, fumma, . . . . . . . . . I^ v ti.

Item, to Joiine Bog pafTand with tfrtant '"j^orSiS antf ^Ulltli^ Sflttl be ]ie Kingis grace to
iHatfnmr Sobtlljf, to his expenfis ij'xl frankis,'y5<»i;««, .... Pxxvj ti.

Apr. 2, 1532. — Item, to Henry Kemp, quhilkis he deburfit for ])c SSingfS 50UC,^ gotten vpon
Elizabeth ScHAW, and bis nurife expenfis, ..... xx ti.

/ifew, to ])e GENTILL woMANE ])at foStinit pC lliinsfS Soiif, . . . xls.

]May 11 — Item, for graithing of the 9inba55tntoiin's Itigciiif of dflanBirS, ' (niijiTft brocjjt
tl)t Crmpn'ottl'tS Collar to ]ie Kingis grace,'' as ane Bill gevin be JNIaifier Joline Scrymgeour Maifter
of Werk, beris, ......... iiij ii. vj d.

Itetn, to ])e faid Jtmbasstatouv, to his revard, ij'". fifty Angell nobillis,y«;«OT«, iiij" ti.

Item, to tl)c ^IfrafiJ of ;if"IaiT'!JrfsV calllt Burgunze Herald, to his revard, . I" ti.

Item, for tway purflls to putt ]ie laid money in, .... viij s.

Item, to tJ)C jottng man tijat s'ang luttl) tijt ambassiatotirr foirfaid, . xx ti.

Item, to f>e gudewyfe of pe houfe quhare ))e U'fralB of d?lailfCl5 was lugit, for liir houfemaill ]>e tyme of his beyng ])are, . . . . . . . i'j ti.

Itetn, to (Carlill, Herald, quhilk come with writingis to ])E Kingis grace and lordis, and
remanit on his anfuer qidiill )ie Parliament, . . . . . . xl ti.

24 — Item, to 3Sutf, Pursevant, to pass' to ituirtoun hiitij It3rttiiigf5 to t])c Itiiig of
3nglanii, .... . . . . . . . xl ti.

Jun. 16.— /fern, to tSc lU'ltg of (iltpi'f (' ClPRE,')5 .... r ti.

Jul. 4. — Item, to Alexander Mure, quhilk come with iun'ttltgi^ fra tljc Sing of IIIfU=
marft, . . . . . . . , . . xl ti.

' A great many more payments are made for dresses, provision for the horses, and ' iiij doggis to jiy Loud Obinze ;'
xl li. to GuiLLiAME, I'Vaiiclie post, &o. &c. * Jasies Akp.ot of Kelso and Melrose, a piijiil of George liuchanan. On Oct. 8, 1534, he got a charter of the Estates forfeited hy the Earl of Angus, Beij. Mag. Sig. xxv. 241.
Obiit 1558, sine prole. His mother was of tlie family of Sauchie. ' These words are inserted, in larger letters,

on the margin. ^ In this atid the other instances ' Spanee' had been written ,ind ' Flandres' substituted.

^ ' Cipke' on the margin. It docs not appear, from any otln-r enti'ies in these Accounts, who this kingly personage
was. The Editor is inclined to believe that the ' Kino,' ' the Prince,' and ' the Wore,' belonged to one or more
of the numerous bands of Gyi'sies or IJohe:\iians, who infested various countries of Europe at and ]H'evious to this
period, in such overwhelming numbers, as eventually to call down upon them the cruel, but i)erhaps necessary,
severities which continueil to be practised against that devoted race for nearly two centui-ies alter this time. For
numerous interesting particulars relative to this remarkable peoi)le, see this Collection, III, 590, &c. * King CrislALL,' mentiuued under date Aug. 23, 1530, of this Appendix, was likely another of these artful wanderers.

278 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1532.

APPENDIX.

Jul. 20. — Item, to Carlill, Herald, . . . . . 1 ti.

Item, to 33utf, Purfevant, to jpaSS luitl) JurttingiS in 3)ngTnntI, and departit with )>e faid

Carlill, Inglis Herald, ])e xx daye ot Julij, ..... xxxvj ti.

Jul. 21. — Item, to jie puir womane qul)tUt Jjatt J)iv ijouSljaiiB Slanc Suttb anc gtonnt IVIiot
furth of pe Callell, . ............ xl s.

Aug. 11 /tort, be ])E KiNGLS command to t]&f ^rilUf of (Ct'prE, . . xl ti.

Item, ])e famyne day to tijc iHorc, be Jie Kingis command, . . . xxx ti.

18. — Ilci}', furniiru be ))E Kingls command to my Lordis Bisciiop of Ross and Secretar,
i^miaSStatottitB' in dfranrE, and to ])e Lard of Gawistoune and Dauid Lyndesay, Herald,
being with | anie, IniV frankis for twa monethis expenfis ; off fe quliilk to my Lord Bilhop of Rofs,
xvj'' frankis ; to my Lord Secretar, vi frankis, to ]ie Lard of Gawilloune, ij' frankis ; and to Dauid
Lyndefay, I'^ frankis ; price of ilk frank maid in finance with Hew Dowglafs, Niclioll Caruecorfe, and
Paterfoiine, burgeffis of Edinburgh, X s. vj d. ;y«;?i«i a,' . . . vij^'lxxxvij ti. x s.

Sep. 18. — Item, for aiir itutc Suit?) tI)C taiSf, and ane dofane of flringls by,-coft in Glasgw,
and fend with Troilus to ]>E Kingis grace in Jiiuicrrcra, . • . . xl s.

/(few, to ))e forfaid Troilus to turfe ])e famyn, . . . . . vj s.

Sep. 27 Item, for carrage of ]ie Kingis bed to tiJC hunting III (5lcnarftlia» ? and for

cariage of ]ie Ikmyn out of Ed'', to Sanctandrose to tijf |DarBouil, . . xx s.

Dec. — Item, be ])E Kingis Precept to IHat'Stcr 3>ol)lU Sovrl)?/ v elnis tanny chamlett,
price of |ie elne xj s., . . . . . . . . Iv s.

Jan. 1531-2 Item, be ]'e Kingis Precept, to Cristiane Rae, quj)cn Sfljo ioaS C^ucnt o£

33anc,* iiiji ehiis riflillis blak, price of ]ie elne xxvj s. viij d. .... viti.

Item, to hir ane elne veluett, price ...... liilj s.

Feb. 23. — Item, to twa cartis, fat ane to turfe fe blak kift, witli tljc Cjbajjclt graft!) to Striueling, and ])at vfir with i\)t SlrrcSf IjtngartS, . • . . . iij ti. xij s.

Item, for ane lok mending and ane new kee to the 33Ialt Itt'St tjiat JtfptS t\)t 3acl:qun'5, xvj d.

Item, for ane bott^ of irne, and leid to 5ett \e famyn, to pe Compt-houfe durre,'^ . ij s.

May 17, 1532. — Item, to Duncan Reche, Pursevant, to pafs with Letteris to ]ie Bischope
OF Sanctandrois to aduertefe him of tl)f (CJjaiigtlll of t\>t Sl'ftt off H)t attuSatiouil of tj&e
ItutJjfiniifS, xs.

Jun 9. — Item, for ant tvcntafi of iHcSSfS for t^r Bingf^ SVaCC, in Quhithorne, xxx s.

/to«, to ))e Chai'LANE diliributour of I'e lliniyn, . . . . ij s.

Aug. 11 — Item, to xij Cheplanis to Sait fUtii for t\)t Mi'ngi'S grace afoir cure Lady of
Paislay, . . . . • . . . . . xij s.

Aug. 21.— /ton, to Schir Johne Jordane (' Clieplane') to tjjf SnmouSt,'^ . xviij ti.

Item, to him, in compleit payment tlie 3j»tngi5 Sllmou^C, fra ]/e xxij day of Auguft 1432 to
))e dayofjiis compt, (Sep. 26, 1633,) takand ilk moneth xvj ti., . . . ''j l^iDec. 2, 1332. — Item, to Jje Inglise bowar, for anc ttoSanc of 33olut!S and vj dofane of
^rrobfS deliuerit at ]iE Kingis command to ?llcvanlfcr CanoSouilC ; and for iiij dofane of Arrovis
deliuerit to ]ie Kingis grace, for Ji'S abnc Scj&uting, . . . . xxti.

' ' SvmiA trium foliorum prcccdentium, (all expended for Ambassadous, Heralds, &c.) iijniix'' li. viij s. xj d."

* Over jiiid above, l>esides ; forhife. ^ See also Aug. 5, l.>.3.5, for another entry relative to the Kinc.'s Dwarf.
He al>>o j;rts * doublat, boise, and boiinat,' on this occasion, ibr his ' Zui.e Leueray ;* and on Sep. 21 preceding he
had a payment uf xl s. The Editor is of opinion that this is the iiHlividtial Dwarf for whom the well known
Poem in thi; Bannatyne IMS., entitled * Ane eitili, Interlud of the Droichis part of the Play,' \T'as written.

* There have already been given some instances oCthe King of Bane in the course of this Collection. The custom
was .similar to that still observed in England on Twelfth N'ujhl. See I, • 11.5, and Note, &c. The Editor does not
recollect to have elsewhere met with a notice of the (^ueen of Bane. ^ Bowtt, bolt. ^ A number of other
entries about the Blak kist and Keliques. ' On Jun. 9, xij li. were paid him for the same purpose. The public
Alms given by King .James V, at this period, was Sixteen pounds, mvntkli/, besides his numerous benefactions and
private charities. See Aug. 21.

19JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 279

APPENDIX.

Jan. 9, 1532-3. — Item, to ]>e Maister of Forbes, be ]>e Kixgis command, . xl ti.

Item, be ))e Kingis Precept to %syi)\\t, yfpar oC ^anct SoljiKStoune, in i!roquI)cr' with
Katherine Sinclair, . . . . . • 1' xxxiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Feb. n.—Item, for mt ttcntan'- of iHc55f5 Sone for t]&c 33n'tonan'3 im\U c[u]baftfe
jjcrist at i\)it ^3oit of <^ixt, . . • • . . . xx §.

Feb. 11. — /to«, to Patrik Kincaid, Maisteu Brovstar, . . xvj ti. v s.

Apr. 12, 1533.— 7/eTO, to Scbir Henry Huntar, for tjc BtngTS SlVt'sc StnganU, in StriUELING, . . • • • • • • • . xij ti.

/tew, for ntrnllfng of tijc ©rgam'S, in Striiteling, .... iijti.

Apr. 12. — Item, to fe L. L.^ be ])E Kingis command, . . . I'' tiMay 13. — Item, to Walter Cnnyngbamis wyfe in Striueling for aitt ftoU) (JU^jilft i\)t ittngtiS
grate Sicto tot'tl) aire rulbcvfng, . . . . . - . xl s.

May 15? — Item, to iHats"tcr bettor 33o{fC, Principal! in Abirdene, for Jie tane* j^alf of
JfjJ Pensioune ; and ])e vjiir half pairt be ]ie Comptrollar, .... xxv li.

Jun. 16. — Ittm, to Williame Haldane and Williame Brovne, for ii)t ^laiicfitfr of vmq''" DiK
RicHERTsouNE, aiit fommoitt iCJjciff, and taftt'itg of anc btljir iTjjctff callit Bartilmew TailjEOUR, .......... XXX ti.

Item, to Maister Johne Ballantyne for ant ntio CorntMc gtbm to tj^t Htngfe
gratr, ......... . xijti.

Item, to him in part of payment of fe {TrailSlattOtint of JfTltttS 3ttuiu5, . viij ti.

Jul. 26. — Item, to Williame Vdwart be ]'e Kingis Precept, be Dauid Bonar, for tIatSt tane
fra^ him be ]ie Kingis command to atir (SmttH iuomaiT, (' S. D.) '^

Item, deliuerit to my lord Secretar in ])E Quenis College to tro ^ttrtt mattrrfS of i\}t
Utligt'S, . . . . . . . . . . iiij ti.

Aug. 24. — Item, to Maister Johnne Ballantyne in part of payment of fe STranSla'
ttount of ])e fecund buke of iTituS JttUlUiS," . .... viij ti.

Aug. 28 Item, to Koliert Hoidie, Inglifman, quiiiik come with Uirtttltgi^ fra JiE Erle of

Northumbirland, tompTfiiantt on tj)t irrft of tljf JiorBourtS," . . . xti.

Sep. 5. — Item, to Dauid Blytli, Pl usevant, titiljilli jjaSt to ittintfottnt trnnfiiS of trrtane
JHtrtJanillS of Ed«, and fend with him itfttrtS to tJjt IStlig of Dnglantf, fchewand ]'e couiplaunt
of our 33orUourarfS vpoune fE Inglismenne, . . . . . vj ti.

Item, to Dauid Creicliloune of ]ie Gardrobe, to fee tua careage horfis to turfe Jie Kingis
bed and v)ier graithe to tJjt ?ijuntin(j in Sltjiolf, and for J>e (pace of vij dais Jiair to remane ; to ilk
horfe on }ie day ij s.,^ fumma, . . ..... xxviij s.

Sep. 7. — Item, to ane boy to pafs furthe of Sasct Johnestoune with ffJHfrtttfltgt'S to tljE
3ttgat in Ed", . . .......vs.

Item, to George Leiche to pa53 to tSt i^t'ngfs gract in Snutrrtra, . . viij ti.

Item, to ane man to pafs to convoy him, ..... xxviij s.

Sep. 15. — Item, to Jame Litiljohnis feruand, to pafs with liutis" anB ^cl)obnt to tl)t iJtngiS
grate, in CPrgt'It, . . . . . . . . . xx s.

Sep. 16. — Item, to ane boy to ryn with ane Lettre to my StorB ((rl)nnfcnar to caufe him haift

to Ed'', . . . . . . . . • . iij s.

' Toclur, (Inwery, or M,irriage- portion. ^ TricentuUs. Three liundred Masses. ' The Lady L., one

of the King's INIistresst's. This must have been either the Lady I^oelileven, (^Margaret, daughter of John, i?('e//>/i Lord
Ei'skine, and mother of the Regent Murray,) afterwards the wife of Sir Robert Dougl.is of Lochleven- — or Elizabeth, daughter of Jolin, Ihird Earl of Lennox, who bore to the King, Adam, Prior of the Charterhouse at I*erth.
There are many payments to this individual. "* The one half. ^ Purchased. ^ These initials are on

the margin. The extract is made to notice the number of such entries for dresses, trinkets, &c. &c. ' The Antiquary need scarcely be reminded that both the Chronicles and Translation of Livy have been admirably edited by
Thoiias Maitland, Esq., Advocate, in Three Volumes Quarto. " Many messengers passed between the countries on the same business. It is unnecessary to multiply entries here. " Several other payments.

280 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1532.

APPENDIX.

Sep. 18. Item, to Williame Criftefoune, meffinger, deliuerit Lettres to jie ^f]&trriffii^ of

FoRFAiR, Elgvne, Forese, Kincardine, Inuernes, Cromertie, Narne, Abirdene, and
Banff, to be proclamit witliin ]iair boumlis, chargeing all men, betuix Ix and xvj 5eiis, mak pame
reddye, vpoune xxiiij houris warnyng, to paS Sotlin, kt, iuttl) i\t SvtngtS grate ax ijiS l.(fU5
ttnfnt, witli viij dais wittalis, vndir J<e pane of tynfale of ]'air lyvis, landis, and gudis. And alfua
deliuerit Letteris to fe Erles of Murray and Huntlie, Lordis Saltoune and Ogilwy, cliargeing )>ame to cum with diligence to avife for Sffrnrc of tlir vcaXmc agant;^ t?)t riifmiit^ of a)ng=

Ian»,' l'"J^-

Sep. -21.— lion, to Cuthbert George, meflinger, to pafs with iLtttCVi* to tl)e <Sx\t of i^.OX'

tljumiiirTauti,- . • • • " '''sSep. a4.. — Itein, to Williame Duncane, meflinger, to pafs with Lettres to ]>e Lard of Bille,
tliavgcing \)in\ to ftrt'p s'urtKc Ui ^OtlSc of M\h, vnder J.e pane of dovncalling of Jie famyn, and
tinfall of bis heritage, ^"'J sOct. 25. — Item, to Adam Stewart, meffingire, to pafs and s"innnionif ]ie 3lat)l) ff2a'ttl'Dtr«
iurnc and jie iLaUp ffratjuaiv to compeire in Ed"^, on Nov. viij, to heir fame accufit of trtSSonabiU
3lntrrcoinnioni)ng and alFulance done to Archibald fumtynie Erle of Anguse and his complices, cure fouerane lordis Rebellis ; and to Sumuiontl anc 5J5St5c of l^e fchyris quhaire jiai duell,
to beire witnefling ]iairupoune ; and to his wage, . xx s.

Nov. 12. — Item, to Cuthbert George, nieflingir, to ryd with Letteris direct to )'e ^cl)crrcf of
^ir ailH 33afhr of Bile to bring Archibald Curre, in Sandefurde, before ])e Stovtis' of Coiiits
gaill in Ed", on Nov. 21 inflant, to anfuer at oure fouerane lordis inflance forpe 3>lltroiliri'ting SllitJ
nnr mtvSC of monci) extending to vij'ti. quhilkis pertenit fumtyme to 3)ltgIi5nuiIlK tljat Xivobnft
one tljc tof^t of ^iv : And als, deliuerit to him, ficlik, Letteris chargeing ]ie Prouest and Baillies of be bur"he of Aire to bring Robert Nele, Johne Fallifdaill, and Thomas Stevinlloune, to
anfuer lie day and place afoir expremit, for )>e famyn caufe, and to his wage, . . xxviij s.

j)gg. 7. Item, deliuerit to Andro Difchintoune, meffingeire, Letteris to ]>e Wardanis of

1)E EisT and Myddell Marciiis, to charge all liegis within ]>aj bouudis to atuait bpouitc tj)e
Diuunii'ng of nnr ^imi? of Siiglisnun, anB vrsfst tftt Same, kt. : And als charging all Baronis
and gentill men havand CnStcUt'S Of iixtnttjii-, o]'"' '•' '^t^ping or lieretage, to defend liame, abyding
hailly refkew of 1>e Kingis Army: And deliuerit to him Letteris to )ie Constabill of Hadingtoune, to warne all perfonis within ])e boundis of his Office to be in Hadingtoune |)e x day of ].is
monetli, weill bodin, ."*i(;. to ftliU Otlt Soiltianc lovtll^ runu'lig ])e fpace of viij dais; and to his
wage,'' xxviij i.

Dec, 16. — Item, to ane feruand of my Lord Hvmi.s, quhilk come with Writingis to })E
Kingis grace, and tiitljiirgtS fra tlir 33ortiotiri5, ..... iij ti.

Item, to .lohne iMortoune, quhilk broclit EiHrnttngfs fia H^t EiEIarifaitr of tjjr itTutHfill
ftTavt]&ts' to ]iE Kingis grace, at |>e Kingis command,'' . . . . xl s.

X)ec. 26. — Item, to Adam Stewart, with ane Miffive Lettre to ))e Lard of Spott; and
alfua to him Letteris to ]ie Maister of Halis for 93pntl'ltg of iJalt'S;^ and ane Lettre to be proclamit at findrie Burrowis, in Lotheane, for funtrstlig of luittallS ; and to his wage," . x s.

Dec. 28 Item, to Sym Pennango to pas with Letteres to ]>e Lard of Balclewche and

v]ieris, aduertifand ]iame of ]ie SingliSnintltf tumiltg to tj)f ^l!ous"f of UiUr,' . . iij li.

' Many simil;ii- oiitrips, iinneressary to be given here. ' He was sent again on Oct. "23. ' Messengers

were (lis]pat<heil to all parts of the kingdom jnior to this date, with Letters to Barons, &c. * In consequence of

these ' tythingis,' fresh Proclamations were issued, calling on the liegis to he in Edinburgh on Jan. 5 next, with
twelve (lays' provisions, &c. ^ Bonfires or hale-tires. ° Letters were also dispatched to the LAiKDSof

' BaANXHor.MK, rAUNvniKsT, Mark Keb, and Wardanis of the Mvnnii.L Marchis foment Ingland, Alexander
HvME, vmquhile Ti;toi;r or WEimiRBURKE, Johne Hvme or Blacater, Williame Cokhlrne of that Ilk, and
Loan HvMK, chargeing thame to be in Edinburgh the last day of this instant moneth.' ' On Dec. 29, Proclamations of new issued for the Barons, &c. of Edinburgh, Lanark, and PelJis, &c. to be in Edinburgh, on Apr. 8,

6

20 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 281

APPENDIX.

Jan. 13, 1532-3 Item, to Johne Guilaw, meffingeir, Letteris to charge )ie Abboiis of

Kelso, Dryburghe, Melrose, and Jedburghe, to rtmaiTf lit tljJiir !<lijl)nruts*, SuiStnittiuSUe
artttrnpniim't, lucdl bo'Diitf, kc, for "Drfntfr of i\)t rcnlnu,' • . . xx s.

Jan. 27. — Item, to Williame Mure, meflingeire, quliilk raid at ])e poift to Newbottill,
Melros, and Cauldstheme, to tatisf protiist'onf ije inaiB for Jat^abiitg of tjic dfraitrbe ain«
ira^satotir callit STEPHANa^s Aqueus,^ ...... .\xv s.

Pel). 10. — Item, deliuerit to Dauid Blair to pafs with Letteris to %6ijm (Caito^ottltf and
3lorB iHatlaitf, to caufe fame cum to ])E King, weill accumpanyit, for Ifffcntt of tjif rtalmf, v ti.

Feb. 28. — Item, to Johne Brovne, fkippar in Leithe, for ]ie fraucht of his fchip in ])e qidiilk my
Lord of Aberbrothok, Ambaffatour, pafl. in Fraunce, . . . I'xlvj W. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to iHrrcSniionU, Herald, quhilk pafl with fe forfaid Ambaflatour, . xl ii.

Mar. 1. — Item, to Williame Mure, to pas with ane charge fra ])E Lordis to )>e Lard of
DuNDAss for lupi'nj of i\)( ftioitsf of 3>iui)f(jarb^),^ . . . . . vj g.

Mar. 13. — Item, to Johne Cobe, to pafs with Letteris to )ie Abbottis of Newbottill and
Melrose and Prioress OF Cauldstreme, for i^csaljing of tijf Slept, . . xxs.

May 28 — Item, to Williame Criflefoune to pafs to CauldstreiME with W^ittingis fra J)E
Fraunche Ambassatouris to be fend to tjir C?r(t of i3orll)uml){rtatTt», . . xx i.

Jun. 13. — Item, to ©nnoitlf, Pursevant, to pas tit tl)f %\\i with Writtingis of ]>£ Kingis
for tl)t 3)ngfis'^tI)tj)cquJ)iIft ftlatTaitf tuttf,^ ..... viijti.

Jun. 22. — Item, to ane boy to rynne to Newbottill, with ane Writting, fchewand fat tje
9:nil3assatour, Bewes, and i^t iConiinisstoitan's", iuauIK if ioitj) \)im on tljc morite, . viij d.

Item, to Alexander Mure, quhilk brocht EBIrittiTJjfS fva tilt Bing of Sfitntarft, to his
rewarde, .......... xxxti.

Item, to James Murray to pafs to Cauldstreme, at )>e poll, all nyclit, with ane W'ritting to
)iE Prioress to prabt^f far iHoitsV. 33ftof^ anif X\)t Comnnssionarts', . . xx s.

Jun. 24. — Item, to Audio Difchintoune to pafs to Cauldstreme at )>e poft with ane Writting fra MoxsouR Bewes to J)e Erle of Northumberland, for ane (Coiilfuct to our (Commis's
^ionan'^, . . . . . . . • • . xxs.

Jun. 27. — Item, to Maister Johne Lauder to pass' to 93onte tit Wyt iliitgi^ eraittrt'^,
maid in fynance, v'' frankis, ....... 'j' '^U ^^- ^ s.

Item, gevin to him at his departing, to by hira Horfis and vferis necetfaris,^ . xlti.

Item, to MY Lord Maxwell for \)i^ ^entire Ifoitr fnioune X\)t JSorlfour, be ])e Kingis
confideratioune, and Precept Jiairupoune, .... iij'xxxiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Jul. 11. — Item, to Johne Gurlaw, to pas at fe Poft to ]ie Kingis grace with Letteris fra ))E
Lordis, certefeing his grace of tlje Ijame ntmmtiTg of tl)f (ConTint'sstonan's", . xiiij s.

Jul. 16. — Item, to Ar<' Hoge to pafs with itrttrns to ti)e f^rtoras'trll to \\)t (Coinmt's'e'ioit!
arts! of SliTglaiTlf, . . . . . . . . . iij ti.

Jul. 2i. — Item, to ©nnonlf, Pursevant, to pafs with Letteris to 3Sol)ne iCaitosouite and
iHatlaire for t|jf itt'irgt's' ^rjbi.|)f, . . . . . . . xti.

Item, to J>E Walisman (Welchman'^) quhilk come heir, propynit, callit 3iames (SrifFoit, I'' ti.

with tliirty days' victuals ; those of Fife, Forfar, Perth, &c. on Feb. 7, with thirty days' provisions ; Inverness,
Aberileen, &c. on I\Iar. 9.

^ Other Religious Houses, North of the Forth, &c. were commanded * to sekd tiiair Houshaldis to the BorBOUR, with the nixt Quarter.' In other districts the lieges were ordered to accompany their * Weismenne,' (Chiefs,)
as soon as * thai be warnit be belis, (bonfires,) or vthirwayise.' ^ On Feb. 15, a macer was dispatched to Pittinweme to get a * schipereddy within vj dais for careingof the Aeotof Abirbrothok Ambassatour to the partis of
Fraunce.' ^ Other proprietors and Captains of Castles, &c. got similar commands. ^ ^Messengers were

also sent to Orkney, &c. * to desist fra all making furthe of WEii^-scHirris incontrair the Inglissiex, for weill of
Peace.' ^ M.tny other payments for dresses, freight ' of ane litiU Schip in the quhilk he past in Flandres,' &c.

« See Oct. 21, I J3I.

VOL. 1. f 2 N

282 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1534.

APPENDIX.

Item, for ane puife to put ]ie faid money intill, . . . • • • iiij s.

Jul. 25. — Item, to Dauiil Dionane to pals with Letteiis to ])e g'cbftTfffi£i of Ed", Bervik,
Peblis, Roxburgiie, and Selkirk, and to ]ie 33urro6ts' of Dunbar, &c. fjjargcing all iitaitfr of
inciT i)E rrlTlfi) vpoune xxiiij houris warnyng, with xx dais wittalis, for Refilling, &c. : And als Letteris to be proclamit at Dunbar, Hadingtoune, and Lauder, chargeing all perfonis on ]ie Coistsyde t0 atfufrt tl)nt ita ISngTi^f ^rbipr nrribf tljatrtipfftiiTf, and to his wage,^ . . xxs.

Jul. 29. — Item, to ane boy to rynne with Writtingis to ])E Kingis grace, in ^aitct %ai)mt
S"tOttlTf (Perth), iij s.

Aug. 4. — Item, to ane boy, &c. &c. in JJ'nlMaitlf • ij s.

Item, to Williame Mure, to pafs with ane Lettie to be proclamit at Selkirk, Peblis, and
Moffat, tljat na mait 6u«t in itTrgottait'if, Askdale-mure, Twede-mure, &c. trnta ])e Kingis
niim'ng,^ ''^s.

Aug. 6. — Item, to Caftellaw, to pas with Letteris to be proclamit at ])e Bordouris, far aitf vb
Tfat's" ahsttitntfr/ ^'''j sSep. 26. — Item, to Audro Hammiltoune, to pafs with Letteris, chargeing ])E Wardanis of

])e Myddill Marchis and pE Lard of Buchcleuche ' t0 rats'c t^e ntittre to pas^^ bpouitf X\)e

CJriffis", to releif ]ie Gentillmen laitlie takin be ]iame, and )'air gudis — and to bis wage, xvij s.

SuMMA totalis fvpriTS'aruiu 31.tp0rartorunt, (the King's Hounds), ij'lxx W. xij s. ixd.

Oct. 7. — Item, to ^antfs" dFIftutf, Inglisman, be ])e Lordis command, at \)i^ Juaus
pas's'fitg, . . vj ti.

Oct. 10. — Item, to George Hereot, Goldfmyth,= for mending of ane of Jie Kingis fduer
ftolpis," viij s.

Not. 30. — Item, to Maister Johnne Ballentyne, be ])e Kingis precept, for bis" lauioriS
tfoiic lit traiTslati'itg of iiiiii'f, . . • • ■s.-s.W.

Dec. 31. — Item, ])e laft day of December, deliuerit to Schir Michell Dysart, aittr |)tS
iitarrolut^," be J'E Kingis Precept, to lie tj&aiin ^3Iai)=(C0ittt^, agaitc Bt^'.%nx^tiav, xv elnis bukraim, icilf and jalToh), price of fe elne xxx d. . . • • • . 1 ti.

Jan. 3, 1533-4 Item, deliuerit to pE Kingis grace, quhilk his hienes gaif to aire ISrfaitIf

rTairSrJorliar,'' . • • • • • • • • xt>-

Jan. 7. — Item, to Cuthbert George, to pafs with Writingis to caus the Erle of Murray
cum to Edi^ to a"abi5f apoitf tjif ambassatouris" Ifrprs'rBf, . . . • "j ^iJan. 22. — Item, to ^Iaister Joiine Drocht, be )'e Kingis Precept, to be him aitf ^ofoite
and aitf ^itgtouitr, vj elnis ferge, price of J)e elne x s. nj h.

Item, to be him ant Boublft, an elne double worfet, price . . xxvj s. viij d.

Item, to be him ane pair fftoisr, iij quarteris franclie gray, price . . x s. vj d.

Item, to be him aitt JlJonrt, price ...... xviij s.

Feb. 19.— /ton, to James Murray, to pafs with Writingis to Jie Erle Montroise and Schir
James Hammiltoune, chargeing ]>auie to Hfip tj[)e tfau of Jus'tictfric bctiiiv X\)t ^uiirpillis aitlf
Wit ((Iuiti)itgi)aiiiis",^ . • • • • • ' . . xx s.

' Similar Proclamations were made throughout the whole kingdom, and ' for resisting of the Inglis Schippis.'
' Large payments made to James ColviUe of East Wemjss, Comptroller, for his services at Newcastle, ' to
TREiT THE PEACE,' and to THE SECRETARY foP ' his supeP expensis quhen he was in Fraunce,' and for jocalis (jewels)
gevin be him siiidpie tymes to the Kingis grace.' " On Aug. 18, a Proclamation to he made that this cessation

from hostilities should" be ' kepit, i|uhill the x day of September.' * Similar Letters sent to Loan Maxwell

and the Laikl op Johnstone. '• Probably grandfather of the celebrated George Hekiot, the founder of the

Hospital. " Stowps, flagons. ' Fellows, companions. ' An Irish (Ersche, or Highland) player on

the Clnirschaw, which was a kind of Harp. Muiiipennie says, ' The strings of the clairshoes are made of brassewire, and the strings of th.- harps of sinews.' Scot's Chron. pp. .5, 6. It is proper to mention, that ' clarscliepipes' were also used. See Watson's Coll. ii. G. ' See I. * 106, &c., for notices relative to these deadly Feuds,

which caused a great excitement in the country.

21 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 283

APPENDIX.

Mar. 25, 1534. — Item, to Adam Stewart to pas with Letteris to Lord jESTIu to caufe him
bring ffvtanr ffJlcbt'S quljnfe Jic tuSc, to if SitlJStl'ffit, and to his wage, . . xiiiji.

Apr. \8.—Item, to 3KotJ)f5iJi), Herald, to pafs to ^e Erle of Rothese to 3ilfs"atit tfie
CasttH of ^aitctaittfiofs/ . . ..... xxxlij s.

Apr. 27 Item, to 5KotI)CS"ai.), Herald, deliuerit Letteris to Dunde, Perthe, Sanctandrois,

Dunfermeling:, &c. to fnftn'ng tjat'r Caytts' for funtt^ing of S5f agtottri^ t'^ And Letteris, elikuife,
for JiSHapinsrljalotitgis": Alfua deliuerit to liim Letteris for JJiiflurrftt'S anS Hrfcitsis" to lit ntai'B at
Dunde, Sanctandroise, Carale, Pettinweme, Anstruthir, Dysart, Kirkauldy, KingORNE, and Innerkething ; and to his wage,5 . . . . . v ti.

May 4. — Item, to ane man quhilk come fra ])E Prioress of Cauldstreme with SBffrft*
ttitgts notu rttintn out of jFrauixrt to Mons" Bewis, Ambassatour,' . . vs.

May 20, 1534 — Item, to Dauid Lindesay, ^^rrallJ, pafland with fe faidis ^ntI)n^s"tat0Urt'S,
to his expenfis, ij'' frankis,yMOT??ia,^ ....... ^ v ti.

Jun. 14. — Item, to Malcolms Gourlaw, deliuerit for x carage horfis turs'aitlf ]'E Kingis iSaf;
Jfnnts" t0 tjbr ?§unttlig, J>e fpace of ix dayis ; and ane horfe quhilk broclit tljc 33tK^ furth of Striuiling, . . . . . . . . . • ix ti. ij s.

Jul. 3. — Item, to jiE Archidene of Durame, ^SirgTt'^ ^mtas'satottr, qttjbilft ronte for (Effits
finnattOUltr of i\)t l^ttt'^ to lils reward, ane liundreth Angell nobillis,yw»»«rt, . Tlv ti.

Item, to iHatstf r itTagmis", ficlyke, AmbafTatour, . . . . . ijc \\.

Item, for twa purfis of crammefy fatin to put )ie faid money in till, . . xxviij s.

/<<■;«, to tijr 3) iigli^ £2otar/ ....... xxxti.

Item, to 33rrJuilt, Herald, . . . . . . . 1 ti.

Item, to ])e b ^x(\)tax{i tljnt s'rliot bitb tljr ftiitgis grare," . . . xxv ti.

Jul. 9. — Item, to ]ie Abbot of Kinloss, quhilk pall to London to rrsa&f X\)t Uiitg al
Jitglait'lf aitjf (oath) apoitc tjjr CoitfirntattottiTr of tj)r |l)farr, . . Lxlviij ti.

Item, to Maifter Adam Otterburne, passaittf to ituittfOltt for trrttlig of X\)t |3frf, and jiair
reraanand fra xx\j day of November to ])e third day of Junij laft bipaft, to his expenflis, vie ti.

Aug. 27. — Item, deliuerit to Johnne Murray ane blak bonet, to roOtr aitf S'tf tI=33oitet to the
Kingis grace, price ]'airof, ........ xiij s.

Item, to bf niTf tuppct to tljr ©"aflf boitrt, and aitf ru'Hiitg t»})})ft to ane vjiir Bonet, ane elne
taphety of ])e cord, price pairof, . . . • . . . xx s.

Item, deliuerit to the Kingis grace ant JJrItrt of ^aitrt IBtitBo, fet in filuer, weyand
xxxvj vnce iij grote wecht, price of ])e vnce iij %., fumma, . . xxvij ti. xvij s. iij d.

Item, for making of fe famyn, . . . . , . v tl. ix s.

Aug. 31. — Item, to Johne Drummond, wrycht, for bn'lTgtlt of tjbe tjre (CaitJtOltsi ftirtj of
Sntmfrnsf, in all expenfis, ...... Ixvij ti. xviij s. iiij d.

' Two Jlessengers-at-arms accompanied him. ' Hired soldiers ; mercenaries. This was the first step

towards tlie formation of a standing Army. Considering the precarious character of troops formed of raw levies of.
country men bound to military service, and the indifferent manner in which they were equipjicd, it is truly
extraordinary how such bodies should have been able to withstand tlie onset of the well appointed and disciplined
forces of the English. When these circumstances are kept in view, the rout of the Scottish Army at Flodden
ceases to be matter of surprise. ' Similar commands sent to the East and West Coasts, &c. throughout the

kingdom. * Large payments were made at this period to the ' Ambassatouris,' WoxsR. be Fi.urie, Moksr.

Bewes, • and with thame the Almane,' (German.) ' Large payments made to the Secretary during his

Embassy to France. The rate of his personal charges was viij franks, or iiij li. iiij s. pcT diem. ^ The * Lettacamp,' {tii-du-camp), regarding which numerous entries are to be found in this and the preceding Appendices.
' Pixkerton, IL 325, asserts, that ' the Order of the Garter was remitted to James by the hands of Lord William Howard, brother of the Duke of Nortolk ; and the young monarch soon after received that of the Golden
Fleece from the Emperor, and that of St BIichael from Francis. See the Appendix, I, * 289, under date
Jul. 13, 1537. ' The Prothonotary. ° Many other instances of the King's urbanity are to be found in

these extracts. The present probably arose out of a challenge to the five best Archers in the Ambassador's train.

284* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1535-6.

APPENDIX.

Sep. 3. — Item, to Edward Stewart, drnTf0ltnr, to mak his expenfis, and thre fervandis, paffin
with ^^allti's' t0 tl)tIl(iTg0f SitgTan'ff, ..... Ivj ti. xiij 5. iiij d.

STljc (!rv})fits"i5" mnflf njiffnr X\)t Sr^'P nitif iMnrnitnris" frf^, fene fcho come to Dunbertane.

Item, in primis, to xij maiinaris pat wes fend hame fra ]>£ Schip, be ])e fpace of thre oulkis
wagis fra ]ie thrid day of September (1534), ..... xviij ti.

Item, payt in Glefgow to xiiij men qubilk war left with fe fchip tff firt'irg tjc Uiitg 0Ut 0f
^rgt'Ie, for ane monethis wagis, begynnand ]ie faid thrid day of September,' . xxviij ti.

Item, to ane feruand of Cocleus, qujilft \)xa(:\)i fra jbi^ ^Hnis'ter aiir JSttoft, intitulat , to his reward, . . . . . . . 1 ii.

Oct. 11. — Item, to Thomas Myllar, carter, to pafs to fftrBf aiTf hrofiiit ©tilt of the Lord
Maxwellis ftirtti 0f tjr 3tangI;oTntf, to be brocht to Ed" to ]ie melting, deliuerit to liira, vti.

Item, to the Lord Maxwell, be Lonlis Auditouris of Cliekar command, for Jie vj iSuiIltaris"
h)itgt£> remanand with him at fe Bordomis, quhilk wes omittit in our laft Comptis, . xl li.

Oct. 21. — Item, to James Grefound, EJ^alis'mait,- commandit be ])e Lordis to be gevin
at j&is" ^f^jartt'itg tofijart .iTTaitlff n'^, . . . . . . . Ix ti.

Item, to MY Lord ^Iaxwell, for ].e liJfptitg 0f tjr ?^ous"t of ^rmtage aitif Sarlultitg of
\\)t 3>ltI)abttaiTti^ of ^Ht'JJttls'Jfalr, be fe fpace of fevin monethis, viz. fra Jie laft day of Nouember to
|ie fyrft day of Jiilij, havand in ])e moneth I", li., ..... Viji^.ti,

Oct. 2-2. — Item, aiTf JJoitft to 3)amfs" ;^tftoart, price . . . xx s.

Item, to be aiTf *5obitf to the Kingis gracis Ifocljttr, iij elnis veluet, price ]iairof ])e elne
lij i.ffumma, ......... viji }. xvj s.

Item, to be hir aitf SSirttTt, x quarteris fatyue, price of ]'e elne xxxij l.,J'umma, . iiij li.

Item, to lyne J^e famyne, v,! elnis fufliane, ..... xxij s.

Item, to be hir a'arftts' aitif \>tCSS rlaitjits, vj elnis Holane claith, price of ]ie elne vj s.
Jumma, .......... xxxvj s.

Oct. 2-i. — Iteyn, fend to the Kingls grace with George Steill, xij dofaue Stuot s'tn'itgfs, price
of ilk dofane v l.,Jumma, .... . . .iij ti.

Item, fend with ]ie faid George certane {i)nr ^icttin's" of dTfaitlferii^, coft fra Johne Browne,
to THE Kingis grace, price pairof, ....... xvijti.

Item, vij fi)itr Ifrtitluitg gTassts for the Kingis grace, . . . xlij s.

Nov. 23. — Item, to be stljabing claitjjis to the Kingis grace, iij elnis fraall Holland claitb,
price of jie elne xiiij s.,/iimma, ....... xlij s.

Dec. 28. — Item, (in Striuiling) for iiiji elnis and ane quarter fad grene, to robtr tjf iiifs
tronts'' t'lT tj&t itt'ngis ^tlllJl), price of fe elne xiiij s. iiij d.,fumma, . iij ti. iij s. iiij d.

Item, to certane |!)Iai) (§0&)itii^ to tijr Btngfs graft to pas"^ tit ^as'lit'iTf, xxiiij elnis ^rottt'^
qtlj&utf, price ])airof, ...... . v ti. xviij s. vj d.

Item, to be ]>e tothir half of ])e faidis (SohJlTts', xiiij| elnis Srottl's" IJIaft, price fairof xj li. xvj s.

Item, to Robert Spittall, for makyng of |'e faidis «5oh)lIl^, ... iij ti.

Dec. 29. — Item, deliuerit to fE Kingis grace, in Streuiling, tO plau at tjjc (llartt^, xiiij ti.

Jan. 13, 1534-5. — Item, fend with Weddaill, futeman to ]>e Kingis grace, in Striueling, artf
^OSaitr IttutC s'tn'ltgt^ and xij hankis of s'ntan io\jrt, price l>airof, . . . xx s.

Item, to Thomas Rynd, goldfmyth, for certane (Sortfilt lUfrft, coft be William Hammiltoune to
])E Kingis grace agaittfJtbjSrrriHfS", as aneCompt, fubfcriuit be ])e faid William, beris, I'.xxiijti.xijs.

' These two entiit'S form the roramciici'ment of the Account, which occupies five folios, and amounts to L.502,
13s. Hid. There are no interesting iltms, the payments hciny for wages, victuals, timber, cables, &c. No date is
affixed to the general account, but it appears to have been rendered early iu October, \o'3i. ' ' Greffon,' or

Griffin. See Jul. 24, 1533. ^ Desks, O. Fr. Letlrin, letrin.

23Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 285

APPENDIX.

Item, for gantfs'i'itg of nitf Bttst' far bitrmmtt'^^ to Jje Kingis grace, filuer, and faffoune, xxxij s.

Jan. 31.— /toH, for vij dofane of Jttoit B'triitgi^ to ])e Kingis grace, deliuerit to Maifter John
Coldoun, .......••• 1^ s.

Jul. 28, 1535.— 7<e;», to x careage horfis, tttrs'nnlf X\)t UijtgiS grart^ IPfliljfOnfsi Xa tje
IgtinttlTg in iHrgotlnitlf, be fe fpace of xviij dayis, ilk Iiorfe apone ]'e day ij s,fumma, xviij \\.

hem, to Malcouie Gourlaw, for his avne wagis, tursnittf axOS s'tflttaitlf t])t iaitiii pnils

Jfffltt's", ..... . . . . XX s.

Item, to iij careage horfis, tttrs'nutr \.\>t ^albcrttsV" at j-e faid ^tutting, be ])e fpace of xvj

dayis, . . . • • . • - • "ij ti- xvj s.

Aug. 5. — Item, to t|)f Sraicbf,* be my Lord TJiefauraris command, to loto:^ \)\^ rTnitljt'^

fin tjbr ta if sfff tin's", . . • . . . . . . xx s.

Aug. 15. — Item, to Dauid Dronar, to pafs with ane ciiarge to my Lordis Maxwell and
Flemyng, to fiftp ntftt'itg toitl) tl)f SitglisiitriT for Ititttfiotfailf, . . . xxxiijs.

Aug. — Item, furneift to tljf ^itthaBs'iatOun'lj, to vpfet ]'e inlaik'' of ])e iiij". Crovnis gevin be
his grace, extending to v s. of euery Crovne, quhilk extendis in fe haill to I"", fraukis, fumma
Jiairof, . . . . . _ . . . . . VMi.

Item, to perfumes fe haill fynance quhilk fE Tovne of Ed", fuld haue furneft, ))at wantit ij*^.
frankis,yM?«;«a, ......... . . . . P. ti.

Oct. 1. — Item, to James Lindefay, Falconar, to pass" luitb ^afftis" to tlje iSiitg of 3)itg=
laiT^, to his expenfis, ........ Ixti.

Item, to pe faid James, for his childeris expenfis, fe tyme his hienes wes at t\)t ?§uittt'ltg in
iHrgotlaitlf, ....... . vi li.

Nov. 2. — Item, to Katherine Hammiltoune, be pE Kingis gracis command, in compleit
payment of ]ie fovme of Ixxx ti. for \)\x S^rtailifri), ..... xxx li.

Item, be Jie Kingis gi'acis command, to Richart Hume, Inglis manne, quljitJt s'llftf mafe
SFtfllts" to t!)f Itlltgt^ grarr, to by ftufe for ]ie famin, . . . . . xxti.

Dec. 24. — Item, to ... . Makcaw, Nureis, be ])E Kingis gracis command, to ijtr rftoarif for
fos"tfrtitg of J)E Kingis gracis Ifofj&trr, ..... xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to })E Inglis Bowar, for aitf Ifos'ait of 33oiois", deliuerit be him, at Jie Kingis gracis
command, to ane fervand of 3>oI)nc CaiTOcljsoitis", • . • . . rij ti.

Dec. 29. — Itern'io J)E Lord Euskynnis s'Oitf,*' qufjilft past iiT dFraiTCf, . xxti.

Item, to George Wallace, for otttrrlilling of tl)f Itiitgi^ gracis' sr^ip totuart IBtip, and
fra thyne to JStirlffOtts", payaad his iHarnitarts* half hyre in hand, and fe remanent in Deip; as fe faid
George compt particularlye beris, ..... I'-^^'j l^i- i'ij- s. x d,

Dec. 30. — Item, to my Lord Secretar, to j&i^ fvpfw^*'^ rfturitaittf tj&rofo 3itglan1f to my
Lordis Smhas'siatouri^ iit jFraitcf, ..... . iij'". ti.

Item, to my Lord Abbot or Kynloss, qtij&ilft Jt gaif to \\)t liiigfii^ turrottr," at ))e Kingis
gracis command, ........ . iiij ti.

Item, to Jie faid Abbot, to liis expenfis cumand throw Ingland with my Lord Secretar,
Ifrlitifrit ht mu Storif iS'l&fs'aurar iitdFraiirr, L'.xlvi frankis,yMmm«, . . . Ixxiij ti.

Jan. 19, 1535-6. — /to», to Richart Hume, Inglifman,^ . , . xlti.

Feb. I. — Item, for aitc Sup to ])e Kingis grace, . , • ^j ^'•

' Biiist ; chest, box. * f;ic/me;i/s, (ointments. ) Probably perfumes, &c. ' Hunting spears, &c. 'The

Dn'ARF. Tliis personage was in great favour at Court, and had a regular pension and liveries, which regularly
appear in these Accounts. ^ To balance the deficiency. •* It does not appear which of the sons of John,

fourth Lord ErsUiiie, this alludes to. ' Probably the Courier, who brought the Letters of Safe Conduct to

pass through England. ' Who had been employed to make ' Violis' to the King. See Nov. 2, preceding.

286 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

APPENDIX.

Feb. 18. — Item, to be ane fcbort coit to Slffrtf 3amf^,' vj quartenis blak fatpie, price of ])e
elue, XXX s. ....... xlv s.

Apr. 26, 1536. — Item, fend to ])E Kixgis grace, witb Scbir Conllantyne Ahannay, ane dofane
3L&3tr striiigis", price . ......... vj 5.

Sep. 24. — Item, to 33utt, pursevaxt, to pas to 5umm0it'if ane Stsstst to tj&t ^axti ^ttmt
aitif ilarlf of (ir'ifmfstottitr, . . ..... xx s.

Sep. 25. — Ilem, to James Biflatt, Meffinger, to pas witb Letteris to ))E Provest and BailLEis OF Dundee and Sanct Jonestoune to fercbe and feik Johne Blacat and George LuwETT, s"us'i)frt of tljf %ingring of tjir limagf of ^anrt Jfranri^ ; and to his wage, . xx s.

Item, to Ercbt, meffinger, to pas and charge )>E Lard of Dundas and Capitane of Dunbertane to {if}) ^uirlir tl)f SLarlfts of JBIara'Htr aittf Sotur^totiiTf, . • xx s.

Oct. 10. — Itew, to Peter Thomefoune, to pas and ^ummoitlf iht 3Lor1f %?iamf aiilf 3lar^
©Ifmfs'totinr, ....... . . xl s.

Oct. 18 — Item, be ])e Kingis gracis Precept and fpeciall command, grbtit at 1)15 gratis
Krparting, to thre feruandis ]iat feruis ]ie Ladyis in Cowpar, to be ^lanie thre Gownis,' xix elnis
rulfatt, . . . . . . . . . . xj ti. viij s.

Oct. 31. — Item, to James Coluill, meffinger, to pas with Letteris, cbargeing all ]ie GentillMEN within ]ie fcherefl'dom of Lynlythuuhow, Striueling, Perthe, and Menteitiie to pas
with MY Lordis Regentis to ti)t Stssfgffitg of CrlfiarstotiiT,^ . . . xxs.

Nov. 2 — Item, deliuerit to Schir Henry Balfoure, Cbaplane, to Lf gfbt'lt lit SlInioI)5"f to tje
purr j&ousballfrrts to prnu for tl)t iJt'itgis grart^ pros-prnt^ rrttirmiiig,* . . Yiijti.

Nov. 12. — Item, to Arthe, meffinger, to pas with Letteris to ))E Erle of Mortoune, Erie of
ISIarfcbell, Abbot of Newbottill, Abbot of Melrofe, and Lord Seytoune, for aitf CoiT&f Ittiouitf, to be
had in Ed", ])e xviij day of )ie famyn monetlie," ..... xiiij s.

Nov. 15 — Item, to Johnne Coib, meffengeir, to pas to j^timnionlf aiTf SsstSf bjpouit tJje
STJjfif rallit SLailllaJu, quliilk was tane be my Lordis Regentis in \e toune of Jedburghe, xxs.

Nov. 29. — Item, ]ie pennult day of Nouember, deliuerit to fe laid S"^ Henry, to ]ie effect forfaid, ........ X lib.

Ite)n, be command of my Lordis Regentis, to iHalfoTmrtotsfbf, IjallfiiTg in SSSarIf t'n
tjf (Castrll of C?1ltnburgi)f, for gude rewill of ]ie cuntre, to his expenfis, . , x lib.

Dec. 21. — Item, to Patersoune, Pursevant, to pas and s'uminon'Jf anr ^ssisf to tje
%axti ^tomis mtnnf, . • . . . . . . vj 5. viij d.

Jan. 1536-7. — Item, be my Lord Regentis command, to Robene Hart, alias i^otbrsai)
It'rraunj, in recompenfe of his travell at Xi)t Sl'ngi^ first Ifrparting, becaus he was at fat tyine
hot wagit to Lundoune, . . . . . . . . xx ti.

Jan. 26 — Item, to Rae, Stnglis'inan, quhilk come for ant (Conlfurt to 33auff Jratlllar, 1nglisman, . . . . . . . . . . iijti.

Feb. 24. — Item, to Rae, Snglis" ISursfbant, be Jie command of my Lordis Regentis, iiij ti.

Mar. 6. — Item, to Rae, &c., be fe command, &c. , . . . xl s.

Mar. — Pursuivants and INIeffingers got large payments to pafs with Letters to the Barons, &c., ' for tijair jjonrdt })rr})aring aganr tJjr ixingis" graris" I)amt=rtinting,* &t.

Apr. 1. 1537. — Item, to the Ciiapellanis ofLawhetEjIo praufor tfjrBingis'grarr, xiiij s.

' The King's natural son, afterwards Earl of ^lurray, Regent of Scotland. ^ They were again summoned

on Nov. 1, following. ^ They also got ' doublattis,' ' hoise,' and ' honettis,' to correspond.' ■• A number

of messengers were sent with similar warnings to ' the INIaister or Artalzerie,* to the ' Lard of Cesfurd, to ly
about Edzarstoun' — ' to caus OxiN be reddy at ye cuming of ye Gunnis within thair boundis,' &c. ' Prayers

appear to have been publicly offered throughout Scotland. ^ Other summonses sent in various directions.

5

24 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 287

APPENDIX.

Apr. 15. — Item, to Ra, Inglis Purfevant, quhilk come with SHritiitgi^ frit tj)C IDu&e o£
^0rt{)f0lft for deliuerance of ])E Charltonis, ..... xxx s.

Apr. 23. — Item, to Kotbfs'ai) f(|cirrortf, to pas to Ingland to Jie Kingis grace, being fan tit
dfrJinrf, witli Writingis fra mv Lordis Regentis, . . . . . xl ti.

Item, to Vmfray Murdoche, to pas with ]ie faid 9Sat]bes'clu toLoNDOuNE, and to returneagane
with fic iiouelles and inftructionis as plefis jie faid Rotiiefay to fend with him, . xvti.

Apr. 25. — Item, to Rae, Inglifman, quhilii broclit Writingis fra t\)t Sufte fff iSnrpSflft to my
Lord Regentis, . . . . . . . . . iij ti.

Item, to William Mure, nieffinger, to pas and charge Thomas Kirkpatrik of Closburne,
t0 prf0"rnt ttoa Jfj^r tffts",' takin be him in Jie Tolboithe of Ed''. |)e ix day of Maij, and to his wage, xx s.

Item, to Thomas Hammiltoune, mafer, for his lauboris done in ^frrbtitj fff tjf ?^trftiftt^ in
t\)t aairst Inittf, . . ...... xxx s.

May 19. — Item, to jie faid Rae, Inglis Purfevant, quhilk brocht Writingis, . iijti.

May 25. — Item, to Cuddy George, meffingeir, to pas to s'uiiriHffit'lf t|bc IHfitltf of ^irc to
compeir befor ]ie Lordis, anent ]ie geir of fame quhilk was rnntiirt 0f ^frrs'it, . xx s.

Item, deliuerit to Williame Mure, Letteris to ])E Scherreffis of Kincardin, Drumfrefe, Sterling, Peblis, Selkirk, Perthe, and Abirdene, . . . . , xl s. ?

' The Quenis Grace (Queen Magdalene's) Entray in Edixburghe, and Coronatioune.'
Itein, ficlik Letteris to fe Scheriffis of Edinburghe, principal), and within fe Conflabilrie of

Hadingtoune and Beruic,- for tljE (£0ttuaratuJttitf al \\)i iiaxanii tff X\)t ®.ntnii grnrc f ittrau £ii

(iFtftitburgJf •iitll yl0r0nntiBttiTf ; and to Iiis wage, . . . . . xxs.

Jul 7.^ — Item, to ane Mafer to pafs to Leith, to charge Wallace t0 \)H\it \)ii ^rbij) rctflTu,

viz. ]iE Mary Willybe, incontinent, t0 t^f JSailr, . . . . . ij i.

The Quenis Gracis Tyrement.''
Item, to ane Pursyvant, to pafs till Dunde, to charge J>e Inhabitanis fairof t0 firing
tbart 33Tafets"" ia CP^iitiurgi), (nroittiitfitt, iax tijf ©ufiTis" drnrfincitt, . . xv s.

Jul. 8. — Item, deliuerit to ^aoittoun'^, for iiij'. Srmns" at \\)t ©.xitni^ (©Bit, . xl li.

' The Quenis Obit, nono Julij.' ^

Jul. 9. — Great quantities of Black ' grtfttl^ Clai'tb' and ' dFraitrJe 33Taft' were purchased
for ' GowNis, CoiTis, and Hudis,' and ' Bonettis,' &c. to the retainers and servants of the Court_
As the subject is so remarkable, pretty copious selections shall be given.

Item, refauit fra Mailer Adam Ottirburne, thretty elne yJoTIaitll' rlaitj&, deliuerand to James
Scrymgeour, t0 fic 2?all^ t0 tjbe dfraiTclje italf l)t£«, price elne viij s., . . . . xij ti.

Item, xxij elne Quhyte Satyn t0 fie Crorrt^ upon X\)t ilFcIuft, price elne xxviij s.,
Jumma, xxxj ti. vj s. vj d.

' By another entry, on May 25 following, he was ordered to deliver ' Niniane Dlnwedv and his marrow, vnder
the pane of putting to the home.' These were the twa Theiffis alluded to. = All the other Sheriffs got similar

notices. ^ There can he no doubt that this was the day of the Queen's death. Without multiplying authoiities,

see Jul. 7, 1539, &c., of this Appendix- The date of the Obsequies, performed in Jul. 1538, is carelessly left blank.
' Interment; Funeral obsequies. For many curious particulars relative to the amiable Queen Magualene, see Mr
Pinkerton's History. Mr Ti/tler's researches also may be expected to throw much light upon the History of this
period. Pinherton. fidlowing Buchanans authority, fixes Jul. 7 as the day of Queen Magdalene's death. Leslie, p.
153, says, ' Scho deceissit the xth day of Julij, and was buryit in the Abbay Kirk of Ilallyrude-hous.' * All

authors are agreed that the public regret was so great, that this was the first occasion of a general ruBi.ie jiournixg.
Indeed Buck'inan, who was an eye-witness, says it was the first instance of Mourning Dresses having been worn
by the Scots, ' which even now, after forty years, are not very frequent, although public fashions have greatly increased
for the worse.' — Bucli. Book XIV, 52. ° This date refers to the period when ' Master Thomas Marioribaukis '

entered into office as Clerk to Robert (Cairncross), Abbot of Holywod, Lord High Treasurer. The furnishings for
THE Funeral Obsequies were expended under different heads ; the ' Broadstar,' or embroiderer ; the ' Maister Stahillar,' &c. had each the charge of their own respective departments.

288 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

APPENDIX.

Item, audit elne veluet deliuerit to i^t i![apcs"ar,' price elne 1 l.,fumma, . xx ti.

Item, xxviij Holland claith, price elne ix l.,Jumma, .... xij ti. xij s.

Item, ten elne vterfyne- to be axe Gouxe to aitt dfraitrbf Prrtst, Coit and Hude,

xiij ti. vj i. viij d.

Item, tua pund fex rnce of blak fewin filk to be dJTfmrt^ to tilt CBltifni^ (Cnbrnt,^ ix ti. xv i.

Item, tua grete liankis of gold to t^f 33ro&l1fstrr, ..... xliiij s,

Item,^ fex (Srrtf Strmu^^ and fex fmall, price of fe Werkraanfchip and fewing of ]ie i5rrtf
^nnus", ......... . iijti.

Item, for \e. s^mnll ^nuiis", ....... xxx s.

/tow, for making of tfon (Crflrts',ane grete and ane fmall, . . . xv s.

Item, fyftene elne grftf frtiiirfs,'^ . . . . . . xv s.

Item, tuenty audit elne s^nxnll frritut's", ...... xviij s. viij d.

/tow, audit l5iT0p^)t^ niltf filBsi^' making, price, ..... . ^ij s.

Item, to my Storif iB'i)fs"ntirar ij fleikis^ blaft 8?tluft, contenand xliij eln, price eln Ivj s.
famma, ............ . I'xx ti. viij s.

Item, mair to him, vij elne iij quarteris and ane naill blak veluet, . xxj ti. xvij s. vj d.

Item, xix elne s'ntall ^ollaittf rlaiti^, xiij ti. vj s.

Item, fra JNIastek Fraxci'^e Boithuilis Wyfe, to tjbt (&urnt£> JTurfnifiit.x elne ptirptirr
brittf t, price elne iij X\.,Jumma, ....... xxx ti.

Item, foure elne of Franclie blak, to be nnf dFtttf fHaittin ait^aiTf j&antCSsilTg to tjir Kt'ltgi'^
<§raft iHuTc, price elne xxx s.,Jumma, . . . . . . vj ti.

Item, tua elue bukram, to lyne ]ie faid Fute Mantill about fe bordouris, . . vij s.

Item, tua elne tua quarteris Franche blak deliuerit to Patrik Sklatar tO fObir aitf ^atfitl to ])E
KiNGis grace, . . . . . . . . . iij ti. x s.

Item, five elne fren^eis of blak filk to ]ie famyn fadill, . . .vij s. vj d.

Item, fra Williaine Keris wyfe, fex elne Scottis blak to be |i)antr5"0"iirgt'5" to iMuIatts', v ti. ij s.

Item, tlire quarteris Scottis blak to complete furth )ie faid barneliingis, . xij s.

Item, tua dofane cordis of filk, price of ilk dofane ij s. viij d. to knyt ]ie Harneffingis of tje
Slltgf^ s"aftfin, . . • . . . • . vs. viij d.

/to«, four dofane carddis'' to feffin ]ie claith apon ]7e hameffingis, . . . xiiij s.

Item, fax blak belt is to ])e fex Mutatis, ...... . . vs.

Item, thre elne canves to lyne ]ie teis of ]ie Mulatis, .... iiij s.

Jul. 10. — Item, to tl)r itingis JTariprsar for ]e Jatbhoitt'o anllJFrstnifntis fat war maid for
■[)E Quexis JTurnnflTt, viz. Ix elnis, price elne viij d., fumma, . . . xl s.

Item, to ]iE Quexis .... 8Fr0tintriltt^, liiij clue ij quarteris blak . . .'" bukram, price elne
xl d.,fimi?n(i, ...... . . . ix ti.

Item, for half ane pund blak tlireid to him )ie famin day, . . . iij s. iiij d.

/fe;«, half ane elne (Crantnifsu ^atiJitr, . . . ■ • xl s.

Item, deliuerit to Robert Harvar, feruitour to my faid Lord," to tjbf (Stifitis STorfmritt,
XX elne j quarter blak veluet, price elne Ivj s., . . . . Ivj ti. xiiij s.

Jul. 11. — Item, deliuerit to ))E Kixgis grace, in ]ie Abbay, niif |)is6anf of iHaiTjr'" and ane
Sl^ttlfBltuIr," . . . . . . . xl§.

' The person wlio liad charge of the Tapestry and hangings. ' ProbaMy a kind of superfine cloth. ' There

are fuinishings of additional silk from various nierthauts, amounting in all, with the above Funeral Pall, &c. to
L.85, 13s. 9d. * This and a number of the following entries are in ' the Browdstaris Compt.' ^ Coats of

Arms for the Funeral Pall and Canopy, &c. ° Fringes. ' Knobs and tassels or bunches. ' Webs, pieces.

^ Silk cords or strings. '^ These left blank iu the accounts. " Robert (Carncorse) Abbot of IIolyK00t>, Lord High Treasurer. Tliis part of the Accounts was given in 'by me Master ThoMas Marioribankis, as
Clerk to ane venerabill fader in God, Robert,' &c. " A sort of gorget or defensive armour of mail for the neck.

" This aud the other Tournajing weapons were delivered by ' Williame Smeithbeird,' .Armourer.

24JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 289

APPENDIX.

/tow, for grathing and dicliting of ttun ^3f0'!S;tm'^ Ol iiUiht to ]>e Kixgis grace, and aiu
?gni)trgfOUlt' Oi iHntlu. with ane ccrtane nalis ourcrilt to ane pair of BrtgnittMUt'S,' . x i.

Item, for beiring of xxiij (Sfbtrtiugt's' and ane Blak Hand of Harnefs to ],e Abbay. viij d.

Item, for nnt Srttt ^utrtSt brrtitg to tljt mhnv and fra ],e Abbay agane, . xvj d.

Item, for dichting and gratliing of four tfosaitr of ^albfrtt^, quhilkis ])E Kingis grace had
apone ])e Sey with him,* ...••• !'! ^

Item, for fe dichting and grath^ng of ttoa tfosaiic 3iftf!)Urgb=^taTfl^, • xxiiij s.

Item, for srathing and dichting and tynnyng of ten Ciua^jjaiTtlit ^UrrlftS, • ' s.

Item, for dichting of (ane) aiTf Ijaitlftt ^ttfriff, . • • U ^•

Item, for ]>e grathing of aitt i{ap})rrf, • • • • ^ ^•

Jul. 12— Imprirnis' ane fteikG of Ulalt ilFfTitft contenand xxj elne j quartar and 3 quartar,
price of ])eelne Ivj s.,/wwOTa, ...•••• lixli-xvs.

Item, laxild ane fleik of ^cottts" blaft, contenand xxviij elne, price elne xviij l.,fumma,

XXV ti. iiij s.

Item, mair to my %axti ff^fs'atirar ane ileik of JSofoan' Haft, contenand xxiij elne f,
price, ........ • xxxvijii. xijs.

Item, deliuerit to Thomas Arthure to be aitt €o\i Soitjb slfbts" tO t^t iJhtgis giMff, iij elne iij
quartaris, of fyne Parife blak, price elne iij ti., fumma, . . • • xj li. v s.

I/ew, to lyne pe foirfaid Coit with, iiij elne | of fyne blak Taffatyis of cord, price elne xx s.,
fumma, . . . • • ■ • nij ii. x s.

Item, to Dauid jongar, furrour,8 for iHnititnbarts" and part of ©ul)i.)tf Blinitnt^ t0 luiit tua
(©Ohmt's tott6 tljarf ^titifs" tn tljr Ealfpts" nf ^.onmr. ■ ■ • "ii *"• xiiij s.

Item, deliuerit to ))e ^Taster ^Imos'ar'' be Dene Johne Wilfoun, . . Ixxx ti.

Jul. 13. Item, to ane boy to pas to Melrose and Dryburghe tfl ioaritf }>e Abbottis tO
tfje (Snirnts" grari^ dTurntfttt,"' ...... • y s.

Item, gevin in arlis" of thre fteik'^ of (Clniltl) of <5aVti roft to tit Ut'ltgi^ graft in Lyons,
and quhilkis his grace refTauit agane in Parife, .... 'J^T'-

Item, coft to his grace, ficlik, in Lyons, tton grtte luaris" of dTtirftf (Turkey) ioetW price
]iairof, ... . .... rixxxxti.

Item, coft ficlik xij Coufrtottn'^ for JJurtJi^.^' price of ilk pece iiij Yi.,/ttmma, . xlviij ti.

Item, for my Lord Erskynnis fuperexpenfis, fe tyme he was in Ingland, for ^tallariouiTt
tff |)E KixGis grace lit tl>t (©rtfotir nf t^f <§nrtmf. fend vnto his grace be his vncle ))E King of
Ingland ;'^ as wis particularlie examinat apone )ie Compt gevin in be f>e faid Lord, xlixti. xvij s. xA

STfjf C^nrnis" nyne |3agt5' and three ?ntajiai)ts' got black Doublatis, Hoife, and Bonettis."'

Jul. 15. — Item, to Thomas Arthuris feruand, eallit Thomas Crag, toir t^f i^tirgt's graff a«e
Jiplflirg Coit, foui- elne of fyne Parife blak, price elne iij Y\., fumma, . . xij ti.

Item, to lyne ]>e foirfaid Ryding coit, fyve elne of blak taffatyis of cord, price elne xx s.,
fumma, . . . . . • . . v ti.

Jul. 16. — Item, to Thomas Arthure, ane elne of Parife blak tO it tit Bt'ngi's" grare
S'd)OiTr,'' ... . . . . . .Is.

' Habergeon. It is sometimes written Hawbirscheoune, and Atvherchoune ; being a coat of chain mail, wanting the
sleeves. ^ Armour (or the tliiiihs and limbs. ^ Javelins. * When he went to Trance on his matrimonial

expedition. ^ This forms the commencement of another branch of these Accounts. ^ Piece or web.

' Rouen, in Normandy. " Furrier. ' This payment to the Almoner was for charitable purposes. '" Messengers
dispatched to the other Religious Houses. " Arr/tie, an earnest penny. '^ Pieces or webs. '^ Probably mats or Turkey-carpets. '* Table-covers. '* Seejul. 3, loSi, of this Appendix, I, * 283. Although

the repaynient of Ij>rd Erskine's ' supcrexpensis' is entered here, the date of the King's Investiture must have been
a considerable time previous to this time. '" It is unnecessary to give the details here. " Shoes.

VOL. I. f 2 o

290* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1537.

APPENDIX.

Item, deliuerit to Robert Gib be )ie faid Patrtk (Sklatar) to ])E Kingis Grace aire
sniftn t0brrit toiti) Jil.lft of iht iTfto fassoilf, furnyR witb gyrtliis and ledderis to ])e famin fadill,
price, . . . • • • • • • • xl s.

Item, for nitf ^nritfs'stitg al ilaft Tftf"£frr, r0btrtt toitfj binft of tl)r dTraitrJbe fnsSoitr,'
price, . . . . • • . . XX s.

Item, for twa pair of girtbis and wainebrafis-' for Armyn fadillis, . . vij s.

Jul. 18. Item, to Tiiomas Crag, fyve elne Paris blak, to be ]>e Kingis giace nitc iflotftitg
©OUltr toitl) nitf UHltfr, price elne 1 l.,fumma, . . ■ • ■ xij ti. x s.

Itetn, tbre elne and 3 quartar of Parife blak to be ])E Kingis grace aiTE JSp'&tlig Cltoift, price
elne Is., _/'«)«»*«, . . . . . • • • ixli. xvd.

Jul. 19. Hem, fevin quarteris, ane naile lefs, of fyne Parife blak, to be ])e Kingis grace aire
pair nf U?0is"f niltf nitr #Tnin, price elne iij \\.,fumma, . . . v ti. xv d.

Item, lua elne and ane quarter of Taftatyis of cord, to lyne ]ie Kingis grace ane pair of
Hoife, . . . . • • . . xlvs.

Jul. 22. — Item, tane fra Mungo Tennand to be tilt Utitgts" Mnlt'-'Hait. aitif %Ht"tfC^ and for
Jib making of ]ie famin, . . • • • • • • x s

Item, for poyntis to ])e tua Coitis and doublate, . . . . xvj d.

Jul. 2-1. — Item, coft* fra Henry Lillie, and deliuerit to ])e faid Tapefar, twa fteikis^ oftloufilr
iinmuostngf " to Ijiitg about X\)t (Sitirin, quliair ]<e Veluet bang, . . vj ti.

Item, fra Thomas Todynar, &e." thre fteikis xiiij eln ane quarter of Ifotlilf 39ailtn05tagt to
hing as faid is, . . • • • • ■ • xj ti. x s.

Item, fra Jobne Dowgall fevyn elne iHiriaiTf " fu5"tinitc at )>e Lordis command, to put t'n
tSf (Cjbaprn lit X\)t |3aTncf, price elne v l.,fumma, .... xxxv 5.

Item, fra Jie faid Johne, 6"fV fartfOllie rortfi's"'' to ]>e farayn eflect, . . xij d.

Jul. 28. Item, to William Edbe, faprsar to ]ie Kingis grace, . xxti.

Jul. 30. 7;ct», to Gilliam tbe ®umt5 .#urrour, . ■ . xxti.

Aug. 4. — Item, to Jobne Gourlay, to pafs with tbre cloife Writingis to ])E Kingis grace at
ffnnptallouit, ....••••• viij 5.

Item, to Jobne Forfytlie, to pafs to Banff, Elgyn, Fores, Invernys, and v])iris placis neidful, to
Ifts'rljargr i\)t CBrlf of iHurrap of \ii^ Etfutninaitlfrif iit tljf f.axil) partis, to Jiis expenfis, 1 g.

Aug. \^.—Item, to Master Alexander Brand, itrtpar of tj)c ^lantmus '" J<c JJahn, xl ti.

Aug. 20 Item, to Patrik Wemys, to gtf nmaitg tl)f dfraitrljc mnt antf ionurit at tj&are

tfrparttiig to jFraitrf, ........ mf ti.

Item, four elne 3 quarteris of gray, to be Hoiffing to fE Kingis ^tantffrtt:^ of \i\<» Jtfttarainp, • • • • • • • • • • ^J «• J d.

Aug. 21. — Item, deliuerit to William Caklerwod, for aitf pair ©rgaiti^ to ])e Kingis grace
Cj&apel, price of ]iame, . . . . • ■ • Ixvj ti. xiij 5. iiij d.

Item, to Master George Buchquhannan, at ))E Kingis command, . xx ti.

Aug. 22. — Item, toWilliame Smeitbberd, for fe mending and grathing of tuflfs'tf tic ^alfini^

of ))E Kingis, "'J «• "U s.

Item, for ImiKfeinis", prnlfas'is," and vj.ir geir tane '- be Robert Gib, . . iiij ti. ij i.

» A number of similar entries, but too minute to be noticeil bere. ^ Literally Belly-bands. Preparations for

the Tournament are strangely mingled with the funereal traiu.ings. '' The mourning Coat and Hood.

■• Purchased. '' Webs, pieces. " Dr Jamicsun, on thi> authority of Colijrave and Roquijhrt, considers this

' to have been a kind of Temming or taminy, from O. Fr. Oa/aih:' — ' A demy ostade, cut in panes like a Spanish
leather jerkin,' Colqrave. ' In consequence of the sudden and unusual demand, the purchases were made from

a great variety of tradesmen. « Milan. ' Six fathoms of cords or ropes. '" After the execution of Jonet

Lady Glammis, and the Forfeiture of her son. " Pendants. " Purchased.

25Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 29I

APPENDIX.

Aug. 24'. — Item, refauit fra Williame Haw, threttene elne vtevfyue, to be four dFutf=iHnit=

tilllS and four ^nnTrB's'tltgis" to ]>e Franche ladyis faddillis, price elne xxiiij s.,/timma, \v t\. xij s.

Item, tuelfe elne Franche blak, to be thre of tI)C giftns't jJ^Htf^iHnitttni^ and thre ^nnTfS"=

^ingt'^ to ])e gretafl Ladyis, price of ])e elne xxxiij s.,Jitmma,^ ^ . . . xx ti. viij s.

Aug. 23. — Item, to Biffiite, MefiSnger, to pafs to Glasgw, and vfer places in ])E VVestland,

for l^erSts" t0 tijf (©ttfitt^ Enlfmji, . . . • . • . xxi.

Item, deliuerit to t\)t HHnpt^nt be my Lord Thefaurar, . . . . xx H.

Aug. 28. — Ite»i, fyve elne Parife blak, tff Cttbit ant Sttttar 0f am Itnlfut^,^ price elne

xxxiij 1.,Jumma, . • viij ti. x s.

Item, aucht fcoir and aucht 33u]^{itni^ to Jie foirfaid ladyis, price of the pece viij i.,Jumma, V ti. xij s.

Item, ane hundreth ^riilft^stiS'' and fex, price of ])e pece vj d.,Jumma, . iij ti.

Item, gevin for \e 8Ff rnfS"s"ilTg of tlie Pendeffis, plaittis, and bukillis, . . xxij s.

Item, for making ane covering to i\)t CljIJriot, ... . . . x s.

Sep. 4. — Item, gevin to Patrik Wemys, Mafter Houfliald, xxij Crovnis ; to my Lord SecRETAR, vj Crovnis, t0 gtf aitf part et i\)t dFrnttrljf iitriT, nt tijarc ioap=pnsstitg,y «?«««, xxviij ti.

Item, gevin to my Lord Secretar, Jiat he deliuerit to tJ)C dFranrbf B-abflttlnr aitif \iix

btt^bailtr, at pare away-paffing, . . ........ xl s.

Item, to tJua s'rniaiTlfts' of tljr (Sttrnts' (quhilkis) war uocht of mynde to have departit, and
now defyris to depart ; and now it is ordanit be Jie Lordis of Counfale of Chekkar, ilkane of Jiame to
have fex Crownis, /»>/;/»«, . . . . . . . . xij ti.

Sep. 14 Item, gevin to Patrik Wemys, to gif X\)t ilTaprss'f ri) ntait t^at pa^t to dfraitrSe,

(France,) . • . . . . vj ti.

Sep. . — Item, to twa dochteris of tl)t itntfu <!9lantmy£i * twa pair doubill folit fchone, price
of Jie pair ij s. ij d.,y!(H;}/irt, ....... iiij s. iiij d.

Item, gevin to ]iame thja PttrB'i^,^ . • • • . ij s. viij d.

Item, tane fra James Corfby, an elne of blak to be ^0ts> to fame, . . xx s.

Item, gevin to Dauid Hoppringill, to pay for pare Itigriitg nit's ntfit, fa lang as pai remanit in
Ed", and pe faid Dauidis expenfis t0 rotfr toi'tl) tljnmf to ^nUtitgtouit aittl fiortljbtniift/ xxs.
Sep. 17. — Item, deliuerit to fex dTraitrJbf 9la1fnts, 5ty ^aStllis', . . xij ti.

Item, fyve itfji) ^atfilTt's" to }ie Franche Ladyis, furnyll with brydillis, harnefling, and girthis,
price of ilk fadill iij Yi.,fumma, • . . ....... xv ti.

/to)!, ane pair of <§trtl)t'^ to aiTf ptigatf, price, . . . . . . ij 8.

Item, deliuerit to ane Francheman ane fadill, to rvtSt luttl) t\)t dFraiiri)f 3Latf Ut^, price, xl s.

Item, to diuerfe men and wyfis in ]ie Cannongate, for ])e lugrtirg of tl)f dFraitf{)f niflt ]iat

part away, in part of payment of ane Bill particularlye writtin and fubfcriuit with Mafter Johne

Cowdanis hand, Ixxxvij ti. viij s. ; payit pairof to ]te faidis men and wyfis, . . Ixxx ti.

Summa totaliunt CF^'pciTsaruiii (a Junij iiij ad Sep. xxviij, 1337),

iiij*ivij«xxxvij ti. xviij s. j d. ob.

' Various similar entries. ^ A number of other ' littaris' for the French ladies occur in these Accounts.

^ Pendants. ■• What the names of these unCortunate y()ung ladies were, the Kditor has not heen able to discover.

The Peerages mention only one danghter «l" John, si.rl/i Lord Glanimis, Elizabeth, married to Hoss of Cralgie ;
but it is probable that the Ladies mentioned here were daughters of Lady Glammis by her second marriage with
Campbell of Skipnish, who was killed in attempting to escape from the Castle of Edinburgh about the ]ieriod of
Lady Glasimis's Execution. See I, * I&7, and the preceding Appendix, &c. ^ A most muniticent donation!

It will afterwards be seen, tliat the King and Queen regularly took up their abode at Glajimis Castle during part
of the Hunting season ; and doubtless the rents of the large possessions belonging to the young Lord were seized upon
by the Crown whilst this young Nobleman was imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, from which he was not liberated
until after the death of King James V. ° It is extremely probable that these young ladies were given in charge

to the Prioress of North Berwick, to be brought up as Nuns in that Monastery.

292* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A. D. 1538.

APPENDIX.

SuM^^A totalium Expenfarum (nif B"ttj)poitnti0iTfnt (SFypntsantm JSrgi^ tii dFram
((a,i) vij"nx''xlixti. vij s. vijd.

Se]i. 19. — Itenu gevin to Anthone Barbour, Franche man, for t^f grntjjutg ' nittf l)0torl(tltg
0f tbf CuirntS* gincf.'^ quliam God affolze,^ ..... iiij ti.

Item, coft he Thomas Arthur, auchtene elne vterfine, to be four dFraitcJf SLnlfHt^ JDuIf
t§Otuitt^, mnid of jie falibune of Preillis Gownis, price ehie xxiiij s.,/uinmei, xxi ti. xij t.

iMar. 1537-8. — Item, to Jonet Dowglas, tbf ^pou^ of Sntttif Sit'ltttfSilM of tl)f iHontl)f,^
at I'E KiNGis erace eommaiKi, as ])e Precept beris, . . . . . xl ti.

Ai)r. lo38. — Item, to Katherine Bellendene,'' for 'tfftti^ nionittf to I)fr ht Jie Quenis
grace tf)r iSingts molJrr, at liis gracis commam), hecaus he tuke |ie det on him, Vj''. Ixvj ti.xiijs. iiijd.

Ite}n, deliuerit to Johne Mofmanne, to mak nitf Square dbf ITJt flf (^oFtf to ]ie Kingis grace,
with Knoppis, ........ . liiij ti.

I/em, tane of Jie faid Jhonis avne gold, tO roiltplfit t\)t s'at^ rl)flTJC with, quhilk vveyit quheu
it was reffiiuit agane fra liim. mair ])an lie refl'auit, ix Crovvnis of wecht, . . ixti.

/<(>«, to iiim fur iMnfttng of le faid Chenje, .... iiij ti.

/few, for mfn"atitg of tl)r iJtngtB ©rtfottr anir JTargrt, . • • xiiij 5.

Item, for gold to it, mair ))an he reHauit, . . . . . xx s.

Item, for mending of ant (Cou})t of Siturr and ))e gilting of it, . . xl s.

May. — Item, for xiij elne i elne ®.ui)itf aFfiTorf S'atiitg'* to i)f aitf ^obitf to \)i^ gratf,
quliilk was lynyt with freis, elaitlie of gold, and pafsmentit ; ]ie quhilkis lynyng and pafsmentis war
tane furthe of )ie Warddrop : price of pe elne of )'e fating, xxxiij 's.,fumma, . xxij ti. xix s.

Marriage of King James V to Mary of Guise.

" <!Fvpnt£iiS Iftburs'at, at fbc Ivingio" roiitinaittf, vpoun pe (iiij) Trumpetouris, (iiij) TaBERNARis, (■ iij QuiiusLABis'} and vjieris Jiat pall in ]ie Schippis to France, ' for l)anit=l)rutgiirg
of ti)f ©Itflic' " The dresses, &c. were very superb, and ' iLfbrrai) Claitijis"' were also provided
for grrbants of tbf lI>Oi)aT 5[^ouSfl)Ortf, with ' Gunnaris,' ' Sciialmeris,' Minstrels, &c. and
including' ix Pagis, iiij Allacayis, iij Mulitaris, v Trumpetouris, and iiij Armoraris.' The
particulars, though very interesting, are too voluminous even to admit of selection. On adding up
these expenses, they are found to amount to . . . I™, ij^ xviij ti. xvij s. vd.

Item Dreffes for ' tl)r ittngiS grarc Iforbtfr,' being ' ane Kirtill and Goune of ]ie Frence
(French) fort' of ' blak fatyne of Venife,' ' blak veluet to vvat' (wait) it, and to ' mak hir hude of ])e
Frenche fort,' with linings of ' crammefy fatyne,' &c. ; and for ' ane chafferoune of gold Parife werk,
quhilk weyit in gold x Crownis and ane half,' amounting in whole to . xlj ti. ij s. x d.

Item, to Johne Gourlaw, for fe paffing with ]>e Kingis Letteris to ]>e Quenisferry and
Leith,' for Proclamatioune making till all iWartitfris" ait"D Srl)tpinrititt to roiitprrt tit 3Lritj)r, ]>e
tbrid day of Maij, and refaif Jjair Wagis for passilTg tit J'raiUf, in Jie Kingis Sciiippis, for ^^antts
IbrtiTgiitg of X\)t (Sitifitf, . • • • • • • • "j s-

' This Actuunt immediately follows the other, and contains the receipts of the New Tax on the Spirituality and
Temporality, imposed on them to meet the King's expenditure in France. The amount of William Bishop ol"
Aberdeen's exjieuditure, from Sep. 12, 1336, to Sep. 27, 15.37, as appears by his Account, which precedes the two
former was L.3627, lis. a.Ul. ' These words have been deleted by another hand, and ' anatomat (anatomizing?) and laubouris made ancntis the Quekis' are interlined. " The charges tor spices, &c. fall under the

Household department. As Selections from the Household Books of James V. are in tlie course of publication
by some Members of the Bannatvne Club, it is unnecessary to give any extracts from that source. ' See

these Extiacts, Dec. Io30, and Note. = This person seems to have been an Embroiderer, and has many very

large payments made to her during the present reign. " Tlic furnishings to this Gown, two doublets, and hose,

the particulars of which occupy threi' folios, amounted in all to L. 171, 5s.— Another ' Coir of Pukpouk Sating' and

' browdliing' cost L. 125, I'Js but the items are too numerous to be noticed here. ' Similar notices were sent

to ' Abirdene, atul vthei- jiartis betuix Leith and Ahiidene, to cause the laud menne cum to Leith and ressaue thair
wagis,' and for ' iiij Cuniiaris' from Dunbar. And warnings were also sent to the Barons ' till cum to SanctANDR.OIS to THE Q,UE.NIS LANDING.'

25Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 293

APPENDIX.

Jun. — Large payments for Srfs's'c^ t0 tjjr IKiltg, and for ' careing' and fcbipping of pe Kingis
geir and clothing fra Edinhurghe to Sanctandrois, and geir bocht to pe Kingis grace ' — DiefffS to ' M.
Jane, the Kingis dochter, and her Nureife, Normond Leflie,'&c. — ' Tappellchere, Comparalionis, and
joiTiais, and vther Jufting geir' — ' Munitionis coft be Johne Bertoune in France,' (extending to iiij".
x> viij }i.) — Gold Rings, anamaling, d yamontis, and goldsmith work, among which ' ane Terget of Gold,
with ane Marmadyne in it of dyamoutis, of ]>e Kingis awin gold,' the workmanship ot which cost
iij ti., &c. &e. — The total expenditure of that month was . , I'", v'f. xx ti. xx d.

Jun. 23. — [tern, to Joiine Paterfone, Purfevant, for pailing with Letteris to Couper, Falkland,
Kircaldy, Dunfermeling, ane Edinburghe, tff rau^ Ijoitcst rrp.linlilTg be niniif iat tj&C ffiluritts CJlt=
ttriirg, [Queen Mary of Guise's Public Entry,] . . . xiij s.

Jun. — ])£ Kingis grace Boware, fen Witfoiiday iall bypail, viz.

In primis, deliuerit to Johne Tennand, tljrt ptnobiLobois, for |ie Irne of ilk bow x s., price of
ill; bow xxs.,yMWWia, . . . . . . . . iiijt xs.

Ite^n, to ])E Kingis grace felfe, jtitf iriTf fff aitt =[3fnoFi:I)0fa, . . . xs.

Item, to fE Kingis grace felfe, in Halirudiiouse, niir Ifnsant htaitt Srrotoisi, xx s.

Item, &c. nitf Bob), with ane dofane ^rntots, . • • . . xx s.

Item, to Johne Tetmand, at TjiMPi alloun, tua dofane of ^^nrotois", , xls.

Item, to ])E Kingis grace, fair, ane dofane Arrowis, , . . xx s,

Item, for ]ie frtljf n'ltg ' of tine dofane Arowis, .... xxx s.

Item, deliuerit to Johne Tennand, ane botu to ])E Kingis grace,' . . xx s.

Jul. (7.): — ' The Expeufis deburfate vpoune t]&e ©unttS ^.ItlllsiHfS Jllttf I3irigf, quhora
God aflbil:^e.' (See the particular articles, under the date Jul. 7, 1537, being the day of her death.)

Item, to Schir Thomas Cragy and ane vjier with him, for making of iiij dofane of ^nitC;^, iiij ii.

/fe/«, to ]ie 33fn=iuamTf, ....... xviiji.

Item, to t\)t ^30U)=^fltltl), deliuerit to Dauid Lindefay, ?luouitC ^crnflf, ane croune of
wecht, ......... . XX s.

Item, to CJ&niplaiii^ icing at tjf Sirigc aitir ^atillsiHcs", tj&t tunte 0f tjbe (©bsrijuois", ilk
Chaiplane havand ij s., extendnii; to vij^'^ X, (loO,)yMA««ia, . . . . xvti.

Jul — Cbf ' iatitgi^ (Taprscjbrrir, and v])eris his geir' were tranfported ' furtho of Sanctandrois to Edinburghe, Cowper, Falkland, Dyfart, Dunfermeling, and Linlithqw,' at various times
during the present month. No minute dates are preserved in this Account. The expense of
' turfing,' ' gralhing ]ie Mulatis,' ' fraucht,' Ike, amount to . . xlix ti. ij s. iiij d.

The expenfis deburfate vpoune fe ' (llarfagt al tl)f ©.Ufllt's" grtr.' (A (ew of the Items of
which Account follow,) . . . . . ... Ixij ti. j s. ix d.

Item, to Alexander Naper, for mtn'aiitg of t\)t CBiUfni^ ^a'flill aittf ijn Cjbtn'ot, in Sanctandrois, .......... xiiij s.

Item, for rarniirg of bflfiltg antf toff vis", with lynnyng claithis ; and ane cofl'er of J)e Mailler
Stabiller to fe Queue; aitr cljiav aitif aite btlirlf ' to ))E Quene, fra Sanctandrois to Couper and
Falkland, and fra Falkland to Ravynnilhcuche and Dunfermeling, J)e fpace of iiij dayis, ilk day ij
cai'tis and iiij horfis, Jie price of ])e cart on \ie day ij s. vj d., and ])e liorfe on ))e day, ij 's.,J'uiiima, Iij s.

Item, for caryiiig of Jie faid geir furthe of Dunfermeling to |)e Ferry, v horfis, ilk horfe
xviij d. . . . . . . . . . vij ii. vj d.

Item, for raruiitg of i\)t Samrs of l^oitouiis' bc^tfisi fra Dunfermeling to Ed"^, iij s.

Item, for iiij elnis grene veluet, to be ])e fobrriltg Of aitt s'atfill tO t&f dTuIf,^ . xiij ti.

' Carrying; transporting. ^ Featiiering. ^ These Items are selected to remark the quantities of bows

with wliicli THE King was constantly supplied, of wliich the above is only one instance. ^ A ihair of state

and trible. ' The Queen's Fool was a French woman, named Sekat, who appears to have been in great favour

at Court. See Aug, 1j38, Apr. 16, 1540. The party-coloured dress of the Court Fools, both male and female, was

294 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1538.

APPENDIX.

Item, for xiij vnce jallow filk to be frtiTjeis' to \e. faid fadill and JjantfS's'iug, price of fe vnce
V l,,Jumma, . . . . . • ■ • • iij ti. v s.

Itein, for wirking of ))e faid fren:;eis, . . . . . xv s.

Item, for x eliiis of blak veluet, deliuerit till Patrik, faidlar, to be ana robcrittg ni airr Sfllfin
anlf aitf ftltf=mnilttn to ane of hir ladyis, ...... xxvjti.

Item, for iij eliiis h elne braid gray, to lyne \e faid mantill with, . . viij s. ix d.

Item, for xv vnce ^ vnce of filk, to be fren3eis, . . .iij ti. xvij s. vj d.

Item, for wirking of fe faid fren5eis, . . . . . xv s.

The ' Expenfis deburfate vpoune iHatfaittC iH01ttniTt^ cariage furthe of Sanctaiidrois, and
v])ir expenfis maid on hir feruandis,' amount to ... Ixxiij ti. ij s. xj j d.

Item, to Robart Dauidfoune, for fffljtitg 0f ^'alftis' furth of fE Illis fra iHcflaitf, v ti.

Item, to Johne Halden, in Kircaldy, for tlun dJ^nIr0tti^ bocht fra liim in Falkland, viij ti.

Item, for vj einis of Parife blak, tff i)f itlaistcr i5corgj Ufllqu^anitatif aitf (©0uitt, at tbe
CBittfiTt's" (Srarr Criitrf in Edixburghe, . . . . . . x ti. xvj s.

Item, for iij elnis of blak fatyne, to lyne ]ie forder quarteris and ilevis of ])e faid Goune, price
of fe elne xxxiiij s., fumma, . ..... iiij ti. xviij s.

Item, for vj elnis of blak veluet, to be him ane Hugtoune cote,' . xvj ti. xvj s.

I/em, RIaister George Balquhannane, be ane fpeciall Precept, at ))E Kingis command, .......... XX ti.

Item, deliuerit to Johne Coib, meflingeir, for pafiing with our fouerane lordis Letteris to ])E
Wardane of )ie West Marchis till charge all Borderaria and vjieris fat naitf niafe iHrrratf tuitjb
Siliglt^ lltfltltf, in |)ai partis, nor commoune nor intermell with faim, brraui^ Oi ti)t Ipfs'tilfltrr, ITfb)
ri^B'tit bpoiiit tl)f 33ffr"£four(5", ....... xxiiij s.

Itejn, to Alexander Hutoune, meffingeire, for palling with ficlike Letteris to ]>e Wardane of

]iE ElST AND MyDDII.L MaRCHIS, . . . . . . . XX S.

Item, to Johne Paterfone, Purfevant, pafl!and with ficlike Letteris to Dunbar, Hadingtoune,
Leithe, Edinburghe, Kingorne, Kirkcaldy, Dyfart, and all pairtis of ]ie Sey-coift, baithe on ])e Souths
fyde and Northe fyde of Forthe, ti)at ita Stitglis'mrit it s'ni runtaitlf it rrs'sauit, . xxviij s.

Befides tl)t ortftixaro Hibrn't^, are Srrssfs", &c. for ix Paigis, iij Allakayis, x Grvmis
OF THE Stabill, V Grumis OF THE QuENis STABILL, &c., but too lengthened to be inserted here.

SuMMA totalis menfis Julij, . ... ij™. j<=. v ti. iij s. iiij d.

Aug. — Payments for the King and Quenis cariage to Linlithqw and to t\)t |i?tllltis, amounting to . . . . . . ... Ixxxiij ti. V s. vd.

Item, for vij elnis J elne grene Birge Satyne, to be tjbc (Bttrm's" dFttIf - aitf (§OUltf, price of
Jie elne, x s.,/iniwia, . . . . . . . iij ti. xv s.

Item, for v elnis i elne callow birge Satyne, t0 it iiv Sttt Utrttll, price of ]ie elne x s.,
Jumma, . . . . . . . . Iv s.

Item, for vj quarteris of fufteane, to be )ie bodyis to Jie Kirtill, and lyne pebodyis of Jie Goune
with, ....... . ..vs.

Item, for ij elnis i elne blaid blak gray, to lyne fe Kirtill with, price of Jie elne xxviij d.
Jumma, . . . . . . . . v s. iiij d.

Item, for iij elnis of grene bukreme, to lyne hir goune with, price of |ie elne ij s., fumma, vj s.

Item, deliuerit to Johne Mofman, to mak ailf (CrOff of gollf to S'ft iTtamatTt S'taiTfS" t'lT, viij
Angell nobillis, vj lycht Franche crownis,y«)//ma, . . . xvj ti. iiij s.

green and yclhtw. So far as the Editor recollects, this is the only instance in history of a Fejiale Buffook, or Fool,
for the amusement of the Court.

' O. F. hocquelon, a sort of sleeveless jacket ; a cassock. ' ' Serat,' a female. See Jul. 1538, and Apr. 16, 1540.

25 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 295

APPENDIX.

Item, for J)e faffoune of |)e faid Croce, . • • • . v ti.

Item, to ia0nnoit1f iLfslif, at pE Kingis command, ... xl W.

Item, to Johne Fifclieare, for merchandice tane' be fHalfaute iWffntrilfr, at ])E Kingis command, be ane Precept, . . . . . • xxxvij ti. vj d.

Item, to William Hill, for mending of J)E Mynicionis^ in X\}t Court Of tjbf ^bbau, at fe
Kingis command, . . . . . . . • v ti. x s.

Item, to Johne Creicbe, Ikippar, in compleit payment of fe frnucbt 0f \)\.^ ^f^t)) quj^ilft pn^t
tiT Sfitmnrft for puriffn's avCa (Suititt^, ...... vij ti.

Sept. — Item, deliuerit ami gevin to Williame Smebeird, for dycbting of ^JuErtfts'7 rnppcriiS,
bnritfs's'iiig, s'tfin=s*n1finis', 3)ctfburrl)t=5tnb(s', and vjieris glJIapputi^, to fE Kingis grace, deliuerit
to Robert Gib and Johne Tennand, ...... xxiij ti. v s.

Item, deliuerit to William Eidve, Tapefchere, for furnylling of X\}t dFraiIt{)C iSurftS"^ CrV})flt£>iS
fene ))e Quenis gracis hame-cuming, and bir biilband and Jiair fervandis expenfis : and for bir ftTttf=
toufe, in lykewyfe, for ane monethis expends, maid be him at ]ie Kingis gracis command, xxjti.

Item, gevin to Duncan Campbell of Drumfad, for ane borfe of his Jiat wes llane turfand ])E
Kingis (EFmiics'Ount out of tSlrirfiitlns'S, at ])E Kingis grace command and Precept, v ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to ScHiK James Inglis, Cbaplaue, s'UTgaiTlT for ttjt ^nVitt. Of Itt'ltg (3*aiUCS") X\)t
8r{)ri1f in J)E Abbay of Cambskynneth, .... xiij ti. vj s. viij A.

Sep. . — Item, to v Falconaris, quljilfeis jjaSst't lit dFranrJc iot'tl) %?aXfet5, xx elnis of
Frenche coleur de Boi/,^ to be ])ame (Cotii, ...... xiiij ti.

Oct. ' The lllartagc of Jje Kingis and Quenys geir fra Ed' to Striuiling,' &c. amounts

to . . . ■ . . . . . . . xix ti. xvij s,

Nov. ' The CJypcn^fS deburfit one tijt (©UfitgS grate antJ Jjt'r ILaTJritiS,' ' Lady Jane,'

' Lord James Abbot of Kelso,' ^ &c., are curious, but too lengthened to admit of particular notice.
Similar entries also occur, with Liveries, &c. in the following and other months of these Accounts.

Dec. . — /ton, to Thomas Ryne, goldiniyth, for elj)fnjfts' of gotti, gold ryngis, tabillatis, and
vpir goldin werk deliuerit be him to ])e Kingis grace, aganc J2cSu Scrf^ itlrs's", and gevin in jictD
^ertS «©{ftlS, ........ ij'xxxixtl. xixs.

Item, to Johnne Kyll, goldfmyth, for] tj&rc (ll|&citjcfs and ttoa i)avtii of Gold, deliuerit, as
faid is, at jacfaj Seris" Mti^, &c., ....... xxiij ti.

Item, to Johnne JMofman, goldfmyth, for certane tabillatis, chen5ies of gold, and ryngis and
llanys, reliauit ]ie tyme forefaid, . . ... . Ixiij ti. x i.

Item, to him for pe making of ti)e &tttt JSastltg of (SoIB, weyand x pund wecht ane vnce
and i ane vnce ;^ and making of ane Schip, twa brafiliatis, and making and tranflating of diueife chenzeis
and ringis of ])E Kingis gracis, and ekiiig" of gold of his awin, . . . Ixxiiij ti. x s.

Item, for aitc grrtt tatSr of Irllticr to ]>e Grete Bafiug of gold, lynit with 5allow, xxxvj s.

Item., for x elnis of Slafe 9Kui)am'5,^ to hyng tabellatis gevin tit iStSn %tviS iHfSS be fE
Kingis grace, . . ....... xs.

Jan. , 1338-9. — Item, deliuerit to ane Inglifinanne |iat come fra ])E Bordouris with ^Wtvi'
ttngt'S tiotri&fitg tilt 33aXlatt niatU of t\jt IHt'ng of CPnglanU, . . . . iij ti.

Feb. . — Item, deliuerit to twa Inglismenne |)at brocht Writingis to fE Kingis grace, ]>e

tane fra tj&r (CounSafe of %Otk, and fe tojier fra ^tjjtv aMlllfam CfbcnS; J'e tane xti., and ))e

v])ir iiij \\.,J'umma, .... .... xiii ti.

' Purchased. ^ The Artillery and fortifications. ' The Queen's Nurse, who came along with her

suite from France. The attentions paid to Foster-mothers and their families in those days are well known. ' It

is written colourderoy. ^ lu September preceding he is styled * Loud James, now Prioor of Sanctandrois.'

" On enquiring of His Majesty's Goldsmith, what the cost of such a piece of plate of the plainest workmanship
would now be, the Editor was informed that the lowest charge would, at the present price of Gold, amount to
L.788, 10s. ' Eiking, adding, ' Black ribbons.

296 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539.

APPENDIX.

Maiclie. — Item, to Helene Rofs, to toljcr aite iHatfltg 33ufec (Matin or Prayer Book) to J)E
QuEXis grace, iij quarteris 5 quarter of Purpure welvot, and to be aiie polk ' to ])e famin, price of
]7e elue, iij ti. x s., fummn, . . . . . . . iij ti. xv d.

Item, for i elne iialf quarter of Raid dammefe (damask) to lyne Jie faidis polk and covering
will), ..... . . . xxij s. \] d.

Item, to Dauid Cliepman, for JSjinlftitg aiitt lani'iig aBout i^i gaiB Imltf Iviit?) <SolK, xs.

Item, gevin to Heleiif- liofs, for viij fingiil iiankis of gold, to ioiBour iiit g.iill liufee and polk,
and be knoppis Jiairto, and for filk to firing fe faid polk with, and werknianl'chip of all,'^ iij ti. x s.

Rlar. Itetn, deliuerit to Jolinne Paterfone, for Jie making of aitt taiSC to i\)t ISiti'lgiS grate

^^U'trU of honour, ''t Jol'""6 Tennandis command, ..... iijti.

Mar. 1. — Item, deliuerit to Arcbibald Heriot, meffinger, to pafs and ferche fair gudis tfUJbilfet'S
luarSJjittrtt antf Urtlarit ^Ifrrtfltts, in Edinbnrcht and Striucling, . . . xvjs.

Miir. 3. — Item, Dre.s.ses to tjf CFlIt of JLfbmav fiua iiitni, in Linlithgow, of ' blak welvot, blak fating, twa Franche Hattis, twa Govnys of Freiie, and twa Kirtillis of Sating bordourit with
welvot, twa coUaris of welvot perlattis, twa babuttis, and twa litill colleris,' amounting to xvh xiiij s.

Mar. 9. — Item, to Munsure LASSEN3E, ])e Franche man, jie ix day of Marche, qui)tlk tome
first in ^tottanH aftir Suit fra tJjc ©tngr of Jf'rainl&r, in ane purfe knoppit with gold, iiij°H.

Item, gevin to Munsure de JNIoranvelay, ;fHatstfr ^oti^ljallf to tjjt Stilfte of <&toffse,
in ane v|>ir fiklike purfe, . . . . . . ; . iij*^ ti.

Item, for ]ie twa purcife, . . .... viij s.

Item, gevin to t\)t |^3fiSfbaiTt ]>at come furth of France, callit 3Bt Ta ^Sliunir, xlti.

Mai-. 25, 1539. — Item, to it ^tljont' to ])E Kingis grace, v quarteris of Quhite welvot, price
of Jie elne iij \\.,fumma, . . . . . . . . iij ti. xv s.

Ite?n, y quarteris blak welvot to be fdione to his grace, price of pe elne Iij s., fumma, iij ti. v s.

/te»i, tobei)rj.nngtlircljtS6t3' to Wyt JJingt'S grate ^e^.'x quarteris of Hohindc!aitlie,xiijs.vjd.

Item, fend to Linlithgow be Katheryne Bellendene to ])E Quenis grace, tioa ^OUnH of Stfaj^
iwg <§oTtI,^ price jiairof, ....... xxiiij ti.

/<e»j, ane pound of Seining Stiurr, ..... xiiij ti. vj s.

Item, ix vnce of ilaft ParjjSe Sllfe. ...... liiij s.

Item, x\j lang iobtnnfS. price of pe pece v s. iiij d.,y5«»»ja, . iiij t. vs. iiijd.

Item, xvj gcljort hobrntS, ladit at vj s. viij A., fumma, . . v t vj s. viij d.

Item, iij boltis of ^aii'Sc rutiantS,'' ilkane contenand xiiij elais i elne, price of fe elne viij d.
for fark collaris and hm\i\\s,J'ii]iima, . ..... xxix s.

Item, xvj elnis of qiil)ttt Sniatt rtlbeillipS for Govnis, price Jiairof, , . viij s.

Mar. 27. — Item, to ti)f Stnglisf U>frolti ]'at come with EiLIrttingi^ fra tijt IJing of (iPnglantf, . ........ . xti.

Itetn, to iWbs'gra, lOrrscbaitt, quhiik come in with ]ie faid Inglise Herold ]iat famiu
tyme, . ......... vj ti.

Item, fend to Striueling, agane Pafche, vij elnis i elne of lycht blew Purpure welvot, to be ane
Gowne to fane, tje dTrfiitlje SrctJie,'' price of Je elne Iv s., fumma, . xx li. xij s. vj d.

Itevt, for ane elne iij quarteris of blew taffiteis of cord, to lyne pe faid goune with, xxxj s. vj d.

' Poke, bag. ' There are various entries of the same kind for tlie King and Queen's liooks. ' Shoes.

■• Curihes, caps. There are also many entries for towels ' to rub the Kingis hede,' and ' to dry the Kingis hede.'
It appears that James V. regularly bathed bis head; and that be used all manly sports and exercises to brace
his frame. = 'Ihe Editor has only thought it necessary to give a few instam-es of the Queen's taste for Embroidery. The quantities of gold and silver thread, silk, &<■. sent her, often monthly, amply prove her great industry,
and the numerous works of embroidery and tapestry which she and her Ladies of honour must have executed.
' Ribbons. ' A French female dwarf. There was also a male Dwarf, called ' Joune ve Dorche,' or

' Dboichi!. '

26JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 297

APPENDIX.

Item, for fuftaine to lyne fe flevis and body of hir Goune, price ])airof, . iij i. ix d.

Item, for ane elne of grene to lyne liir Kirtill, and blak grey to fluff ))e plyife of liir goune
with, . . . . . . . . . . . xs.

Mar. 31 Item, deliuerit to Jolinne joung, Brovdflar,' iij elnis i elne of Crammacy Sating,

to t]&e Stanlf ° of idlagtS of 6ota im'tSanlr to i\yt itingtS (HiiapcXl, price of \% elne iij t. x l.,fumma, . . . . . . • . • . xij t. vs.

Dresses were given to ILorB Jiamc^ of JJflSo, SlofU ^(ainrS of ^aiictantlroigf, and Eatig
Jiane ' ]'E Kingis grace sonnis and dochter.' Tbe drelles for ' my Lordis' confill of ' Gownis
of giay Sating of Venyfe,' ' Coitis with flevis of Purpure VVelvot,' ' waltit with gray welvot,' < Hoife
of Riffillis blak lynit witli blew,' having ' blak Taffiteis to draw fame with,' twa welvot Bonnetis with
Pafmentis of fdk, and ane Marrabas Bonett, ' Beltis and gartanis of taffiteis,' < blak welvot fcbone.'
There was only charged the ' waiting' for a ' Nyclit-goune' of SLatlB J)anc of ' blak taffiteis and
welvot,' and ' lyning of ]>e famin goune with cotonaris, and ]>e foir breiftis with mertrik fabill.' The
amount was ........ Ixxxxvj t. xv s. viij d.

Apr. . — Item, wiocht be Katheryne Bellendene, to tijt IttitgtS Ktiriiall, of variant colorit
welvot, xiiij knoppis and flringis effering fairto, quhilk tuke x vnce of fewing silk, price of lie unce
vjs. . . . . . . . . . . . iijti.

Item, to Duncane Cvnynghame, for furnyfing of B'tdttgi'S of JSoiuiiS to J)E Kingis grace, viij ii.

May . — Item, for vj quarteris of grene velvet, to be ane cover to ane qrtte iHntutg 33uftc of
pE Kingis grace, clefpit with gold, quhilk be gat fra my Lord Secretare, and to be ane polk^ till
keip ]>e famin in, price of fe elne iij ti. v s.,Jitmma, . . . iiij ti. xvij s. vj d.

Item, for iij quarteris of Reid dammefe, to lyne Jie faid polk and ]ie breddis '' of Jie Buke, price
I'airof, .......... xxvij s.

Ifem, for twa dowbill hankis of fewing gold, to be knoppis to fe faid polk, and bordour be
mouthe of it, price of the hank xx s.,Jiimma, . . . . . . xl s.

Item, to Helena Rol's, for making of ])e knoppis and flringis to fe faid polk, and making of pe
polk and covering ]iairto, . . . . . . . . ^ s.

Item, for ttoa Wivitinq JJuJttS of parcijctnent, bought to his grace in Falkland, viij s.

The Kingis pergonal typrntcS this month, for ' JUingfS, goldin werk, dyamontis, chalfferonis and chen3eis of gold, fmall chenjeis and tabillatis, to gif atoau amaiig tijt ^cntill tocnimt '
amount to, ....... . iiij'xi ti. xix s. iij d.

Item, to Thomas Arthuris feruand, till haue to Sanctaudrois, xiij elnis 1 elne of Reid cramraelTy welvot, to be ane <©OUne to ©rCSurort till' iir Mnnaqt, price of Jie elne viij \\.,Jumma,

I'viij ii.

Item, the other furnifliings for her ' ISirttll of quhite welvot,' and ' Gownis and Kirtillis to
tjt <i?rlc of Erbfiia): tiua sBtcrfS,' amount to ij''xjti. xvij s.

Item, deliuerit to twa pure wemene, for ij ky, tjjf t|)mt tjiat ii)t iHantlC tuaS I3l)vnt for
l^err^g tn (Ctoprr, price of Jie ane xl s., and fe vfer kow 1 s.,Jhmma, . . iiij ti. x s.

Jun. . — Item, to ])e Falcgneris, for Jjaint^ijriiigtitg of %ilfetg ftirtj&f of Cat]&nr55, at Jje
Kingis command, , . . . . . . . . x ti.

Jul. 7. — ' The Expenfis deburfit vpoune pe Suffrage of ©ttfitf itlagtialcitf, quhame God
afroil5e :'

Itein, deliuerit to the Payntour, for i)j BoSaitt of 3rmr5 to put about ])E Queir, and vpoune
TORCHls and CANDiLLis, price of ilk dofane XX s., /«/«/««, . . . . vj ti.

/i'eff!, to ]iE Erle OF Murray till offer t]&t PolopeiiitB . . . xxs.

Item, to ])e Tapischere, to by nalis to Sgng bp t\it WitVaot anU ifafe tiattjbe ; and pynouris
taking vp and doune ]>e famin, . ... . . . . . vj s.

' Embroiderer. ' Suit or set. ' Polie, bag. i Boards. ' Preparatory to.

VOL. L f 2 P

298 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1539-40.

APPENDIX.

Item, to ]iE CoLLEGis and <£]&nj)fnant^ X^nt Sang IBertgc itittt ^auU^iHtSS, extending to
ij'x Chapellanis, ilkane liarand ij s.,fumma, . .... xxj ti.

Item, to tjf 330Tmntt, . . . . • . . . iij s.

Jul. — ' The Expenfis deburfit be Johnne Bertane vpoune ])E Kingis ^c]b>p ralllt tjic
^alnmnitBrr, fra hamecuming of fE Quenys grace ]iat now is, to ))e feift of Witfonday laft,' amount
to ......... . I'^lv ti. xj s. X d.

Aug. — ' The expenfis deburfit vpoune tjf litlll itfiu 33arR' confift of charges for making the
' fanikynnis, Anfenjeis, flramaris, and banaris ;' painting the ' Arrays and facis about ])e faid bark,
colouring of Jianie with gold and afure, and painting of hir maftis, falls, and airis, with olej' colouris :'
Making of })E King and Quenys ' C]&alincrt'5;' ' carving of ]ie carvit werk ;' and ' vittalling of tje
©Ititonir and furnifing of hir, Jie tyme fcho pall furth to s'filt \\)t ^urottt^.' The amount
is, ......... ij'xxij ti. viiij s. jg d.

Item, for iij quarteris of ane vnce fduer eikit' to aitc Silucr ^tolp'^ for lltbrfngtltg of tj&e
Stngt's' (Collatt'oillte, quhilk weyit ix^'^ xv vnce iij quarteris/ deliuerit in Striueling Jie vj day of
Aprile, . . . . . . . . . . xj s. vj d.

Item, for werkraanfchip of ilk vnce of ])e laid ftolp, ij s. . . xixt, xj s. vj d.

Item, for ant Situer ®i\ii){i^iXl with ane lang cheUie, quhilk wes gevin at ])E Kingis command to tjie ^atrouitr of iljt ^tj)tppt5,]weyand xj vncis iij quarteris of ane vnce, . ix ti. ij d.
Item, for ])e faffoune of pe famyiic, . . . . iij ti.

Sep. — Item, to vj Falconaris fat broclit ])e ^alftisi furtl) of Catjnf^^ to ])E Kingis grace,

xxiiij elnes of Colouideroy to be ])arne Coitis,'' price of ]'e elne xvj s. . . xix ti. iiij s.

Sep. 21. — /« ihefirfl^ fend to iHaiiamf »§rrjSmor to mak pafmentis, at J)E Kingis command,

It] puiiU iuttjt of 0"fim'ng gollj, price of )ic puud xij X\.,fimima, . . xxxvj ti.

Item, to tl)f ilntij) SLocIjfrbtit'^ in contentatioune of ane Penfioun awing to hir 3erelie, be ane

Precept, ........ ^j'^lxvj ti. xiiij s. iiij d.

The King and Queen paffed from ' Striueling to (iglciinrftnau' ' to tjf blunting of »§leitfunlatoiS.'

Oct. 5 Item, gevin to Johnne Mofman for mnljfnj of tl)t (SlUfUlS CrobJltf, and furnefing

of flanis Jiairto, quhilk weyit xxxv vnce of Gold of Mynde,'' . . . xlv ti.

Oct. 6. — Item, to Olipher Sixclare at ))e Kingis command to tjc JtElarRi^ at JTamtallotinc,^ . . . ..... Ixvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Oct. 9 — Ite7n, to pay ane Frencheman, quhilk was jDttvt biitl) ii)t Scjot of aitf gSonc tit
tilt d^Ijrt]^, and mvtilat of his finger, in Affithment, . ... xxij ti.

Item, to Wiliiame Schaw, in part of payment of T'j'lxxiij ti. xiiij s., reftand awand to him for

ti)t itfii) f a))fS5t{)trpf bvodjt last ftirtlj of dnaiiBcn'S, . • . Ixxiij ti. xiiij i.

Item, gevin to ane boy fat come fra Lundoune, fra tlje IButijt iHijnokirt^,^ in drinkfiluer, ........ xxij s.

Nov — Item, gevin to Hector IM<'intosche, to mak his expenfis qtijitn it hrot^t JBaitfti
Mattrai) furtf) of (CoImitnTI, ... . . . ijj ti. viij s.

Item, ' ])e Expenfis deburfit vpoun ])e Munitionis and Craftefmen wirkand fairon, within JiE
Castell of Ed",' from Nov. 17, 1538, to Sep. 17, 1539, amount to I^'ilij^lxxxiiij ti. xj s. viij d.

' Added, for repairing. ^ Stmop or flagon. ^ The modern cost of the plainest silver-plate of this weight

would amount to L. 102, 6s. ^ The prices of making and furnishings, &c. are elsewhere charged. ^ One

of the King's Mistresses. She was IVIargaret, daughter of John, twelfth Lord Erskine, and wife of Sir Rohert Douglas of Lochleven, and bore to the King, Ja:mes Earl of Murray, afterwards Regent of Scotland. " Gold
from the Royal jMirie, furnished for this and other similar purposes. There are mjiny payments to * Franche
Mynouris' — and Flemish and German miners were also employed in considerable numbers, at and previous to this
date, in the Mines at C'raufurd-Mure. There are instances of charges for interpreters ' to pass with thamo, quhill
thai lerne the langage.' ' Many other payments were made for the same purpose. ** Some of the numerous
Dutchmen and other foreigners who were employed in the Royal Gold and Silver Wines at Craufurd-IMure.

26 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 299

APPENDIX.

Dec. 12 Item, to StoJintE JtcSlif, fone to ])E Erle of Rothes, to by him clathis with, at

])E KiNGis command,^ ....... xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Dec. 20. — Item, to Thoraas Melvillis WiflFe, in Falkland, at ^ie Kingis command, for ferptng
of ftrtanf ptttiS,' and nurifing of fe famyn, vij elnis fyne Frenche blak to be hir ane gowne and ane
kirtyll, price of ]ie elne xxxiij s.,y5/»i»ia, ..... xj ti. xviij s.

Item, to wait fe famin, and to begary fe breift of hir gowne, vj quarteris blak veluet,
fumma, . ........ iij ti. xviij s.

Dec. 31. — Item, gevin to Thomas Rynde, goldfmytb, for goldin wark tane fra^ him be ]iE
Kingis grace to geve in i^ciBejcrfetSiftiEi, ]« pennult and laft dayis of December, in chen5eis,
tabullattis, ringis, (tanis, carkannis, fciiaflferonis, and vper goldin wark ; deliuerit to J)E Kingis grace
in Linlythqw, ...... ij^lxxxij ti. iij s.

Item, for goIBcn fajfrft s'aultt be iitm to t|&e CBittCHt')^ grace, . j'xlixti. xijs.

Item, gevin to Johnne Mofmane, goldfmythe, for ficlyk deliuerit be him to ]ie Kingis
grace, ....... . . ij'^v ti. xiiij s.

Item, for ficlyke geir to Jie Quenis grace, .... Ixxxxvj ti. vs.

SuMMA of t]&f IvUtg anS CBiUJn'^ ptrSonat cjiptnteS, for drefs, goldfmith-work, &c. this
month, ......... viij"'vj^l ti. viij d.

Jan. 3, 1539-40. — Item, deliuerit to Thomas Arthure (Mailer Tailor) to be iij piau flloti^
agaite'' SFpiialHttau, vij elnis half elne reid, and vij elnis half elne 5 allow, Taffitefe of cord, price
of ])e elne xviij s.,yM»i??!o, . ...... xiijti. xs.

Item, deliuerit to him to 5e anf gptft' Clapt to ant of tjt ^lanariS, vj elnis purpur

TaflBtefe of cord, and ane elne of reid Taffitefe to be ant ^6U)tlt, price of fe elne xviij s.,

fumma, . . . . . ■ • ■ ■ vj ti. vj s.

Item, deliuerit to him to tSraio Ujt STall^ of tJ)C initfi^ V^niJ Coty, twa elnis reid and 5ALLow Taffitefe of twa threid, price of pe ehie ix s., Jumma, . . . xviij s.

Item, gevin for xv elnis bukrem to lyne ]>e faidis Play Cotis withe, price of fe elne, ij s.
fumma, . ...... xxx s.

Item, deliuerit to Thomas Arthure for making of ))e faidis Play Cotis and Cape, . xx s.

Jan. 6. — Item, gevin to Johnne Mofmane for fe making of ant 33c(t of (3oTti of tjjt iHuntIt
to tjt ®tttni5 grace," weyand xix vnces half vnce, . . . . xv ti.

Item, for ant ^ajjljer to pe faid Belt, . . . . v ti.

The Queen's Coronation.

Jan. 7. — Item, gevin to pe Secriftane of pE Kingis Chapell for rartagt of tjt Cj&aptn gatr
fra Striueling to Linlythqw at 3wle, and fra Linlythqw to Edinburghe at t]^e(!3tUtniS(tIoronattotint,''
as his byll of compt beris, . . . . . . . v ti. vj s. viij d.

Jan. 15 — Item, for mailing nnt) fas's"ottn of tljt itiitgt^ (Crount, weyand iij pund wecht x
vnces, and pairof Gold of pe Mynde xlj vnce quarter vnce, . . . xxx ti.

Item, for xxiiij ftanis pairto, of pe quhilkis pair was iij grttt <§nrntttfe and anc grttc ^Mts
nrtrot,* price of pe iij, vj li. ; and price of pe pece of pe vpir xix flanis, xiiij s., fumma, xix ti. vj i.

' This (drofajnt Uflftitrit to t^t King; in tije paft'tt of ^alurutitijous, pe viij day of
Februar following.'

' This iDdividual gets numerous presents at different times. He was the fourth son of George, third Earl of
Rothes J and was taken prisoner by the English, and ransomed from Henry VIII, Jul. 1, 1543, on payment of 200
marks sterling. The celebrated Norman Lesley, Master of Rothes, was his brother by a former marriage.
° These Pets consisted of Parroquets, monkeys, peacocks, swans, &c. &c. '' Purchased. ^ Against.

^ Long. " These charges are merely for the workmanship, the Gold having been provided from the Royal

Wine. ' There are also numerous entries for carriage of ' Geir of the Wardrop, Tapeschery, &c. fra Liulythqw

to Edinburghe,' on occasion of the Coronation. * Emerald.

300 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1540.

APPENDIX.

Item, gevin to him for ant Ht'ng, ailf fftirqufiS, deliuerit to fE Kingis grace, pe xxiij day
of Januar, . . . • . . . . . iiij M.

Jan. 21 Item, deliuerit to Thomas Arthure to be ])E Kingis graces Sl^oIj^Mijall, ittrtlH,

and ^luUf , xxxviij ehiis Purpuv Veluet, ..... I'xxiij ti. x s.

Item, for xxvj dofan gpottit Srmtng (Ermine) to lyne \e Kirtill with, price of ]ie dofane xl s.,
fumma, • • • • • • • ■ • • lij ti.

Item, for xiiij dofan of ]>e faid ^niung to complete tjf B.lt'p autf %toUe witii, . xxviij li.

Item, deliuerit to tijc ©tlfltt'S graces Taljour ane lleke' of Purpur Veluet, contenand xxij
elnis half elne, to lit j[)tr 3aol)- JJnall, price of Jie elue iij ti. x s. . . Ixxviij ti. xv s.

Item, X elnis quiiyte Taffilefe of cord to lyne it with, price of pe elne xx s., fumma, . x ti.

Jan. 22. — Ite7n, gevin to Williame Purvefe for dog-chenjeis, rache-cuppelis, and inentlinc; of
H)t itnoft,' . . . . . . • . . vij ti. xiiij s.

Item, to Johnne Dowglafs of Authornedene,^ for certane STretiS tane fra him to i\)t itt'ligt^
^cljfpptS furth of his Wod, . . . . . . . xx ti.

Jan. 25. — Item, gevin to Ormonde, Pmfevant, and Alex. Hutoune, Meffinger, for paffing
with clofe aMrittutgt'^ to ii}t ilovBiji airt 31.aKpf5 to cum to ii)t ©UfitiS Coroitntiott«e, fe xxv
day of Januar, ...... . . iiij ti. viij s.

Item, to William Hardy, meffinger, for paffing with ficlyke Lettres to tijt CPrlf of ^untlie
anK |)t's" Eati}), tljf CFrlr iHarSricll aittl l)fs Eatiu, in ])e Northland, . . xxij s.

Item, gevin to twa Ofiiciaris of Armes ]iat palTit in Anguse, ])E Westlaxd, Northland,
and vjier pairtis, to ioaritf tj)f Saninifs to ruin to tl)f Coroitati'ottirf, . . iij ti. vj s.

Item, to ]iE Justice Clerk and Tiiesaurer Clerk for fair expenfis paffing to ])E BorDouR at t]&t iWctfng of tjf (toinmissfoiiarfs of Sitgfanir, being furtii x dayis, ilk day xls.,
fumma, . . . • ■ • ■ • • • xx ti.

Jan. 31 Item, to Thomas Arthure to be iij JlornaufiS and iij (ffom^pan'SolltS tO tj&f ISt'ngiS

grace, XX elnis blak Arraofing Taffitefe, price of ]'e elne xxxvj s., /!/;«;««, . . xxxvj ti.

Item, for twa pund wecht twa vnces quarter vnce black fewing fdk to be itnopptS anil inHii''
to fe faidis Comparifonis, price of ]ie vnce vs. . . . . viij ti. xj s. iiij d.

Item, for xxvij elnis half elne blak Brodery Veluet to l>e 3ovnaut;S,' price of pe elue x s.,
fumma, . . • • • • • . . xiij ti. xv s.

Feb. 7. — Item, to couer iiij ^tr(II-s'alJlHt)S to ]ie Kingis grace, . iiij ti. xvj s.

Feb. 14 Item, gevin to StovB iHayluall, for beting and mending of fe ((JiaStle of) ^erfmntagt, at )iE Kingis command, . . . . . . . Icti.

Item, to him for ant j&Ol"S of tljf itorti (Carlllt'S, brocht to liE Kingis grace, xxvj ti. xiiij s. iiij d.

Item, gevin to l»otI)i5sai), UlrralB, fov iaiifeattng of tlir 3)ngTi5inan, at jule, ]'at brocht ]>e
hors to ]iE Kingis grace, . . . . . . v ti. x s.

Item, gevin to Johnne Mofman, to pay for atir JlfCf of bltlurotijt (SoTO of t]&C itTuitlJt,^
quljtlfs toaS ScnB to tijt IBuftt of SlWit, in France, . . . xliiij s.

Feb. 21. — /to«, gevin to iJormoilB Jtrs'Icj), at I'E Kingis command, . xx ti.

Feb. 26. — Item, gevin to Williame Scliaw, in complete payment of 2-166 Crownis of J)e fone
xvij s., for JTa^fScljrrg 6rocj[)t Ijamc bt Jitm to tlif ittngig gratf, as his Compt and Precept direct
pairupoune beris, ane thoufand Crownis of wecht,Jumma, . . . I"'f ti.

' A web or piece. ^ Clock. ^ Hawthornden. This property did not pass out of the Family of Douglas

until long after this period. * Knobs and tassels. ^ There are numerous other furnishings of ' lyningis, pointis,
frenzeis of silk,' &c. The dresses to the Lady Jane, (the King's natural daughter.) and all the numerous dependers of the Court, were very splendid and costly. The whole expenditure of this year tills a large Volume. '' Numerous instances may be found in these e-xtracts of large pieces of solid Golden Ore being sent as presents, or else
purchased for satisfying the King's own curiosity.

27Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 301

APPENDIX.

Item, gevin to James BefTat for pafling with ane Writting to Dunbar, to caus prouifioune be
maid to rrSatit UaufF^ntlfUar, Inglisman, . . • • xs.

Feb. 21.— Item, deliuerit to Robert Gib, to kepe fe KomaisJ, (ffomjJarfeoniS, and \)Hxnt<iingfe, ane grete coffer, price, . . . • • • • I'J ^'- yj sMar. 16 Item, gevin to Johnne Mofnian for ])e mackin and faffouue of anf pair of JSfBtS

to )iE KiNGis grace, weyand xvij vnces gold of his graces awin gold, deliuerit of before to ]>e iaid
Johnue, in Ridaris, Angel-nobillis, and Roif-nobillis, . . . , xv ti.

Mar. 22. — Item, gevin to Johnne ooung, Brodiflar, for fluff and Broudering of Ixiiij pece of
(CroiontS, ilnnifs" (' Jacobus Quintus,'') and ITjrfsstlliS, fet vpoun ttoa ffjjititakintS of ilTannu
SFfltift, quhilk wes fe lynyng of ane (goVone of (tllatjt of «©oflr of J)e Kingis, price of fe pece x s.,
fumma, . ■ ..... xxxij ti.

Item, for vj elnis bukrem to lyne ])e faidis STgnnnkilliS witli, price of ])e elne ij s. viij d.,
fumma, .......... xvj s.

Item, for xxvj elnis of Rubennis' to jiame, price of \ie. elne viij A.,^Jumiiia, . xvij s. iiij d.

Item, for broudering of aitf ilFtStmfnt of STaititp ilFrlutt with xiiij ilamcS, droSDm'^, and
€x\iiiUii, ■ • . ■ ■ . . • . . vijti.

/to;;, for cammes to fluff ])e orpheis^ of ]ie faniin,^ ..... v s. iiij d.

Item, for fluff and JvolJfvnig'' of iiij 3rmr^ tope faidis Tynnykillis and Veftment,^ . vj ti.

Item, for brodering of aitc ComparfSSoune of his graces, with billis of filuer rynnand aboute
it, . . . . . . • • xti.

Mar. 24". — Item, for fe fafToun of Ixvij vnces ekit to ti)e itiltgts" graff GlSflTJC, of fe quhilk
])air wes xvij vnces of gold of ])e Mynde ; and aitf djtVlt quhilk wes bocbt for ane hundretli xti.,
chai'geit in Junij following, be ane Precept, and for )ie fafroune of ilk vnce v s.,^ funmia, xvj ti. xv i.

This CHEN3E deliuerit in Striueling to fE Kingis grace ]>e lafl day of Marche.^

Item, gevin to Maister Robert Forman to by him ane (Coft^^rmottr, at his Creatioune
Perfewant, at ])£ Kingis command, ..... . . . . x ti.

Item, gevin to ])E Chaiflanis of )ie Kingis Chappell, being in Edinbiucht at t^t
©^UflttJi (CtrroitatlOttltf, fra ]>e xiiij day of Februar inclufive to fe xij day of J'is inflant monethe, to
})e nomber of xj perfonis, ilkane havand one Jie day ij s.,Jumma, . . xxx ti. xvj s.

Item, gevin to Dummy Carpitane'" tff ijy l)tm tlatjjtg, at ])E Kingis command, . vj ti.

Item, to MY Lord Secritar, to geve ane Duche man fat come fra tJjc ^alSgraif aiiB iiii
C0mTtrs" with ane Writing to fE Kingis grace, .... xliiij ti.

Item, to Arthur Sinclar for ]ie refl of his Coraptis for ti)t SSucljf JorS hl"OCl)t furt|) 0f IBmniarfi," at ])E Kingis command, .... xiiij ti. xix s. iiij d.

Apr. 10, 1340. — Item, gevin to Maifler Andro Kirkaldy, for expenfis deburfit be him vpoune
OflSceris fend with EiSfrittittgiS to iaavm fijt itnlfuis to niiuf to Ujt ©tifitt:^ Coronattotiitr, and
for )ie cariage of ane coffer of ])E Kingis grace fra Linlytliqw to Ed', . . iij ti. xs.

Apr. 16. — Item, deliuerit to ])e Freuche Teljour, to be ane Cote to ^trrat tj^e &\Xtnii

^ See a curious instance of a similar entry, ]\Iar. 26, 154-1, of this Appendix. ^ Ribbons. ^ There are

also charges for ' xvj elnis frenzeis,' iiij sets of knoppis,' * fassis,' and ' stringis of silk,' ^ This is evidently

O. Fr. orfcvrerie, gold embroidery, which is often written orfraye and orphrmj in ancient writings. ^ Charges

tor ' bukrem,* ' rubennis,' &c. ^ Embroidering. ' There are other furnishings too numerous to be detailed.

** Made by Johnne Mosman. ^ There were likewise furnished other chenzeis, bracelatis, &c. to a considerable

amount, also made of the King's awin gold. '" Probably a dumb favourite at Court. " King James V,

like the other Princes of the Stuart family, was passionately fond of fine Horses, and had a most extensive variety of
all kinds. He sent messengers to Spain, Denmark, France, England, and Flanders, &c. for the purchase of stallions
and brood-mares; and besides this, received from foreign I*rinces, and from his own and the English nobility, numerous presents. Besides the Grooms and under-stablers, there often appear in these Accounts payments to above
twenty ' children in the Stabill,' (Stable-boys, &c.) for liveries and wages. There are no data to ascertain the extent
of THE RovAL Stud, but the number of servants employed may lead to a pretty accurate conjecture.

302 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1540.

APPENDIX.

iffialt,^ vj quarteris deme-grane, and vj quarteris Frenche 5ALj:.ow, price of pe elne of demmegrane xiiij s., and price of ]ie elne of jallow xx s.,Jinnma, . . . . iij \\. vj s.

Item, to be hir aitf ittrtill and aiu ll^SiilJe, vj elnis grene Birge Sating, price of pe elne x s.,
fumma, . . . . . • • • • . iij ii.

May 10. — Item, deliuerit to Katberyne Bellendene," till complet ant ^arfe to pE Kingis
grace, s'rbjit iutt^ goIU aittf silucr tuarfe, balf ane dowbill bank of fewing gold, price fairof, xij i.
Birth and Baptism of James, Prince and Steward of Scotland.

May 11 Ifoii, gevin to James Biffatt, meflinger, for pafling witb certaue clofe Writtingis to

hjanit ttrtaitt SlorBfe axCO 3Latiui5 to be in Sanctandrois at tijc 33ittJ)t of tnp JCorS ^vtiuf , xx s.

May 14. — Item, gevin to George Steill, for pe fraucht of ane Bot to Sanctandrois, at Witfounday, witb CapcStljfrtf ailB (illaitSt of goltf, and certane vperis fmall expenfis deburfit be him
for cariage of Jie Tapefcberye at firidry tynies ; as bis compt gevin Jiairupoune beris, iiij ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, gevin to Thomas TuUocbe, for cariage of certane of t]&t KiiSarBrop gat'r, (geir,) deburfit
be him, .......... xxiij I.

Item, gevin to him for ane horfe-cariage with certane geir at tj&c 33(rt5 of in» %or'a
Priiut, . . . • • . . . xs.

Item, gevin to ]ie Tapesar, for dicbting and gratbing of ]ie Tapefcbery, and making of atlC
^atlX' aiotie tjc |3n'ncrg JJrU of ^tatc, and for certane vperis thingis, . xj ti. x s.

Item, to Andro Manfioune, Frenche man, for mafetiig of mu itorH ^ rtnre CraUgH, and (luff
fumefit be bim fairto, ....... . xiij ti.

Item, gevin to Balfar Howftar, Ducheman, and Ricbart Wardlaw, to pafs to Campbell, to
Setri&c tljr iHctallts" niiB ore of Stltirr,* .... .xij Y\. iiij s.

Item, to Johnne Paterfoune, for malidig of ant tait to tjc iSfngfS 33op of Stltifr, xl s.

May 21 Item, deliuerit to Thomas Arthure, to be ailt Cotr nitlf aitt pair of JBrfftis" to J)E

Kingis grace for tljc S'f f (fea), x elnis Reid crammeffye veluet, price of Jie elne vij i\.,Jumma, Ixx ti.

/to«, for v vnces ^asmtlttts of SoHf to it, .... viijti. xvs.

Item, for potnttlS to ])e Cote and brekis, and ane tulat to pe Cote,^ . . iij s.

Item, fend to Sanctandrois with Johnne Beg, xv elnis qubyte taffitefe of Janis, to be ^tV:
nltttii to ijalU tit JToirljtS at tl)t iiaftsmt of inj) aorti |3rtncc, . . . vj ti.

Item, gevin to Johnne Paterfoune, for ane ClatStto tjc ©Ufnf;S ^rcpturt (Sceptre), xiiij s.

May 22. — Item, gevin to ane man to pafs witb clofe Writtingis furth of Sanctandrois pe
xxij day of May, to tijt <jprlt fHav^d&tn and tijt drrU ?i?untltf," . . xxiiij s.

Item, pe famyn day, gevin to James Biflatt to pafs witb Letteris, and denunce in all partis in
Lothiane and pE Merse, t\)t 33trtl) of mi) itorU |3rtnre, . . . xxij s.

Item, to Alexander Hutoune, &c. to all partis of pe Wallland and Southland, to toanic tift
Itorlits' anlr 33arront5 to turn to tie 33a))tume of mii JtorB |3vtnfe, . . iij ti.

May 25. — Item, gevin to George Elpbinfloune to pafs to pE King of Ingland with pe
atfttertt'Smriit of tjie iiivtl) of mg EoiB prince, . . . . . xlti.

Item, gevin to Scliir Thomas Cragy, Cbaiplane, for patutfllj of Ujt ^ruteS, furnefing of
cammefe and vper lluft' pairto, at iiit 33a))ti)me of ini) 3torH |Pn'nce, . xij ti. vj 5. viij d.

Item, to Johnne Paterfoune, for making of iij ftaSt'S to tlje ISiltgt'^ S'tTtter Suarfe put in pe
Schippis, ..... . . xiij s.

Jun. 1.— /fe?w, gevin for ane CJjfnje, deliuerit to Johnne Mofman to melt with vjier Gold to
be t|)f iStngfs grete CJjeiijf, ....... Ixti.

' See ,Tul. anil Aug. 1538. ' There are numerous previous entries of gold and silver thread to sew and

emhroider the King's ' sarkis' throughout the whole Accounts. ' Pavilion. ' Silver ore. ' There

are many other similar outlays. ^ This appears to have been the Prince's Birth-day.

27JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 303

appendix.

The King's Expedition to the Isles.

Jun. 3. — Item, to pE Tapesar, to hing t^t S(ngt5 «I]&almtf in tjc S't]&tp,xvij elnis half
elne French giene, . . . . . . xv ti. xv s.

Item, to couer ane s'tlolt of tiit of ])E Kingis graces, for t^je ^fStJ, ij elnis half elne tanny
Veluet, . . . . . . . vj }i. xvij s. vj d.

Jun. 4. — Item, to be curtingis and ane couer to ])E Kingis 33ttl fn t\)t ^rijij), xxv elnis iij
quarteris blak dames, ..■•... xliij ti. xv s. vj d.

Item, to ]&e ^trEinariS to tic Itt'ngi^ ^djii^^ii, ix fcore elnis reid and 3allow fey ; and till
complete J'e famin, xv elnis ferge, ..... . ^''"j ^i- ^ s.

Item, to William Sraeberd, to Tune )'E Kingis grace (©orjettfe antf <©Ibufe of platf, half
ane elne blak Veluet,^ . . . . . . xxvij s. vj d.

Jun. 4. — Item, to Ra, Perfewant, Inglifmane, quhilk brocht Writtingis fra ]ie Cnpitane of
33frh)i)ft, . . . . .... iij ti. vj s.

Jun. 6 — Item, to ])E Inglisman quhilk came fra t^C ^tfinavalT of 3itgTanit with Writtingis, . . . . . . . . xti.

Item, to I'e man X\)ai tame fra ©ntuXl tat'tj aitc %yaxi to ])E Kingis grace, . xj ti.

Item, deliuerit to Malcolme Gourlaw to ])e Rennold Letliome, pagt, tljat ua^iSit 111 4Pranf£
h){tl) tit ©rlt of iHttrrau, to be him ane Cote with flevis, vij elnis blak Veluet,-' . xixti.

Item, at ))E Kingis command, xx Crownis of Jie fone, . . . xxij ti.

Itein, to Williame Stratherne, meffinger, to pafs to Dunbertane, Irwing, and Air, with
Letteris to charge fame to gcnH JJoti'o' anU ^rJi'jjjt'S iut'tt) ©{ttuali'jS to meit ])E Kingis grace in
tje %\ii ]>e vj day of Julij nixt to cum ; and to remane in Dunbertane and ])e Levinax for inbring of
pe reft of \e Air,^ . . . . . . iij ti. vj i.

Jun. 7. — Item, gevin to Maifter Andro Quhytelaw, for fraucht of ane Bote furth of Leithe to
Levj'nnis moutlie with ])e ^ilufr ioarl^, and for cariage fairof to Sanctandrois, at tlje 33aptpme
of mj) HorB |3riiuc, . . . . . . . iiij ti.

Jun. 8. — Item, fend to Sanctandrois, to be aiTf (Coufr to mg JtorS Printed CreiHttll,
iij elnis half elne crammeffy veluet, ...... xxiiij ti. x s.

Item, to be ane vfer (Cottrr ]'airto, vij eines reid veluet of grane,* . xxij ti. xv s.

Jun. 10 — Item, to be ailScnjtfe^ to tSf ^cJfpjjiS, xvj elnis reid and jallow taffitefe of
cord, ....... xiiij ti. viij s.

Item, to be fe <£roCf^ ])airof, iiij J elnes quhyte taffitefe of Janis, . iij ti. vij s. vj d.

Item, to be ane Clottrr axdS (CtirttngtS to tJ)C Uingfe ticir in Jje nether chalmer in ])e
ScHIP, xvij ^ elnes Grene dames, . . . . . xxxiij ti. v s.

Item, to be Jj^rtnjffe ))airto, ane pund and half pund weebt Grene iilk, extending to xxiiij
vnces, ........ . . vj ti.

Jun. 12. — Item, for jie making of vj ^taittiartt^, quhilkis wes deliuerit to Johnne Bertone to
pe Schippis, . . . . • • • • xl s.

Item, gevin to him for ]ie making of iij STops^tlaftJii^ and iij dTIaggfg, . xl s.

Item, for 3roh)»]^rtIt5, deliuerit to Johnne Tenant, . . . xliiij s.

Item, to Schir Johnne Kylgour, for |3afnttng of tiua s'tanB of ^amts'si to pe Kingis
grace, ... . . . . . . xxx s.

Item, to Mvredoch Striuellng, Patefar,^ to pay for pe malting of tjt J^niS {ovens) in Jie
Schippis, . . . . . . vij l'- ii'j s. viij d.

' A variety of other similar entries for furnishing and repairing warlike dresses and arms. ' The same person

got doublet, cloke, hoise, beltis, and gartennis, with a blak veluat bonat, and ' Ane tergat to his honat,' cost iij li.
xvj s. ' The residue or balance of the Escheats due to the Crown from the preceding Justice-aire of Dunbarton,

' Fringes of red silk and blankets of white fustian also provided. * Ensigns; standards. '• Pastry-cook.

304 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1540.

APPENDIX.

Item, deliuerit to Jolinne Mofman, for making of ttoa CJfCt Cj&anllotariS, tiua CotoptS with
coveiis, and ane 5})il)nc to nil) Htortf |3n'tUC, with ane morfare to ])E Kingis grace Cttlbtrilig,
quhilk wes of filuer, deliuerit to liim of before, ]ie iij, xxiiij, and xxvj dayis of May lalt bipaft ; Jiat is
to fay, anc Sllurr Stop, weyand xij pund wecht twa vnces ; ane vfer Stop, weyand viij pund xij
vnce ; ant KiHatcr |3ot, weyand xxvij vnces ; tilja ^fCt'S \ait\) ft it, weyand Ixij vnces, quhilk extendis
to xxvj pund wecht and vij vnces ; and to him for euerilk vnce wirking, iij i.,Jiimma, Ixiij ti. ixs.

Item, for twa roddis to ])e (Cj&nnBoIaris, . . . . . vs.

Item, gevin to him for ]je making of aneCBtU^is'sill of %aVSi to ]'e Kingis grace, weyand iiij i
vncis, 2 i Vnicornis wecht, deliuerit to his grace \e iiij day of Junij, . iiij ti. viij s.

Item, to William Myllar, for twa drauclitis of |9nbcontS, and ane draucht of bedding, fra ]ie
Abbay to Leithe, to if put tn i\)t ^cljfppiS, ... . .iiij s.

Item, gevin to Johnne Dikfoune, iio5S ^tifrnftr, for his expenfis pngSfltg to ii)t (Purprfour,
in money and clething, ........ Ixxv ti.

Item, to (Schir) Saui'B ItfnBsag of tije ittont (Lion King of Arms) and Jonet Douglafs,'
be ane Precept, ..... VjMxvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Jun. 28.— Item, to l{otljl'S5ai) %lfVnTt», for his expenlis paffing with Writtingis to ^djlv
aHUlItfamc C?i)rri5, be deliuerance of fii Lordis, )ie xxviij day of Junij, . . iiij ti. viij s.

Item, to Johnne Paterfoun, for paffing with clofe Writtingis fra ]ie Quenis grace to (the
King in) tjt 3>lii, . . • • • • • "'j *i.

Jun. 29 Item, to ]'e Tapefar, for ])e fraucht of ane Bote with tjbc CapfiSci)fVg fra Sanctandrois to Leitli, . . . ■ • • v ti. xij d.

Jvd. 7 Item, the expenfis deburfit vpoun tijf Suffrage of ©Ufltt iHajtjtlalcnr, quliome

God affolje ; iu ]ie firft gevin to Jie Belman |ie vij day of Julij, . • .iij s.

/to?«, to ij XV Chaplanis, ilkane ij s. ,/«»(/««, .... xxj ti. x s.

Item, gevin to ti)C ©Ifrrfitg, ...... xxij s.

Ite?n, to ])E Tapesak, for furnefing of nalis and Jingiug of tl)C 33Iafe Oattljf, and pinoris
feis, . . . . • • • • • • . X s.

Item, for vj dofane of ^nnfS, ilk dofane xx s.,fumma, . . . vj ti.

Jul. 10.— I/em, to Jolinne Paterfoun, at Jt'^ rrtuniHlTg fra tl)t Sits", in complete payment of
his wageis, . . . . • . • • • • "j !'•

Jul. 18. — Item, deliuerit be Thomas Arthure to ])E Quenis grace, in Pitlethy, at )ie Kingis
command, xjl elnis Tanny taftitefe of xij threid, .... *xv ti. vj s. iij d.

Ite7n, to ht gfealiarttS to fE Kingis JSapfviS, v quartcris Blak veluet,^ . iij ti. xv s.

Item, to mak jfvtnitiS to his grace ^h)trB«l)antltS", iij vnces blak fewing filk xv s., and
Warkmanfciiip iij s., . . . . • • • • xviij s.

Jul. 27 — Ite7n, gevin to tlje ?taTJ» iHai'gtrrS for expenfis deburfit be hir for tOUCnitg of mg
3tortI ^rtltCt'S CvaHtTI, gilt nalis Jiairto, and vperis expenfis,^ . . . viij ti. xij s.

Jul. 30. — *Item, to Johnne Mofman, goldfmytli, for fe nrafefng of aitf CBluljiSSin of <3oVlS
of itT^niff, weyand iiij| vnces half Vnicorne wecht, with ant Bragouiif anamulit, deliuerit to pE
Kingis grace ))e penult day of Julij, . . .... iiij ti.

Jul. 31 Item, to Andro Michelfoune aitc golont of ^aviit ijtaft, . viij ti. xj s.

Item, ' ane Cote of Serge,' < Bonat,' &c. ' tKijii frufrai) iufS gcbilt to "Ijinx fof firuigtlig of
titfjingtS to tijt BfngfS gract of tijt iaattuitr of m^) 5lorB fjiincc'

' Ilis wife. '' Such charges are very fre<nietit in these Accounts. The scibbards are covered from time to time

with such materials as might suit the King's fancy and the fashion of the day. ' Numerous entries of furnishings

to the King, Prince, Lady Jane, &c. ' On this day Kotuissay Herald was despatclied to London. He got

a Gown of ' Armosy blak Taffitese,' L.lo, 63 a ' Doublat,' L.9, 13s for his expenses, W Crowns of the Sun,

L.'li. i

27JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 305

APPENDIX.

//em, gevin to Robert Blak, niafer, for pafliug to Dunbar, Tamptalloune, and J)e Bass,
ta tonhou tje ^flanB-nuit ttjair,' • ..... xiiij s.

Item, gevin to liim for paffing with ane clofe Writting to fE Bass to ailf ^clantr^mnn to
^cnti to 3Sintgrc for Jlnnrrs" €nnotl)i^ brotjjfr, . . . . . x s.

Aug. 2. — Item, to Jolinne Barbour to be %nlft^l)tlltis to ))E Kingis ^nlftt'^, iiij flcynnis, xl s.

Aug. 6. — Ifrtii, to Jolinne Paterfoune, Perfewant, for pafllng- with Letteris with deligence to

waiTie tcrtatrc aSarrontiS tit aiigti^e antt ifHcvntS to cum to Edinburghe ])e xv day of jis

inonethe,'^ . . . • • • • • • • Is.

Aug. 12. — Item, to SSutf, pcts'ttoant, for pafllng with ane clofe Writting to Allane Stewart
in Lome, . . ....... iij ti. vj s.

Aug. 13 I/em, gevin to Jolinne Mofman for vjl vnces filuer to be ane (ClautjgtJjfU to ftrpc

t)E Kingis grace ^alfi Mtftr,' ...... iiij ti. xviij s. xj d.

Item, for ])e fafToune and gilting of it, . . . . . x] s.

Aug. 14. — Item, gevin to Johnne Tefart, Croce-bow-makar, for stn'ngt^ atlti iaintStii^
rortrfjf to ]ie Kingis graces Crotr^fiototS, ..... iiij \\. x s.

Aug. 16. — Item, to Robert Blak, niafer, for Siiinmoiiung of ane '^iiiHt to ^djiv BamtS

|^amnii)Itoime ; and for giTpne irorlit in to tlir ?torilfS being vpoune his Inqueift, . xv i. x d.

Aug. 20. — 7/em, to ane iTanni) Uabfr Ijnt to ])E Kingis grace, . . vs.

Item, for twa vnces half vnce Sftuer pnSinentfiS to ane J>fel)n rote, (Buflf-Coat or Jerkin,)

with fyde tafletis, . . . . . . ... . ii'j ti. vij s. vj d.

Item, for ane dofan gtltttr ilUttoniS to it,' .... xviij i.

Aug. 27. — Item, to be ane Gowne, cote, and dowblat to Stortt JRolJert, tj&e IStiigt'g grace

^Olte, xv^ elnis gray Sating rel^e, price of ])e elne xxxij s.,-^ . . . xxiiij ti. xvj s.

Item, to couer ane fadill and harnefing to JtorB 3lame5 of l£tel^0, iiij elnis blak veluet,*^ xj ti.

Item, gevin to Johne Grote for frautbt of l)l'^ itj^lj) fend be ]>E Quenis grace furth of

Sanctandrois to ©rltnajj to I'E Kingis grace with Writingis, . . . xx ti.

Item, to Florence Cornetoune, quhilk he delluerit to James Scrymgeour at his lia^S'ing; to

dFranrc biitlj tttljaniits of mi? itortf prinris jaatt'iit'te, ... xj ti.

Item, to ))E Lard of Creich, in parte payment of Jifs JTocIjer iDit]& jHatiaine «!ln')Sinore, at

])E Kingis command, ..... iij'xxxiij ti. vj s viij d.

Item, to Robert Moifet, in ])e Grantoune, for ))e fnljrtngtng of tJjre Cj^ebtSe quj^tlfi toeS
StiSttfljt, . . . . . . . . ixti.

Aug. 30. — Item, gevin to Archibald Stewart to pay iij Gunnaris ane monethis wage in tjje

CaSteTIt'S of Sunnetoift, and ManS 3Lori)br«n, tn Mart, at ))e Kingis command, . ixti.

Item, to Schir George Clapertoune, Maifler Elimozinar, to t^t Ut'ngt's' grace Sllmou?, per

tempus Compoti, extending vlklie (tveehlt/) to iiij ti., .... ij^viij ti.

Item, to Jonet Logane, Statig Cragu," ... xxvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, gevin to Johnne Tenent to furneSe tj&e IKingi^ ^tirSe, per tempus Compoti,^ (viz.

Sep. 17, 1539, to Sep. 2, 1540,) . . .... I"'iiij'xxviij ti. xix s. viij d.

Item, to William Purves, Unoft^maftar^ and SmiitJ), for his Penfioune grantit to him be ]>e
Kingis grace, vnder his Grete fele, . . . . . . xxti.

' These were the Hostages given fur observing ' guid reule' in the Isles. ' ' Close writtingis' sent to Lords

Sevtoune, Zester, Sotnervill, Eails of Airan, Cassillis, and Eglentoune, ' to cum to Edinburghe.' ^ See Jul.

15+2 of these Extracts, &c. ■■ A number of other dresses, &c. to the King, apparently for Field sports. ' Thir

elathis send to Falkland the xx day of August.' The Queen also gets dresses, ' riding eloke,' &c. and a charge for
' xxij Halk hudis' occurs on the same page. ^ It is unnecessary to enumerate all the other furnishings.

' ' The Ekle OF LnuiNAx sisTEii' gets a Gowne, 1.45, 10s., Kirtill, L.I I, 18s., &c. &c. this month, (20th.)
' There are many payments to this Lady. " There is usually a monthly charge for ' the Purs.' In a few

instances, such as the present, the Treasurer entered the gross amount at the end of the year. " Clock-maker

VOL. I. t 2 Q

306 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1540-1.

APPENDIX.

Item, to H}t (S>t\\t{\\ iuoman tint iucg In(tli) 0ixiit to mj) ?tovtf prince, for hii- feruice
and reward, be ])e Kiiiij;is Pr<'r('|)t,' . . . . . . . xl i.

SuMMA totitlium C?)fpni5airuin (a Sep. 17, 1539, ad Sep. 2, 1540,) xxx™ix''Ixiij li. v s. x d.

SuMMA of '■ tj)f ittum'ti'oin'5 nirtf Craftl'Smril"" wirkand Jiairupoun, within ])E Castell of
Edinburghe, Leitiie, i<cc., for tlie fame period, . . l"v'xiijti. xvij s. xj d. ob.

Item, gevin to tua pynouris for doune-taking of xxx Ciialmeius'' of ])e Heid of JBauitJt'S
JTotun'^, (in the Castle of Edinburgh,) and caning of )ie famin with vthir (CfjnlmcrtS avCa
IWlim'tiouiIf, cftfv tI)C CoroiiatlOUltt, to be had again to Leithe, . . xl s.

Item, gevin to ]ie carteris for doun-tal<ing of fe famin to Leithe, extending to viij draucht,
price of )ie drauclit ij 5. vj A.,J\imma, . . . . . . xx s.

Sep. 19. — /to?;, to Alexander llutoune for pafling with Writtingis furthe of Edinburghe to
6Tall)mf5 to ]iE KiNGis grace, ..... xxij 5.

Sep. 24. — Itc»i, gevin to ane ptrSfbilltt |'at dwellis in Leithe to pas to Lanark and ^umitTOlttr
3)amfS SoluglaSS of ^aildjcitr for JTrrSSouiif, ..... xij s.

Item, govin to *0rinoillJ, ^rrScbaitt,-' for bringing of tythandis to jie Kingis grace of fe
tnftdtg ot ©cofgc ittatfavIaiTf, and for his palling agane at his grace command to tI)C Mi^, xj ti.

Sep. 25. — Itcjji, gevin to George Carmichaell for ant JJCCC of (SolD of tijf |Hnuttf * deliuerit
be Iiini to ]ie Kingis grace of iiefoir, in Sanctandrois, weyand twa vnces quarter vnce grote weclit,
price of Jie vnce vj ti. viij s. ,/(<«)/;(«, .... xvti. iiijs.

The expenlls vpoune ])e furnefing of ]ie (fibc) ^Ttifiltaj) HlovS nnts ()iftj) |l)flHii5 itnV to
tilt ittng of .iFinitff, tj)f l3oTpI)i)nf, anU Bultr of *5)h3cis", witli Johnne Bog,'' iiijlxxiij li. v s. x d.

Oct. 2. — Item, gevin to Schir Jolinue Campbell to furneis liis expenfis in {landing to tijc
SmprratoilV with Writtingis, ..... iij^xxxti.

Item, to tijf .'3impCintoun'5 StrbaitU quhilk brocht Writtingis to ])E KlNGls grace, . Iv ti.

Oct. 7. — Item, to I'c man |>at tiikc tSirorgf itlntfadaiTf, at ])E Kingis command, xhiij ti.

Item, to t|)f jJ"vnTfljfmnit tint hrodjt tl)r ?t)ors" to \tv. Kingis grace furth of dfraitrr, ij' xx ti.

Item, to his iervand jiat kepit |ie laid hors, . ... xxij ti.

Oct. 9. — Item, deliuerit to Johnne Mofinau xij vnces quarter vnce filuer to be ant iKrItt(Ut
to ant Uane of S'aiut itlaljago, ..... ix ti. iiij s. iij d. ob.

Item, gevin to gilt J>e faid JScIl'qur with, twa Roia-nobillis, . . v ti. vj s.

Item, gevin to him, to be ane UtUcjnt to ane aSane of ^anct Slntirfanc of Maw, vj vnces
quarter vnce Gold of Mynde, . . . ■ • . . xl ti.

Item, to iiini for making of ]>e famin, . . . . . . vj ti.

Item, gevin to him for making of ]>e v])er JKcltque of S'anct iHaljago, . iiij ti.

Item, to Joimne Patcrfonc for making tlun €ni^iii to tIjc Sai'tt iJrltqufs!, . xxij s.

Oct. 11. — Item, gevin to Johniu! Mofman, for mailing of tlje ^vincig StrmrS vpoun Schir

.James Hamiltonis Cliapcfl gatr, Jiat is to fay, ane croce of siluer, twa chandelaris, ane

Hali-watter-fatt'' with ane styk, twa crowettis, ane bell, aneboistto keip Hoistis

IN,' and ane couer to serue for ))e Pax, all deliuerit to Thomas Dudingftoune, Mailler of

Howlhald to my Lord Prince, and for mcntllHg of tloa flatonfS,'' . . xx s.

' At this pcriiiil thi- King's Advocivte liiid mily L. K) |mt aTiniiiii of Siilary. " Tlie [Kirticiilnrs of this branch of

the i)ulilii- Accounts oi-cnpy 3!} pages ; bnt though tlicy arc very interesting, it is not, possil)le to give suitable extracts
in tliis place. Only two entries in'cil be noticed liere, which immediately follow this article. ' A small piece of

ancient Ordnance. ' Chambers' are mentioned by some <d' the early Dramatists, and sometimes in the Stage-directions of Battle-Scenes, we find, ' Chamber-s are let otf in thi> distance.' ' lie had been despatched, along with
Walter Madarlane, to Kyntyre, to the Master of Glencairn, on Sep. 4-. '' There are numerous similar entries
which prove that, during this reign, (ioLii was found in ])retty large masses in ' the Mynde' at Crawfin-d-Wuir.
'■ The various items for hainessing, five saddles, dresses for Hog, and ' vij childerin (lads) that passit in I'rance with
the said hors (horses) and lialkis.' The iVciHS oc('u|iy above three pages. ' A vat or vessel to hold Iloly-water.
• A box to keep the Host or Eucharist. " I'lagons.

28JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 307

APPENDIX.

Oct. 13. — The Expenfis deburfit vpoun ]>& four ^inluftnnjjfs ients to tijt JDolpJt'n of jFrnnce,
and vpoune f e French Paige callit Laponse, at his departing to France,' . 'j'xliij ti. v 5. vj d.

Item, to ane fervand pat padit to Jie (fSIatDinr^ fra | e Lordi.s with Writtingis to jie Kingis
grace, ........ xxij s.

Nov. 7. — Item, deliuerit to Johnne Moliiian to garneis aitt JSjlfrjtuitJlf ^ to llTl) 3Lor1f |PrtITtC,
ane vnee twa Vnicorne half vnicorne weclit of Goki of Mynde, . . viij ti. viij s.

Item, to iiim tor making of ))e fainin, . . . . . xl s.

Item, for gilting of an iitill garnefing of niTf ?^oritr to mn %ovtS pn'ltCf, . iiij 8.

Nov. 13. — Item, to Thomas Arthuir, for fiiniefiiig of clcthing to Schir Johnne Campbell of
Lundy, kny', at ]>e Kingis command, q\i\jtn I)f Ifrpnrtit to i\>e Stiiiprratour, . 1' ti.

Item, to Maider Robert Forman, JKos's" ^Jfrnfif, to by him clathis, paffing with ))e faid Schir
Johnne in company, ....... . xxiiij ti.

Ite?n, to Thomas Vdward for ane blak furring of cunyng {cony, rabbit) (kynnis, thre Bo wis,
thre dofane Arowis, and ane quaver irorjjt ftirtj of 3>ltglnntt, deliuerit to Dauid Ferry and Johnne
Tennent, ........... xx ti. xvij s.

Nov. 19. — Item, to Alexander Hwtoune to pas and poiittJ tije SLarB itta^faan for certane
dettis, .......... xxijs.

Item, to Williame Hardy for his exi)enris paffing to ionriir ]'E Lairdis of Lothiane tO
rgBt to ii)t 33ortoiir toitl) tlje iStitgis" gvncc, .... xiiij S.

Dec. 15. — Item, to William Hardy to jinsi to tjie Klfe nnU tnit S'fggtng of iitatltnnj)^
lantii^, ......... . vti.

Dec. 19 — Item, gevin to ))e 5oung Tapefcher, for rarfngc of tlje (Taprsrijm'f to (Slntomc^
and v]ieris places, . . . . . . . . vj li. xiiij d.

Dec. 28. — Item, fend to Striueling to be ane Gowne to Seratt, vij elnis grene Veluet, xxj li.

Item, fend to begary it with vj quarteris 3allow Veluet, . . iiij ti. vij s.

Dec. 31 — Item, gevin Johnne Mofman for chen3eis, ringis, tabulattis, bracelattis, targettis,
and v]ier gold warkrefauit fra him in Striueling, pE Kingis grace being prefent, to be gevili in |2jiu»
\tVt ^iftt'iS, ....... . . iiijcx ti.

Item, gevin to (Charlis) Murray, for xx ^atoftlluttiS ' brocht furth of (Duc)heland^ be him,
price of ])e pece half Angell nobill,yMOT»!«, . . ... xvij ti.

Jan. 9, 1540-1. — Item, gevin to ane Ducheman pat pleyit' before ])E Lordis, to mak his expenfis, . .............. xl ti.

Jan. 20. — Item, gevin to tj&e protjoitotar, fervand to ])E Quenis gi-ace, at his departing to
jFratttf,'^ xliiij ti.

Me.m°, deliuerit to Johnne Mofman, in pE Abbay of Halyrudhows, |)e xxj day of Julij
laft bipaft, pE Kingis grace being prefent, pis »5oHj>iuarft ailH %o\at\{ii aftir folowing, quhilk wes of
William Hwmes eschete ; pat is to fay. Thru (CljCniri^, with ane brokin chen;e, xj JlJfTJi^ of goltf,
1 93jlJt5 of jrtnmatl'St, vvith v ^oluUtS of JjTaittljC Ciolum'5, twa Clofet'S, thre fmall buirdis of beltis,
bed and |)endes of gold, viij ringis, thre hingaris, ane croce, ane hart, twa colleris, ane lefart, and ane
fmall belt, all weyand xxviij vnce half vnce, deliuerit to him, with vper gold wark, to ht nitltit tlT
anr grttc Itngot,' price of pe vnce viij ti. x s.,yMm»ia, .... ij'xlij ti. v S.

And pe famin tyme deliuerit to pE Kingis grace, in ane box, pe litlll Copburd of filuer, with
certane tlomokkis, perle-bedis, beltis, and vjier fmall gair contenit in pe faidis boxis.

* The items are too numerous to be noticed. * Probably used instead of a coral for cutting the young Prince's

teeth. ^ Ilagbuts. This is selected to remark, that great quantities of hagbuts, culverins, and all kinds of

Artillery and ammuniliiui, were imported from Holland, Germany, Denmark, &c., in loiO, loil, and I5i2. The
small arms were often in tiindij-ninc number at a time, perhaps from restrictive regulations iu these countries, only
suffering their exportation if under 100 in number. * Holland. ' Litigated. ' See Apr. 'ii, 1512,

of these Extracts. ' l"r. an Ingot, or wedge of gold.

308 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Feb. . — Item, fend to jFnIftl.iiitf, to Jje Quenis grace, with Alexander Kempt, to be liir anc
tSoiunt, XV elnis Purpur veluet, . . . . . . . lij ti. x s.

//e;«, to be anf Ut'fttll, ixi elnis Quhyte Dames of ])e grete flour, . . xixH.

Feb. 3. — Item, lend to hir grace twa pund weclit fewing gold,' . . xxiiij ti.

Item, gevin to Andro Watfone and Scliir Joiine Kylgour, for ])e making of four Uaiitl'tS
to t]&r (Trtiinprth'S, and furnefiug of fluft' |)airto, . . . . . xl ti.

Feb. 4. — Item, to ane Duclieman pat haid his Scjt'p Iirofttn (it ^ailttaitlfrotd with ]'e Kingis
Colis, .......... xxij ti.

/to«, to tfjc CuntfsilJancntnitiS firrbnitti, ..... xliiijti.

/to», gevin to ti)c dFrtir tj)at romt furtljc of iSrctc, . . . xliiijti,

Feb. 9.— 7to«, ' tjbc ©vpcH^is' bpoluur mu iCoiUt'S tijc MuvgiS Sioiti^,' ' Lord Johnne' and
f Lord Robert,'^ for <Ire(li's, &c. unnecellary to be fpecifietl.

Feb. 20. — Item, gevin to Robert Hart, to deliuer to ane feruand of i\)t 3>luprratouvi£!, fat
brocht Writtingis to ]ie KiNGis grace, ...... xxijti.

Item, gevin to Johnne Moffettis fone and his feruand quhilk brocht ^toctf-matts' nitlJ JaClIS'C
SfiHune^ to ]iE KiNGis grace, . . . . . . . xjti.

Mar. 11. — Item, to Johnne M'cafFe, meflniger, for his expenfe to turs certane cXoi^ 8ii!Srit<
ttirgt's' of jiE KiNGis graces to tljc ^futilmciinr of tlje 3)lis anW btljcr ^fcIanHmrn, xliiij s.

Mar. 26, 1541. — Item, to Johnne Paterfoune, for ane cais to aiie flacone of Aquavite,* vs.

' {Tljf <Sntr^ (gei') funifsit to tjic i»tn(jt5 (lEIjapclfis of 5?ticucliiig aiiB ?t)ali)nttt{)ous'.
Ill the first deliuerit to Johnne ooung, iiiji elnis Raid Dames, to be ailC |3cittlahin to ]ie Cbapell in
})e Abbay,' . . . . . . . . , vii ti. xiiij s.

Item, for |>e JJrolulifri) auti CtUar&niaiiScIjt'p of i\)xt Sfgiis iurocI)t iui'tj) (Croluitf of tljonir,
tiirt i^amrS of Jacobus Ciuiittti^,'^ lui'tl) tijc XititgtS Slnnts autt (LroVnnc abobe tjbr ijnb, anB
tiua iSTnt'fornis Iifranb tjjf saniin, price of all, ..... vijti.

Item, to Walter Moncur, for fraucht quhilk he deburfit at ])E Quenis rumpucj; fra ti)c
tSIaiximfO", and palling agane to ]>e Glawmes, ..... iij ti. vj s.

Item, gevin to Adam Stewart, lo tljlturr to ))f. Ert.f. of Murray tit dfrailtt,

iiij'lxxxviij ti. xviij s.

Apr. 2. — Item, deliuerit to Johnne Bertane, to be ane (!lott, Iioi^, njtil ircftiS, to ti)C Bltttlf
JTUirft,^ twa elnis of RAID and vj quarteris of 3ALLOW, . . . iij ti. xviij s.

Item, to be him ane UDotublat, x quarteris raid and fallow Birge fating, . xxvi.

Jfem, for ane raid JSoiut to him, . . . . . . xv s.

Item, for making and lyning of his clathis, ..... xxj s.

Apr. G — Item, to ane Frenciieman, calht JtatuScDf, at his palling in France, I''xti.

/fe?», to fflnistcr a:IfyanBcr ^orBouilf, at his palling to France, . . F ti.

Item, to ane feruand of James Lindfayis, for his expeufis in fjaiue^briltgilig of ft^alftt'iS furtlje
of illttrrai), . . . . . . . . . vj ti. vij s.

' This is selected to repeat former oljservations, that the Queew must have passed mucli of her leisure hours in
Embroidering in Gold and Silver. In almo^t every tnontli of these Accounts there are larjje payments for furnishings of Gold, silver, and sillt thread, &c. On Feb. 12, another charge is made for ' xxi dowbill hank of sewing
gold, xxij li. xj s.' It is unnecessaiy to multiply similar entries, which are very frequent, and the ([uantities are
usually two or three pounds weight at a time. '' In another entry this month, he is styled ' Loan Hobekt of

HALVRunnocs.' Such entries occur almost monthly. ' Sweet-meats and Uhenish wine. * Eau devie,

French Brandy? * The iitljcr fornishings consist of Abbis, emmettis, towellis, altar towellis with croces of

fyne silk, beltis, corporallis, vj tynne crowettis of the fassoune of siluer, ane caip of clayth of gohl, and ane caip of
blew dames with sternis (sinrs) of gold. " See the entry, Alar. 2i, 13.'J9-4.(), of this Ajipendix. ' Sevcra

notices occur of this individual. He was probably a Dware, or Buffoon, as would appear troni the nature of the
dresses given him from time to time. His name, however, is never mentioned. Several Dwarfs, male and female,
were entertained at the .Scottish Court, and had regular pensions and liveries assigned to thein.

2

28 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 309

APPENDIX.

Apr. 19. — Item, gevin to James Hammiltoune, fone to 3(amt5 ?tlaiHmi(touuc, bmiitti)tle

^djerrf of iLtitlntljqln, to furneis his fader (furtli) of Jie realme, . . . ii^' ti.

Item, to the Ducheman feruandis to tjc itorW of X\)t dfatr, . . j'sxxij ti.

Birth and Baptism of Ahtuur Duke of Albany.

Apr. 24.— JTjjc CFypcnsiS UeljttrStt on mn Eorii |3ititcc, aiiti at tl)t Uatfbfttof mj! EorB
29uftt. In the first, fe xxiiij day of Aprile, deliuerit to Johiie Tenent, viij ehiis quhyte TetHtes of
twa thredis, to be seruiettis to lialtf tjf (tautiiUt^, at ttie ^aptis'tn^ of mi) HorB IBuItf , iiij ti.

Apr. 26. — Item, deliuerit to Johnne Molman, to gilt tiua i)C(ri)f Staittlailtf ColuptSi pat wer
maid at ]ie Nativite of m» 3Lort) |3rintf, and now fend to Striueling, x Iloile nobillis, xxvj ti. x s.

Item, gevin to Johnne Paterfoune, for tlua CaCt'S to fe faidis Cowpis, and ane cace to aitf
(dj^allV of niu SLoitl |3lllUr5, maid of before, .... . xlvj s.

Apr. 27. — Item, gevin to Thomas Richartfone, for xij boltis of cammes ' deliuerit to Johnne
Bertone, to be falis, . ....... xlviijti.

Item, deliuerit to liim, for [le fraucbt of \M ^c&t'p antf iWnn'nalltS Vnage, pa^Santt toitji i\it
ISi'itgtS grace to tje Kits, ........ I'xiiijti.

Item, to the Heroldis, ])e tyme of ))e 33aptt5tng; of mi) ItoiU Biifte, . xj ti.

Item, to James Stevinfonne, for vj 98appct'iS and twa paiutlt clatljiS deliuerit be him to ])E
KiNGis grace, . . . . . . . . . vij ti. xiiij s.

Item, to iAOtj^I^dan %?frotiJ, for his expenfe paffing to SiclJ&ltrgTjt, to prepair ])e luggeingis
and furneling- to Jie Lordis, and renianyng Jiairupoune (at the Aire), . . vj ti. xvs.

Item, to Margarete Scote, for hir lawbouris being with ui^) SLovS prince, v vlkis, xxxti.

Item, to Johnne Foreftai-, bower, for SlvroluiS Hedis, gayn3eis,'^ and quaveria, fra ])e ij day
of May 1538, to J)e iij day of Februar laft, .... . xiij ti. vij s. viij d.

Death and Burial of Arthur Duke of Albany.

Apr. 29. — Item, to Andro jare in Striueling, for ant (Cap of IftD tjjat mu SlorlT ISufte iuC5
Ijurfjt in, .......... xiiij s.

Item, gevin to Peter Buntyne, for pafllng with Letteris to ])E Schereffis and Burrois of })E
Westland, for SEIapins'cjjalofng, . . • . . . .Is.

Item, to Johnne Paterfone, for paffing with ficlyke Letteris to ]>e Northland, iij ti. xiiij s.

May 5. — Item, gevin to William Straitherne, for paSStn^ fra ])E Lordis, being in 3)eS=
Iiurcljt, to )'E KiNGis grace, in ^triuiling, with deligence, . . . . xls.

Item, gevin to ane Inglisman )iat cam fra tjjc (iSilnrlianc of tl)C JttiWiU iWarri&tS of Sng*
fantt to ])e Lordis, being in Jedburcht, ...... xliiij s.

May 22 — Item, to Johnne Mortoune, for his labouris paffing to ])e Langhope for Jie Lord
Maxwell, for tnbrtiigins of itiUttisftak to tljeai'rt*, .... iijti.

Death of James Duke of Rotiisay, Prince and Steward of Scotland.

May 25. — Item, to be ftoa dFutCMnanttltfe and twa harnefllngis to ))E Quenis grace, xxelnis
33lali ilFtlurt,' Ivti.

Item, to be fom- Fute-mantillis and four harneffingis to four of Jjf r Eattnfe, xl elnis blak veluet,

F vj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, a variety of ^arnfSSingf^, fren3ies, gilting of bukelis, pendeffis, &c. &c. amounting in
all to the fum of ........ iiji^lvij ti. vij s. ob.

^ ' Webs or pieces of canvass or Sail-cloth. ' For cross-bows. » This expenditure is under the head of

' Expeiisia debursit vpoun the Quenis StabiU and Ladyis,' for the Month of May.

310* CRIMINAL TRIALS. AD. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Way 26. — Item, fend to Striueling to the Cowntes of Arroll,' to be bir anc SuU
EJHfftB, ^ elnis fyne Paryfe blak, . . • • • . . xv ti.

Item, fend to liir )ie famin tyme, four elnis v]>er Frencbe blak, . . vj ti. viij s.

Item, gevin to C?rf5rl)C EiHtUte, at ]ie Kingis command, . . . xl s.

Item, to ]ie Gray Freris iu Jedburcht, to ]ie i)clp of tjc rcparattounc o£ tjatr |3Iace,
(tbe Monaftery of Jedburgb), . . . ....... xx ti.

May 28. — Item, to twa boyis fat paffit to Striueling with iiixt tSann qbift qtonT»fis7 carpandyis,^ and vjier fmall gair brocbt hame be Hanis Anderfoune, . . . ix s.

Item, gevin to Jobnne Paterfoune, for pafling will) Letteris to Aberden, and vfier Burrowis
IN ])E Northland, for i)nmt;brtitgiit5 of ?i?ntoklmtti6,* .... xxij s.

Jun. 23. — Item, gevin to Jie iWnt^tcr (Cotft, to liipport iiim for expenfis maid ]>e tyme of bis
fekenes, .......... xiij ti.

/few, to tbf dfrtitrj&f Sortour, at bis paffing to France, . . . xliiijti.

Item, to Jolinne Cayrnis, for ]ie fraucht of tjbrf filltffr of Ici^lf,^ turfit furth of Leitlie to
^aitrtaitlfrots", at ]ie Kingis command, . . . . • . iij ti.

Item, gevin to )ie Quenis gi-ace (Queen Margaret) fibxict, qubame God aHolji*, at hit
departing to France, ........ xxxiiij ti.

Item, to Jobnne Paterfoune, for pafling to Dunkell to fummond Maister Adame Otterburne, and to pas in Jie Northland with Letteris to tjf |3rflatt^, and with Letteris to t]&f ^r[)f=
rfffis' anlt aSitrroJuis, for CrvprniiTg of Crgi^jtinitis', . . . . • iij ti.

Item, to Robert Blak, to sttiitmoit'a X\)t Storlt UlOlUf ; and paffing with ficlyke Letteris to ])E
Merse, Teviotdale, and Lawdiane, . . • • . . xl s.

Item, to Robert Hart, for paffing to the Weflland to )ie Prelattis with ficlyke Letteris, and
for CPvjJuIsiouitc of C?gtj)ttaitis", . . • • • • iij li- 'j s.

Jun. 24. — Item, to ane Inglifman, fat come with Silllritingi^ fra tht JBorlfOtirts, iij ti.

Jun. 28. — Item, to William Champnay, for paffing with twa dole Writtingis to tJjC Crrif of
Strraitf and l.or"Jf .iFrciunitg, . ...... xiiij s.

Jul. 5. — Item, deliuerit to George Steill, to be lend to Cratofur1f=3to5nnf,'' to hing betuix ])E
Tapescherie and pe wallis, for faving fairof, y]^^ elnis Bertane cammes, . . viij ti.

/to/?, to bind fE Tapescherie with, XXX fawdome of cord, . . . vs.

Item, to )iE Justice Clerk, at his paffing to Ingland, to mak his furnefing, . F ti.

Jul. C. — Item, to Malcolme Gourlaw to mend \\)t ^Satl^oitis' fend to CrawfurdJohnne,
ane ftane of fmall cordis, price, . ...... xiiij s.

Item, to mend )ie faid PailiOnis, four elnis Bertane cammes, . . vs. iiij d.

Jul. (7.) — The expenfis deburfit vpone X\)t ^uffragr of ©uritf iHaglfaTfltr, quham God
aflbl3e. In the fiijt, for nalis, clekis to hing Jie clalhis, and pynouris for dichting fairof, and to fe
Belman, .......... xiij s.

Item, to Schir Jobnne Stirk to be diftribut ainang ])e (ilDapIaiti^, . . xxij ti.

Item, to ])E Erle of Buchane to offer, ..... xxij s.

Item, to Andro Watfoun, Paintour, for Jie fJ»ai'lttt'lTg of v dufan SlrnifS", . v ti.

Jul. 9 Item, gevin for ]ie fraucht of ane bote at midnyeht to turs ane writting to X\)t Cartliltnn, in haill, . . . . . . . x s.

Item, to Jobnne Cob to pas with ane Writting with deligence to Jje Kingis grace to Crawfurd-Johnne, ....... xxij s.

' L;i<ly Helen Stewart, daughter of John ildrd Earl of Lennox. She married, 1st, William^/'M Earl of Errol ;
and 2c!ly, John tenth Earl of Sutherland. ^ Quails. ' Perhaps O. Fr. carpetidu, pomme de car, the apple

called a shorte-start ? Cotetjrave. * Great quantities appear to have been purchased for the use of the King's

troops, besides those obtained by burgesses, Nobility, &c. ^ A fidder of lead * containis neerly sexscore and

aucht stane.' Skene, de Verb, Sig. ft is elsewhere stated to consist of eight pigs, every pig ' three-and-twenty
stone and a half.' Cowel. See also Dr Jamieson, v. fuudek. " During the Royal visit there.

28 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 311

APPENDIX.

Jul. 11 — Item, to %ai)nm ^cat rnllit tTje ^.iitct/ at J)e Kingis command.^ . xxij S.

Item, to Scliir William Layng, be ane Precept aboue fe ordinal- admittit to him in mu l.orU
Prtltrt ^O&l^, for his Leveray Clathis, ..... xiij li. vj i. viij d.

Item, to t^f STwrtf iHnt's'trf^, be ane Precept, at ]ie Kin'gis command, . . xx li.

Item, to Williarae Stratherne, for paffing with dole Writtingis tff r01tbfltf tlje tSTflirporan

JL0r1ft^, .......... xxij i.

Jul. 13. — Item, for taringe of iiyt JTnpfs'rbrric (Tapeftry) fmthe of Edingburcht to Crawfurd-Johnne, . . . ■ . • . xxx s. vj d.

Jul. 15. — Item, to Jolinne Cob for pafllng with clos Writtingis to ))e Lord Borthwyk and
Capitane of Dunber ; and with letteris to Jie Schereffis of Berwyke, Roxburcht, Peblis, and Selkirk, for Wapinfchawing, . ...... xxxiiij s.

Jul. 20? — Item, to Thomas Vdward for ane barrel! of fokkettis,^ deliuerit to Thomas Hammyltoune, to ])E Kisgis gi-ace, . . . . • . ix ti. vij s. vj d.

Item, gevin to Thomas Softlaw for ^tfitttitg of tBf aniutfs" at tlje Buttis"* in StriuelING, .......... viij s. viij d.

Item, to William Purves for mending of mu SLorlf yn'ltCf£i UlT0ft ; and for grathing of fE
KiNGis grace Knok, making of ane new bell, with ane kill lokkit and bandit to put hir in ; xij pair
of Rache-cuppillis ;5 and for expenfis maid be him paffing to Sanctandrois and fratliyne to Striueling ; as his Ticket of Corapt gevin pairupoun beris, . . . . vii. ij s.

Item, ane clos Writting fent fra ]ie Lordis to ))E Kingis gi-ace, . . xxij s.

Item, to artf 3ngTl:SinaiT ])at brocht Writtingis fra fE Bordouris, and remanit vpoune his
anfuer, ...... . . . iiij ti. viij s.

Jul. 22. — Item, for cariage of ]ie fame furthe of Crawfurd-Johnne to Ed', . xxviij s.

Item, to ])e Frenche Tapescher for tlire hors cariage of iTnprsrljfrif furth of Striueling to
Crawfurd-Johnne, and for crukis, nalis, and vjieris expenfis, . . . xlij s. vj d.

Jul. 2i. — Item, to ^(\)ix %amti %»nmmi)ItOitis" iDiiffe , quhllkis wes ]ie prices of comes fawld
to hir, being vpoune Jie Manis of Tolicultre, pertenyng to ]>£ Laird or Ester Wemys, Ixxx ti.

Item, Maifter Johnne Lawder for his (labouris) in Writting of Hi'rrrtioili^ to X\)t Cotortf of
(IKonif) for promotioune of Jie SlbLant^ of CorifingSantf (and) IHrlros" to )ie Kingis grace
f'Oiti^, . . . . . • • "

Item, deliuerit to George Carmichaell, fone to ))E Capitane of Crawfurd, for tbrc JJitrc
of (§onf" quhilk he deliuerit to JiE Quenis grace, tjbf tuntf s'rj^O tors" lit (!lratofur^=3)ol)ltltf, price
of ]ie vnce, vj li. viij s.,Jumnia, ...... xix ii. iiij s.

Jul. 26. — Item, for cariage of pe 5ra})rs"r|)fn'f furth of Crawfurd-Johnne to Cragnethane, and
fra thyne to Peblis and Ed% and furth of Ed' to Striueling, . . . xxxviij s.

Item, for thre hors cariage furth of Edingburcht to Striueling with i!riipf3"cl)rn'f qubtlft sullf
[)al)f pa^sit to thf ^uiitt^, .... . . . xviij s.

Item, for rariagr of thf ^athoitl!* to Crawfurd-Johnne, Jie vj day of Julij, and remanit furth

xj hors to ]ie xxv day of Jie famin, takand ilk hors on )ie day ij s^Jumma, . xix ti. xvj s.

Item, to Johnne Bog for expenfis maid be him vpoun X\)Xt ^aiigtoflfrts"'* qtlljilft

' The celebrated Papist, who fasted forty days on several occasions both in Scotland and at Rome, &c. * Probably this was during or immediately subsequent to his voluntary confinement in Edinburgh Castle, until he should
have proved he was a Holy person by fulfilling his vowsof fasting. ^ Some kind of preserves or comfits?

* .Stretching the canvas at the Butts, for the practice of archery. ^ Dog couples. '' The ends of the lines

obliterated. ' A specimen of a mass of Gold ore from tlie Royal INIine. His sister Klizabeth, daughter of Sir

John Carmichael, was one of the King's ^listresses, by whom he had John, Prior of Coldinghame, &c. See preluding article. She afterwards married Sir J<din Somerville of Cambusnethan. The Prior was father to the noted
Francis Stewart, Earl of Bothwell. ' AVild-Boars ; Tv. Sangliers, See Aug. 15 following.

312 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

f0nif fttrtlb 0f JJ^rniTff to ]<e Kikois grace ; awayting vpoune fame xiiij dayis, and turfing of fame
to Falkland, . . . . • . • • . vj ti. xj s.

Aug. . . . — I/em, gevin to ]ie Erle of Ergyle for 3ariTUlTS(ntiottn of all and findrie ]>e
lanUis, Iortfs'ff)i})})is', nnlf tfomtnioiti^, quhilkis pertenit to ]>e airis of vuiq''^ itTarftnitc ill tjr 3tlis',
and now pertenyng to Archibald Erle of Ergile lieretablie, be Alienatioune, and refignit be him
in our fouerane lordis handis oc?/)e?-joe^?<am i?c?«a«e?i</«m, . . . T™ti.'

Item, gevin to l^os^ U!rrilI1f, for making of liis expenfis, paffing to ti)r i^tltg of 3>lTgInnlf
with Writtingis, ....... xxij ti.

I/em, to Jinrnioitif Itfslfl), for ouergeving of ]ie Gift grantit to him be I'E Kingis grace of
^rrlJt'Lnrtf Sotoglas" and 8;21iniinml3otugInSCr9rI)ftr!J,in complete payment of ij^' merkis, Ixxxixti. vjs.

I/em, to Helene Rolle, to )ie help of \)ir tioci)ttr\5 iHnrrngr, at ))e Kingis grace command, ....... xiij }i. viij s.

Aug. 15. — Item, for making of niTf ^nlr of tumntfr within ])e Park of Falkland to tjj
^nitgiMltfrts",' . . . . . . xvj ti. xvj s.

I/tm, to Williame Forreli, for thre pair of grete dog irnis for |3fir=tfoggt^, ouergilt with gold,
with ]iair CoHnn's" of Purpure Veluet, fluthit with gilting ftuthis ;^ and for 3rotD=!)r1fts" furnefit be
him to ]ie Kingis grace, . . . . . . iiij ti. vj s.

I/em,to Schir George Clapertomie, iHnistf rCrliitOSinnr, to ]ie Kingis grace 2lImob)5', ij'viij ti.

Iten>, to him in augmentatioun thereof, .... Ixij ti. xiij s. iiij d.

/to«, to Jonet Logane, itnlfi) (Crnt'gi),* . • . xxvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

I/em, to Johnne Merl;oun, in complete payment of his lawbouris, warkmanfchip, and furnefmg of tl)f 3L»fgtstfr ^oiis Lt'ggit tuitljiit tljt CasUil of Crltiiihurilst, abone ]>e lowme of ane hundreth and twenty pundis tane allowance in ]ie lafl Chekker ; conform to ]>e Contract maid betuix
him and ]'E Clerk of Register ]iairvpoune, .... Iclxxx ti.

I/em, gevin to Charlis DanieKloun for expenfis deburfit be him vpoun the ffljffeiitg of tlJE
StmgrotiiT nnti Urrjrtiig iTotir tit tfjf (Cnstrll of JJInftitrs, with brwme^ and dovet ;'' and for thre
ftok-lokkis to ]ie Dnngeoune, . . . . iij ti. xix s. vj d.

Aug. 17. — I/em, to Tliomas Wdward, for JiJototS, ftringis, and arowis, deliuerit be him to j)E
Kingis grace, Johnne Tenent,' George Steill, and Thomas Softlaw, at his grace command, xxx ti. viij s.

I/em, deliuerit to Johnne ISIoffettis fervand, Confervatour in Flanderis, (end hame be him at
])E Kingis grace command, to romjjlftf ntif (iljbnlmrr of tl)f Stitttquc ^l?tstonf, (in Tapestrywork,) 273 Crownis of Jie fone, ..... iij'ti. vjs.

Item, to Patrik Lindfay for vij ^tftfl snljniiB" and ane ring deliuerit to J'e Kingis
grace, ....... xxiij ti. ij 5.

Ife)n, to Johnne Clerk, Jak-makar, for niTf J>nft deliuerit be him to ]ie Kingis grace, couerit
with Veluet, ..... . xxiiij ti. xiiij i.

The Royal Household.^

Sep. 7. — «[rj)f rj-^jfitsi's" deburfit vpoun ]ie Kingis servantis, Ordinaris, for ti^nir 3lfbcj
rni) tlnihi^, per temjms Gomjmti, (Sep. 2, 1540, to Sep. 7, 1541.) In /lie firfi, ge\in to the Compter,
Johnne Leflie, ^rSunrt'^ ; Oliver Sinclar, Henry Kempt, CToppniis; Dauid Wod of Jie Crag, Andro

' L.500n. 2 Wild-Boars. Seo Jul. 20 prereding. ^ Studded with gilded studs. ' This Pension

is regularly paid, and is always entered among the ' Elimosina.' ^ Broom ; plantn genista. " Turf.

' There is another charge of vij li. xij d. to Johnne Forestar, bowar, for Arrowis, the same month. ' The concluding entries, under this department, at the close of the reign of Kino James V, are so interesting, and contain mention of so many persons whose names have long been familiar to the Historian and Antiquary, that the Editor has
deemed it proper to give the payments at large. He believes such an enumeration is likely to be acceptable to readers
of every class, as it affords such minute details of the internal economy of the Koyal Palace, &c.

28Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 313

APPENDIX.

Wo(l of Largo, Cnrbfluri^ ; and ])e Laird of Craggy, Mclitv al tl)t Smxtt'-(iLl)Slmct--tSHT ; ilkane of
])ame xx \\.,Jumma, . . . . ... Pxl ti.

Item, to James Leremont and Patiik Wemys, iWai£>ttrt^ 0f ^lotusj^nrif, ilkane of jiame 1 ti.,
and to tie (Clf rfe of CFvpf ns'ts", xx Yi./'umma, . . . . I'xx ti.

Item, to James Aikinheid, Archibald Campbell, jnnnn t'n t\)t Winm^^tTlar \ Stevin
Dudingftoiin, (fervand,) in liis faferis place, iHats'trr of t\)e ^ilbn Wt^ciieXl ', Robert Gib,
^qtn)ar at tl)C ilt'itgi^ s'taiill; and Thomas Marfchell, itlatstrr (ilttftf; ilkane of pame xx ti.,
fiimma, . . • • • • . . • • 1*^1'.

Item, to William Baird, James Wod, 5ts'rJ)rn'^ 0f t^f fiFter^CijaTnterj^ur ; Normond Lefley,
Patrik Kircaldy, Johnne Gutlire, and James Watfoune, jfntrit fir ti&f iSiltgiS Cljalntfr; Johnne
Tennent, jpiitnit lit tl)f SJUnrlfrnp ; Schir George Clapertoun, <J?Ipnt0S"tnar ; Schir Dauid Criftefoun, ^tf&jart ; Schir George Scott, Sbfirruiatour af tljf 33ufli£j ; Schir Johnne Jurdane, C?Iimo-
£ititari^ |3rft5"t ; and Johnne Hay in t!)f Biitgis' ^Jaititctrtf ; ilkane of ])ir perfonis, xiij ti. tj s.
viij d,Ji(mma, ......... I'^lx ti.

Item, to Walter Moncur, jfmait in tht 33railfl)0tiB"; James Murray, Jfmait lit ti)f Still ^t\-
lar ; Dauid BlantjTe, jf man (it tbr t5rftt=itair1fitar ; Thomas Hammiltoune, jrinaii tit tjf ^pttc1^011^; James Richartfoune, unifit lit tbr Prtti)=ilair'ifitar ; James Edmonlloun, Johnne Bog,
Robert Purves, Andro Mithelloune, irntflt (It tl)f ^tahill ; Johnne Sprotty, fmyth ; Johnne Purves,
jcntait 0f thf Slbrry; Dauid Hay, 5'ttmpttuiniait ; Johnne Lawfoun, Ssrjfr of t^f ^an=33iir and
(Coliarf; George Gibfoun, iflats'trr Uaps'tfr; George Ogilvy, (ContjitroIIcr Clf rft ; Peter Hamniyltoun, (Courtf iWatstrr Ctifte ; Schir Johnne M''call, (Jlatour ; Johnne Mccall, ^ultrf man ;
ilkane of fame xiij ti. vj s. viij S.,Jiimma, ...... ijcxl ti.

Item, to Alexander Kempt, Alexander Quhite(law, Murdo jM'k)en^e and (Andro) Drummond, ^rbntfs' t'n tljt JJtngt^ ClbaliUfr — ilkane of fame xiiijti. xiij s. iiij d. ; and William Duchall,
35otfI-inait, xiij ti. vj s. viij d., fumma, ...... Ixxij ti.

Item, to Gilbert, (in Mvfchettis place,) ©rbmf in tf)f KETnitf ^cTTar ; Thomas Murray in tj&t
satlj^fllarr ; William Bell, Grvme in tjbr (iSrttf ) JLarlfnar ; Kellis, ©rbntc for tbe Wti(\)t\l ;
Gawyne Wane, (grbiitf for tjf ^ilbfr fiFfs'fbcIT; Murdo Striueling, ^Satrsar ; Johnne Barbour,
Thomas TuUoche, ^rbmrs' in X\)t ffliJarlfroj) ; Troylus, Patryk Clerk, (Srbmfs" tjbat ftfpis' X\)t
JBrSfrti's" ; Malcolme Gourlaw, Cailsour iit tfjf KiHarlfrop ; William Galbrayth, tgrbmf of t^t
ia('fhftitg='B«rf ; Johnne Angus and Dauid Kirkcaldy, in Montis place, <§rbmf^ lit X\)t JJtngiiJ
$»rrl)ftng; Johnne Cliddifdale, »§rbntf lit tljf ^pirrljotl^ ; William Nycholl and James Dunkane,
©rbmts" in tbf Con rtf I»fri)fing; — ilkane of fame takand x ti.,y«»!??!a, . . Flxxti.

Item, to Andro Angus, and Inuerrugy in Dauid Kirkcaldyis place, SFllllfr tSrblltf^ in tj&C
SingiiS Hirljring; and to Patrik Anderfoune in tf)f aSraiUJous" — ilkane of Jiame v\\.,Jumma, xvti.

Item, to tba iFiirnfjbrofi&f^ in ]ie Kxngis Kecheing, and twa in J)E Courte Kecheing,
ilkane of Jiame xxvj s. viij d ,/M?n;HO, . . ... v ti. vj 5. viij d.

Item, to Patrik Crummy and James Bog, portfri^, ilkane of fame x\'u, fumma, . xx ti.

Item, to Mawfe Atkinfoun, Eabrnlfar, for hir Leveray clathis, . xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

The Extraordinaris in ])e Kixgis Hous, for Jjair Leueray clathis.

In iheji'tji, to George Steill, ])e Laird of Camfkeithe, Schir Mychaell Difart, fe Perfoune of

Difart, Schir William Drummond, ]ie Frenche Potingar, fe 50ung Laird of Grange in Angus, Edward

Stewart, Johnne Charterhous, and Nycholl Claphane, ilkane of fame xx ti.,y5<»!»(ff, . 'j*^ ti.

Item, to Richart Carmichaell, George Ormiftoune, James Schrymgeour, Chefman Falconer,

and Nycholl Arthe, ilkane of Jiame xiij ti. vj s. viij 6.., fumma, . . Ixvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

VOL. 1, f 2 R

314* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A. D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Item, to Johnne Richartfoun, Johnne Monteithe, Johnne Murray tjat ^frtttS tT)t IBtsVrtfe,

ilkane of ]>atne vti.,_/(<;«OT«, • • • • . . . xv H.

Item, to Johnne Drummond, iHiti^ttr WixM\)X, in contentatioune of his Leveray clathis, xx li.

The Ordinaris in the Quenis Hous.

In the firji, to Walter Scrymgeour, itXais'tfr St^rftfr in tje ©umt'iS CJalmfr, for Jiis 5ere
and pe 5ere precedant, ilk 3ere xiij ti. vj s. viij A.,fumma, . . xxvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Johnne Moncreif, Alexander Lindfay, and Gilbert Moncreif, %ii:\)tx\^ in tjbt ©Wflti^
Ciinltttrr, ilkane of fame 3erelie, be fe faid fpace, xiiij ti. xiij s. iiij d.,/um.ma, . Ixxxviij ti.

The Ordinaris in my Lord Prince Hous.

Ill thefirjl, to Thomas Dudingfloune, iHnis'trr ^otis'Saftf ; ]ie Auld Laird/ilTat'^tr 3s'c|)f r,
and his fone ; ilkane of fame for fair leueray clathis xx Yx^fmnma, . . Ix ti.

Item, to Schir William Layng, itlatstfr CFIi)nt0s"titar; and Mailler Allane Lawmond, ^tftoart ; ilkane of fame xiij ti. %■] s. viij A.^Jiimma, . . . xxvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Crilliane Baxfter, S"fr6ait1r tff Ea^l) %a\Xt, . . xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to f e four ISoJtftfrrt^' and \\)t itabf ittfar, (Laundress,) ilkane of fame vj ti. xiij s. iiij d.,
Jumma, ..... . xxxiij ti. vj s. viij d.

/to)i, to Mont, itTais'tfr €foJtE t0 muEortf ^ii'itcf, . . . xti.

Item, to Alexander Orknay, Jforemait tit \)\i BrcSring, . . Iiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Patrik Marfchell, ^atfs'ar, . . . . . vti.

Item, to Patrik Henderfoun, in tl)t SiTi^rTIar, and James M<^kefoune, in \\)t ^nttitrtn'f,
ilkane of fame xti., y!<m>na, . . . . . xxti.

Item, to Johnne Dowehall in tjf <£.a^:\}ani, • . . xij ti.

Item, to William Crummy, ^0rtar, • . . vj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to William Methvene, ISfpar of tl)t ^tlurr bt^ditTi and Colfjarr, vj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Thomas Stroupe, s'crbaiiif t0 %aO\) Saitf, • . . x ti.

The Ordinar Feis and jerelie Pensionis.

In thefirji, gevin to tljE b ^ttaTtairt'i^ (Minstrels) for fair twa Leverayis in f e 5ere, takand
ilk Leueray \j ti. x s., Jumma, . . .... Ixv ti.

Item, to t^r fotir ^Tfite"traTi^ fat playis on X\)t 8FcoTt^, for fair 5ereHe Penfioune, payit
quarterlie, takand ilkane xl \\.,Jumma, . . . . . I'^bc ti.

Item, to fe four ilTnts'tralt^ fat playis vpoune X\)t JTruntprttis" of OTrrf, ilkane takand xxti.,
Jumma, . . ..... Ixxx ti.

Item, to )ie twa Toddeis tl&at pTapt^ bpounc t^c ^h)is"rl)f JTaifantf,^ ilkane takand xx ti.,
fumma, . . . . . . . . xl ti.

7toH, to Hanis Cocherane, iHatstfr (§ttmTfr, for his Penfioun, . . Pti.

Item, to Johnne Byris and James Law, (Sitititfrn's", for Jiair feis, ilkane havand x ti.,
Jlmima, . . . . . . . . xx ti.

Item, Robert Murray, |3IuinBtr, for his Penfioune for vphalding of f e Laid (lead) of f e

PaLICES OF HalYRUDHOUS and LlNL\THQ^% . . . . • xxti.

Item, to George Balglavy, for ttrjjtltg of tjbc ^nlict Of lilalnt'atjOU^, . vj ti. xiij s. iiijd.

Item, to Schir Alexander Boyd, (illjaiplaiw of ^airrt ilfOitnrtfi^, for ane hous mayll occupyit be Johnne Drummond to f e Kingis Wark, pertenyng to his Chapelanrie, . 1 i.

' The Nursery-maids who ' rocked' the Prince's cradle. - Tliis, and many other similar notices, which the

Editor has since met with, confirms the interpretation wliich lie formerly gave of the Swesche, in Vol. I, Jac. VI.

28JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 315

APPENDIX.

Item, to Thomas Arthure, IHaist fr CitilJOttr to J)E Kingis grace, for his fee, kvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to tBf ©ttritts' iHitt's'trr ^aihenr, for his fee, . . . xx ti.

Item, to James Lindfay (itlats'tfr dFnIr0nar), for his fee, . Ixvjfi. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Maifter Johnne Schrymgeour, iHiiistrv of TOlarft, for his fee and leveray clathis, Ixti.

Item, to Thomas Mereleyis, iHats'tf r (CortJiiif r to pE Kingis grace, for his fee, . x ti.

Item, to Johnne goung, JSrolffs'tar, for his fee, . . • • x ti.

Item, to vmq''^ Dauid Ferry (jFiirrour) for ane half 3eris fee, becaus he deceffit within fe
5ere, v ti., and to Patrili Bell, Furrour, for fe v])er half jere, v W.,fumma, . . x ti.

Iteyn, to William Ra, CluItrTIar, for his fee, . . . • . xti.

Item, to Schir James Nychollbun, JlTatst f r fff EiHarft tit ^tritif ling, for his fee, xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to Johnne Burnhill, (Brownhill, ) ittatstf r jftTa5"0Uir, for his fee, . . xx ti.

Item, to Schir James Inglis, «IJia})fIaitf,siitgautf for i\)t ^atolr of ISuig Same^ tjif STj&rfTf
in })E Abbay of Cambuskyknethe, . ... xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to James Bannytyne, ffiSfn'ttfr of X\)t (Casuaftfis", and Maifter Thomas Kene,' x ti.

Item, to tjbc Ittitgis" ^tiornt for his fee, ..... xl ti.

Item, to tfte ^tiorat for X\)t |io6f r, . . • . xx ti.

Item, to tl)f OTnrlfaiif of iht m\titsi\hmnxd)ti, for his fee, . . I-^.ti.

Item, to tBf eiSfarlfaiif Brputts" of \\)t (!F^tf=iHarrbf^, • • • I'^-l^iItem, to tbf JWHartfnitf of tjf a:S!IIrst=IHarri)rs' fis sere for his fee, and pe twa seris laft precedent, ......... • iij' ti.

Item, to my Lord Methven, ilTatBtrr of ^rtfljfrtt, for his fee, - . I"^ li.

Item, to Mailter James Scott,'^ for his Penfioune, . • xiij ti, vj s. viij d.

Item, to. Maifter William Meldrum, for liis Penfioune, « ' • • xl ti.

Item, to Johnne Bannatyne, 8!2!In'ttar, for his lawbouris, . • vti.

Item, to Patrik Sklater, iHat'iStf r ^ailiXIar to ])e Kingis grace, for his fee, . x ti.

Item, to Thomas Softlaw, ^tor r1f=slti)jpfr, for his fe in making of his grace ftalbertis, withoute
ony vper payment, ..... • • . xx ti.

Item, to Raphaell (Caffan3eis Hifpanseart) for his Penfioun, grantit to him be ]iE Kingis
grace, . . ... ... . xxti.

Item, to Walter Cvnynghame's wiflfe in Striueling, for bpijalUiltS of i\)t ^arfe Hifeus" (o£
^tn'upli'ng) ]»is 5ere, .... ... . xx ti.

Item, to \\)t Cnur ptrr, for his fee pis 3ere, . • . • . . . . ^

Item, to Maifter Alexander Gordoun, for pe Martymes terme laft bipaft of his Penfioun, 1 ti.

Item, to Maifter James Foulis, (Clfrft of JKcgtStf r, for his fe, . xiij ti. vj i. viij d.

Item, to Maifter Thomas Bellendene, for his laubouris lltttJtg X\)t l^oWii, xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to Schir Alexander Scott, Provest of Corstorphxng, for his lawbouris tliting; tje
laoTIls", . . . . . • • xiij ti. vj g. viij d.

Item, to ii)t ^\itis.mtx Cltrfe, (Schir George Marfchell,) for his fee, xiij ti. vj s. viij d.

/<e»?, to Maifter James Scott, (ffiSiarttar of tSt 3KoUt^,) • • • vijti.

Item, to George Gude, . . . • • • ''ijti'

Item, to Maifter William Mowbray, . . • • • v ti.

Item, to Johnne Wallace, (OTlftar to tlje ^oWii,) . • • . v ti.

' Tu the preceding Accounts, Thomas Maben was the senior ' Writter.' ' In the coi-responding entries of

former years, ' Blaister Thomas Scott, Justice Clerk, for his lawbouris in the Chekkar,' was inserted here. It will
be observed that ' JIaister James Scott, Writer of the Rollis,' occurs below. ' Obliterated. The entry in the

preceding Account was for two years' payments, ' modefyit with the Lordis, at the command of the Kingis grace
Writting, ilk yere Vc raerkis, summa, vjc. Ixvj li, xiij s. iiij d.'

316* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Item, to Stevin Hendirfo une, . . . . . . v ti.

Item, to Thomas Sinclare, ... . . . vti.

/tort, to Schir George Riclieitfoune, (Urpar of tjr laoIIlS,) . . vti.

/few, to Johnne Perdovene,#Ta5fr, for his lawbouris in fe Chakker, . vti.

Item, to Florence Corntoune, for his Penfioun for ordouring of pE Kingis Wark rontcrnuitg
tje ^cl)lJ>J)l^, and keping of ])air gair, . . . . . xl ti.

Item, to Johniie Ker, iHni'stfr fff t^f ^nljllltfllt'lffr,' . . . . xl ti.

Item, to William DanieUtoune, i\f))ar of tjbc |3alirt Df SiiitlntBtlfo, in Schir Thomas Johnnestonis place, . . . . . . . . xx ti.

Item, to Maifter Dauid Bonar, for his Penfioune for ouergeving of ])e pley ' of fe Vicarage of
Panbryde, at fiE Kingis grace command, . . . . . . xx ti.

Item, to Mailler Andro Quhytelaw, for his Penfioune for ouergeving of his Tak to Alexander
Quhitelaw, (' his 50ungell bioder,') at ]ie Kingis command, jerelie grantit to him, (quhill) his grace
provide him ane benefice, .... . xxvij ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to William Fowlis, SsVbir of tjif eI6ffeRtr=]&0U^ tfur, . . Is.

Item, to Peris Rowane, ^unnnr, for his Penfioune ]ms ^ere, enterit be ane Precept, xl ti.

Item, io Charles Murray, itTni^trr of tj)f itiltgts' iHnrts', (Brood-mares,) for his fee, liiij ti.

Item, to Dauid Orrok, for ftfjjtitg of tj)f (Castcll of Crngitftjbanr,-' fra ]>e lecund day of September, fe 5ere of God 1540, to Jie famin day of September, 154; 1 5eris, includand ane hale 3ere, takand
ilk day for his ordinar wage, for him fijlf, his fervand, and hors, iiij s.,fumma, . Ixxij ti.

Item, to George Tod, Portnr in |)e faid Place, be fe fpace forefaid, takand ilk day xvj d.,
Jutnma, ...... . . xxiiij ti.

Item, to Maifter Johnne Dauidfoune, to geve to Qnintyne Were, Johnne Mylhous, Malie Hill,
and to Atkin Gardnar, all ^rrbnitlfl's' tit fJatj&nitr, (C'raignethane,) in complete payment of ] air wagis
reftand vnpayit be Andro Bowe, to fe laft day of Augull, 1341, . . x ti. xix s. viij d.

Item, to Jonet Browne, quhilk wes reftand awing to hiv be vmq''' Schir James Hammiltoune,
for feding of vij Oxin, . ... . . v ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, gevin to l)e twa ^Iimtari'^ Of X\)( Ca^trll of I3ttltabrrtul)r, for )>air feis pis 5ere to
cum, . . . . .... . XX ti.

Item, to William Pnrves, (iJitofe'iuafiar aitif ^ntut5») for liis Penfioun })is inftant ^ere, xxti.

Item, to Andro Lorymar, for his fe |)is :;ere and ]ie laft 3ere, quhilk was ommyttit and nocht
tane allowance of, ilk 5ere x ti., conforme to his Gift admittit, . . . xx ti.

Item, to Robert Blak, iirTas'f r, for his fe ])is sere and Jie laft 5ere, quhilk wes omittit and nocht
tane allowance, ilka 3ere vti.,y«w/«a, . . . . . . x ti.

Item, gevin to Hary Ra, Inglifman, quhilk come with OMrittingts" to ])E Kingis grace fra
tl)f ISfitg of SitglaiilJ, ....... xvti. viijs.

Item, gevin toSial^ftts" t|)at :pTai.)i^ bjJOUlt X\>t 8FroIl9", to pay for his fonis buirdis,^ for Jiair
Lammes terme laft bipaft, be ane Precept at ]ie Kin(;i.s command, . vj ti. xiij s. iiijd.

hem, gevin to Johnne Tofart, CrOffilJObj lltaltar, for ftringis, windeflis, windes cordis, deliuerit be him to Johnne Tenent, . . . . . . vj ti. iiij s.

Item, gevin to Johnne Atkynnis WyflFe, in Striueling, for meit and drink furneift to vmq'>^
(^rjjt'r) 31niitf^ ^amtlltouiif of dTnitnart, Situriit, ]'e tyme he remanit )iair vpoune fe bigtirg of
tf;f ^.tSxt ffSUarli in ^truiffiiig, at ])E Kingis command, be ane Precept, . Ixv ti.

Item, to tl)f (ilomjpttr, for his fuper expenfis in his laft Coniptis, as ]ie famyn (fchawiu
lieirwith) beris, ..... iiij™. ij'. Ixvj ti. xij s. v d.

' One of the King's Ships. ^ Law-plea. ' Forfeited to the Crown on the execution of Sir James

Ha>ulton of Finnart, knight. ' This payment was regularly made for a considerable period.

29 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 317

APPENDIX.

SuMMA of tJ5fffivpf««S Ot tiiiiaml ^auiidjaTti, above ftated, exdujive of the laft article, . • . ..... iiij"'. j' . Ivij ti. viij s. iiij d.

' The Expenfis of the iJtiri^ tff Sir&cu1fl)rucl)t, (Oct. 22 to Nov. 9,) raigtauitf, (Nov. 9
to 23,) and JSoviurtbt, (Apr. 30 to May 21, all inclufive,) fen pe laft Chakker, (the particular items
of which are detailed,) . ..... viij'^.lxxxxix ti. xvij s. viij d. ob.

Item, to Johnne Broane, iHnt^tf r of tljf 51l)0unf,' for his fe in fe ^ere bigane, and na allowance tane Jiairof, becaus he wes in Burdeous for ])e tyme, in ])E Kingis feruice, xl ti. ; and for Jiis
inftant ^ere vpir xl \\.,Jiimma, . . .... Ixxx ti.

Item, gevin to James Bertoune and Hary Bertoune, fonis to vmq''= Robert Bertoune
OF Ouir Bertoune, Jn&rs'nurur aittf ComptroIInr to ])E Kingis grace for pe tyme, in complete
payment of pe 5erlie Penfioune grantit to Jiame be J)E Kingis grace for all pe dayis of pair lyfe, or ay
and quhill ])ai and aper of pame be beneficit, as his grace thinkis expedient, &c. And becaus Elizabethe Craufurd, pe relict of pe faid vmq'" Robert, and Robert Mowbray, a/za* Bertoune of Bernbowgall, his fonne and executouris to him, hes quyteclamyt and difchargit all foomes of money awand
be our fouerane lord to pe faid vmq'" Robert, and fuperexpendit in his Comptis pe tyme he wes Thefaurar and Comptroller, as is contenit in pe Chekker Rollis, . . . Ixxx ti.

Item, to Arche Pennycuke, Ittai^tfr 0f \.\)t Winuaxxxt," for his fee, . xlti.

Item, gevin to Elijabeth Hume, dochter to vmq'« William Hume, tfl J)ir iHnn'agf, and to
peperfoune pat happynis to complet mariage with hir, . . Ixvj ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Johnne Lowife, Jfulr,^ and his moder, conforme to pE Kingis grace Letteris of Gift
maid pairupoune, for pis 5ear alanerly, . . , . . x ti.

^umnta omitiunt Cryprits'nruin Jjujus" (!l0mpott', • sxxvj». iiij'-, lij ti. xix s. ij d. ob.

The C?VpflTS'i£> maid and deburiit vpoune t^f iHbltlturitiS and Craftifmen wirkand pairon,
within pE Castell OF Edinburghe,'' and vjiiris places, . . I™.j''. Ixx ti. vij s. vj d. ob.

Sept. 9 — Item, gevin to James Scrymgeour, at his pns's'tng; tO dFrnnrr, . P. x ti.

Item, deliuerit to him to geve tljre drnlcoitfris" ]'at pailit with pe ^Inllit^ tit dFraitrr, Ixvj ti.

Item, gevin to pE Quenis grace ^Tnister %?0U5l)anf and his wyffe, at pair departing to
France, ....... ij'. xx ti.

Sept. 13 — Item, gevin to William Straitherne, for his expenfis paffing with twa clofe writtingis to JliECaltrr ittrdFarlaitt and iHr^rfgour with deligence, . . . xliiij s.

Oct. 3. — Item, gevin toane Duchemau^ for two ^us'saiTis' 0f iHailjf, twa paiTS'tS' of niail3e,
twa pair of Clrr^soitt^ of mail3e, xiiij Crownis of pe fone ; x ^alkriiggi's" but i)ri1f!gnir antS CTfs's's
Iirtis', X Crownis of the fone; twa ^nlftrpggis', with Heid-gair and Tellottis, iiij Crownis of pe fone ;
ttna s'taitlf of ^larnriS, with ^Itibt's and ^ogiitgt^, ane (Collar of ^trill, and ane ^Jos'sairc of meljc,
xiiij Crownis of pe fone ; all pis gair deliuerit to William Smythberd,^yM»i»!«, . xlvj ti. iiij s.

Oct. 10. — Item, to Adame Logane, fone to Robert Logane,7 to by him an Horse and to furneis him clathis, pas'^t'iig to tl)f JJiiig of l>itglantf toitl) ftjalftii^, . xxij ti. xiij s. iiij d.

Item, to Caldwellis, dfaTroitrr, quhilk paffit with pe famyne Halkis, to by him ane hors, and
furnefing of his clathis, . . .... xxij ti. xiij s. iiij d.

' One of the Royal Vessels of War. ' Another of the King's Vessels of War. ' The Court Fool oiBuffoon. ' One of the entries is as follows ; — ' Item, the penult day of Julij, resauit he Johnne Druniniond fra

Florence Corintoun, Vf. ane less (199) Estland buird to the Slhkouding or the Rec.isteh Hols; and gevin to the
pynouris for baring of the samin to the caitis and carting thairof, iiij s. Item, gevin to the Carteris, for carrage of
the samin to the Castell, extending to xix draucht, xlvij s. vjd.' * He also, on Oct. 10, got xxij li. for ' thre

schorte Culueiingis, ane Swerd, ane lang Cnluering, and ane sadjll, deliuerit to ye Kingis grace.' ** This is one

specimen of the numerous entries for defensive AK:Moua, which King James V. and his father had a singular passion
for collecting, of the finest workmanship, from foreign countries ; as well as what could be produced, of every possible
pattern, in Scotland. 'I'heir ctdlection of Arm(uir for the Touknajient was equally remarkable, with all kinds of
Jedburgh-Statfs, pikes. Cross-bows, &c, &c. The nature of the Armour here enumerated, has frequently been
explained in the course of this work. ' On Dec. 22, Robert Logane, Voung Laikd of Restalrig, got expensive

dresses of ' hlak Damese ' and ' Sating,' &c. It is likely he was the person here mentioned.

318 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Item, gevin to Thomas Arthure, for fumefing of Clathis of Reid and 5allow to twa Jj'utf men
fat paffit with ])e Halkis forefaid, ...... vij ti. vij s. j d.

/ton, gevin to Cald wallis, for thre monethis Wageis to him, his fervandis and x ^allii^, xixti. xj s.

Item, to mak pair expenfis to J)E King of Ingland with ])e faidis Halkis, xxxiiij H.

Oct. 15 /few, to Dauid Blythe, to pafs in Ingland for nitc (doittftirt ta tjc Sinhns's'as

tffiiri^, ....... . . . xxti.

Item, to ane fervand of J)E Cardynallis, quhilk brocht Writtiitgtsi to )»e Kingis grace
fttrtj&e 0f dFrnitrf, ....... xxij ti.

Oct. 16. — Item, for {)titguig of tje ffaprSrStrie in Halyrudehous, and down-takin of fe
famin, ... . . . . . ^'j s.

Oct. 22. — Item, gevin to Johxne Leslye, broder to my Lord of Rothes, to by him
(dlat^is' t0 1)ts" iHan'figr, . . . . . . . . Hi.

Death of Margaret, Queen Dowager of Scotland.

[The date of Queen SIargaret's death has long been a doubtful and controverted point, and is now, for the first
time, settled from indisputable authority. It is only necessary to notice a few of the earlier writers, as the later
authors merely perpetuate their errors. Bishop Lesleij states, that immediately after the ' Queue moder' had stood
' Godmoder' to Prince James, (which event he dates 1539,) she ' passit to Methwen, to remane thair with hir
husband ; quhair scho tuik seiknes, and schortly eftir deceassit ; and wes buryit in the Charter- Hous Kirk, at
Perth, in King .Tames the Firstis graif, with greit honour and pompe-funeralle, the King hira selfe and mony
Nobill men being thair present.' Bannatyne Club's Edit. p. 157 — Balfour falls into the same blunder. Annales,
I, 270. — The above entry in the Treasurer's Accounts is confirmed by ' The Chronicle of Perth,' which has
recently been printed for the Maitland Club. ' Quene Margaret, mother to King James the Fyft, deceisit on
Sanct Munokis day, in Methuen, 1541 yeiris ; bureit in the Charter hous, besyde Perth, the Kingis Waiestie, Nobilitie, and Barronis being present.' Chron. of Perth, p. 2. — It is proper to add, that there are two Scottish Saints
in the Calendar for October, St Monon, martyr, at Arduena, A.D. 404, Oct. 18 — and St Marnok, Bishop and
Confessor, who died at Kilmarnock, A.D. 322, Oct. 25. The former of these, however, is the likeliest date of the
two, from the various entries, and from the time which must have been employed in preparing the Funeral Ceremonies and ' Dwle' dresses.]

Item, gevin to ]<eMaister CwKE,to be him nitf IBtolf SMntf, ix elnis French blak, xiiijti.viij i.

Item, to ANE Frencheman, caliit Howefone, for v dufane ^alfe=bulfi^, xx pair ^afftsbrl'Iis',
and twa @Iu6(^, xxxv Crowds of \e fone, . • . xxxviij ii. x i.

Oct. 26. — Item, to ane Ofticiar ]>at paffit withe ane Writting fra ])E Justice Clerk to ])E
Lord Maxwall, for raitttitrbjnti0uitf of aitr (Coiortr of Hu^tirfarif, . . xxij s.

Oct. 30. — Item, deliuerit, to be fE Kingis giace ane Stolf,' (©otoitf, ^M\ii, anti (Cotf,^ xj
elnis half elne Paryfe blak, price of ])e elne 1 l.,fumma, . . , xxviij ti. xv s.

Item, for ix elnis blak freis, to lyne ])e Cote all throcht, . . xxxvj s.

Item, for pointis and ane tolat to turs it to Sanct Johnestoune,' . iiij s. iiij d.

Item, for twa 39h)Ir 33onrttis' to his grace, . . . . xl s.

Item, to be his grace aitr UntfiiTg^yTotr, four elnis Paryfe blak, . . x ti.

Item, Paryfe blak, to be his grace aitt Jawtriltg ttoftr,^ . vij ti. xj s. x d. ob.

Item, to Robert Blak, to pafs and proclame aire 5itts'tirt Courtc lit Kf^ittrgiif, to be haldin
be xxij day of November nixt to cum, ..... xxij s.

' The Quenis Tyremont.'

Nov. 1. — In tlwfrji, gevin to Alexander Hwtoune, to pas and warne ])E Erles of Hunt-

' O. Fr. Dxieil, mourning weeds. Cofgrave. ' On Oct. 15, the King got ' skalbertis to his swerdis of

blak Veluet.' On 21st, there was delivered to the King in ' the Abbav, xv elnis of blak Veluet of Janis, quhilk
wes send to the Quenis grace, xlv Ii.' On 25th, ' ane Cote, with slevis of blak Veluet, ane Dowelet of blak
Sating,' with other furnishings of black. " Perth — where Queen Wargaret was buried. ' There are

other furnishings of ' lyningis,' ' pasmentis,' ' schone,' (shoes,) and ' Lyaris and twa Cuscheonis of French blak.'

29 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS, * 319

APPENDIX.

LIE, Marschell, Murray, and vferis Lordis and Gentilmen in ])e North to cum to tf)f ©tttittS
jrurriiTffirt, ...... . . xliiij s.

Item, to Robert Blak, fiklyke Letteris to ))E Abbottis of Newbottill, Melros, Lord jefter,
and vjieris Lordis and Gentilmen in Lothyane, . . . x^^j s. viij d.

Nov. 2 — Item, to Henry Kempt, tff r«tt^ tia §l\illxn^t iat®.i>tnt ^TnglfnTHitf, quham God
aflblje, . . • . . . . . -XJ liNov. 5.. — Item, to ©rmoittf, Purfewant, for pafling with ficlyke Letteris to Fyffe, StraithERNE, and Menteithe, . . . . ... xliiij s.

Item, to Johnne Cob, for paffing with ficlyke Letteris to ])E Erle of Cassillis, Lord
Sympill and Ross, and vlier Gentilmen in ))E Westland, . • . xliiij s.

Nov. 11. — The Queen and her ' Ladyis of Honour' got ISiuIc OTftft^ and iHffuntiitg
IBrrss'f^ furnished on Nov. vij, ix, and xj, which appear to have been sent to Falkland. It is unnecessary to repeat them here.

Item, gevin to Patrik Bell, Furrour, for dJ^0rrtligi'^ and warkraanfchip furnefu to t^c
©tlfltis" grace and ))e |3h)If SilSftft^ forefaid, as bis Compt beris, . . xsx ti. iij s.

Item, to Archibald Leythe, for Furringis deliuerit be him to J>e Quenis grace, to fe eifect forefaid, ........ xxiiij s.

Nov. 14. — Item, gevin to William Straitherne, for paffing with Letteris to Dunbertane,
Renfrew, Irwin, and Air, to charge fe Gentilmen of ])e Schyris pa^^ toitj^ tlje ©rif of (Slfitftnrnc to
iSnitturf, ......... xliiij ti.

Item, to Alexander Hutoune, for paffing to iHc^rrgour and AUane Stewart of Baquhidder,
with twa clofe Writtingis, . . . . . . . iij ti.

Item, gevin to Archibald Heryot, for paffing with Letteris to ^elJttrft to bring in certane
efchete gudis of }>e Kerrys, tljnt ^Irio ii)t ^robos't J'airof, . . . xx s.

Nov. 16. — Item, gevin to Thomas Arthour, (Mailer Tailor,) for making xv (llloftlS to tj&E
(©uritt'sigi'ace and ]&{r itntfuisV ilk Cloke iiij s., /«)«/««, . . . iij ti.

Nov. 19. — Item, gevin for ant Stole, of Scottis blak, to Soljititt Jtcs'Iuf, fone to J)E Erle of
Rothes, . . . . . . . iiij ti. ix s. iij d.

Nov. 19. — Item, gevin to Ormond, Purfewant, to pas with Letteris to warae ]'e Barronys to
rutff tuitS tl)f ISutgt'£j grarc to t5c33or1foun'sV • .... . xliiij s.

Nov. 28 Item, to Archibald Heryot, for paffing with Letteris to ii)t WinrtSnnt of ii)t

iWutllrinjiHarrbfiEi of Sitglaitlf, . .... iij ti. vj §.

Nov. 29 Item, to be tl)tt![xn%^ ane Cote, vJ quarteris demmegrave, and vJ quarteris Sallow,'' .... . . ... Ivij s. ix d.

Nov. 30. — Item, gevin to Thomas Ahannay, for his expenfis paffing to Perthe with pE
Quenis ita1rj)t^ Oofet'^, . . • • • • • . xj s.

Item, deliuerit to Johnne Mofman, for <ill)mitii of ^oHf and vjier (BoTtt Juarlt, broclit furth
of France be him, and deliuerit to t^f ®ttrtt(^ grace, . . . iij <■. xxvj ti.

Dec. 15. — Item, deliuerit to tj)f f ajpre'r^tr, to cover ])e Stavis (Pofls} of aitc 33r1f to ])E
KiNGis grace, and hing aboute ])e famin, xiiji elnis (Urammos'sof SFflttft, Ixxxxixti. vij s. vj d.

Itetn, to (be) Fren3eis to ]ie faid Bed, ix grete hankis sJrludtg ^oTlf, . ix ti. xviij s.

Item, to ])E Tapescher, for his warkmanfchip and making of ])e Fren5eis to fefaid Bed, and
inafeittg of tl)t Clntj&t's' of S~tai)t following,^ . . • . vj ti.

' ' FuTE Mantillis' of ' Paryse' and ' Frenche blak' were provided, on Nov. 3, for the Queen and her Ladies
OF Honour, with * Harnessingis,* &c., and similar furnishings were also made for the King, &c. ^ Other

messengers, dispatched with similar Letters. ^ Probably the same individual who is elsewhere styled ' The

Littill Turk,' one of the Court Dwarfs, From the quality of the dr^ss, he appears to have been a Jester or Butfoon,
whose motliy dress was green and yellow. * He also got a doublet and hose of ' blak fustiane and Scottis gray.*

'It is unnecessary to enumerate these, for although they are interesting, they are too numerous to admit of insertion.

320 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1541.

APPENDIX.

Dec. 21. — Item, deliuerit to Thomas Arthuir, to be ane Dwle Gowne, Cote, and Huid to ])E
KlNGls grace, xji elnis Paiyfe blak Sating,' . . . . xviij s. ix d.

Dec. 23 Item, deliuerit to Dauid Blyth, to by bim nitf IBfolfsCntf, Igtu'lf, and ^oiS, and

to mak his expeiifis pns'^iitg fotti) tje ©mbn^^ntouri^ in 3)nglait1r, . . xxti. iiij s.

Item, gevin to George Leflye, fone to JiE Erle of Rothes, to by him claithis agane

3wle, ..... . . . .xxti.

Item, to Maifter James Bonar, quhilk he gave for CelfroniS and (§nrn0ttt£i to ))e Kingis
grace, . • • • • • . . iij ti. vj i.

Item, to pe men ])at brocht fe (©urf=dFnTr0ltt^ to j)E Kingis grace, . xliiij s.

Dec. 24. — Item, tff Bf Currftri^ tff %ativ %ant for \)it 39tolf, four a elnis Holland clayth,

and four i^ elnis round Holland claytli, . . . . iiij ti. xiiij s. vj d.

Item, deliuerit to Jie Tapescher, to be four <£.\nX\)ii of §tnit, tff Jiitg tJ)e Cbnjptll and ])e

King and Quenis Cbnlmrrris', xlviij elnis Frenche blak, . . . Ixxij ti.

Item, to Jobnne joung, JSrff'iff^tfr,^ to be Pfitlfplitnt^ and froitttHiS to pE King and

Quenis Stitar, viji elnis Frenche blak, . . . . . xj ti. v s.

Item, to be (ilffbfriirgiS tff tjc 3lrttrOltt^^ in ])E Chapell, xij elnis blak Birge Sating, price
of )>e elne x s^Jicmma, . . . . . . vj ti.

Item, gevin to Johnne joung, for tvifa Crurfft'vt^ o( fdk browdery wark, and twa 3ntngfi£i fff

ffur %atSu and ^aiTft 3Sol)ititt; for making of f>e cuveringis of ]>e Lettronis, withe faflis of filk and

furneiing Jiairto ; and making of all ]>e forefaid (C])a^tXl gatr, . . . xviij ti. vij s.

Item, gevin for waving of vj^ vnces blak filk, deliuerit to Thomas Softlaw, tff hinlf tjbf Kt'ngt^

^lorrtf5f)nii1fis' withe, . . . . . . . ix s. ix d.

Item, gevin to Johnne Mofman, for niTf CIainh=5'r{)fn of fduer to put SThjirjjt ptlTHfr* in,

weyand thre vnces, price of |>e vnce xvj s., and for ]ie warknianfcbip, xiiij s.,fimima, iij ti. ij s.

Item, for ane vfer ((IIainb=^rJ)fn tff put ^alfe mn't tit,'' weyand vij |- vnces grote wecht ; and

for ))e warkmanfchip, XX s. /«»»«(«, ... . . vjti. xiijs.

Dec. 29 — Item, gevin to Petir Thomefone, for his expends pa^s't'ng tff Jttmtfnitr to ttt
C?mbas"0"atfftin'^ withe deligence, ..... xxij ti.

Item, deliuerit be Thomas Arthuir to ])E Lady Cragy, to be hir JBfolcs^ffhJitr, WiittiU, and
^llt"lf, vij elnis Paryfe Blak,^ . . . ... xij ti. xij s.

Jan. 3, 1541-2. — Item, to mend tiie ^tifiti^CJbrrffft, vji elnis blak Veluet, xvj ti. xvij s. vj d.
Item, for v quarteris auld Crameffy Sating, to mend Jie lynyng of |>e famin, . iijti.

Item, to Helene Rofs, to mak Fren5eis to pe faid Qljtrpfft of blak filk, iij ti. v s. iiij d.

Item., for ane reii^e of worfet to Jie italfl) fllragffs" brp'tttn,'' . . iij s.

/<«>/«, gevin to Johnne Cranftoune, for brtngtitg of ttoaCljflJi^ to fE Kingis grace, vjti. xiijs.iiijd.
Jan. 10. — Item, to tijr ^itspamrrt «§fittiIniaiT ]'at is withe Raphaell,' . xti.

/to?i, to )ie faid 5t5ap5'irII, at )ie Kingis grace command, . . . xti.

Item, to Alexander Wicht, cultellar, for v gilt ®u5iltgari£f, nut Drlfllttrgjfj^taff, twa
Jrpair=]&r'Jlts", ouergilt, and four lUuggfOttitssloftfti's',^ .... viij t. xvj s.

Jan. 11. — Item, to Jakkis and his collegis, Armoraris, for aitf lur^t ^arrrfi^, with dowbill
Teslettis, and ane Stele-bonet to ]ie Kingis grace, deliuerit to Robert Gyb, xiiij ti. ix s.

' Many other furnishings. ' Embroiderer. ' Desks. O. Fr. Lectrin, letrin. * It is uncertain

whether this is touch and priming powder, or tooth-powder, though the Editor believes the latter to be the proper
reading, as a Clam-shell would not make a ready flask for priming a culverin, &c. See under Feb. 15, 15+1-2,
following. ^ This was a favourite ornament of the King's. He appears to have been eminently skilled

as a Falconer, and indeed in all the sports of the field and manly exercises. ' She also got ' ane Riding

Cloke,' ' Dwle Cwbcheis,' consisting of 8 elns of Holland claith,' ' ane Fute-Mantill and Harnessing,' with
' Arming (Ermine) to lyne hir Huid and taill of hir Gowne,' amounting to xxiij li. iij s. additional. ' There

is much interesting expenditure, for furnishings to the Royal Stables, &c. at this period, but too lengthened to be
given here. ' Raphaell Cassanzeis. ■ Stocks or handles to Dudgeon-daggers.

29JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 321

APPENDIX.

Item, to Robert Crag, for ant Collar al goflf ^ttt boi'tj) |3frTf, brocht hame be him to fE
QuENis grace, xvij ti. xij s. ; and for Bonettis, fwerd-beltis, fewiiig-filk, and vper gear, xiiij ti. xij i.,
^umma, .... . .... xxxij ti. iiij s.

Item, gevin to Williame Calderwood, for aitf pair 0f (©rgaiti^, deliuerit to Wyt (ilbapell tit
?BaIgrtttfbou^, . . . . . • • Ixti.

Jan. 24. — Item, to Scliir Dauid Murray of Balwaird, kny', in recompance of his landis of
DuDiNGSTouNE, taitr \n tff tbf nrlu parft Bf^ulff ^lalnntlfrbouS, . • iiij' ti.

Item, to Dame Mayne, in ))e Cannogait, for dettis awing to hir be 33arl)ara ^tctoart, at pE
KiNGis command, . . . . . . . 1 tl.

Jan. 31. — Item, to Peter Thomfone, for his expenfis pa^^tirg to SliiittfpiTE to tj)f ©ntba^s'aj
tourt^, with deligence, . . .... . xxxiij ti.

Item, to Johnne Cob, for paffing with clofe Writtingis to X\)t (dapntaitr of iBtmbar and
^riorfs" of ^a^tirgtotiitr, . ... . . . xij g.

Feb. 2. — Item, gevin to Helena Rofs, for attf ^ttrs" to putt iij'= Crownis in, quhilk wes gevin
to \\jt dFrrnrl) CFmba^satour, ....... xiiij s.

Feb. 14. — Item, gevin to tjt ©Ufitt's" |3auttour,' to by colouris to paint with, in Falkland, . . . . . . - . . xj ti.

Feb. 15. — Item, gevin to Johnne Mofman, (goldfmith,) for ttoa ^alftiiJrllf^S Of (SoUr to ])E
KiNGis grace, weyand xiij \ Vnicorne wecht, price of fe vnce viij Y\.,fumma, . xiij ti. x s.

Item, gevin to him for making of fame, .... xxij s.

Item, gevin to him for ailf |9fltltarc of Btltirr, to fttip ^ufet^tfttljf ilt,^ to pE KiNGis grace,
ixviij s., and making of it, xiiij s.,Jumma, .... xiij s.

Item, gevin to him for €l)fmtt^, JTaiuInttt^, fffrgnttt^, JJraccIattis", Jiingis", ^taiTi£(, and
Pcrlr^, furnefit Jiairto, . . .... iiij' Ixxxvij t. iiij s.

Item, gevin to Thomas Rynd, for ficlyke (&oftf=ionrfe, . . ij'xlixti. vj s.

Mar. 5. — Item, gevin to Alexander Hutoune, to pas to pe Lord Maxwall with tl)t ^orttius"'
of H)t 3tu3tirr fliourtr of Smtartfalf,' ...... xxij s.

Mar. 6. — Item, to be tlos'c (ilobcn'^ to X\)t ^teilTs^alfini^, v dufane and four Bafane'
(kynnis, ........ . viij s. x d.

Mar. 10. — //f»w, gevin for Clatbis furnefit to Thomas Dury, Ctofef to Hor'if 3)antf ^, xti.vij s.jd.

Mar. 13. — Item, to be aitf Uurl)t ^otoitt to ittats'trrs" itlargarttr, lifter to ]ie Erle oe
Levinax, ix elnis Lylis worfet, . . . . . vj ti. xiij s.

Item, for iHfrtrt)ftfelS" and ilnfe (^able) s'femtni'^, to lyne ))e faid gowne with,^ iij ti. x s.

Apr. 24, 1542 — Item, gevin to Charlis Murray, for aiTC JSartfit (Barbed) ^aritrs"trtg to the
KiNGis grace Hors, . . . . ... xxij ti.

Item, gevin to him for Ixxxxix ^aglin^fBt^, deliuerit to ]ie Mvnitioune Hous, price of the pece
xiiij s.,yMmw(a, ...... Ixixti. vjs.

Item, to t\it ^rotljoitotar, and ane v]ier fervand of the Quenis, at fair paffing to
France,' ......... xxxiij ti.

Item, to Hallot, |Pagr, to furneis his expenfis to France,^ . . . xxxiij ti.

May 5. — Item, gevin to \\>t ©tttltt^ ^aiittour, for ane monethis wage, fra )ie thrid day of
pis monethe to be pait to him monetblye, as it cummis vpone pe day, to ij s. vj d. for him and his
fervand, . . . . . . . iij ti. x s.

' The name of this individual cannot be traced in the Record. He was for a considerable time in the constant
service of the Queen, and receives many large payments. ' See Dec. 24, 1541, preceding. ^ The Porteous

Roll. ' Usually written ' Annanderdaill.' ' Bison. " A variety of other furnishings,

' blankettis, lynnyng schetis, boystaris, Arres-wark for a bed-cover,' &c. ' See Jan. 20, 1340-1, of these Extracts. ' He also got costly dresses, previous to his departure.

VOL. I. f 2 S

322 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1542.

APPENDIX.

May 12 Item, fend to Sanctandrois, to be ane Gowne to the Lady Erroll, Hgane \)n

iHarringt, xiiij elnis reid Veluot of giane, .... xlvtux s.

Item, to be hir nitf Itt'rttTI, vij h elnis Purpure Sating, . . xxij ti. x s.

May 22. — Item, to be fend to Sanctandrois, to be Clatbis to Serat, tje ©unttS J?tolf,
thie elnis dimmegrave, and thre elnis 3allow, . . . . vj ti. xviij i.

Item, to ^tsU, Herold, at J)E Kingis command, for bis lawbouris awaytand vpone tje
dFrrnr|& Dmtns's'ntour, the tyme be wes heir, . . . . . xti.

Item, gevin to Peter Rofs, for turfing of Letteres to tj)f 23uftc of Ponifr,' vj ti. xij s.

May 24. — Item, to be nitf (Cotf and ane pair of J)Ot0" (for J>e King) of ])e Ktaltme faffoune;
and to jeit the Cote with thre vauis aboute the Taill, xj elnis blak veluet of Janis,^ . xxxiij ti.

Item, to ane Inglifman fat brocbt Writtingis to X\)t CPmbns's'atoun'^, . vj li. xij s.

May 27. — Item, to Katberyne Bellendene, to be aitr §'Trbt to put above the Kingis Hames,
twa elnis Purpure teifites, withe thredis of gold, . . . . . xl s.

Item, for rubennis of filk Jiairto, . . . . . ixd.

Jun. 1. — Item, gevin to Thomas Wallace, Ta]50ur, for making of the Quenis grace Stole
i&1i\xm\i and hir Blalfui^, and furnefing maid be him Jiairto, . • x ti. xj s. viij d.

Jun. 7. — Item, to Johnne Caldvvallis, for his expenfis paffingin Norroway for %alfti^ to the
Kingis grace, ....... xxij ti.

Item, gevin to Johnne M wre, for his expenfis paffing to gyd the faid Joimne in iSffrrotoaD, xj ti.

Item, gevin to the Laird of Bruntstoune, for bis expenfis pasis't'ng tff dfraiTCf, at the
Kingis command, with four %?0riS, . . . . . P x ti.

Item, to pay for fe Fraucht, and boyis to kepe ]iame, . . . xx ti.

Item, to THE Laird of Stevinsoune, for his expenfis paffing to France pe famin
tyme, ........ xxxiij ti.

Item, deliuerit to Andro Wod of Largo, at the Kingis command, be ane Precept, to
rrtfeutcilantfi^, as his grace hes gevin iiim command, . . . 'j™ W.

Jun. 17. — Item, deliuerit to tjc dfrritr]bt J)))0ti)gar, at bis paffing to France, xxxiij ti.

Regalia — The King's and Queen's Crowns.

Jun. 27. — Item, gevin to the Capitane of Crawfurd, for fyve fcore xij i vnce btrmolt^
tltg i&aVSi of iHyu'Jf, price of the vnce vj ti. viij s., quhilk wes deliuerit to Johnne Mofman and difponit vpone the King and Quenis graces Crownis, weyand, t|&r Kt'itgi^ (CroJuitr, xij | vnce; tje
(OlUCniiS (llrotolTf, xxxv vnce ; and to eyk, aitf grrte CJcitJC to his grace, xvij vnce, and aitr 33flt
to |>E Quene, weyand xix ^ vnce, .... . vij'xviij ti. viij s.

Jun. 28 Item, to X\)t ©Ufltt'sJ ^Snilttour, for his Wageis fra ))e laft of May, iij ti. x s.

Jun. 30. — Item, gevin to the Lohdis Erskin and Ruthvene, for fupporting of thair Expenfis paffing to i\)t JJortfOuri^, ilkane 200 merkis, and to JiE Justice Clerk 100 merkis,

iiji^xxxiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to Dauid Creiclitoune, Capitane of J>e Castell of Edingburcht, for (iFyjjfus't^
maid vpoune Mathow Hammyltoune, Ewyne M'^neyll Vane, Thomas Gray, and Andro
Hammyltoune, (^tatf ISn's'oitfrs',) be ])e fpace of ane 5ere, . . Ixti.

Jul. . — Item, refiiiuit fra Alexander Quitelaw, aitf ClaiuntfS'ftlfn of filuer, weyand vij vnce
half grote wecht, to mak ane new Sehell to keip ]ie Kingis jiialft niftt,^ and eikit to Jie famyne twa vnce
3J grote wecht ; and to be ane floppell to ane fchell to keip the Kingis grace iTtottJbt pnflffr, xxxix s.

Item, gevin to bini (Johnne Mofman) for making of |iame, . . . xx s.

Jul. (7.) — Item, tS.\)C (SiuriTisi (Magdalenes) 33crigt celebrated as ufual.

' Pomerauia. ' Many otbcr t'urnishiiigs, &c. ' See Aug. 13, 1540, of these Extracts, &c.

29 Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 323

APPENDIX.

Jul. 7. — Item, gevin to ©rntoitlf, Persewant, for his Expenfis pafling to warne fe Lairdis
of Striuelingfchyre and Lothyane to ryde with J)E Quenis grace fe tytne fche paflit forth of Striueling to ^fhli^, . . . . . . . . . xxij s.

Jul. 8. — Item, gevin to Thomas Ramfay, Falconar, for liis Wageis remanying in Edinburcht
Tpone the s'fttiitg of tjjf itiitgt's" grace ^nlltt^, .... iiij ti. viij s.

Jul. 10. — Item, gevin to t^f ©ticiti^ pn{iTt0Ur, for his wageis to Aug. firft nixt to cum, (the
fame being paid monthly,) . . . . . iij ti. x s.

Item, to William Smythherd, for dichting of the Kingis grace 3tts"tcng ^aritf^ and gilt
Harnes, Steill Sadillis, Roundellis for Speris, Schaifronis for Horfis, &c. . . xxli.

Jul 11. — Item, gevin to Johnne Bertoune, for expenfis maid vpoune t^f ^retf SFiti'rame,'
Jul. xj, 1541, at hir pns's'tirg t0 dTraitrt tui'tB t]&t (CnrtfiitaTT; and paying of Marynall wages, &c.,
except hir victaling, , . . ... . . I'^xlix ti. xxiij d.

Jul. 13. — Item, deliuerit to ])e Kingis grace, in Pebli.s, aitf 5Kutg with ane grete ^a^\)iu,
(Sapphire,) . . . . . . . . xvjti. xs.

Item, gevin to Johnne Paterfoune, for ane Kaife for vj ^rftf |9(rcs' (Silver Plate), xvj s. ;
and for ane Kaife to iiij s'ntflTI Prrr^ with ane cover, x s. ; and for twa Kaiflis to twa ilatuitrt^ ^ jrf
^tfttfr, XX s.jjiimma, ... ...... xlvj i.

Item, to ])E Capitane of Dunbar, for fuflenyng of ^aiixixt iHoutfnrt in meit and drink
fra Jie feift of Candilmes, 1540, to ]ie feift of Lammas, 1541, . . . xlv ti.

Jul. 14. — Item, gevin to Peter Thomefoune, for his expenfis paffing to t'i)t (dottn^all tsl Sorlt
with deligence, . . . . . . . . xvti. viij s.

Item, gevin to Johnne Merl30une, in complete payment for the ISt'gtitg of tljf 9Kcg{^ttr ?^OttS
in THE Castell of Edinburcht, aboue Jie fowme promittit him in the Contract, becaus the werk
wes ekit,' .......... xxij ti.

Item, gevin to Frances Aykman, for ISroggt^ furnefit be him to ]ie Kingis grace, and to
iHfli0"trrfS" illnrgarttf, at his grace command, .... Ixiiij ti. xvj s.

Jul. 16. — Item, for cariage of the Paljeonis to t^t |^?uitttitg, and Hors wage, fra Jie vij of
fis moneth, . . . . . . . , . . ix ti.

Item, gevin to William Hardy, paffing to Dunfermling with ane clofe Writting to ]'E BisCHOPPls, being fair, to cum to Edinburcht tO roithoi) thf C&tlflTt^ grace, &c. . . xxij s.

Jul. 17. — Item, gevin to Robert Spittall, for making of ])e Quenis HBtuIc ^niwti'^ and hir
5ll,alfl)(^, ......... xxij ti. ix s. vij d.

Jul. 18. — Item, to ane boy, to pafs with ane Writting of mij llortf ^frrrtariS to DumfermHng to the Lordis, being Jiair, . . . . . . . i>'j s»

Jul. 20. — It£m, to Robert Blak, for paffing with Letteris fra ]>e Lordis to ^rtflmrrBt,* xxij s.

Item, to Raphael Hyfpanjert, for his penfioune, . . . . xxti.

Jul. 21. — Item, gevin to Adam Grymiflaw, to furneis (hire) him ane Hors to fE Kingis
grace, xliiij s. : And at liis returnyng agane furth of C?rgi)If, xliiij s.,Jumma, . iiij ti. viij s.

Item, to Petir Thomfoune, for his expenfis pafling with deligence eftir tj&f iHitis'trr of ^Ott^s
baUlf, . . ....... xxvj ti. viij s.

Jul. 26. — Item, gevin to ])E Laird of Swyntoune, be deliuerance of ])E Lordis, for ane

^or^ qtij&t'Ift bfs" tanf fra ^fi)ir JWafintant Cbfrfs", and he wes caufit to mak redres ]iairof be fe

Lordis Commiflioneris,' ........ xxxiiij ti.

' One of the Royal Vessels of War. ' Laveis. ' Because additions were made to the work. There

are many entries of payments to account of this building in former parts of the Accounts. See also Aug. 16, 1542.
* The same day Letters were despatched to ' the Bischofpis, Prei.attis, and Lordis, throcht all the Westlanij and
Northland.' And during the remainder of the month a great stir was made, in summoning all the Barons, &c. ' for
suppleing of the Bordouris,' &c. ' The Lairds of Aytoune and Swyntoune were Warden-deputes of the

East Marches at this time, having regular Pensions for their services.

324 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1542,

APPENDIX.

Jul. 29. — The C?r})fit^i^ of tljf aSriitt Jis'Iaitlf, and the Kingis gi-ace ^rljippis", /ier tempm
Compoti, ........ iij' Ixxvj ti. xvj s. xj d.

Item, to Alexander Orrok of Sillibawbe, in 5r0r|)irjgu1ff with Barbara Falconer, dochter to
vmq''= Dauid Falconar, at ]ie Kingis command, becaus the faid vmq''' Dauid wes flane in his gi-ace
feruice,' . . . • . .... j'xxxiij ti. vj s. viij d.

Item, to Adam Forman, for paflTing with Wiittingis to t]&e Coutts'nlt fff ^0rfe, and tharefter
to Londyne, to tlie Maifler of Houlliald, ..... xxvj ti. viij s.

Item, to ane Inglifman quhilk brocht ane Writting fra ^c\)ix JSJlfilTtant CFbfri^ to ]>e Lordis,
(of Privy Council,) ...... iij ti. vij s.

Aug. 7. — Item, deliuerit to Charlis Murray, to be Jllte ^^IlsVltJf,- x elnis raid and 5allow Teffites of cord, and twa elnis quhite Teflites of Janis, to be Crocts' fairto, . . x ti. viij s.

Item, to Thomas Gybfbane, karter, in parte of payment of the fnriagc of rfrtntTC Srtcljerif
to ]iE Heremitage,^ . . . . . . . . 1 s.

Item, to James Law, to by ane fait hyde to roucr tj&f ^oTlff r J>at paflit fair, and twa pulderbaggis, . . ....... xiij s. viij d.

Item, gevin to Dauid Purves, mafer, for jiafling with Letteris to \\)t jfWtrs'f, to proclame and
charge all inliabitantis Jiairof fat haid fled, to pafs hame agane for defenfe of fe cuntre, . xls.

Item, gevin to Robert Blak, for paffing with ane Writting to ))E Laird of Basse, to Charge
him to Itrpr CFIrn'itgtouitf, . ...... xiiij s.

Item, to Thomas Dalmahoy, to mak his expenfis paffing with \e ^rtrluric to pe HeremiTAGE, .......... xxij s.

Aug. 10. — Item, gevin to Jolinne Cob, paffing to charge )ie Carteris in Leithe, Hadingtoune,
North Berwyk, and vjieris places in Lodiane, to be reddy within xxiiij houris warnyng,* xxij s.

Item, gevin to twa Inglifraeu, quhilkis wer iu Cowper-of- Angus and Newbottill, ilkane four
Crownis of fe Cone, ........ viij ti. xvj s.

Item, to the Inglifman quhilk brocht Writtingis laft fra t^f CouiTS'alT Of %BX% iiij ti. viij s.

Aug. 12. — Item, gevin to William Champnay, for paffing with Letteris to Dunbertane, Glafqw,
Air, Irwine, and Quhitherne, to charge fame fend fair ^ri^ippt^ and boittis, with vferis Vefchellis, tO
raru iitrit f iirt 5 of t^f SUts" ; and with vjieris Letteris to fe Schereffis, to charge fame be reddy vpoune
fax houris warning,^ . . . . . . . . . Iv s.

Item, to Peter Thomfoune, for jpas^tiTg to itoitlfniTt with Writtingis to the Maifter Houfhald, .......... xxxiijti.

Item, deliuerit to Walter Scrymgeour,'' to be aitc ^tr^fltu, and CrOffS fairto, &c. viij ti. xixs.

Item, gevin to Johnne Mofnian, quhilk he gave to ane man ]iat brocht ttua dFal^ (Coitjrarf^ to
Edenburcht, . . . . . • . . . . xx s.

Aug. 15. — Item, gevin to Archibald Heriot, for paffing with ficlike Letteris? to fe SLorlT
%tiXtx : And with Letteris, to proclame in Coflftitgj&ame fat all Tenentes and Frehaldarea of f e
faniin pafs and remane fair for defence of fe Place,** ..... xxij s.

Item, gevin to .Tohnne Forflar, Bowar, for Arrowis to f e Kingis grace ; and ane Bow, ane
Braife, ane Glvffe, and ane dufiine Arrowis, to ]iE Quenis grace, deliuerit to Oliuere Sinclare and
Johnne Tenent, fra Apr. 3 to Jul. 30, inclufive, . . . . xti. xvs. vjd.

Aug. 16. — Item, to Robert Blak, for paffing with Letteris to f e Schereflf of Hadingtoune, and

' At the Siege of Tamtallon. ^ Ensign, Standard. ' Prior to the Battle of Haddenrig. ' Charges

were also despatched to all the Shires to be in readiness. ^ Messengers sent with similar cliai'ges to all the

other Sheriffs. i" Constable of Dundee, heritable Uoyal Standard- Bearer. ' Letters had been sent ' with

deligence,* by many Messengers, to all the Nobility, &c. * The Monastery. In the counties adjoining the

Borders, the Barons, &c. were enjoined ' nocht to ryde' Forays into England, individually, but to await the arrival
of the Army, &c.

29JAC. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 325

APPENDIX.

Inhabitantis of ]ie Schyre, to paffe within fax houris to ilnfolfer, and await vpoune ]ie LieuteNENT,' . . ........ XXIJ S.

Item, to Beffe M'^caw, iSitrite to Statfu Jant, be ane fpeciall commande of ])e Kingis grace,
ficlik as fcho gatt serlie of before, . . • • • • • ^ ^iItem, gevin to Antbone Briflett, ^timirgfatte, for laubouris done be him to Jie Quenis grace,
at J)i8 tyme alanerly, . . . . . • • . . xx ii.

Item, to George Leche, William Qubite, George Fotbringham, and Dauid Robertfoune, ^urs
rurgrants", pafland to fE Bordouris for curing of all perfonis )iat liapnit to be hurt be 3)ngli£i

ntrnnr, • • • • • • • • • • -"^'J *••

SuMMA totalttint CfpciTS'nrum (a Sep. 7, 1541, ad Aug. 16, 1542, being the total expenditure of the preceding year,) . . . xxiiij"^ iiij>: Ixxxxiij It. xj s. x d. ob.

SuMMA of ' tljf iHhjiTituriti's",' . • • .1" ij"^ Ixxxx li. xiiij s. ij d.

A few of the articles only can be selected in this place, although many of them would be
found to be extremely interesting to the Historian and Antiquary.

(Mar. 18, 1541.) — Item, gevin to certane pynouris, for monting and drawing of the farain
(' ane dowbill Culuering,' newly founded) to the Craigheid,- Xa ht ^fuit > anif s'rbott : And for the
drawing of the Pece cafline (caft) before the laft Chakar to be fchote withe hir, . v s.

Item, for indrawing of the famin within tj&e ftlbltltiouitf^^attS, eftir fai wer fchot and
feyit, . . . . . . . • • . . iijs.

Item, gevin to Andres Menrioune,for Crating 0f tljr SStitgts' grace armriS, with Vnicornes,
TiiRissiLLls, and Fleurdelyces vpoune the farain Pece ; and graving of the dait of fe jere vpoune
the mouthe fairof ; and vpoune the graving of Armes, Thriflillis, and Flourdelyces vpoune findry
vferis Feces, fett in tafk be Johnne Drummond * to him, . . . xiii li. vj s. viij d.

(Sep. 9.)— Item, gevin for xl new 53antmf0'= to fe '^uXV Cultirrfirgts' quhilkis wes fund in
THE Castell rouftit,'' and the Rammes brokine, . . . • vj 5. viij a.

Item, for thre chopinnis Vie de Olyve for clen5eing fairof, • . . vj s.

(Oct. 3.) — Item, Johnne Drummond and his fervandis paffit to Daliiowse-wode and cuttit
xiiij"^ pece of Birk, to be jokkis and fyre-wode, and tenne treis of elme to be navillis to quhelis ;
and gevin for the carriage of fair wark-lvmes to ]<e Wode, and hame-bringing of the faniin, x s.

(Mar. 27, 1542.)— The Expenfis deburfit vpone tjc puHrf rjiHnlitC and craftifmen, fra Mar.
27 to Aug. 6, ........ . xlix ti. xij d.

The Expenfis deburfit vpone tjjt 2MarIt of t^f 98rgi'5"tf r Notts'," {fumma), xxxviij li. vj s. x d.

Item, to William Fandik, Ducheraan, iHafear of SntE ^uitm'^, fra his entere to Wirk in JiE
Castell, quhilk wes ])e xxvij day of Auguft ladbypaft, to ])e xxj day of December (1541) inelufive,
quhilk tyme he deceffit, havand vlklie xviij s,,Jumma, . . . . xv ti. vj s.

' The same charges sent to the Sheriffs of Linlithgow, Peebles, and Selkirk, &c. ' It is believed this refers

to the Calton-hill, probably at the place where Nelson's monument now stands. ^ Proved. * The

Master-Gunner. ' Ramrods. * Rusted. ' See Jul. 14, 1542 of these Extracts, &c. The other

entries referring to this important building were merely payments to account; but they possess no interest otherwise than as viewed in connexion with a work of national utility.

CRIMINAL TRIALS

AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

Jan. 5, 1542-3. — David Schaav found furety (Johne Ker, Ion of
Andrew Ker of Fernyhirft) to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Stirling, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Sir John Striueling of Kere,
KN^. — Alexander Schaw of Sauchy bound himfelf to relieve Ker; and Alexander,
brother of David Schaw, obliged himfelf to relieve both of them of their cautionry.

^Iaugl)tn- of t\)t HaiiU of Sliirl)iufraiifeo«

Jan. 11. — John Maknacht of Kilquhannite (being then at the
horn) found furety to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Kirkcudbrycht
for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of WiLEiAM SiNCLARE of AuchinFRANKO. — (Apr. 17, 1543.) Andrew Herys, brother of William Lord Herys,
became iui-ety for his apjiearance to anfwer for the faid crime.

Caution for 3lortJ «J^Iammi9 — iCatii) <^Iammis*s Crrason, ^t,

[The incidents connected with the Cases of Jonet Lady Glammis, and John Lord GlamMis, her son, have already been treated of so fully, in a former part of this Collection,' that it is
unnecessary to recapitulate in this place. It is proper, however, that the reader should bear in inind,
that Lonn Glammis's Forfeiture was afterwai'ds openly rescinded in Parliament, Mar. 15, 164'2,'
and that his lordship was restored to his dignities, lands, &c. The reasons assigned are too remarkable to be omitted in the present Collection. Thoy were as follows. ' Becaus, ])e faid pretendit
proces, Act of Adiornale, and Sentence of Forfaltour, was led and gevine be vertn of ])e faid Lordis
CONFESSIOUN, maid be him be jufl dredour and for feir of his lif : Quliilk dredour mycht falF in ane
conflant man ;* becaus \e faid Jhone Lord GlamiMIS was prefonit in ])E Castell of Ed", deftitute of all confale of his frendis, and prefentit to ]te Pynebaukis,^ feand vjieris of perfite aige and
(lark ^ of perfoune put on Jie faid Pynebaukis ; and he beand pair fcharplie examinat, for dredoure (and)
prefoning of his body, maid Jie faid pretendit Confeflioune. Be vertu of ]ie quhilk ConfefTioune, na
vjier fufficient probatioune beand led, fe perfonis Jiat paft vpoune ]ie faid Affife fand, and deliuerit as
is abone writtine, and geve ))e faid pretendit Sentence, in maner forfaid. And als, becaus the faid
pretendit Confeflioune, be vertu of J'e quhilk ])e faid pretendit proces, Act of Adjornale, and Sentence
of Forfaltour was led, pe faid Confeflioune was maid be fe faid Jhone Lord Glammis in his minorite,
nocht knawand ])e perrale Jiat was to follow Jiairupoune, and without ])e auctorite and confent of his
Curatouris, fiai nocht beand callit for fair enteres pairto, as fai audit to haif bene, of pe law. And

' See. ' Vid. Acta Pnv\. II. 422. ' Occur, happen. ' A Guiltless or innocent person, ' a true

Hiau,' even though he were by nature a person of fiiiii purpose. ' The Rack, /or Torture. ' Strong

328 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1543.

als, fe faid Lord Glammis was fraudfullie indufit be vmq''' Thomas Scott, Justice-Clerk, and
vperis familiaris to our faid vmq'« (fouerane lord), to mak J>e faid pretendit Confeffioune, fayand to
him, ]'at his lif, laiidis, gudis, movabill and vnmoTabill, fuld bs faif to him ; and ]iat na proces nor
Sentence of Forfaltour fould be led aganis him ; howbeit he maid ])e faid Confeffioune, as wes clerhe
and fufficientlie previt befor my faid Lord Gouernour, and thre Ellates forfaid, be ]ie Depofitionis of
diuerfe famoufe' Witneflis, fworne and examenit in faice of Parliament.' J

Jan. 18. — John Lord Glammys^ and George Lyouxe,' his brother,
' now being in Warde within J^e Caftell of Edinburghe,' found furety that they
' fall obferue and keip ])are Warde within pe burghe of Edinburghe, and tua myle
about ]?e faniyn, and nocht evaid nor brek pe famyn, quhill* ])ai havie Ipeciale
Licence and command of J»e Lord GovERNOUR, vnder ]>e pane of X" markis.'
— Their cautioners were Robert Dowglafs of Lochlevin, Arch. D. of Glenbarvy,
William D. of Bone- Jedburghe, and John Carmychaell of that Ilk.

JSetouue of Capiltiia fommittcti to asiaitr.

Mar. 9. — AitcHiBALD Betoune of Capildra found Sir Walter Scott
of Branxhelme, kn', and James Dowglals of Drumlangrig, as his fureties, in
terms of the following Warrant : —

GUBERNATOR,

Mv Lord Gopernour Ordanis ane mafer to pafs and charge Archibald Betoune of Capildra,
}>at he, within vj houris nixt eftir he be chargeit, pafs to ])E Tovne of Dalkeithe, Jiare to remain
in Warde, '^ vpone iiis arne expenfe, and ane myle about Jie famyn, vnto ])e tyme he be fred be ws:
And J>at he fend na writingis to ])is Tovne to na maner of perfonis, vndir Jie pane of Treflbune, SubscRiuiT with our hand. At Edinburgh, )ie ix day of Marche, f>e 3eir of God I'n.V'^'. and xlij 3eris : And
to fynd fouirte for his renianyng in fe faid Tovne, and ane myle about Jie faniyn, vndir ]ie pane of iiijm ti.

S2Bounl(in0 iHr <SaS»m JDunijar, drasuvcr of Hoss, k(.

Mar. 12. — Mil MuNGO JNIoxypenxy, Archuean of Ross, found
furety (David Berclay of Cullerny) to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire,
for art and part of the Oppreffion done to Mr Gawin Dunbar, Treasurer
OF Ross, coming upon him, in company with Robert, Bifliop of Rofs, and his
accomplices, in the Cathedral Church of Rofs ; and laying hands upon him, and
cruelly Wounding him, to the effufion of his blood. — Michael Gudladj dwelling
with the Bifliop of Rofs, alfo found caution to aniVer for the fame offence.'

Mar. 15. — Alexander Leslie, young Laird of Warderis,

' Reputable, of good fame. ' On the margin, ' Deletur de mandato domini GubernaTORis, per fuum Preceptum, fub fua fubfcriptione manuali.' See the Trials of Lady Glammis
and John Lord Glammis, &c., L * 187, 198. ' No mention is made of this individual in the

Peerages. ^^ Until. ^ On Mar. 20, 1542-3, he found surety to ' pal's and remane in Warde

within ])e Scherefdome of FiflPe." " Sir Thomas Haisty, Monk of Bewlie, (then at the horn,)

found caution to underly the law at the next Aire of Inverness, for the same crime, and for Stouthreif
of certain goods from INlr Gawin Dunbar.

1 Mar. criminal TRIALS. » 329

George Crechtoun of Con3e, aw^ Jixtij-eight others, found caution to underly the
law, at the next Juftice-aires of Aberdeen and Banff, for Convocation of the
lieges, armed in wai'like manner, in great numbers, coming to the Place of
Fbendraucht, belonging to AVilliam Ci-echtoun of Frendravxcht, and expelling
and beating his lervants, Mutilating Martin Abirnethy and John Rofs in their
left hands, and cruelly Wounding John Lemman, William Smythe,and Alexander
Abirnetliy, to the efFufion of their blood, &c.

Conijoration, $(t. at drrentJiaiui)t — ^Iausf)ttr,

Mar. 15. — William Lord Abirnethy of Saltoune, Alex. Abirnethy of Nathirdull, onA forty -four others, found fui'ety to imderly the law at
the next Juftice-aii'e of Banff, for art and part of Convocation of the lieges,
armed in warlike manner, with a great force, in ambufli {cum magna exercitu
le bufchraent) in the Iioules, out-houfes, and barns of the Place of Frendraucht,
for the Slauchter of George Crechtoime of Con5ie and James Crechtoune, being
in the faid Place, for their Slaughter ; And for the Slaughter of Robert Crechtoune with a gun {cum vno magonale lie gwnne.)

Caution for #Iibn- ^nitrlavt of ^ftcariie.

Apr. 21, 1543, {(qoud Palacium S. Cruets.) — Gilbert Earl of Caffillis
became furety to enter Oliuere Synclare of Petcarne before the Governor,
Lords of Council, or Jufticiar, whenever he lliall be required, on premonition of
XV days, to underly the law for certain crimes to be imputed to him.'

dTomtntiitfl jfalousits firttDtnt tijc latr Mins m\ti Ijis Jiarons, $(t.

May 10.— Mr Duncan May found Mr John Spenfe of Mariftoun furety
to underly the law, before the Juftice, on Jul. 6, for Confulting with and frequently giving falfe information to the late King James V, for the purpofe of
deceiving him ; thereby occafioning vehement fufpicions between him and his
Earls, Barons, and lieges ; and for caufing in him great ajiprehenfion and fear
for his Slaughter and dellruction. — May 13. Wilijam Smyth, alias Chefman, alfo found caution (James Lindefay, falconer,) to anfwer for the fame
crimes.

^IaujiT)ttr of Wyt lUrtor of 3^irI^6nUe.

Jun. 17. — James Douglass of Drumlangrig found furety to appear

' ' NoTA — This Oliver Sinclair was favourite to King James V, wbo gave liim the Command of
the Army ag' England, which offended tlie Nobilitie, and was the occafioun of their defeat at Solon
or SoLLowAY Moss. It seems, after the King's death, he was called to account, which is the common fate of favourites.' — illf,S'. Ahr. of Books of Adjournal, Adv. Library, i\I. 5. 14. The reader will
find numerous notices of this personage in the Appendix to this reign.

VOL. I. t 2 T

S30 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1543-4.

on Jul. 24, to underly the law for art and part of the Slaughter of Mr Hector
Sinclai'e, Rector of Kirkbride.

^tcifibincj SjoitI) fembts in a fnurU Court— CTonbotation, ^r.—
^fiJttioii — airariiiff a ^tantiarli ralkU * tijc ^ahj #aist/

Aug. 17. — MuNGO Tenent, burgefs of Edinburgh, Francis his Ton,
and thirteen others, citizens of Edinburgh, found high caution (from 1000 to
500 merks each, according to their feveral ranks) to underly the law before the
Juftice on Oct. 10, for ' ipe contemptioune done to }>E Quenis grace autorite, in
drawing of knyffis in pe faid Tolbuthe, vpon pe . . day of Auguft inftant, in ane
defenfat Court, in prelens of Jje Provest and Ballies of pe faid Burghe, (ittand for pe tyme in jugement, inuading and hurting ilkane v])eris' for Jjare
flauchter : And for Seditioune, with Conuocatioune of our fouerane lady pF.
QuENYS liegis, maid within pe faid burcht, with ane difplayit anfen5e,^ quhilk
J)ai call pF. Haly Gaist : And for pe contemptioune of my loi'd Governouris
command and charge, he being )5air prefent in propir perfoune, gevin to J)ame be
Johne Cob, meflinger, at my faid lord Governouris command.'

Caution for Mtaix dfonnau of 1l?ol},)rootJl)ousc — I^trtsi).

Nov. 3. — ' Dene Williame Forman, Chanane of Halyrudehoule,'
found furety, ' vndir pe payne of P li., })at he fall vpone pe xv day nixt eftir pe
day of pe date hereof, pafs and enter his perfone agane in Warde within his
chalmer within pe Palice of Halyrudehoufe, quharein he wes in Warde of
before ; and remane fiairin, as in Warde, vndir pe faid payne. — (Nov. 17-) Caution found of new to enter upon Dec. 6 next, under the fame penalty. There
is a Note on the margin, ' Deletur, quia pojmt eum in manibus Do^iiNi CarDiNALis, in cujiodia.''

Caution to return to 22aartr ixifjrn rrquirrt.

Dec. 28. — Andrew Johnestoun of Elphingstoun, ' now being in
Warde of my lord Governouris command to remain witliin pe burcht and Chanongate and Portis Jjairof,' was allowed by Precept to depart home, provided he
returned ' as in Warde, at quhat tyme or how fone he falbe requirit be my lord
GovERNOUR fiairto, vpone twa dais warnyng.' Caution found to the amount
of 2000 merks. — (Jan. 19, 1543-4.) He was freely difcharged.

itairtJ of <!lui)ittinrieame ixttti from SSJarli.

Jan. 19, 1543-1'. — William Dowglass of Quhittingeame relaxed
and freed from Ward within the bounds of Edinburgh and Canongate, ' quhare
he now remanis.'

• Each other. ^ Ensign ; standard.

3 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 331

9[bit3infl from t|)t llaiH of <^lnssoiM,

Apr. 27, 1544. — JpHN Young, in Lefwaid,' found caution to underly
the law on May 10, for remaining from the Queen's Army for the recovery
and befieging of the Caftle of Glafgow,'^ held againft her authority and the lord
Governor's, by Mathew Earl of Leuenax and their accomplices, againft the
tenor of the Proclamations.

(irsrapc of tf^t dLa^tain of (JJtiinfiuifii) Castle from TOartJ.

Nov. 4. — James Hammiltoune of Stanehouse, Captain of the
Caftle of Edinburgh, having been ftiffered to efcape by John and George
Tenent, they found Mr Alexander Levingftoune of Donyphace as their furety
that they fliould underly the law for non-deliverance of the laid Captain, and
for putting of him to freedom, &c. in terms of the following Warrant.

GUBERNATOR,

JoHNE Bannatyne, We haue caufit put furthe Johne Tenent and George Tenent
furtbe of ]>e Letteris, quhare fai wer chargeit to deliuer ]>e Capitane of ])E Castell vndir ]ie pane
of putting of fame to ]>e home ; quhilk procefs we difcharge, becaufe fai ar content to vnderly ]>e law
for ony crime may be imput to faim Jiairthrow. Herefor, 50 fall reffaue fikker fouirte for ])ame to
vnderly ]>e law Jiairfor, vpone xv dais warnyng. Subscriuit w' our baud, At Ediuburgbe, pe tbrid
day of Nouember, the sere of God I".V'^.xliiij jeris. [James G.]

aj)il(ins from tl)e liaiti of (Slatiis-imiir.

Nov. 5. — John Suerd (Sword) and nine others found Alexander Bruce,
younger of Erthe, as furety for them, that they fliould underly the law on Nov,
24, for abiding from the Queen's Army, at Gladifmuir, on Oct. 4 laft ; each
under the pain of 100 merks.

Crcasonafili) asststins t^e (irarl of <glenratru at (Blasttohj.-muir,

Feb. 5, 1544-5. — Sir Andrew Heriot, Chaplain in Glafgow, found
caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Lanark, for treafonably
coming with the Earl of Geencarne and his accomplices againft the lord
Governor upon the Common-muir of the burgh of Glafgow. — (Feb. 14.) He
again found caution to the fame effect.

Slbitfiitfl from tije lUiH of (Colftincrijamc aut( tijt W^tst iBavcf^ts,

Feb. 8. — John Craufurd of Giffertland and John Craufurd of
Birkhede found furety (Colin Campbell of Ardkinglas) to underly the law at the
next Juftice-aire of Air, for abiding from the Queen's Army along with the
lord Governor at Coldinghame, for Befieging the Place thereof, and expelling
the enemies of England furth thereof. — Alexander Thomsone, in Helys,

' Otbers are afterwards charged for the same offence. * See numerous entries in the Appendix

to this reign, in relation to this and all the other Raids.

232 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1546.

found caution for abiding from the fame Raid, to have met at the West
Marches. Several others called for the fame offence.

^bitiiiTtj; from tl)e Uaitis of atiunim aiitj €oltJinci;l)ame.

May 18, 1545. — John Blare and Patrick his Ion, both then at the
horn, found furety to underly the law for Abiding from the Queen's Armies
at Alcrum (Ancrum), Feb. 27, and Coldinghame, on Dec. 31 ; and from other
Raids.

^tftUiitji; from 9tnciiim-moss anti OToItiinsIjame.

May 29. — Duncan Drumimond and John D. his brother found caution
(David Lord Drummond) to undei'ly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Dumbarton, for Abiding from the Army at Alcrum-mofs and Mure, and for Befieging the Kirk and Steeple of Coldinghame.

Citasonabli) 9f0sistins auU Sntnrommunins 'miti) tijt eritfjlis]^.

Jun. 8. — Sir David Nesbet, Chajilain, at the horn, found caution
(Robert Broun of Blakburne) to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Berwick, for art and part of treafonably Affifting and Intercommuning with our
ancient enemies the Englilli.

'»'

^lauflljter of ti)t Captain of Souite.

Jul. 3, {ajnid Lhdithqw.) — Johne More, being then at the horn, found
Robert Mafter of Grahame as furety for his underlying the law at the next Aire
of Perth, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of James Stewart, Captain of
Doune.

^Iaufll)tcr — iHutilatiou — a2aoiinUi»s.

Dec. 22. — William Murray, (at the horn,) Ion and heir apparent of

W" M. of Romannos, John his brother, and Thomfone, found furety' to

iniderly the law at the next Aire of Peebles, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Sir Alexander Innes, (Chaplain) ; and for Affifting in the Mutilation and
Wounding of James Geddes. — (Jan. 21, 1545-6.) AVilliam Murray of Romannos
found furety for the fame purpofe. — (May 20, 1547.) The Laird of Romannos
again foimd caution to underly the law for the fame crime, and for the Slaughter of Sir Martin Ewmond, (elfewhere called ' Newman,') alfo a Chaplain.

aUaitr of Bumfrirs for 33rQirsing: ?torI)mai)anr (JDastlr,

Jan. 21, 1545-6. — John Peresoun, in Petdinny, found John Strang,

younger of Balcallvy, furety for his underlying the law at the next Aire of Perth,

1 Sir Walter Scott of Branxliolme, kn*, Patrick Murray of Fawlahill, cilias of Philiphalcbe, and
Alexander Tayt of Pyi'ne, were his cautioners.

4 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 333

for abiding from the Queen's Army affemblecl by the Governor at Drumfreife, for Befieging and recovering tlie Caftle of Lochmabane.

J5lausl)tti- of tT)e 3laiiK of <^loi'at*s 3iiotf)ti-.

Mar. 3. — John Sympill of Foulavod, and John S. his fon and heir
ajDparent, Robert S. of Nobilftoune, and William his brother, and three others,
found caution' to underly the law, at the next Juftice- aires of Dumbarton and
Renfrew, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Walter Striueling, brother of
George Striueling of Glorat.

Caiitioii for tlje ijotnta HaiiU of Calmer*

Mar. 29, 1546. — John Sandelandis, fon and heir apparent to Sir
James S. of Calder, kn', found furety (James Foreftar, young Laird of Corftorjihin, Alex. Lauder of Haltoune, Robert Douglas of Pumfraftoune, Robert Mowbray of Bornbowgall, John Pennycuke of that Ilk, and George Preftoune of
Cragmelour) for his entry within the Caftle of Edinburgh, upon twenty-four
hours warning, under the pain of 10,000 li. ; and that he ' fall remane in Warde,
in Ipe mene tyme, in pe place of Corftorphin Colege, tovne, and 5ardis Jtairof ' —
This was afterwards deleted by command of the Governor, in tei-ms of the
following Warrant :

GUBERNATOR,

Justice and Juftice-Clerk, We grete 50U weill. Forfauiekill as our louit Johnne Sandelandis, 30UNG Lard of Caldour, fand fouirte to entir in Warde quiienne euer we chargit him,
vpoun XV dais warnyng, vnder giite panis : And now we haue gevin and grantit cure Letteris of Licence to ]>e faid Johnne to pas to ]>e partis of France, and pair remane ane certane fpace, as ])e faid
Licence nialr fullelie proportis. Theirfore, we faythfullie promittis to ]>e faid Johnne, that he fall nocht
be chargeit to entir in ])e faid Warde, nor 511 his fouerteis falbe vnlawit for nonentre of liini in Warde,
qubill his returning and liame-cuniing agane within ])e realme of Scotland, and xl dais liaireftir. Oure
Will is heirfore, and we charge 50U, fat incontinent eftir pe fycht heirof, je mak ane Act in ]ie bukis
of Adiornall of our promyfe and obliffing aboue-writtine, maid be ws in nianer foirfaid, anent ])e faid
Johnne and his foueiteis, towart ])e faid Warde ; fwa pat he or ]iai incur na danger for his nonentre in
pe faid Warde, during pe faid fpace: Providing alwayis, pat pe faid Johnne eftir his hanie-cuming
agane within Scotland entii- agane in Warde quheu he beis chargeit be ws, vndir pe panis contenit in
pe Act ellis' maid pairupoune, and his faid fouerteis to fland to pat effect alanerlye ;^ and pe famin
Act to haue na ftrength during pe faid Johnnis remaning bejond fey,'' hot alanerlie eftir his returning
agane within pe realrae of Scotland, as faid is. This 38 do, as 30 will anfuer to ws pairupoune .
kepand pis writting for 50ur Warrand. Subscriuit with our hand, At Sanctandrois, pe xxix day of
September, the 5eir of God ImV^ xlvj 5eris. James G.^

9ssistin(i Hjt ilaiiU of <i^nnistoim an^ ti)t nouus Eaivtf of Callrer

to rsfapc from 22aarU,

Mar. 29. — James Lawsone of Hieeiggis, and two others, found cau1 Allan Lord Gathcart and John Blare of that Ilk. 2 Already. s Alone, only.

' Beyond sea. 5 Prom the Original, preserved among the Wan-ants of Court.

334 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1547.

tion to underly the law for art and part of the affiftance afforded to William
Cokburne of Ormiftoune and the young Laird of Calder, in breaking their Ward
furth of the Castle of Edinburgh.

Ci'fasoiiafilt dfivf-iKaisins — ^toiit|)rrif, ^r.

May 31. — James Gall, Thomas Thrift, and Sir James Thrift, Chaplain, found caution (Archibald Douglas of Kilfpindie) to underly the law, at the
next Aire of Perth, for treafonable Fire-raifing, and Burning the houfes and
dwelling-i)lace of Alexander Skiymgeour of Balbegys : And for Burning Jonet
his daughter : And for Stovithreif of his Title-deeds and goods, &c.

^\an0)ttv of t])t %aivti ot Ctibtane.

Jul. 8. — Andrew Lufe (Love,) being at the horn, found furety to
underly the law, at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for art and part of the cruel
Slaughter of John Kennedy of Culzeane.

aibitjintr from tijt lUiH of 3Buml)arton,

Oct. 7. — Peter Gammyll, dwelling in Brayhede of Corfehill, being at
the horn, found caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for
Abiding from the Queen's Army, convened by the lord Governor at the
burgh of Dumbarton, for Befiegiug and recovery of the Caftle thereof.

IDtforrinij a iHtssfnaer-at-arms.

Jan. 13, 1546-7. — James Ormistoune of that Ilk found William
Linlithgw of Drygrange as furety for him that he would underly the law, at the
next Juftice-aire of Roxburgh, for Deforcing James Sandelandis, Meffenger-atarms, in execution of Letters purchafed by John Abbot of Jedburgh ; and for
Seizing and Tearing of the faid Letters.

SlbiUiiis from tijt Mnitt of ^aint SdibrriDS.

Feb. 28. — James Bartilmo, in Curry, found caution to underly the
law, on Mar. 15, for contemptuously Abiding from the Queen's Army, contrary
to the Proclamation, ordaining the inhabitants of Lothian to convene at Saint
Andreavs, for Befieging and recovering the Caftle of Saint Andi-ews.

^Uti^ttv of ti)t 3$aron of Culnmrt

Mar. 1. — John Charteris of Kinclevin, John and David Charteris,
brolhers-german of Thomas C. of Kynfawnis, John Cochrane younger of Petfour, and four others, found the Laird of Kynfawnis as furety for their underlying the law, on Mar. 15, for the cruel Slaughter of John Ayfoune, baron of
Tulymet. — The Laird of Kynfawnis and five others, along with David

5 Mar. • CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 335

Chalmer of Seggydene, and Thomas his fon and heir apparent, also found caution to underly the law for the fame crime.

Castiiijj tioiDii antj fiiea&intr air SUnajjc of ^aint i^asUaleite.

[It may seem surprising to many readers, that so few instances occur in the Criminal Records,
of proceedings against such of tlie early Reformers, in Scotland, as in their furious zeal defaced and
overthrew so many splendid Religious Houses. In the Appendix to this and the preceding Reign,
however, the reader will find many interesting notices, which have been obtained from other authentic
sources, unnecessary to be recapitulated in this place. Among others which might easily be cited,
the following is so remarkable, that the Editor thinks it an apt illustration of the spirit of individual
Reformers, some of whom were, from constitutional timidity and other causes, compelled to recant ;
but afterwards, even in the face of tortures and the cruelest death, adhered to the Reformed faith.
The tyrannical but vigorous manner in which the Popish clergy dealt with the first outbreakings of
' the Heretics,' as is already familiar to all, was unable to quench the faith of those good men ; to whose
fearless exertions, under God, we mainly owe the religious freedom which this country presently
enjoys. The reader may refer, with advantage, to Dr 31' Cries last (5th) Edition of the Life of
John Knox ; where, in the Appendix to Vol. I., he gives many interesting particulars of the ' Scottish Martyrs.'

' Walter Steuart, brother to Andrew Stewart Liord of Ochiltrie, was accufed before Bischop
DuMBAR OF Glasgow, in Marche (1533), for Casting Doune ane Image in the Kirk of Aire.
He recanted his oppiniouns, after long dealling with him. Bot in his returning hame, he drouned in the
Walter of Calder ; fo that, falling from his horfe, none could refcue him. At lenth, getting hold of a
great flone in the watter, he cried to his frinds and exorted them that they (Ihould) take example by
him not to redeeme life by recanting of the truthe ; for experience there proved it would not be fure. He
protefted he was there to die in the truth which he profefed ; and that being forie for his recantatioun,
he was allured of the mercie of God, in Chrifl. He willed them to remember this work of God to
their oune proffit. Being overcome and drawne from his grip of the flane, (he was) drouned, notte
being able to refcue him in the deep whither he was caried. Howbeit the watter was not deep quhair
he firft fell. George Guide, one of the cheeff Clerks of the CoUedge of Judges in Edinhrugh, riding
behind him upon the fame horfe, was faved.']

Mar. 16. — Stephen Bell found Robert Mowbray of Bei-nbowgall as
fux'ety for his underlying the law on Mar. 29, for Cafting down and Breaking
AN Image of Saint Magdalene, within the Chapel of the town of Lany ;
and for other crimes contained in his Letters.

Slfiitrins front Xiyt Haiti of 3lab)5jei%

Mar. 25, 1547. — William Brown, and forty-fevea others, (all at the
horn,) found Sir Neil Montgomery of Langfchaw, kn', as furety for their entry
to underly the law, at the next Aire of Lanark, for Abiding from the Queen's
Army convened at Lauder, in Sep. 1545, for refilling our ancient enemies the
Englifli ; and for other crimes contained in their Letters.

9[ssi.)ti)mtnt for iKutilatioit rtfr rrttr to i\)t STrrastirtr.

Mar. 26. — Thomas Kennedy of Knokdaw, and David and Fergus

336 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1548.

his fons, found Sir John Lawnioncl of Innerynne, kn', ' that ]>a\ for pame felffis
and ]jair complices fall aflytlie, fatefy, and pleife Robert Cathcart of Carleionne^
for f>e Mutilatioune committit be ])ame vpoune him ; and alfe fall pleife pe Lord
of Bargany in all behalffis, and his rycht, actioune, and interes in J)e premiffis,
as my lord of Dunkeld, Thefaurer, fall pleife to modefy, vndir ])e pane of ane
thoufand pundis : Quhilk modeficatioune falbe infert in J)e bukis of Adiornale,
and to haue \>& ftrength of ane Act Jjairof.'"

23ar6arotis ^lanlns of CTnttlr— SrstroijinQ: tlDo l^ousts, ^r.

Jul. 24. — Ai>EXANDER. CuMMYKG OF Alter found furety (John Earl
of Sutherland) for his entry ; and he became cautioner for John and Hugh C.
his fon and brother, and ten others, to underly the la\y on Aug. 9, for art and
part of cruelly Cutting the backs of eleven oxen and cows with their fwords,
and thereby flaying them, belonging to Alexander Vrquhard of Burrif3ardis :
And for cafting down and deftroying two houfes built on his faid lands. —
(Aug. 1, apnd Sanct Androis.) Continued to the Aire of Elgin, for the above
and other crimes of Oppreflion, &c.

Cljt EaivU of Salljcussi) to xtmmx \\\ Mavlr, ^c.

Feb. 5, 1547-8. — Nychoeace Ramsay of Dalhoussy found caution
to the amount of 10,000 merks, that he ' fall remane in Waird, in fie place as
my Lord Goueunour fall command him to, and nocht depairt furth of the
famin, without his Licence had and obtenit J^airupoune.' — John Lord Borthuik,
John Cranftoune of that Ilk, Andrew Johnnefl;oune of Elphinftoune, Eduard
Sinclare of Drydene, and John Ramfay of Hawis were his fui'cties, whom George
his fon and heir ap23arent bound himfelf to ' freithe, releif, and keip fl^aithles.' —
Mar. 4. He foinid caution of new^ to remain in Ward ' within ]ie Ijoundis of
Fife, induring my Lord Goueenqueis will : And ])at his fone and air fall keip
f)E House of Dalhoussy fra all inyureis, falang as poffibill is ; and falbe reddy
and obedient to my lord Gouernour, as he fall pleife command and charge ; and
J)at he falbe reddy to feme my faid lord Gouernour with all his folkis, freindis,
and tenantis, quhen he beis requirit : And ])at |)e faid Nycholl fall entir agane in
Waird within ])e Caflell of Edinburghe or Blaknes, within thre dayis nixt after
he be chargeit J^airto, be our fouerane lady, my lord Gouernour, or ]>vav Letteris.'

^ttnling: a <J5olt« Ci)ain, ^r.

Mar.15. — John Caekettill of Fynglenne found caution to underly

' See May 10, 1549. ^ Richard Maitland of Lethingtoune, John Sinclare of Herdmanstoune, and
James Heirot of Trabroune, became bound to the extent of 1000 ti. each. ^ ggg jyjgy iq, 1549.

6 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 337

the law, on Apr. 14, for Stealing a gold chain and filver girdle from Johan
Richertfoune, relict of John INIauchane, burgefs of Edinburgh, furth of her houfe
in Edinburgh, in February laft. — Continued to May 15.

^sststinti tijt lUlifIs tit (Kastlr of ^aint ^iiUrflxis,

Mar. 24. — John Castaris, citizen of St Andrews, found caution to
underly the law at the next Juflice-aire of Fife, for Affifting the Rebels in the
Caftle of Sanctandrois," and being in company with them ; and for other crimes
contained in his Letters.

^btlJin0 from t1)t ^niti of porttncrattj;.

Mar. 26, 1548. — Mr John Arnot, bui-gels of Edinburgh, found caution
to underly the law for Abiding from the Army of Portincraig, for i-efifting our
ancient Enemies the Englifli.

IBttainiitri: ti)t ^omt of ^rrabistn — ^tiuitQ: tl)t dTruits aitU
STeiitUg of tijt 33isr|^oprufe of €mtfnuss, $(C,

Mar. 30. — Robert Bishop-Elect of Caithness,^ Sir John Mathefoune Chancellor of Caithnefs, Hercules Barculay Rector of Cannifby, and three
others, found George Earl of Errol furety for their underlying the law on
Apr. 30, for Stouthreif, taking and detaining from Mr Alexander Gordoune
Poftulate of Caithnefs,"* the Houfe and Place of Scrabifter : And for feizing
upon the fruits, teinds, and other emoluments of the Bishoprick of Caithness : And for bi-eaking the Queen's Protection granted to the faid Mr
Alexander, his fervants and tenants of the faid Billioprick.

Crtasoitaljln ^ssistiita; tfjc drnslisl).

Apr. 14. — George Hoppringill of Torwodlie found furety to
underly the law on May 29, for treafonable Affiftance afforded to our ancient
enemies of England, giving and taking Affurance from them ; and for other
crimes contained in his Letters.*

' Numerous notices of Remissions, &c., to individuals for their adherence to the Master of
Rothes, Kirl<caldy of Grange, and others, implicated in detaining the Castle of St Andrews against
the royal authority, and for the Murder of Cardinal Beaton', will be found in the Appendix to
this reign. ^ He was brother to the Earl of Lennox, but never was in Priest's orders.. Owing

to the part he took with liis brother against the Earl of Arran, Governor of the kingdom, he
absconded with him. Having embraced the Protestant faith, he afterwards got a gift of the Priory
of St Andrews — succeeded to the Earldom of Lennox in 1576, which in 1579 he resigned to his
grand-nephew, Esme Stewart Lord D'Aubigny; and subsequently obtained for himself the title
of Earl of March. — See Dotiglass Peerage, Keith's Bishops, he. ' Son of George Earl of

Huntly. * On Oct. 9 following, Cuthbert Cranftoun of Maynis found caution fortlie same offence,

and several others were summoned. Many other instances may be found in the Appendix to this reign.

VOL. I. -|- 2 U

338 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1548.

ai)iUinci from t])t Haiti of HanijTjolm.

May 30. — Gii-bert Law, in Eifter Ogill, found caution to underly the
law at the next Aire of Forfar, for his contemi)tiioufly Abiding from the Queen's
Army at Peebles, Jun. 30 laft, for Befieging and recovery of the Houle and
fortalice of Langholme, taken and detained by our ancient enemies of England.

^ssfstinij tijf (!?ntili6i) — 2:ufptn0 tlir JSousf of 33ultfame.

Juu. 5. — Robert Hopprixgill of Blyndley, and five others, found
the Laird of Torwodley as furety for their underlying the law at the next Aire
of Selkirk, for treafonable Affillance, giving and taking AflTurance with our ancient
enemies the Englilli, and keeping the Houfe of Bukcame (Buckholm ?) belonging
to James Hoppringill of Tynnes, and pafturing the lands thereof.

Crtasonaljli) ^ssisttntj t!)t C?nslis|).

Jun, 20. — CuTHBERT Cranstoun OF DoDDis found George Lord
Hume furety for himfelf, Cuthbert Howlatfoune, and fourteen others, to underly the law on Jul. 31, for treafonable Affiftance given to our ancient enemies
the Eufflilli.'

'&'

(clftiliinti from ti)c iiaiUs of Stauflfjolm, ^'^r.

Aug. 13. — John Strathauchin, in Kincragy, (at the horn,) found
caution to underly the law at the next Aire of Aberdeen, for contemptuoully
Abiding from the Queen's Armies convened at Bigeame (Birgeame), Langholm, Sanctandrois, and Hadingtoune, for refilling our ancient enemies
the Englifli, and for defence of the kingdom.

Caution for tijt llairU of iltti)instoun.

Aug. 14. — Richard Maitland or Lethingtoune found George
Lord Seytoune, as his furety, that he would enter within the Caftle of Edinburgh,
or elfewhere, when and where it might pleafe the lord Governor, on forty-eight
hours warning : And that the faid Richard fliall remain a good and faitliful
fubject, and remain within the kingdom, and have no intelligence with our
ancient enemies the Englifli — under the pain of 10,000 1.

itttjpiufl tijr Castle of ^aint STntsritos against U)t (Buttn,

Aug. 27. — John Sibbet (at the horn) found Andrew Lundy of Balgony
cautioner for his underlying the law at the next Juftice-aire of Fife, for art and
part, along with Norman, formerly Mailer of Rothes, James Kirkcaldy of Grange,
' A number of others, persons of no note, found caution to answer for the same crime.

7 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 339

and their accomplices, in detaining the Caftle of St Andrews againft the Queen
and Governor and their authority.'

aiiitjtng from tijt 2ilaiU of <!3I.ittismuii\

Nov. 21. — James Aschynnane in Elyok (at the horn) found furety
to underly the law, at the next Aire of Kirkcudbrycht, for Abiding from the
Queen's Army, ordained to convene upon the Muir of Gladifmuir, Aug. 20 laft.

gifitliinii from tfje Haiti of iMussilljurfl:!).

Nov. 21 and 30. — Matheav Douglas, young Laird of Manis, found
John Cragingelt of that Ilk, and Robert Montgomery of Makbehill, and John
M. found Gilbert Earl of Caffillis furety for their underlying the law at the
Juftice-aires of Dumbarton and Air-Douglas ; viz. for abiding from feveral
Armies of the Queen, and the other parties for abiding from the Army appointed
to convene at Muffilburgh. They were all at the horn, and caution was allowed
to be received, for their appearance, by Warrant of the Privy Council.

^roftssiufj t])t ©octrCius of ti)t 3tleformation — SJUe^eiJ ^is,))
Cifason — Case of ^mliirial iWiuUn%

[Among the too frequent instances of Judicial Murder, which unhappUy disfigure our early Scottish Annals, the Case of Sir John Melville of Raitii is perhaps one of the most remailiable, although the circumstances have been hitherto but little known. Knox and Buchanan are the only early
Historians who take any notice of this Case ; but even they have barely related the fact of his execution. It is not improbable, that the particulars having been matter of notoriety in their days, they had,
on that account, deemed it unnecessary to enter very minutely into the details,^ which would doubtlessly be fresli in the memory of all their contemporaries. In tliis manner, much valuable information
has, in many instances, been irretrievably lost to posterity, through the author's fear of being accused
of prolixity in rehearsing events which eveiy one was then presumed to know as well as himself.

The Editor having had the original of the following interesting Gift, dated Feb. 12, 1562-3, pointed
out to him by Thomas Thomson, Esquire, Deputy Clerk Register of Scotland, he felt so much interested in the apparent iniquity of the death and forfeiture of this virtuous man, as to be induced to
make a pretty extensive enquiry into the facts attending his Trial, of which, however, no traces are
now to be found in the mutilated and imperfect Criminal Records of that period.

The truly learned and indefatigable Dr 3I'Crie, in bis illustrations of tlie History of the Reformation' in Scotland, after commenting on the rigorous and tyrannical conduct of the Regent Arran,
and his brother the Archbishop of St Andrews, against those Barons and gentry who were the most
distinguished favourers of the Reformed opinions in Religion, states, that, instead of attempting to
prosecute them for Heresy, they rather preferred to bring them to Trial for alleged crimes against the
State. Among others who were banished, and had their estates forfeited, he instances Cockburn of
Ormiston and Crichton of Srunston ; and he then shortly notices the present case, thus — ' Sir John

' On Sep. 12, 1548, Sir Jajies Auchinleck found John, Master of Glencairn, as surety for him to underly the
law for the same crimes — and others also were charged from time to time. Reference may likewise be made to the
Appendix, where numerous other instances will be found. ' See Knox's Historie, p. 82 j Buck. I, 302.

» Dr M'Crie's Life of John Knox, (^third Edit.) I, IGi.

340 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1548.

Melville of Raith, a gentleman of distinguished probity, and of untainted loyalty, was accused
of a traitorous connexion with the enemy ; and although the only evidence adduced in support of the
charge was a Letter written by him to one of his sons tlien in England, and although this Letter contained nothing criminal, yet was he unjustly condemned and beheaded.'

Bishop Leslie, and others of our Historians and Chroniclers, are entirely silent on tlie subject ; but
fortunately several MS. authorities concur in tlie accounts which they have respectively given of this
disgraceful tragedy. According to the Editor's usual plan, he begs to lay these before the reader, as the
best mode of enabling every one to form an impartial opinion, from contemporaneous or early sources.

The first autliority which shall be cited is that of Jolmston's 3IS.,^ where the subject is thus intro-

(juced : ' The Slauchter of Williame Lord Creichtoun, ane Baroun of Parliament, was as the

^V//^ prefaidge of their"' futur tyrrannie, quho was flayne in the Gouernouris awin Hous, almaift
in his awin ficht, be Robert Semple ; hot the committer of the Slauchter was exeamed be interceffioun of the Bijchopis harlot, quho was Semple's dochter. The Archbifchop, in the lait Kingls lyftyme, maid profeflioun of the pure Religioun to thoife quhom he moill trullit ; hot, eflir his death, he
ran heid-longis in all kynd of vyce. Amangis many wtheris his harlotis, he interteayned this Harlot
Semple, nather bewtifull, of gude fame, or wtherwayis in any fort notable, except his awin kynfman,
and followed him as fcho liad bene his lauchfuU wyflfe. Thejecwtd was the death of Joiinne MeluiLL ane nobill man of Fyff, quho was ane of the Kingis moft familiaris, quhois Lettres fend and
writtin to ane certane Englifman, recommending vnto him ane freind of his, takin Preflbner, war interceptid. Allhocht pair was no fufpitioun of any crime conteaned in thame, 3it (was) the wrytid Lettre
and wrytter fairof harlid to judgment. His landis gewiu to Dauid (Hamilton), the Gouernouris
^ouncer fone, maid the punifchment moir filthie. The arme of theife infamous deidis twitchid bot a
fewe, the iuvy many, bot the example perteneit almofl to all.'

The next authority is that of Anderson's MS., the author of which narrates the event in these terms :

' In this meantyme •' (but others writ ])at it was the Winter before) did ])E Lard of Raith moft

innocentlie fuffer, and after was forfalted, becaufe ]iat he writ a Bill to his fone, John Melvin, who
then was in England, which was alleged to liave been found in ])e House of Ormeston.* But
many fufpected ^le prankes and craft of one REIN3EAN Cokburne, now fince called Captane
ReiNjEan, to whome ]ie faid Letter was delivered. But howfoever it was, ])e cruell beads, the
Bi/chop of Sant Andrewes and the Abbot of Duinfermeling, ceaflt;d not till fat ])e Iieid of tiie Gentleman was ftricken frome him ; efpeciallie, becaufe fat he was knowen to be one fat vnfaynedlie favoured
fe trewth of Gouis word, and was a great freind to thofe fat were in f e Castell of Sant Andrewes, of whofe deliverance, and of Goois wonderfull working with them during fe tyme of fair
bowndage, we may now fpeak, leaft that in fupprelling of fo notable work of God we mycht juftlie
be accufed of ingratitude.' &c.

Caldetwood'' likewife notices Sir John Meh-ill's murder in fimilar terms. — ' In this year (circa
1550) John Melvill, Laird of Raith, in Fife, ane aged man, and of great accompt with King
James V., was Beheaded for writing a Letter in favours of a captive to ane Engliiliman, his own Baftard fon,'= as is reported, Prifoner for the time to the Englifliman, to whom he recommended him.
Although ther was not the leaft fufpicion of any fault, yet loft he his head. The letter, as was
alledo-ed, was found in the House of Ormistone. Manie fufpected the craft and prankes of
Ninicme Cockhirne, afterward called Captain Ninian, to quhom the faid Letter was delivered.
Howfoever it was, the cruell beafts, the Biihop of Sanct Andrews and the Abbot of Dumfermling,

I Johnston's MS. Hist, of Seotland, Adv. Library, chiefly compiled from Buchanan, &c. during the reign of King
James VI. ' The Regent and his brother. ' Immediately after the taking of Broughtie Craig from the

English. ' On its being recovered out of the bands of the J^nglish Army. * Calderwood's MS. Church

Hist., Adv. Lib. I. 308. " Referring to the captive, who vras his natural son.

7 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 341

ceafed not till tlie head of the Nobleman was flricken from him ; efpecially, becaufe he was knoune
to be one that unfeignedlie favoured the truth. Tiiey were not content of his death, till that he was
Forfaulted alfo, and his patrimonie beftowed upon David HammiUone, the Governour's youngeft
fon.'

The following verses on the Laird of Raith's Execution, hy John Johnstone,^ may also be
considered interesting by many readers, when viewed in connection with these desultory notices.

Johannes Malvillus, Rethius,
Nobiiis Fifanus, Jacoho V. Regi, olim familiariffinms,fumma vitCB innocentia, oh puree Relligionisjtudhim, injti/picione ftiiji criminis, ijiiquifflmo judicio fuhlatus eji, Anno Clirifii., ISiS.

Quidnam ego commerui ? Quse tanta injuria facti ?

Hoflis ut in noflrum fieviat enfe ca])ut ?
Idem hoftis, judexqiie firaul. Pro crimine, Chrifli

Relligio et faedo crimine pura manus.
O feda ! O mores I Scelerum lie tollere pcenas
Ut virtus feeleri debita damna luat.
It only remains to mention, that there is some doubt with respect to the date of this event, as
several of the preceding authorities class it with occurrences of the year 1550. The following quotations, however, from the Lord High Treasurer's Accounts, seem to fix it with tolerable
precision.

' Dec. 3, 1548 Item, Writtingis to Jie Lairdis of Balmowto, Balwery, Petfyrrane, and to all

fe Lairdis and Gentilmen of Fyf,'' to be heir, (in Edinburgh,) Dec. v'", vpoun ])E Laird of Rathis
Assise, . ........ xxij s. vj d.

' Dec 5 Item, to Adame M'=Cullo, Purfewant, fend agane to Fyf to fumraond ane Aflife to

the Laird of Raith : And to execute Suramoundis of Treffoun vpoun ))e Laird of Petniille and Mr
Henry Balnavis, to Jie xxj day of Februar, . .... xxxiiij i.'

The enquiring reader is referred to much interefling matter relative to the persecutions of the early
Reformers, in the last Edition of Dr 3PCrie's valuable work on the Reformation.']

Gift by Mary, Queen of Scots, in favour of Johnne Meluile,fon ofvmquhile
{Schir) Johnne MelitUe of RaijW {knycht), of all Reversions which helonged
to his deceased father, previoiis to his Foifeiture.

Marie, be tlie grace of God, Queue of Scottis. To all and findrie oure liegis
and fubdittis quhome it efferis, qnhais knawlege thir oure Lettres falcuni, gi-eting.
Witt 36 ws to haue gevin and grantit, and be thir our Lettres gevis andgrantis
To our louitt, JoHNNE Meluile, fone of vmquhile Johnne Meluile of
Raith, kny^, his airis and affignais, all and findrie Reuerfiones, maid be quhatfumeuir perfonis to the faid vmquhill Johnne Mehiile, his fader, gudefchir, or
ony vjjeris his predecelTouris, I'poune quhatfumeuir landis, annuelrentis, or
vtheris rowmes and poffeffionis annaleit be thame or ony of Jjame, to quhatfumeuir perfonis, thair airis and affignais : Quhilk Reverfionis pertenit to the faid
vmq'' Johnne, as his proper evidentis and heritable richtis, for redemptioune of

' Johnstoni Heroes, Lugd. Bat. 1603, pp. 28, 29. - There is another entry for summoning

' diuerfe Baronis of Louthiane.' ' Dr M'Crie's Life of John Knox, passim, and especially

the Note appended to Vol. I. of the Fifth Edition, respecting Scottish Martyrs.'

342 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1549.

J)e faidis landis, annuelrentis, rowmes, and pofTeffionis, and now pertenis to Ws,
and ar become in our handis, be reffone of Efcheit, thi-ow ]>e pretendit Dome
OF FoiRFALTOURE and Decreit led and gevin aganis the faid vinq'" Johnne
Meluile ffor certane allegit ciymes of Trealoune, allegit committit be him,
quhairof he wes convict and juftifeit to the death : Like as, at mair leuthe, is
contenit in '^e faid pretendit Dome of Foirfaltoure and Decreit gevin aganis him
thairupoune. To be haldin and to be hade all and findrie \>e foirnemmit
Reuerfions to the faid Johnne ]\leluile, his airis, and affignais, with all and
findrie commoditeis, fredomes, proffittis, and richtius pertinentis quhatfumeuir,
pertening, or richtiuflie may pertene ])airto. With power to the faid Johnne
Meluile, his airis, and affignais, to redeme and quytout the faidis landis, annuelrentis, rowmes, and polfeflionis, fra the pretendit heritabile polfeffouris thairof
refpectiue, and all vthei'is quhome it efferis, be vertew of \)e faidis Lettres of
Reuerfiounis, refpectiue ; and to vfe ]>e faniyn to f»at effect, ficlike, and als frelie
in all thingis as ]?e faid vmq'^ Johnne Meluile micht haue done before ]je faid
pretendit Dome and Decreit of Foirfaltoure ; and ]3e famyn being redemit and
quitout, be vertew of \iQ Reuerfionis foirfaidis. We Ordane new Infeftmentis to
be gevin to the faid Johnne Meluile, his airis, and affignais, off all and findrie
Landis, annuelrentis, rowmes, and pofTeffionis quhatfumeuir, alfwele haldin of
Ws as of quhatfumeuir vtheris Superiouris thaii'of, within Jjis oure realme,
nochtwithftanding ]?e pretendit Foirfaltour foirfaid ; and with all and findrie
vtheris commodittis, fredomes, and priuilegis apertening thairto, ffrelie, quietlie,
weale, and in peax, bot ony Reuocatioune, obflacile, impediment, or aganecalling quhatfumeuir. Quhairfore, We charge flraitlie and commandis 50W,
all and findrie oure liegis and fubdittis foirfaidis, that nane of 30W tak vpoune
hand to niak ony impediment, latt, or diflrublance to the faid Johnne Meluile,
his airis, and affignais foirfaidis, in the peccable brouking, joifing, vfing, intrometting, and difponing vpoune all and findrie )?e foirnemmit Reuerfionis, efter
the forme and tennoure of Jjir oure Lettres, vnder all hieafl pane and charge Jjat
efter may follow. Gevin vnder oure Priuie Seile, At Edinburghe, the twelff
day of Februare, the 3eir of God I"\V'. threfcoir twa 5eiris, and of our reignne
))e twenty ane 3eir.

Per Signaturam manu s. D. N, Ri:Gn<iEj/ih/cripfum.

asitiins from ti)C IH.iltJ cf iSlatJismuir,
Apr. 13, 1549 — William Ruthvene of Ballendene found William Lord Ruthvene as furety for his entry, on May 14, to underly the law for
contemptuoufiy Abiding from the Queen's Army ordained to convene at Gladif7 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. » 343

muir,' Aug. 20. laft, for Befieging the town of Hadingtoun, and for recovery
thereof out of the hands of our ancient enemies, the Englilh.

^laurtljtei' of t\)t ?LairU of Ctitljilsmiit^ ^f*

Thomas Blare of Balthyok, and Thomas his fon, John Moncur of
Balhinj^ and nine others, found furety " to underly the law, on May 14 next,
for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Sir Henry Denipilare, Chaplain, John
Charteris of Cuthilgurdy, Richard Brown, Alexander Charteris, Alexander
Gray, John PuUour, and Robert his fon ; and for all other crimes contained in
their Letters. — Sir Robert Oistillare was replegiated by the Vicars-General of St Andrews ; and Thomas Broun alias The/ f was replegiated by Patrick,
Bifliop of Murray, perpetual Commendator of Scone.

iHurKer of i^oss of Craitjtoun, ^atH} MnUmwt, ^t*

Thomas Charteris of Kyxfawnis found furety^ to underly the law,
on May 14, for the cruel Slauchters and Mm-ders of James Rols of Cragtoune,
Gilbert Moncreif, and Margaret Douglals Lady Ballunye ; and for other crimes
contained in his Letters. — (May 14.) Several others were likewise put to the
home, &c. for the fame crimes,

iHuttlattoii — ?^iutin0 autj earountJhtg.

May 10. — David Kennedy, and Thomas his brother, fons of Thomas
K. of Knockdaw, were Refpited for INIutilating Robert Cathcart of Carletoune *
of his left hand, and Hurting and Wounding him in the face : And for Convocation of the lieges in Jan. 1546-7. Robert Mailer of Sympill became cautioner for fatisfying the parties.

May 13. — James Wod of Bonyxgtoune delated of art and part of
the cruel Slaughter of Mr Hugh Guthre. — Proved to be fick. Richard Maitland of Lethingtoune became furety for his entry at the next Aire of Forfar.

SiibatJins tfit iHaster of ^'emptU for i)is ^Iaufff)tcr.

May 27. — John Mum of Cauldweli,, William, Archibald, Robei-t,
Hector, and James Muir, his brothers, and twenty-iix others, Convicted of Invading Robert Master of Sympill, and his fervants, armed in warlike man-

' Andrew Schaw of Sornbeg got a Remission for his absence from another Raid at Gladisraure, in
September following. * William MoncreifF of that Ilk. ^ David Bruce of Kynnard.

' See Mar. 25, ISiT, for farther particulars of this Case.

3M * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1549ner, near the Place and Tower of Cauklwell ; and putting them to flight, for
their Slaiightei-s ; committed of forethought felony, on Apr. 9- lail.

Abfentes ah Assisa Domini de Cauldioell, S;c.
Ninian Lord Rofs, William Wallace of EUerflie, The Laird of Lufs,

The Laird of Slanelie, William Wallace of Johneftoune, George Buchquhaniiane of that Ilk,

Mathew Dowglas of Manis, The Laird of Balvey, James Mortoune of Walkin(haw.'

iWuiUrr of tUoo ^^resnant Momen — ^toutfirrif, ^t.

May 28. — William Waluy, William Gracy, and James Fothringeharae. Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter and Murder of Helen Striueling Lady Ullifliavin, fpoufe of James Stratoune, and Jonet Sawlie, her fervant,
within the Place of DuUady ; committed under filence of night, of forethought
felony, on Apr. 24 laft ; the faid Helen and Jonet being pregnant at the time
of the faid Murder : And alio of breaking up the chells of the faid James Stratoune ; and ftealing and reiving, furth of the faid Place and chells, all the goods
and jewels contained therein. — Hanged."

^jJanirtttt — iHuilitr of ilatii) ?inis][)abnT.

May 29. — JoHM LiCHTOUNE OF Vllishaven denounced rebel, and
put to the horn, as fugitive from the law, for the Murder of the faid Helen
Striueling, his mother, and Jonet Sawlie, her fervant.

^upplninn: tijr (triig;Itsl) at 33fouQ:Tjti)--Craiti:, ^t,

July 2. — Egidia Gray, lifter of James Gray in Buttirgatk, put to the
horn for not iinderlying the law for her treafonable Intercommuning, refet,
affiftance, and fupjjly afforded to our ancient enemies the Englilli, being in the
fortalices of Bruchty-Craig and Brakan-hill. — (July .3.) Jonet Hume, relict of
Andrew Gray in Dvnynalde, found John Hume of ColdenknoUis as furety for
her entry, at the next aire of Forfare, for the fame crime.

^upplijing X\)t €\\ci\{%\) at iiauHtr — Common rirasoit.

Jul. 18. — William Lauder, in Lauder, Convicted of the treafonable

Intercommuning, refett, fupply, and affiftance given to our ancient enemies the

Englifli, being within the Fortalice near to the burgh of Lauder ; continually

furnifliing them with meat and drink, from the time of the building thereof, in

the month of . . . 1547 : And for leading and conducting the faid Englifli to

the forefaid Fortalice, and other places at their will, to the fpoiling, wafting, and

deftruction of the kingdom, and conqueft thereof; revealing and fliewing to our

faid enemies the fecrets of the kingdom : And fpecially, for carrying and fend-

' Each of these persons, along with the Laird of Craigbeniard, was fined L.20. ^ See May 10, 1550.

2

7 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 345

ing Letters and dofe writings of Sni Hugh Willeby, and other Engliftimen,
within England and Scotland, in a treafonable manner : And for common
Treafon. — Beheaded.

Usurpation — :3Hn;prisoning: a iHrsstitsn- anU asaitnrssts.

Aug. 13. — Thomas Mawle of Panmure, John and Robert his brothers, David his coufin, Henry Ramfay of Panbride, James Strauthauchin of
BalwifTye, and fixty-feven others, denounced Rebels, and put to the horn, for not
underlying the law, for Convocation of the lieges to the number of 200 perfons,
armed in warlike manner, coming to the lands of Pannethy, belonging to Thomas Douglas and Elizabeth Liddale his fpoufe ; and there, on Jun. 12 laft, hindering the execution of a Precept of ejectment ordained to be executed againft the
Tenants ; and cruelly invading the Officer and witnefles, and forcibly taking
them captive to the Place of Panmure, and detaining them in prifon, under captivity, Ulurping thereby the Queen's authority.

Sntrrfommuiniifj: toitl) tijc CJnglisf) at -Broutri^tn.

Nov. 26.,^Mr James Betoune denounced rebel, and put to the horn,
&c. for not imderlying the law, for treafonably going to the Fortalice of Bruchty,
kept by our ancient enemies the Englifli : And for Intercommuning, fpeaking,
and treating with Sir John Luterale, Captain thereof, for the fubverfion
and fubjugation of the whole country adjoining the faid Fortalice ; Committed
in the months of June, July, and Auguft, 1548.

^biUtiig; from fl)t ^?ost at CrtrjjcfetidUins-lJrat, kc,

Nov. 28. — Robert Betoune of Creiche, and Michael Balfottr
OF Buriie, became in Will for Abiding from the Queen's Army at EgebukEENEBEA,' on Sep. 5. laft, convened for refifting our ancient enemies of England, and for defence of the kingdom : And for their retiring from the Army
convened upon the Muir of Rolling, upon Oct. 20, before the expiry of the term
affigned, without Licence obtained from the Governor ; notwithftanding the
Proclamation of Oct. 30. laft, that no Baron nor Laird fliould retire therefrom,
without fpecial Licence.

GUBERNATOR,

Justice Clerk and 30ur deputis, we grete 50U weill : Forfamekill as we half

' Hume of Godscroft, in his History of the House of Douglas and Angus, quotes a fragment of a
doggerel rhyme made upon the Earl of Argyll's expedition against the Earl of Angus (^Bell
the Cat), which was popular in his day. It mentions this place.

' The Earl of Argyle is hound to ride From the border of Edge-buCKLIN-bray,
And all his Habergeons him hefide, Each man upon a fonke of ftray.
They made their vow that they would flay,' &c.
VOL. I. f 2 X

346* CRIMINAL TRIALS. AD. 1549-50.

Remittit, forgevin, and difcLargit to our louittis RoijKiiT Betoune of Crevcji and Michael Balfour OP BuRLE, fe Will in rjuhilk fai becom bcfoir out fouerane ladeis Jufl.ic« and hi» depntis, in fe
.Tuftice Court tiaidin in ]iii Tolbuyth of Ediribur* ))<; xxviij day of November lafl bipafl, for [lair Remaning fra lie Raid diuifit to convene at Egebucblenbray, )'e fift day of September lafl byjiafl. C^uiiAlRroK we charge 30U, fat incontinent eftir )>e fycbt heirof 36 deleit and put furth of pe bukis of Adiornale Jie Act maid, qubair }»e faidis perfonis becom in Will, as faid i« : A» $'; will anfuer to wh Jiairupone ; kepand ])is writing to 50ur Warrand. Sub.sckh-'IT witb oure band, At Falkland, )ie xviij
day of I'ebruare, fe 3ere of God I'".V^xlix seris. .lAMES G. Joannes The".

.■)ficc--rai0tns, b]j a femalt, punfsOttJ b]) jSranUing; ant( Banijjfjmciit.

Dec. 10. — IssoBELl.A M-FKRLANE Convicted of art and part of treaIbnable P'ire-raifirig and Bunting of the dwelling- houfe of Jonet Glais, in Wefter
Kirrewacliter, on Sep. 1 lad, under filence of night, togetlier with all the victual,
cattle, and goods therein ; thereby committing public 1'realbn and common
Oppreffion. — Skntknce. To he iniANOiCD on the cheek, and thereafter to be
Banished from the ftewartiy of Strathenie, under pain of Drowning.

lUQCttiiXQ a riaitot antj Cnslisfjmni — .-frire-ratsiiTS.

Dec. IG. — VV'jLi.iA.M i\'j;wTOt;NJ; 01 j iia'j Ilk, .John his brother, and
feven others, found caution to underly the law on Feb. fi next, for Reletting
Cuthbert Newtoune, IVaitor, and feveral Englifhmen irj conij)aiiy with hjui :
And for Burning the hoiifi; of Mathew Dollace, in (-)ver Saltoune, &c.

amtcirommuning: ijoitf) tfjc €nQliQl) at 3iiouti])tt) Castle.

Dec. 20. — John Lord Innermeithe dilaited of treafonably going
to the Fortalice of Bruchty, kept by our ancient enemies the Englifh, and Intercommuning and treating with SiR AxDliEW Dudeky, Captain tliereof, for
Fire-ruifing and plundering the country and lieges. — David Mailer of Craufurd
became I'urety for his entry, on Jan. 27 next.

The following perfons were amerciated for not appearing to pals on this
AfTife, viz. John Loun Geammys, Symon Pi'efloune of that Ilk, Alexander
Gralianic, young Laird of Southfeild, the Lairds of Reflalrig, Sherefiiall, Lundye,
Kynfawiiis, Lugtoune, VVauchtoune, and Carnok.'

Ciimcn .ifaisi — 3iittrrlintnff ^iQutt %ttUvti,

Mahioja Ocjieuy, dilaited of Faifiryirig and cauliiig the interlineation
of lier Majelly's Letters, under the Signet, dated Dec. '.i, anno regni 1 (154.3),
and for adding upon the margin of the conclufion thereof, 'William Murray his
fpous,' and for ufuig the lame Letters.

' Theu- names are not specially entered in the Record.

8 Mar. criminal TRIALS. • * 347

Absentes ah Ajjijh 3Iariote Ogiluy.
John Erflcin of Drane, Tlie Laird of Imichty, William Sinclare of Myrefide,

Symon Preftoune of tiiat Ilk, John Scrymgeour, Conflahle of The Laird of Reftalrig,
William lluthvenp of Ralliiidane, Dundee, Patrick Hepburne of WaucliJames Crawmoiul of Auldhar, Rohert Sinclair of Litill Blair, toune,

George Falconar of Findowne, Dauid Gardin of Leis, The Laird of Carnok,

Dauid Wod of Craig, Alexander Wallein ' of Wodwra, Tlie Laird of Lundy,

James Wod of Bonyntoune, .... Oliuer of Gagy, The Laird of Lugtoun.

William Murray of Banheid, The Laird of Baliiamone,

Jan. 27. — A^^iIliam Mafter of Craufurd, as fiu'ety, was amerciated for
her non-ai)i)earaiice this day ; and the was denounced Rebel, &c. and all her
moveables were ordained to be efcheated.

OTatilamiiff — Snbasion — (!!>pprrsjsion.

Mar. 3, 1549-50. — Margaret Hujie, Prioress of North Berwick, was replegiated by the Official of St Andrews, within the Archdeanery
of Lothian, to underly the law for the Waylaying and Invafion of Alexander
Oliphant of Kelle (Kelly) for his Slaughter, and for other crimes of OpprefRon
committed againll him and Alexander Gourlay of Kincraig. — Alexander Hume
in (of) North Berwick became furety for her appearance at the Court of the
faid Official, within the Collegiate Church of St Giles, (Edinburgh,) on Apr. 30
next. — Mr Alexander Wod, \"icar of North Berwick, was alio replegiated.

ftMmrsurUcii — ^ppirosin0 tlje i^iiorrss of Jlovti) 33rrb)irU, ^r.

Alexander Oliphant of Kelle (Kelly) amerciated for not entering Florimont Strang in Kelle, and five others, to underly tlie law, for art and
part of the forethought felony, Hameluckin, and Oppreflion done to Margaret
Prioress of North Berwick and her fervants, coming to her lands of
Gi'ange, lying within the fliire of Fife, in the month of June laft, and befetting
the way to the laid Priorefs and her fervants for their Slaughter ; and befieging
them within the Manfion-houle of the faid lands. ' Deletitr de mandato
dom'mi Gurernatoris et Thesaurarii,^«t eorumPreceptum' — JoiinSpens,
John and Alex. Gibfoun, and John Sinclare, ' defyrit procefs, and Jjame to be
put to J)e knawlege of ane AfTife ; and ])at na AfTife wer fummond, nor na
pairty compeirit to perfew ])ame for ])e Ihidis allegit crymes, tuke inflrumentis,
and protelUt for remeid of law.' — The Laird of Kelly, and twenty-one others,
found Alexander Liudfay, Captain of Fynnevin, furety for their appearance, on
Apr. 16, 1550.'

' Protiably Vallene or Vallance. * From the above notice, it would appear that the matter

was compromised, through the interference of the lord Governor ; but, on 3Iay 8, 15;)0, the Case was
referred to the Justice-aire of F'ife immediately following. John Blacater of Tullyalloune became
cautioner for their entry.

348* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1550.

Crtnsoiiaible dTirt-raistng;, ^r, — Sntfi'rommuninQ: iuitl) tl)c
CPiifjIisI) — lUaibing C?ufj:lisf) ^ai? — I^igl) unreason, ^r.

Mar. 17.' — Richard Latymer of that Ilk Convicted of treafonable
Fire-raising and Burning the Toavn of Durrisdeir, in company with
Sir Henry Quheutoune, {JF/uirton,) Engliflmian, and his accomplices, in
the month of IVIarch 1 547 : Item, for art and part of treafonable Fire-raifmg
and Burning of the lands of Auchincassel and Tibberis, in company with
the faid Henry Quhertottne, Englifliman, and of art and part of the violent
Stouthreif and ' Herefchip' of the poor Tenants of thele lands, ' reiving' from
them five thoufand oxen, cows, and (lieep, together with all their goods, utenfils,
and houlehold fluff, to the value of 3000 1. or thereby; committed in the month
of December 1547 : Iteim, for art and part of treafonable Fire-raifing and
Burning- the Town and lands of Amisfeild, in company with the laid Sir
Henry and his accomplices, Engliflimen ; and for art and part of the violent
Stouthreif and ' Herrefchip' of the poor Tenants of the laid lands, reiving from
them 4000 oxen, cows, and flieep, and burning their whole grain ; committed
during the time of Autumn 1547 : Item, for art and part of the treafonable
Fire-raifing and Burning the houfes, grain, and victual of William Wouch at
Brigtoune, extending to the value of 300 merks, in Spring-time 1547-8 :
Item, for art and part of the Theft and concealment of xxiiij"''' oxen and cows
from Sir James Douglas of' Drumlaugrig, knicht, in company with the Bells
and the Englifli, manifeft Thieves and Traitors, furth of the lands of KiRKHOlP;
and driving the laid cattle to England, and there difpofing of them ; conmiitted
in Summer 1549 : Item, for art and part of the Theft and concealment of 80
oxen and cows from John Johnjionne of that Ilh furth of his lands, in company
with the Englilli, leading the faid cattle to England, and there felling and difpofing of them, in time of Autumn 1547 : Item, as a common Thief and Traitor, part-taking againfl the Queen and Kingdom of Scotland, and receiving
daily pay from the Englilli ; and fpecially, from the Warden of the West
Marches of England, during thefe times of War : Item, for common Theft,
common Refett of Theft, Outputting and inputting, in a theftuous manner, between the Scottifli and Englilli : And for a common Traitor.

Sentence. — To be drawn to the Gallows and Hanged ; And his body to
be quartered : And that his heritages, lands, and pofieffions, and all his goods,
moveable and immoveable, fliall be fforfeited and Eicheated to the Queen, and
apjilied to her ufe.

' T«piity-four score, or four liundrcd and piglity. This is perhaps one of tlio most atrocious cases
of trcason!il>le and wholesale robhery on record. It is mentioned, generally, in various of tlie Historians and Chroniclers, but as they give no new information, it has not been deemed necessary to make
any quotations,

8 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 349

^urci)asincr l)isfj--prtrrt ^vtnd) 3Mintg.'

Mar. 21. — Robert Hathavy, John Syni, and James Lowrie, burgefles
of Edinburgh, came in the Queen's will for breaking the Proclamation of Jan.
8 laft, ordaining that none of the lieges fliall prefume to purchafe ' Burdeous
(Bourdeaux) w^vnis' dearer than 22 li. 10 s. for each ' tvne' (tun,) and ' Rochell
wynis' dearer than 18 1. per tun ; by purchafing ' CunjCok (Cogniac ?) wynis '
at 251. for each tun. — Twenty-one others are charged, of which number ten
came in will, and were fined in fums ranging from 40 mei'ks to 40 s. ; fix refufed
to find caution, and five were fugitive from the law, thereby inciu-ring the pain
of rebellion. A few others were replegiated to the Regality of Canongate.

3$unt(nff t^t CoiMits of SalluitT) anU i!5riM6ottlr — Crrason, ^r.

Mar. 24. — James Deavak, at that time a captive in England, found
caution (James Lawfon of Humby) to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire
of Edinburgh, for art and part of the treafonable Fire-raifing and Burning the
Towns of Dalkeith and Newbottill, in company with Sir James Wilfurd, General of Hadingtoun, and the Englifli, in the months of and December

1548 ; and for purfuing William Ewtoune (Newtoune) of that Ilk for his
Slaughter ; and for other crimes contained in his Letters.

^iQl) Crrason — ^pprrssioii — ?gamesiir6eit — dTirf-l^iislns

Mar. 24. — William Newtoune of that Ilk, Robert and Alexander
Quhitlaw, and five others, found caution" to underly the law at the next Jufticeaire of Edinburgh, for treafonably Refetting Robert Newtoun ; and for other
crimes of High Treafon ; and for Oppreffion and Hamefuckin done to Mathew
Dewar, in the month of June 1548, treafonably coming to his houfe in Saltoune
and Burning thereof, with the whole goods therein.

^lautjljtn-— llabifil)tn0 — Smijpnsoiiiiiri, Jrr.

Mar. 27, 1550. — James and John Craufurd, fonsof Hugh C. fenior,
Robert, George, and Hugh C. fons of William C. of Barquhorn, John Beg and
John Brovne, having previoufly found caiition (George C. of Lefnorefe) to
underly the law for the cruel Slaughter of William Mathy and Finlay Sym ;
and for Ravilliing (forcible abduction) of Agnes Craufurd Lady Lefnorefe, and
detaining her in captivity for a certain fpace ; and for purl'uiug and invading
Alexander Nelbet for his Slaughter, of forethought felony, and ancient ffeud ;
and for other crimes contained in his Letters : Failing to appear, the Laird of

' See May 4, 1555, A number of intermediate Cases of the same description liltewise occur, where
high fines were exi^cted. It is, liowever, considered unnecessary to cite each individual instance.
' Patrick Hepburne of VVauchtoune and Mark Ker of Dolphiustoune.

2

350 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1550.

Lochnoreis was amerciated, and they were all denounced Rebels and put to the
horn. — James Dunbau and Andrew Porter were alfo denounced for the fame
crimes ; and David Craufurd of Kerie was amerciated for their non-entry.

Apr. 30. — DuTHo' Stewart Convicted of art and part of the cruel
Slaughter of Thomas Foreftar, burgefs of Peebles. — Beheaded.

' Compeirit A^ychol Quhippo, ane of pe Scheref-deputis of Peblis, and
proteftit, jjat howbeit he enterit pe faid Diitho before ])e faid Juftice-depute to
vnderly pe law for pe faid Slauchtii', at command of the Quenis Letteris, and
for feir of J>e panis contenit Jiairin, That pe entre of pe faid Dutlio fuld nocht
hurt nor preiuge our fouerane ladieis Commiffioune granted to pe ScHEREF of
Peblife and his deputis for iuftefeing and pvniffing of perfonis committeris of
lie crymes as is contenit jjairin ; and J^airui^ouue took inftrumentis.'

^Iaugi)tn* of a son of ti)t Eaii-H of CauItrSjotll.

May 5. — Peter Howstouxe, brother-german of the Laird of Howftoune, Patrick H. uncle of the faid Laird, Peter H. in Park, Patrik H. porter
(janitor) of Howftoune, and nine others, found caution (Alexander Earl of Glencarne. Lord Kilmawres) for their entering, on Jun. 5 next, to underly the law for
the cruel Slaughter of Robert Muir, fon of John Muir of Cauldwell, (on the
fecond day of April laft, under filence of night ; committed on ancient ffeud and
forethought felony.) '

(Jun. 1 4.) — Archibald Howstoune was tried for the above crime, and
Beheaded.^

iBuvlrtr of Salii,) ^llfsljabiu anlf i)ti' stibant

May 10. — Jaimes Schoriswod and twelve others found caution to underly the law, on Jul. 8, for the cruel Slaughter and Murder of Helen Striaeling
Lady Ullifliavin,' and Jonet Sawle her fervant.

SfssfstiiTQ; t\)t C^nulis]^ ^olUins in tlje (jTastlc of ^atJtiintttou*

May 1(). — Alexander Gibsoun, in Mekilrig, produced a Remiffion
from the Queen for fortifying, affifting, and partaking with our ancient enemies of England in perfecuting the Queen's lieges ; and in carrying gun-powder^

' Duthacus. ^ Patrik Muir of Anistoune, Robert Cathcart of Carltoune, Duncan

Kennedy of Daiquharrane, and John K. of Dunnymuk were present, and some of tlieni were sworn as
Assisors. ^ Unfortunately, the particulars of this case are not narrated in tlie Record.

* See May 28, 1549, and the Appendix to this reign. Their victims were both in a state of pregnancy at the time of the murder. ■' Puhicris in the Record. It is, however, proper to state,
that this word may have been intended to denote^owr, although such interpretation is unlikely.

8 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 351

and victual to the Foi'talice of Hadingtoune, and taking affurance with the faid
enemies for the fubverlion of the kingdom, for the fpace of two years paft, or
thereby. — James Sampsoun and three others, having been charged for the
fame crimes, produced the following Warrant :

GUBERNATOR,

Justice, Juftice-Clerk, and 3 our deputis, We greit 50U weill. Forfamekill as it is our will,
and for certane reffonabill caufles and confiderationis moving ws, we charge 50W, ])at ^e proceid and
do juftice vpoun Robert Wat/bun, James Sampfoune, George RaufF, and George Tait,' Tenantis and
Seruantis to our coufing Alexander Loud Hu.me, in jOur Juftice Court fet be 30W to fame, to
vnderly Jie law ])is x\j day of Maij inftant, for all kynd of actionis and crymes committit be Jiaira in
tymes bipaft, contenit in ])e Letteris raiiit aganis Jiame fairanent, except for ])air taking of Afiurance
with our auld inymeis of England, and Affifting to fame in ony maner of way, in tymes bigane ; ifor
Jie quhilkis, we will fat 3ai be nocht perfewit ; And difchargis you of all preceding aganis f aim fairof,
and of jour offices in fat pairt, be fir prefentis. Subscriuit with our hand, At Edr, fe xvj day of
Maij, f e 3eu- of God I'",V^'. and fifty 5eris. James G. Joannes The^

Ci'tasonaijli) assisting t|)e (HJnsltsf), ^r.

May 23. — John Diksoune, formerly in Belchefter, and Robert
Trotter,- were denounced Rebels, &c. for not underlying the law for their
Treafonably Taking AlRxrance, Affifting, Fortifying, and plain Partaking with
our ancient Enemies, the Englifli, and revealing to them the fecrets of this kingdom, &c. ^Valter Ker of Cesfurd, and Alexander Lord Hume, their cautioners,
wez'e amerciated for their non-appearance.

\_Geo7-ge Erirl nf ErroJ, T.nrd High ConstahleJ]

Siiiistiirtion of tl)r Itorli ^?t(r!j Constable — ^toutljmf—
* Hmbfsrttlnci: tlje gait* — ittutilation, ^c,

Jun. 17. — Gilbert M'^Teyr Convicted of art and part ' of Umbefetting'
the way to John Nycbolfoun, on Monday Jun. 16 inftant, at ' Sanct Androis'
Port,^ near the College of the Holy Trinity, where he was quietly returning
from the burgh of Edinburgh, and cruelly invading him for his Slaughter : And
for Mutilation of the faid John of three fingei's, and the thumb of his right
hand : And for Stouthreif and plundering (' reiving ') from him of his hox'fe
fword, two cloaks,* and fundry other goods. — Beheaded.

^sststiiifl i\)t firsrapr of <!?nsUsT) IJnsoitns of OTatr.

Jun. 26. — Henry Bell and Andrew Mathesoune were denounced
rebels, &c. and Patrick Hakket of Pitfirrane, their cautioner, was amerciated, for
their not appearing to underly the law, for art and part of treafonably conduct-

' ' In Weftmanis.' ^ Cristina Brovnfeild, his wife, was proved to be pregnant, and unable to

travel. ^ The Editor does not recollect of having elsewhere met with the name of this Port.

It must have stood beyond the foot of Leith Wynd. * Collohiorum,

352 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1550.

ing three Englifli prifoners, called John Cuk, Richard . . . . , and John Stevinfoune, being in their cuftody at the time, to the' North Queensftrry, in treafonable manner, in the month of November laft, nnder lilence of night, where they
theftiioufly entered a boat belonging to Florence (Cornetoune ?) which they
carried off, and abfconded in the fame.'

Jun. 28. — Donald M'Ky of Fak, Neill M'ane Moir, Rory M'ane
Moir, Mnrdoch M'ane More.John M'ane More,and Tormat M'ane More, brothers,
and Donald Dow M^corkill, charged for the cruel Slaughter of Alexander M'ane
Rofs, Alexander M'illemycheli, Tormat Makalexander, and five others. Alexander Rofs of Balnagovvne was amerciated for not reporting and delivering to
the Clerk of Jufticiary, the Letters, which had been purchafed by the wives,
children, parents, and friends^ of the decealcd, didy executed and indorfed.

Jul. 15. — John Lokhart of Bau, John' his brother germane, Charles
Campbell of Skeringtoune, and "SA'illiam his brother, were denounced rebels and
put to the horn, and their cautioners'" amerciated for not appearing to underly the
law for piirfuing Andrew Lord Stewart of Vchiltree for his Slaughter, on May
25 lafl, on old Feud and forethought felony, &c.— Hugh Lokart, brother
gernian to the faid Laird of Bar, was replegiated by the Archbifliop of Glafgow,
to anfwer for the fame crime.

Bi'fnfuiig: ti)t Castle of %}iimi\ton for tl)t rscapt of a Wtvttk, $c(.

Jul. 16". — John Lokart of Bar, John his brother german, and Charles
Campbell of Skeringtoune, were denounced rebels, &c and their cautioners'
amerciated, for their not a])pearing to underly the law, for their caufing, afliftance,
ratihabition, &c. and for the help afforded bythem to Mr f/l/OA- Siu JohnM'brair,
formerly Canon of Glenluce, in breaking \A'ard furth of the lord Governor's
Caftle of Ilammiltuune, where he was imprilbned, being charged for fundry great
and odious crimes, Herefies, &c. ; coming to the forefaid Caftle in the month of
May laft, under fdence of night, and taking the faid Mr or Sir John therefrom,
and conducting him to the Manfion Houfe of Bar and otiier places, as contained
in the Letters.

' Laurenre Marser of Awdy bpcame surety for tlie entry of Robert Stewart, in Dunfermling, on
Aufr. 1 1, 17,50, to underly tlie law for tlie same crime, at the next Jusiice-aire of Fife. ^ Kinsnun. ' 'I'lie name is repeated twice. It was tlien usual to give two or more sons the favourite or

prevailing; family name, so as to liand it down to remote posterity. The reader is referred to the
Appendix to this and the former Reign for illustrations of these and similar feuds. ■■ James Dalrum])ill of iStair, ::nd V\ illiam Campbell, hrollier of the Laird of Cesnok. ^ Mathew Campbell, junior, Sherifi' of Air, and George Campbell of Cesnok.

8 Mar. criminal trials. * 353

^ari iUsf — ;^paIiatioit o( €]^urc|)fs antr Stltars — ©cstropiiis
Cljoral ^tall!^, shiycti SuintioiMS, k(.

Jul. 16. — John Lokart of Bar and Charles Campbell of Bargour
denounced rebels, and their cautioner' amerciated, for their not appearing to
underly the law for their theftuous and violent carrying off, depredation, Stouthreif and Spoliation furth of fundry Parifli Churches, Religious Houfes and
Chapels, within the lliires of Lanai'k, Renfrew, and the ftewartries of Kyle,
Carrick and Cuninghame, of fundry Euchariftic chalices,^ Altars, and ornaments
of the Mafs :^ And alfo, for calling down and breaking choral flails and other
ftalls, and glazed windows, &c. in the years 1545, 154i6, 1547, and 1548 ; as
fpecially contained in the Letters.

SHtrrrommuniiiQ: iuitl) ti)t Q^ixQliQi) in ^atiinston,

Aug. 8. — George Hepbuene, in Athelftanefurd, got the Queen's
Remiflion for treafonably Intercommuning with Sir James Wolfurd, General
of Hadingtoune, and other English^men with him in Hadingtoune, in June
1548, and continually from that time until the expulfion of the Engliflimen therefrom ; fupplying tliemwith flieep, oxen, and victual, and thus plainly participating
with and affifting them, and enabling the faid Engliflimen to hold out the faid
Town longer againft the Queen and the lord Governor, to the iubverfion and
deftruction of the kingdom : And alfo, for his treafonably dwelling under aflTurancewith the faid Engliflimen for the forefaid fpace. — John, JAMES,and Adam
Bagbie, in Athelftanefurd, were likewife denounced Rebels for the faid crime ;
and Patrick Hei^burne of Wauchtoune, their cautioner, was amerciated for their
non-appearance.

^laiigfjttr of SLorD Cret^toune of <#auqu][)ai\

[The remarkable event which forms the subject of the following proceedings,
is mentioned by all the earlier historians, who, as usual, vary extremely in their
chronology. Lesley^ says, under the year 1553, ' At fame tyme, the Lord
Sympili, flew' the Lord Creychtoun of Sanchar, in the Governouris
awin Hous, apovm a fudden, within the Toun of Edinburgh. For the quhilk
he was taken and piit in the Caftle of Edinburgh, and had bene execut thairfoir,
war not the gret laboris maid be the Lorde Sancharis freindis, for fauftie of his
lyf, through ane aggrement that was labored betuix thame, be moyence of the
B'lfchop of Sanctandrois, and utheris his freindis at the tyme.' Pitscottie,^

' ArcliibalJ Earl of Ergyle, Lord Campbell and Lorn, &c. - Sacramental or Communion Cups.

' Owing to the unfortunate loss of the Books of Adjournal at that period, this is the first entry now
remaining, relative to the earliest breaking out of the Reformation in Scotland. ■* Bannatyne

Club Edition, p. 248. ^ ' Stabs to death," Balf. Annales, I, 301. He assigns the year 1532 as

the date of the catastrophe. ^ Pitscottie, 8vo Edit. p. 511.

VOL. I. f 2 Y

354 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1550.

however, animadverts sharply on the scandal of compounding for so heinous a
crime, and states that ' no correctioun was maid thairfoir, becaus he (Lord
Sempill) was the Bifchopis guid-father.' Bot the plague of God left never
the Bllihopis hous thaireftir, becaus they left the publict fault vnpunillied, conforme to juflice. Yit the Gorernonr wes weill obeyed in all thingis ; quhill, at
the lall, he and bis brother the Bifchope begouthe to grow greidie, and held
Juftice-airis throche all Scotland, under pretext of juftice, to fill thair bagis and
boxes with money ; for thair compofitiones wer alike to Theiffis and leall men,
with thair lawes. They fcaffed throche all Scotland, opprelTand the leal men als
Weill as the TheifT, for thair particular commoditie.'

The parties concerned in this affair were Robert third Lord Seimpill, who
married, 1st, Issobel, daughter of Sir William Hammilton of Sanciuhar ; and 2dly,
Elizabeth Carlyle, a daughter of the Family of Torthorwald. He had extensive
possessions and honourable offices, having, besides his patrimonial inheritance
acquired Darnley, Cruikston, &c. after the forfeiture oi 3Iuthcw Earl of Lennox,
and held the offices of Governor of the Royal Castle of Douglas, Sheriff of Renfrew, &c. He afterwards fought against the Queen at the battle of Langside,
and obtained the Abbacy of Paisley, on the forfeiture of Lord Claud Hamilton.
There seems to be no doubt that he owed his life to his daughter's corrupt
influence over the Archbishop, who swayed his brother the Regent. The injured
relations of the murdered Lord, finding themselves compelled to yield to the
force of circumstances, were induced to give the use of their names, as concuiTing in the application for pardon.

William third Lord Creichton of Sanquhar, who was slain by hira in
the Palace of the Duke of Chatelhei'ault, Governor of Scotland, and, according
to Buchanan, almost in his presence, married Elizabeth, daughter of Malcolm
third Lord Fleming.']

Sep. 6. — Robert Master of Sempill became in her Majefty's Will,
for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of William Lord Crechtoune of Sanchare,
committed within the Lodging or Hall of the Lord Governor, in Edinburgh, on
June 11th lafl.

Declaratio Voluntatis Domini Guhernatoris, per emn, nomine Regine,

fitpcr dicta Roberto pro dicto criminc dcdarata, apud Ed"^, Sep. 10 injlantin, in domo ReverendiJJimi in Chrijh jMiris Joannis Archiepi/copi Sanetiandree.

The quhilk day \)e faid nobill Prince, at pe eirnift requeift, delire, and follifta-

' His daughter, < Lady Gilton,' was concubine to John Hamilton, Archbishop of St Andrews, by
•whom he had one son, Jolm Hamilton of Blair. See also Buclianan, Book xv, p. 65, who states that

8 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. » 355

tioune of Marie Queene of Scotland, Dowaner, eftir Tpat his grace wes defyrit J)airto be pe wife, kin, and frendis of vmq'" Williamk Lord Cuechtoune,
Declaris J)at pE Quenis pardoune vnder pe Greit Seal! falbe gevin and granted
to pe faid Robert, for pe Slaiichter of pe faid Williame, and extendlt in pe largeft
form, with all claufRs neidfuU; and falbe fred furth of ))E Castell of Ed" pe
morne, and put to libertie ; and within xv dais eftir pe faid day of his depairting
furth of ca])tivite, fall enter his perfoun within Jje boundis of pe Scherefdonies
of Kincardin, Forfar, and Perthe, be-Eift pe Walter of Tay, and Jiair remane
in Ward, as pE QuENis Warder, induring my lord Governouris Will : And fall
keip his Waird, and nocht depairt Jjairfra without his graces Licence, vnder Jje
pane of xx" niarkis, to be payit to oure fouerane lady, and hir Thefaurare : And
fall find fufficient fouirtie for fulfilling of ]jis Will, or ' he depairt furth of pe faid
Caftell of Ed'. In Witnes heerof, his grace hes fubfcriuit pir prefentis.^

James G.

The famin x day of September, Henry Lord Methvene, pe Laird of JohnneftouneAV^allace, pe Laird of Biakwod, pe Laird of Barrochane, pe Laird of Kynfawnis, the Laird of Mynto-Stewart, Williame Hamiltoune of Humby, Andro
Hamiltoune, Capitane of Uumbertane, Robert Ilainmiltouue of Briggis, and pe
Laird of Lundy, become plegis and fouirteis, coniunctlie and feueralie, for pe
faid Robert Maifler of Simpill, for fulfilling of pe faid Will in all poyntis, vnder
pe faid pane of xx" markis.

iHurtirr o( a momnn lii) i)tv ?i?usbant(.

Sep. 19- — William Tod, burgefs of Edinburgh, Convicted of art and
part of the cruel Slaughter and Murder of Elizabeth Adamfoune, his wife, committed under filence of night, in his houfe, within the faid burgh, in Oct. 1548.
— Beheaded.

Sept. 27. — EuGENius M'DoNALD M'EwiN, Captain of GlencamROUNE (Clan-Cameron), Donald M'"allane INFane, and foui'teen others, delaited
of the cruel Slaughter of John Roye M^allane M^coule alias Stewart, and John
Dow M^ewin alias Camroune. — Donald Campbell of Yhtirach)Tne, their cautioner, for delivering Letters duly executed, &c. was fined for not producing
them.

the entreaties of SenipilFs daugliter saved his life. The reader will find numerous notices of these
persons in the Appendixes to this and the preceding reign. See likewise Notice, I. * 340.

' Ere, before. " On the margin : ' Hoc actum deletur, de Mandato domini Gubernatoris :

Quod Mandatum vnacum Declaratione Voluntatis extant in cillula. '

356 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1550.

(!?}jpi't0sioit — ^orninff — Caftinti: Blarlt-iWaiL

Oct. 3. — James Gulane and John Gray, Meffengers-at-arms, Convicted for taking and apprehending John Cathro, and receiving Ulack-mail from
him for his liberty : Item, for Common Oppreffion and Sorning upon the lieges,
forcing and comjielling them to pay Black-mail. — Hanged.

SJliiUtnfl from X\)t iiaitrs of 3lan3l)oIme, ^r.

Oct. 7. — George Galloway in Auchmuir, Convicted of Abiding from
the Queen's Armies ordained to convene at Langholme, Haddingtoun, and Edinburgh, on Apr. 13 laft, for refitting our ancient enemies the Englilli, and for
befieging the Fortalices remaining in the hands of the faid enemies.^

iWuiUer — atfulteri? — oppression — ^acrilecfe.

Nov. 5. — Mr John Elphinstoune, Rector of Innernochty, dilated of
art and part of the cruel Slaughter and murder of Thomas Cult in Auld Aberdeen, under filence of night : And for theftuoufly wafting and deftroying the
goods of William Lowlbuue, burgefs of Aberdeen, for the fjjace of ten years,
during which time the faid Mr John lay in Adultery with Jonet Coleftoune,
fpoufe of the faid William : And for Oppreffion done to Mr Duncan Burnet,
Rector of Methlik, in ' Umbefetting' his way within his lodging in the Chanonry
of Abei'deen, and Cathedral Church thereof, where he was for the time celebrating Matins and Divine fervice, invading and ilriking him to the ground feveral
times with ' rouugis' and ' battounis,' &c. He was replegiated by the Vicar of
Innerkip, Commiffary of the Bifliop of Aberdeen, and Jan. 21 next was affigned
by the Juftice for his entry to miderly the law.

JSfforrius iHtssfntj:ers-at-:3[rms.

Nov. 14. — George Ramsay, Fiar of Dalhoussy, became in Will,
in his perfon and moveables only, for art and part of the Violent Deforcing of
Archibald Hereot and Roger Tempiltoun, MefTengers-at-arms, in the execution
of their offices, by virtue of the Queen's Letters ; and James Maxwell, under
a Decree of the Lords of Council, in the month of October laft ; and for violently taking certain goods from them, after they had been diftrained for the fums
therein contained. — Patrick Hepburn of Wauchtoune became furety for him.

* 2;lm6tstttiitti; tl)e <!5ait* — Conbofation — iHutdatioii, ^c»

Nov. 14. — Alexander Brodye of that Ilk, Lauchlan Malcolmfoun, and o)ie. hundred and twenty-Jive others^ were denounced Rebels, &c., for
not underlying the law for ' Umbefetting' the way of Alexander Cuimmyng

' Sentence is not recorded. " The only person of note in the list is John Hay, son of the

Laird of Park. The enumeration of the rest could hardly be interesting to any one.

9 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 357

OF Alter (Altyre), and his fervants, between his Place of Alter and the lands
of his Leafe of Balnafeiy, for his flaughter ; committed on foi'ethought felony,
by way of Hamefuckin : And for the cruel Invafion of the faid Alexander and
his fervants, for their Slaughter, and putting them to flight, with their accomplices, in great numbers, on horfe and foot : And for the cruel Mutilation of
Alexander or Allefter Adefoun, flegear, one of the faid Alexander's fervants ;
committed in Augufl laft.- — Their cautioners were unlawed or amerciated for
their non-appearance, viz. Alexander Dunbar of Cumnok, Patrick his fon and
heir apparent, Alexander Vrquhard of Burrif3ardis, John Grant of Ballindalloch, James Dunbar of Tarbert, and Robert Dunbar of Durris.

The following Warrant is afterwards recorded, remitting these sums.

GUBERNATOR,

Justice Clerk and ^our deputis, We grete 30W weill. Forfamekill as Lauchlane Malcomefoune,
William Leflie, fone to George Earl of Rothes,' Charles Vrquhard, &c.,- being ciiargit to find ficker
fouirtie pat ])ai fuld compere befoir Jie Juftice or his deputis in ))e Tolbuyth of Ed'', fe xiiij day of
Nouember, fe 5eir of God I'o.V'". and fifty jeris, to vnderly ]ie law for Vnibefetting of ]ie gait of
Alexander Cummyxg of Altarr, and laying of ane grete bufchement ' of futemen, bodin in feir
of weir, to ]ie nowmer of aucht fcoir;* and for maifterfull fetting vpoune ]>e faid Alexander and his
feruandis, and caufing of ))e faid grete bufchement to breke halalie togidder^ vpoun )ie faid Alexander
and his feruandis ; and chafing of the faid Alexander and liis feruandis, for |)air flauchter, to ])e Place
of Alter to Jie fpace of ane myll or fairby : And for ]>e crewall Hurting and Wounding of his feruandis,
and leving of Jianie for deid : And for fe crewale Mutilatioune of Allaller Adefoune, flegeour,*' vpoun
auld feid and foirthocht felony, and breking fairthrow of ])e Actis of Parliament, fifand Alexander
Dumbar of Cumnok, Patrick Dumbar, his fone and apperand air, James Dumbar of Tervett, Alex"^
Vrquhard of Burrifjardis, fouerteis for entre of fame befoir ))e faid Juftice pe faid day : And als, Jjb
faidis Alex'', Patrick, James, Robert, and Alex"^ becom ilkane fouerteis for vperis for entre of fame be
famyn day : And becaus ]>ai onne na wife comperit ])e faid day, to ]>e effect abone writtiu, pai wer
vnlawit and adiugit in diuerfe fowraes of money: Quhilkis vnlawis onre fouerane lady, with ourauife,
and with auife of her faid Thefaurare, hes Remittit and forgevin to fame ; as pe Remit maid pairupoune beiris. Oure will is heirfoir, and We charge 50W, ]iat incontinent eftir qe fycht lieirof,
jC deleit and put furth of Jie bukis of Adiornall all Actis maid, quhair ])e faid Alex' Dumbar, Patrick
Dumbar, James Dumbar, Robert Dumbar, and Alex"' Vrquhard, wer vnlawit for non-entre of }>ame
and ]>e perfonis above writtin, ])e faid day : fwa Jiat ])ai be nocht trublit pairfoir in tyme cuming. As
je will anfuer to ws Jiairupoune, kepand ])is oure Precept for jour Warrand. Subscriuit with our
hand, and with pe faid Thefaurare hand, At Edinbur', ))e xj day of Februare, the 5ere of God I"'.V<^.
fifty ane jeris. JAMES G. Joannes Thes. Gratis.

SntciTomimnuiirj: SMitD tijr itairb of CTaltiiJDtn iiirU Ijis son, lUtirls,

Jan. 15, 1550-1. — Alexander Park of Bagray became in Will for
Refetting, Supplying, Intercom muning, &c. with John Mure of Caldwell and
William his fon, being rebels and at the horn ; and for furnilliing the faid rebels

' He is omitted in the preceding list, and was probably charged separately. ^ The remainder

of the names follow. ' Ambuscade. * 160 persons. ^ To burst forth in a compact

body from their ambush. '' Perhaps this denotes jks/ier, or butcher.

358 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1551.

with meat and drink in November laft, and fundry other times before and fince.
— Warded in the Caflle of Edinburgh.

Snterrommtintits aiiK sujpplninff lUfirls Sjaitlj meat aitti Ijrhife,

Jan. 24. — ALEXANDER and William Galbraithe, Thomas Craig,
and John M'i<ane came in Will for Refetting, Supplying, Intercommuning, &c.
with A^'illianl Cunynghame in Carneferne, rebel and at the horn, and for fupplying them with goods, meat, and drink in November laft, and fundry times
before and fince. — Robert Cunynghame of Mongrenane and James C. of Rofs
became cautioners for their entry, at the next Aire of Dumbarton, to underly and
fulfil the declaration of the faid \A'ill.— \A'illiam M'kane and William M'caichny
fail to appeal', and tlieir cautioners are unlawed.

Common CI) eft

Feb. 6.— John Striueling, young Laird of Tulyduvy, Convicted
of common I'heft. — Hanged.

Creasoiiablp ^upplniitg: t\)t iHastcr of l{otT)ts, a Craitor.

May 4, 1551. — Alexander Prior of Pluscardix delated of treafonably Intercommuning with, Refetting, and Supplying Norman Leflie, formerly
Mafter of Rothes, a convicted and declared Traitor and Rebel, and at the horn
for his treafonable deeds, committed in the months of December and January
laft, and other times fpecified in the Letters. — Replegiated by INIr James Strathauchin. Rector of Fethircarne, and Commiftary of Patrick Billiop of JMoray, and
Jul. 3 afligned for his underlying the law in the Chapter houfe of Moi-ay. —
James Dunbar of Tarbett became furety for his entry, &c.

^^Irari) punisljttr ftp ^rang^iim in (Cljains.

May 6. — John Dauidsoun Convicted by an Affife of the Violent Piracy
of a French fliip of Bourdeaux, in October laft : And aifo for certain other
crimes of Piracy ftated in his Indictment : And for common Piracy — Hanged
in irons,' and his moveables efcheated to the Queen.

3intrrrommtnun0 Suitl) tU iHaistrr of l^otljrs.

May 26 John Grant of Ballandalloch got a Remiffion for

' ' Laqueo fufpeiidi a<l morteni, vfque ad ful corporis confuniptionem, adjudiratus fuit.' This is the
earliest notice in the existing Books of Adjournal of exposing the body of a criminal in chains, to be
consumed piecemeal by the action of the elements. The brevity of tlie Recoid merely leads us to
infer that this Pirate's liody was hung in chains, and within flood-mark near Leith, which was for a
long period afterwards the common place of execution for pirates, as at present on the banks of the
River Tliames. There are, however, few similar instances on record.

9 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 359

Intercommuning, refetting, and fupplying Norman Leflie, formerly Mafter of
Rothes, rebel and traitor, convicted and declared in Parliament, and being at the
horn for his treafonable deeds.

laiOrtins ffom ti)t Conbnition at tT)e 33ovl«crs,

Jun. 10, {apud Peblis.) — Patuick Hepbuune of Boltoune Convicted of breaking the Queen's Proclamation, in abfenting himfelf and abiding
from the Convention made by the lord Governor at the Marches towards
England, for the reformation of crimes, &c., committed therein.

3KitJmg Uiitf) Xi)t ^nglis]!) — dfix-m-aistno:— <^Iau(i;Tjtfrs, ^r.

Jun. 27. — James Patersoun, in Johnnifdeuche, and Stephen Paterfoun, in Kiftbill, found caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of
Hadingtoune, for conftantly riding with our ancient enemies the Englifli, and
leading them to many places where the goods of the Queen's lieges were ; and
thereby caufing them to carry them away, to the extreme ' Herefchip' of the
faid lieges : And alfo for caufing fundry Fire-raifings, Slaughters, Stouthreifs,
and Raids in various parts of the kingdom.

:SnttiToinminunff, ^r, iJcftT) tlje i^astcr of ^Kotljrs,

Aug. 18. — Alexander Dumbar of Cumnock denounced rebel, &c.
and all his moveables ordained to be efcheated, and his cautioner' alfo was nnlawed,
for his not underlying the law this day, for treafonably Intercommuning, refetting,
and fupplying Norman Leflie, formerly Mafter of Rothes, the Queen's convicted
Traitor and Rebel, declared in Parliament, alfo being at the horn ; committed
within the burgh of Fores, and the Place of Grangehill, belonging to Robert
Dumbar, publicly furnifliing him with meat, drink, and lodging, in the months
of December and January laft. — Alexander Vrquhard of Burrif'^ardis,
James Dumbar of Cumnok, and Robert Dumbar of Grayngehill, came in the
Queen's Will, and found caution for fatisfying her Majefty.

Lord Lovett, Archibald Campbell of Calder, Alexander Doles of Cautra,
Robert Murray in Fyndorne, and Alex' Falconer of Lethane, amerciated for not
appearing to pafs on their Affife.

©re ason — dTinliting against ti)t (Sobernoi* at !Jiunim iWtUr.

Sep. 10. — Thomas Haitlie, brother of the Laird of Melleftanis,

Parifli Clerk of , dilated for treafonably coming with the late Sir.

Ralph Everis, and fundry others our ancient enemies of England, in battle

' Alexander Vrquhard of Burrif3ardls.

360 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.U. 1541.

array, bearing the Englifli Red-Crofs, againft James Earl of Arran, Governor of
the kingdom, at Ancrnm-Miiir ; thereby ftriving to the iitmoll of his power,
that the fame fliould be lubjugated by our laid enemies ; and for other crimes
fpecified in his Letters. — He was replegiated by the Archbilliop of St Andrews,
and Nov. 27 was affigned for his underlying the law, &c.

Crrnsoualili) supplying ii)t ^nslisf) in ii)t Castlfs of ?l?ume,

John Haitlie in Fawnis, William Haitlie in Reidpethe, Cuthbert
Myretoun in Melleftanys, and Chriftopher Richerdloun there, came in Will for
tlie above crimes : And for treafonably remaining under the affurance of the
faid enemies of England continually from the battle of Pynke-cleuche, in Sep.
1547, till the recovery of the Caftle of Hume, in Dec. 1548 ; publicly carrying
the forefaid Englifli Red-Crofs, as the fubjects of England, to fundry Fire-raifings, depredations, and incurfions made upon the lieges of Scotland, riding and
marching, and publicly aflifting, fortifying, and participating with the faid Englifli, being then in the Caftles of Hume, Lauder, and Roxburgh : And for furnifliing them with victual and other neceflaries, and thereby enabling them
longer to hold out the faid Caftles, &c. — John Hume of Coldaneknowis became
cautioner for the fatisfaction of parties.

iiflahincr nnti ^cllins 3Lisi}t MvcnH,

Sep. 17. — Thomas Craig, baker, burgefs of Edinburgh, came in Will
for common Oppreflion of the lieges, in the years 1545, 1546, 1547, 1548, 1549,
1550, and 1551, in making and felling his bread or loaves of the price of 4d.
lefs in weight, from three to four ounces, than is ordained by the Statutes of
the Provoft and Bailies of Edinburgh.

The following Declaration of the Lord Governor's Will is afterwards recorded.

(GUBERNATOR,)

Justice Clerk. Forfamekill as Thomas Craig, baxter in Ed', in ane Juftice
Court haldin in ]ie tolbuithe of Ed', pe xvij day of September laftbipaft, become in Will to onr fouerane ladeis Juftice. for certane poyiitis of Oppreflioune, quhairof he was fundin culpabill : Quhilk Will,
We, as Tutour to our fouerane lady, with auife of hir Thefaurer, lies modeSit and fixit to fe fovme of
¥■= markis. Quharefore We, as Tutour foirfaid, charge 30W, )iat incontinent eftir ]>e ficht heirof,
56 infert ]ie faid Will in :;our buke of Adiornale, and mak ))is our writing to :;our Warrand. SubscRiuiT with our hand, At Linlithqw, fe xxj day of October, the 5eir of God I^.V*^. and Ij 5eris.

JAMES G. Joannes "Thes.

^fiilKus from ti)t Conbtntimi at Sumfrirs.

Oct. 6. — Alexakdeii DuNLor of that Iek came in Will for contemptuoufly remaining at home from the Convention of the Lords, Barons, &c.

9 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 361

within the bounds of the fliire of Air, Baillieries of Kyle, Carrick, and Cunyiigharae, at Drumfreife, fortliere holding a Juftice-aire on Jul. . . Lift ; and thereby
breaking the Pi'oclaniations made thereanent. — Neill Montgomery of Langfchaw
became cautioner that he fliould fatisfy the Queen.

aacmainins uitKer Assurance of t|)e (jritslis^.

John Skowgall of that Ilk, and Robert Knowis of tiiat Ilk, got a
Remiffion for their treafonably remaining under Affurance of our ancient enemies
of England, in time of war.'

Conb 0 ration —aitbasion of tlje IJrobost of <!3IascroiM, ^r,

Oct. 8. — I'he Laird of Bischoptoune and others dilaited of Convocation of the lieges, and Invafion of Andrew Hammiltoune, Provoft of the city
of Glafgow, for his Slaughter, and other crimes contained in the Letters.

Absentes ab Assisa domhii de Bifchoptoune.
RobertDenniftoun of Cowgrayne, Robert Simpill of Nobilltoune, Mr John Stewart,
John Bountene of Ardocht, John Hammiltoun of Forguflie, Hugh Craufurd of Kilbirny.

Robert Naper of Kilmahew, William Cunynghame, Tutor of

Alex. M'caulaw of Ardencaplll, Craganis,

iHui-lfer of a ^iTrrnrTiman — ^toutTji-t if, ^z,

Nov. 3. — Thomas Litil-Johne Convicted of art and part of the cruel
Slaughter and Murder of a Frenchman called John Porqueir, fervant of Captain
de la Mote Rouge ; committed in the month of September laft, in Clatty-dene,
in the fliire of Fife : And for the Stouthreif from him at the fame time of 1001.
of Scottifli money, extending to 2001. Turonefe French money, which he was
carrying to the Caftle of Bruchty-craig, for the payment of the wages of certain
foldiers, lubjects of the King of France, being then at the faid Caftle. — Hanged
and afterwards Beheaded ; and his head fixed on the Port of the burgh of
Couper.

Another unfortunate hiatus takes place at this period, by the loss of a
Volume of the Books of Adjournal, from December 18, 1551, to April 19,
1554 ; being apparently that which had originally been numbered ' Sevint
Buik.' In the absence of this information, the Editor again begs to refer the
reader to THE Appendix, where it will be found that neither pains nor labour
have been spared by him in his endeavours to remedy all such defects.

' A number of persons, chiefly persons of no rank, were charged for this oflTence ; but it is unnecessary to enumerate such instances. See the Apfendix, &c. for many other examples.

VOL. 1. t 2 Z

362 * ' CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1548.

The following remarkable document was obtained by the Editor from the
' LiBEU Statutorum Bukgi de Edinburghe,' when engaged in searching
the Archives of the City of Edinburgh for Papers for the present Collection.
It may not inaptly be inserted in this place, as being highly illustrative of the
disturbed state of society at that period, when the reader may recollect many
instances of Feuds and even of pitched battles between the Barons having frequently been fought on the public streets of the metropolis.

Act of the Provojl, Bailies, and Toivn Cotmcilofthe City of Edinburgh,
' Anent ijang) Walpynnis in huithis,' 31ar. 4, 1552.

Item, it is ftatute and ordanit be the Provift, Baillies, and Counfall of this
Burgh, becaus of the greit flaichteris and utheris cummeris and tul5eis done in
tyme bygane within this burgh, and apperandlie to be done, gif na remeid be
provydit thairto ; and for efchewing thairof, that ilk maner of perfone, merchandis, craftifmen, and all utheris occupyaris of buthis or chalmeris in the Hiegait, outher heych or laych, that thay have long valpynnis thairin, fic as handex, Jedburgh-llaif, hawart, (halbart?) jawalyng, and ficlyk lang walpynnis, with
knaipfchawis and jakkis ; and that thay cum thairwith to the Hie-gait, incontinent efter the commoun bell rynging, or that thay fe ony cummaris of Slauchteris, tul'^eis, or apperance thairof, and concur with the Officiaris of this burgh
for flanching thairof; under the pane often pund, to be tane of ony perlbnis that
fail5eis heirin, within viij dayis nixt heireftir. And for obferving heirof, that
ilk Baillie mak ferching, anis in the moneth, throuch all his quarter ; and
quhair he fyndis ony perfones difobeyand this ftatute, that he poynd thame for
the faid vnlaw.

A\)V. 19, 1554. — Peter Dwke, formerly dwelling in Saltouue, got a
Remiffion for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of James (George) Abirnethy,
in Sep. 1548 : Item, for art and part of the Slaughter of James A. junior, brother of the faid George, upon the Water of Tyne, in June 1550 ; committed of
forethought felony : Item, for art and part of the Stouthreif of a horfe from
James Fynlafoune fiirth of the lands of Saltoune, in Oct. 1552 : Item, for
Stouthreif of a mare, in company with James Dewer, from Walter Tod, furth
of the lands of Nevvhall, in Auguft 1550 : Item, for Stouthreif of two oxen
from James Bagbie, furth of the lands of Byris, in the year 1551 : Item, for
Stouthreif of a horfe from 'William Sinclair, furtli of the lands of Abirlady, in
Auguft 1550 : Item, for the Theft and conceahnent of two oxen from the

12 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 363

Laird of Bernys, in September 1550 : Item, for treafonable Fire-raifing and
burning of certain corn belonging to John Hammyltoun of Rylliolme, in his
barn of Saltoune, which grew on the farm in Saltoune, formerly belonging to
the faid Peter, and diiponed to the faid John, on account of the laid Peter being at
the liorn, and his effects efcheated to the Queen ; committed in December 1550 :
Item, for treafonable Fire-raifing and burning the whole corns of four ploughgates of land, with the whole Teind-flieaves of the parifli of Ormylloune, being
in the barn-yards of Ormyftoune, extending to 160 bolls of wheat, at iiij 1. per
boll, 480 bolls of oats, at xxix £ per boll, 240 bolls of barley, at Iiij f. iiij d. per
boll, 60 bolls of peafe, at Iiij f. iiij d. per boll ; together with the whole corns of
three ploughgates, and the whole Teind-flieaves of Crauftouu and Tovnflallis in
the barn-yards thereof, extending to 1 20 bolls of wheat, 400 bolls of oats, 200
bolls of barley, and 60 bolls of peafe, which belonged to umquhile Sir Walter
Scott of Branxholm, ku', and Dame Jonet Betoune, his relict, committed on the
firft night of December 1550 : Item, for the treafonable Fire-raifing and burning of the Milns of Muffilburghe, belonging in leafe to the faid Dame Jonet
Betoune, and deftroying and laying wafte the fame, committed in company with
our ancient enemies the Englifli and the Traitors of Scotland, by the fpace of
three years, viz. in 1547, 1548, and 1549 : And for common Theft, and common Treafon, as well of old as of new.

Interlocutor and Sentence. — 'And becaus })e faid Peter Dwneculdget
na fufScient fouerteis to fynd for him for Afiythment of parteis of J)e gudis and
flvaythis aboue fpecifeit. The Justices fiairfor decernit him to be kepit in fure
Ward, within ])e faid Tolbuth of Ediabur' quhill }je faid Ibuerte wer fundin be
him, fua fiat he fand pe famyne within fourty dais heireftir : And fail5eing of
fynding J)airof, pe faidis fourty dais being bipafl, dome wes gevin vpoun him to
be juftifeit and execute to pe deid for pe faid crimes, nochtwithftanding his
Remiffioune, conform to pe law.'

^laucrTjtrr rcnimittetr ftp «!« allrsrU iHnKman or dTurious person.

May 7. — Jasper Lauder, dilaited of art and part of the cruel Slaughter

of Jolm Balcafky, in Ratho, committed on May 1, inftant.

CoiMPERiT Johne Lord Borthuik, prolocutour for pe faid Jafper Lauder, and

allegit Jjat he fall nocht be put to pe knaulege of ana Affife for j^e allegit Slauchter

of vmq''' Johne Balcafky, becaus fie tyme of pe committing })airof, and lang

of befoire, and as 5it, continualie, pe faid Jafper hes bene furious and wantand

pe vfe of refoune, doand in all pe faid tyme, viz. be pe fpace of xvj 5eris laft

bipaft, furious and daft" dedis ; lyke as at lenthe is contenit in ane Inventour

' The probability is that this man was unable to provide sureties to redress the enormous injuries
he had inflicted, and that his life was justly forfeited to the offended laws of bis country. No future
entry indicates bis fate. - Insane ; fatuous.

364 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1554.

heir prefent to fchaw :' And fua, as furious during jje faid fpace, commonlie
haldin and repute, as is notourlie knawin, nevir queflioune, trubill, nor occafioune being betuix pe parteis, and fua is comparit of pe law to ane infant, pupill,
or beift, wantand pe vfe of refoune, as faid is ; quharethrow he culd nocht contract, trefpas, or do ony fie deid as were obligatorious," quherbj he mycht be
oblifl'' to pvnifment of his perfoune, likeas he inycht nocht oblile him in his
gudis :* And Jjairfoir, aucht nocht to be put to pe knawlege of ane Affife, as faid
is, conforrae to pe common law, as is contenit in Lege, Durius cle officio Prefidis,
and hes bene practicat vpoun James Irwin and v})eris furious perfonis.

The Justice depute affignis pe tent day of Mail inftant for geving of
Interloquitour vpoune pe laid Exceptioune and allegeance ; and in pe meyntyrae,
continewis Jje faid mater in Jie famin forme, force, and effect as is novr, but '
preiudice of party.

Mali 10. — Convicted and Beheaded, notwithftanding of the forefaid allegeance, in refpect that the Inventory above mentioned was not produced.

iitTulil.itioii of i\)t HaiiU of iiiioijois.

Jun. 17. — Robert Lauder, in Tynninghame, and five others, came in
Will for the Mutilation of Robert Knowis of that Ilk of the fore-finger of the
left hand ; committed in the month of March laft. — Adam Hepburne of Smetoun, and Patrick Quhitelaw of that Ilk became fureties to fatisfy the Queen
and parties.

CoPiA LiTERE Reginc Dotarie coucrjs. iafauorem Rohcrti Laudt'/; S<^c.

Justice and Juilice Clerk and ^oui' deputis. It is our Will, and for certane refonable caufis and
confiderationis moving ws, we cliarge 50U, incontinent eftir fytlit lieirof, 59 reffaue in Will Robert
Lauder, in Tynninghame, and liis complices, for Jie Mvtilatioune of Robert Knowis of fat Ilk, takaud
fufficient fouerte of -^anie for Afl'ytliment of our will and ]ie party; difcliargeing 50U of all calling and
preceding aganis Jiame Jiairfor, or for ony vfier crimes quhairfor ])ai ar delalit, and lies fundin fouerte
to vnderly lie law befor ^ou ])e tlirid day of Julij nixt to cum, or ony vjier day or dayis quhatfumeuir,
quhill' ]>e returning of |)e faid Robert and liis complices within our realme furthe of ])e pairtis of
France, and fouriy dais jiairefter, and of -^our offices in ])at pairt in Jie meyntyme ; becaus ]e niaift
pairt of tame is now in reddynes to depairt to )'e faidis pairtis of France, to jie feruice of our derreit
fader the maist Cristin Kino. As 5e will anfuer to ws Jiairupoune. Gevin vndir our Signet,
and fubfcriuit be our derreil nioder the Qwene Dowriar and Regent of our realme, At Edinburgh, )'e XV day of Junij, ]ie ^eir of God 1554 3eris, and of our regnne ])e xij 5eir. [Marie R.J

Jul. 3. — A number of other accomplices came in will ; and others were replegiated by the Archbilhop of S' Andrews.^

jfoi'sino; * JjaiDbess ' anti * .i[>aIf-liaU)i)rt0/

Jun. 22. — Peter Chapeane, Convicted of trealbnably forging and

'■ Unluckily tlie luTentour was not produced. It would appear that tiiey had entirely failed in their
proof, from the fatal result wiiicb has been recorded. '^ Obligatory ; binding. ' Obnoxious ;

liable to. * Effects ; personal estate. ^ Witliout. " Until. " See Jul. 3, following, &c.

12 Mae. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 365

adulterating the Queen's coin of the realm, called ' bawheis' and ' half-hawheis:
— Hanged.

JKcrcibiits tiyt ^.ummciit Ujljilc untjtr (j?.vcommuniratioiu

Jun. 26. — Gabhiell Sympill of Craigbait found furety to appear
at the next Aire of Renfrew, to imderly the law for fuftaining the procefs of
Excommunication for year and day, by virtue of Letters of the Official of Glafgow, for not paying certain funis of money to Catherine Gilmour ; and for
receiving the Sacrament, while under the faid Excommunication.'

dTorffntg falsr monn) lifee * Jjaijuftris/ ^c.

Jul. 3. — Hei,en Patersoune, Convicted of calling, making, and
forging falfe money, like ' bawbeis' and ' half-bawbeis.' — Hanged.

Coiibocaticn — ?f?<imf surltcit — ^Iciutjljtcr.

Sir Johne Howdene, Chaplane in Dunbar, was replegiated by the
Archbifliop of S' Andrews, for Convocation of the lieges, and Invading David,
James, Chriftoplier, Andrew, and George Humes, fons of vmq'^ William Hume
of Prandergaift, within the Town of Dunbar, by way of Hamefuckin, for their
Slaughter, of forethought felony : And for the Slaughter of Nichol Burne, in
December laft.^

mmintjtns— iHutilntion — ^Iau5Tjtn%

Robert Knowis of that Ilk, John K. his Ion, John Mortoune, and
John Skowgall were replegiated by the Archbifliop of S' Andrews, for being art
and part of the Hurting and Wounding of Hugh Lauder, in Dunfe, in fundry
parts of his body, and Mutilating him of his right arm : And for the cruel Hurting
and Wounding of Chriftoplier Sked in his right fliin-bone ; committed in March
laft.^ — George Bald, parifli Clerk of the Church of S' Martin, near Hadingtoune, was alio replegiated for the Slaughter of Richard Hepbiuue, alias Jieid
Rec/te.''

^.vportinij tui)tat, kt. to j^lantrrrs,

Jul. 4. — WiLLL\M Brown and Adam Nicholfoune produced Reniiffions
for tranfporting wheat, flour, and corn' to Flanders, agaiiift the Proclamations,
&c. — Others were replegiated to the Regalities of S' Andrews and Holyrood, &c.

' See Apr. 26, 1555. -' The Humes, ^.c. Et'teiwards found surety to answer for similar

Convocation and besetting Robert Lauder and others, and Wounding them, &c. on Dec. 21 last, at
the next Aire of Edinbur;;!!. = Sir William Knollis, Chaplain, was replegiated to the same Regality,
on Jul, 5. < Red Richie, or Richard. See Jul. 3. ^ The law was severe for such offences.

366 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1554.

crmti) Of ntiou — ^amrsiultf n — 3Htljasioit.

Jul. 5. — Henry Coxgiltoune, Tutor of Congiltoune, James his brothel-, and fovir others, Convicted for coming, in April laft, to the Town of Congiltoune, and there, by way of Hamefuckin, cruelly Invading William Chyrnfide and James Flemyng, his fervant, in his dwelling-houfe. — John Hume of
Blacader, cautioner for fatisfying the Queen and parties.

William Chyrnside and James Flemyng, his fervant. Convicted of
the Slaughter of Richard Hepburne, committed vpone luddantie on Apr. 20 laft,
he being ' ana reddare :" And alio for Wounding Mr Thomas Congiltoune at
the fame time, to the eflulion of his blood. — (Aug. 16.) — Banished from the
kingdom : and not to return, without fpecial Licence, under the pain of death ;
— James Cokburne of Langtoune became furety that they fliould depart within
fifteen days, ' And fiat in pe meyne tyme of ])e faidis xv dais, that they fall
nocht refort nor repair within pe boundis of Eift Lowthiane, vnder pe pane of
v. merkis.'

Jul. 11. — Andrew Hunter, in Dyfart, Convicted of the cruel Slaughter
of William Williamfoune, in Wefter "Wemys ; committed in July inftaut. —
Beheaded.

[John Paterfoune alias Snmvdovne Herald, Juflice-Deimte^

Coiiboration — ?feamtstir{un,

Jul. IL {apud Jedburgh e.) — John Gordoune of Lochinver, John
G. of Barfl-ceoche, Roger G. of Cuyll, David G. of Markbrek, Roger G. of Hardland, Mr Malcolm M'^Culloch, Gilbert MMowell of Machirmoir, Elifeus G., fervant of vmq'^ Symon G., and Patrick JM'kee of Larg, found furety to undei'ly
the law at the next Aire of Kircudbrycht and ^Vigtoun, for Convocation of the
lieges in warlike manner, on Jun. 5. laft, coming by way of Hamefuckin to the
houfe of Michael M^crakene, burgefs of Wigtoune, and fearching for him for his
Slaughter ; ' and for other crimes contained in their Letters.

{Ibid.) — Alexander Stewart, fon and heir apparent of Alkx. S. of

Garleis, M. M'^crakane, and five others, found the Laird of Garleis furety for

their luiderlying the law at the next Aire of Wigtoune, for art and part of the

' Ono who interferes in a quarrel as mediator. The ' reddiiiy-Jiraik' is proverbially the deadliest
in an affray. * The cause of this Feud may be seen from the next Case.

12 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 367

cruel Slaughter of Symon Gordoune, and the Mutilation of Elifeus G., his fervant.

J»laii0l)ttr of t|)C EairlJ of Itritirrtif antj Ijis ^oit.'

Aug. 4. — John Buttir of Gorinok denounced rebel, and put to tlie horn
for not underlying the law for art and jiart of the cruel Slaughter of George
Druramond of Leidcreif, and ^Villiam his fon. — John Crechtoun of Strathurd
and James Hering of Glafclune, his cautioners, were accordingly amerciated.

Conbomtion— Sinbatjuitr asailirs of Cupar — ajrrafuiTS SHarU, ^r.

Aug. 18. — James Turneull, Deacon of the Wrights of the burgh of
Cupar-in-Fife, Andrew Layng, Deacon of the Flefliers, John Burrell, fleflier,
and Laurence his fone, inhabitants thereof, came in Will for art and part of
Convocation of the lieges of all the Crafts within the faid burgh, armed in warlike manner, on the public ftreet thereof, on Apr. 9. lafb : And for difobeying
Robert AVilliamfoun and Allan Jamefoun, Baillies thereof, who admoniflied and
commanded the faid Craftsmen, and each of them, in name of the Provoft and
remanent Baillies, and in their own names, to difperfe and retire to their houfes :
And for Invafion of the faid Baillies, with brandiflied fwords, for their Slaughters.
Item, for making a Contract (' Band') and Obligation, binding them, and each
of them, to participate, concur, rife, and fortify each other againft the Pi'ovoft,
Baillies, council, and the reft of the community, not being Ci-aftfmen : Item,
for Convocation of the lieges, Craftfmen, coming to the Tolbooth of Cupar, after
citation ferved upon them by the Officers to compear before the faid Pi'ovoft
and Baillies, to anfwer for the Hurting and Wounding of the faid Baillies ; and
after they had entered in judgment, and had been accufed for the faid crime,
and convicted by the Affife thereof, for their contemptuoufly going out of the
faid Court, without the leave of the faid Provoft and Baillies ; thereby breaking
the Ward thereof; committed on Apr. 10. laft: Item, for Convocation of the
whole body of Craftfmen of the faid burgh, in the month of June laft, when
Nicholas Arthe had entered upon jjannel, to be accufed in the faid Tolbooth for
Convocation and difturbance made by him in the laid burgh, befoi'e the Baillies
thereof, fitting in judgment ; and during the progrefs of the fame, interrupting
the proceedings of the faid Court, with great clamour, without leave afked or
obtained ; and thereby impeding the adminiftration of juftice : Item, the faid
James Turnhull and Andrew Layng, for contempt and threatening of David
Lyndefay, Purfuivant, on Jul. 26. laft, mocking him with injurious words, in
the difchai-ge of his office, while executing the Queen's Letters paffing upon a
Decreet of the Lords of Council, at the Market-crofs of the faid burgh, com-
' See the Notice and Papers relative to this aifair, I, * 371.

368 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1554.

inanding the faid perfons, and the remanent Deacons and Craftfnien of the faid
burgh, to obey the Provoft and Baillies thereof as their conapetent Judges ; as
is more fully contained in the faid Letters — declaring, that their Proclamation
contained idle fables, and that they would force tears to be flied for the faid
execution.

Declaratio Vohmtatis Regine penes noimullos Artifices hurgi de

CoUPEli-IX-FlFFE.

(Sep. 19.) — The quliilk day, in prefenee of ])e faid Juftice-depute, Comperit Andro Layng,
dekin of \e Flefcheouris, James Turnbull, dekin of fe Wrychtis of fe burclit of Cowper, Johnne
Sicrrell, flefclieoure, and Laurence Bnrrell liis fone, qulia in ane Court of Jufliciare haldin in ))e faid
Tolbuith of Edinbui' ]'e xviij day of Augull lall bipall, become in Will to oure fouerane lady, and liir
Juftice in hir name, for diuers Convocationis and inobedience committit agane )ie Proueft, Baillies,
Counfale, and autorite of ]ie faid burcht of Cowper ; like as in J)e Act of ]iair becuming in Jie faid Will
at mair lenthe is coutenit. And jiair Jie faid Juftice-depute, in Jugeraent, befoir tbe faidis perfonis,
declarit our fouerane ladeis Will foirfaid in Jie faid mater, in maner following ; and commandit ]iame
to obferue, keip, and fulfill ]>e famin : That is to say, ])e faidis perfonis, and ilk ane of }iame, within
xlviij lioiiris nixt eftir ))air Iiame-cuming to Jie faid burcht, fall compeir in prefenee of ]>e Proweft,
Baillies, and Counfale Jiairof, in )ie Tolbuith of the famin, in Jugement ; and ]iair, of jiair awin confentis, act, and oblife fame, and ilkane of ]iame, to keip gude rwle within J)e faid burcht, and be obedient to })e Proweft, Baillies, and Counfale jiairof, now prefent, or fal happin to be for Jie tyme, in all
thingis, conform to the lawis and confuetude of pis realme : And gif it fal liappin Jiame, or ony of
fame, to be fundin inobedieut to ])e Proweft, Baillies, Counfale, and officiaris of J'e faid burcht, prefent and to cum, or to mak ony Convocatloune or gaddering of Craftifmen witliin ]ie faid burcht or
outwith, or to affift to ony vfirrls in making of fic Convocatloune and gaddering, for difobeying of fe
faidis Proweft, Baillies, Counfale, or vjiirris ofticiaris of fe faid burcht, or onywile incontrar fair
autorite, and fai, or ony of Jiam to be convict fairof ; in ]iat caife, fai or ony of fame that happinis to
be convict, to be Banist Jie faid burcht perpetuallie, and of fair reddieft gudis incontinent faireftir to
pay to f e Commoune Werk of f e famin fe fowme of ten pundis money of f is realme, without fauoris :
And gif f ai, or any of fame, fail5ies in making of fe faid Act and Obligatione, in maner forfaid,
fe fail;earis or fai!3eare fall, within fe famin houris, returne agane to the burcht of Edinbur', and fair
remane in our fouerane ladies Waird, or ony vfir Waird fat fall pleis hir grace, ay and quhill fE
QuENis grace half declarit hir Will ; vnder fe pane of rebellioune, and putting of fame to fe home,
and efcheitting of fair gudis movable.

^laufltJtti* of tlje ymxwq HaiiU of (Eluen-tn.

Oct. 26. — RoBEKT Henry, alias Deill amaug u\s. Convicted of art and
part of the cruell Slaughter of Thomas BilTate, young Laird of Querrell. — Beheaded.

<^lau(l]^tcf fin Sniris or ^Ucison.'

Oct. 30. — Henry Congii.toune, Patrick his brother, and William
Lille, found furety" to underly the law at the next Aire of Edinburgh, for art
' See Appendix to this reign. '' Robert Fairlic of Braid.

12 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 369

and part of the cruel Slaughter, by intoxication,' (the ufe of potions, drugs, or
poifon ?) of Oliver Congiltoune, fon and heir of umq'" Robert Congiltoune of
that Ilk ; committed in June laft, in the Place of Kynneix*.

^ittfrrommuniiitr toftl) tije 3taivlr ot JSallasaite.

Nov. 14. — George Crawfurd of Lefnoreis became in Will for Intercommuning with Duncan Hunter of Ballagane, being rebel and at the horn,'^
under filence of night, on one occafion only, in Augufb laft. — Sir Hugh Campbell of Lowdoun, kn', became furety to fatisfy THE Regent — and that the laid
George fliould remain in the Town of Edinburgh, until the Declaration of the faid
Will. — The fame day, John Craufurd of Drongane found furety to underly
the law at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for Reletting, Intercommuning, and
fupplying the Laird of Ballagane, John his brother, Herbert H. in Baitfurd,
and three others, rebels, &c. for the fame crime. — JxVMES Eklis of that Ii>k
likewife came in Will for Intercommuning with the faid Herbert.

Absentes ab Assisa Dominorum de Lefnoreis et Eldis.

John Lokkert of Bar, Alexander Cuningliame of Hill, Neill Montgomery of Langfcliaw,

John Campbell of Lochlie, Hugh Montgomery of Heflelheid, Thomas Kennedy of Bargany,

Rob. Grahame of Knokdoleane, Geo. Kennedy of Balmaclenochane, John Mure of Auchindrane,
Rob. Campbell of Kin^ecleuche, David Bofwell of Auchinlek, James Mure, his brother.

Coitijoratioit — l^tirthtci: antr SiJounti in jj*

Nov. 16. — John Lyndsay of Cobyntoune,^ John his natural brother,
James Someruile brother* of the Laird of Cobyntoune, Alexander Lyndfay of
Northflat, and eighteen others, came in Will for Convocation of the lieges to
the number of 200 perfons, armed with lances, ' culveringis,' bows, and other
invafive weapons, on Sep. 28 laft, before fun-rife ; coming to the barn-yard of
Mr John Someruile, Rector of Libertoune's glebe ; and for the cruel Hurting
and Wounding of Robert Myllar, fervant of the faid Mr John, in his neck and
other parts of his body, to the effufion of his blood, and danger of his life. —
John Lord Someruile' became furety for the Laird, who became cautioner for
the others, towards fatisfying the Queen and parties — and that he fuld remain
in the town of Edinburgh, luitil the Queen's Will was declared, and the royal
Licence granted for his departure.

iWutilation.

Mr John Someruile, Rector of Libertoune, and Michael S. his brother,

' Per intoxicationem. The same phrase was used in the case of Lady Glammys, where the means
employed are believed to have been poison and drugs, See I, * 158, &c. ' For the Slaughter

of John Greirsoune in Beochane, and Andrew G. in Bagrahill. ^ See Nov. 22, 1555, he. for

farther particulars as to these Feuds. ■* Probably a brother-uterine, by another marriage.

' He is named James in all the Peerages, &c. Hvgh, the preceding Lord, died anno 1549.

VOL. L f 3 A

S70 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1554.

Parifli Clerk of Carnwetlie, were replegiated to the Regality of Glafgow, for
Mutilation of John ^Villbun, and other crimes contained in their Letters.—
Hugh Someruile brother of Lord Someruile,' John S. alias Johne of
Begair {Big-gar) Symon Fyfcheare, and eight others, found lurety (James
Douglas of Drunilangrig) to underly the law for the laid Mutilation, at the
next Aire of Lanark.

Nov. 20. — Patrik Dunbar, young Laird of Cuninok, denounced rebel
and put to the horn, along with David Dunbar his ferwant, and James Ogilvy,
for not underlying the law for the Slaughter of Thomas Ruflell ; committed in
Jan. 1553-4, in the houfe of Archibald Alexanderlbn, in Balnageiche. John
Earl of Sutherland was amerciated in 20011. and 400 merks, for not entering them to underly the law. — (Jan. 31, 1554-5.) George Dunbar of Cumnok,
John Chifliolme fen., and John C. jun., found Sir George Meldrum of Fivy,
knt., as furety for their underlying the law for the faid crime, at the next Aire
of Elgin and Forres.

J^Iauflijtei- of a ^on of if^t S.aiilJ of aitjjre, .^c.

Alexander Dunbar of Cumnok, Patrik the young Laird of Cumnok,
and thirty-four others,' were put to the horn for the Slaughter of James Cummyng
inDollacebrachty, (Ion of Alex. C. of Altyi-e.'') — Their cautioners were amerciated
for their non appearance.'' Sir Alexander Duf Chaplain was i-ei:)legiated by the
Bifliop of Moray. — James Earl of Morton was amerciated for not producing
the Letters duly executed and iadorfed, purchafed by the blood-relations of
James Cummyng, &c. — (Jan. 31, 1554-5.) The Laird of Cumnok and Nicholas
Gil'^eane in Monachy, found Sir George Meldrum of Fivy, knt., as lurety for their
entry at the next Aire of Elgin and Forres, to underly the law for art and part
of the Slaughter of the faid James Cummyng, and Wm. C. in Prefley, Patrick C.
in Duimeyne, Andrew M^carreis in Dolacebrachty, Canit (Kenneth or Canute?)
Dow in Bank of IMurray, and Fynlay Rannalfoune, Officer of the laid Alexander ;
committed on Jul. 19 laft, at Clunerny.

dTirr- raisins — a3urnin0 fjouses antr s!)rinin(i;s.

Patrick Grant, brother of John Grant of Ballindalloch, found the
Laird as furety for his imderlying the law at the next Aire of Elgin and Forres,
for Fire-raifing, and burning certain houfes and flieillings on the lands of John
Grant of Karroyne, called Rownay and Clochetlace, committed in June laft.

' This person was brother of James, sij:lh Lord Somervillo, ami was the ancestor of the Fainily of
Spittal. - Tlie only persons of note were James nnd .Fohn Vrqwharil, brothers of the Laird of

Burrisjardis. ^ See Jau. 30, 1554-5. ' From 100 1. to 40 1 , according to tiieir rank.

12 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 371

J?IauijI)trr of tijc JLaivti of ^citicvitt^ mxH i)i9 ^on — dTfuD iJttbJteu
tijc Sruaimontis anU iJl.iirs, $(t,

[As, in reference to the numerous Deadly Feuds wliicli, unhappily, both preceding and subsequent to this period, convulsed the state of civil society in Scotland, the Editor is, through the kindness of his friend, David Labig, Esquire, enabled to lay before the reader an interesting extract from
THE History of the Family of Drummond, which has just been printed, under his superintendence, for private distribution only.

In various parts of this work, it may be seen that the various families of the Blairs of Balthayok
and Ardblaii', the Charteris' of Kinfawnis and Cuthilgurdy, the Drummonds, and several other Barons
and Lairds in those parts of Perthshire, were constantly involved in Feuds with each other, and occasionally with burgesses and citizens of Perth, &c. One of the most deadly of these domestic broils is
contained in the following Papers, which have lately been taken from the Originals, still in the possession of Henry Home Drummond of Blair Drummond, Esquire, and of which, so far as the Editor
is aware, no memory is elsewhere preserved. Without specially noticing the numerous other Trials
and proceedings in this work connected with such Feuds, the Editor begs merely to refer to them
generally.

The subject is thus introduced in the body of the history' above mentioned: — ' George DrumMOKD, the fone of John, fucceeded, who appearantly purchafed the lands of Newton of Blair, for he
is the firfl whom we underfland to have been ftyled George Dmmmond of Blair. He married Jannet
Halyburton of Buttergalk ; the had to him tuo fones, George, who fucceeded, and William Drummond. George Drummond, the father, and William, his youngeft fone, were both treacheroufly

killed together, at an unhappy rencounter by the ,^ upon the 3d of June, 1554 ; hot

moft of them that were prefent, or guilty of the Slaughter, were either brought to publick Execution,
or by theire fubmiffions and fatisfactions made theire peace with the parties wronged, as appeares by
theire applicationes extant.' The Papers above referred to follow.

I. Summons yor apprehending and bringing the Laird of Gormok^ and his accomplices before
THE Queen and Privy Council, Jun. 13, 1554.
Marie be ]ie grace of God, Queine of Scottis, to oure fliiref of Perth and his deputis, and to our
louittis, Archibald Campbell, Thomas Drummond, mefTengeris, our fcheriffis ipecialie conflitute, greting:
fforfamekle as it is humlie menit and complenit to ws be oure louittis, the wift'e, barnis, kin, and
friendis of vmquhile George Drummond of Leidcrief, and Williarae Drummond his fone, vpoun
Williame Ciialmer of Drumlochie, Williame Kory, George Tullydaf, Williarae Chalmer, &c.,
George M'^Nefker, fidlar, his howflialdmen ; Robert Smyth (and Cotters,) tennentis to Jie Laird of
Drumlochie ; Johnne Blair of Ardblair, Andro Blair, Thomas Blair, his fonis, David M'Raithy, his
houlliald man, Patour Blair, (and two others,) tennentis to the laid laird of Ardblair ; Williame
Chalmer in Cloquhat, Alexander Blair, half bruther to Johnne Buttir of Gormok, Williame Buttir,
Dauid Blair of Knokmaheir, Johnne Blair, Patrik Blair, his fonis, Williame Young of Torrence, and
Thomas Kobertlon, tennentis to ])e faid Laird of Gormok ; quhilkis, with pair compleces, with convocatioun of oure liegis to Jie nomer of Ixxx perfonis bodin in feir of weir, with jakkis, coittis of mail5e,
fleil-bonettis, lance ftaffis, bowis, lang culveringis, with lychtit lunttis,' and v])irris wappinis invafiue,
recentlie vpoun Sounday ))e thrid day of Junij inflant, befoir none, off ))e counfaling, deuyfing, cauiing, fending, command, affillence, fortefeing, and ratihabitioun of fe faid Johnne Buttir of Gormok,
come to ))e faid vmquhile George Drummondis, Perroche Kirk of Blair, to half flane him Jie
faid vmquhile Williame his fone, and vjiirris being with him in company : And becaus ]iai culd nocht
cum to fair peruerfit purpois, Jiai paflit to the Laird of Gormokis Place of Gormok, and fair dynit

' Page 1 18, " Left blank. ' The reader will find that he was denounced Rebel on Aug. 4 preceding,

for not underlying the law, as being art and part of this Slaughter. See 1, • 367. * Matches.

372 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1554.

with him, and fend furth fpyis to await vpoun ]>e laid vmquhile George and his cumpany, quhen )>ai
come furth of his Place of Blair : And being aduerteifit be ])e faidis fpyis, pat he wes cumin furth of
his faid Place, pai with fair compleces with ])e faid Laird of Gormokis howllialdmen and feruandis,
bcdin in feir of weir, of his caufing, fending, deuifing as faid is with convocatioun of oure lieges to J)e
nomer of Ixvi perfonis, J)e faraiu day, at twa houris or ])airby eftir none, ifcliit furth of fe faid Laird
of Gormokis Place foirfaid, and vmbefet ]>e gait to fe faidis vmquhile George and Williame, his fone,
quhair liai wer dowblate allane at Jiair paflyme play, and at ])e row-bowlis ' in Jie Hie Marcate gait
befide ])E Kikk of Blair, in fobir maner, training na truble nor harme to haif bene done to fame,
hot to haif levit viider Goddis peax and ouris, and fair crewellie flew ]iame, vpoun auld Feid and forthocht felony, fet purpois and provifioun, in hie contemptioun of oure auctoritie and lawis, gif fabe.
Oure will is heirfoir, and we charge 30W, flraitlie, and commandis, fat incontinent fir oure letteris fene ^e tak ficker fouertie of fe faidis perfonis and fair compleces, committaris of fe crymes
abouewrittin, in maner foirfaid, famony as ])e faidis compleuaris will mak faith befoir 50W, wer arte
and parte f airof, and gevis fair names to 50W in bill," that f ai fall compeir and vnderly cure law for
f e famiu befoir oure Juflice or his deputis, in oure tolbooth of Edinburcht, f e thrid day of Julij nixttocum, vnder fe panis contenit in oure Actis of Parliament : And fat 50 charge fame perfonalie, gif
fai can be apprehendit ; and fail^eing f airof, be oppin proclamatioun at f e mercate croce of f e faid heid
burcht of oure fliyre, quhair fai duel), to cum and find f e faid fouertie to 30W, within fex dais nixt eftir
fai be chargeit be :;ow f airto, vnder ))e pane of rebellioun and putting of fame to oure home : The
quhilk fex dais being bipaft,, and f e faid fouertie nocht fundin to 50W in maner foirfaid, that 5e incontinent f airafter denunce f e difobeyaris oure rebellis, and put faime to oure home ; and efcheit and
inbring all fair movable gudis to oure vie, for fair contemptioun. And als, fat 5e fummond ane
Alfis lieirto, ilk perfoun vnder f e pane of fourty pundis : As 30 will anfwer to ws f airupoun. The
quhilk to do we commit to sow, conjunctlie and feuerallie, oure full power, be fir oure lettiris, deliuering fame be 30W, deulie execute and indorfate agane to oure Jullice Clerk. Gevin vnder oure
Signete, at Edinburcht, fe xiij day of Junij, and of oure regnne fe twelft 3eire. (1554.) Ex deliberatione Dominoriim CoiifiUj?

n. The Offer is ojferit be the Laird of Gonnok, S)-c., to Young George Drummond of Blair,

for the Slauchtir of his Fathir.
Thir ar fe Offeris quliilk f e Lordis of Gor.mok, Drumlochye, and Arblair, and far Collegis offiris to my Lord Drummond, and to fe fonn of vmquhill George Drummond, his wyf

and bamis, kyne and frendis, &c. : —

Item, In priniis, To gang, or cans to gang to fe four heid Pilgromagis in Scotland.

Secundlye, To do liiffrage for f e fawll of Jie deid, at his Paroclie Kirk, or quhat v]iir Kirk fai pleys,
for certane 3eris to cum.

Tli.ridhje, To <lo honour'' to f e kjne and frendis, as efferis, as ivs is.

Ferdbj, To allyth, ]>(' partye is content to gyf to fe kyne, wyf, and bamis, I™. [1000] merk.

Fyfthlye, Gif fir Offiris be nocht fufFecyent thoeht be f e partye and frendis of the deid, we ar content to vndirlye' and augment or pair,'' as refonabill frendis thinkis expedyent, in fo far as we may
lefsumlie.'

in. Answeris hy my Lord Drummond, Sfc, to the above Offeris.

TiiiR ar fe Answeris fat my Lord Drummond, his kyne and frendis^ makis to fe Offiris prefentlye gevin in be f e Lardis of Gormok, Drumlochye, and Aiblair, vyclit far collegis : —

' A game similar to what is now termed Bon-Untj. ' Roll. ^ In the original dorumeiit this is followed

by the atlcstati'm of .Tames Bannatvne, notary-public, that the messenger had duly published the said Letters, &c.

' Uefening to the homage usually exacted in those days, viz The culprit appeared before the nearest in kin, (the

avenger of blood,) or the Chief of the Family, and in presence of the other blood-relations of the deceased, having a
halter round the neck, and, after kneeling, he offered his naked sword by the point, humbly asking forgiveness, &c.
■■ Submit. ° Kcduce. ' Lawfully; conform to law. " Kin and blood-relations.

12 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 373

Item, As Jie firft, fecund, and thrid artickill, J)ai ar fa generall and fempil in ])e felf, Jiat ))ai requyr
na anfver.

Item, As to pe ferd artickill, offring to ]>e kyne, frendis, wyf and barnis of Georg Drunimond I".
[1000] merk for Jie committing of fa lieych, crewell, and abomenabill Slaychtiris and JMwtillationis,
of fet purpos, devyfit of aid be pe Lard of Gormok, and Georg Drummond his fone, nor nane of his
frendis nevir offending to ]iame, nather be drawing of blud, takin of Kirkis, takis, fledingis, or rowmis
our ony of Jiair bedis,' or Jiar fiendis ; fa, in refpect lieirof, my Lord Drummond, his kyne, frendis, the
vyf and barnis of Georg Drummond, cane on nawayis be content lieirwyth.

IV. The Offeris of Williame Chalmer of Drumlochy for hymfelf, Williame Chalmer his Conjing,

George Tiolydaf, Williame Chalmer, Johne Fydlar, James Key, Johne Burry, Johne Wod, his

Seruandis.

In ])E first, Jie faid Williame offeris to compeir befoir my Lord Drxjmmond, and fe remanent
frendis of vmq'" George Drummond, and ])air to offer to bis lordfchip, and ]ie party, ane nakit fwerd
be Jie poynt ; and ficlike to do all vj'er honour to my lord, his hous and frendis, Jiat fall be thocht reaffonabill in ficlike caifes.^

Item, Offeris to gif my Lord and his airis his Ban'd of Manrent, in competent and dew forme,
fik as may fland with Jie Actis of Parliament and lawis of Jiis realme.''

Item., Becaus throw extrame perfecutioun be Jie lawis of Jiis realms, Jie faid Williame hes nether
landis, gudis, nor money, he Jiairfoir Offeris his fonis Mariage to be mareit vpone George Drummondis
dochter, frelic, without ony Tochir : And ficlike Jie Mariage of Jie faid Williame Chalmer, his coufing,
to Jie faid George filler.

Item, the faid William Off"eris hym reddy to ony vjier thing quhilk is poffabill to hym, as pleis my
Lord and frendis to lay to his charge, except his lyfe and heretage.

V. The Layrd of Drumloche, Band of Manrent,
Be it kend till all men be Jiir prefent lettiris, me Williame Chalmir of Drumlochie, that
ffbrfamekle as ane noble and michty lord, Dauid Lord Drummond, and certane vjieris principalis
of the four brancheis and maill fpeciall and nerrefl of Jie kin and freindis of vmquhile George Drummond of Leidcreif, and Williame Drummond his fone, forjiame felflis, and remanent kin and freindis of
Jie faidis vmquhile George and Williame, hes remittit and forgevin to me Jiair Slauchteris, and gevin and
deliuerit to me Jiair Letteris of Slanis Jiairvpoun ; and Jiat I am oblift, be verte w of ane contract, to gif Jie
faid noble lord my Baud of Manrent ; as Jie faidis Contract and Letlir of Slanis, deliuerit to me, fullelie
proportis : Tiiairfore to be bundin and oblift, and be thir prefent lettiris, bindis and oblissis me and
my airis, in trew and aufald ^ Band of Manrent to Jie faid noble and mychty Lord, as Chief to Jie
faidis vmquhile George and William his fone, and Jie faidis Lordis airis, and fall tak Jiair trew and aufald
part, in all and findry Jiair actionis and caufis; and ride and gang with Jiame Jiairin, vpoun Jiair expenfis,
quhen thay require me or my airis Jiairto, aganis all and findry perfonis, our Souerane Lady, and Jie
auctoritie of this realme alanerlie exceptit : And heirto I bind and oblis me and my airis to Jie faid noble
and michty Lordj and bis airis, in Jie ftraiteft forme and ficker* ftile of Band of Manrent Jiat can be
deuifit, na remeid ' nor exceptioun of law to be proponit nor allegit in Jie contrair. In witnes of Jie
quliilk thing, to Jiir prefent Lettiris and Band of Manrent, fubfcriuit with my hand, my fell is hungin,
At Edinburclit, Jie fift day of December, Jie ^eir of God ane thouiand five hundreth fiftie aucht jeris,
Befoir Jiir Witneflis, Andro Rollok of Dunerub,^ James RoUok his fone, Johnne Graliarae of Gormok,
Maifter Johnne Spens of Condy, and Laurence Spens his bruther, with vthers diuers.

WiLjAM Chalmir of Druraloquhy.

' This cirumstance is still considered as most insulting and oppressive by the tenantry in many parts of Scotland.
' See No. V. ^ True, sincere ; literally one-fold, in contradistinction to double, deceitful, &c. * Sure,

secure. ' Remedy, plea in the contrary, &c. ° Ancestor of Lord RoUo.

374 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1555.

It seems unnecessary to add any thing to the melancholy picture which is here given, as to the
frightful consequences which, necessarily, must have been produced on the general state of society in
this country, by the perpetual occurrence of such barbarous contentions.]

Dec. 12. — Patrick Blair, in Ardblair, and Robex-t Smyth in Drumlochy, alias Henry, Convicted of the Slaughter of George Druinmond, and
William his fon.' — Beheaded.

On Nov. 18 preceding, George Gordoun of Scheves, James Gordoun of Lefmore, and Gilbert Gray of Scheves, found caution to underly the law at the
next Aire of Aberdeen, for Refetting, Intercoramuning, and Supplying JViUiam
Chulmer of Drumlochy and his complices, rebels and at the horn, for the forefaid
Slaughter ; and for affording them meat, drink, and other neceffaries, in the
mouths of July and Auguft laft.

I?uittns antr 2Hountrins.

Dec. 19- — Alexander Hoppringill of Craiglethe, and George
his fon, convicted of art and part of the Oppreffion done to David Hoppringill,
fon of Alex. H. of Trynlieknowis, in Hurting and Wounding him to the effulion
of his blood in great quantity, committed on Jul. 15 laft, he being for the time
in the ' hauche' of the water of Caldane, near Trinlieknowis, keeping his father's
cattle. — Walter Riddell of that Ilk became furety for them.

^Iausl)tei- — 3)nbasiou — 22aotintlins — iKutilatiou,

Jan. 31, 1554-5. — Alexander Cummyng of Alter, John Cummyng
called FrancheJohne, John Cuke alias BlaJc dog, John Cummyng Owre, Thomas
Tail-^eour in Tulyduvy, and John T. in Socothe, found James Earl of Mortoune as furety for their underlying the law. at the next Aire of Elgin and
Forres, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Alexander INrgilleife, at
the Parifli Church of Edynkil5ie ; committed in March 1553, of forethought
felony : And alio, for art and part of ' Umbefetting the way' of Patrick Dunbar
young Laird of Cumnok," and his fervants, between the Weft fide of the water
of Duvy and the hill of Clumnerny ; committed upon Jul. 19 laft ; and there
cruelly Invading them for their Slaughter ; and for Wounding the faid Patrick
in his leg ; and for Mutilating Hugh Myll, his fervant, of his right leg ; and for
Hurting and Wounding fundry other of his fervants, in divers parts of their
bodies.

^lausfjtei* — CT)e^annrl bffoir Coiibirtiou jjcrmittrt to assiflit a

iUbcrsioit to ILortJ <3\\w,

Feb. 4. — Nicholas Rajisay Convicted of art and part of the cruel
' See I, ♦ 367. « See Nov. 20, 1334, &c.

13 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 375

Slaughter of Patrick alias Pawtoune Henry. Beheaded. — (On the margin of
Record,) * Nota. J)e faid Nycholl before his Convictioune, maid ])E Lord
Gray, in Jugement,' his ceffioner and affignay, in vheriori forma, to J)e Reiierfioune maid to him be Alexander Raa, anent ])e lowfing fra him of ane foirland
in \>e bui'cht of Perth, befid \>e Fifche-raercat.'

iriff--ratsiii3: — ISuruintj; of Corns*

Feb. 9- — Robert Patersoun Convicted of Fire-raifing and burning
the corns of Sprowftoune, belonging to James Commendator of the Monafteries
of Calco (Kelfo) and Melrose ; committed in the month of November laft. —
Hanged.

dTorfltiiii: a 23i0ti)artie in t\)t name of an Italian, ^r.

Apr. 1, 1555. — WiLMAM Lawder, Thomas Fothringhame, and Robert
Melvile, came in Will for Forging and Falfifying a counterfeited Letter of
Acquittance, dated at Edinburgh, Oct. 12, 1550 ; whereby Francis Cafar, Italian,
difcharged the faid Thomas of the lum of fifty golden Crowns of the fun. Which
acquittance was fubfcribed by the faid William, as a Notaiy Public ; and was
afterwards found to be falfe and forged, before the Lords of Privy Council, and
a Decreet pronounced at the inftance of INIartin alias Maury)ie Oliuer, fervitor
to THE Lord Dosell, Lieutenant of the King of France, dated Feb. 24- lafl :
And the faid Thomas, by the procurement of the faid William, for caufing the
faid falfe acquittance to be forged and fubfcribed, and ufing the fame : And the
forefaid Robert for his inventing, caufing, counfel, art, part, and affiflance given
to the forefiid William and Thomas. — Sentence. To be confidei-ed Infamous in all time coming, and their teftimony never to be thereafter received :
And that they fliould never enjoy any dignities, offices, or honors, either in judgement or outwith tlie fame : And to be Banished from tliis kingdom, and never
to return without THE Queen's fpecial Licence : And all their moveable goods
to be Efcheated.

2tlrrtibin0 t\)t l^oln ^arramrnt M)i\t untfer <ff.tromntuniration.

Apr. 26. — William Cunynghame of Lagland found James Hammiltovme of Fynnert knt., as furety for his underlying the law at the next

Juflice-aire of Air, for infringing the Acts of Parliament, in bearing fentence of

Excommunication for year and day, and receiving the Holy Sacrament, while

in that state."

' III Court. 2 See Jun, 26, 1554. There are many similar instances of prosecution for this

offence, which was deemed one of a heinous and aggravated nature, especially previous to the Reformation, when the consequences of Church censures were very formidable. See Appendix, &c.

376 « CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1555.

donbofatiou — ^pprtsstns ti^t ilaiiU of Snnes.

Apr. 30. — Alexander Prior of Pluscardin, Mr David Dunbar
Dean of Murray, Sir Thomas Rofs Chaplain, and Alex. Dunbar Parifli Clerk
of Raffert, were replegiated by Patrick Bifliop of Murray, for Convocatioun of
the lieges, and Oppreffiug the Laird of Innes and his fervants, in the month of
Januaiy laft : Sureties, James Dunbar of Tarbert, and Alex. D. of Cun5ie. —
Gawin Dunbar Rector of Rofkyne, and James Dunbar Parifli Clerk of Cumnok,
were replegiated by the Bifliop of Rofs, the Archbifliop of Glafgow, &c.

Conljoration — ^aniltac — SHibatJiiTS t\)c ^Jiior of ^i^IusfaiHiit, $(C,
in prcscnrt oftijt ?^olj) ^acmmrnt— ji^uiting aiiti aaiounUinu;.

May 2. — William Innes of that Ilk, and thirty-two others,' found
John Lord Borthuik furety for their underlying the law at the next Aire of
Elgin and Fori'es, for Convocation of the lieges to the number of eighty perfons, armed in warlike manner, and coming within the Cathedral Church
OF Elgin, during Vefpers, and there cruelly Invading Alexander, Prior
OF Pluscardin, Mr David Dunbar, Dean of Murray, Alexander D. of Con5e,
James D. of Tarbert, and fundry others of their friends, for their Slaughters, in
prefence of the Holy Sacrament : And alfo Hurting and Wounding James D.,
fon of the Laird of Tarbert, and Alexander Swyne, in fundry parts of their
bodies ; committed upon ancient ffeud, certain piu-pofe, and forethought felony,
on Jan. 1 laft : And for other crimes contained in the Letters.

jTdiU ftttiDcen ti)t Sunljars antj 3J«»tst0, $((,

James Dunbar of Terbeut, David Dunbar of Bennagefeild, Jafper
Waufe of Lochflin, and ten others, found furety to underly the law at the next
Aire of Elgin and Forres, for Convocation of the lieges, in wai'like mannei', to
the number of fixty perfons, under filence of night, and coming to THE Cathedral Church of Murray, and thei-e Invading William Innes of that Ilk and
his fervants for their Slaughters, on Jan. 1 laft ; committed upon ancient ffeud,
forethought felony, certain purpole, and provifion.

Supplication of (he Assisors to the Queen, with her deliverance thereon.
The quliilk day coniperit Gilbert ]Men5Eis, fone and apperand air to Thomas ^Menjeis of Pitfoddellis, Proweft of Abirdene, in name and behalf of Alexander Jaffray, baxter, Johne Arclay, cordinar, Alexander lleid, tailqeoure, for Jiame and lie remanent puir Craftifmenne of )ie burcht of Abir.
dene, and gaif in ])is Supplicatioune viiderwrittin, maid be fame to J)E Quenis grace, Dowariare
and Regent of Scotland, deliuerit and fubfcriuit be hir grace, in maner following; and defyrit pe
famin to be regeflrat and infert in fe buikis of Adiornale, and to be admittit be )ie Jullice-Principall :

' Among the number .ire James Innes of Monbenys, John Innes, brother of James Innes of Dranye, Andrew,
son of James Innes of Levvcharis, Andrew Innes, alias ' Cow thejegat,' Andrew Inncs, called ' the scalar,' &c.

13 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. « 377

The quliilk flefyre ]<e faid Juftice-ilepute thoclit reflonable ; and Jiairfore ordauit l>e faid Supplicatioune and Jje Quenis grace deliueiance and aiifuer gevin Jiaiiupoune to be legelhat and infeit in jie
faidis bukis of Adiornale, and lies admitlit and adinittis ]ie faniin ; off ])e quliilk Supplicatioune and
deliueiance ]ie tennour follovvis :

' Madame, vnto 3oure grace liuimlie menis,' We, Alexander Jeffray, baxter, Jolinne Arclay, cordinar, Alexander Reid, tail^eoure, for ws and ]>e remanent puir Craftifmen of j)e burcht of Abirdene :
That qnliair we ar new fumiuond to pas vpoiine ]ie Aflife betuix ])E Innesses and Dunbarris, like
as we liaue bene, diuerfe tymes, jiis 5eiie, fumniond of befoir, be50uie gracis Purfevewantis and Meffingerris, to pas vpoun Aflife in actionis diftant fra ws fourty, fifty, and Ix of mylis, ])at we knaw na
thing ]'airof niair nor ]iai ]iat duellis in Jheiufalem :- And fwa, Ma dame,-' we ar hevely tiublit and
berreif lieirtbrow, be faill,^ abvfe, and mifordour of ])e faid Purfewantis and Meffingeiis Jiat will
nocht fummond Lordis, Lairdis, and Barronis, as wes wount to be done in all tymes bigane, paft
memour of man, quliill'' pis inflant ^eir bigane, ]iat jiai bane brocbt of ane new vfe, by'' ^oure gracis
mynd, cs we beleif, to fummond puir bulges men and puir craftifmen, and i'pecialle of joure faid
burcht of Abirdene, quhilk lies bene fouie or five tymes heir fen pis tolmond, and all alluterlie^ herreit paiithrow. Quhairfoir we befeike 50ure grace, Jiat we pat ar puir inliabitantis of soure faid
burcht may baue ^oure grace pardoune and exeniptioune to remane and bide at hame, noclitwithftanding )ie Summondis pat ar to cum vpoun ws, wont'" it be for actionis done within pe faid burcht,

or thre mylis about pe famiu : And 50uie gracis anfuer heirupoune huimlie we befeik (Sic retrofcribitur) Apud Ed'mburclu primo Mali anno I"'V'^lv"'. Fiat vt petitur. Marie R.

<^fXUuji: Svtnd) Wiint5 at too !)ifil) a piirt*

May 4. — Geokge Hume, refiding in the Town of Leitlie, Walter Cant,
and thirteen others, indwellers there, and burgeffes of Edinburgh, found furety
to underly the law at the next Aire of Edinburgh, for Selling French Wines" at
higher prices than fixed by the Queen's Proclamation of Dec. 7 laft, under the
pain of forfeiture of their whole moveable goods, viz. for each tun of ' .B/irdeoitfc' '' and ' Angew' '^ Wine 20 1., and in retail at x d. per pint ; ' Rochell/
' Scherine,"'' and ' Cune3eoche,"^ 161., and in retail viij d. per pint.

^laufiljtn* mxU 5ES2HountJins of jFveiul) ^oltrtns — S«i*isUUtiou
anH iJiibilrsr of t\)t (t\)\\xti) CTouvts.

May 22. — Mr Mauk Ker and the Laird of Coldingknowis dilaited for the Slaughter of vmq'^ .... de la Vigne : And for Hurting and \Vounding of ... . Lefpine, ' corporale of Capitaxe Gal5earttis CuMrANY,""

Bruflie in fundry parts of his body, and other Frenchmen ; committed at

Newbottill, in April laft. ' Comperit Maifter Mark Ker, in prefence of })e

faidis Juftice-deputis, and defyrit to be replegit, as he ])at wes ane Kirkman, to

his Juge Ordinare :' ' And J)e Laird of Coldinknowis ofTerit him reddy to vnderly

' Humbly complain. ^ We know no more of than they who dwell in Jerusalem. ^ And

so, Madam. * Pillaged. ^ Failure in duty. " Until. " Against, contrary to.

8 Twelve months ; tliis year past. ^ Altogether, entirely. '" Unless, excepting. " See

Mar. 21, 1549-50. '^ Bourdeaux. '^ Anjou. ^^ Rochelle and Sherry, or Xeres.

'^ Cogniac ? '" See repeated notices of these persons in the Appendix.

VOL. I. -j- 3 B

378 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1555.

pe law for pe faidis crymes — and ])ai bayth proteftit ]>at pair fouerteis be relevit,

becaus J^ai wer reddy to entir.'

Debate as to the Jurisdiction of certain Church Courts.
Jun. 1. — CoMPERiT 3Iai/ier James Sa/foure, 0&cia\l of Sanctandrois, within )ie Archedenerie
of Lowthiane, vnder proteftatioune, pat ])e faid Maifter Markis comperance in fe faid Juftice Court
hurt nocht ]>e ertate nor priuilege of ]'e Kirk ; and, as Ordinare to )ie faid Maifter Mark, defyrit him
to be replegit, verba. — Comperit alfua Sir Willicnn Bannatyne, Chaplane, as Commiflar to )ie ArcheBiscHorE OF Glasgw, be his Commiflioune producit in Jugement, fpeciallie conftitute, and ])airby
defyrit ]>e faid Maifter Mark to be replegit furth of \ib faid Juftice Court, for ))e faid cryme, to fe
Jurifdictioune of j e faid Archebifchope ; and in caife |)e faid Juftice-depute wald nociit fuffer him to
be replegit be virtew of ])e faid Commiflioune, proteftit ]iat \e famin hurt nocht |ie faid Archebifchope
in his jurifdictioune foirfaid. — Mr James Balfoure and Maijier Dauid M'gill, vnder proteftatioune
Jiat ]iai admit nocht ])e Juftice to gif Interloquitour vpoune fe allegeances following, niji quantum de
jure, allegit fat ])e faid Maifter Mark fuld be replegit to ])e jurifdictioune of ])e Archebifchope of
Sanctandrois, and aucht to be preferrit in replegiatioune to ])e Archebifchope of Glafgw, be reffoun
he hes producit ane Teftimoniale of his Ordour of Crownebennet,' berand fat he wes Scolare in Jie
dyocy of Sanctandrois : And als allegit, fat he wes borne within fe faid dyocy, in f e Caftell of Edinbur*, and maid refidence continwalie within ])e famin dyocy, viz. within fe Place and toun of Newbottill or Ed'' : And als, fat f e allegit cryme he wes to be accufit of wes committit within f e faid
dyocy of Sanctandrois : And forther allegit, fat he hes na Benefice within fe dyocy of Glafgw; and
fat he hes deniittit ])e Benefice of Maffindew," in Jedburcht, quhairby ])e faid Bifchope of Glafgw
allegit him to be ordinar to fe faid Maifter Mark ; like as he prefentlie, in prefence of fe faid Juftice
Depute, dimittis ])e famein : And attour,^ offerrit fe Laird of Haldane cautioune for juftice to be
done, &c., and alkit inftrumenttis vpoune ]ie allegeances and Ofiir foirfaidis.

ll?ici;T) Cftason — ^bjmiuts frnltn to tljt protector of ditilantr, kt*

May 24. — Gkorge "Wauciiope, burgefs of Lauder, produced a Reniiffion for taking affurance upon himlelf and the other Inhabitants of the Town of
Lawder, in October lo^T, during the time of the buikling of the FortaHce of
Roxburghe, with the English Protector, and Lord Gray, his Lieutenant
General ; giving and granting his Bond and faith under his hand, that he and
the other Inhabitants of Lawder fliould be faithful fubjects to the King
OF England ; and giving his oath of fealty, for obferving the fame : Which
Bond was thereafter fulfilled, by his daily treafonable riding in company with
the faid Englifli, confulting and guiding them, as often as occafion required,
againll her Majefty's fubjects, to their liibveriion and ruin. ItEiAI, for his treafonably leading the Protector of England with his Armv, immediately
after the Battle of Pynkecleuche, in October 1547, to the faid Town of
Lauder, therein to remain in Caftles, &c. and leading them, in bodies, to various
parts of the country, for the deltruction and flaughter of the lieges thereof.
Itejni, for his leading, refetting, fupplying, interconimuning, and participating,
continually, dui-ing the whole of the years 1552 and 1553, with Sir Walter Ker
' Having taken his degree ; Saccalaureus ? ^ Maison Dieu. ^ Furthermore.

13 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 379

of Cesfurde, Sir Andrew Ker of Hirfell, and Sir John Ker of Pharnihirft, kn",
their lervants and accomplices, the Queen's Rebels and at her horn, againft the
Acts of Parliament. Item, for his treafonably guiding the faid English Protector, THE Earl of Warwik, Lord Gray, and the English Army,
immediately after the Battle of Pynkecleuche, in the year 1547, they then being
in England, to the Caftlehill of Lauder, being the Queen's proper lands, where
the faid Englifli foldiers built a Fortalice, and fortified the fame with warlike
ftores, to be kept againft the Queen's lieges ; and for inventing, treating, and
confulting with the faid Englifli thereupon. Item, for treafonably delivering
to Ralph Bruier, Captain of the Fortalice of Roxburgh, and other Engliflimen, being therein, an hundred daggers, with all kinds of grain which he could
obtain ; and aflifting and participating with them for the keeping and jn-otection
thereof. And alfo, for treafonably revealing and fliewing to the General at the
Fortalice of Lauder, and to other Captains of Fortalices, during the time of their
remaining in Scotland, all the fecrets of this kingdom, which he had or could
procure, to the hurt and leflon thereof, and to the advantage of the faid Englifh :
And for riding and going with them, for obtaining their ends, in all their deeds
and confpiracies againft the kingdom of Scotland, as if he had been a native
Engliflmian.

^Iaucrl)tcr of a JHesscnscr at airms*

Jun. 7. — John Blakcater, fervant to the Earl of Bothuile, was
denounced Rebel and put to the horn, and William Moncreif of that Ilk, his
cautioner, was amerciated in the fum of 500 nierks, for his non-appearance to
underly the law for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of James Lowis, MefTenger at arms.

^clUntr ITictuaX aitH dTlcsf) in (Jfnulantr,

Jun. 17. — MuNGO Hunter, in Chirnefide, Convicted of breaking the
Acts of Parliament in carrying flefh into England.' — Robert Richartfoun and
fix others in Fuldene, and Patrick Gibfoun in Coldinghame, came in the Queen's
Will for tranfporting Victual into England ; and Alexander Crawfurde, and two
other butchers in Coldinghame and Aytoun, came in Will for carrying flefli into
England.^ A number of others were replegiated to the Regality of Dalkeith,
were denounced Rebels, or came in Will for fimilar crimes, about this period.

Jatmai'UalJlc Case of Dirarij hn ([PnsItsDmtn — ^jppvtssion, ^r,

Jul. 3. — ' HiLBERT Stalfurde, in Kentfchire, in pe Toune of Der-

' George Lord Seytoun became his cautioner. ^ Cautioners to satisfy the Queen George

Ramsay of Dalhoussy, John Hwme of Hutounhall, and Alexander Hwme of Manderstoune.

380 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1555.

ingtoune, Capitane ('^vy/.') ' ; Thomas Man in Northphok, borne within pe toune
of Elfin,' and twenty-feven others, ('^7-ff.') Convicted by an Affife/ chofen
and fworn by their own confent, of Piracy and Oppi-eflion done to the Qneen's
liege fiil>jects, and to others, foi-eigners, in friendfliip and league with this kingdom, and navigating hither ; and of coming upon them with a certain armed
velTel called ' Kait or Lynne' at the times refpectively following, in her
INIajefty's leas, whilft the faid lieges were making for the harbour of Leith, and
by piratical force boarding their vefiels, and reiving and fpoiling them of the
goods under fpecified, viz. On Jun. 23 laft, furth of ' ane hulk' of the town of
Stateyne, then being in the harbour of Leith, a rope or ' kabill' containing 90
' fadummis,' three or four ' piftolettis,' together with certain Tailor's drefies and
canvafs : Itejm, on Jun. 25 laft, furth of a fliip belonging to Robert Orknay,
Scotfman, 34 ' boundis'^ of hemp,^ feven barrels of the fineft flour," with nine
pieces of wax : Iteji, on Jun. 20 laft, of a fliip of Adam Nycholfoune, in which
Mr George Halkheid was for the time, twenty pieces of ' fatyne' and ' dammefe :"*
Which goods the liiid i)erl"ons judicially Confefled that they had ftolen, and that
they had fitted out their armed ftiip without any Licence or protection from
their Prince, contraiy to the common law of Nations. — Sentence. That they
fliall be HANGED as Pirates : And that their fliip, with the forefaid goods, and
all that was therein at the time of capturing the fame, fliall be efcheated to the
Queen.

List of I/ic other Pirates, icith their pnnishmcnt or acquittal.
John Hupgame, borne in Northphok, and now duelland in Lyn, (Siijpen.) ; Thomas Baxter, borne
in Newcaftell, now (hielland in Lyn, (^SiiJ'pen.) ; Edmond VVilliamefoue, in 5orkfcIiire, boine in KirkbenioiTyde,* duelland in Twedmond, in Northunibeiland, (^Gra.) ; Antliony Fitteplace, borne in Welfchire, now in Berrick, (Gra.) ; George Barrat, in Vngle, in Northhantounfthire, now in Northhame,
( Gra.y ; Johnne Wifdome, borne in Anglifberry-Iiill, within v niyle to Brifto, now fuldiour in Berwik,
{Si//pcn.) ; Williame Prince, borne in Birkinfchire, now in Berwik, (Gra.^ ; James Golf,** borne in
Hamfcbyre, now in Berwik, ( Gra.) ; Phillope Withelak, borne in Denlchire, now in Berwick, ( Gra.) ;
Johnne Neillwing, borne in Nortliphok, now in Lyn, (Stt/jjen.) ; Nj'cholace Phillope, borne in Lyncumlcliire, witliin ]ie toune of Bowfloune, in Lyn, (Su/pen.) ; Matliow Crosfurde, borne in 5orkfchire,
now in Lyn, (^Siijpen.) ; Williame Vnthane, borne in Hartfurdefchire, now in BerWik, (Gra.) ; Edward Wrycht, borne in Lifterfchire, now in Berwik, (Gra.); Robert Ra, borne in Carlile, now in
Berwik, ( Gra.) ; Robert Swentoune, borne in jo'kfchire, now in Berwik, ( Gra.) ; Williame Bourfchaw, borne in Tynebriciie, in Kentfcliire, now in Berwik, (^Gra.) ; Williame Lamb, borne in Gloifterfcliire, now in Berwik, ( Gra.) ; Edward Campbell, borne in Newcaflell, now ]iair, ( Gia.) ; Johnne
Hall, borne in Northphokfchire, now in Hunftonne, (Siijpen.); Rolland Kaif, borne in Lundoun-

' The enumeration and description of these pannels are so remarkable, that it has been thought proper to append
them to the Trial in a smaller type. Prefixed to each name on the margin is the word ' Suspen.' or ' Gra.' (gratia),
the first denoting tliose who were IIanced, and the latter those who were afterwards PAunoNrn, or their sentence
commuted. The two List, being jMinors, were not convicted, ^ With the exception of William Lynlythgow of

Drygrance, they were burgesses and residenters in Edinbui'gh and Leith. ^ I3undles? * Ca»«yn'.s (caunahis?) ^ Farine siliginis. Pliny uses farina silUjuna in this sense, though siHgo denoted an inferior or light sort of

corn, vieldiiig less nutriment than wheat. ° Satin and damask. ' Kirkby-on-tlie-muir-sidc ? ' Gough ?

2

9Jac. V. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 381

fchire, now ])aii-, (Gra.); Jolinne Woddorat, borne in Kentfchire, now in Swakle, (^Siifpeti.) ;
Symoune Mawller, borne in Noithpbokfcliire, now in Lyn, (^Sii/pen.) ; Robert Atlielounc, borne in
Newcaftell, now in Lyn, prenteife, (Su/pen.) ; Johnne Mortoune, borne in Chefcliyre, now in Berwik, (Gra.) ; Jobn Moir, borne in Warwikfcliire, now at Lundoune, (Minor) ; George Steill, borne
in Gillfland, now in Norhame Caftell, (3Ii/ior.y

Jul. 6. — Thomas Stilberry, ' fkipper' of tlie fliip called Kait of
Lyn, born in Lincoiifchyre, in Litiltoune, now in Hull, Convicted of the
fame crimes of Piracy, &c. — Hanged.

S^ounT3(ucr tf)e Brputn-ilirrper of tljr <!liittn*s ^arfe.

Aug. 21. — Robert Fiddes, fon of James Fiddes in Preiftisfield, Robert
Bertilmo, and George Fokert, Convicted of art and part of Hurting and Wounding of William Ahannay, fervant of the Laird of Craigemyllare,^ being his
deputy in keejjing THE Queen's Park, near Edinbin-gh ; committed fuddenly,
on Jul. 6 laft.

sUatiDaibttioit of <^Inu0Tjtrr, SUotintr in tj, ^f» — amjivtsonins—
Usurpation of Ujt ^urrn's autI)oitti).

Nov. 8. — Dame Mariota Montgojiery, Lady Symple,^ Came in
the Queen's Will ^ for Ratihabition ° of the Slaughter of Gilbert Rankyne in
Lecheland, committed by the fervants of the faid Lady, Mar. 17, 1553, under
filence of night : And for Ratihabition of the cruel Hurting and Wounding of
John Fynn^, and Mutilation of his arm ; and for Hurting and Wounding of
John Roger in fundry parts of his body, to the efTufion of his blood, committed
at the fame time — by Refetting of her fervants, who had committed the faid
crimes, red-hand,'^ that fame night, within THE Castle of Laven, immediately
after the perpetration thereof: And alfo for Ratihabition of the taking and
apprehending of Humjihry Malcolmefoun and Archibald Scherare, they being
conducted by her fervants on the fame night to the Caftle of Laven, feeing llie
received them into her faid Caftle ; Item, for Incarceration and fubjection of
the faid perfons in the forefaid Caftle by the fpace of twenty-four hours, without
food or drink ; thereby Ufurping the Queen's authority.

' The last two were not convicted, owing to their minority. ^ Simon Prestoune of that Ilk.

^ This lady is called Lady Margaret Montgomery in Wood's Peerage. She was eldest daughter
of Hugh Jirst Earl of Eglixtoun ; and was, at the time of this Trial, relict of William second
Lord Sempill, who died anno 1548. There seems no doubt tliat her name was Mariota, she having
been named after her motlier, Mariota Seytoun, Mistress of Borthwick, and sister of George I^ord
Seytoun. Wood's Peerage, I, 499, and II, 493. * On the margin, ' Deletur, quo ad partem

Regine, per jireceptum. ^ Law Lat. ratihahere, confirmare, pro rato habere. *> This is

sometimes termed ' with the hhiidy hand,' i.e. taken or detected in tlie very fact.

382 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1555.

AssiSAjifper Domhia Mariota Montgomery Domina Sympill.

Jofane Stewart of Fowbar, Williame Wallace of Elrifley, Williame Cunynghame of CunynghameAUane Houftoune, in Fowbar, Patrik Glenne, brujier to James, Laid,

Robert Lindefay of Dunrod, Patrik Howflonne of pat Ilk, John Scliaw of Berragane,

James Glenne of the Bar, Dauid Lyndfay, in Glafgw, Matho Galbrayth.

John Simpill of Fulwod, Hectour Stewart, in Raife,

John Campbell of Skijipynche became furety for fatisfying the parties — and
alfo for the entry of Ewfame Stewarte, at the next Aire of Renfrew, to
underly the law for art and part of the Slaughter of the faid Gilbert Rankyne.'

Confaoration — ?gamrsurfetit at t|)f iHonastm) of Paislrn.

Nov. 9. — Matiieav Stewakte of Baescube, John Brifbane of Bifchoptoime, William Park and Thomas Brilhane, their fervants, Thomas, fon
of John Marchell in Rowchbank, William his brother, William Brifbane, fervant of Lord Sympill, John Stewarte, Ion of Jonet at the Brigend of Paifley,
and Williame Allanefoiine at the mill of Farmalkyne, found John Lord Erflvyne
as fui'ety for their entry, at the next Aire of Renfrew, to imderly the law for
Convocation of the lieges to the number of twelve perfons, armed in warlike
manner, and for coming to the Monastery of Paslay, by way of Hamefuckin, and there Invading John Hammyltoune, fon of John H. of Ferguflie,
' grynter' " of Paflay, for his Slaughter ; and for Mutilating him of his arm,
committed on July 26 laft : And for fundry other crimes contained in their
Letters, — John Allanefoune was denounced Rebel, and put to the horn for not
apjiearing.

Conboration — SiniJa^inS 3)amts Hovli ^omtrfailc'

Nov. 22. — William Baillie of Bagbie, Nicholas his brother, Michael Shorte his fervant, and three othei's, were replegiated by James Earl of
Mortoune, to his Regality of Dalkeyth, to underly the law on Jan. 17 next, for
Convocation of the lieges to the niunber of fix fcore pez'fons, armed in wai*like
manner, and Invading James Lord Someruille for his Slaughter ; committed on Oct. 1 laft. William Symontoune of that Ilk became fui-ety. — James
and John DAL3ELL in Knowhobill, replegiated to the Regality of Boithuile
by Archibald Earl of Angus ; Robert Dal5ell of that Ilk being furety for their
entry, and James Douglas of Todhillis for the due adminiftration of juftice. —
John Symontoune, Parifli Clerk of Symontoune, and Robert Dal5ell, Parifli
Clerk of Dal5ell, replegiated by the Archbifliop of Glafgow. — John Mvre of

' See Jan. 14, 1555-6. ^ Granitarius, one who keeps a store of Grain, a grain-dealer, or

girnall-heqicr. ^ See also Nov. 16, 1554, &c. for notices of these Feuds.

13 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 383

Anneftoune, and forty-two others, found furety to underly the law for the fame
crimes at the next Aire of Lanark.

jftiiti iitt^tttt HovK ^omerbilc mti ilfntrsag of Cofipiirtount.

Nov. 22. — Mr John Soinieuuile, Rector of Libertoune, Michael S.,
Parifli Clerk of Carnweth, Mr William S., Vicar of Kirkbane, Thomas S., Rector of Quodqwene,' and John Carmichael of that Ilk, Parifli Clerk of Carmichael, were replegiated by the Archbifliop of Glafgow to underly the law before his
next head Court, for Convocation of the lieges to the number of 100 perfons, and
hindering John Lindefay of Cobynetoune from coming to the head Court of the
fliire of Lanark, committed on Oct. 1 lafl. — James Lord Soraeruile became furety
for the due adminiftration of juftice. — John Someruile, brother of Lord
Someruile, Parifli Clerk of Quodqwene, was alfo replegiated by the Archbifliop
of Glafgow ; Archibald Earl of Angus became furety for his entry, and for the
due adminiftration of juftice. — James Chancellaee in Newmanyis, and fixtyeight others, found James Lord Somerville, Murray of Cokpull, and John Carmichael of that Ilk, as fureties for their entry at next aire of Lanark, to underly
the law for the fame crimes.

iHutilation of ti)t %nixti of Craiflinatlt anU fjis <^mt»

Nov. 26. — Mr Alexander Levingtoune of Donypace found William Lord Levingftoune as furety for their entry at the next Juftice-aire of
Stirling, to underly the law for art and part of the Mutilation of John Cragyngelt of that Ilk, and Robert his fon, of their left arms ; committed within the
burgh of Stirling, on Aug. 21 laft.— (Jan. 8, 1555-6.) Henry Livingston
in Falkirk, William and Thomas his fons, and his three fervants, found caution
(the Laird of Doniphace) to underly the law at the following Aire of Stirling, for
fame crime.

'^iivtins aiift OTounUinff,

Nov. 28. — Robert Someruile,- brother-german of James Lord S., came in
the Queen's Will, for art and part of the cruel Hurting and Wounding of John
Lyndfay, natural brother of the Laird of Colbynetoune, to the efTufion of his
blood ; committed fuddenly, on Jul. 7 Jaft.

€>j)pitj3sioit — Snbasion, ^r,

John Lyndsay of Cobynetoune, James Johnftoune of Weftraw,

' They were alfo replegiated the same day by the Arclibishop of Glasgow, for the Hurting and
Wounding of John Lyndesay, natural brotiier of the Laird of Colbyntoune, to the effusion of his
blood; committed on Jul. 7 last, on forethought felony, Lord Somervile cautioner. ' See Nov. 22,
155.5, Note, &c. Reference may also be made to the Appendix.

384 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1555.

and James Moffat, fervant to the Laird of Cobyntoune, Convicted of the
Oijpreffion done to John Someruile, brother-german to James Lord Someruile,
in cruelly Invading him at Romefchaw, and chafing him to the dwelling-houle
of John Haithwye, officer of Archibald Earl of Angus in Gaitfyde, beietting the
faid houfe, and Invading the faid John for his (laughter ; committed ' vpoune
fuddentie,' on Sep. 24 laft.

gUiiiJturi from t\)t UaiH of ilnutjer, 4^c,

Dec. 17. — Alexander Gillies in Glenkirk, came in Will for contemptuoully remaining from the Queen's army couveened at Lawder, May 14
laft, to concur with and afRfl George Earl of Huntlie, Gilbert Earl of Caffillis,
and James Earl of Mortoune, having her higlineffes Comniiffion to punifli and reprefs certain crimes and Slaughters committed upon the Borders of the kingdom ;
againft the Proclamations made thereanent. — James Twedy of Drummel3ear
became cautioner. — John Lyle of Stanypethe, John Naper of Ballekinrane, and
a number more, came in the Queen's will for the fame crime. William Giffert of Sherefhall, the Laird of Gorrandaill, Lekky of Croy, and Mr Thomas
Bonar, &c. were denounced Rebels, and put to the horn for not appearing to
iinderly the law for the fame crimes.

Snterfommtintntj: Saiti) t])t 2lairi» of ^ri3b3f 11, vthtl, ^r,

Dec. 19. — Sir James MTuli.och, in Annyk, replegiated by the Bifliop
of Whithorne, for art and part of Refetting, Sujjplying, and Interconnnuning

with M'Culloch of Ardwell, and Finlay M'^Culloch, rebels and at the

horn, for the cruel Slaughter of Patrick More, &c. The Laird of Lochinvar
(John Gordoune) furety.— Thomas MX'lellane Tutor of Bombey, Michael M"^C.,
his brother, Gothray M'Culloch of Ardwell, John ]\rC. in Barholm, Ninian Glendonyng in Partoune, Richard M'^Ky of Myretoune, and John Akin5eane, found
caution' to underly the law at the next Aire of Wigtoune and Kirkcudbrycht,
for the fame crime.

Common ri)tft— lUsttt of Wijttt, $(c,

Jan. 3, 1555-6. — John Robsoune, alias Paw//* JoA-, Convicted of Common Theft, Refett of Theft, outputtiug and inputting thereof, &c. — Hanged.

IHJurting anti asaounUiucr tfjr HairH of <!lui)itffurtir.

Jan. 7. — CiiAKi^ES Pollok, (Tutoh of that Ilk,) Robert and David
Pollok, and four others. Convicted of the Oppreffion done to John Quhitefurde
' The Laird of Lochinyar and Sinclare of Aucbinfranco.

14 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 385

of that Ilk, in Hurting and Wounding him on the Lands of Grenehillis ; committed on Aug. 14 laft, on ancient Feud and forethought felony. — Alexander
Earl of Glencarne and Robert Lord Sympill became fureties for fatisfying the
Queen and party.

Oppression — ?l?urtins nnU Jmmmtiins tijt Cutoi* of ^ollotft.

JOHX QuHlTEFURDE OF THAT Ilk, James his brother, and Archibald
Baillie, Convicted of the Oppreffion done to the faid Charles (PoUok, Tutor of
that Ilk), in Hurting and Wounding him on the faid day on the forefaid Lands.
— Robert Lord Symple became furety to fatisfy the Queen and party.

AssisA.
Johne Muir of Caldwell, Alexander Levingrtoune of War- Joiine Menteith, (f.)

Johne Symple of Foulwod, (/) ' randliill, (/.) Gawin Baxter iu Bothuile, (/)

Arch. Muir, bio]'" to Caldwell, Hew Craufurd of Kilbimy, James Glenne of )ie Bar,

Joline Max wall of Foulbar, (/.) James Baillie, y" of Carpliin, (/.) Johne Craufurd of Craufurdland,
Thomas Craufurd in Newtoune, John Fairlye of |)at Ilk, James Mowat, fone to Charlis.

Pat. Hammiltoune of Dalferf, (y.)

Conboratiou oC iijt Utflts — 3>nbasion, ^r.

Jan. 8. — John Cunntnghame of Glengarnok, Cuthbert C. of
Cochi'ane, and Alex. C, his bi'others, John C. of Croy, and thirty-two others,^
found caution^ to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for Convocation of the lieges to the number of thirty perfons, armed in wai-like manner, and
coming under filence of night, in July 1554, by way of Hamefucken, to the
house of Humphrey Galbrayth in Eifter Glenne, breaking up the doors thereof,
entering the fame, and fearching for him for his flaughter ; committed on forethought felony.

Oppression — asiTounbIng — iWutilation.

HuiMPHREY Galbrayth in Edinbellye, AValter G., brother of the
Laird of Gartfchadden, James G. in Balquharne, and ten others, found caution*
to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Dumbartane, for Oppreffion done
to John Cunynghame of Glengarnok and Cuthbert his brother, in Hurting and
Wounding them ; committed on Aug. 10 laft, on forethought felony ; and for
Mutilation of the faid Cuthbert of the thumb of his right hand.

' Those marked (/.) ^ filed ^ or found the pannels guilty. "- Among the number are Gilbert

Clerk, stage-player, (liistrionem.) On Feb. 28, 1553-6, John Browne, player, {histrio, which may,
perhaps, be intended to denote a moimtehanh or buffoon,) in Avendale, found Sir James Hammyltouiie
of Crawfurde- Johne surety for his underlying the law at the next Aire of Lanark, for the ^lutilation
of John Weir, in Birkwod, of his right hand. ^ David Cunnynghame of Robertland and the Laird
of Glengarnok. * George Bucbquhannane of that Ilk, and James Galbrayth of Kilcreuche.

VOL. I. f 2 C

386 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1556.

James Galbrayth of Kilcreuche, Walter his brother, James G. in
Balquharne, John G. his fervant, Humphrey, fon of John G. in Bolgair, Humphrey G. in the Gleune, Hum^jhrey G. in Bellye, and thirty-feven others, found
caution' to underly the law at the next Aire of Dumbartane, for Oppreffion
done to John Lyle in Wefter Jvilfaflet, coming to his houfe in July 1554, of the
caufing, hounding, affiflance, and ratihabition of James Galbrayth of Balquharne ;
and for breaking up his doors, under filence of night, and Invading him for his
llaughter.

Jan. 14. — Andrew Montgomery, Malcolm Allanefoime, Andrew
Park, and Allan Tei'bert, produced a Refpite for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Gilbert Rankyne, in Lech eland, committed on Mar. 17, 1553, &c." The
Earl of Glencarne, and John Campbell of Shippynche, became cautioners for fatisfying the parties. — They alfo found caution to underly the law at the next Aire
of Renfrew, for the jNIurder of the laid Gilbert, and for forethought felony.

Bcmfssioit for a ^lauflljttr — lUpIrcfiation.

Feb. 12. — WiLEiAM Neavtoune of that Ilk, and John N. in N^ewtoune, pi'oduced a Remiffion for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of John
Crummy, burgefs of Hadingtoune ; committed on ancient ffeud, forethought
felony, &c. in Oct. 1545. Patrick Sydeferf of that Ilk, and Henry Ogill of
Hartre-wod, became cautioners for fatisfying the parties. — George Newtoune, in
Muffilburgh, was Replegiated for the fame crime, by the Commendator of Dunfermeling, to his Regality of Muffilburgh.

Cljr ilaivti 01 i^nocfeUoltant trrnouiucU foi* ^laujjljter.

Mar. 4. — Robert Grahame of Knokdoleane denounced rebel and
put to the horn as fugitive from the law, for the Slaughter of Duncan M'"gilwrik : committed in Nov. 1554, on forethought felony. — He was again denounced on Apr. 11, 1556

ji'tratnig a J^ilbrr SDisI) of tijr (tiiictn MtQtnVs,

Mar. 30, 1556. — David Mvre in the Craig, within the lliire of Air,
found John Schaw of Haly as cautioner for his entry at the next Juftice-aire of
Air, to underly the law for art and part of the Theft and concealment, furth of

' Edmund Bucliqubannane of SpiUale, George Buchqubannane of that Ilk, James Galbrayth of
Balquharne, and the Laird of Kilcreucb. ^ See Nov. 8, 1335.

14 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 387

the hoiife of John Loud Maxwell, from her highnefs the Queen Regent,
in the month of Anguft laft, of a filver dilli' marked with the laid Queen's Arms,
and being her pi-ivate property. — John ED5AIIE, burgefs of Dumfreis, found
furety^ to underly the law at the next Aire of Dumfreis for the fame crime ; and
Makjory Cunynghame, his wife, was denounced Rebel, and her moveables
confifcated as fugitive from the law. — (May 4, 1557.) She was allowed to come
in the Queen's will.

BrumlaiTcrris^s JJiotDrr ticiTOUitfttt for ^lausljtti*.

Apr. 14. — John Dowglas, in Steppis, Ion of James D. of DrujilangRIG, James Douglas, Andrew Paterfoun, and Thomas Doby, were denounced
rebels and put to the horn for the Slaughter of William Dal5ell, brother to Robert
Dal5ell of that Ilk ; committed on INI ay 8, 1555. — John Johnneftoune of that
Ilk, their cautioner, was unlawed for their non-appearance.

^>cTimtsurIun — ^urtins anU aiSlountimjj, xVr,

May 5. — Dauid Seytoune, fon of umq'' ^Villiam S. of Rungawy, Convicted for coming by way of Hamefuckin to the lands of Innerteill, on Feb. 1 8
laft, and cruelly Hurting and Wounding of AA'^illiam Allerdefe, ftone-raafon, and
Henry Buttir, in their heads and breafts, to the efFufion of their blood : And for
cafting Mathew Marfchell into the Water of Innerteill. — George Lord Seytoun
became lurety along with him for latisfying the Queen and parties. — (May 7.)
Lord Seytoun became caution for his entry ' to fufFer pe Declaratour of Jje
faid Juftice,' &c. A number of others found caution on May 6, to underly the
law at the next Aire of Fife for the fame ci'imes.

jf^ovQuxQ, tvmittQf anl) falsifiJin^ a er|)aitcr, ^r.

May 18. — Andrew Drummmond of Balleclone Convicted by a
condign Affile of art and part of fforgeing and ffalfifying a Charter of ffeufarm,
pretended to have been granted by Alexander, Archbishop of Athens and
OF the Isles of Scotland, and perpetual Commcndator of the Monaftery of
InchechafTray,^ of the lands of Balleclone, with the jiertinents, excepting three

' The words of the record are ' vnius jjarapcidis argenteV. Paropsis is used by Suet, and Petron.
to denote a silver dish to serve up meat in. ^ Uchtred Ed^are of Nether Inglistoune, &c.

•^ This individual was the second son of Joiix Lord Gordon hy Margaret Stewart, natural daughter
of King James IV, (by Margaret, eldest daughter of Joljn Lord Drummond.) Having been elected
by the Chapter Archbishop of Gla.sc:ow, and afterwards set aside by the Pope, who nominated
James Beaton, Abbot of Aberbrothok, he got the titular Archbishgprick of Athens (ifi pnrtibtis
Lrfidelium') ; was consecrated Bishop of the Isles, Nov. 26, 1353 ; and got the Commendatory
of Inchaffray. In 1558, lie was translated to the See of Galloway, embraced the Reformed
Religion, and died in anno 1576.

388 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1556.

plougligates thereof, which he and Henderfoune, parchment-maker, erafed

and altered from the firft original Charter, granted to the faid Andrew, &c. in
the year 1553. — Sentence. To be publicly led with his hands tied behind his
back to the Market-Crofs of the burgh of Edinburgh, and there to have His
EIGHT HAND STRUCK OFF and fattened on a pole ; And thereafter to be Banished from the kingdom for life, and to be perpetually reckoned as Infamous :
And all his moveables to be efcheated to the Queen.

(Jun. 13.) — Hary Drummond of Ricartoune became furety ' that
he fall dejiarte furthe of ]3is realme within xv dayis nixt eftir ])e day and dait of
Jjis Act ; and nocht to returne within pe famin, without cure fouerane ladeis
Licence had ])airvipoune, under pe pane of aue thowfand merkis.'

^trallnQ; tijt €Hittn'5 sljcrp from ijcv Parit, dUUinftiugl).

May 18. — Thomas Bullerwell, ' delaittit of }je thiftuous Steling of
certane fcheip fra Jje Quenis grace furthe of hir Park of Ed', wes ordauit by
pe Juftice depute, of his avvin confent, to departe furthe of J)is realme, within
xx" dayis nixt eftir ]>e dait heirof, and to reniane furth of ])e famyn as Banist ;
and nocht to returne Jjairin, without oure fouerane ladeis Licence had Jjairupoune, vnder ]>e pane of deid.'

Oppression — Mbaslou, ^r.

May 28. — JoHN Somervile of Camnethane, William his brother,
John S. in the Grene, and Alexander his brother, and others, dilaited of art and
part of the OpprefRon done to Robert Hammyltoune, in Garryne, on Apr. 4
laft, in chafing him from Cambufnethane wood to the water of Clyde, to the
boat or ' cobill' of Heleife.

Absentes ab AssisA domini de Cambufnethane, S;c.
NeillMontjjomeryofLangfcliaw, William Sympill of Tliridparte, George Brown of Colftoune,
Hugh Montgomery of riilielheid, John Mure of Caulil well, Gilbert Wauchope of NvdryeJames Hammyltoune, Wodfyde, Robert Ker of Kenifland, Marfcheale,

William Sympill of Catlicart, James Montgomery of Brvme- Hugh Montgomery of Stane,'
Walter Pettigrew of Ouer Cottis, land, Robert Ker of Trearnie.

(May 29.) — The pannels were Convicted by an Affife, except the Laird of
Camnethane, who did not enter on pannel. — Sentence was not recorded.^

^Iaus!)tfr.

Aug. 3. — John Hyviesoune, tailor. Convicted of the cruel Slauchter
of Andrew Howefoune, in Weft Nvdry ; committed in July laft, under filence
of niglit. — Beheaded.

' Montgomery of Stair. At and previous to this period, the name was written Stene and Stair
indifferently. ° Only the Scroll-books of this period aie preserved.

14 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 389

ELGIN AND FORRES.

[The following interesting Excerpts have been procured from the Earl of Hadington's^ MS. Collections, Advocates' Library, (A. 422.) The first article is prefixed to a Copy of Proceedings of the
Justice Aire of Elgin and Fores, held and begun at the burgh of Elgin, on Monday, Aug. 17,
1556, before Johne Erskixe of Dvne, Justice-depute. This Aire terminated on Oct. 17, 1556,
being the twenty-first day of the sittings.

The reader is referred to a similar document, which has been published, as in reference to the Justice-Aire of Jedburgh, in a former part of this work ;- and it may be considered a matter of some
curiosity to note the difference in tiie styles of tiiese Proclamations. Of course, it must be understood that sucii intimations as these would run in the same terms, in reference to all the other Justiceaires of the kingdom, at the periods to which they respectively belong.

It may be noticed that the general complexion of the Cases which were tried at this Aire were
trivial. The only entries possessing any interest follow the Proclamation, which is here given entire.]

PROCLAMATIO.

We command and charge, in oure fouerane ladeis name, his darreft moder J)E
QuENE DOAVARIARE AND REGENT of hir realme, and hir Juftice-principall and
hir deputtis heir prefent ; That na maner of perfone or perfones cummand to
this prefent Jnftice-aire, remanand Jiairat, or pafland ])airfra, invaid ony of
thanie vtheris, ather for auld Feid or new, wnder Jje pane of deid : And ])at na
maner of perfone nor perfones heir vther wappinnis hot fchort knyffis at ])air
beltis, except the Juftice, Scheref, Crowneris, and J)air deputtis, officiaris, houfhald, and fervandis, vnder ])e pane of efcheitting of ]5air Wappinis and pvneiffing
of Jjair jierfones, be wairding or vthervvayes, at the will of our fouerane ladies
darreft moder and Juftice. And that all maner of victuallis, fie as flefche, fifche,
meitt, fowale, and vther neceffai-is, be brocht to Jie mercat and fauld for reddle
money, for the prices following ; and that na pryces ])airof, nor 3it \>q lugeing,
bedding, ftabuUing, or vtheris quhatfumevir afianientis and neceffaris for lugeing and furneifling of our fouerane ladeis leigeis, be rafit or hichtit^ vpone thame ;
hot that ]>e famin be fauld and furneiffit of J)e pryces following. That is to fay,
])e laif * of guid fufficient quheit breid, for fuftentation of J)E QuENis Maiefteis
Houfliald and remanent Nobill men, of xxij vnces wecht, . iiij d.

The pynt of Burdeous' vyne, ..... xij d.

The pynt of fine Scherand orAm5erk'' vyne, . . . xd.

The quairt of guid Aill, to be fauld for . . . viij d.

The heft mutton bowik,'^ for . . . . . vj s.

And vther nocht fa guid, to be fauld vnder that pryce, as it is of avail).*

The pryce of ane guifs, . .... xviij d.

))e muirfouU, ....... iiij.

The capone, to be fauld for . . . . . xij d.

' The celebrated Thomas, Jirst Earl of Haddington, who held the important offices of Lord
Advocate, President of the College of Justice, Principal Secretary of State to King James VI, &c.
&c. 'I, * 64. ^ Increased in price. ■* Wheaten loaf. ^ Bourdeaux. ^ Probably

Zeres, or Sherries-sack. ' Carcase. ^ Worth.

390 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1556.

ELGIN AND TORRES.

The peifs of pultrie, . . • . . vj d.

Gryt chikkinnis, . • . . . iv d.

Tlie gryfe/ . . . . . . xij d.

Four eggis, for . . . . . . j d.

The kid, for . . . ... ij s. iiij d.

The carcage of J)e bell beiff, to be fauld for . . xxxvj s.

And vtheris wnder, vpone fmallar pryces, as it is of availl.
The peck of horfe-corne that is guid, . . . viij d.

The threafe of fodder, .... viij d.

The pund of candill, of pe fyneft and faireft faif, for . . viij d.

The leid of peittis," . . . . . . ij d. ob.

And that ])air be guid cheir throw all Jje toune for Gentillmen and

jjair fervandis, for xij d. at f)e melteithe/ . . xij d.

The furneift bed, on pe nycht, and that to freithe the chalnier,* . iiij d.

The ftabill-fie, for ane horfe, xxiiij houris, . . . . j d.

Vnder the pane of confifcatioune of all pe guidis of pe brekeris j^airof. And that
nane of oure fuuerane ladeis leigis tak vpone hand to eitt, diftroy, or flramp
doune ony growand cornes with ])air horllis, or oppinlie or privatlie to carry or
tak away ony fcboinie coirnes and fcheves of pe fieldis ; with certificatioun to pe
awneris of pe faid hoi-fe, that it falbe lefum^ to Jje awnaris of pe faidis coirnis to
tak and hald ])e faidis horffis quliiU" thay be payit, for pe firft fait x s., the fecund
fait XX S., and pe thrid fait, pe fainin falbe efclieittit to our louerane ladeis vfe.
And in lykvaife. We Command and chairge all maner of perlbnes, that nane of
thame tak vpone hand to fcheir ony growand coirnis, with certificatioune to
thame and ^ thay do in the coutrair, it falbe lefum to ony perfones to tak and
apprehend thame with pe faidis coirnes, and bring thame to our fouerane ladeis
Jullice to be pvneift with all rigour, conforrae to pe lawis and confvvetud of this
realme. And gif ony perfone or perfonis brekis J^is prefent Proclamatioun, thay
falbe callit in this prefent Juftice-aire ])airfoir, and for commoun OpprelTouris of
our fouerane ladeis pure leigis tliairthrow, and pvneift thairfoir to the rigour :
And Ordanes the Proueft and Bail5eis of this burclie to fearche and feik pe
brekeris of this Proclamatioun, and bring and prefent thame to pe Juftice, that
thay may be puneift for J)air demereittis, as accordis.

itmU Eofaat ortiainrU to apprtljniti antr prrsrnt lUbrls, $ct.

Aug. 31. {Aptid E/f^-'m.) — The quliilk day, tiorihmekill as it plealitJjE
QuENis grace to releif furth of Waird and put to libertie, Alexander Lord

' Pig. " Load of peats, or turfs, for firing. ^ Each meal, at the priocipal meal-tide, or

dinner. * To be tlie wliole charge of tlie apartment. * Allowable ; lawful. '' Until. " If.

14 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 391

ELGIK AND FORRES.

Fraser of Lovet, vpone expectatioune that pe faid Lord fall perfew, tak, and
apprehend at his vttir power, all hir grace Rebellis and fugitiues fraj^e laft Aire
of Inuernel's, and in fpeciall, Allafter AFane IVrVarrin, Torniet M^vane, Jhonne
Duncane M^auchin, Ken5eocht Roy ]\rauchin, Murquho Boy, Jhonne M'gillefpik
IVrewir, and James M^hutelieoune Bayne, and vtheris refortand within his
boundis or partis ewift' J^airto. Thairfoir pe faid Lord, as principall, and
Jhonne, erle of SuJjerland, and ^V'^ii.liam Innes of that ilk, as
cautioneris and fouerteis for him, lies obleift thamefelffis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, vnder pe pane of Ten thowfand raerkis, that pe faid Lord fall enter pe
faidis perfonis to hir grace betnix this and the feafl of Allhallowmefs nixttocuni,
gif thay may be a])preheiidit ; at pe leift, he fall enter him felff at pe faid feift to
hir Grace, qnhair Icho Ihl happin to be iorpe tyme, to anfuer vpone his diligence
in executioune heirof. And the faid Lord is obleift to releif tham.

3)nqutsitto (BtnemTis, srti iWarjna ^misn Firrromitahis tit C?lrj:in

Wilelmus Innes de Eodera, Joannes Annand, in Elgin, Jacobus Dunbar de Tarvet,

Alexander Dunbar de Cumnok, Robertus Dunbar de Durris, Alex. Vrquhard de Burrif3airdis,

Alex. Cuniming de Ernefyde, Andreas Sufirland de Greifschip, Alexander Innes de Caibo,

Alexander Sujiirland de Duft'us, Alexander Anderfoune, iNIr Alex. Dowglafs, Prepofitus de
Alexander Dunbar de Conjie, Dauid Dowglafs de Erlifmyll, Elgin,^

Wilelmus Leflie de Akinway, Jacob. Sujiirland, alias Garratyne, Wilelmus Dumbreck de Vrcane,
Joannes Innes, fenior, in Elgin, Joannes Hay de Park, Robertus Innes de Innermarkie,

Wilelmus Dunbrek de Frefeild, Wilelmus Cuming, Wil. Gadderare, burgen de Elgin,

Patricius Boyne, in Fores, Wilelmus Auldcorne, Joannes Comes de Sujiiiland,

Walterus Lellie de Kynnynrie, Alex. Vrquhard, mercatorinForres, Jacobus Innes de Dryraye.

Barnes ttrquljaili tntrases to tirlibfv xip ijis tiuo l)fOtf)n-s.

Sep. 2. — The quhilk day, Jajies ViiQUHAED obleift hiai felff" to tak,
prefent, and delyuer ane of his tua brether, Jhonne Reoche Vrquhard or Rore
Vrquhard, to J)E Quenis grace, hetuix this and Sanct Androis day, to be vfeit
at hir graceis pleafour ; and to do pe famin at his extreme power ; and fall, at
pe faid Sanct Androis day, enter and prefent him felff" befoir pe Quenis grace to
juftifie his promeis foirfaid. And for his reentrie, at that day, hes fundin cautioneris Jhonne Erle of Atholl, Jhonne Erle of SuJjirland, Jhonne
Hay of Park, and Hucheoune Murray of Abirrefcorfe, coniunctlie and feuerallie,
vnder pe pane of ane thowfand pundis. Prowyding alwayis, that gif he chances
to flay ane of thame, it fall nocht be imput to him as ane cryme, hot falbe

' Nearest. ^ Yhe following List of tlie ' Magna Ajjifa,' or Grand Jury of Elgin and Forres,

having been preserved, it has been thoni;ht of sufficient interest to be inserted here. ■' It is probable that one of the Assise is omitted here, by mistake, the number being incomplete.

392 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1556.

ELGIN AND FORRES.

efteniit as execiitioiine of his proraeis, becaus he hes pe Quenis command

J)airto.

Erle of Atholl. John Hay of Park,

Erle of SujiiRLAND. witli my hand led at fe pen be Schir Jhonne

HucHEOUNE Murray of Abirscorse. Gibfoune, Noter publict, at my command.

Caution for tijr Slairti of Cumnoclu

Alexander Dunear of Cumnok, Sheriff of Elgin and Forres,
found James Dunbar of Tarbet cautioner for him, under the pain of 1000 merks,
to appear before the Queen, at Aberdeen, on Sep. 26 inftaut.

^ijitJiitQ: from tf^t l\aiti of aitjutarf — aofjit i«uilyertaf|).

Nov. 16. — James Hay, in Fyndachtie, came in ^^'ill for treafonably
abiding from the Queen's Army ordained to convene with John Earl of
Athol, the Queen's Lieutenant, at Abirterf, on Aug. 6, 1555, to reprefs
John Moderate' and other Rebels. — John Hay of Mukhaldis, fon of the Earl
of Errol, became furety along with him for the fatisfaction of the Queen.
The Declaration of the Queen's Will vpomi James Hay, in Fijudauchtie.

(Nov. 27.) — That ffbifaniekill as )>e Quenis grace, in refpect of fe faid Will, may dilpone vpoune
lie life, liaill landis, and gudis, movabill and vnmovabill, of J)e faid James at bir plefoure ; neuerjielefs,
])e faid Juflice depute, of bii- fpeciale command, tempeiand jullice witb mercy, For hir Will, of ])e
faid James awin confent and acceptand fie famyne, Declaris, decernis, and ordanis Jie Tak, ileding,
and afledatioune of pe landis of Fyndaucbtie, lyand within fe fclierefdonie of Banf, pertaining to ])e
faid James, maid to him be vmq^'' ]ie Parfoune of Rathvene for ))e tyme, of ]<e dait, at Edinbur' ])e
ferd day of Maij, fe 3eire of God I™.V''. and xlvij 5eris, pertenis, and fall pertene to hir grace, to be
vfit and difponit be hir, with all rycht and kyndnefs ])at )je faid James had, hes, or onywyfe may haue
fairto, for all ieris and termes Jiairof to rynne, or ony v]iern'ife, in tyme cuming, at hir plefour ; ficlyke, and als frelie as |)e faid James mycht haue vfit, occupiit, and difponit pairupoune, in ony tyme
bigane : And als, Ordanis Jie faid James, of his awin confent, to remoif, devoid, and red him felf, his
feruandis, and gudis furthe of J)e famin, and to decill and ceife fra all forder intromiflioune fairwith,
within XV dais nixt eftir pe dait heirof ; and fra thyne furth to decill fra all raoleflatioune of quhatfumeuir perfoune or perfonis it fal happin hir grace to difpone ))e fame to, vnder ]ie pane of deid :
And Jie premilfes being obferuit, kepit, and fulfillit be ]ie faid James, and na v])irvvife, dif])euflis with
Jie faid James vpoune his life, and Remittis fe faroin to him : And als, gevis and difponis to him 56
reft of all his gudis, movabill and vnmovabill quhatfuraeuir, to be difponit at his plefoure.

dTortjing; anti uttninr!; * iJaUcitirls.*

Nov. 17. — Henry Wynd, burgels of Dyfart, Convicted of treafonably
ftriking^ ffalfe and fforged money, called Balbeis,' and illuing them among the

' See Appendix to this reign. The person here alluded to was the noted John Muidertach, i. e.
John (Macdonald) of Muidart. Reference may also be had to Gordon's History of Sutherland, Mr
Gregory s work on the Isles, &c. - Coining. At this period the coins of Scotland were struck

or forged with the hammer, which gave unshapely and irregular edges to them. ^ Bawbees.

14 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 393

liegis in July, Augufl, September, October, and November laft. — Beheaded,
' ex gratia Regine Dotarie'^

Conijorntwn — ^tarrf)ins for IDoucrlns of iiilspinlJic/ ^r.

Nov. 19. — Robert Bishop of Dunkeld, Suffragan of St Andrews,
William Creychtoune of Drylavv, Parifli Clerk of Holyrood, and Mr Alexander
Creychtoun, Vicar of lunervik, were replegiated by Mr James Balfour, Official
of the Archbifliop of St Andrew's, to underly the law for Convocation of the
lieges, to the number of fourteen fcore, (280 perfons,) armed in warlike manner,
and fearching for Archibald Dowglas of Kilfpindy, (Provoft of Edinburgh,) for
his Slaughter, at the Town of Abii'lady ; committed on Aug. 18 laft ; and for
other crimes contained in the Letters. — Alexander Lord Hwme and John Hwme
of Coldinknowls, became cautioners for the due adminiftration of juftice.

Ccnbocntion — ^tart]^iutj for iBoiiglas of i^ilspfnUie, ^t,

Nov. 19. — Alexander Lord Hume, George Nelbet, of that Ilk, John
Cranft;oune, fon of Cuthbert C, and John Ed3eare of Weddirlie, found caution
to underly the law for the above crimes, at the next Aire of Berwik. — Herbert
Maxwell, burgel's of Edinburgh, and James Stevinsoun of HirdmanSCHElLLES, were on the fame day convicted as art and part of the fame crimes.

3$vfnfiincj: iw cJnglistntf" — ^toiitflicif of l^ovsrs aiiU Cattif, ^r.

Nov. 24. — John Johnnestoune, called Johniie of the Qiiawis, Andrew,
David, and Edward his brothers. John Jardane of Ajjilgirthe was amerciated
for not reporting and delivering the Letters duely executed at the inftance of
William J. in Preiftifdikis, Walter his brother, and John liis brother's fon, to
take caution for the above perfons underlying the law for treafonably bringing
Marke Grahame, William G., called Allels Willie, George G., called Paidis
Georcly, and other Englishmen, to the number of fixty perfons, armed in
warlike manner, in the month of June laft, to the lands of Cummergirthe ; and
for Stouthreif and ' Herefchip' of eight fcore of cows and oxen, four liorfes, &c.

^anilrgr — stealing djalirrs anft dLiywvti} ^rnamnits, ^r.

Dec. 7. — Adaji Sinclare, fon of James Sinclare of Ley, and Henry
Elder, cook. Convicted of art and part of theftuously breaking into the Parish
Kirk of Forese, and ftealiug and concealing furth thereof, ' and lokfaft Iwmys *

' This crime was frequently punislied by strangling at the stake and burning, which, it is
supposed, is here alluded to as having- lieen commuted, by the special grace of the Queen Dowager,
to beheading. ^ See May 19 and Jun. 18, 1357, and Appendix, &c. ^ Literally looms,

e. g. chests, &c.

VOL. I. f 3 D

394 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1556.

being Jjairintill', of fimdry funis of money, in gold and filver, together with certain Chalices and Ornaments of the faid KiRK, and other goods being therein,
belonging to the Queen's lieges ; committed with iiraq''' Thomas Rarafay, common Theif, in November laft, under filence of night. — Sentence. The faid
Adam to be Drowned, ' ex JpeciaU gratia Begine :' ' And the faid Henry
Hanged.

droi*(riii0, anU not i-ebealiits, tlje stiiUing: of false 'Cestaitis/ ^r.

Dec. 7. — William Nasmyth, ' being accuiit of arte and parte of Jje
fFen3eing, fforgeing, and ftriking of certane ffals Teftanis," v f. pecis ; And of
arte and parte with William Hendirfoune, in ]je Potterraw, Jjairintill ; being with
him in cumpany })e tyme he ftruik ]>e faid Teftanis, and nocht reweland ]je
famin, &c. — was at ])E QuENis grace command, be ]>e faid Juftice Depute, of
his awin confent, Banist furth of J)is realme ; and to remane furth of })e famin,
as banift, and nocht to returne jjairintill, without oure fouerane ladeis Licence
had pairupoune : And to departe furth of fie famin within xxx" dais nixt efter
J)e dait }iairof, vnder ])e pane of deid. — Michaell Nafmyth, feruand to my lord
(Archebifchop) of St Androis, become fourtie for him, ]jat he fall fulfill ])e
preraiffis, vnder J)e pane of xl lib.'

iMurtin- — ^lau0|)tn* — iKafuiiff t\)t ,irovtaIife of sa^furrtill, ^c»

Dec. 23. — George Earl of Caithness jjrefented a Remiffion from
the Queen for art and part of the cruel Slaughter and Murder of Henry Leflye
and his fon, a youth, and other fix perfons, the Queen's lieges, along with them,
being in a certain boat loaded with victual, ojipofite the place of Girnego, by
W^illiam Crukefliank fenior, James Sinclare called Lit'ill Jame, James ^Vawane
and Thomas Frafer, his fervants, of his caufing, command, afliftance, and ratihabition : And for Stouthreif and Spuil3ie of the faid victual, carrying the fame
to the place of Girnego, and finking the faid boat. Item, for art and jjart of
the cruel Slaughter and Murder of Sir John Symfoune by Archibald Keith, ' in
]je W^eik,' ^ his fervant, of his command, affiftance, refett, and ratihabition.
Item, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Hugh Neillbune, in Strathvl3e,
by Donald Robfoune, of his counfel, &c. by way of Hamefuckin, in his own
houfe. Ite:\i, for art and part of Convocation of the lieges in great number,
and treafonably befieging the Houfe and Fortalice of Akirgill, l)elonging
to William Earl of Marcheall, and violently expelling John Scarlet the

' Perhaps owing to his youth, or at liis own request. This was the ordinary capital punishment
inflicted upon women. ^ So called from the teste (tete) impressed on thera, testoons, five

shilling pieces. ' The town of Wick.

15MAB. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 395

Keeper thereof, and i)lacing his fervants therein. Item, for treafonably Ufurping the Queen's authoi'ity by taking Alexander Keyth, her free liege, and Incarcerating him in his Place of Girnego, and detaining him therein in clofe cuftody
for a long fpace. Item, for treafonable Ufurpation of the Queen's authority,
by taking David Sinclare his brother. Bailie of the Bifliop of Caithnefs, and
Incarcerating him in the faid Place, for a long fpace. Item, for Refetting,
Supplying, and Intercommuning with Andrew Sutherland young Laird of
Clyne, Andrew fon of William S., of Bulbifter, William S. called Fathir War,
and others their accomplices, rebels and at the horn for the Slaughter of William Murray, Captain of the Queen's Houfe (Caftle) of Barrow. Item, for the
cruel Slaughter of William Auld in Scarmclet, committed * on fuddenty.' Item,
for art and part of Difobeying the Queen's Precept to jjrefent and produce
Kenneth Farcjuhartfon and Gawin Williamefoune before the Juftice or his
Deputies, at the laft Aire of Invernefs, to underly the law for their crimes.
Item, for art and part of the violent occupation and fifliing of a fourth part of
the Salmon-Fifliing of the Water of Thurfo, for the fjjace of four years, or
thereby, viz. 1553, 1554, 1555, and 1556, pertaining for the firft two years to
Laurence Mafter of Olijihant, by reafon of the Gift of his Nonentry granted to
him by the Queen, and for the two laft years belonging to him in hei'itage ;
and for violently detaining from the faid Mafter the whole fifli thereof, extending yearly to three lajls of Salmon, the common price of each laft, yearly, being
100 li. Item, for treafonable Ufurpation of the Queen's authority, coming
with difplayed Banner and Convocation of 2500 men, in ' plain Battle,' ' at the
Water of Elmifdene, againft THE Queen's Lieutenant and her authority ;
committed in the year 1544.

I^illinri <6amr \a\t\i * rulbeiiiisfs' anU ' pistolfttis.*

Jan. 28, 1556-7. — William Wauc hop, fon and heir apparent of Gilbert of Nvdry-Marcheale, Edmund Nycholfoune, miller in Diriltoune, and five
others, found furety ^ to underly the law at the next Aire of Edinburgh, within
the Conftabulary of Hadingtoune, for breaking the Acts of Parliament in flaying
Wild foul (game) with ' culveringis' and ' piftolettis,' from May 1552 to November laft 1556, inclufive. — A number of other perfons were called for the fame
ofTence, and were replegiated to various Regalities, or found caution to underly
the law at the next Juftice-aire of their refpective fliires.

^toutijrrif of ^t\Xti antr ^ilfatr iMorfe, ^r.

Feb. 1. — Alexander Kyle, goldfmith, fon to John Kyle, goldfmith,

' In open battle array, with standards unfurled, &c. ' Gilbert Wauchop of Nudry-Marcheale,

Patrick Hepbunie of Waucbtoun, and James Hereote of Trabroune.

396 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1557.

burgefs of Edinburgh, ' delatit of ]>e Stowthe-reif, vnder fylence of nydit,
vpoiine New-3eir-ene, viz. pe laft day of December laftbipaft, fra Robert Rynd,
alfua goldfmyth, and his feruand boy called James Weir, in his name, at J)e
faid Robertis chalmer flair-fute, befyde pe Buttir-trone, off ane litill coffir, and
in pe famyn xij gold ryngis, viij of ))ame fet with ftanis, fex filuer ryngis, foure
fyluer fpvnis, foure hearttis of gold, ane fyluer quhoffill,' and diuerfe vjjeris
fyluer and gold werk : Off his awin confent is Bannist for pe faid cryme, and
Ordanit be him to departe furth of pe famin within xx'^ dayis nixt eftir Jie dait
heirof : And nocht to returne agane Jjairto without Remit " and Licence of pe
QuENis grace, vnder pe pane of deid.'

^Inu3T)ter.

, Feb. 3. — Robert Bekclay and Dauid M'Caig, both in Caprintoune,
Convicted of art and part of the cruel Slaughter of John Clerk, committed at
the Place of Caprintoune on Jan. 8 laft. — Beheaded.

(Jun. 18.) — ' Robert Berculay in Caprintoune, of his awin fre motive will.
Convict of pe Slauchter of vmquhile Johnne Clerk in Caprintoune confentis to
be Banyst, in prefens of Johnne Clerk, fone to pe faid vmq'^ Johnne : And
als pe Juftice Decernis him to be Banyft, and to pas furth of ])is realme within
xx'^ dais nixt heireftir ; and nocht to returne Jjairintili agane without fpeciale
Licence of pe Quenis grace, vnder fie pane of deid.'

^Iau5!;tctr rommitttU 6n a iHinor.

Feb. 23. — John Peiksoun, cook in Bele, dilated of the Slaughter of
Archibald Lyle, fervant of the Laird of Bafs. — John Lyle of Stanypeth producet
ane Bill and requeift gevin in be him to j^E Quenis grace, with ane delyuerence
vpoune pe bak jjairof, fublcriuit with hir grace hand.

Madame, Vnto 5our grace, luiinilie menis and fcliavvis I, jour leruitour, Johnne Lile of Stanypeth, fader brujier,^ and remanent kynand freindis of vmq'" Archibald Lile, feruand'' to ))E Lard of
Bass : That, quhair Johnne Peirfoune, cuke in Bele, recentlie, vpoun ]>e tl)rid day of Januar inrtant,
cruelly Hurt and Woundit ]ie faid vraq'" Archibald with ane greit key, in his heid, quliairof he lay
continewalie, be ]>e fpace of audit dais, or ]iairby, ]iaireftir, quhill his liarnis blaknit,^ and fyne deit of
pe famin ; and fua crewellie flew hym, in nianer foirfaid : For Jie quiiilk cryme he wes takin reidhand,'' and put in prefouu in Jie pite ' of Beill, and Jiaireftir brocht and pute in warde in Jie Tolbuith of
Ed"': And fyne ^ we obtenit Letteris, and Jiairby caulit fummand ane Aflife of honell and vnfufpect
perfonis of Jie Iherefdome of Ed'', within Jie fcherefdome, within Jie conflabillarie of Hathingtoune, and
four-half-about, to eompeir befoir Jie Juftice and his deputes, in Jie tolbuith of Ed', J>e xix day of

' A silver whistle or call, then in common use. Even during the last century, these whistles were still preserved
and occasionally used in some old families, in place of the modern custom of ringing bells to call servants. The
whistle gradually gave way to silver hand-lielis, and these in their turn were superseded by the intriKluction of
bell-pulls into each room. " Remission. ^ Paternal uncle. ^ This does not imply that he

was a menial servant, but merely that he was in Iiis train or retinue. ^ Literally, until his brains mortified.

" Taken in the t'ai:t ; red-hand, or ' with the bluidy hand,' as it was termed. ' Pit ; the Laird of Beill having,

in coramoii with other petty Barons, the privilege of riT and gallows. ^ Then; afterwards.

15 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. • 397

Januare inftant, to liaif paft vpoune ))e Affife of ]ie faid Jhone Peirfoune for Jie faid crewell Slauchter :
At ]ie quliilk day, eftir [le prefeiiting of ))e faid Jlione Peirfoune in jugement, in ane fenfit Court of
Jufliciarie, vpoune ane frevell' cxceptioune maid for him, allegeand pat he was noclit of lauchfull age
of xxj 3eris, and fairfoir Jiat he culd nocht be pute to |)e knawlege of ane Afllfe for })e faid crewell
Slauchter, We culd get naiuflice vpoune hyme, nor Aflife callit and hyme pute to Jie knaulege of Jie
famyn for Jie faid cryme, howbeit Jie faid Jhone Peirfoune is ane abill man of peirfoune, of Jie age of
xviij 5eris, with Jie raair f and Jiairfor, as we vndirllaad, aucht to be pvnill for ony crymes committit
be hyme. Heirfoir we befeik 50ur grace to haif confideratioune of Jje premifTes, and Jiairfore to gif
command to Jie Juftice, Juflice clerk, and Jiair deputtis, to minifler, and caus be miniflrat, iuftice
vpoun Jie faid Jhone Peirfoune for Jie faid crewell Slauchter, and to pute hyme to pe knawlege of ane
Afllfe for Jie famin, nochtwitliflanding Jie faid exceptioune and allegeance ; as Jiai will anfuer to 50ur
grace at Jiair vtermaifl : And ^our graces anfuer rycht huimlie we befeik. — (Indorsed.) — Apud LinLITHQ^*", XX" menjis, JaiV'J 1356. The Quenis grace, being informit of Jie Petitioune of Jie complenaris
within contenit, Ordanis Jie Juftice to tak ane ordour in this complent, conforme to Jie vfe, confuetude, and lawis of Jiis realme, fua Jiat pe faidis complenaris haif na juft caus of complent heireftir, in
Jiis behalf: As je will anfuer to hir grace Jiairupoune.

(Mar. 15.)— Convicted by an Afllfe.'

CrfasonaMn dTorflins anU SlUtrriits dfalse * iloranes/

Apr. 10, 1557. — Thomas Andeksoune ' pvderare'* Convicted of art
and part of treafonably Fabricating and forging the Queen's coin called the
JLorane, and uttering the fame among the lieges ; committed in the months of
May, June, July, and Auguft laft. — Hanged.

^fitUintj from a SSaat-ben-Haitf or * 30ai) of Crrh)/

[The following entries occur in the Scroll-book, which being so characteristic, they are inserted
here at length. They evidently refer to the Raid at Lochmabane-Stane,' and show, in a very
graphic manner, the distracted state of the country, while, at the same time, they afford a vivid picture of the actions of the parties concerned.]

May 12. — JoHNNE Crechtoune, Tutour of Sanchare, allegis ))at
J)E House of Sanchare vras neuer in vfe to keip ane Wahdane Raid fene*
J)ai war Wardanis Jjame felffis. Item, fecundly, allegis pat he is nocht hakin,'
be vertew of fie Proclamatioune, to haif paft to J)e faid Raid, becaus he is nocht
ane landit manne.

Robert Johnstoune of Cottis, Robert Moffet of Grantoune, Robert his
fone and apperand air, and Thomas Moffet of Knok, allegis fiat, vpoune f>e xv
day of Februar laft bipaft, quhilk is ])e nycht befor ))e day of Meting contenit in
])e Proclamatioune, fiai being in reddynes, and haifaud ])air horfis fadillit, to cum
to fie faid day of Trevv, Jok Johnftoun, callit Uie Gaheart ; Jok J., brufier to

' Frivolous. - And more ; and upwards. ^ The Sentence is not recorded. * Pewterer.

^ See the two following Cases. '' Since the time. " Sic. The Editor never before

met with this word. It may, however, be a mere clerical error for ' habill,' or ' abill,' (Lat. habilis,)
liable ; subject to.

398 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1557.

Wille of Kirkhill ; Wille Grahame, ca\\\i Jingand WUUe ', Ade Armftrang of
Hairlaw, and Criftie Armiftrang, callit the Bull, and \>a\v complices, come to Jje
Winter-cleucli about mydnycht, and Jjair tuke away ])e hale gudis ' being Jjairnpoune, jierteniug to James Johnftoune, fader to pe faid Robert of ]>e Cottis,
extending to the nowmer of xij"""* fcheip and ]>e keparis ])airof ; and ]>e affray^
cumand to ]>e eiris of Jje faidis perfonis, Jtai, for reflvewing and recouering of \>e
faidis gudis, with J)air feruandis and freindis, followit ])e drift" quhiir Jje faid xvj
day of Februar, at viij houris befor none, and red" ane pairt ]:)airof ; and in
defald ' of fufficient power to follow for recouering of ]>e reft of J)air gudis, war
conftrenyt to leif J?e i:)erfute : And panne maid jjaim to cum fordwart fra ]je fray
to J)e day of Trew, quliill ])ai come to ])e Watter of Annand, quhilk was fa greit,
that ]jai mycht nocht ride it ; and Jjair remanit quhill ]>a\ gat fure word ])at JjE
Wakdane was returnyt, and })e day of Trew fchot."

JoHNE Jaudane of Apilgakthe allegis, ])at at \>e faid day of Trew he raid
to \)e Watter of Annan to haif paft fordwart witli Jie Waruane to ])e day of
Trew, and pan J)e Watter was fa greit, pat he mycht nocht ride it without
danger of his life ; and gif he had paft about be ane vper way, and wald pafs
ony tyme cuming, he durft nocht, for feir of his inemys, without he had ane
grite cumpany with him.

^ftitJiuff fvom tljrBaiti at Ecf|)maljnt--stane»

Roger Kirkpatrick of Closeburne, William K. of Kirkmichaell,
and Thomas K. of Freirkerfe, got Remiffion from the Queen, dated at Ed^ May
11 inftant, for abiding from the Army ordained to convene at LochmabenSTANE, on Feb. 16 laft, to meet the Warden before funrife, ' to pafs fordwart
with him to pe day of Trew, for Melting of pE Wardane op Ingland.'

Slljitiinfl from tJjr l^aiK at lLorlimabrn-stauf,

May 14. — Alexander Stewarte of Garleise, John Dunbar of
Mochrame, John Gordoune of Barfkeoche, John Mcculloch of Torhoufe, John
Jardane of Apilgerth, Robert Moffett fenior and junior of Grantoune, Thomas
Moffet of Knok, Robert Johnneftoune of Coittis, and John Creychtoune, Tutour
of Sanchare, found caution " to underly the law at the next Aire of Dumfreis,
for Abiding fx'om the Queen's Army ordained to convene atLochmabene-ftane,&c.

^raifljins for Soufllns of isilspinlii) for \)\% ^laus|)ter.

May 19. — John Diksoune of Belchester, and Robert Dikfoune of

■ Stock of sheep. - Twel re score. ^ Hue and cry. ^ Z)?-ow, or flock. "^ Until.

'^ In this sense it means recovered. ' Default. ^ Expired ; past. ° John Gordoune

of Lochinver, Murray of Cokpule, and William Kirkpatrick of Kirkmichaell.

15 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 399

Bouchrig, found furety (Alexander Lord Hume) to underly the law, at the next
Aire of Berwik, for Convocation of the lieges, to the number of fourteen fcore
(280 perfons), armed in warlike manner, and fearching for Archibald Douglas
of Kilfpindy for his Slaughter ; committed at Abirlady, on Aug. 18, 1556.'

I^amrsurfetn — esiouutims ti)t iUrobost of ^trinburg;]^, ^f.

Jun. 18. — Nicolas Rynd, tailor, burgefs of Edinburgh, Convicted of
cruelly coming upon Archibald Dowglas of Kilfpindy, Provoft of Edinburgh,
within his own lodging within the laid burgh : And for cruelly Hurting and
Wounding the faid Provoft with his poignard,^ in the llioulder, to the effufion
of his blood in great quantity : And als for the cruel Hurting and Wounding of
John Boyd junior, his fervant, with his poignard, upon his left bx-eaft, and in his
mouth and back, within the faid Provoft's lodging, his mafter ; committed by
way of Hamefuckin on May 9 laft.

The Dome gevin vj)ou?ie NicJioU Rijnd, tailyoure.
The Juftice depute, of Jje command of ])e Quenis grace, modefeand and temperand ])e rigour of J)e law towarte ]>& pvnilinent of ])e faid NichoU for Jje faidis
crymes, Decernis and Ordanis him, of his awin content, vpoune Monunday nixttocum, to cum in prefens of ]je Proweft, baillies, and counfale of J)e faid burcht
of Ed', at J)e mercate-croce J)airof, betuix xj and xij houris befoir nvne, and Jjair
publictlie, with his heid difcoverrit,^ in his lynning claithis, bair-futtit, and in
]je raaift i-euerend and humyll maner, fall doune vpoune his kneis, and afli: forgifnefs and pardoune of God, ])e Quenis grace, Jje faid Proweft, baillies, counfale,
and communitie of ])is bur', of his offence aboue writtin, confeftand ]>e famin and
declarand his repentance Jjairof : And als decernis and ordanis })e laid NichoU
to haue tynt and foirfaltit, and be f)e tennour heirof, foirfaltis him of his libertie
and fredome of ]jis bur'. And to be Banist and exilit furth of })e famin, and
nocht to hant nor repair within ])is bur', nor vfe ony fredome Jjairof in ony tyme
cuming, vnder ]>e pane of deid : And als Ordanis \iq Proweft and baillies of ])is
bur' to put ])is act to executioune.

^Iau(jfjtrr of i\)t Eairb of aJunning.

Jun. 21. — Robert Levingstoun in Lynlythqw, and John Knowis,
fervant of the Bifliop of Rofs, found furety * to underly the law at the next aire
of Lynlythqw, for the Slaughter of Robert Bruce of Bynning, committed in
February PV^xl ... on forethought felony, &c.

' See Nov. 19, 1556 ; and the following entry, Jun. 18, 1557. " Pugione. In the Dome it

is called a ' quhin^eare,' which is commonly translated /)2/^2o in this Record. ^ Bare, uncovered. * Thomas Rofs of Prestoune, and Robert Hammyltoune of Briggis.

400 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1557-8.

^anitccre — 33rraIuiT(r into tlje Cljurci) of ^t ilflari) of ti)t Hoiois
for tfjc ^Inutjijtn* of ^iv ^tttv (Cranstounr, ^t,

Jim. 25. — Robert Scott in Bowhill, Parilh Clerk of St Mary de
Forefta, with confent of Mr Henry Lauder, Queen's Advocate, was replegiated
by Sir John Scott, Chaplain and Commiffary of the Archbifliop of Glafgow, for
Convocation of the lieges to the number of 200 perfons, armed in warlike manner, and coming to the Church of St Mary of the LoM'is, and breaking up the
doors thereof, and fearching for Sir Peter Craniloune therein for his Slaughter,
upon ancient feud and forethought felony ; committed on Apr. 16 laft. Robert
Scot of Bonyntoune became cautioner for adminiftration of juftice. — Robert
Scot of Allanehauche, Adam Scot of Burnefute, and William his fon, Thomas
Scot of Hanyng, Walter Scot, young Laird of Syntoune, Robert, William,
and James, his brothers, Walter Scot, fon of William Scot of Hardane, James
Orbiftoune of that Ilk, Robert Scot of Thirleftane, Robert Scot of Howpaflate,
and feveral others, were amerciated for not appearing ; and were ordained to be
charged of new to undex'ly the law, under the pain of rebellion, &c.

?t?ov)3e--straIliiti: — Common Cljrft, ^r.

Jul. 26. — Paul Andesoune' Convicted of art and part of the Stealing
and concealing from Thomas Cunnynghame, in Ledoune, of a ' forit balfonit
horfe,'" furth of the lands between Ledoune and Lethiflieid ; committed on the
vigil of Whitfunday laft : And for Common theft of old and new. — Hanged.

Cftasonaljlt CmfRrfuitt); aittJ Corrri^pontnntj IJoitTj ti)c (ffiucflisT), kt,

Jan. 7, 1557-8. — Symone Heryng Convicted of treafonably going to
the kingdom of England and to the Town of Berwik, five times, in the years
1554, 1555, 1556, and 1557, without Licence obtained from the Queen, the
Regents, or the Warden (of the Marches) : And for difclofing the fecrets of this
kingdom, in as far as he knew the fame, and giving his coimfel, to the hurt of the
country and difturbance of the lieges thereof, to Sir Thomas Quhartoun, Lord
Quhartou>;e, (Whartouj) Englifliman, an enemy to Scotland, and to other Engliflmien, the ancient enemies thereof, and receiving rewards from the faid Lord
Quhartoune and other Engliflimen therefor. Item, for the treafonable making
and writing with his own hand, on July 3 laft, and delivering a Letter to John
Heryng, his fon, to carry to the Town of Berwick to the faid Lord Quhartoune, containing the points and treafons following, de verba hi verbuiii, viz.
' For newis, ])ir fchippis pat is cumit to Leyth is menne of weir and Scottis

' Perhaps Audeson or Adieson, now Addison. - A sorrel-coloured horse, which also

happened to be ' bawfonit,' or marked with white on the face.

16 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 401

• merchandis. J)ir Menne of Weir is Francheinenne, bi'ocht in twa pryffis' with
' })ame. Countie Ringraif cuinis in Scotland, and beis Lieutennent to Jje
' King of Feanche. The Quene lies faid planelie, ])at ])E King of
' Franche will nocht waige^ Scottifmenne, hot lat Jjame vfe pe auld niauer.^
' Thair wes five pryffis ; thre of Jjame is had in Franche. The Quenis dyet
' is to remane in Newbottill twa or thi-e dais, and pane to cum Eift, in ])is cun-
' tre. The Lordis ar all evill content with hir, the quhilk I throw* falbe
' hard of beleif credence.' Item, for common revealing or fliewing to our
ancient enemies of England the fecrets of this kingdom, to the hurt thereof, in
treafonable manner. — Hanged.

Crtason — ^nvv^mQ ^Letters to tfjr (JPnslisl), ^c.

John Heryng, fon of the faid Symon, Convicted of treafonably going
by command of his father, on June 21 lall, and on three other occafions during
the pafl year, with his father's Letters, and twice with his treafonable intelligence,
without Letters, to Sir Thomas Quhartoune, an Englilliman, and enemy
of this kingdom, and revealing and lliewing to him fuch fecrets thereof, as tended
to the lofs and injury of the ftate. Itebi, for art and part of ti'eafonably making
the aforefaid Letter on July 3 laft, containing the points and treafons above
exprefled ; and for treafonably receiving and delivering the fame, with his father's
credentials. Iteim, for being art and part, along with his faid father, in all his
treafons, directions, and revealing the fecrets of this kingdom to the faid Lord
Quhartoune and other Englillimen : And for common revealing and fliewing
the fecrets thereof to the Englifli. — Hanged.'

^urtins antr aaatcuntiinfr — Sitbasimt.

Jan. 10. — Robert Johnnestoune, fon of umq'" AVilliam J., burgefs
of Edinburgh, Convicted of art and part of the Hurting and Wounding of John
Moi'efoune, junior, with a ' quhin5eare' " on his head, to the great effufion of his
blood : And for Invafion of the faid John for his Slaughter, and Hurting and
Wounding him in his left arm, to the effufion of his blood in great quantity ;
committed upon ancient feud, forethought felony, and provifion, at Sandepottis,

' Prizes. '^ Pay the wages of the Scottish soldiers. ^ Perform their accustomed Military

service, by virtue of their Feudal tenures. ^ Trow, trust. ^ From the conclusion it would

appear that both father and son had been put to torture, to draw from them such things as they had
kept back in their Confession, regarding the extent of their treasonable dealings : ' Et propterea dicti
Symon et ejus Jilitis tanquam publici Proditores cruciari adjudicabitntur.' On the margin there is
merely inserted, ' Convict, et Suspen. ;' but it is likely they were drawn and quartered. ^ A

short sword, slightly bent or curved ; a kind of cutlass. It is probably the same with the English
whiniard, or back-sword, and is usually translated /ti^^rjo (poignard) in the Record. From the nature
of the wounds inflicted with that instrument, it must have been one used for striking or cutting, as well
as for stabbing, for which last purpose, alone, the poniard or dagger is fitted.

VOL. I. f 3 E •

402 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1558.

between the burgh of Edinburgh and Leith, on July 27 laft. — James Johnnestoune of Kellobank became furety to fatisfy the Queen and party. Warded in
the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, under the pain of 1000 merks.

John Moresoune, junior, Convicted of art and part of the Hurting
and Wounding of Robert Johnneftoune with ' ane irne fchule" on his head, to
the eflufion of his blood in great quantity ; committed ' on fuddanty' at the
Market-crofs of Edinburgh, in tlie month of January 1551. — John M., fenior,
burgefs of Edinburgh, became furety to fatisfy the Queen and party.^ Warded
in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh under the pain of 1000 merks.

Feb. 16. — Alexander Dunlop of that Ilk found furety (Neil
Montgomery of Langfchaw) to underly the law at the next Juflice-aire of Air,
for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of Andrew Dunlop, his fon ; committed
in July laft. — John Stewarte of Hawrig, John his brother, in Burnehous, Charles
Pollok Tutor of Pollok, Thomas Sprewle of Cowdoune, John Maxwell of Boisfeild, John Stewarte of Bogtoune, and John Nevene of Kirkwod, and fome
others, were amerciated for abfence from this Affile.

^trjurtti i^^otarp — dforrjius an ^osirrnation, ^r*

May 5, 1558. — David Fethye, alleged Notary, Convicted of art and
part of ' falfmg' and foi-ging an Affignation, as if made by Margaret Arbuthnot,
daughter and one of the heirs of umq'' John A. of Brichtie, fpoule of John
Ogiluy, bearing, that the laid Margaret conftituted umq"° AVilliam Difchingtoune, fiar of Ardrofs, and Elizabeth Creychtoune, his fpoufe, and the heii-s procreated of their marriage, whom failing, the heirs of the faid William wliomlbever, her ceffioners and affignees, in and to a Reverfion made by James Arbuthnot of that Ilk to the laid imiq"" John, and his heirs and affignees, imder redemption, of the lands of Balmakin, containing xx 166 merks 8f. 10 d., dated at
Denefyd, Aug. 17, 1538, and fubfcribed thus, ' Margaket Arbuthnot, with
' my hand led at pe penue be Dauid Fethie, Notare — Ita eft, Dauid Fethye,
' Notariixs in premiffis manu fua,' although the faid Affignation was really made,
forged, and fubfcribed by the faid David long after her deceale, as confelfed by
him before the Lords of Council. Item, for giving falfe teftimony and perjuring himfelf ; he in his firft examination deponing, that he faw the laid Margaret touch the pen, after the faid John Ogiluy had fubfcribed the lame ; and
' Iron sliovel or spade. * Sentence is uot recorded.

1 & 16 Fea. & Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 403

being thereafter examined, deponing, that he never faw her touch the pen, nor
did he fee the laid John fubfcribe. — Sentence. His right hand to be ftruck
off on the block, at the Market-crofs of Edinburgh : And to be Banished from
the kingdom, and to be perpetually reckoned as Infamous : And all his moveables to be efcheated to the Queen.

iHaflterful (j^jpjpirssioii — a^ounUina: a Mailit of %tit% kt.

May 10. — Robert Sandis in Leith, and John Pyott there, ' Convict
of arte and parte of ]>e felloune and maifterfull Oppreffion done to Walter Cant,
Baillie of Leith, cumand vpoune him, vnder fylenee of nycht, efter ]je dounpaffing of pe lone, quhair he wes vpoune ])e Ichoir of Leith, in fobir maner, as
become ane officer berand auctorite of ane Toune or burcht, belevand na evill of
ony perfovmis, bot to haue levit vnder Goddis peax and our fouerane ladeis ; and
perfewing of ))e laid Walter for his flauchter, in ])e mentyme, quhen Jje faid Baillie wes cawfand fend for ane officiar to put Hannis Myllare in Waird, quha Jjare,
in prefens of pe faid Baillie, had hurte and woundit ane Duche mariner callit

in his face and diuerfe v|)eris pairtis of his body, and J)air with fwerdis,

buklaris, Jedburcht ftalffis, and vjjeris wappynnis invafiue, crewellie hiirte and
woundit pe laid Walter in his left hand, to pe greit efTulioune of his blude ; the
faid Walter Jeanne, as Baillie of pe faid Tonne of Leithe, being in executioune
of his office, and deforcing him pairin : And als of pe i-eving and taking, at pe
leift preuatlie convoying of pe faid Hannis Myllare, quha had committit pe cryme
foirfaid in prefens of pe faid Baillie, in maner aboue wi'ittin, fi'a pe faid Waltei",
he being commandit to remane qiihill pe officiaris of J^e faid toune fuld haue
cumin to him to haue wardit or prefentit him to our fouerane ladeis Juftice or
his deputis, to haue vnderlyne pe law and pvnift for his dimeritis, conforme to
pe lawis : And fwa, fortefeit and mantenit j^e faid Hannis Myllare in committing
of pe cryme aboue fpecifeit, and wes arte and parte with him Jjairintill ; and withhalding of him fra pe lawis and pvnifment for pe crymes aboue writtin.' — Audro
Sandis and George Chalmer, in Leith, came in will for the fame crime.

H^amesurluu — 3Srsirsin(j tf)t igmisc of ^tniull, ^r.

May 23. — Thomas Kennedy or Baugany, John and Alexander, his
fon and brother, David K., fon of the Laird of Bennane, William Cauldwell, and
feventeen others, found Sir Hugh Campbell of Loudoune, kn', furety for their
underlying the law at the next Juftice-aire of Air, for Convocation of the lieges,
armed in warlike manner, and coming by way of Hamefucken to the dwellinghoufe of Adam Boyd of Penkill, and Invading him, his wife, children, and fervants, for their Slaughter, and befieging them in the faid houfe : And for Hurt404 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1558.

ing and Wounding Kennedy, his wife, with ftones ; committed on

January 29 laft.

gift ill ins fi'^Ki i!)f 3cla(U of Mamt anU Itanatoun*

Jul. 2. — Robert Steavakte in Neilftounefyd, found furety for his entry
at the next aire of Renfrew, to underly the law for con tern ptuoufly abiding from
the Queen's Army, ordained to convene at Dunfe and Langtoune, on Apr. 18 laft,

Hfiitifits from ti)c Utii'H of 3LautJei%

[Among a great many others of less note who were charged with Abiding from this Raid, Alexander
Muir of Skaithrauir, Walter Forrester of Durrisdale, John Quhitefurde of Myltoune, William Baillie
of Cormestoune, James Lokert of Lee,' James Auchinlek of Twedy, John Muir of Nesbet," John
Someruile of Camnethane, Robert Park of Gilbertfeild, John Hammyltoune of Pedderisburne, David
H. of Boithuilshauche, Andrew H. of Lekprevik, Gawin Murray of Udstoune,^ Stephen Dudingstoune
of Sandfurd, Thomas Grundistouue of Kyngask, Andrew Lundy of Stratharlie, William Spittell of
Lewchat, Alexander Mortoune of Randerstoune, John Seytoun younger of Lathreise, James Spens of
Lathalland, James Ballingall of Riggis, James Loclimalony of that Ilk, Alexander Pitblado of that
Ilk, William Ballingall of that Ilk, William Archibald of Blakhall, Archibald Dudingstoune of Pitkapill, Alexander Barculay of Syde,'' James Wischert of that Ilk, William Lyell of Murthill, Alexander Pyote of Fovertie, Gilbert Auchinlek of that Ilk, David Ogiluy of that Ilk, David Fentoune,
grandson of the Laird of Ogill, James Skrymeour of Balbeuchtie, John Kynneir of Henderstoune, came
in the Queen's will, found caution to answer at the Justice-aires of their respective shires, or were
proved to be sick. Some of them were replegiated to Regalities, &c. Between this date and the
month of October following, during which period the above names occur, no Declarations of the
Queen's Will or Sentences are recorded.]

Jul. 7. — John Levingstoun of Castlecaky, came in Will for contemptuoufly abiding from the Queen's Ai-my, ordained to convene at the burgh
of Lauder, on April 1 laft.

^IatiQ;i)trr»

Sep. 13. — John Garden in Penbrek, in Glenmuir, Convicted of art
and part of the cruel Slaughter of James Reid in Halfpennyland ; committed in
Auguft laft, on ancient feud and forethought felony, &c. — Beheaded.

' ' The Lard of Ley allegis, that at the tyme of the Raid he hurt his leg, in fic fort, that he
mycht nother ride nor gang to the Raid ; theirfor lend his feruandis.' " ' Allegis that he is

feik in the gravel, and was nocht at the Raid, and mycht nocht ride, and is vnable of his body and
guttis, and lloppino- at his hart — and nocht fubllantius ; and lies bene fua be the fpace of thir five
5eiris bigane ; like as, be infpectioune of his body, may be confident.' ^ ' Allegis that he is pad

the yeiris, and nocht able of his body, and is rumburiin (ruptured), thairfor he is nocht able to pafs
thairto, and is impotent of his perfoune, and fend his fone for him.' The above entries are from a
Scroll Hook, and are given as a specimen of the excuses which were then urged for absence.
Other notices of a similar description have already been given in the course of the present Collection,
which renders it unnecessary to cite more instances in this place. It may be remarked, however, that
the Treasurer was usually inexorable in Jiis demands for such offences, and exacted very heavy sums
for Compositions, owing to the exhausted state of the public coffers. ■■ Proved to be mad.

1 & 17 Fra. & Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 405

Persewaris, Ro' Crawfurd of Clollellane, The Laird of Auchinkreif, Mr Alex"' Skayne.
FoiRSPEKAR, (or ' Prelocutour,') Mr Jolmne Dunbar.

ASSISA.

James Dalrumpill of )'e Stair, Johnne Bannatyne of Coig, Moreife Dalrutnpill inWaterfyd,

Will. Kirkpatrik of Kirkmycliaell, Wm. Kennedy, fone to Jie Laird Williame Stewarte of Dundufe,

Johnne Campbell of Scliankftoune, of Cove, Ja. Cunyngame in Carmalloche,

Thomas Stewart of Gauftoune, Wm. Anderfoune in Clofbume, Jo. Cunynghame in Quhitehill,

Dauid Kennedy of Culjene, Hew Campbell, brufer tope Laird Patrik Boyle in Blakland.

Roger Kilpatrik of Clofbume, of Shankfloune,

Crwsoitafili) firiiistitti: in ti)t d^nsiisi) — Muxwins 2^irfemic]^aeU, $i:c.

Oct. 29. — CHUiSTorHEU Johnnestoune in Mylbank, Patrick J. in
Watterheid, William J., called WiUlome the SJwwjmre, Robert J. in Ililhouffis,
and tlieir accomplices, dilated for trealbnably bringing in Richard and Fergus
Grahame, brothers, and others of our ancient enemies of England, to the number of 500 perfons, to the town and lands of Kirkmichael, and Burning thereof;
and for other crimes charged in the Letters. Alexander Kirkpati'ick, brother
of William K. of Kirkmichael, fined 500 merks for not reporting the Letters
purchafed by the Laird of Kirkmichael duly executed, &c.

^Inuir^ter — iMutilatton.

Nov. 16. — John Skrymgeour, fon of James S., Conftable of Dundee,
David Fentoune, fiar of Ogill, Mr David Abircrummy of Gourdy, and nine
others, found caution to luiderly the law at the next aire of Forfar, for art and
part of the Slaughter of William Currour, fon of Andrew Currour of Logymekill, and for the Mutilation of Thomas Currour of his right hand ; committed on
ancient feud and forethought felony, on Auguft 15 laft. — Andrew Falconer,
brother of the Laird of Kynnabii", was denounced rebel, &c. and his cautioner
amerciated for his non-appearance — and James Fentoun, brother of David, was
proved to be fick.

^Iau5|)tn* Df a Cfjaplain, rommittet» lii) a i^rtwt.

Jan. 13, 1558-9. — Sir David Coluile, preift of the diocefe of St Andrews, Replegiated by the Commiffary of the Archbifliop, to underly the law for
the Slaughter of Sir Thomas Small, chaplain ; committed in September laft, on
forethought felony. Sir Walter Bunlch, chaplain, became furety.

TOilfuH ^irf-raisins — 3Suntintr Barlti), #ats, M!)rat, $(U

Feb. 15. — Alexander Hwme, brother of Criftell Hwme of Barro,
and Margaret Hwme his After, found furety ' that they fliould underly the law
1 Sir John Hwrae of Coldinknowis, and Criftel Hwme of Barro.

406 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1559.

at the next aii*e of Berwick, for the cruel Fire-raifing and deftructiou of five
' ftakkis' of barley, one ' ftak' of barley and oats, and one ' ftak' of v/heat and
peale, extending to fixteen fcore ' thravis,' computed at nine fcore bolls, belonging to George "Wauchop, burgefs of Lauder, being in his ' barne-5aird ;' together
with a dwelling-houfe and barn ; committed upon Sep. 26 laft, under filence of
night. — (Mar. 18, 1561-2.) Cautioners fined 700 merks for not entering jjannels ;
who were both duly denounced rebels, and put to the horn, &c.

stealing from tijt &ntttt ©oiDagn's €i)ic( (Coofe.

Feb. 27. — Alexander Ross, fervant to Iffobell Kynglaffie, Ipoule of
Thomas Marfchell, chief Cook to THE Queen Dowagek, Regent of Scotland,
delated of theftuoufly Healing, in company with the faid Iffobell, from the fox'elaid Thomas, furth of a chefl or ' Ichryne,' in his chamber in the burgh of
Perth, of a box with 420 merks therein ; and together with two filver goblets,
called ' filuer pecis,' and twelve filver fpoons, and lundry other goods ; committed
on Dec. 7 laft. — John Rofs of Cragy, his cautioner, unlawed, and the faid Alexander ordained to be cited again to underly the law, under the pain of Rebellion.

amteirommunhts ixiitfj an ^n0lis!)man.

May 8, 1559. — ' James ^wh, I'umtynie in Drumfreife, for Intercommuning with Mailter Ninian Manwell, Ingliiinanne, vjjoun preuie befynefle, fend
be his wife furth of Ingland vuto him, off his awin content decernit be J)e Juftice
to be Ban 1ST pis realme perpetualie, and to departe within xx dayis ; and nocht
to returue agane within pe famin, without Licence of our foueranis Lord and
Lady, vnder pe pane of deid .

^laugljtcr of ^iv ©aijiti Jforftrs, luiiflJjt, in Sffilarti.

James Buydin, fon of Niuian B. in Ruthirfiu-de, and William Allane,
and Thomas his brother there, found John Stewarte of Traqwair fui'ety for their
entry at the next aire of Roxburgh, to viuderly the law for art and part of the
cruel Slaughter of Sir David Forbes, kn', under the cuftody of the Tutor of
Pitciu", within the burgh of Rutherfurde ; committed on Mar. 1 laft.

^vtmf^inci tijc ©oftiints of tljt iUfonnation at IBuniJte $c Montvost,

May 10. {(ipud StriiidiHg.) — Paul Methwene was denounced rebel,
and put to tlie horn as fugitive, &c., and George Luvell, burgefs of Dundee, his
cautioner, was amerciated, for his not appearing to underly the law for Ufurping the authority of the Miniftry of the Church, and for taking upon himfelf
the fervice thereof, not being lawfully admitted thereto, at the feaft oiPaJhhe, viz.

1 & 17 Fra. & Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 407

on Mar. 26 laft, and daily for the fpace of three days immediately preceding the
faid feaft, and continually thereafter, adminiltering the Sacraments of the Altar
to feveral of the lieges within THE Burghs of Dundee and Montrose, and
fundry other places, in a manner far different from the divine and laudable ufe
of the faithful Catholic Church : And alfo for Convocation and gathering of the
lieges within the faid burghs, at the time forefaid, he not being admitted or
approved of by the Oi-dinaries of thele places ; and without their licence, haranguing and preaching to the faid lieges, and perfuading and feducing them
to his erroneous and leditious doctrines and Herefies ; thereby Ufurping the
King and Queen's authority, and ftirring up the lieges to commit Sedition and
Tumults, contrary to the Proclamations.

^vtndjhxQ ti)t Sortrtnrs of ti)t lUtormation at ^trtl), ^c.

(May 10.) — Frier John Cristesoune and William Harlaw denounced rebels, as fugitive, &c. and their cautioners, Jo/rn Erflihie of Dene and
PatricJe Murray of Tihbermuir, were amerciated, for their not entering to
underly the law for their Ufurping the authority of the Church, in taking at
their own hands the Miniftry thereof, &c. as above, within the Burgh of
Perth, and other places adjoining, within the fliire of Perth.

^rtarljutf]: t\)t Boctrincs of ti)t 3Uffovmation at ^i)i%

(May 10.) — John Willok denounced rebel for the fame caufe, for
preaching, &c. within the Burgh of Air. Robert Campbell of Kyn3ecleuche,
his cautioner, was at fame time amerciated.

[Another unfortunate hiatus occurs in the series of the Books of Adjournal, from this date, to the close of the reign of Mary Queen of Scots. There is
good ground for conjecturing, that many of the public Records of this kingdom,
embracing from the earliest period of the Reformation downwards to the years of
the reign of King James VI, had long ago been wilfully destroyed, apparently for
the purpose of suppressing evidence of the many religious and political struggles
which occurred during these eventful years. The only materials now left are three
small quarto volumes of the scroll-books, kept by one of the under Clerks of Court,
marked ' 12 Book,' from Mar. 12, 1560-1, to May 13, 1562 ; ' Aucht Bulk,'
from May 19, 1563, to May 19, 1564 ; and ' Nynt Bulk,' from May 24, 1564,
to Mar. 6, 1565. Besides these, there is a scroll Caution book, irregularly kept,
from Jun. 18, 1563, to Nov. 25, 1566. Although the notices which can now
be gathered from these books are meagre, they are in many respects valuable.

408 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1561.

The Editor has, as usual, availed himself of the other Records,' so far as they
elucidate the Criminal proceedings of that period.]

Mar. 12, 1560-1. — James Hay of Mayne, George Monro of Dalcarthy, Alexander Guthrie in Elgyne, and feven others, burgeffes of Elgyne, delatit
for Convocatioune of our fouerane ladeis lieges, to Ipe nowmer of viij"" {eight
/core) perfonis, or ])airby, ])e viij day of Januar laftbipaft, bodih in fere of weire,
incontrare J)e Actis of Parliament, and fetting vpoun Alexander Robertfoune in
Pittendrech, &c. tenentis and feruandis to Elizabeth Douglas Lady of Pittendreyche, and hurt and woundit Jjaim in diners pairtis of ])air bodeis, to ])e gret
efTufioune of Jjair blude, and left J)e faidis Alexander Robertfoune and Alexander
Henry (in Brovnfyde) Hand for deid, vpoun aid ffeid and foirthocht felony, &c.
Guthrie and two others to anfwer att the next aire of Elgin and Forres. — (Apr.
.SO.) Amerciated for non-appearance, (and denounced rebels)

^laufrTjtrr.

Mar. 13. — William Ramsay', Convicted of art and part of the Slaughter of Richard Henryfoune, ' fervitour' to the Mafter of Sinclare ; committed at
■ the vreft end of the town of Dyfert, on 7 March inftant. — Beheaded.

Prelocutors, Jolin Foiret of that Ilk, Cuthbert Ramfay, burgefs of Edinburgh.
AssisA, John Anftrutber of that Ilk, Andrew Farny of that Ilk, William Bonar of Roffye, Andrew ^Murray of Balvaird, ^Ir James Wemys, and others of lefs note.

^IaurtT)tn- ^^ iHutilattoit nf ttoo ^onis of Xi)t ICairlJ of ilOffg-iHrtrilL

Mar. 17. — James Fentoune of Ogill, James Lyoun of Eafter Ogill,
and feven others, found David Earl of Craufurd furety for their entry on
Apr. 30, to miderly the law for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of WiUiam
Currour, and Mutilation of Thomas Currour, fons of Andrew Currour of LogyMegill ; committed within the burgh of Dundee, in Auguft 1588.

Prelocittouris for ])e pannell, Mr Johnne Abircrummy, Mr David Quhytelaw, Tlie Laird of Creych.
Persewaris, Audro Currour of Logy-Mekill, Stevin his fone, Mr Robert Creychtoun.*

The pannels were all refpited,' & found caution to fatisfy the Queen and parties.

' The reader is referred to the Acts of Parliament, edited by Thomas Thomson, Esq., where
much valuable historical matter, illustrative of the History of this reign, is preserved. It was found
to be impossible to select the portions which relate to Criminal matters. " He took instruments

that he ' comperit as Advocate for ])e Quene, and hir interes alanerlie.' ^ Apr. 30, 1561.

4 & 19. Fra. & Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 409

(May 13, 1562.) — The pannels came in the Queen's will.

Prelocutouris for fe pannel, fe Maifter of Wark, Mr Jhoiie Abircrumbye.
Prelocutouris for fe perfewaris, My Lord Ogilbye, The Lard of Innerquharite, The Laird of
Clovay, The Lard of Rofle, The Lard of Monquhanye.

(Jun. 10, 1563 ) — David Earl of Cravxfurd became cautioner for his entry
in Ward, in Edinburgh, on xv days warning, under the pain of 1000 merks.

Mdbin SE&oob — ^hiiot of ?!Hnira0O« — itortj of anioftcUitnrr,

Jul. 20, 1561. — Robert Hannay, fmyth ; James Cowper, tailseour;
Thomas Johneftone, cordiner ; Andro Henderfone, fwerd-flipper ; Andro Richemanne, cuke ; William Clerk, talburnar ; ' James Fawfyid, talburnar ; Johne
Cok, tail5eour : Patrik Mow, talboner, and Alexander BifTet, taburner. The
quhilk day, James Cowper, tail5eour, come in Will for arte and parte of pe
chefing" of George Durye in Robert Hude, vjjerwayis calland and nemmand
him Loud of (In)obedience (Misrule), amangis J)e Craftifmen and })air
leruandis, within pe burgh of Edinburgh, in pe moneth of Apryill laft bypaft,
forefeand and affiftand to him incontrair pe tennour of pe Act of Parliament,
and for breking of pe faid Act : Item, for breking of pe Proclamatioun of pe
Proveft and Bailleis of Edinburghe, maid for obferving of pe faid Act, forbiddand all fie Inhabitantis of pis burgh, })at nane of Jjame fuld tak vpoun hand to
cheife ony fic perfone in Robene Hiule, Abbot of Vnreafone, or ony v])er name
within pe faid burgh : Item, for Convocatioun of our fouerane ladies liegis, in
curajjany with pe faid George Durye, callit Lord of (In)obedience, to pe nowmer

of perfones, bodin in feir (of weir), with ane difplayit handfen5e,^ halbrownis, jakkis, culveringis, morriounis,^ twa bandit fwerdis, cotis of mal3e, and
v]?eris wajiynnis invafive, vpone Soneday pe xij day of Mali laft bypaft, in cumpanye with certane brokin men of were, betuix thre and four houris eftir none,
cumand within pe burghe of Edinburghe, enterand at pe Eift Porte Jiairof, and
pafled to pe Trone ]jairof, quhair Jjai wer met be ane parte of pe Bailleis, counfale, and officiaris of J)is burghe, and chargit be j^ame to pas abak, and devyid
J)ame of pe faid burghe, for efchewing trouble and mifordour in pe famyn : And,
nochtwitliftanding pe faid charge, violentlie and contempnandlie pafland ford ward
to pe faid Caftell-hill, and returnand agane to pe Portis of pe faid burghe ; vfand
pe famyn be ifche and entre, at Jjair plefour, makand plane rebellioun and inobedience aganis pe Magiftratis of pe faid burgh.

Thomas Johijlone, in Will for breking of pe faid Act of Parliament and
Proclamatioun maid be pe Magiftrates, vtjlqn-a. — Andro Hend'irjone, in Will
for breking pe faid Act and Proclamatioune foirfaid Item, pe faid Andro

' A drummer, or player on the (albron or taicbvrn. ^ Choosing. ^ Ensign ; banner.

^ Morions.

VOL. I. t 3 F

410 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1561.

(Hendei'fone) Convict of ))e making of pe faid Convocatioune and rebellion aganis
pe Magiftratis, in maner foirfaid.. — Jhoue Coh, ffylit for brekiug of Jje Act of
Parliament in chefnig of Jje faid Loud of Inobedience, and breking of ])e
Proclamatioun maid be ])e Magiftratis, in maner foirfaid, alanerlie.' — Andro
Richemari, Convict for afliftence to})e faid Lord of Inobedience and his complices,
in breking of \>e faid Act and Proclamatioune ; and furneffing of })ame of raeit
and drink. — James Faivfijkl, Puir'ik Mow, Alexander Bijfett, Convict of Jje
breking of J?e laid Act, Proclamatioun, convocatioun, and rebellioun foirfaid,
conforme to J)e Dittay.

aaiotutti (n erUinlJuriji) — Cfjoosing; a * ItoiH of ^noOrUieitcr/ $tt,

Aug. 8. — Jajies Fkaser, faidlar ; Andro Hammiltoun, cuttlair ; Nicol
5oung, tail3eour ; Nicol Rynd, tail5eour ; Willeam Morefone, Andro Gottirlbne,
Fyeit be ane AfTyife of Intercommonyng with George Durye, tail5eour, vjjerwayis callit Lord of (In)obedience, and vjjeris his collegis, prentiflis," and
feruandis to ]>e Craftifmenne within Jjis burghe, being our fouerane ladeis rebellis
and at hir home, put J)airto be hir Letteris, in defalt of finding fouirtie to vnderly
Jje law for breking of J)e Act of Parliament, in cheifing of Jje faid Lord of (In)-
Obedience, tvmult, and ryfing aganis ])e Magiftratis of ]>& faid burgh, be way of
rebellioun, and v])eris crymes contenit in J^e faidis Letteris, in \>e moneth of July
laft bypaft and Auguft inftant. And als, f»e faidis perfonis, and Walter
Waivane, James Henderfune, flefcheour, Hary Q/i/iijte, cordiner, Alexander
Scott, Thomas Ewin, goldfmyth, Daii'id Kijnloch, Patrick Sclumg, Fylit be
\)e foirnemmit perfones of AfTyife, for difobeyance of ]?e Pi'oveft, Bailleis, and
magiftratis of J^e burgh of Edinburgh, and auctorite J^airof, vpone ]>e xxj day of
July laft bypaft, quhen ])e feruandis and prentifRs of ])e Craftis Jjairof, wer
afTegeand and invadand J)e faidis Proveft and Bailleis in \>e tolbuyth of Jje faid
burgh, be abftracting and withdrawing of Jjame felfHs fra })e help, fupporte,
frething, and releving of Jjame, and for faiftie of j^air lyves, and fortefeing and
participatioune of ])e faidis Proveft and bailleis, to ftenche and reprefs \>e faid
tvmult, and taking and apprehending of f>e faidis perfones, Craftis-childer,^ and
prentilfis, committeris Jjairof ; lyik as they aucht to haue done, of Jjair aythis,
quhen ])ai were creat burgeffis of })is burgh, and bundin dewtie.

Jgurtius anU oaiounliins — ?gamesurluiu

Aug. 22 James Lockheut of ])E Ley found caution for his entry

and twenty-three of his tenants, &c. at the next aire of Lanark, for ' }ie crewall
Hurting and Wounding of John Hammiltoune in Henfchaw, be way of
Hamefuckin.'

■ Only, alone. '^ Apprentices. ^ lAtexaWy cliildren ; lads, youths.

19 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 411

^lausijttr of ItaUj) Bllesljabtin

Dec. 1. — James Schoiiiswod delatit for arte and parte of pe crewell
Slaucliter of vmq'^ Helens Stirling, Lady Ulleflievene.'

Prelocutouris for ])e pannel, Mr George Strang, James Crawmound of Aldbar.

The quhilk day comperit in jugement James Stratoune, and James Lychtoiin,
Parfone of Dunloppy ; and J)ai being requirit be Jje faid James Schorifwod, gyf
jjai wald perfew him of his lyfe for J)e faid Slauchter ? Anfuerit, ))at J)ai wald
perfew him for Jje famyn. And J)airupon pe laid James Schorifwod afkit ane
Act of Court and inftrumentis, and protellit ])at pe faid Parfone fuld tyne his
benefice, conforme to pe lawis.

Thomas Guthiie of Kynbach proteftit for his dampnage and flvayth fuftenit
be him, ])at infafar as he wes chargit be pe Letteris to vnderly pe law, and J)at
na party comperit to perfew him, that he mycht recouer pe famyn, ovther
vpone pe officiar executour of pe Letteris or party ; and jjairupoune afkit
inftrumentis.

i^oisc--straltn0.

Dec. 1. — WiLLiAME Cadenheid Convicted for art and part of ' pe
thefteous Staling of ane blak cut-tailit horfe fra pe Ex-le Marfchell, and ane gray
horfe fra James Anderfoun ; quhairwith he wes tane reid-hand.' — Hanged ' on
pe gallowfe of pe Burrow-mure.'

#i)pfrsston — 3impx-tsonment — (i!r.tartinQ: 3iaansoin.

Dec. 5. — Robert Innes of Innermarky, John Innes of Auchluncarye, and feven others, found furety (' Jhone Erie of Suthirland') to underly

the law at the nixt aire of Elgin and Forres, ' for pe Oppreffioune done to Schir

Alexander Robertfone, cumand with J)air complices, bodin in feir of weir, in pe

moneth of July laft bypaft, to pe Haltoune of Lambryid, and }jair maifterfully

tuke him furth of pe famyn, and had and cariit hira with |)ame to pe Place of

Plewlandis, quhair ])ai held him in ftrait prifoun and Captiuite be pe fjiace of

four dayis ; quhill ^ Marioun Ogihiy, Lady Innermarky,^ his maifti'es, threw pe

feir fcho tuke, quhen pe faid Robert, hir fon, boftit* and fend her worde, " Jjat

he fould fend pe faid Schir Alexanderis held to hir," gaif to him J^e fum of ij",

merkis in hand, and vther twa hundreth merkis to be payit at Candilmes and

Witfonday, with pe 5eirlie terce'* of Vgftoune and Plewlandis, for Jje faid Schir

Alexanderis ranfome and latting of him to libertie ; vfurpand J)airthrow our

fouerane ladeis auctorite.'

' See Trials for this barbarous Murder, I, * 344, 350, &c., and Appendix. * Until.

^ Mother of the Laird. * Threatened. ^ The terce, or third, due to her as widow.

412 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1561.

* (J^mfifsrttiitff t]^e ijoaij*— asaountiins — ittutilatioit»

Dec. 6. — Thomas Harrot, in Coifland ; Crifteane Carfra, his fpous ;
Henry C, elder, in Redingliill ; Henry, his young fon ; John and James C, in
Standanftane ; and BelFye Litfter, ' dilatit for Oinbefetting of })e gait, vnder
filence of nycht, in pe nioneth of Auguft, 1568 5eiris, to Robert Dowglafs, in
Duchrye, vnder pe Lard of Bafs, be way of Brigancy, quhair he wes paiTand fra
J)e toun and landis of Poppill hame to his awin dwelling-place in Dowchrie,
befyid pe dwelling-houfe of ])e faid Henrye Carfra, at pe peth-fute of Stenypeth,
callit Ridinghill, and Jjair crewelly invadit pe faid Robert for his Slauchter, and
hurte, and wondit him in diuerfe partis of his body, to pe gret effafioiine of his
bloode ; and lies Mutilat him of his thrid finger of his rycht hand, and left him
lyand for deid ; vpone aid ffeid, provifioune, and foirthocht felony and fett
pvu-poife.

Prelocutouris for jie pannell.
Mr Alexander Skene, My Lord Bonhwik, The Laril of Traquair, My Lord Bothwill.

Continued to Jan. 15, Lord Borthwik and James Earl of Both well, cautioners.
— (Jan. 15, 1561-2.)— James Someruill of Humby became cautioner for their
entry at the next Juftice-aire of Edinburgh.

^amrsurfitu — eaiountiiitg: — C!jiltJ--iHurtrn%

Robert Dowglass, in Dowchry, under the Laird of Bafs, and Margai'et, his daughter, ' dilatit of pe cuming, with ])air complices, vpone pe fyft day

nixt eftir pe feift of Lambes, (Auguft 6th,) 1561 5eris, vnder filence of nycht,

be way of Hamefuckin, to pe duelling-houl'e of Henry Carfra, in Ridinghill, he

})an himfelff being departit fiairfra, convoying of fum freindis ciuhilkis J)at day had

bene with him in cumpany, and pair ferchit and focht pe faid Henrye for his

Slauchter ; and pe faid Thomas ]?an beand ftandand in fober maner, dowlatt

alaue," without armour or wapnis, accumpaniit with his wyfF and Beflye Litfter

alanerlie, befoir pe faid Henryis dur,^ traifting na harme, &c., pe faid Robert

Dowglafs lychtit' of his horfe, and without ony occafioune invadit pe faid Thomas

for his Slauchter, and hurte and woundit him in his left arme and face, to pe

effufioun of his blood in grite quantitie : And pat fame tyme CTewelly ftrak

pe faid Thomas fpous, with fundrie ftrekis with fute and hand, fcho beand

grite with barne ; throw pe quhilkis ftrekis fcho pairtit with barne at hir

hamecoming.'

They ' ofTerit pame to ane Aflyife, and defyrit na continewatioun ;' but the

same procedure took place as in the foregoing case. — The Laird of Quhittinghame became surety for them.

' Unarmed, defenceless. Having only his coat or doublet on. ^ Door. ^ Alighted.

1

19 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 413

Conboration of tl;e XitQts in itirftUjall.

Dec. 9. — Mr Alexander Dick, Provost of Orknay, Schir Magnus
Ramfay, Chaiplaine, Schir Duncane Raniefay, Chaiplane in Orknay, found caution,' this day ; and (on Dec. 5) Edward Sinclair, bruder to \>e Lard of Roflyng,
and ten others, Mr Magnus Halcro, William Halcro, Nicoll Chalmer, and Freir
Frances Both well, alfo found caution to underly the law on April 15 next, ' for
Convocatioune and gaddering of our fouerane ladeis legis, to pe nomer of iiij"''
{four fcore) perfones, in \% moneth of September laftbypaft, ifcheid owt of J)E
Castell of Kirkwall, and cumand to Jje Toune Jjairof, and ferchit and focht
Henry Binder of Strone and Mr William Mudy for fiair Slauchter, &c., and v]jeris
crymes contenit in })e Letteris direct Jjairupoune.' — After having been continued
from time to time, the Cafe was at length (May 13, 1562,) referred to the Jufticeaire of Orknay.

Common C|)fft anti rtsttof C|)eft.

' Will Ellot, callit Woddir-neJe ; Petir Trumbiil, callit ])e 31o?ik ;^ and
Henrye Blak, in Softlaw, Convict to be Hangit forCommoun Thift and Commoun reffett Jjairof.'

dmiboratioit of t])t lir0ts — J^nbasion — ezatouitUiiiff, ^^r.

John ED5ER of Woddirlye, Richard, OlijAar, James, and George
Ed5er, and Robert Hude, ' deletit of Convocatioune of our fouerane ladeis liegis,
to })e nomer of iij'"' {three Jcore) perfonis, bodin in feir of weir, with jakis,
fwordis, fbeil-bonettis, daggis, culveringis, and vfieris wappingis invafive, contrair ])e Act of Parliament, vpone fie xviij day of September laft bypaft, cumand
to J)e landis of Rawburne, lyand within }je fcherefdome of Berwik, pertening to
Dauid Si)ottifwode of ])at Ilk, in heretage ; and pair invadit and perfewit Jhone
VUafone, James Hog, Jhone Wody, and ])e remanent Jje laid Dauidis tenantis of
f)e faid landis for ]>a\v Slauchteris, dingand and birfand ])ame with diuerfe bafe^
ftrekis, chaiffiind ])ame within jjair awin malingis * ane grit fpace, doand ])at wes
in })ame to haue flane Jjame, vpone fett purpoife, provifione, and foirthocht
felony, fpecifit in Jje Letteris direct Jjairupoune.'

ASSISA.

The Larde of Blacader, George Trotter of Prentonene, The Lard of Blanerne,

The Larde of Spott, Robert Hvme of Redlieueh, The Larde of Bafs,

George Home of Broxtnouth, Mr Richard Spottifwod, The Lard of Innerwike.^

Verdict. — The faid Larde of Woderley and his coUegis being on panale, wer
acquit, be declai'atioun of Jje laid haill AlTyile, of pe foirfaidis crimes,

' George Crawford of Lefuoreis. ' See notices regarding them in Extracts from THE Lord

High Treasurer's Accounts, in the Appendixto this reign. ^ Perhaps for bauch. * Maillings, small possessions. '' The other four Assisors were only feuars.

414 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1561.

John Swyntoune of that Ilk ; William Redpeth of that Ilk, elder and
younger ; the ' Barrouiie' of Dal5ell ; Thomas Nifbit, his brother ; the Laird
of Lochirmachus ; George and Alexander, brothers of John Forrefter of Gammelfcheillis, and lixty others, found furety to underly the law at the next Aire of
Berwick for the fame crimes.

Dec. 13. — ScHiu James Hammiltoune of Craavfordjohne, kn',

and John Gudelett, in Strabrok ' (delatit for the Slaughter of vmq'^ George

Hammiltoune ?)

Prelocutouris for }ie pannell, Mr Dauid Borthuik, Mr Jhone Mofcrop, The Laird of Garlis, My
Lord Levingftone, The Abbot of Deir, My Lord Gray.
Persewar, Agnes Mun-ay, relict of vmq'*^ George Hammiltoune.

James Hammiltoune of Kincapill proteftit that he producit the Letteris, dewlie
execute and indorfat ; and the faid Schir James proteftit that the faid James
producit the Letteris. — Andro Hammilton of Siluertone-hill, fouerte for the
entre of Schir James, and Schir James for fouirte of Jhone Gudelett, the xxix
day of Januar nixtocum. — (Jan. 29, 1561-2.) Continued to Feb. 25 ; the Laird
of Calderwood and Sir James being ' fouirteis.' — (Feb. 25.) Remitted to the
next Aire of Lanark ; the Laird of Trabroun and Sir James became cautioners.

Dec. 15. — Jhone Gledstanis of Cokla"w (dilatit for the Slauchter of
vmq'" Thomas Peblis and Williame Bell.)
Prelocutouris for fe pannall, My Lord Home, The Larde of Coldinknowis, The Larde of Cranftone, Mr Jlione Abircrumby, Williame Trumble alias Pinffit, Robert Scott of Bonyngtone.
Persewaris, Adame Bell, for Wm. Bell, &c., Alex. Hoppringill of Trinlinknowis, Jhone Ofwald.

The Aduocat producet the Lettir vnderwrittin, and defyrit Jie famyn to be
regiftrat ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Eegina,

Aduocattis, We greit 50W weill. Forfamekill as Jhone Gledllanis of CokJaw hes fund ficker
fouertie that he fall eompeir befoir our Juflice and his deputtis in ]ie Tolbuyth of Ed'' je xv day of
December inflant, to vnderly ])e law for pe Slauchter of vmq'" Thomas Peblis and William Bell, and
diuerfe v])eris crymes contenit in )ie Letteris direct Jiairupone, as ]'e famyn beris. Oure will isheirfoir, and we charge 50U ])at je alfift and concur to ])e purfute of fe faid Jhone for fe crymes contenit
in f e faidis Letteris Jie faid day, and fe ]mt juflice be done fairin, conforme to ])e lawis of ]>is realms :
As 56 will anfuer to ws fairupone. Subfcriuit with our hand, at Halyrudehoufe, fe xij day of
December, and of ourregne fe xix 5ere. [MARIE R.]

* In a great many instances the names of the pannels, &c. are regularly noted in these Scroll-books, which were
evidently intended merely as Memoranda for the Clerk, from which to extend the proceedings, aided by the Dittays
and other warrants, into the proper Records of the Court. The crime may be infeiTed from the designation of the
pursuer.

20 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 415

(Mar. 16.) — The Juftice-principall being prefent, Archibald Naper of Merchinjlone maid fayth in jugement that he luld vfe ]je office of Juftiee deputrle
lelilie and trewlie, as efFeris. — Continued to Mar. 26 ; William Cranltone of that
Ilk cautioner.'

Cljeft rommittetr 61? an allecreU Stiiot anU iWinor,

Dec. 16, — James Guyld, indicted for Stealing, &c., as after fpecified.

Prelocutouris for the pannell,

Mr Thomas M''eal3eane, Mr Alexander Sim, Mr Jhone Mofcrope, Mr Dauid Maitland, Archibald

Douglas of Kilfpiiulie, Andro Murray of Blakbarronye.

Persewaris, Neill Layng, Maifter George Hackett.

Continued to Dec. xxiij.— (Dec. 23.) — Mu Alexander Sym, as prelocutour
for James Gujdd, beand callit to vnderlye ])e law vpone his lyfF, allegit that he
is minor, within J)e 5eiris of xviij ])eir aid, as it may be confident be infpectione
of his face, lyik as he is in deid, and falbe profin gyfF neid beis ; and Jjairfoir
aucht nocht to vnderly ane Aflyfe vpone his lyif, nor to thoill" jugement J)airupone, nojjer'' be J)e Commoun law, nor Municipale law, or vfe of Jjis realme.
And attour'' J)e barne him felfF is ydiot of natur, nor lies nocht J)e knawlege to
decerne \q perrell and Jje feir of deid ;' and Jjairfoir aucht not for to vnderly ane
Allyle, as laid is, of lyif: And forder, is fubdewit' to ane malancolius hvmour,
naturallie defcendand from his progenitouris, fwa })at he is mair defyrus to dee
nor to leif,' as be experience is notour, be famekill Jjat his fader exponed him
felff findre tymes to pe perell of deid, and wald haue drowned him felfl' in J)e
North Loch, wer nocht he wes releved })airfra be nychtbouris ; and fyclyik
Maifter AValter Guyld, his fader bruder, occupiit with ])e fame hvmour, flew him
felfF in Paris. And })airfoir, ])e faid James, beand bayth minor, and approacheand mair to pupillaritie nor * maioritle, and occupiit with ])e faid hvmour, mair
willing to de nor to leif, and haifand na cuyr' of deid, aucht not to vnderly J)e
law for J)e lybellit pretendit cryme, and aucht not to perife,"' fupijois he wald
peris, quia non auditur per'tre volens. And eikis " allegeance, Jjat ]?e fame boy
ranne findrie tymes nakit to Ingland, and left his claythis'" behind him ; and
fwa may be vnderftuid J;at he lies this faid hvmour, as faid is ; and offeris him to
preif \iQ faid allegeance fufficientlie."

The Justice Findis, be Inteilocutour, J)at \iq faid mater fould pafs to Aflyfe,
nochtwithftanding ony allegeance, becaufe of })e practik fene of befoir.

' No farther trace appears in the Record. It is probable that Remission had been obtained, or that
the case was remitted to the next Justice-aire. ^ Sufier. •^ Neither. •• Moreover.

= Death. '^ Subjected, liable to. "^ To die than to live. ^ Than. ^ Q^^.^^ i^^^

euro ; viz. reckless, indifferent, or careless of death. ^o Perish. '^ Adds. ^'^ Clothes.

'^ This Trial lias been selected chiefly on account of the remarkable phraseology employed by the pannel's ' Prelocutour,' and from the curious enumeration of the articles stolen, as detailed in the Verdict.

416 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1561.

Verdict. James Guild, Convict,' be deliuerance of ])e faid AfTyife,^ of arte
and parte of pe thiftius Steling and taking furth of J)e purfe of Elizabeth Danielftoune, pe fpous of Neill Layng, hingand vnder hir aprone, in pe monetb of
Apryill, vpoun aue IMonuuday, ane mercat day of Edinburgh, fcho being vpone
J?e Hie Streit, ftandand at pe crame^ of Willeam Speir, indweller in pe faid burgh,
in comoning with him, pe tyme of pe putting of aue firing to ane penner and
ynconie quhilk fcho had coft fra J)e faid cramei*, of ane fignet of gold ; ane vther
fignet of gold, fett with ane cornelene ; aue gold ring, fett with ane grite
fapheir ; ane vther gold ring, with ane fapheir forniit like ane harte ;* ane gold
ring, fett with ane turquhafe ;^ ane fmall dowble ring of gold, fett with ane
dyaniont, and ane rubye, ane aid {old) Angell-Nobill, aud ane Cuflett dukett.*^

[Archihahl Earl of Ergt/le, Jvftice General.']

iUiottns to rtstorc Xi)t i^opisib Hrligioit, ^n

Dec. 24. — Maister William Balfour, indweller in Leyth, found
caution to appear on the laft day of December, luider the pain of 1000 li., to
underly the law for the ci-imes following : — (Dec. 31.) Convicted by an Affife'
' off arte and parte of pe contrauenyng and breking of our fouerane ladeis Proclamatioun, maid in pe moneth of Auguft laft byjiaft, eftir hir hienes arrivell
within ]jis realme ; chargeing in effect, all and findrie hir legis, be opin Proclamatione, at pe mercate-croce of Ed' and vj^eris places neidfull, that J)ai and euery
ane of Jjame fuld contene fiame felffis in quietnes, keip peax and ciuile focietie
amangis J)ame felffis ; and in Jje meyntyme, quhill" pe Eftatis cf Jjis hir Maiefteis realme mycht be afTemblit, and ])at hir hienes had takin a finale ordour be
paiY avife and publict confent, ])at nane of Jjame tak vpone hand, privatlie nor
opinlie, to mak ony Alteratione or innouatioune of pe ftate of Religione, or
attemp ony thing aganis pe forme quhilk hir Maieftie fand piiblicklie and vniiierfalie ftanding at hir Maiefteis arryving within J)is realme, vnder pe pane of
deid ; with certificatione, jjat gyff" ony fubiect of pis realme fuld cum in pe con-

' No traces are left on record of tlie fate of tliis poor creature ; but it is likely that the punishment
was trivial, and tliat his relations would be bound over, under penalties, for his future pood behaviour.
^ Thirteen burgesses. ■* The last remnant of the booths of the Cramers of St Giles's Church,

Luckenbooths, he, were pulled down about twenty years ago, to widen the High Street. ' The
Cranies' formed part of a small alley on the North side of the Cathedral. ■• These were favourite

love-tokens among all ranks, varying, of course, in value. ^ Turquois. '' Ducat. It has

frequently been remarked, in the course of tlie present Collection, that the burgesses, as well as the
nobility and gentry, were possessed of plate and jewellery to an extent greatly beyond what is now
usual — and perhaps this may be accounted for from the difficulty of investing the large capital wliich
many merchants and burgesses acquired in business or otherways. So ostentatious were the burgesses and their wives, that many legislative enactments were required to re])ress their passion for dress
and finery. A reference to these sumptuary laws may prove not uninteresting to the curious inquirer
into the manners and customs of this country. ' They appear to have been burgesses of Edinburgh. The only names of any note were The Laird of Spottiswod, Mr James Watsone, Mr Michael
Cheisholme. * Until. ^ If.

20 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 417

trare heirof, he fiild be eftemit and haldin ane Seditious perfone, and rafer of

Tumult, and pe faid pane fuld be execute aganis him with all rigour, to ])e exemple of v])eris ; as pe faid Proelamatione mair fuUelie proportis ; — be committing

of pe opin and manifeft crymes and offenffis eftir fpecifeit, pe tymis eftir mentionat, refpectiue, in maner following. In pe ffirft, In pQ raoneth of Nouember

laft bypaft, as ane Seditious perfone and rafer of Tumult, contrair pe. tennour of

pe faid Proelamatione, laid opinlie and planelie in my lord of Inuermethis Place

of Reidcaftell, that ' pe Religioun now Reformit,' and miniftratioun of pe

Sacramentis according to Godis Word and inllitutioun, within J)is realme, wer

not of God, nor 3it conforms to his Word ; and })airfore pe famyn and pe Holy

Communioun fuld be vterlie aboliffit within twa jeiris nixt eftir pe dait of pe

faid Contract ;' and ftairupone contractit and maid ane Wodfet with pe Lard of

Wateris. Item, pe faid Mr William convict be pe faid Aflyife as controuener

of pe faid Proclamatioun, be refone he accumpanit with certane wicked perfones,

fawaris of difcord and raferis of Tumult, vpone fett purpois, come to pe Parroche

Kirk of Edinburgh callit Sanct Gelis Kirk, quhair Jhone Carnys wes examihand pe conimoun pepill of ])is burgh, befoir pe laft Communioun miniftrat

J)airin, according to J^e ordour takin and appointit be pe Minifter, Elderis, and

Deacones of pe faid Kirk ; and pe faid Jhone, beand demanding of ane pover

woman, ' GyfF fcho had ony hoip of faluatione be hir awin gud werkis ? pe faid

Maifter William, in difpytefull maner, and with thrawin continance,' having na

thing to do at ]jat tyme in pe faid Kirk hot to trubill pe faid Examinatioune,

faid to pe faid Jhone p\v wordis, ' Thow demandis of f>at womanejje thing quhilk

pow nor nane of thy opinioune allowis nor kepis !' And eftir gentill admonitioun

made be (to) him be pe faid Jhone, he faid to him alfwa Jjir wordis, ' Thou arte

ane verray knaif, and p\ doctrin is verray falfe, as all 5our docti'in and teiching

is !' And Jjairwith lade his hand vpone his wapnes, and provokand battell ; doand

])airthrow, purpoiflie, ])at wes in him to half refit Tumult amangis pe Inhabitantis

of p\s burgh. Item, pe faid Maifter Willeam is Convict for breking of pe faid

Proelamatione, infafar as he, vpone pe tent day of December, in prefens of ane

grite multitude and nowmer of pepill within pe Tolbuyth of Edinburghe, herand

funi Gentilmen fpekand of pe Lordis Supper was fan to be miniftrat pe Sonday

nixt eftii", in pe faid Kix-k, faid p\v wordis, ' Is J)at 3our Communioun ? The

Devill birft me quhen euir it cumis in my belly ! And pe Devill birft J)ame in

quhais belly it cumis, ffor it is ane vei'ray Devill !' Item, pe faid Mr Willeam

wes Convict be pe faid Aflyife of (being) ane Conimoun and manifeft blafphemer

' This extreme zeal may have originated from the notoriety of the Public Disputation between John
WiLLOx, the Reformer, and John Black, a Dominican Friar, which had been keenly maintained for
two days, in summer 1561. Balf. Annales, I, 325 ; Leslie, p. 295 ; M' Cries Knox, (S:c. ^ With
twisted or distorted countenance, i, e. in derision, twisting his features, or making wry faces.

VOL. I. f 3 G

418 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1561-2.

of God and his Haly Evangell ; and for ane feditious perfone and ane Gommoun
auctour' ])airof.^

Protestation by an Assisor exempted from passing on Assises.
The qubilk day, the faid 3Iai/ter James Watjbune, burgefs of Edinburghe, being callit to pas vpone
fE Assise of Jie faid Mr Willeara Balfour, compeirit in jugement befor ]ie faid Juftice, and allegit
fat he fuld nocht be conipellit to pas vpone Jie faid Affife, be refoune he wes ane peifoune priuilegit
and exemit : And fairfore proteftit ]iat albeit ]ie Juftice conipellit iiim at Jiis tyme to pafs vpone tie
faid Mr Williames Affife, that fe famin fuld nocht hurt nor preiuge him anent his priuilege and exemptioune, towart Jie paffing vpone )ie Affifis of vjieris perfonis to be callit and perfewit criminalie befor ])e
Juftice, in tyme coming.

^i-ibilrgc of C?.vrmption from passdi^ upon Assists autj aUTqufsts
fliantcli to t\)t Snljnbitants of lHvt%

Feb. 17, 1561-2. — The quhilk day James Anderfone, burgefs of Perth,
comperit befoir })e Juftice-depute, and jjair jn-oducit our fouerane ladeis Letteris
vndirwrittin, vnder hir fignet, and fubfcriuit be vmq'" her derreft moder, ]je
Queue Dowriar and Regent of hir reahne, and vmq'" Gilbert Erie of Caffillis hir
Thefaurare for ])e tyme ; and for him felff and in name and behalff of ]je Proveft, Bailleis, counfale, and comraunitie of ])E bdrgh of Perthe, and defyrit
])e famyu to be obeyit : Quhilk defyir pe faid Juflice-depute thocht refonabill,
and Jjairfoir admittit and obeyit }?e faniyn ; off J)e quhilkis Letteris ])e tennour
followis.

Marie, be fe grace of God Queue of Scottis. To all and findrie our Lieutennentis, Wardanis,
Admirallis, Juftices, Juftice Clerkis, Schereffis, Stewartis, Bailleis, Crowneris, fair depntis, Proveft,
Aldermenne, and Bailleis of our burrovvis and cieteis, and all vperis our Officiaris, Jugis, Minifteris of
our lawis, liegis and fubdittis quhatfuraeuir, to quhais knawlege Jiir prefent Letteris fall cum, greting :
Forfamekill as it is vndtrftand to ws pat our Burgh of Perth is ane dry Toune, far diftant fra fe
See or to ony vfer parte ]>airof, and ]ie haill traiffick and change ftandis be Craftifmen fat daylie and
continewalie labouris with fair bodeis, quha hes na vf er to leif on : And fat in ]iis trublus tyme bypaft
fe Inhabitantis fairof hes bene put to grite and exhorbitent expenffis, be fummunding and compelling
of fame,at all tymes, to cum furth of our faid burgh, quhen fai ar chargit, and compeir befoir our Juftice, his deputis, and vf eris, jugis and Minifteris of our lawis of our realme, in paffing vpoun Aflyifis.
Inqueftis, and vjierwyis ; throw fe quhilk fai ar put to povertie, and may not indure fic chargis in tyme
cuming. For efchewing of fe quhilkis, and willand fat fai be vftt in femblabill nianer in tyme cuming
as f e Inhabitantis of our Bukgh of Duxde, quha ar of grit pvlfance,'' fituat in mair commpdius parte
nor« our faid Burgh of Perth, hes Exemit and be fir our Letteris Exemis all and findrie ]iE Inhabitantis within our faid Burgh of Perth and fredonie fairof, in all tyme cuming, fra all coraperance befoir
50W our faid Juftice, Juftice Clerkis, Scheriffis, Stewartis, Bailleis, Crvneris,^ Proveftis, Aldermen and
Bailleis of our Bunowis, or ony vf er Jugis within our realme, and paffing vpone Alfyilis and Inqueiftis
in quhatfumeuii' actiounis and cauffis, Criminale or Ciuile, committit be qtdiatfumeuir perfone or perfones within our faid realme ; aceeptand*^ alwayis, gyff fe faidis crymes be committit within our faid
burgh of Perth, or ane myill ]>airabout alanerlie :" And will and grantes fat fe faidis Inhabitantis nor

' Author. ^ The following marking is made on the margin, * Extract and sent to the Regent, ia Maij

1569.' ' Fr. puissance J power, wealth. ' Than. ' Crowners, Coroners. * Excepting. ' Only.

20 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 419

iiane of ]mia, for jiair remayning and byding at liame fra )ie faidis Affyifis and Inqueiflis fall incur n a
danger nor fkaith in Jiair perfones, landis or gudis, in ony wyis, and fall not be callit nor accufit Jiairfoir, nofer criminalie nor ciuilie in tyme cuming, notwithflanding ony Letters, Proclamationis or
chargis quhatfunieuir maid or to be maid in ]ie contrair, in ony perfones contenit Jtairintill ; anent ]>e
quhilk we difpens with Jiame and ilk ane of Jiaim be ])ir our Letteris ; difchargeing 30U and ilkane of
30W, and all vferis our Offieiaris, Jugis, minifleris of our Lawis, liegis, and fubjectis quhatfumeuir
prefent and to cum off all fummunding, chargeing, atteitfcheing, arreiftyng, calling, following, poinding, dillrenzeing, vnlawing, trubling, or intrometting with ]<e faidis Inhabitantis, or ony of Jiaira, fair
landis or guidis, in all tyme cuming; difchargeing ^ou and ilkane of 30W vjierwyis Jiarof, andof ^our
office in ]iat parte, be Jiir oure Letteris. Gevin vndir our Signet, and fubfcriuit be our derrelt
moder, Marie Quene-Drowriar and Regent of our realme, At Edinbur' J)e nynt day of Junij, the 5eir
of God I™ V^'. l\j 5eiri8, and of our regne fe xiiij 3eiri8. MARIE R. Gilbertus The'.'

Ci)c Haifti o( (BvaHanc atjmittetr to jTvct TOartr, ^r.

Ane Copy of ane Lettik concernyng pe Lard of Gradane.

Regina,
We vnderftanding jiat Andre Ker of Gradane, now being in Ward within our burgh of Edinbur', in ))e quhilk he enterit himfelf, at our command, for keping of gude rewll ; and feing his
obedience, and gude mynd he heris to continew Jiairin, and willing to do ws feruice as he falbe requirit :
THAinFOiR, and vjieris cauffis and motiounis moving ws. We will, grant, and confentis, be fir prefentis,
fat his Ward be tranfportit furth of our faid bur' to fe Abbay of Newbottill, or ony vfer parte four
niyill about our burgh of Edinbur', and fair to lemane at he Ward, ficlyik as he is oblifl to do within
Edinbur^ : And will and grantis fat he nor his fouerteis found be him for his remanying within our faid
bur' of Edinbur' fail not be fiimmond, callit, nor accufit for his departing furth of fe famyn, or
breking of his Ward fairthrow, notwithflanding ony Actis or Itatutis of ouris maid in fe contrair,
anent fe quhilkis we difpens be fir prefentis ; provyding alwayis, fat his fouerties fund of befoir for
keping of his ward within our faid bur' of Edinbur', remane bund fat he fall not efchew nor departe
furth of f e faid Abbay of Newbottill, or boundis above expremit, vnder f e panis fpecifeit in f e former
Actis and bandis f airupoune. Subscriuit with our hand, and under our Signet, At Lynlythqw, f e
xxvj day of Januar, and of our regne fe xx jeir. Marie R.

Crtasonablc <#lautjl)tn* anK iHurtirr — ^oisoniitfl, $rc.

[In Infula vocat. Halie-beude Iill, {AiJIey loco pretorii de Ed^ coram
Archibuldo Neper de 3IercJi'mJione, Jiijiiciario dejmtatoJ]
Mar 16. — Mr Adame Colquhoune, Convicted of art and part of the
treafonable Slaughter and Murder of umq'^ Robert Rankin, houfehold fervant to
Patrick Hamiltoun in Bogfyid, by Poifon and Intoxication ' thereof : And alfo,
of the treafonable Intoxication of the faid Patrick, his ftep-father, and Jonet,
alias Jeane Boyde, his mother, endeavouring and intending to flay them by that
fecret method of Poifon or Intoxication, adminiftered by him to them in their

' GWhevt, fourth Earl of Cassillis, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, - The Court continued

to sit in the Kirk of St Giles for a considerable period, probably until the building of the new
Tolbooth was finished. ■* Intoxicationera ejusdem. The same remarkable phraseology was used

in the Case of Lady Glammis and others of tliis and the preceding reigns.

420 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1562.

dwelling-place of Bogfyid, in the month of January laft Sentence. To be

taken to the Gallows at the Caftle-hill of Edinburgh, and Hanged thereon
until he be dead ; and immediately thereafter his body to be Burnt to alhes :
And all his goods, moveable and immoveable, lands, heritages, annualrents,
tacks, office, places, bonds and poffeflions whatfoever, pertaining or which
might pertain to him, to be Efcheated to the Queen.

Prelocutouris for fe pannale, Alane Cathcarte; The Larde of Caprintone, 30unger.

Assise.
Robert Boyd of Portincorfe, Jlione Crawfurd of Crawfurdland, Hew Wallace of Maryfurd,

William Cunyaghame of Cunyng- James Hammiltone of Wodfyid, Hew Montgomery of Heflilheid,

hameheid, James Affinlofs of ])at Ilk, Jhone Fairlye of fat Ilk,

Jhone More of Rowallane, Robert Cunynghame of Auchin- Patrik Montgomerye of Giffine,

Steviu Trane, bm-ges of Irwin, harvy, William Cunynghame of Hackett.'

33aptisiitj|: nnti JHarrgina:, fit ' tl)t fasl)ioii ot ti)t ^^apistrj)/

Mar. 17. — Sir James Arthure came ' in Will, for arte and parte of
J)e breking of pe Quenis grace Act and ordinance, made in hir laft Parliament,
eftir hir grace arryving within l^is hir grace realme, be pe awyife of pe Lordis of
hir hienes Counfall : And for BaptifRng of pe faffion of pe Papiftry Jhone Milleris
barne, in Baquhatftane, callit Andi'o Miller ; witneffis to pe faid barne wer
Andro Ruflale in Falkirk parochine, Alexander Arthure in Slamanane parochine, and Mege Arthure, in Sanct Ninianis parochine, in pe moneth of November laft : And for Baptiffing of ane barne, callit William Lichbody, fone to
Dauid L. in the fame maner ; witnefles, 'Willeam Salmond in Baquhatftane,
Robert Ker in Glentoir, and Jonet Weddell, in the fame moneth : And for baptiffing ane barne, callit William Boid, fone to Robert Boid in Weftir Blairlin ;
witneffis, Willeam Boid in pe Monkland parochine, Jhone Ker {)air, Alefone
Ker Jjair, in pe moneth of Februar laftbypaft. Item, in ^Vill for pe Baptiffing
of other thre barnes quhais names, faderis, nor witneffis he remembers nocht.
Item, in Will for pe Marling of Jhone Thomefone in pe Monkland parochine,
in pe aide and abhominabill Pajjift maner, with Margaret Quhitlaw, in pe parochine of pe Schottis, the faid Jhone hyvand maid ane band and promifs to ane
vjjer woman, and pe faid Margaret had maid ane promife to ane vjjer man, and
bayth the faidis perfones levand Jtair awin parochines for pe caufis foii-faid, and
mariit be pe faid Sir James, in maner foirfaid, jjai not beand proclamit thryife
in pe Kirk, as aucht and fould haue bene done, in pe moneth of November
laftbypaft.^

' By markings on the margin it appears that the whole of the Assise, with the exception of the two
last, ' fylit' the pannel, who must have been a person of considerable rank, in Ayrshire. ^ The

following notice is inserted on the margin : — ' Extract and send to ]>e Regent, in May, 1569.'

21 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 421

Apr. 20, 1562.' — Willeajie Kincaid, Jlione alias Gijrie Kincaid,
Jhone Stewart of Ci'agyliall, Gelis Seitoim Lady Cragyhall, his fpoufe, James
Kincaid at Jie Weft Port/ Andro Mowbray, and Jonet Lyntoune, his fpous, and
Jhone Inglis, taverner. — The Provest of Edinburgh comperit, and producit
J»e Letteris, and defyrit \>e fouirt^ to be relevit ; and als proteftit, })at juftice
mycht be done vpone Willearae Kincaid and his complices for })e allegit Revifing
of Jonet Aldioye ; in refpect, gyfF ony fie Reviffing wes maid, it wes done to })e
fkayth and fldander of J>e Toune ; and refufit alwayis^ to be perfewar.

Comperit Jonet Aldioij, and Mr Alexander Mauchane, for him lelfF, and in
Jje name and behalf of ]?e remanent of })e kinne and freindis, and declarit, forfamekle as our fouerane ladeis Letteris wes refit at the inftance of })e Aduocat,
for certane allegit crymes of Deforcing (and) of Revecing of Jonet Aldioye,
declarit, )jat ))air wes na cryme committit be William Kincaid and his complices,
hot ])at fcho paft furth of J)is burghe of hir awin fre will, to contract mariage
with Jje faid Willeam ; quhilk is ellis " contractit and compleitit, conforme to hir
promeife maid lang of befoir : And pairfoir, wald not perfew \q faidis Letteris
in ony maner of way. The Advocattis oft tymes callit, and not compeirand,
the Juftice-Deputtis take inftrumentis ]?at J)air comperit na manne to perfew.

This Case was nevertheless continued to tlie next Aire of Edinburgh, the sureties being, My Lord
Sempill, Thomas Levingstoun of Hanyng, the Laird of Towche, George Home in Restoune, John
Leringstoune of Prestoune, and the Laird of Innerleyth.

J^tirtintr a preflttant OTomait — cpU--iiCuvDer«

Apr. 23. — Helene Bruce, and John Wilfoun, her Ion, found caution
to underly the law at the next Aire of Edinburgh, for the ' crewell Hurting of
Jonet M'^Nech, and dinging of her be J)e hair, and pofling of hir with their feitt ;
quhairthrow fcho pairtit with barne.'

^fiiUins: from i\yt 2^aii)( tA %z^\^\xx^t,

Apr. 30. — Thojias Patersone of Caverhill, indicted to ' vnderly
J)e law for ])e remanyng and byding of J)e faid Thomas contempnandlie^ fra our
fouerane ladeis Hoift and Raid, ordanit to meit hir derreft coufing and brother,
James Lord Stewarte," Jje xiij day of November laft bypaft, and fra thine '
to pas fordward with him to the burghe of Jedburghe, jjair to remane be J)e
fpace of xx'^ dayis, and to refave fie directioune as falbe gevin to him, for quietnes

* Continued from Apr. 15. * Thomas Kincaid was proven to have been furth of the realm at

the time of executing the Letters, viz. March 2 L ' Nevertheless; at all events. * Already.

* Contemptuously. '^ Afterwards Earl of Munay and Regent. ' Thence.

2

422 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1562.

of ])e cuntre ', incontrar pe tennoiir of Jje proclamatiouu maid ))airupoune. Compeirit James Paterfone, 5ounger of Cauerhill,' and producit ane writting in
fox'me of Teftimoniale, quhilk he allegit to be written and fubfcriuit be Jhone
Allane, allegit Curat ^ and Minifter of Jje parochine of Mennei", for ))e tyme ;
notefeand, ]^at pe faid Thomas Paterfone of Cauerhill labouris in ane hevy and
continewell ficknes, inftantlie, lyik as he has done fen pe moneth of December
laftbypait, fwa ])at he may not ryife furth of his bed without ane flaff and help
of his feriiandis, &c. — Denounced rebel, and his fon amerciated 1001. for his
non-appearance.

SlGitiinji: from tljt 3U*iiti of StUBursl^e.

Apr. 30. — WiLLiAME BuRNiiT OF Barnis denounced rebel for the fame
offence, and AVilliam Portwife of Halkfchaw, his cautioner, amerciated in 100 ].
for his non-appearance. A Teftimonial from the fame ' alegit Curat and Minifter,' as in the preceding cafe, was difregarded, though prefented by William B.,
younger of Barnis, his fon. Hating his father to have been ' of pe aige of thre
fcoir ane ^eiris, labouris in any hevy and continewall feiknes of pe poplicie,' lyik
as lies done be pe fpace of four 3eiris lallbypaft ; quhairthrow he is not abill to
travell to his parroche Kirk to heir pe Devyue feruice.'

SlliitJing fvom tljr lUiti of Srtl)ui'5i)e.

George Ramesay of Daliioussv being callit for pe faid cryme, gaif
in })is allegeance following : pat at pe tyme of pe Conventioun and Raid appointed to be at Jedburghe, tyme libellit, and haill fpace ))airof, pe faid George
wes vnabill, vexit with fie dilli'effis in his perfone, ))at he mycht nocht onnawyis
travell, nojjer on horfe nor fute to na fpace ; be refone his haill left fyid wes
fua occupiit and trublit with evill and maling'' humouris, fie as he canne nocht
declair nor fpecify, ))at his haill arme, fingeris, and leg, on })at fyid, wer impotent, quhairthrocht J)at he mycht not move pe fame ; and fpeciallie, pe faid arme
wes fa doloi'us one to him, ]jat he mycht gett na reft ])airof be nycht nor be day ;
and jjairthrow and be vexatioun Jjairof wes drevin in ane fevir, and become
verray feik, and mair vnabill in his perfone, and Jjairfoir wes not aftrickit,"
being impotent, as faid is, to cum to pe faid Raid, or biddin ])airat, fen na man
is bund to impoffibilitie. And tuiching J)E QuENis grace chargis, he, willing"
to obey pe famyn at }ie vttermoift of his power, fend his feruandis and houlfald, fic as wald and fuld haue gane with him, gyff he had paft ])air perfonalie,

' CautioiiPr for liis entry. - Perliaps a Papift, or one not recognised by the Ordinary ; or

the Testimonial may have been informal, not regularly witnessed, &c. ^ It does not seem very

clear whether pahi/ or sciatica is here meant to be indicated. * Malign. ^ Astricted, bound.

21 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 423

Weill provydit and furneift, as apei-tenit to pe cans, in cumpanye with William
Ramefay of Pelting, his confing, to avait vpon my lord James, now Erle
OP Mar, Lientennent for ])e time of ])e Proclamatioun libellit,' &c. The
Justice has continewit j^e geving of the Interlocutoiir vnto pe xij day of May
nixt to cum. — Sureties for his entry, William Ramfay of Poltoune, and Cuthbert R., burgefs of Edinburgh.

(May 12.) — George Ramefay of Dalhoufly dilTafentit to])e continavatioun,
and offerit him ready to vnderly |)e law, inftantlie ; and nochtwithftanding, at
pe command of THE Quenis grace and pe faid Juftice Depute, fand fouirte (to
enter again on May 14.)'

The following document is recorded at the end of a subsequent volume of the
Record ; and from the Cafe being afterwards referred to as a precedent, it would
appear that the Licence had then been fully admitted. It has been thought of
sufficient importance to be printed, to show the reader the form of such writs.

Licence to the Laird of DalhotiJJye to abide from Raids, &,€.
Regina,
We, vnderftanding ))at our weilbelouit feruitour George Ramsay of Dalhoussye is corpolent,
fubiect to feiknes and infirmitie, and may nocht weill indure trawell without danger of his lyfe ; thairfor, and for diuerfe vfer reafounabili cauffis and confiderationis moving ws, be ]ie tennour hereof grantis
and gevis Licence to fe faid George to remane and byde at hame fra all and findry our Hoftia,
Raidis, Weiris, and Affembleis quhatfumeuer, diuifit or to be diuilit within our realme, or outwith the
famyn. And als, hes Exerait, and be ]nr our Letteris Exemis him fra all comperance and paffing
vpoune AflyifTis, Inqueiflis, or bering of Witnefiing, in all actionis criminall, befoir quhatfumeuir Juge
or Jugeis within our realme, for all fe dayis of pe laid Georgis lyftyrae ; and will and grantis ])at the
faid George ])airfor fall incur na danger nor ftaith in his perfoune, laudis, nor gudis, nor lalbe callit
forjie famyn, criminalienor ciuilie, nochtwithftanding quhatfumeuir actis, (tatutis, lawis, proclamationis,
or chargeis quhatfumeuir, in generall or in fpeciale, maid or to be maid in )ie contrair heirof, or ony
panis contenit thairintill; anent the quhilkis We difpenfe be fir prefentis. Difchargeing heirfor all
and findry our Juflice, Juftice-Clerk, Wardanis, Lieutennentis, Scheriffis, Stewartis, Bailiies, Crownaris, Proueftis, Bailleis and Eldermenne of Burrowis, and all vtheris Jugeis and minifteris of our lawis,
prefent and to cum, thair deputtis, off all atteicheing, arreifting, fummondinj;, calling, following,
vnlawing, or proceding aganis Jie faid George Ramfay, his perfoune, landis, or gudis, in ony wayis for
])e preraiffis, and of fair offices on fat pairte for euir, be fir prefentis. Prowyding alwyife, that the
faid George Ramfay of Dalhouffye furneife and fend his honorabill houiliald, with ane of his fpeciale
freindis, weill fourneift, conforme to fe Proclamationis to be maid Jiairupoune. Subscriuit with our
hand, and vnder ourSignet, At Ed", fe xiiij day of Januar, the 5eir of God r".V'.lxiij ^eiris.

(MARIE, R.)

96iti(ns from Xi)t laaiti of ^etJfiuitilje,

William Cunynghame of Cunynghamheid charged for the fame
crime, and his fon, ' the 3oung Lard,' amerciated for his non-entry to underly
the law.

' Owing to the imperfection of the scroll-book, it does not appear what sentence followed ; but
from the following Licence being recorded, &c. it is probable that he was fully acquitted.

424* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1562.

9[i)itrni0 h'om Hjt Uaiti of Slf^fiwtfl]^^

Robert Hunter of Poemude, Leonard Dowglas of Harwod, John
Douglas (ill Baddis) his fon, John Gudelaitt of Strabrok, William Portwife of
Halkfchaw, and fix others, acquitted by an Affife for the faid crime.

ASSISA.

Alexander Horfljuighe of Jiat Ilk, William Murray of Rotnannos, Jhone Pennycuke of Jiat Ilk,
Jhone Cokburne of ]ie Glenne, George Tail of Pyrne, Jhone Houlloune in Lany,

Mr Robert Wynrame in Gogar, Ja. Wynrame in Gogar-milne, William Vaiche of Kingfyid,
Jhone Stewart in Cragyhall, Dionefe Elphinfton of Henderftone, James Feddes in Preillisfeild,

George Dundas of Jiat Ilk, Alex. Woidlaw' of Kilbabertone, Robert Scott, burges of Peblis.

Alexander Creichtone of Newhall, Robert Fairlie of Braid,

Thomas Hammiltoune of the Grange, befide Levingftoun, Thomas Sandelandis in Murehoufdykis, and five others, found the Laird of Calder furety for
their entry on May 12, ' to vnderly deliuerance of ])e faid Affyife. Item, pe
anfueris of J)e parteis \>at cum in Will, and v})eris of pe faid pannell, written in
ane throuch,^ in paper. — (May 12.) — James Stevinlloun of Hirdmanfcheillis
became furety for their entry on Jun. 15 next."*

(ironbofation — #tuti uoitl) ii^t EairU of ISaltijagofe,

May 2. — John Charteris of Kinfawnis, David his brother, and
thirty-nine others, found furety to uiiderly the law, on May 15, ' for arte and
parte of Jje Convocatioun of our fouerane ladeis legis, to pe nowmer of xxiiij
perfonis, and cuming vipon pe Lard of Batheok (Thomas Blair) and his complices, and geving of ])ame iniurius wordis ; and diuerfe vjjeris crymes fpecifeit
in pe Letteris.' He protefl;ed, ' })at pe finding of pe fouerte to pe day foirfaid be
na preiudice to him, becaus he is ane Parroche-Clerk ;* and ficlyik proteftit, J)at
pe finding of pe fouertie for pe faidis perfones preiuge not pe privilege of pe
Regalitie of Scone, within pe quhilk pai dwell ; bot fiat }jai may be replegit pe
day foirfaid as pis day.'

fftuti ixiiti) t\)t ilaiitr of iXinfaiDiiis — ^laugl^ter.

Thobias Blair of Batheok ; Alexander Blair, appei-and of that Ilk;

William, Patrick, and John B., fons to the faid Thomas ; Alexander Blair,

Tutour of Balmyill ; Thomas, fon to Alexander Blair, younger of Batheok ;

■William Kymmond of Hill, Thomas Frifell of Kynnell, Williame Haldene of

Kelour, John Moncur of Chapeltoun, James Monorgane, apperaud of that Ilk,

and forty-one others, found Gilbert IMonorgan of that Ilk, and John Kynnard of

Incheilure, fureties for thair entry on May 15, ' to vnderly Jjc law for pe crewell

' Wardlaw ? ° A leaf or broadside of half a sheet. ^ No farther traces of this and the

following Cases occur, owing to the loss of an intervening scroll-book. * And therefore, as a

Churchman, was alone liable to the jurisdiction of the Church Courts.

21 Mak. criminal trials. • 425

Slauchter of vmq'* Alexander Raa, burges of Perthe, and diuerfe v])eris crymes
contenit in Ipe Letteris.'

?^amt^urfecii — * biimercnfuir <^laiisl)tei\

May 6. — William Fergusone and William Wrycht, both in Reftalrig, were convicted by an Aflife ' of arte and parte of pe crewell and vnmercyfull Slauchter of vinq"' Jhone Borthwik in Reftalrig, at pe bak of his awin 5ard
])air, be way of Hamefucken, vpone aid ffeid, fett purpois, provifione, and foirthoicht fellonye, vpone pe xx day of Apryill laftbypaft.'

Prelocutouris for }ie pannall, The Larde of Largo, elder; Mr Alex. Syme.
Persewaris, My Lord Borthwick, Tlie Lard of Trabrone, Mr Dauid Borthuik of Adeftoune,

The Lard of Hirdmeftone, George Newtone.
Sentence. That thay ' falbe had to pe Caftell-hill of Ed^ and ])air Jjair
HElDis ftrikine fra J)air bodeis with aNE swoed :' And ]3at all ])air gudis
movable fall pertene and be inbrocht to our fouerane lady, as hir efcheatt.

^latisf)ter»

May 9. —John Sibbett (Sibbald)- delaited for art and part of the
cruel Slauchter of Archibald Ballingall in Bun3eoune, in September 1560,
between Balquhard and Bun5eoune, in the fliire of Fife, befetting his way;
committed on forethought felony.

Persewaris, William Ballingall of that Ilk and David, brothers of vmq''^ Archibald.
Prelocutouris for ]>e perfewaris, Prelocutouris for fe pannale,

Mr William Scott, Mr Jhone Pitcarne, The Lard of Balgony, The Lard of Lundy, y,

Walter Heriot of Ramornye. Mr Dauid M^gill, Mr Alex. Mauchane.

The quhilk day bayth pe faidis parteis defyrit our fouerane ladeis ^Vritting
to be infert in pe Bukis of Adiornall, and defyret pe autentik copy Jjairof.
Regina,

Justice Clerk and 50ur deputtis. We greitt 30U weill. Forfamekill as fe nynt day of Maiinixt
to cum is aflignit to our louitt Jhone Sibbett, to vndirly our lawis in ]>e Tolbuyth of our burgh of Ed'',
for arte and parte of )ie Slauchter of vmq'* Archibald Ballingall, brujier germane to Williame Ballingall
of pat Ilk ; and for fummunding of ane Affyife agane ])e faid day, our vferis Letteris ar direct to fat
effect. And feing Jie faid Jhone penitent, of will and mynd to mak fatisfactioune to Jie kin and freindis
of)>e faid vmq''^ Archibald, according to his puffance and habilitie. Thairfoir it is our will, and We
defire 50W to refaue ]>e faid Jhone in will at fe faid day, and to latt him to libertie and fredome, as our
free liege man, to fe effect pat he may labour for him felff, and aggi'e with his partye.^ And fail5e not
heirin, as ^e will anfuer to ws Jiairupone ; kepand fir prefentis for 30ur Warrand. Subscriuit with
our hand. At Sanctandrois, ])e xiij day of Apryill, 1562. [MARIE R.]

Mr William Scott of Balwery ' exponit, in name and behalff of pe faidis

' This is the first instance where the Editor has, in the earlier Records of this Court, met with
the mention of a sword having been employed by the public executioner, by order of the Justiciar, for
decapitation. It is by no means improbable that death had been inflicted on the murdered man by
that instrument, and that the Judge, to make the punishment still more striking, had judicially ordered
the self-same weapon to be used for their decapitation. ^ The name was at this period indiscriminately spelt Sibbett and Sibbald. ' This case savours strongly of bribery of the Crown Officers.

VOL. L f 3 H

426 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563.

perfewaris, ]?at William Ballingall of Jiat Ilk, Alefone Gowray, his rnoder,
Daiiid B., broujjer of vmq'" Archibald B., nerreft kin and freindis of ])e faid
vmq'* Archibald, wer infoi'mit J)at pe faid Jhone Sibbett had irapeti'at ane
writting of ))E Quenis grace, producit be him, ordaning ])e Juftice, Juftice Clerk,
and his deputis, to refave fie faid Jhone in hir grace will, vpone fmifter informatioim ; and that becaus, as he allegit, ]5e laid Jhone, be him felff, his kin and
freindis, had focht to haif fatisfeit ]>e pairtye for ])e faid llauchter, at ])e vttermoft of ])air power, and pa\ on nawyis will accept J)e famyn ; albeit ]>e faid William and freindis wes ay reddy, lyik as ]>ai ar 5it prowin prefentlie to haue haid
commonyng and acceptit gud wyis, at pe licht of freindis, for Tpe faid Slauchter ;
thairfoir proteftis for remeid of law aganis J)e faid Writting, as impetrat vpone
fals narratioun. — To pe quhilk anfuerit Mr Dauid M^gill, as prelociitour for fie
faid Jhone Sibbett, fiat nochtwithftanding ony Writting fiat he had impetrat be
our fouei'ane (lady), he acceptis fie offir of fie partye, and is content at fie fycht
of freindis, to do fie vtternioift of his jiower for Alfythment' of pairtye. — Allegis
Jhone Sibbett, fiat nochtwithftanding his innocence of fie aid ffeid^ contenit in his
accufatioun, hoipand furelie fiE Quenis grace to try his innocence fiairof, he
fimpliciter cumis in will for fie Slauchter committit vpone aid ffeid and foirthocht
felony ; and vnder proteftation for ciuile defenffis aganis fie pairtye.'

He was accordingly received in ^Vill, and found Robert Lundy of Balgony,
Mr William Lundy, fiar of that Ilk, and Dauid Sibbett of Lethome, to fatisfy
the parties.

iHurUcf of Xi)t SLaiitJ of jTrtiUt.

May 11 Patrik Hunter, John Hunter, Burgefs of Edinburgh, John

Burn, in Over Poffo, George Paterfone, in Hairftane, and William Glen, fervant
to the Laird (of Furde), were Acquitted of art and part of the cruel ' Murther
and Slauchter of vmq''' James Twedy of Frude, in fie houfe of William Tuedy,
burgefs of Edinburghe, in J)e moneth of December laft by paft ; committit vpoune

aid ffeid,' &c.

Prelocutouris for ]ie pannale, Mr Jlione Mofcrop, The Lard of Carniichaell, The Lard
of Culternianis, My Lord Secnpill, Jhone Haye.
Persewaris, James Twedy of Frude, W" Twedy, The Laird of Tracquhair, The Lard of Coilftoune.
Mr Charles Geddese, Robert Fockhert, and William Blaklaw, were
denounced rebels and put to the home, and Sir John Maxwell of Terriglis, ku',
their furety, was amerciated for their non-appearance to imderly the law for the
fame crime, which is ftated to have been committed within James Twedy's
chamber or hall, within the burgh of Edinburgh, the Laird being feated at the
time in a chair before the fire, fleeping ; and that his Murderers attacked him

' A composition made with the kin of a slaughtered person as a solatium for the loss of the life of
their deceased relation. ' Old feud.

21 Mar.

CRIMINAL TRIALS.

* 427

in that defencelefs ftate, and mortally wounded him before he could raife liimfelf up, or parry their blows.

Caluncj; C|)eft-6oot — gflloiMins a CTjief to tscapr ,

May 13. — Alexander Maxwell of Teling found Sir William
Bruce of Erlifliall, kn', furety for his entry on Jun. 28, to underly the law ' for
taking of Thift-bute and Compofitioune fra Andro Cufiiye, ane Theif ; and
latting of him to libertie.'

[The Scroll Court-book, from May 13, 1562, to May 17, 1563, has been lost.
The succeeding Volume, which is a small quarto, is marked ' Aucht Buik,' and
extends from May 17, 1563, to May 17, 1564.]

CeUfiratintr t\)t iHass— attempting to restore i^operi? at Sirft-
^siualU, ittai)faole, ^aislen, ^c. — Conboration, Set.

May 19, 1563. — John Archiebischop of Sanctandrois,' and fortyfeven others, charged for the crimes after fpecified, viz. —

Roll or List of the rest of the jiersons on pannel.
Maifter Jhone M^quhyne, elder, Schir Jhone Coluile, Vicar of Jhone Gordone of Barfteocht,

Cathcart, Schir Thomas Montgomery,

Maifter Mathow Flemyng, Schir William Tail5efeir,

Schir Dauid Fergufone, Curat of Schir James Carfane,

Neilftone, Dauid Kennedy, bru])er to William

Maifter Jhone M''quhene,30unger, Robert Galbrayth of Garfcaddene, Kennedy of Brunftone,

Maifter Andro Dauidfone,
Dene Willeam Lepar,
Freir James Jhoneftone:
Alexander Somervell,

Schir Jhone Hammiltone, Vicar Henry Houftone,

of Paflay,
Schir Jhone Craig,
Schir Jhone Home,
Schir Jhone Elder,
Schir Jhone Vere,
Schir Jhone Broune,
Schir Jhone Dunlop,
Dene Dauid Brenche,^
Schir Thomas Robefone,
Schir Jhone Lytil,
Schir William Harbertfone,
Schir Robert Hill,

Sir Andro Burell,

Archibald Mure,

Maifter Jhone Hammiltone, Subchantour of Glafgow,
Patrik Jakfoun, in Renfrew,
Schir William Win3ett,
Gabriell Maxvell of Staulie,
Malcum, Prior of Quhithome,
' Hew Kennedy of BlairquhynGeo. Kennedy of Barclannochane,
Willeam Hammiltone, Tutour of

Cammifkeyth,
Dauid Boyd,
Jhone Lymbumer,
Alexander Wodburne,
Maifter Alexander Luramifdane,
Dene Gilbert Kennedy,
Dene Michaell Dewer,
Schir Williame Allefone,
Schir James Kennedy,

nequhy,

Maifter Robert Crychtone, Par- Schir Thomas Mure,
fone of Sanchar,

' The Assyise Fylis and conuictis the faidis Hew Kennedy of Blair-

' John Hamilton, natural son of James,^M< Earl of Arran, well known as the author of a Catechism
printed at Saint Andrews, 1552. After the battle of Langside, from which he vainly attempted to
dissuade the Queen, he fled to Dumbarton Castle. He afterwards fell into the Regent Moray's hands,
on the Castle being surprised and taken, and was hanged, at Stirling, Apr. 1, 1570. ^ He is

afterwards called Brance.

428 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563.

quhynnye, Malcum, Commendater of Quhithorne, Dauid Kennedy, S"^ Thomas
Montgomery, and S' William Tail3efeir, off pe controuentioune of our fouerane
ladeis Act and Proclaniationne, chargeing all hir leigis, J)at euery ane of ])aira
fuld contene ])aim felffis in quietnes, keip peax and ciuile focietie amangis J)anie
felffis, and }iat nane of J)ame tak vpone hand, priuatlie nor opinlie, to mak ony
alteratioun or innouation of JiE Stait or Religione,' or attempt ony thing
aganis pe forme quhilk hir grace fand publictlie and vniuerfallie Handing at hir
arrywell within ]iis i-ealme : That is to say, pe laid Hew Kemiedij and
Daukl Kennedy, be making of Conuocatioun of our fouerane ladeis liegis, to Jje
nowmer of twa hundreth perfonis, bodin in feir of weir, with jakkis, fperis,
gunnis, and vjjeris wapnis inuafiue, of paiv caufing, command, fortefeing, and
ratihabitioun, vpone pe audit, tent, and ellevint dayis of Apryill laftbypaft,
cumand to pe I'AiiROCHE KiiiK OF Kirkosuell and College of Mayboill,
refpevtiiie, and Jjair opinlie maid Alteratioun and Innouatioun of ))e faid Stait of
Religione quhilk our fouerane lady fand proclamit, and uniueriallie flanding
and profeffit at hir arryvel within |jis realme, minillrand and abufand on J)air
pretendit maner, irreverentlie and indecentlie, J^ii Sacramentis OF Haly
Kn!K, namelie, pe Sacramentis of |)e Body and blood of our Loi"d Jefus Chrift,
vj)er wyis and eftir ane vpev maner, nor pe publict and generall ordour of J)is
realme : And pe faid Malcum Commendatour of QuhitJio?'ne, Schir T/iotnas
Montgomery, and Schlr WiUiam TaUyfe'ir, miniftrand and abufand, on ])air
pretendit maner, irreuei-entlie and indecentlie, in pe moneth of Apryill foirfaid,
in }je Place of Coxgiltoun, the Sacramentis of Haly Kirk of pe Body and
blood of our Lord Jefus, vj)erwyis and in ane vjjer maner nor pe publict and
generall ordour of p\?> realme, refafit and profeffit at our fouerane ladeis arryvell,
contenit in pe faid Proclamatioune : And pdX in refpect of Jjair Confeffioun of pe
famyn in jugement.

Sentence. — Thairfoir pe faidis Malcum Priour of Quhithorne, S' Thomas
Montgomery, and S' William Tail5efeir, were adiugit to be put in Ward within
pe Castell of DuJiBARTANE.^ And pe faidis Hew Kennedy and Dauid Kennedy to be put in Ward within pe Castell of Edinburgh, thair to remain
during pe will and plefour of our fouerane lady.

ASSISA.

Jhone Maxwell of Teriiglis, kii'. The ScherifF of Air, The Lard of Rowallane,

Andro Lord Stewarte of Vchiltiy, The Laid of Cunynghanieheid, Hew Cunynghame of Watterfloun,

The Lard of Lochinvar, Hew Wallace of Carnell, James Chalmer of Gaitgirth,

The Lard of Glengarnok, Tlie Lard of Crawfurdland, Jhone Dumbar of Miclirvine, '

The Lard of Caprintouii, jouiiger, MrJo.FullertoneofDreghorne, Gawane Dumbar of Baldtone.

' See Oct. ), 1563, &c. ' ' My Lord Flemyng graiitis the resset of the Priour,' &c., ' to be enterit in Ward

withiu the Castell of Dumbertane,' ' It is believed this was the Laird of Mochrum.

21 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 429

The fame day, Jhone Akchiebischop of Sanctandrois/ Maifter Jhone
M^quliyne, elder, Maifter Andro Dauidlbne, Dene Willeam Lepar, Frier James
Jhoneftoun, Alexander Somervell, Mr Jhone M^quhyne, 5ounger, Schir Jhone
Hammiltone, Curat of Paflay, Schir Jhone Craig, Schir Jhone Elder, Schir Jhone
Vry, Schir Jhone Broune, Schir Jhone Dunlop, Dene Dauid Brance, become in
Will to om- fouerane lady, for Conuocation of hir hienis liegis in pe moneth of
Apryill laftbypaft, in ])E TOUNE of Paslay, Kirk, Kirk-3ard, and Abbay Place
J)airof, openlie, publiclie, and plainlie tuke auricular Confeffioun of pe faidis perfonis in pe faidis Kirk, Toune, Kirk-5aird, Chalmeris, barnis, middingis, and
killogeis^ })airof; and Jjairthrow makand Alteratioiin and Innouatioun in J)E
stait of Religion, quhilk our fouerane lady faud publictlie ftanding and
profeffit at hir Maiefties arryvell within ])is realme foirfaid, miniftrand and
abufand, irreverentlie and indecentlie, pe Saci'amentis of Haly Kirk, namlie, pe
Sacramentis of pe Body and blood of our Lord Jefus, vjjerwyis and efter ane
vpev ordour nor pe publict and genei'all ordour of })is realme wes pe tyme of pE
QUENis Maiefteis ai'ryvel foirfaid.

Interlocutor. And fairfoir, Jie faidis perfonis fand fouirtie fat )>ai fuld entir in ])e Wardis
efter fpecifiit, ]iair to remans during our fouerane ladeis plefour : That is to fay, jie faid Archiebijbhop
of Sanctandrois, witliin fE Castell of Edinburghe ; the faid Alexander Sotnervell, within fE
Toune of Perthe ; fe laid 3Ir Jhone M'quhyne, elder, within |ie Toune of Sanctandrois ; the
taid Freir James J7ione/lou7i and Mr Andro Daiiidjbun, within ])E Toune of Edinburghe; ]ie faid
Curat of Pajlay, within ]ie Toune of Sanctandrois : And Jie remanent perfones foirfaidia, disCHARGIT of our fouerane ladeis grace, in refpect fai fand fouirtie J)ai fuld not in ony tyme cuming
controuene )>e faid Act,

The faid 3Ir Jhone 31'^qiiheue, '^ouuger, become in our fouerane ladeis Will,
for controuenyng of pe laid Act and Proclamatioun, in miniftring of pe Sacrament of pe Lordis fupper in pe Place and parochin of Rosdew, in ])E Place
OF Paslay, pe tymes foirfaidis refpectiue, efter our foueranis arryvell foirfaid.— The faid Thomas alias Schir Thomas Rohefone in Will to our fouerane lady, for controvenyng of pe act and Proclamatioune in Patrick Jackfonis
houfe, in Reinfreav, and in pe Place of Garscaduaxe, in pe Levenax, pe

' In a Caution book, which fortunately has been preserved, the following entry is recorded :
' Apud Edinhurcjh, xxvf Jidij, anno, S)-c. Ixiij". The quhilk day, IVilUame Simpill of Thridparte,
and Michaell Nafmi/th of Poffb, became plegis and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, for ane maifl
reuerend fader in God, Jhone Archiebischop of Sanct Androis, now being in our fouerane
ladeis Ward within the Castell of Ed", for his becumin in hir Will to hir Juilice, for his controuenyng of hir Adiornale and Proclamation vnder writtin, as at niair lenth is contenit in ))e Actes of
Adiornale maid ]iairupone, Tiiat he fall nocht controuene the Ordinance and Proclamatione maid be
hir grace anent ]ie Ueligione quhilk hir Maieftie fand publiclie and vniuerfalie ftanding at hir arryvall within pis realme furtli of Jie partis of France : And on na wyis publiclie nor privatlie mak innouatione or alteratione pairof, or attempt ony thing aganis |>e faniin, vnder fe pane of Thre Thowfand
pundis. (SicJiiJj/crihifm-) William Sympyll of Tlnidpart, Michaell Nasmyxh of Poflb,'

' Kilns for drying grain and raalt.

430 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563.

tyme foirfaid, in rniniftring of ])e faid Sacrament, &c. — The faid Schir Jhone
Lytill, in Will for ]>e cryme foirfaid, done be him ])e moneth aboue writtin,
in his awin chalmer, in ))E Place of Halket, and in Jje faid Patrik Jakfonis hous in Renfrew. — The faid ScJiir William Harhertfone, in Will for
})e cryme aboue writtin, committed be him J)e tynie foirfaid, in ])e houfe of
James Grahame in Glasgw. — The faid Mr Willeam Wyn-i^ett, in Will for ]>&
forfaid cryme, done be him in ]>e hous of Dauid Lyndfay in Glasgw, ]3e tyme
aboue writtin ; and Jjairfor in W^ard in Jje Toune of Sanctandrois. — The
faid Schir Robert Hill, in Will for ])e cryme foirfaid, done be him in Jse houfe
of Jhone M'knair in Provane, Jie tyme foii-faid. — The faid Schir Jhone Coluill, in Will for \>e cryme foirfaid, committed be him ]5e tj'me aboue writtin,
within \)e parroche Kirk of Cathcart. — The faid 3Ir 3Iatho Flemyng, in
Will for the famyn ciyme, committit be him ])e tyme and maner foirfaid, within
pe toune of Ruglene.' — The faid Schir Dauid Fergufoue, in Will for \)e
famyn cryme, committit be him within pe Parroche Kirk of Neilstone, Jje
foii-faid tyme. — The faidis Bobcrt Galhraijth of Garfcaddene, Henry Houftoiin Schir Andro Burrell, Archibald Mure, Mr Jhone Hammiltoune, Subchantour of Glafgw, Patrik Jacltjhun in Renfrew, Gahriell Maxwell of Stanelie,
in Will for J)e cryme foirfaid ; and Jjairfoir Jje faid Henry Houftoun wes put in
Ward in ])e toune of KiNGHORNE, ]>e faid Lard of Stanelie in J)e toune of CowPER, ])Q faid Subchantour in Sanctandrois, and all ^e i-emant remittit. —
The faid Mr Robert Crychtone, pai-foue of Sanchar, in Will for J)e cryme foirfaid, committit be him in ])e Parroche Kirk of Sanchar, ]je tyme foirfaid ; and

))airfoir in Ward in ]>& burghe of Perth The laidis Jhone Gordon of BarIkeocht, and Schir Jamea Ca?fine, in Will for ])e famyn cryme, committit Jje
tyme and maner foirfaid, in })E Place of Barskeocht ; and Jiairfoir ]>e faid
Jhone in Ward in Brechin. — The faid George Kennedy of Blarquhynnochy,
in Will for ])e foiriaid cryme, committit in his awin Place, be Dene Adame
Maxvell ; and remittit be our fouerane lady. — The faid Willeam Hammiltone. Tutor of Cammifkeyth, Ma'ijler Mathoiv Nefbit, Dauid Royd, Jhone
Lymburner, Alexander Wodburnc, in Will for })e famyn cryme, committit in
maner and tyme foirfaidis, in ]je Place of Cammiskeyth ; and pairfoir ]je faid
Willeam in Ward in Montroise. — The faid Schir Alexander Lumniifdail, in
Will for Jje famyn cryme, and reimittit — Dene Gilbert Kennedy, Dene
Micliell Dewer, Schir Willeam Allefone, Schir James Kennedy, Schir Thomas
Mure, remittit of J)e faidis crymes be our fouerane lady.

?l?urtin0 tijt ilaiiU of CTlosfftunir — ^lau0ljter.

May 19. — John Carrutheris of Hei,mondis (Holmaines), George

' Rutherglen.

21 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 431

and William his fons, Edward Irrewine of Bonfchaw, Dauid Irrewine of Robgill,' William Bell of Alby, Gavane Jhoneftoiie of Perifbehall, Symone his fon,
William Jhoneftone of Hayhills, and others, their accomplices, delaited of the
' Hurting of the Laird of Ciofeburne (Roger Kirkpatrick), and crewell Slauchter
of J)e remanent perfones foirfaidis,' viz. vmq'" John Kilpatrik in Rig, Edward
his bi'other, John K. in Schelgeir, Peter M'kene in Lynkelandis, John Roger in
Bartilmefland, Dauid Anderfon in CofTodole, and Andro M'knek in Clofburnetoune. — Sir James Hammiltone of Bairfurd, kn', amerciated for not ' againbringing' the Letters duly executed, &c.

May 23. — Patrick Robertsone of Dulcabane, ' delatit of pe
Slauchter of vmq'^ Alex' Reid, tuke him to his RemilRone, and fand James
Campbell of Ardkindlas, with him felff, fouerties, conjunctlie and feueralie, for
aflythment of jiartye, as law will.'

#j)})i*tssioit— CastiiTs Uotoit Igouses, $r(» — l^ousl^injj Cattit, &f.

Jun. 3. — Hary Hepburxe, and Eighty-feven others, ' cietineris of
Brechine,' found caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Forfai",
' for J)e allegit Conuocatioun of our fouerane ladeis liegis, to pe nomer of iij"^
perfonis, or Jjairby, bodin in feir of weir, vpone pe xvj day of Marche laft bypaft, command to pe dwelling houffis of Johne, Hew, and Alexander Downy,
tennentis and feruandes to Robert Cullefe of Bannamvne (Balnamoon), dwelland within Jje barony of J)e famyn, and ferchit and focht J)ame for pair Slauchteris,
and crewelly ftrak and dang ))ame, with rungis ^ and Stalffis, mony blaw ^ and
bloody flrekis ; and })aireftir keift ^ )?air houffis doune, cuttit and diftroyit Jjair
plewis ^ and harrowis, and fchamefullie hocht '' and flew ]jair gudis ' and fcheip,
to gret quantitie.

dTfutj l)ttb)eeit tl)t €itntns at maijin anlj tenants of JSalnamooit.

Robert Cullese of Balnamvne, John Smyth, and fixty-two others,

' tennentis and feruandis to pe faid Lard,' found John of Erfldne of Dvnne furety

for their entry at the next Aire of Forfar, to underly the law ' for pe Conuocatioune of our fouerane ladies liegis, to Jje noumer of ane hundreth perfones, or

Jjairby, bodin in feir of weir, vpone pe xvj day of March laft bypaft, vnder

fylence of nycht, cumand to pe Burrow-Rudis of j^e cietie of Brechine, and ferchit

' Celebrated of late years as the farm of the Poet Robert Sums. ^ Bludgeons, cudgells ; rung

generally denotes a huge shapeless stick, such as an undressed branch, &c. ' Blue, discoloured.

■* Cast. ^ Ploughs. '■ Houghed, hamstrung. " Live-stock ; cattle. This species

of vindictive malice was but too common in these times of lawless violence. Many similar instances
may be found in this Collection ; but, unfortunately, they are too numerous to need special reference
in this place. The retaliation will be seen in the next Case.

432 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563.

and focht certane Inliabitantis Jjairof for pair Slauchteris, and deftroyit pe turvis'
beand vpoun the faid Muir.'

jTorgn'i) ? — * dTalsins* an 3>nstrtnnnit ?

Jun. 26. — ' ScHiR CoNSTENE Miller (Notar publict ?) his right
HAND wes adiugit to be llrikine fra his body, at fie Mercate-croce of Edinburghe, vpone ane fcafTold, at ane ftowp :^ And he to be Banist Jjis realme
perpetualie ; and neuir to returne within Jje faniyn agane, vnder pe pane of deid.^

mitc])cvntt*

Agnes Mullikine, afias Bessie Boswell, in Dunfermeling, wes
Banist and exilit for Wichecraft.^

|gor0e--sttalin5 — <^uitj(n0 afnglis^ Cljicbrs, ^r.

Jun. 30. — Lyell Hall Convicted by an Affife ' off arte and parte of
]je thiftiious Steling and conceiling fra Alexander Loi'd Home, furth of his landis
of Gordoune, in pe nioneth of July, the 3eir of God I^V'lvij 5eris, of four horfis :
Item, of pe thiftuus Steling fra Thomas Cranftone, bruthir fone to pe Gudemanne of Thirflane-manis, in pe moneth of Auguft, pe ^e\r of God forfaid, of
ane gray horfe, price xl merkis : Iteini, of Commone Thift, commone Reffett of
Thift, outputting and inbringing betuix cuntre and cuntrt^ commone gyde to
Inglis Thevis.' — Sentence. To be ' Hangit on pe Borrow-muir of Edinburghe quhill he wer deid.'

ASSISA.

Jhone Home of Coldinknois, kn', Andro Ker of Fawdonfyid, Harrie Dauidfone of Camis,

Aiidro Home of Nynewellis, Jhone Hoppringill of Muirhoufe, Thomas Hunter of Halkburne,
Ralff Halyburtoun of Muirtoun, Jhone Home of CaiTslfyid, James Carnecorfe of Allanefchaw.^

* Samliescttiiirr tijt sattt* — ^tirtins mm miomxnins.

Jul. 6. — Patrick Eviot of Balhoussye, John Rois of Cragye,
James his brother, John Cargill, William Morelbne, and William Rofs, found
caution (' My Lord Ruthvene') to underly the law at the next Aire of Perth,
for ' arte and parte of pe Vmbeletting of pe gaitt to Andro Ramfay, burges of
Perthe, and Hurting and Wounding of him in diuerle partis of his body.'

* Bmlifsrtttiirr tfje ffaif in mi't% ^c.

Andro Ramesay, burgefs of Perth, and fourteen others, found caution

' Tnrfs, or peats, in the process of dryinj; or winning. " Block. ' 'V\\q nature of liis

crime is not specified ; but, from tlie measure of liis punishment, it is likely to liave been the Forgery
of a Notarial Instrument or other Writing. See Feb. 5, laGS-i. ■■ Tins is the earliest existing

Case, in the Records of tlie High Court, of this nature ; and it is almost the oidy instance of so mild
a sentence liaving been pronounced. !bee the Appendix. ^ The rest are burgesses of Edinburgh, Sic.

21 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 433

(Lord Ruthvene) for their entry at the next Aire of Perth, to underly the law
for ' Vmbefetting of the gait to James Rofs, bro])er to pe Lard of Cragy, within
})e burgh of Perth, and Invalioun of him for his Slauchter, in pe moneth of
Januar laftbypaft.' — ' Mr Clement Lytill, prelociitour for James Rofs, and pe
reft of his coUegis vpoune pe pannell, aflcit inftrumentis, jjat Andro Ramefay,
burges of Perthe, grantit he wes put to pe home, and allegit he wes relaxit
Jjairfra, and feliew na thing Jjairupone : And pe faid Mr Clement allegit, ])at he
fuld not haif place to perfew, quhill he fchew pe famyn.' — Interlocutor.
The Juftice ordanis pe faid Andro and pe reft contenit in pe Letteris of Hornyng, quhilkis ar put to pe home, to remane in Warde quhill ])ai fchaw ])air
Relaxatioun.

^lausljter.

Jul. 7. — James Wod of Bonyngtoune, William his brother, and
Alexander Guthrie, MelTenger, found Lord Ruthvene cautioner for their entry
at the next Aire of Forfar, to underly the law for ' ai'te and parte of pe Slauchter of vmq^^ Mr Hew Guthrie, vnder pe Caftell-wall of Brechin, in pe moneth of
Februar 1548 5eiris ; vpone aid ffeid, fett purpoife, provifione, and foirthocht
felony. Crifteane Rettray,' and William Tyrie, ' now hir fpous,' purfuers,
' paffis fra pe perfute of pe Larde at Jms tyme ; quhairupone pe Lard tuk inftrumentis.'— The faid William Wod ' alkit inftrumentis pat he requirit pe Lard,
his bi'uder, to rede pe fpeciall Remiffione grantit to him and pe faid Willeam
and vj^eris for pe faid Slauchter, to j^e effect Jjat he mycht vfe pe famyn. The
faid Lard ' anluerit ]3at he had already producit ane Remiffione fufficient for pe
faid Willeam for pe faid cryme.' — Mr John Hepburne in Brechin and John Low
became fureties along with the faid William for Aflythment of i^arty.

Conboratioit — ?i?ouci]^iit 3 aixti slaving: (Cattle.

Jul. 14. — ^VILLIA1M Cranstone of that Ilk, James his brother, and
George Wodderat, in Lawder, found caution^ to underly the law at the next
Aire of Selkirk, for ' arte and parte of pe cuming to pe fteding of Williamiflioip,
pertenyng to Alexander Hoppringill of Craiglethe, and ferchit and focht him for
his flauchter ; and crewelly hocht' and flew thre noltt.^

J^antrsudint — .ii?ouii]^in0 mxti slanins Cattle.

Alexander HorrRiNGiLL of Newhall, George his brother, and
George his fon, found furety^ to underly the law at the next Aire of Selkii-k,

' Probably widow of the deceased. ^ The Laird of Hundelie (Rutherford), William Scott of

Tufchelaw, and Walter Scott, ' apperand' of Tufchelaw. ^ Hamstrung. ■• Cattle.

* John Hoppringill of TuUeknowis (Trinlieknowis ?) and George Hoppringill of that Ilk.

VOL. 1. t 3 I

434 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563.

for ' Conuocatioune of our fouerane ladeis liegis, in ]>e moneth of July 1 556
jeris, cumaiid to jje fteding of Hawtherne, pertening to William Cranftone of
])at Ilk, in heretage, and be way of Hamefuckin, lioclit, flew, and deftroyit
xl ky."

^tcuti) anlr Mtstt o( J'toutf) — 3acsetUus CFnti:Iis]^mat, ^r.

Jul. 20. — WiLLiAsi Scott of Tuschelaw and his accomplices, having been accufed by the Queen's Advocate of ' Stowthe and RelTett of
Stowthe,' Robert Eliot of Bellelie was amerciated for not ' again-bringing' the
Letters duly executed and indorfed. — And the Laird of Tufchelaw was likewife
amerciated for not again-bringing the Letters, &c. purchafed by the Queen's
Advocate againft Robert Scott of Horslehill, ' to vnderly ]>e law for pe
Reletting of Inglifmenne, and Thiftuus Steling of certane Oxin.'

MntiUtmu

Jul. 21. — Alexander Hoppringill of Craiglethe, and George,
his fon, found Alex. H. of Tulleknowis" furety for their entry at the next Aire
of Selkirk, to underly the law for the ' Mutilatione of Jlione Scott of his
rycht arme.'

^n 1l?firrss fintiQ Caution not to M^invi * ane d)tit ^ratour, or
Uijtv troblun man of tljt cuntvt,*

Sep. 13, (apud Ed".) — The following remarkable Bond is recorded in
the Caution-book, (' Liber Plegiacionis,') which, fortunately, has been preserved. ' The quhilk day, Thomas Borthik of Pryncado and Michael Bcrthik
of Glengelt become j)lages and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feueralie, for Marione
Carutheris, ane of pe twa heretrices of Mowswald, that Icho fall not marie
ane cheif Teatour nor v])er brokkin man of J)e cuntre, nor joyne hir felf
vith ony fie perfone, vnder \q pane of ane Thoufand pundis. In witnefs heirof
])e faidis fouerteis lies lubfcriuit })is Act with jiair handis, day, 3eir, and place
foirfaidis. {Sic fithfcnhtlur) Mychell Borthuik of Glengylt. Thomas
Borthuik of Pryncado.'

Caniifnn ipistclrts, <^'f. — Cinnult at KlJoIni'JO^Oouse,

Oct. 1. — Andrew Armestrang and George Rynd, burgelles of Edinburgh, found furety to underly the law, on Oct. 24 inflant, for art and part of
breaking the Queen's Acts and Proclamations, in carrying I'undry ' Pifto-

' Kine, cows. Tliis barbarous act seems to have been in more tlian tenfold retaliation for the act
contained in the former Trial. * Afterwards styled ' Trinlingknowis.'

21 Mar. criminal TRIALS. » 435

lettis' within the burghs of Edinburgh and Canongate : And for Convocation
of the lieges, at the Palace of Holy-Rood, and invading fundry of the Queen's
domeftic fervants therein ; and for other crimes ftated in their Dittay. —
(Oct. 24.) Continued to Nov. 13. Patrick Cranftoun was alfo charged to compear
the fame day.

Cdefiiatdtfi; tlje iWlass Ijoitfjut tijc CijajJfl of ?&oIi)rootJ — 2tlafeinjj
snumutt for ^Itei'UTS tlje JadicfioiT, $( r.

Christian Fynekertoun, the fpous of James Roger, and twenty-one
others, ' delatit for arte and parte of the cuming to pe Chapell of our foueran
ladeis Palice of Halvrudehouse, vpoun the aucht day of Auguft, the 5eir
of God aboue writtin, and J)air oppinlie making Alteratioune and Innovatioune
of THE STAIT OF Religioun, quhilk our foueran lady fand publictlie and vniuerfalye (landing and profeffit at hir arryving ; miniftrand and abufand, of jjair
pretendit maner, irreuerentlie and indecentlye, the Sacrament of pe Body and
blude of our Lord Jefus, v|)ir\vayis and eftir ane vjiir maner nor the publict
generale ordour of our foueran ladeis realme ;' like as, J)ai haif violat and tranfgreffit pe commandement of pe faid Proclamatioun, publictlie, daylie, and continewalie, eftir J^air inordinat appetyte and plefour : And fwa, becumyng commoune manifeft tranfgreflburis, violatouris, and brekaris of our fouerane'Iadeis
Proclamationis, and as feditious perfones, raferis of Tumult and publict Vproir
aganis the commoun peax and quietnes of the realme : And fwa, aucht to be
adiugit and pvnefit to the deid with all rigour.' — Continued to Nov. 13. The
names of the rest of the pannels may perhaps be considered interesting, though
persons moving in the lower ranks of society.

Johne Aldinftoun, Katherine Bryife, Jonet Ramfay, fe relict of HecHarie 3oung, baxter, Helene Johneftoun, tour Blacater,

Thomas Clerkfoun, Adame Alane, merchand, Iflobell Currour,

Dauid Logan, baxter, Beflie Hill, George Smytb, faidlar,

William Gilcreiltoun, Agnes Aytoun, Johne Clerkfoun, baxter,

Andro Kennedy, merchand, Beffie Tod, Johne Paterfoun, kaife-maker.

William Brocas, fmyth, Henrye Ker,

Walter Scot, Margaret Galloway,

Mr John Mofcrope became furety for the entry of Cuthhert ISlurrmj, ' now

being at pe faill,^ befoir pe Juftice or his deputtis, vpoune xv dayis warnyng eftir

his hame-cuming.' Archibald Treinclie, Jonet Chalmer, his fpoufe, and John

Broune, merchant, were denounced rebels, &c. and their cautioners unlawed.*

■ See May 19, 1563. ' On a sea-voyage. ^ No farther notice of this Case occurs. After

Nov. 8, a blank of nineteen pages is left in the book, apparently for the purpose of entering proceedings between that date and Jan. 8 following, which had probably been noted in another Memorandum
book, or by another Clerk on loose sheets of paper now lost.

436 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563.

Commentiator of l^tiujtnituis Uctti from 2UarU,

Oct. 3 Gawane Commendator of Kilwynning prefentit the

Quenis Maiefteis writting, and defyrit the famyn to be regiftrat in the bukis of
Adjornale ; oft^ the quhilk the tennoui- foUowis.

Regina,

We, for certane cauffis moving ws, grantis and gevis Licence to Gawane Commendater
of Kiln'j'nning to departe out of the Toun of Stiiuiling and certane fpaces Jiairabout, quhaiiin he is
now piefentlie Wardit at our command, and to pas and do his leful befinefs quhair he plefis, within
])is our realme : And willis and grantis that he nor his fouerteis fall incur na danger pairthrow, nor to
be callit nor accufit ]iairfoir ; and to ])at effect willis and comraandis ]ie Juflice Clerk, or vjieris refaveris of ]<e faid fouerteis, to deleit Jie actis of Jie famyn furth of ]iair bukis, for keping of ])e faid Ward,
be pis our writting, fubfcriuit with cure band, At Striuiling, ]ie xxvj day of September, 1563.

Maria R.

Conboratitin — SeiTountiins — iWutilatiom

Oct. 30. — Dene Johnne Dwrie/ Monk in Dunferniling, was 'replegit
be Dauid Durye, fone, and apperand air of })e Lard of Dwrye, baillie of pe Regalitie of Dunferniling, who affigned J)e penult day of November," delatit of ])e Conuocatioune of our fouerane ladeis liegis, to the nowmer of xxiiij perfones, bodin
in feir of weir, &c., vjjoun J^e xxiiij day of July inftant, vndir Icilence of nycht,
and fetting vpoune Dauid Murray in Kerfe, and Anthoune Ruderfurd, vpon J)E
Hie streit of Ed^ quhair pai were gangand to }iair beddis, to J)e Chalmer
of ])e joung Abbot of Dumfermeling, in Ibbir and quiet nianer, &c. ; and J)air
Invading thaim for pair flauchteris, and crewalye Hurt and Woundit the faid
Anthoune in four lindry pairtis of his heid, in his craig, ^ in his right leg, at J)e
kne, and diuerfe v])eris pairtis of his body, to ]>e greit effuffion of his blude ; and
mvtilat and maid him impotent of his faid rycht leg ; and left him lyand for
deid : And als, crewalje Hurt and Woundit pe faid Dauid Murray in his heid
and diuerfe vfieris pairtis of his body, to pe greit effuffion of his blude ; and
Mutilat and demembrit him of his left arme.' — Jabies and Archibald Mowbray, brothers of John M. of Barnebowgall, Robert and James Bertane,
brothers, and Patrick Thomfoun, fon of Thomas T., burgefs of Edinburgh,
Richard Thomefoun, fon of Edward T., baker there, and Thomas Henderfoune,
' 3I(iiJh'rqfthe Fenfe-J'cide^ were denounced rebels, &c., and all their moveables
efcheated, for art and part of the laid crime, and their cautioners unlawed for
their not entering to underly the law, &c.

' Jul. 16, 1577, John Durie, ' Minifter of Chriflis Evangell, fumtyme ane of )ie Conventual!
Brethir' of the Abbacy of Dunfermling, and Josua his son, got a pension of L.66, 13s. 4d. for their
lives, ill lieu of liis ' ltaheit-Jihiei\ an<l other dues, from Robert Pitcairn, Commendator of Dunfermling, which was confirmed by King Ja. VI, Jan. 23, 1579 — liecj. Mag. Sitj. XXXV, 138. « Mr
William Scot of Balwerye being surety ' Jiat juflice fall be miniltrat and done.' ^ Throat.

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 437

Conborattou — S^autinUfntr — iKutilntioit — JBcfoifing an (J^fRcn* —

Smjjitssontns, Hct,

Jan. 8, 1563-4. — JohnCarmichaell of that Ilk, John his fon and
heir-apparent, Archibald his bi-other, James Johneflone of Weftraw, and thirtyone others, delatit of arte and i)arte of Conuocatioue of our Ibuerane ladies
liegis to ]3e noumer of ane hundreth perfones, or ])airby, bodin in feir of weir,
with jackis, fjjeris, fwerdis, fleil-bonettis, and vjjeris wapnis invafive, incontrair jje tenour of jie Actis of Parliament, vpoue })e nynt day of November
laftbypaft, come vpoun Thomas Hammiltoun, Officer of ])e flierefdome of
Lanark, Jhone Jhoneftone, fone to vmq'" Halbert Jhoneflone of Weftraw, and
Jhone Wod of Stoniefyd, as witneffis and affifteris to him, in fiirth-fetting of
our fouerane ladeis auctoritie, at J)e Cruikbaitt, quhair ])e faid Officier was
gangand and dryvand ten heid of nolt, to half apprilit ])aim at \q Mercate croce
of Lanark, be relTone ])e Watteris wes grate, and ])ai mycht not Wynne J)e nerreft
way ; and Jjair maifterfully reft ],ie faidis guidis fra J}e faid Officier, and Jjairthrow defoixit him in executioun of his office and of Jje faid Precept : In takin
quhairof he brak his wand of peax ' vpone J)ame, and tuke witneffis Jjairupone :
And incontinent fett vpone ])e faidis Jhone Jhoneftone, Mr Archibald Hammiltoun, ' and Jhone AVod, and inuadit paim for J)air flauchteris ; and crewelly
Hurte and Woundit ];e faid Jhone Jhoneftone with ane fpeir throw his rycht
hand ; and als hurte and woundit pe faid Mr Archibald with ane fpeir in at his
henche,^ and furth at his fundement ; and ficlyik, hurte and woundit J)e faid Jhone
Wod in Jie bak fyid of liis heid, and dememberit him of ane pece of his neife,
qidiairthrow he Avantis ])e rycht vfe })airof, eftir he was tane and holdin prifoner
to ])aini, and in diuerfe vjjeris partis of Jjair bodeis, to ])e effufione of J^air
bloode in grite quantitie, and left ])e faid Mr Archibald lyand for deid ; vpone
aid ffeid, fett purpois, provifione, and forthocht felonye : And Jiaireftir tuke
))ame prifoneris and captiues, and refauit J^air wapnis fra Jjame, and held jjame
at jjair plefour : And fpeciallie, tuke })e laid Jhone Jhoneftone captiue and
prifoner with Jjame to Jie Place of Carmichaell, pertening to Jhone Carmidiaell
of J)at Ilk, quhair he and J)ai held him in prifone, be Jje fpace of xvj houris or
Jjairby ; and J)aireftir brocht him to Lowthiane, quhair J)ai held him be ])e fjiace
of five dayis or Jjairby ; and fyne, vpon pe faid xv day of November, tranfported
him agane furth of Lothyane to fie Place of Cobyntoun, pertening to Jhone
Lyndefay of Cobintown, quhair he and fiai held him be Jie fpace of thre dayis
or Jjairby : And laft of all, vpone Jje xix day of \& faid raoneth tranfported him
furth of ]je faid Place to Carmichaell, quhair \& faid Lard and Jjai held him be

' See Jul. 23, 1666, Note; Oct. 11, 1531, Notice; and Nov. 18, 1511, for some illustrations of
this official ceremony in eases of deforcement. * See Jan. 10, 1563-4. ^ Haunch.

438 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563-4.

Jte fpace of thre dayis or ])airby : Vfurpand Jjairthrow our fourane ladeis
auctoi'ite.

The Lard of Stanehous vnlawit for nocht agane-bringing of Jjir Letteris
vpone ]5e Lard of Cobingtone.

Persewaris (Jhone Jhonellone, JlioneWod) Prelocutouris — Dauid Hammiltone, fone to my
lord Dukis grace ; Tlie Lard of Stanehous, The Lard of Lemmyngtone, The Lard of Preflone, Arch''
Hammiltone of ^Nluretoune.

Prelocutouris for ]ie pannal — The Earl of Mortone, The Lord Somervell, Gawane Carmichaell,
3oung Kittimuir, Mr Tho. M''Cal^ane, INIr Jhone M'Scrope.

The prelocutouris for pe pannale and pairtye defendand, allegit J)at ]?ai fuld
not be put to ane Affyife for pe allegit deforcement contenit in \>e faid Letteris,
vnto pe tyme pe faid deforcement were firft ciuile dilcuffit ; be refone ])at, of pe
daylie practik of t)is realme, all deforcementes befoi'e pai be Criminalie perlewit
ar decj'dit befor pe Ciuill Juge. To pe quhilk anfuerit pe perfevvaris, and oure
fouerane ladiis Advocattis, layand, pat pe faid deforcement aucht to be decydit
befoir pe Juflice, in refpect of pe libell, conforme to pe Letteris, without ony
decifione Jjairof befoir ony Ciuile Juge ; be refone ]5at pe faid deforcement is
libellit to be committit with Conuocatioune of our fouerane ladeis liegis, with
foirthocht felony and Oppreflione, all concurrand. — Quhairupone ather of pe
liaii'teis defyrit Interlocutour, htnc iude.

The Justice Depute, with avyife of fe AflyfTouris ' continewit the furth-geving of pe Interlocutour quliill Monunday nixt to cum : And decernit to proceid vpone ])e remanent crimis contenit in
])e faidis Letteris.

Item, J^e prelocutouris for pe pannale and defendouris allegit J^at na proces
may be led agains jjame for pe allegit taking and prifoning of Jhone Jhoneftone,
becaus na wrang wes done to him Jjairby, be refone he wes not, pe tyme of his
allegit taking and prifonyng, oure fouerane ladiis fre liege manne ; but wes pan,
and be pe fpace of . . . jeris of-befoir, continewalie, and pan inftantlie, our
fouerane ladiis Rebell and at hir home, denuncit and put pairto be vertew of

hir Letteris in default of finding of lauborrowis that ' falbe hanneles

and flvaythles of him, vnder certane panis contenit pairin : And, for verefeing
pairof, producit pe faidis Letteris indorfate, in Jugement ; and allegit, pat pai
niycht lefully half takin and prefonit him as our fouerane ladiis rebell, and vfit
and handlit liim niair extremelie, gyff pai plefit. To the quhilk it was anfuerit
be pe perfewaris and our fouerane ladeis Aduocattis, that pai on na wyis
affirmand pe execution of pe faid Hornying to be of veretie, allegit, pat pe faid
Jhone Jhoneftone, pe tyme pairof, wes minor and of lefs-aige, nocht doli capax,
and thairthrow pe executioun pairof mycht not extend to preiuge him in pe

' Assessors. These were Lords of the Privy Council, &c. Their names are seldom given in the
Books of AdjournaL as it is believed they took tiie duty by turns daily. ' Left blank.

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 439

perfute of })is action ; fpecialie, in confideratione pat be \>e fpace of aucht or ten
3eiris, oi* pairby, be wes repute and haldin our fouerane ladies fre liege, bauaud
na pairty to perlew bim vpone pe laid Ilornying, and did and exercit all lefull
actis, enter bim felfT in jugement and owtwitb without obiectione of jje faid
proces of Hornying ; and J^airfoir, proces mycbt be led be pe Juftice depute
aganis J^e faid pairty perfewit for taking and apprehending of bim conforme to
pe tennour of pe faid Letteris.

The Justice depute, witli avyife of ]ie Affeffouris, continewit ]te Interlocutour vpone Jie faid
allegeance and anfuer quliili Monunday nixt to cum, Ordanis fouiite to be tane be fe pairty perfewit
for Jiair entre to ]ie faid day to iieir Jie faidis Interlocutouris pronuncit.

' Jaimes Erle of Mohtoune, Lord of pe Regalitie of Dalkeytb, replegit pe
faid James Jhonejloun of Wefiruw ' to bis Regality — and, with confent of
parties, fixed the third day of the next Aire of Dalkeith. James Lord Somervell, furety, &c.

The Laird of Carmecbaell unlawed for non-entry of Robert Twechj, bis fervant,
and John Hunter in Brigtoun-dyik, who were each denounced rebels, &c.

(Jan. 10.) The Laird of Carmicbael, bis fons, two fervants, and three
others, came in Will ' for Conuocation of oure fouerane ladeis liegis, and Hurting and Wounding, vpone fuddentie, of Mr Archibald Hammiltone, Vicar of
Sanct Cuthbertis Kirk befyde Edinburgbe, and Jbone Wod of Sonnyfyid, to
Jje effufione of J)air blood, vpon pe nynt day of November laft bypaft. — The
Justice Ordained them ' to pafs and enter J)air perfonis in Ward, vpone {)e
North fyid of })E Water of Spey, within xx dayis nixt eftir ]je dait beirof ;
and pair remane in Ward during our fouerane ladiis Will. And liclyik, pe faid
James Jlionejlone of Wefraiv, of his awin confent and fre Avill, oblill bim to
enter in Ward within pe boundis foirfaidis, within pe fame fjiace,' &c.

James Lord Somervell became furety for their entiy at the next Aire of
Lanark, to underly the law for all the other crimes contained in the Lettei's.

The Laird of Carmicbaell, &c. ' ar actit and oblill, of j)air awin confent, to
remane and keip pe faid Ward ; and not to purcbafe our fouerane Ladiis
Licence to returne furth of Jie famyn for pe fpace of jeir and day nixt to cum,
witb(out) confent and avyife of my Lord Duke of Cbettelaralt had and obtenit
Jjairupone,' &c.

jTalst i^otan) — dTorfftng; an Sitstrumntt, ^f»

Feb. 5. — Siu James Coavdene, Notar Publict, Convicted by an Affife
' as ane ITalfer, for pe flfals fforgeing, making, and ffein5eing of ane pretendit
Inftrument, writtin and fubfcriuit be his band, and Aiidir bis figne-manuale, in
fawouris and at pe inllance of Mailler NicoU Ruthirfurd : In refpect that the

440 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1563-4.

faid Sir James confeffit, in Jugement, in prefence of the faid Juftice and AfTyife,
Ipe making of the faid Inftrument, and J)at the famin wes ffen5eit and ffals ; and
that he wes foliftit, tyiftit,' and perfwadit be pe faid Maifter Nicoll to do the
famyn. Item, the faid Mr Nicoll Ruthirfurd' Convict be pe faid AfTyife
of plaine and manifeft ffalfet, and as ane ffalfer, in arte and parte with pe faid
Sir James in his fFalfett in making and frein3eing of the faid ffals Inflrument,
throw his perfwafioune, foliflatioune, and tyifling of the faid Sir James to mak
pe famyn in his fawonris : And Jjat, in refpect tliat he confeffit liis foliflatioune
and tyifling foirfaid, and that he wes the diuyfare and inventare of the faid
fFalfett.— Ordanit to pas in Ward within the Tolbuythe of Edinbur' quhill pe
Juflice wer forthir awyfit vpoune )jair punifchement.'

dTorsing: antr Slttei'htg dfalsr €oin, $(t.

Thomas Peblis, Goldfmyth, fone to vmq"' Mr Jhone Peblis, burges of
Edinburgh, Convict be deliuerance of pe Affyife foirlaid off arte and parte of
pe trefonabill making, contirfuting, and fren5eing of pe Irnis^ vnder writtin of
our fouerane ladiis cun5e/ that is to fay, Of pe prenting irnes of ane Testane,
ane Halff-Testaxe, ane NoN sunt, and of ane Lyone callit ])E Hardpi eid : And of pe trefonabill cun3eing, prenting, and flriking with pe faid Iruis
off diuei-fe fals Teflonis, half Teflonis, Non funtis, and Lyones callit Hardheidis ;
and Owtputting Jjairof, as for our fouerane ladiis trew CUN3E, amang hir liegis,
difTauand Jiame J)air\vith ])is lang tyme bygane ; fpeciallie, in pe monethis of
Augufl, September, October, November, December, and Januar laft bypafb. To
JjE TAKIN," vpone jje nynt day of Januer lafl bypafl, eftir ])at pe faid Thomas
had put owt certane of pe ffals Lyonis foirfaidis, callit Hardheidis, to ane pover
woman, as for pe price of ane burding of coillis, fcho come to pe mercate of J)is
burcht, pairwith to by' fic thingis as wes neceffar to hir ; quhair fcho wes ta}aitit^
with pe faidis ffals Lyonis : And pe faid Thomas being nemmit be hir to be hir
warrand, and deliuerer of pe faid ffals con5e to hir, Dauid Symmer and vjjer
Bailleis of pe burcht of Edinburcht come with hir to pe faid Thomas chalmer,
within pe famyn, to ferche him for tryell of pe veretie ; quhair he held pe dur of
his faid Chalmer cloife vpone him, and wald not fuffir J)ame to entir, quhiir Jjai
brak vp pe dur ])airof vpone 50U (him), and entei'it perforce Jjairin ; and pe faid
Thomas being inquirit, ' Gyff he had gevin pe faid pover woman pe faidis

' Enticed. ° He is styled in tlie forged Deed along with Margaret R., ' executouris to vmq'«

Jonet llutlierfurd ;' and seems to have been a relative of George R. of Hondelye, in favour of whom the
forged Deed was concocted, for the purpose of restoring to him, as heir at law of Jonet R., the lands
of Woodhall, in the barony of Reidhall, and shire of Ediiiburgli. ' No farther notice is taken of

these Cases in tlie Record. ^ The Irons or dies from which the Coins were struck. ^ Coin.

" In token or proof whereof. " Buy, purchase. * Charged, accused, attainted, " Until.

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 441

Lyonis, be 'pe faidis Bailleis, for fie price of hir coillis ? Confeffit J)e fainyn :
And his chaliner being ferchit, f>air wes diuerfe of ])e faidis irnis, alfweill fuukin
and viifunkiii, togidder with pe faidis fFals Teftanis, Non funtis, and Hardheidis,
fundin in pe famyn ; and confeffit to be gravin and maid be him and his collegia ;
and als, pe faid Thomas had caffin diuerfe vj)eris of pe faidis Irnis and fals
money pe tyme he held his chalraer, in his clofett ; lyik as he confeffit pe fame
in prefens of pe Jnflice Clerk : And J)at in refpect of his Confeffione maid in
Jugement, in prefens of pe faid Juftice Depute pe faid day.

Sentence. — To be Hangit on ane geibet, at pe Mercate-croce of Edinburgh, his heid to be ftrykin fra his body, and his body querterit ; and his
HEID and memberis to be put and hungin on pe maift patent Portis of
EdiNburghe. And })at all and findrye his gudis, movabill and vnmovabill,
money, gold, filuer, merchandife, takkis, roumes, ftedingis, x'entellis of landis,
reuerfionis, bandis, heretagis, annuelrentis, poffieffionis, and v]jeris his heretabill
rychtis and lyferentis, fuld pertene to our fouerane lady, and be in hir handis,
be refone of efcheatt, &c. ; and J^at he hes ffoirfalt pe famyn for euir.

* Sluifitsetting: tijt sait* — ^Iautj:I)tei%

Mar. 14. — Andreav Sinclare, alias Myllare, at the Mylne of Trottoch, within the flierifdom of Forfar, was replegiated to the Regality of Keryemuir' by Archibald Dowglas, baillie of Archibald Earl of Angufs, delatit of Jje
Slauchter of vmq"^ Robert Smyth, at pie Myll of Trottoch, in Vmbefetting of his
gait at pe Bitter-bui'ne, lyand betuix pe Toune of Dunde and pe faid mylne, in
pe moneth of December laft bipaft ; and pair llraik and punfcheit pe faid vmq'^
Robert vndir his feit, and left him lyand for deid : Of the quhilkis ftraikis he
neuer convaleffit, bot within ten dayis paireftir deceifit pairof ; and fwa wes
crewaly flane be the faid Andro, vpoune auld fTeid and foirthocht fellonye.'
Persewaris, JoLne Smytb, eldeft fone to vmq''= Robert ; Archibald Smyth, brother-fone.

l^ArcMhald Earl of Ar gyle, Juflice-Genefal.'\

MMvUtv — Commtin Cijeft — 2ae»f tt — ^onuitt};.

Mar. 15. — James M'Dormond, Johne M'Graffycht, and Malcum
M'Clarene, Convicted by this Affife of ' Murthour, Comraoun Tliift, Reffiett,
and Sorning.'

ASSISA.

\Vm. CwninghameofGlengarnok, Alex. Abircrumby of |iat Ilk, Robert Haldene,

J, Bucquhennarie of Cainroune, Johne Murray of laichlaw, ' Alexander Drummond of Megoiir,

JohnBucquhennane alias Walter- Walter Berclay of pat Ilk, Williame Drummond of Balloche,

Ibune, James Mentyth, Dioneyfe Dog,

The Lard of Drumquhaflill,^ Walter Bucquhennane of Drum- Andro C.,^ feruand to Drum-
. . . Bucquhennane of Lany, nakill, quhaffill.

' Mar. 28 was assigned to administer justice, &c. ' ' Cwnnynghame.' ' Id.

VOL. I. f 3 K

442 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564.

CoiniiXQ false * Jjalfttis * (3$aUjl)Cis)»

Mar. 20. — IMaister, Duncan Fokbes of Monymusk, and Johne
Forbes of Petfligo, his brother, found Tureties (Alex. Home of Manderftonne,
and Johne Luniifdene of Blanerne) that they ' fall compeir befoir our fouerane
and Lordis of Counfale, vpoune xv dayis warnyng, as thay be chargeit thairto,
to fe forther tryell taiken anent the allegit cunjeing of ffalfe cun5eit Balbeis ;
ilkane of the faidis perfones vndir the pane of ane Thowfand niarkis, conforme
to the deliuerance gevin be the Quenis grace thairupoune.'

Mar. 22. — Chaules Jardane, Malye, Agnes, and John Harknes, in
Toddelmuir, ' Delatit of the Slauchter of vmq'" Adame Spens, vpoune Feb. xyj,
•jmyci^jjj^ vpoun the thrid of the landis of Cumrew, lyand within the Sherefdome of Drumfreife' — ' in default of non-comperance of ])e AfTyife, the Justice continewit the perfute J^airof to the thrid day of ]>e next Juftice-aire of
(Dumfreis,) &c.

Persewar, Johne Spens, fathir-brothir to vmq'*' Adame, as ane of his kin and freindis.

Prelocutouris for the pannell,

Mr Clement Litill, The Lard of Drumlangrik, The Lard of Apilgirth.

Prelocutouris for the perfewar,

The Lard of Torrj', The Lard of Elphinlloune, Rob. Johneftoun of the Cottis, Jhone J. of Cragaburne.

iWasisjtratts of fi^tiiiiljursl) for setting a prisoner at lihti'tv.

Jun. 6. — Maister Johne Spens,*' Dauid Symmer (Somer), Mr
Robert Glen,* (Bailies,) Eduard Houpe, James Barroune, Alexander Park,
(Trealurer,) Mr Johne ]\Iarioribankis,f " Alexander Naper, Archebald Grahame,
Allane Dikkefoune, Michaell Gilbei't, Alexander Bruce, Mr Johne Preftoune,
James Adamefoune, Cuthbert Ramfay,* (Councillors,) and Alexander Guthrie,*
(' Commoun fcribe of Ed" — Toic7i C/er/i?) delated for ' arte and parte of the
putting to libertie of Williame Patertbune, burges of ]>e faid Burghe, furth of
Warde of pe Tolbuithe of Edinbur^ eftir pe faid William had recentlie hurt
vmq'' Nicoll S^ung, he being lyand in perrell of deid ; like as, he, within xxiiij
houris eftir his putting to libertie, deceiflit of pe laid hurting.' ^

Persewaris, Tlie Quenis Aduocattis, Robert 3oHnp> fajier ; Jolin and WilHam, bre]ier, Jolrne 3.,
writer, James 3'> cutlar, (James 5-, feruand to Mr Joliiie Abircrumbye ;) Archibald Naper of Merchameftoune, and the remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'' Nicoll joung, taillour.

Prelocutouris for the paniial, Mr Dauid Borthwik, Mr Thomas M^caljeanc.

Mr Dauid Borthwik afkit inflrumentis (that) the laidis perfonis comperit as
prelocutouris for pe perfones perfewaris.

' Those marked ' were ' Difchargeit be )ie party and Aduocattis.' ' Those marked f were

bound over to underly the law at the next Justice-aiie, or to .appear before the Justice, whenever
they should be required, on xv days' warning. ^ See Aug. 11, laC-1,

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 443

Archibald Dowglas of Kilfpindie, Proweft of 'pe burcht of Edinbur', became
fouerlie for pe eutrie of Maifler Johne Spens, &c. befoir pe Juftice or his deputtis
pe tent day of Junii inflaiit. — Mr Robert Creychtoune afkit inftruinents vpone
pe productioiine of pE QuENis grace Letter, and defyrit pe famyn to be regiftrat ; quhairof the tennour followis.
Regina,

Justice, Thefaurer, Juftice-Clerk, Aduocattis : fforfamekle as Jie day affixt for perfevving at our inflance, and oure Aduocattis, off J)E Baillies and Counsale of Edinbuhgh, for putting to libertie and fredoine furth of oure Ward ]ie committeris of fE Slaughter ofvmq'"" Nicoll
30UNG, burges of Edinburghe, vnpwnift, in contemptioun of our auctorite, is fe fext day of Junij
nixt to cum, in our Tolbuith of Ed' : Quhairfor, fen ]>e faid actioun tendis heiehlie to oure honour
and auctorite royall, and als to ]ie greit hurt of )ie pure freindis of ]>e faid vmq''^ Nicoll, it is our Will,
and we charge 50U, fat 36 with all diligence awyife with ])e faid actioun, and Lettres direct jvairupoun ;
and at J>e day affixt Jiairto, proceid and do juflice in ]ie faid mater, conforme to )ie lawandjuflice without ony delay or continuatioune. As 30 will anl'uerto ws vpoun ]>e executioune of 3oure offices, flFor
it is our will and mynd ]'e faniin be done. Subscriuit with oure hand at Edinbur'^ fe laft day of
Maij, the 3eir of God I'"V'lxiiij seiris. (MARIE R.)

Dauid Sym:mer, for him felf, aflvit inftrumentis that the Juftice depute
declarit, that he and the remanent his collegis vpoun pe pannall fuld haif hot fax
prelocutouris. — The Lard of Merchameftoune declarit, that he wald perfew na
man vpone ])e pannall vpoune his lyfe, bot Dauid Symmer allanerlie ; and that,
becaufe he is furelie perfwadit, alfwele be writting as commoning hed betuix
him and the laid Dauid, that he was culpabill of the crymes contenit in the
Letteris. — Johne 3onng, &:c. aflvit inftrumentis that thai comperit nocht as prelocutouris foirlaidis to perfew pe pannall, or ouy of fiame, of Jjair ly ves ; bot allanerlie ' infafar as pe actioun is hvirtfull to pe freindis of vmq'"' Nicoll 5oung, remittand pe perfute })airof, of ))E Quenis grace actioun, to hir liienes Aduocattis ; bot
infafar as pe Letteris beris ony actioun of pairtye, concerning pe freindis - of pe
faid vmq'° Nicoll, ])at ])ai wald perfew pe famin aganis fa mony of pe pannalls as
J)ai wald name. "\'poun pe quhilkis pe perfonis perfewit a(kit inftrumentis.

Mr Dauid Borthwik allegit that the Justice-Clerk mycht nocht be Clerk
in this mater, nor voit ^ thairintill, becaus he and the Lard of Merchameftonis
wyfe wes fifter and brethir bairnis,'* and that thair wes bairnis betuix the faid
Lard and his fpous. — The Justice, be his Interlocutor, fand the Juftice-Clerk
was Ordinare, '" and mycht nocht be removit.

The faid Mr David allegit, dilator'te, that the fumondis is fa generall that the
famin can nocht pas to ane Allife, becaus it condifcendis de niillo genere criminis
Capitalis, in fpeciall, that may i-eflaif ane particular dyet. He alfo afldt inftrumentis, in name of Alexander GutJire, that the Advocattis and perfevvaris paft
fra the perfutt of the faid Alexander Guthre. — The Justice, Thefaurer, and

' Only. - Blood-relations. ' Vote. ^ Cousins-german. ^ Judge-Ordinary.

444 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564;

Aduocattis, requirit Alexander Guthre, Commoun Scribe ^ of Ediuburghe, in
our foueran ladeis name, to exhibit and produce befoir jiarae, incontinent, the
commoun Buke quhairin the Actis auent the releving of Williame Paterfoune
ar contenit.

The faid Mr Dauid allegit, that thair can be na accufatioun heir towart p&
perfones on pe pannell, becaus thir Baillies ar Jugeis Ordiner, havand power of
incarceratioune ; and infafar as thai ar accufit of the out-letting of this man, as
the funimondis is libellit, it contenis na cryme ; becaus it is nocht libellit, that
this man lattin furth is uowther convict of ony Homicide, or fugitiue fra the
QuENis lawis, as in veritie he is nother convict nor callit vpone that crime ; and
in caife he wer perfewit, the man mycht entir and indure the lawis of this
realme : Becaus Slauchter may be committit in a mannis defence, and he is able ^
to vnderly the law for the famyn, as oft lies bene practifit.' And thairfoir, the
perfones on the pannale can on nawis be perfewit, except it wer libellit that the
faid man ovt-lattin wer owther convict or fugitive. Repetit the fame allegeance
towart 31o/irope.

Maifter Thomas M'calzane * allegit the libell wes nocht relevant, becaus it is
foundit vpone the allegit latting out of Ward oi Pdtterfouu and Mofcrope, aganis
the Baillies and Counfale of Edinburgh, without ony tiualificatioun how latting
out of Ward is ane cryme to thame ; but allanarlie qualifiand to that effect,
that thairthrow thai fchew thame felfis fawouraris of ]je faidis Paterfoiui and
Mofcrope, and contemnit thairthrow the Quenis auctorite, in hynderance of
juilice, &c. : Quhilkis qualificationis contenis na cryme, without it wer faid thai
affiftit to the cryme. And the latting out of Wardouris is na contempt nor
vfurping of the Quenis auctorite, in perfones that hes the Quenis auctorite
of prefoning, and inputting and outputting, as the Baillies of Edinburgh hes,
and hes bene in continuall polTefRoune thairof, pafl memorie of men; nocht
libelland, that thai extendit ' thair powar, havand fie." And allegit, hynderance
of juftice can nocht be ane cryme, fpeciallie as is libellit, quhair it is nocht
libellit that the principale cans is nocht difculfit. And quhair it is allegit, that
the famin wes aganis the lawis, thair is na fie lawis ; and defyrit to knaw the
famyn, and aganis quhat law thai contrauenit, and quhat pwnifinent the law
requiris. And attour, allegit, that thair wes fraus neque dolus libellit, at the
leift fufRcientlie qualifeit, quhilk may induce ony cryme.

The perfewaris, Robert 5owiig> fathei-, and Johne ^owng, brother, of the faid
vmq'" Nicoll, gaif thair aithis " de calumpnia, that thai hed gude actioune to perTown- Clerk. ^ Hnbilis ; W&hXe. ^ Decided, as a jjrrtrf/^«p, or precedent. •'Afterwards Lord Cliftonliall, fatlier of the celebrated Eufame Macaljeane, wlio was burnt, for Witchcraft, in the succeeding reign. See II, 247, &c. '^ Exceeded. « Having such. " Oaths.

22 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 445

few all the perfones contenit in the act producit, viz. Mr Johne Spans, Dauid
Symmer, Mr Robert Glenne, Bailleis ; James Barroune, James Adamefoun, Edward Houpe, Alexander Park, Mr Johne Preftoune, and Cuthbert Ramfay.

The Aduocattis anfweris, that the libell is fpeciale, and relevant aneueh,' and
fuld be putt to the knawlege of the Affife, nochtwithftanding the faidis allegeances, in refpect of the fame libell, and of ane Act producit be the Aduocat,
and fubfcriuit be Alexander Guthre, of the dait the xv day of Marche 1563.

(Jun. 10.) — The Justice, be awyife of his Alfeffouris, Repellis the
allegeances aboue writtin. — The pannal proteftit for remeid of law.

Maifter Thomas M''cal5ane, prelocutour for James Barroun, and the remanent pannal perfewit, as being vpoun the Counfale ^ of Edinburghe, by ^ the
Baillies, that had Jurifdictioune of inputting and outputting of perfones ; allegit,
that infafar as thay ar perfewit, being vpone the counfale of the latting out of
the perfones libellit, and can nocht be repute to thame as ane cryme, that thai
ar nocht fubject to vnderly an Alfyife for that deid, as allegit criminall, becaus
the deid to the quhilk thai ar allegit to half gevin counfale, is nocht certane to
haif bene criminale of the felf ; ffor it followis nocht, that quhan thair is ane
man lattin out of prefonne, that thairfore thair is ane cryme committit ; bot the
prefumptioun is in the contrair, quhair ane Juge Ordinar lattis out ony perfoune,
that thairfore it is nocht lauchfullie done ; And this cans is nocht to be to thame
that gevis counfale in latting out of raanifeft Thevis, or committing of Thift
or Slauchter ; ffor to commit Thift and Slauchter, or to gif counfale J^airto, is
cryme of the felf, except it be done be auctorite ; and thairfor, gevand counfale be
ordour of juftice, and in the performing thairof, thair can na cryme follow vpoune
the counfale-geving to the demandaris vpoun the releving of the manne requyrit
be the Juge Ordinaris ; according to the difpenfatioune of the Coramoune Law,
in Lege, nullus, &c. de regulis juris — vthirwayis thair fall fall ane greit inconvenient, that thair fall na counfale be gevin to Jugis Ordinaris, quhilkis in this
cuntrd vfis nocht to handill greit cauffis without counfale. And forther, in all
tymes bygane, thair wes neuir manne accufit of ony cryme for counfale-geving
to ony Juge-Ordinar, requii'ing counfale in exerceing of his office. And this
perfute is ane noveltie.

Dauid Symmer aflvit inftrumentis for him felf nd his collegis, Baillies, that
Johne 5oung, prelocixtour for the perfewaris, allegit, that the Counfale ordanit
the Baillies to putt the pairteis libellit to libertie ; as the Act maid thairupoune
beris ; and accejjtit the faid allegeance, infafar as the famin maid for him and
his collegis, Bailljes.

Maifter Dauid Borthuik, prelocutour for the haill pannel, allegit, that this
' Enough. ^ Town-Council. ^ Forbye; besydes.

446 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1504.

fact and accufatioune aiicht nocht to be put ' to the pannal as ane ciyine, becaus
thai being Jugeis-Ordinaris ouer lyffe and memberis, and incarceratioune in
prefoune, vnderftanding the woud ^ nocht to be mortall, becaus it wes in fie ane
place as thair apperit na danger of deid ^ ; and 5it, for mair fecuritye, according
to thair accuftomit vfe, in caifis of hurt nother quhair deid wes nocht foUowit,
nor Homicide conimittit, thay lett the man to plege, vndir fouertie of his reentre, vndir the pane of ane Thowfand pundis ; quhilk pane oure fouerane ladeis
maieftie hes caiifit to reifaif, to be vfit at her plefour, as the pane of the cautioune :
And thairfor, allegit, that hir Maieftie, in effect, hes apprevit the ordour vlit be
the Bailleis and perfones vpoune the pannale, in the releving and committing to
2)lege of the faid IVilliaine Puterfoun, and can haif na forther cryme to lay to
the charge of the faidis Magiftratis and Counfale ; and thairfor, aucht nocht to
be putt to the knawlege of ony Affife : And producit and fchew THE QuENis
Aduocateis acquittance and difcharge, in the Quexis grace name, vpone the
reflait and aggreance for the faid fowme. And as to the latting out of 31qfcro])e,
producit THE Quexis grace command and Precept for putting of him to libertie.
— The faid Mr Uauid Borthuilv aflvit inftrumentis, that John ^omigt writer,
producit certane Actis of Parliament anent Slauchteris.

The faid Mr Dauid allegit, that thair is na ciyme qualifeit in the Summondis
producit be the perfewaris, that may be iniput to the Aifyife ; becaus the releving of WiUiam Puterfoun, in maner and be ordour as it wes done, is na cryme
nor offence, nor yit aganis the lawis, outlier Ciuile or Mvnicipall, bot wes done
according thairto ; becaus the Magiftratis accufit ar Jugeis-Ordinaris, havand
power of lyve and inembris, Shereffis, with prefoune, &c. : And infafar as the
faid Williame was tane and committit to prefone for ony allegit cryme, in caife
it had bene of Homicide, lyke as thair wes nane thanne actuale committit, bot
onlie in fimpllc'iter Hurting, as wes thocht and belevit commonlie to all men,
thaj'' mycht of thair office, having kepit him attour^ ane nyclit and ane day,
(lyke as he wes kepit be pe Ipace of four or fyve nychtis,) haif put him to libertie,
vndir cautioune and plege, to haif vndirlyne the lawis ; lyke as, in trewth, infafar
as he wes gevin to libertie, the famyu wes done vndir lufficient cautioun for his
reentre agane, lyke as thai haif bene in wle be virtew of thair officis and jurifdictioun, in ficlik caiflis and offenflis, to haif lattin men to plege, fpeciallie quhair
the actuale deth followit nocht, paft memor ; lyke as thai, and all vtheris Jugeis
Ordinai-is, aucht to haif done of thair offices, according to the Mvnicipale Law,
conformit with the Commoun Law. And thairfor, it is na cryme, nor fuld
nocht be putt to the knawlege of ane AfTyife ; vthirwayife, na perfone that had
woundit ony man mycht be put to libertie and fredome, quhill '' the wound wer
' Imputed. * Wound. ^ Death. "* Above, over, more than. '' Until.

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 447

haill, incontrar all lawis. And attour,' thair is na cryrae as 3it, becaus the faid
Williame Paterfuim is nowtlier conuict nor fugitiue fra J)e Law ; and fwa is
nocht ane Homicide, infafar as he is nocht conuict.

Item, allegit the faid Mr Dauid, thay being Jugeis Ordinaris, as is aboue
writtin, viz. Sheriffis, to be fufficient inquifitioune ; and found, that the wond
was nocht mortall, baith be thair awin jugement and be inquifitioune and informatioun of Maisteris Chyrurgianis, famous men,^ quhairby thai fand, that the
wond was nocht mortall, and thairfor, fand that thai aucht of thair dewetye to
latt the faid ^^^illiame to libertie, vnder cautioune ; and mycht half bene compellit be ordouris and refToun thairto.

Cuthhert Bamsay afl<it inftiinnentis, that nowther the pairtye nor the
QuENis Advocattis wald accufe him. Alexander Park allegit that he was
nocht vpon the Counfale, bot wes allanerlie Thefaurer and ingadderare of the
Commoune-gude.

The Aduocattis afl^it inftrumentis vpone the productioune of the Proteflatioune maid be Maifter Johne Spens and Maifter Robert Glenne, Baillies, of the
daitthe xv day of Marche 1563 (4) ; and defyrit the famin to be fchewin to the
Affyife, quhairof the tennour followis.

Protestatioune be Maijteris Johne Spens and Robert Glenne, Baillies. The quhilk day, in
prefens of Dauid Symtner ane of the Baillies, James Barroune, James Adamesoune, Eduard Houpe,
Alexander Park, Maifter Johne Preftoun, and Cuthbert Ramfay, of the Counfale, Maijfer Johne
Spens and Maijter Robert Glen, Baillies, difaflentit to )ie outlatting of William Patersoune furth of
Ward ; and Proteftit, ]iat in caife Nicoll Zoung deceiffit of ]ie ftraik, and ]/e faid Williame Paterfoun
fugitiue fra fe lawis Jiairfor, that the burding and damnage fat mycht follow fairupone mycht be laid
vpone fe confentaris to his libertie; and \aX )iai nor the Gude Toun, ^ fredome and libertie Jiairof,
wer nocht iu danger, in refpect of ]iis Jialr Proteftatioune and refufale foirfaid. And heirupoune afkit
inftrumentis.

Item, allegit the faid Mr Dauid Borthuik, that the latting of Paterfoun to
pledge, procedit vpone ane Decrete in prefens of THE Baillies and Counfale,
gevaris Jjairof, be fufficient inquifitioun and tryell accuftumat to be taikin within
the Burcht, in ficlik caiffis ; quhilk Decrete is repute as the veritye, quliill^ the
Reductioune thairof ; and fua, feu the faid Decrete ftandis in ftrenth, and the
gevaris thairof nocht decernit be thair Juge-fuperiour to half done wrang, nor
3it the famyn reducit, tl\is Criminall cans, nocht being Ciuilye decydit, aucht
nocht to pas to ane AfTyife.

The Lard of Marchameftoun afkit inftrumentis, that he perfewit na man except Dauid Symmer, as he proteftit of befoir. Dauid Symm.er allegit, that the
thing that he is accufit of wes done be ordinance and awyife of the Counfale ;

' Moreover. ' Credible men ; of good fame, &c. " Edinburgli has been for a very long

time defignated ' the guid toun,' but the origin of the appellation is not clear. ' Until.

2

448 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564.

and that he wes ane ofRciare to the Counfale ;' and thairfor, the thing that he
did was at thair command. And for verefeing of his allegeance, producit ane
Decrete — and thairfor proteftit, quhatfumeuer danger he ineurrit, the Counfale
fuld releif him jjairof.

The Aduocattis pall frome the perfute of Maijieris Johne Spens, Robert
Glenne, and Cutlibert Ttamjcuj : Eikand/ that this few noumer^ can never fuffir the law, nor be decernit to half committit the cryme libellit, nor the few
noumer can nocht ordand.' It is the Common Law and Mvnicipall writtin law,
quhair na flauchter is committit, to lat the perfoun to plege. Hew, the AfTyife
aucht to acquit thame, becaus vpone allegit ordinance thir perfonis of Counfale
on pannall hes na power to lat Paterjbiine to libertie, nor mak ordinance ; becaus the leift of the noumer that can mak ordinance mon ^ be fevine perfones.
Johne 5^^^"^ wryter, prelocutour foirlaid, acceptis this allegeance.

It is allegit for the parte of David Symmer, that he aucht to be acquit of all
cryme ; becaus, gif ony he did, the fame at the ordinance of the Counfale wes
done ; quhilk he wes obleift to obey, as the Ordinance beris.

AssiSA diet, personarum {Summer J' Barroune, Honpe, and Adamejbune.)

Maiftev Archibald Giahame," (ac.) Mailter James Lyiulfay,' (/!) Eduaid Kinkaid, (/.)
Patrik Hardye, («c.) Oldarne Fullarton, (ac.) Thomas Toddman, (oc.)

Jobne Spottifwood,* (/.) James Carmychaell, (/.) Johne Wilfone, (/.) "

Haibert Maxwell, (/.) James Forrett, (/.)

James Jobneftoune, («c.) Thomas Henrye (/.) "^

Verdict. David Symmer, ane of the Baillies of the burcht of Edinbur', wes
Convict be the haill perfones chofm and fworne vpone his Affyife, off the putting to liberty furth of Ward of the Tolbuith of Edinbur* of Wdliam Paterfoune burges ])airof, being takin and apprehendit rekl-hand, for the crewale
Hurting and deidlie Wounding of vmq''' Nicoll 5oung taillour, and putt in Ward
for the faid cryme, in the faid Tolbuith, at the inftance of the laid vmq''' Nicollis father and brethir, be the Baillies of the faid burcht, within thre or four
dayis nixt eftir the committing of the faid cryme : The faid vmq'" Nicoll being
than continualie, fra the tyme of his deidlie hurting, lyand in perrell of deid
})airthrow ; Like as, he within xxiiij houres, or thairby, eftir the putting of the
faid William to libertie, deceiffit, in the faid Hurting and Wounding : And fwa,
doand the famin, without command or auctorite of our foueran lady, or confent

' He seems to have been presiding Magistrate, and as such pleaded that he was merely the organ
of the Bench. ^ Adding. •> The Minority. ■* Have no power to ordain or decree.

5 Must. ^ The Assise unanimously found him guilty. " Those marked («c.) voted for

the acquittal of Barroune, Houpe and Adamefoun. ** Those marked (f.) voted for tiling these

pei'sons, i.e. finding them guilty. ^ Chancellor. '" He voted for the acquittal of Houpe.

" Voted for the acquittal of Barroune. It has been thought proper to preserve the state of the
vote in this remarkable case, which has been preserved in this form.

22 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 449

and ad^vyise of tbe pairteis foirfaidis, beand reddie to perfew, and havand Ipeciale interes tliairin, partialie and wilfullie, in defraude of juftice, to haif bene
execute vponne the laid William, incontrair the lawis and practik of this
realme.

Interlocutor. And ];airfor deliuerit be the Juftice Clerk, and his deputtis, in the handis of the Proweft, and Maifter Johne Spens, ane of the Baillies
of the faid burcht, to be furelie kepit as thai wald anlwer to our Ibuerane ladye.

(Jun. 21.) — James Barroune, James Adamesoune, and Eduard
HouPE, be the Affyife foirfaid wes Conuict of the faid cryme committit in
maner aboue reherfit. Adame FuUertoun, for him felfF, and the remanent perfones foirfaid that wer acquit, aflvit inftrumentis thairof. The pronunceatioun
of this deliuerance continewit to tlie morne.

(Jun. 22.) — This day the pronunciatioun of the deliuerance of the faid
Aflyife wes fchawin and declarit to pe pannall ; quhairupoun the faid pannall afkit
inftrumentis, and j^roteftit for remeid of law, and for thair releif in this actioune
of Wilfull Errour : And ficlyk, that they fuld be hard to gif in, the morne,' thair
Proteftatiounis in writt. The morne aflignit be the Juftice for giving in
thairof.

Protestation bi/ the Pannel, aguinjl the Verdict of the AJJife.

Jun. 23. — David Somer, Baillie of the bur' op Ec, James Barroune, James AdameJbtme, Eduard Houpe, of the Counfale of the famin, Protestis, fforlamekill as the perfones of the Affyife Conuict crirainalie thanie forjie allegit out-letting of WillianiePaterfoune out of Prefoune : Quhilk
Conuictioun and ileliverance of the faid Afiyife is wranguflie, wilfulye, and partialie gerin ; and Jiairfor Pioteflis aganis thame for Wilfull Eerour and wrangus and partiale deliuering, agauis all
Law, ordour, and cuftome of ]iis realme: And in refpect, )iat it wes baith allegit, and evidentlie
fchewin to ]>anie, )iat ])ai niycht lefumlie " haif lattin ]ie faid Williame furth vpoune cawtioune, baith
be Jie Mvnicipall Law of this realme, expreflie writtin in ]ie Maieflie,' be the Commoune and Ciuile
Law, and be the immovable vfe and practik of tliis Bur', obferuit in fie caiffis, be the Provell and Baillies of |)e famin, in all tymes bypall, and be all ])e Stheriffis of this realme : And, tliairfor, Proteftis, that pai may haif actioune, in tyme and place, to all pe faidis Aflyfoures, for Wilfull Errour on
fame, or ony of thame, at particulare dyettis, to vnderly the law for wilfull breking and contrauening of the Lawis of this realme, and for njanifeft Periurie, deliuering aganis ])e Law of the realme,
practik )iairof, and ]iair confcience : And als, Protestis ]iat thay may haif actioune aganis thame
for all coillis, iTcaithis, dampnage, and entres fai may incur or fuftene, in fair bodeis, perfones, or
gudis, throw occafioune of the faid wilfull Conuictioune. And defyris this Protellatioune to be infertit in fe Bukis of Adiornall. Item, Protestis, ttiat the faid Convictioun be nocht preiudiciall to
fame, nor afer of thame anentis the perfute of Alexander Achefoune and Johue Weftouue for releving
of thame, according to ane Act maid be fe faidis twa cautioueris, fe xv day of March, 1563 3eri8 ;
but that Jiai may perfew fe faidis cautionaris for ] air releif, conform to fe famin.

The fame day, Edward Hoiji Protestit, that in refpect, fat he had allegit of befoir to fe Mfyife, befoir their furthganging,'' that he diffaffentit to f e latting furth of William Paterfoune fui-th of
Warde ; and in refpect fat James 5oung, eultellar, ane of f e perfewaris, oppinlie at the bar, had

' To-morrow. ' Lawfully. ' Regiam Miijestatem. ' Before their ' going t'urth' of the Court,

to the Assise-room, to consider the rerdict which they ought to pronounce.

VOL. L t 3 L

450 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564.

planelie confeflit ia prefens of the Lordis ]>e Jiiftice, Jullice Clerk and AfTyfe, that he hard the faiJ
Dauid difliiffeiit to ]>e putting of the faid William to libertie, and Jiat he offerit liim topreif/ be Jie remanent of the Counftill, that he diffaffentit Jiairto; Tiiairfor, infafar as the faid AfTyife lies flfylit and
Connict him, Protestit for Wilftdl and manifefl Errour, renieid of law, and for coflis, llvaithis, dammage, and interes that he falhappin to fullene or incur Jiairthrow, Criniinalie or Ciuilie. And fairupoune aflvit inftrumentis.

Mkmorandum. Quhair James Barroune and his complices of the pannell,
in the face of my Lord Thefaurar, the haill AfFyife, and Cleikis of the famin,
Proteftit for the names of thame quha confentit and difaffentit to thair Convictioune, off intent to reduce the famin, and mak Errour thaii-of, as he allegit,
Maister James Lindsay, Chancellor of the Affyife, iu name of the haill
AfTyife thair prefent, Proteftit, gif ony man of the Aflyife Avald confels that he
difalfentit to the faid Conuictioune, or wald oppin ony fecrete reffones or difputationis amangis thame, quhairby ony malice or disfauour mycht be had to ane
of the AfTyife by ane vther," that he fuld be haldin and repute perjure and
defameit ; and that becaus the haill AfTyife and Clerkis of the famin war fworne
vjjoune the Halie Ewangell, vpoune thair awin motyve will, to keip fecrete the
famine. Quhairupouue the faid Mr James tuke inftrumentis.

^ijctp-stfaliiiQ:— Common Cljfft — lUsctt, ^c.

Jun. 12. — Hob Scot, callit of Colyfard ; Johne Scot, callit 31r Johue
the Cleric ; Mark Eliot, callit qff//e Hill ; Johne Henderlbune, callit J(y//«6' the
Falfer ;' and Robert Paterfoun, in Gilmertoune, ' Convict and Hangit.'*

As.sisa.
The Lard of Hinderftoune, Patrik Cranftoune, burges of Johne Scot, in Bradmedois,
Andro Sklater, hurges of Edin- Edinburghe, Williame Scot of Tufchelaw,

burghe, Andro Armeftrang, Adam Scot of Bonyngtoune,

James GyflFort, in Lyutoune, RichertPaterfoune,inDrumfreife, Johne Mitcheifoune, in Lefwaid,
Williame Borthuik of the Hall, Johne Newlandis, in Edinburghe, Michaell Nafmyth of Poffo.

* Mmijfsttttnij tijt ijait *— Snbasion, ^t.

Jun. 15. — Pateik Houstoune of that Ilk ; Peter, Mr William,
John, and William, his brothers-german ; "\^'illiam H., burges of Dumbertane ;
John H., in Kirkpatrik ; John H., elder, in Dumbertane ; John, his Ton ; and
Alexander Ilouftoune, delatit of Convocatioune of our Ibuerane ladeis liegis and
Invafioun of the faid Andro for his flauchtcr ; and houfing of him in ane Houfe
within the toun of Dunbertane.

Persewar, Andro Hammiltoune of Cochno.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, The Lard of Cvvnynghameheid ; Mr Jhone Porterfield of pat

Ilk; Johne Schaw of Broiche; Mr Riehert Strang; Mr Jhone Abircrumby.

Prelocutouris for the peri'ewaris, Claude Hammiltoune, fone to my lord Dnik ; James H. of

CniikvvoU; Johne H. of Stanehoufe ; Alt-x"^ JL of Myrretoune; James Noble of Eerme.

' I'rove. ' To one individual on the Assise more tli.in anotlicr. ^ Forger. ' There is no niarliing

on the Record indicative of the nature of their crimes, which, however, may be pretty accurately conjectured.

22 Mar, criminal trials. * 451

Andro Haniiniltouii declarit, vpone his aith, he wald perfew the faid Lard of
Houftoime, Mr \Villiaine and Johiie, his brother, of the Ji/^l poynt of the Letteris
allanerlie. Item, the Laird, his faidis twa brother, and Williame, alfwa his
brothir, vpone the Jeciiiid poynt allanerlie : And all the perfones on pannell for
the ///rid poynt. — The lajl poynt contenit in the Letteris, tuiching the Conuocatioun, &c., is fundin to be put to the AlFyife.

AssisA prefaturum perfonarmn.^

Joline Culqulioune of Luce, Robert Colquhoune of Carallro- Williame Levingfloune of JerwifDauid Berklay of Ladyland, dane, wod,

Robert Lord Boyd, Williame Smollett, burges of Andro M'ferlane of Arrochare,

James Glenne of the Bar, Dumbertane, Johns Cwnynghame of DrumJohne Somerulle of Cambufne- Walter Buchquhennane of Drum- quhadill.

thane, makiil.

Verdict. The haill fornemmit perfones on pannell, except Johne Houftoune,
elder, in Dumbertane, CoNUiCT be the faid Aflyife of aiming vpoune Andro
Hammiltoune of Cochno, within ))e bur' of Dumbertane, vpone J)e xviij day of
Marche laftbypaft, quhair the faid Andro wes befet vpoune the Hie-gait fiairof,
and with drawin fwerdis invadit him, and compellit him to tak ane Houle for
defence of his lyffe, vpoune fubdantye.^

^laufilitti* of Xi)t 1)011110 Eairlj of <grriulaiDtrcnf.

* Alexander Haitlie, eldell fone to the Gudman of Lambden ; Johne,
his broder, Robert Lowry, iu Reidhall,' Acquitted by an Affife of the Slaughter
of vmq'" Stevin Brounfeild, younger of Grenelawdene.

Persewaris, Steviu Brounfeild of Grenelaudene, fader ; and William B., brojier.

Prelocutouris for the Pannall,

The Commendater of Jedburcht ; Andro Ker of Faudounfyde ; The Laird of Trabroune ; Mr Tho.

M'^caljane ; Mr Johne Mofcrope ; Cuthbert Cranftoun of Tliirlellane-manys.

Prelocutouris for the Perfewaris,

Adame Brounefeild of Hardakeris ; Alexander B. in Eiflfeild ; Patrik B. in HafTiltoune-manys ;

Alexander B., broJier to ])e faid Adame; Alexander Brounfeild iu the Manys.

The pannall afl^it inftrumentis that Stevin Brounfeild, elder, declarit thatthair
wes na actioun of deidlie ffeid betuix him, his freindis, perfewaris, and the faid
pannall and thair freindis.

Conl)Ofnt(ou on J'outlj Siiuf) of Dcitl) — eeiountjtnrr, ku

Jul. 8. — Andro Ramsay, burges of Perth f Robert Pittilo, and James

' The Ahsaitcs were Mongo Lyndfay of Balull, Robert Bucliquhannane of Ballocli, Hew Crawfurd of Kili>urny, Johne Cwnynghame of Glengarnok, Alex. Park of Bagray, Mr Johne Wod of
Galefloune, Louk Striuiling of Ballagane, and James Edmeltoune. Tiiis is one of the smallest
Assises en Record. There are numerous instances of ihirtecn persons being on Assises such as tiiat
in the preceding Case of the Scots, but very few of so small a. number as eleven, ^ Suddenly ;

ou a sudden ; Lat. suhito. ^ See Jul. 6, 15G7.

452 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564.

Rynd there, and ten others, delatit of arte and parte of Coniiocatioune of our
foiierane ladeis liegis, bodiu in feir of weir, and crevvale Hurting and Wounding
of Williarae Morefoun, feruand to the Lard of Cragy for the tyme, vpone the
South Inche, befyde the bur' of Perth, in the moneth of Januar, 1562, after that
he was tane and holdin in thair handis, in his heid, breking of his collar-bane
and fchulder-blaid ; and llreking of him throw his left arme and in his breift,
aboue his left pap, to the effufioun of his blude, and hurting of him in his faid
arme, quhairthrow he hes nocht the habilitye thairof that he had of befoir ;
comraittit vpon fubdantye.

Persewar, Williame IMorefoune ; Maifter Robert Creyclitoun, Aduoeat.
Prelocutoukis, Joline Rofs of Cragye ; James, Iiis brother ; Patrik Evict of BalhoufTye.

The pairtie paffit fra the perfute of Andro Rarafay, James Dauidfoune, and
Johne Chaip ; and deponit his aith, that he had juft caufe to perfew the remanent on pannall.

AssisA.
Williame Kynnynmonth of Hill, Alexander Blair of Balthyok, Joline Blair of Melgynche,
Joline Lyndefay of Alytli, Alexander Blair of Freirtoune, Williame Chalmer of Segydene.'

Verdict. James Rynd, burges of Perth, Fylit."

^Ii-!Uf5:l)tri — ITuUue e.tecutfon of t\)t Sittan*

Aug. 11. — Robert Patersoune, burges of Ed'; Laui-ence Sympfoune,
tailliour thair ; Katherine Paterfoune, his fpous ; Arthour Granger, thair ;
delatit of the Slauchter of vmq''' Nicoll ^oung, tailliour.^

Persewaris, Robert .jf'ung, fader ; Johne, brojier ; and the remanent kyn and freindis, &c.

Robert Paterlbun and Arthour Granger aflvit inllrumentis that the perfewaris
aboue writtin pall fra thair perfute.

The faid Johne 5o""g (tailliour) vnlawit in the panis contenit in the Actis of

Parliament, for nocht productioun of the Letteris, dewlie execute and indoi'fate,

vpoune Robert Molcrope ; in refpect that mentioun is maid, that he wes ferfit

and focht within the bur^ of Ed", and chargeit at the Mercat-croce of Ed"" ;

and chargeit at f/ie 31ercat croce thairof, having his duelling place for the tyme

within Jedburghe. The faid John proteftit for his releif of the OfRciare,

executour thairof.^ — The Laird of Pennycuke became furety for the entry of

Sympfoune and his fpoule, at the next Aire of Edinburgh, &c. ; and the jiarties

m\itually took out Laicbnrrows againll each other that they fliould be ' harmeles

and fkaithles of thame and all that thai may latt,' &c.

' The other seven were burgesses of Perth. '' The rest were Acquitted. ^ See the

proceedings against the Magistrates of Edinburgh, he, Jun. (i, ISSi. '' A protest is accordingly

recorded, ' becaus he himself was ignorant of the Lawis, and maid oxpenfiis vpone William Barrye,
Meflinger, for putting of the faidis Letteris to dew executioune ; and inl'afar as thai wer nocht dewlie
execut, the fait thairof wes in the faid Williame and nocht in him ; that thairfore, he mycht haif his
releif,' &c.

22 Mae. criminal TRIALS. * 453

iMutilatiou — (!?ltr jTnili.

Sep. 20. — JoHNE GoRDOUNE, in the Park ; Alexander G., of Traquhane ; James, his fone ; and Robert Levingftoune, delatit of the Mutilatioiine
of Robert Macteir, feruaud of Thomas M'Clellane of Bomby, of his thorab of his
right liand, and vtheris crymes contenit in the Letteris direct Jjairupoune ;
committit be thame vpoune the thrid day of Auguft laftbypaft, vpoune auld fFeid
and foirthocht fellonye.

Persewaris, Tho. M-CIellane of Bomby ; Ro* Forrefter, burges of Kirkcudbrycht ; Ro' M^Teir.
Prelocutouris for the Perfewaris, My Lord of CafljUis ; Hew Kennedye, liis fafer broker ; The
•Lard of Drumnellaiie ; The Tutoiir of Bomby ; Mafter Thomas M<'clellan.

Prelocutouris for tlie Defendaris, Mr Johue Mofcrop; Tlie Lard Lochinvar ; Johne Schaw of
Haly ; Hew Wallace of Tarall ; The Lards of Lammyngtoune and Skralicg.

The Letteris wes Caffin, becaus ]jai wer nocht devvellie execute and indorlate.

Oct. 12. — John Henrye, in Striuiling ; James H., younger, thair ; and
Johne H., fone to James H., elder, thaiz', delaitit of theSlauchter of vmq'" Johne
Rae, in Bukeburne, (Bannockburne ?) within the fcherefdome of Striuiling.
Perseware, Jonet Merfchell, relict of the faid vmq''-' Johne Rae.
Prelocutouris for the perfeware, The Lard of Luce (Luss) ; My Lord Boyd ; The Lard of

Diintreith ; The Lard of Manis.

Prelocutouris for the defendaris, The Lard of Fordell ; Mr Henrye Kinrofs ; Mr Richard

Strang ; Mr Edward Henderfoun ; The Lard of Lany.

Maifler Henrye Kynrofs, ane of the prelocutouris foirfaidis, afldt inftrumentis
vpoune the electioune of the faidis fyve prelocutouris, and that the Lard of
M^farland afliftit to the pex-fute. And als aflvit inftrumentis vpoune the indorfatioune of the Letteris producit and executioun thairof, in the moneth of Junij,
as the indorling thairof beris ; quhilk Executioune wes maid befor the committing of the faid Slauchter : Item, allegit that the faid Johne Henderfoune was
within the aige of tuelf jeir,' and wes nocht capax {doli), nor habill" to vnderly
the law thairfor. — Verdict/ ' Acquittis.'

Sitbasion —Igniting: mx'n raounUiittr, $rc.

George Gordouxe of Scheues, knycht, George Gordoune, 5ounger
of Geycht, James Cheyne, &c. (eighteen others), delatit of the crewale Invafioune
of Maifter William Con of Auchry, and Hurting and Wounding of him in

' On the margin, ' Puer and dischargeit, becaus he wes within xij ^eiris.' " Liable; Lat.

/lahilis. ^ Henrye Levifloune of Grene5ardis was the only Laird on tliis Aiiife. Robert Seytoune
of Tullebody, Robert Drummond of Carnoke, Robert Forefter of Boquhane, and Walter ^I'Cawlay
of Ardincapill, were amerciated for being absent. The rest were persons of no note.

454* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564.

diiierfe pairtis of his body, to the greit effiifioune of his blude ; and ftriking and
dinging with biydill of Johne Paterfoune, George Broune, and Alexander
Troupe, his cotteris ; and vtheris crynies, at lenth expi'emit ' in the Letteris
direct thairupoune.

Persewar, Maifler William Conne of Auclirye.
Prelocutouris for the Perfewar. Prelocutouris for the pannall.

My Lord of Caffillis, My Lord Borthuik, Mr The. INPCal^ane, Mr Dauid Boithiiik,

The Lard of Cokpill, Hew Kennedy of Bar- George Baird of Auchtnaddy, Mr Tho. Gordonne.
qidiynaye.

And becaus fufRcient nowmer of Barronys and Pearis conipeirit nocht to
pafs vpoun the AfTyife of the faidis Lairdis of Geyeht, elder and 30unger, the
Juftice ordanit fouerties to be relTauit of thame for thair comperance the thrid
day of the next Juflice-aire (Aberdeen), or foner, vpoune xv dayes waruyng, to
vndirly the law for the faidis crymes.

Verdict. ' Acquittis' James Cheyne and the other pannels. ' The Lard of
Pittindreych, George JoLneftoune of Creychtmond, INIr Duncan Forbes of INIonymuflv, and John Forbes of Fyn3eak,' were the only Barons on the Affife.

Absextes ab Affifa.
James Dempflare of Aiichterles, George Le(lie of Touche, James Stewarte of Brig,

Mr Tho'' Keir of Cowclaraquhy, William Ltflie y' of Wardres, Mr Johne Craig of CraigisfiiUray,
The Lard of Balhagartye, The Lard of Delgatyc, Alex. Bucquhane of Auchnacoy,

The Lard of Cvnache, John Seytoune of Auchinhaif, Patrik Leyth of Harthill,

.... Leflie of that Ilk, William Aucliinlek of Schethin, Johne Caddell of Adowne,

W^m. Gordoune of Auchindoune, Patrik Mowat of Boquhally, Williame Leflye y' of Barres.

s

:^nbasion — Inu-ttns antr auountrmrf — ^flmcsucfetm

Oct. 14. — Maister Archebald Dowglass, and Johne D. in the

Eiftfcheill, delatit of the crewall Hurting and Wounding of Jonet Wifchert,

fpows to ]\Iaifter Thomas Weddell, in hir rycht hand of twa fyngaris thairof :

And Hurting and Wounding of Elizabeth Hutchefoune, fpous to Charlis Burdeaulx, in hir rycht hand, fpecialie in hir thowm thairof; committit be thame

vndir filence of nycht vpoune the xvij day of July laftbypaft, be vay of Haiinfuckin, in abfence of tliair faid fpowffis ; quhairthrow the faidis Jonett and

Elizabeth wilbe mutilat ; to the effufioune of thair blude.

Prelocutour for the pannall, Maifter Thomas Weftoune.

The faid Maifter Thomas (Weddell) producit THE QuENis grace writing,

and aflvit inftrumentis tliairupoun, defyring juftice conforme thairto : And alfe

proteftit for renieid of law.

' Expressed ; Lat. exprimerc. ' The names of a number of others of less note were also

lianded over to the ' Thcsaiirar,' to levy the usual fines. These, as appears from (/le Register of the
Privi) Seal, and other PiiMii- Records, were very rigorously exacted. The proceeds were usually
gifted to some retainer of the Court in compensation for salaries, &c.

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 455

(Regina,)

Justice, Juftice Clerk, and sour deputlis, We greitt 30U wele. Forfamekle as the
xiiij day of October inftant is aflignit to Maifter Aicliebald Dowglafs and Johne Dowglafs in J)e
Schelis flbr to vndirly owre law for Jie crcvvale Invafioun, Hurting, and Wounding of Jonet Wifchert,
fpous to Mr Thomas Weddell, and Elizabeth Huchefoune, fpous to Charlis Burdaux, within our
bur' of Edinbur', as at mair Jenthe is contenit in our Lettres direct Jiairupoune : Quhairfor it is our
will, and we charge ^ow to proceed at fe faid day, and do jullice to ]ie faidis complenaris, but ony
delay, nochtwithftanding ony Writing direct or to be direct in jie contrair. As 56 will anfwer to ws
fiairupoune. Subfcriuit with our hand, At Ed" Jie xiiij day of October, 1564. Maria Regina.

Proteftis the fad Mr Thomas Weddell, that nochtwithftanding that TJiomas
Johnejloune wes nocht fummond in his Letteiis, that he paft fra his perfute.
Stevin Storye in Plefance was amerciated for not producing the fame. — Continued
to Oct. 16 and 17 ; on which laft date they were Replegit, be Interlocutour, to the
Regalitie of Dalkeyth be Thomas Dowglafs, burges of Ed", and baillie thairof.'

eSJoun^ine — ^fourfiiits iialieti proplr ijoiti) firitJles, ^^c. — Cuttiitjj

X\)z barlis of Cattlf , ^r.

Oct. 17. — JoHNNE Greiusoune 01' IIai,ydayhill, Roger and
Mathow ' his brether, Gilbert M^Gub, and Thomas Mammarfoune, delatit of
the Hurting and Wounding of Elizabeth Creychtoun, fpous to Robert Chertouris of Aftrowane, in diuerfe pairtis of liir body, to the greit effulioune of hir
blud ; and ftryking of thair feruandis, being nakit, with brydillis and fwerdbeltis, and breking of the bakkis of thair gudis ; "' and vtheris crymes at lenth
expremit in the Letteris direct thairupoune.

Prelocutouris for the Perfewaris. Prelocutouris for the Pannall.

Jo. Creychtoun of Ryhill, The Lard of Skraling, The Lard of Keris, Mr Johne Mofcrope,
Mathow Campbell of Lowdoune, knycht, Harbert Anderfoune, Cuthbert Greir,

The Lard of Frendraucht, W'" Symontoune of The Lard of Garleife.
Hardingtoune.

The faid Mr Johne Mofcrope aflcit inftrumentis, that the Tutour of Sancquhare producit our fouerane ladeis Lettres in Jugement ; and being inquyrit
' Gif he, Robert Chertouris, and his fpous, perfewaris, wald byde at the executioune thairof? Affii-mit the famin. Quhairupovme the faid Mr Johne afkit
inftrumentis ; and als that the faidis Lettres, fafar as Mathow Greirlbune and
Johne Morefoune were contenit therein, was nocht dewiie execute nor indorfat
vpone thame, becaus thai wer chargeit be the executour thairof be oppin proclamatioune at the Mercat-croce of the burcht of Dnnirfreije, and the faidis
perfones ar indwellaris within the ftewartiie of KirJnidhiycJit, as the perfewaris
thame felfis confeffit. The faid Mr Johne defyrit the firft and laft poyntis of
the faidis Letteres to be red in prefens of the Aflyife. Item, aflvit inftrumentes

' ' Difchargit.' ^ Live-stock, cattle.

456* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1564.

that the faid Johne Greirfones acciifatioune fuld be onlye vpone the firjl poynt
thairof, and the faidis Roger Greirfoune, Gilbert JVrGub, and Thomas Maramarfoune vpone the laji.

ASSISA.

Peter Dennum of Crecliane, Nineane Cwnyugliain of Craig- Robert Men5eis of Auclnnlell,
Gil' Roreflbune in Kirkcudbright, neftane, Jo. Satlingtoune of Auchinfkeeche.

And becaus na nowiner of Airj'ife wes fnndin, the Juftice coutinewit this
actioune to the xiiij day of Februar nixt to cum ; and Cuthbert Greirfoune,
Tutour of Larg, is plege for thair entre thairto.

Absentes, The Maifler of Glenkardine (Glencairne,) Robert Kirkpatrick of Brakoch, John
Ed;are of Ingliftoune, Andro Cwnyngbame of Birkfcbasv, and fifteen others, who were all amerciated
for not entering on the Affife.

^lausljter of tfje HairtJ of I^assinticne.

Oct. 21 — WiLLiAME Ellot of HoRSLEHiLL, Robert, Gawane ' and
Arche, - Williame Ellot, baftard fone to vmq^' Robert Eliot, James Scot, fone
to Walter Scot in Haflindene, delatit of the Slauchter of vmq'" Dauid Scot of
Hassindene ; committit vpoun xviij day of October inftant.

Persewaris, The Lard of Baleleuche, (The Quenis Aduocattis.)
Prelocutouris for the Perfewaris. Prelocutouris for the Pannall.

The Gudnian of Thirlftane, Tho* Scot of Edene, The Lard of M'Kerfloune, W. Douglafs of Cruik,
Walter Scot of Edlchaw, Tho*- Scot of Hanyug, The50ungLard of Edmilloune, Alex. M^Dowgall,
The Gudnian of TuCchelaw. of Steidrig, Mr George Dowglafs.

My Lord Juftice Clerk aflvit inftrumentis, that the pannall aboue writtin defyrit
thair perfewaris to be putt vpone thair Affyife ; becaus thai knew befor the
tryell of the cryme thai wer delatit of : And proteftit, that albeit the Juftice
depute, be awyife of his Afleflbui'is, for the prefent tyme confentit heirto, that
the fame in tyme cuming fuld be na preparatiue. — Veedict and Sentence.
' Fylit— Decollat.' '

^tiifeins a jjrecjnant S8iloman — C]^iIt--miirUn%

Nov. 29. — ^VILI,IA]\rE Harrott in the Cannongait, delatit of the
ftx-yking and dinging Avith his handis and feit Katherine Hay, being greit with
chyld ; ofT the quhilkis ftraikis fcho tuke bed, and continuand in the pane and
dolour thairof, pairtit with chyld ; and fwa wes crewalye flane be him in hir
wamb. — Replegiated to the Regality of Halyrudehoufe.

GTouboration — 3)nbasion nf tl;f ItafrU of (JTamlarfl, ^r, in a #enftU

Court of tfje ^i'Ornfi: of air.

Dec. 12. — Barnard P^ergussoun of Kilkeran, * Thomas' and

' ' Acquit.' See May 31, 1565, Ac. '■' ' Piier — difchargeit.' 3 Excepting in the case

of Gawane and Arche. ^ For accounts of this and other similar Feuds, see History of the

Kknnedies, quarto, Edin. 1830. '■' Thomas Fergussoune and those marked * were discharged

simjiliciter.

5

22 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 457

David his brothers, and fifty-one others, delatit for Conuocatioune of our
fouerane ladeis lieges, vpone the laft day of July laftbypaft, bodin in feir of
weir, &c. to the nowmer of ane hundreth perfones, incontrair the tenour of the
Actis of Parliament, and cuming within the Tolbooth of Air, quhair Robert
Crawfurd of Clolynane, John Dunbar of Blantyre, and Robert Campbell of
Ovirtoune, the Schereff deputtis of the fcherefdome thaii-of wes (ittand in jugement, in ane fenfit Court, for adminiftration of juftice ; and thair, oppinlie, in
plane face thairof, eftir injurious wordis betuix thame, crewalie invadit Johne
Crawfurd of Camlarg, and vtheris being with him in cumpany, with drawin
fwerdis and ftavis for thair llauchteris ; and thairthrow trublit the faid Court,
and ftoppit the laidis Scheref deputis to minifter juftice in the actioun and
cauffis contenit in the Letteris criminall direct J^airupoune, then depending
before thaitti. — The other pannels of note follow : —

Thomas Ferguflbune in the Traif, G.Kennedy of Balmaclannochene, Olipher and Robert, his fons,
Hectour F. fpous to Agnes Crawford, Robert Blair, his lioufliald man.* Gilbert K. of D., 5ounger,

Niniane F. his fon, Duncan Kennedye of Dalquharne, Matho K., feruand to Jonet K.

William F. of Auchinfoule,* Andro Graham, his houiliald man, Hew K., fone to fe Gudman of

Duncane F. of Glenbowar, Wra. Cunynghame of Clonkard, Bogend,

Walter Kennedy, fone to Drum- Dauid Kennedye, alias MePr/f^e,* Gilbert K., fone to Sir Hew of

nellane, Johne Kennedye of Drumnellane, Girwanmanis.

Gilbert Erie of Caffillis amerciated for not entering Patrik Kennedye, younger
of Dalgerrok, and feven others, to underly the law. — As Baillie of the Regality
of Corfrawgall, he defired to replegiate Thomas Ferguffoune in the Traif. —
Continued to ' Thurifday nixt,' Dec. 14.

Prelocutouris for the pannell. — Mr Thomas M<:Kel5eane, Mr Johnne Mofcrope, James Muir,
brother to the Laird of Auchindrane, Johne Schaw of Halye, The Lai-d of Keris, Williame Cwnynghame, 30unger of Caprintoune.

(Dec. 14.) — The Justice, be Interlocutour, ordinit that the faid Thomas
Ferguflbune in Travis be nocht replegit to the faid Regalitye, becaus thair wes
na writtis, actis, nor na vther reafonabill cans propouit that the farain wes befoir
ane Regalitie. — My Lord Caffillis proteftit that the Interlocutour pronunceit
Jjairaueut be nocht preiudiciall to his Regalitie foirfaid.

ASSISA.

The Laird of Camall, George Keffaue, James Dunlope of fat Ilk,

Johne Cathcartof Carltoune, Johne Montgomerye in the Flatt, Johne Blare of Myddil AuchinThe Lard of Entrekin, Johne Schaw of Grimmet, drane,

George Corry of Kelwood, Thomas Scot of Hanyng, Williame Inglis of Scheill.

(Dec. 15.) — Verdict. The faidis Hectour, Thomas and Barnard Ferguffoune Fylit of arte and parte of the Convocatioune, &c. Continued as to
the reft to the next Juftice-aire of Air.

VOL. I. f 3 M

458 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565.

assatiUina In tije ^))tvi^ Court of aijr, $(c,

(Dec. 15.) — JoHXE Crawfurd of Camlarg, David and Quintine hia
brothers, were ' Fylit' by the above Affife for the fame crime.

Prelocutouuis for the pannell,

The Lard of Kelwod, The Lard of Lefnoreife, Maifter Dauid M^'gill.

Fifty-four others were also charged ; the most remarkable of whom were,

Will. Crawfurd of Drummifhoy, Dauid Ciaufuid of Kerfe, John Power of Siluerwod,

Dauid Crawfurd, his brother, W™ Cathcart of Drummifnoddane, George Logan of Brounhill,
Allane Cathcart of Drumgowane, Williarae Cathcart of Wodlieid, Adame Dunbar of Barcurrocb,
Da. Cunjaighame of Polquhirne, Al. Cwnynghame of Montounhill, Cuthbert Dunbar, his brother,
Willianie C, his brother, Williame Cathkart of Watterheid, George Neifbet, in Tempelland.

The remainder of the pannel were remitted to the next Juftice-aire of Air.

^tfalittfl iHontu — ^rourstits aitK iSanisIjmtnt.

Jan. 12, 1564.-5. — Patrik Campbell, cuke and feruand to Dame Katherine Oliphant, Lady of Keltye, delatit of the theftuos breking of ane Bonetkaife, pertening to the faid Dame Katherine, being in hir chalmer on the Northe
lyde of Ed', and theftuos Steling and conceling fra hir, furth thairof, of ffyftie
pundis of Scottis Testanis, ane Portugal ducat, and xx'^ fchillingis of vthir
money. — Sentence. To be scourgeit throwch the Toune, and Baneist the
realme during the Qdenis will ; and to departe furth of the famin within ten
dayis nixt heireftir; and never, to returne within the famin, without fpeciale
Licence of the Quenis Maieftie, vnder the pane of leid.

ailomiUins a Hailit of lUnfrtiM in (P.vrrution of i)is #fRce.

Mar. 5. — Patrik Jaksoune, hurges of Renfrew, and Sir Williame
Jakfoune, his brotlier, fylit by an Affife of arte and parte of the Invading
of Adame Hall, ane of the Baillies of Renfrew, with drawin fwerdis, and Hurting of him, to the effufioun of his blude, in his rycht hand, vpone the xix day of
Nouember laftbypaft, within the burcht of Renfrew, he beand in executioim of
his office of Baillie vpoune the faid Patrik, in putting of him in Ward within
the Tollmth of the faid Burcht, quhill ' he had fundin lawborrovvis that Johne
Quhyte in Abbotilynche fuld be (kaithles of him, as law wald.

laaouuKing anU iHutilation of tl)t pouns llairU of i^incaitj,
autJ * iHalnim iinnram/ i)ts airotljrr.

Mar.^ . — Johne Striuling of Craigbernard, John his fone and
apperand air, Duncane, ^V'illiame, and Walter, brothers german to the auld
Lard, Williame, baftard brother to the 3oung Lard, and nineteen others, delatit
Until. ^ The date is not prefixed, but it must hare been between Mar. 8 and Mar. 13.

1

23 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 459

of the Invafioune of James Kyncaid, Ion and apperand air to James Kyncaid
of that Ilk, and Malcum Kyncaid his brother, within the Tonne of Glefgvv ; and
Hurting and Wounding of the faid James in his held, in perrel of his lyffe :
And Hurting and Woimding of the faid Malcum in diuerfe pairtis of his body,
and Mutilatioune of him of his left arrae, and making him impotent thairof ;
vpoune auld ffeid and foirthocht fellonye ; coramittit in the moneth of Februar
1563. — Deserted. Proteftis Mr Johne Ruthirfuird, that the diverting of this
Court be nocht prejudicial to the Quenis actioune.

<^elUna asaines at UqI) ^vittsi*

Mar. 20 James 5oung, cutlare, burges of Ed', and twenty-two others,

delatit of breking of the Actis of Parliament anent Wynis, in felling thairof,
&c. Their Cases were continued from time to time, and the offenders fined.

^ttulten,)— Sncest.

Apr. 6, 1565. — Maister Johxne Craig, Parfone of Kincardin, and
Margaret Mowat, fpous to Johne Craig of Craigisfyntray, delatit of the committing of the fylthie and horrible cryme of Adultery, ather of thame with vtheris,'
feu the moneth of December 1562, and nychtlie and continualie fenfyne.

Prelocutouris for tbe paniiale,
Mr Richert Strang, IVIr Alex. Sytn, Mr Thomas Bannatyne, Archebald Dempflar, Mr Frances Cbyne.

Afkit inftrumentis vpoune the productioune of the fentence of Devorcement,
of the dait the xviij day of November, 1562. — Continued to Monunday, the
nynte of Apryle inftant.

(Apr. 9.) — Comperit the faidis Mr Johne Craig, and Margaret his fpous,
and afkit inflrumentis, thay requyrit and defyrit proces in the actioune aboue
nemmit ; and in caife the Juflice wald continew the faid mater, that tliai allutterlie ' difTaffentit thairfra ; protefland alwayis, that the continuatione thairof be
na wyife prejudiciall to thair defenflis now vfit, or to be vfit be thaim in ony
tyme theireftir. — Continuit to Thurifday, the xij of Apryle inftant.

Maifter Johne Craig, Perfouue of Kincardyne, and Margaret Mowet, allegit
fpoufe to Johne Craig of Craigisfintray, beand perfonalie in Jugement, and callit
be vertew of our fouerane ladeis letteris, purcheft be Mr Johne Spens of Condy,
and Mr Robert Creychtoune of Eliok, hir hienes Aduocattis, to vnderly the law
for the Adultery committit be ather of thame with vtheris, in the moneth of
November 1562 yeii'is, and daylie, monethlie, and continuallie fenfyne, the faid
Margaret being the fpous of the faid Johne Craig, and nocht laufulie devorceit ;
and as for Infeft, fcho being the faid Mr Johnnis brother-fonis ^ wyffe. It wes
' With each other. " Entirely, altogether. ' Nephew's.

460 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565.

allegit be the faidis Mr Johne and Margaret, and their prelocutouris, that na
proces aucht to be led in the laid Court of Jufticiaiye aganis thame, be vertew
of the faidis Letteris, for the faid allegit cryraes of Adulterye and Infeft ; becaus
vpone the xviij day of November 1562, the faidis Margai'et and Johne Craig,
befoir the faid allegit Adultery and Infeft committit be the faidis Maifter Johne
and Margaret, ather of them with vtheris, libellit in the faidis Letteris, were
lauchfully Devorceit and feparatit be Sentence irreuocabill, pronunceit and gevin
be Mr Johne Ranifay, Minifter of Abirdour, and Thomas Cryftefoune, Minifter
of Gemrye, liavand fufficient Commiffioune to gif the famin. And for verefeing
of thair faid allegeance, prodvieeit the faid Sentence, fignatit ' and fubfcriuit in
forme, as eftir followis.

Sentence of Divotice, pfoceecfing on t//e groiii/d of luFoiF-tiCY.

Till all and sindrv ProfelToiuis of Godilis moid holie Gofpell and Ewangellis, quhome thir
prefentis lall to-cum, Maister Johne Ramsay, Minifter of Aberdour, and Thomas Crystesoune,
Minifter of Geniiye, defyiit peax, mercye, and grace, throw Jefus C'ryft, our onlie Lord and Sauiour.
Forsamekill as it wes lamentalilie exponit to ws be ane difcrete woman, callit 3Iargaret Moivat,
docbter to Patriiv Mowat of Buciiquliellie, that fcho maid ane Contract and Band of Mareage with ane
callit Jolinne Craig, fone to vmq''^ Tlioraas Craig in Cragiftene, ^it, nochtwitbftanding, the foirfaid
Johnne accumpaneit nocht with ])e faid Margaret be mvtuale cohabitatioune, like as in mareage is
requyrit ; be reaioune the faid Johmic is knawin to be impotent, as fcho allegit: And thairfor fcho
obtenit ane Summondis, diiectit be Adame Herrot vnto ws, to cans lauchfulie fummond, warne, and
charge the faid Johne, perfonalie apprebendit, or at his Paroche Kirk, on Sounday, quhilk wes the
fyfteint day of the moneth of Nouember, to compeir befoir ws in the Paroche Ivirk of Gemrye, to heir
and fe cognitioune takin in the faid mater be ws, quho had the Coraraiflioune for the tryell of the
faid mater : And to heir and fe cognitioune taikin, in fie fort, that the faid Johnne fuld be feparatit,
pairtit, and devorceit fra the foirfaid Margaret, gif he wes knawin to be impotent frome liis natiuitye,
as faid is. For the tryell and teftificatioune of the quhilk, fum certane famous - and godlie Witnefis
wer giflfin to ws, in bill ;^ quha, being examiuat be ws and fworne, depouit, all be thair aithis, that the
foirfaid Johnne wes uiroTENX fra his natiuitye, and culd noclit accumpany witli his pairtye, as is
afoir fpecifeit, and as at mair lenth in the Letter of the Examinatioune of the faidis Witnefles is contenit. Thairfor, we, havand refpect to the endis and principale cans quhairfov mareage was inftitute and ordanit, conforme to the trew and infallibill Word of God, quhilk wes ])is, < to awoyd fornicatioune and to tiie procrcatioune of childrcne :' And confiderand the faid Johnne, quha is nowjier
abill to fatisfye and fufficientlie content ))e faid Margaret, nor na v]ier womane, as wes fufhcientlie proven
be fufficient Witneflis, vnfufpect, as faid is, now]ier ^it is abill to remar.e and accumpany with his faid
fpous be mvtuale cohabitatioune, as at mair lenth in our Sunilnondis, to Jie procrcatioune of childrene,
We, the faidis Maifter Johne liamfay and Thomas Cryftefoune, Minifteris foirfaidis, witii confent of
our Elderis, deaconis, and Minifteris aftemblit in the faid place for the tyme, hes pronunceit, decretit,
and decernit, and be the tennour of thir prefentis, pronunceis, decretis, and decernis the faidis perfonis,
Johnne Craig and Margaret Mowatt, to be separatit, pairtit, and devorceit, and be the tennour
of thir prefentis Separatis, Pairtis, and Devorceis tlie faidis perfones, ilk ane of thame, frome the
Holie band of Mareage, from hencofurth difloluit, rclaxit, and lowfit,'* in fie fort, as thocht the fame had
nevir b(!iie (-ftemit : And becaus thair is nathing obiectit nor laid to the faid Margaretis charge. We pro-

* Signet*'*}, sealed. ^ Persons of goo*] fame or repiitation. -^ Roll. ^ Loosed.

23 Mar. criminal TRIALS. * 461

nunce hir to be fre to fanctifye hir body agane in to Mareage, gif ' fcho plefis. In witness to this our
Decrete and Sentence irreuocabill, fubfcriuit with our handis, our fignettis is afBxit heirunto, At
Gemrve, the xviij day of this monethe of Nouetnberj the ^eir of God I".V^'. Ixij jeiris, afoir tliir vvitneffis, Williame Keith in Myddiltoune, Johne Donaldfouiie, Roberte Selpe.
JouNE DoNALDsouNE, with my hand at the penne, led be Maister Johne Ramsay, Minister.

Thomas Cristesouii, Minister of Gemrve, Witness, Ita est Thomas Cristesoune, fllinister

Robert Selpe, w' my hand at the pen, led be Thomas de Gemrye, sub meis signo et signeto in

Cristesoune, Minister of Gemrye, Witness, similibus et consuetis vsitat.

William Ketth, in Myddiltoune, w' my hand.

The Case was finally transmitted to the next Justice-aire of Aberdeen, but there
is no marking on the Recoi'd to indicate the decision of the Justiciar.

Slmftrsfttniff tl)t OTat) — H^orst-stcaliiitj:*

Apr. 28. — Mu James Birny, in Pitlurg, having failed to find caution
to fulfil THE Queen's Will, to which he had fubmitted himfelf, was Warded
in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for art and part of Convocation of the lieges,
' bodin in feir of weii*,' on Feb. 4 laft, and Umbefetting the way to Alexander
Ti'owp, in his palling along the highway near the INIill of Bedcarye, (he being
lame and unable to refill,) along with John Smyth, his fervant, and there cruelly
Invading them with lances and ' Jedburcht ftawis'^ for their Slaughter : And
alfo for Stouthreif and Healing from the faid Alexander of his black horfe, worth
1001., upon which he then rode. — (Apr. 30.) — He found caution to fulfil the
Queen's Will.

[Archibald Earl of Argyll, Lord Campbell and Lome, Jujl'ice-General.']

^i^\) Crtasou — Coiispiraci) to m\t tlje (Jlueen's pf rsoii, ^t,

[The following proceedings give a different view of this part of the life of the noted James Earl
OF Both WELL from that which has hitherto been related by Historians. Without at all entering upon
so extensive a field of controversy, the Editor has merely to refer the reader to the labours oi liohertson, Hume, Laing, M'-Crie, and other modern writers, for their various statements of tlie facts which
are reported to liave occurred immediately before the Marriage of Marv Queen of Scots with
Darnley. The subject will, it is hoped, be soon taken up by Mr Tytler, in the course of his historical work ; where, from the masterly and accurate manner in which that learned and impartial
author has already treated many of the most obscure and controverted points in the earlier liistory of
Scotland, much light may be expected to be tin-own upon the wliole of this extremely entangled and
intricate reign.

In reference to this remarkable individual, the Editor begs here to lay before the reader two very
interesting extracts, whicli, after investigation, he procured from the Kirk Session Records of the
Parish of Cauongate, from whence, it may be remarked, several important historical events may be
verified or illustrated. The story of Bothwell's first Marriage, and the subsequent cruel Divorce,
May 7, 1567,'' are already well known. This event is thus recorded in these Registers among the
Marriages, under date, Feb. 2i, 1565-6, ' James Eull Boduell — Jane Gordoun.' And in the

' Ifi ^ Staves. ' See Account of this Divorce, in Appendix to Robertson's Hist. No. XX, &c.

462 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565.

Record of Proclamations of Banns, the same day, the following entry also occurs : ' James Erll
BoDUELL — Jane Gordoune,' filler to pE Erll of Huntlie, 1, 2, 3." Ma(rned) in our awen,
(viz. Kirk of Canongate.)

These events are also fully treated of by Knox, Buchanan, Leshj, (in his Defence of Queen Mary,)
Meh'il, Spotsu'ood, Keith, Goodall, Tytkr, Chalmers, &c. Tiie enquiring reader will also find much
useful and important information in the Collections of State Papers, &c. by Anderson, Haynes, Murdin, and in the numerous Works of later Collectors.]

May 2. — James Earl of Boithuile, Lord Creychtoune aud Halis,
&c.^ was denounced rebel and put to the horn, and all his moveable goods to be
efcheated, as fugitive from the law, &c. ; and Gilbert Ker of Piynifyde-Loch,
and William Hepburne of Gilmertoiine, cautioners for his entry this day, were
amerciated for his non-appearance to underly the law for the crimes contained
in the following Letters, jiurchaied by Mr John Spens of Condy and Robert
Creychtoun of Eliok, the Queen's Advocates.

Summons of Treason againjl James Earl of Bothuile, S^c.
Marie, be the grace of God, Quene of Scottis, To our louittis Adame M'culloch, Marfchemont Herauld, Meflingeris, our Schereffis in

that parte, coniunctlie and feueralie, fpecialie conftitute, greting. Forfamekill
as it is hnimlie menit and fchewin to ws be our louittis, familiar clerkis and
counfalouris, Maifleris Johnne Spens of Condy and Robert Creychtoun of Eliok,
our Aduocattis, That qnhair it is of veritie, that upone the xxvj day of the
monethe of Marche, or thairby, in the jeir of God PV'lxij 3eiris, James Erle
BoTHWiLE Lord Halis and Admirall of our realnie, being laitlie reconciliat and
agreit with James Erle of Arrane, vpone lie debatis and contraverfeis as
had happinnit amangis thame of-befoir, precogitat, confauit, and confpyi'it the
treafonabill purpos and interpryife heireftir mentionat aganis our nobill perIbune, and did that wes in him to bring the famin to pafs, and to have perfuadit
our laid coufmg to have affiftit and tane parte with him in his maifl treafonabill
interpryife, vfand fik wordis, argumentis, and perfuafionis, as he thocht mycht
bell feme for the purpoife : That is to say, The faid James Eule BoithwiLE, the day foirfaid, jiroponit and earnefllie defyrit our faid coufing to confert and affift to him in this maner, faying, ' I knaw 3e haif innemies in Court

' This accomplished lady, who was the third daughter of George, fourth Earl of Huntly, Lord
High Chancellor of Scotland, six years after tiie date of her divorce, was married (2dly) to Alexander Earl of Sutherland, on Dec. 13, 1573. The Earl having died, Dec. 6, 1594, she married
(3dly) Alexander Ogiivy of Boyne, whom she also survived. She died May 14, 1629, in the 84th
year of her age. For the particulars of the life of this Lady, see Gordons Hist, of the Family of
Sutherland. Sir Robert Gordon, the author of that work, as well as John, twelfth Earl of Sutherland, the Hon. Alexander, and the Hon. Adam Gordon, were her sons by her second marriage.
Reference may also be made to Wood's Edit, of Douglas's Peerage, &c. - Viz. proclaimed for

the first, second, and third times, according to the rules of the Church. ■^ ' Williame Hebhroii

(^Hepburn) of Gilmertoun' became surety for his entry this day, by an Act dated Mar. 6, 1564-5.

23 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. « 463

• Jjat ftoppis 30W of 5our defyre at pE Quenis Ma^^" hand, quha will nevir

• ceile quhill' ])ai have deftroyit 50W and 5our faderis Houfe ; bot and" 36 will

• vfe my counfale, I fall fynd "pe meyne to efehew J>e haill wrek J)aii-of, and bring
' 50W to 5our purpoife. And this way fall we wirk. Howfone pF. Quenis
' Maieftie cumis vpone pe South fyde of pe Watter of Forth, quhilk wilbe
' fchortlie eftir Pafclie,^ we fall prowyde and keij) in cumpany famony freindis,
' feruandis, and parttakaris, as falbe abill, quhenne hir Ma"^ is at pE FIunting
' vpone pe feildis, or v))erwayis pafTand hir time mirralie, to execute ]jis pur-
' poife : That is to fay, AVe fall cutt in pecis famony of hir counfalouris, fer-
' uandis, or v})eris |)at will mak ws refiftance, and fall tak hir felf with us cap-
' tiue, and half hir to pE Castell of DujibertaNE, and }>air keip hir furelie,
' or v])irwyife deraayne hir perfoun at 5our plefour, quhill fcho aggre to quhat-
' fumeuir thing 56 fall defyre !' — Saying alfo, ' This thing is maift eafie to be
' done, quhenne hir Ma'^"' falbe drawin furth of pE Palice of Halyrude-
' HOUSE to pas hir tyme vpoune pe feildis, in quiet maner : And gif 36 tak ony
' feir to execute this interpryife, be reafouue of pe liafard or difficultye jjairof,
' 33 fall onlye bot fland and behald me put all thingis foirfaid to executioun ;
' and I fall quiklie execute and performe the premiffis !' And fwa the faid Erle
BoiTHWiLE treafonablie preconfauit, precogitat, and proponit the deathe, at the
leift the captiuite, empi'efoning, away-taking, and withhalding of our perfoune,
aganis our will ; and als foliftit, tyiftit,* and did that wes in him to have maid
our faid coufing affifter and parte-takare thairintill, had nocht bene the grace of
God, quhilk of his infinit piete, lufe, and favour that he hes to the conferuatioune
of our perfoune and Commoun-Avele of our cvmtre, wald nocht fuffir the faid maift
treafouabill interpryife to tak effect ; bot rather movit the hert of the faid James
Erle of Errane, our coufing, incontinent thaireftir to cum and revele the
famin to ws, for the tyme being in Falklaxd. And it is of veritie alfo,
that the foirfaidis Erlis of Arraxe and Boithwile, in the beginning of the
moneth of Apryle nixt thaireftir, being baith pei'fonalie conftitute befoir ws and
the Lordis of our Secrete Counsale, the faid Erle of Arrane, our
coufing, declarit the haill purpoife foirfaid, and awowit the fame vpone the faid
Erle Boithwile : And eftir that he had maid fayth with ane folempnit '
aithe, that his allegeance wes trew, he offerit to preve the famin vpone the faid
Erle Boithwile be quhatfumeuir maner it fuld feme expedient to ws and
Lordis of our Secrete Counfale to appoynt. And becaus the faid Erle Boithwile maid him to deny^ the famin, it wes nocht thocht expedient be ws and
Lordis of our Secrete Counfale, and als be the ernifi; defyre of baith the pairteis,
that baith thair perfones fuld be committit to ward in fure keping within our

' Until. '■' But if. = Easter. * Ejiticed. ^ Solemn. "^ Denied.

464 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565.

Castell of Edixburghe, and thair commandit to remane quhill we and oiu*
Counfall foirfaid had be all laiichfiiU meanis inquirit and maid fure tryall of
the veritie of the premiffes. And it is of veritie, alio, that with all poffible
diligence thaireftir, baithe the faidis Eklis wer conflitute and put IN AVard
within our Caftell foirfaid, thair to have remanit as faid is ; and in the meyne
tyme quhen diligent inquifitioun was makand to have done juftice in the faid
mater, the faid Erle Boithwile, as faid is, being delatit of Treafoune and
conftitute in "Ward, to half bene anfuerable thairfor according to the lawis of
our realme, he, knawing him felf maiil giltye, and his confcience bering record
aganis him, vpoune the laft day of Auguft nixt thaireftir, treafonable and contempnandlie brak his Wai'd and jirefoune of our Caftell of Edinburghe foirfaid,
and departit furth of the famin to his libertie, efchapand tharby the pvneifchement that was dew vnto him for the crymes of Lefe-maieftie foirfaid, and
thairthi'ow hes declarit him culpabill and accufabill of the foirfaid treafouabill
Conspiracie that he wes of before dilatit and accufit of : And als, he being,
as faid is, conftitute in Ward and vnder the fufpitioune and accufatioune of
cryme of Lefe-maieftie, nocht abyding tlie lauchfull tryell thairof, hot breking
his Ward in maner foirfaid, hes committit plane and nianifeft Treafoune, to his
awin grete infamye and fchame, and in hie contemptioune of ws, gevand occafioune to vtheris to commit the like horribill crymes, gif this remane vnpvneift.
Protestation hij Alexander Hepburn of Quhltfum againji Sentence of

Fugitatio7i and OuHawrij being jjronoK need again jl the Earl of HotliweU.

The famin day, compei'it in jugement of the faid Juftice Court, befoir the
geving of the faid Dwme, Alexander Hebburne of Quhiffam, and gave in
this Protestatioune, in writt, fubfcriuit with his hand, and defyrit the fame
to be regiftrat ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

I, Alexandeu Hebburne of Quhitsum, feruand and kyniiifman to James Erle Boithwill,
my Cheif, protestis folempnitlie in bis name, that fen fe faid Erie is allegit futnmond to this day
to corapeir befoir our fouerane ladeis Juflice, and to vnderly liir bienes lawea for certane allegit
crymes of Treafoune and Lefe-maieftie contenit in the Summondis direct tbairupoun : And nocbtwitbftanding bis innocence and mynd and will to have Jie tryell ]iairof, dar nocbt compeir, for feir of
bis lyife at this tyme and place, be reafoune of the grete conventioune of bis innemeis and vnfreindis
within this bur' at this tyme, quhome be feris to attempt his Slauchter and deftructioune be way of
dethe, and quba hes declare! ])aim felfis innemeis to him laitlie of befoir ; that bis non-comperance bo
nocht baldin nor reput as fugityve fra our faid foueran ladeis lawis, rebell nor culpabill of the faidis
crymes, be reafoune that be dar nocht compeir for jull feir and dreadour that mycbt fall (happen) in
ane conftant raanne ; as well apperis bo the grete gathering maid at this tyme in fe contrair, of pe
caufing of bis innemeis and vnfreiudis, patfuittis his lyfl'e and diftructioune vniuftlie ; hot that be may
be haid beireftir, at tyme and place fure and convenient, and the caufis of the faid feir ceifand, to
ofiBr bim felff to ane Affyife for the faidis allegit crymes, and byde the tryell fairof. And ficlik,
Proteftis, that quhateuir be done and procedit agains the faid Ehle, this day, be nocht preiudiciale to

23 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 465

him, his fame, lyff, landis, honour nov gudis, for the caufis foirfadis ; And defyiis this my Proteflatioune to he infert in the Buiiis of Adioinsile, and for the extract ]>airof, vpoune my expenfTis.

Alex". Hebburne of Quhitsum.
And in likwyfe the faid Maifter Johne Spens of Condy, Aduocat to our
foueran lady and ])erlewer of the faid actioune, in hir name Proteftit in the

contrail", as eftir followis.

Protestation of the Quern's Advocate, ' in the contrair' — Comperit Maifter Jolin Spens of
Condy, Aduocat to our foiierane lady, and allegit Jiat }ie faid Eble culd pretend na juft caus of his
abfence, nor juft feir ])at myciit fall in ane conftant manne ; fpecialie, be reafoun Jiat he is perfewit
he the ordour of juftice ; and ]iat feir Jiat he hes of juftice to be doune is nocht juft feir of the law ;
And thairfoir, can nocht be excufit, hot manne be haldin fugityve fra our Ibueran ladeis lawis ; nanielie,
confidering pair wes na conventioune of his vnfreindis pair, hot ])e Juftice and Memberis of Court,
ftttand with his Afteflburs, in quyet nianer. And Jiairfor, Proteftis pat he be haldin as culpabill of
the crymes contenit in the Letteris, and that he may incur all vperis panis, quhilk towart our foueran
lady, of hir lawis and practik of the realrae, he may incur.

May 4. — Alexander Drubjmond of Medope, of the thifteous deflructioune, fteling, intrometting, wafting, difiJoning, and conceling from Robert
Lord Elphinftoune, in the moneth of Decembex*, or thairby, the 5eir of God
I^Vlxij jeiris, and monethlie, 3eirlie, and continualie lenfyne, his gudis, geir,
and money, in grete quantitie, extending above the fowme of twentie thovvfand
pundis ; throw the occafioun of the Adultery committit be him with Margaret
Drummond, fpovs to the faid Lord, at the tyme foirfaid. The faid Alexander
afliit inftrumentis that he diiraffentit frome the continuatioune, and defyrit juftice, couforme to the Queen's grace writting ; and ficlik, aflvit inftrumentis,
that the Lord Eljjhinftoune purgeit him of all thiftuous dedis fpecifeit in the
Letteris. — Continued to the Juftice-aire of Linlythgow, Robert Lord Elphinftoune having become furety for his entry.

Conboration — SnbalJinij tlje Conimnitiator of StiUrljattan,

May 5. — Robert Innes of Inuermerkie, delatit off Conuocatioune
of our fouerane ladeis liegis, to the nowmer of iij" perfones, bodin in feir of
weir ; cumand to the Manys of Plewlandis, and Invafioune of Johne Commeudatour of Ardchattan, for his Slauchter and vtheris crymes. Alexander Innes
of Crombye become furety for his entry at the next Aire of Elgyne and Fores.

iHtitilation of ii)t 2tairt« of Borff.

May 9. — George Lord Seytoune, and John Seytoune of Cawraldftoune, his brother, James S., fon of vmq'^ John S., of Lathriflc, Alexander S.,
brother of \\'alter S. of Tullebody, and George S., in Tranent, were denounced
vol. l t 3 N

466 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565.

Rebels, and put to the horn, and all theii* movables ordained to be efcheated ;
and Hugh, Earl of Eglintoune, and Walter Seytoune of TuUebody, vvei-e amerciated for their not entering the laid perfons to underly the law for art and part
of the Mutilation of Francis Dovvglas of Borg of his right arm and left hand,
at leaft of the middle finger therof ; thereby rendering him impotent of the fame.

^laufffjtcv of ti)t itairti of IS^asatulsciif.

May 31. — Gawane Ei.lot of Houslehill,' William Eliot of Lanieftone, and "VV^illiame Eliot, callit Gaivenis IVillie, of Fallinefche, continued to
third day of the next Aire of Roxburghe," James Dowglas of Cawerfe, and
William Dowglafs of the Cruke, were amerciated for not entering the faid William of Lameftane and Gawenis Willie, who were denounced rebels, &c. — (Dec.
4 ) Robert (^oung, feruaud to the Lard of Pharneherft, comperit in jugement,
and producit this writing eftir following, defyrand the famin to be infert in the
Buke of Adjornale, and proteftit he mycht have the extract heirof, autentiklie ;
quhairof the tennour followis : —
Rex et Regina,
We vnderftand ))at our louit Williame Ellot of Horllieliill wes Banischit of our realme for }>e
arte and parte of fe Slaucliter of vniq''" Dauid Scot of Haffindene, for liis lyvetyme ; and ffand fouerteis |)airfor : Noclitwitliflanding ye quiiilk, We, for diuerfe cauflls and toiifiderations moving ws, be fe
tennour heirof, gevis and grantis Licence to ])e faid William to refort and cum lianie agane within
our realme, and to remane thairiutill as our fre liege, in tyme cuming, noclitwitliflanding ]ie faid Banifchement : And will and grantis ))at lie nor his fouirteis fall noclit be callit, fummond, nor accufit
fairfor, nor incur ony danger or fkaith fairthrow, in his perl'oun, landis, or gudis ; nochtwitliftanding
ony Actis or ftatutes, maid, or to be maid, in the contrair ; anent ]ie quhilkis we difpenfe be ]iir prefentis : Difcharging lieirfor our Juflice, Jiillice Clerk, Aduocattis, and all vjieris Jugeis within our
realme, of all calling, perfewing, trubling, or intrometting with the faid Williame, his fouerteis, fair
landis or gudis, for his returning and remaining at hame, within our realme, as faid is, and of ]>air offices in that parte, for euir, be )iir prefentis, Subfcriuit with our hand. At Ed". ]ie xxiiij day of
September, the 5eir of God r".V'^.lxv seiris. Maiiia R. IIenky R.^

Crrason.i&lc Sintnroinmuniua iwiti) tlje Bul>t of CljattcIIaiault anU
otljer 3tUl!Cls — Cafeiufl Snaats to strbe asainst tijr (»1urni, ^r.

Oct. 26. — Alexander Moncreie, fon to Williame Moncreif of that
Ilk, Jams Ross, and Duncane Robertsoun, feruand to the faid Alexander,
dilatit off arte and part of the trcafonabill and vnlawfuU fiipple, affiftance, intercommoning with JanR\s Duke of Chattellarault, James Erie of Murray, Alexander Erie of Glencarne, Andro Erie of Rothes, Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie, Gawin Commendator of Kilwynning, James Kii'kcaldy of the Grange, Maif-

' See Oct 21, 1564. ' John Soniervile of Brounhill became his surety. ^ See some

interesting particulars as to the Marriase of Mahy Queen of Scots and Dakn^ey, in the Notice,
I * pp. 478 and -!88, &c.

Hen. ET Mar. 1 & 23. CRIMINAL TRIALS. • * 467

ter James Haliburtoun, Proueft of Dunde, and vtlieris, our foueraois lordis and
ladeis Rebellis, and being denunceit tliair ennemeis, and at thair home, for thair
wilfull and manifeft contemptioune & difTobedience in non-compering at ane certane day, to anfuer to fie thingis as fuld be laid to thair charge : And this wes
done and conimittit vpone the xij, xiij, xiiij, xv, xvj, and all the dayis of this
infl;ant moneth, quhill' Sounday, the xxij day of the famin ; And for arte and
parte with thaim in thair wikkit and rebellious dedis. To the taikhme,^ the fame
wes CONFESSIT be thaim, in jjrefens of the Lordis of Counfale. Item, for arte
and parte of the vnlawfuU putting of thame lelf in amies, as raifit Men of Weir
aganis our tbueranis and thair auctorite, in wageis, vnder Williame MonCREIF OF THAT IlK, gOUNGER, and JaMES KiuKCALDY OF THE GkaNGE,

without owther command or Licence of our faidis foueranis ; taking wageis to
feme thame aganis our foueranis, thair realme and faithfull fubiectis ; expres
aganis the lawis of the realme, and incurrand the panis contenit thairintill : And
this wes committit be thaim the tyme foirfaid : 2o the taikmne, thai pad to
Ingland vpoune the xv day of this inftant, and thair remanit with the faidis
Rebellis and thair Capitanis, in armes, quhill the xxij of this inftant, that thai
wer takin reid-hand :^ And in fpeciale, the faid Alexander gat xx lib. for his
monethis wages, and the faid James x 1. ; and gaif fayth thairfor they fuld
feme as thai wer commandit be the faidis Capitanes.

Verdict. The AfTife fylit the faid Alexander and James of the whole
points, and the faid Duncan of the firft point of the Dittay. — Sentence. The
faidis Alexander Moncreif and Jaimes Ross to be hedit and quarterit :
And the executione delayit at the King and Queine's Grace commandement.^
The faid Duncan Robertfoune to be scurgeit throuch this Toune of Ed', without forther pvneifment in his perfoune or gudis.

Credsonafili) ai&iUins fiom tiyt lilaitj of ^tivXm^,

Oct. 26. — Richard Blyth, burgefs of Dundee, found furety to underly
the law at the next Aire of Forfar, for treafonably abiding from the Ai'my ordained to meet at Stirling, in Auguft laft.

^laucr|)ter — BorUrrrrs rcrtibrt as Cautimtere,

Nov. 7. — Gilbert Lauder, in Quhitflaid, delatit of the Slauchter of
vmq'" George Wedderat (burgefs of Lauder, vpon the faid George's lands and
croft, lying near the Water of the faid burgh) ; committed vpoune the xxviij

' Until. * In token or teflimony whereof. ' Red-liand, in the fact. * They were

in the meantime ordered to be strictly warded in the Cartle of Edinburgh.

468 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565.

day of September laft by paft (upon old fFeud, certain purpose, and forethought
felony.)

Persewaris. Andro Wedderat, fafer-brofer ; The auld Lard of Coldinknowis.
Prelocutouris for the faid Gilbert, The Maifler of Borthwik ; The Lard of Pharniherll; MrJohne

Mofcrope, Walter Ker of Dolphingtoune ; The Lard of Lawder.

Prelocutouris for the purfuaris, The Lard of ColdinknoUis; Tlie Lard of Sesfurd ; The Lard of

Inuerwik ; Thomas Ker of Merfingtoune ; Andrew Ker of Fawdounfyde.

The faid Lard of Coldinknowis afkit inflrumentis that the faid Lard of Lawder would perfew in this cans ; and siclik, that the Juftice reffavit BordouRARis as fouerteis for the faid Gilbert, Proteftand, that gif the lik caus wes to
be intentit or perfewit before them, that ficlik fouerteis may be relTavit to that effect. The Aduocattis afkit inflrumentis of the dait of the Refpett producit,
quhilk wes at Ed' the fecund of Nouember 1565 ; and that the fame frae the
faid dait to the feifl of Michalmas theireftir' fuld onlie indure.

Having pleaded his Refpite, he found Sir Thomas Ker of Pharniherfl, Kn'.
and Walter Ker of Dolphingtoune, to fatisfy the jjarties.

^laugl^ter of ti)t €m'l of Bot]^\Mtirs serbant— SmtsHittion of

tijt Eortis of #'es3ion.

Dec. 7. — Alexander and Olipher Sinclair, brothers of William
Sinclair of Hirdmanftoune, were denounced Rebels, and put to the horn, &c. ;
and the faid AVilliam was unlawed, as their furety, for their not underlying the
law, for art and part of the cruel Slaughter of ^^^1lter Murray, fervant of James
Earl of Bothuile, Lord Creychtoune, and Halis, &c. ; committed Aug. 25. lafb, on
old ffeud, certaine purpofe, pi'ovifion, and forethought felony.

Dec. 8. — William Sinclair of IIirdmanstoun, Johnne Prett,
Mathew S. in Mylnetoune, Alex. S. in Saltoune, Johnne Hog, and Robert FyfTe,
alfo dilatit of the Slauchter of vmq'" Walter Murray.

Persewaris, Adame and Williame Murrayis, brothers to vmq''= Walter.
Prelocutouris for the pannall, My Lord Borlhuik ; Mr Tho. iSI 'cal3eane; The Lard of W^auchtoune ;

The Lard of Trabroune ; The Lard of Butterdeue ; The Gudinan of Broxmouth.
Prelocutouris for the perfewaris, The Comptroller;' The Lard of Traquair ; The Gudman of Hangitfchaw; The Lard of Coldiuknowes ; Adam Wauchope of Caikmuir.
AUegis the prelocutouris for the pannale, that na proces audit to be led aganis
thaim this day ; becaus, of ^ the law, the famiji is haldin and audit to be obferuit — and that LouDis of Sessioune fittis nocht, and fpecialie in this caus,
being Crimiiiale. And the Aduocattis allegit in the contrair, in refpect of the
Alteratioiine of Religioime. The Aduocat afkit inflriunentis vpoune the propofitioune of this allegeance be Mr Thomas M'^cal3eane.

' Sept. 29. ' Sir William Murray of Tullibardine. ' By, or according to the Law.

Hen. ET Mar. 1 & 23. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 469

The juge, nochtwithftanding this allegeance, fyndis that he may proceid.
The AlTefrouris and Lordis at pronimceing heirof, were my Lord AthoU, the
Erie of Huntlie, the Secretar, the Juftice Clerk, the Erie of Mortoune.

The prelocutouris foirfaid proteftit for remeid ; ' and afkit inllrumentis that the
preloeutouris for the perfewaris declarit thai wald infill to the perfute of this
cans : And that the Erie Boithuile declarit he culd nawyife infill to the defence
of the Lard of Hirdmanfloune in this mater, be resoune the famin is his awin
caus, and that his feruand is flane ; and 3it, be reafoune of the commoning betuix
him and the faid Lard, he will nocht prefentlie perfew him his felf. — Continued.
(Dec. 20.) — The perfewaris aflvit inllrumentis that the interlocutour
wes gevin that thai fiild have jugement of their peris.'

ASSISA.

The Lard of Daliiiahoy, Ja**. Stevinfoune of Hirdmanfcliel, The Lard of Johneftoune,

William Weche of Dawik, .James Lethmonth of the Craig, The Lard of M'Kerfloune,

William Newtoune of that Ilk, George Tait of Pirne, ... Paterfoun of Caverhill.

JohHe Lindfay of Cobingtoune, Geo. Haliburtoune of Walftruther,

D.^ Elphingftouneof Hinderfloune, Jo. Aitoun, burges of Haddingtoune,

The pannell alkit inllrumentis that they renunce any fauour of this Writting
producit, defyring na delay of proces ; and makes fayth, (that) thai nor nane in
thair names wes purchelTaris thairof. My Lord Justice Clerk alkit inllrumentis,
that the pei'sewaris and defendaris defyrit baith procefs, nochtwithllanding THE
King and Quein's grace Wrytting producit ; and thairfor proteftis, in my Lord
Juftice Principale, his awin and the A fielTouris names, that na fault be imput to
thaim, feeing thai are willing to obey the famin. The faid Mr Thomas proteftit, that albeit the perfones foirfaid be admitted and fworn to pas vpon their
AlTyife, that famony thairof as ar Gentilmen be haldin for na Barronis.

Verdict. ' Acquit the haill.'

iKutilation — *2Hml)tsfttinii of tlje WHt-sniV — * 23riflantgp/

Dec. 11. — Robert Broun, maltman, Fylit of the Hurting and
Wounding of Archibald Blakwod in his rycht arme ; and Mutilatioun of his
myd-fynger of his rycht hand, be Vmbefetting of his Hie-gaitt betuix Leyth and
Edinburgh ;^ committed vpoun fuddantie, vpoune the fext of December inftant :
And acquittis him of the lying at wait, be way of Brigancye, &c. and Spoliatioune of his cloik. — Sentence. To be putt in Ward within the Tolbuith of
Ed". The Aflyife afkit inftrumentis that the perseware difallentit fra the perfute of Mutilatioune for this time.

' Redress. * Peers, equals in rank. ■' Dynneise, Dionesius. * Many similar

Cases occur in the Criminal Records at various periods ; some of them are mere Highway robberies,
whilst, on the other hand, a large proportion of them evidently arose either from private feuds between
the parties, or the mere love of mischief and adventure.

470 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565-6.

<#Iausf)ter ot tlje Hairti of COljpna.

Oct. 12.— Alexander Lyoun and Mairiore Vrquhard, his fpous, acquitted by an Affife of the Slaughter of John Wod.

Persewaris, Alexander and Gilbert Woddis, brefer to pe faid vmq''' John.
Prelocutouris for the perfewaris. Phelocutouris for the pannall.

My Lord Ogilvy, the Lard of Bonyngtoune, Mr Edmond Hay, My Lord Boithwile,

The Perfouue of Wretoun, The Lard of Many, George Wifchert, Dauid Lyoune,

Sir Hew Kennedye. Matho Hepburne.

The faid Marioiye producit in Jugement ane Act of Court of the Sherifdome
of Abirdene, vnder figne and fubfcriptioune of Williarae Bruce, Notar and Clerk
of the faid Court, berand the contentis of ane Difcharge fubfcriuit be our fouerane lord and lady, that the Shereff and his Deputtis fuld nawyife proceid vpoune
the faid Mariorye in calling of hir to vndirly the law for the cryme foirfaid ; in
refpect quhairof, fche allegit that na pi-oces fuld be led agains her in this Court.

ASSISA.

William Gordoun of Sauchquhyn, Joiiue Blakhall, in Tippertie, William Chalmer of Fedderauch,
Robert Fowlis of Ochtertowle, Patrik Cheyne of Eflilmonthe, Alexander Jeffrey, in Culler,

Alex. TuUedaff of Rannellouue, James Forbes, in Kildrymmie, Alex. Burnet of Leyis, younger,
William Cheyne of Arnage, Alex. Gordoune of Abir3eldy, James Pantoune of Tullemaid,

Thomas Chalmer of Tulykerye, James Gordoune of Crechye, William Raithe, in Eflilmonthe.

Act of the Sheriff' Court of Aberdeenshire.
Curia Vicecomitatus de Abirdene, tent, in Pretoria ejnfdem, decimo die menfis Septemhris, anno Domini 1563, per Georgeum Bijfet, Vicecomitem deputatum dicti vicecomitatus, pro Tribunali
seden. : Sectis vocatis et Curia legitime ajffirmata.
The quhilk day, Mairiorye alias Margaret Vrquhard, fpous to Alexander Lyoune, burges of Abirdene, being prefentit in jngeraent to have bidden Jie law for allegit art and pairt of ))e crewale Slauchter of vmq''' Johne Wod of Colpna, comperit Andro Lard, melTinger, Sbiref in ]iat pairt, with ane
Letter vnder Jie Aibfcriptiounis and fignet of our fouerannis King and Queen of Scotland, dated at
Striueling Jie fevent day of September inf^ant, and of Jiair regnis pe firll and xxiij 3eris ; and inhebeit, be virtew pairof, pe faid Schiref deput and all vperis of ony preceding contrare pe faid Margret
alias Mariorye, for ]ie allegit cryme aboue written, vnto pe thrid day of pe Aire to be haldin within
Ed'' ; as in pe faidis Letteris, at mair lenth, is contenit. Quhilkis Letteris pe faid Schiref deput inftantlie obeyit; and Gilbert Men3ie8 of Couly, burges of Abirdene, become cautioner and fouertieto
enter pe faid Mariorye alias Margret, the faid thrid day of pe Aire, eftir pe forme and tennour of the
faidis Letteris, vnder pe pienis contenit in pe faroiu : And pe faid Alexander Lyoune become obleifl
faythfulie to releif him of pe famin. Quhairupoun pe faid Andro (Laird) and Mariorye Vrquhart and
Gilbert Men^eis hinc inde defyrit Act of Court and inftrumentis.

Extract. De libro Curie Vicecomitatus Aberdoncnjis, per me fcriba ejrtfdem fuifcripU Ita est
IF"" Druce, No""' pub"' etjcriba dict<B Curia, pro tempore, adhoc,fua manu.

SlftiUintr from tfjc last itaift of ^tirlinfl.

Jan. 2, (1565-6.) — Tho:\ias Hunter, in Eifler Bengour, delatit of the
treafonabil remaning and byding at hanie fra our Ibueraneis 01(1 and Raid, orHen.etMar. 1&24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 471

dauit to convene at Striuiling, the laft of September laftbipaft, incontrair the
tennour of the Proclamatiouiie maid thairupoiine.

Prelocutouris for the pannale.
John Aikenheid ; ]Mr Tliomas M''cal5ean ; The Lard of Bynning,
Mr Johns Henderfoune of Bengoure ; Robert Hammiltoune of Incheniauchan.

Allegis Mr Thomas M'cal5ane, that he fuld nocht be putt to pe knawledge of
ane AfTyife for byding frae the Raid jiroclamit to the lafl: day of September laft
bipaft, &c., nochtvvithftanding his nocht being thairat, becaus all fie chargeis to
cum to Raidis lies ane ciuile vnderftanding ; fwa that thai extend nocht to all
maner of perfons, fie as pure folkis and vnhabill perlbnis : And it is of veritye,
that the faid Thomas is ane pure fermorare, havand onlye audit oxingang of
land of Bengour, pleneift with his inaifteris gudis', ffor the quhilk he payis xl
bollis vvittuale, viz. raeill and malt ; thairfor wes nocht lubiect, &c. And attour,-
allegit that the faid Thomas wes vnhabill in his perfoun to ferue in weirfare, be
reafoune that he at Beltane^ laft-wes, or fchortlie thaireftir, havand four horfe ftollin frae him latlie of before, being in Ed' for ferfing^ and trying of the lainin in
the hous of Eduard Kinkaid befyde the Weft Port, fell our the baklyde of the
tournepyke' thairof vpoune his bak ; quhairthrow he wes lb men5eit,''that he was
vnhabel for weirfare, or ony fie travail feruand thairto ; as is wele knawin, and
fal be verefeit quhen neid beis. And attour, his maifter, Mr John Henderfoune,
laird of the faidis landis, takand ordour for fetting out of his feruandes to the laid
Raid, within the tyme of the faid Proclamatiouiie, vnderftanding the faid Thomas inhabilitie that he wes hot ane puire fermorare, cawfit him furneife ane
habill man, callit Thomas Craw ; quhilk Thomas past to the faid Raid, and kepit
the Proclamatioune foirfaid. In refpect of the quhilkis, he fuld nocht incur the
panis contenit thairin, nor pafs to the knawlege of ane AfTyife ; becaufe he offerris him to preif this allegeance, nocht oiilie be Joliiie Mowbray, Parlbne of
Inchinauchan, Minifter of his Paroche Kirk, heir prefent, bot als be vther
famous' perfons that knawis the veritye heirof : And denyis nocht his being
abfent, be the occafioune foirfaid ; and becaus it wes practiket" in ficlik caifli to
the Lard of Dalhoufiy, and according to equitye and confcience. — The Aduocat"
anfueris, that in caife this allegeance were of veritye, the fainin aucht to pals ane
Aflyfe, iia vther probatioune aucht to pafs heirupoune; and that tliair is na fie
practic vfit in fie caiffis, as is allegit.

The Justice Repellis the allegeances, and oi'danis the matter to pafs to ane
Aflyife. — Continewis to the niorne.

' Viz. a ' Steil-bow tenant.' '-' Moreover. ^ May-day, O. S. For notices of the SuperItitions formerly practifed, by kindlina; fires, &c. See Dr Jfimie/bn's Diet. &c. ■* Searchinfj;, inveftigating. ^ A tirciilar, or rather /j)ir/il (hiinale, is Hill termed Ati)r}>j)i/tei\a\r, in Ediuburgli,

and forae other parts in Scotland. " Maimed, mangled. ' Persons of good fame and reputation. * A decided point, or practique. '■' Mr John Spans of Condy, Queen's Advocate.

472 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565-6.

(Jan. 3.) — Dissert,' becaus James Striuiling, Donatour to the Gift of his
Efchete, is with him aggreit and fatisfeit.

SIfiitiinfl from iijt Inst llaiii of ^tivliuij.

Jan. 3. — Andro Ballingall, in Drumbarro, dilatit of the remaning
fra the Raid ordanit to convene at Striuiling, the laft of September lallbypaft.
— My Lord of Flifli:,^ allegeand him to haif fpeciall command of the Kingis
Maieftie to the effect vndirwrittin, commanding the Juftice depute and Clei'ks of
Jufticiarie prefent to continew the actioune of Andro Ballingall quhill'^ the
morne. — IVIy Lord Lindefay allegit, that it was THE KiNGis grace and plefour
that the faid puir man had juftice, without delay or continewatioune ; like as he
fuld verefy ; and thairupoun afkit inftrumentis. — Continued ' to the morne.'

Persewaris,

Mr Johne Spens ; Alexander Balfour, Donatour ;■" Mr James Balfour, Parfon of Fliflc, aflifter.

Prelocutouris for the pannell. The Lord Lindfay, Mr llichert Strang, Mr Thomas Scot.

(Jan. 4.) — Allegit Mr Richert Strang, prelocutour for the pannell, that the
Summondis is nocht relevant, nocht contenand ony relevant caus to infer the
conclufioune, nor to infer the defendar, exprellie being ane jjurelye man, nader
wes comprehendit vnder the Proclamatioune, in refjiect that fumtyme Proclamatiounis ar maid vjioune Barrones, fumtyme vpoune all fubiectis ; nor 3it contenis the narratiue of the Summondis ony pane fpecifeit in the faid Proclamatioune : And in caufis Criminell, lybellis audit to be maift cleir and relevant ;
and gif this perfute wes Ciuile, the Summondis culd reflaue na proces, far les in
this Criminall caus. And it is notoui" to the Juftice Clerk and his deputtis, that
the Letteris audit to contene the verray forme of Pi'oclamatioune, that the
offendaris may knaw quhow to vfe thair defenffis thairanent : For it may ftand,
that the laid Proclamatioune beris within fextie and fextene ; and the defender
is paft that dait lang before the famin. — Anfueris the Aduocat, that the allegeance is nocht relevant, in refpect of the lummondis, quhilk referris to the Letteris
of the Proclamatioune and executioune thairof, prefentlie pi'oducit.

The faid Mr Richert allegit, that the fummondis is nocht relevant to the laid
Proclamatioune, in ony pairt ; and the defendar is nocht fubjectit to anfuer to
the faid Proclamatioune now producit, as ane pairt of the Summondis. It is
allegit, that the faid Andro audit nocht to be put to the knawlege of ane Alfyife,
becaus he is ane pure fermourer, nocht habill and of 3eiris to pas to the Raid, and
he fend his fone, being ane fufficient man of armour, quha paft with the firft of
the Army, and remanit with the laft ; and offeris to preif the famin fufficientlie.

' Deserted. - John Waddell, Parson of Fli(k, one of the Ordinary Lords of Session ; admitted

Jun. 20, 1542. •' Until. '' Donator to the Gift of liis escheat. Much iniquity arose from

the system of granting ' Gifts of escheat' to retainers of tlie Court, wlio were needy, and almost always
inexorahle.

Hen. & Mar. 1 & 24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. » 473

— The Aduocat anfuerit, that the famin aucht haill togidder to pafs to ane
Affyife.

The faid Mr Richert allegit, that the farain eild ' and remaning^ aucht to be
proven be Witneffis, for inftructing of the Aflyife ; in refpect that the Affyife is
fummond be the Aduocattis, and for trj^ell of the Dittay. Item, vnder proteftatioune that the defender grantis na cryme nor offence, allegit for the defender,
that our Ibuerannis lord and lady, be thair Writting, fubfcriuit with thair haudis,
and vnder thair Signet, willit and grantit that the defender fuld nocht be callit
for abfence fra the faid Raid, and that he incur na fkayth in his perfoune nor
gudis ; difchargeing the Juftice, Juflice Clerk, Aduocattis, &c. : As the Difcharge
producit, beris. And thairfoir allegit, that na procefs aucht forther to be led in
this caufe, and vfis the faid Writting for difchargeing of the faid Juftice, Juftice
Clerk, and Aduocattis aboue writtin, at this tyme allanerlie. — The faid Mr James
Balfour a\k\t inftrumentis vpoun tlie tennour of our fouerannis Writting ; and
gif the faid A'ldro will byde Alfyife, conforme to the narratyve of the famin ?
Item, alTiit inftrumentis, that he inquyrit at the partye and my Lord Lindfay,
his prelocutour, gif he wald byde Alfyife, conforme to the faid narratyve, and that
of the remanent, or at the leift of that pairte, that his lone wes in Drumfreis or^
our fouerannis depairtit furth thairof ? — Anfuerit, that the faid defender, of the
law, is nawyife fubiectit to anfuer to interrogatiounis of pairtye. Proteftis the
faid Mr Richert, that the defenflis foirfaidis be difcuffit in ordour, as thai ar proponit — and jiroteftit for the reft of his defenflis quhen neid beis.

(Jan. 31.) My Lord Lindfay became furety for his entry at the next Aire of
Fife, to underly the law, &c.

^ijiUiitii from tfjr lUitiQ of <#tuliiis.

Jan. 4. — JoHNE CoKBURNE OF Wester Newtoune, delatit for his
treafonabill remaining and byding at hame fra thair Maiefteis Oiftis and Raidis,
ordanit to convene at Striuiling the xxviij and laft dayis of Auguft and September laftbipaft, incontrare the tennour of thair Proclamatiounis.

Persewaris, the King and Queen's Advocates; Patrik Anftruther, donatour of the Efcheat.

Prelocutouris for the faid Johne,
The Lard of Scraling, Mr Alexander Syme, Mr Robert Auchraowtye,

Mr Williame Scot, Johne Auchmowtye, burgess of Ed'', Johne Cockburne in Leyth.

Allegis the faid Mr Alexander, that the faid John aucht nocht to be putt to
knawlege of ane Aflj'ife, becaus he is outwith the aige of Ix 5eiris ; and als in refpect of the exemptioune of our Souerannis Maieftye, of the dait Jun. 8, 1557, of
hir regnnethexv 5eir; and in lyk maner, producit ane vther Writting, fubfcriuit

' Age ; viz. the pannel's time of life. ' Abiding from the Raid, ^ Ere, before.

VOL. 1. f 3 o

474 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565-6.

be our fouei'aniiis lord and lady, difchargeand the Juftice, and vtheris thaii'in,
off all proceding- aganis him, &c. off the dait the xxvi day of December 1565. —
Affignis Thurifday nixttocura, with confent of jiairtye, to the faid Johne, for probatioune of the prouifioun contenit in our fouerane ladeis Licence, vnder hir
Pi'ivie feale, to remane fra all Oiftis, Raidis, and Armeis, during his lyftyme, &c.

(Jan. 10.) — Proteilis Mr Alexander Syme, prelocutour, that the allegeances maid this day be difcuffit, tuicheing the prouifioune contenit in the laft
Licence ; and als proteftis, that in caile he preve nocht the defence contenit in
the Act, that he may be hard to fey forther, and preif the famin ; and alfe,
proteftis for ane vther terme, gif neid beis.'

(Jan. 11.) — The faid Johne producit certane WitnefTes, quha wer admittit
and deponit in the faid mater ; and the famin mater being continuit be the
Juftice to this day and Court, vpoun Interloquitovir, gif ane vther terme fuld be
affignit be the Juftice, to the faid Johne Cokburne to fummond ma^ Witneffis
thairin : Mr Robert Creychtoune, ane of the faidis Aduocattis, togidder with the
faid Patrik, donatour foirfaid, beand comperit in jugement, in this Court, to heir
and fe the faid Interlocutour i^ronunceit be the faid Juftice-depute, the faid
Patrik, in prefens of the faid Aduocat, expouit and declarit, that it wes now
comin to his knawlege, and clearlie vnderftand to him, that the faid Johne Cokburne fend for him^ to the faidis Armeis, Robert Wat, wele bodin and furneift,
as faid is, confornie to the Proclamatioune maid thairupoun, and had fatisfeit
and fulfiUit the prouifione of his faid Licence ; and thairfor, with confent of the
faid Aduocat, z-enunceit the faid actioune, and forther perfute of the faid Johne
thairin : And confentit that all proces Ibuld ceife aganis him for the famin, in
tyme cuming. — Quhairfor the faid Justice-depute, with the confent of the
faidis parteis perfewaris, difchargeit the faid Johne of the faid actione ; and
deceruit him fre thairof, and all forther proces to ceife thairin, in tyme cuming.'

Coitcfaleti iJfturtin-,

Jan. 18. — Robert Aitkvnk, delatit of the Murthour of Johne Robertfoune in Abirdene, throuch ftriking of him with an fchip-hananer, behind his
bak, on his bed, within his awin barne ; and thairefter, beleviiig him to be deid,
lokkit his barne dur, mynding,'' eftir concealing of his deid, to have bureit him
in the nycht.

Prelocutour for tlie faid Hobeit, Dauiil Piimrofe.
' TIk! iianios of fivo Witnesses were given in, as liaving been sworn. - More. ' As his

substitute. '' Otliers were cited for tbe same otl'ences, and were pursued as rigorously as in tbi'
above instances, cbiefly <in tlie procurement of the Donators of the esclieat ; who, in addition to tlieir
pecuniary interest, iiad frequently private piipies to revenge against the pannels, being generally persons of opposite factions. '■" Intending, purposing.

Hen. et Mar. 1 & 24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 475

Robert Aitkyne requyrit inftrumentis, that he ofFerit himfelf in the KiNft
and QuENis Maiefteis Will.

Verdict. It is fundin be AflyiCe, that the faid Robert crewalye, in the
moneth of December laftbipaft, Hurt and Woundit Johne Robertfoune in Abirdene, be way of concelit and hid Murthour, in perrell of deid.

Sentence. — To be had to the Mercat-croce of Ed', and thair, vpoune ane
fcaffall, HIS HEiD to be ftrikin fra his bodie.

JItmembration ~ Cuttintj: off a prison's d^avs*

Jan. 26. — Adame Twedy oe Drawey, delatit of the cutting of Robert
Rammage luggis,' and demembring of him thairof.

Persewaiiis, Robert Rammage, and WilHame Rammage, liis brother.

Pleaded the King and Quenis Remiffion. ' The dait of this Remiffioune
of the Gudman of Drawayis, Nov. 30, 1565.' — The Perfevvaris afkit inftrumentis, that thai nevir perfewit the faid Adame of his lyffe, bot onlye for amendis"
to be maid for the cryme. William Twedy of Drummelseour became furety to
fatisfy parties.

Itmitiiis antr gSTountiiiig:.

Feb. 12. — Andro Armestrang, James 5o^ing'> cutlar, Williame Johnneftoune, Bowar,^ and Thomas Broune, Cordiner, burgeffis of Edinburghe, delatit
of the Hurting of Freir Johne Bi,ak, betuix his fchulderis, to the effuffioune
of his blude. — Continewis to Monunday nexttocum ; and Ordanis the pannale to
remane within the famin (Ward) quhairin thai wer of befoir : Quha hes acceptit

the famin.

Prelocutouris for this pannale,
Maifter Dauid Borthwik, Mr Tiiomas M'=cal3ane, Mr Johne Scharpe,

Mr Alexander Sym, Mr Richart Strang, Mr Clement Litill.

(Feb. 18.) — The prelocutouris aflvit inftrumentis, that thair wes ane command,

be deliuerance of the Lordis, producit in jugement ; be vertew quhairof, thai

wer chai'get to aflift the perfones perfewit, in procuring for thame anent thair

lauchfull defenflis, vnder the pane of depriuatioune contenit thairin. They alfo

' afkit inftrumentis,' that they requyrit the Aduocat to fweir the Dittay. — The

Aduocat, Mr Robert Creychtoune, afl<it inftrumentis, that the Juftices, be thair

Interlocutour, declarit that he was nocht haldin to fweir the faid Dittay. Mr

Dauid Borthwik aflvit inftriunentis vpoune the contentis of the Dittay, and that

na deid procedand is qualifeit therein. James joung afkit inftrumentis vpone

the Aduocattis Declaratioune, anent his purgatioune maid be Freir Johne

BM:

' Ears. 2 Assithment, or compensation to the private prosecutor for the personal injury sustained by him. ^ Bow-maker. See July 4, 1566.

476 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1565-6.

Veedict. The AfTyife Fylis William Johnnejloune, bowar, off arte and
parte of the Hurting & ^Vounding• of Freir Johnne Blak, to the effufioune of
his blude, vpone the fyift day of Januar laflbypaft, betuix aucht and nyne houris
at evin, in the Cowgait, betuix Nwyderis Wynd and the Fi-eir Wynd, vpoiine
fuddantye ; in relpect that his awin Confeffioun beris, that he brocht Richert
Arow-viaJeer to his awin hous, and dicht' him thairin, and gave him ane clene
cloke hame with him, and fend him on the morne the faid Freir Blakis clok :
And ACQUITTIS him of the remanent poyntis of the Dittay.

Craitsporting; of Wctuals to i$n'b)irfe, ^t.

Feb. 23. — Andiio Litster in Fouldene, ^^'illiame Bathkatt thaii-, Jhonne
Thin tbair, feruandis to Dalhoufye, & James 5ouiigei', feruand to Rikkertoun,
delatit of Tranlporting of wittuallis furth of the reahne to Berwik, and vtheris
forbiddin pairtis, incontrair the Actis of Parliament. — The Laird of Dalhoufy
became furety for their entry, on May 24, nixtocum.

?t>ame6ticluu— SUtbaHinti iiorlr ^altoune, ^t,

Feb. 28. — Mr Thomas Keir, Johne Farquharfoune of Newtoune, and
twelve others, delatit of the Convocatioun of our fouerane lordis (and ladies) liegis, and be way of Hamefuckyn, Invading of the Lord Saltoune and his
feruandis. Mr Thomas M'cal5ane, prelocutour, proteftit in name of the pannale,
for thair expenffis, be reafoun thai comperit, and wer in reddines to vnderly ane
AflTyife ; lyke as ane fufficient nowmer thairof wes heir, fummond to that effect.
— The Aduocat afkit inftrumentis, that he for tbe prelent difaffentit fra the pei'-
fute of this cans, becaus as he fulpectis coUufioune betuix the pairteis ; and
thaii-foir wald fummond, quhen he plefit, ane imfufpect Affyife to this effect.

^)orsr--^ttaIiiT0 from HaUi? (Jrtimistounr,

Mar. 4. — Parese Smi'iLL delatit of the Steling fra the Lady EdMISTOUNE of four horfe. — Ihe Lady Edmiftoune difallentis fra the perfute of
the faid Pareis.

Prelocutouris for this Pareis.
Johnne Edmilloune, Niniane Stewart, Johne Sinipill, fone to the Lord Simpill.

John Simpill of Blenefchelis became caution for the entry of the faid Pareis at
the next Juflice-aire of Edinburgh.

^lauflljtfr — Simisliicttoit of X\)t llortt l^iflf) dToitjatalile.

Mar. 5. — James Bog, delatit of the Slauchter of vmq'^ George Hamil-

' Wiped ; cleaned. The more intelligihle phrase ' wefch (washed) the blude af his face,' is deleted,
and the above words have been interlined.

Hen. & Mar. 1 & 24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 477

toune, son of William Hamiltoune of Pardovane, committed on fuddantye, in
the month of Januaiy laft.

Persewaris, the Lard of Pardowane, father, brether, kyn, and friendis.

Prelocutouris for the said James, Mr David RFGill ; Mr John Scharpe ; The Lard of M'KerItoune ; The Lard of Swynftoune ; Capitane Anftruther ; Walter Ker.

Prelocutouris for the perfewaris, The Lard of Prefloune, tlie Lard of Keir.

The pannel produced a Refpite, dated' Feb. 22, 1565, for the fpace of 19 years.

Proteftis M' Dauid M'Gill, that the entrie of James Bog in this Court, benawyife
prejudiciale to the Regalitye, in refpect of the committing of the Slauchter
libellit within the famin ; and that the fouerteis fundin to this effect, to THE
CONSTABli>L and his deputtis, incur na danger. And ficlik, Williame Henderfoime, Conftabill depute, proteftit, that his entre foirfaid be navvyife prejudiciale
to his office. — Mathew Sinclare of Lochirmalcus, Williame Ridpeth, of that Ilk,
and Andrew Ridpeth, his uncle, became cautioners for the satisfaction of the pai--
ties.

The last of the Scroll-Books of Adjournal during the reign of Mary,
Queen of Scots, (some of which, as formerly noticed, have fortunately been
preserved,) ends on Mar. 5, 1565-6. A few gleanings, however, of considerable
historical interest, have been obtained from a Caution Book, (' Liber Plegiationis
s, D. N. Regine,') which extends from Jun. 18, 1563, to Nov. 25, 1566. No
other fragments of the Criminal Recoi'ds can now be found, from the period of
the last of these dates to the close of Mary Queen of Scots' reign, July 29, 1567.
The Trials which took place during the minority of King James VI , as given
in the sequel of this Collection, carry forward the chronological series of the
Recoi'ds of the High Court of Justiciary of Scotland.

In one of the MS. Abridgements preserved in the Library of the Faculty of
Advocates,^ the following notice occurs, in reference to this period : — ' Mr
Thomas Craig fitts as Juftice deput for the moft part ; only Najjer of Merchijioune fitts the two firft months. And Sir Simon. Prejtouiie of Craigmillar
had a Commiffion to be Juftice General for a fliort time, viz. from 22 Jan'^
1565, to the end of the next FeV. The reafon feems to be, that at that time,
Argijle had joined the difcontented Lords who had took arms after Henry
Darnlie's Marriage with the Queen, chiefly because he had been proclaimed
King without taking the advice of the Great Lords, or aflving the confent of the
States of the Kingdom. — Vid. Home's Hist, of the Douglafles, in Earle Mortoune's life, p. 287 ; and Spots. Hift. ad. ami. 1564, p. 190, etfeqq.'

' At Edinburgh. = MS. Coll. Adv. Library, M. 5. 14, p. 66.

478 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1566.

[3Ir Thomas Craig, Juji'ice Deputel]

Creasonafile eonspirac|)— Simprtsoning Xiyt &\xttn in \)tx ^alart
of .ii?oIni'oo^ — iHurijrr of 'Qa\ii^ 3tli(cio, ^t,

[The minute circumstances attending tlie bold but unmanly Conspiracy for the Murder of the
Queen's favourite, David Riccio, liave been so frequently detailed, that it is not the Editor's intention to inti'ude any lengthened observations upon the reader's notice, in this place. It will be found
tliat, in the text as well as in the Appemlix to this reign, many interesting particulars have been collected, which are now for the first time laid before the public, equally illustrative of this Treasonable
and atrocious fact and of the subsequent Murder of Kixg Henry (Darnley.)

Reference maybe advantageously made to the Collections o{ Anderson and Keith, and to the Histories of Laing, Hoherlson, Chalmers, &c. for many important Papers, each of which throw additional light on the disastrous consequences resulting from this bloody and barbarous transaction.

The following Trials oj" the Laird of Cambusmichaell and his two associates, and of Henry
Yair, have fortunately been preserved in Sir Ludorick Stewart of Kirkhill's MS. Collections.' As
was formerly observed, the original Criminal Records of this period have long since been destroyed ;
but it would appear, that the Volume in which these Trials was inserted must have been extant in
the reign of Charles I, when this eminent Lawyer flourished. From the same source also, the Editor
has recovered the following brief Memoranda, containing particulars,- which are thought of sufficient
importance to be preserved along with the Trials to which many of these circumstances relate.

' Ane compendious notation of maters intcrpryfed and done Jin ]ie Queen's Ma. comeing out of
France to this her graces reahne, ))e 19 Augujtij, 136 L-^

' In the first, the Slaughter of ])E Earle of Huntly wes vpon pe 28 day of October (1562), at
Brunalfoure, (the Battle of Corrichie.)

' The Earle of Lexxox came to Scotland )ie 21 day of September 1564, and his refloring wes
in )ie Tolbooth of Edr by ane Parliament haldine |ie . . . day of . . . loGl.

' The Hame-comcing of my Lord Darnley, his fon, out of England, wes \e 12 day of Feberij,
1564(5.) He wes made Duke, Earle, Lord, and Knycht, in the moneth of Jully, and wes Crounit
be the Queen's Ma'^"^ with ]ie Ckoune of Matrimony, vpon J)e 28 of fe faid moneth : And
vpon pe morne, his Mariage wes with J)E Queen's grace, in )ie Abbay of Hallyroodhous, with the
Mefs,* and came to Preaching twa Sundays nixt pairafter ; and never after, vnto deceife.

' The Lords underwrittine were Banished for not confenting to the forfaid Mariage. Ther reafon
wes, becaul'e fE Queex wold not grant to pe eftablilhing of ])e true Religiox, and they remainit in
England thrie moneths, or jiairby.

' The names of the Lords, Barrons, and jmncipall Gentlemen, that depairtit to England.

' James Duke of Calleleherault, James Earle of Murray, Alexander Earle of Glencairne, Robert
Lord Boyd, Lord Vchiltrie, Gawine Commendator of Kilwiiiing, Earle of Rothefs, Archbald Earle of

Argyle, (but he remainit in Argyle,) Sir William Kirkaldie of Grange, kny', Monypenny of

Pitmillie, younger.

' The quhilkis Lords fould have been fforfaulted in ane Parliament qnhilk wes halden at Ed'' fe 18
day of March 1564-(5), the Kixg not reforting ]iairto, but playing him where he thouglit b'eft. On
|ie quhilke ]ie Earle of Huntly fould have been reftored, quhilk be Jie Slaughter of Sein^our Davie
(' Rl5io,'^) ane Italian, who fould have bein made ane Lord and ane Laird vpon ]m morne, wes ftayit
and continwit. The faid Slaughter wes committit vpon ])e 9 of March, at even, be thir perfons follow-

' Robert Milne's MSS. Adv. Library, \V. 3, 18, pp. 71 and 7.5. * Sir Lud. Stcu-arfx MS. Collections, ib.

p. 359. ' ' This taken out of the 3d Vol. of Hope and Durie's Practiques, h)st leafe tliairof.' R. Milne's note.

* See Notice prefi.xcd to Jun. 14-, 1567. ' /?. MUne's note.

Hen. & Mar. 1 & 24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 479

ing, viz, James Earle of Mortone, Patrick Lord Ruthven, who tore him out of the Queen hir armes,
William Maifter of Rutliven, Patrick Lord Lindfay, Sir William Maitland of Leithingtoun, kny«,
Secretar to our foverane lady, Mr James M^Gill of Rankeillour-Neather, Clerk of Regifler, with
Jiair aflifters, kinn, freiudis, and fervants. Quhilk SEIN510R Davie they flew in the Queen's
Chamber, and in hir graces prefence.

' And ])E LoRDls quhilkis of befoir wer Baniflied, vpon ])e morne they came to Ed'', and they got
fair peace fra ])E Queen's grace. And ])airefter her grace fled to Dunbar and guydit ]ie countrie,
and Banifhed fe faidis Lords quhilk were ])e Slayers of jie faid Sein^ior Davie, and put faim furth
of ])e realme.

' For the quhilke Slaughter Thomas Scot of CamfmycJiaell, fchereflfe depute of Perth, and Henry
sair, fervants to my Lord Ruthven, were hanged and quartered.

' To the quhilk Slaughter the King conftitute {conjcnlit 7) and went with jiaim to ]ie Queen's grace
Chamber; and Jiairefter dcnyed Jiat he confentit Jiairto, quhen ])E Lordis were out of ]ie realme, bot
faid he wes compellit be Jiaim to confent Jiairto, or elfe they would have flaine him.

' The Nativitie and birth of our noble Prince wes in the Castle of Ed" Jie 17 Junij, at ij
hours, in ]>e year of our Lord 1566. His Baptifeing wes in Stirling, be the Bischop of St
Andrews fe 10 of December, ])e forfaid year. The King of France and ])E Queen of England, be fe Ambaxattis, being witneflis, to witt, Monseor de Breame (for ])e King of France,)
and ])E Earle of Bedfurd for ])e Quein of England. The faid Quein fent ane Funt of Gold to
his Bapti:;eing, with oj'eris great Gifts were given at ]ie faid Bapti5eing, The fad Monfeor de
Breame uamit him, be command of ]ie King of France, Charles ; the faid Erie of Bedfurd namit
him, be command of jie Queen of England, James, quhilk we retein.

' The King came not to )ie faid Baptizme, bot many of ))E Lordes waittit vpon ])E Earle of
Bothwell quhilk were prefent at ]ie faid Baptizme. The King went to Glafgow foon after, and
remained fair quhill Januarij. And fan ])E Queen's grace and ]ie Lords quhilke were fair, in fe
Court, went for him to bring to Ed'' 1566.

' Att fe faid Baptifme f e Lords quhilke were Baniflied for fe Slauchter of SEIN510R Davie
were relaxit, and came home to this countrie. The Lord Ruthven are (is) in England.

' The King remained and lay in f e Kirk of Feild, and divers tymes f e Queen came to fie how
he did, he being very fick, 1566-(7). He being in his bed f e 9th Feb'' at twa in f e bell after midnycht,
wes blawine in fe air, and ]ie haill lodging, William Tail3eour being alfo murthered with him, who
wes his fervant, in anno 1566-(7).

' The Earle of Murray departit to France, within ane raoneth after f e faid Slaughter.

• The Prince wes fent to fE Lord Erskine in Stirling fe 8 of March, fe year of God 1567;
and he delyverit )>e Caftell of Ed' to her grace fe fame day, quhilk fliee gave in keeping to Schir
William Cockburne of Scirling, kny', who keipit fe famin till fe 22 of Appryll, and fan Schir
James Balfour of Pitteiidreich, kniclit, I^aird of Burghley, was made Captaue Jiairof.'

Without attempting to collect into one view the various information which is scattered through the
Appendix to this reign, so far as is illustrative of many of the important matters connected with these
tragical proceedings, the Editor begs merely to refer to these, in addition to the numerous Collections
of State Papers and Histories which treat of the Life and times of Mary Queen of Scots. The
forthcoming Volumes of Mr Fraser Tytler may safely be consulted for an impartial summary of
that eventful and hitherto doubtful period of Scottish History, which, it is confidently expected, will
receive much new and important light from that author's critical acumen and patient research.

It may be mentioned here that in these Records, and other authentic documents, the name of
Queen Mary's Secretary was David Riccio, not ' Rizzio,' as his name has vulgarly been written,
almost uniformly, by all our popular Historians.]

480 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. " A.D. 1566.

Apr. 1. — Thomas Scott of Cambusjiichaell, Shereffe Depute of
Perth,' William Harlaw, and John Mowbray, burgeffes of Edinburghe."

ASSYSE.

The Laird of Langtoun, Alex. Home, burges of Ed', James Nicoll, Baillie,

The Laird of Wliytelaw, William Forrefler, in Leith, John Hamiltoun, merchant,

Andre Hamiltoun of Cochna, Walter Cant, ther, The Laird of Cambusnethan,

The Laird of Skirling, Cuth. Ramfay, burges of Ed% Alexander Bruce, burges of

A. Stewart, Tutor of Caflelmilk, William Fouller, Baillie, Edinburgh.

William Fouller aud James Nicoll, Baillies, proteftit, Jjat })air paffing upon
this AfTyfe be na ways prejudicial! to them, nor their offices ' in tyme cuming.

Verdict. The quhilk day, the faid Thomas Scott, William Harlaw, and
John Mowbray, were Convict and Fyllit be the faid Affyfe of airt and pairt of
the unlefum and treafonable Wacheing, warding, and balding in captivitie, with
Convocatione of our Ibveran ladyes leidges, bodin in feir of weir, alfe weill in
fecret armour as with jakis, fteill-bonnettes, gunnes, piftolets, fvvords, bucklers,
Jedburcht-ftaffis, Halberts, and v]?eris wapnis invafive, be themfelves and
vtheris in jjair names, of ])air caufeing, command, affiftance, devyfing, fending,
and ratihabitione, of our faid soueran ladyes maift nobill perfone, within
hir maift fecreit Chamber of her Palace of Halyrudhowse, immediatelie
and continuallie fra the comitting of the ci-ewall and treafonable Slaughter of
vmq'" Secretar David Rizew, quhilke wes upon the nynth day of March laft
bypaft, * to the fpace of xlviij houres uixt ]iaireftir, treafonablie and maift
awfullie ftoping hir Hienes to ufe hir libertie in the meanetyme : Lykas, alfo,
fhe hade bein haldin be paim in prifon as 3it, maift treafonablie and wickitlie, had
not bein that, be the provifione of God, flie Jjairefter fred and delyverit hir felfe
furth of pair hands, in maift fober and quiet maner, under filence of nycht ;
and, with grayte hallirt of hir lyfe, paft to hir Caste LL of Dumear, for faiftie
thereof: Aud this they did upon fet purpofe, prouifioun, andfoirthoughtfellony.

And Jjairfor, Dome wes given and pronouncit be the mouthe of the Dempfter
of the faid Court, at command of the faid Juftice-depute, that ])e faid Thomas
fould be Hangit qiihill he were deid, drawin, quarterit, and demaneit as ane
traitour ; and all his guidis, moveable and uumoveable, lands, heretages, annualrents, takis, offices, fteidiugs, poffeffiones, and uthers whatfumeuer, to be FOKFAULTIT, and Efcheit to our fouerane ladyes ufe, at her pleafure.^

' ' He was iiANOED and QUART^nzTi.'—Spotstvoods Hist. p. 195. ^ They were both spared

at ' interrefiion of Earle of Bothwell.'— /?. J}Jihie. ^ As being two of the Baillies of Edinburgh,

at the time of the trial. ^ ' Mons" Singnior Dauid ves (lane in Halyrudiiois, |>e ix day

of ISIerciie, anno 15(j5-'(6.) — Kir/: Session Eecords cif Canmirjate. ^ INIar. 3], 1.566, Item, to

Snawdoun, Herauld, 8cc. paniind of Ed', with Lettres to feriiie, &c. ]'e efcheit gudis pertening to
Thomas Scott of Camburmichaell, beingin captiuitie, and to be accufit of certanepointis o( Treffbne,
off ))e quhilkis he wes conuict and jullefiet to ]ie deid, iiij li. xvj s. Treas. Ace.

1 & 24 Hen. & Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. , * 481

^iQf^ Citasoit — Creasoitafile Conspii'Sfg asainst ti)e ^unnauti
^libi) CTounrtl, ^c — iHurUer of iBabitJ Mictio*

A\iY. 1. — Henrie Yair,' delaittit of Treafoue following."

ASSISA.

Lawrence Syinfon,burges of Ed'', Robert Ker, merchant in Ed'', Win. Anderfone, candlemaker,

John Gilbert, goldfmith, Alexander Haiftie, there, Alexander Bruce, in Edinburghe,

Thomas Ewing, goldfmyth, John Watfon, merchant there, Allan Dickiefoue, ther,

Gilbert Scowgall, James Forrett, there, William Rae, cutler,

Capitane Robert Lawder, Edward Litle, merchant ther, Robert Eviot, in Mertoun.

Verdict. The quhilk day the fliid Henry Yair wes Convict and Fyllit be
ane AfTyfe, of airt and pairt, affiftance, fortifieing, fupplying, ratihabitioun, and
eoncealling of the treafonable Couipiracie, convocatione, and gaddering of our
foveranes leigeis, to the number of fyve hundreth perfones, boddin in feir of
'weir, alfeweill in fecreit armour, as with jaks, fteill-bonnetes, gunnes, piftoletis,
fwords, buklers, Jedburcht-ftaues, halberts, and vtheris waipones invafiue ; and
entering therewith, treafonablie, within ]jair Majesties Pali.ice of HallyRUIDHOUS, purpoflie to have put violent hands on our soverane ladies maift
nobill perfone, haldin and demaneit the famyne at ther pleafure ; and ficlyke, to
haue llane or otherwayes demaineit, as they thought expedient, the Lords of
hir hienes Secreit Couxsall and Sessione, and vtheris hir Minifters and
OfSciars, being within hir Pallace and in her fervice for the tyme ; and ]>a.i upon
the nynth day of March laft bypaft, under filence of night, at aught hovires at
even or pairby, it being the tyme of Parliament current. And for performing
this jjair maift wicked and ungodlie purpofe, they then maift treafonablie rulliit
and enterit within f>e laid Pallace, tuike the famen at J)air own hands, reft the
keyes Jjairof fra the Porters, clofit the yetis, and made }>aimfelves as principalis
and maifters jjairintill, our foverane Lady being for the tyme in her maift fecreit
Chamber jjairof, att hir quietnes, having na feir nor dreidour of hir fubjects, to
whom hir grace at all tymes had been maift beneficiall/ guid, and mercifull ; and
J)air maift crewallie, with drawin fwords, whingers, bendit piftolls, and vthers
wapones invafiue, perfewit and invaidit umq'^ Secretar David Riccio, hir
hienes familliar fervand, J)an in companie within hir hienes Chalmer forfaid, and
flew him treafonablie and unmercifullie, in prefence of our faid soverane, and
pat violent hands in our soverane ladyes maift nobill perfone, in defence and
faiftie of the faid umq'^ David ; held, deteinit, and preflit the famen maift awfuUie and treafonablie, till they had committit ])e faid Slaughter in hir pi-efens,
as faid is, hir Majestie being })an great with chyld; giveand to hir hienes

' ' Somtyme a Preift.' — H, 3Ii/hies MS. See Notice to preceding Trial. Having renounced
Popery, he became one of Lord Ruthven's retainers. See Keith, 334. ^ ' For acceffion to

David Rizio's Murder, 9 March, 1566. Wes hanged and quartered. Spotswood's Hist. p. 195.' —
B. Mylne's MS. ^ Beneficent.

VOL. I. f 3 P

482 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1566.

occafioiin, throw dreadour and difpleafure flie conceavit, be the fight of the faid
crewall Slaughter and maner jjah'of, and be the deteining and thrifteing of hir
awn perfone in violent nianer, as faid is, to pairt with hir birth: And immediatlie therafter, feirfchit and fought the faidis Lordis, Minifters, and Official's
being within the faid Pallace, to haue llaine them ; and fwa had don, had
not bein the pleafure of God they efcapit :' AXD fwa, feing themfelues difappoyntit in ]?at behalfe, through Jsair evafioun, at })air pleafure, in treafonable
maner, detainit and held captiue the remanent Lords, Minifters, and officiars
within the faid Pallice, fra the faid hour, at aught, while" tua hours after midnight, J)at famen night, continually ; upon fet purpofe, provifioun, and foirthowght
fellony. Item, for airt and pairt of the unlefum and treafonable Warding and
balding in captivitie, with Convocation forefaid, boding in feir of weir, as faid
is, be himfelfe and uthers his complices, of our soverane Ladyes maift noble
perfone, within hir faid Chalmer of hir Pallace of Halyrudhous forfaid,
immediatelie and continuallie frae the committing of the faid crewall treafonable
Slaughter, quhilk wes at the tyme forfaid, to the fpace of forty-aught hours nixt
therafter ; treafonablie and maift aufullie ftoping hir iliENES to ufe hir libertie,
in the meanetime : Lykeas alfo, Ihe had bein balden be them in prifone as yit,
had not bein that, be the provifione of God, flie therfor fled and delyverit hirfelfe furtli of ther hands, in maift fober and qwyet maner, under filence of night ;
and with great hazart of hir lyfe, paft to THE Castell of Dumbar, for faiftie
of hir lyfe ; upon fet purpofe, provifioun, and foirthought fellony.

And theirfore. Dome was given and pronuncit be the mouth of the Dempfter
of the faid Court, att command of the faid Juftice Deput, that the faid Hendrie
fould be Haxgit while he were deid ; drawin, quarterit, and demaneit as ane
traitor ; and all his moveable and vnmoveable lands, heretadges, annualrentis,
tacks, offices, fteidingis, poffeffiouns, and uthers whatfomever, to be Forfaltit
and Efcheat to our foverane, to be ufed and difpoued be hir Majestie, at hir
pleafure.

8!©rartiin0 tfjt (^wttn in ?MaIi)rutirpousf, ^c — iHurljer of

Apr. 6, 1566. — Thomas Tait, Dauid Aikinheid, Johne Kafs, Thomas
Paterfoiui, Nicoll Galwye, Johne Cochrane, and Gilbert Weche,^ induellaris in
Dalkeyth, John Hunter in Cowlland, Alexander Hoge in Dalkeyth, AVilliame
Archebald in MulTilburcht, James Cuthbertfoune, Johne Mowe, Johne Stevin-

' ' Tlieir names wes Huntlie, Argyle, Botliwell, Sutherland, Caitlines, Lords Flemyng and Levinerftoun,' &c. — See SjMtstvoocTs Hist." p. 194. Item, Home of Godscroffs Hist. p. 292. R. Mylne's
MS. Note. ' Until. ' Veitch.

MaU. ET Hen. 1 & 24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 483

Ibiine, and Adame Watlbune, induellaris in Dalkeyth, found fiirety to iinderly
the law, ' vpoune lex dayis warning, ffor the treafounabill wacheing, warding,
and Imprilbning of our foueran lady within hir Paijce of Halyrudhous. —
(Apr. 8.) JoHNE Smyth, elder in Coufland, found furety in like manner for the
fame crime.

Slbiliins from ti)t Haiti of CraUjfui-lr-©obJsla0»

Apr. 8. WiLLiAME GoLLOK in Peblis, found furety to underly the

law, on Apr. 23 inftant, for ti-eafonably Abiding from the King and Queen's
Army, ordained to conveen at Crawfurd-Dowglafs, on Oct. 7 laft.

Smprisonincr ti)t <!luceu fit jl^olurooUfjouse, $ct*

Apr. 10. — George Scheaves in Fentoun, AVilliame Levingtoune in
Dirltoun, and Johne Ci'aike in Gulane, found Andro Coramendater of Jedburcht,
and others, fureties for their entry, on fix days warning, to underly the law
' ffor the treafonabill Wacheing, warding, and imprefoning of our foueran lady
within hir Palice of Halyrudehoufe.'

iHuriirr of * ^nntour IBautJj* (Mirrio).

Jun. 1. — The Supplicatiouue o/" Williame Quhite, cord'mer in the
Cannogait. — Souerannis lord and lady, vnto 3our Maiesteis, and Lordis of
3our Maiefteis maift honorabill Priue Counsale, huimlie menis and fchewis
I 3our feruitour Williame Q^uhite, cordiner in tlie Cannogait : That quhair I
gave in my Supplicatioun to 5our Maiefteis of befoir, fchewaud, that for feir (of)
being focht at my houfe, the morne eftir 5our hienes cuming to this Toun,' furth
of Dumbar, I efchewitt,^ and durft nocht compeir befoir 5oiir Ma^"^ and Counfale, to anfuer to fie thingis as fuld be laid to my charge ; albeit in veritie, as be
my v])er Supplicatiouue I notefeit and declarit })at I wes nocht prefent at ]je
Slaughter of SEN5EOUR Dauid, 5our hienes Secreter,^ nor 5et wes of counfale, arte nor parte of ])e famin, nor neuir knew ])airof, quhilP Alexander Carpentij7ie aduerteift me in my awin houfe of the famin ; and come nocht out of my
awin houfe Jiat nycht: And offerit me to find cautioune to vnderly the law jjairfor :
Quhilk 5our graceis and Lordis of 30ur Counfale ordanit to be reffauit ; and I
immediatiie J)aireftir fand Jje famin to pe Clerk of 3our hienes Counfale : Nochttheles, I as 3it can nocht be relaxit fra pe home, bot baith my fouerte ftandis,
and I remane at the home. Heirfoir I befeik 3our Ma^'^* and Lordfchipis,
that 3e will ordand '' Letteris to be direct to relax me fra Jje procefs of home led

' Edinburgh. " Escaped; absconded. ^ The word ' feniand' had been first written,

and afterwards deleted. ^ Until. ^ Ordain, decree.

484 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1566.

vpone me, in maner foirfaid, reflaue me to pe peax, and gif to me Ipe wand
])airof,' becaus I have already fundin cawtioune to Ipe faid Clerk of Counfale, in
maner aboue writtine : And jour hienes anfuer huimlie I befeik.^

Apud 'Ed", primo Junij,anno 1566. — The Lordis of Secrete Counsale Ordanis the JulliceClerk and his deputtis to reflave fouirte of this complener, that he fall compeir and vnderly tlie law
eftir ])e forme of this Bill, the thrid day of the Aire, or foner, vpoune xv dayis warning, vnder the pane
of ane hundreth pundis : And fe faid fouirte being fundin, Ordanis Letteris to be direct to relax him
frapehome. Huntlie. James Stewart. Mar. Boithwell. Athoill. Caithnesse.

' JoHNE Hart/ indueller in the Cannogait, became plege and fouerte,' &c.,
in obedience to the above deliverance.

Jul. 2. — James 5oung, cutler, burges of Edinburgh, and Thomas
Broune, cordiner there, found furety ' that thai fall compeir befoir the Ju'ftice,
or his deputtis, the third day of the nixt Juftice-aire of Edinburghe, or foner,
quhenne and quhair it fall pleife our fouerannis lord and lady, vpone xv dayis
warning, to vnderly the law flor arte and parte of all counfaling, devifing, and
actuale deid, of the Slauchter of vmq'" SEN5EOUE. Dauid Riccio ; after the
forme and tennour of thair Supplicatioune gevin in to the Lordis of Secrete
Counfale thairupoune, and vndir the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament :
And this fouerte wes reflauit be command and deliuerance of the faidis Loi'dis.

SupPLiCATiouNEybr ^/amei 'aoung, cutler, and Thomas Broune, cordiner.
Vnto 50ur Ma'"* and Lordis of Secrete Counsell, vnto jour lordfchipes humblie menis* and
fchewis, we jourgraceis femitouris, James ^oung, cutler, burges of Ed'', and Thomas Broune, cordiner ]iair ; That quhair, upone )ie nynt day of March laftbipaft, the tyme of jie Slauchter of vmq'«
SEN3E0UR Dauid Riccio, within :;our Ma'*'* Palice of Halryrudehoufe, we wer in our awin bouffis at fupper, ignorant of the thing attemptit, qubill^ J)e Commoune-Bell rang : At qubilk tyme we pad
in eumpany with the Proweft, as mony ma did, to ])e Abbey, and fat fame nycht returnit agane and
pafl. to our beddis within our awin houffis. On the morne, being Sounday, we wer befoir noyne*' in
the Kirk, and eftir noyne wes in our awin houffis. Vpoune Monunday in the morning, being comraandit be Alexander Cuke, officiare, we paft to fe Abbay, and remanit all day quhill nycht. This is
))e fimpill and plane trewth of our pairties. And Jiairaftir, at J)e Quenis Ma'''» returning fra Dunbar to fis burcht, being inforniit fat hir hienes was fpecialie offendit with ws, for fair abfentit our
felves ; and fwa wes putt to the borne. Heirfor, we befeke jour Ma'™, fen we ar innocent of all
counfuling, diuifiug, and actuale deid of fe faid Slauchter, and is content to vndirly fe law f airfor, that

* A rebel was relaxed from the horn by the symbolical delivery to him of * the wand of peax ' (peace) ; which, on
the contrary, was broken asunder by a Herald, Pursuivant, or INIessenger-at-Arms, in cases of (It'fiircement, &c.
£ach JMessenger of the present day, on his a]>puintment, still receives a small rod tipped with silver, having the King's
blazon, &c. A movable ring, or slide, is so constructed as to slide from one end to the other. When deforced, the
Officer pulls out liis baton, or rod, and, in place of snapping it asunder, slips the ring before described from one end to
the other, before witnesses, and publicly annoutices his (hjorcetiient ; which heaftei-wards certifies in a regular * Execution,' i.e. official attestation of the fact. See also Nov. 18, 1511, and Oct. II, 1531, Notice, for other particulars
relative to the ' Wand of Peax.' " ' I ressauit na souertie, {Siyned) J. Hay.' " Probably father, uncle,

or near relation of Andko Hart, the well-known Printer. ' Complains; literally, makes inoaiu ' Until.

* Before noou ; at the morning service.

Hen. ET Mar. 1 & 24. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 485

30ur Ma'"* will gif command to 30ur Juftice Clerk and liis deputies, to reffeve fouertie of ws, that we
fall compere and vndirly Jie law ]iairfor, the thrid day of Jie nixt Juftice-aire of Ed', or foner, vpoune
XV dayis warning, vndir the panis contenit in J)e Actis of Parliament ; And Jie faid fouirtie being fundin, that we may have Letteris to relax ws fra fe faid procefs of home led vpoun ws in fe faid mater,
reflave ws to 50ur Ma'"'* peace, and gif to ws ]>e wand pairof.' And as for remaning in fe faid Abbey
the faid Monunday, infafar as 50ur hienes is offendit pairwith, wefubmitws in 30ur gratious will and
mercye. And 30ur gratious anfuerhuimlie we befek. — Apud Ed', Jecundo Julij, 1366 The Lordis
OF Secrete Counsall Ordanis the Juflice Clerk and his deputes to relfave fouirtie of thir James
goung and Thomas Broune, that Jiai fall compeir and vnderly the law the thrid day of the nixt Jufticeaire of Ed"^, or foner, vpoune xv dayis warning, efter ]ie forme of pair Supplicatioune, and vnder the
panis contenit in pe Actis of Parliament : And the faid fouirtie being fundin, Ordainis Letteris to be
direct to relax fame fra le home. Huntlie. James Stewart. Jo. Rossen.^

iJflurUn- of SablU laUrCo.

Jul. 4. — WiLLiAiM JoHNESTOUNE, boM^er/ biirges of Edinbiirghe, found
Robei't Campbell of Kingeancleuch furety for his entry at the next Juftice-aire
of Edinburgh, &c. to ' vnderly the law efter the forme of this Supplicatione vnder-written,' &c. The Supplication and deliverance are verhatim the fame as in
the cafe of 3ouDg and Broune.

iHurtier of ^ttvtinx IBabiti l\um.

Jul. 10. — Amdro Armesirang, burgefs of Edinburgh, found furety to
vnderly the law, conform to the following Supplication and deliverance of the
Lords of Secret Council.

SuppLiCATioNE_/br Andro Armeflrang, biirges of Edinhtirghe.
My Lordis of Secrete Counfele, vnto 30ur lordfchipes huimlie menis and fchewis, 1 30ur feruitor,
Andro Armeftrang, burges of Ed"^, that quhair eftir Jie Slauchter of vmq''" Secretar Dauid Riccio,
comniittit within our fouerannis Palice of Halyrudehous vpone Jie nynt day of Marche laftbipaft, I (as
mony ma') chanceit to pas to Jie faid Palice, and to be prefent at the Wache^ kepit Jiairin, albeit I was
nawyise of Jie counfale, diuifing nor foirknawledge of Jie faid Slauchter, nor prefent at Jie actuale deid
of Jie famiu : ftbr Jie quhilk I am content to abyde Jie law. This is Jie fempill trewth of his parte ; and
3it, hering Jiat our foueran was offendit with me at hir graces returning from Dumbar, for feir I abfentit my felf, and fwa was putt to Jie home. Heibfor, I befeik 30ur lordfchipes that I may have
command to Jie Juftice Clerk and his deputtes, to refl'ave fouerte of me, that I fall compeir and vnderly Jie law the thrid day of Jie nixt Juftice-air of Ed'', or foner, on xv dayis warning, quhen and
quhair it fall pleis our fouerannis for all counfaling, devyfing, and arte and parte of Jie actuale deid of
}ie faid Slauchter, vndir the panis contenit in Jie Actis of Parliament : And the faid fourtie being fundin, that I may have Letteres to relax me fra Jie proces of home led vpone me in Jie faid mater, reffave me in our fouerannis peax, and gif to me Jie wand Jiairof : And 3our anfwer, &c. Apud Ed"^,
x" Julij anno I"' V" Ixij". The Lordis of Secrete Counsale Ordanis the Juftice, Juftice Clerk,
and his deputtis, to reftave fourtie of this complenar, after Jie forme of Jiis Supplicatioune. And Jie
faid fouirte being fundin, Ordanis Letteris to be direct to relax him fra Jie home, in maner defyrit.

Argyle. James Stewart. Mar.

' See note to Jan. 1, 1566, &c. ^ JouN Leslt of Ross, the well known Historian, &c ' Bow-maker,

See Feb. 12, 1565-6. * Wany more. ' Watch, or guard.

486 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1566iiluilin* o( * ^cnror ©auiti lUccio, ^r/

Jul. 23. — George Tod iu Dirltoune, and Alexander Robertfoune there,
found Alexander Haminiltoune of Innerwik furety for their entry at the next
Juftice-aire of Edinburgh, ' or foner, quheu and quhair it fall pleife our fouerannis lord and lady, vpoune xv dayis warning, to vnderly the law for art and
parte of the crewale Slauchter of vmq'" Seneour Dauid Riceio : And treasonabill Wacheiug, warding, and iinprefoning, of our foueran lady within hir
Palice of Halyrudehoufe.' — Andre, Comniendater of Jedburcht, band and obleift
him to freyth, releve, and keip fkaithles the laid Alex' Hammiltoune of the
cawtioune aboue writtine, and all panis that he fall happin to incur thairthrow.

Caution for tfje ^Parson at lUnfrtln.

July 26. — Maister Andro Hay, Perfoun of Renfrew, found Hew
Wallace of Carnall furety for him, ' that he fall remane in fre Ward within
the burcht of Dunbar, and twa niylis round about the famin ; and fall on nawyife efchaip nor efchew, vnder the pane of ffyve Thowland merkis, conforme
to the King and Queues Precept direct thairupoune to the Juftice Clerk.' — ' Deletur ex Precepto Rcgiiie.''

(Sep. 7.) — He found caution to enter and underly the law, on xv day.s'
warning

(Jan. 29, 1566-7.) — Justice Clerk, We greit 50W, ]iat incontinent eftir the fyclit heirof ^e
delete Maijter Andro Hay, Peifoune of Renfrewis, cautioner, out of 30ur bukis, fua Jiat fair be na mair
memorie fairof, and fat na forther executioune pass jiairupoun, hot fe famine to reraane as for3ett' for
euir ; kepacd Jiis our Precept for jour Warrand. At Lynlythgw, ]ie xxix of Januar, 1566.

Maria R. Fiat.

i^iirtitr of * ^ttvtitv ©auitr 3ai«io/ ^t.

Jul. 31. — Richert Cranstoun of Skaittilbuls, found William Newtoun of that Ilk, furety for his entry at the next Juftice-aire of Edinburgh,
within the Conftabulary of Haddingtoun, &c. ' to vndirly the law, ffor the
flauchter of vniq'^ Secreter Dauid Riccio, committit vpoune the nynt day of
March laftbipaft : And Wacheing and Warding of our fovei-annis lord and
ladyis maift nobill perlbunis, within hir awine Palice of Halyrudehufe.'

(i:aution lor X\)t ilairii of <!^rmi.otoun.

Aug. 3 John Cokburne of Ormeftoune found Thomas Hammiltoun

of Prieftisfieid, burgefs of Edinburgh, Cautioner for his entry at the next Jufticeaire of Edinbui-gh, &c., to underly the law for all crimes to be imputed to him,
by Warrant of the Lords of Council.

' Forgotten.

1 & 24 Hen. et Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 487

(Countnfeitliifl anU Satterinjj * itnoiits bt^eriMisr callit jH^artJljnljig.'

Aug. 14. — ' Andro Jak, burges of Abirdene,' found furety (500 merks
to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Aberdeen, for arte and parte of the
treafonabill Counterfvitting of thair hieneffis cun3e,' callit the prent of LyoniSj
vjjerwyife callit llardheulin ;^ and haniebringing J^airof furth of vthir realmes,
and outputting of the famin amangis thair lUbjectis, incontrair the Actis of
Parliament.

(Nov. 11.) — John Robertson, James and John Ewyne, and George Biu'-
net, burgefles of Aberdeen, found caution to vnderly the law for the fame crime.

(lEonboration — SiibatJiiiB ILaiilJ of ^j^ariipljirst

Aug. 20. — Alexander, Lord Home, Alexander Home of Manderftoune, Alex. H. of Hutounhall, Marke Home, fone to the Lard of Coldinknowis,
William Trotter in Foulfchetlaw, and James H. in Chyrnefyde-manys, found
furety to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Berwick, ' ffor Conuocatioun of thair hieneffes liegis to the nowmer of ane Thowfand perfones, bodin in
feir of Weir, at twa findry tymes in Jje moneth of September, or thairby, 1564 ;
off the cawfing, fending, command, and ratihabitioun of Dame Katherine Ker;
Lady Pharnyherft : And cuming to the grund of the laudis of Keilling, with thair
pertiuentis, and vtheris adjacent thairto, lyand within the fcherefdome of Roxburcht, ffor Invafioune and perfewing of Sir Thomas Ker of Pharniherft, kny',
and vtheris, his kyn, freindis, and fervandis ; at the leift trubling (the peax) of
the cuntre, lyke as thai trublit and brak the famin,'

^lauflijttr.

Sep. 18. — William Lauder, brother german of Gilbert Lauder of
Balbardie, found caution to underly the law at the next Juftice-aire of Berwick,
for the cruel Slaughter of George AVedderat, burgefs of Lauder, committed in
the month of September, 1565. — (Sep. 19.) Robert, and Richard, fon and heir
apparent of Robert Lauder of that Ilk, and Robert Lauder, fon of umq''' Thomas
Lauder in St Leonardis, found caution to anfwer for the fame crime.

OTaution for t\)t ItatitJ of aSrisijoussf.

Sep. 24. — James Wodderspvne of Brighous, now being in Ward
within the Palice of Halyrudehoufe, found furety (Williame Lauder of Haltoune) that he fall re-enter in "Ward, within twentye dayis nixt eftir he be requyrit be our fouerannis, in quhat place thai pleife, vnder the pane of Fyve
Thowfand pundis.

' Coin. ^ Hardils, hardies or Lions, copper coins, then of the value of three halfpence, but

they were afterwards depreciated to one penny by Regent Morton. See Appendix to this reign, for
severe examples nnade on forgers and importers of base money.

488 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1566.

Conbotation — Siibasion — iHutilatCon .

Sep. 25. — RoRERT and John Sandis, indwellers in Leith, George and
Johne Chalraer, Thomas Dikfoun, George Pantoune, and James Lychtman,
found John, William, James, and Adam Logane, and William Lyndfay, in
Reftalrig, and Robert Vaufe, in Leith, furety for their entry on xv days warning, to underly the law, after their return from Lochbrune,' for Convocation of
lieges, and Invading Captain William Blacader, alias Capitane WilUatne,^ for
his flaughter, and Mutilating James Donaldlbune his fervant. — (Oct. 7.) Alexander Dikfoune, in Currie, found caution to anfwer for the lame crime.

* Fmlif settm0 t]^r saitt' to itoiU <!5lipT)ant.

Nov. 14. — Laurence Bruce of Colpmalindeis found Sir Hew Kennedye of Girwanmaynis, kn', furety for his entry, on Nov. 27, to luiderly the law
for art and part of Convocation of the lieges, and ' Umbefetting the gaitt' to
Laurence Lord Oliphant for his flaughter.

CirasmtaijU iHuitirr ssi £un tr 1S?enri) — ^cijiitij t!jc jjaueen's per»
soil antJ annprisoniuff Ijn- in t\)t (jTastlc of ©uufiar — ComptlUns
\)tx to iWarn) tijc (JParl of aSotfjiMcll, $cr.

[As the circumstances connected with these liorrible transactions are already so familiar to all who
are in any measure conversant witli the liistory of Scotland, it is considered unnecessary to collect
from all the scattered sources the various voluminous Papers which elucidate the whole particulars.
It is enough to refer the reader to Laing's elaborate Dissertation, the State Trials, Anderson's Collections, Keith's History, &c. Unfortunately, no traces of Trials for this crime now remain in the
Books of Adjournal ; but the following brief abstract appears in Sir Ludovick Stewart's Collections.^
The Acts of Parliament'^ ought likewise to be examined, in farther illustration of the subject, and of
all the Trials for Treason and the numerous Forfeitures and Restorations during this and the subsequent reigns.

In THE Appendix to this reign, also, the reader will find a great variety of interesting and minute
information regarding Darnley's Murder.

The Kirk Session Records of Canongate thus quaintly notices the event : ' The King(is) grace
blaven vp v' bud' = in ))E Kirk of Feild, the x of Fabruar 1366-(7.) It is worthy of notice that
the same Session Records preserve the following highly interesting minutes of the Solemnization of
the Maniage between King Henry and Mary Queen of Scots.

{From the Minutes of the Kirk Session Becord of Canongate.) Jul. 21, 1365 — ' The quhilk
day Johne Brand, Mynifter, prefentit to J>e Kirk ane Writtine,^ writtine be fe Juftice Clark' hand,
defyrine Jie Kirk of jiE Cannogait and Mynifter Jiairof to proclame Harie Duk of Albaynye,
Erie of Rois, &c. one ])e one part, and Marie be fe grace of God Quene of Scottis,8 fouerane of
this realme, one fe vjiair part. The quhilk |ie Kirk ordans Jie Minifter fo to do, with inwocatioune
of ))e name of God.'

' A celebrated station for herring fishers, in Ross-shire. Ullapool is its principal harbour. ' See his Trial,

Jan. I'l, 1.307. " Stewart's MSS. Adv. Lib. (among R. Milne's MSS.) W. .3. 18, p. 31. ' Fol. edited by Thomas Thomson, Esq. Deputy Clerk Regsiter. ^ Powder, gunpowder. " Writing. ' Sir

John Bellenden of Auchnoull. " The pen has been drawn through the words ' or Scottis.'

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 489

(From the Register of Frocl am at id's s, Kirk Sessioii Records of Canongate.) Jul. 29, 1565. —
' Henry Duk of Albany, Eill of Rois, Marie be the grace of God Quene fouerane of ))is realme
— 1, 2, ^.' Ma(nietl) in ]ie Chapell' (of Halyruid.)

(^Froni the Register q/' Marriages, Kirk Session Records of Caiwngate.) Jul. 29, 1565. —
' Henry and Marie Kyng and Qweine of Scotis,' &c.

The fate of the leading parties connected with Darnley's Murder ia well known. In reference to
Nicholas Howbert, otherwise called Parish- the Frenchman, he suffered death on Aug. 16, 1569, as
appears from the Lord High Treasurer's Accounts,'' where charges are made for sending two of the
quarters of his body to Perth and Dundee, and his head and one of his legs to St Andrews. His
Confession and examination are given at full length in the Appendix of Documents illustrative of
Darnley's Murder. They are dated at St Andrews, Aug. 9th and 10th, 1569. These important
Papers were obtained from the Originals, which are signed on each leaf by Paris, and are still extant.'
But for the apparently accurate form in which they have been published by Mr Laing, the Editor
would have deemed it proper to have had them collated carefully with the original MS., preserved
in the British Museum.

Before concluding this brief notice, the Editor begs to call the attention of the historical enquirer
to an extremely interesting Narrative, written by James Earl of Bothwell, embracing his
personal history after his flight from Scotland in 1367, his adventures upon the coast of Norway, &C.
It has recently been printed from the original in the Royal Library at the Castle of Drottningholm, in
Sweden, and was presented by Messrs Henry Cockburnand Thomas Mailland to the Members of the
Bannatyne Club, under the title, ' Les affaires du Conte de Boduel, l'An. M.D.XXVIII.'^
An English translation also lately appeared in the New Monthly Magazine,^ in which work the authenticity of the document is fully established.]

(Apr. 12, 1567.') — James Erle of Bothwell," James Ormeftoun of
J)at like," Hob Ormiftoun, his father-brother, Patrick Wilfoune,^Villiam Murray,
Sim Arinftrang, callit Wantoune Simie, Fareis'" Fi-enchman, (dilated) ffor the
Murther of King IIenrie, our fouerane lord's father, for feizing of the
Queen's perfoune at the Foid-hrigis, and Iniprifoning of hir perfoune in the
Castell of Dunbar, and compelling her to compleit Mariage with him — for
Huffing and balding of the faid Caftell, &c.

(Apr. 12.) — (Schir) Patrick Hepburne of Whytecastell, kny',
for airt and pairt of the Murther of THE KiNG, our fouerane lordis father, and
vther crymes immediatlie preceiding.

ItJicj!) Crrnson — iHuvtJtr of iUnn ^tm^, ^t.

[The Case of Captain William Blackader has not been noticed by Laing, although he has

otherwise treated so fully of the proceedings against the Murderers of King Henry. The author of

' Proclaimed for the fiist and second times ; the third time of aslcing is deleted. ' The sobriquet of ' French

Paris' seems to have arisen from the place of his nativity ; for he styles himself* Parisien' in his Confession. See
Zaing, II, 270. " See Appeniiix, No. I, under dates' Aug. 16 and 18, 1569. Lainff's Hist. II, 32. ' British Museum, Calig. B. IX, ful. 370, and Calig. C. I, ful. 318. '■ Quarto ; privately printed foriHE Bannatyne

Ci.uB, 1829. Copies may be seen in the J3rit. Mus., Adv. Lihrary, and other public Libraries, &c. ^ See Letter

from Mr Granberg, in New Monlid;/ Mug. Xlll, 521-537. ' Stavurt omits to insert the date. This was

the first * diet' assigned to the pannels, as appears by the Trvas. Ace. ** See also Acta Pari. Fol. edit, for

numerous particulars exjdaiiatovy of the proceedings adopted against him. * See his Confession, Dec. 13, 1573,

immediately previous to his Execution, in Lainy's Hist., II, 291 ; talien from Anderson's MSS. '" This man's

name was ' Nicholas Howbert, diet Paris.' Sec his Confessions in App. audZaing's Hist. II, 270, 281, &c.

VOL. I. • t 3 Q

490 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

' The Hifloiie of King James the Sext,'' from whose work David Craufurd of Drum soy compiled
his spurious ' Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland,"- narrates the circumstance very hriefly, in these
words : ' That fame verie nycht^ of hir tranfporting,* tua men were tayne as fufpect of the King's
Murtlier. The ane was callit Sebajiion de Vi/lour, a Frenchman of nation; the uther was Capten
William Blakaler. This Capten iliortlie efter was put to tlie knawledge of a Jure, and was convict ;
bot at his death wald nowayis confes himfelf gihie of the Kingis Murther. The uther efcapit.'

Birrel, in his ' Diarey,' ' informs us, that ' tlie 24 day of Junij Capitane Villiam Blacketer wes
drawin haci<ward, in ane cairte, from ]ie Tolbuith to tlie Crolle, and ther wes hangit and quartred, for
being on the King's Murther.' It will be seen by the Appendix to this reign, that liis legs and arms
were sent to Stirling, Glasgow, Perth, and Dundee, on Jul. 26, 1567.'' His quarters were fixed on
the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, &c.

The following lias been obtained from Stewarts MSJ Although the memorandum he has preserved is very brief, it has evidently been extracted from the Books of Adjournal, along with the preceding Trial of Scott and gair,^ &c.]

Jun. 14. — Captaine William Blacader wes Convict and Fyllit be
ane Aflyle of airt and pairt of tlie crewill, odious, treafonable, and abominable
Slaughter of the King's father, vnder filence of night, in his awin ludging
within the Burgh of Ed^ befyde the (Kirk of) Field : And of the treafonable
raifing of fyre within the famyn, with ane great quantitie of Powder ; throw
force of the whilk, the faid haill lodging wes raifiit and blawin in the aire, and
THE King (Henry) erewallie and trealbnablie llaine and diftroyit be the faid
Captaine ; vpon fet i)urpofe, prouifioun, and foirthought fellonie : And tliis he
did vpon the nynth day of Feberij, 15()7. For the whilke cryme the faid Captaine William wes execute.'

Ms\) ri-rasoii — illtirUrr of ^iix^ %Hm'\).

[Mr Thomas Craig, JiiJi/ce-DejJute.^

[Although the following Case properly belongs to the reign of King
Ja^iks VI., it has been thought preferable to insert it here, rather than in the
Appendix. No remarks seem requi.<ite, for the Depositions, &c. give a full
narrative of the parts which they individually bore in this shocking tragedy
T7te Lord High Treasurer's Accounts contain several notices, of which the
following may suffice, in this place.

Dec. 14, 1567. — ' Item, to Walter Bynnyng, Paynter, for Paynting and making of xvj Armes '" to ])e Parliament, for ]jE Forealtour of James Erie

' Printed for tlie Bannatyne Cltih, and Edited by Ihonias Thomson, Esq. Quarto, 1825, p. 15.
* First published, 8vo, Lond. 1706. Mr Malcolm Lai itg had the merit of publishing his detection of
this impudent literary forgery. ' 7i»7(/says, ' tiie 17th day of .Tune.' ■* The conducting

of Mary QuKiiN of Scots to Lochleven Castli-, June 14, 1507. •' Page 10. '' J^/rre/ appears
to be a month behind in his chronology; indeed his dates are seldom, if ever, to be trusted. ' Sir

Liid. Sicwarf's MS. Adv. Library, ]). 47. '^ See I, # 481. ^ One Jj3rt of the ceremony of

Forfeiture consisted in the Traitor's degiiidation from his honours and heraldic distinctions,- by reversing, crazing, and tearing in pieces his Armorial bearings, &c. '" ' He went to death folemnlie
denying the fact. See Crairfurd's Memoires, p. 41.' R. Mylne's Note.

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 491

Boithuile, (James) Ormiftoun of ])at Ilk, Johnne Hepburiie of Boltoun, Jolinne
Hay, 5ounger of Tallo, . . ... viij li.'

Various payments for summoning Assises, &c. this month. Afterwards these
remarkable entries are made.

Jan. 13, 1567-(8). — ' Item, to Johnne Broune, meffinger, and ane boy, pafland
of Ed' with clois ^^Tittingis, togidder with ])e HElD of Poivrie, LEGGIS of
Johnne Hay, 5ounger of Tallo,' and Johnne Hephurne of Boltoun, to be affixit
on 3E PORTIS of Glafgw, Hammiltoun, Dunbertane, Air, and AVigtoun, iiijli. ijs.

' Item, to ane boy palTand of Ed' to Leith, Hadingtoun, and Jedburcht, with
pair LEGGIS to be affixt, ..... xxij s.

' Item, to thre boyis paffand of Ed' with pe reft of pair Armes and leggis,
to pe Burrowis of Perthe, Dundee, Abirdene, Elgin, and Invernefs, to be affixt, . . . . . . . . Ivs.

' Item, for crelis' and turfing^ of pe faidis heidis, leggis, and armis; and
candle for paking pairof, . . . . . x s.'

The important Documents which are appended to this Trial, contain almost
all the additional authentic materials which can now be obtained for clearing up
this atrocious Murder.]

JoHNE Hepburne callit of Bolton, Johne Haye apperand of Tallo, Willi-ame Powrie, and George Dalgleifli, being preient in judgement in the faid
Court, to be accufit of the Dittay after fpecifeit, were putt to the knawlege of
the perfons underwritten, quhilk were lawfully fummoned to pafs upon pair
Affize, choifin and admittit be thamfelues, and fworn to deliver upon the points
of the faid Dittay, viz.

ASSISA.

John Lockait of the Bar, William St Clair in Gosfoird, James Freeman, burges of £(]■■,

The Laird of Caprinton, Laird of Gaftoun, Heuglie Brown, fair,

James Canil)bell of Clianklloun, llobert Gray, burges of Ed'', Charles Geddes,

Heugh Wallace of Carnelj, John Stoddart, fair, John Watfon,

The Laird of Mochrum, Williame Strang, James Ackman.

Verdict. And immediately aftir the chefing and fwering of the faidis perfonis of Alfys, as ufe is, the forefaid John Hephurne, John Haye, William
Powrie, and George Dalgliflie, being accufit be dittay, oppinly read in jugement, of the crymes following ; and efter the reding, alfwa in jugement, of certain
anfweris and Depofitionis maid be thanie of before, at particular examinationis
of pame upon pe faidis crymes, quhilks pai recognolcit, and confeffit to be of
verity, in prefeuce of the faidis perfonis of AlTys ; the faid perfonis of Affys
reraovit furth of the faid Court, and all togidder convenit and refibnit upoun

' Robert Kirkcaklie, Porter of the Castle of Edinburgh, afterwards got a payment of L.57 for his
expenses while in Ward, viz. from Sep. 10, 13G7. '•' Willow baskets. ^ Conveying.

492 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

the pointis of the faid Dittay, togidder with Jje faidis Depofitionis ; and fyne
being fiaii'with rypely avyfit, reinterit in pe faid Court of Jufticiarie, and t)air,
in prefens of the faid Juftice- depute, be pair deliverance, pronouncit and declarit
be ])e mouth of the fpekir, John Lockhart of the Bar, chancilar of the faid Allys,
fand and deliverit the faids Johne Hepburne, John Hay, William Powry, and
George Dalglifli, to be culpable, fylit, and convict of art and part of the cruel,
lliamefull, treafonabill, and abhominabill Slauchter and Murther of umquhill
THE KiNGis grace, fader to our foverane lord, in his awin ludgiug for the tyme,
within the burgh of Edinburt, befyde the Kirk of Field, quhair he was lyand
in his bed, taking the nychts reft, treafonably rifand fjTe within the fame, with
ane grite quantitie of ponder ; through force of the quhilk, the faid haill lugen
wes raifit and blawin in the air, and his grace was murderit trefonably, and
maift cruelly llane and deftroyit by pame parein : And als, for art and part of
the crewall Slauchter and Murther of umquhill William Tailjor, his graces
fervitour, and umquhill Andro Macaig, trefonably, throw raifmg of the faid fyre,
as faid is ; committit in the cumpany with Ja]\ies, fumtyme EiiLE BoTHWELi.,
now rebell, and declarit traitor in Parliment, and at the Horn, in the moneth
of Februarie laft bypaft, under fcilence of nycht, upon fett purpofes, provilioun,
and forthought felonye.

Senten'ce. And thairfoir the faid Juftice-depute, be dome, pronuncit be
the mouth of Andro Lindefay, dempftar of the faid Court of Jufticiarie, decernit,
ordanit, and adjudgit the faidis Johne Hepburne, Johne Haye, William Powry e,
and George Dalglifli, to haif committit the crymes of Trefoun and Lefe-Majeftie ;
and as manifeft Traytours, to be demanit as followis ; that is to fay, the faid
Johne Hephirne, John Hay, WiUiam Powrye, to be hang it to the deid on
ane gibbet at the Mercat Croce of Edinburt; and pair heddis, leggis, and
ARMis to be cuttit from pair bodies, and put up and hangin (as for example) on
the Portis of Edinburgh, and vther Portis of the principall Borrowis of pis
realme, and pair bodies to be bkynt and confumit in fyre, befyde the faid
gibbett. And the faid George Dalgleifli to be hancjeit to the deid, and his
HEID to be cuttit fra his bodye, and put upon the Port of Edinburgh. And
ficlyke, decernit and ordanit the faidis perfonis, and ilk ane of pame, to haif
foirfaltit and tynt all and fundrye pair landis, heritages, pofteflionis, talkis,
fl;eddingis, lyferentis, actionis, debtis, and all vtheris pair guds, moveables and
unmoveables, to be inbrocht, and remaine with our foverayne lord, as his efcheat.
Extractum de libro Actorum Adjournulis S. D. N. Regis, per me Johannem
Bellenden de AiichinonJe, militeni, Clericum Jufticiaria; ejujdcm gcneralem,
Juh ineisfigno etjuhfcriplionc manuaVdnis.

Johannes Bellenden, Clericus Jiijliciari<s.

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 493

Documents illustrative of the Murder of King Henry Darnley.

I. The Depositions of William Powrie.'
1. Apud Edinhurgum, 23 Junii, An. Dom. 1567, in prefetitia Doniinorum Secreti Concilii.
WiLLlAME PowRiE, bome in Kinfawnis, seruitor to Jie Erie Bothwell, deponis, that pe fam day JiE
King wes flane at night, fE Erle Boithwell, accumpanyit with James Ormefloune of fat Ilk, Hob
Ormejtoune, his fader bruther, John Hephurne of Bolton, and John Hay, 30unger, 5eid togidder to
ane counfele in the nether liall of ])e faid Erie Bothiuell's ludgeing in ]'e Ahhay, about four houris eftirnone, or ])airby, and renianit Jiairin twa houris, or pairby ; quiiat )iai did or faid, he knawis not.

Item. Deponis, |iat John Hephurne of Bolton, at ten houres at evin, commandit the deponar and
Pat Wlljoune to tak up ane carriage of twa uiaills, the ane ane tronk, and jie vthir ane ane leddirin "
mail, quhilks were lyand in the faid nethir hall, quhilks the deponar and the faid Pat put on and
chargit upon twa horfes of my Lordis, the ane being his fown ' horfe, and cariit the fame to the ^et' of
the enteres of the Blank Friers, and )>arc laid the fame down, quhair ]>e Tlrle Bothwell, acuinpanit with
Robert Ormefloune and Paris, called French Paris, and vtberis twa quhilks had cloakes about Jiare
faces,' met the faidis deponar and Pat Wilfoun. And ]iat joung Tallo, the Lard of Ormijtoune, and
John Hepburtie of Boltoun, wes awaitand vpon ])e deponar and Put Wiljoun, within tlie faid jet ;
and ]iat fare the faidis thre perlbuns within the faid ^et, reflauit the iaids twa charges, quhilks the
deponar knew to be pulder,*" because the fame wes in fundry polks," within the faid mail and tronk:
And ])e deponar and faid Pat Wilfoun helpt fame in with the fame ; and the powder being taken from
fame, the faid John Hephurne of Bolton fent tliis deponar for candell, and fat he coft fix halpenny
candell fra Georde Burnis wife in tiie Cowgate, and deliverit to the faid Johne ; and fat ]ie faids
perfouns relTavaris of the powder, had ane towel with them, with ane littil licht candell ; and the faids
perfouns within the faid ^et oppynit the tronk and mail, and tuck out the polks with the powder : and
everie ane of fame tuck yane upon his back, or under his arm, and carryit the fame away to the backwall of the jaird fat is next the trees ; and fair the faid Lard of Ormifloune, Johnne Hephurne of
Boltoun, and ^oung Tallo, reffavit the pulder fra fame, and wald AiflFer the deponar and his marrow ^
to pafs na furdar. And quhen the deponar and his marrow came bak againe to the faid Frier jet, the
twa horfs that carryed the faid mail and tronk war away, and jit fay carryit the faids mail and tronk
again to the Ahhay, and as fay came up the Black Frier Wi7id, the Quenes grace was gangand
before fame with licht torches : And fat the deponar and his marrow being cumin to the faid Eries
ludging in the Ahhay, thai tarryit fare ane hour or mair, and fan the faid Erie came in, and immediatly tuk aff his claythes fat wer on, viz. a pair of blak velvet hoife, truflit with filver, and ane
doublet of fatin of the fame manor ; and put on ane vthir pair of black velvet hoife, and ane doublet of
canwes, and tuk his fide rideing cloak about him, and incontinent pall furtb, accumpanyt with French
Paris, the deponar, Georde Dagleijh, and Pat Wilfoun, and came down the twnpike, and alang the
back-wall of the Quenes garden, quhill fai came to the back of the Cunjie-houfe,' and the back
of the Stabillis, while thay came to the Cannogaie. And deponis, fat as fai came by tlie gate of
the Quenes South-garden, the twa fentinellis ]iat flude at the jet fat gangis to the uttii' cloifs, fpeirit
at fame, ' Quha is fat ?' And fai anfwerit, ' Friends.' The centinell fpeirit, ' Quhat friends ?' And
fai anfwerit, ' My Lord BothwelFs friends.'

Item, Deponis, fat fai come up the Canongate, aijd to the Nether-bow, and findand the Bow '"
fteikand," Pat Will/on cryet to John Galloway, and defyrit him to opin the Port to friends of my
Lord Bothivell ; quha came ane oppynit the port, and ]iai enterit, and jeid up aboue BaJJyntines'^'^

' ^niferson's Collection, II, 163. * Leathern /rwn/; or portmanteau. ^ Soum or sowm ; a sumpter

borse. * Gate. ^ This was termed being * minsillit,^ i, c. muflled, masked, ** Gun-powder. ^ Bags.

' Companion. " Mint. '° The Nether-Bow Port. " Shutting. " The celebrated early Scottish Trinter.

494 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

houfe on the fouth-fule of the way, and knockit at ane ftaire, and callit for the Laird of Ormejlone,
and Robert Ormejtone, and nane anfvverit ])ame : And pai fan ilippit down ane clofs beneith the Frier
Wynd, and come to the jet at the Black Friers, and enterit in at J>at jet, and jeid quliill fay come
to the back-wall and dyke, quhair the deponar and Pat Wiljon left the utheris peifouns before exprymit,' with the powder, as faid is ; and Jiaire the Erie Bothweille pall in over the dyke, and bad the
deponar, Pat Wiljbn, and Georde Dalgleifli tarry flill fair while he come backwart to them. And
furdcr deponis, fat fai tariit fare half an houre, and hard nevir din ^ of any thing, quhill ^ at lafl my
lord, accompanyit with joung Tallo, antl Johnne Hephurne of Boltoune, come to the deponar, and
vtheris twa perfons being with him, and evin as my lord and thir twa comes to the deponar and his
marowis at the dyke, thai hard the crak,* and thai pad away togidder out at the Frier ^et, and finderit ^ quhen fai came to the Coivgate, pairt up the Blackfrier Wynd, and paii t up the cloifs which
is under the Endmyllis Well ; and met not quhill fai came to the end of the Bow, and jeid down ane
cloifs on the north fide of the gait,^ to half loppin " the wall of Leith Wytid ; and fair my lord thoucht
it over heich,^ and came again aback to the Port, and caufed cry upon John Galloway, and faid fai
war friends of ?«y Lord Bothwdis. And John Gallotvay rule ■' and let them furtli ; and fyne '" fai
paft down St Mary's Wynd, and down the back jairds of the Canongait, and to the faid Erles
Judging ; and as fai paft the Queen's Guards before fpecifyit, fum fentinells fpeirit " at fame ' Quha
fai war?' and fai anfvverit, ]iai war ' Friends of my L. Bothweill :' And als fpeirit ' Quhat crak fat
was?' And fai anfwerit, ' fai knew not;' and fat the fentinels bid them, if fai were fervandis of my
L. Bothweill, to gang fair way.

My lord come into his ludgeing, and immediately callit for ane drink, and tuk off his cloathes incontinent, and jeid to his bed, and tarriet in his bed about half an hour, quhen Mr George Hacketl come
to the jet, and knocks, and defired to be in ; and quhen he came in, he appeared to be in ane greit
effray, and was black as any pik, and not ane word to fpeik. My Lord enquirit, ' Quhat is the matter, man p' And he anfwerit, ' The Kingis houfe is blawn up, and I trow the King be flayn !'
And my lord cryet, ' Fy, treafoun !' And fan he raife and pat on his claiths. Aud farefter the
Erle Huntley and mony came in to my lord, and fai jeid into the Quene's houfe.

Item. Deponis, fat upon the nixt nicht efter, my lord defyrit ]ns deponar, Pat Wilfon, Georde
Daglyh, the Laird of Ormejtoune, and Hoh Ormejtoune, John Hepburn, and joung Tallo, to keip
thair tongues cloifs, and fai fuld nevir want fo long as he had, and fat he fuld fend the deponar and
Pat Wiljon to the Armitage,^- and fat fai fuld be honeflly fullainit. And being inquyrit, Gif this
deponar, at ray Lord Both wells defyre, foclit ane fyne lunt" of any of the Suddartis ?'■* And anfwerit,
fat he did the fame, and gat a piece of fine lunt, of half a faddome, or f areby, fra ane of the Suddartis,
quhais name he knawis not, and deliverit to Johne Hepbtirne of Boltoune, upon Saturday before the
KiNGis Slaughter.

2. Apud Edinburgum,3 Julii, An. Dora. 1567, inprefentia Dominorum Secreti Concilii.

William Powrie, re-examined, deponis, ])at the carage of the tronk and mail contenit in his
former Depofitioun, were carryed by him and P(tt Wiljbne, upon ane gray horfs ]iat pertained to
Herman, page to my loid, at twa fundry tymes ; and war carryed and conveyed by Jiaini into the
])lace containet in liis former Dcpofition. And fat at the Frier- Wynd-fute '-^ ])is deponar faid to Pat
Willfon, at the conveying of the la(l carriage, thir words, ' Jesu, Patt, quhattin ane gaitt is f is we are
gangand ? I trow it be not gude 1' And he anfwerit, ' I trow it be not gude ; but weill,"' hald jour
tongue !'

Item. Deponis, Quhan the deponar and Pat Willfon come to the Frier 3et with the laft convoy, and

' Expressed. ' Noise. ' Until. * Explosion. ' Separated. ' Street. ' Leapt.

' Higli. ' Arose. '° Then. " Enquired. " The Castle of .Vrmitage or Hermitage. " Match.

"Soldiers. " At the foot of the Inar-Wyiid. "=Hist! Hush!

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 495

laid the fame down, Robert Ormejioune come furtli, and faid thir words. ' This is not gude like I I
trow this purpois will not come to this nycht I 1 will iu and fe quhat )iai are doing.'

Item. Jiaireftir, quhen the powlder and greaith' was carryed inwart, the Deponar tarryand at the
dyke,^ the Laird of Ormijioiin of ])at ilk came again, and faid to John Heplmrne and 3oung Tallo,
thir words, (Paris Frenchman being with him,) ' Be God, it is fair in field, cum of it quhat will !'
And bade the deponar and Pat Wil/bn gang their way : And at the fame tyme ]iat J)e deponar and
Pat Wilfon laid down the lall carriage at the faid Frier Gait, the E. Bothioeill came unto thame
utwitli the Frier 3et, accumpanyit with thre more, quhilks had pare cloaks, and mulis' upon fair feet.

Item. Deponis, fat the faidis Johnne Hephurne of Boltone, upon Saturday at evin, befoir the
KiNGis Slauchter, brought the mail and tronk quhairin the powlder was, Xothe E. of Eothivi/es \m\geing, and laid in tiie fame in the neither hall : and the deponar declaris, fat at the laft horfe cariage
he bare up ane toome' poulder barrel to the fame place fai caniet the pulder, and fat he will not how
nor be quhonie the fame came in the Erie Eothweilis ludging in the Abby.

Item. Deponis, fat upon the morne eflir the Kingis Slauchter, viz. Mononday, John Hepburne of
Boltoun gat ane gray horfe, Mr Young Tallo ane broun horfs fra my L. Bothiveill.

Item. Inquirit, Gif William Geddes Depofition, being red to the deponar, was trew? Declarit the
fame was all trew, except the deponar remembers not quhidder he bad and counfulit this Geddes not
to be fund on the gut^ fat nycht or not.

This is the trew copy of the Depositions of the faid William Powry, maid in prefence of the Lords
of Secreit Counfall, concordand and agrieand with the principal remainand at the office of Jufticiary,
collationat be me. Sir John Bellenden of Auchnoule, Clerk of cure fouerane lordis Jufticiarie, witnefling my fign and fubfcription manual. Joannes Bellenden, Clerictis Jitfiiciaria.

II. The Deposition of George Dalgleish.

Apud Edinbnrgum, 26 Junii, An. Dom. 1567, prefentibiis Comilibus de Mortoun etAthol,
Prepnfito de Dundee et Domino de Grange.

George Dalglisii, feruande in the Chalmer to the Erie Bothivell, of the aige of 27 5eiris, or
fareby, &c., deponis, ]iat fe Sunday the King was flayne at nycht, the E. Bothwell, accumpanyit
with the Laird of Ormijloum of fat Ilk, Hob Ormejioune, his fader-bruther, Johne Hepburne of
Boltone, Johime Hay of Tallo, jounger, war togidder in the neither hall of the faid ErVs ludging in
tlie Abbij, about four houres in the efiirnone, and remained farein ane hour and a half; and quhat fai
did knaws not, be relfoun the deponar remainit for the maill pairt in my lord's chalmer.

Item. Deponis, fat my lord, his mairter, came to his chalmer about 12 hours at evin, or fareby, and
tuke of his clayths, and chingit his hois and doublet, niz. ane pair of hoifs, flocket with black welvet,
pafementit with filver, and ane doublett of black fatin of the fame maner, and put on ane vther pair
of black hoifs, and ane canwes dowblett white, and tuke his fide riding cloak about him, of fad Inglifli claith, callit the new colour. And incontinent the Erie, French Paris, William Powry, feruitor
and porter to the faid Erie, Putt Wilfoim, and the deponar, jeid ^ down the turnpike '' altogidder, and
endlong the bak of the Quene's garden, quhill 50W cum to the Cunjie-houfe," and the bak of the
Stabillis, quhill 50W com to the Cannogate, foreanent the Abbay 5et.' And depones, as fay came by
the entry of the Quene's South garden, ane of the fentinels ]iat flude at the ^et fat gangis to the
utter cloifs,"' fpeirit " at thame, ' Quhais that?' fai anfwerit, ' Friends.' — ' Quhat friends?' ' Friends
to my Lord Bothwell,'

Item. Deponis, )iai came up the Canogait to the Nelhir Bow, quhilk wes fteikit," and fat Patt
Willfon cryit to John Galloway," and bid him come downwind oppin the Port and let fame in, and

' Graith; materials. ^ Wall. *' JWuffis ,' slippers ; that their footsteps might not be easily heard.

' Empty. ' Perhaps for (jait, street or way. " Went. ' Spiral staircase. See I * 471. ' Mint.

" Gate. '" That leads to the outer close, or yai-d. " Enquired. " Shut. " The porter, or janitor.

496* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

fat fai tariiet ane gude quliile or' Galloway came down to let jiame in, and fpeirit at fame, ' Quhat
did yow out of liair beds |iat tyme of night ?' And eftir jiay enterit within tlie Porte, ]iai jeid up abone
Salfynthics houfe, on the foutli-fide of the gait, and knockit at ane dur benetli the Sword-llippers, and
callit for the Lard of Orme/founes, and one within anfwerit, he was not fare : And ])ai paffit down a cloifs
beuetli Frier Wynd, and enterit in at the jCt of tlie Black Friers, quhiil * they come to the bak wall
and dyke of the Toivnivall, qubair my lord and Paris paft. in over the wall, and comraandit fe deponar, William Poiory and Putt Willfoun, to reraayne ftil quhiil fai came till fame, and quhatevir fay
Lard or faw, not to llur or depart quhiil he cam againe : And fat f is deponar and the uther twa tarreit
fair half an hour or f areby, and in the meyn time hard no din of any thing, quhiil at laft my lord,
accumpanyit with John Hay, jounger of Tallo, John Hephurne of Bolton, come to the deponar, and
his company, ]iai hard the crack, and paft all away togidder out at the Frier 3et, and funderit in the
Cowgait. My lord, Johnne Hephurne, and Pat Wil/bune, William Poiorie, and the deponar, jeid
up ane wynd be-eft ^ the Frier Wynd, and croffit the Hiegait * at the Nether Bow, to haif loppin the
wall at Leith Wynd, bot thai thocht the wall over hich, and came agane to the Port ; and my lord
cauffit cry upone Johne Galloway,^ and faid, fai were fervands of my lord Bothiceill ; and fat he rufe
and oppynit the wickit : Quha it wes fat rufe, ignorat : And fyne fai paffit down St Mary Wynd,
and down the back of the Cunnygait, and to the faid Erles ludging, and enterit be the fame tumpicke
fat fai cam furth at. And as fai paffit by the Quene's gardens, ane of the fentinels fpeirit, ' Quha
fai war ?' And fai anfwerit, fai war ' Friends of my lord BothweilU And fo foon as my lord came
in his ludgeing he cryit for ane drink, and incontinent fareftir tuke off his claythes and ^eid to his
bed, and lay be the fpace of half ane hour or f areby. Aud fat Mr George Hachet came to the chalmer about half ane hour eftir my lord lay down. Quhan he came in, he apperit to be very effrayit,
and my lord fpeirit, ' Quhat is the matter, man ?' And he anfwerit, fat he ' Heard at the Kirk of
Field like the fchot of ane cannoun, and, as I hear say, the King's houfe is blawn up, and I trow
THE King be (layne I' And incontinent my lord raife and put on his clayths, that is to fay, the fame
hoifs and dowblet fat he had on upon Sunday, quhilks wer pafiaments with filuer ; and fa fone as my
lordis clayths was on, he departit furth of the chalmer, and the deponar remanit ftill in the chalmer.

This is the trew copy of the Depositione of the faid George Dalglisji, maid in prefence of
THE Lordis before exprimit, concordand and agreeand with the principall remayning at the office of
Jufticiare, tollationat by me Sir John Bellenden, knight, clerk of our foveraigne lordis Jufticiary,
witneffing my figne and fubfcriptioun manual. Joannes Bellenden, Clericus Jicjticiaria.

III. Deposition of John Hay, jounger of Tallo.

Apud Edinhurgum 13 die menjis Septembris, An. Bom. 1567, ?Vj •prefence of my Lord

Pegent, the Erles of Morton and Athol, the Lairds ofLochlevin and Petarow, Mr James

Magyll, and the Jujiice- Clerk.

The quhilk day, John Have, 50UNGER of Tallo, being examinit anent the Kingis graces

Murther, graiitit and confeffit himfelf culpable fareof ; and as he wald anfwer before God, deponit

and declarit the Erie Bothwele his mafters pairt of the fame, fa far as the deponar knew, in manner

following : that is to fay. That upon the 7 day of Februar laft bypaft, before the Kingis Murther,

thcrle Bolhiveil, within his chalnu'r in his ludging in the Ahhiiy of Halyriidlions, fchew to the deponar

the purpofe of the Kingis Murther, liiyand their words, or ficlyk, ' Johne, this is the mater I the

Kingis deftructioun is devyfit, and I mon° reveill it unto ye, for an'' I put not him down, I can not

haif an lyfe in Scotland. He will be my deftructioun ! And I reveill this to the as to my friend ; and gyf

30W reveill it again, it will be my deftructioun, and I fall feik this thy life firft !' And Jiarwith he

' Ere, before. ' Until. ' To the Eastward of. ' High Street. ' The Porter or underKeeper of the Nether- Bow- I'ort, who is frequently alluded to. ' Must. ' If.

25 Mau. criminal TRIALS. * 497

gave tile deponar alfo diverfe adnioiiitiona, and alfo fair promifes to keip tlie matter fecret, and to
take part with Iiim in the Kingis. Slaughter, as Ire had devifit ; and ]>at |)areafter, at evin, in the prefence of John Hepburn, callit of Bolton, tlie fiiid Erie proponit the famyn matter to the deponar,
quhilk John Hepburn was on tlie counfail Jiairof of before. And tlterle Bothwell laid to the deponar,
' I have devifit it in this manner, and ye fall do the fame ;' that is to fay, he faid in prefence of James Ormi/toun of Jiat.ilk, and the faid John Hepburn, thir words, ' The poulder mau (jnujt) be laid in the houfe
under the Kingis chalmer, quhair the Queene fuld lye, in an barril, gyf it may be gottin within
the barril, and the fame barril fall haif an hoill at the nether end Jiareof, and an tre, holit and howkit
like an troch, put to the hoill of the banil, and an hint ' fareupon, quhilk fall be fyrit at the far end,
and the unfyrit end laid in the hoill of the barril in the pulder.' And this purpos fuld haif been put
in execution upon the Saturday at night, and the matter fayllit fat nycht, becaus all thiugis war not in
reddynes Jiairfor.

Item, Deponit, ])at upon Sunday ])arefter, about thre or four houres afternone, in iJterle Bothiveirs
nedder houfe in the Abbaye, the faid Erie, John Hepburn of Bolton, and the deponar, devyfit ))at my
lord fuld gang up to the faid Laird of Ormifion's chalmer (like as he did) fua fone as it was mirk,''
and fat fare paft with my lord, quyet on fute. John Hepburn of Bolton, the deponar, anAAde Murray met fame, and Aim utheris ((uham the deponar remembers not, at the faid Laird of Ormi/ton's
flairefute of his chalmer, above tlie Bow, on the fouth-fyde of the gait,-' and fat my lord commandit
the faid Ade and utheris to pafs to Mr John Spenjis, and remayne fare quhill he came to fame : And
))at my lord, John Hepburn of Bolton, and the deponar, enterit in the faid Laird of Ormi/ton's
chalmer, quhair fay fand the faid Lard, and Hob Onnijlon, his fader bruther, and an bruther of the
Lards, quhais name the deponar knaws not, and was put to the dur ; and ))air fai confullit quhat gait*
fai fuld gang to the Kingis houfe, becaufe fai had not tane purpois ]iairupon of before; and fyne
fai jeid all down togidder to the Black Freir 5eit, and f e faid Lard of Ormijion jcid in throw the
aid howfis and wallis, and paft and opynitt the faid Freir-3et to my lord, the deponar, and the reft
forefaid. And fat my lord and the deponar 5eid up and down the Koivgate, quhile Wille Powry and
Pate Willfon broclit the powder, quhilk was brocht, at twa fuudry times, furth oi the Abbay, from tlui
Erlis ludgeing : And fat the fame was in a tronk and an mail, and was brought upon Hermanis naig,
and fat the powder was refliivit in at the Blacji Freir 5eit be the faid Lard of Ormijion and John
Hepburn of Boltown, and fat the famyn was born in be Wille Powry, Pate Wil/bn, and the faids
Lard of Ormijton, Hob Ormijion, and the deponar, in the trunk and mail. And ])areftir the powder
fat was in the trunk was taken furth of the fame, and put in polUs,* and the powder fat was in baith
the tronk and mail was caryit to the Kingis houfe in polks.

And it is of veritie, that Paris, tlie French man, was in the nedder houfe, under the Kingis
ciialmer, and had an key of the back-dowr, and then the faid Lard of Ormijion paft in at the faid dur,
and fpake with the faid Hob, his fader bruther, and with the faid Paris, being both therein, and fand
the time convenient, and came furth again, and tauld the famyn to the faid Erie and his cumpany;
and- ])at fai had with Jiame alfvva a tre and a powder barrel, for to have done as faid is : But the
barrel was fo meikle,'' it could not be gottin in at the duur : And fan fay tuk all the polks and carried
fame within the faid laich houfe, and temit" fame on tlie flour in an help, and the polks weir taken
furth again. And fat my lord was in the houfe afoir, and had left the faid Paris f arein, and the faid
Hob llaiidand at the dur awaitand upon fair coming : And fat the faid Lard of Ormijtone faid to the
faid Jolni Hepburn, ' 5e ken now quhat ye haif to do, quhen all is quyet abone 50W ! Fyre the end of
the lunt, and cum ^our way!' And ]iareftir the faid Lord of Ormijion paft his way, with Hob with
liiin and Paris. John Hepburn and f e deponar taryit rtill within the faid laich houfe a certain fpace ;
and Varis lockit the back dur, and the dur fat palles up the turnpike to the Kingis chalmer, quhair

' Match. ^ Dark. ' Street. * Way, road. ^ Bags. = Large ; bulky. ' Emptied.

VOL. I. t 3 u

498 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

THE King, the Quene, and Jie Ei-le Bothwell, and vthers were, and paflit up to Jiame, levand behind
Iiiin the faid John Hepburn, and tlie deponar lockit in the faid nedder houfe : And as the deponar
believes Paris iliew the Erie Bothtvcll that all things were in readinels, and lyne fone ])areftir,' the
Quene and the Lordis retuinit to the Ahhay, my lord Bothwell being in her curapany. And Jiaveftir
the Erie Bothwell, accurapanyit with Paris and Georcle Dalglijh, came to the back ^ard ; and the
faid Hepburn, quha had twa keyis of the back dur, lichtit the lunt, and came with the deponar, and
lockit the durris after Jianie, and fand the Erie of Bothwell in the 5aird, qulia fpeirit at ])ame, ' Gyf
they had done that quhilk he had biddin Jiaine, and fyrit the lunt ?' And fai anfwerit, ' ])at it was done.'
And eftir mij lord and thai tarryit in the saird ane lang tyme ; and quhen my lord faw ]'at Jie matter
came not haflily to pafs, he was angre, and wald have gen in himlelf in the houfe ; and the faid John
Hepburn lloppit him, laying thir wordis, ' 3e neid not.' And my lord faid thir wordis, ' I will not
gang away quhile I fee it done.' And within ane fchort fpace it fyrit, my lord, John Hepburn,
the deponar, and Paris being gangang at the fute of the aley in the faid 5ard. And quhen tiiey faw
the iioul'e rifeaud, and hard the crack, they ran their way, and come down the Wynd fra the faid F"reir
^ett ; and fat my lord ])areftir paft to the wall at Leith Wynd, to have pafl over it, but becaufe he
thocht it over hich, he fturrit Jiairwith, and came back again to the Nedder Bow, and paft furth at
the Port, after Johnne Hepburne had cried upon John Gullaway, porter, and caulTit him oppin the
Port ; and that the faids John Hepburn and Georde Dalgleijh paflit afore with my lord, and fone
]iarpfter the dejionar and Paris followit ; and the deponar paifit to his bed, in John Hepburns in the
CuHongait, and my lord paflit to his awin ludgeing to tlie Abbay.

IV. The Deposition of John Hepburn, called ' Johnne of Bowtoun.'

■ Apud Edinburgum 8 die metifis Decembris, An. Bom. 1367, in prefence of my Lord Regent,

the Erie of Athol, the Lord Lindjay, the Lard of Grange, and the Jtijl ice 'Clerk.
The quhilk day, Johnne Hepburne, callit Johnne of Bowtoun, being examinit upon the Kingis
Murtlier, grantit himfelf culpable and gilty fairof: and as he wald anfwere before God, deponit and
doclaryt tlte Erie of Bothiveile his maiflers part of the famyn, fo far as the deponar knew in this
matter, that is to fay ; Tlie firft tyme )iat evir the Erie of Bothioile fpake })is matter of the Kyngis
Murther to the deponar, was ane day or twa aftir the bringing of the powder furth of Dunbar ; at
quhilk tyme he faid to the deponar in this manner, ' Thair is ane purpois divifit araongs fome of the
Noblemen, and me amongs the reft, Jiat the Kinge fall be llane ; and that every ane of us fall fend
twa fervandis to the doing ]>arof, owther on the fields, or otherwife as he may be apprehendit !' And
]jan defnit fe deponar to be ane of the entrepryfers for him : Quhais anfwer was, ' ]iat it was ane evil
purpois, and ^it, becaus he was fervand and eoufignance- to his lordlhyp, he wald do as vtheirs wald, and
j)ut hand to it.' One the morne fareflir, he callit James Ormijlon of that Ilk, the deponar, and John
Hay, -younger of Tallo, and break the purpois to fame ; and maid the like declaratioune to ]>ame, fat
vthir Noblemen had had as far enteres as he in fat matter: And fai maid to him evin fic anfwer as he
liad done. Quhether my lord had fchewed fame fe purpois of befoir or not, fe deponar knawes not.
Swa every day fare was tauking amongis fame of the famyn purpois, quhill within twa dais before f e
Murther, fat the faid Erie changed purpoife of the (laying of the Kinge one the feildes, becaufe fan
it wald be knawn, and fchew to fame quhat way it myclit be ufit better be fe pulder. And on the
Sunday, in the gloming ^ before nicht, f e 9 dale of Februar laft bepall, the deponar fend f e faid Johne
Hayes man for ane tome ^ poulder baiTel to the man quhilk Johne Haye had coft ' the fame fra, fat
<lwells above Sandie Bruces cloife-heid. At evin my lord fuppit in Maijter Johne Balfour's lious,
quhare the BiJ'chop of Argyle maid the banket : And eftir fupper my lord came up the gait, and fai
all with him to the faid Lard of Ormejlonis' chalmer ; quhair f e deponar and Johne Haye paft in, and

' And then, soon thereafter, ' Cousiri-german. ' Twilight, dusk. ' Empty. '■" Purchased.

25 Mar, CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 499

fand the faid Lard and Hob Ormijioun his fader bruther ; and as |)e deponar rememberis, pat was the
first time fat Hob knew of fat matter, and fair fai fpake togidder, and my lord fchewit fame ]ie
maner: And the deponar, the faid Lard of Omiijfotnie, Hob Ormiftone, and Johne Haj/e, paft to the
fute of the Black Freir Wind, haveing fent away W'dle Potcry and Pate IVil/bne for the poulder.
And before far cbmming furth of the faid chalroer, mi/ lord departit with hia fervandis ; quhair ])e
deponar knawes not. And the faids foure being togidder, as is befoir wryttin, at the fute of the
Freir Wind, the faid Willie Powri/ and Pate Wilfone cum agane witli the poulder, quhilk was
brocht at two times in ane tronk and ane mail ; and fai carreit it in at Black Freres yt: And quhen
f ai war changing f e pulder furth of the tronk in polks, my lord come and fpeirid ' Gyf all was redy ?
And bad fame haift before the Queene cum furth of the Kingis houfe ; for gyf file come furth
before fai wer reddy, fay wald not find fie commodity. And fan fe pulder being put in polks, the
faids Lard of Ormijtone, Hob Ormijtmie, this deponar, Johne Haye, Willi Powry, and Pate Wilfone
turfit' up the pouder to the Kingis houfe, and fand Paris aX the dur, quha openit the famyn ; and
fay aflayit to haue taken in tlie faid barrel), and it wald not gang in at the dur ; and fan ])ai liftit tlie
famyn, and brocht it back to the ^aird, and had in the pouder, and turning it furth of tlie polks in ane
bing and help upon the flur, evin directly undir the Kingis bed. And fan f e faid Laird of Ormejlone,
Hob Ormijton, and Paris, pafl; away, and left the deponar and Jolin Hay within the faid houfe ;
quhilks tarryit f arein quhill efter twa houres after mydnight, and ))an tuk ane lunt, with ane litle tre ^
quharon it lay, and placit f e fame, fe ane end in the pouder, and fyrit fe Tthir end, and cam fair
way, and lockit f e thre duris behind fame : And at fair cuming furth to the 5aird, Jiay fand my lord
Bot/iwell, Gcordie Dalgleijh, Pat Wiljbn, and Willie Powry : And ray lord fpeirit at them, ' Gyf
fay had done all things as was ordourit ?' And fai faid, ' 3ea :' And fai tarryit upon ane quarter of
ane hour faireftir. And my lord thocht lang,^ and fpeirit ' Gyf fair was ony part of the houfe fat
they mycht fe the lunt, gyff it was burnand anoueh ?' And Jiai faid, ' ])are was nane but ane wimdo
quhilk wes within f e clois :' And as they war fpeeking upon it, the houfe begouth to take fyre and
blew up ; and fai ran away, and cum up Black Freir Wind, and 5eid down ane clois to half gottin
over the broken wall at Leith Wind, but my lord thocht it over heich to loup, becaufe of his fair
hand ; and fwa returnit to f e Neddir Boiv, and walkynit ' John Galloway, portar, quham fai gart
cum down and opin the 5et : And Willie Potvry, Paris, and John Haye, 5eid evin down the Cannonguit, and my lord, the deponar, Pat Wiljon, and Georde Dalgleijh, jeid down Saitit Mary Wind,
and behind the 3airds unto my lordis ludgeing in the Ahby. And in fair by-ganging, twa of the
watchis fpirit,^ ' Quhat fai were ?' and f e deponar anfwerit, ' We are fervands of the Erie Bothiveill,
gangand to him with news out of the town.' And fwa my lord paflSt to his bed, and fis deponar lay
down in ane bed in f e hall. And fone f areftir 3Ir George Hackett came in, quha told, ])at the houfe
of the Kirk of Field was blawn up in the hair,'' and the King flain. And within fliort fpace fairafter my lord Huntley came in, and my lord Bothweill raifs and put on his claithis, and paffit into
THE QuEENis houfe. And the deponar tarryit fum tyme ]iareftir, and cumand furth, fand the Abbay-
^eit clofit ; and fan f e deponar fand the faid Johji Hay in his bed iu John Hejjburns, and lay down
witli him.

Item. Deponis, fat fare wes fourteen fals l>eys maid for oppyning of all the lockes of the dures of
THE Kingis ludgings at the Kirk of Field ; quhilk the deponar, eftir the committing of the faid
Murther, keift '' in the Qvarie-hole betwix 56 Abbay and Leith.

Thir ar fe true copies of the Depofitionis of the faid John Hay, 50unger of Tallo, and Johne
Hepburne, callit of Boutoiine, maid in prefence of my Lord Regent, and the lords before
mentionit, in manner befoir expremitt, concordant and agreand with the originalis, quhilks are remainand

' Conveyed, carried. ' A piece of wood, hollowed out into the shape of a trough, to hold the train or match.

' Grew impatient. ' Awaked from his sleep. ' Watches or sentinels enquired. ' Air. ' Cast,

threw.

500 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

in the Jufticiarie, collatlonate be me Sir John Bellenden of Auchinoul, knight, Clerk of our foverane
lordis Jufliciavy. Johannes Bellenden, Clericus Jufticiarie.

V. The Confessioun of John Habroun,' young Talla, Daglelsh and Powrie, upon quhome
was Jujlice execute the 3d of Januarie, the yeare of God 1567.

John (Habroun) of Boioton confeffit tliat nyne was at the deid doing, my L. Bothwell, the lord
of Ormiftoun, Hob Ormiftoun, himfelf, Talla, Dagleiih, Wilfon, Pourie, and French Paris ; and that
he faw na nice, nor knew of na other companies.

Item. He knowis nat other but that, that he was blowiu in the ayre ; for he was handilit with na
mens' handes, as he faw ; and if he was, it was with others and not with tham.

Item. As touching Sir James Balfour, he fasv not his fubfcriptioun ; but I warrand you he v/as the
principall couiifallar and devifer.

Item. He fayd, I confefle it is the veray Providence of God that hes brought me to his judgement ;
for I am led to it as an horfe to the ftall, for I had fchippis providit to flie, but could not efcape.

Item. He fayd, let no man do evill for counfall of great men or thayr mailers, thinking thay fliall
fave tham ; for furely I thought that night that the deid was done, that although knowledge ihould
bene gotten, na man durft have fayde it was evill done, feing the hand writtis, and acknowledging the
QuENis minde thairto.

Itetn. Speaking of the Quene in the Tolbuith, he faid, God make all Weill, but the langer deirt -
is hydden, it is the flronger. Quho lives, our daithes will be thought na newis !

Item. Hinraeft,'' he confeffit, he was ane of the principall doers of the daitb, and thairfoir is juflly
worthy of daith ; but he was affurit of the mercy of God, quho callit him to repentance.

Item. Talla confeffit, ut fupra, s.gTe\ns, in all pointes as concerning the parfons, number, and
blowing in tlie ayre.

Item. He affirmit. That in Setoun, my Lord Botlnoell callit on him, and fayd, ' Quhat thought you
quhen thou faw him blowen in the ayre ?' Quho anfwerit, ' Alas I my lord, quliy fpeak ye that ?
For quhen ever I heare fie a thing, the wordes wound me to death, as they ought to do you !'

Item. That fame tyme he faw Syr James Balfour put in his owne name and his brother's unto ray
Lord BothiccUes Remiffioun.

Item. He knew of the deid doing three or four days or * it was done, or thereby.

Item, He fayd, ' After that I came to the Court, I left the reading of God's worde and imbrafit
vanitie; and thairfoir hes God juftly brought this on me.'

Quhairfoir, let all men flee evill cumpany, and to trurt not in men ; for redy are we to imbrace evill,
as redy as hardest to receive fyre. And further, in the Tolbuith he requyrit John Brande, Minifler
of the Congregatioun, to pafle to my Lord Lindfay, and fay, ' My lord, hartily I forgeve your L.,
and als my lord Uegent, and all others, but fpecially tham that betrayit me to you; for I know if
ye could have favit me ye would ; defiring you, as ye will anfwere before God in the latter day, to do
your diligence to bring the reft., quho was the beginners of this worke, to juflice, as ye liave done to
me ; for ye know it was not begunne in my head. But yit praifes God that his juflice hes begunne at
me, by the quhilk he hes callit me to repentaunce 1'

Item, Daglishe fayd, ' As God fhall be my judge, I knew nothing of the Kinges daith befoir

' Vid. Suchanan's Detection, English Edition, &c. ' Dirt; slercus. ^ Finally. ' Ere, before.

'^ Dr Jamieson interprets this word to denote * that part of boiled food that adheres to the pot,' (in which soivcns,
porridge, &c. have been ju'epared.') The Editor believes the jdirase here signifies ' us bfani/s for the hurnimjy in the
Scriptural sense. From O. F. hars or liardes j twigs, rice, brushwood, &c It is now almost obsolete.

/

' -'-7-2 v/

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 501

it was done ; for my Lord Eothwell gangand to his bedde, after the taking of of his hofe, quhilke was
ftockit with velvet, French Paris cum and roundit' with him; and thairefter he taryed on me for
other hofe and claitliis, and his riding cloke and fworde, quhilke I gave him ; and herefter cum up the
gait to the Lord^ of Ormijt'ou?ts lodging, and taryit for him ; and therefter that, he palfit to ane
Wynd befuie t/ie Blache Fryers, and cum to the Hope of the dike, quhair lie gart me fland ftill ; and
as God ihal be my judge, 1 knew nathing qnhiil I heard the blall of powder : And after this he cum
hame, lay dovvne in his beid, quhill Mr George llakit cum and kuockit at the doore. And if I dye
for this, the quhilke God judge me gif I knew maire, quhat ilial be done to thame quho was the
devifers, counfallars, fubfcrivers, and fortifiers of it ?'

VI. The Deposition of Thomas Nelson,^ ' cubicular' to King Henry.

Thomas Nelson, fumtyme fervand in the chamber to wmquhill King Henry, of guide memory,
of Scotland, examinat upoun his confcience, declaris that he was actuall fervand to the King the
tyme of his Murthour and lang of befoir, and came with him fiome Glafgovv, the time the Queene
convoyit him to Edinburgh.

Item. The deponar remembris it wes dewyfit in Glafgow, that the King fuld haif lyne firfl at
Craigmyllare : hot, becaus he had na will thairof, the purpois wes alterit, and conclufioun takin that
he fuld ly befide the Kirk of Feild : At quhilk tyme this deponir belevit evir that he fuld haif had the
Duikis liouCe ;■* and knew na uther hous, quhill the King lychtit, at quhilk tyme he pall directlieto
the faid Duikis houfe, thinking it to be the lugeing preparit for him : Bot the contrare was then fchawia
to him be the Quene, quha convoyit him to the uthir hous ; and at his cuming thairto, the fchalmir
wes hung, and ane new bed of black figurat welwet Handing thairin. The keyis of the lugeing wes
partlie flanding in the durris, and pairtlie deliverit to this deponir be Robert Balfour, awnir, all except
the key of that dur, quhilk pallit throuch the fellare and the town wall, quhilk culd noht be had, and
thairfore Bonkle in the fellare faid, he fuld clois it weill aneuch within ; quhilkis keyes wes keppit and
ufit be this deponir and utheris, the Kingis fervandis, quhill the Quenis cuming to the lugeing:
At the quhilk tyme, the key of the laich chalmir undir the King, quhair fche lay tua nytis, viz. the
Wednifday and Fraday befoir his Murthour, with the key of the palfage that paft toward the gardin,
wer deliuerit in the handis of Archibald Betoun, as the deponir reraemberis ; quhilk Archibald wes
yfcheare of the Quenis chalraer dour: Befoir quhilk tyme of the Quenis lying in the Kingis
lugeing, the tua nytis above namyt, fche caufit tak doun the uttir dour that cloiit the padiige towart
beith the chalmeris, and caufit ufe the famyn dour as a cover to the bath fatt,' qulieiin he wes baithit :
And fua ther wes na thing left to ftope the paffage into the faidis fchalmeris, bot only the portell
durris. As alfua, fche caufit tak doun the faid new blak bed, fayand, it wald be ful^eit* with the bath ;
and in the place thairof, fett upe ane auld purple bed, that wes accuftomat to be carit ; and the faidis
keyis that wer deliverit in the handis of Archibald Betoun remanit (lill in the handis of him and utheris
that awaitit upon the Quene, and nevir wer deliverit agane to the Kingis fervandis : For fche fett
upe ane grein bed, for hir felf, in the faid laich chalmir quherin fche lay the faids tua nytis, and promift
alfua to haif bidden tliair upoun the Sounday at nyt. Bot eftir fche had tareit lang and intertenit the
King verey familairlie, fche tuk purpoife, (as it had bene on the fuddau,) and departit, as fche fpak,
to gif the mafk to Bafiyane, quha that nyt wes mareit hir fervand, namelie, the faid Archibald Betoun ;
and ane Paris Francheman havand the keyis of hir fchalmir, quherin hir bed lluid in, as alfua of the
palfage that pall towart the gairding : For quhen the Quene wes thair, hir fervandis had the keyis
of the haill houfs and durris at hir commandement ; for upon the nyt fche ufit, with the lady Rereis,
to ga furth to the garding, and ther to fing and ufe paftyme. Bot fra the firft tyme that fche lay in

' Whispered. ' Laird. ' Anderson's Collections, IV, 165. The Original ismaiked with Secretary

Cecil's band, * Hamilton-bouse. ' A bathing vat. ° Soiled, sullied, tarnished.

502 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

that lugeing, the Kingis fervandis had nevir the key of hir faid fchalmir agane. The Qoene being
departit towart Halyrud hous, the King, within the fpace of ane hour, pad to bed, and in the chalmer
with him lay wmquljill William Taylyour. This deponir and Edward Symonis lay in the litill gaylery,
that went dervict to fowth oute of the Kingis fchalmir, liavand ane windo in the gawill throw the
Toun-wall, and befyde thanie lay William Tail^eir's boy ; quhilks nevir knew of ony thing quhill the
hous quherin they lay wes fallin about thame ; oute of the quhilke, how fone this deponir could be
red,' he fluid iipoun the rwynous wall quhill tlie pepill conveiiit, and that lie gat elaithis and I'ua
depairtit, quhill on the Monounday at efter none lie was eallit and examinat ; and amangis utheris
tliingis, wes inquiret about the keyis of the lugeing, this deponir fchew that Bonkle had the key of the -
fellare, and the Quenis Ihvandis the keyis of hir fchalmir: quhilk the laird of Tulybardin hering,
faid, ' Hald thair, lieir is ane grund.' Eftir quhilk wourdis fpokin, thai left of and procedit na farther
in the inquisition.

VII, Depositions of (French) Paris, servant to the S(cotch) Q(ueen), and present

AT the Murder of her Housbande,

1. S'evfvyl ' la Declaration et Depofition de Nycollas Haubert, diet Paris, Parrjien, tovchaiit
la Morte et Meurtre dufeu Roy Henry d'Escosse ; au Meurtre duquel le dit Haubert efloit
prefent, avec le Conte de Boduel et les mitres fes adherens : Cejie Depojifion fut faicte a Sainct
Andrieu,Jans ce que le dit Paris fut contraint ni interrogue, defon propre movement et vouUoir
pour s'en defcltarger comme il dei/f, et ce le ixme.jour dAoii/l, 1569.

Et primierement, il deill,
Je confeffe icy, devant Dieu et le monde, que le Mercredy ou le Jeudy ajires difner de la fepmaiii
donct le diet meurtre du feu Roy fut commis, moy ellant en la chambre de la Royne a Kerhafield,
en compaignye de pluefieurs aultres attendant la Royne, qui elloit a la chambre du Roy, Mans, de
Boduel vint a la chambre de la Royne la ou j'eftois, et me deill en I'aureilie, ' Paris, ie me trouve
mal de ma malladye que tu fyais qui eft mon flux de fang, ne fyais-tu point quelque lieu la ou ie
porray aller faire mes affaires ?' ' Ma foy, ce dict-ie, je ne fut jamais icy qu'a cefte heure-cy, niais
ie ra'en vois cherclier quelque lieu.' La-delfus ie trouve ung coing ou trou entre deux portes, et le va
dire ; ' Mons''. venez-vous-en, fy vous eftes otant prefse !' Et eftans la dedans, ie ferme la porte fur
nous, et luy ofle fa robbe, comniencant a le deflafclier. II me regarde, et me demande comment ie me
portoys ? luy difant, que ie me portoys bien, la grace ii Dieu et a luy, me tenant pour bien recompenfe du fervice que luy avois faict de m'avoyer faict donner I'ellat de varlet de chambre ches la
Royne. II me refpondifl, que ce n'eltoit pas affes, et qu'il me feroit davantage. Je luy dis, que ie
me contentois, et que ie ne pouvoys davantage a la maifon de la Royne, voyant mon equalite, et que
ie me contentois. II me diet que ie me ne chomneroys de rien qiie ie luy dife, car difoit-il, Tu ra'ais
faict bon et loyal fervi/ce depuis qu tu m'a fervy ; car ie fyay que tu as couvert mon defhonneur que
tu avois occation de fouller quant tu vins de mon (i^rvice hors d' Anykferre. Mons''. ce dict-ie, ie nay
faict que tor de ferviteur. Et bien, ce dict-il, pour autant que ie t'ay trouve fydelle ferviteur, ie te
veulx dire vne chofe, niais il te fault garder fur ta vie que nul ne le fache. (IMons'. ce di-ie) il n'apertient au ferviteur quant le maiflre luy dit quelque chofe de le reveler, et s'y eft chofe que vous
penfes que ie ne puife garder, ne me le dictes point. Syais-tu (ce dict-il) que c'eft ; c'eft que fy ce

RoY-lii qui eft la d- a jamais les pieds fur nous aultrea Seigneurs, il nous voult dominer ct eftre

cruel, et de nous autres Seigneurs ne le voullons pas fouflVir, et auft'y ce n'eft la fa\'on de ce pais, et
pour cela nous avons conclud nous aultres de le faire fault — de dedans cefte maifon en fair avecques
de la pouldre, de oyant ie ne le dis mot ains baifle la veue bafle mon fens et mon cueur ce tourne de

' Extricated from the ruins. ' Brilixh Museum, Cai.io. B. IX, fol. 270.

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 503

Tavoyr ouy-ainfy parler. II me regarde, me demandant que ie penfe? Mons''. (ce di-ie) je penfe a ce
que vous me dictes, qui eft une grand cbofe. Qu'en penfe-tu ? (ce dit-il) Que j'en penfe, Mons^ ?
(ce di-je) vous me perdonnerez fy ie vous die felon mon pouvre efprit ce que i'en penfe. Que veulx
tu dire ? (fe dit-il), tu veulx piefclier. Non, Mons', vous orres. Et bien (fe dit-il) dis, dia I Mons'.
(ce di-je) depuis cinq ou fix ans que ie vous ay faict fervice, ie vous ay toufiours veu en grands
troubles, et n'ay fceu jamais voyr d'amis qui ayent faict pour vous ; maiutenant, Mons''. vous eftes hors
de tons ces troubles, la grace u Dieu, et plus en court a ce que tout Ie moude diet que jamais ; pour
ma part, ie voye que cbafcung vous faict la court, petis et grands, mais ie ne scay pas que vous rit qui
vous veult veoyr aultrement, ie ne scay pas vous eftes du pais Mons''. Davantage Ton diet que vous
eftes Ie plus grand terrien de ce pays icy, et auliy que vous eftes marie qui eft I'heure quant vng
liomme prend ce ply la que il ce fault arefter ou jamais. Maintenant, Mons^ fy vous entreprenes
cefte cliofe-la qui eft grande, ce fera Ie plus grand trouble que vous euftes jamais, par deffus les aultres,
cai' chafcum cryera ' lia harault I' fur vous, et vous Ie voyres. Et bieu (cedit-il) as-tu faict ? Vous me
perdonnerez, Mons''. s'il vous plaift, fy ie vous ay dieft felon mon pouvre efprit (ce di-ie). Et befte
que tu es (ce dict-il) penfe-tu que ie fay cecy tout feul de moy mefme ? Monfieur, ie ne fjay pas comment vous Ie faictes, mais ie f9ay bieu que ce fera Ie plus grand trouble que vous euftes oneques. (Ce
dict-il) et comment fera-ce ? car ia.y ilifia Leddiriffton qui efteftymel'ung des meilleurs efpricts de ce
pais-cy, et qui eft I'enterpreneur de tout cecy ; en apres j'ay Mons''. d'Argyle mon frere, Mons''. de
Hontlye, Muns''. de Morton, Ruthen, et LindeJ'ay. Ses trois-la une foys ne me fauldront jamais, car
j'ay parle pour leur grace ; et ay tous les fignes de ceulx-cy que ie t'ay nommes, et auffy avons envie de
Ie faire dernierement que nous fufmes a Cragmiller, mais c'eft que tu es uu befte et pouvre d'efprit,
qui ne merite d'entendre chofe de confequence. Ma foy, Monfieur (ee di-ie) il eft vray, car mon
efprit n'eft point pour telle cliofe, mais bien pour vous faire fervice a ce que ie porray, et bien bien
Mons'., ilz vous porront bien faire maiftre et principall de ce faict-ki, mais quant ce fera faict ilz porront aufiy mettre Ie tout fur vous, et les premiers qui cryeront ' ha barault 1' apres vous, et les ceulx qui
vous boutteront Ie premier a mort, silz peuvent. He ! Mons'., ie vous prie m'en dire d'ung que vous
ne m'aves point nomme ; ie f^ay bien que ceftuy-la eft ayme en ce pais du commuen peuple, et aufl'y
de nous autrcs Fraitfois, que quant il gouvernoyt I'efpace de deux ou trois ans, il n'avoyt point de
troubles au pais, tout Ie monde ce portoit bien, largent corroit, maintenant on ne peult veoyr homme
qui ait moyen, et ne voyt-on que troubles ; ceftuy-la eft fage et fy a des amys allies. Qui eft ceftuyla ? (ce me diet-il). Ceft Mons', (ce di-ie) Mons". k Conte de Morra : je vous prie me dire quelle
part ceftuy-la prend ? (Ce dit-il), il ne fe veult point mefler. Mons^ (ee di-ie), il eft fage. Adonc
Mons''. de Boduel retome la tefte vers moy et me deift, Mons''. de Morra, Mens'', de Morra, il ne veult
n'ayder ne nuyre, mais c'eft tout ung. Bien, bien, Mons''. (ce di-ie) il ne Ie faicte fans caufe, et vous
Ie voyrez. La-deflus il me commande de prendre la clef de la cbambre de le Rovne a Kirkafilde.
Je luy dis, Mons''. vous me perdoneres, s'il vous plaiil, pour autantque ie fuis eftrangier, et auflyque
ce n'eft mon eftat, I'buyflier me porra demander que i'en veulz faire et-il aura raifon. Et pourquoy
(ce dit-il) n'eft -tu vallet de cbambre de la Royne? II eft vraye, Mons'. (ce di-ie) mais vouzfyavez
qu'u la maifon d'ung Prince cliafque officier a fon office, et entre les autres rhuyfller a le fien, I'eftat
duquel eft de garder la clef de la cbambre. Pourquoy done (ce dict-il) t*ay-ie mis a la cbambre de
LA Royne fy non pour en tyrer du fervice ? Helas ! Mons'. (ce di-ie) c'eft bien poui- vous faire fervice a ce que ie porrois, mais je penfois en moy mefme fans rien dire (le craignant) fi j'eufle penfe telle
cbofe, iamais la cbambre ne m'euft cbambree. La-deifus il sen alia de moy de ce trou ou coiug-Ia,
ou il avoit faict fes affUu'es. Luy eftant party de moy, je prens mon manteau et mon efpee et m'en
voys pormener dans la grand efglife, et penfoys en beaucoup de fortunes que j'avoys du paffe efehapies
de luy, et commencois a reniereier Dieu qui m'avoit delyvre d'aveques luy, luy demandant du bon
cueur d'eftre hors de fa compaignie pour autant que ie congnoyflbis fes vices fort terribles, et princi504 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8pallement ung donct Ton diet que j'en fuis fy bon feiviteur, me reportant a Dieu, qui congnoit ce que
luy en ay diet, comment ce feroyt fa ruyne. Plus de fix ans il y a, et qu'il foit ainfy qu'on deniande
au Lard de Pcthicrcif, qui a ouy parler pouiquoy je forlis de fon fervice hors d'Angleterre : il me
battill et me toimentaft a coups de pied fur le ventre, pour me (aire faire chofe que ie n'avoys
envie de faire, donct il ni'en a remercie en Ejcqffe, que i'avoys couvert fon lionueur la ou i'avois occafion de le fouller. Apres avoir penfe a. tout cela pour me refouldre de ce faict mefcliant que i'avoys
entendu et qu'il m'avoyt diet, ie deniande a mon Dieu, qu'il me confeillaft voyant le faict fy grand il
ellouuoit raon efprit ; et que fy a cefte lieuie-la 3Ions''. de Croqtie eull efle en ce pais, ie n'eufie point
efte en cefle peine icy. Quant ie vis qu'il ny avoit auttre remede que d'avoyr patience, et qu'il ny
avoit cbemin pour m'en aller fy non par Aiiglclerre, la ou j'eullti efte prins et arrefte per faulte de pafleport, et auUy que ceft traliayfon contre le Prince au fervitenr de s'en aller fans conge, et aulfy que ie
ne fceu prouver pourquoy ie m'en allois ly non per RIons''. de Bodvel qui ne m'euft iamais advoue ;
voyant comme chafeun peult penfler que eela gyfoit beaueoup a fon honneur, et ii des aultres Seigneurs
ace qu'il me difoit. Or doncques ce ebemiu-la ne me vallut rien, je me refoulz delfusung poynt que
fy ce meurtre ce feroit de brief c'eftoit ma ruyne, pour autant que ie cognoyffois I'homme qui n'euft
iamais failli de moy commauder, et s'il y auroit dix ou douze jours entre deux, j'auray efperance de
bien faire, car s'il va navire de quelque cofte que foyt, qu'en An^leterre j'efloys delibere de me defrober pourquoy ie me refoulz au fortier de I'efglife de feavoyr de luy quant ce feroyt. De Vendredy
doncques ie m'en vois a luy a fortier de fa chambre, comme il alloit cliez la Royne, et aulfytot qu'il
me veift il me demande fy ie avoys prins cefte clef. Je luy dis que je regarderoys a le faire ; il me
diet que je ne faillifte dont point, car c'elloit a Dymanebe qu'ilz voulloyent faire a mettre leur faict en
execution. A cefte lieurc-!a je fors d'avecques luy plus fafclie que iamais, et m'en vais fur lechemin
du petit Leith tout expres pour trouver navire ; et quant ie fus a moytie cliemin ie dyfoys en moymefme, or eft-il lion a voy que tu as I'efprit bien perdu, pour autant qu'il ny a plus que de main entre
deux, quant ores le vent feroyt bon, as-tu la puiftance de louer ou flatter une navire tout i'eul ou
expres ; la-deftiis ie m'ofte du grand chemin et me deftorne a part, priant Dieu de me confeilleir, car
de faire bruyt de cela j'eftoys morte. Cefte jour-la, ce pafle en ce point, et auffy le Saraedy toute la
matynee. L'apres difner il me demande encores cefte clef ; je luy dis, Mons'., lielas I comment le
feray-je ? Pourquoy (ce dict-il) qui t'en gardera? N'es-tu pas ferviteur de la Royne? II eft.vray,
Mens'., mais ce n'eft point mon eftat de prendre les clefs. Mais dy moy (ce dict-il) et pourquoy ?
Une foys ie ne le veulx rien commander en ce faict-la. J'ay des clefz afles fans toy, car il n'y a porte
ceans donct je n'ay le clef, car Mons''. Jac(jucs J3ulfor et moy avons efte toute la nuycte pour veoyr
et chereber le meillieur endioit et pafliige pour exeeuter uollre affaire, et pour trouver bonne entree;
mais cefte qui tu es une befle, carie ne te veulx employer en ce faict-la, car j'ay des gens affez fans
toy, et aufiy ([ue je feay que tu n'as point de cueur. La-deftlis ie entre en la chambre de LA Royne,
la ou Slargucrite et quelques aultres eftoyent atteiulantz la Royne, qui eftoit en la ebanibre du Roy.
Adonc le bruyt vint incnntenent que la Royne s'en alloyt a I'Ahbaie ; tout le monde fort bors de fa
chambre, et moy le dernier, prenant la clef de la diet chambre, et m'en voys a VAbbiiie apres elle, la
0X1 je trouve 3Ions'. de Hodvel, qui me demande fyj'avoys cefte clef. Ouy, Mons^ (ce di-ie). II
me coramande de la garder. Au bout d'une heure Marguerite me prie d'aller a 7i7r/i'r//?e/<f querir ime
couverture de Maytres a la chambre de la Royne, ce que je fais et prens ung garfon avceque moy
et entre en la diet chambre, en prefens de Sande Diiram le jeune, et le porte-faix du Roy, et feis
emportier la dite couverture, le diet Duram me demande la clef. Ie luy dis que ce n'eftoit pas a moy
a la donner, mais bien a riiuyifier, luy pryant de me perdonner. Bien, done (ce dict-il) puifque ne le
me voullez donner. La-deifus ie m'en vins ii I'Ahhaie a la chambre de la Royne et delivre la couverture ii Marguerite, cefte jouer-la de Salimedy eftant ainft'y pafte, je m'en alloys me couclier.

Le Dymenehe matin ie me Icvc a fix heures, et m'en vois pormener dedans le pare, et eu ung

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 505

vallon ie me metz a prier Dieu, et luy deniander confeil tie ce faict mefcliant, car ie n'ay fceu trouver
aultre moyen que de lailier couller I'eau du luHeau qui efloit fy oid, en apres m'eflant lefolu, ie m'en
retourne a I'Abhay, la ou ie trouve troys officiers de la Royne, et m'en allay defieufner quant et eulx,
et m'eu revins a neufue heures a la cliambre de la Royne, la ou I'oye nouvelle que Moris', de Morray
venoit prendre fon conge de la Royne pour aller veoyr Madame fa femrae : moy entendant cefte
parolle I'aperfeu incontyiient qu'il Ie fafoit pour fe deftorner de fe faict mefchant. La-defTus ie m'en
allois me pormeuer Lajiurik et m'en vois foubvenir des parolles que j'avoys dictes du diet Seigneur
de Morray a Moris'", de Bodvel, et auffy ce qu'il m'en avoit refpoudu. A cefte heure-la ie dis en moy
mefme, O Mons''. de Morray tn es homnie de bien, pleuft a Dieu que tu fceus mon cueur, je n'auray
pas tant de mal que jay I Et ayant bien penfe je m'en revins a la cliambre de la Royne, la ou elle
alloit difner auz noces de Sqflien ; toutesfoi je m'en allay difner a la ville et apres difner me pormener ;
et eftant revenu, j'entendis que la Royne alloyt fouper chez 3Ions''. d'Argylk, la ou j'eflois derrier
elle luy fervant defciant; et comme elle lavoyt fes mains apres Aiuper, elle me demande, fy i'avoys ofte
la couverture de Maytre de fa cliambre au logis du Roy? Je luy dis qu'ouy. Lors les feigneurs fe
levent de table, done Mons''. de Bodvel m'appelle, et me mene feul avecques luy au logis de fa mere,
la ou il ne fuft gueres qu'il s'en alia au logis de Lard d' Ormijfon, parler a luy et a fon frere Hobe, et
nous prend tout troys avecques luy et s'en va a Cougait et parle a Jehan Hay et a Jelian Hephron,
qu'il trouve a la rue. Apres avoir parle a eux, il s'en va tout feul et moy au logis du Roy, et a mye
cbemin au logis il me diet, or f^ais-tu qu'il y a, tu t'en yras a la cliambre de la Royne a Kirkefield,
et quand Jehan Hephron, Jehan Hay, et Ie Lard Ormijlon entront, et qu'ilz auront faict ce que ilz
ont envie de faire, tu fortyras et t'en viendras a la cbambre du Roy, ou tu t'en yras la ou tu vouldras.
Helas ! Mons'., (ce di-je) vous me commandes ma mort ! Et pourquoy (ce dict-il) te commande-je
de faire quelque chole ? II eft veritable, ce di-je, Mons''., mais ie ffay bien que ceft ma mort. Mais
dis moy pourquoy (ce dict-il) fy ie te commandois de faire ce que les aultres font, tu Ie pourroys
dire, mais ie fcay bien que tu n'as point de cueur ; une fois les aultres n'ont que faire de toy, car ilz
entront bien fans toy, car ilz ont des clefz alfes ; il n'y a porte ceans donct ilz n'en ayent les clefz.
Bien, Monsr. (ce di-ie) ie ni'y en voys. La-deffus il fe departe de moy et s'en vais au logis du Roy,
et entre en fa cliambre, la ou eftoyt LA Royne et aucuns des Seigneurs, et ie m'en vins a la petite
court, entre a la cuifine demandant une cliandelle au cuyfynier, que j'aluniis. Sur ces entie faictz, voicy
Jehan Hebron et Jehan Hay qui entrent en la cliambre, la ou i'eftois et portoys delapouldre dedans
des facz qu'ilz mifrent au milieu de la diet cbambre. En ce fayfant, voycy Moris'", de Bodv'd, qui
furvient et parle au eulx dyfant, ' Mon Dieu que vous faictes de bruyt ! on oyt d'enhault tout ce que
vous faictez I' Et aiufy me regarde, et me demande ce que Ie fayfoys, et que ie men allafle a la cbambre
du Roy apres luy; ce que je feis, et me trouve aupres de Mons". d'Argylle, avec qui Mons''. de Bodvel
parloit, et Ie diet Seigneur d'Argylle m'accaroyflbyt et me toucbe fur Ie dos fanz me dire mot. Et
n'eftant en la cliambre du Roy la longueur dune pater nofter que la Royne s'en va vers FAbbaye
et monte la ou eftoit les nopces ; et moy ie m'en vois en ung coing la ou Mons''. de Bodvel me vint
trouver, me demandant ce que j'avoys d'ainfy faire la myne, et que fy ie la fayfoys ainfy devant la
Royne, qu'il m'accouftroit en telle fa^'on que ie ne fus iamais. Ie ne m'en foucye pas (ce di-ie) que
vous faictes de moy a cefte Iieure-cy, vous priaut me donner conge de m'aller coucber, car ie fuis
mallade. Non, ce dit-il, veulx que vous veniez avecques moy ; voullez vous laifler ces deux gentilliommes-la Jehan Hay et Jehan Hepbron ? Helas I Mons'., ce di-ie, (pie feres vous davantage pour
moy, car mon cueur ne me peult fervir a telle cliofe ? Je veulx que vous venies (ce dict-il), or bien
done Monsr. (ce di-ie) allons. La-deflus il s'en va a fa cbambre changer d'babillemenfz et prend
Ie tailler et moy avecques luy, et s'en va au jardin du logis du Roy, la oa Ie tailleur demeure a la
muraille. Et moy aupres, Ie diet Seigneur de Bodvel s'en va a la porte du jardin, et puis revint vers
nous, la ou Jehan Hcpbron et Jehan Hay s'en veindrent et incontyneut comme ilz avoyent parle a
^'OL. I. I 3 S

506 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-S.

luy, voyla comme ung tempefte ou ung tonnoyre qui va edever, de la peui- que j'eu ie clieus en terre
les clieveulx dreffes comma allaines, dyfaiit, lielas I Moils', qu'eft ce cecy ? II me dicto, je me fuis
trouve a des enterprifes grandes, mais iamais entieprife ne me feit fy grand peur que cefty-cy. Je luy
dis, per ma foy, Mons'., de telle cliofe que cecy il n'en viendra iamais bien, et vous le %'oyres ! O
befte! (ce dit-il) me menaeentde me fiaper de fa dague, mais ne la tire point. La-defl'us il commence
a s'en aller bien vide, et nous apves luy, et s'en cuydoit aller per Leyth Wynd, mais il ne fceut. II
envoya done Hephron parler a portier pour ouvrir la porte, et qu'aufly le monde comencoyt arenir,
il s'en vs. per derrier le Ccmnoncjait, et Jehan Hay et moy nous en allafmes la grand rue. Ie difoys
a Jehan Hay ;i telle cliofe que cecy n'en adviendra iamais bien. II eft vray (ce dit-il) nous avons
bien offence Dieu, mais il n'y a remede, il fe faulte raonltrer verteux et prier Dieu. Helas ! (ce di-je)
Mons^ m'a menace de me frapper de fa dague, mais je vouklroys bien qu'il I'euft faict pour mon
honneur. Paris, ce dict-il, prenes en patience, car vous congnoylles bien I'liomme. La-deflus ie m'en
allay coucber dans mon lict et luy au fien, mais je ne fyay ou, nioy etlant leve le Lundy matin envjTon
fept ou huyt heures, je m'en vins a la cliarabre du dit Seigneur de Hodcel, et incontyuent qu'il me
voyt il me demande que i'avoys a faire la mine ? Je luy dis, que j'avoys que jamais or n'y argent ne
me remettroyt en point que i'eftoys. Pourquoy? (ce dict-il) Force, Mons', que ie f^'ay bien que je
fera pris pour le principal! de ce faict-cy. Ha I ouy (ce dict-il) tu es bien homme que ie vouldroys
bien prendre pour ung tel faict. La-deffus il s'en va en bas en una chambre, et m'envoye querir par
le dit tailler la ou il avoit en la chambre le Lard Ormejion, Hobe Ormijton, Jehan Hepbron, Daglifche,
Porrey et moy.

Mons''. de ^orfre^ me demande, que j'avoys a faire telle mine, et fy i'avoys promis quelque chofeau
Roy, et s'il eftoit mon maiftre ? Non, Mons''. (ce di-ie.) Et voye-tu point (ce dict-il) ces gentilliommes, qui ont terres, rentes et revenues, fenimes et enfans, et ont tout vollu abandonner pour me
faire fervice ! Et fi tu penfe avoir offence Dieu, le peche n'eft en toy, ceft a moy, car je t'ay commande,
et tu ne feroys eftre repris de ce faict, car ce font les Seigneurs mefmes de ce pais, avec moy, qu'avont
commis le crynie, et vouldroys qu'il meuft cofte oo...efcus et ne t'en avoyr iamais parle. Per ma
foy, Mons''. (ce di-ie) ie la vouldrois bien, or bien Paris il fe fault monftrer verteux, et pour toutes les
irheues du monde, il ne fault rien dire ; et s'y vous avez envie de vous en aller, vous vous en yres
bientoft. Et du depuis ie I'ay demande conge plus d'vne demye doufaine de fois, et na le fcue iamais
avoyer; et voyla tout ce que ie fay touchant ce faict.

2. A Sand Andre'^ le dixiemejour d' Aoufi, 1569, Nicholas Howhert, diet Paris, a este inierrogu6 stir les articles et demandes qui s'ensuyuent, Sfc.

Et premierment,
Interrogue, Quant premierment il entra en credit vers la Royne ? Refponce, que fe fuft comma
LA Royne eftoyt a Callendar allant a Glafcoxi, qu'alors elle Iny bailla une bourfe la, ou il avoit
environ 3 ou 4 cens efcus, pour la porter ii Mons''. de Bvducl; lequel, apres avoir receu la dicte bourfle
fur le cbumyn entre Callendar et (Uiijcou, luy diet que le diet Pay-is fen allaft avecques la Royne,
et qu'il fe tint pies d'elje, et qu'il regardaft bien a ce qu'elle feroit, luy dyfant, que la Royne luy
donneroyt des lettres pour les luy porter. La Royne eitant arryuc a Glafcou, luy diet, je t'envoyeray
a I.ijkbuurg, tieiis-toy preft, et ayant demeure la deux jours avecques la diet dame, laquelle efcript des
lettres et luy les bailie, dyfant, vous dires de bouclie a 3Io7is''. de Boduel qu'il bailie ces lettres qui
f'adreffent a Mons". de Ledington a luy mefmes, et qu'il parle a luy, et voyes le j)arler enfemble et
regardes la fa^on de faire, et quelle mine ilz feront, car c'est, ce difoyt-elle, pour favoyr lequel eft
meillieur pour logcr Lie Roy a Craigmiller ou a Kirkafeild, affin d'avoyr bon air; car, f'il logoyt a

' This second I'.xairiiiiation of French Paris is preserved in the Brit'tsh Museum, C'ahg. C. I, fol. 318. It is
given here iu the original t'orui, the same as the preceding.

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 507

I'Abbciye, le Prince pourroyt bien prendre fa malladie, a caufe que fes ferviteurs ne pourroyent leur
en garder d'aller veoyr le Prince : en oultre qu'il diet au diet de Bodud que le Roy la voulloyt
baifer, mais elle ne pas vouUu de peur de fa raalladye, chofe que Rere/s en tefmoigneroyt bien. Et
plus (ce dict-elle) vous dires a MoiW. de Boduell que je ne va jamais- vers le Roy que Rerefs n'y eft,
et voyt tout ce que je fais. Item, la Royxe luy diet, ' Paris haftes-vous de revenir, car je ne bougeray dicy jufques au temps que vous m'aures raporte la refponfe I'

Eftant le diet Paris arryve a Lijlehourg trouve le dit de Boduel en fon logis a TAbbaye, lequel luy
dift, ha I Paris, tu es le bien venu. Mons'., ce dict-il, voycy des lettres que la Royne vous envoye, et
auffi a 3Ions''. de Liddiugtoun, vous pryant de les luy delivrer, et ([ue je vous vis parler enferable, pour
veoyr vos fa^'ons de faire, et comment vous vous accordies enfemble. Fort bien, ce diCt-il, car j'ay ce
jourdhuy parle a luy, et luy a donne une haquenee. Le lendemain le diet Paris diet qu'il vint au logis
du dit de Boduel par troys toys le cliercher a 8, 9 et 10 lieures, et ne le fceut jamais trouver; mais ;i
la fin Poivrye le portier luy dill, qu'il I'allaft chercher a la haulte ville, que peraventure il le trouveroyt
en quelqz lieu au confeil ; et I'ayant chercbe, il voyt venir une troupe de gens de vers le Kirkafeild, la
ou eftoyt le diet Seigneur de Boiduel et Mons''. Jacques Balfour, cofte a code enfemble, lequelz feu
alloyent difner au logis du diet 3Io7is>'. Jacques. Le diet Paris prya Mons''. de Boduel de le defpecher
vers la Royxe. Apres difner (ce dict-il) je le feray; et quant il retourna querir fa defpefcbe apres
difner, il trouve le Seigneur de Boiduell et le diet Mons^. Jacques feulz, telle a telle, en une chambre ;
et le diet Seigneur de Boiduel qui efcrivoit de fa propre main ; et apres avoir faict, il dill a Paris,
voyla ta refponce, retourne t'en a la Royne et me recommendes bien humblement a fa bonne grace,
et luy dictes que tout yra bien, car Mons^'. Jacques Balfour et moy n'avons dormis tout la nuyte ains
avons mis ordre en toute, et avons aprelle le logis, et dictes a la Royne que je luy envoye ce dyamant
que tu luy porteras, et que f'y j'avoy mon cueur je le luy euvoyeraye trefvolluntiers, mais je ne I'ay
pas moi. Va t'en a Mons''. de Ledington et luy demandes f il veult refcrire a la Royne, ce que le
diet Paris faift, et le trouve a la cbambre des comptes, et luy demande f'il plafoyt rendre la refponfe
aux lettres de la Royne que Mons''. de Boduel luy avoyt baillies. Ouy (ce dit-il) et la-deffus il
prend du papier incontinent et efcript, et ayant faict le diet Paris luy diet que la Royne I'avoit
comraande de luy demander, lequel des deux logis feroyt le millieur pour le Roy, car elle ne bougeray
dela jufqu'a ce qu'il I'auroit raporte fa refponce. Le dit Letingfoun luy refpondit, que le Kirhafeild
feroyt bon, et que le dit Seigneur de Buduel et luy avoyent advife enfemble la-delfus. Ainfy le diet
Paris partit pour fon aller a Glafcou vers la Royne; et eftant de retour ii Glafcou et avoyr faict
fon meffaige, qui luy eftoyt donne des diz Seigneurs de boucbe, la Royne luy demande, s'il avoyft
veu parler 3LjJieurs de Boduel et Lethingtoun enfemble ? Diet que non, mais que Mons''. de Boduel
luy avoyt diet qu'ilz avoyent parle de bon vyi'age enfemble, et que le diet Sieur de Lethingtoun eftoyt
du tout a luy, et que le logis eftoyt preft. Item, comme elle retournoyt de Glafcou vers Lijlebourg
avec le Roy a Kallendar, il f'adrelfe ung homnie de MoiW. de Boduel au diet Paris et luy bailie une
lettrepourla prefenter a la Royne, ce qu'il feift, laquelle luy demanda, s'y fhonime eftoyt few? Je
penfe, ce dit-il, Madame qu'il n'euft voullu vous envoyer liomme qu'il n'en full feur. La-deflus en
fen allant coucher elle refcript une lettre, et y meift dedans ung anneau et la luy bailla pour la baillor
au diet bomme porteur, cbofe qu'il feift, pour la rapporter au diet Sieur de Boduel ; apres le Royne
et LE Roy eftans a Lgthkoiv, elle diet au diet Paris qu'il voulloit mettre Guilbert Courlle, Vallet de
chambre ches le Roy, pour ce qu'il eftoyt de bon efprit, affin de veoyr ce que le Roy feroyt, car
elle ne ce fyoyt point a Sande Duram. Du diet lieu Jehan Ha;/ fuft par elle defpefche vers MotW.
de Boduel, auquel elle park afles long temps, en apres aufl'y Paris avec des bralfeletz au dit Sieur
Boduel (le diet Paris arryvent a Lijlebourg luy bailie les braffeletz) lequel Sieur eftoyt preft de
monter a cheval pour aller trouver le Roy et la Royne, avec lequel le dit I'om retourne au devant
du Rov, lequel ils conduyrent jusques a fon logis a Kirkafeild.

508 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

Interrogue, S"il fa^oyt aucun priveaute entre la Royne et 3Ions^. de Baduel, durantle temps que
LE Roy gyroit ii KirknfciU ? Refpoiul, que Mons". de JBoidael luy avoit diet que toutes les iiuytz
Jehan Hepbron feroyt le guet foubz les galleries a Sancte-Croyx, ceperulant que Lady Rerefs yroyt
bien taird le querir pous ramener a la cliaiubie de la Royne, luy deffendant, affavoyr a Paris, i'ur
la vie de ne dire que fa femine eitoyt avecques luy.

Interrogue, S'il favoyt de I'entrepris du ^Nleurtre du Roy' depuis fon aiTyvement a ^ifr/^a/ej/rf jusques
au jour de rexecution ? Refpond, que non aultrement que ce qu'il en a defia depof'e en (a Depofition
faite le neufieme de ce moys, en adioullant que le jour que Moils'", de Boduel luy avoyt communique
le faict de Meurtre du Roy, qui full le niefme jour que la Royne coucliall au logis du Roy' a Kirkafeld, (ainfy corame il y en fouvient fort bein) et comme le dit Paris voulloyt dreffer le lict de la
Royne en fa cliambre, qui elloyt droyt foubs la chambre du Roy ; ainfy que Mom'', de Boduel luy
avoyt commande, lors qu'il parloyt avecques luy au trou la ou il le deftafclioyt pour faire fes affaires, le
diet Sieur de Boduell deftendist au dit Paris de ne drefler le lict de la Royne droict foubz le lict du
Roy, car je y veulx mettre la pouldre en cell endroyt-la, ce dit-il. Et celte mefuies nuyt-la, apres que
le lict fuft drelfe en la chambre de la Royne ; ce que je fis au mefnie endroyt la ou il me fuft
deffendu par le diet de Bodiiel, la Royne rae dift, ' Sot que tu es, je ne veulx pas que mon lict foyt
en cefl. endroyt-la, et de faict le feiil ofter !' Par lequelles parolles, j'ay aperfeu il mon efprit quelle
avoyt cognoylfance du faict. La- deffus je prins la Lardieffe de luy dire, ' Madame, Mons''. de Boidicel
ma commande luy porter les clefs de votre cliambre, et qu'il a envie de y faire quelque chofe ; c'eil de
faire faulter le Roy en fair par pouldre, qu'il y fera mettre I' ' Ne me parle poynt de cela cefte heurecy,' ce diet elle, ' fais en ce que tu voiddras I La-deffus je ne I'ofoys parler plus avant. A cefte heurecy je commence a confyderer que j eftoys employe en ce faict mefchant, auparavant par parolles couvertes et defguyfees eflant envoye de Glajcnu vers Mons': de Boiducl, pour fcavoyr lequel des logis
eftoyent le meillieur, et par ce auffy qu'il m'a refpondu alors, quant il me renvoye vers le Royne,
vous la dires, fy elle vous dematide ce que je fais, que j'ay veille toute cefte nuyt et Mr Jacque Balfour, pour aprefter le logis du Roy'. Eftant interrogue, Sy la Royne palfoyt plus oultre cefte nuyte
fur ce purpos ? La diet que nou, mais le prelfoyt apres plus fort que jamais de parler a elle de pourpos
de Mons" de Boduel, de fa femme, et de aultres chofes. Et eftant coucliee ne dormoyt point toute le
nuyte, ains efcryvoyt des lettres an diet Sieur de Boiduel, et les envoye par le diet Paris au Sieur
de Boduel, envyron onze a douze houres de nuyt, mains riens de creance. Et ayant delivre cefte lettre
au diet Sieur de Boduel, il refcript eftant au lict, et en baillant la refponce au dit Paris, il luy diet,
' Dictes a la Royne, que je dormiray point que je ne efcheve mon entrepris, quant je deburoys
trayner la picque toute ma vie ])our I'amour d'elle !'

Et eftant de retour vers la Royne, Vendredy au matin, luy ayant racompte ces mefmes parolles
que luy avoyt dictes Mons''. de Boiduel, ' Et bien, Paris (ce dict-elle en ryant) il n'en viendra jamais,
fy Dieu plaift a ce poynt-l;\ !' Et ce dyfoyft-clle oftant au lict. Et comme elle f'abilloyt, le dit Paris
prendles deux clefs de la cliambre de la Royne, felon le conimandement du dit Sieur de Boduel, et
les luy aporte. Lequel ayant faict fortir toute le monde de fa chambre, prend le clef d'ung coilre qu'il
avoyt en fa pochette, et apres avoyr ouvert le dit coft're, en tire des aultres clefs contrefaicts toute
neufues, et en regardant les unes au])res des aultres, diet a Paris, lia ! ouy, elles font bien ; raporte
celles-la, et il remeift les contrefaictes dedans le coffre.

Eftant interrogue, S'il fcavoyt qui avoyt fait et bailie les clefs contrefaictes au dit Sieur de Boduel?
Refpond, qu'il n'en favoyt rion, fy non que le dit Si ur de Boduel luy dift, qu'il avoit toutes les clefs
des portes de ce logis-Ia, et que luy et MuiJ'tre Juaptes Balfour avoyent efte tout une nuyt pour
chercher et favoyr la meilleure entree, comme il a defta depofe. Mais cependant que le diet Paris
eftoyt abfent avecques les clefs, Archibald Belhon, huyflier, demande les clefz pour laifTer fortir la
Royne au jardin, et ne les pouvant trouver, la Royne en fuft fafche, et diet tout haut a Paris a fon

Mar. 25. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 509

retour, ' Paris pourquoy aves-vous emporte les clefs de ma cliainbre ? Lequel ne luy refpondit mot fur
I'heure ; raais apres la, tiouvaut a part luy dill, ' Ha ! Madame, pourquoy m'aves vous diet devaut le
monde que j'avoys pris les clefs de votre charabre, voyant que vous faves biea le pourquoy ?' ' Ha ! ce
dit-elle. Parts c'eft tout ung ; ne te foucye, ne te foucye I' ' Et d'autant qu'il en pourroyt avoyr bon
fouvenance, il diet, que ce Vendredy la uuyt la Royne coucba encores au logis du Roy, et luy
reuvoya derechef porter des lettres au diet Sieur de Boduel.

Interrogue, S"il avoyt rien entendu de ce propos le Sabmedy au matim ? Refpond que non, fy non
que LA Royne deift en prefence de ceulx de fa ehambre, qu'il y avoyt eu quelque querelle entre le
Roy et Mons''. de Sancte-Croiv, lequel avoyt bon moyen a celle heure-la de tuer le Roy, car il n'y
aroyt en la ehambre alors qu'elie pour les departir : Et diet oultre, qu'apres difner, le diet Sieur de
Boduel luy commande de prendre la clef de la ehambre de la Royne, cliofe qu'il n'avoyt envie de
faire ; mais corame la Royne fortoyt de fa ehambre, elle le regarde, et luy commande de prendre la
dit clef. Et au foyr, la Royne eftant i\ I'Abbaye, elle envoye le dit Paris vers Mons^. de Boduel,
lay commandant luy dire de bouche : ' Alles vous en a Mons^. de Boduel, et luy dictes, qu'il me femble
qu'il feroit le mieulx que 3Ions'. de Sancte Croix avec Guillaume Blakatre allent ii la charabre du
Roy, faire ce que le diet de Boduel f^-ait, et qu'il parle a 3Io/u'', de Sanct Croix touebant ce purpos,
car il feroyt myeulx ainfy qu'aultrement, et pour ce n'en feroit qu'ng peu prifonnier dedans le ebafleau.'
Apres avoyr le diet Paris raeompte ce faict a Mons''. de Boduel, il luy diet, ' Je parleray ii Mons''. de
Sanct Croyx, et puis j'yray parler moy mefmes a la Royne.' Le dit Par'is n'a fouvenance d'aultre
cbofe que fe feift ce jour-la, mais le refle eft contenu en fa premier Depofition, jufques u ce que la
Royne arryva en V Ahhaye, et 3Ions''. de Boduel f 'eftant aulfy retire en fa ehambre avec le dit Paris,
furvint Mons''. de Honteley, en compaignye de deux ou troys fervileurs, et ce par le chemin derrier
I'Abbaye qui menie droyt au logis de feu Mons''. de Rttthuen ; et apres qu'ilz avoyent parle en I'oreille
&i\^6mh\e, comme Moiis' . de Boiduel 3.\oyt defia commence de changer fes habillementz, le diet (37o?2S''.)
de Boduel deift apres aii dit Paris, que 3/ons''. de Honteley f 'eftoyt oft'ert d'aller avecques luy, mais qu'il
ne le voulloyt mener. Quant et luy, et apres que Mons''. de Honteley fe fuft party pour aller coucher,
le diet de Boduel prendle tailleret Paris avecques luy, comme il eft diet en fa premiere Depofition.

Le Lundy matin, entre neuf et dix heures, le diet Paris diet, qu'il entre dans la ehambre de la
Royne, laquelle eftoyt bien clofe, et fon liet la tendu du noyr, en figne de deuil, et de la chandelle
allumer, dedans ycelle la ou Bladame de Bryant luy donnoyt a delieufuer dung oeuf frais, la ou aufty
Mons''. de Boduel arryve et parle a elle fecretement, foubz courtine. Ce jour-la Lundy, fe paffe ainfy
fans ee que le iUxci Paris parle a elle. Mardy, au matin, elle fe leue; et le diet Paris eftant entre en
fa ehambre, la Royne luy demande, ' Paris, qu'as-tu ?' — ' Helas I ce diet-il, Madame, je voys que
chafcun me regarde de cofte.' — ' Ne te chaille, ce dict-elle, je te feray bon vyfayge, et perfonne ne
t'oferoyt dire mot !' Cependant elle ne le diet cliofe de confequenee, jufques a ee qu'elie voulloyt aller
a SetoH, alors elle luy demandaft de prendre une caflette ou il y avoyt des corceletz d'efeus, que le
Threforier luy avoyt aporte de France, pour la porter a la ehambre de Mons''. de Boduel, qui eftoyt a
cefte heure-la loge dedans le Pallays, au deff'us de la ehambre la ou ce tenoyt le Coufeil : Et puis
apres, luy commandaft de prendre fon coftVe des bagues et le faire porter au Chnjleau, et le delyvrer
entre les mains du Sieur de Skirling, pour lors Cappitaine foubz Mons''. de Boduel, chofe qu'il feift :
En apres, elle voyant le diet Paris tout fafche, elle preflbyt fouvent de faire fervice ii Mons''. de Boduel,
ce qu'il n'avoyt envie de faire, ains demandoyt fouvent fon conge ; et voyant cela, a la parfin elle luy
diet, ' Paris, alles- vous confoller avecques 3Ir Jacques Balfour ; eeft ung homme d'efprit, je ni'y fuis
confoUe par plufieurs foys et me confolle de prefent.'

Item. Interrogue, Du premier pryveaute qu'il a cogneu eftre entre LA Royne et Moils'", de Boduel?
Refpond, que c'eftoyt alors que le dit de Boduel conduyfoit la Royne vers Glajcou, quant elle
alloyt querir le Roy. A Cullender, apres fouper, aflez tard Lady Rerefs vint a la ehambre de Mons''.

510 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

(1e Boducl et voyt le diet Paris la, et demande que faict ce Paris icy ? Cefl tout ung, ce dict-it,
Paris ne dyra cliofe que je luy deft'end de dire ! Et la-deflus elle I'amene a la ciiarabre de la Royne.
Cecy ceftoyt le foyr devant que le lendemaiu la Royne I'envoya la bourfe par Paris au diet Sieur
de Soduel.

Item. En oultre, il diet et declare, qu'enryron le temps que le diet de Boduel full faict Due, la
Royne lui baillaft le buft'ett et veflelle de Targent de Monsieur le Prince la ou eftoyt fes armoyries
pour la porter a M071S''. de Bothiiile ; le quelluy diet, que ceftoyt pour en faire ofter la marque de
Prince, et y mettre la fienne, ce qu'il delyvra a ung qui a efpoufe une Marguerite Hephron (niais il
ne fcait bonneiiient fon nom) lequel comma il luy diet il le debuoyt bailler ii Mr Jacques Balfour
pour le t'aire faire.

Item. II diet et confefle, que la nuyt auparavant que la Royne fuft ravie et enlevee du dit Sieur
de Boduel, que Mons''. d' Ormi/loun vint parler ii la Royne bien fecretement a Luthquoiv : la-delFus
LA Royne efcrypt une lettre par le diet Paris, et par ce qu'il ne fcavoyt bier*- le chemyn, la Rgy'ne
le feift conduyre par le diet Ormi/toun cliez Mojifieur de Halton, la ou le diet Sieur de Boduel eftoit
en bonne compaiguie, et mefmes les Capitanes couches aupres de luy et daultres : Et trouvant le diet
Sieur de Boduel endormye les veille, et luy diet, Monfieur, voyla des lettres que la Royne vous
envoye. Et bien, Paris, ce dit-il, couche toy la ung peu ; cependant je m'envoys efcryre, et apres
avoir efcript, il diet au dit Paris, ' Recommendes me humblement a la Majeftie, et luy dictes que
j'yray aujourdiiuy la trouver fur la elierayn au pont.'

Item. Eftant interrogue, S'il favoyt pourquoy Jofeph fen alia de ce pays ? Refpond, que la
Roy'NE lui diet, Paris il fault que tu controuves quelque cliofe en ton efprite pour faire peur a
.Tofepli, atfin qu'il fen aille : et voyant quil ne pouvoyt rien faire, elle luy diet, je feray faire une lettre
que tu perderas derrier luy pour luy faire peur ; mais luy ne pouvant ee faire elle, le feift dire par le
.hiJiicc-Clerh, comme il peuft, qu'il euft a comparoiftre au Parlement, cliofe qu'il I'affrayaft grandenient, et eourut ya et la demandant fon conge ; enfin la Royne bailie neuf vingtz efeus a Paris,
pour les bailler a Jofeph, affin qu'il fen allaft, ce qu'il feift ; et ainfy ayant receu la diet foranie, il feu
alia.

Item. Diet, que Jehan Hay fouvent apres la mort du Roy le confeylloyt et le comfortoyt bien, et
qu'aultre ne le confolioyt, f'y non que fouvent eommeut Mons''. de Honteley le voyant delfaiet, le
deniandoyt, Paris, qu'as tu ?

This is, the trew copy of the Declaration and Depofitioun of the faid Nicholas IIowbert als
Paris, quhairof the principall is markit every leif with his awin hand. And the fame being red againe
in his precence, he avowit the fame, and all partes and claufes thairof to be undoubtedlie trew.

Ila tjl Alexander Hay, Scrila Secreti Cotifdii S.D.N. Regis ac Notarius Puhlicus.

VIII. Extract of Letter fro.m Lord Hunsdon to Sir William Cecil."

Wherein he fays, he received a letter of the 23 of Auguft, with the Q. Majesty's letter, and my

Lady' Lennox packet ; and towching Paris, he was put to death a fortnight fince, and fo was Sletcart,

who was King of Heralds," which had determined to kill the Regent ; but he was forgiven for that,

and was burnt for Conjuration and Witchcraft.

' Dated Berwick, Aug. 30, 1509. Andi^rson's Notes of Letters in thp Paper Office. Lninc/s Hist. II. 269.
^ This matter is thus clirouicled by two contemporaneous authorities. * Tiiis same day (Aug. 2, 15C8), about 2 in
tlie afternoone, Sir William Steuarte, Lyone King ol" Arms, departed out of Edinburglie to Dunibrittan Castell,
being suspect of t'onspiracy against the Life of the RrcENi, the Larll of Murray.' — Birrets Diartj, p. 17. ' In
this samin niounthc, .Sir \Villiam Steuarte, Lyone King of .irmes, was transported from Edinburgh Castle to Dunbrittanc, and thcr committed to closse prissone, for Conspyring to take the Itegent's lytfe by S<ircerey and Necromancey,
for which lie was put to death.' — Sir Janus Duljhvfs Amiahs, I, 34-5. No mention of these proceedings occurs in the
Books of Ailjournal — hut about this time the TicasvrcT's Accounts notice many prosecutions against Witches, fouB
females having bueu tried between Jlay 16 and Aug. 12, I J69, for this imaginary crime.

Mar. 25. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 511

IX. Letter from Regent Murray to Queen Elizabeth.'

Please it your Majeftie,

I HAVEof lait reffavit three Letters of your hienes, the firft by my fervant Alexander Hume, the
next from ane 3fr Tho. Flemyng, and the tliiril be my lord Governour of Berwicke, for the diifering'^
of the executioun of death upoun ane Paris, Franlheman

As to that quhilk your Majeflie writes of ane Paris, a Franfhman, partaker with Ja. fumtyrae E.
BoTHWELE, in the murther of the K. my foverains fader, trew it is, that the faid Paris arrivit at
Leytli about the middes of June lafl ; I at that tyme being in the North partes of tliis realrae, far
diftant ; Quhair upoun it followed, that at my returning, after diligent and circurafpect examinatioun
of him, and lang tyme fpent in that behaulf, upoun the xvi day of Auguft bypaft, he fufFerit death hy
order of law ; lo that before the recept of your hienes letter, be the fpace of 7 or 8 dayes, lie wes execute.^ Otherwyfe, your Majefties requiCtioun towardis the diferring of his executioun, by way of
deth, fuld have been maift willingly obeyed ; the ianie bringand with it fa gude reafon. Bot I trull
his teflimonie left fal be fund fa authentik, as the credit thairof fall not feame doubtful!, neyther to your
hienes, neyther to thame quha be nature hes graiteft caufe to defire condigne puuifliment for tlie faid
Murther.

X. The Confession of the Laird of Ormiston.*

The Cajile of Edinburgh, ISlh of December, 1573.
The quhilk day Johne Brand, Minifter at Hallyruidhoufe, being fent to the Laird of Black
Ormistoune, to give him comfort, be the promifs of God's word offereit to finners; and alfua, to
requyre the faid Laird to glorifie God, in iliawing of the truth, &c. : After lang conference, and prayers
made, above the fpace of ane hour, or theirby, the faid John Brand, Minifter, faid unto him, ' Sir,
althocht I am trewlie perfuadit that the haill trewth ye have fliawen me of this matter, yit, becaufe
divers and greater doubts are paflit of you, and alfe the memorie of men are bot weak, theirfoir, gif
ye thought guid, I wald wryte certaine of they things, breifeley, that you have fpoken.' Quha anfwerit,
meiklie, ' For God's faike doe the famen ; wreit even as I fliall fpeike. As I ihall anfwer unto God,
with whom I hope this night to fowp,^ I fliall declaire unto you the haill, from the beginning unto the
end of my pairt.' Fir/i, 1 confefs that the Earle Bothicell Ihew that famen wickit deid unto me, in
his own chalmer in the Abbai/, on Fryday before the deid wes done, and requyred rae to take pairt
with him therein, becaufe, as he alledged, I wes ane man of activenefs, (alace theirfor I) quhair I
utterly refuifit, and faid, God forbid, bot, gif it were upon the field, to fight with your Lo. unto the
death, I fould not feir my ftinn cutting. Then the faid Earle faid unto me, ' Tuilhe, Ormifloune !
Ye need not take feir of this, for the haill Lords hes concluded the famen langfyne, in Craigmiller, all
that wes ther with the Quein ; and nane darr find fait with it, quhen it (hall be done.' Efter the
quiiilk, I departit hame to Kaitis Tames,'' quhilk was Thomas Henderfoiis houfe, in Edinburgh, for
his mother was called Kait ; being in part feik, I lay doun in my bed, and lay all Saturday, chieflie
for that caufe, beleivand that way to have put off that evil hour : And fwa, I knew ua farder of it
quhiir Sunday at night, quhere I, being in my chalmer in the Black Frier Wyjid, gangand beltit in
ane goun, John Hepburnc and Johri Hay of Tallo come unto me, and faid, ' the Quenis grace and
Lords are pafl up to fie the King, and my Lord is ftandand at the Black Frier Wynd fute, and bids
you come to him incontinent :' Quhere^ I layd my goun from me, and tuik ane ryding clock, becaufe I

' Undated. Anderson's Notes, ibid. ' Deferring. ' It is tlius recorded in the. Treasurer's Books, Aug.

16, 1569. ' Ilcm, to ane boj' passand of Sanctandrois to Dunde and Pertlie, witli tica tjuartcris of the Bodie of
vmq'* Paris, Francheman, being justefeit to tlie deitli, viij s.' — ' Ifern, to ane boy passand of Sanctaudre to Ed'' witli
THE iiEiD and ane j.ec. of the said Paiiis, FTancIicman, vj s. viij d.' ■* Anderson's MSS. '■■ Sup. A figurative expression, borrowed from Holy Scripture. " Kate's Thomas, a common designation at that time for

servants and persons of low birth, especially in the Border counties. ' Until. * Whereupon.

512 * CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1567-8.

beleivit all had bein weill anewclie now agreit, feing they had pafllt up to vifit him : And cuming, at
the fiift I n)ift the laid Earle, for he liad comiten upe anuther dofli to feik me himfelle, in my awn
chaluier; and thairhe fandniy coufing Hob, quhom he brought with him ; and thairafter, met togidder
in the niiddis of the Wynd, wha tuike me againe ; and we all pafllt up to the Freier Yaircl, through
the flape,' quhair Pareis and Archie Befoim com and met us, and faid all wes ready preparit for the
fetting of the lunt: And they all enquyrit, liow it fould be fet to? And, after diverfe fpeakingis, I
faid, ' Take ane piece of lunt of tbrie or four inch lang, and kindle the ane end of it, and lay to the cald
end, aud it wald burn f'yne to the train, and fwa will blaw up.' Efter the quhilk, the Queine paffing
Lame, the Erie Bothirell faid, ' Speid, and clois all the duris I' for they had 13 fals keys of the
lodging maide, and givin, as they faid to me, be him that aucht the houfe. Efter the quhilk I departit
incontinent, and came not nearer, as I fliall anfwer befoir God, nor ' the duir. And as I was cumand
hame, it ftrake ten hours, wher then I pafit to Kalis Tames hous, to avoyd fufpitioun, that na man
fould fay I was at the deid doinge ; for I was an hour and mair in my bed or the blaft and crak was.

Being requyrit be the faid Minifter, ' GIf he knew not that the King was utherways handilit be
nienes Iiandes, for it is commonlie fpokin lie was brought furth and wirryit I' Quha anfwerit, ' As I
fall anfwer to my God, I knew nothing but he was blawin up ; and did enquyre the famyn maift
diligentlie at John Hejjhurne and Joh7i Hay, and all that tarreit behind nie ; quha fwore unto me,
they never knew nae uther thing hot he was blawin up ; and fwa Itliink it was ane work done be God
for the punilhraent of money wickit men, quhairof I am ane, and ane great finer before God, for the
quhilk I afk God mercy.

Tliirdly, Being requyrit, Gif he knew na farder hereafter? anfrit, At the Pafche ^ thairafter, when
the bruite begouth to rys upon us, and all cryit, ane vengeance upon them that flew the Kixg, it
prickit my eonfcience, and I come unto the Erie Boihivell in Iiis chamber, and faid to him, ' Quhat
Devill is this now, my lord, that every body fufpectis you of this deid, and cryes ane vengeance for
the fanien, and few or no uther fpokin of hot yow ! Aneuther thing you faid to me !' Quha anfrit, ' I
fall let you fie fume thing that I had for me !' Quha lute * me fie ane Contract fubfcryvit be four or
fyve handvvrittes, quhilk he affirmit to me was the fubfcription of the Erie of Huntlie, Argyll, the
Secrelar Mailland, aud Sir James Balfoicr, and alleaged that mony mae promifit, wlia wald afTift him
gif he were put at. And thairafter read the faid Contract ; quhilk, as I remember, conteinit thir
words, in effect: ' That, for fainikle it was thought expedient and niaift profitable for tiie commoun
wealth, be the haill Nobilitie and Lords underfubfcryvit, that fie ane young fool and proud tirrane
fould not reign nor bear reull over thame ; and that for diverfe caufes, thairfuir, that thays all had
concludit that he fould be put off, by ane way or uther ; and quhofoevir fould take the deid in hand,
or do it, they fould defend and fortifie it as tliainfelffis ; for it fould be every ane of their awin, recknit
and balden done be theiiifelffis.' Quhilk writting, as faid Erie Ihew unto me, was devyfit be Sir
Jmnes Hal/our, fubfcryvit be them all ane quarter of ane year befoir the deid was done.

After the quhilk, I never fpake to the faid Erie of it quliill the day he gate his Affyfe ; quhaire the
faid Erie, flanding at the barr, luiking doun and fad lyke, I plukit upon him and faid, ' Fye ! my
lord, what Divill is this yee are doand ! Your face fliawes what ye are I Hald up your face, for Godis
fake, and luik blythlie;^ ye might luik fwa and ye were gangand to the deid I Allace I and wo
worth them that ever devyfit it ! I trow it fall gar ^ us all murne !" Quha anfrit me, ' Had ' your
tongue ; I wald not yet it wer toe do I'* I have ane out-gait fra it," cum as it may ; and that ye will
knaw belyve I' '"

Forder, the tyme when my brother was hurt be the Laird of Stffaird,'^ firfl com word to me, that

' A slap, or Lroktn part of tlie -nail. ^ Tlian the door. * Easter. ' Let, permitted. ' Cheerfully. " Force, or make us all mourn. ' Hold. ' I would not that it were yet to do. ' I have

a viay of escape from it. '" Presently ; hy and by. " Probably Sesfuird ( Ccssford) iii the original.

25 Mar. CRIMINAL TRIALS. * 513

they war flayne ; and than thair came ane Bill ' from tbatnfelffis, and faid they wer onley hurt, and
wald not die : But ane thing did them mair evill than the hurting, viz. that ane commoune bruit was
rifen, that I was at the King's Slaughter, and theirfoir defirit me to get fume guid way to purge
myfelfe, that it pafs na farder, or elfe ye have done with it. Quhilk Bill I tuik and gave to tlie Erie
Bothwell, wha tuik it and gave it to the Quein ; and ftie tuike it and gave it to the Erie Huntlie,
thair prefent, wha read it ; and thairafter turnit unto me, and turnit her back, and gave an thring ^
with her Ihoulder, and paffit away, and fpake nothing to me. This is the haill thing I knaw, ather
afFoir or eftir, as I fall anfuer to my God, with whom I hope to fupe.

Efter the quhilk, being inquyred, Gif ever the Quein fpake unto him at any tyme, or gif he knew
what wes the Quenis mynd unto it ? Anfrit, As I Ihall anfuer to God, Ihoe fpake never to me nor
I to hir of it, nor I knaw nathing of hir part, but as my Lord Bothwell Ihaw me : For I will not fpeike
bot tlie trewth for all the gold of the earth, quhilk I defyre you, guid Minifler, bear record hearof as
ye have written, quhilk I pray yow read over to me : Let ine alfwa fee it. Quhilk I did, afl'oir^ Archibald Doioglass, Conftabill of the Caftle, and George Towers of Brijio, with uthers divers gentlemen
and fervants being in the chalraer.

Quhilk beand done, he faid, for God's faike, fit down * and pray for me, for I have bein ane greit
finner utherwyfe, for the quhilk ray God this day is punilhing me ; for of all men on the earth, I have
bein ane of the proudefl and heich myndit, and maift filthie of my body, abufing myfelf dyvers ways.
Bot fpecially, I have died innocent blood of ane Michael Hunter with my avvin hands. AUace
theirfoir ! Becaufe the faid Michael havand me lyeing upon my back, haveing ane fork in his hand,
myght have flayne me gif he pleafit, and did it not ; quhilk of all things grieves me maift in confcience.
Alfwa, in a raige, I hangit a poor man for an horfe ; with mony uther wickit deids : for the quhilk, I
afke my God mercy : For its not mervell that I have bein wickit, for the wickit companie that ever I
have bein in, bot fpeciallie witiiin tliir feaven yearis bypaft, quhilk ^ I never faw twa guid men or ane
guid deid, bot all kind of wickednefs ; and git my God wald not fuflfer me to be loft, and hes drawen
me from them, as out of hell, and hes given me lazer'' and fpace, with guid companie, to repent; for
the quhilk 1 thank him, and is aflurit that I am ane of his elect.

Thir words, with mony mae, cryand continually unto his God, even to the very end, cryand, ' My
Lord Jefus ! fweit Jefus ! have mercy upon me, as you have had upon uther finners !' in fick fort, that
he was, to the appearance of man, ane of the maift penetent finners that hes bein fein this lang tyme,
and mey be comptit ane example of God's mercies to all penitent finneris.

XL Trials of the Earl of Bothwell, the Earl of Mortoun, &c.

The reader may be once more referred to the Collections by Anderson, &c., for farther illustrations
of the Murder of Darnley. In the new edition of the State TrialsJ the proceedings in the Trial of
THE Earl of Bothwell may be found, but in a modernized and mutilated form. Laing, in his
History, also gives a brief notice of the mock Trial of Secretary Maitland of Lethington^ and he has
likewise preserved the memory of many other minute points, which cannot be noticed in this work. .
Reference may Ukewise be made to Laing's History'^ and Bannatym s Journal,^^ for the Confession
of THE Earl of Morton, on Jun. 2, 1581, the day of his execution, in which works are detailed
the interesting Conference which took place between him, Mr John Dime, and Mr Walter Balcanquell, immediately before he suft'ered.

* Billet, letter. ^ Shrug. ^ Before, in presence of. ^ Kneel ; a common phrase. ^ During

all which time. ° Leisure. ' Howell's and Cubbelt's State Trials, 8vo, Lond. 1809, I. 902 * Laing's

Hist. II, 298. ' Ibid. II, 323. " Edited by J. G. Dalyell, Esq. Edin. 8vo, pp. 4-93 to 518.

VOL. I, f 3 T

CRIMINAL TRIALS

AND OTHER PROCEDUEE BEFORE THE
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

Curia Justiciarie S. D. N.' Rrnrs tenta et inclioata, in pretorio
burgi dcE(liiiburglie,&c. perhonorabilem viruni MagiftrumTbomam
Craig, Jufticiarium deputatum nobilis et potentis domini, Archibaldi
coinitis Ergadie domini Campbell et Lome, Jufticiarij Generalis dicti
S. D. N. Regis, totius i-egni liii, vbilibet conftitut.
Sectis vocatis et curia afRrmata. — Imtuan.

March 15, 1568-9-^ — Gi.org i: Hepburne of Elftanefurd, Adame Hepburne of Kiiigftoune, Adame Nicliolfouu in Ilailis, Adame
Lamb in Elftanefurd, and feventy-four otliers.
Delatit' off arte and parte* of the flauchter of vmq'" Johnne Geddes, feruitour

to James Erie of Mortoime, committed in the moneth of ° laft bypaft ;

and vtheris crymis contenit in the lettres direct thairui)oune.

Alexander Hoy in Lyntoune, alia^ Lard Hoy, and a number of other lureties
were fined, for non-ajipearance of the pannells : thofe not appearing, were ordained to be denounced rebels and put to the horn, and all their moveable goods
to be efcheated, &c. The procedure is not inferted.*"

' Supremi (serenissimi) domini nostri. " It is jiroper to obseiTe at the outset of tlio «ork, tliat liy tlic
mode of reckoning in Scotland at tliis period, tlie year uniforndy roninieiiced on llie :^5tli, and ended
on the 24tli day of March. This practice was universally observed, mitil the beginning- of the seventeenth century, when the style was changed by an express enactment, an<l the year was thenceforward
declared to commence, (especially in all public writings and instniments) with the 1st day of January,
from and after January 1, 1600. The want of attention to this fact, has led to many mistakes in the
quotation of dates, &c. ^ Accused, denounced, Law Lat. delatare, deferre. * Being accessory to.

' Left blank. « See Apr. 26, & Mar. 6, 1569.

VOL. I. A

2 CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1569.

SJjjpointmtnt of <#cvjtanU of S«sticiai'i).

Aijril 5, 1589- — RiCHART Bynning producit aiie Gift, vnder our fouerane lordis priue fele, for vfeing and exerceing of the office of Serjandfcliip in
the Courtis of Jufticiarie, then vacand and pertening to onr faid foueraine lord,
thronch deceile of Johnne Pennycuke, lall i)oireflbur thairof ; conforine to the
quhilk Gift, he defyrit the faid Juftice to admit him in the office thairof: Quhilk
defyre being thocht realbnabill be him, the faid Rychert wes fworne and admittit, &c.

^lausljtetr.

April 5. — ]\Iark Home and William Home, fonis of John Home of Coldinknowis, Thomas Stevinfoun and Thomas Lyndefay, their

fervants, and others.

John Home of Carroklfyde, and Nicholas Carneci'oce of Calfliill, as pledges

for the entry of the above pannels, to underly the law, for art and part of the

ci'uel flaughter of Alexander Haitlie, natural fon of John Haitlie of Mellerftanis,

on Feb. xxij laft, were fined for their non-appearance ; and the pannels ordained

to be denoimced, and their goods efcheated, as fugitives from the law.

I^ttpintr tije Max of tijc Court of Susticiari)— iMacjtstratcs of

April 18. — The quhilk day, comperit Adame Fowlertoune, Baillie' of
the burch of Edinburch, and jiroteftit in name and behalf of the Proueft' and
toune thairof; becaus he wes this day i-equyrit be the Juftice Clerk, in name of
my Lord Regent, to keip the bar, in place of the Scheref of Edinburch, quha
fuld ferue and deput officeris to that effect : That thairfoir, his feruice maid this
day, conforme to the faid command, fuld nocht induce ane i)rei)aratiue^ to thaim,
in tymes cumiug.

April 18. — Alexander Achesoun of Goffurd, Thomas Miller his feruand, Patrik Low, Henrye Cauldwell, Andro Moffett, NiclioD
Achefoune.
Delatit of arte and parte of the flauchter of vmq'" Johnne Sinclaire in Abirladye.

' One of the Magistrates, equivalent to Akleiinan, halUvus. ~ Chief Magistrate or Mayor,

prepositms. The Provost and bailies of Ediiilmrtfh themselves, had Criminal jurisdiction within tlie liberties of the city ; and on account of their office, ])rotested against their being called upon to preserve order in absence of the Sheriff, uho, they pleaded, was the proper officer to attend to this duty.
' Should not serve as a precedent against thein.

2Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 3

Persewaris. Prelocutouris for this pannell.

The relict, with Thomas and Williame Sinclaris, The Lard of Trabroiuie, Tlie Laid of Balwevye,

fonis ; and the kjm and freindis of vinq'"^ The Lard of Boquhayne, The Barroune of Fingafk,

Johnne Sinclare in Abirladye. iNIr Alexander Syme, jNIr Johnne Seharpe.

The iJrelocutouris afkit iiiftrumentis, that the (King's) Aduocat comperit
uocht conjunctlie, to perfew the pannell. The cafe was continued againft ' Achefoun and his feiiiand to the fyft day of Maij nixtocum. Plegiis, Domino de
Onneftoune et dicto Alex. Achefoune.' The other four were difchargeit be the
Juftice and his AfTe flourish in relpect of thair youth.

^mtitts autr MmtnUtng:, ^(,

April 18. — Williame Sinclare in Goffurd mylne, Johnne Sinclare,

his lone, Robert Sinclare, bruder to the faid 'Williame, Adame

Lerthmonth in Abirlad}'e, Thomas Sinclare, fone to Johnne

Sinclare in Abirlady, "Williame Sinclare, his bruther.

Delatit of the hiu-ting and wounding of Johnne Reid in his held, to the efFufioune of his blude ; and ftryking of Johnne Lowrye, with diuerfe bauch^ ftraikis.

All thir perfouis foirfaidis ar difchargeit be the haill perlewaris, contenit in

the vtheris lettres direct thairvpoune, except Johnne Lowrye and Johnne Reid,

quhilkis perfewis the faidis Thomas and William Sinclaris, brotheris, for the

offence and crymes committit and done vnto thame.

Prelocutoris for thir twa Sinclaris on pannell.
Archebald Dowglas of Kilfpindie, The Lard of Blanter, Olipher Sinclare,

Peter Hay of Melgynche, The Maifler of Sinclare, Mr Henrj'e Kinrofe.

The faid ^Villiame Sinclare at the mylne and Johnne his fone, aflcit inftrumentis, that thai come nocht to perfew the faid Alexander Achefoiin of his lyfe ;
hot to defend the lyfes of thair freindis that ar perfewit on pannell.

The Prelocutouris for the haill vther pannell, afldt inflrumentis, that they
wald nocht perfew the Sinclaris, hot defend the lyfe of the faid Alexander thair
freind, perfewit be the faidis Sinclaris ; quhom thai vnderftude to be innocent of
the cryme qidiairof he wes accufit. — Continued to the fyft of Maij nixtocum ;
Plegio, Olivero Sinclare. On which date (May 5,) it Avas recontinued to the
Juftice-air of Edinburgh, ' tertio Itineris, vel iJremunitione xv dieruna.'

April 26. — Adame Hepburxe of Kingftoune, and twenty-two others.

'■ From numerous similar entries in the course of the Record, it is erident that some of the Lords
ot the Privy Council, commonly sat ui judgement with the Justiciar, as Assessors. The King himself
was often present, as may be seen from many of the subsequent entries. - Violent, deadly blows.

4 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1569.

Dilatit of art and part of the Daughter of vmq''^ Johnne Geddes, fervitoiir to
James Erie of Mortoune, &e.'

Thir ijerfones ar all difchargeit, at command and confent of the Erie of Mortoune, and partj'e perfewaris ; be ane tekett, prefentit in jugement to the Juftice
Clerk, be Mr Archibald Dowglafs.

May 6. — George Skirwing in Traprane, Mr James Arnot in Lyntoune, Patrik Sydelerf, younger of that Ilk, and forty-four
others.
Delatit of the flauchter of vmq'" Johnne Geddes, &c. (as above.)
The Erie of Mortoune proteftit, in caife the perlonis of Affyile acquit the
perfones on pannell, of the crymes contenit in dittay, that thai thairfoir incur
wilful! errour."

Verdict. All thir perfones ar acquit of arte and parte of the crymes contenit in the Dittay^ be the Aflyife.

iHutilatioit, ^c.

May 10. — RiCHERT Megot in Howpis, James Dobye, flefcheour in
Edinburgh.
Delatit of the mutilatioune of Johnne Farer of his left hand, and vtheris
crymes contenit in the lettres direct thairvpoune.

Persewaris of this pannell. Their Prelocutouris.*

Johnne Farer, fone to Thomas Farer, Alexander Wardlaw of CuiTehill,

Chrilleane Hanat (in Ravelrig,) his nioder. James Somoniile of Humbye.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, for the maift parte, be thair deliuerance, fylis and
conuicts Richert Megot in the Howpis, and James Dobye, of airt and pairt of
the hurting and wounding of the faid Johne Farer in his held, abune the vane
organe,"' and in the foirpairt thairofF: And lies cuttit his left lug:'' And hurting
and wounding of him alfwa, in his left arme and diuerfe pairtis thairof, to the
effufioune of his blude in greit quantitie ; committit at the Waft end of the burcht
of Edinburgh, at Lowreis-dykis, vjioune the tent day of Januar laftbypaft,

' See Marcli 1.5, 1568. - This iniquitons practice of protesting against the Assise for wilful

error, in case thry acquitted the pannell, was justly complained of as a very heavy grievance. It was
not formally aliolislied liy the Legislature until the reign of Will, and Mary. Vide Acta Pari. IX. 45,
13 Apr. 1G89. — Hume on Crimes, Edit. 1819, I. 410. Instances frequently occur in the Record, of
heavy fine and imprisonment following a verdict ])ronounced in the face of such a Protest. They
were tried in presence of an Assise, but generally submitted to his Majesties will, rather than permit
the case to go to trial. ^ The Indictment, Law Lat. indictamcHtuin. * No Prelocutouris are

marked for the pannell. ^ The vein-organ is usually considered to be the flank or iliac veins ;

but in this case, and in many others on record, the term seems also to have been used at this period
to denote the jugular vein. *' Ear,

2Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 5

vpoun fuddantie, &c. ; continuand thair delyiierance, anent the mutilatioune, to
the thrid day of Auguft iiixtocura.'

aifciUiuji from t\)t Uaiti of Mvtti)in,

May 13. — Williajme Ramsay of Mwrye.
Delatit for remaning fra the Raid" ordanit to have convenit at Breehine.'
Continued to the Juftice-air of Perth. ' Plegio, Wilehno Scot de Bahierye,
tertio Itineris, vel premonitione xv dierum.'

^Iau5!)tn-— 3iattlf of ^ant^Qitit,

May 13. — Johnne Sibbald in Kirklandhill, John Girdwod in Newbigging.
Delatit for the flauchter of vmq''' James Barclay at the Langfyde, &c.

Prelocutouris for tliis pamiell.
Alexander King, Mr Ricliert Strang, Hew Cokbume, brother to Scraling ;

The affife fworn in this cafe, (amongft whom is Robert Tynto of Crympcramp,) confifts of only eleven, who ' acquit' the pannell.

^lausi}tei-— 3iattle of ilaitfjsilfc*

May 21. — Johnne Wiesoun in Bordlaud, Johnne Ai-mour there, and
eleven others.
Dilatit for the flaughter of James Ballanye in Preftoune, James Douglas foldier (militis ftipendiarij,) and William Purwes, fervant of Alexander Home of
Manderftoun, at Langfyde, in the county of Renfrew, xiij. May 1586.

Hugh Erie of Eglintoune as furety for thefe jiannells, is amerciated for their
non-appearance, in the fum of iij". xx lib. ; and the perfons on pannel ordained
to be denounced rebels, and all their goods efcheated,* &c.

^laiicjljtft%

May 26. — Henry Congiltoune, tutour of Congiltoune, Andro Congiltoune, his bruder, Andro Reidpeth in Deringtoune, Thomas

Reidpeth, his fone, Adame Nicolfoun in Ilailis, Thomas Liddell

in Smetoune, John James thair, and Robert N^eilbet,

Delatit of art and part of the flauchter of vmq'" Johne Geddes/ and vyeris

1 See August 3. ^ The gatliering of the King's army, oist, or Iiost. TJie usual signification of

this word, is, an inroad, hostile incursion or invasion ; and generally implies, that tlie ])arties concerned were moimted on liorseback. ^ By Acts of Privy Council, Apr. 20, and May 16, 1659.
* Confiscated. = See Mar. 15, 1568.

6 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1569ciymes contenit in the lettres. — Continued to Jul. xxvj. Plegijs Thomas Fawfyde de eodeni, Domino de Reid2)eth, &c.

iffint of Court— ^icjlj Crtasou— 33attle at EaussitJe.

JxUy 5. — Alexander Kingragge in Auhl Lundoris.'

Quo die, Joannes Arnot in ^^^odmylne, fepe vocat. tanquam plegius, ad intrand. Alexandrum Kincragye in Aukl Lundoris commoran. coram Julliciario

f. d. n. Regis, lliifue deputatis, prefatis die et loco ; ad fubeundum legem, pro

illius proditoria venientia cum fuis comiilicibus, ciun conuocatione fubditorum

domini f. d. n. regis ad niunerum perlbnarum, more bellico armat. in

comitiua cum diuerfis f. d. n. regis confpiratoribus, in inftructa acie feu bello,
cum vomentis curriculatis^ et extenlis vexillis, contra f. d. n. regem et chariffimum fuum confanguineum Jacobum comitem Morauien. dominum Abirnethie,
&c. regni fui ac fuljditorum fuorum Regentem, apud Langlyde, xiij die menfis
Maij anno Ixviij ; et ibid, perfonas dicti Domini Regentis aliorumque fidelium
Confiliarioruni et fubditorum, pro fuis interfectionibus et diftructione crudeliter
et proditorie invadendo ; necnon pro crudeli interfectione quondam Jacobi Ballany in Preftoune, Jacobi Dowglas militis flipendiarij et Willelmi Purwes feruitoris Alexandri Home de Mauderftoune, eadem tempore prefcript. commiff.
Prout in literis regijs defuper direct, plenius continetur. Et non comparen.
amerciatus fuit idem Joannes Arnot, tanquam plegius predict., in penis contentis
in Actis Parliamenti : Necnon decretum et adjudicatum fuit, per dictum Jufticiarium deputatum quod predictus Alex. Kincragye ad cornu f d. n. regis demuiciatur et quod omnia eorum bona mobilia Adui fue ferenitatis ajiplicabuntur
feu efchaetabuntur tancjuam fugitiuus a fua lege pro dicto crimine.

^fiitJins from Uaia of Brtdjtn— protest.

. July 6. — WiLEiAM Rajisay of Mwrye.^
Comi^erit and afl\it inftrumentis, that he i)refentit him felf on pannell, and
offerit him reddye to vnderly the law, for ony cryme that mycht be imputf' to
him. And in refpect that he was fummond be owr fouerane lordis lettres to
this day, and that na perfewar comperit to that effect, proteftit that he mycht
have actioune aganis the purchelTaris of the faidis lettres, and that his fouerte
fundin be him of befoir incur na danger, &c.

1 See May 21, 15G9. — The Editor inserts tliis entry at lenntli, to slio«- tlic mode in wliicli tlw
earlier record is ke|)t ; and wliicli was adliered to for a consideral)le time, in so far as relates to the
marking of fines, &c. " Caiuion or pieces of ordnance mounted on wheeled carnages. ^ See

May 13. « Imputed.

2Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS, 7

July 14. — ACHILI-ES Hendersonne.

Delatit of the thiftuoiis fteling- of ix larabes fra the pei'fones contenit iu
dittay, quhilkis he confeft in jugement to be of veritie.

Verdict. The Affyife fylit and convict the foirfaid Achilles of the thiftuous
fteling of the faidis lambes, in refpect of his confeffioune foirfaid ; and alfe of
commoune thift. — Dome gevin, that he of his awin confent is baneift the boundis
of Sanct Margrettis paraheine/ Edinburgh, and fcherefdom thairof, and feurgeit
throwch the toune. ' Flagellat.'

ittutilation nnti ^tmtmhvation.

Aug. 3. — RiCHERT Megot in Hoipis, and James Dobye in Edinburgh.'
The Juftice, with bayth the parteis confent, allows Robert Abirnethie in
Cornehoufe to be received on the Affife, in abfence of Patrick Loutfut at the
Weft Port of Edinburgh, (who was ' unlawit' in xl lib.)

Comperit alfwa in jugement, in prefence of the faid Juftice-depute, No^vye
Buyflat, dekyn of Scherux-gianis,' and jjroducit this writting following, quhilk
bayth the parteis foirfaidis defyrit to be infert and regiftrat in the buikis of
Adiornale ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Testimonial of the Cherurgianis.
Apud Eilinbur'. xxvij". die meiifis Junij, Anno Domini milleiimo quingentefirao fexagefiino none.
The qubilk day, at findry tymes befoir, at pe qiieift^ and defjTe of my Lord Juftice Clerk, wes prefentit befoir me Nowye Buyftatt dekjni, Robert Henryfoune, Patrilv Hardy, and Alex. Tuedye, eherurgeanis and bingeffis of Edinburgh, my breder,' aiie callit Johime Farer, quha wes hurte vpoun the
left ai'me, on the elbok, on the arme beneth, and on the hand ; to have our jugementis, quhidder that
the faid Johnne fuld be mntulat or no of the faidis hurtis and woundis ])an being haill : Eftir lang
confultatioune and emift advyiement, we fand the faid Johnne nather to be mntulat nor impotent of
his anne nor hand ; bot pat it wald be daylie better, gif he wald make laubom'is vpoune it : And Jis
we teftefie be ])is our hand wrytis and fubfcriptioune to all and findry to qiihome it efferis, day, geir
and place foirfaidis.

Nowy Byssat, Dekiu of the Cherurgeanis. Robert Henrysouxe, w' my baud.
Alex. Tuedy, w' my hand. Pat^. Hardy, w' my hand.

Verdict. Efter productioune of the quhilk wryting, the haill Aflyife foirfaid being removit furth of Court, and being well and ryplie adwyfit with the
famin, reenterit again in jugement ; and be thair delyuerance pronunceit be
Eduard Paterfoune, (at the Quarrelhoiles,) chanceller, fFand the laid Richert
Megot and James Dobye to be convict of the crewale hurting and wounding of
the faid Johnne Farer in his held abone the vane organe, and in the foir pairt

1 Pai-oehin, parish. • See May 10. ^ Sm-geons, Old Fr. Chirurgkns. * Requisition.

^ Bretlu-en iu profession.

8 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1569.

thairof and cutting of his left lug ; and hurting and wounding of him alfwa in
his left arme in diuerle pairtis thairof, to the eftiifioune of his hlude in greit
quantitie ; commitit at the weft end of the burcli of Edinburgh, at Lowriesdykis, upoune the tent of Januar 1568 : and acquittis thaim of the mutilatioune
and haill remanent poyntis contenit in the lettres and dittay.

(On the margin) xvij Aprilis 1571. This pane and contentis of the amerciament, in fa far as couceruis the King, is deleit, be precept and command of the
thefaurer.

Crrnson— (njcft— ^j[)ti(Ij.ie.

Nov. 18. — JoHXXK Levis.
CoNUiCT and filit be Aflyfe, off arte and parte of the cuming, with conuocatioune of the lieges of this realme, to the nowmer of thre hundreth perfonis,
bodin in feir of weir,' with jakkis," Iperis, fteilbonnettis, culueringis' and vtheris
wappinnis inuofiite, incontrair the Actis of Pai'liament, vpoune the . . . day of
Januar 1568 ; in wcirlike manner, with feit and wageit I'uddartis,'' and men of
weir, to the caftell, towre, fortilice, and place of Wauchtovme, being in keping
for the tyme of Johinie Carmichaell younger of that Ilk, at the fpeciale command of our ibueran Lordis derreft Regent ; and thair maift awfulie perfewit,
aflaultit, and aflegeit the laid caftell, tour, fortilice, and place, and crewalie flew
vmq''' Johnne Geddes,'' hurt and woundit Archebald Dowglas, Thomas Gardner,
and Johnne Angus, garytour" in Wauchtoune, be Ichottis of culueringis and
vtherwyife in diuerfe pairtis of thair bodeis, to the greit effufioune of thair
blude, in perrell of thair lyves ; vpoinie fett purpois and prouifioune : And for
arte and jjarte of the vmbefetting' of the gait to Johnne Murdo, tailliour burges
of Edinburgh, and Maufe M'Kafke, his fpoule, at the Craikhill, quhair thai wer
cumand furth of the toun of Dunbar, to thair awin duelling-place in Edinl:)urgh ;
and thair invading thame for thair flauchteris ; cutting of the faid Mawfe
purle, quhairin wes gottin xxxv Crownis of the lone, fex Angell-nobilHs, twa
Roile-nobillis, ane Ilarye-nobill, ane Portugall-ducat, xviij pece of diuerfe Ibrtis
of Scottis cunze of gold, ane xliiij f. pece, twa Inglis Teftanis," foure pundis money, ane chenze of gold,^ weand twa vncis and ane half or thairby ; thre Obligationis contenand diuerfe fownies of money awand to the faid Johnne : And
als, fpulzeit and reft'" fra him felf, ane loir hewit" horfe, with his hail harnefing,
extending to the awaill of fourcfcoir pundis ; with his awin cloik and hatt, ane

' In warlike array. ° Short sliirts or coats of mail. ^ A laroe kind of musket. ' Feed

(waged) and liired soldiers. = See Mar. 15, 1568, &c. ^ Warder, watchman or sentry of the

tower or l)attlements. Fr. guarite. ' Besetting, lilocking up of the liigh road and attacking.

' Testoons, so called from the teste or head which was impressed on them. ' A gold chain.

^^ Spoiled and took hy violence. " Sorrel or reddish coloured horse.

2Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 9

fwerd, ane qiihinseare,^ ane piirfe with fyve piindis of quhyte filuer- contenit
tliairintill : And led and convoyit him as captiue and prefoner to the toune of
Hammiltoune (Haddingtoun?) quhair he wes put in ftokkis, and thairefter compellit to pay ranfoume. This was done in the raoneth of Jamiar, the yeir of
God, I'".VMxviij yeiris.

Sentence. For the quhilk, he wes be Dome, pronunceit be the mouth of
the dempfter, ordenit and adiugeit to be had to the Caftle-hill of Edinburgh,
and his heid to be ftrikin frome his body; and all his movabill gudis to be
efchetit, and inbrocht to our fouveran lordis vfe.

©reason— ^lausl)ter— iftesetting:— ant^Sntecfommiminfl:.

Nov. 24. — George Hepburne of Elftanefurd.^

Prolocutouris.
Mr Edmund Hay, Mr Thomas Bannatyne,'' My Lord Lyndfay.

Verdict. The haill perfones of AflTyife Acquittis the faid George off arte
and pairt of the flauchter of vmq ^ Johnne Geddes, and hurting and woimding of
diuerfe vtheris ; committit at the fege of the place and fortilice of Wauchtoime,
in the moneth of Jauuar laftbypaft, be Andro Hepbvu-ne, fone natm*ale of the
faid George, of his caufing, fending, refTetting,'' command, afliftance and ratihabitioune :" And of arte and parte of the intercommoning,^ relTetting and fujipleing with Harye Hepburne of Fortune, Patrik Hepburne of Kirklandhill, and
thair complicis, rebellis and declarit traitoiu'is, in plane parliament, for certain
crymes of Treafoun and Lefe-maieftie, committit be thame ; Off the quhilkis
thai wer conuict in Parliament : And als, for refletting and interconimoning
with Andro Hepburne, his fone foirfaid, the tyme of his being denuncit rebel],
and att the home for the cryme foirfaid : And for arte and pairt of the flauchter
of vmq'^ James Ballanye in Preftoune, James Dowglas, fuddart, and ^Villiame
Purwefe, feruetour to Alexander Home of Manderftoune, at the Langfyde,
vpoune the xiij day of Maij 1568, committit of his caufing, hounding, feuding,
command, afliftance and ratihabitioim.

I

A short sword or hanger. ' Being small change in silver, probably reserved by Iiim for defiaying the expesnes of his journey, the more valuable store being entrusted to his mfe ; in hopes that,
if they fell in with thieves by the way, they would not molest his better half. It is not unlikely, that
in tliis, as in many other similar cases, ' the grey mare was the better horse.' ^ See Mar. 15,

1568, &c. * Afterwards Lord Newtile, one of the Senators of the College of Justice, and brother

of the now celebrated George Bannatyne, — in honour of whose invaluable compilation of Scottish
Poetry, The Bannatyne Club, recently formed, has been named. In a MS. of George Bannatyne
the following notice occurs : — ' [Nlaift er Thomas BannatjTie, my bnuier, deceifit the xiij of Augufl,
1591 yeiris, being of the aige of li. yeiris, and ane of the Lords of the College of Juftice, &c. He
left of ehyldrpie \'ij fonis and four dochteris,' &c. ^ Receiving, harbouring. "^ Confirmation, Law Lat. ratihabere, conjirmare. ' Holding conference or intercourse with one who had

been denounced rebel against the king.

VOL. I. B

10 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

Dec. 1. — JoHXXE, alias Jok Allaxe, in Stow of Woddell.
CONUICT be AfTj'ife of the crewall flaiicliter of vmq'" George Kay, fmyth,
within the tonne of the Stow, in the moneth of Nouember laftbypaft, vpoun the
xij day of the famin moneth. ' Decollat.'

Persewaris.
Jobnne Blakye in Mortounball. Johnne Broun tailliour in Edinburgli.

ritasou— Ctinboration of ii)t Eitcrtis— 3SattU of aauflss^f.

Dee 6. — Johnne Beouxe of Carllench.^
Dilated of art and part of convocation of the lieges, bodin in feir of weir,
and coming to tlie lands of Langfyde, &c. ; and for the cruel flaughter of James
Ballanye in Preftoune, &c. Came in the King's and his Regent's will for thefe
crimes ; and foimd Thomas Maclellane of Bombye cautioner, &c.

Crtasou— ^laujjljtn*— aftitiinrj from ti)t Unia of jf^atoicft, $(t,

Dec. 6. — JoiiNXE Carkettill of Marcle, George Carkettill, his fonne.

Indytit baytli for arte and parte of the flanchter of vmq'" James Ballanye in

Preftoune, &c. as above : And als for remaning fra the Raid' and oift^ ordanit

to convene at Hawik, vpoune the xviij day of October laftbypaft ; incontrair the

proclamatioune maid thairupoune.

PnOLOCUTOURIS,

The Lard of Innerleytb, Tbe Lard of Dalbowfye, Jobnne Logane of Coitfeild,

Mr Edniond Hay, Alexander King, Alexander Home.

The Juftice, in refpect of the non lauchfull lummonding of Johnne Carkettill
younger, and allegeance proi:)onit in his name, defertis the coimt fra his parte,
and ftiperfedes all proceding aganis him, pro loco et tempore. Quhairupoune he
afkit actis and inftrumentis.

ASSISA.

Johnne Sydferfe of that Ilk, Patrik Creytbtomie of Lugtoun, James Johnflomie of Weftraw,

Thomas Fawfyde of that Ilk, Patrik Monepenny of Pilrig, James Ramfay of Cokpen,

George Dundas of that Ilk, Walter Hall in Preftoune, Williame Reidpetb, younger of

Olipber Sinclare in Qubj^e Kirk, Willianie ^Nloucrief, younger of that Ilk,

Johnne Fmlawfon of Kiilejtb, that Ilk, W°". Paterfoime, burges of Ed.

Dec. 8. Verdict. This Aflyife, in ane voce, be thair deliuerance, fills and
conuictis the faid Johnne Carkettill, of his contempnabill remaning and byding
at hame fra oiu- fouerane Lordis Raid, ordanit be his hienes lettres of proclamatioune to have convenit at Hawick, \poime the xviij day of October laftbj^paft ;

' See July 6, 1569. - Gathering of tbe King's army. ' Hoft.

2JAC.VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 11

iucoiitrair the tennour thairof and iniblicatioune maid of the famin : And acquittis the faid George of the haill (other) crymes contenit in the Dittay. The
deliuerance heirof, pronimceit be Olijjher Sinclare, chaucellare of the faid Aflyfe,
in prefens of the Juftice, octauo Decembris, anno prefcript.

George Home of Aytonne, Robert Fairlie of Braid, Jolmne Pennyciike of that
Ilk, James Home in Dunbar, Francis Dowglas of Spittell, ^Villiam Lauder of
Haltouue, James Home, younger of Coklinknowis, George Heriot in Langnvidrye, Williame Scot of Balweiye, Mathow Sinclare, bruder to the Lard of Roiflin,
(and nine others,) ilk ane of thaim, refpect'me, vfev vnlawit in the panis of xl
pundis, for non-comperance, to jmfs vpoune the faid Aflyife, viz. ij^xl lib."

Conbofation of iiyt Jlic^ts— <!5ppiTssioit, &c.

Dec. 13. — JoHKNE Broune, fone to Johnne Broune in Mollance, Williame Kurour in Blakerne, Johnne M'Kinftray in Grange,
Jolimie Smyth elder thair, Johnne Smyth younger, his fone,
thair.
Verdict. The perfones of Aflyife, be thair deliuerance, in ane voce, filis and
conuictis the faidis Johnne Broune, &c., off arte and parte off the conuocatioune
of our foueran lordis liegis, to greit nowmer ; bodin in feir of weir, with lancis,
fl;alffis, fwerdis, and quliingearis ; incontrar the Act of Parliament, and cumand
to the gi-ound of the lands of the Bordland, for away-taking of the hay being
thairon ; and thairefter beft^ and dang Catherine M'Ke, f])ous to Robert Levingftone of Lytill Airdis, with bauch ftraikis,^ in findry pairtis of liir body, at the
watter fyde of De, within the famin landis of the Bordland ; committit ^'poune
fuddantie, in the moneth of Januar, the yeir of God, I'".VMxiij yeiris : For the
quliilk, thai wer fynit with the thefaiu-er.

protest.

Dec. 16. — Jajies Stewart, bruther to the Lard of Traquair.
Mr David Borthwik, prelocutour chofm for the pairt of the faid James, aflcit
inftrumeutis, that the faid James offerit him felfe reddye to vnderlye ane Affyife, for all crymes in the lettres jmrcheft in his contrair. The (King's) aduocat,
Mr Johnne Spens, being prefent in jugement, declarit that he wald nawyife perfew, &c., thairfore (the pamiel) proteftit, &c.

May 11, 1570. — Patrik Vrquhard.

' Tills latter notice lias been jireserved, on account of tlie names of the ' Aflyfouris,' and to show
the practice of the Court at this period. ^ Beat, hasted. ^ \'iolent or deadly blows.

12 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

Delatit of the filthie and abhominabill cryme of Adulteiye, committit be him
with Joiiet Dauidfone, fpous to George Hopiier, burges of Edinburgh.

Peelocutouris. His Prelocutouris.

Mr Johmie Schsu-jje, Walter Mawer, Tlie Lard of Spot,

Gilbert Thometoune, Walter Lowfoune. The Lard of Ormiflouue,

The Scheref of Munay, yoiuiger, Persewar. The Lard of Braid.

Alexander Donaldlbune, George Hopper biirges of Ed'.

Verdict. The AfTyife, be thair deliuerance, pronunceit and declarit be the
mouth and fpeking of James Young (cutlare in Edinburgh) chanceller, fFand and
deliuerit the faid Patrik, to be culpabill fylit' and conuict of arte and jiarte of the
vfing and bering of familiare and i)riuat cumjianye, at findry tymes, be the fpace
of ane yeir or thairby laltbypaft, with Jonet Dauidfonne, lauchfuU mareit wyfe
to George Hopper, biu'ges of Edinburgh ; conuerfand and abufand his body
with hir, in the filthie and abhominabill cryme of Adulterye, within the faid
Georgis awin duelling hous, and vtheris priuie places at his plefTour : And ipecialie, in the monethis of Januar and Februar lafbbypaft, quhen he (George) wes
abfent furth of this realme and cuntre, and depairtit to the pairtis of lugland,
for wynning of his leving, in the honeft and lefuU traffique of merchandice : The
forfaid Patrik, than and diuerfe tymes ofbefoir, alfuele be day as nycht, in jjriuat
and publict maner, hes conuerfit, ufit, hantit, and reparit with the faid Jonet
Dauidlbune, fpous to the faid George Hoi)per, in his duelling hous foirfaid, and
vtheris fecrete and priuie jilaces, abufand thair bodies ather of thaim with vtheris,^
in the foirfaid filthie and abhominabill cryme of Adulterie : And in the meynt}ane, hes thiftuoullie ftolin, fpendit, waiftit, delapidat, confumat and putt away
the faid George Hopperis money, gudis, geir, alfuele being within his merchand
buith, as houfe foirfaid, for the tyme, at his plelfour, to greit quantitie.

' CONVICTUS ET WaRDAT.'^

jftrt-raisins— ^jjuiljie, ^f.

May 12. — Johnne Commend atour of the Monastery of SaulSYDE,'' Johnne Johnneftoune in Lowringis, Thomas Johnneftoune, and Cuthbert Johnnellomie, brothers of the faid Commendatour.

Caution is found for their entry before the Jullice or his dejiuties, on the third

day of the next Jullice-air of Drumfreife, or eUewhere, on premvnition of xv

' Found guilty ; literally, defiled ; in opposition to another forensic term, ' clangeit,' i. e. cleansed,
' fund clean and accpiit,' or ' adoilzied.' " With each other. ^ Convicted and imprisoned

hvarded.^ A blank is left in the Record, for insertion of the final sentence. ^ Johnne Johnneftoune ; ooul-seat, Sedes Animarum, in Dumfries-Bhii-e. See June 26, 1572.

3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 13

days ; to miderly the law, ' pro arte et parte Cunibuftionis et Incendij diuerfanim
domoruni, Johanni Johnneftoune filio Robert! J. de Craigaburne et Roljerto J.
de Newtoune jjertiuen. ; Spoliationirque diuerforum bonoriuu in eilUem domibus
pro tempore exiften. ; aliifque criminibus in Uteris regijs defuper direct, fpecificatis ; fecundum formam et tenorem earundem et fub penis in Actis Parliamenti
contentis.'

June 14. — WiLLlAME CAR>fEBYE, baxter-biu'ges of Edinburgh.

Persewar comperand, Prelocutouris for the faiil Williame,

Patrik Browne, indueller in Edinburgh. Mr Johniie ^Nlofcrope, ISIr Henrye M'Calgane,

His Prelocutour. James M'Call, William Fiddes,

Johhne Lowreniloune. Nicol RjTid, Walter Wawane, tailliour.

Maifteris Johnne Spens and Robert Creychtoun of Eliok, Aduocatis for oiu'
fouerane lord, being oft and diuerfe tymis callit, coniperit nocht.

Verdict. The AlTjdfe, be thair deliuerance, pronunceit and declarit, be the
mouth and fpeking of James Dalzell (at the ^^^eft-port of Edinburgh) chancellar,
ffand and deliuerit the faid Williame to be culiiabill, fylit and convict of arte and
part of the vfeing and bering familiare and privat cumpany, diuerfe and findry
tymes with Jonet Strang, lauchfull Ipous and mariet wyfe to Patrik Broune.
indueller in Edinburgh, vnder the caftell ■wall thairof, conuerfand and abufand
his body with hir in the filthie, vyle, and abhominabill cryme of Adulterie, within
the faid Patrikis awin duelling houfe and place, within the faid biu-gh, vnder the
faid caftell wall thairof, in the houfe of Catherine Scot in Ryplochis wynd, within
the famiu burgh, and diuerfe vtheris priue partis and places, at thair plefour,
alfuele be day as nyclit, in the monethis of October and Nouember, the j^ir of
God I'".VMxviij yeix'is, December and Aprile laftby^jaft ; the faid "Williame hailing Jonet Paflay to his awin lauchfull Ipous and wyfe on ly^'e : And in the
meyne tyme, hes thiftuouflie ftoUen, fpendit, waftit, delapidat, confumit, and put
away the faid Patrikis gudis, geir, money, and wictuallis to greit quantitie, and
thairthrow caufit the faid Patrik to fkaill ' his houfe and familie thairof, and hes
putt him felf thairby to vtter rewyne, herelchip," and pouerte, &c.

And thairfoir wes put in ward within the faid Tolbuith of Edinburgh, quhill''
ordour had bene takin heiranent.

dfiitts of Court.

July 5. — ' Md. Tlie haill vnlawis iireceding this dait, wer extractit and
To displenish bis house and disperse his family. * Utter ruin, destitution, and poverty. ^ Until.

14 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

delynerit to the thefaiu'er, xix Augufti 1.570 ; the fowmes quhairof extendit to
Ix^.j'.xx ib. ; by' the amerciamentis of perfoiinis adiugeit for flauchter of Geddefe
and Aflege of '\\''auchtouiie.'

[|gcai-in0 of iMInss, ^c]

Sept. 4. — Da:\ie Mar ye de Pyeris Lady Seytoune,^ and Robert
Seytoun, hir fone.

The lad}', befoir the eaUing of the Aflyife, allegeit that fcho fukl nocht be putt
to the knawledge thairof in this cans, without hir hufband, quha being hir heid,
wer warnit to this effect. — Mr Johnne Spens (King's) Aduocat, allegit in the
eontrair, ])e reafoun that in this maner of preceding criniinalie, fcho mycht be
put to AiFyife in refpect of hir offence, without warning maid to hir hufljand
foirfaid.

The Juflice findis, nochtwithftanding the allegeance foirfaid, forther jn-oces to
be vfit.

The faid lady protefl:it for remeid of law. The faid lady, and Robert hir fone
foirfaid, befoir the adniiffioune and acceptatioune of Aflyile, in prefence of the
faid Juflice-deiJUte, offerit thanie felffis in our foueran lordis will, and to my
Lord Regentis grace in his name, in maner following, that is to fay ^

Oct. 4. — Mr Johnxe Kello, miniller of Spot."

Committer of the murthour of vmq'^ Margret Thomefoune his fpous ; committit
be him within his awin lugeing in the toun of Si)ot for the tyme, be ftrangling
of hir with ane towale, vjioiin the xxiiij daj^ of Seiitember laftbyj^afl:, befoir noyne.

Sentence. For the cpihilk he wes adiugeit be dome pronunceit, to be hangit
to the deid, and thaireftir his body to be caflin in ane fyre and brint in affis ; and
his gudis and geir cpdiatfumeuir (pertening to oui' foueran lord) to be confifcat, &c.

' L.9,120, besides, over and above the fines, &c. ^ Second wife of George, fourth Lord Setoun, a Frentli lady, who came to Scotland with Mary of Lorraine. ^ A blank left here in the
Record. The Record affords no information of the nature of the crime. It may, however, be conjectured, from the relif^ious tenets of the Wintoun family, that they were put upon their trial for
intercommuning' with and resetting Jesuites, or hearing mass said, &c. '' ' The Confession of Mr
Johnne Kello, minister of Spott, together with liis repentance made vpone the scaftbld befoir his suffering, the foiut day of October 1570,' was ' Imprinted at Edinburgh, be Robert Lekpriwick' (1570
Herbert's Ames.) Ricliard Bannatyne has inserted the whole Tract in his Joiu-nal, p. 39, which is
well worthy of perasal. Kello was a person of considerable note, and of much religious profession.
The circuTnstance of the miu-der, his subsequent deep contrition, his confession and execution, made
a great stir at the time. These are noticed Ijy Calilerwood and several other T\Titers Bartilmo, Barbara, and Bessie Kello, ' sone and dochteris to vmq'* ^Nlr Johnne Kello,' got a gift of his escheat
' throw the said vm(|'"" Mr Johnne being convict and justifeit to the deid, for the crewell and odious
Muithure of vniq'*^ ^largaret Thomesoun his spous.' Regist. Seer. Sig. Oct. 5, 1370.

3Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 15

Oct 10. — JoHNNE Go VANE, feriiitoiir to Mr Richard Strang, aduocat.
Delatit of the fteling fra James Kinroife of Kippanroife, of his jJiirfe, within
the paroche-kirk of Sanct Geill in Edinbiu'gh, in time of fermond, upon the xvj
day of Julij laftbypaft.

ASSISA.

James Elphinftoun, bruder to the Johne Striueling callit of Butis, Micliaell Elphinftouii, biuder to
Lord Elpliinftoune, James Striueling of Auchyle, the Lord Elpliinftoune,

James Preftoune, apperand of James Richardfoune in Ediu^ Harye Balfour, feiiiand to the Erie
Waylafield, William Weir, cordiner there, of Mar,

Robert Porterfield, feruand to James M'Gilleverye, alias Bu- George Drummond, apperand of
die Erie of Murray,' clianan, Ballocli,

Robert Halden of Bellyfoule, James Drummond, mafter flabler Thomas Drummond, feniand to

James Striueling in Striueling, to the Lord Drummond, the Lady Richardtoune.

By a memorandum, preferved on tlie margin of the record, it would ajipear
that Govane was ' Acquit.'

©reason— Conbofation ot ti)t Eff fits, $^t,

Oct. 31. — JoHNXE Rait, bruder to ^^'illiam Rait of Halgrene, Robert

Rait in Tippertie, Robert Neilfoune at the Kirke of Arbuthnot,

Alexander Duncane, feruand to the faid AVilliam Rait, Mr

Jolinne Fowlertoune, and James Fowlertoune, fonis to Richard

Fowlertoune in Claffingdrum, Johnne Rait in Sallieflat, Robert

Wifchert and Johnne Riche, feruandis to the faid Robert Rait,

Thomas Rait in Pitfkellie, Gilbert Lepar and Andro Lepar

brether (brothers,) George Falconer in Ballandro, Johnne Rait

in BerA^'ye (Bervie,) Johnne Fettes, David Irwyne, George

Rait in Furrathie.

Delatit of the making of ane eagment and ryme in name of Johnne

THE Commoune-wele, and divulgatioune thairof, with conuocatioime, &c. ;

and chefing^ of Robert Hude and Abbot of Unreasoune,' Avithin the parochin of Arbuthnot and vtheris pairtis respective, in the bounds of Mernis ; and

diuerfe ^'theris crymes, at length contenit in the lettres direct thairupoune.

Prelocutouris for tliis paimell.

Alexander Mauchane, The Lard of Covingtoune, Alexander Guthrye of Kincoldrum,

William Rait of Halgrene, Johnne Lindfay of Fairguth.

' It may be noticed here, that the term ' feruand' was at this period frequently, indeed usually, employed to signify secretary, clerk, a dependent or follower of a nobleman, &c. ; not merely a domestic
' fervitour.' The clerks of lawyers, writers, notaries, &c., were uniforndy styled lemitors or feruauds,
as were pages, henchmen, and dependents, in the train of the great. " Choosing. ^ "phe popularity of these personages is too well known to stand in need of any explanation. For an abstract
of the history of the Robin Hood games, and choosing of an Abbot of Unreason, reference need
merely be made to Dr Jaraieson's Dictionary, and the writings of Sir Walter Scott.

16 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

The advocattis foirfaidis alkit inftrumentis, that infafar as the lettres quhairby
the imnnell is calht contenis Treafoune, thay wald only fpeik in this caus for thaii'
defence, at command of ane delyuerance and charge of the lordis direct to that
effect ; and thairfoir proteftit, &c. — Mr Johnne Spens, aduocat for the King, afkit
inftrumentis, that he comperit to perfew at command of the Regentis Precept.

a^tpltfliation to t])t MtQnlitv ot StibtilJrtitTjocft.

Eodem die predict. Robert us Rait, Robertus Will-hart, Joannes Richie et
Joannes Fettes dilatat. de arte et parte invalionis ^Villelmi Sibbald, fratris Davidis Sibbald de Cair, pro ejus interfectione, et crudelis vulnerationis ejufdem in
fuo capite, ad magnam fui fanguinis effiifionem, per omiffionem tormenti ininoris,
lie bent piftolet ; et in mortis periculo earn relinquendo, vltimo die menfis Aprilis,
\'ltimo elapfo, apud montem, lie Sand Gilhertis-hill commifs. prout in Uteris
regiis defuper direct, plenius continetur. Per Archibaldum Giithre balliuum in
Iiac parte Georgij Commendatarij Monafterij de Abirbrothok, virtute commiflionis ejufdem, Replegiati' extiterant ad privilegium et jurifdictionem fui Regalitatis, quafi infra bondas ejufdem commorantes ; aflignando tertium diem
pi'oximi itineris dicti Regalitatis vel alibi fuper prenionitione xv dierum, j)ro
eorum comperentia, ad fubeundiun legem pro dicto crimine. Plegio, Alexandre
Guthre de Kincoldrum, pro eorum introitxx ad fubeundum legem pro dicto crimine, et predictus Willelmus Rait de Ilalgrene plegius deuenit pro adminiftratione Juftitie in premiflis, fecundum forinam jiu-is.^

Verdict. The AfTyfe acquit the haill pannell foirfaid, except the replegeit
perfones foirfaidis, of all crymes contenit in thair dittay ; and acquit thaim alfwa
of the crymes of treafoune mentionat in the famin : Quhairupoune teftinaouialis
wer writtine to the jjarteis.

^lausljtev— iHutilation.

Oct. 31. — JoHXXE Aeexandersoune, William, Gilbert, Andro, and
Roger Sil)bald in Cornetoune, brether to David Sil)bald of Cair,
William Barrye in Newtoune, David Strathauchin at the mylne
of Thorntoune, John Sibbald in Cafteltoune, Robert Barrye
fonne to the laid ^Villiam, John AVatt in Boyl)urne, Dauid Sibbald of Cair, Catherine Striueling in Calleltoune.

' Tlie Bailio or Judge of every Regality, &c. liaving the privilege of criminal jurisdiction, was entitled, on finding surety for the due administration of justice, to appear at the bar of another Regality
and even at the bar of tiie Supreme Court and claim the person of the pannel, if resident within his
bounds. This was often the occasion of niucli injustice and oppression ; for, though liable to be
called to account for their conduct, the jirivacy of their proceedings, their distance from the seat of
governuKMit, and the frequently disturbed state of the country, often prevented the circumstances from
reaching the ears of the officers of the crown, exce])ting in very flagi-ant instances. - This entry

has l)een inserted at length to show the mode of procedure, &c.

3Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 17

Delatit of the flauchter of vmq'^ Petir Rait, bruther to Robert Rait of Tibberta, and mutilatioune of the faid Robex't of his lycht and left handis ; committit in the moneth of Julij laftbiiiafl.

William, Gilbert, Andro and Roger Sibbald, and William Barrye came in the
Kings will for the faid crimes, and found John Strathauchin of Thornetoiine,
fm-ety for fatiffaction of the parties : David Sibbald of Cair binds himfelf to relieve liim of his cautionry.

Prelocutouris for the pannell.
Mr Jolinne Scliarpe, The Lard of Kyniieir, The Lard of Lathene,

The Lard of Balgonye, The Lard of Rankeloiir, Robert Lundye of Conland.

Mr Johnne Scharpe, as prelociitour foirfaid, afkit inftrumentis, that Robert
Neilfoiin and Robert Rait perfewaris comperand, declarit in prefence of the faid
Juftice-depute, that the foirfaid Catherine wes innocent of the crymes contenit
in the lettres, and that thai in ref])ect thairof wald nocht perfew hir, bot difchargeit \\\y Jimpliciter ; and thairfoir proteflit, that quhatfumeuir fouerte wer
fundin at defyre of the Juftice, for hir comjierance to underly the law for the
famin, the thrid day of the nixt Juflice-air, or foner, vpoune xv dayes warning,
that the famin be nawjdle preiudiciale to hir, nor fcho aftrictit to entir or compeir to that effect, for the cans foirfaid.

Verdict. The AflTyife in ane voce, without difcrejiance, acquit the foirfaidis
fex perfonis on pannell of the flauchter and crymes contenit in dittay, quhairof
thai wer accufit in jugement ; and jiroteftit for thair teftimoniallis.

Nov. 4. — William Cwninghame of Aikett, William Fergufliill and
Florence Crawfui'd, his feruandis, Johnne Raburne of that Ilk.
Delatit of the flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Mure of Cauldwell.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, My Lord Prowand, Mr David Borthwick.
The famin prelocutouris aflvit infl;rumentis, that thay jjrefentlie behovit to
fpeik in defence of the perfones accufit, in refpect of the lettres purcheft be the
Kings aduocattis, and of thair declaratioune maid in jugement, that thay wald
infift, in perfute of this caufe.

Mr Johnne Spens of Condie, ane of the foirfaidis advocattis, afkit infl;rvunentis,
that he, be ane i)recept and wryting fubfcryuit be my Lord Regent, wes chargeit
to perfew the faidis perfones, and conforme to the command thairof, wald jjroceid
to proces ; quhilk wryting he defyrit to be infert in the buikis, for his wan-and
quhairof the tennour foUowis.

Advocattis. It is our will and we charge 50W, fat 36 perfew our Souerane Lordis lettres raifit
aganis William Cwninghaine of Aiket, and Johiuie Raburne of fat Ilk, and Jiair conipllcis, ffor arte
VOL. I. C

18 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

and parte of fe flauchterof vmq'« Jolimie Mwre of Cauklwell, at Jie day contenit Jiamntill, but' delay
or difTen-ing: As 56 will anfuere to Lis Maieftie and ws Jiairv-jioune. Subfcriuit with our hand att
Edinburgh, the tlu-id day of Nouember, 1570. Mathow, Regent.

The famine day comjierit ^Villiame Edmeftoune, in prefens of my Lord Jiiftice
and his deputtis, in jugement, and exponit and declarit, that fforfamekill as
Williame Cwninghame of Aiket, and Johnne Raburne of that Ilk, his giidfone,^
and remanent perfonis on pannell, l)e thair awin meane and informatioune, at
the leifl be informatioune of vtheris in thair names, off thair caufing, had piircheft lettres at the inftance of our fouerane lordis advocattis, \'j50une thaimfelffis,
for the flaucliter of vmq'^ Johnne Mwre of Caldwell, kny'. committit and done be
vmq^^ Alexander Cwninghaim younger of Aiket, and be thair cans, command
and reflett off bludie hand, the faid William for the intertennement of his gudefonne, quha wes actouris, factoxu'is, and principale committaris of the farain be
thaim, the tent day of September laftbjqiaft, vpoune the Erie of CaffiUes landis
callit the Bordlandis ; and thairwith, have catifit charge thaimfelfis to find fouerte
to vnderh' the law for the foid (lauchter in the tolbuith of Edinburgh, befoir the
Juftice or his deputtis, the ferd day of N^ouember inftant ; as alfwa caufit ane
Aflyfe to be fummoned to that effect, of lie perfones as thai beft pleafit, bayth
fufpect and noclit knawand the ^'eritie : To the perfute of the quhilk cans, Robert Mwre now of Cauklwell, fonne to the faid vnuj^" Johnne wer nevir warnit
nor requirit, nor gave information to the raifing of the faidis lettres, nor had
knawlege thairoff : And the Ihid Johnne Raburne duellis within the Regalitie of
my Loi'd of Sanct Johnne, and in hurt and i)reiudice of the preuelege of the
faid Regalitie, lies declynit tliairfra, and tane him to the ryaltie to this effect :
And thairfoir, allegit, that my Lord Juilice nor his deputtis heir i)reflent, fuld
nocht put the faid AMlliam Cwninghame of Aiket, and the faid Johnne Raburne
of that ilk to the knawledge of the faid Alfyife, be vertew of the faidis lettres ;
the faid Robert Mwre nevir being warnit nor requyrit to the perfute thairof ;
and as he underftude, the alTurance betuix the Lordis Anirun-out : In the meyne
t}ane thairfoir proteftit. gif my Lord Juftice or his deputtis did in the contrair,
that the lamin wer nocht preiudiciale to the laid Robert IMwre ; hot that he, for
his interes, mycht in all tyme heireftir perfew the faid "William and his complices
now on j)annell. for the llauchter of the laid vmq'^ Joluine his fader ; and that na
declaratioune of the Alfyife, nor piu-gatioune of the faid "Williame thairof, fuld
be reput nor haldin fufficient. nor teftimonye of the Juftice declaring the famin ;
and that ipeciallie of tlie late practik, laitlie auctorifit in the contrair. \"poime
the quhilk premilfes, the faid "William requyrit actis, &c.

' Without. '^ Son-in-law.

3Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I9

*

ASSISA.

John Cwiiiiigliarae of Canilarge, Patrik Houftoun of that ilk, Patrik Hammiltoune of GavtlaMr Jolmne Porterfield of that ilk, Johnne Maxwell younger of Ne- uoch,

James Stewart, fone to the Lord ther Pollok, Johnne Hammiltoune in Po-theOuchiltre, George Hammiltoune, tutour of hill,
The Lai-d of Lamirtoune, Bordlaud, Adam Schaw of Welwod,

Johnne Crawfurd of Craiglynfche, David Hammiltoune of Gairewis, Patrik Gemmill of Tempilhoufe,

Johnne Schaw of Grenok, Williame Hammiltoune of Rot- Johnne Campbell in Sanding.
George Maxwell of Newwerk, tinyairdis.

Verdict. This haill Aflyife, in ane voce, without difcrepance, acquit the
foirfaidis perfewaris on pannell. — Quhilk declaratioune being maid and iironounceit be the mouth of Mr Johmie Porterfield, proteftatioiuiis wes maid for thair
teftimonialis.

a^espUe for afiitrtncr from Uaiti at 5liiilitI}(3:olD.

Nov. 4. — JoHXXE Lyell in Foulfurdleis.
Ad refpectuationem, pro ipfius proditoria domi remanentia ab exercitu f. d. n.
Regis apud Lynlythqw, fecundo Augufti vltimo elapfo convenire ordinat. ; contra
tenoreni Proclamatiouis defujier direct., de data xvj Septembris 1570.

Persewar, Robert Neifbett in Braeanriggis.

dfor trni? of ti)t Jlesnit's ^itjiiaturr.

Nov. 6. — Tho:mas Barrye, meflinger, (Unicorn Purfuivant.)
Convict be Aflyile of the falfeing,' fenzeing, forgeing, and counterfuting of the
manuale fubfcrii)tioune and hande wryte of our fouerane lordis derreft gudfchir^
and lauchfull tutour, Mathow Erie of Levenox Lord Dernelie, &c. Regent to his
hienes, and of his realme and liegis, at findry times fen the acceptatioune of the
office of Regentrye : And fpecialle, of falfeing and treafonabill counterfuting of
his grace fubfcriptioune, in the moneth of September laftbipaft, maid and done
be him felfe, in fubfcryving of ane Signatour,^ concerning the confirmatioun and
ratificatioune of his office of IJnicorne Purlevandfchip,'' allegeit maid and grantit
to him of befoir, be our fouerane lordis derreft moder the Queue : And alfo, in
treafounabill counterfuting of his grace fubfcriptoune to ane vther lettre, directit
be his grace, in our fouerane lordis name, chargeing Sir Walter Ker of Branxhelme knycht. Sir Thomas Ker of Pharnyeherft knycht, and vtheris contenit
thairintill, to mak payment of thair mailes and deweteis, allegeit awand be thaim
to his hienes : As at mair lenth is mentionat and contenit thairintill : This done

1 Falsifying. - Grandfather. ' A TiTit bearing the King's sign-manual, and being a waiTant

for a charter passing the seals, granting or confirming lands or office, &c. * Unicorn purfuivant.

so CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

in October laftbipaft : As his dejiofitionis and confeffioiine, with the faid Signatour
and lettres counterfutit and trealbnablie falfit be (hiiu) beris.

Sentence. For the quhilk cans, dome wes gevin and pronunceit, be the
mouth of James Yule dempftar, that the faid Thomas rycht hand falbe ftrickin
and cutit of, and himfelf to be baneift of the reabne during all the dayis of his
lyfe ; and neuir to returne agane within the famin, without Ipeciale licence of
our foueran lord, had and obtenit thairto.

Nov. 9. — Schir William Cranstoune of Doddo, Commiffar of Lauder.
Delatit of the flauchter of vmq'" James Brounlie. ' Plegio Joanne Cranftoune
de eodem, tertio Itineris de Beruik, vel fuper (premonitione) xv dierum.'

Slljitiinti: from t])t l\aiti of Hinlitljsoto.

Nov. 27. — Alexander Kenned ye of Drumquharne, and Patrik Kennedye of Culuane.
Delatit for remaining fra the raid ordanit to convene at Lynlythqw, the fecond
day of Augiift laftbipaft.

Perfewit be Thomas Kennedye of Barganye, as donatour (of their efcheit) and
the advocattis. — Continued to the Juftice-aire of ' Air, tertio Itineris vel premonitione XV dierum. Plegio, Georgio Campbell de Skeldoune.'

#pj)itssioii— (JTonbofation of Hifgts, $^(,

Nov. 30. — Mr William Balfour in Leyth, Johnne Younge taillour

thair, and feventene vthers, ' flvynnaris,' ' litftaris,' and ' cordinei'is.'

Delatit of findry crymes of Oppreffioune committit be thaim, with convocatioune, &c. vpoune Florence Balfour. — Continued to the Juftice-aire of Edinbvu-gh, tertio Itineris vel premonitione xv dierum. Plegiis, M. Willelmo Naper

de Wrychtishoufis et Joannes Young. This fouerte reftauit at command of my

Lord Regentis grace.

NoTA.— Joliniie Carwod, and Thomas Thomfoune fuddartis, i wer difchargeit, be ane precept
of my Lord Regentis gi-ace, direct to the Juilice, becaus thai wer in the Kingis fervice.^

Cvrason, ^(.— aaaiU of JLinUtijgoSj).

Dec. 2. — Mr James Paavtoune, minifter.
Delatit of the treafonabill afliftance maid and gevin be him to George Erie of
Huntlie, Archebald Erie of Argj-le, and diuerle vtheris confiiiratouris againis our

* Soldiers. - And therefore liable to be tried by a Court-inartial.

4Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 21

Ibiieran lord, in erecting and fetting A'p ane vtlier auctoritie nor' his hieneffis ;
and furneffing and lending of Archibald Robefoune, in his name and vpoim his
expends to the tonne of Lynlythqw, for the awancement of the foirfaidis confpiratouris trealbnabill interpryfis : And liclyke, for remaning fra the Raid ordanit
to convene at Lynl)'thqw, the fecund day of Augull laftbipaft.

Comperit Mr Robert Creychtoune advocat, as perfewar, and produceit my Lord
Regentis Precept and command direct to him, for perfute of the laid Mr James ;
quhilk he defyrit to be red in jugment.

The Jvxftice, in i-efpect of the laid Mr James office of miniftrie, and of my Lord
Regentis grace command, ordanit that pairt of the lybell, qualefeit for his remaning
fra the Raid to be deleit ; and that na proces be vfit aganis him for the famin.

Comjierit Mr Williame Henderfoiine, fei'ixand to the Lard of Lochlevyn, and
Proteftit in name of his faid maifter, quha is baillie conftitute of that pairt of

the Regalitie of Sanct Androis, within the Baronye of M'K " (M'Carfchyi'e?) quhair the faid Mr James duellis and makis his refidence, that the
continewatioune heirof pi'ejiige nocht his priuelege nor jurifdictioune thairof ; in
reQject that he prefentlie is willing and reddye to replege the faid Maifter James,
conforme to his Commiffioune, gif the Juftice will confent thairto : And heii"-
vpoime, aflvit aetis and inftrumentis.

' Continuat. tertio Itineris de Perth, vel i)remonitione xv dierum. Plegio,
Joanne Reid de Aikinheid, pro fuo introitu, ad fubeundum legem pro dicto crimine, in proditoria fua affiftentia vt predicitur, tantmn.'

^Iaii5i)tf I*— aanssilie— 3iJait of ILinIiti)0oiu.

Dec. 4.-«-Mathow Hammiltouxe of Philipftoune.

Delatit of the (laughter committit at the Langfyde, and for remaining fra the
Raid ordanit to convene at Lynlythqw, the fecund day of Auguft laftbijjaft.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Lynlythqw, tertio Itineris vel premonitione
XV dierum. Plegio, Joanne Dowglas de ^Valterftoune.' Johnne Fowlis, burgefs
of Lynlythc[w, his cautioner, is fined 100 marks for non-appearance of the pannel,
who is ordained to be put to the horn, and his moveables confifcated as fugitive
from the laws.

^ ijiUittrj txom UaiUs of Haitirsitrc, JSisgar, ^t,

Jan. 4, 1570-1. — James Spexs in Glendukye, Williame Ruflale in Glaflie,
and Johnne Dick elder in Eifter Cartmoir.
Delatit for remaning fra the Raids of Langfyde, Beger, Striueling, Lynlythqw,

' 'Ilian. '■' Obliterated.

22 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570-1.

Brechin, and vtlieris, in the auld and new Regentis tymes ; contenit in the letti'es maid thairnpoune.

Thir thre, at command and defjTe of James Lyndfay, donatour (to their efcheit,)
wes dilcharg-eit and the Court defert.

The Juftice ordained them to find caution to appear and underly the law, on
XV Feb. next ; John ^^^ardlaw in Leyth being cautioner.

S!6i^incr from Uaiti of HiitUtljjjoiJJ .

Jan. 30. — Matho Ha:\i3iiltoune of Pliilipftoune, Mr Johnne Cokburne, citiener' of Brechin.
Delatit for remaning fra the Raid, ordanit to convene at Lynlythqw, the fecund day of Auguft lalll)ii)aft.

Difchargeit l)e writingis of my lord Regentis grace, quliiUds wer producit in
jugement and admittit.

Crtasoit —^bitriuff from Uaiti of 3linIitT)soU).

Jan. 31. — JoHXXK Ham:\iii.toune of Perdowye (Bardowie.) and Robert Trii)nay in Branzeitt.

Walter Striueling of Ballagaue, is fined in T'. lib. for non-appearance of the
pannels, for whom he had become furety, that they fliould enter themfelves before
the Jufticiar this day, and underly the law, for the traiterous detention of the
tower or fortalice of Perdowye againfl the King and his Regent : And alfo, for
their remaining at home from the Raid at Lynlythqw, the lecond day of Auguft
laft, &c.

The Juftice ordained the pannels to be denounced rebels and put to the horn,
and all their moveable goods to be confifcated.

aniffst miti auultevi).

Feb. 2. — James Bonar, marinare, and Agnes Boner, his lifter.
, CoNUiCT be Aftyile of the filthie, vjdd and abhominabill Inceft and Adulterie,
committit be ather of thame with vtlieris," in abufing of thair bodeis togidder ;
in relpect of thair awin confeffioune maid thairof. ' CoNUiCT and Bbixt.'

Citason— S!6itiinri from t])t l\mti of iCautjsiKe,

Feb. 12. — Dauid Ramsay of Jordanftoune.
Delaitit for remaning fra the Raid of Langfyde ; treafonabill affiftance maid

' Citizen, or iiulweller, probably implying that lie was not a ' burgesfs,' or freeman, which is the
usual description of a merchant or tradesman, who is ' free of the burgh.' ' With each other.

4Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 23

and gevin to the Ei-le of Huntlie, and diuerfe vtheris crjniies, at lentil contenit
in the Lettres direct thairupoune : — QiUiairof he wes acquit be AlTyiie.

Feb. 28. — Cristeane Schaw, the relict of vmq''' Dauid Hammiltoune
of Boithuilehauch.
Delaitit of arte and pairt of the murthoiu- of vmq'^ James Erie Murray, Lord
Abirnethye, Regent, &c., be hir fpeciale caufing, bunding, fending, diuifing, refetting, command, affiftance and ratihabitioiine, &c. — Continued to the Jufticeair of ' Lanerk, tertio Itineris A'el premonitione xv dierum. Plegio, Roberto
Roile de Thornetoune jjro introitu ejufdem.'

^latigljtef.

March 5. — Mr Robert Wynrame, Collector of Fyff.

Delatit of arte and jwrte of the flauchter of vmq''' Henrye Cairnis, cietiner of
Sanct Androis ; (committed in the month of December laft.)

Comperit Margret Sjjcns, the relict of the faid vmq Henrye, George Spens
hir bruder, Thomas Inglis in Auldliftoune, and Mr Robert Creychtoime, Adiiocatt, concurrand togidder, for perlute of the faid \7nq''^ Mr Robert Wynram, and
chufit the i^relocutouris following, viz.

Prelocutouris for the perfewaris. Prelocutouris for the pannell.

The Lard of Balweiye, The Lard of Pittandro, Mr Johnne Scharpe, Mr Richard Strang-,

The Lard of Pitmillie, James Maliiig, Tlie Lard of Onnefloune, The Lard of Hahotuie,

Patrik Schewes. Tlie Lard of Trabroune, J".Sonieruilleof Hombye.

Comiierit Patrik Lerthmonth of Dairfye, knycht, Prouefb of Sanct Androus,
and produceit ane Infeftment, Charter and Commiflioune, maid to him be Johne
Archebifchope of Sanct Androus, togidder with our foueran lordis Charter of
Confirmatioune ; quhairby he, as Stewart, Baillie and Juftice generale, within
the boundis of the faid Regalitie, vpoune the north fyde of the Watter of Forth,
fpeciallie conftitute, defyrit the faid Mr Robert to be replegeit from the faid
Juftice Court, as duelland within the famin boundis ; and ofFerit cautioune of
CoUerayth,' as accordis.

Mr Robert Creychtoime, Aduocat to our foueran lord, Proteftit, in caife the
Juftice wald, conforme to the faidis Charteris and Infeftmentis produceit, fuffir
and permit the faid Mr Robert to be Rei^legeit, that the Replegiatioune thairof
fuld nawyife preiuge the Kingis priuelege, in quhais handis the haill benefice of
Archebifchoperik and rycht thairof qidiatfumeuir prefentlie is becuming ; and

' Caution or surety, that justice shall be lawfully administered.

24 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1571.

advit inllrumentis, that he aUutirlie' difaflentit fra the Replegiatioune of the
foirlaid cans.

The Juftiee, efter iiifpeetioime had of the laid Charteris and Infeftmentis produceit and being ryiplie adwyfit, thinkand the defyre of the faid Patrik, as baillie
foirlaid, to be reafonabill ; ordanis cautioune to be fundin for adminiftratioune
of Juftice within this tolbuith and the mater heirof to be replegeit ; dif^jenland
with the place, vt infra. — Peter Bruce of Erlillaall, becomes cautioner for due
adminillration of jullice.

?i?amtsuflten— Slfitiuctioit, ^f.

MaiTh 23. — "VViLLiAiME Oliphant in Kellye-mylnis, and Johnne Oliphant in Over Kellye.
Petrus Oliphant de Pettoccer plegius deuenit ad intrandum Will. Oliphant et
Joh. Oliphant corain Jufticiario I'uilVe deinitatis, tertio die proximi Itineris Jufticiarie de FyfFe, vel alubi, vbi et quando placuerit fue ferenitati, fuper ijremonitione XV dierum ; ad fubeundum legem, pro arte et parte conuocationis legiorum
f. d. n. regis, ad luunerum lexaginta perfonarum, more bellico armat., et per
modum lie HamcfncJnjn venien. ad domum habitationis Patricij Smyth infra
civitatem Sancti Andree lituat. et ibidem oltia predicte domus confringendo,
Jonetamque Smyth ejus filiam, pro tenqjore in lecto dormienti, extra eandem
domiun manu forti et violenter capiendo, rajjiendo et abducendo, iplamque in
captiuitate per longum fj)acium poftea detinendo, auctoritatemque regiam inde
vfurpando ; xxv die menfis Januarij vltimo elajifi coinmiff. : Secundum tenorem
Literarum defuper direct, et fub penis in Actis Parliameuti conteutis.

^lausfjttr.

April 6, 1571. — LowEis Lummisdene in Dyfert and Johnne Lummifdene his fone.
Delaitit of the llauchter of vmq"' Dauid Erie, taillieour in Dyfert ; conunittit
at the Kirk of Dyfert, vpoune the nynt day of Julij laftbipaft

Persewar. " Prelocutouris

Iflbbell Spindye, relict of the faid vmq'" Dauid. for the pannell.

Hir Prelocutouris. Mr Alexander Sym, iNIr Richard Strang,

Jolmne Steviiifonc, and Mr Robert Crechtoune, The Lard of Trabroune, Tlie Lard of Blanerne,

Aduocat, infiftand in the perfiite thairof. William Munay.

V J- EDICT. The Affyfe acquit the pannell.

It is nortliy of remark, that Andro Foreller, minifter, one of the AlTife, ' proteftis, (that) his comperance hurt nocht liis priuelege':- And ' Mr Alexander

' Eutu'ely, altogether. - /. e. He pleads ' his cloth,' being a clergyman.

.5Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 25

Sym afkit inftrumentis, that the laid Sir George (Strathauchin, another of the
Aflife) declarit aiul allegit, that he Ibuld iiocht pafs vjioune Aflyife, in i-efpect
of the woirdis, ' quod non licet nobis interficere quemquam ;' and thairfoir, that
he fuld voit conforme to his faid declaratioune.' '

[Curia Justiciarie tenta in pretorio Ville de Leijth.'~\

tf^pjji-tssioit— Conboration of i\)t Itiefltia— ?^amesuffun.

Nov. 12. — James Roise, bruder to Johne Roile of Craigy, Alexander

Monereif in the Kirktoun of Malare, ^Villiame Morelbun,

Willianie Roife bi'uder to the faid Lard of Cragy, Johnne

Roife feruand to vmq'" James Roile in Maitlandis, Lancelot

Monereif feruand to the laid Lard of Cragy, .... Rettray

appearand of Kinvaid, Johnne Berday of Strowye, George

Stewart of Ardinculye, Oliplier Rettray, Hew Moncrief in

Hiltoun, Robert Broune in Cragy, INIark M'Kye in Cragye,

Walter Murray thair, Dauid Riithwene in Ku'ktoune, Walter

Monereif and Andro Monci-eif fonis to Hew Monereif, Johnne

Monereif fone to Alexander Monereif in Kirktoun of Maler,

Alexander Marfchell, Johnne Murray, Johnne Roife of Cragye,

Williame Lord Ruthwene, and Heiu-ye Lord Methwene.

George Gib of Lumphay, and Patrik Anderfoun in Newtyild, as plegeis and

Ibuerteis conjunctlie and feueralie actit in the buikis of our fouei-ane lordis, For

agane bringing of his hienes lettres, purcheft be Laurence Lord Oliphant, Petir

Oliphant of Twringis, and diuerfe vtheris thair colligis, Ipecifeit coniplenaris

thairin ; togidder with our fouerane lordis advocattis for his hienes interes, to

tak fouertie of James Roife, &c. (above-mentioned) that thay fall compeir and

vnderly our fouei'ane lordis lawis befoir the Juftice or his deputtis, day and place

foirfaidis : For conuocatioune and gaddering of our Ibueraunis liegis, to the no\^'-

nier of twa hundreth 2ierfonis, bodin in feir of weir,^ vjjoune the xxij day of

September laftbipaft, vpoun the landis jiertening to Lawrence Lord Oliphant,

callit the landis of Duplene and Abirdalgy, lyand within the flierefdome of Perth ;

and thair, perforce, takand Johnne Mwle feruand to William Oliphant, Thomas

Millar at the kirk of Duplene and dyuerfe vtheris complenaris in the faidis lettres,

' It being commaiuled, ' Thou slialt not kill,' Sir George jjrotests, tlmt if lie be compelled to ' pass
upon Assise,' lie would Acquit the pannell, according to this his forced interpretation of the sixth
commandment. - The Court of Justiciary is held within the Tolbooth of Leith, from this date,

to the 8th day of August, 1572. The entry immediately following in the record, is dated at Stirling,
on the 15th day of August; and that is succeeded by an entry, dated ' in pretorio de Ed', xxj Octobris -' after which period, the Court is regularly held in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh. The Record
appears to be very defective at this period, and is probably only the Minutu-Book of the procedure
which then took place. ^ Anayed in warlike manner.

VOL. I. D

26 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1571.

fui-th of tliair avvin howffis and vthei-is partis, quliair tliay wer doand tliair lefull
})iffines for the tyme ; ledand thame as captiues and prefonaris to the toun of
Perth, qnhair thai hekl and detenit thame hnndin in irnis, within ftrait prefoun
and captiuitie, he tlie fpace of tuentie dayis with the niair ;' vlurpand tliairthrow
our fouerane lordis auctoritie vpoun thame, thay being his fre lieges : And for
alfegeing of the place of Duplene, the famin day ; purpoflie to have flane Laurence Lord 01ii)liant, and vtheris complenaris contenit in the faidis lettres ;
^■poune auld feid ' and ffoirthocht ffellonye : And for ficlyke conuocatioune, cuinand to the place and fortalice of Malare, lyand within the flierefdome of

entering perforce thairin, ftryking and dinging^ of Jane Hepburne, fpous to the
faid Petir," and violentlie putting hir out of the famin, in the naoneth of July
lallbipaft : And for diuerfe vtheris cryines contenit in the faidis lettres : Efter
tlie forme and tenom- thairof, and vndir the panis Ipecifeit in the famin. Being
oftymes callit, in jugement, to have produceit the fame lettres dewlie execute
and indorfat, that juftice mycht have been miniftrat thairon, conforme to the
tennour of the faid Act, and under the panis thairin contenit : And the faid
lettres nocht being produceit as faid is, lauchfuU tyme of day biddin ; the faid
Juftice-depute decernit and adjudgeit the faidis George Gib and Patrik AnderIbun as plegeis and fouerteis foirfaidis, coniunctlie and fevieralie, in the panis and
vidawis contenit in the faidis lettres ; quhill<is panis the foirfaidis i)erfonis delatit be vertew thairof of the crymes above exi)remit,° or tliair fouerteis mycht
have incurrit for thair nocht conii)erance the faidis day and place, to have vnderlyne the law for the famin, in caife the faidis lettres had been produceit in
the faid Court of Jufticiarie, dewlie execute and indorfat, as faid is ; that is to
fay, for non-productioune of the faidis lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat \'poun
the faidis James Roife, bruder to the Lard of Cragye, being ane gentleman landit,
in tlie fownie of ane hundreth pundis : ^'2)oun the faid Alexander Moncreif in
the Kirktoun of Maler, being ane gentilman vnlandit, in the fowme and pane of
ane hundreth inarkis ; for the faid William Morefoune, being ane geniane,'^ in the
\'nlaw and pane of xl lil). &c. (each being fined according to his rank in the above
proportions.) The Lord Ruthvene and vtheris, callit, be vertew of the lettres
raifit at the Lord Oliphantis inflance, afkit inftruinentis, (that) thay wer reddye
to vnderly the law for the crymes thairin contenit ; and offerit thaim felfis to
the knawlege of ane affyife for the famin : And proteftit, in refpect of the faid
Lord Oliphantis declaratioune, maid in jugement, that he wald nawyife i)erfew
thaim thairfoir ; that thairfoir thai may have coifts, fkaith and expenfis modefeit, &c.

' And more, anil longer. ^ Ancient feud, enmity. ^ Beating. "> Peter Olipliaiit of

Turingis. ' Expressed, e.rpriwerc. ^ Yeoman.

5JAC.VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 27

Nov. 12. — Peter Oliphant of Twringis, Johmie Oliphant, notaiy

public, Lawi-ence Oliphant, fon of Thomas O. portioner of

"Williamftoune, James Oliphant fervant of the laid Peter O..

Johnne IMenteyth and fix others, fervants to Lord Oliphant,

&c.

Laurence Lord Oliphant, cautioner for the entry of thefe pannels to appear

before the Juftice or his deputes, this day, to vnderly the law for the cruel

flauchter of vmq'" James Roife, lawful fon of vmq''' Thomas Roife of Maitlandis,

committed upon the 20 day of Sei)tember laft ; is fined in the funis of F. lib.,

^'j". niarkis, and viij"". lib. for thair non-api)earance : And the Juftice adjudged

the pannels to be denounced rebels, and all their moveable goods to be confifcated

to the Kingis ufe, as fugitives from the law.

SifiiUins fi'om t\)t Haiti ot 2teitf).

Nov. 22. — WiLLiAME LoKD BoRTHUiCK, Williame Borthuik in Halkernocht, Johnne Borthuik of Rilifchaw, Adanie Wauchope

of Caikmuir, Johnne Yule of Garmiltoune.

Continued to the Juftice-aire of Edinburgh, ' tertio Itineris, vel premonitione

XV dieruni ; ad fubeimdum legem, i)ro eoriun doini remanentia, ab exercitu f. d.

n. regis, apud Leith, primo die nienfis Octobris vltimo elajis. convenire ordinat.'

NoTA. — Thir perfones (following) being fummond and indorfat vpoune, wer drawin and deleit
furtli of the executioune of the lettres be Johnne Lawloiine, quha confeft him to have reffavit command of the thefaui'er to that effect : George Rarafay of Dalhowlie, Cre) chtoun of Beneftoune, Henrye Ogill of Hartramwod, Johnne Hay of Tallo, James Hammiltoune of Sammelftoun,
Francis Dowglas of Langnudrye, Oliver Ranifay of Poltoune. — Nota. Alfwa, na executioune wes
maid vpoune Quhittingem, James Dundas of Newliltoune, my Lord of Torphechin, James Cochrane
of Balbachlaw, Robert Bruce of Bynning, Archibald Tennent of Williamftoune, and James Woddirfpouue of Brighous ; nochtwithilanding thair being within the bodye of the lettres foufaidis, as principallis.

SHiitJins from tlje UaiH ot ICtitfj.

Nov. 23. — Ja:mes Scry:\igeour of Dudhop, Johnne Strathauchin of
Clayjiottis, David Fentoun of Ogill, George Skynner of Bal3ordye, James Scrymgeour of Glafwell, Sir John Carnegye of
Kynnard, Johnne Carnegye of Seytoune.
The above perfons, (and others of lefTer note) found caution for their appearance at the Juftice-aire of Forfar, ' tertio Itineris vel premonitione xv dieruni ;'
to underl}^ the law for their aliiding at home from the Raid ordanit to ha^'e coiivenit at Leyth, on the firft day of October laft. — The laid James Scrymgeour of

28 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 157L

Glafwell proteftit, that this cawtioiine preiuge him nocht anent his laughfull defenffis ; confulering, he fend his lone and air,' lufficientlie fui-neift, being of hahilitie, conforine to the proclaniatioune.

aiiitiinfl from ti)t Uniti of %tit%

Nov. 24.' — Petir Balfour of Bandone, George Ramfay of Clettie, Dauid Balfour of the Kirktoune, Daiiid Seytoun of Ringavy,

Thomas AValker in Drone, James Raiikyne in Marilland, and

Johnne Dan3ell in Foftertoune.

Delatit for remaning fra the Raid foirfaid. The firll three came in the Kings

will and were ' difchargeit thaireftir ;' Seytoune of Ringavye ' difchargeit pro

loco et temjjore ;' ^Valker ' difchargeit ;' and Rankyne and Dan3ell ' continued

to the Juftice-air of Fyffe tertio Itineiis, A'el premonitione xv dieruni. Plegio,

Roberto Scot de Balbartoune.'

Nov. 29. — David Lindesay of Berneyardis, Jonet Ogilvie his fpoule,
{noii comjxtren.) and Thomas Jak in Tannadyce.
Delatit of the flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Fentoune. — Continued to ' xv day of
Januare nixtocum." Plegijs, Patricio Ogilvye de luchemartyne et Andrea O. de

Mygwye.'

aiibiiriuri fiom i\)t Uniti of Eettf).

Nov. 30. — James Drummond of Ochterardoiu- (' difchargeit,') Malcum
Drummond of Bordland (' difchargeit,') Andro Tofcheoch of
Mony vaid (' licence,') James Chelliolme of Cromlikis (' difchargeit be the thefam*er,') ^Villiame Bonar of Keltye, (' Perth,
tertio Itineris, &c.') James Edmonftoune of Ballintoun, (' licence,') Patrick Gray of Ballegernocht, (' licence,') Johnne
Kynnard of Inchellure, (' difchai'geit.')
Delatit for remaning fra the Raid foirfaid.

aiitUitts from tlje Baitr of Ittitlj.

Dec. 4. — Walter ^Vod of Balbegenocht, Alexander Ugftoune of Foddercarne, George Arbuthnot in Bernehill,"^ Henrye Grahame of

' Heir. - This case was afterwards continued to the Justice-air of ' Forfare, tertio Itineris,

vel premonitione xv dierum ;' when ' the pannell jiroteftit, tliis continewatioune preiuge noclit thair
Keplegiatioiine, and dcfenliis qidiatfumenir, to be allegeit in the eontrair.' ^ ' Kinlvai'din, tertio

Itineris, vel premonitione xv dierum.'

5Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 29

Morphye, Robert Grahame his fader, Johnne Mideltoune of Kilhill, Johnne Strathauchin of Monbodo, Archebald Wod of Wodftoune, Robert Falconer of Ballandro, David Stratouu of Cragy,
Charlis Dempftar of Bah-aye.'
Delatit for remaning fra the Raid foirlaid.

Crfasoit— assistiitfl iUfitls (it SBitpoIUins tiit Cotoit of (irUinOuraf),

Dec. 28. — Alexander Guthre biu-ges of Edinburgh.
Delatit of the affiftance maid and gevin be him to the rebellis, withhaldaris
of the toune, in fortefeing, ftrenthing and detening thairof aganis om* foveran
lord and his auctoritie. — Plegijs, Robert Rynd et Johanne Ferguflbune burgen.
de Ed', conixmctim et diuifim. To the laft day of Januar nixtocum ; and thaireftir continewit to the penult day of Anguft.

^fiiUdis from t])t Uaiti of 3teit().

Feb. 15, 1571-2. — Henrye Balmanno.

Delatit for remaning fra the Raid ordanit to convene at Leyth the firft of
Julij laftbipaft, being ane of the Quarter Raidis.

Comjierit in jngement Patrik Lord Lindfay of the Byris, and in prefence of
the forfaid Juftice, and haill perfonis than chofm to jiafs vpoune the AlTyife of
the faid Henrye, Declarit and confeft, that he being lieutenant to our foueran
lord, conftitute for the tyme, permittit and gave fpeciale and fre licence to the
faid Henrye to remane and byde at hame fra the faid oift^ and raid, ordanit to
convene the tyme foirfaid ; nochtwithftanding the lettres of Proclamatioune maid
thairupoun, in maner aboue writtin : Vi)oune the quhilk declaratioune and confeffioune, maid be the faid Lord in jugement, as faid is, the foirfaid Henrye and
George Logan (in Leyth) ane of the nowmer of Aflyfe, a(kit actis and inftrumentis.

Verdict. The Affile, all in ane voce, in refpect of the declaratioune foirfaid,
Acquittis.

[CeUiJration of ti)t iiTass, ^ct,}

Mar. 13. — Mr Archibald Crawfurd, parfoun of Eglilliame, Mr Robert Cuninghame.
Crawford's cafe is continued to the Juftice-air of ' Air, tertio Itineris, vel pi*emonitione xv dierum ; ad fubeunduin legem (pro) arte et parte criminis fequen.'
Plegio, Wilelmo Cwninghame de Caprintoune.'

' ' All difcliargeit in refpect of Licences fdiawin and produceit.' ' Host, army. ' A

blank is left for insertion of an abstract of the ' Dittay,' or Indictment. The crime is likely to have
been celebration of Mass, as in the following case.

30 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1571-2.

The other pannel is ' Abfohiit and difchargeit, in refpect of the executione of
the lettres ; quhairby he is nocht fundin laiichfulie fummond.'

3>trolatri)— Celtfivatfon of ti)t iWass, ^u

Mar. 13. — JxVsrAii Moxtgo:merie and Johnne Mafoune, dv/elling at
Eglintoune, Schir Johnne Muir, dwelling at Kilmarnok.
Hugh Eai-1 of Caffillis, and Charles IMowet of Bufbye, are fined, the former
in xl lib. and the latter in Ixxx lib., as Cautioners for the above pannels, for their
non-appearance ' ad fubeundum legem, pro crimine abhominabilis et deteftabilis
Ydolatrie per ipfos et eorum aliquem connnilT., in miniilratione Sacramentorum,
contra A'erum feu I'ectum Verbi Dei inftitutionem ; MilFafque infra fortilicium
de Eglintoune in menfe Nouembris, diuerfis temporibus agendo ; et Matrimoniiun inter diuerfas perfonas incaflitati et vili inceftu datas contrahendo et com-
]nuniter Iblemnizando ; jjoiniliunque ignarum eorum more Papifticali abutendo.'
— The Juftice alfo ordained the 2)annels to be denounced rebels, and their moveable goods to be confifcated to the King's ufe, as fugitives from the law.

ailiitrinri from ti)t liniti of iltiti).

Mar. 14. — Sm "N^'illiaimi; Ham:miltoune of Sanquhar, knycht.
Hew Wallace of Carnale, wes vnlawit in the pane of ane hundreth pundis,
for non-reporting and agane-bringing of the lettres dewlie execut and indorfat,
purcheft be the Kingis aduocattis ; to tak fouertie of Sir Williame Hammiltoune, to vnderly the law, for remaning fra the Raid, ordanit to convene at
Leith the firfl of October laftbipaft, for aflegeing of the burch of Ed'. ; as he
that becam fouerte to that effect.

Apr. 24, 1572. — Geokgk Cka\v in Eift Reiloune.
Alexander Howe of I\Ianderiloune ' wes unlawit in the panis of ane hundreth
markis, conforme to the actis of Parliament,' for failing to produce our Ibueran
lordis lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be tlie Kingis aduocattis, to
tak fouerte of George Craw to vnderly the la^- for flauchter of ^-mq'" George
Dundas, the Lord Methwene, and vtheris contenit in the faidis lettres.

dTunttsIjincr SHirtual to iUfids in (JJtfntmviib.

Apr. 24. — RouEliT TllOMsoux in Dalniaho)-, Thomas Haiftie in Gogar,
and twenty-three others, chiefly farmers and millers in Gogar,
Currie, Langhirdmeftoune, 0^'er Crawmoud, &c.
All thir perlbnes foirfaidis become in will for arte of the furnefmg of ^ittuale

oJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 31

to the Rebellis detenaris of the burch of Ed', fen the dait of the proclamatioune
maid in the contrair ; and thairfoir fand the fouerties nemit, as plegeis for fatiffactioune of the King and his hienes Regent for the famin will. — Eight others,
' being put to Aflyife for the faid cryme, wer Acquit thairof.'

Creason,

Apr. 29. — Dauid Hammiltouxe, leruand to Boithuilehauch.
Indytit of findry erymes of Treafoune, fpeciaUie mentionat in the Dittay maid
tliairvpoune, quhilk James Millar hes in keping, &c. ; Convict be Aflyife et
* SusPEX.' — A blank is left for the fpecial verdict, or a detail of the Indictment ;
but, unfortunately, there is only oppolite to the blardc the following memorandum : ' The Cannongait men. Ye Dittay to be cravit from James Millar.'

^liitriitcr from tl)t l\ni'ii ot Eeitlj.

May 9- — Alexaxder Campbell of Knoknane.
Delatit for remaning fra the Raid and army ordanit to convene at Leyth the
firft of October laftbiiiaft, ffor aflegeing of the burch of Ed^ — Plegio, Carolo
Campbell de Skeldoune, to the xiiij day of Maij inftant : And at the famin day,
be command of the Regentis Grace, the Court herof, for his pairt, wes defert.

Ctlefiration of ti)t JKlass.

May 20.— ScHiR Johxxe Lerthmoxth.
Thomas Lerthmonth, fumtyme feruand to the Abbot of Jedbui'ghe, wes vnlawit in the jjanis of fourtie pundis, for non-reporting and agane-bringing of
lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be the Aduocattis, to tak fouerte of
S'. Jolmne L. his bruther, to have vnderlyne the law the faidis day and place,
ffor fying and miniftratioune of the Mefs, being excommunicat, &c.

Moniijttif—ntsttt anlf m^ttt,

Maij 20. — Johxxe Tho:mesoux in Hagbray, Michaell Scot in Vogarie.

Johnne Auchinlek thair, Johnne Briggis thair, ^Villiame

Briggis, his fone, thaii-, and Petir Hering in Cranftoune.

Delatit of afliftance, refll'tt, and intercommuning with Hob Ewart of the

Schawls and Ade his bruther, commoune the-\'is ; and fpecialie, reflettand thaim

within thair awin houfl^is,' gevand thaim meit, di-ink, and vtheris neceflaris, thay

being newlie cumin furth of Ed', for the tyme. Item, for arte and pairt of the

fteling, be way of ftouth-reif, reffetting, conceling, detening, and withhalding

' ' This point delayit.'

32 CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1572.

fra James Rutlierfurd and Adame Ainflie, biirgeffis in Ed', oflf four pakkatis of
fcheip-fkynnis, reft and ftollin be the commoune thevis foirfaidis, quliilkis the
faidis perfones reffett and fecretlie concelit and kepit the famin within thair
houffis, be the fpace of fyve dayis and nyclitis ; committit xxvj°. Aprilis vlt".
elaps. : And ftall fuith of ane of the faidis pakkatis, the fowme of xxxv lib. —
Continued as to Scott, to the Juftice-air of ' Ed', tertio Itinei-is vel premonitione
XV dierum, plegio Abbotilliall feniore.'

\'erdict. The Affyife, in ane voce, Acquit the fyve perfones foirfaidis of
the laft point of Dittay, anent the fkynnis and filuer, thairin contenit.

(Trtason— Cnnspirari) against ti)t iUgatt— ^laugj^ttr, $(c,

Jun. 13. — Ja:mi:s Dalzell burges of Ed'., George Robefoun tailliour,
James Chahner thair, Thomas Brad,' Michaell Rpid thair,
Andro Young in Ed'., Thomas Michell tailliour thair, Johnne
Nwtale thair, Johnne Haie thair, Thomas Crawfurd, Mr Patrik BiiTett thair, Thomas Dikfoun fiUTOur thair, Alex'. Sonfie
thair, Alex'. Bow thair, George Rynd thair, Williame Thomfoun thair, Robert Allane thair, Murdo Pryoiu" thair, Johnne
Sjnnpfoim thair, William Cokke alias Saltcraig, Robert Smyth
thair, Johnne Kirk, Williame alias Schir W". M'Ke thair,
Johnne Quhytehill, Andro ^Vardlaw feriand, and Williame
Ofbm-ne drummar.
All Conuict and F3dit be Affyife, off arte and pairt of thair treafonabill
cuming in cumpany to the feildis with Capitanis Halkerftoune, Lauder, and
vtheris confpiratouris and inobedient fubiectis to our foueran lord, to the nowmer of vj^ (600) pei-fones, bodin^ in amies, with difplayit bauers ; firft, to the
Burrow-nuiir of Ed'., quhair thai invadit Cajjitau Ramfay and vtheris the
Kingis lieges for thair llauchteris ; and nocht cimiand to thair intent,'' come
agane to the bak of Craigingall, quliair thai invadit maift awfulie my Lord Regentis grace, reprefentand our foueran lordis perfoun, be vertew of his Office of
Regentrie, and vtheris his hienes fubiectis for thair llauchteris : And for arte
and part of the flauchteris of Amq'" Thomas Trjaiche flefcheour, Richard Crawfurd and Johnne Barboiu* ; committit vpoune the tent of Jiuiij inftant.

Cf If Oration of tije iHas.s.

Jun. 26. — Johnne Johnnestoune alias Schir Johnne Johnneftoune,
Commendator of Salfat.*

' ' Deliuerit to Capitan Home, at commatid of tlie Regent.' It is likely lie was delivered over to
serve as a soldier. ° 'Deliuerit to Capitan Home, at command foirsaid.' ^ Arrayed, furnished.

* Not succeeding in their enterprise. ^ Saidseat, Sedes-Animariim, a Monastery in Dumfries-shire.

oJac.VL criminal trials. 33

Delatit for miniftratioune of the ]VIefs and of the Sacramentis in the Papifticall maner. — Continued to the Jiiftice-air of ' Dnunfreife, tertio Itineiis, vel
premonitione xv dierum. Plegio, Jacobo Johnneftoune de Kellobankis pro ejus
introitu : Et Symou Johnneftoune obligauit feipfum ad releuandum dictum Jacobum.'

^sststtiiQ; of IXthtis in Castle of (Stiin'bnvsf},

Jul. 8. — Olipher, Sinclare, bruther-germane to the Lard of Roifling.
Andro Lindfay, javeloiu'' of the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, and Johnne Loche,
lycht-horfman, wer vnlawit as fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, in the jianis
of ane hundreth markis, fFor non-reporting and agane-bringing of lettres dewlie
execut and indorfat, piuxheft be the Kingis Aduocat, to tak fouertie of Olipher
Sinclare, to vndirly the law, for affiftance inaid and gevin be him to the rebellis
withhaldaris of the biu-ch and Caftell of Ediubm-gh and vtheris contenit in the
lettres direct thairupoune.

M^nsi)ttt of tf)e Captaiit of ClanranalU.

Jul. 9. — JoHXXE Bow MacKemyxe A^"IcKEWYX, Doule Oig MacCoule MacCondoquhy Roy, Donald MaeCayne INIacCondoquhy

Roy in Bar, E^vyme IVIacAVilliame IVIacCayne Dow in Auchinlytht, and above thirty others.

Hugh Lord Frafer of Lovete, and Lachlan IM'Yntofche of Dunnachtie, are

fined in xl li. for each of thefe perfons, for thair non-appearance, to vnderly the

law, for art and part of the llaughter of vmq'" Donald Dow MacCoule AMcKewjTi, Captain of Clam-auald. The princijial parties ' adjudgeit to the home.'

Creason— 3nterfommtinin0 Uiiti) €ai*l of ?^imtli), ^t,

Jul. 17. — George Wilkie, jiortioner of Sauchtonhall, and Robert "Wilkve, his fone.
Delatit of arte and part of the ti'eafonabill reffetting, fupple, and intercommoning with George fumtjnne Erie of Huntlie, ^^'illiame Kirkaldy fumtpne of
Grange, knycht, Sir James Balfour fiuntyme of Pettindrych, knycht, and diuerie
vtheris Confpiratouris within the Toune of Edinbm'ghe, at thair awiue duelling
houffis, and diuerfe vtheris pairtis of the cuntre : affiftand and takand i)airt
with thaim in thair treafonabill deidis ; committit monethle and continewale,
fen the tjnne of thair foirfaltour, quhilk wes in Maij 1571. — Item, for arte and
pairt of the treafounabill fm'neffing and wittualling of the faid biu'ch and fou'faltit

' Jailor, gaoler. Old Fr. javilleur,
VOL. I. E

34 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1572.

Traitouris, withlialderis thairof, with malt and vtheris viwaris ;' takand money
thairfoir and felland the famin als frelie to the faidis I'ebellis as^ thai wer the
Kingis lieges ; nochtwithftanding the Kingis grace i)roclamationis maid in the
contrail-: Connnittit in Marche, Aprile, Maij, Junij laftbipaft, and Julij inftant.
Verdict. For the qvihilkis crymes, the faidis perfones being put to the
knawlege of the AfTyife vndirwrittin,' the faid George wes Acquit, and his fone
foirfaid Fylit of the famin.

iHutilation.

Jul. 18. — Cristeane Gudsonne, fpous to Andi-o Bimie in Leyth.
Delatit of the mutilatioiine of Williame Broune biu-ges of Edinburgh, of his
(formeft) fingar, be byting thairof — Plegio, Magiftro Joanne Logane de Scheref-brayis, to the audit day of Auguft nixt-to-cum ; (on which day the cafe was
continued to the Juftice-air of Edinburgh, tertio Itineris, vel premonitione xv
dieruni.)

Jul. 19- — James Tuedie burges of Peblis, Johnne Wychtman, IMairtyne Hay, and Johnne Bowr thair, and Thomas Johnneftoune,
fone to Thomas Johnneftoune of Craigiburne.
Delatit of arte and pairt of the crewale llauchter of vmq'" Johnne Dikkefoune
of ^^Y^kftovme ; committit within the toun of Peblis the firft of Julij inftant.

Prelocutouris for the Perfewaris. Prelocutouris for the Defendaris.

The Lord Zefter, The Lard of Blanerne, The Lard of Skraling, Alex'. Home of Manderftoune,
Williame Twedye, Williame Dikkefoune, The Lard of Cobingtoune, Mr Dauid M'Gill,
Patrik Dikkefoune. Alex'. King- aduocat, James Dowglas of Wellis.

Blanerne afkit inftrumentis, that he will noclit affift the perfute of this cans
aganis Martyne Hay, becaus he lies mareit his kynnifwoman ; hot he will perfew the remanent.

Verdict. The Affyife, in ane voce, but ony difcrepance, Acquittis the haill
perfones on iiannell of the flauchter foirfaid.

Cmttiaijeniutr &incj's proclamation, ^r.

Jul. 22. — Andro Grey in Corftorphin.
Conuict and Fylit be AfTyfe, for contraventioiine and breking of the Kingis
Proclamatioune, be hame-bringing of his gudis to the Cragis of Corftorphin,

' Vivers, victuals. ^ As if. ^ Tlie only |)ersons of landed property in this Assise are

Alexander Wardlaw of Currehill, and Alexander Dahuahoy of tiiat Ilk ; the rest are feuars, &c.

5 Jac. VI.

CRIMINAL TRIALS.

35

eftir that the famin wes takin away be himfelf of befoir : This wes committit
the tent of Julij inftant. ' Conuict. et in varda pofitus.'

Jul. 26. — ScHiR JoHNNE Ramsay,' Frere Thomas Aitken/ Schir Archebald Fairbarne,^ Williame Ormiftoun,* Robert Achefoun in

Wodenlie/ Dene Johnne Schaw," Schii* Johnne Blak.'

Delatit for contravening of the Actis and IMiniftratioune of Sacramentis in

the Papifticall nianer. — Continued to the Juftice-air of Edinburgh, tertio Itineris,

vel premonitione xv dierum.

Ctlefiratioit ot ti)t iHass, ^t.

Jul. 26. — Schir Thomas Ker in Auld Roxburch.
Andro Ker of Hetoune, wes vnlawit in the pane xl pundis, for none-entre of
Schir Thomas Ker, to vndei-ly the law for Miniftratioune of the Sacramentis in
the Papiflicall maner ; and for lying of IMefs : And als, the faid Schir Thomas
wes adiugeit to be denunceit Rebell, &c.

Ci'tasoit— iHuiUti* at ti)t ST^ins i^tin^ SBaiule^,)
anU o( ti)t tlMO lugntts.

Jul. 28. — Mr James Ham.m
Williame Weir of Auclityefardell,
•Tohune Bannatyne of Corbous,
Arthoiir Kneland of Knowhobbilhill,
Gawin Baxter in Boitlmile,
Adam Muir of Kittemuir,
Johnne Levingftoune of Belftane,
James M'Quliarye of Aucbtule,
Robert Allane of Corffurd,
Robert Tueddel of Bankbeid,
Williame Lokliart in Corffurd,
Alexander Daljell of K)'])e,
Thomas Fowlis of Brownyefyde,
Thomas Inglis of Murdeftoune,
James Baillie of Carphin,
Robert Dal5ell of that Ilk,
Williame Kneland of that Ilk,
Johnne Stevinfoun of that Ilk,

ILTOUXE. Plegio, S"^ James Ilammiltoune,

.

j". li.»

Plegio, Domino de Corbous,

.

j">li.

Plegio, Domino de Lammingtoiine,

iij" li.^

Plegio, Domino de Kneland,

«

v"^ markis.'°

Plegio, eodem Kneland,

.

V^ markis.

Plegio, Domino de Cai'michaell,

feniore

v" markis."

Plegio, Cobington,

,

j'" liPlegio, Corhoufe,

.

vMi.

Plegio, eodem Corhoufe,

•

v=li.

Plegio, eodem.

.

vMi.

Plegio, Quintigemo Lokhart de

Ley,

v= H.

Plegio, S' James Hammiltoune,

•

v" markis.

Plegio, Fowlis de Colentoune,

.

vMi.

Plegio, W'ill. Wallace de Johneftoune,

iij» li.

Plegio, Domino Dal5ell,

.

iij™ li.

t . Plegio, Cobingtoune,

.

iij" li.

Plegio, Dalmahoy,

.

ij" li.

Plegio, Domino de Ernok,

,

ii- li.

' Plegio, Patricio Cokburne filio Jacobi Cokburne de Langtoune. ^ Plegio, Johanne Dikfouu

in Ednem. ^ Plegio, Domino de Touch. * Plegio, Will". Dawfoune in Leyth. ^ Plegio,

Richardo Brounfeild in Payinlloune. ^ Plegio, eodem llichardo. " Plegio, Thoma Aitken

predicto. ^ Finds security to the extent of L.IOOO. '-' L 3000. '<' 500 markis. " 5000 markis.

36

CRIMINAL TRIALS.

A.D. 1572.

Mongo Lokhait of Clegliome,

.Tames Weir of Blakwod,

Williame Levingtomi of JaiTvefwod,

Robert Hammiltoune of Newbous,

James Lokhart of Ley,

James Robertoun of Emok,

Ste^'in Lokbait of Wicketfcbaw,

GawjTie Lokhart of Kiikwod,

Johnne Someiuile of Cambufnethan,

James Maxwell, younger of Calderwood,

Thomas Baillie, tutour of Jarwefloune,

Plegio, Jarwefwod,

Plegio, S' James Hammiltoune,

Plegio, Cleghorne,

Plegio, S' James Hammiltoune,

Plegio, HugoneMontgomeryedeHeiflop, v" 11

Plegio, Domino de Mynto,

Plegio, Domino de Ley,

Plegio, S' James Hammiltoune,

Plegio, Scraling, ....

Plegio, S' James (Hammiltoune,)

Plegio, Carphin,

Plegio, Emok, ....

Gawin Hammiltoune of Ardrie,

Johnne Hammiltoune of Pedderftoune ; 1 t>i • t i. i-i i . n

r , , T,, TT •, . • /. . f -Plegio, Johanna Dunbai- de Barmuir,

Jolinne and Ihomas Hammiltoun Ins lonis, J

Johinie Crawfurd younger, baillie of Monkland, Plegio, Carnell,

Dauid Foriyth of Dykis, . . .

Williame Baillie of Lamintoune,
Thomas Levingtoun of Halhill,
Gawin Hammiltoune of the Hill,
Robert Ra younger, noter,
James Maxwell of Calderwod,
George Hammiltoun younger of Preftotme,
Arthour Hammiltoune of Parkheid,
Johnne Millar in Mylneheuch,
Williame Grenefchelis of that Ilk,
Thomas Weir of Kirktoune,
Patrik Hammiltoune in Hammiltoune,
Jolinne Hammiltoune in Merytoune,
W'illiarae Hammiltoune in Corlkallan,
Johnne Hammiltoune of Stanehous,
Alexander Were of Halcraig,

James Hammiltoune, fumtyroe of W^odhall,
Bartilmo Robertoune in Hammiltoune,

Plegio, eodem Carnell,
Plegio, Emok,
Plegio, Lamingtoime,
Plegio, Banhard eldar,
Plegio, Capitan Lanibye,
Plegio, Jacobo Maxwell fuo filio,
Plegio, Hugone Wallace de Carmyre,
Plegio, Camall, ....
Plegio, Mynto, ....
Plegio, Emok, ....
Plegio, Jacobo Dowglas de Todhoilis;
Plegio, Ley, ....

Plegio, Cultermanys,
Plegio, eodem, ....
Plegijs, Skraling et Camall,
Plegio, Todhoilis,

{Plegiis, Forfyth de Dykis et Alexander
Home, rectore de Spot, . ij

ijm

li. -
markis.

Mi.

li.

li.

ij"
j"

'li.
markis.

y:

markis.

v"

li.

li.
markis.

ij" li.

j"

li.

j" li.
j»li.
iiij"" li.
v^li.

j" li.

(left blank.)

'"li.

ij"" lij"li.

(left blank.)
j"' markis.

jv

li.

ij=
j"

markis.

j"

markis.

Plegio, Emok, .... (left blank.)

Tliir 2>erfones being delatit for arte and pairt of the flauchteris and miirthour

of vmq'^ the King and twa Regentis : Fand refpectiue fouerties vndir the panis

aboiie writtiii, to the thrid day of the nixt Juilice-air of Lanark, or foner,

vpoune XV dayis warning.

The faidis Johnne Hammiltoune of Stanehous and Patrik Hammiltoune, afkit
inftriimentis, that thai offer thaini felfis jirefentlie to vnderly the law for the
faidis crynies. — Lochlevin tuik inftrumentis, that he, as perfewar, wes reddy to
perfew thaim and all vtheris fulpect and giltie of the faid cryme.

Jul,

31. — Williame Ker of Ancrum, Johnne Home, fone naturale to

6Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 37

Johnne Home of Craiiftane, W"". Henflie of Fawlaj% Jok Pyle

of the Raw, George Pyle his hruder, George Pyle in Mj-lneheuch, Aiitlro Hall of the Sykis, and Jok Hall callit Perjeis

Jok.

Richard R\itherfurd, prouefl of Jedburch, wes vnlawit for non-reporting of

lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, piircheft be the kin and freindis of vmq''

James Henrye, Inirges of Jedburch, and James Mitchell, and (be) the proueft

himfelf, and the baillies, counfale, and commonitie of the laid biuxh, to tak fouertie of Williame Ker, &c., to vnderly the law, for arte and pairt of the flauchter

of the faidis perfones, committit the xv day of Junij laftbipaft ; viz. in the pane

of j" li. for the faid Williame Ker, j'^ markis for the faid Johnne Home, and xl

pundis for ilk ane of remanent perfones forelaidis.

3Kefusins to appeal- fiefote t\)t lUcrent anU Cotintil.

Aug. 8. — Henrye Lovell of Balumbie elder, Johnne Lovell ffear
of Balumbie, and James Meluile in Eifter Forrye.
Lettres being jiroduceit be the i)artye, quhair the faid Henrj^e wes denunceit
rebell and at the home, for his non-comperance before the Regent and Counfale ; the faid Henrye was thairfoir put in ward, and thairefter deliuerit to my
Lord Thefaurer, to be kejiit in fure firmance and cuftody ; as he wold anfwer
to the Regent thairA'jJoune : Quhairuj^oune inftrumentis M'ere takin. — Continued as to the others to the Juftice-air of Fyffe, tertio Itineris vel premonitione
XV dierum : Plegijs, Powrye Ogih'y^e (for Johnne L.) vnder the pane of ij™ li.,
vnder proteftatioune it preiuge nocht his regalitie ; et Will". Muncreif de eodem.

[^Curia tenta in pretorio de SfrincVnig, 'aim confevfu partinm''\

^iracp— aatsftt antf seUiiis cf stolen 300I19, ^e.

Aug. 15. — Walter Cowsland, foue to Robert Co\vfland, burges of
Striueling.
Delatit of the affiftance maid and gcAan be him, to Haiye Balfour, perat,' be
thiftuous reflet of diuerle guidis and geir, reft and fpulzeit be the faid Harye,
be way of commoun Peracie, furth of the raid of Burdeaulx,' from fmdry the
Kingis confidderat freindis :' And wes art and part with him in his reif and
fpul3ie* of the faidis gudis, be way of Peracie, as said is : And eftir felling of
the faidis floUin gudis, he, with the faid Hary, paft away with the fchip and
pryiie, quhairin the faidis gudis wer takin, furth of KirkaldjT, vnto the raid of
Abirdene ; quhair thai, for cullouring of their Piracie and for feir of cuming

' Pirate. ^ Tlie Roadftead of Bourdeaux. ' Allies or confederates, by leagues of amity,

&c. * Robbery and i'eizing by violence.

38 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1572.

tliairof to Leytli, fank and drownit the faid fchip : And for diuerfe vtheris
c'lymes of Peracie, at lentli fpecifeit in the Lettres thairof.
Quhairof he was Acquit be AfTyife.

Prelocutouris for this pannell.
Robert Cowfland, fader to the defender, Robert Ramfay, George NichoU.

\_Curia tenia in pretorio de Edinburghe.y

Oct. 29. — Elizabeth Inglis, Ipous to yinq''' Cajntan James Moffet.

Capitan Johnne Spreule wes vnlawit in the pane of xl puudis, for non-reporting of lettres purcheft be the Kingis Aduocat, to tak foiierte of Elizabeth
Inglis, fpous to vmq'* Capitan James Moffat, to vnderly the law, for affiftance
maid and gevin to the rebellis, detenaris of the burch of Edinburghe.

NoTA. Himfelf is donatour heirto.

Oct. 29- — Thomas Baillie, in Sanct-Johnnis-Kirk.
James Lockhart of Lay becomes pledge for the entry of Thomas Baillie, to
nnderly the law for art and part of the flanghter of James Johnneftoune of
Weftraw, committed in the month of January laft ; before the Juftice or his
deputies at the Air of ' Lanark, tertio Itineris, vel premonitione xv dierum.'

miiUi)tvutt,

Dec. 29. — JoxET BoYMAN, Ipous to Williame Steill.
Delatit of diuerfe crymes of Wichecraft." ' CoNUlCT AND BKINT.'

Rearing ot iHassf,

Dec. 29. — Alexander Creychtoun of Newhall.

Delatit for hering of the Sacramentis to be miniftrat in Papiflicall maner,
within his awin place of Newhall, yerlie and monethlie, fen the tyme of his laft
conuictioune, quhilk wes in Januar Ixvij yeris : incontrair the Actis of Parliament.

Verdict. Fylit be the AiTyife, in refpect of his awin conuictioune (confeffioune ?) ' CoNUiCT and aVxVRdit.'

Comperit Capitain Robefoune, and proteftit in name of James Douglas, that
this his conuictioune preiuge nocht his efchete, quhairof he hes the gift.

' Tlie trials after tliis date are all held within the Tolbooth of Edinburgh. - No particulars

whatever inserted in the Record.

6JAC.VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 39

Feb. 3, 1572-3. — James Merser in Weftir Auldye, Jolimie Ireland in
Reiglieild of Auldye, Johune Merfer in Craigtoun of
Auldye, and Thomas Bell in Sdianwell.
Delatit of the flauchter of vniq''' Robert Inglis in Medoheid.

Prelocutouris for the pannell. Persewaris.

The Lard of Balwerie, The Lard of Bamff, Catherine Spens, relict, Thair Prelocutour.

Mr Richard Strang, Johnne RtiiTale, Johnne Inglis, briuler, and Nuiiane Thoniefoune.

Mr Malcum Merfer, fevin fatlierles barnis.

Mr Richard Strang, prelocutour foirfaid, afl^it inllrumentis of the executioun
of the lettres ; as thai beir : And allegeit, in refpect of non-deliuerance of copeis
to twa of the principallis contenit in the faidis lettres, the executioune nocht to
be dewlie maid conforme to the Act of Parliament ; nochtwithllanding the offir
maid of ane copy, and refuife of the famin.

The Juftice Repellis this allegeance, in refpect of the Executioune.'

The prelocutouris for the pannell allegeit, this James Merfer, being ane gentilman of the Lard of Aldeis houfe, lies nocht ane fufficient nowmer of Aflyife, in
peris r and -without his peris, conforme to the Act of Parliament, he audit
nocht to be i^ut to the knawlege thairof.

The Juftice findis this AfTyife fufficient for the pannell, in refpect of the cans
and parteis prefent perfewaris and defendaris. — ' All four Acquit.'

Tiie fame day James Ferguflbun of Dirtullych, alias Barroun Fergttffoiin, is fined for non-appearance of Williame Name, fone of George N. of M'Karfie, James his brother, and Patrik Bell, brother of Jolmne Bell in Schannnar ; and Patrik Fergnffoun of Stroymuk, and Donald Stewart of Dalwongie are fined for non-appearance of James Welkie and Patrik Stalker, fervants of ... , Merfer
of Auldye, for art and part of the above flaughter, ' et lefionis vulnerationifque Catherine Spens, ejus
I'poufe in diuerfis fui corporis partibus, ad rr)agnam fangiiinis ejufdem eifufioneni, illam ex partu
pueri fui mafculi abortani facien., et crudeliter cundeni inde interficien., in menfe Octobris vlt. elapf.
fub noctis fylentio,' &c.

91ssi0tiii0 lUfitls \\\ Castle Qi e?UiniJuv0!).

Feb. 4. — Edward Kinkaid maltman in Edinburgh, James Vr flefcheour, Niniane Arneill flefcheour, Johnne Moffat yair, Johnne
Wilfoun maltman, Johnne Lowrie maltman, Edward Paterfoun yaii% Thomas Wynrame yair, Johnne Gray fifche-monger,
Patrik Gardner flefcheour, and Andro Bartane.
Delatit for affiftance maid and gevin to the Lard of Grange and vtheris de-

' The official atteftation of a meflenger at amies, that the letters were lawfully intimated by delivery of a copy for the party, or leaving the fame at his dwelling-house, &c. - His equals in
rank, liis peers.

40 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1572-3.

clarit tratoiiris, in keiiing, ftrenthing, fortefeing, wittualing and withhalding of
the burch and Caftell of Edinburgh, incontrair our foueran loi'd and his hienes
auctoritie.

Continewit to the njTct day of Febmar inftant. At tliat diet of Court, the pannels came in the
King's will, excepting MofFatt, wliofe cafe was continued to the third day of tlie enfuing Air; and
' ]>e thefaurar clerk grantit him to be fatiffeit' as to Kinkaid.

afssistiita lithtlQ in Castle of (!FtJtn6ur(3;!), ^ t,

Feb. 4. — James Fleming.

Delatit for furneling the rebellis within the Caftell of Ediuburghe, with a
great quantity of wine, flelli, fifli, malt and other victuals, and ^receiving from
them falfe and adulterate money or counterfutit cunje, and paffing thereof
amongft the lieges ; committed in the months of Auguft, September, October,
November, and December laft.

Anch-ew Fifcheare, burgefs of Edinburgh, is fined in xl lib. for his non-ap-
]>earance, and Fleming ordained to be denounced, &c.

Feb. 6. — Arthur Forbes, fon of Ai-thur Forbes of Reres, and Henry
Foi-ret.
Walter Scot of Branxhelme, and Alexander Forbes of Petflego, fined in ij" li.,
ij*^ markis, and ij^ markis, for non-appearnce of these perfons, to imderly the
law for being art and i)art of the flaughter of vmq'" JMr Johnne Wod, committed
on the XV day of April 1570: The principal parties adjudged to be denounced
rebels, and their moveables efcheated, &c.

Crtasoit— CousjJiraci) acraiitst ti)t UtQtiit, ^t,

Feb. 9. — Alexander Haistie, Andro Gotterlbun fmyth, Johnne

Gairland fclater, Thomas Galloway officer, William Forfyth

cordinar, Patrik Cowjier tailliour, James Hamniiltoun fkynner, Johnne Mayne, elder, merchand, and Petir Thomefoune.

All thir perfonnes were conuict of the haill crymes conteuit in the auld

lettres, maid in Leyth ; and for cuming to the Craigis, with the remanent,

vpoun the tent of Junij laftbipaft ; piu-poflie to have flane my Lord Regent and

vthex'is, his faythful fubiectis for the tyine.

Item, the laid Petir Thomelbun fylit and convict of ryving" of the nobill
mennis amies.

' Tearing in pieces.

6Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 41

I31r Thomas Bannaii/ne, Just/ce-Z>epute.' ]

3aestt mxti antteitommuitiitg; luitl) 3ie6cls, ^c.

Feb. 23. — Patrik Lord Geay, James Scrymgeour couftabill of Dmidie, Alexander Maxwell of Teling and Dauid Maxwell his

fone and air.

Johnne Lovell flfear of Balumbie, being oftymes callit for productioun, and

agane bringing of the lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be the Kingis

Aduocattis to take fouertie of Patrik Lord Gray, &c., to vnderly the law ffor

refTett and interconimoning with Henrye Lovell of Balumbye, Patrik and

Dauid Lovellis his fonis, and vtheris, being denunceit rebellis and at the hoi'ne ;

and nocht produceand nor reportand the famin, wes thairfoir vnlawit in the

panis following, viz. for the faid Lord Gray, in the pane of"

Feb. 27. — Thomas Baillie, in Sanct Johnis Kirk.

Delatit of the flauchter of vmq'" James Ballanye and vtheris ; committit at
the Langfyde, the xiij of May anno Ixviij (1568).

Plegio, Alex. Home to the morne. Pollea, difehargeit and the Court defert,
with coufent of Carmichaell, donatour.

^Xmistttv of Mto^tnt llenno.r, ^f ♦

March 4. — Johnne Moxcur in Dunglas, and Patrik Heriot thair.

Delatit of the llauchteris of Mathow Erie of Leuenox Regent, George Dundas and Williame Schaw ; and vtheris crymes.

Williame Reidpeth fear of that Ilk, fined in xl. pundis, for nocht produceing
and agane bringing the lettres dewlie execute, &c.

March 31, 1573.— Marioune Reid.

Delatit of arte and pairt of the abhominabill cryme of Inceft, committit with
Gilbert Young in Barnaught ; being his wyfe, and knawing perfytlie hir faid Ipous
to have lyne in ffornicatioune with Jonet Reid hir lifter, of befoir, and ane barne
procreat betuix thaim ; and fcho admoneift be the Kirk, to abftene thairfra.

Plegio, Johanne Reid de Freyndlaflieid, to the morne ; and thaireftir, continewit vndir fouertie to the thryd day of the Juftice-air of Air, or foner, vpoune
XV dayes warning.

1 Mr Tlionias Bannatyne appeaj-s, in tliis Record, for tlie first time, as a Judge, on Feb. 17. He
is to be considered as the officiating Justice-Depute after this date, unless the contrary is noted. Vid.
Nov. 24, 1569. - A blank is left here,

VOL. I. F

42 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1573.

March 31. — Gilbert Young in Barnaucht.
Delatit for the lame crime. — Johnne Reid of Freyndalflieid, his cautioner, is
fined for his non-appearance ; and Young ordained to be denounced rebel, and
his moveables confifcated, as fugitive from the Law.

Slssistiitfl IJffitls fit Coixin anJj Castle of (!5Uin6ursIj.

April 1. — JoHNXE Watsoun, fniyth, burges of Edinburgh.
Delatit of arte and part of the affiftance maid and gevin be him to the traitouris and rebellis Avithhalderis of the Toun and Caftell of Edinburgh ; and
vtheris crymes, contenit in the Lettres direct thairvpoune. — Ad remiflionem, pro
crimine. Plegio, Thoma Atchelbun burgen. burgi de Edinburgh, ad fatiffaciend.
partibus in le conquerentibus, fecundum formam juris.

9[ssistin0 Itlelitis in Coiuit anU Castle of (J^Uini&ufQ;]^.

April 2. — WiLi.iAME HucHESOUX, n^ynner, burges of Edinburgh, and
Crifteane Barroune, (alias Gudefoune,) his Ipous.
Delatit of affiftance maid and gevin to the rebellis withhalderis of the Toun
and Caftell of Edinburgh. Huchefoun ' ad remiffionem pro crimine. Plegio,
Johanne Gilbert fabro aurario ad fatiffaciend. partibus et ad relevand.'
Prelocutour for Crifteane Barroune, Mr Alexander Sym.

This Prelocutour aflvit inftrumentis, that he acceptit the fummondis and all
partis thairof, as it is qualefeit ; proteftand, that he wald nocht compeir for hir
huf band ; and allegeit, that feing na body perfewis this actioun bot the Kingis
Aduocat, defyris, befoir forther i^roces, that he will gif his ayth gif he lies juft
cans to perfew the faid Crifteane for this caus, quhilk he allegeit audit to be
gevin, in refpect of the dittay is nocht fworne of befoir ; and in caife he refufit to
gif the famin, that na proces audit to be vfit anent hir perlute this day. — AnIweris the Aduocat, he fuld gif na ayth, nor is nocht haldiu to gif tlie lamin in
na criminale actioun ; and fpecialie in crymes of Lefe-maieftie.' — Anfueris Sym,
he audit to gif the famin, in refpect of the natour of the caus and fiinplicitie of
the woman ; quhilk lies nocht occurrit of befoir ; and als in refjiect of the Comnioune Law berand, that in all cauffis, the perfewar being requyrit, na thing
audit to proceid, quliill' he the perfewar gif his ayth that he lies caus to perfew. —
The Aduocat, in refpect of the practik of the realme and municipale law, allegit
in the contrair ; and fpecialie, in refpect hir hufliand hes takin remiffioune for
the famin cryme, quha is conjunct perfoun with hir.

' Treason, - Until.

6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 43

The Juftice be Interloqiiitour, Finclis forther proces to be vfit, nochtwithIlanding the allegeances foirfaidis.

Sym, as prelocutour foirfaid, allegeit this mater aucht nocht to pas to the
knawlege of aue Allyile anent the perlute of Crifteaue Barroun, becaus fcho is
callit, principalie, for remaning within the biirch of Edinburgh the tyme lybellit ; qiihairin gif fcho remanit, fcho remanit with hir hufljand, beand vnder
his obedience ; by' quhome fcho had na remaning ; ffra quhome, icho be na
law wes haldin to depart, nor culd nocht leve in na place by" him, having na
thing to leve A'poun : Attour,^ feing that hir hufband lies gottin ane Remilfioune, fcho being ane pairt of his bodj^ the famin Remiffioune aucht to comprehend hir : Alwayis,* aganis hir, be na la^v, perfute can now be deduceit, for
ony caus contenit in the Summondis ; fpecialie, in refpect of the commoime
practik of this realme in fpul^eis, that albeit^ wemen be at the fpul3e, tliay can
nocht be pei'fewit thairfoir, hir hulband being on lyf : And fpecialie, in refpect
that thair is na particuler deid, for the qiihilk the woman is callit for the
famin : Lyke as, thair is na deid in the fummondis, that can fall vpoun hir ; —
igitur, utjupra. — Anfuerit the Aduocat, the mater aucht to pas to ane Affyile,
in refpect of the natour of the caus libellit aganis hir and hir hufljand, bayth ;''
ffor the quliilk caus he has takin Remiffioun him felf and vfit the famin : Specialie, that nowder' flio nor hir hufband were haldin to abyde in this Toune,
hot haldin to dejjairt furth thairof, conform to the Prodamatiouis maid thairvpoun ; ac tenia eft etiam, quod delictum eft perfonale et in JoVidum, and llrykis
vpoun all committaris thairof, alfuele woman as man.

Anfueris Sym, that in refpect of the fame anfuer maid be the Aduocat, na
proces can be led aganis hir now, hir allane f bayth becaus thai ar callit coniunctlie ; and fwa, being coniunctlie callit, and be the deid, vniun corpus et ima
caro : And as to the allegeance, that thay wer bayth chargeit to depart, it is
anfuerit as of befoir," that gif he had departit and nocht fcho, it mycht have bene
ane cryme ; but feing he remanit and nocht fcho, na law can mak hir to inciu"
ony cryme : And feing my lord Aduocat hes maid this allegeance, defyris that
he will give his ayth, give he lies iuft caus to propone the famin ; And gif he
refufis, that this mater aucht nocht to proceid ony forder. — Anfueris the Aduocat, in refpect of the anfueris maid ofbefoir, fpecialie, in refpect flie is nocht
onelie callit for remaning with hir hulLand, hot for diuerfe vtheris capitale
crymes contenit in the fummondis, fie as fiu-nitour"^ of meit, drink, &c." And

' Besides, /orftye. - Wittiout, apart from, but, independent of. ^ Besides, moreover.
* At all events. ^ Although. * Besides, also, together. " Neither. ' Individually, by herself. ^ Before, formerly. '" The act of furuishina: or providing. " To the
rebels.

M CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1573.

as to the defyre of the ayth, nane fuld be gevin, in refpect of the aufueris maid
ofbefoir.

Attour, the faid Mr Alexander allegeit, the crymes contenit in the Siunmondis
can nocht pais to inqueift aganis hir perfoun for the iaid cavis, to wit, that thair
is jia cryme that can fall competentlie, in the perfoun of the faid woman ; and
feuerallie,' na thing aganis hir, vpoun hir- awin fpeeiale deid and fact : And the
principale pairt of the crymes is allegeit to be committit, be the caufing and confent of thaim ; quhairof na thing can be laid to the charge of the faid Crifteane,
fclio having na command nor aflent of hirlelf, bot of hir hufband being on lyve,
quhilk is hir heid ; and fwa, fcho can nocht be accufat vpomi na command nor
caufmg, and thaii-fore, aucht nocht to pas to inqueift ; fpecialie of- the faid
RemifRoune grantit to hir hulband for the haill crymes, at leaft Lefe-maieftie,
quhilk comprehendis all and produceit in Jugement ; feing he hes takin vpoun
him, C|uha had it in deid, the haill caufing and command, vnder quliome fcho culd
nocht, in ony wjdfe, confent nor command. — Anfuerit the Aduocat, it fuld be
Rei)ellit, in refpect of the Summondis as it is libellit, and crymes of Lefe-maieftie
fpecefeit thairintill.

The Regentis grace ordanit, be his Precept, this Court to be defert, as eftir
followis.

Apr. 8. — Johnne Sym comperand, proteftit for his relief, as fouerte,
quhilk he becom for entre of the faid Crifteane.^

The faid Crifteane afkit inftrumentis of hir entre, and thaii'eftir jjroduceit ane
Supplicatioune,'' with my Lord Regentis grace deliuerance, maid and fubfcryuit
be his grace thairvpoune ; qidiairof the tennour followis.

Apud Halyrudehous, feptimo Aprilis, anno, &c. (I™.V'.) Ixxiij". My Lord Regentis g^ace Ordanis ])e com]ilenar to prefent ])is fupplicatioiine to ])e Juflice, Juftice clerk, and his deputtis, and
fame to continew and fuperfeid all fordev peifewing of fis complener for fe caus witliin mentionat.
As fay will anfuer to his grace fairvpouue.

Conforme to the quhilk, the faid Crifteane defjTit the faid Juftice to obey the
famin ; quhilk he thinkand realbnabill, obeyit the faid deliuerance, and defert
the Court heirof.

May 6. — Laaveence Loud Oliphant.
Delatit of the llaucliter of vmq'" James Roife. Plegio, the Maifter of Marcheall, to the thrid day of the nixt air of Perthe, or xv dayis warning.
NoTA. This continewatioune wes in default of Affyife nocht comperand.

' Separately, as an individual. * On account of. ^ She is named ' Gudefoune' at her

entry on this diet. '' Bill, or Petition.

7Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 45

drire--raisins— ^|)tcp--)steaUu0, $(t.

May 8. — Williame Donald and James Oliphar, fomtyme feruandis
to Blak Ormeftoune.
Delatit of the treafounabill burning of S' Andro Kerris coirnis ; and for thiftuous fteling of nolt, fcheip, and vtlieris gudis, as the dittay beris. Quliairof
they wer bayth Conuict be AfTyife, and Hangit.

18?oItJiu(y at ti)t '^hiitv mxti Pact of ^aisles, $(t,

Juu. 23. — RiCHAKD Smyth, Alexander Clerk, Williame Paiile, W"

Robertlbune, James Brok, Johnne Dmilop, Patrik Zettis,

James Forthik, James Clerk, W" Fleming and W" Layng.

All convict, for haulding of the Abbay and Place of Pafley, incontrare our

fouerane lordis lieges ; and aganis the tennour of his charge, direct be his lettres.

Ite^i, this Alexander Clerk Convict of the llauchter of Johnne CawldwoUis, in

Gawynnis-Weftir ; and of taking his piu-fe, money, fword and buklar.'

iSf'ovsn'yy antr falsiiiu: o( a« instrument,

Jul. 16. — Schir Dauid Axdehsouxe in Glasgow, and Schir Johnne
Crawfurd, notar.
Delatit of the Forgeing and falleing- of ane inftrument.

Persewar, Prelocutouris for this pannell.

Maiioune Myllar. Mr Edmund Hay, Mr Joluine Frude.

Verdict. The AfTyife Conuicts and fylis the faid Sir Johne' of the fteling
of the Inftrument from Marioune Millare, contenit in the firft poynt of Dittay ;
and of the fecund, towartis the fen3eing and forgeing famin Inftrument ; and of
the thrid, contenit in the dittay : And the AfTyife, quhill Saturdaj^ delayit
their jugement vjjoune Sir Dauid Anderfoune, viz. the xviij day of Julij.

JvU. 18. — The AfTyife, in refpect of the Confeffioune maid thaireftir of the faid
Sir Johne, Acquit the faid Sir Dauid Anderfoune of the crymes fpecifeit in the
Dittay.

Curia Justiciarie s.d.n. Regis, tenta in pretorio de Edinbui-', tertio Augufti anno,
&c. (I^V*^) !xxiij° per nobilem et potentem doniinum Arcbibaldum Comitem Ergadie,
dominum Campbell et Lome, Jufticiariura generalem, &c.

Citason.

Aug. 3. — Mr James Kirkaldye and James Cokke (Cokkie), goldfinyth, bui'ges of Edinburgh.

1 Sentence not recorded. ' Falsifpng. ^ By a marking on the mai'gin of the Record,

(' Sufpen.') it appears that Craufurd was hanged. His confession is above alluded to.

46 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 157;^.

Delatit of certane ciymes of Treafoune, &c. committit aganis our fouerane
lord and his hienes auctoritie.

ASSISA.

Williame Naper of Wiychtifliowflis, James Foirman, thair, George Campbell of Dovvchall,

Andro Ker of Fawdounfytle, Andro Naper, bruder to Williame Ranifay, burges thair,

James Boifwell of Aucbiidek, Merchaiiftoune, Richard Rutherfurd, prouell of Ed.,

Alex' Vdward, biirges of Ed., James Aikman, thair, James Zoung, cutlar,

Johnne Duiibare, thair, Edward Hoipe, thair, Johnne Aikinheid, thaii-,

Mongo Bradie, goldfmyth.

No particidars of this case are preserved. The sentence is as usual inserted,
but only upon the margin. ' CoNUlCT. et Suspen.'

Aug. 5. — Capitane Johnne Pentland.

Delatit of the flaiichter of Aiiiq'^ Niniane Liddell of Halkerftoune.

The quhilk day coniperit the faid Capitan Pentland, and prelentit my Lord
Regentis grace Precept, fubfcryuit with his hand, chargeing the Juftice, Juflice
Clerk and their deputis, to fence' ane Court of Jufticiarie, and to prefent before
thaim the faid Cajjitan, delatit of the foirfaid flauchter : And he being prefentit
to reflaue him in will for the faid cryme, takand fouertie for aflythment" of
partye, as vfe is : And that in rel'pect the parteis complenaris procureit mercye
and i)ardoun of his lyfe at the Regentis hand, and the Ibuerte being fundin, to
pronunce and declair the famin will to be Baneil'chenient of his perfoun furth
of the realme ; takand lykewyife fouertie, that he fidd depart furth thairof,
within xviij dayis nixt efter the dait of the faid Precept, and that he fuld nocht
returne agane thairintill without licence of my Lord Regent, vnder the pane of
ane thowl'and jHuidis. As the famin Precept, of the dait the ferd' day of
Auguft, the yeir of God I™.V^ Ixxiij yeiris, fidjfcriiut be James Erie of Mortoune,
Regent foirfaid, at mair lenth beris.

Conforme to the qidiilk, the faid Capitane enterand in jugement, and being
accufit of the faid llauchter, become in our fouerane lordis will for the famin ;
quhilk will the Juftice foirfaid declarit to be Baneilchement of his perfoune during the Kingis grace and my Lord Regentis will. And thairfoir ordanit him
to find cawtioun for fatiffactioune and aflythment of partye, and that he fould
depart and remane baneifcheit furth of the realme, conforme to the laid Precept.
Qiiha fTand in Jugement, according to the faid Juftice couunand, Dyoneile

^ A forensic term, equivalent to hold, open, commence. The act of fencing a Court is still performed by an othcer, who forbids all persons froin disturbing or molesting the Court during its sitting,
&c. ' A fine or compensation paid to tlio relatives of a murdered person, as a solatmm and atonement for that deed. ^ Fourth,

7Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 47

Elphinftoun, biirges of Edinburgh, his brvider, Patrik Ogilwye, burges alfwa of
the famin bui'ch, with him felf, coniunctlie and feueralie, plegeis and foiirteis,
bayth for AflTythment of partye and that he fall depart and remane baueifcheit
furth of the reahne, during the fi)ace aboue M'rittin.

Crtasou— 9[S0istiit0 lUOrls in Coiuit antJ Castle of C?UinlJurfli).

Aug. 13. — JoHNNE Adamesoune, 3oungei-, burges of Edinburgh, and
twenty two others.
Delatit for treaffonabill afliftanee maid and gevin be tliaim to the rebellis and
confpiratouris, withhaldaris of the Toun and Caftell of Ediubui-ghe.
All thir comperand, become in will for the faid cryme, &c.

N.B. — A great number of others, burgesses of Edinburgh, are brought before the Justiciar during
tliis month. Tlieir trials are continued to the third day of the ensuing Justice-air for Edinburghe.

RECORDS OF THE COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

The Records of the Coiu-t of Justiciary, from this period to the close of the
year 1576, are unfortunately lost or destroyed. There is every reason to suppose
that this must have taken jjlace jjrevious to a.d. 1700.

3Hittrrnmmuiun0 bjitl) a Craitor antJ lUiith

Oct. 23. 1576. — Andro CoMiiENDATOli of Jedburglie.

Dilatit of the treafonabill Intercommowning with vmq'° James Ormeftoun,
lumtyme of that Ilk, declarit tratour and rebell, in his awin ludgeing, within the
burch of Jedburghe, in the moneth of Marche 1570 yeiris ; and at the hill of
Dvn5one, beweft' Jedburghe, in the moneth of Januar, the yeir of God foirfaid.

Persewar, Mr Dauid Borthuili.-

Allegit the faid Commendater, for himfelf, that he fuld half Perife^ to pas
vpoun his Ailyis, in refpect that he is ane Lord of Parliament. — Anfuerit my
Lord Aduocat, that albeit the faid Commendater haif voit in Parliament, yit
that may nocht contryne'' the Juge to gif him Lordis vpoun his AlTyis ; for then
it fuld follow, that the burgeffis being accufat, fould haif Lordis vpoun thair
Affyis, becaus thai are the thrid Eftait in Parliament. In refpect of the quhilk,
allegeis the faid Mr Dauid Borthuik, aduocate, that the Lard of Riddell, being
ane barroun of auld blude, fuld pas vpoun his AflTyis, and is fufficient thairto.

^ To the westward of. - Mr Da\'id Borthuik of Lochhill, and Mr Robert Creychtoun of

ElUok, held tiie office of joint King's Advocates at this time. ' In tliis instance, perise signifies

not only equals or peers in point of rank, but Peers or Lords of Parliament. * Bind, or constrain.

48 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576.

The Juftice, be Interloquitonr,' in refpect of the allegeances, continewis the
mater, vnder fouerte, to the morne. Plegio, Alexandre Hume de Hiitounhall.
Oct. 2-t. — Continued to Feb. xv."

^l)ootiiT(]: anti J>laurji)ttr o( Seer antf Hots,

Oct. 26. — JoHNNE Carmichell of Medowflatt,^ Thomas Mureman,

' - younger, in Kirkbryderig,MVilliam Johneftoun of Kellobank,

Sym Carmichell,^ Thomas Johneftoun of Podene, Johnne Bretame in Dafibill, Johnne INIoffett in Hennaland, James Johnuestoim of Brakinfyde, Harbert Brettame, his bruder.

Dilatit of the fchutting and flauchter of deir and ra, in Meggitland, incontrair

the tennour of the Actis of Parliament.

George Balfour, Priour of the Charterhous, Sir Kew Kennedye of Girvanemanys, knycht, John Johnneftoun of that Ilk, and Thomas Johnneftoune of
Cragaburne, become fouerties, &c., that thai and ilk ane of thame fall fateffie
our fouerane lordis will, abftene in tymes cuming. and deliuer thair gunnis to
the Capitane of the Caftell of Edinbm-ghe, betuix and the firft day of December nixttocvun, vnder the pane foirfaid.

^tealincr of Comfistonrs.

Nov. 3. — Alexaxdek ]\IacKe in Inuerrowrie, Johnne Frafer, malbun
in Aberdene, Dauid Scherare malbun thair, and Johnne
Bayn^e, at the croce of Inuerrowrie.

Dauid Leith of , fcherurgeane and cuttir of the ftane'' bel'yde

Abirdene, oft tymes callit to haif produceit oiu" fouerane lordis lettres deulie
execut and indorfate, purcheft be James El])hinftoun of Glak, Johnne Seytoun
of Lvmifurd, Kirkmaifteris of the Kirk of Devyot and the Aduocattis, to tak
fouerte of Alex. McKe, &c., that thai fuld compeir befoir our fouerane lordis
Juftice or his deputis this day and place, to vndirlye the law, for the thiftuous fteling and away taking furth of the Kirk5ard of Devj'ot, of ane grit nowmer of hewin kirk-ftanes, committit in the moneth of Junij laftbypaft, &c. And
nocht comperand, was thairfoir amerciat in the panes contenit in the Actis of
Parliament, viz., for ilkane of thame, in the pane of ten pundis.

■ A judgment so calleil, quiajiidcr (id interim loquitur, Crooksh. Church Hist., &c. ■ Tliis case

was afterwards continued to April 16 and 22, 1577. ^ I" (1000) markis. * \' (300) li.

* And tlie remainder in the pane of iij markis each. * Surgeon and stone-cutter (not cutter

for tlie stone) — ill ntriimqtw paratus — dexterous alike in the use of the scalpel and chisel — a resurrectionist of tomhstones as well as of tlie tenants of the tonih ; at all events it may he charitahly
inferred, that the four wortliies on painiel were his purAcyors, in at leiist one of the hrauehes of his
calling.

10 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 49

Conbofatioii of ti)t Sieves— sasurpation of 2^11111*9 a[uti)oi-iti), ^t,

Nov. 6. — George Craavfurd of Lefnories, Hew Crawfurd of Auchinvie his Bail3e, George Crawfiuxl of Aucliincroice, Ronald
Hutcheoun in Hannayftoun, and thirteen others.
Delatit of con^'ocationn of oiu* fouerane lordis liegis, to the nowmer of Ix perfounes or thairbye, bodin in feir of weir,' incontrair the Actis of Parliament ;
and cuming to the hous of Dauid Blak in Dallek-killis, qiihairin thai had houlit
Johne Craufurd of Heidmark, afTegeing to the famin be the fpace of thre hoiiris
or thairbye, qnhill^ thai forceit him to rander the famin to thame ; taking of the
faid Johne Craufurd in Heidmark perforce, and haifing of him bund as captiue
to the place of Lefinoreis, quhair thai detenit him within the famin, be the fpace
of xviij dayes or thairbye, in ftrait captiuitie and prefoun : Vfurpand thairthrow oiu" fouerane lordis auctoritie vpoun thaiin ; the faid Johne being his
hienes frie liege-man, and thai haifand na power nor Commiffioun to that effect :
Committit in the moneth of October, the yeir of God I'".V^ Ixxiiij 3eiris ; of the
Ipeciall caufing, deuifing, airt, pairt-taking, command, afliflance and ratihabitioim' of the faid George Craufurd of Lefnoreis ; and vtheris crymes, at lenth
contenit in the lettres direct thairvpoun.

Prelocutouris in defence. Persewaris.

The Lard of Kelwod, Jolinne Craufurd of Camlarg, Joline Craufurd in Heidmark,
JNIr Alex. Sym, Mr Alex. Maucliane, Mr Robert Creychtoun, King's Aduocat.

Mr Johne Mofcrope, Mr Thomas Weftoun. Prelocutour. The Maifler of Vchiltre.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Air, tertio Itineris vel fuper i)remonitione xv
diei'um.'

porter J), ffii^itcTjcraft antJ incantation*

Nov. 8. — Elizabeth or Bessie Dunlop, fpous to Andro Jak in
Lyne.^

The Trial of Bessie Dunlop is one of the earliest, and may assuredly be reckoned as one of
the most extraordinary cases on record, in reference to tlie infatuation, common to all the nations of
Europe at that period, on the subject of Witchcraft. It is in every view extremely interesting, but
more particularly on account of the very minute and graphic details given by Bessie of many ciicumstances connected with the prevailing superstition, especially in relation to t/ie Court of Faerie ;
which, so far as the Editor knows, are not elsewhere to be found. Few scenes perhaps are anywhere
to be met with, so intensely attractive as the meetings with ' Thorn Reid.'

The Dittay, or Indictment, seems to have been an echo of two Declai'ations, emitted by this

* Arrayed in warlike manner. In Latin it is usually expressed more bellico armatus. ^ Until.

^ Confirmation ; from Law Latin, ratihabere. * On the margin of the Record, ' Conuict, and

brynt." Lyne or Liniie, in AjTshire, was a six-merk land, lying in the barony of Dairy, the property of the family of Lord Boyd. It is likely that Bessie and her husband were tenants or cottars
on this estate, as the principal scene of the following transactions is within the county ot Ayi\ There
is also a parish of Lme in Peebles-shire.

VOL. I. G

50 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1570.

ill-fated woman ; no doubt extorted, as usual, by the application of the most exquisite tortures. Tlie
Inquest or Assyise return a Special Verdict, corresponding to the various Articles or points of the
Dittay and Examinations ; wliich poor Bessie, to avoid farther torture, (as may naturally be inferred,)
confesses ; and is accordingly ' fylit,' on her own confession. It is very unfortunate, that in this, as
in most other instances during the Sixteenth Century, the Record is so very brief with regard to the
procedure which took place in Court.

With regard to the guilt of this unlucky woman, there can hardly be two opinions. She was certainly tlie dupe of Jier own overheated imagination, already well stored with such fancies, before her
first inter^dew \\itli Thorn Reid ;i who (if not entirely the phantom of a disordered brain) may not
unlikely have been some heartless wag, acquainted with the virtues and use of herbs, and who possibly may have ])layed off this too fatal joke on his unhappy victim.

In vindication of the Criminal Tribunals of tliis country, as well as those of England and France, &c.
it is worthy of remark, that in almost all cases of Witchcraft, the trial and the punishment following
upon comaction, were as frequently for the public profession of the art, ' itfing of Sorcerie,' &c., and
for abusing the people witli their ' devilifch craft," as for the act of Witchcraft itself. In some instances, the poor creatures were convicted for ' being notour Witches,' and were put to death, after
undergoing the most frightful tortures, on the slenderest evidence, afforded by the testimony of ignorant
and superstitious country people, when added to the circumstance of their being ' liabite and repute.'

Tliere was generally, in all cases of this nature, a pre\nous Precognition taken before the Privy
Council, most frequently after repeated examinations before the Kirk Session, or the Presbytery of
the boimds where the unfortunate victim resided. Such inquisitions generally proceeded upon a special Commission issued by the Privy Council ; when the evidence of neighbours was taken down,
whose lamentable ignorance and superstitious fears would magnify into Sorcery and Witchcraft
the simplest actions in tlie life of tlie suspected Witch. Solitary confinement, cold and famine,
extreme thirst, the want of sleep, and the privation of all the comforts, even the commonest necessaries of life, the desertion of their affrighted relations and friends, added to the cruellest tortures, generally induced them at length, weary of life, to make their ' Confeffion,' as it was called.

One of tlie most powerful incentives to ' Confeffion' was systematically to deprive the suspected Witch of the refreshment of her natural rest and sleep ; and the cruellest means were often
resorted to, to accomplish this heinous purpose. Even the indulgence of lying in a reclining posture
on their handful of straw was frequently denied them. This engine of inhuman oppression was perhaps more efl'ectual in extorting confessions, than the actual application of the torture or question itself.
Iron collars, or ' Witches bridles,' are still preserved in various parts of Scotland, which had formerly
been used for such iniquitous purposes. These instnjments were so constructed, that by means of a
hoop wliich passed over the head, a piece of iron, having four points or prongs, was forcibly thrust into the moutii, two of these being directed to the tongue and palate, the others pointing outwards to
each cheek. Tiiis infernal machine was secured by a padlock. At the back of tiie collar was fixed
a ring, by which to attach the Witch to a staple in the wall of her cell. Thus equipped, and night
and day ' waked' and watched by some skilful person appointed by her inquisitors, the unhappy creature, after a few days of such discipline, maddened by the misery of her forlorn and helpless state,
would be rendered fit for ' confessing' any thing, in order to be rid of the dregs of her wretched life.
At intervals, fresh examinations took place, and these were repeated from time to time, until lier ' contumacy,' as it was termed, was subdued. The Clergy and Kirk Sessions a[)pear to have been the unwearied instruments of ' purging the land of witchcraft ;' and to them, in the first instance, all such
complaints and informations were made.

' In Article 14, we aro informed thai Thorn was 'officiare to the Lard of Blair,' probably his baron-officer.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 51

Trial followed closely on the emission of one or more of tlie Declarations or Confessions thus obtained, which formed the gi-ound-work of the public accusation and prosecution. The Assise, having
merely to compare the indictment or dittay with the previously extorted Confession, and such other
written or oral testimony as the prosecutor chose to adduce, returned their verdict, ' culpable and fylit.'
Doom was, of course, pronounced in terms of law — and in a few hours the wretched victim was led
out to the stake, to be strangled and burnt to ashes.

Dilatit of the vfiug of Sorcerie, Witchcraft, and Incantatioune, with Invocatioiin of fpretis of the devill ; continewand in familiaritie with thame, at all fie
tymes as fche thocht expedient ; deling with charnies, and abufing the peple
with devillifch craft of forcerie foirfaid, be the meanis eftir fpecefeit ; vfit thir
diuerfe yeiris bypaft ; fpecialie, at the tymes and in maner following.

In the firft, That fforfamekle as the faid Elizabeth being deniandit, be quhat
art and knaiilege fche culd tell diuerle perlbunes of thingis thai tynt, or wer
ftollin away, or help feik perfounes? Anfuerit and declarit, that fche hirfelf had
na kynd of art nor fcience fwa to do ; bot diuerfe tymes, qvihen onye lie perlbunes come ather to hir, fche wald inquire at ane Thome Reid, quha deit at
Pinkye,' as he himfelff affirmit ; wha wald tell hir, quhen euir fche afkit.^ —
(2.) Item, Sclie being inquirit, quhat kynd of man this Thoni Reid was? Declarit,
he was ane honeft wele elderlie man, gray bairdit, and had ane gray coitt with
Lumbart flevis of the auld faflbun ; ane pair of gray brekis and quhyte fehankis,
gartanit abone the kne ; ane blak bonet on his held, cloife behind and plane befoir, with filkin laiffis drawin throw the lippis thairof ; and ane quhyte wand in
his hand.^ — (3.) Item, Being interrogat, how and in quhat maner of place the faid
Thome Reid come to hir ? Anfuerit, as fche was gangand betuix hir awin hoiis
and the yard of Monkcaftell, dryvand hir ky to the pafture, and makand hevye
fair dule with hir felf, gretand verrie fall for hir kow that was deid, hir hufljand
and chyld, that wer lyand feik in the land ill,^ and fche new rilfine out of gilfane.^

' Viz. at the Field of Pinkie, Inveresk, or Musselburgh, 10 Sep. 1347. See Article 14. 2 On the
margin, ' Confeflit be hirfelf and fylit be the Affyis thairof.' See Art. 14. ' ' Confeffit and fylit.'

* Mr C. K. Sharpe, in a note to the Editor, queries ' land-ill ?' The Editor is inclined to think this is
the right reading, although the meaning of the term is now entirely obsolete. In diseases of sheep
and cattle, similar phrases are still in use ; sucli as the ' muir-ill,' the ' loupin-ill,' &c. The ' land-ill'
seems to have been a familiar term employed for denoting famine, the pestilence or plague, or some
prevailing and fatal epidemic. The following illustrative quotation is taken from ' Ane Addicionn of
Scottis Cornicklis and Deidis,' privately printed, from an Original Manuscript, by Thomas Thomson,
Esq. Deputy-Clerk- Register of Scotland, to whom the Editor is indebted for pointing out so interesting a passage. ' The famyne tyme, (anno 1439,) far was in Scotlande a gret derthe, for ]>e boll of quheit
was at xl f., ande Jie boll of ete-mele xxx f. ; and wen-aly pe derthe was fa gret, jiat far deit a pafiinge peple for hungere. And, alfe,' ])e lande-ill,^ ]>e wame-ill,^ was fo violent, fat far deit ma* fat
3 ere fan euer far deit, ouder^ in peflilens or jit in ony ufer feiknefe in Scotlande. And fat famyn
3 ere fe peflilens come in Scotlande, and began at Dnmifrele ; ande it was callit ' fe peflilens but'' mercy,' for far tuke it nain fat euir recouerit, bot f ai deit within xxiiij houris.' ^ Child-bed ;
usually spelt 'gizzene' or 'jizzen' from old French, ' gisante,' a woman lying in the straw.

' Besides. ' Famine, dearth, the disease or scourge of the land. ' Flu.t, dysenterv, or cholera motbus.

* More, s Either. « Without.

SSI

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1571).

The foil-laid Thoin mett liir be tlie way. heallit hir, and said. ' Gude day, BelRe ;'
and Iclie laid. ' God Ipeid yow. gudeinan."' * Saiicfa Jlarie,'- laid he. * Beffie.
quhy inakis thow la grit dale and lair greting for ony wardlie' tiling?" Sche
anliierit. ' Alhue! haif I noeht grit cans to niak grit dule? Ifor om-geir is trakit;'
and niv hnlband is on tlie point of deid. and aue babie of my awiii will nodit
leve; and inylelf at aiie waik point; haif I iiocht gnde cans thane to haif ane
fair liart ?' Bot Thoni laid. • Bellie. thow hes crabit' God. and alkit Ihni thing
von Ihld noeht haif done : and. thairfoir, I connlell thee to mend to him : for I
tell thee thy barne fall ilie. and the leik kow, or" yow cum hame ; thy twa scheip
fall de to : bot thy hnlbaiid liill mend, and be als haill and feir as eiiir he was."
And than was I sumthing bh-ther. fra he tanld me that my gudeinan wald mend.
Tlian Tlunne Reid went away fra me. in throw the yard of INIonkcaitell ; and I
thocht he jjait in at ane naroware hoill of the dyke nor ony erdlie man euld haif
sane throw : and fwa I was lumthing fleit." This was the fii-ft tyine that Thom
and Bellie forgadderit.* — (4.) Ite3I. The thrid tyine," he apperit to hir. as fche
was o-ausjand betuix hir awiii hous and the Thorne'" of Damwltaruok. quhair he
tareit ane ijude quliyle with hir. and fperit at hir. • Gif lehe wald nocht trow" in
him ?■ Sche laid. • Sche wald tvow in ony bodye did her gude.' And Thorn promeilt hir baxtli geir. luniis. and ky. and \thir graith, gif fcho wald denye hir
Chrillindouu'. and the taitli iMic tuko at the funt-rtane.'" Quhairvnto il'he auluerit. • That iiit I'lhe I'uld be revin at horil-taillis. lehe Inld nenir do that ;" bot
promeill to be leill and trew to him in onye thing fche cidd do. And forder,
he was lumthing angrie" with hir that (fche) wald nocht grant to that quhilk he
fpak.'^ — (5.) Item, The ferd'' tyme he apperit in hir aw in hous to hir, about the
xij hour of the day, quliair thair was littand tlire tail^eouris. and hu- awin gudeinan : and he tnke hir apperoun and led hir to the dure with him, and fche followit. and 3eid''' vp with him to the kill-end. quhair he forbaid hir to Ipeik or
feir for onye thing fche hard or law : and qnhene thai had gane ane lytle pece
fordwerd. Iche law twelf perlouues, audit weniene and tour men : The men wer

' • FvUt.' - It seems not a little singular tliat these personages, whether ' ginle wyehtis,'

' bronnies," or • vnipis,' et hoc genus oiitiie. nay, even • Sathanas" himself", uniformly make use of the most
pious salutations ; often, indeed, the very words which tiie strange superstition of tlie Judge and Jury
would have uttered iu time of need to have dispersed tliem, or sunk them 100 fathoms deep in the
Red Sea I Tlieir own superstitious recollections sliouhi have informed them, that no eWl spirit, such
as thev imagined tlie Thom Reids. Sathans. Sec. to be, could have, even for a moment, listened to these
holy words : far less to liave sravelv pronounced tliem. No doubt these were tlie common salutations
of the Catholics of the Church of Rome of this period, but assuredly not liirlnly to be pronounced by
such questionable characters as Thom. ■' Earthly, worhliy. * Dwindled away. -" Provokeil,
displeased, made angry, vexed. =■ (^Likewise?) before you get home. ' Fleyed, afraid. ■ • ConfelTit and fylit," -' There is probably a clerical omission in tiiis part of tlie Record, for no notice is
taken of the second meetinsr. ''^ Thorns were well-knomi ' trylting places,' as well for brounies as
for lovers. " 13elieve. put confidence iu. '- At the font, in baptism. '^ Vide Articles 6 and
25, &c, " ' Coufeflii and fylit." '-' Fourth. ^^ Gaed, went.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 53

ded in gentilmennis clething, and the weinene had all plaiddis round about
tliarne, and wer verrie lenielie lyke to fe ; and Thome was with thaine : And deinandit, Gif Iche knew ony of thaine? Anluerit, Nane, except Thorn. Demandit, ^\'hat thai faid to hir ? Anfuerit, Thai baid hir fit doun, and faid, ' Welcum, Beffie, willthowgo with ws?' Bot fche anfuerit nocht; becaus Thorn had
forbidden liir. And forder declarit, That fche knew noclit quhat purpois thai
had arnanf^is thairne/ onlie fche faw thair lippis move ; and within a fchort space
thai pairtit all away ; and ane hiddeous vglie Ibwche of wind foUowit tharne :
and fche lay feik quhill Thom came agane bak fra thame.^ — (6.) Item, Sche being demandit, Gif fche fpei'it at Thom quhat perfounes thai war ? Anfuerit, That
thai war the gude wychtis that wynnit in tlie Court of Elfame ;^ qulia come thair
to delyre hir to go with thame : And fordei-, Thom delyrit hir to do the lam ;
quha anfuerit, ' Sche faw na profTeit to gang thai kynd of gaittis, vnles fche kend
quhairforl' Thom faid, ' Seis thow nocht me, baith meit-worth, claith- worth,
and gude aneuch lyke in perlbun ; and (he ?) fuld make hir far better nor euer
fche was ?' Sche anfuerit, ' That fche duelt with hir awin hulband and baii-nis,
and culd nocht leif tharne.' And Iwa Thom began to be \eiTie crabit' with hir,
and faid, ' Gif fwa fche thocht, fche wald get lytill gude of him.'^ — (7.) InterROGAT, Gif fche had focht ony thing at Thom to help hir lelf, or ony vthir with?
Anfuerit, That quhen fundrie perfounes cam to hir to leik help for thair beift,
thair kow or yow," or for ane barne that was tane away with ane evill blaft of
wind, or elf-grippit, fche gait' and fperit at I'honi, Quhat njycht help thame ?
And Thom wald pull ane herb, and gif hir out of his awin hand ; and baid hir
fcheir* the famin with onye vthir kynd of herbis, and oppin the beiftis mouth,
and put thame in ; and the beift wald mend.'* — (8.) Itkm, Thom gaif hir, out of
his awin hand, ane thing lyke the rute of ane beit, and baid hir owthir feith,
and mak ane faw'" of it, or ellis dry it, and mak pulder of it, and gif it to feik
perfounes, and thai fuld mend. Interrogat, How fche knew the farain wald
haill ? Declarit, That fa fon as fche rubbit the faw x-poun the patient, man or
woman, or chyld, and it drank in, the chyld wald mend ; bot gif it fwat out, the
perlbun wald die." — i9.) lT£:\r, Demandit, To whom Iche applyit that kjT:id of
medecine ? Anfuerit, That Iche mendit Johue Jakis barne, and Willounes of

' i. e. WTiat was tlie subject of their conference. ^ ' Confefllt and fylit.' ' TLe good neighbours or brounies, who dwelt at the Court of Faery, g. d. Elf-hame. * Crabbed, cross, angry.
' ' Confeffit and fylit.' See Articles 4 and 25, &c. ^ Ewe. "" Went. * This word ' fcheir'
does not only here signify to shear or cut as with a scythe or sickle, but to ' fchair,' 'fchyre,' or ' drain,'
I. e. after being mingled with other herbs, it was to be sifted, if in the state of powder, or strained,
through a sieve or cloth, if in a liquid form. See also Article 9. ' ' CoDfeflTit and fylit.' '"' i. e.
Either seethe, and make a salve or ointment of it, or else dry it, and make a powder of it. " ' Confeffit and fvlit.'

54 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576.

the toun, and hir gudenian-fifteris kow : Thre tymes Thom gaif hir fie ane herb
out of his awin hand. And demandit, To quhoni Iche applyit the powder in
drink? Declarit.That the Ladye Johneftoune, elder, lend to hir ane feniand of the
faid ladies, callit Catherine Dunlop, to help ane young gentill woman, hir dochter. now niareit on the young Lard of Stanelie ; and I thairvpoun alkit uunrall
at Thom. And he faid to me, ' that hir feiknes was ane cauld blude, that gaid
about hir hart, that caufit hir to dwam and vigous away;" and Thom baid hir
tak ane pairt of ginger, clowis, annetfedis, licorefe, and fum Itark aill, and feith
thame togidder, and fchyre it," and put it in ane vefchell, and tak ane lytill quantetie of it in ane mutchekin cane, and lum quhyte fucker caffin amang it ; tak and
drink thau-of ilk day, in the morning ; gang^ ane quhyle eftir, befoir melt ; and
fche wald be haill. Interrogat, Quhair Iche gaif the gentill woman the drink ?
Anfuerit, In hir awin fifteris hous, the young Ladye Blakhallis. Demandit,
Qidiat Iche gat for hir doing? Declarit, Ane jjek of meill and fum cheife. — (10.)
Item, Demandit, Gif ony vther perlbunes had bene at hir for the lyke cans ?
Declarit, That the Lady Kilbowj^e, elder, lend for hir, and defyrit to I'e gif fche
culd mak hir ony helj} for hir leg, that was cruikit ; qiiha promeift anfuer, fa
fone as fche had fpokin \vith Thom ; but Thom laid, ' Sche wald neuir mend ;
becaus the merch'' of the bane was conlumit, and the blude dofinit ; and gif fche
focht onye forder help, it wald be war with hir!'" — (11.) Item, Sche being demandit, Gif fche culd do onye gude to ony wemene that wer in ti'avell of thair
chyld bed-lare ? Anfuei'it, That fche culd do nathing, quhill fche had firft
fpokin with Thom ; quha layit doun to hir ane gi-ene lilkin laife, out of his awin
hand, and baid hir tak it to thair wylie coittis," and knit about thair left arme ;
and incontinent the feik woman fuld be deliuer. Bot the faid laife being layit
anis doun be Thom, fche culd iieviir ajjprehend it, and maid grit feking thairfoir.'
Item, Declarit, That quhen hirfelf was lyand in chyld-bed-lair of hir lall laid,"
Thom come to hir, in hir awin hous, and bad hir ' tak ane gude hart to hir, for
nathing fuld aill hir.'^ — (12.) Intereogat, Gif fche culd tell of ony thing that
was away, or ony thing that was to cum ? Anfuerit, That fche culd do nathing
hir felff, bot as Thom tald hir : And farder declarit. That mony folkis in the

' Suddenly to swoon or faint away ; vertigim corripi. The word ' vigous tlie Editor never before lieard of. It appears to have a similar sense witii ' dwulm,' and is probahly from Lat. vacare,
vagare, or Fr. vaguer, indicative of an extraordinary vacancy, or wandering of tlie mind and senses ;
or the indescribable sensations experienced by those who are recovering from a swoon. Extremely old
people are vulgarly said to be ' quite (thV;,' when insensible to what is passing around them, although
they still retain, to a certain degree, the senses of hearing and seeing. Vige, Dan. and wage (vaige),
Swed. signifv, to yield, to give way from want of ability to resist, and may jierhajjs be the root of thig
word. " " Vid. Article 7. = Qj,^ ^,3]^, 4 Maii-ow. ^ ' Confeffit and fylit.' "^ Tack or

attach it to their under-dress. The ' wglie coit' seems to have been an under-dress, sucli as a woollen
or flamud jacket. 7 i Confeffit and fylit.' ' Burden, not lad or laddie. See also Article 20.

5 ' Coufelli't and fylit.'

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 55

countre (came to hir ?) to gett witt of geir ftollin fra tliame. Demandit, Quhat
perfounes thai wer ? Anfuerit, The Ladye Thridpairt, in the barronye of Renfrew, fend to hir, and fperit at her, Quha was it that had ftollin fra hir twa
hornis of gold, and ane croiine of the fone, out of hir pyrfe ? And, eftir fche had
fpokin with Thom, within xx dayis, fche fend hir word quha had thame ; and
fche gat thame agane. Item, James Cwninghame, chalmerlane of Kilwinning,
come to hir about ftun heir that was ftollin furth of the barne of Cragance ; and
fche tald him quhar it was ; and he gat it agane. Item, The Ladye Blaire fundrie tjanes had sjiokin with her, about fum claife that was ftollin fra hir ; ane
pair of ftemming hoife, ane pair of fcheittis, ane codwair, lynning claithis, farkis
and feruiettis, ffor the quhilkis fche dang and wrackit hir awin feruandis ; hot
Thom tauld hir, ' That Margret Symple, hir awin friend' and feruand, had ftollin thame.' Item, Being demandit of ^Villiame Kyle, burges of Irrvin, as he
was cumand out of Dumbartane, quha was the fteillar of Hew Scottis cloik, ane
burges of the fam toun? Thom anfuerit, ' That the cloik wald nocht be gottin ;
becaufe it wane (wai-e ?) tane away be Malye Boyde, duellare in the fam toun,
and was put out of the faifoun of ane cloik, in ane kirtill ;'' and albeit, ye faid
"Williame had promeift that fche fuld nocht be trublit for the declaratioun of the
famin ; yit, fa fone as fche com to the mercat of Irrvin, fche was put in the tolbuyth and ftrukin ; hot was relevit be James Blair, brothir to William e Blair of
the Strand.'^ — (13.) Item, Demandit, (Gif fche had been applyit to?) be Henrie
Jamefoun and James Baird in the Manys of Watterftoun, to get tliame knawlege quha had ftollin thair plew-irnis,'' fittick and mufell ? Declarit, ' Sche fuld
gif thame anfuer fa fone as fche had fpokin with Thom ; qidia fchew hir that
Johne Blak and George Blak, fmythis, had ftollin the famin ; and that the cowtir and fok wer lyand in his awin hous, betuix ane mekle ark and ane grit kift:'
And forder faid, ' That quhen thai com thair to the ryping, thai fuld nocht
find thame ; becaus that Jame Dowgall, flieriffis officiar, quha than prefentlie
was with thame, fuld reffaif thre pundis for the conceling of thame ; for the
quhilk cans alfo, fche was apprehendit be the faidis fmythis, and brocht to my
Lord of Glafgow.'^ — (l-t.) Ixterrogat, Quhow fche kennit that this man was
Thome Reid, that deit at Pinkye ? Anfuerit, Sche neuir knew hiin quhen he
was on lyfe ; hot that fche fuld nocht dout that it was he bad hir gang to Thom
Reid, his fone, now officiare in his jjlace, to the Lard of Blair, and to certain
vtheris his kynnifmen and freindis thair, quhoin he naiuit ; and baid thame reftoir certane guidis, and mend vthir offencis that thai had done ; and that it was

' llelative or relation. ° Altered from tlie shape of a cloak into that of a kirtle. ^ ' Fylit.'

See Article 15. * See Article 26. "^ Confellit and fylit," The Bishop of Glascjow, James Boyd
of 'rrocluig-, was the second son of Adam Boyd of Pinkill, hrother to Lord Boyd, who was Bessie's
landlord ; and, as appears from Article 23, seems to liave heeu favouiahle to Bessie.

56. CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576.

he that fend thame word thairof : ' Rememher' that

qiihen he and he went togidder to the blak Settii-day •/ and that the faid ....

wald haif bene ane vther gait ; he di-ew him be the Kirk

of Dahye, and thair coft ane pinid of feggis and gaif him, and put thame in his
naipkin ; and fa thai went togidder, quhill thai com to the feild.'' — (15.) Item,
Interrogat, Gif Thom, at his awin hand, had fend to ony perfoim, to fchaw
thame thingis to cum ? Declarit, That he fend hir to na creatour in middilyerd,* hot to ^^^illiame Blair of the Strand,^ and his eldeft dochter, qulia was contractit and fchortlie to be mareit witli Crawfurd, young Lard of Baidland, and declair vnto thame, ' That gif fche mareit that man, fche fuld aythir
die ane fchamefull deid, flay hir felf, caft hirfelf doun our ane craig, or ga reidwod;'" qidiairbye the faid mareage was ftayit ; and the lard foirfaid mareit hir
yoimgeft fuller. Tryit to be of veritie.^— (l6.) Ixterkogat, Quhat fche
thocht of the new law ?" Anfuerit, That fche had Ipokiu with Thom about that
mater ; hot Thom anfuerit, Tbat this new law was nocht gude ; and that the
auld ffayth fuld cum hame agane, but nocht fic as it was befoir." — Interrogat,
Gif euir fche had bene in fufpect place with Thom, or had carnell deill with
him ? Declarit nocht vpoun hir faluatioun and condemnatioun ; bot anis he tuke
hir be the aproun, and wald haif had hir gangand with him to Elfame."' —
(17.) Item, Interrogat, Quhat tyme of the day or nycht he maift refortit to hir?
Anfuerit, That at the twelft hour of the day was his commoune ajipearing." —
(18.) Interrogat, Gif fche had fene him gangand vp and doun the warld ? Declarit, That anis fche faw him gangand in the kirkyard of Dalrye, amangis the
peoi^le.'- — (19.) Demandit, Giif fche fpak onye thing to him? Anfuerit, Na, becaus he had forbiddin hir, that, quhair euir fche faw him, or mett with him, fche
fuld neuir fpeik to him, vnles he fpak to hir firft." Item, fche faw him gangand
vp and doun on the gait" of Edinburgh, vpoim ane mercat day, quhair he leuch
vjioun hir, and gaid vp and doun amangis the peple, and put his handis to the
lavis, as vthir folk did.''' — (20.) Interrogat, Gif fche neuir alkit the queftioun
at him, Qidiairfoir he com to hir mair (than) to ane vthir bodye ? Anfuerit, Remembring hir, quhen fche was lyand in chyld-bed-lair, with ane of hir laiddis,'"

' These and the following hlanks left in the Record. The words quoted are those which Thome
desired her to repeat to each of these persons, in testimony of the truth of her errand. - The fatal
field of Pinkie, Inveresk, or Musselburgh, fought on 10th Sept. 134.7. Besides the account by Patten
the Londoner, reprinted by Dalyell in his Fragments of Scottish History, there is an interesting French
account of this battle by M. Berteville, lately presented by Mr D. Constable, to the Members of the
Bannatyne Club, accompanied by a very curious contemporary plan of the battle, the original engraving of which (the ]iroi)('rty of the Bannatyne Club) is now placed in the INIuseum of the Society of
Antiquaries of Scotland. ^ Viz. to Pinkie. ' Fylit.' * ' Middle-earth,' often alluded to in faiiy
superstition. « Vide Article 12. "^ Stark, or raving mad. ' ' Fylit.' » The Reformed Religion. 3 ' Fylit be the aflyis heirof.' '" ' Fylit.' Fairyland, (7. (/. Elf-hame.) See Article 6, &c.
" ' Fylit." '-^ ' Fylit." " ' Fylit.' " Street. ''^ ' Fylit.' '« See Article 12.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. St

that ane flout woman com in to hir, and fat doun on the forme befyde hir, and
aflvit ane drink at hir, and fche gaif hir ; quha alfua taiild hir, that that barne
wald de, and that hir hufband fiild mend of his feiknes. The faid Beffie anfuerit, that fche reraembrit wele thairof ; and Thom faid, That was the Quene
of Elfame his maiftres, quha had commandit him to wait vpoun hii-, and to do
hir gude.' — (21.) Interrogat, Gif euir fche had fpokin with him at ane loich
and wattir-fyde ? Anfuerit, Neuir fave anis that fche had gane afeild with hir
hulband to Leith, for hame bringing of mele, and ganging afeild to teddir" hir
naig at Reftalrig-loch, quhair thair come ane cumpanye of rydaris by, that
maid fie ane dynn as lieavin and erd had gane togidder ; and incontinent, thai
raid in to the loich, with mony hiddous rumbill. Bot Thom tauld, It was the
gude wichtis that wer rydand in IMiddil-zerd.^ — (22.) Ixterkogat, Quhene
fche fpak laft with Thom ? Declarit, On the morne eftir Candilmes-day laftwas,
quhair fche fpak with him, and he tauld hir of the evill weddir that was to cum.*
— (23.) Interrogat, Gif fche neuir fjjerit, quhat truble fuld cimi to hir for his
cumpanye ? Declarit, That fche wald l)e trublit thairfoir ; bot baid hir feik ane
affyis of hir nychtbouris, and no thing fuld aill hir: — fforder declarit, that fche
fuld be brocht to Glafgw, and fche come in the Bifchopis handis, fche wald be
wele treit, and fend hame agane.' — (24.) Item, the faid Beffie declaris, that the
Lard of Auchinflceyth'' is rydand with the ffair-folk,^ albeit he deit ix 3eir fyne."
Apud DaJhcijth, xx"" Septemhris, anno 1576.— (25.) Bessye Duxlop being
re-examinat, in prefence of the Lard of Quhittinghame and George Aiu'hinlek
of Balmanno, and being inquirit, Quhow oft Thom Reid come to hir, or'' fche
inquirit quhow thai callit him ? Deponis, That he com thryis, and that fche had
na poA^'er at na tyme, to try or tell ony vthir, in the menetyme, of his ciuning.
He requirit hir fimdrie tymes to pas with him, and becaus fche refufit, he fchuke
his held, and faid that he fuld cans hir forthiuk it.'" Deponis forder, that fche
has fpokin with him at diuerfe tymes, be the fpace of four 3eiris." — (26.) Being
inquirit anent the pleuch-irnis, ftollin fra Henrie Jamefoun and James Baird,'"
depones, That fche inquirit at Thom Reid, qidia declarit to hir. that Gabriell
Blak and Geordie Blak in Lokarfyde fi:aw thame, and brocht thame to thair
faderis hous, namit Johnne Blak, viJoun ane cuttit gray liorfe,''^ on ane Setterday,
in the nycht ; quhilk fche tauld agane to the faidis Henrye Jamefoun and James

* ' Confefllt and fylit.' - Tether, or tie to a stake at pasture. ^ ' Confeflit and fylit.'

* ' Confefllt and fylit.' ' ' Confefllt and fylit.' //'she came into the Bishop's liands, &c. See Article
13. 0 In the I?ecord of Retoius, Jul. 29, 1629, James Dunlop, advocate, is retoured as heir to

Archibald Dunlop of Aucliinskeych, ' proav),'(>.e.\\\i great-grandfather, the father of his grandfather,)
in the 20s. lands of old extent of Sniythstoun, &c. It is likely, therefore, and more especially so from
the coincidence of the name Dunlop, tliat this was the Laird here alluded to. ' The fairies. See

Article 27. 8 < Confeflit and fylit.' ^ Before, ere. w See Articles 4 and 6, &c. " ' Confeflit and fylit.' '2 See Article' 12. '^ Grey gelding.

VOL. I. H

58

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576.

Baird.'— (27.) Item, depoiiis that four jeir fyiie, or thairbye, fche faw the
Laird of Auchinfkeyth, at a thorne," beyond Monkcaftell ; quhilk Lard deit mair
nor fyve 3eir fyiie. Thaireftir, fche, at the defyre of the Ladye Audiinfkeyth,
inquirit at Thorn Reid, Giff fic ane mami was ainangis thame ? Qiilia anfuerit,
That he was ainangis thame.^

ASSISA.

Andro Craufurd of Baithlera, Henrie Clerk in Cokeydaill, James Harvye in Kilbumie,

Hew Homniyll in Kilbume, Johnne Knok in Kilcufe, Robert Roger tliair,

Thomas Gawaiid tliair, James Aitkin in Balgrene, Jolmne Boyde in Gowanlie,

Cutlibert Craufurd in Kilbumie, Jolmne Or in Barnaucli, Johnne Cochrane in the Manys of Bar,

Hew Dunlop of Crawfeild, Thomas Caldwell in Bultreis, Thomas Stewart of Flafwod.

Veudict. And inimediatlie efter the chefmg and fwering of the faidis perfones of Aflyis, as vfe is, the faid Elizabeth Dunlop, being on pannell, aeeufit be

dittay oppinlie red in jugement, of the cr3^ines aljoue writtin ; the famin perfounes reniovit thanie felffis furth of Court, and altogidder couuenit, and relFownit on the pointis of the laid dittay ; and being rypelie awyfit thairwith, and refoluit thairin ; re-enterit agane to the faid Court of Jufticiarie, and thair, in

prefence of the laid Jullice Depute, be thair deliuerance, pronunceit and deelarit

be the mouth and li^eking of Andro Craufurd of Baithlenie, ffand and deliuerit

the faid Elizabeth Dvmlop, to be culpable fylit and convict, oft' the haill pointis

aboue writtin, and of vfing of Witchecraft, Sorcerie, and Incantatioun, with Inuocatioun of fpreittis of the devill, continewand in familiaritie with thame at all

tymes, as fche tliocht expedient, and thairbye deling with charmes. and abufing

the peple, with hir devillifche craft of forcerie foirlaid, be the meauis aboue fpecefeit.

Sentence. ' Conutct, and Brynt.'

Note. Unfortunately, the sentence has not been recorded at length in the Books of Adjomiial ;
but the terms of it most probably were, that she should be carried to the Castle-hill of Edinburgh, and
there ' wirreit at anejlaih,' and thereafter lier body to be ' brynt in affis,' and her whole moveable
goods ' efcheit, and inbrocht to the kingis vfe.' There is merely a marginal marking on the Record,
such as was usual at that period, viz. ' Conuict, and brynt,' and there is no reason to suppose that the
sentence was mitigated.

[Alexander Bunncdyne, Juslice-Depide.']

^mlJtstttintj of tijt ?i5i5lj--U)ai), ^r.

Nov. 16. — James Withiksi'UNE of Brighous.
Dilatit of the vmbeletting* of the hie gait to "SA'illiame Park younger in

' ' Confenit and fylit.' " The ' thorno' here alluded to, was a fairie's trysting-tree or imp-tree.

Thorns hav<- ever been favourite trysting-places, as well for lovers as ' brounies,' and ' the guid wichtis,'
or ' guid ni.htbouris.' ^ < Confeflit and fylit.' See Article 24. * This is usually rendered

in the Record, obsidiatio vici rcyij, a besieging, obstructing, or besetting of the high way.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 59

Lynlythgw, and fcliutting of him with aiie piftulet in the rycht fid, to the grit
effufion of his bliide ; conimittit the xxviij day of March laftbypaft. — Continued to Dec. xix ; ' Plegio, Roberto Leviugftoun de Weftquarter.'

JSvtafeiucr Hocfe-'fast ^lafts— C]^eft, ^t.

Nov. 16. — WiLLlA^lE BURRELL, feruand to Dauid Clerk in Dyfert.

Dilatit of the thiftuous vpbreking of ane lokfaft kift, being within his laid
maifteris hous in Dyfert, in his abfeuce, he haifing the credit and keping the faid
Dauid his maifteris hous, in the menetyme ; and Iteling, conceling, and awaytaking fra the faid Dauid, thiftuouflie, furth of the lamin, of I", pundis ^ money
of this realme, and difponing vpoun ane pairt thairof at his jjleafour ; conimittit
in the moneth of October laftb}q)aft.

The quhilk cryme of thift the faid William Burrell confeffit in prefence of the
faid Juftice-Depute, and haill perfounes of Alfyis.

Verdict. The AlTyife, be relbun of the laid Willeames awin Confeffioun,
ffand and deliuerit the faid William to be culi)able of the cryme aboue writtin,
and convict yairof. — ' Convict, et Suspen.'

©efovfing; of a iHessenser.

Nov. 20. — Patrik Gordoun of Brakny and Patrik Hunter, burges
of Abii'den.
Dilatit of the deforceing, at the leift Hopping of Mr Gilbert Buchane, meffinger, in executioun of his office, &c.

Prelocutouris for the pannell. Persewaris.

Mr Alexander Skene, Mr Gilbert Buchane, meffinger,

Maifter Thomas Craig. Mr Robert Creychton, aduocat.

The Juftice, be interloquitoiu", finding the mater and cryme quhairof the perfounes on pannell are accufit, to be ane allegeit deforcement, at the leift flopping
of ane officer in execution of his office ; ordanis the famin firft to be ciuilie difcuffit.

dTieltr of itanssiUe — ^lauglbtt^i-.

Nov. 26. — George Mowtkay of Markinche.'
Dilatit of the treafonable cuming to the field of Langfide, aganis our fouerane
lord and his hienes auctoritie royale, and vmquhile his darreftvncle, James Erie

' L.IOO. ^ ' Plegiis, Dom. de Awdie juniore, Will. Hammiltonne de PortmannOjWill. Blacader
de Taiffis et Job. Seytoune de Pitmedie. Plegios devenenint, conjunctim et divifim, fub pena bis
mille librarum.' This case was, on Nov. 3. remitted to the Justice-aii- of ' FyfFe, tertio Itineris vel
iuper premonitione xv dierum.'

60 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 15T6.

of Mvirray, Lord Abirnethie, &c. Regent to his hienes and of this realme and
liegis for the tyme, of glide memorie, the xiij day of Maii, the 3eir of God, 1568
3eiris, and llauchteris committit thairat, &c.

Persewar, Mr Robert Creyclitoim, aduocat.

AssiSA.

Heniie Lord Siiiclare, Thomas Grundefoun of KjTigaft,' The Lard of Carflogie,

Dauid Barclay of C'ullarnye, Jolinne Borthuik of GordowniHiall,- Dauid Carmichaell of Bahnadie,

The Lard of Anrtrutbir, Alex. Mouj'jiennye of Kynkell/' Robert Strang of Kildrymmie,

TheLardof Balgonie, younger, The Lard of Balfour,* The Lard of Barani,

Florence Auchniowtie, in The Lard of Balcafkye,^ Robert Betoun, brother to the
Dunferniling, Lard of Balfour.

Proteftis Mr Robert Creychtoun, aduocat, that in caife the Affyis acquit, for
wilfull errour, &c.

The faid George Mowtray of Markiiiche, a(kit inftrumentis of his difafenting
to onye coutinewatiouu of this mater ; and tliat he defyris the perfounes of Affyis, prefentlie to cognofce thairin, and nocht to pas away vnrefoluit.
Absentis ab Assisa Domini de Markinche.

Magnus Sincler bruder to the Lord Sinder, Dauid Durie of tliat Ilk, Alex, Inglis of Inglis-Tarwt,
Johne Kuiiingliame younger of Barnis, the young Laird of Torrye, James Henderfoun of Fordell,
Dauid Betoun of Creycht, James Mowbray of Pitlouer, Andro Klapene of Pitcorphy, the Lard of
Onok of that Ilk, Alex. Sibbald of Rankeloxrr-over ; ilk-ane of thame amerciat to the pane of xl
puudis, for non-comperance vpoun the faid AfTyis.''

The famin day, the Lai'd of Cnllarnye become fouerte for Hemie Lord Sincler ; the Lord Sincler
for Culleniye ; Carflogye for Anfli-uther ; Florence Auchniowtie for the Lard of Balgonye ; Balgonye
for the laid Florence ; Gordownilliall for Carflogye ; Cullarnye lor Bahnadie ; Balcallcye for Robert
Strang; Balgonye for Baram ; the Lard of Balfour for Robert Betoun, Tvith the reft aboue wi'ittin ;
ilkane for vtheris, vnder the pane of F. pundis,' to re-entir the xviij day of December nixttocum.

?^amt0U(fttn — ^pprt ssioit —€i)tUf ^c,

Dec. 1. — JoHXNE MuXTGUMKiE of Scottiftouu, Walter Muntgumrie,
his broder," and Robert Kent, leruand to the faid Johnne."
The faid Walter Muntgunn-ie proteftis, that the continewatioun of the faid
mater to the third day of the Air, or foner, &c., preiuge nawyife the regalitie of
Glafgw, quhairiii he duellis.

The faid Robert Kent, dilatit of airt and pairt of the crymes vnderwrittin,
contenit in our foueran lordis lettres, purcheft be Hev/ Muntgumrie of Hefilheid,
Marioun Sempill his fpous, M' Dauid Borthuik of Lochhill, and Robert Creych-

' Plegio, Kynkell. - Plegio, Carflogie. ^ Plegio, Anfti-uther. ■* Plegio, Rob. Betoun.

'' Plegio, Rob. Strang. ^ ' Nota. Yis vnlaw nocht to be gevin furth, in refpect of ane fufficient
nowmer of AdVls gottin." ' L.IOO. " Plegio, Johanne SpreuU de Ladyemuie, pro his duobus.
Vid. .Tan. 29 aiid 31, 157G-7. s < Acquit.'

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS, 61

toiui of Eliok, Aduocattis to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intereft : Quhilkis
lettres makis inentioun :

DiTTAY against Robert Kent.

That vpoun ])e xix day of Julij laftbypaft, vmq'^ Gabriell Muntgumiie, broder to Joline Muntgumrie of Scottiftoun, being cumit to the place of Hefilheid, and being ofleudit be ane euU',' allegeit
geviii be ))e faid Marioun Sempill to Robert Kent, feruand to Jie faid vraq'^ Gabriell ; and feing the
tyme waki nocht feme to tak reuenge at that time, of his former confauit malice ; he depairtit in his
rage, and confauit hatrent- that nycht, to the place of Tlu-idpart, in Giffing, thre quartaris of ane rayle
diftant fra the faid place of Hefilheid, or fairbye ; quhair, he having menit^ himfelf vnto his faid
brodir, quha was ])air at buirding, off fe difpleafour, as he allegit, done to his faid feruand, and fcliame
vnto himfelf; the said Johne Muntgumrie, reprocheing him of his febilnes, pat he take nocht than
prefentlie ane reuenge pairof ; exhortit, entyfit, and houndit him furth ))at fam nycht, to ])e effect eftir
following : Qidia immediatlie Jiaireftir, ]iat faniin nycht, come to fe faid place of Hefilheid, at xj houris
in |)e nycht, and awaitit befyde fe faniin, in ])e lious of Alex'. Knok quhill* ])e raorne ]iaiieftir, quhilk
was )ie XX day of pe faid raoneth of Julij ; and than returnit to pe faid place, to tak reuenge of pe faid
Hew, as he in quhais place ]ie faid iuiurie was allegeit committif, and of ]ie faid Lady, allegeit committer of Jie famine, by way of deid, as he mycht : And fwa ]ie faid vmqhile Gabriell, vpoun Jie hoimding, furthfetting and counfale of pe faid Johne Muntgumrie, his broder, and of his caufing, command,
art, part, affiftance, and ratihabitioun, vpoune prouifiouii, foirthocht fellonye, hid hatrent, precogitate
malice, and be way of Hamefuckin,'' accorapaniet wt Jie faid Robert Kent his feruand, come to Jie faid
place of Hefilheid, in ])e morning, vpoun plane purpois to half flane ]ie faid Hew and his faid fjious ;
and finding ])e ; ett of ]ie faid place op])in, and cuming up J)e flare jiairof, to half endit and perforrait pair
foirfaid wickit interpryis, enterit in pe hall of ]ie faniin, and finding pe faid Ladye oppining ane lockit
bowall,'' and na perfoun with hir pairin hot ane lafs, the faid Robert Kent pullit hir doun be pe hair
of pe heid bakwart to pe ground, and flraik and dang hir w' his uevis' and feit, diuerfe mony fair
bauch* flraikis, quhair with pai half brufit and brokin hir bowellis, pat fche is neuir abill to confaif
barne agane, and is and has been verie evill difeafit pairwith fenfyne ; and all pe tyme pe faid Robert
was ftrykeand hir, pe faid vmquhile Gabriell llude with ane bendit pillulet' in his hand, haldand pe
mouth pairof to pe dure pat cummis fra pe propir chalmer of pe faid Hew to pe Hall, thinking pe
faid Hew fuld half cumniit in at Jie hall dure to releif his faid wyfe, quhen he hard hir cry ; quhairby
pe faid vmquhile Gabriell mycht half fcliot him at pe incuming of pe dure foirfaid : — And becaus, pat
throw pe crying of pe faid Marioun, pe efFray'" raife within pe faid place, fwa that pe faid vmquhile
Gabriell and Robert jierfauit it was nocht tyme conuenient, and was iinpoffible to pame to execute
Jiair malicious and wickit intent and purpois aganis pe faid Hew, quhom pai intendit to half ilane ; and
feriug, pat his feruandis within pe faid place, fuld bane conuenit and focht ane reuenge of pe foirfaid
iniurie done vnto his faid fpous, pad furth of his faid place, and lokit pe tour jet i' pairof out with beliind pame, and tuke Jie key of pe famin away with pame : And nocht content paii'with, pai thiftuuflie
flail and away tuke, ane fair blak bafoun '" hors fra pe faid Hew, furth of his laiidis of Balgray, pe faid
XX day of Julij laftbypaft ; quhair^'])oun pai raid to pe faid place of Thridpart, quhair Jiai wer reflauit
in pair foii'faid thiftuous deidis be laid Johne Muntgumrie, w' plane ratihabition and mantenance of
all pair wickit interpryfis and executionis pairof : And jit, pe faidis perfounes, nocht content w' pe

1 A slap or slight blow, as with tlie palm of the hand. ' Hatred, rancorous ill-will. ^ Made known his grievance,/jfmonncfi, complained. 4 Until. ' A violent attack made on a person in his own dwelling. ° Perhaps for
bole, a small cupboard, or opening cut out of the solid wall, so frequently met wiih in ancient buildings, — a ' holc-in-the
wa\' 7 Fists. 8 Violent, deadly, or unmerciful blows. The word also implies shameful, filthy, dishonourable,

&c. 9 A pistol on full cock. '" Alarm, hue-and-cry. " Tower gate, on the outside. '* Probably the same

as ' bawsonit,' having a forehead marked with white.

62 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 157b'.

fchamefull oifencis comniittit be fame in nianer foirlaid ; feiiig fe laid Hew, eftu- fat be liad brokin ])e
lokkis of fe laid tour ■^ett, to follow on horleback, for reeouering of bis laid black hors; and ciiming
to ]>e laid place of Tbridpart, quhairin be was aduerteift fat fai war enterit wltb fe famin hors, fe
laid Hew baving depelclieit ' bis tua feriiandis, quhilkis onlie be had witli him at fat tynie, to vilfie
and le about fe laid place of Tbridpart, gif his laid bors was careit ony larder away or nocht, and he
his felf lycbtaiul bis alane at fe 5et fairof, to fe gif his faid bors had bene fail'; the faid Johnne
Muntginiirie and fe faid vniq''^ Gabriell his broder, bailing fene ane reddye occafioun and tynie conuenient to fame to execut fair foirlaid creuell intent and wickit interpryis, befoii- confauit and precogitate be fame, and to defend fair fchamefull and tliiftuous deidis foirfaidis, and to pofles fe geir
conqueill be fame as faid is, niett fe faid Hew at fe ^ett of fe faid place of Tbridpart, with piftulettis and drawin fwerdis in fair handis, and fair I'ett vpoun him, and fcbamefullie, crewallie, and vumercifullie, alftveill befoir iiis face as behind his bak, invadit him for his flauchter, and hurt and
woiuidit him on bis fiUettis,- behind his bak, and diuers vtberis partis of bis bodye, to f e grit effufioun
of his blude, and left him lyand for deid ; and bad nocht faillit to half bled to deid, wernocht^ fe grace
of God and gude neycbtbouris, fat come and careit him bame in plaiddis to his laid duelling place.

And, for fe mair bettir peformance of fe faid Jobne Muntgumreis ovill will and confauit batrent,
aganis fe faid Hew, feing be Goddis grace he niycbt noclit performe f e famin of befoir, be fan immediatlie f aireftir reliiinit fe laid Robert Kent in bous with him, witii f e recent bludie hand ; and bes
continewallie, fenfyne, retenit and retenis him in bis companie and boulhald ; to f e effect fat he may
get his foirfaid wickit interpryis of f e faid Hewis llauclitir mair eafelie performit : Lykeas, vpoun fe
xxvj day of Augull laftbypall, fe faid Jobne Muntgumrie of Scottilloun, accumpaneit with fe faid
Robert Kent and Walter Muntgumrie, his broder, bodin in feir of weir* with jakkis, piftulettis, fwerdis,
buklaris, fteil-bonettis, and vtberis wappinia, invqfiue, come be way of Hamefuckin to fe landis of
Netbirtoun of Helilbeid, and fercheit and focht him f airat for his llauclitir ; and becaus f ai culd nocht
apprehend bim fairat, thai apprebendit James Paterfoun liis feniand, kepand bis bors yairvpoun, and
chain bim furth of f e faidis landis to f e faid Hewis place of Hefilheid, to f e effect fat in cais he had
cuniit furth of fe famin for bis releif, fat fai niycbt haif bereft bim of his lyfe. And fairtbrow, fe
faidis Jobne Muntgumrie of Scottilloun, Walter Muntgumrie, his broder, and Robert Kent, comniittaud
oppin, manifell and vyld opprellioun vpoun fe faid Marioun, and crewall bludefliedding vpoun fefaid
Hew, vpoun fett purpois, prouifioun, foirthocht fellonye, precogitate malice, and Hamefuckin ; and
alfua tbift and relR-tt fairof, in maner aboue written. As fe faidis lettres at lentb beris.

PEnsEWARis. Prelocutour, in peiTute of the haill crymen

Marioun Sempill, Ladye Hafilheid, lybellit, except the tiiift.

Mr Robert Creychtoun, aduocate. Johnne Sempill of Beltreis.

Prelocutouris, Prelocutouris, in defence of the faid Robert

in perfute of the faid Robert for the haill crymes for the haill crymes, except the tbift lybellit.

lybellit. Johnne Muntgumrie of Scottilloun,

Mr Robert Muntgumrie, capitane, Eduard Maxwell of Tynwall, Mr Alex. Skene,

The Lard of Braidllane. Gabriell Sempill, younger of Cathcart.

The faidis prelocutouris, iu defence of the faid Robert Kent, afkit inllrumentis, that thai will nocht infill in his defence, for the thift lybellit, hot for the
remanent crymes onlie.

The faid Robert Kent tuke inftrumentis, that Marioun Sempill, Ladye Hefil-

• Dispatched, druprsr/.i-r, OIil Fr. : The fleshy part of the thigh, next the loin ; FT.Jilct, so termed from the num.
ber of sinews which that part covers. The word is still in us,; in a certain sense, e.g. a fillet of veal. a Had it not been
for the grace, &c. * In warlike array.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 63

heid, Capitane Robert Muntgumrie and the Lard of Braidftane, infiftis in his

perfute of the tliift and vtheris lybellit.

AssisA, jyrefati Roherti Kent}-

Johnne Rois of Hanin":, Alex'. Wilfoun, in Treenie, Chai'lis Mowat of Bufbie,

Thomas Steuart of Gaufloun, James Dunlop of tliat Ilk, Johnne Somervell of CambufWilliam Knelaml of that Ilk, Johne Dunlop of Hapland, nethenc,

Neill Muntgumrie of Langfehaw, William Dik, in Gymifliill, Jolme Schaw of Grenok,

Hew Muntgumrie of Auchin- Johne Steill, younger, in Mony- The Lard of Rais-Logane,

hude, akeris, Thomas Stevinfoun, in Treeme.

And immediatelie eftir the chefnig, fwering, and admitting of the faidis perfounis of AIFyis, and accufing of the faid Robert Kent, be the Letteris of Dittay
foirlaid, in thair prefence ; the faid Mr Alex^ Skene, preloeutour foirfaid, in
name of the faid Robert, denyit Jhnjjllcifer tlie faid dittay and lybell, as it is
confanit ; fpecialie, tlie thiftuons fteling and away-taking of ane blak bafoun
hors fra the faid Hew Muntgumrie of Hefilheid, furth of his landis of Balgray;
bot that the faid Robert onlie fled away thairvpoun to the place of Thridpart,
for feir and faiftie of his lyfe ; and thairfoir, the faid Mr Robert Creychtoun,
aduocate, in refpect of the faid confeffioun and notorietie of the caus, proteftit,
gifF the perfounes of AflTyis acquit the faid Robert Kent of the Dittay foirfaid,
for Ai'ilfull errour.

"\^ERDICT. The faidis perfounes of AfTyis, for the niaift jmirt, ffand and deliuerit the faid Robert Kent to be acquit and innocent of the crymes aboue writtin, contenit in the faidis lettres of dittay : Lyke as, thai declarit in iugement in
the faid Court, and in prefens of the faid Juftice depute, be the mouth and Ipeking of Johnne Someruell of Cambufnethane, chancillare of the faid AfTyis. —
QuhairviJoiui, the faid Robert Kent afl<it inflrumentis ; and proteflit for his teftimoniall, and the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament vi)oun the jierfe-waris
foirfaidis.

Continued againfl the other parties, to the Juftice-aire of ' Renfrew, tertio
Itineris, vel fuper premonitione xv diei'um.'

Dec. 1. — Patrik Bruntscheillis in Hefilheid, Andro GifHng in Nethir Hefilheid, and James Reid pantreman to the Lard of

Hefilheid.'

Dilaitit of art and part of the crewall flauchtir of vmq'^ Gabriell Muntgumrie,

broder to Johne Muntgumrie of Scottifloun ; committit in the monetli of Julij

laftbypafl ; vpoun fett purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellonye.

' This Assise was afterwards tried for wilful error. See Jan. 31, 1576-7. * ' Plegio, Adamo

Muntgumrie de Brunftane.'

64 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576.

The faidis pertbunes aikit inftrumentis, that Johnne Muntguinrie of Scottiftouii
and Waltir Mimtgumrie his brother (brether to the faid viiiq'e Hew,) beiug inquirit be the Juftice depute, gif thai wald infift in iwrfute of ye faidis perfounes for
the faid flauchtir, declarit, that thai wald pas fra the perfute for the faiiiiu ;
And fiflyke, difallentit to onye continewatioun of the faid matei-, offering thanie
felfis prefentlie to the knaulege of ane AfTyis thairfoir.

Continued to the Juftice-aire of ' Renfrew, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitioue XV dierum.'

Creasoit — Jf ieltr of Han ssiUe .

Dec. 18. — George Multkay of Markinche.'

Dilaitit of the treafonable cuming to the feikl of Langfyde, aganis our fouerane lord and his auctoritie royall, &c.

Plegiis, Jacobo Seytoune de Touche, Roberto Wardlaw juniore de Kilbabertoune, ac Joanne Seytoune de Pittady, conjunctini et di\'ifim : et prefate perfone, ad releuand. Dom. de Touehe plegium, coniunctim et diuifim, fub pena bis
mille librarum : — et Dom. de Seyfeild, ad releuand. reliquos cautionarios.

^ihseuce of an Ass'isor.

The quliilk day, the faid mater continewit agane, at command of the Regent,
be the Lard of Cleii'ch, to the xv day of Janviar, in relpect of the ablence of tlie
Lai-d of Kynkell ; and thairfoir, the faid perfounes of Afiyis, except the faid
Laird of Kynkell. beconie fouerteis for vtheris, as in the court preceding ; vnder
the famin panis ; and the Lard of Anftruthir becom Ibuerte for the faid Lard
of Kynkell, to compeir at the faid day.

iToi'Stnfi; aiiK Coimtciffitins atrtilteiatc iHouei), ^t.

Dec. 29. — Johnne Bei.i,, chepman.-

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the treafonabill forgeing, fein3eing, falfing, counterfuting ; at the leift, inbringing of certane fals and adultei-ate money, fie as
penneis, falllie cuin3eit and ftampit ; quhilkis wer output be him in grit quantitie, amangis diuerfe our foueraue lordis liegis, dilfauand thaim thairwith, to tlie
grit hurt of the commoun (wealth) of this realme.

Verdict. The perlbunis of Affyis, (amongft whom are Mungo Bradie, James
Stalker, Johnne Mofman and George Heriot, goldfiniths in Edinburgh,) for
the maift pairt ffand and delyuerit the faid Johnne to be Conuict of the reffait of
fourtie hardlieidi,s^ fals money, and inbringing of thame ignorantlie within the

' Soc Kov. 26, 1.57(i. '-' ('liiipman, or vender of smnll wares. ' Hardhcuh, hardies, or lions, f'orinorly of tlie value of tliree half pence, Imt depreciated by Rcfjent Morton to a ])enny. He also de-
))re<-iated xhc plark from four to two pence. It need scarcely be remarked, that this was a very unpopular measure.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 65

realme : And Acquit him of all outputting of onye vther fals hardheklis, or
vtherwyis of reflliit of the liardlieklis aboue writtin, to be i^ut out wittandlie
ainaiigis oui" fouerane lordis liegis, for diffait of thame yairwith.
The Sentence is not recorded.

Ctittboratton tA i\yt iiieses— as^Biesing; ll^nuse of J^trefl)in, ^t.

Dec. 31. — Walter Barclay in Bannagook.
Dilatit of the conuocation of our fouerane lordis liegis, bodin in feir of weir,'
incontrair the tennour of the actis of Parliament thairanent ; cuming about the
hous and place of StrechiB, affageing of the famin maitl aufullie, be fchutting of
culveringis and daggis, and vfing of vthirs weirlyke perfute ; and fwa continewing in affageing and perfewing of the faid hous and place, fra thre houris in
the morning or thairbye, qiihill the fone ganging to ;^ quhill at laft, be jilane
force and hoftilitie, he compellit the perfounes being within the faid hous, and
keparis thairof, and Johnne Gordoun rebell thairin, to rander the faid hous, and
to deliuer to him and his complices the faid Johnne Gordoune, rebell ; and fwa
reft and tiike fra thame the faid rebell, vpoun na vthir jmrpois, hot to faif him
fra punifchemeut and executioun of juftice vpoun him, for his demereittis : And
vtheris crymes, as the lettres beris.

Prelocutouris for this pannell. Persewar.

The Lord Saltoun, The Lard of Aflowne, The Lard of Coife, Mr Dauid Borthuik,

Mr Alex' Syni, Mr Alex' Skene. (Lord) Aduocat.

This cafe was continued, fii-ft to Jan. 1, and afterwards to Feb. 25, ' Plegio,
Waltero Barclay de Towye,' when the pannel came in his Majefty's will. ' Plegio,
Magiftro de Forbes cum feipfo, conjunctim et diuifim, ad fatiffaciendum voluntati et partibus conqiierentibus ; et Waltero Barclay, ad releuand. diet. Magiftrum de Forbes.' The King's award is not inferted in the Record.

Cljrft— 3U tsttt of Cj^tft— ^Ijtrp-^tf altng, ^r.

Jan. 8. — Daxd Ellot,'' callit of the Ileuclibous.

Dilatit of commoun thift, c ommoun reffett thairof, outputting and inputting
of thift in thiftuous maner, betuix land and land, bayth of auld and new; and
of the Healing fra the Lard of Ceffurd of Ixxx fcheip.

Verdict. Fand and deliuerit to be culpabill, fylit and conuict of the cr}Tnes
aboue wi-ittin. — ' Conuict. et Suspen.

' Arrayed in warlike manner. - Until sunset. The •)lirase is quite new to the Editor, and is

singulaily expressive. ^ Dand or Dandy, a familiar ab' iatiou in the South of Scotland for Andrew, e. g. ' Dandy Dinrnont'

VOL. I. 1

66 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576-7.

SBtmoIisI)in0 anU <!5beiti)roU)iiT(r iHarcIj- atones, ^c.

Jan. 15. — ^VIIXEAME Hay of Delgatie, Maifter Walter Hay and
Patrik Hay, his breder; Willeame Hay, James Lovvrimer, Mr
James Buchane, Andro Burnett, George Scott and Alexander Scott.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the dimolifcheing and doiin-cafting to the grovmd of
certane mai'dieis and ftanis, lett be the Juilice-Deinities at ane Court of Perambulation ; and vfurpation of our fouerane lordis authoritie, conuocation of his
hienes liegis, and vtheris crymes at length contenit in the lettres.

' Desert.' de mandate domini Regentis, dato Alexandre Hay, fcribe fecreti
confilij.

Creasoiiaible amportatiou of dfalst iHonei).

Jan. 22. — Johnne Suthikland, Scottilinan, borne in Culreis.
Being conuiet of befoir, vpoun the aucht day of Januar inftant, ffor the treffonabill hamelending of certane fals and adulterate money (fie as haIhels,2)l(Mis,
and xij d. peces, extending to xx lib.,) to be output and warit trealbnablie
amangis our fouerane lerdis liegis, to thair dilTait and hurt ; and being comniittit to ward quhill dome wer pronunceit, at the pleafour of my lord Regentis
grace : And thairfoir, his grace, temperand iuftice with mercye, ordanit the laid
Johne, of his awin confent, to be baneift this realme during his graceis will,
and neuir to retiu-ne within the famin without his licence, vndir the pane of deid
and payment of ane thowfand merkis ; and that he fall dei:>art furth of the fam
within the fpace of fourtie dayis, and fall do his exact diligence to fpeir and try
out the forgearis, fein3earis and deuifaris of the laid fals cuin5e, and mak rejjort
thaireftir of the famin diligence to the Juftis and his deputis, vndir the famin
pane foirfaid. And for obferving heirof, fand Williame Huchefoun, cordiner in
Edinburgh, Henrie and Alex' Suthirland in Culrois, brethir to the fud Johnne,&c.

Conboratiou of ILicsts— 2ilsincr of CiUbtiiitss, ^c

Jan. 29. — Johnne Muntgumrie of Scottiftoun, Gabriel Sempill,
younger of Cathcart, &c.
Adam Hall of Foulbar becomes pledge for the entry of Johnne Muntgumrie
of Scottiftoun ; and the laid Johnne, Adam Hall of Foulbar and Andrew Matter
of Sempill, become pledges, jointly and fcuerally, to enter Gabriel Sempill,
younger of Cathcart, Robert Sempill of Craigbait, Gabriel Sempill, his brother,
James and Walter Muntgumreis, brothers of the Laird of Scottiftoun, Bartholomew Muntgumrie, uncle of the faid Laird Johne Andirfoun in '\A\ilkmylne of
Partik, and Robert Kent, fervant te the faid Laird, before the Juftice or his

10 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 67

deputies, on the third day of the next Juftice-air of Renfrew and Lanark refpectively, or wlierever and whenfoev'er it lliall pleafe his Majelly, on premonition of XV days, to underly the law for convocation of the liegis, ' bodin in feir
of weir,' againft the tenor of the Acts of Parhament, and ' umbefetting" the high
way to Hew IMvmtgunirie of Hetilheid, and for ufing of ' culueringis and i)iftiilettis ;' committed in the month of December laft,^ &c.

asadful tvi'ov in ^5sm,

Jan. 31. — JoHNNE ScHAW of Grenok, James Dunlop of that Ilk, and
thirteen others.^
Dilatit of the wilfull and manifeft errour, coniniittit in the acquiting of Robei't
Kent,"* leruand to Johnne Miuitgumrie of Scottiftoun, of diuerle crymes contenit in the lettres purcheft aganis him be Hew Muntgumrie of Hefilheid.
Persewaris. Prelocutour in defence.

Mr Dauid Bortlmik, Mr Robert Creychtoun, aduocattis. Mr Edmund Hay, (aduocate.)

Allegeis the faid Mr Edmund for the pannell, acceptand the fummondis, in
quantum, nocht grantand ony part of the fainin ; that nothing audit now to be
put to the knawlege of this fecund inqueift, hot onlie the clangeing of this Robert Kent of the allegeit thiftuous fteling of ane liors fra Hew Muntguim-ie of
Hefilheid, in fafar as thair is na reflbun in all the haill fummondis, allegeing or
concludand aganis the Inqueift, for clangeing of him of ony vthir jJoint contenit
in the faid fummondis : Attovu-, acceptis the fummondis, in fafar as is confeffit in
the famin, that the gentill-woman was onlie in the hous hir allane, the tyme of
the committing of the allegeit deid. — To the quhilk anfiierit the Aduocattis,
that the laid allegeance fuld be repellit, in refpect of the fummondis as it is lybellit, berand the Confeffioun of the partie and notorietie of the cans; and ficlyke,
{loco quo) &c.

The perfounes on pannell, nochtwithftanding the faid allegeance, afliis inftrumentis, that thai offer thame felfis at tliis day to the knawlege of ane condigne
Affyis, difalfenting to ony continewatioun of the faid mater.

The Juftice, vpoun (indrie reflbnabill cauffis, moving my Lord Regentis
grace, ordanis the mater to be continewit to the thrid day of the Air, or foner,
vpoun XV dayis warning ; and cautioun to be tane of the perfounes on pannell,
for thair entre.

' Obfidiatione vici regij. ^ ggg Dg^. 1, 1576. ^ piggjig^ Andrea Magiftro de Sempill et

Doni. de Ernok, coniunctim et divifim, pro eorum introitu; et prefate perfone, ad releuand. ; ac
Dom. de Trearne, obligauit feipfum, ad releuand. diet, cautionarios, pro fuis tenentibus. * See Dec
1, 1576.

68 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576-7.

^lau(ii)ter— Burniits o( roiwit of 33m*uofi).

Feb. 12. — Neill Axgussone (MacLeod) in Alfent.'
Dilatit of art and part of the crewall flauchter of vmq'" Hutcheoun AngufTone
his broder, in tlie He of Alient ; committit in the moneth of Junij, the 3eir of
God F."\''.lxxv ieiris : And for the flanchter of vinq'*' Donald M^Hutcheoun
Ano-nfTone, brother to the faid Hutcheoun ; committit at the famin tyme : AxD
for the trelTonabill byrning of the toun of Dornocli in Sutliirlaud ; committit in
the moneth of Junij, or thairby, the 3eir of God F'.VMxvj 5eiris ; - And
diuerie vtheris llauchteris, as the dittay beris, &c. ; fpecialie, of Dimcane

M<=Rorye.

AssisA.
Willeame Suthirlaiul of Evelik, Adam Bell, in Edinburglie, Alex'. Brodye of that Ilk,

JoluieHay of Park, (Cliaiicellor,) Thomas Frafer, tutour of Lovat, James Campbell of Arcliinglas,
Alex'. Hav, liis broder, Thomas Robefoun, burges of Ed', Alex'.M=NacliteneofDundanoch,

Nicliolas Rois of Dunlkeith, Johnne Rois, proueil of Name, Johns Campbell of Inuerlevene,

Duncan Campbell of Both, Johne Campbell of Caddell, Alex'. Innes of Crummye.

Mr Robert Creychtoun tuke inftrumentis of the faid NeilHs Confeflioun, declaring that his fone Tormot fle^' the faid vmq''^ Hutcheoun and Donald his
lone ; And that he himfelf was cumand to Ed'', to Ipeik my Lord Regeutis
grace, and to offer him to underly the law, for the faidis ciymes, qulian he was
tane in the menetyme, be Torquill M^Cloyde apperand of the Lewis, be the
way, and incarcerate. And ficlyke, that he confeffit the flauchtir of the faid
vmqle Duncane McRorie, and that he had his compouitoiu- thairfoir : ' And that

' Tliis person, according to Sir Robert Gordon, commanded tlie country of Assint. He was tlje
tiftli son of AngTis-more, Laird of Assint. The eldest son, Donald-Caim, died of his wounds shortly
after being taken prisoner by the Laird of Lewis, (John iNLCorquill M'Leod,) against whom he had
revolted. Tormot, tlie second son, was slain by his brother Angus-l)eg, wiio, in liis turn, was slain by
his bastard brother Alexander, in revenge of Tormot's deatli. John-reawicli succeeded liis brotlier
Angus-beg, (who died witiiout issue,) and governed the country for 16 years. On John's death, he
left the government to this Neill- Angus-son ; whose younger brother Ilucheon, jealous of Neill's prosiierity, took him prisoner, and detained him until he forced him into certain terms. In revenge for
this act, he killed Hucheon, with his second son Donald, who had come to visit him in the Isle of
Assint. ' Wlienipon Torcpiell Conaldagh MacLoyd of the Cogigh purfued the Yle in AHint, and
apprehended Neill Ananfliine, whom lie fent to Edinburgh, where he was executed the yeir of (lod 1581." —
Gordon's General Accovnt of Earldom of Sutherland, p. "233. — Neil left his sons John-reamch and
Donald-bane, with three i)astards, Tormot, Angus, and .\lister. - Y Macky of Far ' invaded tlie
cuntrie of Southerland after the death of Earl John, wafted tlie barony of Skibo, came to tlie town of
Dornoijh, and, (vpone lome privat (|iiarrell betuein liimfelf and tlie Morrayes,) being afllfted by the
Laird of Dutl'us and liis freindis, he brunt tlie laid toun, the yeir of (jod 1.J67, wiiich was then cheiflie
inhabited by the Morrayes.' — Gordons Sutherland, p. loO. — This town was a second time bunit after
a siege by the Master of Caithnes and Y Mackay, anno LiTO, ' in the niglit leafcin, which the inhabitants culd no longer defend ; yit eftir the toun was loft, and the catliedrall church brunt, except the
ftei[ile, they held the caftle and the ftciple of the church for the I'pace of a weik, the Catteynes continuallie aliiiulting them, hot in vain without fuccelie.' — Ibid, p. 156. ^ i. e. Paid his Assythment,
and obtained Letters of Slains thereupon.

10 Jac. 6. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 69

he was compellit be M«Kye to pas with him to Dornoch, quhair he and his
cumpanye did na thing bot lay on the feildis, &e. — ' Conuict. et Decollat,"

Feb. 14. — Robert Howstoun, broder to the lard of Houftoun, and
forty-fix others.
Dilatit of art and part of the crewell flauchter of vmq'^ William Lyndelay,
feruitour to James Maifter of Glencarne, in October laftbyj^aft.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Renfrew, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione XV dierum.'*

Feb. 28. — WiLLEAME Porter feild of that Ilk.
Dilatit of art and part of the flauchter of vmq'" Johnne Birfljane of Middill
Walkinfchaw ; committit in the moneth of Maij 1573 3eiris.

Continued to the 30th March, Plegio, Domino de New-wark-Maxwell.

Mar. 29. — The Laird of M^^Farlane and James Flemyng de Kilmacolme,
become fecurities for Porterfeild ; and, on the following day.

Mar. 30. — The Laird of Knok becomes fecurity to prefent him at the
Juftice-air of ' Renfrew, tertio Itiuei'is, vel fuper premonitione xv dierum.'

Preloquutouris in defence. Persewar.

Maifter Jolinne Schairp, Maifter Thomas Craig. William BirlLane.

The faidis preloquutoui'is in defence alledgeis, that thair is na cryme committit, in refjiect that the faid Johnne Birlbane wes flane at the home, put
thairto, be vertew of our fouerane lordis lettres ; and thairthrow, being rebell,
for ane treafonabill cryme : As the lettres of horning, direct thairvpoune beiris,
and produceit prefentlie in proces. And ficlyke, the faid Mr Johnne Schairp
produceit the generale band of the Sherefdome of Renfrew. Johnne Hammiltoune of Schawtoune, aflvit inftrumentis of the productioune of the faidis Lettres
of Horning, and proteftit that thay be keipit in proces, as euidentis to my Lord
Claude Hammiltoune,

Feb. 28. — Johnne Cavxingha-Aie, Ibne to vmq"* ..... Cwninghame
of Clovinbayth, and John Maxwell, broder to Thomas Maxwell of Southbar.

' Beheaded. - Plegiis, Doraluo de Glengarnok, Dom. de Houftoun et Doni. de New-wark, coniunctini et divifim, pro omnibus, tertio Itineris de Renfrew, vel alubi, I'uper premonitione xv dierum.
Et poftea, viz. xv Feb., Will. Porterfeild de Duchall obligavit leipliun ad relevand. dictos plegios, de
prefata cautione penifque omnibus in eadem eontentis.

70 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1576-7.

Dilatit of art and part of foid flaucliter. James Sandelandis of Calder, their
cautioner, fined ' P. markis' for non-appearance of * atlier of tlie faid perfoiinis.'

Crfasonaljle Kctnining cf tl)t ^^Mct of Surfjali.

Feb. 28. — WiLLiAME Portarfeild of tliat Ilk.
Delatit of the treafonabill deteining of the place of Duchall, incontrare our
fouerane lordis chairgis. — Plegio, Jacobo Flemyng de Kilmacolme pro ejus introitu, tertio Itineris de Renfrew, vel fuper premonitione xv dieruni.

dTivt-vaisins— 3i3iu'ntno:(irorit.

Apr. 17, 1577. — Andro Thoiniesoun, in Siluerburne.
Dilatit of the birning of certane coirnes to Mathew Lowrye of Cairnhill. —
' CoNUiCT. ET Combust.'^

^sin0 antr srcfetns of 3iuf|)antmtnts antr asaitfj^crafts.

Maij 4. — Eduart Kyninmonth alias Lowrie.
Dilatit of vfnig and feiking of Inchantmentis and Witchcraftis, in the moneth
of October l^.V^lxxiiij 3eiris, quhen findrie of his cattell wer ilrickin with
feiknes ; and vtheris crymes contenit in our fouerane lordis lettres, purcheft
thairvpoiui. — Quo die, Joannes Addie de Deiu'othane plegius deuenit ad intrandum dictum Eduardum Kyninmonth coram Jufticiario f. d. n. Regis feu fuis deputatis, tertio die proximi Itineris de Forfare, vel alibi, vbi et quando placuerit
fue ferenitati, fuper premonitione quindecim dierum, ad fubeundum legend pro
frequentacione et vfurpacione Incantacionis et preitigiarum, lie JVlchcraftis appellat. alijfque criminibus in Uteris regiis defui^er direct, ipecificat. Hec plegiacio capta fuit, de niandato M. Dauidis Boirthuik aduocati. — Et Jacobus
Striueling obligauit leipfum ad relevandum dictum Joannem Adie, de prefata
cautione et penis in eundem content.

Crtason— Conspirina: Xiyt Seatl) of iu^cnt iHorton,

May 15. — ADAlNf Quuvteeurd, younger of Myltoune.
John Quhytefurd elder of Myltoun, being often called to produce Adam his
fon before the Juftice, to underlie the law for art and i)art of confulting with
John Sempill of Byltreis, and trealbnably conlpiring the murther of James Earl
of Mortoune Lord Dalkeyth, Regent ; conimittit in the month of January 1575.
The laid Adam not conii)eariiig, the laid John as his pledge was amerciated in

' Sentenced to be burnt. No part of the procedure in this case is preserved.

IOJac. 6. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 71

the pain of Ic. lib., and Adam adjudged to be denounced rebel, and all his moveable goods efcheated to the King's ufe, as fugitive from the law, for the aboue
crime. — Richard Binning, meflenger and officer of the Court of Judiciary, reports the denunciation on May 18.

May 21. — John Blair of that Ilk, William Blair his brother, Johnne
Rois and John Mitchell, his feruandis, Johnne Crawfurd in
Birkheid, Johnne C, his fonne, Niniane C. thair, Robert C. in
Ryhill, Robert Blair, brother to Williame Blair of Halle,
Androw Blair Redare at Dalrye, and eighteen others.

Persewaris, Capitane Tiiomas Crawfurd, Mr Robert Creycbtoun, aduocate, Robert Kerof Kerrifland.

Preloquutouris for tbe pennall. Preloquutouris, in perfute.

Mr Henrie Kynroife, Jobnne Maxwell, in Portarbill, Alexander Hwme, in North Berwik,
Mr Dauid Mackill, Jobnne Blair of Middill Auchin- Jobnne Crawfurd in Camlarg,

James Mure, bume. Williame Crawfurd of Dnimfoy,

The Laird of Cauldwell, Quintene Crawfurd, broder to Cannouris,

Mr Nicoll Elpbingftoun.
The pennall aikis inllrumentis of the perfonis comperand and infiftand in
perfute.

ASSISA.

The Laird of Ferme-Nobill, The Laird of Airnok, Claud Hammiltoun of Colchnoch,

Waltare Riddell of that Ilk, The Laird of Auchincapell, Johnne Cleland of FofTauch,

Robert Huntare of Huntarftoun, The Laird of DrumquhafTell, The Laird of Anneftoun.
The Laird of Skirling, Tbe Laird of Keir,

James Weir of Blakwod, The Laird of Dal5ell,

Verdict. The Aflyife, for the maift pairt, be thair delyuerance, fylis and

conviictis WiUiame Blair, brother to the Laird of Blair, of fchutting with piftoUettis, of following and chailing of Thomas Crawfurd and ferwandis for thair

flauchteris, \-poune foirthocht fellonie. Item, Fylis the Laird of Blair, of

following and chafmg of the faid Thomas and his ferwandis for thair llauchteris, vpoun foirthocht fellonie, allenarlie. Item, Fylis Johnne Or (' N^otare,')

of the following and chaifling of thame for thair flauchtaris, vpoune fuddantie.

May 23. — The quliilk day, Loird Rois of Halkheid and

Mure of Cauldwele, become fouerteis coniunctlie and feueralie, for Johnne Blair

of that Ilk ; and Dauid Blair, 3oungar of Adamtoune, and ^Villiame Cuninghame, 3oungare of Glengarnok, become louerteis coniunctlie and feueralie, for

Williame Blair, brother to the Laird of Blair, and Johnne Or, notar, ferwand

to Glengarnok ; that thai and ilkane of thame, fall enter thair perfounes in

waird, within the Caftell of Blaknes, or audit houris at evin,' and nocht efcape

' By eight o'clock in tbe evening.

73 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1577.

nor efchew furth thairof ; ay and qiiliill he (they) be relevit ; viz. of the faid
Laird of Blair, vnder the pane of Fyve thowfand pundis ; and for the faidis
Williame Blair and Johnne Blair, or ilkane of thame, vnder the pane of Twa
thowfand puudis. Et Dominus de Blair ad relevandum.

Jun. 14. — Johnne Crawfurd of the Schaw, Hew and Johnne, his
fonnes, Patrik, Jokie and James Crawfurds, furatyme fer-
• wandis to Hew Loird Somervell.

Dilaittit of the trefToiiabill fyir-ryffing and burning of ane byir pertening to
Johnne Boifwall of Auchinlek, and vtheris crymes contenit in the lettres direct
thairvpoun.

Persewar, Johnne Boifwall of Afflek.

Preloquutouris for the pennall.

Maifter Dauid MacGill, The Auld Laird of Carmichaell, Archihald Dowglas, conneftable,

The Laird of Trabroune, Johnne Crawfurd of Camlaige, Allane Catlicart of Carbelftoune.

Continued ' in craftinum.' Plegio, Hugone Kennedie.

Jun. 15. — The jiannell afl\it inftrumentis, that the Laird of Auchinlek
compeirand, difafentit to the perfute of thame ; and nochtwithflanding the
Juftice command anent the continewatioime of the famin, difafentit thairto
alluterlie.

Jun. 15. — Johnne Sempill of Beltreis.'
Dilaittit of the treflbnabill Confpiracie of my Lord Regentis Graceis flauchtare.

AssisA.
George Dundas of that Ilk, W.WauchopeofNuddre-!V[archell,Hew Weir of Howburne,

Johune Roife of Swanftoun, Johnne Rofe of Suanftoune, Johnue Bannatyne of Corbous,

Johnne Towris of Inuerleytli, Johnne Fairlie of Colmefloune, James Rig of Carberry,
Johnne Logane of Cotfeilde, The Lairde of Mercliifloune, The Lairde of Anftruther,

Johnne Kinkaide of Warrefloune, Tlie Lairde of Dunroder, Tlie Lairde of Saut Menanis.

Verdict. Johnne Simjiill of Beltreis, being prefentit and enterit in jugement vpoune pannell, as dilaittit of the treironabill cryme eftir Ijiecifeit ; at
lenth mentionat in the dittay maid thairvpoune ; Avas put to the knawlege of
ane AfTyile of the perfonis befoir exjireflit : And immediatlie eftir the chefing
and fweiring of the faidis perfounes of Alfyfe, as vfe is, the faid Johnne Sempill
being accufit be dittay, oppinlie red in jugement, togidder with his depofitionis
and confeflionis of the crymes following. The fame perfounes of Aflyife remo-

' On tlie margin of the Record, ' Convict, and the dome of foirfaltour pronunceit aganis him.'

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 73

veit furth of Court, and altogidder conuenit and reffonit on the poyntis thairof :
and being ryplie auifit tliairwitli. enterit agane in Court : And tliair, in prefence
of the faid Juftice dejiute, be tliair del}T.xerance, pronunceit and declairit be the
niowth of Robert Lyndefay of Dunrode ; ffand and delyuerit, that he wes culpable, fylit and convict of airt and pairt of the inaiil treffonable communicatioune, conlultatioune and conferans, had be him, in interpryfing, diuifing, concluding, trelfonablie vndertaking and conceling, to fla, fchwt and cruellie niurthonr, the rycht nobill and nnchtie Prince, James Erie of Mortoune, Loirde
Dalkeyth, &c., Regent to our fouerane loird, his realme and liegis ; planelie
confenting and confaving the famin murthour and flauchtar, maift trefTonablie
and dilfaitfullie, in his hairt and mynde ; ordaining the famin to have bene fuddanlie cominittit, efter his faid treffonabill conferance foirl'aid, cpiliilk wes in the
moneth of Januare or thairbye, the 5eir of God P.V'.lxxv jeiris ; doaud thairby that was in him, to haif performit the famin, conforme to his deliberat intentioune, trelTonablie deuyfit and precogitat, as faid is ; lyke as, he had nocht faillit to haif put the famin to full pruif of executioime, gif God, of his infinit mercy
and grace, be his vthir meanis and iuftrumentis, had nocht revelit the famin,
and put flay thairvnto ; And fwa, he hes committit oppin and manefeft treaIbune aganis our fouerane loirdis darreft Regent and his hienes auctoritie ; and
audit thairfoir to be ^Jvneift as ane publict tratour to his Maieftie ; in example
of vtheris, to attemj^t the lyke treafoiiabill confpiraceis, in tyme cumiiig : Quhilk
confpiracioun and conferance thaix'of, in treffonabill maner foirl'aid, was vfit be
the faid Johnne, within the Kirk and Kirkland of Paiflay, and vther places of
the cuntrie appointit to that effect, in the moneth aboue specefeit, and findrie
vtheris tymes thairfoir, as he thocht meit and expediant. — And the dome of
foirfaltour was pronunceit aganis him be the mouth of Andro Lyndefaj% dempftare, That he fuld be takin to the mercatcroce of Edinburgh, and thair deraanit as ane tratour ; and all his landis, takis, ftedingis, rowines, poffefliones and
gudis to be foirfaltit and efchete to our fouerane loirdis vfe.

IMr Thomas Gilbert, Justice- Depnfe.'\

iHutilatioit.

Jun. 26. — Robert Striuelixg, in Eiftare Baldrochane.

Dilaittit of tlie hurting and wonding of Johnne Binning, meffinger, in his
rycht fchuldare and collar-bane.

Quo die Dominus de Kinkaid, fenior, plegius devenit, ad intrand. Robertum
Striueling, tertio Itineris de Dunbartane, vel alubi vbi at quando placuerit fue
ferenitati, fuper premonitione quindecim dierum ; ad fubeundiun legem, pro arte
et parte lefionis ac vulneracionis Joaunis Binning nuncij.

VOL, I. K

74 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1577.

[il/r Thomas Ba^inati/ne, Justice-Depute "]

(j^jpjjicssion— 3>iitei*commiinins bitf) Heiiels.

Jun. 29. — Dauid Grahame of Fyntrie, knycht, Waltare Graliame and
James Grahame, his brether.
Dilatit of the taking of Johnne Pegot, and intercommoning witli Robert
Belouch ' (Betoune) of Weflhall, rebell, and vtheris crymes.

Preloquutouris in defence. Persewaris.

The Erie of Mwntroife, The Mailler of Gray, Mailler Robert Creyclitoune,

The Lard of Balfour, The Dene of Glafgw, Mr Dauid Bortlmik,

Mr Alexander Sym, Mr Alexander Skene. Aduocates (to our fouerane lord.)

ASSISA.

Gilbert Ogilbye of that Ilk, George Gray of Scheilhill, Dauid Roflie of that Ilk,

ThomasFotheringhameofPowrie, George Di-uinmond of the Blair, Dauid Lindefay of Ed5ell,

Alex' Guthre of that Ilk, Robert Durhame of the Grange, D"'.Gutlu-e, feare of Kincaldnira,

George Halibuitoune of Petcure, Henrye Guthere of Colefloune, The Laird of Auehiulek,

Robert Erikyn, feare of Dun, George Somer of Baljordie. Alex'. Lauder of Winiuoquhe.

Daiiid Grahame, &c., war put to the knawlege of ane Affyife, of the perfonis
befoir expreflit ; and immediatlie eftir the chefing, fweiring and admitting of
the fame perlbunes of Aifyife, as vie is, the haill foirnemmit perfounes on pennail, being accufit be dittay, oppinlie red hi jugement, of the crymes following ;
eftir repetitioune of the Act of Parliament, maid anent conuocatioune of his hienes
liegis, at tuniultis, courtis or gadderingis ; as alfwa, with atteftatioune maid for
wilful! errour, in caice the fame perlbunes on pennall wax acquit of the laidis
crymes : Mailler Alex^ Sym, preloquutour for the lame pennall, eftir denyall of
Dittay, and crymes thairof, jiroduceit ane wrj^ting fubfcryuit be vmq''' Johnne
Peget in Bannabeith, declairing the defendaris to be innocent of all cryme committit to the laid Johne, and that he was onlie moueit be malice of vtheris jJerfonis to perfew the fame : Quliilk wryting the laid preloquutour and perfonis on
pannell, defyrit to be red in jugement, befoir the perfounes of Alfyife ; quhilk
being i-ed in their prelens, as was defyrit, be the faid Mr Alex'. Sym, as jireloquutour foirfaid, afkis inftrumentis thairvpoune.

Mr Roljert Creyclitoune, aduocate, nochtwithftanding jn'oductioune and reiding thairof, proteftit the fame fuld nocht be as motyve vnto the AlTyife, nor 3it
credit to be trew in the felf ; and difTafentit it fuld be red or publeift ony forder
to the AfTyife, in the tyme of the rellait of thair woittis ;'" but that the famin
fuld be gevin agane to the pairte ; quhilk, at command of the Jullice-Depute,
was gevin be the clerk of Coiu't to their preloquutoiu'is.

' Called Betouue in an after part of the trial. ' When they retired to return their verdict.

IOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 75

Verdict. The fame perfounes of Affyife, be thair delyuerance, pronunceit and declarit be the
mouth of Dauid Lyndefay of Ed^el), Fand and delyuerit, for the maifl pairt,' the faidis haill perfonnes
accufit on pannell, to be clengit and acquite of all cawfing, hounding, fending, arte, pairtaking, command,
afilllance and ratihabitioune vfit be thame, in the monetli of October, the ^eir of God Ixvij (1567),
in cuming to the duelling hous of the faid Johnne Pegot, in Balnaboth, within the fcherefdome of Forfare, qubair he was than, in quyat and fober maner, beleveand ne harme nor iniurle to have been done
to liim, be ony peilonis, bot to have levit vnder Goddis peax and our fouerane loirdis ; and thair, violentlie, maillerfullie and perforce, tuke the faid vniq'" Johnne furth of his awin duelling hous of Erlis Stradichtie, quhair the faid Dauid and remanent perfonnes foirfaidis, of his fpeciall cawfing, bounding, fending, deuyfing, arte, parte-taking, affiflance and ratihabitioune, as faid is, detenit and held
him in captiuitie tliairintill, be the fpace of viij dayis or thairby tliaireftir; committand thairthrow,
manefeft oppreflioune vpoune him, hie being our fouerane loirdis frie liege ; and vfurpand of his hienes
auctoritie vpoune thaime, in hie and manefefl eontemptioun thairof. — For the quliilk crynie the faid
Sir Dauid Grahanie of Fyntrie, knyclit, and his colligis foirfaidis, being callit to haue vnderlyue the
law, befoir the Juftice or his Deputtis, in the T .lljuyth of Edinburghe, the tent day of Februare, in
the 5eir of God I^.V^ Ixvij :;eiris, was then replegeit- to the fredome and jurifdictioune of the Regalitie of Killimuu-,^ be vertew of ane Commiffioune of the nobill and potent lord, Archebald Erie of
Angus, Loird of the Regalitie thairof; qubais bailleis vfearisand producearis of the faid Commiffioxme
thane fand cawtioune for dew and faitiifull adminiftratioune of juftice vpoune the faidis perfounes, for
the faidis crymes, in the toune of Kelemuir, place vfit and wont for haulding of Courtis thairintill, the
viij day of Maij nixt tliaireftir, in the ^eir of God I".V'^.lxviij ■^eiris, quhilk was affignit thairto be
the Juftice and his Deputtis : At the quiiilk day, ane Court was fencit, within the faid toune of Keremuir, place vfit and wont for haulding of Courtis within the fame : And albeit the faid Dauid and his
collegis foirfaid comperit, ^it in refpect of the trubles quhilk occureit within the realme, for the tyme,
juftice thane culd nocht be miniftiet in tiie laid mater ; but wes continewit to the laft day of Junij
nixtocum tliaireftir ; and at that day continewit to the xxvij day of Julij nixt tliaireftir following ; and
cawtioune taue for thame to ontir that day : Vpoune the quhilk twentie levin day of Julij foirfaid,
compeirit Johnne Ogilwye of Inuerquliairatie, knycht, and James Scrymegeour of Glafwall, bailleis
of faid Regalitie in that pairt, within the faid toune of Kerenniir ; and thair, at the faid place, vfit and
wont for haulding of Courtis thairintill, fencit and held Court in dew tyme of day, tliinkand to have
proceidit to the adminiftratioune of juftice in the faid mater : In the meintyme, the faid Dauid
Grahame of Fintrie, knyclit, getand knawlege thairof, and vnderftanding him giltie of the faid cryme,
and nawayis willing to compeir and vndirly the law tliairfoir, joynit him with vniq" George Erie of
Huntlie, Dauid Erie of Crawfiu'd, James Loird Ogilbye, quhilkis throw his perfuafioune and counfale,
parte-taking, deuyfing, affiftance and ratihabitioune, togidder with the faid Dauidis felf and his complicis, in proper jierfoun, with conuocatioune of the Kingis liegis, to the nowmer of ane thowfaud men
or thairby, boddin in feir of weir with fwordis, jakkis, fteil-bonettis, fpeiris, culveiingis and vtheris
wappiniiis, imtiifme, incontrair the tenour of the Actis of Parliament, come to the faid toune of Keremuir, the faid xxvij day of Julij, the 3eir of God I'^.V'^.lxviij 5eiris, and ftoppit the haulding of the faid
Court, and all adminiftratioune of Juftice thairin ; canting the faidis bailjeis, thair clerk and vtheris
memberis of Court, for feir of thair lyvis, to ryfe and depairt thairfra, the faniin Court being dewlie
fenceit* of befoir, as faid is : And nocht onlie ftoppit the haulding of the faid Court, bot thai intendit

' By a majority. 2 At this period, Lords of Regalities, &c., had a right to demand the person of any criminal, resident within the bounds of their Regality, on Bnding security, that justice should be lawfully administered. This was
termed, being rcpledged, or replegeit. It was a fruitful source of irjustiee and oppression, and was often employed to frustrate the ends of Law. ^ Kirrynuiir. ■" A forensic term, still used in our Criminal Courts. IJefore proceeding
with the trial, an officer proclaimed that the business of the Court was now commencing, and interdicting all manner of
persons from disturbing their proceedings. This was called fencing, q. d. defending or protecting the Court against all
intrusion or molestation.

7e CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1577.

puqioiflie, of ven-ie malice, to have bereft the faidis Judgeis, and vtheris convenit and affifting thame in
fetting fordwait of juftice the faid day, of thair lyvis : Lyke as, in deid, the faid Dauid, accumpaneit
as faid is, tlian inuadit, foilowit and perfewit thanie for tliair bodelie harme and flamhter : leveand na
tiling that niicht have brocht his wickit and vngodlie inteqiryfe to efl'ect, and had nocht faillit to have
performit the fame, gif God had nocht provydit remeid. — And als, the faid Dauid Grahanie of Fyntrie, knvcht, and his brethir foirfaidis, daylie, monethlie, owkle and continewalie, at thair plefour, in
the monethis of October, Nouember, December, Januare, Februare and Marche, in the 5eir of God
I°'.V^lxviij 5euis nixt, efter the denunciatioune of Robert Betoune of Wefthall, our fouerane loirdis
rebell, for the cryme vnderwrittin, quhilk wes vpoune the xxiiij day of September, the 3eir of God
P.VMxviij c;eiris; and ficlyke, daylie, monethlie and continewalie, in all the monethis or thairby
nixt and immediatlie following the faid denunciatioune, intercommonit, reflet, fuppleit, fchew fauouris,
gaif meit, drink, hous and herberie to the liiid Robert Betoun of Wefthall, within the faid Dauidis
places of the names Erlis Stradichtie, Fyntrie, and borrowis of Dundie, Forfare, Brechin and diuerfe
vtheris pairtis of the realme quliair thai thocht maiil expedient, the laid Robert being ordourlie denunceit our fouerane loirdis rebell, and put to his hienes home the tyme foirfaid, in default of finding
of fouertie to have \Tiderlyne the law befoir the Juflice or his deputtis, in the tolbuyth of the burghe
of Edinburghe, the viij day of November, the 5eir of God I^.V-^.lxviij 3eiris, for arte and pairt of
the cruell flauchtare of vraq'*-' James Ramfay, tutour of Lawis, committit in the moneth of September
immediatlie preceding ; and vtheris crynies contenit in the lettres raifit thairvjioune, and remaining
vnder the proces of borne during the faid liaill fpace, incontrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament ; in hie contemptioune of our fouerane loirdis auctoritie and lawis.

Vpoune tlie quhilk purgatioune and pronunciatioune declairit in jugement, the
faidis Sir Dauid Grahaine of Fyntrie, knvcht, and his foirfaid brether, afkit inftrumentis and protellit for thair teftinioniaUis.

[Mr Thomas Gilbert, Justice-Depute. 1

Oct. 54-. — VioiAT Mar, in Kildeis.'
Dilaitit of tlie vfnig of Sorcerie, Witchcraft, and Intantatioune, with Inuocatioune of fjn-eittis, at the tymes contenit in the faid Dyttay.

ASSISA.

Williame Drummonde at the James Drummond in Auchtirar- George Drummond, alias Gawir,

myll of Nab. dour, in Strageyth,

Jolinne Grahame, appeirand Johnne Drummond of Pitkennec- Andro Millar in Balloclochargye,

of Calandare, tie, Johnne Anderfoun thair,
Dauid Murray of Galdwall, Dauid Murray in North Kynkell, Patryk Murray in Auchtirtyr,
George Marchell of Inuerpethie, Johnne Drummond in Layonocli, Johnne Drummond, in South KinGeorge Drummond of Ballock, Hew Mcrfchell in Xorth Kiokell, kell.

Verdict. The liiid Violat conuict be Alfyife, of the poynt of Dittay contenit
in hir awin Depofitionis and ConfefTioun, maid of hir treffonabill vndertaking,
to put down my Lord Regentis Grace" with AVitchcraft, at the tyme and place
contenit in the fam Depofitionis. — Item fylit, for ane commoune vfare of for-

' On tlie margin of Record, ' Conuict.' Keldeislands lay witliin the barony of Methyen, Perthshire,
where there was a chapel called Keldeis. - James Earl of Morton, Lord Dalkeith, &c.

11 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 77

eerie, libbis' and charmes ; and abufare of the pepill, aganis the lawis of God

and manne.

Absen. ab Assisa Malcum Di-ummond of Bortllaiul, Gilbert Moyll in Alloquliy, Andrew Ramlay in Pittinclerocli, Patrik Maxtoune of Cultoquliy, Patrik Diunimond of Moinsie.

It is much to be regretted that the ' poyntis of Dittay,' and the Declarations
and Confession of this personage, are not preserved in the Record. There is no
doubt, from the singular respectability of the Assise or Jury, that she must have
been of superior rank. — Although her conviction is recorded, the Justiciary Clerk
has not marked the sentence on the margin as usual. It had likely been referred to the Lord Regent and Privy Council ; and when pronounced, omitted to
be inserted in the Record.

Nov. 13. — George BruntI'Ielp, alias callit Ciiflifge.^
Dilatit of the flauchtare of vmq'^ Geoi'ge Ingis. ' Decollat.'

^Iausl)ter antr iHuiUti*.

Feb. 5, 1577-8. — Thoimas Trujible and AValtare Trumble, Ibnnes to

the Laird of Bedrewle, (Sir Thomas Trumble).

Dilatit of art and part of the cruell llauchtai-e and miu-thour of vmq'' Johnne

Forbes, fone to Johnne Forbes of Ardmurdocht, committit in the moneth of

December or thairby laft-was, vjioune let i)iu-pois, prouifioune, be way of vmbefetting of the hie gait, vpoune foirthocht fellonie.

Preloquitouris in defence. Persewaris.

Mr Thomas Craig, Tlie Laird of Gledftanis, .Tolinne Forbes of Ardninrdorht.

Tiie Laird of Cranftoune, Mark Hwme, fader to the tiefunct,

Tlie Laird of Uuiithill, Nicholl Carnecroce. Mr Robert Creychtoune.

Prelocutoris in perfiit.
.Sir James Balfoure, My Laird of Deir, The Laird of Glenbervie.

Tlie Laird of Eggle, The Laird of Lowrefloune,

Assisa.
Robert Lowfoune of Hurabye, Stevin Kinkaid, in Brochtoiine, James Hart, in tlie Caimogait,^
.lames Kinkaid of the Coittis, Clement Kincaid, in the Coittis, The Laird of Pilrig.^

Verdict. 'Acquit ambo.'

Feb. 26. — WiLLiAME Thrisle in Dundie, fkipar of Nychtingall,

' Magical incantations. A.S. lib-lac, L. B. Uhlacum, incantatio per fascina, fascinatio. ' Imc properly signifies phi/ ; thus, ' Lib-lac means ' the playing oft" of magical charms or delusions,' or ' bewitching.' - Crop-ear. ^ A relation (father?) of Andro Hart the printer. ' The remainder
of the Assise are ftuars, &c.

78 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1577-8.

James Dais, youngare thair, Thomas Broixne, in Anftruther,
James Rankene, marinall in Dundie, five others ' marinallis,'
and \A'^illianie Swane, cuik thair.
Dilatit of art and pairt of the crewall flauehtare of vmq'" Robert Watfonn, in
Leyth, committit in October laftbypaft.

Preloquitouris in defence. Persewaris.

The Connertabill of Dundie, Mr Jolinne Scharp, Elizabeth Anderfoun, rehct of

The Laird Eggeil, Mr Alex'. Guthre, vmq' Rob'. Watfoune of Leyth,

The Mailler of Glammis, Mr Richard Strang. The thre faderles bairnis,

Mr Rohert Creychtoun, aduocate,
James Mowbray of Pitloiier.

Verdict. On the margin of the Record, ' Omnes Acquit, de omnibus infra fcript.'

atJtiltert).

Apr. 11. — CuTHBERT Amullekyne of Dempftartoune.
Dilaitit of the cryme of Adulterie, committit with Elizabeth Hammiltoune,
the fpous of Roger Kilpatrik of Cloifljurne, committit at diuerfe tymes.
Persewaris. Prelocutouris in defence.

Roger Kirkpatrik of Clofburn, Mr R'. Creyclitoune. Mr Thomas Fermoure, Williame Grahame.

Verdict. Tlie Alfyife, for the maift pairt, conuictis and fyllis this Cuthbert
Amullegane, for art and committing of the filthie and abhoniinabill cryme of
Adulterie with Elizabeth Hammiltoune, fpous to Roger Kirkpatrik of Cloifljiu-ne,
conuerfand his bodie with hir in the lame filthie act, within the place of Cloifburne, diuerie and findrie tymes, preceding lawfull admonitiounis maid to him
to abftene thairfra, quhilk was the audit day of March, the 3eir of God P.V.
Ixxvj 5eiris (1576-7). As alfwa for his committing of the fame filthie and abhoniinabill cryme of Adulterie with the faid Elizabeth, diuerfe and findrie tymes,
within the laid 2)lace of Cloifljiirne, burch of Edinburghe, and partis of the
cuntrie in fiindrie houffis and chalmeris thairof, fence the tymes of his confeffioun
of the fame, and repentance maid thairfoir, and fence the tynie of lawfull and
dew adinonitioune maid be him the day foirfaid, and vtheris dayis and tymes
fpecifeit in the tellimoniall gevin thairanent. And conuictis him alfwa of the
thiftuous Ipending, waifting and initting away of the faidis Rogeris guidis and
geir, during the fame fpace and tymes, quliill he vfit in maner foirfaid to liant
and converfe with the faid Elizabeth, in the faid Adulterie. In witnelie heirof,
the Chancellare, in name of the reft of this Alfyife, lies fubfcriuit this del)^ierance with his hand.

Note. Sentence of inmishment is afterwards pronounced, see Feb. 18, 1578-9IIJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 79

\_Mr A/exander Baiuudyne, Justice-Depute.']

CreasoitabU i^lausljtci' of %tA)\\ ?tortr ii^Iammis, Itorti Cljaufdlor.

Jul. 22. — David Erle of Crawfurde.

Dauid Betoun tie Melgound, plegius devenit, ad introand. Dauidem Conmitem

Crawfurdie coram Jufticiario f.d.ii. Regis in jn-eterio burgi de Ed'., xxiij die

meiifis Septembris proxime futuro, ad fubeundum legem, pro arte et parte crudelis et proditorie interfectionis quondam Joannis domini de Glammis cancellarij, in menfe ' ultimo elaps., commifs. infra burgum' de Striueling ; ex veteri inimicitia, certo propofito, prouifione et precogitata felonia commifs. : Secundum formam et tenorem Literariun regiarum defujier direct., et
fub penis in Actis Parliamenti contentis. Et hec plegiatio capita fuit de mandato dicti f. d. n. Regis, per ejus Preceptum liac de caufa direct.

(Sic Sublcribitur) Dauid Betoun of Melgound.

(Nov. 4.) Tlie Earl of Craufm'de again finds feciu'ity for his appearance
on the ferd day of Maixhe nixtocum.

^Iaticri)ter of eTfjantelloi* ^lammfs*

Jul. 22. — WiLUiAME Fowlartoune, junior of Crago, Thomas Strathauchin, brother to the Laird of Bogtoune, and Johnne Scrymgeour, in , feruants of the Erl of Crawfurde.

Dauid Betoun of Melgound alfo becomes furety for their aji^^earance on
the 13th day of October next.

\^Mr Thomas Hannatyne, Justice-Depute^

^lauaT)ter.

Nov. 6. — WiLLiAME Stewart and Harie Stewart, foimes to Andro
Lord Ochiltre.
The quhilk day, compeirit Alexander Mowat, lone lawfuU to vmq'" Charlis
Mowat of Bufbie, qulia produceit our fouerane lordis lettres, dewlie execut and
indorlat, purcheft be him, and the remanent kyn and freindis of vraq'^ Charlis
Mowat, aganis William and Harie Stewartis, fonnes to Andro Lord Ochiltre,
being fummond be vertew thairof to wuderly the law, for the llauchter of the
laid vmq'" €harlis ; in refpect quhairof, the faid Alexander proteftit for releif of
the fouertie fundin for reporting of the faidis lettres, to this day nixtocum ; and
tuke inftrumentis of the productioune of the kingis graces lettre and charge, di-

' This unfortunate scuffle took place on tlie streets of Stirling, Mar. 17, 1578, between the followers of the Earl of Craufurd and those of the Lord Chancellor, when Lord Glaniniis was accidentally
slain by a random shot. It is understood that the Earl Craufuid had no immediate concern in this
affair.

80 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1578-9.

rect to the Juftice and his depiittis, for continewatioune of this Court to the thrid
day of the Air or former, vijoune xv dayis warning, difpenfand with tlie compereance of tlie faidis perfonnes in the Court ; As the faid charge heiris, quhilk,
he protellit, fuld be infert in the proces : And in refpect the famin was pirchefl
be ane finifter informatioune, maid to the Kingis grace, for keiping of the faid
malefactouris vnpuneift or accufeit be the law, qulia fa cruellie had fched the
innocent blude of the faid vniq'" Charlis, as alfwa to the hurt of him and A'theris
perfewaris, in the hindrance of juftice : Thairfore, the faid Alexander protefl;it
for remeid, at God and the Kingis grace ; and alkit inftrumentis of the premiffes ; and that he prefentlie dilfafrentit to the continewatioun maid be the Juftice and his deputtis in this Court ; and heirvpoune, tuke actis in the handis of
me notare publict wnderwritten and fcrybe of the faid Court.

[3/r Johnne Grahme, Justice-Depute.]

auministerins ^^oison to i)tx ^m^m'H,

Jan. 12, 1578-9. — Helexe Colquhouxe, fpous to AVilliam Cuninghame of Aket.
Clemant Kinkaid, in the Coittis, oftymes callit to have produceit our fouerane
lordis lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be "William Cunninghame of
Aket, and M'''^ Dauid Borthuik of Lochhill, and Robert Creychtoim of Eliok,
aduocatis to our fouerane loird, to tak fouerte of the faid Helene, that he (llie)
tbuld compeir and wnderly the law this day and place, ffor the treflbnabill Miniftering of Pojdbun to the faid William, hir fpous ; committit in October laftwas : And nocht produceand the famin, was thairfore amerciat iu the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

aijultcii).

Feb. 18. — CuTHBERT Amullekin, in Dempftartoune.'
Johnne Hammiltoun, parfoun of Crawfurd, Johnne and Cuthbert Amullekin,
ferwand to my Loird Ruthuene, become fouerties coniunctlie and feueralie, for
Cuthbert A. in D., conuict for Adulterie, committit with Elizabeth Hammiltoun, Ladie Cloinnirne, that he fall depairt furth of this realme, within thre fcoir
dayis, immediatlie eftir the dait heirof, and remane beneift furth of the famin
in tyme cuming : And als, that he fall abftene fra the crpne abouewritten, vnder
the pane of ane thowfand merkis : And this done at command of fecreit counfale, be thair precept direct to that effect : Lykeas the faid Cuthbert, of his
awin confent and will, reffaueit the faid baniefment.

1 See April 11, 1578.

12Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 81

Conbomtion of ti)t Hietjcs— iHafeins an Miiot o( Wlmtason.

Jun. 23, 1579- — AxDRO Chalmer in Fyntoray, and five others.

Dilaitit of art and pairt of the conuocatioune of ovu' fouerane loirdis liegis,
and making of ane Abbot of Wnressoune ; committit in Junij 1578.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Abirdene, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione XV dierum.' Plegiis, Richardo Blyth, biu-gen. de Dundie et M. Will.
Clialmer (camerario) de Lundoris (portionai-io de Fyntray) coniunctim et diuifim ; et omnes perfones ad relevand,

Jim. 23. — Andro Gibsoun in Fyntrie, Andro Chalmer thair, and feven
others.
Dilaitit of art and pairt of the crnell flauchtare of vmq'^ Alleftare Reid, alias
MacHenrie ; committit in Anguft laftwas.

Continued to the faid Aire of Abirdene, Avith the fame perfons as cautioners.
Mr Will. Chalmer, chalmerlane of Lundoris, as baillie of the Regalitie of L.
produces ane Commiffioune of Replegiatioime, fubfcryuit be the Abbot of Lundoris ; and proteftit that the faid continewatioune be nawife prejudicial! to the
priuilege of the faid Regalitie, &c.

Jun. 27. — JoHNNE Broun of Carfleuch.
Johnne Lord Maxwell amerciated in fforty poimds, for non-production of
Johnne Broun of Carfleuch before the Jufticiar or his deputies, to underlie the
law, for art and part of the flaughter of James MacCuUoch of Barholme ; committed on the 17th day of April laft.

Jun. 27. — The famin day, Johnne Gordoune of Barfkeoch, oftymes callit
to have jiroduceit our fouerane loirdis lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, purchefl be Elizabeth Kirkpatrik the relict, bairnis, kyn and freindis of vniq'*" James
MacCulloch of Barholme, &c.

33tsif sijtff l^mise o( mnvvision, ^r.

Jul. 10. — Alexander Dai,mahoy of that Ilk, William Dalmahoy liis
brother, Jolmne Dalmahoy his fader brother, Johnne Wilfoune,
Johnne Reidheid, William Reidheid his fone, Allane Gilchrift,
William Duchell.
Dilaitit of the afTeigeing of Williame Somerwell in Wareiftoune, Avithin his
duelling place of Wareiftoune ; and vtheris crymes, at lenth contenit in the lettres direct thairvpoune ; committit in Junij 1578.

VOL. I. L "■

82 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1579This mater contiuewit be the Kingis Maieftie, be ane Precept, produceit be
Johnue Somervell, meffinger, to the twentie day of Augiift iiixtocuin ; and tuke
iiiftrumentis of the produetioun of the laniin. — ' Plegiis, Domino de Fawfyde,
pro Dom. de Dalmahoy ; et Dom. de Dalmahoy, pro reliquis omnibus.'

Jul. 31. — JoHNNE Mayne, burges of Edinburglie, now duelland in
Birraine, in Norway, Bergen.
Dilaitit of art and pairt of the forgeing, fen3eing and prenting of certane
fals and adulterat money, viz. fals hardittis ; ' committit ten 3eiris fyn or
thairby.

Prelocutouris in defence. Persewaris,

Mr Johnne Schaq), Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Robert Creychtoune, aduocat,

James Mowbray, Williame Downie. Williame Mylne, Scottifmaii, duellaud at Birraine,

Thomas Baill, Robert Melnile.

Thomas Cok, (merchand in Edinburglie,) chancillare, aftis inftrumentis in his
awin name, and in name and behalf of the reft of the perfonis of AlTyife, that
thai halve deponit and gevin thair delyuerance according to thair knawlege and
conlcience vpoun the fycht of the jjeicis produceit ; and in refpect that they half
na notorietie nor fure knawlege of the deid it felf, nor na fuffecient tryell or
probatioune verefeit in wi'it be the periewaris ; that thairfoir thay incure na
denger nor cryme be AfTyife of Errour, or ony vtherwayife : And proteftis to
this effect, that the decreit vleit be the defendare, togidder with the haill writtis
produceit in proces, be regiftrat in the bukis.

' FoLLOWis the TeJ'timoniaUis^ and writtis 'produceit he the Jaid Johnne
3Iaijne in his defence^ vi%. (1.) From the Council and Senators of Bergen, in
favor of Mayne and Helen Bowiuan his wife, iNIaij 26, 1578. — (2.) Ane vther
Teftimoniall from Birraine, Jun. 8, 1578.— (3.) The King of Scotlandis Teftimoniall, direct to the Touu of Birraine, Sterlini, Julij 28, 1578. — (4.) Ane Teftimoniall direct from the burghe of Edinburglie, Jul. 15, 1578. — (5.) Ane decreit
gevin befoir the Loirdis (of Counlale), Jul. 2i, 1579- — (6.) Ane Teftimoniall
gevin be the Touu of Inuerkething, Julij 30, 157;). — Then follow ' Copies of
the writtis and Teftimoniallis produceit be 'Williame Mylne aganis the faid
Johnne Mayne,' being five in number. The Record on this cafe is clofed by
the inlerti(m of a Teftimonial of innocence granted by Colin Earl of Ergyle,
Lord Campbell and Lome, Juftice-General of Scotland, Jul. 31, 1579, in favor
of Johnne Mayne of the whole crimes charged againft him in his Dittay.

to

pe

' llurdhchh or lunis, formerly of the value of three half-pence, but de])reciat('d by Regent Morton
a penny, which caused much discontent. The pfack also was depreciated by him from four to two-
■nce. " Tiiese documents are preserved at lent'th in the Record.

13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. '83

amsticiar toit]^fn t^t Bountis of ^tfjol appointed.

Nov. 12. — JoHXNE Erle of Athoill produceit aue Commiffioune of
Jufticiarie, gevin to him be om- foiierane loird, wnder the Grit Seill, makand
him Juftice withia the boundes of Athoill : And delyrit that his aith mycht be
acceptit, &c.

^laufiijtev,

Nov. 17. — Meegaeet Lindesay, Ladie Kerlbank and Maifter James
Fotheringhame hir fpous.
Dilaitit of art and pairt of the cruell llaiichter of vniq Katherene Fothringhame, fpous to James Page in Aberlamnay ; committit in Februar laftwas.

Prelocl'touris in defence.
Maifter Johnne Schairp, aduocat, My Loird Inuenneith, The Maifter of Forbes, Tlie Maifter of Caflillis.

' Acquit.'

JifsfesiiTtj ^omt of SSaardston, ^r.

Nov. 20-21. — Alexander Dalmahoy of that Ilk, and feven others.'

Dilaitit of the afleiging of William Somerwell in Warieftoune, and vtheris

crpnes at lenth contenit in the lettres direct thairvpomie ; committit in Junij

1578 ; fpeciallie, for beiring and fchutting of culveringis at the faid place, with

conuocatioime, &c.

Persewaris.

Williame Somerwell, in Wareiftoune, Mr Robert Creyclitoune, aduocat.

Prelocutouris in defence. Prelocutouris in perfuit.

The Laird of Ormeftoune, The Laird of Trabroune, The Lairde of Co^dngtoune,

The Laird of Bonytoune, The Laird of Ernok, The Laird of Dalyell, youngare,

Mr Johnne Scharp, Mr Thomas Craig. James Somerwell.

Veedict. All Acquit of the crymes put to the knawlege of AlTyfe, viz. of

the fchuting and beiring of iiiftollettis in the moneth of Julij, and thaireftir

cuming to the hous and alTeiging thairof, and fchuting of piftollettis thairat, and

hiu'ting and wonding of Barbara Barrie, &c.

antrest mm ^^ulttv^,

Jan. 15, 1579-80. — Elisabeth Pkestoun, filler to the Ladie Borthuik.
Dilaitit of the crymes of Inceft and Adulterie ; committit with the Loird
Borthuik, at findrie tymes, contenit in the lettres.
Verdict. ' Acquit.'

' See Jul. 10, 1579.

84 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1579-80.

antcfst mxH aUuWerg,

Jan. 15. — Margaret Scott, filler to the Ladie Borthuik.
Thomas Borthuik of JMediltoun is amerciated for the non-appearance of
Margaret Scott before the Juftice, &c. to underlie the law for the crimes of Inceft and Adulterie ; committed with William Lord Borthuik, hufband of the
faid Dame Grizell Scott, her filler, ' et procreatione filii ad eundem Dominum
Borthuik,' &c.

Prelocutouris in defence. Persewar.

Mr Dauid ^PGill, Mr Johnne Preftoune. Maifter Robert Creychtoun, aduocat.

AssisA.
James Hoppringill, in Hoppringill, James Rig of Carbame, Robert Trumble, in Heriot mylne,

JohnneHoppringill,intheMmrois, (Chancellor,) Robert Deware,

James Hoppringill, in the Bow, The Laird of Fawfyde, Thomas Adiuftoun, in Carcant,

Richard Scliankis, burges of Ed'. Willeame Cranftoun of Ladyfyde, The Laird Meggot.
Patrik Hoppringill, in Ed'. Johnne Tmnebill, in Symintoune,

mct&t antJ atjultetj).

Jan. 15. — Dame Geissell Scott, Ladie Borthuik.
Dilaitit of Inceft and Adulterie ; committit with Walter Scott of Tufchelaw.

Prelocutouris in defence. Persewar.

Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Johnne Leirmontb, Mr William Harvie. Mr Robert Creychtoune, aduocat.

Absentes ab Assisa Elizabeth Preftomie.
James Hoppringill of Quhytebank, The Laird of Elphingftoune, elder, The Laird of Ormefloune,
The Laird of Trabroune, The Laird of Hermeftoune.

' Desert.'

Feb. 15. — AxDRO Glexcorse, in Peirftoune.

Dilatit of art and pairtof the Pofoning of Iffobell Staig, his fpous ; committit
twa 3eiris fyne, or thairby : And ficklyke, for the lying in the filthie cryme of
Adulterie with his wyffis moder, callit Helene Bathcate.

Verdict and Sentence. ' Conuict of baith the crymes, and brint.'

^lausTjtn- — Conbof ation of ti)t %itst9,

Feb. S-i. — Vthked Makdowell, 3oung Laird of Garthland, and others.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewal llauchter of vmq'" James Gordoune,
fone of Johnne Gordoune of Barflveoche, with Convocatioune of the Liegis, bodin
in feir of weir, &c., in the moneth of Julij lafll)ypaft.

Hew Kennedie of Barquhennye, allegeit, that na proces aucht to be led aganis
him, as cawtioner for the entrie of the 30ung Laird of Garthland and remanent ;

13Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 85

in refpect, that he is nocht lawfullie chargeit, at his duelling place, albeit it be
indorfat, that he was chairgeit at Dawcari'ane, quliair his wyff was for the
tyme ; quhilk is nawyife his duelling hous, nor yit was he chargeit perfonalie ;
and proteftis, that quhatfumeiiir proces be laid in the faid mater, that the famin
be nocht preiudiciall to him as fouertie foirfaid, and offeris him to preve fufficientlie, that he duelt in nather of the faidis placeis quhair he was chai-geit. —
Anfuerit Mr Thomas Craig, for the Gudeman of Barfkeoch, that he is lawfuDie
chargeit, at the place where his wyfF duelt for the time, and the law prefupponis
the famin to be dwelling place ; and that thai thairfoir abyde at the executioun
of the faidis lettres.

Eoilein die, Hewgo Kennedie de Barquhennie, fepe vocat. ad introand. Vthridum Makdowel
juniorem de Garthland, Andream MacDowell ejus patrem, Joannem M'Dowell de Knokincrofchie,
Georgium M'Dowell juniorem de Darregillis, Patricium iVPDowell ejus fratrem, Gelbertum INI"-
Nelie, vocat. the Rt/mour, Alex. Agnew in Blair, Adauium M'Kie in Culinik, Joannem McDowell fratrem Vthridis M'^Dowell de Bariarg, Nicholaum MGoune et Gilbeitura M'^Clennoquhen, coram
Jufticiaris f. d. n. Regis fuifve deputatis, predict, die et loco ; ad fubeundum legem, pro arte et parte
crudelis interfectionis quondam Jacobi Gordoune filij Joannis Gordoun de Barfkeoch ; cum Convocatione fubditonun dicti f. d. n. regis, more bellico armat., contra tenorem Acti Pari., in menfe Julij
ultimo, &c.

' Amerciat.' ' NoTA. Nocht to be extractit, in refpect of the Kingis Warrand.'

Feb. 28. — JoHNXE Sowtabe, notare and meffinger.

Dilaitit of the falfing of findrie euidentis and vfing of fallat ; fpeciallie, for copeing of James Brounes euident in Dundie, and delyuering to the faid James of
the faid copie falfefeit be him ; and the faid James awin proper euident to Robert Stewart, the faid James aduerfare, quhairin decreit is pronunceit.

Verdict and Sentence. ' Conuict of diuers poyntis, and haugit.'

^laugl^tcr of ilorU Cijaiwdlor i^lammis.

Mar. 5. — David Erle of Crawfurde.
Patrik Loird Lindefay of Byrris, et Dauid Lindefay of Ed^ell, fined, for nonproduction of the Earl of Crawfurde, to underlie the law for the flauchter of
vmquhile Lord Glammis, Chancellor, and James Johmieftoime.

iHurtftr— Ci)tft.

Apr. 30, 1580. — Axdro Trumbiei,, fone to Ekkie of Belfis, and Johnne
Young, in the Cames, duellar under the Laird of Minto.
Delaitit of art and part of the cruell and fchamefull murthour of vmq'^ Johnne

86 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1580.

Hammiltoune of Beneftoun, committit in Januar laftwas ; and breking of the
faicl vmq'= Johnnes kill, and thiftuous fteling, conceling and away taking furth
thairof, certane coitis, clokis and vtheris giidis and geir.

Verdict and Sentence. Conuict, baith of the murthour and of the thift,
and the laid Johnne Young hangit. — Nota, This (Andro) Trumbell, fone to
Ekkie of Belfis, becaus of his minoritie, the dome nocht pronunceit vpoun him ;
bot he dela\ it and deljaierit to Andro Lindefay, to be keipit in waird, as he will
anfuer, &c.

Crtasou.

INIaij. 23. — George Balfour, Pryour of Charterhouse.
Compeirit my Loird Thelaurar and the Aduocate, and declairit, that fFor
famekil as that, at ordinance of the Kingis Maiellie and Counfale, thai wer ordanit to perfew the faid George Balfoure, Prioiu- of the Charterhous, of certane
crymes, for the quhilk he is tane, and ane AlTyife fummond to this day ; thairfoir alkis inllruraentis, that thai haue done their diligence, and wer reddie to
perlew him, conforme to the laid ordinance : And protellis, in refpect of the
abfence of Mr Johnne Grahme, Jullice-Depute, that the occafioune of the ftay of
proces this day be imput to him, feing na Court culd be fenfit without him, nor
jM-oces led thairin, conforme to the laid ordinance.

Maij 23. — The quhilk day, in prelence of me Notare publict and witnefles wndervvrittin, comperit George Balfoure, Priour of Charterhous, qulia exponit and declairit, that in refpect the Capitane, Connellable and keiparis of the
Caftell of Edinburghe, had enterit and prefentit him in faice of Court, Avithin
the Tolbuyth of Edinburghe, conforme to ane ^Varrand direct to thame thairvpoune : Thairfoir, and in confideratioune of his entrie, he tuik and afldt inftrumentis thairof, that he prefentlie was content to wnderly the law, for al
crymes of TrelToune allegeit committit be him, and for the quhilk he has bene
this lang tyme bypaft haildin in waird : Oifering him, thairfoire, to the knawlege of ane famous,' condigne and vnfulpect Alfyile ; diffalenting of all forder
delay or continewatioune of Court thairanent. Quhairvpoune, the faid George
afl^it inftrumentis, as faid is, in the handis of ane Notare publict, and fciybe of
Julliciarie, appointit in the Courtis thairof. This was done, day and jilace foirlaid, before Sir Lwes Ballendene of Auchnowle, knycht, Clerk of our fouerane
loirdis Julliciarie, the Laird of Cleifche, Dauid Lawtie, Hew Tod, with vtheris
diuerfe.

' Respectable, persons notoriously of good fame.

13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 87

dTalseiiifl, drovtrtinu, nntt ;Sftmttins at ILetteis.

Jun. 29. — Robert Carmylie, feruitoui- to vmq'" John Sowter.'
Dilaitit of tlie cryme of fallat, fpeciallie of the falfefeing, forgeing and fen3eing
of lettres (of) Arreiftnient and the fubfcriptioune-manuall of Gilbert Thornetoune wiytare ; and the Kjngis Signet thairto of ane vther lettre, vpoune James
Adame in Alyth, for payment of vij'"' merkis.^
Verdict and Sentence. ' Conuict. et Suspen.'^

iHuvlrer of t^e 3LUg:ents, iHurraw antr %tnnox,

Dec. 15. — Arthour Hammiltoune, in Bothwelhauche.*
Dilaitit of the ti'effonable Miirthouris of vmquhile James Erie of Miu'ray
Regent, committit in the moneth of Januare bdx (1569) 3eiris. And liclyke,
for art and part of the treflbnable Miu'thour of vmqidiile Mathow Erie of Leiienox.

ASSISA.

Johnne Blair of that (Ilk,) Mr Archibald Cuming, feare of AlaneLoi<art, 3ungarofCleghoriie,

Jobnne Cuninghame of Drum- Cowtre, Archebald Douglas of Punfeitb,

quhafliU, W". Schaw in Braidroddingis, Johnne Millare in Mylneheuch,

WilliameBaillie of Lammingtoune, Johnne Nowene of Kirvode, Thomas Baillie, tutour of JarMungo Lokart of Cleghorne, Job. Gilmour, burges of Glafgw, reftoime,
Gawin Crawfurd of Farme, Thomas Inchaw in Nethiitoune, Gawin Ra in Bothwell.

The faid Arthour tuik inftrumentis, that the Affyife abone writtin clengeit
him of the flaiichtaris of the twa Regentis, quhairof he was dilaittit.

The faniin day, comperit Mr Robert Creychtoune, adiiocate to our fouerane
lord, and produceit ane warrand, fubfcryuit be the Counfale, defyring and commanding him to infift in perfute of the faid Arthour Hammiltoune, for all
crymes to be layd to his charge, and gevin vj) in Dittay vpoune him ; quhilk he
delyx'it to be regiftrat : Quhairof the tennour foUowis.

supplication of arthour hammiltoun.

SouERANE LoiRD, Vnto ^our Maieftie and Loirdis of Secreit Counfale, liumelie menis and
fchawis, I, 3 our feruitom', Arthom- Hammiltoune, callit of Bothwellhauch ; That quhair, eftir fe
afiegeing of Hammiltoune, I wes committit to waird within |)e Caftell of Dumbartane, (juhaii- I haue
remauit continewalie fenfyne, haueing nathing of my awin, hot Aiftenit vpoun Jie expenffis of my
freindis. Ami now, it lies pleflit jOur Maieftie, and 11.^ charge fe Capitane and Keiparls of the faid
Caftell of Dumbartane, to tranfpoirt me, liiddin,'' to fiis toune of Edinburghe, to quhat purpois I knaw
nocht ; qulia lies brocht me heir, qidiair I am reddie to abyde the tryall of ane Affyfe prelentlie, for
the Uauchter and murthour of 5 our hienes ymq'« fader and Regentis ; or then to find cawtioune to
entir agane to pat effect, and wnderly all things can be laid to my chairge, vpoune fa mony dayis
warning, and wnder fie panis, as 5 our hienes and 11. plellis to appoint, I being fred and at libertie,

' See Feb. 28. - Seven score, or I-IO merks, '■' Hfinged. ' Tliere is marked on the niai'-
gin of the Record, opposite the name, ' Acquyt.' ' Lordshi'ps. '■' By stealth, in a concealed manner.

88 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1580.

as tlie reft tliat wes fufpect of the lyke offences. Maift liumelie heirfoir, I befeik ^our hienes and
11. that a))er I may be put prefentlie to ])e knawlege of ana AlFyfe for ])e faidis crymes, or cawtioun
may be reflkueit of me in maner and to pe eflfect aboue writtin, and 5 our Hienes and 11. anfuer hwmelie
I befeik.

Warrant. ' Apud Halirudhous, xiiij Octobris, anno &c. lxxx° (1.580). The Loirdis of Secreit
Counfale ordanis the Jnflice Clerk and his deputtis to appoynt ane particulare daye to ])is Arthoure
Hamrailtoune, to wnderly tlie law, for all crymes can be laid to his charge ; and to direct lettres requyring all or Ibuerane lordis lieges, be oppin proclamatioun at the mercat croces of Lanark, Glafgw,
Lynlythqw, and ytheris places nudfull, to gef vp Dittay, qubairtlwow ]>e faid Arthour may be accufit
at fe faid day to be appointit, and iuftice miniftrat as accordis. And ordanis fe aduocate to infilt in
perfuit of fe faid Arthour, as he will anfuer fairvpoune.

(Sic fubfcribitur) ' Mortoun. R.Dunfermeling.'^

Arthoure Hammiltoune (then ftiled 'of Bothiielhauche) was afterwards reftored to his eftate, &c., under the Act ' of the reftitution of the noblemen and
Vtheris reffauit to the Kingis Maiefties favour.' 1581, chap. 21.

The following illustrative dociunents are excerpted from the Books of the
Privy Council of Scotland :

I. Apud Hammiltowie, decimo Maii, anno, S)-c. IxxLr. The quhilk day James Robertonn of Emock
become actit and obleift as cautionar and fouirtie for Arthour Hamniiltoun, fone to vmquhile Arthour
Hammiltoun of the Heleife, to enter and prefent the faid Arthour before our fouerane lord and lordis
of his liienes fecreit Counfale, as the faid James falbe requirit thairto, vpoune aucht dayis warning,
vnder the pane of ane thowfand pundis ; and Patrik Hammiltoun, burges of Hammiltoun, obleift him
and his airis to releif fe faid James of pe premiftls, and of all pane and danger that he may incur
thairtlirow.

(Sic fubfcribitur) James Robertoun of Ei-nok, Patrik Hammiltoun, with my hand.

II. Apud Cajtrum de Striuiling, fecundo Jiinii, anno, S)-c. Ixmjc.

SEDERUNT.

Colinus comes Ergadie, Robertus comes de Lennox, Robertus conies de Buchane,

Andreas dominus de Vchiltrie, Allanus dominus Cathcart, Commendatarius de Cambulltennethe.

DuNROD difchargit of the Lettroiin.-
Anent the fupplicatioun prefentit to our fouerane lord and bis Priuie Counfale, be Robert Lyndesay Dunrod, makand mentioun, that quhair he wes burdynnit be his hienes and his faid counfale, to ferche,
feik and bring to his Maieftie, ane Lettrun perteining to Dauid Hammiltoune of Bothuil-hauch, quhairin
ar contenit certane writtis ; quhilk Lettrun, the faid Robert hes brocht and deliuerit, at his Maiefteis
command, to Alexander Hay, ane of the fcribis of the counfale, in prefence of the faidis loirdis. In
refpect quhairof, it is neceffarlie requirit that the faid Robert be releuit of the fame, and difcharge
gevin to him of all intromiffioun thairwitb, and act of counfale to be extendit to that effect : Lykeas,
at mare lenth is contenit in the faid fupplicatioun. The Kingis Miijeftie, with auife of the faidis lordis
of his fecreit counfale, in refpect of the productioun of the Lettrun aboue written be the faid Robert,
conform to the command gevin to him to that effect, difchargis him tiiairof, and of all pane and diinger
that he may incur thairthrow for euir.

III. Apud Ha/i/rudehoiis,xxiij die menfis JanuariJ, anno W]xxx° (1581, new style.) The quhilk

1 Robert Piicairn, Coraraendatot of Dunfermling, and Secretary of State, &c. ' A writing desk, or box for holding
writings.

14Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 89

day, Johnne Rofe of Hanyng become actit and obleifl, as cautioner and fouirtie for Arthoure Hammyltoun, callit of Botliuilliaucli, tliat the faid Arthour fall contene bimfelf as ane faitbfiill and obedient
fubiect to our fouerane lord and liis autlioritie : and on nawyfe reflett, fupplie, intercommoune, or
fchaw fauour to Johnne fumtyme Commendatar of Abirbrothok, and Claude fumtyme Commendatar
of Paiflay, nor to ony vtheris tliair complices that ar or heirefter lalbe declarit rebellis and fugitiues
fra the lawis, for the treflbnable murther of vmq'" the King, his hienes dearefl: father, and of the Erlis
of Lennox and Murray, his hienes Regentis of gude memorie. And als, that the faid Arthoure fall
conipeir perfonalie befoir his Maieftie and Lordis of Secret Counfale, as he falbe requirit thairto, vpoun
fyfteine dayes warning, vnder the pane of fyve hundreth merkis.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Johnne Ross of Haning.

Dec. 15. — Waltare Laavder, fei-wand to vmq,^ the Lairde of Bafs.'
Dilaitit of art and pairt of the crewall murthour of vmquhile Mr James Lawder of the Bafs, his maifter ; committit iii the moueth of October.

Dec. 20. — Laurence Lord Oliphaxt, Arthoure Forbes apperaud of
Reres, &c. (forty-oiie others).
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchter of vmq'^ Alexander Stewart
of Schuittingleis ; committit in the moneth ('thefyrft day') of Nouember laftbypaft : ('And for invading of ^Villiame Lord Ruthvene, Thefaurer, for his flauchter,') and vtheris crpnes fpecifeit in the lettres produceit vpoun tharae.
Preloquitouris for the pannell. Preloquitouris in perfuit. Persewaris.

Tlie Laird of Lochlevin, The Laird of Barnbarroth, Williame Lord Ruthvene,

The Laird of Cardene, George Conie of Kelwod, Sir Johnne Stewart of Traquair,

The Laird of Dundas, W". Mun-ay of Lettir Bennettis, knycht,

The Laird of Delgatie, Mr Ro'. Creychtotine, aduocat. James Stewart in Tinnes, broder

Mr Johnne Schairp, to the defunct,

Mr Thomas Craig. James Hoppringill of Wodhous.

The quhilk day, eftir chefing of the preloquitouris, alfwele for the pannell as
the perfewaris ; comperit Mr Johnne Schairp, and aflvit inftruraentis of productioune of ane deljaierance of the Lordis of SelTioune, iiurcheft be Laurence Lord
Oliphant, chairgeing him (Mr Johnne) and vtheris procuratouris thairin contenit, to compeir this day and jilace, and proeuir for the perfbnis enterit on pannell in thair defence ; quhilk delyuerance, he defyrit to be anfuerit and regiftrat
in the buikis of Adiornall. Quhilk defyre the Judge thocht reffonable, and ordanit the fame to be regiftrat.

Interlocutor. The Juftice-depute, vpoune certane alledgeancis proponit be the parteis hinc
inde, continewit this caufe to the morne ; and ordanit the perfonis on pannell, to find fouirtie for thair

' There is marked on the margin of the Record, ' Conuict. et decoUat.' The Assise are designed,
being all burgesses of Edinbmgh, but the procedure is not entered.

VOL. I. M

90 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1580.

entrie, to vndirly the law for the crymes forfaid, and vtheris contenit in the lettres direct vpoune thame ;
quho ffand the Laird of Lochlevin cautioun to that effect.

Dec. 21. — The Juftice Depute, in refpect of the alledgeance proponit be
athir of the parteis preloquitouris, and that ane AlTyfe could nocht be obtenit to
my Lord Oliphant, for objectiounis ; ordanit the mater to be continewit quhill
the morne, xxij day of Nouember, &c.

Verdict. (Dec. 22.) The AfTyfe, be thair delyuerance, jn-onunceit and dedarit be tlie mouth and fpekiug of George Symmer (Somer) of Bal3oirdie, Chancillar, flfand and delyuerit the perfonis enterit on pannell and perfewit, to be clangeit, innocent and acquit, of airt and pairt of the crewall llaucliter and niurthoiire of vmqle Alexander Stewart of Schuittingleis, fchot with ane poyfonit
bullet:' And of the convocatioim of our fouerane loirdis liegis, bodin with culveringis, piftolettis, jakis, fperis, lleilbonnettis and vtheris wappinnis invafine,
incontrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament : And ficlyke, of vmbefetting
of the hie way to William Lord Ruthvene, Thelaiu-er, invading of him and his
feruandis being in his cumpanie, for thair flauchteris : With the haill circumllances thairof libellit, committit vpoun the fyrft day of November laftbypaft,
vpoun fett purpois, provifioun, auld feid and foirthocht fellonye.

Eftir the pronunceing and declaratioun quhairof, the perfonis on pannell aflvit
inftrumentis, and protellit for than- teftimoniall.

Dec. 23. — WiLLiAME Lord Ruthvene, (Lord High Thefaurer of

Scotland,) James Ruthvene, Alexander Ruthvene, James

Ruthvene, callit Swaddinis Jame, &c. (feventy-nine others.)

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall (lauchter of vmq'" Johime Buchane ;

committit vpoun the fyrft day of Nouember laftbypaft ; and vtheris crymes,

contenit in the fummondis.

Preloquitouris for the pannell. Persewaris.

My Lord Banibarroch, The Laird of Traquair, Laurence Lord 01i[)hant,

Mr Alexander Syme, Mr Dauid M'Gill, William Now, officiar,

Mr Johnne Uuflell, The Laud of Kelwod. Mr Robert Creychtoun, Aduocat, pro rege.

Mr Rol)ert Creychtoun, Advocat, produceit ane Precept fubllryuit be the
Kingis Maieftie and twa of his hienes Previa Counfell, direct to him, chairgeing
him to infift in the perfute of the perfonis enterit on pannell, &c. ; quhilk Precei)t he requyrit to be regiftrat, quhairof tlie tennoure followis.

Justice, ,]ulliceCl.''rk and ^oure deputtis, and Aduocatt : It is our will iuul we command 50W, that
incontinent eftir fyclit heirof, 56 oure Aduocatt perfew Jie Lord Ruthvene, vpoune fe lettres riflin

' This is the only instance in the Record of poisoned bullets having been made use of in Scotland.

14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 91

aganis him to \e xxij day of fis monetli, and contiuewit to ))is day; and 36 oure Juftice, Juftice Clark
and 3 oure deputtis, proceid to fe perfuit ford wart to pe putting of my Lord Ruthvene and his feruandis and freindis on pannell to ane Aflyfe, and do juftice fairin : As 36 will anluer to ws fairvpoun ;
keiping ))is for 5 oure warrand. Frome Halyruidhous, fe xxiij day of December 1580.

JAMES R. Lenox, Robert Stewart.

My Lord Olijihant afkit inftrumentis, that he paft fra the perfuit of my Lord
Ruthvene and n manent perfonis on pannell, pro loco et tempore ; and that, in
I'efpect that Maifter Robert Creychtoun, Aduocat, wald nocht vfe his informatioun, as he alledgeit. A ud proteftit, that quhatfumevir thing the Aduocat did,
in the perfuit of thame, fould nocht prejudge nor hurt his actioime, hot qiUien
tyme and place fall ferue, he may perfew the famin, according to the lawes of
this realme.

My Lord Ruthvene alledgeit, that he and the reft enterit on pannell, aucht
nocht to be putt to the knawledge of ane Alfyfe, for bering, wering and vfing
of piftolettis aganis the lait Act of Parliament libellit ; in refpect, he had ane
Licence grantit to him, be oure fouerane lord, fubfcryuit with twa of the Counfall : Quhilk Licence he produceit, defyring the famin to be infert, quhairof the
tennour followis.

Licence injavor of WilUame Lord Ruthvene, lliefaurer, i§c.

We, for diuerfe reflbnabill cauffis moving ws, be Jie tennour heirof, Gevis licence and power to oxire
rycht traift coufing and counfeleare, Williame Lord Ruthvene, oure Thefaurair, his feruandis, pairttakaris and defendaris, in his cumpanie, to beir, weir and vfe hagbuttis, culveringis and piftolettis, for
his and fair defence, aganis his inimeis ; nochtwithftanding oure Actis, ftatutes and proclamatiounis,
maid incontrar ; with })e quhilkis be ))ir prefentes we difpence : Difchaii'geing oure Juftice, his deputtis and all vtheris judgeis within om-e realme, of ony tioibling, calling or perfewing of oure faid
eoufing or his foirfaidis, ciuile or criminall, att ony day or dayes fairfore ; inhibiting J)ame fairof, and
of fair offices in fat pairt, be fir prefentis. Subfcrjiiit with oure hand, att Halyruidlious, fe xxiij
day of October 1580.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. Lenox, James Stewart.

The perfones on panell, in refjject of the Kingis Maiefteis Precej^t, direct to
the faid Juftice dejiute, wes ordanit to be putt to the knawledge of ane Aflyfe,
of the perfounes following, for the flauchter of the faid vmq'" Johnne Bucliane
and vtheris crymes, &c. ; exceptand the bering, wering and fchuitting of pistolettis, quhilk is cuttit away, be reflbun of the Licence produceit and regiftrat.

Assisa.
James Lord Inuermaith, Robert Mure of Cauldwall, Hew Lord Somerwall,

AUane Lord Cathcart, Johnne Quhytefurd of tliat Ilk, James Erie of Glencaime,

Andro Erie of Rothes, George Dmmniond of Blair, Andro Lord Stewart of A'chiltre,

Gylbert Ogilvie of that Ilk, W". Cwnpighameof Caprintoune, Alex. Di-ummond of Medop,

Patrik Lord Lyndefay, Alex. Maifter of Levingftoune, HaryeDrummond of Riccartonne.

The famin day, the Laird of Caprintoune, being fchofin, fwoi-ne and admittit vpoime the Aflyife of the perfonis aboue writtin, enterit on pannell, and

92 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1580-1.

haifing removit him felf (furtli) of Court with the remanent perfonis of Aflyis,
to deliberat and decyde vpoun the pointis of Dittay, quliairof thay wer accufit ;
he re-enterit agane, fend be the Chancillar of AfTyle in the laid Court, and in
pi'efence of the faid Juftice depute, demandit of Mr Robert Creychtoun, Aduocat,
perfewar, gif he had ony vtliir prefumptioun, certaintie or taikin of the crymes
lybelHt, contenit in the fummondis, quhairby the perfovmes on pannell wer accufit ; quha anl'uerit, that he had na tiling hot the faidis lettres, vndir oure fouerane lordis fignet, fubfcryuit with the dark, togidder with the Kingis Maiefteis
Precept, defyring him to infill in perfuit thairof ; vpoun the quhilk anluer, the
faid Laird of Caprintoun aOvit inllrumentis.

The Erie of Rothes, Chancillar of the faid Aflyife, re-enterit lyke wyife in
the faid Court, and afivit inllrumentis, that tlie perfounes on pannell wer nocht
orderit to be putt to the knawlege of ane Allyle, for bering, wering and vfing
of pillolettis ; in refpect of the Kingis Licence, grantit to thame to that effect ;
and proteftit, that the faid Licence fould be anfuerit (inlertit) and regiftrat in the
buikis of Adiornall.

Verdict. And immediatlie eftir ]'e fchefing, fwering and admitting of ]ie faidis perfounes of
AfTyfe, as vfe is, the foil faidis perfounes enterit to pannell, being accufit be dittay oppiulie red in
judgement, of fe crymes following ; the faidis perfonis of Affyife, being altogidder removit furth of
Court, and fyne convenit and reffonit vpoune ]>e pointis of Jie faid dittay ; and being rj^elie auyfit
])airwith, re-enterit agane within Jie faid Court of Julliciarie, quiiair thay, in prefence of fe faid Juftice
depute, be fair delyuerance, pronunceit and declarit be J)e mouthe and fpeiking of fe faid Andro Erie
of Rothes chancillar, flFand and delyuerit the faid Williame Lord Ruthvene, and remanent perfounes
noclit repledgeit, to be clangeit, innocent and acquit of ])e llauchter of vniq'" Jolnme Buchane, feruand
to Laurence Lord Oliphant, committit with convocatioune of oure fouerane lordis liegis, be way of
haniefuckin, vpoun ))e fyrll day of Nouemberlaflbypaft, vpoune fett purpoife, prouifioun, auld feid and
foirthocht fellonie ; feing na verificatioun fcliawin to fame, nor ^it na perfoun fwerand ]ie Dittay.

Upoun the produceing quhairof, the faid ^Villiame Lord Ruthvene, Thefaurare,
in his awin name, and for the remanent perfonis on pannell, afl\it inllrumentis.

Dec. 24. — Laurexce Lokd Oi.ipiiaxt.
Willelmus Dowglas de Lochlevin, plegius devenit, ad intrandinn Laurencium
Dominum Oliphant, coram Jufticiario f. d. n. regis fuifue deimtatis, tertio die
proximi Itineris Jufliciarie de Perthe, vel alibi vbi et quando i)lacuerit fuo ferenitati, fuper premonitione xv dierum ; ad lubeundmn legem, pro arte ct parte
crudelis interfectioiiis quondam Alcxandri Stewart de Scliiiitingleis, prime die
menfis Novembris ultimo elapfo, ex certo prepofito, prouKione et ju'ecogitata
phelonia commifs. ; alijique criniinibus in liteius regiis defuiK'r direct, fpecificat. ;
fecunduni formam et tenorem earundem et fub penis in Actis Parliament! conteutis.

14Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 93

Jan. 6, 1580-1. — Frances Armestrang, fone to the Laird of Quhithauch, Frances Armeftrang, fone to Sym of TinuishKrne, Hob
Eliot, callit III Bob of Ramfigill, Quintine Niklbun, fone to
Clemmie the Crwne, Gawin Eliot, fone to Scottis Hob, Thomas Armeftrang, fone to Sandeis Niniane, Andro Armeftrang,
fone to Thorn o/GiiigiU'is, William Eliot, fone to Jokis Willie,
Hob Eliot of Braidlie, Johnne Eliot, fone to Eldar Will.
Dilatit of certaue crymes of thift, fpecifeit in the Dittay to be gevin in vpoune
thame.

IVIr Robert Creyehtoun, adnocat, aflvit inftrumentis of the chefing, fwering
and admitting of the faidis perfonis of AfTyife.

The Jnftice-deiJute, ordanit the perfonis of AfTyfe, defift and ceife, frome all
delyuering vpoun the pointis of dittay, red oppinlie in Court ; and ficlyke commandit the faidis perfonis on pannell to be committit to waird within the Caftell and Tolbuith of Edinburgh.

[.JURISDICTION OF HIGH ADMIRAI,.]

Jan. 10. — Johnne Cokburne in Leith.

Dilatit of certane crymes of Pirrafis (Piracies) att lenth fpecifeit in the lettres
produceit.

Tlie famin day, comperit Mr Thomas Gylbert, Admerall-depute to ane nobill
lord, James Erie of Mortoun, &c. Grit Admerall ; and alledgeit, that the Juftiee
aucht nocht to be Judgeis to the faid Johnne Cokburne, in refpect the cryme quhairof he is accufit is ane fefairrand' mater ; and thairfoir, defyrit the faid Johnne to
be repledgeit furth of the faid Court, to the jurifdictioune, libertie and priviledge
of the Admerall, as Judge compitent thairto. I\lr Robert Cre3a'htoun, advocat,
comperand for the Kingis intres, alledgeit, that the faid alledgance aucht to be
repellit, in refpect thair vves na Commiflioune fpeciallie to that effect ; and albeit
thair wer ane Ipeciall ComniifTioune produceit, it fould nocht be obeyit, becaufe
he is fjTft perfewit heir, ct locus eft lireiientioni. Forder, the defyre of the Admerall-depute is for hinderance of juftiee, and wes neuer in vfe to repledge ony
caufe from this judgement.

Interlocutor. The Judge continewis the interloquitour vpoun the alledgeances aboue writtin,
to the tent day of Februare nixtocuni ; and onlanit the faid Jo]inne Cockbume to find cautioun for his
entrie att tlie laid day.

Tlie faid Amerall-depute proteftit, that the continewatioune of pronunceing of

' Seafaring, or maritime cause.

94 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1580-1.

the interloquitoure, be nawayife prejudicial! to my Lord Admerallis jurifdictioiine, and afl^it inftrumentis that he diflTaffeutit to the continewatioime of the
faid interloquitoure.

Feb. 10. Robertus Kirkcalilie, burgen. de Edinburghe, et Willelmus Downie, alias Laird Doicnie, in
Leitb, plegii deuenerunt, conjunctim et divifini, ad intrandura Joannem Cokbume in Lethe coram
Jufliciario f. d. n. regis, fuifue deputatis, tertio die ])roxinii Itineris Jufticiaiie de Edinburghe, vel alibi,
vbi et quando placueiit fue I'erenitati, fuper pieniouitione xv dieiimi, ad fubeundum legem, pro arte et
parte diuerfoinim criminum Piracie et Spoliorum facta, fuper naues Flandriorum et Gallorum ; necnon,
pro aite et parte furtive depredaeionis furreptionis, per modura lie Piracie, omnium et fingulorum bonorum et mercium, extra nauem Flandrorum lie xocsX.Bonaventtire, pertinen. ad .loannem INlacMichaell
de Larew, Lticara Kemont aliofque diuerfos locupletes mercatores in oppido Antuerpie remanen., in
meufe Maij vltimo elapfi commifs. ; alijfque criniinibus, in Uteris regiis defuper direct, fpecificat. ;
fecundum formam et tenorem earundem, et fub penis in Actis Pari, contentis.

^pprcssioit— Cafedtg: €^}^ii\st antJ ^lisoner, ^t,

Jan. 11. — JoiixxE GoRDorx of Blalak, George Gordoun, lone to James

Gordoun of Craigmylne, George Gordoun of Kandmoir, Mr

Al'illiam Gordoun of Dalperfie, James Gordoun of Craigmylne,

Thomas Gordoun of Dawane, Alexander Vaus of Ruthvennis,

Robert Gordoun of Halheid, Andrew Tail5eour in Smiddiehill.

Dilatit of the taking of James Mortymer, aj^perand^ of Craigievar, captiue and

prefoner, and detening of him within the wod of Kilblene, be the fpace of ten

dayes or thairby ; commitit viJoiui xxvj day of Auguft laftbypall ; and vthiris

crymes fpecifeit in the lettres jiroduceit vpouu tliaine.

Prelocutouris in defence. Persewaris.

Captain James Stewart, The ]Mailler of Seytoune, James Mortymer apperand of Craigivar,

The Maifter of Caflillis, Mr Thomas Craig, Aduocat, Mr Robert Creychtoun, Aduocat.

Mr Thomas Buchquhannan, Mr Jolmne Schairp, (The Erie of [^Sutherland]] law-borrous*

fub pena ter centum mercarum.)

The perlonis on pannell aftit inftruments of thair entrie, and proteftis for
releif of thair cautionaris ; and that thay war reddie to byde the tryell of the
law for the cryme libellit. Afkis inftrumentis, that nane perfewis bot goimg
Cragyvar and the Aduocat ; and that the Lard of Cragyvar declarit, he wald
perfew the Lard of Ruthvennis, and the reft of the pannells.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Abirdene, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonicione xv dierum. Plegio, Comite de Sutherland et omnes intrantes ad relevand.,
pro rato.'

ExPENCES OF Paxxellis. The famin day, the liaill perfonnes on pannell
proteftit, that na lettres be grantit in tyme cuming to the perlewar, for calling

' Heir apparent. '^ Legal pledge or security, that, in the interim, no injury should be inflicted

against the other party.

14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 95

of tliame to A'ndirly the law, for the crymes libellit, vnto the tyme he find cautioun for fatiffactioun of thair expenffis.

Protestatioun of Assyise. The perfouis of Alfyife, chofm and admittit,
leing that na nia perfounes of Aflyife could be had to pats vpoune the intrantis
Aflyfe, proteftit, in caife thai wer fummond att ony tyme heireftir to pafs vpoime
the Affyife of the faidis perfonis, for the cryme libellit; That thay be nocht vnlawit, in refpect of thair obedience att the prefent ; and that thay wer hot puir
men, A-nmeit to pafs vpoun Lairdis AfTyflis, and that thay wer drevin to exliorbitant expenffis be cimiing fa far of.

Jan. 17. — George Adam, malbun, lone to Alexander Adam in Gaftoune.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchter of vmq" Andro Cuninghame
of Forrefterhill, committit A^poun the xxiij day of December, anno 1577. And
als, of the flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Wallace, committit ^-pouu the ix day of
Januar inflant.

Verdict. The Aflyife pronunceit and dedarit the faid George Adam ciflpabill, convict and fylit, of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchteris of the faidis
vmq'* Andro Cuninghame and vmq'^ Johnne Wallace.

Sentence. To be taikin to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair his heid
to be fl;rikin frome his bodie ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe ; and that dome was pronunceit be Andro
Lyndefay, Denipftar to the Juftice.

iHurber of Mixq ^tnvx} Barnltp.

Jun. 3, 1581. — JoHNXE Bynning, feruaud to Mr Archibald Dowglafe,
parfone of Glafgw.
Dilatit of airt and ])airt of the trelfonabill paricide, murthoui-e and crewall
flauchter of vmquhile Henrie, King of Scottis ; committit in the moneth of Februar, P.V.lxvj 3eiris.

Persewar. Mr Robert Creychtoune of Eliok, Aduocat.
The Juftice ordanit the faid Johnne Bynning to be putt to the knawledge of
ane AlTyfe, for the crymes contenit in Dittay ; [by virtue of ' ane Warrand produceit, fubfcryuit with (by) the Kingis Maieftie, quhilk the aduocat defyrit to be
regiftrat.'] This document does not ajipear on Record.

Verdict. The Afl}'fe, be thair delyuerance, pronunceit be the mouth and
fpeiking of Mungo Scott, (merchand, burges of Edinbiu-ghe,) Chancillar creat of
the Affyife, ffand and delyuerit the faid Johnne Bynning, fylit and conuict, of

96 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1581.

the crewall, fchameful, treffonabill and abhominabill llaiichter and murthoiu* of
vnnq'° Heniye, King of Scottes, fader to our Ibiierane lord, in his awin hxdgeing,
for the tyme, within the burgh of Edinburghe, befyde the Kirk of Feild, quhair
he was lyand, in his naikit bed, takand the nychtis reft ; treffonablie railFand fyre
within the laniin, with ane grit quantitie of powlder, throuch force of the quhilk
the faid haill kidgeing wes raiffit and blawin in the air, and his Grace wes maift
awfullie and trefTonablie flane, murdreift and diftroyit : And als, ffand and delyiiei'it the laid Johnne, giltie, of airt and pairt of the crewal llauchter and mui*-
thoure of vmq'" Williame Tal3eour, and vniq''^ Andro M'Caig, treironablie thruch
raifing of the faid fyre, committit in cumpanie with James, fumtyme Erie of
Boithvell, and diuerfe vthiris declarit traittouris, in the nioneth of Februar 1566;
and of the treflonabill counfeling and hyding of the faidis horribill crjanes, committit be the laid Johnnis afliftance, at the tyme and place foirfaid.

Sentence. For the quhilk cauffis, the Juftice, be the mouth of Andro
Lyndefay, dempftar, ordanit the faid Johnne Bynning to (be) tane to the croce
of Edinburghe, and thair hangit vjioun ane geibet, and thaireftir demanit lyke
ane traittoure.

Jun. 7. — Archibald Ekle of Angus.
Johnne Cwninghame of Boningtoune, oft tymes callit to half enterit, Archbald Erie of Angus, Lord Dowglas and Abernethie, &c., before oure fouerane
lordis Juftice, or his Deputtis, the faidis day and i)lace, in the hours of caus, to
have vndirlyne the~laM% for the trelTonabill dilbbedience of the command of our
fouerane lordis vtlieris lettres ; in nocht entering of his jierfoune in waird, be3ond
the watter of Spay, within fex dayes efter he wes chairgeit thairto ; and on nawyife to cum be-fouth the faid Avatter, quhill he wer fred be oure fouerane lord ;
and that he fould fend ane procuratorie fufficientlie authorifit, obleilFand him to
fulfill the pi-emiftis : Quhilk chairge wes gevin him, vpoun the xviij day of
March, 1580 3eiris, be Johnne Broun, mef linger, vndir the pane of treftoime ;
and on nawayis obeyit be him, nathir within the faidis lex dayes, nor 3it att na
tyme fenfyne ; incurrand thairby the panis of Trellbun, viz. tinfull of lyfe, landis
and guidis, and be extinctioun of his tytillis, fame, honoure and memorie for
evir. And ficlyke, of his difobedience of the command of our fouerane lordis
vthiris lettres ; be the quhilkis he wes chairgeit, be Johnne Calder, Buit Purfevant and Iheref in that pairt, within conftitute, vpoune the xxix day of March
laftbypaft, in oure fouerane lordis name and authoritie, as kepar, detener and
withhauldcr of the Caftell and fortalice of Thoniptalloune, to rander and delyuer
the famiu to the faid Johnne Calder and Sheref in that pairt, executoure of tlie

U Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 97

faidis lettres, to be kepit be him, in our fouerane lordis name, during his hienes
will, within xlviij houris eftir the faid chairge, vnder the pane of trefToune ;
with certificatioune to him, and he fail3eit, he fuld be repute, hauldin, eftemit
and periewit and demanit as ane traittour ; and nochttheles, he on na wyife
obeyit the lamin chairge, nathir within the tyme foix'faid appointit thairto, nathir 3itt att na tyme fenfyne ; nochtwithftanding the faid Caftell and fortalice
wes lauchfullie requyrit, be the executour foirfaid of the faidis letteris, eftir the
outrinning of the Ipace contenit in the famin. And rychtfwa, for his treffonabill difobedience of the command of oure fouerane lordis vthir letteris, in
noclit randering and delyuering of the Caftell and fortalice of Dowglas to Johnne
Adie, meffinger, within xlviij houris nixt eftir he wes chairgeit thairto ; quhilk
chairge wes gevin be the faid meffinger, vpoim the penult day of March laftwas, in anno 1.581 ; and fwa, nocht obeying of the faid chairge, nathir within
the fpace appointit thairto, nor 3it att na tyme fenfyne. And vtheris crymes
contenit in the letteris direct thairvpoun, eftir the forme and tennour of the
famin, and vnder tlie panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

And the faid Archbald Erie of Angus nocht comperand, to the effect foirfaid,
the faid Johnne Cwninghame of Boningtoun, his cautioner, wes vnlawit, for his
non entrie to A-ndirly the law for the faidis crymis, the faidis day and place, in
the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament, viz. in the pane of ane hundreth
poundis. And ficlyke, the faid Archbald Erie of Angus, Lord Dowglafe, &c.,
^\'es adjudgeit in the famin Court, to be denunceit our fouerane lordis rebell,
and putt to his hienes borne ; and all his movabill guidis ordauit to be efcheit
and inbrocht to his Maiefteis \'fe, as fugitive fra his hienes lawes, for the laidis
crymes.

H^igi) Creasoii.

Jun. 1.3. — George Doavglas of Parkheid.
Johnne Charterhous of Aiiniffeikl, for non appearance of George Dowglas of
Parkheid, is \'nla\Ait in the pane of ane hundreth j'oundis, ' to haif vndirlyne
the law, for the trellbnabill dilbbedience of the command and chairge of our
fouerane lordis lettres, in nocht randering and delyuering of the Caftell toui'e
and fortalice of Torthorrell, to Roljert Maxwell, meffinger, flieref in that pairt,'
&c. Dowglas adjudged to be denounced rebell, &c.

^lanal)tfr,

Dec. 9- — Johnne Stkiuei.ing of Glorat, Johnne Striueling, 3ounger of
Craigbernat, Walter Striueling of Ballagane, Louke Striueling
VOL. I. N .

98 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1581.

of Baldorane, Alex. Abirnethie iu Strablane, and Jolinne Striiieling, fervitoiir to Glorat.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall flaiichter of vmq'" Malcum Kincaid,
fone to [James] Kincaid of that Ilk ; committit in Junij laftbypaft.

Preloquutouris in defence. Persewaris. Preloquutouris.
Mr Dauiil M^Gill, aduocate, Charles Kincaid, eldeft fone to the defunct, The Laird of CauldThe Laird of Keir, James Kincaid, eldar of that Ilk, fader, well,
The Laird of Blaquliannan,' James Kincaid, 5 oiinger of tliat Ilk, The Laird of BlaThe Laird of Merkinftoune, eldar, Thomas Kincaid, broder, neme.
The Laird of Knokdoliaii, George Kincaid, broder, The Laird of LugMr Thomas Bucliquhannan. Mr Robert Creychtoune, aduocat. toune.

The quliilk day, comperit James Stewart of Cardonall, and produceit ane
Precept, fubfcrynit be the Kingis INIaieftie, and twa of the lordis of Secreit
Counfall, direct to the Juftice, Juftice Clark and thair deputtis ; commanding,
that this criminall caife fonld be continewit to the tent day of Januar ; quliilk
wes obeyit, and cautioiin ordanit to be found be the defendaris, for thair entrie
the faid day, in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, to vndirly the law for the cryrnes

lybellit.

(Jan. 10, 1581-2.) — Preloquutouris iu defence.
Sir James Hammiltoune, The Laird of Reftalrig, The Maifter of Serapill,

The Lard of Elphinftoun, Mr Dauid M'Gill, Mr Thomas Buchquhannan.

Tlie pannell afkit inftrumentis, that 30ung Kincaid, being requyrit, gif he
wald perfew thame of thair lyfis ; anfueris, that he wald.

Mathew Stewart of Mynto, bailie depute of Efme Duke of Leuuenox Earl of
Darnelie Torboltoune Dalkeyth and Oben3ie, &c. replegiated the pannell to the
Regality of Lennox, and affigned the 24th day of March following, for adminiftration of Juftice.

[3Ir Henry MacCnhane, Justice-Depute.']

^laufiijter nrar t\)t iititti's person — S^tuistiiftion of iWaaistratts of
Oinbtirsf), itoiU ?l?ijji) Constable, ^c.

Dec. 15. — William Bikaktouxe of Caleb.
Dilatit of bering, wering and Icliuitting of piftolettis, within thre quarteris of
ane myle to the Kingis perfoune, (incontrar the tennoure of the Actis of Parliament and Secreit Counfall ;) and fchuiting of George Auchinlek (of Balmanno)
throuch the bodie ; committit vpoun the xij day of December inftant, vpoune
fett purpois, prouifioun, auld feid and foirthocht fellonie.

^ Bucliquhannane, (Buchanan.)

15JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 99

pRELOUuuTouRis for the pannell. Persewaris.

Mr Alexander Sym, Mr Henry Balfoure, Archibald Aucbinlek of Cumledge,

The Laiid of Durie, 50unger, The Laird of Abbotiihall, (broder,)

The Laird of Corlloun, 30unger. Mr Robert Creychtoune, aduocat.

The Juftice, with auife of his AfleflTouris, \'poun the alledgeances and anfiieris,
alfwele proponit yifterday as this day, hiiic hide, that the deid contenit in Dittay, fovild be remittit to the knawledge of an AfTyfe ; and quhatfumevir thing
contenit in Dittayy/zyj^/'^j^rtr/wyw/v*, with the dome, fould be referuit to the
Judge, to be jji-onunceit accoirding to the lawes of this reahne.

The faid mater, for laik of AlFyiburis, continewit to quhatfumevir day it
plefit the perfewar to fummond an Affife thairto.

Dec. 16. — Comperit Mr Alexander Clerk, Prouest of Ediis'BURGH,
togidder with Mr Alexander King, aduocat, and declarit that W". Bikartoune
had committit the crymes aboue writtin, and committit to thair waird ; and in
refpect thay ar Shereffis within tliaim ielffis, proteflit, that the Juftice Court
and thair proceding vpoune him fould be nawife preiudiciall. The (Lord
High) Coxstabill proteftit in lyke maner, that in refpect the famin was committit within the Kingis, &c.

William Bikartoune remittis him felf in the Kingis will for the fchot, quhilk
wes done on fuddantie ; conforme to the lawis of this realme ; and denyis foirtliocht fellonie.

The aduocat alledgeit the mater wes done vpoun auld feid and foirthocht fellonie, in refpect of the deidlie feid ftandand vnreconfilit betuix George Auchinlek and William Bikartoune, for the hurting of Archibauld B. his broder, in September laftbypaft ; as the Dittay beris.

[3/;- Johne Grahamc, Justice-Depute.']
Dec. 18. — Maifter Robert Creychtoune afkit inftrumentis of productioun of ane new Warrand, direct fra the Kingis Maieftie, fubfcryuit be him
felf and twa of his hienes counfall, connnanding the Juftice and his deputtis, to
putt the faid William to the knawledge of ane AflTyfe.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be thair del3'uerance, pronunceit be the mouth and
fpekeing of Hew Montgumrie of HelRlheid, chancillar, fland and deljiierit the
faid William Bikartoune of Cafche, to be culpabill, tylit and convict of the bering and Avering of piftolettis, and of fchuting of George Auchinlek of Balmanno
throuch the bodie to the grit effufioune of his bluid, connnittit vpoune the xij
day of December inftant ; and ffand him acquit of the doing of the lame, vpoun
auld feid, fett purpois, prouifioune, be way of vmbefetting of the hie gait, foirthocht fellonie, and within thre quarteris of ane myle to the Kingis Maiefteis

100 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1581-2.

perfoune ; in rofpect, it wes notour to tliaiue, that the Kingis Maieftie wes furth
att tlie huiitiiifj^, farder nor thre quarteris of ane myle quhair the deid wes committit, the tyme of the comniitting thairof.

' Convict, et Wardat. in Pretorio de Edinhurglie.'

33eaiiirs, iMfni-incj, atxis ofjootiiifj UjitI) ^^)istolets.

Jan. 8, 1581-2. — Alexander Bai.manno of that Ilk, Petir Bahnanno

. . his ll'ruand, Henrye Boiiar in Luniqnliattif-niylne, Archibald

Bikartoun, ])r()der to the Laird of (,'aleh.

Dilatit of beiring and weiring of pillolettis, and Ichuitting thairwith at

George Aiichinlek (of Bahnanno), hurting and wonding of him throw the bodie;

comniittit iipoun the xij day of December laftbypaft, v2)oun fet purpois, prouifioun, auld feid and foirthocht fellonye.

Prelouuitouius for tlie i)anuL'll. Persewaris.

The Laird of Elpliiiigftoune, The Laird of Colairnie, George Auchiiilek of Baluiaano,

Th(( Laird of Tarbat, Tlie Laird of Al>l)olilliall, Mr Robert Creychtoune, aduocat.

Mr Alexander Syni, Mr Williame Olipbant. PRr.LOauiTouu.

Archibald Auchinlek, brothir.

Verdict. Tlie Adyfe, be the mouth of "\^'illiame Bromie, burges of Edinburgh, fhancellare, fland and delyuerit the I'aidis intrantis, culpabill, fylit and
convict of vmbeletting of the hie gait and paffage to George Auchinlek of Balmanno, at the J'tinkand ftyle of the burghe of Edinburgh,' the xij day of December laftwas, and thair inuaiding of him for his flauchter, and Ichutting of him
with bcndit pillolettis, Ik- thame lelfis, at the leid of thair cawfuig, art, pairttaking, connnand, ;iflillance and ratihabitioune, niaill IMiainefuilie and crewallie
throw the bodie, to the effufioune of his blude, in grit quantitie, in extreme
danger of his lyff, and left him lyand for deid, &c.

The .Tu(lice-dej)ute afkit inftrumentis, that the Proved of Edinburgh hes rellauit the pamiell of his handis.

Mar. 2. — Dauid Dundas of Preiftinch.

Dilatit of the crjnne of Iiu-efl ; connuittit with .Teane Ilammiltoune Countas
of Eglingtoune, in the moiiethis of Marche, Apryle, Juuij, Julij, Augull, September, October, Nouember, December, Januare and Februare I^.V'.lxxij and
Ixxiij 3eiris, and continualie fenfyne.

Continued to the Juftice-aire of ' Liulythqw, tertio Itineris, vel premonitione
XV dierum.' Plegio, Jacobo Campbell de Ardkinles, et ipfe ad relevand.

' .\ passacre or close, nearly opposite to Iladdo's Hold, or llie New North Church, and near tlie
Tolbootii, wiierc the Privy Cotmcil usually sat.

15JAC. 6. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 101

Jun. 14, 1582. — Wii.liame Gilmour, lone to Richard Gilmoiir in Bonetoune Pulquhene.
Dilaitit of the vfing of Wichecraft, Sorcerie and Incantatioune, in the monethis
of October and A^ovember laftbjqjaft.

Continued to tlie Juftice-aire of ' Air, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione
XV dierum. Plegio, Allane Cathcart de Carbifloune, fub duplo penarum in
Actis Pari, contentis,' &c.

itincj's aiJbocate.

Jun. 14. — Comperit the faniiii da}', Mr Dauid IVFGill, Aduocate, and
produceit ane precept of the Kingis Maiefteis, fubfcryuit be his hienes, the
Duke, the Erie of Arrane, defyrand him to fupi^lie the feiknes of Mr Robert
Creychtoun, Aduocate, during the tjane he may noclit travell in his defenfe, re»
quiring the famin to be regiftrat, quhairoff the tennom- foUowis :

Mr Dacid M'Gill of Loclicoit, Aduocate, We gi'it 50W wele. Forfamekle as, We wnderftanding, that our belont Mr Robert Creychtouu of Eliok, our Aduocate, is trublit with infiimitie and euill
at eis, quhairby he may nocht iufilt in perfute or defenfe, in fie cauffis as concemis ws : And feing,
that we haif alredy employit 30W in his abfence, and that :;e haif done our command and directioune,
quhairin we ar fatilYeit : Thairfoir it is our will, and we of new command 50W, that 5;e fupplie the
place of our faid Aduocate, in his abfence, in quiiatfumeuir cans concerning ws, befoir quhatfumeuir
Juge, within this realme ; with fiUl power to 50W to compeir for our intres, perfew and defend quhatfumeuir day and place neidfull, as 5;e haif done at our command in tyme bigane, vpoun the pane of
3 our obedience. Subfcriuit with our hand, Att Dalkeyth, Jie xij day (of) Junij 1582.

(Sic Subfcribitur) James R. Lenox. Arrane.

aui3tice--Bcjpute.

Jun. 14. — The fame day Mr WiLLiAME Oliphant, Aduocate, adraittit
Juftice-depute to my Lord Juftice-Generale, be his lettre direct to that effect ;
and tliairfoir fworne to feme lelelie and treulie in the faid office, dui'ing his feruice thairin, quliill he be difcliargeit.

Crtason— iHurUci* of it^tnrg Carnlti), liintj: of ^tots, anU lU^tnt

iHurray, ^t,

AssESsoiRis TO THE Justice.
Adame Bifchope of Orknay,' Robert Commendatour of Dunfermling,'
Mark Commendatour of Newbottill," Mr Johnne Lindefay, parfoun of Menmuir.*

Jun. 16. — George Hwme of Spot t.
Dilaitit of diuerfe treflbnable crymes, viz. of airt and pairt of the treironabill

' Adam Bothwell, an ordinary Lord of Session. ^ Robert Pitcaim, Archdeacon of St Andrews,
and Secretary of State to King James VI. He was also at this time one of the ordinary Lords of
Session. ^ Mark Ker, one of the extraordinary Lords of Session, &c. ' An ordinary Lord of

Session.

102 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1582.

and crwell murthour of vmq'* Haiy King of Scottis, fathir to our fouerane loird,
committit in Februar Ixvj (1566). At the leift, of the ti-effonabill hyding and
conceling of the fainin, lie haveing foirknawlege thairof, and knawing perfytlie,
that Ml- Archebauld Dowglas and vniq''' Johnne Bynniiig his leruand, war actuallie at the committing of the fame. And for the (lauchter of vmq'" Erie of
Murray, Regent ; and vtheris crymes contenit in the letteris.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill as Aduocate to our fouerane lord.

Compeirit Richart Cafe and Jafpart Hwme, as procui'atouris for Alex. Hwme
of Manderftoune, as informer of the faidis crymes lybellit aganis the Laird of
Spott ; and defyrit to be admittit procuratoris, conforme to thair Procuratory,
produceit thairin.

Compeirit lykewayis James Cuninghame, procuratour for Dame Annas Keyth
Countes of Murray, and Elizabet Stewart hir dochter,' be thair lettres of Procuratorie Ipeciallie conltitut ; and produceit the faid Procuratorie, and defyrit to
be admittit for his inti'es.

The Laird of Spott, in refpect Richart Cafe complenis as procuratour for Alex.
Hwme of Manderftoune, informant, in this cans, deiyres, that lykeM'ayife he
may half preloquitouris admittit for his pairt.

DiTTAY (Kjainft the pannel.
George Hwme of Spott, dilaitit and runimond be vertew of our fouerane loirdis lettres, purchefi.
be Mr Robert Creyclitoun of Eliok, his bienes aduocate, to fis daj' and place, for airt and pairt, red
and counfale, of )ie crevvall, fchaniefuU and abhominabill iMiirthour and flaucbter of vinq'" our fouerane
loirdis darrelt father, Henry King of Scottis, committit in the nionetli of Februare, the 3eir of
God I"".V'. threfcoir fex 3eiri9, within his awin lugeing, befyde ])e Kirk of Feild, ?nder filence and
cloude of nycht, be treffonabill rafing of fyre within the faid lugeing, with ane grit qnantitie of powlder ; throw force of the quhilk powlder, fe haill lugeing wes railit and blawin in the air, and his Maieftie maifl trelfonablie and awfully murdreift, (lane, and deftroyit : At the leift, treliiinablie hid and
concelit the faid horrible and treffonabill cry me, he haifand foirknawledge ))airof, and knawand perfytlie that Mr Archebauld Dowglas, fumtyme parfoun of Glafgw, and vniq'' Johnne Bynning his fer-

' This, at first sight, would appear to be a mistake, especially when contrasted with the mention
afterwards made of these noble ladies, in anotlier part of the trial. ' Dame Annas Kei/tli, Countas of
Murray^ was the eldest daughter of William, fourth Earl Marischal, and is elsewheie named Lady
Agnes, and Lady Anne (Annie) Keith; and was the second wife and relict of Reuent INIurray, to
whom she was married in February 1561. She was aftenvards married to Colin sixth Earl of Argyle,
to whom she bore two sons, Archibald the seventh Eail, and Sir Colin Campbell of Lundie. By her
marriage with Regent Murray she had two daughters, Ladies Elizabeth and Margaret Stewart. —
Dame Elizabeth was married to James Stewart, son of James Lord Doune, who having, in 1580, got
a gift from King James V[. of the Ward and Marriage of the two daughters of the Itegeiit Murray,
a few days afterwards wedded the eldest daugliter, Dame lUizaJieth Stewart, and immediately assumed the U\V' n{ Earl oj Murray. Lady Margaret was married to Francis, ninth Earl of Errol,
and died without issue.

In order to distinguish the mother and daughter, the former was usually styled C<uintess of Moray
and Argyll. She died in June 1588. Tile liusband of Uame Elizabeth is best known in Scotland
as ' the Bonny Earl of Murray.'

15JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 103

uand, was actuallie at the committing of J>e faid odious and crewall Murthour; and nochttheles, keipit
the famin fecreit to him felf, neuir reveling the famin to the hier poweris, pat fai wer the conimittaris
fairof, quhairby thay micht haif bene puneift fairfoir. And fiklyke, for airt and pairt of the treffonabill and horribill Murthour of vmq'^ James Erle of Murray, loird Abernethy, &c. Regent to
our fouerane loird, and of his hienes realme and liegis for the tyme, committit actuallie be James Haminiltoune, callit of Bothwellhauch and Johnne Hammiltoune, Proweft of Bothwell, his brother, within the burcht of Linlytliqw, vpoune the xxiij day of Januar, the 5eir of God I^.VMxix 5eiris; and
that of his cawling, couuf'aie, command, affiflance and ratihabitioune ; treflbnablie refetting, fuppleiug and menteining the faidis James and Johnne Hammiltounes, actuall committaris, immediatlie after the faid Murthour, with the hot bludye hand, within his awin dwelling place of Neidpeth-heid,
quhair he duelt for the tyme ; thay being fugiliues Jiairfoir, and takand the horribill cryme vpoune
tfaame ; trefTonablie conceland and hydand the Murthour and Murthouraris, he being baith of the foirknawlege Jiairof, as alfwa, treflbnablie hurding and keiping of the faidis murtheraris within his faid
place, at the tyme foirfaid, and be the fpace of lindrie dayes thaireftir ; nochtwithftanding he perfytlie
knew, that grit diligence wes tane in ferdieing and feiking of the faidis murtheraris, to haif takin and
apprehendit thanie for exetutioun of juftice. And lykewayis, for the treflbnabill Refetting, affifting,
fuppleing and helping the faid Mr Archebauld Dowglas, fumtyme Parfoun of Glafgw, in the place of
Spot, quhair he duelt for )ie tyme ; and that in the moneth of ^larche I™.V^ fourfcoir ^eiris, eftir pat
the faid Mr Archebauld was delaitit for the trelibnabill and vnnaturale Murthour of vmq''^our daiTert
loirdis father, Henry King of Scottis, of gude memory, and fugitiue for the famin, acceptand thairby
the crynie i-poune him : Lykeas, the faid George trefTonablie fupportet and conuoyit the faid Mr
Archebauld, be him felf and vtheris in his name, of his cawfing, command, affiflance and ratihabitioune,
furth of pis realme, at pat tyme, to the pairtis ot Ingland, for fauftie of his lyff, that he fuld nawayife be
apprehendit, prefentit to our fouerane loirdis lawis, nor puneift for the faid horribill cryme ; and nocht
fatiat pairwith, treffonablie wiait directit meflageis to pe faid Mr Archebauld, into the pairtis of Ingland quhairunto he fled for the caufe foirfaid ; and treflbnablie practizit with him, be him felf and
vtheris mediate perfonis, of his fending, fen his pafliing in Ingland, at diuerfe tymes, in preiudice of
our fouerane loird, his hienes realme and liegis ; and fwa hydeing and couering of the faid ^lurthour,
that the committaris tliairof fuld nather be knawin nor puneill for the famin : And alfwa, for art and
pairt of the treflbnabill accepting to tak and put violent handis on our Ibuerane loirdis perfoune, and
flndrie of his hienes nobilitie and fecreit counfale, at diuerfe tymes, in the moneth of December and
Januare in the qeir of God I'".V''.lxxx 5eiris, and that within the burcht of Edinburghe, and Palice of
Hallrudhous ; and treflbnablie hid and concelit the faidis attemptatis, he being of the foirknawlce
pairof, and maid priuie pairof, be Archebauld fumtyme Erie of Angus, and vtheris of that confpiracie;
and treflx)nabill gevin counfale to pe faid Erie an<l vtheris of the (aid Confpiracie, to put the lamin to
full executioune : And vtheris treflxtnabill confpiraceis and crymes, at lenth fpecifeit and coutenit in
the faidis lettres direct thairvpoune.

Comperit Capitane James Ciminghame, as procuratour for Dame Annas Keyth
Countas of Argyle, and Dame Elizabeth Stewart Countas of Murray,' her dochter, be thair lettres of Procuratorie, fubfcryiiit with thair hand allanerlie, Ipeciallie conftitiite ; and defyrit to be adniittit for his intres, be vertew thairof ; and
afkit inftrumentis vpoun the productioune of the famin. — Comperit lykewyife,
Richart Kafe, feruitour to Alexander Hwme of Manderftoime, and Jafpart

* Vide note at the commencement of this trial.

104 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1582.

Hwnie, as procuratouris fpeciallie conftitute be the faid Alexandei- Hwine of
Manderftoune and his lettre of Procuratorie, fubfcryiiit with his hand, being
Ipeciale infoinner, in the fummondis of Treafoune lybellit and perfewit aganis
the faid George Hwnie of Spott, defyring to be admittit procuratouris conforme
thairto ; and all^it inftrunientis vi^oune the pi-oductioun of the famin.

The faid George Hwme of Spott, haifing refpect to the compeirance of Richart Cafe and Jaf])ai-t Hwme, as procuratonrs for Alexander Home of Manderftoune, informar in this cans, proteflit that lykewayife he may haif preloquitouris
admittit for his pairt, to appone aganis the faid Alexander H\Anie and his procuratouris compeirand in his name, allanerlie fa far as concernis his pairt, as informare of the Aduocate.

The Justice, being rypelie awyfit with the defyre of the Laird of Spott,
admittis that he fall haif j^reloquitouris to appone aganis the faid Alexander
Hwme of Manderftoune and his prociu'atoris, as iiiformaris foirfaidis, vpoune
the danger and perrell of law.

The faid George Hwme of Spott, afkis inftrunientis \'poune the productioun
of the Procuratorie be the faid Capitane James Cuningliame, onlie fubfcryuit be
the faidis Dame Annas Keyth Countas of Argyll, and Dame Elizabeth Stewart
Countas of Murray ; and that the famin is nathir fubfcryuit be the Erie of Argyle, fpous to the laid Dame Annas, nor 3et be the Erie of Miu'ray, fpous to the
faid Dame Elizabeth. — To the quhilk. anfuerit the faid Capitane James Cuningliame, that the Procuratorie is fufficient, and thairfoir audit to be admittit,
nochtwithftanding the lamiu is nocht fubfcryuit be thair hufbandis, in refpect
the actioune is treffonabill.

The faid Laird of Spott, haifing regaird to the tryell of his innocencie, condifcendit, that albeit the faid Procuratorie war nocht fubfcryuit be the fpoufes
refpectiuc foirfaidis, as the famin is nocht ; 3it, gif it wer to the forderance of
juftice, he wald admit the famin ; and wnderftandiiig alwayis, that it tendis to
delay the mater, aflvis inftrumentis, 3it as ofbefoir, that the productioun thairof
nocht fubfcryuit be the hufljandis refpccthie as faid is ; and allegeit that the famin thairfoir audit nocht to be admittit ; and nochtwithftanding thairof, he is
content that the faid Capitane James Cuningliame infift in perfute, be his Procui'atoiy, and nocht to delay the mater ; Lykeas, the faid George allegeand, that
it wes the Kingis Maiefteis mynd for forderance of juftice, that prefent tryell be
tane thairin at this dyet, produceit his hienes Precept in jugemeiit, off the quhilk,
the tennour followis :

Hex,
Justice, Juftice Clerk and 3 our deputtis, We greit 30W wele. Forfamekill as, we wndirftanding
tliat ))air is anc Julliie-Court to be lialdin, the fextene day of this inftant, for tryell of George Hwme

15 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 105

of Spott ; thaiifoir it is our will, and we appoynt Adanie Bifcliope of Orkiiay, Robert Commeiulatour of Dunfermling, Mark Commendatour of Newbotill, and Mr Jotinne Lindefay parfoun of Menmuir, to be Aircfouris vnto ^ow: And tbat je cheis ane condignne Affyife to tbe faid George, etfeirand to bis eftait and degre ; and that 36 admit nane tbat ar ferwandis, kin, freindis or dependaris to
Alexander Hwme of Manderftoune, bis competitour. Admitting allwa to tbe faid George, his lawfull defenflis, quhilkis may be competent vnto him of tbe law, conforme to juftice. Subfcryuit with
our hand, Att Dalkeyth tbe twelf day of Junij 1528.

(Sic fublcribitur) JAMES R. Lenox. Arrane.

Vpoiine the productioune of the quhilk Precept, the Laird of Sjiott aflcit actis
and inftrumentis.

FoLLOwis the CoPYE of ane Precept, direct he the Kingis 3Iaieftie, for
directioun oflettres aganis the Juki George.

Justice, Juftice Clerk and ^our deputtis, Forfamekill as, George Hwnie of Spott, has bene oftymes
dilaittit of certane crymes of Trefoun and Lele-maieftie, grittundie lufpect pairof: Thairfoir, 36 fall
nocht faill, and we command 30W, for tryell to be bad heirin, tbat 38 caus fumniond tbe faid George,
to wnderly our lawis fairfoir, in our Tolbuytb of Edinburglie, vpoune fyftene dayis warning ; nocbtwithftanding our Actis of Parliament and vthiris, that thay quha ar to be accufit of Trefoun, fukl half
fourtie dayis fummonding ofbefoir ; becaus tbe faid George is willing to anfuer vpoun tlie famin xv
dayis warning : And to fat effect, tbat ye fummond ane Affyife, of the maift boneft perfonis, and leifl
fufpect of partialitie, and that heft knawis the veritie, in the faid mater. This onnawayife 36 leif
wndone, as 36 will anfuer to ws pairvpoun. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Dalkeytb, the xxviij day
of Maij inftant, and of our regnne, tbe xv 3eir, 1582.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. Lenox. Arane.

The faid Maifter Johnne Grahme, Juflice-Uepute, in name and behalf of the
Juftice Generale, and for himfelf, aflvis inftrumentis and documentis, vpoun the
productioune of the twa Wai-randis of the Kingis Maiefteis, as thair ar ; and
proteftit, that thai remane in jn'oces, &c.

The faid James Cuningliame aflcis inftrumentis, that the faidis twa Warrandis
pi-oduceit, ar nocht paft in Counfale. Quhairvnto anfuerit the Laird of Spot,
that the Warrandis ar fufficient, in refpect the famin are fublcryuit be our foverane loird and the Dukis grace, conforme to ane Act of Secreit Counfale maid
at Striueling ; and for corroboratioune thairof, jiroduceit the faid Act in jugement, quluiirof the tennour followis :

Apud Striueling, duodecimo die menfis Aprilis, anno domini 1582.

Forfamekill as, findrie gud Actis hes bene maid, alfuell in Parliament as in Secreit Counfale, aganis
the vnrelfonabill and vndifcreit behauiour of liiulrie his Maiefteis domeftice ferwandis, and vtheris
fubiectis ; that ceife nocht, rafchlie and inopportunlie, without dew reuerence of liis liienes, or acknowlegeing ]>ame felfis or tbe nature of |)air fuetis, and without refpect of tyme, place or vthir circumftancis, to \X'^^ and preife bis Maieftie to fubfcrybe fignatouris, preceptis, chargeis and miftivis to the
Loirdis of Seftioune and vtheris inferiouris Jugeis, for ftaying or furtliering of proces, in matteris of
juftice, and findrie vtber extraordinare writtis ; vttirlie perverting the ordour appointit be the faidis
Actis ; quhilkis onlanis thingis to be awyfit, and paft firft in Secreit Counfale, befoir liis hicnes
fubfcribe faim; Quhair be pe coiitrair, bis hienes fubfcriptioune is commounlic firft procurit, beVOL. I. O

106 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1582.

foir tlio lettres be red, liard or confidderit in Counfale ; quhairtlirow fmdrie inconvenientis occuris.
For remeid of the quliilkis, in tyme cuming, it is tliocht expedient, ftatute and ordanit, that nane
prefume or tak vpoune liand, to prefent to Iiis jNIaieftie, ony fignatour, precept, charge or iniffiue to
the Loirdis of Seffioune, or ony inferiour Jugeis, for (laying or furthering of proces, in materis
of juftice, or vther extraordinar writtis, or to preife to urge him with tlie fubfcryning Jiairof, except his hienes ordinar officeris of the eftait, in tliingis properly belanging to Jiair officeis, according to Tjie faidis Actis ; without ])e famin be firft, red, hard and allowit be ane ordinar number of
his hienes Counfale fittand, and fubferyuit with twa of fair handis. That nane of the lettres firft
fubfcryuit be his hienes Maieflie, befoir the allowance fairof in Counfale, or althocht Jiai be fubferyuit be ony vther twa of the Counfale out of Counfale fittand, it falbe ony fufficient Wairand to
|ie keipares of the fignet, privie or grit feallis, or the clerk of the Counfale ; nor 5it fall it be ony caus
of offence or perrell to diffobey the fame, quliaireuir thay fal happen to be vfeit or prefentit, without
the Dulkis Grace half confiderit and fubfcryuit fe famin, for awoyding and cfchewing of ])e foirfaidis
inconvenientis, abufe and coufufioune, in tyme cuming: And quha euir offendis in the premiffis, being
the Kingis domeftike ferwandis, fall vpoune tryell that ])ai ar gyltie, be caflit, and put furth of ])air
feruice in the faid houfe : And being ony vtheris perfonis, falbe rigoruilie punifcheit at the fycht of
his hienes, and his faid Priuie Counfale.

ExTRACTUM de lihro actommfecreti confilijf.d. n, regis, per me Joannem Andro, clericum depiitatum ejufdem, fuh meisjigno ef Jubfcriptione manualibus.

(Sic fubfcribitnr) Joannes Andro.

The Aduocate, being inquyrit, gif he wald infill iu perfute of the faid George
Hwme of Spot, for the treffoiiabill cryme aboue writtin, and vtheris lybellit ;
declairit, that he will infill and j)erfew, dilTafenting fra all continewatioiin in the
faid mater ; and requyrit the faid James Cuninghame compeirand for the Countas of Argyll and Countas of IMurray, togidder with the faidis Richart Cafe and
Jefpart Hwme, compeirand as procuratoiiris for Alex. Hwme of Manderftoune,
informer, to infift and concure Avith him in the faid perfute. Quhairvpoune. he
afkit inllrumentis.

The Justice, being awyfit with the faidis Adame Bifchope of Orknay, Robert Commendater of Dunfermling, and Mr Johnne Lindefay parlbun of MenmAvre, his Affefouris foirfaidis, ffand be Interloquitom*, that jjroces fuld be deduceit in the faid actioun this day, conforme to the lawis of this realme. Qnhairvpoiine, the faid Laird of Spot aflcit inftrnmentis.

James Cuninghame protellis, that the Procuratorie and heidis produceit be
him in writ, be keipt, in proces, in caice this mater pafle to ane Allyife, and the
laid Laird of Spott be acquit of airt and jjairt of the trefibnabill Murthoure and
fiauchter of A'mq'" James Erie of Murray, Regent to our fouerane loird, and of
his hienes realme and liegis, and conceling of the famin, as the Dittay beris, for
Wilfull Errour, &c.

The faid Ridiart Kafe afkis inllrumentis, that he requyrit this mater to be
continewit ; in refpect, the Kingis Aduocate is feik, to quhome his maifter, informer in this caus, gaif his informatioune.

15JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 107

The faid Mr Daiiid M'^Gill, 3it as ofbefoir, a(kis iiiftruinentis, that he prefentlie defyris the faid James Cuiiinghame, Richart Kafe and Jefpart Hwme, prociiratouris and the informaris foirfaidis, feeing that juftice aught to be miniftrat on ther treflTonabill crymes, but delay, to reniane and affift him as informaris, to gif him informatioune. — To the quhilkis anfuerit the faid James Cuninghame, that he coinpeiris onlie as procuratoiir for the twa CountafTis foirfaidis.
And the faidis Richart Kafe and Jefpart Hwme anfuerit, that thay will infill in
the faid jierfute, in name and behalf of the informar, fwa that the famiii be nocht
prejudiciall to the cans.

The faid Mr Dauid M'^Gill, aduocat, defyiis the roll of Aflyfe, fubfcryiiit onlie
be Mr Robert Creychtoune, Aduocate to our fouerane loird, to be firft callit. —
Quhairvnto anfuerit the faid Laird of Spott, that thair is ane roll of Affyife of
the maift famous perfonis of the countrie, and leill fufpect, fubfcryuit be Williame Erie of Gowi-ie Loird Ruthuen, thefaurer to our fouerane loird, the Juftice Clerk, and the faid Mr Robert Creychtoune, aduocate ; conforme to the
Kingis Maiefteis Warrand direct thairvpoune ; quhilk roll aucht to be reffaueit
and firft callit : And proteftit, that the tothir roll be nawyile reffauit ; in reipect,
the famin is gevin vj) be the informer.

The Justice, with awyfe of the Loirdis Affefouris foirfaidis, Ordanis be Interloquitour, that ane of ather of the faidis twa roUis be red and callit, and fwa
furth ordourlie, ane for ane vther.

ASSISA.

Johiie Eil5are of • • • , James Hoppringill of Wod, Henry Heplrarne of Fortounc.

Niniane Spottifwod of that Ilk, Alexander Daunialioy of that Ilk, Thomas Fawfyde of that Ilk,
Henry Haliburtoune of Mertoune, Johnne Edmeftoun of tliat Ilk, Patrik Congeltoune of that Ilk,
Thomas Cranftoune of Moreftoune, Alexander Cokburue of that Ilk, Robert Hwme of the Hauch,
Alexander Wardlaw of Cunihill, Johnne Cokbume of Onneltoune, William Wauchope of Nwdry.

The faid James Cuninghame proteftis, that quhatfumeuir thing the faidis
perfonis of Alfyis dois this day, in this mater, that the famin be nawayife prejudiciall to the faidis Dame Annas Keyth Countas of Argyll and Dame (Elizabeth) Stewart Countas of Murrayis actioune ; vpoune the quhilk he requyrit ane
document.

Verdict of the Ajjyfe, Acquitting of Gewge Hwme of Spott. And inimediatlie after the chefing,
fweiring and admitting of the faidis perfonis of Affyife, with confent of ather partie, and Aveiring of
thanie in jugeraent, as vfe is ; the faid George Hwme of Spott, being accufit be vertew of the faidis
lettres, of the trelTonabill cryme aboue writtin, and vtheris contenit Jiairin, fortefeit be findric takanis of
Dittay gevin in thairvpoune, and the famin being denyit fnnpliciter be the faid George, and referrit to
the tryell and delyuerance of the foirnemmit perfonis of Aflyfe ; thay removit furth of the faid Court,
and altogidder conuenit and reffonit vpoune the poyntis of the faid lettres and dittay ; and eftir lang
reflbning had be ))anie J>airvpoune, being ryplie awyiit thairvvith, and euerie poynt of tlie famin, votit,
delyuerit and Acquit J)e faid George of euery poynt of the famin ; and fyne re-enterit agane in the faid

108 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1582.

Court of Jufticiarie, and tbair, be fair delyuerance, pronunceit be fe mowth and fpeikmg of Johnne
Cokburn of Ormeftoune, Chancellare of the faid Affyfe, ffand and delpierit the faid George Hwme
of Spott, Acquit off art and pairt, red and counfale of tlie crewall, fchamefull and abominable Mnrthour and flawcliter of rmq'^ our fouerane loirdis darreft father, Henry King of Scottis, committit in
the moneth of Febniar, tlie ^eir of God I'".V'. tlirefcoir fex yeiris, within his awin lugeing befyde ))e
Kirk of Feild, 8cc. &c. (as before detailed): And fforder, of art and 'pairt, rede and counfale, of the
treflbnabill attempting to tak perforce, be way of deid, James fumtynie Erie of Mortoune, furth of our
fouerane loirdis waird, qubairto he wes committit, for the horribill Murthour of our fouerane loirdis
vmq''' darrell father ; and that, in the faid moneth of Januare, the ^eir of God I^.V"^. fouri'coir yeiris,
as he was to be tranfportit furth of his Maiefteis Caftell of Edinburgh to his hienes Caflell of Dunbaitane ; tbair to be keipit, quhill he be put to the knawlege of ane Alfyife: And of the treflbnabill
counfale-geving, to corrupt and feduce his keiparis, and vlheris haifing credit of his faidis wairdis and
Capitanis Jiairof, to |>at effect ; and |)airby, treflbnabjie hyding and conceling fe faid confpiracie, he beand
of the foirknawlege Jiairof: And auttourof art and paiit, red and counlale, of the treffonabiil attempting
of the inbringing of the Inglis force, within the pairtis of Scotland ; thairby to diffolue the peax, of lang
tyme keipit, betuix the realmes of Scotland and Ingland ; and be his perfuafioune, treflbnablie drawing and allureing grit poweris of Inglifmen, wele inarmit, to the nowraer of Ten thowfand perfonis or
fairby, to the bordouris of Ingland, foiranent the bordaris of Scotland ; daylie manafl'and and boiftand
weir, and to diflxjlue the publik peax foirfaid ; committit be him in fe faid moneth of Januar, the 3eir
of God 1580 jeiris, quhen the faid vmq''^ James fuintyme Erie of Mortoune was in waird, for the
crewall and treflbnabill Murthour of the faid vmq'" oure foueraine loirdis darreft father : And feing the
firft purpois to mifgif, towardis the releif of the faid vmq'" James furth of waird, practi^it and interpryfit ])is purpois, thinkand Jiairby, that the faid vmq'" James fuld recouer his libertie, and efcaip tryell
and pwnifihment : And rychtfwa, of the treflbnabill hydmg and conceling of the faid atteniptatis, and
caus quhaiifoir Jie famin wes attemptit, and quha was coufpiratouris pairin with him, quhome be J>e
famin wes attemptit ; he being of fe foirknawlege of all the crymes and treflbnablie geuing counfale
to pe faid Archebauld fumtyme Erie of Angus, and vtheris of the faidis confpiraceis thairanent.

\^3Ir WdUame OViphant, Jitstice-Dei;iite.~\

iTiit-iaisinff, ^c.

Jun. 5, 1583. — Alexander Jar!)ene of Apilgirtli.'
Dilaitit of the treironabill Birning of the Place of Litillgill.
The Jiiftice, continewis the mater aboue writtin ; in relpect of the allegeancis
proponit agaiiiis the name of Hammiltoune and Bailleis, and deidlie feid, vpoune
the commoiine caus ; as alfwa, vpoune the faid Alexanderis peiris : And ordanit
thame to be committit in waird, within the Caftell of Edinburgh.

[M>- Johnne Grahnme, Justice-Depute.']

23rrnlun(j: a^llarU out of (Castle of (Jrliinlmrg]^.

Aug. 5. — Johnne Stewart, watclnnan in the Caftell of Edinburghe.
Dilaitit of the breking of the Kingis AVaird of the Caftell of Edinburglie, and
convoying of the Laird of Apilgirth and Williame Tailsefeir his ferwand furth
thairof.

' See Nov. 27, 1584.

16Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 109

The Juftic^ ordanis Johnne Stewart to be committit in waird, quhill the Adiiocate be prefent for his perfute.

dTire-raidns— 33uinin0 corn, ^f.

Aug. 5. — Johnne Lindesay of Covingtoune, Mr James Lindefay and
Robert Lindefay, his fonis.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the treffonable rafnig of fyre and birning of fyve
ftakis of beir, quheit and aittis, perteining to Mr Johnne Scharp, Aduocate.

Tlie Conftable of the Caftell of Edinburghe alkit inftrumentis of the entrie of
the Laird of Covingtoune and his Ibnis on pannell, conforme to ane Warrand
direct to that effect. Compeirit Mr Johnne Frude, and produceit ane fubftitution, maid be Mr Dauid MacGill, Aduocate, niakand and fubftitutand hiin in his
place, to perfew the Laird of Covingtoune and his Ibuis, for the crymes thairin
contenit ; and defyrit thame to be infert in proces.

The Dittay, which is inferted at length, charges the pannell, ' for the maift
treffonable, awfull and horribill rafmg of fyre, within the barne-3aird of Horftoiuie, and coirnis Handing llakkit within the lamiu, pertening to Mr Joliime
Scharp, Aduocate ; quhairby, be ane grit quantitie of powder and vtheris necellaris vfit be 30W, at the leift of 30ur cawling, airt, pairt-taking, refetting, conceling and command, 3e maift treftbnablie and awfullie brint and deftroyit to
him, within pe lamiu barne-5aird, lyand within the Sherefdome of Edinburgh,
fyve ftakkis of corne or Jjairby, conteniug ])e C[uantitie of foure chalder of victuall or })airby, of quheit, beir and aittis. — This 3e did, vpoune pe xx or xxj
dayis of March laftbypaft, vnder fcilence of nycht,' &c.

The Juftice, continewis the mater to the morne, be Interloquutour, in the
lame force and effect as it now ftandis ; and Ordanis the Laird of Covingtoune
to be committit agane to waird, within the Caftell of Edinburghe.

Aug. 6. — The laid Laird of Covingtoune, willing that his innocencie be tryit,
of the faid cryme, conforme to the lawis of this realme ; declarit, that he is now
twyis preientit in this jugement, to that effect ; lykeas, he offerris him felf prelentlie reddie to abyde tryell thairin, be the knawlege of ane Aflyfe, &c.

Interlocutor. Tlie Juftice, being ryplie awyfit with the premifTes, haifing confideratioune of
the wechtiiies of the cryme, being ane mater of Treffotm ; ffindis be Interloquutour, tliat he can nocht
gudlie proceid at this prefent, in tlie faid niatcr ; i'|)eiiaHe, in rel'pect of the ablence of Mr Dauid
MacGill, Aduocate piincipidl ; and that llie Jullice is noclit in vii; to reflaue ane fubllitute, to perfew ony crymes of I'rertijune, fie as birning of coirnis ; quiiilk, for the Weill of the countrie, requyris
fufficient tryell. Sccutidlie, becaus the faid fiibditnte decLirit, that he had reffi.UHit na inllructioun,
informatiouii or taikin of Dittay, fra onr fonerane loirdis Aduocate, nor fra the puirtie offendit ; hot
onlie ane fiinpill Dittay but' taikinni,s, as fend fra the aduocate, ddyuerit to him be Williaine Somer-

' Without proofs or evidence in bupport cf the averments ihtrcin contained.

110 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1583-4.

well, neir kinnifman to fe faid Laiid of Covingtoune. T/iridlie, in refpect of the faidis lettres of Alfyfe wer raifit be Jie faid Willianie Somervvell, as wes notoure ; and that fe officer executour of the
faniin confeffit in jugenient, that ]>e faid Willianie Somervvell gaif vp to him the names of Aflyfe, with
the lettres ; quhilliis wer fummond be his directioun and at his defyre. Ferdlie, feing it is manifeft,
that inquifitioune wes takin in this mater, at command of the Kingis Maieflie, be certane of the Loirdis
of his hienes Priuie Counfale, quliilkis now, be reflbun of pe aduocattis abfence, is fupprefiit and nocht
produceit. Fijiftlie, becaus tlie fpeciall pairtie and intereft awner of Jie faidis coimis, mentionat in the
faidis lettres and dittay, being ordanit be vertew fairof to be fummond, wes nocht lawfullie warnit for
his intres ; in refpect he wes nocht wamit quhill' 3efterday, eftir fe fenfing of the Court, and the
hour of caus neirly bypaft ; f e faid day being aflignit as peremptour, to pis perfuit. And finallie, conliddering Jiat Mr James Lindefay and Robert Lindefay, funis to fe Laird of Covingtoune, prefentit
pame felfis yeflerday in jugement defyring fame to be put to ])e knawlege of aiie Affyfe for pe faid
cryrae, thay neuir being atteichit, conuenit nor eomniittit to waird ; quhik appiris ane grit noueltie,
far by= pe accuftumit ordour of this Court : and for diuerfe vtheris reflbnable caufiis and confidderationis moveing him ; fpecialie, becaus our faid fouerane loirdis Precept commandit him to do juftice
in fe faid mater, as occafioun fuld ferae : Thairfoir continewit pe faid mater, quliill he war awyfit be
the Kingis Maieflie and his hienes Secreit Counfall pairanent ; And ordanit pe faid Laird of Covingtoune to be comraittit to waird within pe faid Callell of Edinburghe.

The Laird of Covingtoun proteftit, that he may be put to libertie, in refpect
he offerit him felf, as faid is, to the tryell of aue Affyfe, and eawtioner for his
entrie the thrid day of the Air or foner, vpoune xv dayis warning, vnder the
pane of Fyve thowfand pundis.

The Juftice continewit the mater quhill he be awyfit, and ordanit him to be
eommittit to waird.

[il//- Johnne Grahame and Mr Eduard Bnice, Justices-Deputes. '\

a^tgami)— ^ijulteri).

Jan. 17, 1583-4. — Alexander Abercrumbie of Pitmeddene.
Dilaitit of the mareing (marrying) of twa wyffis, contrair the Actis of Parliament, and committing of Adulterie.

Continued to the Air of ' Abirdene, tertio Itineris, vel xv dierum.'

\_Mr Johnne Grahame, Justice- Depute. 1

dFire-raisinii— JSurnins: of Corns.

Feb. 1. — Eduard Maxwell of Tinwald, William Maxwell his fone.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the treffonabill birning of certane coirnis pertening
to Robert Maxwell of Bratoch ; eommittit vpoun the fyft day of Marche laftwas.
. ' Committit in waird to the Capitane of Blaknes.'

' Until. ' Beyond, coiiuary io.

17JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. Ill

Preloquitouris for the pannell. PRELoauiTouRis in perfute. Persewaris.

Robert Maxwell of Cadelmilk, Johnne Erll of Mortoun, Robert Maxwell in Bratoch,

.Jolinne Maxwell in Portrak. Lord Maxwell, Mr Dauid MacGill of Nifbet,

Robert Maxwell of Duncowtedir. aduocat,

Feb. 3. — Johnne Kirkpatrik appeirand of Ellifland, Robert Kirkpatrik
of Bratoch, Roger Greirfonn of Lag, and fifteen others, fined in ' fourtie pundis'
each, for abfenting themfelves from the Aflyfe ; in confequence of which, the
pannells were again ' delyuerit to pe Capitane of Blaknes.'

Mar. 16. — They were recomitted, owing to non-fummoning of a proper
AfTyfe.

[_3fr IViUktme Oliphant, Justice-Depnte^

Cattle-stealinfl— ^erjuri).

Feb. 10. — Archebauld Croser, fone to Martene Crofer.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the thiftuous fteling, confeHng, reletting and
away taking, fra George Ra and Thorn Lindefay, tranelloiiris, of Ixx ky and
oxin, ciimand to Hallow-fair, in October 1582 3eiris ; and of periiu'ie and vther
poyntis contenit in the Dittay.

\^ERDicT. The Aflyfe, be the mowth of Thomas Ker of Merfingtoune, ffand
and delyuerit the faid Archebauld Crofer to be culpabill, conuict and fylit.

Sentknct. To be tane to ane gallons, befyde the mercat-croce of Edinburghe, and thair hangit quhill he wer deid ; conforme to the lawis of the
realme.

\^Mr Johnne Grahame of Hahairdis, Justice-Depute. ~\

* (&x\t of <goU)iies, iLortJ aiutijuenis anU 33iiltounis prorw.*

May 4, loSl. — At the Ladie Maris lugeing in Striueling, the ferd day of Maij,
])e 3eir of God I°.V^lxxxiiij jeiris. In prefens of the rycht honorabill Sir Lwes
Bellenden of Auchnowle, knycht, Clerk of our fouerane lordis Jufticiarie, Robert

Grahame of Chomik, Grahame, fecund fone to Sir Dauid Grahame of

Fintrie, knyght, and Johnne Creychtoun, feruitour to the faid Sir Lwes, witneffis
in the mater and effect vnderwrittin.

The quhilk day, compeirit in prefens of Johnne Auchmowtie, and James
CaftelLtw, bailleis of the burcht of Strineling, and me Mr James Bannatyne,
Clerk Ordiner depute, in the office of Jufticiarie and Notare publict, ane difcreit man, Mr Johnne Grahame of Hal3airdis, quha in our prefens, befoir the
witneffis foirfaidis, produceit our fouerane lordis Commiffioune, vnder his hienes
fignet, off the dait, at the Caftell of Striueling, the third day of Maij, the 3eir of
God I'^.V'^. fourefcoir 3eiris foirfaid ; makand him his ]\Iaieflis Juftice, in that
pairt, to fens and hauld Courtis of Jufticiarie, for adminiftratioune of juftice,

112 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

vpoune quhatfumeuir perfoun or perfonis, tane, fufpect or dilaitit of the foirknawlege, airt and pairt, of tlie trelTonabill takking, fortefeing and withhaulding
of the burcht and Caftell of Striueling, and rtheris treflonabill and eapitale
crymes quhatlinneuir : and conforine thairto, defyrrit the famin to be admittit,
and him felf Ivvorne, according to the ordoiu'. Quha immediatlie thaireftir, in
prefens of the faidis bailleis, me Notare and witneflis foirl'aidis, be balding vp of
his rycht hand, fwoir and gaif his ayth, that lie fuld lelilie and trewlie feme in
the faid office of Jiifticiarie, as Juftice in that pairt, according to the tennour of
the faid C'ommiffioun ; as he wald anfuer to our louei'ane lord thairvpoun : And
than incontinent chefit, creat and conftitut, Alexander Peblis mefTinger, Alexander Craigingalt and Johnne Hodge in Striueling, conjunctlie and feuerallie, in
Officiaris ; and Robert Scott in Striueling, in Dempftare of Courteis of Julticiarie ; thay being lykewayis fvvorne be thair grit aithis, gevin befoir the laid
Juftice, to feme and minifter lelilie and trewlie in thair offices thairof, ilkane for
thair awin pairtis, ay and quill thay be difchargeit, &c, Quhairvpoun, the faid
Maifter Johnne a^kit inftrumentis of me Notare publict and clerk foirlaid.

It is much to be regi'etted, that during so important a part of the history of
this country, the Criminal Record should be so defective. There are too good
grounds for believing, that much of that valuable Record has been wilfully destroyed during this troublesome period. A great part of the earlier portion of those
Volumes of the Books of Adjournal now extant, evidently consists of tlie * Minute
Books' of the Court. Accordingly, in the extraordinary matter of thk Raid
OF RUTHVEN, no part of the procedure which took place under the above noticed
Commission, is inserted in these Books. It was usual, no doubt, in these instances, for such Commissioners to report directly to the Privy Council, who
had previously appointed the enquiry to take place ; and their proceedings did
not of necessity, at least in that shape, form part of the proper Record of the
Court of Justiciary. In other instances, however, the process of Treason and
the Forfeiture was led before the three Estates of Parliament, and therefore
could not enter the Books of Adjoiu'nal, unless ordained to be therein recorded.
After diligent search, no trace of this Rei>ort is to be found amongst the Books or
Warrants of the Register of the Privy Seal ; but fortunately, in the Parliamentary
Record, Official Copies or ' Extracts' of the Verdicts and Processes of Forfeiture
of the Earls of Morton and Gowrie are furnished, under the Attestations of
William Stewart, junior Clerk of the Court of Justiciary, and of Sir Lewis
Bellenden of Auchnoule, Lord Justice Clerk. Although the trial of the Earl of
Morton thus occurs out of its regular chronological order, it has been thought

17JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 113

proper to preserve it precisely as it has been inserted in the Books of Parliament.

'Act ratefeing the Domes of Foirfaltour led in Jugement agaiiis vmq'^ James furatyine
Erll of Mortoon and Williame furatyme Erll of Govvrie, convict of the crimis of LefeMajeftie, and execute to the deith thairfoir.' '

May 22. — In prefence of the Kingis Maieftie and thrie Eftatis convenit in
this prefent Parliament, Maifter Dauid Makgill adiiocat to our fouerane, prelocutour for his hienes, at his fpeciall command, fchew and dedarit, how thair is certane
domes of Foirfaltiire gevin aganis certane perfonis for crymis of Lefe-maieftie ;
fpeciallie, aganis vmq,e James fumtyme Erll of Mortoun and Williame fumtyme
Erll of Gowrie : And becaus the memorie of tratouris luld remane to the fliame
and flaunder of thame that ar cum of thame, and to be terrour to vtheris to committ Jje like crymis in tyme cumming ; and becaus pe buikis of Adiornall may
be tint and be oft handeling be worne away^ and v])erwayis the faidis domes of
Foirfalture be deftroyit ; defiring thairfoir, that it wald pleis his Maieftie and
the faidis thrie Eftatis to command the faidis domis of Foirfalture to be drawin
out of pe buikis of Adiornall and attentictlie copeit, and the Pungis Maiefties
great feall to be hung to the fame ; and ficlike, that pe faidis thrie Eftatis fuld
append thair feallis thairto, for the fortificatioun, approbatioun and confirmatioun thairof. The quhilk defyir the faidis thrie Eftatis thocht verie reafounable, and be fenfament of Parliament, thocht the fame to be done and grantit,
to append thair feallis to pe attentick extract of all Foirfaltui'is, baith gevin in
Parliament and Juftice courtis. Then incontenent Sir Leues Balleuden of Achnoull knycht, Juftice-clerk to our fouerane lord, produceit the attentick Extractes of the Domes of Foirfalture gevin aganis pe faidis vmq'* James fumtyme
Erll of Mortoun and William fumtyme Erll of Gowrie ; to pe effect that pe
famyn may be put and regiftrat in the buikis of Parliament to be extractit vnder our fouerane lordis great feall and the feallis of pc thrie Eftatis, as faid is.
And attour our fouerane lord, with aduile and confent of J^e faidis thrie Eftatis,
gaif command to Alexander Hay of Eifter Kennett, clerk of his hienes Regifter,
to gif out pe attentict copy of the faidis Domis of Foirfalture, to pas as faid is
vnder his hienes great feall and vnder pe faidis thrie Eftatis. Of the qidiilkis
Decretis of Foirfalture, gevin in our fouerane lordis Juftice courtis, prefentit as
faid is, and fubfcriuit be pe faid Sir Leues Ballenden clerk of Jufticiarie, and
Williame Stewart 30ungar, clerk be commiffioun for pe tyme, refpectiue, the
tennour followis.

^ From the Records of Parliament, Acta III., 304. " The precaution thus judiciously taken, hat
been the means of preserving legal evidence of the procedui-e in these highly interesting cases.

VOL. I. P

114 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. (1581.)

Curia Justiciarie supremi tlomini nostri Regis tenta et inchoata in pretorio htirg'i de Edinburgh, prinio die mensis Junij Anno Domini millesimo
quingentesimo octuagesimo primo, per honorahiles et discretos viros Jacohum SfriueUng de Keir militem et Magistrmn Joannem Grediame, commissarion in hac parte, per Commissionem s. d. n. Regis ac dominorum eius
Secreti Consilij specuditer constitut. ad effectum siibscriptum : Sectis vocatis et curia legitime affirmata.

ilwt-iHajtsti) — iHurUer of Mm^ ?l?enrB ©arnUii.

Jahes Earl of Mortoun Lord Dalkeith, &c.
Jacobus comes de Mortoun Dominiis de Dalkeith, &c.
Jun. 1, 1581. — Accufatus, calumniatus, de arte, parte, prefcientia, concelatione et non revelatione jiroditorie inurtliure quondam nobiliffimi et chariffimi
Henrici Regis Scotorum, patris f. d. n. Regis Jacobi fexti.

Nomina Assise
Electe, jurate et admisse super prefato Jacoho Comite de Mortoun, vi%.

Coliiius comes Argadie, Joannes domiiius Maxwell, Joannes Gordoun de Locchiovar

Joannes comes de Montroile, Geoigius dominus Setoun, miles,

Andreas comes de Rothes, Jacobus dominus Ogilvie, Patricius Hepbunie de Wachtoun,

.lacobus comes de Glencame, Jacobus dominus Inuenneitli, Patricius Lermouth de Daruefie
Hugo comes de Eglintoun, Hugo dominus Somervell, miles,

Alexander de Sutliernland comes, Alex' Magiller de Levingftoun, Will' LevinglloundeKillyth miles.
The quhilk day the faid James Erll of Mortoun being indytit and accufit,
that in the monethis of Januar and Februar in the 3eir of God I"'.V^lxvj 3eiris,
he, accumpaneit with vmq"' James fumtyme Erll Bothuell, James Ormilloun
fumtyme of that Ilk, Robert alias Hop Ormiftoun his fader brother, Johne
Hay fumtyme of Tallo 30ungar, Johne Hei)burne callit Johne of Bewtoun and
diuerfe vjjeris his complices, craftelie and lecretlie confpirit amangis thame felffis,
tratit, devifit and maliciouflie concludit the maift fchamefull, deteftable and vnnaturall murthour and patricide of our fouerane lordis vmq''^ darreft father,
Henrie King of Scottis, lawfuU fpous for pe tyme to his hienes darreft mother
Marie than Queue of Scotland, and that within the biu-gh of Edinburgh, palace
of Halieruidhous and vjjeris placeis thairabout : And to ]je end he micht bring
his wikit, filthie and execrable attemptat better to pas, he, with the remanent
perfonis afoirnamit, be thame felffis, thair feruandis, complices and ^■J)eris in
thair namis, of thair caufing, command, hounding, lending, pairtaking, affiftance
and ratihabitioun, vpoun Ipe tent day of J)e faid moneth of Februar 1566 3eris,
at twa houris efter midnycht or thairby, come to pe lugeing befide pe Kirk of
Feilde, within the faid burgh of Edinburgh, quhair our laid fouerane lordis
darreft fader wes lugeit for pe tyme, and thair, be way of Hame-fukkin, brigancie

(14)Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 115

and forthocht fellony, maid vyldlie, vnmercifullie and treafounablie flew and
murtherit him, with Williame Tailleoiir and Andro MacAige his cubicularis,'
quhan as they, biirijt in fleip, wes takand the nichtis reft ; brint his haill higeing foirfaide, and rafit the fame in pe air be force of gun-pulder, quhilk a litill
befoir wes placeit and inputt be him and his foirfaidis vnder pe ground and angular ftanis and within the voltis, laiche and darne^ pairtis and placeis thairof
to that effect : And rycht fua, he, with pe remanent perfonis afoirnamit, marrowis' of his mifcheiff, be thame felffis, thair fervandis, complices and v)jeris in
thair namis, of thair caufing, commanding, hounding, fending and airt, pairttaking, affiftance and ratihabitioun, at pe tymis foirfaidis, refpectiue, gaif thair
fauour, counfell and help to pe preparatioun of the faid horrible cryrais : And ay
fenfyne,hes fimulat, hid, [and] concelit the famyn in maift treafounable and fecrete
maner ; and thairthrow had incurrit the panis of Lefe-maieftie and fuld haue
bene pvniffit thairfoir with all rigour, be tynfell"* [of] landis and guidis and be
extinctioim of fame, titillis, honour and memorie ; conforme to pe lawis of this
realme. Likas, the remanent perfonis afoirnamit, his complices and confpiratouris with him in thir his treafounable impieties, wer alreadie tryit and foirfaltit for the fame-felff hienous and deteftable crymis ; and for the maift pairt,
as they culd be apprehendit, had fufferit maift fliamefull deade thairfoir, according to thair deferuing. As at mair lenth is contenit in the Dittay gevin in
anent the premiffes, with the takinis and probationis produceit and vfit thairwith. Quhilkis being red to the faid James Erll of Mortoun and he anfuerand
thairto, denyit the famyn ; be reafoun quhairof, the faidis Juftice-deputtis referrit the famyn to the knawlege of pe Inqueift and Affife abonewrittin, quha
wes fworne, refauit and admittit in prefence of the faid Erll.

Verdict. And they being furth of Court removit and ryplie aduifit with
the faid Dittay, takinis infallible and maift evident, with pe probationis produceit
and vfit for verefeing thairof ; and thairefter enterand agane in Court, they all
in ane voce, be pe pronunceing of pe mouth of Johne Erll of Montroife, Chancellair chofin be pe faid Aftife, fyllit the faid James Erll of Mortomi of airt, pairt,
foirknawlege and conceling of pe treafounable and vnnaturall murthoui" foirfaid.

Sentence. Efter pe quhilk convictioun, the faidis Juftice-deputtis, be pronunciatioun of Andro Lyndfay dempftar of Jje faid Court, adiugeit and for Dome
gaif. That pe faid James Erll off Mortoun ftild be had to ane geibbett, befide pe
mercatt-croce of the faid burgh of Edinbui'gh, and thair hangit' quhill he wer
dead ; and thairefter drawin, quartarit and demanit as ane tratour :'' And that

' Grooms of the bed-chamber. ' Hidden, concealed. ^ Equals, partners. * Loss, deprivation.
* Spotswood, p. 314, states that the King mitigated the sentence to beheading, &c. The Confession
of the Earl of Morton shall be inserted in the Appendix. ^ Although burial was allowed, and ' his

116 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1581-4.

all his landis, heretageis, offices and pofleffionis, takis, ftedingis, cornis, cattell,
actionis, debtis, obligationis, giiidis, movable and vnmouable and v])eris quhatlumeuir, qiibilkis pertenit to him, fuld and aucht apertene to our fouerane lord
and to be api)lyit to his vie be reafoun of efcheat of foirfalture, to be vptakin,
^-iit and difponit be his hienes at his pleafour.

Vpoim the quhilk i^remifles Mr Robert Crychtoun of Eliok, advocatt to our
fouei'ane lord, aflcit inftrumentis and actis of Court.

ExTRACTi'jr e.r actis Curie Jnsticiarie antedicte per me Willelmum Stewart
Jiiniorem notarium iniblicum et clericum dicte Curie, jjer Commissionem
£ dicti s. d. n. Regis antedict. specialiter electum etjuratam, sub meis signo
T-j -■ ^^ stibscriptione manualibus. Ita est,

WiLLKLMUS Stewart Junior
r,; notarius puhlicus ac scriha dicte Curie.

- Curia Justiciabie s. d. n. Regis tenta in Edificio Domine Mar, infra
burgum de Striuelixg, quarto die menfis Maij, anno domini millefimo
quingentefimo octuagefimo quarto, per difcretum virum Magiftrum Joan-

-T nem Grahame de Halsairdis Jufticiarum in hac parte virtute CommilTionis
f. d. n. Regis fpecialiter conftitut. : Sectis vocatis et curia legitime affirmata.

itfse--iHajests— 3UaiU of aatitfjbtu— CrtasonalJlg takiixQ MutQi) anti

CTastle of ^tiding, ^t.

WiLLiAME Earl of Gowrie Lord Ruthven.
May 4,1584. — The quhilk day"WilliameErll of Gowrie Lord Ruthven, being
prefentit and enterit vpoun pannell, in prelence of pe faid Juftice, and put to pe
knawlege of ane condigne Affife of Jje rycht honorable perfonis following, to witt :

ASSISA.

Coluie Erll of Argyill, James Erll of Arrane, Willianie Lord Levingfloun,

Dauid Erll of Cravvfurd, George Erll of Merfliell, Patrik Lord Drummoxind,

Johne Erll of Montroife, Alexander Lord Saltoun, James Lord Ogilvie,

James Erll of Glencame, Hew Lord Somervell, AlexanderMaifterofElphingfloun,

Hew Erll of Eglintoun, James Lord Downe, Sir Jolmne Murray of Tillibardin,k'.

L Dilatit and accufit of the treafounable crymis following, wes, be thair delicorps carried by fome bafe fellows to the common fepulcbre,' his head was fixed on the Tolbooth.
The king afterwards granted the following Warrant to take down the head, which is preserved in the
archives of the City of Edinburgh :

' Rex. Prouofl and baillies of our burgh of Edinburgh, We greit 30W weill. It is our will and
We command :;ow, that incontinent ffter the ficht lieirof, ^e tak doun the bei<l of James fum tyme
Erie of Mortoun of the pairt quhair it now is placeit, ypon 3 our awld toUmith ; fwa that the fam heid
may be bureit : I'or the quhilk tiiis our lettre fall be to 30W fufficient warraiid. Subfcryvit with our
hand, At Halyrudhous, the aucht day of December, and of our reigiie the IVxtene 5eir, 1582.'

17JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. II7

uerance, pronunceit be pe month and deliuerance of George Erll of Merflaell
Chancellair of the faid Affile, found and declarit culpable and convict : That
forfaniekill as, in the beginning of Februar laftwes, Mr Dauid Home fervitoiir
to Jje Erll of Angus, and Mr James Erfkyne feruitour to the Erll of Mar, come
to him privilie, vnder filence of nycht, within pe toun of Perth, and declarit to
him how tliej^ wer directit be pe faidis tua Erllis, to certifie vnto him, that they
wer baith of ane mynd, in following out and executing of thair treafounable
devife, in taking of pe kingis burrowis of Sterling and Pei'th, at left pe ane or
the vper of thame : At the quhilk tyme, he aggreit with thame, in maner of the
faidis Erllis, to rin thair cours in taking and fortefeing of pe townis foirfaidis,
at pe leaft ane or vj)er off thame : Quhairefter, pe laid Mr James reid' bak
agane to pe faid Erll of Angus, and affiirit him, that he had aggreit to thair
maift treafounable interprife. And thairthrow, he lies committit maift manifeft
Treafoun, not onlie in conceling of ane treafounable purpos of fa greit confequence, hot alfo mekill mair, in conlenting and aggreing. Item, fylUt and convict, that forfainekill as, he vnderftanding that Mr James Erfliyne, feruand to
the Erll of Mar, wes travelland throw pe cuntrie, in Stratherne, Striuilingfliire
and Angus, treatand and confultand with pe partakeris and affiftaris with J^e
faidis Johne Erll of Mar, Archibald Erll of Angus,^ Thomas Lyoun Maifter of
Glammis and Johnne Carmichaell of that Ilk 30ungar, vpoun thair treafounable
interprife, in taking of the Kingis Maiefties frie burgh and Caftell of Striueling
and dyuerffie vtlier treafounable purposes, he layit pe wayis for the faid Maifter
James and garrit await for him be his feruandis, that pe faid ]\Ir James micht
be convoyit to him : And efter his cumming to him, pe laid Erll enterit in conference with him, towardis the treafounable intei'prife attemptat be the perfonis
abonewiittin, towardis the faid treafounable furprifmg and taking of pe faid
(burgh) and Caftell. QuliiLk treafounable interprife they brocht to effect, and

' Rode. ^ ' Aiip Art aneiit the arrcifting, ititromiffioun and fequeftiatioun of ))e efchaet guidis

and debtis of ])e rcbellis befoir they be convict or put to the horn ; immediately follows the Act of
Ratification of ' the domes of Foirfaltonr' above quoted, and states, that ' forfamekle as be Act of
Parliament it is provided, that gif ony perfoun or peribnis beis flanderit or I'ufpect of Treafoun, they
ialbe tane and reniaue in firmance and thair guidis vnder fuir borrowis, quhill the tyme they haue
tholit ane Aflife quhi(l<ler they be quyt or foull : And trew it is and of veritie, that Archibabl Erll of
Angus, Johnne Erll of Mar. INJr Thomas Lyoun of Baldukie Maifter of Glammes, with thair complices, quhilk laitlie tuik and detenit his hiencs burgh and Caftell of Striueling, raiiind oppin weir
aganis his hienes and his auctoritie, ar fenfyne pairtlie fled and renianis out of ])is realnie, and pairtlie
remanis hid and couerit within tlie fiime vnapprehendit as ■^it,' &c. ' And they and thair freindis and
fauoraris in the meantyme I'ellis, annaleis, difponis, cancellis and pntfis away thair guidis, geir and
debtis, and gevis acquittancis and dili-liargeis to thair deltouris, in manifeft defraud of our Ibuerane
lord anent thair efthaetis ; fua that litill or na thing thairof lalbe left to cum to liis hienes vfe and behalff, gif ])e intromiffioun of ]ie famyn be left, quhill they be convict or put to Jie borne for ])e faid treafounable crymis : Thairfoir om- faid I'ouerane lord, with auife of his tlirieEftatis, hes ftatute and ordinit,
tliat all their puddis, gear and debtis, maillis, fermis, rentis, he. Tall remane fequeftrat in the handis of
the Lord Thefauiar, ay and quhill thay falbe tryit quite or fowll of the faidis crynies,' He.

118 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

reafounablie tviik (the) faid toun and Caftell of Striueling, fortefeit and furniffit
the faid Caftell with men and (munitionis ?) ; Quliairthrow, he affiftit thame in
thair treaibunable deid foii'faid and wes foirknawin of \)e famyn, and wes art,
pairt, red and counfell thairof ; at leaft, treafoimablie concelit pe fame fra his
Maieftie, contrair to his dewtie and dew obedience. Item, of the difobedience
maid be him, in not randering of Williame Drummoundis hous in Diindie to my
Lord of Pettinweme, ane of our fonerane lordis Previe Counfell and Capitane of
his hieues garde, efter Jje intimatioun of our foueran lordis Commiffioun to him,
maid be pe faid lord Commiffionair ; hot keping the fame be pe fpace of thrie
hoiu'is or thairby thairefter. Item, of committing of ane maift hie Treafoun,
in conceling of ane purpos of wechtie importance, quliairthrow pe lyif and eftait
not oulie of our fouerane lord, hot alio of his dari'eft mother be perrellit ; quhilk
had fallin out, gif he had not ftayit and impedit it : And fua, not onlie maift
vnnaturallie and treafounablie committing maift hie Treafoim, in conceling of
ane purpois of fa wechtie importance, hot alio perfifting in the faid Treafoun,
be continowance of his filence and not declaring of Jje faid purpos, tending to
pe perrell of his Maiefties lyf and eftate.

Sentence. And thairfoir the fentence and dome of Foirfalture wes pronunceit aganis the faid Erll, be pe mouth of Robert Scott in Striueling, dempftar
of pe faid Court ; That J^e faid Erll fuld be tane to pe fkaffald befide the mercatt-croce of Striueling, and thair his heid ftrikkin fra his body and demanit as
ane tratour : And that he hes foirfaltit and tint all his landis, heretageis, poffeflionis, takis, ftedingis, offices, lyfrentis, actionis, debtis and v])eris guidis movable
and vmnovable, to be applyit, vptakin and difponit be our fouerane lord at his
pleafour, and to remane with him and his fuceifouris for euer, be reafoim of
efchaet and foirfalture ; as the proces maid thairvjjoim beris.

ExTRACTUM de libris Actorum Adiornalis dicti s. d. n. Regis, tanquam sententia Forisfacttire dicti Comitis, per me Ludouicum Bellenden de Achnoidl militem dericum. Jiisticiarie eiusdem generalem, suh meis signo et
suhscriptione mcmucdihus. LuDOUicus Bellenden clericus Justiciarie.

1584. — Apiid Edinburg-he, vigesirno die mensis Augiisfi amio domitii 1584,
s. d. n. Rege ipso presetite, cum tribus regni statibus ; vnacum Johanne
Irwivg, deputato Mafiscallj, JVillelmo Henrysoim deputato Considbularij ,
et Magistro Johanne Arthour deputato Vicecomitis de Edinburgh, ac
Andrea Lindsay Adiudicatore^ officiarijs Parliament) : Sectis prius VO'
cutis et Curia ajffirmata.

' Dempftar, deemfter.

18Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 119

i^in Of aautfjben— dTorfeituie of tlje eav\& of SInsus anU iWar; .$ff.

(Aug. 20.) — The quhilk day, Mr Dauicl Makgill of Nelbet, aduocate to
our fouerane lord, producit ane Suramondis of Tre(roun,dewlie execut and indorfit
aganis Archibald Erie of Angus, Johne Erie of Mar, Dame Agnes Drummound
Countes of Mar his fpous, Dame Annabill Murray Countes of Mar his mother,
Mr Thomas Lyoun of Baldeukey, Maifter (and Tutour) of Glames, Dame Agnes
Gra Ladie Home his fpous. Dame Margaret Lyon Countes of Caflillis, Dame
Doi-athia Stewart Countes of Gowry, Adame (Erfkine) Commendater of Cambufkynnethe, Dauid (Erfkine) Commendater of Driburgh, Williame (Erfkine)
Commendater of Paflay, Mr James Erfkene brother to Robert Erfkene of
Lytill Sauchy, Johne Leflie of Buchane, Michaell and William Eliihingflonis,
brether to the Lord Elphinfloun, George Dowglas of Park, James and George
DowglafTe Jjair fonis, James Dowglas of Todhoillis, Johne Dowglas of Glafpene,
William Dowglas of Boncle, (Williame) Dowglas his fone and apperand air,
Robert Dowglas 30ungar of Lochlevin, Laurence Maifter of Oliei^hant, Johne
Maifter of Forbes, Patrik Drummond apperand of Carnok, Johne Levingftoune
30unger of Dynnypace, Johne Carmichaell jounger of that Ilk, Hew Carmichaell his fone, "W'illiame Carmichaell of Rowutriecorce, Johne Lyoun 30unger
of CofTynis, James Lyoun of Eifter Ogill, Williame Lyoun of Balgellie, Hew
Nefbet of Rafchill, Patrik Home of Argaties, Johne Lellie of Largie, Johne
Leflie of Authorteis alias Bannachy, James Hamrailtoun of Haggis, Robert
Hammiltoun of Corfe, Arthour Hammiltoun of Boithuelhauche, Mr Johne Coluill, chantour of Glafgw, Mr Patrik Quhitlaw of Newgrange, Johne Arbuthnocht of Lyntufk, James Murray of Pardowis, Vthreid M^Dowgall of Gartheland
elder, Vthreid M'Dowgall of Garthland jovmger, and Robert Efkene of Lytill
Sauchy : Quhairby they were fummoned to haue comjierit befoir the Kingis
Maieftie and his Eftaitis of Parliament this inftant day, with continewatioun
dayis, fFor certane crymes of Treflbun contenit in the fummondis rafit thairvpoun.

DiTTAY against the Eabls of Angus and Mar and their accomplices.

fuper proditorijs criminibus fequentibus dictis, fcilicet, Archibaldum

Angusie et JoHANNEM Marrie CoiAiiTES, fuofque complices et alios fpecialiter
ante nominates, et eorum quemlibet, pro fuis recentibus proditorijs Confpirationibus earundemque executionibus, modo fubfequentj. Quandoquidem palam
conftat et eft notum, quod in menfe Aprilj, anno dominj millefirao quingentefimo
leptuagefimo octauo, immediate poft acceptum imperij regimen in noftram perfonam, matura ftatuum noftrorum liabita deliberatione, dum nos infra dictum

' Records of Parliament, Acta III., 332.

120 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

Caftnxra noftrum de Striveling permanereiiiiis, Quodquidem tunc temporis fidiffinj et predilectj noftrj Alexandrj Erfkin de Gogar cuftodie commiflTum fuit,
qui trium ftatuuin nobilium et confuluni noftrorum unaniiiii conienfu, ex antiqua et iiobilitate preftanti familia de Erfl<in oriundus et dicta cura dignus com-
])robatus eft : Pi-efatus vero Johannes Marrie Comcf;, nihil jam prifce fidelitatis
retinens om . . . arbitrio fuo ftatuens ob liorrenda facinora pre fe nunc commiflTa
declinans indignus omnium vifus, idem ipfum noftrum Caftellum proditorie ceptum, dictufque Alexander Erfl^in eiufdem Capitaneus violenter depulfus et remotus, cum diuerfis alijs nobilibus viris, per noftrum Confilium deputatis nobifcuni jjermanere, pro noftre perione firmiori tutela et rei publice vniuerfe conferuatione, idque ftunma vi et violentia illata per antedictos Johannem Marrie Comitem, Dauidem Erflvin Commendatariura de Dryburgh, Adanium Erlkin Commendatariuni de Cambuflvynnetb, Wilelmum Commendatarium de Paiflay, Robertuni Erlkiii apparentem de Littill Saucliye, Magiftrum Jacobum Erflvin eius
fratrem luofque complices, qui fubito domefticos noftros feruitores ad voluntatis
fue libitum amouerunt ; alios vero fibi cognatos et liie factionis homines aflumpferunt ; certo propofito et animo deliberato, eorum fubiectioni nos perpetuodamnare et retinere ; nunc hos vt fibi optimum vifti erat promouere, nunc illos noftros
nobiles et fideles ligeos profequi odio et opprimere : Atqui in hoc facinore nedura
fuo fanguinj et cognatis pepercerunt, quorum partim merore perculfi mortem
obierunt ; neque in atrocifl'ima fidelium noftrorum citioris effufione modum ac
modeftiam vallam habuerunt, prefertim infra portas dicti noftri Cafti'i, licet (in
eo nobis refidentibus) idem et campus omnis vndeque quatuor milliarijs proxime
circumiacens, pacis propugnaculum, ara et afylum femper extitit et eft. Quod
facinus proditorium, prefatus Comes ftiique complices, tanquam probum opus
approbari volentes, nos prefecto violenter per iplbs detentos Parliamentum ftatuere et tenere infra dictum Caftrum compulerunt, erga menfem Julij anno antedicto, cuiul'quidem Caftrj tunc fefe ftiperiores et magiftros modo ftiprafcripto
eflfecerunt, nofque contra animi noftri defiderium armatorum prefidio circumvallatos ibidem detinuenmt; qui certe locum Parliamento tenendo femper inidoneus eft vifus, quandoquidem more maiorum et veteri obferuata confuetudine,
Parliamento in locis et vrbibus accefllii et recefllii liberis tenenda funt, vbj nobilium ac trium regni ftatuum vnufquifque libere loqui et fuffragia dare poffit ;
non vero in Caftris, arcibus et fortalicijs, ipforum veftibulis, portis et januis
vndique armatorum militum prefidio circumceptis, per dictum Comitem ad hunc
effectum deputat. nobilium autem ac ftatuum ne vllo quidem ingredi permifTo
fed tali comitante caterua vt prefato Comiti fuis complicibus et deputatis antedictis cui ingreflum jiatefieri perpeti collibuit, Proteftatione etiam accepta tunc
contra ordinem et locum teneudi Parliamentmn : In quo tamen, pro fe fuifque

18Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 121

complicibus prelibatis, antedicturn fuuni proditorium nefas vt fidele feruitium
approbari obtiiuiit, atque liec omnia in aniplificandam gratiam et promotionem
talium confecta I'unt. Qui nefande quondam chariifnni patris noftri murthure
perpetratores extiterunt, fcilicet, quondam Jacobi olim Mortonie Comitis aliorumque fociorum, qui convicti pro eodem fcelere debitam et confuetam px-oditorum
mortem digne perpefR lunt. Poftea ob communem reipublice quietem noftrique
falutem prelcripto audace periclitantem dictum Comitem de Mar, nobis intimum
tanta benevolentia lumus amplexi, premijs et largitionibus muuificentiflimis, pre
reliquis nobilibus, ipfum abunde remunerati eius priftinam dignitatem amplificauimus, quo certius ac melius eum nobis ac debito erga nos officio deuinciremus, in tali faltem fidelitate et fingulari obferuantia qua luus olim pater patruufque Alexander Erfkin antenominatus alijque fui primores nos noftrofque progenitores nobiliffimos perpetuo ante, fumma diligentia coluerunt : Atqui ille aduerlum nos noftramque mentem inftitutum aliud nefarie et audacter profequens,
falubribus noftris confilijs quo fe corrigeret et proditionibus hujulmodi abltineret fepius adhibitis mininie aufcultans, Seditiones tamen vltra concitare et jiirgia
fouere, ne vUo tenqwre deftitit qua oceafione permoti, noftri fideles lubditi lefe
armatos in vnum compulerunt nobili noftra perfona in dicto Caftro, tanquam
in carcere, per antedicturn Comitem et fuos comi)lices detenta et cuftodita, mode
luprafcripto, vt in quo ftatu eflTemus et qua valetudine frueremur intelligerent,
ac pro noftra Ihlute et libertate ipforum vitas periclitari et corpora morti objicere
non definerent : Quocirca apxul Falkirk conuenerunt in menfe Augufto anno
predicto ; quoquidem tempore dicti Marrie, Mortonie et Angufie Comites luique
complices, noftram nobilem perlonam iplbrum poteftati ftibjugatam in Caftro
noftro detinentes vt predicitur iuuitos nos compulerunt Proclamationes dirigere ad conueniendum noftros liegeos vnde per probam afFectionem qua dicti noltri fideles lubditi in recuperanda noftra lilxn-tate alliciti eraut : Et per publicam
Proclamationem cum obtemperantes alii noftri ligij fe conuenerimt, dicti Comites
et ftii complices effecerunt quod in ijs poffibile factu erat, vt huius regni ftibditonnn partem alteram ad reliquorum extremam jjerniciem et necem cruentam.
in arma lubito irruere et prelium inire allicerent : Quo facilius bee patria, perfona noftra nobilis, ftatus publicus et auctoritas regia cuiuis externe gentj et inimicis preda procliuior fieret, nifi nos iingulari onniijjotentis Dei fapientia et
prouidentia diuinitus nobis concefta repleti, dictas txu-bas tumxxltufqxxe concitatos
mox comprimerenuxs et fedaremus. Pketekea dicti Marrie et Aiii^usie Comifes,
in proditoi-ijs fuis ceptis perfeuei-antes, fuofqxxe complices in eifdem fouentes,
preftiterunt ; precipxxe,' vbi dictus qxxondam Jacobxxs olim Mortonie Comes, de
arte, pax'te, px'efcientia et concelatione hoiTibilis et nefarie necis quondanx chariffinxj noftri patx-is confcius dilatus, ideoqxxe in Cafti'o noftro de Edinbxxrgh inVOL. I. Q

122 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

carceratiis et paiilo poll bine tranfportari in Caftrum nofti'um de Dunbartane
juflus fuit, prefati Arcbiljaldiis Angufie Comes, Johannes Carmichall de eodem
junior, Hugo Cannieball eius filiiis. Georgius Dowglas de Parkbeid, Jacobus et
Georgius Dowglalie eius filij. proditorio more confpirautes, molientes et concludentes, violentam interceptionem et ablationeni dieti quondam Comitis e manibus fidelium noftrorum fubditorum ad ipfius conductionem per nos affignatoram,
fpecialem noftram Commiffionem ad hoc habentium : Idque in menfe Januario,
anno domiiii millefnno quingentefimo octuagefiino, fefe in vnum omnes cum fuis
complicibus, more bellico accincti, conveniebant, juxta rupes de Bred, ea intentione et ex certo propofito vt prefatum quondam Comitem interciperent, apprehenderent et vi arraata auferrent. Quemadmodum etiam direxerunt quondam
Archibaldum Dowglas olim Conllalnilarium Caftri de Edinburgh, qui nuper
morte multatus eft, jubentes eum lignificare et diicem dicti Caftri certiorem
facere, vt dictum quondam Comitem retineret ac obl'eruaret apud fe ; noftro interim juflTu ipfiim tranlportandi vt predicitur plane dato : Hinc manifeftiffime
crimen Proditionis et Lefemaieftatis committendo. Et ob hec pleraque alia proditoria fcelera, dictus Angusie Coii/e.s fuique complices ante nominati, in Parliamento noftro tento apud Edinbui'gb, in menfe Octobris anno domiui millefimo
quingentefnno octuagefiino primo Conuicti et fforiffacti decernebantur. Prefatus tamen Joliaunes Manei Comes certo intelligens dictum Angufie Comitem
ea frui conditione et ob caufas prefcriptas noftrum incurrifte indignationem, ipfum
nihilominus in Caftrum noftrum de Sterling introinifit, recepit, familiari tractauit,
pactiones, Conf])irationes, diuerlas confiiltationes et concluliones lecum iiiiit et
deliberauit ; in magnum noftri contemptum tocius patrie communil'que pacis
perturbationem atque adeo ne adhuc fatilTactus ; innno vltra perfiftens, non modo in regni huius vniuerfam ftibuerfionem, fed noftre q\u)que faluti et auctoritati
regie periculuin intulit. Poftquam.Deo optinio maximo fauente. uofter confanguineus fidelis honeftus, virtutis exuj)erancia preftans et Chriftiane Religionis
profefibr fincerus, quondam Efmus Leuinie Dux, chariffiuuis nofter amicus, e fua
natiua \)atv\a Gallia profectus, fe hue appulit inviolabilem ob ingentem zelum fue
erga nos obferuautie : In qua, cum fe fidifiimum, integerrinmm et obfequentiffimum declarauerat, et in nos fidelis aiiimi liii officio probe functus e(let, proditorium fcelerum et Couiuratiomnii prefcriptarum male conlcios fefe intelligentes, in
eifdem iuueftigandis patefaciendifque, metuentes prefatum quondam nobilem dominum Ducem grauiter operam adhibituriim ob noftram falutem et incolumitatem attpie ipfius fedulitate et integritate, reliquos Coujurationis impetus et conatus retardari pertimelcentes pergere, muiquam deftiterunt douce proditi)rie
vonfpirarent : ('um quondam \\'ilelmo olim Comite Gowrie domino RuthAvene,
nobilem noftram perfonam appreheudere et captam detinere apud Caftrum illius

18Jac. 6. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 123

de Ruthwene, et hoc fuper vicefimo tertio die menfis Augiiftj, anno doniinj
millefimo quingentefimo octuagefimo fecundo ; eodemque tempore fidos et dilectos noftros Conliiles aliofque probos ligeos nobis inferuire appropiiiquantes, pro
iplbruni internecione et cede, crudeliffime inuaferiint et vulnerarunt ; tunc
quoque Confulum et aliorum fideliuni fubditoruin noftrorum quofdani captiuos
ceperunt et cuftodierunt, ordinaries remouerunt, Precepta noftra, nobis repugnantibus, dicto quondam chariflimo et fideliffimo noftro conianguineo dirigere
impulerunt, eum inaudita celeritate huius i-egni finibus exterminandum curauerunt, j)erfonam noflram ad I'ui animi libidinem et defiderium (magna luorum
fociorum caterua) ftipatam, hue atque illuc deduxerunt per Ipacium decem menfiurn deinde lequentium : Inftituto certiffimo et mente deliberata hujufinodi jugo
feruitutis imperpetuum nos implicare et retinere, uifi ineffabili Omnipoteutis beneuolentia et auxilio nolinet ipfos hinc abdicaremus vicefimo fexto die menfis
Junii proxime elapfis. Que impia faciuora jam explorata et jiroditiones uefande
jam patefacte, certifllma fimt indicia et argumenta, ipfos ab initio fiiifie fautores,
defenfores et promotores, talium qui reuera conlpirauerunt contractiun inierunt,
rubfcriplerunt et perpetrauerunt cnuleliffimam chariffimi quondam nofl;ri patris
cedem. Quamobiiem quidam ab hinc mortem coudigne vt prefcribitur perpefli
funt : Ex fiipradictis etiam fole meridiano clarius patet, eos ipfos maliciofe et
maxime proditorie contra nos, noflram falutem, dignitatem, coronam et auctoritatem regiam, femper coniurauiffe, dementia tamen iueflabilj humanitate modeftiaque tanta in libertatis noftre recuperatione leniter fumus vfi, vt jn'oditorie
illius nofi:re captiuitatis et diuturne cufl;odie, ne quifpiam author aut capitis
periculum aut terrarum, bonorum jacturam vllam fuftinuifi"e aut incurriffe videatur ; atque adeo prefcripta fcelera omnia et proditiones imjjiiffime per dictos
Angiifie et MaiTie Comites fuofque Ibcios, confceleratos proditores particulariter
ante nominatos, commide, mifericordia et lenitate noftra florefcente, jjartim tunc
temporis, venia data, obuinbrate et invite preterierunt, partim in dicto Parliamento in prefato Caftro tento pro fideli feruitio approbate, alioquin naturali dementia et manfuetudine noftra I'emille fimpliciter et imperpetuum obliuioni tradite condonobantur : Quibus benemeritis et gratitudiuibus cujulpiam fidelis et
grati fubdit(i ?) montem (mentem ?) concitarj ac inflammai'i maxime deciiit non
raodo manibus pedibufque ob . . . . omnia facere vt viciflim obfequij fui et debite
erga nos obferuancie fructum aliquod perciperemus, quinetiam cuiuis flagitio et
proditorio fceleri nobis noftre auctoritati et liegibus rejjugnanti ieia totis ^•iribus
opponere et obhictari fummopere oportuit. Nihilominus, contemptis et fpretis
hifce omnibus, prefatus Archlhaldus Aiigusi Comes, Johannes Comes de Mar,
Agnetam Dnimmond Com'itissa de Mar, eius fponfa, Annil>ale)ii Mnrrai/ Comitissa de Mar senior mater dictj Couiitis, Thomas Lyoune de Baldukye Magif124 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

ter et Tutor de Glaramis, Agnis Gray Domina Hwme eius fponfa, Margareta
Lyoune ComitifTa de Caffillis eius foror, Dorotliia Stewart Coinitiffa de Gowrie, Dauid Erikin Commendatarius de Dryburgli, Adamus Erfl^in Conimendatarius de Caiiibufl\ynueth,Wilelmus Erflviu Commendatarius de Paiflay, Joannes
Carmicliall de eodem junior, Hugo Carmichall eius filius, Patricius Drummond
apparens de Carnok, Johannes Leflie de Balquhane, Magifter Wilelmus Leflie
eius frater, Wilelmus LeOie (Robertus Er(kin?) apparens de Littil Sauchye,
Magifter Jacobus Erll^in eius frater, Georgius Dowglas de Parkheid, Jacobus
Dowglas et Georgius Dowglas eius filij, Jacobus Dowglas de Todlioillis, Johannes
Dowglas de Glafpin, 'Wilelmus Dowglas de Boncle, Wilelmus Dowglas eius filius, Wilelmus Dowglas de Rountrecorfe, ^Vilelmus Connyghame filius natu
fecundus dominj Drumquhaffill, Michael et Wilelmus Elphingftones fratres Robertj dominj de Elphingftoun, Johannes Lyoun junior de Coffynnis, Jacobus
Lyoun de Eifter Ogill, AVilelmus Ogill (Lyoun) de Balgillie, Johannes Levingftoune de Dunypace jiuiior, Magifter Johannes Coluile precentor de Glafgow,
Magifter Patricius Quhitelaw de Newgrange, Hugo Nefl)it de Rafchehill, Patricius Home de Argatlieis, Johannes Lellie de Largie, Johannes Leflie de Authorteis alias Bannachie, Robertus Dowglas junior de Lochlevin, Laurentius Magister de Oliphant, ^'thredus M'Dowgell de Garthland, Vthredus McDowell eius
filius et heres apparens, Jacobus Hammiltoune de Haggis, Robertus Hammiltoun de Corle, Johannes Magifter de Forl)es, Johaimes Arbuthnot junior de
Lyntuflv, Arthurus Hammiltoun de Boithuelhauch, Jacobus Mwrray de Pardoves,
&c. Cum iuis complicibus, focijs et fautoribus. ex iplbrum caufatione, directione, miflione, receptione, julTu, afliftentia et ratihabitione, perfeuerantes in Iuis
proditorijs determinatiouibus et conclufionibus aduerlum nos, noftram perfonam,
auctoritatem et regiam coronam fufceptis, in menfibus Novembris, Decembris,
Januarij, F'ebruarij, Marcij et Aprilis jiroxime elapfis, maxime proditorie intercomnumicarunt, tractauerunt, conftdtauerunt, deliberarunt, et mediantibiis quibufdani perfonis, tandem concluferunt cmn dicto quondam 'SVilelmo olim Comite
Gowrye,l'uper nefandaet proditoria actione, ad intercipiendum et manus violentas
imponenduin in perfonam noftram nobilem, vt itenun more folito, eorum ditioni
et poteftati facilius nos aftricti contra noftre mentis libitum, ipforum voluntati et
libidini omnino obtemperaremus, atque adeo ad cruentas manus infei'endum in perfonas noftrorum nobiliumConfulumetfideliuni lubditorum perniciem,advniuerfam
reipublice difturbationem et authoritatis noftre fubuerfionem. Poft inultas tandem
priuatas Conjxu'ationes, literarum hinc inde mifRonem et receptionem per nuncios
habitam cognitionem et jiroditorins ac nefarias fuas confpirationes facilius ad effectuin perducerent, demum antedicti proditores fuique complices, decimo feptimo,
decimo octauo, decimo nono, vicefimo, vicefimo prinio, vicefimo fecundo, viceftmo

18Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 125

tertio, viceiimo qiiarto, et vicefimo quinto diebus menfis Aprilis vltimo elapfis,
in vnum arniati comieiierunt, ac libenim biirgum noftriim tie Striveling expugnanint et ceperunt, Balliuos magiftraturque eiurdeni captiuos deduxerunt, Pontein, campanile, diuerfaiipie partes dicti burgi fortiter nmnierunt, mercerarios
milites connocarunt vndique jiixta Auftralia nienia viam facilem per vicinos
parietes adiacentes patefecerunt, prope fcholam mnrnni faxis et lapidibus congeftis extrnxerunt, cnins pars ad hue indiuulfa i^ermanet, Caftriini noftnim de
Striveling fumnia \i ftreniio oppugnarunt, paucos noftros fideles ligeos eiiifdem
cuftodes idem ipfum derelinquere et fefe dedere eompulerunt, quos deinde tanquam captiuos arctiffirae mandauerunt cuftodie, Joliannem Gledftanes Ormond
Signefenun, aliofque noftros nuncios, qui literas noftras publice proclamare apiid
forum dicti liberi noftri burgi dirigebantiu', eafdem debite executioni mandare
impedierunt, atque eas ab ipfis violenter furripuerunt, Proclamationes publicas
fieri ad milites ftipendiai'ios conducendum effeeerunt ; exprelTe contra Parliamentj Statuta, et in manifeftam legum violationem : Perpetratifque hifce omnibus nedum flagitijs faginati aut fatilfacti. prefatum noftrum Caftrum de Sterling
armatis viris, prouifionibus bellicis ac cibarijs compleuerunt, et ftrenuo munierunt, certo propoflto et aninio deliberato idem iiiluni contra nos auctoritatemque
noftram regiam pertinaciter et proditorie detinere ac tueri. Quaquidem occafione merito, nos commoti, ad expugnationem et recuperationem dicti Caftri et
burgi, exercitum fedulo coiniocauinius atque ipfi diligenter proceffimus : hinc
audacter et temerarie crimen liunme proditionis et Lefemaiellatis committendo,
in magnum noftre auctoritatis contemptuni et legum violationem. Atque adeo,
pro fua proditoria celatione et occultatione predicte Coniurationis, conl'ultatione,
conclufione, contractu et executione eiuldem : Ideoque dictos Archibaldum AngufieComitem, Joliannem Comitem de Mar, Agnetam Drununond ComitiflTam de
Mar eius fponfani, Annibalem Murray ComitilFam de Mar leniorem, matrem
dicti Comitis, &c. Confpiratores, proditoriolque executores ad videndum et audiendum fefe et eoruni quemlibet, refpectu premiflbrinn, crimen Lefemaieftatis
incurrifle, per nos et trium regni noftri ftatumn decretum decerni et declarari ;
et fuper predictis et alijs quamplurimis rebellionibus, tranfgreflionibus et proditorijs criminibus, per prenominatas perlbnas contra nos regnum noftrum et
auctoritatem regiam impie ac nefarie perpetratis ; et dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, proponendis et oftendendis ac juri pai'endum et ftqier hujufmodi judicium noftrum et noftri Parliamenti, fecundum leges regni noftri expectandum et lubevnidum, dictas vi3 perlbnas, Confpiratores, perpetratores et celatores criminum precedentium refpectiue, ad videndum et audiendum fefe et
eorum quemlibet, intuitu premilTorum, crimen Lefemaieftatis incurrifle, per nos
et trium regni noftri ftatuum decretum decerni et declarari ; et propterea ipfo126 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

rum bona mobilia et immobilia, tam terras quam officia, aliafque res ad eos Ipectantes, nobis confifcari et 2iroperpetuo nobifcuiii in proprietate remanere, perfonafque fiias penam ])roditionis et vltinii fupplicii a regni noftri legibus inflictani
fubire : Et vberius in in-eniiffis relpondendiun et inijiarenduiu intimando lupradictis Confpiratorilius et eoruni cuilibet, quod fine dictis die et loco cum continuatione dierum comparuerunt fme non, Nos dictufque noftri Jufticiarius, in
premiffis jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedet. Insuper citetis, &c. ad
comparendum coram nobis noftroue Jufticiario dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, ad perbibendum fidele teftimonium in caula predicta, fub i)ena legis;
et pi-elentes literas debite executas et indorfatis earundem latori reddatis : Et
vos qui prefentes executi fueritis fitis ibidem dictis die et loco coram nobis feu
dicto noftro Jufliciario. portantes vobiicum lunnnonitionis veftre teftimonium in
Icripto pro premiflis leu ipfos teftes. Ad quod faciendum vobis et veftrum cuilibet conjunctim et diuifim vicecomitibus noftris in hac parte committimus poteftatem. Datum liib Teftimonio noftri Magnj Sigilli, Apud Edinburgb vicefimo quinto die menfis Maij, anno domini millelimo quingentelimo octuagelimo
quarto et regni noftri decimo feptimo.

Quliilkis liaill perlbunis abonevrittin war tlirie ftndrie tymes oiqnnlie callit at
the toUbuyth wyndok, and nane of thame compeirand [exceptand Dame Anabill
Murray Countes of Mar elder, Dame Agnes Drummond Countes of Mar 30unger. Dame Dorathie Stewart Countes of Gourie, Williame Eljjbingftoun, Johne
Leflie of Authorteis. AVilliame Dowglas of Bonkle elder, qubo otlerit tbrime to
the tryell anent the poyntis conteiiit in the lummondis of Trelibun ; quhome the
P^ftaitis of Parliament ordanit to reteir to J^air lugeingis, thairin to remane quhill
the morne at audit houris, and thay than to compeir befoir the Kingis Maieftie
and Lordis of Articles, to anfuer to the laid lummondis,] and immediatlie ))airefter
the laid Aduocat producit Richard Bynning. 8zc. meliingeris, executoris of the
laid lummondis, quha maid fayth that thair laid executiounis, as thay heir, ar lull
and trew, &c. Efter the verificatioun of the quhilkis executionis, the faid Mr
Dauid Makgill, aduocat, producit thir twa wrjtingis following, fubfcriwit be the
Kiugis Maieftie, off the quhilkis tlie tenouris foUowis :

Warrant to delete Robert Erskin of Lrjtill Saucliie from the Summondis.
' Rex.

' Mr Dauid Makgill of Neiliet our aduocat: Forfameikle as we viulerfland tiiat tliair is
ane fummondis of Treilbun directit asraiiis diuerlTe peifimis, ftbr the late tumult and rebellioun laitlie
rommittit aganis ws, and that our ItTuitour Robert Erikene is chargeit thairwillie to tonipeir in our
nixt Parliament, tobefoirfalt tior the caulles contenit in the faid fummondis : Newirtheles, remembering the faid Robertis gud and thankfull feruice done to ws of befoir, and for ccrtane gud ronfiderationis, we ar mowit nocht to inlilt aganis iiim in our nixt Parliament, be the faid fummondis ralit aganis
him ; tiiat 36 deleit his name furthe of the famin and executionis fairof, to the effect he be nocht

18JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 127

trublit Jiaiiby in onyfort; je kepand J)irpoiiitis for 50ur Wavrand. Subfcriwit with our hand, at Edinburghe, the xx day of Auguft, and of our reinge ]>e xvij jeir lo8-l.

(Sic fubferibitur) 'JAMES R. Montroise, James Stewart, Blantyir.'

Heir followis tlie tennour of the vther wry ting : —

Warrant to delete Makdowgalh of Garthland from Snmmondis.
' Our Advocat we greit 50W weill : Fodamekle as faiiis fumraondis of Treflbun rafit and execut at our and 30W our Aduocatis inAance in our name, aganis Vthreid M'Dowgall of Gartldand, and
Vthreid Makdowgall Ills fone and apperand air, ffor the treflJinabh' fup|)ryfing and taking of our Caftell and toun of Striueling, being in cunipanie with diuerll'e our coiifpiratoris contenit in the fummondis rafit Jiairvpoun ; at the ieift, art and pairt Jiairof : ffor diuerfle reffonabill cauffes and confideiationis
inoveing ws, it is our will that 56 extinct and deleit fiu'the of the faid funimondis the faidis Vthreid
M'Dowgall and iiis ibne, aud pas fra that pairt of tlie faid f'umnioiulis, fafer as concernis thanie, for
the faid crynie or ony vther crymes nientionat in the faid funimondis; difchargeing 30W of all perfewing or infifling aganis thame for the famin, and of 3 our office in that pairt. As alfua difcharges
the Lordis of our Parliament, our Jidlice generall and his deputis, of all preceding aganis thame flor
the preniitfes, fimpliciter. Subfcriwit with our hand at Edinburgh, the nyntene day of Auguft, the
3eir of God I .V .Ixxxiiij jeiris,

(Sic fubferibitur) JAMES R.

And according to the command of the faidis twa wrytingis, the faid Aduocat, in prefens of the
Kingis Maieflie and Lordi-i of Articles of this prefent Parliament, pafl fra the perfnte of the faidis
Vthrid M'Dowgall of Garthland, Vthrid M^Dowgall his fone and apperand air, and the faid Robert
Erfkene of Lytill Sauchy ; And thairfoir ])air faidis thrie nemmis of command foirfaid war pi-efentlie
deleit furtlie of the faid funimondis of foirfaltour : Wpoun the productioun of the quhilkis twa wrytingis and deleting of thame furthe of the faid fummondis, the faid aduocat alkit iiiftrumentis, and
immediatlie faireftir, the Kingis Maieflie being perfonalie prefent, commandit the faid Mr Dauid
Makgill, his hienes aduocat, to pafs fra the perfute of the faidis Johne Levingftoune younger of
Dinnypace, William and Micliaell Elphinftonis blether to the Lord Elphingftone, Williame Dowglas
of Bonkle, and Williame Lyoun of Bagillie : And ficlyk, commandit the faid Clerk of regiftri and his
deputis to deleit thame furthe of the faid fummondis of Foirfaltrie : Quhilkis war prefentlie done, in
prefens of the Kirigis Maieflie and Lordis of Articles, be the faid aduocat, and Alexander Hay, Clerk
of regillri ; and Jiairvpoun ]>e faid aduocat aftit infliiimentis. And fiilyk, Johne Leflie of Authorteis
alias Bennadiy, being perfonalie prefent, producit ane Reiniflioun grautit be our fouerane lord, vnder
his hienes greit feill, Remittand the faid Johne the foirfaid crynie and Treffoun contenit in the faid
fummondis of Foirfaltour led aganis him : In refpect of the quhilk, the iiiid aduocat inlykuayis pafl
fra fe perfute of the faid Johne Lellie ; quhairvpoun the faid Johne alkit inflrumentis.

Quhilk Summoxds, with the executions and indorfationis thairof refpectiue
foirfaidis, being red firft in prefens of the Lordis Commiffionaris of Parliament,
vpoun the laid xx day of Auguft inftant, and ficlyk vpoune the xxj day of the
iamyn nionetli thaireftir, fpecialie depute be his hienes Conimiffioun for baldin
thairof, firll in Latene and thaireftir in Scottis ; and the haill perfoncs defendaris abonewrittine, being diuerffe and fyndrie tymes callit at the tolbuith windok, to haue comperit and anfuerit to the faid fummondis, and nane of thame
comperand, (excoptand the faidis Deame Annabell jMwrray Couiites of Mar elder,
Deame Agnes Drunmiond Countes of Mar 3ounger, Deame Dortha Stewart

128 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

Countes of Gowrie,) the faid aduocat, for verificatioun and probatioun of the foirfaidis execiitionis and indorfationis of the faid fummondis, repetit the Actis maid
the faidis xx and xxj dayes of Augufl inftant : As the famyn, fchawin and producit before the Kingis grace and thrie Eftatis of this prefent Parliament proportit. And ficlyk thaireftir, the foirfaidis haill perfones defendaris being of
new oftymes callit at the faid tolbuith windok to haue comperit before the faidis
Lordis of Articles, and defendit the faid fummondis the foirfaid xx and xxj dayes
of Auguft inftant rex"" with continewatioune of dayes, and tliay beand oftymes
callit and nocht comparand, (exceptand as faid is,) the faid aduocat defyrit the
faidis Lordis of Articles Declaratioune, gif the reflTones of the laid fummondis
war relevant or nocht ; Qulia than declarit the lamyn to be relevant, vpoune
the faid xxj day of this infl;ant moneth : At the quhilk tyme the faid aduocat
producit the haill wryttis and rejietit the haill jn'obationis contenit in the Actis
maid the day foirfaid in prefens of the Lordis of Articles, for probatioune of the
faid fummondis. Quhilkis Lordis of Articles thaireftir fand the faid fummondis
fufficientlie prowine aganis the perfones vnderwrittin. — And in femblable maner,
the faid haill fummondis with the executionis and indorfationis thairof, bein<r
i-ed baith in Scottis and Latene, in prefens of the Kingis grace and thrie Eftatis
of this prefent Parliament, and the foirfaidis haill perfones defendaris being of
new callit, as of before, fyndrie tymes at the faid tolbuith windok, and nane of
thame comperand (exceptand as faid is) and the haill wryttis and vtheris probationis producit be him the day immediatlie ofbefore, quhilk he now lykwayes
producit and repetit the famyn to our faid fouerane lord and thrie Eftatis foirfaides, for prewing of the pointtis and articles contenit in the faid fummondis,
and thairfore defyrit farther proces in the faid cans. And thaireftir, the faid
fummondis with the probationis foirfaidis, being firft fene, confiderit and aduifit
be the faidis Lordis of Articles, and now jjrefentlie be the Kingis grace and thrie
Eftatis of this prefent Parliament : Quha findis and declaris that the haill reflbun
of the faid fummondis are relevant and fufficientlie prowin aganis the jjerfones
particularlie vndei'writtine, and ilk ane of thame for tliair awin pairt : And Ordanes Dome to be pronuncit and gevin thairvpoune, be the mowth of Andro
Lyndfay dempfter of this prefent Parliament, depute and fworne thairto ofbefore ; of the quhilk Dome the tennour foUowis, pronuncit be the faid Andro
Lyndfay :

Dome and Sentence against the Earls (j/* Angus aud Mau and their

above mentioned accomplices.

(Aug. 22.) — This Court of Parliament fchawis for law, that the faidis Archebauld Erie of Angus, Johnne Erie of Mar, Dame Agnes Drummond Countes of

18JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 129

Mar 3ouiiger, Maifter Thomas Lyoune of Baldukye Maifter of Glammis, Dame
Margaret Lyoune Countes of Caffillis, Dame Doratliia Stewart Couutes of Gowrye, Adame Commendatar of Cambuflvynneth, Dauid Commendatar of Dryburch, Williame Commendatar of Palilay, Maifter James Erfkin brother to Robert Erfkin apperand of Littil Sauchie, Johnne Leflie of Balquhane, George
Dowglas of Parkheid, James and George Dowglaffe his fones, James Dowglas
of Todhoillis, Johnne Dowglas of Glafpene, William Dowglas fone and apperand
air to ^Villiame Dowglas of Bonkle, Patrik Drummond apperand of Carnok,
Johnne Carmichale of that Ilk, Hew Carmichall his fone and apperand air,
William Carmichall of Rantrecorfe, Johnne Lyoune 30unger of CofTynis, James
Lyoune of Eiitir Ogill, Hew Nefliit of Rafchehill, Patrik Home of Argathies,
Johnne Lellie of Largie, Robert Hammiltoune of Corfe, Arthour Hammiltoune
callit of Boithwelhauch, Mr Johnne Coluill chantour of Glafgow, Mr Patrik
Quhytelaw of Newgrange, Johnne Arbuthnot apperand of Lyntufk, and James
MwTi-ay of Pardows, and euerilk ane of thame, lies committit and incui'rit the
crymes of Treiroune and Lefemaieftie, in the haill pointtis and articles contenit
in the faid fummondis, berand as is abonewrittine : And thairfore decernis and
declaris all thair guidis movable and vnmovable, alfweill landis as offices and
vtheris quhatfumeuer belonging to thame, to be conlifcat to our laid fouerane
lord, and remane perpetualie with his hienes in propertie for euer : And thair
perfones to vnderlye the pane of TrealToune and laft pwneilment appointit be
the lawis of this realme : And this I gif for Dome. Vpoune the quhilk declaratioune and pronunciatioune foirlaid, the faid aduocat aflcit inftrumentis.

The quhilk day the Kingis grace and thrie Eftatis of this prefent Parliament
continewis that pairt of the fununondis of TrealToune dewlie execute and indorfate, perfewit be his hienes Juftice and Aduocat aganis Deame Annuhell Mwiraij Countes of Mar elder, Deame Agnes Gray Lachje Home fpous to the
faid Mr Thomas Lyoune of Baldukye Maifter of Glammis, Laurence 3Iaister
of Oliphant, .Johnne Maister of Foi-hes, Robert Dowglas {younger) of Lochleuin 30iuiger, and James Ham)niltoun of Haggis, tuiching the decerning of
thame to haue incurrit the crjTiies of TrefToun and Lefemaieftie, fFor the cans
fpecefeit in the faid fummondis ; as at miir lenth is contenit thairintill, in the
famyn forme, force and effect as it is now, but preiudice of partie, vnto the xx
day of September nixttocum, with continewatioun of daj-es ; and than farder
proces to be hade Jjairintill ; at the qidiilk day, Ordanis the faid aduocat to produce fie wryttis, rychtis, relfones, documentis and probationes, as lie lies or will
vfe, for prewing of the laid funnnondis agane the faid day, fafar as concernis
thair pairtis thairof : Qnliairwpoune the laid aduocat alkit inftrumentis.

VOI>. I. 11

130 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

miQi) Cvrasoit — 3Kait( of JUutpeu — dforfeiture.

Aug. 22. — JoHNNE Ross of Cragie, as brother and apparent heir or
fucceiror of the decealed James Rofs of Pettheavles.'
The quhilk day Maifler Dauid Makgill, aduoeat to our louerane lord, exhibits and producit lyke as he did fyndrie tymes ofbefore, the fummondis of
Treffoune vnderwrittin, rafit and perfewit at the inftance of our fouerane lord
and his hienes Juftice aganis Johnne Rofs of Cragie, as brother and apperand air
or fuecelFour to vmq'" James Rofs of Pettheifles ; quhairbye he was fummoned
to haue comperit before the Kingis Majeftie and his Eftatis, the xx day of Augufl
inftant, with continewatioune of dayes, in his hienes Parliament to haue begune
the faid day, in the hour of cans, with continewatioune of dayes ; to haue anfuerit vpoune the pointtis of Treaffoune and Lefemaieftie vnderwrittine, contenit
in the faid fummondis, committit be his faid vmq'" brother ; And thairfore, the
faid Johnne to haue hard, that the faid vmq'" James committit the cryme of
Trealfoune in his ly vetyme, for the caus vnderwrittine, &c. As at mair lenth is
contenit in the faid fummondis. Off the quhilk the tennour followis :

Summons o/" Treason agahiJI Johnne Rofs as brother of James Rofs.
Jacobus del gratia RexScotonim,(li]ectis nollrisLeoni Regi Arnioium,Ilay, AUiany, Rofs, Rothefay,
Snawdoune, Merchemond; Heraldis ; Jolianni Ferguffoun, Rol)erto Stewart, Arctiibaldo Dovvglas, Dauidi
Bryffoun, clauigeris; Ormond, Bute,Vnicoine, C'ariik, Signiferis; Ricliardo Byvmiiig, Joaniii M'Lowren,
he, iiunoiis pt oorum ciiilibet, coniunctim ct diuifini, viceconiitibus in liac parte, faliiteni. Mandamns
vobis et precipimus quateinis fummoniatis legitime et peremptorie, coram teilibus, Jobaiinem Rofs de
Cragye, fratrom germanum et apparentem heredem vel fuccefforeiu quondam Jacobi Rofs de Pettheveles, perfonaliter fi eius perfonaleni prefentiam commode habere poteritis, alioqiiin apud locum
eius habitationis, necnon omnes alios et fingulos interefle luibentes ft^u pretendentes, per ptiblicam proclamationem apiid cruces forales burgorum noftrorum de Edinburgh, Perth aliaqne loca necellaria, ita
quod hujusmodi furamonitio ad eorum aures verifimiliter peruenire poterit, ad comparendum coram
nobis nollroue Jufticiario, vlcefimo die menfis Auguiti proxime futuri, hora caufarum, cum continuatione dierum, in Parlianiento nollro tenend. apud Edinburgh, .... die menfis eiufdeui, ad refpoudendum nobis feu noftro Jufticiario in prefato Parliamento, et ad videndum atque audiendum per nos et
trium regni noftri ftatuuni, decretum et fententiam decenii dictum quondam Jacobum Ros de Pettheveles crimen Lefemaieftatis in ipfius vita commifdle, ob eins proditoriam artem, partem, auxilium,
confilium, juvamen et affiftentiam per ipfum preftitam et exliibitam, in nefaria ilia Confpiratione cum
quondam Wilelmo olim Comite Gowrye domino Ruitlnvene, in proditoria interceptione ac manus violentas iniectione in perfonam noftram, a])ud illius Caftrum de Ruithwene, fuper vicefimo tertio die
menfis Augufli anno dominj millefimo quingentefimo octuagefimo fecundo : Atque adeo, ob illius prefeientiam, occultationem et concelationem eiufdem Confpirationis, vbi dictus quondam Wilelmus olim
Comes de Gowrie, Johannes Comes de Mar, Magiller Thomas Lyoune de Baldukye ISIagifter ac
Tutor de (ilammis et prefatus quondam Jacobus Rofs, cum diuerfis alijs fuis coni])licibus, confilium
proditorie iimierunt, deliberarunt, finaliter et ad eflfectum perduxerunt nefaudum ac proditorium illud
tacinus, in apprehenfiono noftre nobilis perfoue apud Ruithwene tempore antedicto : In quoquideni

' From the Records of Parliament. Acta III. 344.

18 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 131

Caflro, violenter nos detinucrunt ac cuftodierunt, contra noflre mentis libetum et voluntatem, per
Ipatium (iiuerfanim dieruin et noctium ; inde crimen fumme proditionis committendo. Eodemque
tempore, fidos et dilectos noftros Confules ac alios prolios ligeos nobis inferuiendi ftudio appropinquantes, pro ipforum internecione ac cede inualeruiit et ( rudeliliinie vulneraiiint ; tunc quoque Coufulum et alioiiim fidelium fubditorum nolhorum quoldam, velut captiuos cepenint et cuftodie niandarnnt, ordinarios Gardie noftre milites remouerunt, Precepta noftra nobis repugnanlibus cbariflimo et
fideliflimo confanguineo noftra quondam Efmo Leuiiiie Duci dirigeie impulerunt vt quam citiflime
bine dilVedeiet, pumque inaudita celeritate huius regni finibus exteiminandum curauemnt, peilbnam
noftram ad fui animi Ubidinem et defiderium, magna fuoram fociorum caterua ftipatam continue hue
atque illuc deduxerunt, per fpatiura deiim menfium deinde frquentium : Iiiftituto certiftimo et mente
deliberata bujufuiodi jugo feruitutis imperpetuum nos implicaie et letineie, nifi inefl'abiljOninipotentis
auxilio et beneuolentia noftnet ipfos Line abdicaremus : Hinc nianifeftiflime crimen Proditionis et
Lefemaieftatis committendo contra nos regalem noftram autboritatem et in apertam legum violationem.
Et piopterea, ad videndum et audiendum nonien, memoriaui et dignitatem dicti quondam Jacobi
Rofs de Peltlieveles extinctam fore et efte decerni, armaque feu infignia I'ua e libro Armorum et nobilitatis deleri et cancellari, ita quod ijjfius pofteri ab oflicijs et lionoribus in hoc regno noftro gaudend.
fint inhabiles et incapaces deliinc imperpetuum ; atque omnia bona fua terras et officia confifcari et nobifcum deinceps in proprietate remaiiere; iiitimando fupradicto Jobanni Kofs de Cragie fratri ac beredi
feu fucceftbri anteuominato, alijfque quibulhbet intereUe babentibus, quod fiue compareant liue non,
dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, Nos et Jufticiarius nofter niliilominus juftitia mediante
procedemus et procedet : Et prefentes literas debiie executas et indorfatas earundem latori reddatis :
Et vos qui prefentes executi fueritis fitis ibidem, dictis die et loco, coram nobis vel Jufticiario noftro portan. vobifcum veftre fummonitionis teft.imonium in fcriptis, pro premiflls vel ipfos teftes. Ad
quod faciendum, vobis et veftium cuilil)et, coniunctim et diuifim, vicecomitibus noftris in hac parte,
committinius poteftatem. Apud Edinburgh, vicefimo quarto die nienfis Juuij, anno domini millefimo
quingentefirao oetuagefimo quarto et regnj noftrj decimo feptimo.

Qiihilk fummondis with the executionis and indorfationis thairof, being red
firft in prefenfe of the Lordis Commiffionaris of Parliament, vpoun the faid xx
day of Auguft inftant, and ficlyk vpoun the xxj day of the famyn moneth thaireftir, fpecialie depute be his liienes Commiflioune for balding thairof, firil in
Latene and thaireftir in Scottis : And the faid Johnne Rofs of Cragie comperand, quha was content tryell war tane vpoune the pointtis of the faid fummondis : The faid aduocat, for verificatioune and probatioune of the foirfaidis
executionis and indorfationis of the faid fummondis, rej)etit the actis maid the
faidis XX and xxj dayes of Auguft inllant, as the famyn fchawin and jjroducit
before the Kingis grace and Lordis of Articles proportit. And thaireftir the
faid fummondis, with the probationis foirfaidis, being firft fene, confident and
aduifit be the fadis Lordis of Articles and now prefentlie be the Kingis Maieftie
and thric Eftatis of this prelent Parliament : Quha findis and declaris, that the
haill reaffbune of the faid fummondis is relevant and liifficientlie prowine aganis
the faid vmq'^ James Ros. And thairfore ordanis Dome to be pronuncit and
gevin thairvpoune, be the mowtb. of Andro Lyndfay dempfter of this prefent

132 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

Parliament, depute and fworne thaii-to of before : Off the quhilk Dome the tennour followis, pronuncit be the faid Andro Lyndfay.

Do.AiE of FoKiEiTUKE. This Court of Parliament fehawis for law, that
the faid vmq'" James Rofs of Pettheveles committit the cryme of Lele-maieitie
in his lyftyme, in the haill pointtis and articles contenit in the faid ihmmondis
berand as is abonewrittin : And thairfore, decernis and declaris the faid vmq'^
James his name, memorie and honouris to be extinct, and his amies to be revin
furth and deleit out of the bulk of amies, fwa that his polteritie iiewir liaue
place nor be liable heireftir to bruik or joife ony office, honouris or digneteis
within this realme, in ony tymes cumming :' And all his guidis, landis, offices to
be coufifcat and remane perpetuallie with his hienes in propertie, for euer : And
this I gif for dome. QuhairwiJouiie the faid aduocat aikit inftrumentis.

The quhilk day Johnne Ros of Cragie protelUt, that quhatlluneuer thing
done this inllant day aganis vmq'" James Ros of Pettheveles his brother, preiuge nocht him anent his landis, reuerfionis, ro mes, poffeffionis, fteadingis and
rychlis qiihatfumeuer pertening to his faid vmq'" brother : And fpecialie, anent
the landis of Pettheveles, and the Reuerfioune thairof quhilk he lies of the faniyn :
In relpect he lies euir reiiianit, at all tymes bigane, our Ibuerane lordis trew lege
and fubiect ; and knew natliing of his faid vmq'" bi'otheris doingis nor procedingis : And pairwpoune afl\it inftrumentis.

?l?itri) OTiraison — l^niti of ilutljbatf, ^t,

Aug. 22. — Oliuer Peibeis of Chapelhill,' Jeaiie Tliornetoune his Ipous,
and James Marfchell of Petcarnis.
The quhilk day, the Kingis grace and thrie Eftatis of this prefent Parliament
coutinewis the fummondis of Treaifoune execute and iiidorfate, perieM'it at the
inftauce of his Maieftie, his hienes Jullice and Mr Dauid Makgill his hienes aduocat, tuichin<>' the decernine: of thaine to haue committit and done certane
pointtis of Treaffoune and Lel'emaieftie : As at niair lenth is contenit in the faid
lummondis rafit ]jairwpoune, in the famyn forme, force and effect as it is now,
but preiudice of partie, vnto the xx day of September iiixttocum, with continewatioun of dayes ; and thane farder jn-oces to be hade paii-iutill as accordis : At
the quhilk day ordanes the laid aduocat to produce fie wryttis, rychtis, relTones,
documentis and vtheris probationis quhilkis he hes or will vfe, for prewing of
the pointtis of the faid fummondis aganes thame agane the faid day. Quhairwj)oune the faid aduocat alkit inftrumentis.

' An Act, was passed in I'ailianiont, Aiifj;. 2~', ' for (lllliprcriiis; of J)c jioflcritio of the porfoiiis tliat
»r or liilliap])in to be convicted of the trclliuiiiaMe attcni|)tat at Striueling.' ' He appears in Parliament, as Commis>iioncr for the burgh of Perth, Jun. 12, 1590, and Mar. 3, 1590. — From Records
of Parliament, III, 31G.

18Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 133

[iV/ir Edward Bruce and 3Ir WdUam Oliphant, Justices-Deputes.']

^InttgTjtcr.

Jul. 2. — George THo:MF.sorx, miuiiter at Iimerkip, George Maxwell

of Newwerk, Robert Maxwell his ferwand, Johniie Maxwell in

Kiilroife, Johnne Morefoune in Park, and Arthour Morefoun

tliair.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchter of \'Tnq''' Robert Mimtgumrie of Skelmnrelie, and of vniq'" AMUianie Muntgunirie his fone and appeirand

air ; committit in Apryle laftwas.

[ilfr Edward Bruce, Justice-Depute.]

Jul. 3. — Johnne Quhytefuhde of that Ilk, Adam Quhytfurde, 30unger
of that Ilk, Thomas Quhytfurde his broder, Robert Muntgumrie of Skelmnrelie, Williame Cochrane of that Ilk, Williame
Mudye, burges of Paillay, Robert Sempill, burges yair, James
Wilfoun, ferwand to the Laird of Cochran, Gilbert Smyth,
broder to Andro maifter of Sempill.
Dilattit of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchter of ^'mq'^ Patrik Maxwell of
Stanelie, committit in Januar laftwas.

Preloquitouris for the Pannell.
The Maifter of Eglingtoiuie, The Maifter of Sempill, The Laird of Caiildwall, The Laird of Heiffilheid.
Mr Johnne Scharp, Mr Johnne Skene, Mr Johnne Preftoune,

Persewaris.
.James Maxwell of Calderwood, Sir Robert Maxwell of Dinwiddle, Maifter Dauid M'Gill of

The Laird of Craigance, The Laird Newwai-k, Niibet, (King's Advocate,

Johnne Maxwell of Nethir Pook, [Gelis Wallace, The Ilelict,^ for his hienes intres.)

Part of the pannels ' replegeit' to the Regality of Paiflay, and the reft continued to the Juftice-air of ' Renfrew, tertio Itineris.'

The Laird of Quhytefurde alone was ' put to the knawlege of ane AfTyife ;'
who, ' eftir lang rellbning and deliberationne had thairof, be the mouth of
Robert Lindefay of Dunrod, fFand and dedairet the faid Johnne Quhytefurde of
that Ilk, to be clene and acquit of airt and pairt of the faid flauchter.'

[jl/;* Jf'itfiam Oliphaut, Justice-Dc})ute.]

aifiiUiitfj from i\)t ?i?ost to jpnss toiuaiUs ^^tirlins.

Jul. 17. — GiLBEKT Lam'deu of Balbardeis, Williame Lawder, his fone
and appeirand air.
Dilaitit for remaining and abyding at hame fra our Ibuerane lordis oift, raid

134 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

and armie, ordanit to haif conuenit at Halinidhous,' and thairfra to haif paft towardis Striueling, [for refifting of the trefTonabill attemptatis of certane tratom-is and rebellis, quhilkis had tane the faid burcht and Caftell of Sti'iueling.]
The quhilk day, the peiibnis enterit on pannell, produceit ane Licence,
grantit to thaine be the Kingis Maieilie and lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfale,
exemeand thame fra oiflis, raidis and armeis ; quhilk exeniptioun is of the dait,
at Halrudhous, the xxiiij day of Apryle, 1584.

(Sic fubll-ribitur,) JAMES R. Huntlie, Lochixwake.

[Mr Jolinne Grahame, Mr IVlUiame 0//pJ/anf, Justices-Deputes.']

Jul. 30.— Patkik M'KlE in Qiihithillis, broder to Ai-chibald M'Kie of
Myretoune.
Dilaittit of the trelFonabill ci'yine of fforgeing, ffen3eing and ftryking of certane fals and adultrit niony, viz. half merkis, xxx £, xx f. and x f. pecis.

Jul. 31. — Verdict and Sentence. TheAliyife, be the mouth of Williame
M^CuUoch of Myi-etoune, in ane voce, fylis the laid Patrik M'"Ke of art and part
of the trellbnabill fforgeing, fein3eing, counferfuting and ftraking of certane fals
and adulterate money, fic as fals half-markis, xl d. pecis, to grit quantitie, callit
Lochmahalies,- in cumpanye with Lawrence Nicholai Italians and vtlieris thair
affiftaris : And he thairfoir adjugeit, be Andro Lyndefay dempfter, to haif foirfaltit and tynt lyfe, landis and guidis, to be applyit to our Ibuerane lordis vfe,
and hinilelf liangit to the deid, at the mercat croce of Edinburghe. And the
haill AlTyis acquit the faid Patrik of the fencing of xxx f., xx f. and x f. pecis,
plakkis and hulbeis.

[3Tr Jolinne GraJiame and 3Ir Kdivard S'-z/ce, J/tstices-Depxfes.]

■ aissisting; (Hail o( S*naus in tailing iuvfli) anU (tastle of ^tiiliujj.

Sep. 4. — Gabriell Meuser of Sawling.
Dilaitit of the treironabill afTilling, art, pairt-taking with Archcbauld Erie of
Angus, Johnne, fumtyme Erie of Mar, Thomas Lyoun, tumtynie Mailler of
Glammis, and vtheris thair complices, in tlie treHonabill taking of the Burcht
and Caftell of Striueling, committit in the moneth of Apryle laftbypafl, [and
beiging of ane dry-ftane wall befide the fcolehous dure of Striueling ; and, furneffing of the laid Caftell with men, viuaris^ and nuuiitioune.]

' Many similar trials occur at tliis period; sonic of tliciii addinp:, 'and for airiftinn- \vv]i Archcbauld
prle of Anpis, .lolmnc crle of Mar, 'llioinas Lyoun niaillcr of (ilainniis, Joliimc C'arniiclicll 3oiniger
of tliat UK, and vtlieris thair coniiiliccs, in tlic trcliiinahill takiiit!' of the liurcht and Caltell of Striueling.' • Tliis word is very douhtlully written, being as like Lochmukiirivs as the above. Perhaps
it was some familiar or cant phrase for pieces struck or forged at Lochniaben. ' Victuals, vivres.

18JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 135

Verdict. The Aflyife, ' eftir lang refToning and mature deliberatioun had
thairof, be thair delyuerance pronunceit be tlie moutli of Archebauld Preftoun,
Chancellare of the faid Aflyife, ffand the laid Gabriell to be clene and acquit' of
the faid crimes.

[Mr WilUant Oliphant, Justice-Depute.]

Nov. 21. — GoTHRA Y IVrCuLLOCH of Ardwell.

Dilaitit of certane crymes of Inceft, committit be him with Katherene M"^-
Culloch, his broder-dochter ; and vtheris crymes contenit in the lettres.

Continued, to the Aire of ' Kirkcudbrycht, tertio Itineris, vel fiqier premonitione XV dierum. Plegio, Jacobo M'Culloch, rectore de Kyrk-Cryft.'

dTire-ratsiiTtr — 33realtiit(j: of iSaariJ, ^t,

Nov. 27. — Alexander Jardine of Apilgirth, &c.
James Twedie of Druninel3eare become plege and fouirtie for Alexander Jardine of Apilgirth, Johnne Jardane and James Jardane his breder, Niniane Jardane and Will Bell his feruandis, Williame Jardane, callit Reid Will, at the
Kirk of Sewerbie, (and) Dauid Moffet in Sewirfyde ; that thai fall compeir befoir oiu" fouerane lordis Juftice or his Deputtis, the third day of the nixt Jultice-air of the llierefdome of Drumfreis, quhair thai duell, or fouer, qulien and
quhair it fall jjleis our fouerane loird, vpoun xv dayis warning, and vnderly the
law for the trelTonabill railing of fyre and birning of the place of Litilgill, pertening to Dame Jeane Hammiltoune, Ladie Lammingtoune : And for elchewing' furtli of the Caftell of Edinburglie, and breking of the waird thairof; and
vtheris ciymes contenit in the lettres direct thairvpoune, &c.

Crcason— SIsststins <!fail of aiustis, ^f,

Dec. 2. — NiNiAXE NicoLL, in the bray of Cleilch.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the trelTbnabill airt, pairt-taking with Archebauld,
liuntyme Erie of Angus ; Johnne, fmntyme Erie of IMar ; Thomas Lj-oune,
fumtyme Maifter of Glammis, and vtheris thair complices, in the trelTonabill taking of the burgh and Caftell of Striueling, aganis our fouerane lord and his
hienes authoritie royall ; committit in the moneth of Apryle laftbypaft.

Continued to the Juftice-air ' of Fyffe, tercio Itineris vel luper premonitioue
XV dierum.' ' Plegio, Hem'ico Stewart de Roffyth.'

' Escapiuij. Se^ Ji'n. 5, 1583,

136 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

amteirommuiiiitcr inttl) <irnil of Mav mm otf^ti' Cvaitoi'9.

Dec. 8. — Dauid Home of Argatie.
Dilaitit of the treironabill haifing intelligence fra Johne fumtyme Erie of Mar,
Dauid (Erlkine) fumtyme Conniiendator of Dry burgh, our tbuerane lordis tratouris
declarit, in the relfait of lettres fra thame, at the leift the ana or vther of thame ;
and fpecialie, fra Patrik Home his broder lone, leruitour to Jolinne fumtyme
Erie of Mar; quhilkis lettres he reflaueit fra Robert M'^V^'illie, quhome he reffauit in his hous, in paffing and repaffing to thame in Inglaud ; committit in
the monethis of July, Auguft and Sejitember laftbypaft.

Persewar, Mr Dauid MakgiU of Nifbet, Aduocat.

AssisA.
George Dundas of that Ilk, Hemie Quliyt, covdiner tliair, Geo. Craw, portionar of Reflonne,

Charles Murray of Cokpale, AIex'Thoiueroune,burgesof Ed', George Smyfli, burges of Edin',

Mathow Stewart of Bavela, Jolinne Moftett, burges tliair, AndroAytoune, broder to the laird

Robert Grahame of Knokdolaine, Edward Johniiefouii, burges thair, of Dinmure.
George Home of Aytoune, Jolinne Gordoun of Petlurg,

James Inglis, burges of Edin', Patrik Creytoune of Lugtoune,

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of George Dundas of that Ilk, chancellare, Fand the faid Dauid Home to be culpabill, fyllit and conuict in contrauening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in refl'ait of ane boy callit Rob
M'^Willie, and conceling of the lettre fend be him, and fchawin be Johnne Ranye,
fend fra Patrik Home out of Ingland ; and reffauing commendationis fra the
Abbot of Dryl)urgh from Ingland, conforme to the laid Dauidis depolitiounis
lubfcryuit with his hand : Lykeas allua, the faid Dauid wes fundin to be clene
and acquit of the reft of the dittay.

Sentence. And thairfoir the dome of forfaltour was prommceit aganis him
be Andro Lyndfay thairefter, that the faid Dauid fuld be tane to ane gippet, at
the croce of Edinburghe, and thair hangit, quarterit and drawin as ane tratour ;
and all his laud is, takis, ftedingis, i-owmes, poilelTionis and guidis, to be efchete
to the Kingis vfe,

^.ttnijinn: piiijltrlt) for tfje fianisljttj iHinisttis.
Coiutalinci; ticasonable Ccrifspontrciue, ^f.

Dec. 8. — Malster Nicole Dalgleisch, minifter at Sanct Cuthbertis
Kirk, near Edinburgh.
Dilaitit of the contrauening of our foiierane lordis actis of Parliament in
lowing and authorifing in his publict prayaris of fic minifteris .is ar in Ingland,
declarit tratoui-is ; and for allifting and fortefeing with die I'aidis declarit tratouris.

18Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 137

Comperit Mr Dauid Makgill, aduocate to our fouerane lord, and in his liienes
name, as perfeware ; and del'yrit i)roces vpoun the Dittay prefentlie prodiiceit be
him in jugement vpoun the faid Mr Nicholl, quliilk the aduocatt delyrit to be
red to the faid Mr Nicoll, in caice he wald obiect ony thing aganis the famin.

The faid Mr Nicoll allegeit, that jugement wes deduceit aganis him 3i{lerday
befoir the Kingis Maieftie and lordis of Secreit Counfale, and as appeirit to him
conuict be thame and thair woting aganis liiiu ; quhairthrow it is nocht neceffar
that he be of new accufit in ony vther iugemeut. — To the quhiUc anfuerit the
aduocate, that the proceidings aganis him in Secreit Counfale wes jter modum
conjil'ij, and nocht be way of jugement, he nocht being judicialie accufit ; and fua
the Juftice audit to proceid aganis him in the faid matir in this jugement.

The faid Mr Nicoll delyrit to knaw of the Lordis of the Secreit Counfale prelent, Aflefom'is to the Juftice,^ quhidder the proceidingis aganis him 5ifterday in
Counfale wes per modum conjllij, or as ane vther jugement : And the faidis
lordis, for fatiffactioun of his defjTe, declarit the faidis procedingis to be per
modum confdij.

Interlocutor. The Juftice, be auife of his Afll-fouris, Faml he interloquitour, tliat the proceidingis aganis the faid Mr Nicoll 5ifterday the feviiit of this inflante, in the mater quhairof he wes accufit, i\ild nawayis preiuge him in this jugement, hot ordanit him nochtwithltanding thairof, to haif his
haill defenffis aganis the Dittay produceit : Lylveas, the Juftice, vpoun certane allegeances proponit
be the faid Mr Nicoll, and defenflis vfit be him, as alfua the anfueris maid thairto be the Aduocate,
and of the mirknes ^ of the nycht, continewit the mater in the famin forme, force and effect, as it is
now, to the morne : And the faid Maifter Nicoll in the meantyme to be committit to waird, quhill he
be tryit be the perlimis of Aflyis chofin, fuorne, and admittit ofbefoir, alfwele vpoune his Affyis as
vpoune tlie Aft'yis of the faid Dauid Home ; and warnit the faidis perfoni-s of Atiyis to compeir the
morne in the hour of caus, to delyuer, (iffirmatme or negatiue, vpoun the poyntis of the faid Dittay, ilk
perfoun vndir the pane of ane hundreth pundis.

Dec. 9- - Dilaitit, &c. ; and for conceling of ane Letti'e fend be Mr Walter Baganqwall^ to his wyff, quliilk wes red be the faid Mr Nicoll ; and vtheris
crjines.

Perseware, Mr Dauid Macgill of Nilbet, aduocat to our fouerane lord,

Compeirit the perfonis of AflTyis vnderwritten, viz. :

ASSISA.

Patrik Creychtoun of Lugtoune, Geo. Craw, portioner of Reftoime, George Dundas of that Ilk,

Alex' Tliomeioun, burges of Ed', Charles Murray ofCokpull, Andro Ay toun, brother to Dinmur,

Jolmne Moffet, burges thair, Johne Gordoun of Petlurg, Henrie Quhyt, burges of Edinr',

James Inglis, burges thair, Robert Grahanie of Knokdolan, Eduart Johneftoun, burges thair,

George Smyth, burges thair, George Home of Aytoune, Mathow Stewart of Bavela.

The faid Mr Nicoll, eftir diuerfe allegeancis proponit be him in prefens of the

' As was formerly remarked, it was usual for some of tlie Lords of Privy Council to sit as Assessors
with the Justice, especially in cases of Treason. The King himself not unfrequently sat in judgment,
and his presence is occasionally noticed in the Record. • Darkness of the night. ^ Balcauquall.

VOL. I. S

138 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.

faid Juftice and his Aflefouris, and anfueris maid thairto be the faid Mr Dauid
M'Gill, adiiocat to our fouerane lord for his hienes intres, ofFerit him felf in the
Kingis Maiefteis will, off the fpeiking, that ' the Minifteris and vtheris wer perfecute, and that the Kingis mineftrie had fpokin thay wordis mycht half provokit ane Criftiane man to feir ;' as alfo of the conceling of ane Lettre direct fra
Mr Walter Bueanqviall to his awin wyff, quhilk wes red and fene be him, concei'ning particular commendationis to him.

The Juftice, nochtwithftanding that the faid Mr Nicoll come in the Kingis
Maiefteis will, Ordanit the foirnaminit perfonis of AfTyis, chofin, fuorne and admittit vpoun the faid Mr NicoUis confent, to proceid to thair delyuerance.

And the faid Mr Dauid M'Gill, aduocate, Proteftit, in refpect of the fentence
gevin 3ifterday vpoun Dauid Home of Argatie in the lyke mater of befoir, that
in caice the faidis perfonis of Aflyis clenge the faid Mr Nicoll, for WilfuU erroure
and tinfale of baith lyffe, landis and gudis.

Verdict. The Aflyis be thair delyuerance, pronunceit be the mowth of the
faid George Dundas of that Ilk, chancellare, ffand the faid Mr Nicoll Dalgleifch
to be culpable, fyllit and conuict for fpeiking that the Minifteris and vtheris wer
perfecutit, meaning to preve the famin peri'ecution be occafioun of juft feir confauit aganis the Minifteris vpoun allegeit fpeich of the Kingis Maieftie, and fum
of his Counfale, qidiilk wes cleirlie provin be act of Counfale ; and quhairfoir
the faid Mr Nicoll come in his hienes will : And alfua, conuictis the faid Maifter Nicoll of conceling of ane Lettre direct fra Mr Waltir Bucanquhall to his wyff,
quhilk was red and fene be him, contening particular commendationis to him,
confeffit be his awin word and writt ; and thairfoir come in his hienes will : And
acquit him of the haill reft of the dittay.

Slljitiins from il)t Uaia o( ^tirlinff.

Dec. 16. — JoHNE Holmes in Auldwallis, Thomas Patoun in Winterberriehill, and twenty two others.
Dilaitit for remaining and abyding at hame fra our fouerane lordis oift, raid
and armie, ordanit to haif conuenit at Halirudhous, in the moneth of Apryle
laftbypaft, and thairfra to haif jmft towardis the bur' of Striueling, ffor reprefling
of the trelTonabill attemttis of certane tratours and rebellis, quhilkis had tane the
bur' and Caftell of Striueling, and rei^refliing of thair infolences.

AssisA.

Alex' Boyd in Kilmaraok, Johnne Huntare in Ilichartoune, William Burnis thair,

Hew Cuik in the hill of Kilma- Johnne Wallace in Bumebank, Adam Hog, feruitour to Bargany,

waris, Johnne Campbell of Auldornok, Thomas Tail in Knokindaill,

Dauid Hammiltoun of Ladietoun, Robert Stewart, James Cuningharae in InchegoJohnne Hammiltoun in Grange, Johnne Knox, thir.

Thomas Patoun in Caftlehill, James Neilfoun in Glafgw,

18 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 139

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mowth of the laid Thomas Tait, chancellare, fFand
the haill foirfaidis perfonis entirit vpoiin paniiell to be conuict, culpabill and fyllit
for thair remaning and byding at hame fra our fouerane lordis oift, raid and
armie, ordanit to haif conuenit at Halirudhous, and thairfra to haif pall towardis
the bur' of Striueling, flfor repreffing of the treflbnabill attemptattis of certane
tratouris and rebellis quliilkis had tane the burgh and Caflell of Striueling.'

laf flratin fl — dTovrstaUins.

Jan. 20, 1584-5. — Johnne Watsoun in Leyth Wynd, Robert Gray in

the Cannogait and fifty foiu* others in Cannogait, Leyth and

Edinburgh.

Dilaitit of contraueuing of the Actis of Parliament for non putting of thair

malt to the marcat, and for taking mair betuix the boll of malt and the boll of

beir nor^ is contenit in the faidis Actis.

Thofe refident in Cannogait, &c. are ' replegiat' to the Regality of Brochtoune,
others to the Regality of Kellb ; and with regard to thole refident in Edinburgh,
they are ' Remittit to the jurilclictioun of the Proueft and bailleis of Edinbiu'gh
be refibun of the Kingis Lettres direct to Mr Dauid M'^Gill, aduocat, to pas fra
thame, and difchairging of the Juftice of all calling, unlawing or proeeiding
aganis the inhabitantis of Edinbiu-gh ; quhilk lettres were fubfcryuit be (the)
Kingis Maieftie and Coiuifale of the dait the xv day of Januar 1584 ; quliairvpoune Mr Johnne Scharp alkit inllriunentis.'

[Curia Justiciarie, f. d. n. Regis tenta in pretorio de Edinburgh, per Magiftros Eduardum Bruce,
Joannem Grahame et Willelmum Oliphant, Judiciarios deputatos.]

3UaiU oi IHutl^btii — Craitorotis Conspiraci) for m^ins ti)e

iiins's ptrsoit.

Feb. 9. — Malcolme Dowglas of Manis, Johnne Cunninghame of
DrumquhaffiU and James Ednieftoune of Duntraith.
The quhilk day compeirit perlbnalie in jugement, Maifl:er Dauid IMakgill of
Nifbet, and produceit the Dittayis vnderwrittin vpouu the faidis perfonis, of the
quhilkis Dittayis the tennour foUowis.

James Edmestoun of Duntraithis Dittay, — James Edraeftoun of Duntrutli, ge ai' indyttit and
accufit,that contrair ^our naturall dewtii',3e Iiaveand our fouerane lordis i;ud countenance as ony vther
fubiect of this reahne of the lyke calling, hes mailt vnhappilie, vnthankfuUie and treli<>nablie deuilit
and confultit with diuerfe vtheris 5 our complicis, viz. Robert Hammiltoun of Inchemachane, Johnne
Cuninghame of DrumquhafTall, Malcolme Dowglas of Manis, Johnne Mufcliet and Walter Dowglas
in Litill Saucliie, in ]>e monethis of October, Noueinber, December and Jiuiuare lallbypad, vpoun the

' Various other trials occur at this period for abiding from the same raid, chiefly against fewars and
burgesses. ^ Than.

140 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1584.5plat laid be the funityme Erlis of Angus and Mar and fair complices, for fair treffonabill deidis prefentlie fugitiues in Ingland, comraunicat to 30W be Johnne Home alias callit Blak Johnne, fair meffinger, and ])e faid Jobune Mufcliet, bow his Maiefteis maift nobill perfoun at the bunting mycbt liave
bene tane captiue and convoyit to fum Itrentli in the Illis and bordouris of this realme, or ellis to Aim
ftrenth in the Illis of Locldowniond, qubill the faidis declairit tratouris fugitiues had with thair complicis refTauit his maift nobill perfoun in Jiair liandis ; and conceling of ))e famin.

Johnne Cuningiiame of DrumquhqffilUs Dittay. — Johnne Cuninghame of Drumquhaflill, ge ar
indyttit and accufit, that eftir mony and diueife tieiibnabill Conlpiraceis, confultit, deuifit, affiftit and
execute be sow and jour partineris, aganis the Kingis Maieftie and quyet eftait of the cuntre eviu to
fat acceptant (altemptat?) of liirpryfing of his Maiefteis maift nobill perfoun, qubilk wes commitlit
be sow and diuerfe vtberis ^our trefFonabill partakaris in the monetb of Auguft PWMxxxij ^eiris, be
taking of his Maiefteis maift nobill perfoun captiue in the lious of Hutiivene, carying of tiie fame about
gairdit at sour pleafour, 36 being prefent and trefTonablie aflifting to fe faid fact ; qubilk beand ouerfeen^ be his Maieftie, befyde money vtberis treflbnabill oflFonfis ouerlukit in sow, and sour honour, lyft
and landis fpairit be bis hienes clemencie, mycht have bene fuffecient motiouue, to liave niouit sow to
defift fra all fic treflbnabill deidis and interpryfis fairefter : Nochtwithftanding of fe quhilk, je raaift
ingratlle and trcflbnablie, vpoun sour accuftwmit malicious and vnhappie vnnaturalitie, bes in the
monetbis of October, Noueraber, December and Januare laftvvas, treittit, deuifit and confultit ane
maift hie and vnhappie Treflbune aganis his Maiefteis maift nobill perfoun ; quhairby nocht onlie tlie
prefent eftait of this commoun-wealth mycht have bene euertit,* but alfua, gif with jour and jour
complicis faiftie his ]Maieftie culd have bene led captiue to the bordouris of this realme, to have bene
reiiauit be his declairit tratouris now fugitiues in Ingland, or to fum fortrace or ftrenth within the Illis
of Locblowmunt in the Leuuenox : Coramittand fairthrow maift liie and abhominabill Treflbun ; and
this is trow, and se can nocht denye fe famin : — Forder se, in tlie faidis monetliis laftbypaft, at the
leift in ane or vther of fame, lies confedrit, treittit and confultit with James Edmefloun of Duntraitb
at diuerfe tymes and places, fic as the Kirk of Strablene and at the Kirk of Killerne, vpoune the executioun of the interpryis abouewrittin ; and bes maift trelfonablie concelit the famin vnto the tyme of
sour lait entrie within je Caftell of Edinbur' and jour examiii-atioun fairin, quhilk wes vpoun the fext
day of this inftant moneth; quhair se, be jour Depofitioun fubfcryuit with jour awin hand, as alfua fe
faid day, being confrontit with the faid James Edmeftoune, and that je knew that Blak Johnne Home
wes directit fra the fumtyme Erlis of Angus and Mar and fair complicis prefentlie for fair Treffoun
fugitiues in Ingland, wes be fair melfage direct to jow to propone fe ]ilatt for executing of the treffonabill interprilTe aboue fpecifeit. As jour faid Declaratioun, fubfcryuit with jour hand, heirwith
produceit as ane pairt of jotu- Dittay, dois teftifie. And this is trew, and je can nocht deny fe
famin.

Malcolme Dowglas of Manis Dittay. — Malcolme Dowglas of Manis, ge ar indytit and
accufit, that eftir raony and diuers treflxmabill Confjiiraceis, confultit, dewyfit, affiftit and execute be jovv and jour partinaris agains fe Kingis Maieftie and quyett eftait of fe countrey,
quhairfore je being laitlie forfaltit, had of his hienes clemencie, obtenit joure pardoun, and owerfene in fe bruiking of soure landis and heretage : git, je raaift vnnaturallie, vnthankfullie and
treflbnablie, in fe monetbis of October, Nouember, December and Januar laftbypaft, lies diuifit,'
treitit and confultit with diuers vtberis joure complices, fic as Robert Hainmiltouue of Incbmaucban, James Edmeftoun of Duntraitb, Johnne Cwningbame of Drumquhaftill, Waller Dowglas
in Lytiil Sauchy and Robert Sem])ill fumtyme of Roifland, vpoun fe platt laid be fe fumtymes
Eillis of Angus and Mar and fair complices, for fair treifonabill deid prefentlie fugitiues in Ingland,

' Pardoned, overlooked. '^ Overturned— Lat. cvericrc.

18Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 141

eftii- communicatioun ])airof to ])e faid James Eiltneftoun of Duntraitli be Jolmne Hwme alias callit
Slak Joftmie, ge, in ]ie monetJiis foirl'aiil, confultit, coiifenit, tretit and dewyfit with Jie laid James
Edmelloun of Duntraitli and Jm remanent ^our complices aboue vvrittin, att jie Kirk of Strablane and
]>e Kirk of Killeme, as alfo in ■^oure hous and place of Manis, quliiiir ])e laid liobert Ilanimiltoun wes
allowit be ^ow to be vpoun Jie counfall fairof, and ]>air dewyfit how his JVIaielleis mailt nobill perfoune
mycht att ))e hunting be tane captiue and convoyit to liini ftrenth on ]>e bordouris of ]iis realme, or
ellis to fum ftrenth in ]ie lies of Locblomount, quhill jie faidis declmit traittouris fugitiiips had, with
)iair complices, rellLuit his Maiefteis mailt nobill perfoune in pair handis : And to Jie taikin, that ])is is
trew, ge directit 50ure Lettres heirvpoun with Walter Dowglas of Lytill Sauchy to ])e faidis rebellis,
declarit traittouris, prefentlie in Ingland, and with Robert Sempill, qulia being Jie riieflingeris and
poiftis of Jie faidis fugltiues had at Jiair pleafour, rellett and interteinment at 5 oure hous of Jie Manis,
in Jie monethis foirfaidis: And Jiis is trew, and 36 cawnocht deny Jie famin, in refpect the faid James
Edmeftoune of Diuitraith and Robert Hammiltoun of Inchmawchane, prefentlie with ■;ow, awowit Jie
fame; lykeas alfwa, James Dowglas and William Johnnftoun ;oure feruandis. in Jiair Depofitiounes
teflifeis the prefens of Jie faid Robert Hammiltoun and Laird of Duntraith with 30W in 30ure awin
hous, and refoirt of Jie faid Walter Dowglas and Robert Sempill in 3 oure faid hous, quha had na vthir
nccalinun of refoirt to 30ure faid hous hot for Jie trelTonabill caullis foirfaidis.

AssisA.
Williame Lord Hay of geftir, Patrik Ogilvie of Lichemairtene, Sir Thomas Stewart of GarneLord Seytoun, Patrik iNJurray of Hangit-fchaw, tullie, kny',

Thomas Maifter of Cafliliis, Johnue Sempill of Fowlwode, Johnne Gordoune of Pitlurg,

Patrik Houftoun of that Ilk, VV'illiame Wallace of Ellerflie, James Mein^eis of Weim,

Johnne Gordoun of Loihinvar, k', W'" Makcullocht of Mortoune, Williame Hammiltoune of Some,
Johnne Murray of Blakbaronie, Patrik Agnew, Shereff of Wig- Thomas Kennedie of Barganye,

Robert Grahame of Knokdoliane, toune, MacFarlan of that Ilk.

^'eudict. The Affyis, be tliair delyiierance, pronimceit be the mouth of the
laid William Lord Hay of gefter, ffand and declarit the faid James EdmesTOUNE of Duntraith, to be culpabill, conuict and fyllit off the vnliappie, vnthankfiill and trefibnabill treitting and confulting witli diuerle vtheris his comI)lices in the monethis of October, Nouember, December and Januare laftwas,
\poun the plat layit be the fiimtyme Erlis of Angus and Mar and thair coml)licis, communieat to him be Johnne Home aiias callit Slak Johnne, the meffinger, and Johnne Mufchet, quliow the Kingis Maicileis maift nouill perfoune
mycht be tane captiue at the hunting and conuoyit to fum ftrenth on the bordomns, or fum ftrenth in the lUis of Lochlowmuiit, quhill the faidis declarit
Tratouris fugitiues in Ingland had refiauit his maift nobill perfoune in thair
handis ; and of the trelibnabill conceling thairof conforme to his awin lettre and
Depofitioune fend to the Kingis Maieftie, fubfcryuit with his awin hand. — And
liclyk, fi'and, pronunceit and declairit the faid JoHXXE Cuxinghame of Drum-
([uhaftill, to be culpabill, conuict and fyllit off the conference, treitting and confulting with James Edmeftoun of Duntraith at diuerfe tymes and places, fie as
at the Kirk of Strablane and at the Kirk of Killerne, vpoun the taking of the
Kingis Maiefteis maift nobill perfoun cajjtiue at the hunting, fpecialie at that

142 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1586.

tyme about the taking of Dauid Home of Argatie ; qiihairby the lordis fugitiues in Ingland mycht be releuit and this eftait alterit; and of the conceling of
the famin ; confonne to his Depofitionis fnbfcryuit with his hand. — AND
rychfwa, ffand, i)ronunceit and declairit the laid Malcolme Dowglas of
Manis, to be culpable, conuict and fyllit, that, forfaniekill as James Edmeftoun
of Duntraith hes teftefeit vpoun his grit aith, that he declairit to the faid Malcolme Dowglas of Manis, that Johnne Home alias callit Blak Jolinne, feruitour
to Johnne lumtyme Erie of Mar, proponit to him, the taking of the Kingis
Maiefteis perfoune at the hunting, amangis vtheris generall conferencis had be
thame in tlie place of the Manis, in prefens of Robert Hammiltoun of Inchemauchane, lykewayis afiermit be the laid Robert ; quhilk jjurpois, the laid Laird
of Duntraith lykwayis teftefeit, wes refufit altogidder be the faid Laird of Manis,
and nawayis thocht gud be him ; and nochtheles, infafar as the faid Laird of
Manis hes concelit the famin, and nocht revelit it to the Kingis Maieftie ; in
ane voice, conuietis the faid Malcolme Dowglas of the conceling thairof ; and
put him thairfoir in the Kingis Maiefteis mercye. In witnes quliairof, the
chancellare, in name of the reft Aflyiroiu-is, fublcryuit the faid couuictioun in
the Minut buk.

Sentence. The famin day, eftir the faid conuictioune, the Juftice, be the
mouth of Johnne Andro, demjiftare of the faid Court, adiugeit and for Dome
gaif, that the faidis Johnne Cuninghame of Drumquhaftill and Malcolme Dowglas of Manis fuld be tane to ane ikaffauld, befyde the meixat croce of Edinbiu-gh, and thair to be hangit, quhill thai wer deid, and quarterit and drawin :
And that aU thair mouabill and vnmouabill gudis, landis, heretageis, poffeflionis,
takkis, ftedingis, offices, coirnis, cattell, lyfrentis, actionis and all vtheris quhatfumeuir quhilkis pertenit to thame, aucht and fuld perteine to our fouerane lord,
and to be applyit to his hienes vie, and to remane with him and his fucceffouris
for euir, be rellbuu of Elcheit and ffoii-faltoiu*.

At Edinburgh, ivithhi the Tolhuyth of the faming the xxij day of Mali,
the T,eir ofGodI™.V<^.foiirfcoirfex leiris.

In presence of the ryclit honorabill Sir Lwes Bellenden of Auchnowle, kiiycht, Clerk of our
fouerane lordis Jufticiarie, Mr Robert Dowglas, prowefl of Lindwdene, collectour generall

of this realme, Dowglas of Quhittingheme, ane of the fenatouris of the College

of Juflice and Patrik Lethingtoun of Saltcoittis,

(May 26, 1586.) — Conipeirit Mr Dauid Makgill 30unger. Aduocate. fubftitute to Maifter Dauid Makgill of Nilbet, aduocate to our fouerane lord, iti

19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 143

prefens of ane honorabill and difcreet man, Willaime Litill, Proweft of Edinburghe, and me Mailler James Bannatyne, Clerk-depute ordinex", in the office of
Jufticiarie, noter publiet ; and produceit Ane Commissioune, direct be our
fouerane lord, vnder his hienes quarter-feill, oflf the dait at Halirudhoufe, the
twentie-fyA'e day of Maii, the 3eir of God I"'.V^ fourfcoir fex 3eiris, and of his
Maiefleis regnne the nyntene 3eir,Makand and conftituand his louittis,MAlSTERis
JoHNNE PiiESTOUNE and Eduard Bruce, coniunctlie and leueralie, liis hienes
Juftices in that 2iairt, to fens and hauld Courtis of Jufticiarie, for adminiftratioun of Juftice, vpoune Mr Archebauld Dowglas, dilaitit and lufjject of the
crevvall, horribill, abhominabill and treffonabill Murthour of Vmquhile
Hexrie King of Scottis of gud memorie, darreft fader to our fouerane lord ;
and being actuallie prefent thairat in cumpanie Avith vmquliile James fumtyme
Erll of Bothwell and vtheris his complicis ; the tyme of the committing of the
famin in the moneth of Februare, the 3eir of God P.V^ threfcoir fex 3eiris :
Defyi'ing the faidis perlbnis to be fworne to minifter juftice lelilie and trewlie
in the faid mater, conforme to the tennour of the faid Commiffioune, law and
confuetude of this I'ealme. Quha immediatlie thairefter acceptit the faid Commiffioune vpoun tliame and befoir me notare and witnefles abouewrittin, be
haulding vp of thair rycht hand, fwoir and gaif thair aithis for miniftratioun of
juftice lelilie and trewlie in the faid office of Jufticiai'ie as Juftices in that jjairt,
conforme to the tennour of the laid Commiffioune, as thai wald anfuer to our
fouerane lord thairvpoune ; and than incontinent for deductioun of forder proces
in the faid mater, Ordanit thair officiaris of Jufticiarie to fens Court, for obedience
of the faid Commiffioune and accejitatioune thairof. Quhairvjjoun the faid Mr
Dauid Makgill afkit infti'umentis of me notare publiet and clei-k foirfaid.

Curia Justiciahie, /Trf. n. Regis tenia in Pretorio de Edinburghe, vicejimojexto die Maii anno
domini millejimo qxiingentejimo ocliiagejimo Jexto, per hoiiorubiles et difcretos viros, Magijtroi
Joannem Prejiotin et Eduardum Bruce, Jujiiciarios in hac parte dicti f.d. n. Regis, virtiUe
Jue CommiJJionis Jpecialiter co/i/iitutos. Sectis vocatis et Curia legitime ajffirmata.

In the quhilk Court the faidis Juftices produceit ane Precejjt direct to thame
be the Kingis Maieftie, commanding thame to accept ane Commiffioune of Jufticiarie vpoun thame, and to put Mr Archebauld Dowglas, dilaitit of certane
heich poyntis and crymes of Treffoun, to the tryell of ane Inqueift : Off the
quhilk Precept the tennour followis.

Maisterts Johnxe Prestoune, Eduard Bruce, Aduocattis and CoramifTeris of Edinburglie,
We greit ^ow weill. Forfaniekill as, Mr Archebauld Dowglas is to be prefentit vpoun fe xxij day
of Maij inllant in pe Tolbuytli of Ediuburghe, to be tryit vpoune certane heicb poyntis of Treffoune,
concerning fe murtliour of our niaift. darrell fader ; and to fe effect ))e mater may be pe bettir tryit
we have directit our Comniiffloun vnto 50W, creating and fubilituaiid 30U our Juftices in fat part, to
pe effect contenit in fe faid Commiffioune. Tliairfoir it is our will and We charge 30W ftraitlie, and

144 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1586.

commandis, that immediatlie efter fe fycht of fir prefentis, 36 accept the faid Commiffioun in and

vpoun 50W, gif :;ouraith for adminiftratioun in fe faid Coniniiflioun and put ])e faid mater to Jie

tryell of ane Inqueift, and do juftice fairinto, according; to the lawis of fis reahne, but ony forder delay;

as 56 will efchew our indignatioim. Subfcryuit with our hand att Halirudhous, ])e xxv day of INIaii

1586.

JAMES R. P. Maister of Gray. Lincluden.

rreaisanaljle Consjpivacij— iHurtJfi* of 2^1113: ?t?eiuy Bantlen.

Comperit perlbiialie on panuell the lauiiii day, in preiens of the laidis Jugeis,
May 26. — Mr Auchebauld Douglas, Parfoun of Glafgw.^

Dilaitit of the horribill, erewall, vnnaturall and treffonabill murthour, flauchter and paricide of vmq''' our fouerane lordis darreft fader, Henrie King of Scottis
of gude mentorie, and vtheris crjanes ; comniittit at the tyme and in nianer at
lenth vnderwrittin.

. The famin day, compeirit Mr Dauid Makgill, aduocat, lubftitiit to Maifter
Dauid Makgill of Nifljet, aduocat to our fouerane lord, in his hienes name, as
perfeware ; and exponit and declarit, that he had reflauit ane fpeciall Warrand
and command, direct fra the Kingis Maieftie, chairgeing him to perlew the faid
Mr Archebauld, of the crymes aboue fpecifeit ; quhilk he produceit in jugemeut,
and defyrit the famin to be infert in proces ; quhairof the tennom- followis.

■ ' Rex.

' Aduocat and ^our fuhftitut, we greit 30W hairtlie weill. Forfamekle as we have appopitit fe xxvj day of Maii inftant, for prelenting of Mr Arciiebauld Dowglas, perfone of Glafgw, to
vnderlie our lawis, for airt and pairt confulting, treitting and executioun of J>e maifl horribill flauchter
and murthour of our ^•niq''= darreft fader of gude niemorie, We command 50W, with all conuenient fpeid,
to tak informatiouno, be all nieanis poffibill, for accufatioun of Jie laid Mr Archebauld of fe treilbnabill
crymes foirfaidis ; and fat 36 perfew him thairfoir fe faid day pppoyntit, or ony vtheris dayis Jiairefter
to follow, be ane condigmie AfTyis, quhill he be ather foule or cleane- of tiie crymes foirfaidis: ffor the
quhilk this prelent falbe to 50W fufficient warrand. Subicryuet with our hand att Halirudhous, ye
xxiij day of Maij, and of our regnne the nyntene 5cir, 1586.

' JAMES H.'

As alfo produceit in jugement, in prefens of the faidis jugeis, Letteris direct
for fummoning of ane Affyis to this day, vpoun the faid Mr Archebauld ; cpihairby ane fufficient nowmer of Affyis is fund. Quhilkis letteris ar of the tlait, att
Edinburghe, the xxiij day of Maij, and of our fouerane lordis regning, the nyntene 3eir, 1586. Togidder with the Dittay, quhairof he is to be accufit : Offering him reddie to perfew the faid Mr Archebauld of the famin, and crymes contenit thairin. Of the quhilk, the tennour followis.

1 He was cousin to Regent ^lorton, and was also one of the Ordinary Lords of Council and Session. KcfiMonce is made to Mr Arnot's Collection for a narrative of facts relative to this slianu'tul
and collusive trial. The acquittal of the Parson of Glasgow has justly been attributed to the unprincipled intrigues of Patrick Master of Gray, and of Randolph the English ambassador. See also Moyses'
Memoirs, &c. - Until he be found guilty or else acquitted.

19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 145

DiTTAY againft Mr Archibald Dowgla.s, Parson of Glasgow.
Maifter Archebaiild Dowglas, pei-foiin of Glafgw : ge are inditit and accufit,
that in tlie monetliis of Janiiar and Febrnare, the 3eir of God ^".^''^ threfcoir
fex 3eiris, 36 being accumpaneit with James funitynie Erie Bothwell, James Ormeftoun fnmtyme of })at Ilk, Robert alias Hob Ormelloune his faderis broder,
Johnne Hay fnmtyme of Talla, Johnne Hepburne callit Johnne of Bowtonne
and diiierfTe vtheris 30ur complicis, craftelie and fecreitlie confpyrit amangis 50m"
lelfis, denyfit and malicioiiflie confultit, treitit and concludit ]je niaifl Ichamefiill,
deteftabill and vnnaturall miirthonr and paricide of our fouerane lordis darreft
fader of gude memorie, Henry King of Scottis, fpous for J)e tym.e to his hienes
darreft moder Marie, then Qwene of Scottis ; and Jjat within ]je burch of Edinburghe, Palice of Halirndhous, and vtheris places fiairabout : And to ]>e end that
5e mycht bring 30ur wickit and execrabill attempt bettir to pas, 3e with J)e
remanent perfonis afoir namrait, be 50iu" felfis, 30ur ferwandis, complices and
vtlieris in 3our names, of 3our cawfing, command, airt, pairt-taking, affiftance
and ratihabitioim, vpoun J)e tent day of ))e faid moneth of Febrnare, att twa
houris eftir midnycht or Jjairby, come to ))e lugeing befyde ])e Kirk of Field,
within ]3e faid bur' of Edinburghe, quhair our faid fouerane lordis fader wes
ludgeit for ))e tyme ; and Jjair, be May of hamefuckin, briganrie^ and foirthocht
fellony, maifl; wyildlie,^ vmnercifviUie and trefTonablie, flew and murdrefl; him,
togidder with Williame Tail3eour and Andro Makcaig, his cubiculeris.'^ quhen
as thay, bureit in fleip, M-er takand pe nychtis I'eft, brint his lugeing foirfaid.
and raflt ]>e famin in the air, be force of gun-pulder, quhillv a little afoir wes
placeit and unput be 30W and 30ur foirfaidis vnder Jje ground and angulare
ftanis,* and witliin \>e woltis in laicli and darnit" places to ))at effect : And quhairthrow, 36 haif incurrit ]?e panis of Lefe-maiellie, and fuld be pwneift Jjairfoir in
all rigour, be tinfale" of lyff, landis and guidis, and extiuctioun of fame, titill,
lionour and memorie, confornie to pe lawis of Jjis realme. Lyke as, J)e haill perfonis, fpecialie afoir nammit, 3our compUces and confpiratouris with 30W in Jiis
treffonabill cryme, as ))ai culd be apprehendit, ])ai fiifferrit iiiaift fchamefull deid
))airfoir, according to ))air deieruingis. IxKjr. 3e ar indj'ttit and accufit for Jje
treflbnabill Confpiracie of ])e faid deteftabill deid and murthour of our faid fouerane lordis vniq'*^ darreft fader, the famin being oppinit' to 30W be ];e faid
vmq'" James fumtynie Erie of Bothwell, and vtheris chief Confiiiratouris,
quhairas of dewtie 36 wcr obleift to haue reueleit \)e famin, quliilk gif 36 bed
done, the faid maift abhominabill, fchamefull and crewall interpryfe of pe faid

' Briganderie. O. Fr. ■ Vilely, basely. ^ Grooms of tlie bcd-clmnibcr. 'Corner-stones.
' Concealed, hidden. '' Loss, deprivation. ' Revealed, disclosed.

VOL. I. X

146 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1586.

murtlioiir had bene impeidit, and our faid foiieraue lordis darreft faderis lyff,
be gude meanis, had been jireferued : And ])airfoir, 30ur faid foirknawlege and
conceling in ane cryme fa haynoiis and trelTonabill, wes neir alyke and equall to
J)e committing of \>e deid : And Jjairfoir, 36 audit to be pwneift in lyfF, landis,
fame and honour, as faid is. — To ])E takin^ that 36 war airt and parte, confultare, treittare, deuyfare and executer of J)e faid treflbnabill, horibill, cryme and
murthour, 3e wer actuallie prefent J)airat, and execuit ipe famin with 30iu" awin
handis, vpoune }>e faid tent day of Februare, at twa eftir mydnycht, quhair, by
J)e preilfe and thrang of peple, the tyme of ])e executioun of f>e faid murthour,
3e tint 30111 mwlis," quhilk being fundin vi^oune pe morne at pe fame place, wer
acknawlegeit to haif bene 30uris. And 3e wer euir f)airefter in griter familiaritie
with pe faid vmq''' James fumtyme Erie of Bothwell, be pe participatioun of pe
faid abhominabill trelfoun -viith him, to pe effect that ather of 30W mycht manteine and fupjiort vtheris in 3our wickit deidis. And this is maill notorlie
knawin, and 36 can nocht deny. — To pe mair^ takin : Quhen 3e wes to be
attintit befoir our fouerane lord and the lordis of his Secreit Counfale, for pe faid
abhominabill trelToune, vi)oun pe firft day of December, 1380 3eiris, 3e gat fecreit intelligence f»airof, and nocht being liabill to abyde pe law })airof, hot
findand 30virfelf maift giltie Jjairof in 30ur confcience, 36 wer fugitiue furth of
this realme to pe pairtis of Ingland, quhair 3e remanit diuerfe 3eiris paireftir ;
planelie takand vpoune 30W pe faid abliominabill cryme ; Lyk as, fchortlie ])aireftir, in pe moneth of Nouember, 1581 3eins, 36 wer foirfaltit for pe faid cryme.
As fie proces of foirfaltour beiris. — To pe niair^ takin : gour maitl familiare ferwand, vmq'^ Johnne Binning, quha for airt and pairt-taking with 30W in pe faid
abhominabill and treflbnabill cryme, M'es conuict and put to death, in pe moneth
of Junij, 1581 3eiris foii"faid, being ofttymes tryit* vpoune 3our jiairt |)airof,
fermelie and conllantlie deponit that 36 wer airt, pairt, deuyfar and executour of
pe faid abhominabill murthour ; and J)at 36 wer actuallie and in jn-oper perfoun ))airat ; quhairat alfo he abaid and tuk pe famin vpoun him, in pi-efens of
pe haill pepill l)yflanding, at his executioune. — To pe mair takin : Vmquhile
James Erie of Mortoune, eftir his conuictioune and befoir his death, nocht onlie
confeft, that he himfelf foirknew pe faid horribill murthoux', bot als, that 3e 30ur
felf wes pe reweillare ))airof vnto him : And forder, ])at 3e wer actuallie at pe executioun of )ie famin, as is maift notourlie knawin : Quhilk 3e can nocht deny.
The faid Mr Archebauld, anfuerand to the Aduocat vpoun the ©ittay produceit aganis him, as yit nocht red in his prefens ; defyrit of the Juftices that

' III token, ]irnof, or tfstiinony. ' Miil/is, 'a kind of .slippiTs willinut. quarters, usually made of

fine cloth or velvet, and adorned with embroidery.' Dr Janiieson. Tliey are afterwards described as
' welwat mulis' in tlie course of the trial. * Further. ^ Examined, jjrobably ujion torture.

19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 147

the famin mycht be red, befoir thair entrie to forder proces, that he mycht anfuer thairto, for defence of his lyff. Quhairvnto thai condifceiidaud, and for
fatiffeing of his defyre, caiifit reid the famin oppinlie in jugement. Quhillc being
red, he acceptit as it wes confauit, and offerit himfelf reddie to anfuer to euerie
poynt, quhen he fuld be accufit befoir the AiTyis be the famin. And for his bettir defence, vfit and produceit ane "Warrand direct be the Kingis Maieftie to the
Jiiftice, for admiffiouu of his lawfull defenffis. Quhairof the tenuoui- foUowis.

' Rex.

'Justice, Juftice-CIerk, and 30ur deputtis, we greit 30W weill. Forfamekill as we haif
appoyntit Jie xxvj day of this inftant, for tryell of Mr Arcliebauld Dowglas, of certane crymes of
Lefe-maieftie, to be laid to his charge, befoir %ow, in ]>e Tolbiiytli of Edinburghe; and albeit it be
our niynd Jiat ]>e faid mater be liandillit according to our honour and ]>e lawis of ])is realme, git we
intend nawayis that onyreflbnabill defence or moyen be tane away fra ]ie faid Mr Archebauld, quhilk
maybe competent to him, ather of equity or ellis be our faidis lawis. Thairfoir it is our will, and we
charge 30W, that ;e hauld Court Jie faid xxvj day of Maij, and put pe faid Mr Archebauld to Jie tryell
of ane inqueill, vpoun fic heidis and articles of lefe-maieflie as falbe gevin in Dittay ; admittand
neuerthles to ]ie faid Mr Archebauld, his haill laufull defenffis, fafar as ]>e famin may be competent to
him. Subfcryuit with our hand att Halirudhous, fe xxvj day of Maij, and of our regnne fe nyntene
3eire, 1586.

(Sic fubfcribitur) ' JAMES R."

Efter the productioun of the quhilk Warrand, and refTait thairof be the Juftice, the faid Mr Archebauld, leinning to his innocencie, but' defyre of ony prolocutour to fpeik for him in this cans, allegeit, that tlie fecund poynt of Dittay,
tuiching the foix'knawing and conceling of the faid mm'thour, aucht noclit to be
put to the knawlege of ane Aflyis, be reffoune, that our fouerane loird, of his
trie mercie and grace, had grantit to him his hienes Remiffioun for the famin :
Quhilk Remiflioun he jiroduceit in jugement, and tuik him thairto. Of the
quhilk the tennoiu* followis.

Letters of Remission in favor of Mr Archibald Dotcglas.
' Jacobus Dei gracia rex Scotorum. Omnibus probis hominibus fuis, ad quos prefentes litereperuenerint, Salutem. Sciatis, quia ex noflris fpecialibus gracia et mifcricordia, Remifnnus tenoreque prefentium Remittimus, dilecto noftro Archibaldo Dowglas, vui ordinarioruni dominorum Confdij et
Seflionis, pro omnibus criminibus, tranfgreflionibus et prodicionibus, per ipfum Archibaldum, aliquo
tempore ante datum prefencium, cuiufcunque grauitatis ac qualitatis fint commifs., (confpiracione tamen, confilio, tractacione, arte, parte et executione, horribilis et detelliibilis murtliure nollri quondam
chariffimi patris tanturamodo exceptis ;) pro quibus dictus Archibaldus, cogiiitioiii nollrorum legum
fubditus eril : Prouifo quod dictus Archibaldus precognitione et concelatione dicti horribilis murthure
nuUo modo oneratus fit ; ad quod, Nos, pro diuerfia grauibus confideracionibus Nos moven., volumus
et concedimns, quod dicta Remiflio extendatur ; et quod in eadem comprehendatur omnis oft'enfio et
crimen que dicto Archibaldo pro fua allegata precognitione et concelatione dicte horribilis murthure
vt dictum eft imputari pofllnt. Et fupra, dictum Archibaldum, fub firma pace et protectione noftra,

' Without.

148 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 158 6.

iufcipien. fii'miter inhibemus, ne quis ei occafione predictorum criminutD, tranfgreflionum et proditionum omnium antedict. (exceptis prius except.) malum, moleftiam, iniuriam aut grauamen aliquod
inferre prefumat iiiiufte ; fuper iioflram plenariam fFoiiffactuiam ; aut ad mortem ei inferat, inh pena
amiflionis vite et merabrorum. In cuius rei teftimoniura, has literas noftras RemifTionis, pro toto tempore vite prefati Magiftri Archibaldi duraturas, fub noftro niagno figillo, fibi fieri fecimus patentes.
Apud Halirudlious, vicefimo primo die menfis Mali, anno domiui millefimo quingentefimo octuagefimo
fexto et regni noflri decirao Nono.'

Quhilk Reiiiiiroun being redd oppinlie in jugement, and confidderit be the
faidis .Tuftices. they ffand and pronunceit, that the fecund jiairt of the foirfaid
Dittay, concerning the foirknawlege and conceling of the Murthour foirfaid, in
refpect thairof, fuld nocht be put to the tryell of ane Aflyis. Quhairvpoun the
faid Mr Archeljauld aflvit inflrumentis.

And the faid Mr Archebauld altogidder denyit the firll pairt of the faid Dittay, offering himfelf to the knawlege of ane condignne Aliyis for the famin, wes
ordanit be the faidis Juges to be put to the tryell of the perfonis vnderwrittin,
fummond ^q)oun his Aflyis, be vertew of oiu" foueraue lordis lettres.

AssisA.
Patrik Maifter of Gray, Gilbert Gray of Baldarran,

James Cohiile of Eifter Wemis, Mr Samuel Cokburne of Tempilhall,

Robert Logane of Reftalrig, George Home of Spott,

Andro Gray of Dunnynald, Patrik Johnneftoun, 50unger of

Andro Logane, younger of Cotfeild, Elphinftoune.

And becaus the remanent perfonis of Aflyis, fummond, be vertew of the faidis
Lettres, to this day, being oftymes callit, compeirit nocht, and wer amerciat
thairfoir, the faid Mr Archebauld fchortlie thaireftir produceit ane ^Varrand and
Precept, direct be our Ibuerane lord to the Juftices and Aduocatis fubllitut foirfaid, Ordaning thame to fupplie the nowmer of the abfentis with fic gentillraen
as mycht be gottin fummond, ather within the burcht or at the bar : Quhilk
Pi'ecept the faid Aduocat, for his Warrand, defyrit to be iufert in j^roces ;
quhairof the tennour followis.

'Rex,

'Justices and our Aduocat and 50ur deput, We greit 30W weill. Wc underftand ]>at
Mr Archebauld Dowglas is enterit prelentlie on pannell, and that his tryell flayis becaus fat fic perfonis as ai' fummond vpoim his Aflyis compeiris nocht, and fat fair laikis ^it fum perfonis of ane perfyte nowmer. Tiierfoir, it is our will that, according to ]>e la wis of our real me, and pratick of jour
court, 56 fupplie |ie abfentis with fic gentiilmen as 56 may get, ather witliin our burcht of Edinburghe,
or within ]te bar, and caus fame be fworne vpoun fe faid inqueift, to f e effect ])e faid mater reffaue
nalanger delay ; keipand this Precept for jour Warrand. Subfcryuit witli om- hand, att Halirndhous,
fe xxvj day of IMaij, 1586.

(Sic fubfcribitur.) ' JAMES R."

Lyke as, the faidis Jugeis, ffor obedience of the faid Precei^t, caulit be thair
officiar, ane of o\ir fouerane lordis meffingeris fummond the perfonis following to

19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 149

pas vpoiin the faid Mr Archebauldis AfTyis, for compleating of ane fiill nownier.
Thaj' ar to fay,

REMAINDER OF THE ASSISE.

Willianie Ker of Ancruni, :;ounger, Alexander Baillie of Litil-Gill,

Mr Robert Favvfyde, joutiger of that Ilk, Gawin Carmiclipll of Wriditillandis,

James Logane of Parfonif- knowis, Andro Ker of Grenheid,

George llanimiltoun of Preftoune, , Walter Ker, brother to the faid Laird of Greneheid.

Qiiliilkis i)erfoms being callit and compeirand befoir the faidis Juftices, wes
admittit be the faid Mr Archebauld to pas vpoun his AfTyis, with the remanent
perfonis aboue writtin, for tiyell of his innocencie in the faid cans, and joynit be
the Juftices to the I'enianent of the nowmer admittit vpoun the faid Aflyis of
befoir : and thai all fworne be thair grit aithis, to delyuer vpoun the poyntis
of the faid Dittay, conforine to the ordovu* and confuetud of this reahne, ordourlie be thair names.

And immediatlie efter the chefing and admitting and fueiring of the haill foirnaniit perfonis of Affyis in jugenient, as \'fe is, and the laid IMr Archebaidd
Dowglas being judiciallie accufit of the horribill, deteftabill and trelfonabill
crymes contenit in the firft poynt of the Dittay foirfaid, the I'amin being denyit
be hiiu fimplic/ter, ojipinlie, in prefens of the faidis Jugeis ; and referrit to the
tryell and kna\\'lege of the foirfaidis perfonis of Affyis : the faid Aduocat-fubflitut, for the bettir inftructioun and verefeing of the faid Dittay and takinnis
thairof, produceit thair, inftaiitlie, the 2)roces of flbirfaltour led and deduceit
aganis him for the famin in the Parliament hauldin and begun at Edinbui'ghe
the day of 1581 3eiris.

To the quhilk anfuerit the laid Mr Archebauld ; and ffirft, to the firft takin
of the faid Dittay, declaii'ing that ' in ])e preis and thrang of J)e pepill })e tyme
of Jje executioun of ])e faid murthoiu- that he tint his mwlis, quhilkis being fund
vpoune the morne, wer acknawlegeit to half bene his ;' that the famin wes altogidder vntrew ; defyring the famin to be verefeit, be ony jJerfounis quha wer
prefent at the finding of the faidis mwlis, or had feue the famin at ony tyme
thairefter ; and that the famin can nawayis appeir, be the DeiJofitionis and declaratioune of the faid vmq'^ Johnne Binning, deponing, that the faid Mr Archebauld his maifter, paft in ane fecreit' and fteilbonnett, arniit, to the committing
of the faid horribill crynie, quhairby the jjaffage betuix his lugeing and the
place quliair the laid nuirthour wes committit, being nawayis meit to ane perfoun armit, to pas with welwat mulis to lie ane deid ; and nawayis lyklie, be
gud appeirance natlier, that na fic thing wes fund ; and the faid takin, to be bot
an allegeance. — SecumUie, anfuerand to the fecund takin of the faid Dittay,

' A shirt of mail privately worn under the usual dress.

/

150 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1586.

makand mentioune, that ' quhen he wes to be attemptit,' befoir oiu- fouerane
lord and the lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfale for the faid abhominable Treffoune, vpoiui the laft day of December, the 3eir of God I^.V. and fourelcoir
3eiris, getting intelligence Jjairof, wes fugitiue furth of this reahne to the pairtis

of Ingland for the faniin, and that he fchortlie thairefter, in the moneth of

(Nov.) 1581 3eiris, wes foirfaltit for the faid cryme ;' exponit and declarit, that
the occafioun of the abfenting of him felf of the realme wes throw juft ffeir,
quhairvnto ony perfoun wald half bene mouit, his giidis, geir, rowmes and pofleffionis being intromettit with, befoir ony atteiching : Lyk as, he fchortlie efter
his paffing fiu-th of the realme, being inforrait that he wes dilaitit of the faid
horribill cryme quhairof he wes innocent, fafare as the famin come to his knawlege, the Quenis Maiefties of Inglandis Ambaffadoiir being iia Scotland for the
tyme, in his name, offerrit to prefent him to the Kingis Maiellie, that he mycht
be tryit of the faid cryme, fwa that^ thair wer deput vnfulpect Jiigeis and perfonis of Alfyis : Quhairvnto his hienes anfuerit, that he wald nocht indent with
his fubiect. And as for the proces of ftbirfaltour produceit, the famin can be na
witnes nor takin to conuict him of the laid cryme, in refpect our fouerane lord
had grantit vnto him, his hienes Letteris of Rehabilitatioun, annulling the faid
fentence of ffoirfaltour, and declairing and decerning the famin, to be of na force
nor effect, als weill in jugement as outwith, aganis him. Quhilkis Letteris he
produceit in jugement, for verefeing of the faid allegeance as the famin vnder
the Grit Seill, off the dait at Halirudhous the xxj day of Mali, the 3eir of God
P.V". fovu'fcoir fex 3eiris, and of oiu* fouerane lordis regnne the nyntene 3eir, at
mair lenth beiris.

Anfuerit the Aduocat, that the faidis Letteris of Rehabilitatioun can naw^ayis
tak away the proces of ffoirfaltour, the famin ftandard vnreduceit ; and referrit
the famin to be confidderit be the AlTyis. And foi'der, for verefeing of the faid
Dittay, and thrid takin thairof, maid vjioun the faid Johnne Binningis Declaratioun and Depofitioun ; produceit thre of the faid Johnne Binningis Depofitiounis, maid thairanent, in i^refens of the Lordis of our fouerane lordis Secreit
Counfale : The firft, maid at Edinburgh the tent day of Mali, fourefcoir ane 3eiris,
(1581) in pre fens of the Erie of Argyll, Chancellare, the Erie of Arrane, the
Erie of Montrois, the Lord Ruthven, Mr Robert Ci-eychtoun of Eliok, Aduocat,
and Alexander Hay, Clerk of Regifler, fubfcryuit be the faid Erie of Ai-rane
and Alexander Hay : The fecund, of the dait the ellevint day of Mail, in prefens of the Erie of Arrane, the Erie of Montrois, the Laird of Bargany, the
Laird of Ai'kinglafe, the Gudman of Manderftoune and the Clerk of Regifter,

* Attainted, forfeited. 'Provided.

19Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 151

fubfcryiiit be the haill perfonis abouewrittin, auditouris to the faidis Depofitiounis : The thrid, daitit at Edinburghe the xv day of Maii, the 3eir of God
1"".^. fourefcoir ane, in prefens of the Erlis of Arrane and Montrois, the Lard
of Arkinglas, fiibfcryuit be the faidis Erlis of Arrane and Montrois and the
Clerk of Regifter : ffernielie and conftantlie dejioning that the faid Mr Archebauld paft to the deid-doing, the faid Johniie Binning and Thomas Gairner his
lerwandis being with him in cumpanie, and that the faid Mr Archebauld wes
actuallie thairat. And forder, produceit thre vthir Depofitionis, the ane maid
be vmq'" James Ormeftoune fumtyme of that Ilk, the vther be vmq'" Johmie
Hay fumtyme of Tala, 3ounger, and the thrid maid be vmq''^ Pareis, Ffrenchman.

Anfuerit the faid ]\Ir Archebauld thairto, firft, that the faid vmq'" Johnne
Binningis Depofitionis can niak na thing aganis him, confiddering the famin ar
altogidder variant and contrarious ; in the felf-fam-tyme declairing, that he wes
paft to his bed, the nycht of the committing thairof, and that the faid vmq'°
Johnne paft furth of liis chalmer to liis awin dwelling hous to his bed, quhair
he reftit quliill the faid abliominabill Murthoiu" wes committit; and heiring the
crak' of the blading of the Kingis hous in the air with powder, rais and come
to his faid Maifteris chalmer, quhair he fand him lyand in his bed, reidand on
ane buk : and in ane A-ther pairt of his faidis Deiiofitionis, declairing, that the
faid Mr Archebauld, efter that he had ftepit in his awin chalmer that nycht of
the connnitting of the IVJkirthour, nane being with him hot the faid Johnne and
Thomas Gardner, and quhen it wes lait, paft to the committing of the famin,
accumpaneit with thame, out at his bak 5et ; quhilk is contrarious :^ And declairing lykewayis, that vpoiui the morne thairefter, he conuoyit the faid Mr
Archebauld to the Tolbuyth, quhilk culd nocht ftand, feing the tyine of the
committing thairof wes vpoun the Soneday befoir ffaftinis-ewin, in the tyme of
Vacance, quhen the Lordis fittis nocht, and that he wes nocht \i)oun the Seffioun at that tyme ; and thairfoir defyrit the contrarieties of the faidis Johnne
Binningis Depofitionis to be confidderit be the faidis i^erfonis of AfTyis, and
thame to cognos thairin, to the bettir trying of his innocence : And ficlyk allegeit, that the faid vmq'^ Johnne wes nawayis his ferwand the tyme of the committing of the faid horribill Murthour, nor 3it come in his feruice be the fpace
of twa 3eiris thaireftir.

Quhairvnto the faid Aduocat anfuerit, tliat the Depofitionis of the faid vmq""
Johnne Binning wer liifficient to teftifie the faid Dittay to he trew, feing in the
haill heidis thairof he aggreis the faid Mr Archebauld to be participant of the
faid trelTonabill and vnnaturall Murthour. — To the quhilk, anfuerit the faid

' Report. ^ Contradictory.

152 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1586.

Mr Archebauld, That the faidis Depofitionis, can not be fufficient to verifie the
faid Dittay, leing the laid vmq'"' Johnne wes hot Jlnguhtris tcftis, qiihilk in ciuilibus, ciild nocht be habill to preif ony actioun of geir, far-les in crimiiialihus,
to tak away anie niannis lyff : And as to the fferd takin of the faid Dittay, allegeit maid vpoun the Confeffioiin of vniq'" James fumtyme Erie of Mortonn,
anfueris, that na fic Depofitionis wer prodnceit in jugement nor 3it to the Alfyis ;
and thairfoir defyrit thame to have refpect thairto, fpecialie in confiderationne
that the faid takin beiris that the faid vmq''' Erie of INIortonne, eftir his convictioune and befoir his death, confeffit that he him felf foirknew the faid hoi'ribill
Murthour, as alfo that the faid JNIr Archebauld wes the reuelare thairof to him,
and actuallie at the executioun of the famin ; and geveand and nocht grantand
that the faid Depofitioun had bene maid, 3it the famin can teftefie na thing
aganis him ; becaus of the law the Depofitionis of ane conuict and condempnit
perfoun can nawayis be reffauit to beir teflimonie aganis ane vther. And forder, anfueris to the Depofitionis of vmq'' James Ormeftoune fumtyme of that
Ilk, vmq'° Johnne Hay of Talo and vmq''' Pareis, Frenchman, that the famin
makis na thing aganis him, na mentioun being maid of him in ony of thair De2)ofitionis ; hot that the famin femes rather to the bettir inftructioune of the perfonis of Affyis of his innocence : And fforder, the faid Mr Archebauld acceptit
the faidis Depofitionis of the faidis vrnq'"" Johnne Hay, Pareis, Frenchman, and
Laird of Ormelloun ; and repeitit thame for his jufl:ificatioune, anent that pairt
of the Dittay, quhairin wes allegeit, that he confpyrit with thame and vmq'"
James fumtyme Erie of Bothwell, vpoun the treffonabill IMurthour foirfaid, be
reffoun the conti'air planelie appeirit be the Depofitionis of the faidis perfonis ;
quliairin wes contenit the haill maner of the actuall doing of the deid be thame
felfis and vtheris thair complicis, and na mentioime maid of him ; nather culd it
appeir that he onywayis had knawlege thairof ; defyring the i)erfonis of AflTyis
to reid and confidder the famin befoir ony delyuerance or writting. — Anfuerit
the faid Aduocate, that the Depolitionis of the faid vmq'" Johnne Binning ar
fufficient to inflruct the laid Dittav, togidder with the notorietie of the faid
deid, leing the faid vniq'' Johnne abaid tliairat to the hour of his death : And
as for the faid vmq''' James Erie of Mortounes Depofitionis, the Ihmin ar mair
nor notoure to the perfonis of Aifyis and to the haill cuntrie, and neidis na forder productioune : And thairfoir, in refpect of the notorietie foirfaid, jn-otellit,
that in caice the faidis perfonis of Allyis clenge and acqiiit the faid Mr Ardiebauld of the faid horribill and crewall Murthour, for ^^'ilfull errour : \'^pon the
quhilk he alkit inftrumentis.

COMPEIRIT the famin day, Sir Williame Stewart of , fone lawfull to Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie, as neir coufing and kinnifman to our

19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 153

louerane lord, and proteftit, that in refpect the faid Mr Archebauld ftandis conuict in Parliament of airt and pairt of the horribill and trefTonabill Murthour
and llauchter of the faid vmq'° Henrie King of Scottis, fader to our fouerane
lord, that in caice the faidis perfonis of AlFyis clenge him thairof, for AVilfuU
Errour ; and gif he fal happin to be fund culi)abill heii'efter of the famin, that his
hienes fal haif fufficient actioune of Errour aganis thame. Quhairvpoun he lyke
wayis afl<it inftrumentis.

And the faid Mr Archebauld proteftit in the contrair, in relpect of his anfueris and defenffis foirfaidis, and that the Kingis Maieftie hes tane away the
faid fenfment' of Parliament be his hienes Lettres of Rehabilitatioune aboue
writtin, produceit in proces, of the dait foirfaid, annulling the faid fenfinent :
Quhairvjjoun he afkit inftrumentis.

Verdict. And immediatlie thairefter, the faidis perfonis of AfTyis aboue
writtin, chofin, fworne and adraittit, as faid is, remouit thame felfis furtli of the
laid Court, for thair bettir delyiierance vpoun the poyntis of the faid Dittay, and
being altogidder conuenit, chufe and admittit Patrik Mai Iter of Gray in Chanceller of the faid Aftyis ; quha, efter lang reftoning had be thame vpoune the
faid Dittay, takinnis and Depofitionis produceit, defenffis and anfueris maid
thairto ; thay and ilkane of thame, being rjq)lie aiiifit thairwith, all in ane
woice, but' difcrepance, votit, fand and delyuerit the faid Mr Archebauld Dowglas, perfoun of Glafgw, to be clene and acquit of his being in cumpany, in the
monethis of Januer and Februer, the 3eir of God P'.V. threfcoir and fex 3eiris,
with vmq'" James fumtyme Erie of Bothwell, vmq'" James Ormiftoun of that
Ilk, vmq'° Johnne Hay fumtyme of Talo, ^inq''' Jolinne Hepburne callit of Boltoune and diuerfe vtheris thair complicis, craftelie and fecreitlie confpyring
amangis thame, deuifing and maliciouflie confulting, treiting and concluding the
maift fchamefull, deteftabill and vnnaturall Murthour and paricide of A'mq'^ our
fouerane lordis darreft fader A^mq'" Henrie King of Scottis of gude memorie,
fpous for the tjTiie to his hienes darreft moder Marie then Qwen of Scottis ; and
that within the toun of Edinburghe, palice of Halirudhoufe and vtheris jjlaces
thairabout ; and for the bettir performing of the faid wickit and execi'abill iuterpryfe and attempt, be him felf and vtheris in his name of his cawfing, airt,
pairt-taking, affiftance and ratihabitioun, cuming to the ludginge beiyde the
Kirk of Feild within the faid bur' of Edinburghe, quhair the faid vmq'*' Hem'ie
King of Scottis our fovierane lordis darreft fader wes lugeit for the tjnne, vpoun
the tent day of the laid monetli of Februar, the 3eir of God foirlaid, at twa
houris efter midnycht or thairby ; and thair be way of briganrie, hameluckin
and foirthocht fellony, maift wj'ldlie, vnmercifuilie and treftonablie murdreiffing

■ ' Sentence, finding, judgment. ^ Without.

VOL. I. U

154 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1586.

and flaying of him, togidder with vmq'^ William Tail3eour and Andro M'Caig
his cubicularis, qnlien as thai, bureit in fleip, wes takand the nychtis reft, birning his ludgeing foirlaid, rafing of the faniin in the air be force of gwn-powlder,
quhilk a litill ofbefoir ^ves placeit and nnput be him vnder the griuid and angulour ftanis, and within the woltis and laich and darnit placis to that eflfect.
And l)eing re-enterit agane in jugement in prefens of the faidis Juftices, be the
mouth and dedaratioun of the laid Patrik Maifter of Gray, Chanceller of the
faid Advis, promuiceit the faid Maifter Archebauld to be Acquit of tlie Dittay
foirfaid and crymes contenit thairin : Quhairvpoune the laid Mr Archebauld
Dowglas afldt inftrumentis.

Peotf.st hij the Assise, that they should not he liahle in Wilful Error.
And immediatlie thairefter the laid Patrik Maifter of Gray, Chancellare of
the laid Ailyis, for himfelf and in name and behalf of the remanent perlbnis Alfyfoiu-is abouewrittin, afkit inftrumentis, that the Uepofitionis of the laidis vmq''
James Orniiftoun of that Ilk, vmq'^ Johnne Hay of Talo and vmq'" Pareis,
Fi'encliman, maid na mentioun of the faid Mr Archebauld, nor contenit na
thing aganis him : And in relpect thair wes na thing produceit for verefeing of
the laid Dittay, quhairby the laidis perfonis of AlFyis mycht haue bene perfuadit
to have delyuerit vtherwayis nor is abouewrittin, except the Depofitionis of
vmq'" Johnne Binning, quhilkis ar bot ane witnes, and altogidder variant and
contrarious in the felf, nor 5it was the faid Dittay fworne nather be the Aduocat
nor na vtheris his informaris ; and that the proces of ffoirfaltour led in Parliament aganis the laid Mr Archebauld is tane away be the Kingis Maiefteis Letteris of Rehabilitatioune, and that na Depofitionis of the faid James lumtyme
Erie of Mortoune wes produceit befoir thame for fortefeing of the laid Dittay,
and that the faid takin of Dittay bure the faid vmq'" Erie of Mortoune to half
deponit efter his conuictioune : Thairfoir, conlidering thai haif delyuerit efter
thair knawleg, proteftit that thai fuld incure na WilfuU Errour in ony tymes
heirefter. Quhilk inftrumentis and proteftatioune thay, efter than* re-entrie
agane in jugement in the laid Court of Jufticiarie, cawfit be oppinlie red of new
in prefens of the faidis Juftices : and thairvpoune the faid Patrik Maifter of
Gray, Chanceller, for himfelf and in name and behalf foirlaid, of new aflvit inftrumentis, and proteftit in maner abouewrittin.

The faiiiin day, Sir Archebauld Naper of Edinwillie (Edinbelly) knycht, Sir Johnne Edmeltoun of

that Ilk, George Home of Wedderburne, Alexander Dalmahoy of that Ilk, Mowbray of Barnebugall, Francis Dowglas of Borg, Thomas Ottirbume of Keidhall, George Home of Broxfniyth, Robert
Lord Seytounp, Patrik Congil of that Ilk ; oftymes callit to have compeirit befoir our Juftice or his
deputtis, the faidis day and place in the hour of cans, to haif pafl vponn the Aflyfe of tlie faid Mr
Archebauld Dowglas, dilaitit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of our fouerane lordis dan-eft fader of
gud memorie ; lawfull tyme of day biddin, and the faidis perfonis nocht compeirand to the effect foirfaid ; thay and ilk ane of thame wer thairfoir amerciat in the pane of Fourtie pundis.

19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I55

[Mr Johune Grahaine, Jusfice-Depiite.'\

^bitJiufl from t\)t aaaitJ of ©umfries.

May 22, 1587. — Johnne Skowgall of that Ilk, (plegio, CapHcme Lauder,) Patrik Hepburne of Kirklandhill,' (plegio, 31. Pat. Hephurrte de Smetotm,) Alexander Aitchelbuu of Gosfurd, (plegio,
Thoma 3Iariorihankis de Ratho,) Thomas Marioribankis of
Ratho, (plegio, Alexcindro Aitcliesoime de Gosf'ord,) \A^illiain
Hepburne in the Nungaif' [of Hadingtoun ?] (plegio, domino
Ahhate de Jedlmrglie,) Johnne Sydlarf of that Ilk,^ Gawin
Dundas of Breiftniylne, James Cochran of Barbachla, Robert
Bruce of Binning, James Stewinfoun of Hirdmanicheillis,
Johnne Hammiltoune of Eift Binning,^ James Rois in Tartrewin/ (plegio, Alexandro ITwme de Denis,) Mungo Tennent in Quliytkirk, (plegio, Jacoho Rychesoim de Smetoime,)
Henry Sinclar of Quhytkirk, (plegio, eodem Jacoho,) Dauid
Monypenny of Pilrig," (plegio, Georgio Logane portionario
de Boningtoiine,) George Logane portioner of Bonyngtouu,'
(plegio, domino Pilrig,) Johnne Woulf of "Wadelie," Williame
Skirvene of Plewlandhill,^ Alexander Tod in Dirltoune,
(plegio, Alexaiidro Rohesoun ibidem,) Alexander Roljefoun
thair,'" (plegio, Alexandro Tod ihidem,) Dauid Dundas in
Brigend, (plegio, Joanne Dundua de Newlisfoune,) George
BilFett in Eiftfeild, (plegio, eodem [^Joanne,']) James Veitch of
that Ilk," (plegio, Archihaldo Gallowuij in Langnudrie,)
George Barroune in Auld Liftoune,'" Dauid Horfljur' in Wefter Garntoun, (plegio, domino Innerleijth,) Arcliebauld Dowglas of Stanypeth," (plegio Joseplio Dou-glas de Poumferstotine,) James Tennent of Lennox,'^ [Linhouse ?] (plegio,
Josepho Douglas ad satisf actionem,) Alexander Ci-eychtoune
of Drylaw,'-' (provin to he in the north the time of the proclamatioun,) Alexander Creychtoune of Newhall,'" (nocht siihiect
to the raid he his edge,) Alexander Michelfoune of JMortoune,

' Thir twa (lelVit to be replegeit to the Regalitie of Sanct Aiulrous be Mr Johnne Arthour, and
continewit to laft of Maij. -' Vltimo Maij. ^ Difchargeit I)e redoun of liis aig. ' Ad Kemiffioneni f. d. n. regis. ' Vltinio Maij. '' Defyrit to be replegeit to Halyruidlious, lie the Juftice Clarkis confent, vltimo Maij. ■" Replegiat. ^^ Provin to be feik the tynie of tlie raid and dilcliargeit. '■> Difchargeit for his gret aig. '" Vhimo Maii. " Thir delyrit to be re|de^;eit to

Torpliecbin be Mr Johnne Gralianie, JuRiee-Deput, and continewit totlie laft Maij. '- Didliargeit
and i)aft fra. '^ Defyrit be the Erll of Angus to be replegeit to Dalkeytb. " In voluntate.

•5 Palt fra. "= Difchargeit.

156 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1587Johnne Stewinfovme of Hirdmanfcheillis,' Frances Boirthuik
in Bancreif/ (j)legio, Joanne Boirthuik eiusjilio cum seipso
coniunctim et div'isim ad sathf actionem ^ Johnne Boirthuik
his fone,^ Mr Patrik Heijburne of Gilmertoune, (plegio,
Georgia Carkettill, hurgen. de Edinhurghe,) and Wauchop
of Kaikmure, (plegio, 31. Patricio Hephurne de Sinetoune.)
Dilaitit for contravening of our fouerane lordis Proclamatioun, in abyding fra

the Raid appointit to follow our fouerane lord to Dumfreis, vpoun the ferd of

Apryle laftwes.

PiiiviLEGES of Burgesses of Edinhurghe, as to Abiding from Raids,
even though dwelling furth of the Burgh.

Compeirit Mr Johnne Scharp, for the faidis Alexander Aichefoun and Thomas Marioribankis, and alledgeit, that thay aucht nocht to be put to the knawledge of ane AflTyis, for abyding fra the Raid, becaus thay ar burgeffis of Edinburghe, and ftent, watcht and waird with the burgeffis thairof, quha paft nocht
in proper perfoun in to the Raid, bot fend men att the Kingis defyre, and wer
ftentit to that effect ; of the quhilk ftent, thai payit thair pairt : And lyke as,
the faid remanent- Burgeffis could nocht be trublit for abyding fra the faid
Raid, nane^ could thay.

The Aduocat anluerit in the contrair, and allegeit that the feruice of thair
perfounes aucht to be tane quliair thay remane," and becaus thay remane out of
the bur', and hes landis lyand out of the bur' quhair thay remane, ewin as thair
landis ar fubiect to ane ftent by'' the ftent of the bur' ; ewin fwa thair perfonis
fould ferue quhene the King makis his Px-oclamatioune.

The Juftice continewis Interloquitour to the laft day of Maij inftant.
(May 31.) — Interlocutor anetd BurgeJJis duelland out of Edinhunjlie.

The Juftice findis be Interloquitour, that tlie faidis Alexander Aitchefoune and Thomas Marioribankis fall nocht be put to the knawledge of ane Aflyis, in refpect of the alledgiance proponit be
thanie, that tliay wer burgeffis of Edinburghe, and that thay ftentit and fkattit' with the toune thairof.
And this Interloquitour to extend in tymes paft.

Henry Sinclar of Quhytekirk and George Logan portioner of Boningtoune
alToil^^^eit," becaus thair moderis are lyfrenteris of their landis. James Veitch of
that Ilk, George Barroune in Auld Liftoune, Dauid Dundas in Brigend, George
BifTett in Eiftfeild, alToilseit, becaus thay half nocht 'SyystQ oxgangis' of land.
Alexander Tod in Dirltoune and Alexander Robefoun thair, aflbil3eit, becaus
thay haif na heretage.

' Ad reniiffionem. ' Voluntate. ' Difchargeit be the Juftice becaus the fone and father ar
noclit bayth fubiect to the Proclamatioun. ^ Neither. ^ Dwell, have their residence or place

of abode. ^ Over and above, besides. "^ Paid assessment and taxations. ^ Absolved.

^ Ploughgates, ox-gates.

20JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I57

The remainder of the cafes continued to the Juftice-aire of EdinbiU'o-he,
' tercio Itineris, vel fuper premonicione xv dierum.'

May 23. — Archibald Max^vell, brothir to the Gudman of Dinwiddie,
Williame Maxwall his foue and Dauid Maxwall his feruand.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall flaiichter of \anq'^ Robert Maxwall of
Coweftanis, committit in Jiinii 1583.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Dumfries, tertio Itineris, (vel fuper premonitione) XV dierum ; per Preceptum regis."

Evtmon—€mmttv(titm(i itiiis's ^tamp, ^c.

May 23. — Patrik Maister of Gray.
Comperit Mr Dauid M^Gill of Nilbet, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, and produceit the Dittay after Ipecefeit and defjTi'it proces ; of the quhilk the tennour
followis.

Dittay against the Maister of Gray.

Patrik Maister of Gray, ge ar indytit and accufit, that 56 haif laitlie,
within Jje fpace of Jjis 5eir bypall, writtin, delt and travellit to France, for findrie
materis preiudiciall to J)e Religioune prefentlie jJi-ofeft be our fouerane lord and
his fubiectis ; and therefore, to haif had libertie of confcience, or otherwyis
to fy (fay) forme of Religioune, to haif bene vfit att ewerie manis awin appittite
within J)e realme ; incontrair Jje tennour of ]>e Actis of Parliament ; incurrand
))airthrow the panis contenit in Jje faniin. SecuncUie, Indytit and accufit, that
during ]>e tyme foirfaid, he hes intendit to deill with fum perfonis in France,
that be J^air moyane, throw his informacioun, oure foueranis mariage with Jje
King of Denmarkis dochtir (being ane deid honeft and lauchtfull in prefens of
God and men) niycht haif bene ftayit ; takand thairthrow vpoun him, without
ony warrand, forder thane becumit ane fubiect of his dewtie to haif done ;
fpeciallie, in that his intentioune tendit to J)e hindrance of Jje Kingis mariage,
being ane act proffitabill to ))e commoun Avelth of ])is realme. ThrijdUe, Indytit and accufit, for Jje vndewtifuU wryting of lettres, concerning the eftait of
his Maiefi;ie and J)e realme, in Ingland ; without his IMaiefteis knawledge or
command ; thairthrow, exceding far Jje dewtie of ane fubiect. Ferdlie, Indytit,
that he has travellit in materis quhilk mycht haif deflroyit the efl:ait of ])is
realme, quhilk trawcll, gif it had tane effect, his Maiefl;eis perfoun mycht haif
bene indangerit, committing Jiairthrow the cryme of Treflbiuie. Fyftlie, Indytit,

' Plegio, Roberto Maxwall de Dinwiddie niilite.

158 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1587.

for counterfitting of pe Kingis ftamp/ and putting of ])e famin to ane letter Avrittin with his Maiefteis awin hand, Avithout his command or avictoritie to do ])e
famin ; and (iclyke, for retening and keping of J)e famin ftamp in his handis.
SaxtUe, Indytit for diners and lindrie vtheris offences and crymes of Treflbun,
akeddie declarit and confeft be hini to his Maiefteis felf ; quhairof he is giltie ;
quhilk he can nocht deny. Lyke as, the haill pointis of Dittay aboue writtin ar
of veritie, as he can nocht deny J)e famin, nor na pairt ])airof

The faid Patrik Maifter of Gray off'erit himfelff" and become in oure fouerane
lordis will and mercie for the faidis crjanes.

^laugljtfi*— 1t?amtsuc]^en.

Aug. 30. — Thomas Bonklf, cuitlar, burges of Edinburgh.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the felloune and crewall llauchter of vmq"' Peter

Heriot, induellar in Leyth, brother germane to James Heriot of Trabroune ; committit be way of Hamefuckin, within the toune of Leyth, vpoune the xxix day of

Auguft inftant.

Persewar, James Heiiot of Trabroune.

Verdict. The Affyis, being purgeit of partiall counfall, chofin, fworne and
admittit, and the faid Thomas being accufit be Dittay, of the cuming be way of
Hamefuckin to the faid vmq'" Petir Heriotis duelling hous in Leyth, and letting
vpoun him foirnent the 3ett- thairof, witli ane drawin fword, quhairwith he
maift crewallie and fchamefullie Hew (him) ; vpoun fett purpois and provifioune,
&c. ; ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Thomas Bonkle to be ifylit and convict of the flauchter of the faid vmq'" Petir.

Sextence. The Juftice ordanit the faid Thomas Bonkle to be tane to the
toune of Leyth, and tliair, at place appointit, his heid and rycht arme to be
ftrukin fra his bodie ; and all his movable guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to
oure fouerane lordis vfe, for the faid cryme. This dome pronimceit be James
Nifbett, dempftar of Juftice Courtis,

^lausljter.

Jan. 23, 1587-8. — Archbald IM'Brair of that Ilk.^
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq" Archibald Newall, burges of
Drumfreis ; committit in (the firft day of) Apryle laftbypaft.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill of Nilbet, Aduocat. Proloquitour, Mr Thomas Craig.

The Juftice, be Intei-loquitour, reiiellit the haill defenffis proponit 3efterday,

' The King's cnjhet, or cachet, a device invented to relieve his Majesty from subsrrihing; so many
official writs. This is still in use in Scotland in tiie case of signatures, and other official writs, formerly
requiring the King's sign manual. The cashet is now in the custody of the Keeper of the Great
Seal. ''■ Gate. ' See Jul. 2, 1388.

21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I59

contenit in the Minute-buik and proces proponit for the faid Archbald M'Brair,
in refpect of the auluer maid thairto be the Aduocat, and ordanit him to be put
to the knawledge of ane Aflyife.

ASSISA.

George Dundas of that Ilk, Adam Wallace, inerchand thair, Thomas Inglis, portionar of Auld

John Lewingftoune of Belftane, Peter Cowdene, thair, Liftoune,

Jolmne Gordoune of Culquha, James Henderfoun, thair, William NaiparofVVryclitifliouffis,

Johnne Maidland of Auchingaffill, Mathow Stewart of Bewelaw, Mungo Ruflell, burges of Ediu',
WiUiame Wallace of Johnfloune, Johnne Maure, burges thair.

Verdict. ' The Aflyfe, be thair delyuerauce, pronunceit be the mouth of
George Dundas of that Ilk, Chancellar, ffand and declarit, the faid Archbald
RFBrair to be convict and fylit, as culpable and giltie of airt and pairt of the
(lauchter of the faid v-mq'" Archbald Newall ; and clangeit him of ony Murthour, and the circuniftance, viz. the carting of him in the watter of Neth,' &c.

Sentence. To be tane to ane IcafTeld befyde the mercat-croce of Edinburghe, and thair his held ftrikin fra his body ; and all his movable guidis to
be efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the flauchter of the faid vmq'^
Archbald.

^uvting^ antr a^aounUins.

Feb. 9. — HoBBiE NisBET, vagabund.

Dilatit of the hurting and wounding of Geoi'ge Park, crealman, duellare in
Eifter Fairny, in his hind-heid ; and for taking of his purs fra him, with ten
poundis money thairin ; committit the xvij day of Januar laftbypaft, betuix
Kingorne and Bruntyland.

The faid Hobble come in the Kingis Will for the faid cryme, and refTauit
thairin be the Juftice ; and committit to waird within the Tolbuith of Edinburghe.

[3Ir James Wardlmv, Justice-Depute^

Cattle-stfaliits^

Mar. 25, 1588. — James Dalgleisch in Blacok,' NicoU Bryden in
Kittifdeuch.'
Dilatit of certane pointis of Thift, viz. The faid James for the inbringing of
Dauid Eliot callit the Carling, Hobble Eliot callit Hob Billie and vtheris thair
complices, commovm thewis, to the landis of Halbyre, beiide the Lone-ftane ;
and fteling furth thairof of ten kye ; committit in October 1581 ; and vtheris
pointis of thift contenit in the lettres. The faid Nicoll Brydin dilatit for the

' Plegio, Jacobo Adamfoun, burgen. de Edinburghe. " Plegio, Joanne Adamfoun, burgen. ibidem.

160 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1588.

thifteous inbringing of Hobbie Arnillrang callit the Pett, William Howatfoun
in Bowtliink. Walter and Hobbie Annftrang callit Helenes Hobble and vtlieris
thair complices, to tlie landis of Freirtoun, pertening to the Laird of Corftorphin, and for the thifteous fteling furth thairof of ane broun meir, with the
haill infycht, guidis and geir, and vtheris crymes of thyft contenit in the
lettres.

The perfounes on pannell afl^it inftrumentis of thair entrie, and that thay
offerit thame reddie to abyde the tryall of ane Aflyis, for the faidis crymes, and
all vtheris fpecifeit in the lettres ; diflaffenting to ony continewatioun : Protefting, in refpect that na partie, nor the Aduocat, comperit nocht to perfew, that
na lettres be grantit aganis thame in tymes cuming. — Continued to the Jufticeaire of Edinburghe, ' S° Itineris, vel fuper premonitione xv dierum.'

I31r Johnne Grahame, Justice-Depute.']

drirt-raisins — JSuniins of tlje Pace of 4?itmet(Uf ne.

Mail 17. — Willia:m Lesije in Lytill Warthill,' Adam Watt at the

Mylne of AVellhall, "Williame LelFell, meffinger at the Kirk

of Inch, Michaell Lellie in the Inch of Warthill, Patrik Leflie, fpne to James Leflie, burges of Abirdene.-

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the treffonabill Birning of the Place of Pitmeddene,

togidder with the haill infycht guidis and geir being thairin, to the availl of

ffyve thowland markis, pertening to Alexander Abircrumbie of Pitmeddene ;

committit in March laftbypaft.

Persewars. Preloquitour for the pannell.

Alexander Abircrumbie of Pitmeddene, The Erll of Botlivvell, The Lord Hvvme,

.Mr Dauid M'Gill, Aduocat. The Coronall Stewart, ISIr Thomas Craig,

Mr Alexander Lindfay, Mr Alexander King.

It wes alledgeit be the pannell, that na proces can be led aganis thaim, feing
it is lycht' that thay half committit Treffbun, in birning of the faid hous of Pitmeddene ; and that all perfounes committeris of treffoune, fould be fummond
vpoun fourtie dayes wairning, and that thay ar nocht fummond vpoune foiu'tie
dayes wairning ; thairfore na proces. — The Aduocat paft fyrft fra that j^airt of
the lybell, makand mentioune of the TrelToune ; and anfuerit, that proces fould be
had aganis thame, in refpect of ane Act of Parliament, maid in King James
the Fyft tyme, in the quhilk it is provydit, that ffyi-e-rafuig fould be funnnond
as Slauchter.

The Juftice continewit Interloquitour to the morne.

.' Plegio, Normando Leflie, burgen. de Abirdene " Plegio, Domino Hume. ' Luce clarior.

21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 161

l^amcsucfetn — dTirf-iaisins, $(t.

May 17. — WiLLiAiME Leslie, apperand of Warthill.
Comperit "Williame Leflie, apperand of ^\'artliill, and exponit and declarit,
that he vnderftuid that he wes fpeciallie contenit in the Lettres ralit at the inftance of Alexander Abircrumbie of Pitmeddene, Robert and James Abircrumbie
his Ibnis, for fummonding of him, to haif fund cautioune, that he fould half
comperit this day and place, and vnderlyne the law, for camming be way of
Hamefukkin, accumpaneit with Johne Leflie, apperand of Torquhane and diners vtheris perfonis, his complicis, fpecifeit in the faidis vtheris lettres, affageing of the faid Place of Pitmeddene ; and for the treffonabill rafmg of ffyre
thairin, and birning and diftroying of the faid place, togidder with the haill
infycht giiidis and geir being thairin, pertening to the faid Alexander Abircrumbie, to the awaill of fyve thowfand raarkis money ; committit vpoune the
penult day of March laftbypaft.

And albeit, he wes nathir liimmond, be vertew of the faidis letteris, to find
cautioun, nathir 3it fand he cautioune for this comperance this day and place,
to vnderly the law for the crymes aboue writtin ; 3it nochtwithftanding he, for
tryall of his innocencie, comperit and ofFerit him reddie to abyde the tryall of
ane AlTyis for the faidis crymes ; difaffenting to ony continewatioune, and requyi-it of the faid Alexander Abircrumbie of Pitmeddene, gif he wald infift
in his perlute thairfore : Quha declarit att the bar, in prefens of the Juftice,
that he knew the faid William Leflie to be innocent of the crymes aboue writtin ; and thairfore wald defift fra all purfeuing of the faid William. Quhairvpoiin the faid William afl<it inftrumentis.

May 18. — The Juftice ffindis be Interloquitour, that the Lettres rafit
be the faid Alexander Abircrumbie aganis the perfonis thairin now on paimell,
(William Leflie of Little "\A'arthill being abfent), Ibuld be putt to ane AlTyife,
nochtwithftanding the alledgance proponit be thame 3iftirday.

In confequence of only nine perfons of Aflife appearing, continued to the
Juflice-aire of ' Abirdene, 3"° Itineris, xv dierum.'

^Ofcert)— OT(ttI)craft— SUttantatimt, $(C,

May 28. — Alesoun Peiesoun in Byrehill.
Dilatit of the pointis of ^Vichcraft eftir fpecifeit.

ASSISA.

Dauid Dalgleifch, maltman iii Johnne Hegie, maltman thair, Robert Meluilo thair,
S' Andros, Thomas LeiUrene thaii-, Alexander Blak thair,

David Guidlett, maltman thair, Florence Strang in Campykis, Alexander Maltman in Anftruthir,
Charles Watfoun, notar thair, George Kin3eow thair, Thomas Kinjew, baillie in PittinThomas Rekie, maltman thair, James Chaiplane in Pittinweyme, weyme.
VOL. I. X

162 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1588.

Verdict. The faid Alelbune, being put to the knawledge of ane AfTyis of the
perlbnis aboiie writtin, wes conuict be thair delyuerauce, of the vfing of Sorcerie
and Wichcraft, with the Iniiocatioun of the fpreitis of the Dewill ; Ipeciallie, in
the vifioune and fomne of ane Mr William Sympfoune, hir couling and moderbrotheris-lbne, quha fche affei-mit wes ane grit fcoller and doctor of medicin, that
haillit hir of hir difeis in Lowtheane, within the toun of Edinburghe, qvihair
fcho reparit to him, being twell 3eiris of aige ; and thair cuming and ganging
be the fpace of fewin 3eiris, qulien icho wes helpit of hir leiknes, quhilk fcho had
quhan hir poiftee ' and power \\'es tane fra hir hand and fute ; continewing
thairby in familiaritie with him, be the fpace foirlaid ; dealing with charmes,
and abufing of the commoun people thaiinvith, be the faid airt of Wichcraft, thir
diners 3eii'is bypaft. — (2.) Item, for banting and i-epairing with the gude nychtbom-is and Quene of Elfame," thir diners 3eiris bypaft, as fcho had confeft be hir
depofitiounis, declaring that fcho covdd nocht fay reddelie how lang fcho wes
with tharae ; and that fcho had freindis in that com-t quhilk wes of hir awin
blude, quha had gude accpientance of the Quene of Elphane, quhilk mycht half
helpit hir : hot fcho wes quhyles weill and quhyles ewill, and ane qvdiyle with
thame and ane vthir quhyle aM-ay ; and that fcho wald be in hir bed haill and
feir, and wald nocht wit qiihair fcho wald be or the morne : And that fcho faw
nocht the Quene thir fewin 3eir : And that fcho had mony guid freindis in that
court, bot wer all away now : And that fcho wes fewin 3eir ewill handlit in the
Court of Elfane and had kynd freindis thair, bot had na will to vilfeit thame
eftir the end : And that itt wes thay^ guid nychtbouris* that haillit hir vnder
God : And that fcho wes cuming and gangand to Sanct Androus in liailling of
folkis, thir faxtene 3eiris byjjaft. — (3.) Item, conuict of the faid airt of Wichecraft, in fa far, as be hir Depofitioune fcho confeft that the faid Mr Williame
Sympfoun, quha wes hir guidfchire-fone,^ borne in Striuiling, his fader wes the
Kingis fmyth, lernit hir craft, quha wes tane away fra his fader be ane mann of
Egypt, ane gyant, being bot ane barne, quha had him away to Egypt with him,
quhair he remanit to the fpace of tuell 3eiris or he come hame agane ; and that
his fader deit in the meane tyme for opining of ane preift-buik and hiking
vponne it : And that the faid Mr Williame haillit hir, fone eftir his hame cum-

■ Poii/tie, potejtas. " Tlie brownies or fairies, and llie Queen of Faery, (q. d. elf-hame ?) ' These.
' 'In the liindor end of Ilarvell, on All-Hallowe'en, When ourGood-neiglibours does ride, if I read richt,
Some buckled on a bunewand and fome on a bean, Ay trottand in trouj)s from the twilight ;
Some faidled a flie-ape, all grathed into green, Some hobland on a hemp-llalk, hovand to the bight;
The King of Pharie and his Court, with the Elf Queen, With many elfiili Incubus was ridand that night.
Tiiere was an Elf on an ape, an wafel begat, Into a pot by Poraathorne ;
Tliat bratibart in a bulle was borne ; They fand a nionfler on the morn,
War faced nor a cat.' Flyting againjt Pobcart, Watson's Coll. Part III. p. 12.

* Grandfatlier's son, paternal uncle. He is called ' liir coiifing and moder-brotheris-fone,' above.

21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 163

ing. — (i.) Iteini, that fcho being iu Grange-mure, with the folkis that pad to
the Mure, Itho lay doun feik alane ; and thair come ane man to hir, cled in grene
clathis, quha faid to hir, ' Gif fcho wald be faithfull, he wald do hir guid ;' and
that fcho feing him, cryit for help, hot nane hard hir ; and thane, fcho chargeit
him, ' In Godis name and the low he leuit one,' that if he come in Godis name
and for the weill of hir faull, he fould tell : Bot he gaid away thane, and apperit
to hir att ane vther tyme,ane luftie mane, with mony mene and wemen with him :
And that fcho fanit hir and prayit, and paft with thame fordir nor fcho could
tell ;' and faw with thame pypeing and mirrynes and gude fclieir, and wes careit to Lowtheane, and faw wyne punchounis with taffis with thame : And
qidiene fcho tellis of thir thingis, declarit, fcho wes fairlie toi-mentit with thame :
And that fcho gait ane fair ftraik, the fyrft tyme fcho gaid with thame, fra ane
of thame, quhilk tuke all the jjoittie^ of hir car fyde fra hir, the mark quhairof
wes blae and ewill faurrit f qiiliilk mark fcho felt nocht, and that hir f3^d wes
far war .^ — (5.) It km, that fcho faw the guid nj-chtboiu-is mak thair fawis,^ with
panis and fyris ; and that thay gadderit thair lierbis, before the fone ryfing, as
fcho did : And that thay come verry feirfull*' fiuntymes, and fleit^ hir verry fair,
and fcho cryit quhene thay come : And that thay conae quliyles anis in the
audit dayes, and quhene fcho tauld laft of it, thay come to hir and boiftit" hir,
fa3'ing, fcho fould be war handlit nor ofbefoir ;" and that thaireftir thay tuke the
haill poiftie of hir fyde, in lie foirt, that fcho lay tuentie oulkis'" thaireftir : And
that oft tymes thay wald cum and fitt befyde hir, and promefit that fcho fould
newir want, gif fcho wald be faithfull and keiji jM-omeis ; bot, gif fcho wald fpeik
and tell of thame and thair doingis, thay fould martir hir : And that Mr ^Villiame
Sj'mpfoun is with thame, quha haillit hir and teichit hir all thingis, and fi)eikis
and wairnis hir of thair cuming and faulfis hir ; and that he was ane 30ung man
nocht fax 3eiris eldar nor hirfelff ; and that fcho wald feir quhene fcho faw him ;

' ' Ane carling of the Queue of Pliaieis, That ewill-win geir to Elphynie careis,

Through all Braid-Albane fcho lies bene, On liorlbak on Hallow-ewin ;

And ay in feiking certayne nyghtis, As fcho fayis, with fur filiie wyciitis ;

And names out nychtbouris fex or fewin, That we belevit had bene in heawin.

Scho faid fcho faw thame weill aneugh, And fpeeiallie gude AiiM Salcleugh,

The Secretare and fundrie vther ; Ane WilUame Si/nifmie, iiir mother brother,

Whom fra fcho lies refavit a buike, For ony herb fclio lykis to luike :

It will inflruct hir how to tak it; In laws and fiUubs how to mak it;

With ftones that mekill niair can doe, In Leich-craft, wliair fcho layis them toe.

A thowfand maladeis fcho lies mendit. Now being tane and apprehendit,

Scho being in the Bilcho])is cure, And keipit in his Callcll fure,

Without refpect of warldlie glamer, He pail into the Witchis chalmer.'

Leytnd of the Sifchop of Si Androis, p. 321.
^ Pm(Jiie, jtotejlas, viz. took the power of her left side from her. ' Uifcoloured and ill-looking.

■* Worse. * Salves, ointments. '' Modern Scotch, ' f<!aisome,' frightful. '' Terrified.

" Boasted, rated, scolded, threatened. •' She should be worse handled than formerly. '° Twenty weeks.

164 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1588.

and that he will apj^eir to hir felff allane before the Court' cum ; and that he
before tauld hir how he wes careit away with thame out of middil-eix-d : And
quhene we heir the quhirll-wind blaW in the fey, thay wilbe commounelie with
itt, or cumand fone thaireftir ; than Mr Wilhame will cum before and tell hir,
and bid hir keip hir and fane hir, that fcho be nocht tane away with thame
agane ; for the teynd of thame^ gais ewerie 3eir to hell. — (6.) Item, of hir confeffioune maid, That the laid Mr Williame tauld hir of ewerie leiknes, and quhat
herbis fcho Ibvild tak to haill thame, and how fcho fould vfe thame ; and gewis
hir his directioune att all tymes : And in fpeciall, fcho faid, that he tauld hir,
that the Bifchop of Sanct Androus^ had mony feikneffis, as the trimbling fewer,''
the palp,^ the rippillis" and the flexus ;' and baid hir mak ane faw" and rub it
on his cheikis, his craig, his breift, ftommak and fydis : And ficlyke, gaif her
directiounis to vfe the 30W mylk,** or waidraue'" with the herbis, claret wyne ;
and with fimie vther thingis fcho gaif him ane Ibttin" fowll ; and that fcho maid
ane quart att anis, quhilk he drank att twa drachtis, twa findrie dyetis.'^

' Before the Court of Elfame. ^ A tithe, or tenth part of them. This singular part of the prevailing superstition, the Editor has seldom before met with. It suggests a strange idea of a kind of intermediate state of existence, maintained by the ' guid nichtbouris,' through the medium of evil spirits ;
and for this extraordinary privilege, they were annually f/fc»«a/e(:?, or forced to pay tithe to ' Sathanas,'
their lord paramount. The icallydraigles of this foul nest were no doubt pitched upon for payment
of the annuity, and Maifter Williame was jealous of the fate of bis unfortunate relative, Alisoun.
In the introduction to the Tale of Young Tamlane, Sir Walter Scott remarks, ' This is the popular
reason assigned for the desire of Fairies to abstract young children, as substitutes for themselves in this
dreadful tribute,' (paying the kane, or teind, to hell.)

' Then I would never tire, Janet, In Elfifli land to dwell ;
But aye at every feven years, They pay the teind to hell ;
And I am file fat and fair of flelli, I fear 'twill be myfell 1'
The Editor begs to refer the reader to the Essay ' On the Fairies of Popular Superstition,' in The Border Minstrelsy, edit. 1821, vol. ii. p. 109.

' The celebrated Patrick Adamsone, Archbishop of St Andrews, ' fumnius Papanorum hoftis, inter
quos delituit extremo vite difpendio' ! That such a character as his grace should have stooped to take
advice of a poor witch for the cure of his bodily infirmities, appears strange indeed. ■• Fever and ague.
5 Palpitation at the heart ? ^ Weakness in the back and loins. " Probably the flux. " Salve.

0 Ewe-milk. '" Perhaps the herb woodroof? " Sodden. ''^ A pretty decent draught for an

Archbishop ! The claret and capon would prove more acceptable to his grace than oceans of ewe-milk,
and such like potations. In that cutting satire, ' The Legend of the Bifchop of St Androis,' his trafficking with Witches is thus recorded.

. ' Sic ane feiknes lies he tane. That all men trowit he had bene gane ;

For leitchis niycht mak no remeid, Thair was na bute to him hot deid.

He feing weill he wald nocht mend. For Phetanilia lies he fend.

With Sorceiie and Incantationes, Railing the Devill with invocationes,

With herbis, (tanis, buUis and bellis, Menis raeraberis and fouth-runing wellis ;

Palnie-croces and knottis of llreafe. The ])aring of a preillis auld tees ;

And in principio foclit out fyne. That vnder ane alter of (lane had lyne

Sanct .Ihones-nutt and the foure-levit claver. With taill and mayn of a baxter aver,

Had careit hame heather to the oyne, Cuttit off in the cruik of the moone;

Halie water and the lainber beidis, Hyntworthe and fourtie vther weidis :

Whairthrow the charming tuik lie force, They laid it on his fat whyte horfe.

As all men faw, he fone deceifit : Thair Saga flew ane faikles beaft.

This wald not ferve ; he fought ane vther, Ane devill duelling in Anllnither

Exceading Ciices in conceatis. For changene of Wlilfta meatis,' &c.

21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS 165

Sentence. The particulars of the procedure which took place in Court, and
of the sentence pronounced against this unhappy woman, are not inserted in the
Record : There is merely a marking in the margin of the Record, ' Conuicta et
Combufta.' The scene of her suffering was likely the Castle-hill of Edinburgh,
where, after being ' wirreit at ane ftaik,' she would be ' brint in affis."

^lauci:i)tei\

Jun. 22. — Adam Creychtoun, fear of Ruthvennis.

Being enterit on pannell as becam in our fouerane lordis will of before in ane
Court of Jufticiarie, hauldin in the tolbuith of Edinburghe, the xxij day of Maij
laftbypaft, for certane crymes, viz. the llauchter of vmq'" James Creychtoun att
the mylne of Ruthvennis, committit in the moneth of Februar laftbypaft, and
vmq'' Tyrie of Drumkilbo, committit in the moneth of December 1581 3ems ;
his hienes temperand juftice Avith mercie, for certane refpectis moving his
Maieftie be his Precept, &c. Ordanit the Dome eftir following, to be pronunceit
aganis him.

•Rex,

'Justice, Juftice-Clark and 50ur Deputes: We greit 30W weill. Forfamekle as Adam
Creychtoun ft'ear of Ruthvennis, being eallit and peifewit before 50W, for findrie crymes committit be
him ; and fpeciallie, for fe crewall flauchter of vmq'= James Creychtoun att ]>e mylne of Ruthvennis,
laitUe committit be ]ie faid Adam, vpoun lett puipois : ffor ])e quhilk, he being apprehendit and putt
in waird, witliin our Tolbuith of Edinburghe, and purfewit conforrae to Jie lettres direct pairvpoun ;
and nocht able to abyde oure lawis, he is becura in our will, to be pwneifl fairfore as we pleis. And
we mynding, that fie ane horribill fact fould nocht paffe without fom pwnieifment, att the erneft fuit of
oure rycht traift coufing, Johnne Erll of Mar Lord Erlkein, and fum vthir refpectis mouing ws, lies
fparit the executioxm of ])e faid Adam to ])e death, for Jie crymes foirfaid, vpoun J)is conditioime, that
within ])e fpace of . . . dayis nixt eftir Jie dait lieirof, that he fall depart furth of oure realme, and reraane furth of ])e famin, in perpetuall baneilment and exyle, (luring all the dayes of his lyftyme ; with
certificatioun and' he fail3ie and do in ])e contrar, that he being att ony tyme heireftir apprehendit

' Heiring how Witches wi-ang abufit him. The Kirkmen calld him and accufed him,
And fcharplie of theis pointis reproved him, That he in Sorcerie beleavit him,
Whairthrow his faule mycht come to (liaith, The Witche and he confefifing bayth,
Scho tuik fome part of white wyne dreggis, Wounded rayne and blak hen eggis,
And made him droggis that did him gude,' &c. — Dalyell's Scottish Poems, ii. 318.
' Whether the following entry in the Books of Privy Council has reference to a relation of ' Maifter Williame,' the Editor leaves to the reader to determine.

Apud Edinburgh, quinto Scptemhris, anno, S;c. Ixxvij" (1577.) The quhilk day, Capitane Johnne
Vddart become actit and obleift, as cautioner and fouirtie for Maifler Thomas Symfoun, fumtyrae feruand to vmquhile Thomas Dauidfoun ypothicar, That the faid Maifler Tlionias fall remane within this
realme and nocht depart furth of the famyn in tyme cuming, without fpeciall licence of my lord Regentis Grace, vnder the pane of fyve hundrcth merkis. And Johnne Symfoun, minifter at Kennowy,
obleill him to releif the faid Capitane Johnne of the premiflls, and off all pane and dangeare that he
fill happen to fullene thairthrow.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Johnne Vddart with my hand, Joiin'ne Symsoun minifter with my hand.

- An, if.

166 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1588.

witliin our realme, be ony of oure judgeis or vtlieris cure fubiectis, that ])e panis of death falbe execute
vpoune hiui, witliout ony mercy. Quhairfore, it is oure will, and we command 30W, that incontinent
eftir fe fycht heirof, 30 infert ])is oure Declaratioun in 3 our act of Adjoumall, to remane fairinas decreit of convictioune aganis the faid Adam, in tyme cuniing. Subfcryuit with oure hand, att Dumfries, the auchtene day of Junij, 1688.

< JAMES R. J. M. Cancellarius.'

Sentence was pronounced by the Juftice accordingly.

Jul. 2.— Robert IVrBRAm of Almagill.'
Dilatit of the flauchter of vniq'^ Archibald Newall, biu'ges of Drumfreis ; committit in Apryll, 1587.

Peksewaris. Preloquitour.

Efter Hill the relict, Mr Dauid M^Gill, aduocat. Mr Johnne Ruffell, Jolinne Halyday.

The faid Robert ]VrBrair produceit ane Precept, fublcryuit be the ICing and
his Chancillar, orderand the mater to be continewit ; quhilk the Juftice obeyit,
' Drumfreis, tercio Itineris, xv dierum.'^

131 J- WiUiame OUphcuit, Justice-Depute^
Jul. 22. — Comperit William Commendater of Pittinweme, as Preloquitoui- for him, (the faid Robert JVrBrair,^) and thair in judgement, in prefence of
the faid Juftice-depute ; feing that vmq'" Archebald M'Brair of Almagill (of that
Ilk) wes execute for the faid flauchter, and that the faid Robert wes innocent
thairof, offerit in the faid Robertis name to refer for his part of the fatisfactioune
of the faid flauchter, gyft of efcheit and vthir mater debatabill betuix lum and
Efter Hill, the relict of the faid vmq'^ Archebald Newall, prefent att the bar,
and piu-fewar of him, to be modifeit and decydit be the Kingis Maieftie, or ony
foure of his hienes Counfall : And the faid Eftir Hill anfuerand be Mr Dauid
M^Gill of Nilbet, aduocat for his hienes interes, lykewyis perfewar, declarit that
his hienes defyrit hir to piu-few the law ; and fwa refufit to refer the faid mater
in maner aboue written. Quhairvpoune the faid "\A'^illiame Commendater of
Pittenweme afkit ijiftrumentis.

(Jul. 23.) — This cafe was continued, firft to July xxiij."
(N0V.2.) — It was then delayed toNov.ij, when the pannell ju-oduced Letters
of Remiflioun, granted by the King in his favor ; Thomas Stewart of Gaftoim and
Walter Gladftanis of that Ilk, having become fureties, ' ad fatiffaciend. partibus.'

' See Jan. 23, 1587-8. ^ pjpgio, Johnne Lyndfay de Covintoune : ' Releuit heireftir be his entrie.' ' Plegio, Andrew Blair de Ardblair. ■• When ' the Kingis Maieftie haifing conimandit
the perfewaris and defender, to fubmit all materis debetabill betuix thame, to four Lordis of the .Selfioune, the Juftice continewit this mater to the xx\'iij day of Julij inftant.'

22Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I67

[Mr Johne Grahame and Mr JVilliame Oliphanf, Just/ces-Dejmfes.l

Jul. 26. — JoHNNE MyLLar ill MiddiU Cairny, and Merioiy Blaikie
in Cairny.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the flaiicliter of vmq'^ Williame Robertfoun in
Cairny, in bewitching of him ; committit in Apryle, 1585 : And for Adultei'ie
committit be athir of thame with vthiris.

Continued to the Juftice-aire of Perth, ' tercio Itineris, xv dierum.'

[_Mr JVilliame Oliphant, Justice-Depute.~\

Aug. 22. — Sill James Hammiltoun of Crawfurd, knycht, and Marioun Hammiltoun his dochter naturell.
Hew Somerwall in Carfwall, oft tymes callit to haif produced our fouerane
lordis lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, &c. to tak fouirtie of Sir James Hammiltoun and Marioun Hammiltoun, that thay fould haif comperit befoir the Jultice or his deputes the laidis day and place, in the hoiu-e of caufe, and vnderly
the Law for the ffilthie cryme of Inceft, committit be athir of thame with
vther thir lax jeiris bypaft ; lauchfuU tyme of day bid din and nocht produceand, the famin wes thairfore amerciat in the i^anis contenit in the Actis of
Parliament.

Sep. 3. — Mr Robert Dowglas, im-ovoH of Lynclowdene.
Robert Lord Sanquhar become pledge and fouertie, that the faid Mr Robert
Dowglas fall compeir before the Juftice or his deputes, the thryd day of the nixt
Juflice-air of the flierefdome of Drumfries, or foner, quhene or quhair it fall
pleis our fouerane lord, vi)oun xv dayes wairning ; and vnderly the law, for airt
and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Sir Robert Maxwell of Dinwiddle, knycht,
committit in October laftbypaft ; and vther crymes contenit in the lettres direct
thairvpoun, vnder the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

\_l\Ir James Wardlaw, Ju.stice-lJcpute.^

iuset of a ^;Jaj)i9t anli ^eminain priest.

May 7, 1589. — Johnne Lowrie, duelland at the Waft-port of Edinbnrghe.

Dilatit of the trellbnabill RelTett, lupplement, mantening, intercomoning and

furnefmg of meitt, drink and herberie to Mr Robert Rriice, confeffit and avowed

Papift and femiuarie Prieft, conuuoun enemie to Goddis truth and Ci'iftiane go168 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1588.

vernment ; committit in July, Jaiiuar, Februar and March, 1588 and 1589.
Item, for doing of fauour, relfetting, fuppleing, mantening and defending of Mr
Robert Bruce, feminarie Preift foirfaid, within his hous at the Waft-port, in the
monethis foirfadis, he being oure fouerane lordis rebell.
Persewaris, Mailler Dauid M'Gill. Preloquitouris, Mr Johnne Ruflell, Alexander King.

It is allegit for the pannell, that in this judgment na perfoun can be put to
the knaulege of ane Affyis, without thay wer fummond vpoun xv dayis warning,
except perlbnis dilatit of TrelToun and tane in flagranti crimine. The Aduocat
allegis that the fainyn fuld be repellit, in refpect that the faid Johnne Lowrie
wes conftitut prifoner ; and the King may tak him furth of prifoun, and put
him to ane Aflyfe.

May 8. — Johnne Lowi-ie, vpoun pannell, cummis in his Maiefteis will,
for geving of meit and drink, as ane commoun tawerner, to Mr Robert Bruce,
ane 3eir fyne or thairby in Januar laftbypaft, a denner at athir tyme allanerlie,'
without ony nichtis ludgeing ; and that vjjoun the faid Mr Robertis expenffis,
nocht knawin him to be ane Preift : And denyis expreflie the haill remanent
pointis of Dittay, fen ony deid done be him to the faid Mr Robert fen the executioun of the laft Proclamatioun, quhilk was vpoun the xxvj day of Februar
laftwes. And vpoun the faid Declaratioun and offer, takis inftrumentis that he
is ready to abyd ane Affyis for the reft of the Dittay'.

Mr Dauid M'Gill younger aduocat, produceit the Dittay and defyrit proces.
May 9. — The Juftice accepts the offer of coming in the Kingis will, ' according to his hienes Warrand and Precept prefentit in Jugement ; and ordanit
cautiovu; to be reflauit of the faid Johnne.' His cautioners were, ' James Couper
merchand, burges of Edinburghe, and Martine Lowrie, burges thair.'

\_Mr James Wardlaw and 3Ir Edward Bruce, Justices-Deputes. '\

May 13. — Archebai.d Wauchop of Nudrie, 3ounger, George Boig
ferwand to the Lard of Cragrailler, "Williame Lauder brother
to the Laird of Bannochie, Williame Craig ferwand to Craigmiller, Richard Bigum (Bigholme ?) alfo his ferwand and
Thomas Kame, fmytlie in Nudrie.
Dilatit of the flauchteris of vmq'" James Giflert of Sherefhall, vmq'^ Johnne
Giffert his brother, and vmq'" Robert Caife in Dalkeith, committit in July laftbypaft ; and als of the llauchter of vmq''^ Johime Edmeiftoun, brother of Dauid
Edmeiftoun of Wowmett ; committit in March laftwes.

' Only.

22Jac. VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. I69

Persewaris for ShereflTljall. Persewaris for Johnne Edmei- Preloquitouris for the pannell.
Johnne GifFert, father-brother to Aouii. Maifter Thomas Craig,

vmq'" James Giftert of Sbereffhall, Sir Johnne Edmeiftoun of that Ilk, Mr Johnne Preftoun,
James Hammiltoune, The Lord Hwme, The Laird of Brunfloun,

Mr Dauid M'Gill, Aduocat. The Laird of Seflcfurd. The Laird of Ormeirtoun.

The Juftice, eftir dyuerfe and findre allegeances and anfueris proponit and
maid be ather of the parties, continewit the mater to the morne at ten houris.

\_3Tr Johnne Russell, Justice-Depute.^
May 14. — The quhilk day comperit Mr Johnne RufTell, Aduocat, and
prefentit ane Commiffioun vnder the Signet, of the deit the faid xiiij day of
May, fubfcryuit be tlie King and Chancelair, ordinand him to be Juflice in the
mater abouewrittin to Mr Edwai'd Bruce and James Wai'dlaw : And according
thairto, wes fuorne for adminiftratioun of Juftice.

Comperit Mr Dauid Makgill of Neifljet, Aduocat, and produceit the roll of
Aflyife, fubfcryuit with his hand.
Persewar, Maifter Dauid Makgill. Prelociuitouris, Mr Johnne Prefloune, Mr Thomas Craig.

Allegis, that the Juftice can nocht proceid aganis the Laird of Nudrie and
his complices, for the flauchter of vmq''' James Giffert, Johne Giffert his brother, and Richart Caife, in refpect, thay half fund caiitioun, vpoun xv dayes
warning, actit in the buikis of Adiornall ; and in refpect, thay are nocht tane hi
Jlagrante crimine, nor 3it is that ane cryme of Leife-majeftie ; and thay being
vnder cautioun, mvn ' be warnit on fyftene dayis : And producit ane Act of
Adjornall, fubfcryuit be the Juftice-Clerk. The Aduocat acceptis the Act, and
thinkis the alleagence to be reflbnabill.

The Juftice findis the allegeance maid yefterday anent the cautioun vpoun
fyftene dayis warning, nocht to be relevant in refpect of the Kingis ^Vai'rand :
And ordanis. the faidis perfounes to be put to ane AflTyfe for all the crymes foirfaidis ; hot continewis the Laird of Nudrie and remanent perfounes foirfaidis,
and putting of thame to ane Alfyife for flauchteris of the faidis James Giffert,
Johnne Giffert his brother and Richard Caife, in refpect of the act of Cautioun
producit.

ASSISA.

(L) Maifter Patrik Hepburne of (6.) James Dimlop of that Ilk, (11.) James Cochrane of BarGilmeitoun, (7.) Mr Patrik He])burne of bachla,

(2.) WilliameLauderof(in)Dunl)ar, Smetoun, (12.) James Hwme in Dunbar,

(3.) VV' illiame Wallace, 3 ounger of (8.) Johne Spreiill of Cowdene, (13.) Williame Wallace, minifter
Johnftoun, (9.) James C'reyilitoun, 5 ounger of Faill, .

(4.) Neill Montgumrie of Lang- of Brunftoun, (14.) Thomas Seytoun of Northrig,

fchaw, (10.) James Henderfoun, 3 ounger (15.) Sir Williame Lauder of Hal-

(5.) Aula M'Cawla of Arucapill, of Dryden, toun.

* Man, must.
VOL. L Y

170 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589.

The Affyis defyrit the Dittay to be fworne, according to the ordour. The
Aduocat allegis that the Kingis Dittay aucht nocht to be fworne be him. The
perfonis of Alfyife afkit inftrumeutis that na man wauld fueir the Dittay.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfonis of the Affyis abonewritten, being chofin, fuorue
and admittit, pall furth altogidder out of Court to the Comifaill-hoiis of Edinburghe, quhair thai efter the cheling of Neill Montgumi-ie of Langfchaw, Chancellair, thay reffonit vpoun the haill pojaitis of Dittay, and thairwith being ryply aduyfit, re-enterit agane within the faid Court, and be the mouth of the faid
Chancellair, fFand, pronuncit and declarit the faidis ]Villiame Lauder, Williame
Ct'dig and Thomas Kame, to be acquit and clengit of the flauchteris of vmq''
James Giffert of Sherefhall, Johnne Giffert his brother and Richerd Caife ; cominittit in July laftbypaft. As lykwayis, be thair delyuerance in prefence of the
faid Juftice-dejiut, ffand, pronunceit and delyuerit, in ane voce, the faidis Archehald Wauchope of Nudrie, George Boig, Williame Craig and Thomas Kame,
to be acquit, clengit and innocent of the llauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Edmeftoun,
brothir to Dauid Edmeiftoun of Wowmett, and of the hmting and wounding of
George Dauldlbun in his .... kne, be the fchoit of ane piftolett ; and of the
liurting and woiuiding of George Hwid, ferwand to the Lard of Edjneftoun, in
his leg ; committit the moneth of Merch laftbypaft.

Apud Edinbueghe, xiiij Maij, anno 1589 — The quliilk day, at xij
hoiu"is efter midnicht or thairby, caution wes found for the perfonis of Aflife as
follows.'

(1.) James Adamefoun, buvges of Etl', and Mr Tlioraas Fifcher, burges thai)-, Ten thowfand markis.

(2.) James Adamefoun, burges of Ed', and Geo. Douglais, fear of Langnudrie, Tlu-ee thowfand markis.

(3.) Johnne Arnot, provell of Edinburghe, Fyve thowfand markis.

(5.) Tliomas Fifclier, burges of Ed', Sir Williame Lauder of Haltoun, knycht, Fyve thowfand mai-kis.

(6.) Johnne Watt, fmyth, burges of Ed', and .... Cant, burges thair, callit Lard Cant, Fyve thowfand markis.

(7.) James Adamefoun, burges of Ed', Ten tliowfand markis.

(8.) Johnne Arnot, proveft of Ed', and Johnne Watt, burges thair, Fyve thowfand markis.

(9.) George Douglais, jounger of Langnudrie, and James Adamefoun, burges of Ed', Three thowfand markis.

(11.) Joimne Arnot, proveft of Ed', Three thowfand markis.

(12.) James Adamefoun, burges of Ed', and Mr Patrik Hepburne of Smetoun, Tua thowfand markis.

(14.) George Douglas, younger of Langnudrie, and James Adamefoun, burges of Ed', Fyve thowfand markis.

(15.) George Douglas, jounger of Langnudrie, and James Adamefoun, burges of Ed', Fyve thowfand markis.

' Instead of again enumerating the whole of the Assise, reference is made to the number prefixed
to each Assisor's name, in the foregoing list. Montgomerie of Langfchaw, Heuderfouji 30unger of
Dryden and Williame Wallace, did not find security.

22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 171

The famyn day, ilk ane of the AlTyfouris foirfaidis quha hes fund the faid
fouirtie, obleift thame, thair aris, executouris and affignais, to freith, releif and
keip fkaithles thair cantionaris refpective foirfaidis, of the fouirtie aboixewi-ittin,
ilk ane of thame for thair awin partis as is aboue fjiecifiet, and of all panis con-"
tenit thairin, at the haudis of oure fouerane lord and his hienes thefaiu'air, and
all vtheris qiihome it efFeiris.

[Mr WilUame Ol'tplmnt, Justice-Depute.']

^lauiiljter.

May 20. — Thomas Maistek of Boyid, James Boid of the Kippis,

Alexander Boyd, bail5ie of Kilmernok, James Slofe of that Ilk,

Thomas Roife in Bondland, and Johnne Craufurd in AVelftoim.

Dilatit of the flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Mure in the ^Vall ; committit in the

moneth of Auguft, 1571.

Persewaris.

Johnne Mure, eldeft. fone, Robert Stewart and Micliael Stewart, kinifmen of the motheris fyde.

Preloquitour for the panuell, Mr Johnne Skene.

The partie pafl fra the perfute of Johnne Craufiu-d ; quhairvpoun he afkit
inftrumentis.

Letters of Remiffioun, granted by the King in favor of the parties, and Caution found for fatiffying the parties. Cautioners, Captain Thomas Crawfurd of
Jurdanehill, Johnne Scliaw of Grenok, "Williame Mure apjierand of Rowallane
and Thomas Mailer of Boyd, bind themfelves to relieve the above fureties.

May 20. — Robert Lord Boyd.
Robert Boyd of Banhaith, cautioner for the entry of Lord Boyd at the Juftice-air of Ayr, or on warning of xv days, for the fame flauchter.

[Curia Justiciarie s. d. n. Regis tenia in pretorio de Edinburgh superiore,
xxiiij die mensis Maij anno 1589,^J<?/' discretos viros 3Iagistros Eduardum
Bruce, WiUiehnum OliphanUct Jacobum Wardhiu\Justiciarios Deputafos.']
May 24. — The quliilk day the Juftices abouewritten producit oiu- fouerane lordis Commiffioun efter fpecifeit ; quhilk thay defyrit to be inlert in the
procefs for thair Warrand ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Commission ybr the Trial of George Erle of Huntlie, Dauid Erle of Crawfukd and

Francis Erle Bothuell.
' James, be the Grace of God, King of Scottis. To all and findrie oure leigis and fubdittis, quhouie
it eflferis, to quhais knaulege tliir oure lettres fall cum ; Greting. Witt 56 Ws, to Iiaif maid and conltitut, and be thir oure Lettres, with the awyife of the Lordis of our Secreit Couufaill, makis and con172 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589.

Ititutis Mr Eduard Bruce, Johnne Coluile, Williame Oliphant and James Wardlaw, oure Juflices in

that pairt, conjunctlie and leueralie, to Jie effect vnderwiittiu ; Gewaud, grantand and committand to

thame, oure full frie, and plane power, generall and fpeciall command, expres bidding and charge,

Court or Courtis of .Tufticiarie, within our tolbuithe of Edinbnrghe, to fett, begin, affix, hald and continew, as oft as neid beis ; and thairin George Erie of Huntlie, Dauid Erie of Crawfurde, Frances Erie

Bothueil, to call, and be Dittay to accufe, and to the knaulege of AlTyis to put, for certane treflbnabill crymes and offencis comraittit be thame, tending to the fubuerfion of the trew Religioun, and perrelling of oure perfoun and eftait ; and as thay fal happin to be fund culpabill or innocent, to minifler

and cans juftice be miniftrat vpoun thame, conforme to the lawis of oure realme ; fettis' to mak be

oallit, abfentis to amerciat, trefpaffouris to puneis, vnlawis, amerciamentis and efcheatis of the faidis

Courtis to alii, lift and crave, and the famyn to our thefaurair and his deputtis, in oure name, to inbring and delyuer; aflyfis ane or ma to fummond, cheis and caus to be fuorne, ilk perfoun nocht comperand, vnder the pane of twa hundreth pundis ; clerkis, feijandis, dempftaris or vtheris officiaris of

Court neidfull to mak, creat, lubllitut and ordane : ffor the quhilk oure faidis Commifiionaris falbe

lialdin to anfuer to ws fairvpovin. The quhilk to do we committ to 30W, conjunctlie and feueralie,

oure full power be ]iir oure lettres, delyuering ])ame be 50W dewlie execute and indorfat agane to fe

berar. Gewin vnder oure Signet, and fubfcryuit with oure hand, att Edinburghe, the xxiiij day of

Maij, and of our regnne the xxij ^eir, 1589.

' JAMES R. Cancellarius."'

George Erll of Huxtlie, Lord Gordoun and Bad3enocht, &c.,
Frances Erll of Bothwell, Lord Creychtoune and Haillis, &c., and
Daiiid Erll of Craufurd, Lord Lyndefay, &c.
Dilatit of certane treflTonabill crymes, contenit in Dittay to be gewin in be our
fouerane lordis Aduocatt, following.

Preloquitour for the faid Erll Crawfurd, Mr Johnne Scharp.

pRELOQUiTOURis for Frances Erll Bothwell, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Johnne Preftoune.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill of Nifbet, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

Comperit the faid Mr Dauid M^Gill, and produceit the Dittay vnderwrittin ;
quhairof the tennour followis.

Dittay or Indictment againfl the Pannell.

George Erll of Huntlie, Frances Erll of Bothavell, Dauid
Erll of Crawfurd ; ge and ilk ane of 30W, ar indyted, for pe trelTonabill
traffiking with llrangearis and minifteris of flr(angearis), fie as Jefuites and feminarie preiftis, and fum excommunicate jierfounes, for alteratioun of J)e religioune prefentlie profeffit within ]jis realme, according to pe finceritie of pe
Ewaugell, the quyet of pe fame ftableifcht be commoun confeiit of oure fouerane) lord and thre Eftaitis, in Jje Parliament haldin att Lynlythqw, the t(enth)
day of December 1.585 3eiris ; and to pe owerthrow of his hieues perfoune.
And this 5e and ewery ane of 50W, with Coronall S(empill), Johnne Cowper,

' Secta, suits of Court. " Sir Jolm Maitland, Lord Thirleftane.

22Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I73

Robert Bruce, Mr Edmond Hay, Mr William Creychtoune, Thomas Nifbet,
Johnne Chifliolme fone to vmq'" James Chifliolme of Cro . . . ., Daiiid Grahame
of Fintrie and diners vtheris, albeit native Scottifmen, (in pe haill monethis of
1588, att ]je leift in ane or vther of ])ame,) 3it in J)is treflbnabill traffique, minifteris (of) ftrangeris : And 3e and euery ane of 30W, hes reflauit m . . . (men ?)
and Spanifch gold fra pame ; att pe leift, ane or vther of ])ame ; to ])e effect
and for Jje cauflis foirfaidis ; committing thairthrovv, maift hie and manifeft
treflToune ; quhilk 36 can nocht deny. — To Ipe taikin that this is trew, ge, Frances
Erll of Bothwell, in fomer laftbypaft, to \)g effect foirfaid, refTauit fra Cornall
Sempill ane thowfand crownis ; and laitlie fra France, (fra ))e) Erll of Erroll,
ane vther thowfand crownis ; and diftributit pe fame be 3oure felff and vtheris
att 30ure command, with vtheris foumes of money, refTauit be 30W fra Mr

■\Valter Lyndfay, to ' waigeit fouldiertis,

horfmen and futemen, rafit be 30W laitlie, in pe monethis of March and Apryle ;
expres aganis the Acte of Parliament, forbiddand rafing of fouldartis, or waigeing of ony men of weir, except be fpeciall commifTioune of Jje Kingis Maieftie,
quhilk 3e had nocht. In ref'pect quhairof 3e haif incurrit ])e pane of Treflbun.
as is abouewrittin. — And 3e, George Erll of Huntlie, in lykewayis, hes refTauit
J)e foume of three thowfand crownis or ))airl)y, the laft 3eir, fra Dauid Grahame
of Fyutrie, to J)e effect foirfaid ; quhairthrow 3e haif incurrit the lyke cryme.
And this is trew, and 3e nor ather of 30W can deny J)e fame. — Secundlie, ge
and ather of 30W ar indytit, for ]je fuffering of 3oure felffis to be induceit be J)e
refTauing of ]5is money aboue fpecifeit, to ]>e effect foirfaid, for contentment of
)je ftrangearis, papiftis minifteris, qnha traffikit with 30W, to ]>& trefTonabill effectis aboue fpecifeit, to haif maid and fubfcryuit ane Baud, aganis 3oure dewtie,
being fubiectis, and fubfcryuit ])e fame be 30ure handis, and diners vtheris 30ure
coraplicis, fie as the Erlis of Montroife and Erroll att Stregmartene, Glentamier
and Auld-Montroife refpective, in fie moneth of March laftbypaft ; Bandis being
forbiddin be fie law of J)e countrey ; befydis dy vers conventicle aithis, leagis and
confpyraceis, haif bene maid be 30W, in })e monethis of Februar and IMarch, to
j)e trefTonabill effect aboue fpecifeit, reiterat and renewit be 30W and diuerfe
vtheris 30ure complices and pairt-takaris in Jse tonne of Sanct Johnneftoune, in
\)e monetli of Ajiryll laftwas ; att ]>e quhilk tyme, 3e maift trefTonablie tuik J)e
faid tovuie, and maid 3oure felffis maifteris pairof, of jilayne intentioun to haif
ftuffit^ Jse famin, and kepit it aganis his Maieftie and his authoritie. For executing of ])e quhilk confpyracie, 36 and ather of 30W, wer art, part, red and

' Part of a line cut by binder from tlie top of tliis and some of the followinp leaves. The edges of
tlie leaves are also pared, so as to take away several words. * Victualled and furnished.

174 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589.

counfall, of ])e convocatting of joure felffis, 30ure afliftaris and pairt-takaris in
amies, to liaif takin the Kingis Maiefteis hous and palice of Halyruidhous and
his hienes perfoiine, fupponit be 50W to be thairin ; and to haif flayne findrie
his gracis faithfull counfalouris and feruandis, fpeciallie Sir Johnne Maidland
of Thirlftane, knycht, his Maiefteis chancellar, with diuers vtheris : Quhairthrow, 3e mycht haif vfit his Maiefteis perfoune, alterit and fubuertit ])e prefent
eftait, att 30111- awin will. For performing quhairof 36 tryiftit 30ure meting att
J)e Quarrell-hoillis, betuix Leith and Halyruidhous, in March laft ; and 5e,
Frances Erll of Both well, wraitt to Dauid Erll of Crawfurd, to haif cumit in
amies to Leith, and to haif kepit ]>& appointit place and t5ane be 30ure felf, as

indeid 36 the l^rll of Crawfurd come ..*.... in amies, to ]je effect })e

])e toun of Kingorne ; the Erll of Huntly, froiiie ])e n . . . . (north?)

partis to ]>e. toun of Dumfermling ; the Erll of Montroife, to ])e Halzairdis in
Auld Liftoun ; and 3e 30ure felff, to Jje faid place appointit. Quhilk 36 nor
ather of 30W can deny. — Iteim, 36 and ather of 30W ar indytit, fforfamekle as
his Maieftie being aduerteift of 3oure treflbnabill Confpiraceis abouewrittin, for
his awin bettir preferuatioune in keping his realme and liegis in quyetnes, haifing fend [Williame] Reidpeth, ane of his Maiefteis gaird, in Apryll laftwes,
with his Maiefteis letteris to his louitt counfaloure and officiar, Mr Thomas
Lyoun of Baldu(kie) Maifter of Glammis, his grace thefaurar to ])e tounis of
Dunde and Sanct Johneftoune ; quhairthrow his Maieftie, be convocating of
his liegis, mycht repres )je rebellioune aboue fpecifeit ; 36 be your felfF, feruandis
and collegis, tuik the faid [Williame] Reidpeth, kepit and detenit him prefoner,
impedit and ftayit ])e executioun of his grace's letteris for convocating of his
trew liegis to ))e mantenance of his eftait and preferuatioun of his Maiefteis
perlbun : Quliairthrow 3e declarit 30ure felffis to haif rebellit aganis ))e fame,
and thairthrow to haif incurrit J)e cryme of Treftoune. — Iteim, 3e and ilk ane
of 30W ar indytit and accufit, that in J)e moneth of Apryll laft, in hie contempt
of his Maieftie and his auctoritie, 3e tuke vpoun 30W to aflage J)e hous of Kirkhill, and war airt, pairt, red and counfall ))airof, ffor externiinatioun quhairof
36 rafit fyre; and in takin pairof, conftrained the faid MrThomas Lyoune, being
))airin for ])e tyme, to rander him pi-efoner vnto 30W, careit him with 30W to ])e
hielandis and place of Auchindoune, kepit him captiue be a lang fpace ; incurrand ])airby the cryme of Treflbun. Quhilk is trew, and 36 can nocht deny pe
fame. — Item, ge the Erll of Bothwell ar indytit, that fforfamekill as 36 directit
ane conimiffioune to ))e Erll of P^rroll to Sanct Johneftoun, to move \ni Erllis of

Huntly and Crawfurd with all Jjair to ciun ford^^'art and joyne J)anie

felffis with 30W, on this fyd of ])e waiter of Forth, before his grace forces wer
ademblit ; quhilk 56 did, in ))e moneth of Apryll laft : Quhairvnto (thay) agreit ;

22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I75

and 5it newertheles, for takin tliat this is trew, the Erll of Crawfurd for execu-,
tioune heirof, enterit in coiiteiiiptuous termes witli the Erll of Erroll. In refpect qiiliairof, 36 and eiiery ane of 30W hes incurrit pe cryme of Tr(effoune.) —
Item, ge and ather of 50W ar indytit, that fforfamekill as his Maieftie and his
counfalouris, vnderftanding ])\r treironabill vproiris and confpiraceis, aboue raentionat, directit his herauld, ^Villiame Rankeku-e, to niak j^roclamatioune att pe
mercat-croce of Abirdene, for delyuei-ance and putting to libertie of his gracis
thefaiirar, officiar of eftait and his gracis counfaloure : The faid herald cumand
to Jje mercat-croce of pe faid toune in his coit of armour, the fame wes reft fra
liim, his Maiefteis letteris directit lyk^v^ns to be proclamit for convocatioun of
his faythfuU liegis, wes maiit contempteouflie and treffonablie takin fra him, in
pe moneth of Apryll foirfaid, be 30W and athir of 30W, 5oure aflfeftaris and
pairt-takaris, fie as Johnne Lefley of Boquhane, Johnne Gordoune of Bukie and

Muri'ay of Cowbairdie ; 36 and euerie ane of 30W, being art, pairt, red

and counfall Jjairof, kepit and mantenit with 30W, in 3oure cuinpany, the foirfaidis perfounes, actuall doaris Jjairof. Quhairthrow 36 half rebellit aganis his
Maieftie and his autlioritie, and })airby incurrit pe cryme of Treflbune : Quhilk
36 can nocht deny. — Item, ge and ather of 50W ar indytit for pe trefTonabil
making of proclamatiounes in his Maiefteis name, for convocating of his liegis
in armes againis his Maieftie and his authoritie, makand ftclanderous and vntrew I'epoirtis in pe faidis proclamatiounis, that his hienes wes kepit captiue
aganis his will ; efter pe tyme that his Maieftie maift wyiflie and advyfitlie ratifeit the Act of Pacificatioune and maid pe Act of Reftitutioune, for quyeting of
pe haill eftait of this countrey ; and j)is done with pe aduife of his Parliament, att
LjTilythqw, the tent day of December 1585 : Declaring alfwa, that it Ibuld be
Treflbune to ony man to oppone him felff aganis the faid Pacificatioun and Act
of Reftitutioun, and quyet eftait of pe countrey than eftableiflit ; and that the
opponeris fould inciu* pe pane of lyfTe, landis and guidis. In making of pe
quliilkis Proclamatiounis, 36 and ather of 30W lies vlurpit his Maiefteis authoritie ; and in contrawening of pe laid Act and contentis Jjairof, hes incurrit pe
jiane of Treflbune. — Item, ge and ilk ane of 30W ar indytit, for airt, pairt, red
and counfaU, of convocating and bringing togidder of ane oift and armie, on
horfe and fute, aganis his Maieftie ; he with his faithfuU and trew fubiectis
being A'poun pe ffeildis. for reprefllng of thir 30ur ti'eflbnabill actis, conl'piraceis
and deuyfes befoir reheriit ; his Maieftie felf, in propir perlbun, with his oift
and armie, hailing paft fordwart fra his Palace of Halyruidhous, to the toun of
Cowie, within the Sherefdome of Kincarne, quhair his Maieftie being in pro])ir
perfoun, 3e haid convocat ane hoft of thre thowfand perfounes inarmit, maid
oreflbunes and gaif perfuafiounis to thame, that 5e haid his Maiefteis guid-will

Vre CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589.

and confent thairto ; animating thame to cum fordwart ganis his Maieftie, promefing to ' and is of weritie ; and fa 36 come

^ of Abirdene with difpleyit banneris to pe Brig of Die, of

mynd to haif afral3iet his hienes oift and armie, his grace maift roj'all perfoun
being thairin ; gif that a part of 30ur faid armie, (being) his Maiefleis guid and
faithful! fubiectis, induceit and perfuadit be errom- to accumpany 30W, vnderftanding pair awin errour, haid nocht (knawing his Maiefleis awin perfoun to
be in the fieiklis) alluterlie refufit 30U, in 30ur faid trelTonabill procedingis.
And this is trew, and 36 can nocht deny the fame. — Attouk, ge Frances Erie
of Botlmell ar indytit and accufit, that 3e in the monethis of Januar, Februar,
Merche and Aprile laftbypaft, at leift in ane or vther of thame, hes reffauit fra
minifteris and ferwitouris of ftrangeris, Papiflis, quhome 36 in dyueris tymes
liaid in cumpanie with 30W, dyuerfe fowmes of monie to the rafing of men of
(weir) and wagit men, or horfe and fute, expres aganis the dewtie of ane faythfuU fubiect, and come fordwart with thame to Dal(keith), his hienes being in
Edinbui-ghe for Jje tyme : Of ])e quhilk wageit men .... (3e) rafit ane number
of Inglifmen, Grahmis and vtheris, inhabitantis of Levin and Newcaflle ; the

reft of 30ur wagit nowmer, being outlawis, theiffis and rebellis, Scottifmen, fie as Robert Maxwell , brother and fonnes of ])e lard of Greneheid ;

ftrak drummis and (raifed) vp men of weir on fut and hors, maid refidence with th(ame) at Dalkeith, come with thame to Leith and dyueris vtheris
pairtis of the cuntrey, boftit' and manaffit the trew fubiectis jjairof with Jjair

wtter wraik. And this treflbnabill deid 3e reiterat (his Maieftie) being

in the north in proper perfoun, for reprefling the vjjroris (aboue) writtin,

in J)e monetli of April] foirfaid ; and campit 30ur felff . . . (at) Dalkeith aganis
his Maieftie, as gif 5e liaid bene fubiectis in tyme of ware, denuncit to ane forrane prince and ene(my.) Qidiairthrow, 3e haif committit maift hie and manifeft Treffbun (aganis) his Maiefteis perfoun, Actis of Parliament and

lawis of this realme (And) this is trew, and 3e can nocht deny the fame.

— Item, ge and ilkane of 50W ar indytit for the trefTonabill and fpeking aganis the peax and quietnes of the cuntrey (and his) Maiefteis libertie concludit in Pai'liament be the Eftatis thairof, quhilk (3e and) euery ane of
30W did at dyuers tymes, and fpecialie in the (moneth) of Merche laftbypaft, his Maieftie being vpoun the feildis and at his willing to perfuad

his hienes, that he was fen the making of the (forefaid) Act at Lithqw,

haldin and detenit cajitiue, and that he would lo (lofe his ?) lyf gif he returnit to his awin toiui of Edinburghe at quhat tyme alfo ettit vpoun the

tidiing and apprehending of his gracis maift nobill (perfoun ?) opiJoining

' A line cut off by the binder's unskilfulness. ' Three words pared off here. ' Thi'eatened.

22Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

177

30ur felff and euery ane of 30W to his Maiefties Actis of Parliament : It

being provydit be the faidis Actis, that quhafoeuir opponit

confpiring abrogatioun or derogatioun f)airof, directlie nor indirectlie, thay fould incur the pane of Treffoun and Leife-maieftie, to
be execute with all rigour.' As the extract of the faid Act, heirwith producit
to fchaw, beris. And this 3e haif done, incurrand J)airthrow the panis of Treffoun, as is abouewrittin.

The quhilk day, the faid Dittay and euerie point thairof being oppinlie red
in judgement, and efter diners anfueris maid thairto be the faidis Erllis of
Huntlie, Bothwell and Crawfurd,

The faid Erll of Huntlie declarit, that nochtwithftanding in his conicience he is innocent of fie odious crymes, as of before he denyit, 3it haifing
cxmi in vpoune that refolute purpois, to fubmitt him felff in his Maiefteis will ;
and nocht willing ony wyife to be contradictour to his Maieftie ; hoping alwyis
that his Maieftie will wie^ the circumftances of his acculatioun ; he lubmittit
him felff maift huimblie in his Maiefteis will, following his intentiouu that he
had att the fyrfl incuming : And that, of the haill pointis of the Dittay. — The
Aduocat afkit inftrumentis of the Ei'll of Huntleis cuming in the Kingis will. —
The Erll of Huntlie proteftit, that they mycht be hard heireftir, nochtwithftanding his cuming in will, be all lefum meanis that he may, of law.

The famin day, the Erll Bothwell, eftir the reding of the haill pointis of
Dittay, and eftir diueris anfueris gevin thairto, and ane plapie denyall thairof
as thay wer lybellit, become in oiu* iouerane lordis will, for rafing of men of
weir, convocating of oiu' fouerane lordis liegis, brokin men, borderaris, and, as
he alledgeit, pledgeis for flaying of the truble of the bordouris, att Dalkeyth ;
and bringing of thame to Leyth : And crawis his Maieftie maift huimblie pardoun thairfore. — The famin day, the faid Erll of Bothwell become in our fouerane lordis will, for fubfcriptiouu of ane Band, infafar (as) it is contrar the law
and Actis of Parliament, alwyis nocht importing Treftbune : and offerit him
reddy to abyde the tryall of ane Aflyis for all the reft of the crymes contenit in
Dittay.

The famin day, the laid Dauid EiiLL of Craavfurd, eftir the reding of the
faid Dittay vnto him, and that he had aufuerit thairto and euerie point of the
famin, denyit the haill pointis thairof, as thay wer qualifeit : And become in the
Kingis Maiefteis will for being vpoun the ground quhene my lord Thefaiirer

' Mutilated by tlie binder. The words of the Act (19 Jac. VI. cap. 21) are, ' And that na itianer
of perfoun nor perfonis, of quliatfunievir (|iialitip or degree thay be, pretend to argun, inipung, tmueli,
folift or lawbour, for pe iufriugeiiig, breking, wraftiug, abrogatioun,' &c. ' Weigh.

VOL. I. Z

178 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589,

come furth of the hous of Kirkhill, or ony cryme his Maieftie may imput to
him thairanent.

' in his Maiefteis will for being with

the Erll of Huntlie Abirdene, but ony convocatioune vpoune his

pairt, witli of all perfwading of his hienes liegis againis his Maieftie,

as is contenit in Dittay.

The Aduocat afkit inftrumentis of the becuming of the Erllis of Bothwell
and Crawfiu-d in the Kingis will. — The faid Erll of Bothwell protefted, that na
mair be putt to ane Aflyile, hot fafar as i-eleuant of the law.

ASSISA.

Tlie Lord Hammiltoiine, Tlie Lord of Catlicart, The Erll of Marfchell,

Tlie Erll of Angus, The Laird of Pittarro, The Lord Seytoune,

The Erll of Mortoune, The Conftable of Dunde, The Lord Somerwell,

Tlie Erll of Atholl, The Laird of Cloilbunie, The Lord of Altrie,

The Erll of Mar, The Laird of Lag, The Lord Dingwall.

The Aduocat, eftir accufatioun of the faidis Erllis of Crawfurd and Bothwell
be Dittay, in prefens of the faidis perfounes of Alfyife, proteftit, in cais the Affyfe clange thame, for Wilfull Erroure.

Verdict. And immediatlie eftir chefing, fwering and admitting of the perfounes of AlTyis aboue fpecifeit, and accufatioun of the faidis Erllis of Bothwell
and Crawfurd be the Dittay above mentionat ; the faidis perfounes of Affyis
removit thaim felffis altogidder furth of Court to the Counfal-hous ; quhair thay
fyrft, be voting, chufe the faid Willeame Erll of Angus Chancillar of the faid
Affyife, and thairefter relfonit and votit vpoune the pointis of the faid Dittay,
and gave thair determinatioun thairvpoun. ^Vith the quhilk determinatioun,
being throuchlie auifit, thay re-enterit agane in Coiu't, in jirefens of the faidis
Juftice-deputes, quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Daniel Erll of Cruirf'urd to l)e fj'lit. culpable and
convict of the trelFonabill taking of the toun of Sanct Johneftoun, in the moueth
of Apryll laftwas, and maid him felff maifter thairof, of playne intentioune to
have kepit the famin aganis the Kingis Maieftie and his (authoritie). — [And
liclyke, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid] Frances Erll of Uothwell convict of airt, i)airt, red and counfall of convocatioun of the kingis liegis, his affillaris and pairt-takaris, and cuming to the Quarrell-hoillis, in Merch or Apryle
laftwas, for altering of the prefent eftait. — And ficlyke, ffand, pronunceit and
declarit the faid Danid Erll of Crawfnrd to be fylit, culpable and convict of
airt and pairt, red and counfall of convocatting of the kingis lieges, att the tyme

quhen the Erll of Bothwell come to the Quarrell-hoillis, for cuining

to the toun of Kingorne a-gait-wart, for alteratioun of the prefent eftait. — And

' A line is pared away here.

22 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I79

ficlyke, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the laid Daiiid Erll of Cra\vfurd to be
fylit and convict of airt, pairt, i-ed and counfall of expngnatioun and alTageing
of the hous of Kirkhill, and rafing of fyre thairat, committit in Apryle laftwas :
Incurrand thairby the pane of TrefTonne. — And ficlyke, ffand, pronunceit and
declarit the faid Dauid Erll of Crawfurd to be fylit, culpabill and convict of
art, pairt, red and counfall of convocatting and bringing togidder of ane oift
and armie, on hors and fute, aganis his Maieftie ; he, with his faithfuU fubiects,
being vjioun the feildis for repreffing of thair treffonabill confpiraceis and dewyfis above reherfit, his JMaiefties felff in proppir perfoune, with his oift and
annie, haifing paft fordwart fra his Palice of Halyrudhous to the toun of Cowie,
within the Sherefdome of Kincardin ; quhair his Maieftie being in proppir perfoune, he and the reft of his collegis convocat ane oift of thre thowfand men,
perfounes inarmit, maid oreflbunes and perfwafiounes to thame, that thay had
his Maiefteis guid will and confent thairto, animating thame thairby to cum
fordwart aganis his Maieftie, in'omefling to waiTand thame at his gracis handis ;
howbeit the contrar is and wes of veritie : And fa thay come fordwart fra the
toun of Abirdene with difplayit baners to the Bryg of Die, off mynd to half affail3eit his hienes oift and armie, his gracis maift royall perfoune being thairin,
gif that a pairt of thair faid armye, being his Maiefteis gvide and faythfuU fubiectis, induceit and perfwadit be erroure to accumpanye thame, vnderftanding
thair awin errour, had nocht knawin his Maiefteis awin perfoune to be in the
feildis, and alluterlie refufit to affift thame in thair faid treffonabill procedingis.
— And ffand and pronunceit the faidis Dauid Erll of Crawfurd and Frances
Erll of Bothwell to be Innocent and acquit of the remanent poyntis of the Dittay aboue writtin.

The King would not consent to the execution of these Peers, and the matter
was allowed to hang up for above two years, when the folloM-ing entries occur
in the Books of Adjournal, which are inserted here, rather than mider their
respective dates, for the sake of connexion.

[Curia Justiciarie, *. d. n. Regis tenia in Pretoria de Edinhurghe, per
Magisfros Johannem Graham deHahairdis, et Vmphridem Blijnschelis,
Justiciarios Depufatos.'\

m)t mtnffis iMill toU)«rU(0 tTje (QxW of l^uutltt.

(July 16, 1591.) — The quhilk day, cornperit ane n()l)ill and mychtie lord,
George Erll of Huntlie, Lord Gordoun and Bad^enoch, &c., being enterit on pannell ; appoyntit be his Maieftie to couipeir this day and place, before the Juftice

180 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. (1591.)

or his deputes, to heir and fee his hienes will declarit, anent the crymes quhairfore he become in will, in ane Court of Jufticiarie, haldin in the tolbuith
of Edinburghe, the xxiiij day of Maij, the 3eir of God I'^.V.lxxxix 3eiris :
Conijierit lykewyis, Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranftoun-Ryddell, Aduocatt to our
fouerane lord, and producit ane Letter, fubfcryuit be his Maiellie and Chancillar,
direct to the Juftice, Juftice-Clerk and thair deputes, for pronunceing of the will
v^lderwrittin ; quhilk he defyrit to be infert and regifli'at in the buikis of Adiornall. Quliillv defyre the Juftice-deputes fiudand reffonabill, ordenit the famin
to be infert and regiftrat in the faidis buikis, according to the Aduocattis defyre
and confent ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

His Makjleis Warrand.
James, be Jie grace of God, King of Scottis. To our Juftice, Juftice-Clark and fair deputes,
greting. Forfamekill as, in ane Court of Jufticiarie, lialdin in our tolbuith of Edinburghe, be our
Juftices in Jiat pairt, conftitute be Comniiffioun, vpoun fe xxiiij day of May, the 3eir of God I^.V'.
Ixxxix ■^eiris ; oure rycht traift coufing, George Erll of Huntlie Lord Gordoune and Bad3enoch, &c.
being accufit vpoune fe Dittay gewin in againis him, be our Aduocate, contening in effect fe Proces
following : ffor fe treflbnabill traifiking with ftrangearis and minifteris of ftrangearis, fie as Jefuites,
ferninarie preiftis and excommunicat perfounes, for alteratioun of fe Religioun prefentlie profeffit
within our realme, accoirding to ])e finceritie of Jie Evangell, to ]>e overthrow of our perfoun ; and
reflauing of meney and Spain^ie gold, to Jie effect and for J>is caus foirfaid : And for fubfcryveing of
ane Band to fe treironabill effect above writtin, att Stregmartene, Glentanner and Auld Montroife,
aganis pe lawis ; befydes diuers vtheris articles : And treflbnabill taking of fe toun of Sanct Johneftoune : And for airt, pairt, red and counfall of Jie conuocatioune maid in amies for taking of our hous
and Palice of Halyrudhous, and our perfoune fupponit to haif bene Jiairin, and to haif flayne oure
rycht traift coufing and counfalour, Johnne now Lord of Tliirlftane, oure chancillar, and diuers
vtheris ; and for performing fairof tryifting to haif niett att fe Quarrell-hoillis, betuix Leith and
Halyruidhous, and cuniing agaitwart in armes to fat effect, to Dumfermling : ffor fe treflbnabill taking of Reidpeth, ane of our gaird, keping of him prifoner, and impeding of f e execution of oure

lettres for f e niantenance of our eftait ; ffor f e treflbnabill aflageing of f e hous of Kirkhill, raifling of
ffyre, and taking of Thomas Maifter of Glammis our tiiefaurar, and keping of him captiue in fe place
of Auchindoune : ffor airt, pairt, red and counfall of f e treffonabill taking of oure coit of armour fra
Williame Rankelour, herald, makand oure Proclamatioun at oure mercat-croce of Abudene : ffor fe
treflbnabill making of Proclamatiounes in our name, for convocatting of our liegis, makand ftlanderous
reportis, as thouch we had bene kepit captiue : ffor f e treflbnabill convocatting of ane oift and armie of
our liegis aganis ws at f e brig of Die, of mynd to haif invadit our armie quhair we wer prefent in perfoune : ffor his treflbnabill fpeiking aganis f e peax and quyetnes of fe countrey (and) our libertie
concludit in Parliament ; incurrand f e panes of our Act maid f airanent : As the faid Dittay att mair
lenth proportis. Quhairof, albeit the faid Erll in his confcience affermit him felff' to be innocent, 5 it
baiting cum in vpoun fat refolute purpois to fubmit him felff in our will, and nocht willing to be contradictor to ws, hoping that we wald wie the circumftanees of his accufatioune, he fubmittit him felff
niaift huiniblie in our will ; as the Act of our Adiornall maid f airvpoun beris. And now we liaifing conlidderit fe huimbill and voluntar fubniiflioun of oure faid coufing, and weit f e circumftanees of his faid
accufatioun, nawyis myndit to feik fe wrak and fubuerfioun of f e nobill bluid and ancient hous of our
realme, hot to recover and retene thame in dew obedience ; haif fairfore of our fpeciatl grace reflauit
and acceptit our faid coufing, George Erll of Huntlie, in our mercie and favours ; and declaria our de-

(24) Jac. VI. CRIMINAL, TRIALS. 181

erniinat will be fir prefentis, that he is and falbe frie, remittit and difchargeit of all fe crymes aboue
writtin, contenit in ]>e faid Dittay, ffor ]>e quhilkis he come in cure will as faid is ; and of all actioime
criniinall and ciuile that we half, had, lies or may haif aganis him, his lyflTe, landis and guides fairfore :
As also reintegrattis and rehabilitatis him to his gui<l fame and warldlie honour, and to vfe all lauchfull deidis, in judgement and outivith, as gif he had newir cum in cure faid will, or that the faidis
crymes uor nane of fame had newir been committit. Quhairfore it is oure will, and we command
50W, that 3e pronunce pis our will in Jugment, and regiftrat fe famin in pe buikis of our AdiornaU,
quhilk we command our aduocatt to lee done and perfytit, and to confent to fe famin in our name.
For pe quhi kis, thir prefentis falbe to 50W and him fufficient waiTand. Gewin vnder our signet and
fubfcryuit with our hand, att Halyruidhous, the auchtene day of Junii, and of our regnne the tuentie
foure 3eir, 1591.

JAMES R. Cancillahius.
(Jul. 16, 1591.) — And ficlyke, the faid Juftice-deiJiite, for obedience of
the faid charge and command, pronunceit and declarit oppinlie in Judgement his
Maiefteis will above writtin, viz. that the faid George Erie of Huntlie Lord
Gordoune and Bad5enoch is and falbe frie, remittit and difchargit of all the
crymes abouewrittin, contenit in the faid Dittay, for the quhilkis he become in
his hienes will as faid is ; and of all auctioune, criniinall or ciuile, that his hienes had or may haif againis him, his lyffe, landis and guides thairfore : As alfg,
that his hienes reintegrattis and rehabilitatis him to his guid fame and warldlie
honoure, and to vfe all lauchfull deidis in judgement and outwith as gif he had
newir cum in will, or that the faidis crymes nor nane of thame had newir been
committit, in maner and forme as is aboue mentionat. Quhairvpoime the faid
nobill and potent lord afliit Act of Court.

l^CuRiA JusTiciARiE, s. cl. H. Regis, tenta in Pretorio de Edinhurghe xxv
Jidij, 1591, per M. Joannem Grahame, <§c.]

30ome of dfoifaltour promiitceit atyanis dfranres, sumtpme CrU

(Jul. 25, 1591.)— The quhilk day, comperit Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranftoun-Ryddell, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, and produceit the Kingis Maiefteis
Warrand, fulifcrpiit be his hienes ; and defyrit the famin to be infert and regiftrat
in the buikes of AdiornuU and Dome, to be i^ronunceit according to the ordinance
thairof, vpoun Frances Erll Bothwell Lord Creychtoun and Haillis, &c. becum
in will and convict of the crymes thairin contenit. Off the quhilk letter and
Warrand the tennour followis.

The Kingis Maiefieis Warrand for pronunceing Dome.

At Edinburghe, the tuentie fyve day of Junij, 1591 3eiri8. Forfamekill as our fouerane lord,

calling to mynd and haifing confiddeiit how Frances Erll of Bothwell Lord Creychtouiie and Haillis,

and Grit Admerall of fiis realrae, in ane Court of Julliciaiic haldin in Jie Tolbuith of Edinburgh, the

xxijij day of May, the 3eir of God I^.V'.lxxxix 5eiri8, being dilatit and accufit be dittay, and perfewit

182 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. (1591.)

judiciallie be Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranftoun-Ryddell, his hienes Aduocat, in his Maiefteis name, for
rafing of men of weir, convocatting of liis liienes licgis, brokin men borderaris att Dallieyth, bringing
of fame to Leith ; and ficlyke, for fubfcriptioune of ane Band contrar ye law and actis of parliament ;
become in his hienes will for ]>e farain : And ficlyke, being indytit and accufit be dittay for airt and
pairt, red and coinilall of convocatioun of his liienes liegis, his affiftaris and pairt-takaris, and cuming
to fe Quarrell-hoillis in March or Apryle, in pe 3eir of God I'".VMxxxviij or Ixxxix seiris, for altering
of Jie prefent eftait, and putt to fe knawledge of ane condigne Affyife fairfore, wes be fair delyuerance
fund culpabill and convict of f e famin. Quiiilk will and dome his Maieftie haifing diflerit to half bene
declarit or pronunceit aganis the laid Erll, vpoun iioip of his better behaviour and amendment, in tymes
f aireftir. Neuirtheles, the laid Frances Erll of Bothwell, forgetfull of his hienes clemencie, being dilatit of crymes of Trellbune and confpiraceis aganis his hienes awin perfoune, and dillructioune f airof
be Nicromancie and Wicheraft,' wes fairfore committit to waird within fe Caitell of Edinburghe,
thair to liaif remanit quhill he had bene tryit of f e famin, be f e knawledge of ane condigne Affyife, or
vtherwyis as accordis of f e law ; fwa that he mycht half bene declarit ather culpabill or innocent of
f e famin : Nochtwithftanding, the faid Frances Erll Bothwell lies laitlie brokin f e faid waird (and)
vpoun his perell efchewit furth f airof, takand f airby the crymes of Treffoun vpoun him, quliairof he
wes dilatit, and for fe quhilkis he wes committit within fe faid waird. Thairfore, our fouerane
lord Ordanis his will to be declarit, and Dome to be pronunceit aganis fe faid Frances Erll of Bothwell, in maner and forme as eftir followis. That is to fay, that he, be fe committing of fe crymes
aboue writtin, quliairof he become in our fouerane lordis will, and wes convict be ane condigne Affyfe
in maner aboue fpecifeit, lies committit Treffoun ; and thairfore that the dome of Forfaltoure fall be
pronunceit againis liim, that he hes forfalt lyffe, landis and guides ; to be applyit to his Maiefteis vfe,
to be vfit and difponit as his hienes fall think expedient. Subfcryuit be our fouerane lord, day, 3eir
and place foirfaidis ; and ordanis the Juftice, Juflice-Cierk and fair deputes to pronunce f e dome
aboue writtin, aganis f e faid Frances Erll Bothwell this day, but delay : As thay will anfuer to his
hienes fairvpoune. , JAMES R.

For obedience of the quhilk Warranil aboue written, the Juftice deput ordenit the faid Frances Erll Bothwell, be cuming in will and convictioune of the
crymes foirfaidis, in the Juftice Court aboue writtin, to half forfalt lyfTe, landis
and guides, and dome to be pronunceit thairvpoune ; Quhilk wes pronunceit be
the mouth of Williame Gray, Dempftar of the faid Coiu't : And ordanit the faid
Letter to be infert in the faid buikis of Adiournall.

[3Ir Edward Bruce, Justice-Depute.^

^laufiljtn — Conboratiou of \\)t Eitflw,

Jun. 19, 1589. — Sir Patrik Houston of that Ilk, knycht, Robert
Sherair, ferwand to the faid Sir Patrik, Johnne Dik, ferwand

' Birrel in his Diary remarks, ' TIic 22d day Junii, (1501,) the Earle of Bothwell brak ward out of
the Caflell of Edinburgiie, qulia had beine ther in prifone foine 20 dayis befor, for allegit Viclicraft,
and confulting with vitches, efpecially witli ane Richard Grahame, to coiifpyre the Kingis death ; and
vpone the 2.5 of Junii, the faid Earl Botliuell wes forfaulted, and intimatioue made thairof by opin
proclamatione at the Croffe of Edinburghe.' — DalyeU's Fragments, B. Dairy, p. 25.

(3-t)JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 183

to Patrik Houftoun his fonne, Patrik Widdome in Houftoiin,
Alexander Howfloun lervvand to Mr William Houttoun, Patrik Wancok, Robert Keffane alias Hill ferwaud to the 30ung
Laird of Houftoun.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the (lauchteris of vniq'° William Cwninghame, oy'
of the auld Laird of Glengarnok, and \'niq''' Johnne Cwningham his lone naturall; committit with convocatioune, of the cauffing of the faid Sir Patrik, the ferd
day of Apryle laftwes, vpoun fett purpoife and proviiiouue.

Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Renfrew, tercio Itineris, vel xv dierum.'

Jun. 19- — Sir Patbik Houstoun of that Ilk, knycht.
Dilatit of airt and i)airt of the crewell llauchter of vmq"' Robert Mvre, brother
to vmq'' Johnne Mvre of Cauldwell, and vmq'*' Andro Wilfoun in Wodfyde ;
committit in Aprile, Ij (1551) 3eiris.

Persewaris.
For the flauchteris of vmq'' W" and Johnne Cwninghame, For the flauchter of vmq'' Andro Wilfoun,
Johnne Cwninghame of Glengarnok, James Wilfoun.

William Cuninghame 30unger of G.

Preloquitouris in perfute.
The Lord Fleming, The M' of Sincler, Capitane James Cwninghame,

The Lord Sempill, The Laird of Balverie, Mr Dauid M'^Gill, aduocat.

Preloquitouris in defence.
Mailler Johnne Schairp, The Laird of Foulwode, W" Foulertoun of Dreghorne,

Mailler Johnne Prelloun, W™ Wallace 5' of Johnelloune, W'" Wallace, ferwand to Ardgovan.

Efter dyuerfe allegeancis and anfueris proponit be ather of the parties, the
.Tiiftice ordanit the mater to pas to ane Affyife.

The proceedings are not inserted in the Record. There is, however, a marking on the margin, showing that, in reference to Sir Patrik, the first case was
continued to the Juftice-aire of ' Renfrew, tercio Itineris, vel xv dierum ; Plegiis,
Domino Keir et ipfe ad relevandum.' In the second case, ' Ad RemifRonem pro
interfectione Andree Wilfoun ; Plegiis, Wilelmo Foulertoun de Dreghorne et
feiplo, conjunctini et divifim.' As to Robert Sherair and the next four, the diet
was ' paft fra ;' ' Plegiis, Johanne Sempill feniore de Fulwod et Dom. Houftoun
ad relevand.' Robert Kessane continued to the Justice-aire of ' Renfrew, tercio
Itineris, vel xv dierum ; Plegio, Dom. Houftoun.'

[Mr JF///iam OUphaui, Jiisf/ce-Dcpufe.]

MitiinQ fiom tlje l\uiti of SlbciUten.

Jun. 23. — George Craw in Peilhvallis, and William Craw in Swiuwode.
Dilatit for remaning fra the raid of Abirdene, ordanit to haif convenit at

Oe, grandson.

184 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589.

Edinburghe with all poffibill diligence, in Aprile 1589 : And for the treflbnabill

affifting to Frances Erie Bothuell, and vther confpiratoviris aganis his Maieftie.

Persewar, Maifter Dauid M'Gill 30unger, aduocat.
Proloquitouris in defence, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Edmond Hay.

Continued to the Aire of ' Forfar, tertio Itineris, vel xv dierum. Plegiis, Jacobo Sydferf, biirgen. de Edinburghe, at ad relevand. unufquifque pro fua parte.'

This is the first of many similar trials for abiding from this raid. They all
appear to have been settled by composition with the Treasurer.

[^Messrs Johnne Grahame, WiUiame Oliphcmt et James Wardlmv,
' ' Justices-Deputes.'\

Jul. 7. — Johnne Wetr, bal3ie of Lanerk, Johnne Bannatyne caUit
Katis Johnne and fifteen others.
Dilatit of the flauchter of vmq'^ Robert Johnneftoune, brother to James
Johnneftoune of ^Veftraw.

Persewaris, Florie Somerwell, mother. The Aduocat.

Continued to Aii*e of ' Lanerk, tertio Itineris, vel xv dierum.'
\^Mr James Warrllaw, Jusfice-JDepuie.l

;Sfivt-Ymm\s—MauQl)tcx,

Oct. 14. — James Johnstoun of that Ilk and Alexander Jardene
30unger of Apilgirth.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchteris of \anq''' Alexander Bail^ie
of Lytilgill, Rachell Bail3ie his dochter ; and for the treffonabill burning of the
Places of Moit antf Dauidlchaw ; and for the flauchteris of vmq'° Andro Aichefoune and Katherene Forreft ; and for the burning of the place of Lytillgill ;
committit in the monethis of Februar and July, 7efpect'tve, laft.

Persewah, Mr Dauid M^Gill of Cranlloun-Ryddell, 50unger.
Preloquitouris for the pannell.
The Erll Bothwell, The Lord Newbottill, Mr Thomas Craig,

The Lord Heres, Lochinver, Johnne Halyday.

Quha produceit our fouerane lordis lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be his hienes Aduocat againis the faidis perfones, for the crynies foirfaid ;
and defyi'it proces. The perlbunes on pannel afl^it inftrumentis that thay offerit
thame reddie to abyde the tryell of the law for the faidis crymes, difaflenting to
all continewatioune and protefling for relief of thair cautioneris.

The famin day, eftir diners allegeances proponit be the Aduocat aganis the
pannell and productioune of Lettres of Hoirning aganis the faid Laird of John23JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 185

ftoun, quhilkis wes produceit be Matliow Bail3e, fone to the faid vmq"^ Alexander ; and lykewyis the faid Mathow produceit ane vthir Warraud fubfcryuit be
the King, Ordaning this mater to be continewit quhill the morne. — ' Plegio,

Murray de Blakbarony, vnder the pane of ten thowfand merkis.'

Oct. 15. — The Pannell aflv inftrumentis of thair entrie and proteftis for
relief of thair caiitioune. — The lamin day comperit Mathow Bail3ie, and produceit
ane Warrand fubfcryuit be the King for continewatioune of the mater to the
tent dayof Januar nixtocum : Quhilk wes obeyit. — The pannell aH'iis Inftrumentis
of productioune of the Precept be Mathow Bail3ie ; and that thay difalTentit to
all continewatioun. ' Plegio, Domino de Blakbaronye, fub penis content, in
Actis Pax'liameuti.'

\^Messrs WiUiame OUphant and James IVardlaw, Justices- Deputes.']

Oct. 28. — Kathekene Roise Lady Fowlis.
Dilatit of certane crymes of AVichcraft.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill, Aduocat. Preloquitour, Mr Thomas Craig.
The quhilk day the faid Katherene afkit inftrumentis of hir comperance, and
that fche offerrit hir reddie to abyde the tryell of ane Ad'yfe, for all crymes that
can be laid to hir charge ; and in refpect na perfoun comperit to infift in hir
perfuit, proteftit that fche fould be fred of the waird quhairin fche remanit this
lang tjane, quhill tryell fould haif bene of hir, be ane Aftyfe of the faidis crpnes,
Quhilk tryell wes appointit this day. — ' Desert.' (See Jul. 22. 1590.)

\_Mr Johnne Grahame, Justice-Depute.']

Jan. 14, 1589-90. — Robert Linkhop in Leith, Williame Downie thair,
Johnne Watfoune thair.
Dilatit of the llauchteris of vmq''' Meftx'es Jeane Kennedie, fpous to Andro
Meluile, Maifter houfliald to our fouerane lord, Sufanna Kirkcaldy hir feruitrice,
Johnne Clapene burges of Bruntyland, and diuerfe vtheris perfounes, to the
nowmer of tlire fcoir of perfounis, quhilkis wes in ane boit, be rinnand of the
laid boit vnder fei, &c.

Persewaris.
Andro Meluile, Maifter boulhald, Alefoune Orrok for Lis fpous, Mr Dauid M'^Gill, Aduocat.
for his fpous, Johnne Clapene,

The Juftice continewit the mater vpoune certane dcfjTcs defyrit be Johnne
Bellendene baillie of the Regalitie of Brochtoune, to the thryd daj' of the nixt
Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Ediuburghe, or loner vpoune fyftene dayis warnVOL. I. 2 A

186 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1589-90.

ing ; and ordenit the pannell to find cautioun for thair entrie. — ' Plegio, Patricio
Monypenny de Pilrig pro omnibus.'

Preloquitouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Johnne Skene.
Feb. ?. — The quhilk day, comperit Johnne Bellendene, bail3ie of the Regahtie of Brochtoune, and delyrit, that the perfonnes aboue wa-ittin, duelland
within the boundis of the faid regalitie, dilatit of the crymes aboue mentionat,
mycht be replegeit furth of this Court, to the priviledge and libertie of the faid
Regalitie ; and offerit to find cautioune of Coloruith, for adminiftratioun of Juftice : Quhilk defyre the Juftice findand refTonabill, remittit the I'aidis perfonnes
to the jvuifdictioun of the laid Regalitie and baillie thairof ; quha fand James
Bellendene of Pendreich cautioune and loviirtie for the adminiflratioune of Juftice to the parties coniplenand, and vnder the pane of law : Lyke as Patrik
Monypenny of Pilrig become fouirtie for the faid Robert Linkhoj), ^Villiam Downie callit Laird Doivnie, in Leyth, come fouirtie for the faid William Downie
mariner in Leyth ; and William Lytill burges of Edinbm'gh, become fouirtie for
the faid Johnne Watfoun in Leyth, that thay fall compeir before the Baillie of
the Regalitie of Brochtoune and his deputis, within the tolbuith of the Cannogait, the xxv day of Februar inftant, in the horn* of cans, to vnderly the law, for
the crymes, refpective, aboue writtin ; vnder the jianis contenit in the Actis of
Parliament.

[3/r Jmnes JVardhnc, Jiisficc-Dcp/ifc.^

M>ovttv^ — ffiiEitcIjf raft — Cl)ilU--muri)ier.

Apr. 2S, 1590. — Meg Dow, now duelland in Gilmertoune.
Dilatit of Sorcerie and Wichcraft and for the crewell Mm-dreiffing of twa
30iing infant bairnis, the ane pertening to Beffie Rae in Gilmertoune.

JONET POLLOK.

Dilatit of the cafting of Jonet Archibald, hir awin bai'ne, in ane coilheuch, of
purpoife to half drownit hir.

Verdict. Thomas Tulloch in Edinburghe, chancillar of the Aflyis, deliuered
their verdict, ' that the jierfonnes aboue writtin was convict and fund culpable
of the crymes, refpecfliie, aboue writtin.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouthe of James Scheill, dempftar, pronunceit dome aganis the faid 3Ieg Dow ; that is to fay, to be tane to the Caftelhill
of Edinbiu-ghe, and thair wirreit at ane ftaik, and thairefter hir bodie brunt in
afles ; and all hir moveabill guides to be efcheit, &c.

With regard to Jonet Poli.ok, there is merely marked on the margin of the
Record, ' Wairdat. in Pretorio de Ed.' ; but what was the result of her imprisonment, does not appear.

23Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I87

[3fr Johniie Grahame, Jiis/ict'-Depiifc.']

Witai'ins mxH sljootfng of iJistolets iuitljin ^alact o( ?&ol2)iooUi)OH0e

Jun. 4. — James Gyb, fone to vniq'" Dauid Gyb, in Barreftounes.

Dilatit of contrauening of the Actis of Parliament and Secreit Counfall reJpective, in bering, wering and fchuiting of piilolettis, in the nioneth of Maij
laftwas ; and Junij inftant, fetting vijoune James Boyd of the Kippis the penult
day of Maij laftwas, with ane bendit piftolett, and fchuiting of him thairwith
throw the rycht fute, and hiu'ting and wounding of him with ane fword in the
rycht hand ; incontrair the tennoiu* of tlie Actis of Parliament maid in the
moneth of Maij laftwas, difchargeing all maner of perfomies to in^•ade vtheris
vnder the pane of deid.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill.

The faid James Gyb ofTerit him in the Kingis will for the crj^me : Quhairvpoun the Aduocat afkit inftruinentis, and proteftit for Wilfull Errour in cais
the Affyis fall acquit, in refpect of the offer.

Verdict. The Aflyis in ane voce, be thair delyiierance, ffyndis the faid
James culpabill, fylit and convict of vmbefetting of the hie way and paftage,
vpoune deidlie feid, rancour and malice to James Boyd of Kippis, burges of
Edinburghe, the i)enult day of Maij laftbypaft, foirnent the mercat-croce of the
faid bm'cht, the faid James being gangand fobii-lie vpoune the hie ftreit thairof,
as within our fouerane lordis chalmer of peax, di-edand na evill, harme, iniurie
or perfuit of ony perfounes, bot to haif levit vnder Godis jieax and om- fouerane lordis, and thair fetting vpoune him, and crewallie invading him with ane
piftolet and drawin fwerd for his flauchter ; fchuiting of him with the faid piftolet and thre buUettis in the rycht fute, and hurting and wounding of him
with his fword in the rycht hand, to the effufioune of his blude in grit quantitie ; vpovme fet puriwis, provifioune, auld feid and foirthodit fellony ; in contrar the tennour of the Actis of Parliament and Secreit Counfall respective maid
anent bering, wering and fchuting of piftolettis, and hiu'ting and wounding
thairwith aganis the tennoiu- of the Proclamatioune, gif it may be extendit
thairto ; in refpect that the faid James Gib confeffit the invafiouue, hurting and
wounding of the laid James Boyid in their jirefens, &c.

The famin day, comperit Mr James Carmichaell, Minifter, and producit the
Kingis Maiefteis ^Varrand, off the quliilk the teiaiour followis.

«Rex.

' Justice, Juflice-Clark, our Conftabill, Conftabill depute, Maifter Iioudiald and vtlier
Judgeis quliatfumeuir, appoyutit to fitt this fourt day of Junij iiiftant, in the caus pcifewit be our
Aduocat aganis James Gyb, fone to vniq'' Dauid Gyb, in Boirowllouiiis, We greit 30W weill. For188 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

famekle as the faid James may ather offer bimfelf at ony tyme in our will, or being convict be ane
Aflyis for the eryme underwrittin, may be remittit in our will : Leill throw miiloiawlege or dowbting
of our will, juflice and executioune of our lawis be delayit or fruftrat. We be thir prefentis declairis,
that forfaraekle as the laid James hes nocht fpairit nor feirit, fchamefullie and crewallie to fchute and
hurt our loving fubiect James Boyid of Kippis behind his bak, to the grit effufioune of his blude ;
and that within the boundis of our awin Palice and Chalmer, in proude contempte of Ws and mony
of our Actis of Parliament, Secreit Counfall and Proclamatiounis pafl Jiairvpoune ; and Jmirby hes
offerit ane perellous preparatiue and example to the reft of our fubiectis ; this being the firft fact coramittit in that forme, fen our returning to our realme or lang befoir ; quhilk, gif it be nocht condignelie
pwneift, to the example of vtheris that may promeis to jiame felffis impwnitie, and incourageing to
pi'akteis the lyk, nane of our beft affured fubiectis, of quliatfumeuir eflait or conditioune, may thynk
fame felffis fure of fair lyves. Thairfoir, we dedair that the faid James Gib fall fuffer the death,
and be put fairto without ony delay, as he hes worthelie deferuit ;' and this for declaratioune of our
will in the faid mater, quhilk ^e, and ilk ane of sow, fall nocht fail to do, and caus be done ; as je
will anfuer to Ws vpoune 5 our dew obedience ; kepand jiir prefentis for 5 our Wan-and. Subfcryuit
with our hand, att Halirudhous, the fourt day of Junij, 1590.

' JAMES R. M. Cancellarius.'

[il/r James Wardlaw, Justice-Depute. '\
Jul. 11. — The quhilk Aay, comperit Mr James Carmich ell, brothir-inlaw to James Boyd of the Kippis, and produeeit ane Precept, direct be cure
fouerane lord to the Juftice, and defyrit the famin to be red ; and conforme
thairto that James Gyb, fone to vmq"' Dauid Gyb, in Barreftounes, fould be
prefentit in this Court ; and that the I'amin fould be obeyit, lyk as the Juftice
for obedience thairof, caufit enter the laid James on paunell, and reid the lamin

oppinlie to him : Quhairof the tennour followis.
' Rex.

' Justice, Jullice-Clark and ^our deputes, We greit 50W hairtlie weill. Forfamekill as
James Gyb, fone to vmq"' Dauid Gyb, in Barreftounes, wes, be ane condigne Affyfe, laitlie convict
and condamnit to deid- before sow, for ]ie hurting and wounding of James Boyd of Kippis behind his
bak, and vn-a-warfe in his rycht fute, with the fchot of ane piftolett, and with ane fword in his rycht
hand : Quhilk dome of deid wes ])aireftir, vpoune certane refpectis, mitigat be ws ; and the faid James
decernit and condamnit to want his rycht hand, for ]>e cryme foirfaid : The executioun quiiairof hes
bene as jit delayit, att fe ernift requeift and defyre of the faid James Boyd of Kippis, to quhome the
wrang and offence wes done ; ane manne, mair willing apperandlie, vpoune repentance of his oft'endar,
to petie, pardoun and forgif, nor to feik revange of his offence, be fchedding of mair blude ; qnhais
Criftinne inclinatioune we can nocht hot allow. And now, being infonnit, that, in refpect fairof, certane gentilmen ar takand fe burding vpoune fame for f e faid James Gyb, hes for the allythment of
the faid James Boyd, maid certane offeiTis, and bundin and obleift fame, coniunctlie and feueralie,
vnder certane pecuuiall panis, that the faid James Gyb fall do fie homage to him, as he lall pleis command ; and als that the faid James Gyb fall willinglie baneife him felff furth of our realme, and fall

1 On the margin of the Record there is written, ' Convict and baneift fis realme, with his awin
confent and ])artie.' " The former Verdict of the Assise and Sentence are not inserted in the Record. It would appear that Boyd of Kippis had successfully used every influence with the King to
mitigate the sentence.

23 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 189

depart furth of ])e fame, how fone he falbe relevit furtli of fe Tolbuith of Edinburgbe, quhairin lie prefentlie remanis ; and fall newir returns agane within the fame, nor ony pairt pairof, during all pe
dayes of his lyftyine ; and fall do nor attempt na hurt nor llcayth to ]>e faid James Boyd, or ony of
his, in ony tynie cuming : As in ]>e Band and obligatioune maid Jiairvpoune, ordenit to be regiftrat in
fe buikis of Counfall, of Jie dait, att Edinburgbe and Saucbie, the twentie-fewin and twentie-nyne
of Junij lallbj'pafl refjieclive, at mair leuth is contenit. Qubairvnto the faid James Boyd, as We ar
crediblie informit, hes agreit ; qubairby, ^it agane, We being movit of our clemencie, to mollyfie and
of our royall auctoritie to difpens with the executioune of Jie Domes pronunceit ofbefore, and to agrie
to ])e making of Jie faid Band, and to condifcend to ]ie baneifment folrfaid. Oure Will is heirfore,
and we charge 50W, eftir Jie fycht heirof, 36 call the faid James Gyb before 50W, the xj day of Julij
inftant ; and of new pronounce and gif Dome of peq)etuall Baneifment aganis the faid James Gyb ;
and that with his awin confent ; conforme to pe Band and obligatioune foirfaid, maid fairanent to pe
faid James Boyd, in all pojmtis : And to inteq)one qour auctoritie Jiairvnto ; to half J)e llrent, force
and effect of ane dome and fentence criminal! in all tpnes cuming ; lyke as we, be ]>e tennour of J)ir
prefentis, willing to mitigat juftice with clemencie, efpeciallie quhair the oifendit partie is futear fairof,
ratefeis and apprewis the faid Band and obligatioun and baneifment contenit fairin, and all and findrie
vthir hedis, clauffis, conditiounis, articles and circumO.ances contenit in Jie faid Band, alfweill vnnamit
and nocht exprefl, as nameit and expreft in ]'ir prefentis, jiromittend. in verba Principis, newir to do
ony thing that may be preiudiciall or derogatiue fairto, in ony foirt, in ony tyme cuming ; difpenfand
of our auctoritie royall, with the faid former dome or domes alreddie pronunceit, fwa that the famin
fall newir half effect in tyme cuming, except in cais of contraveutioune, and according to fe tennour
of fe faid Band. Lyke as, we alfo interpone oure auctoritie to fe faid Band, and everie held, clans
and article Jiairof ; and for ])is effect, we ordaine and commandis 30W, to infert ]nr prefentis in our
buikis of Adiomall, and to intei-pone ^oure decreit and auctoritie Jiairto ; fwa that, in cais of contraventioun of ony point of fe foirfaid Band, executoriallis and executioune may pafs fairvpoune, according to the lawis of Jiis realme : And Jie faid Dome being pronunceit, that 56 putt him to libertie, be
fe caufe of fe faid James Boyd ; conforme to ])e obligatioun foiriaid maid to him ))airanent, that he
may depart furth of our realme conforme Jiairto : Kepand Jiir prefentis for jour Warrand. Subfcryuit
with our hand, at Halyruidhous, the nynt day of Julij, and of our regnne the twentie-thre jeir, 1590.

Sentence. According to the qiiliilk Precept, the faid James Gyb, being
prefentit on pannell, as faid is, and being requyrit, Gif he wald confent to the
faid Dome of baneifment ? Anfuerit, that he wes content thairwith. Thairfore,
the faid Juftice-depnte, be the mouth of the faid James Scheill, dempftar, \>yonunceit and decernit, that the faid James Gyb fall, with his awin confent, conforme to the Band and obligatioune abouewrittin, falbe perpetuallie baneift this
realme : and interponis his auctoritie to the faid Band, conforme to the faid
Precept, fwa that executoriallis may pas thairvpotme : And ordanit the faid
James to be putt to libertie, furth of the faid Tolbuith of Edinburgbe. QiUiairvpoune, the faid Mr James Carmichell afkit act and inftruinentis.

Uajjti^.iitfi: antr Celcliratdttr iWarviagcs after (L-.rcommuiticattoit.

Jun. 18. — Sir Thojias Ker in Auld Koxburcht, James Scott att
South Syntoun-mylne and Thomas AY-wbie in Hafiindane.
Dilatit for fuftening of the proces of Excommunicatiouu and contravening of

190 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590,

the Actis of Parliament, in baptefing of bairnis and making of manages, without ony functioune.

The famiu day, comperit Mr Dauid M'^Gill of Cranftoun Ryddell, Aduocatt
to our fouerane lord, and produceit the Dittay aganis the faidis perfounes :
quhairof the temiour followis.

Dittay againjt the Pannelh.

Sir Thomas Ker, James Scott and Thomas Newbie, ge and everie ane of 50W, ar indytit and
acculit, for lying vnder ])e horrible fentence of Excommunicatioune, feperat fra the fuiFrage and prayer
of fe Kirk, and merite of fe blude of Chryft, to pe damnatioun of 30ure laules, continewallie, fra fe
xx\^" day of March, the 3eir of God V''. fourfcoir-aucht ^eiris. — Item, ge and ewerie ane of 50W, ar
acculit, that flforfamekill as for 5 our mifbehaviour in 3oure functioune of minifterie and rederfchip, 36
being lauchfullie deprj'vit in fe moneth of March 1582 and in September 1583, refpective, 36 half
continewit, nochtwithflanding, in abufing of ]ie facramentis in mareing of findrie perfounes and baptefing of bairais.

Off the quliilkis crymes, thay com in oui* fouerane lordis will.

The King's Will and Sentence against the Pannels.
(Jun. 24.) — The quhilk day, comperit Mr Dauid M'"Gill, Aduocat, and
eftir the entering of the faidis Sir Thomas Ker, James Scott and Thomas Newbie, on pannell, as becum in will for the crymes of Excommunicatioune, and
declarit owre fouerane lordis will ; quhilk wes, that thay fould act thaim felfRs
vnder the pane of deid, newir to abufe the Sacramentis nor functioune in the
Kirk ; as alfo, that thay fovild be tane to the mercat-croce of Edinbiu'ghe, and
ftand twa hom-is, with paijjaris on thair heidis, contening the cryme : Qiihairvpoune Dome wes pronunceit.

The famin day, they ' actit J)ame felffis newir to abufe J)e facramentis, vnder fe
pane of deid.'

\_Mr Johnne Grahame, Justice-Depnte.l

Jul. 16. — James Twedie of Drummelzeare, Adam Twedie of Dravay,

^Villiame Twedie of the ^Vrae, Johnne Creychtoun of Quarter,

Andro Creychtoun in Cardoune and Thomas Porteous of

Glenkirk.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Patrik Veitch, fone to W"

Veitch of Daik, (Dawick) ; committit in Junij laftwas.

Persewaris.

Williame Veitch, Eldar of Daik, as fader, Veitch, 30unger of Daik, as brothir.

Preloqutouris for thame.
Williame Cokbume of Skirling, Patrik Cokbume, Tutour of Langtoune,
Heriot of Trabroune, Johnne Cokbume of Newholme.

23JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 191

Preloquitouris for the pannell.

The Laird of Balfour, Mr Dauid Bailjie, Mr Johnne Scharp,

James Hammiltoun of Libbertoun, The Laird of Bninfloune, Mr Thomas Craig,

RobertForrefter,brodir to the Laird of Garden, James Creychtoune of Carco, Mr Johnne Ruffell.

The Juftice, be reflToune that ane nowmei- of Aflyife could nocht be gottin to
the faidis perlbunes, continewit the mater ; and ordauit the i)erlbunes on pannell
to continew in thair waird, as thay did ofbefore, quhill thay obtenit releif of
his Maieftie.

The faid day, the perfewaris produceit ane Warrand and Precept direct to
the Juftice, ordaning that the lyke cautioun, and vnder the lyke pauis, be tane
of the perfounes on pannell, as wes before ; and that thay fould be retenit in
waird. — The laid day, Johnne Betoune of Balfoure and James Hammiltoune of
Libbertoune become pledgeis and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, that the
perfounes on pannell fall remane in waird, within the toime of Edinburghe,
vnder the pane of ten thowfand markis.

Jul. 20. — Continued to the Aii-e of ' Peblis, tertio Itineris, xv dierum.'

WmittficmU — Sitfantatiou — ^orteri) — ^^ofsonins.

The following extraordinary case is one of the leading trials for Witchcraft at this unhappy period :
and contains many curious particulars relative to that strange infatuation. ' Katherene Roifs Lady
Fowlis,' who was daughter to Alexander Ross of Balnagown, was the second wife of Robert More
Munro, the fifteenth Baron of Foulis, a family of great antiquity, and possessed of considerable property in the counties of Ross, Sutherland and Inverness ; having by that marriage, George Munro
(of Obisdale), John and Andrew, and four daughters, Margaret, Janet, Marjory and Elizabeth.
Robert More Munro had also, by his first marriage with Margaret Ogilvy, a daugliter of the house of
Findlater, Robert his heir, the intended victim of liis stepmother and Mr Hector, who had succeeded
his brother, (being served as heir to his father and brother, Oct. 7, 1589,) previous to the date of this
trial. He had also by his first mairiage three daughters, Florence, Christian and Catharine. — Robert
Munro, ' apperand of Fowlis,' succeeded his father, and became sixteenth Baron of Fowlis, Nov. 4-,
1588, and was four times married, viz. 1st, Maijory daughter of Kenneth MacKehzie Lord Kintail ;
2d, Lady Eleanor Gordon daughter of the Earl of Sutherland ; 3d, Janet Sinclair daughter of George
Earl of Caithness ; and 4th, Elizabeth daughter of Hugh Rose of Kilravock ; by the last of these ladies
he had one daughter, Margaret, who married Robert Mimro of Assint.

It is necessary to have been thus minute in shewing the connexions of this family, to account satisfactorily for the Lady Foulis entering into compact with such a crew of miscreants, and attempting such
horrible practices. The pui-pose of all this Poisoning and Witchcraft was, that by removing Marjory
Campbell the young Lady Balnagown, her brother George Ross of Balnagown might mairy the young
Lady Foulis ; and to do this effectually, it was necessary to destroy her stepson Robert. It may be
remarked, that several of her familiars were led to the stake, and had died confessing the whole plot
previous to Lady Foulis's own trial ; her own ' nourrice' was destroyed through her foolish curiosity,
in tasting of a ' pyg of poyfoun,' and ' immediatlie thaireftir departit be the faid poylbun ;" and it is
apparent that these facts were notorious.

The escape of Lady Foulis and her stepson, Mr Hector, (see the following Trial,) can only be attributed to the very powerful influence of the parties. Besides other circumstances, which must oc192 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

cur on perusal of this remarkable case, the ' Inqueft' bears all the appearance of a selected or packed
iury, being in a very inferior rank and station of life to the pannel, contrary to the usual custom — and
the Tiv'ivate prosecu/or is ' Mr Hector Monro of Fowles,' who was in a few hours to exchange places
as pannel at the same bar for similar crimes I Hector Monro's Assise is also composed of burgesses
and dependents on the families of Monro and Ross.

Jul. 22. — Katherene Roiss Lady Fowlis.
Dilatit of certane crymes of Witchcraft, following.

Persewaris, Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranfloun-Ryddell, aduocat, Mr Hector Monro of Fowlis.
Freloquitouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Johnne Chene.

Tlie Aduocat produceit the Dittay vnderwritten, defyi-ing jiroces thairvpoune ;
quhairof the tennour followis.

Dittay against the Pannell.

Katherene Roiss Lady Fowlis, Thow art accufit, ffor the vnnaturall
abufing of thy felff, coutrar the lawis of God, and exei'ceing and vfing thy felff
inaifl vngodlie and wicliitlie, be the perverft Inchantmentis, Wichcraft, Develrie,
Incantatiounis and Sorcerie, with the craft of poyfoun in maner vnderwrittin
and following, particulerlie iwactefit, execute, devyfit and fett fordwart be thee,
of thy fpeciall counlall, devyiffis, furth-fett and command, aganis Robert Monro
thane apperaud of Fowlis and Mariory Campbell, ipous to George Rois apperand of Baluagowne, att the tymes and places particulerlie eftir fpecifeit, in company with Criftian Roifs Malcome fone, and vtheris eftir fiiecefeit. In the
fyrft, Thow art accufit, for the making of twa pictouris of clay, in cumpany with
the faid Crilliane Roifs and Mariorie Neyne M'Allefter alias Laskie Loncart,
in the faid Criftian Roifis weftir chalmer in Canorth ; the ane, maid for the diitructioune and confumptioune of the young Laird of Fowlis, and the vthir for
the young Ladie Balnagoune ; to the effect that the ane thairof fould be putt
att the Brig-end of Fowles, and the vther att Ardmoir, for diftructioun of the
laidis young Laird and Lady : And this iould liaif bene performit at Alhallowmes, in the year of God I'^.VMxxvij 3eiris : Quhilkis twa pictouris, being lett on
the north fyd of the chalmer, the faid Loflvie Loncart tuik twa elf arrow heides
and delyuerit ane to ye (you) Katherene, and the vther, the faid Criftian Rois
Malcumfone held in her awin hand ; and thow I'chott twa fchottis with the faid
arrow held, att the laid Lady Baluagowne, and Lolkie Loncart Icliott thrie fchottis
at the faid young Laird of Fowlis : In the meane tyme, baith the pictovu-is brak,
and thow commandit Lolkie Loncart to mak of new vthir twa pictouris thaireftir,
for the faidis perfounes ; quhilk the faid Loflvie Loncart tuik vpoun hand to do :
And thow wes prefent, and faw and hard this done, and nane prelent in the faid
chalmer excei)t thow, the faid Crilliane Roiie and Lefl<ie Loncart. And for the
mair witneiling heirof, the faid Criftiaue Roife confeft the faniin, being accufit

23Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I93

thairvpoiine, in prefens of Mr Mai-tene Logie, notar publict, and Jolinne Irrving
of Kinnok. Johnne Wilfoun in the Chanonrie,WilliaiiieRobertroune tliair, Donald
Vrquhart tliair, Robert Irrving brotliir to the laid Johnne Irrving, Apoune the
xxiiij day of November, threfcoir fevrintene yeires (1577). And for the mair
verificatioun heirof, the faid Criftiane Roils, being atteichit and accufit for the
faidis crymes, before rycht honourabill men, ^Valter Vrquhart, flieref of Cromertie, and Robert Monro of Fowles, Jullices to our fouex'ane lord, be his hienes Commiffioune, in ane Juftice Court haldin within the Cathedrall Kirk of
Roifs, the twentie audit day of November I^.VMxxvij yeiris, confeffit the famin,
and wes convict be ane Aflyis, and wes brint for the famin. This is manifeft
be the haill eountrie of Roils ; quhilk thow can nocht deny. — (2.) SiCLYKE,
thow art aceulit, for the conventioune with the laid Criftian Roils and Lorlkie
Loncart, in the moneth of November, I".V^ Ixxvij yeiris, of fett purpois for diftructioune of the laid young Laird of Fowles and the young Lady of Balnagowne, in thy bariie in Drumnyne ; and thair making ane lloup-full of i)oyfonit
new aill, quhilk wes devylit to be for the young Laird of Fowles, Hector Monro,
the Lairdis brother, his bairnis, the haill Ibnis of vmq'" Johnne Monro of
\'^rquhart, Hucheoune Monro of AlFent, Andro Monro of Newmore, and the remanent of the fpeciall of thair kynne ; fa mony of thame, as niycht be apprehendit : And becaus the faid Itoup ranne out and the liquour tliat wes in itt, except ane lytill quantitie thairof, the laid Katherene caufit Donald M'Kay your
awin boy tak ; and tailling it, incontinent thaireftir tuik feiknes, and lay continewallie thaireftir poyfonit with the liquour. And this was kepit in the kill
of the laid toun of Drumnyn, for the Ipace of thrie nychtis, and the faidis Ci'iftiane Roifs, Loflvie Loncart and thow, convenet the thryd day agane thairefter,
in the laid kill ; quhair thow commandet Lolkie Loncart to mak ane pig-full of
ranker poyloune, that wald dillroy fchortlie the foirfaidis perfoimes ; at quhais
command the faid Lofkie Loncart maid the faid poyfoun, and putt itt in ane pig,
and lend itt to thee. This the faid Criftian Roifs confelRt in judgement, being
accufit as laid is, and wes convict for the famin ; as the Proces deduceit heiraneut teftifeis, and as the countrey knawis ; quhilk thow can nocht deny. And
fwa, for vfmg of the faid poyfoun, expres aganis the faidis Actis of Parliament
maid thairanent; incurrand thairby, the panis conteiiit thairin. — (3.) Also, thow
art accufit. for alRfting and geving counlal, in cumpany with the faid Criftian Roifs
and Lolkie Loncart, in fending of ane pyg of poyli)uii with the nourrice to Angus
Leithis hous, quhair the young Laird of Fowles wes for the tyme ; of deliberat
mynd to half poyfonit him thairwith : Quhilkis thow had in keping, and thy laid
nourrice bringand the laid i)yg fra the, it fell the m ay, -Niider fylence of iiycht, and
brak the pyg ; and fche taiftand of the famin, inimediatlie thaireftir departit, be
VOL. I. 2 B

194 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

the laid poyfoun ; And the famin was devyfit fox- poyfoning of the young Laird of
Fowles; quhilk the laid Criftiane confeft judiciallie, being accufit as laid is, and wes
convict of the famin : And for the mair witneffing, the place quhair the laid pyg
brak, the gers that grew vpoun the famin wes lb lieich by ' the natour of vther
gers, tliat nather cow, ox nor fcheip ewir previt^ thairof yit ; quhilk is manifeft
and notorious to the haill countrey of Roifs ; quhilkis thow can nocht deny :
And fwa, for airt and pairt of the flauchter of your nourrice foirfaid, quha deit
be the faid poylbune, albeit it wes devyfit for the young Laird ; as is notour. —
(4.) Maik,' thow art accufit, for airt and pairt, devyile and counfall, of the diltructioune and poyfoning of the laid young Laird of Fowles ; In fa far as the
faid Criftiane confeft, that fche faw Williame M'^Gilliewareycht-dame, about
Pafch,'' in the 3eir of God P.VMxxvij yeiris, dclyuer to the, in thy awin handis,
ane buill' of Wichcraft, within the Stank of Fowles ; quhilk thow relTauit fra
him, and jmtt itt in thy awin pouch incontinent ; of lett ijurpois to bewich the
laid young Laird of Fowles thairwith ; as is notoure. — (.5.) Forder, in figne
and takin, that thow wes ane of the principall devyfaris of the young Lady
Balnagownis poyfoning, Thomas M'Kain Moir M'Allane M'Henrik and vthir
dewylaris of the faid diftructioune and poyfoune, wes be thy convoy and command, reffauit and intertinneit, in the faid Criftian Roiflis hous, in the moneth
of December 1577, be the fpace of fourtene dayes ; being accufit as faid is, confeft the famin ; quhilk thow can nocht deny — (6.) Tiiow art alfo accufit, for
airt and ])airt of the poyfonit drinkis maid be the, in cumpany with the faid
Criftiane Roilte and Lolkie Loncart, M'Gillieuorie-dame, Katherene Roils, Donald Roillis dochtir ; quhilkis drinkis wes maid for the young Laird of Fowles
and his bairnis, Hector Monro and his bairnis, and the reft of thair kin ; to that
effect, that thy awin bairnis fould fucceid to the hous of Fowlis : And the
drinkis alio Ibuld haif bene gevin to the young Lady Balnagowne, fwa that the
faid young Laird of Balnagowne myclit marie the young Lady Fowles : And wes
convict for the famin ; as the Proces deduceit thairanent beris ; quhilkis thow can
nocht deny. — (7.) And als, thow art accufit, for gewing command to the faid Crilftian Rois Malcumfoune, to gif ludgeing, herbrie and intertinnement to Marioune
Neyuanc M'Allefter alias Lofkie Loncart, in fomer 1577, of deliberat mynd, to
confult with yow, anent the vling of the faid poyfoune ; and be quhat way ye
fould get the famin gewin to the faid Laird ; lyke as, ye fpak with hir thairanent, in the faid hous ; as is notour. — (8.) And mair, Tliow art accufit, for fending of the faid Criftiane, thre or foure tymes, for Johnne M'Nilland in Dingwall,
in the moneth of Junij, 1577 yeiris ; and the laid Johnne cam to hir biging," and

' B(!yon(l. ''■ Prml, or tastnd of that grass. ' Moreover, farther. ' Easter, Paise. '^ Small
box. '' Building or Iiouse, cot-house.

23Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I95

remanit thair ane nycht ; and vpoune the morne thaireftir, he cam to Fowles to
the, and delyuerit to the ane elf arrow heid ; for quhilk ye gaif him foure fchillingis money ; quhilk thow can nocht deny. — (9.) And forder, thow art acculit,
for the talking and commoning with Criftiane Myller, dochter to Robert Myllar
fmyth in Aflin, in the toun of Katwall, in the moneth of Jiinii Ixxvij 3eiris, ane
lang fpace, in cixmpany with the laid Crillian Roils ; and in figne and takin, the
faid Criftian Myllar gatt ane half furlett of meill fra Johnne Keillis wyffe in
Katuall ; quhilk the faid Criftian Rolfs confeft, being accufit, and wes convict
thairfore; as the Proces thairof proportis. — (10.) And alfo, thow art accufit,
for faying to the faid Criftian Roifs, that thow fould do, be all kyndis of meanis,
quhair itt mycht be had, of God in heaven or of the Devill in hell, for the diltructioune and doune-putting of Mariorie Campbell young Lady Balnagoune ;
and fche wald nocht be the fyrft reveillar and confeflar of ony thing vpoune the,
that wes hir lady and meftres ; quhilk fche confeft, being accufit, and wes convict of the fame. — (11-) Last of all, thow art accufit, for being in cumpany with
the faid Criftiane Roifs and Thomas Caffindonifch, in the place of Drummyne,
att Lovatt comoning, tlie young Lady Balnagoun being thair, in the moneth of
Auguft, the yeir of God foirfaid ; and being fperit att be vtheris, quhat thow
and Ci'iftian Roifs and Thomas Caffindonifch wer doand thair, anfuerit, Gif thair
wes ony devyife, thair it wes, for the young Lady Balnagoune wes in the kill
with thame, and the famin wes confeft be the faid Criftian Roifs, before Rorie
M'^Ken3ie of Arthirfail^ie, and Rorie M'^Rorie Alanfoune.— (12.) Thow art accufit, for the crewall fiauchter, be thy craft of poyfoun foirfaid, of Marie Murdoclit Moreis dochter, youre nourrice, quha deit eftir the taifting of the pyg of
poyfoun, quhilk wes fend to the. — (13.) Thow art accufit, for gewing of audit
fchillingis money to the faid 'Williame M'Gillieuorie-dam to pas to Elgyne for
Ijying rattoun' poyfoime; quha wairit thairof hot faxtene penneis ; and brayit the
fame poyfoune, and putt itt in ane pece ledder and delyuerit itt to the, in Junii,
Ixxvij ^eiris, within Stank of Fowles ; Katherene Roifs, dochter to Sir Dauid
Roifs of Balnagoune," being in counfall thairof : And to the mare verificacioun,
thow deljaierit to him with the faid audit fchillingis, foure elnes linning claith
for his labouris ; quhilkis he confeft, being accufit judiciallie, and wes convict be
ane Aflyis. and brunt for the famin, as the haill countrie knawis. — (14.) Also,
thow art accufit, for refi'auing of certane poyfoun, quhilk wes brocht to the be
the faid Williame M^Gillieverie-dam, quhene thow 3ait (went) to thy chalmer,
in that nycht in Williame Monrois hous, be the hand of Katherene Roifs, dochter to Sir Dauid Roifs ; quhilk the laid Williame M'Gillievorie-dam confeft,

' Poison for rats, ratsbane. '' Slic afterwards married tlie well known Sir William Sim lair of

Mey, who, when a boy, was a leader of the riot at the High School of Edinburgh, and killed John
MacMorran, one of the bailies, while attempting to quell the disturbance, September 5, 1595.

196 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

being accufit ; and wes convict be ane Aflyfe, and jaid to deid with the fame. —
(15.) And alio, thow art accufit, for fending the faid Willianie M'Gillievori-dame
to the Egyptianis,' to haif knawledge of thanie, how to poyfoim the young Laird
of Fowles and the young Lady Balnagoune ; quhilk the laid Williame grantit,
being accufit, and wes convict for the fame. — (16.) And forder, thow art accufit,
for relTauing of the rottoun poylbune, quhilk the faid Williame IVrGillievori-dame
confeft he bocht fra Thomas Roifs, merchant in Aberdene, in Eigne, without
ony filuer gewin thairfore ; and thaireftir for poyfoun, quhilkis he bocht in
Tayne, and delyuerit itt to the, and thow baid him keip fecreit fie thingis as
thow patt^ to his charge, anent the bying of the faid poylbune ; quhilk the
faid Williame grantit, being accufit and judiciallie convict for the famin, be
the AlTyfe. — (17.) Also, thow art accufit, for continewing in thy former wickitnes and develrie, quhen Williame M^Gilliveri-dame Avas fend for be the, in
the moneth of Maij, anno Ixxvij, Donald M'Ky being melfinger, to the toun
of Taine ; and thaireftir, he com to Fowles and fpak with the, ane lang fpace,
quhair thow fperit at him, Gif he had mair of the poyfane to gif the, for
that poyfone thow had gottin of befoir, was our' litill to ferve thy turne ; and he
faid, he had nane ready at that tyme ; and refuifit, without the Laird thi brothir waigeit.^ And ficlyk, thow fperit at the faid Williame, Quhiddcr the poyfone foirl'aid fervit bettir to be gevin in eggis, browis or keill ? And he anfuerit,
that thow fuld dres the famin as thow tliocht guid, and grantit to the faid Williame that thy brother, the young Laird of Balnagown, knew of the faid poyfone
alfe Weill as thow did; in taikin quhairof, thow fend furft to him out of the jjlace,
with Donald M'Kay, ane ftoip of guid aill, with breid and cheis ; quhilkis the
faid Williame grantit, being accufit, and was convict for the famin ; as the
Proces thairof beris, and is manifell to the haill contrey. — (18.) Alse, thow art
accufit, for quyet and lang conference with the faid ^V'^illiame M'Gillevor-dame,
in Williame Munrois chalmer, in Culcragy, in October, anno Ixxvij, Katherene
Rofs being prefent, anent the former purpois of the down-putting of the young
Lady Balnagowne ; thow gaif him vfe of vadge;' and on Witfunday evin, the
laid yeir, for the faid caufe, thow gaif him xx f And ficlyk, thow caulit Johnne
JVrFindlay Moir, in Miltoune of Catuall, to delyuer to the laid ^V'illiame M'-
Gilleveri-dame, in fummir the faid yeir, ane firlot of meill; quhilkis he confelfit,
being accufit, and was convicte for the lainin. — (19.) Also, thow art accufit, for
caufmg of Agnes Roy, ane vther of the Vichis, to pas for Lolke Loncart to fpeik
with the, in midfumir, in anno Ixxvj ; quha fpak to the, that thow wald gang
in Hillis to fi>eik the elf folk ; and gif the cace wer, that the young Lady of Bal-

' Gipsies. « Entrusted. ' Too. ^ Hired him, was his employer. « Wages, feed,

bribed or hired liim.

23JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 197

nagown departit, that fcho had fpokin to the, gif the young Laird of Foulis
deit, the young Laird of Balnagoun wald mair (marry) the young Lady Foulis
(his) wyf : And thow gaif to the faid Williame M'Gillevori-dame fyve ellis linning
clayth, in the moneth of September, anno Ixxvj ; and on Pafche-day thaireftir,
xvj f. be \Mllianie Cuikis fone ; quhilk the faid Agnes confeffit. — (20.) Also,
thow art acculit, for the affifting with the faid Agnes Roy, fpeciale, quhen fcho
was j)affing for Marrioune IVrKaine M^Alefter alias Loske Loncartis, cmnand
the way with hir, enterit in fpeking, and I'cho faid, ' Scho wald mak bodyis of
clay hir felf, Criftian Malcolmfoue and Gradache Malcomfone ;' and quhen the
faid Agnes Roy fperit at hir, ' To quhat effect the faid bodyis of clay fuld be
^ maid ?' Quha anfuerit and faid, ' That ane of thame wald be maid to the young
Lady Balnagoun, and the tothir to the young Laird of Fowlis.' And the faid
Lofke Loncart com that nycht to Canort, at midfomei*, the yeir of God foirfaid :
And alfe, Agnes Roy confeffit, that thair was fik thingis, and taikinis betuix her
and the, and Katherene Rofs Sir Dauidis dochtir, that at quhat tyme the faid
Agnes Roy had cum in fra Williame IVrGallevori-dam or Lofke Loncart, vithe
thair myndis and anfueris, to the and Katherene Rofs Sir Dauidis dochter ; in
caife thair war ony man or woman in the company, quhilk they war nocht privat of thair fecretis, than the figne and taikin was, that the faid Agnes Roy fuld
vring and greip thair handis or ftamp vndir feit ; cj^uhilkis promiffis the faid
Agnes Roy confeffit judiciallie, being acculit, and was convict be ane Affyife ;
as the Proces beiris. — (2L) Thow art acculit, for geving of twa ellis of gray
cleyth and ane fai-k, with xiij f. iiij d. money, quhilk Johne Syidferf delyuerit at
thy connnand to Johne M'Farcor, cuik to the joung Laird of Balnagown, quha
had cumin thre tymis to Fowlis, and was in fpeking with the and Katherene
Neynday at ilkan of the faidis tymes ; and the faid Katherene Neynday palling out of the faid toun of Fowlis, tuik with her, at thy command, rattoun
poyfoun to Ardmoir, and deljiierit it to the cuik, to mix it with ane kiddis
neir,' quliilk the young Lady Balnagoun and her cumpany fell that nycht:"
And Katherene Neynday, being in Ardmore that time, fkunnirrit^ with it
fa mekill, that fcho laid, that it was the faireft and maift cruell licht that evir
fcho faw, feing the vomit and vexacioun that was on the young Lady Balnagoun
and hir cumpany ; of the quhilk poyfoun, the young Lady Balnagoun contractit
deadlie feiknes, quhairiu fcho remanis ye (yet ?) incureable ; as is notorlie knawin, and was confeffit be the faid Agnes Roy, being accufit judiciallie, and was
convict be ane Affyife thairof — (22.) Mair, thow art accufit, for caufing of
Lofkie Loncart mak ane poyfone drink, devyfit be Lolkie Loncart, and reueilit to
Katherene Rofs Neynday, and was ordanit to be gevin to the young Laird of
' A kid's ear or kidney. * A young deer, killed by the company in the chace. ' Revolted at the sight.

198 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

Foulis and fuld haiie bene maid in Neyn Schallonis hoiis, in Drummyn, at
Alliallowmes, in anno Ixxvij yeris. — (23.) Mairour, thow art accufit, for affiifting of the laid Gradoehe Malcolmefoune, qiilia confeffit, that Marioune Rofs alias
Loflve Loncart, Ichew hir fecretlie, that thow delyrit hir to cut of Robert Monroy apperand of Fowlis, and Hector IVIiniroy of Killry, Huchoime Monroy of
Aflbun, Robert Munroy fone to the faid Hector, with threttie of his belt kinnifmen, and Katherene Rofs dochtir to Sir Dauid Rofs ; qiihilk is notorious. —
(24.) Thow art accufit, for affifting of Thomas M'Kane More M'^Allane M"^-
Euoch in all his vngodlie Wichcraft and Devilrie ; and fpeciallie, quhen the laid
Thomas was fend be George Rofs, young Laird of Balnagoune, to Farndrocht
to the, convoyit with Donald M^Milane and Johne Sutherland, brothir to Alex'
Sutherland, the firll hous he com to, was Criftian Malcolmis hous in Tane, and
was relauit plefandlie and weill intertinit that nycht be Criftiane Malcolmfoime,
thow fperit at this ,' gif it was hir that laid, that hir brother wald be

flaine; the Lairdis of Foulis eldar, youngar and thow, being at that tyme in Affin :
And out of that depailit Kandlochglaifs ; quiiilk tyme, was the xvj day of Auguft, anno Ixxviij yeris : And vpoune the morn thaireftir, being the x^-ij of Augull, thow com doim out of Affin to Canort, and thair Ipak with the faid Thomas
at lenth, and thair defyrit him to vfe his craft, for putting doun of the faid
Mariorie Campbell young Lady Balnagoune ; and thow promefit to reuard him
gretumlie. And for mair fure performing of the faid young Lady Balnagoune,
thow directit George Cuik, lone to William Cuik in Foulis, to Taine, to twa vemen, (tlie ane callit Marioune Neynnane Adame M'Alefter alius Loske Loncart, and Criftiane Smyth dochter to Robert Smyth in Affint, quhiUds vemen ar
haldin and reput rank commoune Vichis in the countrey,) for ane elf-arrow-heid,
quhilk the faid George Cuik reffauit fra the, and delyuerit in prefence of Criftiane Malcomefoune ; quhilk thow kepit in thy awin keping ; lyk as the faid
Thomas confeffit the famyn, being accufit, and was convict thairof. — (25.) FoRDER, thow art accufit, for the kejjing cumj^anie with George Rofs young Laird
of Balnagoune, in ane kill in Drumnene, vpoune the xxiiij day of Auguft, anno
thriefcoir levinteine yeiris, Criftiane Malcunifouis dochter and the faid Thomas
was prefent thair ; the faid George Rols of Balnagowene ftanding, his bak at
the dore, and ane vand in his hand, delyrit the faid Thomas to do that thing
({uliilk he wes to put to his chairge, tuicheing the deftructioune of his wyfe and
the young Laird of Fowlis ; and he fuld giue him ane garmounthe of cleis" for
his travellis ; quhilkis the laid Thomas confeffit, being accufit, (and) wes convictit for the famen, as the Pi-oces beiris. — (26.) Thow art accufit, for affifting
the faid Thomas, Criftaine Malcomfone, (and) Marioune Nieyn M^AUaftei", vpoun
' Left blank in record. * Suit of clothes.

23JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 199

the fecund day of Julij, anno threfcoir fevintene yeiris, for making of ane pictur
of butter to the laid young Robert Monro Laird of Fowlis, in the faid houfe of
Caynort, be tlie devyfe and confultatioune of the faid Donald and Willianie M"-
Gilleuerie, and the faid pictur of buttir, eftir it wes maid, wes fet at the wallfyd in the vefter chalmer of the faid hous of Coynard, and wes fchot at with ane
elf-arrow-heid be the faid Marioune Neyuen ]\rAlefter alias I^oske Loncart
aucht tymes ; quhilk pictiu* fcho niift, and haid (hit?) na pairt thairof: And
thow (and) Criftane Malcomfoune being prefeut in the faid chalmer, att the
fchotting of the faid pictur, thinkand gane the pictur were hit, it wald be for the
deftructioune of the young Laird of Fowlis : Lykas, faid Thomas was convict
for the famin, and fuflerit the deid. — (27.) Als, thow art accufit, for being in
cumpanie with Criftaine Malconifoime and Marioune Neyn M'Allefter alias
Loshe Loncart, with the devyfe and confultatioune of Donald and William M"-
Gilliourois, made ane vther pictur of clay to the faid Robert Monro young Laird
of Fowlis, in the faid hous of Conord ; and fo it was maid vpoune the morne,
the vj day of Julii, anno Ixxvij yeiris : Thay fat the pictui- at the wall-fyd of
the chalmer of the faid hous, and wes fchott be the faid Criftaine Neyne M'Allefter alias Loshe Loncart, with the faid elf-arrow, tuelf tymes, and mift the
faid pictur : And perfauing that ye mift the famin efter everie fchott, and maid
the faid pictur diuerfe and fmdrie tymes, yit the famin tuk nocht effect to thair
purpoile ; thow and the faid tua womene, thy coUegis, being prefent for the
tyme, and uifing' ane takin of the famin ; the faid Criftaine Rofs Malcomfoune
haid provydeit thre quaiteris of fine linning claithe for the pictui-is, giue^ thay
haid bene hit with the elf-arrow-heid, and the linning to be bound about the
faid picturis, and the picturis to haue bene erdit,' vnder the Brigend of the Stank
of Fowlis, foment the 3et :'• Of the quhilkis premiffis the faid Thomas was convict, and fufferrit the dethe for the famin : as is notorious knawin to the haill
cuntrie. — (28.) And ficlyke, tliow art accufit, and (art) ane that vnderftuid thy
felf giltie in thy confcience, of the crymes for quhilkis thay^ complices aboue
wrettin wer convictit ; and ane day or tua befoir the burning of thame, thow
vndirftanding that tliay, being examinat, wald convict ye of Wychecraft, Sorcerie and poyfoune, in refpect money of thame knew thay feci-eittis, and was
practifeiris of thy devylis ; thow came quhair tua notaris was, owt of the prefence of ony Juge, and befoir the fenfnig of ony Court, and ther, befoir tua or
thrie previe witneffis, declarit, that thow was bruttit and fclanderit with Wichcraft and Sorcerie, and that thow was reddie bydand the tryall thereof ; and feing

' Wishing, witching, using witchcraft to procure a token, or testimony of success, in tlicir destntction of the young Laird of Fowlis. ' Gif, if. ^ Earthed, buried under ground. * Gate, yett.
' These.

200 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

thair was na manne to accufe the, thow requirit iuftiaimentis ; albeit, for feir of
thai vitious lyfe, thou neuer came iudicialie to offer the famiu ; And immediatlie
eftir the taking of the faid inftruinent, thow haid thy horie alredie dravvin furth
of the ftabill, and fled away with diligence, as fugitiue out of the cuntrie, to
Cathenis ; quliair thow remanit, for the fpace of thrie quarteris of ane yeir ; in
fignum and takine, that thow thoucht not to byid in the tryall ; quhill at laft, be
lauboiTous and moyane of vmq'^ George Erie of Cathanis, hir (thy) hulband wes
perfuadit relThue him (thee ?) home againe. — (29.) And lykwayis, this inftant
yeir of fourfcoir and nyne, the Laird of Fowlis purcheft' ane Commiffioune, for
punifchinent of certaine \\^ichis and Sorceris ; Befoir any pviblicatioune thairof,
and or" he miclit have conuenient tyme to put the lamin in executioune, in
refpect of the trublis that incuirit in the Noi'the, thow, knawing thai felf giltie,
and feiring to byd the tiyall of ane Affyfe, fand the moyane to purchele ane
Sufpenfioune of the laid CommilFioune ; and caufit ini'ert in the faid Sufpenfioun,
nocht onlie thay awin name, and fie vtheris as M^as Ipecifiet in the faid Commiffioiuie, but alfo certaine vtheris qulia wer nocht Ipokin of: As the faid Commiffioune and Sufpenfioune thairof, produceit befoir the Secreit Counfall, at mair
lenthe beris : Quhilk, giue' thow haid beine ane honed womane, and willing to
abyd tryall, thow wald neuer have crafit Sufpenfioune of ony fie Commiffioune ;
but rather wald havie forderit the famin.

The faid Katherene, efter reding of the faid Dittay, denyit the famin and
haill pointis thairof; and offerit hir reddie to byde the Tryell of the i^erfounes
of A fly is, fummond to that effect.

AssisA.
Johne Sympfoune of Bannaus, Donald Tailyeour, burges of Andro M'CuUo, Imrges of TajTie,
Johne Clwnes, fone to Alexander Tayne, William Rois thair,

Clwnes, burges of Cromartie, Joiin Reid Farquliaifoune, burges Alex' Hay, burges tbair,
Donald Rofs Williamfoune, thair, Alex' M'Kenzie apperand of

in Gane, Rannald IM'Ser Duncanfoun, Fardane,

John Roifs in Muldard, burges tliair, Donald M'^Gilliequboan, burges

Duncan Bayne apperand of William Kemp in Dingwall, in Dingwall.

TuUeich, Alerter M Donald M'Aleftertbair,

Vekdict. Quhilkis perfonnes of Aliyis, being all chofin, fworne and admittit
to pafs vpoune the Affiyis of the faid Catherine, fcho being accufit be dittay, thay
removit furth of Court to the Alfyis hous, cpihair thay chofit John Syinjjfoune
of Bennaus chancellar of the faid Aliyis ; And thairefter votit vpoun the poyntis
of the laid dittay ; and being throuclilie relbluit thairwith, re-enterit agane in
court ; quliair thai, be the ni(juth of the laid Chancellar, in prefens of the faid

' An old forensic term, synonymous with procurints or obtaining, by pavment of the usual official fees.
'Ere. Mf.

23JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 201

Juftice-depute, ffand, prommcit and deh^ierit the faid Catherine, to be innocent
and quite of the haill poyntis of the dittay.

Qiihairvpoun fcho aflvit inftrumentis.

The lamyn day, Dauid Roils of Holme and William Dolace apperand of Buddet, Donald Rofs of
Balnamukkic, Thomas Vmpliia in Elgyn and John Innes of Lewcheris, oftymes callit, to compeir
befoir the Jnftice or his deputes, the faid day and place, in the hour of caus, to haif paft vpoune the
Affyis of the (liid Katherine, dilatit of the ciymes ahone writtin ; lawfull tyme of day hiddin, and
nocht coniperand to that effect ; thay and ilk ane of thame wes vnlawit, in the pane of fourtie pundis.

^orf erg — antrantation — mUMjtvatt — ^lauuijter, ^r.

Jul. 22. — Mr Hector Muxro of FowJes.

Dilatit of certane ciymes of ^\"ichecraft.

The famin day, comiJerit Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranlloune Riddell, Aduocat to
our fouerane lord, as perfewar, and produceit the Dittay vnderwrittin ; quhairof
the tennour followis.

Dittay agubift the Panuel.

Mk Hectou Monro, Ye ar indytit and acculit, fforfamekle as, it is Statute
and ordanit, be the Actis of Parliament, that nane vie Sorcerie, Incantatiounis
or Wichecraft ; and that nane feik refponffis at Wichis, vnder the payne of deid,
and confilcatioun of all thair guidis movable ; as the faidis actis beris : And
trew it is, that ye the faid Mr Hectour, in the month of Auguft r'W^'.lxxxviij
yeiris, fend for Johne M'Coneill-gar and his wyffe, and Johne Banes Ai'y^e, in
Lytill Alteis, thre notorious and commoune Wiches ; and caufit convoy thame
to Johne Murrayes houfe in Bakine, qidiair ye reflauit thame, but^ knawledge of
the faid Johne ; intertinneit thame with yow, be the f])ace of fyve dayes or
thairby, and foclit refponfis and confultatioune att thame ; qidia poillit" the hair
of Robert Monro, your brotheris held, and plait the naillis of his fingeris, and
tais, focht be thair develilch meanis to haif cureit him of his feiknes ; quha
wald haif vfit furth the reft of thair develifch craft, war nocht thay ferit to tarie
with yow, be reffoun of your fader, c[uha wald haif appreliendit thame ; and
thay declarit to yow, that ye was owre^ lang in lending for thame, I'wa that thay
could do na guid to the faid Robert IVIunro your brothir : — Lyke as, ye, in the
lamin monetli, for feir of your fader, convoyit tliame away, vnder fylence of
nyclit : Quhilk is notourlie knawin to the haill couiitrey. — (2.) Item, Ye ar
indytit and actnifit, fforfamekle as, yv, in the moneth of Jamiar I"'.V'".lxxxviij
yeir, haifing tane feiknes in the famin moneth and yeir of God foirfaid, fend youre
I'eruand Hector M"'Huclielbiuie M'Intagart, to ferch and feik Marioune M'lngaruch, ane of the (maift) notorious and rank Wichis in all this realnie, quha

' Without. - Polled or cut. ^ Too.
VOL. I. 2 C

202 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

brocht and convoyit Iiir to yow, on your awin horle, to Johne M'Intail3eouris
hous in Alnes, quhair ye wes lyand feik att that tyme ; quhair ye focht refponfis
att liir, and travellit to be curit be hir devililch Incantaciounis and Wichcraft :
Lyke as, fche, eftir hir cuniming to yow, gaif yow thre drinkis of waiter furth
of tlire ftanis, quhilkis fche had ; and eftir lang eonfultacioun had with hir, fche
declarit, that thair wes na remeid for yow to recover your health, without the
principall man of your blude fould fuflfer death for yow ; and ye and your complices, haifing raknit with your lelffis, quha this fould be, ffand that it wes
George Monro, eldeft fone to Katherene Roifs Lady Fowles : And than, eftir
finding furth of this develillh devyce, for your releif, ye and the faid Wich concludit with j'our lelffis, that nane fould haif entres to the hous quhair ye lay,
quhiir your brother George fould cum : And eftir his cuming to yow, the faid
"\^^ich defyrit. that ye fould gif liiin your left hand, and fould tak him be the
rj'clit hand ; and that ye fould nocht fpeik ane word to him, before he fpak
fyrft to yow : — Quhilkis iniunctiounis ye kepit, feing thair wes nocht ane of
your freindis that gatt entres to yow, quhill the faid Georges cuming ; nochtwithftanding that diuers of thame come to vifleit yow. And for the better performance of your develifch purpuis, ye fend for the faid George dayUe, for the
fpace of fyve dayes, alfweill to his duelling-hous, as to vthir partis of the countrey, quhair he Aves att the huntis ; defyring him to cum to yow, quhair ye wes
lyand feik : Lykeas, the faid George, feiring na ewill of yow, come as ane loving brothir to the faid M'Intail3eouris hous, quhair ye wes ; thair being nane
with yow, hot the faid Wich, and your fofter-moder Criftian Neill Day3ill, and
hir dochtir : And eftir his cuming to yow, ye vfit the iniunctiounis gewin to
}'ow in maner foirfaid be the faid Wich, and gaif your left hand in his rycht
liand, and fpak nocht to him for the fpace of ane houre, vnto the tyme he fyrft
requyrit of yow, ' How ye did ?' And ye anfuerit him, and faid, ' The better
that he had cum to viffeit yow ;' and fpak na mair to him, nochtwithftanding
ye fend fewin poiftis^ to him ofbefore. Sua that that nycht, att ane eftir myduycht, the faid Wich, with certane of hir complices, paft furth of the hous
quliair ye lay, and tuik with thame fpaidis, and pall to ane pece of eird' lyand
betuix twa fondrie fuperiouris landis, the kinge being the ane fuperiour, and the

Bifchop of ^ the vthir ; and maid ane graif of yoiir leuth, and

tuke vp the ower* pairt thairof, and laid it afyde ; the faid eird being the neir
the fee flude : And this being done, fcho come hame and convenit certane of
your familiaris, that knew thir fecreittis, and informit thame, quhat fould be
everie anes pairt, in taking of yow furth to be eirdit" in the foirfaid graif; for

' Until. ^ Expresses or messengers. ' Land, earth, gi-ound. * Left blank. ^ The over
or upper part, the green sod or turf. '■■ Earthed, laid in this grave or trench.

23JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 203

yoiire releif, and to the deatli of your broder George : — Quhais anfuer was,
' That gif George fliould depairt luddaiilie, that the brute' wald ryile, and all
thair lyves wald be in danger ;' and thairfoir willit hir to delay the faid Georgis
death ane fpace ; and fcho tuke on hand to warrand him vnto the xvij day of
Apryle nixt thaireftir : And efter thir plattis, laid be the faid Witch, Icho and
certane your lerwandis, in the faid nioneth of Januar I'^.V'.lxxxviij yeiris, pat
yow in ane pair of blankettis, and careit yow furth to the faid graif ; and thay
war all comniandit to be dum,^ and nevir to fpeik ane word ; vnto the tyme
that fcho and your fofter-moder fould firft fpeik with hir niaifter, the Dewill :
And being broclit furth, wes laid in the faid graif ; and the grene eird, quhilk
wes cuttit, wes laid abone, and haldin doune with ftalfis ; the faid Witch being
befyde yow : And the faid Criftian Neill, your fofter-niother, wes connnandit to
ryn the breid of nyne rigis, and in hir hand Neill younger, Hector Leithis fone ;
and how fone the faid Criftian had run the breid of the faid nyne rigis, fcho
come agane to the graif, quhair ye was lyand, and inquyrit at the faid Witch.
' Quhilk wes hir fchois ?' ' Quha anfuerit and faid, that the faid • Mr Hector
wes hir fcliois to leif, and 3our brother George to die for 30W.' And this forme
wes vfit thryife that nycht : And thaireftir, ye was careit hame, all the cumpanie beand dum ; and wes put in your bed * — To the taken, that ye was partaker of Wiclicraft, and that ye allowit thairof, and focht refponfis of the faid
Marioune the Witch ; how fone ye gat yoiu* health, be the dewelifch moyan
foirfaid, ye pafl: to Hector Mom'o of Kildi'ummodyis, your fader-brothiris hous,
and tuke the faid Witch with yow ; quhair fcho wes interteneit, as gif fcho had
bene your fpous, and gaif hir fik pre-eminence in your cuntrey, that thair was
nane that durft offend hir ; and gaif hir the keping of j^our fcheip, to cuUour
the matter, that ye knew hir nocht : And quhen the Kingis IMaieftie requyrit
yow to prefent hir to his hienes, ye refufit hir, vnto the tjTne that the faid Lady
Fowles tuke in hand to preif, that fcho was in your hous of Fowles ; fwa that
ye, aganis your will, wes compellit to prefent hir at Abirdene ; quhair fcho being examinat before his Maiellie, and produceit the ftanis fcho gaif yow watter
out of, the quliilk wes the deith of the faid George ; haifing denyit of before, that
ever fcho faw yow with hir : And quhilk ftanis wes delyuerit to the Juftice-

' Fr. Bruit, report, hue and cry. - Dunil), speecliless. ' This word at first sight seems to

signify s/ioes, viz. lliat Hector shoidd stand in (it'ori.'e's shoes, and Georgo in Hector's. It rather implies the c/ioicc of the sister- witdi, after the Incantation was completed; who accordingly chooses Hector
to live, and George to die. The whole ceremony is iniiquc, and calculated to ]>ro<luce a very strong
impression on the spectators, especially on the mind of tlieir novice in the ' giaif,' who afterwards appears to have been led by the nose by these hags, as eft'ectually as if by St Dunstan's far-famed pincers.
* A pretty effectual cooler this must have been ' at ane efter mydnycht," in the ' moneth of Januar 1'
St Januarius himself, or even Dr Grahame, the earth-bather, would have siirunk from such an ordeal
with horror !

204 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. L590.

Clark in keping. — Item, Ye ar indytit, for airt and pairt of the creAvall, Ichamefull and odious flauchter of tlie faid vmq'" George IMonro your brother, be the
Inchantmentis and 'Witchecraftis vlit vpoune yow, and be your dewyife, be fpeking to him within your bed, taking of him be the rycht hand, conforme to the
iniunctionis gevin to yow be the faid Marioune Ingareach, in the faid moneth
of Januar I^.VMxxxviij yeiris ; throw the quhilk Inchantmentis, he tuke ane
deidlie feiknes, in the moneth of Apryle 1590 yeiris ; and continewand thairin
quhill JuniJ thairefter, deceiffit in the faid moneth of Junij, being the thrid day
of that inllant. To the mair teftificatioune, that ye ar giltie of the faid cryme,
ye being chargeit to prefent the faid Wich, ye had hir vpoune your landis and
bigingis, and within your touue ; and hes put hir afyd, the faxtene day of July
inftant.

QuHiLKis poyntis of Dittay, the faid Mr Hector Monro allutirlie denyit ; and
ofTerit him reddie to abyde the tryell of ane Aflyfe thairfore.

ASSISA.

Alexander M'Kenzie, apperand Donald IVFGilliequhorne, tliair, Alexander Hay, burges thair,

of Sturdriini, Johne "V'aus of Loclillum, Thomas Manfoun, hurges thair,

Duncane Bayne, apperand of James Corbett, portionar of Johne Reid Farquharfoune, burTuUich, Arboill, ges thaii",

Williame Kempt, in Dingwall, Andro M'CuUoch, bail5e of W" lunes, portionar of Midganie,

Eannald M'Ser Duncanlone, bur- Tayiie, Angus ISPCulloch in Eiflir Aird,

ges of Tayne, Donald Tailqeour, thair, Robert Phayne, thair.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of the faid Johnne Vaus of Lochflum,
Chancellar, in prelens of the faid Juftice-deput, ffand, pronunceit and declarit
the faid Mr Hector Monro, to be acquit and innocent of all the heidis of the
faid Dittay : Quhairvpoiuie he afkit inftrumentis.

The famin day, Alexander INPThomas alias Thomloune, burges of Taj-ne, and Johne Dingwall of
Kildyn and Thomas ^^mphray, burges of Elgyne, oft tymes callit to half comperit before our* fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputes, the faid day and place, in the hour of caus ; to half part ypoun the
Affyife of the faid Mr Hector Monro of Fowlis, dilatit of the crymes abouewrittin, lauchfull tynie of
day biddin, and noclit comperand, thay, and ilk ane of thame, wes vnlawit in the panes contenit in
the Actis of Parliament, viz. Fourtie punds,

\_3Tr James IVardlaw, Jiist'tce-Depute.'\

Jul. 30. — James Veich apperand of North Syntoune, Andro \'eich,
brother to James ^'eicli of Toiirhop.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Johnne Twedie, tutour of
Drummal5ear and burges of Edinbiu-ghe ; committit the xxiiij day of Julij
inftant.

Persewar, Magdalene Lawfoun, the relict.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 205

Preloquitouris, Mr Williame Somervall, Viccar of Kirbene, Mr Dauid M'Gill, AJuocat.

Preloquitouris for the pannell.
The Eril Botliwell, T]ie Lord Fleming, Tlie Laird of Balcleuch, The Abot of Melroife,

The Laird of Omiiltoune, The Laiid of Grenelieid, JNIr Joliune Preftoime, Mr Alexander King.

The Juftice, vpoun alledgeances proponit, and anfueris maid thairto in the
Minute-buik, continewis all proceiding in this mater to the monie. ' Wardat.
vpoun allegeance.'

[Mr Johmie Grahame, Justice-Dejnde.']
(Nov. 28.) — The Juftice, being auifit with the Interloquitour vpoun the
allegeanees maid be Mr ^Villiame Olipliant, c.vcujhtorio nomine for Johnne Lord
Fleming, concerning the nocht vnlawing of James and Andro Veichis, for the
flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Twedie, tutour of Drummel3ear, and anfueris maid
thairto be the Aduocat ; ffand, that thay fould be vnlawit, nochtwithftanding
the laid allegeance.

The famin daj% ^Villiame "\''eich of Daik and Andro Broune of Hairtrie, as
cautioneris and Ibuirteis, coniunctlie and ieuerallie, wer vnlawit, in the pane of
ten thowfand poundis money of this realme, for the nonentrie of James Veich,
apperand of North-Sintoune, and Andro Veich, brother to James Veich, apj)erand of Tourhoip, before oure fouerane lordis Juftice, or his deputes.

Cxintrabention ot ii)t ^tntval MmiH, ^t,

Aug. 6. — Georgk Hwme of Crammie-cruik, William Reidpeth of Grinlaw, George Hwme of Weddirburne, Patrik Hwme of Polwart
and thirty-two others.
Dilatit of the contraventioune of the Generall Band and of tlie Actis of Parliament, in nocht prefenting of thair menne before the Juftice or his deputes, in
Juftice Coui'tis; and for nocht removing of thair teunentis, fugitiues, of (off) thair
landis ; conforme to the faid Genei'all Band.

(Aug. 7-) — The greateft proportion of the pannels were acquitted ; the
remainder were either continvied or ' replegiat' to the Regalities of Thirlftane,
Jedburghe-fforeft, Melroife, &c.

Cafemcr of a iHtsstnstr, ^c— aitsiftrinri anti taUnq U)t

^latt ot dff Jjtitrat.

Aug. 8. — Edward Ckawfuud of Corbilliill, Johnne Crawfurd in Callane and Andro Innes in Turray.

Dilatit of the taking of Johnne Fairwadder, meffinger, and deferteing of him

in executioune of his office, he beand in the executioune thereof ; and fpeciallie,

in the executioune of oiu" fouerane lordis lettres, purcheft at the inftance of

206 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

Alexander Irving of Drum, aganis George Ci-awfurd of Fedderett ; and for
affageing of the Place of Fedderett, taking of the faniin be ftrang hand : and
vtheris crymes, contenit in the lettres direct thairvpoune.

Continued to the Aire of ' Abirdene, tertio Itineris, vel xv dierum.'

[3Ir Humphrci/ BJ>/ndscheUs, Justice- Dejm/e.]

OTitrijtiaft— ^laufrijtn-, $(t,

Aug. 17. — Jo>;ett Grant alias Gradoch in Colquhatftane and Jonett
Clark alias Spaldi)ig in Blalach.
Dilatit of certane cryines of Wichcraft.

Persewaris.
Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranftoun-Riddell, Aduocatt, The Laird of Wardes (Williame Leflie).

The faidis perfounes on pannell denyit the Dittay redd to thame ; and ofFerit
thame to the tryell of ane Aflyfe.

Verdict. Arthoure Skene in Tulloch, Chancillar, delivered the Verdict of
the AlTyfe, whereby 'thay ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Jonett Grant
alias Gradoch, to be fylit and convict of the crewall Murthour of vmq'" Alexander Abircnimbie of Ley, be ^^'^ichcraft : And of vniq'" Gordoune,

fone to held' Johnne Gordoune : And of the flauchter and diftructioune of faxtene heid of nolt," pertening to William Roife in Birfebeg : And of the llauchter
of vmq'" Elfpet Reit be Wichcraft : And als, of the raiing of the Dewill, and
feiking of help to Duncan Rychie : And als, for the flauchter of Johnne Pantouuis wyffe, be Wichcraft. 1 1 em, of the taking on hand, to half diftroyit the
Laird of Cragievar, his fone and vtheris. — Item, fand and pronunceit the faid
Jonet Clark alias Spalding, to be fylit and convict of the flauchter of vmq'*
Johnne Leflie of ^Vardes,^ be Wichcraft : Item, of the flauchter of the faid vmq'*
Elfpet Reit : Item, for gewing of ane fecreit member to Johnne Coutis ; and
gewing and taking of i)ower fi'a findrie niennis memberis : Item, fylit of taking

of Johnne Wattis fecreit member fra him : Item, for bewiching of

Caddell, fone to Allefl:er Caddell in Bandorie : Item, fylit for taking in hand,
to help Johnne Reoch in Dalcjuliing of his feiknes, be Wichcraft — Iteji, pronunceit the faidis Jonet Grant and Jonet Clark, to be fylit and convict for commoune notorious Wichis.'

Sentence. For the quhilkis cauflis, the Jiiflice, be the mouth of James
Scheill, dempfl;ar, adiudgeit thame to be tane to the Cafl;ell-hill of Edinburghe,
and thair wirreit at ane fl;aik, and thair body to be brunt in aflis ; and all thair
movabill guides to be efcheit and iubrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict
of the faidis crymes.

' Bald. ' Cattle, oxen. ' See the Trial of Beffie Roy, Aug. 18, 1590.

24 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 207

^orcnt)— antfantatiou— 8i2aitc|^ciaft, $(C,

Aug. 18. — Bessie Roy, nurreych' to the Laird of Boquhane.
Dilatit of the poyntis of Wichcraft following.

Persewaris, Leflie, elilar of Wairdes, Mr Williame and George Lefleis liis fones, Mr Dauid

M'Gill of Cranftoun-Ryddell, Aduocatt to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intres.

DiTTAY aganis Bessie Roy.
Bessie Roy, in Fetterneir, feruand to the Laird of Boquhane f Ye ar indytit
and accufit, that quhaii', ye, beand duelland with Williame King in Barra, be the
Ipace of tuel yeiris fyne or thairby, and haifing paft to the feild to pluk lint
with vthir wenien, in prefens of thame maid ane compas in the eird, and ane
hoill in the middis thairof : And thaireftir, be thy conjuratiounes, thow caufit
ane grit worme cum fyrlt out of the faid hoill, and creip owre the compafe ; and
nixt ane lytill worme, qiihilk crap owre alio ; and laft, caufit ane grit worme
cum furth, quliilk could nocht pas owre the compas, nor cum out of the hoill,
bot fell doinie and deit : Quhilk inchantnient and Wichcraft thow interpz-eit in
this forme : — That the fyrft grit worme that crap owre the compas, was the
Guid-man, Williame King, quha fould leve ; and the lytill worme, was ane
bame in the Guid-wyfTes wamb, quhilk wes vnknawin to ony manne that fche
was with barne ; and that the barne fould leve ; and thrydlie, the laft grit
worme thow interpreit to be the Guid-wyfTe, quha fould die : Quhilk com to
pas eftir thy fpeiking, quhow fone fche wes delyuerit of the faid barne. And
this is manifeft to the haill countrey ; cpihilk thow can nocht deny. — Item, Ye
ar indytit and accufit, for away taking, be Wichcraft, of ane puir womanis milk,
callit Beflie Steill, quha cam to Williame Kingis lious in Bairoch, feking almes ;
and haifing fittiu doune befyd the fyre, to gif hir barne fouk, thow in the meane
tyine, being ane nurrifch thy felff, and perfawing the puir woman to haif mair
abundance of milk nor thow had ; and feing that the Guid-wyfTe thy huffie ^
fould haif detenit the puir woman, and gewin hir the barne to fofter ; thow, be
thy develifch incantatiounes and Wichcraft, abftrakit and tuik away hir milk :
And immediatlie eftir the puir woman wes jiaft out of the hous, fcho perfawit
hir milk to be tane away, come agane to the faid hous, and complenit to the
Guid-wyfTe, that the nwrilch had takin away hir milk ; and faid, Gif fcho wer
nocht reftorit to hir milk, fche fould de\ulgat the fame throw the countrey, and
fchaw how ye had vlit hir. And thow, fering thy dewelifch craft to be revelit,
faid to the puir womane, ' Gif I haif thy milk, cum fie a nycht to me to this
hous, and afk itt for Godis faik, and thow fall haif itt.' Lyke as, the faid puir
woman, being gled to reflaue hir milk agane, come that fame nycht as thow ap-

' Nurse, Fr. nourrice. ' John Leflie. ' Housewife, mistress.

208 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

poyntit liir, and lay in the hous befyd ye all nycht ; and about the middis of the
nycht, thow ciyit vpoun hir and walknit hir, and baid hir refTaue hir milk ; and
incontinent fche walknit, and hir palpis fprang out full of milk, and remanit
with hir thaireftir. This thow did, as is notom'lie knawin to the haill countrey,
and thow can nocht deny. — Ite:m, thow art indytit for ane commoune awaytakir of wemennis milk in the haill countrey, and detening the famin att thy
pleafour ; as the haill countrey will teflifie. The quhilk thow can nocht deny. —
Item, thow art indytit and accufit, for the bevifching' of William Kingis wyfe
of Barraucht, tuelf yeiris fenfyne or thairby, for your diuilifche devyfe, eftir
thow haid left hir feruice ; thow caufit propyne" hir with ane plaid of thine,
quhilk, beand full of inchantmentis and forcerie, being laid one hir bed, cauffit
hir fuddentlie thereftir depairt :* Quhilk is notorius to the haill countrie; quhilk
thow cane nocht deny. — Item, thow art indytit for ane commoun theif, c^uhilk
thow vfis be inchantment and flicht of the Diuill ; for laitlie, thow cam to Alexander Thines hous in the Benvie-end of Traichie, in the monethe of November
laflwas ; and thair, be inchantment, blew vp his duris and his haill lokkisof his
houfe, and ftall out lie gere as thow plefit ; and thaireftir lokit the duris and
loctis, as thay wer abefoir : Quhilk tliow cane nocht deny. — Item, thow art indytit and accufit, that laitlie, beand nurifli to the Lard of Bakpdiene (John Leflie), in the monetli of Maij and Junij laftbypaft, thow, be thy inchantment and
forcerie, maid vp the haill lockis of the place, and vpunt^ the haill durris thairof,
and ftall ane fteill box out of ane coffer, quhairin wes gryt fowmes of gould and
gould-fmyth-work ; quhair, one (on) being accufit thaireftir, thou allegeit, that
ane blak inanne came and gaif the famin to the ; quhilk wes nothing but the
illufioune of the Diuill : Quhilk yow cane nocht deny. — Siclyk, thow art indytit and accufit, for the crevi'all, airt and pairt and lievifching of vmq''^ Johnne
Leflie of Cultis, quhair as thow trefekit with vmq'*' Barbara Keand alias Leslie,
with Jonet Grant, with Jonet Clark alias Spalding/' lyk as thair Confefliounes
and Depofitiounes teftifies thair vngodlie airt and pairt in the faid murdour ;
qidiairin diuerfe vtheris was pertineris, fie as Mariovme Bruce in Awldrain,
Beffie Paull in the Cromar, quha ar fugitiues for the faid cryme ; and thow
onlie efteniit the inftrument of all that mifcheife : Quhilk is notorious be thair
Confefiiounes, and yow cane nocht deny. — Siclyke, thou art indytit and efteniit for ane notorioufe and commowne AYlche in the cuntrie ; and cane do all
thingis, and lies done all mifcheifis, that deuilrie or Wichcraft cane devyfe, in
abfti-acking of mennis lyfRs, wemennis milk, beftis milk, and bewifching of

' Bewitching. • Offer in gift, to make a present. ^ Give up the gliost, die. * Opened,

burst up. ^ See Aug, 17, 1590.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 209

beftis als weill as menne; lyk as thai diuerfe practifis cane teftifie ye : Quhilk
ye cane nocht deny.

Verdict. The AflTyfe, in prefens of the faid Juftice-deput, ffand and pronnnceit, be the mouth of the faid Chancillar, (Arthoui* Skene in TuUuch,) the
faid Beffie Roy to be Innocent and acquit of all and findi-ie the poyntis and
heidis of the Dittay abouewrittin. Quliairvpoixne, the faid Beffie afkit act and
inftrument.

Aug. 19. — WiLLiAiME Leslie of Crechie and Violat Auhinlek his fpous.

Dilatit of the flauchter and diftructioun of vmq'" Johnne Leflie of Wardes,
younger, be Wichcraft ; committit in Junij 1586.

Persewaris.
Williame Leflie of Wairdes, as fader, George Leflie of Camellis, Mr Williame Leflie of Warthill, as

bretbir, Mr Dauid M'^Gill of Cranlloun-lliddell, Aduocat, The Laird of Frendraclit, 50unger.

Preloquitouris for the pannell.
Tlie Erll Bothwell, The Erll of Arroll, The Lord Home, The Laird of Boquhane,

The Laird of Wauchtoune, Mr W" Leflie of Cunlie, Mr Alexander King.

The pannell aflvit inftrumentis of thair entrie, and proteftit for releif of thair
cautioune, and alfe offerit thaine reddie to abyde the tryell of ane Aflyfe, for the
crymes abouewrittin ; dilaffenting to all continewatioune.

The Juftice, for laik of ane fufficient nowmer of Aflyfouris, quhairof thair
wes ane grit nowmer caffin,' continewit the mater to the thiyd day of the nixt
Juftice-air of the Sherefdome of Abirdene, or foner, T'poun fyftene dayes wairning. — ' Plegiis, Francifco Comite de ErroU et Joanne Leflie de Boquhane, conjunctim et diuifun.'

[Curia Justiciarie, s. d. n. Regis, tenia xxvj'" Decembrifi, 1590, ^;e/-
Magistros Johannem Graham et Vmphridem Blynschelis, Justkianos
Deputatos.'\

Cveasona6l|) toirspiriitfl t\^t Seatl) nf t$e M\\^ — ^t^xttx^ —
Mitfijnaft — Snrantation, $(t*

Dec. 26. — Johnne Feane alias Cwninghame, laft duelland in Preltoune.^
Coniiict of diners poyntis of Wichcraft, contenit in the Dittay.

' Cast, rejected on account of partiality, reiationship, &c. Only two out of the whole ' Roll of
AfFyfe' were sworn, as unexceptionahle. '^ He is designed ' fchoolmaifter at Tranent,' in the Historie of King James the Se.rt, p. 2-11 ; ' Mailer of the Ichoole at Saltpans in Lothian,' in the tract
afterwards quoted ;' and in the course of these remarkable cases, he is termed ' Regifter' and ' Secretar to the Devil,'

VOL. I. 2d210 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

Comperit the famin Maifter Dauid ^rOill of Cranftoune-Ryddell, Aduocat to
our fouerane lord, as pei'fewar ; and i^roduceit ane Dittay agains the faid Johune
Feane.

ASSISA.

Johnne Wilfoun in Edinburghe, Rol)ert Seytoun tliair, Tliomas Craig thair,

Rycliard Newtoune in Tranent, Robert Thrillcie, mercband, bulges Jobnne Coluile thair,
VVilliarae Stratherne tbair, of Edinburghe, James Watfoun thair,

Patrik Hal5eort thair, Johne Donaldfoun, raercliand thair, Jobne Hakit thair,

James Miltoun thair, Robert Smytli, merchand thair, Thomas Wrycht thair.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfounes of Affyfe, being chofin, fworne and admittit
vpoun the faid Johnne Feanis AfTyfe, he being accufit be Dittay of the faidis
cryines : Thay removit thanie felffis altogidder furth of Court to the AfFys-hous,
fjuhair thay chufe the laid James ^Vat^oun chancillar ; and haif reflbnit (vpoun
the) pointis of the faid Dittay, and refohiit thairwith : Reenterit agane in the
faid Coiu't ; quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit
and delyuerit the faid Johnne Feane alias Cwninghame, to be fylit and convict,
Fyest, That qiUian the dewill ajiperit and come to him, quhen he wes lyand
in his bed in Tranent, in Thomas Trumbillis chalmer, mwfand and panfand,'
how he mycht be revengeit of the faid Thomas, quha had ofl'endit him in nocht
fpargeing^ of his chalmer, as he had promefit, his face being toward the wall ;
the dewill apperit to him with quliyte rayment, quhair he (the Dewill) fpak to
him in thir termes, or ever he (Feane) fpak to him (the Dewill) — ' Will 5e be
my ferwand and adore me and my ferwandis, and 3e fall never want ?' And als,
that he fuld be revengit of his enemies ; lyke as, the faid deuill perfwadit him
to burne Thomas Trumbillis hous, in refpect he had nocht keipit jn-omeis. —
(2.) Item, Fylit, for fuffering of him felfT to be niarkit be the dewill with ane
rod, the fecund nycht that he apperit to him, in quhyte arayment as faid is, in
his bed ; and for fein3eing of him felff to ly feik in the faid Thomas Trumbillis
chalmer, quhair he wes ftrukin in grit extafies and tranlis, lyand be the Ipace of
twa or thre houris deid, his fpreit tane ; and fufferit him felff to be careit and
tranfjiortit to inony montanes, as thocht throw all the warld ; accoi'ding to his
awin depofitiounes. — (3.) Item, Fylit, according to his awin confeffioune, for

the abuling of his body with Margaret Spens, M'edo in , promefing

to haif mareit hir ; hot att Satanis command, he ftayit ; quha faid to hira, Gif
he mareit hir, he fould tyne him and mekill ruches.^ — (4.) Item, Fylit for the
fuffering of him felff to be careit to North-Berwik Kirk, (he being lyand in ane
cloil'e bed in Preftoun-panuis,) as gif he had bene fouchand^ athoirt the eii'd,
quhair Sathane commandit him to mak him homage with the reft of his fer-

' From ' penfant,' Fr. thinking, cogitating. " White-washing or cleansing. ' Riches, wealth.

' This suggests the idea of skimming along tlie surface of tiie earlli witli the swiftest flight. ' Souchimd' also denotes a rushing sound, like that of an aiTow whizzing through the air.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 211

wandis ; quhair he thocht he faw the lycht of ane candill ftandand in the middis,
of his feruandis, quhilk apperit blew low' ; and Sathan ftwid, as in a pulpet,
makand ane fermond of dowtfum fpeichis, faying, ' Mony cumis to Ipe fair, and
byis nocht all wares ;' and defyi-it him ' nocht to feir, thocht he wes grynime :
ffor he had mony feruandis, quha fould newir want, and fonld aill na thing, falang as their hair wes one ; and fould newir latt ane teir fall fra thair ene," falang as thay feruit him' : And gaif thir leflbnnes and commandis to him, as followis. ' Spair nocht to do ewill, and to eit, di-ink and be blyth, taking reft and
eife, flfor he fould raife J)ame vp at Ipe latter day gloriouflie.' — (5.) Item, Fylit,
for the being in cumpany with Sathane att his conventiounes, quhair he faw
Robert Greirfoune, Miehaell Clark, Annie Sampfoune, with findrie vtheris ;
quhair he and all the reft kift him behind, and fum his erfe ; and att the fame
tyme, ffor the bewiching and iiofTeffing of ^Villiame Hutfoune in Windiegoull, with
ane ewill fpreit. — (6.) Item, Fylit, for fuffering him felfF to be careit to the fee
with Sathane ; and att the fyrft, he wes (kumand'^ owre all the fee without land,"
in ane . boit, accumpaneit with the perfounes aboue writtin ; and being of the
foir-knawledge of the lek that ftrak vp in the Quenis fchip, as the dewill foirtald
him. — (7.) Item, Fylit, for the rafing of wyndis att the Kingis paffing to Denmark, and for the fending of ane letter to Marioun Linkup in Leyth, to that effect, bidding hir to meit him and the reft, on the fee, within fyve dayes ; quhair
Satan delyuerit ane catt out of his hand to Robert Greirfoune, gevand the word
to ' Caft the fame in the fee hola !' : And thaireftir, being mountit in a fchip, and
drank ilk ane to otheris, quhair Satane faid, ' ge fall fink pe fchip ;' lyke as thay
thocht thay did. — (8.) Item, Fylit, for affembling him felfF with Sathane, att
the Kingis returning fra Denmark ; quhair Satan promefit to raife ane mift,
and caft the Kingis Maieftie in Ingland : And for performing thairof, he tuik
ane thing lyke to ane fute-ball, quhilk apperit to the faid Johnne lyke a wifp,^
and caift the fame in the fee ; quhilk caufit ane vapour and ane reik to ryis. —
(9.) Item, Fylit, ffor being in cumpany with Satan in the Kirk of North-Berwick, quhair he ajjperit to him, in the forme of ane blak mann within the pulpett thairof; and efter his out-cuminge of the kirk, poyntit the graues and
ftwid aboue thame ; quhilkis wer opnit in thre findrie pairtis, twa within and
ane without ; quhilk the wemen demembrit the deid corps and bodeis being
thairin, with thair guUeis f and incontinent wes tranfportit, without wordis. —
(10.) Item, Fylit, for opening of lokis, and fijeciallie ane lok in Dauid Seytounis

' Blue flame, the candle buiiit blue ; an inevitable consequence of the presence of the ' foul fiend.'
- It was part of this strange superstition, that after a person had renoiinced his baptism, and sworn
fealty to Satan, he could thenceforth shed no tears — ' Item, it is a vehement prefumption, if ilie
cannot weepe at the time of hir examination : and yet Bodin faith, that a witch may Ihed three drops
out of her iMght eie.' — Scott's Discoverie of Witchcraft, cap. 5. ^ Skimming. * Out of sight

of tlie land. ^ Of straw ? '' Large clasp-knives.

2lS CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590.

younger in Tranent ; and ficlyke, for the opening of the faid Dauidis foir 5ett,
the key thairof being lyand vpoim the buird,' at the fupper : As alfo, fylit, for
the opning of ane lok be his Ibrcerie, in Dauid Seytonnis moderis, be blawing in
ane womanis hand, him felff litand att the fyi'e fyde. — (11.) Item, Fylit, for the
being cumand furth of Patrik "\^niijhrais fonis lious in the mylne, vnder nycht,
fra liis l'ui)per ; and paflhnd to Tranent on horfbak, and ane man with him ; be
his devililch craft, ralit vp foure candillis vpoixue the horffis twa luggis, and ane
vthir candill vpoune the ftalff quhilk the man had in his hand ; and gaif fic licht,
as gif itt had bene day lycht ; lyke as, the faidis candillis returnit with the laid
man, quhill his hamecuming ; and caulit him fall deid, at his entre within the
hous. — (12.) Item, Fylit, for the wiching" and pofleffing of the (faid) 'Williame
Hutfoune, witli ane ewill fpreit ; quhilk continewit with him tuentie fax oulkis;
lyke as, the faid fpreit departit and left him, how fone the faid Johnne wes tane
and apprehendit. — (13.) Item, Fylit, for being in cumpany with Annie Sampfoune, Robei't Grierlbun, Kaet Gray and vtheris, vpoune Hallowmes ewin ; thay
embarkit in ane boit, befyde Robert Greirfounis hous in the Pannis, and faillit
owr the fea to ane tryift thay had with ane vther witch : quhair thay enterit
within ane fchip, and draiik gude wyne and aill thairin ; and thairefter cauffing
the faid fchip and boit to perifch, with the perfonis being thairin ; and than returning hame. — (14.) lTE:\r, Fylit, for the vfing be way of Witchcraft, of modewart' feit vpoune him, in his purie ; gevin to him be Sathan, for this cans, that
fa lang as he had thame vpoune him, he fuld never want filuer. — (15.) Item,
Fylit, for being in North-Berwik-Kirk, at ane conventioune with Sathan and
vtheris witches ; quhair Sathan maid ane dewelifch fermon, quhair the faid
Johnne fatt vpoune the left fyde of the pulppett, iiarreft him : And the fermon
being endit, he came doune and tuke the faid Johnne be the hand, and led him
widderfchinnis* about ; and thairefter, cauffit him kyfe his erfe. — (16.) Item,
Fylit, for the chaiffing of ane catt in Tranent ; in the quhilk chaife, he was
careit lieicli aboue the ground, with gryt fwyftnes, and as Ijchtlie as the catt hir
felft', ower ane heicher dyke, nor he was able to lay his hand to the heid off : —
And being inquyrit, to quhat effect he chaiffit the famin ? Anfuerit, that in ane
conventioune haldin at Brumhoillis, Sathan commandit all that Aver prefent, to
tak cattis ; lyke as, he, for obedience to Sathan, chaifit the faid catt, jnirpoiflie
to be caflin in the fea, to raife windis for diftructioune of fchippis and boittis. —
(17.) Item, Fylit, that forfamekle as, be his airt of Witchcraft, Magick and
Sorcerie, he gaif him felff ° to declair to ony man, how long thay fould leve, and
quhat fould be thair end ;" gif thay wald tell yow the day of thair birth : Lyke
as, he foirtauld the famyn to Marioun "W^eddell, that hir fone fould nocht leve

' Table. ^ Bewitching. ' Mole's feet. ■* Contrary to the course of the sun. ^ Professed,
save out. ^ What death they should die.

TcJ'ace- TOZJ. p. 223

ilcmc? frum ^cotlanti, i;)f)i.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 213

XV dayes ; quhilk cam to pas as he fijak. — (18.) Itebi, Fylit, for declaring of the
lyke to Alexander Bonis wyffe in Edinburghe, and faying, hir fone fould be
fchort qiihyle in hir aucht ; as he died within a fchort fpace thairefter. — (I9.)
Item, Fylit, for the reffaving of thir directionis and commandimentis fra Sathan : Firft, To deny God and all trew Religioune : Secundlie, To gif his faith
to the Dewill ; and adoring him : Thridlie, He faid to the Dewill, that he fould
perfwaid als mony as he could, to his focietie : Ferdlie, He dememberit the
bodeis of the deid corps, and f])eciallie of bairnis vnbaptefit : Fyftlie, He diftroyit men be fie and land, with coirnis, cattell and guidis ; and raifit tempeft and
ftormie wedder, as the Dewill himfelff, blawing in the air, &c. — (20.) Item,
Fylit, for ane commoune notorious Witch and Inchanter.

The Sentence is not engrossed in the Record, but a jotting made on the
margin, ' Conuict of diuers poyntis of Wichcraft, and brynt.'

[The best illustration which can now be afforded of the extraordinary circumstances detailed in this and in fome of the other Trials for Witchcraft, &c. of this
period, is to give an exact reprint of an extremely rare Black-letter tract, considered to be unique ; and which api)ears to the Editor well worthy of a place
here.' A pretty copious abstract from this curious fragment has already been
given to the public, in the learned and ingenious Prefatory Notice to ' Law's
Memorialls,' edited by Charles Kirkjiatrick Sharpe, Esqviire ; to whom the Editor is indebted for the use of an accurate transcrijit, with which the present reprint has been carefully collated.^ This tract was inserted in a small collection,
published by the late eccentric David Webster, titled, ' Collectanea Scotica,' but
it is there very inaccurately edited.

The Confessions of Feane, Pamson, &c., are said to have ' made the King in
wonderful admiration, who, in rel'pect of the ftrangenes of thefe maters, tooke
great delight to be jirefent at their examinations.' It is very probable that the
King's presence at these examinations, and the frequent perusal of similar evidence against the numerous persons who were tried for Witchcraft at this time,
laid the foundation for the royal work on ' Daemonologie.']

NEWES FROM SCOTLAND,

Declaring the damnable life of Doctor Fian a notable Sorcerer, who was
burned at Edenbrough, in Januarie laft 1591 ; which Doctor was Regifter to the Deuill, that fundrie times preached at North Barricke Kirke to a

' The Editor would liave preferred inserting the ' Newes from Scotland' in tlie Appendix to the
reign of King .Tames VI., but as tliat must of necessity be retarded for a considerable time, the explanations afforded in Feane's Confessions would thereby lose much of their interest. 2 Mr Sharpe's
transcript was taken from the Roxburghe Club copy.

214 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

number of notorious Witches ; with the true Examinations of the faid
Doctor and ^Vitches, as they uttered them in the prefence of the Scottifli
King : Difcouering how they pretended to bewitch and drowne his Majeftie in the fea, comming from Denmarke ; with fuch other wonderfull matters, as the like hath not bin heard at auie time.

Published according to the Scottish Copie.
Printed for William Wright.'

To THE Reader.

The manifold untnjths which are fpred abroad, concerning the deteftable actions and apprehenfion
of thole Witches, wliereof this hiftorie following truely entreateth, hath caufed me to publilh the fame
in print ; and the ratlier, for that fundrie written coppies are lately dilperled therof, containing that
the faid Witches were firft dil'covered by meanes of a poore pedler travelling to the towne of Trenent ;
and tiiat by a wonderfull manner hee was in a moment convayed at midnight from Scotland to Burdeux in France, (being places of no fmall dillance,) into a merchantes fellar there ; and after beeing
fent from Burdeux into Scotland by certaine Scottilh merchants to the Kings Majeflie, that he difcovered thofe Witches, and was the caufe of their apprehenfion ; with a number of matters miraculous
and incredible : all wliich in truth are moll falle. Neverthelefs, to fatisfie a number of honefl mindes,
who are defirous to be informed of the veritie and truth of their confeffions, which for certaintie is
more flraunger than the common reporte runneth, and yet with more truth, I have undertaken to publilli this fliort Treatife, which declareth the true difcourfe of all that happened, and as well what was
pretended by thofe wicked and deteltable Witches againll the Kingis jNIajellie, as alio by what means
they wi-ought the fame.

All which examinations (gentle Reader) I have here tnily publilhed, as they were taken and uttered
in the prefence of the Kings Majeftie, praying tliee to accept of it for veritie ; the fame being fb true
as cannot be reproved.

A True Discourse
Of the apprehenfion of fundrie Witches lately taken in Scotland ; whereof
fome are executed, and fome are yet imprifoned. With a particular recitall of their examinations, taken in the prefence of the Kings Majeftie.
God, by his omnipotent power, hath at all times, and daily dooth take fuch
care, and is fo vigilant for the weale and ju'efervation of his owne, that thei'eby he
difajjpointeth the wicked practices and evill intentes of all fuch as by any meanes
whatfoever feeke indirectly to confpire any thing contrary to his holy will : Yea,
and by the fame power he hath lately overthrowne and hindered the intentions
and wicked dealings of a great number of ungodly creatures, no better than
Devils ; who, fuffering themfelves to be allured and enticed by the Devil whom
they ferved, and unto whom they were privately fworne, entered into the deteftable art of Witchcraft, which they ftudied and practifed fo long time, that in the

' There appears to have been another edition of this remarkable Tract, in all respects the same with
the Roxburghe reprint. At least, in the Gent. Mag. vol. xlix, p. 393, it is reprinted, but bears at the
foot of the title-page, ' At London, printed for Thomas Nelson." Nelson was probably joint proprietor
with Wright, each party affixing his name to the copies sold by him.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 215

ende they had feduced by their forcerie a number of others to be as bad as themfelves, dwelling in the boimdes of Lowthinn, which is a principall fliire or part of
Scotland, where the Kingis Majeftie ufeth to make his cheifeft relidence or abode :
and to the ende that their deteftable wickednelTe, which they privily had pretended againft the Kingis Majeftie, the commouweale of that countrie, with the
nobilitie and fubjects of the fame, lliould come to light, God of his vinfpeakable
goodnes did reveale and laie it open in verie ftrange forte, thereby to make
known to the Avorld that their actions were contrarie to the lawe of God, and the
naturall affection which we ought generally to beare one to an other : The manner of the revealing whereof was as followeth.

Within the towne of Trenent, in the kingdome of Scotland, there dwelleth
one David Seaton, who, being dejjutie bailiife in the faid towne, had a maid called Geillis Duncane, who ufed fecretlie to abfent aiad lie forth of hir maifters
houfe every other night : This Geillis Duncane tooke in hand to helpe all fuch
as were troubled or grieved with anie kinde of ficknes or iufirmitie, and in lliort
Ipace did perfourme many matters moft miraculous ; which things, for afinuche
as file began to do them upon a fodaine, having never done the like before,
made her maifter and others to be in great admiration, and wondered thereat :
by meanes whereof, the faide Davide Seaton had his maide in great fufpition that
fliee did not thofe things by naturall and lawfuU waies, but rather fuppofed it
to bee done by fome extraordinarie and unlawfuU meanes. Whereupon, her
maifter began to grow verie inquifitive, and examined hir which way and by
what meanes fliee was able to performe matters of fo great importance ; whereat fliee gave him no aunfwere : ne\Trthelers, her maifter, to the intent that hee
might the better trie and finde out the truth of the fame, did with the help of
others torment her with the torture of the pilliwinkes^ upon her fingers, which is
a grievous torture ; and binding or wrinching her head with a cord or roape,
which is a moft cruell torment alio ; yet would flie not confefs anie thing ; whereuppon, they iidpectiiig that flie had beene marked by the Devill, (as commonly
witches are,) made diligent fearch about her, and fovmd the enemies marke to be
in her fore crag, or fore part of her throate ; which being found, fliee confefTed
that al her doings was done by the wicked allurements and entifements of the
Devil, and that flie did them by witchcraft. After this her confeflion, flie was
committed to jn'ifon, where fliee continued a feafon, where immediately fliee accufed thefe perfons following to bee notorious witches, and caufed them forth-

' ' Pihiiewinkis,' or phmieicinhs^ a severe instrument of torture, apparently similar to the
' thiimbiehins,' or thumbscrews, afterwards used both in Scotland and England. From a quotation
made by Cowell, in his ' Law Interpreter,' this torture appears to have been applied to Robert Smyth
of Bury, in the reign of Henry IV. — ' Ceperunt infra predictam villam, et ipl'ura in ferro pofuerunt et
cum cordis iigavermtt, et jvper jwlUces ipiius Roberti, quoddam iiilliumentum vocatum Pyrewitikes,
ita ftricte et dure poluerunt, quod fanguis exivit de digitis illius.' Car(. Abbatie S. Edmu7idi, MS.
fol. 341. 2 See her Trial, Jan. 27, 1590-1.

216 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

with to be aijpreliended, one after another, viz. Agnes Sampfon,- tlie eldeft
witche of them all, dwelling in Haddington ; Agnes Tomplbn of Edenbrough ;
Doctor Fian alias John Cuninghani, mafter of the fchoole at Saltpans in Lowthian, of whofe life and ftrange acts you flial heare more largely in the end of
this difcourle. Tliete were by the I'aide Geillis Dimcane accul'ed, as alio George
Motts wife, dwelling in Lowthian ; Robert Grierlbn, flcijjper ; and Januet
Blandilands ; with the jiotters wife of Seaton ; the fmith at the Brigge Hallis,
with innumerable others in thofe parts, and dwelling in thofe bounds aforefaid ;
of whom fome are alreadie executed, the reft remaine in prilbn to receive the
doome of judgement at the Kinges Majefties will and plealure.

The I'aide Geillis Duncane alio cauled Ewphame Mecalrean' to bee apprehended, who confpired and performed the death of her godfather, and who ufed her
art upon a gentleman, being one of the Lordes and Juftices of the Seffion, for
bearing good will to her daughter. Shee alfo cauled to be ajjprehended one Barbara Naper,- for bewitching to death Archibalde lait Earle of Angus, who languillied to death by witdicraft, and yet the fame was not fulpected ; but that
hee died of fo ftraunge a difeafe as the Phifition knewe not how to cui'e or remedie
the fame. But of all other the faid witches, thefe two laft before recited, were
reputed for as civill honeft women as anie that dwelled within the cittie of Edenbrovigh, before they were apprehended. Many other befules were taken dwelling in Lieth, who are detayned in prifon untill his IMajefties further will and
pleafure be knowne ; of whole wicked dooings you fliall particularly heare, which
Avas as followeth.

This aforelaide Agnis Sampfon, which was the elder witche, was taken and
brought to Haliriud Houfe before the Kinges Majeftie, and fundry other of the
nobilitie of Scotland, where flie was ftraytly examined ; but all the perfwafions
which the Kinges Majeftie ufed to hir, with the reft of his Councell, might not
provoke or induce her to confeffe any thing, but ftoode ftiffely in the deniall of all
that was layde to her charge ; where upon they caufed her to bee conveyed away
unto prifon, there to receive iuch torture as hath beene lately provided for witches
in that country : And for as much as by due examination of witchcraft and
witches in Scotland, it hath lately beene founde that the Divell dooth generally
marke them with a privie marke, by reafon the witches have confeired themfelves, that the Divell doth licke them with his tong in Ibme jirivie part of their
bodie, before hee dooth recyve them to bee his fervauntes, which marke commonlie
is given them under the haire in fome part of their bodie, whereby it may not
eafdy bee founde out or feene, although they be fearched ; and generally fo long
as the marke is not feene to thofe which fearch them, lb long the parties that

' Ew])liame Macalieane of Cliftounliall. See lier Trial, Jun. 9, 1391, - See her Trial. The

persons composing the majority of those who acquitted her, were brought to trial for Wilful Error.

24 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 217

hath the marke will never confefle aiiie thing. Therefore, by fpeciall commandment, this Agnis Sampfon had all her haire fliaven off, in each parte of her bodie,
and her head thrawne with a rope, according to the ciiftome of that countrie,
beeing a payne moft grevous, which flaee continued almoft an hower, during
which time flie would not confelFe anie thing, untill the Divels marke was founde
upon her privities; then lliee immediately confeffed whatfoever was demaunded of
her, and juftifying thofe perfons aforefaide to be notorious witches. Item, The
faid Agnis Toniplbn (Sampibn) was after brought againe before the Kinges Majeftie and his Councell, and beeing examined of the meetings and deteftable
dealings of thofe witches, Ihe confeifed, that upon the night of AUhoUow Even
laft, fliee was accompanied, as well with the perfons aforefaide, as alfo with a
great many other witches, to the number of two hundreth, and that all they together went to Sea, each one in a riddle or cive, and went into the fame very
fubftantially, with flaggons of wine, making merrie and drinking by the way
in the fame riddles or cives, to the Kirke of North Barrick in Lowthian ; and
that after they had landed, tooke handes on the lande, and daunced this reill or
fliort daunce, linging all with one voice,

Commer goe ye before, commer goe ye,
Gif ye will not goe before, commer let me.
At which time fliee confelTed, that this Geillis Duncane did goe before them,
playing this reill or daunce, uppon a fmall trumpe, called a Jewes trump, untill
they entred into the Kirk of North Barrick.

Thefe confeffions made the King in a wonderfull admiration, and fent for the
faide Geillis Duncane, who upon the like trump did play the faide daunce before the Kinges Majeftie, who in refpect of the ftrangenes of thefe matters, tooke
great delight to be prefent at their examinations.

Item, The faid Agnis Tompfon (Sampfon) confeffed, that the Divell, being
then at North Barrick Kirke attending their comming, in the habit or likenefle
of a man, and feeing that they tarried over long, bee at their comming enjoyned
them all to a pennance, which was, that they fliould kilTe his buttockes, in fign
of duety to him; which being jiut over the pulpit bare, every one did as he had
enjoyned them : And having made his ungodly exhortations, wherein he did
greatly inveigh againft the King of Scotland, he received their oathes for their
good and true fervice towards him, and departed ; which done, they returned to
fea, and fo home again. At which time, the witches demaunded of the Divell,
'Why he did beare fuch hatred to the Kinge ?' Who aunfwered, ' By reafon the
King is the greateft enemie bee hath in the world.' All which their confeffions
and depofitions are ftill extant upon record. Iteji, The faide Agnis Sampfon
confeffed before the Kinges Majeftie fundrie thinges, which were fo miraculous

VOL. I. 2 E

218 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

and ftrange, as that his Majeftie faide ' they were all extreame lyars ;' whereat
fliee aunlwered, ' (lie would not wifli his Majeftie to luiipofe her wordes to hee
falfe, but rather to beleve them, in that fliee would difcover fuch matter unto
him as his Majeftie fliould not any way doubt of.' And therupon taking his
Majeftie a little aftde, lliee declared unto him the verie wordes which paffed betweene the Kinges Majeftie and his Queene at Upflo in Norway, the firft night
of mariage, with the anlwere ech to other ; wherat the Kinges Majeftie wondered greatly, and Iwore ' by the living God, that he believed all the devils in hell
could not have difcovered the fame,' acknowledging her words to be moft true ;
and therefore gave the more credit to the reft that is before declared.

Touching this Agnis Tompfon (Sampfon), llie is the onlie woman who, by the
Divels perfwafion, fliould have intended and put in execution the Kinges Majefties death, in this manner. She confefTed that fliee tooke a blacke toade, and did
hang the fame up by the heeles three daies, and collected and gathered the venom as it dropped and fell from it in ane oifter fliell, and kept the fame venome
dofe covered, untill flie fliould obtaine anie part or peece of foule linnen cloth
that had appertained to the Kinges Majeftie, as fliirt, handkercher, napkin or
any other thing, which fliee practifed to obtaine by nieanes of one John Kers,
who being attendant in his Majefties chamber, defired him for olde acquaintaunce
betweene them, to lielpe her to one, or a peece of fuch a cloth as is aforefaide ;
Avhich thing the faide John Kers denyed to helpe her to, faying hee could not helpe
her luito it. And the faide Agnis "J'omplon (Sampfon,) by her depofitions fince
her apprehenfion, faith, that if fliee had obtayned any one peece of linnen cloth
which the King had worne and fowled, flie had bewitched him to death, and put
him to fuch extraordinarie paines, as if he had been lying upon fliarp thorns and
endis of needles. INIoreover flie confelfed, that at the time when his Majeftie was
in Denmarke, fliee being accompanied by the parties before fpeciallie named,
tooke a cat and chriftened it, and afterward bounde to each par/t of that cat, the
cheefeft parte of a dead man, and feverall joyntis of his bodie : And that in the
night following, the faide cat was convayed into the middeft of the fea by all
thefe witches, fayling in their riddles or cives, as is aforefaid, and fo left the faide
cat riaht before the towne of Lieth in Scotland. This doone, there did arife fuch
a tempeft in the fea, as a greater hath not bene feene ; which tempeft was the
caufe of the perifliing of a boat or veflell comining over from the towne of Brunt
Ilande to the towne of Lieth, wherein was fundrie jewelles and rich giftes,
which fliould have beene prefented to the now Queene of Scotland, at her Majefties coming to Leith. Againe, it is confefled, that the faide chriftened cat was
the caufe that the Kinges Majefties fliippe, at his comming forth of Denmarke, had
a contrarie winde to the reft of his fliippes then being in his companie; which

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 219

thing was nioft ftrange and true, as the Kinges Majeftie acknowledgeth, for when
the reft of the fliippes had a fah-e and good winde, then was the winde contrarie
and altogether againft his Majeftie ; and further, the fayde witche declai-ed, that
his Majeftie had never come fafely from the fea, if his faith had not prevayled
above their intentions.

Moreover, the faide witches being demaunded, how the Divel would ufe them
when he was in their company, they confefled, that when the Devill did recyeve
them for his fervauntes, and that they had vowed themfelves unto him, then hee
woulde carnally ufe them, albeit to their litle pleaftu'e, in refpect to his colde
nature ; and would do the like at fundry other times.

As touching the aforefaide Doctor Fian alias John Cunningham, the examination of his actes fince his apprehenlion, declareth the great fubteltie of the Divell,
and therefore maketh thinges to ajjpeare the more miraculous ; for beeing apprehended by the accufation of the faide Geillis Duncane aforefaide, who confefled
he was their Regefter, and that there was not one man fuffered to come to the
Divels readinges but onelie hee : the faide Doctor was taken and imprilbned, and
ufed with the accuftomed paine provided for thofe offences, inflicted upon the
reft, as is aforefaide. Firft, By thrawing of his head with a rope, wherat he
would confefle nothing. Secondly, Hee was perfwaded by faire meanes to confefle his follies, but that would jwevaile as little. Laftly, Hee was put to the
moft fevere and cruell paine in the worlde, called the bootes ;' who, after he had
received three ftrokes, being inquired if hee would confefle his damnable actes
and wicked life, his toong would not ferve him to fpeake ; in refpect wherof, the
reft of the witches willed to learche his toong, under which was founde two
pinnes, thruft up into the heade ; whereupon the witches did fay, Now is the
charme ftinted; and fliewed, that thofe charmed pinnes were the caufe he could
not confelfe any thing : Then was he innnediately releafed of the bootes, brought
before the King, his confeflion was taken, and his own hand willingly fet thereunto, which contained as followeth : Fiest, That at the generall meetinges of
thofe witches, he was always jjrefent ; that he was clarke to all thofe that were
in fubjection to the Divels fervice, bearing the name of witches ; that alway
hee did take their oathes for their true fervice to the Divell ; and that he wrote

' A dreadful torture, wliicb, to the disgrace of tliis country, was sanctioned by the Privy Council,
to extort evidence from obdurate and perjured witnesses, and also Confessions from criminals of their
own crimes and delinquencies ; or to induce them to inform against or to criminate others, strongly suspected to be implicated. The boots, or boolikins, were chiefly made use of in extreme cases, sucli as
High Treason, \\ itchcraft, &c. This horrid instrument extended from the ankles to the knee, and at
each stroke of a large hammer, (which forced the wedges closer,) the question was repeated. In many
instances, the bones and flesh of the leg were cruslied and lacerated in a shocking manner before confession was made. Fian endured these tortures with almost incredible firmness. See the Trial of
John Master of Orkney, Jan. 24, 1596, &c.

220 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

for them fiich matters as the Divell ftill pleafed to commaimd him. Item, Hee
confefled, that by his witchcraft hee did bewitch a gentleman dwelling neare to
the Saltpans, where the laid Doctor kept Ichoole, onely for beeing enamoured of a
gentlewoman whome hee loved himfelfe ; by meanes of which his forcery, witchcraft and divelifli practifes, hee caufed the faide gentleman, that once in xxiiii
howers hee fell into a lunacie and madnes, and fo continued one whole hower together : And for the veritie of the fame, hee caufed tlie gentleman to bee' brought
before the Kinges Majeftie, which was iippon the xxiiii day of December laft, and
beeing in his Majellies chamber, fuddenly hee gave a great fcritch, and fell into
madneffe, fometime bending himfelf, and fometime capring fo directly up, that
his heade did touch the feeling of the chamber, to the great admii-ation of his
Majeftie and others then prefent ; lb that all the gentlemen in the chamber were
notable to holde him, untill they called in more heljie, who together bound him
hand and foot ; and fuftering the faide gentleman to lie ftill untill his furie were
paft, he within an hower came againe to himfelfe ; when, being demaunded by
the Kinges IVIajeftie, ' what he fawor did all that while,' anfwered, that ' he had
been in a founde lleepe.' Item, The laid Doctor did alio confefle, that hee had
ufed meanes fundry times to obtaine his purpofe and wicked intent of the fame
gentlewoman ; and feeing himfelfe difappointed of his intention, he determined,
by all wayes hee might, to obtaine the fame; trufting by conjuring, witchcraft
and forcerie, to obtaine it, in this manner. It happened this gentlewoman, being
unmarried, had a brother, who went to Ichoole with the faide Doctor ; and calling
the faide fcholler to him, demaunded ' if he did lie with his fiftei-,' who anfwered
' he did :' By meanes whereof, hee thought to obtaine his purpofe ; and therefore
feci'etly promifed, to teach him without ftripes, fo he woiilde obtaine for him
three hairs of his fifters privities, at fuch time as hee fliould fpie heft occafion
for it ; which the youth promifed faithfully to performe, and vowed fpeedily to
put it in practife, taking a peece of conjured paper of his maifter, to lap them in,
when hee had gotten them ; and thereupon the boy practifed nightly to obtaine
his inaifters purpofe, efpecially when his fifter was afleep. But God, who
knoweth the fecrets of all harts, and revealeth all wicked and ungodly practifes,
would not fuffer the intents of this divelifli Doctor to come to that purpofe
which he fuppofed it woulde ; and therefore, to declare that hee was heavily offended with his wicked intent, did fo work by the gentlewomans owne meanes,
that in the ende the fame was difcovered and brought to light ; for fliee being
one night a fleejje, and her brother in bed with her, fodainly cried outt to her mother, declaring that her brother woulde not fuffer her to fleepe ; whereupon her
mother having a quicke capacitie, did vehemently fuQject Doctor Fians inteii-

' Here the first wooden cut is inserted.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 221

tion, by reafon flie was a witch of her felf ; and therefore, prefently arofe, and
was very inqiiifitive of the boy to iinderftand his intent ; and the better to know
the fame, did beate him with fundrie llripes, wherby hee difcovered the truth
unto her. The mother, thei*efore, beeing well practifed in witchcraft, did thinke
it mofl convenient to meete with the Doctor in his owne arte ; and thereupon
took the paper from the boy, wherein hee lliould have put the fame haires, and
went to a yong heyfer which never had borne calfe, nor gone unto the bull, and
with a paire of flieeres clipped off three haires from the udder of the cow,
and wrajjt them in the fame paper, which fliee again delivered to the boy; then
willing him to give the fame to his laide maifter, which hee immediately did.
The fchoole maifter, fo foone as he had received theni,thiiiking them indeede to be
the maids haires, went ftraight and wrought his arte upon them : But the Doctor
had no fooner doone his intent to them, but jjrefently the hayfer cow,whofe haires
they were indeede, came unto the door of the church wherein the fchoole maifter
was, into the which the hayfer went, and made towards the fchoole maifter,leaping
and dauncing ujion him, and following him forth of the church, and to what jjlace
foever he went ; to the great admiration of all the townes men of Saltpans, and
many other who did beholde the fame. The report whereof made all men imagine he did worke it by the Devill, without whome it coulde never have beene fo
fufficiently effected ; and thereupon, the name of the faide Doctor Fian (who was
but a yoong man) began to growe common among the jjeople of Scotland, that
hee was fecretly nominated for a notable conjurer.

All which, although in the beginning he denied, and woulde not confeffe, yet
having felt the paine of the bootes, (and the charme ftinted as aforelayd,) he confefled all the aforefaid to be moft true, without producing any witnefles to juftifie
the fame ; and thei'upon, before the Kings Majefty, hee fubfcribed the fayd confefRons with his owne hande ; which for truth remaineth ujjon record in Scotland.

After that the depofitions and examinations of the fayd Doctor Fian alias
Cuningham was taken, as alreadie is declared, with his own hand willingly
fet thereunto, hee was by the maifter of the i^rifon committed to ward, and appointed to a chamber by himfelfe ; where, forefaking his wicked' wayes, acknowledging his moft ungodly lyfe, fliewing that he had too much folowed the allurements and enticements of Sathan, and fondly practifed his conclulions, by
conjuring, witchcraft, inchantment, fox'cerie, and liich like, hee renounced the
Devill and all his wicked workes, vowed to leade the lyfe of a Chriftian, and feemed newly converted towards God.

The morrow after, ixjion conference had with him, he granted that the Devill
had appeared unto him in the night before, appareled all in blacke, with a white

' The second wood-cut is inserted liere.

222 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

wande in his hande ; and that the Devill demaimded of him, ' If hee woulde continue his faithful] fervice, according to his firft oath and promife made to that
effect :' "\\'Tiome (as liee then faide) he utterly renounced to his face, and faid
unto him in this manner, ' Avoide ! Satan, avoide ! for I have liftned too much
unto thee, and by the fame thou haft undone me ; in refpect whereof I utterly
forfake thee.' To whome the Devill anfwered, that ' once ere thou die thou fhalt
bee mine :' And with that (as he fayd), the Devill brake the white wand, and
immediately vanillied foorth of his fight.

Thus, all the dale, this Doctor Fian continued verie folitarie, and feemed to
have a care of his owne foule, and would call uppon God, fliewing himfelfe penitent for his wicked life ; neverthelefTe, the fame night, hee found fuch meanes that
he ftole the key of the prifon doore and chamber in which he was, which in the
night hee opened and fled awaie to the Saltpans, where hee was alwayes refident,
and firft apprehended. Of whofe fodaine departiu-e, when the Kings Majeftie had
intelligence, hee prefently commanded diligent inquirie to bee made for his apprehenfion ; and for the better effecting thereof, hee fent publike proclamations
into all partes of his lande to the fame effect. By meanes of whofe hot and harde
purfuite he was agayn taken, and brought to prifon ; and then, being called before the Kings Highnes, hee was re-examined, as well touching his departure,
as alfo touching all that had before happened. But this Doctor, notwithftanding
that his owne confeffion appeareth, remaining in recorde imder his owne hande
writting, and the fame thereunto fixed in the prefence of the Kings Majeftie
and fundrie of his Councell, yet did hee utterly denie the fame.

^Vhereupon the Kings Majeftie, perceiving his ftubborne willfulneffe, conceived
and imagined, that in the time of his abfence, hee had entei'ed into newe conference and league with the Devill his maifter; and that hee had beene again newly
marked, for the which he was narrowly fearched ; but it coulde not in anie waie
be founde; yet for more tryall of him, to make him confefTe, hee was commaunded
to have a moft ftraunge' torment, which was done in this manner following. His
nailes upon all his fingers were riven and pidled off with an inftrument called in
Scottiih a Turkas,' which in England wee call a payi'e of pincers, and under everie
nayle there was thrvift in two needels o^'er even vip to the heads. At all which
tormentes notwithftanding, the Doctor never flironke anie whit ; neither woulde
he then confeffe it the fooner, for all the tortures inflicted upon him. Then was
hee, with all convenient fpeede, by commandement, convaied againe to the torment of the bootes, wherein hee continued a long time, and did abide lb many
blowes in them, that his legges were cruflit and beaten together as fmall as might

' Unusual, unaccustomed. " O. Fr. Tttrqwois, truquuije, tenaille a I'ufage des mai'eehaux, i.e.

smith's pincers.

24Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 223

bee; and the bones and flefli fo brufed, that the blond and marrow fpouted forth
in great abundance; whereby, they were made unferviceable for ever. And notwithftanding all thefe grievous paines and cruel torments, hee woulde not confefle anie things ; lb deeply had the Devill entered into his heart, that hee utterly denied all that which he before avouched ; and would faie nothing thereunto, but this, that what hee had done and fayde before, was onely done and
fayde, for fear of paynes which he had endured.

Upon great confideration, therefore, taken by the Kings Majeftie and his Councell, as well for the due execution of juftice uppon fuch deteftable malefactors,
as alfo for example fake, to remayne a terrour to all others heerafter, that fliall
attempt to deale in the lyke wicked and ungodlye actions, as witchcraft, forcerie,
conjuration and fuch lyke ; the faide Doctor Fian was foon after arraigned, condemned and adjudged by the law to die, and then to be burned according to the
lawe of that lande provided in that behalfe. Whereupon hee was put into a
carte, and beeing firft ftrangled, hee was immediately put into a great fire, being readie provided for that purpofe, and there bui-ned in the Caftle Hill of
Edenbrough, on a Saterdaie, in the ende of Januarie laft pall, 1591.

The reft of the witches which are not yet executed, remayne in prifon till farther triall and knowledge of his Majefties pleafure.

This ftrange difcourfe before recited may perhaps give fome occafion of doubt
to fuch as fliall happen to reade the fame, and thereby conjecture that tlie Kings
Majeftie would not hazarde himfelfe in the prefence of fuch notorious witches,
leaft therby might have infued great danger to his perfon, and the generall ftate
of the land ; which thing in truth might ^^^el have bene feared. But to anlwer
generally to fuch, let this fuffice ; that firft, it is well knowen that the King is the
child and fervant of God, and they but the fervants to the Devil ; hee is the
Lords annointed, and they but veffeles of Gods wrath ; hee is a true Chriftian,
and trufteth in God ; they worfe than infidels, for they onely truft in the Devill,
who daily ferves them, till he have brought them to utter deftruction. But
heereby it feemeth that his Highnefle caried a magnanimious and undaunted
mind, not feared with their inchantmentes, but refolute in this, that fo long as
God is with him, hee feareth not who is againft him ; and truelie, the whole
fcope of this Treatife dooth fo plainlie laie open the wonderfull Providence of
the Almightie, that if he had not bene defended by his omnipotencie and power,
his Highnes had never returned alive in his voiage from Denmarke; fo that
there is no doubt, but God woulde as well defend him on the land as on the fea,
where they pretended their damnable practife.

FINIS.

224 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

^iQft Crtason— iHurHer— drirt--vaisms — ^jpprtssion, ^t.

Jan. 19, 1590-1. — Angus M'Coneill of Dinnievaig (Lord of Kintyre,)
and Lauchlane Maclane of Dowart (Lord of Hay.)
[The desperate atrocities committed by the rival Chieftains, Makoneill and
Macleane, some of whose misdeeds form the subject of the following Trial, although unfortunately not without a parallel in the historj^ of the feuds and conflicts of the Clans, yet they give such a gloomy pictm'e of the barbarities then
in some measure tolerated, or at least winked at, through the weakness of the
arna of the law, that some explanation of the circumstances which gave rise to
such scenes of horror and bloodshed seems necessary. This cannot be better
done, than by giving a pretty copious f[uotation from the quaint but forcible narrative of the aiithor of ' The Hiftorie and Life of King James the Sext,' a work
recently edited by Thomas Thomson, Esq. Deputy Clerk Register of Scotland,
for the use of the Members of the Bannatyne Club. The limited impression of
that work must plead the Editor's apology for quoting so largely, as comparatively few have access to this valuable book for reference.]

Angus Mak-Oneill Lord of Kintyre had to bis wyff the fifter of Macleane Lord of Hay ; and
althoght tbay war brether in law, yit the ane was alwayis in fie fufpicioun with the utber, that of
ather fyde thair was fa litle traift, tliat almaift fendle or never did thay meit in aniitie, lyk unto the
common fort of people, hot rather as barbaris upoun thair awin guairde, or ather be thair meflingeris.
Trew it is, that thir Ilandiili men ar of nature verie prowd, fufpicious, avaricious, full of decept and
evill inventiouii aganis his nychtbour, be what way foever he may circnmvin him. Befydis all this,
thay are fa crewell in taking of revenge, that nather have thay regarde to perfon, eage, tym or cans ;
la ar thay generallie all fa far addictit to thair awin tyrannical! opinions, that in all refpects thay exceed in creweltie tlie mail! barbarous people that ever hes bene fen the begynning of the warld ; ane
example whareof ye fall heir in this hiftorie following. — Angus Mac-Oneill underftanding, be dyverfe
reportis, the gude behavior of Maclayne to be fa famous, tliat almaift ho was recommendit and prayfit be the haill newtrall people of thais partis above him felf ; whilk ingendrit fdi rancor in his hart,
that he pretermittit na iuventioun how he mycht deftroy the faid Maclayne. At laft he devyfit to
draw on a familiaritie amang thayme, and inveitit himfelf to be bancattit be iSIaclajnie ; and that the
rather, that Maclayne fould be the reddier to cum over to his He with him the mair glaidlie, ather being requyrit, or upon fet purpofe, as heft; fould pleas him. And when Angus had fent adverteifment
to Maclayne, that he was to cum and mak gude cheir, and to be mirrie with him certayne dayis, Maclayne was verie glaid thareof, audanfuerit to the meflinger, — ' My brother falbe welcome to me," fayd
he, ' cum when he lift.' The meflinger anfuerit, ' it wald be to morrow.' So when Angus arryvit in effect, lie was rycht cheirfullie welcomit be his brother in law, wha remanit thair be the fpace of fyve or
fax dajas. And wlien it was perfavit that Maclaynis provifion was almaift fpent, Angus thocht it
then tyme to remove. Indeid the cuftome of that people is fa gevin to gluttonie, and drinking without all meafure, that as ane is invetit to another, thay never finder fa lang as the vivers do left. In
end Angus fayis, — ' Becaus I have maid the firft obedience unto you, it will pleas you cum over to my
He, that ye may reflave als gude treatment with me as I have done with you.' Maclayne anfuerit that
' he duift, not adventure to cum to him for miftruft ;' and Angus faid, — ' God forbid that evir I fould intend or pretend any evill aganis you ; hot yit, to remove all doubt and fufpicion fra your mynd, I will

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 225

geve you tua pledges, whilkis falbe fent unto you with diligence ; to wit, my eldeft fone, and my awiu
onlie brother geriiiain : Thefe tua may be keapit heu- be your freyndis, till ye cum laiflie bak agayne.'
Maclayne hering this offer, whilk apperit unto him voyd of all fufpiciouii, gave credence, and fo decretit to pas witli him to Kiiityre ; and forder to teftefie that bayth he flraplie belevit all to be trew,
and that upoun hoip of gude frejnidlhip to continew, ho thocht expedient toretene a onlie pledge, and
that was Angus liis brother, and wald cary with himfelf his awin nevoy the fone of Angus. Whether
he did this to fave himfelf fra fnfpicion of daynger, as apperantlie of the event he did it, or geve he
brocht him bak agajTie upon liberall favour, 1 will not difpute ; becaus I have tauld you afore the
perfyt nature and qualeteis of thais Illandis people ; yit becaus Maclaynis educatioun was cevlle, and
brocht up In the gude l&wis and maners of Scotland from his yowth, it may be, that he lies had double
confideratioun, ane be kynd, and another be art of honeft deliberatioun. To conclude, to Kintyre he
came, accumpaneit with 45 men of his kynnisfolk, and llowt fervauds, in the moneth of Julii 1586;
whare at the firft arryvall thay war maid welcome, with all humanitie, and war fumptuoflie bancattit
all that day. Bot Angus in that mepie tyme had premoneifl all his freynds and weilwillers within
his He of Kintyre, to be at his hous that fame nycht, at nyne of the clock, and nattier to cum fouer
nor laitter ; for he had concludit with himfelf to kill thayme all, the verie firft nycht of thair airyvall ;
fearing, that geve he fould delay any langar tyme, it myclit be, that ather he fould alter his malicious
intentioun, or els that Maclayne wald fend for fuui greater forces of men for his awin defence. Thus
he concelit his intent ftill, till bayth he faud the tyme commodious, and the verie place proper ; and
Maclayne, being logeit with all his men within a lang hous, that was fumthing diftant fra uther howling, tuik to bed with him tliat nycht his nevoy, the pledge aforefpokin. Bot within ane hour tharefter, when Angus had aflemblit his men to the nomber of tua hundreth, he placit thayme all in ordor about the hous whare Maclayne then lay. Tharefter he came him felf, and eallit at the dure upon
]\Iac!ayne, ofl'ring to him his repofing drink, whilk was forgottin to be gevin to him before he went to
bed. Maclayne anfuerit, that he defyrit na drink for that tyme. Althoght, fo be, faid the uther, it is
my will that thou arryfe and cum furth to relTave it. Then began Maclayne to fufpect the falfet,
and fo an-aife with his nevoy betuix his Ihoulders, thinking that geve prefent killing was intentit aganis
him, he fould fave him felf falang as he could, be the boy ; and the boy perfaving his father with a
naiked fworde and a nomber of his men in lykmanner about, cryit with a lowd voyce, mearcie to his
uncle for Gods faik ; whilk was grantit, and immediately Maclayne was removit to a fecret chalmer
till the morrow. Then cryit Angus to the remanent that war within; — famony as wald have tiiair
awin lyvis to be faif, thay fould cum furth, tua onlie exccptit, whilk he nominat ; fa that obedience
was maid be all the reft, and thais tua onlie feyring the daynger, refufit to cum furth. Angus feing
that, comraandit incontinent to put fyre to the lious, whilk was immediatlie performit, and thus war
the tua men cruallie and unmearcefullie brynt to the death. Thefe tua war verie nar kynnifmen to
Maclayne, and of the eldeft of his clan, renownit bayth for counfall and manheid. The reft that war
preafoners, of tlie haill nomber aforetaidd, war ilk ane beheadit tlie dayis following, ane for ilk day,
till the haill nomber was eiulit ; yea, and that in Maclaynis awin fight, being conftraynit thareunto
with a dolorous adverteifment, to prepare himfelf for the lyk tragicall end, howfone thay fould be all
killit. And when the day came that Maclayne fould have bene brocht furth, miferablie to have maid
his tragicall end, lyk unto the reft, it pleafit Angus to lowp upon his horfe, and to cum furth for joy
and contentatioun of mynd, evin to fe and behauld the tyrannicall fact with his awin eyis. Bot it
pleafit God, wha mearcifuUie deilis with all man, and difappoyntis the decrees of the wicked, to difapoynt his intent for that day alfo, for he was not fa fone on horfe, bot the horfe ftumblit, and Angus
fell of him and brak his leg, and fo was careit hayme.

The report of this falfet was careit to the Erie of Argyle, Lord Juftice Generall of Scotland, wha
immediatlie aflemblit his freyndis, and thay tlioght neceftar to compleyne to the King for revenge.

VOL. I. 2 F

226 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

The King direetit letters to Angus, be an herauld at armes callit Orrnond, commanding liira to reftoie
Maclayne in the hands of the Erie of Argyle. But the melienger was inteiTuptit at the heavening
port, whare he fould have tayiie ihippiug towart Kintyre, and fo retuinit. Yit be exceidmg travell
maid be Argyllis frepids, and many unreafonable flrait conditions grantit to Angus, at the laft, Maclayne was randrit. Bot within few nioneths tharefter, Maclayne maid fie preparatioun of annit men,
and aflemblit a great nomber of weill difpofit perfons, wha came with him to Kintyre for revenge of
the former injurie ; whare, what be fyre, what be fvvorde, and what be watter, he deilroyit all mankynd, nayne except, that came in liis way, and all Ibrt of beaft that fervit for any domeflik ufe or plealure of man : And finallie, he came to the verie place whare Angus was mirrelie camping, luiking for na
fik luddan iuvafioun for the tyme ; geve he had not bene horfit incontinent, and withdrawia him felf
to a ftraiig caftell whilk was nar by, he had bene weill recompanceit for bis former traitorie. — It is a
certayne rewll, that all fault growis greater be overfight and forgevenes ; for geve tranfgreflions be
puneill in dew tyme, the Prence not onlie dois his dewtie in executing of juflice, to the great coutentatioun of the offendit perfon, and gude examjile to the pofleritie, as a mirror of his gude lyf ; bot alfo,
he gevis a terror to all offendors weill to behave thaynie felfis, for feare of regorous jmneilliment.

I have tauld you at lenth the barbarous proceidings of tliefe Ilandilhmen, wha aithoght thay war
writtin for be the King, and fubteilie traynit in to Edinburgh, in the yeir of God 1591, with promeis
of the King faiflie to pas and repas, unhurt or moleflit in thair body or guddis ; yit thay war bayth
comniittit to warde within the Caflell of Edinburgh, whare the King, according to equitie, reafon, juftice and gude policie, fould have put thayme to a tryall, and had thayme convict for fik odious uumearcefuU cryraes committit be thayme, bayth aganis the law of God and man, war notwilhflanding
demittit frie to vepas hayme agayne, for a fmall pecuniall fowme, and a Ihaymefull Kemiilion grantit

to ather of thame Hijforie aiid Life of King James the Sext, (Baunatyne Club's Edit.) 4to, Edin.

1825, p. 217.

The qiihilk day, Angus M'Conill of Diimievaig, being enterit on 2:)annell, accufit and perl'ewit be Dittay, be Mr David M'^Gill of Cranftoim Ryddell, Aduocat to our foiierane lord, of the crymes following.

Dittay against Aligns M'CuniU of Dinnieveg.

Fyust, for the maid heich poynt of Treflbune, comniittit be him : That he,
1)6 him felf}' and vtheris in his name, of his caufmg, aganis baith the eftait of his
Maieftie and Croun, as alfo aganis the eftait of the countrey, in the monethis of
September, October, November, December, att the leift in ane or vthir of thame,
the j'eir of God P.V^lxxxvij yeiris, tuik vp bandis of men of weir, ftrangearis,
Inglifmen, retenit and kejiit thame in ciimpanie with him, vnder his waiges,
within the countrey of Kintyre, the North and ^^'eft lies, invadaud and perfewand vpoun his partiderlie deidlie feid, boi'iie aganis Laiichlan M'Clayne of Dowart, the faid Lauchlane, his kyn, freindis, allya, affifteris and jiairt-takaris, being
fubiectis and inhabitantis of his hienes realme : In the quhilk Invafioune, he, accumpaneit with the faid men of weare, ftrangearis, Inglifmen, maid findrie
ilauchteris, l)yrningis, heirfchipjjis and vthir notorious murthouris and oi^jH'efiioiines, vfurjiand thairthrow, our fouerane lordis auctoritie vpoune him ; it being exprellie iidiibite, be the lawis and ordinance of the realme, that na man fould
tak vpoun hand, nor attempt, to ftryke drum, raife ony bandis of men of weare,

2J.JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 227

on horffe or fute, without expres Commiffioun and ipeciall licence of his Maieltie and Coiinllill grautit thairto : Lyke as, alfo, it is prohibite, that iia Inglilinen
be broclit within our fouerane lordis dominioun, to protect and afliiir ony of his
fubiectis be ordour of hoftilitie, as men of weir, quhairbye the eftait of the cuntrey or liegis thairof mycht be trublit, vnder tlie pane of TrefToune : Quhilk
deid maill treirouabill, is notorious and can nocht be denyit be yow (him), be
reflbune that ye (he) in your (his) Supplicatioune, laitlie prefentit to his Maieftie
and Counfall in the moneth of July laftwes, fet doune the fame as ane poynt of
your (his) Siipplicatioune ; allegeing the diflbluing of the faid Inglifmen of weir
and directing of thaine to Ireland, to half bene a pairt of your (his) obedience ;
nochtwithftanding the deid it felff is maift treflbnabill ; quhilk ye (he) can not
deny. — Item, For the trefTonabill raifling of fyre, byrning and hereing' of the
Landis of Mull, Terrie, Coill and Loyng, being a pairte of his Maiefteis propir
landis, and of his hienes realme and dominioune : And then vnmercifuUie flew,
brynt to deid and murdreift twa hundreth perfounes, fubjectis to his Maieftie, men,
wyffes and bairnis. And this wes done be him, his men, freindis, ferwandis, affifteris and complices in the moneth of the yeir of God I"'.VMxxxvij

yeiris ; committand thairbye maift wyild, barberous and trefTonabill creweltie.
— Itkm, For airt, pairt, red and counfall, of the trefTonabill ffyi-e-rafing and burning of tlie toune of Cairfaik, in IMwle, and hereing thairof, in the moneth of
Junij laftbypaft ; in the qviliilk trelTonabill fTyre-railfing be him, at leift, he being airt, pairt, i-ed and counfall thairof, refTet and ratihabitioune,

M^Ilvray, ane of our fouerane lordis liegis, wes murdreift and flane. — Item, Forfamekill as, be Act of Parliament, it is ftatute and ordanit, that in caife ony of
our fouerane lordis liegis wer flayne or nuirdreift, being vnder the credeit and
power of the flayer, the committer of fik flauchter fuld be declarit tratour ; and
the deid to l)e TrefToune, with foirfaltour of lyffe, landis and guidis : And trew

it is and of veritie, that in the moneth of Junij laftwes M^llheynych

and M^llheynych, being captiues and prefoneris, detenit be him be tlie

fpace of dyuerfe dayis, and takyn vnder afTurance betwix him and his partie
Lauchlane M^Clane ; he, in the faid moneth, caufit bring thame out of prelToune,
and in his awin prefence caiifit ftryke of thair heidis without ony dome, and by"
all ordour of law, vfurping his gracis auctoritie ; quhairthrow he lies incurrit
the cryme of TrefToune and panes thairof. — Item, Forfamekill as (he) being ane
landit gentleman, lies in all the depredatiounes, ff}a"e-rafingis, murthouris and
heirfchips^ aboue writtin, and in the executing of everie ane of thame, committit
manifeft thift and ftoutli reif of cattell, infycht and iileneifling, ftollin, reftet and
reft be him, his men of weir, kynuifiuen, freindis, afTifteris and pairt-takeris :

' Harrying:, plunderinor, sacking, devastation. ' Pa«t, contrary to, in defiance of. ' Acts of

plundering and devastation.

228 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

quhairthrow, lie be the Actis of Parliament lies incurrit the cryme of Treffouiie,
and avicht to fuffer the pane thairof.

Refusit to pafs to aue Aflyis, bot become in our foverane lordis will for the
faniin.

The fainyn day, Lauchlane ^rClane of Dowart, being acciifit and perfewit be
the faid Mr Dauid I\rGill, adiiocat, (of the crimes following,) committit be him.
DiTTAY against Lauchlane M^Clane of Dowart.

That he, be him felfF, and vtlieris in his name, of his cauffing, aganis the
eftait of his Maieftie and Croun, as alfo aganis the eftait of the countrey, in the
moneth of November 1588 yeiris, tuik vp baiidis of men of weir, ftrangearis,
Spanzertis, quha were ane pairt of the armie, callit ' The Halie Lyg," deitinat for fuppreffioun of all that profeflit the trew and Crillian Religioune ; and
fwa to fubuert the eftait of the Kingis Maieftie, his Croun, countrey and commoune-welth thairof : Quhairthrow, thay wer fund and declarit, oppin and publict inimes, and fwa to be refiftit, be Act of Counlall ; as in the faniiu, of the dait
the fyi-ft of Auguft 1588, att mair lenth is contenit : Neuirtheles, he reteiiit and
kejjit thame in cumpanie with him, vnder his waiges, within the He of Mvlle,
and remanent North and Weft lies, invadand and perfewand, vpoun his particuler deidlie feid borne aganis Angus M'Conill of Dinneveg ; the faid Angus,
his k}ai, freindis, allya, affifteris and pairt-takeris, being fubjectis and inhabitautis
of his IMaiefties realme : In the quliilk invafioun, he, accumpaneit with the faid
men of weir, ftrangearis, Spanzertis, publict ininieis of the eftait, as faid is, maid
Inidrie flauchteris, heirfchipis, birningis, depredatiounes and otheris notorious
murthouris and oppreffiounes ; and fpeciallie, in the faid monetli of November,
he brint with fyre the landis of Canna, Rum, Eg and EUen-ne-Muk, and hereit
the fame ; he flew and crewillie murdreift Hector M'Cane Chaunauiche and Donald Bayne his brothir, with ane grit nownier of wyffis, bairnis and puir laboreris of the ground, about aucht or nyne fcoir of fawles, quha had efchapit the
fyre, wes nocli fpairit be his bluidie fword. And att that fame tyme, accumpaneit with the faidis ftrangearis, Spanzeartis. publict inimeis as faid is, he tuik
with him the cannoune, treffonablie befageit the lious of Ardenmvrche, be the
fpace of fax or fewin dayes, he caufit fcliwit diners fchottis thairat, and flew

diners gentilmenne thairin, callit" ;

vfurpand thairthrow his liienes authoritie : It being exin-eflie inhibite, be the
lawis and ordinances of the realme, that na man fould tak vpoun hand to ftryke
drum, rais bandis of men of weir, on liors or fute, (or) befaige houifis, without
expres Commiflioune and fpeciall Licence of his Maieftie and Counlall grantit
thairto. Quhilkis deidis maift treffonabill, and fiieciallie the lifting of men of

' The Holy League or Alliance. ' A line left blank in the Record.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 229

weir, Spanzertis, ])ublict iniineis as faid is, execute be him, ar notorious. — Item,
Being- accwfit and perfewit, that, flbrlaniekill that, be Act of Parliament, it is
ftatute and ordenit, that in cais on)'' of our Ibuerane loi'dis liegis wer flayne or
murdreift, being vnder the credite and power of the flayer, the committer of fie
flaucliter Ibiild be dedarit traittoure, and the deid to be TrefToune, with forfaltour of lyffe, landis and guidis : And trew it is and of veritie, that in the moneth
of Februar, the yeir of God r'WMxxxA'ij yeiris, the faid Lauchlane, vnder aflurance and freindfchii^, in compleiting of mariage betuix his moder and Johnne
M^Ean of Ai'dinmurchin, tliat fame nycht eftir the mariage, lie, accunipaneit
with his freindis, feruandis and complices, come to the hous quhair the faid
Johnnis feruandis wer fleping, dredand na fic iniurie, as ye (he) thane execute,
without mercy and pitie he murdreift and flew Donald M^Ean Roy "\"'Eane, and
Johnne Growane ]\rincolliff, with the nowmer of threfcoir faules, men and boj^es,
his graces fubiectis ; and the faid Johnne (I\rEan of Ardnamurchin) his guidfader, with his boj% wer only faulfF be the moyan of his mother : And thairby
committing the cryme of Treflbime. — ItEjM, For contravening of the foirfaid
Actis of Parliament, and committing Treflbime, in fa far as, aliurance being takin betuix him and the faid Angus IVrConeill, be the travellis of the Erll of
Ergylle, in the moneth of July, the yeir of God I".VMxxxix yeiris, quhilk Aves
appoyntit to indure vnto the fyrft day of May laftbypaft ; nochtwithftanding
thairof, haifing na relpect to our fouerane loi'dis Proclamatioun, maid for keijing
of guid rewle in his Maiefteis abfence furth of this realme, he, without ony
feir of God, reverence of his hienes authoritie, nocht i-egairding his awin a3^th,
promeis, fnbfcriptioune or ony kynd of honeftie, maift fchamefullie contravenit

and violatit the faid afllirance, quhen as, in the moneth of I"'.'\''Mxxxix

rei'is, accompaneit with grit forces of men, bodin in feir of weir, came to the
landis and He of Ornenfay, bi'unt and herreit the famin ; immediatlie thaireftir
come to the landis of Ardnavin in Hay, and to the He of G\gay, pertening to the
faid Angus, and thaii\ he nocht only treflbnablie rafit fyre and brunt and herreit
the famin, bot alfo, maift wickitlie and vnmercifullie brynt to deid, flew and
crevv'allie mux'dreift men, wj^ffis and baii'nis being thairin, nocht fpairing young,
nor auld ; being all his Maiefteis fubiectis and tennentis, inhabitantis of the faid
Angus M'^Coneillis lands, vnder traifl; and afllirance foirfaid : Committand thairby maift manifeft Treflbune, contrar the faid Act of Parliament ; and incurrand
thairtlirow the panis thairin contenit. — Item, For the treflbnabill IFyre-rafing,
burning and herreing, of the haill landis of Hay, being xxiiij myle of lenth,
quhilk is a pairt of his gracis pi-opir landis and of his hienes realme and dominioune ; and thane maift vnmercifullie flew, brunt to deid and murdreift Donald
M^Dowthie ^'ayne, Duncan M'Conne in Hay, Johnne Dow M'^Xeill ^'eid, Alex2g0 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

ander M'Rorie Rod, Gilliechallum M'Kay and M'Kay, brethir, Neill

Dow ^rGillieveray, Gilliechallum M'Gilliechoane, and foiirfcoir gentilmen, befyde ane multitude of wemen, bairnis and jouir laboureris of the ground. And
this wes done be him, his men, tennentis, feruandis and complices, in the moneth
of July laftbypaft. Connnittand thairthrow maift vyld, barbarous and treffonabill crewaltie. — Item, Being accufit, fforfamekill as he, being ane landit gentilinan, hes, in all the depredatiounis, ffyre-rafmgis, murthouris and heirichipis
aboue writtin, and in executing of ewerie ane of thame, committit manifeil thift,
ftouth-reifT of cattell, infycht and plenifling, ftollin, reffett and reft be him, his
men of weir, kynnifinen, freindis, affiftexis and pairt-takeris : Quhairthrow, he,
be the Act of Parliamant, hes incurrit the pane of TrefToune.

Become in our Ibuerane lordis will for the famin. ' Ixcarceuat. in Caftro
de Ediuburghe,' until his Majefties will fliould be declared.

[Curia Justiciarie .9. d. u. Regis, fe)ita in Pretorio de Edinburghe, .rxr/J
Januarij 1590, per 3[agistnim Vmphridem BhjnscheJes, Jtisticiarium
Depntatum.^

Couspiriua i\)t i^titfi's 23cati)— asiitcljtraft — ^oiceci) — aiuanta--

tion, ^c.

Jan. 27, I59O-I. — Agxes Saripsoune in Nether Keythe.

In ' The Hiftorie of King James the Sext,'' the extraordinary personage, whose trial ensues, is designated ' Agnes Sampson, grace wyff, alias callit the wyfe wyff of Keyth.' She is said by Amot'
to have been ' a grave inatronlike woman, of a rank and comprehension above the vulgar ;' and Archbishop Spotswod, in his History of the Church of Scotland,^ gives the following interesting notice :
' Most of this winter was spent in the discovery and examination of Witches and Sorcerers. Amongst
these, Agnes Samson (commonly called The Wife Wife of Keith) was most remarkable; a woman,
not of the base and ignorant sort of Witches, but matron-like, grave and settled in her answers, which
were all to some purpose. In her Examination, she declared that she had a familiar spirit, who, upon
her call, did appear in a visible form, and resolve her of any doubtful matter, especially concerning the
life or death of persons lying sick. And being asked, what words she used when she called the spirit,
she said her word was, Holla, Majler ; and that he had learned her so to do. .She farther confessed,
that the Earl Bothwell had moved her to enquire what should happen of the King, how long he should
reign, and what shoulil happen after his death ; and the spirit liaving undertaken to make away the
King, after he had failed in performing and was challenged by her, confessed it was not in his power ;
speaking words she understood not, but as she did take them, the words were, II eji homitie de Dieu.'
This is confirmed by Sir .Tames Melville in his Memoirs,* and was probably contained in her judicial
Confession, though not proved before the Assise. Her Trial, like the rest of the present Collection,
is now printed at length for the first time. Mr Arnot, notwithstanding its interest, has reported it in a
few lines ; for his plan admitted of only an outline, and this of but a few of the leading Cases. Should
any of her Examinations be found among the Warrants of the Court of Justiciary or Privy Council,
they shall be inserted in the Appendix.

1 Bannatyne Club's Ediiion, (Thomas Thomson, Esq., Editor,) p. 241. ^ Criminal Trials, p. 31!). ^ Page 3«.3.
Lond. 1668. * Edition printed for the Members of the Bannatyne Club, (Thomas Thomson, Esq., Editor,) p. 29.5.

24Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 231

Dilatit of the particular pojnitis of Wichcraft, contenit in Dittay.

Persewar, MiDauid M'Gill, of Cranftoun-Ryddell, Advocate to cure fouerane lord.

AssisA.
Johnne Speiis, in Saltoune, Robert Byris, tliair, Robert Dikfoune, in BoUoune,

Williame Bartrani, in Carfra, Rol)ert Kyle, tliair, Williarae Stenbous, in Barnis,

Edmund Bartram, in Hoipis, Williame Stratberne, in Tranent, Williame Peris, in Hadingtoune,
DauidRobefoun, in Braid wod- Gilbert Edingtoune, in Hading- Mathow Young, thair,

fyd, toune, James Ricliefoune,

(Chan.) Williame Quhyte, in Beniaid Broune, thair, Alexander Young thair.

Coilftoune-mylne, Robert Bagbie, thair.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfounes of AlTyis, being chofni, fworne and admittit,
efter accufatioune of the faid Agnes be Dittay ; quha reniovit tliame felffis altogidder fiirth of Court to the Airyis-hous ; quhair, efter cliefing of the faid Williame Quhyte chancellair, thay reflonit and votit vpoune the jjoyntis of the faid
Dittay ; and being throuchlie refoluit thairwith, re-enterit agane in jugement ;
quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid chaneillar, fand, pronuncit and declarit
the faid Agnes,

\^Heir Jhllowes the Articles ofhir Dittay, quhairqf schoe was Convict, he

number (53).]

(1.) To be fylit and convict, of foir-knawlege and telling be hir Witchcraft,
that Williame Markeftoune, ferwand to Tliomas Watfoune, in Inuerrefk, was
hot ane deid man. — (2.) Item, fylit and convict, that Williame Blakeis fone
fark being fend to hir, fcho be hir Wichcraft declarit, that the feiknes that he
had was ane elf-fchot. — (3.) Item, fylit and convict, for ^fmg of Wichecraft, in
hailling of Johnne Thomfoune in Dirletoune ; quha remanit crepill nochtwithftanding thairof. — (4.) iTEsr, fylit and convict, for telling be hir AA'^ichecraft,
that Many Nicolfoune gudeman in North Berwick being feik, fcho fould lay hir
lyfe for hirs, [his?] quha noditwithftanding deit thairof. — (5.) Item, fylit and
convict, for fchawing be hir ^Vichecraft, to ane pure woman quha was fend to hir,
be the fi-eiudis of Dauid Lyndefay, tinkler in Dalkeyth, quha had lyin threttie
oulkis feik, and had nocht fpokkin thre dayes befoir the faid pure Avoman come
to hir, that gif he levit over ^Veddinfday, that he wald nocht die of that nialadie ; quha niendit of the famyn, according to hir declaratioune. — (6.) Item, fylit
and convict, that forfamekle as Johnne Peiny being in Preftoune, being one ane
certane tyme vei'rie feik, fcho, be hir incantatioune and prayer, maid him to convales of his feiknes. — (7.) Item, fylit, for vlingof hir prayer and incantatioune

to half haillit ' Halyburntoune, guidman of Inchcarne, being than

in feiknes ; and declaring, that na cherurgeanrie nor phific could help him ; quha
deceiffit, as fcho tauld the famin. — (8.) Item, fylit, for cuming to Beffie Aiken-

' Left blank in Record.

232 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

lieid, fpous to Thomas Vans in Hadingtoun, and vfing liir prayer and dewelifcli
charmes for recovering of liir health to hir. — (9-) Item, fylit, that feho being
fend for to the Lady Rodene, quha wes feik, fche knew be hir devilifch prayer,
that the faid Lady wes nocht hable to recover ; and thairfore, fcho wald noeht
ciim to liir. — (10.) Item, fylit and convict, that fcho being brocht to Johnne
Youngis wyfe, fchipard att Bairfute, att Pafch^ laftwas, that wes feik for the
tyme, the faid Agnes counfall being focht, anent hir health, fche declarit and anferit, that fche wald newir be Weill falang as fcho remauit vpoune the ground^
qnhair fclio wes for the tyme ; bot defyrit, that fcho fould be tranfportit of the
faid ground, and fcho wald owthir die or mend ; qiiha being tranfportit one hir
command, fchortlie thaireftir departit this lyfFe. — (11.) lTE]\r, fylit, that fche
had foir-knawledge be hir Wichcraft of difeafit perfounes, gif thay wald leue or
nocht ; or quha wes wichit^ perfounes. To M'it, That gif fche ftopit anis in hir
prayer, the feik perfoun wes bewichit ; and gif the prayer ftopit twyis, the difeafit perfoune wald die. — (12.) Item, fylit and convict, that fche foir-knew of
the Devill, and tauld Patrik Porteous, that he wald leve bot ellevin yeiris. —
(13.) Item, fylit, that fche wes maid foir-knawin of the Devill, of the laft
Michelmes ftornie ; and that thair wald be grit (kayth, baith be fee and land. —
(14.) Item-, fylit, that fche wes maid foir-knawin be the fpreit,*tliat the Quenis
Maieftie wald newir cum in this countrej^ except the King fetcht hir.— (15.)
lTE:\r, fylit and convict, that fche lernit hir flvill and prayer fra hir fader, quha
tauld hir, that qxihene fche wes fwitit" to ony feik perfoune, and that gif fche
ftojnt in hir prayer, fche wald nocht pas to the feik perfoun ; and gif fche ftopit
nocht, fche wald pas, and the perfoun difeafit wald leve. — (16.) Item, fylit and
convict, that fche be hir dewilyfche jirayer, tauld that James Kirkcaldeis wyffe,
burges of Hadingtoune, wald convales of hir feiknes. — (17.) Item, fyllit, for

hailling of Johnne Ker of , being feik in all mennis judgment to the

daith, quha lay in Alexander Fairleis hous, in Langnudrie ; and that be hir
prayeris and incantatiounis. — (18.) Item, for hailling of Johnne Duncan, in
Muffilburcht, of his feiknes be hir dewelifcli prayeris. — (19.) Item, for the foirtelling of IlTobell Ilammiltounis death, fpous to James Powar ; and telling that
fche could nocht amend hir, excejit the dewill wes rafit ; and hir gudman being
ane fpairand man, and wald nocht wair'' expenfle, fche wald lie raife him ; and
tauld that fche wes bewichit ; and this wes done fax or fewin 3eiris fyne, or
tliairby. — (20.) Item, convict, for the curing of the guidwyffe of Camroun,
qidia gaid vpoun ftiltis eftir hir birth, and that be A\'ichcraft. — (21.) Item,

' Easter. ' Land, pioppitv. rosidence. ■" Bewitched. * Tins term is frequently used par

excellence to desii;;nate t^atan, it being considered l>y the vulgar to he dangerous to use his name
rasiily. ^ Suited, or made suit to, on account of any, &c. *" Disburse, lay out.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 233

convict, for hailling of the Laird of Reidhallis fone be Wichcraft, qiihome the
cheriirgeanis had gevin owir. — (22.) iTEii, fylit and convict, of the cwring of
Robert Dikfoun in Bowtoune, in fomer laftwas, quha wes liifpect be the woman
he gat the bame with, or hir mother, qiiha had putt fmn qiiheit or vthir thingis'
in his dowblett ; and caufit him to leif of the faid dowblett. — (23.) Item, for
the cwring of Johnne Cokburn the ScherefT of Hadingtounis wyffe, quha wes
wichit be the wich of Mirrielawis, be the blaft of ewill Avind, one Hallaw-ewin.
— (24.) Item, fylit and convict, of cureing, be hir Wichecraft, incantatioun and
faying of develifch prayaris, of Alefoun Ker, fpous to Johnne Reftoune, of ane
feiknes contractit be hir, be the meane of Catherene Gray, ane wich ; with the
quhilk feiknes fche wes difeafit, be the fjiace of thre yeiris preceding that the
faid Agnes cureit hir. — (25.) Item, fj^lit and convict, of the vfing of hir develifch

airt of ^Vichcraft, in cureing of , fpous to Robert Caringtoune in

Craprene (Traprene), qua wes bewichit be A'mq''^ Johnne IVrGill, defyring the
faid Robert to pafs and tak the faid Johnne IVrOill, and gif him fair wordes,
and defyre him to pas to his feik wyife ; and gif he jaid with fairnes, guid it was ;
bot gif he will (waJd) nocht, defyrit him to caufe ane young man ga to him, and
inquyir quha gart him do itt, and to cans him cum to his wyffe ; and gif he refufit to cum, to bring him aganis his will ; quha being brocht in her prefens,
fche wes twyis, in xxiiij houris, extreme wod and out of hir wit. — (26.) Item,
acquit^ of hir develifch practelis, and namelie of hir paffing to Natoun Kirk
vnder nycht, with the witch of Carbarrie and vtheris ; and thair taking vp the
bwreit people, and junting of thame,^ quliairof fcho maid inchantit jiowder for
Wichcraft. — (27.) Item, fylit, for cuming to Robert Bail3ie in the Pannis* fone,
in fomer laft, quha wes very feik for the tj'^me ; and only graiping^ him, and
fpeiking fum wordis of charming, went hir way, and the chyld wes cwrit and
maid haill of his feiknes. — (28.) Item, convict, for hailling of Johnne Hammiltoune in Sammelftoune, quha being trublit with ane feiknes in his feit, he come
to sow" (hir), and 56 (fche) fend him haill of the faid feiknes, vpoun the morne
eftir his cuming. — (29.) Iteji, fylit and convict, for cuming to James Libbertounis wyffe in Over Libbertoune, qidia was feik, vfing of hir develifch prayeris
for hir health, and laid quhen (fche) paft away, gif fche come noclit agane
fchortlie, fche wald depart awa ; fche nocht returning, the laid James wyffe de-

' Enelianted or bewitched. '' (On tlie margin) Nota, ' Acquit of yis.' ' Taking away their

' jounts,' or joints, for preparing charms, &c. See Articles 42 and 50. * Viz. Prestonpans.

■* Gripping, taking hold, groping. " From tlie appearance of the Record, it is evident, that ' the

pointis' of the Indictment or Dittay had been engrossed, previous to the trial, to save time in Court.
The Assise returned a ' special verdict,' rehearsing these poi?ilis, and fj/luig or deyiging the panne!,
according to their impression of the evidence. Tlie words ' vow' and ' ye are usually altered to sche.
In this instance, the clerk has omitted to do so.

VOL. I. 2 G

234 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

partit within thre dayes. — (30.) Item, fylit and convict, for hailling of the Lady
Kilbabertoune, be hir devilifch prayaris, quha wes diieafit of ane havie dileis. —
(31.) Item, fylit and convict, for cureing of vmq'" Robert Kerfe in Dalkeyth,
quha wes havelie tormentit with wichcraft and dileis, laid on him be ane ^Veftlande Warlach, quhene he wes in Dumfreis ; qvihilk feiknes fche tuik vpoun hir
felff, and kepit the faniiu with grit groining and torment quhill the morne ; one
quhilk tyme, thair wes ane gritt dyn hard in the hous ; quhilk feiknes fche caift
of hir felfF in the cloife, to the effect ane catt or dog mycht haif gottin the famin ;
and nochtwitliftanding, the famin wes laid vpoun Alexander Dowglas in Dalkeyth, quha dwynit and departit thairwith ; and the faid vmq''' Robert Kers wes
maid haill. — (32.) Item, convict, for the foirtelling, be hir develifch prayer, to
vinq'*" Patrik Hepburne in Banglais wyffe, that hir hulljand, beand leik, wald
die, becaus hir prayer ftopit ; and thairfore, refufit to pas and viffeit him. Quhilk
prayer wes reherfit be hir, in maner following :

Agnes Sampsone's Prayer to Mr imttenlis for Viff or daith}

I TROw'^ in Almychtie God tliat wrocht, Baith heaviii and erth and all of nocht,
In to his deare fone Chryft Jefu, In to J>at anaplie' lord, I trow,
Wes gottin of fe Haly Gaift, Borne of ])e Virgin Marie,
Stoppit to heavin, that all weill fane, And fittis att his faderis rycht hand ;
He baid ws cum, and fair to dome Bayth quick and deid, as he thocht conuene.
I trow als in Jie Haly Gaill. In Haly Kirk my hoip is maill,
That halyfchip quhair hallowaris winnis, To aik forgevenes of ray finnis,
And fyne to ryis in flefch and bane. The lyft'e that newir mair hes gane.
Thow fayis, Lord, ' lovit mocht 50 be. That forrad and maid mankynd of me.'
Thow coft me on Jie aly croce, And lent me body, fauU and voce,
And ordanit me to heavinnis blifs ; Quhalrfore I thank 5e Lord of ])is;
And all 5 our hallowaris lovit be, To pray to fame to pray to me.
And keep me fra fat fellon fea, And from the fyn that faull wald flay.
Thow, Lord, for thy bytter paffioun in. To keip me frome fyn and wardlie fchame,
And endles damnatioune. Grant me the joy newir wilbe gane.
SwEiT Jesus Cristus. Amene.

(33.) Item, fylit and convict, that the fyrft tyme fche begane to ierue the
Dewill, wes eftir the death of hir hufljand ; and that he apperit to hir, in liknes
of ane man, quha commandit hir to acknawledge him as hir maifter, and to renunce Chryft ; quhairvnto fche grantit, being movit be povertie and his promefis, that fche and hir bairnis fould be maid ritch, and Ibuld gif hir power to

' Tliis is neither more nor less than a doggerel version of the Apostles' Creed ; perhaps one of the
monkish rhymes before the period of the Reformation, which Anny had got by heart. - Believe.

' In Lord Fountainhall's Abstract, he reads ' comely ;' but the whole ' prayer' is so different from the
above, that it has likely been taken from some otlier MS., or has been most unfaithfully transcribed.
' Anaplie' seems to be written for aneplie, < aefald,' ' afald,' literally one-fold, sincere, witliout guile, He.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 235

be revangeit of hir inimeis : and eftir that, he appointit tyme and place for thair
nycht meting ; and tliat tyme, in figne that fche wes becum his feruand, he
markit hir in the rycht kne, quliilk mark fche belevit to haif bene ane hurt reffauit be hir fra ane of hir bairnis that wes lyand in the bed with hir ; qnhilk
hurt v/es nocht haill for half ane yeir. — (34.) Item, fylit and convict, that the
Dewill apperit to hir in liknes of ane dog, att quhome fche foclit hir haill refponfis ; and quhene fche putt him away, fche chargeit him to ' depart on the
law he lewis one ;' quha with tliay wordis is coniurit and paffis away. — (35.)
Item, fylit and convict, for failling, with certane hir complices, out of North
Bervik, in ane boit lyke ane chimnay, (the Devill paffing before thame lyke ane
ink of hay,) to ane fchip callit The Grace of God, in the quhilk fche enterit, and
the Dewill caufit hir drink wyne, and gaif hir vthir guid cheir ; quhairof fche
and hir cumpany gaif ane part to thame that wes in the flott boit ; and att hir
being thair, fche faw nocht the marineris, nathir thay faw hir ; and quhene
thay come away, the Dewill rafit ane ewill wind, he being vnder the fchip, and
caulit the fchip perifch, and fche delyuerit tuentie fchilling to Gray-meill,' quha
wes with hir in the laid fchii), for his on-waitting."— (36.) Item, fylit, vpoun
hir awin confeffioune, that fche, be airt of Wichcraft, faillit to ane fchip, quhair
thair wes ane vncouth woman, and the Irfch tailseour and his wyfFe wes principallis thair ; and that Rychard Grahame wes ane vthir of the principallis,
quha had wrocht mekle mifcheif. — (37.) Item, fylit and convict, for cuming to
Alefoune Inglis, Dauid Robefounis wyife, than being feik, quha chaift hir away,
and wald nocht fuffir 30W (hir) to vfe 30ur (hir) Wichcraft, to the hailling of his
wyffe, becaus fche wes brutit^ to be ane wich ; and haifing mett with the faid
Dauid Robefoimis feruand, fche faid to him, ' Gif his maifter had nocht fpokin
the wordis he fpak, his ■wyffe had bene ane haill woman, and gangand on hir
awin feit.' — (38.) Item, fylit and convict, that cjuhene fche wes fend for to
haill the auld Lady Edmeftoune, quhene fche lay feik, befoir the faid Agnes
departit, fche tauld to the gentilwemene, that fche fould tell thame tliat nycht
quhidder the Lady wald haill or nocht ; and appointit thame to be in the gardin eftir fuppei-, betuix fyve and t&..< att ewm. Sche paffit to the gairdene, to
devyife vpoun hir prayer, one quhat tyme fche chargeit the Dewill, calling him
' Elva,' to cum and fpeik to hir, qua come in owir the dyke, in liknos of ane
dog, and come fa neir to hir, that fche wes effrayit, and chargeit him, ' on the
law that he lewit on,' to cum na neirar, bot to anfuer hir ; and fche demandit,
Quhiddir the lady wald leif or nocht. He faid, ' Hir dayes war gane.' Than
he demandit, ' Gif the gentilwemen hir dochteres, quhair thay wer ?' And fche

' One of tlio warloel<s wlio ' kepit tlie dui' at the gvaiul convention at Nortli Beiwiik, called by Sir
James Melville, ' ane auld lely pure plowman.' '' Attendance. ^ Reported — Fr. ' bruit.'

236 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

faid, that ' The gentilwemen faid, that thay war to be thair.' He anfuerit,
' Aue of thame fould be in perrell, and that he fould haif ane of thanie.' Sche
anfuerit, ' It fould nocht be la,' and fwa departit fra hir ^owling. Fra this tyme
quhill eftir fupper, he remanit in the wall.' Quhen the gentilwemen come in,
the dog come out of the wall, and apperit to thame ; quliairatt thay wer effrayit.
In the mene tyme, ane of the faid gentilwemen, the Lady Torfen3e, ran to the
wall, being forceit and drawin be the Devill, quha wald haif drownit hir, war
nocht the faid Agnes and the reft of the gentilwemen gatt ane gryp of hir, and
with all hir (their?) forceis drew hir abak agane, quhilk maid thame all effrayd.
The dog paffit away thaireftir, with ane 30wle. Than fche faid to the gentilwemen, that ' Sche could nocht help the lady, in refpect that hir prayer ftopit ;
and that fche wes forie for itt.' Mairowre, eftir that fche and ane of hir iifteris
careit hir deid" to ane chalmer, quhair fche remanit frenettik thre or four dayes,
and crippill ane quarter of ane 3eir, vntill fche vfit hir develifch inchantments
to coniure the fpreit agane, and fche abaid with hir the tyme that fche lay; and
quhen fche could nocht byde langar hir felff, fche feud hir fone to byde with
hir ; and quhene ather of thame wes prefent, fche wes weill aneuch ; but quhen
thay baith left hir, fche wes als ewill as fche wes of before.— (39-) Item, convict, for that fche haifing done pleafour to the gudwyffe of Gallowfchelis, for the
quhilk fche did nocht fatisfie hir, fa fone als the faid Agnes defyrit ; and thairfore fche faid to the faid guidwyffe, that ' Sche foidd repent it ;' and within few
hoiu-is thaireftir, the faid guidwyffe tuik ane wodnes,^ and hir toung fchot out
of hir heid, and fwallit lyke ane pott ; quhairfore fche fend to hir the thing that
fche defyrit, and prayit hir to cum to hir, and fche baid the feruand ' Ga away
hame, for the guidwyffe wes weill.' — (40.) Item, fyllit and convict, of the delyuerie of ane letter, quhilk Johnne Fiene, clai-k,* maid in George Mutis bak
hous, in the Pannis,* accumpaneit with the guidwyffe of the hous, Gelie Duncan, Beffie Robfoune, Jokkie Gray-meill, Jonet Gaw, Erifch Marioune, the wobfteris wyffe of Setoune, Robert Greirfoune, the guidwyfe of Spilmourfurd-mylne
callit Meg Begtoune, Jame Sparrowis wyfe callit Kait Wallace, quha convenit
thair for rafing of ftorme, to ftay the Queues hame-cuming to Scotland ; eftir
confultatioun, quhether Gelie Duncan or Beffie Thomfoune wes meiteft to fend
the letter with ; and concludit to fend the faid Gelie, quhilk letter wes fend to
Marioun Lenchop in Leyth. The effect quhairoff is this : ' Marioun Lenchop,
ge fall warne the reft of pe fifteris, to raife Ipe wind this day, att ellewiu hoiu-is,
to ftay J)e Quenis cuming in Scotland.' Lykeas, they that wer convenit att the
Pannis fould do for thair part, beeift ;" and to meit thame that wer in the

' Well, (liaw-wfll. ' In a swoon. ' Madness. ■" ' Regiller' and ' Secietar' to the Deril.

See his Trial, Dec. -26, 1590. ' Prestonpans. '' To the eastward.

24 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 237

Pannis ; and att thair meting, thay foiild raak the ftorme vniuerlall thro the
fee. And within audit dayes eftir the laid Bill wes delyuerit, the laid Agnes
Sampfoune, Jonett Campbell, Johnne Fean, Gelie Duncan and Meg Dyn ' baptefit ane catt in the wobftaris hous, in maner following : Fyrft, twa of thame
held ane fingar, in the ane fyd of the chimnay cruik, and ane vther held ane
vther fingar in the vther fyd, the twa nebbis of the fingaris meting togidder ;
than thay patt the catt thryis throw the linkis of the cruik, and paffit itt thryis
vnder the chimnay. Thaireftir, att Begie Toddis hous, thay knitt to the foure
feit of the catt, foure jountis " of men ; qidiilk being done, the fayd Jonet fechit
it to Leith ; and about mydnycht, fche and the tua Linkhop, and twa wyfeis
callit Stobbeis, came to the Peir-heid, and faying thir wordis, ' See that thair be
na defait amangis ws ;' and thay caift the catt in the fee, fa far as thay mycht,
quhilk fwam owre and cam agane ; and thay that wer in the Panis, caift in ane
vthir catt in the fee att xj houris. Eftir quhilk, be thair inforcexie and inchantment, the boit perifchit betuix Leith and Kinghorne ; quhilk thing the Dewill
did, and went before, with ane ftalf in his hand. — (41.) Item, fylit and convict,
for making of ane pictom* of walx, to the limilitude of Mr Johnne Molcrop,^
fader-in-law to Ewfame M'"Cal3ane, att the faid Ewfamis defyre, for the diftructioune of the faid Mr Johnne, and paft with the faid pictour to ane bray
abone ane waiter on the landis of Keyth, and rafit the Spreit, quha coniiuit the
pictour to ferue for the diftructioun of the laid Mr Johnne ; and delyuerit the
famin to Jonett Drummond, feruitour to the faid Ewfame ; and baid hir putt
the famin vndir hir guid-faderis bed-heid, or bed-feit : And this fche did, four
3eiris fyne, before the faid Ewphame wes delyuerit of hir laft birth. — (42.)
Item, fylitt and convict, for putting of mwildis, or powder maid of raenis joyntis
and memberis,^ in Natoun Kirk, vnder Ewphame M'^Cal3anis bed, tene dayes
befoir hir birth ; quhilkis mwildis fche coniureit with hir prayaris, for ftaying
and flaiking of grinding the tyme of hir birth. — (43.) Item, convict, of the
taking of the pane and feikues of the Lady Hirmelloune, the nycht of hir delyuerie of hir birth. — (44.) Item, fylit, of vfing of ane prayer and coniiu'acioime,
quhene fche haillit feik folkis ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Agnes Sampsones jaroye?/- and conjuration for hailling of se'ik folhis.

All kindis of illis that ewir may be, In Cryilis name, I coniure ye ;
I coniure ye, baith mair and les, With all fe vertewis of f e mefs,
And rycht fa, be |)e naillis fa, That naillit Jefus, and na ma ;
And rycht fa, be fe famin blude, That reikit owTe ))e ruithfuU rwid ;
Furth of fe flefch and of fe bane, And in fe eird and in fe ftane.

I CONIURE ]iE, IN GODIS NAME.

' Dunn. ' Joints of dead men. See Articles 26, 42, and 50. ^ Advocate. See Ewphame

Makcalzeau's Trial. * See Articles 26 and 30.

238 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

(45.) Item, fylit and convict, for the charming of George Dikfounes hors and
cattell fra deing, quhairof thair deid threttene ky, oxin and horlis, be the evvill
meanes of Johnne M^Gill ; and fche haifing relTauit ane ftane of cheis, and half
ane ftane of buttir, fra the faid Georgis wyfe, thair deit nane thaireftir. — (46.)
Item, fylit and convict, for the charming of the ky and oxin of Ry chard Spens,
fermorer for the tyme in Hirmeftoiine, and James Quhyte in Gosfurd ; by going
vj} betuene twa and twa of tlianie in thair byre, ftraiking of thair bakis and
wambes, and faying, ' Aue Maria' oft owre. — (47) Item, fylit, for being att the
conventioune quhair Meg Stillcart, Gray and Jonett Campbell wes with hir, and
ane vthir deid fenlyne, being altogidder fyve in number ; qiiliilk wes att the
Kirk of Garvett, be-eift Biirn-fyde. — (48.) Item, for being att the conventioune
betuix Coulland and Carbarry, quhair thair was Agnes Straittoun, togidder
with the Wich of Carbarrie, and hir felfF ; quhair fche quarrellit hir maifter the
Dewill, and that, in refpect fche had newir gottin guid of him, and faid fche
wald renunce him, bott did it nocht ; and he promefit to hir att that tyme, that
na thing fould ga aganis hir. — (49.) lTE:\r, fylit and convict, that fche, with the
guidwyffe of Si)ilmour-fuird, Gelis Duncan, Beffie Thomfoune, Gray-meill, Agnes
Stratoune, with certane vtheris to the nowmer of nyne, convenit att Foulftruthir,
and thair had thair confultatiounis, how thay mycht wrak Dauid Seytoun and
his guidis ; and firft, Gelis Duncan, Beffie Thomfoun and Gray-meill, liaillit'
ane coird att the brig, aiul the faid Agues Samplbne, cryit, ' Haill, liola !' the
end of itt wes very heavie. And qiilien thay had drawin, the Dewill cam vp
att the end of itt, and fjjerit, ' Gif thay had been all guid feruandis ?' Than thay
demandit him, ' Quhat way thay mycht wrak Dauid Seytoune and his guidis ?'
He gaif to thame cleir thingis, as itt wer fum peaces of glafTe, brayit and mixit
with fum peces of coirdis, and fum vthir thingis amangis thame ; and baid lay
ane tlireid langis the mwre, and commandit to faw the peces of glas langis the
mwre, fwa that quhatfumeuir come owre fyrft, fould perifch fuddandle. Bot
the faid Dauid being ftayit to cum that day, as thay thocht he fould haif done,
the wrak lichtit in the Iiyndis gudis and his dochter, quha ewir fence lies bene
heavele vexit with terrible viliounes and apparitiounes, and hir body tormentit
with ane ewill fpreit, qvdiairwith fche lies bene pofleft maift petiefullie ; quhairof
fche wes the cheif inftrument, reffauing guid deid fra James Porteous and Rychard Crummy to the end foirfaid ; and directit Beffie Thomfoune and Auny Stratoune to the place of Foulftruthir, to craif ane lok fait owre the dur lieid, quhilk
gif thay had gottin, the wrakment had lichtit on Dauid Setoune and his guidis ;
and becaus the fait wes refufet, the wrakment lychtit vpoune the hyndis barne
and his guidis.

' Ilaioled, or jjulled a rope or cord.

24JAC.VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 239

CoNVENTioUN at the KirJc of North Beruik.
(50.) Item, fylit and convict, fForfamekle as fche confeft before his Maieftie,
That the Dewill, in mannis liknes, mett hir going out in the feildis frome hir
awin hous att Keyth, betuix fyve and fax att ewin, being hir allane ; and commandit hir to be at North Bervik kirk the nixt nycht : And fche paffit thair on
horfljak, convoyit be hir guidfone, callit Johnne Couper, and lychtit att the
kirk-3aird : Or a lytill before fche come to itt, about ellewin houris att ewin,
thay danceit alangis the kirk-5aird ; Gelie Duncan playit to thanie one a trump,
Johne Fiene, mifTellit, led all the reft, the faid Agues and hir dochter foUowit
nixt ; befydes thir, we Cait Graj% George Moitis wyfe, Robert Greirfoune, Catherene Duncan, Beflie Wrycht, Iflbbell Gylour, Johnne Ramfayes wyffe, Annie
Rychardfoun, Jonett Gaw, NicoU Murrayes wyfe tail5eour, Criftiane Caringtoune alias Lukit, Mafie Aichefoun, Marrioune Paterlbune, Alexander Quhytelaw, Marioun Nicolfoune, Marioun Bail3ie, Jonett Nicolfoune, Johne Gray-meill,
Ilfobell Lauder, Helene Quhyte, Margret Thonifovme, Marioune Scheill, Helena
Lauder, Archie Henillis wyfe, Duncan Buchquhannane, Marioune Congiltoun,
Beflie Gwlene, Beflie Broune the fmythis wyfe, Thomas Burnliill and his wyfe,
Gylbert M'Gill, Johnne M'Gill, Catherene M'^Gill, with the reft of thair complices, abone ane hundreth perfounes, quhairof thair wes fax men, and all the
reft wemen. The wemen maid fyrft thair homage, and nixt the men. The
men wer turnit nyne tymes widderfchinnes about, and the wemen fax tymes.
Johnne Fien blew vp the duris, and blew in the lychtis, quhilkis wer lyke mekle
blak candillis, ftiking round about the pulpett. The Devill ftart vp him felff in
the pulpett, lyke ane mekle blak man, and callit ewerie man be his name, and
ewerie ane anfuerit, ' Heir, Mr.' Robert Greirfoune being namit, thay ran all
hirdie-girdie and wer angrie ; for it wes promefit, that he fould be callit ' Ro'
the Comptroller alias Rob the Rowar,' for expreming of his name. The fyrft
thing he demandit, was ' Gif thay kepit all pi'omeis, and bene guid feruandis ?'
and ' Quhat thay had done fince -the laft tyme thay had convenit ?' — One his
command, thay opnit vj) the graves, twa within and ane without the kirk, and
tuik of the joxintis' of thair fingaris, tais and neife, and partit thame amangis
thame ; and the faid Agnes Sampfoune gatt for hir pairt, ane wiudene fcheit
and twa jountis, quhilk fche tint negligeutlie. The Devill conimandit thame to
keip the jountis vpoun thame, quhill thay wer dry, and thane to mak ane powder of thame, to do ewill withall. Than he commandit thame to keiji his commandmentis, quhilkis war, to do all the ewill thay could. Before thay departit,
thay kift his erfe. He had one him ane goun and ane hatt, quhilkis wer baith

' See Articles 26 and 42.

240 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1590-1.

blak ; and thay that wer affemblit, pairt ftwid and pairt fatt. Johnne Fiene
wes ewer nerreft to the Devill, att his left elbok ; Gray-meill kepit the dur.' —
(51.) Item, fylit and convict, that quhan hamelines wes contractit betuix hir
and Barbara Naipar,^ in Dalkeyth, Camroime-brig-end and foche places, the faid
Barbara lamentit vnto liir, that a man callit Archie had done hir grit wrang ;
and afkit hir counfall. How to be avengeit of him ? Quhais anfuer was, that
' Sche fould mak the help fche conld.' And eftir puttioune^ betuix thame, the
faid Agnes preparit ane bony finall pictour of 3allow walx, quhilk fche inchantit
and coniurit wilder the name of Archie, in the eift end of the dowcatt of Craigmyllar, in the Dewillis name ; and gaif power to the faid pictoiu-, that, as it fould
melt away before the fyre, fwa fould that man, quhais pictour it was, confwme
and pyne away, quhill he wer vterlie confwmit ; and fwa delyuerit the faid pictour vnto the faid Barbara ; quha faid vnto hir, ' Tak guid tent, that na thing
be wrocht to flay the purpos.' — (52.) Item, fylit and convict, that fche inchantit
be hir forcerie, ane lytill ring with ane ftane in itt, to the faid Barbara Naipar ;
quhilk ring fche relfauit fra the faid Barbara, fche my' fche my' * alliu-e Dame
Jeane Lyounis hairt, than Lady Angus,^ to love and favour hir ; quhilk ring, fche

' Sir James Melville has preserved the following account of this singular transaction, in his Memoirs (p. 395 of Etiition printed for use of the Bannatyne Club). Reference may also be had to the
Trial of Johnne Feane alias Cwninghame, Dec. 26, 1590, &c. — ' About this tym, many Witches wer
tane in Lowdien, wha deponit of feme (witchcraft ?) maid be the Erle Bodowell, as they allegit,
againfl his Maiefteis perlone : Quhilk commyng to the faid Erlis eares, he entred in ward within the
Caflell of Edenbrouch, defyring to be tryed ; alleging that the Deuell, wha was a Iyer from the begynniug, nor yet his fworn witches, aucht not to be credited. Specially, ane renowned midwyf callit
Anny Sampsoun, artirraed that fche, in company with nyn vtliers witches, being convenit in the
nycht befyd Preftounpannes, the Deuell ther mailter being prefent ftanding in the midis of thame ;
ther a body of wax, fchaipen and maid be the laid Anny Sampfoun, wrappit within a lynnyng claith,
was firft delyuerit to the Deuell ; quliilk eftir he had pronuncit his verde, delyuerit the laid pictour
to Anny Sampfoun, and fche to hir nyxt marrow, and fa euery ane round about, faying, " This is King
James the Sext, ordonit to be conluraed at the inflance of a noble man Francis Erie Bodowell 1"
Efterwart again, at ther meting be nycht in the kirk of North Berick, wher the Deuell, clad in a blak
gown, with a blak hat vpon his head, preacliit vnto a great nomber of them out of the pulpit, having
lyk leicht candelis rond about him. The effect of his language was till knaw, what ftaith they had
done, whow many they had won to ther opinion fen their lall meting, wliat fucces the melting of the
pictour had tane, and fie vain toyes. And becaule ane auld fely pure plowman, callit Grey Meill,
chancit to fay, that " natliing ailit the King yet, God he thankit I" the Deuell gaif him a gret blaw.
Then dyuers amang them enterit in a raifonyng, maruelling that all ther deuellerie culd do na harm
to the King, as it did till others dyuers. The Deuell anfuerit, " II ejl vn home tie Dieul' And certanly lie is a man of God, and dois na wrang wittingly, hot is iuclynit to all godlynes, juftice and
vertu ; therfor God lies preferued him in the midis of many dangers. Now efter that the Deuell had
endit his a<lmonitions, he cam down out of the pulpit, and caufed all the company to com and kifs his
ers, quhilk they laid was cauld lyk yce ; his body was hard lyk yrn, as they tliocht that handled him ;
his faice was terrible, his noil'e lyk the bek of ane egle, gret bournyng eyn ; his handis and Icgis wer
herry, with clawes vpon his handis and feit lyk the giitton, and ipak with a how voice I' * See

her Trial, May 8, 1591. ' Sir. Perhaps parley, deliberation. ^ Sic. Probably meant for,

• that fche myiht.' ^ See May 8, 1591, in Note to Barbara Naipar"s Trial. Spottiswood, p. 372,
in reference to the Earl of Angus's death, sajs, " Never died any nobleman with greater regrate ; and
lb much the more was his death lamented, that it was then thought and afterwards confefled, he was

24 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 241

fend agane with hir dochter, within ten dayes thaireftir to the faid Barbara, to
be vfit to the effect foirlaid. — (53.) Item", for ane commoun notorious Wich,
and vfar of Sorcereis and Inchantraentis, with the invocatioun of the Dewill hir
maifter, abufiug the jjure fnnjjle people, thairwith drawing tlianie fra the lening
to the mercie of God, and to beleive in the fupport of the Dewill.

Sentence.' For the quhilk cans, the faid Agnes was ordenit be the Juftice,
pronunceit be the mouth of James Scheill, dempftar, to be tane to the Caftell
(hill) of Edinburgh, and thair bund to ane ftaik and wirreit, quhill Iche wes
deid ; and thaireftir hir body to be brunt in affis : And all hir movable guidis
to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vie, &c.

Ajn-. 30, 1591. — JoHXNE DiKsouN, fone and ajJiJcrand air to vmq'''
Johnne Dikfoun of Belcheller.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Dikfoune of
Belchefter his fadei", connnittit in July 1 588.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill, Aduocat for his Majefleis intres.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Farguefoun of Ci-aigdarrauch
thair chancillar, ffand the faid Johnne Dikfoun to be fylit and convict of the
flauchter of his faid vmq''' fader.

Sentence. For the quhilk cryme, the Juftice, be the mouth of James Scheill,
dempftar, ordanit him to be brokin vpoun the row,^ at the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

taken away l)y Sorcery and Incantation. In tlie time of his ficknefs, when the phyficians found his
difeafe not to proceed of any natiiiall caufe, one Richard Graham, \\]\o was executed fotne years
after for W'itclicraft, being brought to give his opinion of it, made offer to cure him, faying, as the
manner of thefc wizards is, " That lie had received wrong." But wlien he heard that the man was
fufpected to life unlawful arts, he would by no means admit him, faving, " That his life was notj'o
dear to him, as for the continuanre of it fume years he icould be beholden to any of the Devil's injlruments ; that lie held his life of God, and was xcilling to render the fame at his good pleafure, knowing
heJhouM change it for a better." Notwithftanding her improper practices, tliis lady efcaped criminal
profecution.' — Home of Godscroft remarks: ' Anna Sim.son, a famous Witch, is reported to have
confefled at her death, that a picture of waxe was brought to her, having A. D. written on it, which,
as they faid to her, did fignifie Archibald Davidfon ; and ihee, not thinking of the Earl of Angus,
wTiofe name was Archibald Donglas, and might have been called David-fon, becaufe his father's name
was David, did confecrate or execrate it, after her forme ; which ilie faid, if ilie had knowne to have
reprefented him, (Iiee would not have done it for all the world.' ' On the margin, ' Sentence

contra Agnes .Sampfone, convict of \\itclicraft. — To be brunt in the Caftell hill, i*tc.' ^ Wheel.

This was an unusual punishment in Scotland, an<l was reserved for cases of the utmost atrocity. An
instance of a criminal being broken upon the wheel occurs in the case of Robert Weir, for the murder
of John Kincaid of Warriestoun. See Jun. 26, 1604. He was sentenced to be 'brokin vpoune
ane row quhill he be deid, and to ly thairat during the fpare of xxiiij houris: And thairefter his body
to be tane vpone the faid row, and i'et vp iu ane publict place, betuix the place of Warefloun and the
town of Leyth ; and to remane thairupoune, ay and quhill command be gevin for the buriall thairof."

VOL. I. 2 H

M2 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

[^Per 31. Vmj)hridem Blynschelis, Justiciariuin Deputatutn,
et Assessor es 31. Dau'id Carnegie cle Colluthie et D. Jacohum 31eluile de Hcdhill.']

May 8. — Barbara Naipar, fpous to Archibald Douglas, burges of
Edinburgh, (brothir to the Laird of Carfchoggill.)
Dilatit of findrie poyntis of Wichcraft, contenit in Dittay gewin in aganis hir,
be Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranftoun-Ryddell, aduocat to our Ibuerane lord.
Persewar, Mr Daiiid M'Gill, Aduocat to our fouerane lord for liis faienes interes.
Preloquitouris for the pannell.
Mr Joliiine Ruffell, Mr Johnne Mofcrop; Williame, Alex' and Andro Naipar, burgeflis of Edinburgh.
The Juilice efter proponing of diverfe allegeances be the pannell aganis the
Dittay and anfueris maid thairto, ordanit the faid Barbara to be putt to the triell
of ane Affyfe, for the cryines contenit in Dittay.

ASSISA.

Johnne Brig, Maifter portar to Jaraes Galbraitli, Averleman to Dauid Falrlie, merchand burges,

his Maiedie, his Maieilie, Patrik Sandilandis, tail5eour,

George Brig, Maifter of the David Seytoun in Fowlftruthir, burges of Edinburgli,

Ail-lellar, William Juftice, merchand burges Mr Arch'' Wilkie, burges of
Walter Bell, att the Mylne of of Edinburgh, Cannogait,

Deane, Johnne Seytoune, Crilraan to his An'' Cuthbertfoun, burges of Ed',
Hector Clawie, burges of the Maieftie, Robert Cwninghanie, burges thair,

Cannogait, Joh'' Mowbray, merchand burges, William Harper, burges thair.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of Robert Cwningham chancillar, ffand,
pronunceit and declarit the faid Barbara Naipar, to be fylit, culpabill and convict, of the feiking of confultatioun fra Annie Sampfoune ane ^Vich, for the help
of Dame Jeane Lyoune Lady Angus,^ to keip hir fra wometing, quhen fche wes
in bi'edin of barne. — Item, For the confulting with the faid Annie Sampfoune,
for caufing of the faid Dame Jeane Lyoune Lady Angus to love hir, and to gif
hir the geir awin hir agayne, and gewing of ane ryng for this purpois to the
faid Anny, quhill fche had fend hir ane courchie^ of linning ; and fwa for con-

' Dame Jeane Lyon, Lady Angus, was eldest daughter of Patrick, ninth Lord Glammis, who married, 1st, Robert Douglas younger of Loclileven, and was by that marriage mother of William Earl of
Morton ; it\, Archibald eighth Earl of Angus, anno 1586, after he bad divorced his second wife, a
daughter of Lord Rothes, for adultery ; and 3d, Alexander Lindsay, afterwards Lord Spynie, one of
the Kings favourites. The death of the Earl of Angus in 1588, ' was afcribed to Witchcraft, and
one Barbary Naipar in Edinburgh, wife to Archibald Douglas of the houfe of Calhogle, was apprehended on lufpicion.'— Home of Godscroft. Annie Sampson was also concerned in this plot against
the life of Angus. Lady Angus does not seem to have been molested for trafficking with these hags,
though her great grandmother. Lady Glammis, was brought to the stake for Witchcraft, on more slender presumptions, ^ Fr. Couvrechef, kerchief, a sort of head-gear then worn.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 243

travelling of the Act of Parliament, in confulting with her, and feiking of hir
help, being ane Wich. — Item, For the confulting with the faid Annie Sanipfoune,
anent the help of hir hufljand Archibald Dowglas, quhen he wes in the ^Veftland, att the raid of Dumfreis ; hir hufband being for the tyme vnder feid with
the hous of Cowhill. — Item, For confulting with Rychie Gi'ahame, ane Nicromanfer and abufar of the people, in feiking of help att him to hir fone ; and
gratifeing him thairfore, with thre elnes of bombefie and fyve quarteris of broune.
This was done in Johnne Ramfayis hous, outwith the ^V^efl-poirt of Edinburgh ;
incontrar the tennour of the Act of Parliament maid thairanent ; att the quhilk
tyme, fche inquyrit att the faid Rychie Grahame, gif the King wald cum hame
or nocht. — Item, For the hunting' and confulting with ane ^Vich and Nicromancear, aganis the tennour of the Act of Parliament maid thairanent. — And
Acquit the faid Barbara of confulting with the faid Rychie, for ane ftollin dowlet^ of vmq'^ George Ker hir hufband. — Item, (Acquit,) for confulting with Annie Sampfoune, anent the making of vmq'" Archibald Erll of Angus pictour, to
his diftructioun. — Iteji, (Acquit,) for being att the conventioune of North-Bervik ; and the haill heidis of the Dittay, except the heidis quhairof fche wes
convict.

DoMK pronunceii aganis Harhm-a Naper.
May 10. — The quhilk day ane Lettre producit, fubfcryuit be the Kingis
Maieftie and his hienes Chancillar, for pronunceing of the dome vnderwrittin,
againis the faid Barbara ; of the quhilk Precept the tennour foUowis.
' Rex.

' Justice, Juftice-Clark and 3our deputes, We greit jow weill. Foifamekill as Barbara Naper, fpous to Arcliebald Dowglas bulges of Edinburgh, wes convict in ane Court of Jufticiarie, haldin in our Tolbulhe of Edinburgli, ])e aucht day of May inftant, for pe feiking of confultatioune fra Annie Sanipfoune ane Witcli, &c.^ QuliaiiTpoune, na Dome is pronimceit aganis hir as jit.
OuRE Will is heirfoir, and we charge 50W, that incontinent efter the fycht heirof, 36 pronunce the
Dome aganis hir, for the faidis crymes, according to tlie lawis of our reahne and Actis of Parliament :
That is to fay, that leho fall be tane to the Caftel-hill of the burcht of Edinburgh, and thair bund to
ane flaik befyde the fyre and wirreit Jiairat quhill fcho be deid ; and Jiairefter hir body brunt in tlie
faid fyre, and all hir movabill guidis efcheted to our vfe as convict of the faidis crymes. As je will
anfuer to ws vpoune jour office and obedience. Quhairanent thir prefentis fall ferve 50W as fufficient
Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, at Halyrndhous, the tent day of Maij, 1591.

(Sic fubfcribitur) ' JAMES R. J. Cancellarius.'

' Doihe' was pronounced accordingly, ' be the mouth and declaratioune of
William Gray, Dempftar of the faid Court.'

Eftir pronounceing of the quhilk Dome, the faid Barbara declarit tliat fcho was
with barne ; and thairfoir alledgeit, that na executioune of the faid Dome culd

' Haunting, frequenting the society. * Dowblet ? ' Here the verdict of the Assise is inserted.

244 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

be vfit aganis hir, quhill fcho was delyiier of hir birth ;' and thairvpoune afkit
inftruinentis.

May 27. — Robert Carxecuoce callit Melde Hoh, Robert Ramfay in

• ■ Cummiflie, Quintene Bouftoune in Edinburgh and Johnne

Wallace in the Cannogait.

Dilatit of airt and i)airt of the Rapt and Raveifching of Jeane Ramfay Lady

Warreiftoune, aganis the Actis of Parliament and lawis of this realme maid

thairaneut ; committit the xix day of March laftbypaft.

Persewaris.
Jeane Ramfay Lady Warreiftoune, George Ramfay apperand of Dalhouffie, Mr D^ M'Gill, Aduocat.

Preloquitouris for the pannell.
Mr Johnne Cramond, Andro Ker, brother to the Lord Johnne Wallace of Craigie,

Johnne Home 3 ounger of Coldin- of Newbottill, Nicoll Cairnecroce of Calf hill.

knowi8,

Continued to the Juftice-aire of Edinbui-gh and Jedburghe, refpcctiue, ' Tertio Itiueris, vel xv dierum. Plegio, Nicolao Carnecroce de Calf hill, pro omnibus.'

[3Ir Johnne Grahame and Mr Vmphreij Bli/nschelis, Just/ces-Dejmfes.']

aeilful evvov on ^mm — at quittiii cr a Mlitti),

Jun. 7. — Johnne ]\Ioa\'BRAy, merchand burges of Edinburgh," and eleven others, being the majority of jurors upon Barbara Naipar's AlFjde.
Dilatit of manifeft and Wilfull Errour connnittit be tliame, in acquitting of
Barbara Naipar fpous to Archibald Dowglas, brothir to the Laird of Carfchoggill, of the poyntis of Treflbune and \\"ichcraft, vnder writtin.

Persewar, Mr Dauid M'Gill of Cranftoun Ryddell, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.
The famiu day, the perfounes on pannell dilatit and accufit be dittay contenit
in our fouerane lordis lettres, purcheft att the inftance of the Aduocat aganis
them, and iirodiiceit be hini in Judgement ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Dittay agahift the AJfijhrs on Barbara Naipars Inquejl.

James, be jie grace of God, &c. That quhair, Barbara Naipar fpous to Archbald Dowglas, wes

vpoun fe aucht day of Maij I^.V'.lxxxj 3eiris, accufit in aue Court of Jufliciarie, haldin in }>e Tolbuith of Edinburgh, ifor feikiiig help, refpons and confultatioune, att Rychard Grahame, notoure and

knawin Xigromancear, ane commoun abufar of Jie peoj)ili, baith aganis ])e will and ordinance of God

' Home of Godscroft says, that ' nobody infifting in the perfute of her, ihe was fet at libertie.'

this ' Ail'yfe' consisted of, the ' Mailler of the Ail-fella
Seytoun in Fowlftruthir, probably his brother or relation.

...^ ^. ^^ v^^.^1^ . vyi t Dcij^c., man iivjuuiiy iiiiiiiiii^ III iiic uiriinn:

2 It may be noticed, that the minority of this ' Ail'yfe' consisted of, the ' ^Mailler of the Ail-fellar,
the ' Crilman to his Maieftie,' and David Seytoun in Fowlftruthir, p

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 245

and Actis of Parliament and law of fe countrey : And fpeciallie, fforfamekill as, during our fouerane
lordis beine; att Jie Brig of Die, before the coniuioun bell rang, for feir the Erll Bothwell fould half
enterit in Edinburgh, fcho declarit to J)e faid Rychard, that fche bard ana woman fay, that our fouerane
lord wald gett lliaith be ane laid or gangrell ; and defyrit of him, quhat he thocht J>airof, and that he
wald fchaw to hir his opinioune pairof the morne ; quha confultit with ])e Spreit' })airaneut, and rellauit
be his refpons, that his iNIaieftie wald be trubllt be conventioun of wenien, throw fe dropping of ane
laid : and als, Rychard lauching vpoun hir, declairit fair, att Jiat famyn tyrae, that fcho, Etfie M'Cal3 an and Donald Robefoune fould be thre of Jie doai'is of itt : quhilk quhen ftlio hard, fcho fchuik
hir held : Quhilk wes afi'crmit be ]ie faid Richard Grahame, in hir and the faidis perfounes prefens.
And ficlyke, the faid Barbara wes accufit, that fcho gaif hir prefens, in Jie maill develifch and treffonabill Conventioune, haldin be hir and hir complices in fe De\-illis name, vpoun Lambmes-ewin laft,
att ]ie New-heavin callit Aitchefounes-heavin, betuix Muffilburcht and Preftoune pannis, fm his Maieftie come furth of Denmark ; quhair war alTemblit nyne principallis, to witt, Agnes Sampfoune,
Jonett Straittoun, Ewfame M^Caljeane, hir fellF, Johnne Fiene, Robert Greirfoun, George Moitis
wj'ffe in Prefloune, Margrett Thonifonn in Striuiling and Donald Robefoune ; quhilkis njTie perfounes, the Devill, quha wes with fame in liknes of ane blak man, thocht maill meit to do fe tume
for ])e quhilk thay wer convenit ; and fairfore, he fett fame nyne nerrefl, to him felft', in ane cumpany;
and thay, togidder with fe wyflfe of Saltotine-myle and Jie reft of fe inferiouris, to fe nowmer of
tbrettie perfounes, flandand iTcairfe Jie lenth of ane buird frae fe foirfaid nyne perfounes, in ane vthir
cumpany ; Agnes Sampfoune proponit J>e diflructioune of his hienes perfoune, faying to ]>e Dewill
' We haif ane tume ado, and we wald fayne be att itt gif we could, and thairfore help ws to itt.' The
Dewill anfuerit, he fond do quhat he could, bott itt wald be laug to, becaufe it wald be thoirterit ;'
and he promefit to hir and J>ame ane pictour of walx, and ordenit bir and fame to bing, roifl and drop
ane taid, and to lay fe droppis of fe taid, mixt with ftrang wafeh,' ane edder-fkyn,* (and) the
thing in fe foirheid of ane new-foillit foill, in bis hienes way, quhair his Maieftie wald gang inowre
or outowre, or in ony paflage quhair itt mycht drop vpoun bis hienes heid or his body, for his hienes
diftructioune, that ane vtlier mycht haif rewlit in liis Maiefties place, and fe ward^ mycht haif gane
to J)e Dewill. Att fe quhilk conventioune, his hienes name wes pronunceit in Latine; and Agnes
Sampfoun wes appointit to mak Jie pictour and to gif it to the Dewill to be inchantit, quhilk
fcho maid in deid, and gaif itt to him ; and he promefit to giff it to Jie faid Barbara and to Effie
M'Cal^an, att Jie nixt meting, to be roiftit. Mergarett Thomfoun wes appointit to dropp Jie taid.
Thair wes ane appointit to feik fum of his hienes linning clathis, to do Jie tume with. And Gelie
Duncan, vpoun Jie fyftene day of December laftwas, in Jie faid Barbareis face and Effie iM''Cal5anis,
avowit on Jianie baith, att fe fyrft fycht, fche law hir eftir hir cuming to Jie Abay, and before
fche had fpokin thre perfyte fpeicis afoir hir, afferrait that Agnes Sampfoune mett with hir and
Jie faid Effie, in fe faid Barbareis awin hous; and the faid Gelie Duncan and Beffie Thomfoune
being fair alfo, togidder with Johnne Fiene, qulia faid to Gelie, that he wald ga Wefl to his fader,
and eikit forder, that thair wes ane taid hingand be f e helis thre nychtis, and droppit betuix thre
oilier fchellis and npie ftanis, fottin thre nychtis ; att quhat tyme na man luikit or fufpectit to
haif hard ony fie thing : As the particular Depofitiounes of fe faid Donald Robefoune and Jonett
Straytoun, quha conllantlie abaid att f e famin, quhilk wes repetit be f e Aduocatt ; the Depofitiounes
of Gelie Duncane and Rychard Grahame, ewerie ane for fair awin pairtis and circumllances, being
conft-ontit togidder, manifellit and maid playne. And ficlyke, the faid Barbara wes accufit, that fche
gaif hir bodelie prefens v])oun Alhallow-evin laftwas, 1590 ':;eiris, to fe frequent conventioune haldin
att fe Kirk of North-Bernik, quhair fche danceit endlang fe Kirk-3aird, and Gelie Duncan playit on

' Par excellence, the Devil. 2 xhwarted, frustrated ^ Stale urine. * The skin of an adder. * For

uiarlti, world ; perhaps it may be used in the literal sense, ward, rule, or government.

246 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

ane trump, Johiine Fiene, miffelHt,' led ]>e ring; Agnes Sampfoun and liir dochteris and all the reft
following ])e faid Barbara, to fe nowmer of fevin fcoir of perfounes ; of Jie quhilk nowraer, wes Effie
M'Cal3an, Katlierene Gray, Mergarett Aicliefoun, Donald RobeCoun, Robert Greirfoune, Katherene
Wallace, Meg Bogtoun, Jonett Campbell, Jonett Logane, Jobnne Gordoun alias Gray-meill, the pertaris wyffe of Seytoune, Jonett Straytoun, Beffie Tliomfoune, Catherene Duncane, Beffie Wrycht,
Iffobell Gylloun, Jolinne Ranifayes wyfFe, Anny Rychefoun, Jonett Gall, Nicoll Mun-ayes wyffe, tail3eour, Criliian Kering-toune alias X/M«<, Mafie Aicliefoune, Marie Paterfoune, Alexander Quhytelaw,
Marioun Nicolfoun, Marioun Bail3ie, Jonett Nicolfoun, Iflbbell Lauder, Helene Quhyte, Margrett
Thomlbune, Marioune Schaw, Helene Laudei', Malie Geddie, Duncan Bucliqubannane, Marioun
Congiltoun, Beffie Cowane, Beffie Broune, the fmytliis wyffe, Thomas Brouuliill and his wyfe, Gilbert
M^Gill, Johnne and Catherene M'Gillis, with diuerfe vtheris, to pe nowmer aboue wiittin : Att }«
quhilk place and tyme, the wemene maid fyrft Jiair homage, and wer turnit fax tymes widderlounes
about ; Johne Fyen blew vp Jie Kirk dun'is, and blew in pe lychtis, quhilkis wer lyke mekill blak
candillis, haldin in ane auld mannis hand, round about pe pulpett. And pe Dewill ftart vp in ))e pulpett, lyke ane mekill blak man, with ane blak baird ftikand out lyke ane gettis- baird ; and ane hie
ribbit ueife, falland doun ftharp lyke the beik of ane halk ; with ane lang rumpill ; cled in ane blak
tatie goune ; and ane ewill favorit fcull bonnett' on his held ; haifand ane blak bulk in bis hand, callit
on ewerie ane of ]jame, defjTing fame all to be guid ferwandis to him, and he fould be ane guid maifter to fame, and thay lould half anewch and newer want. For Robert Greirfoun and Johnne Fien
(thay) fluid on his left hand ; and the faid Robert ffand grit fault with the Dewill, and cryit out, that
all quhilkis wer befyd myeht heir, becaus his hienes pictour wes nocht gewin fame, as wes promefit;
the faid Effie M''Cal5an remembrand and bidand )ie faid Robert Greirfoun to fpeir for fe pictour,
meaning his Maielleis pictour, quhill fould half bene roillit. Robert Greirfoun faid thir wordis,
' Quhair is the thing ^e promefit?' meaning Jie pictour of walx, dewyfit for roifting and vndoing his
liines perfoune, quhilk Agnes Sampfoune gaif to him ; and Robert cryit to ' haif fe turne done;' 3it
his hienes name wes nocht nameit, quhill^ thay that wer wemen nameit him; craifand in playne
termes his hienes pictour. Bot he anfuerit, ' It fould be gottin Jie nixt meitting, and he wald hald fe
nixt alfenddie for fat caus the foner : It was nocht reddie at fat tyme.' Robert Greirfoune anfuerit,
' ge promefit twyis and begylit ws.' And foure honell-like womene wer very ernill and inltant to
haif itt : And the faid Barbara and Effie M''Cal5ane gatt fan ane pronieis of f e Dewill, that his Iiienes
pictour fould be gottin to fame twa, and that rj'clit fone : And f is mater of his hienes pictour wes fe
caus of fat afil-niblie. In takin quhairof, the Dewill coramandit f e faid Barbara and all her cumpany,
to keip his commanderaentis ; quhilk wer, to do all the ewill thay could : Alfo, thair wes fane thre
deid corps tane vp and juntit ; the naillis and juntis wer pairtit amangis fame. The Dewill comniandit fame to keip fe juntis vpoun fame, quhill the famin dryit; and than to mak powder fairof, to
do ewill with. Eftir f e quhilk, thair homage beiug made, as the fafibun is, in kiffing of f e Devillis
ers, thay pairtit for fat tyme, without ony mair done ; except, that Effie M'Cal3ane, Robert Greirfoune
and the faid Barbara, hapnit to be nameit fair ; quhilk offendit all fe cumpany : And that thay fould
nocht haif bene nameit with fair awin naines ; Robert Greirfoun, to haif bene callit Hob the rowar ;
Effie to be callit Cane ; and the faid Barbara, to be callit Naip. And trew this is, and provin be
Donald Robefoun, Jonett Straittoune, Gelie Duncan and Belfie Thoinfoune, quha ar 5 it on lyffe.
Quhilk, being putt to fe knawlege of ane Inqueill ; thay nochtwithllanding, vpoun f e nynt day of fe
month and jeir of God foirfaid, Clengeit and Acquit, be favour and partial meanis, the faid Barbara
Naipare. That, forfamekill as, during his Maielleis being att f e Brig of Die, the day before f e commoun bell rang, for feir the Eril Bothuell fould haif enterit in Ediuburghe, fche declaiit to fe faid

1 Disguised, muffled, masl<ed. « Goat's. ' An iU./aured, or ugly sort of skuU-cap ; a driss which fitted closely
to the shape of the head, chiefly worn by judges and lawyers. * Until,

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 247

Rychard Grahame, that fche hard ane woman fay, that fe King wald get fkaith be ane taid or gangrell, &c.' Quhairthrow thay, and ewerie ane of Jiame, could pretend na ignorance ; att ])e leift, netbir
of law nor confcience could haif acquit hir Jiairof ; the faniin being verifeit, be fe conflant aflertioun
and Depofitoun of ane pairt of ]>e witneffis being prefent in Judgement for ])e tyrae, as is aboue writtin, and be ])e Depofitiounis of fe vthir pairt produceit : And fairfore, did manifefllie and wilfullie err,
contrar ]>e lawis and prattik of ])e realme ; Incurrand J>airby the horribill cryme of Periurie, et penam
temere juraiitiumjliper AJJifam.

And thay, being reqiiyrit be the Juftice, His Maiestie being fittand in
Judgement, qiiliidder thay wald abyde the tiyell of the law and of ane Aflyfe
for the faidis crymes, or cum in will thairfore ? Eftir lang deliberatioun and
confultatioun, thay refufit to abyde the tryell of ane AlTyfe thairfore ; bot come
simpliciter in his hienes will, for Ignorant errour committet be thame, in
acquyting of the faid Barbara, of the crymes and poyntis of Dittay aboue reherfit.

Sentence. Quhilk will, his Maiestie publictlie, in Judgement, in prefens
of his hienes Lordis of SecreitCounfall, declarit to be, That he, underflanding that
it wes nocht Wilful! Errour thay committit, in acquyting in maner foirfaid ; and
thairfore Ordenit, that the foirfaidis perfounes and ilk ane of thame falbe Affoil3eit fra all penalties in body, guidis or fame, in tyme cuming,

Vpoiuie the declaratioune of the quhilk will, thay and ilk ane of thame alkit
act and inftrument.

Crtasonafili? Conspiriiitr against \)i^ iHajestji^s life— OTitcj^f raft —

^orrevjl— itlurlier, ^f.

Jun. 9. — EwFAME MAKCALgANE,^ (of CHftounhall,) fpous to Patrik
Makcal3ane alias 3IoJcrop.

[EwFAME MAKCALgANE, the subject of the following remarkable Trial, was only daughter and
heiress of Mr Thomas Makcal5ane Lord CHftounhall, one of the Senators of the College of Justice;
a person distinguished alike for his general erudition and attainments, by the depth of his legal knowledge, and by his talents as a statesman. As this family is now extinct, and considerable curiosity must
naturally be felt regarding the parentage of so extraordinary a character as Effy Makcaljane, the Editor has made some investigation in the ])ublic Records, where alone any traces are now to be found ;
and he hopes that the following brief notices will prove not unacceptable.

Mr Thomas Makcal5ane had early followed the profession of the Law, and had, before the year
1556, entered as an Advocat. On Nov. 10, 1556, through the powerful interference of Mary of Guise,
Queen Regent, the Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh were constrained to deprive him of
his office of Assessor for the City, ' for evill, heich and vnplefand langage to hu- grace,' in the discharge of his official duties ; most probably, for the independent manner in which he had pleaded the
rights of ' the Good Town. Nothing daunted, the Assessor protested against this decree, and, after
the lapse of a few months, was restored, by command of tlie Queen Regent, Jun. 5, 1557.' He was

' Here the evidence is recapitulated ' Called Effy (the familiar abbreviation for Euphemia), by Sir James Melville in his Blemoirs, and by other contemporary writers. ^ Liber Statutorum Burgi de Edinburgh.

248 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

' iufeft' in the lands of Cliftouhall, anno 1357, when he is designed, ' iSI. Thomas Macal3eane, advocatus, burgen. de Edinburghe.'' ' Maillei- Thomas Macal5ane of Cliftounhall' was appointed one of
the Ordinary Lords of Session, under the style of Lord Cliftounhall, Oct. 20, 1370, on the demise of
Henry Balnavis, Lord Hallhill. He obtained Letters of Remission, (apud Leith, May 2, 1372,)
for his treasonably assisting James late Earl of Arran, and George late Earl of Huntlie, in detaining
the burgh of Edinburgh against his Majesty. On Jul. 23, 1378, he was nominated by the Estates of
Parliament to be one of the Commissioners ' to treat vpoun the Lawes.' And on the same day he was
appointed one of the Commissioners, with the Earls of Buchan and Ruthven, &c., to ' decyde in ane
caus betuix the Gordounis and the Forbellijs' — a deadly feud then subsisting between these families
and their retainers. ' Honorabilis vir Magifter Thomas Macal3eane de Cliftounhall, unus Senatorum
Collegij Juflicie,' Dec. 1, 1578, constituted his only lawful daughter Euphemia Macal5eane his executrix and his assignee, to redeem the lands of Cliftounhall from Henry Macal5eane, advocate.*^ Dec.
4, 1584, Mr Henry Makcal3eane, advocate, is ' retoured' as heir to William his brother, in the ten
merk land of the town and lands of Carkettle, in the barony of Prestoun and shire of Edinburgh.
' The 24 of Junij (1591), Eupiiane M'Kal^en ves brunt for Vitchcrafte,'^ — ' as a notorious Vitche.'
At what date Lord Cliftounhall died, the Editor has not been enabled to determine precisely,^ and
tlie investigation might occupy mucli more time than he can at present command, or than the importance of the enquiry demands ; but, as his lordship was succeeded in his office of an Ordinary Lord of
Session by John Lindsay, parson of Menmure, Master of the Metals, &c., who took liis seat as a
Judge, Jul. 3, 1381, he had probably died during the preceding month.

The sentence against Ewfame of course earned along with it a forfeiture of her Estates of Cliftounhall, &c. as well as her movable effects, on account of the treason of which she had been found guilty.
She left three daughters'' by her marriage with Patrik Makcaljeane, alias Moscrop, who was son and
heir-apparent of Mr John Moscrop, advocate," a person of considerable eminence in his profession.
Her husband took the name of Makcal5eane, at the request probably of his father-in-law, or in compliance with the entail of the estate. These ladies, Martha, spouse of Mr David Ogilbie, Elizabeth,
and Ewphame, spouse of Henry Sinclair of Quhitekirk, were formally Rehabilitated by Act of Parliament, his Majesty being ' tuichit in honour and confcience,* and now being of mynd that the faid
foirfaltour and convictioun fuld onnawyis hurt or prejuge hir pofteritie.' The Act of Rehabilitation,
dated Juu. 5, 1392,^ accordingly restored them to the estates belonging to their deceased mother and
grandfatlier, burdened with a payment of 5000 merks to Patrik Makaljeane their father, ' pay it and
delyuerit be the faid Patrik to our faid fouerane lord and his hienes donatour, for the Gift of Forfaltour of the laid vmq''^ Ewfame.' The King, however, clogged this act of grace with a very unpalatable reservation ; for the lands of Cliftounhall were expressly reserved to his favourite. Sir James Sandelandis of Slamanno, knight, and to his heirs, to whom his Majesty had previously gifted that valuable
property; and all action, which the deceased had against Mr Henry Maca^eane for the redemption
thereof. These heiresses-portioners therefore could reap but little benefit from the succession ; and

' Protocol-book of James Ilarlaw, Notar Public, from 1549 to 1583, in the General Register House. It was at this
perioil by no means unusual for Advocates, Writers to his Majesty's Signet, and Notaries, to become burgesses of
Edinburgh ; but whetlier this was a necessary step, towards the exercise of their profession within the burgh, the Editor
has not been able to determine. He is rather inclined to think it was a voluntary act ; and that the reason of such persons purcliasing the freedom of tlie burgh, was, tliat they might confer a right upon their descendants to become burgesses upon easitr terms, and to obtain for themselves other civic privileges. ^ Probably his brother. See Harlaw*s
Prolocoll. •' BurrcU's Diaiij, ]>. 26. ^ muriorihank's Annals, ][i. 55. ^ He ' died in the year 1581.' Law's
MeiiwriuUs, p. 33. '' Besides these daughters who survived licr, she had at least two sons ; ' Tliomas,' mentioned at

the commencement of the Trial, and another son, mentioned in article IH of the Dittay. The means she used for
' helping' them, probably cut them off in early infancy. ' On Dec. 2, 1573, Mr Johnne Moscrop, advocat,

Katharine Lytill his spouse, and Fa/rik Mosmiji (alias Mukcahcane ), his son and heir-apparent, got Remission for
their treasonably being present at the field of Langside, May 13, 1568. * No wonder ! 3 Acta Pari. 1592, cap.

132, fol. 008.

24 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 249

tlie estate having passed to the family of Sandilauds, and no male heirs existing, the name of Makcal3eane of Cliftonhall became extinct. On Sep. 25, 1596, Ewfarae the daughter was letoured, as
heiress-portionei' to her deceased grandfather, in eertane small annualrents, payable out of some tenements in Edinburgh.

That a person, moving in the rank of society which Ewfame Makcal5ean occupied, should liave
leagued with the obscure and profligate wretches who figure in the Trials for Witchcraft at this period,
for the destniction of her sovereign, and that too by such unlikely and absurd means, seems irreconcilable with any ideas of sanity which can now be formed. It is evident, however, that she believed
herself, as well as her associates, to be possessed of supernatural powers ; and that she had the firmest
reliance in infernal agency. The only reason which can be assigned for such frantic and detestable
conduct seems to be, that she was devoted to the ancient Roman Catholic faith, and thus bearing personal hatred against the King and the Reformed Religion ; she was besides a zealous partisan of Bothwell, and proved herself capable of using every means which he might suggest, or which she herself
perversely considered to be most calculated to advance his interests and the predominance of her
party. It is worthy of remark, that three days before Ewfame's cremation, Bothwell ' brak out of the
Caflell of Edinburghe, qulia had beine ther, in prifone, fome 20 dayis befor, for alledgit Vitchcraft
and conj'ulting with Vitches, efpecially vith ane Richard Grahame, to confpyre the Kingis death ; and
upone the 25 of Junij,' the faid Earle Bothuell wes forfaulted, and intimation made therof, by opin
proclamation at the crofle of Edinburghe.^ It is known that Bothwell had much traffick with Witches,
and was himself esteemed an expert Necromancer.^]

Dilatit of eertane ti*effonabill Conlpiraceis interpryfit be Wichcraft, to half
deftroyit oure Ibuerane lordis perlbune, and bereft his Maieftie of his lyfFe be
that Ichanieful and extraordinar meanis : And being airt and pairt thairof,
vpoun the counfall (and) confultatioun with diuerfe vtheris Wichis of hir Ibcietie :
And diners vtheris crymes of Wichcraft committit be hir, att lenth fpecifeit in
the Dittay maid thairvpoune.

Persewar.

Mr Dauid M=Gill of Cranfloun-Ryddell, Aduocat to our fouerane lord (for his hienes intereft.)

Pkeloquitouris for the pannell, Mr Johnne Mofcrop, Mr Dauid Ogilvip, Robert Ker in Duddingftoune, Henry Nilbet, burges of Edinburghe, Mr Johnne Ruffell, Mr Johne Skene, Aduocatis.

Comi)erit the laid Mr Dauid M'^Gill, Adnocatt, and produceit ane Dittay,
maid att lenth, aganis the faid Ewfame ; and contractit in thir heidis vnderwrittin, to be putt to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe : Quhairof the tennour followis.

Dittay against Ewfame Machuhane.^

Ewfame M'CaL5ANE, Ye ar indytit and acculit, (1.) For airt and pairt of
the bewiching of Michell Marioribankis, be ftrykeing of him be Wichcraft, with
ane extraordinar difeis, be taking of the power and habilitie of his rycht fyde,
arme and leg fra him ; be youre felff, and your complices be your moyane ;
committit in Apryle 1577. — (2.) Item, Indytit, for confulting with Catherene

■ The day of Ewfame's execution. = BirreWs Diary, p. 25. ^ Laws Memorials, p. xliii.

Spotsivood, &c. * This i^ stated to be only an abstract of the Dittay, and ' contractit in tliir heidis.'

VOL. I. 2 I

250 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

Campbell, ane Erfch womane, knawin to be ane notorious Wich ; and intertinneing liir in your awin hous and Barbara Touris hous, feiking help of hir to
youre bairnis ; fpeciallie to help youre fone Thomas, be youre airt ; to quhome
ye fend his lark to that effect, with Helene Inglis your feruand, and twa xxx f.
pecis, for hir help. — (3.) Item, For confulting with the faid Catherene, anent
the bewiching and llauchter of Patrik Mofcrop, your hufband, quliairby ye
mycht gett ane vtheir guidman ; and confulting with hir, quhome ye fould
marie. — (4.) Item, Indytit, of airt and pairt of the traffiking with Agnes Somervall, fpous to Gilbert Anderfone in Dunfermling, ane commoune trafficquar with
AVichis ; inquyring of liir, ' Gif fche knew ony wittie or Ikilfull wemene in the
countrey, that will owthir cans your hufband love yow^ or ellis gett your will of
him ;' to quhome ye gaif twa fair cleane farkis of your hufljandis, to be careit
owre the waiter,' to be inchantit be thame, att the fame tyme your hufband fell
in feiknes. Quhilkis farkis, fche tuik with hir to that effect ; and brocht hame
agane be hir, inchantit : And thairby, feiking help, ref])ons and confultatioune of
Wichis, to the diftructioune of your fpous, be Wichcraft. — (5.) Item, Indytit,
of airt and pairt of the poyfouning of the faid Patrik Mofcrop, your hufljand,
vpoun deidlie malice contractit aganis him, the fyrft yeir of your mariage ; be
gewing to him of poyfomi, and cuift the reft thairof in the clofett ; quhairby his
face, nek, handis and haill body, brak out in reid fpottis ; Quhilk poyfoun wes
expellit be his youth. And feing the fame twke na effect, as ye dewyfit, ye ftill
continewand in your vndewtifuU behavioiu- and impatience to fee him on lyffe,
quhom ye preiffit be all nieanis poffibill to cutt away ; the faid Patrik being
wereit of his lyffe, be the daylie truble he had in youre cumi^any, wes compellit,
for faulftie of his lyffe, to expone him felff to the feais, and to pas to ffrance in
youre defalt. Lyke as, ye, to be quyte of him, fparit nocht, in all pairtis, to feik
ane hundreth crownis, for his furnitour" away ; and fpairit nocht fpeik, that
your guidman wes palfand to France, and baid ' the ffeind ga with him !' — (6.)
Ite:\i, Indytit and accufit, that increffing in youre dewelifche confultatioune
with Wichis, to the wrak and diftructioun of the faid Patrik your hufband, and
efter he had returnit out of France, ye, ftill invying his health, and feiking to
diftroy him be Wichcraft foirfaid ; ye fend your faid huflmndis dowblett, with
Jofias Coupar yoiu* feruand, airlie in the morning, to Catherene Campbell the
Wich-wyffe, duelland in the Cannogait ; quhilk dowblett the faid Wich fprinklit M'itli bliule, and inchantit it with vtheris forcereis, and randerit itt agane to
the faid Jofias your feruand ; quhilk be brocht hame, afoir his maifteris ryfing :
Eftir the quhilk, your hufljand contractit ane heavie difeis, and pynit thairin

' Water, a word frequently used in MSS. of this period. ' His outfit and furnishing for his

voyage.

24 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 251

inony monethis ; quhilk wes na naturall feiknes, as wes teftifeit and declarit be
the clierurgeanis. Lyke as, the laid conlultatioun wes reveillit thaireftir, be the
faid Jofias your feruand, for the difcharge of his confcience ; and he, for that
caus, pall alF the countrey to Danflvin.— (7.) Item, Indytit, that to mak hir
(yow) perfyte and weill fkillit in the faid airt of Wichcraft, fche (ye) caufit ane
vther Wich, quha duelt in Sanct-Ninianis-raw, inaugwrat yow in the faid craft,
with the girth of ane grit bikar, turnand the fame oft owre your heid and nek,
and oftimes round about your heid ; quhilk wes reveillit be Marioune Love, dochter to Catherene Lyell younger, to the faid Katherene hir moder. — (8.) Item,
Ye ar indytit, that ye, haifing confauit ane deidlie malice agauis the faid Catherene and Walter Scott hir Ipous, for declaratioun of youre iuawgwring foirfaid, fene and perfavit be the faid Marioun Love ; ye, be youre airt of Sorcerie
and Wichcraft, bewichit hir and hir hulband, in thair bodeis, guidis and geir :
And fwa, for airt and pairt of bewiching of the faid Catherene Lyell and Walter Scott, in thair bodeis, gudis and geir, to thair grit llvaith and heirfchip. —
(9.) Item, Indytit, of bewiching, be your airt of Sorcerie, of vmq'" Johnne
Yonlloune, fone to Williame Yonftoune, your hufbandis lifter fone, being ane
young man of xvij yeiris of aige ; be the quhilk Wichcraft he deit : And fwa,
for airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter and Murthour of him ; only, for reveilling of your vndewtifuU behaviour to youre hulband, he being familiar in
your hous ; as the takinnis contenit in the faid Dittay att mair lenth verifeis. —
(10.) Item, Indytit, tliat ye, haifing confauit ane deidlie malice aganis Jonet
Cokburne, dochter to Johnne Cokburne, maltman in Hadingtoune, for the dounbringing of your purs, belt, glas and claithis, out of the chalmer, and haifing
laid doun the fame vpoun the buird,' yovu- hulband tuik vp your faid purs, and
wald haif opnit itt ; but opnit it nocht : For the quhilk, ye faid to the faid
Jonett, ' Weill, madin, haif 36 lattin J)is be done ? ge sail repent itt fra 30ure
hairt.' Catherene Carrutheris alias callit EriJ'ch Jonett and ye, laid in hir way
and paftage, fie inchantit mwildis" and powdei', that in I'chort Ipace thaireftir,
thair came ane fwarft'^ owre hir hairt, and fie ane flaffing^ in hir breift, as itt
had bene fum quick thing,' peching and jianting, heaving vji hir body ; quhairwith, fche is difeafit half ane hour, ewerie tyme fche takis itt ; oft in the nycht
and oft in the day ; continewing fumtymes half ane day ; haifing mair ftrenth
nor hir accuftiunmit maner, in tyme of hir health : And fwa, for laying of muldis and powder be Wichci'aft and Inchantment, in the faid Jonett Cokburnis
gait ; be the quhilk, fche confauit ane feiknes, and wes mekill trublit thairwith,
and is yit, be your airt and Wichcraft — (11.) Iteai, For the crewall Slauchter

' Table. "^ Earth taken from dead men's graves, &c. See Jan. 27, 1590. ^ Swooning. ' Palpitation of tlie heart. ^ Live.

252 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

and diftiuction of vmq''' Ewfame Punfray be Wichcraft. — (12.) Item, For alIwring, be yoiu- develilche "Wichcraft, Inchantment and Incantatioun, of Jofeph
Dowglas of Pinifraftoune, to lo\'e yow ; vnder culloure and cloik (of) mariage
with yom-e dochter ; and for the diftniction of youre hufband : In taikin quhairof, ye gaif him ane craig chein5ie,' twa belt chein3eis, ane ring, ane emirent' and
vtheris your jewellis. — (13.) Item, Indytit, for the confulting with Jonett
Cwninghame in the Cannogait, als callit Lady Bothivell, ane auld indytit ^^'^ich
of the fynefl champ, 18 3eiris fyne or thairby, for to haif poyfonit Jofeph Dowglas of Punfraftoune, and that be ane potioiin of compolit waiter, quhilk ye fend
Johnne T\A'eddall youre feruand for, to be brocht vp to Barbara Toureis hous,
in ane chopene lloup ; quhilk wes rellauit be him, and delyuerit to the faid Barbara.— (14.) Item, Indytit and accufit, for lending witli Jonett Drummond
your feruand, certane Wichcraft, of deliberat mynd to haif bewichit Rlarie Sandelandis, ane madin, att tliat tyme vnder promeis of mariage to Jofeph Dowglas
of Punfraftoune, fche being thane in tlie Braidfchaw ; and to diflTwad hir, fyrft,
fra the laid promeis of mariage of the faid Jofeph, becaus he had gewin his
promeis and faith to ane vthir gentilwoman ; and that he had the glengore^ him
felff. — (15.) Item, Indytit, that be youre airt of Wichcraft, ye travellit to ftay
and imped^ the mariage of the Laird of Punfraftoune with Marie Sandelandis ;
and to that effect, directit Jonett Drunnnond, fumtyme youre nwrice, with fum
of youre charmes and inchantmentis, to offend the perfoun of the laid Marie ;
quhairby, the faid mariage mycht haif bene ftayit. — (16.) Item, Indytit, of the
feiking help, confultatioun and refjions, fra Annye Sampfoun, as ane Wich, and
knawin to be ane notorious Wich, for recovering of your jewellis and euidentis
agane, fra the Laird of Punfraftoune ; and be frequent fending of Jonett Drummond, your fumtyme nurrice, to the faid Annye, to that effect, aboue lewin
tymes ; and in the ane of the tymes, fche rafit the Spreit, be voce and nocht
bodelie ; quha declarit, that the famin fould be delyuerit to the faid Jonett
Drummond, thair meffinger fend to feik the refpons. — (17.) Item, Indytit, of the
bewiching of twa of the Laird of Punfraftounis bairnis, his eldeft fone and dochter, to the deid.— (18.) Item, Indytit, of confulting and feiking help att the
faid Anny Sampfoune, ane notorious ^Vich, for relief of your payne in the tyme
of the birth of youre twa fonnes ; and reflauing fra hir to that effect, ane boirdftane,' to be layit vnder the bowfter, putt vnder your held, Inchantit mwildis
and powder put in ane peice paipar, to be vfit and rowit in your hair ; and att
the tyme of your drowis," your guidmannis fark to be prefentlie tane of him,

1 Neck chain. ' Emerald. ^ Lues venerea. " Hindered, impeded. s Rored stone,

probaljly a Fairy-stone, — a stone liaving a natural hole, formed by the action of water, &c. ^ Birthpangs or throes.

a4JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 253

and laid woumplit' vnder your bedfeit. The quliilk being praktefit be yow, as
ye had rellauit the famin fra the faid Annie, and informatioun of the vfe thairof ; your feiknes wes caffin of yow, vnnaturallie, in the birth of youre fyrft
fone, vpoune ane dog ; quhilk ranne away and wes newir fene agane : And in the
liirth of your laft fone, the fame prakteis foirfaid wes vfit, and your naturall and
kindlie payne vnnatm-allie caffin of yow, vpoun the wantoune catt in the hous ;
quhilk lyke wyis, wes newir fene thaireftir. — (19.) Item, Indytit, for airt and
pairt of the confulting with the faid Annie Sampfoun, for the diftroying of Mr
Jolinne Mofcrop, your fader-in-law, be Wichcraft, about foure yeii'is fyne, or
thairby : And to this effect, fending with Jonett Drunimond your feruand, ane
pictoure of walx, fend in ane buift,^ inclofit within ane guife,^ to the faid Anny ;
and ane feruiett with beif, woiniplit about the guife ; quhilk pictour the faid
Annie gaif to the Dewill to be inchantit ; and the famin being inchantit be him,
wes fend hame agane to yow vidth the faid Jonett Drummond, for doing of the
turne, as the faid Annie declarit that itt fould feme. — (20.) Item, Indytit, for
your develifch confultatioun with Agnes Sampfoiuie, pairtlie be j^oiu* lelff, and
pairtlie be the trafquicking of your auld agent Jonet Drummond, how to be revangeit vpoun Mr Johnne M'^Gillis wyffe ; and refolutioun being tane with
Agnes Sampfoune, ane notoure Witch, fche fend yow fum Wichcraft and Inchantments with the faid Jonett Dz-ummond, quhilk ye caift in att Mr Johnne
M^Gillis windok ; quhilk wes ane bairnis aiproune and halfclaith,^ with fum
thing bund thairin : And this mater being reveillit be vthiris, your feruandis,
ye caufit the faid Jonett Drummond to deny the fame, qulien itt wes laid to hir
charge : Lyke as, fche hes confeffit, that fche wes daylie and nychtlie trublit
with terribill fpektacles and vifioimis ; as, fcho viffiblie, in ane chalmer flwre of
youris, att twa eftir none, faw ane naikit man Hand in the middis of the faid
chalmer, with ane quliyte fcheit about him : As alfo, Jonett Aitchefoun youre
feruand, being fend att twell houris att ewin to draw ane drink, faw lykewyis
ane naikit man behind hir, with ane fark ; the flewis of the ferk vpoun his leggis,
and the taill about his heid ; quhilk terrifeit hir : Quhilk vifiounis man half
procedit of your dewililch airt of AVichcraft : As alfo, the laid Jonett Aitchefoun
wes trublit with hurchounis.* Quhilk Wichcraft foirfaid, wes caffin in agane,
att the faid Mr Johnne M^Gillis windok ; and being fund and opnit out, kythit
to be ane pictour of clay, and ane portrat of Elizabeth Home, fpous to the faid
Mr Johnne, fewitt in ane windeine fcheit ; about the quhilk wes ane auld blak
much" woimplit, thairin inclofit fy^e dewis of findrie cuUoures of worfett, as of

' Folded up. ^ Box, cliest. ' Goose. An acceptable present, besides affording concealment
from those less knowing than Anny. '' A child's apron or pincloth, and neck-cloth. ^ Urchions,
hedgehogs, Fr. herisson ; perhaps the term is used for imps of the Devil. ^ Mutch or cap, folded up.

254 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

blak, reid, orange, yallow and blew. Quhilkis Sorceries, Agnes Sampfoun confeffit ye maid youre felft'. As alio, the laid Agnes Saniplbune confeffit, that
Jonet Driunmond broclit to her the fame auld much, quhilk Icho inchantit ; lyke
as alfo, the faid Jonet Drummond hes confeffit the careing' thairof to the faid

Agnes. (21.) Item, For making of ane pictour of flour and clay, for bewiching of Elizabeth Home Ipoule to Mr Johnne M'Gill, and caufing call the fame
in att the laid Mr Johnneis kiching windok for that effect. — (22.) Item, Indytit,
for airt and pairt of the llauchter and diftructioun, be your devilifch craft
of Wichcraft and Inchantment, of Lilias M'Calsean, dochter to Mr Henry M"-
Cal3an,- ane barne of lex yeir auld ; and that be rubbing of hir face with youre
naipkin, A'j)oune ane Soneday eftir none ; quhen Iche fell vpoune the calley att
youre cloile held ; quhairby iche deit. — (23.) Item, Indytit and accufit, of the
conventicle had att North-Berwik Kirk, tuentie dayes before Michelmes, 1590 ;
and thair inquyring for the Kingis pictour, gewin be Annie Sampfoun to the
Dewill, to l)e inchantit, for the tredbnabill diftructioun of the King. — (24.)
Item, Indytit, for being att the Conventioun haldin at the New-heavin callit
the Fayrie-hoillis, att Lambmes laftwes, to the effect immediatlie aboue writtin.
— (25.) Item, Indytit and accufit, for ane Conventioun haldin be yow and
vtheris notorious Wichis, youre alTociattis, att the Brvme-hoillis ; quhair ye and
thay tuik the fea, Robert Greirfoun being youre adnierall and Maifter-manne,
paft owre the lea in riddillis to ane fchip, quhair ye enterit with the Dewill,
your maifter, thairin ; quhan, eftir j^e had eittin and drukkin, ye caift owr ane
blak dog that fldppit vnder the fchip, and thairby, ye hewing the Dewill your
maiftir thairin, qulia drownit the fchip be tumbling : Quhairby, the Queue wes
putt bak be ftorme. — (26.) Ite]M, Indytit, for conlulting with the faid Annie
Samplbune, Robert Greirioune and diners vthiris Wichis, for the treflbnabill
ftaying of the Quenis hame-cuming, be ftorme and wind ; and raling of ftorme,
to that effect ; or ellis to half drownit hir Maieftie and liir cumpany, be coniuring of cattis and cafting of thame in the fee, at Leith, and the bak of Robert
Greirfounis hous.^ — (27.) Itebi, Indytit, for airt and pairt of the diftructioun of
ane boit, betuix Leith and Kinghorne, and threfcoir of perlbuues thairin, be
your conventioune be vthir Wichis, and be your and thair Wichcraft ; as is notour.— (28.) Item, For an commoune Wich.

The quhilk day, the faid Dittay being red to the faid Ewfame in judgement,
as itt wes produceit att leiith be the Aduocatt, and drawin lummarlie in heidis,
as is aboue mentionatt : Eftir diuerfe obiectiounis maid aganis the famin be hir
and hir preloquitouris, and diuerfe proteftatiounis maid in hir name, and an-

' Carrying. ' Advocate,

24Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 255

fueris maid thairto be the Aduocat ;' the Juftice ffand, be Interloquitour, that the
faidis heidis foiild be putt to the knawlege of ane Affyfe : And the Aflyfe being
chofin, that fche mycht propone hir defenffis to the faid AfTyfe.

ASSISA.

James Johnftoune of Elphin- James Inglis, merchant burges James Somervall of Humbie,

lloune, of Edinburglie, Alexander Fairlie of Braid,

Anftrutbir, younger James Elphinfloune in Bogie, Grahame of Knokdolian,

of that Ilk, Clemmett Kincaid of the Coittis, Dauid Preftoiin of Craigmyller,

Mr Williame Leflie of Cunlie, George Mowbray of Seyfeild, Balfoure of Bandone,

Joimne Logane, portioner of Johnne Drammond of Slipper- Dauid Balfour of Bello.
Couftoune, feild,

IXTERLOCUTOU. The Juftice-deputis, be reffoun of diuerfe objectiounes
maid be the pannell, aganis the poyntis of Dittay aboiie writtin, to the AfTyfe ;
and anfueris maid thairto be the Aduocat ; and that they continewit quhill
fewin houris att ewin : Continewit the mater to the morne, in the fame forme,
force and effect as it wes thane : And caufit incarcerat the faid Ewfame ; and
warne the AfTyfe to be prefent the morne att aucht houris in the morning, ilk
perfoun vnder the pane of ane hundreth poundis.

(Jun. 10.) — Interlocutoh. The Juflice, be refToune 5it of the objectiounis maid be the pannell aganis the poyntis of Dittay, and the Depofitiounis
of findrie perfounes maid for vereficatioim thairof, and anfueris maid thairto ;
thay haifing continewit quhill fewin houris att ewin : Continewit the faid mater,
in fame forme, force and effect as is now ; and imprefonit the faid Ewfame
quhill the morne ; and wairnit the perfounes of AfTyfe to compeir the morne,
ilk perfoun vnder the pane of ane hundreth poundis.

(Jun. 11.) — The famin day, eftir proponing of the haill obiectioxmis be
the pannell aganis the Dittay, and vereficatiounis thairof, and anfuei'is maid
thairto be the Aduocatt ; the above perfounes, being chofin, fworne and admittit, thay removit altogiddir furth of Court to the Counfal-hous ; quhair thay
remanit all that nycht ; and eftir the chefmg of James Jolmefloune of Elphinfloune Chancillar of the laid AfTyfe, thay votit and refTonit vpoune the poyntis
of the faid Dittay ; and continewit pronunceing of thair delynerance quhill the
morne.

Articles o/'Convictioune and Verdict of the AJJi/e.
(Jun. 12.) — The quhilk perfounes of Affyfe, eftir lang deliberatioune and continewance in
the Counfal-hous, vpoune the reffoning and voting vpoun the poyntis of the faid Ewfame M'Caljanis

' It is perhaps to be regretted that no notice is preserved in the Record, of the long pleadings
which occupied the whole of this and the two following days. Neither has any record been kept of
the evidence adduced. Should the Depositions of the witnesses be found amongst the loose papers
belonging to the Court, (which are very numerous, and have never been arranged or examined,) they
shall be given in the Appendix.

256 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

Dittay ; being tiirowchlie auifit tbaiiwith, le-enterit agane in Court, and tliair, be the moutli of the
faid James Johnftoun of Elphiiifloune chanciliav, ftand, pronunceit and declaiit the laid Ewfame,
(1.) To be Fylit, culpable and convict, of confulting with Catheiene Campbell, ane Erfch woman with
-ane fallin neife, duellaud for ane lang fpace in the Cannogait heid, ane notorious Wich ; and intertiuneing the laid Catherene in liir awin hous, and in tlie hous of Barbara Toures, the relict of vmq'' James
Harlaw,' feiking help of hir to hir bairnis ; fpeciallie to Thomas hir lone, to quhome fche fend his
lark with Helene Inglis hir I'eruand. — (2.) Item, of the bewiching, be hir airt of Sorcerie, of Johime
Yonftoun, fone to Williame Yonftoun, hir hiiftandis filler fone, ane young man of fewintene yeiris of
aige ; quhairby he deit : And fwa, for airt and pairt of the llaucliter of the faid vmq'^ Johnne, be the
laid airt — (3.) Item, of the confulting with Jonett C'wninghame in the Cannogait heid, alias eallit
Lady BothrveU, ane auld indytit Wich of the fyneft champ, auchtene yeiris fyne or thairby, for poyfoning of Jofepli Dowglas of Punfraftoune, and that be ane potioune of compolit waiter, qidiilk fche
fend hir I'eruand Johnne Tueddall for, to be brocht vp to Barbara Toures hous in ane chopene ftoup ;
quhilk wes reffauit be him, and delyuerit to the faid Barbara. — (4.) Item, of the feiking help, confultationn and refpons, fra Annie Sampfoun, knawin ane notorious Wich, for recovering of hir jowellis
and emdent* agane fra the Laird of Punfraftoune ; and that, be the frequent fending of Jonet Druraraond, fumtyme hir nurrice, to the faid Annie to that effect, aboue fewin tymes. — (5.) Item, for confulting with Annie Sampfoun ane Wich, for getting of niwiklis fra hir, to be vfit be the faid Ewfarae,
in releif of hir payne, in hir birth of hir twa fonnes. — (6.) Item, of airt and pairt of the confulting
with Annie Sanipfoune, for diflroying of Mr Johnne Mofcrop, hir fader-in-law/ be Wichcraft, about
foure yeiris fyne or thairby ; and to that effect, fending with Jonett Drummond hir feruand, ane pictour of walx, fend in ane buill inclofit within ane guile, to the laid Annie, and ane femiet with beiff
woumplit about the gufe ; quhilk pictour the faid Annie gaif to the Dewill to be inchantit ; and the
famin being inchantit be him, wes fend hame agane to hir with the faid Jonett Drummond, for doing
of tlie turne ; as the faid Annie declarit to the faid Jonet, that it fould ferue thairto. — (7.) Item,
laud hir culpabill, of making of ane pictour of flowre and clay, for bewiching of Mary Home, fpous to
Mr Johnne M^Gill, and caufiug call the famin in att Mr Johnne M'Gillis kiciiing windok, to that
effect. — (8.) Item, culpabill, for the trelfonabill Convcnticill had be hir, Annie Sampfoune, Johnne
Fiene and diueris vlhiris, att North Berwik-Kirk, tuentie dayes before Michelmes 1590 ; and thair,
inquyring for the Kingis pictour, gewin be the faid Annie Sampfoune to the Dewill, to be inchantit
be him, for the trelfonaliill dillructioun of the King. — (9.) Item, convict of the trelfonabill Conventioune, haldiu be him, liir and thanie, att the New-heavin, eallit Aichefounis-heavin, att Lambmes
laftwas I^.V'.lxxxx, to the trelfonabill eflPect immediatlie aboue writtin, viz. in feiking of ane pictour,
to the trelfonabill dillruciioune of the King. — (10.) Item, convict of commoune Wichcraft and Sorcerie, and vfing of the faid Wichcraft agauis findrie his hienes liegis. — (11.) And als, Acquit the
faid Ewfame of the haill remanent poyntis contenit in hir Dittay foirfaid, quhairof fche wes ac^ ulit.

Doo:m of Forfeiture and Sentence of Death.
(Jun. 15.)— Tlie quhilk day, Ewfame IVrCal3ane, fpous to Patrik Mofcrop alias M'Cal5aue, being prefeutit on pannell, as fche that wes convict ofbefore, be ane condigne Alfyfe, in ane Court of Juiliciarie, haldin in the faid Tolbuith in Edinburghe, the tuelt day of Junij inftaut ; for the confulting with
Catherene Campbell, ane Erfch woman with ane fallin neife, &c. (here the above

' Probably the widow of the Notary whose Protocol-book has been quoted in the Notice prefixed
to this Trial. ^ Emerald stone. ' He appears as one of the ' Preloctitouris' in her defence.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 257

articles of conviction are rehearsed.) — For the quhilk ciymes, the laid Jufticedepute ordanit the faid Ewfame, be the mouth of Williame Gray dempftar, as
culpabill and giltie thairof, to be takin to the Caftel-hill of Edinbiirghe, and
thair bund to ane ftaik and brunt in affis, quick/ to the death : And all and
findrie hir landis, heretageis, takis, ftedingis, roumes, poffeffiounes, coirnis, cattell, guides and geir, to be forfaltit and efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe.

[Another unfortunate hiatus in the Records of the High Court of Justiciarytakes place at this period; the Books of Adjournal, from October. . 1591 to MaylS,
1596, having been lost. The Editor has been at some pains in tracing the loss
of this portion ; and it is so far satisfactory that he is enabled to report, that this
must have occurred previous to the time when Lord Fountainhall framed his
MS. Abridgement f vfhich is still preserved in the Advocates' Libz-ary. That
eminent lawyer leaves a blank for inserting notices of the jiroceedings, in case
the Record should afterwards have been found ; but he does not hazard any
conjectures as to the time the missing volume had been taken away or destroyed.
It is to be hoped that the volume may still be px-eserved ; and that, if it has
found its way into any public or private collection, it may yet be restored to the
Clerk of Justiciary.

In a second MS. Collection, also preserved in the Faculty's Library, and understood to liave been compiled by Lord Roystoun,^ it would appear that the
same deficiency had still existed in his lordship's time. The following memorandum is transcribed from that Abstract :"

' NoTA. As there is no Record from October 1591 to 17th May 1596, we
are deprived of what jiaft in that intervall. I fliall therefore notice what tryals
are mentioned by Spotfwood, during that time.

' Firft, he mentions, page 391, that David Grahame of Fintrie was found
guiltie, and beheaded, 16 Feb. 1592, for being concerned in a Popifli plott; the
particulars whereof are there narrated, and in a printed Narrative, anno 1593,
London.

' This was the severest sentence ever pronounced t)y the Court, even in the most atrocious cases.
In ordinary instances of Witchcraft, the culprit was previously strangled at the stake, before being
bunit. Ewfame Makcal5ean endured her fate with firmness and obstinacy to the last. She does no
appear to have repented her crimes, lint rather seems to have gloried in what she had attempted.
- ' Ane Abridgement of the Books of Adjurnall.' W. 1. 26. Sir John Lauder (Lord Fountainhall)
was one of the fifteen Ordinary Lords of Session, appointed after the Revolution, Nov. 1, 1689. On
his death, he was succeeded in his office by Andrew Fletcher, (Lord Milton,) Jun. 4, 1724', after having sat upon the bencli for the long period of almost tliirty-fivo years. ' Sir James MacKenzie
(Lord Roystoun) was appointed an Ordinary Lord of Session on the resignation of Lord Prestonhall,
(R. Mackenzie,) Jun. 7, 1710, and was succeeded by Charles Areskine, (Lord Tinwald,) Nov. 29,
i74'4'. * ' Abstract of the Books of Adjunial,* Advocates' Library, M. 5. 14. fol. 161.

VOL. I. 2 K

258 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

* Stewai-t E. of Bothwell, in Aug. or Sept. 1593, tryed and acquit of confulting with witches againft the King's life. Vid. Agnes Sampfon's tiyal, as mentioned, page 383, in Spotfwood.

' In the Pari', anno 1594, the Earls of Angus, Huntlie and Errol, are forfaulted, for the lame trealbn and Popilli plot for which Grahame of Fintrie was
forfault in Feb. 1592.

' Allan Oi'ine, fervant to the Earl of Bothwell, and James Cochran, keeper of
Blacknefs Callle, execute for art and part in Both well's treafon. Executed in
Oct. 1594.'

In order to supply, in some measure, the want of this Volume of the Books of
Adjournal, the Editor has ventured to insert in this place, rather than in an
Appendix, pretty copious extracts made by him from the Records of the Privy
Council of Scotland. These notices are, for the most part, necessarily taken
merely in abstract. It is greatly to be wished, that the truly valuable mine of
historical information contained in the Acts of Secret Council, may, through the
liberality of His Majesty's Commissioners on the Public Records, be speedily
published, under the superintendence of the present Deputy Clerk Register ; to
whose indefatigable and well-directed exertions, the restoration of the Records
of Scotland is mainly to be attributed. The present state of the Public Registers, and the facilities now afforded for consulting them, wovdd reflect honoiu*
on any countiy.]

(May 19, cqmd Halinidhous.) — Williame Maister of Angus and Dauid
Graha^me of Fintrie, being baith perfonallie prefent, decernit to tyne thair
lyverentis, being dilaitit and accufit, that thai had declynit fra the trew and
Chrifleane Religioun, refuiling to relbrte to the preicheing of Godis worde ; and
that, be relToning or dilperfing of buikis or lettres, thay had prellimit to perfuade his Maiefteis subiectis to declyne fra the ijrofeffioun of the trew religioun.
and thairthrow had incurrit the pane of tinfale (lofs) of all thair mouable guidis,
togidder with the lyfrentis of thair landis, &c.

(May 21, apud Edinburgh.) — Alexander Guthrie, fear of Kincaldrum, become actit and obleift as cautioner and fouirtie to William Douglas (Maister OF Angus), eldeft lone lauchfull to Williame Erll of Angus, that he fall
repair to the toun of Dundee, within the fpace of foure dayis eftir the dait heirof, and thairin remane, quhill he mak iaill and depairt furth of this realme,
within the fpace of fourty dayis thaireftir : And that he fall nocht returne agane
within the fame, without his Maiefteis licence obtenit to the fame effect, vndir
the pane of ten thoufand pundis.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Alex^ Guthrie appeirand of Kincaldrum.

24JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 259

(May 24, apucl Falkht>id.)—Sm James Douglas of Drumlangrig, knicht,
and his deputis, fufpended and difcharged ' of all vfing of the office of Baillierie'
of the regalitie of Mortoune, ' ay and quhill it be tryit quhidder he be denudit
of the richt and poffeffioun of the fame or nocht ;' for ' cwming with convocatioun of his hienes liegis in armour, vpoun the xxvij day of Marche laftbipaft,
to the toun and landis of Penpont, quhair Thomas Kirkpatrik of Clofburne,
SherefF-depute of Drumfreis, with his memberis of Courte, wer fitting in jugement, in ane fenfit Courte haldin be him, and violent taking away of Johnne
Wilfoun in Haghill furth of the faid Courte, eftir he was enterit vpoun pannell,
and reddy to have vnderlyne the tryale of ane Affife, for certane crymes of thift
committit be him, and flaying.'

(May 24.) — Proclamation againft Niniane Chiunesyde, feruitour to
Frances Erll Bothuill, for treafonably confpiring the death of the king, * be
"Witchcraft, Sorcerie and vtheris traterous and diabolicall meanis.'

(Jun. 25, 1591, fipifd Edi)ibi/rg/i.)—Froclamation againfl ' Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill, that, notwithftanding of his Majeftys clemency, &e.
in fuperceding, as of befoir, the pronunceing of dome agaiiis him, in hoip of his
converfioun, penitency and amendment, quhill now that his hienes, perfaving
that he hes gevin him felf ower altogidder in the handis of Sathan, and that his
fpreit has fa michtelie prevalit into him, that he yit ftill infiftis, without feir of
God, or refpect to honeftie or ichame of the warld, to continew in all kynd of
filthines, helping treflbun vpoun treffoun, aganis God, his Maieftie and this his
native cuntx-e, euir aflifting fie perfonis, be force, counfall and vtherwayis, as
wer and ar innemeis to God, his hienes, and focht the fubuerfioun of the trew
Religioun ; takand the manteiuance of tratouris, mui'theraris and vtheris wickit
perfonis, quha, to impetrat impvnitie of thair wickit lyffis and libertie to do evill
at all tymes,maid thair dependance vpoun him; he having aliua now at laft, for
the better executioun of his wickit intentioun and treffonabill confpiracie aganis
his Maiefteis awin perfoun, had confultatioun with Nygromanceris, Witcheis
and vtheris wickit and vngodlie perfonis, bayth without and within this cuntrie,
for bereving of his hienes lyff, confeffit be fum of the fame kynd, alreddy execute to the deid, and fum vtheris yit on lyve, reddie to be execute for the fame
cryme : And being wardit within the Caflell of Edinburgh quhill he had bene
tryit of the fame, he hes noM' at laft efchopit, and fua hes takin the faid treffonabill cryme vpoun him, eftir that his hienes nochtwithflauding had yeildit to
fum conditionis concerning his libertie : ffor the quhilk cans, and for the forraar
treflbnabill offence quhairof he wes convict, in maner foirfaid, his Maieftie now
at laft hes caufit pronunce the Dome and Sentence of fforfaltour aganis him ; as
the famyn at mair lenth beiris : Swa that prefentlie he remanis a dedarit rebell,

260 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

tratour and innymie to God, his Maieftie and this his natiiie cuntrie.' — Therefore ' that nane reflet, liipple, fehaw faiiour, iutercomnioun, nor haue intelligence' with him, &c.

(Jul. 21.) — The Lords declare a certain Letter of Relaxation, in favour of
CoLiNE Campbell of Glenlyoun, ' to have bene and to be maift priuelie
and furi-eptitioiiflie i)iircheft' of his Maieftie, without his hienes priwitie or allowance ; and thairfoir of nane avale, force nor effect.' And ordained the Letters of Horning, Caption, Trealbn and Comniiffion following thereupon, ' purcheft be Dame Agnes Sinclair Counte.Te of Errole, and Alexander Gordoun of
Strathdoun hir fpous, for his intres, to be put to forder executioini in all pointis."
— On Sej). 25, 1587, Canijibell of Glenlyoun was denounced rebel and put to the
horn, ' be virtue of twa feuerall letteris rafit at hir inftance ; the ane for nocht
coniijerance, iierfonallie, befoir his Maiefties and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, to
have anfuerit to ane complaint maid be hir vpoun him ; and the vther for not
reftoring and delyuering to hir of certane giulis. geir, iniicht plenifling, jowellis.
gold, filuer and vtheris lpul5eit be him fi'a hir, or ellis the avale and pryces
thairof jjerticulerlie Ipecifeit and contenit in the faidis letteris. And becaus he
remanit contempnandlie at the faid proces of home vnrelaxt, the faid Dame
Agnes purcheft letteris, be deliuerance of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, quhairwith fcho caufit charge him, and the keparis and detenaris of his duelling-houffis
refpectiue, to rander and delyuer the lamyu to the ofRciar executour of the faidis
letteris ; as alfua, to entir his perfoun in ward within the Caftell of Blaknes,
within a certane fpace mentionat in the fame letteris, vnder the pane of treffoun ;
quhilk chargeis he maift i^roudlie and contemi^nandlie diftobeyit ; and thairfoir,
fcho wes forceit to crave his Maiefteis Commiffioun for perfute of him felf, and
affageing of his liouffis and ftrenthis with fyre and fwerd : flor ftaying of the
executioun quhairof, he hes of lait, be the moyen of fum fchameles and vndifcreit perlbnis, preferring thair awin pre vat gayne and commoditie to his hienes
honour, maift priuelie, &c. purcheft ane letter vnder his hienes fubfcriptioun
and fignet, relaxand him tra all and quhatfumeuir proces of home,' &c.

(Aug. 9.) — Proclamatioun for the perfute of the Erll Bothuile, ' ffor reiifting of quhais treflbnabill intentioun and practizes, reprefling of the infolence
of thame," and the brokin men fterit vp be thame on the Bordouris, and vtherwayis to the brek of his hienes peace, and difturbiug of the quiet eftate of the
haill He, his Maieftie intendis to tak the fleildis in propir perfoun.' Charges
are therefore ordained to be given to ' the erllis, lordis, baronis, fewaris, frehaldaris, landit gentilmen and fubftancious 5emen, togiddir with the inhabitantis

' Procured, obtained. ^ Bothwell's abettors.

25JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 261

of burrowis, betnix fextie and fextene yeiris, duellarid within the boundis of the
Scherefdomes of Edinburgh principal!, and within the Conftabularie of Hadingtoun, Berwik and Roxburgh, alfweill regalitie as ryeltie, that thay and ilk ane
of thame, Weill bodin in feir of weir addres thame felffis to repair to his Maieftie,
at Edinburgh, vpoun the fext day of Auguft inftant,' &c.

(Aug. 6.) — A ' Band' between the Lairds of Cesfurde, Bukcleuche,
Home of Broxinouth, Lauder of Bafs, Ker of Lyntoun, Douglas of Caverfe, &c.
is recorded, wherein they bind therafelves to ufe their utnioft endeavoui's to take
Bothwell, &c. ; and, amongft other conditions, they engage to ' lay afyde all
perticular querrellis, deidlie feidis and contrauerfeis Handing amangis thame,
and for na cans fall fchrink frome his Maiefteis feruice.'

(Aug. 7.) — His Majefty ' finding fum of the cheif perfonis fufpect culpabill in
the lait diforderit contempt to have repentit thame thairof, and quhill tryell of
thair pairtes to haue voluntarle ofTerit them felffis in his hienes ward,' difpenfes
with the attendance of his fubjects, having now abandoned the intention of Rejxiiring to the Borders against Bothwell.

(Aug. 7.) — Sir Walter Scott of Branxlaelme, knyV finds Sir James Scot
of Balwery, kny', and Williame Scot of Abbotifliall, as fureties, that he ' fall dedepairt furth of this realme within the fpace of ane moneth,' and ' not returne
agane within the famyn during the fpace of thre yeiris nixtocura, vnder the pane
of ten thowiand pundis.'

(Aug. 29.) — Sir Walter Scott of Branxhelme, kny', is relieved ' of his
office and charge of keping of Liddifdaill,' ' becaus he is to depairt furth of this
realme, be his hienes licence and permiffioun, &c.

CoMMissiouN yo/- Examinating of Witcheis.

(Oct. 26. Apud HaHriidhous.) Forsamekill as the Kingis Maieftie, with
aduife of the Lordis of his Secrete Counfale, lies gevin and grantit, and be
]>\v prefentis, gevis and grantis his hienes full pouer and Commiffioun, expres
bidding and charge to his trufty and weilbelouitt counfaloiu-is, Sir Johnne Cokbunie of Ormeftoun Juftice clerk, Maifter Dauid Makgill of Nefljitt Aduocat,
as alfwa to M"' Robert Bruce and Johnne Dunkiefoun Minifteris, Williame
Litill prouoft of Edinburgh and Johnne Arnott burges J)airof, or ony three of
thame coniunctlie ; all and fnidrie perfonis, alfweill ])ame quhilkis ar alreddy
convict or vtheris quhilkis ar detenit captiue and lies confeffit, and fum that hes
not confeffit, as alfwa all lie vjjeris as ar dilaitit, or that heireftir falbe accufed
and dilaitit, off committing, vfing and practizing of Witchcraft, Sorcerie, In-

' Several others, of lesser note, find surety to depart the kingdom at this time.

262 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

chantment and vtheris divilifch divyfis, to tlie diflionnour of God, fklender of
his woi-de, perrelling of }iair awin fauUis, abufeiiig of pe coinmoun people and
grite contempt of God, his Maieftie, his autlioritie and lawis : To call and convene befoir the faidis Commiffionaris, or ony three of thame coniunctlie, as faid
is, alf-oft as neid beis, and thame to try, enquyre and examinat, thair Depofitionis to putt in write, and the fame to reporte to his hienes and his Counlale ;
to the elfect ])ai may be putt to the knaulege of ane Aflyife, and juflice miniftrat
as affeiris, or fie ordour takin with \>ame as to his Maieftie and his faid Counfaill falbe thocht maift meit and convenient : The perfonis wilfull or refufeand
to declair the veritie to putt to tortour, or lie vj)ir punifliment to vfe and cans
be vfit, as may move thame to vtter the treuth : And generallie, all and lindrie
vtheris thingis to do and xi'e, that heirin is requilite to be done : Fferme and
ftable haldand and for to hald, all and quhatfumeuir thingis the faidis Cominiffioneris, or ony thrie of pame coniunctlie, as faid is, lauchfullie do heirin.

(Oct. 28.) — ' Francis Erll of Errole clieifT, James Lord Hay of Zefter and
Williame Hay of Gourdie, with the remanent kin and freindis of vmq'^ James
Hay, fone to the laid Williame;' having railed Criminal Letters againft Andro
Herixg of Little Blair, Heid Johniie Her'ing in Gilmertoun, Blak Johnne
Hering in Afflekhill and James Hering in Morganftoun and thair accomplices,
for the cruel and unmerciful Slaughter and Murthour of the faid James Hay, in
Feb. 1589, ' quhen his Maieftie wes in Demnark ; the faid complenaris ofTerrit
thame reddy to haue perfewit juftice, gif thai could haue had ony certantie to
haue the fame miniftrat,' &c. The Earl of Errol accordingly applied for and
obtained a Commiftioun, for fearching and bringing the murderers to juftice.^
Letters of Caption were likewife granted, and Black John Hering fecured and
placed in ward, and the others put to the horn ; but . in the meantime, Hering
obtained a Refpite for feven years, in the face of thefe proceedings, of a recent
Act of Parliament, and of the Kingis ' Declaratioun left and publiftit at his depairting to Denmark.' A charge was therefore given to ' Dauid Hering younger
of Glafclune, purcheffair of the faid Refpett,' to ajjpear before the King and
Privy Council, bringing with him the Refpite, and to fee the fame declared
null, ' or ellis to haue allegeit ane relfonable cans quhy the faniin fould nocht
haue been done :' And the parties appearing accordingly, ' the Kingis Maieftie
and Lordis of Secrete Counlale ffindis that thai ar nocht jugeis competent to the
Reductioun and annulling of the faid Relpett ; and thairfoir Remittis this mater
to the Juftice general and his dejiutis, ordaning thame to proceid and minifter
juftice thairin, according to the Actis of Parliament, lawis and iwacticque of this
realme obferuit in fie caiffis : And in the meantynie, that the faid Johnne Hering
be committit to warde within the tolbuith of Edinburgh, thairin to remane

25Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 263

vpoun hes awne expenflis, ay and quhill he be tryit for the faid flauchter and
juftice miniftrat as effeiris.'

(Oct. 28.) — On the Complaint of James Lord Ogii.vie of Aiulie, ' that
quhair he hes bene his Maiefteis faithful! and obedient fubject, fubmitting him
felff alwayes to his hienes and the Lawis of the countrey, and thairby repofing
him felfF vnder his hienes protectioun, beleving to haue reflauit inivirie of na
man ; neuirtheles Archibald Erll of Ergyle and his freiudis, vpoun quhat
motiue or occafioun the faid Lord knawis not, without ony deferving on his
parte, hauing concludit the wrack of his hous or freindfchip ; and being iiiformeit that he had reteirit him felff in Ibbir and quiet maner, to duell and mak his
refidence in Glen-Ilay, finding the place convenient for thair interprife, the faid
Erll and his freindis fett oute certane brokin Hieland men, thay ar to fay,

Johune Campbell bruthir to Campbell of Lochinyell, Johnne Dow M'Condoquliy in Inuerraw, Neill Leich in Lochquhabir, Donald M'Carlich in the Laird
of Glenvrquhyis landis, AUane Roy M'^Moig fone to the Laird of Glenco, Archibald Campbell of Perfie, Coline Campbell of Glenlyoun, Archibald Campbell his
bruthir, Johnne IVrRannald in Lochquhabir ; c[uha in the moneth of Augufl laftbypaft,to the nowraer of ffyve hundreth men of the cuntrey of Ergyle, duelland for
the maift parte within the fame, and relTett thairin, with the guidis and dexu-edatiounes vnderwrittin, off fett purpois and deliberatioun to haue Hane the faid lord,
and to haue wrackeit and fpuil5eit the countrey : Lyke as, vpoun the xxj day of
Auguft lailbypaft, thay enterit in Glen-Ilay vndir filence of nicht, with fie force
and violence, that the faid Lord, lyand fa fer frome his freindis, vpoun fie fuddantie
wes nocht able to refill thame, bot with grite difficultie and fchorte aduertifment,
he, his wyffe* and bairnis haueing efchaiped, thay enterit in the countrey with
fie barbarous crueltie, not fparing wyffis nor bairnis, bot murthowrit and flew
all quhome thay fand thairin, to the nowmer of xviij or xx perlbnes ; and fpuil3eit and away-tuke ane grite nowmer of nolt, fcheip and j)lenneffing, to the vtter
wrack and vndoing of the haill pure inhabitantis of the cuntrey : Quhilk being
maid knawin to his Maieflie, his hienes nocht onlie caufit ane affiiirance to be
takin betuix the faidis pairteis, bot alfwa directit ane fpeciall Lettre to the laid
Erll and his freindis, to reteir" the faidis brokin men to their awin countrey,
that the faid Lord and his freindis wer nocht forder troublit with thame ; with
ane charge to thame felfhs vndir the pane of TrefToun. Quhairupoun the faid
Lord and his freindis haueing dependit, hoiping to be in furetie thairby, and to
haue relTauit na iniurie of new, during the afTuirance of the faid Erll, nor nane
of his ; neuirtheles the brokin men, quha maid the invafioun abouewrittin, haue-

' Jean, eldest daughter of William seventh Lord Forbes. ^ Fr. retirer.

264 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1591.

iug continuallie fenfyiie remanit in the hillis, and haueing conuocat \Tito thame
felffis a'ne grit nownier of fornaris/ quha, in the tyme of fie afTuirance, hoiping
with fmall travell to get geir, vilipending his Maiefties charge gevin to thame
as faid is, and the faid Letteris nor perfonis foirfaidis, haueing na refpect to his
Maiefl;eis Letteris, thay ^-poun the . . . day of September laftbipaft, within the
tyme of the alRiirance, \Tidir filence of nicht invadit the inhabitants of GlenIlay and Glen-Clova, and hes murthom-it and flane three or foure innocent men
and women, and reft and takin away ane grit pray of guidis ; fwa that the puir
men duelland in Glen-Clova, Glen-Ilay and vtheris pairtis adjacent to the
Month," quha ar nocht able to make refiftance, ar fa oppreft be the brokin men
and fornaris houndit oute be the Erll of Ergyle and his freindis, and mantenit
and reflett be thame, that nather be his iMaiefteis protectioun nor afTuirance of
the pairtye can thair lyveis and guidis be in furetie.'

The above-named perlbns were accordingly charged to appear before the King
and Privy Council, under the pain of rebellion. Lord Ogilvie appeared on the
day appointed, to call them to account for thefe barbarities ; but none of them
having come forward, they were ordained to be denounced rebels, &c.

(Oct. 28.) LiCHTAXE OF VsAXE,^ Johmie L., Archibald and Alexander Ogiluy and Johnne Smith his feruandis, George Ogiluy fone to Alexander

O. of Druramis, now feruand to James Lord Ogiluy, Williame and O.

fonis to Johnne O. of Qiiheich, O. bruther to Innercpharritie, (and

fundry others, fervants to the Lairds of Telling and Balfour, &c.) were charged,
' that qidiair vpoim the xvj day of Auguft laftbypaft or thairby,' they, ' with
convocatiomi of his IMaiefteis liegis, to the nowmer of threfcoir perfonis or thairby,all bodin in feir of weir with jakkis.fpeiris, hacquebutis, piftolettis and vtheris
waponis. ini-qfiiie. prohibite to be worne be the lawis of this realme and actis of
Parliament, off the fpeciall caufing, fending, hounding oute, command, &c. of
the faid Lord, come vpoun ^nnq'^ Robert Camiibell in Milhorne, Williame of Souttarhous, Thomas C. portionar of Kethik and Johnne C. of Muretoun, and maift
cruellie and ^aimercifullie murdreift and flew thame, vpoun fett purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellouny, in hie and jiroude contemptioun of his Maieftie,
and encom'agenient of vtheris to committ the like fliamefull and cruell llauchteris
heireftir,' &c. — The Letters raifed were at the inftance of ' the wyffis, bairnis
and remanent kin and friendis' of the deceafed perfons, charging the above parties to appear before the King and Coinicil ; and they not obeying the charge,
were ordained to be denounced rebels, &c.

' Vagabonds l)elonging to no clan, who lived by plunder and by taking free quarters, or sor»hig, as
it was termed. - Mountains, hill-country. Lat. 3fons. ' Ulysses-liaven. Of this family was

Robert Leightoune, Bishop of Dunblane, and afterwards Arclibishop of Glasgow.

25JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 265

(Oct. 28.)— Bond by Robert Douglas of Caslhogill, dated Oct. 23, 1591, recorded, whereby he binds himfelf as cautioner for Sir James Douglas of
Drumlanrig, kn', that ' Thomas Kirkpatrik of Clofeburne, hi> men tennentis and
feruandis, falbe harmeles and fkaithles,' under the pain of L.5000.

(Nov. 3.) — Robert Lord Sempill, having been charged to appear before
the King and Council, 'to haue \aiderlyne fie ordour as fould be prefcriuit,
twicheing the obfeniatioun of peax, quietnes and gude reule in the cuntrey,
vndir the pane of rebellioun' — and not complying, he was ordained to be denounced Rebel, &c.

(Nov. 13.) — David Edmeftoun of Wowmatt and James Laufoun of Humbie,
become bound for Schir Johnxe Edmestoun of that Ilk, that he ' be him felff,
and all thai that he is oblift to anfuer for be the lawis of this realme, &c., fall
keip the Kingis IMaiefteis peax,' &c., under the pain of L.5000.

{Eodem die.) — Andro Logane of Coitfeild became cautioner for George
HOPPRINGLE of Torwodlie, to the fame effect as above, under the pain of
L.2000.

(Eodem die.)— James Hoppringle of that Ilk and James H. of Quhytebank,
became cautioners for Johnke Hoppringle of Buckholme ; and Buckholme
and Quhytebank for James Hoppringle of that Ilk — each under the pain of
L.2000.

(Eodem die.) — James Douglas of Cavers, fchereff of Teuiotdaill, became
furety for Walter Turnbull of Bedreule, under the pain of 1000 merks.

(Nov. 17.) — WiLLlAME Cunynghame of Toiu-landis denounced, for not
finding caution.

(Eodem r//V.)— Patrik Cokburne, tutour of Langtoun, became fiu-ety for
George Haitlie in Hordlaw, under the pain of 500 merks.

(N0V.I9.) — JamesEarl of Glencairn ordained to be charged to find caution,
to the extent of L. 20,000 within eight days, ' or ellis within the fame fpace, pas
and entir his perfone in warde be-North the watter of Erne and about the burgh
of Perth, and thair remane and keip warde ; and on nawayis tranfcend the faid
boundis, ay and quhill he be fred and relevit be his Maieftie, \Tider the pane of
rebellioun :' And if he lliould fail, to denounce him rebel.' On Nov. 24, he is
again charged to pafs to ward, ' for contemptuous remaning at the home, for
none obeying of the Decrete Arbitrall pronunceit be his hienes and the Lordis
of Counfale and Seffioun, betuix the faid Erll and Dame Annabill Murray
Counteire of Mar :' He is likewife charged, ' to rander and delyuer his houffis of

' A ^eat immber find similar surety at this period. From the above excerpts, which are given as
specimens, some idea may be formed of the value of the Privy Council Records, in elucidating historical and genealogical enquiries.

vol. l 2 l

266 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592.

Kilmarann'ok, Findlaftoun, Stevinftoun, Kilmaweris and Glencairne, to the
official- executour of tlie faidis letteris,' under certification. On Dec. 15, he is
charged to return a bond for L.20,000, under the pain of rebellion.

(Dec. 17.) Patrik Lord Gray, being perfonally prefent, is ordained to

« brino-, prefent and deliuer to hisMaiefteis ftabularis,vpoun the xij dayof Januair

nixttocuni, his hienes awin hors, callit ,' quhilk wes vnhonnelllie tane

away be James Gray lone to the faid Lord, and fumtyme ferwand to his Maieftie ; as allwa, to bring and prefent the faid James befoir his hienes, or expell
him furth of this realme, betuix and the laft day of the faid moneth of Januair;
and fail,eing heirof, that the faid lord pas and entir his perfone in warde within
the Caftell of Duubartane ;' under certification.

(Jan. 12, 1591-2.) — The Kingis Maieftie, with advife of the Lordis of Secrete
Counfale, ffindis and declairis, that Dauid Hammii.toun of Bothuei.lhauch,
(otherwife defigned of Monkton mains,) Iflbbell Sinclair and Alefoun Sinclair,
heretrices-portionaris of the landis of \\\)dhoullie, aucht and fould be repoffeffit
to the landis, houffis, takkis, ftedingis and pofTefTionis whereof thay wer difpoffeffit, throw occafioun of the late trublis."

(Jan. 12.)— A ' Proclamatioun aganis tliame that rijdis misscUiV^ is recorded, ftating ' that there is diners and findrie perfonis, arte and pairt-takeris
with Frances fumtyme Erll Botluiile, in the latt trelfounable Conspiracy
attemptit within his hienes Palice of Haliruidhous, vpoun the xxvij day
of December laftbipaft, for bereving of his Maieftie of his lyffis and crowne,
and that vthirwayis ar dilaitit and liifpect to haue bene vpoun the foirknaulege and devife of the fame Confpiracie, quhilkis nicht and day traiiellis
and rydis ouer all pairtis of this realme, Avitli thair faceis couerit, and vtherwayis difagyfit,' &c. Therefore directs Proclamation to be made, ' that nane
of thame tak vpoun hand to ryde or gang nicht or day, to or fra, in ony
parte of this realme, with thair faceis coverit or vtherwayes difagyfit, in tyme
cuming ;' and to charge the lieges ' to tak and apprehend' all fuch perfons ; ' or,
gif thay be noclit of pour fa to do, that they ryfe fchowte, rais the fray, follow,
concui- and affift ilk ane with vtheris, to the taking and apprehending of thame,'
&c. ; under certification.

(Jan. 15.) — John Graham of Knokdoleane and John Stuart fear of Barfcube,
become fureties for Sir Johnne Edmestoun of that Ilk, kn', James Edmeftoun
of Duutreith, kn', and James alias Jacobe Edmeftoun of Newtoun, as principalhs,
for thame felffis, and takand the burding vpoun thame for thair haill kin, freindis,

' Left blank. ' They were fornmlly restored by Act of Par. 1609, cap. 41. See Acts fol. 450.
' Muffled, masked, disguised ; commonly written mussallit. O. Fr. emmussalle.

25JAC.VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 267

furename,' &c. on the one part ; and ' James Commendatair of Incheflfray and
Hary Lindfay of Kinfawnis, as cautioners for Schir James Cheisholme of
Dundorne, kn', as i)rincipall, for him felff, and takand biu-ding for him for his
haill kin,' &c. on the other part ; that they flioukl obferve the contents of certain Letters of Slains, dated Nov. 25, 1587, granted by the ' cheifF kynnifmen
and freindis on the fader fyde and moder fyde of vmq'" Mungo Edmeftoun, bruthir to James alias Jacobe E. of Newtoun,' who was flain within the burgh of
StirUng, in Nov. 1585, ' under the pain of perjurie, infamy and tinfall of perpetuall credite, honnour and eftimatioun, in tyme cuming ; and forder, vnder the
pane of 5000 merkis.'

(Mar. 8.) — A Proclamation made ' anent deferting of the Raid appointit for
perfute of the Erll of Huntlie.'

(Apr. 4, 1592.) — Proclamatioun anerd the Arrival of Spanyeartis. ' Forfamekill as it is vnderftand to the Kingis Maieftie and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, that thair is certane Spanillie fhippis, riggit oute in weu'like maner, and
prefentlie in reddines to repair to the North His and coiftis of this realme, and
cheiflie to the pairtis eweft the cuntreyis of Orkney and Zetland ; for rubbing,
fpuil3eing and invading, as thay haue done ofbefoir, not onlie his Maiefteis
awne fubiectis, hot the Queene of England his darreft iiiller and coufin, and fie
vther Princeis as ftandis in flrait league of amitie and freindfliip with his hienes,
occupiit this feafone of the yeir in thair lauchfuU and accuftumat trade of fillieing ; be quhais labouris and induftrie, grit commoditie wes randei-it, and in fpe«
ciall to the inhabitantis of this haill Hand,' &c. Therefore, defires that Robert
Earl of Orkney, the flieriffs, &c. in the northern parts of the kingdom, ' that
nane of thame tak vpoun hand to fuffir or jjermittony Spaniflie vefhellis, Span3eartis, pyrottis or revaris, to have reflett or refuge in ony of thair portis,' &c.
and to rife and concur in their exi)ulfion,

(Apr. 14.) — ' Patrik Master of Gray and Robert Gray youngair, his
bruthir,' denounced, for not appearing ' to haue anfuerit to fie thingis as fould
haue bene inquirit of thame at thair cuming, tuicheing the Reflett, intercommoning and haueing intelligence with Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuile and his complices, culpable of the lait treflbunable fact, committit within the Palice of Halyruidhous.'

\_Adam Bis/iop of Orkney, Alexander Commendator of Culrose, Edicard
Commendator of Khdoss, John Earl of Mar, John Lord Thirlstane
chancellor. Sir Robert Melville of Mnrdocairny, l,"n\ treasurer, U^alter
Commendator of Bluntyre keeper of the Privy Seal, 3Ir Richard Cokhurn apjjarent of Clerkingtoune secretary. Sir John Cokhurne of Ornies268 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592.

toun Justice-clerk, Alexander Hay of Eister Kennet Clerh of the Rolls,
Register and Councel, William Little provost of Edinburgh, Nicholas
Cornwall of Bonhard provost of Linlithgow, specially appointed by a
Commission from Parliament ; with George Earl of Marischall, James
Kynross deputy Constable, Mr James Fowles sheriff-depute of Edinburgh, ami James Nysbite dempstar.']

May 4. — Dame Margaret Douglass Countesse of Bothuill,
", . Frances fumtyme Earl Bothuil liir fpoufe, for his interefle, and

others.'
Mr Dauid Makgill, aduocat to our fovierane, jiroducit before the faidis Lordis
Commiffioneris of Parliament/ ane Summondis of Treflbune writtin on parchiament, gevin vnder the Quartei'-feill, dewlie execute and indorl'ate aganis Dame
Margaret Dowglas Counteffe of Bothuill, &c. for certane crymes of Treffbun,
fpecifiet in the faid Summondis : Upon the production of the quhilk and verificatioun of the indorlationis of the lamyn be the meffingeris, executouris thairof,
and witnefles infert thairintill, the faid Mr Dauid Makgill, in his hienes name,
aflcit inftrumentis. — And the foirfaidis perfonis being thryce callit at the Tolbuith-windo of the burgh of Edinburgh, to haif comperit and to have anfuerit
to the faid Summondis of Treffbun, and nane of thame comperand except Patrik
Futhie of Futhies w////«e?, qvQia producit ane Remiffioun grantit be our fouerane
lord vnder the Greit Seill, and ane Lettir lubfcryuit be the Kingis Maieftie, direct to the faid Aduocat to pas from perfute of the faid Patrik ; vpoun the productioun quhairof he aflvit inftrumentis : And als, Robert Onnestoun of Brigend comperit perfounalie, and was content to abyde ane tryall, for ony cryme
contenit in the laid Suminoundis of Treffbun micht be laid to his charge.

The Lordis Commiflionaris of Parliament commandis the faid Patrik Futhie
and Robert Ormestoun to reteir to thair lodgeingis in Edinburgh, and thair to
remane quhill thay be fend for be his hienes ; and continewis to the morne.

May 25. — Quhilkis perfonis war thryife callit at the Tolbuith windo,
quliairof nane comperit except James Lermounth in Kelso, Robert Ormestoun
of Brigend, Johnne Stewart of Foulage and Patrik Futhie of Futhies milne ;
and thairefter the haill executionis of the faid Summoundis of new verifeit, &c.
quhairvpoun the faid Aduocat aff<it inftrumentis. — The faid James Lermounth
in Kellb comperit perfounalie, in prefence of the faidis Connniffioneris of Parliament, and offerit him ready to abyde tryall of law, vpoun quhatfumeuir cx'ymes

' .See the names specified in the follovving Dittay. '' These proceedings liave heen taken from

tlie Parliamentary Records. Acta Pari. 1592, fol. 528.

25JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 269

of Treflbun contenit in the faid Sumraoundis, to be laid to his charge ; And ficlyk, the faid Johnne Stewart of Foulege comperit perlbunalie, and wes content
to abyde the tryall of law for the crymes of Treflbun laid to his charge, contenit
in the faid Sunimoundis : And als, comperit the faid Robert Ormeftoun of Brigend, and producit ane lettre fubfcriuit be the Kingis Maieftie, direct to the faid
Mr Daiiid Makgill aduocat, commanding him in his hienes name to pas fra the
faid Robert, and that pairt of the faid Summoundis quhilk concemis him, and to
deleit him furth of the faid Summoundis ; vpoun the productioun quhairof, the
faid Robert Ormeftoun afkit inftrumentis.

And the faid Mr Dauid Makgill producit Lettres of Relaxatioun, beirand, that
the foirfaidis haill perfonis defenderis, fummound be the faid Summoundis of
Treflbun, to be relaxt fra quhatfumeuir proces of home led aganis thame or ony
of thame, for quhatfumeuir caufe or occafioun, preceding the dait of the faid
Lettre, quhilk is daitit at Dalkeyth the tent day of Mali, and of our fouerane
lordis regnne the xxv yeir, 1592 ; and execute the xij day of the famin moneth
of Mail, and regiftrat in the fcherref court buikis the xxij day of the famyn
moneth of Mali : And ficlyk, thairvjjoune afkit inftrumentis. — And ficlyk, Mr
Johnne Makgill aduocat comperit perfounalie, and in name and behalf of Alexander Home, brother-germane to ^Villiame Home of Prandergaift, proteftit,
that his abfence at this tyme be not imput viito him for contumacie, and \}Vqjuge him not of his innocencie, anent the odious cryme of Trelfoun laid to his
charge, feing the cans quhairfoir he may not compeir is notour. And as to the
cryme of cumming to the Abbay that nicht, contenit in the faid Summoundis,
in cumpanie with Frances fumtyme Erie Bothuell, he proteftis he is maift innocent thairof ; as being that nicht vpoim the Waft Bordour of Scotland, mair
nor thrie fcoir myles fra the faid Abbay ; quhilk he is content to verefie be honeft
gentilmen : And thairfoir-proteftis, that in caife it be not fufficientlie provin be
fie as hard, law and knew him thair, that na argument be groundit vpoun his
abfence, quhairby he may be pi-ejudgeit of his innocencie ; according to the faid
proteftatioun, gevin in be the faid Mr Johnne at lenth in write ; and afkit inftrumentis \'poun the proponing and productioun thairof, exciifatorio nomine for
the faid Alexander Home. — Mr Dauid Makgill aduocat, prefent, tuik him to be
advifit with the Kingis Majeftie, gif he fould gif command to the clerkis to deleit Robert Ormeftoun furth of the faid Siunmoundis of Treffoun or not, conforme to the ticket direct be his Maieftie to him to that effect.

The Lordis Commiffioneris of Parliament ordanis the faidis James Lermounth,
Robert Ormeftoun and Johnne Stewart of Foullage to reteir thame felffis to thair
lugeingis within Edinburgh, thairin to remane ay and quhill thai be fend for be
his Majeftie.

270

CRIMINAL TRIALS.

A.D. 1592.

Pro Clero.

Pro Nobilibus.

Pro Baronibus,

Orchaden.,

Angufe,

Bas,

Dunkelden.,

Maifchell,

Culluthy,

Culrofe,

Glencarne,

Waddeibume,

Lundoris,

Montroife,

Aiith,

Tungland,

Mar,

TuUibardin,

Kynlofe,

Seytoun,

Glenvrquhy,

Blautyre,

Lindefay,

Pittarro,

Incheaftray.

Spynie.

Barnebairauch.

ReGE ipso PliESENTE.

May 29. — The haill eftaittis of Parliament chefit (the perfonis) vnderwrittin to be Lordis of the Articles.

Pro Commissariis Burgorum.
Williame Litle proueft and
George Hereot goldfrayth,

for Edinburgh,
James Drummound, for Perth,
Patrik Lyoun, for Dundie,
Anthone Bruce, for Striuiling,
Williame Cuniiighame, forGlafgw,
James Cokburne, for Hadingtoun.

Officeris of Estait, Johnne Lord Thirlftane chancellair. Sir Robert Meluile of Murdocairny
knycht, tliefaurare, Sir Richart Cokburne of Clerkingtoun, knicht, fecretare, Dauid Seytoun of Par.
broitli comptroller. Sir Johnue Cokburne of Ormefloim, knicht, Juftice-clerk.

The qiihilk day the Kingis Majeftie, and Mr Dauid Makgill of CranftounRiddell his hienes aduocat, being baith perlbunalie prelent, declairit, in prefence
of the Lordis of Articles, that he infillit only at this tyme in perfute of the faid
Sununoundis and tryall thairof, aganis the perfonis following : Thay ar to fay,
Dame Margaret Dowglafs funityme Connteire of Bothuell and Frances fumtyme
Erie Bothuell her ipoufe, for his interes, James Douglas fumtyme of Spott,
Archibald "\^auchope younger of A\idry, Mr Johnne Coluile of Strathvrdie,
Williame Stewart fumtyme Confbable of Dunbartane, Johnne Hammiltoun
younger of Samelftoun, ^Villiame Lermounth of the Hill, Johnne Vauchoip
baillie of Nudrie, Robert Home younger of tlie Heuch, Hercules Stewart of
Quhytlaw, George Auchincraw of Eift Reftoun, Patrik Auchincraw thair, Mr
Thomas Cranftoun younger of Moreiftoun, Johnne Crauftoun his brother-germane, Johnne Onneftoun of Smailhome, Robert Ormeftoun his fone, James
Stewart of Tynneis, Patrik Crummy of Carribdin and Dauid Orme of Mugdrum. And paft ^j;'o loco et tempore frome the haill remanent perfonis, defenderis, ipecifiet and contenit in the laid Summoundis of Treffoun, except the
foirfaidis ipeciall perfonis, prefentlie nominat be his Majeftie, as faid is : And
thairvpoun the faid aduocat afl^it inftrumentis.

And immediatlie thaireftei', the foirfaid Summoundis of Treffoun raifit at our
fouerane lordis inftance, and execute aganis the perlbnis vnderwrittin and ilk
ane of thame, contrair quhome his hienes declarit he infiftis at this tyme in
tryall of the faid Summoundis of Treffoun, in maner foirlaid, being red in prefence of the Kingis ]Maicftie and Lordis of Articles, and the famyn being hard,
fene and vnderftand be thame, aiul thay tliairwith being ryplie advifit; the faidis
Eftaittis fiudis and declaris the relFoun and cans contenit in the famyn Sum25JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 271

moundis of TrefToun relevant aganis the perfonis abovewrittin. And thairfoir
admittis the famyne Siimmoundis to the laid aduocatis probatioim ; quha being
perfounalie prefent, declairit that he foiild vfe his probatioun with all expeditioun ; and the faid aduocat afkit inftrumentis of the relevancie of the faid Summoundis, and that the faidis Eftaites had fundin the reffoun of the faid Summoundis relevant.

Jim. 5. — The quhilk day Maifter Dauid Makgill of Cranftoun-Riddell,
aduocat to our fouerane lord, ffor verefeing of the faid reflbun contenit in the
faid Summoundis of TrelToun raifit aganis the faid Dame Margaret Dowglas
Countefle of Bothuell and Frances fumtyme Erie Bothuell hir fpous, for his interefle, &c. producit and repetit the Extract of the Foirfaltour led and pronuncit
befoir the Juftice and his deputis, aganis the faid Frances fumtyme Erie Bothuell,
lubfcriuit be the Laird of Ormeftoun Juftice clerk, of the dait the twentie-fyft
day of Junii, the yeir of God 1591 yeiris ; Depofitionis of certane witneffes, quha
wer takin and execute to the death for the cryme libellit ; and Depofitionis of
diuerfe vtheris witneffes, examinat befoir the faidis Lordis of Articles in the faid
mater ; the notorietie of the deid libellit, and cuming of the defendaris to the
place of Halyruidhoufe the tyme libellit ; quhilk in mater of Hie TrelToun fould
mak full probatioun : And that the Lordis of Parliament being the Greit AlTyife
of the cuntrie, of the daylie practique, quhatfimieuir perfone clengis not, of certane knawlege, the perfonis accufit, he fyles thame : And the commoun notorietie of this fact and TrelToun, and contumacie of the defendaris, is fufficient to mak
na man to clenge thame : And wes content the foirfaid proces and Summoundis
of TrelToun be haldin concludit : And defyrit the Eftaittes to advile the proces,
and to pronunce thair fentence of Parliament thairintill, accoi'ding to the faidis
probationis and thair confciences. — The quhilk day our fouerane lord and his
hienes advocate paft fra the faid Johnne Wauchoip baillie of Nudrie, and declairit that his hienes wald na wayes infift aganis him.

Summoundis of Tressoun, ^c. against Dame Margaret Dowglass Countesse of BothuUl and others.

Jacobus Dei giatia Rex Scotorum ; dilectis noftris Leoni Regi Arraorum, Hay, Albanie, Rofle,
Rotliefay, Snatloun, Merchmount, heraldis ; Joaimi Ferguflbun, Archibaldo Dowgliis, Roberto Stewart et Dauidi Bryfouii, clauigeiis ; Oimound, Bute, Vnicorne, Carrik, fignifeiis, nuucijs et eorum cuilibet, coniunctira et diuifim, vicecomitibus noftris in bac parte fpecialiter conftitutis : Salutem. Mandamus vobis et precipimus, quatenus fummoneatis legittime et pereniptorie, coram teilibus, Jacobum
Dowglas de Spott, Magiftrum Joannem Coluile de Stratliurdie, Herculem Stewart de Qubytlaw,
Joannem Hammiltoun juniorem de Sammelftouii, Arcliibaldum Wauclioip de Nudrie juniorem, Jacobum Stewart de Tynneis, Gulielmum Stewart quondam Conftabularium de Dmibartane, Gulielmum
Lermountli iu Hill, Magiftrum Tliomam Cranftoun juniorem de ISIorcirtoun, Joannem Cranftoun eius

272 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592.

fratrein, Robertum Home juniorem de Heuch, Joannem Orraefloun de Smailhome, Robevtum Ormeftoun eius filium, Patriciuni Crummy de Caribdin, Dauidem Orme de Mugdrum, Georgium Auchiucraw de Eill Reftouii, Patricium Auchincraw ibidem, Dominam Margaietam Dowglas comitiffara de Bothuell et Francifcum Stewart olim comitem de Bothuell eius fpoiifura, pro fuo interefle,
Confpiratores, perpetratores et celatores criminum Lele maieltatis fubfequentium, perfounaliter, fi
eorum perfonales prefentias commode habere poteritis ; alioquin, apud loca eonjm habitationum vel per
publicam proclamationem, apud cruces forales burgorum noftrorum de Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, Lanerk, Dumfreis, Striuiling, &c. aliaqne loca neceflaria ; degentes vero feu exillentes extra regnum noftrura feu certura nulhim domicilium in eodem habentes, apud dictas cruces forales aliaque loca neceffaria, fuper premonitione fexaginta dierum, fie quod hujufmodi fummonitio ad eomm aures et notitiam
verefimiliter pervenire poterit : Quod compareant coram nobis feu Jufticiario noftro, vicefimo quarto

die menfis Mali proxime fequen. in noftro Parliamento apud Edinburgh, die nienfis

tenend. hora caufarum, cum continuatione dierum, ad refpondendum nobis noftrove Jufticiario in prefato Parliamento, fuper proditoriis criminibus fubfequeutibus ; dictos fcilicet Jacobuni Dowglas de
Spott, Magifti-um Joannem Coluile, Herculem Stewart, Archibaldum Wauchoip de Nudrie juniorem,
Joannem Hammiltoun juniorem de Samnielftoun, fuofque omnes complices fpecialiter ante nominatos
et eorum quemlibet, pro fua proditoria arte, parte, confilio et auxilie, in ipforum recenti proditorio
Confpiratione, confultatione et conclufione lion-endi facinoris contra noftram honorabilem perfonam et
vitam, per dictas perfonas comiff. vicefimo feptimo die menfis Decembris vltime elapf. fub noctis filentio, in ipfaruni proditoria Invafione Palacii noilri de Halyniidhoufe, intrando ibidem, cum afliftantia,
confortio convocatione dicti Francifci quondam Coniitis de Bothuell alioramque homicidarum, oppreforum, latronum, ac hujufmodi infolentium virorum armatorum et a legibus noftris fugitiuorum, ex deliberate animo et certa intentione violentas manus in noftram regiam peribnam imponere, vt vitam noftram vel nefarie extinguerent, vel nos captiuos feeuni deducerent : Et ad hunc effectum, prefati Confpiratores directe acceflerunt ad noftrum priuatuni eonclaue feu cubiculum, et oftiis ignem nefare injicerunt, domefticos noftros prefenti violenta morte minitaudo, objurgandoque, nifi ipfis declararent vbi
nos eflemus, nulla vnquam inquifitione per eos facta ob quamcunque aliam perfonam nifi propter nofinet
ipfos : Ac preterea, violenter effregeioint malliis ottia interioris cubiculi Regine noftre charifiime conjugis : Atqup demum, vbi parum fe proraouifl"e et ad illorum invfitatum fcelus ac propofitum nefandum pernenire non pofle intellexerunt in eorum regreffu rion dum fatisfacti, cradeliter et fine vlia mifericordia, domefticos et familiariftimos noftros feruitores, ob noftram caufam, interfecerunt et jugularunt :
Hinc manifeftifiime crimen Summe Proditionis contra nos, noftram vitam, autlioritateni regiam, et
leges committendo ; atque adeo, pro fua proditoria celatione et occultatione predicts Conjurationis, confultatione, contractu et exerutione eiufdem. Ideoque dictos Jacobuin Douglas de Spott, Magiftrum
Joannem Coluile, Herculem Stewart, Archibaldum Wauchoip juniorem de Nudrie, ceterofque omnes
fuos complices particulariter ante nominatos Confpiratores proditoriofque executores, ad videndum et
audiendum fefe et eorum quemlibet, refpectu premiifoium, crimen Lefe maieftatis inctirrifle per nos et
trium regni ftatuuni decretum decerni et dedaraii, et fuper predictis et alijs quamplurimis rebellionibus et tranfgreflionibus et proditoriis criminibus, per prenominatas perfonas, contra nos, regnum noftrum et autlioritateni regiam impie et nefarie perpetratis, et dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, proponendis et oftendendis et juri parendum, et fuper hujufmodi judicium noftrum et noftri Parliamenti, fecundum leges regni noftri expectandum et fubeundum ; dictas videlicet perfonas, Confpiratores, peqiptratores et celatores ciiminum precedentium, ad videndum et audiendum fefe et eorum
quemlibet, intuitu premiflbnjm, crimen Lefe maieftatis incunilfe, per nos et trium regni noftri ftatuum
derretuiu decerni et declari ; et propterea, ipforum bona, mobilia et immobilia, tam terras quam officia,
aliafque res ad eos fpectantes, nobis confifcari et pro perpetuo nobifcum in proprietate remanere, perfonafque fuas penam Proditionis et vltimi fupplicii a regni noftri legibus inflictam fubire ; et vberius

25 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. a73

in premiflis refpondendum et juri parendum : Intiniando fupradietis Confpiratoribus et eoruni cuilibet,
due dictis die et loco cum continuatione dierum cotnparuerint fiue non, nos dictufque nofter JuAiciarius in premiflis, juftitia mediante, procedenms et procedet. Infuper citptis, &c. ad comparendum
coram nobis noftrove Jufl;iciario, dictis die et loco cum continevvatione dierum, ad perliibendum fidele
teftinionium in caufa predicta, fub psena legis : Et pref'entes literas debite executas et indorfatas earundem latori reddatis : Et vos qui prefentes executi fueritis fitis ibidem dictis die et loco coram nobis
feu dicto noftro Juflicixirio, portan. vobifcum fummonitionis veflre teftimonium in fcriptis, pro premiflis feu ipfos tefl;es. Ad quod faciendum, vobis et veftrum cuilibet, conjunrtim et diuiflm, vicecomitibus nollris in hac parte committimus poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio noftri Magni Sigilli, apud
Edinburgh, decimo die menfis Februarij, anno domini millefimo quingentefimo nonagefimo primo, et
regni noflri Ticeilmo quinto.

Quliilk Summondis with the executionis and indorfationis thairof refpectiue
foirfaidis, being this inftant day red in prefence of his Maieftie and haill Eltaittis
of Parliament, firfl in Latyne and fyne in Scottis, and the faidis haill perfonis
defenderis I'elpectiue abonewrittin, nocht paft fra as faid is, being thryife callit
of new at the tolbuith windo of the faid burgh of Edinburgh, to half comperit
and anfuerit to the faid Summondis and reflbuues contenit thairin ; and nane of
thame comperand, to half defendit in the faid mater and to half anfuerit to the
laid Summondis, the faid Mr Dauid Makgill aduocat to his Maieftie, defyrit the
faidis Eftaittis declaratioun, gif the reflbunes of the faid Suimnondis wer relevant : Quhilkis Eftaittis and euery ane of thame, all in ane voce, ffand the faniyn
relevant aganis the haill pei'fonis vnderwrittin. Thairfoir the faid aduocat of
new, for verefeing of the faid reflbun contenit in the faid Summondis of Treftbun,
producit and repetit the Extract of Foirfaltour, led and deducit befoir the Juftice
and his deputes aganis the laid Frances fumtyme Erie Bothuell, Depofitionis of
the faidis witnefles, the notorietie of the fact, and repetit the haill probationis
repetit be him of befoir, in the faid mater this inftant day ; and defirit the faidis
Eftaittis of Parliament to advyfe the faid Depofitionis of witneffes and vtheris
probationis, and to pronunce thair fentence of Parliament thairintill, according
to the famin probationis and thair confciences : And thairefter, the Depofitionis
of the haill witnefles execute to the death, and of the witnefles examinat in prefence of the faidis Lordis of Articles, haill writtis and probationis, being red,
fene and confident be the faidis haill Eftaittis of Parliament, in prefence of the
Kingis Maieftie, and thaie thairwith being ryplie advifit, the faidis lordis and
Eftaittis of Parliament Findis, decernis and declaris, that the faidis Dame Margaret Dowglafs fumtyme Countefl"e of Bothuell, James Dowglafs of Spott, Archibald Vauchoip yoimger of Nudrie, Mr Johnne Coluile of Strathurdy, Williame
Stewart fumtyme Conftable of Dunbartane, Johnne Hammiltoun younger of
Sammelftoun, Williame Lermounth of the Hiil, Robert Home younger of the
Heuch, Hercules Stewart of Quhytlaw, George Auchincraw of Eift Preftoun,
VOL. I. 2 M

274 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592.

Patrik Auchincraw thair, M' Thomas Cranftouii younger of Morieftoun, Johnne
Cranftoun his brother germane, Johnne Ornieftoun of Smailhome, Robert Ormeltoun liis fone, James Stewart of Tynneife, Patrik Crummy of Caribdin and
Dauid Ornie of Mugdrum, and euery ane of thame, hes committit and done oppin and manifeft TrefToun aganis our faid fouerane lord, in all pointis and articles contenit in the faid Summondis.

Doo]\r. And thaii-foir it was gevin for Dome, be the mouth of James Nyfbite
demjjfter of Parliament, in maner and forme as followis. This Court of Parliament fehawis for law. That the faid Dame Margaret Dowglas fumtyme Counteffe of Botliuell, &c. and euery ane of thame, hes committit and incurrit the
oryme of TrefToun and Lefe majeftie abonewrittin ; in maner at lenth contenit in
the faid Summondis : And thairfoir, decernis and declaris all thair guidis, movable and vnmovable, alfweill landis as offices and vther thingis quhatfumeuir,
belanging to thame, to be confifcat to our faid fouerane lord, and to remane perpetuallie with his hienes in propertie : And thair perfonis to vnderly the pane
of Treffoun, and vtter and laft iwnifliment appointit be the lawes of this realme.
And tliat I gif for Dome.

dTvanfts sumti?me (Svlt JSotfjudl.

Jun. 5. — ' The proces, convictioun. lentence and dome of Foirfaltour, led,
deducit and pronuncit of befoir, be his hienes Juftice Generall and his deputes,
in the Juftice Court halden at Edinburgh Jul. 25, 1591,' was Ratified by Parliament.

The dijlierefing of the pojteritk of perfonis (above) foirfaltit.
Jun. 5. — Ouie fouerane lord and Eftaittes of Parliament haifing confident the treflbunable,
crwell and vnnaturall fact laitlie committit be the perfonis following, in cumpany for the tyme with
Frances fumtyme Erie Bothuell, &c. to wit, Frances Erie Bothuile, Arcliibald Wauchope younger of
Nudry, Sic. and diuers vtheris thair complices, in thair treffounable cuming to his Maiefties Palice of
Halyruidiious, vnder fdence of nicht, vpoun the day of December laftbypaft, invaiding, aifegeing
and perfewing of his Maiefties maift noble perfone, be fyre and fword, breking up his clialmer durris
witli foirhaninieris, and cruellie flaying his hienes fervandis, cumand to his Maiefties refcourfe ; ane
Trellbun and cri eltie not hard nor fene committit be fubjectis, fa heichlie oblift to thair natiue King
and Prince, precogitat, confultit and aggreit vpoun to be put in executioun lang of befoir ; having alfua
devifit raeanis, in thair jugement, to preferuo thair landis and guidis efter the committing of thair
Treffoun foirfaid. Quhilk haynons and treflounable fact, as it paftes all vtheris in crueltie and euil
example, fua it is thocht nieit and expedient that ane condigne law and punilhment be fett douu for
extinguiiliing of the memorie of the treflbnable perfonis foirfaidis and thair pofteritie, to be ane document to all aiges to cum and attempt the lyk : It is thairfoir ftatute and ordanit be oure fouerane lord
and his laidis Eftaittes of Parliament, that the faid Frances fumtyme Erie Bothuell, Dame Margaret
Dowglas fumtyme Counteffe of Bothuile, James Douglas of Spott, Archibald Vauchop younger of
Nudry, Mr Johnne Coluile of Straruidie, Williame Stewart fumtyme Conftable of Dunbartane, Johnne
Hamniiltoun younger of Sammelftoun, Williame Lermounth of the Hill, Robert Home younger of the

25JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 275

Heuch, Hercules Stewart of Quliytlaw, George Auchincraw of Eift Preftoun, Patrik Aucliincraw
thair, Mr Thomas Cranftoun younger of Morieltoun, Johnne Cranftoun his brother germane, Johnne
Ormeftoun ia Smailhome, Robert Ormeftoun his fone, James Stewart of Tynneis, Patrik Crambie
of Cariljdin and Dauid Orme of Mugdrum, thair bairnes, thair airis and haill pofleritie, fall neuir bruik
land, beneBce, honour, office nor dignitie within this realme, in ony tyme curaing : And als his Maieflie
and Eflaittis foirfaidis decemis, decreittis and deliuevis, that all maner of infeftmentis, alienationis, difpofitionis, refignationis, contractis, bandis or obligationis, for making of infeftmentis of thair landis and
heretages, or ony pairt thairof, or annuelrentis furth of the famyne, togidder with all pretendit aflignationis and difpolitioiiis of thair tackis, ftediiigis, ronmes, poUellionis, guidis or geir, to ony maner of perfone or perfonis, quliilk tuke not effect, be actuall and reall polleffioun, befoir the committing of the foirfaid crymis, falbe null and of nane avail, force nor effect, in tvme cuming, as they had neuir bene maid.

(Jun. 8.) — A Proclamation iffued, forbidding all the lieges to ' refTet, fupplie
nor intercommoun with Patrik Maisteu of Gray and Robert Gray his
bruther.'

(Jun. 29.) — A Proclamation ' for perfute off the Erll Bothuile.'

(Jun. 30.) — A Proclamation ' for prefenting of prifonariis.' — That ' as
diuers of the thevis and tratouris that laitlie aflai^eit his Maiefteis perfone
within his awin Palice of Falkland, eftir thair grite lpuil3ie and lieirIchippis, committit vpoun the horfis and guidis of the faithfuU and gude fubiectis of this realme, in thair fchamefull fliclit and returning hamewart, ar takin
be the way, in diuers pairtis, within the lliereffdomes and burrowis of Lanerk
and Peblis ; quhais takaris will uawayis prelent thame to juftice, without thay
be compellit ;' therefore declaring that fuch perfons fliall be held as traitors.

(July 5.) — The King and Council having granted ' Licence to Williame
Erle of Angus to remane in the cumpany and focietie of Johnne Ei-11 of
Montrois, ay and quhill his Maieflie declair forder of his will and ijlealbm- towardis him ;' therefore the Earl of Montrofe binds himfelf, that during this time,
' he fall nocht do nor attempt ony thing hurtfuU or preiudiciall to his Maiellie,
the prefent Eftate, nor the Religioun,' &c. The Earl only obliges himfelf, ' for
his gude behaviour, during the fame tyme of his remaning ;' but would not bind
himfelf for the entry of Angus when required.

(Jul. 8, ajmd Drunifreis.) — 'Promeis of reward to fik as fall reveill the refettaris of the Erll Bothuile and his complices' is only made, but in cafe of
farther concealment, ' they falbe perfewit with fyre, fwerd and all vther kynd of
rigour.'

(Jul. 11.)— John Earl of Morton Lord Maxwell, created Warden of the
Weft March, ' dimittit be Sir Johnne Cai-michaell of that Ilk, knicht.' He is ordained the fame day ' to inak redres for bigane attemptatis.'

(Jul. 12.) — It is declared, that 'albeit Johnne Lord Maxwell be nominat and
ftyllit Erll of Mortoun in the late Act, and in fuudrie vther Actis and ordi276 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592.

nances,' &c. ' jit the fame nominatioim and ftyle fall nawayes hurt nor prejuge the
richte and titles quhilkis Willtame Douglas Erll of Moutoun Lord Dalkeith, hes and pretendis to have, as air of taillie to the Earldome of Mortoun ;
nor 3it impair him in honnour, flyle, dignitie, preeminence and priuilegeis,
quhilkis he hes and broukis, or may brouke and polfes thairby,' &c

Warkand^?- demolishing of the Housscs of Tijnneis, Horden {Harden)

and Dryhoip

Apud Peiblis, xiij die mensis Jidij, anno Ixxxxij" (1592.) — The Kingis
Maieftie, with aduife of the Lordis of his Seci'eit Comilale, Gevis and grantis full
pouer and Commiffionn, expres bidding and charge, be thir prefentis, to his weilbeloxiitt Williame Stewart of Tracquair, to niMOi.Eis and cans to be dimoleift
and caffin doun to the ground, the place a?idhoussisofTY'Si<:Kis, quhilkis pertenit to James Stewart fumtyme of Tynneis ; as alfwa, the lyke pouer and commiffionn, expres bidding and charge, to Walter Scott of Gouldielandis and Mr
ledeon Murray, conjunctlie and feuerallie, to dimoleis and cans be dimoleift and
caffin doun to the ground, the pJaceif, houssis and fortaliceis of Harden and
Dryhoip, pertening to Walter Scott of Harden, quha, with the laid James
Steuart, wes arte and parte of the lait trelfonabill fact, perjietrat aganis his hienes awin perfone at Falkland : And that the foirlaidis perlbnis cans the premifles be jnitt in execution with all convenient expeditioun in lignne and taikin
of the fuirfaidis vthiris perfonis treffijunable and vnnaturall defectioun and attemptat, committit be thame in manner foirfaid. As thay will aniuer to his
hienes vpoun thair obedience.

(Jul. 13, apud Edinburgh.) — Sons, Pennyceke of that Ilk and Mark
Achiesoun of Achiefonilheavin, denounced rebels, for i-efetting the Earl of
Bothwell and his accomplices.

(Jul. 13.) — JoHNNE Steuart of Roifland finds furety (Richard Hereot y'
of Trabroun), ' that he fall nocht reflett Matheu Hereot, denuncet rebell.'

Jul. 20.)— Walter Scott of Hardenis ordered to be denounced rebel, for
not appearing ' to have anfuerit to fic thingis as fould liaue bene inquirit of him
at his cwming, twicheing the late ti-effijunable atteinptat committit aganis his
Maiefteis perfone at Falkland, vpoun the xxviij day of Junij laftbipaft.

(Aug. 10, apud Dalkeith.) — Piiiip Scott of , denounced for the

treafonable refet of tlie Earl of Bothwell and his accomiilices ; and being prefent
at the Raid of Falkland.

(Aug. 21, aj)ud Castrum de Edinburgh.)— In ' the querrell and contrauerfie
laitlie happynnit betuix Robert Bruce of Clakmannane and the Prouoft, baillies and Counfall of Perth,' ' the Kingis Maieftie defiret the faid Robert to informe his Maieftie and tlie Counfale prefent, of the iniurie and offenlies committit

26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 277

aganis him be the faidis Bailies, &c. caiifles and occafions thairof ; quha declarit,
That he having certane guidis and geir cuming throu the fame burgh, nocht
bocht nor to be fauld tliairin, the fame guidis wer not onlie flayed and not fufferit to haue pairage be thair portis, hot at laft intromettit with be fvim of thair
niehtbouris, becaus his feruand caryar of the faidis (guidis) wald not pay cuftum
thairfoir ; quhilk being reportit to him, and he finding the fame to be a novatioun, quhairwith his vmq'" father nor nane of his tennentis and feruandis wer
burdynnit in his tyme, requirit the faidis Baillies, be his Miffiue Letter, to repair
this ijijurie, and to cans his guidis be randerit agane without paj'ment of ony
cuftum, vthirwayes he wald vie the lyke forme of doing to thair niehtbouris,' in
thair paflage betuix thair toun and Dundee : And becaus thai refufit to fatisfie
this his reflbnnable defyre, he tuke fum of thair niehtbouris repairing fra Dundee to the faid toun, and tuke thair waponis fra thanie ; quliilk waponis he offerrit, be his vther Miffiue Letter direct to the faidis Baillies, to cans be delyuerit
agane, be reifaving the lyke deliuerie of his faidis guidis ; quhilk, as of befoir,
not onlie being refuifit, hot fum of thair niehtbouris, and in fpeciall "NVilliame
Inglis and Johnne BaKillie, come to his ground and landis of Gaftounhall, vpoun
the xvj day of Auguft inftant, and eit, trampit doun and diftroyit with thair
horffis, the cornis growand vpoun the faidis landis ; ffor the quhilk, thay being
reprovit, thay vtterit fum iniurious wordis ; quhairvpoim he wes movit to ftryke
ane of thame with ane piftollett, and in end to tak and retene thame in his place
of Gaftounhall, without forder iniurie done to thame : And that fame nicht, the

faidis Baillies, counfall and communitie, to the nowmer of perfonis or

thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, come to his faid jilace, and vpoun the morne,
afoir day licht, foundit thair drwm, aflegeit him thairin, difchargeit hacquebutis
and piftollettis in at the durris and windois thairof ; and at laft trelfounablie
fett to fyre, and enterit perforce in the fame place, at the ruif thairof ; and eftir

tliay had cruellie hurte his feruand, with the fchott of

ane hacquebute, to the effufioun of his blude in grite quantitie and peri'ell of his
lyffe, thay tuke him felff, and tranfportit him away with thame ane certane
fpace, bairfutit and bairleggit, not fuffering him to putt on his awne claithis ;
and fpuil3eit and tuke away Avith thame his haill filuer-werk, bedding, claithis
and all tlie plenneffiug of his hous : And all this m'cs done without ony Commiffioun had be thame thairto : Vfurpand thairbj' vpoun thame his Maiefteis
authoritie. To the quhilk it wes anfuerit be the faidis Baillies and counfall prefent/ that the taking of cuftum, for fie kynd of guidis as had paffage be thair

' Townsmen, inhabitants of the burgh. '' ()li|)h('r Young, Patrik Blair and Adam Anderfoun,

bailleis of the faid burgh, James Drummond dean of gilil, Williame Merfer, Patrik Anderfoun, Thomas Burrell, WiUiame Stevinfounj Robert Sym and Williame Jak, burgofles of the fame burgh.

278 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. UQi.

portis and brig, wes na novatioun, bot a forme of doing vfed be thame and thair
predicefTouris in all tyme bigane, paft memoir of man, according to thair liberties and preuilegeis grantit to thame to that effect ; and thairfoir, in flaying the
faid Robert Bruceis guidis, qiihill the cuftume thairof had bene payit, thay
committit na wrang : And forder allegeit, that albeit the firft taking of fum of
■thair nichtbouris, and retening of thair waponis, wes ane ofTens done, na les to
the contempt of his Maieftie then to thair jjarticulair greif and hurte, 3it thay
not onlie patientlie buir thairwith, bot canfit reftitutioiin to be maid to him
agane of his faidis guidis, without payment of ony cuftum thairof : And thairefter, thay directit Anthone Maxtoun, ane of thair awin nichtbouris, requiring
him to fuffer the faidis Williame Inglis and Johnue Waffilbie (Balfillie) takin
and detenit be him within the faid place, eftir thai wer cruellie hurte and
woundit, to haue libertie and fredome : Quhilk not onlie being refufit, bot at
laft, reporte being maid to thame that he had murdreift and flane the fame perfonis ; quhairvpoun, comi^laint and exclamatioun being maid be thair wyffis,
bairnis and vtheris of their freindis, in end, Olijiheir Peblis, fliereff-depute of the
flierefdom of Perth, to quhome a certane nownier of thair faidis nichtbouris gaif
thair concurrence and affiftance, paft, according to the pouer grantit to thame be
the Actis of Parliament, to the ihid Robert Bruce place foirfaid, and thair perforce recouerit thame furtli of his handis ; and tuke him felff away with thame,
to be anfuerable to juftice.

The Kixgis Maieftie, with aduife of the faidis Lordis, Hindis and declairis,
that baith the faidis pairteis, be thair awin declaratioun and confellioun, hes
offendit and contempnit his Maieftie, his auctoritie and lawis ; And thairfoir,
ordanis the laid Robert Bruce to be committit to warde within his hienes Caftell of Edinburgh ; and the faidis Williame Merfair, Patrik Andirfoun, Thomas
Burrell, Williame Stevinfoun, Robert Sym and "Williame Jak within tlie Caftell
of Blaknes ; thairin to remane vpoun thair awne expenlfes, ay and quhill thay
and thair compliceis, affiftaris and pairt-takaris with thame in the committing
of the foirfaidis crymes and offenlTes, be putt to the knaulege of ane Aflife, befoir the Juftice or his deputis ; and that juftice be minirtrat as effeiris : And
that feuerall warrandis be direct for thair reffett in warde, within the faidis
Caftellis.

(Aug. 29, apud Z)«/Zr////.)— Alexandf.r, Lord of Spynie ordained to be
put to the knowledge of an Aftife before the Juftice, in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, ' the tuelf day of September nixtocum, ffor the treftounable reftett within
his place of Abirdour of Frances funityme Erll Bothuell ; and for intelligence
had with him, or {until) that materis wes pakkit vp betuix thame, for the Raid of
Falkland ; quhairof the faid Alexander is dilaitit, be Williame Commendator of

26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 279

Pittinweyme.' ' Certifeing alwayes the faicl Coramendatour, tliat in cais the faid
Alexander fall, eftir tryall, be fund dene and innocent of the faidis crymes, that
in that caife the pane and pvneifhement, prefcryuit in his hienes lawis and Actis
of Parliament, falbe extendit and vfit aganis the faid Commendatair with all
rigour and extreniitie.'

(Sep. 2.)— David Cochrane of Pitfour complained to the King and Council,
that he had raifed Letters againft Hahy Lindsay of Kinfawnis, on the ground
that the faid Hary, • with conuocatioun of his hienes liegis, to the nowmer of xl
perfonis or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, with jakkis, fpeiris, hacquebutis,
piftolettis and vtheris waponis invafiue, prohibite to be worne be the lawis of
this realme and Acts of Parliament, come vpoun the xxvij day of Julij laftbipaft, about twa houris in the moirning, to the place of Pitfour, quhair the faid
complener, his wyffe, bairnis and familie wer for the tyme, takand the nichtis reft,
lipjjynuing for na violence nor iniwrie of ony perfonis ; and finding the 3ettis
iga/es) of the faid place clofed, fua that thay could nocht gett entres thairin, thay
fecreitlie hid thame felffis, in certane quiet pairtis aboute his hous, and directit
ane boy to his 3ett, as gifF he had cum with ane MifRue Letter to the faid complenair frome the Laird of Lethindie, defiring entres, that he micht delyuer the
laid Mifliue ; quhairof the faid complenair being aduerteiflit, and lippynning
for na thing les then that quhilk happynnit, he caufit oppin his 3ettis, to haue
lattin in the faid boy ; at the oppynning quhairof, the faid Hary and his compliceis violentlie ruflieit in at the 3ett, and being repulfit, and putt bak and the
3ettis clofed, thay then be plane violence and force brak vp the fame 3ettis, enterit within the faid hous, intromettit with the faid complenaris haill mouablis
and plenneffing, and reniovit and expellit his wyffe, with nyne young bairnes,
and his haill familie, furth of the faid hous ; vfing fic inhumanitie aganis his
wyffe and bairnis, as the lyke hes not bene hard of to haue bene committit be a
gentilman of his eftait ; quha, eftir the removing and putting of thame furth of
the faid hous, wald nocht fchaw thame that courtefie to remane in ane barne or
byre, outwith his faid houfe ; hot hes forceit thame to ly vpoun the feildis, aboute
his awne wallis and 3ettis fenfyne : And now hes placeit certane of the faid complenaris vnfreindis, {enemies.) with qubome he ftandis vnder deidlie feid, within
the faid hous ; quha keipis and detenis the fame, and on nawife will delyuer the
fame to the faid complenair, without compulfioun.' Lindfay was accordingly
charged to deliver up the houfe, &c. and to anfwer before the King and Council
for thefe acts of oppreffion. The parties having appeared along with ' Johnne
Tuedie, prefent keipar of the faid hous ;' and ' in refpect the faid hous was randerit to the melTenger, without tryale or cognitioun, ordanis vtheris letteris to
be direct,' charging them ' to render and delyuer the famiu. togidder with the

280 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592.

guidis cand geir quhilkis tliay refTauit thairintill, vpoun inventair,' within fix
hours thereafter, under the pain of rebellion, &c.

(Sep. 14.) — Wemyss younger of Logie and Mr Richard Douglas,

fone lauchfull to the Laird of Quhittinghanie, ordered to be denounced, for not
appearing to have anfwered relative to Earl Bothwell, &c. Sir Michael Balfour of Burlie allb to be denounced, for not appearing to anfwer, concerning
' his Maiefteis peribne and eftate,' &c.

(Sep. 14.) — Proclamation ' to meit at Peiblis, in feir of weir, with xv dayes
victuallis and prouifioun,' upon the xxv day of September, to accompany the
King ' in propir perfone, to tak the feildis' againft Bothwell and his accomplices, ' inhabitantis within the boundis of Weft Tiviotdaill.'

(Sep. 23.)— Andro Ker of Phairnihirft, Johnne Ruthirfurde elder of Hunthill, Williaine R. younger of H., Williame Ruthirfurde proueft of Jedburghe
and Williame Kirktoun baillie of Jedbiu-gh, oi'dained to be denoimced rebels, for
failing to appear this day, to have anfwered ' twicheing the treflbunable refTett,
intercommoning and intelligence had be thame with Frances fumtyme Erll
Bothuill,' &c.

(Sep. 26.) — On account of the ftate of the harveft, ' be the lang continewance
of this ftormie and vnfealbnable wedder,' the meeting at Peebles was poftponed
to the tenth day of October.

(Sep. 28.) — ScHiR Johnne Lindsay of Ballingho knicht, to be denounced
for failing to anfwer as to his intercommuning with Bothwell.

(Oct. 14, apud Jedl)iirgh.) — A great number of the lelTer barons on the Border, find fecurity this day and afterwards, that they ' fall behave as deutifull
and obedient fubiects.' The Court is held ' at Haliruidhous' on Oct. 24.

(Nov. 4, apud Haliruidhous.) — An act is pafled in favour of Alexander
Lord Spynie, in which the charge brought againft him of intercommuning
with Bothwell, &c.' is, after ftrict trial, found to be a malicious invention of
Colonell Williame Steuart ; the King and Council ' reftoir and repone him to
his honnour, dignitie, place and fervice he had of his Maieftie.'

(Nov. 9.) — A ' Commiflioun of Lieutennandrie and Jufticiarie' is granted to
William Eaul of Angus Lord Douglas and Abirnethie, in confequence of
the King being ' informeit of the grite cruelteis, heirfchippis and diibrdouris recentlie committit be the laules brokin hieland men of the Clanchaltau, Clancamroun, Clanrannald, and vtheris, pretending thair dependans vpoun the Erllis
of HuNTLiE and Athoill, hes fa wrakit and fliaikin lowfe lindrie pairtis of
the North cuntrey, that grite nowmeris of honneft and peaceable folkis, his hie-

' See Aug. 29, 1592.

26JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 281

nes fubiectis, ar miu'thowrit, thair houflis brunt, now in the winter feafoun, thair
guidis finiil5eit, &c. : With fpeciall pouer to intercomnioun with the faidis
Erllis and vtheris authouris and movaris of the faidis difordoui-is and cruelteis,
twicheing thair defifting from armes and hoftilitie, and repairing of fie placeis
as his Maieftie hes appointit, quhair the groundis, occafionis and circuinftances
of the faidis troubles may be hard, and the fame redreffit,' &c. And " giif neid
be, to difplay his Maiefteis banner, affege houfis, raife fyre and vfe all vther force
and weirlyke ingyne,' &c.

(Nov. 16.)— A Proclamation iffued againft the Earl of Bothwell ;
and of new interdicting all fubjeets from interconnnuning, &c. with him.

(Nov. 20.) — Another Proclamation and Declaration to the fame effect.

(Dec. 8.) — All Refetters and Affifl;ers of Bothwell, having been ordered, in
time coming, to approach no nearer the Royal jjrefence than ten miles, and many
of them having difobeyed, Warrant is iffued to the Provoft and Bailies of
Edinbm-gh to apprehend ' Dame Margaret Douglas, Contesse of BothUILE, Arch** "Wauchop younger of Nudrie, A^^illiame Stewart fumtyme Conltable
of tlie Caftell of Dimbartane, Johnne Hammiltoun younger of Sammelftoim,
Williame Liermonth of the Hill, Hercules Stewart of Quhytlaw, Mr Thomas
Cranftoun younger of Morieftoun, James Stewart of Tynneis, Sir James Scott
of Balverie, Andro Ker of Farnyliirft, Watt Scott of Harden, &c., and all others
received or that fliall be received into favor, quhilliis fall nocht produce and
fchaw to thame, his Maiefteis Licence, for thair remaning within the fame bvirgh.'

(Jan 5, 1592-3.) — A Proclamation iffued againft ' the coverit and biffy
trauellis of Jesuites, Seminarie Preiftis, borne fubjectis of this reahne, and liun
vtheris, ftrangearis, and their tressounahle Conspiisacie for hihriuging of
strangearis, SpanjEartis, in this reahne, this nixt fpring or fomer ; to the ouerthrow of his hienes and all profeffiug the trew Religioun with him, and to the
ruyne and conqueift of this auncient Kingdome and libertie,' &c.

{Eodem die.) — Act paffed, ' allowing the apprehending aiul warding' of William Erll of Angus within the Caftle of Edinburgh, ' vpoun fufpicioun confauit, that he wes guilty of fum treffonable Confpiracie, diuifit for fubuerfioun of
the trew Religioun,' &c. ; ' as planelie appearis be fum Letteris, laitlie apprehendit with Mr George Ker bruthir to the Lord of Neubottle, fubfcryuit be the faid
Erll and vtheris his colligis : As alfwa, concerning the warding, tryell and examinatioun of the faid Mr George, Hew Barclay of Ladyland, and fum vtheris,'
apprehendit for this fame cans.'

{Eodem die.)— Another Act, that in future, all perfons fufpected of fuch
crimes, fliall be called before the King and Council, " and gift' thair aithis of veritie folempnitlie, that thay fall lelilie and treulie declair and depone the veritle,

vol. L 2 N

^82 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592-3.

&c., and conceill na pairt thairof ; and in cais thay fall refufe to fweir and giflf
the faid aith, that thair refufale, in that cais, falbe lialdin as a Confeffioun of
the crymes quhairof thay ar oi* fall be delaitit and inquirit.'

(Jan. 8.) — Mi{ Alexander King, Advocat, finds caution to the extent of
L.5000, that he lliall appear perfonally, on fix days warning, and anfwer ' to fie
thingis as falbe layed to his charge'. Robert Swintoun of that Ilk, Mr Michaell
Cheilliohne, and Williame Faii'lie, burgeffis of Edinburgh, were his fureties.

(Jan. 12.) — Letters ordained to be directed, charging Sill JoHNNE Ker of
Hirfell, ^nicht, and Mr Walter Lindsay of Balgawy, to appear and anfwer,
' concerning thair practizing in materis aganis the Eftait of Religioun, his hienes perfone and authoritie, and difl;iirbing of the commoun quietnes of the
realme ;' under the pain of Rebellion.

(Jan. 17.) — Proclamation ' to pas fordwart to the North with his hienes,
for refilling and reprefiing of the authoris of the trelfounable Confpiracie for the
inbringing of Strangearis, and rafing of Ciuile wear,' &c. ; and * for defens and
mantenance of the libertie of Religioun from thraldome of confcience, and conqueifl; and llaverie of Sti'angearis ;' ' vnder the pane of tinfall of lyffe, landis and
guidis.'

(Jan. 23.) — JoHNNE Earl of Menteith finds Johnne Blair of that Ilk,
Jolinne Grahame of Knokdoleane and Robert Gi'ahame of Thornik, as his cautioners, under the pain of 10,000 nierks, 'that he fall on nawayis invade nor
perfew Walter Lekky oJ that Ilk, his kin, &c., in the deidlie feid fi:anding
betuix him and his faidis freindis.' Johnne Earl of Montrois, Johnne M' of
Montrois, Mr Johnne Grahame of Hal3airdis, Sir Duncane Campbell of Glenvrquhay, Williame Grahame of Balivie, Williarae Grahame of Claverhous, and
Williame Grahame of Panhollis, bind themfelves to relieve the cautioners of
their furety.

(Jan. 25.) — Walter Lekky of that Ilk, finds Johnne Murray of Polmais as
his cautioner, imder the pain of 3000 merks, that he fhall not invade or purfue
the Earl of Menteith.

(Eodem die.) — Robert Jamefoun, burgefs of Air, ordained to deliver to Sir
James Sandielandis of Slanmannane, ' M' (Maifl;er) Knicht, gentilman of his
hienes chalmer,' the fum of 236 ' crownis of gold,' delivered to him by James
Campbell his fervant, who received the fame from Mr George Ker, brother to
Mark Lord Newbottle.

(Jan. 30.) — Com:mission to Archibald Earl of Argyi.e, his hienes Juftice Generall, for reprefling the violence of ' the Avicked Clangregour, the
Steuartis of Baquhidder and diners vtheris brokin men of the hielandis,'
&c. ; with power to charge ' all and findrie perfonis of the furename of the Mak26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 283

GREGOUR, and the Steuartis of Baquhidder, thair affiftaris and pairt-takaris,
to find fouirtie or to entir plegeis, as he fall think maift expedient, for obferuatioun of his hienes peace, quietnes and gude reule in the cuntrey,' &c. Power is
alfo given to convocate the lieges, and to ' perfew and affege' their ' houffis and
ftrenthis, raife fyre and vfe all kynd of force and weirlyke ingyne,' &c.

{Eodem die.) — A number of ' Mackgregouris' charged to appear before the
Earl of Argyle, at Stirling, the . . . day of February next.

(Feb. 5, apud Sanct Androis.) — George Erll of Huxtlie, Frances
Erll of Erroee and Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun, kn', ordained to be denounced rebels, for not appearing this day, to anfwer ' tuiching thair
practizing and trafficquing with Jesuites, Seminarie Preiftis, and vtheris excoramunicat and trafficquing Papiftis, aganis the ftate of the trew Religioun,' &c.

(Feb. 12, aptid Halirudlious.) — Robert Logane of Resfalrig, to be denounced, for not appearing to have anfwered ' vpoun his trelTounable Confpiring,
confulting, trafficquing and diuifing with Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill, in fundrie treffounable purpoiffis, agains his Maiefteis perlbne and authoritie.'

(Feb. 15.) — Schir James Cheisholme of Dundorne, kn', to be denounced,
for not appearing to anfwer, ' tuicheing his practizing and trafficquing, in fundrie
treffounable materis, aganis the trew Religioun,' &c.

(Feb. 26, apiid Abirdeue.) — Wilijame Erll of Angus, Lord Douglas and
Abirnethy, ordained to be denounced, for not appearing to anfwer, ' tuicheing
the treffounable practizing aganis the eftate of the trew Religioun, prefentlie
profeflit within this reahne, his Maiefteis perfone, authoritie, eftate and realme,'
&c.

(Mar. 3.) — Mr Robert Keithe, brother to George Earl Marifchall, to be
denounced, for not appearing to anfwer a chai-ge at the inftance of the Earl and
Robert Lord Altrie, his uncle, that ' quhair he, vnmyndfuU of his naturall dewtie towardis him, hes laitlie with his compliceis, violentlie, and be way of deid,
takin the faid Erllis hous of Akirgill, in Caithnes, and intrufit him felff in poffeffioun thairof, of intentioun to mak incurfiounis vpoun his tennentis and feruandis, occupiaris of his landis adiacent and belanging thairto ; and to commit
all maner of oppreffioun, reif and heirfliippis vpone thame : As lykuife, to compell thame to anfuer and mak payment to him of the mailles and dewiteis thairof, by {contrary to) all ordour of law and juftice, and to the grite contempt of
his hienes auctoritie : Quhais infolence, albeit the faidis complenaris be able
aneuch to repres and tak ordour Avith ; yit, in refpect of his hienes prefence in
the cuntrey, thay ar laith thairto, in lioip that his Maieftie fall prouyde remeid
for pvnilhement of tic infolence and enormitie.'

(Mr.a 9.) — A Commission is granted to George Earl Marishall Lord

284 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1592-3.

Keith and Altrie, conftituting him his Majefty'sCommiffioner, within the hounds
of the Sherifdoms of Kineardin, Aberdeen and Banf, ' to pas, fearche, feik and
tak Geohge Erli, of Huxtley, Williarii: Eiill of Angus, Frances
Erll of Erroie, Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun, kn', Schir James
Cheifliohne of Dundorne, kn', Mr James Gordoun and Mr ^Villiame Ogiluy, Mr
Robert Abercrummy, and all vtheris Jefuites, Seminarie Preiftis and trafficquing
Papiftis, treirounable practizearis aganis the Eltate of the trew Religioun, prelenthe profefRt within this realme, his hienes perfone, crowne and libertie of this
cuntrey : As alswa, the vtheris perfonis vndirwrittin, denunceit rebellis and
putt to the home, and fugitiiie fra his hienes lawis, for the tressounahle fyreRASING nnd hirning of the place of Dynnibirsi:i>l and Murthour of vmq^^
Jajies Erll of Murray ; thay ar to lay, the faidis George Erll of Huntlie,
Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun, kn', Schir Thomas G. of Cluny, kn', William
G. of Geyclit, Robert Innes of Innermerky, Johnne Gordoun apperand of Lefmoir,
William G. of the Craig of Auchindoir, Johnne G.youngairof Carnburrow, George
G. his bruther, James Lorymer, Alexander Clialmer, leruitouris to the Laird of
Innermerky, Patrik Gordoun of Letterfoury, Patrik G. of Corrachrie, Johnne G.
younger of Auchannachie, Normond Leflie, Johnne Vans of Lochflyne, Johnne
Gordoun of Auldtounleyis, Johnne Drummond, Andro Wode, Johnne Edraeftoun,
Robert Dalgleiflie, Williame Borthuik, George Gordoun of Crechie, James Moubray, George Gordoun bruthir to Patrik G. of Corrachrie, James Borthuik at
the Brigend of Haillis, Johnne Chalmer luftcr-fone to the Laird of Geycht, and
Williame Morifoun ; togidder with the reflTettaris,' &c., and to bring them before the King and Council, or before the Juftice or his deputies, to be jjuniflied
for their demerits : And alfo, ' to reprefs and refill, and as occafiouu fallis oute
or neceffitie requiris, to tak and apprehend all thevis, revaris, fornaris, violent
and maifterful oppreirouris, hieland and lauland, brokin men,' &c. AVith power
likewife to hold Courts of Judiciary, &c. — The following perfons are added ' as
Counfallouris to the laid Erll, be quhais aduife, or ony three of thame conjunctlie, he and his deputis fall proceid in the execution of this pi'efent Comniiffioun,
viz. Johnne Maifter of Foi-bes, Robert Lord Altrie, Alexander Iruing of Drum,
Schir Walter Ogilvy of Findletter, kn', Schir George Ogilvy of Dunlugus, kn',
Alexander Frafer of Phillorth, James Creichtoun of Frendraucht, Williame Forbes of Tolquhone, George Johnneftoun of Caflvvben, Williame Forbes of Monymuflc, Williame Forbes of Corfe, Johnne "Wiiliert of Pittarro,

of Thornetoim, of Lowreftoun, of Balmane and Arbuthnott of that Ilk.'

(Mar. 9.) — A fimilar Commission granted to Johnne Erll of Athohl
Lord Balvany, as his Majefty's Commiflioner, within the bounds of the fhires of

26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 285

Elgin, Fores, Nairn, Invernefs and Cromarty. He is inftructed ' to concur,
fortifie and affift' the Earl Marildiall ; ' and for this effect, to rejmir to him
with his forceis, Avithin the faidis boixndis, at fic tymes as the necefRtie fall fa require, or as he falbe aduertift or defyrit be the faid Erll Marifliaell.' Symon
Lord Frafer of Lovatt, Johnne Grant of Freuchy, Coline M'Kenzie of Kintaill,
Lauchlane IVrintoIhe of Dunnauchtane, George Ros of Balnagowne, Mr Hector
Monro of Foullis, Johnne Dunbar of Moynes fchereff of Murray, Johnne Vrquhart tutour of Cromartie, Thomas Frafer tutour of Lovatt and Williame Suthirland of Duffus, are appointed his ' counfallouris.'

(Apr. 12, 1593, apud Halyruidhoiis.) — 'Johnne Buchquhannane of
Dnunfoid and James B., fonis to Thomas B. of Blairlolk, Archebald M^Airthui'e in {and) Airthure M^Airthure in Ardindowane, Johnne M^Inlay, fone to
the miliar of Dunftuge, and George Uuntene M'^Indoqiihy, feruand to Thomas
B. of Blairlollv,' ordained to be denounced rebels, &c. by virtue of ' our fouerane
lordis Letteris, rafit at the inftance of Johnne Campbell of Ardkinglas, Maifter
Johnne C. of Auchinvelling, Mr Dougall C. Deine of Breichin, Patrik and Robert
Campbellis, brether to vmq'" Duncane Camiibell ; makand mentioun, that quhair
the faid Johnne C. of Ardkinglas, at the Ipeciall directioun of his hienes, being
cuming to the burgh of Edinbiu'gh, vnder his Maiefteis protectioun, and being
on his jornay, at Dumbertane, vpone the xxviij day of Marche laft, accumpanyed
onlie with four feruandis, in peceable and quiet mauer, he tuik purpos to hald
fordwart his jornaj^ that fame nycht efter fupper, be reflToun of the trublis
quhilkis ar in that cuntrey, lijipynniug for nathing les than ony injurie or truble
to haue bene intendit aganis him ; notwithftanding, it is of the treM'th, that
Johnne Buchannane, &c. being aduertiiit of the faid Lard of Ardkinlas intention to hald fordwart his jorney that nicht, thay affociat vnto thame felffis lindrie
vtheris, brokin men and fugitives, to the number of tuentie-foir perfonis on horfe
and fute, all bodin in feir of weir, with lang hagbuttis, jakkis, piftolettis and
vtheris waponis invafiue, prohibite to be worne be the lawis of this realme and
Actis of Parliament ; and lay in ambufliment in ane yaird, direct oppofite to the
gait, quhairby the faid compleneris behuifit to pas, of fett purpos and prouifioun
to haue murderit him in his by cuming : Lyk as, the laid vmq'" Duncane and
ane vther of his feruandis, being gangand a litle befoir him, and the perfonis
foirfaidis fuirlie beleving that ane of thame had beine the faid Lard of Ardkinglas, thay difchairgeit ane dufane of harquebuittis at the faidis tua perfonis, and
fchott the laid vmq''' Duncane in the heid with ane of the fame fchottis ; and
thaireftir cuming furth of the yaird, finding the faid vmq'" Duncane not to be
deid, and ftill beleving he had beine the faid Lard of Ardkinglas, thay fchamefullie and barbaroufly maglit and flew him with fweirdis, and cuttit of his heid :

286 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

And then, perfaving thame felffis to be difapointit, thay fchairplie foUowit the
faid Lai-d, fchott aucht or nyne hagbuittis at him, and had not failit lykwayis to
haue flaine him, wer nocht be the Prouidence of God he efchaipit : Committing
thairthrow maift fchamefull and barbarous Murthure, vpone fett piirpos and
prouifioun, in hie and proud contemptioun of his Maieftie and his authoritie,
and euil example of vtheris to do the lyke, giff this remane vnpunilFet.'

(Apr. 15.) — Jolinne Lord Hammiltoun ordered to be denounced, for not prefenting Mr Patrik Hammiltoun, brother to George H. of Preftoun, Captane
of the Caftell of Brody in Arrane, as bound by the laws and the ' Generall Band,'
to prefent and enter him befoi-e the King and Council, ' to be jiunift for his demerittis, i)roud contempt and rebellioun ;' and to have anfwei'ed to a Complaint
made by Abacuch BilTett,' writer to the Signet, that on 23, 25 and 28 days of
September, 1587, Mr Patrick was denounced rebel, for not appearing before the
King and Council, ' tuicheing thair (Mr Patrick's and John H. fear of Preftoun,
his brother's Ions) cruell jierfuit and invafioun of the faid complener, within St
Geilis Kirk of Edinburgh, in tyme of Parliament, and mutilatioun and difinembering him of the haill fingeris of his left hand,' &c. ; and that ' I'en the tyme of
his denunceatioun, he hes maift fchamefuUie and vnhoneftlie miirdreift and flane

tua innocent men, to wit vmq'^ Dauid Stewart in Buit, and vmq'" Inglis,

quha newer ofFendit him,' &c. ; ' befydis mony vther and odius vicked deidis
committit be him, vpone his Maiefteis peceable fubiectis, and fpeeiallie, within the
pairtis of Arrane, quhair he wes appointit Capitane of Brody, oppreffand fie as
may not refift him, baith be fey and land, and takand ranlbmis and buiting'
with wtheris his complices, that he houndit out to that effect ; behaving him
felfF, in all refpectis, as gif he wer not fubiect to a fouerane lord and king,' &c.

(Apr. 17, apud Edinburgh.) — James Cheyne of Straloch became cautioner
for Patrik Cheyxe of Effilmonth, ' that he, be him felfF and all that he is
obleift to anfweir for, be the lawis of this realme, fall behave thame felffis as
dewtifull and obedient fubiectis' — and that thay fliall not ' tak pairt with George
Erll of Huntlie, &c., nor na vtheris, Jefuitis,' &c., under the pain of 3000 merks.

(Apr. 21.) — A number of ' Northland men' find caution under large fums,
that thay fliall repair to the town of Dundee, upon the 24th day of April in-

' Habakkuk Bisset was clerk to Sir John Skene, Lord Clerk Register. He is the reputed author
of ' Ane iliort Forme of Proces, prefently vied and obferved before the Lords of Couniell and Seflion,'
appended to Skene's Scottish translation of the Regiam Majestatem, published in 1609. This work
forms one of the articles in a scarce volume, entitled ' A Compilation of the Forms of Process in the
Court of Session, during the earlier periods after its establishment ; with the variations which they
have since undergone, and likewise some ancient tracts concerning the manner of proceeding in Baron
Courts ; published by order of the Commissioners lately appointed by his Majesty for Enquiring into
the Administration of Justice in Scotland.' 8vo. Edinburgh, 1809. ^ Free-booting ? Taking booty.

26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 287

ftant, ' and thair, ather fatisfie the Generall Affemblie of the Kirkis, qiihilkis ar
to be convenit thairin the fame day, in fie thingis as concernis the trew Religioun,
&c. ; and retiirne ane Tellimoniall of the fame fatisfactioun, to his Maieftie and
Lordis of Secreit Counfale, within thre dayis nixt thairefter ; or ellis, within the
fame fpaice, fall returne and enter thair perfonis in waird, within the burgh of
Edinburgh,' &c.

Apr. 26.) — Proclamation, that ' fforfamekle as thair is ane Juftice Court
proclamit and appointit to be haldin within the burgh of Hadingtoun, vpone the
thrid day of Maij nixtocum, with continewatioiin of dayes, be certane noblemen,
barrones and vtheris, to quhome his Maieftie hes gevin full power and Commiffioun to call and convene befoir thame diuerfe perfonis, inhabitantis within the
boundis of the flierefdonies of Bevwik, Lawderdaill and Edinburgh, within the
Conftabularie of Hadingtoun, committaris of the faidis crymes and enormities,
and to proceid and minifter juftice vpone thame,' &c. ' And that necelTar it is,
that Commiffionaris be weill and fubftancionflie accumpaneit, with a force of his
hienes guid fubiectis.' Therefore, that the ' Erllis, lordis, barronis, fewaris and
frehalderis, duelland within the faidis bovmdis, alfweill to regalitie as ryaltie,' be
charged to repair to Haddington ' weill bodin in feir of weir, and with ten dayis
wictuallis and prouifioun.'

Anent the Tryall and pvnisJiment of the Ressetaris and asslstaris of

THE ErLI- BOTHUIL.

(May 1, ajmd. Hariruidhous.) — Anent the Kingis Maiefteis Propofitioun to
his nobilitie and baronis prefentlie conuenit, concerning the prefent difordouris
ower all the realme, and contempt of his hienes authoritie ; and fpeciallie, how
his perfoun micht be gairdit, and the rebellious contempt of Frances fumtyme
Erll Bothuill his aflifteris and refettaris reprefit and puneffit ; it wes anfwerit,
that the feruice and execution neceflar for that effect, behuiffit to be done, ather
be a force of waigeit men, quhilk hardlie may be intertenit be ony vther moyen
(to thair knowlege) nor be a generall taxatioun ; and that cannot be condifcendit vnto, without the confent of all the Eftaittis convenit, the perfonis now prefent being vnable of thame felffis to refolue thairanent ; or then, the faid executioun behuved to be maid, be ane force of his hienes fubiectis, of all eftaittis,
to be convenit perfonallie in amies, be Proclamatioun : Notwithftanding, that
thair fall appeir na inlaik, in the det-bimd guidwill and readynes of the noblemen, barrones and counfale prefent, to do all that lyis in thair habilitie, alfweill
for the faulfgaird and prefervatioun of his hienes perfoun, as for the repreffing
of the faid fumtyme Erll his aflifteris and reflettaris, without ony excufe or delay ; thay offerit thame felffis reddy to remane and accumpany his Maieftie, and

288 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

to affift him with thair trew counfale, or to pas in fie pairtis as fould be fund
expedient, for feircheing and repreliending of the avowit and knawin ofTendaris ;
and thocht nieit, that vtheris quha ar fnfpect, foukl be eallit befoir his hienes and
his Counfale, or his Juftice ; and baith the ane ibirt and the vther tryit and pvniffit, as thay fould be fund to haue merited ; with all vther perfounis knawin giltie,
or fufpectit as offendouris aganis the trew Religioun, or in vtheris odius crymis
ower all pairtis of the realme, and juftice to be miniftrat and execuit thairvpone
with all pofTible expeditioun. Further, leing his hienes clemencie, heirtofore
fchawin to the faidis Erllis affifteris and reffettaris, hes produicit la littill guid
effect, hot be the contrair, hes bene fa contemptiouflie and ingraitlie abuilet ;
after reffbning, quhidder it wer mair convenient to fchaw ony forder or lyk clemencie heirefter, or with feueritie to try and perfew the oftendouris, quhill the
occafioun of the evill be takin away ; the noblemen, counfaill and barronis,
Ijrefentlie declairit and concludit, that feueir juftice wes maift expedient to be
vfit and executit in tyme cuming, fen his hienes former clemencie hes bein fa far
abuifet : And lykas, thay haue maift humblie craved of his hienes, that the
conclufionis fett doun be commoun confent in counfale, for the executiouu of
the premifles, fall not be alterit nor brokin be ony thing, to be grantit or paft
his Maiefteis hand, without the knawlege and aduife alfo of the Counfale
fittand, at the imjiortune fuit of ony privat perfonis ; quhairvnto his hienes hes
condifcendit and jn-omeilit :' Sa that the faidis noblemen, barronis, counfale
and vtheris now prefent, or that fall iubfcriue this prefent Act heii'eftir, lykwayis faithfullie promifle vnto his Maieftie, that nane of thame fall heirefter
fpeik or folift him in the fauour, or for Ipairing of ony perfonis that falbe
thocht worthy to be tryit and pvniflit, for the cryme foirfaid, vnder the paine
of his hienes repruif and indignatioun ; and to be eftemit be him as fauoraris
and partakaris with the laid Erll, in all his treflbnable and vicked deidis ;
as alfua, faithfullie promeiffit, not onlie to accumpany his Maieftie, as is befoir
viTittin, fa lang and in fie nwmer as his hienes fall think necefiar, hot alfo to
vfe thair panes, and do thair exact diligence in feircheing, apprehending, trying
and punillieing of the faid Erll his ailiftaris, part-takeris and reffettaris, to the
effect thay may fuffer according to thair demerittis ; and to leif na maner of
guidwill and effectuall doing vnperformit, in this behalf, that thay wald vfe in
thair particulair" deidlie feidis, aganis thair awin privat ennemies. Axu finallie, the noblemen and vtheris prefent, being lliireffis or ordinar judgeis,^ promittit the peii'ormance heirof, within thair awin boundis and jurildictionis ; as

' This Act of the Privy Council sliows, in a very strong light, liow apt the king was to give way to
private solicitations, and to vacillate in all matters of importance, when his feelings were worked upon
hy intriguing courtiers. * Proper, peculiar, personal. ' That is, such of thenn as were judges, &c.

26JAC-VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 289

thay will anfwer to God and his hienes thairvpone. In witnefs quhairof, his
Majeftie and thay hes fubfcriuit thir prefentis with thair handis.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Lennox. Argyle. Mortoun. Mar. Alex' L. Hume. R. L. Seytoun. M' of Glammis.
James Lindsay. Melrose. Newbotle. Lincluden. J. Cokburne. Blantyre. R.
CoKBURNE. Bass. S' Williame Keith. S' George Hwme. Traquhatr. Dunypace.
George Hume of Weddeiburne. Alexander Hwme of Noitliberuick.

(May 2.) — The Commendatair of Sanct Coljiis Inche, tutour of Murray, ordained to be charged, that he in no wife ' cut doun, diftroy, mell and intromet with the wod of Doun in Menteith, qvihilk properlie appertenis to his
Maieftie:' And the lieges to be charged, ' that nane of thame tak vpone hand to by
{huy), blok or bargane with the faid Commendatare or any vtheris, anent the faid
wod ;' under the penalty of paying double the value to his Majefty, and to be
' puneift as diftroyaris of policie,' &c.

(May 3.) — On the complaint of Thomas Kirkpati-ik of Clofburne, ' that
Edward Maxwell of Tynwald, Edward and Johnne his fonis, Johnne M.
of Kirkconnell, Robert M. of Keltoun, Thomas and Robert his fonis, Johnne
M. tutour of Aikinheid, &c. hes laitlie maid and fubfcryuit ane viilauchfuU
Band and League, quhairin thay ar all bundin, fworne and obleift to manteine,
defend and tak pairt, ilkane with vtheris, in quliatfumeviir thair actionis, in the
law, or by the law ;' accounting the actioun and querrell of onie ane of thame
to be eqiiall and commoun to thame all :' And that in terms of this league, they
on April 3, with ' convocatioun of his hienes liegis, to the nwmer of tua hundreth
perfonis or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, with jakkis, fpeiris, hagbuttis, piftolettis, &c. come to the compleinaris 20 f. land of Rouch-Ile, of purpos violentlie to haue intrufit Robert Greir thairintill ; quliilk thay had not failit to haue
done, wer nocht the laid compleinar, being foirfeine of thair interpryfe, aflemblit
certane of his freindis, to defens and mantenance of his awin polfeffioun.' Having failed to anfwer a charge to appear this day, they were ordered to be denounced rebels, and their goods efcheated, &c.

{Kodem die.) — Robert Galbraith of Culcreuch, ' be the fpeciall counfale and
devife' of George Buchannane of that Ilk, having purchafed a Commiffion of
Jufticiary, for purfuit of the Clangregour, their refetters and affifters, with
fire and fword, containing charges for convening the lieges to conciu* and affift
him in its executioun ; ' quliilk Commiffioun the faid Robert hes not purcheft
vpoun ane intentioun to attempt ony thing aganis the Clangregour, bot vndir
cullour thairof to extend thair haitrent and malice againft Alexander Col-

' Whether in terms of the law, or in opposition to it.
VOL. I. 2 O

290 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

HOUN (if Luss and Allan (Awlay) M^Caula of Ardincaple, tliair kin and
freindis, witli all extreniitie ; and vndir cuUour of fercheing and feiking of the
Clangregonr, to allege thair houfles and rais fjre thairin ; quliairof he hes alreddy gevin a liiffident jJrufFe, be the convocating of the haiil name of Bnchannane, for the raaift parte in armes, (witli quhome the faid Allane flandis vndir
deidlie feid.) and be quhais pouer and force he proceidis in all his actionis, &c.
And albeit tliay ar na les willing to perlew the Clangregonr, with thair haill pouer
and force nor {llniii) the faid Robert is, yit thai dar nocht ryfe and accumpany
the faid Robert to that effect, for feir of thair lyveis ; in refpect of the deidlie
feid Handing betuix the faid Alexander Colhoun of Lufs and the laid Robert,
throu the llauchter of vmq'^ Donald McNeill MTarlane, houfliald feruand to the
faid Robert, connnittit be the faid Alexanderis vmq'" bruthir ; quhilk feid yit
ftandis betuix thair houffis vnreconfiliat, and the faid Laird of Culcreuch daylie
awaittis all occafionis to revenge the fame ; and in refpect of the feid laitlie renewit betuix the faid Laird of Ardincaple and the Buchannanis, with quhais
pouer, counfale and force the laid Robert is aflilled, in executioun of the faid
Commiffioun, vfing thair aduife and directioun in all thingis thairanent ; as alfwa, in I'efpect of the grite grudge and haitrent Handing lykwayis betuix the
faid Laird of Ardinca])le and the faid Robert, qulia haueing bereft his awin moder, qvihome the faid Laird of Ardincaple hes now maryt, of hir haill leving, he
hes be ordour of law recouerit the fame furth of his hands ; for the quhilk cans,
the faid Robert feikis to haue his advantage of him, hes gevin vp kindnes, and
denunceit his euill-will to him with Iblempne vowis of revenge.' On complaint
made, ' the Kingis Maieftie, with anile of the Lordis of his Secreit Counlale, in
refpect of the euill will and inimitie Handing betuix the foirfaidis pairteis, thair
kin and freindis, &c. ; and pairtlie, for the flauchtir of vmq'' Petir Colhoun,
committit be Johnne Buchannane Shereff-depute to the faid Robert Galbraith,
be vertew of a CommilTioun, as he allegeit, ExEMis {exempts) the faid Alexander Colquhoun and Allane Macaula, thair kin, &c. fra all ryfing, convening or
affifling the faid Robert, in putting the faid Connniffioun to executioun ; and
decernis the fame, in fa fer as it is extendit to the fercheing or feiking of the
Clangregonr within thair houffis, to be fufpendit and difchargeit jimplkiter, in
tyme cuming.'

{Eodem d/c.) — Patrik Hepburn )•; of Richartoun, Thomas his bruthir, Niniane Huik his feruand and Williame Otterburne feruand to vmq"" Alex. O.,
were ordained to be denounced rebels, for coming, ' with Williame Anderforie,
prcfentlic in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh in waird, and thair complices, all bodin in
feir of weir, with jakkis, fteilbonettis, vpone the xj day of Februare laltbipaft,
about ten houris at evin or thairby, vnder fdence and cloud of nycht, to the

26JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. , 291

toun of Babertoun, quliair vmq''^ Alexander Borthuik, lone to Adanie B. in
Wefter Haillis, and vmq'° James B. thair freind and kynifman, wer Hand in
the faid vmq'" Alexanderis hous, in thair beddis, dredand na evill, &c. ; the
laid Patrik and his complices foirfaidis, maift crewallie and barberoullie rafit
fyre in the houffis and chalmer qnhair the faidis vmq'" Alexander and James
lay, and brunt the famin houflis and chahner, with certane vther houffis adjacent thairto ; of fett purpois and prouifioun to half bereft thame of thair
lyves : And the faidis vmq'^ Alexander and James and thair famelie, for efchewing of the laid fyre, come furth of the faidis houffis, qnhair the faidis perfonis
maift tyrannouflie fett vpone thame, hurt and woundit lindrie of thair feruandis, bairnis and wyffis, crewallie and vnmercyfullie murdreift and flew the
faidis vmq'^ Alexander and James, as alfo hurt and woundit Margaret Hoig,
fpous to the laid Alexander, quha is yit in grit danger of hir lyff ; committing thairthrow ane maift hie cryme of Treflbuu aganis his Maieftie, to the great
contempt of God, his hienes authoritie,' &c.

(May 8.) — JoHNNE Lord Fleming ordained to be denounced rebel, for not
appearing to find furety to ' compear before the Juftice on May xxj, under the
pain of 10,000 pundis,' to underly the law ' for beiring, weiring and fchuitting
with hagbuttis and piftolettis, and wounding of findrie his hienes fubjectis, vpone
the . • day of Aprile laftbepaft.'

{Eodem die.) — Robert Galbraith of Kilcrewch ordained to be denounced
rebel, for not finding fecurity in terms of the General Band ; ' that he, be him
felf, and all lie as he is obleift to anfwer for, Ibuld be anfwerable to juftice and
fatisfie pairteis Ikaitbit, vnder the pane of 2000 pundis ; and forder, that thay
fould not reffett, fupj)lie nor interconimoun with ony perfoun of the furnaine of
Buchunnane, Mak^iegoiir nor Muhjarlane, quhilkis ar declairit fra his hienes
lawis, or denunceit to the home for criminall cauffis ; nor furneife thame meit,
di'ink, hous nor barbery,' &c.

{Eodem die.) — The Commendataiu of Sanct Colmes Inche ordained to
be denounced for not appearing perfonally, and for not prefenting Thomas Inglis
his fervant, ' to liaue anluerit to fie thingis as fould haue bene inquirit of thame,
tuicheing thair trelFounable reflett, fupplie and intercommouning with Fjjances
fumtyme Erll Bothuile,' &c.

(May 12.) — The Inhabitants of Kki. so, except Williame Lauder, having
come in his Majefty's will for the treafonable relet, fiipplying and intercommuning with ' Frances fumtyme Erll of Bothuill and his complices, at
diuerfe and findrie tymes, fen the proces and dome of forfaltiu'e led aganis
thame ;' they find fecurity that they Ihall ' fatisfie his Maiefteis will, in filuer,
prouiding the fame his will exceid not the fowme of 2000 merkis money.'

292 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

(May 17.) — Alexander Levingtoun of Pantoflvane ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing to anfwer ' tuicheing liis treffounable reffett,
fupplie and intercommoning' with the Earl of Bothwell and his accomplices, &c.

{Eodem die.) — The King's Will towards the Inhauitants of Kelso
was this day formally declared, viz. ' That the prefent haill Inhabitantes of the
faid toun and tliair pofteritie falbe freelie pardonit and remittit, &c. ; and that
thir prefentis be als fufficient for the furetie of thair lyves, landis and guidis, as
giff the fame wes paft in forme of Remiffioun vnder the Grite Seill, with all
folempuiteis requifite : And ficlyke, that the laidis perfonis fall mak payment to
his Maiefteis thefaurar of the loiun of fevintene hundreth merkis money ; and
forder, that thay fall find cautioun actit in the buikis of Seci'eit Counlall, that
thay fall not reffett, fupple nor intercommoun with the faid fumtyme Erll nor
his compliceis, furneis thame meit, drink, houfe nor barbery, nor haue intelligence with thame, priuatlie nor publictlie, in tyme cuming, vndir quhatfumemr
cullour or pretence ; vnder the jiane of tua thoufand pundis.'

(May 24.) — The Provoft, bailies, council and community of the Burgh of

Perth make complaint, that notwithftanding their having fubmitted the adjuftment of all differences between them and Robert Bruce of Clakmannane

' to certane of his awin freindis, well affected to the removing thairof, and to

the Kingis Maieftie as owerlinan,' 3'et that ' Johnne Wilfone and Johnne Nevene,

with certane vtheris honefl burgeffis and inhabitantes of the faid burgh, paffmg

toward the cietie of S' Androfe to the mercat thairof, in quiet and peceable

maner, laitlie, vpone the xxiij day of Aprile inflant, wer vnbefett at the cobill'

of Rind, in thair hie way, be the faid Lai-d of Clakmannane, accumpanyit with

nyne horfemen and futemen, bodin with hagbuttis, jakkis and vther airmour,

and be thame maift cruellie and vnmercyfullie perfewit for thair bodelie harmes

and llauchteris : Lykas, the faidis Johnne Wilfone and Johnne Nevene, being

baitli hurt and woundit in diuerfe and iindrie pairtis of thair bodyis, to the effufioun of thair bluid in grit quantitie ; the faid Lard and his complices maift

fcharacfullie tirrit' thame baitli naikit, and in maift barberoiis and difdainefull

maner fl^urgit thame with liorfe brydillis throw the touu of Abernethie, as gif

thay had bene thevis or haynous malefactom'is, left the faid Johnne Nevene

Hand thair for deid, and tuik the faid Johnne ^Vilfone, naikit, as captiue and

prillbnner, away with thame, to quhat place the faidis compleinaris knawis

nocht, nather ar certane quhidder he be deid or leavand ; vfurpand thairthrow

vpone thame his hienes authoritie, to the manifeft and jn'oud contempt thairof,

mifregaird of all law and juftice, and evill example of vtheris to commit the lyk

barbaretie and infolence, vpone the guid and obedient fubiectis.' — The Laird

' Ferry-boat station, near the confluence of the rivers Earn and Tay. '■> Violently stripped. Fr. tirer.

26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 293

was charged to appear before the King and Council to anfwer for his conduct,
and failing, is ordained to be denounced rebel. ' Johnne Erll of Gowry Proveft
of the faid brugh' appears to plead the caufe of the inhabitants of Perth.

{Eodem die.) — Warrant is granted to ' Williame Ker of Cesfurd Wardane
of the Middill Marche, and James DoA\'glas of Caveris Shereff of Roxburgh, and
their deinxittis, to pas feirch, tak and ajiprehend Sill John'Ne Keu of Hirfell,
kny', (quha being excommunicat and out fronie the ciunpany and focietie of the
faithful!, as allua denunceit rebell, and put to the home of a lang tyme bigane,
hes reraanit at the proces thairof fenfyne, as he dois yit, vnrelaxit ; and refoirtand to and fra in the cuntrie, as gif he wer his henes fre fubiect; and continewand in his filthie cryme of Adulterie, f u- the quhilk he wes excommunicat, &c.)
quliaireuir he jnay be apprehendit within thair boundis and jurifdictioun ; and
bring and prefent him befoir his Maieftie and Counlaill, or befoir his Juftice or
his depuittis, to be puneift for his demerittis,' &c.

(May 26.) — Alexander Lord Levingftoun and Williame L. fear of Kilfyth
become fureties for Johnxe Loud J'lemyng, that he ' fall pas and enter his
perfoun in waird, within the boundis of the fcherefdome of Striueling, within
thre dayes nixt efter the dait heirof ; and remane and keip ward thairin, and not
tranfcend the boundis thairof, ay and cxuhill he be fred be the Kingis Maieftie,
with auife of his Counfale, vnder the pane of 10,000 pundis.'

[Adfvu Bis/iop of Orkney, Alexanda- Commendator of Culros, Eduard
Commendator of Khdoss, James Lord Lindserj, Adam Lord Vrquliart,
Sir Robert MehiUe of Murdocarnj, hn', specially appointed by a Commission from Parliament.^

Creasoimfilc Coitepirafi? ngninst X\)t i^tits— 3inbasion of t\)t ^ala«s
of ?l?olt)roaljl)oust auti jf aUtlanU, ^c,

Jun. 1. — FkaKces liuntyme Erle Boihuile,' Gilbert Penniecuik,
Johnne Rutherfurde of Hunthill elder, Thomas Rutherfurde of
Hunthill younger, Symon Armcftrang younger of Quliithauch.
Being fummoned, ' for certane crymes of Treafone and Lefemajeftie,' the Advocate produced the fummons and executions, with Letters of Relaxation, Mar.
16, 1592-3, bearing Bothwell ' to be relaxit fra the procefs of Horning led aganis
him.'

(Jul. 16.) — The ' reafone and caus contenit in the fame fummondis' is
found relevant ; and the Advocate declared, ' that he fuld vfe his probatioun
with all expedition.'

> See Acts of Pari. 1593, &c.

294 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

\^REGE ipso presente, cum omnibus regni sfatibus.}

Persewaris, Mr Dauiil M'Gill and Mr Johnne Skene, Atluocatis to our fouerane lord.
(Jul. 2L) — M"' David Makgill and Johnne Skene, Advocattis to cure
fouerane lord, for verefeing- of the faid realbne contenit in the iliid Summondis
of Tred'one rafit aganis the faid Frances funitynie Erll Bothuill, producit and
repetit the Extract of the Foirfaltour, led and pronuncit befoir the Juftice and
his deputtis, aganis the faid Frances funitynie Erll Bothuill, fubfcryuit be the
Laird of Ornieiftoune Juftice Clerk, of the dait the xxv day of Junij the yeir of
God 1591, Depofitionis of certane witnefles exaininat befoir the faidis Lordis of
Articles in the faid mater ; the notorietie of the deid libellit ; and the cuniing
of the defendaris in to the Palice of Halyruidhous and Falkland, the tymes
libellit ; quhilk in niateris of hie Treffone fuld niak full probatioun ; and that
the Lordis of Parliament, being the greit Affyis of the cuntrie, of the daly practik ; quhatiumeuir perfonis dengis nocht, of certane knawlege, the perlbnis accufit, he fylis thame : And the comnioun notorietie of this fact and treffone
libellit, and contumacie of the defendar, is fufRcient to mak na man to clenge
him : And was content the foirfaid procefs and Summondis of Treffone wer
haldin condudit ; and defyrit the Eftatis to aduife tlie procefs and to pronunce
thair Sentence of Parliament thairintill, according to the laidis probationis and
thair confciences. And immediatlie thaireftir the laidis aduocattis exhibite and
producit befoir the Kingis Maieftie and liaill Eftaitis, lyk as thai did dyuerfe
tymes ofbefoir, the Summondis of Treflbne vndirwrittin, ratit and perfewit at
the inftance of oure fouerane lord his hicnes Juftice, aganis Frances fumtyme
Erll Bothuile, quhairby he was fummond to comjieir befoir our fouerane lord
the thrid day of Aprile, fourfcoir threttene yeii'is inftant with continewatioun of
dayis, to haue anfuerit to the poyntis of Treffone vndirwrittin, contenit in the
faidis Summondis : Off the quhilkis Sunnuondis the tennour followis.

Summons ov Treason affutusf Francis sometime Earl Bothwell

and others.
Jacobus, Dei gratia Rex Scotorum, dilcctis nodris Leoni Rcgi armorum, Hay, Albany, Rofs,
Tlotlieiay, Snawdoun, Mercliciiiont, licrauldis ; Jolianni Fergudbne, Rol)erto Stewart, Alexandro
Douglas ft Dau'uli IJrylibun, clauigcris ; Oniiond, Bute, Viiicorne, Canik, (igniferis ot ninu'iis, ac
eorum cuilibet, coniunctim et di\iifiin, vicecoinitibus nollris in hac parte fpecialiter conftitutis : Saluteni. Mandamus vobis et precipinnis quatemis funinioiicatis legittime et peremptorie coram teflibus,
I'Vanli-iHum olim Cnmitem dc Botliuilc, (iilbcrtum Pennycuke, Jobaiinem Rutlicrfurde de Ihuitbill
leniorem, Thomam Rutherfurdo do Iluntbili juniorem, Simoneni Armeftrang juniorem de Ciuhitliauclio, Confpiratores, perpetratores et celatores criminum Lefe Maieftatis fubfeijuentiuni, perfonalitor, ii coniin pcrfonalcs prefeiitias commode habere poteritis, alioquiu apud loca eorum habitationum,
vel ])er pid)licam proclamationem, apud cruces forales burgorum noftroruni de Edinl)urgl), Hadington,
.ledburgli, aliaque loca necefiaria ; degentes vero leu exiftentes extra rcgnum nolhuin, leu certum nullum domicilium in codem liabentes, apud dictas cmces forales aliaque loca ueceliiuia, fuper premoni26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 295

tione fexaginta dieruni, fie quod huiufmodi ruiniDonitio ad eoruiii aurcs et notitiam verefimilitcr preuenire poterit ; quod coiupaioant coram nobis feu Jufticiario noltro priino die ineufis Juiiij proximo
fequen. in noftro Parliameuto apud Ed' tertio die menfis Aprilis fequen. Tenen. hora caularum cum
continuatione dierum, ad rerpondeiidura nobis nollroue Julliciario, in prefato Parliamento, liiper proditorijs criminibus liililequentibus. In primis, dictos Icilicet Franfcili;uni olim Comitom de Hotlmile,
&c. et eoruni quemlibet, pro fua proditoria arte, parte, confdio, in ipforum proditoria Coid'piratione,
confultatione et conclullone horrendi facinoris contra nodrani lionorabilem perfonam ct vitani, per dictas perfonas commiff xxvii. die menfis Decembris, anno domini 159], fub noctis filenlio, in ipforum
proditoria Invafione Palacii noftri de Halyruidlious, intrando ibidem cum adillantia, confortio et convocatione, aliarumque homicidarum, oppreflbrum, latronum ac Inijufmodi infolentum virorum armatorum et a legibus noftris fugitiuoruni, et deliberate animo et certa inteutioue violentas manns in noftrara regiam perfonam imponere, vt vitam noflram vel nefarie extinguerent vel nos captiuos fecum deducerent : Et ad hunc eftectum, prefati Confpiratores directe accefferunt ad nolham priuatuin condaue
feu cubiculum, et ollijs ignem nefarie iniecerunt, doniefticos noltros prefenti vioienta uiorle niinitando
objurgandoque, nifi ipfis declararent vbi nos effemus, nulla vnquam inquifitione per eos facta ob quamcunque aliam perfonam nifi propter nofmet ipfos : Ac preterea, violenter cftVegenuit malleis, odia
interioris cubiculi llegine noftre cliariiiime coniugis; atque demum, vbi parum fe promouille et ad illorum invifitatum fcelus ad propofitum nefandum peruenire non pofl'e, intellexerunt, in eorum regrefiii
nondum fatisfacti, crudeliter et fine vlla mifericordiadumefticos et familiariffiinos noftros feruilores ob
iioftram caufam interfecenint et jugulauerunt : Hinc manifeft.iflime crimen Siimme Proditionis contra
nos, noftram vitam, authoritatem regiam et leges coramittendo. Secundo, prefatos Franfcifcum olim
Comitem de Bothuile, &c. Et eorum quemlibet, pro fua proditoria arte, parte, auxilio et confiiio, in
fua proditoria Confpiratione, confultatione et conclufione horrendi facinoris contra noftram lionorabilem
perfonam et vitam per dictos Confpiratores commiff. xxviij die menfis Junij anno domini 1592, in ipforum proditoria Invafione Palacij noftri de Falkland intra vicecomitatem iioftnim de Fyff, nobis
ibidem intus pro tempore exiftentibus, accedendo ibidem cum afliftentia et concurfu lionficidarum oppreftbrum, latronum, declaratorum proditoruni et bujufmodi infolentium virorum arniatorum et a legibus noftris fugiliuoram, ex deliberate animo et certa intentione violentas manus in noftram regiam perfonam imponere, vt vitam noftram vel nefaine extinguerent, vel nos captiuos fecum deducerent : Et ad
hunc eft'ectum, predicti Confpiratores cum fuis fociis accoftl-runt ad pofticum dicti noftri Palacij, ejaculando tormenta ferea, et bujufmodi macbinas eneas violenter idem pofticum oppuguarunt, vt eo dinipto, facilius ingi'efi". prefatam fuam coniurationem et horrendura facinus inceptum complerent: Hinc
manifeftiiTime crimen Summeproditionis contra nos, noftram vitam, authoritatem regiam et leges conimittendo ; atque adeo, pro ipforum proditoria celatione et occultatione prefaie ('oniurationis, confultatione, conclufione et executione eiufdem. Tertio, comraemoratos Johannem Rutherfurde dom. de
Hunthill fenioiem, et dom. juniorera, Simonem Armeftrang juniorem de Quhitliauche, ct eorum quemlibet, pro fua ]iroditoria receptione et auxilio preftito dicto Francifco olim coniiti de Botliuill ; et pro
eorum proditoria aliifiantia, participationo et intercominunicatione cum prefato I'Yancifco et fuis complicibus, noftris proditoribus dedaratis, contra leges et ftatuta regni noftri ; idque in menfibus Aprilis,
Maij, Junij, Julij, Augufti, Septembris, Januarij, Februarij, Marcij, anno domini 1592, et eorum quolibet
refpectiuo, in locis deHuntliill, Jed, Hawik, LiddifdaiJl: Hinc manifelliftime crimen Proditionis contra
nos, noftramque vitam, auctoritatem regiam et leges regni noftri committendo ; atque adeo, pro ipibnim
proditoria celatione et occultatione predicts fue intercommunicationis, receptionis et auxilij fuprafpecificat. Quarto, prefatum Symonem Armeftrang, |)ro fua proditoria arte parte et confiiio in execudendo monetam adulterinam domi fue de Boyne in Liddifdiiill, in menfibus Aprilis, Maij, Junij, Julij,
Auguftj, Septembris, Octobris, Novembris, Decembris, Januarij, Febi-uarij et Marcij, et quolibet eorum, anno domini 1591 : Hinc manifeftiflime crimen Summe Proditionis contra nos auctoritatem re296 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

giam et leges regni noftri committendo ; atque adeo, pro fua celatione et occulatione eiufdem. IdeoQUE,fuprafcriptos Confpiratores ad videndum et audiendum fefe et eorum queralibet, refpectu preniifforum, ciiinen Lefe Majeftatis incurrifle, per nos et trium regni noftri ftatuum decretum decerni et
detlarari : et fuper predictis et alijs quanipluriinis rebelllonibus et tranfgi'effionibus et proditoriis criininibus per prenominatas perlbnas, contra nos, regnum noftmm, auctoritatem regiam impie et nefarie
perpetratis ; et dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, proponendis et oltendendis ac juri parendum, et fuper liujufmodi iudieiuni nofti-uin et noftri Parlianienti, fecundum leges regni noftri exfpectandum et fubeuiidum, dictas viz.perfonas Confpiiatores, perpetratores et celatores criininum precedentiuin, ad videndum et audiendum lefe et eorem qucmlibet, intuitu premiflbrum, crimen Lefe Maieftatis incuiilfe, per nos et trium regni noftri ftatuum decretum decerni et declarari ; et propterea, ipforum
bona, mobiiia et imniobilia, tam teras quam officia aliafque res ad eos fpcctantes, nobis confifcari et pro
perpetuo nobifcum in proprietate remanere, perfonafque fuas penam proditionis et vltimi fupplicij a
regni noftri legibus inflictum fubire ; et vberius in premiffis refpondendum et juri parenduni : Intimando fupradictis Confpiratoribus eonunque cuilibet, quod fiue dictis die et loco cum continuatione
dierum coniparuerint liue non, nos, dictufque noftri Julliciarius in premifiis, jufticia mediante, procedemus et [jrocedet. Insuper citetis, &c.'*ad comparendum coram nobis noftroue Jufticiario dictis die et
loco, cum continuatione dierum, ad perhibendum fidele teftimonium in caufa predicta, indorfatas earundem latori reddatis ; et vos qui prefentes exeeuti fueritis fitis ibidem dictis die et loco coram nobis
feu dicto noftro Juiticiario, portan. vobifcum fummonitionis veftre teftimonium in fcriptis pro premiffis feu ipfos teftes : Ad quod faciendum vobis et veftrum cuilibet coniunctim et divifim vicecomitibns
nortris in liac parte committimus poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio noftri Magni figilli ApudEdinLurghe, vigefimo tertio die menfis Marcij, anno domini miilefimo quingentefimo nonageftmo fecundo,
et regni noftri vigefimo fexto.

Quliilkis Sunimondis, with the executionis and indorfationis thairof refpectiue
foirfaid, being this inftant day red, in prefence of his Maieftie and haill Eftaitis
of Parliament, firft in Latyne and fyne in Scottis, and the faid Frances fumtyme
Erll Bothuile being oftymes crjjlit of new, at the Tolbuith window of the faid
biu-gh of Edinburghe, to haue comperit and anfuerit to the faid Summondis and
refTonis contenit thairin : And he nocht comi)erand to haue defendit in the laid
mater and to liaue anfuerit to the faidis Summondis, the faidis aduocattis to his
Maieftie, defyrit the I'aidis Eftaitis declaratioun, gif the reafones of the faidis
Summondis wer relevant aganis the laid Erll Bothuile ; quliilkis Eftatis all in
one voce fand the fame relevant aganis him. Thairfoir, the faidis aduocattis of
new, for vei'efeing of the faid reflbnes contenit in the faid Summondis of Treffone,
producit and repetit the extract of Forfaltour led befoir the Juftice and his depuittis aganis the faid Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill, Depofitionis of the faidis
witnelfes, notorietie of the factis, and repetit the haill probationis repetit be him
ofbefoir in the faid mater this inftant day, and defyrit the faidis Eftaitis of
Parliament to aduife the Depofitionis of the faidis witnefles and vtheris probationis, and to pronunce thair Sentence of Parliament thairintill, according to the
famyn probationis and thair confciences : And thaireftir, the Depofitionis of the
haill witnelfes execut to the death, and of the witnelfes examinat in pretence of
the faidis Lordis of Articles, haill wreittis and probationis, being red, fene and

26JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 297

confidderit be the faidis haill Eftaitis of Parliament, in prefence of the Kingis
Maieftie, and thay thairwith being lyiplie aduyfit, the faidis Lordis and Eftaitis
of Parliament findis, decernis and declaris, that the faid Frances fmntyme Erll
Bothuile lies committit and done oppin and manifeft TrefToun aganis cm- laid
fouerane lord, in all pointis and articles contenit in the faid Summondis : And
thairfoir it was gevin for dome, be the mouth of James Neifbit dempfter of Parliament, in maner and forme as foUowis.

Doom of Foki-eiture. This Court of Parliament fchawis for law, that the
faid Frances fumtynie Ei-ll Bothuile hes committit and incurrit tlie crymes of
Treffone and Lefe-Maieftie abonewrittin, in maner at lenth contenit in the reffonis of the faidis Summondis. And thaii-foir, decernis and declaris all his guidis
moveable and vnmoveable, alfweill landis as offices and vtheris thingis quhatfumeuir belangand vnto him, to be confilcat to our fouerane lord, and to remane
perpetuallie with his hienes in propirtie, in tyme cunuuing ; and his peribun to
vnderly the pane of TrelTone, and vtter pvnifliement appointit be the lawis of this
realme. And this I gif for dome.

(Jun. 21.) — James Gray, lone to Patrik Lord Gray, ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing this day, to have anfwered ' vpoun his contemptuous reviffing and taking be force and violence of Katherene Carnegy, dochter
to Johnne Carnegy of that Ilk, furth of the hous of Robert Joufly merchand in
Edinburgh, and carying of hir away and keiping hir cajitiue aganis hir will ;
committit vpoun the tent day of Junii inftant ; and als to have exhibite and
prefentit the faid Katherene the faid day, &c. to be putt to libertie,' &c.

{Eodcm die.)— Scum James Johnnestoun of Dunfkellie knicht, ordained
to be denoimced rebel, for not appearing to have anlwered * to fie thingis as
fould haue bene inquirit of him at his cuming, tuicheing his trelTonnable bi'eking
of warde furth the Caltell of Edinbui-gh,' &c.

{Eodem die.) — George Smollett burges of Dunbartane, ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing to anfwer certain charges at the inftance of the
Provofts, bailies and community of the burghs of Glasgow and Renfrew,
in regard that the faid George had, ' vpoun fum finifter and wrang informatioun maid to his hienes, laitlie purcheft ane priuey Letter or Commifiioun vndir his hienes fubfci*ii)tioun and fignet allanerlie, without auife of Counlale, tryale,
cognitioun, or ony vthir proces preceding ; vnder cuUour quhairof, haueing affociate vnto him felff certane debollieit men and vagaboundis, he not only maifterfullie and perforce opprelTes and revis the guidis and beftiall, dething and
vtheris wairis, brocht be the Inhabitantis of the His and vthiris pairtis of the
Hielandis to the faid biuTowis, baith be fey and land ; hot takis, apprehendis and
imprefonis thair perfonis, and fumtymes perlewis thame felffis be way of deid :

vol. I. 2 P

298 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

Quhairvpoim, the cheiff perfonis and vtheris inliabitantis of the faidis Hielandis,
hes confauit lie haitrent and malice aganis the faidis complenaris, in particulair,
as gif thay wer authonris and allowai'is of this forme of doing, that thay haue
denunceit thair inimitie and ewill will to thame, takin alreddy fum of thair
nichtboviris prifonairis, intromettit with thair guidis, and avoMdt to vfe all kynd
of rigour and extremitie aganis thame ; quhairby, not onlie ar thay liklie to be
defraudit and dilapointit of that mutuall interchange quhilk hes bene had
amangis thame, to the commoun benefeit of the haill inliabitantis of the Laulandis and iii-ciintrey, hot be tyme, Ciuile weir is lyklie to follow, to the brek of
the peax, and bringing on of mony inconvenientis, giff tymous remeid be nocht
prouidit.' The King and Privy Council likewise difcharged the Commiffion, and
decerned the fame to ceafe.

(Jun. 25.) — JoHNNE LoED HAJrMiLTOUN gets a fufpenfion of Letters raifed
at the iuftance of Abacuch Bilfett,' ' becaus the faid Lord hes found cautioun,
that he fall remove, expell and hald the faid Mr Patrik Hammiltoun furth of
his landis, rowmes, pofTeffionis and bailliereis, during the tyme of his rebellioun,
conforme to the Generall Band, vndir the pane of 1000 inerkis.'

(Jun. 28.) — Thomas Kirkpatrik of Clofburne, his kin, friends, &c. exempted from the jurifdiction of ' Wardanerie and Jufticiarie of Johnne Lord Maxuell, and fra all ryfing, convening or accumpanying of him or his deputis, to ony
dayis of trew heii-eftir :" ' Becaufe it is of veritie, as it is notour, that the faid
Lord and the faid compleiiair (Clofeburn), thair kin and freindis, prefentlie
ftandis vndir terines of vnfreindfchip and inimitie ; and kyndnes and freindfchip
is gevin vp betuix thame, infafer as not onlie lies the faid Lord tane vpone him
the patrociuie and defens of all the faid complenaris vnfreindis, bot alfwa, be all
indirect meanis, hes huiitit for his lyffe, and daylie awaittis the occalioun to
bereve the faid complenair of his lyfTe ; as namelie, vpoun the thrid day of
Aprile laft, the faid Lord conuocat and affemblit togidder of his kin and freindfchip, the noumer of tua hundreth perfonis or thairby, and directit thame to the
faid complenaris landis of Rouch He, to haue difpofleft him thairfra, vpoun inteutioun alwayes, gif the faid complenair had cum to relifl thame, to haive bereft
him of his lyffe ; and fenfyne, Thomas Greir of Barjarge and Gilbert Greir of
Drum, men tennentis and feruandis to the faid Lord, Avith conuocatioun of
vtheris his freindis and feruandis, to the noumer of foiirefcoir perfonis or thairby, bodin in feir of weir, off the faid Lordis fpeciall cauling, &c. come to Bardannauch, being within the fchoit of ane hacquebute to the complenaris landis
of Rough He, and difchargeit ane grite noumer of hacquebutis and piftolettis at

' See Apr. 12, 1593.

26JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 299

him and his feruandis, and had not faillit to haue flane him, wer nocht he wes
the bettir accumpanyit for the tyme : Lykas, vpoun the laft day of Aprile, the
faid complenair haueing directit certane of his freindis and feruandis to the
burgh of Drumfreis, for findrie his effearis, the faid Lord, vpoun aduei-tifnient
thairof, directit xxiiij of his men and feruandis, qulia fei'cheit and focht the faid
coniplenaris feruandis throw all pairtis of the faid burgh, quliair thay wer accuftumat to hant and repair, floggit beddis, and had not faillit to haue flane his
feruandis, gif thay had bene apjirehendit ; and at that fame tyme thay crueUie
hurte Johnne M'Mudie, feruand to the Gudeman of Kerfe, the faid coniplenaris
coufing. In refpect quhairof, the faidis coniplenaris dar nocht ryfe, convene
nor accumpany the faid Lord, vnles thay wald niak conuocatioun of thair haill
kin and freindfchip, qnhairvpoun fum grite inconuenientis will not faill to fall
oute, without remeid be prouydit.' — Lord Maxwell, though charged, failed to
appear before the Council ; but Clofebm*n ' comperit be Roger Kirkpatrik his
bruthir.'

(Jul. 5.) — ScHiR Archibald Stirling of Keir, Matheu Colhoun his feruand, James Kinros feuar of Kippanros, and George Musfliett of Tolgarth, were
ordained to be denounced rebels, for failing to have appeared and anfwered
' twicheing the flauchter of vniq'*' Williame Sinclair of Galduadmoir, Eduard
and George Sinclairis his fonis, committit vpoun the thrid day of Junij laft.'

(Jul. 7-) — An Act anent the weiring of Hacquebutis and piftoUettis is pafled.
It is ftated that the former ordinances had been difi-egarded, ' quliairthrow vile
murthouris and frequent flauchteris lies not onlie bene committit within Kirkis
and vthiris placeis, ower aU pairtis of this realme, hot evin within the burgh of
Edinbui'gh and fuburbis thairof, eweft to his hienes Palace and place of refidence, to the grite hafaird of his awine perfone,' &c. It then ftates various
modes by which noblemen and others were drawn into ftreet brawls and ' deidlie feidis' by fwaggering and turbulent perfons, ' quliilkis wickit and vnliappy
fpirittis lykwayes ceiflis not to make and tell lefingis betuix his hienes, his nobilitie and gude fubiectis, be previe or oppin fpeichis, and fumtymes be famous
libelles and rynies difjjerfit or affixt, alwayes of myiid to faw and fofter difcord
and difleufion,' &c. Command is therefore given to the Provoft and bailies of
Edinburgh and fuburbs, and their officers ' the Capitane of his hienes Gaird,
officiaris and Archearis of the fame, and vtlieris appointit for gaird during the
tyme of this jn-efent Parliament, the Maifter of his hienes Palice, and portair of
the fame, and all thair deputis, to ferche and feik for all hacquebutis and piftolettis borne, woi'ne or fchoitt within his hienes Palice or vtheris place of refidence, or in the bm'gh of Edinburgh or fuburbis thairof, and to take and intromett with the fame, and to efcheate the fame to the behuif of the apprehendaris ;

300 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

and convoy the perfonis of the beararis, weiraris and fchuittaris to his hienes
warde and prefoun,' &c.

Deletioun of Wiixiame GoTiDOUN of Auchindore furth of the
Summondis of Fo\rf(dtoi(r.

(Jul. 21.) — Comperit perfonallie, Mr Jolinne Skene, aduocatt to our Ibuerane
lord, and producit ane writting fubfcrjaiit be his Maiellie ;' oiF the quhilk the
tennour followis.

'Rex,
' Mr Dauiil IVrGill and Mi- Jolinne Skene, our ordiner Aduocattis, We greit 50W vveill : Forfamekle
as We vndpiftand, be veray credible narration maid to ws, that Williame Gordoun of Aucliindore is
altogidder innocent of the crynies ft'or the quhilkis he is atteichit to be foirfalt, in this our Parliament,
contenit in the Summondis of Treaffone direct furth aganis him and certane vtheris thairanent :
Quhairfoir, it is oure will, and We expreflie command 50W and ather of jow, that with all guidlie diligence ye obliterat and deleit the faid Williame Gordoun, name and furename, with his ftyle, furth of
the faidis Summondis and executionis thairof, I'ua that na kynd of procefs be led aganis him at the
faid Parliament, for ony cryme contenit tliairin. And tliir prefentis falbe fufficient warrand to 30W.
Subfcriuit with our hand at Haliruidhous, the xvj day of Julij, and of our regnne the xxvj jeir, 1593.

' Sic fubfcribitur, JAMES R.'

According to the quhilk writting, and for obedience of the famyn, the faid
Mr Jolinne Skene as aduocat to our fouerane lord, and in his hienes prefence
and eftattis foirfaidis, defyrit the Clerk of regifter and his depuittis to deleit the
faid Williame Gordoun furth of the Summondis of TrefTone and Lele-maieftie perlewit be his hienes aganis the faid Williame Gordoun of Auchindore and certain
his complices, ffor the alleagit airt, i)airt, counfaill and affiftance, in the BiRNING of the Houssis aud Place of DuMybiisseU, committit vpoun the I'evint day
of Februar PV Ixxxxj yeris, and cniell Murfhui-'uig aud Slaying o/" James,
Erll of Murray thairin : Qidia at command of his hienes lettre, prefentlie in
jugement, obliterat and delitit the faid Williame Gordoun of Auchindoris name,
furname and ftile, furth of the bodie of the laid Summondis of Treflbne and
executionis tliairof. Quhair\poun Mr Jolinne Demfter, aduocat, in name and
behalf of the faid Williame Gordoun, alkit inflrumentis.

(Jul. 21.) — The quhilk day, in prefence of the Kingis Maieftie and Eftaites of
this prefent Parliament," comperit Jolinne Leflie of Balquhane, and producit the
offeris vnderwrittin, for the pairt of Williame Erll of Angus, George Erll of
Huntlie, Francis Erll of ErroU, Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun, kny', and
Schir James Chifliolme of Dimdurne, knicht, perfonis dilatit and fulpectit of the
crymes of Lefemajeltie ; off the quhilkis offeris, the tennoui* followis.

' See Acta Pari. a.d. 1593, fol. 15, &c. ; see also March 9, 1592-3. ' Ibid.

26Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 301

Offerris presentit to the E.stait'm, he the Laird of Balquhane, in name of
the Erllis 6i/" Angus, Huntlie and Erroll, and vtheris.

In the ffirft, flforfamekle as the faidis perfonis ar Indytit and accufit of Lefemajeftie, for confulting and concluding for the inbringing of ftrangearis and
fubuerfioun of the Religioun, at lenth contenit in J)air Summondis of Foirfaltrie, gif it will pleis 30111- Maieftie and Eftaitis, to felect and cheis certane
ather of 30ur Maiefties Counfaill or Parliament, to intreat and coinmoun, ather
with the faidis perfonis thame lelffis or thair freindis, thay fall nocht onlie declair and niak notifiit thair innocence, and fchaw thair guid will and obedience to 3our Maieftie and cuntrie ; bot alfo, thay neuir meanit nor attemptit, nather directlie nor indirectlie, contrair 30ur Maiefties perfoune, ftait of Jje
cunti-ie, nor Religioim publictlie proffeffit thairintill. Item, efter the triall
of J)air innocence, to tak away all occafioun of fufpitioune, the faidis perfonis
offeris for continwance of thair dewtifuU feruice vnto 30ur Maieftie in tyme
cvming, that thay fall neuir traffique nor haue intelligence with ony forreyne
natioun or Prince, in hurt or jireiudice of 30ur Maiefties perfoun, eftait, commoun Weill and Religioune, bot to follow 30ur Maieftie in all tyme cuming, as
30ur maift obedient and humble fubiectis, aganis quhatfumeuir 3our Maiefties
vnfreindis : And fecuritie to be maid in fie fufficient forme as falbe tliocht expedient. Item, 3our Maieftie being fatisfiit, for removing of all kynd of fldander
and euile confauit opinioune be the Kirk aganis the faidis perfonis, thay ar content, efter commoning had with certane Miniftrie, to be depute be your Maieftie
and Kii'k to that effect, incace Jjai, efter reffoning, may be throuchlie relFoluit,
nocht onlie to fatisfie the Kirk for ony flclander, bot alfo concerning the haill
heidis and Articles of Religiovme ; vtherwayis, gif jjai can nocht be throuchlie refoluit, thay are content to depairt furth of the countrie, thair to remane during
30U1' Maiefties plefour, or ay and quliill thay fatisfie the Kirk in the premiffis :
And to that effect, and incaife foirfaid, maift humbly cravis 30ur Maiefties licence.
And in the meantyme, for 3our Maieftie and Kirkis better fatisfactioune, the faidis
perfonis fall remove out of thair cumpany all fufpect perfonis of Religioun.

Quhilkis being red, hard and conliderit be J)e faidis Eftaitis, and thairwith
being adwyfit, the foirfaidis Eftaitis, for thair advife to his Maieftie thairanent,
fEndis it melt and expedient, incace the faidis noble men and vtheris foirfaidis,
conforme nocht thame felffis vnto his Maieftie and his lawis, prefentlie eftablifchit within this cuntrie, anent the Religioun profefTit within the fame, that
his hienes grant thame Licence, vpoun thair humble fute, to be maid to that effect, to pas furth of the cuntrie, vpoun fie conditionis, and to fie vnfufpect places,
as his hienes and his Counfaill fall prefcriue and appoint : And incaife thay will
nather conforme thame felffis, as faid is, vnto his hienes and to the Religioun pre302 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

fentlie profeffit, nather yit will pas furth of the countrie, conforme to the directionis to be gevin to tharae ; that his Maieftie and his faid Counfaill tak ordour
thairwith, as thay think maift meit for quieting of the cuntrie and Eftait of ReUgioun. And in the meantyme, that thai remane vnder the Proces and Summondis of Foirfaltonr, execut aganis thame in this prefent Parliament, quhill
furder iirobatioun may be had and gottin of the crymes of Treffone and Lefemajeftie libellit aganis thame thairintill.'

(Jul. 26.) — An Act is paffed ' in fauouris of the Erll Bothuill and his
comjjliceis,' viz. Dame Margaret Douglas Countefle of Bothuill/ James Douglas
of Spott, &c. Proclamation is ordered to be made, charging ' all his hienes
liegis, that nane of thame tak vpoun hand to fl<landei*, miuunoiu', reproche or
bakbyte the perfonis abouewrittin or thair pairt-takaris, or onywayes moleft or
perfew thame, in bodyis or guidis, vpoun quhatfumeuir caus, eullour or cryme
bigane.' And that Letters be directed to relax them from the procefs of horn.
(Aug. 8.) — Proclamation, relative to ' ane fchip of Preftoun laitlie arryvit
in this Firth, cum furth of England, quhairin ar fmdrie perfonis and guidis fufpect to be infectit with the peft.' Tlie ' maifteris, fldpparis, marinaris,' &c. are
charged ' to addrelTe thame felffis with the faid fchip and guidis being thairin
to Sanct Colmis Inche, and thair loife handle,' and remane with the fame fchip
and guidis, vnto the tyme pruiff and tryale be had, gifF thay be foule or cleaue
of tliis difeafe,' &c. Charge is likewife given to the liegis, to prevent communication with the fliip.

(Sep. 11.) — ' The Cheiffis and Principallis of the Brancheis of
Clannis' are charged ' to enter plegeis, for keiping of guid reule in tyme
cuming ; Auder the pane of executioun of the faidis plegeis to the death, in caife
of tranfgreffiouu and not redi-es maid be the perfonis ofTendaris, for quhome the
faidis plegeis lyis,' &c.

{Eoclem die.) — A Proclamation, convening ' the Ei-llis, Lordis, &c. weill
bodin in feir of weir, with tuentie da}ds victuall and prouifioun, to meit his
hienes at Peblis, vpoun the firft day of Nouember nixtocum,' for ' invafioun of
the cuntreyis eweft the Bordouris, perturbaris of the commoun quietnes of
the realme ; vndir the jiane of tinfall of lyfie, landis and guidis.'

{Eodem die.) — A Proclamation, ' to meit Ludouik Duke of Lennox, Erll

' Oct. 30, (apiid Lynli/t/iffoti'.) — A Commission is granted to Jolin Lord TLirlstane, Chancellor,
the Earls of Mariscliall, Mar, Montrose and Rothes, &c. ' to lieir and confider the Petitionis of the
Erllis of Angus, Huntlie and Errole,' &c. Their decision was declared to be final. Acta Pari , fol.
44'. — Jan. 18, 1.593-4. They are declared to have amitted the benefit of the Act of Abolition, and that

they be forthwith put to trial. Acta Pari. fol. 53 Mail 20, 1394'. The Advocates produced a

Summons of Treason, but ' nane of thame comperit.' Acta Pari. fol. 35. And again on ]May 30.
See farther proceedings, Jun. 8, 1594. ' See her Trial for the rest of the names, May 4, 1392.

' And there unship their rudder and cast anchor.

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 303

Demelie, Lord Tarboltoun, Methven and Aubigny his hienes Lieutennent, at
Striuiling, on Nov. 1, for invafiioun, perfute and pvnifliement of the rebellious
and contemptuus perfonis, Inhabitantis of the Hiei-andis and cuntreyis adjacent thairto.' In terms of the former Proclamation.

(Sep. 12.) — A Proclamation to the Juftices and Commiffioners appointed
by Parliament, &c. ' to proceid and miniHer juftice vpoun all ftrang and idill
Beggaris, vagaboundis, thevis and fornaris, or thair reffettaris and pairt-takaris
in thair thifteous and wicked deidis ; and being convict, to pvnilhe thame prefentlie to the death, or vtherwayes, as thay fall find cans worthie,' &c.

(Oct. 9-) — A Proclamation to meet his Majefty at Lauder, on Friday next,
Oct. 12. It proceeds on the narrative, that ' the Kingis Maieftie being weareit
with the mony and diuers complaintis of his hienes peceable and gude fubjectis,
herreit, wrakkit and oppreffit be thevis, brokin men, and vtheris ditbrdourit
perfonis, Inhabitantis of the Bordouris of this realme, quhilkis daylie
committis ftouthis, reifRs, flauchteris of trew men, in the defens of thair awne
guidis, and findrie vtheris crymes and enormiteis maift vnnaturall ; not onlie
within the bowellis of this realme, hot als within the nichtbour cuntrey of England,' is determined to ' reprefs the infolence of the faidis difordourit perfonis,
chieflie now, befoir the winter fealbun approche, and the nichts grow lang.'

(Oct. 11.) — Letters appointed to charge Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill,
James Douglas fumtyme of Spott, and Mr Johnne Coluill fumtyme of Strarudie,
to appear before the King and Council, on Oct. xxv, ' to anfuer to fic thingis as
falbe inquirit of thame, concerning maift Heicli Treflbun comniittit be thame
aganis his Maiefteis perfone and eilate ; and to vnderly fic ordour as falbe takin
in that behalff,' under the pain of rebellion, &c.

(Oct. 25.) — The Earl of Bothwell, Douglas of Spott and Mr Johnne
Coluill, ordained to be denounced rebels for not appearing, &c.

(Oct. .) — Proclamation that as the Earls of Angus, Huntley and
Errol, ' be diuerfe thair lettres and vtherwife, hes maift humelie and eirniftlie
craved ane Tryale,' for thair ' trefTonnable Confpiracie,' committed in the month
of January laft ; and in order to prevent difturbances in the kingdom, * in refpect of thair gritnes and the place thay occupy,' that ' his gude fubiectis forbeir to mak conuocatioxm or gaddering in quhatfumeuir pairtis of the realme, be
the perfwafioun or finifter informatioun of ony perfonis ; hot be in reddynes to
repair to his hienes felff, as thay falbe aduertift be his awne Proclamatioun or
Miffiue Letteris, and na vthirwayes : And that thay diUblue thair forceis, gif ony
be akeddy conuocat, and depairt hame to thair duelling houflis, except fic perfonis as ar fpecialie requirit be his awne Letteris, to be prefentit at the Conventioun of the Nobility and Eftates now at Lynlythgow,' &c.

304 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593.

(Oct. 31, apnd Lynlythgoiv.) — A Commission granted to Johnne Lord Thirlftane Chancellair, George Erll Marilliaell, Johnne Erll of Mar, Johnne Erll of
Montrois, Andro Erll of Rothes and Alexander Lord Levingftonn, James Scott
of Balveiy, Johnne Murray of Tullibairdin, Alexander Bruce of Airth, knychtis,
and George Lauder of Bafi, "^^^illiame Scott of Abbotifliall and M' Dauid Carnegy of Culluthy, Alexander Hume of North Beruik Proueft and Clemett Cor,
Commidioners of Edinburgh, with the Commiffionaris of Dundee, Striuiling,
Lynlythgw and Coujjar, with the officiaris of Eftate that fall happin to be prefent for the tyme, &c. ; and that Maifteris Dauid Lindfay, Robert Bruce, Patrik
Galloway, James Carmichaell, Robert PoUok and Johnne Duncanfoun, Minilteris, or fic of thame as beis prefent, haue accefs and avidience quhen thay haue
ony thing, or fal happin to be callit vpoun for conference ; to heir and coufidder
the Petitionis of the Erllis of Angus, Huntlie and Erole.

{Eodem die.) — Puoclamation ' that nane tak vpoun hand to invade, trouble or perfew the faidis Erllis and vthiris, feikaris of the faid Tryale, in bodyis
or guidis, during the tyme of the fame tryale ; vndir all hieft pane, charge and
ofTens,' &c.

(Nov. 6, ajmd Hidiriddhoiis.) — Proclamation ' that nane repair to Edinburgh hot fic as ar writtin for.' A Convention had been called by the Eftates
at Linlithgow ' to findrie noblemen, baronis and vtheris to convene within the
burgh of Edinburgh, vpoun the tuelft day of Nouember inftant, and thair to treate,
conlult, deliberat and conclude vjioun findrie materis ; fpecialie, twicheing the
fuirtie of the Eflate of Religioun and profelfouris thairof, and fuirtie to be tane
of all perfonis fi^ifpectit or dilaitit to be adverfaris of the fame, or trublaris of the
quietnes of the cuntrie ; or in cais of thair difibbediens and contempt, how thay
fall be i)erlewit or reprelTit,' &c.

(Nov. 26.) — ' Act of AbolitkjXJN,' that Godis trew Religioun publictlie
preichett and be law efl:abliflit in the firft yeir of his hienes reignne, fall only
be profefiit and exercifit be all his Maiefteis lieges, &c.

(Dec. 22.) — A C(.)MMISSion granted to ' Wili.iame Loi;d Hf.ri is, Schir
Johnne Gordoun of Lochinvar, Alexander Steuart of Garleis, James Douglas of
Dnunlanrig, Thomas M'^Clellane of Bombie, Thomas Kirkpatrik of Clofeburne,
Williame Greirfoun of Lag, Alexander Jardane of Aijilgirth, Johnne Charterhous of Amysfeild and Charlis Murray of Cokpule, or to ony feviii, fyve or
thrie of thame coniunctlie, his hienes full pouer, fpeciall command and charge,
to convene, treate and confult vpoun fic thingis as may tend to the obfervatioun
of the peax and amitie with England ; eflabliffing and making of quietnes and
gude reule, within the boundis of the West Marche ; refilling and repreffing
of the diflurbaris thairof; and committaris of thift, reffett of thift, reifF, niur27JAC.VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 305

thour, flauchter, fFyre-rafmg or vtheris oppreffionis and enormities ; quhairthrow
the trew and peceable fubjectis may be preferuit and defendit from wrak and
heirfchip : And to that effect, to convocat his hienes liegis within the boundis of
the faid Marche, in amies, for perfute or defens, alfoft as neid beis ; vndir the
pane of tinfale of lyffe, landis and guidis, &c. And for the bettir furtherance
of the premifles, Juftice Courte or Courtis, within the Tolbuith of Driunfreis, or
ony vthir place, within the boundis of the faid ^Veft Marche, to fett, begin, afferme, hald and continew. The faid Commiffioun qidiill the fyftene day of
Februair nixtocum, and forder ay and quliill the fame be difchargeit, to indure.'
— This Commiffion was granted on account of ' the prefent troublit ftate of the
Bordouris, fpeciallie in the Weft Marche thairof, foiranent England, be occafioun
of the treffounable rebellioun of Schir James Johnnestoun of Dunfkellie
knicht and his compliceis ; quha, eftir impvnitie, and his hienes grace and pardoun reflauit, for findi-ie treffounable and wicked deidis committit be him and
the thevis of his name, and vtheris, thair affiftaris ; at laft the faid Schir James
tressounaUie hrak umrde furth of the Casfell of Edinburgh, and be the faidis
wicked thevis of his name and vthiris, maift crewellie and barbarouflie 3Iurthourit the trew men, induellaris in the Sanquhair, in the defens and faulftie of
thair awne guidis ; continewing ftill in his treffounable deidis, as Birning of the
Parroche-Kirle of Lochmabene, and flauchter of fum of his Maiefteis fubiectis
fend hither be Johnne Lord Maxwell, his hienes Wardane and Juftice, for
the furthfetting of his Maiefteis authoritie : And at laft, \'poun the faxt day of
December inftant, cuming with conuocatioim of his hienes liegis, and diuers
Engliflnnen, treffounablie broclit within this reabne, armed, in plane lioftilitie
aganis the faid vmq'" Lord Wardane and Juftice, he beiring our fouerane lordis
authoritie for the tyme, vmbefett, invadit, perfewit and maift cruellie and outragiouflie slew him and sindrie Gentilmen of his name, and vtheris his Maiefties fubiectis ; drownit, lamyt, dememberit and tuke'a grite nowmer of prifonaris,
reft and fpuilzeit thair horffis, armour, purfRs, money and vtheris guidis ; and
ftill continewis in thair rage, crueltie, heirfchip and waifting of the cuntrey ; in
proude contempt of his hienes authoritie and Lawis.'

(Dec. 27.) — Alexander Lord Spynie ordained to be denounced rebel, for
failing to appear befoi'e the King and Council to have anfwered ' to fic thingis
as fould haue beene inquirit of him at his cuming, tuicheing certane treffounable
practizeis and Confpiraceis deuifit and attemptit aganis his Maiefteis perfone
and eftate.'

{Eod.em die.) — Archibald Wacchop appeirand of Nudrie and Gilbert
Pennycuik to be denounced rebels, for the fame reafon as abo^'e.

(Jan. 9, 1593-4, ajyud Edinburgh.) — Hercules Scott bruthir germane to
VOL. I. 2 Q

306 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1593-4.

Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill, and Niniane Chirnesyde, — Sym ArmeSTEANG y' of Quhithauch, — Josias Steuart bruthir germane to Andre Lord
Vchiltrie, — and M' Thomas Cranstoun apperand of Mureiftoini, are feverally
ordained to be denounced rebels, for not appearing to anfwer concerning certain
treafonable jJractices and Confpiracies, deviled and enterprifed againft his Majefty's perfon and eftate.

(Jan. 18.) — ' Act of the taxatioqn of ane liundreth thoufand pundis,' —

' the Quene his darreft bedfellow now lliortlie approcheing to the tyme of hir

birth, to the conforte alfweill of his hienes as of all his trew and faithfull fubiectis.'

{Eoclem die.) — ' Act declairing the Eullis of Angus, Huntlie and ErROi.E to haue amittit the benefeit of the Act of Abolitioun.'

(Jan. 25.) — ' Act of materis referrit to the Secreit Counl'aill.' — ' That thai firft
begin and tak ordour anent the Papistis Lordis, Jefuitis, Seniinarie Pi*eiftis
and excomnmnicat perfonis, and thair relTettaris ; thaireftii', with Frances
fumtyme Erll Bothuill, his coniijlices and thair reflettaris ; the Slaiichter
of his hienes Wardane of the West Marche ; the Slauchter of the twa
MixiSTERis; and all vtheris Slauchteris, Murthouris, Deforceing and dinging
of OfRceris of armes, in execution of thair officeis ; cruell Oppreffionis, and vtheris
odious crymes,' &c.

(Jan. 26.) — Robert Steuart and Williame Steuart callit of Innermeith,
and "Williame Steuart of Tulliemett, and Robert Creichtoun of Cluny,
were ordained to be denounced rebels, for not appearing to have ant'wered concerning certain treafonable practices and Confpiracies, &c.

{Eodem die.) — Schir Johxne Mei,uill of Carnbie ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing to have anfwered a charge, at the inftance of the Tenants of his Majefty's proper lands of Kingfljarns ; that he, having begun to
erect a mill on the faid lands, the tenants made ' lauchfuU interruptioun to him ;
for the quhilk he hes conlauit ane deidlie haitrent and malice aganis thame,
daylie invading and perfewing thame, &c. ; as namelie, vjioun the faxt day of
October laft, Thomas Fermour, ane of the faidis tennentis, being cumand in
peccable and quiet maner fra the citie of Sanctandrois to his awne houfe, wes
vmbefett in the hie way betuix the Grenelaw and Poldulf be the faid Schir
Johnne, James Meluille and Robert Betoun his fervandis, quha being miffilit,
{disguised, or masked,) bodin and furneift with hacquebutis, piftolettis, fwerdis
and vtheris wapones invafive, &c. and thair, maift cruellie liurte and woundit the
faid Thomas in diueris pairtis of his jjodie, as namelie, the faid Laird ilruke him
with ane piftoUett vpoun the heid and feld him ; quhairthrow he is almaift blindit of his left ee ; and left him thair for deid,' &c.

{Eodem (//e.)— Robert BuchanNane of Spittell, Mungo B. in Tullichewne,

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 307

and eight other Buchannanes, ordained to be denounced rebels, for not relieving
George B. of that Ilk, of a Decreet Arbitral, pronounced by Ludovick Didie of
Lennox, upon a Submiffion entered into by the Laird of B., taking burden upon
him for his friends, on the one part, and Allane (Awlay) M'Caula of Ardiucaple
and his friends, on the other part ; ' be the quhilk Decrete, the faid George lies
bene decernit to mak payment to the faid Allane, and vtheris his friendis, of a
certane fowme of money, for fum violence done, and attemptit aganis thame be
the faid George freindis.'

(Jan. 31.) — William Erll of Angus, George Erll of Huntlie,
Frances Erll of Errole and Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun,
kn', charged ' to pas and enter thadr perfonis in warde, within the feuerall wardis
following,' ^'iz., Angus, within the Caftle of Blacknefs ; Huntlie, within the Caftle of Dunbartane ; Errole, within the Caftle of Edinburgh ; and Sir Patrick,
within the Caftle of Thomptalloun ; ' thairin to remane, vpoun thair awne expenfles, ay and qidiill thay be tryit, foule or clene, of the faidis crymes ;' under
tlie pain of Treafon.

(Feb. 14.) — The King and Council Annul, revoke and difcharge ' all and
quhatfumeuir CoMMissoNis of Lieutennandrie and Justiciakie, j^receiding the dait heirof.' This Act proceeds on the narrative, that ' a grite nowmer'
of fuch Commiflions had been ' paft and purcheft be findrie noblemen, baronis
and vtheris, within thir lait yeiris ; quhilkis, for the maift pairte, wer vfit ayther for thair awne particulair pi'offeitt, to the depaupering of honeft men, his
hienes gude fubiectis, na commoditie foUowand to his Maieftie ; to acquite fum
perfonis of crymes, quhairof thay wer gilty, and deferuit pvnilliment ; or to be
revengeit of vtheris, aganis quhome thay profeflit euill will and enimitie ; as vnbajjpie experience, be the monyfauld ftauchteris, and treflbnable ffyre-rafingis
that lies bene committit within thir few yeiris, euidentlie declairit.' Charges
are ordered to be given, that thenceforward ' nane of thame tak vpoun hand to
vfe or execute the fame Commiffionis, or to mak convocatioun of his hienes liegis,
vnder the pane of TrefToun.'

(Feb. 26, apud StrimUng.) — Proclamation againft Alexander Lord
Spynie, Robkut Creichtoun of Cluny, &c. charging the lieges, that none of
them refet, fupply nor intercommune with them, nor furnifli them with meat,
drink, houfe or ' harbory ;' and that they affift the Sheriffs, &c. in apprehending them ; under the pain of being held ' as arte and pairt-takeris with the faidis
declairit tratouris.'

(Mar. 8 ) — Act againft the Earls of Angus, Huntlie and Errol, ordaining them ' to be repute, haldin and perfewet as tratoiuis ; and the proces
and dome of ffoirfaltour to be led aganis thame, conforme to the lawis of this

308 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

realme, and Actis of Parliament ;' — they having failed to enter thair perfons in
ward, as lawfully charged.

(Mar. 14.) — ' Mr James Betoun of Creich, keipar of his hienes Castell
and Palice of Falkland, charged to rander and deliuer the fame, with the
plenneffing, guidis and geir being thairin, pertening to his Maiefteis felfF, vpoun
Inventair, to the officeris executouris of the Letteris, within xxiiij houris ;' and
failing, to denounce him rebel : And alio to charge Dauid Murray, faderbruthir to M. of Balvaird, in like manner, to remove furth of the Park

and Wood of Falkland : This is done in confequence of ' his hienes darrefl bedfallow the Queue, now laitlie preiffing and requiring his hienes with the accomplillieing ' of his promife, that his haill conjunct-fee and terce-leving, pertening to her within the lordlchip of FyfFe, fould be putt in hir awne poffeffioun.'
(Mar. 27, 1594, apud Edinhurgh.) — A Cojimission, granted to ' Alexander Loud Hwme, Wardane of the Eift Marche ; Schir Robeut Keu, appeirand of Cesfurde, Wardane depute of the Middle Marche ; and Schir Walter
Scot of Branxholme, kn' ; eueryane of thame within thair awne bouudis and
jurifdictioun,' to convocate the lieges, ' alfwele to burgh as to land, regalitie as
ryaltie, on horle and fute, in weirlyke maner.' This is done, in confequence of
the King and Council ' heiring of the treirounable intentioun of Frances fumtyme Erll Bo thuile, and vtheris his complices, his hienes declairit tratouris,
be quhome certane cumpanyis and bandis of wageit men of weir, on horfe and
fute, are rafit of lait ; for executing, as appeiris, of findrie trelfounable practizeis
and Confpiraceis,' &c. And, ' in cais thay or any of thame flee to houffis or
flrenthis, with power, &c., to direct their preceptis and chargeis for rendei'ing of
the faidis houflis, &c., vnder the panes of ti'effoun and hoirning ; the perfonis
difobeyand, to cans denunce to the home ; and thaireftir to AlTege the faidis
houffis, raife fyre and vfe all kynd of force and weirlyke ingyne, that can be had
for wynning and recouerie thairof,' &c. All i^erfons betwixt fixty and fixteen
years of age, are charged ' to ryl'e, concur, fortifie and affift' the Commiffioners.
(Mar. 29.) — ProclamatkjN, charging all the lieges within the age of fixty
and fixteen, dwelling within the bounds of Edinburgh, Haddington and Linlith-
■ gow, ' alfweill t(j burgh as to land,' &c., to repair to Edinburgh, ' vpoun Mononday nixt, the firft of Aprile nixt to cum, weill bodin in feir of weir, fpeciallie
with jakkis, fl:eilbonnetis, fpeiris, or lang gwnis, with prouilioun for the fpace
of aucht dayis eftir thair cuming ; and to remane and attend vpoun his Maieftie,
or vthirwayes to pas forward, as they falbe commandit' ; ' for preventing, withfl;anding and repreffing of the proude and temerarious attemptatis of the faidis
declairit traitouris (Bothwell, &c.) and vnuatui'all liibiectis, and perfute of
thame as occafioun falbe offerit.'

27Jac. VI, CRIMINAL TRIALS. 309

(Mar. 31.) — The King and Council, underftanding that ' Johnne Erll of
Athoill, accumpanyed with his freindis and feruandis, and vtheris his Maiefteis liegis, perfwadit be him vpoun funi coUourit pretens, ar to repair in weirlyke manner with all coniienient expeditioun, to the South pairtis of this realme,
to joyne in cumpany and actioun with Frances lumtyme Erll Bothwill,' &c. —
Therefore, Letters are ordained to be directed, charging him ' to diflblue his
forceis and returne hame to his awne duelling place, and thair remane and contene him felfT in quietnes, vndir his Maiefteis obediens.' The lieges who had
joined with him, are charged to ' i>as hame to thair awne duelling houffis, within xxiiij houris.' A free Pardon and Remiffion granted to thofe obeying —
' thame that refuiffis to accei)t his hienes grace and fauour, now quhen it is ofFerit, and dois in the conti'air heirof, falbe alfwa perfewit as tratoiu'is and Confpiratouris aganis his Maieftie and his authoritie, with the lyke rigour and extremitie, without fauour.'

(Ai)r. 2.) — Proclamation for the ' Erllis, lordis, &c., of the Sherefdome of
Perth and Steuartreis of Stratharne and Menteith,' &c., that they, ' weill bodin
in feir of weir, with aucht dayis victuallis, addres thame felffis to meitt his
Maieftie, his Lieutennent, or vtheris haueand his hienes pouer and Comuiiffioun,
at the burgh of Stirling, vijone the fyft day of Aj^rile inftant, for perfute and
withftanding of the faidis declairit tratouz'is,' &c.

(Apr. 9.) — Proclamation to pass to the North, along with ' his hienes in
propir perfoun, for perfute, refifting and rejirefling of the cheiff authouris of the
treffounable Confpiraceis diuifit and maid aganis God, his treu Religioun, jirefentlie profeffit,' &c. The ' Erllis, baronis,' &c. of the flieriffdoms of Fife, Kinrofs, Perth be-north the water of Erne, Forfar, Kincardine, to meet at Dundee on
29th April ; Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Fores, Nairn, Invernefs and Cromarty, to
meet at Aberdeen on 2d May ; ' alfweill regalitie as ryaltie, togidder Avith the inhabitantis of biuTowis, weill bodin in feir of weir, with xxx dayis iwouifioun,' &c.

(Apr.l3, apud Brunt-Iland.) — Proclamation againft 'Capitane George
Strang, Capitane Robert Meluill, Mr Jerome Lindfay, fone to Mr Dauid L.
Minifter, Mr Johnne Murray, Dauid Orme of Mugdrum, Mr Allane Orme and

Orme his bruthir, Robert Douglas, fone uaturall to Schir George D.,

and Patrik Clapene, bruthir to the Laird of Carflogy, his Maiefteis vnnaturall
and dilbbedient fubiectis, fugitiue fra his hienes lawis, for thair trefTouuable affifting, intercommuning, &c., with Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill, and
vtheris his compliceis, his Maiefteis declairit traitouris, in thair treflbunable and
wicked deidis ; and fum of thame for rafmg bandis of men of weir ; and vtheris
for reflauing of wageis and entering vnder the charge and commandiment of
thame and vthiris Capitanes and Commandaris, for feruing of the faidis tra310 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

touris aganis his Maieftie,' &c. The lieges are therefore difcharged from furnifliing them with ' meit, houfe nor harbory/ &c.

{Eodem die.) — The Magiftrates of the ' Townis off the coift-fyde,' find caution
to appear before the King and Council, ' to anluer to fie thingis as falbe inquirit
of thame. concerning thair affiftance, arte, pairt-taking, intercommoning or haueing intelligence with FraXCES lumtyme Eull Bothuii,l,' &c., viz. ' The
Magiftrates of KiRKALDY, luider the pane of 2000 merkis ; KiNGHcniNE, 1000
merkis ; Dysart, 2000 pmidis ; Pittinweyme, 1000 merkis ; Carkaill,
500 pundis; Sanct Androis, 2000 merkis ; Axstruther, 1000 pundis ; and
CouPAiR, 500 merkis.

(Apr. 23, apiid Edinhurgh.) — Thomas Mertoun of Cammo, and Williame M.
younger of Cammo, become fecurity for Henry Lord Sinclair, that he, his
kin, tenants, &c., fliall oblerve peace, quietuefs and good rule in the country ;
and in no wife invade, trouble nor purfue Dauid Wemys of that Ilk, Johnne his
fon, their kin, tenants, &c. ; under the pain of 10,000 merks.

(Apr. 26.) — Johnne Erll of Athoill to be denounced rebel, for not appearing to anfwer concerning his dealing and practizing with Bothwell, &c.

(Apr. 29.) — Proclamation, for the lieges to be in readinefs to repair to his
Majefty, upon fix days' warning.

(May 2.) — Anuro Lord Steuart of Vchiltrie ordained to be denounced
rebel, for not ajipearing to anfwer ' tuicheing his treflbunable attemptattis, confpirit, practizit and putt in executioun aganis his Maiefteis perfone and efl;ate.'

Cvrasonalilt) Conspiiins anti Crnflirluug: atjainst tije -pvottstant
ItUliflion, ^^c— ' CIjc ^panislj BlauRs/

(Jim. 8.) — Williame Erll of Angus, George Eull of Huntlie,
FjiANCFs Erll of Erroi.l and Schir Patrik Gordoun
of Auchindoun, kn'.^
The quhilk day, Mr Dauid WG\\\ of Cranftoun-Riddell and I\Ir Johnne
Skene, aduocattis to our Ibuerane lord, producit, in prefence of the Kingis Maieftie and Eftaitis, lyk as thay did djaierfe tymes ofbefoir, the Summondis of
Trefibne, rafit and perfewit at the inftance of our faid fouerane lord and his
hienes Juftice, aganis the I'aidis Williame Erll of Angus, George Erll of Huntlie,
Frances Erll of Erroll and Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun knicht ; quhairby thay wer fummond to haue comperit befoir oiu- faid fouerane lord, and his
hienes Juftice, the xviij day of ]\Iaij laftbypaft, M'ith continwatioun of dayes, to
haue anfuerit to the crymes and pointis of Treflbne and Lefemajeftie contenit
in the faidis fummondis : The quhilk fummondis, reflbnis and cauffis thairin
- - 'See Acta Pari. 1592-3, p. 283.

27JAC.VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 311

contenit, being firft red, in prefens of the Kingis Maieftie, and in prefens of the
Lordis of Articles, thay fand the fame funimondis relevant. And tliaireftir, this
inftant day, the fame Summondis of Trelfone being red in prefens of the Kingis
Maieftie and haill Eftaitis ; and the faidis thre Erllis and Laird of Auchindoun
being thryfe callit at tlie Tolbuith windo, and nane of thame comperand ; the
faidis haill Eftaitis ffand the faidis fmnmondis relevant ; and thairfoir, thay admittit the fame to the faidis aduocattis probatioiin. And immediatlie tliaireftir,
the faidis aduocattis, for preving of the faidis Svmimondis of Treflbne aganis the
faidis [Erllis] and Lard of Auchindoun, producit, in prefence of the Kingis
Maieftie and haill Eftaitis, the Pkobationis following ; lyk as, thay in-oducit
the famyn probationis of befoir to the faidis Lordis of Articles, vpoun the firft day
of the moneth of Junij inftant. In the first, thai producit Aucht Blankis,
in jjaper ; tua thairof fubfcryuit be the faid Erll of Angus allanerlie ; vther tua
be the laid Erll of Huntlie allanerlie ; vther tua fubfcr}T.iit be the laid Erll of
Erroll allanerlie ; and vther tua be the faidis thre Erllis and Laird of Auchindoun ; all fend to Spayne. Quhilkis blankis hes na defignatioun on the bak, nor
declaratioun of the caufes for the quhilk thai wer fend, hot blank and quheit
paper on baith the fydis, except the faid fubfcriptionis. — Item, thai produce
dyuerfe and findrie feillis of the faidis Erllis, imprentit in paper, lend with Mr
George Ker to Sj^ayne ; to the effect vtheris feillis miclit be maid thair conforme
to the famyn, to feill the faidis blankis, efter thai I'uld be fillit. Thay produce
dyuerfe and findrie Depofitiouis of Mr George Ker, fubfcryuit with his awin
hand ; with ane Mifliue Lettre, writtin and fubfcryuit be him, vncompellit or
coactit, hot of his awin frie will to the Kingis Maieftie ; be the quhilk Uepofitionis and Lettre, the haill treflbnable Trafficquing aganis the Religioun, the
King, his eftait and realme, is willinglie confeffit and planelie declarit ; and the
treffonabill end and effect for the quhilk the faidis blanliis and feillis wer fend,
is maid manifeft, viz. that thai wer fend to be fillit vp be the Counfaill of
Spayne, and Mr Williame Creichtoun Jefuite, with fic forme and fecuritie as
thai fuld deuyfe, anent the fending in Scotland of monie, for lifting of men of
weir and of Threttie Thowfand Span3eardis to cum in this cuntrie, and land in
the waft pairtis thairof; quhairof Fyve Thoufand fuld haiie remanit in this
cuntrie, and beand couiunct'with the faidis Erllis, fuld alter the Religioun and
eftait of this cuntrie. — Itejni, for preving the premilTes, thay produce certane
De])ofitionis, fubfcryuit be vmq''' Dauid Grahame of Fintrie ; conforme in all
thingis to the Depofitiounis of the faid Mr George Ker. — Iteji, thai produce
the Dome of Foirfaltour gevin and pronuncit aganis the faid vmq'^ Lard of
Fintrie, contenand his Depofitiounis and Dittay ; quhilkis ar conforme in all
pointis to the faid firft reffone of the fummondis, and expreflie verrifies and pre312 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

vis the famyn : The quhilkis TrefTone the faid Laird of Fintrie confeffit in jugement, and neuir revoikit the fame, hot 3eid (went) to the death thairwith, and
wes juftifiet and execute thairfoir. — Item, thay produce findrie Lettres writtin
be Mr James Gordoun, vnder ane fen3eit name of James Cryftefoun : And ficlyk, ane Lettre writtin be Mr Robert Al^ercrummy, Jefuite, having ane fen3eit
fubfcriptioun of Robert Sandielbun : And ane Lettre writtin and fubfcryuit be
the faid vniq'"' Laird of Fintrie, havand ane fen5eit name of Dauid Forrefler :
Quhilkis Lettres planelie previs, conforme to the premiflTes, the haill TrefTone
libellit. — Item, thay produce Lettres writtin be Mr James Gordoun, in fauouris
and commendatioun of Mr George Ker, writtin to fmdrie perfonis in S2)an3ie, to
preif, that he was purpofit to pas to Spaine with the laidis blankis : Togidder
with tua Obh'gatiounis, fubfcrjoiit be the faidis Mr James and Robert, in the
quhilk thay confefs the fen3eing and mutatioun of thair awin names, quhilk lykwayis may be eafelie provin j)er comparationem litcrarum, and be infpectioun of
the faidis Obligatiounis, that Sandefoun is Abircrummy, and Cryftefoun is Gordomi : And as to the fen3eit name of the faid vmq'" Laird of Fintrie, calland
him felfF Dauid Forrefl;er, he confeffit the fame fals fubfcriptioun and name to
be his awin hand-write and name, in his Depofitiounis, 20th Januar 1592 ; the
quhilk lykwyis is provin, j)^>' comparationem literarum, be the fubfcrijitioun of
the Depofitionis, and ane Lettre writtin and fubfcrjaiit with his awin hand, heirwith producit ; quhilk Lettre is direct to the Kingis Maieftie, and is rejietit in
viodum probafionis of the faid libell. — Item, thai produce Lettres of Incident
Diligence, quhairby the faidis Erllis, and Laird of Auchindoun, and Mr James
Gordoun, and Mr Robert Abircrummy. ar fummond to this Parliament, to heir
and fie the lubfcriptionis of the faidis Blankis, and fen3eit fubfcriptionis, and
feillis foirfaid, to be thair awin ; and being recognofcit, to preif aganis thame ;
and to heir and fie all vther probatioun vfit, led and deducit aganis thame, as
accordis of law : And repeitis the Depofitionis of witneffes, in quantum, and the
notorietie of thair fubfcriiitionis and hand-write. — Item, becaus Mr George Ker
and vniq'" Lard of Finti-ie, Mr James Gordoun and Mr Robert Abircrummy,
wer Traffiquing Papiftes, trattouris and participantis of the Trelfone libellit,
lyk as thai ar 3it, (except the faid Laird of Fintrie, qulia wes execute for the
fame,) and thairfoir, it may be objectit that thair Depofitionis fall mak na faith
in this caufe, the faidis aduocattis producis ane Interloquittour of the Lordis of
the Seffioun, fubfcryuit be the Clerk of Regifter, ffindand thir infame perfonis,
minoris, or perfonis beand fellowis or compan3ionis in the fame cryme, may be
witneftes in the cauffes of Treflbne and herefie ; quhilk Interloquitour wes producit and practizit in the accufatioun of vmq'^ Ewfanie M'Cal3eane. — Item,
thai produce the Sentence of Excommwnicatioun aganis the perfonis accufit, and

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 313

alfo contrail- Mr James Gordouii, vmq" Dauid Grahanie of Fintrie. — Iteia:, it is
of veritie, that the King and thre Eftaitis of this reahne, in criiuinall cans, hes
jurifdictioun and pouer of ane greit Affife, and may juge and decyde all crymes,
conforme to thair confciences, and vehement preliimptionis, conjectures and probabilities, quliilk may be collectit and gatherit in the caufes ; and Ipeciallie, in
the cryme of Treffone ; as is manifeft in the writtin law of this realme, callit
Regiam Maieftatem, lib. 4. cap. 1. And the taidis aduocattis repetis, in forme
of probationn, the notorietie of the crymes libellit, and that of the law snjficit
allegare noforium sed non probare, and the i)nblict voce and fame, quhilk is ane
vehement prol)atioun in criniinihus chntdetiliiiis, and namelie, in the cryme of
Tredbne and Lefemaieftie, with the notorietie of the TreHbne, and of the traffiquing libellit, committit be the perfonis accufit at the Brig of Die, the yeir of
God 1589 yeiris ; ffor the quhilk, findrie of thame cum in his JNIaiefteis will for
the famyn ; quhilk is ane Confeffioun of the cryme. — Item, tha}' repetit and
producis ane Catologue of fals and fen5eit names of certane Jefuittes and traffiquing Pajiiftes, contening alio certane fen3eit names of the faidis Erllis, qulia
all did fen5ie thair names, to the effect thai micht the mair furelie and quietlie
vfe the treironabill traffique libellit. — Item, thay produce and repeittis, that tlie
faidis Erllis and Laird of Auchindoun, being fulpect of TreiTone, and chargit to
enter in ward, conforme to the Act of Parliament maid be King James the Secund, difobeyit the fame ; and thairby hes incurrit the pane of Treflbne, be reffone of thair contumacie ; becaus of the law, he that is contumax may be condampiiit, for his contumacie caulTes him be eflemit as prefent, and inducis aganis
him ane Confeffioun of the ciyme L.3 . . . ' decerninuis :' And it is of treuth,
that of the law he is callit contumax, quha is funnnond to ane certane day, be
ane peremptour funmiondis, with certificatioun, and comjieris not the faid day.
//. Contnmacia et ibi gloffii ff. de rejudic: And for verificatioun thairof, thay
produce the Kingis Lettres, with the executionis thairof ; quhairby the faidis
Erllis and Laird ar chargit to enter thair peribnis in ward. — Item, thay produce ane act and decreit of the Secreit Counfaill, maid at Edinburglie the audit
day of Merche laft wes, with the publicatioun thairof at the mercat croce of
Edinburghe, vpoun the xij day of the faid moneth, the yeir of God foirfaid ;
ffindand and declarand, that the faidis thre Erllis and Laird of Auchindoun hes
contravenit the faidis chargis, and fuld be pvniflit, eftemit and accufit as Tratoui'is. — Item, To the end that the faidis Erllis and Laird of Auchindoun thair
contumacie and perfeuerance may be knawin, in the trelFonable Treffone libellit,
withoiit ony apperance of repentance or amendement, the faidis aduocattis repeittis the manifeft TreiTone conunittit be thame and ilk ane of thame, be relletting of certane ftrangearis, traffiqueris and treffonable mwtineris and ral'aris of
VOL. I. 2 II

314 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

feditioun aganis the eftait of the realme and Religioim, quha laitlie arryvit and
landit in the toun of Montroife, and ar prefentlie, lyk as thay haue bene fen the
tyme of thaii* arryving in this realme, reflett, helpit, fupportit, affiftit and mantenit be the faidis thre Erllis and Lard, and enerie ane of thame, to the owerthraw and eueriioun of this realme and Religioun prefentlie profeffit within the
fame. — The faidis aduocattis repetit the haill wi'eittis and vtheris premiffes
abone mentionat, as thai ar fett donu in maner abone mentionat, with the notorietie of the deid ; and that this Parliament is ane greit AiTyfe ; fua that he,
quha of his confcience can noeht clenge, he of neeeffitie mon fyle : And reuuncit
forther probatioiin of the firft reffone of the Summondis of Foirfalture.

SuMMONDis of Tressome and Foiufaltuue aganis the Erllis of Huntlie, Angus ami Ekkoll, and Sir Patiuk Gordoun of Auchindoun.

Jacobus Dei gratia Rex Scotoruni, dilectis noftrisLeoni Regi arnioruin, Hay, Albanie, Rofs, Rothfay, Snawiloun, ]Merc]ieinont, heiauliiis ; Roberto Stewart, Davidi Bryiroiie, Alexandro Douglas,
Jacobo Cbaluieris, clauigeris ; Orment, Bute, Vnicorne, Carrik, figniferis ; Joaiini Blindfcheiliis Bute
fignifero, Roberto Frafer Vnicorne fignifero, &c. nunciis ; et eorum cuilibet,. conjunctim et diuidm,
vicecomitibus nodris in hac parte : Saluteni. Mandamus vobis et precipiuius qualenus fummoneatis
legittime et peremptorie, coram teflibus, Wilbelmum Comitein de Angus, Georgium Comitem de
Huntlie, Francifcum Comitem de Erroll, Dom. Fatricium Gordoun de Auchindoun militem., Confpiratores, perpetratores et celatores criminum V.n'iv maieilatis fubfequentium, perfoiialiter fi eorum
perfonales prelentias commode habere poteritis ; alioquin apud eorum loca habitationum, vel per publicam proclamationem, apud cruces forales burgorum nodrorum de Edinburghe, Hadingtoun, Lanerk,
Abirdene, Perth, Bamff, &c. aliaque loca neceflaria ; degentes vero feu exiftentes extra regnum noftruni, feu nullum certum doniicilium in eodem habentes, apud dictas crurcs forales aliaque loca neceflaria, fuper prenionitione fexaginta dierum ; fic quod hujufinodi fumraonitio ad eorum aures et noticiam verifimiliter peruenire poterit ; quod compareant coram nobis feu Jufticiario noftro, vigefimo die
menfis ^laij proxime fequen. in Parliamento noftro, apud Edinburgh, decin)o octauo die menfis Maij predict! tenend., liora caufarum continwatione dierum ad refpondendum nobis nollrove Julliciario in prefato
Parliamento, fuper proditoriis criminibus fubfequenlibus : Dictos fcilicet Guilielmum Comitem de Angus,
Georgium Comitem de Huntlie, Francifcum Comitem de Errole, Dom. Patricium Gordoun de Auchindoun
militem, &c., et eorum quemlibet, pro fua ])ro(litoria Confpiratione, confultatione et conclufione horrendi fceleris et facinoris ad exequendum dellinati pro alteratione flatus reghi noftii et vere Religionis
inde profefli', per nos noftrofque probos et fideles legios, fecundum Dei omnipotentis Verbuni, per Acta
Parliamenti noftri approbate, et ])er leges nollras confirmate : Idquo prefertim, in menfibus Junii, Julii,
Augufli, Septembris, Octobris, Nouembris, aut eorum aliquo, anno domini 1592, in ipforum confilijs
et conventionibus cum Magiftro Jacobo Gordoun et M. Roberto Abircrummy, Jefuitis et feminariis
prefljiteris, et cum M. Georgio Ker et quondam Dauide Graliame de Fintrie, aut eorum aliquo, exoommunicatis Papiftis, fuper literis a M. Wilhelmo Creichtoun et M. Jacobo Tyrie, Jefuitis ex Hifpania, niiftis et directis ad prefatum M. Jacobum Gordoun : Et in ipforum proditora confultatione et
conclufione defuper habita ; in quibus declaratur, quam diligenter, et quanta cura ipfi cum Rege et
ronfilio Hifpanie elaborauerunt, pro pecunia et militibus in Scotiam deportantis, ad extreniam fubuerfionem et alterationem Religionis nunc profefle, et invafionem regni Anglie ; quod folum in hoc retardabatur, donee ex Scotia clarus quidem vir mitteretur cum literis certitudinis, et aliis vacuis cartis
(lie lilauhis), fubfcriptis per nobiles viros (jui pro parte et nomine Catbolicorum Pronianorum in hoc
noftro regno cxillentium ]!{:{'& obligarent et hipothecarcnt : Quequidem Litere (lie Blankis) impleren27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 315

tur, cum auifamento dictorura M. Wilhelmi Creiclitonn ft M. Jacobi Tyrie, in Hifpania degentium,
tanquam certiHima vincula, Cv^'ua. et fidejufiones predict, nionete et niilitum, extenden. ad numerum
30,000 viroium armatoium, anno predicto, intran. verl'us occidentalem partem Imjus legiii noftri, prope
Kirkcubreiclie vel fluuiura de Clyde, prout ventus nauigationi melius iuferuiret. Ad cuius inipij et
proditoi'ij faciiioris perinipletioneni, commemorate vacue Litere (lie Blattkis) partira Latino, partira
Gallice, Tub diuerfis formis, vna cum Literis certificationis et fidei lubfcripte fuerunt manibus prefatorum Wilhelmi Coraitis Angufie, Georgii Comitis Huntlie, Francifci Comitis de Erroll, et D.
Patricii Gordoun de Aucliiudoun militis palam profitentiura et affirmatium fe efle maieftatis regis
Hifpanie (ad quern ille Litere mittebaiitur) liuniillimos et maxime obedientes fervitores : Quod ipforum factum proditionis predicte manifelle eos arguit, quod tum natura et fide fint nobis fuo Regi
obligati (ad quem hujufmodi Litere vacue nou erant mi(ie) ligeantiam et fidelitatera nobis debitam
proditori dinbluerunt, et alieno et peregrino llegi, fine nollro concenlu, fidem fuara obftrinxerint ;
et literas vacuas ipforum manibus fubfcriptas ad eum miferunt, in quibus fcribi et impleri potuit
per eum et eius confilium quicquid ipfis vifum effet quod podet effe nociuum et detrimentofum
nobis, noflre auctoritati regie, regno neiho et fubditis ; ([uo ipforum facto, niliil magis proditorium
fieri et excogitari abillis potuit. Porteaeodem Litere (lie Blankis) ad effectum fupralcriptum tradite
et deliberate fuerunt, in menfe . . . anno domini 1392, dicto M. (Georgio) Ker, vna cum variis et diverfis figillis dictorum comitum cere impreffis : Quiquidem M. Georgius trans mare in Hifpaniam
nauigaturus, ad hoc fceleratum opus excquend. electus fuit ; idemque negotium in fe libenter fufcepit,
et iter ingrellus ad Cumbram Infulam vfque peruenit ; cum pleiiaria commiflione perfonarum fupramentionat.; onus in fe acceptantium pro omnibus aliis fue factionis hominibus Catholicis Romanis,
ad fedulo laborandum pro pecuniae! militibus recuperandis; cum ipforum fideli permiffione ad preparandum fefe fuofque viros et equites armatos, quo ad dicta pecunia extendere et fatisfacere valuerit ;
qui certo expectarent adventura et introitum dictorum Hifpanorum militum, deducerentque maiorem
numerum eorundem in Angliam, pro euerfione eiufdem et Keligionis ibi profeffe : Et quorum Hifpanorum 5000 infra hoc nollrum regnum pro perpetuo refulerent, cum quibus antenominates pruditores,
degenerati nobiles et hujufmodi omnes Papifte Catholici illius fecte in hoc noftro regno degentes ^nia
conjungerent, pro alteratione flatus eiufdem, et Religionis nunc profefle ; quorum qui alterutrum euertit
vtrumque euertit, cum inter fe ita funt coiijuncta vt vno pereunte alterum perire fit necelie ; et oxaltatione miifarum et Catholice Romane profeffionis, ad euidens perriculura et detrimentum nollre regie
perfone, difturbationeni pacis regni noftri, et alterationem vniuerfi flatus eiufdem. Committendo inde
nefandam et manifellillimam Proditionem, contra Deum noftrum omnipotentem, nos, auctoritatem noftram regiam et leges. Ideoque antenominatos Guilieliiium Angufie Comitem, Georgium Huntlie
Comitem, Francifcum Errolie Comitem, D. Patricium Gordoun de Auchindoun, militem, &c., ad videndum et audiendum fefe et eorum quemlibet, intuitu premifibrum, crimen Lefe Majeflatis incurrille, per nos et trium regni noftri ftatuum decretum decerui et declarari : Et propterea, bona, (raobilia,) et immobilia, tarn terras quam officia aliafque res ad eos fpectantes nobis confifcari, et pro perpetuo nobiftum in proprietate remanere ; perfonafque fuas penas Proditionis et vltimi fupplicii a regni
noftri legibus intlictas fubire : Ac vlterius, in ]iern)ift(' rcl'iiondend. et juri parend : Intimando fupradictis Confpiraturibus et eorum cuilibet, quod fiue dictis die et loco cum continwatione dierum comparuerint fiue non, nos, dictufque nofler Jufticiarius in premiflis,jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedet. Infuper, citetis, &c., ad comparendum coram nobis noftrovo Jufticiario dictis die et loco, hora
caufarum, cum continewatione dierum, ad perhibeiidum fidele teftimonium in caulii predicta, fub pena
legis ; et prefentes literas debite executas et indorGtas earundem latori reddatis. Et vos qui jirelentes
executi fueritis fitis ibidem, dictis die et loco, coram nobis noftrove Jufticiario, portan. vobifcum fummonitionis veftre teftimonium in fcriptis pro premiliis, feu i])ibs teftes : Ad quod faciend. vobis et veftrum cuilibet coniunctim et diuifim vicecoraitibus noftris in hac parte committimus poteftatcm ; Datum
fub teftimonio noftri magni figilli, apud Edinburgh, decimo nono die menfis Marcii, 1593, et regni noftri vigefimo feptimo.

316 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

The quliilk Summondis, with the executionis and indorfationis thairof refpecthie foirfaidis, being this inflant day red, in prefens of his Maieftie and haill
Eftaitis of Parliament, firfl in Latyne and fyne in Scottis, and the faidis Williame Erie of Angus, George Erie of Huntlie, Francis Erie of Arroll and Schir
Patrik Gordoun of Aiiehindoun kyn', being oftymes callit of new, at the Tolbuyth vyndow of tlie faid bvirgh of Edinburghe, to haif comperit and anfuei'it
to the faid Inmmondis and reflbne contenit thairin ; and thai nocht coniperand,
to haif defendit in the faid mater, and to haif anfuerit to the faid fummondis ;
the faidis Aduoeatis defyrit the faidis Eftaitis declaratioim, gif the reflbun of the
faid ftnnmondis wer releuant aganis the faidis tlirie Erlis and Schir Patrik Gordoun of Auchindoun kny'. Quhilkis Eftaitis, all with ane voce, fund the famin
releuant aganis thame : Thairfoir, the faidis Aduoeatis, of new, for verefeing of
the faid refToun contenit in the faid Summondis of Treflbune, producit and repetit the haill audit Blankis, in paper ; twa thairof fubfcryvit be the faid
Erie of Angus allanerlie ; vther twa be the laid Erie of Huntlie allanerlie ;
vther twa fubfcrivit be the faid Erie of Arroll allanerlie ; and vther twa fubfcryvit be the faidis Erlis and Lard of Auchindoune ; all fend to Spane : And
als repetit the haill vther probationis repetit be him of befoir in the faid mater,
this inftant day ; and defyrit the faidis Eftaitis of Parliament to advyis the
probatiounis foirfaidis led and deducit in the faid mater, and to pronunce thair
fentence of Parliament thairintill, according to the famin jn-obationis and thair
confciences. And thairefter, the haill writtis and probationis, being red, fene
and confiderit be the haill Eftaitis of Parliament, in prefens of the Kingis Maieftie, and thai thairvithe being rypelie advyfit, the faidis Lordis and Eftaitis of
Parliament ffindis, decernis and dedaris, that the faidis Williame Erie of Angus,
George Erie of Huntlie, Francis Erie of Eroll and Schir Patrik Gordoune of
Aiiehindoun kny', hes committit and done oppin and manifeft Treflbune aganis
our faid fouerane lord, in all poyntis, articlis and maner contenit in the faid
Summondis. And thairfoir, it M'as gevin for Dome be the mouthe of James
Nefljet dempfter of Parliament, in maner and forme as followis.

Dome of Foieealtouu. This Court of Parliament fchawis for law, that
the faidis Williame fumtyme Erie of Anguis, George fumtyme (Erie) of Huntlie, Francis fumtyme Erie of Eroll and Schir Patrik Gordoune fumtyme of
Auchindoun kny', and ilk ane of thame, hes committit and incurrit the fpeciall
cryme of TrelToun and Lefemaieftie abonewrittin, the tymis and in maner at
lengthe contenit in the reflbune of the faid Summondis of TrefToune : And thairfoir, decernis and declaris all thair gudis, moveable and vnmouable, alfweill
landis as officis, and vtheris thingis qvhatfumewir belanging to thame, to be
confifcat to our fouerane lord, and to rcmane perpetuallie with his hienes in propertie, in tyme cummiug ; and thair perfonis to vnderly the jmnis of Treflbune

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 317

and vtter pwnifliement, appoyntit be the lawis of this reahne : And this I gif for
Dome.

The interest which must be felt by all in the mysterious stoiy of ' the Scottish Blanks,' induces the Editor to give an accurate reprint of an extremely
rare Tract, published under the immediate authority and revision of the King
and Privy Council of Scotland, which he is fortunate enough to have in his
own Collection. The original is marked, ' ex Pamphletis Roberti Mylne fcribae,'
a well-known Collector of Tracts, illustrative of the History of Scotland, who
died Dec. 21, 1747, at the very advanced age of 105 ; having ' enjoyed his sight,
and the exercise of his understanding, till a little before his death." The fame
Tract was reprinted under the direction of Queen Elizabeth's Council ; but unluckily, it is ' done into English,' and is otherwise inaccui-ately edited. It bears
for imprint on the title-page, • London, Printed by R. F. for John Norton. 1593-'

A DISCOVERIE
Of the Vnnaturall and Traiterous Conspiracie of Scottisch
Papistes, againft God, his Kirk, their natiue Cuntry, the Kingis Maiefties
perfone and eftate. Set downe as it was confeffed and fubfcrived bee M.
George Ker, yit remaining in Prifon, and David Grahame of Fentrie, iuftly
executed for his Treafon, in Edinburgh, the 15 of Februarie 1592. Wherevnto are annexed, certaine intercepted Letters, written by fundrie of that
faction, to the fame purpofe.
Printed and publillied at the fpeciall command of the Kingis Majeftie.

At Edinburgh,
Printed by Robert Waldegrave, Printer to the Kingis IMajeftie.

Cum privilegio Regali.

TO THE READER.

I© ANIE and dangerous poynts (good Reader) of vnnaturall and treafonable
jiractifes of Scottilli Papifts, or (as tlicy will needes be ftyled) Catliolicke Romans, againft God, liis Kirk, their natiue Country and the Kinges Majefties
eftate and perfone, beeing difeovered by Codes great and niercifuU providence, partly by the depofitions and confeffions of lome of the practifers
tliemfelves, and nanily, Mailer George Ker, wlio for that caulie is iraprifoned, and David Grahame of Fentrie, juftly execute for the fame alfo,
in Edinburgh the 15. of Februare 1592, and partly by diverfe letters of
fundrie of the practifers, intercepted at diverfe tinis. It is thought good by tlie Kings ISIajeftie,

' See Scots Magazine, 1747, and British Magazine, or London and Edinburgh Intelligencer, for 1747.

318 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

and hi-i honourable Couufell, tliat the mofl fubllantiall poynts of the faid depofitions, fliukl be
faithfully taken out of the originals, which were deponed and confefled by the faide M. George,
and David Grahame of Fentrie, before tlie liononrable perfons depute by the Kings Majeflie, and
his liienes Counfell to that effect, and fubfcrived with their own bands ; and for tlie greater eafe
of the memory of the reader, ihould be fummarly gathered into this forme following, which otherwife were fcattered here and tliere in their depofitions, according to the occafion of tlie diverfe demands at diverfe dyats : for the readier taking vp whereof, the times of the depofitions and perfons
deponers, feverally and coniunctly as the matter craveth, fliould be fet down in marginal quotationes :
As alfo, that fome of the mofl remarkable letters of the practifers, fhould be joyned herunto word by
word, quhilkis were intercepted with Maifler George Ker, and the reft decyphered and trandated as
after lliall appeare ; and fo the wliole together to be imprinted, and fct foorth vnto the view of the
world, to the glory of Gods Majeflie (the only revealer of thefe fecretsj, to the comfort and edification of his Kirk, and the perpetuall detection and ihame of the viinalurdll enemie. Al quhilk thinffg
are fo faitiifullie done in this volume following, that no man how impudent fo ever he be, can iiifllly
chaleng it with any falfefying, forging, or clianging one thing for anotlier, to the wrefling of the original depofitions, in any the lell fiibftantial pairt therof, as by conlerring this extract with the firfl records which are in the Clerks hands, mofl evidently Ihall appear, if any lilt to looke vpon tliem. Thou
art therfore (good Reader) gretly to confider the goodnes of our God in this cace, fo watchfull over
his Kirk, for the good and fafetie tliereof, by difcovering fik deep and dangerous practifes of the deadly enemie, euen then, when as we thinking nothing lelTe, ar redy to be furprifed by their cloffe courfes
fo cuningly and craftily conveied : as we may well fay with the Prophet, our foide is efcaped, euen
as a bird out of the fnare of the Fowlers, &c. As alfo, thou art to be wakened vp, to the eirnefl confideralion of the diligence force and crueltie of our enemies (quhilk yet is nothing abated, but more
eiger prefently than ever hertofore to atcliicu their deuelifli intent) and no waies to trull them or be
fecure, as though they wer deeping and minding no danger to vs, while in the raeane time, fo deiply
and deadly they confpire within and without, with fo great force and craft againft, our Religion, landes,
and lives, that they dare be bold in their pride, to afi'ure the Sjiainzeard of no refillance heir to their
cruell interprife, as by their awin bragging words hereafter in their Letters evidently fhall appeir : yea,
all kindly natiue Scotlifli men, and true loners of theCliriftian religion, ought fpedily and fubllantially to concur, to the withllanding and overthrowing of this our common enemie, within our awin bowels ;
whofe vnnaturalnes, barbarity and hie attempt, can be matched with no example domeftick or forraine
that we read off, whether we confider the cruell baibaroufnefTe of the Spainzeards to whom they have
fold their euntry. King and people, (wherof let the monument written by one of their awin Fryers
Bgainfl the Spanilh cruelty, befid experience, whereuer they are maflers, be a witnes.) or whether we
confider their mofl dcceatful dealing, covering their mofl bloody purpofes with cloake of moll
tender friendfliip, quhilk moll clolly they have counterfeit, by fubfcription to the true Religion,
by hearing of the worde ]ireachcd, and common profeffion thereof with vs, and participation of
the Sacraments, by bandes, finally afHnities, othes, and al atteflations and lawes facred and humane,
that might feenio to jirocure credite aniongll men, and many other things to bee enlarged in time
and place, as mens callings in Kirke and policy cranes : Confider, and confider again (good Reader)
what Ihould be the eflate of all honell and godly men, their wiues and daughters : the eftate
of Kirk, common weale and Prince, yea and of thefe miferable wretches themfelves, if tlieir purpofe to make the Spanzard our mailer (for no man fervand nor fellow will that jiroud bcafl be)
fuld tak effect : O miferie, miferie, miferie vnfpeakable, efpecially to themlelfis, if their wofull purpofe fucceede to their minde and fane proceeded practifes. Wherfore yet again, it is liie time and
more, that all good men and lovers of their native Cuntrie be wakened vp to true, repentance to the
Lord, who fo heauily tiireatencth, and in a part already ftriketh : and to a diligent and fubllantiall

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 319

concnrring, every one according to liis calling and place, both in land and Burgh, to witiiftand thefe
defperate attempts before they parte remedy, and tymely to prevent the farther danger, by affiiting the
execution ofluftice vpon the reft of the detected traitors, without reipect of perfons ; that fo wee, labouring to take evill out of Iftael, the Lord who hath lb notahilly begun the work, may bring it to an
happy end, to his glory and our comforts, through Chrift our Lord. Amen.

A DiscovRSE of the vnnatvrall and traitei-ovs practifes of the Scotish
Papists, againft God, his Kirke, their native Countiy, and the Kings
Majefties perlbn and eftate.

BY the Confeffions and depofitions of Mafter George Ker, and David Grahame Deponed bee
of Fentry. It is dilcovered, That in March, 1591, IMafter William Chrich-3|5*^&7„'f'^7b.
toun (who hath remained thefe two yeares bygone in Spaine) lent to Mafter '"'''"■
lames Gordoiin, leiiiite, father-brother to George now Earle of Huntly, aue
gentle man called INIafter AVilliam Gordoun, Ibnne to the Laird of Aberzeldie,
witli letters, to let the Catholickes heere vnderftand, what travell Mafter AVilliam Criechtoun had tane with the King of Spain (inee his comming there : And
that the faid King had opened to him, that he had bene deceaved by Engliflimen, and wold from that time forth embrace the advile and way which the faid
Mafter William wold Ihew him, both for invading of England, and alteration of
Religion within this realme. And for that purpole, the laid Mafter William
craved by this gentleman, to be fent to him fo many blanks and iirocurations, as
could bee had of noblemen here, for the afTnrance of his trafficke.

Vpon the fight and refate of the which blankes, fent with fome other difcreet Deponed bee
gentleman, hauing the noblemens commifTion, to be filled vp with fiich condi- -i, '5'^'™o°of fJij.
tions as Iliuld be capitulat and aggried vpon betwix the King of Spain, and '''■*"■
Mafter William Criechton, quhilkis fuld haue fervit as pledgis and fuirties for And deponed b«
the fubfcrivers part, at the landing heir of the Spanifch armie. It wes concludit, ^f*Fen ""the™^
that thair fuld have bein fent out of Spain, about the latter end of the fpring, '•'"'^^'^''- ^^'•'2'
in this prefent yeir, 1592, an armie of thritty thouland men, to have landed Deponed bee
either at Kirkcudbright or at the mouth of Clyde, according to the opporhinitie s'fK^'h^isu^''
of the wind, quhair thay fuld have intrinfchit and fortifeit thame felfis, for the
alTurance of thame and thair fchippis.

And firll of all, money fuld have bein fent to the Catholikes heir, for raifing Deponed bee
of forces to lupplie the faid armie: Quhairof foure or fine thouland luld haves FLb^Mao,"'
remainit within this Cuntry, quha with the fortification and affiftance of tlK^ ,']''(,{? "I-J ™i5y2
noble men, Catholikes, thair friends, and fik vther forces as the Sijanifli money ^^p°"^^ ^e

, „ , '^ J lenlrie, 13 of

wald raile, fuld haue immediatly after thair landing, beiun to alter thair Reli- 1'"<^'^- ^^'■>^-
gion, prelently profeft within this realm, or at left procuret libertie of confcience, :\i!''George Ker,
and Paj)iftry to haue bein erected heir : And the reft of the armie fuld ha\'e paft ^ ' ''''
toward England the neereft way, fra their landing to the bordour.

320 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

Deponed bee Tjii^. Letters feiit fra IMafter William Criecliton, beeinff concredite be Mafter

Fentry, 13 ot "

Feb. 1592. lames Gordoun to Mafter Robert Abercumby, wer niawiii be him to David

Graliame of Feiitrie, at Abernetliie, in Aprill, 1592.
Deponed be ^j^^^j f^j. effectuatiue,- of tliis mater, it wes aiiis tliocht maift convenient that

David (jrahame ^

of Fentrie, the ^ Schir lamcs Chefliolm, qulia then wes an of his Majefties mafter houflialdis,
fuld haiie gone to Spaine with this Commiflion, in refpect he was vtherwife
bownit, towardis his vncle Mafter William Chelliolme (callit Bilhop of Dumblane), for Schir James had the firft credeit of this erand with the uobill men ; as
he declarit to David Grahame of Fentry, that hee had delt with the Erlis of
Huntly and Erroll, and conferrit with Mafter George Ker, auent this turne,
about the time of the laft Parliament, haldin in Edinburgh in Junii, 1592, as
alfwa, intercommuned again in his a^'^'in houfe with the fame IMafter George
in October, 1592, tuiching the haill heidis of this defpatch. Bot Schir James,
Deponed be not being abill to be fa foone reddy, and Mafter George Ker being bownit of
1592. ' the country, it wes thocht beft that the fame Commiftion fuld be geven to him,

and that lie fuld vndertak the carrying of the faid Letteris : And fwa hee wes
imployed in that erand, the rather, becaufe baith his gud-dames were Criechtons.

Thairefter, Mafter George beeing bownit to this jornay, and reddy to mak
fail out of the Fairly-raide, at the weft fey bank, upon the 27th of December,
1592. Then (be Gods providence) the faid Mafter Georg was api)rehended in
the He of Cuniray, and with him tliair wes interceptit fundrie miflive Letters
directit to this purpofe. Amongis quhilk, thair wes aught blankis, quhairof one
is fubfcrivit,

De vostre Majestic tres humble
et tres ohesant serviteur,

GUILLAME COMPTE DE ANGUSS.

Ane vther blanke is fubfcrivit,

De vostre 3I(ijestie tres humhJe
et tres ohesant serviteur,

FitAXCOVSE COMPTE DE ErROLL.

Deponed be And tliir twa blaukis were baith procurit of thanie, be Schir James Chefliolme,

M. Oeorj^c Ker, n -r«

3 Feb. 1502. ill their awin ludgeingis in Edinbm'gh, at the time of the laft; Parliament, in
Junii 1592.

An vther blanke is fubfcrivit,

GULIELMUS ANGUSIiE COMES.

Deponed be Fen- All vtlicr blaiike is fubfcrivit,

1502. "\Aliich were baith procurit of thame bee Mafter Robert Abircrumby, quha

jiMTeorgA'cr, was the chiefeft travellair in that matter, in October 1592.

3 Feb. 1592.

27 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 321

An other blanke is fubfcrived,

Geoegius Comes de Huntlie,

And an other is fubfcrived,

Georgius Comes de Huxtlie.

\Vhich were both, with the whole blanks, proponed firft to the Erie of Huntly, Deponed bee
by Mafter George Ker in Stratlibogy, at his paffing there. 3 Febt^yj-i. "'

AVhich fix feverall blanks before fpecified, fliuld haue bene all filled with iniffive Deponed be
letters, by the advyfe of Mafter ^A^illiam Creichton. 3 rfb!"!!?.!^"'

And the other two blankes, making out the number of eight, were both fub-3°o''f p^^'""!!
fcrived in the niids of two open throghs of paper in this maner,

GULLIELMUS ANGUSSI^ CoMES.

Georgius Comes de Huntly.
Fraxciscus Errolli.e Comes.

Patricius Gordoun de Auchixdoun Miles.

^Vhich two laft blankes were firft fubfcrived by the Erie of Huntly, and Patrike Gordoun, in October, 1592. And thereafter, beeing fent with Mafter Ro- Deponed be iM.
bert Abercrumby to the Earles of Angus and ErroU, Avere fubfcrived by them PeT^ioo".'
in the fame moneth of October, 1593. And thefe two blanks fliuld have bene
filled vp with procurations, and whatfoe^'er fliuld have bene thoght meet by
the laid IMafter "William Criechton, for the avowance of that which Mafter George
Ker had in direction and credite of the fubfcrivers ; which credite he refaved fra
the Earle of Huntlie, be the report of Mafter lames Gordoun, and fra the Erles Deponed bee M.
of Angus and Erroll, by thame felfis in Edinburgh, in the beginning of October, Febl^^iia".' ^
1592.

And the fumme of this his credeit, was an affurance that thir nobill men fuld
raife an power of horfmen, and nieit the Siianifli armie at thir landing, and
reciprockly to aflift, accumpanie and convoy thame in their iiafling to England, Deponed be m.
be all the forces thay culd procure vpon the King of Spains charges : And thir (; Feb. 1592.
nobill men fubfcrivers tooke the burding on thame, and intei'ponit their bandis,
for the concurrance of the haill Catholikes of Scotland in this caiife ; and thocht
it meit amangis thame felffis, for the better fecrecie, that nana vther fuld be crauit
to binde, for this erand, but thay three.

With thir aught blankis, fubfcrivit as faid is, there wes interceptit ftampis in
wax ; of the Ei-1 of Angus fellies of amies, fax ; of the Erie of Huntleis feils of
armes, foure ; and of the Erie of Errols feillis of arnies, three.

David Grahame of Fentry deponit, that he met fundrie times, fen this pur- Deponed be Fenpofe wes in hand, with IMafter Robert Abircrumby ; as namely, that the firft 1590.'
knawledg liee had of this purpofo, was be tlie faid Mr Robert, in Dumfermling ; ^.i^l^'of^^IbT'
and thairaftir in the Caftle of Striviliug, before Mr George Ker his prejiaration ••''^-•

VOL. I. 2s"

322 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

to his lornay, quhair Mafter Robert fliew liim, that this Commiffion wes to be
given to the faid Mafter George, to caufe fill the blankis with Mafter William
Creichtouns aduile, and that hee was to deliver the fame blankis, with the vther
Letters, to him who was to depart and carrie with him all this mefTage.

Like as, the' faids blankis and Letteris, quhilkes were procurit for that erand,
were all delivered by Mr lames Gordoun and Mafter Rol)ert Abircrumby to
Mafter George Ker, to bee carryit bee him to Mafter William Creichton, lefiiift ;
and to bee filled vp, at the difcretioun and direction of the faid Mafter AVilliam,
and of Mafter lames Tyrie, quha wes beft acquented with the effairis thair.

For the vnderftanding of the borrowit and counterfait names that ocurres
in the Letters following (good Reader,) thou fall finde thame interpreit
on the margent, quhair thay are poyntit out by this mark;* quhil kinterpretations are contained in the originall depofitiouns of the practifars,
and in fome of thair interceptit Letters.
A Letter directed from an Englifli lefuift, and intercepted with Mafter

George Kerr, the 27 of December, 1592.
Good Father, the iuclofed to my Lord, I pray you reid and take it as
writen to your felf : Quhat I writ to him, I writ to you ; quhat I crave of him,
I crave of you ; quhat I hop of him, I hope of you ; as of my jiatron and pedagog
in spirHiiaUhus, as of a man, whofe difcretioun and moderatioun I haue well
experimented, in all cafes and at all times. If I had fo farre ouerlafched and
gon befid my compas, as fome good fellowes wald imagine, yet I wonder, that
fome good men, haith in their owne conceits, and vther meanis fpiritiiall, will
admit no excufe, no fatisfaction, no purgation ; quhen Saint Paul, to tlie Galathians, in luoft evident delites, fettis downe this reuU amongs the perfect and
fpirituall : Fratres, et si pro: occiipatiis J'uerit homo in al'iquo delicto, vos qui
spirituales estis, Imjusmodi instruite in spiritu lenitatis, considerans teipsum, ne
8^ tu teuteris. If I had fjioken with you, at my laft beeing in Italic, as I well
hoped, I had pei-haps made a better conclufion of my bufieneOe thaire, then I did
to my awin content, and al my friendis fatisfaction, quhilk hop for all thefe
ftormes. I will never give over, and quhen I leaue by your meanis, to be vnder
the gude habering, I will writ to 30U of that fubject. Tlie Lord Seytoun, in
quhais lioufe I fojorn fometimes, falutis 30W. Of the effaires of the Catholikes
heir, I leaue it to them to write and relate, by quhais meanis thefe Letters ftaalbe couvoyit. My Lord Seyton hath ane hauen of his awin, quhilke may be
herafter very commodious for our miftions. Commend me I pray you to F.
Barth, Pere, &c. Mafter Dudley Ilper, knight, and lohn Thules, quhilk vpon
fome luden pufches of perfecution, mak their repair hither, ar in health, and fa27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 323

lute 30W. And Mafter Syall, a Prieft, dyed heir lately in Edinburgh. Love
me, and pray for mee, I beieik 30W all, solito. And if 30W feud ony iuto thefe
partis, let thame come furnillied with all amjile faculties as 30W may ; let them
inquh'e for one M. lonas, quhilke will bee a token betuix vs. Our Lord IjlelFe
and fend vs to meit anis or we die. Seyton, this 2. of October, 1592.

Your ever mod affured, lOHN Cecilio.

Blanke on the back.

A Letter directit from the Erll of Angus, all writen and fubfcribed with
his avvin hand, intercepted witli M. George Ker, the 27 of December, 1592.

My niaift affectioned commendationes premittit, this prefent is only to knaw
of 30ur welfare and friendis, and of the eftate of maters where 36 remaine, and to
be ane teftimonie of my gud affection towards you. For God be praifed, if you
were in this country, I could do you greater pleafure nor I was able to do before,
albeit gude will inlaiked not at na time, as 3e knaw. The prefent bearer can in-3i. Gcorg Ker.
forme 30U of fik things as occurres with vs ; for we are heir dayly fubject to alteration. Ye may credite him as my felfe, for fo his vertewis dois merite. It is
not needfuU I trouble 30W with his recommendation, feing he is to 30W that he
is to me ; 5ee knaw his honeftie and good intention, and the caufes of his parting;
to quhais llifficiencie referring the reft, my hartie falutations, and my bedfellows,
with al our companie, 3oung and aid, remembrit vnto you and your gude company, commits you with tham to the protection of God. Edinburgh, the tenth
of October, after our compt, 1592.

Yours ever at power, Angus.

Blanke on the backe. To ai. WiiUam

A Letter direct from M. lames Gordoun to M. ^Villiam Criechtoim, interceptit with M. George Ker the 27 of December, 1592.

Traist friend, after maift hartly commendatiouns, your friends tliat ar heir i\r. Oeorg Ker.
hath directit this prefent bearer to you, for full refolution of all j'our effau's in
thir quarters : 'SYe have delayit over lang, I grant, but he will fliew you the caufe
of all. The next beft is, ye vfe al expedition in time comming, againft the next
fomer, vtherwayis ye will tyne credite heir with your factours. If ye come, ye
wiU finde ma friendis nor ever ye had, but vtherwife ye wil find fewar ; becaufe
tlie next fomer many ar bownit to vther countries, and will not abid on you na
langer : Haift hame heir fum word to your friends, that we may put tham in
gude hojie of 30U, and thay wil tary the langer. The bearer is an honeft man,
and verie fufficient ; ye may credite him as my felfe. I fuld haue cumnilt with
him my felfe, wer it not I w^es perfuadit that ye wald remain on oiir anfwere ;
and becaufe I got an ftop out of Flanders. As tlie bearer can fliew you, yee Relative to the
haue goten all that ye defirit, thairfore mak haift. The bearer is cummit to

324 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

you on his awin charge, therfore ye mon have refpect to him. Tlie lafl bearer

that ye fend, cam heir behind the hand, and hath gottin na fatisfaction as 5it ;

becaufe nathing could be gottin heir, and we culd find na man but this, tliat wald

pafTe on his awin charg ; and I feare, that if hee had not come on his awin expenfis, ye fuld not haue refavit anfwere fa foone ; therfore ye fuld treate him the

better. Wee will abide lieir your felfe fchortly, and I wald ye broght the reft

The ^paiiisch ar. of your fricuds witli you that ar beyond fea; for if j^our block paffes fordward.

The Cathoii 1- ^^'^^ ™^" ^^ ^^^° prcfeut, vtherwife we mon cum and vifit you All vther efRonianes and faires of this couutry, I will commit to the bearer, quha is faithful. Your wife

their conlcde- i i • i . i i rrates. aud your ban-nes commendis thame to you, and luikes to le j'ou luortly. If I

M. Robert Abir. or Saudefouu, your friende, refauis ony filver fra the bearer, ye lliall be adverteift be an vther tikket, how mekle it is, and fubfcrivit with baitli our handis.

The reft I will referre to the bearer. God preferve you fi'om all evill. At

Dundie the 20 of November, 1592.
M. lames Gor- Yours uiaift affectioued at all his power, I. Christesox.

doun. ^

M. William Direct on the back,

Creichtoun. mi'jr> ic-ii-i /-

To his allured triende, (jreorge Craufurd.
> A Letter directit, fra M. Robert Abircrumby, to M. William Criechtoun,
interceptit with M. George Ker, the 27 of December, 1592.
Efter my dew and hxunble falutations and offer of fervice, I regrate and lamentis havily, the Ueuth and negligence your merchands lies vfit, in anfwering
of your laft fuit ye proponit to thame. For appearandly, if they had made anfwer in due tynie our wares had bein heir in due time, with our great profite
and confolation. The ftay and ftop of the matter appeirandly Avas lacke of expenfis, that na man wald of his own charge, take that viage in hand ; yea, fome
cravit a tlioufand crownes for his expenfis. Swa the mater M'as aiiis halely given
over, and almoft clein for3et, vntill it pleafit God of his divine Providence to
ftirre vp this bearer, to take the turn in hand on his awin expenfis : As hee hes
bein ever bent in that caufe, not only to fpend his gudis, but alfwa the thing that
is mair deir to him, that is, his life : thairfoir, I thinke hee fuld be the mair acceptable, as alio for the affinitie of bluid : for baith his guddaines was Creichtouns. And as for witte and abilitie, of treating of they effaires, he is not inferiour to nane of your merchands quhilk ye defyrit, as ye wil perfave be experience, God willing. And albeit that he, of his couragious liberalitie and zeal to
the caufe, hes tane the inater in hand, on his awin charges, yet all your friends
in thefe quarters thinkes it very reafonable, that all fuld be refounded to him
againe, Cum rsura, with promotion, till ony vther accident fuld fall out, for the
well and furtherance of this caufe, &c. But nowe I will fay an word of him,
and fyn com to funi vther purpois of our own. If I had an thoufand tongues.

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

325

with as many mouthes, with Cicerois eloquence, I cannot be wortliie enugli in The hyperbolical

commendation of this gentiUman to you and al your companie : As I Tall let you commenTatioun

vnderftand, God willing, if ever we fall chance to meit face for face ; and thairfore, Ke?.'' ^'°'^^

whenfoever ye may, prevent him with ony benefit, either be 30ur felf or any

other. Abide not quhill hee crave it at you, for hee is the worft aflver in his

awin caufe that ever yee converft with. Sed nunc ad alia. If ye be right remembrit, at your departing out of this, ye gave Mafter lames Mackartuay an

procuratory, to intrommit with Mafter Alexander Homes litill leving, hee hes

heir in Eaft Lowthiane ; the quhilk he pledit and obtenit in law, and tuke vp

yeirly rentis thairof to his awin behuif, and givis his nane of it. In this meane

time, there falles out fike cummirs tuichin that land, that we ar able to lofe the

hail wai-e firft. The faid JVIafter Alexanderis narreft friendis and aires hes in

iudgement prooved him to be deid, and fwa enteris aires to him. By this, the

Laird of Spot his ovirlord is forfaltit, and fwa the land wardis ; fwa that we are

able to tyne all, if remedie bee not found. Quhairfore, falling in confultation Thir wrhiis intcrccDtic with

with Mafter Alexander King, he thocht beft to fell the land to him, and we to the rest, ane char.
vfe the filver on an mair fm-e maner, of the quhilk ye fall refaue fum wrytings*!!^ wbeV's^^"
from this bearer, the quhilks ye will vnderftand better nor I. Only I thinke if ifo^; ol'pa'iy-"
forme of moyan bee not vfit, we fall lofe all, and better is to haue fuin thins nor "^' '°3" -Vf''"

•^ » ander King his

lofe all. As to the price, fet ye it downe, for he hes mentioned nane as ,et ; but ^"^^ ^"'^ ""'shee will give als meekle as any vther, becaufe, as hee faies, hee hes fum land ly- husband landis

and contigue to it. I pray yow for an haftie anfwere of this. I doubt not butof Spot't, with a''

yae have heard how thay young men, quhais faithers was llane bee the Laird of jJrcc^bee ili'm to

Ruthvenis, Hew him againe, quhais lady is inariet to one lames Reid. Camnay '''^' ^*'^'^'"

is come in the Conftables handis, and your nevoy is private of it ; and that be

the moyan, I trow, of Abraham your brother, but your Maicli is litill better nor

beggand. Drumkilbo is dead, and Thomas Tyrie is tutour. I pi-ay you advertife mee bee what manner Mafter Stevin \A"ilfoun lies commit bee my Lord Levingftouns obligation, the quhilk ye had of the fourtie crounes, his L. was

owin 50W ; for mafter Stevin hes gotten thefe foiutie crounes randering the

obligation quhilke yee had : I durft never make mentioun of the hundrcth

crownes fra the father, and fourty crownes fra the foiine, quhilk ye left mee

power to crave, &c. My Lord Levingftoun is dejiarted of this world, ge heard

befoir, that DaAdd Forefter * had ane fonne, and now hes ane other borne in the David Grahame

Caftle of Striviling, quhair he is in waird, hardly handlit. Thair is but ane of

our nobilitie lieere, quhilk lies of the K. of Spaiiie, ane penlioii well jiayit of

twelve huiidreth crownis. The quhilks appearandly are evill bcltowit : For hee

nor nane of his, as yet, hes never done ony kinde of good, in the promotion of the

Kingis matters ; quhairfore fike penfiones were better beftowed on vthers, quha ^nv y amangis

travells dayly and hourly, initting in hazard baith thair goodes and lives, as this thameseifie.

326 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

bearer hes done and dayly dois : and vthers, as he can fliew yow, &c. Becaufe
I haiie na vther thing to write, and haue hein lang eneugh, I commend mee to
your prayers, and you to God. At Scotland, the 15 of December, 1592.

M. Robert Abir- YourS at his pOWCr, ROBEKT SaNDESOUN.*

crumby. i i i

M.WiiUam Du'ect ou the back,

criechtoun. ^^ j^.^ ^^,^^.^ fneude, George Craufurd.

A Letter directed to the King of Spaine, bee three noblemen of Scotland,
quhairof twa hes Tenfyne returned to the profeffioun and defence of the treuth,
bee thair aithes and fubfcriptions, quhairefore thair names are fuppreffed ;
the third his name exprefTed, (to witte the Earle of Huntlie,) becaufe he continues as 3it in his former wicked courfe. This letter, writen by thame in name
of the Catholicke noblemen of Scotland, cyphered in French, was intercepted
in Januarie 1589, lately before the time of the Raide of the Brig of Die, thairefter was decyphered word by word, and tranflatit in Scottis, as foUowes :
They are sorry gip -^yee caunot fufficicntly exprcffe bee fi)each, the great regrait wee have

that the Spanisch . \n /- •

flote past by, coufavit, being fruftrate of the helpe we haue fo long had to lee, this year pail,

iaSco'tiand. ^ the defired affects fall out, quhilke we attended of your Majeflies prejiarations.

And our difpleafiu-e hes beene fa mekle the greiter, that your armie navall fuld

haue palTed by fa neir vs, vnvifiting vs, quha expectit the fame with fufficient

forces, for the peaceable recept and affifting thereof, againft all enemies ; in fike

fort, that it fuld haue had na relitlance in this country, and with our* fupport,

fuld liaue given anugh adoe to England. At leaft, gif it had cummit heir to

refrefch it, it had preferved a number of vefchels and men, quliilk we know have

The Spanyard perifchcd ueir our lies and vj^on the coaft. of Ireland : And had difcovered an

greTassis'tance incredible uumber of friends, in full reddinefle to haue run the fame fortune with

in Scotland. j^^ j^^ ^^j^^ ^^^,^^ ^^ ^^,pg ^^^.^ ^^j^ affirmc. it fuld not haue founde half fa many men

in England, for all that is fpoken by the Englifch Catholikes refugit there ; quha
by emulation, or rather bee ane vnchriftian envie, extenuats ouer farre our
meanes to aid yow, to magnifie thair awin only, and make themfelfis to bee eftemit able to doe all ; to advance thamefelfis thairby in credeit with your Majeflie and fik as are about you ; but by experience of this year jjaft, hath fiifficiently teftified, they haue not fchawin themfelfis, in fik number, to affiil j^our
forces, as we haue done. And therefore your Majeftie, as maill wife as yee are,
lliall, gif it pleis you, mak fick accompt of the ane, as yee neglect not the vther,
and fa ferve you with them baith, to the end 5e pretend, with hazarding your
They haue in- forccs for the particular of the ane or the vther. We i-eniit to the declai-ation

fotmit the K. of r- j^ t •

spanis subiccts of lome of your awin fubjects that hes beene heir, the commodities and advanOi'e''nlLani>,'io tagcs of landing in thir partes, quhair the expenfis beftowit vpou the equippage

fngfn'scotiand.""^'^'^ Gallialfe, fall bring niair fruite to your fervice, than ye may haue of ten

vpon the fey. And wee may alTure your Majeftie, that having anis lax thou27 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 327

fand men heir of youi' owne, with money, ye may lift heir forces of this country,
as freely as in Spaine, qiiha v\ill ferve yow na lelTe faithfully than your owne
natui-all fubjects. And albeit wee can not, without blame of prefumption, giue
your Majeftie avife in your effairs thair : Al waves in that, that may concerne 1^'' ''^'° "'5

y^ • 1 • j^ 1 • p "-'"8 "' Spam

your lervice heir, wee Ipeak mair freely, as beins vpon the place, and knawinsj I'ow to assault

, ., ,. . .1 . , T r. ■. ° lliis iland hereby the ordmary experience, mony thnigs vnknawin to ony of yours that are not after.

heir. The overlate arrivall of your armie in our watters, tuke from it the commodities to reteir it felfe in fik fafetie, as it might haue done cuming foonar, be
reafon of the great winds that are ordinar heir in harvell : as alfwa lacke of pylottis experimented vpon the coalles of Scotland, England and Ireland, appears
to have bred great harme to the faid armie ; quhairvnto wee culd have remedis
concerning Scotlands, to have fent pilotts from this, gif it had likit j'oiu* Majeftie
to have fervit your felfe with thame. Likewife, (faving better advife,) it feenis
to vs altogidder vnprofitable to fight the armie bee fea, gif it may be efchewit,
for mony caufes : And amangis vthers, becaufe like as fall haue fochten by fea,
falbe vnabill, being wearie, to feight againe bee land againft new forces : Sa the
beft fuld bee, to fchift bee ane way or vther, for fparing of your men and vefchels, and fwa the Englifch forces ftayiug vpon the fea vnfoghten, fall be difapointed, and fall not come in time to affift thame, that falbe aflTailzeit be land.
Attour, fending heir a part of yom* forces, before the vther, quhilk fuld goe the K^'']'^f'g''^^n
right way to England, and that fecreetly by the backe of Ireland : Your Ma- how to assault
jeftie fuld compell the enemie to divide their forces, and it may bee, fuld caufe after.
thame fend the greateft part heir, quliair yee might make thame believe the
greateft part of your forces wer arryvit, at leaft fuld caufe thame difgarneis as
meekle of England, and drawe a great part of their forces, quhilk wald refift
your landing and invafion on that coaft. And we may well in'omife, that having
heir fax thoufand of your men, and money to lift vtheris heir, wee fuld within ^^"'''' '''^""! "!'"

J ^ •! ' sent from .spaine

fax owlkis after their arrivall, bee well farre within England, to approache and and money to

^ m • txT- levie a power in

affift the forces quhilke your Majeftie luld caufe enter thair. The knight \V il- Scotland,
liam Sempill Colonell, can Ihew your Majeftie the haill ; to quhom we remit. Al-ouikis bee far in
fwa, wee haue caufit wi'it baith before and fen his depart, our money fik adviles "^ "" '
bee M. Robert Bruce, and caufit addrefte the fame to my Lord Duke of Panne, Bruce is the

. mouth of these

to whome your Majeftie remittit vs, from the beginning, in thir effaires. And lords to the King
feeing wee hope your Majeftie is dewly advertifed and informit, wee will end D.'o'tTarma.' '
the prefent, kiffing maift humbly your Majefties hand, praying God with all
your affection, to grant you full accomplilhment of all your holy iuterprifes.
From Edinburgh, this 24 of January, 1589.

Youi' Majefties maift humble and affectioned servitours,

G. Erle Huntlie, &c.

In name of the vtlier Lordis Catholiks of Scotland.

328 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

A Letter direct fra the Erie of Huntly to the Diike of Parme, interceptit
in lanuarie, &c.

Letters resavit My Lord, I haue reflkvit from lohne Chefliolme, the letters it pleafit your

Parrae, bee lohn hieneffe to Writ, the 13 of October, full of maift Chriftian affection to the weill
es 0 me. ^^ ^^^^_ caufe : For the quhilkis I giue your liienefTe maift humble thankis. The

Support of 1000 fupport of ten thoufaud crowns, fent to that end, is relTavit be M. Robert Bruce,

D? of Parme. quliilkis fliall uot bcc employed, but for helpe of the maift vi'gent neceffitie of the
faid caufe, as it lies pleafit yoiu' liienefTe to direct. After the departure of Colonel Sempill, I have found my felfe fa boaftit on all hands, and i)reaflit in fik
fort be our King, that it behuifit mee to yeeld to the extreame difhcultie of time,

He dissembles and fubfcrive with his Majeftie, not with my heart, the Confeflion of thair Faitli ;

fearr&ToUide. 01' vtherwife, I had bene forced immediatly to haue departit the cuntry, or to
haue taken the fieldis for refifting his forces, and fik as hee might haue drawin
out of England to his aide ; quhilk I could not have done, efpecially then, qiihen
be the returning of your armie in Spain, all hope of helpe was taken from vs ;
but if on the one jiart I have failit, bee the apprehenfioun of dangers that threatned my ruine, I fall on the other part endevour my felfe to amend my fault,
(quhairof I rei^ent me with all my heart) be fein effect, tending to the mtII and
advancement of the caufe of God, c^uha lies put mee in fike credite with his Majeftie, that fen my cuming to court he lies broken his former gairdis, and caufit

lie lies establish- me eftablis vtliei's about his perfoii of my men, bee the moyen of ciuhom and

ed gardis about . , /^.t i n. f i • y->Ai

the King at iiis their captaiucs ar alfo mine, 1 may ever bee matter or liis perlon : And your
bee MaTster of fupjiort bciug ariyvit, f^nilzie the hereticks of his authoritie, to fortifie and afTure
orca^msaroffe". ^"^' i^terprifes ; quhair^-pon I befeeke your hieneffe to fend me your a-\ile, and to
affure your felf of my vnchangeable affectiounes in my former refolutions ; albeit
the outward actions bee forced to conforme thamefelfis, fumtimes, to neceffitie of
occafiounes, as M. Robert Bruce will mair amplie ^^Tite to your hieneffe, to
whom I remitte mee farder. Praying God, after I haue maift humbly kiflit
your hieneffe hand, to give yow accomplifliment of your holy enterprifes. From
Edinburgh, the 24 of lanuarie, 1592.

Your hieneffe maift humble and affectioned fervitour,

G. Eri.l of Huxtlie.
A Letter fra the Erie of ErroU to the Dulce of Parme, interceptit in lanuarie, &c.
My Lord, fen God of late, bee the cleir licht of his holy Catholik faith, lies
chafit from my vnderftanding the darkneffe of ignorance and errour, quhairin I
have bene heirtofore imrifchit ; I haue bene als fooii jierfwadit in acknowledging
of fa great ane effect of his divine grace towardis mee, that I am chiefly obligit
to procure, fen I knaw the enterprifes of his Maieftie Catholik, and your hienes

27Jac VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 329

tendes principally to that end, as alio to the advancement of fome civill caufe,

quhilk hes verie great affinitie and conjunction with ours heir. That I mon The causes of

teftifie the prefent, the affection that I haue to the well of the ane and the vtherjlnLLTabiefor

having ever before my converfioun bene ane of the number of your friendes and^^,'',?"'^*'"'"'-''

fervitours, for the refpect of the laft ; to the quhilkes, the firft of religioun, quhilk

is the greateft and maift important that is in this world being joynit thereto, I

am alfo become altogether yours ; quhilk I befeik maift humblie your hieneffe,

caufe it fignifeit to his Majeftie Catholik, and to promife him in my behalfe, that

hee lies not iii this country a mair affectioned fervant than I, neither 3et 30ur

hienefTe, as 3e fall vnderftand mair ample of my intentioun in jiarticular, be liim,

bee whom your hienes fliall reflaue this prefent. To whom, after I haue maift

humblie kifTed your hand, I befeike the Creator to give yow the accomplifliment

of your holy defires. From Edinburgh, this 24 of lanuarie, 1589Your hienefle maift humble and maift affectioned fervitour,

Francis Erll or Erroll.

A Letter fra Robert Bruce, to Moniieiu' Francifce Aguii-re Efpaignell, &c.
interceptit in lanuarie 1589- ^Vriten in French, and tranflatit in Scottis,
as followis :

Monsieur de ACxUIRRE, I have refavit your Letter, of the nynt of November, writen from Handwerp, quliairbj^ I was glad to vnderftand of your arrivall
thair and helth, and that ye haue guydit your felfe fa wifely in execution of al
that I committed to yow. Your Mafter, quha at my i-equeft hes gevin yow entertenement, hes givin mee the like teftimony of your behaviour, and hes promifit mee bee his Letters, to have 30W in the favourable connnendation I defirit,
and to employ 50W in gude occafions. Gif he fend 30W heir again in thir jjarts,
caufe fette you on land neare Seytoun, quhair I pray 30W to enter fecreetly, and
there ye fall be keepit quhil I may come and finde 30W.

[The reft of this Miflive, being fet downe in oblcure times (terms ?) is to be
fene in the originall.]

A Letter fra Robert Bruce to the Duke of Parme, intercepted in lanuarie
1589, lately before the Raid of the Brig of Die, cyphered in French, deciphrit there aftei-, and tranflatit in Scottis, as followes :

My Lord, Monfieur Chefliolme, arryvit in this country five dayes after his Letters sent be
departing from thair, and with thair requiiite dilligence, cam to the Lrlle of from tiie D. of
Huntly in his awn houfe in Dumfermling, quhair having prefented to him yourEriTof iiuntiie.
hienes letters of the 13 of October, hee declarit amplie to him the credite givin f,",',' '''u",„.''^^
him in charge, conforme to the tenour of the letters from your liieneffe : quhair ''"'"''"«•
thay perceavit your hienelFe great humaiiitie and affection, to the advancement
of the glory of God in this country, with ^'thers conlblations maift convenient,

VOL. I. 2 t

330 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

to moderat the dolour and difpleafure conceavit be the heartis of the Catholiks,

be reafoun of the fucces of your arniie, agaiuft thair hope and expectation. AlraeTvuTom'the f^^'^' ^^"^^ daves thereafter, as the conimoditie ofterit to mee to refave the money,

D.of Parmc, beejijg f^id Chelhohue deliverit to ine fax tlioufand twa hundreth three fcoire

Bruce, to bee _ . , . ^

empioied for twelve crouues of the funne, and three thoufand fevin hundreth Spanilch piftospaines "service Icts ! And likevvjfe hes cariet himfelfe, in all his actions fenfyne, verie wifely,
and as become a man of God : Chiefly then, quhen vpon the lufpition conceavit
of his fa fudden returning, the king fent to gar take him. I fall behave my lelfe, be
the grace of God, in the keeping and deftribution of the money laft fent, and of
that quhilk reftes yet of the firft fowme, according to your hienes prefcriptioun,
and as I ought to anfwere to God in confcience, and to your hienes in criedite,
The money is to gj-,^ to the liaill world in the reputation of an lioneft man : And fal minnage it

bee destributed *- '^

nmang the Ca- jn fik fort, that bc the grace of God, thair fall be fruite drawin thereof, pleafant

tholikenobilitie x^i/ iii iiof Scotland. to your hienes. It is true that I nnde (as all vthers wald doe, that walde mterprife fik a charge heir) my felf involved in great difficulties : For on the ane
part, I am in great danger of the heretikes, and of thame of the faction of England, be reafoun of the oppin profeffion that I make of the Catholike Religion,
and of the lufpition that the laft hes of my fecreete pi'actifes and dealing againft
thame ; On tlie vther part, I liaue meekle adoe to moderate the appetite that
fum Catholicke lordis hes, to haue the money prefently, for the hope quhilk they
The Erie of s'^^'^ ^^ ^^"" jjreteudit occafiouns, that will never fall out as they promife. The
Huntiy wald Earlc of Huutly made inftance to haue the third part of the fowme quhilk was

haue a third part •' ' ^

to himseifc. fent heir, alfe foone as it was delyvered to me ; but he hes not tuitchit, nor fall
not twitch hereafter a mal3ie, but vpon gude takins. I haue payed him in the
meane tyme, with inexpugnabill reafonis, quhairof in the end he is contented.
I befeik your hienes, bee the firft letter it iall pleas you to write in thir partis,
to the Catholicke lordes, to remove ane errour from three, quha hes writen thair
in name of the remanent, that moves them to thinke, be reafoun thay were the
firft that made offer of thair fervice to the King Catholike, that all the money
that comes heere fliould be parted in thre, and immediately after the arrivall
thereof delyvered to thame, without giving part to vtheris, quhilke belide thame
are in great number to the King Catholikes fervice and yours, and alfwa deliberat to hazard after their power, for the advancement of this caufe, as thay
are ; of whom the vtheris will not depend in ony fort, in the accepting of the
moyans that cummes from your liberalitie, but acknawledge thame as comming
directly from your hienes, to quhonie onely they will bee bound and obleift, and
not to the vther three. Of the quhilkes, the Erie of Mortoun, hes hitherto con-
(juhat ever ti.is tented himfelfe with reafon : As alfwa the Earle of Huntiy, hes never fchawin
beineat this himfelfe fubject to money, bot fen he hes beene inducit be the third, to wit, my

27Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 331

Lord Claud Hamiltoun his vncle, quha is fum quliat covetous of ffeir, and 'y™*;. '' '! "o""

' •■ ^ ° bee obiecut to

thocht vnder fike pretext to make his profite. The faide Earle of Huntly is con- ti'm now after bis

Itrained to remame at Court : He is falhn from his conltancy in his outward pro- scription geven

feffion of the Catholike Religioun, partly for having loft all efperance of your °

fupport before the returning of the I'aide Cheflioline, becauCe of his lang ftay

there, partly by the perfwafion of fum politicks, partly to efchew the perrills

imminent to all thame that calles thamefelfis Catholikes, partly to keepe hiinlelfe

in the favour of his King, quha preafit him greatly to fubfcrive the Confeffion

of the Heretikes, and to league with England. Bot for all this, his heart is na TheEarieof

wife alienat from our caufe ; for he lies the foul ever gude, albeit he haue not wis his Religion,

fik vigour to perfevere, and execute fik as is requifite, in fa great an enterprife ; and 'poiicief after

but thay may helpe thay defects, putting befide him a man of credite, refolute "J^'^ beti".*'"

to affift him, as we haue advifed to doe, fen the Barron of Fentrie is put in

waird be the King, in the Towne of Dundie : Swa that he darre not gang out

of the portes thereof, vnder the paine of a great fowme, qiihill the occafion may

bee offerit to depart the cuntry, within the tyme limited. And I bee the Kings

commandeinent, am difchargeit to come neir the faid Erie ; becaufe they have

attributed to the faid Laird of Fentry, and mee, his conftancy in the Catholik •

Religion, and his abfence from Court againft the Kingis wil : His wairding lies

fum quhat hinderit our courfe, and permittes mee not to move him, as it hes

pleafit you to command mee, and as I defire to difpence the money conjunctly

with me ; fa that for fui^pleing of the default of him, I haue afTociat to the fame

end, a very honeft man and very wife, callit Father William Criechtoun lefuift, sir lames ches-

- _ c 1 holme, brother

quha wes detenit fum yeiris in the towne of Londoun, alter hee was tane to lohn chesvpon the fea, cummand toward this from France. Likewife, I fall helpe myrate!"^'*
felfe be the prudence of Schir lames Chefliolme, eldeft brother to the faid John,
quha brouffht the money from voiir hienefle. For hee is a man confident, wife, The money is in

^ 'ri •' • ^ my L. Levmgane on our part, and very litle fufpect. In the mean time, the ane part of the stonis duefe
money is in the principall lioufe of my Lord Lvingftoun, a very Catholike Lord, Edinburgh, to
the vther heir in Edinburgh, in great enugh fuirtie , to helpe as it fall neid the l"l^ nobiements
Lords Catholiks, quha will conveene heir very loon to refift, to the defyinges of 'j"JJJj ' (^'JJ'g^.
thame of the faction of England, quha in the fame time ai-e purpofit to remaine bleat Court, with forces, to range all things at their fantacie. As for the like
fowme or greater, quhilk your hienefle willis to caufe follow the laft lent heir,
it is good in all eventis, it were very foone lent heere, fecreetly, to help the ne- Jfair money pro.
ceffitie that may fal out, and to caufe things incline to our fide, quhen they are Duke of Parmc.
in ballance, as their is great appearance thay will bee, be the occalioun foirlaid :
And in cace that neceffitie requires na diftribution, the faid fowme fall bee keepit"' '*!"?»?''*"

^ -^ Spanish forces

and refervit to better occafions. or quhill the arrivall of your forces in this He. suia arrive in

' this IlaniL

332 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

Thair is fiifpition, as alfo arguments probable anugh, that Thomas Tyrie, quha
hes brought lieir your hienefle letters to our King, lies not behavit himlelfe according to his duetie : For hee hes accommodate himfelfe in his behaviour, mair
after the affectioun of our Chancellar (quha is of the faction of England, and
abufes the credeit hee lies with the King) nor according to the inltructions given
him thair. Hee lies not prefentit nor made mention to the King of Colonell
Sempills letter, quhairof I liaue caulit prefent the copie to his Majeftie be the
Erie Bouthwell, as gif it had beene fent to him with an vther of the laid Colonellis to himlelfe, quhilk hee refavit from Thomas Tyrie at his arryvall, quha
hes rei)orted to the laid Chancelar, all that Segneur don Bernardino fpak to him,
in Parife, to the difadvantage of the faid Chancellar. Alfwa, hee hes reportit to
the King, that my Lord Bifchop of Dumblane, beeing returuit thair, fpake to
your hieneffe and to vthers, many things to the great prejudice of his hienes : And
it is beleeved alfo, that he is the caufe of the lulpitioun quhilk is conceavit of
They compt our tlie coiiimiug of the faid lolin Chefliolme, iiewlie to the laid Billiop. However
thlThereticifes. it be, the Ather reports foirlaid, quhilk he hes made, hes not fervit to conciliat,
but to alienate the atfection of the King, of the Chancelar and mony otheris heretickes from the faid Segneur don Bernardino, the faid Bifchop, and Catholickes
heir, that lies had adoe with tlianie. As for mee, albeit I fpeak not willingly to
the difadvantage of ony wliatfonie\'er, chiefly of tliame whonie I liaue recommendit, as I did the faide Thomas Tyrie to the laid Don Bernardino, 3et I will
preferre the love of the treuth to men, and wald not in concealing thereof, bring
prejudice to the publick well, nor to the fidelitie that the an aught to vthers,
and fpecially to that we aught all to the King of Sjiain, and 3our hienelTe, to
Bruce servand Quliome I aiii prefeiitlv fervand, particularly addicted, bee the obligation of five

to the King of i i j ' i j ' ^ o ^

spaine, and to hundrctli crowucs of fee, and fourty for monethly entertainement, quhilk it hes

the D. of Parme, '. ^ . , . ,, , ,'• c o ■ i •

hes ane pensioun pleaiit your hicnes to give mee iriely in name or the King ot Spaine, vnbeing

"he nione"Can'd required for my part, nor vther thing for my particulai-e to this prefent ; bee

;?."?, ,""""" "'^ reafoun quhairof, I am the mair bound to give your hienes niaift humble thanks,

and to ende^'our my felfe to deferve, be my niaift humble and faithfuU I'ervices,

aJs Weill the faid entertainment, as the recompenfe it hes pleafit 30ur hienefle to

proniife me of your grace and favour. The faid gift of your liberalitie, come

to me Weill to jiurpole, feing bee reafoun of the danger of my perfon, it behuifit

mee to augment my ordinare tryne for my greater fuirtie, quhilke I was not

Bruce lies nego- able lauger to have borne out without helpe. For from all the lordes of Scottiat in Spaine " i .n t j^ t i

with the K and land, I liave not retyred but a jiart onely of the money, quhilk I qiendit traveltries with the u.' ling, for the well of this caufe in Spaine with his Majeftie Catholike, and with
of Parnic. ^^^^^, ],jj,jj^.j]|. jj^ ^jjg j^j^ couutries. As for the foure hundreth crowns imployed

for the deliverance of Colonell Sempill out of prilbn, I haue put in it conipt with

27Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

the remanent quliilk I deburfed of the firft Ibwme, according as it hes pleafit yoiir

hienefle to command me. The Earle of Mortoiin, to qiihome I haue given con- Quiiat ever this

folation bee wi-it in prilbim, hes inftantly prayed me alio be write to remember beene at this

his maift affectioned fervice to your hienes. Finding himielf greatly honourit tfeeobLctiuo'"

be the care it pleafit yow to have of him. Be the erace of God he is na mair inI"™T™^^'"u
i •' o his aim and subdanger of his life, be way of iuftice ; it not beeins: poffible to his enemies to '"ij.tion given

n . . . , , '« 'lis contrare,

prove againit him ony thing qnhilk they had fuppofed in his accufatioiin : As gif he remaine

alio the Kinges affection not la farre alienate fra hiiu as it hes bene heeretofore :

And incaife thay wald noye him, or that it were prefently requifite for the weill

of our caufe to deliver him, wee have ever moyan to gette him out of i)rifoun,

and abides not in the meane time, hot the Kings will towarde his liberty, only

to avoide all perfuit that thay wald make, gif wee delyvered him extraordinarly. Quhen they ofierit him in the Kings name his libertie, gif he wolde fubfcrive

the coufeffioun of the Heretikes faith, he anfwerit hee walde not doe it for the

Kings crowne, nor for a hundreth thoufand lives, if he had them to lofe ; and

hes offerit to confound the INIinifters be publicke difputation. I fall folicite the

lords, his friends, to procure of the King his libertie very foone : for hee importes

mair the well of our caufe, nor ony of the reft, be reafoun of his forces, quhilkes

are neare England, and the principall towne of Scotland, and the ordinare refidence of our kings : As alfwa, he is the lord the maift refolute conftant and of

gi'eateft executioun of ony of the Catholickes. It is na fmall marvell, confidering the moyanes the heretickes hes to harme vs, and tliair warldly wit fa far

pafling ovrs, and thair evil will and intentioun againft vs, that wee fubfift.

Truely, wee cannot bot attribute the effect thereof to God, quha (then when the

certain newes of the returning of the arme of Spaine be the backe of Ireland,

were difperfit through this country, and the heretickes of the faction of England

triunqjliant, and the conftancie in the outwarde profeffioun of the Earle of

Huntly and others wes branglit) caufit the Earle of Angus to die, quha wes

cheiffe of the Englifch faction, and the felfe fame time fufcitat fum diffentioun

amangis the hereticks, bee refoun of fum offices that fum pretendit to vfurpe

aboue vthers at Court, and bee the inftant jiraj^ers and haly perfwafions of twa

fatheres lelliiftes, convertit to our holy faith twa hereticke Earles of the firft of

authoritie and power amangis them, the an quhairof is callit the Earle of Erroll,

conftable of Scotland, convertit bee Father Edmond Hay : The vther called the

Earle of Crawfurde, convertit bee the laid Father ^Mlliain Criechtoun. Thaye

are baith able and wife young lordes, and maift defirous to advaunce the Catholicke faith, and your interprifes in this He, quhilk they are deliberate to teftifie

to liis Majeftie Catliolicke and your hienes by their owin letters, quhilke be the

grace of God, I fall fend be the firft commoditie. In the meane tyme, they haue

334 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

The King of required me to niak yow offer of thair inaift hiuuble and maift affectioned ferPirme^hes inter- vice, promifing to follow quliat fiimever the laid leluiftes and I i'all thinke good
cuiedinScoV-'^'to bee done, for the confervation of the Catholikes, and to difpofe and facilitat
land. ^Yie executioun of your enterpriles heir, quhilk thay may doe mair eafily, nor

Tiie lesuists and thay that are knowne to bee Catholikis, quliais actions are ever fiifpitious to the
priests doe great },ei.etji^j.g fyj. tliair Religiouu, quhairof thir two Earles hes not yet made outliurt in Scotland. ' o ' a .'

•ward i)rofeffion ; but in that, as in the reft, thay lubmit them felfis to our will,

fit iscvi ^"'^ ^^ ^^^^^ ^^'^ finde maift expedient. The faides fathers of that company makes

(lent, that the m-eat fVuite in Scotland, and fa foone as ane lord or other perfon of importance

declining to pa- ^ i i-r- /> i •

pistrie drawis js couvcrted bee thame, they diipole and niclyne in the verj^ meane time their
tva oir native afFcction to the fervice of the King of Spaine, and your hienelfe, as a thing inlet^Th'e'sen'ioc'oT parablie conjoined with the advancement of the true Religon in this country.
'*' J S' "!• n """ Gif I had commandement of your hienelFe, I walde give thame fume litle almous

and D. ot ramie. •' ' o

in your name, to help thame and eight vthers, quhairof foure are alfo lefuifts,
and the vther foure ar feminarie pri.^lles of PontawmoulFone in Lorane ; quhilkis
are all the Ecclefiaftickes, that produces fa great fpirituall fruite in Scotland,
and acquires to 30W heir fik augmentation of your friendes and fervantis. After
the pairting of Colonell Sempill from this, the lords fent letteris with the faid
The Papist Father Creichtoun and vther gentlemen, after the armie of Spaine, to caufe it
bee Creiehtoun, land in tliis cuutry ; hot it had taken the way to !52)aine few dayes before their
nishZt'IoUnd arrivall at the lies, quhair it had refrellied the felfe, la that it was not poffible
in Scotland. ^^^ them to attend on it. Thay of this country that are of the faction of England, were in a marvellous feare, during the incertitude of the landing of the
faid armie, and confelfes plainly, if it had landit heir, thay liad bein alluterly
wrakkit. The Erie ]5oithwell, quha is Admirall of Scotland, and als gal3ei"it a
lord as ony is in the country, albeit hee make profelfion of the new Religion, yet
is he extreamly defirous to affift 30W againft England, having lifted and entertained all tliis foinmer, (vnder pretext to ga dantoun the lies) fum trowpis of
men of weir, quhilk, together with his forces ordiiiaris, fuld haue ioyned with
yours, gif thay had cuininit heir. He fuffers Jiinifelfe to bee peaceablie gydit be
me, notwithftanding the diverfity of our Religion, and hes oftentimes faid, that
if the Catholickes wald giue him fuirtie to poffefle, after the reftitution of the
Catholickes Religion, twa abaies quhilke he hes, that hee fuld even prefently bee
altogether ane of ours : Hee intends to fend the Colonell JIalkerftoun, to accompanie certaine captaines and gentilmen to Spaine, and almaift foiu-e hundreth
fouldeours all faife from the nawfrage in our lies. And becaufe thay are in
great neceflltie, he is jnirpofed to accommod thame with fliips, victuals and
vther things neceffare, to teftifie thairby to the King of Spaine, the affection hee
hes, to doe him maift humble and affectioned fervice : And gif we think it good,

27JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 335

lies offerit himfelfe to ga out of t'le countrj^ and to ga offer himlelfe to your
hieneire in the Law Countries, and be your advile tliairafter, doe the like to his
Majeftie Catholike in Spaine. Bot heerevpon, wee fall advife vpon the maift
expedient : Gif wee may alwayes be aflTurit of him, he will bee alfe profitable for
the well of our caufe, as ony lord in Scotland : For he lies great dependanee about
this towne, quhilke is the iirincipall of Scotland, as allwa, vpon the fronterris of

.,- iii A counsel! of

England. Hee lies off'erit to maintaine and defend me againlt all tliat wold at- chosen men for
tempt againis me. Wee haue chofen for every Catholike lord a gentleman of the Jonrare* erected
wifeft and faithfull Catholikes, and belovit of their friends, to ferve tharae of a ^^^^Jl'j^^^ ^7^!_^.=
counlell, and to conveen at al occafions, to refolve the maift expedient that mav '•i?'''='^<; '"'^'•-

prises.

concern the well of our caule, according to the will and intentioun of thair lordis,
qulia hes obleift thamefelfis to approve and execute thair relblutions, and nawife
to contraveine the fame. And bee that moyan, we hope to proceede with greater
foliditie and effect, than wee have done heirtofoir : Alwayes, thir fall knaw na
thing of our intelligences thair, nor our fiiiall intentiounes, bot according to the
exigence of the effaires I'all be in hand, and that fuperficially, and without difcovering our felfis OA'er farre.

gour hienefte fall vnderftand, bee the particulare Letters of the lordis, that
quhilke reftes to bee faid to yow by thir prefentis : Be refoun quhairof, I will
make end, maift humbly kiffing your hienes handis : And prayand God to give
yow all tlie gude hope and felicitie ye defire. From Edinburgh, the 24i of lanuarie, 1589.

Your hieneffe maift humble and maift affectioned fervitor,

Robert Bruce.'

(Jun. 12 ) — Charges ordained to be given to the keepers and withholders of
the ' placeis, houffis, touris and fortaliceis of Strathbogy, Boig of Geycht,
Innernes, Slanes, Douglas, Bothuill, Dryinmen, Ruthuen in Bad3enauch, Crawfurde, Auchindoun, Gartlie, Peill, Birnes, Balgawy, to rander and dehjiier the
Jamiju to the Herauldis, purfevantis or vthiris officeris, executouris of the faides
Letteris ; and to remove thame felffis and thair feruandis furth thairof, within
xxiiij houris,' under the pain of Treafon.

(Jun. 13.) — Robert LoGxVXE of Reftalrig, ordained to be denounced rebel,
for not apjiearing before the King and Council, to anfwer a charge at the inftance
of Robert Gi'ay burgefs of Edinburgh ; ' makand mention. That quhair vpoun
the fecund day of Aprile left, he being pafling in peceable and quiet maner to
Beruik, for doing of certane his leftiim effeai'is and bufynes, lippynning for na

* In tlie Advocates' Library, tliere is also a copy of the same Tract, printed verbatim with the Edition from which the present has been taken. It is chiefly in Black Letter. Another Edition was
' printed at London by T. Snodham, and are to be fould at the houle of T. Elle, 1603,'

336 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 159+.

trouble nor injurie of ony perfonis ; treuth it is, that Johnne alias JoJelde
Hoxildie and Petir Craik (' lioulliald') feruandis to Robert Logane of Reftalrig,
■with three vthiris thair compliceis, vnibefett his hie way and palFage, befyde the
Bowyrod ; quha not onlie reft and fpuilzeit fra him nyne hundreth and fiftie
pimdis money quliilk he had vijoun him, hot alfwa, maift cruellie and barbarouflie invadit and perfewit him of his lyfte, hurte and wovmdit him in the heid,
and llraik him with diners vtheris bauch ftraikis vpoun his body, to the grite
danger and perrill of his lyfFe, to the faid complenaris vtter wrak and euill example of vthiris to committ the lyke rubberie and violence,' &c. Logan failed
to appear and to prelent thefe perfons, for whom he was refponfible.

(Jul. 11.) — Johnne Eler ' citienair of the toun of Danflvene,' as prociu-ator for
Joachym Eler, Michael Meves and other citizens of Danskeiie, obtain Lettei-s
for charging ' Patrik Erll of Orknay, Johnne Forret of Fingaik, and Dauid Hoppringle, mercheant and burges of Edinbui'gh, for the wrangous, violent
and maifterfull fpoliatioun and away-taking fra the faidis perfewaris, of ane fliip
of the toune of Uanfkene, callit ' The Ark of Noy' (Noah,) with hir ankeris, cabillis, towis, furnitour, and certane vtheris guidis and geir.'

(Jul. 22.) — Proci>amation, that ' the Kingis Maieftie, now finding the effectis of the traiterous practizeis of his dilloyall and maift vnthankfuU and vnnaturall fubiectis fafer (fofar) procedit, as the Jesuitis, the peiuiitious fpringis
and inftrumentis of tliir euills ar returnit ; not fnnplie, hot accumpanyit with
ftrangearis, and furnifl with money to fteir vp and profequute a i)ublict wear,
aganis God, his trew Religioun, his Maiefteis perfoun and authoritie,' &c. ' For
refifting and repreffing of quhilk maift treflbunabill and odious attemptatis, his
Maieftie willis and effectuuflie requiris all Minifteris of Godis worde, within the
haill Prelbitereis ouer all the realme, eirniftlie to travell with all his hienes
faithfull and gude fubiectis of all efteatis, allweill to burgh as to land ; to tak
this mater in harte, as that quhilk importis the prefent dangear and hafard of
thair Religioun and confcience ; the lyffis of tliame lelffis, thair wyffis, bairnis
and kynnisfolkis ; the concj^ueift of thair natiue cuntrey and of thair awne laudis,
levingis and guidis, vail^eantlie defendit be thair worthie foirbearis, vnto this
age ; fra that maift crewell and vnmercifuU Natioun of Span5ie and thair adherentis ; And to that effect, to move the Baronis and gentilmen in euerie fliyre
or prifl)iterie, and the Proueft and bailleis of ilk burgh, to convene with all fjjeid,
in lie convenient jilaceis as thay fall think maift expedient, to advife vpoun the
bell and maift exjjedient meanis to refift and repres the inteftine and fore3Tie
inemeyis of trew Religioun, &c. ; and to reporte vnto his Maieftie thair guidwillis, and offeris to prepair thame felffis with armour and victuallis, to pas fordwart with his Maieftie, vpoun the nixt aduertifment.'
(Jul. 25.) — A Commission granted to ' Archibald Erll or Ergyle

28JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 337

Lord Campbell and Lome, Johnne Erll of Athoill Lord Balvany, and
JoHNNE Lord Forbes,' conftituting them ' his hienes Lieutennantis and Jiifticeis within the boundis of the rtierefdoms of Abirdene, Banff, Elgin, Fores,
Name, Inuei-nes, Ci-omartie and Tarbett,' to ' pas fordwart, ferche, feik, tak, apprehend, or vtherwife to perfew to the deid, with fyre, fwerd and all kynd of rigour and extremitie, all his hienes declairit Traitouris, rebellions and vnnatnral lubjectis, Jesuitis, Seminarie Priestis, Trajfiapibig Papistis, and thair refettaris,' &c.

{Eodem die.) — Proclamation calling the Earls, Barons, &c. of the fliires
of Edinburgh, Haddington, Berwick, Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles, to repair
to his Majefty, at Edinburgh, Aug. 26 ; thole within the bounds of Lanark,
Dumfries, ^Vigton, Ayr, Tarbet, Bute, Renfrew, Dumbarton, Linlithgow, Stirling, Clackmannan, Kirkcudbright and Annandale, Kile, Carrick and Cunninghame, at Stirling, on Aug. 27 ; Fife, Kinrofs, Perth, Stratherne and Menteith,
at Perth, on Aug. 28 ; Forfar and Kincardine, at Brechin, on Aug. 29 ; Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Forres, Nairn, Invernefs and Cromarty, at Aberdeen, on Aug.
31 ; ' and fra thyne to pas fordwart as thay falbe commandit, for refilling and
reprefTnig of the trelTounable practizes and conlpiraceis of the faidis vnnatural
lubiectis, or perfute of thame, as occalioun lalbe offerrit.' Licences to be granted
to the ' ageit, dileafit and infirme, thay payand fie relTounable compofitioun thairfoir, for the furtherance of this feruice, cheiflie the payment of the wageis of
horfemen and futemen,' &c. Thefe Treafons are faid to have been highly aggravated, by their taking place ' evin in this tyme appointit for his hienes baptifine of his daiTeft fone the Prince, quhome God in his niercie lies grantit to
the conforte of this natioun ; be the affiftance and witneffing of the fouerane
Princeis his maifl; deir freindis and allyes, and commoun welthis, his narreft and
gude nichtbourig.'

(Jul. 31.) — Kanjeauch M'KANgiE of Kintaill was charged to appear and
produce a Commiffion of Jufi;iciary, ' maift inoi'dourlie pafl; aganis the tennour
of the Actis ; and fpeciallie, gevand him pouer to proceid aganis perfones dilaitit
of trefloiinable Fyi-e-rafing, quhilk is onlie propir to the Juftice Generall and
his deputis, and audit na to be tryit befoir ony inferiour judgement.'

(Aug. 2.) — Andko Ker of Fairnyhirft, Thomas Ker his brother, Thomas
Ker of Caveris and Robert Ker of Newtoun, having been denounced rebels, ' for
lubfcryving of ane AfTuirance to Schir Robert Ker appeirand of Cesfurde.' They
are charged ' to pas and entir thair peribnis in warde, within the Cafl;ell of Dunbartane ;' until they obtain themlelves relaxed from the procefs of horn.

(Aug. 15.) — WiELiAME Hay of Linplum to be denounced rebel, for not anI'wering to a charge at the infl;ance of M' Dauid Ogill minifter at Humble, and

vol, l 2 u

338 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

]Vr George Chalmer minifter at Bar, ' that qiiliair, tliay being defyrit be certane
freindis, at his f^jeciall directioun, to haue conuenit with him at ane tryift, vpoun
the ground of his awne landis, for removing of the contrauerfie betuix liim and
the faid M" Dauid, anent the richt of the vicarage of Barro ;' they on 8th inftant
attended, when Hay ' came and mett thame, accumpanyed with three of his feruandis izi amies, and befoir the vttering of ony Ipeiclieis to thame, he fliamefullie and \nihonneftlie jierfewit thame of thair lyveis ; thay haueing na thing,
faiilffing thair buikis in thair handis, flioit and difchargeit his ijiftollett at the
faid M' Dauid, off fett purpois and prouifioun to haue llane him thairwith ; and
he happpining with the fame flioitt to fall, the faid Williame belevit he wes
flane, and left him for deid ; and thaireftir foUowit and perfewit the faid M'
George and prefentit ane bendit piftoUett at him, quhilk mifgave, cheilfit him
three quarteris of ane myle, and had not faillit to haue flane him, wer nocht he
gatt entres within the portis of Hadingtoun, and wes releuit be the inhabitantis
thairof.'

(Aug. 17, apud St?'ht'd'nig.) — Peoclamatiox, referring to the circumftance
of the preceding Proclamations having been iffued, in regular form^; — ' nochtwithflanding, be relfouu of the prefent feafoun and nature of the yeir, and lait
liarveft liklie to follow, be that occafioun, the grite grudge and murmuring of a
grite nowmer of his Maiefteis gude fubiectis, giff thay falbe drawne frome thair
harvifl, cheiflie at that tyme quhen as thair coirnis ar rype and reddy to be
flioirne ; refpecting heirwithall the grite fcairltie of viuers and vtheris necelTaris
for men and horfis, and grite derth that hes followit and yit continewis be that
occafioun ; and laft, the want of ane thouland wageit men on horfe and fute,
thocht neceffar for this purpois and yit not tane vji.' — Therefore the lieges are
ordained to convene at the before-named places, on the laft day of Sei)teniber —
firft, fecond, third and fourth days of October, ' for refifting and repreffing of
the treffounable practizes,' &c.

(Aug. 24.) — ProcsAMAtion, charging ' all and findrie noblemen, gentilmen
and vtheris his liienes faytlifull and gude fubiectis, luifTaris of the honnour of
his hienes and thair iiatiue cuntrey, that thay and euery ane of thame preas be all
gude means poffible to intertene i\\eAmh(issadou7'is [' of findrie Princeis andCommoun-welthis, darreft and narreft freindis to our fouerane lord and ladj^ repairit
to this burgh of Striuiling to the Baptisme of the Peixce, darreft fone to
our fouerane lord,'] and the gentilmen and vtheris being in thair cumiianyis,
freindlie and courteouflie : And that thay may performe the fame the mair eflfectuallie, that thay retene nane in thair cumpany hot fic as ar difcreit, courtas, of
gude inclinatioun, and honneft behauiour ; nawayes factious, querrellous, hot fic
as will vtterlie forbeir to invade or perfew ony maner of perfone or perfonis, or

28JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 339

mak prouocatioun of difpleafoiu-, in worde, deide, or countenance outhir for auld
feid or new, or for qiihatfumeuir caus or occafioun, in coming to this toun, remaning thairin, or depairting tliaii-fra,' &c.

(Sep. 10, apud Harinddhous.) — Act anent Thomas Foullis, goldfmith and
bui'gefs of Edinburgh, in which it is narrated, That in conlideration of the fum
of £14,598 ' jn-efentlie lent and deliuerit to the Kingis Maieftie, and vthirwayis
hes deburfit in certane his hienes awne particulair effairis,' ' his Maieftie hes prefentlie confignit and delyuerit in his handis twa Drinking jwceis of gold, weyand in the hail! fyftene pundis and fyve A'nce of Gold.' And in cafe of non-payment of the above fimi, betuix and the firft day of Nonember next, ' Ordanis
him and Thomas Achiefoun his Maiefteis Maifter cun3eour, to ftryke domi and
cun3ie, and caus the faidis twa drinking peceis of gold to be ftrukin doun and
cun3eit, in ffyve pund peceis ;' ' The fuperplus, giff ony beis, to mak fiuthcwmand and delyuer to his Maiefteis felff.'

(Eodem die.) — Another ' DrinJciiig j)cce of gold, weyand tuelflf pundis and
fyve vnce of gold,' coufigned, on the fame conditions, with Thomas Achiefoun
Maifter Cwn3eour, for payment of £6000, advanced by Johxne Arxott burges of Edinburgh. Achiefoun becomes cautioner for his JMajefty ; and for his
relief, he is empowered to ' ftryke doun and cun3ie' the Drinking pece, if the
money be not paid within the time ftipulated ; and after fatisfying Arnott, to
pay the furplus to his Majefty.

{Eodem die.) — Johnne Arxott gets Affignation of the ffew-farms and ffewmailes of his Majefty's proper lands of Colbrandifpeth, for ' this inftant crope
and yeir' 1591-, and of the crojis and years 1595 and 1596 ; and alfo the ffewmails of his highnefs's proper lands of Orkney and Yetland, of the years 1595
and 1596 ; for funis expended before the ' incwmiug of the ftrangearis to this
honnourable tjane of the baptizing of the Prince,' viz. £5000 for ' wjaie and
beir ;' and ' 8000 markis, to the intertenying of his INIaiefteis and the Quenis
grace, his darreft bedfellowis, awne houffis, quhan all vthir moyane failit ;' which,
with ' annualrent,' then amounted to £11,500.

{Eodem die.) — ' Proclamatioun for the North.' The ' Erllis lordis,'
&c. ordained to meet at Edinburgh, Sep. 30, at Dundee, Oct. 4, and at other
times as fpecified in Letters to be directed, at Aberdeen ; with thirty days' victuals and provifion, after their reaching Aberdeen ; — ' for refilling of the treffounable practizeis of the faidis dedairit tratouris,' &c.

(Sep. 30.) — Act in favour of Tho:mas Foullts goldfmith, biirges of Edinburgh, that he had ' prefentlie, at his Maiefteis eirnift delire, lent and deburfit
the fowine of £12,000, for outredding of fmdrie his hienes eflfearis, fpeciallie the
payment of the wageis of horfemen and futemen, leveyed for the advancement

340 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

of his hienes author! tie and feruice in the North pairtis of this realme.' Until
repayment, ten per cent intereft is ftipulated to be paid.

Proclamation againft Fkancis fumtyme Erll Bothuill.
{Eodem die.) — Forsamekle as the vnnaturall and maift odious Rebellionis
of Frances fumtyme Erll Bothuill, is now manifefted to the haill warld,
in hie and inanifeft contempt of our louerane lord and his avictoritie ; ffirft,
breking Avarde oute of the Caflell of Edinburgh ; Invading his Maieftie vndir
cloude of nicht, at his Palaceis of Haliruidhous and Falkland ; Awaitting on
his Maieftie, at his ouerpafling at the Ferreyis of Leith and Kinghorne ; Seiking at findrie tymes, belyde the burrowis of Edinburgh and Linlythgow, to haue
feafed on his hienes perfone, at the hunting ; Entering in his prefence, in niaift
irreverent and barbarous maner, the xxiiij day of July, the yeir of God 1593, at
his Palice of Haliruidhous foirfaid ; Clengeing him felfF of the odious cryme of
Witchecraft, in a Judgement, quhair he wes baitli Juge and pairty ; Preafmg
his Maieftie (yea almaift compelling him aganis his harte, giff he had not preferrit his honnour and libertie of his Crowne to his awne lyfTe,) to capitulat
with him, in matei-is maift foule and ignominious : And the thryd of Aprile laft,
in his difpyte of his Maieftie, cwmiug with difi^layed baneris in ficht of ftrangeris and in his hienes awne prefence, committing prefum^ituus infolenceis vpon
his hienes gude lubiectis : By quhilkis treflbunable and continuall indigniteis,
the faid fumtyme Erll, labouring his Maieftie now the Ipace of three yeiris and
mair, he hes perturbit his hienes and his eftate, in fie forte, as he had na lafair
to correct the practizaris with ftrangeris for fubuerfioun of Religioun and amitie
betuix the tua realmes, quhairvnto baith his hienes awne confcience and eirnift
prayeris of his gude fubiectis urged him ; till now, of lait, his hienes, hoiping be
his lang patience, to haue moved the faid fumtyme Erll to fum conformitie and
humiliatioun, he aftignit the fecund day of October nixt to cum, for going fordwart in that Crifteane feruice aganis the faidis Pi'actizaris ; hot the faid Boithuell, fliaiking of all Religioun (with opinioun quhairof he had abufed the fimple
people, during the fpace of three yeiris foirfaid), and making fliipwrak of all
honneftie, lies enterit in freindfchip with the faidis Practizaris, refiauit thair
gold, and promifled to thame, befoir the laid fecund day of Octolier nixt, ather to
apprehend and pofles his hienes perfone, or then, giff he fett fordwart to the
North, fua to perturb the South pairtis of this realme, be furprifing the Caftellis
of Blaknes, Thomptalioun, Bruchtie, Brint-Uand, He of Man, and be vthiris incurfionis ; as his hienes Ibuld be forced, vndoing juftice with the faid pi-actizaris,
to returne with fliame and difcredite : And to that effect, the xiij of September
inftant, or thairaboute, to haue invadit his Maieftie, vndir filence of nicht, at his

28Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 341

Palice of HaljTuidlious foirfaid, Avitliout fpairing ony perfone, from the Vttet
5eit {outer gate) to his bed chahiier ; haueing, for that purpois, three or fourefcoir
of his rebellious complices warned to haue concurred with him, at the place and
tyme foirfaid ; and immediatlie eftir his Maietteis a])prehenfioun, to haue caryed
him captiue to the Caftell of Blaknes, (the keipar quhairof, being corrupt, is now
execute for his demereitis,) thair till haue detenit his hienes, till his difordourit
outlawis had cum frome the Bordouris, quha wer indeid vndir wairning to haue
mett tlie xv of this inftant, at Jedburgh, and fra that to haue haided to Bothuill
for his releiff ; and to his Maiefteis perpetuall fliame, how fone thay had hard
of his captiuitie, gift' God of his mercy had not, be Letteris vndir the faid Bothuillis awne hand, quhilkis wer found vyton W Allane Orme, ane of his fervandis,
detected the names of his aflbciattis, quhairby fum of thame wer apprehendit,
and the reft fugitiue, and his Maiellie through devyne grace deliuerit of that
moft dangerous Trealibun : And as the faid BothuiUis dili'embled hypocrifie,
thir three yeiris paft, had prociu-ed to him the fauour of ower mony of his people,
be the quhilk he was inabled to work all thir infolencies aganis his hienes, fo
wes his Maieftie, not onlie aganis his natui-all inclinatioun, (being moir inclynnit
to pitie nor to pvniflie,) forced nochtwithftanding, to pvnilhe fum of his dependaris, for the terrour of nheris'; hot be the fame fauour of the people borne to the
faid Bothuell, his hienes wes diftracted and difabilled to proceid in the gude caus
foirfaid, with that eirniftnes that he intendis : And fo, be the ignorant and fooliflie affectioun of his liegis borne to the faid Bothuill, he was impellied and haldin
bak fra that quhilk thay maift defirit, and he wes maift willing vnto ; flbr thay,
conforting the faid Bothuill, maid him bauld, euerie three monethis to mak a
new Confpiracie ; quhilk forceit his hienes, for faulftie of his lyffe and honnour,
to neglect all vtheris actionis, and onlie to prouyde aganis his barbarous and
difi)erat invafioun : Bot feing his defectioun from the trew Religioun, quhairwith, in maner foirfaid, to this hour, lie hes cloiked all his Treafonis, is now manifeft be his actionis, all Letteris fend to the Minifteris beiring his accord with
the faidis Papiftis ; his hienes hoipis that nane of his gude fubiectis, treulie profefling tlie faid Religioun, fall conforte or harbour him heireftir, ony mair ;
bot, in relpect the faidis Pajjiftis and he now being all joyned in ane rebellious
focietie, haue maift fliamefullie abufed his hienes faid liegis, thay falflie pretending liis hienes fauour, and Bothuill als falflie pretending a cloik of Religioun : His hienes ordanis Letteris to be direct to Officeris of ai-mes, fliereffis
in that parte, chargeing thame to pas to the mercat croceis of the heid-burrowis
of this realnie, and vtheris j)laceis neidfull, and in his hienes name and authoritie to mak publicatioun heirof, that nane pretend ignorance of the fame : And to
command and charge all and fmdrie his hienes lieges, ordanit be his formair

342 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

Proclainatioun to attend vpoiui his Maieftie, that thay convene thame felffis, in
maift fenfible and fubftantious maner, to accnmi)any and defend his IMaieftie, in
his niaift Criftiane feruice ; quhairin eueiy ane of thanie, eftir a meafiu-e, hes als
grite intereft as him felfF, and on the fucces quhairof dependeth the eftate of the
faid Religioun, ftabilitie of his Crowne, and thair fanlftie : As alfwa, commanding and chargeing famony of his Maiefteis fubiectis as ar pennittit to remane at
hame fra this prelent Raid and Armey, faithfullie to affift and concur with his
hienes Lieiitemient, 'Williame Erll of Mortoun, and all vtheris his Maiefteis officeris, Commiflionai'is, or Wardanis, for rejireffing of the faid Bothuill, or ony
vtheris his Maiefteis rebellis infolenceis, during his hienes abfens and remaning
in the North ; according to his Maiefteis Commiffioun gevin to the fame effect :
Certifeing thame that dois in the contrair, thay falbe repute and haldin gilty of
all crpnes committit be the faidis rebellis, and perfewit and pvnift thairfoir with
all rigour and extremitie, in example of vtheris.

(Oct. 1.) — ' Pkoclamatioun, for concurring with Archibald Erll of
Ergyi.e and JohnN'e Lord Forbes, Lieuttennentis in the North pairtis of
this realme.' The lieges are charged, ' that thay and ilk ane of thame, weill
bodin in feir of weir, addres thame felffis and joyne in cumpany with the faidis
Lieutennentis, concur, affift and tak ane efauld and trew parte with thame, following thair directioun in the perfute of the faidis declairit tratouris,' &c.

(Oct. 2.) — Licences for ' abiding from the Raid' are oi-dained to pafs the
Signet and to be duly regiftered, otherwife to be held as null.

(Oct. 4.) — ' Proclamatioun for concm-ring with Buckcleuch (Sir Walter
Scott of Brauxholme kn'), Keipar of Liddifdale.' The Wardens of the Eaft and
Middle IVIarches and the lieges are directed to ' ryife, concur, fortifie, affift and
repair to the faid Sir "W^ilter, at all tymes as thay falbe requirit thairto, be his
Miffiue Letteris, &c. for perfute, taking and apprehending, refifting and reprefting of the infolence of his hienes declairit traitouris,' &c. This Proclamation
proceeds on the narrative, that the King had ' gevin and difponit to him the office thairof (the Keeperfliij) of Liddifdale), heritablie, in tyme cwming.'

(Eodem die.) — ' Proclamatioun to affift the Laird of Cesfurde,
Wardane' (of the Middle March). The lieges within thefe bounds, ' and in
fpeciall, the inhabitantis of the burgh of Jedburgh,' are charged to concur, &c. as
in the former Proclamation.

(Oct. 8, apiid Dundee.) — Act in favour of Sir James Skrymgeour of Dudop kn', Conftable of Dundee, that ' albeit his Maieftie hes appointit ane of his
hienes Page of Honnour to beir ANE Cornett Blanche befoir his hienes, during the tyme of the prefent Raid, for the bettir attendance to be gevin be his

28JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 343

houlhakl feruandis on his Maiefteis awne perfone ; yit fall the fame uawayes
derogat nor preinge the faid James Infeftmentis,' &c. viz. ' the i)lace and preferment of BEIRING HIS HIENES Ba>:er AND Standart before his Maiefteis
perfone and his fuceelfonris, at tymes of Oiftis, Weiris, Raidis, Armeis and Battellis ;' — ' nather fall the fame Blanche Cornett be borne nor vfit eftir his Maiefteis Baner and Standart foirfaid beis difplayit, hot the fame Blanche Cornett
rollit vp.' — ' And in the meantyme, qnhill tryall be tane, the faid Blanche Cornett fall not be borne, except dnring the tyme of this prefent Raid.'

(Oct. 16, apiid Ahirdeiie.) — Proclamatiox, that ' his Maieftie, with aduise
of the Lordis of Secreit Counfale, lies conclndit and refolnit to remane and not
to depairt furth of thir North pairtis, vnto the tyme the fame be quieted and
fetled, to Godis glorie, his hienes obediens, eafe, repofe and fuirtie of all liis
faithfull and gude fubiectis,' &c. The ' Erllis, Lordis, Baronis, fubftautious
ffewaris and landit Gentilmen, &c. togidder with the inhabitants of buiTowis,
duelland within the boundis of the flierefdome of Perth, (except the inhabitantis
of the Kerfe, be neth the Watter of Hay, allanai'lie,) Striuiling, Linlythgw,
Renfrew, Dunblane, the Cuntreis of Ros and Ardmannauch, ikc. to repair to his
Maieftie, at Abirdene, vpoun the xxviij of October inftant ; and fra thyue to pas
forward,' &c.

(Oct. 19-) — ' All Houssis, quhairin God hes bene diftionnourit, (' be committing of Ydolatrie and prophaning of the facramentis,') ordauit to he cajjiii
doiiii.'' — ' In fpeciall the placeis, fortaliceis and houlfis of Strathbogy, Slanes
and Newtoun, — and that, in fignne and meraorie of the vnnaturall defectioun
and rebellioun of the awnaris and pofleflbures thairof for the tyme, aganis God,
his Maieftie and his authoritie.'

(Oct. 23.) — ' The Capitaxes and Commandaris of his Maiefteis horfemen
and futemen falbe anfuerable to the inhabitantes of the Burgh of Abirdene,
for payment to thame of the ordinair chargeis and expenffis of the perfonis vxi-!
dir thair cliarge,' &c.

{Eodem die.) — Act in favour of the Burgh of Aberdeen, abfolving their
Provoft. &c. for not apprehending and prefenting ' 3fr James Gordoioi, fadirbruthir to George fumtyme Erll of Huntlie, eftir his landing at the raid and
heavin of Abirdene, nor yit for latting to libertie of certane ftrangearis quhilk
arryvit and landit with him,' — nor for refetting with declared traitors, &c. ' at
the horn for the Murtliour and Slaucliter of vmq'" James Erll of ^lurray.'

[Eodem die.) — ' Tuentie ftane wecht of poulder, togidder witli certane mattokis, gavillokis and vthercs werklwmes and materiallis for dimolifling and cafting doun of houffes and fortaliceis, valuat and eftimat in the liaill' to £548, 6s. 8d.
to be reftored to the Burgh of Aberdeen, or the value of fuch as may be loft or
deftroyed, &c. to be paid.

3ii CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594.

(Oct. 28, apiid Terrisoule.) — ' Act anent the doiai-casting of Strathbogie.'

(Nov. 4, apud Ahirdene.) — ' Capitaxe Thomas Ker and James Ker his
bruthir' ordered to be denounced, for not anfwering ' twicheing tliair treffounable affiftance, &c. with George fumtynie Erll of Huntlie,' &c.

(Nov. 7.) — ' Act, quhair the Baroxis gaif thair Aithis to affift the Lieutennents.' The names inferted are ' Marilliaell, Forbes, Lovat, I\rKanzie, Grant,
M'Intoilie, Buchane, Finlatter,Drum, Innes, Phillorth, Effihnouth, Frendraucht,
Straloch, Muchallis, Duffus, Vrie, Corfe, Monyinufl^, Corfmdae, Toquhone youngair, Tutour of Cromartie, Alter, Auchtirallen, Boquliallie, Towy-Barclay, "Wardres, Ravynnifcrag, Ludquharne, Pitcaple, Pittindreich, Hairthill, Birnes."

{Eodem die.)—' Commissioux of Lieuteunandrie' granted to ' Ludouik
Duke of Lexxox, Lord Darnelie, Tarboltoun, IMethuene and Aubigny, his
Maiefteis Lieutennent and Juftice, within the boundis of the Schirefdomis of
Abirdene, Banff, Elgin, Fores, Name, Inuernes and Cromarty, allweill to Burgh
as landwart, regalitie as ryaltie.' It is directed chiefly againft the Earls of
Huntl'ie, Angus and Errol, ' Mr James Gordoun, WUUum Og'duij, Bohert
Ahircrumhij, and all vtheris Jesnites,' &c. and their refetters.

{Eodem die.) — ' Declaratioux in fauouris of the Erll IMarifliaell and
vtheris,' that the burning and deftroying of the place and fortalice of Ballogy,
of the month of October lall ; and thereafter demoliiliing the place and fortalice
in Newtoun, ' wes and is done be his Maiefteis expres command, allowance and
approbatioun.'

(Nov. 8.) — ' WARRAXD_/b/- nudcing off Baxdis' is granted to ' the Baronis,
&c. of the North pairtis, alfwele for the luirtie of the trew Religioun and of
thame felffis and all vtheris profefTouris thairof, as for refifting of the Invalioun
of his Maiefteis declairit traitouris,' &c. And this, notwithftanding of all Acts
to the contrary.

(Nov. 28, apud Haliruidhous.) — ' Archibald Erll of Ergyle promittit,
band and oblift him to mak all the perfonis of the Surneuame of Campbell, &c.
anftierable to juftice ; and that he fall ather caufe thame fatisfie pairteis Ikaitheit,
fvva that na complaint falbe miniftrat to his hienes ; or then entir thame befoir
his hienes or his Juftice, to vndirly tryall and pvnifliement, as efTeires ;' ' conforme to the tennour of the Generall Band, lawis and Actis of Parliament.'

(Dec. 19.) — TiiO-^Lvs Foullis, goldfmith, ordained to retain Jewels belonging to his Majefty, till payment lliould be made to him of 5900 merks due by
the King, ' for certane chenzeis and goldfmith werk ;' viz. ' Threttene fraall diamontis with chattonis of gold : auchtene chattonis of gold left with rubeis : and
fyve grit rubeis fett in chattonis of gold, enamelat reid, quhyte and blak.'

28JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 345

(Eodem die.) — ' Ratificatioun of the Duke of Lennox Commissioun,
with a pouer to him to grant Remiffionis.'

{Eodem r//V.)— Claud and Alexander Hamilton, fons of James H. of
Levingftoiin, ordained to be denounced rebels ; for coming with their accomplices, ' bodin in feir of weir, of the fpeciall caufmg, command, &c. of the laid
James, and of Agnes Cokburne his fpous, betuix tuelff and ane eftir none, to the
ffauld of Preiflinche, quhair fliamefullie and barbarouflie thay hocheit and flew
with fwordis fevin young ky with calfF, fax oxin, and fyve floittis and queyis of
three yeir auld,' &c. ' And not content heirwitli, thay come, vpoun the xxv of
November laft, furtli of tlie jilace and Peill of Levingftoun to the place of Bynnis,
quhair Patrik thair eldar bruthir duellis, and thair, efter thay had dynnit {dined)
and confultit with the faid Patrik, thay come to the milne of PJiilpftoun, pertening
to James Lord Lindfay of the BjtIs heritablie, and to Dauid Dundas of Preiftinche in tak and alFedatioun, and brak the llanes, quheillis, hopper, huipis and
gangand graith of the faid milne all in peceis, ftrak and dang thair millaris, held
bendit piftoUettis to thair breifl;is, and caufit thame fweir that thay fould duell
na langair at the faid milne,' &c. : — And that ' A-poiui tlie laft day of Nouember,
they come to the barneyaird of Dudingftoun and patt fyre in three of the rtakkis,
of purpois and intentioun to haue brint the haill barne3^aird.' Lord Lindfay of
the Bires, and Dundas of Preftinch, appeared pei'fonally to jnirfue the Hamiltons
before the King and Council ; but they all abfented themfelves. [See Feb. 3.
1.594-5.]

(Jan. 9. 1594-5.) — Williame Polwart, of Rottonraw, ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing to anfwer to a Complaint at the inftance of Sara
Hunter, relict of Andro Joufty, merchant, burgels of Edinburgh : That upon
Dec. 23 laft, he ' with vtheris his compliceis, bodin in feir of weir, come vndir
cloude and filencc of nicht to tlie complenaris duelling place, witbiii the burgh
of Edinburgh, quhair ilio wes, &c. and eftir that the laid Williame had craftelie
gottin hir yett oppin, he appointit ane nowmer of his compliceis to awaitt at the
faid yett, to impede and ftay all thofe quha fould happin to cum to the laid complenaris releiff; and he liini felff, with the reft of his infolent comj)liceis entcrit
within hir houl'e, and lie ane verie barbarous and vncumelie behauiour, did quliat
in thame lay to haue revilTed hir, and to liaue carj-ed hir with thame quhair
thay pleifit, and to haue rubbit and fpuilzeit hir houfe ; quiiilk they had not
faillit to haue done, wer not be the Prouidence of God flio wes deliuerit of that
dangeir, be the lielp of fum of hir nichtbouris.'

(Jan. 19.) — ' PitoCLAlslATloux that nane cum to the Conventioun or place of
his IMaiefteis refidence, hot fic as ar writtin for.'

{Eodem die.) — ' The Kingis Declaratioun, anent THE Laiud of JohnneVOL. L 2 X

346 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1594-5.

STOXis Plegeis.' — That ' in cais ony perfone of the name of Johnneftoun, or
vtheris for quhome certane plegeis ar now enterit, fall commit ftouth-reiff, oppreffioun or blude, in thair thifteous deidis ; or contravene any of the conditiones
for the qnhilk thay ar now enterit, at ony time heireftir,' if the principal party
committer of the theft, &c. be not given up * to anfueir for thair awne deid, and
to vndirly tryale and jivniihement thairfoir, as appertenis, within xv dayis nixt
eftir requifitioun,' ' the jilege or plegeis of that branche or brancheis fwa offending, to be execute to the deid :' And that Sir James Johnneftoun of Dimikellie kn', and Sir Walter Scott of Branxholme kn', (' quha hes gevin Band for
fulfilling of certane conditiones') ' falbe haldin to enter vther plegeis,' &c.

(Feb. 3.) — ' Jami- s HAiMMii/rouN of the Peill (of Levingftoun,) Agnes Cockburn his fpoufe, and James, John, Claud, and Alexander, their fons, were ' denunceit rebellis ;' (See Dec. 19, 1594.) and Alexander Cokburn and Hector Lokhart, their fervants, were alfo ordained to be denounced rebels, for not anfwering
a complaint at tlie inftance of ' James Lord Lindfay of the Byris, David Dundas
of Preftinche, and Jolin Yallowleis, Meffinger (at arms) : That upon the xiij Januaiy laft, the laid Johnnie Y. accumpanyed with Michael Bynnie feruand to
the faid Lord, and Thomas Huttoun feruand to the faid Dauid, as witneffis to
him, with foure feuerall Letteris and chargeis ; and hauing paft to the Place of
the Peill, and at the j^ett thairof, the faid Agnes, &c. cwming fm-th at the faid
yett, tuke the faid meliinger be the craig (throat), ftruck him vpone the held,
amies and flioulderis, and gaif him mony bauch ftraikis with piftollettis ; held
bendit piftollettis to his bi-eift, caufit thame to fweir neuir to vfe ony Letteris
agains thame ; and in end, with mony threatningis and minafTingis, in ane verie
barbarous and vncouth maner, forceit the fold Meflinger to eit and fwallie the
iiaill copyis of the faidis Letteris, and tuke the principall Letteris frome him ;
and thaireftir, lliamefullie and cruellie dang the faid Witneffis with bendit piftollettis and quhinzearis, and left thame for deid : The lyke of quhilkis IhamefuU and prefumptuus infolenceis hes fendle bene hard of in the In-cuntrey ; the
preparatiue quhairof will not faill to breid a greitair contempt of all law and
juftice, tlu-ouch the Iiaill realme, giff this be fulferrit to pas ouer vnpvnift.'

(Feb. 4.) — Proclamation 'anent the lliuiting with hacquebutis and jiiftollettis.'

(Feb. 11.) — The Subscriptionis off the foirfaltit Lordis recognosceit.
FousAMEKi.E ScHiR James Scott of Balueiy, knicht, being fufpectit and dilaitit of trafficque and intelligence with his Maiefteis declairit Tratouris, rebellious and. vunaturall fubiectis ; and thaireftir taken, apprehendit, and at laft
committit to warde, and findrie tynies exaniinat thairvpoun ; in end, he planelie
confeffit and declairit, That in the moneth of Auguft laftbipaft, he, being in cum28JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 347

panie with Williame fumtyme Erll of Angus, George fumtj-me Erll
OF HuNTLiE, Francis fumtyme Erll Bothuill, Francis fmntyme Erll
OF Errole, George Eull of Caithxes and vmq'^ Schir Patrick GornoUN of Aucliindoun kn', in ane Oiftlair-hous, befyde the Kirk of Mennmre ;
thair wes produceit be tlie faid fumtyme Erll of Angus, certane Heidis and Articles, altogiddir writtin with his awin hand, quhairu])oun ane Band wes appointit to be maid : Quhilkis, eftir thay wer red in thair prelens and audiens, and
had aduifit, confultit, concludit and aggreit tliairupovui, at lad thay all fubfcriuit
the lame with thair awne liaudis ; lyke as, the laid Schir James gaif his fubfcriptioun thairto, as witnes : Quhilkis Heidis and articles being thaireftir committit to his cuftodie and keiping, he laitlie produceit and delyuerit the famin to
his Maieftie ; be quhome, and be the Lordis of his Secreit Counfale and SefRoun,
and certane vtheris bell acquentit with thair liand-writtis and fublcrii)tionis, the
famin being fene, confidderit and tryit, and thaireftir compairit and conferrit with
vtheris thair hand-writtis and fubfcriptionis, The Kingis Maiestie and the
faidis Lordis lies Recognosceit, and as thay Weill and treulie vndirlland, Recognofceis the Subfcriptionis of the faidis Heidis and Articlis, quhairupoun the faid
Band wes appointit to be maid as faid is, to be the verie lubfcriptionis and handwrittis of the i)erfonis particularlie aboue inentionat. And for the bettir refolutioun and fatisfactioun of his IMaielleis gude fubiectis heiraneut, Ordanis ane
Act to be maid heirupoun, ad futuram rei memoriuin.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. Ex certa scientia.
J. T. CANCiaLARius. Mar. Orknay. J. L. Lindsay. Alex. L. Hwme. Flemyng.
Allane Lord Cathcart. Tho. M' Glammis. Blantyre. Neubottle. R. SecreTARius. LiNCLOUDEN. Alex. Hwme. Tracquair. Culluthy. (David Setoii of)
Parbroitii, coniptrollair. S. Jo. Hw.me (of Sputt). P. Young.

{Eodem die.) — Johnne Erll of Montuois and .... Maister of MoxTROIS find caution (Sir Johnne Murray of Tullibairdin) ' that thay fall compeir
perfonallie, befoir the Kingis Maieftie and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, and anfuer
and vnderly fie ordour as falbe i)refcryuit to thame, tuicheing the lait vnhapijy
accident quhilk fell oute betuix thame and thair freiudis, on the ane parte, and
THE Laird of Calder and Schir Ja:mes Sandielandis of Slamannane
Maifter knicht, thair kin and freindis vpoun the vthir parte, vpoune the laft day
of Januar laftbipaft ;' the Earl luider the pain of £2000, the Mafter under the
pain of 2000 merks.

(Feb. 12.) — Act againft James Douglas, ibmotime of Spott, tliat ' nut onlie
deieruis the faid James Douglas maift rigorous and extreaine pvnilhment, for tliir
particulair, befydis the formair crymes for quhilkis he wes foirfalt ; hot the cenfuris of the Kirk aucht to proceid agauis him,' &c.

348 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1595.

(Feb. 14.)— Andro Makfarlane of Arroquhair, Andro Dow M. and Malcolme Beg M. to be denounced rebels, for not appearing, to haue vndirlyne fie
ordour as Ibiild haue bene prefcriuit to thanie, tuicheing the obferuatioun of his
hienes peax, quietnes and gude reule in the cuntrey,' &c.

(Feb. 17.) — Act ' anent the Duke off Lennox proceidingis in the North ;'
and ' exonering' him and his councillors, as having difcharged their duty faithfully.

{Eodem die.) — Act ' anent dimoleiffing of the Place, houfles and Fortalice of
the Ckaig, pertening to Johnne Ogiluy.' Patrick Lox'd Gray and Patrick Mafter of Gray, got full Conimiffion, as Sherifs-principal of Forfarfliire, to take all
neceffary fteps for that purpofe.

(Feb. 28.) — Harie Steuart of Cragyhall becomes furety for the entry of James
Sandielandis of Calder, &c. (See Feb. 11.)

(Mar. 5.) — James Master of Ogiluy finds furety (David O. of Quhytefeild.)
that he iliall not fupply, refet nor intercommune with ' Johnne Ogiluy of Craig,
nor na vtheris his Maiefteis declairit tratouris and rebellis,' &c., under the pain
of 2000 merks. He is denounced rebel on Mar. 27.

(Mar. 15.) — Act againft his Majefty's Traitors and rebels.

{Eodem die.) — Proclamation againft refetting, fupplying or intercommuning with declared Traitors, &c.

(Mar. 26. 1595.) — ' Proclamatioun that nane tranfporte Erllis of
Huntlie and Errole within this Jvingdome.'

(Mar. 28.) — Dame Jeane Gordoun, Countesse of Suthirland, finds
furety, under the pain of 2000 merks, that llie lliall not refet, fupply nor intercommune with any of his IMajefty's declared Traitors, &c.

(Jun. 18.) — Proclamation, ' that nunefurneis the rebellis in Irland.'
' Forfamekle as Angus Makoneill of Dunnyveg and Glennis, and Donald
Gorme of Slaitt, accumj^aneit with a nowmer of rebellious and diirobedient lubjectis, inhabitantis of the His, ar myndit, as the Kingis Maieftie is informit, to
ti'anfporte thame felffis ouer to Irland and to joyne with the Erll «)F Tyrrewxe, Odoneill and vtheris of the rebellious people of that land, for troubling
of the quyet eftait thairof; as alfwa, findrie of his Maiefteis fubiectis, inhabitantis within the fcliirefdomes of Lanerk, Renfrew, Dunbartane, Tarbett, Bute,
Air, Wigtoun and baillereis of Kyle, Carrik and Cwninghame, daylie furnifles
the rebellis of Irland with victuallis, waponis, poulder, bullett and vthir mvnitioun of weir ; be the quhilk doing, the peace and amitie ftanding betuix his
Maieftie and his darreft fufter and confine the Quene of England, thair realmis,
dominionis and fubiectis may be gritelie endangerit :' Therefore Proclamation is
ordered to be made, that the liegis fliall in no wife ' afllft, tak pairt, ryde, gang,

29Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 349

accumpany, nor yit fiirneis and fell ony kyrnl of victuall,' &c. under the pain
of Treafon.

(Nov. 26.) — Proclamation ' anent the arrijvaill of stratigearis of tliat
niaift cruell and vnmercifull natioun of Spayne and thair adlieixnitis.' The
Clergy are called upon to exhort the lieges ' to tak this mater in hairt, as that
quhilk importis the prefent dangeir and haiard of thair religioun and confcience,
&c. : ' And to the effect tliay may the bettir convene, with ane vuiforme mynd
in this cans, to vrge all and fiudrie perfonis, amangis quliome deidlie feid and
eleift' is prelentlie Handing, to lubfcriue and giff alliirranceis ilkane of thame to
vthir ; and quha refuiffis, to reporte the famin to his ]\Iaieftie ; quhairthrow his
hienes may tak ordour with thame as appertenis.'

(Nov. 27.) — Pi{ocla:mation that the lieges ' prepair them felffis and be in
full reddynes, Weill bodin in feir of weir, to mak AVapponschowingis and
gif Muftouris, vpoun the fecund day of Februair nixt, in prefens of the Schereffis,
fteuartis, proueftis and baillies of burrowis ; ilkane of thame within thair awin
boundis.

{Eodcm die.) — George Murray, fone to Johnue Murray of Spain3iedaill,
Robert Hoppri/igle, fone to the Gudeman of Quhj tebank, Amlro Douglas, fone
to George Douglas, feruand to the Laird of Ceffurde, Raguel Bennett, fone to
vmq'^ Mungo Bennett in Chafteris, .... Adair, fone to ... . Adair of Kinhilt, .... Kirktoun, fone to ... . Kirktoun of the Tour, and Malcohne Cokburne, fone to , make fupplication to the King and Council, ' That

quhair, it is uocht vnknawne, how that thay this langtyme bigane have bene detenit in warde within the tolbuith of Edinbm-gh, for the vnhappy accident" quhilk
fell oute in the perfone of Williame Sinclair, fone to the Chancellair of Caithnes, be the flauchter of vmq'*' Johnne I\rMorane, burges of this bm'gh, qidiairof
thay and euery ane of thame ar innocent, and ar willing to abyde tryale tliairupoun, befoir ane vnfufpect Juge : And becaus the Proueft and Baillies of this
burgh, to quhome Commiffioim wes given, to juge vpoun the faidis complenaris,
wer partialis thay being in effect baith juge and pairty, it pleifit his INIaieftie,
vpoun thair Supplication gevin in lieirupoun, to ordaue M' Mark Borthuik, Juftice Depute, to fitt with the faidis Proueft and Bailleis, vpoun Mononday the
xxvij of October laft, and to putt thame to the knaulege of vnfufpect Affile, the
maift halff of thair peiris, they being all for the maift parte the Ibnis of Baronis
and gentilmen, and to proceid and miniller juflice vpone thame, conforme to the
lawis and practique of this realme : At qidiilk day, thay being enterit vpoun

1 Rancorous grudge or offence ; literally an eye-sore ; what hurts or offends the eye. ^ See the
spirited account given of this affair of the Insurrection of the Boys atteiuliiis^ the Hi^ih School of Edinburgh, (in consequence of the Magistrates denying them their usual ' privilege' of a day's play, &c.,)
in the Extracts made from the Diary of Kobert Birrell, which immediately follow these selections.

350 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1595.

pannell, befoir the faidis Proueft, bailleis and Juftice depute, thair tryal wes continevvit to the morne thairefter, the xxviij day of the faid moneth ; at quhilk day,
albeit they micht have juftlie declyniiit the faidis Proueft and bailleis, and had
mony gude argumentis of law and practique to have pi'eferuit thame fra the
tryale of ane Affife, yit tliay be thair freindis and pi'olocutouris, freelie offerrit
thame lelffis to tryale, prouyding that ane condigne and vnfufpect Affife vver
ge\in to thame, viz. of Gentlemen outwith the toun of Edinburgh, according to
his Maiefteis ordinance ; quiiilk being refuiffit, thay wer compellit to vfe thair
laudifuU defenffis : Quhairupoun the faidis Juges, perceaving that thay could
not gett thair intent aganis the faidis complenaris, and mynding na thing ellis
but to wearie and wrak thame with expenffis, thay continewit thame to the fourte
of Nouember : and vpoun that day, maid ane new continewatioun ; quhairby it
is euident, that thay intend to hald the faidis complenaris in continewall warde ;
and ather to compell thame to becwm in will for that cryme, quhairof they ar
innocent, or then to fubmitt thame felffis to ane Affile of the burgeffis of this
burgh, cj[uha will not faill maift partiallie to proceid aganis them,' &c. Having
heard parties, the King, ' with auife of the faidis Lordis, Ordanis the faidis perfewaris to be putt to the knaulege of ane Affife of thair peiris, of landit gentilmen duelland outwith the burgh of Edinburgh, for the crime foirfaid ; within
the tolbuith of Edinburgh, V2)oiui the firft day of December nixtocum, in prefens
of M' Mark Borthuik, Juftice depute, to quhome his INIaieftie adjoins Schir Robert Meluill of Murdocairnie, kn', thefaurair depute, M"^ Johnne Skene, dark of
Regifter, and Schir Johnne Carmichael of that Ilk, kn'. to be Affeffouris; fecluding
all vtheris affeffouris,' &c. 'NMth certification, that if appearance is not made
againft them, they fliould be put to liberty, on finding caution, &c.

Discharge of a L-etter granted to f/ie Countess of Bothwell.

(Nov. 29-) — FoKSAMEKiLL as the Kingis Maieftie laitlie fubfcriuit and paft
ane Letter to Dame Margaket DouGLAS,fvmitj'me Countesse of Bothuill,
movit thairunto vpoun hir humble lute, and proftrating of hir felff in his hienes
way and prefens ; quhilk Letter, as his Maieftie is informed, fcho immediatlie
thairefter, not onlie caufit proclame in findrie pairtis of this cuntrey, and thairby tuke occafioun to reforte publictlie quhair fcho pleifit ; lyke as, a grite nowmer of perfones lies refortit and intercommonit M'itli hir fenfyne : Bot als, fcho
lies directit and had intelligence of lait with J"' ranees fumtyme Erll Bothuill, hir
fpous, in the realme of France, vanelie vanting of hir credite at his Maiefteis
handis, and perfwadiiig him of that fauour ; quhilk, in refpect of his monftrous
factis, is not to be luiked for ; iiather is it nor wes it his hienes meaning, that the
liiid Letter fould haiie bene proclameit, nor flio tane fic libertie thairby, as flio

29JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 351

hes done ; bot onlie, fould liaue feruit for remaning of hir feltf and hir bairnis
within the place of Moftour, that hir freindis micht lumtyme haue refortit to hir,
without dangeir of his hienes lawis : And thairfoir, feing flio hes fafar abuiit his
Maiefteis fauour, grantit to hir be the laid Letter ; his hienes, with adiiile of the
Lordis of his Secreit Counlale, hes annullit and dilchargeit and be thir preleutis
annullis and difchargeis the fame Letter and contentis thairof, simjilicitcr, in
tyme cwming ; ordaning the fame to ceis and to haue na forder force nor effect
at ony tyme heireftir. And that Letteris be direct to mak publicatioun heirof,
be oppin proclamatioun at the mercat croceis of Jedljurgh, Kellb, Hawik and all
vtheris placeis neidfuU ; quhairthrow nane pretend ignorans of the fame.

(Apr. 1.) — Proclamation ' aganis trafficquing ivith Strangearis,' ' except it be betuix marcheant and marcheantis, in niateris concerning marchandice
allanerlie, without the Ipeciall aduife, licence and content of his Maieftie had and
obtenit thairto, vndir the pane of deid.'

(Dec. 2.) — Proclamation for aflembling of the lieges at the Towns of
Leith, Inverkeithing and Bruntifland, S' Andrews, Dundee, Montrofe, Invernels,
Cromarty, Kirkcudbright, and Air, ' weill bodin in feir of weir, to repair vpoun
the firft aduertifment, vndir the command of the fchirreff of ilk fliyre, and lie
vthiris as the fame fcliereff, with aduife of the Baronis within the boundis particularlie aboue mentionat, fall cheis to that effect, to the laid townis, to joyne
with and fupplee the fute-forceis, in refilling to the landing of the Ennemy, in
thay pairtis ; vndir the pane of tinfale of lyffe, landis and guidis.'

(Dec 3.) — Proclamation ' that nane accunipany The Erll of Mar and
Lord Levingstoun to thair day of law.' It is ftated that ' as it is \^ldirftand
to the Kingis Maieftie and Lordis of his Secreit Counfall, that thair is a grite nowmer of his hienes liegis, of all efteatis of perfonis, quhilkis ar warnit and requirit be
Johnne Erll of Mar Lord Erlkin, Alexander Forreftair of Garden, and vtheris
the kin and freindis of vmq" Dauid Forreftair, burges of Striuiling, on the ane
parte ; and Johnne Levingftoun youngair of Duunypace, . . . Bruce youngair
of Airth, and certane vtheris thair colligis, on the vther parte'; to be prelent at
ane dyet appointit to be haldin within the tolbuith of Ed', vpoun the xx day of
December inftant, for thair vnderlying of his hienes lawis, for the Slauchtcr of
the faid vmq'' Dauid : Amangis quhilkis perfonis, thair being deidlie feid and
contrauerfie prefentlie ftanding, at the leift amangis a grite nowmer of thame,
it is to be feirit, that vpoun the firft occafioun of thair melting, fum grite inconuenient fall fall oute, to the brek of his hienes peax,' &c.

(Dec. 10.) Act ' anent the derthe.' The King and Council ' being avouuderfullie movit at the prefent derth of all fortis of victuaill, this fealbun of tlie
yeir, vniuerfallie throu all pairtis of this realme, and the grite penuritie and in352 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1595.

digence quliairunto the puir handy-labouraris, and vtheris his hienes fubiectis of
all efteatis ar redactit be that occafioun, the fame derth ftill daylie increffing,
and fofterit, pairtlie be the auaritious gredynes of a grite nowmer of perfonis that
hes bocht and byis victuaill afoir it cum of the ground, and that foirftallis and
keipis the fame to a derth, and ijairtlie, by the fliameles and indifcreit behaviour
of the ownaris of the fame victuaill, quha refuifTis to threflie oute and bring the
fame to opjiin mercattis,' &c. It is therefore declared, that after Proclamation
made, all foreftallers, &c. fliall be ftrictly puniflied, in terms of the ftatutes, and
their victual ' efcheated' to his Majefty's ufe. All coftly apparel, banquetings,
&c. are deprecated ; and it is.declared that the former Acts relative thereto fliall
be ftrictly enforced.

(Dec. 11.) — The King and Council, ' with the fpeciall auiie and confent of
ScHiR James Johnnestoun of Dunflvellie kn', being perfouallie prelent, ffrethis
and releuis all Prisonaris tak'in he hivi, his freindis, affiftaris and pairt-takaris,
(it omj of the lait Covflictis quhilkis happynnit to fall oute betuix thame and the
surename of Maxweli,, thair freindis, &c. : As alfua, Difchargeis all Bandis,
Obligationis, or vthiris fecuriteis quhatlinneuir made be thame or ony of thame,
to the laid Schir James Johnneftoim, his freindis, &c. ather for thair entree
agane, vpoun certane dayis wairning, payment of foumes of mony in name of
Ranfoim : Decerning the fame Bandis to be null,' &c.

(Dec. 23.) — ' Charge aganis persoxis vndir deidlie eeid,' to appear
before the King and Council ' at Haliruidhous ;' and ' that they keip thair
ludgeingis eftir thair cuming, quhill thay be fpeciallie fend for,' &c. ' Thay ar
to fay, Robert Maisteb of Eglintoun and Patrik Houston of that Ilk,
to conipeir perfonalie ; the faid Maifter accumpanyed with his freindis, not exceiding the nomner of threefcoir perfonis, and the laid Patrik not exceiding the
noumer of xxiiij perfonis,' vjjoun Jan. xv nixttocum : James Erll of GlekCAIRNE and . . Cunynghame of Glengarnok, vpoun Jan. xvj : Johnne
Erll of Montrois and Franshe of Thoirnidykis, on Jan. xxvij : Hew
Campbell of Lowdoun, fchereff of Air, .... Sandielandis of Calder, and Schir James Saxdielaxdis of Slammannan, Mr . . . CrauFURDE of Kerfe,^ and .... Spottiswode of that Ilk, vpoun Jan.
xxvj : Dauid Erll of Craufurde, and . . . Guthrie of that Ilk,
vpoun Feb. viij ; Schir Thomas Lyoun of Auldbar kn', and . . Gairdin
of that Ilk, vpoun Feb. x : Alexander Lord Levingstoux, Schir Alexander Bruce eldair of Airth, and Alexander Colquhoun of Lufs, vpoun
Feb. xviij : Johnne Erll of Mar, Alexander Forrestair of Garden,

Imp iiiinilicr (it tiillDwcrs allowed in tlie otlier instaiicos arc in the same proportions, accoiding to
the rank ot tiie respective parties. - Altogether not exceeding the number of sixty persons.

29 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 353

and Andro Makfarlane of Arroquhair, vpoun Feb. xx : Jajiks Lord
BoRTHUiK, . . . Prestoun of CraigmiUar, Mr George Lawder of
Bafs, and Charms Lauder fone and air of vmq" Andro Lauder in AVyndpark,
vpoun Jan. v: Schir Johxxe Edmestoun of that Ilk, and Mr Williame
CraNstoun appeirand of that Ilk, vpoun Jan. vij : Geokgic Erll Marishaei ,
and . . . Seytoun of Meldruin, vpoun Mar. i : James Cheyne of Straloch, and Wilmaime King of Barrauch, vpoun Mar. iij : James Tuedy of
Drummel3eair, vpoun Mar. x : Charlis Geddes of Rauchane, vpoini Mar. xij :
— To vnderly fie ordour as falbe prefcriuit, tuiclieing the removing of the faidis
fFeidis,' &c. With certification, that if they fail, ' thay falbe repute, haldin and
perfewit with fyi-e and fwerd, as inemeis to God, his Maieftie, and to the commoun wele and quietnes of this thair natiue cuntrey, with all rigour and extremitie.'

(Dec. 25.) — Mr Johnne Mackanzie, Minifter at Vrra, ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing, to anfwer a charge at the inftance of Alexander Sane of TuUoch, and Alexander Bane, (younger) ' fear' of Logy, ' for his
infolenceis, oppin and manifefl: oppreffionis coniniittit vpoun thame ; as nanilie,
be reflett and huirding within his houfe, of Johnne ^FGiUichallum Rasa, ane
commoun and notorious theiff and lymmair and denunceit rebell, be oppin and
avowit thift, in the moneth of May laft ; quha come to the faid I\r Johnis houfe,
vpoun fett purpois and prouifioun to ly derne {hid) and quiet thair, quhill he
micht find the commoditie to murdreis Hucheon Makconeill Bane and Duncane
Bane, fone to the faid Alexander Bane youngair : Lyke as, eftir he had remanit
with the faid Mr Johnne the fpace of xlviij houris, vpoun fuir knanlege had be
the faid Maifter Johnne of his barbarous and wicked intentioun, he come furtli
of the faid houfe, vndir filence of nicht, be the faid M' Johnis preuitie and foirknaulege, to the duelling place of the faid Hucheoun INIakconeill Bane, of fett purpois and prouifioun to haue execute his barbarous and wicked intentioun ; quhilk
he had not faillit to haue done, wer nocht the faid Hucheoun, getting fum informatioun of his intentioun, convoyed him felff with the laid barne away : And
fenfyne, the faid M' Johnne come to the faid complenaris landis of \'rra, and
cuttit his plewis and rigwiddeis ; and thairby, and be vtheris the lyke oppiu and
manifeft oppreffioun, hes layd and haldis the faidis landis waifl:,' &c.

(Jan. 12, 1595-6.) — Mr Williame CraNstoun appeirand of that Ilk, ordained to be denounced rebel, for not entering ' his perfone in warde, within
the Caftell of Thomptalloun,' in terms of the command ifiiied by the King and
Council, on Jan. 9-

(Jan. 15.) — Johnne Halden, dagmaker and others, to be denounced rebels,
for not anfwering ' tuicheing the Riot committit be thame laitlie, vj)oun the . .

vol. I. 2 Y

354 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1595-6.

day of Januair inftant, aganis the Proueft and Bailleis of- the Burgh of Edinburgh, in thair convoy and taking to warde of James Lord Borthuik.'
. (Jan. 17.) — James Erll of Glencairne ordained to be denounced rebel,
for not appearing before the King and Council, ' tuicheing the removing of the
ffeid and contrauerfie Handing betuix him and Robert Maifter of EgUntoun
and his freindis.'

(Jan. 28.)— John and Alexander Foster (Foruestair) ' fones to the
Laird of Garden, Alexander Forreftair of Myethill and Walter F. fone and apIJeirand air to Duncane F. of Puldoir,' to be denounced rebels, for not appearing before the King and Council, for coming with their accomplices, on Dec.
.30, ' bodin in feir of weir, with daggis, piftollettis, &c. to Johnne Roilliill officiair of amies, being executing Letteris of Hoirning aganis Alexander Forreftair
of Garden, and certane vtheris parrochionaris of the Ruid-Kirk of Striuiling, the
laid officiair being in the vezy meantyme, of the reiding the fame Letteris, publictlie, at the mercat-croce of the burgh of Striuiling ; pullit him doun af the
lame croce, dang him with juftoUettis on the lieid, and with the gairdis of thair
fwerdis, and cruellie hurte and woundit him in diueris pairtis of the body, to
the elFulioun of his blude in grite quantitie ; and thaireftir, violentlie and perforce reft the fame Letteris, and thair raif thame all in peceis ; in hie and
proude contemptioune of his Maiefteis auctoritie and laM^s.'

{Eodem die.) — Proclamation, that none of the liegis ' reffett, fupplee,
Ihaw fauor nor intercommune' with ' the Forrestairis ;' under certification,
that they ' falbe apprehendit, perfewit and pvneift, with na les rigoiu- and extremitie to the deid, nor {than) gif thay had reffett Frances fumtyme Bothuill,'
&c.

(Jan 29.) — Ja:mes Cunyxghame appeirand of Glengarnok, ordained to be
denounced, for not ' compeiring perfonalie' before the King and Council, ' tuicheing the removing of the ffeid ftanding betuix him and Schir Patrik Houftonn
of that Ilk kn' and his freindis,' &c.

(Feb. 5.) — Proclamatiox for a general Wapponfliawing, on May 5.
' Marcheantis-trafficquaris in vthei'is cuntreyis,' are commanded ' to by, prepair
and bring hame corflettis, pickis, miuTonis and all vthir kynd of armour ; fell
and mak penny thairof to all his liienes fubiectis, vpoun reffounable pryceis.'
It proceeds on the narrative ' of the preparatioun and intentioun of mercyles
ftrangearis, to arry^'e in this Hand this nixt fpring, for moving of a publict wear
aganis God, his trew Religioun,' &c.

(Feb. 12.)— On the complaint of The Countess of Eglintoun (Dame
Helen Kennedy,) Hugh Earl of Eglintoun, only lawful fon of the deceafed Hugh
Earl of E , Robert M after of Eglintoun his Tutor, and the kin and friends of

29JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 355

the late Earl, ' That quhair, the faid vmq" Erll, being maift fliamefullie and
cruellie flane be Johnne Cunynghame of Rofs, bruthir to James Erll of Glencairne, Alexander C. callit of Poquhene his feruand, Alexander C. of Aikatt,
Willianie C. his bruthir, Patrik C. in Bordland, Johnne and Dauid IMaxuellis,
brethir to Patrik M. of Newark, and Johnne Ryburne, vi»un fett purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellony, the faidis coniplenaris perlewit thanie for the
fame flauchter, criminallie, befoir the Juftice and his deputis ; and thay, takand
the crynie vpone thame, abfentit thame felffis fronie tryale, and wer thairfoir
denunceit and regiftrat at the home ; quhairat niaift contempnandlie thay
remanit diners yeii-is thaireftir, quhill now of lait, as the faidis complenaris ar
informed, that the faidis perfonis hes purcheft ane Remiffionn or Refpett for the
faid flauchter, quhairby thay intend to tak away the faidis complenaris lauchfull perlute ; fua that in fteid of juftice, quhilk thay euir luiked for, conforme
to his Maiefl:eis folempne vow and promeis maid to that effect, thay ar now
movit to lament to his hienes the want of juftice, throu the faid Refpett or Remiflloun,' &c. They farther ftate, that there has been ' na aflyithment nor fatiffactioun maid to the faidis complenaris for the faid flauchter, nor Letter of Slanis
grantit thairupoun ;' and that therefore, in terms of the Acts of Parliament and
Secret Council, and ' ane louable practique paft in the lyke caife, at the inftance
of the relict and ten faderles bairnis of vmq'" Luk Striuiling of Baldorane, aganis
Thomas Kincaid and Johnne Jak his feruand,' the Refpite or Remiffion was ipso
facto null. — Robert Mafter of Eglinton having appeared for the complainers,
and James Earl of Glencairn and ^^^illiam Cunningham of Caprington for the
defenders, the King and Council remitted ' this mater, to be decydit befoir the
Juftice or his deputis, as accordis of the law.'

(Feb. 21.) — Proclamation regarding ' the Spanishe Preparatioun
to arryve in this Hand, for moving of a jniblict wear,' &c. ; charging all the
lieges within the ages of 60 and 16 'to be in full reddynes,' within 2 J' hours,
• to convene and repair to fie pairtis and placeis as thay falbe aduirteift,' &c.

(May 21, 1596.) — Sir James Johnnestoun of Dunikellie kn'. 'as maifter,
landiflord or cheiff to Johnne, James and Williame Johnneftonis, brethir, in
Haifliebray, Niniane J. in Rowantrie-know, and ^^'illiame J. fone to James J. of
Hefliebray, for quhome he is obleift to anfuer be the General Band,' &c. is ordained to be denounced rebel, for not appearing and prefenting thefe perfons to
have anfwered, ' tuicheing the fliamefuU, cruell and vnmercifull flauchter of
vmq'*' Mr Williame Johnneftoune, Perfone and Minifter at Lochmaben ; committit be thame laitlie, vpoun the fourte day of Marclie laft.'

(May 22.) — Proclamation for the Ilis. — The Kingis Majestie, his
Nobilitie, Counfaill and Efteatis prefentlie conuenit, Considdebing the pj-oude

356 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1595-6.

Rebellioun, defectioun and difobedience of the Inhabitantis of the Ilis and
HiEi.AKDis of this reahiie, fubiect for the maift parte, thir mony yeiris bygane, to all kyud of infolence, barbaritie and crueltie, not onlie in committing of
vyle and beiftlie Murthouris, Slauchteris, reif, thift, oppin heirfchippis, oppreffionis and depredationis vpoun his Maiefteis peccable and gude fubiectis, inhabitantis of the cuntreyis nixt adiacent ; hot euery ane of thame maift vnnaturallie puttand violent handis in vther, befydis innumerable vtheris treffounable,
monftrous and odious crymes, committit be lum of the cheifT perfonis, inhabitantis of the faidis Ilis ; ffor the quhilk, the fentence of Foirfaltour is led aganis
thame ; quha nochtwithftanding remanis peccable in the cuntrey, without feir
of God or of his Maieftie, nawayes acknaulegeing thair offens, nor yit his hienes
as thair Ibuerane lord and King ; nather payand thair mailles and dewities, exactiones and cuftumes to his Maieftie, his Comptrollair and ordinair officiairis ;
the fame mailles and dewiteis and cuftumes being a grite part of his hienes propirtie, rent and patrimonie of his crowne, quhairupoun his princelie porte and
eftate fuld be fuftenit : And thairfoir, his INIaieftie is refoluit to repair, in propir perfone, to the faidis Ilis and Hielandis, with all conuenient expeditioun, for
abandounine: and reduceing of the faidis rebellious, vnnaturall and difobedient
perfonis, to the acknaulegeing of his hienes and his lawis ; and compelling of
thame to mak payment of his Maiefteis propir rentis and dewiteis, in tyme
cuming : For quhilk purpois, neceftar it is that his hienes be weill and fubftantiouflie accumpanyed, with a force of his faithfull, loving and gude fubiectis ;
and thairfoir, his Maieftie, with aduife of his Nobilitie, Counfall and Efteatis
foirfaidis, Ordanis Letteris to be direct, chargeing all and findrie Erllis, Lordis,
Baronis, fewaris and freehaldaris, betuix faxtie and faxtene yeiris, vail3eant
{ivo/i/i) in yeirlie rent the fowme of three hundreth merkis, ather in heritage or
annualrent, within the boundis of the haill flierefdoniis, fteuartreis and bailliereis within the realme, togidder with the inhabitantis of burrowis within the
faidis boundis, alfweill regalitie as ryaltie, be oppin Proclamatioun, at the mercat-croces of the fame burrowis ; that thay and ilkane of thame, weill bodin in
feir of weir, with fchippis, crearis, boitis and all vtheris vefchellis, and prouifioun, requifite and neceftair for tranfj)orting of thame to the faidis Ilis, and fra
He to He, within all the boimdis of the fame His and Hieland pairtis, during all
tiie tyme that thay falbe occupiit in that feruice ; addres thame felffis to melt
his Maieftie, at the burgh of Dunbartane, vpoun the firft day of Auguft nixtocum, prouidit to imbark and pas fordwart thairfra to the faidis Ilis and Hielandis ; and to attend and accumpany his hienes, for the fpace of fourtie dayis
eftir thair cuming, to the effect foirfaid ; vndir the pane of tinilill of lyff, landis
and guidis.

29Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 357

[The Editor has thus endeavoured to supplj% from the most authentic source,
a pretty copious Selection of the leading- Cases which occurred before the Privy
Council of Scotland, during the interval unfortunately vacant in the Records of
the Coiu-t of Justiciary, through the loss of the Volumes from 1591 to 1596 ;
which period, doubtlessly, occupies an interesting portion of the History of this
country. To some of his readers, perhaps, an apology is due, for the insertion
of so many State Papers, and of notices of mattei-s, not strictly embracing the
immediate objects of this Compilation ; but, in extenuation of this trespass, it
may be remarked, that the leading features of these times were so peculiarly
distinguished by open defiance of the King and Parliament, and by the frecjuent
and daring Consjiiracies enterprised against the Royal pei-son, as well as by
Bothwell's Treasons, and the Popish and Spanish Plots, for the overthrow of the
Government and of the Religion of the Country, that such Illustrations as those
he has ventured to select, may, by many others, be considered as necessary Historical elucidations, at least as convenient appendages to such a Collection as the
present.

Before closing his Extracts, which are intended in fome meafure to fupply this
hiatus vakle dejlendus, the Editor must farther draw \ipon the valuable stores
contained in ' The Diakey of Robert Birrel, burges of Edinburghe,' which was,
for the first time, given to the public by John Grahame Dalyell, Esquire, in his
' Fragments of Scotiih Hiftory,' Edin. 1798. The reading has been taken from
the original MS. in the Advocates' Library, W. 5, 10. There is also in the same
Library, among Wodrow's MSS., (^V. 7, 26,) another copy, which is, apparently, a Transcript of the former.]

NOTICES extracted from ' BIRRELL'S DIARY.'

(Sep. 6. 1591.) — The Eaull of Bothuell made a lloure in the Abayof Holyroudhousse, ri\qi
qnho came in over the hous in the South fyde of the Palace ; and the faid Earll, taking too grate pre- Sep. G. I
funiptione, he, witli liis conijilifefs, firake vith ane liammer at his Maiefties clialmber dore : And, in
the meane tyme, the hail! noblemen and gentlemen of his Maiellies houiie raifle, qulio thought to Laue
taken the faid Earll Bothuell and his complices. The faid Earle fled ; yet he returned at the South
fyde of the Abay, qnher the faid Earll and his complifefs flew his Maieflies Maifler Stabler, named
Villiau) Shaw, and one vith him, named M' Peeiter Shaw. Bot the King's folks took 8 men of Bothuill's factione ; and one the morrow, hangit thani all, vith out ane Affyfle, betuix the Girth crofle and
the Abay gaite.'

(Dec. 28.) — The King's Maieflie came to S' Geill's Kirk, and ther made ane Oratione, anent the
FRAY made by Bothuell, and William Shaw's slaughter, hes Mailler Stabler.

(Feb. 7, 1591-2.) — The Earll of Huntly came to tlie limifs of Diniihrijtole in Fijffe, qnher
the Earll of Murray, vith a few nouuiber, wes for the tyme, being his auen houfle. The chieffe

' ' This tumult was called the first Road of the Abbey.' — Sir James Balfour's Aminls, I. 390.

358 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

[1591-2, mane tliat ves witli him ves Dumbar Oirifte of Murray. Tlie Earll of Huntley' fett tlie faid lioufs in
I'eb. 7. J fyre; Xlie Earll of Murray being vithin, vill not quhither to come out and be (laine, or be burned
quieke ; yet, after advyfnient, this Dumbar fays to my Lord of Murray, ' I vill goe out at the gaitt befor your lordlhipe, and I am four the peopell will chairge one me, thinkeing me to be your lordfchip ;
fua, it being mirke vnder night, ye fall come out after me, and looke if that ye cane fend for your felue.'
In the meine tyme, this Dumbar, Tutor to tlie fhriiFe of Murray, came furth, and rane difperatly amonge
the Earle of Huntlies folks, and thay all rane vpone him and prefently flew him. During this broylle
vith Dumbar, the Earll of ^Murray cam running out at the gaitt of Dunebrillell, quhilU Hands befyde
the fea, and tliev fate him doune amonge the rocks, thinking to have beine faue ; hot unfortunatly the
faid Lord's cnapefcull-tippett, quherone ves a fdk flringe, had taken fyre, vich bewrayed him to hes
enimies in the darknes of the night, himfelue not knowing the fame ; they came doune one him on a
fuddaine, and tlier mofl creuelly, without mercey, murthered him.^

Feb. (12?) — At quhilk tyme, one Capitane Johne Gordoune, takin upon the 12 of Februarij:
Himfelue wes headitt, and hes man was hangitt.

(Feb. 28.) — RichardGrahame wes brunt at theCroffeof Edinburghe, forVitchcrafteandSorcerey.

(Mar. 18.) — Ane Proclaniatione, that the youxg Earll of Murray fliould not perfew the
Earll of Huntly, in refpect he, being vardit in the Blacknes for the fame Murder, wes villing to
abyde ane trayell, faying, tiiat ' he did nothing bot by hes Maiefties Commilfione, and fua ves nather
airt nor pairt of the Murther.'

(May 12, 1592.) — The Earll of Bothuell and hes complices ver denuncit rebells and fummond
to the Parliament quliilk ves to be haldin at Edinburghe, the 12 day of Julay ; quherin the faid Earle,
with all his quhole complices, wer all of them forfaulted.

(Jul. 17.) — The Earll of Bothuell, with his complices, made a fray at Falkland, hes
Maieflie l)eing ther : And tlierafter, hes Maieftie cum over the vatter. And vpone the 26 day of this
fame niounthe, hes Maiellie made ane Oratione concerning the fame, in the grate Kirke of Edinburghe.
ImediatUe after the ffray, Bothuell and hes men came ouer the vater ; and ther ver 18 of them taken
in Cader-mure, and in vther pairts neir Cader-mure, laying flciping, for vant of refl and interteiniraent ;
and immediatly after ther taking, they were all brought to Edinburghe and hangitt.
" (Jul. . . .) — At the fame tyme the Laird.s of Nidrie and Samuelstone, ver takin by Johne Lord
Hamiltone, and vardit in the Caftell of Draffin, and came to Edinburghe, thinking to haue gotlin grace
to them from his Maieftie. He came doune to hes Maiefties ludging at tlie Nether-bow, and going
in to M' Johne Laings hous, quher hes Maieftie lodgett, the gaurd ftandeing aboue the port vith ther
hagbutts, guns and uther veapons ; the forfaid gaurd, feing my Lord Hamiltone, for honor of his Lordfchipe, Ihott ane volley at my lord : Ther wes ane man, fpeiking to hes lordfchipe, Ihott through the
head ; ane vther, by him, fliott through the legge ; and ane bullet ftrooke the lintell of the gaitt, iuft
aboue my lord's head quher he ftoode ; yet no more harme doune : So that, by meir accident, the faid
Lord Hamiltone had moft haue beine flaine, and not through aney eiuill vill. The Lord Hamiltone,
feeing that he could gett no gi-ace to the faid tuo gentlemen, he fent vord to hes baftard fone Schir
Johne, quho convoyed the faid tuo gentlemen away, and vent vithe them him felue, for their more faftey.

(Jul. 31.) — Francis Hay Earll of Errole ves put invard in the Caftell of Edinburgh, for Papiftry

(Oct. 18.) — The Earll of Angus vardit for Papiftry.

(Nov, 7.) — Hes Maieftie did receaue againe the Laird of Nidrie in his fauor, and reftorit him
to his former dignity and eftait.

• ' Ii (was) giuen out and publickly talked, that the Earle of Huntley was t)ie only instrument of perpetratting this
facte, to satisfie tlie Kingis jelosie of Murray ; quhom the Queine, more rashlie then wyslie, some few dayes before,
had commendit in the King's heiringe, with too maney epithetts, of a proper and gallant man.' — Balf. Annals, I. 390.
- ' V'ponc the 7 'lay of Februarii 1502, the Earle of Jlurray was slaine by the Earle of Iluntly, maist creuelly, at
Dunnybristle ; and with him the Sheriffe of Murray.' Marj. Annals, p. 5C.

29JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 359

(Nov. 17.) — The Ladey of Bothuell ves received into liis Maieflies fauor. [1592,

(Nov. 18.) — Ane Proclamatione, that no man receaeuid the Earle of Bothuell ; and ficlyke, Nov. 17.]
that all thoffe that had reeeaued hes Maiclties fauor, quho had bene vith the Earll of Bothuell, Ihould
not come neir his Maieftie vithin 20 rallies, vnder the |)aine of death.

(Nov. 23.) — Ane Proclamatione, that no man ihould receatt the Countesse of Bothuell, giue
her interteiniment, or to haue aney commerce or fociety vith her, in aney cais ; quha had beine hot fo
laitly reeeaued in his Maieflies fauor befor, viz. one the 17 day of the fame mounthe. Behold the
changes of Courte !

(Nov. 30.) — Johne Cachoune ves beheidit at the Crofle of Edinburghe, for Murlhering of his
anen brother the Laird of Lusse.

(Dec. 2.) — Capitane James Steuarte' came to the King, quho had beine banilhed fince the
Read (Raid) at Streiueling befor, wich wes aboute the I day of Nouember 1585.

(Dec. 17.) — The Ministers ver accufit by the King for opin TrealToue, in fpeiking aganis hes
Maieftie ; yet hes goodnel's paft it ouer at that tyme.

(Dec, 31.) — Mr George Ker ves broght to Edinburghe out of Calder, and putt in vard, for carriing of Letters out of the countrey frome the Papifts to the King of Spaine.

(Jan. 1. 1592-3.) — The Earll of Angus ves commandit to vard in hes auen ludging, andftraitly
keipit till the morrou, and then ves convoyet to the Caftell of Edinburgh, for fending Letters to Spaine
to the Spanifch King, vith M' George Ker.

(Jan. 3.) — Ane Proclamatione to refift the Papists ; and all men to fland to the Religione prefently profefled vithin this realme ; in vich his Maieftie hes beine brought vp into froiue bis youth :
And ficklyke, charging all fufpected Papifts to come and fubfcryue ane Band, that they fall not Hue
as Papifts, hot in Religione conforme to that prefently profelfed.

(Feb. 8.) — The Earlls of Huntley and Errole ver denuncit rebells and putt to the home, for
not corapeiring to fubfciyue the Band concerning Religione.

(Feb. 14.) — Schir Alexander Stewart and Mr Johne Grahame flen be Schir James
Sandilandis at the fitt of Leithe wynd.

(Feb. 15.) — The Earle of Angus brake ward out of the Caftell of Edinburghe ; quha hade beine
in, fen the firft of Januar befoir, for fending Letteres to Spaine.

(Feb. 17.) — Dauid Grahame beheidit at the Cioce, for opin Treafone, callit Lord of Fentres.

(Mar. 15.) — The King's Maiestie came hame fra the Northe, quhair he haid beine fex veikis
befoir, and haid caufit caft doune the palace of Strabogie, and ane place callit the Slanis, ane place
callit the Newtoune, and ane place for the tyme quhilk belongit to M' Walter Lyndefav, callit the
Brumhous, vith ane hous of Sir Johne Ogilveis callit the Craige. His Maieftie had with him 5 bandis
of men of weir out of Edinburghe, Capitanes George Todridge, James Inglis, James Williamfone, and
C. Dauidfon and Geddes.

(Mar. 20.) — Ane Proclamatioune at the Croce, chairging the Earlis of Huntlie, Angus, Errole, with diverfe Gentlemen and Irismen of the Illis, to conipeir to the Parliament for diverfe
poyntis of Treafoun.

(]May 19. 1593.) — Katherine Muirheid brunt for Vitchcraft ; and quha confeft fundrie poyntis
thairof.

(Jun. 4.) — The Laird of Jonestoune brak ward out of the Caftell of Edinburghe.

(Jun. 20.) — Mr George Ker brake waird out of the Caftell.

(Jul. 21.) — The Parliament haldin ; the Earle of BoTHUELLforfaultit, and hisarmes rewine'' at
Croce of Edinburghe be the Heraldis.

' ' Quho called liimselue Earle of Arran.' — Balf. Ann. I. 392. i Torn and defaced.

360 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

[1593, (Jul. 24.) — At 8 houris in the morneing, the Earle of Bodwell, the Laird of Spott, Mr

Jul. 24.] WiLLiAME Leslie and Mr Johne Colvill, came in to the King's chalmer, weill provydit with
piftoll. This Earle with his complices come not this way, provydit with piftollis and drawin fwordis,
to liarme the Kingis Majellie any wayis ; hot becaus he could not get prefence of his Maieltie, nor
fpeiche of him, for the Homes, quho wer courteouris with the King, and enimeis to the faid Earle
Bodwell ; fua thai cam in into hes Maiefleies chalmer, refolweing thame felff not to be haldin bak till
thai fould have fpokin with him : And fua, after thai come in, his Maieflie wes coniniing fra the bak
ftair and his breikis in his hand, in ane feir ; howbcit he neidit not. The foirfaid Earle Bodwell and
his complefTis fell vpone thair knies, and beggit mercie at hes Maieftie ; and his Maieftie, being wyfe,
merciful, a noble Prince of grate pitie, not defyrous of bluid, grantit thame nieicie, and relauit thame
in his fawour: And at 4 houris efter none, caulit proclame thame his frie ledgis. And vpone the 27
day, the fame Proclamatioune of the Earle of Bodwellis peace wes renewit at the Croce, with Heraldis
and fex trumpettis founding for joy.

(Aug. 10.) — Ane new alteratioun oferid againe.

(Sep. 20.) — The faid Earle Bodwell chairgit be ane Proclamatioune at the croce, that he fould
not come vithin 10 myllis to the Kingis Maieftie, wnder the pane of deathe.

(Oct. 11.) — The Kings Maieftie ryding to ane day of Law, the excommunit Lordis raett him ;
quhom he refauit in his favoris, viz. Huntlie, Erole, Angus, Schir James Chissim, with fundrie
wtheris.

(Oct. 31.) — Ane Conventioune haldin at Leithe, for the fame pui-pos, concerning Angus,
Huntlie and Errole and thair complelfis.

(Nov. 2.) — Ane Proclamation, that na man tnible the faidPAPiSTis Lordis, hot to refaue thame
and interteine thame as his faithfull and trew fubiectis, as thai will be anfuerabiU to him.

(Nov. 7.) — Smetoune hangit, for braking of ward, with Mr George Ker, out of the Caftell of
Edinburgh.

(Eodem die.) — Ane Proclamatione that na man fould repair to the toune of Edinburgh, without
leiue grantit be his Maieftie ; quhilk Proclamatioune greiuit the toune, and fpeciallie the Minilteris.

(Nov. 27.) — Ane Proclamatione of the Act of Abolitioune in fauoris of the Papist Lordis.

(Dec. 7.) — The Lord Maxwell (laine be the Laird of Johnelloun.'

(Dec. 11.) — The Earle Bodwell put to the home ; quhilk day the faid Earle Bothwell and
Ker of Sesfuird met and faucht twa for twa.

(Dec. 27.) — The Earle of Bodwell, nor the Laird of Jonestoune, na man fould refait
thame, nor give them interteinment.

(Jan. 22, 1593-4.) — The Act of Abolatione quhilk wes maid, null and to na eft'ect.

(Feb. 19.) — Prynce Henrie wes borne, at the pleafour of Almightie God, quhilk day befell on
Tuyfilay.*

(Mar. 13.) — His Maiestie come to Mr Robert Briuffe preiching, being Sonday ; quhair Mr Robert Bruire faid to hes Maieftie, that ' God wald fteir up ma (more) Bodwellis nor (than) ane, that
wes enimies to him nor (iJian) Bodwell ; if he reuengit not and faught not Godis quarrell and battelia
on the Papiftis, before he faucht or reueng his awine particular.'

' ' In tlie mounth of December 1593, Sir Johne Houstone (mistake for Jhonstone) of that ilk slew Joline Lotil
Maxswell, quh.i had betrayed the Laird of Houstone (Jhonstone) under frendshipe and alliance ; and it was nin.ored,
that he had piirrhesed ane Commissione of the King to pas vpone the Laird of Houstone (Johnslonu) with fyre and suord,
albeit that they war suorne frinds and bound vpe in alliance and of bloode ; and in ane vcrey ^'nile persuii, the Laird

of Houstone (Johnstone) slew him in his auen just defence.' Marj. Annuls, p. 57 ' This yiir (.ndit with the Lord

5(ax-wells slaughter by the Laird of Jhonston, the 0 of this mounth of December.' Balf. .Inn. 1. 31'4. ' ' Vpone
Tuesday at 5 houres in the morning, the 9 day of Februarij L593, Anna, daughter to the Kmgof Denmarke, and Queeine
of Scotland, wes deliuered of ane sone to King James the Sext, in Streueling, the 4 yeir after her coming in Scotland,
the 27 yeir of the said King James raing and 28 of his age.' — Marj. Annals, p. 58.

29Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 361

(Apr. 3, 1594.) — The King, being ludgit in Robert Gouvlayis ludging, he come to the fermone ; [loU4,
and tliair, in prefcns of tlic Iiaill pci])]!", he proniell to icveng Godis cans, and to banijlie all the Papistis ^P'"" "'■-1
and thaii- reijuyltit tlio haill peiple to gang witli Iiiin aganis Bodwell, quha wes in Leithe for tlie tynio.
The lame day, the Kingis Maiertie rais and the toune of Edinburgh in amies. The Earle of BothUELL, quha wes in Leith, hoiring tliat liis Maieflie wcs cumniing doune, with the toune of Edinburgli,
he reafe with his fyue hunder horfe, and come ont of Leithe and raid up to tlie Ilalkhill, befyde Lexftelrik {Fejiahig,) and ther ftuid till he law the King and the toune of Edinburgli approching neir
him. He drew his companie away throw Duddingftoune. My Lord Home followit till the Wowniit; at quiiilk place tlie Earle Bodwell turiiit, thinking to have a het of Home; hot Home fled and he
followit; yit, be chance, little bluid. The Kingis Maieflie ftud liiinli'lf, and feeing the laid chail'e.'

(Apr. 5.) — SiCLYKE, the King raid out to haue tane Bothwell, bot gat him not.

(Apr. 29.) — WiLLiAME Hegie hangit, for refaueing the Earl of Bothwell.

(May 17.)— My Lord Home maid his repentance wnto the New Kirk, befoir the Aflemblie.
vpone his kneis.

(Jun. 8.)— The Parliament haldin; at quhilk tyme, the Earles of Angus, Huntlie, Errole,
Macklen, ]Mackoneill and Auciiindoune wer all forfaulted.

(Aug. 30.)— The Prince baptized, and named Henrey Frederick, by the grace of God."

(Sep. 16.) — Ane Proclamatione that nae man refait nor intertene the Earle Bodwell.

(Sep. 17.) — Allane Orme^ hangit for intertening of the Earle of Bodwell.

(Sep. 2-i.) — .JoHNE Gibsoxe hangit, and James Cochrane hangit, for intertening of the Earle of
Bodwell.

(Oct. 3.)— The Battell of Glenliuet^ fouchin betuix the Earl of Argyill, Generall for the
King, aganis the Earlis of Huntlie and Atholl and tlmir aflofiatis. The IVheifle, of not,^ that wes
ilene on Huntlie and AtlioU fyid, wer, the Laird of Gight, AlBnlie, Mr William Gordone, the Guidman of Dortli {Dort) and lies lone. This Dorth was brother to Abergeldie. Thre brethren of Tillaclioudey, and the younge Laird of Di-unidelgie.

(Oct. 15.)— The Capitane of Blacknes wes hangit, for refaueing and intertening the Earle
Bodwell.

(Dec. 4 ) — Ane Proclamatioune, chairging all men not to haue to doe with the Earle Bodwell.

(Eodcm f//c.)— Capitane Rallie hangit for counterfetting the (irait Seall aganis the mercheantis.

(Jan. 13, 1594-5.)_George Mwr hangit, for Uaing of twa .Miuillers, viz. Mr Dauid Blayth and
ane Aikman.

(Jan. 19.) — The young Earle of Montrois faucht ane combat with Schir James SandiLANDIS at the Salt Trone of Edinburgh, thinking to haue revengit the Slauchter of his cufine INIr
Johne Grahame, quha wes thair flaine with ane fchot of ane pilloll, and four of his men llane with
iVordis, viz. Joline Craufurd, Johne Graham, George Dundas and Alexander Boner.

' Marjoribanks dates this affair the 2J of JIarcli, and says, ' The King, all tiiis tyme of the chace, was standing vpone
the Borrow-mure of Kdinbuighe.' — Annals, \i. r><.). * This ceremony took place at Stirling, within the Chapel

Royal. David Cunninghame Bishop of Aberdeen officiated. For a particular account of this splendid ceremonial, see
' A Trve Rcportarie of the most trivmphant and royal accomplishment of the Baptisme of the most excellent, right high
and niightie Prince, Frederik Henry, by the grace of (Jod, Prince of .Scotland. SoL-mni/cd, ihe 'M day of August ISJJJ.
Printed by K. Walde-graue Printer to tlic K. .Maiestie. Cum Priuilegio Kegali.' Quarto, lilack Letter, pp. ;il». This
remarkable Edition was purchased, by .lames Jlaidment, Ksquire, at the sale of tlie Library of the late Archibald Constable, Esquire, who considered it Unique. One other copy, however, is known to have been in the Koyal Library at
Copenhagen. Several Reprints we-e published early in the next century. See also Bircli's Life of Henry Prince of
WaL-s, &c. ' ' Brother to tlie Laird of Mugduni, {.Miii/dium).' — Balf. Ann. i. :):).">. * ' .Vt this tyme,

thair wes grate appeirance of troubells in Scotland, throughe the forfaulted Earlis of Huntly and Errole; quha with
ther complices gadrett ane grate pouer of men against the Earlle of Argyle, being the King's lieutenant, and taught anu
grate Battell in the North, near Stralhbolgie, at ane part called the Lcddcrfute ; wich battel was called by some the fi:Ul
of Glenliuet, and by others the battle of Belrinnes, &c.' Minj. Annals, p. GO. See also, in DalycU's Poems of the
Si.'iteenlh Century, ' The Balell of Belrinnes.' And MS. Adv. Library, W, 3, 10. ' The chief parsons of note.

VOL. I. 2 2 ^

362 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

[ 1594-5, (Feb. 14.) — Ane of the Keiperis of the Wardes, in the Callell of Edinburgh, wes hangit, for latting

Feb. 14. J the Earle of Angus out of ward.

(Feb. 18.) — Hercolles Stewart hangit, and ane Johne Syme, for bearing companie and intertening his awin brother, and the Earle of Bodwell.

(Feb. 23.) — The Earle Bodwell excommunicat.

(Mar. 10.) — Ane horrable tempeft of fuaw, quhiche lay vpone the grand till the 14 of Apryill
thaireftor.

(Maij 26, 1595.) — Johne Gilcryst, Henderfone and Huttoune, all thrie hangit, for making of
fak wrettis and prefing to warifie (verify^ the fame.

(Jun. 11.) — Ane callit Cuming the Muncke, hangit, for making of ffalfe wrettis.

(Jul. 19.) — James Laird of Enderm.\rkie and his feniand heidit, as pavtakeris of the MukDUR OF THE Earle OF MuRAY and Patrik Dumbar, in Duniburfell in Fyff; quha wer flaine the
7 ofFebruar 1591.

(Aug. 14.) — Cristiane Johnestoune, ane widdow in Edinburgh, raveft be Patrick Aikenheid.
The toune wes put in ane grait fray be the ringing of the commone bell. The faid Criftiane wes
followit and brocht back fra him ; fua that the faid Patrik got no advantage of liir.

(Sep. 15.) — Johne Mackmorrane flene be the fchot of ane piftoU out of the Scholl ; this Johne
Macmorane, being Baillie for the tyme. The baimis of the faid Gramer-fcool came to the Tonnis
Counfell, conforme to thair yeirlie cuftonie, to feek the priviledge ; quha wes refuifit : Upone the
quliilk, ther wes ane number of fcolleris, being gentilmenis bariiis, made ane mutinie, and come in the
nicht and tuik the fcooll, and provydit thame felfis with meit, drink, and hagbutis, piftolit and fword :
They ramforcit the dores of the faid fcooll, fwa that the refufit to lat in thair Maifter nor na wthir
man, without they wer grantit thair priviledge, conforme to thair wountit vfe. The Prouoft and
Bailjes and Counfell heiring tell of the fame, thai ordanit Johne Mackmorane bal5ie to goe to the
Gramour-fcooll, and tak fum ordour thairwith. The faid Johne, with certane ofHceris, went to the
Hie fcooll, and requyftit the fcollaria to oppin the doris : Thay refufit. The faid Bailjie and officeris
tuik ane gell {Joist or beam) and ran at the bak dore with the geaft. Ane fcoUar bad him defifl frome
dinging vp the doir, wtherwayis, he wowit to God, he fould fchute ane pair of bullettis throw his
heid. The faid Bail3ie, thinking he durft not fchuit, he and his affiftaris ran ftill with the geaft at
the faid doir. Thair came ane fcoller callit William Sinklar, fone to Williame Sinklar chanfler of
Catnes, and with ane piftollet fchot out at ane window, and fchott the faid Bailjie throw the heid,
fua that he diet prefentlie. The haill tounis men rane to the fcooll, and tuik the faid baimis, and pat
thame in the Tolbuithe : Bot the haill bairnis wer lattin frie, without ane hurte done to thame for the
fame, within ane fchort tyme thairefter.

(Sept. .) — The Ladie Bodwell refauit in fauour with the King, in Glalgow.

(Oct. 20.) — Gilbert Lawder flaine, in Linlithgow, be the Cranftounis.

(Nov. 22.) — Four Heraldis fitting drinking, twa of thame fell in words, viz. John Purdie and
Johne Glaidftanis, the faid Johne Glaidflanis flikit Johne Purdie at the table : And the faid Glaidftanis being apprehendit, he wes beheidit vpone the 25 day of the fame moneth of November, for the
fame flauchter.

(Dec. 3.) — The Ladie Bodwell banifchit yit anes agane. Bot within fex dayis thairafter, the
faid Ladie purchill ane Letter of paice, fubfcryuit be his awin Maiefties hand.'

(Jan. 5, 1595-6.) — Ane Proclamatione, declaring perpetuall Peace betwix Scotland and Ingland;

' Amongest the constancies of the Conrte tliis yeirc, one was rcniarkcablc ; that at Glasgow, in September, the King
receaujil the Countesse of Bothuell to his fauor the 22d day at night ; and one the 3d of Decimber, agane proscriued and
exyled her, wnder tlic paine of death : yet gaue her a Letter of Protection, wnder his auen hand, within Cdayes thairefter.
Balf. Ann. i. 398.

29Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 363

and that nane of the Bordereris invaid ane another, wnder the pane of deathe. Sic Ipk, at this fame [1595-6,
tyme, the gencrall mufteris proclamed to be haldin the 2 of Februar nixt. Jan- 5.]

(Mar, 2.) — Campbell of Arkinles wes tane for the Slaiichtcr of Campbell Laird

of Cadder: And one the 4 day, lie thollit ane AiFyife ; and contenuit day till day, till the 8 of Apryill,
he wes convyit to the Blaknes till ward ; and at lengthe he wes maid frie.

(Apr. 6, 1596.) — Three men hangit, viz. Patrick Douglas, Patrick Byde and ane

Syme. This Douglas wes a theifFor murderer and brunt ; and liaid contenit long wnfufpeckit to, be
ony man.

{Eodem die.)— The Laird of Buckcleuch pall to the Caftell of Carlell with 70 (men) and tuik
out Will Kynmonthe out of the faid Caftell ; the faid Will lyand in ironis, within the irone yett. This
he did with fchowting and crying and found of trampet ; putand the faid toune and contrie in fick
ane fray, that the lyik of fick ane waffaledge wes nevu- done fuice the memorie of man, no in Wallas
dayis I

(Apr. 14.) — Mr William Schaw wes ftrukin throche the bodie with ane raper, be Frances
MowBRA, fone to the Laird of Barnbougall.

(Mali 31.) — Ane Proclamatioune, chairgcing all men betuix 60 and 16 to be in radines, betuix that
nnd the fiift day of Auguft, to pas witli the King to the lyllis.

Ciinl of tijc OJavIs of Ifeuntlie auti (J^rrol oilrcrtU.

Maij 24, 1596 — (^Apud Hulinddkous.) — The Kingis Maieftie, liaueing oftymes tane grite panes and
trauellis for quieting of the troublit eftate of the North Cunlrey, kytheit be the effectis that foUowit
vpoun the perfonis and levingis and houfles of the principall authouris of the faid trouble ; befydis the
expelling of thame felffis furth of the clieif ])ainis and placeis quhair thay maid thair commoun refidence : In end, it wes tbocht meit he his Maieftie, his Counfale, noblemen and baronis of the cuntrey,
and vthiris refident with his hienes for the tyme, that befoir his Maieftcls returning furth of the fame
cuntrey, his hienes fould conftitutc and appoint ane Lieutennent, to mak bis refidence and remaning
thairin in his Maiefteis abfence, for obviating and withllanding of all forder practizeis, gif ony Ibuld
preis tobe attemptit ; and reduceing and contening of the inliabitantis thairof, vndir liis Maiefteis obediens : And albeit findrie Noblemen, then prefc nt with his Maieftie, wer burdynnit to accept tliiit charge
vpoun thame, yit few or nane could be movit tliairunto ; fum excufeiiig tlianie Iflrtis be tluiir inliabilitie, and vthiris for want of prefent preparatioun ; fua that delay of tyme in this caife being then thocht
tobe verie dangerous, his Maieftie wes movit at laft, of verie neceflitie, to burdyn liis darreft coufingLuDOUIK Duke of Lennox Erll Darnelie Lord Torboltoun Metbuene and Aubigiiie, with the laid chai'ge,
eftir the fame wes refufeit tobe acceptit be all perfonis then prefent with Iiis hienes : Lyke as liis Maieftie wes forceit to furneis him with a counfaill of certane noblemen, befydis forccis of borfcmen and
futemen, for the bettir execulioun of that charge ; quliairin be continewit almaift dining all the tyme
of that winter feafoun : And becaus it wes then thocht tobe verie troublefum and fafheous, and almaift
vnpoftible that he fould remane ftill in thay pairtis, furneift with the faidis foiceis, feing the money
appointit for that eiiand with grite difficultie (coulil ) be had : In end, he wes movit, of verie necellitie,
be his Maiefteis allowance, to ouerfee the palling furth of this realiue to the pairtis beyond fey of
George fumtyme Erll of Huntlie, and Frances Atmtyme Erll of Errole, cheif authouris of the faid
trouble, vpoun Bandis alwayes gevin that thay fould not returne agane within this realme, without his
hienes fpeciall Licence ; and that during the tyme of thair alliens, tliay fould not traflirque to the prejudice of the trew Religioun, prefentlie profeilit within this realme, his hienes perfone, crowne and
eftate ; vndir certane pecuniall panes, mentionat in the faidis Bandis maid thainipoun : And in refpect

364 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I596.

tliairof, to promeis lyl<wayes, be liis liienes allowance, that the pointis foirfaidis of the faid Band being
obfeniit and keipit, tliair wyffis in that caife fould liaiie intiomiffioun witii thair rentis and leving, during' the tyme of thair ablens : Qiihilk promeis, liis Maieil:ie, his nobilitie, counfale and efteatis preI'eutlie coniienit, ffindis, tliat liis liienes can nawayes violat, without fpott and dirogatioun of his
princelie hoiinoiir: And thairfoir lies Sufpendit, and be the tennour iicirof Suipendis all forder executioun tobe viit aganis the faidis fumtyme Erllis, tuicheing the Intromiffioun with thair rentis and leving,
ay and quliill eftir tryale it lalbe fundin and dedairit, that thay haue trafhcque to the prejudice of the
!hid trew Religioun, as his Maieltie is inforuiit ; quhilk tryale his liienes fall tak and cans be tane, betuix and the feift of Lambmes nixttocum ; quliairvnto findrie of the Minifterie, being now perfonalie
prefent, proniittit to hald hand : And incais, eftir tryale, it falbe onywayes foniidin, that thay haue had
trafficque, to the prejudice of the laid trew Religioun, and conlequentlie aganis his ^laiellie, liis peiTone,
iTowne and Eftate, or vthirwayes to haue contrauenit ony parte of the laid Band, aganis the tennour
of the famin ; then and in that caife, not onlie fall his hienes cans introniiffiouii to be had with tliair
rentis and leving, and the lUniiu haillelie inbrocht to his hienes vfe ; hot lykwayes, thair cautionaris
falbe callit and perfewil for contrauentionn of the faidis Bandis, and the panes contenit thairintill vptakiii of thanie, with all rigour and extremitie, in exani])le of vtheris.

( Dec. 16, 1597.) — An Act of Parliament was palled. Reducing the Forfeitures of the Earls of
Huntlie, Angus and Errol, and of vniq'' Sir Patrick Gordoun of Aucliindoun kn', for not entering in
ward and obeying the charge of Treafon, Mar. 8, 1593 : And alfo Reducing the Doom of Forfeiture,
pronounced Jun. 8, 159i ; It likcwife Rellored them to their lands, honours, dignities, ofiices and
eilates, &c. Acta Pari. 1597, fol. 123, &c.

(Dec. 16.) — Another Act was palled, abolilliing ' all actioun and accufatioun, payne, penallie and
pwnilhement following tliuirvpoun, competent to his hienes aganis the I'aidis perfoiiis, or ony of thair
complicis or affitliaris, for ony fact or deid committit be thame or ony of thanie, thair complicis and
alfiilaris foirfaidis, fen the firll d«y of Maij 1592 jeiiis.' — (Jun. 30, 1598.) The Earl of Angus got a
' CommilTion' from Parliament, appointing him ' his hienes Lieutenant and Jullice within the boundis
of the Eiil, IMiddill and \\'('ll Marchcis of this i-ealme, foiranent England, and all the fcheiefdonies of
the famyn ; togidder with the ftherefdomes of Peblis, Selkirk, Eift Lowthiane, Niddifdaill, Galloway,
Kyle, and Ouer Ward of Cliddifdaiil, alfvveill to burgh as to landwart, regalitie as ryaltie, (the inhabitantis of the burrowis of Air and Irwing onlie except) ; and that during his hienes will allanerlie : And
liclyke, Wardane and .Jullice within the boundis of the faid Weil Marclie and fcherefdomes and burrowis apperteining thairto, for the fpace of ane yeir iiixtocum.' — (Jul. 31, 1598.) The Earl of Angus
accepted this Office, and proinifed faithful difcharge of his duties, 8cc.]

Mx Malttv ^cott of 3Jvnii.ri)oTlmc*s idicbins iiiiimoutMiU out of

tl)e Castle of Cnitislr, ^c'

Act (Diciit the Laird o/'Buckcleuch, S<^c.
May 25. — {^■i}>u(l IlaJlniidlwtis.) — Axent tlie demand maid in name
and for the Kingis Rlaiefteis darreil Sufter the Quene of Enoland, be Robert
Bowis hir ambafladour, lieir refident, ftbr I'edres tobe gevin to hir of tlie allegeit
outragioiis fact done be Schir Walter Scott of Branxhohne knicht and his compliceis, at the Callell of Carlile, proportand : That fforfamekle as the faid Schir
Walter, knawne to be a publict officiar, with his faidis conipliceis, vpoun the xiij

- 'See Acta Pari. 1596, fol. 99.

30Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 365

day of Aprile lafl;])ipaft, in weirlyke maner and hoftilitie invadit hir Majefteis
realine of England, a(rail3eit violentlie hir Caftell of Carlile and fubjectis, and
comniittit vtlicris haynous offenffis contrair to the league and amitie betuix the
tua realmes ; gevand thairby ane jull and nianifeft occafioun of violatiouu of the
fame : Thairfoir requiring tiie faid Schir Walter tobe baith deulie fylit for his
fact, and deljiierit to his faid darreil fufter, to fuffir the panes tobe execute vpouii
him for tlie lann'n ; as the faid demand at mair lenth proportis.

The faid Schir Walter, being lauchfuUie warnit, and compearand perlbnalie
befoir his Maieftie, his nobilitie, counfale and efteatis prefentlie conuenit, and
the faid fact being havelie layed to his charge be the Kingis Majeftie — ffor juftifeing of his awne parte, denyit that euir he had ony intentioun to invade the
realme of England, or to a(rail5ie ony of his faid darreft fufteris houffis : Lyke
as, na deidis of hoftilitie, fic as llauchter, de])redatioun of guidis, fyre raling, or
taking of prifonairis, nor yit the actuall taking, or his intentioun to tak the faid
Caftell, is relevantlie qualifeit aganis him in the faid demand ; bot that he allanerlie fimpillie recouerit ^Villiame Armeftrang of Kynmonth, ane fubject of Scotland, furth of that parte of the Caftell of Carlile, quhair maift injuftlie he wes
detenit for the tyme ; as maift wranguflie he had bene tane of befoir, within the
realme of Scotland, be Thomas depuite to the Loi-d Scrope Wardane of

England, accumpanyed with a force of fax hundreth armeit men, within tlie
tyme of ane general affliirance, takin at a day of trew ; to the quhilk the faid \Villiame had repairit, at the fpeciall command of the faid Schir \\'alter, in quliais
name, as Keipar of Liddifdale, the faid day of trew v/es keipit : Be the quhilk
breking of the afliiirance, the faid Schir Walter reflaiiit ane oppin and inanifeft
injm-ie, to the diflionnoiir of his Majeftie his fouerane, and of the realme of Scotland : Qidiilk diflionnour and wrang can not juftlie be excufeit, be pretens of
the faid ^Villianles ftop2)ing of the following of ane lauchfuU tred, I'eing the laid
forme of following wes nawayes lauchfull ; and albeit it had bene lauchfull, yit
the ftopparis thairof could not lauchfullie haue bene takin be the faid Inglilhe
deputie, at his aM-ne hand, within the realme of Scotland : Quhair1)y it is euident, that the onlie \\rang quliilk wes in all this mater, wes committit be the
faid Lord Scrope and his deputie, be invading the realme of Scotland in weii'iyke
maner, and taking of prifonaris within the fame, in tyme of peace, and vndir affuirance of a day of trew, as faid is : In qidiilk the faid Wai-dane contincAvit, be
his wrangous dctening of tlie faid prifonair and refufall of redres, eftir lauchfull
requifitoun maid to him for that effect, be Lettres lent to liim be the faid Schir
Walter, and als be the faid Amballadour at his Majefteis requeift, eftir that the
faid Schir ^Valter, \poun the faid Wardane of England his denyale of jiiftice,
had maid baith lute to the faid Ampalfadour and als his humble complaint to

566 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

his INIajeftie : Qiihilk wrang and denyale of juftice, movit the faid Schir Walter
to attempt the fiiiiple recouerie of the faid i^rifonair, in fie moderat ane faffioun
as wes poffible to him ; being onlie accumpanyed with fourefcoir horfemen, and
vndir filence of nicht, without ony vther deid of hoftilitie done be him for the
tyme ; quhilk fimple recouerie of the faid prifoner, mon neeeffarlie be eftemit
lauchfull, giff the taking and detening of him wes vnlauchfull, as without all
queftioun it wes, and mon be fwa eftemit be all I'eflbiinable and indifferent perfonis. — For the quhilkis refibnis, the faid Ambalfadouris demand to fyle and delyuer the faid Schir Walter, to fuffir panes for the faid fact, is altogidder vnreffounable, and wald tend gritlie to the diflionnour of his Majeftie and his haill
realme.

Quhilkis relTonis being at length hard and confidderit be his Majeftie, his nobilitie and efteatis foirfaidis, it wes thoclit maift meit and conuenient be thame,
that conforme to the ancient treaties of peace and cuftum obferuit betuix the
realmes, this mater of mutuall allegianceis of notour injureis done betuix the officiaris of the twa realmes audit and fould be intreatit be Cominiffionaris ; quhilk
his Majeftie is maift willing and pi'omittis for his hienes parte, with all poffible
diligence, to fend to meit vpoun the bordour, for tryale of the faidis allegeit
wrangis, and making of redres for all extraordinair wrangis quhilkis falbe tryit
tobe done be his Majefteis fubiectis, at fie tyme and place as falbe condifcendit
vpoun : The faid AmbalTadour being reddy to cans the lyke be done for the
parte of England : Vnto the quhilk Cominiffionaris his Majeftie fall giff expres
command to caus mak full fatisfactioun and redres, conforme to the ancient
treaties of peace ; to the effect, that now, in fa neceffar ane tyme, qulien the
haill He is minaffit be tlie commoun inemej'', tliair be iia juft occafioun, for his
Majefteis parte, of breking of the happie aniitie quhilk falang lies continewit betuix the tua realmes.

[iJ/r Robert Leirmond and 3lr Johnnc Camphell, Justices-Deputes.']

iUstttintj: niiK Sintnronnmnunfi iuit!) SiotljlwrU nftf r i)is dforfnture.

Maij 29. 1596. — Dame Agxks Sixcleh Couxtes (Dowager) of
Ekrole.'
Dilatit of the tre(!bnabill Trafficquing and RelTauing fra fFrances fumtyme
Erie Eoithwell, fen his fforfaltour ; and fpeciallie, fen his paffing furth of the
realme.

Comperit M' Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcarne and "William Heart of Livielandis, aduocattis to our fouerane lord, and produceit ane Warrand of his

' Slie was (laughter of George, fourth Earl of Caithness, and second wife of Andrew, seventh Earl
of Errol.

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 367

Maiefteis, to the Juftice to proceid, and the Aduocattis to infift in hir perfute ;
defyring to be rcgiftrat, quhairof the tennour followis.

Warkant to puTj'ae and to udininijier Jujlice.
Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 50ur Deputia, and Aduocate; We g^ete 30W wcle. Forfamekill
as We half appointit ))is day, for ]>e perl'ute and trycll of Dame Agnes Sincler Countes of Eirolc, j)f
certane crymes of Treflbun, quhairof felie is dilatit and fulpect : It is our will J>airfoir, and VVe command 30W our faid Juftice, Juftice Clerk and 3 our deputtis, to proceid and minifter iuftice vpoun liir,
conforuie to Jie Lawes of our realme: And ]>at :e our Aduocate infill in pe perl'ute of liir : As 30
will anfuer to ws Jiairrpoun : Quliairanent )nr prefentis falbe to 50W a warrand. Subfcryueit wiili
our hand, At Halyrudehous, fe xxix day of May, 1596.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES II.

Comperit the famiii day M'" Johnne Scharp and Johnne Niehollbun, aduocattis and ijroloquitouris for the lliid Dame Agnes, and produceit ane 'Warrand.
deliuerit be the Lordis of refTioun, chargeing thame to compeir in hir defence :
quhilk charge was vfit be James Clialmer INIaier ; and defyrit the fame to be regiftrate, quhairof the tennour followis.

Supplication and WARRAKTy?jr Advocates to defend the Coiintefs of Errol.
My Lordis of Counlale, vnto 3our 11. huimlie menis and fchawis, We 5our f'eruitouris. Dame Agnes Sincler Countes of Errole and Alexander Gordoun of Strawawin ' my fpous, for his interes. That
quhair, we are to be accufit fis day, befoir ]>e Juftice and his deputis, for Allegeit Intercommoning
with Frances funityrae Erie of Roithwell, or for fura vthir forgeit crymes, quhairof as fe Lord knawis
We ar maift innocent : And albeit for pe better defence of our innocencie fairanent, and for proponing of our lawfull defenceis, it be neidfuU to ws to haif certane Aduocattis to procure Jiairintill, We
being to be accufit on our lywes ; and fat ))e baiting of preloquitouris in fie materis is permidibill and
accuftumit of pe Law and daylie practice; nochtpeles, fair will nane of Jie Aduocattis procure for ws
in fe faid materis, without 30ur 11. command. Heirfore we befeke 30ur 11. fat we may haif command
to M"* John Scharp, John Rudeil and John Nicholfoun aduocattis, to compeir befoir ])e Juftice and
his deputis, and procure for ws in fe faidis materis, vpoun our refTonabil expenfis. According to Juftice and 30ur 11. anfuer, we befeik.

Apud Ed', xxix" Maij 1596. Fiat ut petitur.

(Sic fubfcribitur) .... J. P. D. R. Secretarius. IMr James Joiinstoun.
Persewaris, Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Drunicarne, Mr William Heart of Livelandis.
Preloquitouris in defence, Mr Johnne Scharp, Mr Johnne Nicholfoun, Mr Johnne Ruflell.
The faid Dame Agnes requires of the Juge that fche may haif hir hufband to
aflift in hir defence.

The Juftice ffindis hir fufficientlie authorifit with preloquitouris : — Allegeit,
that hir hulband being in this toun, fould be heir to affift.

First, It is allegeit for the faid Dame Agnes, that tlie Dittay, anent the allegeit crymes contenit thairin, is gencrale, nocht condilcendand ^■poun the moneth
of the committing of the allegeit crymes, preceillie ; hot refoluand alter nut'iue in

' Strathowne, or Strathdon, the son of Alexander, third Eai-l of Huntly, and ancestor of the Gordons of Clunv.

368 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

ane of the xij monethes : qiiliowbeit lie fuld preceiflie lybel the monethe, if the
law, per legem LiheUorum Diges. de Acciisationihus. — SecimdUe, Allegeit the
Dittay to be alluterlie' irrelevant, infafar as the famin is confauit vpoun the reffait of onye Letteris fra the Lady Boithwell, being in the tyme lybellit in our
fouerane lordis faifgard and protectioun : And quhair it was nienit' that the
tennour of the lettres was to fupport Frances fumtyme Erie Botlnvell, (nocht
granting the veritie thairof), the defyre of fupport be onye of Boithwellis freindis
can newir infer a trellbun aganis tliame fra qiiliome the fupport is atkit, except
it had bene qualefeit that the faid fupport was grantit ; for albeit the defyre to
fupport ane trattoiir may be treflbnabill, yit the refufe of the fupport can nawyife
be criniinall. Thridlie, As to the lall point, twitcheing the allegeit relfait of
Lettres fra the Maifter of Cathanes,^ (nocht grantand as faid is,) repetis the
former anfwer, with this additioun, that the Maifter of Cathanes ftandis the
Kingis fubiect, newir being forfalt. Fcrdlie, As to that point, twitcheing of ane
Obligatioun inclofit within the Ladye Boithwellis Lettre, the famen is verrie irreleuant, nor inferris na cryme, except thair had bene fowmes delyuerit, for it
may ftand, that the Ladye Boithwellis Lettre being refufit, the famin with the
Obligatioun mycht be revin, as it was trew indeid. As to the qualificatioun of
the conceling, quhair thair is na cryme thair is na conceling, for the conceling
man lie of a cryme.

The Aduocate anfueris to the Jftrst allegeance, anent the generalitie of the
tyme, that it aucht to be repellit ; becaiis the Dittay will ftand releuant in onye
day of the haill yeir, the Erie Boithwell ftandand forfalt all that yeir ; and it
being Trellbun to trafficque for him, and to concele the famin : Anfueraud to the
secund allegeance, fayis that it is nocht let doun nakitlie in Dittay, that the Letteris was reffauit fra the Lady Boithwell, as the cryme cpihairvpoun the jjannell
is accufit ; bot, that the Lettre contenit treironabill traffiquing and in'ocimng of
money for my Lord Boithwell, than ftandand forfault. The refiauing and conceling thairof was lykwyfte Treflbun, in the perfoun of the reftaiiear and concelar ;
becaus it is manifeft of the law, that the knawledge and conceling of TrefFoun is
Treflbun. Quhair it is affermit be the iiannell, that the Letter and Obligatioun
refl"auit wes revin and brunt, the jierfewar acceptis the famin in quantum ; and
yit the famin pnrcheffis nawyis the knawledge and conceling ; becaus it wes
nocht anewch, in caife it had bene trew that the defender had rewin and diftroyit the faidis Lettre and Obligatioune, (the contrar quhairof is maift trew ;)

' Altofjetlier, entirely. ' Complained. ^ John Master of Caithness, her brotlier, (wlio

died in 1577,) married Dame Jean Hepburn, only daugliter of Patrick tliird Earl of Bothwell, who
was Francis Earl of Bothwell's mother. The person here alluded to might he Joim Master of Berriedale, Ton of William Lord Berriedale, and grandson of George fifth Earl of Caithness.

29JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 369

bot it behowit hir, of hir dewtie and alledgeance, to haif revelit the treffonabill
directing thairof, and to haif manifeftit hir awin innocencie, be refufall and reveling, and be deteining of the meffingir quha wes in hir hous and power, fche
haifing fic knawledge of his treflTonabill travelling and traffiking in that mater ;
quhilk the Aduocat repetis, as ane anfuer to the liaill alledgeance.

The Defender repetis hir former anfuer, and eikis thairto, that thair can nocht
be ane conceling in TreiToune, quhair thair is nocht tractatus in Treffoun ;
tractus est duorimi vel plurium in eodem consensu. Thair is na confent heir
qualefeit, that ony fupport wes grantit, 3e (yea) be the contrar, it wes refufit ;
and the propofitioun defiendo suhsklio and the refufmg thairof noclity«6vV traC'
tatiim, itaque, thair is nather cryme nor conceling. The aduocat acceptis the
alledgeance in quantum, and anfueris, that the famin elydis nocht the Dittay,
quhilk is nocht only foundit super tractatu, sed suiter silenfio et celatione ; and
the Doctouris and fpeciallie Angelus affirmis, that the knawledge of ony kynd of
Treffoun and conceling thairof, be him quha may preif it, is Treffoun : And
trew it is, that my Lady Bothwellis wiyting for money and fupjjly to my Lord
Bothwell hir huftand, being the Kingis rebell, is Treffoun ; quhilk being knawin
to the defender, and habill to haif bene verefeit be the Lettres reffauit be hir fra
my Lady Bothwell to that effect, hir conceling thairof is exjires Treffoun : Lyke
as, the lyke cryme wes fand Treffoun, in the pairt of Dauid Home of Argattie,
in anno 1584' or thairby ; cpilia, for reding and conceling of ane Letter direct
fra his brother-fone,' being thane foirfalt in Ingland, to ane of his awin tennentis,
for fupport fra him of money and vtheris hisprivat effairis, wes thairvpouneput
to ane Affyife, convict thairof and thairfore execute : And M' Nicoll Dalgleilch,^
being accufit for reding of commendatiounis, writtin in ane Letter, fend be M'
Walter M'Canquall to the faid M' Nicoll, in ane Letter writtin to the faid M'
Walteris wyffe ; the Dittay, foundit vpoun the faid cryme, wes fund relevant ;
he wes put to the knawledge of ane Affyfe, and he wes convict thairof. And
this cryme fpecefeit iiganis this prefent pannell, being mair odious of tlie felff
and relevant of the law nor the faid vthir crymes aboue mentionat, the famin
aucht to be fand relevant, nochtwithftanding the haill alledgeance maid in tiie
central r.

The Defender anfueris to the pretendit practikis, that thair is nane of thame
px'oduceit : and jn-oteftit, that before ony of thame be red be the judge or the
King and Counfall, that thay may haif infpectioun of thame, that fche may anfuer thairto : And in caife ony lie thing wer as is alledgeit, it is nocht i^ertinent
in this caife, fpeciallie M' Dauid Home of Argatie, quha is allegeit to haif red

' See Dec. 8, 1584. ^ Patrick Home, ' fervitom' to the Earl of Mar, ' Minister of

St Cuthbert's, near Edinburgh. See Dec. 8, 1584,

VOL. I, 3 A

370 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

ane Letter, writtin be ane declarit Tratour : As to M' NicoU Dalgleifch, he wes
iiewir convict. And forder, the Act of Parliament, maid att Lynlythqw in fourfcoir and fyve 3eir (1585) retretis,' and for maift A-rgent cauffis hes retretit all fic
proceffis, and hes ordenit the memorie thairof to be l^iireit for ewir, that thay
fould nocht be hard in judgement thaireftir. — Anfuerit the Aduocat, that the
Act of Parliament, maid att Lynlythqw, contenis reftitutiounes gratie et non
juris ; and all^eit it haif redintegrat" the perlbnis forfaltit being on lyff, and the
poflerite of thame being deceiffit, to thair fame, honour and leivingis, yit it alterit nocht decisiones juris, foundit vpoun the Commoun Law and nocht vpoun
particular Actis maid aganis the perfonis foirfaltit.

The defender repetis the former anfuer, with the Act of Parliament and
cauffis thairin contenit ; quhilk Act of Parliament refcindis the haill proceffis,
2ier exjyressum, as gif thair had bene fpeciall decreitis gewin i-poune ilkane of
thame.

The Juftice continewis to Monunday the laft of Maij.

(Maij 31.) — The Juftice continewis Interloquitoiu', in the alledgances proponit betuix the Lady Erroll and the Kingis Advocattis, to the fecund of Junij
nixtocum. [No farther entries occiu- in the Record.]

^laucfibterins, selUng;, antr matins of iTlesI) iw time of llent.

May 31. — William Bauuie, flefcheour in Dunde, and thirteen others
' flefcheouris' of Dundee and Perth.
Dilatit of contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in flaing and eitting of
flefch in Lentrone laft was.

Only one of the pannell ' fylit and convict ;' another continued to the aire of
Perth ; and the others found to be ' cleane and acquit.'

CJatins df ks]^ in time of Eent.

May 31.— [David] Erll of Crawfurd.

Mr John Halyday produceit the Kingis Licence, fubfcryuit be his Maieftie,
granting the Erll of Crawfurd licence to eit flefche, and Thomas Stewart to
mak reddie flefch, (in time of Lent).

The Aduocat allegis the Licence is null, in refpect it is paft but^ compofitioun,
and nocht conforme to the Act of Parliament. — The pannell alledgis, that na
proces fould be led in this Judgement, becaus befor the criminall perfuit, ane
precognitioune ciuile aucht (to have taken place), and it importit ane pecuniall
pane allenarlie. — The Aduocat anfueris, that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit,

' Lat. Fetractare. ^ Lat. Redintegrarc. ^ Without.

29JAC.VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 371

in refpect of the Act of Parliament, ordaining that the Thefaurar fall accufe
thame, and being convict, thair efcheitis and vnlawis falbe tane vp.

I31r Robert Leirmond, Justice-Depute.']

Jun. 1. — IssoBELL Pratt, feruand to Criftopher Lyndefay in the Grange.

Dilatit of the crewall Murthoiir and flauchter of ane infant bairne, procreat
betuix hir and John Abircrumbie wrycht, eftir the bairne wes quick borne ;
committit in the Grange the fewintein of Maij laftwas.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, in ane voce, ffylis the faid Iffobell Pratt of the murdreiffing of hir awin barne, be llrangling of the barne, ane man chyld, be nipping of the bairuis chraig.'

Sentence. ' Fylit and Convict. Sufpen.'

Jbl^ootincr h)it$ ©a^crs anlf ^istolets— ?gurttnff antt Ujountrinig:.

Jun. 1. — James Crei'chtoun of Ruthvennis, Dauid Home his fernand,

Stephin Currour of Logiemegle, Johnne Cuming in Glafwall

and Abimilech Crech, burges of Edinburghe.

Dilatit of contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in bering and wering of

(and fchuting with dagis and) piftolettis ; and hurting and wounding of John

Ker, feruitour to Dauid Wod of Craig, in the body and rycht hand, George Ker

in the heid, and James Ker in the left hand ; and mutilatioun of the faid James

of twa fingaris of his left hand.

Comperit James Reid, Conftabill of the Caftell, and produceit ane Teftimoniall
lubfcryuit be Dauid Ramfay, Minifter at Elyth and Ruthvennis, teftifeing Cristopher Creychfoun in Megle and jilexander Creijchtotm to be lyand deidlie
hurt : And als, produceit the Kingis trecept, ordaining the Juftice to continew
the mater, A-poun fyftene dayis wairning, vpoim the faid Criftopher and Alexander Creychtoune, in refpect thay ar lyand deidlie woundit. — The Juftice admittis the Kingis Warrand, the Thefaurar being prefent and confenting thairto.
— Continued to the Aire of * Forfare, tertio Itineris, (vel fuper premonitione) xv
dierum.'

^^ootins iuiti) ^istoltts— ItJurtinrj: antr iMounHinfl.

Jun. 2. — Dauid Wod of Craig, Mr James ^^'od, brother to the Laird of
Craig, Robert Wod, broder to Thomas \^^od in the Grange, and
John Ker, feruitour to the Laird of Craig.

' Squeezing or pinching of tlie child's tliroat or windpipe, craig. — The same mode of suffocation
wliich was recently practised by the infamous Burke and his gang, in tlie West Port of Edinburo-Ii.

372 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

Dilatit of the hurting and wounding of Criftell (Chriftopher) Creychtoune,
feruitour to James Creychtoune of Ruthvennis, be the fchot of ane piftolet in
the bodie and arme, to the effulioun of his bkide in grit quantitie ; and thairby,
for contravening of the Actis of Pai'liament, in bering, wering and fchuting
with piftolettis ; committit in March laftbypaft.

It wes allegeit be Mr Johnne Scharp, aduocatt, that Dauid Wod of Craig can
nocht be vnlawit for the entrie of Daiiid ^Vod, fone to the Laird of Boningtoun,
and George Ker, becaus Johnne Ducie, Minifter of Monroife, tellifeit to ^Valte^
Commendater of Blantyre (Treafurer), that thay wer vnliable ; quhilk was confeft be the Thelaurar. — Continued to the Aire of ' Forfar, tertio Itineris, xv
dierum.'

[il/r James Foivlis, J iist'i ce- Depute. 1

iHuiXrcr— rijtft.

Jun. 7. — Johnne Pennycuik in Dykenuke.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of vmq'"
Johnne Cowane ; and of Hurting of Alexander Young in Cowter, and chaiffing
of Cuthbert M^Clellen at the Weil Port of Edinburghe ; and for airt and pairt
of the thifteous fteling of thre uaigis fra thame ; committit the xxiij day of May
laftbypaft, &c.

Persewaris, Robert Lord Sanquhar, Jolinne Drybiuelit in Ravinfliauch, Williame Dryburcht thair,
John Wauchop, baillie in Nudrie, Johnne Creyclitoun of Bruntoune, Robert Miller in Stanyhill,
Sir Archibald Naper of Edinbellie, kny', Mr Williame Hairt, aduocat.

Verdict. The pannell is ' ffylit' of eight feperate acts of Theft, &c. and
' for Conimouu thift, commoviiae Reffett of thift, inputting and outputting of
thift, bayth auld and new.'

Sentence. To be tane to the Gallows of the Bori'ow-muii-, and thair to be
hangit quhill he be deid ; and his held and rycht hand to be ftrikin off, and put
and hung vpoune the "V^^eft-port ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit and
inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, &c.

[JMr Jacobus Fowlis Justiciarius, per Commissionevi s. d. n. Regis co7istitut.~\

Jun. 8. — Thomas Gardyn, fumtj^me in Bandoch, now in Legatftoun.
Comperit James Guthrie of Gagye, and produceit our fouerane lordis lettres
deulie execute and indoriate, purcheft be IfTobel "\^^od Ladye Guthre, the relict ;
James Guthre of Gagye, Dauid and Gabriell Guthries, fonnes ; with the kyn and
freindis of '\mq''' Alexander Guthre of that Ilk ; to tak fouertie of Thomas Gardyn, fumtyme in Bandoch, now in Legatftoun, that he fould compeir befoir our

29 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 373

Soueranis Juftice and his Deputis this day and place, and vnderlye the law for
art and part of the crewall llauchter of the faid vmq'" Alexander Guthre of that
Ilk ; and defyrit proces thairvpoun, and proteftit, that he as cautionn be relevit
of his cautionarie.

Comperit Mr Dauid Peirfonn, and produceit ane Warrand of his Maiefteis,
datit at Lynlythq^^% the ferd day of Junij inftant, to defert the dyet ; and defyrit that the famin be obayit ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Clerk and 30ui- deputis, We grete 30W wele. Forfamekill as it is vnderftand to ws fat our vtheris Letties ar lafit, at ]>e inftance of pe bairnis, kyn and fieindis of vmq'"
Alexander Guthre of J>at Ilk, and our Aduocattis for our intres, for calling of Thomas Gardyn of Bandoch to vndirlye our lawis befoir jow, vpoun Jie viij day of Junij inflant, for art and part of ]ie Slauchter of ]>e faid vniq''' Alexander, as our faidis Lettres at lenth beris : Nochtwithfianding quhairof, in
refpect We half alreddie caulit fat deidlie feid ftanding betuix fe houffis of Gardyn and Guthre,
araangis vtheris, to be afTurit and fubniittit to certane of our Counfale, Barrownis and Minifteris, for
reconfiliatioun and remowing falrof ; all fie perfuittis wald in Jie mene tyme be ftayit fat may hinder
})C fame : And fairfoir it is our will, and We command ^ow, Jiat vpoun fe fycht heirof 36 defert fe
faid dyet, appointit fe faid aucht day of Junij inftant ; and on nawyife vnlaw tlie faid Thomas nor his
cautionar for nocht entre fairat, hot defifl fra all maner of proceding fairin ; fat according to f e fubmiflioun, fe remaning of fe feid may be fe bettir handillet, and proceid without impediment. As 36
will anfuer to ws vpoun 3 our office and obedience : Quhairanent fir prefentis falbe 3 our warrand.
Subfcryueit with our hand, at Lynlytbqw, fe ferd day of Junij, 1396.

(Sic fubfcnbitur) JAMES R.

Quhilk Warrand the Juftice obayit, and thairvpoun defert the faid Court, in
refpect of na contrair warrand produceit.

croitsulttna b)i(!) S^Uitcfjcc, for Ktstruction o( €av\ ct #r]ftntg, ^f.—
eijaitcfjcraft— IJoisoniiiri:— iHuvljer.

June 24. — Johnne Stewart INIaillcr of Orknay.
Dilatit of confulting with vmq'° Margret Balfour, ane ^A'^ich, for the diftructioune of Patrik Erll of Orknay, be poyfoning.

Persewar, Mr Williame Hairt Aduocat to our fouerane Lord.

Preloquitouris for the Pannell.

My Lord Barnbarrocht, Mr W™ Leflie, Mr Johnne Nicolfoun, Thomas Kennydy Tutour of Caffillis.

The famin day, Patrik Erll of Orknay being ofttymes callit, to compeir this
day and place, to haif infiftit in perfuit of Johnne Maifter of Orknay for the
crymis contenit in the Lettres, as he that wes lauchfullie fummond to that effect,
comperit nocht ; quhairvijoun the faid Maifter of Orknay alkit inftrumentis.

The faid Mr Williame Hairt aduocat infiftit in jjerfuit of the faid Johnne
Stewart, for the crymes contenit in the lettres : That is to fay ;

374 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

DiTTAY against the Master of Orkney.
FORSAMEKILL as the faid Jolinne Maifter of Orknay, brother germane to
Patrik Erll of Orknay, vpoun the fyrft, fecund, thryd, ferd, fyft, faxt and remanent dayes of the nionethis of October, Nouember, December and lanuar, att
the leift in fum of the dayes of the monethis foirfaidis 1593, Confpyrit the Murthour of the faid Patrik Erll of Orknay, his brother, confultat and dewyfit thairanent with vniq'" Alyfoune Balfour, ane knawin notorious Wicli and execute to
the death for Wichcraft ; and that att the tymes foirfaid, Avithin the faid Annq'^
Alyfounis hous in Ireland' in Orknay, how thay mycht haif bewichit the faid
Patrick Erll of Oi-knay his brother, and bereif him (of life) be Sorcerie and
Wichcraft : Quhilk the faid Alyfoune grantit and confeft the tyme of hir executioun and diuers tymes of befoir ; Lykeas, the faid Johnne, in the foirfaid
moneth of November, and in ane or vthir of the dayes thairof, Ichortlie eftir the
deceife of vmq'" Robert Erll of Orknay, than pall to M' Williame Mwdeis hous,
in AVallis in Orknay, aceumpaneit with James and Williame Stewartis, his brether, Patrik and Olipher Sinclaris, Thomas Palpla and vtheris thair complicis,
quhair the faid Johnne with the laidis perfonis confultit, confpyrit and de\v)^t
how to murthour the laid Patrik Erll of Orknay his brother, be poyfoning, or
vthirwayes, be craft and quyet dealing. Lykeas, the faid Johnne hyrit and
conduceit the faid Thomas Palpla his feruitour to poyfoun the faid Erll of Orknay, quha tuk the fam in hand; and beingaccufit thairof, confeft the famin, andwes
execute thairfoir to the deid : Lykeas alio, the faid Johnne, with the affiftance
of the faid Williame Stewart his brother and thair complices foirfaidis, confultit, dewyfit and concludit att the tyme foirfaid, to haif murtherit the faid Patrik
Erll of Orknay, att ane Banl^ynet in Dauid Moncreifis, in Kirkwall in Orknay ;
quhilk the faid Williame Stewart his brother hes confeft diuerfe tymes fenfyne :
Lykeas, the faid Johnne Stewart, in the moneth of December thaireftir, in the
yeir of God foirfaid, att the leift in ane of the dayes of the faid moneth, confultit,
dewyfit, confpyrit and interpryfit to haif enterit in, fecreitlie, in the faid Patrik
Erll of Orknayis chalmer, within the Place of Birza in Orknay, thair to haif
llayne and murtherit him in his bed. Committing thairby, att the leift doing
that in liim lay, be the meanis foirfaidis, to haif flayne and murdreift the faid
Patrik Erll of Orknay.

The famin day the faid Mr of Orknay declarit, that albeit the ftunmondis be
altogidder irrelevant in the thre heidis thairof, viz. Wichcraft, Poyfoning and
Murdering of his brother, anent the fpeciall circumftances and factis alledgeit
done and interpryfit be the faid Maifter of Orknay, and that it is newir lybellit
that ony effect followit vpoune the faid pretendit purpois of confultatioun, Cj[uhilk
' Yieland, or Yrland, ' a town' in the parisli of Stennes or Stenhous.

29Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 375

is alwyife denyit and is maift falflie forgeit ; yit neuirtlieles, in refpect of his
innocencie, he is content to abyde the ordinar tryall of all the poyntis and crymes
fpecifeit in the laid fummondis.

The famin day the Aduocat produceit his Maiefteis Wai'rand, and defyrit the
famin to be infert ; and forder defyi-it the concurs of my Lord of Orknay, as he
that wes lauchfuUe wairnit to that effect ; quha being callit comperit nocht ; and
the faid Aduocat defyrit jiroces, and tuik inftrumentis, that the partie opponit
nocht aganis the famin. FoUowis the tennour of the Kingis Warrand.
Hex,
Mr Thomas HAMJtiLTOUNE of Drumcame, and Williame Hairt of Lewielandis, aduocattis to our
fouerane Lord. We greit 30W weill. It is our will, and We command 30W, that incontinent eftir fe
fycht heirof, je compeir before our Juftice or his Deputis, in ane Court of Julticiare to be hauldin in
our Tolbuith of Edinburgh the xxiij day of Junij inftant, and infill in perfuit of Johnne Stewart, Mr
of Orknay, fnmmond be vertew of our vtheris Lettres^ purchefl, att jour inllance aganis him, ftbr be
alledgeit cocfulting, entei"pryfing and dewyfing of ])e flauchter of Patrik Erll of Orknay ; and that 56
nawyis confent to prorogatioun or delay of fe faid mater to ony vthir day, nochtwithftanding of ony
directioun purchefl or to be purchefl in Jie contrar heirof: For ])e quhilk J)ir prefentis falbe to 30VV
ane warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyruidhous, fe xvij of Junij, 1596.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

ASSISA.

Laurence Bruce of Cultman- Sir Wm. Stewart of Houftoun, Frances Robertfoun, burges thair,

Lundie, knycht, Williame Tod thair,

Hew Sinclar of Burgh, Thomas Otterburne of Reidhall, Johnne Makic thairj

Alexander Lord Spynie, Patrik Chene of EfTilmonth, Johnne Dik thair,

Robert Lord Sanquhar, James Ogilvie of Balfour, Patrik Kennedie burges thair.

. . . . Mr of Ogilvie, Andro Bauchop, burges of Ed',

The faid Maifter of Orknay produceit ane Declaratioun vnderwrittin, togidder with ane Inllrument, quhilk thay defyrit to be infert in the proces. — Item,
the fummondis is foinidit vpoun thre heidis, viz., AVichcraft, Poyfoning and
Mui'thering of his brother : As to the fFyrft point, albeit the fpeciall circumftances of the mater be nocht fpeciallie qualifeit and fett doun in the fummondis, yit
he is content to abyde ane AflTyfe thairof, in refjject of his innocencie. And as to
the Confeffioun of Alefoun Balfour, to remember the AfTyfe, that the laid Alefoun wes, be vehement tortour of the cafcbielaAvis.' quhairin fche wes kejMt be
the fpace of fourtie-aucht houris, comjjellit to makthe faid jjretendit Confeffioune :

Likeas hir hufband callit Tailliefeir, being ane man of Ixxxxj yeiris

of aige, togidder with hir eldeft fone and hir dochter, wer all kepit at anis and

1 This instrument of torture is elsewhere called caspicaws. Dr Janiieson conjectures tlie word to
signify ' the warm hose,' No doubt the application of intense heat to the limbs, during the infliction
of the torture, was usual in various countries. After encircling the leg with an iron frame-work, it
was put into a moveable furnace or chauffer, and during the progress of heating the iron, the intended
questions were successively put. This exquisite pain must have induced the unhappy sufferer to confess almost any thing that might be proposed. Perhaps the instrument may, from this last ciroimstance, have obtained the soubriquet or nickname from an old French word, Casse-hix.

376 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

at the fame inftant in waird, befyde hir, and put (to) tortouris att the fame inftant tyme ; the fader beand in the lang Irnis of fiftie ftane wecht ; the fone
callit in the biiitis with fiftie fewin ftraikis ;' and the dochter, being fewin yeir
auld, put in the jjinnywiukis ;' to this effect, that hir faid hufband and bairnis
beand fwa tormentit befyde hir, mycht move hir to mak ony Confeflioune for
thair releif : Lyke as thaireftir, immediatlie eftir hir reliefe out of the faid torment, fclie revoikit the faid Confeflioune : And thaireftir, in prefens of the haill
toune, before the Aflyife, and att the tynie of her executioune, fche declarit oppinlie, that the faid Confeffioune wes altogidder fals and extortit : The notorietie
quhairof is referrit to tlie Aflyife. Item, the vthir twa heidis, anent the poyfoning and tlie mvu'thering, (albeit the fame be nawyife relevant poyntis of ony
tyme, becaus it is nocht alledgeit that thair followit ony thing vpovuie the faidis
pretendit confultatiounis, nor yit that the fame cam ad actum j)roximum,) the
Maifler being altogidder innocent of the faid pretendit forgeit accufatiounis, refufis na tryell : And as to the Confeffioune maid be Thomas Palpla, the fame
wes in lyke maner extortit of him, he being kepit in the cafchielawis ellewin
dayis and ellewin nychtis f tuyife in the day, be the fpace of fourtene dayis,
callit in thebuitis, he beand naikit in the meane tyme, and fl^airgeit with towis,^
in fic foirt, that thay left natlier flefch nor hyde'' vpoun him : In the extremitie
of the quliilk tortour the faid pretendit ConfefTioun wes drawin out of him :
Quhill< pretendit ConfefTioun he ewir revoikit and recantit, immediatlie as lie
wes frie of the tortour ; and att laft, publictlie, the tyme of his executioune, he
oppinlie revokit the famin, quhilk wes referrit to the Aifyfe,
Follows the tennour of the inftrument produceit.

Declaration of Alesoun Balfour, at the place of her Execution.

Apud Kirkwall, vpoun Jie Heding-liill of pe fame faxtene day of December 1594. In prefens
of Thomas Swyntoun Jliiiiller at Kirkwall, Jolinne Stewart Reidar ])air, Mr Gylbert Body Minifter
att Holm, Alexander Somerwall in Deirnes, Johnne M'Kenzie, Daiiid Moncreif feniitour to my Lord
Erll of Orknay, and Gylbert Pacock, with fiudry vthiris. Tlie quliilk day, in prefens of me notar
puJilict vnderwrittiu and witneffis foirfaidis, Alesoun Balfour, being condampnit for hir alledgeit
poyntis of Wiclicraft, and led to ])e Hill to pe place of Executioiuie ; fche, in prefens of me and witneffis foirfaidis declarit and tuik vpoun hir faull and confcience, as fche wald anfuer att ])e day of
judgement, quben the fecreitls of all hairtis falbe difdofit, that fche wes als innocent and wald die als
innocent of ony point of Wiclicraft as ane barne new borne : And als, being inquyrit vpoun liir faull
and confcience to declair ' quhat fche knew of fe Lah-d of Stenhoua, and to quhat eifect he gaif to hir
fe walx pat wes fund in hir purs?' Qulia pan prefentlie declarit, be hir pairt of Paradyce, and as

J See Plan's Trial, p. 219, &c. and the Trials for Witchcraft. = See p. 215. ' This fact is

quite inconsistent with the application of intense heat. Perhaps the instrument may have been similar,
in its construction, to the Witches' bridle, mentioned in the notice prefixed to the Trial of Bessie Dunlop. See page 50. '' Hopes, cords. ^ Skin. A most disgusting and frightful instance of the iniquities practised imder form of law ; wliicli, indeed, would disgrace the most barbarous tribe of Indians!

29JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 377

fche wald anfuer to Jie lewing Lord, tLat fche knew na tiling to fe auld Laird of Stehhous bot honeftie ; and fat his Lady, being fubiect to the colick, notour to hir, willit fe Laird to giff hir ane peace
walx, a fowre 3eir bygane fyne, to mak ane implaifter ; to be imployit be hir to his Lady, for remedie
of hir laid difeife, and na vthirn-yis, as fche Wald anfuer to fe lewing God of heavin and aeirth : And
faid fan playnlie, fat fche wald die with the fame confeffioune ; lykeas, fche thane deit conflantlie
fairwith. And ficlyke, being inquyrit and accufit be fe Perfoun of Ropher, ' gif fche wald abyde be

hir fyrfl Depofitioun, maid in fe Caftell of Kirkwall, vpoun the day of December inftant ?'

Quha anfuerit, fat f e tyme of hir firfl Depofitioun fche wes tortourit diuerfe and feuerall tymes in fe
Cafchielawis, and findrie tymis takin out of fame deid,' and out of all remembrance af ' of guid or ewill ;
as lykewyis hir guidman being in f e ftokis, hir fone tortourit in f e Buitis, and hir dochtir put in fe
Pilliewinkis, quhairwith fche and fay wer fwa vexit and tormentit, fat pairtlie to efchew ane gretar
torment and pwneifchement, and vpoun promeis of hir lyffe, and guid deid be fe faid Perfoune,
falllie, aganis liir faull and confcience, fche maid fat ConfelTioun, and na vthirwyis : For f e quhilk,
fche afkit f e Lord mercy and forgiuenes ; and conftantlie deit f airatt. QuLairvpoun all and findrie
fe premiflis, Thomas Ballendene fear of Ewe tuik act and inftrument.

(Sic fubfcribitur,) Ila eft, Jacobus Nevene, notaritis publicus

ac teftis in premiffis rogatus et requijltus : Tefte tnamt propria.

After the qiihilk Declaratioiin, the Juftice patt the faid Johnne to the tryell
of the Aflyfe. Quhilk perfounes being chofin, fworne and admittit, and the
faid Johnne Maifter of Orknay, being accufit be Dittay of the faidis crymes, irl
thair prefens, he denyit the faniin. Eftir the productioun of certane euidentis
and inftrumentis, quhair tlie faidis vmq''' Alyfoun Balfour and Thomas Palpla
maid revocatioun of thair Depofitiounis and Confeifiounis, alledgeit maid in preiudice of the faid Johnne Maifter of Orknay ; the Alfyfe tuik inftrumentis, that
thair wes na thing produceit for vereficatioun of the Dittay, and that the faid
Dittay wes nocht fworne.

The faid perfoun on pannell afliit inftrumentis of the chefing of the Aflyfe but
oppofitioun.^

Verdict. The Aflyife removit altogidder furth of Court to the Counfal-hous,
quhair thay, be pluralitie of vocis, chufe Robert Lord Sanquhar Chancillar of the
faid Aflyife ; and thairefter reafonit upoun the poyntis of the Dittay, and haifing votit thairvpoun, efter voting and refolutioun, re-enterit agaue in Court,
quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid Chancillar, ffand the faid Johnne Stewart
Maifter of Orknay to be Acquit and innocent of the haill crymes and poyntis
of Dittay particularlie above mentionat, quhairof he wes accufit.

[3Ir James Fowlis, Justice-Depute. 1

Jun. 30. — Alexander Fleming of Barrochan, Patrik Fleming and
Mr James Fleming, his fonis, &c.

' In a swoon, or ' dead-faint.' ^ Without challenge upon his part.

VOL. L . 3 B

378 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

Comperit Patrik Maxwall of Dargavell, and produceit our fouerane lordis
lettres, dewlie execute and indorfate be the faid Patrik him felfF, Marioun Porterfeild his fpous and Rabecca Maxwall his dochter, to tak fouirtie of the faid
Alexander, Patrik and Mr James, and vtheris thairin contenit, that thay fould
haif comperit this day and place, and vnderlyne the law for airt and pairt of the
cuming to the faid Patrik Maxwallis duelling-place of Dargavell, and Reveifching of Rabecca Maxwall his dochter furth thairof, and taking of hir away with
thame to the jjlace of Barrochane, and kei)ing hir in ftrait firmanfe, be the fpace
of fyftene dayis or thairby ; conimittit vpoun the thryd day of Nouember laftb}i)aft, and vtheris crymis contenit in the lettres direct thairupoun.

This mater ordenit to be continewit, be the Priour of Blantyre thefaurar and
the Juftice Clark, be thair Precept. — Sir Patrik Houftoun of that Ilk became
jiledge and fouirtie for Alexander Fleming of Barrochane, Patrik F. his fone and
apperand air, Mr James F. alfe his fone. Hew F., James F., James Henryfoun
and Peter Cuming, feruandis to the faid Alexander ; Robert Fleming in Covenlie, Gabriell Reid in Barrochane, Williame Houftoun thair, Patrik Houftoun
thair, Williame Reid in Hillis, Patrik Fleming in Aylie, Thomas Kellocht in
Craighall, Matho Patrik thair, Johnne Allane in Cruik, James Fleming in Corflie, Patrik F. att the kirk of Pullellane and Alexander Alfchenar in Wod, and
that thay fall compeir before our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis, the thryd
day of the nixt Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Renfrew, or foner quher or
quhen it fall pleis our fouerane Lord, vjioune fyftene dayes wairning, and vnderly the law for the faid crimes.

jTortilile ^litjuttiou, ^f.

Jul. 5. — Williame Banxatyne of Corhous.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the away-taking of and reifing of Margret Hammiltoune, dochter to Johnne Hammiltoune of Auchnaglene, fui-th of Johnne
W^eiris hous of Dargavill.

Persewaris. PRELoauiTOURis for the paimell.

Johnne Hammiltoune of Auchnaglene, Mr Thomas Craig,

Mr Williame Hairt, aduocat to our fouerane lord. Mr Alexander King.

The faid Williame Bannatyne tuik inftrumentis of his compeirance. Compeirit James Reid, Conftabill of the Caftell of Edinburgh, and tuik inftrumentis
that he had prefentit ^Villiame Bannatyne of Corhous before my Lord Juftice,
and enterit him on pannell, conforme .to the ^Varrand direct be the Lordis of
Counfall to that effect. — The faid day comperit Mr James Hammiltoune of
Candor and Williame H. of Hillis and James H. of Bardowie 3ounger, and tuik
inftrumentis of the production of our fouerane lordis (letteris) dewlie execute,

29JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 379

purcheft be Johnne Hammiltoune of Auchnaglene for fummonding of ane Affyife
to Williame Bannatyne of Corhous. — As alfo comperit Johnne Hammiltoune of
Auchnaglene, and infiftit in perfuit of Williame Bannatyne of Corhous, and
thairvpoune tuik inflrumentis. — The laid Williame Bannatyne of Corhous tuik
inftrumentis, that Williame Hammiltoune of Auchnaglene, being defyi-it to
fweir the Dittay gewin in aganis him, declarit, he wes fa informit, be brute,' that
he did the famin ; bot he wald nocht tak it vpoun his confcience that the famin
wes trew done be him.

The perfewar and the aduocatt protellit for Errour, in caife thay Acquyte the
faid Williame Bannatyne.

Dittay against Williame Bannatyne of Corhous!'

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid Johnne Hammiltoune haifing placeit Margret Hammiltoune his dochter,
ane bairne often 3eir auld or Jiairby, with Jolnme Weir in Dargavill, hir moder-brother, to haif bene
educat and brocht vp be him, vntill hir lauchfuU and perfyte age ; lipning tliat nane fould haif interruptit hir educatioune and vpbringing, or attempted ony violence or iniurie aganis hir; nochtwithllanding quhairof, it is of veritie, that Williame Cwninghame tutour of Boningtoune, accumpaneit
with certane bretherene and feruandis of Williame Bannatyne of Cofhous, mountit vpoun the faid
Williamis awin hors, be his fpeciall caufing, directioune, fending and hounding out, all bodin in feir
of weir, with vnlauchfull and foirbidin wappinnis, come vpoun fe xxviij day or fairby of March laflbypafl:, vuder fylence and cloud of nycht, to |ie faid Johnne Weiris duelling-hous of Dargavill, lyand
within ])e flierefdome of Lanark, and violentlie enterit fairin ; fyift, fchamefullie and vnhonefllie perfewit the faid Johnne Weir of his lyfTe, reft his purs fra him, quhairin thair wes ane grit quantitie of
gold and filuer, hurt and woundit him in diuers pairtis of his body, and left him lyand for deid ; and
thaireftir, violentlie tuik the faid Margret away with fame, fyrll to Jie place of ]« Corhous, quhair
fche wes reflauit and kepit all that nyclit, be J)e knawledge, allowance and privitie of fe faid Williame
Bannatyne, and ]iaireftir, be his directioune, convoyit hir away to fum pairtis of ])e Bordonr, quhair
fche wes kepit and detenit : The away-takeris of hir remaning continewallie fenfyne in hous and cumpany with the faid Laird of Corhous ; quha intendit, in hir minoritie, to move hir to findrie pnrpoflis,
altogidder to hir difadvantage.

Wes i)utt to the knawledge of ane Aflyis, and in thair prefens, wes accufit be
Dittay of the crymes aboue writtin ; quha denyit the famin flraitlie.

Verdict. Eftir the quhilk accufatioune, thay paft altogidder fuilh of Court
(to) ane fecreit place in the eird of the faid Tolbuith, quhair thay convenit and
chufe Robert Scott of Thirlftane chancillar, and eftir chefing of him paft to
voting vpoun the pointis of the Dittay foirfaid ; and being refoluit thairwith
re-enterit agane in Court, quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid chancillar, ffand,

' Fr. Bruit, report, rumour. " This crime affords a striking picture of the times; which, by reference
to the Criminal Records, will be found one of very frequent occurrence. Heiresses were forcibly carried off" by some powerful Baron or Laird, who had perhaps been disappointed in effecting a man-iage
for themselves or sons, by fair means. A fitting opportunity was watched, and the young lady relieved
of the tediousness of courtship, by getting a priest on the other side of the Border to marry them ' out
of hand.' Abductions were also common on the part of relations, competing for the guardianship of
the heiress.

380 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

pronunceit and declarit the faid Willianie Bannatyne of Corhous to be clene, innocent and acquit of the cryrnes aboue writtin.

Jul. 7. — Thojias Ewing at the Mylne of Ogilvie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the hurting and wounding of Williame Broun in
Nether Baddinliaith, in diuerle pairtis of his body, to the effufioun of his blude
in grit quantitie ; be gewing of him of faxtene bludie woundis in the body, be
way of murthour, vnder fylence of nycht ; committit in the moneth of Auguft
laftbypaft.

Persewaris. Preloquitour for the pannell.

Williame Broune in Nether Baddinhaith, Mr Johnne Moncreif.

Mr Thomas Hammiltoun, (King's Advocate).

The faid Williame Broun produceit the lettres aganis the faid Thomas Ewing,
dewlie execute and indorfat, and tuik inftrumentis thairvpoiuie. — The Aduocat
produceit his hienesWarrand, ordaining him to infill in jierfuit of Thomas Ewing.
— The perfewaris afkis inftrumentis that the faid Williame afkit inftrumentis.

The perfewaris (pannell ?) alledgis, that the lybell is irrelevant foundit ; becaus that nather llauchter nor mutilatiouu followit thairvpoun ; and it appertenis to the fliereft'. — The aduocat anfueris, that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, becaus the defender is nocht jjerfewit vpoune ane intendit murthoiu', Ajioune
foirthocht fellony vnder fylence of nycht, qnodquidem consiUiim hoviicidij cogi~
tati, per buhistr'iam et insidias peruen'it ad actum ; quhilkis qualiteis being conjoynit, makis the lybell relevant. — The perfewar (pannell?) anfueris, non est
crimen lese maiestatis, et nihil peruenit ad actum. — The aduocat alledgis, that
the alledgance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the lybell.

The Juftice fRndis the lybell relevant.

Verdict. The Aftyfe, for the maift pairt, Acquit the faid Thomas Ewing ;
fTorfamekill as he, vpoun the xxvj day of Auguft laftbyj^aft, accumpaneit with
Williame Ewing his brother, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht, \inbefett the hie
way and paffage to Williame Broun in Nether Baddinhaith, vnder fylence of
nycht, be way of Murthour and Brigancie, vpoun the croft of his Landis of
Nether Baiihaith ; and thair, with fwoi'dis and quhingaris, crewallie invadit him
for his flauchter and murthour, hurt and woundit him thairwith, be gewing of
him of faxtene bludie woundis in the held, and diuerfe vtheris pairtis of his
body, to the effufioun of his blude in grit quantitie ; vpoun fett purpois, provifioun and foirthocht fellony ; and for cafting of him be the heillis in ane burne
callit the Stankburne, belewand he wes deid, of purjiois to haif drownit him.
Pronunceit be the mouth of Nicoll Towart (in Blakfiu'd), Chancillar (of the faid
Affyfe).

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 381

li?urt!nfl; antr asjountiiiifl— Ci)tft, $(t,

Jul. 28. — Hary Auchincraw, in Fowldene.
- Dilatit of airt and pairt of the thifteoiis fteling of ane lokit gold and filuer
bag, fra Robert Gray, merchand burges of Edinburgh, togidder (with) Ixxxxij

fyve pound pecis, fyve four pownd pecis, thre dowbill duikatis, thre

dowbill crofe duikettis, fyve auld roif-nobillis, fyve fouerane angellis, thre dowbill
myllrais, v lib. Seottis filuer; committit in Aiwyll 1591.

It is allegeit be the faid Hary Auchincraw, that na continewatioun aucht to
be grantit this day, becaus all Juftice courtis ar peremptour ; lykeas he being
fummond to this day, he comjierit perfonallie, offering him reddie to abyde ane
tryell ; quhairvpoun fyftene perfonis of Inqueifl ar callit, reflauit and admittit ;
fwa that thair being na alledgeance maid be the partie, nor na vthir lauchful impediment proponit in the contrar, this proces can nocht be delayit, feing he can
nocht be obleift to find cautione ; and quhidder he be acquit or fylit, he aucht
nocht to find cautioun, feing he is prefent within the bar.

The Aduocat allegis that the Juftice mycht continew the mater to the morne.

The Juftice continewis to the morne. ' Plegio Bernardo Borthuik de CoUielaw — pena V mark.'

Jul. 29. — [' Dilatit of fetting vpoun Robert Gray, merchand burges of
Edinburgh, and hurting of him in diuerfe pairtis of his body : and for the thifteous fteiling fra him of certane gold and filuer.'] The faid Hary Auchincraw
comperand, defyrit the AlTyife to be callit qulia wes admittit 3ifterday ; and offerit him reddie to vnderly the law, for the cryme aboue writtin, and defyrit the
Juftice to put him to the faid Afiyife ; quhairvi^oun he aflvit inftrumentis. The
partie on pannell takis inftrumentis of his offer to vnderly the law, and difTafTenting to all continewatioune ; and proteftit that he be nocht continewit, in (virtue)
of his oft comperance in the mater, at twa feuerall dyettis of befoir. The pannell
proteftit, that in refpect Robert Gray being within the bar, as alfo M' AA'^illiame
Hairt, aduocat, his perfewaris being prefent and refufit to perfew, that na lettres
be grantit in tyme cuming.

The Juftice continewis to gif anfuer the morne. ' Desert, in refi^ect Robert
Gray comperit nocht to perfew, nor the aduocat.'

^\miQl)ttv ot n iHtsstitfltr at Slvnis.

Jvil. 29. — Patrik Barclay of Towie.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Williame Mure, meffinger in
Deir ; committit in the moneth of Februar laftbypaft.

Persewaris, Janet Keytli relict, M' Williame Mure as fone, M' Williame Hairt (King's Advocate.)
Preloquitouris for tbe Pannell, M' Jobune Scbairp, M' James Donaldfoun.

382 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

The pui-fewaris tuik inftrumentis of productioun of the lettres aganis Patrik
Barclay of Towie, and proteftit for relief of thair cautioneris.

The faid M' Williame Mure produceit the Kingis Maiefteis Warrand, ordaining the mater perfewit, aganis Patrik Barclay of Towie, to be continewit to the
nynt of Auguft nixtocum.

The Juftice Continewis the actioun to the morne, to be auyifit with the Counfall. ' Plegio, Magillro de Elphinftoune.'

His Maiesties Warrand.
Bex,

Justice, Juftice clerk and 30ur deputis. We greit 30W weill. Forfatnekill as our vtheris
lettres ar purcheft, att pe inftance of ]>e relict, balniis, kyn aud frelndis of vraq" Williame Mure, meffinger in Deir, for calling of Patrik Barclay of Towie before 50W, in our Tolbuitli of Edinburghe, the
xxix day of July inftant, to vnderly our lawis, ffor airt and pairt of ])e flauchter of fe faid vmq" Williame Mure : As alfo, our vtheris lettres ar direct for calling of diuerfe perfonis, feruandis to ))e Lady
Erroll, to compeir before 50W in fe Tolbuitli of Edinburghe, the xxix day of July inftant, to vnderly
our lawis ffor airt and pairt of ]>e flauchter of fe faid vmq'' Williame Mure : As alfo, our vtheris lettres
ar direct for calling of diuerfe perfonis, feruandis to ]>e Lady Erroll, to compeir before 50W, in the
Tolbuitli of Edinburghe, the nynt day of Auguft nixtocum, to vnderly the law, ffor pe taking of Williame Keyth of Ludquhaime, and vtheris crymes contenit in ]>e faidis lettres: And haifing confideratioune, that Jie flauchter of ]<e faid Williame Mure fell out, vpoun fe taking of fe faid Williame Keyth,
and executione of our vtheris Letteris, aganis ]>e perfonis committeris fairof ; for efchewing of J)e
trubling of ane Affyfe, quha ar to be fummond vpoune baytli the faidis crymes. We half tliocht it guid
to continew the dyet, for fe flauchter of pe faid vmq'^ Williame Mure, to ]>e faid nynt day of Auguft
nixtocum, to pe effect the perfonis of Afl^yis be nocht putt to pe dowbill travell. Thairfoir, and for
diuerfe vtheris confideratiounis moving ws, it is our will, and We command 50W, that incontinent eftufe fycht hereof, je continew fe perfuit of ]je lettres purcheft aganis ])e faid Patrik Barclay of Towie,
for pe Slauchter of ]>e faid vmq'« Williame Mure, to pe nynt day of Auguft nixtocum ; fwa that pe
crymis contenit in a])' of fe lettres may be tryit be ane Affyis : And tak fufficient cautioun for fe entrie of fe faid Patrik Barclay, ]>e faid day: Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe to 50W ane warrand. Subferyuit with our hand, att Dunfermling, the xxix day of July, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

(Jul. 30.) — The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the productioun of ane Warrand
of the Couufall, and delyrit the famin to be ingroft. The pannell takis inftrumentis, that the jjai-teis, being oft tymes callit, comi^erit nocht. The Aduocat
paft fra the pairt of the fummondis bering Treftoune.

AssiSA.
Andro Reid of CoUieftoune, Patrik Lealk of Haddo, Sir George Ogilvie of Dunlugous,

Alex' Blakhall of that Ilk, M' Alexander limes, Williame Forbes of Corfindae,

Patrik Chene of ElRlmont, Thomas Leaflc of Auchinad, Williame Leaflv of that Ilk,

Alex' Wod of Colpnay, Archibald Bnice of Pitfowlis, Abraham Forbes of Blaktoun,

James Chene of Straloch, Robert Dnimmond of Drill, Robert Innes of Coitis.

The AflTyfe, be pluralitie of vocis, chefe Sir George Ogilvie of Dunlugus
(Chancellor.)

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 383

Verdict. — The AfTyis, in ane voce, Acquyte Patrik Barclay of Towie of
airt and pairt of the llauchter of vmq" Williame Mure, Meffinger ; committit
be Patrik Cantlie, than his feruand, of the fpeciall caufing, hounding, fending,
directing, command, afRftance and ratihabitatioun of the faid Patrik, in the
moneth of Februar laftbypaft, vpoun fett purpois, prouifione and foirthocht
fellony.

The quhilk day comperit Patrik Barclay of Towie and produceit ane Warrand delyuerit be the Counfall, and defyrit the Juftice and the Aduocat to infift
in i)erfuit, according to the tennour thairof ; quhilk the Aduocat defyrit to be infert in proces, quhairof the tennour foUowis.

My lordis of Privie Counfall, vnto 30ur 11. huimlie menis and fcliawis I :50ur feiuitour, Patrik
Barclay of Towie, That quhaire, Jonet Keytli, ]>e relict, with Jie bairnis and freindis of vnuj'« Williame
Mure, meffinger, within ))e fherefdome of Ahirdene, being iterit vp, movit and perfwadit be fe inftigatioun of fum of my vnfreindis, lies nocht only now, but att diuers tymes ofbefore, vpoun Jiair wrangus
narratioune, purcheft Lettres and fairwith caufit chairge me to vnderly fe law, for fe alledgeit airt and
pairt of Jie flauchter of |)e faid vmq'^ Williame Mure, meffinger, committit be Patrik Cantlie, my alledgeit feruand, vpoune the faxtene day of Februar laflbypafl, 1593, the faid vmq'' meffinger thane
being in executioune of his office, &c. According to J)e quhilkis Lettres and chargeis, I, fie faid Patrik Barclay, being alluterlie innocent of ])e faid cryme, fand cautioun and fouertie, in dew tyme, att
ewerie chairge, to liaif vnderlyne )ie law for fe famin, to diuerfe dayes by])afl ; and att laft, to Jie xxix
day of Julij inrtant, before tiie Juftice (and) his deputis ; and comperit perfonalie att all Jie faid dyettis
bygane, as I did this day before the faid Juftice, offering me reddie to vnderly ]>e law for Jie faid cryme,
])air being fufficient number of Inqueift fummond and eomperand att ewerie day to compeir jiairvpoune :
As the Juftice, deputis and clarkis, with the actes takin Jiairvpoun will teftifie : Newirjieles, the faidis
perfewaris, or raj)' my inimeis, quha fteirit pame vp fairto, lies att diuers tyrais bygane purcheft Lettres
fubfcrjTiit be our fouerane lord, direct to fe Juftice and his deputis, to continew Jie dyettis quhairvnto I wes chargeit in Jie faid mater ; and namelie, this day hes procureit and produceit his ^laiefteis
Letter vnder his fubfcriptioune, vpoun finifter narratioune, to continew the famen vnto ]>e nynt day of
Auguft nixtocum ; to Jie quhilk continewatioun I diflentit, and ofFerit me reddie, prefentlie, as I do 3 it,
to vnderly Jie lawis for Jie faid crymes, quhairof I am innocent. And feing the Juftice depute hes continewit his Interloqwitour to be gewin Jiaii-vpoun quhill the morne, and is to tak 5 our 11. aduife, qubidder
lie fall proceid or nocht, nochtwithftanding the faid privie letter of continewatioune; and that it is alfo
of veritie that I and my fieindis, with the perfonnes of Inqueift, lies bene put to gret tnibellis and expenffis now and ofbefore, in keiping of all jie dyettis in Jie faid mater, alfweill principall as continewatioune, purcheft be Jie perfewaris and my vnfreindis ; and that thair intentioun is to trubill me and my
freindis Jiairby, in cumiiig heir fyue fcoir of myles att ilk dyet, and in waifting our rentis and fubftance
in attending Jiairvpoune : And that the faid llaucliter wes only committit be Jie faid Patrick Cantlie,
vpoun ane particuler quarrell and feid betuix him and the faid vmq'^ William Mure, quhairof I wes
newir participant, airt nor pairt. Heirfoir I befeik 5 our II. to tak fie ordour in Jie preraiffis, that I and
my freindis fall nocht be trublet to keip ony forder dyettis in Jie faid mater, bot that proces may be
grantit and followit out Jiairintill the morne, bot forder delay ; and to that effect, to caus the parteis
perfewaris, being heir prefent, and oure fouerane lordis Aduocat, to fummond and haif reddie ane Affyfe to pafs vpoun famekill of Jie faidis Lettres as falbe fund relevant ; quhairvnto I am willing to anfuer
inftantlie, as I wes att all dyettis ofbefore, bot ony forder delay : And jour 11. anfuer huimblie I requyre.

384 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

(Sic fubA'iibitur in dorfo,) Apud Edioburglie, xxix Julij, J'-.V'.lxxxxvj. The Lordis of Secreit Counfall Ordaiiis the Judice, Judice Clark and fair deputis, to procoid and ininilter jurtice vpoun fe coraplainer within writtin, tlie mornp, hut forder delay or continewatioune ; conforme to ])e lawis of Jiis
realme : And that the Aduocat infill in Jie perfuit of him ; as thay will anfuer to his Maieflie and ])e
faidis Lordis pairvpoun.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Blantyre. M. R. 30UNG.

The famin day, Jonet Keyth the relict, and M' "Williame Mure as fone, with
the kyn and freindis of vniq''" Williame Mure meffiugir in Deir, being- oft tymis
callit to infifl in perfuit of tlie faid Patrik Barclay of Towie for the laid flauchter, the lauchfiill tyme of day biddin and nocht comperand ; the Juftice ordenit
Mr Williame Hairt Aduocat to compeir and infifl in perfuit, quha comperit and
produceit ane roll of Affyfe of the perfonis aboue writtin.

The famin day, Patrik Barclay of Towie, being enterit on pannell, as fummond
be vertew of our fouerane lordis lettres, purclieil att the inftance of Jonet Keyth
the relict, with the bairnis and remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'' William
Mure meflinger, and being perfewit be Mr Williame Hairt aduocat, indytit and
accufit :

DiTTAY against Patrick Barclay of Towic.

FoBSAMEKiLL as Williame Keyth of Ludquharne, Alexander Keyth his fone and M' Samuell
Keyth liis bro])er fone and our fouerane lordis aduocattis, haifing rafet liis hienes letters att fair inllancc, for chargeing of ])e faid Patrick Barclay of Towie and Patrick Cantlie his feruand, now robell
and att ]ie home, for ]ie caus and cryme vnderwrittin, to haif fand fouirtie that thay fould liaif comperit before fe Juftice or his deputis in ]>e Tolbuith of Edinl)urgh, att ane certane dyett fpeciallie
contenit pairin, for certane haynous and trelfonabill crymis contenit in fe famin ; tliay directit ])e faidis
lettres to ]ie faid vmq'^ W" Mure meffiugir, for putting of ))e famin to due execution ; quha haifing
reffauit tlie famin, vpoun ])o x\j day of Februar laftbyjiafl, lie pali be vertew Jiairof, vpoun ]>e famin
day, to ))p place of Towie, quhair the faid Patrik Barclay wes prelent for ]ie tyme ; and bccaus he
could nocht apprehend his perfonall prefens, he chargeit him fairatt ; and ficlyke chargeit the faid
Patrik Cantlie rebell perfonallie, foirnent ])e 5ett of )ie faid place and delyuerit him ane copie. Eftir
]>e quhilk charge, tlie faid Patrik Cantlie part, in fra ]>e faid mefiingar to ]>e place of Towie, to the faid
Patrik Barclay his maifter ; and eftir he had fpokin with liim, and had gottin directioun fra him, to pe
effect vnderwrittin, perfaifing the faid VV" Mure niefiingir to be paft away, he come furtli vpoun the
faid Laird of Toweis befl hors, foUowlt the faid vmq" W" Mure on horlbak, as he was rydand away
in fobir and quyet maner, to put ])e faidis lettres to forder executioune vpoune vtheris fairin fpecifeit,
dredand na ewill, harme, iniurie or perfuit of ony perfoune, hot to haif lewit vnder Godis peax and our
fouerane lordis ; in refpcct he wes in executioun of his office, and prel'entit our fouerane lordis perfoun, till ]ie place and landis of , quhair he overtuik the faid vmq''=W'" Mure; and

]iair, the laid Patrik Cantlie, of ]ie fjieciall caufing, hounding, fending, directing, counfaling, refetting
agane with ]>e bludie hand, airt, pairt-taking, command, affiltance and ratihabitioun of ])e faid Patrik
Barclay his maifter, fett vpoune liim and maift crewallie and awfullie, fyrft with ane drawin fword, ftrak
the faid vmq'^' W'" Mure in Jie bak, to the eft'ufioune of his blude in grit quantitie ; and liaireftir, with
ane piftolet chargeit with bullett, fchot the faid vniq'= W'" tlirow ]ie body, and maift fchamefullie and
crewallie Hew him Jiairwitli : Eftir )ic quhilk Hauditer, he immediatelie ]iaireftir returnit agane to the faid
place of Towie, quhair the faid Patrik Barclay of Towie reffauit liim, with ])e liett bludie hand : And

30JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. S85

fiva, the faid Patiik Barclay of Towie is airt and pain of ]>c crewall flauchter of ])e faid vmqi« W"
]Mure mefllnger, committit in ))e oxecutioune of liis office, vpoune fett purpois, piovifioune and foirthocht felloiiy, in hie and raanifeft contemi)tioiine of our fouerane lordis authoritie and lawis.

Verdict. The AfTyife, be mouth of the faid M' George Ogilvy of Dunlowgus knycht, chancillar, fiand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Patrik Barclay of
Towie to be cleane, innocent, and acquit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of the
faid vmq'" Williame Mure nieffinger ; committit iu the maner foirfaid. — Quhairvpoune lie afl<^it actis and inftrunientis.

^Ut^ring; ralunmiouo 6prrc|)C0 mxH slanUtvs asninst tl)e Mwq*

Aug. 3. — JoHNNE DiKSOUN in Lyne, Inglifman.

Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in vtering of Calumnious
fpeichis and flclanderis aganis our fouerane lord, and calling of him ' ane baftard,' &c.

The aduocat (Mr Thomas Hammiltounc) produceit the Depofitiounis of certane witneflis ; and proteftit for Wilfull Errour, in caife thay clange.

The Affyfe tuik inftrumentis, that Jolinne Dikfoun come in his Maiefteis will,
for ony Ipeich he fpak aganis his hienes, quhilk wes in his drukinnes.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of Robert Smyth (merchand in Edinburgh) chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit Johnne Dikfoun, Inglifman, in
Ljii, to be fliylit, culpable and convict, for contravening of our fouerane lordis
Actis of Parliament ; and fpeciallie, of ane Act maid be his hienes, in anno 1584-,
and in anno 1585, rateifeit be ane Act maid in anno 159^' ; in famekill, that vpoun
the XXV day of Julij laftbyi^aft, being the Sabbath day, Archebauld Gairdenar,
ane of his Maiefteis cannoneiris, haifing requyrit the faid Johnne Dikfoun to
vyre his boit' to gif place to his Maiefteis ordinance ; he fyrft anfuerit, that ' he
wald nocht vyre his boit for King or Kafard ;' and thairefter, maift proudhe,
arrogantlie, flvlanderouflie and calumniouflie callit his Maieftie ' ane baftard
King ;' and that ' he wes nocht wordie to be obeyit.'

Sentence. The Juftice depute, be the mouth of Williame Gray dempftar,
ordenit the faid Johnne Dikfoune to be tane to ane gibet, ftandand beneth the
inercat croce of Edinburgh, and thairvpoun to be hangit quhill he be deid," &c.

?!^tt(vins anti btntJinti; Ijase foiit,

Aug. 6. — Alexander Keeman in Garuiocht, and Williame Gairdin
fone to ^V" G., fone to Robert G. in Culroife.
Verdict. Fand to be fylit, culpabill and couvict of the outputting of falfe

1 Veer liis hoat. ' See the Cases of Tennent, Oct. 10, IGOO ; Comuall, Apr. 25, 1601 ; and

Ross, who was executed on Sept. 10, 1618,

VOL. I. 3 C

386 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 159G.

and adulterit coinage of the patren of ten-fliilling-pecis, to tlie fimilitude of our
fouerane lordis trew coinzie, to findrie perlbunes.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of Johnne Nilbet dempftar, ordenit
the faidis Alexander Kehnan and Williame Gairdin to be tane to ane gybbet,
A-nder the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair hangit quhill thai be deid ; and
all thair guidis to be efcheit.

?i?oi-gcrstcaIiuri:— CT)tft, ^r,

Aug. 6. — SvMONE MoFFET in the Ryneclewis.

Dilatit and fylit for the thifteous fteling of xxx naigis (horfes) and meris ;
and alfe of ane cloik, ane hairt of filuer owi-gilt, ane woux/ ane Camrige owrla/
&c. ; comraittit in Junij laft ; and of Common Thift.

Sentence. To be hangit quhill he be deid, vjwun the faid Gibbet ; and all
his movabill guidis to be efcheit.

^latitjljtcr.

Aug 7. — Gylbeut Pacok, feruitour to the Maifter of Orknay.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of (the flanghter of) vmq'° Hary Colvile (Perfoun of
Vrquhart) ; comniittit the njait of Julij laftwas.

Persewaris, James Merfar as brothir, James Coluile brothir foue, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune.
. Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Rychard Spens, George Abimethie.

The perfewaris produceit the Dittay aganis Gylbert Pacok, for the flauchter of
vmq'*' Hary Coluile Perfoun of Vrquhart, and defyrit proces.

The pannell alledgis, that na proces can be led agane the faid Gylbert this
day, be reafoun he is uather tane in flagranti crimine, quhairof he is innocent ;
nor yit contumax, nor denunceit for ane crime ; and fwa, be the cuftum of the
Court and Act of Parliament, he audit to be fummond vpoun xv dayes wairning. This wes decydit betuix Maidland and Crowner Preftounis brether, in this
famir. Juftice Court, and in all vtheris perfounes, quha wes prefentit on this
forme, on pannell : In refpect quhairof, na proces can be had agane the defender,
vnto the tyme he be fummond vpovui xv dayes wairning. — The Aduocat anfuerit, that the alledgeance audit to be repellit, becaus the defender in effect wes
tane in flagranti crimine ; inlafar as he, baiting committit flauchter contenit in
his dittaj', the complent thairof being maid to his Maieftie, he directit his Commiffioiui for taking of him ; be vertew quhairof, he wes apprehendit, and now
prefentit to Juftice. As to the practik alledgeit betuix Crowner' Preftounis
breder and Maidland, it can nawayis militat in this cais, becaus Maidland wes
accufit for ane cryme committit in Flanderis, mair nor ane yeir eftir the com-

' Watch. * Cambric overlay, a sort of rnff. ' Colonel.

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 387

mitting thairof ; and this man is apprehendit incontinent, fa fone as the ciyme
come to his Maiefteis knawlege, and fa fone as his hienes Commiffioun could tak
effect. As to the defenderis alledgeance of his innocence, it is mair jn'opper to
be tryit be ane Alfyfe nor ' to be credite for his affirmatioun. — It is aufuerit (replied), that the alledgeance llandis relevant, nochtwitliftanding the anfuer maid
be the Aduocat and his lordfchipis informeris, for heir I am vpoun the proceife
caftin of the Juftice Court and Act of Parliament, the wordis quhairof admittis
na extentioune nor interpretatioun, being ft .... ;' and the Act preceiflie beris,
that ane jiartie nocht apprehendit hi Jiagrant'i, quhilk is hi ipso delicto, falbe
wairnit vpoun xv dayes wairning ; the cuftum of the Court, fwa vniuerfallie obferuit, thair is newir ane Avord ex incontinente contenit in the haill Act. As to
the Kingis Commiffioune, direct for api^rehenfioun of the man, the forme of the
Commiffioun ftandis according to the cuftum of Commoun law and practik,
quhilk is but^ preiudice of the parteis lauchfuU defenffis ; fwa that nowther the
directing of the Commiffioun, nor apprehenfioun of me, be vertew thairof hiu'tis
me in my lauchfuU defenffis ; and the priviledge is grantit to me, be his hienes
lawis : And albeit, I haif the priviledge vpoun xv daj^es wairning, be his hienes
lawis, yitt that all occafioune of giltienes may be tane away, and that I wcs maift
innocent of the fact and cryme quhair^'poune I am to be accufit, defyring alwyis*
to haif the gyft of his hienes lawis, I cam in the countrey, and remanit in the
countrey, nocht being fugitiue, and to abyde his hienes lawis, according to the
lawis of the countrey : In refpect quhairof, my alledgeance ftandis relewant. —
The Aduocat acceptis the alledgeance in quantum, and thairby inferrit ane vehement prefumjitioun agane the defender of giltienes, in refpect he refuffis to
abyde ane tryell of the cryme prefentlie laid to his chairge ; and forder, repetis
the maner of his taking contenit in the fyrft anfuer, and referis to the Judge.

The Juftice ffindis, nochtwitliftanding of the laid defenderis alledgeance, that
the mater audit to pafs to the knawledge of ane Aftyfe.

AUegeis, that James Stewart of Gramshj can nocht pafs vpoun his AfTyfe, becaus he is brother to my Lord of Orknay ; becaus my Lord of Orknay is perfewar, and lies gewin informatioun bayth to the Aduocat and vtheris, for perfuit
of the matter. — James Stewart repellit, becaus he gaif partiall counfall. — Ilenrie
Smclair of Loqulioij repellit, for partiall counfall. — Eduard Scolaij repellit, for
partiall counfall.

The Aduocat, for inftructioun of the Aftyfe, produceit his Depofitiounis.

The faid Gylbert tuik inftruinentis (tliat) he revokit his Depofitiounis.

Verdict. The Aftyis (thirteen in number) being fworne and adinittit vpoun

' Tlian. - This word is obliterated in the Record. ' Without. * Nevertheless,

388 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

the AlTyfe of Gylbert Pacok, removit furtli of Court to tlie Coiiiifallious and
votit vpouii the poynt of the Dittay, eftir chefing of James Maiftertoun (Merchand in Edinburgh) chancillar, and being throwchlie auiiit thairwith, ffand,
jn-onunceit and declarit the faid Gylbert to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of airt
and pairt, red and counfall of airt and pairt of the ilauchtir of vmq''^ Hary Coluile ; committit the nynt of Julij lallbypaft.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair his heid
to be ftrikin fra his body ; and all his movables efdieate and inbrocht.

3tt?an!(rsucluit— ^ssietjins ^yanst of ?luKq[uI)iiii*n— Caftiitij

raptibe, ^r.

Aug. 9. — WiLLiAME IVIoWAT in Turreyf, (feruand to Alexander Hay
eldefl fone to vmq'^ Andro Erll of Erroll).
Dilatit for cuniing with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis lieges, bodin in
weirlike maner, with lang culveringis, dagis and piftolettis, &c., contrar the tennour of the Actis of Parliament, be way of Hamefuckin, to the place of Ludyuhairne, and affeigeing of Williame Keytli of Ludquharne thairin ; entering
thairin be]force, taking of him captiue and prifoner : — And for maifterfull Reifing
and away-taking, furth of the laid place of Ludquhairne, of the faid "Williamis
haill infycht pleneiffing and writtis : And tranfpoirting and careing of the (aid
Williame Keyth of Ludquharne captiue and prifoner to the place of Ardmakhorne ; quhair thay deteuit him, be the fjiace of aucht dayes or thairby ; A'furpand thairby of our fouerane lordis authoritie vjwune tliame ; committit in the
moneth of October laftbypaft.

Persewaris.
Williame Keyth of Ludqubame, Mr Thomas Hamiltoune of Drumcarne ailuocat to our fouerane lord.

The Aduocat produceit ane command of the Kingis Maieftie, fubfcrniit with
his hand, with ane vthir Warrand fubfcryuit be the Lordis of Seffioune, commanding the Juftice to proceid and minifter juftice in the faid mater, quhairof
the tenouris follow.

Eex,

Justice, Jullice Clark and 3 our deputis, We greit 30W weill. It Is our will, and we command 50W, fat vpoim ])e fycht lieiiof, je faill noclit to proceid and minilter juftice, in ]7o criminal!
caus to be perfewit before 50W, att fe inftance of fe Laird of Ludquharne and our Aduocattis for our
interes, aganis certane perfonis contenit in pe Lettres raifit Jiairanent, for Jie taking of ]>ii faid Laird,
and vtheris crymcs fpeciallie expreflit Jiairin, vpoun J-e nynt day of Auguft inftant ; but all forder conlinewatioun or delay ; nochtwitbftanding of quliatfumcwir vthir command, Warrand or objectioune,
inaid or to be maid, gewin or to be gewin in ]m contrar ; anent fe quhilkis and panis Jiairin, we difpens. As 50 will anfuer to ws, vpoune 3 our offices and obedience : Quliairanent, thir pre lent is falbe
50ur fufficient warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, att Dunfermling, the nynt day of Auguft;, 1596.

(Sic lubfcribitur,) JAiMES R.

30Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 389

Follmvis (lie Unnour of the Supplicatiox, and Wahraxd gewin he the Lordis of SeJJioime.

My Lordis of Counfall, vuto jour II. liuiinlie nienis and fchawis, I jour feruitour, William Keyth
of Ludquharne, That quiiair I haif rafit crimiiiall lettres be 50ur 11. del)Tierance aganis William Dwi~
kat, (Duiget or Duguld,) Hary Ramfay, Arclid. HeiTing, Robert Creychtoune and Alex. Harvie,
feruandis to Daiue Elizabeth Dowglas Countes of Errol, Alex. Hay eldeft fone to vmq''^ Andro Erll
of Erroll^ William ]\Iowat his feruand, Patrik Con of Auchry, Alex. Hay in Ardmakhorne, Alex.
Hay in Auchquharne, Patrik Cmikfchank in Ardifrie, James Butter in Gafk, Tlioraas Hay fair,
Jolmne Hay and Patrik Cantlie, feruitour for Jie tyme to Patrik Barclay of Towie,' Gylbert Stewiiiloune in Ogftoune, Thomas Craigie in Lochcow, Johune Findlater fair, Johnne Stewiufoune and
Thomas Gybfoun fair, Johnne Moffie fair, Wm. Sym fmyth in Myltoun of Son'ie, Patrik Sym att
])e mylne of Sorvie, Thomas Cruikfchank fone to Patrik C. in Ardifrie, Patrik Hay in Haddo, Gylbert Gray in Bannatwthill, James Gray fair, Patrik Hay in Over Ardinakhorne ; and certane vtheris
fair complices, fpecefeit in f e faidis Lettres, for f e crymes and cauffis fairin containit ; quhilkis av
dewlie execute and indorfat vpoun fe foirnameit perfounes, and fay fairby fummond to compeir before the Juflice generall and his deputes in ]ie Tolbuith of Edinburgh, the D)Tit day of Auguft inftant,
in fe hour of caus ; lykeas I am reddie to perfew the faidis lettres. Neuiryeles, as I am informit,
Ludouik Duik of Lennox, att f e inltigatioun and perfwafioun of f e faid parteis, intendis to vfe and
produce ane pretendit Commiffioune of Lietenandrie within f e bouudis of f e North, and be vertew
fairof, to repledge the faidis perfonis fra the faid Jullice generall and his deputis to his jurlfdictioune
and Court of Julliciare, to f e grit hiuderance of Juftice ; albeit, the faid pretendit Commiilioune
aucht nawayis to irapeid nor (lay juftice, to be miniftrat to all his Maiefteis lieges, be f e Juftice generall and his deputis ; the famin being grantit cumulaliue, and nocht priuatiue : Lykeas, I am noclit
habill to perfew juftice aganis the foirnameit perfounes in fe North pairtis of fis realme, in ref])ect of
f e grit multitude of my parteis, and fat f e Laii'd of Balquhan, Lieutennentis depute, is fifter and bref ir
baira with fe faid Patrik Con of Auchry, ane of fe clieif committeris of fe crymis eontenit in fe
faidis Lettres. Quhilk being eonfidderit be his Maieftie, his hienes hes directit his Warrand to fe
Juftice generall and his deputis, to proceid and minifter juftice in f e faid mater to ws paiteis, nochtwithftanding f e faid pretendit Commiflioun : As fe famin, fubfcryuit be his Maieftie, heir prefent to
fchaw, beris. Nochtveles. fe faid Juftice generall and his deputis refufis to obey fe famin, witliout
fay be compellit. Befeikand heirfore jour 11., fat I may haif command to ane mafer or vthir officiar
of armes, to pals and charge fe faid Juftice generall and his deputis, to proceid and minifter juftice
in fe faid mater to ws bayth parteis, as accordis of Jie law, nochtwithftanding of f e faid pretendit
Commiffioun of Leutennandrie or Jufticiarie, grantit to fe faid Duik of Lennox; or ony vthir Comraiffioun, Letter or previe chairge, purcheft, or to be purcheft att his IMaiefteis handis, in hinderance
of juftice ; and jour 11, anfuer.

(Sic fubfcribitur) H. Bikautoune.

(Sic deliberatur) Apud Edinburgh, nono Augufti, anno Ixxxxvj, Fiat vt petitur.

(Sic fubfcribitm-) Blantyre, M. J. Lyndesay, Clericus Regiftri.

Compeirit M' Thomas Rollok, procuratour for the Duik, and produceit aneCommiffioune granted to his lordfchiji be his Maieftie, of the tennour and contentis thairin eontenit, of tlie dait, at Abirdene, the aucht day of Nouember 1594' ; with ane
Act of Secreit Counfall ratifeing the famin, of the dait, in December P^'^xxxxiiij
yeiris ; with lettres directit fra the Kingis Maieftie and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, of the dait in March laftwes, difchargeing the Juftice and Aduocat to pro1 Vid. Trial of Barclay of Towie, (viz. ToUie or Tolly,) Jul. 29, 159G.

§9© CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

ceid aganis quhatfiimeiiii' perfonis duelland within the boundis contenit in the
Dukis Commiffioun, within the quhilk the faidis haill perfonis caUit to tliis day,
for the taking of the Laird of Ludquhairne, duell : And lykewayis tuik inftrumentis, that the Juftice wes difchargeit to proceid in the faid mater be James
Lowrie, meflinger ; and that for all of the faidis parteis : And allegeit, that the
Juftice could nawj^is proceid, in refpect of the Avrittis and dil'charge aboue mentionat, nochtwithftanding the Kingis INIaiefteis previe delyuerance, authorifit be
the Lordis of Seffioun, quhilkis ar nocht of that ftrenth and effect as to tak away
the ftrength and effect of the writtes aboue fpecifeit. The aduocat anfuerit, that
tlie faid alledgeance aucht to be repellit, nochtwithftanding the writtis produceit,
quhairvjioun the famin is foundit ; in refpect of the Kingis Maiefteis expres Warrand in the contrar, togidder with the delyuerance of the Lordis of Counfall, alreddie produceit be the jierfewaris, and of the Judgis notorietie that the Duikis
CommifTioune is difchargeit and renunceit ; lykeas the ^Varrandis produceit be
the jjerfewaris tendis to the doing of Juftice, and the vtheris Warrandis, produceit be the faid IVIr Thomas Rollok, to the delay and hinderance of juftice ; and
thairfore aucht nawayis to be refpectit, and the Judge aucht to proceid and
minifter juftice nochtwithftanding thairof.

It is forder allegeit that the Judge can nocht vnlaw the parteis nor thair cautioneris this day, in refpect thay ar in bona fide and mycht juftlie byde away;
this, in refpect of the Conimiffioun and Lettres of Difcharge publictlie grantit,
and the jjrevie AVarrand and delyuei'ance nather intimat nor declarit to thame,
thare wes na neceffttie to thame to compeir, nor thay can nocht be put thairby
in mala fide. — The Aduocat anfweris, the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, as nawyis compitent to the proponer, hot onlie to the parteis abfent, quhais contumacie aucht to be pwneift for thair nocht compeirance.

The Juftice ffindis proces, and ordanis the cautiounis fand for thair comperance this day to be vnlawit, &c.

The cautioners are accordingly amerciated as follows : for Patrik Con of Auchry, fyve hundreth markis ; for Alex' Hay in Nether Ardmakhorn, ij' markis ;
for Alex' Hay fone to vmq'^ Andro Erll of Erroll, ij" markis ; and the remainder,
in j'^ markis each. — And that ' the principall perfounes nocht comperand to be
denunceit rebells and put to the hoz'ne, and all thair movabill guidis to be efcheit
and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vie, as fugitiues fra the lawes for the crymes
aboue writtin.' — Continued to the Air of ' Aberdene, tertio Itineris, xv dierum.'

Aug. 12. — Henry Walker in Elrig and feven others.
Dilatit for airt and pakt of the taking of Niniane Thomfoune feruitour for

30JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 391

the tyme to Gylbert Pennycuick, brotliir to the Laird of Pennycuick ; and for
that (he) thifteouflie flail, concelit and away tuik fra him fax hundreth markes
money, ane jiair of reid filk fchankis,' thre pair of worfet fchankis, twa pair of
Hemming fokis," audit farkis, xij ruffis of camrige and lanie,^ ane pair of mwles,"
ane pair of pantovuiis,^ twa jiair of marrekyue fchone ;" committ the fecunde day
of Nouember 1585.

The perfounis on pannell defyrit the faid Gylbert Pennycuick to gif his ayth
de calumn'ut, quhidder he hes guid cans to jjerfew the dittay or nocht. The faid
Gylbert anfuerit, that he had guid cans, as he wes informit. Thaireftir the faid
Gylbert declarit vjjoune his knawledge, fo far as he kennis,thay wer tliair. — Thaireftir it wes alledgeit be the pannell that na partie, vpoun informatioun, can be
had to perfew in Criminall cauffis, and fpeciallie in the actioun of Thift ; feing
Gylbert Pennycuick was nocht actuallie tliair him felfF, hot the guidis and geir
alledgeit fpuilzeit and ftollin wes tane fra his feruand, callit Ninian Thomfoun,
as the lybill beris ; quha prefentlie nather comperis be him felfT nor his procuratour to perfew.

' The Juilice thaireftir defertit the matir.'

iHuvtJei%

Sept. 17. — JoHNNE Campbell of Arkinglafe.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the crewall murthour and flauchteris of vmq'^ Sir
Johnne Campbell of Calder knycht, committit in Februar 1591 ; and vniq'^ .
.... M'inturner wechinan (watchman) of the place of Taneftrie, (feruitour to
Duncan Campbell of Inuerlewir.)

The Juftice-depute produceit ane Warraud, fubfcryuit be his Maieftie ; quhaix'-
of the tennour foUowis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 50ur ileputia. It is our will, and We command 50W, pat ye fit and
proceid in Jie criminall Lettres rafit att our inftance and att J)e inftance of our aduocattis aganis Johnne
Campbell of Arkinglas, according to Jie tennour of )ie Lettres rafit ]iairanent ; kepand ]nr prefi;ntis for
3 our Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, at Dunferniling, the xvj of September 1596.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The Aduocat produceit ane vther Warrand, direct fra his Maieftie to hiin,
quhairof the tennour foUowis.
Rex,

Aduocattis, or ony ane of 50W ; It is our will, and We command 50W, tliaf 56 perfew and

' Stockings. ^ Tamine or taming, Fr.c«to»Jine,Lat.sto»!eH,' viz. socks made from prepared flax.
'" Cambritk and lawn. * Slippers, usually ratide of velvet. ^ A sort of slipper, or more probably pattens, being a sort of dog having wooden soles, with latchets to tie ; they were formerly much
worn by people of all ranks in Edinburgh. '' Shoes made of marekin, (Fr. marroqidn,^ or dressed goatskin. This case is quoted, chiefly on accouut of this enumeration of apparel.

392 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

follow fuith tlie lettres rafit att our inftance and 50iuis aganis Johnne Campbell of Aikinglas, and perfew hira according to ]>e tennour of ]ie lettres, as 56 will anfuer to ws vpoune 30ur office; kepand ])ir
piefentis for sour warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, att Dunfei'mling, ]>e xvi day of September 1596.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The faici Laird of Arkinglas takis inftrumentis of his comperance, and proteftit that the Laird of Arneapill his cautioner be fred ; as lykwyis proteftit for
Alexander Bifchop of Brechin, Sir James Edmeftoun of Duntreith knycht,
Alex' Mein^eis of ^Veynle, Sir James Skrymgeour of Didvp knycht, Awla ]\rcallay of Arneapill, Colene Campbell of Blairnerne and George Balfonr of l\rcormailoune, qiilia become actit cautiounaris and fonirteis for the faid Johnne
Campbell of Arkinglas, vnder the jiane of fourtie thowfand pvndis, that he Ibnld
compeir before the Juftice or his deputis, the thryd day of the nixt Juftice-air of
the Sherefdome qiihair he dnellis, or foner vpoun fyftene dayes wairnin,g and vndii-ly the law for airt and pairt, red and counfall of the flauchter and murthouris

of vmq'" Sir Johnne Campbell of Calder knj'cht, and vmq'^ M'inturner ;

that thay and ewerie ane of thanie fould be frie and I'elewit of the laid cantionarie, in refpect of the laid Johnne Campbell of Arkinglas comperance this day,
being lauchfullie furamond att the inftance of the Kingis aduocattis, to vnderly
the law for the faidis flauchteris ; and the haill parteis being de^vlie and lauchfullie wairnit to half comperit this day and place, to half infiftit in perfuit of
him, for tlie faidis flauchteris.

Persewar, Mr Wm. Ilairt, aduocat. Preloquitour for Arkinglas, Mr Alex. King.

The Juftice continewis the mater to the morne that the King may be fpokin
in this mater.

(Sep. 18.) — Continued to the xxiij of Sep. ' Plegio, Domino Arneapill.'
(Sep. 23.) — The lamin day, comperit Johnne Campbell of Arkinglas, and
offerit him reddie to abyde the tryall of the law, for the alledgeit airt and j^airt of
the flauchter of vmq''' Sir Johnne Campbell, &c. ; and proteftit for releif of the
Laird of M'cawley, his cautioner.

The Juftice, in refpect nane of the kingis aduocattis comperit to perfew him,
Defertit the dyet, and ordeuit the cautioner of the faid Laird of Arkinglas to be
relevit.

Oct. 14. — JoHXXE Maister or Oekxay.
Comperit James Merfer as brother to vinq'" Haiy Colvile Parfoun of Vrquhart, and produceit our fouerane lordis Lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat
and perfewing thairof, purcheft be him felff, to tak fouertie of Johnne Stewart
Maifter of Orknay, that he fould liaif comjierit this day and place, in the hour of
cans, and vndirly the law for the alledgeit airt and pairt of the flauchter of the

SOJac. VI. CR IxM IN AL TRIALS. .393

faid vmq'" Haiy Colvile ; quliairvpoun he aflvit inftrumentis, and 2)roteftit for
releif, (that) Alexander Maifter of Elphinftoune, cautioner for rej)orting and perfewing of the faid Lettres be relewit.

The faid James Merfer tuik inftrumentis, that the Maifter of Orknay comperit
nocht ; & proteftit for proces aganis him & his cautioneris, feing the hour is paft.

Mr Thomas Nicolfoun comperit, and allegeit na proces fould be deducit againis
the Maifter of Orknay and his cautioneris, feing the King and Counfall hes ordenit the mater to be continewit ; and that he ofFerit cautioune for the entrie of
the faid M"" of Orknay the morne. The faid Mr James Mercer allegeis, that thair
wes na ordinance produceit of continewatioune ; and that na cautioune aucht to
be reftauit, in refpect the partie comperit nocht nor enterit.

The quhilk day, Hary Commendatour of Sanct-Cohnes-Inch and Sir George
Elphinftoun of Blythifwod knycht, oft tymes callit, as cautioneris and fouirteis,
conjunctlie and feuerallie, for Johnne Stewart M' of Orknay, to haif enterit and
prefentit him before our fouerane Lordis Juftice or his deputis, the faidis day and
place, in the houre of cans, to haif vnderlyne the law for the dewyfing and airt and
pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Hary Coluile fervitour to Patrick Erll of Orknay ;
committit be Adam Gordoune, brother to the Guidman of Auchannaquhy, and diuerfe vtheris his comjilices, in the moneth of Junij laftbypaft ; lauchfull time of
day biddin and nocht enterand, the faid Johnne Mafter of Orknay, as faid is, tlie
faidis Hary Stewart Commendatar of Sanct-Colmes-Inch and Sir George Elphiaftoune, as cautioneris conjunctlie and feuerallie, wer vnlawit for his nocht entrie,
in the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament : Lyke as, the faid Jo" SP of
Orknay wes adiugeit to be denunceit our fouerane lordis rebell and put to the
home; and all his movabill guidis oi-denit to be efcheit and inbrocht to his hienes
yfe, as fugitiue fra the lawis of the realme, for the faid cryme.'

Oct. 26. — Sir Patrik Bannatyne of Stenhoufe.
James Merfer produceit our fouerane lordis Lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, piu'chaft be him as broder, with the kyn and freindis of vmq'^ Hary Coluile
Parfoun of \'rquhart, aganis Sir Patrik Bannatyne of Stenlious.

^laiiflljter.

Oct. 26. — William Bannatyne of Gairfey, and James Lokie, wryter
in Edinburgh.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vraq'° Mr Hary Coluile Perfoxui
of Vrquhart ; committit in Junij laftbypaft.

' On the margin, opposite this last entry, ' Tliis Act, ordanit be his Ma"^ Warrand, to be extinct
and deleit,'

VOL. I. 3 D

394 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

DiTTAY againji Wil/iame Ban7iati/7ie of Gaufay and James Lokie.
FoRSAMEKiLL as, thay, liaifing conlauit ane deiillie feicl, rancour and malice aganls fe laid vniq'"
Hary Coluile, confultit, deny fit and interpryfit his ere wall flauchter, with Johnne Stewart, brother gernian to Patrik Erll of Orlinay, Adame Gordoune, and diuers vthoris Jiair complicis: Lyke as, the faid
Adaiue, accumpanoit with Alex' Dunbar of ... . and Thomas Tweddell fervitour to Jie faid
W™ Bannatyne of Gairfay in Orknay, and diuerfe vtheris fair complices, to the nowmer of xxx perfounes or Jiairbye, all bodin in feir of weir, in )ie monetb of Junij laflbypail, fchippit in ane fchip of
Dyfart, at Muntiois, and faillit to Orknay ; quliair ])e laid Thomas Tweddell pall alchoir, to fe laid
Williame Bannatynis hous of Gairfay, brocht furth of ])e faid hous vietuallis and mvvnitioune, with ])e
qulnlk lie furneifl fe faid fchip, and Jiairefter faillit to ^ctland to Burwick and pall over land to Neip
in Nelhig-, quliair ])e faid vniq'" Hary was for ]ie tynie, doand ])e laid Patrik Erie of Orknay, his maifteris lefull cftairis and buffines, trailling na ewill, harme, iniurie or perfuit of ony perfonis, but to haif
lewit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis ; and fairvpoun, the tuclt day of Julij laflbypail, the
faidis perfounes niaill fchamefullie, crewallie and vnmercifullie (lew the faid vmq'= Hary Coluile ; and
thay and ilk ane of fame were airt and pairt Jiairof ; the famin being committit of ]ie fpeciall caufing,
dewyfing, counfaling, hyring, conduceing, command, afiillance and ratehabitioune of Jie faidis Williame Bannatyne and James Lokie : Lykeas, the faid W™ Bannatyne of Gairfay, directit the faid
Thomas Tuaddell, his feruitour, to his ])lace of Gairfay in Orknay, quha eftir coming to fe faid place,
brocht out munitioun and vietuallis to furneis him felft' and remanent perfounis, committeris of Jie faid
flauchter: Committit vpoun fett purpois, provifioun, foirtliocht fellony, in hie and nianifefl contemptioune of our fouerane lordis authoritie and lawis, in ewill exampill, &c.

Persewaris.
James Merfer as brother, James Coluile, brother to the Laird of Cleifch, Mr Jeremie Lyndefay.

Preloquitouris for the panneli.
Mr Thomas Bellenden, The Gudeman of Lef . . . ., Mr Johnne Nicolfoune, Mr Tliomas Nicolfoune.

The Panneli aflvis inftrumentis of thair compearance, and proteftit that thair
cautionaris (be releuit.)

The panneli alledgis, that the Lettres of Hoirning ar ewill execute aganis
W" Bannatyne and James Lokie, and ar null in the felfF; becaufe the defenderis,
long before the chairge and executionis thairof, and be the Ipace of ane half yeir
preceding the crynie committit, had thair duelling place in Edinbui-gh, and lies
maid thair refidence thair continewallie fenfyne ; Iwa that the faidis chargeis
and executiounis, being maid in Orknay, and nocht cumming to thair knawledge,
ar altogidder iueffectuall ; as alio the laid denunciatioun is null, nocht only for
the cans foirfaid, bot alfo becaus the faidis defeudaris had fund cautioun, actit in
the buikis of Adiornall, before the faid pretendit denunciatioun : In refpect quhairof, thay are wranguflie denunceit for nocht finding of cautioune. The perfewaris alledgis, that the letters of (are) lauchfullie execute, in refpect thay are execute att thair duelling hous.

The Juftice ffindes the Letters of Hoirning null, in refpect the cautioune wes
fund lang befoir the denunciatioun, &c.

The perfewaris produceis the Depofitiounis of Gylbert Pacock and WilHame
Stewart, quhair thay deponit aganis William Bannatyne ; togidder with ane

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 395

Band, fiibfcryuit, betuix Adam Gordoime, AV™ Bannatyne and Thomas Tueddell
on the ane pairt, and James Lokie on the vther.

The perfounes (on i^annell) takis inftrumentis, that thair is na thing produceit
for verificatioun of the Dittay, except the Band produceit, alledgeit fubfcTj^iit
be the i^annell, Adam Gordoun, Thomas Tueddell and the Maifter of Orknav ;
and the alledgeit Depofitiounis of vmq'^ Williame Stewart and Gylbert Pacok :
And anfuerand to the pretendit Dittay, and vereficatioun thairof, produceit; alledgeis, that the faid Dittay is na wyis of veritie, nor 3it is the famin ony wyis verefeit be the writtis produceit ; fpeciallie, feing the Dittay is fett doun with thir
circumftances, that the i)annell wes airt and pairt of the faid flauchter, the famin
being committit of thair fpeciall caufing, dewyfing, confulting, hyring, conduceing, command, affiftance and ratihabitioun, and that the faid Williame Bannatyne directit the faid Thomas Tueddell, his feruitoui', to his place of Gairfay in
Orknay ; quhilliis ar the fubftanciall pointis of the Dittay, and as thay ar fett
doun conjunctlie in the famin ; fa all the faidis fubftantiall pairtis and everie
ane of thame audit to be cleirlie verefeit and provin, fpeciallie in refpect that in
all actiounis criminall, prohat'iones dehent esse luce meridkaia clariores. L. vltima C. de Prohatiouihus. And as to the pretendit aflertioune, contenit in the
lybell and in the Dittay, bering that Thomas Tueddell wes feruitour to Williame
Bannatyne, the contrar thairof is of veritie ; ifor it is notourlie knawin that he
wes ane officiar of amies, haifing his awin hous, wyffe and famelie ; and the
Band produceit preifis manifeftlie the affertioim of the faid perfewar, in fafar as
it proportis, that the faid Thomas Tuaddell wes ane fpeciall contraker for him
felff, alyke principall with all the refb of the perfoiinis contenit in the Band ;
quhairas, gif he had bene the faid Williame Bannatynes feruand, it is nocht probable that the IMaifter of Orknay wald half contractit or bandit with ony of the
faid Williamis feruandis, the faid Williame Bannatyne being bund to feme him
be the faid Band ; fwa that quhatfumeuir deid alledgeit to half bene done be the
laid Thomas Tueddell, can nawyis tuicli the faid Williame, and thairfore audit
nawyis be refpectit be the Inqueift : And as to the pretendit Depofitiounis of
Williame Stewart and Gylbert Pacok, the famin makis na thing to the purpois,
and can preif na thing, aganis ony of the pannell, ffor diuerfe cauffis: First, becaus
thair Confeffiounis, maid extrajudiciallie, nierite na fayth; nather authorilit be the
Juftice (or) Juftice-Clarkis fubfcrijitioune, nor yit done in thair prefens : &'-
cundlicy becaus thay ar extortit Confeffiounis be the defunctis freindis, and
maid in prefens of the Erll of Orknay, quha fchew him felff partie in that caufe,
att quhais appitite and defyre the famin wer maid ; as the Depofitiounis beris
the famin to be maid, in his prefens : Thrydlic, the faidis Depofitiounis ar maid
.be tua perfounes that ar giltie of the faid crynie, and wes actuall comniitteris

396 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

of the faid flaucliter, quhilk can nawyis prejudge ony tliiyd partie ; feing it is
luanifeft, bayth of the Caunoune and Ciuile law, that sochis criminis, and he that
is giltie of the famyn cryme, can nocht be witnes aganis ony thryd perlbun, and
his Depolitioun can nawyis be preiudiciall to him : This is expreflie decydit in
Cap., Veiiiens ; et in Capitulo, Personas tie tcst'ihus ; et in Capitulo, Prhno de
confissis ; quhair the text, and the glofe, and all the Doctouris contendes, Quod
v.uUi de se confesso credendam est contra alios, excepto Cr/miiie Lesc maiestatis ; et quod confess'io confitent'is de se et ermine, si non est adttersus alios, admittenda. This famiu is decydit in L. finali, C. de Acciisntionihus, quhair the
law iidiibitis expreflie all Judges, to fpeir ony queftiounis att fic perfounes as
confeffis the crymis thame felffis, quhilk may preiudge onye thryd perlbune ;
and declaris all fic Depofitiounis that ar maid be giltie perfounis, and that hes
tane the cryme vpoun thame, to be irrite and of nane availl, infafar as thay may
be preiudiciall to ony thryd perfoune : Ferdlie, becaus the faidis Depofitiounis
contenis na fubftantiall point aganis ony of the pannell ; for it is newir deponit,
in ony of thame, aganis ony of the pannell, that thay wer actuall doaris, conlulteris, committeris or dewyferis of the faid deid ; hot ar naikit alTertiounis of the
reherfall of vthir men, quhilk can preifF na thing in ane ciuile cans, mekill lefs
in ane criminall ; and thair is na thing contenit in any of the faidis Depolitioimis quhilk ])reiffis that point of the Dittay, that "Williame Bannatyne directit
Thomas Tueddell to the doing of the turne, quhilk is the maift fubftantiall point
of the Dittay aganis liim ; and that point nocht being provin, thair is na wound
nor deid alledgeit committit be the laid Thomas Tueddell, quhilk may infer ony
preiudice to the faid Williame : flfor it can nocht be verifeit, nather is itt of veritie that he wes his leruitour att the tyme ly!)ellit, nor ane 3eir of before ; and
gewand and nocht grantand that he had bene his feruand, yit the maifter can
nocht be obleift for the fact and deid of his feruand, except his caufing and directioune had bene clerlie provin ; foz', according to the commoun rewle of the
law, that ane Ibuld nocht be pvneift for ane vthir, it is cleir and manifeft, that
the maifter can nocht be obleift for the faultis of his leruandis, nor the father
for the faultis of his Ibnis, bot the contrar ; as is playnlie dilTydit in Bartol. in
L. Ne quideni ff. de Incendio, ruina et naufragio, and be all the Doctouris in
L. de Serins ffugitiuis ; quhair it is expreflie concludit, that the fault of the feruandis or fubiectis, audit nawyis to be hurtfull to thair maifter : And as to that
pairt of the Depofitioun, bering, that Mr Archebauld Wilkie laid to ane of the
deponei'is, that ' Williame Bannatyne wes the wyte of all the Maifter of Orknayis plattis laying,' the contrar thairof is of veritie, and falbe deirlie jirovin be
the faid Mr, and Depofitioun, gif neid beis : In refjiect quhairof, the faidis pretendit Depofitioun can work na thing aganis the pannell. And as to the Band

30Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 397

produceit, the famin can preifF na part of the Dittay ; for thair is na mentioune
maid of any fie interpryis in the faid Band ; bot the famin is ane naikit and generall Band, of the faid Williame and James fernice to the Maifter of Orifnay,
and of his mantenance and defence ; quhilk is maift lefum of the law, and contenis na kynd of probatioun nor prefumptionn aganis the pannell, or ony of
thame ; fpeciallie, feing that the faid Band wes maid for ane juft neceffar cans,
viz. ffor reconfiliatioune of the deidlie feid, quhilk had continewit ane lang tyme
of before, betuix the Maifler of Orknay and thame ; and thairvpoun, had follo^^'it grit effufioun of thair blvide, as is notour to tlie haill toune of Edinburgh ;
quhair the faid Maifter of Orknay diuerfe tymes affail3eit the faid Williame
Bannatyne, and wes woundit, with twa or thre of his feruandis ; and the notorietie heirof is knawin to the periewar, quha wes reddie with him, att diuerfe
tymis, to haif refiftit the Maifter of Orknay and his furie : In refi^ect quhairof,
the laid Williame, being ane meane gentilman, and haifing to do with la potent
ane aduerfar as the Maifter of Orknay, had maift juft cans to bind vp the ftrateft band of freindfehip with the faid Maifter of Orknay, 3e {yea), and {if) it wer
to feill it with his awin blude, for his releif ; and fie ane generall Band of freindfehip, can neAvir mak nor convict all the perlbunis contenit thairin, of all the
deidis and malifices that fal happin to be committit be ony ane perfoun contenit
in the Band : And thairfoir, albeit all the reft of the perfones contenit in the
Band, except the pannell, had bene committer] s of the deid lybellit, yit that can
nawyife mak the pannell to be giltie tliairof, feing thay wer nather airt nor pairt
of the famin.

The perfewar, for anfuer, defyrit the Aftjdfe to merk the Depofitiounis and the
Band produceit ; and proteftit for wilfull errour, in caife thay accpiit.

Verdict. The Aflyife, be pluralitie of votis, chufe Andro Rychartfoune
(merchand), burges of Edinburgh, Chancillar, and thairefter reafonit vpoun the
pointis of the Dittay ; and being throwchlie awyfit thairwith, together with the
Depofitiounis and Band produceit, and anfueris maid thairto, &c. ffand, jwonunceit and declarit the faidis Williame Bannatyne and James Lokie to be Innocent,
cleane and acquit of the haill crymes aboue writtin, contenit in Dittay : Quhairvpoun thay afl^it inftrumentis.

NoTA. — James Merfer tuik vp the Depofitiounis and Band produceit be liim.

^laug|)ttv 111) atlitcTjfi'aft anlr ^m-rei-j).

Oct. 30. — Alesoune Jollie, fpous to Robert Rae in Fala.
Dilatit of the alledgeit airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Iffobell Hepburne, fpous to Johnne Edmeftoun in Fala, be ^Vichcraft and Sorcerie ; com-
^nittit in the monetliis of Apryle and Maij, 1596".

398 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596.

Persewar, Mr Williame Hairt, aduocat. Proloquutour for the pannell, Mr Tlionias Craig.

Comperit the Aduocat, and produceit Lettres of Secreit Coimfall, of the dait
the fyft of October iuftant ; commandmg the (Juftice), Juftice-clark and thair
deputis, to fett ane Court to this (day), and to caus fumniond ane AfiTyfe to AleIbun JoUie, for the cauffis of Wichcraft contenit in the lettres ; commanding
alio, Johnne Edmeftoime and James Ilepburne iu Bancreif, apprehenderis and
dilataris of the laid Alefoun, to compeir to infill in the perluit, conforme to thair
delatioune, execute te Williame Porteous meffinger ; commanding alfo the Aduocat, to infill in perfuit of the faid Alefoun, the faid day. Be vertew quhairof,
the faidis Johnne Edmelloun and James Hepburne are lauchfullie wairnit, to
compeir and infill in the perfuit of the faid Alefoim. And ficlyke, produceit
vthiris Lettres, i^urchell at the Aduocattis inftance, for chairgeing of the faidis
Johnne Edmelloune and James Hepburne, to compeir and infill in perfuit of
the faid Alefoun, and for fummonding of ane Alfyfe, execute be the faid Williame
Porteous ; and thairwith jn-oduceit ane Dittay.

The Juftice depute produceit ane ^^^'lrrand, fubfcryuit be the King, att Lynlythgw the xiiij of October inftant, commanding him to putt the faid Alefoun to
the tryell of ane AlTjde, for the crymes contenit in the Dittaj'.

The Pannell alibis inftruinentis of the productioune of the faidis Lettres, with
the executiounis thairof, and that the faid Johnne Edmeftoune and James Hepburne, being lauchfullie fummond, oft tymes callit, lauchfuU tyme of day biddin
and comperit noclit, in refpect thay knaw tlie danger of the law : And als, the
faid Alefoun offerit hir to the tryell of the law, but ony delay or continewatioune.
— The aduocat, efter accufatioune of the faid Alefoune, produceit ane Confeffioune maid be vmq"' Jonet Stratoune, ane AMch, of the dait, att Tranent, the
tent of September lafthj^jaft ; quhairby fclio confeft, that Alefoun Jollie had
caufit hir bewich the faid vmq'^ IlTobell Hepburne.

The Alfyfe chufe Sir James N^ewtoun (in Creychtoune) Chancillar of the
Aflyfe.

Dittay of Alesoun JoIUefor Sorcery, Witchcraft, Incantation, Poisoning, S^c.

Alesoun Jollie, fpous to Robert Rae in Fala; ge ar indict and accufit, flForfamekill as, 59, liaifing eonfauit ane deidlie Iiaitrent, rancour and malice aganis vmq'' Ilfobell Hepburne, fpous for the
tyme to Johnne Edmedoun in Fala, for tlie alledgeit rcdemiiig of ane aiker of land fra the faid Robert
Rae and ;ow, quliairin 38 wes in pofleflloun be the fpace of twa 5eiris or thairby ; 56, accumpaneit
with vniq''' Jonet Stratoune, ane notorious Widi, confultit, dewyfit and interpryfit, within 5 our awin
duelling-hous in Fala, and within the faid vmq'<' Jonettis duelling-hous in Ileifildane, in Lauderdaill,
the crewall and abhoniinabill murthour and llaughter of the faid vmq'^ Illobell Hepburne ; and tliat, in
the moneihis of Auguft, September, October, Noueniber, Decembur, Januar, Fcbruar and March, in
the 5eir of God I".V'.lxxxxv jeiris, att the leill in ane or vtliir of tlie faidis monetliis : Lyke as, 50
hyrit, conduceit and feduceit the faid vmq'^ Jonet Stratoune, to performe the faid crewall munhour

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 399

and (laucbter of the faid rmq'^ Iflobell ; qulia, Id the faidis monetliis and ^e'ms of God foirfaidis, att the
leift in ane or vthir of the famin, of ;our aht, pairt-taking, coiifulting and only quarrelUng, be Sorcerie, Wichcraft, Incantatioune, Poyfoning, or vthcr dewelifch or extraordinar lueanis, laid ane heavie
feiknes vpoun the faid vmqi'= Iflobell Hepburne, qidiairof fcJie deceiflit intlie moneth of Maij, the ^eir
of God I^.V'.lxxxxv ;eiris; and Ava, wes crewallie muidreilt and flajTie be jow and the laid vinq'^
Jonet Stratoun, be Wichcraft and Sorcerie, vpoun fet puqjois, provifiouiie and foirihocht fellony.

Off the quhilk Dittay and ciymes foirfaidis, the Juftice-depute putt the faid
Alefoun to the trj^ell of ane Aflyis of the perfounes \Tiderwrittin ; that is to fay,
James Veitch, in Dalkeyth, &c. — The faid Alefoun denyit the famin.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the moutli of the faid Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit
and declarit the faid Alefoun to be Innocent, acquit and clangeit of the haill
crymes aboue writtin : Quhairvpoun the faid Alefoun afkit inftrumentis.

Nov. 4. — JoHXXE Boyd, burges of Edinburghe.
Dilatit of the flauchter of vmq'" Jonet Lyell, fpous to Williame Stewinfoune ;
connnittit in December laft-was.

Persewar, Williame Stewinfoune mariner in Lcith.
Preloquitouris, in perfuit, Mr Rychard Spens, Walter Henryfoune.
Comperit Williame Scharp, and defyrit to continew the mater, becaus that Williame Stewinfoime and he ar hurt ; that he may half place heireftir to perfew.

Dittay qfJohnne Boyd hirges of Edinburgh.

FoRSAXEKiLL as, he, haifing confauit ane deidlie rancour and malice aganis vmq''' Jonet Lyle, fpous
to Williame Stewinfoun mariner in Leyth ; in Jie moneth of December laftbypafl, come to J»e toun of
Leyth, to ]e faid Jonetis duelling hous Jiair ; and eftir he had intyfitt hir to pas furth of hir faid hous
and by (buy) ane half baiTell of inzeounis' to ]'e faid Johnne Boyd, he remanit within hir faid hous,
pall to fe almerie,- quhair fcho had ccrtane meill ;' in Jie quhilk raeill, be mixt certane poyfoune, of
purpois to poyfoim and deflroy hir ; quha the famin nycht, bulk' the meill in bannokis (and) eit fairof ;
eftir Jie quhill< eitting fche tuik ane vehement vometing and laxatt, and ])e famin nycht deceiflit fairby : And Avt, he maid crewallie, trelTonablie, vnnaturallie and barbarouflie Hew and murdreill the
faid vmq'^ Joiet Lyle, vpoun fett purpois, provifioun and foirthocht fellony.

Veudici. The Alfyis chefis Williame Rae (elder, cuitlar in Edinburgh) chancillar ; and, in ane voce, Acquittis the faid Johnne Boyd of the Dittay vnder (aboue)
writtin.

J'Iciugljtci* fii) 2511 itrijr raft anU ^orctvi).

Nov. 27. — Cristiax Stewart in Nokwalter.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Patrik Ruthvene, be Wichcraft and Sorcerie,
\
' Onions. ' CupboarJ, she Laving been too poor to have a ' meal-gime).' ' Oatmeal. * Baked.

400 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596;

Persewaris, Alexander Rutlivene, brother to the defunct, Mr W" Hah-t, Kingis advocate.

TLe quliilk day, eftii* accufatioun of the faid Ci-iftiaii Stewart in Nokwalter, be
Dittay, in prefens of Walter Robefoun and vtlieris perlbunis of Aflyile, of airt and
pairt of the llauchter of vniq'" Patrik Ruthven be Witchcraft ; the faid Alex'
Ruthven, for verifeing of the faid Dittay ijroduceit the Depofitiounis of the laid
Criftiane, maid att the burcht of Perth, in my Lord of Gowreis ludgeing thair,
the xviij of Auguft 1596, in prefens of Mv Patrik Galloway minifter, Mr Williame Couper minifter att Perth, Archebaiild Moncreif minifter, Mr Alexander
Lyndelay and Thomas Gaw notar : Togidder with the Depofitiomies of the faid
Criftian, maid in the laid ludgeing, the xix of the laid moneth of Auguft, in jirefens of the faid Mr Patrik Galloway, Mr Williame Couper, Mr Williame Rynd,
Jolmne Roife and Henry Eldar notar ; all fubfcryuit with thair hand : Togidder
with ane vther Depofitioun, maid in the ludgeing foirfaid, the xxj day of the laid
moneth of Auguft : Togidder with ane vther Depofitioun, maid l)e the faid Criltiane Stewart, maid att Edinburgh the xiij of September 1596, in prefens of Mr
Robert Bruce minifter of Godis word in Edinburgh, Clement Con ane of the
bailleis thairof, Mr Gylbert Moncreif doctor of medicine, fubfcryuit with thair
handis ; teftifeing hir, to half tane ane clout fra Ilfobell Stewart, to bewicli the

faid vmq^'' Patrik : Togidder with ane Declaratioun of the dait att

the day of , 1596, fubfcryuit be Sir George Hwme and \ViIliame Stewart, teftifeing that the faid Criftian Stewart deponit in September
laftbypaft, in Lynlythgw, in prefens of his Maieftie, that fche bewichit the laid
vmq''' Patrik.

Verdict. The Alfyis, being chofin, fworne and admittit, remowit furth of
Court to the north end of the Tolbuith, quhair eftir cheching of INIichaell Rattray in Pittindyne chancillar, reafonit vpoun the poj-nt of the faid Dittay ; and
being throuchlie auifit thairwith, reenterit agane in Court, quhair thiy, be the
mouth of the faid Chancillar, ffand the faid Criftiane Stewart to be Frlit, culpabill and convict of the bewiching of vmq'° Patrick Ruthvene, be cafting of
'\\^ichcraft vpoiine him with ane blak clout : And for airt and jmirt of the flatichter of the faid vmq'^ Patrik ; committit in Junij laft : And for coramoun Wichcraft.

Sentence. For the quhilk crime, fclie wes ordenit to be taue to the Caftlehill and thair to be brunt.'

' On margin of the Record, ' Fylit and Brunt.'
