VOLUME SECOND.

EDINBURGH :
WILLIAM TAIT, PRINCE'S STREET ; AND

LONGMAN, RKES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMAN, LONDON.

M.DCCC.XXXIII.

PRINTED AT THE BANNATYNE CLIB PRESS BY ISALLANTYNE AND CO.

TO

THE PRESIDENTS AND MEMBERS

OF THE

BANNATYNE AND MAITLAND CLUES,

THIS SECOND VOLUME

OF A

COLLECTION OF ANCIENT SCOTTISH CRIMINAL TRIALS,

ORIGINALLY PROJECTED BY
THEIR MUCH LAMENTED ASSOCIATE, THE LATE

SIR WALTER SCOTT, BART.,

AND COMMENCED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF THESE DISTINGUISHED

LITERARY INSTITUTIONS

BY ONE OF THEIR NUMBER,

IS GRATEFULLY AND RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,

BY

THE EDITOR.

CRIMINAL TRIALS

AND OTHEE PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

[Jifr James Fowlis, Jusfice-Dejmte.^

Dec. 15. — George Dowglas in Glafpen.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'* James Stewart of Newtoun ;
committit the fecund of Nouember inilant.

Persewar, James Stewart, eldeft fone.
' PfiELoauiTOURls for the pannell.

Mr Jolinne Nicolfoune, George Dowglas youngar of Langnudrle,

IVIr Robert Lyntoune, William Carmicbell of Rowntrie-corfe.

The perfewar aflvis inftrumentis of the productioun of the Lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be thame aganis James Dowglas of Torthorwell,
Charles Dowglas in Anderfchaw, John Dowglas his ftap-fone, Johne Tuedie in
Howgait, George Inglis, and James Bannatyne thair, quhair thay ar deniinceit
rebellis and put to the home. The faid George Dowglas in Glafpen afliis inilrmnentis ofliis rnniperanre, and that he offeris him veddie, to vnderly the law
for the flauchter of James Stewart of Newtoune. — Comiierit the Kingis Aduocat
and produceit ane Warrand, fubfcryuit be the King, ordaining the mater to continew. The pannell takis inftrumentis of the offer, and defyris that the Juftice
minifter juftice in the faid mater, nochtwithftanding the Kingis ^Varrand.

The Juftice admittis the Wai-rand ; and ordanis the j^artie to fyud cautioun
thairfoir, to the ordour.

Continued to the air of ' Lanark. Plegio Wilelmo Carmichell de Rowintrecorfe et Johanne Carmichell in Howgait, conjunctim.'

Dec. 16. — JoNET Grawie.
Dilatit of certane crymis of Wichcraft.

Persewaris, Effie Crummie fpous to Capitan Skrymgeour, Mr Williarae Hairt aduocat.
The mater defert, be the laik of ane Aflyfe, quha wer nocht fummond.
VOL. II. A

2 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596-7i^iintins a bitiateti ^tt of ^^adiament.

Feb. 2, 1596-7. — Robeut Waldegraii', Prentar to his Maieftie.
The quhilk day, Robert Waldgraif, Prentar to his Maieftie, being enterit on
pannell, accufit and perfewit be IMr Williame Hairt aduocat to our fouerane lord,
flor the trefToiiabill Iniprenting of ane alledgeit Act of his hienes Parliament, as
I'ett furth be his Maieftie and thre eftaitis of Parliament, haldin att Edinburgli
the penult day of Maij 1592, intitulat, ' ffor ]>e abolifching of pe Actis concerning the Kirk ;' and treflbnablie vitiat, adulterat and alterit fra the originall Act
of Parliament, A'otit and agreit \'poune be his hienes and thre eftaitis in the Parliament foirlaid, contenit in the Regifter of his liienes Actis of Parliament, dewlie thaireftir publeifchit : ffor the quhilk treflbuabill cryme (he) is wardat, to be
pwneift be tinfel of lyffe, landis and guidis.

The faid Robert ^^'aldgraif declarit, be his ayth, in prefens of God in hea\'in,
that the laid Act of Parliament quhairvpoun he is challangeit, wes newir formit,
vitiat or alterit be him, nor na vther of his knawledge ; and forder declaris, that
fa far as his memorie can feme him, quhilk is now waik, in relpect of his infirniitie and lang feiknes, that the faid Act wes fend and del\T.ierit to him be ane
in the Clark of Regifteris name, quhome he fupponis to half bene his feruand
for the tyme ; as he fal anfuer to God in the latter day : And gif ony wrang be
done, in the altering of the faid Act, the famin is done be him quha brocht it to
the faid Robert and without his knawledge : And forder declarit, that he had
his Maiefteis Warrand, to prent all the Actis of Parliament concerning the Kirk,
quhairof he tuik this to be ane : And nochttheles, inl'afar as his Maieftie is offendit, or fault may be imput to him in the mater, he becumis in his Maiefteis
will and mercy ; declaring vpoun his faull and coufcience, he newir offendit his
Maieftie, in thocht, word or deid.

The Juftice-depute coutinewit to tak the faid Robert in will, vutill he knew
his Maiefteis mj^nd.

Persewar, Mr Williarae Haert aduocat.
Feb. 4. — The Aduocat produceit ane "Warrand direct to the Juftice, Juftice
Clark or his deijutis, to put Robert Waldgrave to the tryell of ane Aflyfe ;
quhairof the tennour followis."

The Aftjde being fworne, the Aduocat produceit the Act of Parliament prentit
be him felff, acknawledgeit be him, confeft addit to the bulk produceit, att the
leift prentit iVmtime eftir the reft : And forder produceis the extract of the rj'cht
Act of Parliament, vnder the fubfcriptioun of the Clark Regifter, far different fra
the viciat and adulterat Act.

' Most unfortunately, this interesting document is not inserted in any part of the Record preserved.
This Volume is evidently the scroll-book used iu Court, from which the proper Register was afterwards extended.

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 3

The faid Robert Waldgrave anfuerit, that he had the Kingis Warraud for
prenting of the haill Actis concerning the Kirk ; and alledgeit that the Clerk of
Regifteris or fum (ane) brocht the faid Act, in his name, to be prentit ; bot he can
nocht declair the manis name qnha brocht it. It is anluerit be the aduocat, that
gif ony "Warrand be had of his Maieftie, it wes ane generall A\'arrand gewin to
him, before he prentit the buik ; bot had na Warrand to prent this Act, quhilk
wes prentit eftir the prenting of the buik. The faid Robert produceit ane Gift
vnder the Previe feill, geving him Licence to prent the Actis of Parliament.

The Affyfe, in ane voce, chufe James Skeddowie (merchand in Edinburgh)
chancillar.

Verdict. The Aflyife, in ane voce, ffyles the faid Robert AValdgrave, for
the trefTonable Imprenting of ane alledgeit Act of his hienes Parliament, as felt
furth be liis Maieftie and thre Eftaitis, in the Parliament haldin att Ed', the
penult day of Maij, the yeir of God I™.^. fourfcoir and tiiell yeiris, intitulat
' anent the aboleifching of the Actis contrar the libertie of the trew Kirk and
aboleifching of the jurifdictionne, penultimo Maij 1592,' and trelTonablie viciat,
adulterat and alterit fra the originall Act of Parliament, votit and agreit vpoun
be his hienes and thre eftatis in the Parliament foirfaid ; contenit in the Regifter
of his hienes Actis of Parliament, dewlie thaireftir publeifchit.

[Curia Justiciarie tenta in Preforio Ville de Ijcyth, xj JFehruarij 1.596,
per 3Iagisfnim Jacobum FouUis, Jiisticiarium Depututum. Assessoukis,
(Walter Lord Blantyre) Thefaurer,' (Andrew Stewart, third) Lord Ochiltre,
(Sir John Skene of Curriehill) Juftice Clerk,^ (Sir John Cockburn of Ormiftoun) Clerk of Regifter,' Sir Robert Meluill.']

Crcasmt— Conbofation of an unlabjful Slssemljli), ^r.

Feb. 11. — Robert Hammiltouxe of Inchmauchan, Williame Kirkaldy of Grange, Sir James Edmeftoun of Duntraith, elder,

Edmeftovm yoimger of Duntraith,' and [James] Lokart of Leis, eldar.
Dilaitit of certane treflbunabill crymes, committit be thame the xvij and xvii j
dayis of December (laftwas,) aganis his Maieftie and his Counfalouris.

Peksewaris,
Ml' Thomas Hammiltoune of Diumcaime, aduocate, Mr Williame Ilaiit of Levelaiidis, advocate.

Prelocutouris for Robert Hammiltoune,
Mr T. Craig and Mr Jolinne Nicolfoune, Mr Johnne Rutrell, Mr Alex. King, Mr Jolmne Dempftar.

' He was also one of the Extraordinaiy Lords of Session. ^ Lord Cunieliill, also one of the

Ordinary Lords of Session. ' Lord Ormistoun, one of the Ordinary Lords of Session. ■* Of

Murdoeairnie, one of the Extraordinary Lords of Session. '•' ' Delait, in relpect of the Tlielauraris dedaratioun lie was nocht chargeit.'

4 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597The faiclis Aduocatis (perfewaris) producet the Dittay vnderwrittin, and ficlyke producet ane AVarrand, quhairof the tennour foUowis/

Compeirit I\I"' Thomas Craig, Alex' King and Johnne Nicolfoun, and producet ane Warrand fiibfcryuit be the Lordis of Seffioun, ordaining thame to
compeir for the pannell ; and defjTit the famin to be regiflrat. The faid Mr
Johnne Denipftar produceit ane vther Warrand, fubfcnyiiit be the faidis Lordis
of Seffioune ; quhilk the Judges adniittit, in refpeet of the Act of Parliament.
The faid Mr Johnne RufTell produceit ane vther AV^arrand, for James Lokhart of
Ley ; c^ululk tlie Judges lykwayis adniittit. Quhairvpoune the faidis procnratouris tuik inftrnracntis. — ]Mr Johnne RufTell tuik inftrumentis, that the Judge
admitis him, for the Lairdis of Duntraith and Ley.

The Lord Ocliiltrie declyuis him felf to be Afleflbur, in the perfute aganis the
Laird of Grange.

The pannell takis inftrumentis, that the aduocat dedaris he produceis ane
cowmone Dittay" aganis the haill pannell.

The haill 2)annell adhairis to the declinatour of my Lord Ocliiltrie, in refpeet
the Dittay is cowmone. — The Kingis aduocat takis inftrumentis, that Mr Thomas Craig declairis, that the grvmd of the argument quhillc will declyne my Lord
A'^chiltrie, in perfute of the Laird of Grange, is foundit vpoun ininiitie ftanding
betuix the Laird of Pharniherft and the Laird of Grange ; quhilk Laird of
Pharniherft is guid-brother ^ to the faid Lord Vchiltrie. — The Laird of Duntraith takis inftrumentis, that he propones his declinatour aganis my Lord
Vchiltrie, becaus the pannell is cowmone. Declairis, gif lie him felf war vpone
the pannell his allane, he wald nocht declyne my Lord Vchiltrie.

It is allegit aganis the haill Affeforis, that thay can nocht be Afleffouris nor
Judges in this caus, becaus thay haue all gevin counfale in this caus, and hes
fund this cryme to be Treflbne, without citatioun of jiartie. — The Laird of Duntraith and Laird of Lies pafte fra the alledgeance foirfaid, aganis the Aflefouris
and the lau''. — The aduocat takis inftrumentis, that the pannell will nocht declyne the reft of the AfTefouris for this caufe, nor vfe ma^ declinatouris.

The Juftice ordanis the Laird of Grange to be removit of pannell this day.

It is allegit be Mr Thomas Craig for the reft of the pannell, leing the Laird
of Grange hes bene anes pamiellit (and) anes accufit, .... vpoun ane commoun
Dittay, as my Lord aduocat hes declairit, and that my Lord Vchiltrie hes declynit him felf as Aflefour to the Laird of Grange, becaus of inimitie and affift-

' The principal Register for tliis period is unfortunately lost. The Volume preserved is merely the
Court lioolv or scroll, from wliicli the proper Record was afterwards made up. '' One Dittay

only, common to tlieni all, /'. c. they were not charged upon separate Indictments. ' Brother-inlaw. ^ 'I'his and the ])rece(ling sentence partially deleted. The plea was retracted. ^ More,

or farther ohjeclions against the Assessors.

30JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 6

ing in deidlie feid with the Laird of Grange, betuix the Lard of Grange and
Pharnilierft, and as partie to tlie Laird of Grange, tlie Lord Vcliiltrie can nawayis
be AiTeflbur to tlie reft of the pannell, qui priuent cons'unilem causam ; feing the
Dittay is cowmoune, fa tliair defences is cownioune, and Interlocutonr vpone
the ane defence fall be Interlocutonr vpone the vther : And as he him felf can
nocht fit vpoun the Laird of Granges land and heritage, to fit vpone the defences in his awin perfoune, fa he can nocht fit vpone the lyk defence ///. consim'di causa, quhilk may prejudge the Laird of Grange ; fpeciallie in refpect, the
Laird of Grange is als i^annell this day, and the defens was proponit for him and
the reft coniunctlie, and fund relevant in his pei-foune ; and to the effect that
this defence fould nocht be competent to the reft of the perfonis pannell, he is
removit of pannell this day ; the quhilk letter part of this alledgeance audit to
be referrit to the Judge and Afleflxjuris. Quhairvpoune thay tuik inftrumentis.

The aduocat alledgit, the former alledgance aucht to be repellit ; becaus tliair
is na continentia cause vpoune this cryme, becaus euerle perfon is vpone pannell
super facto proprio et delicto personali ; lyk as the declinatour proponit aganis
my Lord Vcliiltrie, is only for ane perfonall cans of evill will betuix the Lard of
Pharnieherft and the Lard of Grange, quhilk is nawayis competent to the reft
of the pannell : As to the circuniventioune and defraud of the law, remittis to
the Judge and Aflefouris quhani it tuiches. — Anfueris, the grund is nocht laid
be the laidis accipientis' vpone contiueittia cause, quhilk is tantum in ciudibus.
bot only vpon this, qui priuent consimilem causam, et allegantium socij ejusdem
criminis. The Laird of Grange being als pannell, for this fain cryme, this day,
quando ex piacto vnius prej udicahis alieri, quhilk is nocht lefum of the law directlie, far les in this cans, be removeing of the Laird of Grange of pannell.
And quhair it is allegit, that the Judge is nocht bund to gif anluer, it is anfuerit
thairto, that quhair anie declinatour is refen-it to judge, he aucht to gif ane anfuer vpone his confcience ; lyke as, this pairt of the alledgeance is referrit to the
Judge and Affefouries confcience, quhither the Laird of Grange is remo^■it af
l^annell purpoiflie ?

The Judge, with advyfe of his Aflefouris, repellis the alledgeance proponit
for the perfonis prelentlie vpone pannell. — The Judge ordanis the dittay to be
red to the haill pannell.

The pannell takis inftrumentis, that my Lord Aduocat the firft and lecond heidis of dittay .... and will perfew the reft .... heidis ;" as alfo declairis,
that he will infift aganis euerie ane of the pannell vpone the faidis heidis.

The aduocat declairis, that he vflJis the haill fpeaches vterit be Mr Walter' in

' Excipients. ' Record mutilated. = See tie Trial of Walter Balcauquall.

6 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596-7.

Pulpitt, contenit in the jffirsf article of the Dittay, as nieanis vfit be him to fteir
vp auditouris to leditioune ; quhilk the pannell hard and allowit, be pertineing to
the new Kirk, and doing the actionis, and vtering the treflbnabill t'peiches contenit in the firft Article of the faid Dittay, and being airt and pairt thairof. And
forder, the Aduocattis (haldis ?) thir woirdis ' conceilling and nocht reveilling of
tlie preicliing,' pro deleto ; quhair^iioun the pannell takis inftrumentis. — It is
allegeit be the pannell, that na proces (lies) aganis the pannell, becaus Mr Walter Balcanquell, quha is alledgit to be author of the Confpiracie and alledgit feditions Conventioun is nocht callit ; and alledgit the practik betuix Lyndfay of
Blariefadden and the Laird of Kerfe, the Lady Boydis aduocat. — The aduocat
aufueris, the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in rel'pect of the Dittay.'

It is alledgit, that the Conventioun in the New Kirk is na cryme, let be" a
crynie of Treflbun ; becaus it is na cryme, of the Law, convenhig, except it be in
airmes ; and the Conventiones of Sinodellis and preftjytereis, and generall (Affemblies ?) ar allowit be his hienes Actis of Parliament ; as alle, of all perticuler
feflionis of Kirkis. — The aduocat anfueris, the alledgance aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the Dittay.

It is forder allegit, that the Convocation is na crynie, becaus it is alloM'it be
fpeciall Act of Secreit Counfale maid in anno 1590, demanding all Erles, Lordis,
Barronis, gentilmene, frehalderis and inhabitantis of burrowis and vtheris liegis
quliatfumeuir, of quhat rank degrie foeuir tliay be, to convene thame felfis befoir
the INIinifteris, be thair IMifTaue lettres or mefRngeris, at quliatfumeuir places or
dayis thay fall think expedient ; and thair to gif thair Confeflionis of thair fayth
and fubfcriptionis thairto, and to the Generall Band maid and fublluyuit be his
Maieftie and certane of the Eftatis, tuching the mantenance and defence of the
trew religioune, his hienes perfon and eftait, for withftanding all forrane propagatoiiris, tending to the trubling thairof, and forces tending to the trubill thairof.
And trew it is, that thai, being exhortit be the INIinifteres, haveing power be the
faid Act to convene with thame, to the effect foirfaid, viz. for mantenance of the
trew Religioun, and withftanding of the ennemeis thairof, and na vthirwayis ;
nather the faid Minifterie did wrang in convening, nor the pannell in convening
at thair connnaud. And forder, thair was f])eciall Proclamatioun execute at his
INIaiefteis command, vpone the ix day of December laftbypall, quhaii-bj' his
hienes, with advyfe of the fecreif Counfall, expreflie declairit, that his mynd and
intentis was nevir to difcharge ony laufuU AfTembleis of the Kirk eftableifchit
be the lawis, becaus the Seflionis, bayth of the Kirk, Prefljytereis, Sinodell and
Generall AfTembleis, and all actis laufullie maid be the Ecclefiafticall Judge-

•»^

■ (On the margin,) ' Repellis the alledgeance.' ^ Not to mention.

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 7

mentis, and als the hering of the word, fall fland and be yet as of befoir, ratefeing and approveand the famin ; and declairing, that it was nevir his Maiefteis
mynd nor iutentioun to inipung or preiudge the famin, in ony foirt ; and declairing all vthiris Proclamatiounes and vnlawfull convocatiounes, maid in airmes, to
be difchargit. And his will is, that the faid conventioun was onlie maid to the
effect foirfaid, without all armonr, and in fober maner, and was maid lauchfuU
in itfelff, and was diffoluit be the i>annall without airmour : And the difchai-ge
of conventionis with airmour, is a permiffioune of the conventionis without airmour, tending to the lauchfull effect. L. cum Prece. ff. cle Judicijs. In refpect
quhairof, thay did na wrang, and can nocht be put to the tryell of ane AfTyfe for
the faid Convocatioune. And for preifeing the faid alledgance, the faidis excipientis produceit the Act of Secreit Counfale, in prent, with the coppie of the
Proclamatioun, of the daitt the ix of December lafl. It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, the alledgance audit to be repellit, becaus the Act of Counfale produceit
gifis nocht abfolute power to all Minifteris to convocat and convene the legis
with thame, at thir jilefour ; hot the 2)articuler Commiflioneris to convocat the
legis refident within the boundis of the Commiflioun, for the caufis expreffit in
the llimniondis ; and to wit, for geving Confeflioun of thair ffaj'th, fubfcryving
the Band for defence of the Religioun, his Maiefleis eftait and perlbun, and withllanding of the fforane jirepai'atioun, maid be flrangeris, in contrair thairof ;
quhilk is nawayis aggreabill to the cafe fet doun in ditta; becaus the famin
beiris, that the legis was convocat be Mr Walter Balcanquell, haueing na power
gevin to him be the faid SefTioune to convocat his liienes leigis ; and the perfonis
convocat war nocht fubiect to thair jurifdictioune, hot fum of thame inhabitantis
of the Sherefdome of Fyfe, fum of Angus and Mairnis, vtheris of Tueddell,
Cliddifdaill and Leuinox ; and fua, nawayis fubiect to the Commiflioneris of the
flierefdome of Edinburgh. Lafl, thay war nocht convocat to the effectis contenit in the Act of Counfale ; hot be the contrair, to in\-aid his Maiefleis maifl
nobill perloune and troubill his eflait, as tlie dittay beiris ; nather can the famin
Act mak ony fayth, becaus it is nocht authorizit be the fubfcriptioune of the
Clerk of Counfale, hot imjjrentit be Robert Waldegraue, quha is convict be
ane AfTyfe of ffalfefeing of his hienes Actis of Parliament. And for the mair
cleir vei'ificatioun of the falfat of the faid Act, the aduocatis producis his Maiefteis authentik beirand na fie Act of Counfale to be ; and as to the

coppie produceit be the defenderis, of the dait the nynt of December, nonjacit
fitlem, becaus it is noclit fubfcryuit autentiklie.

To the quhilk it is anfuerit be the i)annell, that the foirfaid alledgance ftandis
relevant, nochtwithftanding (the alledgance ?) made in the contrar ; and fpeciallie,
anent that pairt of the alledgance tuiching the Convocatione, and that the fame

d CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.t). 1596-f.

is nocht a treiTonabill cryme ; to the qitliilk there is na anfuer maid be my lord
aduocat. And quhair it is alledgit, tliat the Conventioun is only limitat to the
particular boundis qnhair the parteis duellis, it is anfuerit, it is na argument to
niak the Convocatioun A'nlauchful ; fFor gif it was lauchfull to convene in thir
tua fchyres, it is lauchfull to convene in quhatlumeiier vtheris placeis ; hot fpeciallie, that paiit of the alledgance audit to be repellit, in relpect of the expres
woirdis of the Act, giving power ' to convene quhatfuraeuir dayes and placeis.'
And quhair it is alledgit, in the fecund part of the alledgance, that thair was na
power to the faid Mr Walter to convene ; it is anfuerit, that thare is expres
power gevin to Mr Robert Bruce and certane vthiris, quha (were) preifent in the
faid place, to convene : And the faid JMr Walter and the haill Prefbiterie, est
vnum corpus, and quhatfumeuir he did was be the directioune of the reft of the
brethren haifing power. And quhair it is alledgeit, that thai half only power to
tak Confeflioun of the ffayth and fubfci-iptioun of the Band ; it is replyit, that
tlie faid Conventioun was only to that effect, and to gif ConfefRoun of the Religioun, and for the maintenance thairof. As to the argument maid anent the
Act, that it is only printed, and nocht fubfcryiiit be the Clerk of Counfall, and
that Waldegraue is convict for ffalfe imprenting of the Act of Parliament ; it
audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Pri\iledge jiermittit ; the "Warrand fubfciyuit be the King paft the Privie feill and regiftrat in the bulk thairof ; lyke
as, the famin Act of Secreit Counfall, as it now ftandis jirintit, is regiftrat in the
buikis of fecreit (Counfall), as falbe verifeit be the Regifter : And as to Walgraves con\ictioun, esf super id'io facto, and nocht for this act ; and quhatfumeuir convictione fubfequeiit deduceit aganis him, it can nocht preiudge this pannell, and that quhilk wes lauchfuUie maid of before. Laft, as to the argument
maid anent the Proclamatioun, it nawyis militatis, accepting alwyis the dait
thairof, quhilk Aves vpoun the xxiiij day of Nouember laftbypaft, and is interpreit be ane pofteriour Proclamatioun, maid vpone the ix of December thaireftir ;
and declairis all Actis maid in fauor of the Kirk to ftand effectuall, and difdiargeis Convocatiounis maid in amies alluterlie. And the pannell proteftis
that this argument, maid anent the Conventioune in the New Kirk, may be feuerallie difcuflit fra the vtlier fubfequeiit cryme, anent the taking of amies and
affageiiig of his hienes perfoun, feing the Conventioun may be lauchfull and the
vther vnlauchfull. In refpect of the quhilkis premiffis, abloluitour' audit to be
gewin to the conventioun in amies. — The Aduocat repetis liis former anfuer.

The pannell ofTeris thaine reddie to be put to the tryell of ane Affyis for the
SECUND heid, the famin being maid fjoeciall anent the names of his Maiefteis
feruitouris and his couufaiouris.

'^ Acquittal, Lat. alsohere.

SOJac. VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 9

As to the THUYD point of the Dittay, anent the Conventioun in Mr Robert
Bruce gah-ie, and directioun of certane Commiflioneris, with fuitis to liis ]\Iaieftie : ffirft, as to the conventioun maid efter none, repetis the anfuer maid ofbefoir ; fpeciallie, that tlie famin is laucliful, and permittit be expi-es law, and
wes nocht maid in amies : And forder, his Maieftie directit my Lord of Marr
and my Lord Vchiltrie, and defyrit to convene with Mr Robert Bruce ; as alfo,
directit Traquair and Cesfurd, that the Articles of thair greifEs ' fould be prefentit to his Maieftie and his Counfall, at efter none ; and fwa, did na wrang, nather in thair conventioun nor directioun of the Commiffioun, feing the famin procedit be his Maiefteis allowance, and wes vthirwyis lauchfull, for the caus aboue
fjjecifeit. — The Aduocat anfwerit, that the faid alledgeance aucht to be repellit,
in refpect of the Dittay and anfueris maid to thair alledgeances, foundit vpouu
the alledgeit lauchfulnes of thair Convocatioun ; as lykwyis, the faid alledgeance
can nocht be reflauit in this place, becaus it is merifact'i, and is nocht inftantlie
verifeit, nather is it open to the Judge, but man be i-emittit to the Aflyife ; and
gif the Judgeis will dip vpoun the tryell of it, the famin man be repellit, noclit
only as irrelevant, hot alfo vntrew, as is notourlie knawin to the Judge and Af.
feflburis : And for thair better refolutioun, maid cleir be his Maieft;eis Declaratioun, fubfcryuit with his hand, prefentlie produceit. — It is aufuerit be the pannell, acceptand alwyis his Maiefteis Dedaratioun produceit, in quantum, that
nocht only is thair alledgeance fufficientlie verifeit, becaus it is notour to the
Judge and liis Afteffbui-is ; hot alfo, it is verifeit be the Aduocat, and pingeis^
bayth the Conventioun cuming doune.

FiNALLiE, as to the laft cryme contenit in the Dittay, it is nather relevant
nor contenis ony maner of cryme; fFor fyrft, as to the Conv^entioun vpoun Fryday
att ewin, it is anfuerit vt supra. Nixt, as to the procureing of Nobilmen and
vtheris to be vpoune thair faction, and pairt-takeris of thair caus, tion releuat; feing
it nather condifcendis quhat Nobillmen, quhat factioun, or quhat caus ; or quhat
the Noblemen wes defyrit to, nor quhat meffageis wes direct, be quhom, or. to
quhom, or to quhat effect, and quha wes the beraris of the faid meftage ; and fwa,
it contenis na treflbnabill crym : Bot fpeciallie, it is newir affirmit that thir perfonis on pannell directit, or procureit ony meftageis to be direct, to ony treflbnabill
effect. — The Aduocat anfuerit, that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect
of the Dittay berand, that thay convenit to auife how to procure the afllftance of
ane factioune, to fortifie and aflift thame in thair treflbnabill interpryfis, contenit
in the preceding Articles of the Dittay. Lyke as, the faid laft Article beris
playnlie, that the lettres direct and the Band proponit, tendit to the famin effect.
The pannell defyrit the Aduocat to produce the Band.

' Grievances. * To peenge or pinge, to complain.

VOL. II. B

10 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596-7.

(Feb. 12.) — Intrax. Robert Hammiltoune of Inchmaucbane, Sir James
Edineftoune of Duntraith, and James Lokart of Ley.
Interlocutor on the relevancy of the Dittay, Ikp.

(1.) The Judge Repellis the alleilgance, anent the fyifl dircuffing of Mr Walter Bakanquall. (2.)
The Juftice ftindis the fyrft pairt of the Dittay concerning Convocatioune, and tlie circumftanees quaJifeit and contenit in tiie faid firft Article Relevant ; and Ordanis the famin conjunctiue to pas to the
knawlcdge of ane Aflyfe, nochtwithftanding the alledgance maid agauis the famin. (3.) Item, the
Juftice ffindis it is nocht neceflar that the Aduocat condifcend particulerlie vpoim the names of the
Kingis Counfaloiiris or donieftik feruitouris ; and fhndis that point of the Dittay releuant, as it is confauit, nochtwithftanding of the alledgance maid in the contrar. (4.) Tlie Juftice ffindis the thryd
point of the Dittay releuant ; and Ordanis the famin to be put to the knawledge of ane Aflyfe, becaus
it is coincident with the circumftanees contenit in the fyrft Article. (5.) The Juftice Ordanis the
Aduocat to condifcend, in fpeciall, vpoun the names of the Nobilitie to qubome the Mifliues wes direct ; and being condifcendit vpoun, ffindis it releuant.

The famin day, Mr Andro Blakhall maid fayth.

The Pannell afl^is inftrumentis of the haill Interloquitour pronounceit. — The
Aduocat deelaris that he jiaffis fra that pairt of the article, concerning the directing of the Mifliues, pro loco et tempore. Quhairvpoun the haill panuel afkit
inftrumentis.

Interlocutor. The Juftice, eftir that my lord Aduocat had deleit certane wordis, anent the
directing of Mifliues, flfand tlie reft of the latter point of the Dittay relewant ; and ordanit the famin to
be put to the tryell of ane Aflyfe.

The aduocat takis inftrumentis (that he) repetis the conclufioun of the laft
held, in the conclufioun of ewerie ane of the pointis of the Dittay.

AssisA.
JamesFoulliselderof Colingtoun, Thomas Kennedie of Avdmillane, Thomas M'Dougall of M'KairGeorge Logane of Boningtoun, Johnne Naper, younger of Mer- ftoune,
Patrik Home of Aytoun, chinftoun, .... Kennedy of Penquhirry,

. . . Stewart of Dunduf, James Ritchertfoun of Smetoun Mure of Auchindrane.'

MrJamesFouUisy' of Colingtoun, Walter Dundas of that Ilk,

Exceptions against the persons summoned to pass upo7i the Assise.
Mr Johnne Ruflell produceit ane exemptioun for the Laird of Corstorphin,
vnder the Previe feill. The aduocat alledgit the famin aucht nocht to be admittit. — Mr Alex' King pi-oducet ane exemptioun for the Laird of H ass, and
repeittis the Act of Pai'liament, in refpect he is a Counfallour. The aduocat
repeittis his former anfuer thairaganis. — Mr Johnne Nicolfoun produceit ane exemptioun for the Laird of Cole pen. The aduocat repeitis the former anfuer
thairto. — Tlie pannell allegit that Johnne Kennedie of Hanqiiherrie can nocht
pas vpone the Afl"yis, becaus he is nocht a barroune, and fa nocht thair peir.

' The infamous John Mure, the Murderer of Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean. See the extraordinary Trials of John Mure, Jun. 24, 1602, &e., and of the Lairds of Auchindrain, elder and younger, and
James Bannatyne, Jul. 1611.

30JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS- 11

Intkrlocutor. The Juftice, with auife of his Afleffouris, in refpect thair is nocht ane fufBcient
number of Aflyis prefent tliis day, continewis the dyet to the xiiij of Februar inflant, and the haill
number of Aflyife prefent and fumniond to tiiis (diet), to compeir vpoun the faid xiiij day, vader the
pane of twa hundreth marliis : And continew Interloquitour, rpoun exemptiones to the faid day : And
ordauit the pannell to remain in waird, as thay did ofbefoir.

The famine day, William Sinclar of Roifling, Cokbiirne of Clarkingtoun, Johnne Lewingftoun of Preftoune, Andro Ker of Phairuieherft, Henry
Pitearne of Ramfyis-Forfar (Fortliar,) Sir Johnne Carmichael of that Ilk, and
Patrick Mofcrop, burges of Edinburghe, oft tymes callit to haif compeirit before
our fouerane Loi'dis Juftice or his deputis, the faidis day and place, in the hour
of caus, to haif paft vpoun the Aflyis of James Lokert eldar of Ley, Sir James
Edmeftoune of Duntrait knycht and Robert Hammiltoun of Inchmauchane, dilait of certane Trefl"onabill crymes, committit be thame, vpoun the xvij and xviij
dayes respectiue of December laftbypaft, as thay wer lauchfullie fummond to ; the
lauchfuU tyme of day biddin and )iocht comperand, thay and ilk ane of thame
wer thairfore vnlawit, in the pane of ane hundreth markis.

(Feb. 14.) It is allegit be the pannell, that na vther perfonis of Inqueift aucht
to be callit or refl"auit this day, vnto the tyme it be proceidit quhair it left, vij.
that the tuelf perfonis of Inqueift quha wes fummond be the Kingis Maiefteis
Thefaurer, conforme to the roll produceit be the Thefaurer, in judgment, and
thairefter war reflauit but objection, with confent of all the jiarteis, being the firft
callit ; but that res non est Integra to accept ony vtheris, except thay be lauchfuUie abfent : fpeciallie, it being of veritie that thay ar all heir prefent, and thairfoir thay being anes buikit, reflTauit, be confent of parteis, and now prefent in this
Tolbuith (of Leith), accoirding to the Juftice commandment, chargeing thame to
be prefent, vnder the pane of ij" merkis, na vther j^ei-fonis can be furrogat in thair
place. — The Aduocat anfueris, that the nominatioune of the faidis perfonis and
the bulking of thair names can woirk nathing in this caus ; becaus falang as the
perfonis of Aflyfe is nocht fuoirne and admittit, omnia sunt Integra, to the Judge,
quha may ather call thame of new, fueir and admit thame, or call vthiris and
omit the firft. As to the allegit confent, it is altogidder denyit. — It is anfuerit,
that the fummonding, buiking, fetting doun of the Aflyfe is ane fufRcient confent and reflait, fpeciallie the famin being done in prefens of the aduocat, without
contradictioun ; and the faidis deidis nocht being privie, bot iudiciall deidis,
quhilkis in all cauflls, bayth Criminall and Ciuill, biudis bayth the parteis. The
aduocat repeitis his former anfuer.

Interlocutor. The Juftice, (with) auife of his Affeffouris, Repellis the alledgeance proponit be
the pannell ; and ordanis that tiie Aflyfouris, fummond to this day, to be reftauit ; in refpect tliat tlie
Affyfe that wer builiit the xij of Februar, and continewit to this day, wes nocht fuorne.

Ig CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596-7.

Quhairiipoun the pannell afkit inftiiimentis.

It is allegeit be the pannell, that Sir Robert Ker can nocht pas vpOhe the
AlTjfe, for thre cauffis : firft, becaiis he hes informit and folifcit againft the Laird
of Grano-e, quha was pannellit vpone the faniin dittay et habet causam coniunctani : Nixt, becaus he is donieftik feruitour to his Maieftie ; and, as in ciuill
judgementis betuix his Maieftie and ony of his fubjectis, he could nocht be witiies, mekil les can he be AfTyfour, to cognofce vpone ane cryrae allegeit committit
aganis his Maiefteis perfone : Thridlie, nocht only is he fervand to his Maieftie,
hot he is partie allegeit to be grevit ; infafar as it is expreflie fet doiin in the Dittav, that his ]\Iaiefteis haill feruandis was conimandit ' to be Ibupit af the gait
and to foiip the calfay with thame,' Cjuhilk is the maift fpeciall circuinftance of
the haill Dittay, and the famin addmittit coniunctlie with the haill circumftances : And thairfoir, he being ane of his Maiefteis domeftic fervandis and ane of
his houfliald, be the Dittay he is partie, and confequentlie can nocht be ane Aflylour — The Aduocat anlueris, that the firft pairt of the allegeance aganis the
laid Sir Robert, as haiieing gevin partiall counfall aganis Williame Kirkcaldie, is
iiawayis comiietent to this pannell, becaufe delicta sunt j)ersonaU(t, and thair is
nocht fie a thing as cont'inentia cause or causa coiiiuncta in this cace, quhair
euerie man is challanget for his awin offence, perfonallie and principallie, and
nocht as complecis to the faid Williame or ony vther. Nather is the fecund pairt
proponit aganis the faid Sir Robei't, as domeftik feruand to his Maieftie, onywayis
relevant ; becaus the deutie of a fubiect comprehendis the haill effectioun that
can be borne to the Prince be his natiue fubiect, and the qualitie of a domeftik
feruand eikis nathing thairto : And as the Kingis Maieftie myclit fit in perfone
and judge in his proper caufe, or depute liis counfalouris or domeftikis to be
judges or Aflefouris, fa may thay be Aft\fouris : Lyk as, thair is djiierfe practikis paft in tlie Kingis proper caufTs befoir the Juftice, as laitlie the cauffis
aganis Ewfanie M'Kal3eaue and Barbara Naper, fjuliair the maift pairt of the
Aftj'fouris war domeftik feruandis to his IMaieftie ; this famin alledgeance being
than proponit and repellit. As to the laft obiectioun, that he is partie grevit, it
it is alfe ii'relevant, becaus the pannell hes na partie hot the Kingis ^Maieftie, and
ar only accufed for Ti'eflbne aganis his Maieftie and eftait ; and thairfoir the faid
alledgeance audit to be repellit.

It is forder allegit aganis The Laird of Sesfurd, that he can nocht be vpon
this AfTyfe, in refiiect of the deidlie feid ftanding betuix Robert Hammiltoune
on the ane pairt, and the kin and freindis of William Home of Coldounknowis,
quha is fecund and tliirdis with the laid Laird of Cesfurd, on the vther pairt. —
It is anfuerit be the aduocat, that the alledgeance audit to be repellit, except it
war qualiffc'it, the faid Laix'd of Cesfurd to be partakear of the faid deidlie feid ;

30Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 13

and forder, it is iia relevant obiectioun aganis the vthir tua, becaus it may verie
Weill be, that the ane be clene and the vther tua foull, aut contra. — It is anfiierit, that the cans is fa conjunct and can nocht be devydit, and thair is litefconteftatioune maid in this caus aganis thame all. — The aduocat anfueres, thair is na
litefconteftatioune maid, vnto the tyme an Aflyfour be luorne. — Anfuerit be the
pannell, that the repelling of the defenffis and proceiding to the electioun of the
Inqueift and proponing of the objectiounis aganis faid perfones, is nocht litefconteftatioune.

It is alledgit aganis The Laird of CarmicheU, that he can nocht pas vponfe
this Aflyfe, in refpect of the objectionis proponit aganis the Laird of Sesfurd,
and nameiie the faid deidlie feid, quhilk the pannel repetis, ftanding betuix the
faid Robert Hammiltoune and the laird of Waftra, for the flauchter of his father,
to quhome the faid Laird of CarmicheU is thrides of kyn : And forder, allegis
that bayth he and the Laird of vSesfurd ar of his Maiefteis Counfall, quhais
flauchter is allegit to be confpyi'it ; the famin being fpeciall circumftance of the
Ditta, fua tliat they are bayth parteis in effect. — The aduocat repeitis his former anfwer, and that thair being counfalouris to his Maieftie, makes thame to be
mair qualifeit and les fufjject to pas vpone this Alfyfe. The pannell repeitis the
famin alledgeance maid aganis the Laird of Cesfurd, anent the feid betuix Robert
Hammiltoun of Inchmauchane, to quhonv the Laird ojPharniher.st is kynifman
in the lyk degree. — The aduocat repeitis his former anfuer, maid to the obiectioun aganis the Laird of Sesfurd.

It is allegit, that Sir Thomas Ershene can nocht pas vpone this Inqueift, in
refpect of all the alledgances proponit aganis the Laird of Sesfurd, except the
deidlie feid, as fecund and thirdis of kyn and betuix ; and fordex-, he is nocht
ane barroun, thair being tua barronis vpone tlie pannell.

The pannell proponis aganis IVte Sir Robert Mcluill Yoinigar, that he can
nocht pas vpone this AfTyfe, in ref2)ect of the haill alledgeances proponit aganis
the Laird of Sesfurd, quhilk thai repeit : and forder alleges, that the faid Robert
is na barroune. — The aduocat anfucris, that he is barroun of Brunteland. — The
pannell anfueris, that his Infeftment is tane away be Act of Parliament.

It is alledgit, that T'he Guidman of Mandcrstonne is na barroune.

It is allegit, that The Laird of lluthven can nocht pas vpone this AfTyfe, in
refpect he is nocht xxv 3eiris of aige ; and as he may nocht be a juge nor a tutour, na mair can he pas on ane Alfyfe — It is anfuerit be the aduocat, that the
famin audit to be repellit, in refpect he is paft xxj 5eiris.

- The Juftice Repellis The Laird ofEuthcen, in refpect of his awin declara.
' tioune, that he is nocht xxj 3eris of aige.

As for The Laird of Bohertland, repeitis the haill alledgeances maid aganis

14 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596-7.

the Laird of Sesfurd : And forder, it is alledgit that he can nocht pas vpone this
AfTyfe, in relpect of the deidlie feid Handing betuix the Cunninghames and
Montgomeries ; the Laird of Duntraith being thridis of kyn with the Erie of
Eglintoiine that deid in the Cannogait. — The aduocat anfueris, it audit to be
repellit, except he be partaker of the feid, quhairof the contrar is notour. — It is
allegit, the Band niakis the feid.

AssisA. Sir Johnne Gordoune of Lochinvar, Tliomas Makdougall of M<=Kairftoun.

The pannell repeitis tlie haill allegeances aganis Sir Hew Carmkhell Yoiingar,
quhilkis war maid aganis the father. — The aduocat repeitis his anfuer.

It is allegit that 3Ir WiUiame Leslie of CiiuUie can nocht pas vpone this
AlTyfe, in refpect that he is a Pi-elat ; and forder repeitis the haill allegeances
maid aganis his Maiefteis domeftikis. — The aduocat anfueris, it aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the prefent eftait of the Kirk.

It is allegit aganis Mr Patrik Mortoun, that he is nocht landit, and that he
is a kirk-man, and can nocht be reflauit. The aduocat repeitis the former anfueris.

[Curia Justiciarie tenia in Pretorio dcLeijth, per 3L Jac. Foulis, J. Z).]

;^iii(ievi> Of an ^tt of parliament, anlf fiettincj it piiiitetj antt tiv^

tiiUttH,

Feb. 21. — Mr Johnne Howiesouxe, Minifter att Cambuflang.
Dilatit of the trelFonabill falcifeing, forgeiug and fein3eing of an alledgeit Act
of Parliament intitulat, ' Anent the aboleifching of J)e Actis contrar the libertie
of pe trew Kirk and aboleifching of pe Jurifdictione, as maid in pe Parliament
haldin att Ed"^ the penult day of Maij, the 3eir of God l^V'lxxxxij 3eiris ;' corruptand thairby ane trew Act of Parliament concerning the faid matei", maid be
the Kingis Maieftie and thre eftaits, in the Parliament haldin at Ed' vpoun the
fyft day of Junij, the 3eir of God I^Vlxxxxij 3eiris, intitulat, ' ffor abolefching
of pe Actis contrar the trew Religioune ;' quhilk trew Act being ti-efTounablie
falcifeit, corruptit, alterit, and in fum pairtis eikit be him, and in vther fubftanciall articles thairof pairit ; as the famin, conferrit with the faid fals Act fchawin
and produceit, bure, he delyuerit the faid fals Act in the moneth of Maij or thairby, in the yeir of God r"V''lxxxxiiij 3eins, to Robert Waldgi'ave, prentar, moveit,
perfwadit, vrgeit and intyfit the faid Robert to im^jrent the famin and publeis
itt, as haifand the Clark of Regifter autentik Warrand of the famin fubfcryuit
with his hand, and the Kingis Maiefteis priueledge for imprenting thairof: And
incontinent eftir the faid Mr Johnnis caufing, command, affiftance and ratihabitioune, the faid Robert liad imprentit the famin, the faid Mr Johnne bocht
and relfauit fra the faid Robert fourtie or fiftie copeis thairof, and treffonablie

30 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 15

publeiffit and difperfit the famin amangis our fouerane lordis liegis ; in manifeft and oppin contempt of his hienes authoritie and lawis, and lie A^'es authoiir,
perfwader, airt and pairt of the falcifeing, iinprenting and dilperfing thairof,
and thairby committit Hie Treflbun, and aucht and fould incur and vnderly

the pane thairof.

Persewar, Mr Tliomas Hammiltoune of Druincanie, aduocat.

The faid Mr Johnne Howieibune becummis in the Kingis will, according to
his Confeffioune, maid att Halyi-uidhous the xv. of Februar inllant. Tlie faid
Mr Johnne takis inflrumentis, that he apperis heir vnfummound and vnwardit.
The faid Mr Johnne Howiefoun alledgeis, that he knew na thing of that Act of
Parliament tliat he gaif in to be prentit to Robert Waklgrave, quhairof he is
prefentlie accufit, hot that it liad been tlie trew Act according to the Regifter ;
and that he gaif it to him as it was gewin to him be Gylbert Tail3eour, fafar as
he knawis, with vthir Actis of the Generall Aflemblie ; and that Robert Walgrave, being defyrit be fum of tlie bretherene, to print that Act quliilk Aves pronuncet att Dundie to the Generall Airemblie tliair, the laid Mr Johnne, thinking
that it had bene trew as he had it in his bulk, delyuerit the faid bulk to the
prentar, qixhilk contenis mony maer Actis nor the faid Act : And als, he gaif
him no command to prent the faid Act. And as to the Dittay, as it is confauit
aganis him, denyis it euerie word, except fafar as greis with his Depofitioun and
Declaratioun fubfcryuit with his hand, and his prefent declaratioune. For the
quhilk he becumis in his Maiefteis will.

The aduocat produceis Mr Johnne Howiefounis Depofitioun, fubfcryuit with
his hand, togidder with Robert Waldgraifis Depofitioun, togidder with the fals
imprentit Act, with the autentik Act fubfcryuit be the Clerk Regifter, for verifeing of the Dittay. The Aduocat proteftis, infafar as be the Depofitioune produceit in proces, fubfcryuit with the faid Mr Johnnis awin hand, it is confeft,
that he delyuerit the faid Act quhilk wes prentit be Robert Walgrave, for the
quhilk the faid Robert wes wairdit ; and that he had na Warrand of the Clark
of Regifter, nor onyvther, todelyuer that Act to be prentit, quhilk wes done be
him of ignorance ; fTor the quhilk he become in his Maiefteis will : As lykewyis,
be his Declaratioun dytit be him felff and writtin, in pi-oces, the famin Confeflioun and becuming in will is in effect repetit and mair amplie declarit, and of
his awin bulk produceit out of his awin hand, to be fene be the AfT'yfe, and confeffit to half bene delyuerit be the pannell to Robert Waldgi-ave, as contenand
ane copie of the Act, quhilk fum of the bretherene of the Minifterie blameit the
faid Robert to half omittit in the impreffioune of the remanent Actis of the
Kirk : And that be conference of the coi)ie thairof contenit in the faid bulk with
the imprentit Act, it is fund to agrie with the faid prentit Act word be woi-d.

16 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1596-7.

and the faid copie and prentit Act being red to the Aflyis and fund altogidder
difconforme to tlie trew and avitentik Act extractit and fubfciyuit be the Clark
of Regifter, lykewyis produceit in fam proces, the faid prentit Act omittand
mony of the fubftanciall heiddis of the trew Act, and in vthir partis eikand
clanfTis and articles noclit contenit in the faid trew Act : And that it is confeffit lykewyis be the pannell, that he bocht diuerfe of the faid prentit Actis fra
the faid Robert Walgrave, as vtheris Minifteris did, and difperfit fum of thame
to IMinilleris, quliilk man of necefTitie infer foirknawledge of the prenting of the
faid Act, and ratihabitioun eftir it wes imprentit ; in cais the Allyis acquyte
the pannell of airt and pairt of the faid crynie, proteftis for Wilfull errour.

The faid Mr Johnne Howiefoune Proteftis, that na thing alledgeit be his Maiefteis aduocat can ony wyis hurt or indaninage the faid Mr Johnne, vnles that
he had confeffit that he had athir forgeit or writtin the Act quhairv^poune he is
accufit, quhilk he did nocht ; nor 3it gaif ony copie thairof to Robert ^^'aldgrave,
bot only fchew to him the faid bulk, with the leif thairof laid in, quhair the
Act ftandis yit as it did thane ; nather did he gif him ony command to imprent
the faniin ; and thaii-fore the faid Mr Johnne alledgeit he aucht to be acquyte of
the Dittay according to Juftice and guid confcience ; quhilk he belewis the Affyis
will do, and will nocht tak innocent blude vpoune thair heidis.

Verdict. The quhilk day, Mr Johnne Howiefoune Minifter at Cambuflang
being enterit on pannell, dilatit, accufit and perfewit be Mr Thomas Hammiltoune
of Drumcarne and Williame Haert of Lewielandis aduocattis to our fouerane lord
for his hienes interes, for the treflbnable falcifeing, &c. (here the Dittay is repeated.) The quhilkis crymes, the faid Mr Johnne, eftir reding of his faid Dittay and
accufatioini, alluterlie' denying, eftir diuerfe alledgeances and declaratiouiiis
maid be him of his innocencie thairof, and anfueris maid thairto be the Aduocattis, he offerit him to the tryell of ane Aflyife for the faidis crymes : And thairfore the Juftice-depute patt him to the tryell of ane Affyis of the perfounes vnder written, thay ar to fay Cornelius Cudbert Merchand burges of Edinburghe,^
&c. Quhilkis perfounes being chofin, fworne and admittit, and the faid ]\Ir
Johnne Ilowiefoun being accufit, be Ditta)', of the crymes aboue writtin in thair
prefens ; Lyke as the faidis perfewaris produceand the faid Mr Johnnis Depofitioun fubfcryuit with his hand, maid in prefens of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall,
att Halyruidhous the xv of this inftant, togidder with the DeiJofitioiui of Robert
Waldgrave fubfcryuit with his hand, maid in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, quhair
he wes wardit, the fewint of Februar inftant, togidder with the faid fals im-

' Entirely, altosetlier. » It is not necessary (o insert the names. They are all ' uierehantlis'

and • burgellis' of Edinburgh.

SOJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. It

prentit Act of Parliament, and the trew Act of Parliament extractit furth of the
Regifter, fubfcryuit be Mr Johnne Skene Clark of Regifter, to the faidis perfounes of AfTyis, for verifeing of the Dittay ; thay remowit altogidder furth of
Court, to the Counfal-hous, quhair thay eftir chefing of the faid Archibald Geddes (merchand bm-ges of Edinburgh) chancillar, be pluralitie of votis, thay reafonit vpoun the pointis of the laid Dittay, and thaireftir votit thairvpoune ; and
being throuchlie refoluit thairwith, reenterit agane in Court, quhair thay be the
mouth of the faid Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Mr John
Howiefoun Minifter of Cambuflang, to be fylit and conuict of the delyuerie of
ane alledgeit Act of Parliament intitulat, ' Anent pe aboleifching of pe Actis
contrair pe libertie of pe trew Kirk, and aboleifching of pe jurifdiction as maid
in pe Parliament haldin att Edinburgh pe penult day of INIaij 1592 ;' and that
in the moneth of Maij or thairby, the yeir of God I^.VMxxxxiiij yeiris, to Robert Walgrave prentar, to be prentit. Quhilk alledgeit Act is eikit, alterit and
pairt' fra the trew Act of Parliament maid be the Kingis Maiellie and his thre
Ellaitis, in the Parliament haldin att Edinburgh, the fyftdayof Junij I^.V^Ixxxxij
yeiris, intitulat, ' ffor aboleifching of pe Actis contrar pe trew Religioun :' As
the famin, extractit and fubfcryuit be the Clark of Regifter beris : And eftir the
famin being prentit, for refTauing and bying of ane certain number prentit copeis
thairof fra the faid Robert,^ and diftributing and difperfing of the famin amangis
our fouerane lordis liegis : And ffand the faid Mr Johnne Howatfoun to be
cleane, innocent and acquit of all vthiris pointis, heidis and dauffis, contenit in the
Dittay and accufatioun aboue writtin, gevin in aganis him.

ICuria fetifa in pretorio de Leijih, per M. Jac. Fowles, J. Z).]

dfoisins mxti 5^ttninfl 33ase Coin.

Mar. 15. — Alexander Neilsoun (Arneili-) burges of Glasgw.

Dilatit of the trelTonabill fforgeing, counterfuting, prenting and out-putting
of ffals and adulterat money, fic as twa penny-plakis, half markis and fourtie
penny pecis, to the availl of ffyve hundreth poundis worth, (within his awin
hous in the New Wynd of Glalgw) ; conmiittit in the haill monethis (of the
years) 1592-93-94 and 95, and in the monethis of Apryll, Maij, Junij, Julij,
Auguft and September lafl.

VERnicT. The Affife (with the exception of four, who ' ffyle' him of outputting of fals twa-penny-plakis) Acquit the faid Alexander Arneill.

' Pared, aLiidgod. - See the case of Polcrt Waltlegrave printer, Feb. 2, 1596-7, &c.

VOL. II, Q

Ig- CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597.

iHurKn* — H^amrsucfeen.

Apr. 11, 1597. — Patkik Cwnixghame, feruand tovTnq'^ Dauid Edmeftovxn of Biu'iihouffis.

Dilatit of art and part of the crewall murthour and flauchter of vmq'^ George
Preftoun of Haltrie ; committit in September, anno

Declaris, that he paft away with the faid vmq" Dauid Edmefton of Burnhouffis, and that he was haldand his horle quhill he come bak. — Mr Johnne Preftoune takis inftrumentis vpoune the admiffioun and fwering of the AflTyis.

Veiidict. The Affyis in ane voce convictis and fylis the faid Patrik Cwninghame, feruitour for the tyme to vniq'" Dauid Edmeftoun of Burnhouflis, off
art and part of the crewall Murthour and flauchter of vmq'' George Prefl;oune
of Haltrie ; committit the vj of December 1588, be way of Murthour and
Hamefuckin, vpoun fett purpois and prouifioun.

Sektexce. ' Convict et decollat."

[3/r WilUame Haert of Levielandis, Justice-Depute. '\

^arrtfiUf.

Jun. 15. — Wileia:me Mow, hatmaker, burges of Edinburgh.

Dilatit of the abhominabill cryme of Paracide, in hurting and wounding of
Andro Boirthuik burges of the Caunogait, his guid-fader f committit the xiiij
day of Februar laftbypaft.

Persewar, Mr Robert Lyntoun Ailuocat fubftitute to Mr Tlioraas Haramiltoun of Druracarne.

The quhilk day, the faid Juftice-Depute produceit the "NVarrand vnderM'rittiD,
quliilk he defyrit to be infert in proces ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice and Aduocatis, We greit jow weill. It is our will and we command 50W, that
vpoun the ficlit heirof 56 faill nocht to infill in accufatioun and tryell of ])e vnworthie attempt of
Williame Mow hatmaker, aganis Andro Boirthuik his g-uid-fader: And gif he becum in our will for
ye fame, that ^e accept and put him immediatelie to libertie, vpoun fufficient cautioun fund be him, to
vnderly quhat ewir we fall declair heireftir to be our will, for his faid cryme ; Tnder Jie pane of ane
thowfand poundis : Kepand fis prefent for 30ur warrand. Subfcrj'uit with our hand, Att Falkland, the
xij day of Junij, 1597.

(Sic fubfcribitnr) JAMES REX.

The quhilk day, ^^'^illiam Moav hatmaker, burges of Edinburghe, being enterit
on pannell, accufit be Dittay and perfewit be Mr Robert Lyntoun, fubftitute aduocat to Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcarne aduocat, of the abhominabill
crjnne of Paricide (and) Brigancie^ vnder nycht ; committit be him vnder nycht,
vpoun the xiiij day of Februar laftbypaft, of I'ett purpois, precogitat malice and
foirthocht fellony, vnder cullour of freindfchip, as eftir followis, to wit.
^ The sentence and execution are recorded on the margin. ^ Father-m- law. ' O. Fr. briganderie.

30JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 19

DiTTAY of Williame Mow.

FoRSAMEKiLi, as he haifing confauit ane deidlie haitrent, rancour and malice aganis Andro Boirtliuik baillie in the Cannogait, his fader-in-law, feiring that the faid Andro fould liaif difponit his
landis, heretage and guidis by ' him, he haifing na airis maill gottin of his awin body to fucceid
to him ; the faid Williame, vpoune the faid xiiij day of Februar laflbypaft, being the Sabboth day
eftir the preicliing, tuik in heid to execute his abhominabill fact foirfaid ; and trafonablie, vnder cullour of freindfchip and familiaritie, peifwadit his faid fader-in-law to pas witii him, in the foir-nycbt,^
furth of his awin hous in the Cannogait, be Pleafance, to the Schenis,^ quhair he affermit to the faid
Andro, that his guidbrothir Henry Tait hurt Johnne Fynlafoune feruand to the Laird of Roifling,
quhairof he wes lyke to die, and defyrit thair to fpeik with hini ; and durft nocht, for feir of his lyflFe,
to be fene in the day lycht : And that he wald putt the faid Williame in possession of his fielding and
guidis ; albeit thair wes na fick thing of veritie, hot falflie devyfit be the faid Williame be fubieftioun*
of the Ewill Spreit ; to the effect that vnder fylence of nycht, the faid Williame Mow mycht haif the
better oportunitie to liaif murthourit his fader-in-law foufald, fecreitlie in the feiUlis, vnder fylence of
nycht as faid is. And he haifing craftelie convoyit the faid Andro to the place foirfaid, thair being na
fie tryill^ and meting as the faid Williame affermit to him, the faid Andro and the faid Williame retumit to the Potter-raw ;■' and the port being fleikit, becaus of the nycht,'' he perfwadit the faid Andro to pas in the nerreft throw the Bak-raw'' be the Toun wall, being ane privie paffage that leidis to
Pleafance; and thair, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht, he fecreitlie, crewallie and vnmercifullie fett
vpoune his faid fader-in-law, behind his bak, with ane drawin quhingar' in his hand, gi'ipit him be the
craig,' and gaif him twa grit ftraikis in the held ; doing tliairby that in him lay, thair fecreitlie vnder
nycht to haif murthourit his ageit father-in law foirfaid, for greid of geir and land ; quhilk he had accompleifchit, gif God had nocht flrenthenit the faid Andro to mak fum defens for his lyff, be griping
of the faid Williame in his airmes, and calling of him vnder the faid Andro to the ground, and thiawing
of his drawin quhingw furth of his hand ; and nochttheles, haifing the faid Williame in his will, fpairit
his lyffe : Quhairby the faid Williame wes giltie of the cryme foirfaid, and aucht to be pwneift
thairfoir.

Eftir the quhilk accufatioun, and reding of the Dittay to the faid Williame
Mow, he maift humblie fubmittit him felff, and become in our fouerane lordis
will for the famin, and haill crynies and offences contenit in the faid Dittay. In
quhais will the faid Juftice reflauit him, and ordanit the Hiid Williame Mow to
find cautioun, for fatisfactioun of the faid Will, vnder the pane of ane thowfand
poundis ; and the famin being fundin to be putt to libertie. Lyke as, Robert
Cowdoun in Dalkeith, Williame Yit'ich. thair, Thomas Stewinfoun in Bryans and
Robert Waddell baxter burges of Edinburgh, become actit and obleift as cautioneris and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, for the laid Williame Mow, that
he fall vnderly quhat ewir our fouerane lord fall declair heirefter to be his Maiefteis will for the faidis crymes, vnder the pane of ane thowfand poundis ; Lyke
as alfwa, thai become pledges and fouirteis for the faid Williame Mow, that the

' Past. ^ The early part of the evening. ^ Districts of Edinburgh, then without the walls of

the city. * Suggestion. ^ Appointment. '' The Potter-row-port being shut at that time of

night (Sunday). '' The Back-row stood in the line of the city wall, apparently where Drummond

street is now built. ' A sort of short sword, cutlas or hanger. ^ Throat.

20 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597.

faid Andro Boirtlmik, his kyn, freindis, tennentis and feniandis falbe harmles
and fkaythles of the faid Willianie Mow, and of all vthir wyis, quhome he may
flop or latt,' and that he nor thay falbe nawyis trublit, moleflit or perfewit be
him, vthirwyis nor be ordour of law and Juftice, vnder the faid pane of ane
thowfand poiindis : As alfwa the faidis Cavitioneris obleift thame and ilkane of
thame to vtlier, to frej-^th, releif and keip flcaythles vtheris^ pro rato for the fourt
pairt of the faid penaltie, att the handis of our fouerane lord, his hienes Thefau1-er and all vtheris quhome it efferis. — "Williame INIow alio obliged himfelf, in due
form, to relieve his cautioners.

Jul. 11. — Alexander Young, ane of his Majefleis Ifcheris, Thomas
French and James Dot, his feruandis.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the llauchterof vmq'° George Mylne in Pittinweme,
committit in Ai)ryle laftbypaft.

]\Ir Thomas Hammiltoun, aduocat, produceithis Maiefteis Warrand ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juflice Clerk and 50ur Deputis ; We grelt 50W wele. Forfamekill as it Is vnderftand to ws, tliat thare is tua feuerall dyattis appointit to our feruitour Alex"' goung, ane of the Ifcheris
of our clialmer, tlie ane the xj day of Julij inftant, att ])e inftance of our aduocat ; and Jie vy att fe
inftance of \e partie, tlie xxj day of J)is inftant, ffor calling of Jie faid Alex'' to vnderly our lawis before
30W, for airt and pairt of \e alledgeit flauchter of vniq'« . . . Mylne in Pittinweme ; as Jie Lettres refpectire beris : Nochtwithftanding, being crediblie inform it that the mater is fubmittit to freindis, to be
takin away in amicable maner, and ])e paking vp' Jiairof liklie to be effectuat, leing our inforraatioun
proceidis of \e freindis of ajier* of thay parteis to quliome the famin is fubmittit : It is thairfore our will,
and we command 50W, that 3e defert bayth the faidis dyattis and Lettres, and ceis from calling or
proceidding aganis af of J)e faidis parteis or ])air cautioneris fairatt, in defalt of fair comperance or
vfr wayes ; that the mater may be better handlit and reconcelit be ])e freindis : As 50 will anfuere to
ws, vpoun 5 our offices and obedience; keipand ])ir prefentis for 3 our warrand. Subfcryuit with our

hand, Att Sanct Androus, the day of July 1597.

(Sic fubftribitur) JAMES REX.

Quliilk Warrand being red, the faid Juftice depute admittit the famin, and
ordenit the lettres rafit to this day, att the inftance of the Aduocat, aganis the
faid Alex' Young and his feruand, and the vther Lettres rafit, att the parteis inftance, aganis tlie faid Alex' and his feruandis, for the llauchter of the faid vmq'^
George Mylne, to the xxj day of this inftant, to be Defert. Quhairvpone, the
faid Alex' Young afkit inftrumentis.

'^ Let, hinder, control. " To free and reliere each other, &c. ' Adjusting, settling,

compromising. ^ Each, cither of these parties.

SUac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 21

Jul. 23. — Andro Rkwli,, Woblter (weaver) in Corftori)hin.
■ Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flaiichter of vinq'^ Johnne Rewll his fone, ane
barne of xij 3eir auld; committit the (xxj) of Junij laftbypaft.

Verdict. The Aflyis chufe Robert Varnour (of Aucliindinny) Chancillar ;
and in ane voce ffylis Andro Rewll, wobfter, of the murthour and llauchter of
Johnne Rewle, his fone, committit ane moneth fyne, betuix Corftorphine and
Edinburghe, be the flraik of the plwmet* of his fword vnder the vayne organe.^

Sentence. For the quhilk, the Juftice, be the mouth of AVilliame Gray,
dempftar, (ordanis) that the faid Andro Rewle falbe tane to the Caftel-hill of
Edinburghe, and thair his heid flrikin fra his body ; and all his movabill guidis
ordenit to be efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe.

J^lausljttr.

Jul. 27. — Robert Pook (Pollock) in Nethirplace, James Vrie in Paratais, Alexander Wallace in Pooktoune and George Tod thair.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'' Jonet Biggar, fpous to Andro Gilmour in Benwartbank, and ane infant barne in hir wamb ; committit the
XX day of Maij lallbypaft.

Persewaris, Andro Gilmour in Benwartpark, and Robert Gilmour tliair.
Continued to the Air of ' Renfrew tertio Itineris, xv dierum. Plagiis, Jacobo
Tennent de Lennox (Linhoule), Jacobo Vrie et Alex. Wallace, conjunctum et
divifum ad relevand.'

Crtason— assistins aSotljiBell fit tafeiitg ^titij—Uai'H oC aiiaioijjmct

Aug. 15. — Patrik Sleich, lumtyme in Birkinfyde.
^ Dilatit of breking of waird, he being in Sir George Homes hous in the Cannongait ; and for the treffonabill accumpaneing of Frances fumtyme Erll Bothwell, James Douglas fumtyme of Spott, quhill thair cuming in to the Abay of
Halyrudhous, in the moneth of Julij 1593 3eiris.^ — Item, fortheaffifting of the
Erll Bothwell and Sir James Dowglas, at Leith and the Raid of Wowmet ; commit in Apryll Ixxxxiiij (1594.)

The Aduocat produceit the Kingis Warrand to put the faid Patrik Sleich to
ane Aflyfe. — The aduocat proteftis for Willfull errour, in caife thay (the affife)
acquit the faid Patrik Sleich of the Dittay ; in refpect of his awin Depofitioune

' So termed, from lead being usually run into the plummet or pommel of a sword, to balance its
blade. '^ The jugular vein. ' This appears to be partially deleted, perhaps owing to the

Dittay being so fully narrated in the Verdict of the Assise.

22 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597.

produceit, fubfcryuit be the Juftice Clark, the Aduocates felff and the Juftice
Depute ; in the qiihilk he confeffis the cryme, albeit he deny the famin now.
The aduocat (alio) defyris the Warrand produceit be him, fubfcryuit be liis Maiellie, to be infert in proces ; quhaii-of the tennoui- followis.

Rex,

Aduocat, We greit 50W weill. Forfaniekle as We Iiaue commamlit our Juftice, Juftice
dark and thair deputis to put Patrik Sleich, prefentlie wairdit within our Tolbnith of Edinburghe, to
fe knawledge of ane AfTyfe with all diligence, for his treironabill being in cumpany and affifting of
Frances lumtyme erll of Bothwell att J>e conflict att Edmeftoun-edge . It is fairfore our will, and we
command ;ow, that 56 forme ane fpeciall dittay vpoun fe faidis crymes, and infift in perfuit of him
for Jie fame with all inftance: As 36 will anluer to ws vpoun 5 our office ; kepand fir prefentis for
3 our warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Falkland, the fyft of Auguft 1597.

(Sic fublcribitur) JAMES REX.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of James Lokert, elder of Ley, Chancillar, Fand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Patrik Sleich to be fylit, culpabill
and convict : Forfamekill as he, in the moneth of Apryll, J"" V" Ixxxxiiij yeiris,
come treffonablie, in cumpany with Frances fumtyme Erll Bothwell and vtheris
his cumpanie, to the number of iiij^ perfonis, vnder Capitan and cornett, bodin
in feir of weir, &c., to the toun of Leith, quhair thay treflbunablie tuik the faid
toune, the IMagiftrates thairof and Tolbuith of the famin, of purpois to haif fortifeit the faid toun : And feing his Maieftie come with ane number of his trew
fubiectis, to befedge thame thairin, thay drew thame felff furth thairof to the
landis of Nudrie, quhair his Maieftie, with his cumpany, following, on horfe and
fut, thay treffonablie fett vpoun thame and chaift thame, tuik ane grit number
of his trew liegis, Imrt and woundit ane vthir pairt thairof ; and fwa, he committit oppin and manifeft TrefToune.

Sentence. For the quliilk cryme, the Juftice depute Ordanit the faid Patrik to forfalt his lyffe, landis and guidis, and to be tane to ane gibet att the
mercat croce of Edinburghe, and thair hangit quhill he wes deid : Pronunceit
be "W'illiam Gray, dempftar.

3Ufarinct anU 5l2lUarin0 o( iJistflUtg.

Oct. 18. — William Hammiltoune, feruitour to Dauid Dundas of

Preiftiuch, and Alexander Mowbray, brother to vmq'^ Johnne

MoM'bray of Barnbowgall.

The quhilk day, the perfonis aboue writtin being enterit on pannell, dilatit of

airt and pairt of contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in beriug and wering

piftolettis vpoun thair perfonis, within the burcht of Edinburghe, in the moneth

of Auguft laftbj'paft : For the quhilk thay wer tane and appreheudit be Henry

Nifbet, proveft of Edinburghe : And being demandit of the Juftice quhidder

31 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 23

thay wald cum in his Maiefteis will thairfor, or abyde the tryell of ane AfTyfe for
the famin ? Thay declarit, that thay, the tyme of thair challangeing, wer myndit
to pafs furth of the bur' of Edinburghe with thair piftolettis ; and nochtwithftanding, thay wald becum in his Maiefteis will, for ony offens done be thame to
his Maieftie, in bering of the faidis piftolettis, or to the faid Proveft of Edinburghe, or ony vtheris.

Nov. 1. — The Kingis Will about IVilUani Hammiltoun^ servitour to
Dauid Diindas of Preistinch.
The quhilk day Williame Hamniiltoun, being enterit on pannell to heir our
fouerane lordis will declarit, for the cryme vnderwrittin ; compeirit Mr Thomas
Hamrailtoun of Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane Lord, and produceit the
Warrand vnderwrittin, and defyrit the famin to be regifti-at, quhairof the tennom* followis.

Apud Linlythgw, xxo Octobris, anno Ixxxxvij. Forsamekill as Williame Hammiltoune, feruand to Dauid Dundas of Preillincli, being takin, apprehendit and comraittit in waiid, and fairefter
prelentit to jullice, accufu and peifewit, for bering and wering of piftolettis, and prelenting of ])e fame
to the Proveft of Edinburghe ; the faid Williame become in his Maiefteis will, for fe faid cryme, being verry haynous and capitall, mereting feueir puncifchment : git his Maieftie, of his fpeciall grace
and mercy, forbering that rigour and extremetie, quhilk worthielie may be vfit aganis fe faid Williame,
and mitigating juftice with mercy, hes declairit, and be fir prefentis declairis, his Maiefteis will as followis, to witt : That [the faid Williame, within f e fpace of fourtie dayis eftir pe dait hereof, fall depairt and pas furth of fis lealme, remans as exylit and baneift furth fairof during his lyftyme ; and oa
na wyis return agane within the famyn, vnder Jie pane of deid : And ordanis his Maiefteis Juftice and
aduocat to cans ane Act of Adiornall to be extendit heirvpoun ; and publicatioun heirof to be maid att
all places neidfull, quhairwith nane pretend ignorans of J>e famin.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Sentence of perpetual Banifliment. According to the quhilk Warrand, the
Juftice Depute pronounceit his Maiefteis Will aboue writtin, and ordaneis the
faid Williame to be baneift this realme for the cryme aboue (writtin) during his
haill lyftyme ; and on nawyes to return agane within the famin, vnder the pane
of deid.

^ovctr|) anti ESaitcfjcraft

[Apud Linlythgw, Mr WiUiame Haert of Lewielandis, Justice-Depute.']
Oct. 19. — Capitan Patrik Hering.
The quhilk day, comperit Sir "Williame Menteith eldar of Keufe, kny', Williame Menteith, his foun and aperand air, and Mr Thomas Hamniiltoun of
Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes interes, as perlewarisi
and produceit his Maiefties Lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft att

24 CRIMIXAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597.

thair inftans, aganis Capitan Patrik Herring, be vertevv of the quhilkis lettres
faid Capitan Patrik Herring is lauchfullie denuncit his Maiefteis rebell and putt
to the home att the mercatt croce of Striuiling, vpoune the auchtene day of October inftant, for nocht finding of cautioun, that he lould haif comperit before the
Jultice or his Deputis this day and place, and vnderlyne the law for certane
crymes of Sorcerie and Witchcraft, as att lenth fpecifeit in the faidis Lettres :
And i^roteftit for releif of thair cautioun, fundin for perfuit of the faidis Lettres
and forder proces aganis the faidis Capitan Patrik Herring ; quhairvpoun thay
afkit inftrumentis.

Comperit \ViIliame Ihvid in Stirling, and produceit ane Letter and Precept,
directit fra his Maieftie to the Juftice, Juftice Clark and thair deputis, and defyrit the famin to be obeyit and infert in proces ; of the qiUiilk Precept the tennoiu' foUowis.
]{ex.

Jl'STICE, Juftice dark and 30ur Jeputis, We greit 30W weill. Forfaniekill as our louit,
Capitan Patrik Herring is fummonti, att ]>e inftance of fe Lairtlis of Kerfe, eldar and 5ounger, to vnderly ]>e lawis befoir 30W and 5 our deputis, in ]ie Tolbuitli of Lynlythgw, the nyntene day of October
inllant, for certane erymes of Wichcraft allegeit aganis him ; We, for findrie reafonable cauliis and coniideratiounes moving ws, willis and commands 30W and ilkane of 30W, to continew fe faid day and all
proceiding agenis Jie faid Capitan Patrik Herring in fe faid eryme, vntill fe tent day of December nixtocum, to be haklin in fe ToUiuith of Striuiling; difchargeing 50W and ilkane of 30^' and 3 our deputis,
be ]iir prefentis, of ony calling or proceding in Jie faid mater vntill pe foirfaid day and place: The
Cautioneris of baith ]>e faidis parteis ftandand in Jie fame forme and effect as tliay ar now, vntill "pe faid
day ; but preiudice of ay of fe faidis parteis. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Dunfermling, the xvij
day of October inftant, 1597.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Vpoun the productioun quhairof the faid Williame alkit Inftrumentis.

It is allegeit be the j)erfewaris, that nochtwithftanding of the W'arrand produceit, that the Juftice audit to proceid and minifter juftice to the parties, according to the lawis and Actis of Parliament, becaus the Warrand produceit is
ane privat Warrand, to the hinderance of juftice, quhilk my Lord Juftice, be Act
of Parliament, is ordenit nocht to refpect, but to proceid nochtwithftanding of
the famin : As alfo, the ^^^arrand conteiiis ane command to continew the dyet,
quhilk can nawyis be done, be the ordoui* and jjractik obfei'uit in the countrey ;
feing in continewatiounis, quhilkis ar actis judiciall, it is neceflar that the judgement be eftableiffit be the prefens of thre perfonis, the Judge, the perfewar and
defender ; and the defender being now abfent, thair can be no lauchfull continewatioun maid, hot the certificatioun of the Lettres man be gi'antit aganis him :
And gif he be nocht alreddie lauchfullie denunceit, he audit to be putt to the
home of new ; and gif na cautioun be fund, as thair is nane, his cautioner fould
be vnlaM'it.

SUac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 25

The Juftice, in refpect of my Lord Aduocatis anfuer, and be reafoiin of abfens of partie defendar, without quhais perfonal comperance thair can be na certane comperance to ony certane day, and in refpect alfo of his Maiefteis Letter,
difchargeing all proceiding this day, Defertis the dyet, to new wairning to the
thryd day of the nixt Juftice Air of the Sherefdome quhair the faid Capitan Patrik Herring duellis, or foner, vpoun xv dayes wairning. Quliair^'poun the
faidis perfewaris atkit inftrumentis,

aSTitcijfiaft— ^oiuri)-3inrantatioiT, ^r.

Nov. 12. — JoNET Stewart, in the Cannogait; Chuistiax LewingSTOUN, in Leyth ; Bessie Aiken, thair ; and Christian
Saideer, in Blakhous.

Dilatit of the crymes of Wichcraft vnderwrittin.

Verdict. The quhilk day, the pei-fonis of AfTyfe being chofin, fworne and
admittit ; and the pei'fonis on pannell being accufit, be Dittay, in thair prefens, of
the crymes vnderwrittin, removit furth of court ; quhair, eftir chufing of Henry
Lummifdane (in Edinburghe) Chancellar of the laid Afiyife, tliay reallbnit and
votit vpoun the poyntis of the faid Dittay ; and being throuchlie auyfit thairwith, reenterit agane in Court, quhair thay, be the mouth of the laid Chancillar,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the laid Cristiane Lewingstoun to be fylit and
convict of the abufing of Thomas Gothray, baxter in Iladingtoune, vnder pretext of Witchecraft, quha addreftit him I'ellf to the faid Criftian as ane wyfe woman, hailing knaulege in the foirfaid airt, and fayd to hir that he was witchit,
and that his geir went fra him ; quhilk fcho affirmit to be trew, and promefit to
help him, and luld lat him fie quhair the Witchecraft was laid : Lyke as, the
morne thaireftir, fcho tuke him doune his awin ftair and hakkit' a hoill with
ane knyffe, and tuke out a lytill polk of blak pladiiig, quhairin was fum jjickellis
of quheit, fum threidis of wirlet of diuerfe cuUouris, hairis and naillis of
mennis fingeris, and affermit that he was witchit be that meanis ; and baid
his wyfTe keip^ thame in hir aprone, and caft thame in the fyre ; qidiilk was
done immediatlie thairefter : And than fcho fayd, gif fcho had nocht fund out
this geir, thay wald half bene wrakkit bayth in body and geir : Quhilk fcho deponit in prefens of my Lord Juftice, vpoun the tent day of Julij laftbypaft, to be
of veritie : And forder fayd, that fcho laid in this graith her felft", in tlie nycht,
in a hoill vnder the ftair ; and nochtheless maid Gothray and his wyffe to beleif
it was Witchecraft layd in be ane vther : Lykewyis, at the famyn tyme fcho affermit that hir dochter was tane away with the Farie-folk, and declarit to Goth-

' HnwMt, (lug. " Keep, is ppiiiaps used for hep, catch, indicating that the witch directed

Thomas to toss them towards his wife, who would receive them in her apron, &c.

VOL. II. D

26 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597.

rayis wyfC, than being with barne, that it was a man chyld fchowas with ; as it
provit in deid : And that all the knawlege fcho had was be hir dochter, wha met
with the Fairie. — Item, indytit and accufit, that fcho and Cristian Saidler,
being confultit be Robert Baillie, mafoune in Hadingtoune, to cm-e his wyffe,
qulia allegeit hirfelffto be bewitcheit, fcho, at the faid Criftian Saidlei-is defire to
gang and cure hir (went;) and than the faid Criftian Saidler bad hir tak thre pyntis
of fvveit wirt,' and feith it with a quantitie of frefche butter, to a pynt ; quhilk
fcho gaif hir to drynk : And ficlyke, to gif hir a bath in a pot of wodbind and
rofet hett togidder ; quhilk fcho did, hot availlit not ; doing thairbye, baith fcho
and the faid Criftian Saidler, that in thame lay to abufe the faid Robertis wyffe,
promefling to cure hir be hir craft, quhilk fclio was nocht able to do : And this
was done vnder cuUour of Witchecraft. — Item, indytit and accufit lykewyis,
that fchortlie befoir fcho was apprehendit, fcho was fend for be the faid Criftian
Saidler to hir hous, and at hir cuming the faid Criftian defyrit hir to gif her felfF
furth for a wyife wyffe and a woman of fkill ; and faid to Andro Peimycuke of
that Ilk, being than feik in her hous, that fcho fend for hir as being a wyife-wonian to help liim ; and than the faid Criftian Saidler bad hir tak weill in hand to
bail! him, and put him in gude hope : And tlie faid Andro than fayd, tliat he had
bene in the Cannogait with Jonet Stewart, and that fcho had done him na
gude, and beleiffit that fcho had witchit him ; and that the fayd Jonet fayd ' he
fuld never haif a day to do weill :' And than fcho, be the faid Criftian Saidleris
counfale, bad get a reid cok ; quliilk wes done : quhilk fcho flew and tuke the
blude of it, and fcho buke" a bannok thairof with floure, and gaif the faid Andro
to eit of it ; quhilk lie could not preif ^ And thaireftir, fcho, at the faid Ciiftian
Saidleris defyre, tuke ane of the faid Androis farkis, quhilk fcho gaif to her, and
bad her dip it in the wall^ at the bak of the hous ; quhilk fcho did, and brocht
it in agane ; quhilk Criftian Saidler put vpoun him, Mat as it was, being verie
evill at eife, and gaif him to vnderftand that he wold get his health be this
meanis ; albeit that it wes onlie plane abufione, as the event declarit : And than
the faid Andro defyrit hir to gang to Jonet Stewart, and craif his health at hir
hand for Godis fake. — And ficlyke, fund, pronuuceit and declarit the faid JoXET
Stewart to be fylit, culpabill and convict, for earning to BefTie Inglis in the
Kowgait, being deidlie feik, and lycht and tuke afi" hir fark that was than vpoun
hir and her mutche, and waifchit thame in a South-rynnand water ; quhilk fcho
did, as fcho fayd, at conmiand of vmq'' ]\Iichaell Clark, fmyth in Lafwaid ; and
j)ut tlio fark wat vpoune liir at midnycht, and faid thryis over, ' In J)e name of
J:e ffader, ])e Sone and pe Ilaly Ghaift ;' and fyrit the water,^ and brunt ftrayat

' Worts, the fermented stuff from wliiili ale is brewed. ' Baked, ^ Prce, taste.

* Draw-well. ' Put red Lot iron into it.

SIJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. ?7

ilk newke of the bed, as the faid Michael had leirnit hir ; quhilk was done, vnder pretext and cullour of Witchecraft. — Item, for hailling of women of the wedonynpha," and Ipeciallie of Beffie Aitkyn and fyndrie vthiris, be taking of ane
garland of grene-wodbynd, and caufing of the patient to pafs thryife throw it ;
qiihilk thairafter fcho cuttit in nyne peices and call in the fyre ; quhilk fcho affermit fcho leirnit, with the reft of hir cures, fra ane Italean ftrangear callit 31r
Johnne Damief, ane notorious knawin Enchanter and Sorcerer ; quhilk was
lykewyis done vnder the pretext of Witchecraft. — Item, fylit for hailling of
fyndrie perfones difeafit of the falling evill, be hingand of ane ftane about thair
nek fyve nychtis ; quhilk ftane fcho aflfermit fcho gat fi'a the Lady Crawfurd ;
and fwa for abufing of the peple vnder pretext of Witchecraft. — And ficlyke,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid CristiaN Saidler to be fylit and convict for abufing of the peple vnder pretext and cullour of Witchecraft ; and fpeciallie, that fcho and the faid Ciistkm Levivgstoune, refoirting oft in liir hous,
and confultit and devyfit in fik thingis, and nemelie defyrit the faid Criftian to
tak Weill A'poun hand to cure ane ...... Gray in Hadingtoune, quha was alledgeit to be witchit, and come to the faid Criftian houfe to feik remeid thairfoir :
Lyke as alfo, Robert Bail3ie come to hir houfe, craving of her remeid for his
wyffe, quha was be witchit, and fcho fend the faid Criftian Levingftoune to Hadingtoun to her, and bad her tak brwme and cammamyle and feith in quhyte
vyne, and gif it to the feik woman to drynk, for the feiknes of her hairt. — Item,
fForfamekill as Andro Pennycuke being difeafit, be the fpace of xx oulkis, in hir
hous, of the vnderfute,^ as fcho affermit, and culd nocht haill hir (him), fcho fend
for the faid Cristlan Levingstoune, and baid her tuik weill in hand ; and fcho
faid to the faid Andro, that fcho fend for ane wyife-woman, quhilk was the faid
Cristian Levingstoiat, quha had flvill and wald haill hir (him) : And eftir hir
cuniing, thay tuke a reid cok, flew it, buke a bannok with the blude of it, and
gaif the famyn to the faid Andro to eit : And thairefter, fcho gaif the faid Criftian ane of the faid Androis farkis, and baid liir dip it in the well behind hir
hous, and fcho did it, at hir command ; and fcho put the famin vpoune him wat ;
quhairthrow he maift haif fownit^ amang thair handis ; thairby abufing the pure
gentleman, under cullour of Sorcerie and Witchecraft. — Item, that vnder cullour of hir craft and hailling of difeafit perfounes, fcho affermit tliat fcho culd
haill Leprofie ; lyke as, fcho tuk in hand to haill the Young Laird of Bargany,

' A wcid, a disease peculiar to women in cliildbed and to nurses. It occurs among the singular
enumeration of diseases in Sir John lloull's Cursing, one of the Poems in the Bannatyne M.S. —
' The cruke, the cramp, the colica, — The worm, the wareit wedonypha, — Rimluirfin, ripplis and bellythra.' It is also known by the name of wyten-on-fa. ' In Sibbald's Glossary, tlie word ' undergore' occurs, as expressive of a ' flats of Leprous eniption.' ^ He had almost swooned or

fainted away.

S8 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597.

quhilk fcho affermit fclio did, with cure of law,' maid of quick-filuer, and rabbit
it on the patient, qiihilk fcho allegeit fcho leirnit at hir fader ; albeit fcho did the
lamin be vnlefTinn ineanis, fcho haifing na fik knawlege as to cure Leprofie,
quhilk tlie maift expert men in medecine are not abill to do. — Item, that vmq'"
Rol)ert Hunter, being difeafit with a flaw in his face, quhilk fcho affermit to be
Leprofie, fcho vfit a cure vpoune him mixt w' quick-filuer and gaif him in drynk :
God knawis how it wes compofit, bot the gentillman deit within xij houris thaireftir, as wes notourlie confeft be hir felff, and can nocht be denyit ; quhairby
Icho was giltie of his death, be hir craft, miniftring to him vnlefTum thingis,
quhairof he deit fuddenlie ; and fwa fcho abufit the laid Robert Hunter. — Item,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Bessie Aitkyn to be fylit, culpabilland
convict for abufmg of the peple, in geving lier furth to haill feik perfones, be
putting of thame throw ane girtlr of wodbind, tliryis thre tymes, and vfit thir
wordis, ' This in ])e name of J)e Father, ])e Sone and ])e Halie Ghaift :' Quhilk
cure fcho practizit vpouu Marioime ^^'allace in Marlingis-wynde and diuerfe
vtheris, for a dolour in thair lun3e f quhilk quhen fclio declarit to Jonet Stewart,
Icho affermit that the faid Jonet bad hir tak reid nettellis and Alex',^ and batli
hir with, and feith Alex' with frefche butter and rub vpoun hir ; and to put the
faid Marioune ^^'allace ix times throw the girth of wodbind, at thre feuerall
tj^mes, and xxiiij houris to be betuix ilk tyme ; quhilk fcho did. — Item, for vfing

of the lyke to , a wyffe of Cramond, for curing of hir difeife,

quhome fcho pad throw the girth of wodbind nyne times : and forder, fcho tuke
Bellie Ilenderfoune doune the bak-fyde of Xetliir Crawniond, and tuke vp nyne
fopis' of fait watter and put in a ftolp ;'' and being all in bed or fche come agane^

fcho waifche " the feik woman, callit 'W'hiltrie, frome the ci-oime of hir

held to the foill of hir fute, being haldin vp betuix twa fifleris ; and fyne fcho
did that in Gcillis" name : This was done to Wiiliame Kellis wyfte, and laid that
his wyffe had twa meidwyflies, and the laft had done his wyffe evill ; and counfaillat him to fend for hir, and afk his wyffes health thryis at hir for Godis faik ;
and baid him, at hir away-ganging, caft a fyrie coill, and twitche'^ hir thairwith ;'
and fayd forder, gif the faid Beffie had not cum, tlie faid ^^'i^iamis wyfle liad
deit : Lj'ke as alio, fcho maid a faw'" of reid nettellis and butter and wodbind,
and laid it to the patientis lun3ie, as Jonet Stewart had done to hir of before ;
and pat hir throw the girth : Lyke as, fcho caufit to bath hir lun3ie with fcheippia

' ' Salvfi or oititinent. ^ Hoop or circlet. ^ Loins ; it onglit to have been written ' lun^eis.'

*- An herb, vul<;arly called ' Aletlkuiler,' 'Jtinkin Alfchinder, or ' loveaire,' with black leaves. Lat.-
oltis alru/ii, ligitsticitm, levisticum. ^ Soirp.i, sop»<, or small quantities ; prohablv as much as

coulil be taken up in the palms of the liands joined, at nine times. Literally, as much liquid as can
Conveniently be contained in the mouth. ^ Stoup, a wooden vessel tor hoUling water.

' Washed. * St (jiles, the tutelar Saint of Edinburgh. ' Touch. '" Salve.

31JAC. VI. . CRIMINAL trials: 25

doung. — Item, fcho confeft that fclio leirnit of Janet Stewart to tak rawfF'
Spainzie feid, and fteip it amang quyte wyne, and gif it to drink, for the fawingevill." — Item, fcho coiifell alfwa, that James Johnftoiine, earning to craif hir

counfale anent his difeis of , fcho baid him get a gi'ene

gwife,^ with four or fyve kitlingis,* and put the kitlingis in the guife wambe,
and roift the famyn ; and with the jufe and drippingis to rub him ; hot jjut the
famyn never in practize vpoune him. — Iteim, forder ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faidis Crisdan Leivingsiouuc, Jonet Stewart, Cristiaii Saidler and
Bessie A'ltlien to be fylit, culpable and convict of coramoune abufaris of the
peple, be geving thame felffis out for Witcheis, and to vnderftand that thai had
craft of Sorcerie, abill to haif curit diuerfe grit difeiffis and feikneffes ; quhilk be
na naturall meanis of phifik, or vther lawful! and Godlie wayes, thay war abill
to performe.

, Sentence. For the quhilkis crymes, the faid Juftice Depute Ordaint the
faidis perfones.^ and ilk ane of thame, to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ediuburghe,
and thair to be wirreit'' at ane ftaik, quhill thay war deid ; and thair bodeis to
be brunt in affes, and all thair movable guidis to be efcheit : Quhilk was pronunceit be the mouth of [Williame] Liddell, Dempftar of the faid Court.

Attrition — Creasou — lirsiesins i\)t itincr, %cx. \\\ ColOoot^ of

Jan. 20, 1597-8.— Edward Johnnestoun, merchand burges of Edinburgh.
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit be ]Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcairne,
aduocat to our fouerane lord, of the Dittay vnderwrittin : That is to fay,

Dittay against the Pannell.

Edwakd Johnnestoune, merchand burges of Edinlmrgli, ge ar indytit,
fforfamekill as, diners wickit and malicious perfonis, invying the quj^et eftait of
the Kirk and commoun wealth of this countrey, haifing preiHit be leis, calnmeis,
fals clamouris and mifreportis of his INIaiefteis vertewous procedingis, to rais
diflentioun betuix his hienes and the minifteris, and diuers vther his fubiectis ;
perfewerit fwa malicionflie in thair godles practeifis, in the monethis of Septem-

' Probalily the same as raff, denoting plenty or abiuulance of Spanish seed. ' Epilepsy, fulling sickness. ^ A green goose. "' Kittens. ^ Bessie Aiken, one of the pannels, pleaded

lier venter (pregnancy) ; which, as had formerly heen decided in the case of Barbara Naipar, was sustained. Atter childbirth, and sustaining; ' lang piineirchment, be famine and iinprifonment,' in the
rolbooth of Edinburgh, she was at length banished for life, in compliance with a Warrant from the
King. See Aug. 1.5, 1598 : But by what process of reasoning iiis Slajesty came to so enlightened a
conclusion, it is difficult to conjecture ! Bessie's extreme poverty puts bribery out of the question.
^ Strangled, worried.

30 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597-8.

ber, October, Noiiember and in the beginning of December, in the yeir of God
I^.VMxxxxvj, to difpofe the haertis of the nauchtieft and vvarft inclynit peopill
to Tnifcontentment and rebellioun, till at laft, vpoiin the xvij day of the faid
moneth of December, takand thair avantage, be occafioun of his Maiefteis chargeing of fum inhabitantis of Edinburgh aff the toune, with quhais extraordinar
and fufi)ect behaviour his Maieftie wes than offendit, to abufe the Miniftrie,
nocht onlie with ane vehement fray' of thair awin priuatt perrell, hot alfo of
the extreme danger of the Kirk and Religioune, incuffit thairby fic terrour to
thame, that thay def)'rit the Nobillmen, barrounis, gentilmen and burgeffis, being att the preiching the faid day, to repair to the New Kirk ; qidiair, eftir conference and deliberatioun vpoun the remeidis of the confauit danger, haifing concludit to promeis ayfald^ concurrence to vtheris, in the defence of Religioune,
and renewing of the Covenant maid to that effect, be thair folemp aithis, and
extenfiouTi of thair rycht handis : Ane number of the faidis feditious leyaris,
autliouris of the reportis and diffentioun foirfaid, being prefent, and perfaving
that to be ane verrie convenient tyme, and fic occafioune, to perfoi'me thair preceding proiectis ; incontinent, of thair vphaulding of thair handis at the NewKirk, began, in maift confufit and tumultuous maner, to cry, ' To amies !' and
to exhort thair afTociattis to ftik^ certane of liis Maiefteis nobilitie, counfalouris
and domeftik feruandis : Quhair ye being prefent, and airt and pairt of the faid
treffonabill and rebellious tumult, ifcheit^ with thame, furth of the faid New
Kirk to the calfay,^ in ane grit number ; and difperfing your felffis in diuerfe
quarteris of the calfay, cryit, ' To armes !' to ' Stryke J)e fwafcli !'° and ' Ryng

• Fear. O. Fr. Effroi/, eff'ray,fniyeur. ' q.tl. One- fold, single, unfeigned, hearty concurrence

with eacli other. ' Stab, assassinate. ■* Issued, ruslied fortli. * Caufewav, street. ^ The

alarm-dnim. Dr Janiieson, in his valuable Dictionary and Supplement, defines this instrument (but
apparently with some hesitation) to be a trumpet. In all the instances the Editor can recollect of
having met with the 'fwafche or 'ficefche,' in the ancient Records and in other MSS., reference is
uniformly made to its being sirttc/i, not sounded or blown. As the instrument is one now entirely
forgotten or unknown, some enquiry has been made by the Editor into the subject ; and, without offering any farther remarks, the following curious notices are given, being the result of considerable researches. In the Lord Treasurer of Scotland's accounts, anno I5-I2, the following entries occur.

' In the firfl, delivcrit to be x coittis and x pair of hois to the four pl.iyeris on llie veolis, four trumpettis of wave, and twa kihurnerris (drummers), ....,, Jxij li. xvj f.

(1544.) ' Item, to tua men that playit vpoun the fwe/c/ie, f/iiJiilkis had thair labroimis brokin thair,
[at the ' Aflege of Glafgw'J be the Irifche men,' ....... xliiij f.

(1548.) ' Item, viij Aprilis, ane to play throw the toun witli the fwifche, to raife certane men of
weir, to pas to Yaifter,' . ........... iij f.

From the Treasurer's Accounts, as recorded in the Burgh Court Book of Canongate ;

(Nov. 15, 1576.) ' Item, gevin to Carfane the Sicajchear, that day we moufterit, . xxi s.

' Item, the I'ainin day, gevin to the Pyper, at the Baillies command, . . . viij s.

' Item, the famin day, gevin to ane Bonet-maker fallow, to play on my Lordhjiva/l'he, vj s. viij d.

' Item, upoun the tent of October, gevin for anejicrifchc to our moufteris, . . . iiij li.

' Item, for TWA Stickis TO THE SVasche,' vjd.

Besides these, numerous other entries occur in the Lord Treafurer's Books, at different dates, of

31 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 31

Jie commoun bell !' affirming the Religioune to be in danger, and his Maieftie to
be accumpaneit with ane number of nobilitie and counfalouris, Papiftis, and inimeis to the Kirk : And be that policie, haifing convocatt and fteii-it vp your
aflbciattis, to the number of ffour or ffyve hundreth men, with jakis, knapflcais,
corflattis, hagbuttis, piflolettis, pikis, halbertis, fwerdis, gantillettis and vtheris
wappinnis invafnie, ye and your faidis afTociattis, treflbnablie and feditiouflie inclofit his Maieftie within the Tolbuith of the faid burcht, quhair his hienes wes
for the tyme with his Counfall, in his goun,' in maift peceabill maner, for adminiftratioun of juftice, and difcharge of that poynt of his princlie dewtie to his
peopill : And the faidis feditious raflcallis and ye inclofit the Kirk-ftyle, and
haill paflageis of the faid Tolbuith, and acces to the famin, gairdit thame with
forceis of armit men, debarrit be force and violence ftc of his Maiefteis faithfull
fubiectis and familiar fei'uitouris, as preiffit to haif enterit within the faid Tolbuith, to haif bene ather releifaris of his iierrell, or pairt-takaris thairof ; boiftit
and dang^ gentilmen, and vthiris his Maiefteis feruandis, aff the calfay ; flayit
fie as wes with his Maieftie to ifch furth of the Tolbuith, except fie particuleris
as focht and obtenit your licence ; minaffit fie as wes within the Tolbuith for
his Maiefteis defens, bidding caft furth certane of his counfalouris and feruandes
att the windois, and boiftit that ye fould fift thame ; and vterit infineit fie treffonabill and feditious fi)eichis, and continewing thairin be the fjiace of twa liouris;
treafonablie befegeit his Maiftie, in fwa barbarous, contemptuous and zebellious
maner, as wes newir vfit of before, ather^ fene in this countrey, or hard of in ony
vther ; till att laft, the weill affectit magiftratis, and certane dewtiefuU inhabitantis of the faid burcht, with diueris gentilmen, being thairin for the tyme, haifing affemblit thame felffis in fie number and preparatioun, as ye could nocht
gudlie haif refiftit perfewering in your will ; hot, laiking power to jjei-forme
your maift trefonabill interpryis foirfaid, wer forceit to reter'' your felffis, and
fuffer his ]\Iaieftie to be relewit, in difpyte of your malice and treafonabill rebellioune. Quhilkis crymes, particulerlie aboue fpecifeit, wer committit att the
tyme, and in maner foirfaid, of your counfaling, dewyfing, interpryfing, caufing,
fteirring vp, command, affiftance and ratihabitioun ; and ye wer airt and pairt
thairof. Quhilk ye can nocht deny.

payments to Jivcfcheouris and tahrounaris. The present quotations sliall be closed by another singular
extract.

(Oct. 14, 159G.) ' Joline Sandia becum actit In Jtryk the fiit/Je tlirow this burgli, at four hown's in
tiie mornyng, and at audit liouris at evin ; and for liis (iilifijence thairintill, Robert Bennat is becum
actit cautioner to the Beilleis and Counfall of this l)urgli, under the penaltie of ten pundis.

(^Eodem die.) ' Aiidro Angle becain actit to ring the bell daylie, at four houris in the niornyng, and
at audit houris at evin, &c — Actis, Ordinancis and Stututis of the Buif/h of Cidros.'

' Sitting in council in his robes of state, and therefore unarmed. * Threatened, brow-beat,

and drove. ' Either, or. * Retire, withdraw. Fr. rctirer.

32 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597-8Quhilk Dittay, being red in the faid Edwardis prefens ; and being inquyrit,
gif he wald abyde ane AfTyis thairfore, or cum in his Maiefteis will for the laniin ?
Anfuerit, that lie wald noclit cum in will of the Dittay, as it is confauit ; and
he produceit ane Supplicatioun efter fpecifeit.

Edavaed Johnnestounis Supplicatioun to the Lords of Secreit Cotni/uU,

and thair TieVmerance.

SouERANE lord, vnto sour Maieftie and Lordis of 50ur liienes Secreit Counfall, huimlie meinis and
f'ldiawis 50ur graceis feruitour, Edward Joliniiertoune : That qidiair, vpoune occafioun of fum fpeicliis
vnliappelie vterit be me in 3 our Maieftpis [jrefens, vpoun ])e xiij ilay of fis iiiftant, tending to my pur^
gation of Jie tumult and vproir, quiiilk fell furth in ))e toun of Edinburgh, vpoun fe xvij day of December, 1596 seiris, it pleafit ;our hienes to coniniitt me to waird within fe Tolbuith of Edinbiugli, thair
to reraane quhill 1 wes tryit be ane Affyis of ])e faniin. Quhilkis fpeichis wer niaill vnauifitlie fpokin,
and with my haert I repent fe vtering fairof ; maift huimblie craving 30ur Maiefteis pardoun fairfore,
and for tljat fuddane and vnhappie commotioun, quhilk fell furth tlie faid xvij day of December 1596,
quhairatt I wes prefent, althocht vpoun na ewill intentioune nor purpois aganis 50ur Maieftie, or ony
of jour counfall : git, feing jour hienes wes fa heichlie oflendit ])airat, noclit only condemn I fe famin
as rafch and vnaduifitlie done, hot alfo fra my haert I repent I wes prefent that day. Maift huimblie
befeiking jour Maieftie, according to jour wountit grit (mercy) and clemeneie, to pardoun me for fe
famin, protefting folcmpnelie, be Godis grace, I falbo mair war' and circumfpect in all tyme cuming,
in ])e faythfull and loyall difcharge of my dewtie to jour Maieftie ; ffor quhais lang leif and profper^
ous eftait I fall continewallie pray : And for my efcheit, quhilk jour Maieftie difponit, I am content
to, being relewit out of waird, quhilk I huimblie craif, to fatisfie fe donatours Jiairof att jour Maiefteis
fyclit, according as vthiris neychbouris'' hes done: And fwa, jour Maiefteis gracious anfuer maift
liuimblie I befeik,

(Sic dellberatur) Apud Edinburgh, xix Janunrij 1597. -

The Lords of Secreit Counfall Remittis fe anfuer of fe complent within writtin to the Kingis
Maieftie.

(Sic fubfcribitur) FyviE.

According to the quhilkis, he becummis in his Maiefteis will : And as to the
Dittay produceit, denyis the haill pointis thairof, except fa far as is contenit in
the Supplicatioun aboue writtin.

And thaireftir, the faid Edward Johnneftoun, eftir the reding of the Dittay
aboue writtin, produceit be the faid Aduocat, declarit, that fafar as his Maieftie
thinkis of his lionour and conicience that he is giltie of ony poynt of the faid
Dittay, he beand in his Maiefteis will thairfore ; for Hitisfactioun of the quhilk
will, Archibald Johnneftoun merchand burges of Edinburghe, become pledge and
fouirtie ; and the faid Edward Johnneftoun obleift him to releif the faid Archibald of the caution aboue writtin, and of all danger that may follow thajrvpoune.

' Wary, cautious. ' Fellow-citizens, townsjnen.

31 Jac. VI. CEIMINAL TRIALS; 39

(Jan. 21.) — The quhilk day Eduarde Johnneftoun burges of Edinburgh, being enterit on pannell, to heir and fie our fouerane lordis Will declarit, anent the
crymes quhairfoir he become in his hienes will, in ane Court of Jufticiarie haldin
be tlie faid Juftice-depute, in the Tolbuith of Edinburghe, the twenty day of Jaiiuarie inftant : For I'atisfactioune of the quhilk will, Archibald Johnneftoun
merchand burges of Edinburghe become actit and oblift cautioner and fouirtie
in the buikis of Adiornale ; as ane act maid in the faid Court, the laid tuenty
day of Januare, at mair lenth proportis,

Comperit Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcairne aduocat to our fouerane
Lord, and producet in jugement to the faid Juftice-Depute, twa Warrandis fubfcryuit be his Maiefteis hand : Of the quliilk tua warrandis the tennour followis.

The tennour of the jiiji Warratul.
FoRSAMEKLE 38 Eduarde Johnneftoun, merchand burges of Edinburghe, being panneltit and accufit for airt and pairt of tlie treaffonnabill cryme of Treaffoun and Liefmaieftie, committed be iiim and
his complices vpoun the fevintein day of December Ixxx fextein (1396) yeiris, aganis our royale perfoun, and certane of our nobilitie and counfalouris, being within our Tolbuith of Edinburghe for adminiftratioun of Juftice to our liegis, in quiet and peciabill maner; is cum in our will for the faiJ
cryme : Tliairfoir We, for declaratioun of ane parte of oure will anent the faid Eduarde, nochtwithftanding of his merite of death and confifcatioun of all his movabill guidis and geir and iforfaltour of
his landis for the faid cryme, haue neuirtheles, of our grace, clemency and mercy, pardonit and remittit to him his lyif. We decerne and ordaine Jie faid Eduarde, for him felf and takand the burding on
him for his wyif and bairnis, and all vtheris having rycht of thame to the obligatioun vnder writtin, to
fuperceid all executioun compitent to him and liis bairnis or ony of faira vpoun ane Obligatioun maid
and fubfcryuit be Thomas Foulis goldfmyth, burges of Edinburghe, and his cautioneris, to the laid
Eduarde and his foirfaidis, quhairby the laid Thomas and his laidis cautioneris, for |)e foume of Aucht
thoufand markis reflauit be ]>e fai<l Thomas fra Jie faid Eduarde at ))e making pairof, become bund and
oblift to pay the laid foume to fe faid Eduarde or his foirfaidis, or vjiirwyis to content and pay to
thamc ane grite quantatie of victuell theirfoir, or to grant quhatfumeuir lecuritie of infeftment of landis
for J)e famin, in raaner Ipecifeit in ]>e faid Obligatioun, of quhatfumeuir dait or daittis fe famin be of;
and that ay and quhill the faid Thomas and his foirfaidis relFaue payment of the faid foum fra ws and
our Comptroller, according to ane Act and ordinance maid anent the fatisfactioune and pament of ]>e
faidis Thomas debtis reftand be ws to him ; fua that the faid Eduarde or his foirfaidis fal haue na actioun nor executioun vpoun the faid Obligatioun, ather principall foume, prolFeit fairof, or victuell
Jiairin contenit aganis the faid Thomas and liis cautioneris, quhill thay relTaue pament and fatisfactioun
of fe faid foum of Aucht thoufand markis fra our faid comptroller; and ordanis the faid Obligatioun,
haill ftrenth, force and effect Jiairof to ceis and be fufpendit in the mentyme, quhill the tyme aboue
fpecifeit ; at the quhilk tyme, Jie faid Thomas and his cautioneris falbe onlie oblift to pay the faid principal! foume of Aucht thoufand markis, togidder with the annuelrent of ten markis for ilk liundreth '
pairof, for all 3eiris and termes that the faid Eduarde fall happin to want the faid principall foume, and
fall nocht be aftrictit to pament of ony griter proffeit for the faid foume, nochtwithftanding of quhatfumeuir claus or conditioun in fe faid Obligatioim : And for the mair lecuritie, we ordane fis oure

] Interest at the rate of 10 per cent
VOL. II. E

31 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597-8.

(leclaratioun of ane parte of oure will to be inft-it and regiftrat in ]ie buikis of Adiornall, with lettres
to pas Jiairupouu, in form as efftiris. Subfcrj-uit with oure baiul, At Ilaliruidhous, the xxi day of Januare, 1597.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

FoUowis the tennour of the vther Warrand.
Eex,

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 3 our depuittis, We greit 50W weill : Forfamekill as in ane Court
of Jufticiarie haldin be ^ow in our Tolbuitb of Edinburglie, the tuenty day of Januar inftant, Eduarde
Johmieftoune, merchand biirges of Edinburglie, is becum in our will, for his airt and pairte of the Infurreetioun movit aganis ws and oure counfalouris within oure burghe of Edinburglie, vpoun the xvij
day of December, 1596 5eiris ; and that Archibald Johnnelloun, merchand burges of Edinburglie, is
become oblilt and actit in 5 our buikis, for fulfilling our will to be pronuncit fairanent : Quhairfoir, We
movit with clemeccie, mixing mercy with iuflice, albeit the faid Eduarde meritit rigorous pvnifchement, be thir prefentis declairis our Will in ]iat behalf, as followis, to wit : We Decenie and ordane
the laid Eduarde Johnneftoune and his cautioner to content and pay to our faniilier feniitour. Sir
George Home of Spott, donatour to Jie faid Eduarde his efcheit, the foum of Tlirie thoufand and fyve
hundreth niarkis, botuix and the tent day of Februare next ; and als, to gif ane fufficient difcharge to
our faid donatour for his intromifiioun with quhatfiuneuir foumes of money perteining to pe faid Eduarde, vpliftit be ]ie faid Sir George and vjuiis in his name in ony tyme bygane : Quhilk We declair
falbe in full contentatioun for fe faid Eduart his efcheit, and of all fardcr pane and cryme we may lay
aganis the faid Eduarde, for ])e caus foirfaid : Ordaining alfua lettres of Poinding and Horning vpoun
ane fimpill charge of fex dayes to jias and be direct at the faid Sir Geoigis inlfance aganis Jie faid Eduart and his cautioner, for fulfilling heirof and pament to him of Jie faid founie ; for fua is oure will
be ])ir prefentis. Subfcryuit with oure hand, At Edinburghe, the tuenty ane day of Januare, 1597.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

According to the qiihilkis Warrandis, the faidis Jullice-Depute pronuncit and
declairit ovir Ibuerane lordis Will aganis the faid Eduard Johnneftoun ; and decernit and oi'danit him to fulfill the haill pointis, articles, and clauffis contenit
thairiu ; and that lettres be direct heirvpoun aganis the faid Eduard and his
cautioner for fulfilling of the premiffis, confonne to the tennour of the faidis
Warrandis.

dTortif 1*1) — (Counttiffid'no; a Sisrijavst.

Feb. 8. — John Halyday, burges of Edinburghe, Thomas Marioribankis, notar thair, James Lowrie, fone to vmq''' James Lowrie
burges of Edinburghe, Johnne "\^'yn5ettis, fumtyme kater to
his Maieftie, Alexander Lowrie, baxter in Edinburghe.
Dilatit of the counterfiting, falcifeing and deAyyfing of ane fals and counterfit Difcharg, alledgeit maid be Capitau Williame Nifbet to James Lowrie, of the
fowme of thre hundreth markis, ccntenit in ane Obligatioun maid be the faid.
James to the laid Capitau ^^'iliiame ; and of ane Iiihibitioun following thairvpoun.
Verdict and execution of SENTE^X'E. « Fylit and hangit.'

31 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. JS

dTalscli) nctiiirj; as a iJotai-y.

Feb. 8. — JoHNNE MoscROP, wryter in Edinburghe.

Dilatit of gewing of him felfF for ane notar, he nocht being (ane) ; and fubfcryning as notar diners obligationnis.*

The Dittays in this and the preceding cafe are recorded, and contain the particulars of the forgeries ; but they are not worthy of being inferted.

Verdict. The AfTyis, ' be the mouth of Johnne Stoddart of Sheilgrene chancillar, fand, pronunceit and declarit the faid perfounes vpoun pannell to be fylit,
culpable and convict of the particuler crymes aboue writtin, quhairof everie ane
of thame was accufit.

Sentence. The faid Juftice-depute ordanit thame, be the mouth of Williame Liddell denipftar of the faid Court, to be tane to ane gibbet befyde the
mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thairon to be hangit quhill thai be deid ; and all
thair movable guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.

^ml&esettinfl t^e i^itpijUjaB— HfeamesucReit — ^l)ootinfi ct ?^a(rl)uts

Feb. 15. — Johne Mure of Auchindrane and others.
The famin day Matthow DundufT of that Ilk alias Stewart, oft tymes callit as
cautioner and fouirtie for Johnne Mure of Auchindrane, John Mure fone to
Quintene Mure in Carcloy, Dauid Sinclar and Johnne Schaw, feruitour to the
faid Johnne Mure, and Patrik Dauidfoune, feruitour to the faid Mathow Dunduff alias Stewart. And ficlyke, the faid Johnne Mm-e of Auchindrane, ofttymes callit as cautionir and fouirtie for Alexander Kennedie, fone to Hew
Kennedie of Craigneiil, Dauid Mure feruitovir to the Laird of Bargany, Johnne
DundufT alias Stewart, fone naturall to the faid Matthow, to half enterit and
prefentit thame before our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis this day and
place ; ffor cuming vpoun the thryd day of Januar laftbypafl, vnder fylence and
cloud of nycht, with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis lieges, bodin with hagbutis and piftolettis to the toun of Mayboll ; and eftir thay had flellit" thair
horffis att the Guid-wyfFe of Knokdais 3ettis in Mayboll, thay convoyit thame
felffis fecreitlie to Thomas Nafmythis 3aird in Mayboll, nixt adiacent to Sir
Thomas Kennedeis duelling hous in Mayboll, as place meiteft for accompleifching of thair crewall, vngodlie and barbarous murthour and flauchter of the faid
Sir Thomas Kennedie ; quhair thay fluid, darnit betuix tua edjis,^ awaitting for

' On the margin, ' Convict and hangit.' ' Put up, placed or stabled, stalled, ^ Concealed

or hidden between two hedges.

36 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597-8.

Iiis flauchter, and to haif miirdreift him be way of Brrgancie, Hamefuckin and
'V'mbefetting of his hie g-ait. and way of foirthocht fellony, precogitat malice,
oonlim-it and dewyfit mnrthonr : And thay, i)erlaving the laid Sir Thomas Kennedie, with Dame Elizabeth M'Gill his fpous, Thomas Kennedie thair eldeft
lone, Mergaret and Helene Kennedeis thair dochteris, cimiing fiirth of the faid
Thomas Nafmj'this duelling hous, and cumand throw his yaird betuix the twa
ed3is, kepit thame felffis darnit,' quhill the laid Sir Thomas wes within fax ellis
to thame quhair thay lay ; quha luddanelie vmbefet the laid Sir Thomas, his
Ipous and bairnis, or' he could be war^ of thame, he dredand na harme nor inuirie of onj^ iwrlbune, and fpeciallie of the perfonis aboue writtin, thay llandand
with him in apperand favour and freindfliip, att the leill buf* ony profeffioune
of feid or vpgewing of kyndnes ; and thane I'chott and delafcht' audit Ichott of
hagbuttis" and piftollettis att the faid Sir Thomas ; and he, being nocht habill
to fiiftene thair force and malice at that tjone, eftir he had reterit him felff with
his wyffe and bairnis, thay perfewit thame with diuerfe vthiris fchottis, and
crewallie infiftit and invadit thame for thair llaucliteris ; as the markis of the
faidis fchottis vpoun the wallis, duris and yettis' of the laid Thomas Nafmythjs
duelling hous and yairdis may deirlie teftifie : As lykewyis, eftir thay had delafcht thair haill hagbutis and piftolettis att him, thay maid crewallie and vnmercifullie invadit and perfewit the laid Sir Thomas Kennedy to the Kirk Yaird
of Mayboill, quliair thay wald nocht haif fail3eit to haif llayne him, gif be the
provifioun of God, ajid darknes of the nycht, he had nocht bene feperat fra thame,
and efchapit thair bludie handis. As at mair lenth is contenit in our fouerane
lordis lettres, rafit at the inftance of the faid Sir Thomas Kennedie of Culzean,
and ]\Ir Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcairn, Aduocat to our fouerane lord for
his hienes interes, thairAjwun ; lauchfull tyme of day bidden and nocht enterand
thame, the faidis cautioueris, respecfitie, wes vnlawit for nocht entrie of the
faidis perfonis in the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament, viz. The faid
Matho Dundufl" alias Stewart, wes ■\^lla^vit for nocht entrie of the faid Johnne
Mure of Auchindrane, in the pane of ffyve liundreth markis ; and for nocht
entrie of the faid Johnne Mure, fone to Quintene Mure in Carcloy, Dauid Sindar
and Johnne Schaw and Patrik Dauidfoun, for ilk aue of thame, in the pane of ane
hundreth markis : And the faid Johnne INIiu'e of Auchindrane wes vnlawit for
non entrie of the laid Alexander Kennedie, lone to Hew Kennedie, in the pane
of twa hundreth markis, and for nocht entrie of Dauid ]\Iure and Johnne Dunduff, alias Stewart, for ather of thame, in the i)ane of ane hiuidreth markis.

.. ' Hidden, concealed. ^Before. ^ Aware. ■• Witliout. ^ Disdiarg-ed, old Fr., £/M/ac/(er.
* A sort of large musket, or harquebus. ' Yets, gates.

31 Jac. VI; criminal trials. 37

Lyke as, the faidis imncipall perfounis nocht comperand, wes adiudgeit to be
deminceit our fouerane lordis rebellis and putt to his hienes home ; and all thair
movabill guidis ordanit to be elcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vie, as
-fugitives fra his hienes lawis, for the faidis crymes.

anU iffistoUts, ^c— iHuiUci*.

Modern die. — Mathow Stewart of Dundufl" {alias Dunbuff of that

Ilk.)

Dilatit of cuming be way of Brigancie, vnder fcilence and cloude of nycht, to

Thomas Nafmythis ^aird in Mayboill, and vmbefetting the hie gaitt to Sir Tho-

.mas Kennedie of Cul3eane, and fcluiting of piftulettis and hagbuttis at him, be

way of Hamefuckin ; committit the thrid day of Januar laftbypaft.

Persewaris, Sir Thomas Kennedye of Culjeane, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune atluocat.
Preloquitouris for tiie pannell, The Laird of Craigiehall, (viz. Ilary Stewart.)

The faid Hary Stewart takis inftrumentis of the entrie of Matho Stewart of
Dunduff ; and proteftit, that he as cautioner be relewit.

The laid Hary Stewart becom pledge and fouirtie for Mathow Stewart, that
he fall compeir before our fouerane lordis Juftice, &c. the faxtene day of Februar
inftaut, &c.

I Feb. 16. — The quhilk day, Matho Stewart alias Dunduft' of that Ilk,

(vnder proteftation that he grantis nocht the lybell to be relewant anent the
hamefuckin and foirthocht fellony, quliairof nane of thaine is qualifeit, hot ar
only mentionat be way of narration, to induce the cryme quhairvpoun the Dittay
is refoluit, viz. the convocatioun, and fchuting of piftolettis ; and that he
grants nocht the fchuting, wering or having of hagbutis or piftolettis, A'poun
him felff tliat nycht) ; he is content to fubmitt liimfelff to his INIaiefteis will, anent
the cryme of Convocatioune, and being prefent with the perfounes contenit in
the fummondis, fum of thaine being his feruandis, haifing and fchuting of piftolettis att Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cul3ean that nycht : And cravis my lord
Juftice to report to his Maieftie and his Counfall, and reflaue anfuer thair-
.vpoun.

The aduocat produceit the Kingis Warrand ; quliairof the tennour followis. ■

Rex,

Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcairn our aduocat, We greit 30W weill. It is our will,
and we command gow, that inconlinent efter ]>e fycht heirof :;e infift in perfuit of Matho Dunduff of
Jiat Ilk, alias Stewart, dilatit of certane crymes contenit in our vthiris lettres, rafit att Jie iiillance of
Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cuil3eane, and att ^our inflance for our interes ; quhilk wes continewit to fis
day : And that ay and quhill the faid Matho a]i' becom in our will, or be convict of ])o faidis crymis be

38 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597-8.

ane AlTyis : And fir prelentis fall be to 50W ane fufficient WarranJ. Subfcryuit wnth our hand, Att
Haiyruidbous, the xvj day of Februar, 1597.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

In refpect qiihairof, and of the command gevin be his hienes, in prefens of my
Lord Juftice, craves proces, diflaffeuting fra all continewatiouu ; and offeris inlafar the relevancie of the lybell in all tlie pointis thairof, as the famin is confauit, gif ony particular allegance wer maid aganis the famin.

The Juftice, with auife of the Nobill-men prefent, continewis the mater in the
fame eftait quhill the morne. ' Plegio, Domino Craighall, vndir the pane of
Thre thoAvfand poundis.'

Feb. 17. — The quhilk day, Matho Stewart of Dunduff being enterit on
pannell, perfewit be vertew of our fouerane lordis lettres, purcheft att the inft^nce of Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cuilseane and Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of
Drumcarne aduocat to our fouerane lord, thay comperand perfonallie and infiftand in his perfuit of the crymis eftir fpecifeit ; that is to fay ;

DiTTAY against the Laird of Dunduff.

FoRSA^rEKILL as be and his complices contenit in the faidis Lettres, vpoune ane lurking malice
and deidlie baitrent borne aganis the faid Sir Thomas Kennedie, cauleles, and but ony accufatioune
gewin or oflferit vpoun his pairt, eftir mony confultatiounis and wickit dewyfis had be thame for his
llaucbter, thay laitlie, vpoun the tbryd day of Januar laflbypaft, directit Alexander Kennedie, fone to
Hew Kennedie of Craigneill, to await vpoun him to lerne bis dyett ; lykeas, the faid Alexander wes
familiar with the faid Sir Thomas att bis Iious, and that famin day vpoun the feildis, and att Corfragwell, be taking of Iiis guid nycht, and taking aff his hatt, according to his wountit farailiaritie with him
ofbefore ; and fwa, thay baifing vnderf^and be the faid Alexander Kennedie, that the faid Sir Thomas
■wes to foup that nycht in Thomas Nafmytbis duelling hous in Mayboill, lyand within the Baillerie of
Carrik, and Sherefdome of Air, quhair he did remane and repair; thay, with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis Liegis, to the number of ten perfounis or tbairby, bodin in feir of weir,' all inarmit with
hagbutis, piftolettis and vjiiris wappinnis hmajtiie, come thane vnder fylence and cloud of nycht to the
faid Toun of Mayboill ; and efter thay had ftellit thair borflls att the Guidwj-fFe of Knokdais ^ettis
in Mayboill, thay convoyit thame felffis fecreitlie within the faid compleneris hous, as place meiteft
for accompleifchment of thair maift crewall, vngodlie and barbarous intcrpryife ; quhair thay fluid darnit= betuix tua e(l5is awaitting for his flauchter, and to half raurdreill him be way of Hamefuckin,
Brigancie and Umbefetting of his hie gait, and be way of foirthocht fellony, precogitat malice, confpyrit and dewyfit murtliour, &c.^ He being airt and pairt thairof; deraereiting thairby maift hie and
wortiiie pwneifchment ; to the grit contempt of our fouerane lordis authoritie and lawes of this realme,
and to the maift^ barbarous example of vthiris to committ tiie lyke.

And being inquyrit, quhidder he wald abyde the Tryell off ane Aflyfe, or
cum in his Maiefteis will for the faidis crymcs ; the faid Matho declarit that he
had nather hagbut nor piftolett the nycht aboue writtiu, contenit in the lybell,

• Arrayed in a warlike or hostile maner. ' In concealment. ^ The remainder of the Dittay

is the same as is contained in Jobnne Mure of Auchindrain's case, (Feb. 15,) q. v.

31JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 39

iiather yit fcliot ony ; nochtwithflanding thairof, he becurais in his Maiefleis
will for the faidis crymis contenit in the lettres : Quhairvpoun the faid Mr Tlionias Hamniiltoun of Drumcarne aduocat afkit inftrumentis. And ficlyke, the
faid Matho Stewart of DundufT beciunis in the Erll of CaffiUis, and Sir Thomas
Kennedie of Cul3eanis will for the crynies aboue writtin, contenit in onr fouerane Lordis lettres, rafit att the inftance of the faid Sir Thomas Kennedie and
Mr Thomas Hamniiltoun ; his lyfFe and landis being exceptit : And actit and
obleift himfelff to A'nderly thair judgement, quhat ewir thay fould decerne
thairanent ; quhairvpoun the faid Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cul3ean aflcit inftrumentis.

' Wardit in the Caftell of Edinburghe.'

Feb. 28. — The quhilk day, Matho Stewart of DundufF being prefentit on
pannell, to heir and fe our fouerane lordis will declarit, anent the crymes quliairfore he become in will, in ane Court of Jufticiarie, haldin in the Tolbuitli of
Edinburghe, the xvij day of Februar inftant ; The faid Juftice depute produceit
his Maiefteis Lettre, directit to him, for the declaratioun of his hienes will,
quhilk he defyrit to be red in judgement to the faid Matho Stewart of DundufF,
and the famyn being red, to l)e infert and regiftrat in proces ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

Declaeation of the King's Will.

James, be })e grace of God, King of Scottis, to our Juftice general! and 30ur depwteis, greiting. Forfamekill as, in ane Juft,ico Court, haldin in fe Tolbuith of our burclit of Edinburghe vpoun
Jie fewintene day of Februar, J". V". fourfcoir and fewintene 3eiris, be our lowit Mr Willianie Haert
of Lewielandis Jufliee depute, to our rycht traift coufing and counfalour, Ar'\ Erll of Ergyll Lord
Campbell and Lorn our Juftice gnnerall, Matho Stewart of DundufF being acculit be Sir Thomas
Kennedy of Cul^eane, kny', and Mr Thomas Hamniiltoun of Drumcarne, ouraduocatt ; that the faid
Matho and bis complices, contenit in our lettres direct ])airvpoun, vpoun ane lurking malice, &c. [Follows the Dittay.] The faid Matho Stewart become in our will for ]ie crymes contenit in our faid
Tjiiris lettres ; and als become in ]'e will of our rycht traift coufing and counfalour, Johnne Erll of CaffiUis, Lord Kennedy, &c., and of pe faid Sir Thomas Kennedy of Cuilzeane, kny', for pe crymes foirfaidis ; liis lyfe and landis being exceptit ; and actit and obleifl him felff to vnderly our judgement, our
faid rycht traift coufingis and the fiiid Sir Thomas' judgement, quhat ewir we or tiiay fould decerns
Jiairanent ; as ane Act of our buikis of Adiornall maid Jiairvpoun att mair lenth proportis. We, be ))ir
our Lettres, publeifch and declairis our will toward the faid Matho Stewart of Dunduff in manner following: That is to fay : — fforfamekill as V/e half fene and confidderit the declaratioun of Jie will of our
faid rycht traift couiing Johnne Erll of Caflillis, and of ])e faid Sir Thomas Kennedy, aganis quhome
the faid wickit interpris wes dewyfit, berand in effect, that thair will is that the faid Matho Stewart of
Dunduff falbe baneift this our realme of Scotland, and als the realmes of Ireland and Ingland, and all
lies, landis and dominiones perteining to ony of ])e faidis realmes, and that induring Jie wiljis of our
faid rycht traift cufing and counfalour and of j)e faid Sir Thomas Kennedie, and ay and quhill thay
bayth coniunctlie and in ane voce declair the contrairie, will be writt ; and that he fall depairt to quhat
realme or countrey he pleafis (except as befoir exceptit) betuix fe dait hereof anil fe fyftene day of
Maij nixtocum, and fall remane furth of fe iaidis realmis of Scotland, Ireland and Ingland, and all lies,

40 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1597-8.

laiulis and doniinionis appertening to ony of fie faidis realmis ; and fall noclit returne withine our realrae
without Licence of our laid rydit traill couliiig Jolinne Erll of Caffillis and tlie laid Sir Thomas Keniiedie, coniunctlie, had and obtenit J>airto in writt : And als, viito pe tyme of his depairting furih of our
realme to fie places quhair he is baneift, he fall na wyis repair within fe toun of Mayboill, nor ane
myle about, nor na v|)' pairt quhair our laid rycht traill coufing and the laid Sir Thomas fal happin to
be, rndir fe pane of Fyve Thowfand nierkis raoney of our realme, to be payit to fe faid Sir Thomas,
his airis and alfiguais, in cais of contraventioun of ony point of )>e premiffis : And J)e faid payne to be
applyit to fe vfe, vtilitie and proffeit of fe faid Sir Thomas, his airis, executouris and alTlgnais allaner*
lie : QuiiiLK Declai-atioune of fair will we ratifie, approve and affirme in all pointis, heidis and circumftances, and be Jiir prefentis decernis and ordanis pe fame as ane pairt of our will, to be reallio and with
effect fulfillit and obeyit : And that it fall nocht be lefura to pe faid Matho Stewart of Dunduff to contravene the famin directlie or indireetlie, for quhatfumewir caus or occafioun, be our outter declaratioune to be maid be ws heireftir, or ony licence or dlfpenfatioun to be grantit in liurt or preiudice of
fir prefentis. And fforder, We will and declair, that the faid Matho Stewart of Dunduff fall confent and
pay to our Thefaurar, in our name, the foume of Ane thowfand merkis money of Jiis realme, togidder
with )ie vnlaw and amerciamentis in Jie quhilkis he ftandis cautioner for certane his complices, pairttakeris of ]>e faid cryme. Thairfore it is our will, and We requyre 50W, that incontinent eftir fe fycht
heirof, ;e cans tiie faid Matho Stewart of Dunduff to be prefentit in ane Julliee Court befoir 30W, and
to raak publicatioun of our will, as laid is, and to caus dome to be pronunceit aganis him, conforme
fairto ; and that fufficient cautioneris and fouerteis be fundin be fe laid Matho Stewart, for fulfilling
and obeying fairof : And that he be reenterit in waird, within our Caftell of Edinburghe, and that he
remane in fuir firmance J'airintill, ay and quhill the faid Caution and fouirtie be fund, to fe effect foirfaid : As 5e will anfuer to ws fairvpoun. The quhilk to do, We commit to 50W our full power, be fir
our prefent Lettres. Gewin under our Signet, and fubfcryit with our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the
laft day of Februar, and of our regne the xxxj 5eir, 1597.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. A. Elphinstoune.

According to the quhilk Letter, and his Maiefteis Will declarit thairin, the
faid Juftice depute, be the mouthe of Williame Liddell, denipftar of the faid
Court, pronunceit dome agane the faid Mathow Stewart of Dunduff, and publeifchit the haill premiffis to him ; and decernit and ordanit the faid Matho to
fulfill, obtemper,^ and obey the famin in all poj'ntis, and to ffind fufficient cautioune and fouirtie for obedience thairof ; and delyuerit him to James Nifbet,
ane of the Bailleis of Edinbiu-ghe, to be reenterit agane in waird within tlie Caftell of Edinburghe, to remane in fuir firmance thairiiitill, ay and quhill he find
fufficient cautioun and fouertie to the effect foirfaid, conforme to his Maiefteis
will aboue reherfit. Quhairvpoun the faid Sir Thomas Kennedie of Culzean
afkit actis and inftrumentis.

Mar. 1. — At a Court held this day, a document, declaring the Will of the
Earl of Caffillis and Sir Thomas Kennedie, was produced, dated at Edinburgh the
penult day of February 1597, and ordained to be regiftered in the books of adjournal. It is precifely in the terms rehearfed in the Declaratioun of the King's

> Comply with, obtemperare.

30Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 41

Will. Vpoun the publeifcliing and declaration of the quhilk will, Mr Alex'
King, aduocat, in name of the faid Erll of CafRllis, Lord Kennedy, &c., and the
faid Sir Thomas Kennedie of Culzean for him felfF, aflcit actis and inftrumentis.

asiilful dTire-rflisiiTii:— Buniintj; of Corns .

Mar. 8. — JoHNNE Keith, fear of Troup ; Williame Roife, his feruand ;
"\^'^illianle Keir and Williame Dalgarno, leruitouris to George
Erll of Marfchell.
Comperit James Chene of Straloch, and produceit our fouerane loi'dis Lettres,
dewlie execute and indorfat, as the famin beris ; togidder with ane Precei)t, direct fra his Maieftie, ordaining the Lettres vnderwritten to be defert ; quhairof
the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 50ur deputis, We gi'eit 30W well. Forfamekill as it is vnderftand
to W9, that our louitt, James Chene of Straloch, haifing fund cautioun to 30W, according to fie ordour,
for agane bringing of our Lettres, rafit att Iiis and our aduocattis inftance, for our interes, for calling
of Johnne Keith, fear of Troup, Williame Roife, his feruand, Williame Keir and Williame Ualgarno»
leruitouris to our rycht traill coufing, George Erll of Marfchell, to vnderly our lawis before sow, in
our Tolbuith of Edinburghe, vpoun the aucht day of March iiiftant, for ]>e treafounabiil Raifing of
ffyre and birning of ids coirnis of Crvvvy, in Jie moneth of Nouember laft, vnder fe panis contenit in
our Actis of Parliament : The faid James Chene of Straloch directit ane boy with our faidis vfiris
lettres, to haif caufit the famin be execute aganis the faidis perfonis ; quhilk boy, in his returns J)airwith hither, wes vmbefett in fe way befyde Sanct Laurence Kirk, be ane 30ung man vnknawin to him,
and nocht only bereft of our faidis vjiiris lettres and vj)iris fummondis, quhilkis he had vpoun him for J)e
tyme, bot als him felft'wes flrikin xiiij or xv flraiUis in Jie held, and left him lyand for deid ; quhairby
the reporting of our faidis vfiris lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat att fe faid day, is impedit, andpe
faid Laird of Straloch forceit to raife new lettres, quhilk requyres ane langer and ane new day : In refpect quhairof, it is our will, and we command ^ovv, that vpoun the fycht heirof, 50 defift aganis fe
faid James Chene of Straloch, or Johnne Cuming, fear of Ernfyde, his cautioner, for nocht reporting
of our faidis criminall lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat vpoun ))e faid aucht day of March inflant,
conform to ])e Act maid fairanent. As ■^e will anfuer to ws vpoune 30ur office and obedience, kepand
thir prefentis for 3 our Warrand, Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyrudhous, the fourt day of
March, 139L

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Quhilk Precept the Juftice admittit.

[il//- IViU'tame liotrthiiil\ Justice-DeputeJ]

^lausi)tcc— iHutUatioiT.

Maij 15 Johnne Innes, alias M'Caiiie, burges of Elgyne, Johnne

Innes, 3ounger, his lone.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Williame Hay, faderis broder to Williame Hay of Mayne ; and of vmq'" Agnes Leflie, the relict of vmq'''
VOL. II. F

42

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

Mr Alex' Dowglas, fumtyme proveft of Elgyne, (and for airt and pairt of the
niutilatioiui of the laid ^Villialne Hay of Mayne of his left hand) ; committit
(vpoun the xxj day of IMarch laltbypaft, vpoun fett purpois, provifioune and
foirthocht fellony, within the burcht of Elgyne.)

Persewaris.
Mr Alex' Hay, aiie of the Claikis of our fouerane lordis feffioune, (for Williarae Hay's flaugliter;)
Mr Thomas Hammiltoune, advocat, (for Agnes Leflie's flaughter.)
Preloquutour (for the pannell).
Mr Jolmne Kuffell.

The aduocat produceit his Maielleis Warrand, for perfuit of the Lettres, purcheft att the inftance of the kjTi and freindis of vmq'" Williame Hay and vmq''
Agnes Leflie.

Comperit Mr Johnne RufTell, prolocutour et excusatorio nomine for Johnne
Innes, eldar, barges of Elgyne, and produceit ane Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit be the
Bailleis of Goruiok, teftefeing that the faid Johne Inhes eldar, fchipit thair, to
haif bene tranfportit fouth to this burcht, to vnderly the law, for the flauchter
contenit in the Lettres quhairwith he is fuinmond ; and be aduerfar wynd being
continewallie fenfyne, could nocht compeir perfonallie : And in lyke manner produceit ane vthir Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit be Alex' Hay, niinifter att Dippill, teftifeing the inhabilitie of the faid Johnne Innes ; and rycht fiva, produceit ane
A-ther Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit be IMr Thomas Gordoune, notar publict, teftifeing
this faniin inhabilitie : And in refpect thairof, proteftis that na proces can be led
aganis the faid Johnne nor his cautioneris. The aduocat anfueris, that the Teftimoniall aucht nocht to be reflauit, in refpect of the Act of Parliament and practik of tliis judgement, admitting na alfoin^eis' for the non comperance of parteis
fummond to vnderly the law, bot lie as ar verifeit be the ayth of ane Minifter
and twa witneffis, deponand vpoun thair awin certain knawledge.

The Juftice ordainis proces, in refpect of the Act of Parliament.

The perfons fummoned on the Aftyfe, protefted their compearance, and that
they be not fummoned in time coming.

The Juftice ordained James Petrie, burges of Elgyne, cautioner for the faid
Johnne Innes, elder, ' to be vnlawit in the pane of Twa hundreth markis ; alfo
ordanit the faid Johnne Innes, eldar, to be denunceit our fouerane lordis rebel],
and putt to the home ; and all his movabill guidis to be efclieit and inbrocht to
his Maiefteis vfe, as fugitive fra his liienes lawis for the faidis crymis. — Continued to the Air of Elgyne, tertio Itineris.'^

' Essoi/ne, Old Fr., excuse for non-appearance in Court, &c., by oath that party Jssick, &c. ' On
Jul. 25, Williame Gordoune of Geicht, as cautioner for Johne Innes, ehier, is fined 400 marks, being
' double of the panis contenit in the Act of Parliament, becaus he wes at the home.' Innes is of new
denounced rebell, and his goodis ordained to be escheit.

31 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. U

[3Ir WiUiame Hairt, Justice- Depute. "]

Cafeiiis Captibe anti prison ef—33aiUes' amiisKictioit — jTalse

^imprisonment.

Jun. 2. — Mr James Hay of Ramies.
Dilatit for taking of Alexander Rychardfoune, in Fynnauchtie, captiue and
prefoner.

Persewaris. Preloquutouris for the pannell.

Alexander Rychardlbun in Fyninaclitie, Mr Jolinne Sciiarpe, aduocat, Mr Johnne Dempflar,

Mr Thomas Hamniiltoune. Mr Robert Cokburne.

It is allegeit, that the taking of the perfewer is na cryme, in refpect that Mr
James Hay had fufficient jjower, be reafoun of his Infeftment and Lettres of
Baillierie, quhilk gaif liim power, as it proportis. The haill claufTis quhairof
being prefentlie produceit, he I'epeitis ane fpeciallie, that claus thairof, that lie
lies power to pwneis tranrgreffouris ^/ecuiidutn J u>is ordinem ; and this perfewar
being dilatit for ane recent thift of twa fcheip, quhilk wes ftollin fra Gilbert
Paterfoun, the ane quhairof he fauld to Leonard Coull, the vther to Elifabetli
Alexander, bayth duelland within the faid barony ; and this perl'ewar being
brocht before (an Affile ?) and the flcynnis being fchawin to thame, he confeft
that he fauld the fcheip ; and fwa he (the pannell) committit na cryme, nor did
na wrang, gif he had detenit him, quhill he (the purfuer) faiid caiitioun, as law
will ; and he finding cautioun, he lait him to libertie : Quhilk cautioun he faiul
in the Court-buik, as the act produceit in the Court-buik beris. — The Aduocat
allegeis, that the alledgance audit to be repellit, for twa cauffis ; ffyrft, becaus
the Infeftment of the Baillerie produceit, gewis na power to the pannell of jurifdictioun criminall, or of ony thing that may import jiotejtatem vite et neci's, or
to tak or imin-efoun the Kingis frie liegis ; fecundlie, in caife ony fie power
could be pretendit, be vertew of the faid Infeftment, the faniin could newir be
extendit farder nor ane power of ane Barroun baillerie, quhilk can na wyis gif
authoritie to the partie infeft to deteine the Kingis frie liegis, alledgeit tane
vpoun the fufpicion of ane cryme, attoure' the fpace of xxiiij houris ; nather
makis this Infeftment ony mentioune of ;;/// and gallous, quliilk ar the only
terms quhairby Jurifdictioun is gewin to Barrounis, of thair Bailleries of materis
criminall : Attowre, it is to be markit, that the Act of Court verifeis the detentioun of the i>erfe\var fyve dayes eftir his taking. — Anfueris the defender, that,
in this caife, it is altogidder impertinent to dil'put de vita et nece, pit et gallufe ;
quia de hoc non agitur ; and the Baillerie gewis fufficient authoritie of the appreheufioun of ony fufpect of Pykerie,- and to keip him quhill he found fufficient

' Above, further than, beyond. ' Petty theft.

44 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

cautioiin, as law will ; according to the cuftiim of all barrounis and baillereis,
quliilk wes newir callit in queftioun ofbefore. — The Aduocat anfueris, he that
hes nocht power to cognos and defyde in ane caiis criminall, hes nocht power to
tak, and imprefoun, and detein ane frie liege.

The Juftice continewis Interloquutoui- to Tyifday ; and ordanit the faid Mr
James Hay to find cautioun, and remit the partie ajmd acta.

(Jun. 6.) — The Jullice continewis Interloquutour in the faid mater, to the
niorne, &c.

(Jun. 7.) — The Aduocat produceit ane Warrand, fubfcryuit be his Maieftie,

direct to the Juftice, &c. ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Claik and ^our deputis, We greit 30W weill. It is our will, and We
command ^ow, that, vpoune tlie iyclit lieirof, 56 nawyil'e proceid in )ie criminall cans perfewit before
■;ow this day, at fe inftance of Alexander Rychardfoun, and our aduocat for our interes, aganis Mr
James Hay of Rannes, for J)e violent taking, dctening and withhauhling of Jie faid Alexander in captivitie and prefoune, vfurping ])airby our authoritie, conforme to )ie lawis of our realms: And that 36
continew 5 our Interloquutour to be pronunceit ])airin vnto fe tyme that forder tryell may be taken
pairanent : Quhairfore, it is our will, and We command 50W, that 36 nawyis proceid heirintiil, bot
that the faid mater be continewit the faid Interloquutour quhill the thryd day of fe aire, or vjierwayis
rpoun fyftene dayes wairning ; as 56 will anfuer to ws vpoun 30ur office and obedience : Quhairanent
thir prefentis falbe ;our warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Edinburgh, the fewint day of Junij,
1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

It is anfuerit, that the faid Letter aucht nocht to be admittit, in refpect it is
ane privie Letter aganis Juftice and the Act of Parliament ; and als, his Maieftie directit ane command in the contrar, to do jviftice.

The Juftice continewis the mater, to the morne, &c.

(Jun. 8.)— Interlocutok. The Juftice ffindis, that the mater fall nocht
pafs to ane Inqueift, in refpect of the allegeance proponit, fufficientlie verifeit.

Quhairvijoun Mr James Hay of Rannes and his proloquutour alkit actis and
inftrumentis,

^jjjjvtssion — Snflirti'its rorturt for ISistobtri? of stipposttr rijrft.

Jul. 13. — James Ckaavfuku. goUKiiiyth, burges of Edinburgh; Magnus
Anderfoune thair; and Johne Anderfoune, fenfar (tail3eour barges) thair.'
Dilatit for taking and apprehending of Margret Gairdner, dochter of vmq''
"\A'illiame Gairdner in Sammelftoune, and ftryking of " hir fingar in ane har-

' The case was continued from Jul. 10 and 1 1 to tliis day. The barbarities inflicted by these
wretches, in attempting to discover if this poor girl knew of Crawford's purse, supposed by them to
have been stolen by her, L?iye seldom been equalled. 'Off,

31 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 45

row boir,' byrning hir with hett tayngis,* vpoun the fchoulderis, and vnder the
oxftei'is/ &c. ; committit in the moneth of Febiaiar laflwas.

Persewaris, Margret Gairner, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne.

Comperit Margaret Gairner, and pail fra the perfuit of the faidis perfoiines
fimpliciter, for the faidis crymes.

The advocat fubftitute'' Mr Thomas "Wilfoun aduocat, his depute.

The pannell denyis the Dittay, and produceis ane Declaratioune, fvibfcryuit
be Margaret Gairner, quhairby fche hes declarit the pannell to be innocent. —
The faid Mr Thomas Wilfoun proteftit for Wilfull Errour, in caife the AfTyis
acquit, nochtftanding of the Declaratioune, quhilk is priuatlie purcheft, fen fche
verifeit the contrair aganis James Crawfurd, in prefens of tlie King and Counlal. — The Alfyfe proteftit in the contrar, feing that (there is) na thing produceit
for inftructioun of the Dittay, nor na partie comperit to fweir the Dittay ; bot,
before thair chefing, fche \}?&. fimpl'idter fra the accufatioune.

The Aftyis chefis Phillop Mowbray' chancillar.

Special Verdict. The perfounes of AfTyife being chofin, fworne and admittit, eftir accufatioun of the faidis James Crawfurd, Magiuis Anderfoun and
Johne Anderfoun, be Dittay, of the crymes eftir fpecifeit, they remowit altogidder furth of Court to the Counfalhous, qvihair thay reafonit vjjoun the jiointis
of the Dittay ; being I'efoluit tliairwith, thay re-enterit agane in Court, quhair^
the faid perfounis of Alfyis, all in ane voce, Acquitt the faid perfounes of the
Dittay vnderwrittin, to witt : That thay, in the moneth of Februar lafl;bypaft,
come to Margaret Gairner, dochter to vmq'' ^^'^illiame Gairner in Sammelftoune,
fche being in peciabill maner, in feruice witli Jhone Hewie, burges of Edinburgh, without ony kynd of offence connnittit be hir to thame ; and thair, maift
violentlie patt handis on hir perfoune, tuik hir captiue and jjrefoner furth of hir
faid maift;eris duelling-hous, and convoyit hir to the faid Magnus Auderfounis,
duelling-hous, within the faid burcht ; quhair thaj% with all kynd of regour and
threatningis, chargeit hir to confes that fche had ane jnirs with money thairin,
perteining to the faid James Crawfurd, alledgeit tynt'" be him in the faid Jolme
Howeis hous ; and becaus fche wald nocht confefs the haifing thairof, being
niaift innocent and cleane of the away-taking of the faniin, thay immediatlie the
famin uycht, careit hir captiue to ane hous belyde the faid burcht, fche being
ignorant of the maifter of the faid hous ; and thair, compellit hir to put hir

' One of tlie horcs or perforations ihroiigli whitl] tlie teeth of the Iiarrows are tlirust. ^ It may

be inferred from the Dittay, tliat the instrument made use of l)y these monsters, was common kitclieu
tongs, heated ' ()uhill Jie blaidis ))airof wes reid-hett,' whieli were first applied to the shoulders and
hack, until ' the famin grew cauld ;" and, after being a second time ma(le red hot, thrust under the
aTm-pits of their unhappy victim. ' Arm-pits. * Substituted. ' Of Cassilhill. '' Lost,

46 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

fingar in the boir' of ane harrow, dang wadgeis^ in the faid boir about hir faid
fingaris, quhairby thay raif ' the flefch thairof, and cuttit the fennounis/ and
brak the banis of the famin, and forceit the l)lude to burft out at the endis of
hir faidis fingaris;' manaffing and terryfeing hir, with the faid crewaltie, to confefs the haifing of the faid purs, quhilk fcho had nocht : And thaireftir, becaus
of hir denj'all, thay hett ane pair of taingis of irne in the fyre, quhill the blaidis
thairof wes reid-hett, and fyne patt thame betuix hir fchoulderis, and vpoun hir
bak, quhill" the famin grew cauld ; and thaireftir hett the faidis taingis of new
agane, and laid the blaidis thairof vndir hir bair oxfteris," threatning hir to confefs the haifing of the faid puife : And thaireftir convoyit hir captiue to ane
hous in Libbertoune, quhair thay detenit hir bound, be the fpace of fourtie-aucht
houris, with the mair ;' during the quhilk fpace, fche gatt nather meit nor drink,
and lay in point of death.'

Quhair^•poun the faidis perfounis afkit inftrumentis.

[Mess/s WiUiame BolrthtiiJc ami WiUiame Haert, Justices-Deputes.']

Jul. 31. — Ai.EXAXDER Hay of Delgattie.'«
Dilatit of the cr} nie of Adulterie, committit with Elizabeth Clark, dochter to
■\nnq'* Williame Clark in Deir, and with Katherene Anderfoun and Elizabeth
Perie, feruandis to the faid Alexander Hay ; committit in the haill mouethis of
the 3eiris of God, I™.^'Mxxxvj, Ixxxvij, Ixxxix, and Ixxxx 5eiris.

Preloquutouris for the pannell, Mr Williame Olipliant, Mr Johne Ruflell, Mr Joline Chene.
Persewar, Mr Thomas Hamrailtoune of Drumcarne, aduocat.

The pannell aflvis inftrumentis, that the aduocat infiftis vpoun the haill Actis
of Parliament, and fpeciallie in the Act ane hundreth and fyve of King James
the Sext, haldin in the Parliament 1581 yeiris.

It is alledgeit for the pannell, that the mater can nocht be putt to the knawledge of ane Inqueift, becaus the fundament of this perfuit is foundit vpoun the
Actis of Parliament ; and trew it is, be Act of the Queue, our Ibuerane lordis
moder, quhilk is the fyirft, it is ftatute, that notorious Adulteraris, eftir admonitioune jireceiding, lall die the death : Trew it is, that, in the haill funnnondis,

' Hole or perforation. * Drove wedges. ^ Tore, larerated. ^ Sinews. ^ A process

infinitely more cruel than the tliumb-screw, or the ' pilnie-winkis.' '' Until. " Arm-pits.

8 And upwards. '■> It is obvious that this unlu<ky rrcature iiud been bribed by Crawford to withdraw her prosecution ; and on this account, the Uittay not having been sworn, and no evidence adduced, the Assise liad no course left, but to return a verdict in the terms above written ; for the
verdict of ' Not Proven' is of comparatively modern invention, after Juries were freed from the degrading trammels under which they had previously laboured. At this period they were bound to return a verdict of' Fylit' or ' Acquit,' Guilty or Innocent. '" See another Trial against him ' for
Adulterie with Barbara Forbes, his allegeit fpoiis,' Nov, 25, 1598, Ike,

32Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 47

it is nocht alledgeit, that the defendar is ane notorious Adulterar, or wes admoiiifcheit, or comniittit ony cryme of Adulterie eftir admonitioim ; and of the
law, ftatiitis quhilk ar penall ar maift ftraitlie to be interpreit, and fuffer na executioiin. Forder, as to the fecund Act maid be our fouerane lord in the Parliament, in anno 1581, it is only ane explanatioun of the former Act, in that
pairt tuiching the qualitie of ane Notorious Adulterar ; and thairfore, the haill
circumftances fett doun in the former Act ar vnderftand, of the law, to be relieittit in the pofteriour ; and fpeciallie, tuicheing the laid admonitioun, namelie
in confideratioun of baith the faidis Actis, all Adulteraris ar nocht appointit to
be pwneift, hot Notorious Adultei'aris, eftir admonitioune : And forder, the
faidis Actis of Pai-liament lies newir bene in viridi observantia, nor 3it ony perfoun putt to ony (ryell, natlier man nor woman, and fwa of the Law contruria
ilissueludine tolUtur, according to the Coninioune Law, quia et midtis peccatiim
manet inipnnitum. — It is anfuerit be the aduocat, that the alledgeance aiicht to
be repellit, in refpect of the fummondis, quhilk is altogidder conforme to the
Act of Parliament of ane hundreth and fyve in number, in the Actis of Parliament 1581 yeiri=, feing the famin contenis ane expres qualificatioun of expres,
notour, and manifeft Adulterie, be procreatioun of childrene in that vnlauchfull
communicatioune ; quhilk is fa publict and manifeft, that it neidis na admonitioune, nather can it be amendit be abftinence eftir admonitioune : And be the
faid Act, admonitioune is only ordanit to be vfit quhen parteis ar fufiiect, quhais
contumacie eftir admonitioune, in that caife, makis thair cryme notour and equall
to the vtheris twa qualiteis of Notour Adulterie, contenit in the faid Act. And
quhair it is affermit be the defender, that the regour of this Act hes nocht bene
putt to executioun, the contrar thairof is manifeft, be infinit examples extant in
the Adjornall buikis.

It is forder alledgeit peremptorie, contra istam instantium, that this mater
can nocht be putt to ane Inqueift, becaus the ground thairof is the cryme of
Adulterie lybellit, and the CommifTaris fentence gewin thairvpoun ; quhilk fentence proceding vpoun the depofitiounis of twa or thre fubornit witnelFes. Tliair
is ane fummondis of Reprobatour' intentit for imprewing of thair Depofitiounis,
quhilk being reprovin, confequentlie the fentence will fall ; and gif the faid Reprobatour wer pronunceit in the excepientis fawour, it wald furneis him ane infallabill defence in this Judgement ;" at the leift, wald elide the haill probatioun
that M'ald be vfit be vertew of the faid fentence ; quhairof it followis, that the
dependance of the faid ciuile judgement man furneis ane exceptioun in this criminall, that na proces falbe deduceit in this meane tyme : And becaus the faid

' An action for leading a new proof, or to re-prove tlie facts libelled. ' Before this Tribunal.

48 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

CommifTaris decreit is nocht as yit produceit, hot purpoflie is heireftir to be vfit
in mocliim prohationis, to the Aiiyle, the excipient is content prelenthe, the laid
decreit nocht being vfit for ony kynd of probatioun, feing the famin is reprovit
be the faid Reprobatour, and the eflfect thairof is in pendente, he is content prefentlie to reniince all exeeptioun, dilatour or peremptour, and that the lybell in
facto, falbe putt to the knawledge of ane AlFyfe : And forder, in caife my Lord
advocat wald produce the Decreit inftantlie, he is content to anfuer thairto. —
It is anfuerit be the aduocat, that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect
of the fummondis contenand ane cryme verry releuantlie fett doun, and nawyis
relatiue to ony precedaud ciuile decreit ; nather can thair ony thing done heiranent, ciuilie, before the Conunillaris, or to be done heireftir, ftay the prelent
tryell of this cryme in this Judgement : And as to the pi-oductione of the alledgeit decreit, or difputatioun thairvpoune, it is altogidder impertinent ; becaus
the perfewar has nather vfit it, nor alledgeit ony fic decreit, nather in his fummondis nor in his antlieris.

Aug. 1 . — [A veiy long preliminary discussion took place, as to the relevancy
of the Libel, &c. which it is not thought necessary to insert ; as it would be uninteresting to the general reader, and does not bear on any point which can be
of use to the Criminal Lawyer, in modern practice.

The following Judgement was pronounced.]

The Juflice repellis the haill alledgeancis projjonit aganis their relewancie of
the fyrft member of the fummondis, alfweill dilatorie as peremptorie ; and aflbil5eis fra the laft pairt, vi ItheUatur : And as to the laft defence, foundit vpoun
the Remilliouue,' the Jullice fupercedis to gif anliier thairto, quhill he Ipeik with
his Maieflie vpoun Furifday."

The Aduocat, thaireftir produceit ane WaiTand, direct be his Maieflie to my
lord Juftice, &c. ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

B.EX,

Justice, Juftice Clark and ^our deputis, We greit jow wcill. Foifamekill as Jie fyrA
day of Auguft is appoiutit to Alexander Hay of Delgattie, for his comperance before 50W, to vnderly
our lawis, for fe filthie cryme of Adulterie, eoramittit be him willi Elizabetli Clark. It is our will
jiairfore, and we command 30W to proceid and miuifter juflice in ])e faid mater, conforrae to fe lawis
of our realme, nochtwithftanding quhatfumeuer warrand or command g-cwiti, or to be gewin to ^ow
in Jie contrar. As je will anfuer to ws fairvpoune : Quhairanent, tliir prefentis falbe vuto 50W ane
wairand. Subfcrj-uit with our hand, Att Falkland, the fyrll day of Auguft, 1398.

(Sic fubferibitur) JAMES R.

' Letters of RemifTion were erranted to Hay of Dals'etlie, ' for his being at the Feild of Gleneviot,
in cumpany with the Erlis of Erroll and Huntlie, and for his airt and pairt thairof.' The Letters likewise Remit liim ' of all ^•thir cryines and offences quhatfumevir, preceding the faid Field of Gleneviot,'
' (juhilk wes in the moneth of September, 159-1— exceptand onlie Wichcraft, Thift and Murthour.'
' Tliursday.

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 49

Aug. .'3. — The Juftice Repellis the alledgances, foundit vpoiiu the Remiflioun ; becaus thair is nathiug- produceit, to verifie. Quhairvpoun the aduocat afldt inftrumentis.

ASSISA.

Patrik Ogilvy of Incliinartene, Tho'. Abircrumbie of Murthlie, Magnus Mowat of Boquhollie,
Sir James Scott of Balwerie, SirPatrick Dowglasof Kilfpiudie, Andro Meldrum of Diumbiek,
Sir Thomas Kennedy of Cul5eane, Williame Blair of Bagillo, JohnneCreychtouneof Innernytie,

Sir James Halyburtouneof Pitcur, Gilbert Pennycuke of that Ilk, Andro Murray of Balwaird,
Alex. Blair apperand of Balthaok, James Lokkart of Ley, W" Murray, apperand of Tulliebairdyn.

Exceptions were taken againfl Ogilvy of Inchmartin, on the ground of partial
counfel, &c. ; and that he, in confequence of a 'fpecial letter, before he wesfummond, at the fpeciall defyre and requeift of the Erll of Erroll, ciiln to this
•toune.'

- It is forder alledgeit, that the lettres criniinall wer rafit be the Erll of Erroll'
him felff, and his feruandis att his command ; the expenffis thairof payit be him ;
the AfTyile funimond att his command and directioune ; he hes informit my Lord
aduocat in this perfuit as partie ; he hes caufit the Affyis to be fummond, vpoun
his expenflis ; he hes writtin particuler Miffiues to the Gentlemen of the Inqueift
to cum heir, before thay wer fummond : Qiihilkis factis, and ewerie ane of thame,
gewis ane fiifficient teflimony that he is partie ; and 3it of fuperabundance, it is
forder eikit, that he hes folifcit my Lord Juftice him felff, as partie, Ten the intentioun^ of this cans ; and lykewyis, vpoun the iecund day of Auguft iuftant, paft to
his Maieftie in Falkland, infiftif' with his hienes that this mater Ibuld be pult to
the knawledge of ane Inqueift, in preiudice of the excipient :^ Quhilk lykewyis is
refen-it to my lord Juftice declaratioun. — It is anfuerit be the aduocat, that the
alledgeance audit to be repellit ; yit as of befoir, in refjiect of his Maiefteis Warrand preceding the rafmg of the lettres, the lettres thame felffis proceding vpoun
ane delyuerance of the Lordis, grantit vpoun the perfewaris Supplicatioun I'ubfcryuit with his hand, and of the Roll of the AfTyis, lykewyis fubfcryuit be the
perfewar ; and albeit the alledgance mycht appear to contene ane relevant caus
quhairfore my Lord of Eri-ollis felff could nocht pafs vpoun this Affyis, as alledgeit to half gewin partiall counlall, in maner qualifeit in the faid exceptioune ;
yit the famin can nawyis excluid his kynnifmen and freindis fra paffing vpoun
the faid Affyis : For partial counfall is ane perfonall impediment, to ftay the
gewar thairof to pas vpoun the Affyfe of that perlbun aganis quhom he hes
gewin partiaU counfall ; bot is nocht extendit to his kynnifmen and freindis.

' In another place it is stated, that the Earl of Erroll, ' has foliftit and travellit with his Majejiie^
ill ])is caufe, as partie.' * Since the cause was iHtentil, or raised. ^ Urged. * The pannel.

VOL. II. G

50 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

And quliair it is alledgeit, that my Lord of ErroU is partie, it is veny abfiird ;
ffor poffiblie my Lord of Erroll could nocht qualifie aiie entres that mycht mak
him aue partie, nather can he tyne or wyu' in this caufe ; and gif he wald compeir att the bar, and feik to be admitted as partie to perlew, albeit the defender
kepit fylence and maid na alledgance in the contrar, my Lord Juftice wald nocht,
nor could nocht of his office admitt him. — It is anluerit be the Laii-d of Dalgattie, that that exceptioun yuilk wald declyne the Erll of Eroll, wald declyne his
haill kyn and freindis : And in effect, it is granted be my Lord aduocat that the
Erll of Erroll can nocht pals vpoun this AfTyife ; ergo, nane of his kyn and
freindis can. It is nocht affermit in this caile that the Erll of Erroll lies gewin
partiall counfall, hot expreflie that he is partie ; to witt, in fortificatioun of the
former alledgances, nocht only the faidis Lettres Criminall, quhairvpoune this
perfuit is foundit, wes rafit to him and att his command, bot the meffingei"is exe^
cutouris thairof, bayth vpoun the partie and vpoun the Aflyfe, execute the famin att his fpeciall directioune : In lyke maner, befydes the haill particuler circumftances numerit ofbefoir, he hes foliilit the haill perfounis of Inqueift quha
wer funnnond to Monunday laft, to remane in this toun, quhilk Aflyis Ibuld be
chofm, as thay wald do him finguler pleafour : And this, with the former argumentis, being tane coniunctlie, man infer fimpliciter the Erll of Erroll to b«J
partie. — The Aduocat anfuerit, that tliair can be loa partie bot ane perlewar or
defendar, or ane partie admittit for his interes ; and nane of the faidis qualiteis
is alledgeit aganis the Erie of Erroll, nor can be provin be this proces ; nather
can ony extraiiuliciall probatioune, by the proces, be admittit in this perfuit, for
his Maiefteis interes, without concurrence of ony pi'iuate partie.

The Juftice, be Interloquitour, ffindis my Lord aduocat only partie in this
perfuit ; and the alledgances maid be the pannell aganis the Erll of Erroll fufficient and releuant, being provin to fecluid him to pafs vpoun this Affyis ; bot
ua argument to fecluid the Laird of Inchmartene. Quhairvjioun the perfewar
and defender alkit inftrumentis : And repellis the fyrft argument maid about the
four-half-about.*

The AflTyfe being fvvorue, and the partie being acculit be Dittay of the filtliie
cryme of Adulterie, committit with Eliz. Clark, the Aduocat produceit ane Decreit of the Commilfaris of Edinburghe, of the dait the penult day of November,
1596 3eiris, berand the cryme lybellit, in the felfffame termes as the Dittay beris,
to half bene fufficientlie verifeit and provin aganis this defender. In refpect
quhairof, in caife the Aflyfe clange, the perfewar proteftis for wilful! errour.

• Lose or gain. ' It liad been objected that Inchmartin ought not to pass on the Assise, ' beraus, be fe Act of Parliament and conimoun practik of fis realrae, he is nocht of fe four-half-about.
The aduocat refulis to anluer, becaus )iis mater is nocht ane Perarabulatioune.'

32Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 31

[There follows a very long argument, ou the relevancy of the Decreet of the
Commissaries, which it was contended ought not to be received as proof in such
a case, especially seeing that an Action of Reprobator was then in dependence,
&c. Although this argument is very ingeniously conducted by the counsel for
both parties, it would occupy a much greater space in this Collection than its
importance seems to demand.]

Verdict of the Assise ^ including the Dittaij.

The famin day, Alexander Hay of Delgatie being enterit on pannell, dilatit, accufit and perfewit
be veitew of onr fouerane lordis Lettres, purcheft at the inflance of Mr Thomas Hammiltoune, aduocat to his Ijienes for iiis interes : That quhair, it is expieflie prouydit, ftatute and ordainit be diuerfe
his hienes Actis of Parliament, that na maner of perfoune or perfounes within this realme commit the
fylthie and abhominabill cryme of Adulterie, vnder the pane of deid and confifcatioune of all thair
movabill guidis ; as the faid Actis at mair lenth beiris. And trevv it is and of veritie, that the faid
Alexander Hay of Delgatie being in the moneth of Januar, 3eir of God 1".V'-. fourfcoir foure 3eiri8,
mareit in face of Haly-Kirk, with Elizabeth, dochter lauchfull to Robert Lord Altrie ; and efter the
faid marriage, the faid Alexander and his faid fpous, haifing duelt, remanit and cohabitat togidder, and
contine« it in niutuail focietie and mutuall intertenement to vtheris, at bed and buird, as become mau
and wyfTe lawfullie joynit in mariage, be the fpace of diuerfe 3eiris and monethis immediatlie following
the faid mariage ; nochtwithflanding quhairof, the faid Alexander, vnmyndfuU of his dewtie towardis
God and tlie faid Eliz', his fpous for the tyme, and of the faythfull promeis maid be him to Iiir the
tyrae of the folempnizatioune of the faid mariage maid betuix thame, quhilk was the tyme foirfaid : He
in the monethis of Marche, efter the xxv day thairof, Apryle, Maij, Junij, Julij, Auguft, September,
October, Nouember, December, Januar and Februar, and Marche before the xx7 day thairof, the3eir
of God I'".Vslxxxvj and Ixxxvij 3eiris ; at the leifl in ane or vther of the faidis monethis and yeiris of
God refpectiue foirfaid, maift, fchamefullie frequentit, fecretlie, the eumpany and focietie of Elizabeth
Clark, dochter to vmq'*' William Clark at the Kirk of Deir, and gaif the vfe of his bodie to hir in the faid
fylthie and abhominable cryme of Adulterie : And alfo, in the faidis monethis rcfpccliue aboue writtin, the 5eir of God I°.V'.lxxxix and Ixxxx yeiris refpectiue, at the leift in ane or vther of the famyn,
the faid Alexander Hay of Delgatie gaif the vfe of his bodie in the fylthie cryme of Adulterie and
camall copulatioune, as faid is, with the faid Elizabeth Clark : And that within the places of Delgatie
and Sanden, in the hallis, chalmeris, vollis, felleris, loftis, wardropis, orcheardis, parkis and feildis thairof; and fpeciallie in quyet cavernis of Sanden and heicthis thairof: In the quhilk fylthie cryme of

Adulterie the faid Elizabeth Clark bure, and thair was procreat betuix tbame, ane barne ;

and the faid Alexander caufit Alexander Watt, his flewart, tak vpoune him to be the fader thairto ;
albeit the faid barne was gottin of the faid Alexanderis awin bodie, in the fylthie cryme of Adulterie
with the faid Elizabeth Clark, as faid is : And thairthixiw, hes contravenit the tennour of the faidis
Actis of Parliament, and hes incurrit the panis thairin contenit. — For the quhilk crymes, the faid
Juftice Depute put the faid Alexander to the knawledge of ane Affyife of the perfounis vnderwrittin ;
tbay ar to fay, Pati ik Ogilvie of Inchemertene, &c. : Quhilkis perfounes of Aflyis being chofyn, fwonie
and admittit, efter accufatioune of the faid Alexander, of the crymes aboue writtin, be Dittay, and productioun of ane decreit of the Commiflaris of Edinburghe, of the dait at Edinburghe, the penult day
of November, the 3eir of God I^.V'.lxxxxvj yeiris, be our fouerane loniis Aduocat, for verefcing of
the Dittay ; thay removit all furth of Court to the Counfale hous, quhair thay chufit the faid Sir
Thomas Kennedye of Cul3eane, chancillar of the faid Aflyis, and reflbnit and votit vpoun the poyntis
of the Dittay ; and being tlirouchlie refoluit thair with, reenterit agane in Court, in prefens of the faidis

52 CRIMINAL TRIALS. .A.D. 1598Juflice-dpputis, qnlmir thay, be the inouth of the laid Sir Thomas Kennedy chancellar, ffand, pronunreit
and doclarit, for tlie maiil pain of the faid Aflyis, tiie faid Alexander Hay of Delgatie to be Cleane,
innocent and acquit of tlie cryme of Adulterie aboue writtin, alledgeit committit witli EHzabeth Clark,
in the quhilk cryme fcho bure, and thair was procreat betuix thanie, ane bairne ; committit in the nionelliis, yeiris and placeis relpectiue aboiie fpecifeit, at the leift in ane or vther of thame ;
and of the haill acculatiounes and Dittay aboue writtin.'

Quliairvpoun the faid Alexander advit actis aud iiiftrumentis.^

Aug. 1. — George Wauchop, broder to vmq'^ Aixhibald Wauchop, apperand of Xudrie Marfchell.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq''' Daxiid Edmeftouu of Wowniet ; committit in Januar 1596.5

Persewar, Aleloun Home, the relict. Proloquutour, Patrik Home of Pohvart.

Robert Hepburn (in Haillis, cautioner for the pannell) tuik inftinimentis of the
entrie of George Wauchop, and proteilit that he as cautioner be releuit. — The
pannell ailvis inftrumentis, that Alefoune Home paffis fra the perfuit of him
this day.

Continued to the Aire of ' Edinbui'ghe, tertio Itineris, xv dierum. Plegio
Roberto Hepburne in Haillis.'

[^Jlr mUiame Haert of Levielandis, Justice-Depute. '\

Wi\Xi\)tx^li — ^ontin — incantation, 3f c.

Aug. 15. — Bessie Aikin
Being prel'entit on pannell, the faid Juftice-depute caufed intimat and reid to
hir his ^laiefteis Pi'ecept dii'ect to him, quhairof the tenuour flbllowis.
Rex,

Mr Williame Haert, our Juftice, We greit 50W weill. Fodamekle as, BelTie Aikene,
being convict before 50W be ane A(r)ie,^ wes committit to waird in our Tolbuith of Edinburghe, in
refpect fche wes fan with bairne, quhaiiby the fentence pronunceit aganis hir could nocht be putt in
executioun ; quhair fche hes remanit this jeir bygane, and delyuerit of ane infant, and lies luftenit
lang pwnoil'ihment be famine and impreilment : Thairfoir, tempering jullice with mercy, we haif pardonit and pardonis hir lyffe ; and willis and commandis 50W, that 30 caus prefent hir befoir 30W, and
decerue hir to be baneill our realme, and to depairt within xx dayes ; with certificatioim, gif fche be
apprehendit heireftir, fche falbe execute to ))e deid : And to J)at effect, that ;e putt hir to libertie

' There is a memorandum irregularly entered before the Verdict, which shows what was the state
of the vote. It stood as follows : — ' The Lairds of Boquhallie, Pennycuik, Tillybairdin, Balvaird, Inuernytie, Cul^eane, Fylit the faid Alexander Hay of Delgattie of Jie dittay vnderwrittin : And ])e
Lairdis of Drumbrek, Kilfpyndie, Inchmartene, Balgillo, Murthlie, Pitcur, Balwerie, Ballhyok, and
Ley, AcQuiTT him.' ^ g^g -^^^ 20, 1598, where another Trial, ' for Adulterie with Barbara

Forbes, his allegeit fpous,' occurs. ' Robert Birrel thus records this murder. ' David Edmonftoii
of the Wowmit Ilaine be Thomas Chriflifon, be the 111 oti of ane gun.' ' For Witchcraft, &c. See

Nov. 12, 1597. °

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 53

furtli of our faid tolbuitli : For ]>e quliilk tliis fallie to 50W ane fufficient warrand. Subfiryuit witli
our hand, Alt Dalkeyth, the xv day of Augufl, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

According to the quhilk precept, the Juftice, be the mouth of Williaine Blak,
decernit and ordanit tlie faid Beffie Aiken to be Baneift this reahne, and newir
to returne within the faniin, vnder the pane of deid ; with certificatioun, gif fche
be apprehendit thairin, fche falbe pwneift to the death : And ordanit hir to depart within XX dayes eftir the dait heirof ; and to that effect, to be putt to libertie
furth of the Towne of Edinburghe.

'&'

<^Iaui3:IjUr — ^ijootiiis of IJistoIets, ^t.

Oct. 31. — JoHNXE Arkot jounger of Wodmylne.'

Dilatit of the flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Murray, fone to Murray

of Aiket, and feruitour for the tyme to Patrik, Commendatour of Lundoris :
And for beiring and weiring, and fchuiting of piftolettis ; connnittit in September laftwas.

Comperit Charhs Murray of Haykit, and produceit our fouerane lordis Lettres,
dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft at his inftance, aganis Johne Arnot, to vnderlye the law, for the llauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Murray : As alio, pi'oduceit
ane vther Lettre, for chargeing of Andro Aytoun of Dininiu-e, and Henrie Pitkarne of that Ilk, as cautionei'is for the faid Johne Arnot, to enter him this day ;
(quha) proteftit for releif of thair cawtiones.

Comperit Mr Dauid AVardlaw, and jn-oduceit ane Warrand, for continewatioune of the iJerluit of Johne Arnot, to the third day of November nixt to cum ;
off the quhilk, the tennour foUowis.

Rex,

Justice, Juflice Clark and ^owr deputls ; We greit 50W Weill. Forfamekle as We haif
borne ane erueft intentioun to lie jullice iniiiiftrat with all rcgour in this accident that intervenit in fe
flauchter of vmq'' Jolinne Murray, foiuitour to Palrik, Conimendater of Lundoris, be Johnne Arnot,
30unger of Wodmylne; and heirtofoir, in our awin peiibun, hes tane panes in that mater : And now,
be reffoune of our vther gi-it adois,^ We ar forcit for fum dayis to be abfent ; and We nawayis being
willing that ony proceding be ))airintill qnhili our returne : Thairfoir, We haif thocht meit and expedient that 56 fall continew and prorogat the perluit and dyet, quhill Jie thrid of November nixt; and
nawyis proceid fairin, quhill ]ie faid day ; alwayis retening that feme cawtioune for the faid Johnne
Arnot, quha was reflauit for him ofbefoir ; or vjiirwayes, that -qe caufe him to be wairdit within our
tolbuith of Edinburgh, thair to reniane quhill the faid thrid day : Quhilk nawayes je fall faill to do.
And 5e will anfuer to wa, vpoune )ie difcharge of :;our ofhces and ^our devvtifull obedience; Quhairanent ])ir prefentis fall remane to 50W for waiTand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyrudehons, the
Jaft day of October, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

' The objections to, and arguments on the relevancy of the Libel, in this Case, are so important, and
the Counfell, on both sides, being men of such eminence in their profession, the Editor has thought it
necessary to give the whole at length, as preserved in the Record. '' Business, afiairs.

54 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

Andro Aytoune of Dinmure and Henrie Pitcarne of that Ilk become plegeis
and fouirteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, for Joline Arnot 50unger of Wodmylne,
that he fall compeir befoir our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis in the Tolbuith of Edinburghe, the thrjd day of November nixt to cmn, to vnderlye the
law for airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq" Johne Murray, feruitour to PatriJf, Commendator of Lundoris ; vnder the pane of Ten thowfand pundis.
Persewar, Charles ]SIuiTay of Ayket, as fatlier.
Pheloquutouris. Preloquutouris for the pannell,

My Lord of Lundoris, Tyllybairdin 30unger, Mr Joline Scherp, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Jo. RulTell,
My Loid adiiocat, The Laird of Balvaird, Mr Will. Olipliant, Ancho Aiiiote miiiifter of ScotThe Laird of Polmais. land weill, Alexander Drumniond of Medope.

]^ov. 3. — The pannell afldt inftruments, that nane of the kyn and frendis
of vmq'^ John Murray compeiris to perfew, except the father, with the preloquutouris nominat. — The aduocat declairis, that he infiftis only vpoune the lybell,
iufafar as it is foundit vpoun the Actis of Parliament only. Quhairvpoun the
perfeweris afldt inftrumentis. — The perfewaris declaris that thay adhair to my
Lord Aduocatis declaratioun.

It is allegit for the pannell, that the publicatioune of the Actis of Parliament
quhairvpoun the perfute is foundit allanerlie, now aucht to be fcbawn and produceit, befoir ony forder proces ; becaus tlie publicatioun thairof is exiireflie lybellit, and the lybell makis relatioun thairto ; and the leigis can nocht be conftitute in mala fide, befoir the famin Actis be lauchfullie publeiichit ; and fpeciallie, the Actis quhairvpoune the fummondis is foundit, quhilkis imponatis' a
heich and grit jjane aganis the haill iiihabitantis of the realme, to witt, amputatioun of the richt hand, and efcbeit of thair haill guidis moveabill. — The aduocat declairis the alledgeance meritis na aniiier — The perfewer acceptis the aduocatis anfuer ; and allegit, that the pannell, adherand to the former alledgeance,
can nocht be compellit to enter in difputation vpoun the Summondis or Dittay
proponit aganis him, quhilk is foundit expreflie vpoune tliat publicatioun of tlie
Actis of Parliament, befoir the famin publicatioun be ather proponit or replyit,
and the manner of publicatioun ather is knawin to the Judge, after the productioun or allegatioun, quhilk the Judge, be the lawis of this realme, may find
to be ane lufficient publicatioun : For it is certane, be the lawis of this realme,
that ane Act of Parliament vnpubleiffit can never conftitute the legis in mala
fide, nor be na fufficient groiuid, quhairby they may be perfewit, acculit criminallie nor ciuillie ; fpeciallie, in refpect of dyuerfe Actis maid anent the publicatioun of the Lawis of this realme, and fpeciallie, anent the Act maid in the 3ei^

* Imposes. Lat. imponere.

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. JlJ

of God I™.VMxxix, that the Actis of Parliament could nawayis conftitute the
legis 171 mala fide, befoir the famin was publefit. It is forder allegit, that quhanfoeuir the publicatioiin of Lawis and Statutis is of neceffitie, the famin aiicht to
be firft verifeit. And trew it is, that the publicatioun of the Actis of Parliament
is fpeciallie appointit be expres Act of Parliament ; nather can the famin \'npubleifchit bind the leigis, or induce ony knawledge to tham. — The aduocat anfueris, the foi'mer alledgeance, audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis.

The pannell declaris that thai will cum and projione the reft of thair alledgeances in ordour, att command of my Lord Juftice, quhilk the pannell is willing
to obey ; vnder proteftatioun alwayis, that my Lord Juftice, the tyme of the difcuffing of the allegeance alreddie j^roponit, and of the reft to be proponit, geve
ane direct anfuer to the firft allegeance, anent the publication of the Actis of
Parliament, quhairupon the lybell is foundit ; fpeciallie, in refpect that the firft
Act of Parliament, maid in the ^eir of God Ixvij, quhilk is the fpecial Act quhairvpon the lybell is foundit, is of fie importance and antiquitie, and in effect is tane
away be the contrair confuetude, that the haill legis of this realme fal be in danger in the panis thairin contenit, gif the famin fall be reput as ane Law quhairvpoun thay may be accufit criminallie. And for verificatioun of this allegance,
that the publicatioun of the Actis of Parliament is requifit, it is allegit be the
pannell, that the famin, be ane fpeciall Act, in the 3eir of God P.VMxxix, is exprefslie ftatute. — The aduocat allegis that this allegeance is thryfe repetit, and
thairfoir mei-eitis na forder anfuer.

Secundlie, the partie, to wit Charles Murray, with the remanent kyn and
freindis, has na actioun competent to thame to perfew the firft tua memberis of
the fummondis, becaus the partie lies qualifeit na dammage nor intreis fuftenit
be thame thairtlirow. — The aduocat anfueris, the fecund member is verrie competent to the i^artie informer, becaus it contenis ane hofteill invafioun of the faid
vniq'° Johne Murray with piftolets, prohibeit be the Actis of Parliament, in pei"-
fute quhairof his parentis lies verrie guid entreis to inforine ane Affife. — It is anfuerit, becaus the allegeance proponit for the pannell is proponit aganis tua ftuerall memberis of the fummondis, and the anfuer maid be my Lord aduocat is
only maid for fuftening of the entres of the partie aganis the fecund member,
conteining the invafioun of the faid vmq'° Johne Murray, as is allegit, that my
Lord Juftice, befoir all forder proces, audit to geve ane anfuer to the allegeance
proponit aganis the entres of the partie for the firft member. — My Lord (advocate) declairis that he infiftis only vpone the firft member of the fummondis, for
the Kingis intreis ; quhairvnto the partie adheris. Quhairvpoun the pannell
alkis inftrumentis.

It is forder allegeit be the pannell, that thair is na cryme qualefeit in the fe56 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

cund membei" that may geve the partie oiiie entreis to perfevv the faniin ; becaus
the lamin contenis na cryme qiiliairupon the pannell may be pwneift, at the delyre of the partie : and albeit he vver convict of the famin cryme, the partie, be
the lawis of this reahne, can repoirt na afTythment nor fatisfactioun thairby, feing
it is never lybellit in the fecund member, that ony damnage hes foUowit thair^
upoun, quhairby the partie was hurt or preiudget. — It is anfuerit be my Lord
Aduocat, the partie perfewis nocht allanerlie for his awin enti-eis ; hot haifand
entreis as is qualifeit befoir, affiftis the aduocatis perfute. — It is anfuerit be the
pannel, tliat the defender can nawayis be drawin in queftion for his lyfe, or ony
member, be ane partie quha hes na entreis ; and albeit the faid aduocat may be
fund to haif entreis in our fouerane lordis name, to quhom and quhais entreis the
pannell fall anfuer with reuerance, as effeiris ; that is na juft cans to compell him
to enter in difputation with a partie that hes na entries ; and thairfoir, the Defender defyres my Lord Juftice anfuer directlie, quhither, gif the jjartie hes entreis, to infill in the perfute of the fecond member of the funnnonds or nocht ;
for gif the partie be fundin to haif na entreis, he audit nawyis to be refpectit in
this perfute, as ane informer ; and mekill mair, man be excludit as ane perfewar ;
feing na partie, be the lawis of this realme, can be hai-d to informe and concur
as ane partie, as our fouerane lordis aduocat, vnles thair be ane fpeciall entreis
competent to him, and that the famin entries be exprefslie qualefcit : And that
is nocht only obferuit in cauffis criminall, quhilk ar of the grittift importance,
bot alfo in caufRs ciuill, quhairintill na jierfon Avill be adinittit to perfew, Avitkout thair be ane fpeciall entres qualefeit, as faid is. — It is anfuerit be the aduocat, the fummondis contenis the parteis intreis, in refpect of the Invalioune maid
aganis him ; and quhair it is allegit, that the parteis frendis can jiretend na a!'-
fythement, thay conclude na alTythejnent, bot puneifchement, quhilk is verrie
competent to thame, for the iniurie done to the defunct. As to the comparefoun
tane fra the intreis of parteis in Ciuill perfuitis, it is nocht pertinent ; becaus in
ciuill actionis, the perfeweris intreis man tend to ane conclulioun, foundit ather
.super hicro captando vel damno vitando ; bot in Criminall perfutis, the conclulioun tendis only ad pcnctni, quhilk is alyk competent to bayth the perfeweris,
and fatisfics alyk baith thair intentionis, in refpect of the offence committit aganis
thame, as is qualifeit be the fummondis.

It is anfuex'it be the defender, that the Invafioun qualifeit in the fecund member of tlie fummondis, contenis na cryme quhairvpoun ony partie may be perleM'it to vnderly the law, before the Juftice generall and his deputis, at the inftance of ony particuler partie, and at ane particular dyet ; feing thair is nathing
qualifeit for the partie in the fecond member of the fummondis, bot effect lis sine
effectu, quhilk is pimiefcheable in the cryme of Trelioun pr Laifmaieftie ; and

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 57

the partie, without concurfe of our fouerane lorclis Aduocat, he him felff; or
could nevir be hard to perfew the fecund member of the fummondis vpouu the
invafioun thairin qualifeit, att ony particular dyet, befor my Lord Juftice or his
deputis ; quhilk cryme could nocht be put to the knawledge of ane Inqueift, albeit the partie war prefent, and maid na alledgeance in the contrair ; feing the
Juftice could i)ut nathing to the knawledge of aneIuqueift,bot that cryme, quhairvpoun puneifment might follow. And as to that pairt of the reply, bearing that
the argument, fra the comparifoun of Ciuell cauflis to the Criminall, is nocht
pertinent, it is allegit, that in Ciuill cauflis, quhair our fouerane Lord and his
hienes aduocat lies entreis, the fummondis contiues tua conclufionis, quhairupoun
tua feuerall effectis follows the puneifment of the partie tranfgreffour ; to oiu"
fouerane Lord, and a commoditie to the partie : And the lyk is impoirtit be Criminall perfute, quhair the partie lies ouy entreis, to wit, the puneifment at the
inftance of our fouerane lord and the Aflythment to the partie. — It is anfuerit be
the Aduocat, that the weiring, bering and vfing of piftolettis, being prohibit be
the Actis of Parliament, vnder the panes thairin contenit, the partie perfewit or
flvaithet thairby lies verrfe guid entreis to perfew the offender ad penam : And
quhair it is allegeit, tliat in tliis caice thair is only ejfectus sine effect it, the lybell is nocht foundit super mero effectu, seel super conatu qui peruenit ad actum :
And to the reft of the alledgeance, repeitis the former anfuer. — It is anfuerit,
that thair is na flvaith qualifeit inferrit to the partie ; and tliairfoir the anfuer
and lybell, in that pairt, is nawyis competent to the parteis ; fpeciallie, in refpect
that thair is nathing qualefeit, bot ane naikit invafioun be allegit i)refenting,
quhairvpoun na deid is qualifeit to haif followit ; et sic est effectus ct tcinium
conatus, qui cum effectu idem est ; quhairupoun na deid lies followit, as faid is.
Thridlie, it is allegit, that the firft member of the fummondis is altogidder
irrelevant and generall, in that pairt thairof, beiring, that the defender hes borne
and worne piftoletis, in findrie vtheris partis of Fyfe, by' the laiidis of Woidmylne and Monymale : nocht condifcending in fpeciall vpoun the vtlier pairtis
within Fyfe ; be the quhilk generalitie the defender is preiudget of his defenfliis ;
ffor gif the perfewer had condifcendit vpon the vtheris jiairtis, thair is fufficient
defenflis competent to the defender to haif elydit that part of the lybell ; feing
he poflefles vtheris landis in Fyfe by the landis of Monymale and Woidmylne,
fie as the Landis of Pittowie, Pinckerton, &c. : Attour the lybell is altogidder
irrelevant and generall, anent the landis of Woidmylne, nocht condifcending vpoun
the fpeciall pairt thairof; feing be the lawis of this realme he is nocht forbidden
to heir piftolettis or fchute thairwith, within his awin duelling-place, houfllis, or

' Forbye, besides. See p. 59, where the Lord Advocate restricts the libeU
VOL. 11. H

5.S CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598,

Sairdis, qiiliilkis ar all of the landis of Woidmyliie ; in refpect qiihairof, the lybell,
in the tua former pointis of the firft member, is altogidder generall and irrelevant.— It is anfuerit, that the funimondis is verrie relevant, in la far as the faniin
beiris that the defender buir and vfit piftoletis vpoun the landis of Wodmjine
(and) Monymale, exprefslie, and vther pairtis of Fyfe, quhilk is relevant aneuch ;
tor the haifing and weiring thairof being forbidden in the haill realme and in
everie pairt thairof, it wes nocht leirum to the defender to haif thame in ony
pairt of Fyfe : And quhair it is allegit, that the defender, duelland in ^Voidniylne, it was lelum to him to haif piftoletis within his awin hous, clois and
yaird, and that in refpect thairof, the lybell nocht bearing the fpeciall pairt of
the lands of ^Voidmylne, vpoun the qidiilk the defender buir and had the I'aidis
piftoletis, it is nocht relevant ; it is anfuerit, that the lummondis ftandis verrie
relevant, beirand that he had and bure the laidis piftoletis vpoune the laidis
landis, contrair the Actis of Parliament ; quhairby it is cleirlie fignifeit, that he
had the piftoletis, quhair, by Act of Parliament, he mycht nocht haif thame :
Attour, the hailing of the piftoletis within his hous, yaird or cloile, being ane defenfe allegit competent to the partie, the perlewer was nocht obleift to niak ony
Dientioun thairof in his fummondis ; bot gif thay pi-opone ony allegeance vpon
Uie generalitie of the fummondis, quhairby thay find thamelelfis preiudgeit in
the particuler defenfe competent to thame in nianer foirfaid, gif my Lord Jultice ordane the perfeweris to condifcend, thay lull coufonne thamelelfis to his
directioun.

It is anfuerit be the defender, that the beiring and weiring of piftoletis ar
nocht forbiddin be the Actis of Parliament, within all the pairtis of the realme ;
becaus the Act of Parliament maid thairanent contenis certane limitationis and
exemptionis, as the actis beiris, repeitit heir hrenitatis causa. As to the fecund
member of the anfuer maid for fuftening of the relevancie of the lybell, beiring,
that the piftoletis war boire, woirne and vfet, incontrar the tennour of the Actis
of Parliament, quhairby it is fignifeit, that the famin wair boire, woinie and
viet vpoun the pairtis forbiddin ; that pairt of the anfuer is na wyis relevant,
leing it audit to haif bene fpeciallie lybeliit, in quhat pairt the piftolettis war
boire, worne and vfet, and the lybell maid relevant and li>eciall in that point ;
to the effect that the partie mjcht haif bene hard to haif vfet his lauchful defenflis, and to haif difpute with the pcrfewaris, quhither the place qualifeit in
the lybell was lauchfull or vnlauchfull. Anfueraiid to the thrid member of the
reply, quhilk contenis ane oflfer maid be the perleweris to condifcend vpoun the
fpeciall place, gif my Lord Juftice thinkis the famin neceftar ; it is allegit be the
defender, that pairt of the anfuer nawayis to be relevant ; becaus my Lord Juftice, of his. office, audit only to judge vjwun the lybell as the famin is fet doun,

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 59

quhairwith the partie was fummond lauchfullie, and thairupon had allcgeances
maid thairaganis to gif ane direct anfuer, relevant or nocht relevant : And the
pai'tie is nocht haldin, of reflbne, to anfuer to ony declaratioun to be maid at the
bar, quhilk confiflis in facto, quliairupoun the Aflyfe ar obleift to geve thair determinatioun ; and ' the place' being ane fpeciall point, quhairupoun tryell aucht
to be tane be the AlFyie, quhilk nocht being relevantlie fet doun in the lybell,
the famin can nawyis be fupleit be ony declaratioun to be maid. — The perfewaris,
to efchew prolixitie, be thair declaratioun, reftrictis the woirdis of the lybell
anent the haifing of piftoletis vpoun the landis of Woidniylne, infafar as the
I'amin may appeir to comprehend the hous, clois and yaii-d, to ' the landis of
Woidmylne,' outwith the houfe, clois and yaird ; albeit the faid declaratioun be
iiawyis necefTar, becaus the perfewer was nocht obleift to lybell the defenderis
exceptioun. — It is anfuerit, that the faid declaratioun aucht nawayis to be reflauit, the famin confifting in facto, tending to fa lieich ane cryme to the defender,
and nawayis being lybellit, for the x-efone foirfaid : And quhair it is allegit, that
the perfeweris ar nocht obleift to Ijbell the defenderis exception, it is anfuerit,
that the perfeweris ar obleift of the Law to fet doun ane relevant lybell, quhairupoun the cryme lybellit may be inferrit ; and the Judge aucht to geve ane direct anfuer vpon the relevancie thairof ; and the lybell can nawayis be fuppleit
be ony new declaratioun maid at the bar, in prejudice of the defender.

The perfewer anfueris, that the fummondis is relevant of the Law ; and gif
thair war nocht ane perticuler exceptioun proponit in facto aganis the allegit
generalitie of this woird, (' the landis of Woidmylne,') my Lord Juftice wald
find the famin relevant of the Law, as conteneand ane fpeciall tyme, place, with
all vther ciixumftances requifit ; and fua the famin being only quarrellit be ane
alledgeance in facto, the famin may be fuftenit be ane reply in facto. — It is anfuerit, that the faid allegeance confiftis altogidder injure et non in facto, and is
proponit aganis the irrelevancie of the fiunmondis, in the aftuniptioun, quhilk is
mair large nor the propofitioun ; and ane irrelevant lybell can nawayis be fuftenit be ane reply confifting in facto. — The alledgeance is in facto, beand piiuata jura rei, cannocht be knavvin to the perfewer ; and thairfoir aucht nocht
to be lybellit, natlier can he be aftrictit to lybell ne<>-atiue for the refpect of thair
priuat defence in facto, in facto particulure. It is anfuerit, that the perfewer
can nocht be hard to alledge mifknawledge, be limitationis, reftrictionis and exceptionis contenit in the Actis of Parliament, qidiairupoun the lybell is foundit.
— It is anfuerit be the aduocat, the haill factis comprehendit in the fummondis
jnan be affirmatiue, and referrit to the Aflyfe ; and na negatiue can be lybellit be
the perfewer. — It is anfuerit be tlie defender, that the factis lybellit, quhairvpoun
the Aflyfe aucht to tak cognitioun, audit nocht to be fet doun mair aniplie nor

90 CRIMINAL TRIALS, A.D. 1598:

the law is maiJ, quliairupoun the famin is foundit; fua that the AfTyfe, of neceffitie, may cognolce vpone ane affirmatiue, liniitat and reftrict as the Law
prelcryves.

Nov. 4. — The pannell takis inftrumentis, that Charles Murray of Aitkit,
with the kyn and freindis of \inq'^ Johne Murray, comperit noclit, being oft
tymes callit to that effect ; and that he offerit him lelf reddie to anfuer as effeiris.
Comperit Rodger Efditoun, feruitour to his Maieftie, and producet the Warrand vnderwrittin, quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Jullice-Clerk (and 3 our deputis), we greit 50W weill. It is our will, and for
certane cauffis and confulderationis nioveing ws, We command qow, tliat, vpoun the ficlit heirof, 3P
continew the criminall caufe peifewit befoir jow, at ])e inftance of Cliai'.es MuiTay of Aiikett, and
remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'^ Jolme Murray, and our aduocat for our entres, aganis Jolme
Amote of Woidniylne, ffor tlie flaucliter of J>e faid vmq'«' Jolmne, beiring, weiring and Ichuiting of piltolettis, aganis tlie tennour of the Actis of Parliament, and vjieris crymes contenit in our vferis letteris
direct fairupoun ; and that unto the thrid day of pe nixt Juftice-Air of our llierefdome, quhair )>e faid
Johne Aniote duellis, or foner, vpone fyftene dayis waiming : Takand the famin or vferis new cautioun for liis conipeirance, vnder the famyn pane contenit hi the former Act ; or then enter and delyuer him in waird witliin our Caftell of Edhiburgh, to remane in the meane tyme. As 36 will anluer
to ws vpone 3 our office and obedience ; keipand jiir prefentis for 5 our warrand. Subfcryuit with our
hand, Att Halyrudhous, the Herd day of November 1598.

(Sic.fubfcribitur) JAMES E.

The Juftice ordanit the perfonis ^TiderwTittin to be reffauit cautioneris, in
maner following :

Sir Patrik Hepburne of Lufnes kny', Johne Toures of Innerleyth, James
Creichtoun of Ruthvennis, Thomas Abircrumbie of that Ilk, Alexander Blair,
apperand of Bathayoke, Johne Traill of Blebo, Henrie Pitcairne of that Ilk,
Andro Aytoun of Dynmwre, Robei-t Lummifdene of Aii'drie, and Dauid Betoun,
fear of Balfour, become pledges and fouerteis coniunctlie, vnder the pane of ten
thoufand jHindis, (viz. to ilk ane of thame, vnder the pane of ane thoufand
pundis,) for Jolme Arnot of Woidniylne, that he fall compeir befoir our louerane
lordis Juftice and his deputis, the thrid daj^ of the nixt Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Fyfe, or foner, vpone fyftene dayis wairning ; to vnderly the law, fFor
the flauchter of vmq'^ Johnne INIurray, feruitour to Patrik Commendater of Lundoris ; and for beiring and weiring of pifl:oletis. — The I'aniin day, John Amote,
30unger of Wodmylne, band and obleift liiin, his airis, executouris and affignais,
to freith, releif and keip fkaythles his cautioneris aboue writtiu of thair faid
cautioun, and of all danger, coifl:, fkayth and expenfis, that thay or ony ane of
thame may incur thairthrow.

32 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 361

[iV/r William Haert et Mr William BoirtJmik Justices-Deputes.']

J Nov. 3. — James Lokhart, younger of Lie, Thomas Gairdner elder,

and Thomas Gairdner younger.
Delaitit of contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring of
piftoletis.

Persewaris, Ailame Somervell, Thomas Someryell, and Mr Thomas Hararailtoun of Dnimcarne.
It is allegit be James Lokhart, yovmger of Lie, that Allane Lokhart and Laurence Broun to be feik ; and producet Mr ^Villiam Birny, minifter at Lanerk,
quha, being fworne, deponit that Allane Lokhairt had bene feik in the het feiknes' tuentie dayis befoir Setterday laftwas ; bot convaleffit, lyand aboue the
claythis : And that Laurence Broun was lyand bedfaft, vnhable to travell to
this Court. — ' Continewit to the morne.'

Nov. 4. — Continued to the Air of ' Lanai-k, tertio Itineris, vel xv dierum.'
Pledge, William Hammiltoun of Dynferf. Lokhart becomes pledge for Allan
Lokhart and Laurence Broune.

3ii)iiiri; in Wimtf ^c.

Nov. 4. — Gilbert Lord Somervell, Thomas Somervell, portioner of

Grainge, Adarae Somervell, feruitour to the faid Gilbert, W"

Somervell in Amphorlay, James Somervell in Grenefeild, Hew

Elder in Carnewath-mylne, and Hew Paterfon in Carnewath.

Delaitit for lying await for James Lokhart, younger of Lie ; and for cuming

to his chalmer, vnder filence of nicht, within the burch of Edinburgh.

Persewaris, James Lokhart, younger of Lie, and Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Druracairne.
James Lokhart, younger of Lie, pafTis fra tliat pairt of the lybell perfewit at
his inftance aganis my Lord Somervell and his freindis, fa far as the fiimin
tuiches ony pairt of thift ; referveing alwayis liis actioun ciuillie aganis thame
thaii'foir. Quliairupoune my Lord tuik inftrumentis, for him felf, and the remanent impannellit.

Conipeirit James Lokhart, elder of Lie, and declairit vpoun his fauU and confcience, that he nevir knew of the raifmg of the Lettres, at his fones inftance,
aganis my Lord Somervell and his complices ; bot was reddie to aflift and defend the faid Lord, in all his honeft actiones : And thairuiJoun cravet inftrumentis.—Continued to the Juftice-air of ' Lanark, tertio Itineris, vel xv dierum.
Pledge, Dauid Somervell of Plane, for fa mony as he was for befoir ; my Lord
for the reft.'

' Fever, scarlet fever ?

62 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

[J/?- WiUhnne Borthuih, Justice-Depute^

Nov. 10. — James Lyoune of Eifter Ogill, and Williame Lyoune in
Balgillie.
Cowperit Mr Thomas Rollok, aduocat, and produceit ane "Warrand, fubfcryuit
be his Maieftie and the fecretar, quhilJv Mas adniittit be the Juftice ; quhairof
the tenuour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Clark and 5 our deputis, We grcit 50W Weill, rorfaniekle as the . . ."•

day of is appoyutit and affignit to James Lyoune of Eifter Ogill, and Williame Lyoune in

Balifillie, ffor fair comperance befor ^ow in our Tolbuith of Edinburglie, to vnderlye our lawis for fe
ilaucliter of vmq'= Alexander Cowtis ; notlitnitliftanding, for certane cauHis and conlidderationis moving ws ; efpeciallie, for efeliewing of forder troubill and inconvenientis, quhilkis be J>e keping of fe
faid dyet may fall out: It is cure will, and we command 30W expreflie, be Jiir preientis, to defert fe
faid dyet, and to defift and ceife fra all proceding fairiu ; difpenfing with Jie perfonall comperance,
alfweill of pe defendaris as of Jie perlewaris, and with nocht reporting of pe lettres ; and that 56 nawayes vnlaw J)ame nor pair cawtionaris, nochtwithftanding quhatfumever warrand or command gevin
or to be gevin and direct to ^ow in the contrair : As ^e will anfuer to ws pairvpoune : Quhairanent
]iir prefentis falbe vnto 50W ane Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Edinburghe, )ie vij day of
November, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribilur) JAMES REX.

\_Mr WiU'iume Hairt, Justice-Depute.']

J^jjuil^ir, ^f . — ILinljilitt) o^ ^'^rl of Slicjtjir for X\)t (Cainpijdts antr

iHacsiTijors.

Nov. 14. — Akciiibald Eui.l of Ergyli.,' as principall ; and JameS
Seytoun of Tillybody and James Sohaw of Sauchie, as Cautioners, to enter John Dow Campbell M^Condochie, &c.
Comperit Alexander (James?") INIaifter of Elphinftoune, togidder with Maifteris Alexander King and Jolme Halyday, his preloquiitouris ; and as j'rocuratouris for Alexander Elphinftoune, brother to Robert Lord Elphinftoune, Andro
SjTn in Wefter Roffie, William Ilirdman thair, Ninian Ilenryfoun,' &c. ; and
produceit our fouerane lordis Lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, chargeing
Archibald Erll of Ergyli Lord Campbell, as principall, James Seytoun of Tillybody and James Schaw of Sauchie, (as cautionei s.) to enter John Dow Campbell
JVrCondochie, tutour of Innerraw; Duncan Campbell, his fone; Patrik Campbell,
brother to the faid Johne ; Lauchlane Campbell, brother-lone to the faid Johne ;
Archebald and Duncan Campbellis ; John Dow M'Gregour, brother to the Lard

' The Earl of Argyle is here pursued, as the King's Lieutenant of the bounds or district within
which these Campbells and MacGregors resided ; in which capacity he had found security for tiie
lawless tribes over whom he had command ; tliey in their turn becoming liable to him in relief, under
separate bonds. * He is designed James in the entry, Dec. L ' The other pursners, being the

Mafter of E.'s tenants, are here enumerated, as having been injured by the Campbells and MacGregors.

32JAC. VI. (5RIMINAL TRIALS'. ^3

of M'^Gregour; John Dow, Andro Dow, fonnes to vmq'^ Ewine M'Gregour; Gregour IVrGregour and Joline Dow M'Gregour, fonnes to Allefter Skorach ; Patrik
Makgregoui*, fone to Patrik DowM^Gregour; and James M'Gregour, fone to Duncan Glene.

Persewaris, Alexander Elpliinllone, brother to Robert Lord Elpliinfton, and otliers.
Prelocutouris, Alexander Maiftcr of Elpbinftoune, Mr Alexander King, Mr Jolinne Halyday.
Prelocutouris for the defenders, Mr Willianie Olipliant, for Archebald Erie of Argyle ; Mr Tliomas Craig, for James Scbaw of Sauchie ; Mr Robert Lyntoun, for James Seytoune of Tilliebodie.
The Juftice continewis, with confent of partie, to the xxj day of the faid
moneth of November.

Nov. 21. — The Juftice afTynis the firft of December to the defenderis, to
gif in thair defenflis.

Dec. 1. — Compei'it Johne Halyday and Mr Alexander King, prelocutouris
for James Maifter of Elphinfloun and his Tennantes, as perfewaris, aganis the
Erll of Ergyll. — Comperit Mr Johne Scharp and Williame Oliphant, as preloquutouris for the Erll of Ergyll and his cautioneris ; and produceit the defenflis,
quhilk wes delyuerit to Mr Alexander King.

The Juftice afllgnit the fewint day of December to anfuer.

Dec. 7- — Anfwers to the Defences were lodged. The Juftice continewis
tiie pronunceing Interlocutour in the faid mater Uteratorie}

JiJesif fititfl Pace of as^bintullie — Caftins ^risoiter, ^f .

Nov. 24. — *SiR James Stkwart of Auchmadies,^ -Sir James Stewart

of Ballieachan, Patrik Butter, fear of Gormok,^ * James SteWart of Bodinfchawis,

* Robert Stewart of Facaftell, * James Stewart of Force, Dauid Donald of the

Grange,* *Alexander Robertfoune of Fafcallie, *Alexander Stewart of Cullelony,

Patrik Blair of Ardblair,^ William Chalmer of Drumlochy," James Ramfay of

Ardbikie,' George Campbell of Crwnan," William Wod lumtyme of Latoune,''

Dauid Campbell of Eifter Denheid,'" *John Falow, younger in Balbrogie,"

Robert Alexander in Cowper,'^ Colene Falow in Grange," Patrik Campbell of

Kethik,'* John Sowter in Cowper-grange, James Blair in Bruuftoune, Sir ^Valter

RoUok, tutour of Duncrub, Henrie Durhame iu Falow, Johne Pitcairnis at the

Mylne of Kilour, * Dauid Arnot of Incheok, * George Cwneiftoun of Ettradoiir.

Laurence Name of Alliefargie, Archibald Hei-ring of Di'immy, Archibald

Campbell of Perfar.

' No furtber notices are entered in the Record ; so it is likely tbe matter Iiad been privately compromised. ^ Those marked * did not ' compear.' ^ Plegio, Domino Drumlochy. ' Plegio,
Colene Falow in Granp;?. ^ Plegio, Laur. Meifar of Mekillour. ^ Plegio, Pat. Butter of Gormok. ' Plegio, W" Wod of Banblane. ^ Plegio, BylVhop of Brechin. ^ Plegio, James
Ramfay of Ardbikie. '" Plegio, Byfchop of Brechin. " Plegio, eodem. '•^ Plegio, Bifcbop
ef' Brechin, " Plpgio; eodem. " Pleg'o, Colene Campbell of Landy.

(34 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

Dilatit for AflTageing of the Place of Affintullie, and taking of Andro Spalding of Affintullie ; committit in the moneth of November, the yeir of God
P.VMxxxxvij yeiris.

Persewah, Mr Tliomas Hammiltoiin, ailuocat.

The aduocat produceit his Maiefteis Warrand, for continewatioun of the dj^ett
to the XV of December nixtocum. — The Laird Arbokie and ■\^^illiame Wod fumtyme of Latoun, now of Banblane, Dauid Campbell of Denheid, Williame Chalnier of Drumlochy, Archibald Herring of Drinimy, offerit tliame to Affyfe ; and
diffiiflentit to the continewatioune ; quhairvpoun thay afkit inftrumentis. Johne
Pitcarne, att the Mylne of Inuerkelonr, afkit inftrumentis. — The famin day,
Johnne Erll of AthoU, oft tymes callit as cautioner and fouirtie for Sir James
Stewart of Auchmadeis, &c. to half enterit and prefented thame, &c. wes vnlawit
for nocht entrie of the faidis Sir James, &c. for ilk ane of thame, in the pane of
fyve hundreth merkis : Lykeas, the faidis perlbnes principall, wer adjudgeit to
be denunceit rebellis, and put to the home, and all thair movabill giiidis efcheit,
as fugitiues.

Nov. 25. — Ai.EXAXDEU Hay of Delgetie.

Mr Thomas Hammiltoiui of Drumcairne, aduocat to our fouerane lord, pro-?
duceit his hienes Lettres, purcheft at his inftance, to tak fouertie of Alexander
Hay of Delgetie, that he Ibuld half compeirit this day and place, and vnderlyne
the law for the cryme of Adulterie, committed be him (with Barbara Forbes, his
allegeit fpous).

Compeirit Mr Johnne RufTell, aduocat, exciifatorio nomine for the Laird of
Delgatie, and allegeit na proces (lay) aganis the faid Alexander, becaus he is
deidlie feik, nocht abill to travell, and comperis lyand within my Lord Sinclairis
place in RavinfTuik ; and ofTeris to verifie the famin lauchfuUie. — Comperit Mr
Williame ]\Iurray, minifter of Dyfert, as Minifter of the parochin, quhair the
Laird of Delgatie lyis, and being folempnlie fworne, depones, vpone certane knawlege, that the faid Alexander was deidlie feik, and could nocht travell. — Compeirit lykwayis, Alexander Cryftie, bailzie of Dyfert, ane of the witneffis vfeit,
deponet that the Laird of Delgitie is lyand bedfaft, hevelie diflfeifit, and nocht
habill to travell. — Compeirit lykwayis, William Craig of Craigiftoun, and deponet
that the faid Alexander was lyand bedfaft, and deidlie feik, as appeirit to him.

The aduocat defyrit that this dyet may be continewit to Tyfday, becaus the
Minifter and the witneffes lies nocht deponit conflantlie of his feiknes ; quhill that
his Maieftie be aduerteift thairof, and direct Mediceneris to tak tryell thairof.

The Juftice continewis this matter to the penult day of November inftant ; and
ordanet the Laird of Delgetie to find new cautiouu for his compeirance that day.

32 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 6S

The famin day, compeirit Alexander Bonar of Balgirfcho, and become pledge
and fouirtie for Alex' Hay of Delgetie, that he fall compeir befoir my Lord Juftice and his deputis, in the Tolbuthe of Edinburghe, the penult day of November
inftant, in the hour of caufe, in cais he be habill to travell, and vnderly the law
for the cryme of Adulterie, committit with Barbara Forbes, his allegeit fpous ;
vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

Pheloquutouris for the pannel, Mr Jolmne Ruffell, Mr Williarae Oliphant.
Nov. 29. — Comperit the Aduocat, and alledgeit that tlie Laird of Delgatteis cautioner aucht to be vtilawit, and him felfF aucht to be denunceit to the
home, for his non entrie this day ; and the famin aucht nawyis be delayit, in refpect of ony aflToinsie' of feiknes ; becaus the mater being continewit to this day,
to the effect his Maieftie mycht direct ane Doctor of Medicine to vifleit the defender, and to try his prefent eftait, and to report the famin to my Lord Juftice ;
I offer me to preif, be Mr Thomas Moriefoime, doctour of Medecine, quha, conforme to his Maiefteis command, hes vilTeit the Laird of Delgattie, that he mycht
haif travellit and keipit this dyet without hafard of his lyffe ; quhais declaratioune, being prefent, I defyre my Lord to reffaue. To the quhilk it is aufuerit,
excusaforio nomine, as ofbefoir, that the Declaratioun of Doctor Moriefoun, in
preiudice of the faid Laird of Delgattie aucht nocht to be relTauit, for tua cauffis :
ifyrfl, becaus it is dictum tmius testis, quha, of the law, veque probatciuiliter
neque criminuliter, fpeciallie in fic a mater of grit confequens ; nixt, becaus of the
law testinonjurato non creditur: And trew it is, that Doctor Moriefoune wes nather directit in prefens of partie to this effect, nor jat fworne in prefens of partie ;
and quhatfumewir prewie directioun hes bene gewin to him extra judiciallie, the
famin can nawyis preiudge the Laird of Delgattie : Nixt, gewand- that his depofitioune mycht be reflauit, quhilk is altogidder denyit, and that the famin mycht
mak faith, it is cei'tane that the famen, of law, quod ulleganti impedimenttivt
danda est probatio et non contra; and trew it is, that the alledgance of the feiknes
is proponit be Delgattie, quha, as he verifeit the famin vpoun Satterday laft, be the
Minifter and twa witnefTes, conforme to the Act of Parliament and ordoiu* obferuit in this Judgement ; yit, as ofbefore, he ofTeris him to preif prefentlie, the
continewatioun of the laid feiknes in the perfoim of Delgattie, and that he is altogidder vnhabill to travell, without perrell of his lyffe ; and in refpect thairof
hes tane medicine, and is prefently vnder medicine ; and this he ofTeris him to
pruiff be the depofitioun of ane famous Doctor, viz. Doctor Medicine,^ and the
Teftimoniall of Archibald Mwdie, ypoticar, quha miiiiftrat the faid medicine.

' Essoyne, essoigne. Old Fr. An excuse for non-appearance in Court, &c., onoatli tliat tlie party is
sick, &c. * ^i/o, allowing, or granting for the sake of argument. ^ An amusing mistake of the Clerk of Justiciary for ' Doctor Schomer.'

VOL. II. I

CG CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1^598:

To tlie qiihilk it is anfuerit be my Lord aduocat, that the fyrft alledgance is
iiocht relevant, becaus the Kingis ]\Iaiefleis directioun iu this caife aucht nawyis
to be repute tlie deid of aiie priuat partie, bot the couunand of tlie maiil fouerane Judge : Nixt, the teftimony of the faid Mr Thomas can nocht be rejectit,
becaus he is allegeit shigularis ; becaus this is nocht ane mater of ordinar probatioun, quhilk niyclit fall sub sensu comnutni omnium homiuum indiffcrenter,
bot may be only provin be Doctouris of Medicine, quihus vt periti in sua arte
rapicndum est : Laft, the offer of the contrar Declaratioun can nawyis be reIpectit, becaus it is procureit be the defender, to efchew the tryall of ane haynous
cryme ; and the taking of medicine imports na feiknes. As to the faid Mr
Thomas aith, it could nocht be properlie tane, cjuhill now, that he is reddie to mak
judiciall Report, conforme to his Maiefteis directioun ; quhilk the perfewar produceis and defyres to be red ; craifand my Lord Juflice anliier thairto, and that
his lordfliip will half regard that the laid ]Mr Thomas, in this caife, is testis omni
ei'ceptionc major ; being knawin to half fpent mony yeiris in the ftudie of his
ordinar courfe of medicine, and to half pad the haill degreis thairof.

The faid \^\irrand being red, the Aduocat took inftrumentis thairupoun.

The faiil Mr Thomas Moriesoune, s".' doctor of medicine, being fwoine, declarit, tliat on command of Lis Maiefteis Commiflioune, be part, vpouu Monunday laft to Ravinilieuch, and betuix tbre and
four houris eftir none fand llie Laird Delgattie lyand on bis bed : He declarit bis comniiflloun to bini
fra liis Maieftie, inqiiyrit tlie caufe of bis difeife, qidiilk lie declarit was ane indigoftioun and cniditie of
bis ftommok, witii fciiottis' tbrow liis body, quhilk be faid was be excesand travell ; to the quhilk tbe
Doctouv cikit,^ that intemperance belpitt itt : And forder declaris, that he fand him feik and defyrit
iiini to tak medicine; and ihinkis, be wald baif bene wai"' of bis trauell ; and nocbtbeles, be bis opijiioun, he mychl baif travellit to Edinburgbe to this dyctt, without danger of his lyfe.

Mr Martene Sciiomer, Doctor of Medicine, being Avorne, deponit, that tbe Lady Delgattie being
bcir in Edinburgbe, crniftlie defyrit tbe deponcr to pafs to bir buftiand in Ravenlbeucb, quhair fche
affermit be wes deidlie feik : He tuik Ar"" Mwdie, ipoticar, with him, with fie remedeis as he thocht
agi-eabill for the feiknes declarit be bis wyffe: Thay come vpoun tlie xxviij day of this inftant to Rp*
vinllieuch, quhair tbay fand tbe Laird of Delgattie, vorry bcavelie difeafit, tormcntit with rehement
panis in his ftommok and in bis melt,'' with auc grit fqwalllng of his haill belly, that he mycht not fuffir him to tuicli bis bellic, ftommok, nor melt : Tiiairvpoune, for remcdio of his neceffitie, inftantlie be
gart gif him ane cleifter, and applyit ficlyke, fomentatiounis to bis melt, maid vnctioune of vleis,^ and
left tbe poticar with him to minifler fie medicines as ar neceffar for him. And in end, declaris vpomie
his confcience, as for tbe prelent as be fand him, be mycht nocht travell to Edinburgbe, ^e' be mycht
not let vp in his bed, for dolour, nor mycht nocht cum to the flure : And dedaiit, that he cam fra the
Laird of Delgattie this laft nycht, att midnycht.

And forder, the procuratouris for the faid Laird of Delgattie fend for Ar^^
3Iiidie, ipoticar to the doctor ; quhilk thay defyrit to reniane in procefs.

The Juftice continewis this mater to Fryday the fyrft of December. — Alex''
Bonar of Balgirfcho became fiirety for his appearance, ' gif he be abill to travel!.'

' Probably senior. ^ Now termed shootingpains, or spasms. ' Added, subjoined.

* \N'orse. ° The spleen. ^ Oils or unguenta. ' Yea.

32 Jac, VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS: 6^

Dec. 1. — The Juftice continewis the mater to the third day of the nixt
Juftice-air of Abirdene, or foner, vpoun xv dayis wairning, eftir he be convaleft ;
in refpect of the faid Laird of Delgateis difeale. Alex' Bonar of Balgirfcho became pledge and fouertie.'

JStaiiitg; anU Mtarins of l^istcrlcts.

Dee. 9. — Sir James Dundas of Arneftoun, knycht.

Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in bering and weiring of

piftolettis. ^

Prelocuutouris for die pannell, Mr Johne Sliarpe, Mr Willlame Olipliant, Mr John Monereif.
Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune.

It is alledgeit be Sir James Dundas, that he can nocht be putt to the knawledge of ane Aflyis for the cryme libellit, in refpect of the limitatioun and exceptioun contenit in the Act of Parliament ; be the quhilk it is promittit, that it
fall be lefum to all men, in ganging, remaning and repairing to oiftis, raidis and
aflembleis, to heir, weir and vfe piltolettis : And trew it is, before the tyme lybellit, the faid Sir James wes commandit be ^Villiame Erie of Angus, being than
Leutenent, as he is yitt, to accumpany him, att ane Juftice Court, appointit to
be hauldin att Peblis, vpoun the nynt and tent dayes of October : fibr obedience
of the quhilk command, the faid Sir James did na wrang to provyde him felfF
of armour, vpoun the faid audit day ; the faid Sir James, att that tyme, being
domeftik feruitour^ and proper depender vpoun my Lord of Angus, lyke as he
wes diuers 3eiris ofbefoi-e : And this alledgeance, fafar as concernis my Lord of
Angus command gewin to him, and the haulding of the faid Juftice Court, is offerit to be verifeit prefentlie, be my Lord of Angus awin declaratioun, quha is
perfonallie prefent. The Aduocat anfueris, that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect alfeweill of the place quhair the cryme is lybellit to be committit,
to witt, in the hie way paffand fra Nudrie to Kirkliftoune, as in refpect of the
qualitie of the pannell nawayis duelland within the boundis of my Lord of Angus Leutenandrie ; natliir can my Lord of Angus declax'atioun be reflauit in this
caufe, becaus his lordfchip, in prefens of my Lord Juftice, lies raknit the faid Sir
James to be within degreis-defendand to his lordfchii^, baith in affinitie and confanguinitie : And his lordfchip declaratioun ex post facto, in eais it mycht be
reflauit in this place, fra the quhilk the perfewar altogidder difaflentis, yit the
faniin can work nathing ; becaus the Act of Parliament allowis allanerlie the

' See Feb. 15, 1600. '^ Tiiis affords a striking ilhistration of the former definitions given

of the word ' feruitour,' which hy no means bears the modern interpretation of a menial or ' servant.'
In this instance, a knight and baron, of considerable rank and power, is termed ' domellik ieruitonr;'
and besides, the same person is described as being related to the Earl of Angus, ' baith in alliuitie and
confanguinitie.' ■

68 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

wering of piftolettis, in ganging to Raidis and Proclaniatiounis, and to perIbnnes chargeit be his hienes Letti-es and aiithoritie.

Before the Judgeis Interlocutoui-, the faid Sir James Dundas paft fra his alledgeance, albeit the famin may be ane fufficient realbxin to exeme him fra all
jienaltie : And fyrft, that his Maieftie fall nocht tak the faid Sir James to be ane
contradictour to his hienes lawis ; and fecundlie, att my Lord of Angus fpeciall
defyre, be quhais command he addreft him felff to Peblis, haiiing the faidis piftolettis ; and als, fpeciallie confydand in his Maiefteis benignancie, he referring
him in his Maiefteis will for this challenge. Quhairvpoun the Kingis aduocatt
tuik inftruinentis.

23r0JtjjfiTg: tf}t Pafe at 'MmntuXlit,

Dec. 15. — Patkik Butter of Gormock, &c.'
Dilatit of the AfTageing of the Place of Affrntullie, &c.

This case was continued to 16. 19. 20. and 21 December ; on which laft diet,
the Juftice continued it farther to the xxiij December.'

dTirt-raisiucr— rj^fft— 1^oucj]^tnci: antj J^Iasins l^orsts anU CattU.

Dec. 21. — William Roise of Kihawick, Hucheoune Roife his fone (and

apperand air,) Dauid Roife of Holm, John Rois in Cautray,

Dauid Rois in Lyne, Alex"^ Roife in Lenoch, Alex' Rois alias

Roy, Walter Rois in Kilmany and Johne Rois in Rymoir.

Dilatit for the trefTonable Byrning of George Dunbaris hous in Alwne (Clwne ?)

and thifteous fteling fra him of his haill inl'ycht, guidis and geir, worth twa

thowfand markis ; of hoching of and llajing of ten horfe and threfcoir of nolt,

pertening to the faid George Dunbar.

Persewar. Preloquutour for tlje pannell.

Joline Dunbar of MejTies. Mr Willlame Oliphant.

. Mr Williame Oliphant tuk inftrumentis that the Laird of Moynes comperis to
perfew. — The pannell takis inftrumentis of thair entrie, and proteftit for releif
of thair cautioneris ; and tuik inftrumentis that na perfoun comperit to perfew,
bot Johnne Dunbar of Moynes.

The famin (day) the faid Johne Dunbar in Meynes produceit ane Warrand,
fubfcryuit be his Maieftie, vndaittit, ordaning the Juftice and his deputis to defert the Lettres purcheft be him felfi' and George Dunbar in Clwne and ^Villiam
Falconer his guid-fone, aganis Ali-axe Camroun of Locheldy (Lochiel ?) and
his complices, Quhilk Warrand, the Juftice wald nocht admit ; and ordanit
the cautioun for reporting of the Lettres dewlie execute and indorfat vpoune
' Vid. Nov. 24t, » No farther procedure appears on Record,

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 69

thame, to be vnlawit, for nocht reporting thairof vpotin the faid Allaiie and his
complices, famony as the faidis Lettres are nocht execute vpoun.
■ Thairefter, it wes alledgeit be the pannell, that na proces fould be gewin aganis
thame, for ony cryme contenit in the Lettres, committit aganis the faid George
Dumbar and Williame Falconer ; becaus thay compeir nocht, nather hes Johne
Dunbar of Moynes ony interes to perfew ; hot the cautioune fand for perfuit of
the faidis lettres, att the inftance of the faid George Dumbar (and) Williame Falconer, fould be vnlawit, for nocht perfuit thairof. — To the quhilk it wes anfuerit
be the faid Johne Dunbar of Moynes, that he hes fufficient interes to perfew the
haill crymis, feing the crymis wes done to him and vpoun his landis, and thay
wer his tennentis ; and he wes reddie to perfew for the haill crymes, and iwa
the cautioun could nocht be vnlawit.

The Juftice ffindis that the faid John Dunbar could nocht perfew the pannell for ony cryme that wes done aganis George Dunbar and Williame Falconer,
J)ot for the burning allanerlie ; And ordanis the cautioun to be vnlawit for nocht
perfuit of the lettres, fafar as the famin concernis the faid George Dunbar and
William Falconer.

Therefter, before pronunceing of the Dome, Difchargeit to vnlaw the cautioune
tor nocht appeiring and perfute of the lettres, hot the Aflyfe only, and Ordanit
the Warrand vnderwrittin to be infert and regiftrat in the buikis of Adiornall,
quhairof the tenour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 3 our deputis, We greit 30W weill : Forsamekill as fe xxij day of
December inftant is aflignit to Allane Camroune of Bothell (Lociiell?) and certane vferis of his clan
and complices, for fair comperance befoir 30W, to vnderlye our lawis for pe trellbnabill Fyre-rafing in
fe duelling lious of George Dunbar in Chvne, and in ane vtber coitter hous pertening to fe faid George :
Putting of violent bandis on Mariorie Dunbar, bis fpous, and IfTobell Dunbar, fpous to Williame Falconer; and for fe maifterfuU reif of certane guidis pertening to fame; and for diuerfe vferis crymes
fpecifeit in ]>e criminall lettres rafit fairvpoun. Nochtwitbftanding, for certane cauffis moving ws, it
is our Will, and We command 30W to defert ]>e faid dyet, and defill fra all proceding ])airintill ; difpenfing with pe perfonall comperance of Jie faid Allane and bis complices, as alfo with Jie perfewaris
and fair cautioneris for nocht reporting of pe criminall lettres dewlie execute and indorfat; And that
^e deleit furtb of 36 buikis of our Adiornall the Act maid anent fe reporting of |>e faidis Lettres ;
quhairthrow fe famin baif na eflFect nor executioune heirefter : Qubairanent thir prefentis falbe vnto 50W
ane WaiTand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Ilalyrudehous, jie xxij day of December 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

[No Assisers appeared, in consequence of which thirty persons summoned, are
' ilkane of })ame ])airfoir unlawit, in Ipe pane of P merkis.']

The quhilk day Williame Rois of Kilrawik, &c. being enterit on pannell, as
fummond be vertew of our fouerane lordis lettres, pui'cheft at the inftance of
Johne Dunbar of Moynes, George Dunbar in Clune, ^Villiam Falconer in Lethrtf CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598.

inbar, to compeir this day and place, to haif vnderljTie tlie law, for cumnnTig
with thair complices, to the nofl-mer of ij' (200) men, brokkin men' and Ibrneris,-all bodiii in feir of weir,^ with bowis, dorlochis,^ twa bandit fwordis, fteilbonuetis, haberllionnes,' lang hagbuttis'^ and piftolettis, expreflie prohibite to be
borne, woi-ne, vfat or fchot with, be the actis of Parliament and Secreit CounTale respectlue, %-nder diners panis contenit in the famyn ; laitlie vpoune the
aucht day of October inftant, haifing confanit ane deidlie feid, rancour and
malice aganis the faidis compleneris, come vnder fylence and cloude of nycht, be
•way of Brigancie' and Hamefucken,' to the faid George Dunbar duelling hous
in Qwne, pertening heritablie to Johne Dunbar of MojTies ; and thair, be tliame
felffis and thair faid complices, of thair Ipeciall caufmg, hounding, fending, directioun, maintening, quarrelling, airt, pairt-taking, command, aliiftance and ratihabitioune,'' trelTonablie rafit fyre in the faid George Dunbaris duelling hous
in Clunne, and bigginges thairof: And nocht content thairwith, put violent
handis in Mariorie Dunbar, fpous to the faid George, and in Ilfobell Dunbar,
fpons to the faid Williame Falconer, tp-rit'" thair claithes of thame, and fchot"
thame moder-nakit'-furtii of thair faid duelling hous, befoir the famyn was brynt
and diflroyit : The faid Ilfobell Dunbar, fpous to the faid W", being than lyand
in grit dolour and diftres of the birth of ane man-chyld, quhairof fcho was delyuerit hot foure dayis ofbefoir ; quhilk man-chyld, they but pitie or compaffioune,
kaift furth of the faid hous to the mydding -.'^ Lyke as thay, at that famyn tyme,
thifteouflie ftall, concelit, reflet and away-tuk fra the faid George Dunbar, furth
of his faid duelling houfe, his haill infycht-pleneifling," guidis and geir, extending to the valour and quantitie of twa thowfand markis ; togidder with ten
horfis and tln-efcoir of nolt, and maid fchamefullie and vnworthelie hocht" and
Hew auchtene ky and oxin pertening to the faid George Dunbar, as his awin
propir guidis and geir : And fwa, they and ilk ane of thame war airt and pairt
of the faid crymes : As at mair lenth is contenit in the Lettres direct tliairvpoune ; — Offerit thame felffis reddie to abyde the tryell of the law and of ane
AlTyes, for the faidis allegeit crymes, diffafenting fra all continewatioune : And
in reipect that na partie comperit to perfew thame, excejit the faid Johne Dun-

' Broken men, outlaws, separated from every clan by tlieir crimes, and dependinsr upon plunder for
their subsistence. SratterU?igs is a synonymous word in English, and wliicii Dr Johnson terms ' an
elegant word.' ' Men who, without homes, secured free quarters to themselves by violence, and

were a dreadful and merciless scourge to the poor and unprotected tenants and labourers of the ground.
' In warlike array. * Short swords or daggers. ' Habergeons, (awbyrchonnes) coats of

mail, composed of plate or chain mail, without sleeves. Grose, Jamieson. ' A large kind of

musket. " 0|)en and violent robbery. Fr. hrigatidurie. * Assault and violence done to a

person in his own house or home. ' Confirmation, ratification. Law Lat. Ratihahere, pro ra~

turn habere. '° Tare, rent. Fr. tirer. " Pushed them by force. '- Stark-naked.

" Midden, dunghill. " Household furniture, &c. spraichrie, \^ Hamstrung.

32JAC.YI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 71

bar of Moynes ; nather yit was thair ane fufficient Aflyis of thair rank fummond
to this day and place, to pas vpoune thair. Aflyis ; hot as appeirit, of meir malice
be the partie perfewar, thay being niaift innocent of the faidis crymes ; And
thairfoir, firft, proteftit for releiff of Danid Brodie of tliat Ilk, Patrik Dunbar of
Cou3e, Johne Rois, fone to Angus Rois, burges of Name, and Johne Rbis, provefl; of Name, cautionei-is and fouerteis refpectiue, fuinmonit for thair entrie this
day. and place, to the effect foirfaid, be releifEt ; quhilk was adinittlt: Lyke as
alfo, that thay be nocht afl;rictit to fyud new cawtioune, for thair entrie gane, to
vnderlye the law for the faidis crymes, feing thay haifing obeyit the charge of
the faidis Lettres, and haifing cum fevin fcoir of myles for tryell of thair innocencie of the faidis crymes ; and the caus of delay of thair tiyell preceding fra
tlie partie perfewaris, quha nather comperit to jierfew, as faid is, nor fummond
ane fufficient nowmer of Aflyis, as faid is : Lyke as, thay being prefentlie content to abyde the tryell of ane Aflyis of quhatfumevir perlbnis at tlie bar. Quhilk
protefl:atioune the faid Juftice, for the cauflis foirfaidis, admittit. Of}' the quhilkis,
all and fyndrie the premiflis, thay afkit notis (actis) and infl;rumentis.

Dec. 29. — Johne Creychtounk of Crawfurdtoune, William Creychtoune, brother to Mr Robert C. of Carco, James Creychtoune,
fon to John C. of Crawfurdtoune, and Williame M'Gowne in.
.-;(; . the Maynis of Crawfurdtoune.

'•Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'' Patrik MaxMcll, callit of
Dalquhorne.
jyj, - I, (.,,,> Persewar, Mr Alexander Maxwell.

The Juflice continewis this mater to the morne.

Dec. 30. — Continued to the Air of ' Drumfreis tertio Itineris, vel fuper
premouitione xv diernm.'

^Inugljtci— E^acaiiug antJ ^Ijootinir ot i^istolcts.

Dec. 29. — Jaimes CKKYcirrouNE, in Tounheid, fone to vniq''' 'Williame

Creychtoune, tutour of Sanquhar, and Johne Ed^er of Ingliftoune.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Patrik Maxuell of Dalquhorno ; and for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in bering, wering and

Ichuting with piflulettis ; committit in the moneth of lalthypaft. — Mr

Robert Creychtoune of Carco, and Williame Creychtoune in the Tounhead of
Sanchar, fined ' ij" merkis,' and ' fyve hundreth merkis,' for non appearance of
James Creychtoune and Johne Ed3er, ' to half \aiderlyne the law' for the faid

72 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598

crimes. Creychtoune and Edjer are adjudged to be denounced rebels, and ' all
thair movabill guidis to be efcheit,' &c.

^Iausl)ttr,

Jan. 2. 1598-9- — Robert Tulloch of Tannachie, Thomas Tulloch, his
lone, and James Barclay in Mekill Tarrie.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of tlie Slauchter of vmq'^ Williame Dowglas, fone to
AVilliame Dowglas of Erlifmylne.

Persewar, W"" Dowglas of Erlifmyll. Preloquitour, Mr Johne Scharp.

The purfuer produces the Letters duely executed. Comperit Mr Johne Scharp,
cvcusatorio nom'uie for Patrik Dumbar of Blarie, as fouertie for Robert Tidloch,
&c. and alledgis, in refpect of the uotorietie of the ftorme, thay being vpoun thair
jurnay, thay can nocht compeii*.

The Juftice continewis to Furifday (Thurfday).

Jan. 4. — The pannell takis inftrumentis of thair entrie, and proteftit for
releif of thair cautiouneris.

Continued to the aire of ' Elgyne and Forres tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione xv dienim.'

^tatifftjtti-,

Jan. 4. — "William Wod of Baublane, (fumtyme of Latoune.)
Dilatit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of umq'^ Robert Frafer, (L^nicorn

Purfuivant ; committit in the moneth of October yeiris.)

The faid Laird of Latoune produceit ane Warrand, lubfcx'j'uit be the King

and his Counlhll, quhairof the tennour followis.

Rkx,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 50ur deputtis, We greit 30W weiil : Forfaraekill as our vferis lettres ar purcheft att fe inftance of Katherene Rynde, the relict, with fe bairnis, kyn and freindis of
vniq''^ Robert Frafer, Vnicorno Purfevant, for calling of W" Wod of Latoune befoir 50W in 5 our Tolbuith of Ed' the fourt day of Janiiar inflant, in fe hour of caus, to ynderlye ]>e law for alledgeit airt
and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vniq'' Robert ; quhilk flauchter, amang mony vjieris, wes committit in the fFeild ftruckkin betuix our rycht trail! couling George Erie of Huntlie and Archebald
Erie of Argyle. And nochtwithftanding, for diuerfe conliderationis moving ws, We, in our lait Parliament haldin at Ed', the nyntene day of December, the 5eir of God r"V' fourfcoir fevintene jeiris,
Jiaif Remittit and put in obliuioune, all Slauchteris and crymes quhilkes war committit at f e laid flTeiUI,
or at ony tyme preceding, fen Jie firft day of Maij, the ^eir of God I'"V'= four fcoir tuelf ;eiris; Ava
that thay fuld nawayis be callit iu memorye be ws or ony of our fubiectis, in ony tyme heirefter ; putting fe famyn, with all actioune, accufatione, pane, penaltie and puneifment following Jiairvpoune, in
perpetuall obliuioune : Quiiairfoir, and in coniideratioun of the premifles, it is oure wille, and we command 30W, that incontenent eftcr ])e fycht heirof 5e defert the faid dyet ; l\va that the laid Willianiu

> Vide Mar. 3. 1598. and Mar, 8. 1600,

32JAC. VI.' CRIMINAL TRIALS. 73

Wod nor liis cawtloner be nawyis ti-ublit, vnlawit nor adiudgeit for his nocht entrie, the faid fourt day
of Januar inftant, or ony vtlier day fairefter, befoir 30W, for fe caus foirfaid, contenit in fe faid act ;
difcbargeing 50W and jour deputtis of all preceding ])ainntil and of ^our offices in ]iat pairt, be tbir prefeutis. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Dalkeith, tlie ferd day of Januar, the jeu' of God I™.V'^.lxxxxviij
jeris.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX. Angus. Vchiltrie. Elpiiinstoune. Secretarius.
■ The famin day, comperit William Dunbar, IMiiiifter of Dyke, and produceit
the Letter vnderwrittin,' teftifeing the inhabilitie of Alexander TuUoch, quliy
he may nocht compeir this day ; and thaireftir being fworne, he deponit, that
Alex'' Tulloch wes vnhabill to travell without perrell of his lyffe ; quhilk letter
was fubfcryuit be the Moderatour of the Prilbeterie, viz. James Dundas, Minitter att Alve, and . . . Balfour, Minifter at Name.

The Juflice admittis the excufe, and ordanit the mater continew for the faid
Alex" Tulloch to the thrid day of the air of the SherefFdome of Elgyne and Fores, or foner vpoune fyftene dayis wairning. The faid Robert Tulloch aflvit inllrumentis, that the Guidman of Erlifmyll perlew him for airt and pairt of the
-Slauchter of the faid vmq'^ Willlame, for the reflatt, and nocht for the actuall
committing thairof.

Jan. 5. — The Juftice nocht being throughlie avyfit, continewit it, to gif
anfuer quhill this day ; and ordanit the pannell to fynd cautioune for his entrie
to the day and place, in the hour of caus, to vnderlye the law for the faid cryme ;
•quha fund .... Wod of Balbegeno, cawtioner and fouertie to the effect foirXaid, be vertew of our foverane lordis lettres, purcheft at the inftance of Katherine Rynd, the relict, Jo" Frafer, eldeft fone, with the remanent faderles bairnis,
•kyn and freindis of the faid vmq'" Robert : The quhilk day, the faid Jo" Frafer
cbmperand as perfewar, and the faid Williame Wod as defendar, quha proteftit
for releif of his cawtioner ; the faid Juftice depute admittit his Majefteis Precept, and Ordanit the dyet to defert. Quhairvpoune the faid W'" Wod afkit
actis and inftrumentis.

Jan. 26. — JoHNE AiiNOT of Wodniylne.

Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in bering, wering and
fchuting with piftulettis vjjoune the ffeildis and laudis of Wodniylne, at vinq'"
Johne Murray, feruitour to Pati'ik Commendator of Lundores."

The famin day, the faid Johnne Arnot being enterit on pannell, declaii-it with

ane forrowful hairt for his offence committit aganis his Maieftie, and offence

done to my Lord of Limdoris, nocht to contend aganis thame, or in ony foirt to

ii'ritat thame, qiihome he is fory to haif offendit fa helie. He comperit in Judge-

' This Letter does not appear in the Record. - Continued from 23. and 24. Jan.

VOL. II. K

74 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598-9.

ment, noclit to mak ony defence, in his offence committit aganis his Maieftie, be
vmbefetting and tranl'greffing of his lawis, in bering and wering of piftolettis,
hot fimplie and huiniblie to cum in his Maiefteis clemencie and will ; quhilk he
offerit in all pointis to fulfil : And nocht only to obey his Maieftie thairanent,
bot lykewyis to vnderly his Maiefteis will, concerning quhatfumewir fatisfactioun
to be maid in all foirt of honoure and humbill obedience to my Lord of Lundoris, and Laird of Tillybairdin, as maifter and cheif to vmq'' Johne Murray ;
and in geir and vthirwyis to Charles Murray and his freindis, for AflTythment of
the Slauchter of the faid vmq'' Johne ; quhairin abfolutlie I put my felff in his
Maiefteis clemencie and will.

Quhairvpoun, the faid Mr Thomas Hammilton alkit inftrumentis.

The famin day, Sir Patrick Hepburne of Lufnes, knycht, and Johne Touris
of Inverleith, become pledgis and fouirteis, coniunctlie and feverallie, for Johne
Arnot Younger of AVodmyll, that he fall reraane in waird within the tolbuith of
Ed', and fall nocht depart furth thairof quhill his Maieftie declaris his will, in
the quhilk he come, for bering and wering of Piftolettis ; vnder the pane of Fy ve
thowland merkis.

Jan. 30. — Geohge Home in Aytoune.
Dilatit of vmbefetting of Williame Murray, burges of Ed', vpoune Coldinghame-mwre, and maifterfullie Steilling fra him of ane thowfand threlcoir fevin
pundis iijl". iiijd. in gold and filuer.

Compei'it Mr Dauid Guthre, as preloquitour for W"" Murray, quha hes fpeciall intei'es in this mater ; and defyrit this mater may continew, quhill the
inorne, that he may cum fufficientle inftructit with ^jrobatiounes, that (he) can
nocht half for the prefent. — The pannell defyrit that he mycht be putt to the
knowledge of ane AfTyfe of countrey men.

Jan. 31. — Comjierit W™ Murray, merchand burges of Ed', and produceit
ane Warrand, fublcryuit be the Kingis Maieftie ; quliairuf the tennour foUowis.
Rex,

Justice Clark and 50ur ileputtis, We greit 50W weill. It is our will, and We command
30W, that vpoune fe fyclit beirof, to ftay and continew all preceding aganis George Home, for his
allegeit reife fra W™ Murray, or putting of him to fe knawledge of an Affyis fairfoir, till 36 reffaue
our forder Warrand Jiairanent ; keping him in fair waird in ))e meyntyme. As 5e will anfuer to ws ;
keping ))is prefent for jour Warrand. SubliiTyuit with our hand, At Ed', ))e penult day of Januar, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

iforrjiiTCi; anK tittcrmtj: Mst foiit — Crtnson.

Feb. 9. — Elspeth Skihlino, Ipous to Johne Hepburne induellare in

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 75

Sanct Marie Wynd, Marioune Hepburne hir dochter, Mariorie
Fyn, dochter to Johnne Fyn in Bruntiland, and Helena Bruce,
fpous to RafT Wallace fkynner, burges of Edinburgh.'

Dilatit of the treflbnabill Counterfitting, fforgeing and Prenting of falfe and
adulterat teftanis with the croce vpoune thanie ; and Outputtiug of the I'aniyn
amangis our Souerane lordis liegis.

Persewar, Mr Robert Lyntoune, fubftitute for our fouerane lordis Aduocat.

AssisA.
Johne Mofman goldfmytli in Ed', Hew Lyndefay goldfmyth, James Trotter (fmyth),

Johne Cwninglianie goldfraitli tliair, Thomas Smyth merchand, James Crawfurd goldfmyth,

Williame Stalker goldfmyth thair, Johne Hog in the Potter-raw, Robert Vaus tail3eour,
Abrahame Hammiltoune fmytli, Robert Thomfoune goldfmyth, Dauid Heriot, goldfmyth,
Robert Cokkie goldfmyth thair, Williame Harper merchand, Robert Schaw flabler.

The quhilk day Elfpett Skirling, &c. being enterit on pannell, dilatit and
accufit, for airt, pairt, red and counfall of the treflbnabill ftbrgeing, ffalcyfeing
and prenting in calmis, maid of trie/ fillit vp with calk,^ of fals adulterat money,
lie as Scottis teftanis with the croce, to the fimilitude and liknes of our fouerane
lordis trew money ; quhilk thay, in the monethis of Auguft and September
laftbypaft, and Februar inftant, treflbnablie flbrgeit, counterfit and prentit within
the duelling houflis respectiiie of the faid Elfpett Skirling and Rauff ^Vallace,
in Sanct Mary Wynd, and treflbnablie outit* the famin amangis our fouerane
lordis liegis in Bruntyland, Edinburghe and Potter-raw : Quhilk craft of the
falcifeing of the faid money, the faidis Marioune Hepburne and Helene Bruce
lernit be the inftructioune of Hew Bruntoun Inglifman, quha vfit and praktefit
the famin in the faidis houflis, att Faft;ernis-ewin laftbypaft; : Lykeas, thay, att
diuers and (indry vtheris tymis, treafonablie fforgeit, prentit and Coin3eit ane
number of the faidis fals teftanis, quhilk wes outit be the faid Mariory ; committand thairby opjjin Treaflbun : — ^Ver putt to the knawledge of the Aflyife aboue
writtin ; in quhais prefens the faidis perlbnnes, being accufit be dittay, of the
crymes aboue writtin :

Verdict. Eftir chefing, fwering and admitting of the quhilk Aflyis, and accufatioun foirfaidis, the faidis perfounes of Aflyis paft all furth of Court to ane
loft in the Tolbuith, quhair thay chufe Williame Harper Chancillor of the Aflyis,
and reafonit and votit vpoun the pointes thairof, and being refoluit thairwith,
re-enterit agane in Court, quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid Chancillare,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Elfjiett Skirling, Marioun Hepburne and
Helene Bruce, to be culpable, ffylit and convict of the faidis crymes ; and the
faid Marjory Fyn, to be acquit and innocent thairof.

Sentence. For the quhilk cans, the Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Wil-

' See the Case of RauflF Wallace, Feb. 24, 1598-9. = Wooden moulds. = Chalk, Lat. calx.
* Vended, uttered, put out.

^6 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598-9.

Hame Blak denipftar, ordenit the faidis Ellpet Skirling, Marioun Hepburne and
Helene Bruce, to be tane to the Caftelhill of Edinburgh, and thair fyrft to be
wiiTeit at ane ftaik, and thaireftir to be brunt in affis ; and all thair movabill
g'uidis to be efcheit and iubrocht to our foueraue lordis vfe, as culpabill of the
laidis crymes.

[Mr Bohcrt Murray, J/tsfice-Dejmte.']

iHtuKer.

Feb. 13. — Alexandeb Spexs, wobfter (weaver) in Cruikftoun.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour of vmq'^ Johne Donald,
^A'obller in Cruikftoune.

Persewaris, Chriftian Donald and Marioun Donald, as fiftcris.

"I'erdict. The Aflyis, by the mouth of thair chancellor Williame Hoppringill in Clentis, flfaund ' the faid Alexander to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of
the crewall INIurthour and llauchter of the laid vinq'° Johne Donald, wobfter in
Cruikftoun ; conimittit in the moneth of Auguft laftbypaft, vnder fylence and
cloud of nycht, vjwune the landis of Cruikftoune.'

Sentence. The Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Williame Blak denipftar,
Ordanit the faid Alexander Spens to be tane to the Caftlehill of Edinburghe;
and thair his held to be ftriken fra his body ; and all his movabill guidis to be
elcheit, &c.

Feb. 20. — Robert Stewart, brother german to Patrik Erll of Orknay
and Sir Robert Creychtoune of Cluny, knycht.

The quhilk day coniperit ]Mr Thomas ^^^il^oune aduocat, and produceit our
fouerane lordis lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft be George M^ldrum apperand of Haltoun, Robert, "Williame and INIeldrum as fonis,

with the kyne and freindis of vmq'" Mr Williame Mcldrum of IMontcoffer ; for
chargeing of Thomas Lewingftoun of Baldone, as cautioner for Robert Stewart,
Brother-german to Patrik Erll of Orknay ; and Johnne Creychtoune of Inuernytie, as cautioner for Sir Robert Creychtoune of Cluny, knycht, to haif enterit
and prefentit thame this day and place, to haif vnderlyne the law for airt and
pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'" Mr A\'illiame Meldrum ; and proteftit
that Alexander Lord Spynie, and Dauid Lyiidi'ay of Quarrelhill, cautioner for
reporting and perfuit of the faidis lettres, be relewit. Quhilk wes admittit :
quhairvpoun he afkit inftrumentis.

The famin day comperit Mr James Doiialdlbune aduocat, and produceit his
liienes Precei)t ; quhairof the tennour followis.

32JAC. VL .CRIMINAL TRIALS. 77

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 3 our deputis, We greit 30W weill. Torfamekill as our vjieris
lettres ar purclieft att fe inftance of fe bairnis, kyn and freindis of vmq''^ Mr Williame Meldrum of
Montcoft'er, for chargeing of Jehne Creychtoun of Inuernytie, as cautioner and fouretie for Sir Robert
Creychtoun of Cluny, kny', and Tbomas Lewingftoun of Baldone, as cautioner and fouirtie for Robert
Stewai-t, brojier-german to our ryclit traift coufing, Patrik Erll of Orknay, to entir and prefent Jiame
before 50W in cur Tolbuith of Edinburgbe, tbe tuentie day of Februar inllant, in ]>e hour of caus, to
vnderly our lawis for airt and pairt of. ]>e Slauchter of fe faid vniq'° Mr Williame Meldrum. For keping
of })e quhilk dyet, as We ar crediblie informit, bayth the parteis intendis to mali grit convocatioun of
pair freindis, and vperis our liegis; qubairvpoun grit inconvenient may enfcw, to ]ie difquyeting of our
peciabill fubiectis and prefent eftait ; quhilk We iiaif thocht guid to prevent, be pe delay of pe perfuit
of J)e faid mater on the faid day : Quhairfore, and for diuers v])eris reafonabill caufTis and conlideratiounis moving ws, it is our will, and We command 30W, tliat incontinent, eflir the fycht heirof, 56
defert the faid dyett, Ava that the faidis perfones, nor fair cautioneris, be nawyis callit, adiudgeit nor
vnlawit for pair non comperance att Jie faid day, najier 3 it the cautioner for reporting and perfuit of
pe faidis lettres be vnlawit, for nocht productioun pairof : Difchargeing 30wof all proceding aganis the
faidis perfounes and pair cautioneris, on ))e faid day, of -^our offices in J>at pairt; nochtwithllanding of
pair nocht comperance and entrie; with the quhilk We difpens be ])ir prefentis. Subfcryuit with our
liand, At Haliruidlious, the xx day of Februar, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. W. Elphinstoun. Secretarius.

Quhilk Precept, the Juftice admittit. Quhairvpoune the faid Mr James Donaldfoune aikit actis and iaftrumentis.

I31r WdUame Hairt, Justice-Depute. '\

dTovQiitij antr uttnins fiast foiu— Crracon.

Feb. 24'. — Rauif "Wallace Ikynuer, barges of Edinburghe.'
Dilatit for airt and pairt of the trelTbnabill flforgeing and prenting of ffals and
kdulterat money, fik as fals Scottis teftans and Inglis teftanis.
Persewar, Mr Robert Lyntoune aduocat-depute.
The Juftice produceit the Warrand vnderwrittin, direct to him be his Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followis.
Rex,

Justice Clark, aduocat and jOur depuittis, We greit 30W Weill : It is oure will, and We command 30W, that incontinent, eftir pe fycht heirof, that 3e put Ralif Wallace, prefentlie in waird, and
dilatit of ffals cun3ie, to pe knavledge of ane Affyis ; and being convict, that 36 fie him pwneift, according to his deinereittis ; as 3e will anfuer to ws pairanent. Subfcryuit with our hand, AttHalirudehous, the xxiij day of Februai', 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

The Aduocat produceit the Dittay, eftir chefing, fwering of the AfTyfe, togidder with the Depofitiounis of Rauff Wallace and his fpous, and Marioune Hepburne for verifeing of the Dittay.

•See the Case of Elspeth Skirling, &c. Feb. 9, 1598-9.

78 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598-9.

AssisA.
Hew Lyndefay goldfmytli, Thomas MuUiegan mercliand, James Trotter Tmytli,

Archebald Somerwell mercliand, Johne Giffert mercliand, Robert Vaus in St Marie Vynde,

Robert Tliorafoune goldfmytli, Johne BJak maltman, Johne Coninghame goldfinyth,

Robert Nicolfomie merchand, Dauid Palmer goldfmyth, Jo.30ungtail3eourintheCannogait,

Thomas Huchefounefword-flipper, Johne Chalmeris merchand, Peter Spens dag-maker thair.

The faid Rauff denyit the haill Dittay and his Depofitiounis ; and declarit,
that quhatewir he confeft, it wes for tortoiir. — The Aduocat protellis for Wilfull erroiir, in cais thay acquit, in refpect of his Confeffioun. — The faid RaufF
produceit ane inftrument of his declaratioiine of iunocencie, and that he deponit
and confeft all thingis be exquifite tortour.

Verdict. The Affyfe being convenit foliter allane, chofe Johne Cwninghame
chancillar, and paft to reafoning vpovm the pointis of the faid Dittay ; and liaifing votit and refoluit thairwith, callit the Juftice to Judgement, quhair thay, be
the mouth of the faid Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Rauff to
be Cleane and acquit of airt, pairt, red and counfall of the treffonabill Counterfitting, fforgeing, ffalcifeing and Prenting of fals and adulterat money, fie as fals
Scotis teftanis and Inglis teftanis ; quliilkis wer trefTonablie (and) falllie counterfittet, forgeit and prentit, be Hew Bruntoune Inglifman, quha, in the monethis
of Januar and Februar, in the 3eir of God I".V'.lxxxxvij yeiris, before the ffeift
of Fafternis ewin, caift the famin within the faid RaufRs duelling hous in Sanct
Marie Wynd, the faid RaufT being prefent thairat : Lykeas he, eftir calling of
the famin, treafonablie concelit the trefTonabill prenting and forgeing thairof, and
outing of the famin, be the faid Hew Bruntoune and vmq'° Helene Bruce, his
(RauflPs) fpous. — Itejm, ffand and pronunceit him to be ffylit and Convict, fforfamekill as he, knawing, that about Fafternis-ewin bygane ane yeir, vmq'" Helene
Bruce his fpous was tane and apprehendit for the trelTounabill outing of fals
Inglis teftanis, coin3eit be the laid Hew Bruntoune Inglifman, within hir duelling hous; he, the nycht of the apprehending of hir, vnderftanding that the faid
Hew wes the caufe of his apprehenfioune, for outing of the faid fals coin3ie,
tuik and apprehendit him, and nochtwithftanding thairof, he treafonablie patt
him away, and wald nocht prefent hini to Juftice, he being maift giltie of the
faid treafonabill cryme ; and thairby, he committit maift oppin and mannifeft
Treafoune.

The whole perfons of AfTyis find Caution, ' that thay fall entir thair perfonis
in waird, Avithiu the Tolbuith of Edinburglie, vpoun TyilUay nixtocum, before
nyne houris, ilk perfoun vnder the pane of Fyve hundreth pundis ; except Johnne
Giffert, James Trotter, Robert Nicolfoune and Johnne Blak, for ilk ane of thame,
vnder the pane of Fyve hundreth merkis.

(Mar. 2.)— Rauff Wallace being prefented on pannell, to haif hard Dome pro32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 79

nunceit aganis him, as he that wes convict of the taking of Hew Bruntoune,
Inglifinan, and latting of him to libertie, conforme to the convictioune, the
faid Rauff declarit, that he wald cum in his Maiefteis will, for that thing quhairof
he was convict ; and pi'oteftit, that na wrang fould be doun to him, feing, quhen
he tuik the faid Hew, he offerit him to Alexander Perfoun, Baillie, and thaireftir he i^aft and focht the Bailleis of the Cannogait, quhom he could nocht gett ;
and or' he returnit, the pei-fonis quhom-with he wes left, patt him away.

Rauff Wallace Dome.

(Mar. 3.) — The Juflice-depiit produceit ane Warrand, direct fra his Maieftie
to him, to that effect ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice-clark and 30ur depiitis, We greit 50W weill. Forfamekill as RauflF
Wallace, fkynner in Edinburgh, being laitlie accufit, and put to fe knawledge of ane AiTyCe, for certane treflbnabill crymes of ffals cuin5ie, prentit in his hous, ifor the quliilk his wyffe wes laitlie execute, the faid Rauff is convict be ]ie faid Aflyis of ]>e treflbnabill taking and away-putting of Hew
Bruntoune, Inglifman, fforger and prenter of ])e faid fals cun5e, within fe faid Rauffis hous, knawing
hira gyltie fairof, at fe tyme qulien ])e faid Rauffis wyffe wes takyn in Leyth, ane 3eir fyne or fairbye, for ])e outputting Jiairof; and for fe nocht prefenting of the faid fals cun5eour befoir our Juftice,
to haif bene pwneifl for his offence ; ftor the quliilk, tlie faid Rauff come in our will : And We, being
perfytelie informit, that Jie faid Rauffis wyffe declarit vpoune hir confcience befoir hir death, diuers
tymes, befoir fe prenting of Jie faid fals coin3ie, and that he pat J)e faid fals cun3eour away, for hyding
and feir of detecting of his and his wyffes gyltines ; quhairbye he is worthie of extreme pwneifment.
Thairfoir it is cure will, and We command 30W, that se hald Court, and gif and pronunce Jie lyke
dome aganis him, as was gevin aganis his vmqi'' fpous ; to be takyn furth to ane flaik, and wirreit,
quhill he be deid, and his bodie brunt in afles, quhill he be deid,' in exampill of vjieris : And this onnawyis ye leve vndone : As 3e will anfuer to ws vpoune 3 our obedience ; ffor the quhilk Jiir prefentis
falbe to 30W ane warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyrudhous, ]>e thrid day of Marche, 1598.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

According to the qvdiilk Warrand, the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of
Williame Blak, dempftar of the faid Court, decernit and ordanit the faid Rauff
Wallace to be tane to the Caflell-hill of Edinburgh, and tliair to be wirreit at
ane ftaik quhill he be deid ; and thairefter his bodie to be brunt in afTes ; and
all his landis, heretage, and his movabill guidis, to be foirfalt and efcheit, &c.
a-s convict of the treflTonabill taking and a^jprehending of the laid Hew Brinitoune, Inglifman, quha cun3eit fals cun3ie within the faid Rauffis duelling-hous ;
and nocht prefenting him to Juftice, conforme to the Act of convictioune.

ratlful evvov on Assise.

Feb. 27. — Thomas Milligan, merchand-burges of Edinburgh, and
fourteen others.
Dilatit, for airt and pairt, of the manifeft and Wilfull Errour committit be
' Before, ere, ' These four words are evidently a clerical repetition.

aO* CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598-9.

thame, being^ adinittit vpoime the Affyis of RaufT Wallace, flvynner, &c. and
Acquitting him of the fyrft point of the Dittay. — Continued to Mar. 2.
Mar. 2. — The cafe again continued to Mar. 9.
(Mar. 9.) — The Juftice defertis the dyet, in refpect that the Thefaurer and
the Aduocat, being oft tymes callit to perfew, coraperit nocht ; quhairupoune
the perlbunes aboue writtin comperand, alkit inftrumentis.

Mar. 3. — James Barclay, in Mekill Tary.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Williame Dowglas, fone to
Willianie Dowglas of Erlifmylne.*

Coinperit Mr James Dundas, chanter of Murray, and Minifter of Aloa, and
produceit the teftimoniall. — The pannel takis inftrumentis of his offer to ane
■Affyfe ; and proteftis, that he be nocht trublit in tyme cuming. — Only feven
Aflifers appear. Mho, in like manner, proteft, ' that thay be nocht trublit in
tjnue cuming vpoun this AfTyfe ; c^uhilk wes admittit.' — Teftimonial fubfcrjmit
be Mr Johnne Stratoune, Minifter att Raffort, direct fra the Minifteris of the
Prefljiterie of Forres, of the dait, att the Kirk of Forres, the xv of Februar,
1598, teftifeing that thay had lene the faid Alexander (Tulloch, fone and apperand air to Robert Tulloch of Tannoquheis), and that he wes vnhabill to travell ; quhilk excuife maid be the Minifter of Aloes, togidder with the Teftimoniall, the Juftice admittit. — Continued to the thryd day of the nixt Juftice-air
of Elgyn and Forres, or foner, &c. on xv days wairning.

^Iatifli)tti-,

Mar. 16. — Patrik Campbell of Kethik, Andro Sym, his feruand,Williame Spalding, in Kethik, and John Druminond of Coquhal3ie, and ffive others.
Dilatit for airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Williame Hay, fone to Williame Hay of Gourdie ;'" (committit vpoune the fecund day of Februare laftbypaft, vponne fet purpois, prouifioune, and foirthocht fellonie).

Persewaris, Andro Hay, apperand of Gourdy, Laurence, Robert, and Patrik Hay, as breyder,
(brothers), Jolinne Stewart, appeirand of Airntillie, Johnne Halyday, aduocat.

The cautioners for Campbell, Sym, and Spalding, who did not appear, are
' amerciat in the pane of ffyve hundi-eth merkis' for Campbell ; and for each of
the others, ' ane hundreth merkis.' The principal to be denounced rebels, &c.

The Juftice continued this cafe ' to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-aire of
Perthe, or fonei', vpone fyftene dayis wairning.'

' See Jan. i, 1398-9. » See Mar. 20, 1598-9.-

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 81

[M>- Williame Hart and Mr Bobert Murray, Justices-Deputes.^

Mar. 17. — Robert Quhippo, iadueller in Edinburgh.
Delaitit for certane crymes of Tliift.

Persewar, INIr Thomas Hammiltonn of Dnimcairne, aduocat.
Preloquutouris for the pannell, Mr Juhnne Ruflell, Mr Thomas Craig, Cornelius Tennent,
Williame Home, brother to Sir George, The Guidraan of Nortii Beruik, Mr Samuell Home.

The Aduocat produceit the Warrand, direct fra his Maieftie, Ordaining him
to infift in the perfute ; as alfo ane Warrand to the Juftice, to proceid and niinifter Juftice in the faid mater, togidder with the Dittay.

It is allegit, that Mr Williame Hairt, as Juftice, can nocht be Judge in this
mater ; becaus his wyfe, callit Margaret Carnecors, and the Guidman of Gallowfcheilis, ar ferdis of kyn, viz. thair grandfyris ar tua brether : Quhilk rekuing he offeris him to verifie inftantlie, be gentillmen and vtheris witneffis vnfufpect ; in refpect the Judge declairis he knawis nocht the rekning : Quhilk
Guidman of Gallowfcheillis is pai'tie in this caus, be this qualificatioune, viz. he
purcheft the Warrand fra his Maieftie, to tak the defender ; he affiftit the Bailleis in taking of him ; he feit the officer to fummond the Aflyfe ; and lies gevin
the Aduocat informatioune ; and is vpgever of the Dittay. — The Aduocat anfueris, the alledgeance audit to be repellit, becaus thair is na vther partie or
perfewer heir hot him felf, as Aduocat for his hienes entris ; nather can the
Guidman of Gallowfcheillis half ony entreis, in perfute of this Dittay : ffarder,
repeitis the decifioun gevin in the action perfewit be the aduocat aganis the
Laird of Delgetie, in the lyk caice ; and the Intei'locutour alreddie pronunceit
vpone this alledgeance.

The Juftice repellis the alledgeance, in refpect the Aduocat is only perfewer ;
as alfo, that Mr Robert Murray is alfo Judge, aganis quhome thair is na declinatour. — Quhairvpoun the defender alkit inftrumentis, and proteftit for remcid
of law.

It is allegit be the defender, that he can nocht be pvxt to ane Aflyfe, in refpect
that he (is) nocht deprehendit in a mater of Treflbun, nor in flagranti crimine ;
and thairfoir, fould haif bene fummond vpone a fyftene dayis wairning. — It is
anfuerit be the Aduocat, the alledgeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the
crymes fet doun in the Dittay, quhilkis, in Thift allanerlie, may be tryit fummerlie without ony delay, according to the practik ; and the pannell is brocht to
the bar out of the Kingis waird.

The Juftice repellis, in refpect the Dittay is only for thift ; quhairupoun the
Aduocat afkit inftrumentis.

The defender, of his awin confent, defyris Tyfday nixtocum, to the effect that

VOL. II, L

82 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598-9.

he may caufe the parteis conteiiit in the Dittay compeir, and cleir the Dittay. —
The aduocat takis inftrumentis of the jjannellis defyre, quhairby he efchewis prefent tryell, aud ci'aves jn-oces.

The Juftice ordanis proces. — The defender thaireftir defyi'it, that feing my
Lord Aduocat is nocht obleift to fueir ony Dittay, that thairfoir it may be
knavvin to the Juftice befoir the electioun of the Inqueift, gif ony partie vpone
ony of tlie articles contenit in the Dittay, will fueir the famin to be of verritie.
— It is anluerit be the Aduocat, the alledgeance nieritis na anfuer.

Follows the Assise, and Ohjections to Assisers.

Tlie aduocat takis inftrumentis, that Dauid Seytoun declairis, that thair is feitl Handing beluix him
and the pannell.

It is allegit, that Alexander Dikfoun in Edffecarno ca.n nocht pafs vpone the Affyfe ; becaus it is of
veiitie, tliat he was in companie with the Laird of Samelftoune, vpone the grund betuix Kidlaw and
Newtoun mylne, at the committing of the flauchter of vmq'^ Williame Quhippo, the defenderis brother, quha was flane be the Laird of Samelftoun ; for the quhilk the defender beiris feid aganis the
faid Alexander. — The Aduocat anfueris, that the allegeance aucht to be repellit, vnles the pannell
wald allege, tliat the Aflyfour was airt and pairt of the faid flauchter for his hund vpoun the grund :
He nocht geving affiftance to Samelftoune in tlie fact, can work nathing aganis him ; nather the pannellis beiring of feid aganis the alTyfour, vnles thair was ane juft caus of feid gevin be the aflyfour. —
To the quhilk it is anfuerit, that gif the faid Alexander was to be accufet criminallie vpone liis lyfe
at the fame defenderis inftance, as being vpone the grund the tyme of the committing of the faid
flauchter, and fua being airt and pairt thairof, na Afl'yfe could clange him ; and confequentlie, he can
nawayis be fufi'erit to pas vpone this Aflyfe. — The Aduocat afkit inftrumentis, tliat Alexander Dikfon being fwoirne, dedaiis that he faw ncvir the defenderis brother. — Alexander Dikfoun in Edgecamo, being fwoirne, deponis, that the day of the committing of the flauchter of this defenderis brother, thair being ane hunting apointit betuix the Laird of Sammclfton, elder, and the Laird of Colftoun, his maifter, thay met ; and the faid Patrik Haniniiltoun, now of Sammelftoun, haifing huntit
his haulk, and followit on horfbak, the reft being on fute, except the Lairdis of Colftoune, and Auld
Sammelftoun, aud the faid Patrik Hammilton following liis haulk, forgadderit with the deponeris brather, and hurt him ; and thaireftir came bak to the hunteris, and fcliew that lie had allaiierlic hurt him,
and faw na forder ; the faid Patrik and the deponeris brother being a myle frame thame.

The pannell allegit, that Thomas Woid in Grange can nocht pafs vpone this Affyfe ; becaus thair
is blude betuix thame. — The faid Thomas confefllt the alledgeance to be trew.

It is allegit aganis The Laird of liochluic, that he can nocht pafs vpone this Aflyfe ; becaus tlie
Laird of Roclilawis wyfe is thridis of kyn to the Laird of Spottifwoid ; quhilk Laird of Spottifwoid,
with the kyn and freindis, ftandis vnder deidlie feid with the defender, for tlie flauchter of the faid
Laird of Spottifwoidis brother.

It is allegit, that Archebauld Geddes, younger, burges of Edinburgh, that thair was bluid betuix
him and the defender.

It is allegit aganis James Laufovn and Johne Reidjjelh, that thair is deidlie feid ftanding betuix
thame, and the defender vnreconceillit. — It is confeft be the faid James Laufoun and Johne Reidpeth,
that thai beir the defender at evill will.

It is allegit aganis George Rutherfuird, that lie is the Laird of Sesfuirdis man, quha is partaker of
the Laird of Spottifwoidis feid.

32 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 83

Tlie Aduocat takis inftrumentis, that the pannell, out of his awin mouth, objectis aganis Mr James
Home, fen being ane vnfieind to Hardeis, as pairtaker with him in his tliift.

It is allegit aganis Patrik Hopprinf/ill, tliat he can nawayis be vpone this Affyfe ; becaus tliair is
deidlie feid, (landing as yet vnreconfeillit, betuix Williame Hoppringill, his brother fone, and the excipient, qiiha come and perfewit him for his lyfe, at the lioufe of Blindley. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, tliat the allegeance is nocht relevant, becaus it is nevir allegit, that Patrik Hopringill is pairtaker
of the feid, or that his brolher-fone is at feid with the pannell, for his awin caule : And as to his
brotheris fones affifting of the Bailleis in liis taking, that was lauchfull, and can impoirt na feid ;
fforder, the alledgeance of kyn with the Guidman of Gallowfcheillis is generall. — The Aduocat takis
inflnimentis.

The pannell takis inftrumentis, befoir the raiding of the Dittay, that thair is
na perfewer comperis to fweir the Dittay. — The Aduocat takis inftrumentis, that
he offeris to verifie the Dittay, and to caufe the Guidman of Gallowfcheillis fweir
the famin to the Aflyfe : In refpect quhairof, and of the notorietie of the pointis
of the Dittay, in cais that thai chainge, proteftis for "Wilfull Errour aganis the
Aftyfe.

The Aduocat proteftis, that the allegeances maid be the defender may be minutit, to the effect that it may be fchawin to the Kingis Maieftie, quhidder this
Judgement be lauchfullie vfet or abufet.

For verificatioun of the Dittay, the Aduocat producet ane Miffaue Lettre, direct be Sir Williame Seytoun to the Laird of Traqviair.

The quhilk day, Robert Quhipjio, burges of Edinburghe, being enterit on
pannell, perfewit and accufet l)e Mr Thomas Hammiltovui of Drumcairne, aduocat, of the crymes eftir fpecifeit ; that is to fay.

The Dittay against Robert Quhippo.

(1.) For airt and pairt of the thifteous Steilling, conceiUing, refetting and away-taking of ane blak
meir and ane broun horfe, pertening to Baldie Watt in Adinfloun, furth of the landis thairof ; commitlit with his complices, in the monetli of November I"'.V'. fourfcoir fevintene yeiris.— (2.) Item,
flfor airt and pair of the thifteous Steilling, conceiUing, reffeting and away-taking of ten oxin and fyve
ky, furth of the landis of Soutray-barnes ; quhilkis kyand oxin pertenit to Robert Wodell in Tranent,
and was pafturand and in girfing ypone the faidis landis ; committit in the moneth of Augurt I^.V^
fourfcoir fyftene yeiris. — (3.) Item, fforfamekill as James Hopringill, fone to Williame Hopringill,
bailing in the moneth of Augult, 1595 yeiris, delyuerit to the liiid Robert Quhippo the fowme of
Ixxxxviij li. to be convoyit to George Hopringill of Blindlie, for woll toft be the faid James fra the
faid George : And in the mcane tyme he confultit with James Hardie, his compain3eoun, ane notorius
theif, how he fould detene the faid fowme ; and agreit, that the faid James fould fett vpone him at
Wompla-buih, in his paffing to Blindlie with the faid filuer ; lyke as, he meitand with him thair, caufit
the faid James cut his claythis, as gif ane number of tlieifis had fet vpone him and had tane the faid
filuer, with his naig frome him ; with the quhilk filuer he nevir pairtit ; hot, be confert, (law the laid
filuer ; and was airt and pairt with the faid James Hardie in fteilling thairof. — (4.) Item, florfaniekill
as the faid Robert, accunipaneit with Frence' and Frence, brether to the Laird of

' French, Frank.

84 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1598-9TUornydykis, came in the nioneth of Febrnare or thairby, in the yeir of God, 1590, to vmq'' Thomas
Bailleis duelling hous in Sanct Johnes Kirk, and tliair brak vp the dur of the (table and thifteoudie
flaw, conceillit, reflet and away-tuik foure hors pertening to the faid vmq'^ Thomas, and convoyit the
famin away with him ; and lie was ain and pairt of the thiftous fteilling thairof. — (5.) Item, ffoifamekill
as the faid Robert, accumpaneit with dyuerfe cowmone theifis, his complices, to the number of fax
perfonis, on hors and fute, quhairof foure vpone hors and tua on fute, of the quhilk number Thomas
Hardie in Boundmylrig was ane, all bodin in feir of weir,' with fuoirdis, fecreittis' and vtheris waponis im-qfiiic, laitlie, vpone the xj day of Januar laftbypaft, vnder fylence and clud of nycht, betuix
fyve and fax houris at evin, as notorius briganes,^ rmbefet the way betuix the burgh of Edinburgh and
toun of Leyth to Peter Paterfoun, feruitour to Johne Fyndlafoun burges of Dundie, as he was, in £ober and quyet maner, gangand furth of the faid burch to the toun of Leyth ; and thair, with drawn
fwoirdis fett vpone him, and gaif him dyuerfe bauche ftraikis,'' and maiflerfullie flaw, reft and awaytuik fra him tua hatis, ane fwoird, ane pair of buitis, ane pair of fpures, ane bonet-caice^ full of evidentis,^ ane nieht bonet,' with tua pair of fchankis,* being thairintill ; pertening to the faid Johne
Fyndlafoun. — (6.) Lykeas, he, tlie famin nycht, betuix the houris foirfaidis, fet vpoune George Herper
and George Martene, boitmen in Borrowfloun-nefe, as thay war palfand in fober and quyet maner, fra
the faid burch of Edinburgh to the toun of Leyth, dredand na harme, &c. and maifterfullie flaw, reft
and away-tuik fra the faid George Martene fourfcoir li. money ; and fra the faid George Herper, ane
ten f. peace. — (7.) Lykeas, he, the famin nycht, about the houris foirfaidis, maifterfullie fet vpoune
dyuerfe our fouerane lordis leigis, paflaud betuix the faid burch of Edinburgli and toun of Leyth, and
ftaw, reft and away-tuik frathanie thair cloikis and purifls. — (8.) Item, fior aiit and pairt of the thiftious fteilling, conceilling, refleting and away-taking of thre ky, furth of the burch of Lynlythgw ; quhilkis
ky pertenit to Johne Tulloch fmyth thair ; comniittit in tlie moneth of September, anno 139G yeiris.-^
(9.) Item, fFor airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling, conceilling, refetting and away-taking of foure

ky and twa oxin, pertening to Waterftoun, his awin man, in Kydlaw, furth of the toun and

landis thairof; comraittit in July 1597 yeiris. — (10.) Item, ffor cowinoun thift, cowmone reflet of
thift, inputting and outputting of thift, infang and outfang thift, fra land to land, fra towne to contrie,
baitb auld and new.

Verdict. The Juftice- depute, eftir dyuerfe allegeances maid be the faid
Robert and his preloquutouris, quhairfoir the faid Robert fould nocht be put to
the knawledge of ane Aflyfe, for the faidis crymes, &c. pat the faid Robert to
the knawledge of ane Aifyfe ; and he being accufit l)e Dittay in thair prefens,
quha denyit the famin, tliay removit furth of Coiul to the Over-7^olbuthe of
Edinburghe ; quhair thay, being convenit thair allanes, ffirft, be pluralitie of voits
choifit tlie faid Mr Patrik Hepburne of Smetoune chanceller of the faid AfTyfe,
and thaireftir reffonit and voitit vpone the haill pointis of the faid dittay ; and
being throiichlie advyfet thairwith, re-enterit agane in Court, in prefens of the
faidis Juftice-Deputis ; quhair thay, be tlie inaift paiit, be the mouth of the faid
Chanceller, ffand, pronunceit and declairit the faid Robert Quhijipo to be Cleane,
Innocent and Acquit of the haill ciymes aboue writtin ; except, that thai fand

' Warlike array. ^ Chain-mail, secreth/ worn under the ordinary dress, ' Pyne doublets.'

' Robbers, Fr. brigands. ' Heavy, severe or deadly strokes. ' Anglice, ' Band-box ?'

* Title-deeds, vouchers, or legal documents. ' Night-cap, Fr. bonct-de-nuit. ^ Hose, stockings.

32Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 85

him culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the theftious fteilling, conceilling,
reffeting and away-taking of ten oxin and fyve ky furth of the Landis of Soutray-barnes ; quhilkis ky and oxin pertenit to the faid Robert Weddell in Tranent, and was pafturand and in gerfing thair, vpone the faidis landis ; committit
in Auguft, 1595 jeiris. — Item, of the airt and pairt of thiftioiis fteilling, conceilling, relTetting and away-taking of foure hors fra vmq'" Thomas Bail3ie of
St Johnes Kirk, furth of his ftable thair ; committit in the moneth of Februare
or thairby, I^.V.lxxx ten 3eiris.

Sentence. For the quhilk cans, the faidis Juftice-Depiitis, be the mouthe
of Williame Blak dempfter, Ordanit the faid Robert to be tane to the Gibbet
befyde the mercait croce of Edinburghe, and thairvpoune to be hangit qiihill he
was deid ; and all his moveabill giiidis to be efcheit, &c.

\_Mr IViUiam Ha'irt, Justice-Dej)ute.'\

Mar. 20. — George Rattray, feruitour to the Laird of Craighall, and
Thomas Lathreis, cherurgean in Perth.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'' Williame Hay, fone to
Williame Hay of Gourdie.'

The Aduocat proteftit for WilfuU Errour, in refpect of the verificatioim of
the cryme, and of his Confeffioune, verifeit be the Laird of Aiichey and Mr
Patrik Hay.

Verdict. The Aflyis being chofin, fworne and admittit, remowit altogidder furth of Court, to the heich Tolbuith of Edinburghe, &c. ; and be the mouth
of Williame Dowglas of Erlifmylne, chancillar, all in ane voce, fFaud, pronunceit
and declarit the faidis George Rattray and Thomas Lathreis to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq'° "Williame
Hay, fone to AVilliame Hay of Gourdie ; committit in the moneth of Februar
laftbyi)aft, within Audro Gybis duelling hous in Perth.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair, thair
heidis to be ftrikin fra thair bodeis ; and all thair movabill guidis to be efcheit
and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe.

aibitidttj fiom t\^t 3Ua(tr of ^ttrlincr— iTorfciturr.

Apr. 20, 1599. — JajMes Connell in the Maynis of Flerainghill and

Twelve others.

' 1598-9, Feb. 16. < Tlie Slauchter of William Hey, fone to the Gudeman of Gourdie, in Andro
Gibis hous in the Kiikgait (of Perth), be the Laird of Craighall, Rettray and liis complices. Thomas
Lafreis cliyrurgiane wes thair; quha fuiferit for it.' Fkmiiujs Chronicle, MS. Atlv. Library. See
also Mar. 16, 1598-9.

S6 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Haniniiltoune of Drumcairne, aduocat.
Prelouul'tolris for tlie paniiell, ^Ir Jolinne Nicolluune, Mr Richait Spens.

. Comperit Johne Graliame of Knokilolian, and produceit our Ibuerane lordis
lettres, deulie execute and indorfat, &c. — The Aduocat produceit ane Act of
convietioune, of the dait the xiij day of December, lo84-, quhair the perfounes
aboue Avrittin wer convict ftbr thair contemptibill (contemptuous) remaning fra the
Raid of Striuiling, quhilk Aves in the moneth of Apryll, 1584 yeiris ; and defyrit
dome to be pronunceit aganis thame, as thay that wer convict in maner foirfaid.
— The panneli afkis inftrumentis, that thay defyre the Aduocattis aith, quhidder
the Laird of Knokdoliane be his informer or nocht : And als, alledgis that he is
informer of the aduocat in this perfuit, and that he wcs prefent att the bar for
the faid purpois ; and defyrit the Laird of Kuokdolianis aith thairvpoune ;
quhairvjjoune he aflvit inftrumentis.

The Juftice findis that tlie Aduocat fould nocht gif his aith, nor yit declair
qulia fould be his informer.

Alledgit that na dome can be pronunceit aganis Johnne Wrycht in Bankhous,
becaus he wes nocht convict of the crjine Cjuhairof the reft wes convict. — The
Aduocat in the contrair.

It is alledgeit for the haill panneli. that na dome of fforfaltour can be pronunceit aganis thame, vpoim the convictioun produceit ; becaus the lamiu is gewin
and pronunceit in the 3eir of God I■".^"Mxxxiiij 3eiris, fen the quhilk tyme oure
fouerane lord, with auife of his eftaitis in Parliament, in the moneth of December, 1585 yeiris, hes be expres Act of Parliament annullit all crymes and offences
committit aganis his Maieftie, for the quhilkis his Maieftie may half ony particuler interes, be quhatfumewir perfoun or perfounes, men or Avemen, within
this realme ; and hes declarit the famin to be A-oyd, of the felfF, and of nane
availl, force nor effect ; as att mair lenth is contenit in the f^Tft article of the
Pacificatioun maid att Lynlythgw, heirwith produceit : quhilk Pacificatioun, in
all the heidis and articles thairof, is ratifeit and apprewit be his Maieftie and
Eftaitis of Parliament, in the yeir of God I^.VMxxxvij yeiris, eftir his hieneis
perfyte age : Lyke as alfo, in the famin Parliament, thair is ane generall abolitioune of all crymis and offences committit be quhatfumewir his hienes liegis,
fen the tyme of his hienes Coronatioun, to the day and dait that may follow thairvpoun, maid and grantit to quhatfumewir perfouis : And trew it is, that the
crymes contenit in the convietioune produceit, concernis his Maiefteis interes allanerlie ; and the famin, ^vith the convictiounis following tliairvpoiui, precedis
tlie laid Pacificatioun ; and thairfore, be the expres prouifioun thairof, ar null
of tlie felffis.— It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that the alledgeance is nawyis relevant, nather can it ftay dome to be pronunceit agains the panneli, conforme to

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 87

the convictioun in-oduceit ; becaus the Actis of Parliament, quhairvpoxm the
alledgeance is foundit, coiitenis only ane abolitioun of crymes committit be his
Maiefteis profeffit rebellis, in the commoiuie trubles ; and is nawyis menit of fie
as abaid att all tyme att his Maiefteis obedience, and wer newir ather foirfalt,
baneift, or denunceit rebellis, for the faid conimoune cans : For gif the faid Act
mycht be ane warrand to this pannell, it niycht alfo weill ferue to be remiffioun
to all fie as ather committit thift, or opprefiioune, or tranfportit foi'bidden guidis,
foirftallit victiiallis, or rcgratit the mercatis, before the faid Act, in the j-eir of
God, 1585, qiihilk wer abfurd ; and thairfore the pannell, newir haifing bene
pairt-takeris of the commoun trubles, can nawyis inioy the benifite of the faid
Act, maid allanerlie for that cans, for fatling of the faidis trublis ; and nawyis to
procure impiuiitie to fie as haifing abidden att his Maiefteis obedience, hes committit ony crymes ; vtherwyis the faid Act, quhilk wes maid for pacefeing of
the countrey, and vniting of his hienes guid fubiectis, fould half bene ane generall
Remiffioun to all thewis, brigands, oppreflburis, and vtheris diforderit people of
the counti-ey ; quhilk na man will alledge.

To the quhilk it is replyit, that the generall Abolitioim and Act of Pacificatioun hes twa pairtis ; ane thairof, quhilk is confauit in favouris of thay (thofe)
profeffit rebellis contenit in the anfueris, fie as repofteffioun of thay perfounes
difpofTeft for the commoune caus ; vpoun the quhilk pairt of the Pacificationn
the defenderis alledgeance is nocht foundit : The fecund pairt thairof is maid and
confauit in favouris of the haill liegis ; be the quhilk, all crymes, offences ami
attemptis, committit aganis his Maieftie, and for the quhilk his hienes hes particuler interes allanerlie, ar altogidder annullit and aboleilchit ; except the fpeciall
crymes and fjieciall perfounes committeris thairof, mentionat in the faidis Actis
of Pacificationn and Abolitioune ; quhilk exceptioun makis the faid law to be
generall and vniuerfall, to all kynd of crymes quhilkis ar nocht exceptit ; and it
is na abfurd thing to grant, that his Maieftie hes gewin ane pardoun and remiflloun to all crymes and offences mentionat in the faid anfuer, quhen the famin is limitat to ane certane tyme ; and fpeciallie, quhen the famin is maid be
his liienes \i'ith auife of Parliament, for eftableiffing of ane generall peax and
quyetnes within the countrey : And quhen it is menit that thiftis, reiffis and oppreffiounes, be this conftructioun, will fall be this Act of Pacificationn ; it is anfuerit, that the faidis crymes concernis particuler parteis, and nocht the Kingis
interes allanerlie ; and the parteis interes is nocht difchai-geit be the faid Act of
Parliament ; and this cryme concernis the Kingis interes allanerlie. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that the excepting of fum crymes in the Act, is only menit
of crymes committit be the faidis perfounes aganis his Maieftie, the tyme of the
commoun trubles ; nather can the famin Act be extendit to ony crymes com88 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599.

niittit be ony vtlier perfounes ; for it is notoure, that in all Jufliee Courtis, fen
the yeir of God 1585, dittay hes bene tane, and tryall and pwneifment hes followit, for all foirt of crymes committit before the faid Parliament, haldin in the
1585, be fic perfounes as Aves nocht paii't-takeris of the commoun trubillis.

Tlie Jxiftice continewis Interloquutour to the morne, and ordanis the perfonis
comperand to find cantioun.

Apr. 21. — Sentence. The Juftice Ordanit na proces againis Johnne
Wrycht in Cabrokhill. The faid Juftiee-depute fFand, that Dome fiild be pronunceit aganis thame, in maner following : And be the mouth of Williame
Blak dempflare, Ordanit that the faidis perfonis, and ilkane of thame, fuld fforfalt their landis, heritages, takkis, lleidingis, cornis, cattell, guidis and geir ; and
the famyn to be efcheit, to our fouerane lordis vfe : And to pas in ward within
our Tolbuithe of Edinburghe, thairin to remane induring his hienes will ; as convict in ane Court of Jufticiarie, haldin in the Tolbuith of Edinburghe, the faid
xvj day December, the 3eir of God FWMxxxiiij 3eiris foirlliid, be the vmq''^ Mr
Johnne Grahame Juftiee-depute, for abj'ding fra our fouerane lordis oift, raid
and airniye, quhilk wes ordanit be his hienes Pi'oclamatioun to haue convenit at
Halirudhous, in the monetli of Aprile, the 3eir of God r^.^'Mxxxiiij yeiris, and
thairfra to haue pafl; forduarde to the burghe of Striueling, for repreffing of tlie
trefTonabill attemptatis of certane his IMaiefteis tratoviris and rebellis, quhilkis
had lurpryfed the faid burghe of Striueling and Caftell thairof.

Wisins dTalsf SSUf igljts anU ilTrnsurf s.

Maij 18. — JoHNE Cakstaiks, citincr' in Sanct Androus.
Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament in vfing of fals vechtis and
mefouris.^

Peusewar, Mr Thomas Hatnmiltoune of DrumcarnGj aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Preloquutouris, Mr Johne Scharp, Mr Jolme RulFell, Mr Henry Balfour, Mr Robert Leremont.

Comperit Mr Robert ^Veymis, and produceit ane Precept, fubfcryuit be his
Maieftie, quhairof the tennour followis.

Eex,

JusTiCE-CENERALL and 50ur deputtis, We greit 30W liairtlie well]. It is oure will, and We, for
certane relTonahill caudis and coniiderationis moving ws, Command 3owand jour cjarkis, to continew
30ur Court appoyntit to be lialdin in our Tolbuith of Ediuburgli, |>e xviij day of Maij inftant, anent
])e accufatioune led at pe inftauce of our aduocat, aganis Johne Carftairis, merchand, citiner in Sanct

' Citizen. ' This Trial is inserted, not so much on account of any peculiar importance which

the Editor attaches to the case ; but because it hitihly illustrates the constant importunities which must
have been practised, in soliciting Warrants from liieKing; and the strange vacillation displayed by
him in granting these Precepts. It is altogether a ludicrous, as well as a melancholy instance, of the
absurdity of the King's perpetual interference with the judicial proceedings of the country.

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 89

Androis, for fe caufTis contenit in our vperis lettres, direct furtli f airanent : Difcliargeing ■^ow of
all preceding jiairin aganis liini or his cawtioner, vnto ]>e thrid day of ])e nixt Juftice air of our Sherefdome of Fyfe, or that he he wairnit of new agane vpouu fyftene dayis wairning ; And that nochtwithftanding quliatfunievir Warrand, gevin or to be gevin to 30W in the contrair ; quhairanent J)ir prefuntis falbe jour Wairand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Halyrudehous, the auchtene day of Maij,
and of our regne J)e xxxij yeir, l.')99. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES HEX.

Comperit the faid Johne Carflairis, and produceit the Precept vnderwrittin.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and jour deputtis, and our aduocat, We greit 30W weill : Forfatuekill as We vnderftand tliat our louit Johne Carftairis, nierchand citiner in Sanct Androus, is, vpoune
finifter repoirt and informatioune maid of him, fummond to vnderlye our lawis, for allegeit vfing of
wrangons wechtisand meafouris : And feing, We perfytelie knaw the faid Johne to be ahvayes innocent of pe faid cryme, and that the inforinaris name is nocht inlert in tlie criminal! lettres raifit fairanent: Thairfoir, it is our will, and We command jow, that nochtwithftanding Jiairof, in caife ony informar compeir in the faid caufe, that je infift in the perfute pairof, minifter juftice Jiairintill, and put
the famyn to ))e knawledge of ane afTyis ; and albeit na informar compeir in ]ie faid mater, that ^it
nochtwithftanding Jiairof, the Lettres being repoirtit, deulie execute and indorfat, je proceid Jiairintill
and put ])e famyn to the Tryell of ane Aflyis ; and gif neid beis, that 33 caufe fummond ane affyis of
fik perfounes as ar prefentlie witliin fis burch, or may be had at ]ie bar for Jiis effect : And fail^eing
of the repoirt of Jie faidis lettres, tliat je direct na fdv lettres aganis ])e faid Johne in ony tyme heirefter, vpoune ony fik informatioune, quhairbye the faid Johne may be moleftit or trublit, he and his
freindis put to extraordinar chargeis and cxpenftis, in attending vpoune ony fik dyet, in ony tyme
heirefter : Quhairanent Jiir prefentis falbe fufficient for jour Warrand : And for jour forder Warrand,
it is our Will that Jiir prefentis be regiftratc in ])e buikis of Counfale, ad fuluram rei memoriam.
Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyrudehous, tlie xvij day of Maij, 1599.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX,

The Bailie-depute of the Itegalitij of St Andrews permitted to sit in
judgement, .with the Jii.itice-depute.
Maij 19- — Comperit Mr Robert Leirinand as procuratour and depute for
the Laird of Derfie, ftewart of the Regalitie of Sanct Androus, and defyrit Johne
Carftairis to be replegeit to the Regalitie of Sanct Androus ; at the leift, that
the faid Stewartis-depute, lauchfullie authorefit, may fttt in judgement Avith the
Juftice, according to the provifioune of the Act of Parliament.

The Juftice refufis the Replegiatioune, bccaus the Kingis aduocat wes fyrft
challanged before the Juftice generall ; and Admittis Williame Leirmond, Baillie-
(lepute, to fitt with him in Judgement, to fee juftice miniftrat as efferis : Quhais
rycht of Baillerie being fene, he fatt doun in judgement.

The aduocat alkis inftrunientis of the fwering of the Aflyfe, and proteftis for
Wilfull Errour in cais thay acquit. — The haill AlTyfeaflvit inftrumentis, thatnather witnes nor probatioun wes produceit to thame, for verificatioun of the dittay.

Comperit Mr Henrie Balfour, Aduocat, and produceit his Maiefteis ^Varrand,
quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and jour deputtis, We greit 50W well. Seing, the mater criminall

VOL. II. M

90 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599perfewit at our inftance anil our adaocat, aganis Joline Caiflairis, citiiier of Sanct Androis, wes continewit ^illcrday to ])e nynteiie day of Maij iiiftant, quliairanent We find our felffis indirectlie circumvenit ;' and We beintr of delilierat mynde, lliat juftice falbe miniflrat indiffiTentlie to our Iiaill liegis,
to ])e effect that malefaitouris may be pwneiliit, and Hk as ar innocent may be defendit, be thair innocencie : Heirfoir, it is cure will and We command 30W, that the faid mater be put to ])e knawlege of
anelnqueift, without ony forder delay or continewatioune, the faid xix day of Maij inftant; and that
56 proreid and minifter jullice Jiairintiil, as accordis of the laws : And in cais ony of Jie perl'onis of }>e
luqueift fummond to pafs vpoune the AfTyis be abfent, that vjieris be elected and cholin in J)air place ;
nochtwilhftandint; ony letter, charge or directioune, gevin or to be gevin be ws in the contrar. SubIVrj-uit with our hand, Att Halyrudehous, the xix day of Maij, . . .

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Comperit lykewyis, the faniyn day, Mr Robert Lyntoime, fubftitute for Mr
Thomas Ilainmiltoiine aduocat to our Ibueraiie lord, aud produceit his Maiefteis
"Warraud ; off the quhilk the tennour foUowis.

E£X,

Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcame, our aduocat: It is oure will, and We command 30W, that 3e inflfl in our name in the perf'uit of jie lettres criminall, raifit at our inltance aganis
Johne Carflairis, citiner of Sanct Androis, for vfing of fals wechtis and mefouris, as is alledgeit : And
that 56 fie the faid mater be put to J>e knawledge of ane condigne Affyis, to ]>e effect the veritie may
be tryit, and juflice miniflrat as accordis of pe law: As 3e will be anfuerabill to ws vpoune 30ur
dewtie and obedience, nochtwitliftanding ony vther Letter gevin, or to be gevin be ws in fe contrair.
Subfcryult with our hand, Att Halyrudehous, the xix day of iNIaij, 1599.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Folloiv'is ihe Dittay against John Carstairs.
-That quhair, it is ftatute and ordenit be our Ibuerane lordis maifl nobill progenitour. King James the fourt, of worthie memorie, in his hienes ParHament,
hauldin at Edinburghe, the xxvj dayof Junij I".iijMxxiiij (1474) yeiris, that all
thai that vfis fals meafouris and wechtis, dilTaueand the pepill, fould be indytit
as ffallaris, and dittay ordanit to be takin thah'of be the Juftice Clark ; as att
inair lentli is conteuit in the laid Act of Parliament, off the dait aboue wi-ittin ;
quhilk is ratifeit and approvin in all Parliamentis that ewir lies bene haldin fenfyne be our Ibuerane lord and his hienes maift noble progenitouris, of worthie
memorie : Neuirtheles, it is of veritie, that the laid Johne Carflairis hes maift
fraudulentlie and falllie, contrar the tennour of the laidis Actis of Parliament,
lawis and conftitutiouns of this realme, daylie and continewallie thir fax yeiris
laftbypaft, in vfing of his induftrie and traffique of merchandice, vfit wechtis and
meafouris, in hying, bloking and intaking of all Ibirt of geir fra the commoun
pejjle, with grit wechtis and lang eh-and," far mair gritar and langar nor the
commoun courfe of the countrey, and of the citie quhair he duellis, and throw all
the mercatis of this realme quhair he hantis,^ frequentis, and raakis his refidence
and mercats : Aud agaue, in felling, weying, and gewing furth of the famin
merchandice, wair and guidis, Avitli lefs meafouris and fchortar elvand, to his
hienes leigis : Lyke as, the faid Johne Carftairis hes bein oft and diners tymes
' Circumyented, imposed upon. ^ £In-waud, or yard in measure. ^ Haunts, visits.

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 91

trappit and fnairrit in his dowbill fraudes, falfett and difTait, in vfing of the
faidis fals weclitis and mealburis, bayth in the Citie of Sanct Androus, and in
findrie vtheris our Ibuerane lordis mercattis and publict jjlaces of tliis reahne ;
and fpeciallie, att findrie tymes, be Dauid Watlbun, deane of Gild of tlie laid
Citie, and his Gild breder ; and at laft wes aceufit, tryit and conuict of the faid
cryrae of ffalfett and fraudulent vfing of the faidis fals wechtis and raeafouris,

before the faid Deane of Gild and Gild breder, in the moneth of the

3eir of God I^.V.lxxx 3eiris ; as the convictioun att mair lenth beiris.

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of Stevin Phili), merchand in Sanct
Androis, thair chancillar, ffand, pronuneeit and declarit the faid Joline Carftaris,
to be Innocent and Acquit of the faid crymes,

[CuKiA JrsTiciARiE ieuta in Tcmpio de FalMand, xvj Junij 1599, per M.
Wilelmum Haert ef per Andream MehiUc, Magistrum domus,^J'.d.n. RegisJ]

SlssauU Ujitljiit t\)t Palace of #alfelanU.

Jun. 16. — Mr Patrik Myrtoune, ane of his Maiefteis Maifter carveris, and JoiiNNE Ramsay, ane of his Maiefteis familiar
ferwandis."

Dittay against Mr Patrih Myrtoune.
FonsAMEKiLL as lie, vpoune the tent day of Junij inftant, being in his Maiefteis chaliner in the Palice of Falkland, and enterand in conference with Jolinne
Ramfay, ane vtlier of his Maiefteis familiar ferwandis, efter linn contentious purpofe paft amangis tliame, vnfemelie for fik ane place, he nather regairdit the
dewtie aucht to his Maieftie his fouerane prince, as his borne fubject, nather the
mair ftrait obligatioune quhairby he was bund to his hienes, as his awin proper
ferwand ; he trelfonablie and malitioullie ftruike the faid Johiie Ramfay vpone
the face with his hand, and gaif to him ane cuH",^ his Maieftie being in his cabinet within the faid chalmer : And fwa, alfweill in refpect of the neirnes of the
fact, coinmittit fa iieer his Maiefteis awin perfoune, as that the famyn was done
within his awin bed chalmer, he hes trelfonablie tranfgreffit his hienes lawis and

' The Clianibcilain and Master of the Household liad jurisdiction in all offences committed within
tlie King's Palace and certain bounds. The Lord High Constable had likewise similar powers, but
more extensive tlian either of these other officers. Fortunately liie whole facts in this very singular
case have been pretty fully detailed in these proceedings. '' The well known Sir John Kamsay, (brother of George first Lord Ramsay of Dalhousie. He was afterwards created Viscount of Haddington, Lord Ramsay of Barns and of Melrose in Scotland, Baron Kingston upon Thames and Earl of
Holdernessin England. Ramsay, at that time one of the King's Pages, was the principal instrument
in saving King James Vf. from assassination, at Perth, on Aug. 3. 1600, when assaulted by Mr Alexander Ruthven, brother to the Earl of Gowrie. Rutliven was twice stabbed by Ramsay with his
dagger and thrown down the staircase, where he was dis|)atched by Sir Thomas Erskine and Dr Hugli
Herries. It was lie also who subsequently rushed upon the Earl of Gowrie, and pierced him through
the heart. See Trials for the Gowkie Conspiracy, Aug. 22 and Nov. IGOO, Aug. 12, IGOO, Jun. :i\,
1609, &c. = A slap or slight blow.

92 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599Actis of Parliament maid thairanent, and lies incurrit the panis tliairof : Lyke
as alfo, lie vpoiine the morne thairefter, being the ellevint day of the faid moneth
of Junij, vpoune ane new rencounter maid betuix the faid Mr Patrik and the
faid Johne Ranifay, within the Inner eloife of the faid Palace, his Maieftie being
within the famyn, he maift contenipteoullie and vndewtifullie drew his fword
and preiifit to haif ftrykkin and flane the faid Johne thairwith, gif he hadnocht
bene ftayit be certane of his INIaiefteis ferwandis, being thair prefent for the tyme ;
quhairbye, he hes alfo tranfgreflit his hienes Actis of Parliament and Lawis of
this realme, and hes incurrit the panis thairin contenit.

DiTTAY against Johne Ramsay.
Forfamekill as he, A-poune the tent day of Junij inftant, being in his Maiefteis bed-chalmer, within his Palice of Falkland, quhair his Maieftie was for the
tynie, within the cabinet thairof ; and haifing enterit in certane vnfemelie and
contentious purpofis, with l\Ir Patrik Myretoune, ane of his Maiefteis carveris ;
and be vndifcretioune of his language and behaviour, entering in fik quarrelling
with vtheris ;' and that in end, all dewtie being foi^et '' on ather fydes ; and nather refpecting tyme, place, iior the neirnes of his Maiefteis awin perfoune, the
laid Johne maift vnadwyfedlie and vndewtifullie gaif to the faid Mr Patrik the
ley \^ quhairvpoune the laid INIr Patrik ftryking him with his awin hand vpoune
the face, the faid John thairbye contracting ane deidlie quarrell aganis him,
vpoune the morne thairefter, the ellevint day of the faid moneth ; being refoluit
to revenge his particuler,^ without ony regaird of the Kingis Maiefteis honour
and his awin dewtie, his Maieftie being his native Prince and gratious maifter ;
vvilfullie and malitiouflie, vpoune fet purpois and foirthocht fellonye, af]ail3iet
and invadit the faid Mr Patrik within the Inner eloife of the faid Palice, his
Majeftie being within the faid Palice for the tyme, and treflbnablie ftruck the
faid Mr Patrik with ane batoune'' vpoune the arme and held, and thairefter
drew his fword to haif llane him thair-svith, gif he had nocht bene ftayit, be certane of his hienes gentlemen and ferwandis being prefent for the tyme : Quhairbye he has treftbnablie tranfgreffit his hienes lawis and Actis of Parliament
maid thairanent, and lies incurrit the panis thairin contenit.

PERSEWAn, Mr Tliomas Hammiltoun of Diumcarne, aduocat to our fuuerane lord.

ASSISA.

Andro Lundy of Conland, Robert Arnot, Baillie in (of) James Boii;, fellarnian,

Mr Franres Botluvell, feruitour Falkland, James Blytli, in Falkland,

to his Ma''S Williame Ilenryfoun, feruitour to James Lundie, feruitour to her

Johne Drummond, Ifchar to Lis his Ma''"=, Ma'"',

Ma''", Jolnie Boig, Maimer portour, Robert Galbraitli, Pantrieman,

Hary Balfour, feruitour to his Williame Craig, ailman, James Lyddcll, Ypotifar.

Ma''S John Awerie, in Falkland,

' Each other. ^ Forgotten. ^ The lie. * Personal quarrel. ' Tlie blow with the

baton was given to aggravate the previous offence, and to afford an opportunity of immediate combat.

32Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 93

Mr Patrik INIyrtoime, eftir reiding of the Dittay, defyrit tryell to be tane of
the Dittay laid to his charge ; and als, nochtwithftanding, he wald huiinblie fubmit him to his Maiefteis will. — The laid Johne Ramfay, eftir reiding of the
Dittay laid to his charge, declarit that he could nocht deny the Dittay, hot wald
niaift huimblie lubniit hiin felft" in his Maiefteis will. — Quhairvijouae and the
laid Mr Patrikis will, the faid Mr Thomas Hammiltoune aflvit inftrumentis.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfonis of Affyis being chofui, fworne and admittit, eftir the accufatioune of the faidis perfonis be dittay of the crymes refpcctiue aboue
writtin, removit ftirth of Court to ane qviyet jilace of the faid kirk, quliair thay
electit and chufe the faid Johne Drummond (of Slipperfeild) Chancillar, &c., and
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Mr Patrik Mortoune to be ffyllit, culpabill and convict of the crymes aboue writtin, contenit in his Dittay : And als
ffand, pronunceit and declarit tlie faid Johne Ramfay to be ffylit, culpabill and
convict of the crymes aboue writtin, contenit in the Dittay foiriaid.'

\_3Ir Rohert Murray, Justice-depnte.']

K\^tii of a (CofFei* bJitl) aSUritiuss, ^t,

Jun. 21. — Grissell INIathow, ferwand to James Seytoune, burges of
Aberdene, and William Calder, workman in Abii-dene.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the thifteous Steling of ane coffer with writtis
and evidentis furth of the faid James (Seytounes) hous, pertening to Mr George
Seytoune ; committit in the moneth of May laftbypaft.

James Seytoune takis inftrumentis that Griirell Mathow was never feduceit to
mak the ConfelTionis quhilkis ar writtin ; and alfo, that the thing that he confeft befoir the Sherefe of Abirdene and baillies thairof is trew, and he abydes at
the famyn ; and farther, that the Depofitioune, now producit, Avas maid in the
faid James Setounis awin hous, quhair thair was na tortour nor yrnes prelentit
to hir. Scho (GrifTell Mathow) confefTis lykewyis, that fcho maid that Confeffioune vncompellit. Eftir reding of the Dittay, fcho ratefeit the faid Declaratioune maid be hir ofbefoir, and confeft the famyn to be of veritie.

^^'illiame Calder declairis that he brocht the coffer doun the flair.

Mr Alexander Peblis takis inftrumentis, that thay declair thay maid the fame
Depofitionis, abydes thairat and declairis the famyn to be of veritie.
Dittay against Grissell 3Ialltow and WiUiani Calder.

FoRSAMEKiLL as tliay, in tlie moneth of May lallbypail, being intilit anj feduceit be James King,
burges of Abirdene, to tliifteouflie licill and gif to him the maift fecreit coffer quhilk Mr George Seytoun, Tutour of Meldrum, had, ftandand in the laid James Seytoun's duelling hous in the Braidgait of

1 The King's Will is not inserted, and no farther entries occur. Owing to Ramsay's youth and
other circumstances, it is likely that both were placed under aiTcst for a short time. At all events,
both of them were afterwards restored ; and it is likely that tliey received a suitable reprimand.

94 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599.

AbirJene, with Iiis gold and filuer being thairin ; and the laid GrilTcll being leiuitiice within tlie faid
Lous, and knawing the haiil lecreitis thairof, after conference with the laid James, Iclie delyiit him to
cum about ellewin houiis att ewin, the nycht of the away-taking thairof, to the laid James duelling
hous ; and tliair iVhe lould delyuer to him the niaift fecret coffer quhilk the laid Mr George vfit ; fche
lupponing that his gold and filuer wes thairin : Lyke as, the faid James, acciimpaneit with the laid
Williame Calder, in the moneth of May laftbypaft, vnder fylenee and cloud of nycht, about xj houris
att ewin or thairby, come to the faid James Seytounis duelling hous, to ane chalmer vpoun the turnpyke held thairof, quhair thair wes ane new coffer, bandit with quhyte irne, pertening to the faid Mr
George, llandand, and thair the faid Grilfell delyuerit the laid coffer to the faid Williaine, quha brocht
the famyn doun to the hall dure, quhair the faid James King was llandand; and thairfra 56 and he
ihifteouUie concelit, reffett and away-tuke the faid coffer, quhairin thair wes certane writtis and eui-
<lentis, doun the ftair ; and convoyit the famin furth of the turnpyke jett, doun the cloife, and throw
Capitan Keiris saird and to Fyveis wallis, qidiair thay fett doun and brak vp thefyde thairof with ane
quhingar,' and thifteoullie Hall and away-tuke furth of the famin, twa bunfchis of letteris and writtis :
And fwa, thay and ayther- of thame ar airt and pain of the thifteons fteilling thairof, conceling, refI'ettin" and away taking of the famin coffer, with tiie writtis thairin, furth of the faid James duelling
hous : Quhilk coffer pertenit to the faid Mr George, as faid is, as wes notourlie knawin.

Verdict. The AfTyis being chofin, fu-orne and adniittit, and in thair prefens the faidis Griirell Mathow and Williame Calder accufit be Dittay; and eftir thar Depofitiounis, maid att Abirdene the fewint, and att Edinburghe the
xiij dayes rcfpectUie of Junij inftant, quhairin thay confeft the haill Dittay aboue
written, wer produceit to thame, for verifeing thairof; and efter reding thairof
in thair audience, tlie faidis perfounes remowit furth of Court to ane quyett
pairt of the faid Tolbuyth, &c. ; and be the mouth of Patrick Con of Auchry,
chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faidis GrifTell Mathow and Williame
Calder to be culpabill, ffylit and convict, &c. : Quhairvpoun the faid James Seytoune afliit actis and inflrumentis.

[3//- William Ilairt and Mr Eohert Murray, Jtisticcs-ilcputes.']
June 23. — Sextexce. The Juftice-deputtis, be the mouth of Williame
Blak, dempftar, decernit and ordanit the laid Grissell {Mathow) to be tane to
the North Loch of Edinburghe, and thair Dkowxit^ quhill fcho be deid ; and
all hir movabill guidis to be elcheit, &c.

[ xl//- Robert Murray, Justice-cJepute.']
Jun. 27. — The Juftice Depute Decernit and ordanit the faid Williame
Calder to be (koiu-git throw the burch of Edin])urghe, and Baneift the faid
Burch, and lykewayis baneift the burch of Abirdene ; and never to returne
within the laid burrowis, vnder the pane of deid.

* A short sword, hanger or cutlass. ^ ' llk-ane,' each, eit/ier. ' This is the first, perhaps the
only instance, of sentence of Drowning, pronounced during the reign of James VI. by the High Court
of Justiciary. It was common in all Regality and Barony Courts, having a feudal right of ' fiil and
gallotcs,' to inflict death upon women in this manner. The North Loch of Edinburgh was the scene
of execution, in all such oases, where sentence was pronounced by the Baillies of Edinburgh, or by
the Baillie of Regality of Broughton. The bones of some of the culprits have often been turned up,
when the surface of the ground required to be disturbed.

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 95

\_3Ir Williame Halrf, Justice-Depute.^

2irariit5 of Uistolets — ^^lausljter.

Jun. 23. — Patrik Dunbar, fone to Johne Dunbar of Leacht.

Persewar, Jolin Ta!t, as bioder to tlie faid vmrj''^ Charles Tait.
Preloquotour for die pannell, Mr Joline Nicolfoune.

The qiihilk day, anent the criininall actioune and caufe, perfewit in ane Court
of Jufticiarie, haldin in the Tolbuith of Edinburghe, the xxij day of Jiinij inftant, at tlie inftance of Johne Tait, as brother to vmq'"' Charlis Tait, younger of
Adamehill, aganis Patrik Dunbar, brother to Johne Dunbar of Leacht, for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in bering and M'eiring of
piftulettis, vpoun the landis of Bar, Kihnarnok and toune thairof, vpoune the
xxiiij, XXV, xxvj, xxvij, xxviij and penult dayes of October laftbypaft ; at the
leift, in ane or vther of the faidis dayis : And fiklyke, for airt and pairt of the
felloune and crewall llauchter of the faid vmq'" Charlis Tait ; comniittit vpoune
the penult day of the faid moneth of October laftbypaft, with fword and fchot of
piftulettis in the toune of Kilmarnok, vpoune fet purpois, provifioune and foir-.
thocht fellonye : At tlie qvdiilk xxij day of Junij inftant, the faid Patrik comperand with Mr Johne Nicolfoun, his preloquutour, and enterand on pannell,
conforme to ane charge gevin be vertew of our fouerane lordis lettres, purcheft
at the inftance of the faid John Tait, to Dauid Dunbar of Baldork as cawtioner,
quha wes chargeit to enter hina to A'nderlye the law for the crymes foirfaidis ;
and alledgeit that na proces culd be led aganis hiin, for beiring, weiring and
Ichuting of piftulettis ; nather culd he be put to the knawlege of ane AlTyis
thairfoir : becaule he lies obtenit our fouerane lordis Reniiffioune, vnder the!
Greit Seill, for the famyn : As the faid Remiffioune, of the dait, at Halyrudehous, the XX day of Fcbruar, produceit, beiris : And ficlyke, it was alledgeit be
the faid Patrik and his preloquutoiu", that na proces can be led aganis liiin, nather could he be put to the knawlege of ane Aflyis, for airt and pairt of the
flauchter of the faid vmq'" Charles Tait, becaus it is of veritie that the faid vmq'°
Charles, being chargeit be Robert Giliuerie, nieflinger, vpoune the xxv day of
March, the yeir of God P.V. Ixxxxvj yeiris ; and that be vertew of our fouerane
lordis lettres, purcheft at the inftance of George Dunbar in Lellieifok, as fader,
with the remanent kyn and freindis of vmq''' George Dunbar, feruitour for the
tyme to James Chalmer of Gaitgirth, to haif fund fufficient cawtioune and fouertie to him that he fuld haif comperit before our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis, in the Tolbuithe of Edinburghe, the xxj day of Apryle nixt thaireftir, in
the yeir of God foirfaid, and vnderlyne the law for airt and pairt of the flauchter of the faid vniq'" George Dunbar, in defalt of fynding of the faid fouertie, and
for hisdiflbbedieiice and conteniptioune ; the faid Robert Giliuerie, meffinger, be
vertew of the faidis lettres, vpoune the fecund day of the faid moneth, paft to

96 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599the mercat croce of the burch of Air and thair lawfullie ilenunceit the faid vniq'°
Charles Tait our Ibueraiie lordis rebell, and put him to his hienes home, as the
extract of the faidis Lettres of Horning, dewlie execute, indorfat and regiftrate,
vnder the figne and fubfcriptioune manuall of \Villiame M'Kerrell, fliereffe
dark of Air, produceit to the faidis Jugeis, at mair lenth beris : And fwa, the
laid vniq'° Charles wes llayne att the home.

With the quhilkis alledgeances, the faid Juftice depute, ndcht being avyfit, continewit to pronunce his Interloquutour thaii'in to this day and place ; and ordanit the faid Patrik Dunbar to find cautioune for his entrie ; quha fand Williame Dunbar of Enterkyn cawtioune and fouertie for his comperance ; lyke as,
the faid Patrik Dunbar, comperand and entrand on pannell this day, with the
faid Mr Johne Nicolfoune his preloquutour, and the faid Johne Tait, as perfewar, oftymes callit, lawfuU tynie of day biddin, and nocht comperand to perfew, the faid Juftice Depute ffand be Interloquutour na proces to be led aganis
the faid Patrik Dunbar, nather yit that he falbe put to the knawledge of ane
Aflyis for the crymes foirfaidis ; in refpect of the alledgeance abouewrittin,
verefeit.

Jul. 4. — AxGt's WiLLiAMsouNi: alias M'Ixtosch, in Termit, Johne
and Angus his fonis, Lauchlane Williamfoune, George M^Coneill Reoch, at the Brigend of Innernes, and Allefter M^Achane VicGillichallum.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vniq'^ Allefter M'Rannald fone
to Allane M'Rannald of Eifter Leyis.'

The quhilk day, comperit Dauid Hammiltoune, agent,^ and produceit our fouerane lordis lettres, dewlie execute and indorfat, (except the fumnionding of ane
Aftyis,) purcheft be Johne M^Rannald, fone arid apperand air to Allan M^Rannald of Eifter Levis, as brother, Avith the remanent kyn and freindis of vniq'*
Allefter M'^Rannald, fone to the faid Allane, to tak fouertie of Lauchlane Williainfone, alias M'^Intofche, &c., that thay fould liaif comperit befoir our fouerane
lordis juftice or his deputtis, this day and place, in the hour of caufe, and vnderlyne the law, for airt and pairt of the flauchter of the faid vniq'" Allefter M'Raiinald. Quhairvpoun he alkit inftrumentis.

Comperit the famyn day, Angus Williamfoune of Tarmit, &c., and exponit and
declarit, that thay war fummond be Johne Rofs, meffmger, and that be vertew
of our fouerane lordis Lettres, purcheft at the inftance of Johne M'^Rannald, fone
and apperand air to Allane M^Rannald of Eifter Leyis, as brother, Avith the remanent kyn and freindis of vmq''' Allefter M"^Rannald, fone to the faid Allane, to

' See Jul. 20, 1599, ' This is the earliest instance the Editor has met with of an Affoit appearing, as procurator, at the bar of the Court of Justiciary.

32JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS, 97

fynd fufficient cawtioun and fouertie that thay fiild liaif comperit befoir our fouerane lordis Juftice or his dei)uttis this day and place, in tlie hour of caufe, and
vnderlyne the law for airt and pairt of the flauchter of the faid vmq'^ Allefter
JM'Rannald ; and thay, for obedience of the faid chai-ge, ffand Lauchlane I\rintofche of Danachfan cawtioner and fouertie for thair entrie, to the effect foirlliid ;
ffor qidiais relieff, and tryell of thair innocencie in the laid cryme, tliaj^ com-r
perit, as faid is, and enterit on pannell ; and proteftit for relief of thair laid cautioner : As lykewyis, offerit thanie reddie to abyde the tryell of ane Affyis, and
vnderlye the law for the faid cryme ; difTalfenting fra all continewatioune : In
refpect quhairof, and that na partie comperit to perfew thame, being oftymes
rallit, and lawfuU tyme of day biddin, thay lykewyis proteftit, that na lettres be
grantit in tyme cimiing, for trubling or fummonding thame for the faid cryme :
.Quhairvpoune thay aflvit actis and inftrumentis.

[ilTy Robert Murray, Justke-Deputi'.']

Jul. 13. — Jaimes Grahame, brother-gennan to vmq''^ Dauid Grahame
of Fyntrie.

Dilatit for the flauchter of vmq'" Johne Crawfurd, feruitour for the tyme to

vmq" Robert Erie of Orknay ; eommittit in the moneth of December

yeiris, within the Kirkjaird of Ferfnay, vpoune fett purpois, pro^ifioune and
foirthocht fellonye.

Persewar, Marioune Bcyes, relict.

The faid James Grahame alledgeis, that he can nocht pafs to ane AlTyis, becaus he hes obtenit the Kingis Refpect' for the laid cryme, for the fpace of xix
yeiris nixt, efter the dait thairof, quhilk is of the dait, at Falkland, the n}'nt day
pf July inllant ; and takis' him to the laid Relpcct. — It is alledgeit be the perJewar, that the faid Refpect is contrair the Actis of Parliament, and thairfoir is
null in the felff ; it being grantit, without fatisfactioune of partie. — It is anfuerit
be the jjannell, that the grace^ of ane King can nocht be tane away be ane Act
of Parliament ; and the Kingis handis can nocht be clofit in granting of the
lamyn.

The Juftice admittis the Refpect, in refpect the pannell is reddie to find cautioun to fatisfie"' the partie, as law M'ill. ^^'illiame Stewart, brother to Johne
Erie of Atholl, becomes fouirtie that he fall fatisfie the faid Marioune Boyes, peri'ewar, as law will.

, ' Respite, dated at Falkland, Jul. 19. ' Betakes. ^ Royal prerogative. * Viz. for the

Assytliment.

VOL. il. N

98 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599.

[iV/r WiUiame Hairf, Jiistice-Dejmte.']

Jul. 20. — Allane M'Rannald of Eider Leyis.'
Dilatit foi- airt and pairt of the flauchteris of vmq'^ Donald Williamfoune, in

, and for the flanchter of vniq'^ Alexander and Johne Hayis, in Kilrawik.

Persewaris, James Hay, fone lauchfull to vmq'^ Alexander, and brother to vmq'« Johne, with thair
remanent kyn and freindis ; Johne Williamfone, as brother, with remanent kyn and freiudis.

The pannell ofFerit him reddie to abyde the tryell of ane Affyis, and vnderlye
the law, for the faidis flauchteris, diflafenting fra all continewatioune : In reIpect quhairof, and that na partie comperit to infift in his pei-fute, proteftit firfl;
for releif of his cawtioneris, (Alexander Ruthvene, penfioner of Rofs, and Alexander Bayne, fear of Logie) ; as alfo, that he be nawyis trublit, perfewit nor
fumniond for the flauchter of the faidis perfonis in tyines cuming ; and lykewyis
proteftit that the dyet fould defert. — The Juftice ordanis this dyet to defert.

Jul. 25. — WiLLlAME AucHiNCRAW, in Swj'nwod-heucheid, Hary Craw
(Auchincra%v), in Eift Reftoune.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the flauchter of vniq'" George Hwme of Spot ;
committit in the nioneth of September, the yeir of God, P.VMxxxxj yeiris,
vpoune fet purpois, provifioune and foirthocht fellonye.

Comperit Williame Home, brother to the Gudeman of Manderfl:oime, togidder
with Jeane Hammiltoune, relict of vmq'' George Home of Spot, and Annas
Home, dochter, and produceit our fouerane lordis lettres, dewlie execute and
indorfat ; quhairvpoune thay afliit actis and inftrumentis.

Patrik Cokburne, Tutour of Langtoune, called, as cautioner and fouerte for
the faidis ^Villiame and Hary ; lawfuU tyme of day biddin, and nocht enterand,
he was vnlawit, and amerciat in the panis, contenit in the Actis of Parliament,
viz' ij" niarkis, for non-entrie of each of the faidis Williame and Hary : Lyke as,
the faid Juftice-depute adjudgeit the faidis Williame and Hary Auchincrawis to
be deniinceit our fouerane lordis rebellis, a!id put to the home, and all thair
movabill guidis ordanit to be efcheit and iiibrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as
fugitiues fra his hienes lawis for the faid cryme.

dTofffing anir (Txjiintei'ffittnci;, aulr ^itttcnng; Uast Coin.

Nov. 24. — Johne Murkay, Leiclie,' in Dunfermling ; Walter Murray,
his brother, in Creift'; Williame Thomelbune, fmyth, in Cowper-in- Angus ; Williame Sympfoune, feruitour to Arthour
Smyth, in Quhitfeild ; and Thomas Frafer, in Banfl'.
See Jul. 4, 1599. = Physician.

1 Co

33 Jac, VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 99

Dilatit for airt, pairt, red and counfale of the trefTonabill fforgeing, ffalfefeing
and counterfitting of falfe cun3ie, fik as falfe ten-fchilling peiceis, twa-mark-peiceis, fyve-pund-peceis, fyftie-fcliilling-peceis, hat-peiceis, piftulettis and crownis.

ASSISA.

Johne Irving of Kynnok, AdameWilfoune golilfmyth tliair, Johne Mofman y, merchand tliair,

Hew Lyndefay goltlfmytli in Ed', Aiulro Naper merchand in Ed', Dauid Meldrum of Segie,
Robert Fairlie goldfinyth thair, W^Williatnfoune merchand in Ed', George Mowtray of Seyfeild,
R' Thomfoune goklfmytli thair, James Crawfuid goldfmytli thair, W" Stallcer goldfrayth thair(Ed'),
Johne Lamb goklfmyth thair, Archibald Geddes merchand thair, Thomas Somervell maltraan tliair.
The aduocat takis inflrumentis of the Confeffioune of Johne and Walter
MuiTayis, of the firft, fecund and thrid poyntis of thair Dittay, and of IVilliame
Sijmjifoiinis. — The aduocat takis inftrumentis of WiUiame Thomejounis Confeffioune of the fforgeing of the yrnis for prenting of falfe piftulettis ; and that
he was airt and pairt thairof — The aduocat takis inftrumentis of Thomas FraJeris Confeffioune of his knawlege of the cun3eing of the counterfit money, contenit in his Dittay ; and of the conceliug of the famyn fra the Kingis Maieftie
and his Juftice.

The Juftice produceit the Warrand vnderwrittin, ordaning the famjai to be
jnfert in jiroces ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

Rex,

Lord Justice and Juftice-Clark, We greit 50W hairtlie Weill. It is oure will, and be fir
prefentis, We defyre 30W, concerning Johne Murray, brother to Walter MuiTay, tane laitlie in Duufermling, and dilatit of flfals cun3ie ; becaus he firft confeffit and declarit fe veritie of his awin and liis
complices preceding fairin, he being convict with his complices for Jie faid cryme ; tliat 56 moderat
the dome aganis him, in maner and forme as efter followis, to wit, that he be Baneift pis our realme
of Scotland, and decernit to pafs furth of ])e fame, within fe fpace of aucht dayis, and never to retume
Jjairto agane, during all ))e dayis of his lyftyme, vnder pe pane of deid, to be execute aganis him with
all rigour: And fis to be inlert in 5 our fentence ; ftbr the quhilk, }>ir prefentis falbe 5 our Warrand.
Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyrudehous, the xxiiij day of November, 1599.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Follow the DiTTAYS agahift the uhole Per/ous on Pannell.

Johne Murray and Walter Murray, being enterit on pannell, Dilatit and accufit of the
crymes vnderwrittin, to wit, flTor the trefTonabill outing' of fals and adulterat money, fik as xf. peceis
and twa mark peceis, amangis our fouerane lordis liegis, to the fimilitude and likenes of his hienes
trew money ; quliilk fals money, extending to the fowme of xxiiij lib. money, the faid Johne reffauit
fra George Drummond, faidler in Banff, to be outit twa ^eir fyne or thairbye ; quhairof he delyuerit
ane pairt to the faid Walter Murray, his brother, and thay paflit throw fyndrie pairtis of the cuntrie
about Banff and Tuna, to haif outit the famin ; and haifing onlie outit ane few nownier thairof, becaus thay war fa confpeckell,^ that thay culd nocht pafs ; the faid Johne come bak to the faid George
Diiimniond, and delyuerit fa mony thairof as was nocht outit to him agane : Be outing and conceling
of the quhilk fals cun3e, thay and ather of thame committit Treffoune. Item, lykewyis for the trelfonablU outing of ffals and adulterat cun3e, fik as fals fyve-pund peices, and fyftie-fchilling peiceis,
and diffaueing of our fouerane lordis liegis thairbye ; quhilkis Hans Johnftoune, Fleming and Tbom
Reid, his prenteis, of thair fpeciall counfale, directioune, outred and fumeifling, about twa 5eir fen-

■ Vending, circulating, putting out, uttering. ' KenspccUk, conspicuous, glaring.

100 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599.

fyne or tliairbye, I)reiitit in tlie places, (and) to the nownier following;, to wit : In the tonne of Kyncardyn, fyftie foure falle fyftie-lcliilling peiceis : Item, in the Eill-ferrie of Dundie, xxxij fyftie-lcliiliing peiceis ; quhilkis thay and the faid Hans pairtit amangis thanie ; comniittand thaiibj-e TreUoune.
— Item, The faid Joline and Walter Murrayis, and Williame Sympsoune, feruitour to Arthour
Smyth, in Quhitfeild, being indytit and acculit, for the treironabill ftorgeing and conceling of xiiij fcoir
of fals Hat-peiceis, Crownis and Piftuletis, quhilk the faid Arthour Smyth and Williame Sympfoune, of the fpeciall command and counfale of the faidis Johne and Walter Murrayis, cun3cit about
gule' lartwas, of brafs, and delyuerit the famyn to the faid Walter, quhilk he brocht away with him to
Dunfermling; ffor the hundretli quhairof, he Add haif payit to the faid Arthour the fowme of ten
markis : And becaus he had na money to pay thairfoir, he left with him ane plaid and ane pair of
fchankis, and pronieifl to gif him ane yrne ftndie -^ quhilk wes done be the knawledge of the faid
Johne Murray and Williame Synipfoune, quha treffonablie conceillit the famyn ; and fwa, committit
oppin and manifeft Treflbune. — Williame Thomesoune, fmyth in Cowper-in- Angus, being indytit
and accufit of art, pairt, red and counfale of the treflbnabill ftorgeing, cun5eing and prenting of fals
Piflulettis, quhilkis George Dmramond, faidler, and Arthour Mwle, gude-brother to the faid Williame, of the faid Williamis knawlege and conceilling, about twa ^eir fen fyne or thairbye, trellbnablie
fforgeit of brafs, in the burch of Perth, and vpoune the Craigis of Kynnowle ; fibr onlred of the quhilk
cun3ie, the faid Arthour forgeit ane pair of yrnes for the prent of the faidis Pillulettis, quhilk tlie faid
Artliour Muule gravit about ane yeir fyne or thairbye ; and fwa, the faid Williame trellbnablie conceillit the famyn. — Lykeas, Thomas FRASEK,llokker of PiUulettis in Banff, being indytit and accufit
of the treflbnabill conceilling of the fforgeing, prenting and counterfitting of xxx falfe PiUulettis of
brafs, to the fimilitude of trew Piflulettis, quhilkis Hanfe Johnfloune, Fleming, and vmq'<^ ThomaA
Lathreis, cherurgean in Perth,-' and George Drummond, faidler, than indweller in Banff, about tlire
yeir fenfyne or thairbye, cunjeit and prentit in the (aid Thomas buith in Banff'; quhilkis PiUulettis
the faid Thomas faw vngylt ; be conceilling quhairof he committit Treflbune.

Verdict. For tlie quhilkis crymes, the faidis fyve perfonis, and ilkane of
thame, was put to the knawledge of ane Affyis, of the perfonis (above) writtin,
&c. ; and, efter cheiffing of the faid George Mowtray of Seyfeild chancellar, thay
reflbnit and votit vpoune everrie poynt of the faidis crymes ; and being thruchlie avyfit, efter longe reffoning and voiting thairin, &c. thay ffand, pronunceit
and declarit the faid Johne and Walter IMurrayis, Williame Sympfoune, Williame Tliomfoune and Thomas Frafer, to be ftylit, culpabill and convict of the
crymes of Treflbune refpectiue aboue writtin.

Sentence. For the quhilk caufe, the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of
Robert Galbrayth, dempftar of the faid Court, Ordanit the faid Walter 3Iur-'
ray, Williame Si/mpjhnne and Williame ThomeJ'ouue, to be tane to the Caftellhill of Edinburgh, and thair to be wyrreit at ane llaik, and thair bodeis to be
brunt in afles ; and all thair landis, heritageis, takis, fteidingis, rowmes, poffeffionis, to be forfaltit, efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe : And als,
at command of our fouerane lordis Precept, aboue written, Ordanit the faid
Johne 3Iurray to be Baneift this realme ; and to pals furth thairof witliin aucht
dayes ; and nevir to returne agane within the famyn, vnder the pane of deid :
Qululk was pronunceit aganis the faidis perfounes for Dome. And continewit

' Vule, Christmas. " Stithy, a smith's anvil. ' See his trial. Mar. 20, 1598. He was beheaded at the market*
cross of Edinburgh, along with George Rattray, for manslaughter.

33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 101

the pronunceing of dome aganis the faid Thomas Frcifer, quhill he was forder
avyfit thairwith.

* <!^fen*' — Cafeiitff ttstulous SJittevest.

Dec. 4. — WiLLiAME Wii.LiAMSOUNE, iiierchand-burges of Edinburgh.
Dilatit of contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in taking of ffyftene markis
for the lane" of ilk hunder of foure hundreth markis, lent be him to Gylbert
Maiftertoun and Johne Mofnian, merchandis burgeffis of Edinburgh ; committit
at the feiftis of Whitfounday and Martimes 1598, and Whitfbunday 1589 yeiris ;
and for taking of fyftene markis for the lane of ilk hundreth markis of fourtene
hundreth markis, lent be him to Williame Scott of Balwerie ; (thairby) committand oker." — Continued to Feb. 8.

* (J^Iui* — Caluitff usui*iou9 %\\ttKt%t

Dec. 4. — Mergaret Tindall (Tinwall), the relict of vraq'° Archibald Dowglas of Stanypeth.
Dilatit of Okeran, and contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in taking
yeirlie of tuentie markis for the annuel-rent of ilk hunder merkis of fewin hundreth merkis, lent be hir to Johne Harlaw, as principal, Robert Scott and Johne
Bannatyne, burgeffis of Edinburgh, his cautioneris. — Continued to Feb. 8.^

\_Mr Robert Murray, Justice-Depute.']

Dec. 14. — Alexander Guthrie, eldar of Kincaldrum, Dauid Guthrie,
younger of Kincaldrum, Johne Rynd, younger of Kerfe, Arthour Erlkyn, portioner of Auchterforfar, Gedeon Guthrie, in
Lytill Lowre, Williame Guthre of Langlandis of Guthrie,
Alexander Guthrie, fear of that Ilk.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vniq'*" James Guthrie, fone to Alexander Guthrie (elder) of that Ilk ; committit in Junij laftbypaft.
Persewar, Mr Robert Lyntoune, Aduocat fubltitute.

The Juftice continewis this mater to the morne ; and the AfTyfe comperand,
war wairnit perfonalie to compeir the morne ; ilk perfoun, vnder the pane of
twa hundreth mark.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, aduocat.
Dec. 15. — Continued to xviij of Dec. ; the Inqueift of new to compeir
the faid day.

Dec. 18. — Continued to the Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Forfare, or
foner vpoune xv dayis wairning.

1 Loan, usage or interest. ^ Usury, extorting usurious or unlawful iatcrest for the use 9f

money lent. ^ No farther proceedings are recorded.

102 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1599-

* €\)t first Sag of tfje ^tix appointit to be i\)t first 30as of aanuair

ItixMt,'

[The following curious document, which was referred to in a Note to p. 1,
(Mar. 15, 1568-9,) is now, for the first time, printed from tlie Records of the
Privy Council. It was uniformly acted on throughout the kingdom after the
first day of January, 1 600.]

Apud Haliruidhous, xvij Decemhris, lxxxxix° (1599.)

The Kingis Maiestie and Lordis of his Secreit Counfall, vndirflanding,
that, in all vtheris Weill governit commoun welthis and ciuitreyis, the firfl day
of the 5eir begynis jeirlie vpoun the firfl day of Januare, commounlie callit
' New 5EIRIS Day ;' and that this realme, onlie, is different fra all vtheris, in
the compt and reckning of the 3eiris : And his Maieftie and Counfall, willing
that thair falbe na difconformitie betuix his Maieftie, his realme, and liegis and
vtheris nichtbouris cunti'e5is, in this particular ; bot that thay fall conforme
thame felffis to the oi'dour and cuftum obferuit be all vtheris cvmtreyis ; efpecialie, feing the courfe and feafoun of the 3eir is maift projiir and anfuerabill
thairto, and that the alteratioun thairof importis na hurte nor preiudice to ony
pairtie : Thairfoir, his Maieftie, with aduife of the Lordis of his Secreit
Counfall, Statutis and Ordanis, that, in all tyme cuming, the fii'ft day of the
3eir fal begin, 3eirlie, vpoun the firft day of Januar ; and tliir prelentis to tak
executioun, vpoun the firft day of Januare nixtocum ; qidiilk falbe the firft day
of the I™, and fex hundreth 3eir of God : And thairfoir, Ordanis and Commandis
the Clerkis of his liienes Seffioun and Signet, the Directour and ^^''rittaris to the
Chancellarie and Preuey Seall, and all vtheris Jugeis, Writtaris, Notaris and
Clerkis within this realme, that thay and euerie ane of thame, in all tyme heirefter, date all thair decreittis, infeftmentis, charteris, feafingis, letteris and wi'ittis
quhatfumeuir, according to this prefent ordinance ; compting the firft day of the
3eir, fra the firft day of Januare 5eirlie ; and the firft day of the P. and Vj<^ 3eir
of God, fra the firft day of Januare nixtocum. And Ordanis publicatioun to be
maid heirof, at the mercat-croceis of the heid burrowis of this realme ; quhairthrow, nane pretend ignorance of the fame.

Dec. 19.— WiLLiAME M'lxToscHE of Effeich, Duncan Mlntofche, fone
to Lauchlane M'^Intofclie of Donachtan, and others.
Comperit Mr Donald Campbell, and produceit our fouerane lordis lettres,
deulic execute and indorfat, imrcheft be Allefter M'Gregour of Glenftray, as
Cheif and neir kynnifman to vmq'" Patrik ]\FGregour, in Cadderlie, Johne Hay
of Vrchye, as brother, with the kyn and freindis of vmq''^ W'illiame Hay ; and
ficlyke, Johne M'Coneill Vlntail3eour, fone to vmq'' Donald IVflntailseour, in

33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 103

Barglas, and Donald IVrGilleis, as fader to vmq'° Dowgall M'Gilleis ; to tak
Ibuerte of Williame M^Intofche of Efleich, Duncan M^Intolche, fone to Lauchlane M''Intofche of Donachtan, and diuers vtheris perfonis thairin contenit ; be
the quhilkis Lettres, the faidis perfonis ar, vpoune the fevint day of December
inftant, denunceit rebellis, and put to the home, in default of finding of fouerte,
to haif coniperit befoir the Juftice or his deputis, to half vnderlyne the law for
the flauchter of the faidis vmq'" perfonis. Quhairvpoune he alkit actis and
inftrumentis.

^I^ootiitfl ot WiiQ^ntfi ana Pstolets — ^amijesettinjj tijt l^ic|;I)Ujai>,

Dec. 27. — Alexander Blair, of Bagray.

Dilatit for beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and piftulettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament, and vmbefetting of the hie gait and palfage to
Johne Creychtoune of Inuernytie, in his cuming hame to his duelling-place of
Inuernytie, and fchuting of hagbuttis and piftulettis at him ; committit vpoiui
the xix day of September laflbypall.

Williame Bonar of RofFye become jilege and fouertie for Alexander Blair of
Bagray, that he fall compeir before our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis,
the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Perth, or foner, vpoiuie
XV dayis wairning, and vnderlye the law, &c.

|l?amfsu(6eit — ^Iausi)tei\

Jan. 8, 1600. — Thomas Gairdyn of Legatftoune.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Alexander Guthrie of that
Ilk ; committit in the moneth of October, the yeir of God, I™.VMxxx and fewin
yeiris, be way of Hame-fuckin, befyde the Place of InuerpefTer, vpoune fett purpois, provifioune, auld feid and foirthocht fellony.

Persewar, Alexander Guthrie, younger of that Ilk.

The pannell produceit our fouerane lordis RemifRoune vnder the Greit Seill,
of the daitt, att Aberdene, the firft day of Auguft, I^.V. fourfcoir and nyne yeiris,
gi'antit be his hienes for the faid cryme, and tuik him thairto : Quhilk was adjnittit be the Juftice-depute, quha ordanit him to find cautioun and fouirtie to fatilfie the jiartie, as law will : Lyke as, the faid Thomas, for obedience of the faid ordinance, ffand Williame Stewart of Seytoun,GeorgeGardin of Latoune, and him fel(f.

|t?amesu(feeu — ^lau0!;tei\

Jan. 8. — Dauid Gairdin, brother-german to Thomas Gardin of Legatftoune.
Dilatit for airt and pairt of the faid crime, was adjudged to be denounced
rebel, and put to the horn, for non-appearance to vnderlie the law ; and Dauid
Peiribun of Cairny, his cautioner, was amerciated iu the pain of 100 marks.

104 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

\_Mr WiUlame Hairf, Jus/ke-Dejmfe.l

Feb. 15. — Alexander Hay of Dalgettie.'

Dilatit for the crjane of Adulterie ; coinniittit with Barbara Foi-bes, his alJedgeit fpoiis.

The Laird of Delgattie takis iuflnimentis of his entrie, and proteflis for relief of his cautioner.

The Juftice continewis to the xij of Maixh nixtocura. Johiie Fi'afer of
Creichie becomes fouirtie, &c.

dTorstvi) — dTalsiflM" fl niitJ rountevfnliiici: a (C gaiter, ^f»

Feb. 15. — Fynlay Feknie, lone to vmq''' Alexander Fernie of Nig,

Robert Innes, notare, and James Tarbart, wryter.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the ffalfifeing, fforgeing and counterfitting of ane

fals Chartoiir and Inftrument of Seafing ; quhilk Chartour is alledgeit maid be

A-mq'° Alexander Feme of Nig to vmq'^ Alexander Feme, his fone and apperand

air, See.

[The Dittays are each inserted at length in the Record. That against James
Tarbet's only is here given, the others being little else than repetitions in point
of form.]

DiTTAY against James Tarhetf.

.Tames Tarbett, Ye ar indytit and accufit, for being airt and pairt of the flFurgeIng, flfein'^eing and
counterfitting of ane falfe Chartour, as maid be vmq'* Alexander Feme of Kig to vniq'^ Alexander
Feme, liis fone and apperand air, of all and haill the fyve oxgait of land of Pitcal5ean, twa oxgait of
land callit the Quarter-land of Nig, nith the fourt pairt of the kill thairof, and fuperioritie of ane oxgait of land in Meig, and of the Croftis callit ^SPWaldene, M'^Coreis, Croft-cuUin, Ballafmath, Sraythifcroftis, Meringis and thair pertinentis ; daitit the xx day of Marche, the yeir of God I^.V^.lxxv yeiris,
albeit writtin be yow, and Johne Kennedie at vour command, according to the haill tennour of the
bodie thairof, within thir nyne or ten yeiris lanbypafl, .iff ane copie thairof in paper, delyuerit to yow
be Johne Irving and Fynlay Feme; to quhome ye redelyuerit the faid Chartour, writtin be yow, and
at your command, as faid is, in parehement ; to the effect, the famyii niycht be to thanie ane principal
Chartour; the dait of the famyn beand ane pairt of the bodie of the Chartour, being fourtene or fyftene
yeiris anteriour to the vryting of the famyn : Lyke as, within thre dayes eftir the wryting of the faid
Chartour, ye faw Fynla Feme, in Kait Thomas taveme, at the drynking of ane pynt of vyne with ane
Johne Inving, fublVryve the famyn with his luind, with the name of ' Alex' Feme,' his fader: Quhilk
Chartour is improvin,- and declarit falfe and fein^eit aganis the faid Fynla Feme, inforo confrailii/o-,
rio, be the Lordis of Counfale; and he ordanit to be pwneifl in liis perfoun and guidis for the famyn ;
quhairof ye are airt, pairt, red and counfale, and lies coneeillit the fiimyn.

Per.sewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Prelocl'utol'RIs for James Tarbert, ^Fr Richard Spcns, Mr Thomas W'illoune.
Of the quhilk Dittay, the faid James Tarbett become in our fouerane lordis will.

' See Nov, 25, 1598, &c ' By Action of Hcduction-Improbation on the ground of forgery, &c.

33JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 105

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Thomas Inglis, in Paflay, chancellar, ffand and pronunceit the faidis F'mla Femie and Robert Tunes cnlpabill
and convict of the crymes refpectiue aboue writtin.

Sentence. The Juftice-depute, be the month of Robert Galbraith, dempftar of the faid Court, ordanit thame to be tane to ane Gibbet, befyde the mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair
movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Feb. 16. — AssisA,Jitj)er Jac. Turhet.

Sir Jo° Creychtoun of Inuernytie, Williame Hay of Liiiplum, Dunbar of Entirkyn,

Sir Ja" Eilmeiftoune of Duntr,iitli, Mr James Watfoune, portionerof Gawin Hammiltoune of Roploch,
Somervell elder of Cam- Sauclitoune-hall, . Edward Maxwell of Tynwall,

netlian, Crawfurd of Beircroftis, Awlay M^Caulay of Ardincapell,

Sir James Maxvell of Calderwod, Jo. Robertfoune of Smythftoune, James Carmicliaell of Pitylchaw.
Joliiie Blair of Bagillo, Mr George Frafer in Edinburgh,

Mr Thomas Hamiltoune of Driuncarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord, produceit the Warrand vnderwrittin.

Rex,

Justice, Juflice-Clerk and 3 our deputis, We greit 30W weill. It is oure will, and We
command 30W, that, vpoune )'e fycht heirof, 5e put James Tarbet, wryter, to the knawledge of ane
Affyis, for fe cryme of ft'alfet, confeflit be him, in his Depofilioune ; and efter his convictioune, that
3e pronunce Jie dome of hanging aganis him, and caufe him immediatlie to be execute to fe deid ;
As 36 will anluer to ws vpoune 30ur offices and obedience: Quhairanent, thir prefentis falbe your
W^arrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Halyi'uidehous, the xvj day of Februar, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Verdict. Tlie Aflyis, be the mouth of thair chanceller, Sir James Edmeiftoune of Duntraith, kny', ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid James Tarbet
to be ffylit, cnlpabill and convict of airt, pairt, red, counfall and conccling of the
fforgeing, ffein5eing and ffalfefeing of the faid Chartour, as is contenit in the
accufatioune aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence. To be tane to ane Gibbett, befyde the mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to
be efchete, &c.

Feb. 16. — Williame Craig of Craigftoune.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the cruell Ilauchter of ^•mq'° Patrik Forbes of
Carnehill ; committit in the moneth of Maij 1579, on the landis of Carnehill, of
fett purpoife, prouifioune and foirthocht fellounie.

For quhilk actioun the faid Williame tuik him to his Maiefteis Ref])ect, (Refpite,) under his hienes Priuie Seill, At Halyruidhous, Februar xx, 1585 ; and
flfund Patrik Lord Glammis, and him feltF fouirtie, conjunctlie and feuerallie, to
latisfie the parteis, conforme to law.

VOL. II. O

106

CRIMINAL TRIALS.

A.D. IGOO.

[J/;- IViU'tam Haert and Mr Rohert Murray, Justices-Deputes.']

mmnci from tTje c?arl of Slusus' Uaiti at Bumfiits.

Feb. 2L— George Campbell of ( Plegio, Daniele Cwiiinghame de

Dal1

"to'
beythe.

Domino Haning.

Archibalclo Lokert biu'gen de Ed".
( Difdiargeit, in relpect proviu he duellis
\ in Glafgow, Sec.

Domino Lochnox*eis.

Domino Corfbie.

Domino Bar.

Domino Edentoune.

Domino Carnell.

Abfent.

Domino Carnell.

Jofias Stewart de Boningtoune.
( Continewit tertio Itineris xv dierum :
\ Plegio, Job. Cathcart de Carltoune.

Domino Ardmillene.

Domino Locbnoreis.

Eodem.
( Difdiargeit be the Thefaurar, in relpect
\ of his aige, with confent.

Abfent.

Domino Lodinoreis.

Domino Barganye.

Eodem.

Domino Carltoune.

Abfent.

Gilberto Kennedy de (Bai'gany ?) tertio
Itineris xv dierum.

Domino Auchindrane.

Domino Dunduff.

Abfent.

Domino Kelwod.

Domino Carltoune.

Domino Knokda.

Domino Carltoune.

Cefnok,
Johnne Schaw of Sornebeg,
George Lokart of Bar,

Mr Matho Rofe of Haning,

Johnne Wallace of Carnell,
Dauid Blair of Edentoim,
Williame Dumbar of Entirkyn,
Dauid FouUertoun of Corfbie,
Edward 'Wallace of Seweltoune,
.Hary Stewart of Barfkimming,
Williame Crawfurd of Lochnoreis,
Hew Cwninghame of Laigland,

Allane Lord Cathcart,

Johnne Cathcart of Cairltoune,
Johnne Dalrumpill of Stair,
Johnne Campbell of Shaukiftoune,

Bernard Fargviefoun of Kilcairren,

Hew Kennedj' of Girvanmanis,
Johnne Corry of Kelwod,
Hugh Kennedy of Bennene,
Walter Mwir of Cloncaird,
Thomas Kennedy of Ardmillane,
"Walter Kennedy of Knokdone,

Johnne Kennedy of Blaquhane,

Matho Stewart of Dunduff,
Johne IMure of Auchindrane,
INIr Lambert Kennedy of Kirkmichell,
Johnne Dauidfoun of Pennyglene,
Fargus Kennedy of Knokda,
Johnne M^Alexander of Dakeoch,
Gylbert Kennedy of Bargany.

Dilatit for abyding fra the Leutennentis Raid of Drumfreis, aj)pointit be
Archebald Erll of Angus to half conveuit thairat.

{

33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 107

Comperit Joline Halytlay Aduocat, and produceit the Warrand vnderwrittin,
for Glrvunmanis, {Hew Kennedy,) and allegeit that the Juftice could nocht vnlaw his cautioner, nor adiudge him felflf to the home.

Rex,

Thesaurer, Aduocat, Juftice, Juftice Clark with 5 our deputtis, We greit 50W weill.
Vnderftauding, tliat our rycht traift coufing and counfalour, Aiidro Lord Vchiltrie, his kyn freindis,
men, tenneiitis, feruandis and dopendaris wer, vpoun fe refpect of James Dowgias of Torthonvald
being in fe cumpany of our ryclit traift coufing the Erll of Angus our Leutennent for fe tynie, exemit
frome his jurifdictioun and obedience of his Proclamatiounis publeifcliit for convening of our fubiectis
within ])e boundis of his Leutennandrie ; and that noehtwithftanding 5e our faidis Tiiefaurer and aduocat hes raiit our vjieris lettres at 3 our inftance, and aniangis v])eris hes cauiit chairge Hary Stewart
of Barfkymming and (Hew) Kennedy of Girvanmanis, twa fpeciall kynnifmen, freindis to our faid
couGng the Lord Vchiltrie, to corapeir before 50W our Juftice and 3 our deputis, vpoun the xxj day
of Februar inftant, to vnderly our lawis within our Tolbuith of Edinburgh, ft'or alledgeit nocht obedience of our Proclaniatioun, chargeing fubiectis within Jie boundis of Kyle, Carrik and Cwninghame,
to meit our ft-id Leutennant att Drumfres, vpoun ]ie . . . . day of laftbypaft, for Jie furtherance and aduancement of our feruice, att our Weft Bordour. It is fairfoir our will, and We command
30W, our faid Thefaurer and achiocat, ])at vpoun ])e fycht heirof, 50 pafs frome }ie perfuit of ]>e faidis
Hary and (Hew) for ]ie laid taus, and deleit Jiair names furlh of J)e criminall i'ummondis intentit att
30ur inftances aganis Jiame. And lykewyife, that 36 our Juftice and Juftice Clark difpence with fair
non-comperance of ]ie faid perfounes l)efor ^ow at ])e faid dyett ; and on nawyis vnlaw or proceid
aganis fame or fair cautioneris, for fair nocht coraporance att f e fame dyett, noehtwithftanding of ony
vfer command, gewin or to be gewin to 30W in the contrar ; as 50 and ilkane of 50W will be anfuerabill to ws vpoun :;;our office and obedience; Quhairanent fir prufentis fallbe 3 our Warrand. Subicryuit with our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the .... day of Februar, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

MoNTROisE CANCELLARius, Lennox, R. Cokburne, Jo. Prestoune, Fyvie.

The faid Johne Halyday produceit ane Letter fubfcryuit be the King and
Counfall, difchargeing the Juftice of all proceding aganis the Laird of Capr'ni'
toune, &c.

We vnderftanding that our louittis, William Cwninghame of Caprintounc and Danioll Cwninghame of Dalbeyth, being chargeit be vertew of Proclamatioune, to haif mett our rycht traift coufing,
Williame Erll of Angus, our Leutennent and Wardane of our Weft Marcheis, att Drumfreis, or fie
vfer pairtis contenit in our faid Proclaniatioun, for perfuit of f e difobedient perfounis witliin our faid
Wardanrie, in fe monetli of Februar, r".Wlxxxxviij 3eiris: And fat for obedience fairof, and command of our faid Proclamatioune, thay addreflit fame felffis in weirlie maner witli fair freindis and
feruandis to our faid raid ; and James Dowgias of Torthorrell, being our vebell, and lying att our
home, for ]ie tlauciiter of our vmq''' coufing, James Stewart of Newtonne, and fair neir kynnifman,
being fan in cumpany att f e faid raid with our faid Leutennent ; fwa that the faidis Williame Cwningf
liame of Caprintoune, George Campbell of Cefuok, nor the faid Daniell Cwninghame, could nocht
guidlie remane att our faid raid, (the faid James Dowgias being in fair cumpany) : Quhairvpoun tliay
haifing than nienit fame vnto ws. We, for efchewing of gritar inconuenient, than failhfullie promittit
in verbo principis, and gave licence to fame, fair freindis and feruandis, to pas hame fra our faid Raid,
&nd that thay fould faireftir, att na tyme addres fame felffis to ony raid witli our faid Leutennent,
(the faid James Dowgias being in cumpany with him,) hot that thay fould remane att liamc, and incur

108 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600na fkaytli nor danger |>airtlirow.' And als, that the faidia Williame, George and Daniel), being lykewyis cbargeit agane, to liaif mett with our laid Leutennent att our laid burcb of Drumfreile, vpon ]>e
xxij day of September laftbypaft, (witb quhom the faid James Dowglas wes fan in curapany,) fwa
that thay mycbt not ad(h-es fame felffis fairto : Tbairfoir, and according to our faid promeis, we liaif
frelie Remittit, and be fir prefentis Remittis the laidis Williame Cwninghame, George Campbell and
Daniell Cwninghame fair kyn, freindis and feruandis of all offence, cryme and panis committit be
fame, for abyding fra f e faidis raidis or ony of fame ; Difchargeing heirfore our Thefaurer, Aduocat,
Juftice, Jullice-deputis and vf eris officeris quhatfumevir, of all calling, atteiching, areilling, poinding,
vnlawing, trubling or intrometting with f e faidis perfonis, thair freindis or feruandis, or ony of fame,
for abyding fra f e faidis raidis or ony of fame, and of fair offices in fat pairt for ewir ; nochtwithllanding ony lettres, proclamatiounes and charges direct fairanent : Quhairanent and haill panis contenit fairiii, We haif difpenfit, and difpenfis be fir prefentis. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the x^j day of Februar, 1600. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Lenox, Montroise, Cassillis, Vchiltrie, Fyvie, Blantvre, Secretarius,

The Juftice continewis to gif anfuer to the Kingis twa Lettres produceit, to
the morne.

It is allegeit na proces agaiiis the Laird of Blarquhan, iu refpect of the Leutemientis Licence produceit, to remane fra the Raid ; and that he had xxiiij
perfonis dependeris at the Raid.

We Williame Erll of Angus, Lord Dowglas and Abimethie, Lieutennent to his Maiellie
owr fe Eift, Well and Middill jNIarchis of Scotland anent Ingland, be fe tennour heirof gewis and
grantis Licence and libertie to fe rycht honourabill John Kennedie of Blaquhane, elder, to remane
and abyde att liame fra our Raid and Proclamatioune, quhilk is proelameit be ws to convene att Drumfreis, the xxij day of f is inltant of September, and f aireftir to pass forwart with ws towardis f e Borclouris, and fair remane, with xx dayis prouifioune, according to our Proclamatioune : Quhilk we be
fis prefent promittis and grantis f is our Licence to fe faid Johne Kennedy of Blaquhan to remane
and byde at hame fra our faid Raid and Proclamatioun ; And that in refpect of his prefent difeife :
Be fis prefent, fubfcryuit with our hand, Att Drumfreis, the xviij day of fis inftant of September, a
thowfand fyve hundreth fourfcoir and nyntene 5eiris; befoir f ir witneflis, Williame Bannatyne of
Corhous, Williame Cwninghame tutour of Bonytoune.

(Sic fubfcribitur) W. Angus, Leu".

It is allegeit be 3Ir JSIatho Hoije of Haining, that he Aves nocht fubiect to
the Proclamatioun, becaus he duelt the tyme of the Proclamatioun, and ane 5eir
befoir and fenfyne in Glafgw ; and he lies nocht ane hous in Kyle. — The Aduocat allegis the contrar : In refpect of the fummondis, he fowld be put to ane
Aflyfe and thai fould cognos thairvpoun.

It is allegeit for Bernard Farguesoun, that he is paft the age of the Proclamatioune : Quhilk alledgeance wes admittit be the Juftice, and he difchargeit
and put away.

' This Letter affords a striking illustration of the insecure and disturbed state of the country, and
the weakness of Government. Douglas of Torthorwald, residing so near the Borders, seems to liave
been too powerful a subject to be sued, even for the Slauchter of a Steuart, ' cousin to the King.' Although at the Horn for this Slauchter, the Lieutenant scruples not to accept of the assistance of this re»
bellious subject to restore peace on the Borders, instead of delivering him up to justice for his crimes !

33JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 109

It is allegeit for the Laird of Seweltoun, that he hes nather land nor heretage ; and thairfoir, nocht fubiect to the Proclamatioune. — The Aduocat allegis
that he fould pafs to ane Aflyfe.

The Pannell cummis in (the King's) Will ; except fa mony as produceit the
Kingis Warrand.

Feb. 22. — The quhilk day comperit Sir Hew Campbell of Terrin3eane,
knycht, and produceit our fouerane lordis Will ; and defyrit it to be infert and
regiftrat, &c.

The Kingis Will for the JBarrounis of Kyle and Carrik.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 3 our deputis ; We greit 30W weill. Forfameklll as the perfounes vnderwrittin, thay ar to fay, Johnne Schaw of Sornebeg,' &c. become laitlie in our will, for
])air remaning and byding att hame fra }>e oill^ and Raid proclameit and appointit to half mett with
our Leutennent in Drumfreis, vpoun pe . . . . day of September lart. Thairfore, We haif declai'it
cure will as foUowis, to witt : That We haif Renunceit and difchargeit, and be pir prefentis renunceis
and difchargeis all actioune and cans, criminall and ciuile, quhilk We had, haue, or ony wyis may haue,
move or perfew, aganis ])e faidis perfounes for pe caus foirfaid : And Remittis and forgewes fiame
frelie for ewir : And Ordanis this our declaratioun of our Will, to be als effectuall for ])air fuirtie in
tyme cuming, as gif thay had pavticuler Remifliounis Jiairvpoune vnder our greit leill. Oure will is
heirfore, and We command 50W to pronunce and delyuer ])is oure will, judicialle ; and caus thir prefentis be actit and regiftrat in our buikis of Adiornall : As alfo, that je deleit furth of our faidis
buikis, ))e Act quhairby Hew Kennedy in Balloch wes vnlawit for nocht entrie of Walter Kennedy of
Knokda, minor, before 30W for ])is fame caus : As 3e will anfuer to ws jiairvpoune : Quhairanent thir
prelentis falbe vnto 50W ane warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the xxij day of
Februar, 1600. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES K.

Quhilk the Juftice caufit publeife Judiciallie, and declarit to be our foverane
lordis will, as is aboue writtin : Quhair\7)oune the perfounes on pannell prefent
for the tyme aflvit actis and inftrumentis. — The Juftice admittit the Letteris
produceit, &c.

[ilf/- Williame Hairf, Justice- Dejmte.']

Mar. 4. — Williame Stewaut brother (german) to the Lord Vchiltre,

and "W^illiame Stewart fone naturall to Sir Williame Stewart

of Carftairis, kny'.

Mawife Aikraan, the relict of vmq'^ Robert Cathcart, (wryter in Edinburghe)

produceit our fouerane lordis lettres deulie execute and indorfat, purcheft be hir

felff with the bairnis and kyn and freindis of the faid vmq'" Robert, for chargeing of Walter Mure of Cloncaird, as cautioner and fouerte for AVilliame Stewart

brother to the Lord Vchiltrie, and Williame Stewart fone naturall to Sir '\\i\-

' It has been thought unnecessary to repeat the names. ' Host, army.

no CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

liame Stewart of Carftairis, kuy', this day, &c. to vnderlye the Law for the
llauchter of the faid vmq"= Robert, (committit the third day of Junij, 1.590 :)
Quhairvpoun fc-ho alkit inftrumeutis and proteftit for relief of AUane Cathcart
of Drumjowan, cawtioner for reporting of the faidis Lettres to this day.

The Juftice (in obedience to a AVarrand from the King) continewis this dyet
to the morne, the fyft day of IMarche inftant.'

Mar. 5. — Continewis the mater to the xxix day of IVIaij. — "SVilliame
Stewart of Seytoune becomes pledge and Ibuirtie that thay fall compeir, &c.

]\Iaij 29. — The perfones on panuell takis inftrumentis of thair compearance, and proteftis for releve of thair cawtioune ; and als, in refpect that na
partie comperit to perfew thame, produceit the Extract of our Ibuerane lordis
Remiffioune, qiihairof the tennour followis.

Preceptum Remissionis Willehni Stewart fratris Andree domini Stewart de Vchiltre, et Willelmi Stctcart Jilij quondam domini Willelmi Steicarf tie Houjtoune, pro arte et parte Interfectionis

quondam Roberti Cathcart fcribe die nienfis anno domini^ l^.V". nonagelimo comuiiff. ; ac pro omnibus actione et crimine que inde fequi aut prenominatis perfonis inde quouifmodo
imputari poterint, &c. Apud Falkland, decimo quarto die menfis Augufli, anno domini niilleiimo
quincentefimo nonageiimo nono.

Hec efi vera copia albreuialionis, Precepti RemiJJionis fvprajcript. content, in libra Secreti Sigilli

J. d. n. regis extract, de eodem capiat, et collationat. per me Daniele.m Hay, notarimn publicum
ac ejvfdem Secreti Sigilli fcriham.

Mar. 8. — Robert Tulloch of Tannoquheis, and Alexander TiiUoclie,
his fone and apperand air.
Dilatit for airt and pairt of the llauchter of vmq'" Williame Dovvglas fone to
Williame Dowglas of Erlifmyll."

Comperit the Aduocat, and produceit ane Precept direct fra his Maieftie ;
quhairof the tennour followis.
Rex,

Mr Thomas Hammiltoux of Drumcarne our aduocat. It is our will, and We command 50W, that 36 perfew our criminall lettres, rafit att ])e inllancc of James Dowglas, and remanent
bref, kyn and freindis of vmq" Williame Dowglas, fone to Williame Dowglas of Erlifmyll aganis
Alexander Tulloch, fone and apperand air to Robert Tulloch of Tannochie, for vnderlying of our Jawis
for ]ie flauchter of ]ie faid vniq'"' Williame Dowglas : And that 59 infill with the faidis perfewaris, in
perfuit of fe faidis Lettres the aucht day of March inftant, or ony v])er day or dayes neidfull and convenient; kepand )>ir prefentis for jour Warrand : And this je faill nocht to do, nochtwithflanding of
ony command gewin or to be gewin in Jie contrar. Subfcryuit witli our hand, Att Halyiuidhous, the
aucht day of IMarch, 1600. (Sic fnbfcribitm-) JAMES If.

Comperit INIr Johne Scharpe aduocat, and produceit ane Warrand fubfcryuit
be his Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followis.

' See May 18, 1604. ^^ See Jan. 2, and Mar. 8, 1598.

33JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. IH

' Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 50m- doputis, We greit 50W weill. Foifamekill as We ar
infonuit that Robert Tulloch of Tannoqnliie is cliaigeit as cautioner for Alexander Tulloch liis lone,
to enter and prefent the faid Alexander, vpoune ])e aueht day of March, befoir 30W, to vnderly our
law for alledgeit airt and pairt of the flaucliter of vmq''' Williarae Dowglas, fone to William Dowglas
of Erlifmyll. It is our will, and We command 50W, for diuers cauffis moving ws, to luflcr and permitt the faid dyett to the faxtene day of Maij nLxt ; and that 56 defift and ceis fra all calling, vnlawing or proceding aganis the faiJ Robert Tulloch, or aganis the faid Alexander Tulloch his fone, the
faid day, for fair nocht comperance, Quliairanent we difpens be ]iir prefentis, difchargeing 30W Jiairof,
and of 3 our office in Jiat pairt ; and that noclitwitlillanding ouy vfir command or Warrand, gewin or
to be gewin to 30W on ])e contrar : As 50 will anfuer to Ws v|)oun 30ur obedience. Subfcryuit with
our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the audit day of Mairch, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Comperit the Gudeman of Erlifmyll, togidder with Mr Thomas Hammiltoune,
and produceit ane vtlier Warrand llibfcryuit be his Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 30ur deputtis. We greit 50W haertlie weill. It is our will, and
We command 50W, that incontinent eftir ])e fycht heirof, ye proceid and minifter in fe actioune and
cans perfewit att Jie inftance of ]ie kyn and freindis of vniqie Williarae Dowglas, fone to Williame
Dowglas of Erlifmyll, the audit day of March inftant, aganis Alexander Tulloch, apperand of Tannocheis, and his cautioner, for ])e crewall flaucliter of fe faid vinqj^ Williame Dowglas ; and that but
ony prorogatioun, continewatioune or delay to be giantit ; and that nochtwithflanding of ony Precept
or command, purcheft or to be purcheft, in Jie contrar heirof, Quhilk We annull be ]nr prefentis. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the aueht day of March, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The faid Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcarne adiiocat lykewyis alledgeit,
that the laft Precept fould be admittit, in i-eQiect of the Act of Parliament, defyring juftice to be miniftrat ; and that the Precept produceit be Mr Johne
Scharp audit nocht to be admittit, in refpect it is contrar the Act of Parliament,
and that my Lord of Angus declarit that it wes his Maiefteis will that the laft
Precept fould tak place, feing that he at the granting of the fyrft wes wrangullie inform it.

The Juftice-Depute, m3aiding to half continewit the mater to Tyifday nixtocum, quhill the Kingis Maiefteis mynd wes knawin, ordanit Mr Johne Scharp,
producar of the Precept for Robert and AJexander Tulloch, to find cautioun for
the entrie of the faid Alexander Tulloch the laid day ; quha refufit to find the
faid cautioun : And in refpect thairof, Ordanit the faid Robert Tulloch to be vulawit for nocht entrie of the faid Alexander Tulloch his fone ; and the faid
Alexander to be denunceit rebell and putt to the horne.

Iay of Delg
■ See Nov. 25, 1598, Feb. 15, 1600, &c.

Mar. 12. — Alexander Hay of Delgatie.'

]12 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Dilatit for the cryme of Adulterie, comniittit with Barbara Forbes his allegeit fpous.

Continued to July x. Johne FrilTell of Creichie becomes plege and fouertie.

i3rii)iIe0W of if)t jfanilti? of ^tJbocates — ^ot liable to pass tipoit

Assists,

l\Iar. 12. — Mr James M'Gii.l of Rankelowr-Nethir, Aduocat, allegeit,
that becaus he is ane ordinar Aduocat, lawfullie admittit be the Lordis of CounIhll, Avith all pi'evilegeis and immuniteis ; thairfoir he audit nocht to pafs rpoune
onj' Inqueift : And for verificatioune thairof, remittit the famyn to the notorietie
of the Juge and haill meniberis of Coiu-t : Quhilk, the faid Juge acknawlegeing
to be of veritie, thairfoir lies declarit and declairis, that the faid Mr James is frie
fra all AfTj-ffis, and audit nawyife to be \ailawit for his abfence thairfra at ony
tjnne heirefter, during all the dayes of his lyftyme, in refpect of the Privilege of
his faid Office. — QuhairA-poune the faid ]\Ir James alkit inftnunentis.

^laurjTjttr.

INIar. 12. — Axdro Mviiray of Bahvaird and Anthon MuiTay his ferM'and.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vinq'" Dauid Lundie, fone to Mr
George Lundie of Gorthie ; coinmittit \T)oun the xxv of INIareh 1598 yeiris, belyde Inglis-Tarbert, vpoune fett pm-poife, provifioune, and foirthocht fellonye.

Persewar, Walter Lundie, as brother.

The Juftice, with confent of partie, continewis this mater to the morne, the
xiij of IMarch inftant, &c.

I\Iar. 13. — Sir Johne Creychtoune of Inuernytie, as cawtioner, was vnlawit and anierciat for nocht entrie of the faidis perfounes, viz. for Andro Murray, in the pane of Ane thowfand markis, and for the faid Anton, twa hundreth
inarkis : Lyke as, the Juftice-deimte adjudgeit the faidis Andro and Anthon to
be denunceit our fouerane lordis rebellis, &c. and all thair movabill guidis to be
efcheit, &c.

[3/r WiUiam Haert and Mr liuhert Mttrrai/, Jnst'ices-Deputes.']

^laugljtti* \\\ a ^iitsle (Comtiat ov 33ufl.

Jun. 5. — RoBEET AuCHMOWTiE clierurgeane, burges of Edinburghe.

[The Editor lias thought this case of so much importance, as to demand the insertion of all the
legal objections and arguments of both parties, which fortunately have been preserved at considerable
length. The Case of Auchmowtie, is the earliest instance preserved on Record, of a party committer
of Manslaughter, in a Duel, or ' Singular-Combat,' suffering death ; where nothing unfair was proven
by the public or private prosecutor. It thoroughly illustrates the state of the Law and practice, and
the opinions then entertained, by the most eminent Scottish lawyers and statesmen, on this interest33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 113

ing subject. The ancient Law, and especially tlie practice, relative to Criminal Trial for single combats, seem to be now imperfectly understood, owing perhaps, in some measure, to the obscure state
of the Records ; for few would choose to encounter the labour, or could afford the time, necessary to
be expended in examining the Books of Adjournal, merely for the purpose of illustrating an individual
case. Although the arguments are somewhat prolix and redundant, it was deemed best to give them
in the precise form in which they stand in the Record.]

Dilatit, of airt and pairt, of the Slauchter of vniq'^ James AVauchop, fone to

George Wauchop of Glegliorne (Cleghorne, burges of Edinburghe) ; committit

the XX day of Ajjiyle laftbypaft.'

Persewaris, George Wauchop of Gieghorno, fader to the defunct; Mr George Wauchop, brother ;

Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, Aduocat.

Preloquutouris for the pannel, Mr Johne Scharpe, Mr Alexander King.

Mr Johne Scharpe and Mr Alexander King produceit ane delyuerance of tlie
Lordis of Coiinfall, purcheft at the inftance of Robert Auchmwtie ; quhairbye
thay ar chargeit to conipeir this day, befoir the Juflice or his deputis, to jn-ocui'e^ in defence of the faid Robert, for the flauchter of the faid vmq'^ James :
Quhairvjjonne thay afkit inftrumentis.

The perfewaris produceit the Dittay underwritten.

DiTTAY against the panncll.

Robert Auchmwtie cherurgean, burges of Edinburghe, ye ar indytit and
accufit, fForfamekill as ye, haifing confauit ane deidlie hatrent and malice aganis
vmq'"' James Vauchope, fone to George Vauchope of Gleghorne, merchand burges of Edinburghe, laitlie, vponnethe xix day of Apryle laftbypaft, tuke on the
Singular-Combat with the faid vmq'" James, but ' licence of oiu* fouerane lord,

' The following account is given by George Birrell, in his ' Diarey,' p. 48. ' The 2 of Apryill, being the Sabothe day, Rohort Auchmuttie, barber, (' baiber-chirurgeon,') lieu James Wachope, at the
Combat, in St Leonardis Hill ; and vpoiie the 23, the laid Robert put in ward in tolbuitlie of Edinburgh. And in the maine tyme of lies being of ward, he hang ane clok without the window of the
irone hous, and ane wtlier within the window thair ; and ikying, that he wes feik and might not lie the
licht. He had aqua forth continuallie feitliing at the irone window, quhill at lell the irone window
wes eittine throw ; fwa, vpone a morneing, he caufit his prentes boy to attend qidien the toune-gaird
fould haue delTolvit; at quhilk tyme the boy wattit on, and gaue his mailler ane tokine that the laid
gaird wer gono, be the Icliaw or waiff of lies hand curche. The laid Robert hang out a tow, quhairon he
thocht to liaue comeit doiine : The faid gaird fpyit the waiff of the hand curche ; and fiva the f.iid
Robert was difiapointit of his iutentiouno anddevyle. And fua, on the 10 day, he wes belieidit at the
Croce upone ane I'caffolt.' ^ To act as Procurators, or Advocates, in defence of the Pannel.

' Without. It was by no means unusual, in these turbulent times, for such licenses to be granted by
the King, both in exercise of his ancient Feudal prerogative, and as the only means which could then
be devised for preventing bloodshed to a more frightful extent. Only a few years before, a remarkable instance is recorded by Birrel, Mar. 15, 1397. ' Ane iingill Combat fochin betuix Adanie Bruiitfeild and James Carinichaell. The faid Adame Bruntfeild challangeit James Carmichaell for murdering of his vmq'"^ brother Stephen Bruntfeild, Capitane of Tantalloune. The faid KAmws. purfcliefl ane
Licience of his M. and faucht the faid James on Barnbowgall Linkis, befoir Fywe thowfand gentihnen ;
And the laid Adanie being bot ane ^oung mane and of a niein (latur, flew the faid James Carmichaell,
he being als abill a lyik man as wes leiweing.' — In a MS. Hist, of Scotland, Adv. Lib. A. 4, 35, it is
recorded, ' thai mett in ane fmall inche be the lie ueir to Barubugell; my Lord Duke and fundrie
utheris being thair Judges.'

\^OL. II. P

114 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

and provokit him thairto, that he vpomie the niorne thairefter, heing the tuentie day of the faid moneth, and the Sabhoth day, fidd ineit yow, bodiii' with
I'word and gautillet, vpoune St Leonardis Craigis,' belyde this burch of Edinburgh, near to our fouerane lordis Palice of Halyrudehous, quhair his Maieftie
was in proper perfoune for the tyme ; and thair to fecht with you the Singularcombat, for certaue iniurious wordis falliu out betuix j'ou and him : Lyke as ye,
vpoune the faid xx day of Ajjryle, being the Sabboth day, airlie in the morning,
betuix fyve and fax houris, accumiJaneit with Athens your complices, come to
the faid place appoyntit, callit St Leonardis Craigis, and thair awaittit vpoune
the faid ^anq"" James cuming to yow ; quha, haifing kepit the faid tryift' at the
laid liour and place, ye and j'our complices foirfaidis fett vpoune the faid vmq'^
James, and maifl fchamefullie and crewallie, with IVordis, ftraik him in the face
and Apoune the held, and gaif him foure bludie woundis thairon ; and thaii'bye
maifl barboroullie, crewallie and tj^rannouflie flcAv the faid ^^nq'' James Vauchojie, Ajjoune fet piu-pois, proviiioune and foirthocht fellonye; in hie contemptiouue, &c.

Akgumexts and Pleadings of the Parties*

Tlie faid Dittay being red, the Pannell afkis inftrumentis of the tennour thairof, and fpeciallie of
that pairt, quhairin it is alledgeit that the pretendit Slauchter contenit tliairin procedit vpoun the provocatioun to ane Singular Combat, and that %'niq''^ James Wauchop refoirtit to tlie place appointit, and
it is alledgeit tliat he wes thair flajme : And alledgeit, that the mater contenit in the Dittay audit
nocht be putt to the Unawledge of ane Affyfe, becaus the faid vmq''' James, the tyme of the faid alledgeit flauchter, and be the fpace of diuers yeiris ofbefore, wes the Kingis rebell, putt to the borne,
for noncompearance, to anfuer to his JNIaieflie and the Coniifall, for the treflbnabill rcllett, intertinnement and intertommoning of vmq'"^ Archibald Wauchop, fumtyme apperand of Nudry-Mercball, than
flandand vnder proces of ftorfaultour, for the caufTis thairin contenit : quhilkis Lettres of Hoirning wcr
execute aganis liim, and wer direct vpoun ane Decreit, gewin be his Maieftie and Lordis of his liienes
Secreit C'ounl'all, of the dait, att Halyruidhous, the xxij day of Febniar I"'.Y'.lxxxx^'j yeiris : And for
verificatioune of the faid alledgeance, the preloquutouris produceit tlie Decreit foii-faid, with the Extract of the Lettres of Hoirning, with the executioun thairof: And thairfore, in caife the Dittay wer
of veritie, quhilk is nocht grantit, the flauchter of ane rebell, qulia had na protectioun be his MaieiUe
nor be the Law, and fpeciallie ^-poun ane Singular-combat takin on be bayth the pairteis, is nocht ane
cryme pwneilabill : And thairfoir, the Dittay fould noclit be put to the knawledge of ane Affyis.

It is anfuerit, be tlie Aduocat and perfewaris, that the alledgeance fuundit rpoun the Hoirning produceit is lunvyis relevant ; becaus the faid Hoirning is and wes null, fra the beginning, and is I'a declarlt be decreit of the Lordis of Counfall and Sedioune, in Maij laft, heirwith produceit : And feing,
it is of lyke^ of the Law, ' nocht to be att the borne,' and ' nocht to be lauchfullie putt to the home,'
the perfoun that wes flayne, newir being lauchfullie denunceit, he man* be repute newir to haif bene

' Furnished or provided with. ' Perhaps that part of Salisburj'-crags opposite to St Leonard'shill, situated within the King's-park ; and then resorted to in affairs of honour. On Mar. 11, 1597,
' Williame Gluffer and James Hepburne ilewane another at the fingell-combat, on the hill callit Sant
Leonardis Craigis. The faid twa ver buriet on tlie monie thairefter.' — Sirrel. ^ Appointed meeting. "I In order to condense these legal disputations as much as possible, they are thrown into a

small-sized type. ^ Alike, of equal import. ^ Must of necessity.

33 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 115

att tlie home : In refpect quhairof, tliis mater aucht to pafs to the tryell of ane Affyfe ; and fpr verificatioun of the anfuer, produceit the faid Decreit. — It is anfuerit be the preloquutouris for the faid
Robert, tliat thair alledgeance is maifl relevant in itt felff, and conchidis necefllirlie : And as to the anfuer, it is na argument aganis the relevancie, bot it apperis to be ane reply to elide the allegeanee, howbeit it wer relevant, and is foundit upoune ane Decreit obtenit before the Lordis of Counfall and Seffioune, prefentlie produceit ; quiillk Decreit the preloquutouris defyris to be red, befoir thay mak ony
forder anfuer tliairto.

The faid Decreit of the Lordis of Counfall and SeOioune being red, the preloquutouris for the defender acceptit the famin in quantum ; and anfuerand to the perfewarls alledgeance, fayis, that the
Hoiming produceit, procedit vpoun the Decreit of his Maieltie and the Lordis of his hienes Secreit
Counfall, for the faid vmq'" James Wauchopis contumacie, being challangoit vpoun ane cryme of Treafoune ; quhairin tlie Lordis of Seffioun nocht being Judgeis competent in the fyrll inllance, mekill les
could thay be Judgeis compitent in the fecund, to retreit' the Decreit of our fouerane lord and Lordis
of his hienes Secreit Counfall ; and fiva, the former Decreit, being alledgeit to be reduceit be tlie
Lordis of Seffioun, quha wer nocht Judgeis, the faid fyrft Decreit ftandis in effect ; and coufequentlie,
the proces of Hoirning following thairvpoune. Attowre the faid Decreit is gewin for null defence and
nocht comperance of my Lord Thefaurer and aduocat nocht comperand, quha wer only fumniond, and
the faid Robert Auchmowtie, qidiais prefens could nocht be milknawin, in refpect of the fact intervenient, and being in preafoun for the challange of the faid alledgeit flauchtei', the tyme of the executioun of the fummonds and deductioun' of the haill proces ; and he was nawyis fummond. And mairowre, the faid actioun of Rediictioune, quhalrv])oun the faid Decreit reductiue procedit, is iiitentltt att
the inftance of Mr George Wauchop, as air apperand, to the effect that he mycht be Retourit ;' and of
his fifteris, to the effect that thay mycht be decernit executouris, to the effect that thay mycht recover
the faid James heretage and movabill guidis, and to that effect allanerlie ; the effect of the Lordis Decreit reductiue can nocht cxceid the inlentioun and defyre of the perfewaris. And qnliair it is alledgeit
be my Lord Aduocat, that the faid proces of Hoirning being reduceit, it is all alyke as gif it had newir bene execute ; it is anfuerit thairto, that the faid allegeanee is alluterlie* irrelevant of the Law,
becaus it is fufficient for the faid Robeitis Defence, that att the tyme of the faid alledgeit flauchter,
thair wes anie decreit of his INIaiertic and lordis of Secreit Counfall llandand, be the quhilk, lettres wer
ordanit to be direct, to denunce him rebell for his non comperance, in ane mater of Treaffoun ; the faid
Decreit beirand that he wes lauthfuliie chargeit and compcrit nocht. Vpoun the quhilk Decreit, our
fouerane lordis lettres of Hoirning wer direct, and the famyn devvlie and lauchfullie execute and dewlie
regiftrat in the Shereffis buikis ; Ava that nane could pretend ignorance thairof : And gewand^ that
the faidis Lordis mycht haif bene Judgis to the Reductioun of the charge^ of the fyrft lettres and to
the Decreit gewin be his Maieftie and the Lordis of Secreit Counfall thairvpoune, quhairvpoun that
pretendit Reductioun procedis, allaneilie" vpoun this reafoune, that the executione of the charge to
compeir befoir his Maiellie and Loirdis of Secreit Counfall, wes nocht fubfcryuit, att the leift, wes
nocht flampit, be the officer : As to tiie fubfcriptioun, it wes nawyis neceffar be the lawis of this realme,
and thairfore the caus of gewing of the faidis Lordis Decreit roan be afcryTiit allanerlie to the wanting
of the flamp. It is alfo of veritie, that the laid James Wauchop continewit in his rebellioune be the
fpace of four yeiris or thairby, and newir quarrellit the famin in his tyme ;'' and thairfore, quhatfumewlr thing is done be the faidis Lordis Decreit audit nawyis pieiudge the Defender in Iiis Defence of
the alledgeit cryine, committit of before, he being now challangeit vpoun the faid alledgeit flauchter. —

> To recall, retract, or set aside. "^ Leadinf;^, carrying on. ^ A form of la^v, px'oeeeding on a writ

issued from Cliancory, by which a person is returned by an Inquest, as heir to a party deceased. * Altogether,

entirely. * Giving, or gi'aiiting, for the sake of argument. ^ An official iiotitication given by a ^lessenger at arms to the party against whom a writ is issued, and certified by the officer serving, in an instrument^ termed an ' Execution," which is usually indorsed upon it. " Only, solely. * During his lifetime.

116 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

And that pairt of my Lord Aduocattis aiifuer, beirand, ' tliat tlie Reductioune of tlie Hoirningis eftir
the flauchter, is alyke as gyf tlie Hoirning had iiewir bene execute,' is allenarlie irrelevant of the Law,
in this mater, and fubiect quhairvpoun the queflion ftaudis ; for, be the Lawis of all natiounis, ane re*
bell, Ipeciallie for ane cans of Treafoun, may be flayne, and that flauchter is nocht pwneifabill be the
lawis ; quhilk is of veritie, nocht only quhen the proces of rebellioun is maift julUie and ordourlie procedit, hot als this famin ground of the law is als trew, quhen be a Decreit of the Prince and his Counfall ony perfoun, challangeit vpoun Treafoun or ony vthir cryme, coniperis nocht bot difobeyis, and
thairfoir is ordenit to be declarit and publeift as rebellis ; and quhair publicatioun is maid dewlie and
lufficiently, and quhair the famin is regiftrat in the proper regifleris appertening thairto, as is cleirlie
verifeit in this caice be the writtis produceit, the griteft point of this queftioun ftandis in the propofitioun : For verificatioun quhairof, the defender alledgeis thir places of the Law and of the Doctouris, as
followis, to preif this concluiloune, Qvod Bannittim, cuius bannum inhijlum aut nullum ejl, impu7ie
licet occidcre. Alexander, concilio G5, lib. 3, numero G, et deinceps. Baldus, confdio 1-12, lib. 4. —
Phillippus Decius, confilio 482, lib. 4. — Nellus a Sancto Germano, in Tractatu ' de Bannitis.' — Bartolus, in lib. ' Si ex lege facia de Adulterijs,' Verba Bartoli ad quellionem, ' de eo qui interfecit non
legitime exbannitum ;' et dicit, ' fi interficiens nullitateni fciebat, tum punitur ; fecus, fi hoc ignorabat
et quod ignorans, non puniatur ;' reddit rationera Dicius, qua occidens deceptus eft, auctoritate publice fcrlpture. — Bartolus in L. 2, § ' Iiec actio,' ff. vi bonorum raptorum. Hec Bartoli verba, ' Occidens bannitum cuius bannum non tenebat, excufabitur a pena homicidij.' — Joannes Andree in additionibus ad fpeculat. in Tit. de Obligationibus et folutionibus, concludit, quod ' fi quis banitus fuerit
propter pccuniam non folutara et pollea foluerit, banno tamen non cancellato occifus fuerit, non tenetur pena homicidij.' — Bartolus in L. genero ft', de his qui notantur infamia, hec verba, quod ' fi quis
occidit ilium quem credebat efle exbannitum, vel adulterauit illam quum credebat non mixtam, quod
non puniatur pena homicidij nee adulterij.' — Item, Julius Clauus, § final!, in his criminibus in verbo
' Horaicidium,' qidiair he treitis this queftioun att grit lenth ; quhair rebellioun is nocht formall, or quhen
thair is ane play, na nullitie, gif the rebellioun be fund in tlie regifter and nocht cancellat, nor na Relaxatioun, as we call it in the famin Regifter, occifor non tenoatur pena homicidij.

Item, the Defender defyris my Lord Juftice, for fchortnes, to reffaue the buikis contenand the-
])laces alledgeit, and to confidder the famin, as accordis ; fpcciallie, feing the queftioun is nocht only
vpoun the defendoris lyfle, bot als it may bring in ane dangerous preparatiue throw all this realme ;
that eftir a man be flayne, being ftmd att the home be vertew of ane Decreit, and the hoirning newir
being quarrcllit during all his tyme, and the Hoirning being retretit' allanerlie, for want of ane ftamp
vpoun the fyrft charge of fummonds, quhairof all men mycht pretend juft ignorance, be reafoun that
the faidis lettres of Hoirning with the Decreit wer regiftrat, lyke as, the faid Hoirning wer ftampit,
and tlie faidis Lettres of Hoirning and chargeis wer reduceit, in confcquentiam ; for tlie charge wes newir regiftrat nor mifterit- to be regiftrat. It is alfo gritlie to be weit,-' that this flauchter procedit nocht
vpoune ony lang precogitat malice, bot vpoun ane quarrel! tane betuix twa young men in thair heit,
vpoun ane Angular combat, fochin* the tyme and place appointit ; quhilk nedit nocht his JIaiefteis Licence, bccaus the faid James Wauchop wes nocht his Hog, bot rebell, as faid is.

It is rcplyit be the perfewaris, as of before, that the haill former alledgances aucht to be repellit, becaus the famin being foundit vpoun the faid Hoirning, and vpoun the privilcdgo of the Law to flae rebellis, the faid Hoirning falling, the liaill alledganceis following thairvpoun lykewyis fallis, ffor the
cauftis foirfaidis: And quhair it is alledgeit, that the Decreit annulling the Hoirning is null, becaus it
wes gewin be the Lords of Seliioun, nocht being Judgeis competent ; and for the non comperance of
the defendar fummond, and tliat the famin can be na forder extendit nor to the perfewaris interes ly-

' Retracted or set aside. ^ Needed, had occabion to be. ^ Weighed, ' Fought.

33JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. II7

bellit, it audit to be Repellit, in refpect of the Decreit rtandand, to the validitie quhairof and jurifdictioun of tlie Lordis of SefTioun gewavis thairof my Lord Juftice is nocht Judij;e ; natlier can ane Decreit, gewin vpoun the nulhtie of ane Hoirning for ane nullitie of the law, be rellrictit to the particuler interes of ane partie perfewar, bot being fund null of the Law, att the inftance of ony lauchfuU
partie, man be null, quoad omnes mortahs ; nather is thair ony relewant caus contenit in the luidis alledgeanceis, quhairfore the faid Robert Auchmowtie foukl nocht haif bene fumraond to the gewing of
the faid Decreit, for liis ciyme and malifice could nocht mak him neceffar partie in the Reduction of
the Hoirning, execute at my Lord Thefliureris inftance, aganis the defunct. And quhair the alledgeance beris, that the Decreit of the Lords of Secreit Connfall and lettres rafit thairvpoun, with the denunciatioun and regiftratioun of the faniin, being formall, and exftant publictlie in Regifteris, can nocht
be tane away in cotifequentiam, for nullitie of the fyrft charge, that is altogidder irrelevant of the law ;
quhairby it is expreflie provydit, that na man can be lauchfullie denunceit to the home, vnles he be fyrft
lauchfullie chargeit : The Decreit produceit, with the lettres and denunciatioun following tliairvpoun,
can newir lubfift, becaus thaj' proceid nocht vpoune ane lauchfull charge, bot vpoune ane charge altogidder null of the law, and declarit to haif bene fa fra the beginning, be the Decreit produceit : And
quhair it is affermit be the pannell, that the law of all natiounis, licet rebelhs impinte occidere, for verificatioun quhairof thay cite Alex', Bartolus, Baldus, Nellus, Decius, Julius Clarus and vtheris, it isanfuerit, that na refpect aucbt to be had in this caice to the faid alledgeances, becaus the defunct wes
newir rebell be vertew of the Morning produceit ; becaus it is expreflie ftatute, be Act of Parliament,
that all chargeis and executiounes of Lettres of Horning falbe ftampit with the meflinger executouris
ftamp, beirand the fyrft lettres of his name and furname, vthirwyis, incaife ony of the executiounis necefTaris want the folempneteis of the law, the Horning is altogidder null ; and it is of veritie, that the
only charge quhairvpoun the Decreit and Hoirning produceit procedis, wantis the faid folemnitie, as is
declarit in the Decreit-reductiue produceit ; and thairfore the faid Horning is, and wes fra the beginning null ; quhilk nullitie being ane nullitie of the law, is and hes alwyis bene conipitent to haif bene
proponit, be way of actioun orexceptioune : Andfeing the lam in coidd newir haif debarrit the faid vraq''
James, being on lyfFe, fra his defence, or haif bene objectit to him as ane lauchfxdl impediment to him ;
fa the famin can nocht ftay nor delay the lauchfull tryell and pwneifment of his flauchter, fpeciallie,
becaus the faid Horning is nocht only null of the law, bot declarit null be fentence of the ordiner
Judge : And quhair it is allegit be the pannell, that many inconvenientis may follow to the liegis, gif
ane Horning, exftant in the Regifter att the tyme of the flauchter comniittit, in the perfoun of the pretendit rebell, the famin falbe na warrand to the committer of the flauchter ; giff ony place be to motiues, in this judgement, my Lord Juftice hes to coididder how mony grittar inconvenientis may enfew,
gif ane fals or null Hoirning, exftant in the Regifter, falbe ane fuflicient warrand to murthour ony of
his hienes frie liegis without perrell or puneifment. And as to the haill authoriteis of the Doctouris
alledgeit, thay ar fett doune vpoune ane generall propofitioun, preceding, nimirum non Jiante Jtatulo,
quod licent bannitnm iminme occidere ; pnjjit qnis puniri ob interfectionem illius, cuius bannum de
Regi/iro non erat cancellatum, vel cuius bannum erat nullum ? Quhilk can nocht militat in our caice,
becaus thair is na ftatute nor Law in this countrey gewing power to all men to flae fie as ar att tlie
borne ; mekle les to flae fie as wes newir lauchfullie att the borne ; igitur, &c.

The Defender, be his preloquutouris, Repetis thair former alledgeances, infafar as the famin contenis thair objectiounis aganis the Decreit-reductiue, and remittis the famin to my Lord Juftice, fpeciallie in that pairt, quhairin the Juftice-generall, in ane mater criminall, properlie appertening to his
jurifdictioun, may judge in ane mater of Treafoun or Keductioun of ane Decreit gewin vpoun ane challange of Treafoun ; in the reductioune of the quhilk Decreit, thay could na mair be Judgeis nor thay
mycht be judgeis in the principall caus or mater. And quhair it is reafonit be the perfewaris, that the
proces of Hoirning is reduce! t, the defenderia adheris to the anfueris maid be tharae ofbefoir; and eikis

118 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

thau-to, that the perfewaris alledgances ar noeht relevant, noclit fpecifeand that tlie faid proces of Homing wes reduceit before tlie laid alledgeit flauchter ; for the reductioun fupervenient, and fpeciallie for
the alledgeit want of ane ftamp, quhilk is the only reafoun of the faid reductioun, is na caus to take
the defenderis lyffe ; fpeciallie, the want of ane llamp nocht being in the denunciatioun of the Homing, hot in the executioune of the charge, quhilk wes nather regiflrat nor neceflar to be regiftrat : And
forder, it is anfuerit be the Defender, that of the Law and practik of all natiounnis, and fpeciallie
within this realme, na man is pwneill for the flauchter of ane rebell ; and quhenfoeuer the rebellioun
wes proponit aganis the accufatioun, the Juftice newir patt that flauchter to the knawledge of ane AlI'yis, quhilk, as is belewit, my Lord Aduocat will noeht deny ; fwa that the argument is nocht vpoun
that general!; ffor it is out of all dout, that my Lord Aduocat makis the queftioun vpoune the Reductioune of the homing : To the quhilk it is anfuerit, be the maift pairt of the wryteris on the Law,
that howbeit the proces of rebellioun eftir the flauchter wer fund inforraall or null of the law, that declaratour can nawyis preiudge the partie defender ; and this is maill equitabil and agreeand to reafoune : And itapperis, that thair is na anfuer maid to the conclufioun of the Doctouris of the law; hot
that thay found thame felfEs, in the countreis quhau- flatutis ar maid, that it fould be leffum to ony privat man to flay ane rebell, and that in this i-ealme thair is na fie flatute or ordinance : To quhilk it is
anfuerit, that the Jullice-Generall foUowis the difpofitioun of the Commoun Law and the conluetude
of all natiounis : and als, it is knawin to be ane inveterat confuetude of this realme, att this tyme, and
by the Ipace of twentie 3eiris bypafl, that quha foewir is cballangeit vpoun ane flauchter and vpoun rebellioun wes newir putt to the knawledge of ane AfTife ; and thair is na queftioune that ane confuetude iuviolablie obieruit is of gritar force nor ane writtin law, L. ' non duliium,' if. ' de legibus ;' and
as the Doctouris concludis, that ane rebell, quha wes declarit formallie rebell, may be flayne vnpwneift, fa thay conclude, quhair the proces of rebellioun is newir drawiu in queftioun the tyme of the
rebellis lyftyme, hot eftir iiis deceis, albeit the famin be null, the flayer liill (fliall) nawyis be pwneill :
Now, this is owre proper queftioune, un Bannihts vel rite vel nuUiler bannitus, pnjit impune offendi ?
The ■affirmatiue thairof is cleirlie verifeit be the allegatiounis before reherllt, in tlie quliilkis the Doctouris adduces diuers grit praktells and decifiounis in findrie of the maill famous Judgeinentis' of
Europ, quhair the flayaris of rebellis, albeit vnjulllie declarit rebellis, and quhais rebellioun wes declarit null : Quliilkis allegatiounis ar nawyis refutit be my Lord Aduocat, tliat quhen the rebellioun is
fund null eftir the flauchter that the flayar falbe pwneill.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris to the fyrll pairt of the alledgance, anent the jnrifdictionn of the Lordis
of Sellioun, anent the Reductioun of the Horning produceit, that albeit thay could nocht half bene
judgis compitent to the tryall of the cryme contenit in the charge vflt aganis the defunct, yit thay wet
maift compitent judgeis to the Reductioun of the Hoirning, for the nuUitie of the law thaiiin contenit ;
nather audit thair ony refpect to be had to the dait of the decreit of Reductioun, gewiii fen the flauchter of the faid vmq'^ James Wauchop, becaus the famin, being ane Declaratonr of nullitie of the faid
charge and denunciatioun following thairvpoun ; lyke as tlie famin charge and Hoirning followin? thairvpoun myclit haif bene alledgeit and declarit null in this Judgment, be way of exceptioun, gif it had
bene produceit in this Judgment, quhilk is nocht neceffar now, in refpect of the Declaratour and Decreit produceit : And as to the general! ground of tlie Law proponit for tlie panne!!, quhilk tliay wa!d
mantene be ane alledgeit cuftum of this Court, quhilk thay wald nialv equivalent to ane llatute, becaus tliay liaif na Law nor Act of Parliament to warrand the faid propofitioun ; the faid alledgeit
cuftum of this Court can nawyis warrand this propofitioun, becaus it wes newir fund be ony fentence
or Interloquutour of this Court, that it wes lefuni to flae ane man being att the home ; Iiot quhenfoewir the panncll proponit fie ane defence, the griteft favour tiiat wes grantit to thame, in refpect thairof, wes to continew the mater to the thryd day of the Air or foner, vpoun xv dayes wairuing ; quhilk

• Tribunals, courts of Justice

33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 119

can noclit be grantit in tins calce, becaus it is fuffiiientlie verifeit to my Lord Juflice, tliat the defunct
deit nocbt rebel!, and that the Hoiniing vlit in tliair defence is and wes null fia the beginning, and wei
null of the law; quhilk is the principall reply qubairvpoune the perfevvaris infiflis : And yit, for fatisfactioun of the defenderis argument, that of the law, licet Bannitum impune occidere, licet illius bannttm fuerit nullum, it is anfueiit, and the perfewaris fall verifie be the authouris citatbethe defendaris,
that the contrar is trew of the law ; as is affermit be Bartolus in L. ' vt vim,' numero primo ff. ' dc
Jufticia et jure,' in thir wordis, ' Bannitus eft referuata defenfio, ergo illicita eft offenfio ;' et infra, ' fed
ego dico, quod de jure communi non licet occidere Bannitos.' Forder, for corroboratioun of the reply,
foundit vpoun the nullitie of the Hoirning, and that thairfore can furneis na defence to the pannel, the
perfewaris citatis' Bartolus ad legem quartam, § ' condemnatum,' ff. ' de re judicata,' his verbis ; ' non
jure Bannitus, non dicitur exbannitus, nee poteft impune oft'endi.' Idem ad Legem penultinium, ff.
' de adimendis legatis ;' et ad legem ' vxor,' numero tertio, ff. ' de Donationibus inter virum et vxorem :'
et lege, ' non putant' § non queuis,' ff. ' de bonomm poft'eflione contra tabulas.' — Forder, it is aue propofitioun mantenit be all the Doetouris, quod ' non licet Bannitum in ciuitate tolleratum impune occidere, quia talis tollerantia in ciuitate preftabat illi lecuritatem, tametfi de banno nondum fuerit cancellatus.' Sallicetus in Lege, ' nullus,' capitulo ' de Judeis ;' et fequitur Joannes de Annama in capitulo
' ficut ;' extra ' de Indicijs,' dicens ' hoc efTe fingulare dictum et fe vidiffe fervari in Bononia ;' Joannes
de AiTiono, fingulari decimo ; Hippolitus de Marcilijs, fingulari 77. Phelmus in capitulo, ' ficuti Judei' in fine ; Et ibi Johanes de Anonia extra ' de Judeis.' — And it is manifeft that the defunct, continewallie eftir the alledgeit Hoirning to the hour of his deceis, had publict refoirt within this burcht,
and had acces and permilfioune to do his lauchfuU effairis thairin hot ony impediment, bot of the knawkdge, permiflioun and allowance of the Magiftratis and Counfall thairof, it being knawin that he wes
the Kingis frie liege, and nawyis lauchfuUie denunceit at the borne : Lyke as, the pannell wes his familiar compan3eoune, frequentit his converfatioun, borrowit and lent, eit and drank with him, as his
awin confeflloun beris ; and fvva can newir be hard to fay that he wes rebell. — Fynallie, the pannell
can newir be hard to found ony defence vpoun the foirfaid ground of the law, quod licet Bannitum impune occidere, becaus it is eertan of the law ' quod impunitas occidenti Bannitum non conceditur,
quando non ob publicam vtilitatem fed ob priuatuni odium vel priuatas inimicitias qftis bannitum interficit hunc enim vel ut homicidum debet Index punire :' Bartolus in Lege ' de Delictoribus,' lib. ij :
Ludouicus Ronianus in Lege ' fi quis in graui,' § ' vtnun,' ff. ' ad Senatum confultum :' Felicius in
capitulo ' in Ecclefiorum,' numero 10, 11, vel 12, ' de Conftitutionibus.' Marcilius confilio nono,
numero 28, et confilio 10 numero 4-2. Baldus in Lege ' decuriones,' capitulo, ' de his qui notantur
infaniia,' &c., ' banc fententiam probant Doctores omnes' ad Legem ultimum, Capitulo ' de maleficis et
machematicis,' in fine, his verbis, ' aut proprium fortaflls inimicum fub huiufmodi vindicti nomine occidens ^ And it is notour and confeft be the pannel to the Kingis

Maieftie, and att his examinatioun, that he flew the defunct, not for ony refpect of his pretendit rebellioune or for feruice to his Prince, bot for his awin particuler quarrcll and combatt, vndertane vpoune
the panneliis provocatioun and cartell in writ ; quhilk fulbe fuihcientlie verifeit to my Lord Juftice,
gif he think itt expedient. In refpect quhairof, the haill former alledgeances aucht to be repellit, and
the dittay aucht to be putt to the knawledge of ane Aflyis.

It is anfuerit be the defender, that the Lordis of the Seflioun could newir be Judgis to the Reductioune of the Hoirning, becaus it procedit vpoun ane decreit gewin be the King and Counfal ; to the
Reduction quhairof the faidis Lordis wer nocht Judgis ; and fwa the Decreit ftandand, thay could be
na Judgis to the reductioun of the Hoirning. — To the fecund pairt, quhair it is alledgeit, that it wes
newir found in this Court, that itt wes lefum to ony perfoun to flae (ane re)bell, &c. it is anfuerit,

Cite or quote. * Part of this page torn away here, bj- which several lines are rendered unintelligible.

120 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

that qulipn rebellioun is proponit tlie judgement and gif neid beis

norlit only continewalioun of the mater wes do decifiounis, wes

directlie the allegatioun maid of the Doctouris (by) the Perfewaiis ; tlie defendar

leferis to the buikis,' Line inde. As to the argument (of) ane rebell being tolerat in ane citie can nocht
be offendit, the maift pairt of the Doctouris concludis indillinctlie, that he maybe offendit quhidder he
be tollerat or nocht ; and mair, alttiocht he obtenit tlie Kingis grace, and the grace be nocht regiftrat,
pote/iimpune occidi ; fa it is in this caife, quhair tliair is na Relaxatioun regiflrat : Attowre, the reply
wes newir fund relewant be the practik of this realrae, and it wer ane grit danger gif fsva war. Item,
that pairt, it is nocht lefum to flae ony rebell jori««<« odij caicja, &c. it is nocht relevant, ifor the maift
pairt of all the wryteris are in the central- ; and be the practik of this realme, non queritur, vtrum fit
public! boni an priuati odij caufa?

The pel fewaris ceifand to repeit ony thing that is alreddy faid, anfueris only to twa pointis, qubilkis
femis to be newere proponit be the defenderis ; the ane, that the Doctouris aflermis, that ane rebell
haifing obtenit the Kingis grace, may be flayne but perrell of Law, gif his grace be nocht regiftrat ;
quhilk is altogidder contrair the lawis and practik of this countrey, becaus in crymes of rebellioune
committit to the Kingis Maiefleis only particular oti'ence, his Maiefteis awin ...... is grantit to

the rebell preiugeis liaill crymes, and makis him to be lauchfuU fubject, tliat may

nocht dit but pwneifment, and his in that caufe nedit na

.... quhair it is nixt allegeit wes newir practefit, that ane man being flayne atl

the borne, and his kyn and freindis perfewing the flear before the Jullice, that ony proces wes grantit
in the mater : It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that in ane actioun altogidder lyke to this caife, verry
notour to my Lord Juflice and all the memberis of Court, the Laird of Arkuiglas, being accufit for
the ilaucliter of the Laird of Caddell, alledgeit, that na proces could be grantit in the faid mater, becaufe the defunct wes flayne att the home; and for verificatioun thairof produceit Lettres of Hoiming dewlio execute, iiidorfat and regiftrat aganis the defimct, att the inftance of Mr James Harvie, aduocat : To the quhilk it wes anfuerit, that the said Hoirning wes reduceit, and fa could nocht ftay
proces : It was duplyit, that the llcductioun could nocht preiudge the pannell, becaus the actioun of
the Reductioun wes intentit eftir the deceife of the Laird of Caddell, and fa could nocht mak him
nocht to haif deceiflit att the borne, nather could the faid defender be preiudgeit, he nocht being callit
thairto, fpeciallie feing the perfewaris of the Reductioun, to witt the relict and bairnis of the defunct,
becaus lang before the intentioun of the faid Reductioun, tliay had fuuimond the faid Laird of Arkinglas to vnderly the Law for the faid flauchter, and for his nocht comperance ha<l putt him to the home ;
to the quhilk it wes anfuerit, that the Hoirning being null fra the beginning, and declarit fa be the
Decreit of the Lordis, the Decreit wes drawin bak to the tyrae of the denunciatioun, and fa the defunct deit nocht att the home, nather wes it neceifar to thame to call the faid Laird of Arkinajlas to
the faid Reductioune, becaus his cryme could mak him to haif na interes in thair ciuile cans and thay
had done fufficiently calling .... the partie rafar of the lettres, and the Kingis Thefaurar and Aduocat for his Maiefteis interes: In refpect of the qubilkis anfueris, verifeit be the Decreit produceit,
my Lord Jurtice repellit the haill defenfTis proponit be the pannell vpoun the faid Hoirnins, declarit
the famin null, and fand forder proces in the faid mater. — In refpect quhairof, being ane caco fa lyke
to this prelent cais, that thair can na a poynt of difconformitie be alledgeit betuix the cailFis ; Repetand the former anfueris thairwith, the haill alledgeances jiroponit be the defenderis audit to be Repellit.
It is anfuerit be the defenderis, as to my Lord Aduocatt alledgance anent the I'rinceis grace and
admiffioun to his fycht, o»mi?io id non rekvat, without ane relaxatiouno. — Item, anent the fecund allegance, foundit vpoun ane practik, anent the accufatioun of Arkinglas ; anfueris, that thair is na thing

' Tlie Buoks or authorities fuimerly quoted by the pursuei'.

33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 121

fchawin to verifie ; and proteftis, that it be nocht refpectit, vnto ' itt be fcliawin, that we may anfuer
thairto. — The Atluocat referris the notorietie thairof to my Lord Juftice. — It is aufuerit be the defender,
that that alledgeit notorietie can nocht preludge him, witliout he faw it, and might anfuer thairto.
The Justice continewis Interloquutour to the fewint of Junij inltant.

\_3Ir IViUiam Haert, JiiJtice-DeputeJ]

Jun. 7 The Defenderis defyris the practii< alledgeit for Arkinglas to be fene, before ony forder proces ; quiiilk can nocht be refufit, bayth in refpect of the Act of Parliament, be tiie quhilk it
is ftatute, that all the verificatiounes of the acciifer fould be produceit in prefens of partie, quha can
nocht be preiudgeit be the pretendit knawledge of the Judge or memberis of Court, fpeciallie in ane
accufatioune capitall. — The perfewaris anlueris, that the Act of Parliament alledgeit be the defenderis,
is only anent the verificatioun of the cryme to be produceit to the Affyis ; and that na vther verificatioun fould be reflauit, fra^ the Affyis be ioclofit, nor wes alledgeit and produceit in prefens of partie
before the inclofing ; and concernis nocht the alledgeances of the Law nor practik maid and to be decydit
before my Lord Juflice, in the quhilk his awin knawledge and confcience is his onlie warrand. — Anfuerit the defender, that in ony mater eriminall, thair may be twa kynd of defenffis to him ; ane to
impeid the mater to pafs to ane Affyfe, the vther, to purge be the Affyis, qulien thay ar chofin : In
this caife, thair is ane exception peremptour proponit, quhairfore this mater fould nocht pafs to ane
Affyfe, to the quhilk thair is diuers anfueris, and replyis maid; and fpeciallie the laft, fomulit vpouu
the faid pretendit practik quhairvpoun my Lord Aduocat apperis maifl to bo foundit ; and gif ony lie
practik be, it fould nocht be refpectit without the productioune thairof, be reafoun that in ane ciuile
caufe of leift confequens, ane decifioun alledgeit and nocht produceit wald nocht be refpectit, and gif
the faid alledgeit practik wer fchawin, the defender wald reafoun that it wald nocht militate in this
caufe : And the Judge can haif na warrand in this caus to judge vpoun his confcience ; the practik
nocht being produceit, and the partie nocht being hard. — Anfuerit the perfewaris, that thair reply is
nocht foundit vpoun the practik alledgeit, bot vpoun the Decreit of Reductioun of tlie Hoirning vfit
be the defenderis ; the effect of the quhilk decreit being impugnit be the defenderis, the faid Decreit is
mantenit be the perfewaris to be ane lauchfuU ground, be law, reafoun, and practik, to raak the faid
hoirning null fra the beginning ; and for my Lord Juftice bettir fatisfactioune, the faid practik is alledgeit, quhilk being notour to his Lordihip, as done in ane actioun quhair as himfelff wes perfewar,
it nedis na forder productioune nor verificatioiine ; ffor the relevancie of the faid reply dependis nocht
vpoun the practik, bot is relevant of the law, albeit the practik be allegeit for forder bleiring' of the
mater, and that quliilk is notour to the Judge, in jure vel praxi, neidis na forder verificatioune.

The defender anlueris, that infafar as my Lord Aduocatis reply is foundit vpoun the law, he referris
him to the lawis alledgeit be him ofbefoir for his defence, and fayis, that thairby it is cleirlie decydit
that the defence proponit is of the law maift relevant, defyring the Judge, as he will anfuer to God
and his Maieftie, that ewerie place alledgeit be confidderit be him and his A/Ieffouris* before the Interloquutour: And quhair my Lord Aduocat anfueris, that the relevancie of his alledgeance dependis
uocht vpoune the practik, gift" his lordfchip will anfuer directlie that it falbe na pairt of the verificatioun or confirmatioune of the reply, his lordfchip fall nocht be vrgeit with the productioun thairof:
bot, feing my Lord Aduocat aflfermis that that practik is fa notour and weill knawin to my Lord
Juflice in that mater, quhilk wes perfevvit at his awin inilance ; that knawledge, how grit it war, can
nocht tak away the defenderis defenffis, quhilk he can nocht propone, that practik nocht being fchawin ;
fpeciallie, coniiddering the name of this judgement, and the wechtines thairof vpoun lyffe and deid,
and it may verry weill iland, that the argumentis of the defence wes nocht maid in the vthir caufe

^ Till. ® From the time that the Assise are inclosed. ^ Confusing, blinding. * The Assessors

are not marked in the Record ; but it has formerly been remarked, that it was the daily custom to have Assessors,
and that they are only occasionally named in the books gf Adjoiuual.

VOL. II. Q

122 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

quhairin tlie practik wes alledgeit : And farder, it is ane vndoiuit ground of the law, that judgemeutis
fould notht proceid vpoun exatnplis, hot \-])oun the lawis : And it is ane vther ground, that ony
thmg judgeit aganis ane perfoun can nocht be hurtfull to ane vther ; and the defender hopis that the
Judsre will noclit tak vpoun his confcience to proceid vpoun that practik, quhill it be fene be the partie
and his objectiounis hard.

It is anfuerit, that it is na forder neceffar to produce the practik alledgeit notour to the judge him
felff, nor to produce ane law and Act of Parliament ; and Ava thay ccis to infifl ony forder vpoun that
pojTit. As to the lall pairt of the laft anfuer, that the Judge aucht to decerne be law and nocht be
examplis, it apperis that that anfuer can nocht Weill agrie with ane vther anfuer maid be the partie in
this famin proces, that the practik and cuflom of the Court hes the force and effect of ane Law ;
quhairvpoun tliay inferrit that it wes lefum, be the practik of this countrey, to Hay ane man att the
home, quliilk wes nocht fa relevantlie alledgeit be tliame as this practik is be the perfewaris, becaus
thay alledgeit na decifioun in termes for thair argument, as in this caice. As to the lafl pairt, quod
res inter alios acta, alios non preiudicat, that is ^Tiderftand to be confiderit in facto ; hot quhair in lyke
caiffis that is decernit be the Judge to be Law, quliilk may aflrik' him of Law and reafon to the lyke
decifioun in tliingis thaireftu- falling furth, it is nocht to be confidderit ratione rei, Jed ratione paritatis
rationis, quhilk makis the conftant^ decifiounis of the Judgis in caiiTis bypafl, to half the effect and
llrenth of Law in thingis prefent and to cum.

The Defender anfuerit, that thair is na difconformitie of his former anfueris to ony of his vther alledgeanccs maid in tliis proces, ffor it is certane, that be the conflitutionis of the maili pairt of all the
Natiounis, quod licet Bannitum impiine offhidcre ; and it is reflauit as ane commoun law within all
the Judgementis^ within Europ, and within this realme ; and quhairewir it is alledgeit, it Hopis the
pannell to pas to ane Affyife ; and it is certane that thair is ane grit difference betuix ane Law coniiderit, and ane example: ffor ane Law is ane thing quhilk is perfyte of itt felff; ane confuetude hes
the effect of ane law, quhair i.t is groundit vpoun mony factis and decifiounis, in foro coniradictorio,
quhair the paileis ar hard ; bot vpoun ane lingular act thair can nocht be ane confuetude induc«it ;
and gif the practik alledgeit vpoun this Angular act wer exhibite, the partie wald propone, that that
practik war nocht in the termis of this caus : And thairfoir, the defender repetis his fyrll defyre vpoun
the productioun of the practik ; and gif it be nocht produceit, the anfuer maid thairvpoun fould nocht
be refpectit. — And forder, the defender alledgeit, that be'' the perfewaris verefeis nocht thair intentioun ; and thairfoir referris hira to the buikis.

The perfewaris and defenderis being inquirit, gif thay wald fay forder, declarit that thay wald fav
na forder.

IXTERLOCUTon. The Juftice continewis this mater to Tj-ifday nixtoeum,
the tent day of Junij inrtant, becaus he is nocht throuchlie auifit with the alledgeances, defenfis and anfueris proponit, hinc indc.

Ilie famin day, Mr George "\A"auchop, ane of the perfewaris, produceit his
Maiefteis Warrand, quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and jour deputis, M'e greit 30W weill. Forfamokiil as Robert
Auchmowtie, chirurgeane, is prefentlie in waird, for )>e ilauciiter of vmq'' James Wauchop, the parentis
of the faid James liaifing lamentablie futed '■> att our handis for Juftice, quhilk We of our Royall dewtie can nocht refuife. It is cur Will ]>airfcre, and We command 50W, that :;e, with all convenient
diligence, eftir the fytht heirof, je proceid and minifter juftice vpoun the faid Robert, for the flauch-

' Eestrict. ' Uniform, uudcviating. ' Tribunals, Courts of judgment. * Besides, forhye,

' Suited, sued, made suit.

33 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 123

ter of the faid vmq'* James: And gif ony difficultie aryife, that 36 vfe the auife of fe wyfeft and
maifl lemit men, in difcufling Jiairof, quhom 56 fall adioyne to 30\v as AfTeffouris. And this 36 faill
nocht to do, nochtwithllanding of quliatfumewir Warrand, directioun oi- command, gewin or to be
gewin to 30W on fe contrar. As 56 will anlVei' to ws faivvpoune ; quiiairanent thir prefentis falbe
5 our wanand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Striueling, the penult day of Maij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitm) JAMES U.

Vpoun the iiroductioii quhairof, he aflcit inftrumentis ; as alfo afkit inftrumentis, that the Juftice continewit to proceid aad gif Interloquutour in the faid
mater, quhill the tent day of this inftant.

l3Tr Robert Ijijntoime, substitute to the Aduocat, in his absens.~\
Jiin. 10. — The iamin day, George Wauchop produceit the Kingis Maielteis Warrand, and defyrit the famm to be infert, quhairof the tennour followis.
Rex,

Justice, Jullice Clark and 30ur deputis. We greit 50W weill. Forfamekill as it is fcliawiti
to ws, that the commoun courfe of juftice, quliilk We ar maift willing fould be participat to our haill
liegis, it is verry fair hinderit and delayit be verry friuolous fubterfugeis in ])e perfuit intentit be George
Waucliop aganis Robert Auclimowtie chinirgeane ; quhairin as We of our princelie dewtie lies ewir
bene of intentioun, that in ])at mater juftice fould haif place ; fwa We wald na occafioun wer gewin
to fe partie perfewaris juftlie to mak complent to ws of pe ftay of juflice heirintill : Tliairfore it is our
command, that all excuiffis fett a pairt, without ony delay quhatfumewir, 59 proceid and minifter juftice in fe faid mater: As ye will anfuer to ws vpoun pe dewtiefull difcharge of your office. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Falkland, the nynt day of Junij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Intekloquutour aganis Robert Auchmoivtie.

The Juftice Repellis the haill Defenffis proponit in the twa Courtis of before,
for the defender, in i-efpect of the anfueris maid thairto on the Law and vtherwyis be his Maiefteis aduocat : And tliairfore, ordanis the faid Robert to be put
to the knawledge of ane Ad'yife, for the Dittay produceit be the aduocat aganis
him, tuicheing the Slauchter of the faid vmq'' James Wauchop.

Thaireftir, the laid Robert declarit that he wald cum in his Maiefteis will, finthe Slauchter of the faid vmq'" James AVauchop.

The Perfewaris aflcit inftrumentis of (the) Juftice Interloquutour, and that the
faid Robert declarit he wald cum in his Maiefteis will, for the Slauchter of the
faid vmq''' James : And thairefter, produceit ane Warrand direct fra his Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and jOur deputis. We greit 30W weill. It is our will, and We
command sow, that in cais Robert Auchmowtie, att his accufatioun for Jie flauchter of vniq'"^ James
Wauchop, becura in our will for ])e famin, that 36 refuife to accept liim in will, and putt him to }ie
knawledge of ane Affyis, proceid and minifter juftice vpoun him, conforme to f e lawis of our realme :
As 3e will anfuer to ws vpoun ■^our office and obedience; kepand ])ir prefentis for 3 our warrand.
Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Falkland, the audit day of Junij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

124 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

In refpect of the q\iliilk Warrand produceit, the Judge ordenit the faid Robert
to be putt to ane AfTyife.

The faid Robert declarit in oppin audience, in prefens of God, that Johnne
Auchmowtie and James Chahneris cam nocht neir him att the combat betuix
him and vmq'^ James "\^"auchop ; and that thay vewit the feildis only, that the
Baillie of Nudreis fonis war nocht to fupplie him.

ASSISA.

Williame Naper merchand-burges Robert Halyburtoune mercLaud- Jobne Stenhop of Stenbop-mylne,

of Edinburgh, burges thair, Tiionias ^Marfchell meicliand tbair,

Patrik Kennedie faidler burges Alex Broune mercband tbair, Alex' Fairlie of Braid tliair,

thair, JaniesLychtouneinerehand thair, Andro Watlbune, mercband thair,

•lobne Henderfoun maltnian in Andro Naper mercband tbair, Johne Heriot tail5eour mercband

Plefance, Jolme Landis merchand thair, thair.

Johne Kanifay of Qubvteliill, Jobne Aitkyn merchand thair.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfonis of AlFyis, being chofni, fworne and admittit,
and the faid Robert accufit be Dlttay of the crymes aboueM'rittin, quhilkis war
alfo fworne be the faidis George and Mr George ^A'auchopis to be of veritie ;
removit altogidder furth of Court to the Counfale-hous, quhair thay, eftir chefing of the faid Alexander Fairlie of Braid Chancellar, reflbnit and votit vpoune
the poyntis of the faid Dittaj^ ; and being throuchlie avyfit thairwith, re-enterit
agane in Court, quhair thay, be the mouth of the faid Alexander Fairlie of Braid,
Chancellar, ffand, pronimceit and declarit the faid Robert to be fylit, culpabill
and con^•ict of the flauchter of the faid Ainq'" James "\'auchope, committit the
XX day of Apryle laft was, vpoune St Leonardis-Craigis.

Sextence. For the quhilk caufe, the faid Juftice, be the mouth of Robert
Galbraith, dempftar of the faid Court, Ordanit the faid Robert Auchmwtie to
be tane to ane flvaffald, befyde the mercat-croce of the burch of Edinburgh, and
thair his held to be ftrj-kkin fra his bodie ; and all his movabill guidis to be
efcheit and iubrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as culpabill of the faid cryme :
Quhilk wes pronunceit for dome.

[3Tr Williame llairt, Jiijlice-Depute.']

CvfasoimiJlt l\t%ti anU a^nttvroimnunins SMitl) a Ktdaiflr Craitor.

Juu. 11. — Sir Johxe Cranstoune of that Ilk, knycht, and Mr Williame Cranftoune, fear of that Ilk.
Comperit Mr Williame Cranftoun, fear of that Ilk, and produceit ane Warrand, direct fra his Maieftie, Ordaning the ijerfuit aganis him and his gud-fader
to be continewit, as followis.
Rex,

Jlstice, Juflice Clark and 50ur deputis, We greit 30W Weill. It is our will, and for certane cauflis and conlideratiounis moving t\s, We command 50W, that, vpoun the fycbt lieirof, 36 con33 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 125

tinew the dyet appoiatit for ])e Lairdis of Cranftoune, eldar and 50uriger, for tliair compeianco befoir
30W, to viiderly pe Lawis for ])e crymes contenit in our lettres direct fairanent, vnto ])e xvij day of
Junij inftant ; and on nawayis proceid aganis ]>ame, nor fair cautioners, fund for pair comperance fat
day : As 50 will anfuer to ws vpoun ^our office and obedience ; kepand ])ir prefentis for 30ur Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Falkland, tlie fyrfl day of Junij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitxu-) JAMES R.

Mr Robert Lyntoune, aduocat fubftitute, produceit the Kingis lettres, purclieft att the iiiftance of Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcarne, aduocat, aganis
Sir Johne Cranfloune of that Ilk, and Mr Williame Cranftoune, fear of that Ilk,
for the Reflett of Mr Thomas Cranftoune, fumtyme of Morieftoune. — The faid
Mr "Williame Cranftoun proteftit, in refiiect that Mr James "Watfoun, minifter
of Cranftoun, comperit and teftifeit the feiknes of Sir Johne Cranftoun of that
Ilk, quha mycht nocht comi^eir. As alfo he comperit him felff, and wes reddie
to find new (caution) ; that the Laird of Coldinknowis, cautioner for thair entrie
be relevit ; quhilk the Juftice grantit.

James Dowgias of Caveris, fcheref principall of Tewiotdaill, becomes pledge
and fouirtie, &c. for thair entrie the xvij day of Junij inftant.

(Jun. 18.) — Being enterit on pannell, perfewit and accufit be Mr Thomas
Hammiltoun of Druncarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes interes,
of the crymes following : That is to fay,

DiTTAY agauijl Sir Johnne Cranftoun, Jen', and Mr IVilUame Cranjtoun.
That quhair, it is expreflie provydit, ftatute and ordenit, be diners lovabill
Actis and Statutis of Parliament, that na maner of man tak vjjoune hand, oppinlie and notourlie to rebell aganis our fouerane lord ; and rj^cht fwa, it is ftatute and ordenit, that nane of our fouerane lordis liegis reffett, fupi)lie, mantene,
do favouris and intercommoune with manifeft and notorious rebellis, and fie as
hes uotoriouflie committit Treftbtm, ather be help or be counfall, vnder the pane
of treafoun and forfaltour of thair lyffe, landis and guidis : As the faidis Actis
and Statutis in thame felffis att lenth beris, quhairof nane of our fouerane lordis
lordis liegis juftlie can pretend ignorance. Neuirtheles, it is of veritie, that Mr
Thomas Cranftoun, fumtyme apperand of Morieftoun, ffor diuers heich crymes
of Treafoun and Confpiraceis, committit be him aganis his Maieftie and Eftait,
in cumpany with Frances fumtyme Erll Bothwell, and namelie, in the Confpiracie ijraktefit att his hienes Palice of Halyruidhous, in the monetli of December,
the yeir of God P.VMxxxxj yeiris, being forfaltit in the Parliament haldin att

Edinburgh, in the moneth of I".VMxxxxij yeiris ; and thaireftir, of

new, haifing committit the lyke treafounis and attemptatis aganis his Maiefteis
perfoun and eftait, in the monethis of Junij, Julij, Auguft, September, October,
Nouembei", December and Januar, or in ane or vther of the faidis monethis, the
yeir of God I".VMxxxxiij yeiris, he wes fummond to haif comperit before his

126 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Maieftie and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, to haif anfuerlt for the faidis crymes
and attemptatis ; and for his nocht compei-ance, wes decernit to be denunceit our
fouerane lordis rebell, and putt to the home ; and in refpect thairof, be expres
Act of his hienes Secreit Counfall, maid att Striueling, in the moneth of Februar,
the yeir of God I"'.VMxxxxiij yeiris, it wes ftatute and ajjpointit, that nane of
our fouerane lordis liegis fould tak vpoun hand to relTett, fupplie or intercommoun with the faid IMr Thomas, or to furneis him meit, drink, hous, harbrie,
nor vtherwyis haif intelligence with him, priuatlie or publictlie, be lettres, meffageis or ony vther maner of way, vnder the pane of Treafoun. And yit the
faid Mr Thomas, continewing in his former Treafoun and rebellioun, he of
new, in the moneth of Apryle, the yeir of God I'".VMxxxxiiij yeii-is, come in
cumpany with the faid Frances fumtyme Erll of Bothwell, James Dowglas
fumtyme of Spott, vmq'^ Hercules Stewart, brother to the faid Frances, vmq''
Archebald ^^'^auchop fumtyme younger of Nudrie, and diuers vtheris his I\Iaiefteis rebellis, forfaltit traittouris, atliftit with certane clannit men of the Bordour, oppin thewis and rebellis, to the number of fax hundreth men, bodin in
feir of weir,' with jakis,^ fpeiris, lleil-bonnettis, hagbuttis, piftolettis and all
vther weirlyke prouifiounis, and in profeflit hoftelitie, with cumpaneis of wadgeit' men, difplayit cornettis and bennaris, cam to the touu of Leith ; and thaireftir, in tbair retreit, betuix the Wowmet-edge and the Borrow-mure of the
burch of Edinburgh, his Maieflie being in proper perlbune \i)oune the feildis,
invadit and perfewit diuers our fouerane lordis faithfull fubiectis, perfewit thame
for thair flauchteris, with drawin fwordis, fperis and ane grit number of fchottis
of hagbuttis and piftolettis, and Moundit ane number of thaim, to tlie grit effufioune of thair blude, tuik diuers jjerfounes, fpuil^eit thame of thair horffis, armour and guidis : Quhairby, the laid Mr Thomas, being vpoun the ground, ane
of the cheif leidaris and conductouris of the faidis rebellis, committit publict,
profeffit and manifeft Treafoune : And continewallie fenfyne, knawing his giltijies in the faidis crymes being notour, hes bene fugitiue fra the lawis. Quhilkis
rebellioiuiis being fa grit and manifeft, and quhilkis of thame felffis fould haif
movit all the guid fubiectis of the realme, to haif x'efufit quhatfumeuir maner of
aeid and fupplie to the faid Mr Thomas : Yit it is maift trew, that Sir Johne
Cranftoun of that Ilk, knycht, cheif and fpeciall kynnilinan to the faid Mr Thomas, and Mr AVilliam Cranftoune, fear of that Ilk, brother to the faid Mr Thomas, quha could nawyis milknaw the faidis Confpiraceis, treafounis and rebelliounis, diuers and fmdrie tymes fen the faidis yeiris, P.VMxxxxiij and Ixxxxiiij
yeiris, hot fpeciallie in the monethis of Januar, Februar, March, Apryle, Maij,
Junij, Julij, Auguft, September, October, November and December, in the yeir
' In warlike array. ' Short coats of cliain or plate mail. •' Hired.

33 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 127

of God P.VMxxxxix yeiris, att the leift in ane or vtlier of the faidis monethis,
willinglie and wilfullie Reflett, fuppleit, intercoraonnit, gaif aeid and counfall,
hous and harbrie, meit and drink to the faid Mr Thomas Cranftoun, in his duelling-place of Nether Craling, fuppleit and intercomonit with him thairin, be the
fpace of diuers dayes and monethis, att tliair pleafour ; quhairby thay and ather
of thame hes contrawenit the lawis, ftatutis and Aetis of Parliament and Secreit
Counfall, and hes incurrit the panis thairof, viz. of Treafoune and ffoirfaltour
of thame felffis, thair lyffis, landis and guidis ; quhairin thay aucht to be convict, in example of vtheris to comitt the lyke attemptatis in tyme cuming.

And the faidis Sir Johne and Mr Williame Cranftounis, being inquyrit, gif
thay wald abyde the tryall of the law and of ane Aflyife, for the cryme foirfaidis ; thay produceit the Letter vnder writtin, for anfuer.

We will nocht contend with his iVIaieftie ; hot in Jiis mater, as in all vjier thingis, we ar content to
fubmitt our felflSs to his Maiefteis guid pleafour and will ; protefting alwyis, that we can newir acknawledge our felffis to be giltie of ony cryme or offence ; and fa, befeikis his hienes to confidder of
ws, as of his Maiefteis maift obedient faithfull and huimble fubiectis.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Cranstoun, W. Cranstoun.
The Juftice, nocht being auifit with the anfuer, continewis this mater to the
morne, qu' ill he vnderftand his Maiefteis mynd thairanent : And Ordanit the
faidis Sir Johnne and Mr Williame Cranftoune to keip thair houffis.

(Jun. 19.) — The faidis Sir Johnne Cranftoune and Mr W" Cranftoune tuik
inftrumentis of thair comperance, and proteftit for releif of thair fouirtie ; and
thaireftir produceit the Warrand vnderwrittin, quhairof the tennour followis.
Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Clark, cure Aduocat and 30ur deputiis. It is our will, that Sir Johne
Cranftoun of fat Ilk, kny', and Mr Williame Cranftoun, fear fairof, be conimandit to fair ludgeing,
without finding of ony cautioune for fair comperance befoir 50W heireftir: Quhairanent pir prefentis
falbe 30ur Warrand. Att Haliruidhous, the xix of Junij, 1600. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The quhilk Precept the Juftice admittit, and ordanit the faid Sir Johnne
Cranftoun and Mr Williame Cranftoune to pafs to thair ludgeing.

%m*tin5 an Sx in tijt PousI)— ^anutl 3$ani6i)eU.

Jun. 14. — George Dempstar, fone to Dauid Dempftar, citiner," (in
Brechin).
Dilatit of hurting of ane ox pertening to Thomas Collace of Pitforquhie, with
twa ftraikis in the bak, quhilk ox was gangand in his pleuch, teilland his ground
of the landis of Pitforquhie ; committit in the moneth of Marche laftbypaft.

The faid George declaris, that he wald cum in his Maiefteis will for the faid
crime. — The Juftice declaris, he will put him to ane AlTyfe.

' Citizen or * indweller ;' not a burgess.

128 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Sentence. The Affyis, be the mouth of thair Chancillar, Andro Wod, brother to Balbegno/ ffand the faid George to be ffylit, culpabill and convict.

The Juftice delyiierit the faid George Dempftar to Thomas Geddes, baillie,
to be re-enterit in waird within the Caftell of Edinbiu-gh, qiiliill his Maieftes
mynde wes knawin anent the dome.

Do:\iE offofiis George Deinpjiar.

Sentence was not pronounced, until Jul. 4, Avhen the following entry occurs
in the Record.' — The faid George Dempftar produceit his Maiefteis Warrand,
quliairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Clark and 30ur deputis, We greit 50W weill. Forfamekill as George
Dempftar, lone to Dauid Dempftar, citiener in Brechin, being convict before 50W, in ane Juftice-court,
hauldin in our tolbuith of Edinburgli, the fourtene day of Junij laflb)-paft, for pe liurting of ane ox
pertening to Thomas Collace of Pitforthie, quhilk wes teilland the ground of fe landis of Pitforchie ;
wes committit to ward, witliiu our Caftell of Edinburgh, quhill our mynd wes declarit Jiairanent :
Thairfore, we command 50W, that, eftir the fycht heirof, 5c caus prefent him on pannell, and promince
dome. That he be Baneilt our realme, during our will, for f e faid cryme ; and that he pafs furth
Jiairof, within fourtie day is eftir Jie dait heirof; and nocht to returne fairin, but our fpeciall licence;
vnder ]ie pane of deid : ffor pronunceing quhairof, thir prefentis falbe 3 our warrand. Subfcryuit with
our hand, Att Halyruidhous, the thryd day of Julij, 1600. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

According to the quhilk Warrand, the Juft ice-depute, be the mouth of James
Lowrie, demjiftar, Ordenit the faid George Dempftar to be baneift this realme,
during oiu* fouerane lordis will ; and to pafs fiu'th thairof, within fourtie dayes
eftir the dait heirof ; and that he returne uocht thairiu, but fpeciall licence of
his Maieftie ; vnder the pane of deid.

\_Mr Rohert Murray, Jujiice-Depide.']

Mfaiiitfi: anU J^ijooting of 1*?as&uts mxH ^ijstoUts, ^f»

Jun. 24.. — Adam Schaw, (in Caftell-Cawill), brother to George Schaw
of Glenmure.
Comperit Johnne Halyday, aduocat, and produceit ane Precept, direct be the
Kingis Maieftie ; quhaii'of the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Clark and ^our deputis, We greit 30W weill. It is our will, and We
command 30W, that, vpoune the fycht heirof, 3e continew the criminall actioun perfewit att fe inftance of our aduocat aganis Adam Schaw of Glenmure, for bering and fchuting with hagbutis and
piftolettis,' contrar Jie tennour of our lawis and Actis of Parliament, vnto the fyrft day of Julij nixt;

' The others were Alexander Keylh, fone to the Laird of Ludquharne, Joline Ramfay callit of tlie
Forth, James Ramfay of the Rinde, Thomas Wilkie portioncr of Saucliton, Johne Dunbar of Moynes,
Johne Stevinfoune of Hermpfclieillis, George Barroune of Kynnaird, Nicoll Dal;ellniylne, Andro
Brodie, Alexander Horfburcli of Harkes, Archibald Hamniiltoune, I'lnyth, and Williame Broune, indueller in Edinburgh. '■' He is dilated ' for bering, wering and I'chuting of piftolettis, and hurting

and wounding of George (Charles ?) Campbell of Ilorlcleucii in fe rycht arme.'

33Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 129

and reflaue new cautioun conforme to fe ordour ; as 38 will anfuer to ws fairvpoune : Quhairanent
thir prefentis falbe 3our WaiTand. Subfcryuit with our liand, Att Halyiuidhous, the xx day of Junij,
1600. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The Juflice, nochtwithftanding of the Precept produceit, vnderftanding his
Maiefteis mynd, continewis the mater to the morne. Gylbeit Pennycuik (of
that Ilk) becomes pledge and fouirtie, &c.

Jun. 25. — Charles Campbell of Horfcleiich produceit the Kingis Maiefteis
Precept, ordaining the Juftice to continew the perfuit to the xx^ij day of Junij
inftant, &c.

Jun. 27- — Gylbert Pennycuik of that Ilk amerciated in the pane of ffour
hundreth markis, for non-production of the faid Adam Schaw ; who is ordanit
to be denunceit our fouerane lord is rebell, and putt to the home, and all his
movabill guidis to be efclieit, &c.

[_3Tr William Borthuik, Jiijlice-Dejnde.^

raeaniTfl of |)istolctsf, 3ft.— 3Uemisstoii on ^anmcitt of dfiiie.

Jul. 1. — Geohge Schaw of Glennmre.
Being enterit on pannell, as he that was lawfullie fummond to compeir befoir
the Juftice or his deputtis, to heir his hienes will declarit, anent the bering and
wering of piftulettis. — Comperit lykewyis Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie, and
produceit ane Precept direct fra his Maieftie, &c.
f . Rex,

Justice, Juftice-Clark and 3 our deputtis, We greit 50W weill. Foifamekill as George
Schaw of Glenmwre become in our will, in ane Court of Julliciarie, haldin in ]ie Tolbuith of Edinburgh, the xvij day of Maij laftbypaft, for bering, wering and fchuting with hagbutis and piltuletlis,
and hurting of Charlis Campbell of Horfdeuch fairwith ; as ane Act maid fairvpoune beiris : Sen the
quhilk day, the faid George lies payit and delyuerit to ws Jie fowme of ffyve hundreth markis, in full
fatisfactiouiie of our will for ])e faid cryme thairfoir : And for declaratioun of our laid will, wit 5e, that
We half Remittit, and bejiir prefentis Remittis, the faid George Schaw for fe faid cryme, and renunceis and difchargeis all actioune, tryell (criminal) and civil), that We, our Thefaurer or aduocat may
half aganis fe faid George Schaw, for ])e famyn cryme : Difchargeing our Thefaurer and Aduocat of
all calling, trubleing or perfewiiig of him )iairfoir, in tyme cuming. And fis We pronunce to be our
will ; and caufe ])ir prefentis to be infert and regiltrate in our buikis of Adiornall, ad perpetuam rei
memoriam : Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe 3 our wairand. Subfcryuit with our hand. At Halyrudehous, thefirft day of Julij, 1600 5eiris. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Quhilk Precept being red and produceit in jugement, the Juftice autlioreifit
the famyn to half full effect to the faid George Schaw for the laid cryme, conforme to the tennour thairof in all poyntis. Quhairvpoun the faid George afkit
actis and inftrumentis.

VOL. II. R

130 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

[Jlr IViiruime Haerf, Jtiftice-Dcpufc.']

a^jiUinij from tijt IXmti ai Bumfrits.

Jul. 2, 3, & 4. — JoHKE Ross of Drumgrauge, George Logane of that Ilk,
James Boifwell, feare of Avicliiiilek, Joline Boifwell of
Duiitrine-gemen, Robert Mure of Kuokmarloch, Robert
Wallace of Holmeftoune, Hew Wallace of Boiglieid, W"
Cwniiighanie of Polquharne, George Schaw of Gleumwre,
and W" Wallace of Lytill Cefnok.
Dilatit for abydiiig fra the Raid of Drumfi-eis, ordenit to haif convenit with
Archbald Erll of Angus Lieutenneut, in September laftwas.

[A variety of procedure takes place, in these and some other similar cases,
but not of sufficient importance to be inserted at length. Some of the parties
are fined, others discharged, &c.]

Jul. 10. — Alexandeu Hay of Delgattie.
George Sinclair of INIaij and James Forbes of Lethindie, become pledgeis and
fouerteis, conjunctlie and feuerallie, for Alex' H. of D., that he fall compeir befoir the Juftice or his depiitis, &c., the xvj day of Julij inflant ; for the cryme
of Adulterie, committit with Barbara Forbes, his alledgeit Ipous — Johne Frafer
of Strichin, cautioner for his entrie, is relieved of his caution.

Jul. 16. — The cafe is continued to the next Juftice-air of ' Abirdene, tertio Itineris, (vel premonitione,) xv dierum.' Williame Rois of Kih-aik becomes
pledge for his appearance.

^lauflijtci- — %urtiiis nnU 0:iLItitinl5iits.

Jul. 15. — James Maister of Ogilvie,' Sir Johne Ogilvie of Craig,

Mr Dauid Ogilvie, Frances Ogilvie, all brether ; James Gordoun, feruand to the IMaifter, Patrik Guthre of Pitmowes,

Johnne Barclay, fone to George Barclay of the Syde.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Patrik Rjnid, fone to 'W"'

Rynd of Kerfe ; and of hurting of Alex'' Lord Spynie, in the heid ; committit

iu March laftbypaft.

Mr Olii^her Colt produceit ane ^^'^arrand, direct to the Thefaurer and Aduocat for deleiting of Patrik Guthrie ; quhairof the tennour foUowes.
Rex,

TiiESAURER and Aduotat, Wo greit 50W wi'ill. It is our nil], and We command 50W,
tliat, rpoun the fycht lieirof, je deleit Patrik Guthrie of Pitmoweis fuith of ]ie criminal! fummondis

' See Jul. 25 and 29, and Aug. 14.

33JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 131

rafit at 30ur inftance aganis the M' of Ogilvie, and iic as accumpaneit him on ])e feildis att Jie late
Conflict betuix him and our coufing the Lord of Spynie ; fwa that he be nawyis callit nor perfewit
thairfore : As 36 will anfuer to ws vpoun 5 our offices and obedience : Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe
3 our warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, att Halyruidhous, this xxviij day of Junij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. .

Quhilk Precept, the Juftice, with atiife of Alexander Maider of Elphinftoun,
and Mr Thomas Haniniiltoiin, adniittit ; and ordenit na proces aganis the faid
Patrik Guthre nor his cautioner. — The Lord Advocate having produced a Warrant from the King to that effect, the Juftice continued the cafe to the xxv of July.

Jul. 24. — Hector Bannatyne of Karnes.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Johne Spens of Vefl;er Karnes.

Persewaris, Niniane Spens, eldeil fone, Patrik Maxwell of Newark, George Spens in Edinburgh, Mr Sanderis Maxwell.

Pkeloquutouris for the pannel, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Johne Ruffell, Sir Johnne Hararailtoune,
the Lard of Garthland, the Lard of Corlious.

The perfewaris takis Inftrumentis of the productioune of the lettres, and takis
inftrumentis for releif of his cawtioune. — Alledgeis, that na preloquutour can
be hard, nor yit audit the defender to be hard, becaus the defender is att the home
for the faid cans ; as the lettres dewlie execute and indorfat, produceit, beiris. —
Anfueris the preloquutouris, that the partie may procuir' for him felff; and
thay will compeir vpoun tliair awin perrell ; and declaris thay accept the Horning.— And it is alledgeit for the pairt of the faid Hector Bannatyne, and alledgeis, that the lamiu is null, becaus in Act of Parliament, in anno Ixxxxvij^
(1597), it is fjieciallie provydit, that all executiounis of Horningis falbe regiftrat
in prefens of the SherefF-clark, ane notar, and foure witneffis ; quhilk is nocht
done, becaus the executiounis of the Hoirning is nocht regiftrat, conforme thairto. — Anfueris the perfewaris, that the lettres and executiounis ar fufficientlie regiftrat ; and abydis at the lettres, executiounis and regiftratioun, as thay ar produceit, and ar CufRcient : And forder alledgeis that the Juftice is nocht Jiulge to
the nullitie of the Horning.

The Juftice ordanis the preloquutouris to comjieir in defence, nochtwitliftanding of the Horning produceit.

Forder, (the perfewar) alledgeis, that the prelocutouris can nocht compeir, in
refpect of ane Horning produceit, be the quhilk the Lard- of Games is denunceit
att the inftance of Ninian Stewart, fear of Kilcliattan, for nocht reftauing of the
faid Ninian innnediat tennent to the landis contenit in the lettres, of the dait the

' Procure, i. c. act as procurator, speaker, or counsel, in his own behalf and defence. ^ Acta Par).
1597, cap. 36, fol. 139.

132 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

xj Auguft 1592 3eiris. — Anfueris the preloquutoiiris, that the Hoirning is null,
in relpcct the executionis ar nocht regiftrat.

The perfewaris paffis fra thair alledgauceis produceit be thame, for this day
only, &c.

Alledgeis, that Ninian Spens can nocht perfew in judgement, becaus he is minor, vnauthorifit with tutouris and curatouris. — Tlie faniin day, the faid Ninian
creat Patrik Maxwell of Newwark and Mr Alexander ]\Iaxwall curatouris ad
fifes. The pannell afkis inftrumeutis, that the Laird of Newwark and Mr Sanderis' ar chofin preloquutouris.

Alledgis that this mater can nocht be put to the knawledge of ane AlTyfe, for
the crynie, albeit he wer nocent,' (he being niaill innocent ;) becaus the faid
vniq'' Johnne Sjjens wes lauchfullie denunceit rebell and put to the home, vpoun
the fourt day of Julij 1592 yeiris, att the inftance of the faid Hector Bannatyne
and Charles Bannatyne, for nocht obedience of ane Decreit of the Lordis of
Counfall ; quhilk Hoirning wes regiftrat vpoune the famin fourt day of July
1592 yeiris ; as the famin, produceit, beris. — The perfewaris afkis inftrument
of the alledgeance.

The perfewaris alledgis, that the Horning is null, becaus he is relaxt ; as the
lettres of Relaxatioiui and executiounis produceit beris. — The defender acceptis
the Relaxatioun ; and anfueris, that the faid vmq'^ Johnne Spens ftuid rebell,
be vertew of the Horning produceit, nochtwithftandingof the Relaxatioune ; becaus it is of veritie, that he is denunceit i-ebell at the inftance of twa fpeciall
parteis, viz. at the inftance of Hector Bannatyne of Games, in the fyrft place ;
and lykewj'is at the inftance of Charles Bannatjnie, in the fecund place, and for
diuerfe cauffis and for diners effectis : And trew it is, that this Relaxatioun produceit relaxis him fra the home, infafar as he wes put to the home at the inftance of Charles Bannatyne, and nawyis is relaxt fra the home, infafar as he is
at the home at the inftance of the Laird of Cauies, and for ane cans only ;
quhairas the Decreit lies mair cauflis quhairvpoun the faidis lettres procedis ; and
fwa, he ftandis yit effectuallie at the home, at the inftance of the Laird of Cames,
as yit vnrelaxt : And forder, the Laird of Cames is nather fummond nor appoiutit to be fummond be the fufpentioinie. And forder, the faid relaxatioune
is null, becaus the executioun of the Relaxatioun is nather ftampit nor fubfcryixit ; quhairas the Act of Parliament Ordanis the executioune to be ftampit
with twa lettres :' And repetis the Act of Parliament maid in the tyme of King
James Fyft. — Thrydlie, the faid Relaxatioune is null, in refpect thair is na officer contenit in the letteris of Relaxatioune. — Thaireftir, the perfewaris produceit the extract of the i-elaxatioune.

' Viz. Mr Alexander Maxwell. ' Guilty. ' Viz. Willi a seal, bearing the Initials of the

Messenger's or Officer's name.

33 Jac. VI. CRIJMirfAL TRIALS. 133

Anfueris the perfewaris, ^^/y?, that the officer relaxis the faid vmq'^ Johnne
Spens, for the cauffis contenit in lettres of Hornhig, and hes fufpendit the officer executour of the horning fra ony forder executioune, for the cauffis contenit
in the Decreit of the Lordis ; and thairfore, hefore ye tak away the Relaxatioun,
the Judge can iiocht cognos vpoun the nullitie of the Horning, hot the Lordis'
man be Judgis thairto. As for the fecund pairt, allegis that the faid lettres of
Relaxatioune ar fufficientlie ftanipit ; as the extract of the Relaxatioun beris.
ThrklUc, declaris that the officeris name is contenit in the extract, and the officer makis mentioun of the officeris ftanip as affixit, as the fainin beris. Forder,
alledgis, that thay will abyde be the princii^all Lettres of Relaxatioun and the
extract thairof ; and gif thair be ony difference betuix the pi'incipall and the extract, wyte* the extracter.

The Juftice Continewis the mater to the morne.

The famin day. Hector Bannatyne of Cames, being fworne, Declarit that he
dred' bodelie harme of Patrik Maxwall of Newwark, Mr Sanderis Maxwall his
brother, and Ninian Stewart of Kilchattane.

Jul. 25. — The Cafe continued to the Juflice-air of ' Buit, tertio Itineris,
XV dierum.' Plegio, Domino Johanne Hammiltoune de Litrik milite.

^Iau3]^tcr — ?l?uittn0 anU MoimtJiiiQ;.

Jul. 25. — James Maister of Ogievie and others.*

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Diumcanip, aduocat to our fouorane lord.
Preloquutouris for the paiinell, Mr Johnne RulFell, Williame Oiiijhant, Francis Erie of ErroU,
Erie of Buchan, The Lard of Fyndlater, My Lord of Aldbar.

Mr Dauid and Frances Ogilveis ar content prefentlie to abyde the tryell of ane
Affyis. The remainder of the pannell, declarit, that they wald nawyis enter in
proces with his Maiefteis aduocat, for the cryme contenit in the lettres, infafar
as his hienes hes actioun competent to thame for the famin crymes, or ony of
thame ; hot offerit thame felffis in his grace will thairfore ; protelling that thair
becuming in will, &c. Ibuld nawyis be hurtfull or preiudiciall to thame or nane
of thame, for quhatfumewir actioune or exceptioune compitent to thame or ony
of thame, aganis quhatfumeuir perlbune or perlbunes, haifing interes to perfew
for the faidis crymes ; cpihairvpouu the faid Mr Thomas Hammiltoune alkit
inftrumentis.

The Juftice continewis tlie mater to the morne ; and warnit the AlTyis to
the morne.

. * Of Council and Session. ^ Throw the blame upon the Extractor. ^ Not dreed (suffered),

but feared or dreaded. Letters of Lawliurrows ajtpear, l)y the Record, to have been granted against
these parties, which were afterwards deleted as ' pail fra be fe Lord of Games.' * See Jul. 13

and 29, and Aug. 14.

134 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

The Juftice, in oiu- foiierane lordis name, acceptit the pannell (and other under named) in his hienes will for the crymes aboue writtin ; and Oi-denit
tharae to pafs in waird to thair ludgeingis within this burch of Edinbm-gh, and
to remain thaii-in quhill thay be fred be his Maieftie : And to that effect, to find
caiitioiuie to keip thair foid waird, ay and qidiill fufficient cautioun be fundin be
thame that thay fall fatisfie his Maiefteis will to be declarit.

James Ogilvie of Balfom'e becomes pledge and fouertie for James Maifter of
Ogiluie, &c., as above, ' vnder the pane of Fyve thowfand poundis.' Sir Jolmne
Ogilvie of Innerquharratie kny', becomes pledge and Ibuirtie for Mi Dauid O.,
Frances O., brether to James I\r of O., and Johnne Barclay, that thay fall compeir befoir our fouerane lordis Juftice or his deputis, the thryd day of the nixt
Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Forfar, or foner quhen or quhair it fall pleis our
fouerane Lord, vpoun xv dayis warning, &c.

^IjootiiTs of ?i?a(j6i!ts aiiK ^tstoUts — ?^uvtins nnti WLomtimQ,

Jul. 26. — JopixxE Ogilvie, callit Reid-Johiine, Alexander Ogilvie,
callit UlalSanclie, James Ogilvie of Boigfyde, Johnne Barclay fone to George Barclay of the fyde, and Johnne Lyoiine,
feruand to the Maifter Ogilvie.
Dilatit of bering, wering and fchuting of hagbutis and piftolettis ; and for
hurting of Alexander Lord Spynie, &c.

The parteis ' became in will ;' and found caution, as in the former cafe.

Si)itJiiTS horn tl)t 3Ka:tl ot J3umfi't(s.

Jul. 29. — George Kexxedie of Glenmuk,

Dilatit for abyding fra th.e Raid of Dumfreis, quhilk was conveuit with Williame Erie of Angus, Lord Dowglas, and Lieutemiant, in the moneth of September laftbypaft.

The pannel become in our fouerane lordis will thairfore. And thaireftir the
faid George jiroduceit his RIaiefteis will ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Claik and jour deputies, We greit 50W weill. Tliat nochtwitliftanding
George Kennedie of Glenmuk obtenit cure Licence, with certane v])', for fe caus followinir, ;it he is
to entir on pannell before 30W, in our Tolbuith of Edinburghe, the xxix day of Julij iuftant, in pe ho.iilof caus, and is to be perfewit be our traift coufing and counftdour Alex"^ INIaifler of Eipliiuftoun, our
Thefauror, and Mr Tiionias Ilauiniiltoun of Druincarne, our aduocat, for abyding fra our Raid of
Druuifrei*, liaul(Hn be cur rycht traid coufing and counfalour Williame Erie of Angus, in Jie moneth
of September laftbypafl ; and at fe faid dayis contentit to cum in our will for ]ie faid crynie. Thairfore 3e fall, incontinent cftir Jie fycht licirof, rcllaue the faid George Kennedie in our will ; and proniince and dedair this to be our will, as followis ; That the faid George, before he pas aif pannell, con34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 135

tent and pay to our Thefaurer the fownie of ane liundreth poundis ; and that in full fatlsfactioune of
our will, for his abyding fra the faid Raid ; and forder pronunce and declaii-, that the faid George Kennedy falbe reniittit and forgewin of all vji' pane and penaltie that we may lay to liis charge, in tyme
cuming, for abyding fra ]>e faid Raid ; and that he be nawyis callit, trublit, moleftit norperfewit for pe
famin, in tyme cuming; nochtwithftanding of ony v]>' Warrand that may be direct in Jie contrar heirof : And cans thir prefentis be regiftrat in our buikis of Adiornall for the faid Georgeis better fecuritie.
Subfcryuit with our hand, At Lynly', the xxviij day of Julij 1600 5eins.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The Jiiftice, with aiiife of the Thefaurer, coiitinewit the mater to the morne,
quhill the Thefaurer wer auifit with the blank conteuit in the faid Letter.

^fjootdts ijotti) Hfeatj^juts nuti IJistoUts — J^Iaufjljtcr.

Juh 29. — Alexander Lord of Spynie,' Sir Johnne Lyndefay of Ballinfcho, (Wodheid knycht,) Alexander Lyndefay of Faifdew,

(Fefdow,) Harie and Gilbert Rind (fonis to Williame Rind, of

Kerfe,) Harie Lyndefay, lifter fone to the Laird of Pitcarlie,

(fervitour to the faid nobill Lord,) Andro Brydie, Mr Patrik

Lyndefay, Dauid Balfour, brother to Burlie, James Lyn, Preift,

Dauid Lyndefay, father brother to the Laird of Blariefedden,

Alexander Lyndefay at the niyll of Fynevin, Dauid Gardin of

Leis, and Harie Lyndefay of Blariefedden.

Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in bering, weiring and

fchuting with Hagbutis and Piftolettis : And for art and part of the Slauchteris

of vmq'" Lowrence Bvirne and James Irnis, feruitouris to the Maifter of Ogilvie

and Sir Johnne Ogilvie.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune (of Drumcairne, aduocat to our foiierane lord.)
Preloouutouris for the pannell, Mr Johnne Scharpe, Mr Alex' King, and Mr Thomas Wilfounc.

The Lord of Spynie produceit the Kingis Warrand, vnder^'rittin, defyring the
famyn to be admittit ; and declarit that he and the perfonis on pannell vald

abyde thairat ; quhairof the tennour followis.
Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and jOur deputis. We greit 50W weill. Forfamekill as, vpoun ]>«
xvij day of Jiis inftaut, Alex' Lord of Spynie and certane his compliceis and Jiair eautioneris wer adiudgeit and decernit in certane panis and vnlavvis, for pair nocht entrie and comperance before 50W,
our faid Jufliee and 3 our deputis, to half vnderlyne our lawis, for certane crymes i'pecifeit and contenit in ])e Criminale Icttres rafit jiairfpoun : Nochtwithftanding, ftbr certane caufiis moving ws, It is
our will, and we command 30W to difcharge thefaidis vnlawis, and deleit the Actis furth of our buikis
of Adiornall, quhairby tliay wer decernit in the faidis vnlawis, fwa that na executioun follow fairvpoune
hcireftir : And that ■:;e tak new cautioun of Jie faid Lord and his compliceis, that thay fall conipeir before 50W, our faid Jullice, and 3 our deputis, vpoun ])e xxix day of Jiis inftant, and vnderly our lawis
for ])e crymes fpecifeit in our faidis lettres: And that thay fall renunce all exceptioun of nocht lauch-

' See Jul. 15 and 25, and Aug. 14.

136 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

full cltatioune, Tpoune fyftene dayis warning ; Ava that, in caife of ])air nocht comperance, thay may
allVeill be tlenunceit to our home as thair cautiouneris vnlawit, in refpect of pis our favour now
fchawin vnto fame : As 50 will anfuer to ws pairvpoun: Quliairanent thir prelentis lalbe 30ur Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, Att Halyrudhous, the xviij day of Julij 1600 3eiris.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Comperit Alex' Lord of Spynie, Sir John Lyiidelayof Wodliead,knycht, &c.,
quha denyit expreflie that poynt of the fummondis anent the fchuting, bering
and wering of hagbutis and piftolettis in maner lybellit, and offerit to abyde
tryell thairanent : And in lafar as the fummondis may appeir onye cryme, anent
the llauchter of vmq''' Lowrence Burne and James Irnis, vpoune the fourt day
of Marche laft, declarit and affermit that quhat ever fell out thairanent, was in
thair maift juft and lauchfull defence ; as is manifeft be the Confeffioune of
partie and act of Adiornall maid thairanent, vpoiin the xxv day of Julij inftant,
be James Maifter of Ogilvie, Sir Johnne Ogilvie of Craig, and thair compliceis,
than comperand on pannell ; quha being convenit, adiornayit at the inftance of
his hienes aduocat for his Maiefteis interes vpoune the faid xxv day of Julij inftant in this Jugement, lying await for the faid nobill Lord, his kyn and freindis,
for tliair Slauchter and vmbefetting of thair hie-way befide the place of the
Leyis, as thay war rydand furth the way, in ibber and quyet maner ; the faid
Maifter, Sir Johnne and thair compliceis, vndei'ftanding be thair Ipyis and
watcheis, that the laid nobill Lord was to cum furth of his duelling place of
Kinbrakmouth to the Place of Gairdyn ; the faid Maifter, Sir Johnne Ogilvie
and thair compliceis, vpoime fet purpois, provifioune and foirthoclit fellonye, addreft thame felffis, in amies and wappynnis invafuie, with hagbuttis, piftulettis,
jakis, fecreittis, fteilbonettis, gauntilettis, lance-ftaffis and vtheris, to the nowmer
of ... . perlbnis or mae ; and tliair fchot, thair hagbuttis and piftulettis at the
laid nobill Lord, his kyn, freindis and lerwaiulis, being in cumpany with him,
liurt and deidlie woundit the laid nobill lord in tlie held, and left him lyand for
deid ; and crewallie, with thair hagbuttis and piftolettis, fchot vmq'° Patrik Rynd
his ferwand throw the bodie to the deid, vpoune the fourt day of Marche laftbypaft ; as in the fummondis perfewit thairanent and act of Adiornall maid thairvpoune, at lenth is contenit. And trew it is, that James Maifter of Ogilvie, Sir
Johne Ogilvie of Craig and thair compliceis, panuellit, compei'and perfoualie
vpoune the faid xxv day of Julij inftant, become in his Maiefteis will for the
faidis haill crymes and poyntis of the laidis Summondis, be Act of this Court,
as the famin beris ; and thairby hes confeffit and affermit the famyn crymes,
Slauchter, fchuting of piftolettis to that effect, invalioune, perfuit, lying await
and vmbefetting of the laid Nobill Lord, his kyn, freindis and company, in Jiis
hie-way and paflTage frome his a\\in hous, rydand thairfra in fober and quyet

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 137

maner, as faid is ; quliaii'bye it is evident, that quhatever fell out be occafioune
foirfaid, on the pairt of the faid nobill Lox-d, was in his awin maift juft and lawfull defence, and remanent on pannell, his freindis and cumpany ; as is expreflie
affennit be the faid Act of Adiornal and ConfefRoune of pairtie thairanent. The
quhilk Act of Adiornall and fumrnondis quhairvpoune the famyn procedit, with
the haill poyntis and me nl eris thairof, the faid nobill Lord and remanent perfonis on pannell repeittis, &c. ; and yit, infafar as the faid fumrnondis now perfewit may appeir to import ony cryme for the flauchteris foirfaidis, the faid nobill Lord, &c. declarit that thay vald nawyis enter in proces with his Maieflie
or his hienes aduocat for the famyn flauchteris, infafar as his hienes may half
actioune compitent thairfoir, in thair contrair ; bot ofFerit thame in his graces
will for the famin Sla- chteris, committit in thair defence, as faid is ; protefting,
that this thair offer or becuming in will for the faid flauchteris, for his hienes
intei'es, as faid is, fall nawyis be preiudiciall to thame or ony of thame, anent
quhatfumeuir actioun or exceptioune compitent to thame, or ather of thame,
aganis quhatfumever perfoune or perfonis haifand interes to perfew for the famyn
Slauchteris, as accordis of the law : Quhairvpoune the faid nobill Lord and remanent perfonis on pannell aflvit actis and documentis.

The Aduocat aflvit actis and inflrumentis, that the faid Alex' Lord of Spynie,
&c. becom in will, as faid is.

The famin day, Alexander Mailler of Elphingfloune produceit HIS MaiesTEis Will, towards my Lord of Spynie ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 30ur deputtis, We greit 50W weill. Foifamekill as Alexander
Lord of Spynie, Sir Joline Lyndefay of Wodlieid, knydit, Dauid Gairdyn, Ilarie and Gilbert Hindis,
Dauid Balfoure, Dauid Lyndefay, Harie Lyndefay feruitoiir to tlie faid nobill Lord, Alexander Lyndefay of Faifdow, ar becuni in our will, ifor tlie flauchter of certane our fubiectis, committit be fame in
the Conflict, qubilk liappynnit and fell out betuix fame, and James M' of Ogilvie and pair complices;
howewir the fame be allegeit to baif bene committit in fair awin defence. Thairfoir it is oure will, and
We command and ordane, that the faid Lord of Spynie, for him felff, and takaiid the burding on him for
his faid brother and remanent complices foirfaid, fall remane and keip waird in his ludgeing, within our
burch of Edinburghe ; and on nawyis remove faiifra, quhill We declair our will towardis fame ; vnder
the pane of Fyve thowfand pundis : As alfwa that he, for him felff, and takand fe burding on him as
faid is, fall fatisGe and fulfill our will to he declarit as faid is, vnder the faid pane. And that je caufe
pronunce fis our will and pleafour aganis the faid Lord and his complices iudiciallie ; and mak ana
act fairvpoune: Quhairanent fir prefentis fallbe 50ur warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand at Lynlytliqw, the .... day of Julij, 1600 ^eiris. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

According to the quhilk, the Juflice Ordanit, &c. Harie Lyndefay of Kynfawnis become plege and fouerte for Alexander Lord of Spynie, &c. vnder the
faid jiane.

Harie Lyndefay of Blariefedden, ]\Ir Patrik Lyndefay, Alexander Lyndefay
VOL. II. s

138 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

at FjTinevin-mylne, James Lyn and Andro Biydie, tuke inftnimentis of thair
comperance, and that they offerit thame reddie to abyde the tryell of ane AfTyis
of the crymes contenit in the lettres produceit aganis thame. Whereupon the
Juftice continued the matter to the Juftice-air of ' Forfar, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione xv dierum.' Alexander Lord of Spynie, becomes ' plege and
fouerte' for their entry.

[Mr Williame Hairt, Juftice-Depute.
AssEssouRis, IMr Edward Bnice and Jolme G . . . ftoune.]

dfirc-rnisincr— Igoiisl^ing of Cattle —iHuftfci* — Cf)eft— iUsettiits

iUtJtUs, ^r.

Jul. 29. — JoHNXE RoiSE of Ballivot.

Dilatit of the Burning of the (duelling hous of) Clunie, pertening to George
Dunbar thair ; And for the thefteous Steling of the faid George Dunbaris haill
infycht and j)leineiffing (guidis and geir, to the valour of) twa thowfand markis
worth, ten horfis, threfcoir nolt ; And for Hoching of xviij oxin and ky pertening to the faid George : — Item, for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Robert Roife, (fone to Dauid Rofe of Lyne) : — I/em, for the Murthour of Huchfoune
Roife in Logy : And for reflett of Dauid ( M' Williame) Roife Williamfoune and
vtheris, rebellis at the home, for the thift abouewrittin : And for Comraoun
Thift ; as at lenth is contenit in the dittay.

The Juftice-Depute produceit the "Warrand vnderwrittin.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 30ur deputLs, We greit 30W Weill. It is cure will, and We
command 50W, that according to our former directioune, 36 put Johnne Rois of Balliwot to tbe tryell
of ane Affyis, the morne, the xxix day of July inftant, for fik crymes as be is dilatit and fufpect gyltie
of ; and befoir bis putting to the fame tryell of ane AfTyis, that 36 reaxarainat him vpoime Lis faul and
confcience,' for tbe better clering of the treutb of fik thingis as war inquyrit of him of befoir : As ^e
will anfuer to ws vpoune 5 our offices and obedience: Quliairanent fir prefentis falbe 3 our Warrand.
Subfcryuit with our hand, At Lynlythqw, the xxviij of July, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarn, aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Preloquutouris for Mr Johnne Roife.

The Laird of Ballingoune, Tbe Barroun of Kilraik,' Mr Johne RufTell, Mr Williame Oliphant.

The famin day, the Aduocat tuik inftrumentis, that Johnne Roife declarit that
he wald abyde the tryell of Aflyfe. Thaireftir, he declarit that he wald vfe his
Aduocatis counfal and aduife.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis, that Mr Johnne Ruflell declarit that this gentilmaii wes niifufit be tortour aganis the Law.

' It appears that the torture was used in this case, ' be my Lord Juftice, att bis Maiefteis directioune.' See Objections against T/ie Laird of Duffous, p. 144. * William Roife of Kilravock.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 139

Allegeis that Mr Edwai'd Bruce can noclit be Judge nor AflefTour, becaus the
Chantour of Murray and Deane and fubdeane, quha ar of kyn to the faid Mr
Edward Bruce, hes bene dilatouris and accuffaris and informeris in this eaus ;
and fwa he can nocht be Judge nor Afleflbur. — Tlie Aduocat anfueris, that this
exceptioun can nocht be hard aganis my Lord of Kinlofs/ albeit it niycht be
aganis the proceis thame felffis.

The Deane of Murray being demandit and inquyrit, gif he has gewin counfall
aganis Johnne Roife, denyit the faniin. Robert Dunbar, being fworne, denyit
that he ewir gaif counfall in perluit of Johnne Roife ; and declarit (he) affiftit
the Sheref of Mui'ray in executioiui of the Kingis ComniifRoune in taking of
Johnne Roife, and wes his freind, and faulfit his lyffe. — The faid Mr Johne Ruffell takis inftrumentis of the faid Robert Dunbaris declaratioune.

AUedgeis Johnne Roife, that he can nocht be put to the knawledge of ane
AfTyis for Thift, Slauchter or Murthour, quhill" he be fummond vpoun fyftene
dayes wairning, and foner haif ane copie of the Dittay. — The aduocat anfueris,
that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the daylie practik of this
hous, that perfounes tane be vertew of his Maiefteis Conimiffioun and putt in
waird, may be bi'ocht fra the waird to tlie pannell,^ and putt to ane Allyis but*
ony citatioun or delay : And it is of vei'itie, that this defender wes tane, be vertew of his hienes Commiffioun, in the moneth of Apryll laftbypaft, and hes bene
detenit in waird continewallie fenfyne, and hes bene diuers tymes examinat
vpoun the crymis contenit in his Dittay, as is knawin to my Lord Juftice. — It
is duplyit be the pannell, that tlie jiropofitioun contenit in the faid argument
reflaues* ane diftinctioune, viz. parteis committit to waird be the Kingis Comraiffioune, for ane cryme done aganis his hienes, may, without ony citatioun, be
prefentit in judgement ; bot be the contrar in delictis priMafia betuix jiartie and
partie, fie as thift, relTett of thift, llauchter and murthour, as the partie aduei'far
is purchefler of his Commiflioun priuatlie, vpoun his awin information, he can
nawyis wyn that vantage, that fummerlie, without dittay or copie thairof delyuerit, or lauchfuU citatioime, he fall be funimarlie be put to ane AfTyis, as i$
in this caife : Swa that the Kingis Commifliounis ar of diuers natoiu'is ; fum
gewin be his Maieftie without fute or informatioun of partie, vtheris gewin be
informatioun. As to the nixt poynt, that he wes tane be Commiffioun, thair is
na Commiffioune fchawin ; et rite omnia, it is defyrit to be fchawin, that the
partie may obiect aganis it.

Thaireftir, the pannell refwmit the argument aboue writtin, for tlie RelTett of

' Mr Edward Bruce was Commendator of the Abbary of Kiiiloss, and Iiy courtesy, termed ' INIy
Lord of Kinlofs.' ^ Until. ^ From imprisonment to the bar of the Court. * Without.

' Receives, admits of.

140 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Dauid Roife and vtheris contenit in the Diftay, att the home, for Fyre-rafing
and thift. It is alledgeit, that as tuiching that pairt of the dittay concerning the
ffyre-rafing, I fould nocht be put to ane AflTyis ; becaus ffyre-rafing is ather dilidiim puhlicum or priuatum ; gif it be priuafum, I fould be fummond vpoune
fyftene dayes wairning ; gif it be ])ublicut>i, I fould be fummond vpoun fourtie
dayis wairning, quhilk is nocht done. — The Aduocat repetis his former anfuer,
with the practikis of Arkinglas, tane in this toun, prefentit on pannell ; Robert

Quhippo, for tliift ; Rauff Wallace, for fals cuin3ie ; Pacok, for the

(lauchter of vmq'' Hary Colvile, and diners vtheris. As to that pairt of the allegance, that Thift, Murthour and flauchter, and RefTett of thift, quhilk ar capitall crymes, ar jyriuafa delicta, he makis na anluer ; becaule it is ignorantia
juris to call thame priuata delicta. — To the qidiilk it is anfuerit be the pannell,
that as to the particuler practikis nominat, thair is na thing produceit ; and
aganis the famin practikis, thir particuler practikis ar alledgeit : The perfuit
movit be the Laird of Cwninghameheid and the Bairnis of the Laird of Waterftoun, aganis Dauid \yylie ; in lykemaner, the perfuit movit be the freindis of
vmq'^ Coronall Preftoune, aganis Maidland alias Broune ; in the quhilkis, it wes
fund be the Juftice, that nochtwithftanding thay wer tane, thay audit to half
had fyftene dayes wairning. As to the nixt argument, tuiching delictis priuatis,
repetis his former anfuer.

It is alledgeit, that Johnne Roife of Ballivot can nocht be put to the knawledge
of ane AflTyis for the Slauchter and Murthour of Huchfoune Roife, becaus that
in the moneth of December, 1588 yeiris, he wes acquit lauchfullie be Aflyile of
the faid cryme ; as the Teftimoniall of the dait, the tliryd of December, vnder
the feillis and fubrcri])tiounis of Lauchlan Angus M'intofch in Termit, Jolmne
Cuthbert in New Caftelhill, burges of Inuernes, &c., and fubfcryuit be Johnne
Dimbar, Johnne Wilfoune, Alexander Gaderar, notaris and clarkis.

Iteji, It is alledgeit, that the Slauchter of Robert Roife fould nocht be put to
ane AiTyis, becaus it wes done in the defence of his lyffe, in his awin hous, quhair
he wes aflageit be xxiiij perfounes, for recovering of ane Decreit of Removing.

Item, As to the Reflett of rebellis, he can nocht be put to ane AfTyfe, becaus
thair is na thing produceit to teftifie thame to be at the home. Secundo, gif it
wer produceit, iion eji crimen capitale.

As for George Dunbaris thift of Clwnie, and for Reffett of thift, hochinf of
oxin, and for the Fyre'

As to the generall, for Commoun-thift and Reffett of thift, it is fa generall
that it fould nocht be put to ane Affyife.

Anfueris the Aduocat, to the Teftimoniall of the clangeing produceit, that the
' A blank is left for filling up the plea of law.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 141

famia can nocht flay jiroces, becaus the cryme being trefTonabill, for the Slauchter of Huchfoun Roife vnder traift, the famin could nawyis be perfewit, bot ather
at the inftance of the kyn and freindis of the defunct for thair interes, or of the
Aduocat for his interes ; and fwa this Teftimoniall, nocht proceding vpoun fie perfute, is null. As to the secimd, anent the Slauchter of Robert Roife, that the famin
fould be repellit, be refloun the defender produceis nocht his decreitis and lettres,
quhairby he wald allege the fact to ha jure factum ; and the allegance can nocht
flay the mater fra ane Aflyfe. As to the tlirijd, anent the reffett of rebellis, contenit
in the dittay, (it) audit to be repellit, in refpect of his hienes CommifRoun, gewin,
for taking of the defender and his faidis compliceis, as denunceit rebellis, for the
faidis crymes ; lyke as, Lauchlan Roife in Leanwi-adich, being rebell, and tane with
the defender furth of his hous, wes fenfyne juit to the knawledge of ane AflTyife,
and wes convict and execut for the faidis crymes. The Aduocat lykewyis takis
inftrumentis, that pannell refufit to abyde ane AflTyis for Commoim Thift and Reffett of Thift ; quhilk ar relevant crymis, being fubioynit to ane particuler Dittay.
To the quhilk, it is anfuerit fchortlie, fyrjl, as tuiching tlie Teftimoniall anent
the Murthour of Iluichfoun Rois, albeit it be fett doune in the Dittay to be treffonabill, he remittis the famin to the confideratioun of the Juftice. The secuncl
pairt of the argument alledgeit be the Aduocat, aucht to be repellit ; in refpect
of the Teftimoniall produceit. As to the nixt, tuiching the Slauchter of Robert
Roife, the excipient declaris, that he proponis that the famin may be coniunctlie
difcuffit, be the AfTyfe, with the Dittay. As to the thiyd poynt, confidering the
Reflet of rebellis, allegis, na thing produceit to verifie the rebellis.

Interlocutor of the Jujllce-Djpute.

The Justice Findis, tliat Johnne Roife of Ballivot falbe putt to the knawledge of ane Affyis, for
the Burning of the Clwne, and for the fleilling of George Dunbaris guidis, and hoching of the oxin.
The Jullice ffindis na proces aganis the faid Johnne Roile for the Murthour of Hucliefoun Roife, in
refpect of the Teftimoniall produceit, teftifeing him to be acquit. Findis, that Johnne Roife fould
nocht be putt to ane Aflyfe, for the Slauchter of Robert Roife, quhill he be fumraond vpoun fyftene
dayes wairning, except he wer alt the home for the (iiid flauchter. The Juftice Ordanis the Horning
(to) be produceit, quhairin Dauid M'^Williame and his compliceis wer at the home, for the Burning
of Clwne and Thift, or (before) he be put to ane AlFyfe for the Reflljtt of thame. Ordauis Commoune
Thift to be put to ane Aflyfe, in refpect of the particuler Thift put to ane Affyfe.

The Aduocatt takis inftrumentis of the Interloquutour. Allegis the aduocat,
that Johnne Roife wes chargeit of befoir vpoun fyftene dayes wairning, for tlie
Slauchter of vmq'" Robert Roife, and produceit the lettres quhairby he wes chargeit ; and fwa he can nocht pretend ignorance that he wes wairnit vpoun fyftene
dayes wairning. — It is alledgeit be Johnne Roife, that he wes nocht fummond,
att the leift lauchfullie fummond ; becaus he is nocht fummond att his duelling,
and na duelling hous defignit ; and secuiidlie, it is allegeit, that the charge makis

142 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

na mentioun that he knokit fax knokis. — The Adiiocat alledgis, that he wes
laiichfullie fiimmond, as the executioun beris ; and ana copie affixt bayth att his
duelling and att the mercat croce.

The Aduocat produceit ane Hoirning aganis Dauid IVPWilliame Roife and
Lauchlan Roife and vtheris, quhome Johne Roife reflett. — (Johne Roife) alledgis,
that the Horning is null, becaus the perfonis quha ar fmnmond and alledgeit
to be att the home are nocht chargeit vpoune fourtie dayes. — It is anfiierit be
the Aduocat, that the Horning is lauchfull, becaus thay ar lauchfuUie put to the
borne for thift and hoching of oxin.

The faid Mr Johnne Rulfell alledgeit for Johnne Roife, before Interloquutour,
that he can nocht be putt to ane Affyfe for RefTett of rebellis ; becaus he is nocht
fummond Apoune fyftene dayes wairning thairfore ; and wes nocht fumniond for
Reifett of rebellis of befoir. It is alledgeit forder, that the Horning quhairby
the rebellis is putt to the home, quhom for, and for quhais reflett he is to be put
to ane Aflyis, is null ; becaus it is nocht regiftrat conforme to the Act of Parliament, in prefens of ane Notar and foure witneflis. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that Johnne Roife can nocht be hard to obiect aganis the Homing, becaus
the defender, be the famin Lettres, is chargeit to find cautioun, and for difobedience is denunceit and tane for the famin cryme, be vertew of ane Conimiflioune
rafit vpoun the faidis lettres. — The aduocat addis forder, that the hoirning is
fufficient, becaus the perfoun att the borne is lauchfullie denunceit.

The Justice continewis Interloquutour till the morne ; and wairnit the Affyfe to compeir the morne
att tuell houiis.

Jul. 30. — The Aduocat paflis fra that pairt of the dyttay, concerning the

Reflett of Dauid ]\PWilliame Roife, rebell, and vtheris his complicis, pro loco et

tempore : Quhair\-poun the defender aflcit infl:runientis.

It is alledgeit for Johnne Roife of Ballivot, that tuiching of that point of the

dittay, concerning Robert Roife, the defender aucht nawyis to be put (to) ane

AflTyfe ; becaus he is nocht chargeit -vpoun fyftene dayes wairning ; and infafar

as it is alledgeit that thair wes ane anteriour citatioun vfit aganis him for the

faid cryme, the famin is nocht lauchfull ; feing it is euident, be tlie executiounis,

that he is nather chargeit perfonallie, nor att his duelling place, conforme to the

Act of Parliament ; and infafar as thar is mentioun maid of ane duelling place,

trew it is, the famin is nocht defignit ; it being of veritie, that the tyme of the

charge, and diners monethis ofbefoir, and diners monethis thaireftir, he duelt

with his hous and famelie in his place of Slenes and duelling lious of Name, att

the quhilkis, and nather of thame, he is nocht chargeit : And gewand' that the

executioun mycht refpect the place of Ballivot, quhair he is alledgeit to be char-

' Giving, or granting, for the sake of argumeut.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 143

geit, yit it can nocht fuftene the executioun ; becaiis he oflferis him to preve, be
witnes att the bar, that he duelt att his duelling place of Name, the tyme of the
charge, diueris monethis of before, and diueris monethis fenfyne : And nocht
only is the duelling jilace nocht defignit, hot thair is na mentioun of knoking,
conforme to the Act of Parliament. It is forder alledgeit, that the partie enterit
on pannell wes nocht tane for this cryme, viz. for the flauchter of Robert Roife,
bot be vertevv of ane Commiffioune ; quhilk Commiffioune procedit vpoun ane
Hoirning ; quhilk Hoirning is null, and confequentlie the Commiffioun fallis. It
is forder allegeit be the faid Johnne Roife, that na proces can be deduceit in this
mater, without the Commiffioun and Hoirning be produceit.

The Justice ffindig, that the faid Robert (Johnne) Roife falbe put to the knawledge of ane Affyis for
the Slauchter of Robert Roife, nochtwithftanding of the alledgeances proponit be the faid Johnne Roife.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the Interloquutour.
Objections agahijl the Ajjije?

It is allegeit aganis the Laird of Duffous, ^William Sutherland,] that he can nocht pas vpoun tlie

Affyis of Johne Roife, becaus lie is thrydis and ferdis^ of kyn with Dumbar, ilieref of

Murray ; quhilii ilieref of Murray hes behavit him felfF as expres partie aganis tlie faid Johnne in this
perfute ; fyrft, in caufeing of him to be tane and apprehendit in tlie moneth of May laflbypall ; nixt, in
purcheffing of ane Commiffioun for his apprehenfioun, and executing of the famin, be l)im felfF, his
freindis and aflifteris ; caufing of him to be brought to Edinburglie, and thairefter tranfporting of him
out of Edinburghe to Foires ; patt him in irnis thair ; brocht him bak in irnis ; purcheft warrandis to
that effect ; hes gewin informatioun to liis Maiefleis Aduocat ; hes folifcit and procureit in this caus ;
the perfounes of Inqueift. gewin vp be him ; and fra the beginning, hes behavit him felff as partie ; procureit fra his Maieftie Warrandis to tortour him ; and efiir the taking of liim, hes brant his bigingis
and his houflis, within fyftene dayes eftir the taking of him ; and hes brunt his victuall, writtis and
euidentis, being thairin ; haifing nather Commiffioune, fyrll nor lall, for doing of ony of the premiffis ;
and be him felff and his feraandis, freindis and affifteris, fpeciallie Dauid Dumbar of Daldork, Williame Dumbar of Entirkyne, Patrik Dumbar, ilieref-depute of Elgyn and fforres ; quha comperis perfonalie, and informis the Aduocat, quhilk he can nocht deny vpoun his confcience, hes perfewit this
excipient with all regour.

And forder, Johnne Dumbar younger of Craichla, being requeiflit be the Sheref Murray to pas
vpoun this Affyis, hes purcheft Licence fra him to pafs hame : And as to the Commiffioune, the famin wes grantit to Johnne Dumbar of Moynes, quiiilk procedeit vpoun ane reafoun of Horning
quhilk is null ; and fwa, fra the beginning all is null, and confequentlie the Sheref Murray maun be
eftemit ane profeft partie, but (^ivithout) ony Warrand. — The Aduocat anfueris, that the alledgance is
nocht relevant, ffor quhatewir the Sheref Murray did in this mater, haifand the Warrand of his Maiefteis Commiffioune and directioune, as is notour to my Lord Juftice, the executioune thairof tending
only to Juftice, can import na declinatour aganis him felff, mekill les aganis his kynnifman, aganis
quhome tliair is na relevant alledgeance maid, ather of feid or partiall counfall. — To the quhilk it is
anfuerit, ffyrft, that thair is na Warrand produceit ; nixt, he had na Warrand ather to burne houffis,
nor to tak and apprehend the partie ; bot fpeciallie, for burning of the hous efilr the partie wes apIt has been thought of importance to preserve these curious objections at length. They strongly illustrate the
remarkable state of the manners and customs of this District of Scotland at this period ; and besides, show the practice of tlie Court, in such matters, in a very striking manner. ' Within the third and foui'th degi'ees of kiu,
or relationship. This was a statutory disability, and very frequently pleaded.

144 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

preliendit ; ffar les had he ony Warrand to gif vp ane AfTyis, to gif vp dittay, to crave ane toitour, or
to do ony of tlie particuler deidis eontenit in the former alledgaiice : And quhen ewir ony panie ingyues liim felflf willinglie, in that quhilk nawyis appertenis to his office, lie man he efteniit as partie.
And forder, tlie notorietie of this alledgeance is remittit to my Lord Juftice, that the Sheref Murray,
be him feltt" and iiis freindis, lies delt with his Majeflie, the Officeris of Eftait, the Lordis of Secreit
Counfall, in preiudice of this partie, for away-taking of his lyffe. And laft, quhatfumewir Commiffioune can bepretendit, ather in his name, or in the perfoun of the Laird of Moynes, is alreddie fallin,
and ran be na Warrand ather to the ane partie or the vther ; bccaus it procedit vpoun ane Horning,
quhilk is alreddie null. And fwa, all that lie hes done, is done but (^without) ane Warrand, and coufequentlie, man be eftemit to be done be him as ane partie. Attoure,' it is of veritie, that the Sheref
ISIurray, without ony Warrand, efter he had brunt the hous of Ballivot, quhilk wes eftir the taking of
the laid Johnne Koife be the fpace of fyftene dayes, violentlie, att his awin hand, tuik Johnne Roife
eldeft lone, and apperand to Johnne Roile of Ballivot, coultitute him prcibner and captiue, quhill'
thaireftir he wes compellit to find cautioune for his releif.

It is forder alledgeit, that the laid Laird of DufFous can nocht pafs vpoun the faid Johne Rofles
Aflyfe, becaus thair is deidlie feid' ilandand vnrecounfalit, betuix the Sheref Murray, his kyn and
freindis on the ane pairt, and the faid Johne Roife, his kyn and freindis on the vther pairt ; nocht only
for the caulfis foirfaid, hot alfwa for the burning of the hous of Ballivot, and taking of his eldeft fone ;
with the quhilk Sheref Murray, the Laird of Duffous is Ilandand in confanguinitie, in nianer foirfaid.
It is forder alledgeit aganis the faid Laird of Duftbus, that he can nocht pafs vpoun the faid Johne
Roffis Aflyfe, becaus ane of the fpeciall pointis quhairfore the faid Johne Role wes tortorit, wes for
the burning of the coirnis of James Sutherland, brother to the Laird of Duffous ; in refpect quhairof,
the faid Laird of Duft'ous can nocht palle vpoune his Alfyis, feing the tortoring of him for the caus
foirfaid importis ane deidlie feid. — The Aduocat repetis his fyrft anfuer, eikand. That the inquefitioun
of the burning of James Sutherlandis coirnis att Johne Rois, in his tortour be my Lord Jultice, att his
Maiefteis directioune, can import na feid aganis the Laird of Duffous.

Forder, it is alledgeit, that quhen the Sberelf Murray fould half put Johne Roife to ane Aflyis in
Forresj the faid Laird of Duffous came, as partie, with the SherefiF to ingyue him felfif ^ vpoun his
Affyfe.

The Laird of Dvffous, being fworne, declarit that he cam to Forrefe, be command of the Kingis
Maiefteis Letter, and as funimond vpoun his Aifyis, and nocht to perfew the faid Johnne Roife.

It is forder alledgeit be the faid Johne Roife, that the Laird of Duifous can nocht pafs vpoun his
AfTyis, becaus tiiair is deidlie feid Ilandand betuix the Sheref Munay, his kyn and freindis on the ane
pairt, and Johne Roife of Ballivot, his kyn and freindis on the vther pairt, for the cvewall flauchter of
vmq'e Allefter Roife, quha wes flayne be the Sheref Murray his kyn and freindis, in the moneth of
Maij ; quhilk vmq'^ Allefler Roife and Johne Roife ar blether bairnis: And repetis the kyn'^ betuix
the Laird of Duflbus and the Sheref of Murray. In lyke maner, thair is deidlie feid Ilandand vnrecounfalit, betuix the Laird of Duffous, his kyn and freindis on the ane pairt, and the faid Johne Roife,
his kyn and freindis on the vther pairt, ft'or the crewall Slauchter committitbe George Roife, quha is fecimd and thrydis of kyn with the faid Johne ; quhilk George Roife Hew Johnne Stewart, feruand to
James Sutherland, brother to the Laird of Duftbus. — The Aduocat anl'ueris, that the llauchter of Allefter Roife can import na feid, becaus he wes put to the tryell of ane Alfyfe, and ordourlie convict
for Thift, and execute to the deid. As to the fecund, anent the flauchter of Johne Stewart, it is nocht
relevant, except Johne Roife wald alledge, that the Laird of Duffous wes pairt-taker of that feid.
Anfueris the pannell to the fyrft, that the alledgance ftandis relevant, except my Lord Aduocat wald

* Moreover, besides. * Until. ^ Deadly ft-nd, * To ofFor him&elf voluiiturilj', a^ :m ' ultroniuus

witness,' without lawful citation to that effect. '' Details tlie relatiouslii]).

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 145

inftantlie verifie be writt, be quhat authoritie the faid vmq'* AUefter wes put to ane Aflyfe, and att
quhat inftance, and for quhat caus. — The Aduocat takia inllnimentis that the I'arroun of Kilraik declarit Allefter Rois to half bene heidit. — As to the nixt argument alledgeit be tlie aduocat, berand, that
alledgance of the flauchter of Johne Stewart is noclit relevant^ &c. ; it is anluerit for Johne Roife, that
the (lauchter of Johne Stewart, quha wes feruitour to James Sutherland, brother to the Laird of Duffous, committit be George Rofe, inakis him and his haill freindis to be pairt-takeris of the deidlie feid.
Alledgis, that AlexaiiderYouug burges of Elgyn., can nocht pals vpoun the AlFyie of Johne Roiie,
becaus he is noclit ane landit man ; Secundlie, he is feruand to the Laird of Duftbus : Quhilk the
Laird confefl. — The Aduocat allegis nocht relevant, becaus ane burges may be a peir to ane landit
man, nocht being ane barroune.

It is alledgeit, that James Hiithirfurd hurges of Elgyn, can nocht pafs vpoun the faid Johnis Affyfe, becaus he is fifter fone to the Laird of Tarbet, quha is vnder deidlie feid with Johne Roil'e for the
flauchter of vmq''' Allefter Roife. — The Aduocat alledgis, nocht relevant, in refpect of his argument
maid ofbefoir aganis the Sheref Murray, — It is alledgeit forder, be pannell, aganis James Rulhirfurd,
that the Laird of Tarbet wes att the burning of the hous of Ballivot eftir the apprehenfioune, and att
the taking of Johne Roifis eldeft fone. — The Aduocat anfueris, that quhat wes done in the burning,
and taking of John Rofis fone, wes done be vertew of the Commililoune.

It is alledgeit aganis Robert Dumbar of Burgye, that he can nocht pas vpoun the faid Johnne Roffis
Affyfe, becaus he wes att the burning of Johne Roife of Ballivot (his house) and taking of his eldefl
fone. Forder, it is alledgeit that George Dumbar, quha had his hous brunt, mareit Robert Dumbaris
fifter. t' Repellis Robert Dumbar.']

It is alledgeit, that George Brodie burges of Edinburghe, can nocht pafs vpoun Johne Rofis Afiyis,
becaus he is thryd and ferdis of kyn with the Sheref Murray, for his Gudame wes the Auld Sherefis
fifter : Nixt, he wes att the taking of Allefter Roife. — Aduocat anfueris, that the taking of Allefter
Rofe wes lauchfuUie take, be the Sheref Murray as ane judge compitent.

It is alledgeit aganis Mr Johne Doioglus of Nevay, that he can nocht pas vpoun his Alfyfe, becaus
he is thrydis of kyn with the Sheref Murray, for his Gudame wes the Auld Sherefiis fifter : Secundlie,
thair is deidlie feid ftandand betuix Mr Johne Dowglas and Johne Rofe ; becaus Mr George Innes,
fifter and brether bairnis with Johne Roife, flew Mr Johne Dowglas moder : Forder, his brother Mr
Alexander Dowglas, wes playne dilatour' of Johne Roife to the King. — The Aduocat anfueris to the
freindfchip' of the Sheref Murray as of before: As to the feid, referris to the faid Mr Johne Dowglas
ayth. [' Stand by.';]

It is alledg«it aganis George Lokarl of Bar, that he can nocht pafs vpoun Johne Rofe Aflyfe, becaus he is nocht within the foure-half-about : Secundlie, the Sheref Murray and the Laird of Baris
wyff'e ar thryd and ferdis of kyn. [' Bar, ftand by.']

It is alledgeit aganis Thomas Gilzeam of Monachtie, that he is nocht xxj yeiris, and that he has na
land. [' Repellit Thomas Gilzeame.']

It is alledgeit aganis Johne lluntar, that he is na burges ; quhilk wes confeft.

Clje iiinij'3 'm.xW asninst 3>amt6 iHaister tA ®%\\\s\t ant( ^Iciantrtr

Aug. 14. — Coiiiperit Alexander Mailler of Eli)hingftoune, thefaiirer to
our fouerane lord, and produceit ane Act, conteining his Maiefteis ^^'ill aganis the
faidis perfonis, &c. ; quhilk Act the faid Juftice-depute pronunceit and declarit

' Accuser ; informer against ; he who gave up the Dittay. ^ Relationship. ' See Jul. 15, 25, 8s 29.
VOL. II. T

146 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

judiciallie to the faidis parteis, and ordenit the famyn to be regiftrate in the
buikis of Adiornall, and to haif the ftrenth of ane Act thairof, with execiitoriallis
to pas thairvpoune, &e. ; quhairof the tennour foUovvis.

At Halyrudehous, the fourtene day of Auguft, I^.V^. 3eiris. Forfaraekill as Alexaftder Lord
of Spynie, and certane his compliceis, on Jie ane paiit, and James Mai/fer of Ogilrie, and certane liis
conipHceis, on pe vther pant, ar becum in his Maiefteis Will, for Jie SlawcLteris and vtheris cryraes

committit be ]>ame, at fe Conflict quhilk hapnit and fell out betuix ])ame, in J)e moneth of lafl :

The Kingis Maieftie ]iairfoir hes declarit, and be ]iir pvefentis dedairis, his hienes Will, as followis :
That is to fay, becaus the faid Maifler of Ogilvie and his complices, befydes the flauchter committit
be fame, hes violat and contravenit his hienes lawis and Actis of Parliament, maid aganis the bering,
wering and fchuting of hagbutis and piftoletis, that thairfoir he fall mak payment to his hienes, and to
his Maiefteis Thefaurer, in his liienes name, of Jie fowme of ffy ve thowfand pundis ; quhairof ]ie fowrae
of ane thowfand niarkis betuix and Jie firft day of September nixtocum, and the remanent of fe faid
fowme betuix and the tent day of November nixtocum : And that the faid Lord of Spyne fall lykewayis mak payment to his Maieftie and his Thefaurer, in his hienes name, of ])e fowme of flFyve thowfand markis ; quhairof ane thowfand markis betuix and the faid firft day of September, and J)e remanent of ])e faid fowme betuix and the faid tent day of November nixtocum : As alfo, that the faid
Lord of Spynie, for liim felff, and takand the burding on liim for ])e haill perfonis quha wer in cumpany with him at |)e faid Conflict, on ])e ane pairt ; and the faid Maifter of Ogilvie, for Iiim felff, and
takand ]'e burding on him for ])e haill perfonis quha war in cumpany with him att pe faid Conflict,
fall fubfcryue ane Submiflioune of Jie feid and contraverfie betuix fame to his Maieftie, and fik of his
hienes Counfale as his Maieftie fall thynk meit : And forder, that the faid Maifter of Ogilvie fall
within ]ie fpace of fex dayis enter his perfoun in Waird, within Jie burcht of Hadingtoune, and Jiair
remane, or in ony pairt beeift' Jie faid burcht: And that Jie faid Lord of Spynie fall, within the famyn fpace, enter his perfoune in Waird, within the burcht of Lynlythqw, and Jiair remane, or in ony
pairt beveft' Jie famyn burcht ; ay and quhill this Declaratioune of his Maiefteis Will be fuUie fatisfeit
and obeyit lie Jiame, in all poyntis : And that thairefter thay be fred be his Maieftie. And ordanis
and commandis the Juftice, Juftice-Clark and Jiair deputtis to pronunce Jiis his hienes Declaratioune
of his Maiefteis Will judiciallie, and to caufe regilli-ate Jie famyn in Jie buikis of Adiornall.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

For pronimceing and declai'atioiine quhairof, Dauid Hairt, feruitoiir to the
faid Alexander Maifter of Elphingftoxine, alkit actis and inftrumentis.

Wi\t dJarl of <goh)vie*s Conispirflc^,

[The Goavuie Conspiracy has long been reckoned as one of the darkest
pages of Scottish History ; and the subject lias, perhaps, given rise to a greater
profusion of controversial tracts, and to more difference in opinion among historians, than almost any other passage in our Annals. Having been so fortunate as to recover the Original Autograph Letters of Robert Logan of Restalrig
amongst the ' Warrants' of the Parliament, and of the Privy Council, of Scotland ;
and having, besides, after considerable research, discovered many other illustrative

' To the eastward of. ° To the westward of.

(hiHoxie'Q don^ptxac^.

SaararedfbrJ/rPurjurnIs Oimmal Trials.

n

F/H S r FL "OR .

/lAi'tf' rhi' Hrfrhrn or tirnuud rliwr .

.<FroXTJ FLOOR.

PL.ITE II

Tl
Turnpik.- I y^^ OalU'ry

Cfuunber

Eniraru:^ Gate

\y:

TnUiEr\^1!md,.

in

SOUTH
STREET

THE TVRRE T intjo wliich the KING was taken

tSE BlAck TtrkflPIKE,'

Co iL r t Y/r r d

Gcblle ry
Ch anih e r

H'iiicloir ti-om trhirfi Vu Kuu^yrt^

^K 2

R2 H 2

=0 '-'"^'- tt:

T/F£ TTRRET

Ear I of .Var & Kinff'x Suitr
the Earl or ifoirrir &c .

4

K,K,K, Pifsition of thi! Kmp,the Masrej- of Riuhven and Jmireir ffendfrson.oa tiidr aitrtaux inKr the Turret %catthe amonencementoftheStruaale.

K ?. R 2. H 2, Their rfl/nhv SiWjiluins, ai the time the Kino cried for help .

s

1

1

vi

'^^^^

a^M '^i"./ -'V^ tfui/nnhMuns ussoj ;>i// .\/u,iuijojfvup.i

Ms^^^^^ -r — «,- rsa

^'^^^^^""^ ^ 1

^^,^^^1^=======''*°^

^

a;

xwimk'k ^

■i

S

Mlwl pi \ ^ '

'o

=^

' "^^ J

iii'i

■'i!

S

1

i! i

^ ^

^,

. "^

25 11

t

^

II

'{

^

1

^ t

\

<

'^ .V

t:

[

^

5

'

>

1

1

-vi

£

1

5

fN \

^

It

S

^ 1

t^

£?
^

^ !3

I

■^

— — — ' — '

a

1

. ,:

<

■<j

^ li i

IHI — C

_„_^__. J

'^> ^ 1

•w .

■1

<

J^

•^ 1—

-

1 1

=«;

■1 ^

'II

C5

^^K.

1 ' i

1

*^

OJ

w ^

un iv

ft;

f^

f. U

t^

t<;

■^

U

S ;i _

^

•'1

^

,^ a,»" ' '

i

5i

S

h

■if

1

to

«o

___———- «

1

Id
iiiiiii

■

5s1 '

P

1====-' —

Ci

jl'i II

%

1

^

1 1 1

K

<

■^

! 1

*^

1

^

5!

.':'!ili

_

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 147

documents, tending to throw additional light upon this obscure and much contested point, the Editor had intended prefacing the present Article, by a short
Sketch or Narrative of the whole facts and circumstances upon which the reality
and truth of this extraordinary drama must now be considered as hingeing. After
mature deliberation, however, this purpose has been abandoned, chiefly because
the introduction of such disquisitions is, in some measure, unsuitable to the
plan and intention of this Collection, and, if indulged in, would encroach on
space which is so much better occupied by extracts from the original and graphic pages of the Books of Adjournal. It seems to be more consistent with the
nature of this work, to collect and place in juxta-position the entire authentic
information which can now be procured from original and undoubted sources.
With this view, therefore, considerable labour has been expended in searching
the Public Records, and the unexhausted and truly valuable stores of the Faculty
of Advocates, whose MS. Collections have been as carefully and extensively examined, as the other laborious avocations of the Editor would permit.

This arrangement is the less to be regretted, as so many excellent, though
certainly most conflicting Accounts, have been written, both for and against the
reality of this Conspiracy. Mr Parker Lawson, the ingenious author of the
Life and Times of Archbishop Laud, has recently treated of this subject, in a
concise and able manner, in his ' History of Remarkable Conspiracies.' The
Editor, having heard of the work when it was in the course of going through
the press, gave that gentleman free access to his entire Collections, partly with
the view of saving the necessity of such a Disquisition as that which he had
himself contemplated ; and in order that the truth of this Conspiracy might, by
Mr Lawson, be thoroughly sifted and placed upon an unquestionable foundation. The reality of the Gowrie Conspiracy has now, as is conceived, been satisfactorily made out by Mr Lawson, who has embraced views similar to those
entertained by the Editor ; and, after a patient examination of the whole of the
evidence and materials, which have now been collected, has come to the same

conclusions. . .

The Editor has only farther to remark, that the result of his enqmnes and
examinations of Original Documents are now offered to the Public; and that
these Papers, a great portion of which are here for the first time published, are
arranged, either in the order of their dates, or according to their apparent importance, and their bearing on the question. If they have swelled out to an undue size, the Editor hopes their novelty, and historical interest, will make ample
amends. Thev have, at a considerable additional expense to the Editor, been
condensed, as much as regard for the imiform typography and appearance ot the
book would permit.]

U8 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

[Curia Justiciare,/ d. n. Regis, tenia in Pretorio de Perth, xxij Atigvjl \QOO,per Magijinon Wilelmum Haert, JiijUcium Dejm/atum.']
Aug. 22. — Mr Thomas Cranstouxe and George Craigingelt, feruitouris to vmq'^ Jolinne Erll of Gowrie ; and Johne M'Duff
alias Barroiine, in Strabrand.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Treafonable crjnnes vnderwrittin ; committit
aganis His Maiestie, the fyft of Auguft inftaut.

The quhilk day, comperit Mr Thomas Hamiltoune, aduocat to our fouerane
lord, and produceit his hienes WaiTand, directit to the Juftice ; quhairof the
tennour follo■^^■is :

Rex,

Justice, Jiiftiee-Cleik and ^our deputis. We greit 30W weill. It is cure will, and We
command 50W to put Mr Thomas Craniloune, Johne Barroune and George Craiggingelt, to fe knawledge of ane AfTyis, for fe lait traitterous Confpiracie devyfit and intendit to be execute aganis ws,
at Perth : And tliay being convict, that ^e caufe dome to be pronunceit aganis fame, to hang fame
to deid : And that 56 fie the fame dome put to executioune, without delay : Quhairanent thir prelentis falbe 30ur Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Falkland, pe xxj day of Auguft, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

AssisA.
James Bower, notar in Perth, Robert Broune, Kepar of his GeorgeMurray, burges of Perthe,
Andro Rae, baillie thair, Maiefteis wyne fellar, Patrik Seill, thair,

Johne Ogilvie, laidler thair, James Liddell, Potifar to his Johnne Pullour, mercband thair,

Dauid Rynd, flefcheour thair, JNIaieftie, Andro Gellatlie, mercband thair,

Thomas Elgyn, thair, James Bog, aid to the Maifter Williame Jak, baxter thair,

James Balnavis, flefcheour thair, Portar, Patrik Drummond, fkynner thair.

It wes alledgeit aganis Eohert Broune, that he can nocht be putt on his Affyie, becaus he biu-e fword that day, and beris quarrell att him (Mr Thomas
Cranftoune ?) The (aid Mr Thomas afkit iuftrumentis, that Robert Broun declarit he bure quarrell aganis Mr Thomas fen that day, for the periuit of his
Maieftie. — The Aduocat afkit inftrumentis, that the faid Robert declarit that it
wes for perfuit of his Maieftie the King, quhilk can be na Cj[uarreU ; and thairfore he can nocht be put off the Aflyfe.

The Juftice admittis Robert Broune vpoune the faidis jierfonis Affyis.

It is allegeit be Mr Thomas Cranftoune, that James Liddell can nocht be
vpoun his Aftj-fe ; becaus he mifreportit of him at Falkland.

The advocate produced the feveral Dittays, which follow.
DiTTAV againjt Mr Thomas Cranjloune.

Mr Thomas Craxstouxe, Ye ar indytit and accufit of airt and pairt of the
deteftabill, horribill and treftbnabill Confpiracie attemptat aganis our fouerane
lordis maift nobill perfoune, be vmq'*' Johne Erie of Gowrie and vmq" Mr Alexander Ruthven, his brother : Forfaniekill, as the faidis vmq'' Erie and Mr Alex34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

149

ander his brother, haifing maift develiflie concludit amangis thame felffis tref-*
fonablie to Murthour his Maieftie, thair iiatiue Prince : And for that purpois,
the Erie haifing directit the faid vmq'" ]\Ir Alexander, vpoune the fyft day of
Auguft inllant, to his Maieftie, the faid vmq" Mr Alexander, vfing iucredibill
craft and diffimulatioune, haifing efelie perfwadit with his ftiir wordis, vtterit in
maift humbill and loving maner, his JMaieftie to ryde with him to St Johnftoune ;
and the faid vmq'" Johne Erie of Gowrie, haifing with the lyke deffait of mynde
and hwmilitie of behaviom-, refTauit his Maieftie, and drawin him to his ludgeing ; immediatlie efter denner, the faid vmq" Mr Alexander requeiftit his Maieftie to gang with him to the Gallerie chalmer of the faid lugeing, quhilk his
Maieftie reddelie did, fufpecting na ewill, hot mefuring the intentionis of that
dilTaitfull traittour with the finceritie of his hienes awin hairt : In the meyntyme, the faid vmq'^ Mr Alexander, haifing lokkit behind him diuerfe duris, led
his Maieftie to the Cabinet of the faid Gallerie chalmer, qvdiair he had preparit
Andro Henderfoune, familiar feruand to the faid vmq'^ Erie with ane fecreit,'
plait-flevis, fword and quhingear, be expres command of the faid Erie, to await
vpoune the faid Mr Alexanderis cuming, and do quhatfoever he commaudit him ;
and thair, finding tyme and all vther occafionis to concur for performing of his
maift abhominabill treftbune, haifing coverit his held, and drawin Andro Henderfounis quhingear, he maift horriblie and crewallie prefentit the famyn to his
Maiefteis hairt, vowing inftantlie to flay him for the death of his vmq'" fader,
convict and execute to the death, be ordour of Juftice, for Heich Treflbune :
And fynding him felff fumquhat dilfapoyntit, be the faid Androis witlidrawing
of his qvdiingear furth of his hand ; and, as it pleafit God, fumquhat dafchit be
his Maiefteis graif and conftant fpeicheis and reflbnis, he treffonablie caufit his
Maieftie fweir that he fuld keip fylence, and remane prefoner in that chalmer,
quhill he returnit fra his brother, with quhome he wald confult. And fwa^ haifing treflbnablie imprefonit his Maieftie, and lokkit the dur vpoun him, and incontinent returning within the chalmer, he treflbnablie fwoir that his Maieftie
behovit to die ; and pi-eifling to half bund his Maiefteis handis with ane gartane,^ quhilk he had lowfe in his handis for the purpois ; and fynding his Maieftie to refift, he putting his rycht hand to his fword to haif drawin it, and with
the vther maift crewallie and vnmercyfullie haifing grippit his Maieftie mouth
and herd, of purpois baith to hald him and hinder him to fpeik ; neuirtheles, his
Maieftie, extraordinarlie ftrenthennit be the mercie of God, ftayit him to draw
his fword, and cuming to the wyndok foirnent the way to the Spay-poirt, cryit
for ' Help' to my Lord of Mar, and vtheris his faythfuU fubiectis ; quhair the
faid Erie of Mar, with diuerfe vtheris his Maiefteis deutifull fubiectis and fer-
^ A coat of chain-mail of proof, secretly worn under the usual dress, ' Garter,

150

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

M-andis, being of accident drawin thair, be the maift treffonabill de\yife of the
faid vniq" Erie of Gowrie, be ane bruit' gevin out be yow the laid Mr Thomas
Crauftoune, that ' his Maieftie wes riddin away,' thairbye to induce his hienes
ferwandis to ryn to thair horfis, and thynking to follow the King, to poift of {off)
the toune, and to leif him deftitute of all help : That deveilleifch iuventioune,
proiectit for the mair fecret and affurit executioune of his Maiefteis flauchter,
turneinf. be the providence of God, to the beginning of his Maiefteis faiftie and
releif ; all faythfuU fiibiectis, feing his Maiefteis exceding danger, haiftit for his
releif ; hot preiffing all to enter the way, thay faw his Maieftie drawin to the
faid chalmer be the faid vniq'" Mr Alexander, and being fecludit be fa mony
durris, lokkit, in that paffage, be the faid A-mq'" Mr Alexander, of fet purpois :
At laft, Sir Johne Ramfay, led doubtleflie be tlie fpreit of God for his Maiefteis
faiftie, ran vp the bak turnepyke,' being ane vnaccuftumit paffage, and enterit
be ane dur of the faid chalmer, quhilk anfuerit to the faid tiu-nepyke ; quhilk
diir wes opnit of accident, be the faid Andro Henderfoime ; qiilia, being confouudit Mith horrour of fa heich trefibune, quhen he faw it at the poynt of the
executioune, baith hairt and hand being tane fra him, be the power of God, protectour of his Maiefteis innocencie ; the faid Sir Johne Ramfay entering in the
chalmer, and feing the horribill violence vfit be the faid vmq''' Mr Alexander to
bereve his Maieftie, deftitute of armour or wappynnis, of his lyfFe, ran to his
help ; and haifing gevin to the faid Mr Alexander fum ftraikis with his qiihingear,^ expellit him furth of the foirfaid chalmer. During the quhilk fpace, the
faid vinq'" Erie, perfaifing his treffoune difcoverit, and being vpoune the Hie
fcreet of the faid burcht of Perth, accumijaneit with thre or four fcoir of perfonis
or thairbye, he come foirnent the duelling-hous of Archebald Makbreg, haifing
na provocatioune, nor knawin nor fene caufe to vfe ony wappjomis, drew his
twa fwordis, and thairbye gaif example to his haill cumpany to do the lyke, and
altogidder rufchit langis* that pairt of the gait,^ with drawin fwordis to the 5et^
of his lugeing ; his Maieftie being thairin for the tyme, in maner foirfaid : And
thair, ye the faid Mr Thomas, enterand with your drawin fwerd befoir the faid
Erie, he commandit yow to enter vp the Blak-timipyke ; lyke as ye and he treffonablie ran vp the faid turnpyke, accumpaneit with Alexander and Harie Ruthveimis. Hew Moncreif, Patrik Eviot and diuerfe vtheris your complices, and
cmning to the faid Gallerie chalmer dur, within the quhilk his Maiefteis maift
nobill perfoun was for the tyme ; and thair, fynding the faid Sir Johne Ramfaj-,
Sir Thomas Erfkyne and Doctor Herreis at the dur for his Maiefteis defence,

' F>'. hruit, a report or rumour. ^ For ' blak tumepyke,' a winding staircase, commonly in a

turret. 1 lie term is still used in Scotland. ' A sort of cutlass or short sword, a ^awoer. ^ Alon^,
alomjst. 5 Street or road. c Gate.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 151

ye treffonablie invadit and perfevvit thame for thair flauchteris, repulfat tliame
perforce, and enterit within the famyn chahner, hurt and wovindit thame, and
everie ane of thame ; and left nocht of the perfute of the faid horribill TrefToiine,
qnliill the faid vmq'" Ei-le, being llane within the faid chalmer, and ye haifing
reffauit twa deidlie woundis, difparit of performing your interpryis, fled doune
the cloife, quhair ye treffonablie commandit to gaird and keip the bak yet ; and
affiftit ane nowmer of feditious I'ebellis, quha had inclufit and befeageit his
Maieftie within the faid ludgeing. Quhairbye, ye half committit maift Heich,
manifeft and abhominabill Treffoune ; and ar airt and pairt thairof.
DiTTAY againjl George Craiggyngelt.
George Craiggyngelt, Ye ar indytit and accufit of airt and pairt of the
maift crewall, abhominabill and treffonabill Confpiracie attempit aganis our
Souerane Lord, be vmq'" Johne Erie of Gowrie your maifter, and vmq'" Mr
Alexander Ruthven his broder, vpoune the fyft day of Auguft inftant. Forfamekill as, Johne fumtyme Erie of Gowrie, and vmq'" Mr Alexander Ruthven
his broder, haifing maift crewalie, vnnaturallie and treffonablie Conlpyrit his
Maiefteis Murthour ; and, for performance thairof, vpoune the fyft day of Auguft inftant, the faid vmq'" Mr Alexander, be directioune of the faid Erie, haifing maift diffaitfuUie drawin his Maieftie to Perth : And, efter his denner, haifing perfwadit his hienes to gang quytlie his allane to the Gallerie chalmer, and
thair, treffonablie, with the drawin quhingear of Andro Henderfoune, quhome he
had laid than in wait, armit with fecreit, plait-flevis, fword and quhingear, to
affift him and do quhat he directit, according to the command gevin to him be
the faid vmq'^ Erie his maifter, haifing preiffit to half flane his Maieftie ; and
being fumquhat ftayit be fik graif perfwafionis, as God at that tyme furneiffit
his Maieftie to ftay the rage of that treffonabill angre, he tuke his Maieftie
fworne that he liild keip fylence, and remane jjrefoner in the foirfaid chalmer,
till he returnit : And than lokkand the dur, and incontinent returnand, he declarit his Maieftie behovit pi-efentlie to die ; and preiffing to bynd his handis,
and incenfit be his refiftance, haifing layit his rycht hand to draw his fword, and
being ftayit be his Maieftie with his vther hand, haifing vnnatm-allie and crewallie tane his Maieftie be the herd and the mouth, to hald him and ftay him fra
crying ; nochtwithftanding quhairof, his Maieftie, be the afliftance of God, wan
to the windok that luikis to the Spay-poirt, and thair cryit for ' Help !' During
the quhilk fpace, the faid vmq'^ Erie, haifing raifit ane fals brute, that ' the King
wes away ;' thairbye to half inducit all his hienes ferwandis to poift to overtak
him, vpoune the way to Falkland : Quhill thay wer making haift to get thair
horfis, and abyding vpoune thame, betuix the faid lugeing and the poirt, it piefit God, that my Lord Didie, the Erie of Mar, and certane vtheris his Maiefteis

152 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Weill affectionat fubiectis and ferwaudis, fa\v and hard his Maiefteis cry ; quha
rynnand to his releve, and fynding na man to enter, being excludit be fa niony
duris, lokkit of fet piu-pois be the faid Mr Alexander at his vpgoing : At laft, it
l)leafit God to direct Sir Johne Ranifay vp the Bak-turnpyke, quhair, fynding
the bak dur of the faid chalmer opuit be Andro Henderfoune, quha, ftnpefeit
with the vnlpekabill horrour of the fycht of the faid TreiToune, preparit him
felff to flie thairfra ; the faid Sir Johne enterit, and in his faythfull and dewtiefull hairt of his ]Maieftie, geveing fum llraikis with his quhingear to the faid
imq'' Mr Alexander, pat him perforce fiirth of the faid chalmer : And than, the
faid vmq'" Johne Erie of Gowrie, feing his Trelfoune difcouerit, and in danger
to be dillapoyntit, calling of the mafk of his depeft diffunulatioime ; being vpoune
the Hie ftreit of Perth, accumpaneit with thre or fonr fcoir of his complices,
without ony occafioune gevin to him, or fycht of ony contrair partie,' drew his
twa fivordis, and thairbye caufit the reft draw thair fwerdis ; and than treffonablie come, in hoftile maner, to the yet of the faid duelling-houfe, quhair his
Maieftie was for the tyme, and treffonablie entering with drawin fwordis, Ye
the faid George Crai<re:ine;elt, than meting him with ane drawin twa-handit
Iword in your hand, the faid Erie commandit to keip the bak yet, quhilk ye treffonablie did ; and ye, witli Mr Thomas Cranftoune, Alexander and Harie RuthA-ennis, Hew Moncreif, Patrik Eviot and vtheris his complices, rinnand vp the
Blak-turnpek, to the chalmer quhair he knew his Maieftie to be for the tyme,
treffonablie and perforce enterit thairin, ftraik fra the defence thairof Sir Thomas Erfkyne, Sir Johne Ramfay and Doctour Herreis, his Maiefteis ferwandis,
and perfewit thanie for thair flauchteris, and ci-ewallie womidit thame, and infiftit in the crewall and vnmercifull perfuit of this abhominabill Treffoune to
the verrie death : During the quhilk tyme, Ye the faid George Craiggingelt,
obeying the treffonabill command of your faid vmq'^ maifter, treffonablie enclofit the faid bak yet ; and affiftit be ten or twelf rafcallis, your complices, treffonablie befegit his Maieftie, your foueranis maift nobill perfoune ; and remanit
with your twa-handit fword drawin, in your hand, attour- the fpace of twa
houris, at the faid bak yet, and in the cloile of the faid lugeing, and fufferit na
man to haif entrie or paffage at the faid yet : And lykewyis, treffonablie minaffit his Maiefteis domeftik feruitouris, being inclufit and befegeit with his Maieftie within the faid lugeing, for thair flauchteris, boifting^ to hang thame, and
avowing that thay fuld all die ; ye herand and feand Harie and Alexander
Ruthvcniiis, and vtheris your complices, call for poulder to blaw vp tlie faid
lugeing, and caufmg bring ane jeift^ to ryn at the yet thairof, and ding it vp,

' AdvcTsary. ^ j\ Love, more tLan. ^ Tlueatening. < A jcist or beam, to be used as a battfring-ram to force open the gate.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 153

that thairbye thay mycht haif enterit perforce, and crewallie Murderit his Maieftie, and his faythfull ferwandis, being with his Maieftie thairin. Quhairbye
ye haif conimittit maift Heich and manifeft Treflbune ; and ar airt and pairt
thairof.

DiTTAY agalnjl Johne 3I(ik(hif al'ins Barroune,
JoHNE Makduf alias Barroune, Ye ar indytit and accufit for airt and
pairt of the trefibnabill Confpiracie attemptit be vmq'" Johne Erie of Gowrie,
and vmq"^ INIr Alexander Ruthven his broder, aganis the Kingis Maieftie, vpoune
the fyft day of Auguft inflant. Forfamekill as the faidis vmq'" Johne Erie of
Gowrie, and vmq'" Mr Alexander Riithvene, having fecreitlie Confpyrit his Maiefteis Murthour ; and for affectiiating thairof, the faid vmq'^ Erie having dii-ectit
his brother INIr Alexander the fainin day to Falkland, to perf'vvaid his Maieftie
to cum to S* Johneftoune, to the laid vniq'" Erles lugeing ; quhair, efter he had
dynit, the faid Mr Alexander, having drawin him to the laid Gallerie chahner,
and lokkit the haill durris efter him, and having Andro Henderfoune lyand in
wait, be directioune of the faid vmq'^ Erie, armit with his fecreit, plait-flevis,
fword and quhingear, and commandit be him to do quhatfumever the faid vinq'"
]Mr Alexander his broder laid bid him ; the faid vmq'" Mr Alexander di-ew the
faid Androis quhingear, and myntit' to have flane his Maieftie thairwith ; and
being pairtlie ftayit be the taking of the quhingear fra him, and pairtlie be the
maieftie of his nature, praite^ and reafonis vfit be him, to ftay his treflbnabill
furie ; haifing joroniefit to advyfe with his brother, takand in the meyntyme his
Maiefteis ayth, that he fuld remane prelbner, and keip filence ; he paffit furth,
lokkit to the dur, and Ichortlie thairefter returning, fwear abhominablie, that he
behovit inftantlie to die : And preifland to haif bund his Maiefties handis, to
the effect he mycht the mair eifelie ha^'e miirtherit him, his Maieftie, be the
afliftance of God, maid fik refiftance as he wan to the windo of the laid chalmer ; and feing certane his hienes faythfull fubiectis, cryit for ' Help' aganis the
murthorer, preiftand to bereave him of his lyffe. And the faid vmq'^ Erie, cairfull to withdraw all meanis of help or fuccours frome his Maieftie, having caufit raife ane fals rumour of his INlaieftie pafling away, quhilk him felff and Mr
Thomas Cranftoiuie his ferwand affermit to be trevv, and that his Maieftie was
paft Mid-Inche ;^ be occafion of the quhilk ruraoui*, my Lord Duke, the Erie of
Mar, and vtheris his Maiefteis ferwandis, being run to feik thair horfis, to follow his Maieftie, quhome thay fupponit to be away ; feing and hering his Maiefteis prefent danger, ran to his releve, hot being ftayit be the duris, lokkit of
fet piirpois be the faid vmq'^ Mr Alexander, could nocht haif accefs ; quhill at
laft, it pleafit God to direct Johne Ramfay to rin vp the Blak-trumpyke ;* and

' Made an attempt, essayed. "^ Talk, persuasion. It is not unlikely that this is a mistake of the
transcriber, for ' graice.' ^ Past tlie middle of the South Inch of Perth. " Turnpike. The

VOL. II. U

154 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

thair, fynding tlie dm- of the faid chalnier opnit, be the faid Andro Henderfoune,
preifland to flie furth of the fame, abhorraiid the fylthines and ci'ewaltie of the
faid Treafoune, the faid Johne Ramfay enterit, and difchargeand his native and
bund dewtie to his Prince, gaif to the faid Mr Alexander fum woiindis, and expellit him furtli of the faid chalmer ; quha, falling in the fate of the faid triimpyke ; albeit ye the faid Johne Barroune, hard, faw and knew his Maiefteis
perrell, nawyis movit thairwith, nor preifland onywyis, according to your dewtie,
to mak him ony releif ; bot be the contrair, preifland to afllfl; the faid treflbnabill
atteniptat aganis his IMaieftie, ran furth to the Hie fl;reit, quhair the faid vmq'°
Erie was for the tyme, and declarit to him that his faid vmq'° broder wes flane ;
and thairbye incenflt the faid Erie to draw his fwordis, and furiouflie ran with
his complices to his ludgeing, quhair his IVIaiefl:ie was for the tyme ; and treffonablie enterit thairin, and paflit vp to the dur of the chalmer, quhair his Maiefl:ie was for the tyme, and invadit his Maiefl;eis ferwandis, being thair for his
Maiefteis defence, and perfewing thame for thair flauchtei-is, dang^ thame in
diuerfe pairtis of thair bodeis ; and infiftit in the treflbnabill executioune of his
Confpiracie foirfaid, to the verrie death ; quhome ye treflbnablie movit, be your
aduerteifment, to the executioune of the laid treflbnabill Murthour, with his awin
handis : Lyke as, ye followit him in the faid ti'effonabill interpryife, and enterit
within the faid lugeing ; and in the cloife, at the bak 5et, haveing incourageit
all men to aflift the faid vmq'° Erie, did quliat in yow lay to fl;eir vp all men to
fortifie tlie faid vmq'^ Erie in his faid Confpiracie : And thairbye, ye was airt
and pairt of the faid maift horribill Treafon.

The laid Aduocat produceit, for verificatioun of the Dittays ; in the fyrfl;, the
Depofitiounis of Andro Henderfoune, to prove the devyfe and actuall executioune
of the Treafoun lybellit ; and vfit the famin aganis the haill pannell. And, for
verificatioun of I\Ir Thomas Cranftounis particuler Dittay, produceis the faid
Mr Thomas tlirie Depofitiounis, fubfcryuit with his hand, and cognofeit be himlelff: Togidder with George Craigingeltis Depofitioune, fubfcryuit with his
hand. And, in lyke maner, produceit the faid Georgeis Depofitioun aganis him
felff : And the Depofitioun of Johne M^DufF alias Barroun, for verificatioun of
his Dittay. Togidder with the Depofitioune of Olipher goung, James Druinmond and Dauid Rynd, anent the bringing of ane jeift to force the 3ett, his Maiefl;ie being thairin : And alfo, the faid Dauidis Depofitioun, that he hard Alexander Rutliven cry for powder.

Repetis the xxv Act of King James the fecund, exprefllng that the Invafioun
of the Prince, and aflaljeing of ony caftell, place or hous, quhair his Maiefl;ie
is, is Treafoune : And lykewyis, the hundreth threfcoir and fyftene Act of the

proper name Turnbull is still vulgarly pronounced Trumbull, and was at this period commonly so written ; the word turniiike seems to have been similarly con-upted. ■' Violently struck and thrust at.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 155

Kingis xiij Parliament ; bering, that the ftiykeing, hurting or flaying of ony perfoun within the Kingis Inner-Chahner, Cabinet or Chahner of peace, the Kingis
Maiefl:ie for the tyme being within his Palice, to be Treafoune. Repetis the
notorietie of the fact, and the knawledge of the AfTyis thame felffis ; and gif
thay clange,' Proteftis (for) Wilful! and manifefl; Errour.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfonis (of Aflyis) being chofin, fworne and admittit ;
and the faidis Mr Thomas Cranfton, George Craiggingelt and Johne M'Duff
alias Barroune, being accufit, in tliair prefens, of the particuler Dittayis reflective foirfaidis, and crymes contenit thairin ; quhilkis wer verifeit, be thair awin
Depofitionis, diuerfe Actis of Parliament, and vtheris Depofitionis produceit be
the faid Aduocat ; the faidis perfonis of AfTyis, immediatlie thairefter, pall altogidder furth of Court, to the Over-hous of the faid Tolbuith ; quhair thay, efter
chefing of the faid Andro Rae chancellar, reflbnit vpoune the pointis of the Dittayis refpective foirfaidis, and votit thairvpoune ; and eftir longe reffoning and
confultatioune vpoune the famyn, being throuchlie avyfit thairwith, re-enterit
agane in Court, in prefens of the faid Juftice-depute ; quhair thay, be the mouth
of the faid Andro Rae chancellar, ffand, pronunceit and dcclarit the faidis Mr
Thomas Cranftoune, George Craiggingelt and Johne MakdufF alias Barroune, to
be Fylit, Culpabill and Convict of airt and pairt of the maid crewall, abhominabill and treflbnabill Confpiracie, attemptit be vmq''' Johne Erie of Gowrie, and
vmq''' Mr Alexander Ruthven his brother, aganis the Kingis Maieftie, committit
vpoune the fyft day of Auguft inftant : As at mair lenth is contenit in the Dittayis refpective abouewrittin, laid to thair charge.

Sentence. For the quhilk caufe, the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of
Williame Lyell,^ dempflar of the faid Court, Decernit, Ordanit and Adjudgeit
the faid Mr Thomas Cranfloune, George Craiggingelt and Johne INIakduff alias
Barroune, to be tane to ane Gibbet, befyde the mercat-croce of Perth, and thair
to be Hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair Landis, heritageis, takis, ftedingis, rowmes, iJofTelTionis, guidis and geir, to be fforfalt and elcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as Convict of the faidis crymes.^

' Cleanfe, i. p. find the paniiels Not Guilty, or Acquit tliem. ' ' Joline Fendiauclil' is deleted,

and ' W™ Lyeir interlined, and also the name is written on the mavfjin. ' ' Upon Saturday, the

23d of Auguft, 3Ir Tliowas Cranjloun, George Craigeiir/elt and John Baron, officer of Strabran,
attenders upon the Earl of Gowry, were hanged in St Jolinftoii, for drawing their i'words in the time
of tlie tumult ; yet confeftt'd they notliing which might fmell of knowlege of any Confpiracy. — Mr
Thomas Cranfton, hrotiier to Sir Joiin Cranfton of ihat Ilk, exhorted the people to forhear impreca-
• tions againft tliemfelves ; for he had now found by experience, that they wanted not their own eft'ect.
For that he hinifelf had vfed three kinds of imprecations, viz. " Ciod nor a (word go through me !" —
" I fliall be taken for a Traitour !" — " God nor I be hanged !" — " I have been taken," faid he, " for a
Traitour ; but I tliank God, I am nocht one. I was ftabbed through with a fword at tliis laft tumult;
and now, I am to be lianged !" He conceived a fervent prayer, at which time, in the niidft of a cloudy
darknefs, glanced a ludden brightnefs, to the aflonillnnent of the beholders.' — From Caldcr wood's
MS. Church Hijiory, in the Univerfity of Glafgow Scott's MSS. Adv. Lib.

156 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Deposit/ox of 3Ih Thomas Cranstovn.'^

At the Burch of Perth, and within the duelling hous of Johne Pitcame tbair, the fext day of
Augufl, tlie veil- of God I" and fex liundreth yeiris.

Quliilk da\-, in ])ielens oft' Mr Patiik Galloway Minifter to his Maieftie, Oliuer Young, Andro
RavbaiUeis, James Adanifone dene of gild, Williame (Jak) dekin of the baxteris, and Henrie Elder
commouiie clerk, wieter heirof, burgeHiis of tlie faid burch of Perth,

Mr Thomas Cranstoune, fwmtyrae feruitour to vmq'^ Johne Erie off Gowrie, being appellit on
his confcience, as he vald anfuer to God, feing he was vpoune his deid bed, as appeirit to tliame,
deidlie Tondit with twa llraikis, Deponit as followis. That vpoune the fyft day of Auguft inllant, he
being in the ludgiug, hering ane vncertane rumour and brute* of the Kingis furtb-going to the South
Inche, came doune the bakftair to the gardin jeard, qiihair my lord his maifler wes ganging, as he
reniemberis, with my lord Duik, or with fwnie vtiier nobill man ; to quhome the faid Mr Thomas faid,
' The report and bmte is, my lord, tliat his Maieflie is gane to the South Inche :' Quhairvpoune my
lord defyrit him to ' to hawe his liors readie, that lie mitht follow ;' quha anfuerit, < they ' war iu
Scone ; and fa being his Maiellie in the Inche, it vald be hard or they come furtb thairof'' and to
ourtak liis Maieflie.' Thaireftir, he followit my lord throuch the hall to the wtter clois, and thairfra
tlie faid Mr Thomas pafiit to the bak clois to feik his boy, for fending of him to Scone for the hors ;
quhome he culd nocht find : And quhill he wes thair, he hard ane tumult and din ; and thairvpoune
come throth the wtter clois to the for-5eatt, inquiring all the gett,* ' Quhat the matter fuld be ?' And
in the end, feiisg my lord his mailler llmgHng befoir the 3eatt, with certaneof Tullibardins feruandis,
young Tullibardin being prefent ; he, fwa far as he micht, with the help that was prefent, freithit^ my
lord fra ])refent flrugling. In the meane quhill of the faid flrugling, my lord fell on Jiis henche
and elbo ; hot ryfing agane, paffit vp the gait, foirnent Archebald Makbrekis, quhair he drew his tua
fuordis furth of ane (kabert ; quhilk the faid Mr Thomas feing, being jowp alane,^ Iwit his clok fall,'
and lykvayis drew furth liis fuord, inquiring of my lord, ' Quliat the fray was, and quhat he wald
do ?' To quhcnie my lord anfuerit, ' He wald gang in to his awin liows, or die be the way.' Quhairto the faid Mr Thomas replyit, he vald gang befoir him ; hot prayit his lordfthip to tell him, ' quliome
at he fuld lliaik, becaus he knew noclit quha was pairtie.' And fua, tiudying fordvart to the 5 eat,
ane pat ane fteilbonet on my lordis hede ; quha it vas he knawis noclit. Proceding fordvart, at the
awld turnepect dur, the Maiilcr of Gowrie was lyand, quhidder deid or hurt he knew nocht ; and
nocht perfytlie knawiiig quha than it was, becaus he saw nocht his face ; fpearing quho it was, my
lord baid, ' Vp the flair !' And he paffing fordvart, at my lordia command, nawayis knawing
quha followit, my lord come to ane chamber, qnhair he faw Sir Thomas Erikin, Doctour Hereis and
Jhone Ranifay flandin with drawin fuordis ; quliilk Doctour Hereis, prefenting his fuord to Hop the
entrie, Mr Thomas laid to him, ' geall theift'! darthow?' Doctour Hereis anfuerand, ' A Mons^
Cranfloune !' Quhilk Mr Thomas faid, ' Theift" I gift thow be innocent of 5one fklauchter, come
furth and I fall varrand the.' Thairefter, my lord and Jhone Kamfay jokit :'» The reft ftraik fwme
ftraikis at Mr Thomas, and he at thame. Quhow my lord and Jhone Ilamfay fched" he knew nocht,
alvyis>- Mr Thomas deilling with the reft. Jhone Ramfay ftraik the faid Mr Thomas throw the
body; and thairefter wes ftrukin at, he belewis be Doctour Hereis, hot nocht throch the body.
Quhilk Mr Thomas, miffing my lord, lap'^ out at the dur and come furth of the place. Efter all, Mr

From the original, preserved among the Warrants of Parliament, General Register House. ' Fr. bruit.

' Ilis horses were at Stoon, his usual residence. * Ere they could be sent for from Scooii, a distance of two or

tlirec miles. * May. >> I'l eed, delivered. ' Apparently, in extremity of peril, without adequ.ite means

of assistance. Perhaps from O. Fi-. ' jupper,' to shout or cry aloud. ' Juppertv,' in old Scots, signifies a dangerous
enterprise, from (). Fr. jeu-perdu — or rather, jcH-;jar(i, a hazardous game. " 'Disencumbered himself of his cloak,

by droppmg it on the ground. "> For Monsieur, as is afterwards explained. '" Probably for ' yokit,' or engaged m combat. ' Jowkit,' would signify a dexterous evasion of thrusts ; but there was no room in that apartment
lor such a display of the art uf self-defence. " Separated. '■ Ever, coiitiniialjy. " Leaped, sprung.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 157

Thomas proteftit, in prefens of God, that he nether was with my lord, nor with tlie Maifter ; nether
hard fpokiii with any of tliame, befoir this twmult, nocht fax wordis, fourtene dayis ofbefoir : And
proteftit lyivvyis, in the prefens of God, that he newer knew my lord nor tlie Maifter to hawe pretendit ' any thing aganes the Kingis perfone : And forder proteftit, that na lufpitioune be tane of his
name, as being callit Mr Thomas Cranftoune ; becaus it is of weritie, that lie paftit furtli of this cuntrie vpoune the third day of Februar I-'-V'^. fourlcoir nyne yeiris, and retwrnit noclit thairefter thairto
quhill the morne efter Peace-day,' in the yeir of God l^.V". fourfcoir fewentene yeiris : Quha palfing
thairefter to P'ranee, quharfra he came hetlier, remanit quhill he come hame with the Erie of Gowrie.
And in the mair verificatioune heirof, the laid Mr Thomas fubfcrivit thir prefentis with his awin hand.
(Sic fubfcribitur) Mk Thomas Cuanston.

M. P. Gallouay, witnes. James Adamsone, witnes.

Olipher Young, Bail3e, witnes. Villiame Jak, witnes.

A. Ray, Baliuus, witnes. Henrie Elder, witnes.

Craigingeltis Depositioune?

At Falkland, the xvj day of Auguft, 1600. In prefence of my Lordis Chancellar, Secretar,
Juftice Clark, Comptrollar, Schir George Home of Spot, Schir Patrik Murray and Mr William Hert,
Juftice.

George Craigengelt being examinat, Deponis as followis. Deponis, that he newir hard the
Erll of Gowrie, fen his hamecuming, fpeik any thing anent the miflyking or revendge of his fatheris
deathe, nether in priuat or publict. Deponis, that he defirit, at all tymes, Mr William Kind, quha
had my lordis eare by"" ony man, to perfwaid my lord to keip him felff in the Kingis favour and obedience ; in refpect of jelofie that wes amangis thanie : Quha anfuerit, that he fould do all that he culd
to perfuaid ray lord fa to do ; and that it wes beft fa to do.

Being inquirit, gif he, being in cumpany at the latter meit,' befoir my lordis ganging to Strabrand
with Andro Henryfoun and Mr Williarae Rind, faid, that < thair apperit to be fum elaft^ betuixt his
Maieftie and my lord ; and that it wes verray meit it wer foirfene ; and quhat fuld cum of it ?' Anfuerit,
that he denyis it planelie, that euir he fj)ak it or hard of fic a thing.

Denyis, that during my lordis being in Strabrand, nather yit in St Johnftoun,'' eftir his cuming fra
Strabrand, he knew ony man or page to cum fra Court to my lord ; or that he commandit to gif thame
any meit or drink.

Deponis, that my lord and his broder vfit at all tymis maift familiar conference, quhen my lord had
na vthir cumpany.

Deponis, that at my lordis being in Strabrand, Sandie Ruthven come fra Dunkeld to my lord :
And that vpoun Fryday, my lord directit Capitane Ruthvene to ryde, and tell my Lady that he wes
to cum ; and Capitane Ruthven mett my lord at the cobili,' and raid bak to Dunkeld with my lord ;
quhair he, having fowpit, returnit to his bed to Trochene, the deponer being in cumpany.

Denyis, that he knew any thing of the Maifter or Andro Henryfonis ryding to Falkland, vpoun the
Tyifday the fift of Auguft. Declairis, that he wes lyand in his naikit bed that day ; quhill eftir the
Kingis cuming, that Thom Eldar and Johnne Banoun come till him and baid him ryife, and faid ' the
King wes cum.' Quhilk he did, and come to the kitcheing, quhair he fand na appeirance of meit for
the King ; and thairfoir fend out to Duncane Robertfonis houfe, quhair he gat a murefoule.^ And
thaireftir, this deponar caufit mak reddy a fchoulder of muttoun and a hen ; quhilk wes lang in doing.
And that lie thaireftir went vp and brocht doun fum ftraberries and dreffit fyve or fex difchis of defert : And in the ganging vp the ftair, met the Maifter of Gowrie buittit, and inquirit at him, ' Quhair
he had bene ?' Quha anfuerit, ' Ane eirand nocht far af.' And the deponar inquirit agane, ' Quhat movit

' Designed, plotted. ^ ' Pais,' ' Pasche,' Easter. ' From Original, among Warrants of Parliament.

♦ More tlian. ' Probably the last service or course, or the dessert at dinner. ' Grudge, cause of offence ;

literally, eye-sore, ' Perth. ' perry-boat. '-' Muir-fowl, grouse.

158 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

the King to cum fa fuddanlie, vnluikit for ?' Quba anfuerit, that ' Robert Abircrumby, that fak knaiff,
had brocht the king thair, to cans his INIaieftie tak ordour for his debt.'

Deponis fartlier, that the Erll of Gowrie that day neuir Ipak word to the deponare, nor defirit him
to mak any proiiifioun for the Kingis cuming.

Deponis, that, eftir tlie Kingis deiinar, he gart tak vp the Duk and the Erll of Maris dennar :
Quhilk endit, he caufit James Eriliin and the feruandis dyne ; lyke as, the deponar fat doun with
thame, and fat quhill thai hard a tumult on the gait. And then he and the reft at the table raife, and
went alton^idder to the cloife, quliair the deponar faw the IMaifter lyand deid, at the fute of the Blak
tumepyke ; and that the deponar cryit then, ' Quhair is my lord ?' And faw na body befyde the
Maifter; and that he ran out at the sett, and mett my lord at the 3ett, cumand in with tua drawm
fuordis in his hand, a knappifcall' bonat on his heid, and a cumpany of ten or tuelff with drawin
fwordis witli him. Rememberis, that Mr Thomas Cranftoun and Hew Moncreiff wes with my lord,
quha enterit togidder, with thair drawin fwordis, in at the Blak turnpyke. And the deponar herd ane
cry, ' Keip the 5ett I' Quhilk movit him to rin in about the nuke of the houfe, to the bak jett of the
3aird,2 ^^, f^ jimt „a man ifcliit that way ; with whom paft a nowmer of ten or tuelff raftallis of the
toun. And the deponar being thair, Mr Thomas Cranlloun come till him, and baid ' Keip that 5ett!'
And deponis, that lykuife that he faw Mr Williame Kind in the 5ard, and baid his lifter ga hir way.
And that Mr Thomas and Mr Williame pairtit fra him thair, immediatelie, without forder fpeche.
And that the deponar, having renianit thair a quhill, come bak to tlie cloife, quhair he faw Hary Ruthveii cum doun the Blak turnpyke ; quha faid to the deponar, that ' my lord wes hurt vp in the
chalmer.'

Being thaireftir inquirit, ' Quhair he gat the twa-handlt fvvord, quhilk he had drawin in liis hand ?'
Anfuerit, that quben he raife with the reft fra his dennar, hering the tumult, he paft to the pantrie to
feik his fword, quhair the Dur wes fteikit ;' and fa he went vp to my lordis chalmer, quhair be fand
the twa-handit fword ; and come immediatelie doun to the cloife with it ; and faw Mr Alexander
Ruthven lyand deid in the Blak turnepyke, as faid is.

Declaris, that he neuir f|)ak a word with Cryftie that day ; or that eulr he fpak a word with him, of
the fufpitioun betuix the King and my lord, at ony vther tyme.

Denyis, that he ^ves vp the Blak turnpyke ony tyme that day.

Denyis, that eftir the dennar, he baid Barroun or Cryftie the Portar follow him ; or that he and
they went in at the Blak turnpyke togidder.

Deponis thairefter, that Johne Barroun and Barroun Fandowie brocht the Maifter out of the
chalmer, qulian he wes flaying, doun the Blak tnrnpyk ftair ; and that tlie faid John Barroun fpak
that to this deponare.

Deponis, that befoir my lordis ganging to Strabrand, vpoun a nyciit at ix houris at evin, my lord
gart ifche* the chalmer, quhair remanit onlie Mr William Rind, Mr Tliomas Cranftoun and a tailjeour:
And that vpoun the morne thairefter, that Mr Williame Rind dedairit to the deponar, that my lord
wes feyand^ on a py dowblelt,'' with" the taill pecis for the wamb.

(Sic fubfcribitur) G. Craigingelt.

' Often written ' knapschaw,' and ' knapiscliay :' A ' steel-bonnet,' or helmet, fitting close to the skull, of a round
form. It seems often to have been titted into the usual bonnet, or other head dress, and worn along with the ' secret,' or chain-mail, to avoid the appearance of beiui; fully armed. ' Yard, garden. ^ Shut, fastened.
* Make void or empty ; he desired those in tlir chamber "to retire, excepting, &c. * Trying, assat/ing. « Often
called a ' Secret,' being a kind of chain or plate armour strongly ([uilted into the breast of the dress, for the sake of concealment. There have been many conjectures as to the meaning of the word ' py,' or, as it is more freijuently written,
' pyne ;' which appears to the Editor to be from O. Fr. peiyne. ' Faire peigne,' to give one the slip, to elude by craft
or stratagem, &c. INIr Aruot thinks it was so called, from being ' worn by pians or foot soXAxers.' — Trials, p. 31.
But there was no occasiim for their armour being cniicetilcrl. It is worthy ot" remark, that in the struggle between Mr
Alexander Hutlnen and the King, when Sir John Ramsay came to the King's rescue, the latter instantly exclaimed,
Fy ! strik him laidi, Ijecaus he hes ane pync-dowlit vpoun him !' 'The words, ' the theis (thw'hs) and,' are
deleted from the Deposition.

43Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 159

This deponar, being re-examinat this day, at eftemone, deponis, that the tumult raife at the end of
the latter meit ; and that he, with his Maiefteis officeris, ran furth of the hall ; and that he went to
the pantrie to feik his fword, and the dur being rteikit, he went vp to my lordis chalmer, quhair he fand
ane twa-handit fword, and come doun immediatlie to the cloife, drew it and keift the Itabert awav,
quhan he faw Mr Alexander lyand deid in the fute of the Blak turnpyke : And then immediatelie went
to the jett, and niett my lord cumand in thairat, with tiia drawin Avordis in hand, and ane cumpanv
with drawin fwordis with him. And that the deponar come bak to the cloife with him, quhill my lord
enterit, and his cumpany with him, in at the Blak tumepyke ; and then the deponar hard a cry g-angand, ' Keip the bak j;ett !' Quhairvpoun he paft to the bak 5ett ; bot quha cryit, he knew not. Being
inquirit, ' Quhy he went not vp with my lord, his mailler, in at the Blak turnpyke ?' Deponis, that
the heiring of the cry, to gang to keip the bak 5ett, movit him to gang thair.

(Sic fubfcribitur) G. Craigingelt.

Apud Edixburgh, quarto die meufis Novemhris anno domin'i jniUeJinio
Jexcentefimo, per dominos CoinmiJ]arios Juhjcriptos, vix. Joannem Comitem de
Montrofe Cancellurimn, Alexundrum Magijlriim de Elphingstoun thejaurar'mm, D. Jacohum EljiJiingstoun de Barntoun Jecretarium, Petrum EpiJcopum Dunhcldcn., Jacohum Commendatarinm de Inchechaffray, Edicardum Commendatarium de K'ndqfe, Marcum Dominum Newhuttil, Akwaiidrion Dotninum Fijiic ; Thomcim Fijcher et Georgium Hereott pro Edinburgh, Alexandrian Butherfvrde pro Aherden, Jacohum For^ret pro GlaJgow, Jacohum Drummond pro Perth ; ComnujOiirios J", d. n. Regis Jpecialiter conjVdutos, per Commiffionem, datum Jid) teftimonio 3Iagni Sigilli ; Vnacum Thoma Scott deputato MariJmlU, Guliehno Henrijjoun et Gulielmo
Hay pro Conftahulavio, Daniele Grahame et Joanne Frajer pro Vicecomite,
et Thoma Cannnquhane adjudicatore.

CI)e <!rarl of <goSm-ic*s Conspimct)— dTorfeitui-e of tfjc 33rotI)er9 of

tfjc late etixX, $iu

]N"ov. 4. — WiLLiAME RuTHVEN as brother and heir apparent to vmq'^

Johne Erie of Gowrie, and Mv Alexander Ruthvene and his

tutors and curators, &c. : Alexander and Harie RuthVENis, fonnes to vmq'" Alexander Ruthvene of Foreland, Hew

MoNCREiF, brother Germane to AVilliame Moncreif of that

Ilk, Patrik Eviott, brother to Colene Eviott of Balhonliie,

and Andro Hexrysoun chahnerlane of Scone.

The quhilk day Maifter Thomas Hammj'ltoun, aduocat to oiire Souerane lord,

producit, in prefens of the faidis lordis Cominiffionari.-^,' ane Summondis of Trealfoun, dewlie execute and indorlat aganis Mllianie Ruthven, brother and apperant air to vmq" Johne Erie of Gowrie and Maifter Alexander Ruthvene, and

the faid Williames tutouris and cui-atouris, gif he onyhes, and all vtherishave-

> See Records of Parliament, Acta. 1600, fol. 192.

160 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

and or pretemland to liave interes in the mater of Treaffonn vnderwrittin ; to
heir and fie it be fundin and declarit, that the faidis vinq'*^ Johne Erie of Gowrie
and Mr Alexander RnthA-en to hane cominittit TreafToun aganis our fouerane
lord, in bereving of his Maieftie of his lyfe, at Sanct Johnftoun, the fyft day of
Augnft laft biijaft. The quhilk funimondis being callit thryle at the bar, and
the laid ^A'illianie Ruthven nawayes comperand ; and thairefter, Johne Blinfell
Hay, herauld, coniperit and maid fayth, that he lauchfullie fummonit the faid
"Williame Ruthven at the 3ett ' of Dirltoun, vpoun the tuentie aucht day of Auguft laft bipaft, and that vpoiui the faniyn daj' he funnnond him at the marcat
ci-oces of Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, fchore and peir of Leyth ; and that vpoun the
penult day of Auguft, the yeir of God foirfaid, he fummond the faid ^Villiame
Ruthvene at the marcat croce of Perth, Scone, and Kinrofchire, and his tutouris
and curatouris, gif he ony lies, and all vtheris haveand or pretendand to haue
enteres in the foirfaid actioun and caufe of Trealfoun ; and that he execute the
famin fuinmondis of Trealfoun at the famin places, befoir William Ramfay
trumpatar, Robert Eldar meflinger in Edinburgh, Thomas Wallis and Williame
Baxter poftis in Edinburcht, Dauid Gray thair, and Dauid Young thair, Vpoun
the verificatioun of the executioun of the faid fuinmondis of Trealfoun, and that
the faid ^Villiame Ruthvene nor nane vtheris comjjerit in the faid matei", the
faid Aduocat afkit inftrumentis.

And liclyk, the faid Aduocat producit ane vther Summondis of Treaflbun, rafit
at the inftance of oure fouerane lord and his hienes Aduocat, aganis Alexander and Hakie Rutiivexis fonnes to vmq''' Alexander Ruthvene of Freland,
HewMoncreif brother germane to "NMlliame Moncreif of that Ilk, Patrik Eviott
brother to Colene Eviott of Balhouffie, (and Andro Henryfoune chalmerlane of
Scone,") to heir and fie thame decernit to haue committit Trealfoun and Lefemajeftie aganis oure fouerane lord, at Perth, the fyft day of Auguft laft bipaft ; as
at mair lenth is contenit in the faid fummondis. The quhilk fuinmondis being
thryfe callit at the tolbuth window, and nane of the faidis perfones comperand,
except the faid Andro Henryfoiui, quha, at command of the faidis lordis Commiflionaris of this prefent Parliament, wes brocht furth of the tolbuth of Edinbiu-cht, and brocht and prefentit be George Todrik baillie of Edinburcht befoir
the faidis lordis Commiffionaris. And iminediatlie thairefter, coniperit perfonalie
in prefens of the faidis lordis Commiffionaris Johne Blinfell Hay herauld, and
maid fayth that he lauchfullie fummond the faid Andro Henryfoun, perfonalie
apprehendit within the faid tolbuth of Edinburcht, vpoun the tuentie aucht day
Auguft laft bipaft ; and alfe, that he vpoun the penult day of the fainin moneth
of Auguft fummond the faidis Alexander and Harie Ruthvennis, Hew Moncreif,
' Gate. 2 Afterwards ordered to be deleted.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 161

and Patrik Eviott and the faid Andro Heniyfoun at the mercat croces of Perth,
&c. Vpoun the verificatioun of the executionis of the foirfaidis fummondis of
TrealToun, and that nane of the foirfaidis perfones comperit to defend in the faid
mater, except the faid Ancko Henryfoun, the faid Mr Thomas Hamyltoun of
Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord, afkit inftrumentis. And liclyk, the
faid Aduocat aflcit inftrumentis that he prefentlie producit, in prefens of the
faidis lordis Commiffionaris, oure fouerane lordis Letter of Relaxatioun, gevin
vnder his hienes fignet, at Edinburcht, the thrid day of October laftbypaft, berand, the faid Williame Ruthven, Alexander and Harie Ruthvenis, Patrik Eviott
and Hew Moncreif and Andi'o Henryfoun to be relaxit fra all Horningis execute aganis thame at the inftance of quhatfumeuir perfones, at the mercat croce
of Edinburcht, vpoun the tuentie day of October laft bipaft ; and alfe, berand
the faidis perfones to be relaxit from all Hornings, at the mercat croce of Perth,
vpoun the tent day of October the yeir of God foirfaid ; and lykwyes, to be relaxit, at the marcat croce of Hadingtoun, vpoun the laft day of the famin raoneth
of October laft bipaft : The quhilkis Letter of Relaxatioun, executionis and indorfationis thairof, wer dewlie and lauchfuUie regiftrat in the Schiref court
buikis of the fchirefdomes within the quhilkis they wer relaxit fra the faidis
Hox'ningis.

The lordis commiffionaris of this prefent Parliament Ordanis the faid Andro
Henryfoun to be tane to the tolbuth of Edinburcht, to be kepit thair in waird
as he wes ofbefoir : Quhilk Andro wes inftantlie delyuerit to the faid George
Todrik baillie. Quhairvpoun the faid Aduocat lykwayes aflut inftrumentis.

Rege ipfo prefente, cum omnibus regni Jlutihiis. Vnacum Francifco
Comite Arrolie Conjluhidario Scotie, Georgio comite Marijcalli, et Daniele
Grahame deputato vicecomUis cle Edinburcht et Daiiide Lyndejay adiudicatore.

Nov. 11. — The quhilk day, the faid Maifter Thomas Hammyltoun, aduocat to our fouerane lord, of new producit the faid fummondis of Treaflbun
dewlie execute and indorfat, aganis Williame Ruthven, brother and apperant air to vmq''' Johne Erie of Gowrie, and Maifter Alexander Ruthven his
brother, and the faid Williames tutouris and curatouris, gif he ony hes, and all
vtheris haveand or pretendand to haue interes in the faid mater of Trealfoun, to
heir and fie it be fundin and declarit, that the faid vmq"' Johne Erie of Gowrie
and Maifter Alexander Ruthvene his brother committit TrealFoun aganis oure
faid fouerane lord, in maner fpecefeit in the faid fummondis, vpoun the fyft day of
Auguft laft bipaft : The quliilk Williame Ruthven, his tutoui'is and curatouris
and all vtheris haveand or pretendand to haue enteres, being thryfe callit at the
VOL. II. X

162 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

tolbutli window, and the faid Williame Ruthven nor nane vtheris in his name
comperand to haue anfuerit to the faid fummondis ; quhairvpoun the faid Aduocat afldt inftnimentis. And thairefter, the faid Johne Blinfell, Hay Herauld,
fomperit perfonalie in prefens of the Kingis Maieftie and eftaitis, and maid fayth
that lie iauchfullie fmnmonit and warnit the faid Williame Ruthven, at the place
of Dirltoun, vpoun the xxviij day of Auguft laft bipaft ; and that vpoun the
famin day he fummond him at the mercat croces of Edinburcht, Hadingtoun,
and at the fchoir and peir of Leyth : And alfe, that he vpoun the penult day of
the faid moneth of Auguft, fummond the faid Williame Ruthvene at the mercat
iToces of Perth, Scone and Kinrofchire, &c. : As the executionis thairof beris.
Vpoun the verificatioun of the executionis of the quhilk fummondis of Treaffoun,
and that the faid Williame Ruthven nor na vtheris in his name comperit nocht
to defend in the faid mater, tlie faid Aduocat afkit inftrumentis.

And fidyk, producit ane vther fummondis of Treaffoun, rafit at the inftance
of our faid fouerane lord and his hienes aduocat aganis Alexander and Harie
Ruthvenis, fonnes to vmq'' Alexander Ruthven of Freland, Hew Moncreif, brother germane to Williame Moncreif of that Ilk, Patrik Eviot brother to Colene
Eviot of Balhouffie and Andro Henryfoun chalmei'lane of Scone, to heir and fie
thame decernit to haue committit Treaffoun and Lefemajeftie aganis oure faid
fouerane lord, at Perth the fyft day of Auguft laftbipaft ; in manner contenit in
the fummondis of Treaffoun rafit thairvpoun. The quhilkis pei'fones being thryfe
callit at the tolbuth window, and nane of thame comperand, except the faid Andro Henryfoun, quha com])erit be Mr Thomas Henryfoun ane of the Commiffaris of Edinburgh, quha producit this writting vnderwrittin, fubfcrivit be the
Kingis Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followes.
Rex,

Aduocat, it is our will, and We command 50W, that vpoun the fycht heirof, 36 delete
Andro Henryfoun, chalmerlane to vmq'<^ John Erie of Gowrie, his name, furth of ]>e fummondis of
Treaffoun and Forfaltour, rafit and execute aganis him, ffor his being airt, pairt, red, counfaill and
conceilling of the lait Treaffoun, confpyrit be the faid vmq''^ Erie, his vmq'" brother and complices,
aganis oure perfone: As 36 will anfuer to ws thairvpoun : Keipand thir prefentis for ^our warrand.
Subfcr)-uit with our hand, At Halyrudhous, ]>e xj day of November, 1600.

(Sic fuhfcribitur) JAMES R.

Conforme to the quhilk command, the faid Aduocat inftantlie delete furth of
the faid fummondis of Treaffovm the faid Andro Henryfoun, and fcorit his name
furth thairof Quhairvpoun the faid Maifter Thomas Henryfoun afkit inftrumentis.

And thaireftir, comperit perfonalie in prefens of the Kingis Maieftie and eftaitis, Johne Blinfell, Hay Herauld, and maid fayth that he Iauchfullie fummonit
and warnit the faidis Alexander and Harie Ruthvenis, Hew Moncreif and Patrik

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 163

Eviott, viioun the penult day of Auguft laftbipaft at the maiTat croces of Perth,
&c. Vpoun the verificatioiin of the executionis of the foirfaid fummondis of Trelfoun, and that nane of the foirfaidis perfones comperit to defend in the faid
mater, the faid Maifter Thomas Hammyltoun, aduocat to oui'e fouerane lord, alkit
inftrumeutis, &c.

Rege pt-efente, &,c.
Nov. 15. — The quhilk day, Mr Thomas Hammyltoun of Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord, jn'oducit in prefens of the Kingis Maieflie and haill
ellatis of parliament, lykas he did diuerfe tymes of before the laid tua fummondis
of Treaffoun, &c., the quhilkis tua fummondis, reflbnes and caufes thairin contenit, being firft red in prefens of the Kingis Maieftie, and in prefens of the
Lordis of Articles,' they fand baith the famyn fummondis relevant. And thaireftir, this inllant day, baith the faidis fummondis of Treaffoun being red in
pi'efens of the Kingis Maieftie and haill eftaittis, and the faid William Ruthven,
his tutouris and curatouris, and all vtheris haveand, or jjretendand to haue, enteres ; the faidis Alexander and Harie Ruthvenis, Patrick Eviott and Hew
Moncreif, being thryfe callit at the tolbuth window, and nane of them comperand, the faidis haill eftaittis fand baith the faidis fummondis, reffones and
cauffes thairin contenit relevant ; and thairfoir they admittit the famyn to the
faid Aduocattis probatioun. And immediatlie thaii'eftir, the faid Aduocat, for
preving of the pointis of baith the faidis fummondis of Treaffoun, producit the
Lettre of Horning, dewlie execute and indorfat aganis the faidis Alexander and
Harie Ruthvenis, Hew Moncreif and Patrik Eviott, and that they were denuncit rebellis and put to the home, for the crymes of Treaffoun thairin contenit.
And repetit the haill Depofitiounis of the witneffes examinat befoir the Lordis
of Articlis : And the Depofitionis of vniq'*" Mr Thomas Cranftoun and George
Craigingelt ; and thair executioun to the death, for the foiriliid cryme of Treaffoune. And laft, the faid Aduocat repetit the notorietie of the deid of the faid
Treaffoun, togidder with the haill circumftances of the faid mater ; and renuncit forder probatioun for preving of the pointtis of baith the faidis fummondis of
Treaffoun ; and defyrit the faid proces to be advyfit. And thairvpoun the laid
Aduocat afkit inftrumeutis.

The quhilk day, the faid Aduocat, eftir that he had repetit and producit all

' Lordis of the Articles. Efiscopi, Dunkelde, Brecliiiicn. — Abbates, Halyiudlious, Lun-
(loris, Blantyre, IncliaflFray, KiiilnfL-, Towii^daiule. — Comites, Lennox, Arroll, Marfchall, Mar. —

Domini, Setoun, LevingRoun, Newlmttill, Fyvie. — Barones, Sir James IJaniyltoun .,

Innerweik for HaJingtoun, Craigliall for Fyft", Kinnaid for Forfar, Drum for Kiniardin, Imliemartine
for Perth, Tutour of Cromartie for Cromartie — Commissarij Burgoru.m, Tlionias FilVher and
George Hereott for Edinburgh, Conftable of Dnndie for Dundie, James Drumond for Perth, Alexander Rutherfurde for Aberdene, James Forrefl for Glafgow, George Bruce for Culrole, Laird of
Darfie younger for Sanctandrois, Johne Williamefoun for Striviling.

164

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

his probationis to the faidis haill Eftaitis, quhilkis he wald vfe, for preving of
the pointis of the faidis fummondis of Treaffoun, rafit and perfewit at the infiance of our faid fouerane lord and his hienes Juftice, aganis the faid Williame
Ruthven, briither and apperant air to the faid vnicx'' Johne Erie of Gowrie and
Alexander Ruthven his brother, his tutouris and curatouris, and all vtheris
haveand, or pretendand to haue iuteres, in the mater of Treaflbun vnderwrittin ;
quhairby they wer fummond to haue coniperit befoir our faid fouerane lord and
his Eftaitis of Parliament, at ane certane day bigane, Avith continewatioun of
dayes, to haue anluerit to the pointis and crymes of Trealibun and Lefeniaieftie
contenit in the faidis fummondis : Off the qiiliilk lummondis the tenuour
followes :

SuanioxDis of TeExVSsoux aganis ^^'illiam Rvthvex, as hruiher

and apperent air to vmq'" Johne Erie of Gowrie, and Alexander Ruthven

his brother.
JACOBUS, Dei gratia Rex Scotorum, dilectis noftris Leoni Regi Armorum, Merchemount,
Hay, Rofs, Kotliefay, Albanie, et Snao'doun, Heraldis; Roberto Stewart, Dauidi Bryfoun, Alexandre
Dowglas et Jacobo Cbaluieris, clavigeris ; Ormount, Bute, Vnicorne, Carrik, figniferis, nuncijs ac eorum cuilibet, coniunctim et diuifini, ricecomitibus nollris iu liac parte, falutem. Mandamus vobis et
jirecipimus, quatenus fummoneatis legitime et peremptorie, coram teftibus, Willielmum Ruthvene fratrem et beredem apparentem vel fucceflbrem quondam Joannis Comitis de Gowrie et quondam Magilhi Alesandri Rutbven fui fratris, perfonaliter, fi eius perfonalem prelentiam commode habere poteritis, alioquin apud locum fue babitationis ; fi vero extra regnum noltrum fuerit, quod fummoneatis
dictum Willielmum Ruthvene et omnes et fingulos eius tutores et curatores, fi quos habet pro fuo intereffe, necnon omnes et fingulos alios interefle habentes fi?u pretendentes, per publicam proclamationem, apud cruces tbrales burgorum nollrorum de Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, Perth, aliaque loca neceflaria, fuper premonitione fexaginta dierum, ita quod hujufmodi fummonitio ad eorura aures ct notitiara verefiniiliter penienire poterit, ad comparenduni coram nobis noftroue Jufticiario quarto die menils Nouembris proxime futuri,liora caufanim, cum continuatione dierum, in Parliamento nollro teiiendo apud Edinburgh primo die dicti menfis Nouembris fequentis, ad refpondendum nobis feu noflro
.Tufticiario in prefato Parliamento, ad videndum atque audiendum, per nos et trium regni noftri flatuum
decretum et fententiam decenii, dictos quondam Joannem Comitem de Gowrie et quondam Magifirum
Alexandrum Rutbven eius fratrem, crimen Lefemajeftatis in ipforum vita commififfe. Propterea
quod, omni Dei metu, Principis refpeetu, et legum rejectareuerentia, noftrornnique immemorcs beneficiorum, qui ob paterna crimina Maiellatis damnatos ab exilio, infaniia et egeilate reductos, ad fumn;as
opes liimniofque honores ereximus, ingenitum tamen in nos prodentes odium, incrcdibilemque noftram beneuolentiam, incredibili atque inaudita ingratitudine cbmpenfantes, in menfe Julio proxime preterite, et initio Augufli inllantis, proditionem noilram pernitiem et necem confpirarunt ; Quoque fcelerata et nefaria confilia facilius cxequerentur, dictus quondam Joannes Comes de Gowrie, quinto die
AugufU inllantis, dictum quondam Magiftrum Alexandnim Ruthven fratrem fuum Falcolandiam
fummo mane mifit, vt nobis perfuaderet, fe, infcio dicto Comite fratre fuo, ingentem auri vim ab obfcuro homine quodara repertam detexifle, ac thefaurum ipliim repertoremque eius clam omnibus artiffime mandaffe cuftodie, donee omnia pro nollro jure nobis declararet, fperare autem nos talis fui erga
nos officii memores et auri portione et onini alio fauore fe reniuneraturos, expedire vero ad vitandum

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 165

fufpitionem, vt fine vllo comitatu, proliibilat fequi domellicoruni folita tuiba, Peilham feciira pioficifceremur ; quo in fuam nos poteftatem ex aiiimi fententia redactos niinori negotio trucidavent. Cuiufquidem tragedie mandatas fibi partes, dictus quondam Magifler Alexander, incrediljili calliditate et
confidentia, agens fuaviffima oratione vultuque ac verbis benevolentiani, reuerentiani, fideiu liumillimnmque erga nos obfequium fpondentibus, quod cupit facile perfuadet, Nofque, nihil vel fraudis vel
periculi fubefle fufpicantes, pauciffimis, ijfque inermibus, coniitati ferius inparatas ducentem infidias,
ficuti Pertbam contendimus. Comes interim nos adventare flipatoribus, arrais, aliifque omnibus ad defenfionem neceflariis deftitutos, primo per Andream Henderfoun, fecundo per Andream llutbvene, per
dictum Magiftrum Alexandrum premiffos, monitus, ac poftremo per iplum Magiftrum Alexandrum
certior factus, et exfecrandam Conjurationem callidifiime diffimulans, obuiam nobis extra vrbem progreflus, intra menia et sedes fuas detellando facinori dellinatas perfide deduxit: Ibique dum prandii
fpecie aliquandiu, donee omnia ad cedem neceflaria pararentur, detinet, in fecretius cubiculum cum
dicto quondam Magiftro Alexandro fratre fuo et dicto Andrea Henderfoun, quem lorica et galea armare fe jufferat, ingreffus, dicto Andree imperat, vt quirquid dictus Magiller Alexander juberet ftrenue exequeretur ; ipfumque Andream quid imperare vellet curiofius fcifcitantem, obferato oilio, donee
ipfi ad perpetrandum faeinus redirent reliquit. Ac rebus ita difpofitis, dictus quondam Magiller Alexander ad dictum cubiculum, magnifica fe ibi proniiffa perfecturum affirmans, nos facile attrahit : Vero
Comes, quo omnem omnino opem auxilij fpem nobis in tanto difcrimine eriperet, rumorem de noftro
per pofticum fubito deceffu, per certos familiarum fuoruni fpargens, eumque dictus Comes et Magiller
Thomas Cranftoun eius feruus, verum effe cliariifimis confanguineis noftris Ludouico Lennoxie Duci
et Joanni Manie Comite paucifque alijs domellicis noflris qui forte aderant impudenter afleverantes ;
vt comites notlri ita decepti, citatis equis, ex vrbe prorumpentes Falcolandiam, quo nos contendere
dictus Comes affirmabat, celerrime fequi niterentur. Dictus interim quondam Magifter Alexander,
multis a tergo obferatis oftiis, ad illud tandem conclave in quo dictum Andream Henderfoun armatum,
vt diximus, in infidijs locaverat, nos perduxit, fceleflilfimoque perpetrando facinori tunc adveniffe tempus ratus, tecto capite, in nos proditorie irruit, ac fediflimis profequutus conviciis prefentem mortem
admoto ad jugulum noftruni pugione minatus eft : Nos vero et refiftere quantum inermibus licuit, et
perfuadere nitentes, vt a feuo detellando et proditorio fcelere, fine vlla julla caufa aut villus boni futuri fpe fufcepto, defifteret et ad fauiora confdia rediret ; promifla etiam attcmptate Proditionis fi recipifceret venia, rapidum perditiffinii hominis furorem paulatim ita retudimus vt fe Comitem quid de
nobis flatuere vellet confulturum refponderet ; et in dicto cubiculo, captiuos nos obferato poft fe oftio
relinquens : Moxque rediens, nioriendum inftanter nobis effe pronunciauit, ac colligari manus noftras,
-quo vinctum facilius interficeret, vocato ad auxilium fuum dicto Andrea Henderfoun, conatus quuni
mori potius quam talem ferre ignominiam, paratos nos et ftrenue rtfiftentes cerneret enfem ftringere,
nofque eo conficere proditorie parans, nos, nuUis arniis, nullis coniitibus fed fola Dei Omnipotentis ope
fulti, fortiter refiltere cepimus : et manus illius firmiter retinentes, poft diuturnani luctam, cubiculi feheftram que precipuam Parthie plateara refpicit, eo invito, apperuiraus, et dictos noftros fidos eonfanguineos Ludouicum Lennoxie Ducem, Joannem Marrie Comitem, qui ibi forte equos fuos vt nos confeqnerentur expectabant cernentes, ad auxilium aduerfus horrendam Proditionem, et vim vite noftre
allatam vocavimus : Cumque illi de noftra magis quam fua falute foliciti in neglecto difcrimine celerrime procurrerent. Pervcnire tamen ad dictum cubiculum, tot oftijs, per dictum Magiftrum Alexandrum de induftria occlufis, nequiverunt, donee mira Dei Omnipotentis mifericordia, fidelilfimus nobis
adolefcens ac farailiaris fenius Joannes Ramfay, alio aditu forte afcendens, dicti cubiculi oftium aliud,
quo dictus Andreas Henderfoun hoiTore fufcepti facinoris tenitus profugerat, apertum repcriens uigreffus, ac vite noftre a dicto quondam Magiftro Alexandro vim intentara cernens, opem ftrenuiffime
tulit ; et aliquot vulneribus dicto Magiftro Alexandro inflictis, nobis juuantibus cubiculo ejecit. Dictus
auteni quondam Joannes Comes de Cowrie, dum paucos qui forte aderant domefticos noftros auxi166 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

lium nobis fcrre parantes perfpicit, omni tandem reiecta diffimulatione, delib' ratum facinus propriis manibus perpetrare, nobifque prefentem mortem infene decrevit, atque duobus ftrictis enfibus iple arniatus, et centum aut eo circa ftipatus conlciis, qui gladiis, lanceis alijfque arniis omues muniti erant, a Via
in aream edium fuaium irrumpens, recta ad cubiculum in quo inclulos nos effe noverat properauit, dictumque Joannem Kamfay, Dominum Thomam ErftejTie et Hugonem Heres medicum, experte omnes
erga nos fidei feruos, qui forte accurrerant vitam fuani pro nollra falute profundere, et aditu dicti cubiculi in quo tunc eramus, dictumque quondam Coraitera prohibere nitentes, proditorie invadena, dicto
Magillro Thoma Cranftoune, Hugone Moncreif, Alexandre et Henrico Ruthvenis, Patricio Eviott,
multiique alijs domefticis et conlanguineis fuis ftipatus ferociter repulit, et dictum cubiculum in quo
nobilillima facratiffiraaque perfona nollra tunc fiierat, dictis noftris fidelibus feruis propugnanlibus
iumrao impetu repullis, et vi ingrellus, ac nos ad cedem immaniilime ac proditorie perfequens, dictos
noftros fidelilfimos feruos multis vulneribus faucios, fere oppreffit ; nee aliter a deteftande Proditionis
feroci ac pertinaci executione deflitit, quam a dictis noftris fideliffimis feruitoribus confoflus cecidit
priufque immanis anima corporis fedem quam deteftande nefarie et borrende Proditionis confilium et
executionem deferuit. Hincque dicti quondam Joannes Comes de Gowrie et quondam Magifter
Alexandre Rutbven eius frater, crimen proditionis et Lefemajeftatis commiferunt, contra nos, regalemque nollram autlioritatem, et in apertam legum omnium violationem. Et propterea, dictus Willielmus Kutbven, frater et heres apparens vel fuccefTor dictorum quondam Joannis Comitis de Gowrie
et quondam Magiftri Alexander fui fratris, omnefque tutores et curatores dicti Willielmi, fi quos habet
pro fuo intereili?, omnefque alij interefTe habentes feu pretendentes, ad videndum et audiendum, per
nos et trium regni noftri Statuum in Parliamento decretum decerni, quod dicti quondam Joannes Comes
de Gowrie et quondam iNIagifter Alexander Rutbven eius frater, crimiua Lefemajeftatis et Proditionis
preferipta in fua vita commiferunt : Ideoque nonien, memoriam, et dignitatem dictorum quondam Joannis Comitis de Gowrie et quondam Magiftri Alexandri Ruthven lui fratris extinctum efTe et fore
decerni, armaque et inilgnia fua de libro Armorum et Nobilitatis deleri, ac cancellari, itaque ipforum
pofteri ab officiis, honoribus, dignitatibus, fuccefTionibus, pofleflionibus, bonifque omnibus, mobilibus
et immobilibus, juribus, titulis, fpe fucceffionis, et alijs quibulcunque in hoc noftro regno gauden. et poffiden. feu vllo modo clamau. fint inliabiles et incapaces dehinc imperpetuum ; atque omnia bona, terras,
redditus, officia, beneficia, honores, dignitates, fuccefRones et fucceflionum fpem omnem et apparentiam, jura, titulos, pofTefliones, aliaque jura et bona, mobilia et immobilia, et alia quecunque, que ad
dictos quondam Joannem Comitera de Gowrie, et Magiftrum Alexandrum Ruthven eius fratrem fpectabant, aut vllo jure, titulo, fucceffionis fpe, pofTeflione, aut alioquouis modo fpectare vel pertinere po»
terant, confifcari, in nos devolui, ad nos pertinere, et nobifcum deinceps in proprietate perpetuo remanere. Intimando dicto Willielmo Ruthven heredi apparenti aut fucceflbri antedict. dictifque tutoribus et curatoribus fuis, ft quos habet, alijfque omnibus intereffe haben. vel habere pretenden. fiue
compareant fiue non, dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, nos et Jufti(;iarius nofter nihilo*
minus, Jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedet. Insupeu citetis Magiftrum Joannem Moncreif
aduocatum, Alexandi-um Blair Juniorem de Balthiok, Georgium Hay de Nethertoun Priorem de Charterhous, Robertum Graham de Thornik, Joannem Grahame de Balgoun, Andream Hay Balliuum de
Perth, Alexandrum Peblis burgenfem ibidem, Joannem Murray de Arbeny, Willielmum Robertfoun
notaiium in Perth, Gilbertum Richardfoun ibidem, Willielmum Rynde ibidem, Dauidem Rynde
ibidem, Joannem RentouU ibidem, Georgium FoiTeft ibidem, Thomas Burrell ibidem, Henricum Leyis
ibidem, et Robertum Cryftie janitorem quondam Comitis de Gowrie ; Ludouicum Lennoxie Ducem,
Joannem Coniitem Marrie, Patricium Commendatarium de Luudoris, Joannem Grahame de Vrquhill,
Dominum 1 liomam Erftene de Gogar, Dominum Joannem Ramfay, Dominum Hugonem Heres milites, Robertum Galbraith, Robertum Broun, Jacobum Boig, Jocobum Liddell et Joannem Boiginlie
aiU-cellar, Magiftrum Petrum Hay, ad comparendum coram nobis, noftroue Jufliciario, dictis die loco

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 167

cum continuatione dierum, ad perliibendum fidele teftimonium in caufa predicta, fub pena legia : Et
prefentes literas debite executas et indorfatas latori earundem reddatis. Et vos qui prefentes executi
fueritis, fitis ibidem dictis die et loco, coram nobis vel dicto noftro Jufticiario, portantes vobifcum fummonitionis veftre teftimonium in feriptis, pro premiflis, feu ipfos teftes. Ad quod faciendum, vobis et
veftrum cuilibet coniunctim et diuifim vicecomitibus noftris in bac parte committimua poteftatem.
Datum fub teftimonio noftri magni figilli. Apud Edinbuiglie vicefimo fexto die menlis Augufti anno
domini milleflrao fexcentefimo et regni noftri anno tricefimo quarto.

FoUotvis the Executionis ofthefoirfaid Summondis.^

Vpoun the xxviij day of Auguft, the 3eir of God J'" and fex hundreth 5eii-is, I Joline Blinfchell,
Hay Herauld, ane of the fchireffis in that pain within conftitute, paft, at command of tbir our fouerane lordis lettres and fummondis of Treaffoun, to the duelling hous of Alexander Adamefoun in
Edinburgh, in vraq'^ M' Thomas M'Cal3eans clofe, quhair Williame Ruthven, brother and apperant
air or fucceffour to vmq'* Johne Erie of Gowrie, and vmq'^ Maifter Alexander Ruthven, his brother,
maid refidence ; and lykwayes, to the Caftell of Dirltowne, quhair the faid Williame refortit and maid
fumtyme refidence with Dame Dorathie Stewart, Countes of Gowrie, his mother, becaus I culd nociit
apprehend him perfonalie ; and at euerie ane of the faidis duelling houffes rex"?, with my difplayit
coitt of amies and found of trumpett, eftir I had knokit fex feuerall knokis at euerie ane of the faidis
duelling houffes rex"« be vertew of the faidis lettres, in his hienes name and authoritie, I fummond,
waniit, and chargit the faid Wilhani Ruthvene, &c.

The faid Maifter Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcarne, aduocat to oure fouerane lord, defyrit the
faidis Eftaitis declaratioun, giflP the reflbun of the faid fummondis wes relevant aganis the faid Williame
Ruthvene, quhilkis Eftaitis all in ane voce ffand the famin relevant aganis the faid Williame: Thairfoir
the faid Aduocat, of new, for verifeing of the laid refloun contenit in the faid fummondis of Trealibun,
producit and repetit the faidis Lettre of Horning, execute and regiftrat aganis the faid Williame Ruthven, the haill Depofitionis of the witnefles examinat befoir the Lordis of Articlis, with the Depofitionis of the Aiidis vmq'« Maifter Thomas Cranftoun and George Craigingelt, thair executionis to the
death for the famin crymes, the notorietie of the faid fact of Treaflbun and haill circumftances of the
faid mater ; and alfe repetit the haill vther probationis repetit be him of befoir in the faid mater this
inftant day ; and defyrit the Aiidis Eftaitis of Parliament to advyfe the probationes foirfaidis, led and
deducit in the laid mater, and to pronunce thair Sentence of Parliament thairintill, according to the
famin probationes and thair confciences. And thaireftir, the haill wryttis and probationes being red,
fene and confident be the haill Eftaitis of Parliament, in prefens of the Kingis Maieftie, and they thairwitli being ryplie advyfit, the faidis Lordis and Eftaitis of Parliament findis, decernis and declaris that
the faidis vmq'<^ Johne Erie of Gowrie and Maifter Alexander Ruthvene, his brother, committit and
did oppin and nianefeft Treaflbun aganis oure faid fouerane lord, in all polntis, articles and maner contenit in the faid fummondis : And thairfoir it wes gevin for dome, be the mouth of Dauid Lyndefay,
dempfter of Parliament, in manner and forme as followes :

Sentence ar/ainfl the decenjed Earl of Gowrie and Mr Alexander Ruthven, S)-c.

This Coukt of Parliament fchawes fur law, that the faidis vmq'^ Johne Erie of Gowrie and
vmq'e Maifter Alexander Ruthven, his brother, committit the foirfaid cryine of Treaflbun and Lefemajeftie, in thair lyfetymes, aganis our fouerane lord and his authoritie royall, in maner at lenth
contenit in the faid fummondis : And thairfoir decernis and declaiiis the name, raemorie and dignity
of the faid vniqi*^ Johne Erie of Gowrie and vmq"^ Maifter Alexander Ruthven, his brother, to be extinguifchit, and thair armes to be cancellat and delete furtli of the buikis of armes and nobilitie, fua that

' A small portion of one of the ' Exerutions ' is here given, to sliow the solemnities, and ' the piimp and circumstance of state' then prevalent, in all official ' charges' t'oi Treason. It is unnecessary to insert the whole of the
l^xecutious. They are all in the same style.

168

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A:D. 1600.

thair pofteritie fall be vnliabill and incapabill in all tyme camming to bruik, pofles or inioy ony offices,
honouris, digniteis, fueceffionis, poffeflionis, and all gudis, moveable and immoveable, richtis, titiliis, hope
of fucceffioun. and vtheris quhatfumeuir, within this realrae ; and all gudis, landis, rentis, offices, benefices, honouris, disrniteis, hope and apperance of fuccefliomi, richtis, titiliis, poffeffionis and vtheris gudis
and o-eir, moveable and immoveable, and vtheris qubatlumeuir, quhilkis ony wayes pertenit to the faidis
vmq'^ Jobne Erie of Gowrie and vmq'« Mailler Alexander lluthven, bis brother; or quhilkis, be ony
richt, titill, hoip of fucceffioun, poffeilioun, or ony vther maner of way, micht haue belangit and pertenit to thame, to be confifcat, devoluit in oure fouerane lord, and to appertene to his hienes, and in
all tyme cuming remane in propirtie with his Majellie for euir. And forder, his Majeftie and Eftaitis foirfaidis, in deteftatioun of the faid horribill, vnnaturall and vyill TreaiToun attemptit be the
laidis vmq'° Johnefumtyme Erie of Gowrie, and vraq'^ Maifter Alexander Ruthven, aganis his hienes
awiu lyfe, Decernis, ftatutis and ordainis, that the dead bodeis of the faidis Treatouris fall be caryit
vpoun ^loninday nixt to the mercat croce of Edinburcht, and thair to be hangit, quarterit and drawin,
in prefens of the haill peopill ; and thaireftir the heidis and quarteris of their carcages to be affixit vpoun
the maill patent pairtis and places of the burrowis of Edinburcht, Perth, Dundee and Striviling. And
this I give for dome.

SuMMONDis o/'Tressoun aganis Alexander a9id Harie Ruthvenis, fortes to vmqle Alexander But/tve?i of Freland, Patrik Eiiott atid Hew MoycREiF.
JACOBUS, Dei gratia Rex Scotorum, dilectis noftris Leoni Regi Armorum, liay, Albanie, Rofs,
Rothofay, Snawdoun, Merchemount, Heraldis ; Roberto Stewart, Dauidi Bryfoun, Alexandro Douglas, Jacotio Chalmeris, clavigeris ; Ormound, Bute, Vnicorne, Carrik, figniferis, Nuncijs, et eorura cuilibet coniunctim et diuifim, vicecomitibus noftris in hac parte, falutem. Mandamus vobis et precipimusqaatenus fummoneatis legittime et peremptorie, coram teftibus, Alexandrum Ruthven et Henricum
Ruthvene filios legitimos quondam Alexandri Ruthven de Freland, Hugonem Moncreif fratrem Willielmi Moncreif de eodem, Patricum Eviott fratrem Colini Eviot de Balhouffie, Confpiratores, perpetratores et celatores criminum Lefemajeftatis fubfequentium, perfonaliter fi eorum perfonales prefentias habere poterilis, alioquin apud loca fuarum habitationum, et per publicam proclamationem apud
cruces forales burgomm noftrorum de Edinburcht, Perth, Hadingtoun, aliaque loca neceflaria, degentes
autem vel exiftentes extra regnum noftrum, feu certum nullum domicilium habentes, apud dictos cruces
forales, aliaque loca neceflaria, fuper premonitione fexaginta dierum, ita vt hujufmodi fummonitio ad
eorum aures et notitiam verefimiliter peruenire poterit : quod compareant coram nobis feu Jufticiario
noftro quarto die menfis Nouembris proxime futuri, in noftro Parliamento apud Edinburgh, primo die
dicti menlis tenendo, bora caul'arum, cum continuatione dierum, ad refpondendum nobis noflroue Jufticiario in prefato Parliamento, fuper Proditoriis eriminibus fubfequentibus ; dictas, viz. perfonas et eorum quemlibet, pro fua proditoria arte, parte, confilio et auxilio, nefaria et exfecranda Confpiratione,
conlultatione, condufione et perpetratione hon-ende feuilfimeque Proditionis, contra nobiliflimam et
iacratiffimam noflram perfonara et vitam, per dictas perfonas et quondam Joannem Comitem de Gowrie, quondam Magiftrum Alexandrum Ruthvene eius fratrem, quondam Magiftrum Thomara Cranftoun et Georgium Cragingelt eius feruos, aliofque fuos complices, ipforum nomine, ex fua caufatione,
mandato, affiftentia, et ratihabitione, quinto die Augufli inftantis, modo fubfequenti, commifle et perpetrate. Cuir enim dictus quondam Joannes Comes de Gowrie et dictus quondam Magifter Alexander Ruthvene eius frater, eximia noftra beneuolentia, innumerifque cumulati beneficiis, inaudita atque incredibiliingratitudine, in noftram perniciem Coniuralfent ; dictufque Comes dictum quondam fratrem Falcolandiam ad nos, dicto quinto die Auguftj, mifilfet, vt eximii commodi obiecta nobis fpe Pertham nos aliiceret, additis ei Andrea Henderfoun et Andrea Ruthven, itineris focijs, qui dicti Magiftri
Alexandri juffu de noftro fe refponfo celerrime monerent, dictufque quondam Magifter Alexander ful'-

SIJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 169

ceptas in fe tragedii partes tam callide et fimulate egiffet, rt nos, omni prorfus fufpicione vacnos, facile
in fuam fententiam pertraxerat, et folita coniittira tuiba fequi proliibita, Perthara fecum deduxerat :
Premiffo interim dicto Andrea Ilenderfoun, qui nos adventare premoneret ; Conies vero, dicto Andree
lorica, galeo, gladio armare tefe juffo, Andree Iluthven adventum expectat, atque ab eo etiam adventare
nos certior factus, nee vultu tamen nee verbis fe tali quicquam fcire pre fe ferens, more folito prouidere incipit : Ac tandem per ipfum INIagiftrum Alexandruui, nos apud portam vrbis adeffe monitus,
obuiam procedit et in edes fuas proditorii faeinoris deftinatas ducens, prandij fpecie aliquandiu detinet,
donee dictum Andream Henderfoun cum dicto quondam fratre in fecretius cubiculum vocat ; ibique
dicto Andree imperat, vt quicquid dictus Magiiler Alexander juberet fedulo exlequeretur : Etrepcnte
ad nos reuerfus, paucos familiarum qui nos fequuti erant primo ad prandium : Mox, eo finito, ad hortum,
ab ea edium parte remotum, eo confilio invitat, vt nullis arbitris, dictus quondam Magifter Alexander,
qui preftare que promiferat fe velle fimulans, ad dictum cubiculum nemine familiarium noftrorum confcio, nos attraxerat, ut fecurius, fine flrepitu vUo, vlloue impedimenlo, nos conficere pofTet. Cumque
dictus Comes, quo omneni prorfus auxilii fpem nobis eriperet, falfum rumoreni per quondam Magiftrum
Thomam Cranfloun, feruum fuum, de noftro fubito defceffu fparfiflet, noflrique omnes familiares, ipfo
quoque Comite, adhibito jurejurando, id affirmante, verum efie credentes, in viara precipites proruniperent, vt concenfis equis, citato nos curfu Falcolandiam fe'querentur. Dictus, interim, Magifter Alexander omnia pro voto fucceffifl'e, tempufque perpetrando facinori adveniffe ratus, multis poft fe obferatis ofliis, ad dicti cubiculi conclave nos ducens, dicto Andrea Henderfoun armato prodeimte, dictus
Magifter Alexander ferociter et proditorie in nos irruit, fedinimifqueet falfifiimisprofcindensconviciis,
admoto ad jugulum nollrum pugione, prefentem nfficem minatus eft : Nos vero, comitibus, armis, omnique alia humana ope deftituti, ac foli Diuini numinis auxilio fulti, graviflima oratione, et fi defifteret
et ad faniora conlilia rediret, promifla etiam Proditionis impunitate, iniquiliimi liominis furorem paulatim ita repreffimus, vt cnm fratre confulturum fe, quid de nobis llatuere vellent, dixerit ; et, jurejurando
prius a nobis extorto, captiuos nos filentefque in fuum reditum in dicto conclaui remanfuros, obferato
poft, fe oftio, nobis inclufis, egreflus ; breuiflimaque interpofita mora, rediens, moriendum nobis inftanter pronunciauit : Cumque proditorie colligare nobis nianus, quo niinori negotio vinctos interimemt, niteretur, nofque ftrenue refifteremns enfem fuum dextera ftringere, finiftra vero uocem nobis
precludere faucefque abftruere cepit ; nos vero, Dei Omnipotentis prefenti ope confirmati, ac fortiter
reluctantes, invito eo, ad feneftrani que precipuam vrbis plateam refiiicit prevenimus, ibique dileetos
noftros confanguineos Ludovicum Lennoxie Ducem et Joannem Marrie Comitem confpicientes, qui
illic forte equos vt nos confequerentur expectabant ad ferrendum nobis aduerfus Lorrendam Proditionem et prefentem mortem auxilium, vocauimus ; lUi autem, tam infperate Proditionis immanitate perculfi, cum ad opem nobis ferendam celerrime qua nos confcendifle audiuerant, tot oftijs per dictum
quondam Magiftrum Alexandrum, de induftria occlufis, fruftra procurrcrent ; benigno tandem baud
dubie Dei Spirilu ductore, familiaris nofter Joannes Ramfiiy, adolefcens, infolita forte confcendens viaper aliud dicti cubiculi oflium, quod dictus Andreas Henderfoun, proditorii faeinoris horrore attonitus,
vt fe inde proriperet, nuper aperuerat, ingrefliis, ac dictum quondam Magiftrum Alexandrum mortem
nobis pertinaciter intentantem cernens, aliquot inflictis ei vulneribus, nobis adjuuantibus, vix e cubieulo expellere potuit ; cum dictus quondam Comes, detectam noftro clamore Conjurationem perf])iciens,
quod frater non potuit propriis ipfe manibus perficere, defjierato et proditorio animo properat, et
ftrictis duobus quos geflerat enfibus, e via in aream edium fuarum, centum aut eo circa ftipatus
confciis armatis, irruit, ac dicto quondam Magiftro Thoma Cranftoun prevnte, dictus quondam Comes,
dictique Alexander et Henricus Rutlivene, Hugo Moncreif, Patricius Eviot aliique eorum complices,
recta ad cubiculum in quo nos antea inclufos noverant prorumpentes, nuUo nobis ad refpirandum,
nuUo domefticis ad opitulandum dato fpacio, dictum Joannem llamfay, Dominum Tliomam Erlkeyne
et Hugonem Heres niedicum, qui foli forte ex noftris accurrorant et aditu cubiculi dictos proditores
YOL. II. Y

170 CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

prohibere conabantur, feuiffime invadunt, ac fumtno impetu, iis repulfis, cubiculum vi ingrefli nofque
ad cedem rapidiffirae querentes, dictos noftios fideliflimos feruos, pro noftra falute foitiffjme dimicantes,
inultis illatis vulneribus, fere opprefferunt ; donee dicto Comite confoflb, dictifque quondam Magiftro
Thoma Cranltoun, Hiigone Moncreif et Patricie Eviott, aliquot vulneribus fauciis, e cubiculo expullis,
ad aream confugere coacti fuerunt ; ibique convocato perditiffimoi-um hominum ingenti multitudine,
aditus omnes edium occluferunt, diipofitifque vndique prefidijs, proditorie nos obfidione cinxerunt ;
et trabem, vt ollia confringerent, adferentes, puluerem etiam tormentarium querebant, quo edes in quibus nos obfidebant ex fundamentis convuHas atque in aerera fublatas fubverterent proditorie, nofque
et dictos noliros confanguineos et familiai-es, aliofque fideles fubditos nobifcum obleffos, incendio et
i-uina obrutos proditorie necarent ; crucem etiam, et laqueos ac fediffima omnia alia mortis genera, iis
omnibus qui nobifcum edes propugnabant feuiffime minati : Aliquot etiam e noftris vulneratis ad mortem fere, in obfidionis proditorio propofito perfeverauerunt, donee augente fidelium fubditorum ad nos
concurfu conjurati, omnibus contra iraprobam ipforum fpem fuccedentibus, paulatim fefe fubducere
coacti funt : Hincque dicte perfone, et earum quelibet, crimen Lefemajeftatis contra nos, regalemque
nollram autlioritatem et leges commiferunt. Ideoque dictus Alexander Ruthvene, Henricus Ruthvene eius frater, Hugo Moncreif et Patricius Evict, Confpiratores, proditoriique executores et celatores facinorum predictorum, ad videndum et audiendum CeCe et eorum quemlibet refpectiue, premiffa
crimina Lefemajeftatis commillffe, per nos et trium regni noftri Statuum decretum decerni et declarari ; et fuper predictis et pluribvis aliis rebellionibus, tranfgreffionibus et proditoriis criminibus, per
ipfos refpectiue, contra nos, regiiura noftrum et autlioritatem regiam, impie et nefarie perpetratis, dictis
die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, proponendis et oftendendis, refpondendum ac Juri parendum ;
et fuper ijfdeni Judicium noftrum et Parliament! noftri fecundum leges regni noftri expectandum et
fubeundum, dictas viz. perfonas, Confpiratores, perpetratores et celatores criminum predictorum rex"'
ad videndum et audiendum fefe et eorum quemlibet, intuitu premifTorum, crimen Proditionis et Lefemaieftatis incurriffe, per nos et trium regni noftri Statuum decretum decerni et declarari ; et propterea,
perfonas fuas penam Proditionis et vltimi fupplicii a regni noftri legibus prefcriptam fubire, ipforumque omnium bona, mobilia et immobilia, tam terras quam officia, beneficia, aliaque omnia ad eos
fpectantia, vel ad eos vllo modo pertinere poterunt, nobis confifcari, et pro perpetuo nobifcum in proprietate remanere ; pofterofque eorum ab lionoribus, dignitatibus, officijs, beneficijs, fucceftionibus, aut
vUis bonis, mobilibus vel immobilibus, in regno noftro obtinendis vel poflidendis, efle et fore dehinc
imperpetuum inhabiles et incapaces : Et vlterius, in premifllim refpondendum et juri parendum : Intimando fupradictis Confpiratoribus et eorum cuilibet refpectiue, quod fiue dictis die et loco cum continuatione dierum comparuerunt fiue non, nos dictufque nofter Jufticiarius in premiftis, jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedet. Insuper citetis peremptorie, coram teftibus, iNIagiftrum Joanneni
Moncreif Aduocatum, Alexandrum Blair juniorem de Balthyok, Georgium Hay de Natliertowne,
Magiftrum Petrum Hay, Robertum Grabame de Tliornik, Joannem Grabame de Balgowne, Joannem
Murray de Arbanie, Andream Hay balliuum de Perth, Alexandrum Peblis, Willielmum Robertfoun,
Gilbertum Ricliardfon, Willielmum Rynd, Dauidem R)iid, Joannem Rentowll, Georgium Forreft,
Thomam Bun-ell, Henricum Leyis ibidem, Robertum Cbryftie janitorem dieti quondam Comitis, Ludovicum Lennocie Ducem, Joannem Marrie Comitem, Joannem Grabame de Vrquliill Doniinos
Thomam Erflceyne, Joannem Ramfay et Hugonem Heres milites, Robertum Galbraitb, Robertum
Broun, Jacobum Bog, Jacobum Liddell et Joannem Boig in lie ail-cellar, ad eomparendum coram nobis,
dictoue noftro Jufticiario, dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, ad perhibendum fidele teftimouiura in caufii predicta, fub pena legis ; et prefentes literas debite executas et indorfatas earundem
laton rcddatis : Et uos qui prefentes exequuti fueritis, fitis ibidem, dictis die et loco, coram nobis feu
dicto noftro Jufticiario, portantes vobifcum fummonitionis veftre teftinionium in fcriptis, pro premiffis,
vel ijifos teftes. Ad quod faciendum vobis et %eftrum cuilibet, couiunctim et diuiftm, vicecomitibus
noftris m hac parte, noftram committimus poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio noftri magni figilli, Apud

3tJAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

171

Edinburcht, vigefiino fexto die menfis Augufti, anno domini millefimo fexcentefimo, et regni noftri
Trigefimo quarto.

Quhilkis eftaitis, all in ane voce, ffand the famin relevant aganis the faidis
Alexander and Harie Ruthvenis, &c.'

Sentence. This Court of Parliament fcliawis for law, that the faidis Alexander Ruthven, Harie
Ruthven his brother, fonnes lauclifull to vmqi'' Alexander Ruthvene of Freland, Hew Moncreif brother to Williame Moncreif of that Ilk, and Patrik Eviott brother to Colene Eviott of Balhouffie, committit the crymes of TrealFoun and Lefemajeflie aganis oure fouerane lord and his authoritie royall,
in nianer at lenth contenit in the faid furamondis. And thairfoir, decernis and declaris thair perfones
to vnderly the panis of TreafToun and Lefemajeflie, and lafl punifchement prefcryvit be the lawis of
this realme : And all thair gudis, moveabill and immoveabill, alfweill heretages as offices, benefices
and vtheris quhatfumeuir pertening to thame, or quhilkis raicht onywayes belang or appertene to
tfaame, to be confifrat to his Maieflie, and to remane with his hienes in propirtie for euir : And thair
pofteritie to be now and in all tyme cummyng vncapabill and vnhabill to bruk and poffes, within this
realme, ony honouris, digniteis, offices, benefices, fuccefliones, or vtheris gudis or geir, moveabill or
immoveabill. And this 1 gif for dome.

Bofuments Mustratibe ot t])t eavl of <!5ob)iie*s ConisjJirafy.

No. I.

Depositionis^ of the Witnesses examinat in prefens of the Lordis of Articles, for preving of the faidis tua Siimraondis of TreafToun.

(1.) The Duik of Lennox, fwox-ne and examinat, deponis, That vpone the
fyft day of Auguft laft bipaft, this deponar for the tyme being in Falkland, in
companie with his Maieflie, he faw Maifler Alexander Ruthvene fpeikand with
his grace, befyd the ftabillis, betuix fex and fewin in the mornyng : And fchortlie thaireftir, his Maieftie palling to the Hunting of the buk, and haveing Hane
ane, in the jjark of Falkland, his hienes fpak to the deponar, defyring him to
accumpanie his Majeftie to Perth, to fpeik with the Erie of Gowrie : And incontinent thaireftir, this dejionar fend his feruand for ane vther horfe, and for
ane fword, and lap on and followit his grace : And as this deponar ouertuk his
grace, Maifler Alexander Ruthvene wes fpekand with his Majeftie : And fchortly eftir the deponaris cummyng to the King, his hienes raid a pairt and fpak
with this deponar, faying, ' ge can nocht guefs quhat erand I am rydand for !
I am going to gett ane poife' in Pei'th ; and Maifter Alexander Ruthvene lies
informit me, that he hes fundin ane man that hes ane jjitcher full of cun3eit
gold of gi'eat fortis.' And in the mentyme, his hienes inqiiirit at this deponar,
' Off quhat humour he thocht Maifter Alexander Ruthvene to be of?' Quha anfwerit, that ' he knew nathing of him hot ane honeft difcrete gentihnan :' And
efter that his hienes had declarit to this deponar, the haill circumftances of the

* As narrated after tlie former Summons. ^ From the Originals, preserved amongst the Warrants of the Parliament of Scotland, General Register House. ^ A hoard, or hoarded treasure.

^,^2 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

man qulia had the faid gold, the place quhair it wes fundin, quhair it wes keipit,
this deponar anfuerit, ' I lyk nocht that (fchir,) ffor that is nocht lyklie.' And
they rydand befyd the brig of Erne, his Majeftie tanld to this deponar, that
Maifter Alexander defyrit him to keip that mater of the pois clofe fecrete, and
to tak na bodie witli him. And than his liienes, baith at that tyme, and thaireftir in Sanct Johneftoun,' within the Erie of Gowreis hall, Hiid to this deponar,
' Tak tent qnhan I pafs with Maifter Alexander Ruthvene and follow me.' And
as his Majeftie wes within ane myle to Perth, eftir that Maifter Alexander had
comeit ane certane fpace with his hienes, he raid away and gallopit to Perth befoir the reft of the cumpany, towardis his brotheris ludgeing ; off purpoife, as
the deponar belevis, to adverteife the Erie of Gowrie of his Majefteis dimming
tliair: And as his INIajeftie wes within tua pair of bntelangis^ to the towne of
Pertli, the Erie of Gowrie, accumpaneit with dinerfe perfones, all on fute, mett
his hienes in the Inche, and falntit him. And immediatlie thaireftir, his Majeftie, accumpanyit with this deponar, the Erie of Mar, Lundoris, Inchaflfray,
Schir Thomas Erflvene, Laird of ^^rquhill, James Erflcene, Williame Stewart,
Schir Hew Heres, Schir Johne Ramfay, Johne Mnrray, Johne Hammyltonn of
the Grange and Johne Grahame of Bagowne, paft altogidder in the Erie of
Gowries hall, the faid Erie of Gowrie and Maifter Alexander Ruthvene being
baith prefent with thame ; and eftir thair entrie, his Majeftie cryit for ane
drink, quhilk wes lang of cumming : And it wes ane hour nixt efter his firft
cmnmyng, befoir his Majeftie gat his dennar : And the tyme that his Majeftie
gat his deferte,' the Erie of Gowrie come to this deponar and to the Erie of
Mar and remanent perfones foirfaidis, and defyrit thame to dyne ; quhilk they
did in the hall : And quhan they had neir hand dynit, the Erie of Gowrie"* come
frome his Majefties chalmer° to the hall and callit for wyne, and faid that he
wes directit frome his IMajeftie to drink his fcoU " to my lord Duik and the reft
of the companie, quhilk he did : And immediatelie eftir the fcoill had paffit
about, this deponar raife frome tabill, to haue awaittit vpoun his Majeftie, confbrme to his former directioun ; and than the Erie of Gowrie faid to this deponar, that ' his Majeftie wes gane vp quietlie fum quiet erand :' And fyne the
faid Erie of Gowrie cryit for the key of his 3aird,'' and paffit in company with

' Pertli. ' Butt-lengths, the kiigtli of two pair of hutts. ^ The dessert consisted chiefly

of strawbenies, even at that time a favourite fruit in Scotland. Tiiey are often noticed in the Treasurer's books during the preceding century. ' Gowrie had previously dined at half past 12 o'clock,
as soon as be heard of the King's having consented to visit Gowrie house. — See Aiidro Henderson's
Deposition, &c. * According to usual etiquette, the King dined apart from the rest of the guests,

and was waited upon by his entertainer, thoui;li this appears to have been done in an ungracious manner. ^ This ancient custom was, in some measure, equivalent to the modern practice of drinking
healths. The King's scoll w&s drank by deputy on this occasion, Gowrie, in liis Majesty's name, drinking ' to my Lord Duik,' he. Frequent allusions are made to a similar custom in Shakspeare, i<cc.
5 Garden, orchard and pleasure ground attached to Gowries house.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 173

this dei^onar to the 3aird, accunipanyit with Lundoris and Schir Hew Hereis
and certane vtheris. And fchortlie eftir thair being in the 3aird, Maifter Thomas Cranftoun' come doun to the 3aird, ciyand, ' The Kingis Majeftie is loppin
on^ and riddin throwche the Inche.' And tlien the Ei'le of Gowrie ciyit,
' Horffis, horffis !' And the faid Maiftex- Thomas Cranftoiin anfwerit to him,
' gour horfe is in Scone ;' quhilk the Erie of Gowrie maid him nocht to heir,^ hot
cryit ay, ' Horfe, horfe !' And the deponar and the Erie of Gowrie cum fiirtli
of the 3aird, throw the hall, to the clofe and come to the wtter 3ett ;* and this
deponar fpeirit^ at the porter, ' Gif the King wes furth ?' Quha anfwerit, that
' he wes alTurit that his Majeftie wes nocht cum forth of the place.' Than the
Erie of Gowrie faid, ' I am fure he is furth ; alwayes® ftay, my lord Duik, and
I fall gang vj) and get your lordfchip the veritie and certantie thairof : And the
laid Erie of Gowrie paflit vp, and incontinent come dovui agane to the cloife,
and he affirmit to this deponar, that ' the Kingis Majeftie wes fiu'th at the bak
3ett and away.' Quhairvpoun this deponar, the Erie of Gowrie, and Mar and
haill company, paft furth at the foir^ett of the ludgeing, and ftude befoir the
famin 3ett vpoun the hiegait ;' And as they wer ftanding thair, advyfeing quhair
to feik the King, incontinent, and in this mentyme, this deponar hard ane voce,
and faid to the Erie of Mar, ' This is the Kingis voce that cryis, be quhair he
will.' And fua they all lukand A^p to the ludgeing, they faw his Majeftie lukand
furth at the window, wantand his hat, his face being reid," and ane hand grippand his cheik and mouth ; and the King cryit, ' I am murtherit ! Treaflbun !
My Lord of Mar, help ! help !' And incontinent this deponar, the Erie of Mar
and thair cumpany, ran vp the ftair to the Galry-chalmer, quhair his Majeftie
wes, to haxie relevit him : And as they paft vpe, they fand the dure of the chalmer faft ; and feing ane ledder ftanding befyd, they rafchit at the dure with the
ledder, and the ftoippis of the ledder brak : And fyne they fend for hameris ;
and nochtwithftanding lang forceing with hammeris, they gat nocht entrie at
the faid chalmer, quhill" eftir the Erie of Gowrie and his brother wes baith
llane. That Robie Broun paft about be the bak dur and come to his Maieftie
and affurit his hienes, that it wes my lord Duik and the Erie of Mar that wes
ftrikand vp the chalmer dure ; and than the hammer wes gevin throw the hoill
of the dure of the chalmer, and they within brak the durris and gaif thame entrie : And at thair firft entrie, they faw the Erie of Gowrie lyand dead in the
chalmer, Maifter Alexander Ruthvene being flayne and takin doun the ftair befoir thair entrie. And at thair firft entrie within the faid chalmer, quhair the

» See his Trial, Aug. 22, 1600. ^ Mounted, leapt on. ^ Affected, or pretended not to

hear. * Outer gate. * Enquired, asked. « Nevertheless, at least. '' The Higligate, or High Street of Perth. " Red, inflamed. ^ Until.

174, CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Kingis Majeftie Aves, the deponar faw findrie halbertis and fwordis flrikiiig vnder the dure of the chahiier and fydis thairof, be reflbne the famin wes na cloile
dure ; and knew nane of the ftrikeris in, except Alexander Ruthven, ane of the
defendaris, quha defp-it to fpeik with this deponar throwch the dure, and fperit
at him, ' For Godis faik, my lord, tell nie how my lord of Gowrie dois ?' To
quhome this deponar anfuerit, ' He is weill.' And the faid deponar bad the faid
Alexander to ' gang his away, and that he wes ane foill ; and that he wald gett
litill thaid<is for that labour.' And in this mentyme, as they, continewand in
ftriking with halbertis vnder the dure, Mekill Johne IMurry,' leruand to Tullibardin, wes ftrikin throw the leg. And howfone the laid Alexander Ruthven
had hard the faid lord Duik fpeik, he and his haill complices paft frome the
foirfaid dure, and maid na mair trubling thaireftir thairat ; and paft doun to
the cloife and ftude thair : And faw nane of the remanent defendaris jirefent at
the doing of the violent turnis that day, except be report, hot the faid Alexander Ruthven : Bot fayis, that he faAV Hew Moncreif, Harie and Alexander Ruthvenis, and Patrik Eviott with the Erie of Gowrie, at the Kingis denner that
day, and ofbefoir. And thaireftir, loukand ouer the chalmer window, he faw
George Craigingelt and Alexander Ruthvene, and diuerfe vtheris of the Erie of
Gowreis feruandis, quhome this deponar knew nocht, ftandand with armes, within the clofe : And alfe, faw vtheris perfones carying ane geft^ fi'ome the towne,
to the clofe of the Erll of Gowries ludgeing. And declaris, that thair aboad findrie perfones within the faid clofe, and in the Hie-ftreit, befoir the faid Erlis
ludgeing, cryand and makand tumult, be the fpace of tua houris and mair, nixt
eftir the death of the faid Erie of Gowrie and his brother.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Lenxox.

(2.) The Erle of Mar fworne and examinat, deponis conforme to the lord
Duk of Lennox Depofitioun, in all thingis fubftantiall ; except, his lordfchip
faw nocht Mr Alexander Ruthven in Falkland, quhill about ten houris, the day
libellit ; fchortlie befoir the flaying of [the] buke : And alfe, ouertuk nocht his
Majeftie that day, quhill his INIajeftie wes neir the Brig of Erne : And that eftir
thair dennar, my Lord of Mar palTit nocht to the ^aird, in company with the
Erie of Gowrie, bot paffit to the chalmer quhair the king djTinit ; and faw nathing of the geft.^

(3.) AxDRo Hexdersoux, chalmerlan of Scone, fworne, deponis. That he
is of the age of threttie aucht yeiris. Declairis, that vpoun Monunday at nicht,
the fourt day of Auguft laftbipaft, this deponar being, eftir fupper, in companie
with the Erie of Gowrie (and) Maifter Alexander Ruthvene, within my lordis

' John ^Furray of Arbany. ^ Joist, beam. = The using of tlie joist or beam to break open

the outer gate, — not the ' gest,' ' gist,' oi- action, according to the old English acceptation of the word.

^4Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 175

awin chalmer, the Erie of Gowrie inquirit at this deponar, quhat he had to do the
morne ? To quhonie this deponar aiifuerit, that he had to do, to ryd to Ruthven to fpeik with the tennentis : Than the Erie of Gowrie anfuerit, ' Stay that
jornay, 36 man' ryd to Falkland, in company with my brother Maifter Alexander, and tak Andro Ruthvene with 30W : And that 3e be redie to ryde, be four
houris in the morning : And haift 30W bak with anfuer, as my brother directis
30W, be wrytt or otherwayes : And lett Andro Ruthven remane with my brother.'
And the morne, eftir four houris in the morning, they raid all thrie togidder to
Falkland ; and cummand to Falkland, they lichtit at Johne Balfouris hous :
And feing that Colonel Edmond wes thair, they ludgeit in ane Lawes houfe :
And the Maifter fend this dei)onar, about fewin houris in the morning, to fie
quhat the Kingis Maieftie wes doand : And as he wes within the Palice, he faw
the Kingis Maieftie cummand furth mid-clofe, butit.^ And than he returnit bak
agane to the Maifter, and faid to him, ' Haift 30W, the Kingis Maieftie is cummand furthe.' And incontinent the Maifter foUowit his Maieftie and fpak
with his Maieftie, foiranent the equirie :^ And the King layit his hand on his
fchulder and clappit him ; quhair they fpak togidder be the fpace of ane quarter
of ane hour. And thaireftir, the Maifter directit this deponar, to ' ryde to
Perth, in haift, as he luiffit the Lord Gowreis honour and his ; and aduertefe his
lordfchip, that his Maieftie will be thair, with ane few number, incontinent ; and
cavife mak his denner reddie.' Than this deponar anfuerit, ' Sail I ryd prefentlie ?' The Maifter anfuerit, ' Na, hot ftay a quhill, and follow the King and
me, quhill I fpeik with his Maieftie agane.' And as his Maieftie wes rydand
throw the flop of the park dyk, the Maifter Qrak his Maieftie : And innnediatlie
thaireftir, the Maifter bad this deponar to ' pas to Sanct Johneftoun, with all
poflibill diligence,' according to his former directioiui. And at tliis deponaris
cummyng to Perth, quhilk wes fchortlie eftir ten houris in the morning, he enterit in the lord of Gowreis chahner, quhair he faw his lord fpeik with George
Hay and Maifter Petir Hay : And howfone my lord of Gowrie faw this deponar, he come afyd to this deponar, and inquirit, fecreitlie, ' Qvdiat word he had
brocht frome his brother ? and gif he had brocht ane letter ?' This deponar anfuerit, that ' he had brocht na letter.' ' Quhat anfuer' (than faid he) ' half ye
to me ?' This deponar anfuerit, that ' the Maifter, his brother, bad tell his lordfchip, that the Kingis Maieftie wald be thair incontinent ; and bad haift his
denner.' Than the Erie defyrit this deponar to follow his lordfchip to the Cabinat, and fperit at him ' how his Maieftie had tane with his brother ?' He anfuerit, that ' he wes weill tane with : And quhan he did his coiu-tefie, the King
layd his hand vpoun his fchulder.' The Erie fperit, ' Quhat number of perfones

» Must. ^ In boots, prepared for riding. " Equerry, stables.

176 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

wes with the King at the hunting ?' Quha anfuerit that ' he knew nocht weill ;
hot thair wes fmdrie of his awin with him, and funi Inglifmen.' And than the
Erie fperit, ' Quhat nobilhnen wes with him ?' He anfuerit, ' Nane ; bot my
lord Duik.' And thaireftir, this dejjonar pall to his awin houfe, in the towne ;
and tuk aff his buttis, and returnit to tlie Erie within ane hour. And howfone
the Erie faw him in his chalmer, he callit vpoun this deponar, and bad him ' put
on his fecrete and plate lleiffis.' The deponar inquirit, ' To quhat effect ?' The
Erie anfuerit, ' I haue ane Heland-man to tak, in the Scho-gait.' And than this
deponar paffit to his awin houfe, and put on his fecreitt and plait lleiffis, come
bak affane to the Erie of Gowreis houfe : And about half hoiu- to ane, the Erie
command this deponar, ' Tak vp my dennar.' And this deponar paffit and
tuk vp tlie firft feruice, be relTone George Cragingelt' was feik. And incontinent, the laid Erie paffit to his dennar, accomj^anyit with Maifter Johne Moncreif laird of Pitcreif, Mr James Drummond, Alexander Peblis barroun of Findowie : And fchortlie eftir the firft feruice wes fett doun, my lord littand at the
tabill with the foirfaid company, Andro Ruthven come in fronie the Maifter, and
roundit to the Erie ; bot hard nocht c[uhat he laid. And fchortlie thaireftir, this
deponar paffiug doun, to tak \^i the fecond feruice, Maifter Alexander Ruthven
and AVilliame Blair come in to the hall, my lord fittand at his dennar : And
howfone my lord faw thame, he and his haill companie raife frome the table.
And than, this deponar, herand my lord on fute, bade this deponar fend for his
fteill bonat and gantilat, beleevaud that my lord wes going to tak the laid Heland-man : And as the deponar perfavit my lord pafland to the Inche, and nocht
to the Scho-gait, he fend hame his fteilbonat, and caft his gantilat in the pantrie :
And thaireftir foUowit the Erie to the Inche, quhair he faw the faid Erie meitt
his Maieftie, the Duik, and the Erie of Mar, and come in altogidder to the Erlis
houfe. And eftir his Maieftie had cum to the Erlis ludgeing, the Maifter of
Ruthven fperit at this deponar, ' Quhair the key of the Galry chalmer wes ?'
Quha anfuerit, that he handlit nocht the faid key ien the Erie come in Scotland.
Than the Maifter bad this deponar fpeik to Maifter AVilliame Rjaid, to gif to
him the faid key. And the Maifter, paftand vp towardis the galry, Mr Williame
Rynd followit him, and gaif to him the faid key. And thaireftu', imraediatlie
eftir his Maiefteis dounfitting to his dennar, Maifter Thomas Cranftoun come to
this deponar, and bad him ' gang to the Erie of Gowrie :' Quhilk this deponar
did. And the Erie of Gowrie, in the vtter chalmer, quhair the King dynit, fpak
to this deponar fecreitlie, and bad him pas vp to the gahy to his brother. Sua
lie paffand v]^, and the Erie followis him : And they beand all thrie togidder, in
the galry chalmer, quhairof he bad the key fra Maifter AVilliame Rynd ; the Erie
' Craigingelt seems to Imve been ?*Iaster of tlie Household to the Earl of Gowrie.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I77

faid to this deponar, * Taiy ftill with my brother, and do ony thing he biddis 30W.'
Than this deponar turnit to the INIaifter, and fperit, ' Qiihat will 3e do with me,
fchir ?' Than the Maifter fpak to my lord, ' Lett Andro Henrylbun gang in to
the round of the chahner, and I will loik him in, and tak the key with me :'
Quhair this deponar abaid half an hour or thairby, lokkit his allane, haveand his
fecrete, plate flewis, fword and quhinger with him, and wantand his lleill bonnat. And all this tyme, this deponar, fearand fum ewill to be done, fatt vpoun
his kneis and prayit to God. And about the end of the half hour, Maifter Alexander oppenis the dure of the round, and enterit firft within the famin, haveand
the Kingis Maieftie be the arme, and puttis on his hatt on his held, drawes furth
this Andro Henderfoun deponaris quhinger, and fayis to the King, haveand the
drawin quhinger in his hand, ' Schir, 3e man be myprifoner! Remember on my
fatheris dead !" And as he held the quhinger to his Maiefteis breift, this deponar threw^ the famyn furth of Maifter Alexanderis handis. And the tyme that
the Maifter held the quhinger to his Maiefteis breift, the King wes beginnand
to fpeik, the Maifter faid, ' Hald 30ur towng, fchir, or be Chryft 36 fall dee.'
Than his Maieftie anfuerit, ' Maifter Alexander, ye and I wes verie great' togidder : And as tuicheing your fatheris deid, man,^ I was bot ane minor ; my
Counfall micht haue done ony thing they pleiffit : And forder, man, albeit 36
bereve me of my lyfe, 36 will nocht be King of Scotland, for I haue baith fonnes
and dochteris : And thair is men [in] this towne, and freindis, that will nocht
leiff it vnrevangeit.' Then Mr Alexander anfwerit, fwerand with ane great
aith, That ' it was nather his lyfe nor blude that he cravit.' And the King faid,
' Quhat rakis,^ albeit 3e tak of your hat ?' And then Maifter Alexander tuk af
his hatt. And the King faid, ' Quhat is it 36 crave, man, and" 36 crave nocht
my lyfe ?'' Quha anfuerit, ' Schir, it is bot ane promeis.' The King anllierit,
' Quhat promeis ?' The laid Maifter Alexander anfuerit, ' Schir, my lord my
brother will tell 30W.' The King faid, ' Fetche hither 3our brother.' And fyne
the faid Maifter Alexander faid to the King, ' Schir, 3e will nocht cry, nor oppin
the window, quhill I cum agane ?' And the King promeffit fua to do. Then
Maifter Alexander paftit furth and loikkit the dure of the roimd ; and paflit

' Death. See a siifcinct and able account of the Raid of Iluthven and Gowrie Conspiracy in Constable's Miscellany, v<d. xliii., by John Parker Lawson, M.A., p. 2-23 to the end. ^ Wrenched,
twisted by violence ; tlie past tense of tlie verb to thruw. ' On very familiar terms. ' A familiar and homely phrase used in Scotland, rather expressive, at least in this instance, of a desire to
soothe one who is unreasonable, than as indicating- any mark of contempt or hauteur, as the mere English reader might naturally imagine. It seems equivalent to ' my lad,' or ' my good fellow.' * Kecks.
A reproof for appearing covered in his presence ; which shows much greater firmness and presence of
mind than could have been expected, even from the most resolute mind, under such circumstances.
6 If. ' The King, from the outset of this hazardous parley, assumed very high ground; and in no
instance does he seem to have lost his presence of mind and perfect self-possession. See note to Sir
John Ramsay's Deposition, No. 7, and the whole Narrative and Examinations.
VOL. II. Z

178

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

iioclit frome the dure, as he "beleves.' In the mentyme, the Pving enterit in conference with this deponar, ' How cam 36 in heir, man ?' And this deponar anfuerit, ' As God leves, I am fchott in heir lyk as ane dog.' His Maieftie anfuerit
' Will my lord of Gowrie do me ony ewill, man ?' This deponar anfuerit, ' I
wow to God, fchir, I fall die firft.' And than the King bad this deponar ' oppin
the window :' And he oppinit the window that luikit to the Spey tour. The
King anfuerit, ' Fy ! the wrong window, man.' And thaireftir this deponar,
pafTmg to the vther window, narreft his Maieftie, to ojjpin the famin, befoir he
gat to the window, ]\Iaifter Alexander oppinit the dure and come in agane, and
faid to his Maieftie, ' Be God, fchir, thair is na remede !' And than he leippis
to the King, and gatt him be baith the handis, haveand ane gartane in his handis.
Then the King anfwerit, ' I am ane frie Prince, man, I will nocht be bimdin.'
Sua his JNIaieftie caftis loufe his left hand from Maifter Alexander ; and at that
famin time, this deponar drawes away the gartane frome Maifter Alexander ;
and his Maieftie leippis frie frome the faid Maifter Alexander ; and the faid
Mr Alexander followes his INIaieftie, and witli his leaft hand about his Maiefteis
traig^ puttis his richt neiff' in his Maiefteis mouth. Sua his Maieftie, werfland''
to be quit of him, this deponar puttis his hand out of his Maiefteis mouth : And
thaireftir, the deponar pat his left hand ouer his Maiefteis leaft fchulder, and
puUit vp the brod of the windo, quhairvnto the faid Maifter Alexander had
thrufchit' his Maiefteis held and fchulderis ; and with the force of the drawing
vp of the window, it preiffis his Maiefteis body about his rj'cht fyd to the window ; at the quhilk tyme, his Maieftie cryis furth, ' Ti-eaflbun ! Treaflbim !'
Sua the Maifter faid to this deponar, ' Is thair na help with thee ? Woe worth
thee, thow will cans ws all die.' Sua trymling," the Maifter pat his hand on the
gaird of his awin fworde ; and incontinent the Kingis Maieftie pat his hand
on the Maifteris handis, and ftayit him frome drawing of his fworde : And
this wayes, they baith being glafpit togidder, cummis furth of the cabinat to the
chalmer ; And in the mentyme, this deponar threw' about the key, than ftanding in the dure of the heid of the turnepyk, quhilk enterit to the chalmer, and
oppinit the dure thairof, to efchew him felf, and to lett his Maiefteis feruandis
in : And howfone he oppinit the dure, Johne Ramfay cam in at the famin dure,

' This circumstance is elsewhere stated. Henderson infers that he did not leave the back of the door,
tither from his not hearing his retiring footsteps, or from liis too precipitate return ; which last, alone,
would show he iiad liad no conference, on so momentous an occasion. The fact seems to be, that Ruthven was comi)letely abashed by the dignified and collected demeanour of the King; and having become (|uite unnerved by the desperate situation in which he now felt himself placed, he availed liimself ol tlie King's proposal to call for Gowry, to retire and ' screw his courage to the sticking point.'
Appalled l)y tlie awful circumstances of his Treason, and conceiving that it was now too late to retrace his steps, lie seems to have stifled every feeling of reason and religion, and desperately to have
rushed forward to the conclusion of his conspiracy, with headlong and insane fury. ^ Throat.

Fist. ■> Wrestling, struggling. 5 Forcibly (hnist. ^ Trembling with emotion, violent passion, and exertion. " T/irawcd, turned.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I79

with ane halk in his hand, and paffit to the Kingis Maieftie and said about him
and drew his quhinger : And as he faw him myntane with the quhinger, this
deponar paft furth at the laid dure, and pad doiin the turnpyik.

(Sic fubfcribitur) A. Hexdersoun.

And as the deponar paffit throw the cloife, and come to the foiryeitt, the deponar faw the Erie of Gowrie Handing befoir the yett, accumpanyit with diuerfe
perfones, of qiihome he rememberis nane ; hot rememberis weill, that the Erie
had this deponaris knaipfchall' on his heid, and tua fwordis drawin in his hand.
And immediatlie thaireftir, the deponar paffit to his awin ludgeing, quliair lie
remanit quhill the King paffit furth of the towne : And than the deponar paffit
to the Brig, and walkit vp and doun be the fpace of ane hour, and returnit nocht
agane to the Erlis ludgeing that nicht. And the tymes of his entrie to his houfe
that nicht, this deponaris wyf inquirit at tliis deponar, ' Quhat truble wes within the place ?' To quhome he anfuerit, ' Weill is me, of ane thing, that gif I had
nocht bene thair, the King had bene twyfe llikit' this nicht ! Bot wais me,^ for
the thing that is fallen out !' And this deponar, being demandit be Maifter
Johne Moncreif, eftir his returning from Falkland, ' Quhair haue ye bene with
30ur boittis on ?' Anfuerit, ' He had bene tua or thrie mylis beyond Erne.' And
durft nocht tell him the veritie, be relTone the Erie of Gowrie had difchargit him
to tell the erand he fend him, to ony bodie. And fordei', this deponar declaris,
that quhan he faw tlie Erie of Gowrie Handing with his drawin fwordis, befoir
the yette, this deponar fpak nocht to the Erie, nather yit the Erie to him at that
tyme ; bot he paffit to his awin houfe.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Axdro HENDERSorx.^

' Steel-bonnet. ^ Stabbed. = Woe is me I * It may here be remarked, tliat the pusillanimous conduct of Andrew Henderson tended, both at tlie time, and even now has been considered as
strongly fortifying the idea of a plot on the part of tiie King to put down the family of Gowrie, and
to seize upon their estates. But it is obvious that the King would not liave ciiosen so ' weak a velfel* to be the means of effecting so daring a deed. This blockhead seems to have been utterly paralyzed by the novel and difficult situation in which he was placed. When locked up in ' the round of
the chalmer,' or turret, by Mr Alexander Ruthven, where the scene of action was to take place, lie
first craved direction from above, ' and all this tyme (about half an liour) fatt vpoun his kneis, and
prayit to God.' Notwithstanding, he was little better than a passive spectator of the struggle ; and after ' efchewing him felff,' by which means he ' lett his Maiefteis feruandis in,' he passed his ill-fated
master, Gowrie, without uttering a word, and ' paffit to his awin ludgeing, quhair he remanit quhill
the King paffit furth of the towne ;' and then, in a ' quaudury^ saunters about on ' the brig, be the
fpace of ane hour !' This was not a man to be intrusted witli playing a principal part in so liazardous
a game. Nor would the King, constitutionally feeble, and unfit by nature for violent muscular exertion, have been so insane as to risk his person, unarmed, and habited merely in a slight hunting suit,
without even a dagger or weapon of any sort, to contend with an atiiletic young man, such as Kuthven was, perfectly skilled in the art of self-defence, armed with a sword and ' pyne-doublet,' or secret
coat of mail — and this conflict, too, in a remote tower, out of the probable reach of aid from any
others who had been intrusted with this plot. This circumstance, by itself, would go far to disprove
the very idea of any Conspiracy on the part of the King against Gowry and his brotiier. But when
one takes into consideration the total ignorance of the whole of the hunting party, the King's sole attendants, who had merely time to send for fresh horses and their side-arms, when they, on the hunting- field,
heard, for the first time, of tlie proposed visit to Perth, such a proposition seems the height of absuidiiy.

180

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

(4.) The Abbott of Ixchechaffray, fworne and examinat, deponis, That
vpoun the fyft day of Auguft laftbipaft, this deponar, being in Falkland, about
fevin houris in the mornyng, he inett Maifter Alexander Ruthvene, accumpanyit
with Andro Ruthvene ; and at that tyme, onlie falutit the faid Maifter Alexander, without ony conference forther at that tyme : And at that tyme, he faw the
faid Maifter Alexander enter in conference with his Maieftie, vpoune the grene,
betuix the ftabillis and the parke ; quliilk conference, induring for the fpace of
ane quarter of ane hour : And the faid Maifter Alexander accompanyit his Maieftie quhill they come to the medow. And at his returning fronie his Maieftie,
this deponar defyrit INIaifter Alexander to difchone^ with him, be reftoun his awin
culd nocht be fafone be preparit. To quhome Mr Alexander anfuerit, ' He micht
nocht tarie, be reflbne his Maieftie had commandit him to await vpoun him.'
And as this deponar paftit to Falkland, levand Mr Alexander behind him, he
mett his horfe with his man cummand frome Falkland to him. And then this
deponar, eftir he had difchonit in Falkland, he tuik his jornay the hieway to
Inchechaffray : And the deponar, being hot ane mile a north Strameglo, his Maieftie, accumpanyit with my lord Duik, Lundoris, the Laird of Vrcj^uhill, John
Hammyltoun of the Grange, Finlaw Tail5eour and Maifter Alexander Ruthven
cam by this deponar, rydaud the hieway to Perth : Than incontinent this deponar horflit and accompanyit his Maieftie to Perth, qvihair he faw the Erie of
Gowrie meitt his Maieftie in the Inche ; and paffit in company with his Maieftie
and his Nobill men and feruandis to the Erie of Gowreis ludgeing, quhair they
dynit altogidder. And eftir dennar, this deponar being in the chalnier at the
north end of the hall, word paffit throw the hall, that his IMaieftie wes paffit
away and riddin towardis Falkland : And than this deponar, in company with
the Lord of Mar, and remanent prefent for the tyme, paffit to the cloife, and
frome that to the Hie-ftreit : And the Erie of Gowrie being prefent with thame,
defyrit thame to ftay, quhill he returnit, and advertefit thame of the veritie
thairof : And incontinent the Erie of Gowrie paffit vp the ftair, and returnit bak
and certefeit the deponar and his collegis of his ]\Iaiefties depairture. Than the
lord Duik, this deponar, and remanent, cryit for thair horfis, to follow the King.
Than, as they wer ftandand a^jouu the Hie-ftreit, they hard ane cry and ane
voce : And the Duik firft declarit, ' I am affiirit yon is his Maiefties voce, be
quhair he will him felf.' And immediatlie thaireftir, this deponar faw his Maieftie loukand furth at ane windo of the round, wantand his hat, and his face reid,
cryand ' Fy ! Help, my lord of INIar ! Treflbun ! Treaffbun ! I am murderit !'
And at that famin inftant, be his judgement, his IMaieftie wes pullit, perforce, in
at the famyn window. And incontinent thaireftir, this deponar paffit in haift

' To breakfast. Old Fr. desjeuncr.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 181

vpe with the Erie of Mar and my lord Duik, to the chalmer within the galry ;
quhair he faw, hard and did, in all thingis conforme to the Dukis depofitioun.

(Sic fubfcribitur) IN'cheaffray.

(5.) The Abbott of Lundouis, fworne and examinat, deponis conforme
to the Lord Duik of Lennox, in all thingis : Addenda^ that eftir dennar, quhau
woi-d Aves of his Maiefteis depairtour towardis Falkland, and that they had altogidder cum doun to the porter, and had inquirit at him, ' Gif the Kingis Maieftie wes gane furth ?' The porter anfuerit, ' He wes nocht paffit furth :' And
the Ei-le of Gowrie affirmit that ' He wes paffit furth at the bak jett :' And the
porter faid to the Erie of Gowrie, ' That can nocht be, my lord, becaus I haue
the key of the bak 3ett.' And eftir that his Maieftie had cryit furth of the windo
of the round, ' Treaffioun ! TreafToun !' &c. this deponar faw James Erflveyne
incontinent lay handis vpoun the Erie of Gowrie, vpovui the Hie-ftreit. And
immediatlie Schir Thomas Erflveyne grippit the Erie of Gowrie, ' Fy, Tratour,
this is thy deid, thou fall die !' Then the Erie of Gowrie anfuerit, ' I ken na
thing in the mater.' Than, inftantlie, the Erie of Gowreis men ruiggit the
faid Schir Thomas Erflvyne and James Erflveyne fra the Erie of Gowrie ; quha
incontinent ran the fpace of half ane pair of butlandis frome thame, towardis
Glenvrquhis houfe, and drew furth his tua i'wordis,' and cryit, ' I will ather be
at my awin houfe, or die be the gait.' And incontinent tliaireftir, the faid Erie,
accompanyit with threttie perfones or thairby, paffit within the faid place, quhair
his Maieftie wes for the tyme : And fchortlie thaireftir, the deponar, as apperit
to him, faw ane multitude of people caryand ane jeft towardis the place.

(Sic fubfcribitur) LuNDORis.
(6.) Schir Thomas Erskeyne, of the age of threttie-fex 3eiris, Sworne,
deponis conforme to the Lord InchefTray and Lord of Lundoris : Addendo, that
immediatlie eftir this deponar hard his Maieftie cry furth of the windo of the
round, ' Fy ! Help ! I am betrefit ! They ar murdreffing me !' he ran with
diligence towardis the place, to haue helpit his Maieftie : And befoir his entrie,
feing the Erie of Gowrie, this dejjonar and his brother grippit him be the nek,
and faid to him, ' Tratour, this is thy deid !' Quhilk Erie anfuerit, ' Quhat is
the mater ? I ken nathing !' Immediatlie the Erlis feruandis feuerat him frome
this deponar and his brother ; and than this deponar enterand within the clofe,
he forgadderit with Schir Hew Hereis, quha demandit of the deponar, ' Quhat
the mater menit ?' And in the mentyme, the deponar hard Schir Juhne Ramfay
cryand out at the turnepyk heid, ' Fy ! Schir Thomas, cum vp this turnepyk,

' It appears that these swords were, according to a custom tlien prevalent in Italy, worn in one
scabbard, and served for double defence, as the sword and dagger. The Earl was singularly skilled in
the use of arms.

182 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

ewin to the lieid.' And as this deponer had paffit vp fyve ftoppis of the turiiepyke, he feis and meittis with Mr Alexander Ruthvene, bhidit in tua pairtis of
his bodie, viz. in his face and in his neck : And incontinent this deponar cryis
to Schir Hew Heres and vtheris that wer with him, ' Fy ! This is the Tratour !
Strik him !' And incontinent he wes ftrikin be thame and fell : And as he wes
fallin, he turnit his face and cryit, ' Allace ! I had na wyte of it !' This deponar
beino- ftanding abone him in the turnepyk. Thaireftir, this deponer pall to the
held of the turnepyik, and enterit within the chalmer at the end of the galry,
quhair the king and Schir Johne Ramfay wes thair allane prefent : And at the
firft meting, this dejionar faid to his Maiellie, ' I thocht 30ur INIaieftie wald haue
concredited mair to me, nor' to haue commandit me to await 30ur ]\laieftie at
the dure, gif 36 thocht it nocht meit to haue tane me with 30W.' Quhairvpoun
his iMaieftie anluerit to the deponer, ' Allace ! the Tratour diflavit me in that,
as he did in the leave f fTor I commandit him exprellie to bring 30W to rae :
Quhilk he promefit to me to do, and returnit bak as I thocht to fetche 30W ; bot
he did nathing bot fteikit the diu*e.'^ Schortlie thaireftir, Schir Hew Heris followit this deponar in to the chalmer, and George Willbun feruant to James
ErfKeyne : And immediatlie thaireftir jNIaifter Thomas Craufloun, with his
fword di'awin in his hand, enterit within the faid chalmer ; and the Erie of
Gowrie followit him within the famin chalmer, with ane drawiu fworde in euerie
ane of his handis, and ane knapfcall^ on his held ; quha flruck at this deponar
and his collegis, ane certane Ipace. Lykas, they defendit thame and ftruk agane :
And that famyn tyme, the faid deponar wes hiu'te in the richt hand, be Maifter
Thomas Craufloun. And this deponar hard my Lord of Gowrie fpeik fum
wordis at his entrie, bot vnderllandis thame nocht. And lafl, Schir Johne Ramfay gaif the Erie of Gowrie ane dead ftraik : And than the Erie leanit him to
his fword ; and the deponar faw ane man hald him vpe, quhome he knew nocht :
And howfone the Erie fell to the ground, Maifter Thomas Cranftoun, and the
remanent quha accumpanyit him, depairtit, and paffit doun the tui'nepyk. And
the deponar rememberis, that at that tyme, thair wes ma perfones in the clialnier with the Erie of Gowrie, by^ Mr Thomas Cranftoun ; bot knew nane of
thame ; except he believes, that ane blak man'' that wes thair in company within
the chalmer, wes Hew Moncreif, brother to the Laird of Moncreif ; bot the deponar knawes nocht weill, quhidder or nocht it wes Hew IMoncreiff.

(Sic lublcribitur) S" Thomas Erskyne.

(7.) Schir Johxe Ramsay, of the age of Tuentie thrie 3eiris or thairby,
Sworne, deponis. That immediatlie eftir he had dynit, the day libellit, in the

' Than. « Lave, the rest. = Shut the door. ' A ' fteel bonnet,' or defence for the

head. ^ Besides, forbi/e, "^ Daj.ij.pouipig^iong,]^

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 183

Erie of Gowreis houfe, he tiik liis Maiefteis hulk' fra Johne Murray, to the effect the faid Johne micht haue dynit : And the deponer, miffing his Maieftie,
and forgaddering' with the Laird of Pittincreif in the Erie of Gowreis hall; and
demanding of Pittencreif, ' Quhair his Majeftie wes ?' The faid Laird firft convoyit the deponer to the chalmer quliair his Maieftie djaiit ; thaireftir to the 3aird,
hoiping that his Maieftie had bene thair : And miffing his Maieftie in the 5aird,
the faid Laird convoyit the deponer vp to ane fair gallerie, quhair this deponer
wes nevir befoir ; qnhair, haveing remanit ane certane fpace, belialding the gallerie, they come baith doun to the cloife, quhair they mett with Maifter Thomas Cranftoun in the middis of the clofe, quha faid to thame, that ' His Maieftie wes away vpoun horft)ak at the Inche.' Quhairvpoun this deponer and Pittincreif finderit ;^ and the deponer paffit furth of the 3ett to his ftable, to haue
gottin his horfe : And being ftanding at the ftable dure, he hard his Maieftie
cry, knew his hienes voce, hot vnderftude nocht quhat he fpak : Quhairvpone
he immediatlie cummis within the clofe, and finding ane turnpyk dure oppine,
he enteris within the famin, and rynnis vpe the turnepyk, quhill he cummis to
the dure vpoun the held thairof : And heiring ane ftrugling and dyn of mennis
feitt, he ran with his haill force at the dure of the Turnepyke held, quhilk enteris
to the chalmer at the end of the gallerie, the deponer haveing in the mentyme
his halk on his hand : And haveing dung^ vpe the dui'e, he feis his Maieftie and
Mr Alexander Ruthvene in vtheris armes, ftryveing and worllying^ togidder,
his Maieftie haveing Maifter Alexanderis held vnder his arme, and Maifter Alexander being almaift on his kneis, had his hand vpoun his Maiefteis face and
mouth : And his Maieftie, feing the deponer, faid, ' Fy ! Sti-ik him laich, becaus
he hes ane pyne dowlit" vpoun him !' Quhairvpoun the deponer kaift the halk
fra him, and drew his quhinger, quharwith lie ftrak the faid Maifter Alexander :
And immediatlie eftir he was ftrukin, his Maieftie fchoitt' him doun the ftair,
quhairat this deponer had enterit. Thaireftir this deponar addreffis him to ane
window, and lukand furth thairat, and feand Schir Thomas Erflceyne, the deponar cryit, ' Schir Thomas, cum vp this turnepyke, ewin to the held.' In this
mentyme, his Maieftie pat his fute vpoun the halk leifche, and held liir ane lang
tyme, quhill the deponar come and tuk hir vp agane :" And than Schir Thomas

' Tliis hawk is repoitod to have been presented to the King this day, by John Murray of Arknay,
commonly called ' Weikle JoJin Murray.' - Meeting. = Separated. ' Struck, forced.

^ Wrestling, struggling. '^ Secret doublet, or chain shirt of mail. ' Forcibly thrust, threw,

or pushed." " In the wliole of this prolonged and desperate struggle, the King, although unarmed and defenceless, (being habited in a gieen hunting-dress, with a hunting-horn sus])endeil round Jiis
neck,) exhibited extraordinary presence of mind, and no small share of personal bravery, prowess and
dexterity, in parrying oflF the attacks of an athletic young man, bent upon so deadly an errand, and
provided with ' aVecret' or ' pyne doublet,' capable of turning the ordinary thiust of a sword or dagger,
and besides furnished with necessary weapons. It has become fashionable to ridicule the ijusillaniniity of

184 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Erfkein enteris. And in the reft, deponis conforme to Scliir Thomas Erlkeyne,
in all pointis. And forder fayis, that qnhan this deponar enterit firft within
the chalmer, he faw ane man ftanding behind his Maiefteis bak, quhorae he nawayes knew ; nor reinemberis noeht quhat apperrelling he had on ; bot eftir that
this deponar had ftrukin Maifter Alexander, he faw that man na mair.

(Sic fubfcribitur) S^ JoHXE Ramsay.

(8.) JOHKE Grahame of Vrquliill, fworne and examinat, deponis conforme
to the Lord Duik of Lennox and Erie of INIai-, in all thingis ; Reddens eandem
cav[)am fc'ient'ie: Addenda, that this deponer, the tyme that he wes at dennar
in the hall, with my lord Duik and the Erie of Mar, he faw the King and Maifler Alexander Ruthven pafs throw the hall, vp the turnepyke, towardis the gallerie : And as this deponer, Johne Hammyltoun and vtheris wer followand,
Maifter Alexander cryit bak, ' Gentlemen, ftay, for fua it is his hienes will.'

(9.) JoHXE Grahame of Balgowne, of the age of fyftie yeiris or thairby,
mareit, dejionis conforme to the lord Duik, in all thingis ; Addenda, that this
deponer, the day libellit, efter the death of the Erie of Gowrie and his brother,
and herand his Maieftie reporte that Maifter Alexander preflit to haiie bund his
hienes handis with ane gartane, this dejjoner fand ane gartene at the cheik of
the round dure, among the bent j' and immediatlie thaireftir, this deponer prefentit the famin gartane to his hienes, and at the ficht thairof, his Maieftie faid,
that ' the famin wes the gartane, quhairwith Maifter Alexander preffit to haiie
boimd his handis.' And then Schir Thomas Erfkeyne grippit to the famin gartane, and faid, that ' He wald keip it.' Quhilk he hes yit in keijjing.

(Sic fubfcribitur) J. Grahame of Balgowne,

(10.) I Maister Johne Moxcreif deponis, as eftir followes, to wit. That
day, I wes ftill prefeut with my loi'd of Gowrie, vnto the tyme I hard his

James VI., but it is hard to conceive how far the bravest man, if unarmed, and placed in similar circumstances, could have surpassed liim in courage, or have displayed more coolness, address and
self-possession, than did the King, throughout all this perilous transaction. Although constitutionally and habitually timid, and being destitute of the advantage of a healthy or robust frame; these
infirmities being likewise aggravated, in no small degree, by the broils and conspiracies in which he
found himself incessantly involved, James on many occasions showed, when personally placed in difficult emergencies, that he was not unworthy of tlie royal blood from which he was descended.

' Before carpets were generally used in this country and in England, it was customary, in lieu of
this modem luxury, to strew nishes, or withered ' bent,' (a sort of coarse grass, « hair grass,' growing on muir-lands, sandy gi-ounds, &c.) on the floors of halls, &c. On the arrival of guests of distinction, it was a mark of civility and polite attention to have the floors strewed with fresli bent or rushes.
The older English writers, especially the Dramatists and Satirists, inveigh loudly against the filthy
odours generated liy the st.ile and rancid straw or rushes on the floors of English halls ; owing to the
frugality or slovenliness of the landlord. Carpets aie, to this day, rarely used in many places of the
continent of Euiojie, to the no small annoyance of British travellers ; and, perhaps from this cause,
(the recent introduction of carpets into general use.) it is reproachfully remarked, of' the most polite
nation in Europe,' that a Parisian spits without remorse on the finest drawing-room carpet, and this
too in presence of ladies.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 185

JMaieflie cry, ' TrealToun !' And faw him put his arme fiirth at the windo of tlie
round ; and then left him ; for I confavit in my heart, that it wes ane plane
TreafToun confpyrit aganis his Maieftie : And wes inducit heirto, in refpect of
the prefuinptionis following : Firft, I faw the Kingis Maieftie and vmq" Maifter Alexander Ruthvene, my lordis brothei-, gang furth at the hall dure, thair
allanes, quhair as his Maieftie had na wapponis, and Maifter Alexander had
ane fworde : Nixt, I faw his Maieftie cum in quiet and fober maner to the towne,
quhairthrow ajjperantlie he wald liaue na ewill purpofe in his mynd : Item, the
laid Maifter Alexander rydand to Falkland, in the morning, wes obfcurit' fra
me and my brother Hew, quhair he wes ; and I haveing inquirit of my brother
Hew, ' Quhair he wes riddin to ?' He knew nathing thairof ; ftxa that natlier he
nor I culd gett tryell of the famin : Item, I haveing inquirit at Andro Henderfoun him felfF, quha raid to Falkland with the Maifter, and returnit tua houris
J)efoir him, fylit me,^ and anfuerit, that he had bene tua or thrie mylis abone
the towne : And alfe, the faid Andro had ane vther dwblit on him nor he vfit
commounlie, and wes mair bukfum ; and, as apperit, micht haue contenit ane
fecrete :' Item, that day, being the Counfaill day of the towne, my lord excufit
him felf, in refpect of his adois :■* Item, I haveing preafit him to fubfcryve ane
Confirraatioun of ane ladyis, firft ; refufit, in refpect foii-faid ; alwayes' paflit it
thaireftir : Item, my lord taiyit langer fra his denner nor he vfit ; and albeit
Andro Rutliven, quha wes with the Maifter, come and roundit to my lord at the
hurde, he maid him to mifknaw all thingis, vnto the tyme the faid Maifter Alexander come him felf; and than raife from the buird and mett his Maieftie:
Item, my lord obfcurit altogidder, that he knew the cumming of ony man, quhill
the Maifter come : Item, JMaifter Thomas Crauftovui was the firft that I hard
cry, ' The Kingis Maieftie is away !' Item, eftir my lord Duik, and my lord of
Mar, and his Maiefteis feruandis wes in the dole, my lord of Gowrie come bak
agane to the hall, fayand, ' The King wes away ;' fua that, as I thocht, he wald
haue ilk man thinkand fua. And I thocht his Maieftie wes not reflavit with
that heartlie intertenement, as becam : Item, eftir his IMaiefteis ryding away,
my brother Hew come to my houfe, and I inquiring of him, ' Quhat he thocht
of thir materis ?' Anfuerit, ' Befoir God, fafar as I can pcrfave, I trow it fall
kyth^ to be ane plane Treaffoun, one my lordis pairt :' And I fperand at him,
' Gif he knew ony thing thairof?' Anfwerit, ' He knew nathing, hot he and
Harie Ruthven, eftir all thingis wer endit, fell in conference heiranent ; and he
thocht thingis wer lyklie.' L({ff, Andro Henderfonis Lettre moves me maift of
aU. And, vpoun my faluatioun and condemnatioun, I kuaw na forder in tliis

' Hid, concealed. ^ Evaded tlic qv.cstion ; literally, 'jinked me.' ^ Pyne d()iil)let or si--

cret mail, worn quilted in tie dress. * Business^ affairs. ' Yet, notwiilistanding-. "^ Turn out.
VOL. II. 2 A

186 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

mater, nor yit can remember of ony vther circumftance or prefumptioun micht
haue inducit me to confave the former Treaffoun, quhillc I apprehendit in maner
foirfaid. (Sic fiibfcribitur) Maister Johne Moncreif.

(11.) AXDEO Ray, ane of the Bailleis of the burgh of Perth, be thir prefentis,
teftefeis ^-poun my coufcieuce and in the ficht of God, as I fall anfuer to him in
the o-reat day, That vpoun the fyft day of Auguft P and fex hundreth yeiris,
I being in the vmq'° Erie of Gowreis ludgeing, qulian his Majeftie wes thair,
law his Majeftie eftir his dennar, accnmpanyit with the Maifter of Gowrie, ryfe
frome the tabill, and gang fm-th of the chalmer quhair he had dynit, bot to
quhaitt place I knaw nocht ; being behalding the faid vmq'" Erie of Gowreis intertenement of the nobillmen, in drinking of his Majefteis fchoill to thame,
quliilk his Majeftie, befoir his ryfing frome the tabill, had commandit him to do :
And that eftir that the lordis, viz. my lord Duik, my lord of Mar, my lord Lundoris, and my lord of InchafFray, with finckie of his Majefteis gentilmen and feruandis, accumpanyed with the Erie of Gowrie in perfone, ane fchorte fpace eftir
dennar, had miffit his Majeftie and inquirit, ' Quhair he fuld be ?' They went
to the foirgaitt, and fpeirit at the portar, ' Gif he law the King ga furth at the
foir yeitt ?' And hard the portar anfuer, that ' His Majeftie wes nocht gane furth
that way.' Alfo, That the Erie of Gowrie faid to the porter, ' ge lie, knaif ! He
is furth.' And the porter replyit, that ' he fuld gif his heid, in caife his Majeftie went furth,' Yit, vpoun the Erie of Gowreis aflurance, that ' his Majeftie
wes furth to the Inclie,' the lordis rufchit out in haift at the foiryett, and fpeiring, ' Quhair the King wes ?' I being with thame, I law ane ding \'p the lang
fcoirit window, in the north fyd of the turrett, vpoun the Hiegait ; bot quha
dang it vp I knaw nocht. And forder, faw cleirlie his Majeftie, beir heidit,
Ichut' furth his head and arme at the foirfaid window ; and hard his Majeftie
crying loudlie, ' Fy ! Treaflx)un ! Treaftbun !' And, ' Murther ! Help ! Erie of Mar !'
Quliairvpoun I, being verie agaft and wonderfullie aftonyed at that cruell and
terribill licht, and pitiefull and wofuU cry, I nocht knawing quhat the mater
meinit, bot perfaveing his Majeftie in exti'eme and great danger, ran with all
pofRbill diligence throw the ftreittis, crying loudlie, ' Fy ! Treaffoun ! Treaffoun
aganis the King ! For Goddis laik, all honeft men haift and releif the King !'
And commandit to ryng the comraoun bell, that all men micht cum in haift to
his Majefteis relief. And than I returnit, with all poffibill diligence, with ane
great number of the people with me, and come afoir the foirfaid turret and Avindow, quhair I faw his Majeftie firft crye out : And than I cryit out, ' How is the
King?' Bot my lord Duik and my lord of Mar anfweirit, ' The King is Weill,
(praifit be God).' Than I cryit agane vp to his Majeftie, and fchew his Majeft;ie

' Shoot, pulli, thruft.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 187

that the Bailleis and townefchip wes thair cum, in all haift, to fupplie and releif
his Majeftie ; and thairfoir, befocht his Majeftie to command, ' Quhat wes his
Majefties will and bell to be done ?' And than his Majeftie beknit furth his
hand to me and to the peopill, commanding me to ' cauCe the peopill reteir
tharae to thair ludgeing-.' Quhilk commandment I incontinent obeyit, and commandit all maner of man to reteir thame felffis to thair ludgeings : And elykwayes, paft to the marcat croce, and be oppin proclamatioun, commandit, in his
hienes name, that all inen fuld i-eteir thame to thair ludgeingis, vnder the pane
of Treaftbun : Quha obeyit, incontinent eftir my charge. And this I teftifie to
be of veritie, be the fayth and trewth of my body ; fafar as I juftlie can remember.
In witnes of the quhilkis, I haue fubfcryuit tliir prefeutis with my hand, At
Perth, the threttene day of October, the yeir of God I" and fex hundi'eth yeiris,
befoir thir witneffis, Maifter Pati-ik Galloway Minifter to his Majeftie, James
Drummond of Letchill, Oliver goung, Conftantyne Mallice, Thomas Johneftoun,
Bailleis, Henrie Eldar, clerk, Robert Anderfoun, Andro Ai'nott and Williame
Jak, burgeffis of Perth.

(Sic fubllribitur) Anduo Ray, Baillie, with my hand.

Patrik Galloway witnes, James Drummond witnes,

Oliveir 50UNG bail3ie witnes, Thomas Johnestoun baillie witnes,

Robert Andersoun witnes, Andro Arnott witnes,

Williame Jak witnes, Henrie Eldar, fciibe, witnes.

(12.) Robekt Cuystie, porter to vmq'^ Johne Erie of Gowrie, of the age of
threttie yeiris, Jhlutus, deponis. That he wes porter to the Erie of Gowrie, the
fyft day of Auguft, libellit ; lyk as, he wes be the fpace of fyve oixkis of befoir :
And fchortlie eftir the denner, this deponar faw my lord Duik, the Erie of Mar,
the Erie of Gowrie cum to the cloife, and my lord Duik fpeirit at this deponar,
' Gif his Majeftie wes pafRt furth of the cloife ?' The deponar anfuerit, that ' he
wes nocht furth.' Then the lord of Mar faid, ' Billie,' tell me the veritie, gif his
Majeftie be furth or nocht.' And he anfuerit, ' In treuth he is nocht furth.'
The Erie of Gowrie, lukand with ane angrie countenance, faid, ' Thow leid ?
He is furth at the bak yett, and throw the Inche.' Than this deponar anfuerit,
' That can nocht be, my lord, ffor I haue the key of the bak yett, and of all the
yettis of the place.' Thaireftir, this deponar hard and faw his Majeftie luikand
furth of the window of the round, and cryand ' Treaffoun ! Treaffoun ! Fy !
Help ! Help, my lord of Mar !' And incontinent, my lord Duik and Erie of Mar
and vtheris ran vp the great turnepyke to the gallerie : And thaireftir, the lord
of Gowrie come from the Hie-ftreitt, within the cloife, haveand ane fteil-bonnet

' Brother, fellow ; a familiar and jocular mode of address ; equivalent to ' my lad,' or ' my man.
* Lied, told a falsehood.

188

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

on his heid, and ane drawin fword in ilk hand, accumpanyit with Alexander and
Harie Ruthvenis, Patrik Eviott and Hew Moncreif, Maifter Thomas Cranftoun,
all haveand drawin fwordis in thair handis ; and paffit altogidder, with my lord,
vp tlie auld turnepyk. Bot quhat wes done within the houle and place thaireftir, kennis nocht, bot be reporte ; nether faw he ony geft' brocht to the place,
be ony of the towne : And kennis na mair in the mater.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Robert Chrystie.

(13.) Alexander Blair, younger of Balthayok, fworne and examinat, depouis conformis immediate precedenti, except, that he law nocht my lord of
Gowrie pas with his company and drawin fwordis vp the tiu-npyk : Bot faw
Alexander and Harie Ruthvenis and Hew Moncreif cum down the litill turnepyk, quhair they and my lord had afcendit ; the faidis thrie perfonis, haveand
drawin fwordis in thair handis : Bot faw nocht Patrik Eviott thair. And this
deponer fayis, that eftir the tumult wes riffine, and this deponar preffand to enter within the place, he wes a litill ftayit^ be thame in the place ; bot they yeldit
attanis,^ and the deponar gat entrie. Lykwayes, he faw ane gefl brocht in frome
tlie towne, and fett vp at the wall of the cloife ; bot quha brocht the famin in,
he kennis nocht.

(Sic fubfcribitur) A. Blair apperand of Balthyok.

(14.) George Hay, Priour of Charterlioufe, of the age of tuentie aucht yeiris
or thairby, mareit, deponis covjbrmis to the lord Duik of Lennox, in all thingis,
eftir his Majefteis entrie in Sanct Johneftoun, the day libellit ; addendo, that
that famjTi day, the deponar haveand ado, in Sanct Johneftoun, with the Erie
of Gowrie, and fpeikand with him, in his awin place, he faw Andro Henderfoun
cum in, buttit, from Falkland ; and hard the faid lord Gowrie inquire of the faid
Andro, ' Quha wes with his Majeftie in Falkland ?' And thaireftir, the faid Erie
tuk tlie faid Andro Henderfoun to the cabinat ; and eftir ane certane fpace, the
Erie cummand to the chalmer, he gaif this deponar his difpatche, fayand, that
he had to do that day, and micht nocht awaitt on his erand, and bad him cum
ony vther day.

(1.5.) Maister Petir Hay, of the age of threttie yeiris or thairby, mareit,
deponis conjh/mis to George Hay, in all thingis ; the witnes immediatlie preceding.

(16.) Robert Grahame of Thornik, fworne and examinat, deponis confoi'me
to the Duik of Lennox, eftir that his Majeftie enterit in Perth.

(17.) Olivkir 50uxa baillie in Perth, fworne and examinat, deponis, That

the day libellit this deponer wes in the Erie of Gowi-eis ludgeing, quhair he faw

the King dyne : And, eftir denner, faw the Kingis Majeftie and Mr Alexander

Ruthven pas, thair allanes, throw the hall and vp the turnepyk. And immedi-

' Joist, beam. ^ Delayed, detained. ^ At once.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 189

atlie thaireftir, this deponer paft to his hulgeing in the towne, quhair he abaid
quhill the crye and tumult raife. And incontinent, this deponer, rynnand to the
place libellit, his Majeftie cryit out at the window, and commandit this deponer,
be name, to ftay the tumult of the people ; the quhilk this deponar obeyit and
did : And faw Hew Moncreif cummand furth of the jjlace libellit, his face being
bludie, and Harie Ruthven, aiie of the defendaris, at the mouth of the ^Vattergait, with ane drawin fworde in his hand. And kennis na mair in the mater.

(18.) James Drummond of Pitcarnis, fworne and examinat, deponis conJbrmis immediate precedentj, in oinnibus ; addenda. That as this deponar, immediatlie eftir the cry rais, wes cumand to the place libellit, he meittis vpoun the

Hie-ftreit, Alexander Ruthven, ane of the defendaris, haveand ane drawin fword

in his hand, and cryand, ' Fyre and pulder !" And kennis na mair in the mater.

(19.) William Ryxd, flefcheour in Sanct Johneftoun, of the age of threttie
yeiris, or thairby, mareit, deponis. That he faw within the cloife of Perth, eftir
the frey raife, Patrik Eviott and Hew Moncreif, baith bluidand, haveand drawiq
fwordis in thair handis.

(20.) Henrie Leyis, burges of Perth, fworne and examinat, deponis conformis to James Drummond and Williame Rhynd ; hot he faw nocht Patrik Eviott
thair.

(21.) George Wilsoun, feruand to James Erflvyne, of the age of tuentie
four yeiris, or thairby, Jblutus, deponis conforme to Schir Thomas Erfkyne, in
all thingis ; be reffone this deponer wes in company with the faid Schir Thomas,
eftir the firft time that he and James Erfkyne grippit the Erie of Gowrie, and
wes findrit fra him be his feruandis. And immediatlie thaireftir, this deponer
accumpanyit the faid Schir Thomas Erfkyne vp to the turnjiyk, into the chalmer
quliair his Majeflie wes ; quhair he faw as the faid Schir Thomas hes deponit,
in all thingis.

(22.) Dauid Ryxd, flefcheour in Perth, fworne and examinat, deponis conformis to James Drummond ; and hard Alexander Ruthven cry for pulder ; hot
faw nocht Patrik Eviott.

(23.) Gilbert Ritchertsoun, in Perth, of the age of tuentie four yeiris or
thairby, folutus, deponis conformis to James Drummond in all thingis, and Dauid Rynd.

(24.) JoHNE Murray of Arbany,^ of the age of fyftie aucht yeiris or thairby, mareit, deponis : The day libellit, the deponer come to Sanct Johueftouni
eftir dennar, quhair he hard his Majeflie cryand furth at the window of the
round, ' Fy ! TreafToun ! My lord of Mar ! Help !' Incontinent thaireftir, my
lord of Mar and the Duik ran vpe the broad turnepyk, and the deponar followit
' Fire and gunpowder. ^ Commonly called ' Meikle Jobne.*

190 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

thame in the clofe, qiihair he faw the lord of Gowrie, haveand ane fteil-bonnat
on his held, and tua drawin fwordis, ane in ilk hand : And faw the faid Erie
pas vp the turnep}^k, accumpanyit with certane his feruandis, haveand drawin
fwordis in tliair handis, of quhome he knew nane.

(25.) Thojias Burreli,, burges of Perth, fworne and examinat, deponis
confornie to James Drummond ; addendo. That the tyme of the fray, this de2)onar, enterand within the doife of the jilace libellit, he faw Handing in the clofe,
Avith drawin fwordis in thair handis, Alexander and Henrie Ruthvenis and Hew
Moncreif, bledand in his face. Aiid at that famin tyme, this deponar faw Maifter Thomas Cranftoun cum doun the blak turnepyk ; and he tuk furth of his
hand his fword, and hard the faid Alexander Ruthven cry for ' Fyre and pulder.' And faw nocht Patrik Eviott thair.

(26.) George' Forrest, tail5eour in Perth, of the age of foiirtie yeiris or
thairby, mareit, dejwnis ; The day libellit, he faw George Craigingelt and Walter Crnikfchank, allakey,^ Handing in the yaird with drawin fwordis.

(27.) Williame Robertsoux, notar in Perth, of the age of threttie four
yeiris or thairby, mareit, deponis. The day libellit, this deponar, beand within
the clofe of the place libellit, he faw the lord Gowi'ie Handing in the clofe, accmnpanyit with fevin or aucht perfones, of quhome he knew nane ; the faid Erie
than haveing ane fteill-bonnet on his held, and ane drawin fword in ilk hand ;
at the quhilk ficht, this deponar being affrayit, paft furth of the place : And keniiis na raair of the mater.

(28.) Robert Galbraith, feruand to the Kingis Majeftie, of the age of
threttie yeiris, deponis coiiformis to the lord Duik of Lennox, in all thingis ; be
reaffoun this deponer, all that day, wes in company with his Majeftie. And eftir that his Majeftie had cryit out at the window, ' Treaffoun !' this deponer
followit the Duik and Earle of Mar ^-p the turnepyk : And deponis, as they
haue deponit.

(29.) Robert Broun, feruand to the Kingis Majeftie, deponis conformis immediate precedent}, in otnnibus ; becaus this deponer, the tyme libellit, accumpanjat Johne Hamyltouu, to feche the hammeris vp to the galrj' : And this deponar paft vp the litill blak turnepyk, and at his firft entrie within the chalmer, he
faw the Erie of Gowrie lyand dead ; thair being at that tyme in company with
his Majeftie, Schir Thomas Erfkene, Schir Hew Heres, Schir Johne Ramfay,
and George Wilfoun.

(30.) James Bog, porter to his Majeftie, fworne and examinat, deponis, That
he faw the Kingis Majeftie and Maifter Alexander Ruthven pas throwch the

' ' Alexander' is deleted and ' George ' inserted. ' Old Fr. Lacquay, laquais, a footman.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 191

hall to the chalmer. And faw, that day, George Cragingelt with ane drawiu
fword in his hand, accumpanyit with certane rafcallis. And, in ceteris, deponis
conjhrmis to the lord Duik and Erie of Mar, in all thingis.

(31.) JoHNE Bog, feruand to the Kingis Majeftie in the aill cellar, fworne
and examinat, deponis confonnis to James Bog.

(32.) Alexander Peblis, burges of Perth, of the age of threttie yeiris or
thairby, mareit, deponis. The day libellit, this deponar being within his awin
houfe, foiranent the Erie of Gowres ludgeing, howfone his mother hard the eommoun bell ryng, fcho lokkit the dure and held him in all the tyme : And faw at
that tyme the Erie of Gowrie enter in at the yett, with tua drawin fwordis, ane
in ilk hand: And ane allakey' put ane fteil-bonnet on his held. And ane certane fpace thaireftir, the de^jonar faw Hew Moncreif cum furth of the place,
with ane bludie held, and Patrik Eviottis man, lykwayes bleidand. And alio,
faw Patrik Eviott cum forth of the yett ; hot rememberis nocht gif he had ane
fword in his hand. And faw Alexander Ruthven alio cum furth, with ane fword
drawin in his hand. (Sic fubfcribitur) Alexander Peblis.

No. II.
Interragatouris^ to be demandit of the WitnefTes, fworne and admittit,
in the actiounes and caus of Foirfaltour perfewit aganis Williame Ruthuen, brother, air and fucceflbur of vmq'^ Johnne fumtyme Erie of Gowrie,
and vraq'° Mr Alexender Ruthuen his brother ; Alexander and Harie
Ruthuenis, Hew Moncreif and Patrik Eviott.
First to inquyre, Geif they knew tliat the vmq'"-' Erie Jiiectit the faiii Mr Alexander, Andro Heu«
derfoun and Andro Rutlicen to his Maieftie, to Falkland, to peifuade him to cwm to Sanct
Johneftonne ?

Gif thai faw the faid Mr Alexander cwm to his Maieftie, to Falkland, vpoun the fyft day of Auguft, laftbypaft ?

Gif thai knew that the faid Mr Alexander directit Andro Henderfoun and Andro Ruthuen, feuerallie, to foirwaime Gowrie that the King was cuming to Perth that day ?

Gif thay faw the faidis Andro Henderfoun and Andi'o Ruthuen, befoir the Kingis cuming, cum to
Gowrie and fpeik fecreitlie withe him ? Geif thai knew that Gowrie commandit Andro Henderfoun lo
put on his airmour ? Or geif thai knew that the faid Andro patt on his fecreit the faid day ?

Gif the faid Mr Alexander come to Gowrie, befoir the Kingis cuming, and fpak with him lecreitlie ? How the King was accumpaneil ? And geif his fervandis had ony vther airmour or vapounes
nor' fuordis ?

Gif they faw Mr Alexander, Andro Henderfone and the Erie gang wp to the gallerie chalmer, the
tyme of the Kingis denner ?

Gif, efter the Kingis denner, they faw the faid Mr AUexander, withe his fuord about him, convoy
the King his allaine, without ony vapounes, to the gallerrie chalmer ?

' This was Walter Crookshanks. He is not known by the Editor to have been brought to Trial, or otherwise
punished. * From an original paper, preserved amongst the Warrants in General Register House. ' Th.-ui.

192

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Gif tliai hard vniq'^ ^SIi' Tliomas Cranftoun dedair to tlie nobilmcn, and to the Kingis fcrvandis, tbat
liis Maiellie was riddin away ?

Gif they hard the faid Erie awow the fame to tliame, witli sreit aithis ?

Gif they faw liis Maieftie Ichut ' out his bair held and airme out at the windok of tlie turret aboue
the ^ett, and cry ' Treafoun ! Help! I am JNIurderit I ' The faid Mr Alexander haifing his hand at his
liines faice and his throt ?

Gif they faw Andro Henderfouu, in the tunat, at that tyme ?

Gif thev faw the faid Mr Allexander treaffonablie efforfing him felf to murder Iris Maieftie ?

Geife thev faw Gowrie, with his tua drawin fwordis, accumpancit with ane greit number of his
coiuplieis in airmes, twrn aft' the calfay of Sanct Johneftoun into his awin cloife, with vmq'* Mr Thomas Cranftoun, the faidis Allraander and Harie Ruthnens, Hew Moncreif, Patrik Eviot, and ryn alto^dder wpe tlie Blak turnpyke of the faid ludging, feik his Maieftie for his (laucliter, and invade and
perfew Schir Johnne Ramfay, Stliir Thomas Alkin and Schir Hew Heirreis, in his bines defens, and
Jmrtt and wond eweriane of thame ? And geif they faw Georg Craigingelt, Georg Dewar and ane
greit number of vtheris of Gowreis fervandis and dependaris, hefett the foir-;et and bak'-^et, and iucloife his Maieftie within the faid ludging, ft ay the entreffes and palfagis thairof, and afteidg his Maieftie thairin, and crv, ' Greine coittis, 56 fall all die ! ^e fall all be hangit?'

Gif they faw the faidis defeudaris perfew the duris of the chalmeris, quhair his Maieftie and his feruandis was, and ftryk in thairat, with dravin fuordis, and halbartis, and Jedbrugh ftaveis ?

Gif they faw Allexander Ruthuen caus bring ane jeft, treaflbnablie to haue brokin wpe the dooris
of the faidis chalmeris and ludging ?

And geiue they faw him feik powder in the mairchant buithis, to haue blavin the faid ludging in the
aire, with hLs Maieftie and all tliat was thairin ?

No. III.
REPORT by the Bailies and Toavn Council of Pebth of the Examinations and ' Depositions of the Induelleris of Perth,"^ taken by
them, by command of the King and Privy Council.

Apud Perth, quarto die menjis Septemhris, anno Domini miUeJimoJexceiitcJinio.
QuniLK day, the Bailleis, counfall and decanes of craftis of the burcht of Perth, being convenit
•within the New Kh-k of tlie famin, Coraperit Jafper Howp, indueller in Edinburcht, prefentit his Maiefteis Miffiue, directit to thame, clofit ; quhilk being with all due reverence rellauit and oppnit, the
tennour followis :

'■ Traist freindis, We greit ;ow hairtlie wtill. We haue tLccht meit, for diuerfe refpectis and
confideratlones, to continew tlie dyett nppointit for jour comperance befoir our Couufell, vpone Tuifday nixt ; and haue directit tua of our Counfell particularlie to acquent ■;ow with our will and plefour
in that mater. Quhairvnto, as 30 refpect jour awin fuirtie and weill, je will conforme 30ur felffis.
And fua, afluring 30W that it fall nocht be neidfull to 50W to kepe the faid dyett. We commit 30W to
God. From Striveling, the xij of September, 16C0. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

[And writtin on the bak thairof,]

To our traift freindis, the Bailleis, Counfall and comtanitie of our hurt of Perth.

Lyke as, vpone the xviij day of September inftant, in prefens of the faidis Bailleis, counfall and

' Shoot, push, thrust. 2 from the Original, preserved in the General Register House, and now printed for

the first time. = r e ; 1

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

193

decanes, fiklyke conuenit, within the faid New Kirk, Comperit the rycht honorabill Schir Robert Melwill of Murdocaidny, knyS and Schir Dauid Munay of Gofperte, kny', Comptroller to his Maieltie,
tua of his liienes Counfall, and declarit, that, conforine to his Maiefteis General Letter, direct ofbefoir,
they wer direct in Comraiirioune, to impairt to tlie faidis Bailleis and Counfall his Maiefteis mair particular will and plefour, anent the trying of tie within thair faid bur' as milbehavit thame felffis wpone
the fyft day of Auguft laft. Quhilk wes, that the Proueft, bailleis and counfell fuld, be tiiame felffis,
try thair awin nychtbouris quha wer amangis tiiame, ather in word or deid, tliat kytliit ' buffie wpon
the faid fyft day of Auguft laft ; quhen as the wmqi" Erie of Gowrie and the Maifter his broder did
that in thame ley, to haue putt in executioune thair intendit Trelfoune, aganis his Maiefteis perfone ;
and that thairin they fuld leave na fort of tryell ontane,^ as they refpectit thair awin fuirtie ; quhairby, fic giltie perfones mycht be pwneift for thair offence according to thair moritt, and innocentis nocht
preiudgit : And that, betuix and the day of , they report thair diligence to his Maieftie

thairanent. Quhilk defyre, thocht godlie, honeft and equitabill, the faidis Bailleis, counfall and decanes, with all faithfullnes and diligence, promittit to obey.

Apud Perth, vigefimo fecundo Septembris, anno Domini Millefimo fexcentefirao. Quhilk day,
Proueft, bailleis, counfall and decanes of craftis of the bur' of Perth, being convenit within the New
Kirk of the famin, efter lang reflbnyng haid be thame wpone the forme and maner of the trying of thair
awin nychtbouris,^ conforme to the Commiftioun declarit to thame be liis Maiefteis Commiftionaris,
direct to tiiame for that effect ; Ordanit the tryall to be deducit, in maner following, viz. That the
Proueft, Mr Johne Malcome and Williame Cowper, Minifteris ; Conftantine Malice, Andro Rav, Thomas Johneftoun, bailleis ; James Drummond of Leithill ; James Adamefune, dene of gild ; Robert
Mathow, thefaurar ; Robert Anderfone, Andro Arnot of the Counfall, and Henry Elder, clerk, fall be
Examinatouris and reflaueris of the haill townis Depofitiounis.

And becaus it is neceffar, that the Examinatouris depone firft thame felffis, thairfoir, that fua mony
of thame (except the Proueft) as wes nocht in the toune, wpoun the laid fyft day of Auguft laft, viz.
the tua Minifteris, Conftantyne Malice, baillie, Robert Anderfone and Andro Arnot, fall reftaue the
remanent thair coUigis Depofitiones ; and thairefter, thay all concuiTand togidder, to reflaue the Depofitiones, firft of the remanent Counfell and decanes, and thairefter of the haill inliabitantis of the
faid but', begynnand at the Water-gait quarter, and fua ordourly throw the haill quarteris and i'uburbis
of the famin bur'. And for that effect, the faidis perfones appointit for the examinatioune foirfaid, to
convene within the faid New Kirk, at fevin houris in the morning, to continew till nyne ; to meit
thairefter at ten, to remane quiiill tuelft'; to meit at tua efter none, and to diifolue at fex houris at
evin ; and to follow furth this ordour daylie, quhill the tryell be endit ; begynning the morne, at fevin
houris in the mornyng. The officiar of everie quarter to be reddy for warnyng of thair quarteris, as
they fall be commandit. Everie perfone to compeir wnder the pane of ten pundis. The drum to pas
about the toun for that effect ; and the Examinatouris, nocht keping the preceife tymes of conventiouiie,
without ane lauchfull excuifo, to incur the penaltie of tuentie fchiliingis, ioties quoties, vnforgevin.

Everie perfone to be fuorne, to teftifie the veretie, wpone thair coufcience, and in the ftcht of God,
and as they fall anfuer to him in the grait day; and to be exarainat wpone the hedis and artikles following, viz.

\_Heads and Ajxticles of Examinatjon."]

Giff they haid ony foirknawledge off the wyld and vnnaturall Treffoune, intendit aganes his Maiefteis perfone, wpone the fyft day of Auguft laft, be the wmq''= Erie of Gowrie and the Maifter
liis broder ?

Giff they com to the ludgeing', with thair armour, to aflift that filthie fact ?

' Showed, or proved themselves. ^ Untaken. ' Neighbours, toivnsmen.

VOL. IL 2 B

194

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

GifFthej- tbanie felffis vterit or hard ony onreverent fpeches gevin to his Maieflie, or to ony of his
hienes feruandis ?

Gift' they faw ane jeirt ' brocht to the ludgeing ?

Gift" they hard ony crying of ' Grene-cottis !' ' Bludie botfcheris !' ' Tratouiis !" < Murderaris !' ' ge
fall all die !' ' Giff ws furth our Proueft I' Or ony ficlyke evill wordis ?

Gift" they hard ony cry for ' Fyre,' or ' Powder ?'

Gift" they law ony mynt ^ at ony of the Kingis Maiefteis feruandis to ftrik tharae ?

GifT they knaw ony thing of the faid wyld TrefToune that is nocht fperit at thame ? Or, ony forder
nor is contenit in the faidis Artiklis ? Or gif, fen the faid fyft day of Auguft, they hard ony thing,
that in ony fort may cleir the faid mater ?

Akd becaus thev ar informit, that he, quha wpone the faid fyft day of Augiifl, within the toune of
Dundie, fuld haue vterit thai filthie and vunaturall fpeclies aganes his Maieftie, quhilkis demerittis extreme pwneifment, is Johxe Lamb fone to Robert Lamb, burges of tliis bm-', quha being fearcit and
focht, can nocht be apprehendit within this toune :

(L) The laid Robert Lamb, his father, being fivorne wpone his intelligence, quhair he fuld be?
Deponit that he pall out of this bur' ten dayis fyne, to qidiat pairt he culd nocht tell ; bot as he fupponit, he wes ather pall to Striuiling, Glefgow, or to the hieland pairtis of Lome ; in the quhilkis
paii-tis the faid Johne wfis his puir handling and traffek. Quhairfoir, the faidis Bailleis, Counfall and
decaues, ordanit Thomas Johneftoune, baillie, to fie and conduce fex abill men, and with all diligence
to pafs to the faidis pairtis of Striveling and Glefgow, to fearce, feik and apprehend the faid Johne
Lamb, and as occafioun beis offevit, to fend tua and tua of his cumpanie to Lome and wtheris pairtis
quhair bell knawlege may be haid of the faid Johnis being, ay and quhill they apprehend him ; and
the thefaurer to fatisfie the faid Thomas his eipenflis to that efl'ect.

23 Septembris, 1600. Befoir none.
- In presekce of the faidis Examisatouris, Compekit the perfones following ; quha being fuomc
wpone the retro-writtin Artiklis, deponit every ane, as foUowis.

(2.) Oliuer 50UXG, baillie,^ fuorae, deponit that efter he wes commanding the pepill hame, at
his Maiefteis command, the entres of the foir jett was kepit be certane of the Erie of Gowryis fervandis, with drawin fwordis ; amangis quliome Thomas Billett cordiner wes ; quhilk Thomas, fua fone
as he wes commandit be the deponer, depairtit fra the 5ett. Saw nor hard na forder, be reffoune of
his biftynes, in difpafcheing of the pepill.

(3.) Thomas Johsestoune, baillie, deponit, that he cuming thair at tlie found of the bell, faw ane
tumult befoir the Erie of Gowryis ludgeing ; and being defyrit to gang hame be the Laird of Balthyok and goung Tullybardin, he immediatlie depairtit ; and in the away paffing, faw Alexander
Ruthuene yonger ryn throw the Water-gait, with ane drawin fuorde, cryand, ' Falfe Tratouris I'
Jgnorat cetera.

(i.) James Drummond deponit, he faw Alexander Ruthuene younger wpone the gaif* with ane
drawin fuord, cryand, ' Fy for powder ! He is deid ! He is flane !' Saw ficlyke, Johne Rentoull Handing in the foir 5ett, with ane drawin fworde, haifiing ane fteill bonett, ane fecreit and gantullat.
Ignorat cetera.

(5.) James Adamesoke deponit, that being in his awin clofe gadgeing' ane falomond barrell, to
raak ane miHburS ihairof to wther baiTellis, Johne Tenendyfe wyft", ofliciar, knokit werie loudlie at

1 Joist, or beam. It is termed a single roof-spar in the course of the examination. ^ Threaten, make attempt to strike. ^ xhis active and zealous JIagistrate died Dec. 29, 1603, as is recorded in Fleming's Chronicle.

Street. 5 Gauging. ^ Meastu-e, size, j^tterii.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

195

his 3ett, cryand, ' Allace I Thair is mony wapnys about the Kingis hous : And they fay tlie King is
fchott.' Quha, at the heiing thairof, com luddandlie furth, quhair he faw Andro Ray, baillie, cryand,
' Fy I Treffoune I Cum and lelewe the Kyng.' And immediatlie ftoppit doune foirnent the ludgeing ;
quhair, how fone he come, faw the Duik and the Erie of Mar, declaring the King wes weill ; and
defyring all men to depairt to thair liouflis, Quhairat, and efter he haid fene the Kingis hand putt out
at the wyndo, he incontinent depairtit hanie. Ignorat cetera,

(6.) Robert Mathow deponit, that he, cuming at the found of the bell, hard Violet Ruthvene
and Margaret Moncreiff, relict of vmq"= Thomas Lafreife, cryand, ' Bludie boilfchearis I'' Depairtit at
the command of the Bailleis and clerk. Ignorat cetera.

(7.) Henrie Elder deponit, being in his awin chalraer quhen the bell wes ringing, qidiilk wes
ceiffit befoir he culd wyn to the South- gait-end, quhair he, heryng the Nobill men that wer aboue,
crying for the Bailleis to command the pepill hame, he with the faidis Bailleis difpafchit the pepill :
And thaireflir, immediatlie pad to the mercat croce, and thair, in his hienes name, commandit all
maner of men to pas to thair houffis, wnder the pane of Treffoune : And returnyng thairfra to the
ludgeing agane, all the pepill haid removit thame felffis, except fum of the wmq'« Erie of Gowryis fervandis, quha wer {landing in the foir entrie of the 3ett, with drawin fwordis ; amangis quhome, Thomas Biffett, cordiner, wes ; quha, liowfone he wes commandit be Oliuer goung, bail3 ie, and the deponer, patt wp his fworde and depairtit. Saw Alexander Ruthuene cuming furth at the foir-,ett with
ane drawin fuorde, and fayde to the deponer, ' Tiieiwis ! je ar vnworthie of fie ane Proueft I' And,
' Giff he leiwe, he fall remember on this day.' Ignorat cetera.
All the Examinatouris concurrand,

(8.) Mr Henrie Andersone deponit, he ^\vm ane fallow, bering ane fingill roiff fparon his fchoulder, cuming foment the foir-3ett of the ludgeing thairwith : Culd noclit difcerne quha buir the lamin,
for the tumult, and being occupeit, hering the Bailleis cry for his Maiefteis hellh and will : And immediatlie tliaireftir depairtit. Ignorat cetera.

(9.) Patrik Blair deponit, he come thair with the clerk; and or- he culd win thair, the bell
wes i-ung out, and the Nobill men wes commanding all hame. Quha thairat depairtit, leaving the
Bailleis and clerk commanding hame the pepill : And being at the croce, faw Alexander Ruthuene,
yonger, firll addrefs him to the merchant-buyth of Blais Powrie, and tliairefter to the merchant-buyth
of Johnne Lawrie. Knew nocht quhat lie wes feiking, in refpect of the diflance betuix tharae. Ignorat cetera.

(10.) Walter Gray deponit, that he wes furth in the South Inche ; and gatt na entrie. Ignorat.

(11.) Patrik Grant deponit, he come with his armour, at the found of the bell, foirnent the
ludgeing. Hard Williame Rynd, flefcher, being in the auld brokin houfe aboue the foir-3ett, cry
furth at the wyndo thairof, ' The Prouefl is flane !' Saw alfo Patrik Lamb, fawfter,' cuming throw
the Water-gait, with ane fingill roiff fpar on his fchowder. Saw Alexander Ruthuene cum furth of
the ludgeing, with ane drawin fworde, cryand, ' Fy on 30W all ! Thair is ane Nobill man tynt '
this day.'

(12.) JoiiNE Ogilby, decane, deponit, that at the found of the bell he com thair; faw ane man
cuming to the place with ane jefl. on his fchowder. Knawis nocht quha it wes. Hard Joline Rentoull cryand, ' Grene-coittis I ge haue committit murther I' And the deponer reprowing him, he anfuerit, ' ge ar nocht gude nychtbouris' in ane towne, that helpls nocht 30ur Proueft.' Ignorat cetera.

(13.) W^illiame Jak, decane, deponit he com befoir the ludgeing, at the lound of the bell, with
ane Rofs-aix,'' or halbert ; and fpering be the way, quhat the mater menit ? The pepill cryit, ' The
King wes flane I' And he na foner com thair, nor he hard all crying, ' The King wes weill !' And he
depautit. Ignorat cetera.

' Butchers. ' Ere, before. ' Sawyer, ■» Lost, ' Citizens, townsmen. ^ Lochaber-axe.

196

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

(U.) Dalid Rynd, decaiie, deponit he com witli liis armour to tlie ludgcinj:, at tlie found of the
bell ; and feing wtlieris pafs wp the blak turnepyk, he followit wp ; quliair lie law Hew IMoncreift"
nrikkiiiff in wnder the chalmer dur witli ana Jedwart Itaff,' and wald nocht be ftayit be the deponer.
Saw Patrik Lamb, lawfter, on his Icliowder, but oay help, bring in ane roifF fpar, foirnent the foir
lett of the ludgeing. Hard Alexander Ruthuene cry, ' Fy, bring powder !' J<jnor(U cetera.

Cib.') Thomas Bissett, decaue, deponit, at the found of the bell, he com tliair. Confeffit he
lluid in the entrie of the foir 5ett, with ane drawin fword ; and how fone Oliuer goung and the clerk
commandit him hame, he depairtit. Denyit all the reft.

C16.) Andro Cldbert, decane, deponit, he wes in the Wod of JNIethuene that day, quhill evin.

Ignorat.

(17.) WiLLiAME !Mathie, decane, deponit he com at the found of the bell. Saw ane man cuminc throw the \Vater-"-ait, with ane fpar on his fchowder ; hot knawis nocht quhat he wes that buir
it. Ignorat.

(18.) WiLLiAME Robertson, decane, deponit he wes nocht thair.

23 Septemhris, IGOO. Efter none.
Tjie Names of iiie Quarteris.

(19.) Gilbert Rycherdsose deponit, at the found of the bell, he com foirnent the ludgeing,
paft wp the Blak turnepyk, quhair he faw .... Biiice, fone to Williarae Bruce, with ane drawin
fuorde, cryand in wndtr the dur, ' ]My lord Duik, for Godis faik, tell me how the Kyngis grace is ?'
And the deponer cryit ower the wjmdo, ' Cum wp and help the Kyng and the Proueft !' And being
commandit harae, he depairtit to the croce, quhair he faw Alexander Ruthvene, crying at Johne Lawreis raerchant-buyth, ' Cum doune and gift' us powder!' But nane anfuerit. Ignorat cetera.

(20.) WiLLiAME Rynd, flefcher, deponit, that he, being flaying flefche, hering the commoune
bell, com doune foirnent the ludgeing, with ane fuord, enterit in at the foir ;ett and wp the blak
turnepyk, quhair he faw Hew Moncreifl" with ane Jedwart-ftafl', Patrik Eviot and his man with drawin
fuordis : And being thair, hei-yng the pepill commandit hame, he cryit over the wyndo, ' It wes the
Kyngis will that all fuld gang hame ;' and thairvvith cuift ane (klait ftane* ower the wyndo among the
pepill, quiiilk they fay fell on ane tal3eouris held : And fua depairtit him felft". Ignorat cetera.

(21.) Thomas Lamb deponit, he com nocht thair, quhill all the pepill wes depairting. Ignorat.

(22.) Thomas Robertsoxe, alias Denis, deponit, that at the begynnyng of the trubill, he wes
in the wmq'^ Erie of Gowryis kitfcheing, helping to mak the dcnner reddy, with Robert Sniythis
man, quha wes principall cuik : Being demandit, ' Quha tuik wp my Lordis denner?' Anfuerit, Andro Henderfone, chalmerlane, tuik wp the firft feniice ; and betuix the firft and the fecund feruice,
Audro Henderfone paft fiuth with my lord, to melt the Kyng. Being ilclyke demandit, ' Giff he
hard ony word, that the Kyng wes to cum that day to the toune ?' Anfuerit, ' Xane, quhill they gaid
furth to meit his Maieftie.' Being forder demandit, ' Gift" the faid Andro Henderfone wes in the
kitcheing, the tyme quhen the cry raife ?' Deponit, he enterit neuir within the kitfcheing, efter his
outganging to meit the King ; and giff wtherwayis it may be fund that he wes thair, he is content to
be haiigit.^ Deponit forder, efter the cry, he com furth of the kitfcheing, faw the JNIaifter lyand deid,
at the Blak turnepyke fute ; and my lord with ane fuord in everie hand, ane fteill-bonet on his held,
accunipanyt with certane his fervandis, ftap ower the Maifter, and pas wp the Blak turnepyk ; fua the
deponer com furth. Knawis na forder.

(23.) Mychaell Baxter, tal^eour, deponit, That at the begj'nnyng of the trubill, he wes

I The Jedburgh staff, or pike, was, from its poiuliai- constniction, celebrated in those days, both as a weapon of offence and defence. * 'ITiri-w a slate stone. ' Tliis strange mode of expression is intended as an earnest
assevcrutiou of the ti'uth ; and was probably made on a second or third repetition of the same question.

34. Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 197

fcliapand ane cloik in his awin hous, quliilk is in the bak clofe of tliG wnKj''' Erie of Gowryis ludgeing. Com uocht fuith of tlie bak clofe, quliill' at tiie ilefyre of Andro Uuthuene, hot- ony wapnis.
Helpit to beir vvp tlie Maifter, being deiil, to the Noitii chalmer, in the ludgeing on the vvlher fyde of
the i-lofe. Ignorat cetera.

(24'.) James Bower, notar, deponit, at tlie found of the bell, he com thair, in his armour, nocht
knawing quhat the mater wes. Cryit wp to the Erie of Mar, ' How tlie Kyngis Maieftie did ?' Qulia
anfuerit, ' His Maiertle wes weill.' And thaireftor fperit,^ ' How the Proueft, my lord, did ?' Quha
anfuerit, fidyk, ' Weill.' Defyrit tliairfoir, that his lordfchip wald be fua gude as to latt him fie thair
faces, that he mycht depairt. Quha anfuerit, ' I may be ane meffinger to 30W.' Defyrit him thairfoir
to depairt hame ; quha obeyit and dcpairtit. Ignorat cetera.

(2.5.) Robert TAI.5E0UR deponit, he com thair at the found of the bell, with his armour. Saw
Patrik Lamb, fawfler, bring ane fingill roiif fpar on his fchowder, foirnent the foir-3ett of the ludgeing ; quhair Andro Ray, baillie, caufit him cafl the famin doune. Hard Violet Ruthvene cryand,
' Thewis I Lymmeris ! Tratouris I and Bludie Theiwis !' Depairtit away, at command of Oliuer
goung baillie. Ignorat cetera.

(26.) WiLLlAME RocERTSONE, notar, deponit, he being thair but ony wapanis, faw nor hard na
thing hot ane tumult. And being demaiulit anent Andro Henderfone, deponit, that efter the Kingis
Maieflie haid cryit, ' TrefToune !' And the tumult thairupone arryfing, the faid deponer wes ftandand
at the foir ^ett, with young TuUybaidin and his ferwandis, quha ifchewing in at the 5ett to relewe the
King, the deponer, ane fchort fpace thaireftcr, follovvit in to the clofe ; the faid Lairdis feruandis
Handing togidder thair. Saw the Maider of Gowrie, lyand deid, at the fute of the tuinepyke ; quhair,
ane fchort quhyle thairefter, he faw the faid Andro Henderfone cum out of the faid turnepyk, ower
the Maifleris belly: And he inquiring at him, ' Chalmerlane, Jefus 1 quhat nienis the mater?' Quha
maid him na anfuer. And as the deponer rememberis, Johne Murray of Arbeny, and wtlieris quhome
the faid Johne can tell wes prefent thair. Ignorat cetera.

The Examinatouris Ordanis the Clerk to writt, with all diligence, for the faid Johne Murray.

. (27.) WiLLiAME Stenesone deponit, at the ringing of the bell, he com hefoir the ludgeing, with
ane fuoid ; and entering to the jeaixlc, faw George Craiggingailt with ane tua-handit fuord, and
wtheris nychtbouris ; at qidiilk tyme, James Boig cryit ower ane wyndo, ' Away hame ! 5e will be
all hangit.' And depairting, he faw ftanding in the entrie at the foir ^ett, flopping the entrie with
(hawin fwordis, Johne Rentoull, Thomas Biflett, with wtheris of my lordis fervandis. Hard Violet
Ruthuene cry to the round,* ' Bkulie Tratouris, that lies murdreill tliai innocentis ! Grene-coittis !'
■ (28.) Archibald Steidman deponit, that he being cuming furth of Archibald M'Biekis, quhair
Andro Ray, baillie, melting with him, commandit him to ryng the commoune bell ; quliilk he did. Cora
Hoclit thair. Ignorat cetera.

(29.) Blaise Powrie deponit, that he being fitting at Thomas Foulis buyth wyndo, he faw the
Duik and the wmq''^ Erie of Gowrie cum furth at the foir sett. Quhilk Erie of Gowrie wes putt per
force ane litill fjiace wp the calfay ; and befyde Archibald M'^Brekis, the wmq'^ Erie of Gowrie drew
his fuordis, and com bak agane, fordward to the ludgeing, and enterit thairat : At the quliilk tyme, he
deponit, he depairtit hame. Knawis na forder.

(30.) JoNET Elder, fpous of the faid Blais, being examinat and fuorne, deponit, that all the
tyme of the tumult, fcho wes at hir buyth dur. Alexander Ruthuene yonger com to liir, with ane
drawin fuorde, and creavit for powder ; quhilk fcho alluterlie refuifand, he perforce tuik fra liir keyis,

■ Until. 2 ■Without. ^ Enquired, asked. * She called up to the round or toner of the ' Ludgeing,' where the nohility then were with the King.

198 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

and rypit tlie buytli ; quliair, he finding nane, ran away with the keyis, and he keift thame fia him

wpone the calfay.

(31.) George Forrest, talseour, deponit, tliat at the ringing of the bell, he com with ane halbert to the hidgeing, part to the garding yearde, quhair he faw George Craiggingelt and Walter
Cmikfchank, baith wilh drawin iuordis, George being ane tua-handit fuorde. Hard George Craiginffelt cry, ' Grene-cottis ! Wo worth 50W, for 5 our heir cuming, and the thing 5e haue done this
day !' And ane cryit out to Walter Cruikfchank, ' It wes ane evill haltf leaflF' and ane drynk 36 gaiff
ws this day; 5eiiill hing for it.' Forder, he faw ane bering auefpartothe ludgeing; bot knawis nocht
quha buir it. lynorat cetera.

(32.) James Mar, wrycht, deponit, that he being at tlie dur of his awin buyth, he faw Patrik
Lamb, fawfter, bring on his fchowder ane fingle roiff Ipar to the foir 5ett of the ludgeing. Ignorat
cetera.

24 Septemhris, 1600. Afoir none.

(33.) Thomas Foulis, fmyth, deponit, that he wes fchoand Robert Brownis horfe; he faw the
Erie of Gowry gang in at bis awin 5ett, with tua drawin fuordis. Hard Violet Ruthuene cry, ' Bludie
boitfcharis ! Tratouris ! Grene-cottis 1' He faw Johne Rentoull, Thomas Biffett and wtheris quhome
he knew nocht off, the Erlis feruandis, fland in the foir entrie of the foir 3ett, with drawin fuordis ;
and wald nocht fuffer the Froueft to enter in at the jett. Ignorat cetera.

(3i.) Thomas Greig deponit, that he com nocht neir the ludgeing, bot faw Patrik Lamb, fawfler,
bring ane fpar throw the Water-gait on his awin fchowder. Ignorat cetera.

(35.) Dauid Ronaldsone, cordiner, deponit, that he com thair with na wappyn, bot he hard
Violet Ruthuene cry, ' Fy I Thciwis ! Bludie boitfclieris I W^o worth 30W, grene-cottis 1' And hard
Alexander Ruthuene fay, ' Wo worth this day, for euir 1' Ignorat cetera,

(36.) George Dauidsone, lorymer,^ deponit, that for obedience of the bell, he com to the ludgeing, enterit within the clofe, bot taryit nocht. Saw Andro Blair, ferwand to the Laird of Balthyok,
creave the lialbert fra Robert Tal3eour, quha refuifit ; quhairat he tuik him ane kuft'.-* Hard na fpeches
bot all cryand, ' How dois the Kyngis Maieftie ?' Ignorat cetera.

(37.) Archibald Macbrek deponit, that befoir ony cry gevin be the King, be faw the Duik,
the Erie of Mar and the Erie of Gowrie ilanding befoir the foir 3ett. Hard ane cry, lyke to the
Kingis voce. He than faw Schir Thomas Erfkyne enter in grippis with the Erie of Gowrie, quhair
the Erie wes putt all nioifl on his kneis ; quhairat the Erie ftappit bakward all maift foirnent the deponcris hous, and thair he drew his tua fuordis, bot he culd nocht dignofce ' ony perfone that wes with
liim. The deponcr in the meanetyme ftart in for his fuorde, and cuming furth with his drawin fuorde
and dager, the Laird of Glenwrquhay faid to him, ' Quhair away and the King in the ludgeing?'
Quhairat he layit fra liim his fuorde,^ and floppit doune to the place but ony wapyn. Being interrogat, ' Quliat euill fpeches he hard vterit agaues his MaieiUe, or his hienes fervandis ?' Deponit, he
hard nanc, bot all cryand, ' How dois his Maieftie ? Lat ws fie his face.' And thairefter, hard thame
cry, ' Lat fie our Proueft ! How dois our Proucft ?' Hard Alexander Ruthuene fay, ' It can be na
war° nor it is ! Latt ws to the lioufe.' And tliairwith the deponer depairtit. Knawis na forder.

(38.) Henrie Leise deponit, that he, at the found of the bell, com to the 5ett, and enterit within the clofe of the Erie of Gowryis ludgeing; quhair he faw Hew Moncreifl' bluiding, and Alexander
Ruthuene yonger cum doun the Blak tuniepyk. Saw Patrik Lamb, fawfter, bring in to the clofe
ane roift fpar, and caft it doune thair. Hard Alexander Ruthuene cry, ' Fetche ws powder I' Ignorat cetera.

1 Bad lialf loaf, &c. ; in .-illusion to the scraps, or shabby fare affoidi'd by Gowry to the King and his attendants.
J A spurrier, ur spur-malicr ; a dealer in horse accoutrements, such as bits, bridles, &c. They were usually saddlers.
Old Ir. Innmkr. = A cutf, slap, or slight blow. ■> Recognise, distinguish. Lat. dignoscere. ' In reference to the rrocUiination against bearing arms within a certain distance of the King's person. ^ Worse than it is.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I99

(39.) Henrie Bannewis (Balnaves) deponit, wes in the ludgeing befoir tlie tumult. Paft furtb,
at the defyre of Schir Thomas Erflcyne, to by him aiie pair grene filkin fcliankis.' Bufoir his letuniyiig, tlie King had dynnit : And liaiffing tauld bis anfuev, be paft wp the gait ; and being on the calliiy
he hard ane tumult; and luiking behind him, he faw tlie lord of Govviie with hisfuordis in his bandis,
and hard all the pepill cryand, ' The King is flane I' And thairwith he paffit him^ for bis wapnis ; and
cnming doune to the foir 3ett, he faw Hew Moncreiff cuniing furtb : Sperit at biui, ' Quhair the King
wes ?' Anfuerit, he knew nocht. Saw nocht the King, nor bard him fpeak ony thing ower the round :
And immediatelie thairefter, depairtit hame. Ignorat cetera.

(40.) Thomas TAL5EOUR deponit, he wes but ony wappyn. Saw Johne Rentoull and Thomas
BifTett refift the Laird of Baltbayok, in the entrie of the foir 3ett ; and wtheris of the Erie of Gowryis
fervandis, being than with thame. Ignorat cetera.

(41.) Andro James deponit, he faw Patrik Lamb bring ane trie on bis fcbowder to the foir sett,
and hard ane cry out of the ludgeing, ' Quhair away kneave with that trie?' Mett Hew Moncreiff
cuming furtb at the ^ett, bluding, Depairtit at command. Ignorat cetera.

(42.) Patrik Quhvttok, cordiner, deponit, that he being flanding on the calfay, be faw the
wmqie Erie of Gowrie, befyde Archibald IVPBrekis hous, haiff tua drawin fuordis in his handis ; and
hard him fay, ' He wald fordward to bis awin ludgeing.' Hard Violet Rutbuene cry wp to the place,
' Bludie boitfcheouris I Tratouris I Theiwis 1' and ficlyke evill fpeches. Ignorat cetera.

(43.) Patrik Bruce deponit, he being on the calfay, he faw the vrnq'!^ Erie of Gowrie, at bis
awin 5elt, all maift fall doune to the eird. Hard Violet Ruthuene cryand, ' Tratouris I' &c. Ignorat
cetera.

(44.) Andro Poll deponit, at the found of the bell, he com to the ludgeing, with ane balbert ;
and being in the clofe, he faw Patrik Lamb, fawfter, bring in on his fcbowder to the clofe, ane fyav
of fir, qubilk he fett afF his fcbowder to the wall, betuix the turnepyke and the feller dur. Saw Mr
Themes Cranftoun cum doun the Blak turnepyk, bluding: And fua depairtit hame, at command.
Ignorat cetera.

(45.) Anthone Maxtoune deponit, he com doune the gait with the young Laird of Tullybardin, quhen the nobill men wer fitting at thair dennar. Wes wpone the calfay, quhen ane cryit out
off the round ; hot knew nocht qubais voce it wes, and, as apperit to him, the cryar wes balff braithles.
Saw my lord Duik, my lord Mar and the Erie of Gowrycum furtb at the foir 3ett: Efter fum ftrugling, he faw the Erie of Gowrie giing ane pece wp the gait, quhair he hard the laid Erie fay, ' He wald
gang into his awin hous.' Saw na wapnis in his handis, at the quiiilk tyme he paft wp the gait, retuniyng bak agane at the found of the bell but ony waipnis. He hard Violet Rutbuene, cryand, ' God
latt neuir ane of 50W bane fic plantis of 30ur awin !' And hard Alexander Rutbuene fay, ' Fy on 30W,
Bailleis and haill toune I Is this all the help 3e mak this day to 3our Proueft !' And fua depairtit
hame, being commandit. Ignorat cetera.

24 Septemhris, 1600. Efter none.
(46.) Alexander Peblis deponit, that during all the tyme of the tumult, he wes lokkit in bis
awin hous, and luiking out at the wyndo. Hard Thomas Biffett cryand wp to the round, ' Is my
Lord of Gowrie allywe ?' ' Giff he be nocht allywc, he fuld haue amendis of all that wes tbairin !'
And James Bower cryit wp the ellyke fpeches. Wald nocht depairt, quhill they faw my lord of Gowrie ; and ane of thame tua cryit wp, ' Grene-cottis I we fall haue amendis of 50W !' Vagging thair
handis wp, fayand, ' ge fall pay for it I' Hard Thomas Elder in Balbuchtie, cry wp, for « Ane ficht of
the Erie of Gowrie.' Hard Robert Talseour cry, ' Tratouris and theiwis, that lies flane the Erie of

^ It appears that the whole of the royal pai-ty were dressed in ffreen hunting-suits. IJalnavis is sent to puidiase
green-silk stockings for Sir Thomas ErsUine's dress suit. * Perhaps for ' hame,' home.

200

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Cowrie !' Saw .Toline Rentoull, Thomas Biffelt, and wlheiis of the Erlis ferrandis, Hand in tlieentrie
of the foir -ett, with luordis in their handis ; and wald nocht cum fra it. Saw ane of the Erie of
Gowrj'is allakeyis,! ^j the entrie of the sett, putt ane lleill bonett on the Erlis heid. Hard Violet
Euthuene and wtheris wemen cry, ' Tratouris ! Theiwis ! The Erie of Cowrie haid anew to tak meit
and cirynk fra hame,"- hot hes nane to revenge his deid I' Ignorat cetera.

(VI ') Patbik Law, tal;eour, deponit, he com na forder nor the duelling hous of Arcliebald M'-
Brek • quhair he, hering the nychtbouris commandit lianie, be the Bailleis ; he dcpairtit to his awin
hous :' And being at the croce, he faw Alexander Ruthuene cum to the merchant-buyth of Blais
Pomie and Johne Lawrie, cryand for ' Powder,' bot gatt nane. And thairefter, ane gude fpace, faw
tlie laid Alexander cum wp the callay, and pas furth at the Hie-gait-port. lynorat cetera.

('48.') Thomas gouNO, tal^eour, deponit, he wes bot new cum in to the toune. Hard nor faw
nathinn-, hot all cryand wp, for ' Ane ficht of the Kingis face ;' and ' Ciff his IMaieftie wes weill Y
Except, he hard Mr Alexander Bannewis, Redar, cry wj) to the round ; bot tuik nocht tent quhat he
faid. Ignorat cetera.

(49.) Johne Hendersoxe, baxter, deponit, be cuming thair at the found of the bell, and being
ftanding aboue Archibald M'Brekis hous, he faw ane, hering ane trie on his fchowderis, to the ludgeiu" ; bot knawis nocht quha it wes, except be report fenfyne, it wes the man that is in the irnis.

(50.) JoiixE Broune, wobfter, deponit, he com at the found of the bell, with ane staff. Hard na
thiuff, bot hard fum cryand, ' God fend ane drap of grace to his Maieftie !' verie pltifullie. Knawis
nocht quha it wes. And fua depairtit, being commandit. Ignorat cetera.

(51.) JoHKE Lawrie deponit, he com at the found of the bell. Hard na thing, bot all cryand,
' The King is weill.' And he anfuerlt, ' God be thankit.' And lykewayis deponit, that quhen he cam
hame, his wvff tauld him, that in his abfence, his buyth-dur being lokkit, Alexander Ruthvene lap in
at the buyth-wyndo, and rypit^ all the buyth for powder: Wald nocht depairt, quhill his wyff maid
faith^ that they had na powder. Siclyke, him felff faw ane, bering ane trie to the ludgeing on his
fchowder ; bot knew nocht quha it wes ; and hard ane gentill man cry ower the wjTido, ' Quhair away
kneawe ? Lay doune the trie !' Quhilk trie, the Baillie caufit the man call doun. And fna depairtit
hame. Ignorat cetera.

(52.) Alexander ]Macduff deponit, he com, at the found of the bell, foirnent the ludgeing,
with his wapenis ; quhair he faw ane caft furth ane Iklait out aff ^ the heid of the Blak turnepyke, and fell
ane tails eour at the foir sett. Saw alfo ane mekill man bringing ane fingill roiff fpar to the ludgeing, on
his fchowder ; but knawis nocht quha it wes. Depairtit fua fone as he wes commandit. Ignorat cetera.

(53.) Cregour Makgregour, Ikynnor, deponit, he faw the Erie of Cowrie gang bak fra his
awin ludgeing, foirnent Neill Robertfonis hous, quhair he than drew furth twa fuordis, and iNIr Thomas Cranftoune drew ane fuorde, and pafs in togidder at the sett. Hard ane cry out at the over''
round, ' Trcflbune I' Bot knawis nocht quhais voce it wes. Saw Patrik Lamb, fawlter, bring ane fpar
on his fchowder to the hous. Ignorat cetera.

(^54.) Johne Broune, notar, deponit, that he faw my lord Duik and my lord of Cowrie cuming
furth at the sett ; and fpering, ' Gif his Maieftie com furth ?' And gaiting word that liis Maieftie wes
nocht cum furth, they wer altogidder at my lord of Cowryis sett ; and ' Trelibun !' being cryit furth
at ane Ikoir wyndo, that luikis to the Water-gait, Schir Thomas Erfkyne tuik my lord of Cowrie be
the gorget, and fayd, ' O Tratour ! This is thy deid I' Or tlie lyke terme. And thairefter, they being
(indent, my lord of Gowiie paft wp the gait, and haiffing tua fuordis in his hand, befoir Duncane Robertfonis hous, fayd, ' He wald nocht tary furth of his place, his Maieftie being thair, and Treffoun
thairintill !' And thairefter, the deponer depairtit hame to liis hous ; and com doune agane with ane

1 .\ footm.-m, or servant, a lacquey. O. Fr. lacijuaii. ' Him ? ' Ransacked. * He took her

oath, or ' faith and troth.' ^ From, otf. ^ Upper,

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

201

lialbert, and (laid befoir the 5ett of the place, quiiill Lis Maieftie patt fiii-th Les hand at the fayd wyudo, and fayd, ' I am weil!.' Thairefter, the faid Joline anfueiit, < Prailed be God ;' and pall hame.
lynorat cetera.

(55.) JoiiNE Gaw, merchant, deponit, lie com thair at the found of the bell, hot tareyit noclit ane
malmond of ane hour. Ignorat.
(56.) George Hunter deponit, he wes that day in the place of Kynnard. Ignoral.
(57.) Patrik Flemyng, merchant, wes nocht that day in tlie toune. Ignorat.

(58.) WiLLiAME Hall youngar, noclit thair. Ignorat.

(59.) Malcolme Hall, baxter, com noclit. Ignorat.

(60.) James Blair, merchant, deponit lie com thair, bot tareyit nocht. Ignorat.

(61.) Robert Eduard deponit, he wes thair, bot tareyit nocht. Ignorat.

(62.) Robert Blakwod deponit, he wes all the tyme fleipand. Ignorat.

(63.) JoHNE RoBERTSONE, merchant, was thair, and depairtit at command of the Bailleis. Ignorat.

(64'.) JoHNE PuLLOUR, merchant, wes nocht thair. Ignorat.

(65.) James Lafreise deponit, lie wes nocht in the toun that day. Ignorat.

(66.) Thomes Cramby, flefour, wes all that day in Strowyhill. Ignorat.

(67.) Johne Covenrie com nocht furth of his mailleris hous. Ignorat.

(68.) James Irland com at the found of the bell ; bot depairtit, fa fune as he wes commandit be
the Bailleis. Ignorat.

25 Septemhris, 1600. Befoir none.

The perfonis following werexaminat wpone the preceiding Artiklis, and fuorne ; qulia deponit, That
thai that cam to the ludgeing, tareyit noclit thair, bot depairtit in all haift, at command of the Bailleis
and clerk ; and fua knew nathing : And the wther pairt that followis, wes nocht in the toune, as is
heirefter devydit.

(69.) Andro Gow, tal3eour, wes in the toune, bot com nocht.

(70.) Henrie Tal^eour wes thair, bot tareyit nocht.

(71.) Alexander Moncreiff com befoir the ending. Ignorat.

(72.) Williame Mersar wes thair. Ignorat.

(73.) Alexander Mychell, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(74.) Alexander Craig, cordiner, thair. Ignorat.

(75.) Adame Andersone, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(76.) James Gill, tliair. Ignorat.

(77.) James Blyth, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(78.) Patrik Olyphant, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(79.) Allane Robertsone, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(80.) George Archibald, thair. Ignorat.

(81.) Thomas Gaw wes nocht thair. Ignorat.

(82.) Johne Pitcarne wes nocht thair, wes feik. Ignwat.

(83.) Johne Thomsone, flefcher, wes in Dunkeld, com nocht hame quhill the morne thaiiefter.
Ignorat.

(84.) Thomas Johnestoune, wobfler, cam nocht fua far doune. Ignorat.

(85.) Robert Lethame wes nocht thair. Ignorat.

(86.) Robert Thomesone, feik, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(87.) Thomas Rynd com nocht neir the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(88.) Thomas Elgyne wes llepand. Ignorat.

(89.) Sampsone Mar, nocht thair ; except he paft hame for his fuord and com nocht bak. Ignorat.
VOL. II. 2 C

202 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

(90.) Andro Tiiomesone, nocht thair. Ignored.

(91.) Patrik Boner wes noclit in tlie touiie. Ignorat.

(92.) Robert Murray wes in Collace. Jgnorat.

(93.) Matiio GALgEAR wes thair but ony wapnis. Hard na tiling. Ignoral.

(94.) George gouNG wes noclit thair. Ignorat.

(95.) JoHNE Neving wes thair, tareit nocht. Ignorat.

(96.) Alexander Adamsone wes in Glefgow. Ignored.

(97.) Alexander Smyth com thair at the found of the bell. Pad away at command of tlie
Kingis mouth, and his fervandis. Ignorat cetera.

(98.) Patrik Drummond wes nocht in the toune. Ignorat.

(99.) James Bannewis wes nocht thair. Ignorat.
(100.) George Horne deponit, he wes in Faulkland. Ignorat.
(101.) Robert Stenesone wes in the Meirnis. Ignorat.
(102.) DuNCANE Forrester, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(103.) Matho Chaip, nocht thair, nor in the toune.
(104.) Thomas Wilsone wes nocht thair. Ignorat.
(105.) Archibald gouNG, nocht tliair. Ignorat.
(106.) James gouNG, in the Querrell (^quarry). Ignorat.
(107.) Johne Elder, noclit thair, Ignoral.

(108.) Johne Drummond deponit, lie was in the toune; com with ane llaff, hot nocht I'ua far
doune as the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(109.) Andro Ramsay, ileping all the tyme. Ignorat.
(110.) Alexander Adame, feik, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(111.) Henrie Scherpe wes nocht thair. Ignorat.
(112.) Johne Greiff, in the malte-barne. Ignorat.
(113.) Alexander Carrinwath com nocht fa far doune. Ignorat.
(114.) Johne Andersone wes in Wigtoun. Ignorat.

(115.) Thomas Cre com noclit fua far doune, being halflFdeid quhen he hard the King wes flane :
Bot heiring his Maieftie wes weill and faiff, he prafit God and pad hamc. Ignorat cetera.
(116.) Andro Keir com nocht tliair. Ignorat.
(117.) James Pattoun, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(118.) Adam Keltie, fleping. Ignored.
(119.) WiLLiAME Johnestoune, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(120.) Johne Rodgie, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(121.) Alexander Moncreiff wes in Auchtergavin. Ignorat.
(122.) Adame Wilsone cam nocht fa far doune. Ignorat.

(123.) Patrik Fleming, notar, wes thair; hard na thing bot all men lamenting the Kingis eftait
hevelie. Had na wapnis. Ignored.

(124.) Patrik Wilsone wes thair; hard na thing, bot faw the Magiftratis putting away the pepill. Ct/erei ignorat.

(125.) Johne Lamb, wobfter, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(126.) Stevin Blak, nocht thair. Ignored.
(127.) Matho Allake com nocht fua far doune. Ignorat.
(128.) Johne Rychie, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(129.) Andro Gellatlie, hering the bell, part to the lit-hous (elge-house) quhair his wyfle we.s,
for the keyis, to get ane wapin ; and befoir he com thair all wes flenfchit. Ignored.
(130.) Robert Narne, tal3eour, deponit, that he wes in Mukerfie. Ignorat.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

203

(131.) Alexander Farie, decane of the Walcaiis {fullers), deponit, he was in the wod of Methuene. Ignorat.

(132.) Robert Broun deponit, at the found of tlie bell, he com to the ludgeing with anelWord ;
quhair he faw Hew Moiicreiff cum forth bluiding, with ane drawin fuorde. Ignoral cetera.

(133.) Donald Johnestoune deponit, all the pepill wes returning lianie befoir he com, and \\v
retuniit with the reft. Ignorat.

(134<.) WiLLiAME Dog deponit, lie wes in Cragy. Ignorat.

(135.) Thomas Hall com nocht neir the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(136.) Donald Cornell wes in the Eider Rynd. Ignorat.

(137.) Stephane Philp deponit, he wes nocht thair quliill the Kingis depairtour. Ignonil.

(138.) Robert Grant hard the bell and com nocht. Ignoral.

(139.) James Maxtoun wes cumand with his halbert; and melting Oliuer 30ung baillie, liecoinniandit him bak, or than he fuld brek his held ! Ignorat.

(140.) JoHNE Drummond com at command of the bell; and depaiitit luddandlie at command.
Ignorat cetera.

(141.) George Dixsoun wes thair ; depairtit at the firft command that wes gevin. Ignorat cetera.

25 Seplembris, 1600. Efternone.
(142.) DiONEls CoNQUEKOUR elder hard the bell, hot com nocht thair. Ignorat cetera.

(143.) Gavyn DALgELL wes in Dal5ell. Ignorat.

(144.) Thomas LisK, hering the bell, com with ane halbert; and at the firit command that wes
givin be the bailieis, he depairtit. Ignorat cetera.

(145.) Charlis Quhyte wes in the toune and cum nocht. Ignorat.

(146.) JoHNE Smyth, maltman, (wes) in the toune, com nocht. Ignorat.

(147.) WiLLiAME DuNCANE, fkynner, com with ane fuord. Ignorat.

(148.) JoHNE Dykis com als far as Archibald M'brekis, with ane I'uord ; and at command of Aridro Ray baillie, depairtit. Com na forder. Ignorat cetera.

(149.) Dauid Grant com with Thomas Gaw to Duncane Robertlonis round, quhair they tareit
all the tyme. Ignorat.

(150.) Patrik Steill, hering the bell, quhen he wes Ichering (reaping) in the Moirtoun-hauch,
com in to the toune, quhen all the tumult wes ceifiit. Cuming foirnent Gabriell Merfaris, faw Oliuer
50ung and Andro Ray bailieis, commanding all hame. They commandit him, and he obeyit. Com
nocht to the ludgeing of all (at all, ava). Ignorat cetera.

(151.) Robert gouNc cum to the ludgeing; paft away at command of the bailieis, Ignorat cetera.

(152.) Adam Gray wes at his litt-fat (dying-vat) ; hard the bell ; com nocht. Ignorat.

(153.) Peter Craigdelie com nocht thair. Ignorat.

(154.) Robert Flemyng wes in Gavyne Daljellis. They lokkit the settis, and he gat not fuiih.
Ignorat.

(155.) JoHNE Boio yonger wes in the wod of Methuene. Ignorat.

(156.) Thomas Archer com na forder nor the croce. Ignorat.

(157.) Robert Ruthirfurde wes in the walk-mylne (fulling-mill). Ignorat.

(158.) Alexander Maissoun cam na furder nor the Salt mercat. Ignorat.

(159.) Williame RuTHVENE.ane of the mails (toivn officers), wes in Langforgoun, fummonding
ane AlTyfe. Foirknew na thing. Ignorat.

(160.) Alexander Maxtoun, cuming doune to the ludgeing, be the gait, wes commandit hame,
be the bailieis and young Tullybardin. Ignorat.

(161.) Johne Burry cam nocht fua far doune. Ignorat; and but armour.

204

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

(162.) Andro Grant wes in the South-ferry of Portincraig. IgnoraL
(163.) Henry Bkoune, notar, cuniing thair, wes commandit hame. Ignoral.
(164.) JoHNE Brovne, wobfter, hard the bell; com nocht furth. Ignorut.
(165.) Williams M'beith wes in Forgoune at ane biydall. Ignorat.

(166.) JoHNE Edmund wes in Dundie; and being inlenogit ' Gif he faw Johue Lamb fone to
Robert Lamb, merchant, thair?' Deponit he faw him thair tua dayis ofbefoir, hot nocht that day.

(1G7.) Georoe Drummond com thair, quhen the bailleis wes difchargeing all away. Hard na
evill fpeches. Ignorat.

(168.) Thomas Cok wes lyand feik. Ignorat.

(169.) JoHNE Wentoune wes in the North Inche. Enterit nocht in the toune. Ignorat.

(170.) Walter Burnehill came nocht fua far doune. Ignorat.

(171.) James Donaldsone com na forder nor the Salt mercat; with armour. Ignorat.

(172.) James Lamb wes reflaving collis (coals) in the South Inche. Enterit nocht in the toune.
Ignorat. And becaufe he culd not gait entres in at the Port, lie caufit the horfe leid the collis throw
the Inchfi, throw the Lang-calfay, the New-raw, Leid-fyde, and to his hous.

(173.) JoHNE Colte, merchant, com nocht. Ignorat.

(174.) Dauid Jaksone yonger wes in Aberdalgie. Ignorat.

(175.) Andro Lyell come ; tareyit nocht. Ignorat.

(176.) Dauid iMoNCREirr, baxter; com thair; pafl. way at command of the bailleis. Ignorat.

(177.) JoHNE Broune, fkjTiner, wes thair. Ignoral.

(17S.) Andro Crystie, wobfter, wes thair. Ignorat.

(179) JoHNE He WAT, taljeour, com nocht. Ignorat.

(180.) James Hendersoxe, baxter, cuming to the end of the Water-gait, he hnrd the Bailleis
commanding the pepill hame ; quhilk he obeyit. Com na forder. Ignorat.

(181.) Robert Broune, maltman, com to the end of the gait, and na forder. Ignorat.

(182.) Robert Liddell, cordiner, com at the found of the bell. The Duik bidding all, ower
the round, to gang hame, he fpak up agane to his lordfchip, and defyrit to fie the King and the Erie
of Gowrie. And his lordfchip anfuerit, ' ge fall fie the King.' And fua, the Kingis Maieftie, beilinyng with his hand, and commanding all to depairt, he obeyit. Cetera ignorat.

(183.) James Syme, baxter, wes thair ; bot depairtlt, fua fone as the bailleis commandit him. Ignorat cetera.

(184.) JoHNE Andersone yongor hnrd tbp hell, and com nocht. Ignorat.

(185.) Johne Colte, maiffoun, wes in Inneniytie. Ignorat.

(186.) James Sanderis, merchant, wes in the Stormond. Wes nocht in the toune thre dayis
thairefter. Ignorut.

(187.) Robert Murr.vy yonger wes in the North Inche. Ignorat,

(188.) Johne Mertyne, baxter, wes cuming to the ludgeing at the found of the bell ; melting
with the bailleis at the Rattoun-raw, wes commandit hame, and obeyit. Ignorat.

(189.) Thomas Dog, baxter, com nocht fua far doune. Ignorat.

(190.) Thomas Syme, taljeour, com nocht fua far doune, be a gude (pace. Ignorat.

26 Septembris, 1600. Befoir none.
(191.) Johne Ma issouN, nocht thair. Ignorat.
(192.) Johne Burnet, nocht in the toun. Ignorat.
(193.) Patrik Rodgie wes in the Parkhill. Ignorat.
(194.) Thomas M'Lawrene wes feik. Ignorat,
(195.) James Murray wes thair, but ony wapnis. Tareit nocht, Ignorat.

34JAC.VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 205

(196.) Alexander Ryciierdsone, agit, nocht tliair. Ignorat.

(197.) lloBERT Kynneir wes tliair. Deponit he hard na crying, hot all for ane lyclit of tl.air
King. Ignorat cetera.

(198.) Thomas Duff wes tliair. Saw nor hard na thing ; hot faw ane man, quhome he kend
nocht, bringing ane jeift on his fchowder, quhen he wes depairting. Ignorat cetera.

(199.) Robert Blair, litflcr (dger,) nocht in the toune. Ignorat. Wes than working outwitli
the Caftell-gavill-port, at ane litt-fatt.

(200.) James Keddie, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(201.) Andro Allane, Anytli, com tliair ; taroit nocht. Ignorat.

(202.) Marcus Scott com nocht. Ignorat.

(203.) JoHNE Ruthuene wes in Dunkeld. Ignorat.

(204.) Johne Dasoun, taljeour. Ignorat.

(205.) JoHNE Gregour, nocht in the toune. Ignorat.

(206.) Adame Paull, nocht in the toune. Ignorat.

(207.) Johne Murray, tal^eour, wes in Cragy. Ignorat.

(208.) Robert Tyrie, porter, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(209.) Walter Boig com, hot tareyit nocht. Ignorat.

(210.) James Crobie com nocht fiia fardoun as the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(211.) Johne Robert.sone, maltman, wes fleping. Ignorat.

(212.) Robert Watsone com nocht neir the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(213.) Robert Lamb, wohfler, wes feik. Ignorat.

(214.) Williame Wentoune com nocht. Ignorat.

(215.) Williame Bariocht, fkynner, com nocht. Ignorat.

(216.) Williame Hunter, couper, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(217.) EwiN BuRRY wes thair, efter all wes ceiffit. Ignorat.

(218.) Johne Barioune, alias M Duff, or (ere) he com, all wes commandit hanie. Ignorat.

(219.) Andro Burrie com nocht fua far as to the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(220.) Andro Rogie wes in Lome. Ignorat.

(221.) Lawrence Citalmer com nocht to the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(222.) Patrik Neving com, and at the firll dilcharge depaiitit. Ignorat.

(223.) Arthour Luffrent com nocht. Ignorat.

(224.) Williame Robertsone com na forder nor the croce. Ignorat.

(225.) James Gellatlie com nocht fra his buyth. Ignorat.

(226.) Williame Maxwell wes in Skone. Ignorat.

(227.) Williame Malice wes thair; depairtit incontiuent. Ignorat.

(228.) Williame Cok. wes in Rlethuene. Ignorat.

(229.) Duncane Broune wes nocht within the port. Ignorat.

(230.) Johne Blak wes in the Claypottis. Ignorat.

(231.) Patrik Wylie wes lyand feik. Ignorat.

(232.) George M'Gregour elder, nocht in the toune. Ignorat.

(233.) James Bissett wes in his hous, quhair his wyff wes lyand feik : and giff he had culu furtli,
his wyff wald haue gane lycht.' Ignorat.

(234.) Johne Scherar, lyand feik. Ignorat.

(235.) Thomas Nycoll, notar, wes in the toune ; hard the bell, bot com nocht neir the ludgeing.
Ignorat.

(23C.) Alexander Grant, merchant, wes in Glefgow. Ignorat.

' Delirious ; the delirium or ' liglit-lieadedness' attending fever, &C.

206 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

(237.) \Vir.i.iAME WiLLiAMESosE, baxter, com lang efter the ringing of the bell ; and at his cuining, they war all depairting. Ignorat.

(238.) Alexander Robertsone hard the bell, bot com nocht. Ignorat.

(239.) Archibald Broune, at the lound of the fecund ringing of the bell, cuming to the place
quhair the tumult wes, faw thebailleis commanding all hame ; be depairtit. Ignorat cetera.
(2i0.) JoHXE Hendersone, baxter, wes in Rait. Ignorat.

(2il.) John Layxg, maltman, being gating collis' in the South Inche, at tlie found of the bell:
Tareit na lano-er at the hous, nor (than) he hard his Maieftie fay, ' Gang hame all I I am weill !' Cetera ignorat.

(24'2.) JoHXE Lendell, baxter, hard the bell ; he and Willianie Scherpe, fittand iu Gabriell Merlaris laich feller, quhairof they fteikit' the dur, and tliey culd nocht gait furth. Cetera ignorat.

(243.) Walter ^oung, baxter, hering the bell, com to the croce ; and hering the tumult wes at
the Erie of Gowryis lodgeing, he com thair ; and melting all the pepill returning hame, being commandit by the bailleis, he alio returnit. Ignorat cetera.

(24:4.) JoHNE Kvnloch, taif^eour, wes thair at the found of the bell, bot tareit nocht; haid na
wapnis. Ignorat.

(245.) WiLLiAME Clerk wes meitting^ collis all the tyme, in the South Inche. Ignorat.
(246.) Thomas Drummosd, llcynner, wes in the Moirtoune. Ignorat.

(247.) Patrik Priol'R, baxter, hering the bell, com to the ludgeing; fuafone as the bailleis commandit the pepill hame, he depairtit. Ignorat.

(248.) James Fargusose, baxter, com nocht to the ludgeing, quhill all wes depairting hame. Ignorat cetera.

(249.) Thomas Nycolsoun, baxter, wes lang ia cuming ; mett all the pepill returning hame, and
be palt na forder. Ignorat.
(250.) Johne Jak, belman, wes nocht neir the ludgeing be ane gude fpace. Ignorat.
(251.) Axdro Gib wes fleping. Ignorat.
(252.) Thomas Smyth com nocht thair. Ignorat.
(253.) Robert Cudbert, nocht thair. Ignorat.

(254.) Andro Wilsoxe, baxter, hering the bell, hard that thair was ane tumult of pley* at the
Erie of Gowryis ludgeing. Cuming thair, wes incontinent commandit hame be the bailleis, qulia obeyit.
Ignorat cetera.

(255.) Andro Malcolme elder, baxter, wes in the South Inche all the tyme; ane man of threfcoir ten yeris of age. Ignorat.

(256.) Joane Beirxe, ftynner, of the ellyke age, wes nocht thair. Ignorat.
(257.) Axdro Doxaldsone, merchant, hering the bell, wes cuming to the ludgeing; but mett all
pepill returning bak. Pafl na forder. Ignorat.

26 Septembris, 1600. Efter none.

(258.) James Stobbie, fkynner, com nocht out of his houfe. Ignorat.

(259.) WiLLiAME Ros, at the Charter-hous-5ett, wes fchering out of the toune, and culd nocht
gait entres at the port. Ignorat

(260.) James Tyrie, com thair, immediatlie befoir the ceifllng of the tumult, and na loner. Igiiorat.

(261.) Johxe Kempie, tal5eour, com nocht thair. Ignorat.

(262.) George Lamb, baxter, deponit he wes in Dundie, all the nycht ofbefoir; bot come to the
toune befoir xij lionris at none : Com nocht out of his hous to the ludgeing, at na tyme of the tumult.
Being intenogat, ' Gitf lie law Joline Lamb, fone to Robert Lanib in Perth, in the toune of Dundie
' Getting coals. 2 ghut, locked. ^ Measuiing. i .\ tumultous broil or quarrel.

.'34.JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 207

tlie day of tliair departour?' Deponit, tlie laid Joline Lamb led George Wodis Iiorfu to the Port ot
Dundie, be four houiis in tlie mornyng; and lie left the laid Johne thair behind him. I gnorat cetera.

(263.) WiLLiAME Hay, litfter, wes in the toune, bot com nocht to the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(264.) Dauid Jaksone elder wes fchering befyd Balhouffie, and befoir he com in to the toune,
the Kyngis Maiellie wes ryding away. Ignorat.

(265.) Williame Hammiltoune, merchant, com nocht quhill the bailleis wes commanding all
the pepill hame ; and he obeyit amangis tlie reft. Ignorat cetera.

(266.) Dauid Drummond, meflinger, deponit, he com thair at the found of the bell ; tareyit na
langer nor he hard the pepill commandit away. Ignorat cetera.

(267.) Alexander Chalmer, maltman, wes in the Banchellis. Ignorat.

(268.) Thomas Bonar, merchant, wes thair ; bot knawis na thing.

(269.) Thomas Cathro wes in the baick-hous, and mycht nocht win furth, except he had tint his
liaill balking. Ignorat.

(270.) Alexander Forbes, faidler, at the found of the bell, com thair with his wapnis. Hard na
thing, bot ane command gevin to the bailleis to cans the pepill gang hame ; and he incontinent, at the
hering thairof, obeyit, and paft Iiame. Ignorat cetera.

(271.) Williame Gles, faidler, wes thair with his wapnis; law nor hard nathmg, bot all crying
for the Kingis welfair.

(272.) Crystie Wilsone, baxter, com nocht furth of his hous. Ignorat.

(273.) Archibald gULE, tal3eour, com nocht furth of his buyth. Ignorat.

(274.) George Sympsone, of thre fcoir yeris, cuming, faw the bailleis putting away the pepill.
He com nocht neir. Ignorat.

(275.) Andho Maling, (kynner, com nocht neir the ludgeing. Ignorat.

(276.) Olicer Car wes in the toune, bot com nocht thair. Ignorat.

(277.) George Malcome, baxter, iij" {three score) yeris, com nocht furth. Ignorat.

(278.) Johne Neving wes in the Ferry Portincraig. Ignorat.

(279.) Alexander Gles, of iij'" ten yeris. Ignorat.

(280.) Andro Lathangie. Ignorat.

(281.) Petir Balmanno, wes that haill day in Duukeld. Ignorat.

(282.) Johne Olvphant, lyand bedfaft. Ignorat.

(283.) Williame M'Andro wes in Bachiltoune. Ignorat.

(284.) George Jak, baxter, (wes; in Abirbrothok. Ignorat.

(285.) Robert Cok deponit, he wes drinking in Gabriell Merfaris lious, with James Liddell and
James Setoune, tua of the Kingis fervandis. Eftir ' Treflbun' wes cryit, he depairtit hame. Ignorat.

27 Septembris, 1600. Befoir none and eftir none.
■ (286.) Andro Uysd, baxter, wes all that day grinding in the mylne of Ruthuen. Ignorat.

All thir perfones on this fyde, wer in the toune, and com nocht neir the Ludgeing. Ignorat.

(287.) Robert Lamb, (295.) Dauid Gles, (303.) Williame Houp,tal5eour,

(288.) Williame Scherpe, (296.) Dauid AUane, fmylli, (304.) James Ros,

(289.) Dauid Wrycht, (297.) Johne Pait, (305.) Patrik Foulis,

(290.) Williame Malcolme,baxter,(298.) Mr Thomas Mug, (306.) Andro Merfar,

(291.) Rychard Blak, (299.) Walter Symplon, (307.) Johne Adamefoun,

(292.) Williame Lawder, (300.) Patrik Jakfon, myller, (308.) Thomas Rollok,

(293.) Johne Boig elder, (301.) Robert Keir, (309.) Alexander Broune,

(294.) George Wiifone, (302.) Johne Mar, llaibler, (310.) Patrik Pittillo,

208 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

(311.) George Wod, (321.) Williame Souter, (331.) Williame Roddonie,

(312.) Gcorire Adamfone, (322.) Wm. Smytlie, cordiner, (332.) Patrik Malcome,

(313.) James Robcrfoue, flfynner,(323.) Thomas Stobie, (333.) Wm. Robeitfone elder,

(311.) Jolme Monypenny, cuper, (324 ) Andro Scherpe, wobfter, (334.) Andro Luffient,

(315.) Arcliibald Smytli, (323.) Thomas Souter, (335.) Dougell M'Lawrene,

(316.) Edmund Finlafone, (326.) Thomas M'Ky, (336.) Patrik Mug,

(317.) Williame Rulil'll.wobfter, (327.) Andro Lowdoune, (337.) Williame Aleifter,

(318.) Dauid Donaldfone, (328.) Luik Reid, (338.) Henry Hall, baxter,

(319.) Johne Marfchell, flcynner,(329.) W^alter Cudbert, (339.) Johne Henryfoun, merch',

(320.) David-Cryftie, wobfter, (330.) Patrik Quhyte, (340.) Williame Myller.

Thir perfones following wer nocht in the toune of Perth, vpoun the fyft day of Auguft, 1600, viz.

(341.) Alexander Wyclitoune, (346.) James Berne, (351.) Williame Walcare,

(342.) James Nycoll, flaibler, (347.) Alexander Drummond, (352.) James Haggart elder,

(343.) Andro Mathow, (348.) Finla M'inneis, (353.) Alexander Merfer,

(344.) Angous Cardny, (349.) Robert Muglie, (354.) George Quhattene,

(345.) Johne Conqueriour, mer- (350.) Johne Robertfone, mer- (355.) Andio Fifcher.
chand, chand,

WE, wnder fubfcryveand, Testifeis, That it is of veritie, we hard euerie thing writtin ofbefoir in
this bulk, according to the Angular Depofitiones of everie perfone contenit thairinto ; quhilkis wer particularlie fuorne and examinat, in our prelenffes, in the Itrateft maner as we culd devyle, wpone everie
artikill contenit in tins buik. Subfcryuit with our handis, At Perth, the ellevint day of October, the
yeir of God J"', and fex hundred yeiris.-

Olipheb gouNO, Baihe, "^

A. Ray, Baliuus, l ^'^^^^ *° ^^ ^4, 25 and 26 dayes

M. P. Gallouay. j Examinatioun.

Thomas Jhonestoune, bailje, Walter Gray, w' my hande,

Jasies Drummond, M. William Cowper,

Robert Anderson, Henricds Elder, Notarius,

Andro Arnet, w' my hand, Scriba communitatis burgi

Robert Mathow, w' my hand, de Perth, manu fua.

No. IV.
The Eakle of Gowries Conspiracie agaiiift the Kingis Maieftie of Scotland, At Saint John-ftoun, vpon Tuefday the fift of Auguft, 1600.
London. Printed by Valentine Simmes, dwelling on Adling-hill, at the
Signe of the White Swanne, 1600.'

[The prefent Reprint of M'hat has been termed ' The King's Narrative,' and
' The Account published by authority,' has been made from the Earliest Eng-

' Preserved in the Library of the Faculty of Advocates. Simmes printed another Edition in 1603,
after King James ascended the English throne, small quarto, pp. 32, in Roman letters, a copy of
which the Editor saw, penes David Laing, Esquire.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 209

lish Edition, of 32 pages small quarto, Blade Letter. There were likely at least
two Editions printed at Edinburgh, by Robert Waldegrave and by Robert Charteris, immediately after the Trials for the Conspiracy took place ; in order to quiet,
as well as to satisfy the public mind, which had been much inflamed by Mr Robert Bruce and the other refractory Ministers of Edinburgh ; who greedily availed themselves of this opportunity of expressing their incredulity, by way of
avenging themselves against the King, for his obstinate adherence to Episcopacy, &c. In Herbert's Edition oi Ames s Typographical Anthjuities, \>. 1521,
notice is taken of an Octavo (mistake for small Quarto) Edition, at Edinburgh,
printed by Robert Charteris 1600, ' cum jn-ivilegio Regio ;' three sheets and a
half. As Ames quotes Harl. 31iscel. III. 76, where this Tract is inserted, it is
likely that he never saw the original, which is so extremely scarce, that a copy
cannot now be traced. Lord Hailes reprinted this Tract, as the fii-st number of
an intended series of Papers relative to the Gowrie Conspiracy ; but either he
did not live to finish this work, or, more probably, he abandoned the undertaking,
owing to the want of proper materials. His lordship says, ' This Accomit was
published by authority, at Edinburgh, about the beginning of September 1600;
for Nicolson, Queen Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, sent it to Sir Robert Cecil, on
the 3d of September 1600. Paper Office.' He also remarks, that ' it appears
by a Letter from Sir John Carey, Governor of Berwick, to Cecil, 4th of September 1600, that some Treatise had been published in Scotland, in tixdiCATION OE Gowrie. Paper Office." This last-mentioned Treatise must have
been privately circulated in MS., or, if printed, the impression had been seized
at press. Not a vestige of the Tract remains. Even the Title, or an abstract
of the facts and arguments, is unnoticed by any of the numerous contemporaneous writers who profess to espouse the cause of the Earl of Gowrie. The
Rev. James Scott, in his History, 8vo, Edinburgh, 1818, p. 5, quotes a MS., in
the Libraiy of the Society of Antiquaries, Perth, which he terms ' Stewart's
Collections,' in which it is stated, that ' after the Earl of Cowrie's death, a small
Treatise was published in his Vindication, but was suppressed. Some copies of
it were, however, preserved ; and Sir Robert Douglas has said, that his brother
Sir William had seen one of these Vindications, and that also several old gentlemen in Perthshire had owned that they had seen it.' On this subject, it shall
only farther be noticed, that among the Correspondence of the indefatigal)lc
Geoi'ge Paton, one of the profoundest and most meritorious of our Scotish Collectors, (a pretty large portion of which has fortunately been recovered and preserved by the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh,) a Letter occurs, addressed by
Mr Paton to the eminent Antiquary, Richard Gough, Esquire, 27th IMay 1782,
from which the following passage is extracted. ' Did you ever see the counterVOL. II. 2 D

210

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

])art or answer to K. James's Account of E. Gowrie's Conspiracy, or that published l)y authority ? The answer I am assured was printed, but supprest ; altho'
a copy or so may be preserved ; which, if discovered, might throw some light on
that dark passage of our Scots History. E. Cromarty's credulity and weakness
of judgment is conspicuous in his account of that Tragedy, by his narrating the
infhience of spells, and notice of a few pretended magic characters, written on
parchment or paper, foimd in the unhappy Lord's pocket ; which were nothing
else than a few chymical chai-acters, known to every practitioner now-a-days in
that art ; which science both the brothers acquired in their travels thro' Italy.'
It is almost unnecessary to add, that even Mr Gough could not afford any information on the subject.]

A Discourse of the vnnaturall and vile Confpiracie, attempted againft his
JNlaiefties perfon, at Saint Johnftoun, vpon the fift day of Auguft, being
Tuefday, 1600.

His Maieftie liauing his refidence at Falkland, and being daily at the buck-hunting (as his ufe is in
tliat feafon) vppon tlie fifth day of Auguft, being Tuefday, hee raide out to tlie parke, betueene fixe
and feeuen of tlie cloeke in the morning, the weather beeing wonderful! pleafant and feafonable. But,
before his Majefty could leape on horfe back, his HighnefTe being now come downe by the equerie ; all
the huntfmen, with the hownds, attending his Maieftie on the green, and the Court making to their
hoifes, as his Highnefle fclfe was, Mafter Alexander Rutliwen, fecond brother to the late Earle of
Gowrie, being tlien lighted in the town of Falkland, liafted him fall downe to owertake liis Maieftie
before his on-leaping, as hee did. Where meeting his Highnefle, after a very lowe curtefie, bowing
his head vnder his Majefties knee, (although hee was neuer wont to make fo lowe courtefie) drawing
his Maieftie aparte, hee beginnes to difcourfe vnto liim (but with a very deiected countenaunce, his
eies ever fixed vpon the earth) howe that it chaunccd him, in the euening before, to be walking abroad
•ibout the fields, taking llie ayre folitarie alone, without the towne of Saint Johnftoun, where his prefent dwelling with the Lorde his brother was, and tliere, by accident, affirmed to have recountred a bafe
like fellow, vniknowne to him, witli a cloke caft about his mouth ; whom, as hee inquired his name,
and what his errand was, to be pafllng in fo lolitarie a part, being from all waies : the fellow became
on a fodaine fo amazed, and liis tongue fo faidtered in his mouth, that, vppcn liis fufpitious behaviour,
hee begoniie more narrowly to look unto him and examine him ; and perceiving that there appeared
fometliing to be hid under his cloke, liee did caft by the lappes of it, and fo finds a great wide pot to
be undiT liis arme, all full of coyned gold in great peeces ; afluring liis Majeftie, that it was in very
great quantity. Upon the figlit whereof (as he affirmed) liee tooke backe the felow, with liis burthen,
to the towne, where liee, priuatly, without the knowledge of any man, tooke the fellow, and bound
him in a piiuy derned boufe; and after locked many doores vpon him, and left him there and his pot
witli liiin, and had liafted himfelfe out of Saint Jolinftoun that day, by foure bowers in the morning,
to make his Maieftie advertifed thereof, according to his bound dutie ; earneftly requefting his Majeftie, with all diligence and fecrefie, that his Majeftie might take order therewith, before any know
therof ; Avearing and protefting that he had yet concealed it from all men, yea from the Earle his own
brother. His Majefties firft anfwere was (after thanking him for his good will) that it could not become his Majeftie to meddle any waies in that matter, fince no mans treafure that is a free and law34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 211

ful fubject can, by tlie law, appertaine unto tlie King, except it be fouuil lild iiiuk'r tbe eartli, as this
was not. Wliereroto Le anfweied, tliat tlie fellow confeffed unto liini, that lie was going to Iiave bid
it under the ground ; but coulde not take leafure, at that time, to enquire any further of him. Wherevnto his Maieftie replyed, that there was great difference betwixt a deede and the intention of a deede ;
liis intention to haue hid it, not being alike as if it had beene found already hidde. Rlaiiler Alexanders
aunfwere was, that hee tliought his Maieflie oucr fcrupulous in fuch a matter, tending fo gieatjy to
his Maiellies profite ; and that, if his Maieftie deferred to meddle with it, that it might be, that the
Lord hh brother, and other great men, might meddle with it, and make his Maieftie the more adoe.
Whereupon the King, beginning to fufpect that it had beene fome forraine gold, brought iiome by Ibme
Jefuites for practiftng Papiftes, (therewith to ftirre up fome new fedition, as they haue oftentimes
done before,) Inquired of the faid Maifter Alexander, what kinde of coyne it was, and what a fellow
he was that carried it ? His atifuere was, that fo farre as hee could take lefure to fee of them, tliat
they feemed to be forraine ftrokes of coyne ; and although the fellowe, both by his language and faIhioas, feemd to be a Scots felow, yet he could neuer remember that he had leene him before. Thei'e
fpeaches increafed his Maiefties fufpition, that it was forraine coyne brought in by fome practifing
Papiftes, and to be diftributed into the countrie, as is before fayd ; and that the fellow that carryed it,
was fome Scots Prieft, or Seminarie fo difguifed, for the more fure tranfporting thereof.

Whereupon his Majeftie refolued that he would fend backs with the faid Maifter Alexander a fervant of his owne, with a waiTant to the Prouoft and Bailiffes of Saint Johnfton to receiue both the
fellow and the money at Maifter Alexanders hand ; and, after they had examined the fellow, to retaine him and the treafure till his Maiefties further pleafure was knowne.

Whereat the fayd Maifter Alexander ftirred marueloufly ; affirming and protefting, that if eyther the
Lorde his brother, or the Bailiffes of the towne were put on the counfaiie thairof, his Majeftie would
g^tte a verie badde count made to him of that treafure ; fivearing, that the great loue and affection hee
bare unto his Maieftie, had made him to preferre his Maieftie, in this cafe, both vnto him felfe and his
brother. For the which feruice, hee humbly craned that recompence, that his Maieftie would take the
panes once to ride thither, that he might be the fnft feeer thereof himfelfe ; which being done, hee
woulde remit to his Majefties owne honourable difcretion, how farre it would pleafe his Majeftie to
confider upon him for that fervice.

His Highnefle being ftricken in gi'eat admiration, both of the vncouthneffe of the tale, and of the
ftrange and ftupide behauiour of the reporter ; and tlie Court being already horfed, wondring at hia
Maiefties fo long ftay with that Gentleman, the morning being fo faire, the game already found, and
the huntfmen fo long ftaying in the fields on his Maieftie ; he was forced to breake off, only with
theie wordes, that hee could not now ftay any longer from his fport, but that hee would confider of
the matter, and, at the end of his chafe, give him a refolute anfwere, what order hee would take therein. Wherevpon liis Maieftie parted in hafte from him, towards the place where the game was.

Maifter Alexander parting from his Maieftie very mifcontent, that indelayedly he raide not to Saint
Johnftoun, as hee defired him ; protefting that his Maieftie would not find euery day fuch a choife of
liunting as he had offered to him ; and that he feared that his Maiefties long delay and flowenefs of
refolution would breede leafure to the fellow, who was lying bound, to cry, or make fuch dinne, as
would difappoynt the fecrecie of that whole purpofe, and make both the fellow and the treafure to bee
niedled with, before any word could come from his Maieftie ; as alfo, that his brother wold mili'e him,
in refpect of his abfence that morning, which, if his Maieftie had pleafed to hafte, he might haue preuented, arriving there in the time of his brothers and the whole townes being at the fermon ; whereby
his Majeftie might have taken fuch fecret order with that matter as he pleafed, before their out-comining from the church. But his Majeftie, without any further anfwering him, leaping on horfe backe,
and riding to the dogs, where they were beginning to hunt, the faid Maifter Alexander ftayed ftill in

212

CRIMINAL TRIALS. " A.D. 1600.

that place, where hee left his Maieftie ; and hauing two men with him, appointed by the Earle bis
brother, to carry backe vnto him tiie eertayne newes, in all halle, of his MajeRies comming (as beerafter more particularly Oiall in this fame difcourfe be declared.)

He directed the one of tbem, called Andrew Henderfon, Cbamberlaine to the faide Earle, to ride
ill all bafte to the Earle, commanding him, as be loued bis brothers honour, that be Oiould not fpare
for fpilling of bis horfe, and that bee Ihould advertile the Earle, that be hoped to mooue his Maieflie
to come tliither; and that be ihould not yet looke for hym, the fpace of three houres thereafter, becaufe
of his Maiefties hunting ; adding thefe wordes, ' Pray my Loide my brother to prepare the dinner for
us.' But his Maieftie was no fooner ridden vppe to a little hill above the little woodde, where the
dc'^es were layde on in hunting, but that, notwitbftanding the pleafant beginning of the chafe, he could
not ftay from mufing and wondering vpon the news. Wherevpon, without making any body acquainted with this purpole, finding John Nel'raith, Chirurgian, by chance riding befide him, his Maieftie
directed him backe to bring Mafter Alexander with him ; who being brought unto his Maieftie, and
bauin" newlv directed, as faid is, one of his men that was with him backe to my Lord bis brother,
his Majeftie vnknowing or fulpecting that any man living bad come with him ; then tolde him that
he had beene aduifing with bimfelfe, and in refpect of bis laft wordes, lo earneft with bira, he refolued to ride thither for that errand in bis owne perfon, how foone the chafe was ended, which was
already begunne. Like as his Majeftie, vpon the very ending of tbefe wordes, did ride away in the
chafe, the laid Maifter Alexander following him at his backe ; no other creature being with his Highnes hot he and John Hamilton of Grange, one of his Maiefties mafter-ftablers, the reft of the Court
being all before in the chafe, bis Maieftie onely being caft back, vppon the ftaying to ipeake with
Maifter Alexander, as is before liiid.

The chafe lafted from about feauen of the clocke in the morning, vntill eleuen and more, being one
of the greateft and foreft chafes that euer his Maiefty was at : all which time, the layde Maifter Alexander was (for the moft part) euer at bis Maiefties backe, as is fayd. But there neuer was any ftop in
the chafe, or fo fmall a delay, that the fayde Mafter Alexander omitted to round his Majeftie, ernertly requefting him to baften the end of the hunting, that he might ride the fooner to Saint Johnftoun.
So as, at the death of the bucke, his Maiefty, not ftaying upon the curry of the diere (as bis ufe is)
fcarcely took time to alight, awayting vpon the comming of a frelli horfe to ride on, the greatnes of
the chafe hauing wearied his horl'e.

But the faid Mafter Alexander would not fuffer the King to ftay in the parke where the bucke was
killed, while his frelh horfe, which was already lent for, was brouglit out of the equerie to bira, (although it was not two flight-ftiot off betwixt the parte where the bucke was killed and bis Maiefties
equery) ; but with very importunity forced his ^Majeftie to leap on agayne upon that fame horfe, that he
had hunted all the day vpon, his frelb horfe being made to gallop a mile of the way to ouertake him ;
bis Maieftie not ftaying Co much as vpon bis fword, nor while the Duke and the Earle of Mar, with
diuerfe other Gentlemen in his company, ba<l changed their horfe ; onely laying vnto them, that hee was
to ride to Saint Johnftoun to fpeake with the Earle of Gowry, and that be would be prefently backe
againe before euen.

Wberevppon fome of the Court galopped backe to FalUeland as faft as they coulde, to cbaunge theyr
horfe, but could not ouertake his Maieftie, vntill bee came within foure miles of Saint Johnftoun.
Others rid forward with their horfes, wearied as they were, whereof fome were compelled to alight by
the way : and, bad they not both refrelhed their horfes, fed them, and given them fome gralfe by the
way, they had not caried them to S. Johnftoun : the caufe of his INIaiefties feruants fclowing fo faft,
vndefired by him, being only grounded vpon a fufpition they bad conceiued, that bis Maiefties intention of riding, was for the apprehenfion of the Mafter of Olipbant, one who bad late laid downe a vile

3i Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 213

and prowd opprefllon in Angus. For repairing of the which, they thought that his Maieflio liad fome
purpofe for liis apprehenfion.

But tlie fayde Mafter Alexander, feeing the Duke and the Earle of Mar, with diuerfe of the Court,
getting frefli horl'e for following of his Maieftie, earneftly defired him that hee wold publilh to his whole
traine, that fince he was to returne the fame euening, as is afore faid, they needed not to folow him ;
efpecially, that he thought it meeteft his Maiefty fliould ftay the Duke and the Earle of Mar to follow
him, and that he lliould only take three or foure of his own feruants with him ; affirming, that if any
Nobleman followed him, hee could not aunfwere for it, but that they would marre that whole purpofe.
Whereuppon his Maieftie, halfe angry, replied, that hee would not miftruft the Duke nor the Earle of
Mar in a greater purpofe than that, and that hee could not vnderftand what hinderance any man could
make in that errand.

But thefe laft fpeaches of Maifter Alexanders made the King beginne to fufpect what it fliould
raeane ; whereuppon many and fundry thoughts beganne to enter into the Kings mind ; yet his Maieftie could neuer fufpect any harme to be intended againft his Highnelle by that yong Gentleman,
with whom his Maieftie had beene fo well acquainted, as he had not long before bin in fuite to be one
of the Gentlemen of his chamber : fo as, the fartheft that the Kings ful'pition could reach to, was, that
it might be that the Earle his brother had handled him fo hardly, that the young Gentleman, being of
a hie fpirit, had taken fuch difpleafure, as hee was become fomewhat befide himfelfe, whicli his Maieftie coniectured, as well by his raifed and vncouth ftaring, and continual penfiuenes all the time of
the hunting, as likewife by fuch ftrange forte of vnlikely difcourfes as are already mentioned.

Wherevppon the King tooke occafion to make the Duke of Lennox acquainted with the whole purpofe, enquiring of him very earneftly what he knew of that yong Gentlemans nature, being his brother
in law, and if he had perceiued him to be fubiect to any high apprehenfion ? His Maieftie declaring his
fufpition plainly to the faid Lord Duke, that he thought him not well fetled in his wits ; alwayes deiiring my Lorde Duke not to fade to accompany him into that houfe, where the alleadged fellow and
treafure was.

The Lord Duke wondered much at that purpofe, and thought it very vnlikely ; yet hee affirmed,
that he could neuer perceiue any fuch appeerance in that Gentlemans inclination. But Maifter Alexander perceiving his Maiefties priuie conference with the Duke, and fufpecting the purpofe as it appeered, came to the King, requefting his Maiefty very earneftly he Ihould make none liuiiig acquainted with that purpofe, nor fuffer none to goe with his Maiefty where hee ihould convoy him, but himfelfe only, vntill his Maiefty had once feene the fellow and the treafure ; whereunto his Maiefty, half
laughing, gaue anfwere, that he was no good teller of money, and behooued therefore to have fome to
helpe him in that errand. His reply was, that he would fuffer none to fee it but his Maiefties felf at
the firft, but afterwardes he might call in whom hee pleafed.

Thefe fpeeches did fo increafe his fufpition, that then hee beganne directly to fufpect fome treafonable deuife. Yet many fufpitions and thoughts ouerwhelming one, euery one another in his mind, his
Maieftie could refolue upon no certain thing, but rode further on his iourney, betwixt trull and diftruft, being afliamed to feem to fufpect, in I'efpect of the cl^annelTe of his Maiefties own confcience,
except he had found fome greater ground. Maifter Alexander ftill prellng the King to ride fafter,
though his owne horfe was fcarcely able tokeepe company with the King for wearines, hauing ridden
with him all the chafe before. The King being come two mile from Falkland, Maifter Alexander ftayed a little behinde the King in the way, and pofted away the other feruant Andrew Kuthuen to the
Earle his brother, aduertifing him how farre the King was on his way to come thither. Then how
foone foeuer the King came within a mile of (Saint) Johnftoun, he fayde to his Maiefty that he would
poft in before, to aduertife the Erie his brother of his Maiefties comming : who, at his incoraming to
Jiim, was fitting at the midft of his dinner, neuer feeming to take knowledge of the Kings comming

cu CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

fil his brotlier told it liiiii, notwitliftanding that two of his feiuants Iiad aduertifed him thereof before.
And, imediately vpon liis brolliers report, riiing in hafle from tlie boord, and warning all the leruants
and friendes to accompany }iim to meete his Maieflie ; wlio met him with three or foure fcore men, at
the end of the Inflie, his Maiefties wliole traine, not exceeding tlie number of fifteene perfons, and all
wythout any kinde of armour, except fwordes, no not fo much as daggers or wliingears ; his Maieflie
llayed an houre after his comming to the fayd Erles lodging to Saint Johnftoun before his dinner came
in. The longfomenes of preparing the fame, and badnes of the cheere, being cxcufed vpone the fodjiine comming of his INIaieftie, rnlooked for tliere.

During which time, his Maiefly enquired of Maifler Alexander, when it was time for him to goe to
that priuato houfe, about that matter whereof he had informed him ; who anfwered, that all was fure
enough, but that there was no hafte yet for an houre, til the King had dined at leifure ; praying liis
Maiefty to leaue him, and not to be feene to round with him before his brother, wlio, hauing miffed him
that moniing, might thereupon fufpect what the matter lliould meane. Therefore liis Maiefly addrefft'd him to the Earle, and difcourfed with ])ini vpon fundry matters ; but could get no direct anfwcrof him, but lialfe wordos, and imperfect feutences.

His Maiefty being let downe to his dinner, the faid Earle floode very penfiue, and with a delected
countenance, at th' end of his Maiefties table, oft rounding ouer his (lioulder, one while to one of his
leruants, and another while to an other; and oft times went out and in to the cliamber. Which forme
of behauiour he likewife kept before the Kings fitting downe to dinner; but without any welcoming of
his Maieflie, or any other hearty forme of entertainement. The Noblemen and Gentlemen of the
Court that were with his Majeftie flanding about the table, and not defired to dine (as the ufe is when
Jiis Majefty is once fet downe, and his firfl feruice brought up) vntill his Majelly had almoft dined.
At which time, the Earle conueyed them forth to their dinner, but fate not downe with them himfelfe
(as the common maner is), but came back, and flood filent at the end of the Kings table, as he did
before ; which his Maiefly perceiuing, beganne to entertayne the Earle in a homely manner, wondring
hee had not reraayned to dyne with his gliells, and entertayne them there.

His IMajeflie being ready to rife from the table, and al his feruants in the hall at their dinner, Mafter Alexander flanding behinde his Maiefties backe, pulled quietly vppon him, rounding in his Majefties eare, that it was time to goe, but that he would faine haue beene quit of the Earle his brother,
wifliing the King to fend him out into the hall to entertayne his ghefts. Whereupon the King called
for drinke, and, in a merie and liomely maner, fayd to the Earle, that although the Earle had feene
the falliion of entertainement in other countries, yet he would teach him the Scottifli falhion, feeing
Lee was a Scottiih man ; and therefore, fince he had forgotten to drinke to his Maiefty, or fit with his
ghefts and entertayne them, his Maiefty would drinke to him his owne welcome, defiring him to take
it foorth and drinke to the reft of the company, and in his Majcfties name, to make them welcome.
Whereupon, as he went foorth, his Maiefty rofe from the table, and defired Maifter Alexander to
bring Sir Thomas Erfkine with him ; who defiring tlie King to goe forward with him, and promifing
that hee fliould make any one or two follow him that hee pleafed to call for, defiring his Maiefty to
commaund publikely that none ftiould followehim. Thus the King, accompanyed onely with the fayd
Slaifter Alexander, comes foorth of the chamber, paffeth through the ende of the hall, where the Noblemen and his Maiefties feniantes were fitting at theyr dinner, vp a tuniepecke, and through three or
foure chambers, the fayde Maifter Alexander euer locking behind him euery doore as he palled ; and
then, with a more fmiling countenance than he had all the day before, euer faying he had hym fure
and fafe enough kept ; vntill at the laft, his Maiefty paffing through three or foure fundry houfes, and
all the doores locked behind hym, his Maiefty entred into a little ftudy, where hee fawe ftanding, wyth
a very abafed countenance, not a bondman, but a freeman, with a dagger at his girdle. But his Maiefty had no fooner entred into that little ftudy, and Mafter Alexander with him, but Maifter AlexanSiJAC.Vl. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 215

(ler locked to the ftudy doore beliinde Iiim ; and at that iiiftant, changing his countenance, putting his
hatte on his head, and drawing the dagger from that other mans girdle, held the poynt of it to tlie
Kings breafl, avowing now that the King hehooued to be in his will, and vied as he lift ; fwearing many
bloody oths, that if the King cryed one word, or opened a window to looke out, that dagger fliould
prefently go to his heart ; afFyrming, that he was fure that now the Kings coufcience was burthened,
for murthering his father. His Maiefty, wondring at (o fodaine an alteration, and ftanding naked,
wythout any kinde of armour but his hunting home, which he had not gotten leyfure to lay from him,
betwixt thefe two traytors which had confpyred his life, the fayd Maifter Alexander ftanding (as is
fayd) wyth a dagger in his hand, and his fworde at his fide ; but the other trembling and quaking
rather like one condemned, than an executioner of fuch an enterprife.

His Maieftie begunne then to dilate to the faide Maifter Alexander, how horrible a thing it|was for
bim to meddle with his Maiefties innocent bloud ; afluring him, it would not be left vnreuenged, fince
God had giuen him children and good fubiects ; and if they neither, yet God woulde raife vppe ftocks
and ftones to punidi fo vile a deede.

Protefting before God, tliat he had no burthen in his confcience for the execution of his father; both
in refpect that, at the time of his fathers execution, his Maiefty was but a minor of age, and guyded
at that time by a faction which ouerruled both his Maieftie, and the reft of the cuntry ; as alfo, that
whatfoeuer was done to his father, it was done by tlie ordinarie courfe of law and juftice.

Appealing the faide Maifter Alexander vppon liis confcience, how well he at al times fince had deferued at the liands of al his race, not only hauing reftored them to al their lands and dignities, but
alfo in nourilhing and bringing vp of two or three of his fifters as it were in his owne bofome, by a
continual attendance vpon his Maiefties deereft bedfelow in her priuy-chamber.

Laying alio before him the terrors of his confcience, efpecialy that he made profelfion, according to
his education, of the fame religion which his Maieftie had ever profeffed : and namely, his Maiefty
reniembred him of that holy man, Mafter Robert Rollocke, whofe fcholler he was, afl"uring him, that
one day the faid Maifter Roberts foul would accufe him, that he had neuer learned of him to practile
fuch vnnatural cruelty : his Maiefty promifing to him, on the word of a Prince, that if he would fpare
his life, and fuiFer him to go out again, he would neuer reueale to any flefli lining what was betwixt
them at the time, nor neuer fuffer him to incur any harm or puniflmient for the fame.

But his Maiefties fear was, that he could hope for no fparing at his hands, hauing fudi crueltie in
his looks, and ftanding fo irreuerently couered with liis hat on, wliich form of rigorous behauiour could
prognofticate nothing to his Maieftie but prefent extremity. But, at his Maiefties perfwafiue language, he appeered to be foraewhat amazed ; and, vncouering his head againe, fwore, and protefted
that his Maiefties lite Ihould be fafe, if he would behaue hyrafelfe quietly, wythout making noyfe or
crying ; and that lie would onely bring in the Earle his brother to fpeake wyth his Maieftie. Whervpon, his Maiefty, enquiring what the Earle would doe with iiim, fince (if liis Maiefties life were fafe,
according to promife,) they could gayne little in keeping fuch a prifoner. His anfwer only was, that
he could tell his Maiefty no more, but that his life Ihould be fafe, in cafe he behaued hyinfelfe quietly ; the reft, the Earle his brother, whome he was going for, would tel his Maiefty at his comming.
With that, as he was going foorth for his brother, as he affyrmed, lie turnd hym about to the other
man, faying thefe wordes vnto him, ' I make you here tlie Kings keeper till I come backe agayne,
and fee that you keepe him vpon your owne perill ;' and therewithal fayd to his Maieftie, ' You muft
content yourfelfe to haue this man now your keeper, vntill my comming backe.'

With thefe wordes, he palfeth foorth, locking the doore after him, leaning his Maiefty with that
man he found there before him. Of whome his Maiefty then enquired, ' If he were appoynted to be the
murtherer of him at that time, and howe farre he was vpon the counftll of that Confpiracie ?' Whole
anfwer, with a trembling and aftonillied voyce and behauior, was, that, ' as the Lord Ihould judge him,

216 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. IGOO.

lie was neuer made acquaynted with that purpofe, but that he was put in tliere perforce, and the doore
lockt vpon him, a little fpace before his Maiellies comming :' as indeede, all the time of the fayd Mafter Alexanders menacing his Maiefty, he was euer trembling, requefting him for Gods fake, and with
many other atteftations, not to meddle with his Maiefty, nor to do him any harme. But becaufe M.
Alexander had, before his going foorth, made the King fweare he Ihould not cry, nor open any window, his Maieftie commanded the faid fellow to open the window on his right hand, which he readily
did : fo that, although he was put in there to ufe violence on the King, yet God fo turnd his heart, as
he became a flaue to his prifoner.

While his Maiefty was in this daungerous eflate, and none of his owne feruantes nor traine knowing where hee was, and as his Maiefties traine was arifing in the hall from their dinner, the Earle of
Gowrie being prefent wytli them, one of the Earle of Gowries feruants comes haflily in, affuring the
Earle his Maifler, that his Maiefty was horfed, and away through the Inlhe ; which the Earle reporting to the Noblemen, and tlie reft of his Maiefties traine that was there prefent, they al rulhed out
together at the gate, in great hafte : and fome of his Maiefties feruants enquiring of the Porter, ' Wlieu
his Maiefty went foorth ?' the Porter affyrmed, that the King was not yet gone foorth. Wherevppon
the Earle looked very angerly vpon him, and fayd he was but a liar : yet turning him to the Duke,
and to the Earle of Mar, faid, he iliould prefently get them fare worde where his Maiefty was ; and
with that, ranne through the elofe, and vppe the ftaires. But his purpofe indeede was, to fpeake with
liis brother, as appeered very well by the circumftance of time ; his brother hauing, at that fame inftant,
left the King in the litle ftudy, and ranne downe the ftaires in great bafte.

Immediately after, the Earle commeth backe, running agayne to the gate, where the Noblemen and
the reft were ftanding in a maze, afluring them that the King was gone, long fince, out at the backe
gate; and if they hafted them not the fooner, they would not ouertake him ; and, with that, called for
his horfe ; whereat they ruflit all together out at the gate, and made toward the Inflie, crying all for
tlieyr horfes : paffing all (as it was the prouidence of God) vnder one of the windows of that ftudy
wherein his Maiefty was. To whom Maifter Alexander very fpeedily returned, and, at bis incomming to his Maiefty, cafting his handes abroade in a defperate manner, faide, he could not mend it,
his Maieftie behooucd to die : and, with that, offered a garter to bind his Maiefties hands, with Avearing he beliooued to be bound. His Maieftie, at that word of binding, faid, he was borne a frie King,
and Ihould die a free King. Wherevpon, he griping his Maieftie by the wreft of the hand, to hane
bound him, his Maieftie releeued himfelfe fodainely of his gripes : wherevpon, as hee putte his right
hand to his fword, his Maieftie with his right hand feazed v])on both his hand and his Avorde, and
with his left hand clafped him by the throat, like as he with his left hand clafpt the King by tiie
throat, with two or three of his fingers in his Maiefties mouth, to have ftaied him from crying. In
this maner of wreft ling, his Maieftie perforce drew him to the window, which he had caufed the other
man before to open vnto him, aivd vnder the which was palling by at the fame time the Kings traine,
and the Earle of Gowrie with them, as is faide, and holding out the right fide of his head and right
flbow, cryed, that they were murthering him there, in that treafonable forme : whofe voice being inftanlly heard and knowne by the Duke of Lennox, the Earle of Marre, and the reft of his Maiefties
traine there, the faide Earle of Gowrie euer afking ' what it meant ?' and neuer feeming any waies to
haue feen his IMaieftie, or heard his voyce ; they all rulhed in at the gate together, the Duke and the
Earle of Marre running about to come by tl^at paffage his Maieftie came in at. But the Earle of
Gowrie and his feruants made them for another way up a quiet tumepeck, which was euer condemned
before, and was only then left open, (as appeared) for that purpofe.

And in this meane time, his Maieftie, with ftruggling and wraftling with the faid Maifter Alexander, had brought Iiim perforce out of that ftudy, the doore whereof, for hafte, he had left open, at
his lafl iucomming ; and his Maieftie having gotten, (with long ftrugling) the fayde Maifter Alts3i Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 217

antlers head under liis arnae, and himfelfe on his knees, liis Maieftie droue him backe, perforce, hard
to the doore of the fame turne-pike ; and as his Maieflie was throwing his Avorde out of liis hand,
thinking to haue ftricken liim therewith, and then to haue ihotte him ouer the ftaire, the other fellow
Handing hehinde the Kinges backe, and dooing nothing but trembling all the time, Sir John Ramfay,
not knowing what way firft to enter, after hee had heard the Kinges cry, by chance findes that turnepeck door open, and, folowing it vp to the head, enters in into the chamber, and findes his Maieftie
and Maifter Alexander ftrugling in that forme, as is before fayde : and after he had twife or tlirile
llricken Maifler Alexander with his dagger, the other man withdrew himfelfe, his Maieftie ftill keeping his gripes, and holding him clofe to him : immediatly thereafter, he tooke the fuyd Maifter Alexander by the fliouklers, and iLotte him downe the ftaire : who was no fooner Ihotte out at the doore,
but hee was met by Sir Thomas Erikine and Sir Hew Hereis, who tlifire, vpon the ftaire, ended him ;
the fayde Sir Thomas Erfkine being caft behind the Duke and the Earle of Mar, that ran about the
other way, by the occafion of his medling with the fayde late Earle in the ftreete, after the hearing of
his IMaiefties crie. For vj)pon the hearing thereof, hee had clafped the Earle of Gowrie by the gorget, and cafting him under his feete, and wanting a dagger to have ftricken him with, the fayd Earls
men rid the Earle their Maifter out of his handes ; whereby hee was caft behinde the reft, as is fayd :
and mifting the companie, and hearing the fayde Sir John llamfayes voyce vpon the turn-peck head,
ran vp to the fayd chamber, and cryed vpon the fayd Sir Hew Hereis and another feruant to follow him :
where, meeting with the fayd Maifter Alexander in the turne-peck, he ended liim there, as is fayd :
the fayd Maifter Alexander crying, for his laft wordes, ' Alas ! I had not the weight of it.' But no fooner
could the fayde Sir Thomas, Sir Hew, and another feruaunt, winne into the chamber where his Maieftie was, but that the fayde Earle of Gowrie, before they could gette the doore Ihut, followed them
in at the backe, hauing caft him directly to come vp that priuy paflage, as is before faid : who, at his
firft entrie, hauing a drawne fworde in euery hand, and a fteele bonet on his head, accompanied with
feuen of his feruants, euery one of them hauing in like maner a drawn fworde, cried out with a great
oatli, that they Ihould al die as traitors I Al the which time, his Maieftie was ftill in the chamber ;
who, feeing the Earle of Gowrie come in, with his fwordes in his hands, fought for Maifler Alexanders
fword, which had fallen from him at his out-lhutting at the doore ; hauing no forte of weapons of his
owne, as is fayde : but then was (hut backe by his owne feruants that were there into the litle ftudie,
and the doore liiut vpon him : who, hauing put his Maiefty in fafety, re-encountred the faide Earle
and his feruants, his Majefties fervants being onely in number foure, to wit. Sir Hew Hereis, Sir
John Ramfay, and one Wilfon a feruant of James Erlkins, a brother of the fayd Sir Thomas, the fayde
Earle hauing feuen of his owne feruants with him : yet it pleafed God, after many ftrokes on all
handes, to giue his Maiefties feruants the victorie ; the fayde Earle of Gowrie being ftriken dead with
a ftroke through the heart, which the faid Sir John Ramfay gaue him, without once crying vpon God,
and the reft of his feruants dung over the ftaires with many hurtes, as in like maner the fayde Sir
Thomas Erfkine, Sir Hew Hereis, and Sir John Ramfay, were al three very fore hurt and wounded.

But al the time of this fight, the Duke of Lennox, the Earle of Mar, and the reft of his Maiefties
traine, were ftriking witii great hammers at the vtter doore whereby his Maiefty pafl't vp to the chamber with the faid Maifter Alexander, which alfo he had lockt in his by-comming with his Maieftie to
the chamber ; but, by reafon of the ftrength of the faid double doore, the whole wall being likewife
of boordes, and yeelding with the ftrokes, it did bide them the fpace of halfe an houre and more, before they could get it broken, and have entreffe : who hauing met with his Maiefty, found (beyond
their expectation) his Maieftie deliuered from fo imminent a perill, and the fayde late Earle the principall confpirator lying dead at his Maiefties feete. Immediately thereafter, his Maieftie kneeling
downe on his knees in the midft of his owne feruants, and they all kneeling rounde about him, his
Maiefty, out of his owne mouth, thanked God of that miraculous deliuerance and victory, afluring

VOL. II. 2 E

218

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. l60o/

liimfelfe, that Goil had preferued liim from fo difpaired a perill, for the perfiting of forae greater work
behind, to his glorie, and for procuring by him the weale of his people, that God had committed to his
cbarse. After tliis, the tumult of the towne hearing of the Daughter of the fayde Eaile of Gowrie
theii-^Prouoft, and not knowing the manner thereof, nor beeing on the counfell of his treafonable attempt, continued for the fpace of twoo or three houres thereafter, vntill his Maieftie, by oft fpeaking
out to them at the windovves, and beckoning to them with his owne hand, pacifying them, caufing the
Bailies and the reft of the honeft men of the towne to be brought into the chamber ; to whome hauing
declared tlie whole forme of that flrange accident, he committed the houfe and bodies of the faid traitrous brethren to their keeping, vntill his ^Slaiefties further pleafure were knowne. His Maieftie
hauing, before his parting out of that toune, caufed to fearch the faid Earle of Gowries pockets, in
cale any letters, that might further the difcovery of that Confpiracy, might bee founde therein. But
nothing was founde in them, but a little dole parchment bag, full of niagicall characters, and wordcs
of inchantment, wherein it feemed that hee had put his confidence, thinking himlelfe neuer fafe without them, and therefore euer caried them about with him : Beeing alio obferued, that while they were
vpou him, his wound, whereof he died, bled not ; but, incontinent after the taking of them away, the
blood gulhed out in great abundance, to the great admiration of all the beholders ; an infamy which
hath followed and Ipotted the race of this houfe for many difcents, as is notorioufly knowne to the
whole cuntrie. Thus, the night was farre fpent, beeing neere eight houres at euening, before his Maieftie could (for the great tumult that was in the towne) depart out of the fame. But, before his
Maiefty had ridden foure myles out of the fame towardes Falkland, although the night was very darke
and rainy, the whole way was clad with all fort of people, both horfe and foote, meeting him with
great ioy and acclamation. The frequencie and concourfe of perfonnes of all degrees to Falkland the
reft of the weeke, and to Edenburgh the next, from all the quarters of the countrie, the tcftimony of
the fubiectes hearty affection and ioy for liis Maiefties deliuerie, exprefled euery where, by ringing of
bels, bonefiers, (hooting off guns of all lorts, both by fea and land, he. with all other things enfuing
thereupon, 1 haue of fet purpofe pretermitted, as well knowne to all men, and impertinent to this difcourfe ; contenting myfelfe with this plaine and fimple narration ; adding onely, for explanation and
confirmation thereof, the Depofitions of certaine perfons, wlio were either actors and eie-witnelfes, or
immediate hearers of thofe thinges that they declare and teftifie ; wherein, if the reader Ihall find any
thing differing from this narration, either in fubftance or circumftance, lie may vnderftand the fame to
be vttered by the deponer in his owne behoofe, for obtaining of his Maiellies princely grace and fauor.

Apud Falkland, 9//; Aiigvji 1600. In prefence of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treafurer,

Lorde Secretary, Lord ComptroUir, Lord Aduccate, the Lord Incheffray, and Sir George Home

of Spot, Knights.

James Weimis of Bogy, of the age of 26 yeere, or therby, fwome and examined vpon the forme and
maner of behauiour of late Johne Earle of Gowrye, the time of his being with him at Strabran ; or if
he had heard the fayd Earle make any motion of the Treafon intended againft his Royall Majeftie?
Depones, that he neither heard, nor law, any appearance of any fuch intention in the faid Earle.'

Ueniaunded, ' If he was in any purpofe with tiie faid Erie, aneut any matters of curiofuie?' Depones,
that at their being in Strabran, fome of their company found an edder, which being killed, and knowledge thereof comming to the Earle, tlie Earle fayde to this deponer. Bogy, ' If the edder had not beene
(laiiie, yee ih.ould haue feene a good fport ; for I lliould haue caufed her ftand ftiil,'^ and fliee Ihould

1 1 his evidence is inserted ■n-ith tlie view of proving, not the traitorous pui-poses, but the sorceries of Gowrie. How '
raf this end has been attained, the reader is left to decide.^ — Hailes. '' It was an ancient superstitious notion,

and which had not ceased in the days of Gowrie, that serpents might be rendered innoxious by means of certain
charms and incantations. The writers, who treat of ^lagic, insist on this among other fooleries. Delrius, Distjiii34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 219

not haue piefled away, by pronouncing of an Hebrew word, wliich in Scottifii is called bolinefTe ;' but
the Hebrew word the deponer remembers not of: and that the Earle fayde, bee had put the fame in
practife oft before. And this deponer iniiuiriiig of the Earle ' where lie get the Hebrew word ?' The
Earle anlwered, ' In a cabbalift of the Jewes, and that it was by tradition :' And the deponer inquiring,
' what a cabbalill raeaned ?' The Earle anfwered, ' It was fome wordes which the Jewes had by tradition,
which wordes were fpoken by God to Adam in Paiadife ; and therefore, were of greater efficacie and
force than any wordes which were excogitate fince, by Prophets and Apoftles.' The deponer inquiring
' If there were no more requilite but the word ?' The Earle anfwered, ' That a firme faith in God was requifite and necefTary ; and that this was no matter of maruel araongfl, fchollers, but that al thefe things
were naturall.' And that the Earle fliewed to this deponer, that he had fpoken with a man in Italic,
and firil hearing, by report, that he was a nigromaneer, and thereafter being informed that he was a
very learned man, and a deep theologue, he entered in further dealing with him, anent the curiofitie of
nature.

Depones further, that the faide Earle reported to him, that he being at muficke, he fell in company
with an other man, who flaring in the Earles face, fpake to the reft, of the companie thinges of him,
which he could neuer attaine unto, nor be worthy of:' and therefore that the Earle reproached him,
and defired him to forbeare thefe fpeeches. And that he met againe with the faid man in a like company, who did begin with the fame language which bee had fpoken before : and that the Earle layd
to him, ' My friend, in cafe yee will not hold your peace from fpeaking lies of me, I will make you
hold your peace, by I'peaking truth of you ;' and faid rato him, within fuch a fpace he ihould be hanged
for fuch a crime ; and fo it came to pafle. This deponer, inquiring of the Earle, ' who told him that ?' He
anfuered merrily, ' That he fpake it by guelFe, and it fell out fo.' And that the Earle fayd further, that
' it was nothing to make an herbe flefhe, which would difTolve into flies -^ and that likewife it was poffible that the feed of man and woman might be brought to perfection otherwife than by the matrix of
the woman :' And that this deponer couulelled the Earle to ' beware with whom bee did communicate
fuch fpeeches :' who anfwered, that ' bee would fpeak them to none, but to great fchollers ; and that
he would not have fpoken them to this deponer, if he had not knowne him to bee a fauorer of him,
and a friend of his houfe, and would not reveale the fame againe, feeing hee knewe they would be
euill interpreted amongft the common forte,' (Sic fubfcribitur) J. \^'EI^IVS of Bogie.

Apud Falkland, 20th Augvjl 1600. Inprefence of the Lordes Clmncellour, Treafurer, Adtiocate ; Sir George Home of Spot, Sir Robert Meluill, and Sir James MeluiU, Knights.
Maister William Rynd, fworne and examined, and demaunded, ' where he firft did fee the characters which were found uppon my Lord ?' Depones, that he, having remained a fpace in Venice, at

sit. Magic. I. 2, q. 13, p. \V1, 148, speaks of it with much seriousness. The form of tlie incantation may Ije
found at length in Wienis, Be Prastigiin Dcemumim, lib. 5, c. 4., 5, 10. Perhaps all the learning of Cowrie did not
exempt him from believing that such incantations were possible, and even lawful ; but from this circumstance, to
assert that he was a magician, may seem too hasty a conclusion. — Hailes.

1 ' One Colvil liath sent the King tlie collection of the fortune to befall Gowrye, tipon his nativity, vnitten witli
t!ie Earl's hand, in riench, at Orleans, and there found, containing that he should return, be in great credit, seek for
a wife, and yet dye with his sword in his hand, before lie should be married.' Nicolson to Cecil, 12th November
1600. Paper Office. It would seem that the sorcerers with whom Gowrie conversed, differed in their opinion of his

future fortunes Hailes. 2 While the doctrine of equivocal generation prevailed, tliis absurdity found credit.

Augustin. lib. 3, (/. Triiiitate. c. 7, says that magicians can speedily produce ' animalia imperfecta, muscas, vermes,
ranas, et hujusmodi insecta, et alia qua; ex putrefactione nascuntur, non creando, sed activa passivis applicaiido.' This
opinion is followed by the rabble of schoolmen ; and perhaps Gowrie might have attempted ti> produce so imperfect an

animal as a flie, by the proper application of actices to passives Hailes. 3 Of this Pai-acelsus speaks : ' Noii

parva dubitatio et qua-stio inter aliquos ex antiquis philosophis fuerit, an naturae et arti possibilc esset hominem gigni
extra corpus muliebre et matricera naturalem ? Ad hoc respondco, quod id arti pagi/riccc, (i. c. cliemica:) et naturif
nuUo modo repugnat, immo autem possibile sit !' He subjoins the receipt at length, but it is so licentious and so
absurd, that I must be excused from inserting it in this work. It may, however, be observed, tliat, according to 1 ara
celsus, men formed by tliis receipt need to learn nothing ; for that, as they are made by art, they know every thing j
an advantage which persons who come into the world iu the natujal way, never enjoy. — Hailes,

220

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

liis retui-ning to Padua, did find in my Lordes pocket the characters whidi were found vpon liim at
his death : and the deponer inquyring of my lord, ' Where he had gotten them?" My lord anfwered, that
' by chance he had copied them himfelfe :' and that the deponer knowes that the characters in Latine
are my lords owne hand-writing ; but lie knowes not if the Hebrew characters were written by my
lord. Depones further, that when my lord would change his clothes, the deponer would take the
characters out of my lords pocket, and would fay to my lord, ' V/berefore ferves thefe?' And my lord
would aiiAvcr, ' Can you not let them be ? they do you no evill.' And further, the deponer declares,
that fometimes mv lord would forget them, vntil he were out of his chamber, and would turne backe
as he were in an anger, vntil bee found them, and put them in his owne pocket : Depones further,
that he was fundiy tymes purpofed to Iiaue burnt the characters, were it not that he feared my
lordes wrath and ana:er; feeing, when the deponer would purpofely leave them fometimes out of my
lordes pocket, my lord would be in fuch anger with the deponer, that for a certayne fpace he woulde
not fpeake with hym, nor coulde not finde his good countenaunce. And that (to this deponers opinion) mv lord would neuer be content to want the characters off hymfelfe, from the firft time that the
deponer fawe them in Padua, to the houre of my lords death. Being demaunded, ' For what caufe my
lord kept the characters fo well ?' Depones, that, to his opinion, it was for no good ; becaufe he heard,
that, in thofe partes where my lord was, they would give fundry folkes breeues.^ Depones further,
that Maifter Patricke Galloway lette this deponer fee the cliaracters, fince that hee came to this towne
of Falkland, and that he knowes them to be the very fame characters which my lord had. Depones
alfo, that, on Jlonday the fourth of Augull, the Mailler, Andrew Henderfon, and the deponer remained in ray lords chamber, till about ten houres at euen, and after a long conference betwixt the
lord and the Mailler, my lord called for Andrew Henderfon, and after fome fjjeeches with him, difniilfed them. Denies that he knew of the ^Mailers or Andrew Henderfons riding to Falkland ; and
after Andrews returne from Falkland upon the mon'ow, howbeit he did fee him booted, yet he knew
not that he was come from Falkland. Depones, that my Lord being at dinner when the dialler came
in, the deponer heard my Lord fay to tlie iMafter, ' Is the King in the Inlhe ?' and with that he did rife,
and faide, ' Let vs goe.' But the deponer knowes not what tije Maiftcr faid to my Lord. Being demaunded, if he did fee any kind of armour or weapons, except Avords, in the Kings conipanie ? Depones
that he did fee none. It being demaunded, how the deponer was fatisfied with my lords anfwer made
to him, concerning the Kings comin? to Saint Jolmftoun, faying that hee knew not how he came?
Declares that he thought my lord had diifembled with him, and that he behoued to haue kno^-ne it, feeing his brother was come with his !Maiellie before that he demanded of him, and that he had conferred with my Lorde privilie. Depones that he knew not that the Mafter was ridden to Falkland, vntil
after his Majellies coming to Saint Johnftoun, that Andrew Ruthven told him ; becaufe the deponer
inquired of Andrew Ruthven, ' where the Mafter and he had bin ?' And that Andrew anfwered, ' they
had been in Falkland:' And that the ?.Iairter leaning fpoken with the King, his INIaiefty came forward
with them : and that this conference betwixt the deponer and Andrew Ruthven was in the yard, when
my lord was there. And Andrew Ruthven fliewcd to the deponer, that Andrew Henderfon was
directed by the Maifter, to fliew my lord that his ^Nlaieftie was comniing. Depones alfo, that, in his
opinion, the MaUer could not have drawne the King to my lordes houfo, without my lordes knowledge : and that, when hee heard the tumult, he was refolued in liis heart the Maifler had done his
Maieftie wrong; and that no true Chriflian can tliinke otherwife,= but that it was an high treafon,

Epistles, scliotlulcs, or small treatises. The word here means magical wi'itings, amulets, &c. ^ jo this narrative the IVillowing expiessioiis, in a letter from Nicolsou to Cecil, 21st of August 1600, may be properly subjoined :
iiJr U illiani Rynd, the pfdag<if;ui", Juttlt been extreme!;/ touted, but confesseth nothing of that matter against the Earl

or his brother.' Paper Office Huiles. He could not confess any fore-knowledge ; for it is evident, that he had

purposely been kept in profound ignorance of the Plot, which was "known to GoTirie aud his brother alone. Rind's
finn adherence to Henderson's Pepositiou, is a very strong fact, and desenuig of the utmost credit.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

221

attempted againft his Higlmeffe by tlie M^Rer niid tlie Loid. U.-jiones alfo, tliat, to lii« opinion, tlic
Kings wliole company was witliin a dozen of men. (Sic fubfcribitur) M. \V. Rvnd.

22d August 1600 — Mailer William Rind frt-orne and re-examined, if oucr he heard the Earle
of Gowrie vtter his opinion, anent tlie duetie of a wife man in the execution of an high enterprife ?
Declares, that, being out of the countrey, lie had diuerfe times heard him reafon in that matter, and
that lie was euer of that opinion, that ' he was not a wife man, that hauing intended the execution of
a high and dangerous purpofe, communicate the fame to any but to hirafelfe ;■ becaufe keeping it to
himfelfe, it could not be difcoucred nor difappointed :' which tlie deponcr declared before, vnreqnired,
to the Controller, and Mailer William Cowper Minifter at Perth : And hearing the depofitions of
Andrew Henderfoun read, and being enquired, vpon his confcience, what he thought of the fact that
was committed againft his Majoftie? Declares, that upon his faluation, that he beleeves Andrew Henderfoun has declared the circumftances truly. (Sic fubfcribitur) M. W. Rynd.

A PUD Falkland, 20//t Avgiijt. 1600. Li prefnice of the Lordes Chancellour, Trcnjhrer, Aduocate, Controller, Sir George Home of Spot, and Sir James 3Ic/uill, KnigJds.
Andrew Hendersoun fworne and examined, and demanded, ' What purpofe was betwixt him and
the Earle of Gowrie vpon Monday at night, tlie fourth of this inflant, in the laid Earlcs chamber ?'
Depones, that the Earle inquired of him, what ho would be doing upon the morne ? And he anfwered,
that he was to ride to Ruthwcn : The Earle faid to him, ' You muft ride to Falkland with ?»Iafter Alex.
ander my brother, and when he directs you backe, fee that ye returne with all diligence, if be fend a
letter or any other advertifement with you.' Depones, that the Mailer directed him to fend for Andrew Ruthven to be in readinefle, to ride with them the morrow, at foure houres in the morning.
Declares, that tliey comming to Falkland, about fcuen houres in the morning, the Mafter llaied in a
lodging belide the pallace, and directed the deponer to fee what the King was doing ; and the deponer
finding his Majeftie in the clofe comming forth, lie palTt backe, and told the Mafter, who immediatly addrelfed himfelf to his Highnefte, and fpake with his Maieftie a good fpace, benetli the equirie :
and after his Maieftie was on horfebacke, the Maifter commeth to the deponer and comraaunds liini
to fetch their horfes, and bade him hafte him, as he loued my lordes honour and his, and aduertife mv
lord, that his Maieftie and he would be there incontinent, and tliat his iMaicftie would be quiet : And
tlie deponer inquiring of the JIafter, ' if he Ihould go prefently ?' He did bid liim leape on and follow
him, and not to goe away vntil he fpake with tlie King: And the Mailler having fpokcn with the
King, at a breach of the park wall, he turned backe, and bade the deponer ride away ; and the deponer

1 It was natural for the Kinif and Iiis T^Iinisters to enquire, who were the accomplices of Gowrie and his brother ;
and when no accomi»lices could be discovered, to impute this to the caution of Gowrie. This ai>pears to be the reason of the question put to Rynd. Spothirood says, IJistorij of tlie Church of Scotland, h. 6, p. 4-Gl. * I remember
myself, tliat meeting with r)Ir William Coiiper; tlieii Jlinister at Perth, the third day after, in Falkland, he shewed
me that, not many days before tliat accident, visiting by occasion the Earl at his own house, he foinul him reading a
book intitled De Coiijiirationibus admsus PriiirijjcSi and having asked him, 'what book it was?' lie answered, That it
Tvas a collection of the Conspiracies made against Pi'inces, which, he said, were foolishly contrived, all of them, and faidty
either in one point or other; for he that goeth about such a business sliould not, said he, put .any man on his counsel.'
From till' title and contents of this book, Ijord Ilailes was inclined to think that it was the Latin translation of Blachiavel's discoiu'ses on Lh-y, b. 3, c. G. Gowrie iniglit very innocenlly read that discourse. Machiavel thus explains
his intentions in writing it : ' E noii mi e parso da las<-iare indietro il ragionare delle coiigiure, essendo cosa tanto
periculosa a i priucipi et a i privati, perche si veile per quelle molti piu principi haver perduta la vita et lo stato, clie
per guerra aperta : perche il poter fare aperta guerra con un principe e conceduto a poclii, il potergli congiiu-ar contra,
e conceduto a ciascuno. Dall' altera parte, fiU huomini prirati won entrano in impresa piu ptriculvsa lie piu Umrrariu
di questa : perche la e difficile et pcricolosissima in oyni sua parte. Donde ne nasce die mvlle sc ne lentuno, c pochissiiir
hanno il fine desiderato. Accioche adunque i principi imparino a guardarsi da qiiesti perieeli, e die i prioati piu
timidamente vi si mettino, anzi imparino ad esser conttnti a vivere sotto quelln impcrio die dalla scrtc c stato loro prcpcsto,
10 ne parlero dijfusamente non lasciando in dietro alcim caso notabile in docimiento dell mui e dell' altro.' It may be
observed, that the conjectures which the King and his Jlinisters formed, were afterwards fully disjoovcd, ii: their own
opinion, when Logan of Restalrig and Bour apjieared to have been conscious of the purposes of Gowrie. — Huiks.

222 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

making his retume, in al poflible hafte, to Saint Jolinftoun, he found my lord in liis chamber, about
ten houres, wlio left the companie he was fpeaking with, and carae to the deponer, and allied, < Hath
inv brother fent a letter with you ?' Tlie deponer anfwered, ' No : but they will be all here incontinent,
and bade the deponer delire my lord to caufe prepare the dinner.' Immediately thereafter, my lord
took the deponer to the cabinet, and ailed at him, ' how his Maieftie took with the Mailer his brother?'
The deponer anfwered, ' Very well I and that his ;Maje(lie laide his hand ouer the Maifters Ihoulder.'
Thereafter my lord inquired, ' if there were many at the hunting with the King ?' The deponer anfwered, that he ' tooke no heede, but they who were accuftonied to ride with his Majeltie, and lome
Englillimen were there ;' and that my lorde inquired, ' what fpeciall men were with his MajeiHe ?' And
that the deponer anfwered, he did fee none but my Lord Duke. And within an houre thereafter,
when the deponer came in from his owne houfe, the Earle bade him putte on his fecret, and plaitte
ileeues, for he had an Hyland roan to take ; which the deponer did incontinent. And about twelve
lioures, when the deponer was going out to his owne houfe to his dinner, the ftewai'd came to
liim and told him, that George Cragingelt was not wel, and was laine downe ; defired him to
tarry and take up my lordes dinner: and about halfe an houre after twelue, my lord commanded
him to take up the 6rft feruice. And when the deponer was commauuded to take up the fecond
feruice, the jNIaifter and William Blaire came into the hall to my lord. The deponer remembereth himfelfe, that Andrew Ruthven came before the Maifter a certain fpace, and fpake with my
lorde quietly at the table ; but heard not the particular purpofe that was amongft them. And fo
i'oone as the Maifter came to the hall, my lorde and the whole company rofe from the table : And
tiie deponer hearing the noyfe of their forthgoing, fuppofed they were going to make breakes for Maconilduy :' And the deponer fent liis boy for his gantlet and lleil-bonnet ; and feeing my lorde palfe to
the Inihe, and not to the Ihoe-gate, the deponer did call the gauntlet in the pantry, and caufed his
boy to take his fteelebonnet to his owne houfe : And he followed my lord to the Infhe, and returning backe with his Maiellie to the lodging, beeing directed to get drinke. And the Maifter came to
the deponer, and did bid hira caufe INIailler William Rynde to fende him vp the keye of the galerie
chamber ; who part vp and delivered the key to the Maifter : And immediately my lorde followed
vp, and did fpeake with the INIailler, and came downe againe, and directed Maifter Thomas Cranftone to the deponer, to come to his lordlhip in his JNIajefties chamber. And that my lord directed
him to go vp to the gallery to his brother ; and immediately my lord followed vp, and commanded
the deponer to bide there with his brother, and to do any thing tliat he bade him : The deponer inquired at the Jtlaifter, ' What have ye to do, sir ?' The Maifter anfwered, ' Ye muft go in heere, and tarry
untill I come backe; for I will take the key with me.' So he locked the deponer in the round, within the chamber, and tooke the key with him. Shortly thereafter, the Maifter returned, and the Kings
^Nlaieftie with him, to the faid cabinet in the rounde ; and the Mailler opening the doore, entered with
the King into the faid rounde : And, at his verie entrie, couering his head, pulled out the deponers
dagger, and held the fame to his Majefties breaft, faying, ' Remember ye of my fathers ^Murder ? Yee
Ihall now die for it :' And minting to his Highnes heart with the dagger, the deponer threw the fame
out of the Mafters hand : And fwore, that as God ihall iudge his foule, if the Maifter liad retained
the dagger in his liand the fpace that a may goc fixe fteps, he would have ftricken the King to the
hikes with it : But wanting the dagger, and the Kinges ^lajeftie giuing him a gentle anfwere, he faid
to the Kinges ^Nlajeftie, with abominable oathes, that, if he would keepe filence, nothing Ihoulde aile
liim, if he would make fuch promile to his brother, as they would craue of him : And the Kinges
Majeftie inquiring, ' What promife they would craue ?' He anfwered, that he would bring his brother.

' This expression is obscure. Henderson, in his evidence at the trial, says, that he believed Gowiie was going to
take the Hiijhlandman. The expression here has probably the same meaning. To make breakes far Maconilduy, i. e.
to make breeches for the son of black Donald, may signify, to secure the Highlandman and commit him to prison.
Thus, stone-doubkt is a vulgar English phrase for a prison. — Hailes,

3i Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 223

So lie goes fortli, and lockes the doore of tlie round vpon his Maiefty and the deponer; hauing firit
taken oath of the King, that he (Iiould not crie, nor open the windowe. And his Majeftie inquiring of
the deponer, ' What he was ?' He anfwered, ' A fervant of my lords.' And his Majeily ailiing of the
deponer, ' If my lord would doe any evill to him ?' The deponer anfwered, ' As God ihal iudge my
foul, I flial die firft.' And tiie deponer prefling to haue opened the windoe, the Maifler entred, and
faid, ' Sir, there is no reraedie ; by God, you muft die :' and having a loofe garter in his hand, prefled
to have bound his Maiellies hands; and the deponer pulled the garter out of Maimer Alexander liis
hand. And then the Maifter did put one of his hands in his Majelties mouth, to haue flayed him to
fpeake, and helde his other arme about his HighnefTe necke : and that this deponer pulled the Maifters hand from his HighnefTe mouth, and opened the windowe : And then his Majeflie cryed out
thereat ; wherevppon his HighnefTe feruants came in at tlie gate ; and this deponer did runne and open
the doore of the turn«pecke head, whereat John Ramfay entered : and tlie deponer ftoode in the chamber, vntill he did fee Jolm Ramfay giue the Maifter a flroke ; and thereafter, priuily conueyed himfelfe
downe the turnepecke to is owne houfe : and the deponers wife inquiring of him, ' What the fray
meaned ?' The deponer anfwered, ' That the Kings Majeflie would have beene twice flicked, had not
hee releeued him.'

(Sic fubfcribitur) Andrew Hendersoun with my hand.

Further, the fayde Andrew Henderfoun depones, that after his returning from Falkland, on tlie
fift of this inllant, Maifler John Moncrief inquiring of him, ' Where he had beene ?' He anfwered, Tliat
he had beene ' beyond the bridge of Erne ;' and fayes, that he gaue that anfwer to Maifter John, becaufe my lord commanded him to ' let no man know that he was to ride to Falkland :' And that my
lordes direction to him was, to ' come backe with his brother Mailter Alexanders anfwere, and to leave
Andrew Ruth wen to awaite upon the Maifter,'

(Sic fubfcribitur) Andrew Hendersoun with my hand.

Further, the fayde Andrew Henderfoun depones, that, when he had taken the Maillers hand out
of the Kings Majeflies mouth, and was opening the windoe, Maifter Alexander fayde to him, ' Wilt
lliou not helpe ? Woe betyde thee, thou wilt make vs all die V

(Sic fubfcribitur) Andrew Hendersoun with my hand.

No. V.
De execrabili et nefanda ruATRVM RvvENORVM ill fereniffuni ScoTOKUM Regis cajnit Conjuratioxe,' apud Perthum, Augiifto menfe, an.
1600, Vera ac dilucida Nauratio. Cui pra,^nii(ra eft, Prefationis loco,
velitatio cuin Lectore in fide et aftenlu commodando paulo religioliore. His
acceffere ad Regem Soteria Carmine Heroico.

Ecce improbi tendunt arcum, aptant fagittas fuas nervo ad jaculandum in caligine contra
rectos corde. Atqui iftis propofitis deftruentur : luftus enini quid operatus eft ? —
Pfal. 11, vers. 2 et 3.
Edinbvrgi excvdebat Robertus Charteris, Typographus. 1601. Cum privilegio Regio.

1 From a copy in the Library of the University of Edinlmrgh, liaving the signature of Sir James Balfour at tlie
foot of the Title-page, ' Ja: Biilfouiius Kynardia; Miles, Leo Armoium Rex. IG-i9.' Tlie Editor is indebted to
Mr David Laing for the following curious abstracts from the Records of Aberdeen : — ' 1601. The inbabit.-mts ordered to accompany the Magistrates through the town, singing Psalms and praising God. The Cross to be decked ;

wine to be drunk with spicerics, and glasses broke.' Vol. xl. pp. 10* and lOG ' Mr Thomas Cargill tobej>aid £20

for his Latin Treatise, congratulating the King on his deliverance from Cowrie's Conspiracy.' Ibid. p. 179 ' See

•also, under the year 1019, ordered to be celebrated.' Vol. xlix. p. SS9.

o2i CRIMINAL TRIALS. 34 Jac. VI.

AD LECTOREM pro intemerata Narrationis huius fide.

PR.ISCRIPTIO.

EN tihi, Lector, narratioiiem, quam Tragicis fiue prodigiofis, per nie licet, hactenus inleras, vt de
intomerata narrantis fide nihil addubites. Narrationera quidem carte, quse ordinem, euentumque pef-
(imo facinoris puriter iinipliciterqiie proponit : at confilia, cauflas, finefque rerum, quarum pleraque in
ambi'^uo, aut incomperta, nee exponit vbertim, nee (quod Hilloriffi eft proprium) de rebus ipfis iudirat. Et Narrationem nudam adeo fimpliceinque, vt in ea verborum apparatum, orationilue oraaraenta masnopere fi defideres, fruftra fis. Res enim per fe nimis atrox ac invidiofa, lenocinium et
quafitos arte colores circuniponi libi non patiebatur, quo fuco coniptior et calamiftris, eo niaiorem forfitan Lectori fcrupulum iniertura. Veritatis enim, ait ille, Jimpkx eft oratio. Atque adeo prodigiofis
adfcribere non dubitavi: Turn ex meo ipfius fenfu, qui confilium, et modum, atque euentum facinoris,
et vniuerlara rei gertffi rationeni, omnia ccrte agnofco niiraculo proxiina. Turn niulto inagis, mi Lector, ex tuo : quem ego audio in prsecipuis Tragoediaj huius actoribus duo potiirimum admirari : Vnum
in Re?e, qui infi;lijs appetitus : alteram in proditore, qui illiufmodi fraudem architectatus. Nam et
affine prodigio tibi videtur, Principem admirabili folertia ingenij, fingulaii iudicij acumine, maximo
rerum vfu, ab liomine adoleiVente, puluerem fcholallicum non ita multo ante egreffo, turn occafione
leuicula ac prope futili in fraudem inductum : turn etiam cum fraudem vel maxime fulpectaietur, lummi
difcriminis incuriolum. Nee rurfus miraculo carers videtur, Lominem adolefcentem (hie mihi comitcm iplum intellige, qui calciamentum confuit, non fratrem fraudis miniluum qui confutuni niodo
induit) yix duos fupra viginti annos natum, ampliter a natura, vberius a doctrina iiiformatum, in magna
domi re, bona foris fama, fumma apud omnes gratia, in caput Principis fui ob fingulares virtutes omnibus cariffimi, et de illo imprimis optime meriti, fine probabili aliqua caufla confpirare. Et tamen fi
voti compos factus efl'et curiofus alleni operis arbiter Momus, ac fuilFent ills in pectore feneftrte per
quas daretur aditus ad introfpiciendum in adyta mentis vtriufque : foret liic, opinor,
Nil adeo magnum, tieqite tarn mirabile qukquam,
Quod non paulatim minuant mirarier omnes.

Vidifies enim in Rege praeter alias dotes Regias, niueam puramque mentem, infolontem malarum artium, vt fraudes ftruere, ita nietuere nefi.nara; vidifles fidem SancliJJimum humani pectoris honuin.
Contra in proditore malam mentem, impurum animuni, fimulandi dilllmulandique artificem, /ijiutam
vapidofub pectore Vidpem : liominem quam foris inanis tectorij fulgore vifendum, introrl'um tani turpeni, luridum, virulenturo. Neque fraudem ipfam capitalem babes nunc clarius oculis fubieetam, quam
eogitati facinoris cauffas, confilia, finem, tum fenfibus animoque coraprjehenfa teneres : adeo quid ille
tanto flagitio volebat, quid cajitabat, aut meditabatur, liquido dignolleres. ^'erum vtcunque vota non
truatur fuo Momus, ll tibi otiura humani insenij lubricum et delultoriara fortunse viciffitudinem a^qua
iudicij lance raecura expendere : fimul animls rationem reuocare ad veritatem : nihil opinor, reperietur etiam in iftis qute niiraculo proxima videbantur, adeo fidei abfonum quod tuum, vel mediocriter
I'apientis aflenlum debeat remorari. Nam fi quos Itupor, aut liuor, aut alius quilpiam adfectus ita prffipedit : vt obftinauerint animo ad illuflrifiimum veritatis Solem mero meridie caligare, ad liorum ego
aures pro cymbalo non fum futurus. Te tantum, Lector benignior, qui in omni negotio inteutus ac
lufpenfus ambulare cupis: in fide autem et alTenfu potilfimum tardus lentufijue efle amas, cum eo, vt
lemitam qua eatur in viam paratus fis ingredi : te inquam, pro virili iuuarc eft animus ; et fcrupulum
ilium vnum aut alterum, qui te folicituni habet eximere : ne fi inani credulitate iam tempore ipfo prope
fatis confutata, li^rere aut fluctuare poiTO pergas, cum itlhac tua religione (vt parciliime loquar) dignus effe odio vuleare. Atque vt id magis fiat ordine : de Principis fiducia primuni paucis : dein de fceleris inflmctore pluiibus dlfieram. Nam quod tibi videtur parum digiium regio faftigio, nee principi
latis decorum, pro auri olla caput in difcrimen mittere : equidem non repugnarem, Ci vero vineeres vel
aurum Regi tantum in niente fuilFe : vel de iiifidiis et vitje periculo faltem iudicio cuiufquam illi con34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 225

llitiiTe. De difcrimlne concepta niagis quam iniecta fufpitio, fecit aliquantifper animi pendulum : fed
dum rectioiis vir fpiritus religioni liabet, abique tiianifellis iiuliciis alienam virtutem fufpitione violare,
quid niiium fi ea folicitudo mox veitit in fiduciam ? Quod fi auri cupidine velut inefoatam ipfuis iimplicitatem putas, quam vellem pra;ftantiflimi Regis ingcnium iuxta mecum exploratum liaberes. Neque
enim modo quibus ille intime notus, fed et communiter omnes qui e vulgo id fciunt, fplendens boc
aurum, quod aliis mortalibus prffiftiiniit oculos, ilium plane necligere, atque oculo (vt poeta loquitur)
in-etorto adfpicere. Ille ne vt falutem fuam et publicam auro contra charam non babeat : cui tarn amplae, tamque frequentes pecuniaium conquiiendaruni rationes, falua et vita et exiftimatione, curse cor*
diue impendio nunquam fuemnt ? Bafileiani grapbice admodum et magnifice (vti decebat et Deam et
love prognatam) in oratione de regno depingit Dion Cbryfoflomus. Aurum quidem copiofum babenteni iuxta pedes cumulatum, fed cuius afpectu nihil afficiatur: magis omnigenis qu.e folium iplius circumiecta fint, animalibus delectetur. Et tu audebis credere Regem clariffimura exprelfiflimam meliercle Bafileias Ideam : qiiippe quem venationis auocamentum mirifice capit et rapit, aurum nee capit
nee tenet, relicta feranim confectatione, fperatam auri prsedam vel periculo capitis perfequuturum? Imo
contra, boc vnum in eo populares defideramus, maiore adremattentionem,inopil)us congerendis, ibefauris
accuraulandis, fifci vtilitatibus promouendis Itudium veliementius. Sediiimirum Herculem vnicum vita;
ad virtutem inflituendse exemplar ille fibi propofiiit ad imitandum. Quem quod memorant nudum inceffifle Leonis duntaxat exuvias indutum, id eo fenfu viri rerum intelligentes accipiuut : quod neque aurum
neque argentum, neque vellimenta pretiofa in magno pretio babuerit, omnia nifi vt exercenda? liberalitatis
effent, nullo loco numeraverit. Ad eundem modum Rex nofler aurum, argeutum, altaque in fortunae
ditione pofita, quae miferi mortales mifere capiunt, in poftremis ducit : ea non appetens nifi ad vnicara
gratificandi facultatem : in fubditorum benevolentia, amicorumque fide firmifiimum regni prafidium,
et maximum Imperij inftrumentum pofitum exiftimans : hunc thefaurum etiam Regise Perfarum gazse
anteponens. Quare meo quidem animo, quidlibet cauflse comminifcere potius, quam vt auri cupiditatem principi munificentillimo obtrudas. Ego magis adducor vt credam rei novitate inductum, aut
incolumitatis publicse ftudio, dum ab auro extraneo non iniuria nietuit rerum domi turbandarum materiam. Et quanquam auri infpiciendi provinciam vni e purpuratis fuis poterat demandare, et nullo
fuo difcrimine ad fe deferendum curare: tamen qui morum in eo candorem, et promptam fuis omnibus
humanitatem reputabit, etiam bic antiquum obtinere nibil mirabitur. Quid eft enim Uege bumanillimo
familiarius, quam comiter invitatum in nobilium vli'orum aedes cum lubentia itare : idque quantum
poteft rariffimo comitatu ? Nempe quia moderata ac pacifica multorum annorum gubernalione id fe
confecutura arbitrabatur, vt aniore civium et benevolentia feptus, munimento alio non egeret : innocentiae fuaj prsefidio contra vim omnem fatis firmiter munitus. At enim, inquies, bominis erat paiura
confiderati, poflquam fuboluiffent illi inlidise, non cogitare tum fasculum quo viveret in quo nnfquam
tuta fides : quam ipfe perfonam fuftineret. Certe quidem nee ajuuni ignorabat ad fraudem, perfidiam
et veteratorias artes aflFabre factum : neque illud nefciebat, cum qui multorum fe cuftodeni |)rofiteatur
ex fapientum fcito, Sui primum capitis ciijiodem ejje oportere ; fed cogitabat rurfus nibil effe cauille, cur
adverfus ipfum fallaciam intenderent, eoque 3Iaff?ium animum decere ningnam fortunam. Imo, vt eft
liiftoriarum omnis seui exequentiflimus, non fugiebant eum exempla illuftrium viroruni, qui etiam tum,
cum ctedes et venena fufpicarentur, maioribus animis quam fucceflibus in vitae periculum incurrillent.
Meminerat capitale fuiffe Dioni, cum infidias a Calippo opinione praecepiffet, quod arnicum et iiofpitem
forraidare nollet. Nee minus funeftum Antipatro Caftimdri filio, qui ad ca'nam vocatus a Denietrio,
qui cum ipfo pridie coenaflet, non recufavit vna ire, licet fibi valde metueret, ne videretur ci diffidere,
qui ipfi fifus fuiflet. Meminerat Herculem Alexandri ex Barfine filium, a Polyfperciionte ail ca'nam
invitatum, cum et fufpectam baberet earn invitationem, et excufaffet incommodam valetudinem, fubdola bominis verfipellis oratione vt in fuum ipfius exitium vna proficifceretur, adductum. Quae quidem
et alia eiufdem modi exempla quanquam eum admonebant, quantum polR't adire periculi : tamen
VOL. II. 2 F

226 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. ICOO.

aniino intenitus ccptum vrgebat : quod amoiis fiilucia fuipiciones non atlmitteret : et animus recte
factorum conll-ieiitia erectus ancipiteni fiiiei nietum, et i>ericuIorum cogitationem averfaretur ac (lifpelleret. Fecit isitur vt decebat viiuni foitem : fecit quod ante euiu excello plerique animo : fecit quod
aliquando ilie Regum invictiffimus Alexander, qui iiiiecto a purpuvatis fuis mctu de peifidia medici
pro niedicata potione venenum propinaturi, poftquam fecreta ffiftimatione expendiliet quid in viramque
partem ipes aut metus fubiecerant, tandem latins iudicauit (ait Curtius) alieiio mori fcekre, quam
■metufuo. Nam et Sereniffimus nolter Princeps, cum aliquandiu aninium in diveifa verfallet, decreuit
tandem cuinflibet dilcriminis euentum potius expectare, quam eius liominis, que fperabat amicilTimum,
et Iciebat mnltis masmilque bencficijs libi pigneratuni, fidem prajdamnare. Itaque quamvis Dioni, Antipatro, et alijs, qui luorum iiiluiiis circumventi, eiufinodi confidentia magno conftiterit : certe vt olim
Alexandre (referente Curtio) Sua temeritas cejfit in rjlorlam : ita, Deo immortali baud dubie totius
Imius actionis dauum moderante, ifthaec fine fiducia, fiue temeritas eft, Regi mitiflima non in gloriam
modo cedere debet, led et in fecuritatem. Ecquis enim erit ille tam male volente Genio natus, qui in
pollerum audebit attentare adverfus eum, cui Deum nullo loco deelle aniraaduerterit : et extremis
prjefertim temporibus videt opera adferre prajfentilfimam ? Iniurium fit, inio vero impium, non eius
cbaritate flag:-are ardentius : admiratione plus teneri, magis ac magis venerandum facrofanctumque
liabere eum, qui Nuniini eximie cliarum elle, valentifllmce in defperatifilmis rebus fuppetiie clare teftidcantur. Et enim qui in lioc negotio fola rationum Immanarum momenta intuetur, nse ille non folura
tota via, fed et toto aberrat coelo. A cado enim et provida ilia mente, qua; ferie nobis incognita, fupera inferaquo nioderatur ac gubernat, vniverfa liuiufce negotij difpenfatio ell. Vidit nimirum seterna
ilia mens regera pium, probum, beueficum comitate et monim facilitate nuUi homini fecunduni, eo naturn feculo, cuius htec labes, virtuti et innocentise inuidere velle : afque nibil ignominiofuis credere,
niodella finiplicitate, et probitate in fiinima fortuna. Ideo vifum illi in clarillimo Principe rarum ac fin-
■gulare exemplum prodere, Juliffimam ejje ciijiodiam Princijns ipftiis iimocentiam : periclitari cam
■pofle, et oppugnari : at nee expugnari nee opprimi. Vidit itideni periculuni effe, ne a Diuinie opis ciuicique amoris tiducia, fecurior ellet quam tutior : eoque eum qui anions excubijs feptum felt" putabat,
paullo niomento teriore fuorum fuccinxit : vt in loco admodum lubrico temperamentum adhibere meminerit : integiitatem qiiidem confertis (vt aiunt) nianibus retentam, fed fun ul, generofe cautus, et
citra ignauiam circumfpectus. Vidit denique in ea incidiife tempora, quibus, ipfo aufpice ac duce,
magna illi inouenda nioiiendaque eflent. Itaque placitum benigniiriiiio Parenti in Principe eius Auf-
])iciis ductuque magna aufuro, prffiter fuperioia, permulta quidem et prrolulliia fauoris fui experimenta,
vnum infignitiffimum paternEB benignitatis docunientum edere : tuiu ad iungenda et efficacius liominuni (India, turn ad animum i|>fi hac vehiti amoris tcffera, in onuiem deinceps vitam firmiter obfigillanduni. Vt in periculis obeundis, aut laboribus pro Noininis fui gloria, Regni ornamento, dignitatis
amplitudinifque Regime incremento fufcipiendis nunquam fatiAat, aut deficiat animo, fed poft acceptuni Diuini pra^fidij tain certum arrliabonem, auxiliares Numinis copias in rebus qnamlibet ardnis perpetuo fibi fpondcat cum poeta : Dii me tueantur, diis j'ietas nica curce ejf. Nam fi fummus Ille rerum arbiter, Scotorum Regi feciflet opinionem quo inaxime vellet modo bonitatem fuam experiri,
quanquam profecto nefcio an alio aliquo nialuifiet, lioc vnum fcio certiore quam expertus eft, ne optaffet quidem. Qiiamobiem, mi Lector, define ingenij tui acumine non tam Regis optimi, quam Dei
ipfms confiliura, folicitare : vana cogitationum mittens, Providentiffi decivto te permitte : quod Deo
placuit, idem vt tibi non difpliceat aquum ccnfe, atque in Trifmegilli Solomonis vcrivprbio acquiefce.
Cor Regis in mantt Dei ad inclinandum illud quocimque vult. Item. Vt Cceli altitiido aut jjrofundilas terra inperfcrutabdis ej, ita hipervejiigabilis eJf Regis animus,

lam altera parte admirandum ac prope incredendum tibi videbatur, invenem, natalibus claruni, opibus florentem, domeftica externaque difciplina liberaliter inflitutum, prudentiae dottrinwque opinione
apud omnes ordines gratiofum, peffimo poft homines natos flagitio omnium expectationes ludificari.

34JAC. VI. CHIMINAL TRIALS.

227

feque cum illuftii familia in probri nunquam intermoiituii praocipitium peffum dare. At ego contra
triftem ac mifeiabilem fortaffo cafum vt agnofco, ceite novuni aut incredibile nibil video : nifi quem.
admodura de paniciilio, declamat. 377. loquitur Quintil. Quadum eje crimina, quce ipfa magniludine
fidem lion impetrant. Neque enim negabo meum ipfius affectum, principio imperare fibi non potuiire,
vt non afppctu primo doleret et miferaretur forteni Iiominis, qui facinore infando fe cum familia indigniffime perditum iuiliet, Sed cum difcufla vulgaiium opiiiiouum nebula recta; Rationis Sol niiiii face
fua pectus illuflianit, adeo miiaii defij : vt prope foitem bominis vltia niliil miferarer. Ecquid enim
perfpicerem liic nimiopere novum aut inciedendum ? Nempe quod liomo adolefcens, opibus, ingenio,
doctrina piffiftans, dum animo fuo plus fatis obfequitur, nefaiio fceleie le obftrinxerit. Atqui meminerani fcripfiU'e Platonem, In magnis ingeniis vt magnas virtutes, ita injigma vitia ineffe confuevifji.
Et ii audimus Senecam, Nullum ejjh magnum ingeniumjine mixtura dementice. Itaque qua homo non
impoflibile, qua adolefcens credibile : qua vel foitis fortunse turgidus, vel doctrinse ingenijque fiducia
ferox, vero non abfimile milii videbatur. Vulgi imperiti ad obliquos inopinatolque eventus attoniti et
obftupefcentis folet lia;c efle queiimonia. Qui potuit accidere ? Quis putaffet ? At qui lapientia fupia
vulgum, et exploratos habent modiee cafus humanos, eos improuifus ifliufmodi fortunie ictus niliil percellet : neque digitum tranfueifum de recti iudicij gradu dimovebit. Illi enim flectentes oculos ad
communeni fortem, ad varios et reciprocos rerum humanarum fluxus, bumani nibil fe alienum putant :
poft primogeniara principum parentum noxani, quemque noftrum liajc et deteriora (fi quid eft improbius) poffe admittere fatis iutelligunt : quando verura nimis ct illud verbi,
C'uivis potejl accidere, quod cuiquam potejl.
At proba educatio, ais, et eruditio multa, non iinebant bominem concipere animo tantum ncfas.
Fateor equidem in bona inftitutione ad vitam recte inflituendam non exiguum efTe momentum, cum ad
naturse coramoda accedit probse educationis difciplina. Verum

Mulla cff opera opus Jictura, qui Je Jictorem probum
Vita ejje agenda expetit.
Atque vt de domeftica parricidae huius educatione mibi cauere fortaffe vt non nolis : an exoticam
pariter et tianfmarinam audebis prajftare difciplinam ? Eam tu pariter mecum non ignoras Polypodis
capiti perfimilem, in quo bona et mala : aut certe liortis yEgyptiorum, vbi <l>u^fixxx fnftiyfiivx Auy^ei
Kcii iriXa,. Venenata falutaribus permixta. Et quam vellem ilia vt non praiponderaflent. Sed vt
fuerit vtraque non omnino mala, quis nefcit, perindc ac res omnes bumanffi natsB funt volvi, mutari,
verti : ita adolefcentis indolem, vel pravis confultoribus obrepentilius, vel malarum cupiditatum illecebris obiectis corrumpi depravarique facilem ? Certe non teniporum magis, quibus niiiil fluxius, quam
niorum in honiinibus viciffitudinem agnofcit idoneus ffiftimator Tacitus, Rebus, inquit, cimctis ineji
quidani velut orbis, vt qiiemadmodum temporimi vices ita et morum vertantur. Et exempla fi requiris, millena aliquot aut ego proferre, aut tute tibi pofiis fubijccre, qui paullo momento ab lionefto in
prauum abflracti. Vnum modo Neronem milii vide. Cui elogium hoc tribuit, qui inter Imperatores
cognomentum meruit Optinii. Optimos quofque Principes longe abjuiffe a quinquennio Neronis. At
ille idem poll bipedum omnium nequiffimus, et nullo non fcelere infamis. Itaque fi lubet bominem
fua et iulla cellimatione confere, difce a Platone cenfore Eequiffimo et fcientifllmo. Qui cum Helicoui
Cyziceno daret literas ad Dyonifium, commendavit quidem bominem, vti liumanum et permodeftum.
Sed in calce commendatitianim adfcripfit, laudare fe bominem, hoc eft, vt ille interpretabatur, animantem natura mutabilem. Atque ita profecto fe res habet. Solus ipfe niundi Rector :eternum in benignitate fua perfeverat immobilis et immutalnlis : alia omnia ftare loco nefcia : homo maxime, non
in dies folum, fed et in boras verfatilis.

Quod petiit, J))ertiit : repetit, quod niiper omifit :
^Jluat, et vita difconvenit ordine toto.
Vt meritiflimo Poetarum optimi buUse, fomnio, vmbrse, frondibus ac folijs liumanum genus ajquiparaverint : adeo volubili funt homines ingenio, leves, mobiles, atque foliorum inftar, ad quamuis auiu228

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

lam inftabiles. Neque novum rairurauo fit, eum homineni quern atcrnus Parens faburia bona mentis,
aut rationis fuljfidio contra ffiftus turbiiliorum aftectuum non ftabiliveiit, ia fcopulos oftenlae plus
quam tragioa' cupiditatis vento abripi. Sed enim, inquies, eniditio multiplex et interior animi cultus
letinaculi vice elfe debebant, ne ilium aftectuum »ftus tranfueifum abriperet. Certe quidem fi legitimum literarum vfum confectatus fuillet, et cultuia; patientem accommodaffet aurem. Sed, prout
luiit tempera, vereor vt rectum ftudiorum finem aut fequutus ille fuerit, aut affecutus. ^Mdeas alium
literanmi peritia frui ad oblectationem : alium ad dignitatis et famae incrementum : non neminem ad
memoriam fui port exactum vitje cuniculum in a!vum proroganduni. At quotufquilque eas vult effo
inrtrumentum vit<fi per virtutem ac decus agitanda; ? Ecquis praftantis doctrinffi adminiculis fubnixus,
difcit affectus niagis ac magis habere in poteftate ? Ecquis fenfus animi fuapte natura contumaces ad
obfequium rationis redigere? Ecquis contra temerarios fortunse cafus celfior et erectior flare ? Cum
tamen venis ac genuinus ifle fit lludiorum finis, quo firmior adverfura fortuita llempublicam capellas.
Atqui adolefcens hie litteras, credo, magis illecebram ad peccandum effe voluit. E Platonis fcliola multi
tpanni exijlfe dicuntur, neque Philofophise, neque magiftii ipfius culpa : fed fcientije opinione prseferoces, I'olos fi; digiios exiftimarent qui alijs dorainarentur. Quid fi illhic vitium compar ? Fecit faltem vt folent qui auimo fubdoli ac perfidiofi. Literarum velo pelfimarum cupiditatum fcenam iuumbravit, quo tectius atque occultius fe putabat delictumm, eo laxiores habenas ad quidvis audendum
animo Aio permittens. Quid ? quod animum Icientice lludio flagrantem non eoercuit ? quid fi literarum intemperantia laborans modum non tenuit ? quid fi nimis multa fcire voluit ? et ea nee bona, nee
fructuofa, nee legibus concefla.

Miijis animus d%im mollior injiet,
Et qua max iinitere legas : nee dejinat vnquam
Tecum Graia loqui, tecum Homana vetujtas.
Hoc ftudium in quod incumbere, fladium quod decurrere illuftres adolefcentes decet. At ilium
multifaria ingenij dote, et verfatili fialertia vfum ad naturse recondita inquirenda, et ea quae fupra nos,
ad magicas et illicitas artes addifcendas nimis multa loquuntur, de quibus mox dicemus. Vis igitur
fcire. Lector, quid de multiplies huius hominis cognitione exiflimandum habeas ? En tibi viam ad
cenfendum, prsibit Pliilofophus non ignobilis. Diogonem niemorant, cum in hominum vita Praefides
provinciarum, Confultos iuris, Philofophos, Medicos confiderabat, dicere folitum, fe nihil invenire bomine folertius et fapientius : fed cum oculos deflecteret ad fomniorum Interpretes, diviuos, coniectores,
ariolos, nihil ineptius et ftolidius. Idem hie in pari cauffa cenfe. Quamdiu bonis difciplinis ifle animum excoluit, fuerit fapiens, eruditus et adprobus. At poflquam Servatoris fui defertor ad dseraonem velut inducijs factis transijt, curiofitate non ferenda illufionum diabolicarum focius ac particeps
effe fatagens, fit tibi ille idem improbus, infipiens et execrabilis. Et miraberis deinceps, five fe noxio
illiGenio mancipaverit, five cum falutis fuse hofte acerrimo quafi coUudere fuftinuerit, iam fuperis animum illi lymphantibus, in peflima facinorum prEecipitafie. Itaque non efl quod de caufa qua impulfus, controverfiam vltra mihi facias. Nam quod ais magnum aliquid fpe devorafl'e, quia verum fit illud Arbitri : Sicut muta animuUa cibo inefcantur, Jic homines non caperentur, niji Jpe aliquid mordereiit. En tibi viam maxime compendiariam, qua; elatioris animi adolefcentes agat in prseceps, curiofitatis nimiffi et magicorum ludibriorum fludium. Quis ell enim in rebus seflimandis tarn frutex, cui
ex fubiecta narratione coelo clarius non appareat, vanitatis magicse fuiffe confectatorem ? Qui illi perpetuus itineris comes, idem characteres perpetim circumgeftaffe teftis eft. At characteres eos Magicos fuiHe, et modus fervandi loquitur, et eorundem voces nefandee clamant ita manifello, vt ridiculi
fint, fi qui cum ineptis fuis interprefamentis reclamant. Scribit Athenaeus literas Ephefias (ita vocabant antiquitus notulas, fiue voces Magicas) h nvrccfioii ftfPTToJa-i, id eft, in confutilibus pelliculis
olim a Magis cum cura adferuatas. Et notulas itidem Govvrius fuas libellulo infcriptas in pellicula
conlutili cuftodiebat. Quod fi nefcis quam eflicaei crediderit eas effe virtute, id ex iplis notularum
verbis percipe. Quibus fi fides, oranes potentes ad bonos Spiritus attrahendum, et malos propulfan34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 229

dam. Huic vim adfcribit perficiendi mirabilia, et indubitate in prselijs victorice coraparandte : illi vim
optata impefrandi. Nonnullas ctiam efficaces efle voluit adverfus adveifas liomiiium valetudines et
raoleftias : ab alijs contra ipfam divinarum legura inevitabilem potellatem (lioirefco verba leferens)
promptiffima remedia pollicetur. Quid ? quod pro ariolo ac futurorum proefcio haberi fe difcupiebat,
et fuani in rebus Magicis folertiani apud familiares non dilTimulabat. Sed quod apud notes praedicabat Italum queradam qui apud vulgum malefieus audiebat familiariter iibi cognitum, liinc credo elFe
fundi noftri calamitatem. Quis eft enim in nofcitandis adolefcentum noftri sevi ingenijs adeo peregrinus, qui non continue fubodoretur Govvriura hereditaria ea feabie pravse curiofitatis prurientem, atque in patris ac aui mores inftitutaque euntem, confuluifle Maguni hunc, qua; Tors maneret eum, aut
quo fato eflet periturus : et veteratoris fpiritus aftu (ita vt fit) ambigua aliqua refponfione fuoim illi
factum. Quemadmodum enim bedeva proceram arborera complexa non diraittit, priufquam eam ad
tabem uexu fuo perduxerit, ita novum non eft etiam prteclariffima ingenia, qua fe vanltati Magica;
femel addixerunt, ab eius contubernio non ante explicari, quam in inextricablies malorum cafles praecipitaverint. Habes igitur, Lector, ab aliqua dictione Magica, quae illi commeritum ab Rege exitiuni
prsenuntiaverit, vnam baud dubie infoelicis fufcopti cauflara. Quod fi tentas defcendere in temetipfura, reperies cuique noftrum fuas etiam efle et internas, vt pereundi, ita et in furias et quodvis fcelus
quamlibet cbotliurnatum ruendi cauflas. Habemus enim in nobis tres adverfarias potcftates, Ambitionem, Cnpiditatem, et Voluptatem, quarum minifterio irapoftor ille Genius, omnia fapientia; praecepta falutariaque monita ex animo expectorans, folertiflimum quemque impellit in fraudem. Neque magis folens eft ferrum confumi fua rubigine, aut exedi lignum lua teredine, quam homines etiam exiftimatiflimos intercutibus his vitijs laborantes, ad miferabilem exitum perduci. Ergo vt nullum Govvrius characterem circumgeftaverit, at vero, hunc vere tergeminum humani generis hoftem in pectore,
in venis, inque medullis circumferebat. Neque opinor de vindictse cupiditate mecum pugnabis, quando ipfe minifter fceleris hoc mantelo celandae fratris perfidite eft vfus : cum dictitaret fe paternum fupplicium caede patris patriae vltum ire. At ego ambitionem magis fufpectam habeo, quae, vt tu fcis,
fortunatoi-um : vt ille ait, Commune efl nohilitatis malum. Quod fi inftabis non efle credibile vt per
Regis interitum ille regnum affectaverit. Qua enim fpe potiundi ? quibus copijs ? aut qua virium
fidutia? tam alieno tempore, Rege ipfo iam turn tribus liberis foelici, atque vno horum mafculo, puero
fupra quam credi poflit in ea setatula et animi et corporis viribus inclito : Nobilitate vero reliqua et
Principi fuo, vt cum maxime addictiffima, et tranquillitatis cupientiflima. Agnofco equidem fi quam
ille animi mentera habuiffet, nunquam fuifle procelfurum eo vecordiae, vt flagitio tam pudendo auguftum Imperij verticem violare, fe facraque Chriftiana quae profitebatur, confcelerare non timeret. Sed
nimirum ftultis ac fallacibus cupiditatuni delenimentis deceptus, et imaginarije foelicitatis velut fulgetris animi oculos illi praeftringentibus, verum videre non potuit : neque futura fatis praevidere.

An ager animus falfa pro veris videt?
Namque (ait ab aeuo recentiori fcriptor) Ambitio et cupiditas oculonim mercB fuffiijiones, veras rerum
fpecies nos videre nonjinunt, imagines ludibundas oculis ohtendentes, vifus ludijicatriculas. Scilicet
titulofse amplitudines, ftipatoi-um frequentia, opes, cognitiones, aflinitates : falutantium, deducentium,
imo afl^entantiuni turba, populi applaufus, iuveni harum rerum infolenti tantos aniraos fecerant, vt neque fatis fe cogitaret, neque pericula expenderet, qua orat aditurus : dum animo obfequitur luo, res
cavendas et adraittendas iuxta defpiciens. Neque mirum id cuiquam videbitur lucifugi Spiritus artes
verfutafque edocto. Qui impoftor folertiffimus, non alios cupiditatum quas dixi prajftigiis magis fibi
mancipat, quam quos fortunatos, temeritatis alumnos, natalibus, opibus, clientelis, inflates, aut prudentiae fcientia>que opinione niniium fibi confidentes, deprehendit id genus homines fuo arbitrio imprimis
permittente Providentia. Quamobrem, mi Lector, cum probe cognita atque explorata habeas turn
ifthffichumanarum cupiditatum blandimenta, tum ilia veteratoris Spiritus commenta, putidum fit coniurationis confilium deinceps qu^rere : pene improbum, fi illud non capis, de fcelere ipfo amplius ambi230

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

eere. Rem factam liabes, coniurationera acre ipfo liqnicliorcm, facinus inter ea quce ab reuo contlito
infidiofiffirauro, atrociffimum, periculofifiiiiium. Et tu etiamnum quteres et cuntabere de caufla ?
Quid fi foitafle earn non expedio ? Illud (cio, fi de caulla liquido conftaret et fine, raeliercle et parricidas masis oderis, et fcelus daninares veliementiue. Sed qualecumque fuerit in palrando conlllium,
faltem noxani illi liicidentam nocuifFe nofeiintiir : et plevcpque fraudis ciicumftantia; in nanatione fubiecta tanqiiam in tabella fynceie, puriter et ex fidetibi exhibentur. Per quas fingiilas tecum ire fuadct
animus, iubet ftudium veritati?, flagitat nieus in te amor, fed ne defundar coercct, et habenas amori ultra pcrmittere vetat, tum acumen tuum qui irtba?c per te melius potes et debes, turn verbura illud vetus, A'o?i debet enormior eJJ'e jjrologus quam fahula. Itaque quilquis es explica tantum atque excute
tuam ipfius intelligentiam, ego fpondebo neque rem ipfam in obfcuro, neque te diutius in vado liaefltationis verfaturum. Ait Romanus ille Sophus: Vnius fenfentiam ferjiii non ejfe vita, fed factionis.
Tu in-itur quo meliorem civem, et Regis reique publicaj aniantioreni, quo a factione factiolilque alieniorem probare te ftiides, eo magis decet te bonis accredere, et de Aio Principe pie recteque fentientium
coronre populariter fuffragatorem accedere. Si fufpiciofus effe pergis, Nunquam deeril fiifpicioni argu"
mentatio, ait Seneca : Sedjimplicitate opus, cf bcnigna renim (t/iimutione. Imo ii audis eundem fapientem : In quibiifdam rebus faiius e/i decipi, quam diffidere. Vbi vero id tolerabilius, quam rbi
fdlus exillimatioque Piincipis vertitur ? Audi non me, fed coniiliarios magni Regis apud Curtium.
Infiio qiicniqiie periciilo magniiin animiim habere, cum de falute Regis timelur credulos e//e dehere,
rana quoque diferentem admitterc : ct tamen an tibi vllum a fraude jiericulum, bic, vbi nihil fupra fidem, nihil ex rano haullum, vbi tarn fidi auctores, vbi viri partim illullres et fpectabiles, partim parricidanmi amicillimi et intimi, teftes funt, et cognitores, fidi, locupletes, omnique exceptione maiores ?
Quare 7iimio fatius ejt, vt opujt te ita ejje, quam vt animo Iubet,
Qui animum vincunt, qtiam quos aninuts, femper probiores cluent.
Quod fi fortaffe nonnulli qui omnem fortunarum fuarum fpem in hoc homine coUocaverant, a deftinatione fua longe iacente?, maleuolentia; oeftro perciti, non decrunt oppedere veritati : at vos faltem ex
hypoplietarum ordine, Divino, vti par eft, nomine inftructos, veritatis emiffarios, sequillimum eft tara
obviam tamque manifeftam veritatem obvijs vlnis amplexaii. Et quanquam confilio valetis plurimum,
tamen quando etiam fummi gitbernatores in tempejtatibus a vectoribus admonerifolent : hoc ab homine
amico vobis ijiftillari finite. Sicuti vos decet arbitros efle et prjeitores omnium officiorum ad pietatem
religionemque pertinentium : ita tos omnium fubditorum maxime convenit Pitharcbicos efle, et Prineipalibus edictis sequanimiter obfecundare. Quo intentius ad Dei opera fpeculanda animi aciem dirigitis, eo llquidius quam nos e vulgo Deum adfpicitis, in Regis optimi periculo difcutiendo fefe fenfibus
Hoftris ingerentem et inferentem. Eapropter vos decet cum primis et iftam impietatem exeerari, et
eius auctorem, quo magis vana quadam fimulataj pietatis fpecie vobis imponere ftudebat, hoc lubentius
fuis verifque coloribus depictuni populo fpectandum propinare : vtnimque tara ftrenue atque fublimiter: quam dare atque exauditibiter damnare. Intereft enim exempli in \niiverfum, vefli"um ordinem hie
recte fentire, cuius omnia dicta, facta, fignificata magnopere pertinent ad exemplum. Neque hie niodo,
Vt facitis vos officiofos exbibete : fed, fi me aiiditis, etiam alias, tum in accipiendis, tum in obeundis
non illicitis Religiofiflimi beniguifiimique Principis imperijs non fcupulofara obedientiam, fed obfequiofam alacritatem adferte, Ambigua laudis ciuis eJt, ait vetus fcriptor, qui debitis rcipubUca:officiisnonJua
fponte, fed iiijjus, fungitur. Quicquid enim imperio cogitur, exigetiti magis quam prtp/tanti acceptum
refertur. \ t deforme obfequium in ifto ordine nemini bono probatur : ita abruptam contumaciam
ecquis fatis fanus non damnabit? Sicuti adulari imperanti non fas, fie nee vitro irritare et fine libertatis, fiue incautee pietatis obtentu pericula provocare. Si Principum ingenia nou noftro modulo metin : fed ad sequi bonique regulam a-ftimare poftemus, eft certe cur Deo maximas referamus gratias,
quod imporamur ab eo Principe, qui (vt parcillime dicam) modeftam loquendi viuendique libertatem
a fubditis vfurpari Eequiflime ferat. Verum quia et non immemores moneo, et opinione mea longius

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 231

iftliiec prouoxit oratio, vt iaiii tandem prajfaii ilefiiiam, nee fit, quod dicitur To Tna-uyfix. fssj^o* tS BuXmh,
inftratum lacculo maius, ad te a quo coepeiain redeo, Lector, Ejiiclianiiea; fapientke neivo olini iiimis
iiilijErentem : at nunc in couipertilfima veritate neque diffidentem vt opinoij neque liefitantem, imo
prope non vltra admiranteni. Et profecto, vt funt Divina, humanaque, quid ell cur magno opere mireris, vel iuvenem adfpirante inconfulto populaiis aurse fauonio, et fortuna veluti fuccollante in cogitationes eiraticas etinipias vanefcentem, infolentise faftufque Ciii Deo poenas pendere ? Vel llegem optimum ac pijflimum, non ab euanidis bonis in mancipio fortune pofitis eftimationem captanteni, fed
ab animo bene compofito et fiducia in Deuni firmiter fubnixo, veram folidamque gloriam peteflentem,
eiufdem Dei benignitate eminentifiiinuni tranfniittere difcrimen ? Si quid eft in Iiis exenipJis infolens
aut niirum, inde ad vitam recte inftituendam docunienta potius tibi fume. Ergo qua vides iuftitia; Divin£E feueritatem prodigiofis eventibus in faeinorofos deftrictam, bine difce inter obfequia Fortunse
cautus incedere: nee fcelere cotbuniato in ofTenfionem Nuniinis a quo provocatio non expectanda,
fciens prudenfque impingere. Rurfum qua vides leternam illani mentem pro Rege excubantem, et
lioftium in caput iplius iuratiilimorum fine animura obnubilantem, fiue coniilia corrumpentem, fiue conatus eludentem : quera Deo vnice tliarum vides liunc tu quoque difce in oculis ferre, magis magifque
cliarum, venerabilem ac facrofanctuni liaberc : at neque facto violare, neque verbo ledere, neque fui'picione offendere : imo vt rcctori buic parentique noftro Magnus ille mundi Arbiter ac Rector perpetuus
Adftes, Prseftes, ac Sofpitator fiet, niecum ex animo precare.

No. VI.
' A SHORT DISCOVRSE of the good ends of the higher Prouidenee, in
the late attemptat agaiuft his Maiefties perfon. Printed by RoCEiiT WalDEGKAVE, 1600.'

QThis Tract, wliich is in duodecimo, pp. 28, is in the valuable Collection of Mr David Laing, by
whom it was purchased at a sale of the Library of the late Mr Archibald Constable, who considered
the book to be u/iigue. Of the author nothing is known ; but it may be conjectured to be one of the
compositions of Mr Patrick Galloway, who so zealously defended his Majesty's character, in his Sermons, &c. It is to be hoped that Mr Laing will soon reprint this rare little volume, and add one
more to the many Tracts illustrative of this most mysterious subject. The following extracts may be
taken as a fair specimen of this interesting little volume.]

' The Eternall Prouidenee hauing giuen many markes, euen from the firlle conception of his Maieftie, that he is appoynted for great thingcs : and willing at laft, before his approches to his deftined
right, now in the good age of his filler of England (whome he hartilye wilhetli long to Hue, and who
hath euer had him in the deare account of hir owne fonne) that he Ihould be incouraged, be a fpeciall
figne of his high protection and hand with him, and therewith alfo, haue a further triall, both of his
owne and his peoples hearts, invred him firft with a dangerous (I mull fay it) excefl^e in a Prince ; for
. clemencic, goodnes and trufte, howfoeuer of their nature good, may haue alfo their owne exceilis ;
whilk, in the fortune and happs of many potentats, haue fo often redounded to their perrell and overthrowe, that Princes haue greater caufe to feare fick perfons as they haue faued, reflored, or made vp,
then wliere they liaue done ane iniurie. And thogli fick benignitie worketh euer to good, in the honeft and acknowledging hearte, (as his Maieftie hath had good tryall in nianie,) yet when it mceteth
with ambitious and vngrate perfons, it lyeth oppen to fik requytales, as he hath alio found in the traytor
of GowRiE and his brother the Maister, his deftined hangman of his Princis life. But God would
fo haue it, and that his Maieftie alfo Ihould abandon him felfe in the armes of their treadicrie, and meafuring others be his owne fiuceritio, Ihoulde neither fufpect fraude and falfe meafure, neither remoueo

232

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

his truft from the place where hee had heaped vp fo many benefites : But, in the finipleneffe of his
pureft Iiearte, being fo few, iliould come iu their reach, and being fole and vnarmed, Ihould be brought
in the place of death.'

' Our excellent Princis ^iiattainted hearte was of fick purenes in the behalfe of the tratore, the
iiewe Ano-el of Italie, (whole vncertaine nianer of port, over popular (howes, with certaine his motions to liis Maiefties felfe, might haue well ynough ibewen the arroes of his hearte,) that leauing the
fmall trvne whilk he had at the chafe, accompanied only with his coufings, the Duke and the Earle
of Marre (whome God would haue to be witneflis of that whilk Ihould happin,) hauing no other than
Iiis huntinc home, he came in their towne, in their lioufe, and the verie fnare prepared for bis death ;
where they, beeinsr ayded with his fingle heart, and repofe in themfelues, mder deceaueable iliowes,
fand bell to inuite him ; and violating, vndcr fick truft, the naturall and publicke faith, attempted the
fame, he neuer hauing done them anie outrage, but contrarily, with all good fauors, honors and digniteis,
cuen courted them in a fort, and their whole houfe. O mofle wicked treacherie I to thirfte the dropes
of the innocent blond of their King, who hath fo farr rellored, prefered and honored them ! For to lay
to his charge the death of their father,' &c

' Yea, and in thefe eilayes, that we heere fpeake of (fo little commerce haue fick defignes with Gods
affiftance, or their own wit) their hart may fayle them, their refolution may wauer, the partie may dalh
them, or bis humanity meafe' them : a dread, a fufpect, a word, or a looke may alter the cafe : and
finally, the protection of God may intercede, withftand, or confounde them. The Earle was ouer
wife, the INIaifter ouer foolilh, the other^ ouer tiraide : his Maieflies prefence, his refolute heart, his
matching the one, his threatning the other, his gayning of time, and calling for ayde, haue their owne
regards. But that lie leeued, and venged himfelfe like a good knight, it was of the protection, mercie
and influence of Him, bee whofe good ordour Kings do rule,' &c

No. VII.

EXTRACTS from the Records of the Privy Couxcil.

Proclaimatioun of Thankifgeving, for his Maiefteis delyuerie.

Apud EDiyBiRGH, fe,vto die menjh Augnjii, anno 1600.
Sederunt. — Cancellarius, Fyvie, Thefaurarius, Secretarius,
Aduocatus, Comptroller, Collector, Clericus Regillri, Spot.
FORSAMEKLE AS it is laitlie cum to the knawlege of the Lordis of his heynes Preuey Connfale, of ane lait intendit Treafoun be vniq'"^ Johnne Erll of Gowrie, and Mr Alexander RuthVEN bis brother germane, aganis the perfone of his INIaieftie, quhome God preferve ; and becaus his
hejTies, praifit be God, be his mychtie hand, by^ all expectatioun, is fault and preferuit : Thairfoir,
willing that thankis be gevin to Almichtie God, the onlie inftrument of that prefervatioun : And in
confideratioun of the fmall boundis of any of the Perroche Kirkis, within this burgh, to contein the
multitude, the faidis Lordis hes thairfoir thocht meeteft, be oppin Proclamatioun at the mercat croce
of this burgh, to notifie the faid happie deliuerance of oure fouerane lord fra the faid perrill and danger, with the death of the faidis traitouris, fua worthelie deferuit : And thairfore, requireing thame, as
it is the pairt of all his deutifuU fubiectis, to rander thankis to God, for his faid deliuerie ; and in taikin
of thair joy, cans the liaill bellis within the burgh to be mng ; and at nyeht caus mak banefyreis, alfweill within this burgh as within the Cannoin-gate and village of Leyth, efter the accuftumat forme
obferuit in the lyke caiffis, for the vttering of the joy of his Maiefteis happie deliuerance : And hes
Ordanit ISIr Dauid Lindfay to prais God, within the Kirk for the fame; and Ordainis the people to
accumpany him to that effect.

Maze, bewUder. 2 Andrew Henderson. ' Contrarj- to, against.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 233

CHARGE, for keiping of the corpis of vrnq'^ the Erll of Gowrio and liis hruitlier. Aug. IGOO.

Apud Falkland, /?y^;/;Ho die menfis Augnjli, anno 1600.
Sederunt. — Lennox, Cancellarius, Mar, Thel'aurarius,
Secretarius, Computorum Rotulator, Spot, Kinlofs.

FoRSAMEKiLL AS vmquhill John Erll of Gowrie and Mr Alexander Ruthven, his brother, being in the actuall executioun of a niaill iiorrible and traterous Confpiracie aganis the Kin«ris
Maiefteis royall perfone, witiiin the faid Erllis avvin ludgeing, vvitiiin the burgh of Perth, it hes pleilit
God, maid niiraculouflie to deliuer his Maieftie fra thair intendit Treafoun, and to turne thair traterous practizeis vpoun thame felffis, quha hes wortlielie fufferit death, as they wer in the actuall perfute
of his Maiefteis perfone. Quliairfore, neceffar it is, that the corpis of the faidis vmquhill Erll and ^Ir
Alexander be keipit and preleruit, quhill forder ordoure be tanc on this mater, as appertenis. And
thairfore, Ordanis Letteris to be direct to officeris of airmes, fchereffis in that pairt, chairgeing thanie
to pas, command and charge the bailleis of the burgh of Perth, to preferue and keip the corpis and
bodyis of the faidis vmquhill Erll and Mr Alexander, vnbureyit ; ay and quhill they vnderiland forder
of his heynes will and pleafour thairaneut. As they will aniuer to his Maieftie, vpoun thair obedience,
at tliair heicheft charge and perrell.

(Eodem die.) — Letteris, for arreifting the Rentis of vmq''^ the Earl of Gowrie.

(Eodem die.) — Charge, that nane of the name of Ruthven repair towardis thair Maiefteis.

{Eodem die.) — Charge, forrandering the faid vmq'* Erllis caftellis, touris and fortaliceis of Ruthven, Strabrane, and ludgeing within the burgh of Perth, with theguidisaud geir being thairintill, vpoun
Inventair, to his Maiefteis Thefaurair, &c.

{Eodem die.) — Act, that na thing be difponit of the Erlldome of Gowrie, hot be auife of the Lordis
of his Maiefteis Preuey Counfale,

(Aug. 12. Apud Hali/ruidlwiis.) — Act, mortifeingL.lOOOyeirlie to the Puir, furth of the reddiert
of the fruitis, rentis and dewteis of the Abbay of Scone ; in perpetuall niemorie of the liiid happie
deliuerie.

{Eodem die.) — Act, aganis the pafting of Giftis of the Erldome of Gowrie.

{Eodem die.) — Act, aganis the Ministerls of Edinburgh. — Forsamekill as vmquhill Johnne
Erll of Gowry and Mr Alexander Ruthven, his brother, haueing maift trateroullie divifitandconfpirit
the death and diftructioun of the Kingis Maieftie, oure fouerane lord, be fie a deteftable and horrible
manner, as hes not bene hard of in ony kingdome or age ; it pleifit Almichtie God, quha euir hes had
a cair of his heynes perfone, maift miracouloullie and wounderfullie to deliuer his Maieftie of that deteftable Treafoun ; efter the quhilk happie deliuerie, and thankis gevin thairfore be his heynes to God,
his Maieftie imniediatlie, be writ, acquentit the Lordis of his heynes Preuey Counfale, alfwele of the
faid intendit Treafoun as of the faid happie deliuerie, and defyiit thame to command the Minifters of
Edinburgh to haue convenit thair feuerall flokis in thair awin kirkis ; and thair, publictlie to haue intimat to the people the faid Treafoun, and to haue gevin thankis to God for the faid deliuerie of his Maiefteis noble perfone. Lyke as, the faidis Lordis, haueing convenit befoir thame Maifteris Robert Bruce,
James Balfoure, Mr William Watfoun and Mr Johnne Hall, Minifteris of Edinburgh, vpoun the lext
day of Auguft inftant ; and the faidis Lordis haueing at lenth oppynnit vp vnto thame the haill forme,
maner and circuniftanceis of tlie faid Treaflbun, quhilk wes alfua affermit in thair prefence be a honneft
and famous gentilman quha wes prefent, and a ey witnes at Perth with his Maieftie : And for thair
farther fatisfactioun, the faidis Lordis haueing produceit andfchawin to thanie his heynes awin Miliiue
and write in this matter ; and thairfoir, according to his heynes directioun, liaueing inftantlie delt and
travellit with the faidis Minifteris, and haueing commandit thame to haue repairit to thair pulpettis
and kirkis, and to haue certifiet the people of the faid Treftbun, and to haue thankit God for the faid

VOL. II. 2 G

234 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aiiu'. 1600. Iiappie deliuerie; tlie faidis Minifteiis, niaift vndewtifullie untrufting' bis Maieflie and the vndoubtit

tiTutli of tliis lionible Treafimn, refuifit to obey bis lieynes and the faidis Lordis : For quiiilk, tirey and

ISIr Waltir Balcanquell, JNlinirter, quba wes abfent the laid fiill day be reHbun of bis feiknes, being now

callit, and compeirand befoir his Maieftie and a giete nowmer of his heynes Preuey Counfale ; and his

Maieflie and his Ccr.nfale liaueiiig bard tbair pretendit excuiffes, and finding thame ftill conftant in thair

diliruft and doubt, be fliair vilfull and obrtinat refulaill, 3 it to afliiir and certitie the people of tlie faid

intendit Treafoun aganis his Maieftie, nochtwitliftanding the conftant and trew reporte and declaratioun

tjuliilk tliay bane hard, alfweiii of certane of bis INIaiefteis Nobilitie, quha wes prefent with his iSIaieftie at

Perth, as be the Lordis of liis beynes Prewey Counfale, and be his heynes awin ^linifter.- The Kixgis

MAlESTiEand Lordis of Secrete Counfale, thairfore Findis, decernis and declairis, tliat the faidis Mr

Bobert Bnice, Mr Walter Balcavqudl, Mr James Balfoure, Mr Willkime Watfoun and Mr Johnne

Hall, hes niaift vndeutifullie behauit thame felffis to his Maieftie, in the mater aboue writtin ; and that

they ar not worthie to be fuft'erit to fpeik or preiche publictlie to his heynes peopill, at ony tyme heirefter : And thairfore, his Maieftie and the faidis Lordis lies difchargeit, and be thir prefentis difchai'geis

the faidis fyve Minifteris of all preiching, or fpeiking publictlie to his liienes fubiectis, in ony pairt of

this realnie, at ony tyme heirefter, vnder the pane of deid : And forder, Ordanis thame to remove and

depairt furtb of the burgli of Edinburgh, within fourty-autht houris efter the dait heirof ; and onnawyfe to reforte or repair, in ony pairt, within the fpace of ten myllis to the faid burgh of Edinburgh,

lieirefler. vndir the faid pane of deid. And Ordanis intiraatioun to be made heirof, be oppin Proclamatioun at the mercat croce of Edinburgh ; qnhairtbrow nano pretend ignorance of the fame.

(Eodem die.) — ' George Cragixgelt, Hew Moncreiff, Andro Hekdirsoun chalmerlane of
Scone, Patrik Eviot brother to the Laird of Bowfie (Balhouflie), HARYand Alexander RuthVEXIS brether to JNIr ^Villiam Ruthven,' were ordained to be denounced rebels, for non-appearance
before the King and Council, ' to baue anfuerit to fie tliingis as fould baue bene inquirit of thame at
ihair comeing, and layd to thair charge, tuiching the lait treafounable Coxspiracie divifit aganis his
lieynes royall perfone, be vmquhill JonxxE Erll of Gowry, and Mr Alexander Ruthven, his
brother.

(Aug. 13.) — Charge iffued againft ' the remanent of the Mixisterie of Edixburgh quha ar
not difchairgit, with the haiil Deaconis and Elderis of the SeJJionis of the Kirkis of Edinburgh, that
they keip tbair ordinar tymcs of melting in tbair faid SefTionis, &r. and gif ihay fai^ie, or do in the
contrair, that incontinent tliairefter the faid Herauld, mafer or ofticer denunce them rebellis,' &c.

(^Eodem die.) — ' Act, anent the fuppleing of the vacand placeis of the Minifteris of Edinburgh.'

(.^ug. 19. Apud Falhland.) — Androw Johxestoun, bvrges of Perth, ordained to be denounced
rebel, for failing to appear before the King and Council, ' to baue anfuerit to fie thingis as fould baue
bene inquyrit of him, at his cumming, and layd to bis charge, tuicbeing the lait trefonable Coxsricie,' &c.

(Aug. 21.) — ' AcTjanentanefolempne'YnAisVi.i&G'E.vi'scfor his Maiejteis delyuerie ;' with ' aduyfe
of the Commiffioneris of the Generall AfTeniblie, to be maid and keipit, in all the Kirkis of this
realnie, vpoun the laft Tuyfday of September nixt, and the Sabbothe nixt and iramediatlie following
thairefter.

(Aug. 2'2.) — William Moxcrief of that Ilk fined in the fum of 100 crowns of the fun, and Sir
JoHX Meluill, ' apperand' of Carnebie, Kn'. in the fum of oO crowns, for ' tbair mutuall geving of
leyis to vtheris, in prefence of the Lordis of Secreit Counfale, fittand in judgement for the tyme,

vpoun the tuentie-ane day of Augull iiiftant.' And Ramsay, younger of Balmontbe, wa.s

alfo ordained to pay 60 crowns to the Treafurer, for ' the perfuit and invafioun of ... . Ballenden,

' Distrusting, doubting. ' 3Ir Patrick Galloway.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 235

vpoun tlie Hie-ftieit of the burgh of Edinburglie vpoun the fouitein day of Auguft iiiftant, his Malef- Aug. UiOO.
lie being, for tlie tyme, witliin the Palice of Halyraidhous ; and for the fame, is becum in \m Mait-l'-
teis will.'

(Eodein die.)— Joiii^ Erll of At holl, Alexander Lord of Spt/nie, . . . Rynd Liird of Kerfs,

Gairdin elder of Le>/is, ami .... Gairdin t/onnyer of Lei/is, on the one part; awd J. \meh

Master of Ogiluy and Sir John Ogiluy of Craig, M, on tlie other part, were charged ' to fubfcryue and delyuer to the officeris executouris of the faidis Letteris, fie forme of AlFuraiiceis as lalbe
prefentit vnto them, within fex howris nixtefter the chairge, under the pane of rebellioun,' &c.

(Aug. 31. upud Glafyw.) — ' Charge, aganis tlie Auld Ministeris of EoiNBUKtiii.' It is
dated that ' his Maiellie is credebelie informed, the faidis perfonis, not onlie flill continewis in thair
infidelitie and blindnes, maliciouflie and wilfullie refuillng to acknawleg the certane treuth of this
mater ; hot, to his Maielleis forder contempt, they bant and rel'orte in all pairtis of this cuntrie, difperfing mony vntrew bruitis and rumouris aganis his hienes, practiling be all meanis to fofler and iiiterteny his Maielteis fubiectis in the lyk wilfull eiTOur and blindnes with tharae felffis, and to lay vpoun
his Maieftie, the burding of that, quhilk maift traiteroudie wes deuyfit and intendit aganis his hienes
awin perfoun.' The Minifters are therefore ordained to appear before the King and Secret Council
' at Striviling, or where it fall happin his INIaiellie to be for the tyme, Mr William VV'atfon on Sep. 9,
Mr Walter Balcanquall and Mr Jolin Hall on Sep. 10, Mr Robert Bruce and Mr James Balfour on
Sep. 11; 'to vnderly fie forder punifchment, as his Maieflie and lordis of his hienes Counfell fall
inioyne vnto them; vnder the pane of rebellioun,' &c.

(Sept. 10, aptid Striviling.) — Mr Walter Balcanquell, Mr William Watson and Mr
John Hall, appeared in prefence of his Majefly and the Lords of his Secret Council, ' and of thair
awin frie motive, confefiit and declairit, that they wer now fullie and throuchlie perfuadit and afilirit
of the treuthe of the Troafonable and vnnaturall Con.spiracie, deuylit and intendit to liaue bein
execut aganis his hienes at Perth, vpoun the fyft of Auguil lall, be vmq''' Joiime Erle of Gowrie
and Mr Alexander Ruthven his brother ; and that, fein thair remouing fra the bruglie of Edinburgh,
thay had not directlie nor indirectlie delt nor trauellit, be publict real'oning or priuat confeience, to
put ony of his hienes fubiectis in dillrult or doubt of that mater ; and that they wald, in publict, manifeft and declair thair faid perfuafioun and afTuranee of this mater, and move his Maiefleis fubiectis
to do the lyk, and gif thankis to God for the fame.' — This declaration having been gratioufly received,
Mr Walter Balcanquell was ordained to ' repair and adres himfelf with all guidlie diligence to Tranent, Dalkeithe and Mulfilburgh ; the faid Mr Williame Watfoun to Dumbar and Dunce ; and the
faid Mr Johne Hall to Dumfermling, Sanct Androis and Perth ; and thair, in the ordiuer Kirkis thairof,
and upon ordinar preiching dayis, that tliay preich to the people ; and, in thair Sermonis, that thay niak
ane publict and manifell Declaratioun of thair awin alliirance and perfuafioun of the treuth of the faid
Treafoun, intendit be the faid vmq''^ Earl and his Brother; and craue God and liis Maieftie pardoun for
thair ouer lang flawnes and doubting thairof; and thairwithall to moue all men to gif thankis to God
for his Maieftais delyuerie ; and fchairplie to rebuik all fie perfonis quha continewis doutfull heirin :
And that thay report to his Maieftie ane Tellimoniall of the ISIinifter and eldaris of the townis and
Kirkis foirfaidis of thair conformltie to the preraiffes ; that thairefter, his Maieftie may tak forder ordour
with thame, as falbe thocht expedient.'

(^Eodem die.) — ' The Bailzels of the burgh of Perth, reprefenting the haill bodie of the fame,'
are charged « to compeir perfonallie, befoir his Maieftie and his Counfell at Linlithgow, vpoun the
faxtene day of September inftant, to anfuer to the contempt and indignitie done to his Maieftie,' in
regard that, after the King's delivery from the Treafon deviled by the Earl of Gowry and his brother,
' his hienes luiking for na forder danger or invafioun at that tyme ; nochtwithftanding, it is of treuth,
that his hienes wea of new aflail3eit and perfewit be a grit nowmer of the communitie and iiihabitantia

236 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6OO.

Sii). 1600. of the burgh of Perth, all in armcs, quha environed bis Maiefteis hous on all pairtis, aff.-igit and periewit bis bienes within the fame, vttering maift irreuerent and vndeutifuU fpeiches aganis his Maieftie,
Iiis Nobilitip and cevtane of his feruaiidis and guid fubiectis, qiiha accumpaneit liis bienes for the tyme,
and could nawayis be moved to forbeir thair tumultuous and infolent behauiour; hot did quhat in them
lav be crying for fyre and poulder, and rjTining with jeftis at the 3ettis of the faid hous, to haue
blawin vn the"^ettis of the faid houfe, and to haue expoued in hafard the lyfes of his Malellie and his
guid fubiectis.''

(Sep. 11.) Mr Robert Bruce appeared before the King and Council, and obftinately ' continewit doubtfull and nocht tlirouchlie refoluit of the trefounable and vnnaturall Confpiracie," &c. He is
ordained ' to remove and depairt furth of tliis realme, betuix and the aucht day of October nixtocum,
and onnawvis to retunie agane within the fame ; nor yit repair within the realme of England, without
his bienes licence had and obtenit to that effect, vnder the pane of deid : And in the meantyme, quhill
liis depairtur, that he remane in the Place of Airtbe, for making of his prouifioun and fumifching ;
and that he addres him felf to the faid place, this prefent day. And ordanis the Mafer of Counfell to
pas and mak intimatioun heirof to the faid Mr Robert, that he pretend na ignorance thairof.'

(Eode?n die.) — Mr James Balfour, having declared himfelf perfectly fatisfied with the truth of
Gowrie's Confpiracy, &c. he is ordained ' for ane pruif of his amendement and dewtifull behaviour in
tvme comraeing, and for fatisfactioun of his bienes fubiectis, quha be his en-our and bliiidnes hes bein
careit with ony finifter opinioun or doubt of tlie faid mater, fall repair and addres him felf with all
euidlie diligence to the townis of Dundie, Montrois, Arbroith and Brechin ; and thair, in the ordinar
Kirkis tliairof, and vpoun ordinar preiching dayis, that he preich to the people, and in his Sermoun,
that he mak ane publict and manifeft deelaratioun of his awiii aflurance,'^ &c.

(Oct. 18, apud Hahjruidhous) — Mr John Hall is ' reftoirit, redintegratted and reponed to his
full libertie, baith to repair againe to the faid toun (Edinburgh), and to difchairg his former functionn
and calling.'

(Nov. 3.) — His Majefly's ' Maifler Porteris and the Ifchearis of his Maiefteis chalmeris' are ordained ' diligentlie to fearch all fik perfones entering within his Maiefteis Palice, quhome thay fall
fufpect to bo armed with fecretis, jakis, corflettis or ony vther offenfive armour, fauffing^ thair fuerdis
and quhin^earis,' he.

(^Eodem die.) — Forsamekill as the grit and monftrous bavis'' and cumpanies commonlie awaiting
vpoun Noblemen and Baronis at Parliament and Conventionis, and repairing within Iiis jNIaiefteis
Palice, and to his liienes awin prefence, is not onlie offenfive and difpleafant to his Maieftie, hot werie
difhonourable to tlie natioun,' &c. ; ' the Capitane of his JNIaiefteis Gaird and houfe, and his bienes
Maifter Porteris,' are ordained to gif diligent attendance, and fee this prefent Act relT'aue the dew
effect and executioun in all pointis ; and for this effect, to debar all lie perfonis as fall prefent thame
felflfis, and craue entrie within his Maiefteis 5ettis, with ony ma nowiiieris nor is heirin particularlie
prefcryuit and inoyned vnto thame: That is to fay, eueiie Erle with tuelf perfonis ; euerie Lord
with audit perfonis ; and eueiie Barroun with four perfonis, gif he be allane, or gif he be in cunapany with ony Nobleman, with his page and him felf. And that the faid Noblemen and Baronis
confonne them felffis to this prefent ordour, vnder the pane of incurring of liis bienes vvi'aith and
indignatioun.'

Tliis smells very strongly of a counter Conspiracy, on the part of his sapient Majesty, against the wi'U-liiicd purses
of the citizens of l*erth I — For never was a more pitiful attempt made, to extort a tine from iinnrtVnding and loyal
citizens. Tlie wonder is, that these hrave burghers, hurrying to the spot, and merely hearing that * the Green-coats'
had slain the Earl of Gowrie, their Provost, and the Miister of llntliven, ( who were both greatly beloved,) should
have dispersed so peaceably, on the bare assertion ot the IJailies, that the King was safe ; without any explanation
being afforded them of the cause of this bloodshed and uproar ! ' In the same terms with the other Act, dated

Sep. 10. See May 21, IGOl, of these Extracts. ^ Saving, or excepting, their swords, &c. * Bevies.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 237

(Nov. 12.) — Act, againft refetting of Jesuites, or fupplying tliem ' with meit, diink, lioufe or^'"^- IGOO.
hei'borie,' under the pain of Tieafon.

(May 21, 1601.) — The Act of Council, dated Aug. 12, 1600, diipenfed with, lb far as regarded
Mr James Balfour, Mr Walter Balcanquell and Mr William Watfoun.'

(.Tun. 16.) — ' Act, anent the fyft day of Auguft.' The liegis are commanded ' to keip the faid
fyft day of Auguft 3eirlie, iblemne fra all fort of handy labour, wark, and ferious occupatioun, quhilk
onnywyile may diftract thame fra tlie foirfaid exercife of thankifgeving to God ;' ' and reioyfing for
his hienes happie preferuatioun, wrocht fa meraculouflie be Goddis divyne Prouidence.'

No. VIII.
Extracts from the Account Books of the Lord High Treasurer

OF Scotland.

Item, be his Ma'^'^ fpeciall command, to Robert Ker, paige of honour, thrie ellis grene freis, to be J"'- ^'^OO.
his hunting claithis, at xliiij f. the eine, iiidc, ..... vj li. xij f.

Item, vj quarteris of lining, to lyne his breikis, at vij f. the eln, hide, . . x f. vj d.

Item, ane quarter vnce of filk thairto, ..... vi) f. vj d.

Item, half ane elne and ane quarter grene fteming, to be him ane pair of fokis, . xliij f. ix d.

Item, lykwayis be his Ma"^'^ directioun, to Johnne Ramfay, Johnne Munay, George Murray and
Johnne Auchmowtie, auchtene ell greine freis, to be thair hunting garmentis, at xliiij f. the elne, itide,

xxxix li. xij f.

Item, thre ell grene fteming to be thair hunting fokis, at iij li. v f. the elne, inde, . xiiij li.

Item, to Finlaw Tail3eour four elles grene fteming, to be his hunting claithis, at iij li. x f. the eln,
inde, . . ....... xiiij li.

Item, lykwayis to Johnne Achefoun, James Cokburne and Robert Walker, huntifmen, to be garmentis, nyne ellis grene fteming, at iij li. x f. the ell, inde, . . . xxxj li. x f.

Item, be his Ma"*'* fpeciall coiumand, to Williarae Colquboun, in drinkfiluer of ane cairt that wes
prefentit to bis hienes, . . . . . . . x li. xiij f. iiij d.

Item, lykwayis be command, to George Murray, to be gevin to ane boy in drinkfiluer, at the prefenting of ane balk to his Ma"'', . . . . . . ^ 'i- ^j viij d.

Item, for mending and repairing of hir Maiefteis litter-geir, faidillis, harnefling, brails, and all vtheris
neceflaris thairto, as the particular, fubfcriuit be Robert Stewart, Maifter ftabular, producit, beiris,

xij li. xij f.

Item, delyuerit to his Maiefteis felft', to play at the cairtis, in the moneth of Feb' 1600, the tyme his
Maieftie wes in the cun5ie-houfe of Ed', at the manages of the Erie of Sutherland and Mr of Forbes,
lex fyve-pund-peces, being omittit in the preceiding conipt, i7ide, . . . xxxij li.

Item, to his Ma'^'"* fyve ordiner paiges, for thair allowance in fchone and rther fmall neceftUris, the
month, comptit, . . . . . . . . vij li. x f.

Item, to Johnne Acliefoun, James Cokburne and Robert Walker, huntifmen, for thair ordiner allowance the faid moneth, . . . . . . . . Ix li.

Item, to Alex' Moncreiff, Falconer, for liis ordiner allowance this moneth, . . j'= li.

Item, to ane boy paifand of Ed' with clois Letteris to the Erles of Athoill and Gowrie, xxxii f.

Item, to ane boy pafland of Falkland, of new, with clois Letteris to my Lord Incheaffray and IMr
Ruthven, . . ....... xxiiij f.

1 See Sep. 11, 1600, &c. of these Extracts.

238

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. IGOO. Item, the furnitour following, delyuerit to James Inglis, tailseour, to be twa pair of bnittis and tua
pair of fokis to Lis Ma"'' for the buk-hunting,

Item, fyve quarteris of grene Inglis fteming, to be ane pair of fokis, at iij li. x f. the eln, inde,

iiij li. vij f. vj d.

Item, fvve viices and tua drop-wecht of filuer pafmentis, to put vponn the faidis fokis, at v li. vi f.
viijd. the'vnce, 2H*, ...... xxvij li. vj f. viij d.

Item, ane quarter and ane half of taffatie thairto, ..... iij li.

Item, half ane vnce of filk, • • • •■ • • . xv f.

Item, for ane pair of buittis to his Ma«S .... vj li. xiij f. iiij d.

Item, ane quarter and ane half quarter veluet, to the heidis thairof, . . v li. xij f.

Item, ane vnce of braid pafmentis, to put thairon, ..... xxx f.

Item, half ane vnce of filk, . . • . • • • xij f.

Item, tua pair of gartanis, . . .... Iiij f. iiij d.

Item, ane eln of broun Frenche fteming, to be ane vther pair of ryding fokis to his Ma''% vij li. x f.

Item, fyve vnces and tua drop weciit of golden pafmentis, to put vpoun the heidis thairof,

xxvij li. vi f. viij d.

Item, ane quarter and ane half of taffatie thairto, ..... iij li.

Item, half ane vnce of filk, . . • . • . • xv f.

Item, for ane vther pair of buittis, . . . . • T !'• siij f. iiij d.

Item, ane quarter and ane half quarter veluet, to the heidis thairof, . . . v li. xij f.

Item, vnce of braid pafmentis thairto, ...... xxx f.

Item, half ane vnce of filk, . . . . • . • ^iij 1.

Item, tua pair of filkin gartanis, . . . . . . hij f- ii'j JItem, lykwayis be command of his hienes Precept, to William Elphingftoun, for the price of ane
horfe; as the faid Precept producet teftifies, with acquittance, . . iij'xxxiij li. \j f. viij d.

Item, be his hienes Precept, to Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltre, . . . . I" li.

Item, lykwayis be command foirfaid, for ane chein3ie and ane belt of goldfmyth work, fet with
pearle, with ane pair of garniffingis in the lyk wark, fet with pearle, propynit, in his Maielleis name,
to Sir George Elphinllounes wyffe, the day of hir mariage, v'lxxx li.

Item, be command of his Maiefteis Precept, to Peter Brambill, Frenche pavier ;' as the faid Precept, with his acquittance, producet vpoun conipt, proportis, . . . iij'xxxiij li. yj f. viij d.

Item, to the herauldis, trumpetouris and oiSceris, paffand with difplayit coittis, to divulgat, at the
marcat croce of Edinburgh, the Treafouu intendit aganis his Maiefteis perfoun at Perth, . xli.

Item, to certane warkmen that handillit the artail5erie of the Caftell of Edinburgh, that wer fchot,
on the fext of Auguft, iij li. iiij f.

Item, for hay to be furrage to the cannones, the faid day, and the vther day that his Maieftie come

to Edinburgh, ............. xxxij f.

1 Perhaps this may be the Rope-dancer, who is alluded to by Jlelville, in his BIS. Diary, as follows : ' At that
tj-me, (the end of August 1600) being in Falkland, I saw a ffusoambulus Frenchman play Strang and incredible
pratticks, upon stentcd (stretched) takell, in the Palace-clos, befor the King, Quein and Iiaill Court. This -n'as

politiklie done, to mitigat the Quein and peiple for Cowrie's slauchter Even then was Hendersone tryed befor ws ;

and Cowrie's pedagog, wha bald bein buted.' — Meh-ille's Diary A most amusing accomit is also given of another

mountebank, an Knglishnian, who performed in Edinburgh two years before. ' The 10 of Jiilii, ( 1598,) ane mati,
sume callit him a Juglar, playit !<ick sowpill trikis vpone ane tow {rope) quhilk wes festnit betuix the tope of St
Geillis Kirk stipill and ane stair benethe the Croce callit Josias cloise heid ; the lyik wes neuir sene in this contrie,
as be raid doune the tow and playit sa many p,avies on it.' — Birrel's Dianj, JIS. Adv. Library. This person was
very liberally rewarded for his ' sotvpiU tricks' by his Majesty, besides the contributions he would doubtless obtain
from the Magistrates and citizens. .' Item, be his hienes speciiUl command, to an Inglis sportour, tliat come doun
upon ane tow fra tlie cok of tlie stepill of Edinburgh, xx li.' Anotlier entry, in the same month ( Sept. 1598), probably refers to the same person : ' Item, lykwayis to David Weir, sportour, be command, vjU. siijs. 4d.' — Lord Treasurer's Accounts, Ccneral Register House. The name is likely to have beeu Vere.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 239

Item, for carving of tlie Poiilder to the Caftell, and of aiie barrtll of ftwintciie flane weclit to the Aug. 1600.
trone, to be weyit, quliilk his Maieftie ordanit to be fend to Dunbartane Caftell, . xxv f. iiij d.

Item, be his Maiefteis command, to the trumpetouris, that day that l;is Maieftie came to the croce
of Edinliurgh to dcclair the maner of the Treafoun intendit aganis his hienes perfone, vli. vjf. viij d.

Item, to William Lcflie, being direct of Falkland in greit haift, to bring the Jnflice and Jiis clerkis
to Court, iij li. vj f. viij. d.

Item, to Robert Logane, being direct on horfljak, to bring fra Mr Williame Fullartoun, the Depofitioiies of Mr Tliomas Cranfloun and George Craigrngelt, to be prelentit to the Juflice at Perth, iiij li.

Item, delyuerit to Johnne Achefoun, huntifman, four d° (dozen?) of couppillis, and ane lyov.n to ilk
d° for his Maiefleis lioundis, xl li.

Item, for furniffing to liis Maiefteis buck-hunting, of colleris and lyounis of all furtis, flinchit and
icillit, ....... .•*••. ...Ixli.

Item, to ane boy pafland of Edinburgh with clois Letteris, from the Counfall to his Maieftie, bein"
in Falkland, xvj f.

Item, to ane boy pafland of Falkland with a clois Letter to my Lord Chancellar, being in Edinburgh, XV f.

Item, to a boy pafland of (Edinburgh ?) with a clois Lettre, fra the Cliancellar to his Maieftie,
being in Falkland, xvj f.

Item, to aneboypafTand of Edinburgh, with fome directions to Daui(lMoyfie,I)eingat Falkland, xilijfl

Item, to ane boy pafland of Edinburgh with clois Letteris to my Lord Newbotill, Jufticc Clerk and
Mr Dauid M Gill, xxiiijf.

Item, to Ar* Dowglas maifer, pafland with ane Act of Secreit Counfall to the croce of Edinburch,
and thair, efter found of trumpet, difchargit M''' Robert Bruce, James Balfour, Walter Balcanquell,
Williame Watfoun and Johnne Hall, of all forder preiching, in priuie or in publiet, within ony pairt
of this realme, xxj f. iiij d.

Item, to the faid Archibald, pafllind with ane vther Act of Secreit Counfall, to the faid marcat croce,
and thair, efter found of trumpet, commandit M'" Peter Hewat and George Robcrtfoun, and the
Elderis and Deaconis of all the four Kirkis, to convene at thair ordinar dyetis, for obferving thair
accuftumat difcipline in tlie Kirk, . . . . . . . . . xxj f. iiij d.

Item, to William Forfyth, meftinger, pafllind with Letteris to the marcat croce of Edinburgh, and
thair, eftir found of trumpet, dil'charget baith men and wemeii bruikand the I'urname of Rnthvcn (not)
10 cum neir his Maiefteis perfoun, within ten niylis, ...... xxj f. iiij d.

Item, to William Forfyth meflenger, pafland with ane Warrand of the Secreit Counfall, to charge
Mr Andro Lamb to preiche in the Hie Kirk of Edinburgh, on Sonday the fewintene of Augufl
inftant, ..... ......... xiij f. iiij d.

Item, to Ar'' Dowglas maifer, pafTand with Letteris to charge the Miniftrie of the Prelbiterie of
Edinburgh, that thai, at the nixt exerceis, on Tyifday the nyntene of this inftant, take funi gude ordouv
amang thanie felffis, how the vacand places of the Minifterie of Edinburgh may be fuppleit and feruit,
vnto the tyme ordour be tane for planting of new Miniftcris at the faid Kirk, , xxj f. iiij d.

Item, to ane boy pafTand of Edinburgh with a clois Letter to the Bailleis of Edinburgh, . xvj f,

Item, to ane boy pafTand of Edinburgh with a clois Letter to Mr James Mehiill, ]Minifter at Anftruther, Mr Robert Wilkie, Rectour of St Androis, Mr George Gledftanis, Minifter thair,' xxiiij f.

' Similar entries occur of ' clois Letteris' to Mr Robert Howie, Minister .it Dundie ; Mr James Nicolsoun, Minister at Mcgill ; Mr Jokune t'aldclcuch, Minister at Ne\vburi;li ; Mr Anili'o Lamb, Sfinister at Leith ; I\Ir James Law,
Minister at Kirklistoun ; Jlr James Spottiswood, Persoim of Calder; Joliiiiii' C'lappeitoim, Bliiiistcr at Chirreside ;
Mr William Kow ; Mr Dauid Lindesay, for the Synode of Ediiiburgli ; Mr William Coupcr for Perth; Mr James
Nicolsoun, for Anguss; Mr Robert Wilkie, for Fyiif ; IMr James liiysone, Jlinister at Durisdeir, for the Synode of
Nythdaill ; Mr Johne Welsche, Minister at Kirkcowbrycht, for Galloway, &c. &c.

240 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1600. Item, to Robert Elder, meffinKer, pafland of Edinburgli, with Letteris, to charge Ranifay,

younger of Balmonth, Johiine Kamfay callit the gunner, to compeir befoir the Couiifall at Falkland,
the xix of this inftant ; to heir and fie thame decernit to iiaue incurrit the pane contenit in the Act,
maid for the reftraint of the fechting, within a myle to hi.s Maielleis perfone, . . iiij li.

Item, to William Forfyth, mefilnger, pafland of Edinburgh, with Letteris, to charge Dauid and
Johnne Ramfayis, brether to the Laird of Dalhoufly, and Hew Brawnden, to compeir the laid day,
for the famin purpois ; and for fummonding of certane witnefles to preifF quhilk of thir pairteis wes
onfetteris, .............. xxxij i.

[Letters are alfo fent to the Lord Prefident, Lord Advocate, Johnne Oliphant, Regifter to the
Compter, &c.]

Item, to Robert Elder, meffinger, pafland of Falkland, with Letteris, to charge Mr William Row,
Miniller at Forgoundynie, and I'extene of his parochineris, to compeir befoir the Counfall, the xxj of
this infl^ant, I'ij f. iiij d.

Item, to Johnne Bennet, nieflinger, pafland with Letteris, to the marcat-croce of Falkland and
Cowper in FyiflF, and a trumpetour with him, difchargeing baith men and weraen of the lurname of
Ruthven, not to cum neir his Maieftie within ten mylis, . . . . . . xl f.

Item, to William Forfyth, raeflinger, paffand with Letteris to the marcat-croce of Edinburgh, and
thair, efter found of trumpet, chargeing the haill Minifteris within this realme, to keip thair Provineiall
Afltjmbleis, the thrid day of September nixt, for publict thankif-gevin, for bis Maiefteis prefervatioun xxj f. iiij d.

Item, to Johnne Blenfcheillis, Hay Herauld, pafland with twa feuerall Summondis of Treafone to
tlie mercat-croce of Edinburgh, peir of Leith, with croces of Hadingtoun, Kinrofs, Perth, Scone, and
feuerall duelling-houflis of Dirltoun, Ruthven, Perth, and Scone, and vtlicr duelling-houflis of the
perfonis following ; and thair, efter difplayit coit and found of trumpet, lawfullie fummonit, warnit
and chargit William Ruthven, brother and air to vmq''' Johne Erie of Gowrie, and Mr Alexander
Ruthven, his brother, Harie and Alexander Ruthvenis, fonis to vmq'' Alexander Ruthven of Frieland,
Hew Moncreifl', brother to the Laird of Moncreif, Patrik Eviot, brother to the Laird of Boufie, and
Andro Henderfoun, chalmerlane of Scone, to compeir (befoir) our fouerane lord and his Judice, the
fourt of November nixt, in liis Parliament, &c. . . . . . . . . xx li.

Item, to William Ramfay, trumpetour, pafland to accompany the faid Herauld, to the pairtis aboue
writtin, ......... ...... viij li.

Item, to the witnelTes, &c. ........... vj li.

Item, for auchtene copeis to tlie faid Summondis of Trcafoun, ..... v )i.

Item, for tranflating of the twa fummondis out of Latin in Inglis, . . v li. vj f. viij d.

Item, to William Forfyth, meflenger, paffand of Edinburgh with Preceptis of Parliament, to be delyuerit to the Erie ofMortoun, the Lordis Seytoun, gefter, Newbotill, Home, the Lairdis of Rolling,
Bai's, Wedderburne, Cesfurde, Traquair, Robert Scot of Haning, the Coramendateris of Melrofe and
Halieruidlious, the Bailleis of Tyninghame, Lauderdaill, the Sherefis of Edinburgh principall, Edinburgh within the conftabularie of Hadingtoun, Berwik, Jedburgh, Selkirk, Peblis, the Proueft and
Bailleis of Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, Cokkany, North Beruik, Dunbar, Lauder, Jedburcht, Selkirk and
Peblis ; and with Lettres to be publifchit at the marcat. croces of Hadingtoun, Dunie, Jedburgh, Selkirk and Peblis ; chargeing the Minifteris, within thais boundis, to keip thair Provineiall Affembleis,
the thrid Tyifday of this inftant, for publict tliankii'-geving for his Maiefteis delyuerie.' . vij li.

Item, to ane boy pafland of Glafgow to Edinburgh with Letteris, to caus cliarge the ffyve Minif-

) .Similar entries occur for payments to other Messengers for delivering Precepts and publishing Letters at the
market-crosses of the various burghs, &c. throughout Scotland.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 241

teris of Edinburgh to compeir afoir his Maieftie and Counfall, the nynt, tent and ellevint dayis of this Sept. 1600.

inftant, xxvj f. viij d.

Item, to James Furde, meffinger, pafland of Edinburgh to execute the famin Letteris, at the faidis
ffyve MiiiiflerLs dvvelliiig-houffis, and at the marcat-croces of Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, and Couper in

Fyiff, . . . . . . . , V li. vj f. viij d.

Item, to Andro Home meffinger, paffand to the marcat croce of Edinburgh, and thair, eftir found Oct.
of trumpet, inliibit the reflait or intercomoning with Henrie and Alexander Ruthvenis brether to Mr
William Ruthven of Frieland, and Hew Monereiff brother to the Laird of Moncreift', and Patrik

Evict brother to the Laird of BalhoufTy, xxjf. iiijd.

Item, to ane boy pafTand of Edinburgh, with a ciois Lettre to my Ladie Gowrie, . . xij f.
Item, to WUliani Forfyth meffinger, pafland of Edinburgh with Lettres to charge Mr Richart Ogill

Minifler at Innerveik, and Gibfoun brother to James Gibfoun Minifter, with certane witnefles in the toun of Dalkeith and Eift Lowtliiane, to the number of xiij perfonis, to compeir afoir the
Counfall, tlie penult of this inflant, to anfuer vpoun Aim vnpertinent aplicatiounes maid in thair Serniones, .............. vli. vjf. viijd.

Item, to ane boy pafland of Edinburgh, with a clois Lettre and fum dlrectiones ; with a clois Lettre
and fum vther directiones to goung TuUibardin, for tranfporting of the corpis of Gowrie and his

brotlier, . . xxxij f.

Item, to ane boy pafland of Edinburgh, with a clois Lettre to my Lord Aduocat, . xvjf.

Item, to Johnne Blynfcheillis Ylay Herauld, pafland of Edinburgh, with Lettres, to fummond Mr
Johne Monereiff, Alexander Blair younger of Bathiok,' &c. to compeir befoir our fouerane lord and
his Juftice, at the approaching Parliament; to heir witneffing, in the actioun and caufe of Treafoun, intentit and perfewit aganis William Ruthven, brother to vmq'^ Johne Erie of Gowrie, and certane
vtheris, that ar to be convenit for the fame Treafoun, ....... xvjli.

Item, to Johnne Blenfclieillis Yla Heraukl, Robert Elder meflinger, William Forfyth meffinger, Nov.
William Ramfay tnjmpetour, William Baxter, Thomas Wallis and Dauid Young, being fewin in number, for fupport of thair expenfis in attending fra the firfl of November, that the Parliament wes fenfit,
to the ellevint thairof, tlu-it the Lordis of Articlis wes ciiofin, for uerifeing of the executioun of the
fummondis of Treafoun intentit aganis Johnne fumtyme Erie of Gowrie, . xiijli. vjf. viijd.

Item, for the armes^ of the perfones that wes foirfaltit, xvjli.

Item, to the painteris for Schir Johnne Ramfayis pinfell, ...... xxli.

Item, for carying the quarteris of the lait Erie of Gowrie and his brother, to be affixt on the maifl

eminent places of Striuiling, Perth and Dundie ; and for a creill,^ hay, and i'alt, . viijli. vijf.

Item, to ane boy pafl^and with his Maiefleis Warrandis, to be delyuerit to the Magiftrattis of the

feidis burghis, for this effect, iiiji'.

Item, to Andro Home meffinger, pafl^and with Lettres to the marcat croce of Edinburgh, and thair,
efter found of Trumpet, comniandit and charget all and findrie Erlis, Lordis, Prelattis, Commilfioneris
of barrones and burrowis, that thai, and ilk ane of tliame, ryding on horfljak, cled with fute mantillis,
and vther abuil^enientis, requifit for the honour of the prefent Parliament, repair, attend and accompanie his Maieftie, everie ane in thair awin rankis, at lenth fet doun in the faidis Lettres, xxjf. iiijd.
Item, to William Forfyth meffinger, pafland with Lettres to the marcat croce of Edinburgh, and
thair, efter found of trumpet, commandit and chargit all and findrie Nobill men and Barrounes quhilkis
ar repairit to the Parliament, that nane of thame refort within the Palice, with ony ma companie nor
is particularlie prefcryuit to thame, . . . . . • • . • "xjf. nijd.

> Here follow the names of the other witnesses. ' In token of degradation, the armorial bearings of the

Traitor were torn iu pieces and trampled upon, at the time of execution of the sentence. ' A kind of basket.

VOL. IL 2 H

242 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Kov. IGOO. Item, to Alexander Stobo meffinger, pafland witli Lettres to the raarcat croce of Edinburgh and
Cannongait, and tliair, efter found of trumpet, inliihit all his hiencs liegis, that nane of thame I'uld repair towardis ony places of his Maielteis refidence, armit with fecreitis, jakis, plait-flevis, or ony vther
bid armour, . . ............ xll.

Item, to Robert Elder meffinger, pafland with aue Act of Secreit Counfall to the marcat croce of
Edinburgh and Cannongait, and thair iniiibit all his Maiefteis lieges, that nane of thame lukl repair
within the raiikis of the perfonis keiping gaird, vpoun the hie ftreit of the calfayis of Edinburgh and
Cannongait, except fie perfones as falbe appointit to await vpoun his hienes Nobilitie and ellaitis,
ynder the pane of deid, . . .......... xlf.

Item, to Andro Home meffinger, pafland with Letteris to the marcat croce of Edinburgh, and thair,

efter found of trumpet, inhibit the reflett, fupplie or intercomraoning with Jefuittis, . xxjf. iiijd.

Item, to Andro Home, meffinger, pafland with Lettres ' to the marcat croce of Edinburgh, and tliair,

efter found of tnimpett, requirit that qnhafoewer of his hienes liegis will bring to him twa of his

houndis that ar raikit away, I'uld be gratifeit with a horfe worth, j li. . . . xxjf, iiijd.

No. IX.

Extracts from the Recouds op the Burgh of Perth, and from the
Court Books of the Sheriff of Perthshire.

[The Editor, having been impressed with the conviction that much interesting information might
still be gleaned among the Records of the Burgh of Perth, relative to the Gowrie Confpiracy, applied
for leave to examine the Books and papers of that ancient City. Immediate access was most liberally
granted by the Lord Provost ; and the Town Clerks readily afforded every facility, for this purpose ; but,
owing to the very neglected state of ancient Records, common to almost all the Burghs of Scotland
during the last and preceding century, the greatest part of the old Papers, such as Royal Letters, &c.
(with the exception onlyofTitle-Deeds and other important writings) had been allowed to be destroyed,
as useless lumber. The Council Records and Court Books were, according to the usual custom of
Scotland, at the comniencenient of the seventeenth century, kept very briefly. What follows, is all
that bears upon this question, of any general interest. The same facilities were politely afforded, towards examining the Records of the Sherift"s Court. These, however, only notice the appointment
of the new Sheriff" and his deputy, an abstract of which also follows. J

Curia Capitalis burgi de Perth, tenta in pretorio ejufdem, fexto die menjis Octobris, anno
domini milk/imo fen;ce?>te/!mo, per Ale.vandrum Blair juniorem apparentem de Balthioh, Prepqfitum
dicti burgi, Oliiterum ^onny, Conjtantinum Malice, Andrcam Ray et Thomam Jolmejioun, baU
Uuos eiitjdem ; affirmata.

Quliilk day, eonvenit within the Counfall (houfe) of the burch of Perth, the auld Counfell of the
famin, viz. James Drunimond, Robert Anderfon, Patrick Blair, Mr Henrie Anderfone, Walter Gray,
Williame Hall elder, Patrik Grant, Gabriell Marfar. Decanes of ciaftis, Johnne Ogilbie, Williame
Jak, the faid Patrick Grant, Andro Cudbert, Williame Mathie, Dauid Rynd, Williame Robertfone,
Alexander Farie. Quliilkis perfones aboue writtin, being eonvenit for electing of thair Magiftratis,
according to the ordour ; Comperit the faid Oliuer goung, baillie, and producit bis Maifteis clofit
Letter ; of the quhilk the tennour foUowis.

1 There are ntlier two entries ; one payment of L.5, 6s. 8d. to proclaim the Letters at Linlithgow, Stirling and Glasgow, and another ot L.3, Gs. 8(1. for proclaiming at Couper in Fife and Dnndee. Otlier payments ai"e made in January 1601, declaring, that whoever should detain any of the King's houiida ' raikit away,' should ' incur his Maiesteis indiguatiouu.'

S4JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 243

Rex,

Trustie freindis, We gTeit 50U hartlie Weill. HaifBnrf pruifFaml experience of the loyaltie,

aiFectioun and gude iViuice of 50W, the pii-fent Proueft, Bailleis and Counlale of Jiat oui- bur' of Perth,

We are nawayis myndit that 5e fall be alterit, at ]}is tyme of 3our electioun approcheing : And thairfoir, haif tliocht gude to will and defire 30U, with fic of 5 our nichtbouris as lies wote in electioun of

Magiftratis within our faid bui', to continew 30U and euerie ane of 30U in 5our particular offices

within ])e lame, without alterationn or change ; quharby We may haue a forder teftimony of 3 our gud

will, houeft dewiteis and feruice. Sua We commit 30U to God. Frome Brechin, this xxviij day of

■ September, 1600. (Sic fublVribitur) JAMES R.

(Indoiled) To our tnifty friendis. The Proueft, Bailleis, counfell, decanes of craftis, and vtheris

haifiand wote in the Electioun of Magiftratis, within our bur' of Perth.

Quhilk being red, the (aidis Proueft, counfell and decanes, all in an voce, bot wariance, obeyit his

Majefteis Lettir, with all liarlie gud will ; And thairfoir, continewis the prefent Proueft, baillles and

Counfell, for the 5eir to cum. And becaus of tlie departour of Oliuer Peblis and of Andro lienderfone, quha is r«gi(lrat at the home and fummond for Treafoun, the Counfell, be monieft woittis, hes

electit and chofiu Adame Anderfone and Gawyn Da]3ell to be in thair places, for filling of the Counfellis number.

(2.)
(1601, Sept. 14.) — Ordanis the Bailleis to ward Andro Henderfone, Chalmerlane, as cautioun
for Thomas Broune, for x li. money of Bludie-wytt, committit be the faid Thomas to James Stirling,
wpone the fyft of September inftant.

(1601, Nov. 2.) — Allovvis of the fpyce and wyne gyffin be the Deane of gild to my Lord and
Lady AthoUis, quhilk extendis to four pundis xj f. iiij d. : and to pay himfelff" of the firft cafualities in
his hand. Aliowis alfo to Andro Arnot baillie, of the fpyce and wyne giffin be him to Mr Patrik
Galloway, Alexander Peblis and Oliuer Colt, quhilkis extendis to fewin pundis fex fchillingis ; and
ordanis the thefaurar to repay to iiim agane.

(1608, Aug. 4.) — The Counfell hes ordanit, that the fyft day of Auguft' and the fyft day of Nouember, be perpetualie kepit heireftir, for his Maiefteis preferuatione, according to his Maielleis defire; becaufe thir tua dayis are preceiflie keipit in England and Scotland.

(1611, Jul. 23.) — Proclamatioun anent the v day of Augiiji. Ordanis the fyft day of Auguft
to be folemlie keipit ; and the proclamatioun to pas about the toun, viz. ' Fousamekill as, feing it
pleifit God, of his great mercie, to gewe deliuerance to our fouerane lord the Kingis Maieftie, frome
that confpyred Treflbun, within this burch, aganes his Maiefteis maift facred perfone ; it becumis ws
thairfoir and his gude fubiectis to reioyce and be thankfull thairfoir. I thairfoir command and charge,
that all the inhabitantis within this burch and fuburbis thairof, this day, as being that day of the
moneth quhairon his hienes wes deliuerit, gift' teftificatioun of thair joyfull hartis, by retorting to the
hering of Godis word, at the ringing of the bellis, by fetliug out of bonfyris, and all wlher godlie declaratioun of thair willing and contentit hartis.'

(3.)
Curia Capitalis Vicecomitatus de Perth, tenta in prcBtorio ejiifdem, vlthno die menjia
Septembris, anno domini millejimo fexcentejimo, per honornhilem Guilielmum Murrai/ apparen.
de TuUibardyn, Vicecomitcm princi-palem diet, vicecomitatus. Sectis vocatis, Curia kgittime ciffir.
mata ; idque virtute literarum CommKfionis,/. d. n. Regis, quorum tenores/equuntur.
James, be the grace of God, King of Scottis, to all and findrie our leigis and fubiectis, quhome it
efifeiris, to quhais knawlege thir our Letteiis fall cum, greting : Forfamekill as, ])e office of our fche-

' Previous orders exist, in these Books, relative to the observance of the day. The present was selected, as showing the continuance of the custom for a number of years. . ;,

244 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

refscliip of our fdierefdome of Fertile prefentlie vaikis, be deceis of vmq'^ Joline Erll of Govvrie, quha
Torthelie fufferit deatlie, in Jie actuall executioun of ane horribill and viinaturall Confpiracie, intendit
acanis our awin perfone be him ; and feing, ]iat our leigis and fubiectis, inliabitantis within our faid
I'cherefdome, and vjiairis hawing enteres to luit juflice, befoir our fcliereff of Perthe, ar graitlie preiudgit, throw pe want of an fcherefF to minifter juflice vnto fame : As alfo, feing pat ]>e heid Court of
our faid fcherefdome now fihortlie approcheis : And We, willing Jiat Jie famyn Court falbe haldin,
and all thingis proper to be handlit and done in fat judgement, at that tyme, falbe formalie and dewlie
profequute and followit furth, as accordis : Thairfoir, We have maid, conllituit and ordanit, and be J>e
tennour helrof, niakis, coiiftituitis and ordanis our veil-belouit Williame Murray, appeirand of Tullibardin, our Schereff of our fcherefdome of Fertile, &c. &c. Gewin vndir our iignet, and fubfcryuit
with our hand, at Dundie, fe tuentie-fewint day of September, and of our regnne Jie threttie-four
3eir, 1600. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Lenox. Huntlie. Mar. Comptroiller.

Secretar. Jo. Frestoun. Mr Almuser.'

The Schereff foirfaid, hes nominat and creat Mr Johne Moncreiff of Eiller Moncreiff fchereff-deput

of fe faid fcherefdora of Perth," Alexander Campbell and Johne Murray, officearis ; quha being prefent, hes gewin thair aithes for dew and lawchfuU admiuiftratioun of thair offices, ay and quhill thai

be dilchairgit.

No. X.
Extracts from the Records of the City of Edinburgh.

Sexto Augufii, I"'.VJ°.— The quhtlk day, Alexander Lord Fyvie, Frefident, Froveifl of this
bur', Williame Maull, Richerd Doby, Thomas Fifcher and Thomas Geddes, bail5ei8 ; Dauid Williarafone, deyne of gild ; Johne Jakfone, thefauier ; Henrie Nelbit, Roger M^Nacht, Johnne MorieIbun, Williame Hammiltoun, Robert Hereis, Williame Speir, Archibald Adiefoun, Dauid Hammiltoun faidler, Robert Cokkie goldfmyth, Fatrik Sandilandis deacone of the tail3eouris, Robert Bannatyne deacone of the ftynneris, Dauid Heriot deacone of the goldfmythis, and Andro Scott deacone
of the chirurganes. My Lord Frouefl exhibit and caufet be red before thame, and in prefens of Mr

Robert Bruce, Mr James Balfour, and Minifteris of this bur', ane Lettre Mifr

fine direct from Falkland to his lordfciiip, be Dauid Moyfes writt«r, declayriug, at lentli, the forme

and maner the tiefTonabill Confpiracie intendet be vmq''' Erie of Gowrie and Mr Alexander

his brother, for mvrthoring of his Maieftie in the laid lordis lious, yillerday, at afternone, the fyft of
this monetb; and how his Maieflie, be theProuidence of God, efcaippet the famyn. And als, produce!
ane vtlier Lettre, prefentet be Sir Fatrik Mnray, direct be his M. to my Lord Cliancellare, anent the
lam mater ; and bering ane command to the Miniftrie, to conveyne thair flokis, and pray to God for
his Maiefleis delyuerie ; and als, that the Caflell fuld fchwitt thair haill ordinance ; and the haill bellls
of this bur' fuld regne, for joy of his Maielfeis prefervatioun. Quiulk being red and publill to the
laid Minifteris, beand perfonallie prefent, thay tuik thame to thair advyfement ; and the laid Proueft,
Baillies and Counfell, for thair pairtis, thanket God for his Maiefleis preferuatioun ; and ordanet tliat
the haill bellis of this bur' fuld be rung, and bayne-fyris fet furth. And appoyntes Thomas Fyfchear
and Thomas Geddes to pas to the Secreitt Counfall, and dcclair to thame the tounis niynd ; and to
inquyre qulien the faid bellis fall ryng, and quhow lang.

(Aug. 6.) — The faid Proueft, Baillies and Counfall, beand convenit, at afternone, fyndis expedient,

1 The Master Almoner. ! The preceding entry is dated Aug. 2, Mr Johne Moncreiff being Sheriff-depute.

His reappointmeut is of course dated Sept. 30, l(iW.

34.JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 245

and ordatiis, that Thomas Fyfchear and Andrew Scott be direct to Falkland, to his Maieftie, with
thair Lettre MilFiue, to congratulat hia Maiefteis delyuerie, requyre his Maiefteis owercuming, and to
offer the tounis feruice.

(Aug. 8.) — The Baillies, deyne of gild, thefaurer, and maift pairt of the Counfall, beand convenit,
vnderftanding that his Maieftie is to cum ower the watter on Monunday nixt.' Thairfore, fyndis expedient, that the haill Counfall meitt his Maieftie tiie faid day, in thair heft armour ; and ordanis at
the nichtbouris be wayrnet to that effect, ilk perfoun vnder the payne of xx li.

(Aug. 15.) — The Baillies, thefaurer and maift pairt of the Counfall beand convenit, ordanis Johne
Jakfoun thefaurer, to pay to Thomas Fyfchear baillie, the fowme of twenty-ane pundis xj f. for the
expenflis deburfet be him and Andro Scott to Falkland to his M. be directioun of the Counfall, and
for thair expenffis maid at his Maiefteis landing at Leyth.

(Oct. 3.) — Item, to pay to the lokman,'-' xlvj f. viii d. deburiit be him for tranfporting of the buittis
fra Falkland to this bur'.'

(Nov. 28.) — Ordanes Patrick Eleifs thefaurer to pay to the pephereris and tua extraordiner drummeris nyne merk, and to the townes twa fwafcheris, fax li. fyve f. for thair feruice at this laft Parliament; quhilk falbe allowit to him in his comptis.

No. XL
EjtTRACTS from Robert Birrel's ' Diarey.'*

The 5 day of Augufte, his M. the King, being invittit be the Earle of Gowrie to bankit with him,
in the faid Earle his hous at St Johneftoune ; the faid Earle and his brother bearinir, or haueing malice and deidlie hatred in thair hairtis, aganis the King, thair naturall Prince ; thai liaid devyfit a way
to haue tane his lyiff : Dot the Lord preventit ther intentioune. The raaner of the Confpiracie wes— »
Quhen they fund occatioune that his M. haill Nobillis and courteouris wer gone furthe, the twa brether defyrit his M. to goe and fie thair cabinet. His M., ablift foull I thinking of no ewill, went with
thame, quhair they enterit in grips with him, with dageris, to haue flaine him. The King of Kingis,
the great God, gaue him ftrenthe, fua that he cuift the M' of Gowrie wnder his feit ; and befoir the
Lord his brotlier come to his M. he cryit ouir ane window, ' Treafone ! Treafone !' In the mane tyme,
the foiifaid twa brether had ane mane, ftanding behind the tapeftrie, in armes, with ane twa-handit
fword in his hand ; quha wes ordeiiiit, giue thair fould come any helpe, he fould come furthe and
keipe the doir till the Murder fould be done. Bot it pleafit God that he wes maid powerles, and could
not fteir out of the place quhair he ftuid. In the meine tyme, that hes M. and the twa brether are at
the wriflelling, Thomas Erlkein and Johne Ramfay, hes Ma. Page of honour for the tyme, come rinning vpe to the cabinet, quhair thair prefentlie wes hand payment. At the lelft, the twa brether, Confpyreris of his M. baithe wer ftikit ; and the Lord preferuit the holy, innocent Prince.

(Aug. 6.) — The newis come to Edinburgh, the 6 day of Auguft, that his M. had efcappit lie ane
danger ; quhairat, thair wes fie joy, that the cannonis fchott, the bellis range, the trumpettis foundit,
the diTimes ftrak. The toune raife in armes, witli fchutting of mufkettls, carting of fyir-workis and
baill-fyirs fet furthe, in fic maner, the lyik wes nevir fene in Scotland, ther wes fic daunceiug and miri--
nes all the nicht.

{Eodem die.) — The fame 6 day, in lyik maner, the Earle of Montrois being chanfeller, the Mafter'

• ' The morne' deleted, and these words interlined. * The puldic executioner. Down to a pretty recent date,

this officer had a right to his hc/t, or dishful of meal, out of every sack exposed for sale in the market of Edinbiu-gh.r
This odious tax was afterwards commuted. -^ This functionary is again sent for, with the buittis, on Apr. 16,

1602, by warrant from his Majesty. They are ordered to be sent at the town's expenses ; and accordingly the Treasurer is desired to defray the Lockman's charges, until his return with his infernal instrument. Tin; i>unis]iment of
' the buittis,' therefore, can scarcely be supposed to have been very frequent, when the pair belonging to the City of
Edinburgh was the only pair to be had. Other entries, in the Town Council Records, prove this fact clearly.'
* From Original MS. Adv. Lib. Edinburgh,

246 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6OO.

of Elphingftonne tliefiiuipr, Sir Dauid Moriay comptrower, Sir James Elpliiftoune fecretar, SirJolind
Preftoune collectoiir, witti fundiie wtlieris Nobellis, went to tlie Croce of Edinburgh ; and tliair, liard
Mr Dauid Lindefay niak ane orifone, and the haill peiple fett doune on thair kueis, gifing thankis to
God for the Kingis deliuerance out of fie ane grait danger.

(Aug. 11.) Tlie II day of Auguft, being Monday, the King came owir the watter. The toune,

with the haill lubiubis, met him vpone the Saudis of Leithe, in armes, with grait ioy and fchutting of
mufcattis and iliaking of pickis. He went to the Kirk of Leitlie, to Mr Dauid Lyndefayis orifone.
Thairefter, the toune of Edinburgh haueing commit vpe to Edinburgh, and flanding at the Hie-gaitt,
his M. pall to the Croce, the Croce being hung with tapeftrie, and went vpe thairon, with his Nobillis.
Mr Patrick Galloway, being thair, made ane Sermon vpone the 124' Pfalm. He deelairit the haill fircumflance of the Trefone propofit by the Erie of Gowrie and liis brotlier : Quhilk, the King tellefeit
be hes awine mouth, fitting vpone the Croce all tlie tyme of the Sermone.

(Aug. 12.) — The nixt day following, at 6 houris at evine, the ffywe Minifteris of Edinburgh banifcliit, be oppine Proclamatioune and found of trumpet, at the Croce ; for not affirment the Kingis
wordis, quhilk he ratifiet at the Croce : Thair names, Mr Robert Bruce, Mr James Balfour, Mr Williame Watfone, Mr Walter Mackankwell, Mr Jolme Hall ; and chairget tliame, that thai com not within tene myllis to his M. nor williin ten myllis to Edinburgh ; and chairging ihame not to teiche and
preiche, wnder the pane of daithe.

(Aug. 13 ) — The 13 day, ane Proclamatioun, difchairging the Seffioune of tlie Kirk to fitt with the
Elders and deakinis, mider the pane of horneing and denunceing tliamc hes M. rebellis.

(^Eodem die.) — The 13 day, aue wther Proclamatioune, chairging the haill name of lluthen not to
come neir the King, within tene myllis, wnder the pane of Treaffone.

(Aug. 22.) — The 22 of Auguft, tliair wes execut in Pertlie 3 of my Lord Gowreis feruantis, viz.
Mr Thomas Cranftoune, George Craigingelt and ane callit Barroune.

(Aug. 28.) — The 28 of Auguft, the haill freindis, tutouris and cuiatouris, and bairnis, pretending any

riclit to the Earldonie of Gowrie, fummoned to compeir to the Parlement, the firft day of Noueniber.

(Sep. 10, 11.) — The 10 and 11 dayis of September, the Minifter(is) accufit before the King and

Counfcll, in Stirling ; at quhilk tyme, tliai got leivve to come liame, hot not to preache within the

tonne.

Mr Robert Bruice comniandit to remane in Earth (Airth.) Thaireftir, the faid Mr Robert Bniice
commandit aft' the eountrie, yitt he remanit the fpace of 4 dayis ; and theiie he wes chairgit, that he
come natlier in Scotland, Ingland nor Ireland.

(Sep. 30.) — The laft of September, the King commandit tliat the fyft diiy of Auguft fould be keipit
as aue foleme day, with preiching and pryer, and tliankilgiveing, for hes prefervatioune from the TreaIbne of Gowrie, and his brother and his compleflis.

(Oct. 9.) — The nynt of October, ane Proclamatioune, chairging all tliame of the name of Ruthane to
pas out of the cuntrie ; in fpeciall, Alexander, father brother to the faid Earle, and the laid Earle his
twa brether.

(Nov. 3.) — Tlie 3 of November, Mr Robert Bruice tuik fea and maid faill at 10 houris at evine,
efter he had gotten fundrie chairges to pas out of the cuntrie, wilder tlie pane of Treaftbne.

(Nov. 15.) — The 15 of November, being the ryding-day of Parliament, the Earle Gowrie and his
brether, and his fathers brother, with twa other and his muncreis^ of their dependers all forfaulted,

(^Eudem die.) — Tlie fame day. Sir Thomas Eriken maid Lord of Direltoune, Johue Ramfay and Hew
Hares knychtit, and Sir Thomas Erfkenis man made gentleman.

(Nov. 19.) — The 19 of November, the Earle of Gowrie and his brother baulit^ to the gibbit and

' This seems unintelligible. The other MS., in Advocates' Library, reads ' mantles,' which by no means clears
the matter. The scroll from which the JIS. was copied, probably read ' hcv nmncrvif,' (Hew Sloncriefj) which had
been written so indistinctly as to puzzle the transcriber. 2 Ilauled, dragged in a hurdle.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 247

liangit and quarterit : And thairefter, tliair twa headis Cut vpoun the liaid of the prifone-hous ; tliair
to lland quliill the wind blaw tliame away.

(Dec. 19.) — The 19 of December, thair was banifchit of the Miniftrie Mr Williame Vatfone, Mr
James Balfour, Mr Valter Balcanquell.

(Aug. 5, 1601.) — The 5 day of Augufl, keipit holy day, with pretching baith befoir none and efter
noon in all the Kirks of Ed'. Bail-fyiris fet out : Graitt merthe and joyfulnes, for hes M. prefervatioune frome fic ane danger, as the Lord preferue him fra the lyik.

(Nov. 18.) — Tiie 18 day, ane Proclaraatioune maid, that all tliame of the name of Ruthane fould
change thair names ; and that thai come not neir the King be 10 mylles, wnder the pane of Treffone.

No. XII.
Extracts from Fleming's Chronicle. — MS. Advocates' Library.

(May 20.) — The Erll of Gowi'ie come to Perth, efter fewin 3eiri8 peregrinatioun in wther cuntreis.

(Jun. 28.) — The executioun of Dauid Drummond, for the flauchter of George Ramfayis man ; the
firfl Juflice Court that ewer Johne Erll of Gowrie held, efter his returne.

(Aug. 5.) — The Slaucliter of Johne Erll of Gowrie, and Mr Alexander his brother, in the Erllis awin
ludgeing in Perth, be Johne Ramfay and Doctour Heres, his Maiefteis feniandis. Praifit be God !
the King wes faiff fra thair intendit Treafone aganes his facred perfone. The toun knew nothing till
the commoun bell rang.

( ) — The Toun of Dundie being aduerteifit, come all wp in armes to halve fpoil5eit theburch of
Perth ; hot praifit be God, the King knew the toun of Perthis part to be frie.

( )— Mr Thomas Cranftoun, George Craigingelt and Johne Barroun, feruantis to the Erll of Gowrie, wer haiigit at the croce of Perth, for art and pairt of the Confpiracie.

(Sep. 29.)— Thair wes bonefjTes fett furth in Perth, and all pairtis of the cuntrie, for his Maiefteis
deliuerie from that Treafone ; and preiching appointit ewerie Tuifday in euerie burcb.

(Oct. 30.) — The coirpis of the Erll of Gowrie and his brother wer tranfportit to Ed', to the Parliament, to be hauldin the firft of November ; and wer foirfaltit, the xj of November.

( )_Jolme Ramfay wes knychtit of Weft Barnes, and Hew Heres of Cowfland — Sir Thomas
Erflcyne maid Lord Dirltoun.

( ) — Andro Henderfone. fett to libertie, and receivit his office of Chalmerlanrie.

(15 Aprilis, 1601.) — The Kingis Maieftie come to Perth, and wes maid burges at the raercat croce.
Thair wes audit punftlieonis of wyne fett thair, and all druckin out. He reflauit the banquet fra the
toun, and fubfcriuit the Gilde-buik, with his awin hand, ' Jacobus Rex, parcere fubiectis et debellare fuperbos.'

No. XIII.

Memorials of Discourses, Sermons, and Orations, delivered immediately

after the Occurrence of Gowrie's Conspiracy.

[A great variety of Orations, &c. delivered on the occasion of tlie Conspiracy, have been printed, both in Scotland and in England, on the recurrence
of the anniversary. It has been thought of considerable importance, towards
elucidating this subject, to print such of those memorandums of Original and

248

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

iinpublislied Discourses, as have been preserved by the indefatigable Calderwood
and Wodrow, in their MS. Collections. They undoubtedly contain the very expressions made use of by various of the orators, who then addressed the people,
so recently after the occurrence took place. The intrinsic curiosity and value
of these specimens of popular oratory, cannot fail to be appreciated, independently of their connexion with the immediate object of their introduction in the
present Collection.]

(1.) Discourse on Psalim CXXIV. By Mr Patrick Galloavay, one of
the Minijlers of the King's Houfehold.

[This Discourse was delivered at the Cross of Edinburgh, in presence of King James, on Monday
11th August, 1600. On that day, his Majesty crossed the Firth, and landed at Leith ; when, to use
the words of a contemporary writer, ' The citizens of Edinburgh were attending upon him in their
aiTues. Mr David Lindfay, minifter at Leith, takes him to the kirk, exhorteth him after thankfgiving
to performo his vow, made before times, of performance of judice; at which words he fmyled, and
talked with thefe that were about him, after his unreverent manner of behaviour at fermons. Thereafter, he went up to Edinburgh, and fat upon the merkat-croce, cloathed with tapeflry, accompanyed
with feme of the Nobility, where Mr Patrick Galloway made a fermon to the people conveened about
the crofs and the King, in harangue, both tending to perfuade the people that Gowrie and his brother
had verily confpircd the Kings death, and were flain in the execution of the interprize.' — CahlerwoocCs
Hijtonj, MS. Adv. Library, Vol. V. p. 393. — Tliis and the other Discourse by Galloway have been
often referred to, by writers on the subject of the Gowrie Conspiracy. It is probable that the first of
them contains all that was delivered at the time ; and the Sermon, to which the other ' harangue' served as the Application, does not seem to have been preserved. — See Bannatyne Club Miscellani/,
Vol. I. p. 141.]

David, the King, conipofit this pfalme, efter that he had bein freed frathe grit danger of his deedlie
enemies. In it, he dois thrie thingis efpeciallie, — [_he] fettis doune his danger, his delyuerie fra the
danger, and his thanckfulnefs to God for his delyuerie ; and in iick fort, that alraefl all the thrie is
incluidit in euerie verfe. His danger was this, that he had fallin into the handis of men, and men
onlie, naturall men, that had not ane fpunk of grace, or of that fpreit ; and the thing that agregia' his
danger, is the properties of thir men, crueltie and craft ; quliilk becumes rather bruit beillis then men.
Their crueltie is fett doune be tua comparifounes, ane taine fra beillis, ane other taine fra the watteris;-
fluidis, proud and fuallein, that with thair force caries with them euerie thing that is objected to thair
force. Thair craft is fett doune, be ane fimilitude, tane fra the fouUer, quha be his craft ourcouoris the
poore fouU with his nett and catchis it. This is the danger Dauid was in I Or I gang forduard, I obferue ane leflbune, and that for your Majerties vfe. Sir! I tie this is not the firft tyme that kingis,
good kingis, euen kingis quhome the Lord lies cholin according to his auin hert, hes fallin be Godis
permilfioune, vnto the handis of men, men cruell and craftie, and hes bein delyuert alfo fra thame.
But quhairto ? Not to the end, they fuld leif according to the faffoune of the warld, hot that tliey fuld
be new men, and fcliau ther gratitude to God, as Dauid did ; heirof, quliilk we fall fpeick heirefter.
As to his delyuerie, it wes not fra man hot fra God, and therfor he opinlie proclames, that excep the
Lord liad bein with vs, men had fuallouit him vp, according to the falToune of beiftis ; and therfor, he

1 .Aggravates. * In the manuscript the letter v is generally substituted for w ; thus, ' fatteris,' for ' watteris,'

Sc ' lith,' for ' iiith," &c. ; a peculiarity, which it is not thought necessary should be here adopted.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 249

tackis him to God, quliilk is liis gratitude, and afcryves his delyueiie halie to him, quhil he fayis, ' our
help is in tlie name of tiie Lord.'

This, fchortlie, concerning the danger that Dauid was in ; liis delyuerie, and his thanckfulnes for
his delyuerie. The lyck caus we haue in hand, prefentlie. Our King, our Dauid, our Anointed, has
bein in danger deedlie, and is delyuerit, praifed be God I For the quhilk, baith he, and ye, and we, hes
occafioune to be grate and thanckfull to the Majeftie of God, the delyuerer. As to his danger, it is
lyck Dauidis, he fell in the handis of men, and men onlie : For, as to that man Gaurie, let nane
thinck, that be this tratourous fact of his, our Religioune hes reffauit onie blot ; ffor ane of our religioune was he not, bot a deip diffimulat hipocreit I Ane profound Atheill I Ane incarnall deuill, in
the cot of ane Angel ! As is niaift euident, bayth be this tratourous fact, quhilk he had attempit ; and
alfo, be findrie other things, quhilk we have receauit be his familiaris, and the raaift deir and neir of
his freindis ; as the bookes quhilk he ufet, quhilk preiffes him, plainlie, to have bein ane ftudier of
magick, and a conjurer of deuillis, and to haue had fua monie at his command. His nianer of lining
out of the countrie, in lianting with papiftis, yea tlie Pape himfelf ; with quhom he had not conferance
onlie, bot farder, hes maid couenand and bandis with him : As appeiris verie weill ; for fen his hame
comming, he has treuellit niaift eirneftlie with the King, and his Majeftie hes receaued fra him the
liardeft aflalt, that euer he did, fra him ; I fay, to reuolt fra Religioune ; at leift, in inuard finceritie,
to interteine purpofe with the Pape, and he himfelf promeifit to furneis intelligence ! — Wes fick ane
man of the religioune? Or can onie man fay that our religioune is ftained, be the doingis of fick ane
man ? Na not ! He wes nothing but ane man ; and our Dauidis danger wes, that he had failin in the
handis of men. Nou, that ye may knau the danger the better, I fall receite the hiftorie to you; eueu
as it wes befor my God, quha ane day falbe my Judge, as he fal heir me record, and befor ray Prince
and Soweraine, and befor yow all, quha ane day fall ftaud vp and beir witnefs agans me, in cais, ip
ony point, I lie.

On Twyfday laft was, Alexander Ruthven cam to Facland to his Majeftie, and fand liira at his
paftyme, and defyrit him to ga to St Jonftoune ; and fua, he leidis him fra Facland to Perth, as ane
maift innocent lamb, fra his palice to the flauchter-hous. Tbair he gettis his denner, ane cauld denner, yea, ane veri cauld denner I as they kend quha was thair. Efter denner, Alexander Ruthven
leidis his Majeftie up ane tarnpeyk, and ihrouch ane trans, the dore quhairof, fa fone as they had enterit in, chekit to with ane lok ; then throw ane galery, quhais dore alfo cheket to ; throw ane chalmer,
and the dore thairof cheket to alfo ; and, laft of all, bringis him to ane rounde, fkairs fax feit breid,
and fax feit weyd, and the dore thairof he lokkit alfo ; in the quhilk, their was ftanding ane armit
man, with ane drawin dagger in his hand, to have done this filthie turne, the niaift unnaturallie, and
contraiie that dutie quhilk we aw to Princes. Then Alexander coweris his lieid, and fays, ' I am fair
thy hairt accufis the now ! Thow was the deid of my father ; and heir is ane dager to be awengit upon
the for that deid I' Now, judg ye, guid people, quiiat danger your Dauid was in I quhen, as ane innocent lamb, he wes clofit wp betuix twa hungerie lyounis, thrifting for his blud ; and four lokks betuix
him and his freindis, and his fervandis ; fua that they micht neither heir nor harkin him. This was
his danger I But quhat fort of delyverie gat he? It was holy miraculous, altogitlier to be afcrywit to
God, and no part to man ! And amang mony that occurritt, 1 fall poynt out unto you fyue or fax circumftances, quhilk ye will all call and accknawleg to be miraculous ! And firft, his Majeftie, ftanding
betuix twa armit men, without all kynd of armour, hawing natliing on but his hunting-home about his
neck; quhen he, at his entry, fuld have bein aftonifchit at the ficht of ane armit man to tak his lyf,
yeit, on the contrair part, this man was fa aftonifchit at his ficht, that he micht netiier moue fute nor
hand : Was not this miraculous ? But yeit, farder, quhen Alexander had tane him be thegorget, and
had haldin the dager to his breift, not twa vnce {inch) fra it, fua that their was Ikers twa vnce betwix his
deid and his lyf ; yeit, ewin then, be his gracious, chriftiane, and maift lowing wordis, he ouercarae,

VOL. II. ^ I

250

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

the traitour. Tlie wordis wes tliis : ' Mafter ! confider that ye ar ane Chriftiane ; and farder, that
hitherto ye haue bein traiiit wp in the principallis and gjoundis of Chriftianitie ! And then confidder,
Mafter, how \e wes brocht up in the fthuill, quhilk hes fend fo mony noble and haly youth, the
Coledge of Edinburgh, vnder Mr Robert Rollok, that lialy man, and maift wortl)y of all giul memory,
quha wald never have teichit yow to put Iiand in your Prince ! And laft of all, Mafter, fuppois ye
talk my lyf, nether ye nor your brother will be King efter me ; ye (yea), the lubjecta of Scotland will
ruit yow out, and all your name !' Thir wordis fua movit the hart of the traitour, that he beguith to
enter in conditionis with the King, and miid him fueir (quhilk he alfo did) that all theis thingis fould
l)e for^^eit ; and that efter, he fuld ever be faworable to him and his brother: And fua, he gaid forth
to liis brother, fra quliom lie rcfafit commidioune to difpach him haftely. He then coming wp agane,
brino-s ane pair of lilk gartanis in his hand, and efter he had lokkit the door, fayis, ' Tratour, thow
maun die ! And thaiifor lay thy handis togither, that I may bind the :' To the intent, na doubt, that
Le bein"- bund, thei micht haue ftranglit him, and caftin him in a coif, or pit, quhilk thei had prepairit
for that vfe ; that na blud being found, his freindis micht mifs him without fufpicioune, and not witt
quhair to feik him. Now heir is the thrid miracle ! The King anfueris the traitour, ' I was borne ane
frie Prince I I have lifit lietherto ane frie Prince ! I fal never die bund 1' With this, every ane of
them greips to vtheris gorgetis, quhill in warfling the King ouercoms, and getis him under him. Now
is not this miraculous? Will ony confider it? The Mafter of Gourie, ane able young man, in comperifoune with the King, I am affurit had ftrenth doubill, yea and threfald greiter nor the King, and yeit
is ouercome and callin vnder. Quhill thei ar thus wording, up comes John Ramfay, be the black turnpyk, and at the Kings command, gives the ^lafter ane deid llraik. Now yeit ane miracle I My Lord
being in the clofe, quhen he hard that the Mafter was flayne, fa he had bewichit the hartis of thir
people of Paith, be the counterfeit vertews he had begun to kyth amang them, that gif he had cryit,
' My brother is raurtlierit I' the fame people had faikit that lame haill hous : Bot yeit, fa the Lord
directis be his Providence, that he corns vp the fleir, immediatlie, with aucht with him : And mark,
how that fame word quhilk thei had prepairit to be ane word for the keiping clos of thair knavrie,
God vfit as ane mein for the prefervatioune of the Prince : For thei had appointit this for their wachword, ' The King is gane to the Vnce!'' Quhilk word his fervandis heiring, ran about to meit his
Majeftie in the Vnce ; and going by the window, quhair the King and the Mafter was wording, hard
the Kings Ikreichs and cryis; quhilk hes tane fic impredioune in their hairt, that, fa long as they leif,
will never gang out of them, and is heir fitting to beir witnels to it. The cry was, ' Treafoune ! Fy I
Help, Yearle of INIarr I I am murderit I' The Kingis fervandis heiring his cryis, incontinent cums vp
this black turnpyk : Now yeit ane miracle ! Into the chamber with the King is only four ; twa ladis
and twa men, and ane of the men mutilate:- !Mv Lord, ane man Weill exerceifit in his arms, corns
rp, and audit with him ; and at the firrt, cals vp all thir four in ane nuik;^ and never ftayis, quhill
Jone Ramfay chancit to cry, ' Fy upon the, cruel Tratour I Hes thow not done evil anuch ells ? Thou
hes goten the Kingis lyf ells, and wald thou have ouris to ?' At quhilk fpeiche, he drew ane lytle hak ;
and in bak-going, he gat the ftraik quhairof he deid.

This is the vary [trewth] of the fact, quhilk I haue refauit, (not be the Kingis Majeftie,) bot be
him quha fuld have bein the doar of the turae. He is livand yeit ; he is not flaine ; ane man weil
anuch knavne to this toune ; Andro Henderfoune, chamberlane to my Lord of Gourie. This day I
■refavit ane letter fra him, wrytin be his awin hand, fublcryvit be his awin hand : Ony man that wald
fie it, come to me, and fie gif thei can knaw his hand-wryt, for their fatisfactioune. The tennour of
the letter is this : ' It is of treuth, that on Twyfday laft, I was eommandlt be my Lord of Gourie, to
ryd with his brother to Falkland ; fra the quhilk he fend me bak againe to tell my Lord, that the King

1 The South Inch of Perth. * ' Dr Herries.' Sir Hugh Henies of Coiisland had a club foot, whicli woiJd

of course impede Lis motions in fencing. ' At the first onset or assault, forces or drives them up into a comer.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 351

was comming, and to bid prepaii- for liis comming. My Lord commandit me to put on my fecreit,
and my plait (leif, and to wayt on the Mailer, and do quliatever he bad me. At the Malleris lichting-, I went to him, and tauhl him of my Lordis command, quhilk I had refawit. He taks me with
him up a turnepyk, tlirow ane trans, ane galrie, and chamber, and loks me into the round that gois afF
the chamber: at quhilk doing, I beguith to grow fleit, and lufpect fum evil agans the King; and then
1 tuik me to my kneis to pray, that it wald pleis his Majellie never to fuffer me to be imployit to fick
ane turne : And quhill I was fetting on my kneis, Mr Alexauder come into the round [with the King
in his hand.' The reft of his narration differs almoft, nothing from this'] quhilk ye have hard, according to the Kingis informatioune : This only, he fchew the maner how he chappit-' to liave bein thus:
Quhen the King and the Mafler war woi-fling, he opnit the dore and gaid doune be the black turnepyke, — be the quhilk the Kingis fervands came up, and faifit him.

This is the verity, quhilk will fatisfy ony gude fubject ; for as for thir romuris that gois, that the
King was ane doar, and not ane fufVerer; ane perfewar, and not perfewit, it is not true, nor lickly :—
For think ye, hawin lick ane turne in his hand, he wald go to thair towne, in quhilk he was fa meikle
efteimit, accompanyit with lie few folks, only ten perfouns; and fie men, quha as I am alTurit wald
have bein content to have bled their hail blud with my Lord of Gourie, and it had not bein in ane
actioune agans the King I The Duik his good brother, the Yearle of Mar his good father, quha, at
that unhappie and curfit tyme he was baptizit, gave him the name. As for fik as will not be fatisfeit
with this, let them perifth in their incredulitie: Their is evidencis anuch of the verity. Now, quhat
am 1 that fpeikis thir thingis ? Ane, (as I will proteft befor God,) quha lowit the Yearle of Gourie
better nor ony flefch in the eirth, acceptis his Majeftie.^

(2.) ExTUACT^'owz a Sermon on /he Cojiverfton qfZaccheiis, LuJee, cap. xix.
By Mr William Cowper, one of the Minijters of Perth.

[This Difcourfe was preached in St Giles's Church, Edinburgh, Sunday, August S-l, 1600. Cowper had been sent for, to preach in one of the vacant churches of Edinburgh, after the Ministers there
had been banished from the town; as stated in Mr Bruce's Account of his Troubles at that time.
The Application only of Cowper's Sermon has been copied, as being all that relates to this transaction.
The MS. volume containing it, along with otiier of his Sermons, supposed to be in his handwriting,
at one time belonged to the late Mr Scott, one of the Ministers of Perth, who has made particular
mention of it in his History of John Earl of Gowrie. It had formerly been the property of George
Adamson, and subsequently belonged to Mr James Cant, the well-known Editor and annotator of an
old Historical Poem by Mr Henry Adamson, from whom Mr Scott obtained the RLS.]

Quhat fall we doe then, bot haue our recourfe to that grace of Jefus Chrilt, that onlie is able to
change vs? And efpeciallie, let vs feek it at this tyme, that now we abyde not in the hardnes of our
heart, quhen the Lord, both by his word and works, is fa faft calling for our repentance ; and I think,
amongft all the works of God that feruis to humble us, this lall miferable euent is one of the firft.

I know there is mony of yow bot thinks of it as I did my felf quhen I heard fiilt of it : I thought,
indeid, lie had fufferit as ane innocent ; and quhat greif then it wrought in me, my owne confcience
beareth nie recoid I The lofe of an earthlie cretur went neuor fo neir my heart. And the firll thing

1 In tlie MS., wliicli is in a contemporary band, with a few corrections, apparently by tbe autlior, some words are
illegible ; but are supplied from Calderwood who has inserted both of tlie Discourses by Galbuvay in his History. — MS.
Hist. vol. V. 2 Escaped. ' Calderwood, mentions, that after tbe foregoing ' harrangue' was endeil, they sung

the 12 Uh psalme; and makes the following remark : ' Mr Patrick Galloway his harangue did not persnade many,
partly, because be was a Haltering prea<her, and partly, because others were named before Henderson to be the armed
man in the studie ; to wit, Oliphant, Leslie, and Younger, who was slaine.' Henderson is described as ' a man of
low stature, rudie countenance, and brown bearded,' and the King himself heing asked 'by the Goodman of Pitmillic,
" whether Henderson was the man ?" Answered, That " it was not he, he [tlie King] knew that sm lick well enough." '

252 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

that ever cliiled my affcctionn toward liini, wes ane appeiiance that he had gone without the conipas of
podlines ;' quhilk maid me then to fay thir words vnto uiy people ; ' I know,' laid I, ' it is light that
firft mon latisfie your difcontentit myndis ; and, tliairfore, the Father of Light lend light ! Bot I am
forrowfull from myne heart, that the light that is, maksagainft him quhora we loued ; and if this light
hreak out as it is begunne, we will find our lelues dilappoyntit of our hope 1' And that quhilk I fpake
than vnto thame, I fpeake prelently vnto yow : ' The light, that hitherto God lies dilcouerit in that
matter, cnclynes to the cleiring of his Majefties innocencie, and layis ane blame on the other.' And
if ve craue my reffoun, I lay, it is the teftimony of his feruant, that prcfentlie is in prifoun ;' quhilk, in
my judgment, is mekle to be regairdit : For I haue knowen him now this four or fyue yeiris bygane,
and can give liim no other witnes, bot that quhilk both toune and countrye will giue vnto him ; that
is, the teflimonie of a man that feareth God, and delt vpryghtlie with all men. And quhair as, fonie
of yow thinks that he is bot ane fuppofitius man, and that his Depofitioun is ratlier a policie then any
veritie ; that is mair incredible to me, nor any other thing of this actioun vnto yow ; and if my teflimonie can haue ony credit with yow, I will beare to yow record, that it is verifeit vnto me by honeft
men of our toune, that he wes feene come doun the flair from that chalmer quhairin the King wes,
before ony of the Kingis feruants enterit vp, except only John Ramfay, or before my Lord enterit in.
And quiiat his Depofitioun is, I will tell yow Ihortlie,^ &c. Now, [before] I leaue this, there is thrie
thingis I will touch Ihortlie : The ane is concerning the bretherin of the Miniftrie : This doing of myne
may fceme to condampne thame in a fault; bot I hope no wife man will thinck fo, quhen he conllderetli, that ane preachour may fpeake that with ane wai'rand, quhilk ane other may not. The nixt
thing concernis his Majeftie : We are to craue of God, that this wairning may work amendement in
him, and a great caire to purge the countrye of the great contempt of the Gofpell, and of the innocent
blud, quhairwith it is defyled : For I faw neuer yet thir great temporall delyuerances fra danger, quhair
they wrought not a turning of the heart vnto God, bot they were ay forrinners of ane greater ternporal judgement. And the laft conceniis yow that are his People : I exhort yow, in the name of
God, to thinke reverentlie of your Prince ; remembriug, that Salomon binds your confciences not to
fpealis ill of him, even in your fecreit chalmers.

(3.) The Applicatioun of the XXX Psalme, Prechit be Mr Patrik Galloway, 1/ie lajf ofAugiiJf, 1600, hefo'ir his Majeftie, in Glq/gow.

Now I fuld end, gif I had not to let you fie, in the Applieatioun of this Pfalme, that as Dauid and
his pppill had than jull occafioun to prais God, fa our Dauid and we liaif now juft oecafioun to prais
God : Dauid tlian in danger, our Dauid has now bene in danger ; Dauid than delyuerit in the heich
mercie of God, our Dauid now delyuerit in the heich mercie of God. Now, the Lord of Hevin, that
is prefent with us, as he has gevin us proif of the ane, fa mot he gif us the proif of the wther, ihat we
may be tliankfull for this great grace; for, concerning the danger, Dauid was neuer in gretar danger
nor our Dauid ; his delyuerance, neuer mair magnificent than the delyuerance of our Dauid ; and
tliaii'foir, we haif as jull occafioun, as euer Dauid had, to prais God. Tak tent then ; I think thair is
heir na finall number that neuer hes hard the danger quhairin the Kings Majeftie has bene in ; or gif
tliai haif hard, than haif thai hard a poyfonit wntreuth. Thairfoir, to cleir the treuth, I will Ihaw yow
the ftorie trewlie.

His Majeftie, be perfuafioun of the Mafter of Gaurie, was led fra his paftyme to Sanct Jhoneftoun,
(tak tent tliat ye may cfchew fals informatioun I) Quhen he comis thair, and enteris in my Lordis

This, Mr Scott, in .-inotlicr place, asserts to be ' the Eai'l's being infected with the wesik and criminal credulity
of those times, with regard to [iretended Projihccies and use of Euiliantments. That he was so infected seems to be
incontestable.' '•< Alluding to the evidence of Audrcw Henderson. ^ 'I'he Deposition of Henderson is not contained in the 3Ianuscript, but it had been read to the people at this place ; at least an abstract of it would be recited.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 253

ludging, efter ane cauld denner, and ane far caulder welcome, Iiis Majeftie is tane be the Iiand be tlie
Mafter of Gauiie, and led wp ane ftair, thre or four durris all lokit on bis bak, nather friend nor fernant with liim ; and thair is fitting a man, preparit to joyne with the wther, to the trefTunabill raurthering of his Majeftie ! Quheii he is fet betnixt thefe twa, the Mafter of Gaiirie, a vyjl tratour I ua
foner cumis the King in, but to teftifie that all reuerence of a Chriftian to his God, and of a fulyect
to his prince, was ftrampit vvnder fute, he puttis on his hat, drawls his dager,' and fayis, ' I fall now
be avengit on the for my fatheris flauchter.' But the Lord ftayit the dager, that he dueht not ftryk
with it. Quhen the ire of this tratour was fumthing mitigat, be the Kingis moduft language, he gois
out, leifing the wther man to keip him ; appeirandlie, to get furder relolutioun of his brother. Agane
he cumis in, as a wod lyoun, and enteris wpon his Majeftie, with his gartanis to bind him. Nobill
men, and citizens of St Jhoneftoun, hard liis Majeftie cry, ' Trciroun I I am murdreiftit I' as the voyce
of ane half deid man. Let vyle knavis fay athort the cuntrie quiiat they will, this is the treuth ! I ken
Weill thair is mony furmiies of tlie pepill caftin in withal, to breid ane eviU confait of the Kingis Majeftie, in the hairtis of the pepill. I will tell pairt of thame. This is ane : ' How can it be fik a nobill man as the Erie of Gaurie, fa weill brocht up, culd half fofterit fik a trcffoun ?' This wald appeir
to carie fumthing with it ; but, in very deid, lies na probabilitie. If the Erie had bidden ftill in Scotland, and keipit that education quhilk he gat wnder that worthie man, Mr Robert Rollok, he mycht
perchance not half attemptit fik ane trefl^un. But quhen he jeid to Padua, thair he ftudieit Nigromancie : his awin pedagog, Mr William Rin, teftifies that he had thefe characters ay upone him,
quhilk he luifit fa, that gif he had forgot to put thame in his breikis, he wald rin up and down lyk a
inad man ; and he had tliame wpon him quhen he was (lain : And as thai teftifie that faw it, he culd
not bleid fa lang as thai war wpon him. He that this wyfe caftis of all reuerence to his God, quhat
reuerence can he half to ane eirthlie king? Ane wther queftioun, I ken, wilbe muifit. Sum will fay,
' Sail we trew'' tliat he culd half devyfit, his allane, fik a treftbun ?' ' Culd he half enterpry fit fik a work
without a bak?' I dout not hot he had ane bak ! The Lord difcouer it ! And I am affurit he fall at
laft difcouer it I And, as I liaif faid befor to your Majeftie, I lay yet, and ye try it not out, ye fall yit
fum day mak us all ane forrowfull morning ; if ye rype not wp the fontaiue thairof, it is a manifeft
tempting of God 1 And I exhort your Majeftie and Counfall to do it, as thai will anfuer to God, befoir quliom thai falbe countit tratouris, one day, if thai keip up the loift chope of it, quhilk they can
try out. But to ineit the queftioun. It is na meruell, fuppois it be hid, for the Erie of Gawrie was a
mau of exceiding great fecrecie ; thair was not ane man he wald reueil it to. His awin pedagog, Mr
William Rin, faid, that the Erie, talking of trefToun againft Princes, faid, that ' gif the rycht hand
wift quhat the left hand was doeand, he was not to be compted a man :' and thairfoir, I trow iudeid,
thair was none wpon the foreknawledge of the executioun but the Erie, and his brother, and the Deuill, that led thame bayth. I ken thair wilbe a third queftion, ' Is thair nane can heir witnes to it?'
God forgiue thame that fay, ' the King is a pairtie, he can not be beleuit ;' and thow war a gnid
Chriftian, thow fould rys up and fay. I am ane pairtie, and the King, that neuer lies bene a lyar, fuld
be beleuit him felf, and not fik fufpicious furmifes fprcd abrod. But I go on : Thair was thair nobill
men, his Majeftics feruandis, and citizens of Sanct Jhoneftoun, quha faw his Majeftie carieit thair

1 Caldcrwood, who strnuiously professes disbelief of tlie whole matter, makes this observation: — ' In this harangue Mr Patrick saith, that Jlr Alexander " drew his dagger," wliiih would seem to he his own dagger, and not tlic
armed man's standing in the study, as is related in the diseouise. But it is certain tliatJIr Alexander had no dagger.
But leaving tliis speech as ambiguous, it is to be considered, That JVIr Patrick doubteth not but he liad a back to the
enterprize, and i)rayeth the Lord to discover it, exhorts the King and Counsel to try out the fountain of it : And
yet, forgetting himself, he saith immediately after, That the Erie was a man of exceeding great secrecic; and there
was no man to whom he would reveal it ; and that he believed there was none ujion the foreknowledge <if the execution, but the Erie, and his brother, and the Devil. The circiunstanccs that are most unlikely, Mr Patrick turnes all
into miracles; but here is need of a true and seen miracle indeed, to make unseen miiades to be believed.' — CuhUrU'ood's Hist, MS. Advocates' Library. " Trow, believe.

254 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

without onywapin, but Lis liunting home about his craig; fowr dunis all lokkitwpon him ; my Lofd
Duke, the Erie of Mar, baillieis and burgeffes, faw his handis in the Kingis face and throt. If they
will not beleue tharae, quiiom will thai beleif ? Fy wpon wncredulous and malicious hairtis ! I fay
mail- for the treuth : Andro Henderloun, a man to that hour approuit guid and zealous, and without
fpot all the dayis of his lyf ; this man, perforce, is put into the rowme, without ony foreknawledge ;
this man yit lireth ; eucrie man hes acces to him ; this man, as befoir he was maid be God ane inflrument to faif the King, fa now he is maid ane inflrument of the Kingis honour, to tell the treuth. I
mufl fpeir heir, becaus fum fayis, ' Quhill we fie him die on the fcatfald for it, we will neuer beleif
it r Fy on it I that his Maieftie fould execut hira that fault his lyf, for thair plefour ! I man fay, in
my confcience, that man is rather worthie of rewaird nor of punilhment ; and I trow, not a man that
feiris God, but he will confent to it. But he was put in, be the prouidence of God, to be ane inflrument of your delyuerance. Now, as ye half hard the danger, tak tent alfo how he was delyuerit. As
Dauid faid, ' Lord, thow hes exalted me, and not maid my fois to rejoys ouer me,' juftlie may your
Majeftie fay, ' I was in dcidlie danger, and thow. Lord, hes luikit on me.' Quhen I confidder his Majefties delyuerance, I man fay, thair was not ane circumftance of that actioun, but ilkane is a wonderfull
preferuatioun ! Firft, quhen the Erie of Gaurie and his brother takis that man, and puttis liim in, and
fayis to him fimplie, ' Do quhat my brother commandis the,' they thought he fuld half put to his hand
to do the turne ; but God cumis doun fra hevin, and alteris the man. Na foner cumis the King in,
but he cryis, ' Allacel allace ! wo is me I' Is not this ane great work of God ? He that fuld half
ilane his Majeftie, is maid ane inflrument of his fafetie ! And quhen the Mafler of Gawrie is bringand
doun, to flay his iSIajeftie, he withhaldis his hand. Thridlie, quhen the mailer of ane cruel tiger is
maid as it war ane dow, faying, ' I will proraeis yow your lyf, fir, gif ye will hald your twng.' Fy,
tratour ! Quhat had he to do with bis Majefties lyf ? But he is mitigat be the Kingis modeft wordis I
' Ye and I cum in mider freindlhip ; ye ar a Chrillian, brocht wp under that guid man, Mr Robert
Tlollok ; quhy wald ye put handis in your Prince ?' With this he gangis out, and iliortlie cumis in
agane, and as a tiger enteris upon his Majefi-ie. This is a mervell I He was far beyond the King in
flrenth ; and yit the leving God fa llrenthened his Majeftie, that he gat him wnder his fute. And
laft, quhen the Erie of Gawrie caufit cry, ' The King is away !' they, running out to follow his Majeftie, heir his voyce. Agane, quhen the Erie, and fevin men with him, cumis in againft fowr, lie
himfelf is flane be thefe fowr, and the reft of his cumpanie hurt and put to fiicht. Yea, had Gawrie
bidden ftill on the calfay, and faid, ' The tratouris about the King hes flane my brother,' all the men
of Sanct Jhoneftoun had nilhit in with hini. But the Lord wrocht wtherwys I And thairfor, as Dauid
laid, fa fuld your Majeftie fay, ' O Lord, I will magnifie thee, becaus thow hes exalted me.'

Now, becaus it is faid, als falflie as ' the fone (hynis not,' the King 5eid to Sanct Jhoneftoun to flay
the Erie of Gawrie, (fie is the fpreitis of malicious hairtis I) I wald now half you, indifferent pepill,
quhen the Mafter of Gawrie cumis to Falkland, and muifis him to come to Perth, I think not threttene
in his companie. Judge gif he wald have come to Sanct Jhoneftoun, quhilk was Gawries Londoun,
thair to liaif flane him ? Agane, if he wald haif brocht my Lord Duke, the Erles guid brother, and the
Erie of Man- his godfather, with him, gif he had bene niyndit to flay him ? Judge laft of this, quhen
his Majeftie is led be the Mafter of Gaurie, and feperat fra all his folkis, put in ane lytill round, haifing natbing but a hunting home about him 1 Let indifterent pepill judge heir, whether his Majeftie wald
haif bene myndit to flay the Erie of Gaurie or not?' Now, quhen I haif Ihawin yow the danger, and
Devyne delyuerance, fie quhidder our Dauid fuld not fay, ' I will magnifie the, O Lord, becaus thou
hes exalted me !' Quhair he fayis, ' Sanctis fing praifis for me !' Sie gif we have not juft occafioun to
prais God for the delyuerance of our Dauid ; for wofull had bene the eftait of Scotland, yea wofull
darknes, if the Lord had not wrocht this delyuerance I The Lord gif your ]\Iajeftie a thankfull hairt,
and to ws, your fubjectis thankfull hairtis, for your delyuerance I'

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 255

(4.) ' Ane Orisoun,' delivered before the King in Ghijgow.

[The following curious paper is taken from Calderwoodts 3ISS,, preserved in Wodrovv's Collections, Vol. xliii. No. 59, Advocates' Library. Calderwood records, in his Church History, that when
the King arrived in Glasgow, there was likewise ' an Oration naade to him, be one, in name of the
Town ; congratulating him for the delivery out of the late danger ; with a commemoration of their
fervice to him and his progenitors.' — Cahl. Church Hijt. MS. V. 420. This concludes all the Original MSS. known to the Editor, wliicli preserve notices of popular Addresses of this description, on
tlie subject of the Gowrie Conspiracy. The Editor has again to acknowledge the attention of Mr David Laing, who obligingly communicated his transcript of this paper, which agrees with another copy
made by the Editor ; and has also been collated with the original Manuscript.]

Althocht, maift gracious Soveraigne, it hes bein breiflie, in the Latine tung, declairit, quhat is
the dewtifull luif of your Hienes fubjectis towardis your Majeflie, and grit rejoicing for that happie
delyverie of your Majeflies niaill noble perfoune, fra that treffunabill and deteflabill attempt and Confpiracie aganos your Majeflie, at Saint Jhonfloun, yit, pleafe your Majeflie, let it not feame tedious, in
few wordis, for the fatisfactioun of the prefent auditour, tuiching the fume of the mater fpokin, quhilk
I tak up be this. That albeit, we haue had oftintymes ane joyful! fieht of your Hienes prefence, praying for your Majeflie prefervatioun and profpei'ous reigne ; becaus our dewtie, prefcryvit be God and
j'ewle of nature did fo requyi'e : For nane tliair is fa ignorant, mifknawing matei-is of eflait, quha may
not knaw, that in your Hienes prefervatioun ftandis his awin ; and that vpon his Majellics lyf dependis
the lyf of all. Nevertheles, feing laitlie God, of liis mercie vonderfull towardis your Hienes and ws
your Maiellies fubjectis, hes delyverit your Majeflie fra the deteflabill, cruell, and niaill barbarous
Confpiracie, attemptit be vmquhill Jhone Ruthven, Erie of Gowrie, and Mr Alexander his brother,
we half grit mater of joy and glaidnes of heart, and gritter then can be expreflit be outvart fignes. For
glorious and happie vas that day quliairin your Hienes fubjectis did fie your Majertie delyverit out of
that feirfull danger, and prefent perrel of your Hienes lyf, for thair is na man quha may not fie, quhen
your Hienes, the father of the comnioun veill vas prefervit, that the haill eftait, lyklie to decay, vas
prefervit frome ane feirfull defolatioun and wofull miferie, quhilk had enfewit vpon the haill inhabitanes of your Hienes realm, Therefoir, your Hienes fubjectis, of ane naturall and inteir luif towardis
your Majeflie, acknawledgis, vithe thankful! hartis, the prefence of Almichtie God, vatching at all
tymes ower your Maieftie ; and in fpeciull, this vonderfull benefeit of your hienes prefervatioun ; rejoicing gladly for the fame, and vifijng maift ernefllie that your grace may enjoy ane long lyf, beautifeit vithe all blifllngis of the Almichtie God. Your Maieflie beholdis liow the faces and countenance
of all menarefet vpon your hienes, quhat manifeft fignes and evident taikinis apeiris of that exceiding
glaidnes and joy, quhilk, conceavit in hart, burftis furthe in tung, vord and countenance I !3elioId !
the citie of Glefgw, quhilk honoris and reverends your Maieftie, thair lupreme lord and King, vithe
dewtifull honour and fingular obeyfance, as it var raifit out of the place, comes furthe as becumes,
maift humblie prefenting thair fervice to your hienes, rejoicing for that happie delyverance, and praying to the michtie God, that all thingis may befall imppelie and profperouflie vnto your Maieftie. It
is not vnknawin to yow, maift gracious Soveraigne, quhat afFectioun, luif and honour, the citizenis of
Glefgw hes born and done vnto your Maiefteis maift nobill progenitouris, not fpairing to fched thair
bluid and liafert all they had ; vithe quhat dewties and all kynd of guid aft'ectioun thai haue honourit
your Maieftie ; and how oft your grace hes had a proif of thair maift villing obedience in your Maiefties fervice : It fowld not feame ftrang, gif be quhat meane thai can be abill, thai fchaw plainlie,
maift evident fignes of thair guid vill and maift invart luif quhilk thai beir towardis your Maieftie.
Quhairfoir, nocht ftaying your grace vith longe fpeiche, ve mak ane end ; praying the eternall and
everlafting God to preferve your hienes, multiplie his grace, Iheane above vpon yow ; gif vnto yoir

256 CRIiVIINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Maieftie ane lono- Ivf, vithe ane liappie aiul profperoiis rei^ne ; and lad, tliat cioun of eternall felicitie,
throw the rychteous meritis of the Lord Jefus. Amen,

No. XIV.

The Triai. of George Sprot, Notary in Eyemouth, his DriNG ConfessioN upon the fcaffold, together with various Illustrative Documents,

[Although the proceedings against Sprot took place, so late as the month of August 1608,
(being eight years after the Conspiracy of John Earl of Gowrie and his brother,) and though the consequent Forfeiture of Robert Logan of Restalrig, in the year 1609, ought each to be inserted,
according to the strict chronological order laid down at the commencement of this work ; the Editor
considers it necessary, in these instances, to depart from this rule ; so as to give a connected and comprehensive view of the entire evidence which our Public Records afford, of this most extraordinary
transaction. The value and interest of these Papers, it is trusted, will be considerably enhanced by
this arrangement ; and to avoid confusion or mistakes, as to dates, &c. they shall be carefully noted on
the margins. The sources from which the Editor has procured these materials, are in every instance
mentioned ; but wherever this circumstance is not taken notice of, they must be considered as taken
from the Records of the Court of Justiciary.]

(1.) 3Ir WilUame Haiti, Jujiice-Depute.

Aug. 1608. ?^i(j:!) CrcdsoiT — Concealmcitt of (^oiJOfic's Coitspiran), $(t,

(Aug. 12, 1608.) — George Sprote, Notter (notary) in Haymouth
(Eyemouth.)

Dilaitit, accufet aud perfewit be Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of Bynnie, of certane trefTonable crymes, contenit in his Dittay follovk'ing.

George Sprote notter in Eyraouth, Ye ar indytit and accufet, fforfamekill as
vmq'" Johnne luintyme Erie of Gowrie, liaifing maill crewallie, detaillabillie and
treflbnabillie cunfpyrit, in the moneth of July or thairby, the yeir of God I^.Vj".
yeiris, to Murther our deir and moft gracious fouerane, the Kingis moft facred
Maieftie ; and haifing impairtit that devillifch j)urpois to vmq''' Robert Logane
of Reftalrig, quha allowit of the famyn, and maift willinglie and reddelie vndertuik to be pairtaker thairof ; the famyn cuming to your knawlege, at the tymes
and in maner perticulerlie eftir fpecifeit, ye maift vnnaturallie, inaliciouflie and
treftbnablie conceillit the famyn ; and was airt and pairt thairof, in maner following. In the firft, in the laid moneth of Julij, the yeir of God I^.Vj". yeiris,
eftir that ye had perfauet and knawin that dyuerfe Letteris and meflages had
paft betuix the laid lumtyme Erie and the faid Laird of Reftalrig, ye being in
the place of Falft-Caftell, ye faw and red the begynning of ane Letter writtin
with the faid vmq"' Robert Logane of Reftalrig his awin hand to the faid vmq'*
Johnue fumtyme Erie of Gowrie, of the tenuour following :

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 257

' My Lord,' Aug. 1(508.

' My niaill Imnibill deutie ami feruice hertlie remeniberit : Att the reflait of ■:;our lordfcliipis letteris, I am fo conforlit, that I can iiafer vtter my joy, nor find my felf I'ufficientlie abill to requyte
30ur lordfcliip with dew tliankis, and perfuaid 30111' lordfchip, in that matter, I fall be als fordward
for 3 our lordfchipis honour, as gif it war my awin caus ; and I tliink ])air is na leving Chriftiane tliat
wald nocht be content to revenge lliat Macheveliane maHacrene of our deir freindis, ^e,' howbeit, it
foukl be to ventour and haizaird lyfe, hindis, and all vtlier tliingis ellis my heart can bind me to tak
jKiirt in that mater, as 30W fall find bettir pi-uif Jiairof : Bot ane thing wald be done, that 3 our lordfchip fould be circumfpect and be earnefl with 3 our broj'er, that he be nocht rafche in ony fpeiclies
tuiching )ie purpois of Padua.' ■>

And ane certane fpace eftir the execiitioiin of the foirfaid TreflTone, the faid
vmq''' Robert Logane of Reftah'ig, haifing defyrit Laird Bowre to delyuer to him
the foirfaid Lettre, or ellis biu-ne it ; and Boure haifing gevin to yow all tickettis
and letteris qiihilk he than had, ather concerning Reftalrig or vtheris, to ficht *
the faniyn, becaus he could nocht reid him felf; ye abftractit the aboiie writtin
lettre, and retenit the lamyn in your awin handis, and dyuerfe tymes red it ;
contening forder in fubftance nor° is formerlie fett doun, according (to) thir"
woirdis following.
' My Lord,

' gE may eafalie vnderi^and, that fic ane purpois as 3 our lordfchip intendis, can noclit be done
lafclilie, bot with deliberatioun ; and I think, for my felf, it war maill meit to haif ]'e men 30ur lordfchip fpak of, reddie in ane boit or bark, and addrefs )>ame as thay war takand paiiynie vpune ])e fie,
in fic fair fomer time ;'' And gif 30ur lordfchip could think guid, aperto cum 30ur felf to my huufe of
Falfe-Caftell, be fie, or fend 3 our lordfchipis brofer, I fould haif ]>e place vei-rie quyet and wcill provydit, eflir 30vir lordfchipis adverteifnient ; and perfuaid jOur lordfchip, ;e fould be als fure and quyet
heir, quhill we had fettillit our plat,' as gif ';;e war in 30ur awin chamber; fior 1 trow^ and I am afiurit, we fall heir woird within few dayis, fra thame jOur lordfchip knawis of; fori haif cairto fie qnhat
fchipis cumis by. fiOur lordfchip knawis I haif keipit my Lord Bothuell quyetlie in this hous, in his
grittell extremities, fay the King and his CouniaU qiiliat thay lykit: And I hoip, gif all tliingis cum
to pas, as I truft thay fall, to haif baithe 30ur lordfchip and his lordfchip at ane guid dyner afoir I die;
et Iwcjocqje, to animat 3 our lordfchip : And dout noclit, my lord, bot all tliingis fall be wcill, and I
am refoluet, quiiairof 3 our lordfchip fiill nocht doubt of ony thing of my pairt, 3R,^ to perrell lyfe,
land, honour and guidis ; je, the haizard of iiell fall nocht efiVay me fra Jiat ; 3ea, thoclit Jie Ikr.ft'old
war alreddie ftt vp ! The foner f)e matter war done it war J)e better ; for Jie Kingis buk-hiinting will
be fcliortlie, and 1 hoij) it fall prepair fum dantie cheir for ws to dyne aganis ])e nixt 5eir. I remember Weill, my lord, and I will nevir for5et fa lang as I Icve, that mirrie f|)oirt 50ur lordfchipis br(i|ier
tauld me of ane noble man at Padua, for I think that ane parafteue"' to this purpois. My lord, think
na thing that I commit the fecrecie hrirof and credeit to this beirar ; for I dar nocht only rentour my
life, land and all vther thing I baif in his credeit, bot I durft haizard my fauU in his koiping, gif it war
poflible, in earthlie men ; fi'or I am fa perfuadit of his trcuth and fidelitie, and I trow, as 3('ur lord-

' It will roadily be observed, that a mere ohx/rrict of part only of lliese treasonable Letter.s had been consiilered, by
the public prosecutor, as necessary to be engrossed in the ' Dittay' of Sprot. Frojier transcripts of these epistles n'iU
be found in the f.dlowiiig Article, under No. XV. Restalrig's Forfeiture, Jun. 24-, IGO!), where they were produced
in evidence, and recorded in the ISooks of Parliament. ^ Yea. ' See another allusion to tliis ' purpois' in the next-tpioted letter. '' View, inspect. * Than. '^ These. " S-unmer time. » Plot,

conspiracy. ^ Yea. '" From racairaTr,! ? qui a latere slat i 11 parallel instance, a ' preparatiuc.'

VOL. II. 2 K

258 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1608. fchip may aflc him, gif it be trew he wald ryde to Hellis settis' for me? And he is nocht begylit of
my pairt to him. And fairfoir, I doat nocht hot ))is will peifuaid 5 our lordfcliip to geve him tiiiil, in
this matter, as to my felf. Bot I pray ^owre lordfchip direct him hame with all poilible haift ; and
o-eve him (Irait command, that he tak nocht ane wink fleip quhill he fie me agane, eftir he cum frome
c;our lordfchip. And, my lord, as 50m- lordfchip delyres in jour Letter to me, aper ryve and bume,'-^
or ellis fend bak agaue with fe beirar ; for fa is the fafioune, I grant.'

Quhilk Letter, writtin everie woird with the faid vmq'^ Robert Logane his
awin hand, was fubfcrjiiit be him efter his accuftomet maner, with this woird
' Reftahig.'^ AxD albeit, be the contentis of the foirfaid Lettei-, ye knew perfythe, the treuth of the faid maift treflbnable Confpiracie, and the faid vmq''
Robert Logane of Reftah-ig his foirkuawlege, allowance, and giltienes thairof ;
lyk as, ye was affiirit thairof, by his reffaiieing of djiierfe Litteris fend to Gowrie
for the faid purpois, and be findrie conferences betuix the faid vmq'^ Robert
Logane of Reftalrig and vmq''' James Bour alias callit Laird Sour, in your
pretence and heiring, concerning the faid Treffoun, alfweill in the faid moneth
of July, immediatlie preceiding the faid Treffone, as at dyuerfe vtheris tymes,
fchoirtlie thaireftir ; as lykwayis, be the reveilling thairof to yow be the faid
vmq'" James Bour alias callit Laird Bour, quha was vpone the knawlege and
devyfe of the faid Treffone, and was imployit as ordiner meffinger be the faid
vmq'" Robert Logane of Reflalrig to the faid vniq'^ Erie of Gowrie, in the traffique of the faid damnable Treffone ; quhairby, your knawlege, conceilling and
gil tines of the faid treffoun was vndenyable : 5IT, for forder manifeftatioun
thairof, about gule,* in the yeir of God I^.'^'j'^. and tua j-eiris, the faid vmq'^ Robert Logane of Reftalrig him felf fchew to yow, that Bour had tauld him, that
he had bene fumquhat rafche to let yow fie ane Letter quhilk come fra the Erie
of Gowrie to the faid Laird of Reftalrig, quha than vrget yow to tell, quhat ye
vnderftuid be that Letter ! To quhome ye anfuerit, that ye ' tuik the meaneing of
it to be, that he had bene on the purpois and counfall of Gowreis Confpiracie :'
And he anfuering to yow, that ' quhat evir he had done, ye war his awin ; bot
gif ye wald fueir to him, that j^e fould nevir reveill any thing to ony perfone,
he fould be the beft ficht that evir ye faw :' And in taikin of forder recompance,
he than gaif to yow tuelf pundis of filuer. Neuertheles, albeit ye perfytlie
knew the haill practeis and progres of the faid Treffone, frome the begynning
thairof, as faid is, alfweill be yoiu* ficht of the faidis Letteris, as alfo be your conferences with the faidis vmq'^ James Bour and vmq'" Robert Logane of Reftalrig ;
yit, dm-ing all the dayis of the Ij'ftj'mes of the faidis vmq'" Robei-t Logane of
Reftalrig, and of the faid vmq'^ James Bour, quha bayth levit quhill ° the yeir of

' The gates of Hell. * Tear and bum. ^ It was at this time usual for tlie lesser Barons

to take the name of their lands as their common title ; and they subscribed their Letters, &c. in the
same manner, as is now customary with the Nobility. * Christmas. ^ Till.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 259

God I".Vj'. and fax yeiris, or tliairby, be the fpace of fax yeiris efter that ye Aug. 1608.
knew thair giltines of the trefTonabill Confpiracie foirfaid, ye maift treflbnabillie
conceillit the famyn : And fua, ye was and is airt and jDairt of the faid maift
haynous, deteftabill and treffbnable Confpiracie : And thairfoir, ye aucht and
fould incur, vnderly and fuffer the fentence and pane of Heich Treafone. To
the taikin' that ye haif nocht only be your Depofitiones, folempnelie maid and
fubfcryuit with your hand, in prefens of many of the Lordis of his Maiefteis
Counfall, and of the Minifteris of this toun, of the dait the fyft, fyvetene and
xvj of July laftbjqiaft, and tent day of Auguft, confefTit everie heid, poynt and
article of the Dittay ; bot alfo, by dyuerfe vtheris your Depofitiones fubfcryviit
with your hand, ye haif Ratifeit the famyn, and fwoir conftantlie to abyde thairat, and to feill the fame with your bluid : Quhilk ye can nocht deny.

AssisA.
Williame Trumbill of Airdrie, Harbert Maxwall of Cavenfe, James Tennent of Lynhous.^

Quhilkis perfones of AfTyfe being chofin, fworne and adniittit, eftir accufatioune of the faid George Sprote befoir thame of the faidis trelTonabill, haynous
and deteftabill crymes, contenit in the Dittay foirfaid, and reiding of the faid
Dittay of new agane, in his and thair prefens, the faid George Sprote, of new,
agane confeffit, in the faid Affyfe prefence and audience, the foirfaid Dittay, and
everie poynt thairof to be trew and of veritie. Quhairvpone my lord Aduocat,
as ofbefoir, afl\it actis and inftrumentis ; and in refpect thairof Proteftit, in cais
the faid Aflyfe clange him of the faid ciyme, for AVilfull and manifeft Errour.

Verdict. The faid Aflyfe haveing with grit deliberatioun gravelie confiddrit the tennour and haill circumftances of the faid Dittay, and conftant Judiciall ConfeflHoun thairof be the pannell, alfweill in prefens of the Juftice and
Alfeflburis,^ as thaireftir, in prefens of the faidis AfTyfouris thame felfis ;^ thay
all voittit, vpone the haill tennour of the faid Dittay ; and being ryplie and weill
advyfet thairwith, thay all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid Harbert Maxwall chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid George Sprote, according
to his awin Confeflloun, Judiciallie maid in thair prefence and audience, to be
ffylet. Culpable and Convict of airt and pairt of the laid maift haynous, deteftabill and trefTonabill Confpiracie contenit in his Dittay aboue writtin, and of the
knawlege and conceilling thairof

Sentence. For the quhilk cans, the faid Juftice-Depute, be the mouth of
George Cheiflie, dempfter of Court, be his fentence and dome, decernit and or-

' In proof, token, or testimony. " The rest are ' merclieand buvgeflis' of Edinburgh, being persons in the same rank of life witli the pannel. ' The Assessors are not inserted in the Record.

* That is, while the Jury liad retired to consider tlieir Verdict, Sprot had once more solemnly affirmed .
the truth of his previous Confessions and Depositions. ',

260 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Au?. 1608. danit the faid George Sprote to be taiie to the mercait croce of the bur' of Ediiiburo-li, and thair to be hangit vpoiie ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and thaireftir, his heid to be ftrukin frome his body ; and his body to be quarterit and demanit as ane tratour ; and his heid to be put vp A-pone ane prik of irne abone
the Tolbutli of Edinburgh, quhair the reft of the Confpiratouris heidis ftandis :
And his haill landis, heritages, takis, fteidingis, rownies, poffeffiones, guidis and
geir, to be forfaltit and efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as culpable and convict
of airt and pairt of the trealbnable and detaiftable ciynies aboue fjjecifeit, and
conceilling thairof. Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

(2 ) Sprottis Depositioux vpoiin the Pmlfolde?
At Edixburgh, the xij day of Auguft 1608, George Spkott, notar
in Eymouth, being brocht to the fcaffold and place of executioun, he, in publict
audience of the haill people, at the foure nvkeis" of the fcaffold, ratified his formar Depofitiouns, anent his knowledge and concealing of Reftalrigis guyltines
of Gouryis Trealbun ; ffor the w*" he huniblie craved God and his Maieftie
(humblie) forgifnes ; being moft forie and grievit that he had offended God and
the Kingis Maieftie, in concealing fuche a vylde, deteftable and vnnatural Treafoun, interprifit be the Erll of Gowiy and Laird of Reftalrig aganis his natural
King, lb goode and lb godly a Prince, who lies evir bene fa gratious to his fiibiectis and to this haill Yland ; protefting, that yf he had a thoufand lyveis to rander, and wer able to lufTer ten thoufand deathis, it is not fufficient fatisfactioun
and recompence for his fa foull and horrible offens ; and that God had prefervit
him frome mony great perellis, when his lyfle wes in extreanie danger, to bring
him to this publict declaratioun of that deteftable and horrible fact, in teftifeing
of the treuth, as he laid publictlie, in prefence of all the people, in thir wordis
following. To my owne fchame, the fchame of the Devill, and (the) glorie of
God, for fatisfactioun' of the confcienceis of all thefe, yf ony be, that lies or can
niak ony doubt of tlie treuth of this fo cleir a mater. And he acknowlegeis, that
his banting with Reftalrig, who wes a man without Religioun, and fubiect to
mony other vyceis, and his ingyreing^ of himfelf in thir materis, efter the firft
ficht of Reftalrigis Lettres writtin to Goury : And his continuall beiring of company with Reftalrig and Laird Bour, who wes irreligious and without feir of
God, brocht him frome one fyn to another ; and confequentlie, vpoun this grevoiis
(fine,) ffor the whiche moft iuftlie, worthelie and williiiglie, he is now to rander

From the Original, preserved in tlie General Register House. On the back of the paper is marked ' Bookit,' which shows that this was the copy from which the authentic Register kept of this extraordinary investigation was filled up. The copy preserved in the Records of Parliament, which was
taken from this paper, is less accurate than the present Official ' Extract ;' on which account the Editor
has preferred retaining the ortliography of James Prymrois, who was Clerk to the Privy Council. The
pnncipal variations are marked by parentheses. ^ Nooks, corners. ^ ' Satisfeing,' in Parliamentary Record. « B. Lat. Ingyro, to encircle or entangle, as with the folds of a serpent.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 261

his lyffe : And he defu-it all the people (prelent) to be war of evill company, and Aug. 160S.
namelie, of the company of thefe who ar voyd of Religioun : And he defyrit that
this his Declaratioun mycht be infert in his jwoces : As alliia, he defirit the Minifteris of Godis worde to publifche this his Declaratioun to tliair flokis frome
thair pulpettis ; and tooke euery one of thame who wer prefent be the hand, with
thair promeis to do the fame, faying vnto thame, that ' this wes the mod glorious
day that evir his eyis did fie ;' and, with thefe wordis, he jn'oflratis him felf and
fallis vpone his kneis, in prefence of the haill people, and maid a verie pithie
prayer, beginning in this forme, as foUowis. ' O fader ! how fould I call the
fader that am fo vnworthie to be callit thy fone ! I haifF wanderit aftray lyke a
loft fcheepe, and thow of thy mercy lies brocht me home (vn)to thd, and lies prefervit my lyfe frome niony dangeris vntill this day, that I mycht reveill theie
hid' and fecreit mifteries, to my awne fliame and thy glorie ; and thow hes promiffit, that whenfoeuir a linner, frome his hairt, will repent and call to th^ with
vnfen3eit rejientance, that thow will heir him and giff him mercy !' And lb he
continewit a goode fpace, in a moft fervent prayer, to the great admiratioun and
reioffing of all the people, and in a better forme and maner noP ony of the beholdaris and heiraris can be able to lett doun in wryte ; the fame not being writtin in the prefent tyme, becaus thair wes no place of writting vpoun the fcaffold,
in refpect of the preafe and multitude of people. And, going vp the ledder, he
defirit libertie to fing the fext Pfalme, and requeftit the people to accompany him
in finging thairof : Whiche being grantit, and he being at the ladder-head, the
fame wes tane vp and foung be him felf, with a very loud and myghtie voce ;
and wes affifted with above the nomber of fyve hundreth perfonis, who, with
tearis, accompanyed him in finging (of) that Pfalme : After the ending wherof,
he repeittit and ratefeit his faid former Depofitioun : And with that, recommending his foule to God, he wes caffin over, and fo endit his mortall lyffe. In witnes quhairof, we, vnder-fubfcry varis, who, for the moft parte, wer all of ws \7)oun
the fcaffold with him, and remanit with him vntill pe tyme of his death, and
otheris of ws in fo convenient placeis neir to the fcaffold, that we did heir all that
wes fpokin be him, half fubfcryvit thir prefentis with our handis.

(Sic fubfcribitur.) Glasgu,^ B. Galloway.* A. Brechin.' Balfour of
Burley. Haliroodhous.*' Jo. Preftoune, CP Reg'^ Pa. Schairp. M. P.
Galloway.' Jo. Hall. "Walter Balcanquell. M. P. Hewat. M. H. BIyith.
Charlis Lummifden. Richard Dobie, baillie of Edinburghe. William
Speir, baillie. James Anniflie, baillie of Edinburghe.

Tenet aim ]}ri7ic/pali, J. Puywrois.

• ' Hye,* in Parliamentary Record. " Than. ' Archbishop Spottiswood. * Gavin

Hainmilton, Bishop of Galloway and Abbot of Dundrennan. ^ Andrew Lamb, Bishop of Brechin.
« John (Bothwell) Lord Holyroodhouse. '' ' MaiRer Patrik Gallouay, Minifter to the King.'

262 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1608. (3.) The Archbishop of Caxterbuky's Account of the Examinations,

Trial and Execution o/" George Sprott, &c.
[The following scarce Tract was published by Dr George Abbot, then
Dean of ^^'incllester, who was an eye-witness of the facts he has narrated. This
xevy eminent person was the second of the eight Divines of Oxford who were
appointed to translate a large portion of our present version of the New Testament, in the year 1 604. He accompanied the Earl of Dunbar to Scotland, in the
year this Tract was published, (1608,) to assist in effecting the establishment of an
Union between the Churches of England and Scotland ; and conducted himself
Avith so much moderation, as thereby to lay the foundation of his future preferments. Previous to that period, Dr Abbot had been three times Vice-Chancellor of Oxford ; and in December 1609, was elected Bishop of Litchfield and
Coventry. A few weeks afterwards, he was translated to the See of London ;
and was, on November 2d, 1609, elevated to the exalted station of Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Primate of all England.

Sir AVilliam Hart's Report of the Trial and Examinations, &c. is i>rinted here,
only in so far as it contains additional matter. His attested copy of the proceedings had been taken by Dr Abbot to England, when he returned ; and being
personally so much impressed with the extraordinary circumstances which he
liad witnessed, he readily complied with the desire of his friends to publish it,
accompanied by an original preliminary Dissei'tation of his own, explanatory of
the remarkable facts narrated in the Report.]

The Examinations, Arraignment and Conuiction of George
Sprot, Notary in Aye-mouth ; Together with his conftant and extraordinarie behauiour, at his death, in Edenboi'ough, Aug. 12, 1608 : Written and fet
forth by Sir William Hairt Knight, L. Juftice of Scotland. Whereby ap-
^ peareth the Treafonable deuice betwixt John late Earle of Gowry and Robert
Logan of Reftalrig, (commonly called Lefterig,) plotted by them, for the
cruell MuRTHERiNG of our moll gracious Sovereigne. Before which
Treatife is prefixed alfo, A Preface, written by G. Abbot, Doctour of Diuinitie and Deane of Winchefter, who was prefent at the fayd Sprot's Execution.

London : Printed by Melch. Bradewood for William Afpley. 1608.

A Preface to the Reader.

Among tliofe troubles and erodes, wherewitliall our heauenlie Father is pleafed to exercil'e his beft
children, while they remaine in this tabernacle of their flefli, tliere is no one more frequent, tlian fuch
euil and (landerous reports, as the virulent tongues of malicious perfons, out of a hatred to their vertues, are dcfirous to lay vpon them. For there was neuer age nor countrey, wherein either man or
woman was adorned with rare and eminent qualities, for the feruice of God, and aduanceraent of true

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 263

religion, but immediatly fuch as were ill-affected began to imploy their wits, and beat their braines, ^„„ 1608.
how by calumniation and forged imputations, they might obfeure the luftre of thofe lingular parts,
which their quicke hut enuious eye had dUcouered in them. That worthy Moyfes, the meekeft' man
vpon earth, is reproched as ambitious, and charged by Core, to ^ take too much vpon him. That
admirable Daniel was ^ accufed to the King as a contemner of his greatneffe, and violator of his
lawes. It was obiected to zealous and iuft Nehemiah by * Sanballat, that himfelfe and the people of
luda intended a rebellion. Paul and Silas, two great inflruments of Gods glory, were complained
vpon as feditious perfons, and ^ difturbers of the peace and quietneffe of the city. The old Chviftians,
men no doubt of vertuous behauiour, yet becaufe, in time of perfecution, they sfTembled themfelues
together in the night, for the worlliip of their God, and profefTion of their faith, were reported by the
Gentiles to haue the Feafls of '' Thyefles, (that is, to eat the flefh of children,) and to do as Oedipus
did, that is, promifcuoufly to commit fornication with their mothers, fillers and daughters. Yea, their
owne ' feruants were brought by the terrours of the Infidels to accufe them of fuch crimes. Tertullian complaineth of this, declaring that it was obiected to the Chriftians, * that they killed a babe new
borne, and in the blood thereof did dip their Eucharift, and fo eat it ; as alfo, that fuffering their dogs
of purpofe to ouertume their lights, they in the darke committed inceft with their mothers and daughters. Hence it grew as a kind of prouerbe. That it was the part of the Chriftians to doe good, and
yet to be ill fpoken of. So ^ Euagrius reporteth, touching that holy and bleffed Emperour Conftantine the Great, that the Ethnicks laded him with many falfe criminations, becaufe he tooke away their
Heathenilh fuperflitions, and in place thereof aduanced the feruice of Chrift lefus.

In all which accufations, and other of like nature, (if we looke aduifedly into them,) we fliall perceiue, tliat both Sathan hath his worke, and euill men haue a part, yea that God himfelfe hath a finger.
Sathan hath his worke, becaufe, (as Cyprian, writing of Cornelius, faith,) It is '° euermore the worke
of the Diuell, that he may with lies teare the feruants of God, and, by falfe opinions fpread concerning them, may defame their glorious name ; that fuch as are bright in the light of their owne confcience
may be fordidated, or dimmed, by the reports of other. Euill men haue their part, either becaufe,
with Zoilus, when they " can do no hurt to the good and vertuous, at leafl they will fpeake ill of them ;
or els, becaufe, (as Hierome writeth,) '•' It is the folace of euill men to carpe at the good, thinking that
by the great number of offenders, the guilt of their faults is diminilhed and abated. Nay, God hath
a finger in it, to trie and fliarpen men, and by that meanes to fit them to himfelfe. For (landers haue
that force in them, as Gregory well noteth, fpeaking thus : '^ Going thorow almoft all examples, we
finde, that there hath not beene one good man whom the naughtineffe of euill men hath not tried : for,
that I may fo fpeake, the fword of oure foule is not brought to the exactnelTe of fliarpneffe, if the file
of other mens naughtineffe hath not rubbed and fretted it. Againe, in as much as we ihould grow
into deepe and dangerous fecuritie, if it were not for fuch remembrances, our heauenly Father is contented that by fuch calumniations we Ihould be rowzed from the fleepineffe and drowzinefle of the
world. '* Pliny writeth, that the Lion is fubiect to no fickneffe, but only a faftidium, or fulueffe of
ftomacke : wherewithal! when hee is opprefled, the way to cure him is to offer him fome contumely ; which is by tying an Ape neere him : for the Lion is fo moned and vexed for the time, with
the tricks which the Ape plaieth, that he riddeth and putteth ouer that, which fo much before offended him. Euen {o God vfeth the contumelies of bafe perfons, and the reproches of the vileft, to rowze
vp men of excellent fpirits, that they furfet not in voluptuoufneffe, and fo confequently be lulled afleepe
in idle fecuritie, to their owne harme and peraduenture ruine.

But be it for one or all thefe reafons, certaine it is, that in our age, as well as in times by-paft, the

1 Num. xii. 3. 2 Num. xvi. 3. 3 Dan. vi. 13. ■• Neh. vi. 6. * Act. xvi. 20. ^ Euseb. Ecd.

Hist. lib. iv. 7. 7 Lib. v. 1. ** TertiiU. -Apolog. cap. ii. 9 Euagrius, Eccl. Hist. lib. iii. -iO.

19 Cyprian, Epist. ad Antonian. lib. iv. 2. 'l Aeliaii, Hist. lib. xi. 10. '^ Hieron. Epist. x. ad Furiam.
13 Gregor. Horn. 38. in 40. Horn. " PUn. Nat. Hist. lib. viii. 16.

264 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6OO.

Aug. 1608. deereft cliildren of God haue tafted of this trial], and haue been forced to endure very hoiTible impu*
tations and llaining afperrions, wliicli the venomous tongues of vngodly men haue ftriued to cafl ^-pon
them. It were no very liard matter to name (Irange calumniations, wliirh haue been inuented by
the vaflals of Antithrift, and publiihed by the a<lorers of the heart in diners hooks, (whiih are no
better than defamatory libels,) againll Gods feruants of the highefl ranke vpon eartli, becanfe they
ouerturned the ilrongliolds of idolatry, and gaue free pafliige to the Gofpell of Chrill lefus. But I
forbeare to giue fuch particular inrtances, and rather leane to the coniideration of the wife, whether it
luaveuer be hoped, that fuch irreligious creatures (who haue folde themfelues to Satlian the acculer of
the brethren) will make fpare to lalh and fcourge fuch (ingle perfons as fland in their way, and liinder
their defignes ; when they make no confcience to brand our holy faith, and tlie generalitie ofourprofeflion, with reports moft, odious, and fuch as mull needs be acknowledged for abominable, if they
Ihould be true : but in footh are, in the fight of God, of angels and men, before heauen and earth, but
plaine fictions and forgeries, conteining in them no parcell of veritie. Of which fort are thofe defamations, which a countryman of ours, without all lliame, auoucheth in a ^ Pampiilet not long fince put
out, and publiihed to the world ; That the Proteftants are bound in confcience, neuer to afke God
forgiueneffe of their iinnes : That the Proteflants are bound in confcience to auoid all good works :
That the Proteftants make God the author of finne ; the only caufe of finne : That man finneth not :
That God is worfe than the Deuill. And that of ^ Rofii^us, writing againft the French King now
reigning: Hominum animas cum corporilius interire, et homines a brutis pecorihus nihil differre.
Euangelicorum infinita millla credunt. Infinite thoufands of Protellants do beleeue that the fouls of
men die together with their bodies, and that men do nothing differ from brute hearts.

Such truthlefle, iliamelefle, and graceleffe afii?rtions, they haue not fticked to prodame openly in
tlie face of the funne. The knowledge wliereof lliould caufe all men indifferently affected, not to be
credulous or light of beleefe, when they finde gall and bitternelfe cart out of the mouth or penne of an
enemy of the Gofpell againft any contending for the truth, though it be but a priuate man ; but efpecially
to fufpend their iudgements, when perfons of higheft quality, for maintaining Gods caufe, are traduced
by an enemy, or defamed by fonie vile one, whofe tongue and pen indeed is no fiaiuler, as we commonly fpeake. For thefe great ones are the fpecial marke whereat malice doth aime ; and as poifon
ordinarily hafteneth to the heart, fo doth enuie let drine at the head, at thofe who be moft eminent in
the State and Commonwealth. W hen Cato the elder liued, there was not in all Rome fo woorthy a
man as he: for (as = Pliny noteth) he was the beft orator, the bell leader or generall in the field, the
beft fenatour or counfeller that was in that citie : yet was he fo intreated as neuer man was, being
publikely called to his anfwer foure and fortie feuerall times, whereby one while liis fame was hazard,
ed, another whdo his life: and yet alwayes he was honorably, or, as the yoonger Pliny hath it, ' glorioully ahlolued and acquited. Doubtleffe there was againft him a great deale of fpleene, a very great
deale of malice. From the touch whereof, euen Kings and Princes are fo farre from being free, that
they are more fubiect to it than any other perfons: which made ^ Antifthencs to lay, That it was a
kingly thing, when thou haft done wel, to be ill fpoken of for thy labor. And if we be defirous to fee
n famous example of this, there is no one more notable than that of holy Uauid, who being firrt a
Prophet, and afterwards a King, (but in both mort vnfpotted touching the crimes layd againft him,)
yea being a man after Gods own heart, yet was accufed and charged with many hainous iniquities ;
which caufed him to complaine both before and after Jiis comniing to the crowne : as vnto Saul : '
Wherefore giueft thou an eare vnto mens words, that fay, Beholde, Dauid fecketh euill againrt thee ?
And to God himfelfe:' O Lord my God, if I haue done this thing, meaning, which they layd vnto

C irtaino Articles or forcible reasons piiiitcd at Aiit\vcr])c 1600. - Ross, contra Henric. Galium, cap. iv. v.

3 Pliii. X ,t. Hist. lib. vii. 27. 1 Pliii. ile viris illiistrib. ■S Diog. Laert. in Antistli. 6 1 Sam. xxiv. 10.

7 Psal. vii. S.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 265

him : if tbeie be any wiukedneffe in my hands, intending, fuch as they would faften vpon him, then let Aug. 1608.

the enemie perlecute my Ibule and take it. And in another place, fpeaking to the flandering aduerfarie, ' Thy tongue imagineth mifchiefe, and is like a Iharpe razor that cutteth deceitfully. And yet

further : " The proud haue imagined a lie againft me. So in the next Pfalme : ' Deliuer my foule, O

Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitfull tongue. Thefe things, and that the ' drunkards did make

fongs vpon him, did many times exceedingly grieue him, that he who lahoured to leeme innocent,

Ihould be reproched as nocent : that he who was but the patient, Ihould be held for the agent ; that

the man wronged, Ihould be reported to do wrong vnto other ; that he whole life was fought, Ihould

be termed by Shimei, ^ a man of blood, and a murtherer. This troubled and grieued him aboue meafure. For it is the property of innocency and integi'itie, that if it may findo no other reward, vet it

would gladly Ihiue in the fimplicitie and finceritie of it felfe. But when there was no other helpe to

be freed from thofe (landers, Dauid had one aflured reraedie ; that was, to retire himfelfe to the Lord,

and commend his caufe to his Maker: As he excellently doth in the three and fortieth Pfalme ; where,

being oppreffed by the malice of his aduerfaries, and complaining of it in the firlt verfe : ^ ludge me,

O God, and defend my caufe againft the vnmercifull people : deliuer me from the deceitful and

wicked man ; he helpeth himfelfe in the laft verfe, rebuking tlie impatiency which he found in his

owne foule, and directing his affections vnto another courfe, ' Why art thou caft downe, my foule ? and

why art thou difquieted within me ? Wait on God : for I will yet giue him thanks : he is my prefent

helpe and my God.

Many men haue been defirous to haue their fame cleered from the reproches of their enemies, and
haue fought meanes to haue their hearts eafed from the difturbances and dillenipers whereinto falfe
accufations haue put them. Zeno is mucli commended, that with fuch calmnelle he could tume alide
thofe bitter taunts which fome bellowed on him ; for being afked, how he did bear himfelfe againft
euil fpeeches :^ I do, faith he, as if an ErabafTadour (liould be fent vnto me, and I Ihould returne him
without an anfwer. This for a philofopher, who was but an heathen man, was an excellent refolution.
But in thefe words of Dauid, there is a way more noble than Zeno could conceiue ; that is, to looke vp
to our great God, and commit all to him, expecting his good leafure. It is not enough when a man,
being priuy to his owne innoceucie, doth not boile within himfelfe, or fret againft the wicked (which
are things^ forbidden vnto vs), but he mull goe a ftep farther, and propofe to his owne heart I'ome more
notable example. And in this cafe, who is rather to be imitated by a Chriftian than our Sauior Cliriil ?
Concerning whom S. Chryfoftome faid well : That'" when he caft out diuels, and did innumerable good
things, and yet was ill fpoken of ; againft thofe men who faid, that he had the Diuell, he did not fend any
thunderbolt, he did not ouerthrow thofe blafphemous mouthes, he confumed not with fire thofe vnchafte,
vngratefull, vnworthie tongues of theirs : but only with thefe words put alide thofe euill fpeeches ; I
haue not the Diuell, but I honour liim who fent me. Tiiis is moft traly related of our Sauiour ; but there
was in him fomewhat els, which is better obferued by S. Peter : " When he was reuiled, he reuiled
not againe ; when he fuffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him that iudgeth righteoufly.
And this, committing it to him that iudgeth righteoufly, was the courfe which Dauid vfed : to wait patiently on the Lord, to caft vp his eies to heauen, and commending to God the integrity of his waies,
to leaue all to his difpofing. And this is the very leffbn which hee teacheth both himfelfe and other.
For in the feuen and twentieth Pfalme, hauing fpoken of his '- aduerfaries, of falfe witnefles which rofe
vp againft him, and fuch as fpeak cruelly, he concludeth with this document, Hope in the Lord ; bee
ftrong, and hee Ihall comfort thine heart, and truft in the Lord. Which is the moft found inftruction,
that any creature can haue : to looke vp to his Creator (to whom all hearts are open, and no priuie

1 Psal. lil. 2. 2 Tsal. cxix. 69. 3 Psal. cxx. 2. ■» Psal. Ixix. 12. 5 o Sam. xvi. 7. 6 Psal. xliii. 1. 7 Verse 5.

8 Diog. Laert. in Zenon. 9 I'sal. xxxvii. 1. 1" Chrys. IlomU. 1. dc jnccmpreh. Dei iiatuia. '' 1 Pet. ii. 23.
12 Psal. xxvii. 12, 14.

VOL. II. 2 L

266 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Av. 1608. tiling can be fecret) and to commend to his prouidence, to his fatherly care and wifedome, the vnfpot-
° tednefle of his waies, and the fimplicity of his conuerfation. And affuredly that God who is the God

of tnith will bee the patron and protectour of innocencie in his leruants. It is a llrong conlolation
which Dauid giueth in this cafe : ' Commit thy way vnto the Lord, and truft in him, and he Ihall bring
it to pafle. And hee Ihall bring foorth thy righteoufnefle as the light, and thy iudgement as the noone
day. But it followeth : Wait patiently vjwn the Lord, and hope in him : As if that mull bee the
meanes to attaine thy defire ; not to run before thy Maker, and appoint him the time when thy integrity fliall bee cleared, and the dimming clouds of obloquy Ihall be blovven from thy eftimation ; but to
leaue that to his managing, to his difpofe and direction. For as S. CInyfortome telleth us ;2 If it be in
the power of God to giue vnto vs, it is alfo in his power to giue when himfelfe pleafeth. It is fliid of
liim that hee doth all things ' in meafure, number and waight. But if before the number bee full, or
the meafiue be vp, thou wilt limit him the time wlien thy innocencie muft appeare : thou takell on
thee to be wifer tlian the Lord, and in a fort mounting vp into his throne in heauen, thou doell iuftle
him out of his feat of maielly and eternity. If thou wilt let downe the decree for time or place, or the
manner of purging thy felfe, or how the wickednes of thine enemies muft be difplaied, thou makell
thy felfe the fudge, and the Lord of heauen and earth (liall be but thy executioner. Leaue the maine
then to him (which doth not fore-clofe thee, but that thou mayll vfe all honell meanes to lay open thy
vnfpottedueffe) and thou (halt haue reafon with Dauid to thanke him, and fay : ' He is my prefent
lielpe and my God.

And in tnith it is ftrange to fee the Lords worke in this behalfe, how, wlien the fame of liis feruants
hath beene vniuftly denigrated by falfe accufations, hee taking the matter into his hands hath, in his
good time, difpelled all mifts of flander. Heereof Dauid himfelfe had Angular experience. For when
Saul was informed that Dauid fought his life, and by the often ingeminations of malitious men this
was taken for a truth, and Dauid was accordingly perfecuted, and in danger to be murdered, God put
SauP two feuerall times into the hands of Dauid, that eafily hee rhight haue flaine him : which being
entertained as an inuincible argument of Dauids fidelity, Saul himfelfe, by the irrefragable euidence of
truth, was forced to cry out,^ Thou art more righteous than I : for thou haft rendered me good, and I
haue rendered thee euill. And a fecond time : " I haue finned : come againe, my fonne Dauid, for I
will doe thee no more harme, becaufe my foul was precious in thine eies this day : behold I haue done
fooliihly, and haue erred exceedingly. Eufebius hath i'uch another example, of ^Narcillus the Bilfiop
of lerufalem, who was a vertuous and worthy man, and yet by three perfous was accufed of a hainous
crime. The ftory doth not cleerely deliuer what it was ; but by circumftances it may be gathered to
bee incontinency. Thefe three, to giue the more reputation to that accufation wherewithall they
charged him, did vfe diuers imprecations and execrations on tliemfelues, if thole things were not true
wliich they obiected againft him. As the one willied that himfelfe might be burnt, the fecond that he
might die of a loathfome difeafe, the third that he might lofe the fight of his eyes. This conllant and
coni'enting crimination fo affected Narcillus, though priuy to his own vprightneffe, that he withdrew
himfelfe from his abode, and lining priuately, commended his righteous caufe to God; which had fuch
effect, that not very long after, the firft of his accufers was indeed confumed with fire, the houfe being
burnt in which he remained : the fecond died of the fame difeafe which he wilhed vpon himfelfe : and
the third being much affrighted with the punilhment of his fellows, had remorfe of his finne, and came
and openly acknowledged the confpiracy of them three againft innocent Narcillus; but withall, he had
fuch feeling of his owne iniquity, that powring out continuall teares, hee loft the light of his eyes with
the rheume that defcended. A nioft memorable narration to their comfort, who, being wronged by
men in their fame or good name, commend their caufe to God. Like to which is that of Theodoret,*

Psal. xxxvii. 5, G. " Chrvs. in Psa}. cxxix. * Sapient, xi, 17. ' Psal. xliii. o. '1 Sam. xxiv. 4, c. xxvi. 7.
" 1 Sam. xxiv. 18. " 1 Sam. xxvi. 21. ^ Euseb. Ecd. Hist, Ub. vi. 8. ' Theodor. Ecd. Hist. lib. 1. W, n.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 267

who reportetl), tliat Euflatliius the Patriarke of Antioch had many combats with the Arrians for de- Auo-. 1608.
fence of Chrills truth : and wlien he tlill preuailed againlt them, they, out of their malice, fubomed a
harlot to accufe him of fornication, and openly to maintaine, that a cliiide was his which flie held in
her armes : by which meanes bee was conftrained to flie to the fame luccour that Narciffus formerly
had done ; which had fuch force with Almighty God, that within a while after, the harlot was ftricken
with a grieuous ficknefTe, which wrought in her fo powerfully, that fliee freely confeffed the combination of the Arrians againft the holy man : and how fliee was fuborned to accufe him wrongfully
whereof Ihe was now fory. But whereas ilie had faid that Eutlathius was the father of her childe ;
that indeed was true of another Euflathius, but not of the Bifliop of Antioch. Wherein we may beholde, that euen fo long agone equiuocation was in vfe, but it was with leaud ' perfons, as heretikes and
liarlots : but withall Gods worke appearetli, that he will not euermore Aiffer innocencie to be opprelTed, and truth to be wronged ; but at the laft veritie fhall breake forth, as the Sunne which was dark,
ned with a cloud. And this mercifull fauor of God to his feruants was not onely in the ages pafl, but
our dayes haue experiments of the very like occurrents ; as in a famous cafe lately acted at Edinborough may eafily be difcouered: whereof, becaufe I was an eye-witnelfe, at my late being there by the
coramandement of his Maieflie, I haue thought it my dutie, in honour to God and loue to iiis truth >
to declare what I faw and heard ; that this following Treatife, penned by an honourable perfonafo of
Northe Britaine, might not goe forth vnaccompanied with the Declaration of one of South-Britaine,
for fo much as hee beheld.

There are few in this Hand of any vnderftanding, but haue heard of the traiterous and bloodie attempt of the Earle Gowrie and his brother againll the perfon and life of our mo(t bk-lfed Souereigne.
Wherein, albeit there were fuch euidences and arguments, as that any man who would haue taken notice thereof, might haue been fufificiently informed therein, euen at the very firft ; and afterward by the
cleere depofitions (for mofl pregnant circumftances) and ample atteftations of many perfons of honour and qualitie, the Parliament of that Kingdonie tooke full knowledge thereof; and accordingly proceeded to the forfaiting of the whole Eflate of that Earle, and of his heires for euer ; yet fome humorous men, whom in that refpect I may iuftly terme unthankfull vnto God, and vndutifuU to their King,
out of fond imaginations, or rather, if you will, feditious fuppofitions of their owne, did both at home
and abroad, by whifperings and fecret buzzings into the eares of the people (who were better perfwaded of them than indeed there was caufe) imploy their wits and tongues to obfcure the trueth of
that matter, and to caft an imputation where it was leaft deferued. Which when God had permitted
for the fpace of fome yeeres to ranckle and fefler in the bowels of tliofe who were the authors of it ;
the fame God, in his wifdome, at lalt meaning to cure them, if they would be cured, of that maladie,
difcouered, that in the fame treafoun, although carried neuer fo fecretly, there were other confederates, of whom hitherto the world had taken no kinde of knowledge. And albeit two of the perfons interefted in that bufineffe were lately dead, and departed vnto far greater torment than all the earth could
lay vpon them (vnleffe they died repentant), yet it was apprehended that a third partie remained, who
had fore-knowledge of that confpiracie, and was able to vtter much of the fecrets of it : one George
Sprott, a Notarie, inhabiting at Ayrae-mouth, a place well-knowen in that countrey. Which matter,
or fome part thereof, being made knowento an* honourable perfon, a moll faithful! feruant to his Maieflie, firfl by fome words that fell from Sprott himfelfe, and afterwards by fome papers found vpon
Lim, it was fo wifely caried, and fo prudently brought about, by the great care and diligence of that
noble man (God Almightie blefiingthe bufineffe) that fo much was reueiled, as followetli in this Treatife,
vpon the acts to be feene ; which are heere fet downe at large, word for word, as they agree with the
proceffe originall, and other examinations, that fuch as haue beene auerfe may at lafl receaue fatisfaction. Touching all which, I fhall fay nothing, but only report that which befell vpone the day of his

' Lewd. * The Earlo of Daubar.

268 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Alio. 1G08. death, when hee fuffered for that treafon. Hauing then the fentence paffed on him, vpon Friday the
twelfth of AuKiill 1608, in the fore-noone, and publikely being warned to prepare bimfelfe to his end,
which mull be that after-dinner, lie moll willingly fubmitted himfelfe vnto that punilhmeut, which (as
he then acknowledged) he had iuftly deferaed. And being left to himfelfe til diner-time was expired,
then came to him, into that priuate place where hee remained, fome of the ' reuerend Bifhops, diners
LL. of the Setiion, two of the Englilh Minillers there iraploied by his Maieflie, with diuers other Minifters of the towne of Edenborough. Before whom, he firft acknowledged and auouched his former
confelllon to be true, and that he would die in the fame ; and then falling on his knees in a comer of
that roonie, where he and they tlien were, in a prayer to God vttered aloud, he fo paflionately deplored
his former wickedneffes, but efpecially that finne of his for which he was to die ; that a man may iuftly
fav, hee did in a fort deiect and caft downe himfelfe to the gates of hell, as if he Ihould there haue
beene fwallowed vp in the gulfe of defperation : yet prefently laying holde vpone the mercies of God
in Chrirt, he raifed himfelfe, and ftrangely lifted vp his foule vnto the Throne of Grace, applying ioy
and comfort to his owne heart fo effectually, as can not well be defcribed. In the admitting of this
confolation into his inward man, he burft out into teares, fo plentifully flowing from him, that for a time
they flopped liis voice. The light and hearing whereof, wrought fo forcible an inipreffion in tliofe perfons of honour and learned men who beheld him, that there was fcant any one of them, who could refraine teares in the place, as diuers of themfelues that day did witnefle vnto me. The effect of his
prayer, was the aggiauating of his crfme, in concealing the treafon againft the Kings Maieftie; into
which hee laid, God did moll iuftly fufter him to fall, by reafon of his former wickednelfe, which he
had fo defperately multiplied, in defpight of God and his holy Word. And thereupon, going on with
many fenfible fpeeches and moft feeling comparifons, hee infilled on the fearefidl and dreadfull danger wherein hee was, if the Lord in iudgement Ihould hioke vpon him. Notwithllandiug, at lall he
proceeded : ' Yet moft mercifull father,' whereat he made a ftay, and repeating the word father with a
niaruellous loud and llirill voice, he added, ' why fiiould I call thee father, that haue fo many wayes
and fo honibly tranfgrelfed thy commandments, in all the courfe of my life, hut efpecially in concealing this vile, fearefull and diuellilh treafon againll my moft gracious Soueraigne ? Lord, Lord, there
is nothing belongeth to me but wrath and confufion !' And fo went on in a ftrange vnafl'ected current of words, liuely expreffing the forrow of his heart. Yet there he ftayd not, but fpake forward to
this purpofe : ' Notwithftanding, Lord, thou hall left me this comfort in thy Word, that thou haft
fayd. Come vnto me all ye that aie weary and laden, and I will refrelh you. Lord, I am weary,
Lord I am heauily laden with my finnes, which are innumerable : I am ready to fincke, Lord, euen to
liell, without thou, in thy mercy, put to thy hand and deliuer me. Lord, thou hail promifed by thine
owne word, out of thine owne mouth, that thou wilt refrelli the weary foul.' And with that he thrull
out one of his hands, and reacliing as high as hee could, ^-ith a louder voice and a ftrained, cried, ' I
challenge thee. Lord, by that word, and by that promife which thou haft made, that thou performe and
make it good to mee, that call for eafe and mercie at thy hands. Lord heare mee. Lord pai'don mee,
Lord comfort me by thy holy fpirit : alTure my confcience of the forgiuenefli; of my finnes, and fay to
my foule, that thou art reconciled.' And fo after many zealous petitions vttered to the like effect, he
applied to himfelfe the mercies of God in Chrift lefus, in whom lie allured himfelfe of God's fauour,
with eanieft requeft, that he might continue in that aifurance to the end, wherof he nothing doubted.
Afterward, being brought to the fcaffold, where he was to die, he vttered many things, among which
I obferued thefe : He acknowledged to the people, that he was come thither to fuffer moft deferuedly :
That hee had beene an offender againft Almiglitie God, in very many refpects ; but that none of his
finnes was fo giieuous vnto him, as that for which he muft die : wherein, iiotwithftanding, he was not
an actor, but a concealer only. That he was ingyred in it by the Laird of Raftalrig and his feruant

1 Archl). of Glasc, Bis. of Biickli. (Brechin"), L. IIal\Tudeli., Lord Collector, Lord Register, Lord Justice, D.
Masey, JI. Ilodson, JI. P. Galoway, JI. I. Hall, X. Ch.' Lumsden, with others.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 269

the Laird of Bour, both which, hee fayd, were men that profefled not religion. Whereupon lie ex- Auo-. 1608.

horted men to take heed how tliey accompanied witli fuch as are not religious ; becaufe, fayd he, with

fuch as make not profeffion of religion, there is no faith, no truetli, no holding of their word, as himfelfe had tried and found. But touching tlie treafon, for the concealing whereof he was condemned, he

added, That he was preferued aliue to open that fecret myfterie which fo long had layen hidde ; That

God had keptliim fmce that attempt of the Earle Gowrie from verie manie dangers, but notedly from

one, when being in apparent hazzard of drowning, he was llrangely deliuered ; ' which,' laid he, ' was

Gods worke, that I might remaine aliue vnto this happie and bleffed day, that the trueth might be made

knowen. And now I confeffe my fault to the fliame of my felfe, and to the fliame of the Diuell ; but

to the glorie of God. And I doe it not either for feare of death, or for any hope of life, (for I haue

del'erued to die, and am ^^^worthie to line) but becaufe it is the trueth, which I iliall feale with ray

blood. My fault,' fayth hee, ' is fo great, that if I had a thoufand hues, and could die ten thoufand

deaths, yet I might not make fatisfaction, that I fliould conceale fuch a treafon againfl fo gracious a

King.' Thefe and the like words, when hee had fpoken vpon one fide of the fcaffold, hee turned hiiu

to the fecond fide, and afterward to the third, (that all the people might heare) where he fpake to the

fame purpofe as formerly he had done. And here it may not be forgotten, that in the vttering of thefe

things his tongue ferued him verie well, with words readie and fignificant; his niemorie was perfect;

his countenance reafonably erect and full of alacritie, without all feare of death ; his voice was loud and

audible on euery part ; which was the more ilrange, becaufe at the times of liis examination, as alfo

that very fore-noone, at the houre of his arraignment, his fpeech was low and weake ; but now fo

flrong, as if God of purpofe had giuen him power to deliuer his words in fuch a manner, that all the

people might heare and vnderftand.

When this aboue-raentioned declaration had beene made, Sprot returned to that part of the fcaffold
where he firft began to fpeake, and there falling on his knees, he vttered a prayer to the fame purpofe,
as is fet down in tliis enfuing Treatife. And haviing ended the fame, one of the Minifters praied
againe, and the prifoner ioyned with him. That God would forgiue his finnes, and receiue his foul to
mercie. After which, Sprot, rtanding vp, made diners requells : Firft, that what he had deliuered by
this Confefiion on the fcaffold, might be put into his Proceffe, that the world might take notice of it.
Secondly, that fuch as were prefent(as they might haue opportunity) would be futers vnto the King,
that his Maieftie would forgiue him this offence, for the which, he fayd, he craued pardon of God, of
his Soueraigne, and the world. And thirdly, hee defired thofe of the Minifterie which were prefent,
that wherefoeuer they came, they would proclame in the pulpit his confefiion of his crime, his forow
for the fame, and his full hope that God would pardon him. And to tlie end that this might be performed, hee tooke the hands of fuch Minifters as flood neere about him, fo binding a proraife on them.
And heere, being told by the faid Minifters and other perfons of qualitie, that being fo neere his departure out of the world, it concerned him to fpeake nothing but the trueth, and that vpon the perill
of his foule: he anfwered, that to the end that they fhould know, that hee had fpoken nothing but the
veritie, and that his ConfeiTion was true in euerie refpect, hee would (at the laft gafp) giue them fome
apparent token, for the confirmation of the fame. Then fitting himfelfe to the ladder, the Executioner
commeth to him, and, as the manner is, alking forgiuenefte of him ; ' With all my heart,' faith hee, ' for
you doe but your office, and it is the thing I delire ; becaufe fuffering in my bodie, I Ihall in my foule
be ioyned vnto my Sauiour.' Afcending vp to the ladder, he defired the people to fing a Pfalme with
him, which they did with many a weeping eye. Hee named the fixt Pfalme, and beginning it or taking it vp himfelfe, in euerie verfe or line thereof hee went before tlie people, finging both lowd and
tunably vnto the very end. Then once againe confirming and auowing his former confefiioun, he couered his owne face, and commending his foule to God, hee was turned off the ladder ; where hanging by the necke fome little while, hee three feuerall times gaue a lowd clap with his hands, that all

270 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Atiir. 1608. the (landers by might heare : which was the figne or token (as it feemelh) which he a little before had
fayd that hee would giue at his lall gafpe, for the ratification and auowing of thofe things, which by
his confeflion hee had fo wany times declared and deliuered. Tiiefe things were done in the open
fight of the funne, in the Kings Capitall towne, at the Market-croffe in Edenborough, in the prefence
of diners thoufands of all forts ; of the Nobilitie, of the Clergie, of the Gentrie, of the Burgeffes, of
women and children, my felfe, with the rell of the Englilh Miniflers, Handing by and looking on, and
gluing God the glorie, that after fo long a fpace as eight yeeres and eight dayes (for fo it was by iuft
computation after the attempt of Gowrie) he was pleafed to giue fo noble a teflimonie vnto that,
which by fome maligners had beene fecretly called in queftion, without any ground or reafon. I haue
reported at length thofe particulars, which I heard and i'aw ; which tiiat honourable perfonage who
wrote this Treatife following doth fomewhat more briefly deliuer, but yet both of vs very truly, as
thoufands can witneffe.

Out of both thefe naiTations there may diuers obferuatlons be gathered. As firfl, how hainous a
thing it is in the fight of God himfelfe, for fubiects of what nature or qualitie foeuer to enter into
confjnracie againft, the life and perfon of the Lords Anointed ; for Almighty God hath threatened to
difcouer tliefe traiterous enterprifes ; and if no other way, yet by fome ftrange and miraculous falhion.
Hee who fpake againll cruell imaginations of the heart, ' Curfe not the King, no not in thy thought ;
for the fowie of the heauen ftiall carie the voice, and that which hath wings ihall declare the matter ;
what will he do, when acts of hoflilitie in rebellious maner lliall be entred into ? And doth his Diuine
IMaiellie difclofe it, and will he not alfo punilli it? The example of that Earle Gowrie, among thoulands of others, may be a fufficient inftruction in this behalfe, who, for his Soueraignes loue and gracious fauor, tellified in many refpects, and intended many more wayes vnto him, returning nothing
but vngratefulnefle and traiterous refolutions, digged a pit for another, but by Gods iudgement fell into
it himfelfe : and did not only lofe in one day his fidelitie, eftimation and life, but ouerthrew his houfe
and all the honour of his familie, thorow fucceeding generations. Therefore farre be at all times from
any noble heart to walke in his wayes, or vpon any occafion to entertaine fuch difcontentment as may
grow to vndutifulnefle ; for when the wrath of God (hall ouertake men offending in this kinde, and the
iuflice of a King lliall once proceed againlt them, what horror mull there needs be in their bowels and
confcience ? what trembling and affrighting in their very foule ? If this poore man Sprot, for concealing that odious combination, found fucii touches in himfelfe, and fuch remorfe in his heart, what quaking and dreadfulneffe, may we thinke, will fall on him who is guiltie of the highell act of trealbn and
rebellion ?

Secondly, wee heere may fee the Lords protectioun ouer Chriftian Kings and Princes ; whom, as
hee placeth next himfelfe in maiellie and authoritie, and calleth them by his owne name, I haue faid,
* Ye are Gods ; fo he bleffeth and vpholdeth them, as his Deputies and Vice-gerents, men reprefenting
himfelfe, efpecially if fincerely they ferae and feare and loue him. He is a God of order, and loueth
fubordination in all kingdomes and countreys, where if hee grace, countenance, and protect inferiour
Magiflrates, what will hee doe to the heads and chiefe gouemours of his people, who are next to his owne
greatnefle? Hee hath fet them aboue other in honour and glorie, whicii caufetli them to be more obferued according to their (late : but withall, the prayers of their fubiects are powred out for their welfai'e, day and night, and at all times ; which concurring with their owne requefls to God, do find acceptance with the Higheft, to their noted profperitie and eminent felicitie. It preferueth from many
perils, to haue at all houres and feafons the prayers and fupplications of faitlifuU men and women houering ouer their heads, which may be perpetuall remembrancers for them to their heauenly Father, if
by human fragilitie and vnauoidable imperfections they Ihould forget themfelues.

Thirdly, we may note, more particularly, the fauing health of God upon our gracious Souereigue ; to

' Eccl. X. 20. ^ Tsal. Lxxxii. G.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 271

whom as the Lord hath giuen many bleflings and much happineffe beyond all his progenitours, fo bee Aug. 1608.

hath maintained and protected his perfon in a mamellous and ftrange maner, not onely from his cradle

vnto this day, but (as it is very well knowen) from before his coming into the world. And how did

the Lord free his feruant euen from the brineke of the pit, and from the gates of the graue at the time

of Cowries attempt ? As alfo fince tjiat day, when thofe wicked fonnes of Belial, the Raine of the land

and countrey wherin they were borne, intended that Powder-treafon ? Wiiich, as on the one fide, it

expecteth at the hands of l)is Maieftie a greater thankfulneffe to God the King of kings ; fo, on the

other fide, it calleth for vs who fit peaceably vnder his ihadow, euerlafting tokens of gratefulneffe to

fo mercifull a Lord, and heartie obedience to our Souereigne, whom God hath railed vp, defended,

protected, maintained, vpheld with his extraordinarie fauour to no common end ; but to the enlarging

of his Church, to the further ruine of Antichrifl ; to the vniting of Kingdomes, to the comfort of all

the godly difperfed thorow Europe. And happy is hee, not who can finde deuices, and call imaginarie

perils to hinder fuch a worke, but who in his poore place can with a faithfuU heart giue furtherance to

the fame.

Fourthly, as many bleflings from heauen hane been powred on the head of his Maieftie, fo it is not
the leaft, that tanquam e po/iliminio, after fo many yeeres, and that as from the bones of a dead man,
when lining men would not beleeue it, God hath giuen farther light to the opening of the Confpiracie
of that vngodly Earle Gowrie, which fome few perfons, affected more to a rebell that is dead, than to
their liuing Souereigne, did endeuour to difguife and mafte at their owne pleafure. The ftrange conceits of whome I can neuer fufficiently woonder at ; that men profefling conicience and zeale to the
trueth, fliould, vpon no kind of ground or fliew of probabilitie, fuffer fuch vnreuerent thoghts to enter
into their hearts, efpecially agaiiift iiis facred perfon, whofe life hath beene fo immaculate and vnfpotted in tlie world, fo free from all touch of vicioufnefte and ftaining imputation, that euen malice it fell'e
(which leauetli nothing vnfearched) could neuer finde true blemifli in it, nor caft any probable afperfion on it. Againft his facred perfon, whom as they muft acknowledge to be zealous as Dauid, learned and wife as the Salomon of our age, religious as lofias, carefuU of fpreading Chrills faith as Conftantine the Great ; fo if they will fpeake trueth, they muft confeffe to be iuft as Mofes, viidefiled in
ail his wayes as lehofaphat or Hezechias, full of clemencie as another Theodofius, farre from fpilling
the blood of any of his NobiHtie, but rather fparing thofe who haue lift vp their hand againft him. Notwitliftanding, when prepofterous affection had fo blinded thefe men, that they would not fee this truth,
the Lord hath giuen light yet once more, to tlie rectifying of their iudgements. A fingular example
of Gods vnlimited and vnbounded wifdome, who will doe things as he liketh. That when as S. lohn
fayth, ' Qui fordejcit, fordefcat adhuc. He that lift to be peeuifli, and refiactarie, and felfe-coneeited,
did thlnke hee might haue perfifted and died in that peeuilhnefle and refiactarie conceit, and fuppofeil
that neuer any thing in this world fliould haue been able to reforme him, may fee before his face fo illuftrious a teftitnony of his mifconceited fancie, and almoft vnfatistiable vndutifulnefi^e, that vnlefle his
face be hardened and his heart obdurated againft both heauen and earth, he muft ceafe to be pcruerfe.
God is the God of truth ; and he wlio is the protectour of innocency in the pooreft, will certainly be
the mainteiner and defender of integritie and finceritie in his nobleft and deareft feruant. It is fit that
he fliould haue his owne will, to put off and prolong his mercies till the time which feemeth good to
himfelfe, that men may wait vpon him, and patiently expect, and ftill tarie the Lords leifure : yea,
that liis power may be knowen, who can bring light out of darknefle, an good out of euill, and trutb
out of treafon ; who can giue hope beyond iiope. But when hee is once refolued that things acted in
fecret fliall be preached vpon the houfe top, that iniquitie fliall be opened, that fimplicitie thai! be
cleered, and innocencie dilljurdened of fcandalous imputations, if men would not fpeake, or children
found out the trueth in the ftreets, ^ yet the verie ftones Ihall cristas our Sauiour once anfwered to the

. ' Apoc. xxii. U. 'Luc. sjjc 40.

272 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. ICOO.

An!:r. 1G08. maligning Phavifees. Bleffed be the God of iullice, who cleereth vp the fame of his holy ones, when
malice would obfcure it.

Laftlv, heere may be a warning to men of mine own profeffion, I meane the Minifters of the Gofpell, that in cafes of highelt nature between a King and his rebell, they conceiue not things to the
woorft, and (becaufe they will be oppofite to him whom moft of all they fliould honor) by buzzings
and whifperings, and fecret fuggeflions, witliout all ground of trueth, labour to fow fedition in the
eares of women and childi'en, or in tlie mindes of men either weake or ill difpofed.' For as the '^ lips
of the Prieft lliould alwayes preferue knowledge, fo fliould they prefenie trueth. And we are to go
before our flocks and congregations, in obedience and obfequioufnefTe vnto the Chriftian INIagiftrate, not
in lowing fedition, or making of mutinies, to the difturbance of the State. Wio Ihould Iticke elofer
to Moyfes, welding fo huge a charge, than Aaron and his tribe? And who Ihould rather labour to doe
his Prince all right, than the Minifter of the GofpelJ, who, next after teaching men their dutie to God,
is made to teach obedience and refpectiueneffe vnto Kings ? And who more delerueth to be challLfed
than he, if he wilfully tranfgreffe ?

Thefe things I thought not amilTe to obferue to thee, Chriflian Reader, before thou come to the
perufing of this plaine and true narration, touching the examination, arraignment and death of the perfon here defcribed. God Almiglitie blefle the Kings Majeftie, grant vnto him many dayes full of
pietie and felicitie ; and after this mortall life expired, fend him an euerlalling crown of glorie, through
lefus Chrift our Lord. Amen. Thine in the Lord,

GEORGE ABBOT.

THE EXAMINATIONS, Ssfi. o/* George Sprot, ^Notarij in Aye-mouth.

THOUGHT good (gentle Reader) for fatisfaction of tlie true hearted and wellaflected fubjects to their gracious Souereigne, and doling of the mouthes of
his malicious enemies, to fpend a little time in dUcourfe of a flrange and
almoft miraculous accident, that fell out of late, anent the reuealing of the
practiles of Gowries trealbnable Conspikacie, intended againft his Highnefle royall perfon. Which purpofe was hidden and concealed, vntill the
time it pleafed God to moue one George Sprot (who was priuie thereto)
■^S to manifefl. and confelFe the fame, as by this that followeth may appeare.
This Sprot, after diners examinations, being moued with reniorfe of confcience, for the long concealing of the fore-knowledge of this treafonable confpiracie, confelleth, declareth and deponeth, with
the perill of his own life, That he knew perfectly, that Robert Logane, late of Restalrig, was
priuie and vpon the foreknowledge of Gowreis treafonable confpiracie. And for the greater allurance of
his knowledge, deponeth. That he knew there wer diners Letters interchanged betwixt them, anent
the treafonable purpofe aforefayd, in the beginning of the moneth of luly, 1600. Which Letters lames
Bour, called Laird Bour, feruitor to Rellalrig, (who was imployed mediatour betwixt them, and priuy
to all that errand) had in keeping, and fliewed the fame to Sprot, in the place of Faft-Callle. The firfi
of Gowreis Letters, containing in effect, as followeth :
Good Laird of Restalrig,

You vnderftand what conditions fliould haue beene betwixt vs, ofbefoir. Indeed, I purpofed
to haue come by your houfe ; but vnderflanding of your abfence in Lothiane, I came not. Alwayes,
I with you either your felfe to come Weft, or els to fend fonie Aire meflenger, who may conferre with
mee, anent the puqiofe you know. But rather would I wifli your felfe to come, not only for that
eiTand, but for fome other thing that I haue to aduife with you.

' This is an evident allusion to the blind obstinacy of Mr Robert Bruce. * Mai. ii. 7.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 273

To the wliich Letter Reftalrig wrate an anfwer, and feiit the fame to the Earle of Gowiie, by the Aug. 1608.
faid lames Bour, of the tenure following: [The Letter is liere inferted. •]

Which letter, written euery word with lleflalrigs owne hand, was fubfcribed by him after his accuftomed maner, ' Reftalrig :' And was fent to the Earle Gowrie by the fayd James Bour. After whofe
returne within fiue dayes, with a new letter from Gowrie, he ftayed all night with Reftalrig in Gunnef-greene:^ and Reftalrig rode to Lothiane, the morne thereafter; wliere he ftayed fiue or fix dayes.
Then, after his returning, part to Faft-Caftle ; where he remained a certeine ihort fpace. And farther
deponeth, that he faw and heard Reftalrig reade the laft letter, which Bour brought backe to him from
Gowrie, and their conference thereanent. And heard Bour fay, ' Sir, if ye thinke to make any commoditie by this dealing, lay your hand to your heart.' And Reftalrig anfwered, that he would do as
he thought beft. And farther fayd to Bour, ' Howbeit he Ihould fell all his owne land that he had in
the world, he would paffe thorow with the Earle of Gowrie ; for that matter would giue him greater
contentment, nor if he had the whole kingdome : and rather or bee Ihould falfifie his promife, and
recall his vow that bee had vowed to the Earle of Gowrie, bee Ihould fpend all tiiat bee had in the
world, and hazard his life with his Lordlhip.' To whom Bour anfwered : ' You may doe as you pleafe,
Sir, but it is not my counfell, that you iliould be fo fudden, in that other matter. But for the condition of Dlrlton, I would like very well of it.' To whom Reftalrig anlWered, ' Content your felfe, I
am at my wits end.' And farther Sprot deponeth, that he entred him felfe, there-after, in conference
with Bour, and demanded, ' what was done betwixt the Laird and the Earle of Gowrie?' And Bour
anfwered, ' that hee beleeued that the Laird ihould get Dirlton, without either golde or filuer; but
feared that it lliould be as deare vnto him.' And Sprot inquiring ' how that could be ?' Bour fayd,
' They had another pie in hand nor the felling of any land :' But prayed Sprot, for God's fake, that
hee would let be, and not trouble himfelfe with the Laird's bufinefli ; for he feared, within few dayes,
the Laird would cither be landlelfe or lifeleffe. And the faid George Sprot being demanded, ' If this
his depofition was true, as he would anfwer vpoun the faluation and condemnation of his foule ; and
if hee will go to death with it, feeing he knoweth the time and the houre of his death to approch very
neere ?' Deponeth for anfwer, that hee hath not a defire to Hue ; and that he knowes the time to be
(hort, hauing care of no earthly thing, but only for deeriiig of his confcience, in the truth of all thefe
things, to his owne fliame before the world, and to the honour of God, and fafetie of his owne foule;
that all the former points and circumftances conteined in this his depofition, with the depofition made
by him the fift day of luly laft, and the whole remanent depofitions made by him feu that day, are
true ; which bee will take on his confcience, and as hee hopeth to be faued of God, and that be would
feale the fame with his blood. And farther, being demanded where this aboue written letter, written
by Reftalrig to the Earle of Gowrie, which was returned againe by lames Bour, is now? Deponeth,
that hee abftracted it quietly from Bour, in looking ouer and reading Bours letters, which he had in
keeping of Reflalrigs ; and that he left the aboue written letter in bis cheft among his writings, when
hee was taken and brought away, and that it is clofed and folded within a piece of paper.

This forefaid depofition was made by him the tenth of Auguft 1608, written by lames Primerofe,
Gierke of his Maiefties Priuie Counfell, and fubfcribed with the fayd George Sprots owne hand, in
the prefenee of the Earle of Dunbar, the Earle of Lothiane, the Billiop of Rofle, the L. Scbune, the
L. Halyrudehoufe, the L. Blantyre, Sir William Hart, his Maiefteis luftice, Mr John Hall, Mr Patricke Galloway, Mr Peter Hewart, Minifters of the Kirkes of Edenborough. Subfcribed with all
their hands.

And alfo, the eleuenth day of the forefaid moneth and yeere, the faid George Sprot being re-examined, in the prefenee of a number of the Counfell and Minifters aforefaid, and it being declared to

• As the Letters are inserted at length, from the Originals, preserved in the General Register House, Edinburgh,
it has been thought unnecessary to reprint them here, iu abstract. ^ A house of Restalrig's.

VOL. II. 2 M

274 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1608. him, that the time of his death now verie neere approched, and that therefore they defired him to
cleere his confcience with an vpright declaration of the truetli ; and that he wouhl not abufe the holy
name of God, to make him, as it were, a witnefle to vntrueths : and fpecially, being defued that he
would not take vpon liim the innocent blood of any perfon, dead or quick, by making and forging lies
and vntruths againll tiiem : Deponeth, that he acknowledgeth his grieuous offences to God (who hath
made him a reafouable creature) in abuling his holy name with many vntrueths, fen the beginning of
this procefle : but now being refolued to die, and attending the hours and time when it lliall pleafe
God to call him, he deponeth, with many atteflations, and as he wiflieth to be participant of the kingdome of heauen, where he maybe countable and anfwerable, upon the faluation and condemnation of
his foule, for all his doings and fpeeches in this earth ; that all that he hath deponed fen the fifth day
of lulv lalt, in all his leuerall depofitions, were true, in euery point and circumflance of the fame ; and
that there is no vntruetli in any point thereof. And hauing defired Mr Patricke Galoway to make a
prayer, whereby he might be comforted now in his trouble ; which was done : The laid deponer, with
many teares, after the prayer, affirmed this his depofition to be true : and for the confirmation thereof, declared, that he would feale the fame with his blood.

And the next day thereafter, being the twelfth of the forefaid moneth of Augufl, the laid
George was brought forth and prefented in iudgment vpon pannell, within the Towlebewth of Edenborough, before Sir William Hart of Preflon, his JVTaieflis lullice ; and there, in a fenced Court holden
by him that day, affifted by the honourable perfons following, his Assessors in that errand : They
are to fay,
Alexander Earle of Dumfermling, Dauid Earle of Crawford, Michael L. Burley,

L. Chanceller, Marke Earle of Lothiane, Sir Richard Cokburne of ClarkGeorge Earle of Dunbar, Trea- lohn L. Abernethy of Saltoun, intoun. Knight,

furer, lames L. of Balmerinoth, Secre- Mr lohn Preflon of Fenton Barnes,

lohn Archbifliop of Glafcow, tarie. Collector Generall,

Dauid Biihop of Rofle, Walter L. Blantyre, Sir lohn Skeyne of Currhill,

Gawin Billiop of Galloway, lohn L. Halrudehoufe, Knight, Gierke of Regiller ;

Andrew Biihop of Brechine,

was delated, accnfed, and purfued by Sir Thomas Hamilton of Binning, Knight, Aduocate to our
Souereigne Lord, for his Highnefle Entries, of the crimes conteined in his Inditement, produced by
the faid Aduocate; whereof the tenure followeth. [Here follow the Dittay and proceedings in the
Court of Justiciary, in terms similar to those recorded in the Books of Adjournal.]

The doome being pronounced, the faid George was conuoyed to a priuie houfe ; where he remained
at his fecret meditation, and afterwards in conference with the Minillers and others, vnto the time all
things was prouided neceffarie for his execution : and being brought to the place where he was to die,
he, in publike audience of the whole people, at the three fides of the fcaffold, ratified the former depofitions made by him concerning the treafonable practices intended and deuifed betwixt Gowrie and
Reftalrig, for the murthering of our mofl gracious Souereigne, and bereauing his HighnelTe of his life,
and his owne knowledge and concealing of their guiltinefl'e. [Here a copy of Sprot's Confession is
inserted. See a correct transcript of this extraordinary paper, p. 260.]

By this Nanation aforegoing, each man may learne, that the contriuing and plotting of treafon
againft Kings and Princes, is a thing odious in the fight of God, and therefore ordinarily is difclofed
by him, at firfl or at lafl, by one meanes or another : and that it is not good to conceale any fuch Confpiracie intended by enemie or friend, becaufe the life and fafetie of a Chrillian King, who is the common Father of the Countrey, ought to be dearer to all good men, than the lone or acquaintance of any
whatfoeuer : who howbeit hee make fliew of manie faire things in him, yet in this alone. That hee
purpofed euill againfi, the Lords Anointed, fuflBciently declareth himfelfe to be of a rebellious and

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 275

vngodly difpofuion. And how wofull the fruit is either of fuch traitourous refolutlons, or of the con- Aucr 1G08
cealing of them, may be feene (as in a glafle) both in the fudden end of the Earle Gowrie, and in the
execution of this George Sprot with more deliberation.

(4.) Narrative of Spkott's Execution, &c.

^In the course of pursuing the researches necessary to be made, owing to the task which the Editor had imposed upon himself, of collecting such original and authentic information, bearing upon all
the facts connected with Gowrie's Conspiracy, as could now be procured, he discovered the following curious fragment, among the voluminous MS. Collections of Wodrow, preserved in the Library of
the Faculty of Advocates, in an anonymous MS. marked ' Hist, of Church of Scotland.' Rob. III. 2,
9. It is evidently wi'itten by some person who entertained ideas unfavourable to the reality of the
Conspiracy ; but, notwithstanding the turn he attempts to give to the declarations of Sprott, and certain gratuitous assertions occasionally introduced by him, on the whole, it unquestionably establishes
the author's belief of the veracity of Sprott, and the truth of liis dying Confessions ; and being written
by a professed paitisan of the family of Gowrie, this paper becomes more important than had it contained a fulsome detail, and concluded with a panegyric on the King.]

Upoun the xij day of Augiift 1608, thair wes ane man hangit at the Croce
of Edinburgh, for conceiling of the Treffoun committit be the vniq'° Erie of Gowrie, in maner aforvvrittin. The manis name wes callit George Sprott, nottar in
Eymouth. The maner of his reueiling of the faid Treffoun, wes in this forme.
The faid George wes apprehendit in the moneth of Aprile, or thairbj', 16 08, vpoun
fum informatioun that he had maid of the faid Treaffoun of before : And being
brocht to Edinburgh, and thairefter examinat be the Lordis of Secrete Counfall,
thair wer producit Letteris quhilkis wer fund in liis hous, writtin be the vmq'^
Laird of Reftalrig that laft deceffit, ane godles drunkin debofchit man in his tyme,
direct to certane perfonis, quhais names culd not be maid knawin, feing the Letteris were not direct on the bak ; making mentioun of the proceding of the faid
Erie of Gowreis Treffoun, and about fum melting thairanent, to have bene betuix the Erie and his brother and the faid Laird of Reftalrig, in his hous of Fafcaftell : And being particularlie examinat, he clerit many thingis to the Counfall, and caufit lindrie men of rank to be fufpectit. And to the effect he micht
the better declare the mater, he reffauit fum choppis (Jlrokes) in the buittis, and
abyding, that thay Letteris wer wi'ittin be the Laird of Reftalrig, and be his
Depofitionis that he had deponit. It wes thocht very ftrange be mony, that the
Erie of Gowry and his brother fuld have communicate fic ane hich turne, to the
knawledge of fic ane debofchit drvuikin man as the Laird of Reftalrig ; and yit,
all that faw the writtis and knew the Laird of Reftalrigis handwritt, affirmit
it wes the fame. And thairefter, the faid George being vrgit to depone quhat
forder he knew in the faid mater, to the forder fatisfactioun of the Couniall, and
being buittit to that effect, he than Avith grite and folemne aithis declaii'it that
all wes fals that he had writtin or faid in the faid mater ; and willit thame that
wer his auditouris, that gif euir at ony tyme thairefter he fuld fay or write

276 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1608. vtherwayis, that tliair fuld be na credit gevin thairto.' And fua, the mater
lying over till my Lord of Dumbaris ciiming into this cmatrey, he than caufit
tak the faid George Sprot furth of waird, and canfit cure his leggis, quhilkis
wer very ewill woundit with the buittis ; and thairefter cavifit prefent him before the Counfall ; quhan he ratifeit all that euir he had faid firft in the faid
mater, and declairit, that albeit the Letteris wer writtin and deuyfit be him felff,*
yit the fubiect quhairupoun he wrait thame wes trew ; and declairit that he wes
preuy to the knawledge of the faid TrefToun, and dilatit all the particular circumftances of his knawledge. And thairefter, vpoun the day foirfaid, being put
to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe, he planelie confeffit liim felfF to haue bene preuy
to the knawlege of the faid TrefToun, and that thairfore, he deferuit maift worthelie to die. And thaireftir, being brocht to the place of execution, quhair
thair wes prefent with him fmdrie of the Counfall and fmdrie of the Miniftrie,
with grite nowmer of people ; and being pofit, as he fould be partaker of lyf
eternall, that he fould declai'e the veritie, maift planlie confeffit, that he had nather promife of lyf, natlier rewaird to his wyf and bairns efter his deceas, nor
ony vther thing that movit him, hot iimple the grudge of his awin confcience.
And fua, declairit that quhat he had deponit in the faid mater wes trew ; and
that he wes preuy to the knawlege of the faid Treaffoun, and cravit God pardoun thairfore ; and befocht the pepill to pray for him ; and fua deit very penitent. And thairefter, his body wes brokin and qviarterit, and his heid putt vp
befyd the Erie of Gowreis.

No. XV.

dToiftitui't for WqI) Crcason— <goi»i*ie*s Coitspiraci?.

Robert Logan, eldeft fone to vmq'° Robert Logane of Restalrig.

[It is not tlie puq)ose of the Editor, here, to enter into any vindication of the conduct of the Lord
High Commissioner and tlie Parliament of Scotland, for their insisting so rigidly on the Forfeiture of
the lieir of the deceased traitor Restalrig. Such were then considered to be the Laws of this country, in

' It seems clear, that this retraction of his former voluntary Confessions, was only extorted from
Sprott by the extremity of the torture suffered by him in ' the buittis.' For no sooner is he rid of them,
and patiently examined on oath before the Privy Council, than he explicitly declares the truth of his
previous Declarations ; and these he, with unswerving confidence, continued to repeat, until the moment
of his death. The administration of the torture to this person to so exquisite a degree (however reprehensible the practice unquestionably was), proves the extreme anxiety of his exaniinators to draw out
the truth from this person, even though this should be to the discredit of the King's repeated attestations. Their integiity, therefore, is deserving of the highest praise — for had they been acting as mere
time-servers, it would have been enough for them to have encouraged Sprott in his repeated asseverations. ■■' This assertion is entirely gratuitous on the part of the anonymous writer, and is disproved by the Declarations, so fervently emitted by Sprott, as a dying man, attested by many respectable
and unexceptionable witnesses, such as Archbishop Spottiswood, several members of the Privy Council of Scotland, the Ministers of Edinburgh, the Bishop of Galloway, and the Bailies of Edinburgh, &c.
In addition to this, the testimony of such a host of witnesses, at the Forfeiture of Logan of Restalrig,
proves the authenticity of these Letters beyond the shadow of a doubt ; if any eflect is to be given to
human testimony, in such a matter.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 277

aggravated cases of High Treason ; and it is by no means unnatnral that this Parliament should hare June 1609.
pressed for their most rigorous enforcement, immediately after the occurrence of so unexpected a discovery. The extraordinary disclosures of the real facts and circumstances attending the origin and
progress of the Conspiracy, which had been so long concealed by Sprott, and his unswerving adherence
to his Confessions, had an irresistible effect upon the opinions of such portions of the community, as
had, till then, remained in their incredulity. These doubts unquestionably originated with the perverse
conduct of Mr Robert Bruce, whose talents and integrity were universally respected by the Presbyterian
party, and had placed him in the situation of leader and organ of that body. The injudicious attempts
which were made by the King and Council, to concuss him into a public profession of implicit reliance on every item of ' the Account published by authority,' and to force upon him, not only the subscription of a certain formula, but besides publicly to recite this paper, and to preach upon the subject, in the exact terms pointed out to him, from the pulpit all over the kingdom, tended much to rouse
the suspicions of the doubting. His stubborn and bold spirit, which had in it much of the intrepidity
of John Knox, could by no means brook such indignity, and accordingly he went into the banishment
which was awarded him. The particulars of his extraordinary correspondence, and the conferences
he had with the King, shall be given in the present Collection.

One remarkable circumstance attended these Cases of Logan and Gowrie.' The dead bodies of the
traitors were actually produced in Court ; and, in the latter case, sentence was pronounced against the
corpses of the Earl of Gowrie and Mr Alexander Ruthven. In Logan's case, his bones, which had
been buried for several years, were dug up and produced at the bar ; but no warrant for burning or
public exposure is contained in the doom of Forfeiture ; and the Editor does not find that such was
resorted to, although the matter excited the strongest feelings and the utmost detestation of his memory. On this subject, it may be interesting to many, to notice some illustrations of so extraordinary
a subject.

Sir George Mackenzie, in his Treatise on the Criminal Law, B. 1, Title 6, § 22, says, ' Albeit the
bones of the defunct traitor are ordinarily taken up and brought to the pannel, in pursuits of this nature, as was dene in the forefaulture of the Laird of Restalrig, yet this is not necessary.' Lord Hailes,
in an interleaved copy of the Earl of Cromarty's Account of the Conspiracy, remarks, ' He is certainly in the right ; for the bones of a traitor can neither plead defences, nor cross-question witnesses ;
and upon this matter, there is no difference whether the accused person be absent in body or present
in bones !' Paulus Jovius, in the History of his own Times, vol. i. Lib. 2, p. 50, Edit. Vcnetiis, 1553,
notices a similar instance. ' Innocentium namque Catiam Opicini propinquum Ludouicus Sfortia aliquot ante annis facto functum, objectis quibusdam criminibus, e sepulchro in jus vocari daranarique
jusserat, ut bona illius veluti convicta judicio per leges fisco addicarentur. Quod sicuti inauditum et
execrabile visum est, ita illi singularcm invidiam concitavit.' Bishop Guthrie also in his INIemoirs,
Glasg. 1747, p. 250, mentions, in the case of Archibald Lord Napier, ' The Committee resolved to
raise his bones, and pass a sentence of forefaulture thereupon : And for that end. Letters were raised
and ordained to be executed at the pier and shore of Leitli against Archibald Lord Napier his son,
then under exile, for his loyalty, to appear upon sixty days' warning, and to hear and see the same done.
And when his friends were startled at the noise of it, and made enquiry what was meant by it ? They
found it was only to draw money from the present Lord Napier, for the use of some sycophants that
expected it : And so, they advanced five thousand merks to that end ; and thereupon the intended
forfaulture was discharged.' See also Limborch, Historia Inquisitionis, lib. 4, c. 8, pp. 357, 363.

' See also the case of Francis Mowbray, Jan. .31, 160.3 ; who, in his attempt to escape from the Caslle of Edinburgh, (where he had been confinea on a chaise of Higli Treason,) by means of cuttinf? his blanlsets and letting himself down from his window, fell, and expired in a few liours. His body was brought to the bar, before an Assise ;
and ordered to be gibbeted, drawn, and quartered, &c. The case of the Arclibishop of Spalato, 1G24, bvmcrs's islaU
Tracts, vol. ii. p. 30, may likewise be referred to, as illustrative of this practice.

278 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

June, 1609. SententicB ThohsmuB, pp. 162, 167, 248, &c.—' Accusal! post sepultuiam, decretumque ut more majorura punirentur.*— TbfiV. Annal. 13. — ' Cum accusatores ac testes perorarent, respondente nullo,
miseratio quara invidia augebatur.' — Tacit. Amial. 3.

The first recorded instances, in Scotland, occurred in the reign of King James V., viz. the case of
Robert Leslie, and that of James Colvile of East Wemyss, Dec. 4, 1540, wliich were continued from
time to time to 1542; when by Act of Pari. cap. 13, it was declared, that all such actions, in future,
ag-ainst the heirs of deceased Traitors, must be led witliin Jive years after the decease of ' fame Jiat
notouriie committis or fall coramitt crimes of Leife-maiellie aganis Jie Kingis perloune, aganis fe
realme for evertioune of fe famin, and aganis paim Jiat lall happin to betraife I>e Kingis army, alanerlie.'

j^cta Pari. vol. ii. p. 415. The practice was founded on the Civil Law, Corpus Stir. Civ. Dig. ad

L. Juliam Maj. L. ult. — It is only necessary, in farther illustration, to refer to our learned Commentator on the Criminal Law, Hu)ne on Punishment for Crimes, vol. ii. p. 438 ; Mackenzie on Crimes,
p. 29, No. 22 ; and Mach Obs. on Stat. pp. 136-7.

As will be seen by the Warrant inserted at the end of these proceedings, the Lord Advocate was
directed, by the Privy Council, to prepare the summons against Logan's representative, and to insist iu
its pursuit, after thorouglily investigating Sprott's Conviction and Confessions, and examining the witnesses, whose depositions follow. Sir Thomas Hamilton's Report to his Majesty has been recovered
among the Denmylne Papers, and is also appended. It need hardly be remarked, it is a most important and interesting document.]

(Jun. 24.) — Sir Thomas Hamyltoux of Bynnie knycht, Aduocatto oiire foiierane lord, producit in prefens of the noble and michtie lord, the Erie Marfchaill
Comraiflionar and in prefens of the haill Eftaittis, lyk as [he] did diuerfe tymes
of befoir, ane Summondis of TrealToun, rafit and perfewit be oure faid fouerane
lord, and be the faid Aduocat aganis Robert Logane eldell fone to vnq'^ Robert
Logaue of Reftalrig and his tutouris and cnratouris, gif he ony hes, and all vtheris
haveand or pi'etendand to bane interes in the faid mater, for thair interefle ; to
haue anfwerit to the laid funimondis, and to the cr^^mes of Treaflbun and Lefema'" contenit thairintill : The qidiilk fummondis and reflbnes and caulfes thairin
contenit, being firft red in prefens of the lordis of Articlis of this prefent Parliament, they fand the famyn fummondis relevant : And thaireftir this inftant day,
the famin fummondis of Treaflbun and relTones and caufles thairin contenit being
red, in prefens of the faid Lord Commiffionar and of the haill Eftaittis of Parliament, the faid Robert Logane eldeft fone to the laid A'uq'^ Robert Logane of
Reftalrig and his tutoui-is and cnratouris, and all vtheris haveand or pretendand
to haue interes, being thryfe callit at the tolbuth Avindow, to haue anfwerit to
the faid fummondis of Treaftbun, and comperit noclit, the faidis haill Eftaittis
ffand the faid Summondis of Treaflbun railit be our laid fouerane lord and his
hienes Aduocat aganis the faid Robert Logane and his foirfaidis, and the reflbun
and caufe contenit thairin, maift relevant caufles of Treaflbun committit be the
faid \Tiq"' Robert Logane of Reftalrig his father, in his lyftyme : And thairfoir
the faidis Eftaittis, all in ane voce, Admittit the famin fummondis of Treaflbun,
and reflbun and caufe of Treaflbun contenit thairin, to the faid Aduocat, in oure^

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 279

fouerane lordis name, his probatioun : Quhairvpoun the faid Aduocatt, in name June, 1609.
of his hienes, afkit actis and Inftrumentis.

Summons of Treafon and fforfeiture of the Memory and EJlates of the deceafed Robert Logane o/Restalrig.

Jacobus Dei gratia, Magne Biitannie, Francie et Hibernie Rex, fideique defenfor: Dilectis noftris
Leoni Regi aimorum, Mercliemount, Day, Rofs, Rothefay, Albania et Snawdoun, lierauldis ; Dauidi
Bryfoun, Alexandre Dowglas, Jacobo Chalraer et Magiftro Willelmo Stewart, clavigeris ; Ormount,
Bute, Vnicorne, Carrik, figniferis, nuncijs, ac eorum cuilibet, coniunctim et divifim, vicecomitibus
noftris in hac parte fpecialiter conftitutis : Salutem. Mandamus vobis et precipimus, quod fumraoneatis legitime et peremptorie, coram teftibus, Robertum Logane filium primogenitum et heredera apparenteni quondam Roberti Logane de Restalrig, perfonaliter, fi eius perfonalem prefentiam habere poteritis ; fm minus, apud domicilium et locum habitationis fue, necnon dictum Robertum Logane
eiufque tutores et curatores, fi quos Jiabet, omnefque alios intereffe habentes feu pretendentes, per
publicationem apud cruces forales burgorum noftrorum de Edinburcht, Hadingtoun, Dunfe, Grenlaw,
aliaque loca neceffaria, ita vt hujufmodi fummonitio ad eorum aures et notitiam verifimiliter peruenire
poftit ; ad comparendum coram nobis noftrove Commiffionario et Jufticiario, ac regni noftri Scotie
Ordinibus, in Parliamento noftro apud Edinburgh, vel vbi nos noftrumve Commiftionarium ac Julliciaruni et dicti regui noftri Ordines pro tempore convenire contigerit, tenendo duodecimo die menfis
Aprilis proxime futuri, hora caufarum, cum continuations dierum ; ad refpondendum nobis feu noftro
Jufticiario in dicto noftro Parliamento, necnon ad inftantiam dilecti et fidelis confiliarij noftri Thome
Hamniyltoun de Bynnie militis, noftri Aduocati, pro noftro interefle : Et ad videndum et audiendum,
per nos aut noftri Commiftionarij, Juftitiarij et tiium dicti regni noftri Scotie Statuum, decretum et
fententiain decerni dictum quondam Robertum Logane de Reftalrig, crimina Lefemaieftatis infrafcripta in vita fua commififl*, eorumque confcium et participem fuifle, eaque approbafte et cailafle :
Ideoque Memoriam eius damnari, et bona omnia mobilia et immobilia, jura aliaque omnia ad eum
infra dictum noftrum regnum fpectantia, nobis confifcari et perpetuo nobifcum modo infrafcripto remanere debere ; ob caufas et rationes fequentes. Quum enim quondam Joannes olira Comes de
GowRiE et quondam Magister Alexander Rutiivene eius frater, nulla prouocati iniuria, fed
multis magnifque devincti nobis beneficijs, in necem noftram, raenfe Julio aut eo circa, anno Domini
milleftmo fexcentefimo, ingrate, crudeliter, nefarie, et proditorie Coniuraflent ; et de afciftendis in fceleris confilium et partem focijs confultantes, neminem ad tam immane nefas aut fufcipiendum aut patrandum aptiorem promptiorenive dicto quondam Roberto Logane de Reftalrig exiftimaront : Ideoque
dictus quondam Joannes olim Conies de Gowrie dictum quondam Magiftrum Alexandrum Riithven
fuum fratrem ad dictum quondam Robertum Logane de Reftalrig mififlet, cum vt dicti horrendi fceleris confilium et executionis deftiiiatum ordinem ei fignificaret, turn etiam vt eum hortaretur vt eos
confilio et auxilio fuo, in tarn nefando facinore perpetrando jnuaret ; dictus quondam Magifter Alexander dictum quondam Robertum Logane de Reftalrig, in Vico Canonicorum opportune conveniens,
omnem Proditionis feriem ei patefecit, dictufque quondam Robertus Logane pro fua ad fcelera omnia
naturali et inveterata propenfione, adeo gratam fil)i eam coniurationem effe declarauit, vt fide data et
accepta, crebrifque cum dicto quondam Magiftro Alexandre ea de re, in dicto menfe Julio, habitis fermonibus, omnem tandem tuto et fecrete peragendi criminis ordinem proditorie conftituerunt ; atque in
ea crudeli et fceleftiflima voluntate, dictus quondam Robertus Logane de Reftalrig, non folum peitinaciter et proditorie perfeuerauit, fed crebris nuntijs Literifque per quondam Jacobum Bour de Bourhoufe alias Laird Boure vocatum ad quondam Comitem de Gowrie millis ; qnibus dicti quondam Comitis Literis fuper ea re acceptis, refpondebat dictum quondam Joannem olim Comitem de Gowrie

280 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

June, 1609. eiiixe ad conftantiam in prefato fcelere profequendo et perpetrando proditorie hortatus eft, aicemque
fuam de Faftcaftell, natura et arte niuiiitiffimi, poll fcelus proditorie peractum, paratum tutumque
coniuratis refugiuin futurum proiiiifit, fi tribus aut quatuor focijs comitatus dictus quondam Comes eo
fe recipere in cymba pifcatoria vellet. Et quamvis nomen noftrum et de caede noftra expreflam mentionem in dictis Literis, quondam Robertus Logane, vt in tam fedis proditionibus fieri folet fupprefferet ;
ea tamen adeo dilucide et peripicue liabita temporis et circumflantiarum facti in dictis Literis defcripti
rations expreflit, vt nil clarius manifeftiufque effe pofllt. Cum tandem, quinto die menfe Augufto,
anno Domini millefimo fexcentefirao, quera csedi noflre diem deftinauerunt, dictus quondam Joannes
olim Comes de Gowrie miflb ad nos Falcolandiam dicto quondam jNIagiftro Alexandro Ruthvene fratre
fuo, fraudulenter et nefarie nos Pertham pertraxifTet, et in lecretius cubiculum, exclufis viris nobilibus
domellicifque noftris, qui et pauci et inermes, inllituta eo die venatione relicta nos eo fecuti erant,
dictus quondam INIagifter Alexander duxiffet, ibique vim vite noftre proditorie afferre enixe conatus fujffet ; Nofque Divino favente Numine, licet et aimis ct alia onini huniana ope deftituti, tam atrocem
violentiam diu propulfalTeraus, donee clamore noftro accitis, qui in propinqua Vrbis platea noftrum ex
Vrbe exitum operiebantur feruis noftris, Dei mira Providentia, Dominus Joannes Ram fay, (Vicecomes
Hadingtonie,) accurrens, et dictum quondam Magiftrum Alexandrum nos opprimere conantem cernens,
ftricto pugione in pectus ipllus addacto, eura fugere coegit ; quern Dominus Tiioraas Erikynne, (Fentonie Vicecomes,) ad auxilium nobis in dicto difcrimine ferendum, pro eximia ftia in nos fide properans,
dictum Magiftrum Alexandrum letlialibus vulneribus confecit : Ac dictum quondam Joannem olim
Comitem de Gowrie, ad ceptum i'celus perficiendum, multis ftipatus Coniuratis, ferociter accelerantem,
dicti Vicecomites de Hadingtoun et Fentoun prohibere conantes, fummoque cum vite fue difcrimine,
noftrum periculura propulfantes, et vitam noilram honeftis vulneribus acceptis protegentes; tandem
dictus Vicecomes Hadingtonie dicti quondam Comitis cor, proditionem fpirans et fanguinem noftrum
auidiflime fitiens, enfe fua ferociter et feliciter transfixit. Cuius Proditionis, quamvis nos dictum
quondam Robertum Logane de Reftahig ream elfe ignoraremus, ipfe tamen fua damuatus confcientia,
ac femper timens ne dictus quondam Jacobus Bour, dicte Conjurationis confcius, rem omnem detegeret ;
fepius cum dicto Jacobo egit, vt fidem (ibi de ea Proditione celanda obftringeret ; tandemque per
dictum quondam Jacobum ceriior factus quondam Georgium Sprott notarium in Aymoutb, turn vifis
ipfius quondam Robert! ad dictum quondam Comitem de Gowrie ea de re Literis fcriptis, apud Gmiifgrene, priufquam claufe fuiflent pluribus diebus ante patratum fcelus : Et poft detectam Conjurationem (quod dictus quondam Jacobus Boure literarum prorfus ignarus, dicti quondam Georgii opera in
legendis fcriptis omnibus ad eum miffis vel pertinentibus vtebatur) quafdeui etiam dicti quondam Reberti Literas fuper ea Coniuratione apud dictum Jacobum Boure fortuito vidille, quare dicto quondam
Comite de Gowrie, poftquam eas legillet, ad dictum Robertum Logane reportandas, dictus quondam
Jacobus Bour retinuerat. SiCQUE Coniiuationis porfectam noticiam habere, eiufdem dictum quondam
Robertum conl'cium elle et participem intelligere, dictus quondam Robertus Logane de Reftalrig cum
vtroque diligentilfirae egit, multifque vnicuique eorum datis muneribus, perfuafit vt dictam Proditionem pro perpptuo ca'larent, obtinuitque vt fe vino nunquam revelaretur : Xeque prius horrendum illud
dicti Iloberti maieftatis crimen detectum fuit, quam dictus quondam Georgius Sprott, Diuino vt apparuit infpirante numine, ad vindicandam noftram ab improborum calumniis famam, predictara proditoriam Coniuralionem, et dicti quondam Robert! Logane eiufdem reatum, multis conftantiflimis Confeflioiiibus, vitro patefecit ; et dicti quondam Robert! Literis quas a dicto quondam Jacobo Bour acceperat prolatis manifeftauit ; ac conftanti, pia et penitent! ob tam horrendum facinus, tam diu cielatum,
morte fa^liciter confirmault. Cuius crudelis, nefarij et proditorii facinoris, et Lefe maieftatis criminis,
dictus quondam Robertus Logane de Reftalrig, in vita fua, fuit ars et pars, confcius et particeps : Idque
ipfius perfuafionc, hortatu, confilio et auxilio, fufccptum et pei-petratum fuit, dictufque quondam Robertus dictum fceleftiflimum Maieftatis crimen ad mortem et in morte proditorie cielauit : Et prop34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 281

TEREA, tlictus Robeitus Logaiie, filius et heies apparens dicti quondam Robeiti de Logane de Reftal- June, 1609.
rig, eiiifque tutores et curatoies, fi quos liabet, omnefque alii intereffe liabentes feu pietendentes, ad
videndum et audiendum nomen, Memoiiara et dignitatem dicti quondam Robert! Logane de Reftalrig
extinctum fore et effe decern!, armaque et inlignia fua de Libro Armorum et nobilitatis deleri et eancellari, ita vt ipfius pofteri ab officiis, bonoribus, dignitatibus, terris, tenementis, prediis, redditibus,
poffeflionibus, omnibufque bonis, mobilibus et immobilibus, juribufque et alijs in hoc regno nollro
Scotie poflidendis et gaudendis, sint inhal)iles et incapaces de bine imperpetuum ; atque omnia bona,
terras, predia, tenenienta, atque alia quecunque bona, mobilia et immobilia, jura aliaque ad dictum
quondam Robertum Logane de Reftalrig pertinentia, vel que ad ilium poft initum fcelefte factionis et
proditorii criminis fupradicti confilium pertinuerunt, fpectarunt, vel ad ilium vUo niodo pertinere vel
fpectare potuerunt, nobis conBfcari et ad nos pertinere, et pro peipetuo nobifcum in proprietate remanere : Intimando dicto Roberto Logane filio et heredi apparent! dicti quondam Robert! Logane de
Reftabig, eiufque tutoribus et curatoribus, fi quos habet, omnibufque alijs interefle habentibus vel
pretendentibus, quod fiue comparuerint fiue non, dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, Nos,
dictufque Commiffionarius et dictus nofter Jufticiarius dictique regni nortri Scotie Ordines in prefato
noftro Parliamento, jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedent. INSURER funimoneatis ad comparendum in dicto Parliamento noflro, dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, coram nobis dictoue
noftro Jufticiario et Commifllirio ac dicti regni noftri Ordinibus, ad perbibendum fidele teftimonium
in premiffis, fub pena legis: Et vos qui predictas has nollras literas executione mandaueritis, fitis ibidem, portantes vobifcum dicte fummonitionis teftimonium et ipfos teftes. Ad quod faciendum, vobis
et veftrum cuilibet, coniunctim et divifim, viceconiitibus noftris in hac parte, noftram plenariam tenore
prefentium commlttlmus potellatem. Datum fub teftinionio noftri Magn! Sigilli, apud Edinbur',
decimo quinto die menfis Februarij, anno domini millefimo fexcentefimo none, regnorumque noftrorum
anuis quadragefimo fecundo et fexto.

And immediatlie thaireftir, the laid Sir Tliomas Hammyltoun of Bynuie kn',
adiiocat to our fouerane lord, in his hienes name, for preving of the pointtis of
the faid fiunmondis and reflbne and caufe of TrealToun and Lefemajeftie contenit thairin, Repetit diuerfe Miffive billis, all writtin and lublcrynit be the faid
vnq'^ Laird of Reftalrig, all the Depofitiounes of the witnelles examinat befoir
the Lordis of Articlis of befoir, and befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counlkill, George
Sprottis Depofitiounes and convictioun, and his executioun to the death for the
famin caufe of TrealToun of Gowrie ; togidder with diuerfe wryttis and vtlieris
probationis, quhilkis were prefentlie producit befoir the faidis Eftaittis be tlie laid
Lord Aduocat, in our fouerane lordis name, for preving of the foirfaid luunnondis
of trealToun, and reflbne and caufe of lefemajeftie contenit thairin: Off the quhilkis
Miflive billis and Depofitionis, producit be the faid Aduocat in oure fouerane
lordis name, for preving of the faid funimondis of Trealfoun and reaflbun thairin
contenit, aganis the faid Robert Logane and his foirfaidis, the teunouris followes.
Letters by Robert Logan of Restalrig to the Earl of Goavrie, &c.
relative to the projected Conspiracy againft the King.

[As HAS formerly been remarked, the Original Letters of the Laird of Restalrio, with the
Examinations of the Witnesses, have been recently discovered among the Warrants of Parliament, he.
preserved in the General Register House, Edinburgh ; and the Editor has been thereby enabled to
give a faithful transcript of these interesting documents. At the time the Records of Parliament of
this period were framed, and for a long time afterwards, it did not seem to be the practice, or to be

VOL. II. 2 N

282 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

June 1609. considered of any consequence, even in such important cases, to give a literal transcript ; all that was
aimed at, was to give tlie words employed, generally, without attending, in the slightest degree, to tlie
spellinsr, &c. So very inaccurately have they hitherto been given in any printed Collection, that they
may be said to be now, for the first time, accui-ately laid before the Public. As an instance of this
total disregard of minutite, not one of the characteristics of Logan's handwTiting liave been attended
to even in eno-rossinc the Letters in the Records of Parliament ; although they are there so scrupulously
examined and detailed by the Witnesses. So extremely dissimilar are they also in other particulars,
that they must have been merely read over or dictated to the transcriber, one of the under Clerks of
Parliament, who probably had been unable to decipher any part of these remarkable Letters, which
are written in a very dithcult hand. In consequence of their great importance, a Fac-simile of a portion of Logan's Letters has been given ; and a Plate accompanies this Part.]

(1.) Letter, Robert Logan of Bejialrig to ... .
Ry'^ hoxorabill sir,

My dewty with fervife remembred. Pleife yow onderftand, my Lo. of
Gowry and fome vtheris his Lo. frendis and veill villeris, qha tendaris his Lo.
better preferment, ar vijoun the refolucion ye knaw, for ]je revange of that
cawle ; and his Lo. hes vrettin to me anent ]>at purpofe, qhairto I vill accorde,
incafe ye vill ftand to and beir a pairt : And befoir ye reiblve, meet me and M.
A. R.^ in the Cannogat on Tyfday the nixt owk, and be alfe var as ye kan.
Indeid M. A. R. Ipak vith me fowr or fywe dayis fyn, and I hew promifed his
Lo. ane anfwar vithin ten dayis at farreft. As for the pnrpofe, how M. A. R.
and I hes fett down the cowrfe, it vill be ane very efj' done twrne, and nocht far
by that forme, vith the lyke ftratagem, qhairof ve had conferenfe in Cap. h.*
Bot incafe ye and M. A. R. foi-gader/ becawfe he is fomeqhat confety, for
Godis faik be very var vith his raklefe toyis^ of Padoa ; fTor he tald me ane of the
ftrangeft taillis of ane nobill man of Padoa that ever I hard in my lyf, refembling ])e lyk purpofe. I pray yow, Sir, think na thing althocht this berare onderftand of it, for he is the fpecial fecretair of my lyf; His name is Lard Bower,
and vas auld ]Manderftonis man for deid & lyf, and evin fa now for me. And
for my awin part, he fall knaw of all that I do in this varld, falang as ve leif
togidder, for I mak him my howlehald man : He is veill vorthy of credit, and
recommend him to yow. Alvyfe to the pvirpofe, I think heft; for owr plat that
ve meet all at my howfe of Faftcaftell ; ffor I hew concludit v' M. A. R. how I
think it fall be meittefl; to be convoyit quyeteft in ane bote, be fey ;' at qhilk

' Mr Alexander Ruthven. It 1ms been deemed proper to print these Letters, most scrupulously,
according to the Originals. ° The Record of Parliament reads this ' B" b.' ' Meet together,

'• In Pail. Rec. ' to this,' by an absurd liluiider of the Clerk of Parliament. ' It is obvious, that

it would have been the height of insanity in the brothers and their accomplices to have murdered
King James; at all events, to have done it in Gowrie House. Mr Alexander Rutiiven merely intitmiated to the King that he was his prisoner ; — and subsequently, when he desired Iiim to permit liis
hands to be bound, it was probably for the purpose of dragging iiim down to the river side, after being
muffled up ; and then to convey him to the boat which they appear to have provided, where he would
lie bound, until they could set sail for Fastcastle, on tl;p departure of the King's attendants. The subsequent struggle, and fatal termination of their enterprise, had never been contemplated ; for they certainly reckoned on the unshaken fidelity of Andrew Henderson.

34JAC, VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 283

tyme vpon fwre adwartifment I fall hew the place very qiiyett and veill provy- June, lou9.

dit : And as I receve yowr anfwer I vill poll this berair to my Lo. And therfoir I in-ay yow, as ye luf yowr awin lyf, becawfe it is nocht ane matter of mowife,'

be circumfiject in all thingis, and tak na feir bot all fall be veill. I hew na vill

that ather my brother- or yet M. W. R.^ my Lo. auld pedagog knaw ony thing

of the matter, qhill all be done that ve vald hew done ; and than, I cair nocht

qha get vit, that hifis vs. Qhen ye hew red, fend this my letter bak agane vith

pe berar, that I may fe it brunt my felf, for fa is the faflbn in fik erandis ; and

if ye pleafe, \Tyt yowr anfuer on the bak herof, iucafe ye vill tak my vord for

the credit of the berair : And vfe all expedicioun, for the twrne vald nocht be

lang delayit. Ye knaw the kingis hwnting vill be fchortly, and than fall be

beft tyme, as M. A. R. lies alTwred me, that my Lo. hes refolved to interpryfe

}jat matter. Lwkinge for yowr anfwer, committis yow to Chryftis haly protectioun. Frome Faftcaftell, the awchten day of Julij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Youris to vtter power redy. Restalrige.

(2.) Letter, Robert Logan of Rejlalng to Lciinl Bowe?:

Lard Bower,

I PRAY yow liafte yow vaft to me abowt the erand I tauld yow, and ve
fall confer at lenth of all thingis. I hew recevit ane new Letter fra my Lo(rd)
of Go(wrie,) concerning the iJiirjiofe ])' M. A. his Lo. brothir fpak to me befoir,
and I perfeif I may hew avantage of Dii-lton, iiicafe his other matter tak effect,
as ve hope it fall. Alvayfe I befeik yow be at me the morne at evin, for I hew
alTwred his lo. fervand, Y I fall fend yow over the vatter vithin thre dayis, vith
ane full refolucion of all my vill, anent all purpofes : As I fall indeid recommend
yow and yowr truftinefs till liis lo. as ye fall find an honeft recompenfe for yowr
panfe in the end. I cair nocht for all the land I hew in this kingdome, incafe I
get a grip of Dirleton,"* for I elleme it the plefanteft dwelling in Scotland. For
Goddis cawfe, keip all thingis very fecret, that my lo. my brothir get na knavvlege of owr purpofes, for I (wald?) rather be eirdit quik.' And fwa hvking for
yow, I reft till meitting. Fra the Kannogait, the xviij day of July.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Yowris to power redy. Restalrige.

I am verie ill at eafe and thairfou- Ipeid yow hither.

• Sport. It is no mummery or cliild's plaj'. ^ See Note to Letter (5.) ' Wr William Rliynd.
' The estate of Dirleton, in the county of East Lotliian, was a very valuable barony, whicli the family of Gowrie acquired by the marriage of William, becond Lord Hutliven, to Janet, eldest of the
three heiresses of Patrick Lord Halyburtouu and Dirlctoun. Their Ion Patrick (the chief instrument
in the murder of Kizzio) was styled ' Lord Rutliven and Dirletoun ;' wliicli title continued, till the
extinction of llie family. Restahig seems to have been promised this barony, as a bribe or reward
for his participation in tlie Conspiracy; and he dwells ou the idea with evident delight. ' Buried alive.

284

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

June, 1G09. (3.) LETTER, Robert Logaii ofRefialr'ig to ... .

Ryt honorable sir,

Ai>L my hartly dewty v' hiunbill fervife remembred. Sen I hew takin on
hand to interpryfe v' my lo(rd) of Go(wrie) yowr fpeciall and only beft belowed,
as ve hew fet down the platt ah-edy, I vill requeft yow that ye vill be very circumfpek and vyfe, Jj' na man may get ane avantage of vs. I dowt nocht bot ye
knaw the pere]l to be bayth lyf, land and honowr, incafe the mater be nocht
vyllie \'fed : And for my avin part, I fall hew ane fpeciall refpek to mj^ promife
Y I hew maid till his lo. and INI. A. his lo(rdfchipis) brother, altliocht the fkafald
ver fet vp. If I kan nocht vin to Fakland ]je firft nycht, I fall be tymelie in S'
Johneftoun on the morne. Indeid I lipnit for my lo(rd) him felf or ellife M. A.
his lo. brother at my hov/fe of Faft(caftell), as I vret to thame bayth. Alwyfe
I repofe on yowr advertifinent of the precyfe day, v' credit to the berar ; for
howbeit he be bot ane filly aid gleyd^ carle, I vill anfwer for him Y he fall be
very tre\^'. I pray yow, fir, reid and ather bwrne or fend agane v' the berare ;
for I dar hafard my lyf and all I hew ellife in the varld on his meflage, I hew
fik pruif of his conftant trewth. Sa committis yow to Chryftis holy protectioun. Frome the Kannogait, the xxvij day of July, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Yowris till all power v' humbill fervife redy.

Restalrige.

I VSE nocht to wrytt on the bak of ony of my letteris concerning this erand.

(4.) Letter, Robert Logan of Rejlalrig to the Earl of Gowrie.
My lo.

My maift humbill dewty v' fervife in maift hartlie maner remembred.
At ])e reflet of yowr lo(rdfchipis) Letter I am fo comforted, efpecially at yowr
lo. purpofe, communicated onto me thairin, that I kan nather vtter my joy nor
find my felf liabill how to enconter yowr lo. v' dew thankis. Indeid my lo. at
my being lafl; in the town, M. A. yowr lo. brother imperted fomqhat of yowr
lo(rdfchipis) intencioun anent Y mater onto me ; and if I had nocht bein bufyed
abowt fum turnis of my avin, I thoght till hew cumniit over to S. Jo.^ and fpokin
v' yowr lo(rdfchip.) Yit alvayfe my lo., I befeik yowr lo., bayth for ))e faiftie of
yowr honowr, credit, and mair nor that, yowr lyf, my lyf, and the lyfis of mony
vtheris qha may perhapis innocently fmart for ]>' turne eftirwartis, incafe it be
reveilled be ony ; and lykvayfe, the vtter vraking of owr landis and howfis, and
extirpating of owr names, Iwke that ve be all alfe fwre as yowr lo. and I my felf
fall be for my avin part, and than I dowt nocht, bot v' Godis g(race,) we fall bring
our matter till ane fine, qhilk fall bring contentment to vs all that ever vifled for

1 Squinting. « Saint Johnston (Perth.)

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 285

J?e revenge of the Mafclievalent' mafTakering of owr deireft frendis. I dowt nocht June, 1600.
bot M. A. yowr lo. l)rother hes informed yowr lo. quhat cowrfe I layid down, to
bring all yowr lo(rdfehipis) aflbeiatis to my howfe of Fa(ftcaftell,) be ley, qhair I
fuld hew all materiallis in reddynefs for thair I'aif recayving a land, and into my
howfe ; making as it ver bot a maner of paffing time,^ in ane bote on ]je fey, in this
fair fomer tyde ; and nane other ftrangeris to hant my howfe, qhill ve had concluded on the laying of owr platt, qvihilk is alredy devyfed be M. A. and me. And
I vald vifs that yowr lo. wald ather come or fend M. A. to me, and thereftir I fowld
meit yowr lo. in Leith, or quyetly in Reftal(rig) qhair ve fowld hew prepared ane
fyne hattit kit,^ v' fiiccar, comfeitis and vyn ; and thereftir confer on matteris.
And the foner ve broght owr purpofe to pals it ver the better, before harweft.
Let no' M. W. R. yowr awld pedagog ken of yowr comming, bot rather vald I,
if I durft be fa bald, to intreit yowr lo. anis to come and fe my avin howfe, qhair
I hew keipit my lo(rd) Bo(thwell) in his greteft extremityis, fay the K(ing) and
his Counfall qhat they vald. And incaife God grant vs ane happy fwccefs in
this erand, I hope bayth to half yowr lo. and his lo., v' mony otheris of yowr loveris and his, at ane gnde dyner, before I dy. Alvyfe I hope that the K(ingis)
bwk-hunting at Falkland, this yeir, fall prepair fum daynty cheir for ws, aganis
that denner the nixt yeir."* Hocjocq/e, till animat yowr lo. at this tyme ; bot eftirvartis, ve fall hew bettir occafion to niak mery. I proteft, my lo. before God,
I vifs nathing v' a bettir hart, nor to atchive to that qhilk yowr lo. vald fane atteyn onto ; and my continewall prayer fall tend to that effect ; and v' the large
fpending of my landis, gudis, yea the haferd of my lyf, fall nocht afray me fra
that, althocht the fkaffald ver alredy fett vp, before I fowld falfify my promeife
to yowr lo. and perfwade yowr lo(rdfchip) therof. I trow yowr lo. hes ane
pruife of my conftancy alredy or now. Bot my lo. qharas yowr lo. defyris, in
yowr letter, Y I craif my lo. my brotheris mynd anent }jis mater, I alvterly diffafent fra that, J) he ibwld ever be ane counfalowr therto ; for in gude fayth, he
vill newir help his frend nor harme his fo. Yowr lo. may confyde mair in this
aid man, the beirer heirof, my man La(ird) Bowr, nor in my brother ; for I lippin
my lyf and all I hew elfe in his handis ; and I trow he vald nocht fpair to ryde
to Plellis-yet to plefowr me ; and he is nocht begylit of my pairt to him. Alvyfe, my lo. qhan yowr lo. hes red my Letter, delyver it to the berare agane,

' Math i a veil an, after the cruel policy of Machiavel ; alluding to the beheading of William Earl of
Gowrie, May 28, 1.584. ^ Feigning pastime, or a pleasure sail. ' Coagulated milk; prepared, by milking from the cow upon butter milk, kept till it is pretty sour, so sharply, as to form a
sort of fiotli. The mess is made in a particular kind of wooden bicker or kift, having a pin or plug
near the bottom, by which the whig or whey is allowed to escape, after having stood for several hours.
It is also called ' sour cogue,' and ' Corstorphine cream;' and, if properly made, is a very palatable
dish, eaten with sugar and cream ; though some prefer it in its sour state, for when fresh, it has a very
agreeable acidity. * At the anniversary dinner, in commemoration of their enterprise.

286 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

June, 1609. that I may fe it brunt v' my awin ein ; as I hew fent yowr lo. Letter to yowr
lo. agane ; for fo is the falFone I grant. And I pray yowr lo. reft fnlly perf waded of me and all that I hew promefed ; for I am relblved, howbeit I ver to dy
the morne. I man intreit yowr lo. to expede Bowr, and gif him ftrait directioun,
one payn of his lyf, that he tak never ane vink fleip, qhill he fe me agane ; or
ellife he vill vtterly vndo vs. I hew alredy fent ane other Letter to the gentill
man yowr lo. kenuis, as ])& berare vill informe yowr lo. of his anfwer and fordvardnefs v' yowr lo. ; and I fall fchaw yowr lo. forder, at meting, qhen and qhair
yowr lo. fall think meitteft. To qhilk tyme and ever committis yowr lo. to the
proteccioun of the Almychtie God. From Gunifgrene,' the twenty nynt of
Julij, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Yowr lo. awin fworne and bund man to obey and ferve
v' efauld^ and ever redy feruife to his vttir power till his lyfis end.

Restalrige.
Prayis yowr lo. hald me excufed for my vnfemly Letter, qhilk is nocht fa veil
vrettiu as miller^ ver ; ffor I durft nocht let ony of my vryteris ken of it, bot
tuke twa fyndry ydill dayis to it my felf.

I vill never forgett the gude fporte that M. A. yowr lo. brother tald me of
ane nohill man of Padoa, it comifs fa oft to my memory. And indeid it is a paraftevr* to this purpofe ve hew iu hand.

(5.) Letter, Robert Logan of Reftalrig to

Ry"^ hoxorabill sir.

My hartly dewty remembred. Ye knaw I tald yow at owr laft meitting
in the Cannogat that ]M. A. R. my lo. of Go(wries) brother had fpokin v' me,
anent y matter of owr conclufion ; and for my awin part I fall nocht be hindmeft : And fenfyne I gat ane Letter frome his lo. felff, for J)' fame purpofe ; and
upon the reffait therof, ouderftanding his lo. frankuels and fordvardnefs in it,
God kenuis if my hart vas nocht liftit ten llegefs ! I poftit this fame berare till
his lo. to qhome ye may concredit all your hart in ])' alfveill as I ; for and it ver
my very fowll, I durft mak him meffinger therof, I hew fie experienfe of his
trewth, in mony other thingis : He is ane filly aid gleyd carle, bot vonder honeft : And as he lies reportit to me his lo. awin anfwer, I think all matteris fall
be concluded at my howfe of Fa(ftcaftell) ; for I and ]\I. A. R. concluded that ye
fowld come v' him and his lo. and only ane other man v' yow, being bot only
fowr in company, invill ane of the gret fifching botis, be fey, to my howfe, qher
ye fall land afe faiffly as on Leyth Ichoir ; and the howfe agane his lo. cumming
to be quyet : And qhen ye ar abowt half a myll fra fchoir, as it ver paffing by

'_ A residence of Logan's. ' Sincere, liearty ; literally, onefold. ^ Need, q. d. so well

as it ouglit to Lave been. ■■ Apropos, in point.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 287

the liowfe, to gar fet fiirtli ane vaff.' Bolt for Godis fek, let netlier ony knawlege June, 1609.

come to my lo. my brotheris eiris/ nor yit to M. W. R. my lo. auld pedagog ;

for my brother is kittill to fcho behind,^ and dar nocht interpryfe, for feir ; and

the other vill diffwade vs fra owr purpofe v' refTounes of Religion, qliilk I can

newer abyd. I think thair is nane of a nobill hart, or caryis ane llomak vorth a

penne, bot they vald be glad to fie ane contented revange of Gray Steillis deid ; *

And the foner the better, or ellfe ve may be marrit and fruftrat ; and therfor, pray

his lo(rdfliip) be qwik, and bid M. A. remember on the fport he tald me of Padoa ;

for I think v' my felf that the cogitacion on ])' fowld ftimiilat his lo(rdlcliip).

And for Godis cavvfe vie all your cowrfes ami dijcrecione. Fell nocht, fir, to

fend bak agane this Letter ; for M. A. leirit me Jj' faflbn, that I may fe it diftroyed myfelf. Sa till yowr dimming, and ever, committis yow hartely to Chriftis

holy protection. From Gunnilgrene, fie laft of July, 1600.^

(6.) The Depositionis of the WitrieJ)es producit.^
(i.) M*^ Alexander Watsone, Minifter at Coldinghame, of the aige of 1.
(fyftie) 3eiris, mareit, deponis, the fyve Miffiue Letteris fubfcryvit be the Lard
of Reftelrig, and producit in proces be ]3e lord Aduocat, for preving of the reffoune of Trefibune perfewit aganis Robert Logane, fone and apjierand air to Robert Logane of Refl;elrig, being fchawn to this deponar ; and he haveing at lenth
fichtit and confiderit the famin, Deponis, that he takis vpovm his confcience, that
he verelie belewis that the faidis fyve Miffiues, and euerie ane of f»ame, ar werralie
and ti-ewlie writtin-be Jje faid vmqle Robert Logane of Refl;elrig, with his awin
hand : And giffis this reflbun of his knawlege ; that nocht onlie he thinkis that
the carecter of euerie letter fiairof refemblis perfytlie the faid vmq'" Robertis
hand wryit, euerie way ; bot alfo aggreis with his faffioun of fpelling, quhilk he

' A 'waff,' or signal. ^ Alexander (fifth) Lord Home niariied Agnes, sister of Patrick

(sixth) Lord Gray, and widow of Sir llohert Logan of Restalrig. By lier, (wlio afterwards became
the wife of Sir Thomas Lyon of Auldbar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland,) lie iiad one son, Alexander, who became sixth Lord Home, on liis father's death, Aug. 11, 1375. This Lord, then, was
'brother' to Logan of Kestalrig, writer of tliis Letter, being the son of Logan's motlier; and it seems
most probable that lie is the person here meant. He was created Earl of Home and Lord Dunglass,
Mar. 4, 1604. See Douglas's Peeraiic, vol. i. p. 736; Crairfiird's Peerage of Scotland, p. 292 ;
Thomas Crawfurd's Notes on Buchanan's Histonj ; also Nisht's Heraldry, p. 151, quoted there.
Sir Henry Nevill to Sir R. Cecyll, 29th Nov. 1399. 'The Lord Hume alfo, lince his coming hither,
goeth operdy to Mafs.'— Winwood's Memorials, vol. i. p. 134. See also p. 150. He was employed
on a secret Embassy to Rome in 1599. ^ Cannot be trusted ; an allusion to the hazard of shoeing a treacherous or ill-broken horse, in the hind feet. ■* To be revenged for the death of his

father, William Earl of Gowrie, who was beheaded May 28, 1584, for his treasonable part in the Raid
of Ruthven. He was known, among his contemporaries, by the chivalrous sonbriqiiet 'Greydcdl,' a
hero of popular romance. * The signature has been purposely torn off. This had been done,

probably by Restalrig or by Laird Bower, at all events previously to the production of the Letter in
evidence ; as appears by the following memorandum, in the Books of Parliament : ' The fuhlcriptioun
is ryvin fra this lafl Letter.' ^ ' Ai'UD Ed", xx Jnnij 1609. Witnes.ses producit be the Aduocat aganis Robert Logane, fone to the Lard of Reltelrige, for cognofching of the Lard of Rellelrigis
hand wryit and fubfcriptioun of fe ffywe Miffiue Billis producit, all wryttin and fubfcryuit be Reltelrige."

288 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

.luno, 1009. lies particularlie remarkit, in euerie ane of the faidis Miffiue Letteris, in thir
poiutis following : ffirft, that he newir vfeit to wrytt ane ' 3' in the hegynning of
ony word, fik as ' 50W,' ' 30uris,' ' seild,' ' 3ea,' and ficlyk ; hot ewir wrait ' y' in
fteid of the faid ' 3 :' That he wrait all wordis begynning with ' w' with ane
fmgill * V ;' and qulian that letter ' v' fell to be in the niyddis or end of ane
word, he wrait ane doubill ' w :' That quhen he wrait * quhen,' ' quhair,' ' qlk,'
or ony fik word, qiihilk vfis to be writtin and fpellit be vthex'is with ' qiih,' he
wrait onlie ' qh,' ' qhen,' ' qhair,' and ficlyk : Quhaneuir ane word began with
' con,' he newir wrytt ' con' at lenth, hot with ane ' p.' Qulian euir ' t' fell to be
in the end of ane word, he wraitt it without ane llraik throw the ' t ;' and did
pe lyk quhan ewir ' t' fell in ony pairt of ane word : And, for forther confii-matioune of the premiffes, he produceit thrie Letteris, writtin euerie word, and fubIcryvit be the faid vmq'' Robert Logane of Reftelrig ; and comparing Jjame with
the fyve vther IMifliues producit be the Aduocat, lliew euidentlie pe direct conforinitie of the faniin, alfweill in the character and trew refeniblance of the handwraitt, as in the fpelling and wryting of euerie wrytt, fillap, and letter : according to the particularis aboue fjjecifeit.

(Sic fi-ibfcribitur) M" Alex*^ WaTsone.

(ii.) M Alexander Smythe, Minifter at Chyrnefyde, of the aige of xxx
3eiris or thairby, mareit, deponis, that he wes weill acqiientit with the vmq''' Lard
of Refl;elrig, be reffoun he vas petagog to his barnis ; and lies fene werray mony
of his handwrittis : And haveing fene, red, and at lenth confident the fyve Miffiue Lettres, producit be the Aduocat, and inquirit ' gif he knew the famin to be
the Lard of Rellelrigis proper hand wryt ?' Declairis, vpoun his great aytlie,
That he certanlie belewis the faidis fyve Letteris, and euerie word thairof, to
be the Lard of Rellelrigis jn'oper hand wryit ; becaus he findis the carrectar
pairof to aggrie, euerie vay, with the chap' of his ordiner wryting ; and i-emarkit, werray particularlie, the nianer of Rellelrigis fpelling of mony wordis,
vtherwayes nor vther men vfes conimounlie to wryit and fpell ; according to the
haill particularis remarkit ofbefoir be M' Alex' ^Vatfoun, pe witnes iinmediatlie
preceding: And in thefe pointis, ;nid all vtheris, is conforme to the faid M'
Alex' NA'atfonis Depofitioune, in all thingis : Beddeiis ca////((m Jc/e>if/c,heca\\she
wes perfytlie acquentit with the Lard of Rellelrigis hand wryit, in his lyfetyme,
and wes petagog to his barnis mony 3eiris, and in his companie.

(Sic fubfcribitur) M"^ Alex"* Smyth.

(iii.) Sir Johnxe Arxott, Proveft of Edinburcht, of the aige of Ixx 3eiris,
or ])airby, mareit, deponis, that he wes weill acquentit with Robert Logane of
Reftelrig, and with his hand wryit ; becaus he had rellauit diuerfl^e of his
Lettres him felf, and fene mony vtheris lettres writtin be him : And the fyve
Miffiues producit be the Aduocat, being fliawin to him, and he haveing fene and

' Sliapc, stiuclure.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

289

confident pe famin, reinemberit that he had fene, red and perfitlie confident the June, 1609.
famin of befoir ; and efter gud advyfinent, is refoluit, that the faidis fyve Letteris ar als certantlie the Lard of Refteh-igis hand wryit, as the Letteris writtin
be the deponar, at ony time, ar his awin hand wryit : And fua takis on his confcience, that the foirfaidis fyve Miffiue billis, producit be J)e Aduocat, ar the
proper hand wryit and fubfcriptioun of the faid vmq'" Lard of Refteh-ig, be his
jugement : And for vereficatioun thairof, hes producit four writtis, all writtin be
the faid vmq'" Lard of Reftelrig, and fend to this deponar, and to Ai-chibald
Johneftoune ; aggreand perfytlie, in fpelling and carrecter, with the faidis
Miffiues. (Sic fubfcribitur) S. J. Arnote.

(iv.) Alexander Cuik, fcheref clerk of Bervik, of the age of 1 (ffyftie) -,eiris
or Jjairby, maryit, deponis, that he wes Weill acquentit with the vinq''' Lard off
Reftelrig, and hes fene mony and findrie of his writtis, and relfauit diuerfe of
his Lettris, direct to him felf : And being defyrit to fie and confidder the fyve
Letters producit be the Aduocat, and to dedair quhidder he knew and eftemit
the famin to be all written be vniq'"" the Lard of Reftelrig ; deponis vpon his confcience, that he belewes and eftemis the faidis haill Lettres to be all writtin be
the Lard of Reftelrig ; reddens canjfam Jcientie, becaus nocht onlie the carrecter aggreis euerie vay with the chap of Reftelrigis hand wryit, hot alfo the fpelling, in mony particularis, quhairin Reftelrig differrit frome vjjer menis forme
of wryting ; and in the particularis thairof, deponis conformis to the twa firft
witnelfes, the Minifteris of Coldinghame and Chyrnefyde, reddens eandem caujJam Jcientie. (Sic fubfcribitur) Ai.ex"^ Cuik.

(v.) WiLLiAME Home in Aytoun-Mylne, of the aige of xxxiij 3eiris or J)airby, maryit, deponis that all the fyve Miffiuis abonevrittin, being lliawin to this
deponar, and haveing at lenthe confiderit euerie ane of thame, takis vjioun his
confcience, that, to his knawlege, that the faidis fyve Miftive Lettres ar all writtin and fubfcryvit be the vniq'*" Lard of Reftelrig ; for ])e fpeciall reffbnis contenit
in the Depofitionis maid be M' Alex' Watlbun, M' Alex' Smyth, Minifteris,
and Alex' Cuik, fcheref clerk of Bervik ; to quhome he is conforme in all thingis,
reddens eandem cayjf am Jcientie. (Sic fubfcribitur) Williame Home.

(vi.) JoHNE HouNE, notar in Aymouthe, of the aige of xlij 3eiris or ])airby,
folutus, deponis, the foirfaidis fyve Miflive billis, being at lenth fichtit and confiderit be this deponar ; declairis vjjoun his confcience, to his knawlege, all the
faidis fyve Mifllves ar the Lard of Reftelrigis proper hand wryittis and fubfcriptioun ; for the refibnes abone vritten, in the depofitioun of Williame Home,
reddens eandem cavjjam Jcientie. (Sic fubfcribitur) J. PIorne.

(vii.) M"' William Hog Minifter at Aytoun, of the aige of xxx 3eiris or
J)airby, mareit, deponis, that he knew weill the Lard of Reftelrig, and hes fome

vol, II. 2 o

290 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

June, 1609. of his writtis ; and proclucit ane Letter, wiittin be Reftelrig to the Lard of Aytoiine, all writtiii with Reftelrigis awin hand wryit : And haveing confident the
fyve writtis producit be the aduocat, declaris, that lie thinkis |)anie lyklie to his
Avryittis, and ])at the faniin appeiris to be verie lyk his wryitte, be the conformitie of letteris and fpelling. Sic fubfcribitur) M<i W" Hogg.

AL. CANCELLS.
[George Sprott's Confession follow here. See p. 260.]
The quhilkis IMifiive Billis, and liaill Depofitiounes abone Avrittin, and vtheris
wryttis' and probatiounes pi'oducit now prelentlie be the faid lord aduocat, he
repetit, for preving of the faid Svimmondis of TreafToun and caufe ))airin contenit ; and renuncit forder probatioun : And thairvpoiin the faid Aduocat afliit Inftriimentis. And lykwayes the faid lord Aduocat producit, in pi-efens of the faid
Coniiniffionar and haill Eflaittis of Parliament, oure fouerane lordis Lettres of
Relaxatioun, berand the faid Robert Logane eldeft fone to the faid Robert Logane fumtynie of Reftalrig, to be relaxit be Robert Logane meffinger, fra the
proces of all Horniiigis, at the marcat ci'oces of Hadington, Dunfe and Grenelaw,
vpoun the fevint and audit dayes of Aprile refpectiue 1609 3eiris ; and at the
niarcatt croce of Edinburgh, be Joline ]\Ioncur meffinger, vpoun the ellevint day
of Aprile, the yeir of God foirfaid ; as at niair lenth is contenit in the faidis Lettres of Relaxatioun, of the date the fext day of ISIarche lall bipaft, and regiftrat
in the Clerk of Regifteris bulk, the ellevint day of Aprile 1609 yeiris : Vpoun
the productioun of the quhilkes Lettres of Relaxatioun, the faid Aduocat lykwayes aflvit inftruinentis : And delyrit the haill Eflaittis to confider of the faidis
probationes producit and repetit be him, and to advife the faid proces of Foirfaltour, and to gif furth thair decreitt thairintill, according thairto.

And ficlyk, the faid Sir Tlionias Hanimyltoun of Bynnie kny' his heines Aduocat, eftir that he had I'epetit and producit all his probationis to the faidis haill
Eflaittis, quhilkis he wald vfe for preving of the pointis of the faid funimondis,
and relTones and caufles thairin contenit, he reproducit the faid fummondis of
Treaflbun befoir the faidis haill Eflaittis, raifit and perfewit at the inftance of
oure faid fouerane lord and his heines Aduocatt aganis the faid Robert Logane
and his tutouris and Curatouris, and all vtheris haveand or pretendand to haue
interes, quhairby they wer fummonit to compeir befoir oure fouerane lord and
his Eflaittis of Parliament at ane certane day bigane, with continewatioun of
dayes, to haue hard and iene it be fundin, that the faid vniq'" Robert Logane of
Reflalrig conimittit TreafToun and Lefemajeflie, in his lyfetyme ; and to heir and fie
his fame, name and pofteritie abolifliit ; and to haue anfuerit to the haill pointis
and crymes of TreafToun and Lefemajeflie contenit in the faid fummondis.

' The foiTgoing Deposition and Confession of George Sprott is engiossed in the Record, immediately after the testimony of the Witnesses, who proved Logan's liandnriting. See No. X. (3.)

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 291

The quhilk Summondis, with the executionis and indorfatiounis thairof, beino- June, 1309.
this inftant day red, in prefens of his Maiefteis Commiffionar and Ellaittis of
Parliament, firft in Latine and thaireftir in Scottis; tlie faid Robert Logane, beinooftymes callit of new at the tolbuth window of the laid bur' of Edinbur', to Iiaue
comperit and anlwerit to the faid fummondis of Treaflbun and relTones and
caulTes thairin contenit ; and he nocht comperand to haue defendit in the faid mater, and to haue anfuerit to the faid fummondis, the faid Sir Thomas Hammyltoun of Bynnie kny' aduoeat to oure fouerane lord, defyrit the faidis Eftaittis declaratioun, gif the relTones of the faid fummondis wer relevant : The quhilkis
Eftaittis ffand the faid fummondis, and reffone and caufe thairin contenit relevand, &c. And thaireftir, the haill Depofitiounes of the Witnelfes, Miffive billis,
and haill wryttis and probatiounis, being red, fene and confiderit be the foirfaidis haill Eftaittis of Parliament, and they thairwith being ryjilie advyfit,
the faid Lord Commiffionar and Eftaittis of Parliament fRndis, decernis and declairis, that the faid vmq'^ Robert Logane of Reftalrig committit and did, in his
lyfetjaiie, oppin and manifeft TrealToun, in all the pointis, articlis and maner,
contenit in the faid fummondis : And thairfor, it wes gevin for Dome, be the
mouth of Dauid Lyndefay dempfter of Parliament, in maner and forme as
foUowes.

Dome of Fobfrituee. This Courte of Parliament fchawis for law, that the
faid vmq'*' Robert Logane of Reftalrig ; in his lyfetyme, committit the foirfaid
cryme of Treflbun and Lefemajeftie ; and that he wes airt and pairt, giltie and
pairtaker thairof, aganis oiu'e faid fouerane lord and his authoritie royall ; and
that the foirfaidis cruell, wicked and treaflbunable crymes were interpryfit be
his caufing, perfuafioun, coxmfaill and help ; lykas, the faid vmq'^ Robert Logane
of Reftalrig treafTonablie conceillit the foirlaid cryme of Lefemajeftie, to his death,
and in his death ; in all maner at lenth contenit in the faid fummondis : And
thairfoir, Decernis and Declairis the name, memory and dignitie of the faid vmq'^
Robert Logane of Reftalrig to be extinct and aboliftieit, and his armes cancellat,
rivine and deleitt furth of the buikis of Armes and nobilitie ; fua that his jiofteritie fall be excludit, and be vnhable to polTes or inioy ony offices, honouris, digniteis, landis, tenementis, rowmes, rentis, poffeffionis or gudis moveable or vnmoveable, richtis and vtheris quhatfvmeuir within this kingdome, in all tyme
cumming : And that all the faidis gudis, landis, rowmes, tenementis and vtheris
gudis, moveable and vnmoveable, richtis and vtheris quhatfumeuir, pertening to
the faid vmq'^ Robert Logane of Reftalrig, or quhilkis micht onyways haue pertenit to him at ony tyme, fen his Confjjyring of the faidis trealTonable crymes,
to be efcheat and foirfaltit to our faid fouerane lord, to appertene and to reniane
perpetualie with his Majeftie in propirtie. And this I gif for dome.

292 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Tel). 1609. (7.) AVarrand to the Aduocat, to libell a Summondis of Foirfaytour aganis the

airis of Restaleig.'

Feb. 14, 1609. The Lordis of Secrite Counfale, ordainis and commandis Schir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie kn' his Maiefties Aduocat to lil)ell aiie Summondis for fJorfeyting of the meraorje of
vmquhill Robert Logane of lleftahig, for aut and pairt of Gowryis Treasoun, to be perfenit in
this approching Parliameut : And that the faid Lord Aduocat infifl, in the perlute of the faid fumniondis, at the Parliament, as becomeith him of his dewtie and office. Qubaii-anent the extract of tbir
prtlentis falbe vnto liira a warrant.

(8.) Letter, Sir Thomas Hamilton of Binnie ku', Lord Advocate, (afterwards
Earl of Haddington,) to KiXG James VI. containing an interesting Account
of Restalrig's Forfeiture.^

Pleis your most sacred MaiesTie,
AcKNOULEDGEING my felf bund, in dewtie, to rander accompt to your Maieflie of the feruices properhe belonging and committed to my chairge, I baue tane the bouldnes to \vi-yte of oure progres in
the Forfaltouris intented agauis the Lord Maxuell and the Memorie of Restalrig, before
the Lords of Articlis. Oure firft proceiding wes aganis the Lord Maxuell, whairin albeit thair wes
no compeirance for the defender, yet Aim of the Lordis of Articles kything more fcrupulous and precife, in findrie poyntis of that proees, nor (than) we did forefie or fufpect ; and heiring thairefter, that
findrie of that number had preconfaued hard opinions of Reflalrig's proees, the knoulege thairof, whilk
wroght feir and millruft in the myudes of dyuers your Ma"*^ weill affected feruandis, did breid in the
Erie of Dunbar fuche caire and feruencie to remoue thefe impedimentis, that bending his wittis, in
more paliionat maner nor lie vfis to expres in common and indifferent maters, he did trauell fo earniftlie with the nobilmen and haill remanent Lordis of Articles, and folicited fum of the moft learned
and beft experimented of your Ma'"* Counfall, to furneis reafons and light, to the cleiring of the probatioun of that moll haynous Treallbun ; and gaue to my felf fo eaniill chairge, and furneifled fo pregnant, judicious and cleir groundis, to confirme the Summondis, and manifeft the verie circumflances
thairof to the worlde, that he left no travell to me, hot the repetition of the fubftance of his information. To the whilk, haveing fo neirlie conformed my difcouile, as pofliblie I could, it pleafed God,
that the Lordis of Articles, being happelie prepared, be the Depofitionis of dyuers honeft men of the
Minillrie, and viher famous Witneffis, who recognofcing vmq'* Reftalrig's handwrit, in his treffonabill
Mifiiues produced be me, with verie fenfibill and forcibill reafons and caufis of thair conllant and confident affirmation, tliat thefe Miliiues wer writtin be him : Whan the probation of the fummondis wes
referred to tlie Lordis votes, thay ftand vniformallie, all in aue voce, the faid fummondis to be fo cleirlie provin, that thay feiraed to contend who fould be abill moll zealouflle to expres the fatisfaction of
his hairt, not onlie be moll pithie wouvdis, bot be tearis of joy ; dyuers of tlie bell rank confeffing, that
that whairof thay dowted, at thair entrie in the howfe, was now fo manifell, that thay behoued to
efleme thame Traitours who fould any longer refufe to declaire thair affured refolution of the trenth
of that Trealoun. Swa, hoping your Maiellie will graciouflie pardoun my boldnes, in offering to your
Maieltie this rude relatioun of their purpofes, concerning my chairge iu your Maielleis feruice, I befeik God, who hes fo mercifuUie preferued your Ma''= from the honibill devyfles of your develifch
enuemies, and fo miracouluflie detected thair helliili practifes, long to protect and preferue your Mal Ac(a, Serreli Cimcilij. 2 From the original, preserved in the Denmyhie Collection of JISS. Adv. Library.

The remarkable Case of John Lord Maxu-dl, his escape from the Castle of Edinburgh, his forfeiture and execution,
&c. are inserted iu this Collection, under the i)roper dates.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 293

ieftie from all hairmes and dangers, and to grant your Maieftie all happines and contentment. Edin- June, 1609.
BURGH, this 21 Junij, 1609.

Your mod facred Maiefteis moft bundin and faithful! feruant,

S. Th. Hamilton.
To the King's Moft Excellent Maieftie.

(9.) Warrant from King James VI. to the Lord Clerk Regifter, to engroft
Logan of Restalrig's Lettere and Sprott's Depositions, in the Records
of Parliament.'

James R.
It is o' pleafor', will and expreffe command, that in the inferting in the Parliament Regifter, of the
proces of ftbrfeito' of the difceafcd trayterous Laird of Restalrig, that you ihall, at all length, ingrofle the MKfiue Letters, and fo muche of Sprotte his depofitions, as doeth eoncerne that mater :
ffor doing whereof, thefe prefents falbe vnto yow a fufficient WaiTant. Giuen at Royfton, the xxth
of Januar, 1610.

To o' trufty and welbeloued counfello' S"^ Johns Skene of Curryhill,
knight, Clerk of our Regifter.

No. XYl.
Johnston's Narrative of the Conlpiracy of John Earl of Gowrie, taken from
his contemporary MS. Hiftory of Scotland."
About the end of Februar 1600, Williame (Johne) Erll of Gowrie^ com out of France,
throw England, and com till Edinburcht, accompanyit with his brother S' Alexander Ruthven, with
ane great number of nobilmen, gentilmen and wtheris ; and ludgit in the heid of Fofter's wynd :* And
in the moneth of Junij nixt thaireftir, as he was going from his luging to the Kingis Ma''= in the Abay
of Hollrudhous, accompanyit with 7 or 8 of his houfliald feruandis ; and as he was going throw the
lang galrey of the Abbay, Coi'onell Stewart,' (of quhom we maid mention at tiie taking of wmq" Williame Erll of Gowrie at Dundie,) cuming furth from the King, and the faid Erll perfaving him cuming
from the Kingis chalmer dure, being at tlie far end of the galrie, (leift fum tumult fould haue liappned
be fchouldering fum of tliame or thair fervandis) the laid Erll begane to go afyd'^ till (he) lat the laid
Coronell pas by him : Bot the lame being cfpyed by ane of the laid Erllis fervandis, going in the rank
befoir him, callit Mr Thomas Kinrolcher, (he) faid ardentlie till him, ' Quhat I My Lord, ar ^e going
back for ony man heir? Com fordward, my Lord, bauldlie !' Quhilk going afyd firll, and than cuming
fordward agane, being fene by Coronell Stewart, he went in agane to the King," ' Schir, it will pleis
3 our Ma''^ heir ane ftrang mater, that for guid fervice done to 3 our grace I Tuld be fo evill rewairdit
as I am ! Heir cumes in the Erll of Gowry, and I fie he myndis till begin firft at me ; but be war of
the beft of 50W all !' Heirwith the laid Erll enterit in his Ma'"^' chalmer, and the Coronell went out
thairof. Bot thair was nothing of that purpois fpokin betuixt his Ma"^ and the Erll that tyme. Bot
the CoronelUs wordis to the King, being repoirtid to the Erll, he anfuerid, ' Aquila non capiat mitjcas !'

1 From Original, among the warrants of Parliament preserved in the General Register House, Edinburgh.
- This MS. is preserved in the Library of the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh, Jac. V. 2. 2. Fol. 633, b.
5 There is a running margin preserved, which shall be marked at the foot of the page. * Tlie Erll of Gowrie comes
out of France.* ■* Forrester's Wind, near the site of the present County Hall and the Libraries. ^ * The

ErU of Gowrie and Coronell Stewart, in the galry of the Abay.' * Avoided him, by giving place and stepping

aside. 7 ' Coronell Stewart his speitches to the King.'

294

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. IGOO. In the beginning of Auguft, the King being at hunting, betuixt Falkland and Pearth, (as eftlrward
was repoirtid be his INIa''*^ and his followeris,) the Erll of Gowry and his brother, haveing ftill caryed
ane deidlie haitred and ane abhominabill rancour at the King, becaus of thair fatheris executioun, as
forfaid, intei-prylit ane moll pernitious and daninabill Confpiracie aganis his Ma"^ in thair ludging, in
Pearth. So that wpone Tyfday, being the 5 day of Auguft, the fame seir, 1600,i (notwithllanding
of his Ma'"^ manifold kvndnefles, quhilk he had fchawin to tbeife tuo brethren, and efpecially in reftoirino- to Jiame thair fatheris haill patremony, landis, rentis and honouris, being foirfaltit, and be publict Act of Parliament brocht into the Croune,) the laid Erll and his brother, haveing refolued to put
thair wicked Treafone to executioun, thocht thay could find no better occafioun than prefentit at that
tyrae; and thairfoir, thay wald aflayquhat could thay do. So to bring the fame to pas. Sir Alexander
Ruthven, iNIaifter of Gowry, fpving his tyme convenient,'^ wpone the foirlaid day, the King being in
Falkland, and cuming furth at that Palace at 7 houris in the niorneing, till go to the hunting, (accompanyid with verrie fewe in number, except onlie Lodouik Duik of Lennox, quho had maryit Maiftres
Jean Ruthven, lifter to the faid Erll of Gowry, and Jolinne Erll of iSIarr, brother-in-lawe to the Duik
of Lennox, and of auld alyat with the faid Erll,) being ane gentilman of brawe perfoneage and behaviour, and Weill lykit of be his Ma*''^, com to him befoir he was raontit on horlback, and faid theife
wordis : ' Scliir, gif your Ma''^ war at lazer, I wald greturalie comunicat to 5 our grace ane hid and
mifticall fecreit, quhilk I dar not difcover to my brother, wpone na conditioun, nor to na wther man
leivinge, except to 50ur INIa''^ oidie !' The King wfeing the ordinar forme of courtelie, quhilk he vfit
till all Nobill men, went a pairt with him from his awin company, and harkned quhat he wald fay.
Than, faid lie,^ ' Schir, pleis 50ur grace, the wther day, as I was walking alloun athort the feildis, I
met ane ccrtane man, wuknawin to me quhat he was, quho tauld me of ane great treafour of gold
quhilk he had fund ; and he fchew me quhair the fame was : Quhairwpon I tuik the man with the
treafour, and brocht him and it baith to my brotheris ludging at Pearth. Bot, Seliir, I feir nothing
niair nor my brother get wit of it, befoir 5 our grace lie athcr the man or it, and that he tak boith the
man and the treafour to himfelfF, to5our Ma.'^^ great preiudice (to quhom it richtlie apperteinis^) and
to mv great hinderance of 5 our heines gratificatioun. And thairfoir, Schir, I maill humblie befeik
30«r 'SW''' that 56 reveill not this thing till any man quhatfumever ; bot lat be jour Imnting, and fend
away '5 our company, except it be tuo or thrie of jour awin domellick fervandis, that je may go thither with all diligence.' The King lieiring the gentilman fpeiking lick a rair purpofe, admirit^ thairat,
and thocht weill it had bene nothing bot fum vaine imagination, and that he had bene befyde himfelff :
Bot aftirwards, heiring him fpeik fo confidentlie, and confirmeing the fame, be ane aith, to be trew,
he thocht better of it, and promeift that eftir he had hunted ane hour or tuo, he fuld ryd derectlie with
him. And fo the faid Schir Alexander tuik his leive of his Ma"^.

About ten houris, the King left his hunting;'' and the faid Schir Alexander cam till him againe,
thinking the tyme verrie weirrifum till him ; and without geweing the King leive to chainge his hunting horfe, caufit him ryd derectlie to Pearth with him, (befoir his onwaitteris, being wandering throw
the feildis, liad cum till him,) his Ma"^ haveing nather fworde nor dager, bot his hunting home hingand about his neck.

The forfaid Duik and the Erll of Mar, perfaving the King fo fudanlie to leive his paftyme, and talk
that way, wonderit verrie mekill Jiairat, feing nane of pair fervandis war as jit cum neir thame ; jit
thay followit him, in all haill : So that cuming till Pearth, his haill fervandis quhilk was cum to him,
was bot about 14 or 15 in number. Now S' Alex^ waited all this tyme fo neir to the King, that he
liad not leive" till fchaw any of his attendantis his purpois ; except onlie, he roundit to the Duik, that

1 ' The Erll Cowrie his Conspiracie.' • ' Sr Alexr Mr of Gowry com to the King at Falkland.' ^ ' His

spfitch to the King.' i As treasure trove. 5 Jlan-elled, wondered. 6 ' The King gois to Peai-th."

" Opportunity.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 295

' he was going to fie a ritch treafour;' biding Lim wait wpone him, quhan he went thairtill. Befoir Au<'. 1600.
his Ma"^ com to the toun, he began to be fumquhat afrayid, quhat ]>e mater could nieane ? Bot, calling to niynd the great luiff quliilk he bure to the joung man, as alio the great bountifulnes quhilk he
had Ichawin, baith to liis brother and to all thair freindis, he went fordwart without ony forder feir.

His Ma'"' cuming neir to the toun, the Erll of Gowry him felff, accompanyit with 40 or 50 gentilmen, com forth Jiairof and met his Ma'"',* and convoyit him till his ludging, in Pearth, (as appeirit,
with all devvtiful reuerence) excuifing him felff, that he wnderflude not of his Ma'"'^ cuming thither
that day, to fe end that he micht haue bene better provydit for him. The denner being reddie, the
King fat doun at tabill and dyneit : And eftir he had dyneit, the Erll himfelff convoyit the Duik and
the Erll of Mar to ane great hall neir thaiito, leiving the King with the Mr of Gowry and the reft of
his fervandis. This being done, and all thingis being in redynes, Schir Alex' faid to the King, ' Now,
Schir, quhill the Duik and the Erll of Mar and the reft of 3 our Ma"^ attendaris ar at denner, it is
maifi convenient that ^our Ma'''' go and fie the treafour and the man 1' Quhairto his Ma''^ willinglie
agriet. So, going thairfia, Schir Alex' caryit hiin throw ane fair galrie,' and than throw ane wlher
chalmer, (lill cloifing everie dure faft beiiind him, faying, that ' it was 3it better lockit wp;' and than
led him within the thrid chalmer and fteikit^ to the dure thairof. This being done, lie oppinit ane
lytill lludie dure, in the quhilk thair was ane airmed man, appointit to 'be his murderer I Tliair was
alfo in the faid chalmer ane bred,'' with the pictour of wmq" William Erll of Gowry, (with ane courting hinging befoir it) who was execut at Striviling :^ And fchawing to the King, thair, the man, with
his fatheris pictour; without all dewtifull obedience or reverence, moft proudlie he pat his hat wpone
bis heid,'' and pointing till his fatheris pictour, faid, ' Rememberis thow not of the Murder of my father, quhais pict'ur that is ? Does not now thy confcience accus the of his innocent blude ? I fall be
revengit now wpone the I Now for him thow fall die !' The King, greatlie affrayit thairat, quyetlie
anfuerit,'' ' My freind, quhat guid can my blude do to 30W? I never defervit this at 5 our liandis 1
As concerning 3 our fatheris death, lie diet be way of juftice; being convict of Heicii Treafone, be my
Governouris, the tyme of my menoritie, and his haill landis and lordfchipis, rentis and honouris war
foirfaltit be oppin Parliament, and brocht in to the Croun : And 3it, notvvithftanding thairof, quhan I
com till maioritie, I remitid all quhilk pertenit to 3 our father, to 5 our brother and 3 our iiandis ! And
lykwayis, 30ur hous, be me, is maid now mair honorabill nor euer it was befoir! I am 30ur King! 39
ar a Cln-illiane, and hes bene nurifchit with ane quho never wald haue counfallit 30W to haue murderit sour King! Quliat can 30 gaine be my death? I haue childrene to be my airis and fucceffouris
to my Croun ! My people will rwin 30W and 30ur hous for ever; fo that 30U and 30ur polleritie fall
be quyt cutit afF; and nothing fall remaine of 3 our name bot euerlafting fthame and iiifamie ! It war
better to forget all bygaines, and lat ws returne quhair we com fra; and I promeis to 30W, be the
faith of a King, nevir to think wpone any thing that is part, now, betuixt 30W and me !' All tliis tyme,
the Tratour was fo affrayit with himfelf, that (as God wald) he had no power to harmo the King,
albeit he had his drawin dager in his hand.

Efter the Duik and the Erll of Mar and the reft of the Klngis attendantis had dyneit, the Erll of
Gowry faid to thame, that ' the King had gone furth another way.' But the faid Duik making fpeirings for him, at the common people about the 3etis, and porteris thairof, hard that he ^vas not pt cum
furth ; fo that he ftayit ftill, not thinking wpone no evill.

Theife wordis betuixt the King and Mr of Gowry being endit, the faid Mr caufit the King iweir

1 ' Erll of Gowrie com and met the Kintf.' 2 ' Tlie Mr of Gowrie schawes Treasoun instei.l of the Treasour.'

3 Closed, shut. * Board ; an oil painting on oak or pannel. 5 This highly graphic- and dramatic ""lu™-

stance is not stated hy any of the Historians; nor is it adverted to in the Depositions, or in the Account published
by authority; though it greatly heiglitens the force of Ruthven's language, when about to commence his treasonable
attack. " 6 ' The proud and trcasouable wordis of the Mr of Gowrie to the King.' < ' The Kmgis

ansuer.' s Inquiry.

296 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1600, till him, folemlie, to 3eild himfelf prifoner to the airmed murderer ilanding befyd him,' without atlier
oppinin? the windows, or any wayis crying out thairof, till adverteife his followeiis of his danger, till
he com againe fra fpeiking with his brother : Quhairvnto he lolemlie gave his aith. After the Mr of
Gowiie was gone furth of the chalmer, the King, taking couradge to him felfF, commandit that appcintit Murtherer to oppin the windois, for he wald not oppin thame him felf, becaus of his aith ; or
wtherwavis, he fould be revendgit wpone him : Quhilk window he half oppined. This being done,
prefentlie the iNIr of Gowrie com in fra his brother, and laid to the King, ' Now thow moft die 1'
And thairwitli, having a filk ribbon in his hand, and thairwith griping the King till bind his airmes :
The King feing that, taking couradge till him felff, anfuerit, ' I was borne a frie King ! I have leivit
a frie King 1 And baith in bodie and mynd I fall die a frie King ! And, Tratour ! thow fall die befoir
I die !' And feing him put his hand till his iVord, the King fo gripid his throit with his left hand,'
and his fword airme with his right hand, that he could not get the fword drawin. The Mr, on the
other pairt, griping the King fo fall as he could, thay baith wrallit togidder, a certane fpace, in the
chalmer, till his Ma'"' with him weirit^ neir the oppin windo ; and feing it half oppin, cryit with a
lowd voice, thrie tymes, ' Treafone ! Treafone ! Treafone I'

The Duik and the Erll of !Mar and the refl of the Kingis fervandis, being in feuerall pairtis, heiring
the Kingis voice cryinge ' Treafone I' ran in all haill feuerall wayis to find the King. The Duik and
the Erll of Mar ran to the entiie quhair the King had gone in at ;'' and finding all the dures hard lockit,
could not win till they gat foir-hammeris and brak up the fame. During all this tyme, the King and
the faid Mr being wi-ailing togidder, thay baith fell wpone the flure, and the King fell aboue him. So
the Mr, feing he could not get him felf moveit, he commandit the appointit Murderer now to ' flay
the King!' Bot he anfuerit, tliat ' he could not help him.' At this inllant, ane certane 50ung gentilman, quho had laitlie bene Paidge of honour to his Ma''% callid Johnne Rarafay, knawing ane
certane privat entrie, throw ane lytill heich turnpyke, till the chalmer quhair the King was, went that
way ; and finding the dure cloilit, brak wp the fame with his fute ; and finding the King aboue the
Tratour, with the Tratouris fword in his hand, tlie faid Johnne pullit out his dager and ftrak at the
faid tratour two or thrie tymes : Bot becaufe it did him no hurt, be reafone of liis doublet of pruiff
quhilk he had wpone him, as the King fufpectit, he bad him ' llryk laich, at his bellie ;' quhilk he did
3 or 4 tymes ; and fo flew him.^ This being done, S' Thomas Erfkene knight and Hereis

doctour of Medecine, com in till his Mfi'''=, and feing him (iiiff, praifit God.

Prefently tlie Erll of Gowry, heiring the tumult, and awaiting the end of thair treafone, preifit verrie
fafl till rin and do that quiiilk his brother could not get done : bot be fum of the Kingis fervandis, feing
bim in fick a raige, he was flayit a quhyll : Bot, geting fra thame, he ran till ane chalmer, and tuo drawin
fwordis in his handis, com wp with 7 or 8 of his bell fervandis, the lytill turnpyk, be the quhilk Johnne
Ramfay had paft, befoir, avowing, ' quhom ever he fand in his way, theife fwordis fould go throw thame f
And being iu the midis of the turnpyk, Johnne Ramfay, heiring fick a din, com doun thrie or foxu- itapis
with his raper in hand ; and melting the faid Erll, about tuo Itepis laicher nor'' he was, faid to him,
' Now my Lord ! quhat will ye have mair? The King is flaine els !' ^ git the faid Erll fo preafed to
go fordwart, that the faid Johnne, feiring forder evill, ran his raper throw his bodie ;^ and all his fervandis fled away feuerall wayis. All this was done befoir the Duik or Erll of Mar com neir the King.

The brute' heirof going throw the toun, thair arraife fo great a tumult that the haill comnioun people com about the hous,'" not knawing what the mater was, crying allowd, ' Jiat if they fawe not the
Erll of Gowrie quicklie, thay fould put the houfe in ffyre !' And fo contenewit, till the King fent for
the Bailleis of the toune, and tauld the haill forme thairof; and than thay quyetide the people.

1 ' The Mr of Gowry caussis the Kinj^ sweir liimself presoner.' * ' The Kinjjis wrasliiig with the 'Mr of

Gowrie.' 3 jjy degrees worked liiniself near the window. ^ ' The Duik and Erll o( iMai- seikes the

King.' 5 ' Johiie Uamsay slayis the Mr of Gowry.' B I^wer than. " Already. 8 ' Xhe

Erll of Gowry slaiue by Johnne Kamsay." 9 Fr. bruit. l** ' The toun of Pearth in a Mutany.'

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 297

This is the Kingis relation of this florie. Quho wp.kl I<naw oiiy forder of it, lat tliame reid ane lytil Aug. 1600.
buik, qiihilk he caiifit, himfelf, preiit Jiairwpone. Bot this ciimiiig to the earis of fum of the Miniftiie,
and wtlier commouii people of the land, haidUo coukl thay beleive it to be trew ; quhilk pat great
fufpitioun betuixt the King and many of the people.

Schortlie eftir, the dei<l bodies of the faid tuo blether war brocht till Ed' and hangit v/p at the Crofs
fairof, and thair heidis and airmes put wpon the tolbuitli of Edinbur' and wther feuerall and oppin
pairtis of tlje land.

No. XVII.
Ane Conspiracie dewyffit be the Ekll of Gowrie to flay his Majesty.'

Now, as ye haue hard befoir, the Erll of Gowrie was execut in Stirling, for talking the King
in liis hous of Rutiiweine : This Erll had beiiind liim four fons,* and ane gud number of dochteris,
quha had bene niareyitt to findrie Nobill menne of the land.^ His eldefl; fone, being be liis nioder
putt to the fchoillis in Ittalie, pafRt his courfe in Padua; quha returnis to Scotland, about the 13 of
Apryll, 1600; and at his hame cuniing was kyndlie refauitt be Iiis Prince, and niekill thorht of be all
menne ; for he wes ane braw manne off perfone, ane grit Icholler, weill trauellit, and ellemit werry
wyife; and abuiff all, wes thocht to be ane Nobill man of gude Religioune, and that feiritt God and
luiffit iuftice ; Yitt, in vardlie cairing,'' fpecially contrair the Kingis perfoun ; hewand ane rewendge
hairt for the bluid of his fader : ffor, being inquiritt be fum, ' Gif he wes to beir querrell at Crowner^
Stewartt,' quha had beine the principall taker of his fader, at the tyme of his executioune? His
anfuer wes, that ' ane egill killed na fieis,'^ meaning that his rewendge fuld nocht be fo law.' And
Leafling to his fecund broder, ane gallant manne, quha wes (lyllit ' Maifler,' and had to name Mr
Allexander Ruthwene. Tliay dewyife to tak his Maiefteis lyff, in the Erllis awin hous in Sanct Johnneftoune ; becaus the Erll wes Prowefl of that famin towne. And to draw his IVIaieflie to the famin
hous and toune, thay dewyife this, that the Maifter fuld ryd to the King, and fchaw liis Maiellie, that
my Lord his broder had tane ane ftranger patland throw the cuntrey, quha had granlit the heaffing of
ane gritt pois of gold, quhilk wes ane grit riches ; as alfo he had confelBtt mony thingis, quhilk his
Maiefly wald be weill pleiffit of; and that he and pois and all wes in his broderis hous, in Sanct
Johnnftoun ; bot my Lord wald nocht mell with him, befoir' his Maieftie war prefent.

His Maicfty, being in Falkland, wes ridding out to the hunting, and was on the feildis quhenne the
Maifler of Gowrie fehew him all this ; the quhilk quhanne his Maiefly hard, nocht heaffand no fufpitioune of Treaffoune, incontinent leiffis his paflyme, and rydis with the Maifter to Sanct Jolinnfloun,
not pafling 20 in number ; the Duke of Lennox and the Erll of iVIar being in his cnnipany : And at
his Maiefly cuming, the Erll of Gowrie femit as giff he had not bene aquent with his cuming, and
thairfoir culd not mak liis Maiefty fie intertcnement as he wald haue willit. Bot the dcnner being
enditt, the Duke and the Erll of Mar went to the 5aird, to eitt chirrcis : The Erll of Gowry gois with

1 From an Original JIS. Hist, of Scotland, Anon. Adv. Lib. Edinburgh, A. i. 35. - (l.) James, second

Earl of Gowrie, who was i-estored in 15SG, and died at the early age of 14-, in 1588. (2. ) John, third Earl of Gowry.
(3.) Mr Alexander Ruthren, born at Perth, Jan. 22, 1580-1. (1.) William, «ho was skilled in alchemy, &c. died
abroad. (5.) Patrick, who was for many years confined in the Tower, London. His daughter married Sir Anth.
Vandyke. ^ (1.) Mar;/, married to John Stewart, fifth Earl of Atlndl. Their daughter Dorothea was married to William Murray, Master of TuUibardin, who was of the King's retinue, at the time of the Conspiracy. (2.)
Jean, married to James Lord Ogilvy. (3.) Sophia, married to Ludovick Duke of Lennox, (i.) Elizabeth, married to John Lord Grahame, M;ister of Montrose, afterwards the fourth Earl of Montrose. (5.) Lilian, married to
Sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar. (6.) Dorothea, married to Sir John Weniyss of rittencrief. (7.) Catherine, died
vinraarried. (8. ) Beatrix, married to Sir John Himie of C'oldingkn<iws, who was Lady of the Bedchamber, .and in
terms of the strictest intimacy and friendship with Queen .\nne of Demn.-uk. ^ In the estimation of the

world. 5 Colonel. ^ His words were, ' Abulia non capiat muscas.' 7 Low, mean. * Until.

VOL. II. 2 P

298 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

A"cr. 1600. thanie, leiffing his :\raiefty and the Maifter to beir him cumpany ; the Afaifter heaflFand ane feruand of
his broderis in the chalmer, keipitt fecreitt, all in harnifs," quha had this diiectioun, to ' abyd thair and
to do quhat the Mailler direckitt him.' Now the Xobiil men being in the 5aiid, the Mailter fayis to
his Maiefty, ' Pleis jour grace, go fie the eirand 5 our Maiefty com for.' The King an-yflis and gois
with him wp to the chalmer, quhair the Maifter baning the dur, fayis, ' ^e man be bond,' heaffand ane
o^artane to bind his handis with, and drawand ane daggour, fayis, ' Remember on tiie deathe of my
fader !' This Andro Henderfoun, quha wes cumand out in hainefs, heiring his Maiefty fay, ' I wes
borne ane frie Prince, and I will nocht 5eild villingly :' The Maifter perfeiffing' to ftrek, his Maiefty
haldis the hand and the dagour baithe, and fayis to Henderfoun, ' Saiff the Prince lyff I' At the quhilk
word, the man being amaffit, ftuid ftill ; and his Maiefty, being worfthelling with the Maifter, cumis
neir ane windo, quhair he crj-is outt, ' Treffoun I The King is flayne !' Sir Thomas Edlceyne and
Doctour Hairreyis being ftandand law,^ heiris the famin, and cumis wp the foir entrie ; bot Johnne
Ramfav, his Maiefty peadge, be fortoun, vith the rord, rinnis wp the bak-ftair ; palftng and entiring
in the ciialmer, flindis his Maieftie and tiie Maifter in grippis, as ye haue hard. This Henderfone being
fled awav priwellie, Johnne Ramfay, at his cuming, ftrekis the Maifter throw the body, and releftis his
Maieftv of him ; and thairefter, Sir Thomas Erfkeyne and Hew Harreyis cumis wp and ftraikis him
alfo. The cry is reaflit be Goweryis folkis, that ' the King is away and lopin on !' Quhairwpone thay
com out of the 5eird, with all fpeid, to get horfe : Bot the Erll of Gowrie cuming firft, findis his broder hand on the ftair deid, drawis tua fuordis quhilk he veir bothe in ane fkabertt, and cumis into the
chalmer, the King being putt into the Cabatt, ftrekis at thame tiien that wes on the fluir, and hurttis
Sir Thomas Ei-lkeyne on the hand, and Johnne Ramfay on the thie; and wes lyk to haue had the
wictory of thanie all ; bot Johnne Ramfay fayis, ' My Lord, we are bot feruandis, his Maieftie is
fla\Tie !' At the quhilk vordis, my Lord puttis doun the pounttis of his fuordis to the fluir, and ftandis
ftill. Johnne Ramfay, takand the awantage, ftraikis out and ftraikis liim throw the body; quhairof he
fallis deid. The reft of the Nobill men cumis wp and mannis the hous.

The toune of Sanct Johneftoune ryflis and cumis to the 3ett of Gowreyis hous, and cryis for their
Proweft; and be mekill ado, was pacifeyit, be the Kingis mowth. The quliilk being done, the King
low]iis on liorfe and cumis to Falkland ; and than our the wattir to Edinbrughe. And on the nynt
day of Auguft, Mr Patrik Galloway maid ane preitching at the Corfe of Ed', giflFand God thankis for
the delyuerance of his Maiefty; and the preitching being endit, tlie Kingis Maiefty, out of his awin
mowtti, declairis tlie haill forme of this treflbune to the pepill ; and defyrit the Minifteris of Ed' to
fchaw the famin to the pepill out of pulpett on the nixt Sabothe ; the quhilk thay refuiflTet, faying, ' it
wes nocht pertinent to thame,^ nor thay had no warrand of the Word for thame to preiche fic doctreyne.' His Maieftie, being heallalie oftendit with tiiame for tliair refuiflal, commandis thame ten
myllis of ^ the toune of Ed', difcharging thame to preitche, wnder the payne of deithe. The haill
name of Rutliwene wes chargit nocht to com within ten myllis of his Maiefty. The ^Minifteris being
accuflit befoir the Counfell, the 10 day, gatt that fauour to remayne in Ed', bot not to preitche; bot
Mr Robert Bruce was chargitt to pas aft' the cuntryis of Scotland, Ingland and lyi-land.

The bodyis of the Erllis of Gowrye and his broder war brocht owir the water, and hung on the
gybett benethe the Corfe of Ed', and on the 13 day of Xoueniber, the Erll of Gowry, his broder and
fader-broder was foirfaltitt ; and Sir Thomas Erflcepie maid Lord of Dirltoune, Johnne Ramlay and
Schir Hew Haireyis maid knychtis of; airmis wes giffin to Sir Johnne Ramfay be his Maiefty, to
witt, ane fuord and ane bludy dagour, by^ the airmis of the llamfayis.

This attempt wes thocht to be dewyflit be ftrangeris and forane Princes, bot fpeciallie the Papiftis ;"

i Armour. * fvune words are evidently omitted lu-rc. J Below, beneath. '' It did not pertain to

their office, nor were they warranted by the Holy Scriptures, &c. ^ Olf, distant from. ^ Furbi/e, besides.

" It is rather a singidiu- coincidence, that John Earl of Gowrie actually joined the Popish Lords who were defeated

34JAC.VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 299

ami Cum tlioclit tliat thair war Aim of Inglaiul piewie to the famin. He waa in his hame-cuming Aug. ItiOO.
interteiiyit be all cuntreyis quhair he come, as ane Prince, an noclit lyk ane fubiect : Gif he bad bene
ane g-nde fiibiert, it had bene ane grit loife of him.

No. XVIII.
DOCUMENTS eelative to the conduct of Mr Robert Bruce and
THE Ministers of Edinburgh, &c.
[Among the variety of extraordinary incidents arising out of the Conspiracy
of John Earl of Cowrie, perhaps no feature is more singular, than the obstinate
resistance of Mr Robert Bruce of Kinnaird, a younger son of the family of
Bruce of Airth, in Stirlingshire, and one of tlie Ministers of Edinburgh, a ruling
sjiirit in the Assemblies of the National Kirk ; and his refusal to return public
thanks, for the King's deliverance from this danger. It may be asserted, without
the fear of contradiction, that few instances can be adduced, even in the History of the most troublesome periods of the Scottish Chiu'ch, of sterner and more
inflexible adherence to principle (whether real or imaginary), tijan that displayed, for so long a series of years, by this keen antagonist of Episcopacy and Kingly prerogative; for he would not yield to the demands of the King, or the entreaties of his friends, down to the period of his death, in 1631. It is not easj'-,
even with the most charitable allowances for exasperated feelings of party si)irit,
to designate Mr Robert's conduct by a gentler epithet, than that of a revengeful
retaliation against his sovereign, for certain oppositions made by him, in the
affairs of the Church ; and especially, for his strenuous attempts to introduce
Episcopacy. Great tact and ability were displayed by this remarkable person, in
his repeated ' Conferences' and disputations with the King and Council ; and his
Majesty's unusual and continued lenity and forbearance, show, in the strongest
light, how much the opinions of Bruce were known to be valued and followed by
the people ; and that the Court attached the utmost consequence to the benefit of
his influence with all classes. It is clear, that they sti'ained every nerve to get
him persuaded, by fair means, publicly to declare his conviction of the truth of
Gowrie's Conspiracy and guilt, and of the King's innocence. Like a second John
Knox, Bruce appears, previous to this event, to have assumed and maintained the
undisputed sway of the Church ; and it seems obvious, that King James and his
Covmcil did not dare to adopt those measures, which, in other instances, would
have been immediately followed up, \ ith the utmost rigour and extremity. Had
Bruce been merely a Minister of the Kirk, of an ordinary stamp, a single week

in October 1593. But he was pardoned in consideration of Iiis tender years, and probably from the King's partiality
to him individually ; at all events, it would charitably be inferred by the King and Council, that he was under the
influence of the Earl of AthoU.

300 CRIMINAL TRIALS. • A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1600. M'ould not have elaiJsed, before his head would have borne Gowrie and the Master of Ruthven company, on the top of Edinburgh Tolbooth, for his daring and
treasonable conduct.

The sources from which the following Collection of Papers has been formed,
are CulderuootVs MS. Church History, Woclrow's MSS., and the Bulk of the
Universal Kirh, from none of which, are any reprehensions against Mr Robert Bi-uce to be looked for ; but, on the contrary, every thing is so stated by
them as to exhibit their Champion in the light of one ' persecuted for conscience
sake.' There is a ' Narrative by Mr Robert Bruce, concerning his troubles,' in
Calderwood's MSS. Adv. Library, M. 6. 9. No. 36, which has been printed in
the Miscellany of the Bannatyne Club. It contains a considerable portion of
the Conferences here given ; but varies in language, and in other respects ; and
may be referred to by those who have access to that valuable work, and M^ho
wish to look more minutely into this unparalleled affair.]

(1.) CoxFEEEXCE between the Ministers of Edinhurgh and the King.

Upon Tuifday the 12 of Augufl, the Minifleris of Edinburgh were cliargeil, be a Maeer, to compear before tlie King and Couufell. Tlie King demanded at INIr Robert Bruce, in name of the reft,
' Why they had difobeyed him and his Counfell, and would not praife God for his delivery?' They
anTwered, ' tliay had not difobeyed, but was all ready to have praiied God for his Majefties delivery,
generally ; as they did, upon tlie Sabbath ininiediatlie following ; but they could not defcend unto
particulars, to qualifie wliat fort of danger it was ; in refpect they had noe certainty.' ' Had yee not
my Letter,' fayes the King, ' to fliew yow the certaintie ?' ' Sir,' fayes Mr Robert, ' your Letter did bear
noe particular, but made mention only of a danger, in generall, and we were content to follow it.' ' Could
not my Counfell,' fuid the King, ' affure you of the particulars ?* And withall addreU'etli himfelf to tlie
Prefident, ' Allured ye not thera ?' fayes the King to the Prefident. The Prefident anfwered, ' Yes,
Sir, we all afTured them of the certaintie of that Treafone.' ' Sir, with their honouris leave,' faid Mr R.
' they bad received noe information, except David Moyfes Bill and John Grahame of Balgonie his Report, who came in the mean tynie, when the Lords were fitting at Counfell ; and the tuo Reports did
foe fight againfl other, that noe man could find anie certaintie.' The Secretar ryfed up and faid, ' they
agreed very weill.' The Prefident faid the like. Mr Robert anAvered, ♦ he had Dauid Moyfes Letter
to Ihew, which would telli6e the contrare.' The King afted at lall, ' Now, are yee yet perfwaded ? Yee
have heard me, yee have beai'd my Minifter, yee have heard my Counfell, yee have heai'd the Earll of
Marr, touching the Report of this Treafone; whither are yee yett fully perAvaded or not?' ' Surely,
Sir,' fayes Mr Robert, ' I would have farther light, before I preached it to peiAvade the people. If I
were but a private fubject, not a Paftor, I could reft upon your Majefties report as otheris doe.' Then
the King afked Mr James Balfour, ' Are yee fully perAvaded ?' He anfwered, ' I will fpeak nothing
to the contiarie, Sir.' < But are yee not perfwaded ?' fayes the King. ' Nott yett. Sir,' faid he. Mr
Williame VVatfone anAvered after the fame maner. Mr Walter Balcanquall faid, that he would
' affirme all that INIr David Lindfay preached in pulpite, in prefence of his Maieftie yefterday.'
' What faid Mr David ?' fayes the King. ' Mr David founded himfelf upon your Majefties report,
and made a faitbfull reliearfall of your report ; and foe fall wee.' ' Think yee,' fayes the King, ' that
Mr David doubted of my report I' Mr David was fent for incontinent. They faid unto liim, ' Are
yee not certainly perAvaded of this Treafone ?' ' Yes, Sir,' fayes he, ' I am perfwaded, in confcience,

3J.JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. - 301

of it.' ' Now,' fayes the King-, ' Mr Walter, are ye freely perlVaded ?' ' Indeed, Sir,' fayes he, ' I Auo-. IGOO.

would liave farther time and light.' Then the King allied at Mr John Hall, ' Are yee fully perfwaded ?' He anfwered, ' I would have the civill tryell goeing before. Sir, that I may be perfwaded.'

Then tlie King afked at Mr Fetter Hewat, ' Mr Peter, whether are yee yett perfwaded or not ?' ' Sir,'

fayes he, ' I fulpect not your Proclamation.' ' But whether beleeve yee it or not ?' fayes the King.

' The Prefident heard,' faid he, ' what I faid the lall Sabbath.' The Prefident beganne to juftifie him,

but the King infifted, faying, ' Lett me hear himfelf. Whether beleeve yee my Proclamation or not?'

fayes the King. ' Sir,' fayes he, ' I beleeve it.' See they were all removed, and alter a great fpace

the Macer cometh to them with a roll in his hand, wherin all thair names were written, and a fcore

drawen upon Mr Peter and Mr George Robertfon's name. Mr George and Mr Peter were not called

in. The reft were called. The Chanceller pronounces the Sentence, &c.

(2.) Letter, the King to the Ministers of the Synod of Edinburgh.^

Trustie freindis. We greet 30W heartily weill. Jie Minifteris of Edinburgh being difcharged
Jiair preaching, be us and our Counfell, for Jiair unaturall and unduetifull behaviour towards us, in this
late danger, wherof it pleafed God miraculoufly to deliver us; We have, by advice of Jie fame Counfell, refolved that they fall never be reftored agane to fair own places ; fince, in that cafe. We dread noe
leffe then ])e hazard of our life and perrelling of our ftate ; as We have more particularlie declared to
])e Commiffioneris,'- by whofe advice Jiair rowmes ar declared to be vacant, that operis may be pi ovided
therto. Lyke as, for the fame effect. We, be advice of the fame Commiffioneris, have appointed a
meeting at Ed', upon the fecond of October nixt, not only upon order taking in that mater, but for
confulting upon fuch ofer thingis as fall be tliocht good to be proponned in name of Jie Kirk, for J)e
weall of our and tlieir ellate, at our firft Parliament, appointed the firfl day of November nixt : And
therfor, have thought good to will and defyre 50W to direct two of pe raoft wifeft and heft affected of
5 our number to keep the faid dyett, and inftructed fufhciently to give ther advice and concurrance
with ]ie faid Commiffioneris in the premifTes ; as jie will tellifie jour deutifull affection towards us,
and the quietnelfe of our and jour eftate. And in refpect of our faid happy deliverie upon a Twifday, We have, by the advice foirfaid, appointed that every Twifday heerafter fall be a day of ordinar
preaching, within every burgh within the boundis of ))e Synods ; and in like maner commanded, by
our publick Proclamation, that fe lali day of September next, and the Sunday next therafter he keep
folemnly, for giveing thankis to God for our deliverie of fuch ane evident danger ; which We have
thought meet alfo to intimate unto jow, by this ovu- particular Letter, belide our Proclamation, that jee
pretend noe ignorance. And foe, Wee committ 50W to God. From Stirline, the 24 of Aguft, 1600.
To ourtrufty freindis, the Ministeris of the Synod of Edinburgh. JAMES \l.

To be delivered to them by Mr David Lindfay, o' lall Moderator.

Lett jour Synod be conveened the third Twifday of September next, for directing of Commiffioners for the effect forfaid.

(3.) Letter, Mr Robert Bruce' /o the Earl or Mar.

My Lord,
After my very hearty commendations of fervice, ffearing that this lingring of mine fould give Sept. IGOO,

1 Calderwood's Cliurch Hist. JIS. Advocates' Library, vol. v. p. 518. ' Of tlic Ceneral Assembly of the

Church of Scotland. ' During tliis interval, the l(dluwing correspondence is recorded by Calderwuoil, ou this

subject, but not of sufficient interest to merit insertion here : —

1600. Sept. 18. Letter, Mr Peter Hewat to Jlr Robert Bruce, .... \'ol. v. p. 532

Sept. 22. Do. Mr Robert Bruce in reply, 533

Sept. 18. Do. i\Ir James Balfour, Mr Walter Balcanquall and Mr John Hall to Do. 336

Sept. 22. . Do. 3Ir Robert Bruce in reply, ..,....• 537

302 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Sept. IGOO. occafion to finirter inipreflions, and mirilh the people in lewd opinions (wherunto they are over niuili
bent, of will) of tlier Prince, I thought it my duety, my Lord, to prevent fuih I'ulpicions, and to lignifie
my minde unto your L. as be this Letter I doe ; that if ever God open my mouth, atber in that place or
any ojier place, I will proniife, be his grace, to fuit them and divert them from fuch cogitations as flew
from perveiTitie of nature, rather then from ane lolide ground. This I may doe lafelie, and fall
doe fartlier, when God fall grant me farther light ; fFor your L. takes me up wrong, if yea be of that
mind, that it is not confcience that moves me to this, but only preportrous affection to perfons. My
actions, my Lord, IJioitly will be my bed judges and witnelfes, atlier with me or againll me ; and in the
mean tyrae, I would crave this favour of your L. if my fervice will not be acceptable to iiis Ma. within
the country, that he would fufler me, with his Licence and favour, whill this llorm be fettled, to
depart. I will not falli your L. with farther Letter ; but, if I durll fay it, my confcience fayes to me, I
deferve good will of your L. alwayes. The Lord in his mercie direct your L. in all your affaires, and
take you and yours under his tuition and defence, both now and ever. Of Airth, fe 22 of September 1600. Your L. to bis power to be commanded, with fervice.

MR R. B.

(4.) Letter, the Earl of Mark, in reply to Mr Robert Bruce.

Sir,

I RECEIVED your Letter, wherein yee defyred me to be a dealler at his Ma" hand, that yee may
have a Licence to paffe furth of fe countrie, if better cannot be (wliereof I would be very forry.) I
fall leave nothing that in me lyes to doe that which yee defyred me ; but yee mull give me leave, even
to fpiak with yow. I think yee are farr in the wrong, to your felf and all your weall willers, that is
foe hard of credit, in foe manifeft a mater ; and now, feeing it has come to fuch ane bight, I fear his
Ma. fall be very hard in it ; ffor I darr take it on me, before God in heaven (that is my only witneffe,
in writteing tliefe words unto yow,) that Jie moll milhant Treafone that ever was intended againlt a
Prince, was that day intended againll his ^la.. be my Lord of Gowrie and his brother. This I may
baldly write, in refpect of pat I faw ; and if I had occafion to fpeek with yow, I beleeve to let yow fee
it evidentlie. Alwayes, Sir, I befeech yow evin to refolve with your felf upon that ; which I am
affured of in confcience yee may ; and that, in refpect I knew it to be the truth. I remit fe rell to fe
bearer, wdiom I know yee will credit. And foe, I committ yow to God. Of Stirline, the 24 of
September, 1600. Your loving freind, MARR.

As to that part of your Letter, concerning your good will toward me, in tmth I never thought oJ>erwife ; nather merited I ever other at your hand, nor yet fall doe.

June, 1602. (5.) LeTTEK, Mr RoBl.RT BrUCE to THK Kl>'G.'

[The following Letter has been collated with a more correct transcript, preserved in ' The Booke
of the Univerfall Kirk' Adv. Library, W. L 14, p, 329; from which this Extract has been taken.
• Ancnt the rcquelt made be the Moderator, in name of the haill Affemblie, to his Ma., in favouris of
Mr Robert Bruce ; His Ma. declarit, that he wald doe in that matter, be the advyce of the Commitfioneris of the Generall Afiemblie, and (as) Mr Robert, be liis awne behaviour, lliould give him occalione. And becaufe INIr Robert Bruce had, be his Miliiuo direct to his Ma. before his departure off
the countrie, as alfo by the ratificatione and farther examiuatione and explanatione thereof, in write,
at Perth the 26 of July, 1602, declarit his refolutione of his Ma. innocencie, and guiltinefs of the
Earle of Gowrie and !iis brother; and promifed to divert the people, fo farr as in him lay, from

> Calderwood remarks, ' Mr Robert Bruce, eight dayes before the time appointed for his departure, direrted a
Letter to the King, be the Laird of Balvaird ; wherein he took his good niglit, and made a reiiititii>ii of the foriiier
offers, in as reverent and humble maner as he could,'

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 303

their lewd opinions and uncharitable conftructiones, anent his Ma. actiones, namely in tliis turne. June 1602,
Therefore his Ma. defyrit the determinatione of the Affemblie, quhither, if the faid Mr Robert fould
lykewife make the fame declaration in pulpit, according as it is at lenth fet downe in the faid MifTive
and explanation thairof, at Perth ? Quhairof the tennor follows, &c. The quhilk, the haill Alfemblie,
after voicing, thought not only reafonable, but alfo concludes, that the faid Mr Robert aucht to do the
fame.' This affords the most satisfactory explanation of Mr Robert Bruce's conduct, and seta it in
the true light in which it ought to be viewed. The subsequent behaviour of this zealous and able man,
when all the previous circumstances of his personal altercations with tlie King are taken into consideration, is far more questionable than, in charity, without such explanation being afforded, might have
been conceded.]

Please your Ma.,

Hearing that your Ma. was nothing relentit of your former wrath againft me, and being now upon
the point to Ihow my obedience unto your Ma' laft charge, I could not omitt this, as my laft, dewtie,
to intreat your hienes clemencie, and to mitigate the extreamitie of this intendit wrath. I am not
ignorant of that fpeech, that ' ]>e wrath of ])e Prince is the meffinger of death,' foe that I craue that the
Lord, for Chrilt fake, may adde his blelling, and work affectionatly ' in your grace, as he fall fee expedient
for his awne glory, and your Ma' perpetuall prefervation. Then, to be ihort, to fhow my conformitie
with the reft of my breither of tlie Minilhy, as at all tyraes, foe now efpecially, to Ihow both my
reverence to your Ma., and to clear my fufpectit affections herein, I offer to give to the ffather of our
Lord Jefus Chrift, in him and throw iiini, moil heartilye thankis, for all your Ma. deliveries, from your
cradle to this prefent houre ; but namely, for that delivcrie which he grantit to your Ma. in S. Johnftoune, on Tuifday the fyfth of Auguft, farr above all our deferts and your Ma^ expectation. I offer
alfo to fteir up the people to that fame dewtie ; and attour, to divert the people, foe farr as in me lyes,
from ther leud opiniones and uncharitable conftructions of your Ma. actions ; and namely, in this turne.
Finallie, ther is noe dewtie that your Ma. can crave of me, without the manifeil offence of God and
hurt of my own confcience, but I will doe it, with alfe good a heart as ever I did anie thing in the
earth ; that if by anie means I might teftifie my good affectione toward your Ma. my Soveraigne, and
to injoy my naturall air and fuch uther comforts as the Lord hes given nie under your Ma' raigne,
quiiilk I maift humblie crave of your Ma., befeekand the Lord to move your heart hereunto, for
Chrift's fake. Soe, waiting of your H. anfwei-, in all humilitie, I take my leave.

Mr Robert Bruce.

(Upon the back thereof.) Ax Perth, the 26 of June 1602. Farther, concerning tlie heids within
contanit, 1 am refolvit of his Ma"" innocence and the guiltinefs of the Earle of Gowrie and his brother, according as it is declareit be the Act of Parliament : And therefore, acknowledges the great
mercy of God towards his Ma* haill Kirk and countrie, in liis Ma. delyverance ; for the quhilk, I
thank God from my heart. (Sic fubfcribitur) Mr Robert Bruce.'

(6.) NoTA. The Answer to ihis \s 7iot preserved hij Calderwood, as explained by him in the following terms.

Mr Robert was upon his journey to the fliip, and Balvaird' returned with his anfwer to his wifew
He lliewed her that his Ma, had interlyned the Letter, and eeked' fome words upon the margent ;

^ ' Effectually,' in Book nf Univ. Kirk. '' Tliis postscript or indorsation, Calderwood most unfairly innitv.

This is by no nieans a solitary instance of such conduct. It must be obvious to any one who carefully perll^e^ the
various Conferences, &c. that he uniformly stiulies to place Bruce in the character of tlie hero of his book, and iii
the interesting attitude of a person persecuted for conscience sake, and cruelly trampled upon by the coll^litute<l
authorities, ^ Sir Andrew JIuiray of Balvaird. * Added,

304 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Oct. 1600. and if Mr Robert condefcended not to tliefe words, and wes not content to utter them in pulpit, there
was noe byding for him in Scotland. He def)Ted alio, that he might keep the interlyned Letter a
while, proniifein? to redeliver it ; but he gave it to his uncle Sir Patrik Murrey, and was never redelivered. In tlie meantyme, ^Ir Robert returned to Reftalrig, upon Thmfday at night,' the penult of
October. The Ihip was not as yett out of the harbourie, it being great in (juantitie,- and heavie
loadned, and tlie floods^ alfo decreafing, there was litle hope of out-getting. Alwayes Cornelius
Iniflis, fonne to James Inglis the owner of the lliip, was moved to emptie her of a great part of her
loadnin" ; but tiie deid neep ' was fo great, according to the courfe of the moon and cultome of that
fea, that thev looked not for her floating : But, by^ ther expectation, and farr by the cullome niaiked
in tliofe feas, 80 years before, where the waters fould have decayed, againft the cuftome they increafed,
till they put her on floatt and convoyed her out ; and thereafter returned to their own naturall courfe,
and continued in ther ebnefl'e for five weeks after. 'Ihe liiip faired furth on Saturday the firfl of November, and was drawen up to the Queens-ferrie, where flie lay at anker. Upon the third of November Mr Robert went up to the fliip. Two of the IMinifters certified him, that he was to be charged,
vnder the paine of Treafone, to retire to the (hip within 24- houres ; which made him to make the
greater hafte. Soe he raid to the Queens-feme, accompanied with Sir William Cranftoun and his
fone ; and after fupper took (hip. Two bailliffes went with him to the lliipe, and Mr Thomas Gray
and a Notar, John Maky. He took inftruments in the hands of the Notar, that he obeyed the Act.
They returned in a boat. It was marked by them that returned, that, by^ cuftome, there appeared
foe great a light, which ferved them to read, and the mariners and Ikippers to take up fail ; although
it was neer midnight. Soe they drew to fea, by God's blelfing, and arived at Deep " in France, upon
Saturday the 8 of November.

(7.) Lltter, Mr Robert Bruce to his Wife.

A long letter is inserted in Caklericood' s MS. Church History, Vol. V. p. 584 to 591, in which
he-treats of his ' persecution,' &c. He subscribes himself, ' Your loving hufband, not wearie I affure
vow of the Lords croffe, but wearie of the treicherous flatterie of men.' It is dated, ' Oft' Berwick,
the 5 of this inftant of June.' And on Sept. 29, 1601, Mr Patrick Simson, Minister at Stirling, writes
him, inviting him to return to Edinburgh. — See Caldcrwood, p. 692.

Jan. 1602. (8.) 'A CoNFEREXCE hetween Mu Robert Bruce andjbme {Commijjioners)
directed from the King.'

The Kinc; appointed Mr Robert Bruce to come to Craigmiller, to conferr with fome appointed be
him. Mr Robert took Mr Patrick Simfone with him, to be a witneffe to thair dealing : Soe, upon
the 15 of Januar (1602), they mett at Craigmiller. They proponned three things to him : (1.) That
he would approve the book fett out upon Gowrie's Confpiracie : (2.) That he would purge the King,
in fuch places as the King fould appoint him to preach in : (3.) That he would crave the King pardon, for his long miftruft and difobedience. All the three were refufed be Mr Robert, after long conference. They gave him fome Articles and Inftructions, in write, and craved his Anfwer in write ; the
tennor wherof followeth.

IssTRUCTioNs/or Jiis Mojejlies ConimiJJioners directed to Mr Robert Bruce.

Whether, if he be throughlie refolved now, of the forme and maner of that treafonable attempt
committed againft his Ma. at Perth ; and fpeciallie, of Iiis Ma^ honeft minde, intention and miraculous

This must have bpcn done by stealth, and in contravention of the Cliarge wliich confiDed him to Airth, &e. See
p. 233, &c. '-' Size, burthen, 3 flood tides. ^ Neap tide. * Contrary to. 6 Contrary to. " Dieppe.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 305

deliverance, and of Cowrie's and his brotheris vile and bloody Confpiracie, intended to ])e taking Jan. lGO:i.
away of his Ma= life ; as is particularly fett down in the printed book and Acts theranent, or not ?
As his doubting of that turne hes been the principall caufe of the doubt of many, and of his H. flander
in that point, if he be willing to utter in pulpit, in fuch places as fall be appointed, his refolution therin,
according to the forme of the faid Articles, as clearly, as any his Ma' good fubjects have done ; craving
pardon, and escufeing his long incredulity, and the flander aryfing therupon ; and wifliing the people
that anywife doubted fairof, as they were ever ready to conceive doubts upon unjufl grounds, only
moved by his example, foe now to be contented, be his means, rightly to be refolved thairof.'

(Sic fubfcribitur) James R.

(9.) Thk Second Conference o/'Mr. Robert Bruce ivlth the King.

In the beginning of Aprile, the Erie of Marr directed a Letter to Mr Robert Bruce, at the King's
direction, to come to Brechin, with diligence. Immediatly before the receipt of the Letter, lie was
exercifed iu prayer, with fliedding of tears. When he come to Brechin, as foon as the King faw him,
he raife, and come forward to the place where he flood ; and looked, as appeared to Mr Robert, very
lovingly. He caufed void the houfe,* none remaining but the King and Mr Robert. The King afked, ' If he was refolved?' He anfwered, ' Yes.' He afked next, ' What moved him?' Mr Robert
anfweredj ' Sundrie things, namely, my Lord of Marr his deep fwearing ; for I thought (faid he) that
a Chriflian, of his quality, could not forfwear himfelfe, for all the gear in the world I' ' How could
he fwear?' faid the King ; ' he nather faw nor heard !' ' I cannot tell that. Sir,' faid Mr Robert,
' but indeed he fwore very deeply.' The King, underflanding what was the forme of the oath, which
he repeated to him : ' What was the caufe, then,' faid the King, ' yee would not truft me ?' ' Sir,' faid
Mr Robert, ' Your Ma. took noe paines to informe.* ' I fent,' faid the King, ' Sir Thomas Arelkine
to yow.' ' As for Sir Thomas Arefkine,' faid Mr Robert, ' I trufted him in a part ; but thair were
other things that I thought hard.' ' What was that ?' faid the King. ' That part which concerned
the Master of Gowrie and your Ma.' faid Mr Robert. ' Doubt yee of that?' faid the King. ' Then
yee could not but compt me a murtherer I' ' It followeth not, if it pleafe you. Sir,' faid Mr Robert ;
' ffor yee might have fome fecreitt caufe.'^ The King deduced the whole Tragedie, from the beginning. Mr Robert uttered his doubt, where he found occafion. The King heard him gentlie, and with
a conftant countenance; which Mr Robert admired.' At lafl, the King urgeth him to preach the Articles which were fent to him. Mr Robert anfweied, he had ' given his anfwer already to thefe Articles ; and had offered to the Ambaifadors that which all men thought fatisfaction, yea more than
preaching.' ' What is that?' faid the King. ' That I will fubfcrive my refolution,' faid Mr Robert.
' Truft you it ?' faid the King. ' Yes, Sir,' faid Mr Robert. ' If ye truft it, why may yee not preach
it ?' faid the King. ' I fall toll yow, Sir," faid Mr Robert ; ' I give it but a doubtfonie truft ; for I
learn this out of Bernard, " in doubtfome things, to give undoubted truft, is temeritie ; and in undoubted things, to give a doubtfome truft, is infirmity I" ' ' But this is undoubted,' faid the King.
< Then bear with my infirmity !' faid Mr Robert. ' But yee fay it is more than preaching ?' liiid the
King. ' Sir, I ought to preach nothing but the word of God,' faid Mr Robert. ' Obedience to Princes,
fuppofe they were wicked, is the word of God,' faid the King. ' I durft lay a waiger, ther is noe exprefl"e word of King James the Sexth, in the Scripture.' ' Yes,' faid Mr Robert, ' if thair be a King
there, there is word for yow alfo.' ' The whole Kiik has done it already,' faid the King ; ' yee
muft not be fingular 1' ' Sindrie have not done it,' faid Mr Robert. ' Shew me one I' faid the King.

1 The Answers are general and evasive ; and as tlie substance is contained in the following most remai-kahle Conference with the King, at Brechin, it seems only necessary to refer the curious to Culdenvood's Church History,
MS. Vol. V. p. 598, &c. - I'he Chamber. A common mode of e^rrcssion at this time. ^ Occasion, necessity.

* Lat. admirare, marvelled ; or wondered at.

VOL. II. 2 Q

306 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6OO.

Apr. 1602. ' Your Ma. muft bear with me,' faid Mr Robert ; ' for it were againft the rule of Cliaritie to harme my
brelbreu.' He defyred the King to conveen the Miuillrie, to fee what they would injoyne him to
doe. ' That needeth not,' faid the King ; ' none darr or will refufe but yee ; and tlierefore yee are the
fole and only giound of my flauder.' Mr Robert, to clear him of this imputation, faid, ' I have offered to fubfcrive my Refolution, in what language your Ma. pleafeth ; which none have done but I.'
' Wliere is your Refolution ?' faid the King. ' I fent it in write to your Ma.,' faid Mr Robert.
' That which yee fent was too generall,' faid the King ; ' but what fault find yee in my Articles ?'
' I cannot remember all ; but one thing I remember,' faid Mr Robert, ' yee would have me to refolve
according to your book ; and who can doe thai?' ' There is never a falfe word in that book,' faid the
Kin". ' Yes, Sir, there are findrie.' ' Weill then,' faid the King, ' wee fall putt out that claus out
of the Articles. What other fault find yee?' ' I cannot remember now,' faid Mr Robert. ' Have
yee not the Articles ?' faid the King. ' 1 gave them to Sir Patrick Murray,' faid Mr Robert. • I am
fure,' faid the King, ' yee have keeped the Copie.' Mr Robert, perceiveing the King's drift, to urge
liim farther, thouglit it not expedient to produce the copie. ' Weill,' faid the King, ' ftay heer till Sir
Patrick Murrey come.' Yet, after fupper, Mr Robert gott licence to returnc home, till the next
advertifment.

Sundrie other things pall between the King and him, in conference ; as namelie, Mr Robert defyred,
that he ' and others of the Miniilrie be not urged to Imrt thair confciences ; and that his Ma. would
not think, that honell men would fell their foules ; howbeit their bodies and geir fall be at his command.' ' I undedland not what ye mean,' faid the King, ' be felling of your foules ; but I fall gar
the befl of you fay and gainefay !' ' That may be. Sir,' faid Mr Robert, ' and that yitt they fay not
againft confcience.' ' Yee fall not find the like in me,' faid the King ; ' my faying fall bealwife one.'
' It fetteth not to compare with your Ma.,' faid Mr Robert. — He prayed in heart, all the time, thus —
' O Lord ! keep my heart unto thee ! and fave me frome the danger that this traitourous and falfe
heart is like to caft me unto !'

(10.) The Third Conference ofMu Robert Bruce tvif/i the King.

Mr Robert Bruce, after his Conference with the King at Brechine, was confined in the parioch
where lie had his dwelling place, and fuffered to preach noe where ells. He received a Letter from
the King, to come to him, to Perth, the 24 of June. When become and entered in the King's chamber, no other was fuffered to enter but Sir Patrick Murrey. The King alTced, ' Where the Articles
were ?' INIr Robert anfwered, tliat he had redelivered them to Sir Patrick Murrey. Sir Patrick produced them. After they were read, the King aiked, ' If he was willing to preach according to thefe
Articles ?' ' Not, Sir,' faid Mr Robert, ' if it pleafe you ?' ' Why ?' liiyis the King. ' Becaufe my
preaching is the mater of my Infl,ructiones and Commilfion : No Prince hath the pouer to give inftructions to another Princes Ambaftader. I am the fone of God's Ambaflader and preacher I' ' But,' faid
Mr David Lindl'ey,' ' yee offered to preach to that effect, before yee went out of the country.' Wlierupon. Sir Patrick produced Mr Robert's Letter ; which was read, in the audience of the King and
Commiffioneris. ' Weill,' fayes Mr Roliei t, ' yee refuted this offer, foe am I not bound to it.' ' Will
yee goe from the thing yee have offered ?' fay they. ' Weill,' fayeth Mr Robert, ' will this Letter fatisfie yow? Sail I be noe farther urged, in cafe we condefcend to this Letter?' ' Nay,' quoth the
King, ' yee may fay all this and not be refolvcd ! Say truely, was yee refolved at that tyme or no ?'
' Not indeid,' faid Mr Robert. ' How fay yee then, that yee will give thanks for my deliverance, that
day .'' laid the King. ' Yes, Sir,' faid Mr Robert, ' I have caufe to give thanks for your prefervatione,
fuppofe yee had caft your felf in danger.' ' I told yow that,' quoth the King ; ' yee fee what he meant.

1 lie was Minister of Leith, and preached the Oration before the King the day of his landing after tlie Conspiracy.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. S07

— Are yee now refolded?' ' Yes, Sir,' faiil he. ' That's but the duety of a fuhject, when yee have Jun. 160-2.
done,' faid the King. ' Are yee refolved to preach ?' ' I am difcharged to preach the pleafures of
men,' (liid Mr Robert : ' Place me where God placed me,' and I fall teach fruitful doctrine, as God tail
give me grace : But we have not that cullome to be injoyned to preach ; nor I darr not promife to
keep that injunction. It lyeth not in my hand to make a promife ; I know not certainly what God
will fuffer me to fpeak ; I may ftand dumb. Ttierefore, Sir, leave me frie ; and when I fall find my
felf to be moved, be God's fpirite, and to have the warrant of his word, I fall not faill to doe it.'
' That is plaine Annabaptilby ! That is a caball and tradition,' faid the King: ' Yee fall preach as the relt
have done, or ells I cannot be fatisfied. Yee fall goe !' ' I pray your Ma.,' faid Mr R. ' fett down
your difjunctive, and the one, God willing, fall be as welcome to me as the other. I have racked certainly a peace of my heart, to plcafe your Ma.; now feeing your Ma. cannot be fatisfied, except I make
Ihipwrack of all, lett me goe, in God's name. Suppofe I have fome commodities, as other mean
gentlemen have, in your Msfi countrie, yett. Sir, I never defyred to have feen your Ma^ face, or your
countrie aither, except I had been certaiidy informed that your Ma. was fatisfied 1' ' What warrant
had yee ? Who informed yow foe ?' faid the King. ' If it pleafe yow. Sir,' faid Mr Robert, ' 1 had
firfl a warrant from the mouth of both your ambafladers, who aflured me their fatisfaction fould be
•yours.' ' I truft,' fayetli the King, ' they will not fay, fuppofe of all this new kindnefle that is knilt
up betwixt yow.' ' Surelie, Sir,' faid Mr Robert, ' I am perfwaded they will fay it, and heer is a
brother, (meaning Mr Patrick Simfone,) that lies heard my Lord of Marr fay as much. Belide this,
if it pleafe yow, Sir, I have your Ma* own warrant, be Letter.' ' What !' fayeth the King, ' my Letter ?' ' Your Ma^ Letter,' fayeth Mr Robert, ' willeth me to fend in my refolution, in write ; and
therupon, promifed to be fatisfied. And foe I did ; and therefore, I ought not to be urged any farther.' ' My Letter beareth noe fuch thing,' fayeth the King. ' If it bear not, Sir, it fall turn to my
own paines,' faid Mr Robert. ' I have it befide me.' The King went in to his Cabinet, and walked
up and down a reafonable fpace. In the mean tyme, the Commiffioners dealt with Mr Robert, almofl
each one after another. He would have glaidly gone out of the houfe, but the door was locked ; foe
he behoved to Hand, till the King come out of the Cabinet. At lalt, the King cometh out. The
Commiffioners fay to him, ' Sir, feeing it is foe, that Mr Robert alledgeth fuch promifes, yee fall leave
the preaching free to his own will : But let us come to liis fubfcription in the rownie therof.' ' Are
yee content,' fayes Mr David and the reft, ' to fubfcribe the King's innocencie and their guiltlnefle ?'
• Not in thefe terms,' anfwered Mr Robert. The King urgeth him the more earneltly, and fayeth, ' I
will not only have yow cleering mee, but my whole company.' ' As for your Ma^ company,' fayes
Mr Robert, ' they have no need of my cleering ; nather will they feek it. I am bound to your Ma.,
and I will doe all that lyeth in my poffibility.' ' Then yee mull fubfcribe my innocencie,' faid the
King. ' Your own confcience. Sir, can doe that heft,' faid Mr Robert. ' It is very hard for me to do
it r ' Why is it hard ?' faid the King. Laith^ was Mr Robert to anfvver, lead he fould irritat him ;
but he infilled. Then faid Mr R. ' Your Ma. will not be oft'ended if I fpeak freelie ?' ' Not,' faid
the King. ' I was reading,' faid Mr Robert, ' upon Ammandus Polanus, touching the llauchter of
the Magicians, when the King of Babell commanded to flay. Amandus difputeth the quellion, whether the King of Babell did weill or not ? Firll, he fayeth, (mimi gratia, it would appear that he did
Weill; for lie had the plaine law of God for him, in manie places: Yett he concluds agaiuil the King,
that he did not weill ; ffor, Lowfoever he had the Law, yett he looked not to the Law nor had regaird
to God nor his glory : Therfore fayeth lie, howfoever the Magiftrat hath the fword and may nioft
juflly execute, yett if he have nothing but his own particular-^ before his eyes, God nor his glory, he
is a Murtherer ! — Now, Sir, I pray, what can I or any man fay, what your Ma. hail before your eyes ?
Or what particular yee had ?' ' It is true,' fayeth the King, ' and therfore I will give yow leave to
' Restore me to my pulpit. ' Loth, umvilliiij!, ' Quarrel, offence, or cause.

308 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Jan. 1602, pofe me upon the particulars.'' ' Then, firft, it pleale yow,' faid ISIr Robert, ' Had yee a purpofe to
flay MY Lord?' ' As I lall anfwer to God,' fayetli the King, ' I knew not that my Lord was llaine
till I law him in his laft agonie ; and was very forie, yea prayed in my heart for the fame.' ' What
fay yee then concerning Mr Alexander?' faid Mr Robert. ' I grant,' faid the King, < I am art
and pairt of Mr Alexander's flaughter; for it was in my own defence.' ' Why brought yee him not
to jullice,' faid Mr Robert, feeing yee would have had God before your eyes?' ' I had neither God
nor the Devil, man, before my eyes,'- faid the King, ' but my own defence 1' Heer the King beganne
to frett. He took all thefe points ' upon his falvation and damnation,' and that he ' was once minded
to have fpaired Mr Alexander ; but being moved, for the time, the motion prevailled.'^ Farther, Mr
Robert demanded of the King, ' If he had a purpofe, that day, in the morning, to flay Mr Alexander ?'
The King anfwered, ' upon his falvation, that day in the morning he loved him as his brother !' Mr
Robert, be reafon of his oatlies, thought him innocent of any purpofe that day, in the morning, to flay
them : Yett, becaufe he confeffed he had not God nor jullice before bis eyes, but was in a heat and
mind unto wrong, he could not be innocent, before God ; and had great caufe to repent, and to crave
mercie for Clirift's fake !

In end, Mr Robert yielded to fubfcribe his refolution, according to the Act of Parliament ; which
he did. Partly becaufe, in his judgment, it was the duety of a fubject to reverence the lawes of the
Country, except he knew them, certainly, to be contrarie to the word of God : Nixt, he was bound to
free himfelf of that imputation which was layed to his charge, partly be the King himfelf, partly by
others, directed to him from the King, that ' come death, come life to him, come what would come of
him, the whole blame fould lie upon him, in refpect he was the author of the flander I' Thirdly, becaufe he made a faithfull promife to him, that ' noe more fould be craved of him.' Soe, upon thefe
three refpects, he gave his refolution, in write ; not that he was perf waded, in his confeience, for any
thing that he could learn, be himfelf, or from God's Spirit, after prayer, as he himfelf recordeth in the
Hillorie of thefe proceedings ; but, in refpect there was a llrait and publick Law, he thought good to
follow it, till God gave him farther light. All the Comraiffioners, and Mr Patrick Simfone, who accompanyed him, fubfcribed as witnelFes. Wherupon Warrant was granted to him to travell abroad in
the couutrie ; provided he come not neer Edinburgh, be foiu' milles.

Nov. 1602. (ll-) Mj^ Robert Bruce drew neer to Edinburgh, in tyrae of the Affemblie. George Heriot
and John Robertfone, Commiflloners for the Town of Edinburgh, made mention of his repofition ;*
wherunto the Alfembly applauded. But the King and the Moderator^ ailedged they had fundrie
things to proponne, before that were granted. The King defjTed to have the Interlocutor of the Affembly, ' whither Mr Robert fould be injoyned to utter in pulpit, that which he had offered in his bill
before his baniihment, and the refolution which he had fubfcribed at Perth, after his returne, or not?'
Mr John Hall'' being firll aflced, anfwered, ' Ther could be nothing done in that mater, whilP the parties
were firft heard.' Soe it was thought meet that Mr Robert fould be fent for : But the mater was delayed till the end of the Affembly ; and howbeit he was nather called nor heard, they voted that he
fould publilh in pulpit his bill and refolution.*

' Grounds of quarrel or grudge. ' That is, in the heat of the struggle and the deadly encounter in which he

was engaged, he had no leisure for reflection, but looked only for the means of ridding himself of his antagonist.
' On cool retleclion, and at that distance of time, the King is inclined to thinii it miglit have been in his power to
have saved Mr Alexander's lite. But this lie admits, after being in the knowledge of all the facts and incidents, which
he could not at the time have contemplated. Had he attempted to have taken hiui alive, in all human probability,
it would have cost his own life and tbat of his party: for Gom'ie, as Provost of Perth, and adored by the citizens,
could have in an instant overpowered the Iiandful of followers attending upon the King, in this hasty and unprepared
visit. 4 The fact of his being reponed or reinstated. ^ Mr Patrick Galloway. "' The Moderator of the former Assembly. ' Until. * It is unnecessary to pursue this matter farther. The Editor hopes that Wodrow's

Life of this remarkable person, together with the Lives of other eminent public characters, written by Wodrow, shall
soon be published. The publication of these Lives would prove a valuable accession to the History of Scotland, and
could hardly fail amply to repay tlie person who undertook such a task.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 3O9

(12.) Letter, the Laird of Beltr'ies {Sir James Sempiir) to Mr Robert Bruce. Nov. 1602.

Sir,
I INQUIRED of his Ma. yefternight, if he had any new intention anent yow? He anfwered, none,
but that yee fould enter and doe your duetie, as was told yow of before. His Ma. alledges, yee never bide long at one refolution ; fFor, after my excufeing yow of your not abilitie for preaching the lafl
Sabbath, as yee willed me to doe, yett he fent Mr Henry Blyth to the Moderator, to enquire if yee
fould teach ? This I was ignorant of; but yett I anfivered, that it was upon a fear that pofieffed yow,
of a new offence, in not teaching ; and foe that was done for the full alfurance of his Ma' minde in it.
To the purpofe, Sir, yee fall enter, if yee pleafe, on Sunday next, and advertife his Ma. two or three
dayes before ; iiiquireing, if he pleafe to fpeak with yow ? At your entry, yee mufl doe (as his Ma.
fpeeche is) the duety of a good fubiect and of a good pallor; not to fay, fimply, yee are refolved,
which yee have done already ; but yee muft indeavour to remove all fcrouple from the auditor ; as
Weill in cleiring his Ma^ innocencie, as of your guiltineffe. Thefe are his Mas own words : And my
poor advice is, to fatisfie his Ma. ; feing, (with manie) I think it may and would be done, being a
thing able to do good to the King and whole Common-weall, to knitte the hearts of his people to him,
by removeing fcrouples, if any be, or by confirming them in the concewed truth ; wliich, be your
filence in this mater, will be called againe in queftion be them. The Lord give yow that refolution
which may bell ferve for his glory. Halyrudhous, this Tuifday the laft of Nov'^' 1602. Keep this
ticket for both our warrants.

(13.) Mb Robert Bruce's Answer to Belfries' lajl Letter.

Sir,

I WAS upon my journey homeward, when I received your laft Letter; and hearing that yee were Dec. 1602.

gone in the country, I delayed any anfwer till your returneing. Therefore, now. Sir, for anfwer ;

firfl,, I fay, that if Mr Henry Blyth had any fuch commilllon of me, or if the honeft man will fay foe

in my name, 1 will be content to take that imputation upon me : but otherwife, as it is true indeed,

I received wrong, I am noe wayes ambitious of it. For I have been twice thruft into it, and as oft

out of it ; and I have noe will that his Ma. be compelled to ufe his lloyall office upon the remanent

of my frail life. For thefe four or five yeares bygane, I liave been continually under a lingering and

dwyning death, which I am aiTured has been more troublefome and tedious to rae, both in body and

minde, then that hour of death fall be, when euer it fall pleafe the Lord to call me therto. 1 have not

forgott thefe voices, that oftentyraes I woundered to hear, ' that his Ma. dreadeth us bodily harme.'

Thefe things maketh me to look or I leap, and to advife weill or 1 enter ; yett I fpeak nott this, as if I

were minded to fliake off my duety that 1 ought to my flock : But if it would pleafe his Ma. to fuffer

us to ftand in that liberty wherein the Lord lies placed us, and to fpeak in the chair of trutii, as the

word and fpirit of truth fould direct us, 1 would proraife, be God's grace, when ever the word fould

give us occafioun, as oft tymes it will, tliat then, from the authority of the word, I fall reprelie all

fmifter conftructions of his Ma. actions, and by the authority thereof, beat down all feditious and infolent humors of fubiects, that would preffe to ufurp upon your fuperiours ; and foe, from the word,

as moved therby to fpeak upon thefe matters ; which muft have a farr greater grace nor-' to fpeak be

way of injunctions, or fpeak as it were a cunned leflbun,^ or ane ABC putt in man's hand. The

one deuty fmelleth of Divine Theologie, the other of Court Theologie, and does noe good to the caufe,

but hurls greatly : And as God liketh of a cheerful! giver, foe when the people feeth thefe things to

come freely, of my felf, without conftraint, nor yett putt unto my head, they will reverence them the

' He was son of John Sempill of Beltrics, whose conviction for Treason is recoided in vol. i. p. 72. Sir James
was Ambassador to England 1399, &c. and was author of a Satire, ' Tlie Pacliman and the Priest.' His son Robert
Sempill was author of the well-known Elegy on ' Habbie Simsou the Piper of Kilbarchan.' * Than.

' Conned lesson, got by rote.

310 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Doc. 1602. more, and liave tlie greater weight witli them. Soe to he fliort, if tliis fort of fervicc may he acceptable to the Prince, I am at command ; if otherwife, I will hold me with the benefite that I have gotten, within the compafs of obedience; and be God's grace, fall be unreproveable of any. Having
iioe fartlier for the prefent, I reft, &c.'

(14.) Letter, Mr John Hall to Mr Kohert Bruce.

Sin,
•Ian. 1603. James Aikiniieid, bailiffe, gave intelligence to his Ma. that yee were purpofed to preach this
next Sabbath, God willing ; and I being down in the Abbey, his Ma. gave me this anfwer, and ordained me to fio-iiifie the fame unto yow : That is, becaufe your advertifement was general!, and thereby he could not underliaiid what yee was to doe in the niattei', wherein he has been oflended ; alfo,
lie would afTm'e yow, that if yee entered into the pulpit, and did not according to the Act of the Affenibly, it would be a matter of great irritation : Therfore, be your tickett, ye would certifie againe
that ye are ready to preache, and to fatisfie his Ma. according to the Act of the Aflembly; or otherwife it will not be heard as a futhcient offer. Sir, if yee write heeranent to uiee againe, I fall be
ready to deliver it, and ihew yow the event.'^

Your brother in Chrift, Ma John Hall.

(15.) Mr Robert Bruce's last Conference loilh the King, o« Tuefday

ilie fifth day of Apr U, 1603.

Apr. 1603. Mek of all qualities reforted to Edinburgh, to congratulate the King his preferment. ^ Motion was
made, be tome brethren of the Prefbytery of Edinburgh, that Mr Robert Bruce fould be defyred to
come Eaft to congratulat with the rell ; for the King took it evill in part, as was reported, that he
fould be the laft in giving fignification of liis liumble affection. Upon Saturday, the 2 of Aprile, Mr
Robert returned anfwer, that ' in refpect of his Ma' laft Conference, holdin with the Comuiiflloners,
he durft not take the boldnelfe to draw neer to his Ma. ;' alwife,* did fignifie the finceritie of his inward affections, to the Lady Man- and fome other noble wemen, who could bear witneife of his integritie in that point : But, feeing he was informed that his Ma. would accept the offer of his affection,
he fould come with diligence, to try wliat might be done.

Soe, upon Mounday, the 4 of Aprile, he come to Edinburgh and founded fome llahle men, liis
freinds, touching the King's difpofition, whither he was willing to accept of him and his congratulation. Soe farr as he could learne, he was not able to redeem his countenance and favour, but with
confeffion of a fault, and that upon his knees ; be which meanes he might efchew publication in the
pulpit, and recover his Ma^ favour alfo. Mr Robert findeth himfelf brought in as great a ftrait almoft
as ever he was ; and anAvered to the Lords that interceded for him, that ' feeing he could not purchafe his Ma* prefence but upon thefe hard conditions, his earnell defyre was, that they would make
his excufe, in all humility, to his Ma. and to ihew that notwitliftanding he came to the town to congratulat, the preaffe and throng of the people was foe great, becaufe his Ma. was upon the point of his
departure, that he could get noe acceife.' They take much in hand ;s but the King, underftanding
he was come to town, fent one of his doraeflick fervants, James Murray of Powmais, the day following, Tuifday the 5 of Aprile, foon in the morning, before his Ma' departure, for him, before he was
rifen out of his bed. Mr Robert thought it liard, and that the King catched that peace of difgrace to
his Miniftry.

1 (1602. Jan. 19.) — Mr Robert Bruce addressed a Letter to the Town-Counri! of EdinburKh, which is an echo
of that to tlie LainI of Beltries. Tliis was followed by Geon/e Herivt and Curmiiiis Iii;//is waiting on tlie King, on
liruce's part ; wlio inliibited any preaching ; whereuiion he left the town. On 27'th January, he intimated his design to preach next Sabbath, to James Aikenhead, one of the Bailies of Edinburgh. ^ Jl„(-h correspondence,
&c. took place, till at last the Commissioners of the General Assembly, l"eb. 25, 1G03, 'declared that his re-entrie to
the Ministrie of Edinburgh came through his own default.' ' To the English Cro«n. The King dejiarted
for England immediately after this Couference took place. * Nevertheless. ^ Undertook ; promised largely.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 3H

Alwil'e lie went down to the Abbey. The King was at his breakfall. Mr Robert fought occafion Apr. 1603.
of fpeecli with him, at tiiat tyme ; thinking, tiiat in tlie prefence ol' many Grangers and noble men, the
King would not urge him, as he did before. The noble men courteoufly gave him place. But when
lie was upon the point of bowing and entering in conference. Sir Patrick Murray, who (lood upon his
Mas left hand, and rounded I'oniewhat in his ear, prevented liini. He was referred to the King's bedchamber, to be heard after the preaching ; which was very cold. It was made be Mr Andrew Lamb.
Mr Robert, all the tyme, prayed to God to direct him be his Spirit, in the end ; as he had done in the
refl- of that action before. He relblved noe wayes to goe to the knees, againfl bis confcience ; but
rather now, in the entry to this great Monarche, to urge his Ma. with a thankfull heart to God for his
wonderful! and unlooked-fore blefling. He had all the words and mater conceived, which he communicated to Mr James Melvill, Minilter at Anllruther, who was Weill plealed both with the mater and
the maner ; wherby Mr Robert was greatly encouraged to perfill in his refolution. In the meantyme,
the Lord Fleming cometh for Mr Robert, and taketh him to the King's bed-chamber ; where he found
my Lord of Marr, my Lord of Blantyre, the Laird of Dunipaice, Mr Peter Hewat, Mr Tiiomas Abernethie. The Lord Fleming went to the Chamber of Prefence, told the King Mr Robert was in the
place appointed. The King ncontinent withdraweth himfelf, goeth in to his bed-chamber, iiis boots
on, ready to ryde. Soe foon as he drew neer, he walked in circle about the houfe,' as his cuflom
was. Mr Robert cafteth liimfelf to meet him, with all reverence and humble inclination of his body
that he could, without goeing to knee. The King heard Iiira gracioufly, in outward appearance. The
fumme and effect of Mr Robert's words were this. ' Sir, I have marked four things in this great
work, touching your Mas Jjigb advancement : ffirft, that the God of heaven and earth has placed yow
in all thefe earthly thrones, without the loii'e of the credite of your holy Religion and hurt of the
inward peace of your own confcience : Next, that lie lies placed without fliedding a drop of your
Ma' blood, which is leffe nor'^ confcience : Thirdly, without the hazard of your Ma^ fubjects purfes,
which is leffe nor blood: And lafl of all, that he hes foe wounderfullie directed the tongue of that
worthy Lady and noble Queen, together with the aftections of the whole Counfell, foe that if furth of
your Mas own bowells, they could not have confpyred more effaldly' to your Ma* promotion. Thefe
things crave a twofold duety of your Ma. •. Firfl, that yee take heed to your own heart, that the glory
and glance' of thefe earthly things deceive you not ; that ye make them not your reward, nor place
the confort and confolation of your lieart in tiiem ; but rather, as they are given, ufe them as fteppes
and degrees to ftepp up to the Crown that cannot fade nor faille : Next, feeing the God of heaven hes
manifelled his unfpeakable care, in preferving foe many Crowns and Kingdoms to yow, sir, your Ma.
cannot efchew the note of ingratitude, if yee extend not your Ma" credit, and imploy your whole care,
for prefervation of his own kingdome.' The King anfwered, ' Mr Robert, be God's grace I fall not
place my confort or confolation in them, or in any earthly thing : As for the prefervation of the kingdome, if I would preferve my own life, I muft fludy to preferve it ; for we have common freinds and
commone enemies : The Papilis that Ihutt'' at that kingdom, Ihutt at my life alfo, as I know certainly.''
As touching this wounderfuU mercy of God, Mr Robert, if yee be remembered I oft tymes foretoki
you, that God would bring this work about, after this fort ;' and named fome places to him. But Mv
Robert could not reniember.

Mr Robert took his leave ; and had as good a countenance of the King, as ever he had in liis life,
in his own judgement. The King did not urge him with any fuch thing as the Lords gave out ; nor
made mention of any thing, tending to that purpofe. Ather the mediators were unfaithful, or God
putt it clean out of his heart. When the King mounted on horiback, Mr Robert went to him againe,

' A mode of expression for chamber. ^ Than. ' Triil.v, sincerely ; from ' ufaiilJ,' literally one-fold.

* Dazzle, spleiulour, glitter ; literally the reflection thrown from a mirror Ijy the sun. Shoot, aim at.

'' In alliisiou to the numerous Conspiracies which had been devised by the I'apists against his person.

312 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Apr. 1603. to take his leave ; and was as weill received as any fubject, of bis calling, in Scotland. Tliofe that
ftood by heard the King fay, ' Now all particulars ' are pall betwixt yow and me, INIr Robert.' But
ISIr Robert himfelf could not remember that he heard thefe words.

(16.) Notes yy-o?« Calderwood's Church Hiftonj, 3IS.

Feb. 1605. (1.) Mr Robert Bruce, the year of the King's departure out of the country, gott peace and reft ;
but the year following he was threatned of new, for the mater of Gowry, to be deprived of life, living
and ftipend. He was very farr call down. Whill be was ryding to Stirline to fetch the Erie of Caffillis to his houfe, it pleafed the Lord that night to give him a confortable vifion in his fleep. He
recommended his cafe to God, and foe fell afleep. He faw great difficulties prefented to him, and it
behoved him ather to paffe through them, or to die be the way. At the lail, be refolved, in God's
obedience, to hazard ; and whill he was paffing through, he feilleth a motion in his heart, moveing him
to fay, in and through ISIicbaell, the Captaine of the Lord of bolls, ' I fall prevaill, O Micbaell !
Slichaell ! Who is like the llrong God !' Mr Robert was greatly couforted with this ; and putt it in
write when he awaked.

This year the Comniiflioners of the Generall Affembly directed Suramonds, warning him to compear at Edinburgh, the 27 of Februar, to heai- and fee himfelf removed from his function, in Edinburgh. He compeared before them, and took Mr Thomas Gray with him. But none gott acceffe
but himfelf. After long reafoning, they removed him. He appealed from their fentence. They
inhibited him to preach therafter. He obeyed not. The Laird of Lowrefloun, Commiflioner, had
Commiffion to fee the fentence of Removall pronounced againll him.

Jul. 1605. (2.) Chancellor Setox fent for Mr Robert Bruce, advertlled him that he had gotten command

from the King to difcharge him from teaching, &c.
Aug. 1607. (3.) The fifth of Auguft was folemnlie keeped in Edinburgh. The Kings fkoll was drunken be
theDuke, his Commiflioner, and fonie other noblemen at the croffe of Edinburgh, which was covered,
for the greater folemnitie. Bacchus was fett up, and much wine drunkin and fweete meats caft
abroad. iNIuch vanitie and paflime, befide ringing of bells, and getting on of bale-fires. The peft
brake up foon after.

(17.) Letter, 3Ir Robert Bruce to the Laird of BeJtrife {Sir James SenqiiU.)
Right Honourable Cousise,
Feb 1603. Ye moft give me leave to utter my friendly counfell againft you. To what purpofe fliould ye and
Mr Ewart put me in efperance of my liberty, be your Letters ? Of yours I faw only one ; and I have
four of Mr Peter's, affuring me of ane confortable ilhue ; and, in truth, I gave fnch credit, and was fo
certainly perfwadit be him, that I fent home my wife and children, and fpoiled my felf of all my outward conforts, and exponed my felf to the extremitie of the feallbne, in a cold lodging, in tbir miferable
and baibarious parts, that I have almofl extinguillied both my vitall and fenfitive fpirits. Why would
ye not fignifie bis Ma^ will plainly unto me, or to Mr Peter eitlier ? His Ma. pleafure fliould have
been a law to me. Yea, if his hienes would command me to the fcaft'old, I have a good confcience to
obey him ; and it would be more welcome to me nor this lingermg death that I am in. The time has
been I have done his Ma. acceptable fervice, as bis own band writts befides me will beare record ;
whilk I fall leave to my pofterity as their rairell Jewells. 1 thank God, 1 was never within the compafTe of law ; and yett am war ufed nor either Papifl or Atbeill. Alwayes I crave noe more of you,
but a Chrillian duty. As I prayed you in my laft Letter, foe will 1 now ; feed me not with complyments : The worll fliall ay be welcome to me, be his grace who fullaines me wounderfully. I am a

' Quan'els, causes of offence.

3i Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 313

man that hes tafted of many afflictiones, and I wote not who cioffes me! But be it Papifl, orAtheilt, Feb. 1613.
Bilhop or Miniiler, I will lay over all my vengeance where it belongs. As to my prayer, in the end
of my lail Letter to his Ma., I heare, be iNIr Peter Ewart, that I was quarrellit, as if I had prayed for
reconciliatione in that particular. Indeed, if it had been foe conceaved, I might liavo been jullly quarrelled. But the Lord knowes the contrary is mod true. I had no more mind of tliat Trealbne, at
that time, nor the bairne tliat is yelt unborne. As to the reft of my faults yee make in my other'
Letters, they are but baimly : For fuppofe I wrotte unto yow with my own fubfcribing hand, yet it is
not worthie to prefenthis Ma. I waill' the bell hand that I can gett, and for the omiffione of my I'ubfcriptione, what marvell ? Seeing I wrott not the body. And yet the writter therof conllantly affirmes
that I fubfcrivit, whilkes makes me to think tliat ye have not receaved my clofed Letter to his Ma.,
but the copie therof, which I directed to your felfe to be perufed, and not to be preii^nted, except ye
knew it would not offend. I pray you, coufiiie, if ye delight in my converfatione, lett the effect declare
it. Lett me find the fruit therof ; and if yee be not able, lett me be in no war cafe nor I am in, be your
deid ; for that were needlefle. Suppofe ye liave gotten new friends, men I grant that are more able
to perfit you in your outward eftate, yett I will looke that ye will obferve a Chrillian duty towards
me. So wiihing yow well in the Lord, I take my leave, and rells

Your moll loving coufine to his power, in God,
Inuerness, the 10 of February 1613. Robert Bruce.

No. XIX.

Collection of additional ORIGINAL LETTERS and Miscellaneous
Documents illustrative of Cowrie's Conspiracy.

(1.) Letter, George Nico/Jb//, Queen EUxubetJi's Amhajfador in Scotland,
to Sir Robert Cecil, Secretary of State. ^

It may pleafe your honor.
This daye morninge, at 9 bowers at that tyde, the K.[ing] wrote to the Chancellor, Secretai-y, Aug. 1600.
and others, and to fome of the Kirk ; and word came hither in this maner, and the L.[ord] Secretary
told me. That yefterday th' Erie of Gowry fent the M' liis brother, M' Alex' Riven, to the K.[ing]
liunting in Fawkland Parke ; fhewing the K.[ing] that wiiere, for his adoies, he had muche troubles
to git treafor, &c. his brother th' Erie Jiad founde in an old towre, in his houfe at S' Johnfton's [Perth]
a great treafor, tohelpe theK.[ing's] turne; w"' w*, he faide, his brother wolde faine have the K.[ing]
to go to fee quietly, that day. Whereon, after the K.[ing] had hunted a while, and taken a drink,
he tooke freflie horfe and difcharged his company (to wit), the D.[uke] and Erie of Marr then in
company w"^ him, taking onely a few w"' him ; yet the D.[uke] rode, and the Erie of Marr followed,
and the K.[ing] met by the way the L.[ord] of Inchchaffray, who alfo rode w"i him to S' ,Iohnfton's ; where the K.[ing] cominge, th' Erie meting him, caryed him into his houle, and gave him a
good dynner ; and after went to dynner w"^ the D.[uke] and his company. The M^, in the meane
tyme of their dining, perfwaded the K.[ing] to go w* him quietly to fee it; as the K.[ing,] difcharginge liis company to follow, went w"" the M"^ from ftaithe to llaithe, and chamber to chamber,
locking ftill the doors behinde him, untill he came to a chamber where a man was, w* the K.[ing]
tliought had ben the man had kept the treafor. There the W cleked hold on the K. [ing] and drew
his dagger, fayeing he had killed his father, and he wolde kill him I The K.[ing,] w"' good wordes

' Select, choose. ° The Original is in the State Paper-Office, London — See Chalmers' Life of liuddiman, p. 113.
VOL. II. 2 R

314 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Au". IGOO. and meanes, fought to difwaid Iiim ; fayeing, he was younge when his father was executed, and dyvers
others honeft men ; that he was innocent thereof; Iiad leftorcd liis hrotiier, and for amends, made him
creater then he was ; that if he killed him, he could not efchape, nor he his lieir ; Tliat he prefumed
M' Alexander had learned more divinity than to kill his Prince ; afluringe him, and faithfully promifino- jjim, that if he wold leave of his enterprice, he wold forgive him, and kepe it fecrett, as a matter attempted upon lieate and raihenels onely. That to thefe the M"' replied, what was he preachinge?
that fhould not helpe him ; he (hould dye : And that therewith, he ftroke at the K.[ing,] the K.[ing]
and he bothe going to the ground, that the M' called to the man there prefent to kill the K.[ing.]
That the man anfwered, he^had nether liarte nov hand ; and yet is a very curragioufe man. Tliat the
K.rin"] having no dagger, but in his hunting cloths w"> his home, yet defended himfelf from the
M''; and in flrugling, got to the windowe, where lie eryed Treafon ! w* S' Thos Erfkin, John Ramfay, and Doctor Harris, hearing, ran up after the K.[ing], but found the doors Ihut, as they could not
pafle ; yet John Hamfay, knowing another way, got up and in to the K.[ing,] who cryed to John he
was flaine ; whereon John out w"' liis rapier and killed the M'. In this tyme, that th' Erie fhould
tell the Duke, Marr, and the rell, that the K.[ing] was gone away, out at a back gate ; that they raa
out and Gowry w"" him, and railFing him, that th' Erie laide, he wold go back and fee where the
K.[ing] n-as. That he, w'** 8 w"" him, w"' a fteele bonnett and two rapiers, ran up the ilaires; that
John Hamfay, meting them w'i> drawn fwordes, S' Tlio^ Erfkin and Doctor Harris being then corned
to .John, after fondry (Irokes, in the end killed the Erie alfo; S' Thomas being hurt, and Doctor Harris
mutulate and wanting 2 fingers. That this ftir being, the townes men and Cowrie's frends, in evil
appearance, faid, they wold liave accompt where th' Erie was, or they wold pay the grene cotes I To
pacifie \v* the D.[uke] and Mar were fent to the Magiftrates ; and fo quieted the matter, as the
K.[ing] and his company gott away; the K.[ing] thanking God for his deliverance. And yefternight, knighted, as I lieare, John Ramfay and Doctor Hai'ris ; but the Secretary told it not me.'

Upon thefe, Lettres corned from the Courte, The whole Council liere convened ; and in end, at one
of the clock rofe, and came all to the market crofl'e, and there by found of trunipett intimated, but in
bref, the liappie efchape of the K.[ing] and tlieir Act, that they made in Council, for the people to
thank God for it ; and in joy thereof, to ring bells and build bone fires. M"^ David Lindfay, Handing
with the Council on the Croffe, made a pithy and (hort Exhortation to the people, to prayle God for
it ; and therew"' praied and prailed God for the fame; the whole Council on their knees on the CrolTe,
and whole people in the flretes, in like forte. The peces of the Callle alfo Ihotte in joy ; the few
bells yet ringing; the youthes of the towne gone out to fkirmilh for joye, and bone fires to be bilded
at night: And the Council to go, this tyde, over to theK.[ing,] for further deliberation in this matter. The K.[ing] at his retoine to Fawklaud, prefentlie caufe thrult out of the honfe, from the
Q.[ueen,] Gowrie's two fifters in cheif credyt w"* the Queue ; and fwears to roote out that wliole
houfe and name. Upon the conveninge of the Council, tlie portes of the towne were iliutt, for apprehcndinge Gowrie's other brethren ; and the lands are to be given to thefe new knjglits and others.
This is the information and reporte comed yet hither, by the K.[ing's] command ; w"^"" fome yet
doubted to be fully fo. What will follow, I remit to the fequell ; being glad the K.[ing] is fafe,
Witliout hurte. Gowrie's Secretary is taken, and matters hope to be diltovered by him. Some falfe
lyenge villains gave it out, I (hould have ben this day morne at Leith, by 3 of the clock, and ihould
fay, being afked by one, that I was there attending ilrange newes from beyond the water. I tolde
the Secrctarie of it, that it was falfe, as God be thanked it is ; and that if I were charged by any fuch
devililh devices, I wold relufe no debollied fwinger or bloody villaine that ihould be io fuborned to
put doubt towards me ; praying the Secretarie to remember it, and fay it for me, if he hard it. That
your honor fees how the malicious here fpite me ; in what danger I live, and how fubject I am to all

^ ' i\Ir James Hamilton is this day gone to Kugland.'

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

315

accufation here; and fome piactifing knaves wold wljir])or it, that tliis plot fhould he drawne and An". 1600.
divifed in other parts, [Ingland.'] But thus mucli, for this tyuie, in liafte, w"> inyne Immhle dutv
and fervice. I ptay God preferve yo' lion'. Edenburgli, the 6"* of Auguft, 1600.

Yo' honor's, &c. &e.

Geo. Nicolson.*
I have no copie of this.

(2.) ExTRACTs/rom Letter, Sir Henry Necille to 3Ir Secretary Cecil,''
Paris, 27th Feb. 1599— (1600.)

Right Honorable,

The Earle Gowry, a nobleman of Scotland, who hath fpent fome time in thefe parts, is Feb. 1600.
purpofed to retume home through England ; and defires to have the honor to kiffe her Majcdies
hands, as he paffeth. And becaufe I know him well, and have had good communication with him,
and therein found him to be of very good judgement, and exceedingly well affected both to the
common caufe of Religion, and particularly to her Majeftie, and that which may concerne her honor
and fervice, I have thought good to recommend him efpecially, unto your honor ; and to befeech you
to be a meanes, that he may receave that honour and favour that he is worthy of; that fo he may
depart, confirmed in that good devotion and refpect which he beares allready towards her Majeftie.
If your honor pleafe to conferre with him about thefe alterations feared in Scotland, I beleeve he will
give you good fatisfaction ; and that you will finde him to be a man of whom there may be exceeding
good ufe made. I have given him my palfport, to ferve him till he come to her Majefties Court, in
as ample and favourable fort as 1 could. The reft I referre to your honor's good favour towards him ;
whereunto I humbly recommend him. And fo, &c.

Your honor's very, &c. Henry Neville.

The Lord Hume purpofeth fhortly to retume likewife, as he telleth me, and hath already prayed
my paflport, which I cannot deny him. But you will be pleafed to have regard to fome of my former Letters.

(3.) ExTUACTy>-07« Letter, Sir Henry Neville to Mr IVinwood, London,

28th Aug. 1600.

Now to the occurrences of thefe parts, you fliall underftand, that the Erie Gowry, and a brother of Aug, 1600.
his, have been lately (layne, in Scotland, in the Erie's own houfe, and in the King's prefence. They
are charged to have confpired the King's death at that time, but God would not fuffer them. They
Lad prepared for it, to execute their defleign, although they attempted it; and fo they fell into the
pitt themfelves had digged.

This is the relation fent hither of it ; which, notwithftanding, is diverfely cenfured, according to
men's divers affections. But howfoever, her Majeftie hath fent Sir Henry Bronkard thither, to congratulate the King's efcape, and to doe fome other offices to him. There is alfo one Hambledoun
come from thence, to refide here at leaft for fome tyme.

1 This word is interlined. 2 < This must be allowed to be a very interesting letter ; as it exhibits a strikinj;

picture of tliat singular transaction, at the moment, and of the manners of the times. In it we see, that the King
had on a hnnting-liorn ; tliat the King and his attendants wore yrcne cotes ; and that the Earl of Cowrie's two sisters lived in the palace, at the moment of the conspiracy, and were in cheif crcdi/t with the Queue. 'I'he foregoing
dispatch of Nicolson pi-oves very clearly, that Queen Elizabeth bad no fimjer in that pye, particularly when Nicolson's
declarations are coupled with the subjoined Letter, from Lord WiUoughby.' (No. 8.) — Chalmers. ^ In these

and the following Extracts, it has been deemed unnecessary to give any tiling farther than what relates to the t'onspiracy. The above Letters to Cecil and Winwood, have been taken from that valuable and authentic Collection,
Winwood's Memorials and Affairs of State, Vol, I. pp. 156, 249, and <27-l.

316 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Nov. 1600. (4.) Ektu ACT Jro7?i Letter, Sir Henry NeviUe to Mr JFimvood, (in cipher,)

London, 15tli Nov. 1600.

Out of 205 (Scotland) we hear there is no good agreement, but rather ane open diffidence between
165 (Counfail,) the King of Scots, and his wife ; and many are of opinion that the difcovery of fome
aifection between her and the Earle Cowry's brother, (who was killed with him) was the trued
caufe and motife of all that Tragedy.

(5.) Extracts J'ro7n Letters, Sir John Canj, (fon of Lord Hunfdon,)
Governor of Berwick, to Sir Robert CeciU

('■)

Aug. 1600. (Aug. 10.) — The King lias made great fearch, and lays great wait for the two younger brothers,
who, by gi-eat fortune, efcaped from the fchools ; and not daring to tany in Scotland, they are this
(lay come into Benvick clofely, in difguifed apparel ; and being brought to me, they only defire, that
their lives may be fafe, and they may have a little overfight here, till the truth of their caufe may be
known : And the pitiful cafe of the old diftrefTed good Countefs hath made me, the willinglier, to give
jny confent, for their ftay here a while ; till I may, by your honourable means, know the Queen's
Majefty's pleafure, whether they Ihall flay here, or go fome whither farther into the country ; for they
only defire the i'afety of their lives ; and the old Countefs's cafe is pitiful and lamentable. I befeech
yoiu' honour, let me know lier Majelly's pleafure, with as much fpeed as may be ; for that I would do
nothing to offend her Majefty. The poor gentlemen flole into the town this morning clofely, and I
could not well turn them out again ; feeing they come for refuge, to fave their lives, till I know her
Majelly's further pleafure therein.

(ii.)
(Aug. 24.) — Upon the receipt of your letter of the IGth Augufl, according to the contents thereof,
1 did fend for the tutor of the two gentlemen, the Earl of Cowrie's brothers ; who, for my own part,
I have not yet feen, flnce their coming into the town, fo clofe have they kept themfelres; as they have
never yet flirred out of their chamber which they firfl entered into, to look abroad. I confeiTed with
their tutor, which might be the fecurefl way, for their own fafety; advifmgthem, for their better fecurity, to go farther off from thefe bordering places, where the King might not fo eafily hear of them,
and their being. I wiflied them to repair towards Richmond, or to llippon, or to about Hull, or to
fome other fuch inland towns, out of the way, where the King might not fo eafily have intelligence of
them ; and fo they to be freer from the danger of their countrymen, who are very converfant upon the
llieet-ways. He liking very well hereof, yielded willingly thereto ; defiring only, for that they came
very meanly in, without either money, horfe, or apparel, to have three or four days refpite, that they
might fend to their friends for money and nags, and fuch other neceflaries as iliould be fit for their
journey ; then will they prefently depart, as fecret as may be ; and in the mean time, they lliall remain
very clofe, till their necelTaries be gotten, which will be within four days.

(iii.)

Sept. 1600, (Sept. 4.) — Before this day, I could not by any means get the prefent Earl of Cowrie and his brother out of the town ; for that they had fent to their mother for maintenance, and could not hear till
now any thing from her; and now it falls out fo ill with them, as llie hath fent them no manner of
maintenance, hoping they Ihould have flaid here fiill ; neither dares ihe truft many of her fervants.
For if it Ihould be known, that ihe did, any manner of way, either give them fuccour or maintenance,

1 These extracts were obtained by Lord Hailes from the Originals, in the roper-Office, London. According to
his jilan, they are modernized Cecil's Secret Cvrresp. p. 161.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 317

or any manner of help, llie fliould prefently forfeit, and be thrown out of all that Ihe hath. Such Sept. 1600.
fecret fearch and privy fpial is there through the whole country for her and her fons, as no friend either
dare or can travel between them ; fuch privy fearcli is laid for them in all places, as almofl no man
can travel, in their country, but he is fearched. And if I had fent them fooner away, I ihould but
have fent them to veiy great danger, either of being killed or taken ; for that they being very poor
themlelves, and having no friends, nor any acquaintance, could neither have told whither to have gone,
or what to do. But, finding their neceffities, and their willingnefs to fubmit themfelves to any appointment, and for that I would have them out of the town, before any fault were found, I have found
means, that they are furnillied with fome money, and are ftolen privately out of the town. I have
fent them, with a man of mine own, to Durham, where they iliall be fecretly for a twenty days, till
their mother may take fome better order for their maintenance ; and then they mean to travel to Cambridge, and there to fludy for a time. They have none but themfelves, and their fchoolmafter with
them. All the time of their being here, they were as in a prifon ; for nobody ever faw them, neither
did they ever llir out of their chamber ; fo as thei'e can be no certainty known of their being here, but
only upon miflruft ; and as fecretly are they gone out of the town.

(Sept. 21.) — I HAVE even now prefently received your letter of the 15th of this inflant, underftanding thereby the Queen's Majefiy's pleafure for the Earl of Cowrie's two brothers. All that hatli been
faid of them, touching their behaviour here in Berwick, is but furmifes and fuppofes, by the contrary
part}'. For I will affure your honour, upon my faith, it could not have been better carried, nor dofelier handled by any creatures living, than by them, during their being here. For myfelf did never fee
them but once, aiul that was at midnight, only myfelf; and for any other, I know they kept themfelves clofe enougli ; for they durft do no otherwife, they were fo afraid of themfelves. They went
away as fecretly ; and to Durham they went long fince, with an intent to pafs onward to Cambridge,
as I did before fignify to your honour. So as what is now become of them, I know not, neither where
they be ; for fince their departure, I have not heard of them any thing ; fo as I know not where to
hear of them. Thus much I thought good with fpeed to certify you ; that with fpeed there may be
fome courfe taken for their difpatch, according to her Majeily's pleafure.

(6.) Letter, King James VI. to 3Ir John Caldcleuch.^

Trusty frend. We greit ^ou hertlie weill. We have taiken occafioun heirby, richt emifllie Aug. IGOO.
to will and defire ■^ou, that 30 faill not, all excuillis fet a part, to be at Falkland, upoun Wedynfday at evin nixt, the twenty day of this inllant, for 50urbeft advyfs and opinion to be had, anent the
planting of Kirkis of Edinburgh ; the forme and maner of the univerfall thankis and prayis that fall
be gevin to God, in every Congregatioun and Kirk within this realme, for our miraculous delyverie of
that treafonabill Confpiracy, intendit laitlie aganis us, at Sanct Johnftoun, be umquile Johne Erl of
Gowrie, the M' his brother, and thair allbciattis; and for jour advys to be gevin in fic uther, our
great and wechtie effairis, as falbe particularly impairtit to jou at jour coming: flbr the quilk. Unking precefly that nicht, that on the morne thaireftir, they matevis may be handellit and put to ane point ;
We commit jou in Godis protectioun. From Halyruidhous, this xiij day of Auguft, 1600.

James R.
To our trufty frend, Mr Johne Caldcleuch, Miniller of Newburgh.

1 AVodrow's MSS. Advocates' Library, Vol. LXIX. Jac. V. I. 1-2. It is proper to mciilioii, tliat tliis seems to he one
of the numerous circulars which were addressed to tlie Clerijy, as may be seen from the preccdiuc; Kxtraits Irom the
Lord Hij;li Treasurer's Books, No. VIII. See Note, p. 239. No doubt each Letter would vary from another in
some minute particulars, and according to the favour tlxi' respective parties enjoyed at Court.

318 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Aug. 1600. (7.) ExTRACTS^-ow LETTERS, Rowland JFhyte, E/quire,^ to Sir Rohert

Sydney^'

(i-)
(Au". 16.) — The King of Scots had lately like to have bene murthired. Young Goory^ (the Erie
of Gooiyes brother, whom tlie King reftored to his honour and liuing, and bellowed on them both,
great gifts and advancements) told the King in fecrett, that in the Caftell, which he kept vnder the
King, he found a great cheft buried, of that waight which cold not choofe but be treafure. He wold
not prefume to open yt, but in his JMajefties preience ; and therfore befought him to take the paines to
goe himfelf and fee yt brooke open : Which the King did, leauing his traine below in a bafe-court,
and went alone with young Goorey vp the ftairs, and from chamber to chamber, which Goorey locked
as he went, till he had brought the King where he had apointed. And then he told the King that
the time was come wliicli he had long willied for, to I)e revenged vpon him for his father's death :
That he had traind him to that place to kill him, which inftantly he wold doe ; and drew out his dagger to haue rtabd him. But the King catcht him by the Ijand, and defyred hym to heare hym fpeake.
Then fayd, that when his father was put to death, he was but an infant ; and therefore, cold not be
acceflbry to his death. Tiiat during his Minority, many tliinges were coniitted, by the Regents of his
Kingdom, which he was lorry for; which appeared by the great fauors he had bellowed vpon him and
bis brother. Bot all wold not ferue ; for he llrugeld to flabb him ; and the King, in defence of his
lifte, Ihewed a great refolution and courage ; which young Goorey perceuing, called to a fervant of his
own, who was a partner in this Confpiracy; but he ftoode Hill, and fwore he had neither hand nor
hart to kill his anointed King; and tooke part with the King, who had time then to put his head out
of a window, and cryed ' Treafon !' and called for fpeedy help ! Then his traine went vp the ftaires,
where they found the Earle Goorey, and Ibme others, with weapons, to refill them ; but they made
way, with the death of the Earle of Goorey and liis companions, and fo refcued the King, and before
Lis face flue the young Goorey. — London, Saturday the 16 of Augull, 1600. By pofl.

(Aug. 26.) — Here is one Hamelton come from the King of Scots, to refide here as his Agent, and
to deliuer to the Queen the maner of the Confpiracie againft his Mailer. — Strand, (London,) this
26 of Auguft, 1600.

(iii.)
Sept. 1600. (Sept. 12.) — One Preston, Capten of the King of Scots Foote-gard, a very proper and difcret Gentleman, was with the Queen, fent from liis Mailer, to deliuer more matter difcouered of the Treafon
intended againft his Maiellie by the Earle Gowrey and his Complices. — Strand-bridge, this Satur>
day, the 12 of Septemb. 1600,

(iv.)
Oct. 1600. (Oct. 3.) — Sir Harry Brunckar is returned out of Scotland ; and from the Kings own mouth,
receues the maner of the Confpiracy againll hym ; which is as yt is fett down in the printed booke I
fent you the laft week. The K. hath knighted all his fervants that aflifted hym out of that perrill.
Some difpleafure the King conceaues againft the Minifters ; for that they wold not, in the pulpitt,
preach againll the horiblenes of the fact. — Strand, Friday night, late, the 3 of October, 1600.

1 This gentleman was employed by Sir Robert Sydney to solicit his affairs at the Court of England, and to relate
to him all that took place; for which he received a salary. His Letters are minute and valuable, as they contain
much private information not elsewhere to be found. '^ Lord Governor of Flushing, afterwards Lord Chamberlain to King James. He was brother of the celebrated Sir Philip Sydney. See Si/dney Slulc Papers, or CoUIds'k
Letters and Memorials of State, Loud. 1746. Folio. Vol. IL p. all. ■" The Jlaster of Gowry, Mr Alexander

Ruthvea.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 319

(8.) Letter, Lord Graf to ... . Sept. 1600.

Sib,

I LANDIT that fame niclit I Itft you laft, at eiclit liouris, and yes in clanger amongft the craiges,
anil never in my lyf lb feik. Heir I met v' Tliomas Hendryl'one of Edinb: He lies no newes, faue
of Tir Eaiie of Gouryes death. He tellis it in the fame forte as ye haue hard it. Ther is execute
M' Th: Cranftoun and George Craigingelt, v' fevin honeft men of S' Jhonfloun. They ar executed,
for tliat they ver fund to be in armes befor the reft. His man, who ves v' him, is bootit, M' Villiam
Rynd ; and lies deponit no thing, faue that my Lord lludiit Magik in Italic and France, and had
fprittis. His chamberlane, vho ihould haue llaine the King,^ is yet keipit. M' Patrik Gallouay hes
preatchit all this in the pulpit of Edinb., bothe of the Magic and Treafoun ; hot all vho ar dead, confefiit no thing. The King, efter the preatching, fueir foleninelly, that all ves treu he hed preatchit,
by his faluation and condemnation. The reft of the Minifters ves preaffit to fubfcryue that it ves treu;
hot they refufit : Yet they grantit to thank God for his Ma'"^ delyuerance : And fo they ar banifit.

Riihart Preftoun is at Loundoun ; hot as yet I knou not vhat they fay to him. From Loudoun ye
fliall heir all. And I romaine your louing freind and coufing, Giiay.

Dover, 28 Sept. 16G0.

T forgot, amongft vther thingis that M' Gallouay preatchit that Th' Earle of Goury ves a dcaller
betuene the Pope and the Kingis Ma"": Bot the reft of the Minifters vill not beleue him.

(9) ExTRACTy>-ojM Letter, Mr Winivood to Secreturij Cecily
Paris, May 17, 1601.

The Ambaftador of Scotland hath been advertifed of a dangerous practice againft the Scots May, 160L
King: That lately, one called Giarnet hath been fent out of Scotland, with Letters to Bothwell,
to haften home with diligence, where he iliall find fufficient ainftance. The principal perfon who
employed this perfon is the Queen of Scotland ; and Letters have been intercepted out of Scotland, from Mr Gray, that the death of Gowrie fliould fliortly be revenged.^

(10.) Extract from Letter, Lord Henry Howard {afterivards Earl of
Northampton) to Edward Bruce, {Lord Ktidofs.^)

[ Without (laic, but previous to Aug. 24, 1602.]
Out of the Archduke's Camp, one of her Miijefty's greateft commanders helh been advertifed, that Aug. 1602 ?
a fire will break out in Scotland, before it be long ; which makes Cecil to fear, knowing in what ftate
King James ftands with England at this day, that other trains, made under ground by fecret pioneers,
within the body of that ftate itftdf, may break out when it is leaft looked for. Add hereunto, the
gallant maintenance of Gowrie's fon,« fo near Scotland, and with fo great fliews ; thongli no man knows
from whence, befide Sir John Cary,'' who is holden to be very inward in that courfe, as certain gen1 From the original in tlie Advocate's Liljrary. Tlie envelope is lost, and no trace remains in any other Letters
in the same valuable Collection. It docs not appear whether this Letter is from Patrick, sixth Lord Gray, or his
son, the well-known intriguing Patrick, ISIaster of Gray, wlio acted so base and treaclierous a part in England,^
during the latter part of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and the earlier portion of King James VI. _ The families of
Ruthven and Gray were nearly related by intermarriage. -' Andrew Henderson. ~^ Wiiiirimi's Memorials, I. 326. See Also Pin/iertoii's Diisertatiuii, (appended to Luiny's Scotland, (First Edit.) ISOO, Vol. I. p.
5.34, &c. ) who strongly asserts the Queen's participation in schemes .against Iier husband. The inferences he draws
from tlic alleged intrigues of Queen Anne are ([uite fanciful ; and the hypothesis he then maintained, in reg;ird to
the Conspiracy, quite untenable. Lainq discarded Pinkerton's Dissertation from the subsequent editions of his History. ■•See Notice prefixed to the case of Francis Mowbray, Jan. 31, 1603, &c. ^ From Cecits Secret
Co'rresponrJeiice willi King James VI, edited by Lord Ilailes ; who has purposely modernized the style. Cecil eniployed Howard, and the" King Pruce, as the medium of correspondence. " Patrick Ruthven, the son ot \\ illiam Earl of Gowrie, whose daugliter, as lias been remarked before, h as married to Sir Anth. \'anilyke. It w-as he wlio
wrote the admirable Letter to the E.arl of Nortluunlierland, published in the Cahala, {Scrinia .S'l/rra, -Ito. Lond.
1654., p. 106.) wliich shews talents of uo ordinary description. ' See Extracts of bis Letters to Cecil, (a.)
p. 316.

330 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

All". 1602? tlemen iu the North, making feveral collections of tokens vifible, and words let fall, have advertifed
tlieir own conceits, in confequence, with thofe other fears which have been formerly advertifed.

The Mafter of Gray hath had long coufereiice with Queen Anne ; fince which time his flyle is
l)eaved up colliurno altiore, as Cicero laid of Anthony. Divers of Cowrie's uearell and dearell friends
have fecret accefs to perfons of great quality.' They keep old iiFues open, and feed fpleen againft,
all thofe that are employed and trufled in the courfes of the prelent ftate ; wliich the King's wifdom
tempereth.

(11.) Letter, Lo7-d Willoiighhy, Queen E/kabeth's Governor of Berwick,

to Sir Robert CeciU

Sir,
Oct. 1600. I RECEIVED your packet to Mr Hudfon, the 18th of this month; and another to Mr Ralph Gray,
this morning ; both which I liave difpatched accordingly, but fuch is tlie negligence of the polls, that
the packetts are 7 or 8 dayes in coming. For occurens yt is uncertain, wliether tlie convention hold ;
but the King is refolved to have bilhopes : The Marquis of Huntley Ijave reconciled the King and
Queen. The Erie of Mar is retired to Stirling ; who hath very diilionorably fuggefted [to^ the King,
that I was privy to the practice of the Earl of Goury : his realon to induce him to believe yt was,
becaufe I gave the faid Earle kind entertainment, at his being at London, Other newes hear is none,
but that the contry is in very good quiet ; which courfe I will endeavour to continue in the town, to
my utmoft. But fuch are the contentions of the Council beer, that unlefs S' Will. Bowes had carried
himfelf very difcreetly, and I myfelf prefently prevented yt, they had quarrelled in my bed-chamber,
being at Council. Tiius, not willing to trouble you any further, I reft

Yo"^* faithfully alliired to doe you fervice,
Berwick, this 21 October 1600. P. Wylloughby.

(12.) Letter, Sir James Coluill of Eajl Wemijfs to Sir Edward Bruce,

Lord Kinlofs?

Co USING,

Jan. 1603. Efter my hartly commendation, I culd not omit thir feu lynis, that 36 may knavv of my profpei^us
ariuel to this toun ; defyring ^ou to haue my maift humble feruice I'ecommendit to his bines. It greifis
me mekil, in my palling throuche Ingland, the los he hes, for the laik of fum (relident') honeft man,
in quliom hartlie his iNI. miglit confyd ; and fik as interly low him, micht affur them felfis. For, to be
plain, I dout vtheris, for caufis I vil not vret. I pray tlie Lord grant him that grace, that he may
fauour them quha louis him aboue al. I dout not hot, or now, 56 haue refauit my Letter from Loudoun, delyi-ing erneftly to knaw the fucces of that maiter aganis his M. I hoip, vitlie tlie grace of
God, to dilcouer mair in that, nor his M. hes 3 it hard ; as alio, in findrie vther practiles aganis him, at

my fiift cumming I man 3 it erneftly requeft 30U to remember my coufing

Capitane Coluill to his M., quha hes lofit al his efperance, for his M. feniice ; and hopis he llial fhortly
gif better prouf nor he lias 3 it doon. I wret to 30W afor, tuichin IMefter Dauid Foulis. Let iiim mak

1 It appears, fr.-m the Letters of Nicolson to Cecil, preserved in tlie Paper Office, that Beatrix Rulhven, sister

of Gowiie, was privately admitted into the presence of Queen Anne of Denmark Hailcs. 2 The

Original is in the State Paper-Office, London. ^ From the Original, preserved in the Advocates' Library, Edin. ( Denmylne Collections, A. \. 3i.) Colvill was then serving with reputation in the armies of Henry IV.
of France. He was created Lord Colvill of Culross, Apr. 2o, 1004. It is jiroper to mention, that his first wife
was IsrM Ruthven, second daughter of I'atrick Lord Ruthven, and sister of William, first Earl of Gowrie. His
second wife, Helen Shaw, was widow of Robert Mowbray younger of ISarnbougle. This connexion with the family
of Gowiie, may account for the reliance placed in his information ; but no farther trace is to be found of the matter,
in any collection to which the Editor has had access. In an interleaved copy of Lord Cromarty's account of the
Conspiracy, Lord Hailcs remarks, ' there was another Colvill at Paris, then a spie of E. Essex (perhaps his ' cousing
Capitau ColuUe.)' Earl BothweU was also then iu France.' i Interlined.

34 Jac. VI, CRIMINAL TRIALS. 321

30U priue to tlie maiter, for the man is content, and defyiis only tlie furtie of convoy. Al vther Jan. 1G03.
thiugis, to neu occation ; and my haitly commendationis to jour brother: Praying 30U, that this may
ferue 30U and Sir Thomas Erftyne, I remain 30m- maill loving coufing,

From Calys, our firft of Januar (1603'). James Coluill of Eft Weimes.

Ther vas neuer fo mayny paflageris heir a vay.' I pray tlie Lord it be for gud : Bot hes M. hes
gret caus to luik to him felf.
To my Lord, my Lord of Kinlos.

(12.) Letter, Andro Henderfoun of Lafomi, Chamberlain of Scone, to King
James VI, informing his Mrijejhj of certain conduct of David Lord Scone, <|c.^

Maist nobill, gi-atious, hie, renownit, deir Sowerane,
and my onlie confort wnder God,

It will pleis 3owr Maiellie, (albeit ower bauld) all kynd of dewtie coramandis me to wifite 30wr Jul. 1608.
Maieftie with thir few lynnis, fen I iiawe owerniekill mater for me. It will pleis 3owi- Maieftie to
caufe ftay fe paffing of the executioun of Scone,^ that it pafs nocht conforme to 30wr Maielleis kit
Gift: ffor, S"", I protefl affor' God, fie as is prowydit fairto mereitis nocht at 30wr Maieileis hand :'^
And, S'', fen I liawe thair awin hand wret, for my Warrand, I can do na lefs nor mak 30wr Maieitie
frequent thairwith, quhilk 3our Maieftie fall lie, or ellis lat me nocht hawe that grace tofiesowrMaiefteis face. S% thay hawe gevin 30WT Maieftie ane werie improper ftyle, faying in fair Letter, direct frome Reftowne' to Scotland, in fe Pakald be poft, quhilk wes fe tyme I wes at 30wr Maieftie.
The wordis of J)e Letter ar Jiir; ' gowr Maiefties promifes ar bot dilfiinulatioune;' and that ' 3owr
Maieftie is bot lyke thais that ar about 30wr Maieftie.' S^, quhen as thay wrait fwa, iudge quhat
thair fpeeches wilbe amongis Jiair familiares ! And my pairt of Jie Letter is, S', that I ' mereit rather
hanging nor ony wther rewaird 1' S', this is bot ane pairt of fe Letter. S', quhen this Letter wes red
in Scotland, it wes na fmall reioyling to ])e Ruthuenis ; ffor in guid faith, S', Ikarce, quhen thai hard
thais newis, that |)e twa pairt of fe calfay culd content fame for pryde ; as fum of fair awin name
quha wret fe Letter had experience of. S', pleis your Maieftie, feing (prayfit be God) thair is appearance of forder licht of fat Treflbun,^ S'^, for Goddis caufe, lat it be exactlie tryit ; ffor in guid faith,
SS be all thay traitowris fauowraris, 30wr Maieftie is callit ' fe Murtherar !' And my parte, 'ane
manefuorne knaiffe !' S', thair is twa in particular, quhilk in guid faith 30wr Maieftie is obliffit to,
wiz. Schir Jhone Moncreif and f e Laird of Bogie ; ffor in guid faith, I cum newer in f e pairt, bot
fair language mett me, that thay tuik it on fair confcience that quhilk I deponit aganis tliay tratowris
wes fe treutb. I pray God, gif 3 owr Maieftie knew fe hundreth part of fe greitis I Iiaif fuftenit, fir
fywe jeiris bygane; quhat be the infamows lybellis, and fpeeches of thay tratowris fawouraris.

Thus taking my leif, on my kneis, craifand at fe Alraichtie, to 3 owr Maieftie, fe Quene and Prince
graces, with all llie reft of 3 owr Maiefteis royall pofteritie, mony guid and ioyfull dayes, with a happie and ioyfull refurrectioune. gowr Maiefties moft humbill and daylie oratour,

[This Letter bears no date, but Andro Hendersoun of Latoune.

probably in July, 1608.]
To f e moft nobill, gratiows, and hie renownit Pryns, King James of Britaine, ffrance and Yreland.

1 The date may be fixed to be 1 603, as mention is made of the Duke of Savoy's .ittempt on Geneva. 2 ' Hereawa,'

in these parts. ^ Prom Collection of Auto^'aphs, fonned by Sir James Balfour of Denmylne and Kiiinaird, Bart. Lion
King at Arms, preserved in the Adv. Library, Edinburgh. ' This word had been ori{;inally left blank. The person
whom Henderson employed to transcribe the Letter was probably kept in ignorance of the fact. Henderson inserts
' Scone" in his own hand. ^ Before. 6 Sir David Murray of Gospertie, created Lord Scone, and afterwards Mscount Stormont. He obtained the barony of Ruthven, and the lands attached to the Abbacy of Scoue, of whicli the
Earl of Gowrie was Commendator. 7 Royston, one of the royal residences in England. 8 Xhis proves

the Letter to have been written previous to the Examinations, at least, before the Trial of George Sprot.

VOL. II. 2 S

322 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

.Jul. 1608? (13.) Letter, David Lord Scone to King JAmes VI., exculpating hiinfelfaml his nephew from the charges hroiight againft them Ziy Andro HenDERSONE.'

PlEIS 5OUR SACRED Matie,

I wes coiiveynit heir, before my Lord of Dunbar, and confronted with Andro Henryfoine, wpoun
fume wnreuereud Ipeiclies fpoken be me of 5 our Ma''S quliilkis wer alluterly deiiyit, in the prefence
of S' Alex'' Hay, jOur Ma'^'* fecretar, that euer he had I'pokin or wrettine any thing in my preiudice,
ather to 5 our Ma*"' or ony vther man leiveand ; quhilk, if I haid euer hard fpokin be ony vther man in
the world, wnchallendgeit, I micht beiu thocht the onlie wngrate and wnworthie man in the world :
Bot I leave this to 5 our JNla"^'' gratious confideratione, what all my actiones lies bein in 5 our Ma'"'
fervice, bothe in word and deid ; quhairof I will be glaid content to be cenfuret, be ray giittefl
enemyis. Now, S^ to qualefie the informatioune of Andro Henryfonis, he hes produceit ane Lettre
of my brother foneis, direct fra Ingland to me, about the fpace of four 3eiris and ane half fence ; at
quhilk tyme, 5 our Ma''' will be remembrit, I maid eirneft fute, to haue haid the fauour to have remayneit
with ^our Ma'i'^, and to haue haid fome place of credit thair; whereanent, it pleafit 50ur Ma''^ to fay
to me, that 5 our Ma''"^ wold advyfe with fome of the Inglis Counfall, to gett fume place to me ; and
at my way-comeing fra 5 our Ma"*^, I delt with fik of 5 our Maiefteis Counfall, as come vp with jour
Maieftie, to be my freind, in abfence; feing all the reft of the Scottis Counfall that come with jOur
Maieftie wer preferrit to placeis of credit (bot I) : Of quhome I relfaueit verrie fair promeiflis, nocht
only to remember ^our Maieftie, bot lobe my particular freind. And my brotheris fone beand thair,
vpone fome vther biffinefre of his awin with jour Ma''S I defyreit him to bald fie of the Counfall, as
haid promefit to be my freindis, in remembrance ; quhilk he did, according to my Directioune, and
wrett heir to me to Scotland with Mr Dauid Murray, that he had kilFit jour ^Maiefteis hand, and reffaueit verie guid wordis and fair promeilfis, that yee wold nocht onlie remember jour Ma''% and advyfe
with fame on the meynis, how fome place micht be gottin to me. Quhilk Letter pat me in hop to
beine fend for fchortlie thairefter : And within fyf or fex dayis efter ])e receitt of this Letter, my brotheris fone wrett to me ane vther Letter, produceit now be Andro Henderfone, wherein he atfuiris me,
he is certefeit, be fum fpeciall freindis of myne, that the fair promeiflis that wer maid be fum of fe Counfall, wes nothing bot diffimulatioune ; and fpeciallie of thame }iat I truftit maift into ; ffor be fum
fpeicheis that he haid hard, he feirit fat J>ei fbuld rather kylh my vnfreindis, and that jour Ma'''= wes
informeit be fic as wer about 50U, that I haid fent Andro Henderfone to beg fumthing fra jour Ma''^
that I could nocht mak fute for my felf : And quhateuir jour Ma'"'^ haid grantit to gif to him, jour
i\Ia"' wes informeit, he haid tranffactit with me for ]ie fame ; and I wald gett \e, fame to my felf. Thir
fpeicheis beand reportit, be fum freind, to my brotheris fone, and he, feiring I micht be moveit fra the
loue I buire to Andro Henderlbne, to pas his Gift, quhilk 3 our Ma'''' haid grantit to him, and that the
famin micht be layd to my chairge fum vther day ; and out of the love my brotheris fone buire to me,
he gave me this aduerteifment ; and alfefone as this Letter came to my handis, I fent it to Andro Henderfone, to the eflfect that he fould tak na exceptionis of my guidwill, albeit I haid refuifet to pas his
Gift, in refpect of the premifFis ; bot I gaif him furetie that I wald deill with jour Ma''' for ane
benefit to him, quhilk I did; and obtenit of jour Ma"' better nor Sevin liundrethe raerkis be jeir,
quhilk he poflefles prefentlie ; quhilk wes thocht, be uianey of Jie cuntrie, mair nor he meretit ; jit, in
refpect he did jour Ma''' no evill, being quhair he micht haue done it (if God haid nocht bein jour
Maiefteis better freind ;) and euer fence that tyme, I haue reteynit him in my fervice, and hes protectit him and euer fall; and he hes haid Jie comniandement of all )iat I haue, in theis pairtis. Bot 3 our
Ma'" will knaw, in the awin tyme, that ])is is nocht come fra Andro Henryfone ; for he wes neuer
' From the original, in Sir James Balfom's MS. Collection, Adv. Library.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

very wyfe, and he lies loft ane guid pairt of Jie witt quhilk he haid; for it appehis he is nocht his awin Jul. 1608 :
man ; for the quhilk I ame niaift lorey : And I will neuer tak me to him, for ony thing that can be
reportit of me to 5 our Ma"'' ; and in the awin tyme, 3 our Ma'*'' will knaw how this comeis, fra quhome
and how this pure man lies bene abufeit. Alwayis, I man leave this and all my vther actionis, bothe
in word and deid, to 5 our Ma'<^'^ gratious confideratioune, fra the firft tyme I haid fe honour to ferve
3 our Ma""^, quhilk is threttie tua 3eiris fence ; and I neuer haid caus to weyrie ; ftbr 5 our Ma''"' hes
nocht onlie honorit me, hot geviu me all I haue in the world, and brocht me vp fra nothing ; and if I
fould prove vngratte and wnthankfull to fa gratious a mailler, I mereit punefment aboue all tratouris
in tlie world. Sa wiffing 3 our Ma"'' all happines, withe fe contenewance of jour Ma"''^ guid helthe,

I refl 3 our Ma'"'' humill and obedient fervitour,

D. Scone.
[|The envelope has not been preserved, but the letter is marked, at the top of the folding, ' L.
Scone to the K.' No date is noted.]

(14.) Letter, Sir Andr.ew Moray of Bah air d, to King James VI., defending himfelf againji the accnfations o/'Andro Hendersoun, Chamber'
lain of Scone}

May it pleis gouR sacred Maiestie,
I HAVE bein, be vertew of jour heichnes commandenient, accufit be the Erie of Dumbar, as gif I
had bein ane mod ondewtifull f'ubiect vnto 3 our Maieftie, kything the malice of my hart bythe vttering of onreverent fpeiches. gour Maiefleis informer is Androw Henderfoun, of quhom I will forbear
to fpeak any thing, leaft. I fould feira to haue no better defence nor- the accufing of my accufer. The
firfl point of my accufatioun is, that I haue calllt 30ur Maiefties promifis hot diflimulatiounis ; and
quhatfoeuer may, by confequence, be inferrit vpon this point ; for verificatioun quherof, he hes producit
vnto the Erl of Dumbar, ane Letter, wrettin by me, from Roilloun, the lall of March, 1C04, directit
vnto my vncle, my Lord of Scone. The woordes are thefe. ' My Lord, Efter I had wrettin at lenth
vnto 3 our lo. witli Maifter David Moray, I have tryit fuin thinges, quherof my dewtie bindes me to
aduertife jour lo. notwilhllanding of that quhilk I wret to jow in my lall Letter, that his Maiellie had
faid vnto my felf, concerning 30W; I fear it be al hot dillimulatioun.' Quhilk woordes, how far thay
man be wreftit befoir they can prooue the thing alledgit, I am perfuadit that 3 our Maiefteis felf, without any apologie of myne, will mofl gratiouflie confider. Neuertheles, to the end 3 our Maieftie may
the moir cleirlie onderrtand how far this malitious imputatioun diffagreis from my trew meaning, I
■will hot fchortlie fay this meikill. That former Letter, quherof I maik mentioun, fent be Mr Dauid Moray, had in it tua pairts ; the iSrll, was ane declaratioun, how 30ur Maieftie had not only
moll gratiouflie admittit me to 3 our prefence, hot alfo gracit me with moll fauorabill countenance;
and mairoaer moll bountifuUie had givin commandement to gif me tua hundreth pund. The vther
part was, that I had rememberit my vncle vnto findrie of 30ur Maiefties Counlell, and fum of 30UV
fauorites, from quhom I had refauit great proteftationes of aftectioun vnto him, and as great promifis
of friendlVhip, in his adoes.' Bot befoir the wretting of this laft Letter (quherof I am now accufit), I
was certanlie informit, be fum of my vncles fpecial freindes, that they from quhom I had refauit faireft
woordes, wer his greateft enemies : Quhilk, mouit to call their promifis dilfimulat. Sa that the fence
of my woordes ar very cleir, after this maner ; ' notwithftanding of that quhilk I wret in my laft Letter,
that 3 our Maieftie had faid and done vnto my felf, jet that quhilk I wret concerning my vncle I tuik
it al to be bot diffimulatioun.' Gif my former Letter wer as weill to the foir, to be producit vnto
30ur Maieftie, as this laft is, it wald maik this mater moft cleir. Bot as God fchal be my juft judge, I
1 From the Denmylne MS. Advocates' Library, Edinbiugh. " Thau. ' Concerns.

324 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Jul. 1608. liaue fet doun vnto ^our Maieftie, moil trewlie, beath the contents of the one, and my meaning in the
vther. Then fallowis, in my Letter, ' I knew liis Maieftie to be, as tliey ar tliat be about him ; and I
aliiiir sow, 36 haue na fauour of tliem tliat ar in greateft credit lieir.' To tliis I anfuer, that I was
neuer fie a fott to think that 30ur Maieftie was fo fimpill to be guidit be them that ar about 30W. I
protert, befoir God, tiiat I had na fie meaning. 1 liaue baith hard and fein to muclie of ^our Maiefties wifdom and relolutioun to tiiink fa vykl a tlioght. Bot my meaning was, ' feing my vncle had no
fauour of them that wer in greateft credit about 50ur Maieftie, (the quiiilk I was moft certanlie mead
to beliene,) therfoir I gieatlie fearit that their hard informatioun might muif 30ur Maieftie agenft him,
he not beins prefent to anfvver for him Telf, and hauing about 3 our Maieftie fo many enemies.' Their
reftis set more in my Letter. ' I heir fay that their is ane turn pall heir, in fauoures of Androw Henderfoun, into the quhilk sour lo. hes great neid to tak liead to 50ur preceding ; for albeit his Maieftie
hes paft it vnto iiim, I fear it be rather to try how 50 behaue 30ur felf, nor for any good mynd tliey had
to pleafour Androw Henderfoun.' Theis woordes I houp neid no apologie. Befoir God I liad mynd
of no thing concerning sour Maieftie. I knaw, and that be experience, that al 3 our Maiefteis grantee
ar and haue bein euer moft frie and abfolut. My only meaning was, of the advantage they tliat wer
about sour ]Maieftie miirht maik of my vndes behaviour in this matter; ifor it was directlie faid, be
fum of them, that he wald content Androw Henderfoun with a fmal pairt, and tak the reft to him
felf. From this point, it will pleis 3 our Maieftie to confider, that the grund of my accufatioune proceids, and not from that zeal and aflTectioun my accufer profeftis to bear vnto 3 our Maieftie : or els he
had communicat this vnto sour heichnes, at the firft, and not keipitthe fam befyds him thir four seires
and moir ; and now at lenth reveilit it, be the inftigatioun of vther men, as him felf pairtly confeffis.
Their is no man could moir juftlie accufe me vpon this mater nor the Erl of Dumbar, gif his lo. had
knawen mv trew meaning; for it was his lo. of quhom I cheiflie meanit in my Letter: And I liaue
crauit his lo. moft humblie pardoun, for that I was fa folifche, vpon any informatioun, to belieue, that
his lo. thoght vtherwayis nor he had faid vnto my felff. Gif I durft haue prefumit, vithout 30ur Maiefties leiue, I wald, with proftrating my felf at 3 our Maiefties feit, be woord, and not be Letter, mead
this my moft trew Declaratioun ; and vnto the tym sour Maieftie grant me that libertie (quhilk be
thir prefents I moft Immblie beg at sour gratious handes) my hart fchal neuer be pertaker of any contentment ; albeit my confcience bears me witnes, that I neuer fa mekill as thoght onreuerentlie of
30ur Maieftie, 3et am I grevid aboue meafur to think that any thing fould haue efcapit my hand,
quhilk, in the hardell conftioiction, can be accoumptit for ondewtifulnes againll 3 our heichnes. Their
is na thing in this warld can difcontent me mair than to want 30ur Maiefties fauour; bot to want it
throch my awen juft deferuing wer to me infupportabill. I wer to be accoumptit the moft ingrate
wTech that euer had lyf, gif euer I had fufterit any fuch thocht to haue had place within my mynd ;
confidering the manifold fauoures 30ur Maiellie hes fcliawen, baith to my felf and al my kynred. Their
remains set the laft point of my Letter, into the quhilk I maik fum mentioun of my Lord Secretar.
My ilmpill meaning was, that his lo. at that tynie had not fa great fauour as he defyrit to haue had,
of theis that wer in credit about sour Maieftie. I will ceafe to trubill sour Maieftie any moir, w' my
idill woordes; not dowting bot 30ur Maieltie will, according to 50ur accuftomit goodnes, confider
that the aifectioun I careit vnto my vncles weill, mead me the moir erneft in my Letter ; and gif their
be any woordes in it onadvyfit, or not weill chofin (as I do confes their is many) sour Maieftie will
iinput them to want of witt and laik of difcretioun (quhilk euer accompaneis youth,) and not to malice, quhilk I proteft, in the prefence of God, is as far reinouit from my hart, as it ftiks neir to their
hart that does accuife me. Praying vnto the Eternall to grant vnto 3 our Maieftie ane moift happie
and profperous regne, ane bliflit and ane long lyff, I reft

gour Maiefties moft humbill and moft obedient fubiect,

S. Androw Mor.w
Edinerugiie, the IS of July, 1608. of Baluaird.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 325

(15.) Letteij, Alexander Blair in Colone, to (Dauid Lord Scone,) charging Apr. 1610.
Ha7-y Ruthven with nfing ireajbnable exprejjions}

This is to latt 50111- 11. wmleifland the wordis that Hary Ruthven fpak. He vas cumand downe
betuix 5 our 11. park dykis, aboue Scone ; quhair he and William Wallace, feruitour to my 11. of Blantyr
fell in conference about ane Sprott, quha was execut in Edinburg at that tym. William Vallace
fayis to Hary Ruthuen, ' this mater is mead cleirer nor it was.' Hary Ruthuen anfueris him agane,
and fayis plainely, ' Ha ! ha ! The Erle of Gowry was faiklelly put downe ! And the King, and
all that was thair that day, vas Trateuris to the Erie of Goury I' And William Vallace anfuering,
forbade him to fpeik fik langage, for it wold do him evill. This I thought good to advertice 30ur 11.
that his Ma''= our gratius foueran might be acquent therwith. I have fubfcryvit this with my hand,
and am redy, for my dewty to his Hienes, to feale it with my bluid.

Alex" Blair.^

M. G. Graham^ B. of Dumblane, vitnes to this fubfcripne.

(16.) Depositions, relative to the Treajbnahle exprejfions made itfe ofhij
Hauy Ruthven alias Fkeeland.^

(i.) At Edinburghe, the xxvj day of Aprile 1610, In pre.sence of Alexander Erie of Dtaifermlyne Lord Chanceller, Dauid Lord Scone, the Prefidcnt, Aduocat, and Schir William Hairt
Jufiice depute.

Alexander Blair in Colone, maryed, of the age of xxxviij yeiris, fworne vpoun his great aithe,
being humblit vpoun his kneis, and demandit, ' What war the wordis he hard Hary Ruthuen fpeik,
for the whilk he hes bene wardit thir diuers oukis bigane ?'^ Deponis, that vpoun the aucht day of
September, the yeir of God I^.vj" and aucht yeiris, Hary Ruthuene, William Wallace fervand to the
Lord of Blantyre, and the depouner, having mett togidder in Colone, and being comeand thairfra
towardis the burgh of Perth ; as thay war betuix my Lord of Scones Park dykis, aboue Scone, Williame Wallace fayis, that < This mater of Gowryis Treasoun is maid eleirar nor it wes, be the Executioun and Confeffioun of one named Sprott.' Vnto whome Hary Ruthuen anfuerit, that ' The Erll
of Gourye was ane honneft man, and that he wes faikleflie putt doun I' And that ' Thay wer all traytouris that wes at his Slauchter, King and all !' Quhairupoun William Wallace replyit, ' Speik not
fik language 1' And this deponer faid to him, ' That is fclanderous language : You do not weele to
fpeeke fik language.' And the depouner fayis, that Hary Ruthuen and the depouner wer in goode
termis of freindfchip, at that time ; and that Haryis wyfte and the depouner ar thridis of kin : And
deponis, that Hary Ruthuen and William Wallace ar vnder very grite freindfchip and kynilnes; and
that Hary Ruthuen is doar and factour to Williame Wallace, in this rowme of Colone ; and Hary
aggreit Williame Wallace and Agnes Seytoun, anent hir lyverent of the rowme ; and that Hary Ruthuen fend to Williame Wallace, ane hundreth merkis, in Januair lall. Demandit, ' ftor quliat cans he
concealed this mater, fra the moneth of September, quhill the moneth of Auguft thairefter, that he
reveilled it to the Lord of Scone?' Deponis, that lliortlie thairefter, he tauld to Henry Rattray, goodebruther to the faid Hary Ruthuen, that the faid Henry Ruthuen had fpokin fclanderous wordis of the
King ; and that the depouner wald half reveillit the fame to the King, yf he wes in the cuntrey : And
feing bis Maieftie wes abfent, that he wald tell it to my Lord of Scone: To whome Hary Rattray
anfuerit, ' He will defye jow and my Lord of Scone bothe ; for he hes alreddy biddan the prwffe of

1 From the Original, among the Warrants of Parliament, &c. General Register House. ^ There is written

in a very small hand, as a memorandum at the foot of this document, ' From Justice Clerk, Mr A\ "> Ilairt this day
XV dayis'.' The date is likely to have been in .\pril, 1610. = Mr George Graham, Bishop of Dumblane. He

was translated to the see of Orkney anno 1G14-. 1 Originals iu General Register House, among the Warrants

of Parliameut, &e. & Weeks past.

326 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Apr. 1610. the cannoun I" And deponis, that findrie tymes, he foght the occafioune to half tauld it to my Lord
of Scone, but could not half it ; and that ihortlie thairefter, he come to my Lord of Scone, being walitino- vpoun the Greene of Scone, and tauld him that he had forae mater to commvnicat vnto him ; and
my Lord anfuerit, ' Come to me ane vther tyme and I will heir 30W.' Deponis alfua, that afoir that
tyme, he reveilled this lame mater to Andro Henderfoun, who advifit the depouner to ' tell it to my
Lord of Scone ; and that nane hard this conference bot Andro Henderfoun and the depouner : And
the depouner fayis, that he tauld tliis to Andro Henderfoun, within fourtene dayis after that Hary
Ruthuane fpak it ; and he tauld it to Hary Rattray, within ane moneth after the fpeiking of it. Deponis alfua, that lang afoir Hary Ruthuen fpak ihir fpeeches of his Maieitie, the depouner hard him
fay, ' Andro Henderfoun is going to big (build) : Lat him big quhat he will, 1 hoip to fee the day
that 1 fall putt him out of his houfe and duell in it !' And that Adame Hepburne in Scone, and Dauid
Blair thair, wer prefent, and hard thir fpeeches, quhilkis wer fpokin in Sanct Johnuelloun, in Andro
Boydis houfe thair, as thay wer come from the buryall of ane woman callit Coke, as he rememberis ;
and that Hary Rutliuene directit his fpeeches, on this mater, to the depouner, bidding him ' Go tell
the fame to that fals knave Andro Henderfoun I' Deponis forder, that after Hary Ruthuen had fpokin
thir wordis, concerning Andro Henderfoun, that Andro Henderfoun and the deponer, being walking
together on the brig of Perthe, Andro Henderfoun perfavis Conftene' Hynd vpoun the brig, and left
the depouner, and pafl to Conflene Hynd ; and as thay war fpeijiing togidder, Hary Ruthuen come
by, gaif Andro Henderfoun ane grite touke'^ and alnioft putt him over the brig, faying vnto him,
' You may iiald out of my gait !' And this wes fourtene dayis afoir the falling of the tree-brig of
Sanct Johnneftoun. (Sic fubfcribitur) AleXr Blair.

Hary Frieland, fumtyme callit Hary Rutiien,^ of the age of xl yeiris, maryed, duelland in
Sanct Johnneftoun, being humblit vpoun his knees, folemnlie iVorne vpone his grite oathe, and demandit, ' Yf he rememberis, that in Harvefl wes a yeir, in the moneth of September, he and Williame
Wallace, with Alexander Blair come from Collone to Sanct Johnneft^oun ?' Deponis, [he rememberis'] that he^ come frome CoUoun that day, towardis Sanct Johnneftoun,'' and that Williame Wallace and Alexander Blair come [in company] togidder, and that [a litle afoir thame] Henry Balnavis, Johnne Broun notair, [and Andro Gairdner,] and the depouner went [in company] togidder;
and thay wer a large fpace befoir Williame Wallace and Alexander Blair, and llayed for thame vpoun
the top of the parkis of Scone, befyde the rtane brig : And that the caus of thair being at Colone, wes,
for geving of feafing of the Landis of Coloine to Williame Wallace ; and that thai come all togidder
fra Colone, in companyis, as is afoirfaid \to Scone.] Demandit, ' Yf ther hes been ony grudge or evill
will betuix Alexander Blair and the depouner ?* Deponis, that thair hes bene fome mifiykeing and
drjTies this langtyme betuix thame, becaufe this depouner gaif informatiouu and advife to the Lady
Roffy to perfew Alexander Blair, for ane horfe, quhilk violentlie he fpul3eit and tooke from the Ladyis
dochter ; and becaus he afliftit and fortifeit William Wallace and his tennentis aganis Alexander Blairis
oppreftioun ; and becaus the depouner wes a doar, in procuireing of Agnes Seytoun lyvrent of the
rowme of Colone, in William Wallace favour. Demandit, ' Yf at that tyme of thair comeing frome
Colone, he hard Williame Wallace fay, that the Treafoun of Goury wes now cleirit and maid manifeft, be the Depofitioun and executioun of one namit Sprot ?' Deponis, vpoun his grite oathe, that
he never hard William Wallace fpeik ony fd< fpeeches ; and that he never hard William Wallace
name Sprottis name : And deponis, vpoun his grite oathe, that thair wes never ony fuche anfuer maid
be him to William Wallace, as is afferraed be Alexander Blair; and that thair wes no kj-nd of conference betuix thame, concerning that mater of Goury or Sprott. Demandit, ' Yf at ony tyme, he

Constantine. fi A smart stroke or blow, by pushing or running at one. The Sirname was formally

abolished l)y Act of Parliament. •* These anil the following words, within brackets, are interlined. '^ Altered

to they.' ' Perth' deleted. Being the origuial paper, the corrections, on reading over the Depositions to the

witnesses, are of course, made by the clerk.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 327

fayd, that lie fould duell in Andro Henderfoiiis hounis, latt him big as he wald ?' Deponis vpoun his Apr. 1610.

grite oathe, tiiat he neuir fpak ony fuch mater. Demaudit, ' Yf afoir the falling of the brig of Sanct

Jolmneftoun, the depouner toukit Andro Henderfoun vpoun the brig ?' Deponis, that at the tyme

fpecifeit in Alexander Blairis Depofitioun, this deponer, comeing alangis the brig, with his horfe in his

hand,' he forgadderit vpoun the brig with Andro Henderfoun, the Perfone of Bonhard, Alexander

Blair, and Conflene Hynd, quho wer all Handing togidder ; and thay fufferit the depouner to go by

thame vpoun the midis of the brig, becaus he had ane horfe; and at his by-palfing, his Ihoulder tuicheit

Andro Henderfoun, who tooke no offens thairat ; and when the depouner was by- thame, Alexander

Blair looked over liis ihoulder and fayd to the depouner, ' Yow myclit half gevin ws the gait !'' And

that Andro Henderfoun wes angerit at Alexander Blair for thir fpeecheis. And deponis, vpoun his

grit aithe, that he fpak na thing to Andro Henderfoun at that tyme. Demandit, vpoun his grite oathe,

to declair, ' Quhat is his opinioun anent Gouryis Treasoun, feing he wes prefent with the Erll in

the chalmer quhair his Maieflie wes perfewit ?' Deponis, vpoun his grite oathe, that he is and ever

wes of opinioun, that the Erllis pairt wes worft ; feing he faw the King's Maieftie haif na thing but

ane hunting home about his neck. Demandit, 'When he mett laft with his bruther Alexander?"

Deponis, vpoun his grite oathe, that he faw him nocht for audit yeiris ; and that the lafl tyme he faw

him wes in Hull, in England, afoir the deceis of the Queue of England.

(Sic fubfcribitur) H. R. of Froland.

Alexander Blair, re-exarainat, grantit that he met with Hary Rutliuen and Williame Wallace,
at the taking of Williame Wallace feafing of Colone ; and that after the giving of tlie feafing, Henry
Balnaves, Jolinne Broun and Andro Gardiner pall away, and that Williame Wallace and Hary Ruthuene ftayed a quhyle behind, to tak ordour with the tennentis ; and then thay tua, with the depouner,
come togidder.

Henry Ruthen, confronted with Alexander Blair, anent the forme of thair comeing frome Colone :
Deponis, as ofbefoir, that Williame Wallace, Alexander Blair, Henry Balnaveis, Johnne Brom and
Andro Gairdner come togidder frome Colone ; and that Williame Wallace and Alexander Blair fell
togidder in cumpany ; and the depouner and the vtheris perfonis foirfaidis fell togidder, and wer ever
afoir Williame Wallace and Alexander Blair, whill tliay come to the Hoill-brig, quhair the depouner
and his company Hayed for thame ; and then this depouner fell in company with Williame Wallace
and Alexander Blair ; and that the vther perfonis foirfaidis wer within the breid' of this chalmer of
the tolbuith to thame, and hard every worde that wes fpokin betuix tiiame.

Alexander Blair deponis conllantlie,'* that at this tyme, the vtheris perfonis foirfaidis wer the
fpace of three pair of buttis frome thame ; and that he with Hary Ruthuen and Williame Wallace
wer half ane hour togidder, at that tyme, going thame felffis allone.

Hary Ruthuen denyis this altogidder.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Alex^ Blair. H. R. of Frelandis.

Williame Wallace, feruand to Walter Lord Blantyr, fworne vpoun his grite oathe, being ^-poun
his knees; and demandit, ' Yf he knawis Hary Freeland and Alexander Blair?' Deponis that he
knawis thame very weele. Demandit, ' Yf in September 1608, quhen he tooke feafing of the liauch
of Colone, yf Alexander Blair, Henry Freeland, Henry Balnaveis and Johnne Broun wer thair ?' Deponis, that thai wer all thair. And that efter the geving of the feafing, Alexander Blair tooke this
depouner in to his lioufe to drinlv ; and the vtheris perfonis foirfaid went afoir, and the depouner and

' He led liis horse over this frail wooden hrid^'e, which must have heen in a very crazy condition, and prohably
without ledges, for in ' tuikiug' Andrew Henderson, he ' almaist patf him over the brig.' ' Past. 3 The most
honourable part of the way was ' the crown of the calsay," or middle of the street. To usnrp this privilege was attended with as much danger, as ' taking the wall,' in the days of Addison or Sir Richard Steele. A great deal of bloodshed took place in both countries, on such trifling matters of mere punctilio, between hot-blooded ' gallants.'
■* Breadth. * Without varying, with constancy.

328 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Apr. 1610. Alexander Blair followit, and our-tooke tliame at a mylne, quhair Hary Freeland and liis cumpany
went in to drink ;' and the depouner and Alexander Blair Hayed vponn thame befyde the mylne,
quhill tiiay come out ; and then thay come altogidder fra the milne, in company, to Scone ; and drank
in mv Lord of Scones fellair, as the depouner rememberis. Being demandid, ' Yf thair was ony
fpeeche or conference betuix the depouner and Hary Iluthuen concerning Gouryis Treasoun or
George Sprott ?' Deponis vpoun his grite oathe, that thair was nevir ony kynd of fpeeche, talking,
or conference araang thame, conceniing that mater of Goury or of Sprott ; and that the affirmatioun
of Alexander Blair, in that raater, is ane vntreuthe. And denyis that haill mater, and all the circomeflaneeis thairof, and all that is deponit, writtin and fubfcryuit be Alexander Blair, concerning that
particular : And deponis, vpoun his grite oath, that, as he rememberis, thair wes no privat conference
betuix the depouner, Alexander Blair, and Hary Ruthuene, that day : And deponis, that he had privie conference, that day, with Alexander Blair, anent the roume of Colone ; and that Alexander Blair
maid ane offer of iij" markis^ for the fame, quhilk the depouner refufit.

(Sic fubfcribitur) William Wallace.

Alexander Blair, confronted with Williame Wallace, anent the conference betuix thame and
Hary Freeland, in thair comeing frome Colone : The faid Alexander abydis be his former Depofitioun, anent the mater of Gourie and Sprott ; and Williame Wallece denyis the fame altogidder.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Alex" Blair. William Wallace.

(ii.) At Edinburghe, the xieeij day of Aprile IGIO. li> prefence of the Examinatotiris aboite
writtin.

Alexander Blair and Hary Ruthuexe being re-examinat and confrontit, vpoun the fpeecheis
pafl betuix Hary Ruthuen'and Williame Wallace, concerning Goury and Sprott : The faid Alexander
Blair abydis conflantlie be his formair Depofitioun, in that mater; and the faid Hary Ruthuene altogidder denyis the fame. The faid Alexander Blair offenit, in the faid Haryis prefence, to try this mater
BE Single Combat betuix thame, quhenever it iall pleis his Maieflie or Counfaill to appoint thame
tyme and place ; althoght it wer this fame nycht : And fayis, that he is content to be hangit, yf in the
combatt he move not the faid Hary to confefs the Ireuthe of this mater, as he hes deponit aganis him.
Tlie faid Hary Ruthuen anfuerit, that he can not be vrgeit, be law, to feght in fuche a quarrell: And
that he will abyde the ordinair tryall of the law ; and refuifit the Combatt.

Alex. Blair. H. R. of Frelandis.

Williame Wallace, being re-examinat, abydis conftantlie be his formair Depofitioun maid
yifterday.

Al. Cancell\ D. Scone. Jo. Preston. S. T. Hamilton. S. William Heart.

(iii.) At Edinburghe, the laji day of Junij 1610. \s prefence of the Erll of Dumfermlyne
Chancellour, Daitid Lord of Scone, Mr Johnne Preftoitn of Pennycoohe Prejident, Sir Alexander
Hay Kingis Secretair, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie Aduocal and Mr George Young.

Henry Rattray of Kincarrody, maryed, of the age of xxx yeiris, or thairby, fn-ome vpoun his
grite aith, and demandit, < Yf Alexander Blair come to him, and tauld him that he hard Haiy Freeland fpeeke fome outragious fpeeches aganis the Kingis Maieftie?' Deponis, vpoun his grite aithe,
that Alexander Blair nevir fpak ony fuche mater to him. And fayis, that Williame Wallace haveing
chargeit Alexander Blair to find him law fouirtie, the faid Alexander Blair come to this depouner,
ane moneth afoir Hary Freeland wes maid prifouner, and fayd to him, ' Can 1 not be quyte of your
goode-bruther ? I vow to God, yf I be not quyte' of him, I fall putt ane fleche^ in his hoife I' '

1 This word deleted, and five words interlined. " 3000 merks. s Fr. owiVc, requited. * Fr. rfccAe, a shaft
or arrow. ^ > i j >

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 329

Alexander Blair, being confrontit with Henry Rattray, and being re-exarainat, vpoun that pairt Jun. IGIO.
of his forniair Depofitioun, concerning Henry Rattray, the faid Alexander, with mony aithis, abydis
be his Depofitioun, in that point : And the faid Henry Rattray, with mony aithis, denyis the fame, and
tliat tliair wes nevir ony fuche purpois or conference betuix thame, as is contenit in that Depofitioun.

Dauid Blair in Scone, maryit, of the age of xl yeiris, fworne and demandit, ' Yf he reniemberis
that Alexander Blair, Henry Freeland and the deponer wer drinking togidder in Andro Boydis hous ?'
Deponis, that lie reniemberis weele thairof, and that Henry Rattray tooke thame in, to gif thame ane
pynt of wyne, they being come frome the buryall of ane woman in St Johnneftoun. And deponis,
that the company falling in difcouife, ' who had the bell ail! in the cuntrie?'' It wes aiifuerit, be one
of the company, that ' Andro Henderfoun Chalmerlanc of Scone haid the bell aill.' And then Henry
Freeland fayd, ' Andro Henderfoun is bying, and bigging, and conqueffing. It is evill to witt quho
may brooke and poflefs thame heirefter, for all his goode ailH' And deponis, that he directit thir
fpeeches to the haill company ; and fayd, that ' he caired not quha wald tell it to Andro Henderfoun.' And the depouner reniemberis not that he called Andro Henderfoun ' ane falfe knaif ;' bot
fayis, ' he gaif evill wordis anew.' And fayis, that the Paifone of Bonhard wes prefent^ and hard
thir fpeecheis.

CoNSTANTYNE Hynd, in Biigend, vnder the Baillie of Errole, maryed, of the age of xl yeiris,
fworne and demandit, ' Yf he remeniberis, that a litle afoir the falling of the tree-bridge of Perth, this
depouner, Andro Henderfoun, and Alexander Blair wer walking togidder vpoun the bridge?'' Deponis,
that he reniemberis very weele thairof; and that in the meantyme, Hary Freeland come alangis the
bridge, with ane naig in his hand ; and the deponar, witli liis company, having thair bakis to Hary
Freeland, he faid to thame qulien he come to thame, ' Gif ws the gate I' And in his by-ganging, the
pafliige being narrow and flrait, the depouner is of opinioun that he rubbit clokis with Andro Henderfoun, and pall by without ony forder fpeecheis. And deponis, that Alexander Blair fayd to Hary
Freeland, when he wes by, ' The half of the gait myclit half ferved yow, when yow crapt vnder the
boorde I'

Al. Cancell^ D. Scone. Alex" Hay. S. T. Hamilton.

No. XX.
LETTERS OF John, Earl of Gowrye.

[The following Letters of John Earl of Gowrye, are the only specimens of his literary compositions now known to be extant. The original of the Letter to King James VI. was presented to
the College of Edinburgh, by Drummond of Hawthornden, in 1626 ; but it has unfortunately been
either mislaid or lost, (witii other autograph Letters in the same Collection,) subsequent to the year
1757. About that time, it had been transcribed and published by Sir David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes,
in a reprint of the ' Account published by authority,' (No. IV. of the present Collection of Illustrative Documents,) and which was intended by him to serve as a specimen of his projected Collections
relating to the Gowrye Conspiracy.

The other Letter is preserved in a volume of Original Papers, collected by David Calderwood the
historian, who was a fellow-student, under Principal Rollok, with the Eari of Gowrye, at the College
of Edinburgh ; where they took the degree of Master of Arts, in ISO^ At the time of writing these
Letters, the Eari was in his 17lh year, prosecuting his studies at Padua. They are also given, pp.
331-6, of the valuable ' IMiscellany' of the Bannatyne Club. A fac-simile of the Eari of Gowryc's
subscription to the last of these interesting reliques concludes this Collection of Papers.]

^ ' Toun' is deleted.
VOL. II. 2 '^

330

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Nov. 1595, 1. Letter, the Earl of Gowrye to King James VI.

Please 30UII Majestie,

GiF the beftouing of gi-eat benefites fould moue the receauers theroff to be
thankfiill to the giueris, I haue luony and extraordinar occalionis to be thankful!
to 'our Majefte ; not only being fauored with the benefite of 30ur Majefteis gude
countenance at all tymes, bot alfo that it hath pleafit 30ur Majefte to accept lb
Weill of me, as to honour me with 3our IMajefteis moft louing letter, as with ane
certane fio-ne and vine tellimonie of 3our Majefteis gude fauor and gracioufues
touartis me ; wheroS' I efteme lb much, that I wald think my feltf very hapie, if
it foidd pleafe jOur INIajefte to comand me in any thing, that therby 30ur Maiefte mio^ht haue ane tryall of my prompt and fathfuU obedience ; for 3our Majefteis worthines and valor, attour the particular courtefis fcliauin to me, merits
whatfomeuer I am able to do, and ane hundreth thoufand tymes more. In end,
I pray 50m- Majefte to haue me excufed that I haue taine the audacitie to wrett
ao-aine to 30ur Majefte, for not hauing the comfort of 3our Majefteis prefence,
could not declare my willing mynd better then be vfing of the nixt remede. In
the meane tyme, I fall repole my felfF ftill on 30ur INIajefteis conftant fauor,
quhill God of his mercie grant that I fe 3our Majefte in fuche ane gude eftate as
I wiflie, \vhilk will give me the greteft contentment of all.

Sua craning earneftly of that Creator of all thingis to blift 30ur Majefte with
all felicitie and fatisfactione in health, with ane increas of mony profperous dayis,
I kifs moft deuotly 30ur Majefteis hands.

Yoiu' Majefteis moft humble fubiect and obedient feruitor in all deuotione,

Gowrye.

Att Padua, the 24th of November 1595.

2. Letter, the Earl of Gotvrtje to Mr Johne Malcome, Minijler at Perth.^

'¥,\)Xoynrov irw to ova^x ts S'la £K «lu^«.

Beloved Brother,
Hauing taken occafione to wret to Scotland, wald nocht omitt my deutie to
30U, in vifiting 30U with this letter, that therby 36 myght vnderftand of my prefeut eftate, quhilk continues as of before ; praifing God, from my hairt, that of the
riche abundance of his gude grace and mere mercie lies maid the beames and
licht of his countenance, to fliiue \i)on me moft fauorably ; to be ane guide to
conduct me faiflieper hunc Auernum, quherin mony here, {quorum oculi denjii

' ISIr John Malcolm, one of the Regents, and afterwards Principal of St Leonard's College, St
Andrews, was ordained Minister of Perth, 4th November, 1591. He was the author of a Latin Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles, a work of considerable learning, printed at Middleburgh, 1615,
4to. lie died at an advanced age, at Perth, 3d October, 1634.

3i Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 331

caligine et nehidis ohfiifcatifunf,) 6 miferum fpectaadum ! are drouned, in his Nov. 1595.

iuflice ; I meane noclit all, ahfit ; for I am acquainted with diners heir, qui,

etiam inter has jJaliides Jiigias, hes neuer boued ther kne to Baal : Qnhat ana

meruell is this ? and quha can beleue it ? and 3it it is certanly true ; glorificetur

igitur Deus in operihusjuis, ac eo mogis quojunt miralnliora et ■ko.^o. Tnn (pvTiv.

There wes ane notable exemple of conilancie not long ago, in ane Silefian Minifter, of fome threfcore yeares and mair, quha, efter he had beine deteined in prifone about nyne yeares, and the Jefuites had trauailed with him to recant ; l)ot

2)erfaiffing that thei could preuaile nothing at his handis, caufed bring him to the

fyre, lyke bludie dogges ; quhere, efter he had maid ane excellent difcours and

harang to the people, fliauing them the gret honour he wes callit to in fuffering

for Chrifles fake, and exhorting them to conuerlione, abode moft patiently, without

ony fin-inking, all tormentis ; magiiifeing Godis holy name, and praying that

ther finnes mycht be foi-giuen them. Efter he wes brunt, not being ^it I'atisfied

of the crueltie that they had vfit againft him, quhen he wes lining, did cad ane

gret heap of Hones vpon his allies, multo Jceuiores quum erant Jiidei aduei-fus

Steplianum. There were vtheris, quha for feare of death, at that fame tyme,

maid filthie apoftacie fra the true Religione to that damnable idolatrie ; and at

that inftant that ane of them begane to deny Chrift, in making defectione, there

isfliued blude out of his nofe jn fuche gret abundance, that all did fee him thocht

he fould have dyed prefentlie. This wes ane vifibill figne of the hand of God,

that chopped on him quha had done fuch ane villanie againft his confcience, for

to purchafe his auin lyfle, quhilk he wes not worthie to bruik, be the lol's of his

foule. Bot thir renegates not the les efcaped not their auin puniflnnent, for

they all were fend ad triremes, vbi non vnius horefputio vitamfinituri,fed morientes Jemper, nee tamen morientur. Laitlie, efter thefe thingis, ane certane

Ingliflie man, being moued on zele to caft thev Jftcra JkiJUu (as thai moft falllie

callis it) out of the prieftis handis, that wes careing it in proceffione, to the

grund, and to ftramp on it with his fete, wes ai)prehendit and denudit of his

clothes, therefter ane hude putt on his heade, quheron wes painted the deuils

image, and fome with bleafis, quha brunt him continually in the backe and breft

as he walked forduart ; bot he, in the meane tyme, wes occupiet in fchauing the

people how thai were fchamfullie abufed by thefe mifcent idolaters, quha were

leading them to their auin damnatione. In end, he fpake with fuch ane vehemencie, that the enymies caufed knett his toung, fearing fome vprore to enfeu,

if he had gottin ony forder libertie to fpeke : So he wes brought to the place of

executione, quhere, lifting vp his eyes to heauen, and on his knees killing the

chain he wes bund with, they caufed firft cut of his hand for the fact he had

committed, and nixt burne him quicke. All thir thingis were done in Rome,

332 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

Nov. 1595. that mother of all Ayce, and hoorillie fynagog of deuils. I am fory that my abfeuce will not permit me to kyth my mynd and giidwill, in heljiing to fett furth
Godis gloria there, cui totus ex animo inaimherem; hot quhen, at his gude pleafui'e, I returne, fall with his grace, indeuore my felfF to amend qnhatfomeuer is
omitted for laike of my jirefens. I thank 5011 moll hartfully, of 50iir remeraberance of me in 3our prayeris ; defjTing 5on earneftlie to contineu, according to the
lone 36 cary to the faluatioune of my foule. Thus, remembering my loving commendationis to jour felflF, with the haill nychtbouris of the toune, Committis 30U
with them all to the protectione of the Omnijjotent.

Youris aluayis affectionat, Goavrye.

At Padoua, the 28 of Nouember, 1595.

I DOUT nocht bot 36 haue hard, long fince, of the Papes benedictione given to
the King of France ; quliilk hes turned to ane maledictione. No vther neuis
occurris heir for the prefent; bot nou agane, latlie, there is fome Ingliflimen put
in the hous of Inquifitione, in Rome.

To my beloued brother, Mr Jhoxe Malcome, Miuifter at Perth.

No. XXL

FAC-SIMILE OF THE Subscription of John Earl of Gowrye.

[il/r WUl'mme hairt, Jtijiice-Depute.'\

SMriting; ^lanUcrous ^asttuils ngainst i\)t l^iitff, ^c— ^tUitioit.

Oct. 10. — Frances Tennent, merchand burges of Edinburghe.'

[The Trial of Francis Tennent forms one of the series, in a black catalogue of Cases, which must
leave an indelible stain on the character of King James VI. Owing to the scrupulous care adopted

' On the margin, ' Convictus et Sufpenfus.'

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

333

by tbe Lord Advocate to suppress these offensive papers, the precise nature of the Pasquils alluded
to, cannot now be correctly determined. Tlie likelihood, however, is, that besides ' detracting' the
King and his ' maill nobill progenitouria,' and publicly branding the King as the ' Sone of Seniour Davie,'
(a popular soubriquet for his sacred Majesty,) these offensive squibs had contained matter relative to the
recent Conspiracy of the Earl of Gowrie. Such a conjecture is fortified by the circumstance of
the well-known Mr Robert Bruce and Mr John Davidson, the persons to whom the Pasquils are
fictitiously addressed, having publicly asserted the story of the Conspiracy to be an entire fabrication,
and that the Murder was devised and perpetrated by the King and the Court faction, to rid themselves
of a powerful rival.

After a minute and careful search, the Editor has not been able to obtain copies or fragments of
these papers, or to get even a tolerable abstract of their contents. The only light we obtain from any
contemporaneous writer, is from that amusing and minute Chronicler, Robert Birrell ; who only ventures to say ; ' The 8 of October, Frances Ketinaird hangit at the Cioce, for TreafTone ao-anis his
Maieftie, for making of Plakketis and wreittis, fie as Cokkolentis.' ' The latter part of this mysterious intimation would lead us to believe, that these pasquils contained, amongst other satirical remarks,
reflections on the Queen's conjugal infidelity. It is certain, at all events, that this shot took effect ; and
it is equally clear, that his Majesty retaliated, in a most ungenerous and cruel manner. In the course
of investigating the public Records, &c. the only notice which the Editor observed, was in the Lord
High Treasurer's Accounts ; where, in the month of October, the following entry is mode : ' Item,
to the Officeris of Jufliciare, for Cummoning of ane Aflyis to Francis Tennent, xl f.'

Should the Editor, afterwards, be so fortunate as to obtain inspection of these papers, or authentic
contemporaneous transcripts, amongst tiie MS. Collections of Thomas first Earl of Haddington, then
Secretary of State, Lord Advocate, &c. or from similar sources, they shall be given in the Appendix.]

Dilatit for falfe, malitious and vndeutifull wiyting and difperfing of flvlanderous, calumnious and reprochefuU Letteiis, to the difliouoiir of the Kingis Maieftie,^ his hienes progenitouris, Counfale and procedingis ; conform to the Dittay, produceit (by) Mr Thomas Hammiltoune Aduocat to our fouerane Lord.
DiTTAY agabift Frances Tennent.

Frances Tennent, merchand burges of Edinburgh, ge are Indytit and accufit for fe fals, malitious, vndewtiefuU wiyting and difperfing of iklanderous, calumnious and reprociiefull Lettres, to Jie
difhonour of Jie Kingis Maieftie, his maifl nobill progenitouris, counfale and procedingis ; and lleiring
vp of feditioune and contempt in fe hairtis of his fubiectis, aganis his Maieftie ; in raaner, fubflance
and effect contenit in twa of 50ur Lettres writtin, heirwith produceit, and vfit as ane pairt of jour
Dittay ; The ane of the faidis Lettres, writtin with 3 our hand, and fubfcryuit be the fein5eit name of
' James Sympsoune, scoller,' and directit ' to Mr Robert Bruce,' off tlie dait, at Newcaflell, Jie
xvij day of Januar, the 3eir of God I"'.V<'.lxxxxvij 3eiris ; and the vther, lykewyis writtin with 50ur
hand, and fubfcryuit with the fein3eit name of ' Johne Stratiiauchin ;' and directit vpoune the
bak, ' to Mr Johne Davidfoune :' Quhilkis twa Lettres, 30 laid doune in the Kirke of Edinburgh, to
the effect the famyn mycht half fallin in the handis of the pepill ; thairbye to bring his Maieftie in contempt, and ftcir vp his pepill to feditioune and difobedience ; exprefslie aganis the Lawis and Actis of
Parliament maid aganis Lefing-niakeris and authouris of feditioune and infamous fpeicheis and writtis.
Quhilk 3e can nocht deny; Lykeas, 36 half confefl fe famyn, be twa feuerall Depofitionis, fubfcryuit
with 5 our hand.

' Perhaps for ' Cokkoleingls,' cuckoldings. ' See Cases of Diksoun, Aug. 3, 1596; Cornuall,

Apr. 25, 1601 ; and Ross, executed Sept. 10, 1618.

334 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1600.

TheAduocat produceit his Maiefteis Warrant, for jjerfute of Frances Tenneni.

The faid Frances Tennent produceit certane

Defensses, in tiritf, ogrmis the D'lttay ; qiihairof the tennoiir followis.

' It is alledgeit, for ]>& pairt of me Frances Tennent, that na proces aucht to be
gevin aganis nie, in \>e Criniinall actionne perfevvit be my Lord Aduocat contrair
me ; becans I am nocht deprehendit, in recenti criniine, bot is convenit vpoune
ane deid, alledgeit done thre jeir fince or fairbye : And conforme to the Actis of
Parliament, I audit to l)e fimimond A-poune fyftene dayis wairning, and ane
copie of pe Dittay gevin me ; quhilk is nocht fwa done ; bot I am fummarlie
prefentit on pannell, without ony citatioune preceding. Secundlie, gifand' 30ur
lorfchiii wald proceid aganis me the faid Frances, nochtwithftanding the alledgeance foirfaid ; jit I aucht to half ane copie of Ipe Dittay, and ane day affignit to
me, to anfuer })airto ; feing I am convenit on my lyffe ; And gude reflbune vald
I had ane day to be avyfit Jjairwith ; And to remember the Dittay to be fpeciall,
anent the cryme ; And to allege, that fpeking generallie, without courfing,' is na
laM'fulI caufe to tak ane mannis lyffe. Thridlie, alledgeit, the Law Intitulat
' Si qnis Ii/iperatori viaJedixcrif,' ^ — and produceit the buik to iuflruct the LaAA',
quhilk is ane Defence to me the faid Frances in this caife.'

It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the alledgance aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the Dittay contening the cryme of Seditioun aganis the Prince, quhilk
may fuffer na delay. As to the laft Defence maid v^joun the Law, ' Si qnis Iinperaiori riialedixerit,' the famin aucht to be Re])ellit, in refpect of the Actis of
Parliament maid anent the crymes lybellit ; ordaning the authouris of fklanderous fpeichis and writtis aganis the Prince, his progenitouris, Counfall or procedingis, to be puneift to the death.

The Jullice ffindis proces : Quhairvpoune the Kingis Aduocat afkit inllrumentis.

The famin day, twa Letteris being produceit be the Aduocat, maid and writtin be Frances Tennent, togedder with his Depofitionis; the faid Frances acknowledgeit and confeflit in jugement the famyn to be his handwrit : Quhairvpoune
the Aduocat afkis inftrumentis ; and in refpect thairof, and of the ij" and fyft
Act of the Kingis xiij Parliament, and vther Actis thairin mentiouat, protellis,
gif the AfTyis clenge the faid Frances, for Wilfull Errour.

The Aduocat produceit

His Maiesteis Waeraxd to pro/m/ice dome aganis Frances Tennent,

in nianer following :

' Giving or granting, that your lordship, &c. ^ ' Curfing' had been originally written, and is

deleted in the record, to make way for tlie improved orthography ' courfing.' ^ Codicis, lib. 9,

tit. 7, 1. unic. ' Quoiiiam si id ex levitate processerit, conteuinendum est: Si ex insania, miseratione
dignissimum : Si ab injuria, reniittendum.'

3^Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 335

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clerk and jour Deputis, We greit 30W weill. It is cure will and We
command 30W, that vpoune Jie fyclit iieirof, 56 pronunce the dome following, vpoune ftVances Tennent
burges of Edinburgh, efler his convictioune, of the forgeing and cafting doune of certane leditious Pafcallis :' That is to fay, that he fall be takyn to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and his toung cuttit
out at fe rute ; and that thair falbe ane paper affixit vpoune his brow, bering, that he is convict for
fforgeing and geveing out of certane vyild and feditious Pafcallis, detracting ws and our maid nobill
progenitouris : And thairefter, tliat he fall be takyn to the gallons and hangit, ay quhill he be deid -.'^
As 39 will anfuer to ws vpoune 50ur oflfices and obedience: Quhairanent, thir prefentis falbe 30ur
Wan'and. Subfcryuit with our hand. At Lynlythqw, the xxiij day of September, 1600 3eris.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

The faid Frances produceit ane vther Warrand, fubfcryuit be his Maieftie,
difpenfing with the former Warrand, quhairof the tennour foUowis :

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 30ur Deputtis and Aduocat, We greit 50W weill : ftorfamekill as,
albeit be our vther Warrand direct to 30W, We comraandit 30W to put ffrances Tennent to ]>e torture
of ]>e buittis ; and Jiairefter to pronunce dome aganis him, that he fuld be careit to fe mercat croce ot
Edinburgh, and ]iair his toung to be cuttit out, and fyne hangit : Nochtwitiiftanding, for certane cauffea
moving ws, We half thocht gude to mitigat that fentence, be difpenfing with ])e tortoring of ])e faid
ffrances, othei-^ in the buittis, or be cutting out of his toung; and ar content, that 36 onlie pronunce
dome aganis him to be hangit, without any forder: Quiiilk We command 30W to do, be thir prefentis;
and to forbeir the faid tortour. Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe jour Warrant. Subfcryuit with our
Land, At Dundie, the xxvij day'of September, 1600 yeiris. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Verdict. For the quhilk crymes, the faid Fi-ances was put to the knawledge
of ane AfTyis,^ &c. ; and (they) being throuchlie avyfit thairwith, reenterit agane
in Court, quhair thay, be the mouth of George Dowglas, callit of Bengowre,
chancellar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Frances to be fylit, culpabil
and convict of the dittay abouewrittin, and crymes thairin contenit.

Sentence. The Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Robert Galbraith, dempftar of the faid Court, Decernit and ordanit the faid Frances Tennent to be tane
to ane Gibbet, befyde the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit
quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our
fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.

NoTA. Immediatlie efter dome pronunceing, Mr Thomas Hammilton tuke vp the tua Lettres,
writtis and Pafcallis, the ane direct to Mr Robert Bruce, and the vther to Mr Johue Davidfone, Minifteris ; quhilkis twa Pafcallis he vald nocht haif infert in proces,

^ Pasquils. ^ This seems to be a dreadfully severe and barbarous sentence, when compared

with the trivial nature of the offence ; and marks a shockingly vindictive spirit on the part of the King.
The case of Archibald Cornuall, Apr. 23, 1601, is another of many melancholy instances of the sanguinary temper of James VI. in all instances of infringement on his kingly dignity. Although the
application of the torture, and cutting out of this unlucky libeller's tongue, were ultimately dispensed
with, certainly the punishment was vastly disproportioned to the measure of the offence. The recent
Conspiracies may perhaps have induced the King to make some severe examples ; and |)oor Francis
Tennent was offered up as the first suitable victim. Independently of his wouiuled kingly dignity,
the wealthy burgess's escheat had proved too great a bail to James's cupidity, to admit of iiis passing
scot-free. ' Owther, either, * Consisting of merchants of Edinburgh, but persons of no note.

336 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

'^ov. 5. Thomas Bellie, burges of Brechin, and James Bellie his fone.

Dilatit and accufit for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament
for bying, haifing and keping of poyfoune ; mixing the famyn with daich,' and
caftino- doune thairof in Jonet Clerkis 5aird in Brechin, for deftructioiine of fowlis ;
be the qiihilk poyfoune they diftroyit to the faid Jonet twa hennis. And being
perfewit be Mr Robert Lyntoune,lubflitute for Mr Thomas Hammiltoune, aduocat,
for the faid cryme, they refufit to jjafs to AfTyis, bot come in our fouerane lordis
will for the laid cryme : Quliairvpoun the faid Mr Robert afkit inftrumentis.
The Juftice continewis the faid dyet to the morne.

Nov. 6. — Continewis in eras, the fevint of No^•ember.

Nov. 7. — Comperit IMr Johne JMarlchell, Miniiler of Brechin, and produceit his Maiefleis will ; ciuhairof the tenuour foUowis.

Eex,

We, \Ti(!erfl;amling that Thomas Bellie, induellar in Brechin, is become in our will for haifing anil keping of poyfone, and poyfoning thaii-witli of certane hennis : Thaiifoir we declair our will
as followis, to wit ; That the faid Thomas fall, within the fpace of fourtie dayes, remove and depairt
fmth of our realme, and remane as a exylit and baneill perfoune furth ]iaiiof, during all the dayis of
his lyffe ; vnder the pane of deid : Commanding lieirbye our Juilice, Jullice Clark and tliair deputtis,
to pronunce and delyuer fis our Will, iudiciallie ; and caufe regirtrate the fame in our buikis of Adiornall. Subfcriuit with our hand. At Halyrudehous, the faxt day of Xouember, 1600.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

Sentence. According to the quhilk, the Juftice, be the mouth of James
Lowrie, dempfter, Ordanit the faid Thomas, within the fpace of fourtie dayis, to
remove and depairt furth of this realme, as ane exylit and baneift perfoune, fm-th
thairof, during all the dayis of his lyftyme ; vnder the pane of deid.

Nov. 12. — V/iLLiAME Home of Ballicafs.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ M' Alexander Dikfoune,

fone to vmq'" Robert Dikfoune elder of Haffingtoune-maynis ; committit the xxj

day of Aprile, 1597 yeiris.

Persewar, Johne Dikfoune.

The Juftice continewis this mater, to the faxt day of Marche nixtocum.

' Plegio, AVilelmo Home de Ballandyne.'

13L- WilUame Borihidl-, Jiifiice- Depute :-'\

l^timtmt\\t\\ — ^6xtMt SHilfuction — * 3Uapt nnH iubisljiitg/

Jan. 13, IGOI. — Johne Kyncaid of Craighous.
[The Case of Kyncaid of Craighous, which follows, afibrds a lamentable instance of perversion of
the ends of justice, while, at the same time, it contains a most amusing illustration of the cupidity and
' Dougli. « He also officiated on Nov. 20, 22, 25, Dec. 17, and Jun. 7.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 337

meanness of ' King Jamie tlie fupient and fext.' At tliis period, it was by no means an uncommon
tiling, in Scotland, to make short courtsliips with heiresses and rich widows, by < captivating' them by
a coup de main and getting married, according to the briefest form recognized by the laws of the land ;
and, no doubt, some of these unceremonious courtships, in the long run, proved Iiappy to all parties.
The Laird of Craigbouse, a Cadet of the ancient family of Kincaid of that Ilk, in Stirlingshire, (as
were the Kincaids of Warriston, Craiglockhart, Coates, &c.) was possessed of considerable wealth.
From the whole complexion of the following story, it appears pretty clear, that this luckless gallant
had been regularly trahied to carry off a certain buxom ' wedo.' It is not even alleged in the Dittay,
that any violence had been done to the lady, farther than the fact of carrying her off. Perhaps it may
be thought by no means improbable, that the Bailie of the Water of Leith, out of whose house she was
said to have been carried, in the face of open day, was one of the parties concerned m facilitating the
' abduction ;' for it is very unlikely, that a ' wedo' could be thus forcibly taken, (after breaking up the
doors of her dwelling,) and that she could, by any ordinary force, be carried, against her inclination,
through the Village of the Water of Leith, and also through a populous part of the country, in the
immediate vicinity of the City of Edinburgh, to the foot of the Braid hills, wliere Craigbouse is situated ; without raising the hue and cry, and being released, ere she had been carried a couple of miles.
But it is still more incredible, that the perpetrators of this outrage should, in addition to the palpable
indiscretion of committing this crime in broad daylight, be such bunglers, as ' all by accident' to ride
into the heart of the King's hunting party I The machinery of the imprisonment, trial, and subsequent
proceedings, were admirably contrived to practise on the fears of the unlucky Laird ; until, at length,
he fell into the snare which was so craftily laid for him — lie ' become in our foucrane lordis Will !'
It appears from the Acts of the Privy Council, that, on Dec. 18, 1600, ' John Kincaid of Craighous
(was) committit to waird, within the Caflell of Edinburghe ; thairin to be dctenit, vpoun his awin
expenflis, ay and quhill he be prefentit to the Juflice,' &c. ; and the matter, as is proved by the Books
of Justiciary, was hung up till Feb. 17, 1601 ; all which time poor Kincaid lay 'in durance vile,' and
was finally forced, by squalor carceris, to accept of almost any terms. This ' Will,' it may be affirm,
ed, is matchless ! A fine of two thousand five hundred merks is imposed, which, considering the relative value of money at that time, was an enormous sum. To wind up the transaction, the King demands the Laird's guid ' hroime horfe,' to quench the remainder of his wrath ; and perchance the King
would think, with the reader, that ' the rapt of Craighous' was the best day's sport he had had for many
a year,]

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Rapt and Reveifching of IfTobell Hutchefoiui,
■wedow ; taking of liir captiue, &c.

Prelouuutour for the pannell, Mr Johnne Drovvling.
Persewak, Mr Robert Lyntoun, fubllitute, for the aduocat.

The quhilk Johnne Kincaid of Craighous, hauing enterit on pannell, declarit,
that he will becum in his Maiefteis will, ffor taking of lObbell Iluchfoun, wedow,
his hienes frie leige furth of Jolme Johneftoune, baillie of the Watter of Leithis
hous, and taking of hir to his awin hous of Craighous ; committit the xvij day
of December laft. (Signed) JoHXE Kincaid.

Dittay againjl Johnne Kyncakl of Craighous.
FoESAMEKLE as he, with conuocatioun of the perfonis vnderwrittin, and
diuerfe vtheris our fouerane lordis leigis ; To wit, Robert Kyncaid, fone to
VOL. II. 2 u

338 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

Edward Kyncaid, burges of Edinburgh, Daiiid Watfoun, fifler-foiie to Johne
Johneftouii, baillie of the Water of Leilh, Johne Watlbun, his feruand, Ale.xander Barcar, baxter in Edinburgh, Johnne Quhippo, baxter thair, and Williame
Hepburne, with diuerfe vtheris his complices, of his fpeciall convocating, caufmg, command and directioun, laitlie, vpoun the xvij day of December laftbypaft, being bodin in feir of weir, with fwordis, fecreittis and vtheris wappynnis,
invafitie, contrair the tennour of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, come
to Johne Johueftoun, baillie of the "\"\'ater of Leith duelling-hous thair ; quliair
IfTobell Iluchfoun wedow was, in fober, quyet and peceabill maner for the tyme,
dredand na evill, harme, iniurie or perfuit of onye perfonis, bot to haife levit
vnder Godis peax and our fouei'ane lordis : And thair, be way of haniefuckin
and conuocatioune of our fouerane lordis liegis, as faid is, violentlie and forceablie brak vp the duris of the laid duelling-hous, enterit thairin be way of deid,
and pat violent handis in the faid IlTobellis perfoun, tuke liir captiue, reft, reveifchit and tuke hir away with him to his place of Craighous ; quhair he detenit hir, quhill his INIaieftie, being vpovm the feildis, accumpaneit with Johne Erie
of Mar, Sir Johne Ramfay and diuerfe vtheris, his Maiefteis domeflik ferwandis,
heiring of the committing of fik ane horribill fact, directit the faidis Johne Erie
of Mar, Sir Johne Ramfay and diuerfe vtheris his hienes ferwandis, to follow
hir, and to releve hir furth of his handis ; quha haifing cum to his place of Craighous, and requyring for hir relive, he refufit to grant the famyn, quhill thay
manaffit to bring his ]\Iaieftie about his faid houfe, and raife ffyre thairin ; and
fwa compellit him to releve hir : Committing thairbye. Rapt and Reveifching of
the faid Urobell, Haniefuckin, Convocatioun of our fouerane lordis liegis ; and hes
treflbnablie vfurpit his hienes auctoritie, in taking and violent and forceabill
detening the faid IfTobell his frie liege, expres contrair the lawis and Actis of
Parliament ; and he being airt and pairt thairof : Quhairbye he hes incurrit
the panis, contenit in the faid lawis and Actis of Parliament ; quhilkis fuld be
execute aganis him, with all rigour.

Continewit to the morne, the xiiij daj' of Januare.
[3//- WiUianie Ha'irt and 3Ir Williame Borthnih, Jujiices-Deputes.']
(Feb. 17.) — The quhilk day, Johne Kyncaid of Craighous, being enterit
on pannell, appointit to heir and fee our fouerane lordis Will declarit, in the
qiihilk he become, in ane Court of Jufticiarie, haldin in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, the xiij day of Januar, the yeir of God V^Xy. and ane yeiris, be Mr Williame Borthuik, Juftice-depute, for taking of Illbbell Hutcheoune wedo, his hienes
frie liege, furth of Johne Johneftoune, baillie of the Water of Leith hous thair,
and taking of hir to his awin duelling-houfe thair ; committit the xvij day of
December laftwas :— Comperit Mr Williame Brois, feruitour to Alexander Maf34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 339

ter of Elphingfloune, Thefaurer to our fouerane lord, and produceit ane Warrand direct to the Juftice, Juftice Clark and thair deputtis, conteniiig Lis liienes
"Will ; and defyrit the Juftice to pronunce and declair the faid Will, according
thairto ; and to caufe inlert the famyn in the buikis of Adiornall, to half the
ftrenth of ane Act and decreit thairof. Tlie quhilk Warrand being red, the
Juftice pronnnceit his hienes Will conforme to the tennour thairof, and ordanit
the famyn to be infert and regiftrate in the buikis of Adiournall ; to haife the
ftrenth of ane act and decreit thairof ; with executioun of horning and poinding,
to be direct aganis the faid Johne and his cawtioun, for fulfilling of the faid
Will ; and the horning to be vpoune ane ftmple charge of fax dayes wairning ;
quhairof the tenour followis :

James, be the grace of God, King of Scottis. To our Juftice, Juftice Clark and Jiair deputis, greting. Forfameliill as Johne Kyncaid of Craighous, is becum in our will, for ])e Reveiiching of Iftbbeil
Huchefoun, wedo : Thairfoir, We declair our will as followis, to wit ; that the faid Johne Kyncaid
fall niak payment to ws and our Thefaurer, in our name, or to fik vlheris as our faid Thefaurer fall
appoynt and afligne, of the fowme of xxv" (2500) merkis money of our realme : As alfo, that he fall
delyuer to ws and our faid Thefaurer hisTiroune horfe : Commanding heirbye 50W our faid Juftice,
Juftice Clark and 3 our deputis, to caufe pronunce and declair J)is our will aganis ])e faid Johne, judiciallie, and infert J)ir prefentis in our buikis of Adiornall, to haif the ftrenth of ane act and decreit ;
that executioune of horning and poynding may be direct aganis fe faid Johne, vpoune ane fimple
charge of fax dayes. Subfcryuit with our hand, at Halyrudehous, the laft day of Januar, IGOl 5eiri3.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

\_Mr WilUame Borthuik, Jufl'ice-Dejnde.']
Jan. 22. — Walter Scot, James Scot and \A'illiam Scot in Schoftanis,

all brether to Robert Scot of Bowhill, and John Scot in Quholp-'

law, alias callit JoJine of J3o)ujtou)w.
Comperit Mr Allane Hammiltoune, feruitour to Sir Archebald Naper of Edynbillie, knycht, and as procuratour for the faid Sir Archebald, and produceit our
fouerane lordis lettres, deulie execute and indorfat, piircheft be Alefoune Edmeiftoune the relict, and the faid Sir Archebald Naper as fader, with the brether and
remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'" Archebald Naper, Gudemau of the ^Vowmet ;'
to tak fouertie of Walter Scot, &c. that thay fuld haif comperit befoir the Juftice
or his deputis, this day and place, in the hour of caufe, and vnderlyne the law
for the Slauchter of the faid vmq'" Archebald f be the quhilkis lettres the faidis
perfonis ar denunceit our fouerane lordis rebellis, and put to the home. Tlie
faid Mr Allane Hammiltoune proteftit for releve of Johne Naper, 30unger of

' Woolmot, near Edinburgh. '^ George Birrel gives the following notice in his • Diarey,' p. 52,

' The aucht of November (1600), Archebald Napier ilane be fyve of the name of Scot and Thomas
Crichtoun, ryding hame to his awen lious to the Wowraet.'

340 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

Mercliiuftoiine, cawtioner for productioune of the faidis lettres : quhairvpoune
he alkit actis and inftrumentis.

[Mr Williame Hairf, Jiiftice-Bepnle.']

Jirtaluufl into i^t ^\mt at iSoninfltouii— Cijcft of Citlt Stctfs, ^r.

Mar. 31. — James "Wod, flfear of Boningtoune, and Williame Wod of
Latoune.
Dilatit of the brekiiig of the Place of Boningtoune, &c.

Persewar.

Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Drumcarne, Ailuocat to our fouerane lord, for liis hienes interes,

Preloquutouris for James V^od, Mr Joline Ruflell, Mr Alexander King, Mr Laurence M'Gill,

Capitan Andro Gray, Robert Gray.

The Aduocat produceit his Maiefteis Warraud, fiibfcryuit with his hienes
(hand,) ordaining him to iufift in perfuit, &c. ; qiihairof the tennoiir followis.
Rex,

IMr THO^^AS Hammiltoune of Druracanie, our Aduocat, We greit 30W weill. It is our
will, and We command -^ow, tliat eftir fe fj'clit heirof, 56 compeir before our Juftice or his deputis,
in our Tolbuith of Edinburgli, the lalt day of March inftant, in pe hour of caus ; and infill in perfuit
of James Wod, fear of Boningtoune, and Williame Wod of Latoune, tane and dilatit of breking of ]ie
Place of Boningtoun, and of ]ie treffonabill and thifteous ftcilling and away-taking furth ]iairof, of certane ewidentis, writtis and pleneifling, pertening to Patrik ^^'od, eldar of Boningtoune, and to Jie Lady
Vfane :' As alfo, for contravening of fe Actis of Parliament in heiring of Mefs f and refletting of

Lueis ,' ane Seniinarie Preifl : ffor ]ie quhilk tiiir prel'entis falbe ■^our W'anand. Snbfcryuit

with our hand, Att Halyrudhous, the lall day of March, 1601. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Thairefter, the faid Mr Thomas Hammiltoiine produceit the Dittay following.
DiTTAY againjl James Wod and Williame Wod.

James Wod, fear of Boningtoun, and Williame Wod of Latoun ; Ye ar indytit and accufit :
fl'orfamekill, as it is ftatute and ordenit be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, and fpeciallie, be
ane Act maid in his hienes Parliament, hanldin and begun at Edinburgh, the xxix day of Julij l^.V".
Ixxxvij yeiiis, that incaice it fal happin ony landit men to be lauchfullie and ordourlie convict of the
crymes of Tiiift, Reffett tliairof or Stouth-reitf, in tyme cuming, thay fall incur the cryme and pajTie
of Trelfoune ; that is to fay, tinfall of lyife, landis and guidis ; as the faid Act at niair lenth beris :
And trew it is, that ye and ather* of yow, being landit gentilmen, accumpaneit with Thomas Daw,
fmyth in Brechin, Alexander Daw, in Carrefloun, his brother, and vlheris your complices, laitlie,
vpoun tlie xvj day of March inftant, came, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht, fra the citie of Brechin,
to the Place of Boningtoun, pertening to Patrik Wod, eldar of Boningtoun, fader to yow the faid
James ; quhair Alexander Daw fchott the haill 3ettis^ of the faid place, and preiffit'' to pryife' the

' A strange corruption, for Ulysses-haven, in the shire of Forfar. * There is no notice of this

branch of the Diitay having been insisted on, and no fartlier notice is taken. Blrrcl says, in his
' Diarey,' p. 54, ' The lall day of ]\Iarche, James Wood of Bonnytoun and his guid-brother Williame
Wood tholit ane Aflyze for being at the Mefs in Andro Napier's lious ; but continewit the executioun.'
' Name left blank. < Either, each. 5 Shot or unbolted the bars and bolts, or other fastenings, of
the gates, ^ Made a strenuous endeavour. '' To prize or wi'ench open by means of any lever,
such as a 'pinch' or crow-bar, &c.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 341

irne 3elt thairof, and to enter thairin peiforce : And becaus ye could noclit pryife the faid ime 5ett,
ye pryfit vp ane llaincbelP of ane laith volt windok,* and onterit thaiiby to tbe faid place: And efter
your entrie, ye opnit tbe baill duris, and fchot the lokis of all the kiflis^ within the faid place, and
fpeciallie of the Cbartour kill, ftanding in the cbalnier of dace'* of the faid place, peitcining to your
faid fader ; ft'urtb of the qubilk ye treifonablie (and) thifteouflie Hall, concelit, refl'ett, lloutbfullie reft,
and away-tuik, the baill evidentis being thairin ; and findrie vther writtis furth of ane vther kid, within
tbe Galrie of the faid place, and opnit tbe baill remanent kiftis and cofferis being thairin ; ffurth of
the qubilkis lykewyife, ye treifonablie and thifteouflie Hall, ftouthfullie reft, reliett and away-tuik nyne
pair of fcheitis, foure buird-clathis,^ twa dofone and twa of feruiettis,^ ane pair of blankettis of fuftiaiie, and ane peace of vnbleicbit linning claith : And efter that tbe baill kiftis wer opnit, and that ye
wer paking vp tbe writtis and plenneilling foiifaid, within tbe faidis buiid-claitbis, !Malbo Wod in

Croftis, James Wod his fone, and Dauid , ane rynner boy to the Mailler of Ogilvie, came to

tbe Place of Boningtoun to yow, and belpit to pak vp the graitli : Lykeas, ye the faid Williame Wod

of Latoune, with Matho Wod, James Wod and Dauid , and ilkane of yow, thane thifteouflie

convoyit away and bure vpoun thair bakis, the baill plenneilfing aboue writtin, writtis and evideutis,
togidder with ane lytill cofter with writtis, pertening to the Lady Vfane, furth of tbe faid Place of
Boningtoun, towardis the Place of Bofchene ; qubair ye wes reflett be Johne Ogil vie, feruand to the
Maifler of Ogilvie, and be yow tbe faid James Wod, fear of Boningtoune, haifing borrowit tbe faid
Place of Bofchene to that purpois : And vpoun the Thurifday thaireftir, being tbe xix day of this
inllant, ye thifteouflie tranfportit and convoyit tbe faidis euidentis, writtis and plenneilfing, fra the faid
Place of Bofcben to the Place of Incbture ; qidjair ye the faid James Wod, be your felff, and vtbeiis
of your cauling, refPett llie famin : And fwa, ye and alber of yow ar art and pairt of the tliifteous breking of tbe faid Place of Boningtoune, and of tbe treflbnabill and thifteous fteiling, conceling, awaytaking and ftouth-reift', furth thairof, of tbe plenneiffing, writtis and euidentis aboue writtin, pertening
to tbe faid Patrik Wod of Boningtoune, fader to yow tbe faid James, and to tbe faid Lady Vfane ;
and of the reflett thairof: Of tbe qubilkis crymes, ye, being landit gcntilnien, and being ordourlie and
laucbfullie convict, ye and atber of yow bes incurrit tbe cryme and pane of Treifouae, viz. tinfall' of
lyffe, landis and guidis : To tbe takin* that ye and ather of yow ar airt and pairt of the faidis crymes,
ye baif confeft tbe famin be your Depofitiounis ; as the famin, fubfcryuit be your bandis, beris.

The famiii day, the Laird of Latoune, efter reding of the Dittay produceit be
the Aduocat, declarit that he wald becum in the Kingis Maiefleis AVill for the
famin : Quhairvpoun the faid Mr Thomas Hammiltoun aflcit inftrumentis.

The parteis, requiring that this mater mycht continew to the morne, THE
Justice repellis, and ordanis proces.

The preloqnitouris for James Wod defyrit that thay may haif licence to propone dech"natouris aganis ony Affeflbur that he fall Ipeir att. — It is alledgeit be
the faid James Wod and his preloquutouris, that na jiroces can be led aganis the
faid James ; becaus he is challangeit vpoun crymes of TrelToune, and that he is
nocht fummond vpoun fourtie dayes, to vnderly the law for the faid cryme,
quhilk audit to be ; in refpect he is natlier tane in flagranti crimine, nor putt

' Stancbpon. * Tbe window of a low vault or cellar. ' Chests. '' The presence

chamber, or room of state. Properly speaking, it is that part of a hall wbicli was raised higher tiian
tbe rest ; tbe place of honour. ' Chawmer o dais is still used to signify a parlour, in remote parts ot
the country. ^ Table-cloths. Servets, towels, or table napkins. Loss ; from the

verb to fpie, or lose. ^ In token, evidence, or proof.

342 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

to the home. To the qiihilk it is aiifuerit, that it is nocht necefTai' to warn him

■5-poun fourtie dayes, becaus he is acciifat of TrelToune, and brocht fra tlie Kingis
waird to the bar.

The Justice ffindis proces, and repellis the alledgeance ; qiihair\-poun my
Lord Aduocat afl\it inftrumentis.

It is alledgeit, that the Dittay is nawyis relevant, becaiis it is difconforme to
the Act of Parliament ; becaus the Act of Parliament is anent commoun thift,
reflett of thift, or llouth-reiff ; and trew it is, that the propofitioun of the Dittay
is nocht fa fett doiin, but only vpoun funpill thift ; qiihair that the wordis of
the Act of Parliament is extendit only to commoune thift, commoun reflett,
commoun ftouth and reifF. — The Aduocat anfueris, that the alledgeance audit to
be repellit, in refpect of the Actis of Parliament and Dittay ; fpeciallie, feing
thair is na thing obiectit aganis the tua poyntis of Dittay, anentis the reflett of
thift and fl;outh-reiff, quhilkis ar baith feuerallie (feparately) releuant. — It is
anfuerit be tlie defender, that thay wordis of the Act of Parliament, anent reflett
of tliift, ftouth-reiff, man {nnijt) be eiiifdem nature with thift ; that is to faj',
commoun thift : And forder, the haill ftrenth of this Dittay, fa far as is c^ualefeit aganis Bonningtoune, is qiialefeit ^-poun the alledgeit actuall deid of thift,
alledgeit committit be him, quhilk of all neceflitie man be, be the Act of Parliament, commoune. — The Aduocat anfueris, tliat the wordis of the Act of Parliament ar confauit dif , and ewerie poynt thairof is relevant, lyke as the

pannell is perfewit for the thift, reflett of thift and ftouth-reiff. — It is anfuerit be
the pannell, that that word ' commoun' is vnderftand to be repetit in ewerie pairt
of the dif . . . . ; and as fimpill thift is nocht Treflbune, luulto iidnus is fimpill
reflett or fimpill ftouth-reiff, Treafoune ; for thay man be eiufdem nature. — The
Aduocat alledgis, that the faid alledgeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the
wordis of the Act of Parliament.

(2.) Forder, it is alledgeit be the defender, that the Dittay is nocht relevant,
becaus it condifcendis nocht quhat landis the excijiient lies ; for, without it wer
fpeciallie condifcendit vpoun, the Dittay can nawyis be relevant to infer Treffoune ; And forder, gif the Aduocat Avald condilcend, we mycht and wald allege,
that gif onj^ Infeftment the defender had of thay landis, he wes, lang before the
alledgeit committing of the cryme lybellit, denudit of thais landis, be Decreit of
Redemptioun obtenit att the inftance of liis fader ; and we declair that the alledo^eance is only proponit to elide that pairt of the lybell concerning Treflbmae ; vnder
proteftatioun, that he nawyis grantis the cryme lybellit. — The Aduocat anfueris,
that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay ; ffor gif he
haif land, the concliifioune anent the Treflbune ftandis relevant ; and gif he want
land, the reft of the Dittay will tak his lyffe and all his gudis.— It is anfuerit.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 343

that my Lord Aduocat man fay pnfitiue, tliat he is landit, and condifcend quhat
land he hes ; ffor it man be lybellit and cognofcit be AfTyife, qiihidder he be ane
laudit gentihnan or nocht ; and ane prefumptioun can nocht be put to ane AfTyife,
hot {withoitl) ane affirniationn and ane fpeciall condifcending vjjonn quhat land
he hes ; and the paxtie man be hard, to propone his defenffis aganis the famin, —
The Aduocat repetis his former anfuer.

(3.) Fordei', of all necefiitie, the Aduocat man condifcend vpoun the names of the
landiSjbecaus gif he wald condifcend, that fame condifcending wald be ane fufficient
exceptioun to the defender, to purge him of the haill Dittay ; be reafoun that the
euidentis, alledgeit lloUin, M'ill be fund to be the euidentis of the landis quhairof
he falbe condifceiidit to be heretour ; and fwa, can nawyis be thift ; for ane man
can newir be callit and convict of thift, for lleilling of his proper guidis ; that is
contrar to the definitioun of thift, quhilk is contreciatlo rei cdiene, invito domino.
— The Aduocat repetis his former anfuer and the Dittay.

(4.) Item, it is allegeit that the Dittay is nocht relevant, in refpect that it
condifcendis nocht, quhat euidentis and of quhat landis thay ar of; quhilk man
be condifcendit vpoun, in refpect the defender wald fufficientlie purge the haill
Dittay and away-taking thairof, be fchawing that the faidis euidentis wer his
awin proper euidentis. — The Aduocat repetis the Dittay for anfuer.

(5.) Item, it is forder allegeit, that this Dittay can nocht be putt to the knawledge of ane Aflyfe, becaus it man reflaue ane Ciuile precognitioune, quhilk is

nocht ' . — The Aduocat anfueris, that thair is na Ciuilitie in Treffoun, and the allegeance mereitis na anfuer. — The defender fayis, he will fay ua
mare at this tyme.

(6.) Item, anent the feruiettis, non relevaf, et ejlres parvi momenti ; and jae/-

Jii can work na thing.

Interlocutor of Relevanaj. The Juftice ffindis the Dittay relevant ; and remittis the famin to
the tryell of ane Inqueift, nochtwithftaniling of the haill alledgeances aboue writtin, proponit for the
pannell ; and to be verefeit to the Inqueift, as accordis.

Vpoun the quhilk Interloquutour, the Aduocat afkit inftrumentis.

AssisA.
Sir Patrick Creychtoun of Mr Patrik Balfoure of Pitcullocht, Johne Mathefouiie of Brochtoune,

Strathuird, Andro Paterfoune of Leuchrie, Clement Kyncaid of tlie Coittis,

Patrik Hepburne of Riccartoune, James Richefoune of Smetoune, Alexander Fairlie of Braid,
Patrik Levingtoune of Saltcoittis, Johne Houftoune of Lany, Patrik Johneftonne of ElphingGeorge Lyle of Stanypeth, Johne Faiihe of Comeiftoune, ftoune.

Mr Patrik Hepburneof Smetoune, Williame Congiltoiine of that Ilk,

The Aduocat afkit inftrumentis of the fwering of the Affyfe ; and that my
Lord Juftice will nocht reffaue the Laird of Latoune in will ; hot will put him to
ane Affyfe. The Aduocat (alfo) afkit inftrumentis of the reding of the Dittay to

' Left blank.

344 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A-D. 1601.

the Affyfe ; and of the productioun of the Act of Parliament ; and of the productioun of the foure Depofitiounis, maid and fubfcryuit be the pannell ; beirand
the liaill contentis of the Dittay.

The Defender acceptis the Diltay, the haill verificatiounis and Judgeis Interloqmitour, and repetis the haill allegeancis proponit ofbefore, to be cognofcit be
the AfTyfe ; And alledgis, to the Aflyis, that feing the Act of Parliament is ane
pairt of the Dittay, and the fnndament and ground of the famin ; and feing, the
haill Dittay and verificatioun confiftis vpoun thift ; in caife the Aflyiefind nocht
the pannell giltie of Comraoune Thift, protellis, that he be chargeit of the faid
Dittay and Act of Parliament ; and ane cryme or jjoynt of Thift, of the laAV
and practik of this realme, man newir be eftemit Commoun Thift ; and ane perfoune can newir be con\'ict of Commoun Thift, for ony ane alledgeit poynt or
cryme ; ftbr he, of the law and practik of the realme, is eftemit ane Commoun
theif, quha is convict of thre feuerall poynlis and crymis of Thift ; quhilk is
nather qualefeit in the Dittay nor verifeit. And forder, the Defender takis inftrumentis, that thair is na thing produceit to verifie him to be ane landit gentleman ; and thairfore, of all neceffitie, man be clangeit of all poyntis of Treffoune ; ffor except it had been relevautlie qvialifeit in the Dittay, and llifficientlie
inftructit, that the Defender wer ane landit gentilman, Treflbune could nather
be inferrit nor concludit vpoun that dittay. Forder, the defender alledgis, that
the remanent of the crymes conteuit in the faid Dittay, for the alledgit awaytaking of the euidcntis and the Confeflioun maid be him of the famin, is na cryme
of Thift ; haifand confideratioun, that the euidentis is confefTit to appertene to
his fadei", to quhome he is eldeft fone and apperaud air ; and the away-taking of
liis faderis euidentis, can newir import Thift ; haifing confideratioun, that his
fader, quhom-l'ra the euidentis is alledgeit tane, is na perfewar nor complenar ;
and thair is na actioune that can be compitent for the awaytaking thairof, bot'
only ane fimple actioun of fpuil5ie ; ffor that wer ane dangerous preparatiue^ to
the haill realme of Scotland, tliat quhen ane fone offendis his fader, ather be alledgeit away-taking of his euidentis, horfe or vther graith, the fader newir complenand nor fyndand fait with the doing of the faid deid, that the committeris
falbe convict of Treffoun or Thift, at the Aduocatis inftance.

To the quhilk, it is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that the Affyle aucht nawyis (to)
refpect the alledgeance proponit, in fafar as this Dittay is confauit aganis William "\A'od of Latoune ; becaus he nather proponis nor adheris to itt, hot lies ratifeit his Depofitiounis, and hes becuin in his Maiefteis will, for the haill poyntis
of the Dittay; in refpect quhairof, in cais the AlTyis onywyis clange,' proteftis
for Wilful erroiu". And in fafar as the alledgeance is proponit for Boningtoune,
' Unless, excepting. * Precedent, esample. ^ Cleanse, or acquit.

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 345

the fyrfl pairt, anent the Commoune Thift, iiawyis concernis the AfTyis, hot the
dittay fouiulit vpoun the Thift, RefTett of Thift and Stouthreiff, fpeciallie fett
doun in the Dittay, in ewerie Ipeciall poynt thairof, is fund relevant be my Lord
Juftice ; and the confideratioun of the relevancie of the famin, only jiei-tenis to
the Judge, and nawyis to the Aflyis, quhais dewtie is only to try, declair and
determine, gif the fact and deid contenit in the Dittay to half bene done and
committit be the Pannell ; and gif thay be giltie thairof, thair giltienes of the
quhilk Dittay being manifeft, be thair awin Depofitiounis, llibfcryuit with thair
handis and red in thair prefens before the Aflyis, thay nor nane of thame can
pretend ony ignorance thairof : And quhair it is alledgeit, that it is nocht verifeit
that the faid James Wod is ane landit gentilman, that aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the notorietie that he is eldeft fone and apperand air to the Laird of
Boningtoune, and fear of the laid lewing ; as his liibfcriptioun of his awin Depofitioun, produceit, beris : Nether is it necefTar that the Aduocat, jierfewand
for his Maiefteis interes, fal verifie, be writt or productioun of the iiannellis euidentis, that he is ane landit gentilman ; quhilk wer impoffibill, the writtis being
in the defenderis awin handis ; quhilk, jjofliblie, can nocht be prefumit to be
habill to be recoverit be the perfewar ; hot in crymes of Treflbun, fyve yeiris
poflTeffioun of heretage, be the rebel], is loco tittd't, and niakis the rebell to be
repute to haif bene heretabill proprietor of the faidis landis, and the lieretabill
lycht of the famin to befall to the King, be fforfaltour. And it is of veritie, that
the defender lies pofTeft the Landis of Birnie, as heretabill proprietour thairof,
be the fpace foirfaid : in ref2)ect of the notorietie quhairof, and of his awin affirmatioune foirfaid, it being manifeft and notour that he is ane landit gentilman,
and that he lies committit the haill crymes contenit in the dittay, as is cleirlie
verifeit be the Depofitiounis produceit, and Latounis Confeffioun, and becuniing
in will ; in caife that the Affyfe clange him of ony of the pointis libellit, proteftis for WilfuU errour aganis the faid AlTyfouris, and all payne that can follow
thairvpoune. As to the laft pairt of the alledgeance, that the fader, to quhorae
the euidentis and geir pertenis, perfewis nocht, and that the fact is committit be
his eldeft fone and apperand air ; anfueris, that albeit the partie grewit keipis
fylence and jierfew nocht, the Aduocat lies fufficient interes, be exprefs Act of
Parliament, to perfew all crymes, without concurrence of the partie : Lykeas,
the perfewar accejitis that jiairt of the alledgeance, that the deid contenit in the
Dittay is committit be the Laird of Boningtounis eldeft fone, quhilk beris ane
judiciall Confeffioun of the treflbnabill fact contenit in the Dittay, and fand be
interloquutour of the Judge to be ane trelfonabill cryme.

It is anfuerit, that the Dittay and ewerie held thairof aucht to be verifeit ; and
quhair it is alledgeit, that he man be prefewmit ane landit gentilman, becaus he

VOL. II. 2 X

3i6 CRIMIXAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

fubfciyves ' ffear of Boningtoun,' that argviment can work na thing, becaus na
thino- can mak ane man flear, hot Chartour and leafing ; and forder, gif that may
verifie, erg'o, it is confell be the perfewar, that the euidentis tane away ar the
defenderis awin projier rychtis, and fa can nocht be Thift : As to the Act of
Parliament, the faniin militatis na thing in this caice, ftor in the caice of the
Act of Parliament, it is the crynie that makis the man tratour ; and this cryme
jje , etjua naiiira is na Trellbun, except it be coinmittit be aue laudit gentiU
man ; quhilk man {must) be verifeit.

Verdict of the Afflfe.

QuHiLKis perfounis of Affyis, being chofin, and the faid James Wod, fear of Boningtoun, and
WiLLiA^r Wod of Latoune, being accufit oppinlie in judgment, be reding of Jie faid Dittay, &c., tliay
removit altoiridder furtli of Court, to the Counfal lious of the laid Tolbuith ; quhair thay, being convenit, electit and chule the laid James llychardfoune of Smetoune Chancillar, and realonit and votit
vpoun the poyntis of the faid Dittay ; and efter lang deliberatioun, being tiirowchlie auifit thairwitb,
thay reenterit agane in Court, and thair, be the mouth of tlie faid James Rychardfoune Chancillar, all
in ane voce, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid WiUame Wod of Latoune to be ftylit, culpabill and
convict of the Dittay aboue writtin, and haill crymes thairin contenit ; in refpect of his Depofuiounis,
aiul that he become in his Maiefleis Will thairf ore : And als, the faid perfounes of Affyfe, for the mailt
pairt, be the mouth of the faid James Rychardfoun of Snietoun Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and
declarit the faid James Wod, ffear of Boningtoun (as flear of Boningtoun, quhilk he confell to, be his
awin fubfcriptioune at his Depofuiounis) to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the
thifteous brcUing of the Place of Boningtoune, entering tliairin perforce, aecumpaneit with the perfounes
contenit in the faid Dittay, and of opning of the haill duris and lokis of all the kiftis within the faid
Place ; and fpeciallie, of the Chartour-kifl, ftanding in the chalmer of daice of the faid Place, pertening
to Patrik Wod of Boningtoun his fader ; and of the thifteous lleilling, conceling, ftouthfuUie reifing,
reifettiug and away-taking furth of the laid kill of the haill euidentis being thairin, and findrie vther
■writtis furth of ane vther kill. Handing within the galrie of the faid place ; and opning of the haill
remanent cofferis and kiftis being within the faid place ; and of the thifteous fteilling, ftouthfullie
reifing, reffetting and away-taking furth thairof, of nyne pair of fcheitis, foure burdclatliis, twa dofone
and twa feruiettis, ane pair of blankettis of fufteane, and ane piece of \Tibleachit linning claitli, pertening
to the auld Laird of Boningtoune ; and of ane coffer with euidentis, pertening to the Lady Vfane ; committit vpoun the xvj day of March inftant, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht.

' Hary Ste^'art of Craigiehall and George Dowglas of Langnudrie, amerciat
in ])epaneof ane hundreth markis' each ; for not appearing ' to haif pad vpoun

the faid AlTyfe.'

Sektence. Apr. 1. The quhilk day, James Won, fear of Boningtoune, and Williame Wod
of Latoune, being prefentit on pannell, to heir and lie dome pronunceit aganis thame, as thay that war
lawfuUie and ordourlie convict and fund guiltie, be ane Aliyis, in ane Court of Jufticiarie, haldin in the
Tolbuith of Edr the laft day of Marche laftbypafl, be the faid Jultice-depute, of airt and pairt of the
thifteous breking of the place of Boningtoune, &c. as at lenth is contenit in thair Convictionis : Tbairfoir,
the faid Juftice-Depute, according to the tennour of the Act of Parliament, lies fund, be the Convictioune of the faid James Wod, as feare of Boningtoune, and the faid Williame Wod of Latoune, be ane
Aflyis, of the crymes of thift foirfaidis, tliat thay and ather of thame hes incurrit the cryme and pane
of Treflbune, viz. tynfall of lyfl'e, landis and guidis : ffor the quhilk caufe, he, be the mouth of Robert

34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

347

Gall)iaitli, denipftar of Coiirt, lies Ordanit and Ordanis thame and atlier of tliame to be tane to ane
■gibbet, ftandand be-eiil the niercat-croce of Ed\ and tliairvpoune to be bangit, quhill tliay be deid :'
And all tliair landis, licritageis, takis, fleddingis, rowmes, polleflioai.s coirnis, cattell, giiidis and geir
to be forfaltit and inbrocbt to our foiieiane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes,'

[31r Wdliame Bortlmile, Jujlice-Dcpnte.']

^•rcaj^iiirj into i\)t IJIart of I'onnincitciun-^^tealincrCitle Ectiig, ^t,

Apr. 3. — Thomas Daw, fmyth in Brechin, and Alexander Daw, fmytb,
his brother, in Correftoune.

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the thifteous Steiling, conceling, reffetting and awaytaking of certain euidentis and writtis, with pleneiffing, furth of the Place of
Bonningtoun ;3 with certane pleneiffing, fcheittis, blankettis and buirdclathis ; and
ane coffer, -with writtis, pertening to the Lady Vlane.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the Confeffioune of the pannell, of thair
being at breking of the Place of Boningtoune ; and that Thomas Daw gat thre
crownis, and Alexander Daw gat ane croiine, for thair panis : And protefting, gif
the AfTyis clenge, for Wilfull errour : Repeittis lykewyis the Dejiofitionis of Latoune and Boningtoune ; quhilkis ar produceit to the Affiyis.

Verdict. The Aflyis,'' be the mouth of Thomas Somervell, merchand in
Ed', chancellar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faidis Thomas Daw and Alex'
Daw to be flfylit, cidpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the thifteous fteling,
conceling, refletting and away-taking of the faidis writtis and euidentis, &c.

May 7. — The Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Robert Galbraith, Dempftar, ordanit the laid Alexander Daw to be tane to the gibbet on the Caftlehill, and thairA'poun to be hangit^ cpdiill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis
to be efcheit and inbrocbt to our Ibuerane lordis vfe, as Convict of the faidis
crymes.

^ It is probable that great interest was made for tlie young Laird of Bonningtoun. The sentence
was not carried into execution till Apr. 27 ; under which date, Robert Birrell records as follows : —
' James Wood of Bonnytoun biheidit at the crofle, at (J houres in the niorneing, for breaking tlie Place
of Bonnytoun, quhilk appartenit to lies father, and I'ould haif beine hes awen.'

^ Since the above was written, the Editor has found the following interesting notice : — ' Upon Mounday Jie 27 of Aprile (1601), the Laird of Bonytoun was beheaded at fe Crofle of Edinburgh,
betwixt fix and fevin in the morning, be a Comniiffion from the King, directed to Jie Bailliftes of
Edinburgh, tymoufly in the morning ; for howbeit great inlercefllon was made be Iluiitly, Erroll,
Hume, and ojieris, yett ))e Minilters were inltant with the King, to have a proofe of his fincerity. He
died ane obfl.inat Papitt, ever looking for pardon till the lall gafp. He pretended he I'uffered for the
Roman Catholic Religion, but it was noe point of his Dyttay; only the Heeling of his father's evidences and writtes was layed to iiis charge. Latoun gatt Reniiffion, be Jie inoyen of Courtearis.' —
CalderwoocT s Church Hist. MS. Adv. Library. ' In an abstract of their Dittay, which is inserted,
it is stated, that they, ' accumpaneit with the Wodis,' &c. ' vnder fylence and cloude of nyclit, come to
fe Place of Boningtoune, and Jiair thifteouflie dam ye barneki/n wall with ane ladder,' &c. ■* Composed of ' merchandis' and ' burgeflis' of Edinburgh. ^ Birrell says, ' The 7 of Maij tua men wer
hangit on the Caftell Hill, the ane callit Williame Crichtoun, for tliift ; and the nther, Alexander
Smythe, dager-maker, for opining of the lockis to the Laird of Bonytoun,'

348 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

^n-jui-ij — 5®eavin(r of iHass, ^c.

Apr. 2t. — Mr Williame Bahclav, brother to Su* Patrik Barclay of
Towie, (Tollie) knycht.

Dilatlt of Periurie ; and Heiring of Mefs, contrair the Actis of Parliament.

Comperit Dauid Hairt, ieruitour to my lord Thefaurer, and produceit the
lettres deulie execute and indorfat, purcheft be Mr Thomas Hammiltoune, his
hienes aduocat, aganis INIr Williame Barclay, for the crymes within conteuit.
* Coutinewit in eras.'

[Mr Williame Hairt, Jnjlice-Depute.']
Apr. 25. — D ITT AY. That qulia'r, it is exprtflie provydit, ftatute and declarit, be Act of Parliament, maid in the tyme of his hienes denell mother, vmq'"^ Marie Quene of Scottis, that the panis of
Periuirie falhe to the perfonis committeris tliairof, confifcatioune of all thair guidis movabill, wairding
of thair perfonis for yeir and day, and langer, induring hir Maiefteis will ; and to be infamous perfonis,
never abill to bniik office, honour, dignitie nor benifice, in tyme to cum : And als, it is ftatute and
ordanit, be Act of Parliament, maid in his hienes Parliament, lialdin and begun at Ed' the viij day of
.lunij the yeir of God J™.VMxxxxiiij yeiris, that in all tyme cuming, all Wilfull Heraris of Mefs, and
conceillaris of the famyn, be execute to the death ; and thair guidis and geir efcheit to our fouerane
lordis vfe, fa lone as thay fall be fund gyltie and convict tliairof, or declarit fugitiue for the famyn,
befoir the Juftice-generall and his deputtis, or the lordis of his hienes Privie Counfale ; as the faidis
Actis, at mair lentil beris. And trew it is, that the faid Mr Williame Barclay, haifing, in femoneth of

laftby|iaft, fworne and fubfcryuit befoir the Prelljyterie of Ed"^ that he wes of the Religioune

prelentlie profell within this realme ; nochtwithrtanding thairof, vpoun the xx and xxj dayes of Marche
lallbypaft, lie afliftit and hard twa Meflis, quhilkis war faid be M'' Alex' MQuhirrie, ane Jefueit
Preill, within Andro Naperis duelling houle in Ed'; be the heiring quhairof, and aflifting thairto, he
hes profeft and fn'orne the contrair Religioune; and fua, lies committit the cryme of Periurie, and
incurrit the pane thairof abouewrittin, contenit in the faid Act of Parliament : Lyke as, he, be the
wilfull heiring of Jie faidis twa feuerall raeifis, at the twa feuerall tymes refpective abouewrittin, hes
incuiTit the panis contenit in the vther Act of Parliament, maid anent Wilfull heraris of Mefs, viz. the
pane of death and confilcatioune of all thair movabill guidis.

The faid Mr Williame refufit to abyde the try ell of ane AfTyis ; bot become
in his Maiefteis Will for the famyn crymes : Quhairvjjoune the faid Mr Thomas
Hammiltoune afkit Actis and inftrumentis.

[_Mr Williame Borihuik, Jiijlice-Depute.'\
May 2. — The faid Juftice-dei)ute produceit his ]\Iaiefteis Warrand, concerning his hienes Will ; qiihilk he jironunceit and opjiinlie red in jugement ;
quhairof the tennour followis.

James, be ])e grace of God, King of Scottis. To our Jullice, Jullice Clark and his deputis, greting;
fforfamekill as Mr Williame Barclay, bro))' to ])e Laird of Towie, is becum in our will, in ane Juftice
Court, haldin in our Tolbuitli of Ed', vpoune Jie xxv day of Apryle laftbypaft, for Periurie, and hering
of Mefs, contrair ])e tennour of our Actis of Parliament : Thairfoir, We declair our will, as followis, to
wit : ffor fe Periurie, W'e ordane fe faid Mr Williame to be declarit Infamous, and nocht habill, now, to
bruik office, honour, dignitie or benefice, within our realme : And for )ie hering of Mefs, we decerne
and ordaine him to be Baneill our realme, during all fe dayis of his lyftime, and never to returne
within pe famyn, vnlefs, be fatisfactioone of fe Kirk, he obtene our fpeciall Licence to pat eflFect ; vn34 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 349

der fe pane of deid : And tliat lie remoue or depairt furlli of our realme, within fourtie dayis nixt after
Lis libertie furth of liig prefent waiid. Commanding, lieiifoir, 50W, our faid Juftice, Juftice Clark and
30ur deputtis, to pronunce and deliuer]>is our will, iudicialiie, aganis fe faid iSIr Wiilianie ; And faireftir, caufe commit him to waird agane, within our Caftell of Ed', pair to remane quliill the forder knawledge of our will and plefour towardis him. As 56 will anfuer to ws fairvpoune : Quhairanent fir
prefentis falbe jOur Warrand. Subfcriuit witli our hand, At Dalkeith, the laft day of Apryle, and of
our regne Jie xxxiiij 3eir, 1601. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

QuliiUv being oppinlie red and declarit in judgment, the Juftice-depiite interI)onit his authoritie thairto.

[J//- WiUiame Haerf, Jujllce-Depnte.']

Apr. 25. — Archebald Coiinuall, ane of the tonne officiaris of Edinburghe.

[The following Trial is perhaps unparalleled in the Annals of Criminal Jurisprudence, in any country ; and cannot be read without exciting feelings of the utmost disgust and indignation, at the coldhearted and vindictive, nay, sanguinary spirit, which dictated the pronouncing and carrying into execution of so awful a sentence, for an offence of so tiivial a nature, probably originating in pure accident or
inadvertency, or at most in a foolish jest of tlie officer, who would, no doubt, for his own interest, as
well as that of his employer, in making a sale, endeavour to dispose of thepi cture to the best advantage. The Dittay only accused him of ' pre<JJin(] to half hung the fame' upon the gallows ; but that
he was prevented from doing so by llie people.

It is evident that the King instigated these disgraceful proceedings; and it is equally certain, that the
unhappy victim of this most tyrannical act suffered death accordingly. The ' Afiife' bears all the
marks of a selected ' fet of wortldefs and plucklefs wretches.' No less than eight of their number are
Tailors, who have at no time been fanied for extraordinary firmness or independence. The veracious
Robert Birrel gives the following account of the matter. ' The fame day (Apr. 27), Archibald Cornell,
toune officer, Langit at the Croffe, and hung on the gallows 24 houres : And the cans quhairfore he
wes hangit : he being an unmerecifnl, greidie creatur, he poyndit ane honell manis hous, and amongft
the reft, he poyndit the King and Queins picturis ; and quhen he came to the croffe to compryfe the
fame, he hung tharae up upone twa naillis on the fame gallows, to be conipryfit ; and thai being fene,
word 3ead to the King andQueine, quhairupone he wes apprehendit and hangit.' If Birrell is correct
with regard to date, (which it would appear he is,) it makes the matter still worse, so far as the King
is concerned; for it puts violent and sudden rage out of the question. The ' trefibnabill fact' took
place upon the 15th day of April ; so that the trial, condemnation, and execution must have proceeded
on cruel, deliberate, and malicious determination : The proceedings before the Justiciar are dated
Apr. 25 ; and the poor town officer did not suffer death till Apr. 27.

Unfortunately for the character of King James VI. this is by no means a solitary instance, — witness
the Cases of Johne Dicksoun, in Lyne, Aug. 3, 1596 ; Francis Tennent, Oct. 10, 1600 ; Thomas
Ross, son of Ross of Craigie, in 1618 (executed Sept. 10), and many others. Another very remarkable instance of the arbitrary and despotic character of James, in the month of October the same yeai-,
ia given in the new and accurate edition of Lord Hailcs' Annals, Svo, Edinburgh, 1829, Vol. iii. p. lOG,
and which is reprinted here, in illustration of the above remarks. The object of this latter act of
tyranny is abundantly clear. Mr Peter Name was a victim offered up to the English nation, at a time
when the King was plotting with Cecil, &c. to secure his succession to the throne of Elizabeth ; as a
foretaste, doubtless, of the protection he would afford them against every encroachment of his Scotish
subjects. There is no doubt that tins unfortunate man suffered, for his supposed intention to murder;

350 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

as the torture was directed to be used, till lie should confess ; and then the Judge was directed to
pronounce sentence of death I

So extraordinary is this Case of Archibald Cornwall, in all its hearings, that the Editor deemed it
requisite to investigate the matter, as minutely as his opportunities permitted. The result of these
inquiries are appended, and left to the reader's consideration, without farther observations.]

Dilatit of tlie ignominious Diflionouring and Defaming of his ]Maieftie, in
taking of his Portratour, and laying of the famyn and fetting thairof to the
ftowiiis and Ai^beraris of the gibbet, preiffing to hing vp the fam\ni thail•^-poune.
Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoun, Aduocat to our Souerane Lorde.

AssiSA.
Patrick Acarfane, wrytter, Johne Blak, tail3eour thair, Edmond Smyth, tail5eour (' in

Williame Tail; eour, deacon of the Johne Home, fruitman in Ed', the Cannogait,')

tail^eouris in the Cannogait, Johne Pillons, cordiner thair, James Sympfoun, tail5eour tliair,
Johne Rankene, tail^eour, burges James Aikman, tail^eour tliair, Williame Bauchop, wryter thair,

of Ediuburghe, Dauid Bennet, tail3eour thair, Alexander Lyell, Ikyner thair,

Patrick Somervell, burges thair, Adarae Carketlill, tai]5eour thair, Patrik M^Gregour, fruitman.

The Aduocat takis inftnimentis of the Admiffioune and fwering of the AfTyis.

The Aduocat proteftis for Wilful Erroiir, in cafe they acquitt ; in refpect of
the notorietie of the deid, knawin to thamefelffis.

The qidiilk day, Archibald Corneiiall, ane of the toune officeris of Edinbvu-ghe,
being enterit on pannell, dilatit, acciifit and perfewit, be dittay, prodiiceit be Mr
Thomas Hammiltonne of Driuncarne, adnocat to our foiierane lord, for the treffonabill and ignominious dillionoiuung and defaming, fa far as in him lay, of our
louerane lord the Kingis Maieftie, be taking of his hienes portratoiu' to the publict mercat place of this biu'ghe, and thair fchamefuUie and wyildlie {vilely) fetting the famj'n to the ftowpis and •v'jibereris of the gibbit ; and in mair, and manifell and trefTonabill contem2)t and difdane of his Maieftie, he ftuid y^ vpoune
ane buird or furme, belyde the faid gibbet, and cald ane naill thairin, fa heich as
he culd reiche it, and liftit vj) his hienes portratour foirfaid, and held the famyn
vpoun the gibbet, preifRng to half hung the famjni thairon, and to haif left it
thair, as ane ignominioiis fpectacle to the haill world ; gif he had noclit bene
ftayit, be the juft indignatioune of the haill people, minafting to ftane him to
deid, and pulling him perforce fra the faid gibbet, to ftay his treflbuabill fact
foirfaid ; committit be him, vpoune the xv day of Apryle inftant.

^'eedict. The Aftjas, be the mouth of the faid Johne Rankene, chancillar,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit, for the maift pairt, tlie faid Archebald Corne-
■\\all to be fylit, culpa1)ill and convict of the trelTonabill fetting of his Maiefteis
portract to the tramme of the gibbet ; and prefenting of the famin, to be hung
heich vpoun ane nail infixt in the faid gibbet.

Sentence. For the quhilk caufe, the faid Juftice-depxite, be the mouth of
Robert Galbraith, dempftar of the faid Court, decernit and ordanit the faid Archebald Corneuall to forfalt lyffe, lands and guidis, and to be tane to the faid

S-IJac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 35X

gibbet, qiihairvpoune he preiffit to hing bis Maiefteis portratour, and thairon to
be bangit quhill be be deid ; and to liing thairvpovm, be the fpace of xxiiij
houris, with ane paper on his foirheid, contening that ^yild cryme committit
be him.

(1.) Narrative falenfrom IVodrow's MSS.^

In the faid moneth of Apiile (1601), one of the officeris of Ed', havuig rowping at the Croce of
Ed'' certane poindit geir, amang the quhilk the Kingis picture wes ; and to the effect that the bred*
and picture micht be the better fene (the officeris ftand being hard befyde the gibbet) vndifcretlie and
rafciielie the officer wes, calling' in anenaill in tlie gibbett, to haue hung vp the bred, as wes reportit,
and yit hang not vp the famin, bot ceiffit, being admonifchet be fura of the pepill Handing by, that it
wes not Weill done to put vp ony nail! to the effect foirfaid : AUwyfe, vpoun the faid prefiuiiptiouir,
the officer wes challengit and ])ut in wairde, witliin tlie tolbuith : And the Kingis Maiellie, beins informit thairof, caulit examine certane witnefles tliairvpoun ; and thairefter tlie laid Officer wes put to
ane Affyfe, and convict vpoun the faid prefuniptioun; and dome gevin vpoun him, to be liangit xxiiij
houris, with ane paper on his foirlieid, declairing tlie faid caus. Lyke as, he wes fua done with, vpoun
tlie faid xxvij of Aprile, about fax houris at evin ; and fufferit to hing on the gibbet quhill the nixt dav,
at evin, at the fame time ; And thaireftir, the gibbet wes takin doun and brunt with fyre.

(2.) Account tahenfrom CalderwooiVs MS. Church Histonj.

Apr. 27, 1601. — Upon the fame Mounday, at fex homes at even, ane Officer of Edhiburgh, named
Archibald Cornwall, was hanged upon a gibbet, at ])e Croffe of EcK. At ])e rouping of fome poynded
gear, at pe Crofle of Edinburgh, finding a broad wherein was the King's picture, and Handing hard befide the gibbett, undifcreitly and rallily was driveing in a nail in the gibbett to liing up the board, as
was reported : but being admonillied by foine of fe people Handing by, he ceafed and hanged it not
up : Alwayes, upon the fame prefumption, he was putt in waird, in the jayle. The King, being informed, caufed examine certaine witnefles ; and thereafter, he was putt to ane Affife, convicted and
condemned to be hanged, and to hing twentie four houres, with a paper on his forehead : which ^vas
done ; and thairefter the gibbett was taken down and burnt with fire.

(3.) ExTiiACTS_^-o;« THE RECORDS of the Town Council of tvl'e City of

Edixburgh.

Apr. 17, 1601. — For the honour and reverence thai aught to ourfoueian lord, his darreft fpous and
children ; Statutes and ordanis, that nane of thair Maiefteis and graceis pictures and portraits be
poyndit, I'owppet or compryfet, for ony maner of caus, publictlie or piivatlie, heirefter : Difchargeing
thair officeris and feriandis of the fani and of thair offices in that pairt, vnder the payne of tyufall of
thair faid offices, and wairding of thair perfounis for the fpaice of twenty dayes.

(Apr. 22.) — Tlie Bailleis, deyne of gild, thefaurer, and maift pairt of the Counfall being convenit,
appoyntis George Todrig baillie, Danid Williainfoun and Patrik Sandelandis, to pas to his Maiellie,
prefentlie at Dalkeyth, and to inform his Maieftie of the trewth, anent the offence confauet be his Maiellie aganis Archebald Cornuell, officer, for the allegeit hinging of his Maieftie and fpous picture at
the gibbet, in ane rowping.

(May 1.) — Thomas Hammiltoun appointed in place of ' vmq'^ Ar'' Cornuell.'

(4.) Commission OF Justiciary to Robert LorclqfItoxhu?-gh,forthe Torture, Trial and Execution of Mr Peter Name.
James, be the grace of God, King of Scottis; To all and findrie our lieges and fubditis, quhomi Wodrow's MSS. Adv. Library, Edinburgh, Vol. IX. Rob. III. 2, 9. ^ Board ; a painting on
panel. ' Driving.

352 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

ever it effeiris, to quhais knawlege tliir our letters fall come, greeting. Forsamekle as Mr Peter

Narxe, haTein? niaift tiaiteiouflie devifit and confpyiit the INIuitlier and delhuition of

Engliftimen ; and for exccutioune of this vyld and abhominahle fact, haveing trained thame within oure
realme, proniilTing unto thame to get thame advancen in credits and lervice with us ; and haveing
brocht thame to the town of Kelfo, he thair refolvit to have acconiplilhen his faid vyld Murther; and
being in the actual executioun, lie was, be the providence of God, ftayed, the puir innocent ftrangearis
relevit, and Iiimfelf apprehendit, and is prefentlie in handis. Quhilk vyld and detellable coyfinage and
Confpiracie of an intendit and coiifpyrit Murther, being of Co rare ane example and preparative, and
caiTying with it fa foull ane fclander and reproche to our natioun, giff the fame be not accordingly tane
order with and punilheit: And albeit, thair be na law maide againe practizars and Confpiratours of ane
Murther, unexecute ; and that this fact, naikedlie confiderit, will not appeir puneiftiable to the death ;
vet We, havein"' resaird to the circumftanceis thairof, with the intereft quhilk it carryis to our fervice,
and the fclander and reproche to our natioun, We have tliairfoir, of our awin abfolute auctorite and
power, Ordanit the faid vyld and deteftable Confpiracie to be puneillieit to the death ; to the ten-or of
all uthiris to interprife the lyke heireftir. For quhilk purpois, We have maid and conflitute, and be
the tenor heirof Makis and Conftitutis, our richt trull coufing and counfallor Robert Lord of RoxBUHGHE, our Jullice in that parte, to the effect undirwrittin ; Gevand, Grantand and Committand to
him, our full power and Conimiffioun, expres bidding and charge, to try and examine the faid Mr
Petir, upoune the forme, maner and ciicumllanceis of the faid Confpiracie, and upoun the vyld Murther, quhairof he is fufpect gilty ; And, giff neid beis, for the better difcoverie of the treuth, to put him
to Torlour : As alfwa, to put him to the knawlege of ane Aflize for the fame, and giff he cry gilty of
the faid Confpiracie and intendit Murther committit be him, that he caus execute him to the deid for
the fame ; and in fpecial, for the foull and treterous Confpiracie forefaid : And for this effect, Juftice
Courtis, at quhatforaevir placeis convenient, to fett, begyn, affix, have and continew ; fuitis to make to
be callit ; abfentis to amerciat, unlaws and efcheitis of the faidis Courtis to alk, lift and raife, and for
the fame, giff neid beis, to poind and diftrenc;ie ; Affifers neidfull to this effect, refpective, under the
pane of fourty pundis, to fummond, warne, cheis, and cauis to be IVorne ; clerkis, ferjands, dempftair,
and all utliir official's of Courte neidfull to make, creat and ordane, for quhome he fal be haldin to
anfwer ; and generallie, all and findiie uther thingis to do and ufe, quhilk for executioun of this our
Commiflioun ar requifite and necefTar ; ferme and liable balding, and for to hald, all and whatfumevir
thingis in our name fall be done herein. Given undir our iignet, and fubfcrivit with our hand, At
Brechin, the tent day of October, and of our reign the xxxv, and yeir 1601.

(Locus figilii.) JAMES R.

23ira{uiitr into i\)t ^ovtJ (Cijanfrllcv's ^^ouse— 2L!)tft, ^r.

May 7. — Williame Creychtoune, fiimtyme indweller in Edinburgli.
Dilatit and acciifit, fforfamekill as he, accumpaneit with John ]\rCiilloch and
Robert Ahannay, laitlie, in the moneth of September laftbypaft, cam to Johne
Erie of Montrois chancellaris houfe, befyde the Abay of Halyruidhous, and thair,
vnder fylence of nycht, brak the famyn, and thifteouilie ftall, concelit, rellett and
away-tuik fnrth thairof, fourtie-fyve pound pecis, ane cloik, twa dowblettis, ane
bow and fuure arrowis, with ane pair of filk fchankis, jjertening to James
Grahame, lone to the Chancellar, and vther feruandis to the Chancellar : Att
the leift, for airt and pairt of the fteilling, conceling and away-taking thairof.

34JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 353

As at mair lentil is contenit in the Dittay, quliilk wes verifeit bs his awiu Depofitioiinis and Confeffionis.

Verdict. The faid ^Villiame wes putt to the knawledge of ane Aflyfe, and
thay being chofin, fworne and admittit, be the mouth of George Frenfche in
Edinburgh, chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid ^Villiame Creychtoiuie to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of the crymes foirfaidis.

Sentence, ffor the quhilk cans, the faid Jullice-depute, be the mouth of
Robert Galbraith, dempftar, ordenit the faid Williame Creychtoun to be tane to
ane gibbet to be affixit vpoun the Caftel-hill of Edinburgh, and thairvpoun to be
hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

[3fr WilUame Hairt and Mr WiUiame Boirthuih, Jnjl'ices-deputes.']

Crtasoit— ^^ufcljasinQ:, dforcjintr, anU Ftntfincr of Couittei-feit aittj
autiltci-attti Coin — K\)tlt, ^t,

Maij 29. — Thomas M'Alexander of Drummochreyne ; James Johneftoun, fone to ... . Johneftoun in Kirkcaldie, fumtyme feruitour to Johne Jolineftoune, wryter ; George Dowglas, fumtyme in Bengoiu-e, now in Edinburgh ; Williame Maxwall,
fone to George Maxwall in Haik ; Cuthbert Home, fone to
vmq'° Robert Home of Reidheuch ; and James Moffat, fone

to Moffet of Helbeth.

Perfewit be Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane
lord, for his hienes interes, of the crymes following, that is to fay,
Dittay againft M^Akwander and Jolineftoune,
For airt, pairt, red, counfale and conceiling of the treffonabill Outing' amangis our fouerane lordis
liegis, in the Tounis of Gawyefyde, Dalfarf, Hammiltoune, Ciochftane, Air, Irvin, and vllieris pairtis, of
certane fals and counterfit ten fchilling peices, to tiie fimilitude of his hienes trew coin3ie; committit
ane yeir fenfyne in harveft. Ibem, for airt, pairt, red, counfall and conceilling of the treflbnabill forgeing, counterfittlng, cafling and prenting of xxx falfe ten fcliilling peiceis, within the citie of Glafgw,
in Dauid HalHs bak chalmer tliair; quhair thay, togidder with vmq'" Marioune Hepburne and ane
ferwand woman of hirs was higeit ; off the quiiilkis, thay treflbnablie outit ane to the faid Dauid Hallis
wyffe; and the faid Thomas M" Alexander delyuerit twa of the faidis pieceis to the faid James Johneftoun, at the Bridgend of Glafgw ; and als delyuerit to him fyve pundis w''^ thairof, in ane lytill 3aird
at tlie fuid Brigend, quhilk he tuk bak fra him agane. Item, for airt, pairt, &c. of the tretfonabill
fforgcing, prenting and carting in calmis' of trie, fillit with calk,* within the place of Tourlandis, of twa
fals foure nierk pecis, to the fimilitude of his Maiefteis trew coin3ie of foure merk pecis of filver;
quhairof the faid Thomas outit ane to ane honefl man in Air : Lyke as, the faid James, be directioun
of tiie faid Thomas, convoyit the calme out of Irving to the place of Tourlandis, quhair lie and Sandie
of Tourlandis wes prefent at the treffonabill fforgeing of the faidis pecis, quhilk wer maid of ane pew1 This term corresponds with the modern hiw term ' utterins ;' literally, putting out, circulating. 2 Probably

for ' worth,' although it is also an usual abbreviation for ' wecUt,' weight. ' Jloulds. ^ Mood bedded with

chalk or plaster.

VOL. II. 2 Y

354 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

der plait: Committit in harvift, bygane thiie 3eir. Item, the faid Thomas being accufitt flor aiit,
pairt, &c. of tlie trelibnabill refraueing fra George Dowglas, callit of Bengowie, of fourtie pouudis in
fals fyve pound pecis, foure pound pecis, and crounis, to haif bene outit amangis our fouerane lordis
liegis, as trew and giiid gold ; qubairof he outit twa fals crounis to Johne Johneftoun in Mayboill,
and lent the reft thairof (except ane foure pound peace and twa crounis, quliillus he referuit to

him feltf) to Gilbert Makalexander in Air; and delyuerit the foure pound peace to Bnice,

Ills feruant. Item, the laid Thomas dilatit and accufit, fforlamekill as he, accumpaneit with William
Boirthuik of Johnellounl)urne and twa of his feruandis, betuix Martimes and jwill,' in the yeir of
God I™. VMxxxxviij yeiris,- pall owre att the Qeinis-fFerrie, towardis Callell Campbell, or thairby, quhair
thay brak ane hous, and thifteouflie ftall, concelit, reffett and away-tuik furth thairof foure hors, and
cam about be Stirling to Falkirk, quhair his naig^ tyrit : And fwa, wes airt and pairt of the thifteous
fteilling of the faidis foure hors. Item, the faid Thomas being dilatit of airt and pairt of the thifteous
fteilling, concelling, refetting and away-taking of ane naig fra ane feruand of the Erie of Caflilis,

quhilk Bruce his feruand ftall be his directioune, and William Maxwall delyuerit the famya

to Gylbert M'^alexander.

DiTTAY ag-ahijl George Dowglas, fumtyme in Bengoure, now in Edinhirgh.

Dilatit for the treffonabill bying of fourtie peacis of fals gold, in fyye pound pecis, foure pound pecis
and crounis, and the maift pairt of them wer crounis, fra vmq'^ Dauid Johneftoune, quhilk he reffauit
in the moneth of Junij, or thairby, inKingorne, to be treffonablie outit ; ifor the quhilk he payit fourtie
merk in guid filuer, quhairof Johnftounbume, liis pairtiner, payit tuentie merkis. Lykas, be, togidder

with the faid William Boirthuik, William Maxwall, Moirlie and James Hoppringill his

feruandis, paft, at ^Nlydl'omer was ane yeir, to ane fair in Air, for outing of the famin, quhair he, in the
faid fair, coft"" ane broune meir ;^ ffor the quhilk, he treflbnablie outit and payit xxiiij poundis of the faid
fals gold: And als, bocht ane naig fra James Hammiltoune, feruand to tlie Maifter of Cathcart; for
the quliilk he trelfdnablie outit and payit xxvj or xxvij lib. of the faid fals gold ; The quhilk gold the
faid James Hammiltoune, being outand in Aire, for certane Lundoune wairis, the famin wes cryit fals;
the faid James immediatlie tliaireftir followit the faid George, fra the burcht of Air, be the fpace of
foure niyles, rafit the countrey and owertuik him and his cumpany, and compellit him to reflaue the
fals gold, and reftoir the faid naig to the faid James Hammiltoune: Eftir the quhilk, he, accumpaneit witii Thomas M'^Alexander apperand of Drummochryne, William Boirthuik of Johnftounbume
and his feruandis, fatt doun be ane brae-fyde, and pairlil^ the fals gold quhilk he left vnoutit,'and delyuerit fourtie poundis worth thairof to the faid Laird of Drummochryne, in fals fyve pound pecis,
foure pound pecis and crounis ; and outit and delyuerit to the faid William Boirthuik, his pairtiner,
tuentie poundis worth thairof; and retenit thrie crounis thairof to him felfF; quhilk he thaireftir outit
and delyuerit to the faid Williame Maxwall ; and fua, hes committit Treafoun.

DiTTAY (f Williame Maxwall, Jane to George Maxwall in Haih.
Indvtit, accufit and perfewit, ffor airt, pairt, red, counfall and conceilling of the pairting of the
faid fals fyve pound pecis, foure pound pecis and crounis, quhilkis George Dowglas, callit of Bengoure,
pairtit and delyuerit att ane brae-fyde, cuniand out of Air, att Mydfomer wes ane yeir, to Thomas
M"^ Alexander, apperand of Dnimmochryne, and Williame Boirthuik of Johneftounburne ; quhairof he
delyuerit fourtie poundis worth to Drummochryne, and xx lib. thairof to the faid Williame Boirthuik,
quha delyuerit the famyn to the faid Williame Maxwall, quha convoyit it to Edinburgh ; and att his
cuming, reftorit agane to the faid Williame Boirthuik, quha thairefter outit ane of the faidis fals crounis
in , and ane vther in Lauder ; and thairby, the faid William Maxwall committit Treafon.

1 Yiile or Cliristmas. ' Anno 1.598. ^ Horse, nu(j. ■* Purchased, bought. ^ JIare.

* Parted, divided. 7 Uncirculated.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 355

Item, indytit ffov the treafounable reflauing fra George Dowglas of thrie fals crouuis, to be outit as
guid gold amaiigis our foueraiie lordis leigis ; qidiairof he delyuerit ana to Jeaue Reid, fpous to James
Lewingftoune, in wad' of ane HiiddiU, and tlie vther twa he delyuerit to tlieGuidman of Jolineilouuburne. Item, accufit, iforfamekill as he, being in cumpany with vmq''= .... Morlie, and bein" feruandis to Williame Bortliuik of Johneftounbunie, be his fpeciall directioune and command, pall to
Well Lowtheane about Caldermure or tliairabout, and tliifteoullie Hall, concelit, reflett and away-tuik
furth thairof, twa nieiris ; quhilk he convoyit to the weft end of the toune, and tliairfra directit thame
harae with .... Morlie to Johneftounburne ; and cam in him felif to Edinburgh to James Lewingftounis hous thair, quhair ye mett tlie Guidman of Johnftouneburne and tauld him how ye fped.

Hyvtay agamJlJames 3Ioffef,fune to .... Moffet of Helheth.

FoRSAMEKiLL as he, accumpaneit with Petir Daveis Johnelloun of Kirkiiill, Tiiomas Stewart
feruand to Rob of Kirkhill, Jony Lyall and Cryllie Brydene feruandis to the Guidman of Cairtcrtoune, and James Wilfoune vnder Geordle of Kinraonth, in the moneth of I^.V^.lxxx ....

yeris, cam to ane hill pertening to Mr James Mi^Math of Dalpever, and thair tliifteoullie concelit,
reffett and away-tuik aft' the iamiu, fourfcoir of fcheip, pertening to the faid Mr James ; oft' the quhilk
he gatt fourtene for his pairt.

DiTTAY aguinjl Cuthhert Home,fone to vmq'" Robert Home of Redheuch.

FoRSAMEKiLL as he, accumpaneit with .Johne Broderftanis, younger fone to Joline Broderllane,
flefcliour in Tranent, and Richard Paterfoune, in the moneth of March, or thairby, I^.Wlxxxxviij
yeris, cam, vnder fylence and cloud of nyclit, to John Creychtounis duelling-hous at Preftoun-grangemyll, and thair thifteouflie brak the I'aid hous aboue the dur, enterit thairin, and brak vp his kift, and
thifteouflie flail, concelit, reffett and away-tuik furth thairof, foure hundreth poundis worth of gold
and filuer, or thairby, and mnKl crewallie dang the faid Johne Creyclitoune and his wyff, and left
thame for deid : Of the quhilk foume he gatt fiftie pound for his pairt. Item, ffor the thifteous Reffetting of faxtene fchep, or thairby, pertening to Sir Patrick Hepbume of Lufnes, knycht, and Williame Caldcleuch in Eifter Gemmilfcheillis, his feruand and fchiphird; quhilkis fcheip wes thifteouflie
flollen be Mertene Hall: Comraittit in the moneth of Januar I'".Vj'^. yeris. Item, ff'or Commoun
Thift, Commoun Reflett of tliift, inputting and outputting of tliift, fra countrey to countrey, fra land
to land, bayth of auld and new.

Foe, the quhilkis crymes, the faidis (perfounes on paimell) wer putt to the
knawledge of ane AfTyife, of the perfounes after fjiecifeit ; they are to fay.

AssisA.
Johne Stenhoip of Stenhopifmyll, Johne Logane of Cowfloune, Alexr HorlLurcht of Hoikas,

Williame M'^Clellane Tutour of W"" Annand in Tranent, Johne Henderfoune in Prelloune,

Bombie, Johne Farguyfoune of the Yle, Rob' Anderfoun bui-ges of Perth,

Dauid Seytoun, elder in Tranent, George Hereis, I'umtyme of the Williame Polwart, lumtyme of
Capitan Patrik Herring, Kirktoune of Effie, now in Rottinraw,

James Dalzell eldar, in the Wat- Edinburgh, Williame Hal yburtoune,fumtyme

ter of Leith, Johne Boifwall of Afflek, of Inchkairney.

The Aduocat proteftit for Wilfull Errour, in cais thay acquit.

Veudict. Efter the accufatioun of the faidis perfounes be Dittay of the
faidis crymes, quhilk wer verifeit be thair awin Depofitiounis and Confeffioun,
(the AlTyiy) reniovit altogidder furth of Court to the laich Counlal-hous ; quhair

' Pledge, security.

356 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. ICOl.

thaj% eftir diefiug the faid Joline Boifwall of Afflek Chancillar, reafonit and
\-otit ^•J>oune the faid Dittayis refpectiue, and ewerie point thairof, &c. ; and be
the month of the faid Chancellar ffand, prominceit and declarit the laid Thomas
M^Alexander and George Dowglas, James Johnftoune, Williame Maxwall, James
Moffett and Cuthbert Home, to be ffylit, culpabill and con\'ict of ewerie poynt
of the Dittayis rejpediue abone writtin, quhairof euerie ane of thame refpectiue
^^'es accnfit, and quhilk wes laid to thair charge,

DoiNiE pronounced againjt the Pannels.

For the quhilk caus, tlie faid i\Ir Williame Haert, Jiiltice-depute, be tlie moutli of Robert Galbraith denipftar, ordanit the faid Thomas 3L Alexander, as convict of Treafoune and tliift ; James
Johne/iovn, as convict of Treafoun ; George Dowglas, as convict of Treafoune ; Williame Maxwall,
as convict of Treafoune and tliift ; to be tane to the Caflell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be wirreit
at ane llaik quiiill tliay be deid, and all thair landis, heretagis, takis, lledingis, rowmes, pofleffiounis,
cornis, cattell, guidis and geir, to be fforfaltit and efcheit, and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe: And
als ordanit, be the mouth of the faid dempflar, the faidis James Moffett and Citddie Home to be tane
to the faid Caftell-Jiill of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit vpoun ane gibbett, quhill thay be deid ;
and all thair movabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of tlie
laidis crymes of Tliift.

[i!//- WiU'tame Hairt, Jujlice-Depute.']

Crtnsou — 2^lttniii5 Ijasc (Totn, ^r.

Jun. 6. — Thomas Glass in Fowles, and Johne Gib at the Wodheid of

Condie.

Thoimas Glass was dilatit for the treffonabill Onting of xij falfe fyftie-fchilling peiceis of gold, to the fimilitude of our fouerane lordis trew coin3ie, amangis

his hienes liegis ; off the quhilkis peiceis, he reffauit foure fra \aTiq'^ "Walter

Murray in foure fra Johne Murray his brother, and foure fra Patrik

Drummond of the Lenach. Item, for the treffonabill reffauing fra George Drummond, faidler in Perth, of twentie peice of falfe fyve-pund peiceis, hat-peiceis,
and fyftie-fchilling peiceis ; and for the treffonabill outing thairof amangis oiu"
fouerane lordis liegis, as trew gold ; quliairof he gaif ane jiairt to Robert Schedden,
nolt dryuer. And ficlyke, Johxe Gyb, for airt and pairt of the cumming in
cunipany with vrnq"" Mr Williame Balfoure, brother to the Laird of Burlie,
Johne Oliphant and A-mq'"' Harie Ciilie, his ferwandis, Patrik Murray of Galwallis, his ferwandis, in the moneth of Februar laftbypaft, vnder fylens and
cloude of nyclit, and thair thifteouflie Ijreking vp the dur of the faid hous, entering thairin perforce, and tliifteous lleling, conceling, reffetting and aAvaytaking furth thairof, ane purfe with foure fcoir and twelf merkis, pertening to
the faid Andro ; quhilk the faid Johne delyuerit to the faid Mr "Williame ; togethir M'ith ane horfe and ane meir, and his haill infycht pleneiffing.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 357

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of William Stalkar, goldfinyth in Edinburgh, Chancellour, ftand, i^ronvmceit and declarit the faidis Thomas Glcifs to
be fiylit, culpabill and convict of the ciymes aboue writtin, quhairof he was accufit ; and als, fFand and i^ronunceit the laid Johne Gib to be ffylit, &c. of the
crjanes whairof he was accufit and iierfewit.

Sentence. Thomas Glas to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and
thair to be wirreit at ane llaik quhill he be deid, and his bodie to be brunt in
affes ; and all his landis, heritageis, takis, ftedingis, rowmes, pofleffionis, coirnis,
cattell, guidis and geir to be forfalt and efcheit to our fouerane lordis x^e, as
convict of the crynies foirfaidis : And als decernit and ordanit the faid Johne
Gib to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit quhill he
be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Jim. 18. — Nicole alias Nikkie Mofeett, at the Brigend of Cramond,
and Dauid Adiefoune, fone to Johne Adielbune, in Dylert.

Nikkie Moffett was dilatit and accufit for airt and jiairt of the thifteous
fteling of twa naigis fra James Bannatyne, tennent to the Laird of Cleghorne,
twa yeir fenfyne or thairljye, furth of ane biumefytle beveft' Calder. Item, for
airt and pairt of the thifteous fteling of ane blak naig fra Patrik Clarkfoune in
Blakburne ; of ane gray meir ; and for commoune thift and commoune reffett
of thift. — And ficlyke, Dauid Adiesoune being accufit for the fteling furth of
Margret Strathauchinis hous, in the Cannogait, of ane naipkyn, quhairin thair
was xij aucht mark peiceis, ane hairt of gold, ane pair of grene filk gartonis,
and ane cloik of Inglis hewit- grene claith, pertening to Dauid Drummond, feruitour to Sir Johne Ramfay, committit at Mart3mies laft-\vas : Ifev), for brykiiig
of Mark Lord Newbottill chalmer, and fteling furth thairof ane veluot cloik,
ane raife veluet goune furrit, and vtheris guidis and geir : Item, for the thifteous fteling furth of Robert Erflvyne houfe, in the fit of the Cannogait, of certane gold, filuer, claythis, guidis and geir, with thre hundreth markis : Item,
for commoune thift, &c.

Verdict. The Aftyis, be the mouth of Hector Dauidfoune, fword-flipper in
Edinburgh, Chanceller, ffovmd the pannels to be ffylit, &c.

Sentence. To be tane to ane gibbet, ftandand vpoune the Caftell-hill of
Edinburgh, and thairvpoune to he hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair
moval>ill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

• To the westward of. ' Coloured.

358 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

^ti-(Iuit(i a ^Jtrsoii, U)I)ile ti)t iitntr U)as sitting in a^uUscmtut, ^f»

Jim. 20. — JoHNE DuxnAS of Newliftoune.
Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in llrj'king of Mr James
Haniniiltoune, fone to James Hamniiltoune, at the Veft-port of Lynlythqw ;
c-ommittit the 3d of '

Persewar, Mr Robert Lyntoune, aduocat, fulillitute for Mr Tlioraas Hammiltoune.
Preloquutouris for tlie pannell, Mr Joline Scliarpe, Mr Will. Olipliaut, Mr Robert Leirmontb.

DiTTAY agaiiijt Joline Duudas of Neid'ijhunc.

That qulialr, be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, maid in tbe moiieth of Julij Jn^.V^lxxxxiij
yeiris, it is ftatute and ordanit, tliat qubofoenir fall flryke or liiut in ony tyme tbaireftir ony perfoune,
before his bienes Juftice or bis deputis fitland in judgement, or witliin tbe inner 5ett of our fouerane
lordis Palice, qul)air bis liienes fall niak refidence for the tyme, or within the outar Tolbuith of Edinburgh, tlie tyme that the Lordis of bis bienes Sefiioun (fit) for adminillratioun of Juftice, fall incur
the pane of death, and falbe accuiit criminallio thairfore ; as att mair lentb is contenit in the faid Act
of Parliament maid thairanent : And trew it is and of veritie, that tbe faid Jobne Dundas of Newliftoune, being forjetfull of his dew obedience and reverence, qubilk lie aucht to our fouerane lord and
his bienes autboritie, laitlie, vpoun the ferd day of Junij inftant, he being within tbe Tolbuith of the
burcht of Edinburgh, in tlie bak hous thairof, qubilk is betuix the owtar Tolbuith and the inner Tolbuith, his Maieflie being for the tyme, in proper perfoime, fitand in the Inner hous with the Lordis of
his bienes Counl'all and Seffioune for adminiftratioun of Juftice, he than enterit in conference and
ipeiche with Mr James Hammiltoune, eldeft lauchfull fone to James Hammiltoune, att the Weft-port
of Lynlythqw ; and eftir fum contentious and hett langage paft betuix -^o\\ (them) twa, 5e (be) maift
difpytefuliie, butt refpect or regain! of bis Maiefteis perfonall prefens in the Inner-bous and Tolbuith,
or to the tyme and place, the before none, in the tyme of the fitting of the Lordis of Seflioun, inradit
and perfewit the faid Mr James, and ftraik bim with •^our (Iiis) neave vpoun tlie face, and bad nocht
fail5eit to haif followit out jOur (his) perfuit, witii all rage and crewaltie, againis tbe laid Mr James,
war nocht 36 (be) wes ftayit be ane number of our fouerane lordis guid fubiectis, awaitting in the
Tolbuith vpoun his bienes, or vpoun thair awin actionis for the tyme : Quhairby he, be ftrykeing of
the faid Mr James vpoun tbe face, quhen our fouerane lord in proper perfoun wes fitand in the inner
Tolbuith, and the tyme that the Lordis of Seflioune wes fitand tliair for a<lminiftratioun of juftice, hes
incurrit the pane of death ; qubilk fould be execute aganis bim, conforme to the faid Act of Parliament, with all regour.

(The jiannell) declarit, infafar as his Maieflie, as is contenit in the Dittay, wes
iitand in the Tolbuith, the laniin was by his knawledge ;- and that vpoun the
occafioune of fum contentious wordis fallin furth betuix him and Mr James
Hammiltoune, quhairwith he wes movit to mak fum mynt' for revange thairof,
and thairby maid fum truble in the Myd-hous, quhairwith his Maieftie is juftlie
offendit ; That he will cum in his Maiefteis will for ony fact or offence comniittit to our fouerane lord, or the Lordis of his hienes Seflioune, the tyme and
place contenit in the Dittay ; to be confulderit be his Maieflie, according to his
hienes guid will and jileafour, and according to his accuflomit clemencie, fchawin
to vtheris his hienes liegis for the lyke crymes ofbefore.

' The fourth of June instant. See Dittay. « Unknown to bim. ' Attempt, motion.

34Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 359

With the quhilkis premifTes, the Juftice tuik him to be auifit qiihill Tyifday
nixtocum, the xxiij day of this inftant, that he mycht knaw his Maiefteis will
thairin : And ordenit the Bailleis of Edinburgh prefent, to tak tlie ftiid Johne
Dundas to waird to the Caftell of Edinburgh : And ficlyke, caufit Andro Home,
ane of the Officeris of Court, to warne the perfounes fummond vpoun the faid
Johne Dundas AfTyis, to compeir in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh to pas vpoun Iiis
Aflyis, vnder the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

Jul. 9. — The following Precejit ordanit to be infert in the buikis of
Adiornall.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clark and 3our deputes. We greit 30W hairtlle weill : Forfamelvill as Joliue
Dundas of Newliftoune, being indytit and accufit in ane Court of our Jufticiarie, haldin within our
Tolbuith of Edinburgli, Jie xx day of Junij laftbypaft, for Jie invading and perfewing of Mr James
Hammiltoune, laucbfull fone to James Ilammiitoune, att ])e Weft-port of Lynlythqw ; and llrykeing
of him vpoun Jie face, vpoun fe ferd day of jie faid moneth of Junij, &c. And We having reflkuit the
faid Johne Dundas in our will, and having weyit and confidderit the haill circumftance of Jie cryme
contenit in Jie faid Dittay, and quhatfumeuir thing wes done be the faid Johne tlie day and place foirfaid ; the faid Johne, according to our will notifeit be ws to him felff, hes payit the foum of ane thowfand fewin hundreth and fiftie merkis, quhilkis wer deburfit in fum of our necelfar affairis ; quliairof
we difcharge the faid Johne for ewir be Jiir prelentis. And ficlyke, according to our directioun gevin
to him, as ane v)nr pairt of our will, hes comperit in prefens of our Chancillar, I'refident and Lordis
of Seflioune, thay being convenit in full nowmer in ])e faid Inner counfal-hous for admiuiftratioun of
juftice, and thair hes fidlelie fatisfeit pame for ony offence done be him to fame, the faidis day and
place. We Will thairfore, and be jiir prefentis dedairis, that the faid Johne Dundas falbe fred and
relewit furth of ])e waird, quhairin prefentlie he is ; and We command 50W to freith and releve him of
pe famin : As alfo, we declair that the faid Johne Dundas fall nocht att ony tyrae heireftir be indytit,
perfewit or accufit for ony fact or deid committit he him the day and place foiifaid ; hot We acquyte
and mak him frie Jiairof in all tynie cumiiig : And thairfore We command 50\v, that, in our JufticeCourt to be hauldin in ]>e faid Tolbuith of Edinburgh, the faid nynt day of Julij inftant, in prefens of
Jie faid Johne Dundas, ^e mak publicatioun of |ie dedaratioun of our Will, eftir Jie forme and tennoiuof Jiir prefentis ; and that the faid Johne hes obeyit and fullillit the famin in all pointis : Kepand Jiir
prefentis for ^our Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, att Halyruidhous, the fewint day of July, the
jeir of God, i™.Vj^ and ane 5eiris. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES U.

MoNCRiEF Cancellarius. Fyvie Sechetakius. Home Comptroller. J. Halyruidhous.

?i?anusurlun — 23t t(janr|> — (J^ppre ssioii — ?t?(H'!5f--sttaUu tj —

Aug. 1. — Thomas Cwninghame, fword-flijiper, ferwand to (Williame
Cwninghame) the Laird of Tourlandis.
Dilatit of certane crymes of Thift, and for taking of cajitive and {jrelbner
Patrik Gemmill.

Dittay again ft the Pannel.

Thomas Cwninghame, fword-fllpper, fumtyme feruitour to Williame Vaus, arniorar in the Cannogait, being cnterit on pannell, dilatit and perfewit : Forfaniekill as lie, accunipaneit with Alexander

3G0 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

and Hew Cwnintjliaraes, Prefer to the Laird of Tourlandis, vmq''^ Jolme Cwningliame alias Potter,
JNIarioune Parker, Illbbell Parker bir filler, Williame Speir, lerwand to tlie faid Alexander, and ane
vtlier boy, laitlie, in the moneth of Januar laftbypaft, vnder fcylence and cloude of nycht, be way of
HameAickin and Brigancie, come to PatrikGenmiill duelling-hous in Tempilhous, quhairhe, hiswyffe
and familie was, in fober and quyet raaner, takand the nychtis refl, dredand na evjll or harme ; and
thair brak vp the dur of the faid hous, enterit thairin perforce, and tuke the faid Patrik and his wyife
furth of thair bedis, band his wyffe fit and liand, and kaill hir in ane mekill kid,' manaffit^ the faid
Patrik to delyuer to thame his filuer and gold ; and becaus lie refufit to do Jie faniyn, thay band ane
tedder' about his nek, and hang him vp vpoune ane balk,'' quhair he hang ane lang fpace, quhilP the
faid Thomas for pitie cuttit him doune ; and tliairefter thay pakkit vp his haill infycht guidis and pleneiffing in fcheittis, and caufit the faidis thre wemen convoy the fauiyn tlufteoullie vpoune thair bakis:
And thaireftir tuke and apprehendit the faid Patrik Gemniell captiue and prefoner, and convoyit him,
being ane ageit man of threfcoir of yeiris, in ane grit florme, be the fpace xxviij myles fra his awin
houfe, quhill he come to Clyddiiholme, quhair he was relevit be the Bailleis of Lanerk : Vfurpand
thairbye our fouerane lordis auctoritie vpoune thame ; the faid Patrik being his Iiienes frie liege ; and
the faid Thomas was airt and pairt of the faidis crymes. Item, for airt and pairt of the cuuiing vpoune
ane Sabboth day, ten oukis fenfyne or thairbye, in tyrae of preching, accumpaneit with Williame
Cwninghame of Tourlandis, Alexander Cwninghame, his brother, vniq'"^ Jolme Cwninghame, the potter, and vtheris ferwandis of the young Laird of Blaquhannis, and vtheris thair compliceis, to the nowmer of xiiij perfonis or thairbye, and rynning of ane forrow^ with the Laird of Cwningharaes heidis
tennentis, for the thifteous fleling and reving fra thame of xij horfe and ineiris, quhilkis war fauld in
the cuntrey. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous fleling and away-taking of twa naigis, ane
foir" and ane vther broune, pertening to Thomas Bigger in Byres furth of the landis of WaiTeikhill,
committit in Junij laflwas. Item, for commoune thift, commoune reffelt of thift, &c.

Verdict. The Affyis, be the mouth of Johue Fai-guefoun of the Yle, Chancellar, fFand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Thomas Cwninghame to be fFyld,
culpabill and convict of the haill poyntis of the Dittay aboue writtin, and crymes
thairin coutenit.

Sextexce. To be tane to ane gibbet, vpoune the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh,
and thairvpoune to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

J^tiiltiiis iHittisters — #I)stnictiiicr tijc Qtsijjnintr of iHaiise

Aug. 18. — Sir DaUID Wod of Craig, knycht.
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit of the crjmies following.

Persewar, ]Mr Thomas Hammiltoune, aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Preloquutouris for the pannell, Mr Johne Scharpe, Mr Lowrence ^PGill, Mr Robert Cokburne.

Dittay againjl the Pannell.

Forsamekill, as it is expreflie flatnte and ordenit be Act of Parliament, maid in our fouerane
lordis Parliament, hauldiu and begun att Edinburgh, the xxLx day of Julij, the yeir of God I'^.V.
Ixxxvij yeiris, that quhatfumewir perfoun or perfounes invadit ony Miniller, or puttis ony violent

1 Cliest. 2 Menaced, bullied. 3 ' Tether; halter or rope. ^ Beam. 5 Until. ^ Foi'ay,

or predatory incursion. 7 Sorrel. Fr, saure, Ital. saiiritlo, a dark reddish colour.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 361

handis in him, for feiiiing of tliair lewingis,' or fie vtlier caufTis or quarrellis fpecifeit in the faid Act,
falbe pwneill thairfore with all regoure, and incur the pane of tinf.ill of thair movabill guidis for the
faid invafioun and violence allanerlie, albeit na Slauchter nor mutilatioun follow thairvpoune; the half
of the faid movabill guidis to be applyit to our fouerane lordis vfe, and the vtlier halfF to the pairtie
offendit, but^ preiudice of the heichar pwneifchment, gif ony gritar cryme concur with the violence
and invafioun foirfaid ; and to be callit crimmallie thairfore, before our fouefane lordis Jnftice or his
deputtis, att particuler dyettis : As the faid Act att raair lenth beris. And trew it is, that Sir Dauid
Wod of Craig, knycht, accumpaneit witli vtheris his complices, with convocalioun of our fouerane
lordis liegis, to the number of tuelf perfounis or thairbye, all bodin in feir of weir Avith fwordis, gantillettis and vtheris wappinnis, inuafme, incontrair tlie tennour of the Actis of Parliament, laitlie, vpouu

the xxvj day of March laftbypaft, cam to the Kirk of Fordoun, and to the landis occupyit be

lyand befyde the faid Kirk, and within the Slierefdome of Kincardin, quhair Mr Adam Walker, Minifter att Fordoun wes, accumpaneit with funi of the Prefljiterie of the Mernis, according to the ordinance of the Act of Parliament, and the directioun of the faid Prefljiterie, cum to haif defignit^ ane
Manfe to Patrik Bonkle, principall Minifter att Fordoune, and to his fucceffouris ; dredand na ewill,
harme, iniurie or perfuit of ony perfoun, hot to haif lewit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis ;
and thair, fyrft boiflit,^ manaflit and threatint the faidis Minifleris, and fpeciallie the faid Mr Adam
Walker, for thair bodelie liarmes ; and thairefter, fett vpoun the faid Mr Adam Walker, and invadit
and ftrak him with the gaird of his fword vpoun the heid, putt violent handis in liim, and with his
fword, behind his bak, flrak att him, and dang hira to the eird ;^ and with thaii' drawin fwordis hurt
and woundit him in baith his handis, to the eft'ufioun of bis blude in grit quantitie ; and thairby, for
the quarrell of the defignatioun of ane gleib^ and manfe, quliilk is ane pairt, at the leilt, Ibuld be ane
pairt, of the faid Mr Adarais levying, he beand ane of the Minifleris of Fordoune, and helper to the
faid Patrik Bonkill to the cuir'' thairof, thay haif put violent handis in the faid Maiiter Adam, invadit,
flraik, dang and bled hira with the gairds of thair fwordis, and with drawin fwordis, in maner foirfaid ;
and he wes airt and pairt thairof: Quhairby he lies incurrit the payne of tinlall of all his movabill
guidis ; the ane half thairof to be applyit to our fouerane lordis vfe, and the vthir halff thairof to be
applyit to the vfe of the faid Mr Adam Walker, as partie offendit.

The pannell takis inftrumeiitis of his entrie, and pi'oteftis for releve of his
cautioner fummond for his entrie ; and that thair is na partie perfewar bot my
Lord Aduocat ; and that na perfoiuie affiftis him in this perfuit ; and that tlie
lettres ar rafit at his lordfchipis inftance allanerlie."

The Aduocat paffis fra all vthir perfounes, nor" the Laird of Craig ; and paflis
fra that pairt of the fummondis, ordaning ony vtlier perfounes guidis to be
efcheit, ]iro loco et tempore.

The Judge declai'is, that na pairt of the pane contenit in the Act of Parliament fall fall to the pairtie,'" bot only to the Kingis pairt, conforme to the Act of
Parliament.

' Livings, stipend. ^ Without. ' To designate or appoint a place for the Minister's

manse, or dwelling-house, &c. ■• Intimidated, brow-beat. ^ Struck him to the ground.

'' The glebe (gleba) is a jiiece of arable and pasture ground, uniformly allotted to the Parochial Clergy
of Scotland, ar.d usually adjoining the manse. ■• Viz. the cure of souls. * At the instance of

the public prosecutor alone ; not at the instance of the private party, with the Lord Advocate's concun-ence. ° Excepting, but, other than. '" Viz. that tiie private party injured shall have

no share of any penalties which might be awarded ; but that the whole should fall to the Crown, as
sole prosecutor.

VOL. II. 2 Z

362 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

It is alledgeit be Sir Dauid Wod, that this mater aucht nocht to be putt to
ane Affyis, except it wer verifeit, be writt, that Mr Adam Walker is the Minifter of the Kirk of Fordoun, and that he had commifTioune to mak defignatioun
of the gleib and manle that day. Anfueris the Aduocat, that the alledgeance
aucht to be repellitj in refpect of the Act of Parliament and of the fummondis ;
and thay thingis are merifacli, and only pertinent to the Affyfe.

Forder, it is allegeit be the faid Sir Dauid and his preloquutouris, that the
lettres ar alluterlie' irrelevant, takand thair ground and foundament \'poun thais
AV'ordis of the Actis of Parliament, ' anent the invalioim and putting of violent
liandis in ane Minifter, vpoune quarrell, for feiking of his lewing ;' and that particuler caufe is only proponit in this lybell ; and it is fubfumit, that diuerfe of
the Minifteris of the Mernis, and fpeciallie the laid Mr Adam Walker, wes boiftit
and nianaffit' the day lybellit, quhilk alledgeit boifting and manaffing is na rele-
^•ant caufe to induce the penaltie lybellit. Forder, that pairt is generall, nocht
condifcendand vpoun the names of the vther Minifteris. Item, thair is ane
manifeft irrelevancie in ane vther pairt of the faidis lettres and lubfumptioun
thairof, berand, that the gleib alledgeit defignit wes ane pairt of the faid Mr
Adam AValkeris lewing, att the leifl fould be ane pairt thairof, becaus he is
alledgeit to be fucceffour to Patrik Bonkill, quha be the letteris thame felffis is
grantit to be the Minifter of Fordoune : As alio, it is grantit that the faid pretendit defignatioune wes maid be the faid Patrik, and fwa is grantit to be alluterlie the faid Pati'ikis lewing : And the Act of Parliament vnderftand in that
pairt, to be, of the lewing of the perfounes that ar offendit, and nocht of the
lewingis he hopis for to be fucceflbur ; quhilk is de futuro cont'ingenti ; for he
may be depryvit, or deceife, before the deceife of Patrik Bonkill.

The Aduocat repeitis the fummondis and Act of Parliament, for ane anfuer.

The Judge, in refpect that this fummondis is only execute aganis the Lairdis
felff, quhairby he is acculit a^jouu his awin deid done be him to Mr Adam
Walker, alledgeit Minifter att the Kirk of Fordoune, and craving defignatioun
of the gleib and manfe, as the faid fummondis beris, to Patrik Bonkill, principall
Minifter thairatt ; and that his coadiiitour wes ftrikin and invadit for that caufe,
fuftenis the fummondis.

Quhairvpoun Mr Thomas Hammiltoun afl<it inftrumentis.

ASSISA.

Williame Raitt of Halgvene, Dauid Rait feare of Halgiene, Robert Rait in Sillieflat,

Robert Aibuthnet, feare of Daiiiil Arbutlmet of Fyndowris, Robert Arbutbnet in Barkbill,

that Ilk, Alpxaii(k'r Sylibakl (Sibbett) ia Williame Sybbald (Sibbett) in
Jobne AUerdes of tliat Ilk, Watterltouno, Carnetoune,

Patrik Falconer of Killiill, Robert Stratbauchiii in Munbodo, Avchebaki Irrving in ReidmjTe,

Joliue Irving in Quliyterigis, Andro Gray of Kinggornie, James Tullo in Allerloune.

' .\Ilogetlier, entire!}-. 2 Intimidated and menaced or threatened.

35 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 363

The Aduocat proteflis for Wilfull Errour, in caife thay Acquyte ; becaus tlie
Laird of Craig lies confeft the deid, and maid his repentance thairfore.

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of Robert Arbuthnet, fear of that Ilk,
Chaneillar, for the maift pairt, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Sir Dauid
■\Vod to be Acquyte, cleane, innocent and clangeit of the haill crymes aboue
writtin, quhairof he wes accufit and perfeAvit : Quhairvpouue the faid Sir Dauid
Wod afldt actis and inftrumentis ; and i>roteftit for his Teftimoniall.

Sir Jolinne Wifchart of PittaiTo, knycht, Johiine W. liis fone and air, Robert Falconer of Balamlro,
Johnne Allardes, fear of that Ilk, Johnne Ramfay, eldar of Balmayne, Alexander Lyndefay of Brodland and Patrik Craig in Kinnetli, and ilk ane of thame, was vnlawit in the pane of ane bundreth
merkis, for nocbt comperand on the faid AfTyis.

Nov. 13. — WiLLLiAME NuKiLSOUNE (Nicolsoune) in Dirltoune.
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit,

FoRSAMEKiLL as he, and Adame Nicolfoune, his lone, with thair complices, being bodin iu feir of
weir, with fwordis, forkis, quhingear and vtberis wappynnis, invctfiue, laitlie, vpoune the xiiij day of
September laftbypafl, haifing confauit ane deidlie iiatrent and malice aganis vniq'*^ VVilliaine Jakloune
in the Cannogait, for taking of ane fchaeff of peis off thair land, fett vpoune Iiira, vnder fcylence and
cloude of nycht, befyde tlie Place of Dirltoune, quhair he was in fober and quyet nianer for the tyme,
doand bis lefull effairis and bufiines, dredand na evill, harme, iniurie or perfuit of oiiy perfonis, hot to
baif levit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis ; and firfl, llraik bim with ane fork in at the leafk ;'
and thairefter, ftrakc iiim with quiiingearis aboue the left palp,^ and throw the bodie; and tliairefter,
bure him to the faid Williamis duelling-houfe in Dirltoune, and caufit dicht ' the blude fra bis woundis,
and fyne tuke him furtb of tlie faid boufe, and careit bim to the Place of Dirltoune, and kaifl bim
behind the 5et thairof, to the effect that the faid ci'ewall Murthour fuld nocht half cum to lycht : And
fwa, maift, crewallie and vnraercifullie flew and murdreifl; him ; and he was art and pairt thairof.

Verdict. The Affife, viz. ' George Dewar feruitour to the Lady Gowrie,
George Bettie, cuke and brewfter to her in Dirltoune,'* &c., be the mouth of Hew
Baillie in North-Beruik, chancelar, ffand the pannell to be Innocent and Acquit
of art and i)airt of the Slauchter of the faid Williame Jakfoune, &c.

iKiuKev at tljt miavntn of tijc mc&t mni'tf)t&,

Nov. 14. — Tho:mas Akjistkang, fone to Ringanis Thoin. (In the Dittay he is llyled ' fone to Sandeis Ringane."
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit be Archbald Carmichell of Edroin, brother to
vmq'^ Sir Johne Carmichell of that Illc, knycht, Warden of the Weft Marcheis
of Scotland, for the tyme, of the cryme following : that is to fay,

' The groin or flank, sometiines spelt leask or fisfi, ^ Breast. ^ Wipe off. * The

rest of no note. ^ This last seems his proper designation, as the Dittaymentions ' the faid

Ringane (Ninian) his fader.' The loose mode of designating persons, in the rank of life of the pannel, which was prevalent iu the Borders at this period, is apt to lead modern readers into confusion as
to identity of persons.

364 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

FoRSAMEKiLL as he, accunipaneit with the laid Ringane his fader, Lancie, Hew, Archie and Watt
Ainirtrangis his brelher, Syra of the Syde, Lancie of the Syde, Rob Sandie, Rob Scott, Thome Tail-
^eour, Williame Fonofter, Wililaine Graliame of the Braid of the Grange of Medop, and divers vtheris
his compHces, to the number of xx, commoun thewis and traittouris, all bodin in feir of weir,' with
jakis, tleilbonettis, lances, hagbuttis ; haifing, be the infligatioun of vtheris quliais names he knew,
confultit, dewyfit and interpryfit the crcwall, trefibnabill and fchamefull Slauchter of vniq''^ Sir Johne
Car.michell of that Ilk, tlian Warden of the Well Marcheis, vpoun ane Soneday, in tlic nioneth of
Junij, the ycir of God l"\Vj^ yeiris, att ane nieitting at tlic fute-ball,^ quhair diners borderarls and
freindis wes conuenit to tliat effect : Quhilk purpois being plattit and lett doun^ be him and thame,
and being fuirlie aduertefit that the faid vniq'" Sir Johne was to keip Court^ at Lochmaben, vpone the
niorne thairefter, being INIonunday and the .... day of the faid moneth of Junij, the yeir of God
foii-faid ; ft'or executioun of the quhilk treffonabill and vngodlie fact, tliay niett aitogidder, att thair
trylling place* of the Blerieheid, quhair thay lay att waitt for the faid vmq''' Sir Johne Carinichellis
pafiing by ; and as he wes in fobir and quyet maner pafland by to the faid Court, dredand na ewill,
lianne, iniurie or perfuit of ony perfounes, hot to haif lewit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis,
he being liis Maielleis Wardene for the tyrae, thay aitogidder fett vpoune him at the Rae-knowis,
fchott thair hagbuttis att him, and thairwith maift fcharaefuUie, crewallie (and) treffonablie fchot the
faid vniq'*" Sir Johne Carmichell throw the boxly, and (lew and murdreill him thair ; vpoun fett purpois, provifioun and foirthocht fellony.

Verdict. The AfTyis, be the month of George Ferrie, portioner of Reftalr'ig, Chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Thorn Armftraiig to be
ciilpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the treffonabill and crewall Slauchter
and IMurthour foirfaid.

Skntexce. For the quhilk cans, the faid Juftiee-depute, be the mouth of
Robert Galbraith, dempftar, Decernit and Oi'danit the faid Thom Armftrang to
be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair his rycht hand to be flrickin
fra his arme ; and thaireftir to be hangit vpoune ane gibbett, quhill he be deid ;^
and thaireftir, to be tane to the Gallows on the Burrowmure, and thair his body
to be hangit vp in irne cheinis ;' and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, to our
fouerane lordis vfe.

' Arrayed or furnislied in warlike manner. ° At this period, especially on the Borders, it

was by no means uncommon to have such meetings for |)laying at foot-ball, archery, &c. — and these
games were often taken advantage of, for the perpetration of deeds of violence ; at least, they were
frequently terminated by bloodshed and violence, tliroutih tlie feuds of neighbouring clans or districts.
^ Plotted and arranged. '' A Warden's Court, for punishment of excesses committed on the

Borders, itc. ' Appointed place of meeting. '^ Robert Birrel thus notices this event.

' The 11 of July (1600), the Laird of Carmichael burict; quha wes llaine be the Armllrangis and
Carlilcs, he doing and executing his office of Wardenrie, upone tlie 16 of Junij befoir.' He thus notices the execution of Armstrang and l/ie Peck, whose trial immediately follows. ' The 14 of November, Thomas Arnjllrong and Adam Steill, alias callit the Peckit, wer baitli hangit at the croffe. This
Thomas had his hand Itrak aff with ane flroke, befor he wes hangit, becaus he wes at the (laughter of
James Carmichael. This Pccket wes ane of the maill notabill thieffes that evir raid.' " This

is tlie earliest notice in this Record of a Criminal being hung in chains which the Editor lias yet met
with, and was evidently, in this instance, suggested by tlie atrocity of the crime, and the dignity of
tlie person so basely murdered. The de6ciency of facts, iu the earlier \'olumes, may account for this
circumstance ; as tlie particulars were then seldom recorded.

35 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 365

?t?orsf, Cattle, anU ^I)cep--flttalinfl — ^lauflljtcr, ^f.

Nov. 14. — Adie Scott, callit the Peck.

Being enterit on pannell and accufit,

For the tliifteous (leilllng, conceilling and away-taking of certane oxin, furth of the Diocliellis,
pertening to the Erll of Mortoune and his tennentis. Item, for aiit and pairt of the thifteous fteilling of certane fcheip furth of ane rowme befyde Laramingtoune. ITE^r, for airt and pairt of the
thifteous fleilling (and) conceling of fourfcoic heid of nolt, furtli of the landis of the Cairne, pertening
to certane Lowtliian men, quhilk wes in gerfing' on the famin landis. And for airt and pairt of the
flauchter of vmq'^ Hary Kannald, feruitour to Sir James Sandielandis of Slewmanna-mure, and vmq^
Andro Smyth in Auchnowhs-hill, committit in the monetii of Auguft, I™.Vj^ yeiris. Item, for airt
and pairt of the thifteous fteilling of foure liors furth of Corfwodburne, pertening to Sir James Sandielandis of Slewmanna-mure. Item, for airt and part of the thifteous fteilling of xvj oxin furth of
Leftoun-fc'heillis, pertening to Alexander Dowglas. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous ftelling
of certane guidis fra the Guid-wyfF of Garvell-fute. Item, for airt and pairt of the tliifteous lleilling
of certane guidis furth of Ingerflouu-burne, pertening to Rychard Hodge thair. Item, for airt and
pairt of the thifteous lleilling of certane daith furth of Caringtoun-mylne. Item, for the cuming to
Johne Ker Miniller of Lynis hous, breking thairof, taking of him felif prefoner, and fleilling of his
infycht and pleneiffing furth thairof. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous lleilling of twa naigis
furth of Hairburneheid, pertening to Adanie Johnelloun thair. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous lleilling of threttie gers oxin' furth of Corfwodburne, pertening to certane Lowthean men. Item,

for the fteilling of certane oxin, pertening to Adamfonn in Leftounfcheillis. Item, for the

fetting upoune vmq''^ Rodger Schaw in Craiganbae, George Schaw thair, Quintene M'^Millane in Craigneill, Downie M'^Millane thair, Sandie McMillane thair, Johne Chalmeris in Clatteran-fchawis, Johne
McMillan in Dafellocii, George McMillan his brother, George McMillan in Craiginbae, Andro Mi^Millan in Powfchalkene, James Reid in Stronefchalkene and Williarae Gordoune in Knokllhene, att the
Sandiehillis ; quhair he and his complices flew the faid vmq'' Rodger Schaw in Craigbae, and thifteouflie ftall xxij naigis fra thame. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous fteilling of nyntene nolt
furth of the byre of Nether Quhitlaw, pertening to Thomas Ker of Caveris ; committit at Martimes
1600 yeiris. Item, for Commoun Thift and Commoun Reffett of Thift, inputting and outputting of
thift.

Verdict. The Affife'' ffand, prommceit and declarit the faid Adie Scott to
be ffylit, culpabill and coiiAdct of the haill cryme of Thift and flauchteris aboue
writtin, laid to his chai'ge.

Sentence. The Juftice Ordanit him to be tane to ane Gibbett att the mercat croce of Edinlnirgh, and thairvpoun to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and all
his movabill guidis to be efclieit, &c.

^tttviitfl: atiuUtratetJ iMoiui), ^f. — Cvfason.

Nov. 27. — George Drummond, burges of Perth.

Dilatit and accufit of,
The TrelTonabill outing* of fals and adulterat money, fic as Hatt-pecis,^ crounes, foure pound pecis,

' Grazing. ^ Oxen sent from the Lothians to pasture or graze. ' The same as in

preceding Trial. * Uttering, issuing. ^ An early coin of James VI. in which the head

is surmounted with a hat, in place of the crown or laurel.

366 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

and foure nierk pecis, amangis our fouerane lordis liegis, as trew money and coin5ie, att the ffairis of
Perth, Striuiiin", and in vther inercattis in the North pairtis ; quhilk fals coin5ie he bocht fra Hanis
Johneftoune, Fleming, Charles Hereis, Fleming, and Arthour Smyth, a fmyth duelland befyde Banff,
and wes coin5eit be thame in Banff, Elgyn, Abirdene and Lenoch, fyve or fax yeiris fyne.

^'erdict. The AfTyis, be the month of Petu' Spens, daginaker in tlie Cannogait, chancellar, ffand, pronvmceit and declarit the faid George Dnimmond to
be culpabill, ffyht and convict of the cryme of Treafoune aboue written.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell(hill) of Edinburgh, and thair to be
wirreit att ane ftaik qiihill he wes deid, and his bodie to be brent in affis ; and
all his landis, heretageis, guidis and geir to be foifaltit, efcheit and inbrocht to
our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crjnnis.

\_Mr WiUiam Hairt, Jttjfice-De}n(te.~\

Assessors, Lords Halyraidhous, Dunkeld and Fentonbaraes.

Crrason— EeepiitQ: t\it ^otise of (iirunning:l)amcI)eaU against tfje
MwcCs Commissioutrs — ^lausijtcr,

Dec. 15. — WiLLiAME CuNNiNGHAME of Tourlandis.
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit be Mr Thomas Hammiltone of Druincarne, aduocat to onr fonerane Lord, of the crymis following, contenit in Dittay produceit
be the faid Aduocat.

Dittay agu'injl the Funnel.

WiLLiAME CwNixGHAME of Tourlandis, ye ar indytit and accufit, fforfamekill as Alexander
Cwninghame, your brother, and certane his complices, hyrit and conduceit fuddartis,' haifing, in the
moneth of Maich the yeir of God Inj.Vjj. yeiris, tane tlie Kous of Cwniugliaraeheid, and being chargeit

be vertew of our fouerane lordis lettres to haif randerit the famin within" , vnder

the payne of Treffoune ; Neuirtheles, it is of veritie, that ye, witliin fourtie audit houris efter the
taking of the faid place, and eftir the charge gewin for randering thairof vnder the pane of Treffoun,
convo)it youre felff and enterit within the faid place and hous of Cwninghameheid, and treflbnablie
affiftit the faid Alexander Cwninghame, your brother, in keping of the faid hous aganis the Lairdis of
Duntraith and Vichill, his ^laielleis Coininiflioneris, quha wer alfageing the faid place, and that be the
fpace of xxiiij dayes eftir your entrie within the famin ; during tlie quhilk tyme, ye and your compliceis
treflbnablie fchot out of the faid place diners hagbutis att the fiidis Coininiffioneris and thair 'aflifteris ; committand thaiiby oppiu and mauifell Trealbune, and incunand the tinfall of lyffe, landis and
guidis ; quhilkis audit and fould be execute aganis yow, with all regour. To the takin^ that ye aigyltie of the faid cryme, ye haif confeft the famin, be youre Depofitioun. Item, ye ar indytit and
accufit, fforfamekill as ye, acconipaneit with Alexander Cwninghame, your brother, and vtheris your
compliceis, being bodin in feir of weir, with fecreitis, rteilbonnettis, dagis and pillolettis, prohibite to
be borne, worne, rfit or fchot with, be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, laitlie, in the moneth
of September, or thairby, the yeir of God I™.V ''.Ixxxxvj yeiris, haifing eonfauit ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis vniq'^ James Stewiiifoune in the ^lyltoune of Hobertoune, come to the Landis
of the Myltoune of Robertoune, quhair the faid vmq'^ James wes in fobir and quyet maner, doand his
lefull effairis and buffines, dredand na ewill, harme, iniurie or perfuit of ony perfounes, hot to haif

I Waged, or stipendiary soldiers. « Left blank. 3 Jn proof, token, or testimony.

35 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 367

lewit vnder Godis peax and our foiierane loidis; and tliair, with your wappinnis foirfaidis, niaifl fchaniefullie, crewallie and vnmercifullie (lew tlie laid vmq^" James; and ye was airt and pairt of the faid
crewall Slauchter; committit vpoun fett purpois and provifioune, and foirthocht fellony. To the
taikin that ye ar airt and pairt of the faid Slauchter of the faid vmq''^ James Stewinfoune, ye wes,
vpoun the xxij day of JanuarI™.Vc.lxxxxvij yeiris, deuunceit rebell and putt to tlie home, for nocht
comperand befor the Jiiftice or his deputis, in the tolbuith of Edinburgli, tlie xxiiij day of November,
the yeir of God foirfaid, to haif vnderlyne the law for airt and ])airt of the Slauchter foirfaid ; att the
quhillv liorne ye haif remaiiiit continewallie fenfyne, and as yit remanis : as the Letteris of Hoirning,
produceit heirwith, beris.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Preloquutouris for tiie pannell.
Mr Williame Oliphant, Mr Johne Ruflell, The Laird of Reidhall,

Mr Alexander King, The Laird of Glengarnok, The Laird of Capringtoune.

The Preloquutouris produceit ane Warraiid of the Lordis,' commanding thame
to compeir in Defence of the Laird of Tourlandis, now enterit on pannell ; quhilk
Warrand is fubfcryuit be the Chancellar, in prcpfentiu Dominorum. — Tlie pannell takis inftrumentis, that the Juflice declaris that Sir Johne Cohhurne of
Ormijhun, Juflice dark, fall nocht be judge nor AffelTour, nor yit Juftice dark
in this mater.^ Alledgeis, that Sir George Home, thefaurer, can nocht be
AffefTour, becaufe he may win and tyne in the caufe, in caife of convictiouue.
The Aduocat anfueris, that the alledgeance audit to be repellit, in refjiect he is
nocht partie. The faid Sir George Home declarit he wold nocht voit in that
mater. — The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the admitting of my Loirdis of Halyiiiidhous, Dumkerd^ and Fentounbarnes to be AfTeflburis in this caufe.

The pannell alledgeis, that he fould be cited vpoun fourtie dayes wairning,
for the alledgeit Treafoune of keping of the hous. The Aduocat anfueris, that
it hes bene the iiiviolabill practik, qiihen ony is tane* for Treafoune, to putt him
to ane Aflyis for the faid cryme of Treafoune, but'' citatioun.

The Juftice repellis the alledgeance maid be the pannell.

It is alledgeit that the Dittay is nocht relevant, in refpect of the generalitie
thairof, nocht condifcendand att quhais inftance the charge wes gevin to rander
the place, quhoni to, or ex qua ccniju. The Aduocat alledgeis that it audit to
be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay." Forder, the Dittay is nawyis relevant,
becaus I wes nocht chargeit, nor na intimation wes maid to me of the charge,

' This form was usual, especially in cases of Treason, in order to screen Counsel from the consequences of defending one who must be inferred to have been most obnoxious to the King. A Supplication was, in the first instance, presented to the Lords of Council and Session, by tlie pannel, praying
them to name ' prolocutors' for the defence, and suggesting various names. The prayer was generally
granted, as a matter of course. ° ' Declinator of the Judge was competent, on the ground of relationship, or that he had a pecimiary or other interest in the case, &c. ^ Bisiiop of Dunkeld ?

* Taken or apprehended and put in ward. ^ Without. "^ It will be noticed, in the course of

this Collection, that this loose and unjust mode of answering a special objection was usually sustained
by the Court, seemingly on the ground, that such must of necessity be held to be inferred, from the
general scope of the Indictment. Much of the apparent obscurity in such matters, ho\vever, may arise,
from the brief manner in which these circumstances are recorded in the Books of Adjournal.

368 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

nor na qiialificatioun of the Dittay of my knawledge. The Aduocat anfueris, it
audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay.

The Juflice ffindis the Dittay relevant, and referues the haill defenffis proponit aganis the v^erificatiouue of the Dittay to the Affyis ; ffindis the proces for
the llauchter.

The Aduocat paflis fra the taking away of the horfe, 2^ro loco et tempore.

ASSISA.

Nicoll Carnecroce of Calfliill, Capitan Patiik Herring, Thomas Alexander, povtionar of

James Weitcliie of NortIiSyntoune,ArchebaldLayng,merclian(lthair, Drummeldrle,
Robert Hepburne of Mavkill, Johne Fairlie, merchand tliair, Williame Dowglas of Erlifmylue,
Jobne Baillie of S' Johnes Kirk, James Johnefloune, merchand Joline Dunbar of Moynes,
Edward E(l5er, merchand burges burges tliair, Tlionias Hay of Scrogis,

of Ediuburghe, Robert Home of the Heuch, Andro Logane of Grantoune.

Quhilkis perfounes being chofin, fworne and adniittit, eftir the accufatioun of
the faid A^'^illiame Cwninghame of Tourlandis, of the crymes contenit in the
Dittay foirfaid ; ffor \''erificatioune of the fyrft poynt thairof, the faid Mr Thomas
Hamniiltoun, aduocat, produceit the faid Williame Cwninghames Depofitiounis
and Confefliounis ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Deposition and Confession of the Pannel.

At EdI^, the xij day of December, 1601 3eiris. In prefens of Johne Erll of Montrois, chancillai',
S"^ George Home of Spott thel'aurar, Mr Thomas Hanimiltoun of Drumcanie Aduocat, Sir Johne Cokburne of Ormiflouu Juflice Clark, and Mr Williame Haert of Lewielandis Juflice-depute, Williame
CwNiNGHHAME OF TouRLANDis, being fworne, and being demandit, anent ))e laft taking of Jie Place
of Cwninghameheid and keping of fe lamin, anfueris, that tlie hous wes fyrll tane be his broper Alexander, vpoun quhais aduerteiiment, vnderftanding that thair wes fum variance betuix him and the fuddartis within the place, the deponer cam to Jio place, and enterit pairin, and remanit within })e famin
be ])e fpace of twentie or xxiiij dayes ; be \e quhilk fpace he wes befaiget be fe Lairdis of Duntraith
and Vrchill, haifing the Kingis CommKlioun ; during ]ie quhilk tyme tliair wes fchuting out of fe hous
and fchuting in : Declaris, that his brofer Alexander had nocht enterit in Jie place of Cwninghameheid
fourtie aucht houris, before the deponer cam to liim ; and the taking of ])e place wes about March, 1600
3eiris: Denyis that he wes clinrgeit or putt to ])e home, for nocht randering of fe Place of Cwningliameheid ; bot his broper wes chargeit, vnder ])e payne of Treafoun, befoir ]ie deponar enterit in ])e
hous, and gatt knawledge }>airof quhen lie enterit.

And als the Aduocat produceit the Extract of the Lettres, vnder the figne and
fubfcription of Mr Robert Young, for chargeing of the Toune of Glafgw to affift
the Kingis Comniiffioner, for Aflageing of the faid hous, and to head fourtie hagbutteris thairto, in refpect of the Commiffioune and Lettres of Treafoun, direct
and execute aganis the Laird of Tourlandis and his complices ; quhilk wes difobeyit. Quhilk Extract of the Letteris, is of the dait, at Halyruidhous, the
fewint day of March, 1600 yeiris.

And for verification of the laft poynt of the Dittay, concerning the Slauchter
of the faid vmq'" James Stewiufoune, the Aduocat produceit Extract of the

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 369

Letteris of Hoirning, vncler the fabrcriptioun of Mr Johae Skene, dark of Rsgifter, quhairby the faid Williaiue Cwiiinghame of Tourlandis wss putt to the
Home.

Verdict. Eftir productioune quhairof, and diners alledgances maid aganis
the farain, and anfueris maid thairto be our fouerane lordis Aduocat, the haill
perfounis of Affife paft altogidder out of Court to the Counfal-hous ; quhair,
eftir chefing of the faid Nicoll Carncorfe of Calf liill chancellar, &c , they ffand,
pronunceit and declarit the faid ^Villiame Cwninghame of Tourlandis to be
Cleane, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'"
James Stewinfoune, committit in the moneth of March, in the yeir of God
J^.V.lxxxxvj yeiris, as the Dittay beris : And als, ffand, &c. the faid A\'illianie
to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of the affifting of Alexander Cwninghame his
brother and his complices, in the kepiiig of the Place of CVninghameheid aganis
the Lairdis of Duntraith and Vrchill, his Maiefteis Commiffioneris ; the faid
Alexander being chargeit, vnder the payne of Treafoune, to haif randerit the
famin, conforme to his Depofitiounes, fubfcryuit with his hand.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburghe, and thair his
heid to be ftrikin fra his botly :' And als his lands, heretageis, takis, ftedingis,
rowmes, poirelTiounes, coirnes, cattell, guidis and geir to be ffoirfaltit, efcheit and
inbroclit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faid cryme.

Dec. 16. — Dauid Gray, fyfchemonger in Edinburgh.

Dilatit for the cryme of Adulterie, committit with Elfpeth Iliflope, indueller
in Edinburgh, and Margaret Gourlay, wedow in Edinburgh.

The faid Dauid confeHis that he had ado with baith Elfpeth Hiflope and
Margaret Gourlay, as the Dittay beiris ; bot knawis nocht quhither the bairnis be
Ills or nocht. For the quhilk he afkis Godis mercie, and cummis in the Kingis will.

Verdict. The Aflyis, for the maift pairt, ffylis Dauid Gray of the cryme
forefaid.

Dec. 26. — Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of Robert Galbraith,
dempftar, Ordenit the faid Dauid Gray to be baneift the burcht of Ed"^, and during all the dayes of his lyfF; and nocht to return thairin, without his Maiefteis
licence, vnder the jiayne of deid : And als, Decernit and Ordanit the faid Dauid
to pay to the Baillie of the Quarter of Ed' Cj[uliair he duellis, the foume of fourtie
poundis money, to be applyit to the vfe (of) the Kirk : And to pafs in waird in
the Tolbuith of Ed', thair to remane quhill the famin be payit.

' ' The 16 of December, Cuninghaine of Tourlands bebeidit at the crofle, for Treafoune.

•^Birrel's Diary, p. 55.

VOL. II. 3 A

370 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

I31r WilUame Hairt, Juftlce-Depute.']

AssESSOURis. My Lord Chancillar, The Bifchop of Dunkeld,
The Lord of HaljTuidhous, The Comptrollar, My Lord Collectour.

<#laufll)tci- — ratarins autj ^i)ootiu5 Bags mxti ^istoltts, $(t,

Dec. 18. — Thomas Trumbill apperandof Mynto ; Dauid Dauidfone of

Kames ; George, RafF, James and Williame Dauidlbune, his

fones ; Jaquie Laidlaw of Rafflat ; Hector Trumbill of the

Firth ; James Trumbill, callit bane[fl James ; Mark Trumbill

in Bewlie ; Andro Trumbill, his brother ; Walter Trumbill,

callit Sir Dauidis Wattie.

Accufit and perfewit be Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, aduocat to

our fouerane lord, for his hienes interes, being affifted be Mr James Ker, brother

to vmq'^ Thomas Ker of Craling, of the crymes following.

DiTTAY aguhjl the Pannels.
FoRSAMEKiLL as it is ftatute and ordenit be diuers of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament,
that na inaner of perfoun or perfouues, of quhatfumewir eflait, degrie or conditioun thay be of, fall
fchuit, weir or beir culveringis, dagis or piflolettis vpoun thair bodeis, or in thair cumpaneis, in ony
pairt of this realme, atlier to burclit or land, vnder the payne of cutting aii" of the rycht hand, and confifcatioun of all thair guidis niovabill, being convict be ane condigne Affyis thairof : Neuertheles, it is
of veritie, that the faidis perfounis, accumpaneit with diueris vtheris thair compliceis, with convoeatioun of our fouerane lordis liegis, to the number of xxx perfounes or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir,
with jakis, fleilbonettis, liagbuttis, daggis, piftolettis, lances and vtheris wappinnis invafiue, of thair
caufing, command, afliflance and ratyhabitioune, the faidis dagis and piltolettis being expreflie forbidden,
vpoun the fourtene day of September laftbypaft, being the mercat and ffair day of the burcht of Jedburghe, cam to the faid burcht in ane profeflit hoflilitie, nochtnithftanding publict Proclamatioun maid
in our fouerane lordis name, and in name of Sir Andro Ker of Pharnyherll knycht, Provelt of the faid
burcht of Jedburghe, and of the bailleis thairof, that nane fould repair to the faid ifair or mercat hot
in fobir and quyett maner, keping oure fouerane lordis and the faid Provefl and bailleis peax : And
yit, in manifell contempt of the laid Sir Andro Ker, thay haifing confauit ane deidlie feid aganis him
and vrnq'*^ Thomas Ker his brother, and haiBng of lang tyme before invadit and perfewit Thomas Ker
of Caveris, thair freiiid and kynnifman, for his flauchter and hurt, and woundit him in diuers pairtis of
his body, to the grit effuiioune of his blude, nawyis repenting thame of thair former wickit deidis and
wrangis, bot contincwing thairin, thay addrelt thame felffis before his ludgeing in the burcht of Jedburghe, foiranent the mercat croce thairof, he being within the famin in fobir and quyet maner for the
tyme, with his (wife ?) and famelie : and thair, in publict mercat tyme of day, eftir diuers bragis, infolent behavioure and manaifiiigis vfit be thame foiranent the faid Provefl ludgeing, in contempt of him
and his feruandis, feiking the occafioun of ane new quarrell, without ony ofience, harme or iniurie done
to thame, nocht only thay wure vpoun thair bodeis and in thair cumpaneis piftolettis and gunnis, bot
als fchot the famin att the faid Sir Andro, his feruandis, and diuers honefl inhabitantis of the faid
burcht, offett purpois, provifioun, auld feid and foirthotht fellony ; bot fpecially, fchot the laid vmq'i^
Thomas Ker and vmqi George Glaidner, domeflik feruand to the faid Sir Andro : And fwa, thay
maift crewallie and vnmercifullie flew the faid vmq'e Thomas Ker and vmq'* George Glaidner with
thair wappinnis foirfaidis : And thay and ilk ane of thame ar airt and pairt thairof; and confequentlie,
thay and ilkane of thame ar nocht only giltie of the faidis flauchteris, bot lykewyis of fchuiting and

35Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 371

weiring of the faldis dagis and piftolettis, in maner foirfaid ; with coiivocatioun of oure fouerane lordis
leigis : And in refpect thairof, tbay and ilkane of thame aucht and fould be pwneift in thair perfounea
and guidis, according to the lawis of this realme, in example of vtheris.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hamrailtoune of Drumcarne, aduocat to our fouerane lord; Mr James
Ker, brother to (the faid vmq'* Thomas and to) the laid Sir Andro Ker of Phaimyherll.

Preloquutouris for the pannell, Mr Johne Scharp, Mr VVilliame Oliphant, Mr Johne Baling,
The Scheref of Roxburcht, The Guidman of Buchtryg, The Guidman of Hwtounhall, The Laird of
Mynto 30unger."

Williame Erll of Angus comperit and defyrit Jaquie Laidla, diielland in
Ancruni, qiihilk is ane pairt of the Regalitie of Jedburghe-FoiTeft, to be Replegeit to his Regalitie. The Juftice findis him to be replegeit.

The pannell defyris that thir materis may be continewit quhill Tyifday,^ and
that it may cum in pari jwjju with the vther caus f becaus letteris being rafit
be thame ofbefore, before my lord Juftice and his deputis, againis the Laird of
Phairniherft and his complices, to ane day of lang tyme bypaft, before ony
Lettres wer rafit be the partie aganis thame, it pleafit his Maieftie to command
to defert that dyett : And fummondis being rafit now be my lord Aduocat aganis
bayth the parteis to this day, for deidis alledgeit committit be thame aganis
vtheris* vpoini ane day, viz. the xiiij of September laft ; it lies pleafit my lord
Juftice, with auife of the Nobill men, counfalouris and afieliburis, to continew
the perfuit of thais parties nixtocum the xxij day of this inftant ; off all reafoun,
this perfuit aganis thame aucht to be continewit to the famin day ; and tryell
tane of the factis committit be ather of the jiarteis aganis vtheris, pari paffii, and
be ane Inqueift, but ony diuifion of the cauflis.^

The Justice, nochtwithftanding of the defyre, Ordanis proces.

The Aduocat declaris he will infift aganis all the perfonis enterit vpoun
pannell : And paffis fra thir wordis in the lybel, ' be way of Hamefucken.'

The Juge Ordanis the Aduocat to condifcend, in fpeciall, vpone the tyme of
the hurting of the Gudman of Kaveris.

The Aduocat condifcendis and declaris the hurt done to the Gudman of
Kaveris, wes committit be the haill perfones perfewit, awcht yeris fyne, or thairb}', laftbypaft.

Tlie pannell takis infti'umentis of the Interloquutour and the Aduocattis
fpeciall condifcending vpone the tyme foirfaid of the hurting of the Gudman of
Kaveris. — My lord Aduocat declaris he infiftis aganis the pannell for the ciymes
of Slauchteris libellit, vpoune foirthocht fellony ; and for the bering and wering

' His name is only inserted at the second diet, after the case was continued to the Air of Roxburghe. ^ Tuesday. ' A counter pursuit against Sir Andro Ker of Phairnyherst, and

others, which was delayed till Dec. 23, (q. v.) * Against each other. = Without any separation of these two cases.

372 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 160L

of piftolettis ; with convocatioime, and being airt and pairt thairof. — The
pannell allegit that the lybell, in that pairt anent the Convocatioime, is na wyfe
relevant, quhairvpone the perfones vpon pannell or ony of thame may be put
to the knawledge of ane Inqueift ; vnder proteftatioun, that thai one na wyfe
grant the famyn to be of veritye ; becaus the iiertbnis of the pannell, famony of
thaiin as convenit in Jedburghe, the tyme libellit, convenit at the command and
directioune of the Sheref of Roxburgh, quha ofbefoir, with concurfe of the Laird
of Phairnyhirft, than Proveft of the burgh of Jedburgh, had tane affurance
l)etuix vmq''' Thomas Ker and vmq'" Robert Trumbill of Bewly and vtheris
thair freindis ; to the effect, that the Sheref mycht haif convoyit thame furth of
the faid burgh, but ony truibill, at the Burne-wynd-Port, quhairin thai enterit,
vpone conditioune accordit vpone betuix the Sheref and the Proveft : Lyke as,
the Sheref, according to the faid conditioune, convoyit thame furth of the faid
Poirt, in qu3''et maner, but offence of ony man ; in refpect quhairof, thair reparing to the faid Sheref can nocht be comptit ony Couvocatioune, quhairvpone
ony cryme may be inferrit ; alwyfe this allegeance is proponit for the haill
pannell, vnder proteftatioune forfaid, that thai grant na Couvocatioune,

My Lord Aduocat afkis inftrunientis vjione the declaratioune forfaid, and that
it is proponit for the haill pannell.

The Justice ffyndis the lybell relevant, notwithftanding the allegance ; and
Repellis the fame loco quo ; and Referris the cognitioune thairof to the knowledge of the Affyfe.

Quhairvpoun the pannell aflvit inftrunientis. — The pannell denyes ony bering
or wering of hagbuttis or piftolettis the tyme libellit ; and takis inftrumentis
that it is affermit in the libell, difertis verbis, that thai wer fchot to the deid
with hagbuttis and piftolettis. — My lord Aduocat afkis inftrumentis, that it is
affermit in the lybell, that thai wer fchot and flaue with hagbuttis, piftolettis,
' and vtheris wappyuis.'

It is allegit be the jiannell, that my lord Aduocat can never be hard to allege
that thai wer flane with ' vtheris wappynis ;' in refpect of the exprefs affirmatioun
in the lybell, that thai wer fchott with hagbuttis and piftolettis. — My Lord
Aduocat paffis fra thai wordis in the lybell, ' to Jje deid.'

The pannell defyrit tyme to avyfe with the lybell, in I'elpect of the paffing fra
the wordis forfaid be the Aduocat.

The Justice ordanis proces.

The procuratouris allegis for the pairt of the haill iiannell, \Tider proteftatioun
that he on na wyfe grantis the lybell, nor na cryme thairin contenit, nor na pairt
thairof to be of vei-itie ; that the pannell audit not to be put to the knawlege of
ane Aftyfe, becaus vmq'^ Thomas Ker and George Gladner, his fervand, wer

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 373

oi-dourly enterit our fouerane lordis rebellis, the tyme of the allegit Slauchter ;
and proponis this allegance vnder proteftatioime forfaid. And for verificatioune
of the faid allegance, produeeit the extract of the Hoirning ; be the quhilk
lettres thai wer denunceit to the home, for the Slavicliter of vmq''' Henrie
Olypher.

My Lord Aduocat allegis the faidis perfonis wer lawfully relaxit fra the
Horning produeeit, befor the cryme libellit ; and thairfore the forfaid allegeance
aucht to be repellit ; and produeeit the faid Relaxatioune ; and afldt inftrunientis of the productioune of the Horning, and allegis the famin to be
null, in refpect of the executioune not contening ony copy of the faidis lettres
to haif bene gevin to the faid Thomas Ker and George Glaidner, or affixt
vpone thair dwelling place. To the quhilk it is anfuerit be the pannel, that the
faid Hoi-ning is lawchfull, being for ane criminal caus, to witt, for Slauchter,
quhilk merittis na favour ; be the quhilk letteris thre perfonis being only fummond to vnderly the law, Thomas Ker and George Glaidner ar bayth perfonally
apprehendit,' and the perfonis lykwyfe lauchfully fummond at the market croce,
and ane copy affixt ; and the letteris bei-is exprelly, that the meffinger ' deliuerit to the faid Thomas ane,' quhilk of all neceffity man be fupponit and prefwmit to be ' ane cojjy,' being deliuerit be the officer, quha had na vther erand
with the faid Thomas, hot to charge him and deliuer him ane copy : And be the
fubiect of the letteris, can be referrit to na thing bot to ane copy ; and the
omiffioune of that word in the extract of the Horning furlh of the Regifter can
nocht preiuge the partie. — Anfuerit my Lord Aduocat, that the Horningis,
being of thair awin natour odious, and neA'ir vfit to relfave ony favorabill interpretatioune in jugement, this Horning being vfit to flay the tryell of tlie partyes
vpone pannell, for the crwell Slauchteris and vtheris crymes libellit, the Horning
wanting ane necelTar folempnity requifit be the Act of Parliament, is manefeift
null, and fa can not flay jjroces.

The Juge Repellis the allegance proponit aganis the nullity of the Horning.
Quhairvpone the pannell alkit inflrumentis.

My lord Aduocat anfueris, the faidis perfonis wer lawchfully relaxit fra the
faid Horning befoir the crymes committit be the pannell and produeeit the faid
Relaxatioune. The pannell yit, as of befoir, defyres continuatioune quhill Tyfday, or to the morne, that thai may, in the mene tyme, aduyfe with the Relaxatioune produeeit. My lord Aduocat craves proces, and diffafentis fra all
continuatione.

The Justice ordanis forder proces.

' A teclinical phrase, employed when the officer ' serves' or ' executes,' as it is termed, the Letters
or writ upon the party against whom directed, by delivering a copy to him personally.

374 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

It is allegit yit be the pannell, that in refpect the maid pairt of thame hes bene
detenit in waird this lang tyme bigane, fwa that thai culd not provyde thame
felffis for defence, and this Relaxatioune is bot laitly produceit, and laitly writtin
as apperis, delay awclit to be gi'antit prefently, in i-efpect of the tynie of the
nyclit. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, fik ane allegance blekkit' never this
buk of before. — It is allegit, vnder proteftatioune forfaid, that thir perfones vpone
pannel awcht not to be put to the knavvlege of ane Inqueifl, for the allegit
Slaiichter of the faid vmq'° Thomas Ker, becaus, the tyme of the committing of
the Slaiichter, he wes enterit our fouerane lordis rebell and put to the home, and
herewith produceit the faid Horning, vfit at the inftance of James Maiftertoune,
for nonjiayment fevin fcoir ten 11. (L.150) mony, and xl li. for expenffis. — It is
allegit be the pannell, that the Relaxatioune producit for the firfl Horning, vfit
aganis Thomas Ker and George Glaidner, is null, becaus it is exprefly providit
be Act of Parliament, that all regiftrationis falbe in the Sheref Coiu't bukis of
the fchyre quhair the pairtyes wer denuncit, or quhair thai dwell. This Relaxatioune is nether affermit to be regiftrat in the Sheref bukes nor be the Sheref
clerk, nather declarand befoir quhame it is regiftrate, nor be quhame, nor befoir
quhame it wes produceit. — The Aduocat anluerit, the allegance audit to be
repellit, in refpect of the Relaxatioune produceit, quhilk is minut," jiroduceit and
regiftrate in the Sheref bukes of Roxburgh, and fubfcryvit be the ordiner clerk
thairof. — It is allegit be the Aduocat, that the Horning produceit, at the inftance
of James Maiftertoune, aganis the faid Thomas Ker (is null ?) becaus it is nocht
lauchfully regiftrate, within xv dayes efter the denunciatioune, conforme to the
Act of Parliament, nor yit fubfcryuit be the Sheref clerk. — It is foi'der allegit be
the pannell, for the forteficatioune of the allegance proponit for the nullaty of
the faid Relaxatioune pi'oduceit, that it is null ; for this caus, becaus it is not
regiftrate nor affermit to be regiftrate be ony Sheref dark ; and infafer as it
apperis to be fubfcryvit be ane callit Dowglas, thair wes never ane of that name
Sheref clerk of Roxburgh, except ane Mr George Dowglas, quha deceiflit twa
yeir before the faid Relaxatioune ; and he never affermes him felfF to be clerk
to the Sheref of Roxburgh. My lord Aduocat anfueris, as ofbefoir, the Relaxatioune is lufficient notwithftanding the allegance, and declaris that this Relaxatioune was regiftrat be Mark Dowglas, Sheref Clerk of Roxburgh, quha wes
reput flieref clerk, and vfit the office by regiftratioune of Hoi-ningis and Relaxatiounis, and geving furth of extractis thairof. — ^'pone the quhilk declaratioune
the pannell afl\is inftrumentis ; and forder allegis, that Mark Dowglas wes never
flieref clerk, nor affermes him to be flieref clerk, bot be the contraire, be deceis
of Mr George Dowglas, Sheref clerk, Robert Trumbill wes lawfullie providit to
' Never blackened, defiled, disgraced. " Minuted, noted in the '.Minute book.' '

35Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 375

the faid office, quha vfit and exerceit the faid office of clei'kfchip, dyueris yeris
after the deceis of the faid Mr George Dowglas.

The jjannell declairis thai haif na mair to fay, nor will fay na mair, befoir this
mater be put to the knawledge of ane AfTyfe.

The Juges continewis the faid mater quhill the morne.

Dec. 19. — The Aduocat allegis, that he will infift only aganis Hector
Trumbili. of the Firth, James Trumbill, Mark Trumbill and Axdro
Trumbiel.

It is alledgeit for the reft of the pannell, that my lord Aduocat can uocht pafs
fi-a thame, in refpect of the ftait of the proces, quhairin the pannell comperit and
l)roponit findrie defenliis, quliairvpoune Interloquutouris ar gewin, with auife
of the AlTeflburis : and eftir the proponing of the alledgances and anfueris maid
thairto, and Interloquutour gewin be my lord Juftice ; partie being willing to
abyde tryell of Juftice, my lord Juftice may nocht pafs fi'a pei'fuit in thair
preiudice.

The Justice ffindis, that my lord Aduocat may pais fra thame.
The pannell allegis the Relaxatioune produceit, makis no mentioune that it
wes regiftrate in the Sheref bukis of the flierefdome of Roxburgh ; in refpect
quhairof, na refpect audit to be had to my lord Aduocatis allegeance made
thairanent.

The Juge, cx officio, defyrit the aytli of James Dowglas of Kaveris, Shereff
of Roxburgh, being prefent, giff he knawis that Mark Dowglas wes Sheref clerk
of the faid flierefdom, and wes in vfe to keip Courtis, and x'egifter and extract
Horningis ; quha being fworne, declaris, he knew not the faid Mark to be Sheref clerk, be his knawledge ; and that he wes never reflavit nor admittit be liim
to the faid Office of clerkfliip. Quhairvpone the pannel afkit inftrumentis.

My lord Aduocatt aflvis inftrumentis that my lord Juftice declaris he will heir
the partyes be word, (and) he will gif his Interloqimtour thairvpone. — It is anfuerit be the i>annell, that the allegeance proponit be my lord Aduocat aganis
the validity of the extract of the Horning producit, fubfcryvit be my Lord Clerk
of Regifter, avvcht to be repellit, in refjiect of the extract, quliilk is ane Extract
furth of the Regifter of the Horningis of the Sherefdome of Roxburgh, and as
the originall buk of the Regifter makis na mentioune of the clerk, fwa the extract furth of the Regifter can mak na mentioune, becaus the Extract refpectis
the Regifter, and the Regifter of every flierefdome awcht not to mak mentioune
of the clerk, of the productioune of ilk feuerall horning ; becaus it being the
Regifter of the Sherefdome, is merkit be the clerk, quhilk is fufficient for the
haill horningis thairin contenit : And my lord of Regifter makis na mentioune
of the Sheref clerkis in the Extract of ony Horningis gevin furth be him ; and

376 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

gif this Extract falbe fund null, for the argument foirfaitl, the haill Extractis
I'ubfcrj^uit be my Lord of Regifter, and the haill declaratiounis gevin be the
Lordis of Seflioune thairvpone, will be fund null : And it is not proper for my
Lord Juftice to fynd all the faidis Extractis null, for the quhilk tliair is ane fufficient AVarrand be Actis of Parliament, gevand my Lord Regifter jiower to extract all Horningis furth of the Regifteris, and that they fall mak als grate fayth
as the princjpall ; and gif fik ane Relaxatioune had bene, as is now produceit,
thefe wald half bene alio in the Regifter of that j^eir.

The Juge ffyndis the Extract of the Horning produceit, vnder my Lord of
Regifteris fubfcrijitioune, to be fufficient. Quhairvpone the pannell aflcit inftruments.

It is forder allegeit be the pannell, that this Extract of the Relaxatioune produceit, is nocht contenit in the Regifter of the Sherefdome forlaid, nor is nocht
contenit in tlie Regifter thairof that yeir, quhilkis ar extant in my Lord of Regifteris handis.

The Justice Repellis the alledgance maid aganis the Relaxatioune, and
fuftenis the faid Relaxatioune produceit.

Quhairvpone my Lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

The Justice declaris he and the Afleiroris will heir bayth the faitlis parteyis,
be word ; and gif thair allegeanceis be worthy writting, he will heir thaim to
wi-itt ; vthirwyfe nocht.

Quhairvpone my lord Aduocat afliit inftrumentis.

AssisA.
Adanie Quhytefurd of Myltoune, Gilbert Pennyeuik of that Ilk, George Heiflop, armurare, burges
Neill MontgomerieofLangfchaw, Petir Collace, indueller in the of Edinburgh,
Matho Fynlafoune of Killeitlie, Iieid of tlie Cannogait, George Waldye, fkynner, burges

\\'illiani Weir of Auchterfardell, Andro Naiper, burges of Ed', thair,

Robert Cairncorfe, burges of Ed', Andro Scott, cliirurgean, Jolme Dowglas, burges thair,

James Hoppringill of Quhyte- James Stalker, indueller in the \ViHiame Fyddes, baxfler, burges
bank, hoid of the Cannogait, thair.

The quhilk day, James Ker, brother to the Laird of Phairnyhirft, being perfonally prefent in jugement, I'woir the Dittay to be trew, in prelens of the AfTyfe ;
tjuhairvpone my lord Aduocat alkit inftrumentis.

To the taikin' that this deid being done vpone the Ruid day," the ffair day of
Jedburgh, be thir perfonis vpone pannell, thai wer takin ryd hand^ be the Proueft of Jedburgh ; and at his Maiefteis command broclit to the tolbuith of Edinburgh, and hes bene kepit ca2)tives thairin continually fenlyne. — The jjannell
takis inftrumentis, that thair is na verificatioune vfit nor produceit, for verifeing

' In proof or evidence. ' Holy Rood, or Holy Cross day, Sept. 14. ' Red-hand, in the

fact, ' with the bludie hand,'

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 377

of the Dittay, bot the aith of Mr James Ker, informer. The pannell produceit
ane Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit be the Sheref, togidder with ane new Declaratioun
of the maner and trewth of the Slauchteris of vmq'° Thomas Ker and George
Glaidner; quhilk thay defyrit to be infert in proces. — The Aduocat proteftis, that
the infonnatioiin of partie fonld nocht be reffauit, nor the Teftimoniall of the
Shereff Ibuld be reftanit. — It is agreit vpoune, that George Gybfoune and Williame Mayne fould be reflauit witnefs.

The Aduocat proteftis, in refpect that George Glaidner is flayne with ane
hagbut or piftolet, quhilk is na wapj^in of defence, bot vnlauchful wappin, in
caife the Aflyis Clange, for ^Vilfull errour. And the Pannel proteftis for Wilfull errour, in cafe thay Convict thame, albeit he wes flane with ane hagbut or
piftolet, feing thay were nocht the flayaris of him, nor had na hagbut nor piftolet ; bot thair wes that he gaue away with the faidis crjanis. — And

the Aduocat alledgis that the pannell are airt and pairt of the faidis crymis.
. The Justice ffindis that the Teftimoniall fould nocht be reflauit.

Special Verdict of the AJJijse.

Quhilkis perfones of Aflyis being fvvorne, &c. thay removit altogidder furth of the Court to the
Laich-Couiifal-hous, quhair, eftir chefing of the laid Neill Montgomery of Langi'chaw chancillar of the
faid Aflyis, and after examinatioun of George Gibfoun and William Mayne, burgelRs of Edinburgh,
quha wer reflauit as witneflis, with confeut of our fouerane lordis Aduocat and of the perfounes on
pannell ; and eftir lang reafoning and voting vpoun the poyntis of the Dittay foirfaid, being throwchlie auifit thairivith, thay reenterit agane in Court, in prel'ens of my lord Juftice ; Quhair thay, be the
mouth of the faid Chancillar, fland, pronunceit and declarit Hector Trumbill of the Firth, James Trumbill, callit ' haneifi James,' Mark Trumbill and Andro Trumbill, brether to vmq'* Robert Tnimbill of
Bewlie, to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the flauchteris of the faidis vmq'" Thomas
Ker, brother to Sir Andro Ker of Pharneyhirll, and of vmq'^ George Glaidner his feruand, comraittit
vpoun the xiiij day of September laft,was, in tlie Burne-wynd of Jedburghe : And als, be the mouth of
the faid Chancillar, ifand, pronunceit and declarit the faidis perfounes to be Acquit of Convocatioun
of our fouerane lordis liegis, and of bering, weiring and fchuting of piflolettis and hagbuttis, and of
foirthocht fellony, and of all the reft of the lybell.

The Juftice thaireftir continewis all pronunceing of Dome, till he get his
Maiefteis mynd thairanent ; and committit the perfounes convict to waird within
the tolbuith of Edinburgh.

On Dec. 26, the following is inserted in the Record.

DoME^r Andro Trumbill, brother to the Guidman of Beivlie.
Dec. 26. — The Justice, be the mouth of Robert Galbraith, dempftar of
Court, decernit and ordanit the faid Andro Trumhlll to be tane to the mercatcroce of Edinburgh, and thair his held to be ftrikin fra his body; and all his
movabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict
of the faidis crymes. Quhilk wes pronunceit for dome.

VOL. IL 3 B

f578 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

^!j<iotinjr iwitl) ^t^aalJUts, ^Vc— ^lausljtn- — Sfmcml)v«tion—
(Cunboration ot tfjc iiitflts, ^f»

Dec. 23. — Sir Andro Ker of Phaniyhei'il, James Ker of Lyntellie,
"Willianie Ker, his fone ; Michaell Ker in Oxnem, (ftewart to
the Laird of Pharnyherft.) Dauid Anifle, younger in Falaw,
JoJine Aniflie, his brother, Lancelot Auiflie in Oxnem, Adame
Aniflie, his fone, Thomas Robfoune, callit Prett'te-Jit ; Matho
Robfoime in Biirnefit, Thomas Gay in Tounheid, John Gay
thair, "Willianie Rutherfurd, callit Gray Will, burges of Jedburglie ; Johne Rutherfurd, his fone ; James Hillop in Efchiefteill, Mr James Ker, brother to the Laird of Phairnyhirft ;
Williame Robfoime in Burnewynde, Thomas Ker, brother to
George the Uroirjler.
Dilatit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in beiring, weiring and
fcliuting with hagbuttis and piftolettis : And als, for airt and pairt of the flauchteris of vmq'^ Robert Trumbill of Bewlie, and vmq'' Johne Middilmeft, brotlier
to Williame Middilmeft of Lilflie-chapell : And for airt and pairt of the fchuting of James Dowglas, apperand of Todhoill, with twa bullettis in the wambe,
hurting and wounding of him thairwith : And als, for hurting and wounding of
James Dowglas in Cruik, in the neife, and demembering of him of ane pairt
thairof : And for demembring of Henrie Dauidfoune, fone to Dauid Dauidfoune
of the Kamis, of his lycht hand : And for demembring of Mark Trumbill, brother to the laid wwi^" Robert Trumbill of Bewlie, of the tliowme of his left
liand : And for dcmendjring of Andro Trumbill, his brother, of the lytill fingar
of his left hand ; and for hurting and wounding of Williame Trumbill in Tounheid, in the wambe, be the fchot of ane piftolet with twa bullettis ; committit
the xiiij daj' of September laftbypaft : ^^"ith convocatioune of our fouerane lordis
leigis ; vpoune fett purpois, provifioune, auld feid and foirthocht fellonye.

PERSEWAnis, Mr Thomas Ilammiltoune, aduocat, Nicolas Trumbill, the relict of vmq''^ Robert of
Bewlie, Thomas Trumbill, apperand of Mynto.

Preloquutouris for the pannell, Mr Johne lliiirell, Mr Tliomas Craig, Mr Johne Lcirmonth.

Comperit Williame Erll of Angus, lord of the Regalitie of Jedburghefibrreft, and defyrit the perfones following, duelland within the boundis of the
faid Regalitie, to be replegeit to the privilege thairof ; to witt. Sir Andro Ker,
&c. ; and produceit his Infeftment of the Regalitie, contenand expres privilege
of Regalitie, and delyrit the faid perfonis to be repledgeit.

The Aduocat allegis, that the laid Laird of Pharnyherft, and remanent perfonis, can nocht be replegeit ; becaus the leafing prewis uocht Pharnyherft to be
in Jedburghe-fforreft, or within the regalitie thairof; and except he preve itt,

35Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

379

thay can nocht be hard to replege. The Lord Angus anfueris, that Phariiylierft and landis thairof ar pairt and pertinent of tlie lordfchip of Jedhurgliefforreft, lialdin of iny Lord Angus.— The Aduoeat takis inftrunientis, t!iat Thomas Truinbill, apperand of Mynto, declaris, as he is inforn)it, that tlie Place of
Pharnylierft is nocht within the boundis of the Regalitie : And als, the Aduoeat
allegis, that my Lord of Angus can nocht be hard to preve, be witnefes, the Place
of Pliarnyherft to be pairt and pertinent of Jedburghe-fforreft.

The Justice ffindis that it man be verifeit be writt, that the Place of Pharnylierft is pairt and pertinent of Jedburghe-fforreft.

Thairefter, it wes fund be Interloquutoiu- that it may be verifeit be witneflis,
that the Place of Pharnyherft lyis within the boundis of the faid Regalitie.

The Lairdis of Aytouii, Broxfmyth, Traquair, being produceit as witnelis
to preve as above ; and the Aduoeat anfuerand, that thay wer kyn and freindis
to the Laird of Pharnyherft, the Juftice ffand that thay could nocht be relFauit
for the refpect foirfaid.

The Laird of Dnimmahear wes fworne, that he cam nocht heir to defend
the Laird of Phairnyherft, and wes produceit as witnefs to preve Pharnyherft
to be within the Regalitie ; and being fworne, deponis that he knawis the Place
of Pharnyherft to be within the Regalitie of Jedburghe-fforreft.

Gylbert Pcnmjcuik of that Ilk, being fworne, previs na thing.

James AnijVie, being fworne and produceit, the Aduoeat allegis that James
Aniflie could nocht be reffauit, becaus he is of the name of Anillie, of the quhilk
name diners wes att the Slauchter aboue writtin ; and fwa the perfewaris,
declarand that thay bui-e feid aganis all the name of Anillie, the faid James
coidd nocht be reffauit : And the Juftice referrand the mater to tlie declaratioun
of the faid James, qulia wes fworne, and declarit he bure feid att na man, reffauit the faid James witnefs, nochtwithftanding that the informeris alledgeit feid :
Deponit, that he knew Phairnyherft to ly within the boundis of the Regalitie.

Allegis the Aduoeat, that the Laird of Pharnyherft can nocht be repledgeit,
Ijecaus he being Proveft of the Kingis frie burcht of Jedburghe, and accufit of
ane capitall crynie coinmittit within the famin, he can nawyis be repledgeit to
ony Regalitie, in refpect of the qualitie of the place and perfoun ; nather can
his hienes Aduoeat be drawin to infift in fie ane perfuit before ony inferiour
Judge, bot audit only perfew him before his hienes Juftice Generall. — It is
anfuerit for my Lord of Angus, proponer of the exceptioune of Replegiatioun,
that albeit the Laird of Phairnyherft acceptit vpoun him to l)e Proveft of Jedburghe, that can nocht preiudge my Lord of Angus of his privilege of Regalitie
within the haill boundis of the lordfchip of Jedburghe-fforreft ; nather yit preiudge the Laird of Pharnyherft of ony benefite compitent to him, in relpect of

380

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

his cUielling-place : And albeit aiie capitall ciyme be committit within the
Regalitie, ather within burcht or land, that can nocht preiudge the lord of the
Reo-alitie'of his priviledge, quha is Judge compitent to all and quhatfumeuer
i^ei-founes duelland within the boundis of his Regalitie, quhairewir the cryme be
committit ; And forder, the Laird of Pharnyherft is nocht perfewit as Proveft,
vpoun the difcharge of his office, or for ony failsie' committit be him, in vfmg or
exerceing thairof, bot as ane privat man, for the crymis contenit in the Dittay :
And albeit mv lord Aduocat is nocht obleift to compeir befoir ony vther Inferionr
Judge, that is na cans to preiuge the lord of the Regalitie of his privilege, feing
the parteis olTendit may perfew, and any lord Aduocat may perlew be his fubftitute ; and gif that argvmient fould be refpectit, the haill heretable Regaliteis
Ibidd be vnprofitabill, and na replegiatioun fal be admittit in favouris of the
lordis of the Regalitie and thair bailleis : And forder, his Maiefteis Aduocat is
ordinarlie partie in all criminall perluitis.

The Laii-d of Pharnyherft, being inquyrit, gif he wald adhere to my lord of
Angus' defyre and alledgeance, he anfuerit, that he wald gif his procuratouris
leif to anfuer for him : And Mr Johne RuHell, as procuratour for the Laird of
Pharnyherft, declarit he wald keip fylence, quhill- the dilcuffing of my Lord
Angus' alledgeance ; quhairvpoun he aikit inftrumentis.

Denunciation againjl WiUiam Ker, S<,c.for the above crimes.

The quliilk day, Sir Andro Ker of Pliairnybirll knight, oftymes callit as cawtioner and fouertie for
WiLLiAME Ker, brother to Robert Ker of Ancruni, George Mofcrope, burges of Jedburglie, David
Mofcrope his brother, thair, George Ker in Oxnem, Johne Ker in Redden, Andro Ker thair, Charles
Robfoune in Wallis, George Pyle in Mylneheuehe, Dauid Pyle his brotlier, and Symmie Hall in
Haviefyde, to haif enterit and prefentit thame befoir our fuueraue lordis Juftice or liis deputis, the
faidis day and place, in the hour of caul'e, to haif underlyne the law for the above crynies ; lawful!
tyme of day biddin, and nocht enterand the perfonis abouewrittin, as he that become cawtioune for
thair entrie, as faid is: Tbairfoir the Jiifticp decernit and ordanit the faid Andro Ker, as cawtioner
foirfaid, to be vnlawit and amerciat for tliair nocht entrie, in tlie panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament, vid. for nocht entrie of the faid Williame Ker, in the pane of twa hundreth markis, and for
nocht entrie of the remanent ix perfonis, for ilk ane of thame in the pane of ane hundreth markis :
And als Adjudgeit the faidis Williame, &c. to be denunceit our louerane lordis rebellis, and put to his
liienes borne ; and all thair movabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, as fugitiues
fra his hienes lawis for the faidis crymes.

Persewaris. Preloquutouris for the pannell.

Margaret Trumbillj freind' to John Middilmeft, The Erll of Crawfurd, My Lord Vchiltrie,
Mark Trumbill, brother to Bewlie.* My Lord Newbottill, The Lard of Lytildene.

Dec. 2-i. — I\Iy Lord of Angnis declaris, that he infiftis only to haif James
Ker of Liutellie and "Williame Ker, his fone, replegeit ; but vnder proteftatioune

' Failure, malversation. ^ Until Lord Angus's allegation of being lord of this Regality, &c.

was discussed. ^ Relative, blood relation. * These ' perlewaris' and also the ' preloquutouris' here noted, are inserted in the Record, in addition to those formerly entered.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 381

that lie paffis noclit fra the priviledge of his Regalitie, nochtwithftaiiding that
he requyres not the land of Pharnyherft replegeit.

The Justice Admittis the replegiatioune to my Lord of Angus, for replegiatiovm of James Ker of Lintellie and Wllliame Ker, his fone : And my Lord
of Angus appointis the thryd day of the nixt Jullice-air of the Regalitie of Jedburghe-flforeft, or foner, vpoun fyftene dayis warning, for adminiftratioun of
Juftice ; and ffand Ker (of Caveris) cautiouner for adminiftratioun of Juftice ;
and James Commendater of Melroile ' become fouertie for thair entrie ; and the
Guidman of Lintellie obleift him to releve my Lord of Melroile.

The Laird of Pharnyherft takis inftrumentis that Mark Trumbill of Bewlie
infiftis in pei-fuit of his lyffe. — The Laird of Mynto refufis to perfevv ; quhaii*-
vpoune the Laird of Pharnyherft aflvit inftrumentis. — The Laird of Pharnyherft
aflvit inftrumentis, that Mark Trumbill infiftis in perfuit of his lyffe. — The pannell, except the Laird of Pharnyherft, afkit inftrumentis that Mark Trumbill
wold nocht infift aganis thame.

The pannell aflcit inftrumentis that thay offerit thame felffis to ane Tryell,
and to abyde ane Affyfe. — The faid Mark Trumbill lykwayis declaris, that he
will nocht perfew the Laird of Pharnyherft, att this tyme, in refpect he can nocht
gett ane Affyis to him. — The Laird of Pharnyherft alkit inftrumentis of the
declaratioun of Mark Trumbill ; and fpeciallie, in that poynt, that he being
inquyrit, gif he had juft cans to infift aganis the Laird of Pharnyherft ? Declarit,
that in refpect his lyffe wes faifit be him, and in his handis, he wald nocht perfew : And nochtwithftanding of the faid declaratioun, to teftifie his obedience to
his Maiefteis Juftice, and that he cravis na fubterfuge, in refpect of his innocencie, and that he did na thing hot as ane publict Magiftrate, thairfore he willinglie oflferis him felff prefentlie to ane Tryell : And becaiis this perfuit is only movitt att my lord Aduocatis inftance, he cravis his lordfcliii)is declaratioun.

The Aduocat defyrit this mater to be continewit quhill Setterday ; becaus that
he had informatioun of his Maieftie to infift in perfuit ; and vpoun informatioun
of partie, quha lies paft fra the perfuit.

Sir Andro Ker of Pliairnylierft, and Sir Joline Ker of Ilirlell, as cawtioneris for Mr James Ker,
Michael! Ker, Thomas Ker, brother to George the browfler, and James Ilillop, to haif enterit thame,
&c. were amerciat in the panis following, viz. for nocht entrie of Mr James 200 markis, and for ilk
ane of the reft 100 markis : And thefe parties were ordered to be denounced rebels, &c.

Dec. 26. — Continued to Juftice-air of ' Roxburghe, tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione xv dieruni, jjlegiis, Patricio Home de Aytoune, D. And. Ker de
Phairnyherft et D. Joanne Ker de Hirfell.'

' Afterwards named ' Johne,' in the Record.

382 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602

^laujlijtei- ill Mn(lit Comljat, in dTiflUCf.

Jan. 13. CapitaN Johne Rig, Archeour of the Gaird of France.

Dilatit for the Slauchter of vmq''' Mr Thomas Strathauchin, alias Meirnis.

Comperit Mr George Strathauchin, alias Meirnis, and produceit our Ibuerane
lordis lettres, deulie execute and indorfat, purcheft be him felff aganis Capitan
Williame (Joline) Rig ; and defyrit proces.

Comperit Mr Thomas Hope exciifato?-io nomine for Capitan Johne Rig, and
produceit ane Warrand fubfcryuit be the Kingis Maieftie, ordaning the dyet
aganis the faid Capitane Johne to be defert ; of the quhilk Precept, the tennour
folio wis.

Kex,

Justice, Juftioe Clark and 30ur deputtis, We greitt jow weill. Forfamekill as Capitan
Johne Rig and vmq'= Mr Thomas Strathauchin, Ai'cheouris of ])e Gaird of France, and fwa being
ferwandis to our darreft broder Henrie King of France, the faid Mr Thomas Stratiiauchin appeillit to
the faid Capitan Johne Rig to fe Singolar Combat; in fe quhilk Combat the faid vniq'^ Mr Thomas was hurt and woundit, and be evill handling and cure of cherurgeanis, deceiflit : Quhilk Combat,
and all that followit })airvpoune hes bene tryit be our faid darrefl broder Henry King of France and
his Jugeis, as Jugeis compitent to J)e faid Tryell, the faid vmq''^ Mr Thomas and the faid Capitan
Johne Rig being baith fubiectis to our faid darrefl bro|)er : And nochtwithftauding, as We ar informit,
the freindis and kyn of fe faid vuiq'^ Mr Thomas Strauchin hes rafit our vferis letteris, and hes fumjnond Jie faid Capitan Johne Rig, to compeir befoir 30W in our Tolbuith of Edinburgh, Jie xiij day of
Januar inflant, in pe hour of caufe, to vnderlye our lawis for Jie Slauchter of the faid vmq'^ Mr Thomas, albeit it be of veritie, that We nor our Juftices can nawyis be Jugeis compitent to J)e faid Capitan Johne Rig, he being ane Archeour of our faid derreft bro])eris Gaird, and fwa his fubiect ; befoir
quhome and his Jugeis he hes bene alreddie tryit : Lyke as, alfo, the faid Capitan Johne Rig being
vpoune fe poynt of his voyage, to pafs in France to his fevuice, can nocht gudlie attend vpoune pe
famin dyett : Quiiairfoir, We hailing tane fufficient tryell in ])e faid mater and of )ie proceding ])airof,
hes concludit that the faid Capitan Johne Rig falbe nawyis trublit in tyme cuming for fe faid flauchter. Commanding 30W, that 36 onnawyis proceid aganis him nor his cawtioner, at Jie faid xiij day of
Januar inftant, nor in na tyme cuming, for J>e Slauchter of ]ie faid Tmq''' Mr Thomas ; difthargeing
30W Jiairof, and of 50ur offices in Jiat pairt : And for fe faid Capitan Johuis mair fecuritie, caufe regiftrate J)ir prefentis in our buikis of Adiornall, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, and for 3 our Warrand.
Subfcryuit with our hiind, at Halyrudehous, fe firfl, day of Januar, 1602 3eiris.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

To the quhilk it is anfuerit be the faid Mr George Strathauchin alias Meirnis,
perfewar, that the faid Letter was ane priuie Letter, and audit nocht to be admittit. — With the quhilk Letter and anfuer maid thairto, the Juftice being
throuchlie avyfit, adniittit his Maiefteis Warrand, and defertit the laid dyett :
Quhairvpouiie the laid Mr Thomas Hope alkit inftrumentis ; and the laid Mr
George proteftit, that the admiffioune thairof preiuge nocht his perfuit in tyme
coming.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 383

Creason — dforflinfl: mia mtttvino^ 3$ast CToiit, 3ff»

Jan. 13. — Patrik Drummond, in Lenacli.

Dilatit of airt, pairt, red, counfale and conceilling of the trefTonabill fforgeing,
prenting, coin3eing and out-putting of falle and adulterat money, fik as fall'e
fyve-inmd-peices and fyve-fchilling-peiceis ; quliilkis, fyve yeir fenfyne, or tliairbye, was coin3eit be Hans Johneftoune, Fleming, and vmq'^ George Drummond,
faidler in Perth, in the kill of Lenacli and vpoun the Craigis thairof, of his
knawlege and conceilling ; fFor the quhilk he reffiiuit ten falle fyftie f. peiceis.

Verdict. The AlTyis, being fworne and admittit ; and the pannell accufit
be dittay, quhilk wes verefeit be his awin Depofitioun, and the Dei^ofitionis
of vmq'° ^Valter Murray in Dunfermling, vniq'^ George Drummond, faidler in
Perth, and vmq''^ Thomas Glas in Creif, and Thomas Reid, I'erwand to the faid
Hans, &c. ; they, be the mouth of Andro Naper, merchand, biu-ges of Edinburgh, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Pati'ik to be ffylit, culpabill and
convict, &c.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair wirreit'
at ane ftaik quhill he be deid ; and thairefter, his bodie to be brunt in afles ; and
all his landis, heritageis, coirnis, cattell, guidis and geir to be fforfalt, and be inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe.

?^oust--l)i'f afeins — Jri;tft — Hfeorse^jstf aliuij.

Jan. 13. — Patrik Murray of Galwald.

Dilatit of the cryme following, viz. Forfamekill as he, being in cumpany
with vmq'^ Mr ^Villiame Balfoure, brother to the Laird of Burlie, vmq'^ Johne
Gyb, Hary Cuik, Johne Oliphant, and vtheris thair compliceis, in the moneth of
flfebruar laftbypaft, cam, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht, to the duelling hous
of Andro Fluikar, in the Brigend of Gairny, and thair brak vp the dur of the
laid hous, enterit thairin, and fteilling furth thairof his haill inlycht pleneifling
in ane feak, with ane meir ; and had and convoyit the famin away with thame
to the place of Strowie. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous fteilling, conceling and away-taking of ane horfe furth of ane ftabill in the Cannogait-heid,

pertening to Tofcheoch of Monyvaird ; committit twa yeir fyne, or

thairby.

Verdict and Sentence. The pannel being ' fylit' by the Affife, the Juftice Oi-danit him to be tane to ane gibbet flandand in the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thairvpoune to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and ordanit all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

' Strangled.

384 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

Jan. 23. — Thojias Jak, wiycht in Haltoune.
Dilatit, accufit and ijerfewit, fforfamekill as he, accumpaneit with Johne Herrino- in Lano--Forgoun, bodin in feir of weir, with fword and vtheris wappinnis
im-a/iue, laitlie, vpoun the xxix of Julij laftbypafl, haifing confauit ane deidlie
feid ao-anis the faid vmq''' Alexandex', fett vpoun the faid vmq'° Alexander foirnent' his duelling hous, at the Kirk of Forgoune, and thair crewallie hurt and
woundit hiin in the held, and claif his harne-pan" M'ith fwordis, and thairby flew
him; and he wes airt and pairt of the llauchter of the faid vmq'" Alexander Mon cur.

Persewaris.
Andro Moncur, fone to the defunct, Johne Flouris, fifter-fone to the defuncf,

Patrik Moncur of Chapeltoune, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune, (King's Advocate.)

The pannell, nochtwithflanding that he is innocent of the Slauchter of the faid
A'lnfx'" Alexander Moncur, he becummis in the Kingis will for the famyn, and
for beiring of piftulettis.

"\"erdict. The AlTyis, be the mouth of Robert Gyb in Lochtoune, chancillar,
ffand the faid Thomas Jak to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of
the Slauchter.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair, his held
to be ftrikin fra his body, and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.^

iWuiijei-— rf)(rft.

Jan. 29. — James Cruikschaxk, feruitour fumtyme to Mr Dauid Ogilvie.

Dilatit, accufit and indytit, flbrfamekill as he, accumpaneit with Andro goung
alias Dauidfone, hantand^ in Sanct Johniftoun, laitlie, vpoun the fourt day of
Januar inftant, fett vpoun vmq'' Robert Innes, merchand att the Kirk of Inch,
one Carnboddo-niure, and thair, in the dawing of the day,^ maift crewallie (and)
fchamefuUie Murdreift and flew the faid vmq'" Robert Innes, be cutting of his
thrott : And als, thifteouflie fl;all, conceillit and away-tuik fra him his pak,*
contening merchand-geir, with his purs and certane money thairin.

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of Robert A'arnour, flvynner in Edinburgh, chancillar, ffand the faid James to be ffylit, culiiabill and convict of the
crewall Murthour of the faid vmq'^ Robert Innes ; and of the fteilling of his pak
and purs, with certane money thairin.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit vpovui ane gibet quhill he wer deid ; and thaireftir his held and rycht

' Before, immediately opposite to. - Skull, ' hrain-pan.' ^ On the margin, ' Convict et

decollat.' ' Literally, haunting, dwelling, but witiiout any fixed occupation. ^ At dawn,

immediately before sunrise. '' TraveUing pack, he being what is termed a ' packman,' or smallware merchant.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 385

hand to be ftrikin fra his body ; to be affixit, the hand in Dunde, and the heid
in Carnbodo-mure ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

^toutj^ieif — Cattle-stealiitg — l^orsr-stealiittr, ^t.

Feb. 12. — James Vallem and George Vallem, fonis to Dauid Valleni
of Woodwrae.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit, be Dittay following,

FoRSAMEKiLL as tliay, accumpaneit with Williame Ogilvie, Williarae Cumtning, Archebald Dowglas, Rikard, Ramfay, and vtheris their compUces, commoun thevis and brigandis, in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of God I™.V'^.lxxxxvj yeirls, being bodin in feir of weir, with
fwordis, fecreittig, piftolettis and vthei'is wappynnis invqfiue, vmbefet' tlie hie way and paffage to
Williame goung and James Blak, cadgeaiis," duelland vpoune the fouth fyde of the ffen-ie of Dundie,
and to twa of thair fervandis, at the Coittoune of Melgum, lyand within the Sherefdome of Forfar,
qiihair tliay wer dryvand fevin pakis of merchand-geir, on fevin horfis, towardis Brechin, to the ffair
thairof ; quliilkis packis pertenit to Patrick Wechlerbunie, burges of Dundie, and Johne Alexander,
burges of Edinburgh, vmq'" John Wrycht, burges thair, and Thomas Allane, tailjeour, burges of the
Cannogait; and thair fet vpoune thame oppinlie, in day lycht, at xij houris in the day; and, be way
of Stouth-reif, violentlie reft, (lall and away-tuke fra the faidis cadgearis, the faidis fevin pakis and
fevin horlis ; and thifteouflie and mafterfullie convoyit the famyn away with thame, togidder with the
faidis ca<lgearis, to the mouth of Glenraoy, and difponit vpoune ane grit pairt of the faid merchandgeir, at thair pleafour : And als, the faid James being accufit, fforfamekill as he, accumpaneit with
Williame Cummpig and vtheris his complices, in the moneth of October laflbypaft, come to the toune
and landis of Auchterlony, pertening to Johne Carnegie, grynter,^ and thair thifteouflie (tall, conceillit, refl'ett and away-tuke furth thairof, fax oxin and twa ky, pertening to the faid Johne Carnegie and
James Pittilach his feruand ; quhilk thay draif to the North and fauld, at thair plefour. Item, the
faid James indytit and accufit for airt and pairt of the thifteous fteilling of ane quliyte horfe furth of
Mr Williame Gairdyn fiabill. Vicar of Abirlemnoch, pertening to Johne Mortimer younger of Fiemingtoune, committit foure yeir fenfyne, or thairbye. Item, the faid George Valleme being indytit
and accufit for the thifteous fleilling, conccilling and away-taking of ane horfe fra Johne Kyd.
Persewar. Preloquutouris for the pannell.

Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne, aduocat. Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Johne Ruffell.

It is allegeit that the Dittay fould noclit bs putt to ane Affife, becaus thay
fould be iiimniond vpoun xv dayes wairning, and thay fould haif ane eopj^ The
Aduocat anfueris, that in refpect of the Dittay, quhilk is vpoun thift, the alledgeance audit to be repellit.

The Justice ffindis proces.

• Forcibly beset, kc. by stopping or blocking up the way. ^ In this souse ' cadgers' were

carriers, who travelled tlirough the country with their pack-horses, and were employed by small-ware
merchants to transport their goods to fairs and markets. At this period, all distant carriages were
effected by means of pack-horses ; and (as is the present custom of carriers) tliey usually travelled in
companies, for mutual protection and security. 'J"he moilern term cadger, is commonly applied to
persons who collect eggs, fowls, butter, he. from small farmers, &c. and bring them to market for sale.
Their present equipage consists of a horse or ass, with creels, or panniers, placed across the animal,
when foraging and bargaining witli small farmers iind cottagers ; but when they go to market, their
accumulated store is commonly brought in carts. ^ Properly, one who keeps or takes charge of

a granary or farm. It is sometimes spelt ' grainier, or ' granitour.'

VOL. II. 3 C

386 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

It is ailegeit, that this mater, concerning the taking away of the pakis, fould
iiocht be putt to the knawledge of AfTyis, becaus it is ane mater of depredatioun ; and be Act of Parliament maid in the tyme of King James the ffyft, cap.
XXX vij, all depredatiounis and maifterfuU reiffis fould be fyrft Ciuilie difcuffit
l)efore the Lordis. The Aduocat anfueris, that the faid alledgeance audit to be
repellit, in refpect of the Dittay contening Stouth-reif and thift. The preloquutouris takis inftrumentis, that thay defyrit to putt thair alledgeance in writt
thame felfl', and to dyte itt ; and that the Juftice anfuerit that he, be the auife
of the Chancillar, Collectour, Thefaurer, Lord Hereis and vtheris* ....

The Justice Repellis the alledgeance, in i-efpect of the Dittay.

The Pannell takis inftrumentis, that na partie comperis to perfew, bot my
Lord Aduocat ; and na perfoune can be putt to ane Affyis, without ane fvvorne
Dittay. The Aduocat anfueris, that he fould nocht fweir.

"\'erdict. The AfTyis, be the mouth of Alexander Kerfane in Balbethie,
chancillar, ffand the faidis George and James ^"allemes to be ffylit, culpabill and
convict of the crymes rcjpectiiie aboue Avrittin, laid to thair chairge.

Sentence. To be tane to ane gibbet at the mercat croce of Edinburgh,
and thairvpoune to be hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair raovabill guidis
to be efcheit, &c.^

[il/r WiUiam Boirthuik, Jiijl'ice-Dejmte.']

<^lausl)ttr — 35tniinri of i'istoUtjj, ^c

Mar. 3. — Patkik Lokd Gla:m:mis ; Johnne Lyoun, fone to Jolinne

Lyoun in Rouclialhill ; Johnne Lyoun, fone to ... . Lyoun,

burges of Dundie ; Johnne Scrymgeoure, Johnne Edmeftoune,

and Fargus Murray, feruandis to the faid Patrik LordGlammis;

Williame Lyoun, foruand to the laid Johnne Lyoun, fone to

Johnne Lyoun in Rouclialhill.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq"' Patrik Johneftoune of Moftoun ; and for beiring and weii'ing of piftolettis, contrair the tennour of the

Actis of Parliament ; conimittit Aiioun the faxt day of September laftbypaft.

Comperit Mr ^Mlliame Oliphant, and produceit ane Warrand, direct be his

Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followis.
Rex,

Justice, Juftice clavk and 50ure deputes, We greit 50W weill. Forfamekill as the tliryd

' Assessors to the Justice. Tire sentence is left unfiiiislied ; but it is probable that it referred to the
right of the Justice to dictate the ' allesreances' and replies, in cases wliere the matter was disputed
between the King's Advocate and the Counsel for the pannel. ' ' The aVf of Februar, twa brether

liangit, viz. Dauid ^'olumc and liis brother, for opprcfliou and fpuil5ie.' — BirreVs Diary.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 387

day of March nixtocum is appointit and affignit to Patrik Lord Glammis, and certane his friendis and
feruandis for fair comperance before 30W, to vnderly oure lawis for pe (laut-hter of vniq'^ Patrik
Johnneftoune ; nochtwitlillanding, for certane caulfis moving ws, it is oure will, and We command
50W to continew the faid dyet, vnto fe tent day of Mairch nixtocum ; and that 3e difpens with the
perfonall comperance of the faidis perfounes, and tak new cautioun of fame, that tliay fall compeir
befoir 50W, the faid tent day of March nixtocum. As 56 will anfuer to ws fairvpoun. QuLairanent
thir prefentis falbe to 30W ane Wairand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Halyrudhous, the faxtene
day of Februar, 1602.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R. Montrois, Can""', S. G. Home,' The^

QuIiiUi Precept the Juftice admittit.

The quhilk day Sir Johne Murray of Tillybairdyn, knycht, comperand be I\Ir
Williame Oliphaiit, his Aduocat, be his letteris obligatouris, fubfcryuit with his
hand, at Glammis, the laft day of Februar, 1602 yeiris, become plege and fouertie for Patrik Loi'd Glammis, &c. that they fall compeir befoir our fouerane
lordis Juftice or his deputtis, the tent day of Marche nixttocum, &c.

The quhilk day, Johnne Gordoun of Boigis, Sheref-depute of Abirdene, and
Johnne Arbuthnett of Carnedaw, oft tymes callit as cautioneris and fouerteis,
coniunctlie and feuerallie, for rejiorting of our fouerane lordis letteris, devvlie
execute and indorfat, and perfewing thairof, purcheft be Margaret Arbuthnett,
the relict, Johnne, Robert, Gylbert and Alexander Johneftounis lauchfull bairnis,
with the remanent kyn and friendis of vmq'" Patrik Johneftoune of Moftoune,
&c. ; lauchfull tyme of day biddin, and nocht produceand the faidis letteris
dewlie execute and indorfat, and nahe comiieirand to perfew thame ; thairfoir
the Juftice-depvit, be the mouth of James Lowrie, dempftar, decernit the faid
cautioneris, conjunctlie and feuerallie, to be vnlawit and amerciat, for nocht
reporting thairof, and for nocht perfuit thairof aganis the faid Patrik Lord
Glammis, in the pane of . . . thowfand poundis ; and vpoun ilk ane of the
remanent fax perfounes, in the pane of ane hundreth merkis.^

[Mr Williame Haert, Jujlice-Deputc.']

^tealinij Xiyt Dom's Max of Cocfejjfit — atruUeip, ^t.

May 21. — Williame Norwall, fcolemaifter in Cokpen.'

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit, for the thiftious fteilling, away-taking and conceling of the puir folkis box, furth of the Kirk and Seffioun-hous of Cokpen,

vpoun the xj day of Apryle laftbyjiaft ; quhairin thair wes audit poundis money,

or thairby, gewin in ahnous to the pure ; quhilk he brak vp at the watter-lyde,

befyde Movmtounhall.^ Item, ffor the cryme of Adulterie, cominittit fourtene

or fyftene yeir fyne, or thairby, with Chriftiane Dowglas ; he haifing ane mareit

wyfTe, callit Margret Morifoune, than on lyffe.

' Sir George Home, afterwards Earl of Dunbar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, ' ' Thefaurario deliberat.' = See June 9, 1602. * Mouktonhall ?

388 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

The faid Williame become in our fouerane lordis will ; and the Juftice, reflaueand him in will, ordanit the faid Williame to be Baneift this realme, during
all the dayes of his lyffe ; and to depairt furth thairof within audit dayes eftir
the dait heirof, and noclit to returne thairin vnder the payne of deid. And the
laid Williame obleift himfelf to the effect foirfaid ; vnder the payne to be hangit,
butAflyfe.

2iav6arous iWuv^tr ot a SiimlEi Umins iHan.

Jun. 2. — WiLLiAJiE Geikie Younger in Ketliynuis.
Dilatit for airt and jjairt of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of vmq''
Patrik Cathrow, in Kethinnis (' ane dumb borne 30ung man') ; committit vpoune

the XX day of Februar laftbypaft.

Persewaris.
Dauid Catbrow, myller at the niylne of Kethinnis, fader-bother to the defunct ; Mr The' Hammiltoune.
Preloquutour for the pannel, Mr Williame Olipbaut (advocate.)
DiTTAY agaiitJJ the PannelLFoRSAMEKiLL as be, with bis complices, being bodiu with ane giut fting or rung,' laitlie, vpoune fe
XX day of Februar, the ^eir of God l™.Vj^ ane 5eiris, haifing confauit ane deidlie liatrent, rancour and
malice aganis fe faid Tniq''= Patrik, quba was ane finipill, pure, durn 50ung man, fett vpoune him
within ])e toune of Cowper-in-Angus, qubair be wes in fober and quyet maner for pe tyme, doand bis
lefull effairis and buffines, traifting na ewill, barme, iiiiurie or perfuit of ony perfonis, hot to half levit
vnder Godis peax, and our fouerane lordis; and pair, crewallie invadit bim for bis flauchter, hurt ami
woundit bim with pe faid rung on the face and neife, and brak ]ie girfell of his neife,^ to the effufioune
of his blude in grit quantitie ; and gaif him diuerfe v])eris baucb, blae and bludie Araikis, v])oun bis heid,
bak, wauibe and fcboilderis ; Lyke as, the faid Williame Geikie, nocht being fatisfeit with Jie crewaltie
done to ])e faid vniq'^ Patrik Cathrow, in day lycbt ; be, vpoune ]'e faid xx day of Februar, pe 3 eir of God
foirfaid, vnder fcylence and cloude of nycht, vmbefet ])e bicway and paflage to jie faid vmq'^ Patrik, in
the Rafcbe-m)Te, lyand betuix Cowper and Ketbynis, as be was in fober and quyet maner pafland on
the hie way towardis the tonne of Ketbynis, to his faid faper-brojieris duelling bous pair, dredand na barme
or iniurie to liaif bene done to bim be pe faid Williame, in refpect of the bludie woundis gevin to bim
ofbefoir ; and pair, of new, fett vpoune pe faid vmq'^ Patrik, and with ane rung, befl.,^ ftraik and dang
bim vpoune pe beid, face, bak, fillettis and wambo, and brak bis baill iiitrallis, that it was piteous to
half bard pe laroentabill routis'' and cryis of the pure duin man ; and left bim nocht, quhilP be pe faidis
crewall flraikis be flew, and murdreift him, and left him deid vpoune pe ground : Committaml pairbye
crewall, fchamefull and abhominabill Slauchter and jNIurtbour, being ane dumb borne 30vmg man,
vnbabill to half defendit bim feltf; vpoune fett purpois, provilioune and foirthocht fellonye.

The Aduocat protellis for Wilfull Errour, in cais thay acquit, in refpect of
the Dittay and taikinnis.^

^ To be banged without farther Trial. - This Dittay, it need hardly be observed, has been

preserved here chiefly on account of the extraordinary nature of the case, and the remarkable phrases
with whicn it abounds. ^ A large bludgeon or cudgel. ■* The gristle, cartilage, or flexible

part of bis nose; perhaps implying also the ' bridge.' ^ Beat, Old Fr. baste, hasted. It may

be ' bij't,' baft, a synonymous word. ' Bellowings, usually applied to the lowing of cattle, especially when impatient to be milked, or to be driven home in the evening. ' The kye stand routin'
in the loan.' 'Until. ' Evidence, .toA:e«5, proof.

35 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 389

Verdict. Eftir accufatioime of the faid Williame, be Dittay, of the ciymes
aboue writtin, quhilk he alhiterhe denyit, tlie Aflyis, be the mouth of Sampfouue Ker, in Auchterhous, Chancellar, ffand the faid Williame Geikie to be
Clene, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt of the crewall nuuthour aiul flauchter foil-laid, &c. Quliairvpoune the laid Williame Geikie afkit actis and inftrumentis.'

€.tevri0in(j tlje St&tt o( 0otav)} h)itl)out laiMful esaairant.

Jun. 9. — "Williame Norvell, fcole-mailler in Cokpen.^
Accufit and jierfewit be Dittay, at the inftance of Mi' Robert Lyntoune, fubftitute to our fouerane lordis aduocat, for the crymes following.

Dittay againji the Pannel.

FoRSAMEKiLL as, it is flatute be the Actis of Parliament and lavvis of tliis realine, that na maner
of perfoune gif him felf furth for ane Notour, or vfe or exerce the office of Notarie, vnles tliay be firit
prefentit be liis Maiellie, be his hienes Letter of Prefentatioune directit to the Lorilis of tlie SelTioune,
and tliaireftir admittit be tlie faidis Lordis to the faid office, efter tryell ; and thair ProthogoU-buik
fychtit and niarkit be the Clark of Regifter and his deputtis ; and gif ony man prefwme to do in the
contrair, to be pwneifl to the death : As the faidis Actis of Parliament at mair lenth beiris. And
trew it is, that the faid Williame Norvell hes vfit and exerceit the faid office of Notarie, as ane ordinar
Notar, in fyndrie deidis, fik as in Contractis, Obligatiounis, Seafingis, Requifitiouis or Redemptionis ;
and generallie in all thingis, quhen he was requyrit, continewallie fen the moneth of November, the
yeir of God r".V'=.lxxxv yoiris, to the day of his apprehenfioune ; albeit it be of veritie, that he was
never admittit to the faid office of Notarie ; lyke as, he never had his Maielleis Prefentatioune direct
to the faidis Lordis of Sefiioune, for his admiffioune to the faid office ; nather had he ane Prothogollbuik, niarkit be the Clark of Regifter or liis deputtis, conforme to the ordinance prefcryuit be the laidis
Actis of Parliament : Quhaiiin he hes falflie circumvenit and diffauit our fouerane lordis leigis, as ane
falfe difTauear ; geveing bim felff furth to be ane Notour, he being nane : Quhairbye he lies incimit
the panis contenit in the faidis Actis of Parliament.

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of Robert Smyth, merchand in Edinburgh, Chancellar, ffand the laid Williame to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of
the faidis crymes.

Sentence. To be tane to ane gibbet, ftandand vpoune the Caftel-hill of
Edinl)urgh, and thairvpoune to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to be elcheit, &c.

^'laufiljter.

Jun. 15. — James Cwninghame of Glengarnok.
Dilatit of art and part of the flauchter of vmq" Williame Cwninghame, in
Wal3aird.

» It is likely that the Lord Advocate abandoned his writ of Error against the Assise ; at least no
mention is made of the matter, in the Record. = See May 2\, 1C02. Although the former Assise
had acquitted Norvell, yet the public prosecutor had set his seal upon him ; and, in his next charge,
crushed this ill-fated thief, adulterer, and ' fals notour.'

390 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. l602.

PfiRSEWARls, Katherine Crawfurd, the relict; Gabriell Cwningliame, as brother.

Preloquutouris for the peifewaris.

The Laird of Cwninghameheid, the Laird of Craigance, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune.

Preloquutouris for the pannell.

The Laird of Caprintoune, the Laird of Houlloune, the Laird of Blair, Williame Porterfeild of at

Ilk, Mr Johne Scharp, Mr Williame Oliphant.

The Juftice continewis this dyet to the morne, the xvj day of this inftant.
(Plegio, Roberto Hammiltoune de Inchemauchan.)

Jun. 16. — The perfewar aflds inftriimentis, that he is reddie to perfew,
and will infill conforrae to the cautioune fundin contrar the Lard of Glengarnok ;
and proteftis for releif of his cautionar. — The Aduocat declaris, that he will
nocht infift in perfuit, becaus he lies na informatioune of the partie nor the
Thefaurer. — The pannell takis inftrumeutis, that Gabriell Cwninghame and the
preloquutouris infiflis in his perfuit.

The Justice, being- auifit with my Lord Chancellar and the reft of the
AffelTouris, declaris, that vpoun occafioun moving thame, will nocht putt this
mater to the knawledge of ane AfTyis this day ; bot continewis the famin to the
thryd day of the nixt Juftice-air of the flierefdome of Perth, or foner, vpoun
(xv dayis warning.)

The Laird of Glengarnok, prefent, takis inftrumentis, that the partie perfewar, rafar of the letteris, hes comperit this day judiciallie, and offerit him reddie to perfew ; lyke as, the faid Laird of Glengarnok, being enterit on pannell,
ofTeris him to (abide) ane tryell, for the cryme lybellit, according to the law.

Johnne Blair of that Ilk becomes pledge and fouirtie for James Cwninghame
of Glengarnok, that he fall compeir, &c,

^lautjljtei* — ^toutl)rcif.

Jun. 24. — JoHXE Mure of Auchiudrane.'

Dilatit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'"' Sir Thomas Kennedie of
Cul5ean, kny' : And of ftouthreif^ of his purfe, worth ellevin fcoir rois-nohillis ;
fax dofoun of goldin buttownis ; ane ryng of gold, contenand nyne dyamountis fet
thairin ; his Iword, belt and quhingar ;' committit the xij day of May laftbypaft.

Persewaris, Dame Elizabet Mi^Gill, the relict of vmqic Sir Thomas Keimedie of CuUane, kny',
James Kennedie as fone, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcairne, Aduocat to our Ibuerane lord.

Preloquutouris for the pannell, the Laird of Langlchaw,* the Laird of Kowallane,* the Laird of
Auchinlek,'' the Laird of Blair," Mr Williame Oliphant, Mr Johne Ruflell.

The Laird of Langfchaw takis inftriunentis of the entrie of Johne Mure of
Auchindrane ; and proteftis, that he be relevit, as cawtioune. — The perlewaris

' See Jul. and Nov. 1608, Feb. 1609, and Jul. leiL « Theft accompanied by violence. ' A

kind of short sword or hanger, * Sir Niel Montgomery. ^ Mure. '' James Boswellt

■" John Blair of that Ilk.

35Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 391

takis iuftrumentis of the productioune of the letteris ; and proteftis for releve of
thair cawtiouiie.

Compeirit Johne Maifter of Orkiiay, and iiroduceit the Warrand vnderwrittin ;
quhairof the tennoiu' followis.

Rex,

Justice, Jullice Clark and 5 our deputtis, We greit 50W liaiitlie weill. Forfamekill as We,
vnderftanding, tliat the xxiiij day of Junij inftant is appoyntit be vertew of our vferis Letteris, direct
at fe inftauce of Dame Elizabeth M'^Gill, relict of vmq''^ Sir Thomas Keniiedie of Cul5eane, kny', and
James Kennedie, tliair eldefl lawfuU fone, with concurrence of our Aduocat for our intrcs ; for tryell
of Johne Mure of Auchindrane, and certane vferis perfonis his complices, for f e crewall murtbour and
flauciiter of J)e faid vmq'^ Sir Tiiomas Kennedy ; committit be ]iarae in Jie moneth of Maij laftbypaft.
And We, willing to be condinglie tryit, for ])e pairt of fe faid Jolme Mure of Auchindrane ; and for

better tryell Jiairof, neceflar it is, that the boy callit ,' quha was directit fra Mayboill to

fe faid Johne Mure of Auchindrane, as alfo the boy callit ,'' quha come to Thomas

Kennedie in Bargany, a lytill befoir ])e committing of fe faid murtbour, war apprehendit and examinat
and tryit, quliilk we vnderfland is nocht git done ; and that the laidis twa boyis ar fugitiues ; quhairbye ]ie veritie is fuppreiiit. Thairfoir it is oure will, and We command gow, incontinent efter ]ie fycht
heirof, ge continew gour Court, and all proceding aganis the faid Johne Mui'e of Auchindrane in Jie
faid mater, quhill the tlirid day of ]ie air f or that he be new fummond, be ])e pairtie, to |>at effect. As
alfwa, that ';;e proceid and minifter juilice aganis all the remanent perfonis conlenit in our faidis Letteris comperand, and that war fummond to vnderlye our law for the cryme aboue fpecifeit. And this
ge faill nocht to do, without ony delay. As ge will anfuer to ws vpoune ■:;our obedience. Anent the
quhilk, })ir prefentis falbe gour Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, at Falkland, the tiventie-foure
day of Junij, 1602. (Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

The faid Johne Mnre of Anchindrane difalTentis to all continewatioiin of this
mater ; and offerit him reddie to vnderly the law for tlie crymes aboue writtin.

Sir Neill Montgomerie of Langlchaw become pledge and fouirtie for Johne
Mure, that he fall compeir the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the Sherefdome
of Air, or foner, viioun xv days wairning.

8ri)tft — ^Ijcotin ti Df ^istolfts — a^aiiiaiouslij 3iuvntntr a Moiunit

on a rtli--i)ot * ^irtill/ ^'r.

Jun. 29. — Alexander Rowaxe, fone to NicoU Rowane of Sandiedub.

Dilatit of certane crymes of thift, fchuting of piftolettis, and for burning of

Katherine Huggoune, in the Burnefyde of Saling, vpoune ane girdill.'

Comperit James AVynrahame, and produceit the AVarrand vnderwrittin ;

quhairof the tennour followis.

Justice, Juflice Clark and goure deputis, and Aduocat, We gi-eit gow weill. Forfamekill as ])e
xxis day of ])is inftant wes appointit and affignit to Alexander Rowane, for his perfonall comperance
befoir gow, to half vnderlyne our lawis for certane odious crymes, att lenth fpecifeit in Jie criminall

' William Dalrymple. ^ There was only 07>e boy. Dalrynii)le, however, liail been prevailed on to change his

name several times. This unfortunate youth was afterwards murdered on the Sands of Girvan, by the elder and
younger Mures and James Uanuatyne, under circumstances of peculiar atrocity. See Jul. 1611, &c. That Case is
perhaps one of the most remarkable, in all its parts, of any one on record. ^ The Justice air of the Sherifl'dom ot Ayr.
'• A large circular piece of hammered iron, still in common use in Scotland, in place of au oven, for toasting oat-cakes, &c.

392 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

letteris direct Jiairanent : Tliairfore, and for findrie vj)er our weclitie occafiounes moving ws, efpeciallie, becaus cure Thcfaurer, quha audit to perfen' in fat mater, will nocht be preft-nt, atl ]iat day :
It is our will Jiairfore, and We command 30W to continew the faid dyett, vnto Tpe fyrft day of Julij
nixt; and in ]>e nieane tyme, tliat 56 keip fe faid Alexander Rowane in fuir waird : As je will anfuer
to ws Jiairrpoune. Qubairanent thir prel'entis falbe 5 our warrand. Subfiryuit with our hand, att
Perthe, the xxvij day of Junij, 1602. (Sic i'ubfcribitur) JAMES R.

Jul. 1. — The Justice continewis the mater to the thrid daj- of July.

Persewaris.

James Stewart, portioner of Sandiedub, Katlierine Huggoune, at the Burnefyde of Sawling, Criflian

Hammiltoune in Lynmylne, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune for his liienes intres, Mr Johne Gib.

Prelouuutouris for the pannell, ]Mr Vnij)hra Blyndfcheillis, Mr Alexander Peblis.

DiTTAY agaJnJl the Pannel.

FoRSAMEKiLL as, the faid Alexander, with his complices, in the moneth of Jamiar laftbypaft, come
to the landis of Overtoune of Pitvar, and thair thifteouflie ftall, concelit, reffett and away-tuke furth
tbairof, ane gray horfe pertening to Robert Tempilman thair. Item, for airt and pairt of the thifteous
lleilling, conceling and away-taking of ane blak kow, fra James Inglis, in tlie Pow of Adie ; conimittit
in the moneth of Auguft or thairbye, the yeir of God l"\V'^.lxxxxTiij yeiris. Item, for contravening
of our fouerane lordis Actis of Pai'liament, in fchuiting of ane piilulet, chargeit with twa bullettis, at
the faid Criftian Hammiltoune, and fchuting of hir throw the courfchet' thairwith ; committit in the
moneth of Augull lallwas. Item, fl'orfaraekill as, he and his complices, in the moneth of December
or thairbye, the yeir of God I".V''.lxxxxviij yeiris, come to Katherine Huggoune duelling-houle, at the
Burnefyde of Sawling, and thair put violent handis in hir perfoune, and fett hir bair erfe vpoune ane
reid hett^ girdill, ftandand vpoune ane ingill ;-' held her perforce thairon, quhilH ane grit pairt of the
flefche of hir hi])is was brunt. Item, for airt and pairt of the tliifteous fleilling of certane blak aittis
fra the faid James Stewart; committit in the moneth of Februar lallwas. Item, for commoune thift
and commoune reffett of thift.

Jul. 3 — The pannell takis inftrumentis, that thair is na jierfounes coml^eiris to perfew, except the perfounes aboue writtin ; and farther, that nather
Johne Broune in Fairnyherft, James Gibfoune, Agnes Rowane, Johne and Thomas Homes, compeiris nocht to perfew, nather to informe my Lord Aduocat. —
AUedgeit for the pannell, that the burning of Katherine Huggoune is nocht
relevant, and audit nocht to be put to ane Ailyis, becaufe fcho was nocht brunt
to the deid. — The Aduocat anfuerit, that this being ane extraordinar and odious
crjnne, the attenuating of it, and proceding to the verie executioun, be fetting of
hir vpoune ane burning girdill, as conatus cum effectu, mereittis the deid,^ and
audit to pafs to ane Aflyis.

The Justice ordanis this matter to be (put) to the knawledge of ane Allyis.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the Iwering of the AlFyis ; and alio of the
Iweiring of that poynt of the Dittay concerning Criftian Hammiltoune, of fchuting of hir with ane piftulet throw the hair of the heid : And further, of the

' Often spelt cotircJie, or curcheij, a sort of cap or mutch, shaped to the head like a close liood, but
the back part so formed as to descend on the shoulders, and a little over the ears. Old Fr. couvrC'
chef. 2 Red-hot. • = Fire. ' Until. ^ The punishment of death.

35 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 393

fweiring of Katherine Huggoune, concerning the burning of Lir vi^oune the
girdill ; and of the fweiring of James Stewart, of the pairt of the Dittay concerning him, aganis Alexander Rowane. — The Aduocat proteftis for Wilfull Errour
aganis the Aflyis, in cais thay clenge,' in refpeet of the notorietie of the crymes
laid to his charge, and of the fwering of the Dittay be the perfewaris.

Verdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of Dauid Bruce of Brathieburne, Chancellar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Alexander Rowane to be fTylit,
culpabill and convict of the haill crymes and poyntis of Dittay aboue writtin.

Sentence. For the quhilk cans, the Juftice, be the mouth of Walter Pirie,
dempftar, decernit and ordanit the faid Alexander Rowane to be tane to ane
gibbet, flandand vpoune the Cafl;el-hill of Edinburgh, and thairvpoune to be
hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

33arftavous iHtuUtr, ^f.

Jul. 3. — Patrik Stewart, in Innervak.
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit be Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcarne,
aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes interes, of the crymes following,
to wit.

Dittay againjl the Pamiell.

FoRSAMEKiLL as he, accumpaneit witli Stewart, his brother, and Allefter Reocb, his ferwand, laitlie, in the moneth of November, tlie yeir of God I^.Vj*^. yeiiis, haifing confauit ane deidlie

malice aganis vmq'^ Angus Dow M'^Ewir, liis ferwand, for alledgeit abufing of Stewart, his

dochter, in fornicatioune, tuke and apprehendit tlie faid vinq'* Angus, band liim hand and fit as ane
malefactour, brak his rycht leg with ane ax, and thaireftir, with ane fcharpe knyffe or durk, cuttit
away his fecreit niemberis fia iiim, and put in het adis and emmeiis^ in the bag of liis I'ecreit nieniberis, quhilk reftit vncuttit ; and crewallie demanit, hurt and woundit him thairbye ; and thaircfter
kuift' him on horlLak, and convoyit him to the toune of Blair-in-Atholl ; quhair the faid vniq'"^ Angus
tuke bed, and continewand bedfafl, in grit dolour and difeas thairof, be the fpace of fyve dayes or
thairbye ; at laft, he, in the faid moneth of November, deceiffit, be the faid crewall handling ; and fwa
was crewallie and vnmercifuUie (lane be thame : The faid Patrik being airt and pairt of the faid crewall
llauchter ; the lyke of the quhilk crewaltie and tyrannic was never hard to be committit within this
cuntrey, nather in hieland nor lawland.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Dnimcame, aduocat.
Preloquutouris for Patrik Stewart, Mr Johne RufTell, Mr Alexander King.

Williame Stewart of TuUich takis infl;rumentis of the entrie of the faid Patrik ;
and proteftis, that he, as his cautioner, l)e relevit ; quhilk wes grantit.

The pannell denyis the cryme ; quhairvpoune his preloquutouris takis inftrumentis : As alfo the pannell takis inftrumentis, that na partie compeiris to perfew, except our fouerane lordis Aduocat ; or that na jjerfoun fwoir the Dittay.

' Cleanse, acquit. ' Hot ashes and live-embers. ' Cast, tossed.

VOL. II. 3 D

394

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

ASSISA.

Johne Stewart Neilfoune in Fofs, Alexander Kobertfoune of Faf- Duncan Robertfoune of GlenWilliame Stewart in Duiitulleich, cal^e, gennet,

Joiine Tailafoune, apperand of Johne Farguefoune, callit Bar- Mr Robert Rois of Craigie,

]\Ioin:;eis roune Farguefoune, Duncan Robertfoune of Pitcaftell,

Tarloch Robertfoune in Calie- Johne Farguefoune in Cluny, James Robertfoune of Killifchawie,

j,j^gr Dauid BaiToune in Faudowie,' Andro Boyd, portioner in Litill

Robert Robertfoune of Strowan, Alexander Stewart in Bifchoprie, Duukeld.

The Aduocat proteftis for Wilfull Errour, in caile thay acquit, in refpect of
his awin Confeffioune ; quhair he confefl, that he wald haif flayne his brother,
for the latting of the faid vniq'' Angus gang.

Verdict. Eftir accufatioiuie of the faid Patrik be Ditta)^ quhiLk was verifeit be his Depofitionis, the Affyis, be the mouth of the faid Chancelar, ffand,
pronunceit and declarit the faid Patrik Stewart to be fj'lit, culpabill and convict
of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq"" Angus Dow M'Evir.

Sentence. To be tane to ane place befyde the mercat-croce of Edinburgh,

and thair his heid to be ftrykkin fra his bodie ; and all his movabill guidis to

be efcheit, &c.

The famin day, George Ledie Capitan of Blair, Neill Stewart in Fofs, Robert Stewart in Faucaftell, Alexander IVMntofch in Tirenie, George M'Tntofche, his brother, Alexander Stewart in Bohefpik, John Butter in Eifter Dunfallandie, Andro Burt, eldar in Cult, Johne Stewart M'^Robert in
ArchgowU, George Nafmyth in Ladache, and James Nafmyth off Inwar, vnlawit, ilk ane of tharae in
the pane of ane hundreth markis ; for nocht compeiring and palling Tpoune the Affyife, &c.

3Kapt antJ i^abisfjincj— aScsicfrinfr ^omt of aucl)mrtl»eiT, ^r.

Jul. 6. — James Chene of Pennan."
Dilatit of the Rapt and Reveifching of INIariorie Cuke, dochter to Willianie
Cuke in ^'^rinacli : And ficlyke, for the aflageiiig of Gilbert Baird of Auchmedden
(his) houfe : And for fthuting of piftolettis at Lilias Baird, and caufing of hir
pairt with barne ; and vtheris crynies.

Persewaris, Mr Thomas Hamniiltoune, Willianie Cuik of Vrinoch, for INIariory.

Preloquutouris for the pannell.

Mr Thomas Craig, My Lord Home, My Lord Sanquhar,

The Laird of Donypaice, Mr Johne Ruffell, Mr Alexander King.

DiTTAY agaivjl the Pannel.

FoRSAMEKiLL, as it is expreflie provydit, rtatute and ordanit be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, maid in the tyme of his hienes prediceffouris, that na maner of man commit Rapt or Reveiftli1 This person's name affords an instance of the ditficulty and uncertainty of Genealogical enquiries, and the immense
research requisite for tracing Faniily-jieiligiees, especially in the North of Scotland. He is here described as ' Dauid
Barruune in Fawdowie ,-' when chosen Chancellor of the Assise, he is designed ' Dauid Furyuisoun, liarroiin ofFaudowie ;' and he subscribes the verdict of the Assise, ' Dauid IMcDuf of Faudout !' Another person in the same
Assise, ' Johne Fargncsoune, callit Barrvune Farguesomic,' still fiu-ther illustrates this remark, regarding the laboujand indefatigable industry which must be displayed by the correct Genealogist and Historian. "^ See Jul. 9,

20, and 30. The pannel was brother of Patrik Cheue of Essilmoutb, a person of cousiderabU note and iuUuence.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 395

ing of wemen, vnder the panls contenit in tlte faidis Actis : And trew it is, tLat James Chene cf Pennan, accumpaneit with Alexander Chene, fone to Williame Chene in Orclieartoune, Geddes

and Thomas Dauidfoune, feruitour to Patrik Chene of Effihnonth, accumpaneit with diuerfe vtheris
thaii- complices, with conuocatioune of his hienes liegis, to the novvmer of tvvelf perfonis or thairhye,
all bodin in feir of weir, with fecreittis, plait-flevis, gantilettis, fteil-bonnettis, fwordis, dagis and piftolettis, expreflie prohibite to be borne, worne, vfit or fchot with, be his hienes Actis of Parliament
and Secreit Counfale, vnder diuerfe panis contenit in the famyn, laitlie, in the monelh of July, the
yeir of God Im.V'^.lxxxxvij yeiris, come, be way of Hamefuckin, vnder fcylence and cloude of nycht,
to the faid Williame Cuke duelling-hous in Vrinach, lyand within the Sherefdome of Abirdcne, quhair
tlie faid Mariorie Cuke was, in fober and quyet maner for the tyme, doand hir lefull effairis and buffines, traifling na ewill, harme, iniurie or perfuit of ony perfonis, bot to haif levit vnder Godis peax and
our fouerane lordis ; and thair pat violent handis in hir bodie, tuke hir captiue and prefoner, and perforce reveifchit,' and convoyit hir away with thame to the faid James Chene duelling-Iious in Pennan .
quhair the faid James deforcit and abufit hir bodie, and held and detenit hir in captiuitie within the
faid James houfe, be the fpace of xij dayis or thairbye ; vfurping thairbye our fouerane lordis authoritie
vpoun thame, in taking of the faid Mariorie, his hienes frie liege but" commiffioune or authoritie : And
fwa, he being airt and pairt of the faidis crymes, hes contravenit the tennour of the faidis Actis of Parliament, in rapt and reveifching of the faid Mariorie, being than ane virgyn ; and hes incurrit the panis
contenit in the faidis Actis, quhilkis aucht and fuld be execute aganis him with all regour, in cxampil
of vtheris to commit the lyke in tyme cuniing.

The iiannell being ^ defyrit qiilia wald infift in tliis perfuit, The Aduocat
declaris that he infiftis, togidder with Williame Cuik, fader to Mariory Cuik :
And the faid Mariorie, being chargeit to infift, fche is excufit, be Teftimoniall of
the Minifter, that fche is lyand in chyld-bed-lair.

Item, ffand that my Lord Aduocat has intei-es to perfew, albeit that the
principall letteris ar nocht rafit at his inftance, for the Reveifching of Mariory
Cuik ; the ^\'^alkning' being rafit in my Lord Aduocattis name, nocht contenand
Mariory Cuikis name.

The Aduocat takis inftrvxmentis, that he pafTes fra the wordis, ' as adminiftratour, tutour, gyder and gouernour,' and kepis the wordis ' as fader.'

The Justice fRndis Williame Cuik, as fader, hes interes to perfew for the
iniurie done to his dochter ; albeit fche wes of jierfyte aige quhen the principall
Summondis wes rafit, and is nocht prefent to perfew.

The faid Mr Johne Ruflell preloquutour defyris, that his alledgeance may be
recordit be Avritt.

It is alledgeit, for the pairt of James Chene, that he aucht nocht be putt to
ane Afiyife for the reveiffing of Mariory Cuik, becaus he opponis exccptiojpontanee volnntafis aganis the force and violence ; as he, being fyrft mareit with
Katherene Ruthirfurd his fpous, and infafar as it is offerit to be provin, before
the tyme lybellit, that the faid James had carnall deill with the faid Mariory ;
and thairefter, in refpect of the familiaritie betuix him and hir freindis, fche

1 Carried away by force. ^ Without. ^ Having ? * Process of Wakening.

396 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

frelie, of hir awin meare will, cam to the faid James, in cumpany Avith Marioime
CuUen and Helene Qiihyte, remanit in his hous be the fpace of xiiij dayis altogidder, he being abfent all the tyme furth of the faid hous, and fche mycht half
returnit to hir faderis hous att hir jileafoiu-, it being diftant hot ane myle or twa
att the farreft, hir fader and freindis haifing acces to hir ; the faid James being
abfent be the fpace of xxxij mylis att the leift, purpoflie fend to Abirdene to by
hir clathis ; during the quhilk tyme fche nocht only adminiftrat hir efTairis, bot
tuik of hir kiftis and coifFeris fie geir as fche pleafit, quliilk thaireftir M'es reffauit
aff hir hand be hir fader and mother : Quhilk being done, fche wes perfwadit
be hir fader and Rychart ^'giftoune to affirm, that fche wes reveift, and fche
fould gett geir fra him for hir aduancement. In refpect quhairof, the faid
alledgeance being verefeit prefentlie, the mater can nawyis be putt to ane Affyis ;
att the leift, this exceptioun and tryell thairof man be tane coniunctlie with the
lybell ; and takis inftrimientis, that thay offer prefentlie to verifie the faid
alledgeance, before the mater be putt to ane AfTyfe.

The Aduocat alledgis, that the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of
the funnnondis ; and na probatioim can be reffauit in the mater, be the Juftice.

The Justice, AA-ith auife of his Affeffouris, repellis the alledgeance, in refpect
of the fummonds.

The pannell proteftis, that nochtwithftanding thair alledgeance be repellit hoc
loco, that thay may haif place to verifie the faid alledgeance to the Affife.

The Justice continewis this mater to the nynt of July.

Preloquutouu for the pannell, My Lord Erie of Crawfurd.'
Jul. 9- — Allegeis, that the bering of piftolettis or fchuting thairwith, can
nocht be put to ane Affyife, becaus thair is Commiffioun grautit to the Laird of
Effilnionth' and vtheris thairin contenit, to tak the Laird of Troupe and vtheris,
in quhais cumpany the faid James wes prefent, att the executioun of the faid
Commiffioime ; vnder proteftatioun, he aifermis nocht that he M'ure piftolettis,
att the tyme lybellit ; and produceit the Commiflioune. — The Aduocat allegeis,
that the alledgance aiicht to be repellit, in refpect of the Commiffioun grantand
na Commiffioiui to the faid James Chene ; nather wes he defyrit be the Coramiffioune, att the tyme lybellit, to aflift thame. — Allegeis James Chene, that gif
he Aviire ony piftolettis the tjnne libellit, he did na wrang ; vnder proteftatioun,
becaus his Maieftie directit his Commilfioini to certane his Commiffioneris,
fpeciallie to Patrik Chene of Effilmontli, his brother: Quhilk Commiffioun is
ane fufficient to him to beir piftolettis ; and gif ony wyis he lies borne or worne
the faidis piftolettis, it wes done with his faid brother and vtheris his Commiffioneris, in executioun of the faid Commiffioune. — The Aduocat alledgeis that
' In addition to those formerly entered. ^ Patrik Cbene, brother of the pannell.

35JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 397

the faid alledgeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Commiffioun berand
na anfuer. — Anfuerit the pannell, the Commiffioun gevis ane Warraud to convocat the Kingis liegis.

The Justice Repellis the alledgeance, except that thay inftantlie verifie that
he wes with the Commiffiouneris the tyme lybellit ; and that thay wer in the
executioun of thair officeis.

Assis A ybr the Reveifflng.

Alexander Faiilie of Braid, Robert Flefcheour, burges of Wiliiame Bandene, alias RuthJohne Traill of Blebo, Dundee, vene, 30unger of that Ilk,

Johne Jobnelloune, callit Joline Patrik Lyoune, merchand, burges Hector Rae, mercband, burges

of Elphinftoune, burges of Edi^, tliair, of Edinburglie,

Andro Logane of Grantoune, Gabriell INIerfer, burges of Perth, Thomas Somervell, merchand,

Alexr Wod of Lammieletham, Mr Dauid Home, brother to the burges thair,

Dauid Kynneir of that Ilk, Laird of Wedderburne, Mr Archebald Wilkie, in the

Johne Fairlie of Comeifloune, Cannogait.

The AfTyis being fworne, and the Dittay I'ed, my lord Aduocat produceit for
takyn,* Letteris of Horning aganis the faid James ; quhair the faid James gaid^
to the home, for the rapt and reveifliing of the faid Mariorie Cuke ; and als
produceit ane proces of the Predjiterie of Deir, fynding the faid James gyltie of
the faid cryme ; and als vfit the faid Wiliiame Cuke ayth, to be gewin, quha
wes prefent to offer his aith.^

ReiJellis the foure-half-about.

It is allegeit that JVilUame Cuile can nocht gif his aith, becaus the deid wes
nocht done to him ; and his dochter is abfent. Seamclo, he can nocht gif his
aith, becaus that he offeris him to prove, that fen the laft Court, the faid AA^illiame
ofFerit to compeir at the bar, and fueir that the reweiffing is nocht of veritie. —
Th§ Aduocat takis inftrumentis, that he repetis the Interloquutour pronunceit,
that Wiliiame Cuik had guid interes to perfew in this caus, and that he offeris
him reddie to fweir the Dittay ; in refpect qvdiairof, and of the Letter of Hoirning
produceit aganis the pannell for the faid cryme, and of the proces and fentence
gewin aganis him be the Prefbiterie of Deir, for this famin caus ; gif the AfTyife
clange, proteflis for "WilfuU Errour.

The pannell afl^is inftrumentis, that gif the King and Kirk wer fatisfeit, he
wald forgif the faid James. The pannell takis inftrumentis, that Wiliiame Cuik
declaris that he can nocht, of his confcience, ffyle or clange the faid James, hot*
Mariorie Cuik his dochter tuik vpoun hir confcience, that the faid James tuik
hir away and reveiffit hir. — The Aduocat thaireftir in-oduceit the faid ^A'il-

' Token, or proof. "^ Went, suffered himself to be put to the horn. ^ Testimony, or

evidence upon oath. * Unless, except.

398 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602^.

liame Cuikis Deiwfitiounis, maid before the Coimfall, quliairvpoun he afkis
iiiflrumentis.

The pannell aflvis inftrumentis that the Aduocat vfes na foz-der probatioun.
Item, James Chene produces ane Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit be Dauid Ho\viefoun,
Minifter of Abirdowr, teftifeing, that the witnefles coutenit in the proces
produceit agauis James Cheyne. teftefeit na reveiffing. — The Aduocat takis
inftrumentis, that Mr Johne Ruffell jiroduceis and gewis in the Teftimoniall
ftibfcryuit be Mr Dauid Howiefoun, Minifter of AbirdowT. The faidis Maifteris Thomas Craig, Alex' King, and Thomas Craig (Johne RufTell) \'fes the faid
Teftimoniall, as preloquutouris for James Chene, quhiUc wes fend to thame be
Mr Alex' Cheyne amangis the reft of his writtis, to be vfit in Defence of the
faid James Cheyne. — The Aduocat pi'oduceit ane vther Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit
and writtin be the faid Dauid Howiefoune, teftifeing the fubfcriptioun of the
vther Teftimoniall to be fals.

Special Verdict. The perfones of Aflyfe being chofin, Avorne and admittit, and the faid James
being accufit be Dittay of the ciymes foirfaidls ; and our fouerane lordis Aduocat; for verificatioun
thairof, haifing produceit to thame our fouerane lordis Letteris, purcheft at the inftauce of the faid
Meriorie Cuke and Williame Cuke, hir fatlier; be the quhilkis the faid James was denunreit rebell
and putt to the borne, in <lefalt of fynding of fouirtie, that he fuld haif comperit befoir the Juflice or
his deputtis, to haif vnderlyne the law for the faidis crymes ; and als, haifing produceit the Extract of
the proces led and deducit aganis the faid James, for the away-taking and violent reveifehing of the
faid INIeriorie Cuk, befoir the Prefbiterie of Deir, the fourt day of Augufl, the yeir of God 1597 yeiris,
Mr Duncan Dauidfoun being Moderatour ; togidder with the Depofitiounis maid be the faid Williame
Cuke, at Falkland, the firft day of July inflant, in prefence of my Lord Chancellar, Thefaurer, Bifcliops
of Rofs and Dunkeld. Aganis the quhilkis writtis and verificatioune, the faid James Cheyne and his
preloquutouris maid diuerfe alledgeanceis for elyding of the farayn, and anfueris maid thairto be the
Aduocat; the faidis perfonis of Alfyis removit altogidder furth of Court to the Counfall-hous, quhair
thay, efter chefing of the faid Dauid Kynneir of that Ilk chancellar, &c., ffand, pronunceit and declarit
the laid James Chene to be Clene, innocent and acquit of the rapt and reveiffing of the faid Meriory
Cuik, dochter to Williame Cuik in Vrinach ; and of detening of hir in captiuitie, be the fpace of xij
dayes ; and of the deforceing of hir, committit in the raoneth of July, the yeir of God I".V'^.lxxxsvij
yeiris;' And als ffand, pronunceit and declarit him to be ffylit and convict of the lying with hir in the
place of Pcnnan, at the tyme foirfaid, without violence, Quhairvpoune the faid James afkit actis and
inftrumentis.

The Justice coutinewis the nixt dyet to xx day of this moneth.^

sr rtasoit — dTor (rinfj iHarfe-pterrs.

Jul. 13. — Alexaxdek Reij), cuitlar in Edinburghe.
Indytit, accufit and perfewit, fforfamekill as he, being ane prentar in our fouerane lordis Coin3ie-hous thir diuers yeiris bj^gane, and haifing the credite to

' 1597. This method of marking the year arose from the mode of expression then in use, viz.
Ane thoufand fyue hundreth, thre fcoir feuintene 5eiris.' ^ See Jul. 20, 1602.

36JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 399

his hieiies trew coin3ie, ffor the quhilk the Maifter-coin3eoiir fatisfeit liim
honeftlie and payit him for his panis ; nochtwithftanding thairof, he, vnmyndfuU
of his dewtie, fyrft to God, nixt to his Maieftie, and laft to the laid Maiftercoin3eour, the faid Alexander Heid, vjjonn the xxviij day of Junij laftbypaft,
gatt ane fals half-nierk-jDeace of copper prentit, with the ballance on the ane fyde,
fra Criflian Reid, fpoiis to Dauid Lowrieftonn, in Corftorjihene ; and als bocht ane
fals batterit peace, blank but i)rent,' fra Williame Smyth, fernitour to AVilliam
Weylandis, lorymer," burges of Edinburghe, vpoun the fyrft day of July inftant ;
the quhilkis twa fals pecis, he, vjioun the thryd day of the faid moneth of Julij
inftant, maift treflbnablie prentit, fforgeit and paft his Maiefteis trew prenting
irnis with the prent of the mark peace ; and thairby lies committit Treflbun.

ASSISA.

Williame Stalker, goldfmytli, James Letliingtoune, jufter in the Robert Thomfoun, goldfmytli,
burges of Edinburghe, Coin3ie-hous, burges of Edinburghe,

Alex"' Bruce, cuitlar, burges thair, Dauid Lyndfay, fmyth, burges of Robert Tail3efeir, cuitlar in Leith

Williame Myller, raeltar in the Edinburghe, wynd,

Coin5ie-hous,^ James Mynto, forgear in the George Seytoun, forgear in the

Thomas Myller, cuitler, burges Coiiijie-hous, Coin5ie-hous,

of Edinburghe, Walter Mathie, forgear thair, Moreis Gray, forgear thair,

Johne Quhyte, cuitler, Patrik Schaw, prentar thair, Williame Sinclar, forgear thair.

Verdict. The AfTyis, be the mouth of the faid Patrick Schaw, chancillar,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Alexander Reid to be ffylit, culimbill and
convict of the treflbnabill prenting of twa mark pecis, vpoun his Maiefteis trew
irnis, as his hienes trew coin3ie.

Jul. 20. — Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of Walter Pirie,
dempftar, decernit and ordanit the faid Alexander Reid to be tane to the Caftelhill of Edinburghe, and thair to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his movabill
guidis to be efcheit, &c.

?^amtsiic&tn— aatsitaiufl ^mwt ot aiuffjmctitrcit — ^iiultf ri).

Jul. 20. — James Chene in Pennan.^

The quhilk day, James Chene being enterit on pannell, dilatit, accufit and
perfewit of the crymes efter fpecifeit, thay ar to fay,

FoK contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring of hagbuttis
and piftolettis vpoune his perfoune, and in his cumpany, oppinlie, outwith houflis, in the nionethis of
September, October, November, December, Januar, Februar and Marche, the yeir of God 1597,
vpoune the landis of Pennan, Auchmedden, and diuerle vtheris boundis, within the Iherefdome of
Abirdene. Item, fforfamekill as he, accumpaneit with diuerfe vtheris, his complices, forneris and
brokkin men, all bodin in feir of weir, with hagbuttis and piftolettis and vtheris wappynuis, imuefiue,
incontrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament, laitlie, in the moneth of Marche, the yeir of God

1 Without any impression. ^ Old Fr. spiu'-maker, lormlcr. Lorimers, besides selling small iron wares,

generally dealt iii saddlery. ^ The Royal Mint. * See JiJ. 9, 1602.

400 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1C02.

1597, haifing confault ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis Gilbert Baird of Auchmedden and
Lilias Baird his fpous, come, be way of Haraefuckin, vnder fcylence and cloude of nyclit, to the faid
Gilbertis duelling-place of Auclimedden, quliair the faid Lilias Baird was for the tyrae, in fober and
quyet maner, accunipaneit with hir bairnis and ferwandis, hir hufband being abfent, and thair clam'
the cloife dykes of the faid place, pullit out the ftainchellis- of the kitchen wyndois, brak vp fum duris,
andalfageit the faid Lilias and hir ferwandis within the faid place, be the fpace of thre houris orthairbye ; clam vp to the tops of thair houflis, kaifl in ftanes at the chyranay heid, schot in hagbutis and
piflolettis at the duris and wyndois of the faid place ; fchot the faid Lilias throw the claythia, fcho

being grit with barne f fTor feir of the quhilk fchot, fcho fchortlie thairefter pairtit with the

faid barne,'' quhilk was crewallie flane be the faid James ; and fwa, ye committit Haniefuckin, Affageing of houffis vnder fcylence and cloude of nycht, and hes contravenit the tennour of the faidis Actis
of Parliament, in beiring, weiring and fchuting with hagbuttis and piltolettis. Item, for contravening
of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament in abufing of his bodie in notour Adulterie, with Mariorie
Cuke, dochter to Williame Cuke in Vrinot, within his awin duelling-place of Pennan, in the monethis
of July and Auguft, the yeir of God 1397, he being mareit with (Katherine) Rutherfurd, his fpous,
and being vndeuorceit.

The faid James declarit, for obedience of his Maieftie, that nochtwithftaiiding
that he was maift innocent of the faidis crymes, and tliat he may vfe his lawfull
defence aganis the famyn, he vald become in our fouerane lordis will ; provyding
alwayes his lyffe may be faiff : Quhairv2)oune the faid Mr Thomas Hammiltoun,
and als the faid James Chene, aflcit actis and inftrumentis.

Jul. 30. — The Juftice produceit His Maiesteis Will, quhairof the
tennour foUowis.
Eex,

Justice, Juftice dark and 5 our deputtis, We greit 50W hairilie weill : fforfamekill as James
Chene of Pennan, being accufit before 30W for findrie crymes, he voluntarlie become in our will, for
J)e cryme of Adulterie and fyndrie OpprelTiounis committit be him. Heirfoire it is oure will, that 36
fall gif furth dome aganis fe faid James, that he fall be Baneifchit this cuntry, and fall nawyis returae
■within the fame, without oure Licence, vnder fe pane of death, to be incurrit be him, and of pe fowme
of thre thowfand markis to be incurrit be his cautioner, quhome 56 fall ordane him to fynd for his
remaning furth of ])e cuntrey ; and that befoir he be put to libtrtie. Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe
to 50W ane fufficient Warrand. SubfcrjTiit with our hand. At Falkland, fe xxvij day of Jidij, 1602.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES REX.

The quhilk "Will the faid Juftice-depute pronunceit, &c. ; and the faid James
afkit actis and inftrumentis.

^Iauci!)tti- — ^ijootins of WaQbutfi antr i^istolcts.

Jul. 21. — Dal'ID Graham of Craig, and Alexander Kennedie of Baliarrak.
Dilatit of art and part of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Richard Spens, feruitour to
Johne Erie of Caflillis ; and for beiring and weiring and fchuting of hagbuttis
and piftolettis ; committit in December.

' Climbed. ' Iron stancheons. = Pregnant. * MiscaiTied.

36Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 401

Persewar, Mr Thomas Haramiltouno of Drumcarne, aduocat.
Preloquutoukis for tbe pannell, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Alexander King.

Comperit Rychard Spens as fader, .... Spens and .... Spens, as brether to
vmq'^ Rychard Spens, and declarit thay wald noclit infill in perfuit of Dauid
Grahame of Craig, att this prefent, and att na tyme heireftir ; and als defert. The
faid Dauid Grahame declaris, he offeris him reddie to vnderly the law, for the
crymes contenit in the letteris. — The faid Rychard Spens and his fonis defyrit
that the perfuit of Alexander Kennedie fould delay, quhill thay may haif tyme
to fummond ane Alfyis. — The faid Alexander Kennedie takis inftruraentis that
he offeris him to vnderly the law, for the crymis lybellit ; dii'affenting to all
continewatioun now, as ofbefore. — ' Desert' as to Grahame : And as to Kennedie, continued to the Juftice-air of ' Air, tertio Itineris.'

Aug. 19. — Elspet Heislop, lait fervand to Archibald Bauld, indueller
in Edinburghe.

Dilatit and accufit for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament,
in abufing of her body in the filthie and abhominable cryme of Adulterie with
Dauid Gray,^ fifchmunger in Edinburghe ; committit in the monethis of March,
Apryle, Maij, Junij, Julij, Auguft, Sei^tember, October, November, December,
Januar and Februar, in the yeiris of God 1594-5-6-7-8-9, 1600 and I6OI yeiris,
att the leifl, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis and yeiris rejpectiue foirfaid ;
and that within the burcht of Edinburghe, att the Weft-port thairof and vtheris
pairtis, about the faid burch : In the quhilk ciyme fche hes procreatt and borne
to the faid Dauid foure fmdrie bairnis, quhairof twa deceiffit this lyffe, vnbapteift ;
and ane is yit on lyfe, vnbapteift.

Quhilk cryme the faid Elfpett confeft, and become in our fouerane lordis will
for the famin.

(Nov. 27.) — Sentence. The Juftice oi-danit the faid Dauid Gray and
Elfpeth Hiflope to be kairtit throw the Touue, and ane paper vjione thair heid,
contening thair cryme : And to be banifchit the faid burgh ; and nocht to return
thairin, during all the dayis of thair lyftyme, vnder the pane of deid.

Nov. 10. — JoHNE Congiltoune, gairdner, in the Plefance (of Ed'.)
Dilatit of art and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq" George Spottifwod, brothergerman to vmq''' Ninian Spottifwod of that Ilk; committit in Junij 1588 yeiris.

I See Jan, 12, 1602.
VOL. II. 3 e

402 CRIMINAL TRIALS. AD. 1602.

Persewar, Agnes Spottifwood, onlie dochter to the faid vmq'e George.
Preloquutour for the pannell, Andio Blak.

The faid Johne Congiltoune allegeis that this mater can nocht pafs to ane
Aflyis, in refpect he hes our fouei-ane lordis Remiffioune, grantit for the flauchter
of the faid vmq'" George, vnder our foiierane lordis Previe Seill, of the dait, at
Edinburghe, the thi-id day of IMarche, the yeir of God 1588. And als, pi-oduceit
ane Letter of Slaynis, grantit be Williame Spottifwod of that Ilk, Mr Johne
Spottifwod his father-brother, Williame Spottifwod, Alexander Spottifwod and
.... Spottifwod, brether to the faid vmq''' George, and Criftian Thomefoune,
the relict of the faid vmq'^ George, to the faid John Congiltoune, daitit at Edinburghe; the xxij day of Februar 1588.

Dauid Corfbie, merchand burges of Edinburghe, James Dauidfoune, flefcheoiir
burges tliair, become cautioneris and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, to
fatisfie the partie perfewai', as law will ; Lykeas, that he fall pafs the faid
Remiffioune the Grit Seill, vnder the pane of ffourtie pundis.

^Iciu (jijter — ^fjooting of a iJistoUt.

Nov. 19- — ^^"lLLIAME Wauchope, fone lauchfuU to vraq'" Johne
^Vauchope, baillie of Nudrie.

Dilatit of airt and jiairt of the Slauchter of vniq'^ Johnne Symfoun, meffinger
in Edinburghe ; committit in the moneth of October or thairby, the yeir of God
I^.VMxxxxix yeiris. Item, for contravening of our fouerane lordis actis of

Parliament, in fchuiting of ane piftolet at James Wadie, fone to vmq'*

Wadie, wrycht.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Archibald Geddes elder, burges of
Ed"', chancellar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Williame Wauchop to be
Giltie and ffylit of the faidis crymes rejpecliue aboue writtin.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat ci'oce of Edinburghe, and thair his
held to be ftrukkin fra his body ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheat, &c.

Cf)UU--mtiiUfi%

Nov. 27. — Agnes Cowane in Corftorphin.

Dilatit for the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of ane young infant barne,
procreat be her to George Kyle, feruitour to the Laird of Corftorphin.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, be the mouth of Patrik Home of Polwart, chancellar,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Agnes to be culpabill and convict of the
faidis crymes.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftelhill of Edinburghe, thair to be hangit
vpone ane gibbet quhill fcho be deid, and all her moveable guidis efcheit, &c.

36JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

403

SlimUerattiig: anij ilttci-inci Base Eoins, ^r.

Dec. 15. — Allane Napeii, culteller in Glefgvv.

Dilatit ffor the trefTouable giltiiig of tueiity fevhi fals auclit-merk and fouremerk jieces, of the number of threlcoir fals aucht-merk and four-nierk peces ;

quhilkis war fend to him to his duelling-iious in Glefgow, be Campbell

of Glenlyell, about tua yeir fyne or thairby ; togidder with tua licht angellnobillis, and that with Donald M'^nair, ferveaud to the laid Campbell of

Gleulyell.

Verdict. The Affife, be the mouth of James Hoijpringill of Quhytebank,
chancelei', ffand, pronunceit and declairit the faid Allane Naper to be ffylit,
culpable and convict of the crymes aboue writtin : and that, in refpect of his
awin Confeffioun maid in jugement, and of his camming in the Kingis Maiefteis
will thairfoir.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair to be
wirreit at ane ftaik, and his body brint in affis ; and all his moveabill guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

f ^laiiSljter*

Jan. 4, 1603. — Williame Wauchope, brother to vmq'^' Aj'chibald
'Wauchope of Nydrie.'
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Dauid Edmellouu of the
Wowmett, coinmittit in the moneth of

Perseweris, Aliefone Home, relict of the faid vrnq'^ Dauid, Ewfame Edmeftoune, fifter.

Preloquutouris, Dauid Home of Rowieftoune, George Home bretlier to the faid Aliefouae.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Laurence Mcgill, Mr George Wauchope.

The pannell takis inftrumentis, that nane compeir to inlift in his perfute, hot
the partie. It is allegit be Williame ^Vauchope that this matter can nocht pais
to the knawledge of ane Aflyfe, nor that the partie hes na entreis to perfew, bot
reflauit ane Allythment." — Anfuerit that thair is na thing produceit to \^erifie.

The Justice repellis, in refpect nathing is producet to verifie.

It is forder allegit that this matter can nocht pas to ane Aflyfe, in refpect his
Maieftie hes remittit the famyn, be his fpeciall Letter of grace, quhilk is produceit, blank in the dait, and fubfcryuit be his Maiefteis allanerlie. — It is anfuerit
be the perfewer, that this Letter is only ane Letter, blank, fmifterullie prnxhcft,
contrair the Act of Parliament, vndaittit, vncomponit be tiie Thefaurer, and
fubfcryuit only be his Maieftie; quhilk is nocht fufficient of the law. — It is

• See Feb. 2, 1603. « A fiae or compensation made to the relations of the party slain, as a

solatium for the Slaughter.

404 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

declairit be the defender, that he cnmis in his Maiefteis Will, baith concerning
the fact and the imperfectiones of the Letter.

The parteis produceit ane Letter, fubfcryiiit be his Maieftie, commanding the
Juftice to proceid and minifter Juftice, and put him to the knawledge of ane
AfTyfe, for Slaiichter and beiring of pittolettis.

The Justice continewis this mater to Thurifday nixt; and wairnit the
AfTyfe, aptid acta, to the faid day.— (Jan. 6.)—' Desert.'

Snijjovtins antj S^ttti'intj 35ase Coin.

Jan. 13. — Alexander Thomesoun, mariner in Borreftounes.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit for the trefibnable hame-bringing of fourfcoir fax
falfe merk-peices furth of the realme of Ingland to Scotland ; and for the trelTonabill out-putting of lex of them to ... . Gray, Baillie in Eyemouth ; comraittit
in the moneth of Januare inftant.

Vehdict. The Aflyis, be the mouth of Dauid Home of Rowiftoiin, chancellar, fland, pronuncet and declaret the faidis Alexander Thomefone to be fTylet,
culpable and convict.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburghe, and thair to be
hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and his guidis, geii-, landis, heritageis
and polfefTiones, gif he ony hes, to be fforfalt and efcheit, &c. As alfo, ordanit
the faidis fourfcoir fax falfe merk-peices, quhilkis war produceit in jugement, to
be meltit and diftroyit at the faid croce.

iHurtiev — ^l)tft.

Jan. 20. — JoHNNE Ramsay, fumtjnne in Meluill mj^lne.

Dilatit of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of vrnq'" James Roife, fumtyme
thefaurer and burges of Edinburghe ; committit vnder fdence and clud of nycht,
vpone the auchtene day of September, P.'N'j". and ane yeiris ; and thifteous
Steilling and away-taking fra the faid James, of his horfe, cloik and purle, at the
tyme foirfaid.

Verdict. The Aifyis, be the mouth of Dauid Fairlie merchand, chancillar,
ffand, pronunceit and declairit the faid Johne Ramlay to be fTylet, culpable and
convict of the faidis crymes.

Sentence. To be tane to ane gibbet, befyde the corfe of Edinburghe, and
thair to be hangit quhill he be deid : And thaireftii-, his heid to be ftrukkin fra
bis body, and put on the Nether-boll of Edinburghe ; and the remanent his
meraberis to be vfet at his Maiefteis directioun, and his haill moveabill guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

36JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 405

jlgamtsucfeen— Ittapt, Mabisj^inij anU dTortincj:.

June 21. — Henrie Sikcler of Quhytkirk.
Dilaittit,accufet and perfewit at the inftance of Mr Tho.Hammiltoune of Monkland, adiiocat to our Ibuerane lord, for his hienesentreis,ofthecrynies following, viz.
FoRSAMEKiLL as the laid Henrie, being accumpaneit with James Hepburne, ferveand for the tyme
to the Laird of Roifling, Andro Anderfone, and vtheris thair complices, with convocatioune of our
fouerane lordis leigis, to the number of audit perfones or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, with
fwoirdis, fecreitis, fleil-bonettis, &c. laitlie, in the moneth of December, I-a.Vj". yeiris, come be way of
Hamefukkin, vnder fdence and clud of nicht, to vmq''^ George Carkettillis duelling hous of the Monkrig, quhair Margaret Carkettill, now fpous to Archibald Haramiltoune of Bairfute, was, in fober and
quyet maner for the tyme, takand the nichtis reft ; and thair brak the faid hous, enterit within the
samyo, and put violent handis in the faid Margaret, had and raveifchet hir away with thanie perforce ;
and convoyit hir away to the place of Merkill ; quhair the faid James forcet and abuifet her body :
And thaireftir, tranfpoirtit hir to the place of Quhitekirk, quliair ftlio was detenit all the nicht captiue
and priflbner, and keipit and detenit hir in captiuitie with the faid Henrie and remanent perfones foirfaidis, be the fpace of aucht dayis thaireftir, or thairby ; fcho being our fouerane lordis frie leige ; vfurpand thairby his hienes auctoritie vpone thame : And fua, the faid Henrie was airt and pairt, red and
counfall of the taking of the faid Margaret, and of the Rapt and Raveifching of hir, and keiping of
hir in captiuitie ; fcho being his hienes frie leige ; and of the fForceing and abufing of hir body, to the
greit contempt of our fouerane lord, his hienes auctoritie and lawis : At the leift, of Refletting of hir,
in maner foirfaid.

Comperit, Johne Home, Conftable of the Caftle of Edinburgh, and takis inftrumentis of the entrie of the pannell.

AssisA.
Sir Johne Ker of Spylaw, Henrie Lauder, in Dunbar, Adam Hepburne of Bonhard,

Stevin Bruntfield of Grynd- Adam Scott, brotlier to the James Heuderfone of Drydane,

lawdene. Laird of Dryop, And nine others,

(Feuars and burgesses, excepting ' Mr Thomas Levingfloune, fone to the Laiid of Hajniing.')

The faid Henrie denyit the Dittay, and ewerie poynt thairof
The Aduocat alledgeit that the faid Henrie could nocht deny the Reflett.
Verdict. The Alfyis, be the mouth of the laid Adam Hepburne, chanceller,
in refpect na pairtie compeirit to fweir the Dittay, nor that nathing wes producet
be our fouerane lordis Aduocat for verifeing thairof, ffand, pronuucet and declairit the laid Henrie to be Clene, innocent and acquyte of the haill poyntis of
Dittay aboue fpecifeit. Quhairvpone the faid Henrie Sincler afldt inftrumentis.

^iQi) Crtason— S?oom pronounceU tijjon t\)t StaU ISotiij ot a
susptctrK Craitor, piotsurttJ at tl)t Mav o( tf)e Court.

Jan. 31. — Frances Moubuay, deceased, (Ion to the Laird of Barnbowgall.)

[The Case of Francis Mowbray may, perhaps, be considered as one of the most extraordinary

of its kind, in the whole range of the Criminal Records of this or of any other country. There is

something monstrous in the idea of wreaking vengeance on the lifeless remains, even of the most atro406 CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

cious criminals ; but in the present instance, the victim had only been imprisoned in the Castle of
Edinbursh, on vehement suspicion of Treason; and, in his endeavour to eft'ect an escape, he was precipitated over the rocks, and killed. The production of the mangled body of the suspected criminal,
at the bar of tiie Supreme Criminal Tribunal of the country, and the subsequent sentence of Forfeiture, however repugnant to modern ideas and to every proper feeling, were by no means, in themselves,
solitary examples of such procedure, in cases of High Treason. To avoid repetition, reference is made
to a Notice prefixed to the Forfeiture of Logan of Restalrig, (see Vol. II. p. 276,) for several illustrations of a similar nature. In addition to these instances, it may be noticed, that Robertson, in his
History of Scotland, observes, that after the battle of Corrichie, the dead body of the Earl of Huntly
was presented in Parliament, before sentence of Forfeiture was pronounced against him ; and other
cases might easily be mentioned.

In order to arrive at \\\& facts of this case of Francis Mowbray, which are of themselves of considerable historical importance, the Editor found it necessary to institute an examination of various contemporary Histories and MSS. preserved in the Advocates' Library.

The most accurate account of Mowbray's Treason, however, is detailed by Archbishop Spotswood,
(p. 471,) in the following brief passage. ' About the fame time, the King had intelligence given him,
that one Fh.\nxis Mowbray, fon to the Laird of Barnebowgall, who had lived a while in the Infant's Court at Bruxells, had undertaken to kill him. This brake out firft at London, by an Italian,
a fencer, whofe name was Daniel; which coming to the Queen's ears, flie commanded Sir Robert
Cecill, her secretary, to call the perfons (for they were both in the city) and examine them. The
Italian abode by his fpeeches. Mowbray denied, and offered to prove him a liar, in combat ; which the
other accepted. Both being fent into Scotland, they were tried (examined) firrt feverally, then confronted before certain of the Council. The Italian produced witnefles, who verified all that he had
deponed : Whereupon INIowbray was committed to the Caltle of Edinburgh ; where, feeking to elcape
by night, at a window of the chamber where he was detained, the Iheets proving too Ihort, by which
he thought to deCcend, he fell from a great precipice ; and was found, the next morning, dead, at the
foot of the rock. The corps was the fame day, being tlie lall of January, prefented to the Juftice, and
Sentence of Forfeiture pronounced againll him ; his body hanged for a fpace upon the gibbet, and afterwards quartered, and affixed to the gates and mofl open places of the town. His friends (for he was
well born, and a proper young gentleman) gave out, that he had been ftrangled, and his corps thrown
down at the window. But this carried no appearance, and was believed of few.' '

From the vai-ious Collections of State Papers of this period, we find, that King James was kept in
constant alarm, from the incessant machinations of British as well as Foreign Papists and Jesuits ;
and, owing to many previous communications from the English Court, advertising the King of the certainty of such attempts being on the eve of execution, his Majefty had probably considered it necessary to make very severe examples of the first plotters who should be detected.

These Popish plots were in constant agitation, until the remarkable discovery of the Gun-Powder
Treason, Nov. 5, 1605. Caldenoood records one instance, in his IMS. Church History, not mentioned
by other historians, where the King certainly acted with unwonted lenity, no doubt in consequence of
Instructions from Queen Elizabeth. It is thus briefly told. ' About the end of April (1602,) ane
Englilh gentleman addrelled himfelf to Court ; and got prefence of the King, upon the lall of Aprile ;
and conferred with him a little fpace, in Durafermline. Therafter, he went to his lodging. He Hew

1 Robert Birrell gives the follon-ing account of tliis monstrous proceeding. ' The 3J of Januar, Francis Slowbray brake ward out of the Castell ; and he fell owir the wall and brake his craige. Thairefter he was ti-aillit to
the gallows and hangit ; and thaiiefter was (juartcrit, and his hcid and lour quarteris put one the four Portis.' —
Diary, p. 57.

36JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 407

James Cliamers, one of the Kingis fervants, and liurt the barber tliat was peling his head, before tliey
were aware. He was apprehended and putt in the Tolbooth of Dumferiidine. He cryed like a mad
man, " The hour I The hour ! The King I" &c. Being examined, he confeiJed tliat he and ane Italian
fould have flaine the King. As is reported, he was traiifported to the Callie of Edinburgh, and keeped
in the irones ; but within a quarter of a year was lett at liberty. It was reported tliat the King thought
not much of the matter, but tooke the man to be fome what diftracted in his witts.'

Without further remarks, the remaining Papers which have been collected are ajipended, and left
for the readers deliberate consideration.]

The Justice ordanit his Maiefteis Precept to be infert and regiftrat in the
bnikis of Adionaall,

Rex,

Justice, Juflice clerk and 3ourdeputis, We gi-eit :;ow weill. Forfamekill as vmq'^ Frances
Mowbray, being accuf'etof maifl lieich, horrible and deteilable poyntisof Trcflbne and Lefmaieftie, aganis
us, our perfone and Eftait, and for Jie famyn, committit to waird within our Caflell of Edinburgti ;
and the famyn being fufficientlie verifeit be fe Depofitiones of twa or thre witneffis, and fe tryell
fairof fa deir, fat ]iair remanit na obfcuritie of J>e fame. Tlie faid vmq''= Francis, obduret in mynd,
and to all appearance feducet be Sathan, quha was the firfl motioner of theis his devillifche interpryfes,
hes, vpone intentioun to efcaip furth of our waird, procuret his awin miferable and fchamefuU death ;
and hes maid his giltines (be his breck of waird) mair nottour and manifefl. It is our will heirfoir,
that 3e caufe give dome and fenteuce aganis liim, to be demaynit, quarterit and liangit ; and his held
and quarteris to be put vpoune J)e maill publict pairtis and places of our burghe of Edinburghe ; as
ane qviha is giltie of ])e faidis crymes. And ]iat 36 direct ])e officiaris (to quhome ])e execulioun of
theis turnes belang) to do Jie fame, with all ]ie formes accuftomet in fic caiflis : Quhairanent )nr prefentis fall be 30ur Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, att Halyrudhous, fe lafl, day of Januare, 1603.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

MoNTROis, Can''"^^^ Mar. Hereis. Halyrudhous.

S" G. Home, The". Jo. Prestoun. M. T. Ha.mmiltoune.

Sentexce. According to the qidiilk Precept, and for obedience thairof, the
Juflice, be the mouth of ^Valter Peirie, dempflar, decernit and ordanit the faid
vmq'" Frances Moubray, now prefentit on pannell, to be demanit as ane tratour,
as eftir followis : That is to fay, To be hangit be the craig vpoune ane gibbet,
befyde the mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and his body to be quarterit ; and his
heid, ane leg and ane airme to be jjut vp aboue the Nethef-boll, ane ehie aboue
the reft ; and ane vther leg to be hung on the Weft-poirt of Edinbin-gli, and
ane vther airme to be hungin vpoun the Potter-raw-poirt : And all his landis,
heritageis, takis, fteidingis, rowmes, poffeffiones, coirnes, cattell, guides and geir
to be ffoirfalt and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as giltie of the faidis trelfonabill crymes. Quhilk wes pronuncet for dome.

PAPERS illustrative of Mowbray's Treason.
1. Extracts y>-o»i CalderwoocVs MS. Church Hijiory.

(Oct. 1602.)— In October, the King was advertifed, out of England, of a Confpiracie. Ane Italian,
who had been iu this countrie eight years, alledged upon Francis Mowbray, fone to the Laird of
Barnbougall, that he folicited him to take part with him in cutting of the King, by poyfone or fome

408 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1601.

other means. Tliey were both prefented before tbe Counfell of England. At tbe Kingis defyre, they
were <ent to Scotland. The Italian affirmed conftantly,' before tbe King, and offered to fight the
Single-combate with Francis. Francis, being examined, be certaine of the Kingis Counfell, denyed ;
and offered to fight with the Italian.

(Jan. 5, 1603.) — It was ordained that Francis Mowbkay and the Italian, who accufed him of
Treafone, would fight, hand to hand, in the great clofe of the Abbey of Halyrudhoufe. The 5 of Januar
was appointed for the combat. The barafTe being made and preparation, advertilement was fent two
or three dayes before, out of England, to flay the Combate ; becaufe there was certaine Scotilh-men,
who would verifie the Treafone. Soe, upon hope of further tryell, it was delayed.

(Jan. 29, 1603.) — In the meantyme, upon the 29 of Januar, the King and Counfell were occupyed, for the moll part, all that day, in the examination of Francis Mowbray and the Italian, and confronting Francis with other two Scotifli men fent out of England, hot of light accorapt, becaufe they
had fpent their moyen, and wes forced to leave the country, — to witt, Mr Walter Mowbray and John
Anderfone. The day following, that is to fay, the Lord's day, the penult of Januar, Francis Mowbray allayed to come down the wall of the Callle upon peeces of the blanketts of his bed, fewed
together on the night before. The blankets were too ihort ; fo be fell, and falling, feld himfelf upon
the craig, about eight houres at night. He was apprehended immediately, but was fpeechleffe, and
dyed about three houres in the morning.

Upon Mounday the lall of Januar, his body was drawn backward to the Tolbooth, where the doome
was pronounced, that he fould be drawn backward to the gibbett, and there hang for a certaine fpace ;
and then be quartered ; and the members of his body to be fett up in publick pairts of the town. It is
marked, that when he was examined, he faid, before the King, ' If ever I thought evill, or intended evill
againfl my Prince, God, that marketh the fecreits of all hearts, make me to fall at my enemies feett;
make me a fpectacle to all Edinburgh ; and call my foul in Hell forever !' And, being required, fubfcribed thefe words. He fell at his enemies feet indeed ! For the Italian was above him in a Chamber. He was made a fpectacle to Edinburgh. As for the third, we remitt to God, who faveth and
condemneth whom he pleafeth. It is reported, that he fought his fupper fooner than at other tymes,
as though he had fome Letters to write : After fupper, he rave the blanketts in four pieces, and fewed
them together; and that he was minded to doe the like with the flieets. The keeper, coming to the
door, and finding it clofe, cryed. He thrufl himfelf, for hafle, out at the window, and cometh down
upon the blanketts. The blankettis being Ihort, he falleth. Some horfemenwere awaiting on, tocaiie
him away ; but finding him unable, they fpoyled him and departed ; and his body was brought up to
the Caftle. The Italian was let at liberty, and was to be rewarded.

2. Extract y>-o??< an Anonymous 3IS. HlJ'tonj of Scotland^

(Jan. 30, 1603.) — Francis Mowbray, being warditt for allegit Treflbune aganis (his) Majefly,
brak waird ; and being afchaipitt' be the watche of the Caflell, thay fchaikis him out of tbe claithis
quhilk he wes gangand doune into ; quhairby he fallis, and flayis him felff be the fame.

3. Extracts from CecWs Secret Correfpondence with King James.
(i.) Mowbray, to Daniel and others, did confefs a purpofe, in his own heart, to be made an
inflrument againfl the perfon of the King, whenfoever he were fet in hand ; and to affect all perfons
oppofite to the jirefent carriage of your affairs, as he would demonftrate upon the firfl opportunity. If
other embryones, which are yet iiiformes, but yet dangerous, come any nearer to the likelihood of any
formal Ihape, his Majefly iliall be advertifed ; though, in the mean, we repute it a great indifcretion
to reveal our uttermoft, before the defire of utterance, out of a found affection, becomes fo llrong as

* ^\ ith constancy, without prevarication. 2 Advocates' Library, A. 4. 35. 3 Escaped. Perhaps for espied.

36JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 409

the fon of Croefus would, by ftraining, break tlie ftiings of his tied tongue, to deliver wliat his love
and duty binds him to.^

(ii.) Cecil and I are very glad that the Laird of Weenies^ had no better warrant for his traffitk
with this bufy body.^ The man is not honeft, nor was drawn to this difcovery of Moicbraijs Treafon
by love to the King, but merely upon fpleen and malice to the party, upon the fractions of old amity.
In this point we will lay no more, but only wilh, for the good of the King's lervice, that he neither
have encouragement to come, nor entertainment, though he fliould chance to come ; which I do not
think will happen, becaufe Cecil's angels' have him in charge, for the working out of more Huff, if it
be polFible ; and his penfion feafons him in the giddiueis of his natural and habitual uncertainties.

From Francis Mowbray, Cecil did never hear word, fince the laft which was adveitifed ; which
makes him wonder, both at the paufe, and at the motive that may caufe it, after fo large promil'es.
Cecil will obferve the King's direction, as well in mining, by invention and fubornation, into his
ends, as by continuing the penfion, though he have very ill deferved it He doth concur with the
judgement of King James, touching the peril that may grow by driving him into defpair, for want of
provender, before the clofe decks be difcovered. You may, in like fort, affure King James, that Cecil
will take no extraordinary courfe with him, about King James's particular, till he take him with more
meat in his mouth, and the matter be fo pregnant as negatives would be found both ridiculous and
impudent.^

33eavinf|;, Mcariufft a "^ ^I)O0t(n£r ?t?a56nts null ^istolcts, ^c.

Feb. 1. — Sir IIakie Lyxdsay of Carreftoiuie.
Perfewit be Mr Thomas Hammiltoim of Drumeairne, aduocat, of the Dittay
following, i^roducet be the faid prefoner.

Sir Harie Lyndsay of Carreftoun, Ye ar indytit and accufet, fforfaniekill as it is ftatute and
ordanit be dyuerfe our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, that na maner of perfone or perfones tak
vpone hand to beir or weir hagbuttis or piflolettis, or ony vther ingyne of ffyre-wark vpone thair per.
fones, and in thair companeis, oppinlie, outwith houffis, or fchute thairwith at ony perfone or perfones,
vnder the pane of cutting af of thair rycht hand, and vtheris panis thairin contenit : Nochtuithllanding
quhairof, it is of veritie, that ye, being forgetfull of your deiitifull obedience and reverence, quhilk ve
fould half gevin to the faidis Actis and lawis, and of the guid exampill quhilk ye fould half gevin to
vtheris his IMaiefleis leigis, in refpect of your place, office and feruice in his Maiefteis houihald ; ve.
laitlie, vpone the . . . day of Januare laftbypaft, with eonvocatioun of our fouerane lordis leigis, to the
number of ten or tuelf perfones, all bodin in feir of weir, with fecreitis, lleil-bonetis, hagbutis and
piftoletis, pafl fra the Palice of Halyrudhous towardis Perthe, qubair ye was informet Patrik Eviot,
brother to Colene Eviot of Balhoulfie,*' was in the South-Inche thairof for the tynie ; and thair (et
vpone him, and crewallie invaidit him for his (lauchter, and chaidit him to ane eok-boit, quhilk he wes
compellit to tak, and enter in the waiter of Tay, for faiftle of his lyfe : And he being thairin, ye and
your company fcliot and dilafchet the number of ten or tuelf fihott of hagbuttis and pillolettis at him.

' Lord IIi>nry Ilowaid to Mr Edward Bruce; without date, but about Aug. 1802. .See W\\. II. p. .510, Xutc.
^ See Vol. II. J). 276, Nate. ^ The Master of Gray. * Gulden angels, bribery. 5 I^ord Henry Iliiwanl to MiEdward Bruce — probably wTitten soon after tliat of the 27th August, 1602.' — Hailrs. ** .'\lthoiigh Eviot escaped this
barbarous attack, he was murdered, five years afterwards, by his wife and Iicr paramour. Flimi/ii; gives tlie following graphic account of this transaction, in his curious MS. Chronicle, preserveil in the Library of the racnlty of
Advocates. (8th .Apr. 1608,) ' Pathik Evict, brotber-gerinan to tlie Laird of Balboussie. wes murtherit in Blelok.
be his wyfe Jonet Ross, quha wes air to the Lairdschip of Craigie and Kynfawnes both {ti/so, ) lie wes schote with
ane gun in his bed, sleijiing, be James M<^Nair. Thairefter, they wer both taikin and execute ; and brunt, efler they
wer hangit, in the Hayfeild of Perth, the 17 May 1608. His held and arme jiutt wp on tlie Castell gawill port.'

VOL. II. 3 F

410

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

of purpois to liaif flane him ; quhilk ye had iiocht failjit to liaif done, war nocht he lay darnel' on his
face, in the boddome of the feid boit. Be beiring, weiring and Ichuitting of the quhilkis liagbuttis and
pilloleltis ye liaif contravenit the tennour of the faidis Actis of Parliament, and incumt the panis contenit thairin ; qtdiilk lould be execute aganis yow with all rigour, in exampill of vtheris, &c.

The laid Sir Harie Lyiullay declairit, for obedience of the Kingis Maieftie,
and for the offence done to his hienes, mj^nding nawyis to vfe ony defenffis be
la^v, albeit he mj'cht vfe thame ; he will becum in his JNIaiefteis Will for the
Dittay jn-oducet be the Adiiocat : Protefting, that his becumiiig in will preiudge
him nocht, anent ony defens that he will vfe aganis ony pairtie that fall happin
to perfew him, heirefter, for the faidis crj'mes : Quhairvpoun he aflsit inftriimentis ; and lykwayis our fouerane lordis aduocat afkit inftrumentis of his
becuming in his Maiefteis will.

The famyn day, Patrik Eviot proteftit, that the faid Sir Harie Lyndfayis
l)ecuming in will Ibiild nocht preiudge him of ony actioune that he had to perfew aganis him.

#Iau(jl^tn* — ^tntnire of 33ani0l)mrnt.

Feb. 2. — WlLLIAMl:WAUCIIO^l:,fonetovmq'''Robert^^'auchopeof Nydrie.*

Comjoeirit Johne Mayne, and producet ane Precept contening HIS HIEXES

WILL, togidder with ane delyuerance of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, quhillf

the Juftice ordanit to be infert and regiftrat in the buikis of Adiornall ; quhairof

the tennour followis.

Rex,

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 50ur deputis. We greit 30W weill. Forfamekill as Williame
Wauchope, fone lauchfull to vmq''^ Robert Wautliope of Nydrie, being laitlie perfewit befoir sow, to
haif ^^lderlyne our law, for airt and pairt of |'e llauchtcr of vmq''' Dauid Edmelloune of Wowmett ;
flbr ])e quhilk flauchter he is becum in our will, in hoip of our clenieneie and fauour : We pairfoir, for
d}Tierfe confiderationes moveing ws, temperand the rigour of juflice with clemencie, haif declairit and
declairis our will towardis him, as followis : That is to fay, That the faid Williame fall depairt furth
of our realme to quhatfumeuir pairtis he pleiflis, betuix Jie dait heirof and pe firli day of Marche nixtocum ; and nawayis to returne agane within ]ie famyn, without our Licence firft had and obtenit Jiairto:
And for fat effect, to find fufBcient cautioune actit in ]>e buikis of Adiornall, vnder the pane of fyve
hundreth pundis, to be payit to our Thefaurer in our name, in cais of fail^ie. And forder, in cais it
iiiU happin ]>e faid Williame to returne agane within our realme, eftir his departour, without our licence,
as faid is, that, in pat caice, he fall die J)e deathe Jiairfoir, quhaireuir be can be apprehendit, be ony of
our Juftices or niinifteris of our lawis : And J>at pir prefentis falbe ane fufficient Warrand and Commiflioune to ]>at effect. Subfcryuit with our hand, att HaljTudhous, }ie fecund day of Fcbruare, 1603.

(Sic fubfcribitur) JAMES R.

FoIIouis the [Supplication and Warrand.

VNTO 50ur Maieflie and Lordis of Secreit Counfell, humlie nienis and fchawis 50ur feruitour,

Williame Wauchope, fone to the Laird of Nydrie : That qubair, eftir I haif remauit this lang tyme

in wand, within the Tolbuithe of Edinburgh, and haif cum in jour hienes will and pleafour, foir airt

and pairt of the llauchter of vmqi'= Dauid Edmelloun of Wowmet, it hes plefit jour Maiellie, of jour

1 Hid, concealid. 2 See Jan. i, 1603.

36JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 411

liienes fauour and mercie, to gi-ant ane Warrand for puting of me to libeitie furtli of the faid waiiil, I
findand cautioune actit in 5 our graces builds for my depairting furth of the cuntrie betuix and the firlt
day of Marclie nixtocum, vnder the pane of fyve hmuheth pundis, and onnawayis to returne agane
within the famyn, without jour hienes Licence, vnder the pane of deid. As ])e faid Warrand heir prefent to fchaw beris. Out of tlie quhilk waird I am nocht as jit relevit, albeit I half done quhat in me
lyis to find cautioun and fouirtie, conforme to ])e faid Warrand, and lies offerit Johne Robiefoun,
flefcheour, burges of Edinburgh, cautioner for me to fat effect ; and it nawayis lying in my power, as
I fall anfuer to God, to get ony v])er perfone to becum cautioun for me, bot fic perfones as ar noclit
refponiall in landis and guidis, as the faid Johne is, quhairof jour Jlaiellie and lordis as jit haif had
a fauourable confideratioun of me and my eftait in tyme bygane ; fua I maid liumlie befeik jour lordfchipis, that je will freith and releve me furth of the faid waird ; and that I may haif command to jonr
Maiefteis Clerk of Counfall or Juflice Clerk, to relTaue Jie faid Johne Uobiefoun cautioun for me :
Conforme to the faid Warrand and jour anfuer.

(Sic deliberatur) Apud Halyrudhous, primo Februarij, anno tertio I™.Vj'^. Fiat ut petitur,

Johne Robiefoun and John Mayne, coniunctlie and feuerallie, cautioneris.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Montrois, Canh'i^s. M. R. Youn(;.

Conforme to the quhilk Precept and "Will producet, tlie Juflice, be the mouth
of James Lowrie, derapftar, pronuncet his Maiefteis will to be, &c.'

?l?ousc-6rtaItiii(i; — STIjeft, ^f .

Feb. 15. — Andiio Reid in Bervie.
Dilatit for cuniing to George Sincleris houfe, accumpaneit with Johne Bennet
and Thomas Welfch ; breking- of the faid George houfe, ftreking vp of kiftis,
and taking furth thairof certane abuil3ementis,'^ clothing, and gold and filuer,
jjertening to Dame Agnes Sinder Lady Errole, Barbara Sincler and Thomas
Sym, meffinger, liir fervandis.

Persewaris. Preloquutouris for the pannell.

Barbara Sincler, Thomas Sym, meffinger. Mr Vmplna Blindfchell, Mr George Frafer.

Compeirit the Lady Errole, and infiftit in the perfute of Andro Reid, according to the Dittay ; and jn-oducet ane Rolment of Court. — Mr Vmpra Blindfchell.
for the pannell, allegit, that he can nocht be put to the knawledge of ane Aflyle
for the haill Ditt.iy, except the plaittis ; in relpect he was put to the kna\ilege
of ane Aftyfe for the famyn, befoir the Scheref of Kyncairne ; and the Judge
hes fund him nawayis worthie of daith thairfoir, as the proces producet beiris.
The pannell afkit inftrumentis of the productioun of the Rolment of Court furth
of the perfeweris handis, quhair Andro Reid is put to the kna^'ledge of ane
AfTyfe be our foucrane lordis Commiffioune, of the poyntis of Dittay producet,
and of the Judges decreit. — It wes anfuerit be the perfeweris, to the former
allegeance, that he fould be put to the knawledge of ane AfTyfe for the faid
crymes, becaus he was nather ffylit nor clangit be the AfTyfe thairfoir : And for

' In terms of the Wairant, wliich is repeated. ' Apparel, dress. Fr. habiliment.

412 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

the verificatioune tliairof, producet the proces fubfmiiit be Neilfoun,

clerk thairto : And thairfoir the faid allegeance audit to be repellit.

The Judo-e continewis Interlocutor to the morue.

Feb. 16. The Juftice continewis this mater to the morne.

Comperit the haill perfonis of AlTyfe, and declairit that thai haif onwaittit this
tua dayis vpone thair call, and ar fuperexpendit ; and proteftit that thai be nocht
vnlawit heirefter, in cais of thair non-compeirance.— Continued to 17th, and

afterwards to 18th.

Persewar/ Mr Thomas Hammiltoune. Prelocutour for the pannell, Mr Johne Scharp.

Feb. 18. — The Aduocat afldt inftrumentis of the productioune of the
Rolnient of Court, producet be the pannell, lublcryuit be Mr Johne Foullertoun, and proteftis (that) the famyu remaue in proces ; and adheris to the
alledgeances, that he is ffylit of the cryme, be his awin Confeffioune, be ane Affyfe
alreddie ; and defyres only that dome may be pronuncet aganis him, conforme
to the lawis : and that in refpect of the Rolment producet ; and confentis he
pafs to na AlF} le. — It is anfuerit be the pannell, that na dome aucht of new to
be gevin, becaus thair is a judgement alreddie gevin be the Judge, conforme to
the Rolment of Court ; and that in refpect of the Act of Parliament, quhair it
is iirovj'dit, that a man anis being clanget, can nocht be of new perfewit for
that cryme — The Juftice continewis this mater to Wednifday nixt.

Jun. 10. — Sextexce. The quliilk day, Andro Reid in Bervie, being
enterit on pannell, as he that was couAict be ane Affyfe, in ane Juftice-Court
balding in Stanehy ve, the xv day of September, the yeir of God I", fex hundreth
and tua yeiris, be Johne Keyth in Coltoun, Sheref-deput of the fcherefdome of
Kincardin, and Capitan Andro Stewart Judge, be vertew of om' fouerane lordis
Commiffioune, direct to my Lord Shereff of Kincardin, for cuming to George
Sinderis houfe, &c. ; quhairvpone na dome wes pronuncet : For the quhilk
caufe the Juftice-deinite decernit and ordanit the faid Andro Reid to pafs furth
of this realme, betuix the day and dait heirof, and the tent daj' of Auguft nixtocum ; and never to returne within the famyn ; bot to remane Baneilchit during
all the dayis of his lyfe, vnder the pane of deid : And all his moveabill guidis
to be efcheit and iubrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faid
crymes ; qidiilk was jironuncet for dome.

Compeirit Capitane Andro Stewart, and proteftit, that the fentence and dome
of Baneifchment pronuncet aganis the laid Andro Reid in Innerbervie, be na
wayis preiudiciall to the actioune of Errour, to be intentit aganis the Affyfe,
for Clangeing of the faid Andro Reid of the crymes confeft be him.

' In addition to those formerly eutered. - Ko farlLer proceedings are entered, until June

10,1603. ' 1 5 >

36 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 413

Feb. 24.— Donald M'^Angus of Glengarie, John Dou ]\rkeane l^'^donill

voir, Donald ^rkeane V'donill voir, Angns M'^kcane V^donill

voir, liis bretlier ; Findlay IVrdonill V'donill voir, Alexander

MMonill V'donill voir, John M'^donill V'donill voir, thair brether ; Rorie M'murchie V'donill oge, Donald M'niurchie Y'-

qnhonchie, Tormot M^murchie V'keane, Johne Moir M'murchie

^^ic donll oige, Johne Dou M'keane V'douU oige, Living M"-

indowy, in Glengarie, and Eweyne Ockerdane Carfar.

Coniiieirit Williame Makiefoun, and produceit our fouerane lordis letteris,

deulie execute and indorfate, purcheft be Angus ^rindowie, as brotlier to Donald

M^keane Vdoun, Johne and Dongall JVrniurdo Boweis, as nerrefl of kyn to

vniq''' Donald Mcdonald M'volddonicli ; Johne JVLdonald VJok, as brother to

Donald Mcdonald V'Jok, with the kyn and freindis of the faidis vmq'^ perfones ;

aganis Donald M^angus of Glengarie, &c. ; be the quhilkis Letteris thay ar

denuncett rebellis and putt to the home, in default of finding of fouertie to haif

compeirit this day and place, to haif vnderlyne the law for the Slauchter of the

faidis vniq'' perfones : Quhairvijoune he aflvit inftrunientis ; and proteftit for

relief of Rorie M'kenzie of Cultellan, cautioner.

Mar. 3. — James STEWART,fone to vmq'" James Stewart, Maifter of Buchan.'
Sir James Scrymgeour of Dudop, kny', oft tymes callit, as cautioner and
fouertie for James Stewart, fone to vmq'" James S. M' of Buchan, to haif enterit
and prefentit him to haif vnderlyne the law, for airt and pairt of the felloune
and ci-ewall Slauchter of vmq'" Patrik Brylbne, tail^eour, burges of the Cannogait ; committit in the moneth of October laftbypaft, vpone fet purpois, &c. :
The Juftice unlawit Sir James Scrymgeour in tlie pane of tua hundreth merkis,
and als adjndget the faid James Stewart to be denuncet, &c., and his moveabill
guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Apr. 28. — AiXASTEii M'kie, Gilchrill Kittoche alias Makilmoyle,

M'^ynroyer, Fyndlaw Dow M''olean.

Dilatit of certane poyntis of Thift, and for cuming to the Laird of Luiffis

' ' Patrik Biyfone flaine in tlie Cannogafe he aiie James Stewart of Buquharie ; qulia wes appreemlit and wanlit in Sir James Ballendine's lious ; quliair he remanitflill, till the 26 of November,
on the quliilk day he brake ward out of Sir James Innes hous.' — Birrel's Diary, p. 56.

414 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

boundis, in companie with the Laird of M'Gregour, and airt and pairt of the
Murthour and Reif committit thairon in Februar laft.

DiTTAYS againjt the Paunels.
Allaster M'^kie, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling, conceilling and away-taking of foure
?owis, peiteninu to James Galhraitbe in Bolgair, furtli of Barroun IVPewins corrie or glen ; committit
about iSIicliaelmas lall. Item, for lleilling fra tlie laid James of tuelf Iclieip furth of the laid glen.
Item, for the thiftious fteitling of tua lambes in Balglafs, pertening to the Lady Keir. Item, for the
lleilling of tua meirs furth of the landis of Galgerrachene ; committit about Midfomer lafl. Item, for
the thiftious lleilling of tine meiris or fillies furth of Campfie-raure. Item, for comraoun thift, &c. —
GiLCHREiST Kittoche, &c., ffor being in company with the Laird of MakGregour and his complices,
and airt and pairt with him of the crewall INIurthour and flauchter of dyuerfe the Laird of Lufes
freindis, feruandis and pairtakeris, to the number of feviu fcoir porfones ; committit within the Laird
of Lufe boundis, in the moneth of Februar lafl : And for the harieing and f])uil5eing and reveing of
the haill cuntrey thairabout ; and thifteous lleilling and away-taking with thame, of the number of
audit hundreth ky, horfe, nolt, fcheip and vther belliall ; committit be thame at the tyme foirfaid.

Quhairof the faidis perfones war airt and pairt, accoirding as thair Dejiofitiones and Confeffiones beiris.

^'erdict. The AfTyfe ffand, pronuncet and dedairit thepannell to be ffylet,
culpabill and convict of the haill crymes refpectiiie aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence. The Jnftice, be the mouth of James Henderfone, dempfter of
Court, ordanit thame, and ilk ane of thame, to be tane to the Burrowmiire of
Ed", and to be hangit vpone the Galloife thairof quhill thay be deid ; and all
thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

SJntfiTommuiunci; iwitl) i\)t Claii--<grf flor.

May 17. — Aulay M^caulay of Ardincapill.
Compeirit Johnne Dunlop, feruitour to mj^ Lord Duik of Lennox, and producet ane ^Varrand, fubfcryiiit be his Maieftie ; qi^liairof the tenuour followis.

Rex,

Justice Generall, 50ur depute, Juflice clerk, Aduocatt and 50ur deputtis. We greitt 50W
hairtlie Weill : ftbrfamekill as our louit Aulay JNPcaulay of Ardincapill is fummond at fe iullance of
^ow our faid Aduocat, to compeir on the xvij day of Maij nixtocum, to vnderly the law for the allegit
intercommoning with AUajter M'gregour of Glenjira, and vmq''' Johnne Dow M'^greyour liis broper,
our rebeliis, and for certane vjieris crymes and poyntts of Diltay, fpecifeit and contenit in ])e fummondis raifit Jiairanent. And We, vnderftanding that the faid Aulay M'^caulay is altogidder frie and
innocent of )ie faidis allegit crymes laid to his chairge ; and tiiat he is to accumpany ws to our realme
of Ingland, with our darrell coufing the Duik of Lennox, his maifter : Thairfoir, and for certane vjieris
guid cauffis and confiderationes-moveing ws, it is our Will, and We command ^ow, to deiill and ceife
fra all calling or accufeing of the faid Aulay Mucaulay, the day foirfaid ; or ony wayes proceiding
aganis him or his cautioner in the matter foirfaid ; bot fuffer the dyett, appoyntit to that eflect, to defert
in it felf, as gif ony fie Letteris had nevir bene raifit; najier jit trubill nor moleft fe faid Aulay
APcaulay, for the pretendit caufe foirfaid,' at ony vjier dyet Jiaireftir, quhill the returning of our faid

' Sec Note to the Laird of MacGrcgor's Declaration, Jan. 20, 1001.

36 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 415

deiTeft coufing furtli of our lealuie of Inglaiid. As 56 will anfuer to us vpone 5 our obedience ; and
fat nochtwithftanding of ony v]>er Warrand geviu or to be gevin in tlie contrair : Quliairanent fir
prefentis fall be to 30W fufficient Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, att Beruik, fe fevint day of
Apryle ]C03. (Sic lubfcribitur) JAMES R.

The quhilk Warrand the Juftice admittit, and defertit the faid dyet.

^trtiltni) — Ci)iltJ--ilffuiUer.

May 18. — Joiixe Rybukxe of that Ilk.
Robert Montgomerie of Heffilheid produceit our fouerane lordis letteris,
purcheft at the inftance of Mr Thomas Haramiltoune, aduocat to our fouerane
lord, aganes Johne Ryburne of that Ilk, for Adulterie and the Murthour of ane
infant bairne, gottin vpoun Agnes Dunlop : Be the quhiUc Letteris the faid
Ryburne of that Ilk is put to the Home.

iitlurbff o( ^thtix ^ton IDfisons in t\}t Ecnno.v ftp tijc ClnitMay 20.— Gillespie M'^donald Manxes Doav, Donald M'clerich
alias Stewart, and Johne M''coneill M^condocliie.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit for being in company with the Laird of M''gregour : And for airt and pairt of the lait grit flauchter and crewall ]\Iurthour of
fevin fcoir perfones in the Lennox,' all freindis and fervandis to the Laird of
Lufe : And of the thiftious Steilling and Reiffing of audit hundreth oxin, ky^
and vther befliall, and herrieing the haill cuntrie ; committit in the rnoneth of
Februare laftbypaft : Item, for the thiftious Steilling of tua horfe and ane meir
furth of Strabrand, fra Johnne Stewart Neilfoun and his man ; committit at
Lambes' laft : And for coinmoun Soirning,'' &c. — Donald 3IcClerich dilatit and
perfewit for airt and ]>airt of the thiftious Steilling of nine ky and oxin, tua yeir
fyne or thairby, fra Patrik Stewart furth of Innervaik, in Athoill ; and for
commoun Thift and commoun Soirning, &c.

Verdict. The AflTyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Douglas, btirges (of Edinburgh), chanceller, ffand, pronunceit and declairit the faidis thre perfones to be
culpabill and convict of the foirfaidis crymes.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftel-hill of Edinburghe, and to be hangit
thair on ane gibbett, quhill thay be deid, &c.

> See Apr. 28, Jul. 5 and 14, 1603, &c. ' The 9 of Februarii, the Laird of Macgregor, with four hunder
of hes name and factioun, enterit in tlie Lennox ; quhair he maid Spul5ie and flauchter to the number
of sixty honest men, befyde wemen and bairnis. lie fpaied naue quhair he came.' — Birrel's Diary,
p. 58. 2 Kine, cattle. = Lammas-day, 1st August. "^ Taking free quarters by force,

(q. d. sejournant ?)

416 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

SJnbasioii nf n iHinister, ntav ti)t Colftootl), Ixiljcit tlje ^ril);)
Council ixiti-f J'itting in a^uUtjement.

Jun.2i). AVALTEi{GRAHAMK,l'eruitour to i\Ir Robert WilliamfouiijWryter.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit be Dittay of the ciymes following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as it is ftatute and ordanit, be oure fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, fpeciallie be
ane Act maid in his Maiefteis ellevint Parliament, cap. 27, that quhatfumeuir perfone or perfones
Invaidis ony IMinifter,' or putis ony violent handis in liim for ony forget'^ querrell, lall be pwneill thairfoir with all rigour, and incur the payne of tynfall of all thair moveabill guidis for the faid invafioun and
violence allanerlie, albeit na (lauchter nor mutilatiouno follow thairvpoun ; the ane half of the faidis
guidis to be apjilyit to our foueiane lordis vfe, and the vther to the pairtie invaidit or oflendit, but
preiudice of the gritter pwneifchraent, gif ony heicher cryme concur with the violence and invafioun
foirfaid : And als, Proclaraatioun was maid, in our fouerane lordis name and auctoritie, vpone the . . .
day of Junij iuftant, in the yeir of God, J".Vj^. and thre, befoir the Trinitie ffair, that na perlbne fould
invaid or perfew ane vther within this burcli, during the tynie of the ffair, vnder the pane of deid : And
forder, it is provydit be dyuerfe Actis of Secreit Counfall, that na perfone fall invaid ony man, be
drawing of ane Avord, within ane myle to the Kingis Palice, or to his hienes Counfall, vnder the pane
of deid. And trew it is, that the faid Walter, in hie and manifeft contempt of our fouerane lordis
Actis of Parliament and Proclamationes foirfaidi?, vpone deidlie malice conlauet be bim aganis Mr
Thomas Douglas of Stannj'peth, Minifter at Balmirrieno, and haifing forget a quarrell aganis him, for
the revenge of certane injurious fpeiches, allegit gevin lie the faid Mr Thomas Douglas to the faid Mr
Robert Williamfoun, his maifler, vpoun the xxj day of Junij inflant, he, vpone the xxij day of the faid
moneth of Junij, prepairit to him felff ane grit foure-nuikit' battoun, of aik, of purpois to haif fellit the
faid Mr Thomas Douglas thair : Lyk as the faid Walter fet vpone him, beliind his bak, vpone the liie
llreit of the burch of Edinburghe, in the tyme of the faid ftair, a lyttill beneth the Stinkand-ftyle,'' the
Lordis of Secreit Counfall being within the faid burch, and haifing fittin at Counfall in the Tolbuth of
the faid burcli, norlit pafTand ane half hour befoir the violence and invafioun following ; and thair, maid
fchamefullie, barbaruilie and crewallie, without regaird of the perfon of ane Minifter, and haiSng never
fpokin with hini ane word of befoir, invaidit him for liis flauchter with the faid batoun, ftrak him thairwith tua ftraikis vpone the held, behind the richt lug,^ and hurt and woundit him thairwith, to the
eflFufliou of his bluid in grit quantitie ; vpone fet purpois, perfuafioune,'^ precogitat malice and foirthocht
fellony. And efter the committing of the faid ere wall and fchamefull Invafioun, and hurting of him,
as faid is, tiie faid Walter fled and gat away ; and thaireftir was tane and appreiiendit for the laid barbarus crewaltie ; and he hes confeffit the famyn. Quhilk batouning of the faid Mr Thomas, fa neir to
his hienes Counfall, mereittis gritter pwneifthment, nor gif ' he had <lrawin ane fword to the effect aboue
fpecifeit, in refpect of the vyle indignitie thairof : Quhairby he hes contravenit the tennour of the faidis
Actis of Parliament and Proclamatioun foirfaid, and incurrit the payne of daith, quhilk audit and fould
be execute aganis him with all rigour, in exampill of vtheris, &c,

Persewar.

Mr Johne Nicolfoun of Lefwaid, Aduocat, fubftitute to Mr Thomas Hammlltoun of Drumcairne.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the month of James Lyndefay of Dowhill, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Walter Grahame to be ffylit, culpable (and) convict of the faidis crymes.

' Clergyman. * Forged, feigned, simulate. ' Four-cornered, square, ■* Near the

Tolbooth, and almost opposite the door of Haddo's-hold, to tlie eastward of the late New North, or
' Little Kirk.' ^ Ear. ^ In common style, this word is usually ' provision.' " Than if.

36&1JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 41T

(Aug. 12.) — Mr 'W^illiame Borthuik, Juftice-depute,' (pronounced vSentence againll the pannel,) be vertew, and at command of ane 'W^arrand of the
Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfall, quhairof the tennour foUowis :

Apud Edinburghe, vltimo Junij 1603. The Lordis of Secreit Counfall Ordanis Jie Juftice and
his deputis to pronunce dome vpone Walter Graliame, for Jie flreking of Mr Thomas Douglas, Miniiler,
with ane batoun ; in maner following, viz. : That ]ie faid Walter fall be fcurgit fra f e Caflell hill to
the Nefer boll, throw jiis bur', and his riclit Iiand to be flrukin af at Jie Nejier boll : And ]iaireftpr,
Ordanis him to be Banifchet liis Maielleis liaill dominiones, and onnawyis to returne agane within )ie
famyn during his lyftyrae, vnder fie pane of deid. And that he remove furth of fe faidis realmes
betuix and ])e laft day of September iiixtocum, vnder ]?e pane foirfaid.

(Sic fubftribitur) Montrois Canrius. Al. Vchiltrie. Elphingstoun. A. Fvvie.

NeUBOTLE. J. COKBURNE. R. CoKBURXE. Jo. PrESTOUN. CrAXSTOUNRIDDELL. QuHlTTINGHAME.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouthe of AValter Peirie, dempfter of Court,
decernit and ordanit the faid Walter Grahame to be fcurgit throw the bur' of
Ed',^ &c., within tua moneth nixt following, vnder the pane foirfaid ; Quliilk was
gevin for dome.

Jun. 30. — Joseph Boncle, burges of Dumbar.

Dilatit and accufit for the Slauchter of vmq'* James Loche, induellar in Dumbar, committit vi^oun the xxviij day of Jimij inftant, be the flraik of ane fword
in the liflv^ and the wambe."

Comjieirit Williame Kellie, Thefaurer of Dumbar, in name of the Proveill
and bailleis tliairof, and producet the letter vnderwritten ; quhairof the tennour
followis.

Proveist and bailleis of the bur' of Dumbar. It is our will, and for findrie giiid refpectis and
confiderationes moveing ws, We command 50W, tliat 50 caus iiiiflie convoy, bring and prefent Jol'ephe
Bonkle befoir our fouerane lordis Juflice and his deputies, within ])is bur' of Edin'', to vnderly the law
and juftice for ])e (laucliter of vmq'^ James Loch, fmyth, committit be him vpoun ])e xxviij of Junij
inftant. Quliairanent ])ir prcfentis falbe -^our Wairand : And but' preiudice or ony derogation to
tjuhatfunieuir 30ur liberteis and privilegisof Scherefschip, difponit and grantit be his Maieftie in 5 our
fauoris, and contenit in 5 our new Infcftment, maid Jiairvpoun. Subfcriuit with our handis, at Edinburglie, ]ie xxix day of Junij, 1G03.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Montrois, Cankh-'s. J. Elphingstoun. A. Fyvie. A. Vchiltrie.

QUHITTINGHAM. JO. PrESTOUNE. ED3ELL. CrANSTOUNRIDDELL.
R. CoKBURNE. J. COKBURNE.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of Patrik Nifbet in Dumbar, chancillar,
flfand, pronunceit and declarit the faid Jofeph to be ffylit, culpaljle and con\'ict
of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'" James Loch.

Sentence. To be tane to ane place befyde the raercat croce of Edinburghe.

' On Aug. 12, 1603. ^ In terms of the above Warrant of die Privy Council. ^ The

groin or flank. ■* Belly. ^ Without.

VOL. II. o G

418 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

and thair his heid to be ftrikin fra his body ; and all his movabill guidis to be
elcheit, &c.

Crrason — dToiiiin^ anli ^ttttrins hast i^oitetn

Robert Dow alias Meinzeis and Allefter IVrciaren, finyth.

Dilatit ffor airt, paii't, red and counfale, and conceilling of the trelTonabill
fforgeing, coimterfitting and outputting of fals and adulterat coin3ie, fic as fyvepound-pecis and foure-merk-pecis, qiihilkis Arthour Smyth coin3eit fyve 3eir
lyne or thairby, in his fmiddie befyde Banff: And for outing' of ane pairt
thairof, amangis our foixerane lordis liegis.

Verdict. The Affyis, be the mouth of Williame Stalker elder, Goldfmyth,
ffand them to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of the treflbnabill conceling of the
fforgeing, 2>renting and counterfitting of fals coin5ie, prentit and forgeit be the
faid Arthour Smyth, in his fmiddie befide Banff, conforme to thair Depofitiounis.

Sentence. The faid Allefter JVrdaren to be tane to the gallow on the
Borrowmure, and thairvpoun to be hangit quhill he be deid : And all his landis,
heretageis, takis, ftedingis, rowmis and poffeffionis, guidis and geir, coirnis,
cattell, infycht pleneiffing to be forfaltit and elcheit, &c.

Continewis dome vpone Robert Dow to the morrow quhill he auife with the
Counfall."

^latitjijttr o( i\)t ^airtJ of iluss's ^to}?U hv ti)t €lnn--(Bvtscv, ^c*

Jul. 5. — Gii.lie:\iichell M'Hischok, feruand to vmq''' Johne Dow
]\rgregour, and Nicoll M'pharie Roy M^gregour.

Dilatit for being [' at the ffield of the Lennox^ aganis Sir Vmphray Colquhoune : And for airt and jjairt of the Slauchter of fewin fcoir perfounes,' ■*] in
cmupany with the Laird of M^gregoiu* and his complices, at the ffeild of the
Lennox, aganis Alexander Colquhoun of Lufe : And for airt and pairt of the
flauchter of the faid Laird of Lufe freindis, fervandis, aflifteris and pairtakeris,
to the number of fevin fcoir perfones or thairby : And for reifing and herreing
of the haill cvmtrej% and fteilling and away-taking of ky, oxin, horfe, fcheip,
gaittis and vther beftiall, to the number of audit hundreth beftiall or thairby ;
committit in the moneth of Februare laftbypaft.

Verdict. The Aftj'fe, be the mouth of Robert Oifteane in Edinburghe,
chanceller, all in ane voice, but^ variance, ffand, pronuncet and declarit the faidis

' Uttering, putting out. '' On Jul. 5, he is ordained ' to be tane to the Caflellhill of Edinl)nrglie, and thair to be hangit quhill he be dead; and all Iiis raoveabill guidis to be efiheit, and his
lands and heritageis, gif heony has, to be forfaltit,' &c. ^ See Notice prefixed to the Trial of

Allaster M'Gregour of Olenstrae, Jan. 20, 1601-. * This sentence occurs at the first entrv. See

also Apr. 28 and May 17, 8if. ' Without.

36 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS, 419

Gillie-Mitcheil ^rifchok, alias M'gilliechallum, and Nicoll M'^farie Roy M'^gregour to be ffylit, culpable and convict of airt and pairt of the crymes foirfaidis.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair to be
hangit on ane gibbet quhill thay be deid ; and thair guidis to be efcheit, &c.

* iffitXtt of Vot ^tnnox* — MiinQljttv of tl)t ^Tolquljauiw, ^c.

Jul. 14. — JoHNE (Dow M'anevalich) M'Ghegour, at the Kirk of
Comerie.

Dilaitit for being in cumpanie with Allafter M'^gregour of Glenftra' and his
complices, at the ifeild of the Lennox, againis the Laird of Lufe and his freindis :
And airt and pairt of the Slauchteris, thiftis, i-obbereis comniittit be thame ;
quhairin thair was flane vlj fcoir perfonis ; comniittit the audit day of Februare
laft.

Veedict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of James Chalmer, burges of Edinburghe, chanceller, ffand the faid Johne Dow M'anevalich JVr'gregour to be ffylit,
culpable and convict of the faidis crymes.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftel-hill of Edinburghe, and thair his heid
to be ftrikin from his body ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

J'laus^btfc — Hnmn-ciful (j^ppi-essioii — .ii'Ijaating:* ?i?a(pljuttis/ ^c,
€attlt nnU ^Ijecj) ^tcaUiis, ^c.

Jul. 19. — George Tuumcill, of Belfis.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit of the crymes rejpectiue following, viz.

For aiit and pairt of the Slaucliter of vmqi^ Johne Hammiltoun, callit of Cumnock ; committit the
xxij day of Januare, I^.V"^. threfcoir nyntene yeris. Item, of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq''
Williame Tiumbil!, fone lauchfull to vniq]„ Waltei' Trurabill of Raflat ; committit in tiie moneth of
Apryle, ["".Vj"^. yeiris. Item, for Vfurpationn of our fouerane lordis autiioritie, in taking of Adame
Tnimbill, fumtyme fervand to the faid vmq'"^ Walter Trumbill of Raflat, he being his hienes frie I'ubiect, and binding him with fetteris, and hinging him be the feit and fchouderis, ouer ane balk, for the
Jpace of xij dayis, qulialrlhrow his feit rottit fra him ; without Commiffioun gevin him to that effect.
Item, for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring of Iiagbutis,
dagis and pillolettis ; and in fchuiting of Walter Trumbill, younger of Raflat, betuix the toun of Jedburgh and the place of Belfis, in the airme and thie ; committit in anno I"'.Vj^ and tua yeiris. Item
for the thiftious Steilling of four nolt fra Johnne Donaldfoune, in Melrois ; committit thre yeir fyne or
thairby. Item, for airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling of fax ky and oxin, xx fcheip, tua horfis,
with the infycht pleneiffing and euidentis pertening to Dauid Riddell, in St Bofuellis ; committit in

the moneth of I^.V.lxxxxviiij yeiris, or thairby. Item, for the thiftious Steilling of xvj nolt,

pertening to the Laird of Bemerfyde ; committit in anno I^.V-'.lxxxxviij yeiris. Item, for the thiftious Steilling of tuentie nolt, ane yeir fyne or thairby, pertening to the Lady Newtoune, Item, for

' In the Verdict of the Assise, it is said to )iave l)een in company with ' the Laird of SIcGregour;" so that Allasler
of Glenstra was the Cliief of this Clan, either by right of blood, or Chieftain for the time, by election, as was usual
anioug the Clans. See Jan. 20, 1601.

420 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1602.

the thiftious Steilling furtb of the landis of Belfis, in the raoneth of ... . Im-Vj"". and ane yeiiis of
fyve fcheip, pertening to ane fer?and of George Dauidfones. Item, for the tliiftious Steilling and
away-taking of ane meir, pertening to George Wilfoune in Langnewtouiie, furth of his duelling hoiis
in Langnewtoune ; comniittit ane yeir fyne or tliairby. Item, for a commone briggane' and notorious
cowmone theif, refTet of tliift, outputing and inputing of thift.

Persewaris, Iffobell Trunibill, as dochter (to Walter) and fifter (toWilliame Trumbill) ; George
Rutherfurd, as kinfman ; Mr Johne Nicolfoune, fubflitute for our fouerane lordis aduocat.

Preloquutouris for the pannell, Mr Johne Kuffell, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Williams Douglas,
Dauid Ramfay.

It is allegit be the pannell, that na proces aucht to be grantit vpone the Dittay,
vnto the tyme he be fummond vpone xv dayis wainiing, in refpect the deidis
fontenit in tlie Dittay is done xxiiij yeir fyne. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat,
that he was denuncet rebell and put to the borne for ane of the flauchteris contenit in the Dittay, viz. ffor the flauchter of vmq'" Williame Trumbill, and ane
Commiffioune grantit be the Kingis Maieftie and Coiinfall for taking of him ; be
vertew quhairof he was takin and apprehendit and jirefentit to the Counfale,
-s'pone the fyft day of July ; att the quhilk tyme, in prefens of the perfewer and
defender, than prefent, this day (being that day xv dajds) was allignit to the
perfewer to perfew him for that cryme and all vther crymes could be laid to his
charge : And thairfoir, thair being xv dayis grantit to the Counfell to deliberat
vpon his defence, thair aucht to be na forder citatioune grantit. — To the quhilk
it is anfuerit be the pannell, concerning the Hoirning, he is relaxt. Secundo, as
to the Commiffioune, na Commiffiovme can be grantit to jireiudge him of his
lauchfnll defenffis, parte non c'ltata. As to the laft, he gat na coppie of the
Dittay, and thairfoir man be fummond on xv dayis wairning.

As for the flauchter of vmq'" Williame Trumbill, fayis he Avas flane be him in
his awin defenfe, he being aflageit within his awin hous. As to the flauchter of
vmq'^ Johne Hammiltoune, denyis, and offeris him to the tryell of ane Aflyfe. As
to the flauchter of Walter of Raflat, fayis he was flane at the borne, and producet the hoirning for verifeing thairof, raifit at the inftance of Andro Comniendater of Jedburcht, quhair the faid Walter, for nocht removeing fra the landia
of Raflat, and half ane quarter of the tonn and landis of Belfis ; quhilkis letteris
ar of the dait the xx day of Apryle 1581, and of our fouerane lordis regne the
xiiij yeire; denuncet the xij day of Julij, anno foirfaid. — It is alleget be the
Aduocat, to the lall pairt, that albeit he was at the home, the pannell aucht nocht
to vfurpe the Kingis auctorite vponne him, to flay ony man at his awin hand.
The Justice continewis Interloquitour to the morne.

Jul. 20. — The Justice Remittis the haill poyntis of Dittay, except for
the flauchter of vnnf Walter Trumbill of Raflat, to ane Aflj-fe.

It is allegit aganis James Waddell, burges of Jedbiu-ghe, that he can nocht pas

' Robber ; Fr. brigand.

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 421

vpone this Affyfe, becaus tliair is deidlie feid ftandand betuix the haill name of
Trumbill, on the ana pairt, and the liaird of Pharniherft, the haill Keris, and the
haill inhabitantis of the toune of Jedburghe, on the vther pairt, for the Slauchter
of Thomas Ker, brother to the (Laird of) Pharniherft.

The Aduocat jiroteftis for Wilfull errour, in caice that thay acqnit George
Trumbill of the flauchter of vmq'" Williame Trumbill, becaus he confeft the
committing of the Slauchter out of his hous, he being aflageit, and allegeit in
his defence.

The Aduocat, for inftructing of the Dittay, producet ane Teftimoniall, beiring
the pannell to be excommunicat for Slauchteris, Murthouris, Inceftis and Adultereis,&c. ; fubfcryuit be Mr George Douglas, clerk of thePrefl)iterie of Jedburghe.

\^ERDICT. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Walter Eleife, in Danieltoun, chanceller (be pluralitie of voittis), ffand, pronunceit and declairit the faid George
Trumbill to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of beiring, weiring and fchuiting with
hagbuttis and piftolettis, contrair the tennour of our fouerane lordis Actis of
Parliament ; committit betuix the toune of Jedburghe and the place of Belfis,
in anno FWj". and tua yeiris : And to be Clene, innocent and acquit of the haill
remanent crymes aboue fpecifeit, mentionet in the faid Dittay ; and fpeciallie, of
the flauchter of the faid vniq'" Williame Trumbill, becaus the famyn was done
in his awin defcns.

Quhairvpoune the faid George Trumbill afliit inftrumentis.

(Avig. 18.) — Sentence. The Juftice decernit and ordanit the faid
George Trvunbill to be tane ' to the mercat-croce of Edinburghe, and thair his
richt hand to be ftrukin frome his airme, as convict of the faid cryme ; quhilk
wes gevin for dome."

^ctwi) — (Cijaiminfi;— Siliusiufr tl)c ^?ttiple«

Jul. 21. — Jaimes Reid, fumtyrae ferveand to George Anderfoun in
Muffilbur'.
Dilatit, accufit and perfewit, be Dittay, of the crymes following, to wit,
For ane cowmone Sorcerer, charmer and abufer of Godis peopill, be geving
him felff out to haill all kynd of feiknes : Quhilk craft he lernit fra the Devill,
his maifter, in Bynnie-craigis and Corftorphin-craigis, quhair lie met with him
and confultit with him to lerne the faid craft ; quha gaif him thrie penneis, at
ane tyme, and a peice creifche" out of his bag, at ane vther tyme ; he haifing
appeirit to the faid James dyuerfe tymes, quhyles^ in the liknes of a n)aii, quhyles
in the liknes of a hors : with quhome he lykwayis dyuerfe tymes confultit fen
his firft melting, quhilk is threttene yeir fyne or thairby ; quhilk lykwayis
' See Aug. 23, 1602. ' Grease, fat. ' Sometimes, occasionally.

422 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

lernit him to tak foiitlie-rynnand-watter ' to cuir the faidis difeiffis. Item, for
cureing of Sara Borthiiik, be his Sorcerie and devih-ie, quha was grevouflie
trubillit and difeafit, be bringing of fouth-rynand-watter fra the Schyreif-brayiswall, and carting a certane quantitie of fait and quheit about hir bed ; be the
quh.ilk cuir fcho was hailit. Item, fforiamekill as he, be the fpeciall perfualioune of Jonet Cryftie, dochter to Johne Cryftie at Cryftiefounis mylne, and

his mother, confultit with the Devill, for diftructioun of Dauid

Libbertoun, baxter, burges of Edinburghe, liis fpous, tliair coirne and guidis ;
quha caufit him tak a peice raw flefche, quhairvpone he maid nyne nekkis,^ and
inchantit the famyn, quhilk he delyuerit to the faid Jonet, and caufit hir lay ane
jjairt thairof vnder the mylne dur, and the reft A'uder the ftabill dur, for diftructione of his hors and cattell. And als, inchantit to him nyne ftanis, quhilk tlie
faid James cuift vpone the faid Dauid Libbertones landis, for diftructioune of his
coirues. Lyk as, the faid James and the faidis Jonet Cryftie and hir mother
infformet^ and maid ane pietour of walx, quhilk the Devill inchantit ; and he
and the wemen turnit the pietour at ane ffja-e, in the faid Johnne Cryftiefones
hous, for diftructioun of the laid Dauid Libbertones felff. Item, for cureing of
the faid Johnne Cryftie, being difeafit of a fwalling, in putting of thre filk poyntis,""
in his devilifch maner, about his waift, quhilk remanit ten oulkis^ with him; and
went away fra the faid Joh.nne, 1)e quhat way he knew nocht.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of Johne Howie, merchand, chanceller
(all in one voce), ffand, pronuncet and declarit the faid James Reid to be ffylet,
culpabill and convict of the haill crymes aboue fpecifeit.

Sextence. To be tane to the Caftel-hill of Edinburghe, and thair to be
wirreit'' at ane ftaik ; and his body to be brunt in affis :■: And all his moveabill
guidis to be efcheit, and inbrocht to his hienes vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.

ilTuititr — X^oliljei'i).

Jul. 27. — Tho:mas Horsburcjii, burges of Peiblis.
Dilaitit and accufit of the Murthour and Slauchter of vmq'" WilliameChiniolme
in Peibbillis, with his awin quhinger, vnder filence and clud of nycht : And als,
of the thiftious fteilling of ten fax li. peces," and tuentie merkis in quhyte filuer,
pertening to the faid vmq'" Williame, vnder the faid Williames bed-heid ; committit in the moneth of Marche laftbypaft : And ficlyk, for the thiftious fteilling
of tuentie tua li.^ fra his guid-mother,'" committit nyne yeir fyne, or thairby.

' Tliis su])erstition still obtains, in tnaTiy remoto places of Scotland; where tlie virtues of such water
are firmly believed in. '' Nicks, notches. ■' Formed, constructed. ^ Laces, ties. ^ Weeks.
'' Stranfj'leil. " ' The 21 of Julij, James Heid brunt, for conl'ulting and uleing with Satlian and

Witclieis ; and quha was notably knawin to be ane couufellor with Witches.' — Birrel's Diary.
" Ten £6 pieces. ^i.%%. '« xMolher-in-law.

19

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 423

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Michell Hunter of
Polmwid, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the iaid Thomas to be ffylet,
culpabill and convict of the faidis ciymes.

Sextexce. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair to be
hangit on ane gibbett quhill he be deid ; and thaireftir his heid and richt hand
to be ftrukin fra his body ; and the heid to be fet vpone ane prik vpoun the
ftepill-heid of Peiblis ; and his richt hand to be put on the Eift-pairt thairof :
And all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

ITsurpatton of ^inQ*& Slutljoviti) — ?t?uittns mxti S^UounUiuff.

Jul. 29. — Alexander Seytoux, in Boigin-Johne.

Dilatit for the taking and apprehending of Mr Johne Cardno, convoying him
to his lious in Boigin-Johne, and detening him captiue and prefoner, be the
fpace of xxiiij houris ; and hurting of him with ane rapper' in tlie body, and
vfurpation of our fouerane lordis authoritie vjioun him, in taking of the laid Mr
Johne ; committit in Nouember laftbyi)aft.

The pannell aflvis inftrumentis of his comperance on pannell, and proteftis for
releif of his cautioner ; and als, he offerris him reddie to vnderly the law for the
faid cryme, dilafTenting till all continewatioune.

The Jullice continewis to the Juftice-air of ' Abirdene, tei'cio Itineris, (vel
fuper premonitione) xv dieinim.' James Chene of Straloch, cautioner.

^lausfjter.

Jul. 30. — George Harrett of the Coittis.

Dilatit for the Slauchter of vmq''^ Williame Dowglas, in MufTilbiirgh, feruitoure to Williame Erll of Angus, lord Douglas, &c. ; committit in the moneth
of Julij, the yeir of God I'^-Vj". and twa yeiris.

Marioune Wilfoun, the relict, produceit our fouerane lordis Letteris, dewlie
execute and indorfat, &c. Thomas Harrett in Lintoune, his cautioner, vnlawit
and amerciat in the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament, viz. in the payne
of ane hundreth merkis ; and als adiudget the faid George Harrett to be denunceit oure fouerane lordis rebell, and putt to the home ; and all his movable
guidis ordauit to be efcheit.

fc>

iHuiUer.

Jul. 30. — Marioux Wardlaw, Ijjous to Johne Kennedie, gantillet
maker, burges of Edinburghe.
Dilailit of airt, pairt, red and counfall of the Murthour committit be Williame Boirthuik, tutour of Boirthuik, Johne Boirthuik his brother, and vtheris

' Rnpier.

424 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

thair complices, in cuming to James Frammis duelliug-hous in the Cannogait,
vnder fcylence of nycht, and ftiykeing of him nyne ftraikis in the body and
heid, to the effufioun of his body ; and levand him for deid.

Persewar, James Fiamme, gantillet-maker in Edinburglie.

Continued to the air of Edinbiirghe, ' tercio Itineris (vel fuper premonitione)
XV dierum.'

* jfitXa of tijt 2lemT0.T*— ^lau(jl)tn- at CoIquTjouns —

^toutijitif, ^c.

Aug. 12.— DuGALL arGREGorii and Neill M'Gregour Pudrache.'
Dilatit and acculit of the crymes following ; to wit, the faid Neill 3Pgregoi(r
of airt and jiairt of the Slauchter of vmq'° Patrik Layng and of vmq''' Johne
Reid, wobfter, fervandis to the Laird of Lute ; committit in December lallwas :
And ficlyke, of airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling of tuelf fcoir guidis
furth of the Laird of Lviffes boundis, in the Lennox f committit the tyme foirfaid. And ficlyk, the laid Dougall 3I'gregon)-, of airt and pairt of the Slauchter
of foure men, fervandis to the Laird of Lufe, in the lait ffeild of the Lennox ;^
and being in companie with the Laird of IM'gregour and his comjjanie at the
fame feild ; and airt and pairt of the Slauchteris, reiffis, thiftis and foiriiingis
committit that day, in the moneth of Februare laft.

\^EBDiCT. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of James Broim, burges of Dumfreis,
chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and deelairit the laidis Neill JM'Gregour Pudrache,
and the faid Dougall M'gregour to be fylit, culpabill and convict of tlie haill
crymes aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence. Thairfoir the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Walter Peirie,
dempfter, decernit and ordanit the faidis Neill and Dougall M'gregour to be tane
to the Burrow-nuire of Edinburglie, and thair, vpone ane gibbet, to be hangit
quhill thay be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

a)n«st — ^UiiHeri) — 2ri)tft, ^r .

Aug. 23. — George Trujibill, in Bellis.^
Dilaitit, accufit and perfewit, be Dittay, of the crj'mes following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as it is expreflie provyilit, ftatute and ordanit be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, that all notorious and manifeft Adultereris and Inceftuous perfones foukl die the daithe, and
thair haill moveabill guidis to be efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe ; and all fie perfones quhaar excommunicat for Adulterie, ar be Act of Parliament cflemit for notorious and manifeft adultereris ; as the
faidis Actis at niair lenth beiris : And trew it is, that the faid George Trumbill lies in the monethis of
Januare, Febiniare, Marche, Apryle, Maij, Junij, Julij, Auguft, September, October, November and
December, in the yeiris of God l'".\Xlxxxxviij, Ixxxxix, 1600, IGOl, and V'W^. and tua yciris ; at the
leift in ane or vther of the faidis monethis and yciris, abufet his body in the filthie cryme of luceft and

' Pudraclie ^ignifips of the country or district of Balquliidder. = See Blav. 20, 1G03, &c. ^ See Jan. 20,

1601. 4 See Jul. 9, 1G03, and .\ug. 18, wlicu he had his right liaiid siruek otf for shooting pistolets, &c.

37&1JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 425

Adulteiie with Marioun Ti-umbill, fpous to Jok Trumbill in Belfis, his brother fones wyfe ; ffor the
quliilk fact he is excommunicat within the Pielbiterie of Jedburcht ; as tlie fentence of excommunicatioune proportis. Item, for the thifteous fteilling of ane gray horie furth of the landis of Raflat,
pertening to vmq'= Walter Trumbill of Raflat ; committit in the moneth of September, 1577. Item,
for the fteilling of xx oxin and ky furth of the landis of Raflat, fra the laid vmq'« Walter; committit in
the moneth of September Ixxix yeiris. Item, for the thiftious fteilling and reifing of foure horfe, fra
foure mylleris of Je<lburcht ; committit thre yeir fyne, or thairby. Item, for the fteilling of ane naig
fra Walter Trumbill now of Raflat.

Perseweris.

Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland, kny', aduocat to our fouerane lord ; George Rutherfurd,

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Johne Ruflell, Mr Williame Douglas.

It is allegit be George Tnunbill, that he fould nocht be putt to ane AfTyis for
the crymes of Thift in the Dittay ; becaiis, within this moneth, he wes chargeit
befoir your lordfliips of findrie partieuler poyntis of thift and commoune thift ;
comprehending all pointis of thift, except itt wer for pointis of thift committit
fen his clangeing. The Aduocat alledgis it is nocht relevant.

The Justice ordanis George Trumbill to be putt to the Aflyfe, for all crymes
contenit in the Dittay, except fie as he is alreddie clangeit of.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fwering of the Inqueift ; and of productioun of the Prefljiteries Teftimoniall, teftifeing George Trumbill to be excommunicat for Inceft and Adulterie, contenit in the Dittay : And proteftis "NVilfull
Errour, in caice thay acquit. And further, produceis Letteris of Hoirning, to
verifie the vther fotire poyntis of Dittay, and of his lang remaning vnrelaxit ;
and proteftit for ^Mlfull Errour, in caice thay acquit, in refpect foirlaid. — The

paimell takis inftrumentis of Halyburtoune of Moreillaw coniperance,

and fwering of the twa pointis of the Dittay, viz. of the mylleris naigis, and Watt
Trumbillis naig. The Aduocat aflvis inftrument of the fwering of the Dittay,
be the Guidman of Moriflaw.

^^ERDicT. The Affile, having ' be pluralitie of voitis' chofen Williame Cokburne of that Ilk chanceller, thay ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid George
to be ffylet, culiJalnll and convict of the haill crymes refpectiue aboue writtin.

Sentence. And thairfoir the faid Juftice-depiite, be the mouth of Robert
Scott, dempfter of Court, decernit and ordanit the faid George to be tane to the
Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and to be hangit on ane gibbett quhill he be deid ;
and his haill landis, heritageis, tenementis, annuelrentis, poffeflionis, coirnis, cattell, infycht pleniffing, guidis and geir, to be forfaltit and efcheit to our fouerane
lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.

^Iaus!)tn- — ?i.>ourj;i)iu0 (!5.tcu — .i^toutljmf, ^c,

Sep. 2.3. — JoiixXE Johnnestoux, callit of Loch-hous.
Dilatit, accufet and perfewit be Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland, knycht,

VOL. II. 3 H

426 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1603.

aduocat to our fouerane lord, ffor airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq''' Jolmne
Cunningliame, fervand to the Erie of Glencairne ; coramittit in the yeir of God
P.^'Mxxxxvj vein's, or thairby, within the burcli of Edinburgh. Item, for
airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq''' Gilbert Roriefoune. Item, for airt and
pairt of the hoching' of Robert Cuninghames oxin. Item, for airt and jiairt of
the maifterfull and ftouthfuU reveing fra James Lichtoun, Johne KeUo, Johne
Byres, George Cuninghame, merchandis burgeffis of Edinburgh, .... Hunter
in Glefgow, and Williame AValker at Bellis-mylne, of thair jiurffis and money
being thairin, eftimat to thre thoufand (and viij'') merkis ; and away-taking of
thair nagis fra thame ; committit in the moneth of Julij 1602 yeiris, at the
Rowne-tre-barne, betuix Air and Wigtoune.

AssisA.
Charles Campbell of Horfcleuch, George Campbell of Gelt,

Charles Campbell of Skeringtoun, Williame Campbell of Walwoid.^

\'erdict. The AfTyfe all in ane voce, be the mouth of the laid Charles
Campbell of Horfcleuch, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the laid Johnne
Jolinneftoun of Loch-hous, accoirding to his awin Confeffioun, maid in judgement, and Depofitiones fubfciyuit with his hand, to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of the haill poyntis of Dittay aboue reherfit.

Sentence. To be tane to ane fcafiald at the mercat-croce of Edinburgh,
and thair his heid to be ftriikin fra his body. And all his moveabill guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

\_3Ir Andrew KneiUand, Jtipke-Depnte?']

Bftt rontinurU oiMina to plastic iw c?liCnliiirsT).

Nov. 8. — JoHXNE CoLQUHOux, younger of Campftradden,^ Dougall
MTarlen, and Johne M'^Coneill V'neill M'Farlane and others.

Compeirit Antoun ^Miyte, wryter, and producet ane delyuerance grantit be
the lordis of Secreit Counfall, fublcryuit be my Lord Chanceller, &c. as follows.

IMy Lordis op Counsall, vnto your lordfcliipis Iiumlie menis and fchawis we your feruitouris,
Sir Jobnc Murray of Tulliebarden, kny', and James Hadden of Glennageis : That quliair, we and
atlier of \vs liaif purcliell lettree, quliairwith we Iiaif caufet charge Johne Colquhoun, younger of CampJlradden, Dougall M'^Farlane, Johne M'^Conell ^''^neill Makfarlane, and certane vtheris perfones thair
complices, fpecifeit in the faidis letteria direct thairvpoune, to find cautioun, that tiiai fall compeir
befoir our fouerane lordis Juftice and his deputis within the Tolbuthe of Edinburgh, the aucht day of
November inflant, to vnderly the law for certane crymes mentionet in the faidis letteris : At the raifing
of the quhilkis letteris, we and ather of ws ffand cautioun actit in the buikis of Adiornall, for repoirting of the faidis letteris, deulie execute and indorfate, at the day foirfaid, vnder the panes contenit in
the Actis of Parliament. And be reflbne of the fufpitioune and danger of the plaige of peftilence

Hamstringing;, * James Johneston of Locliwood beheitlit at the crosse of Edinburgh, for oppression, slaughter,
and raising of fyre and vtbir maney cryai*^s.'-~Birrei. s The rest of the Assise com|)osed of merchants. ^ This

Judge is lirst noticed, Nov. 3, 1603. ■* See p. 'iSS, Tvhere he is said to have been killed, 7th February preceding !

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 427

within the faid burcht of Edinburgh, quhilk hes intervenit fen tlie raifing of the faidis letteris, we nor
the perfonia fummond on the Aflyfe of the perfones dilaitit, may nocht guidlie repair thither, for feir
of the faid plaigue. Quliairthrow, neceffar it is that the day foirfaid be prorogat and continewit to ane
certane vther competent day tbairefter, that (gif it pleis God to ftay the faid plaigue) we may faiflie
refoirt and repair to the faid burcht of Edinburgh, to the effect aboue fpecifeit. Heirfoir, we befeik
your lordfchipis, that ye will give command to our fouerane lordis Jullice, Jultice-clark and thair
deputis, to continew the day foirfaid, to ane certane vther lauchfull competent day thaireftir ; and to
wairne the partie and the perfones fummond vpone the faid Affyfe thaiito ; quliairthrow we may the
mair faiflie repair to the faid burcht to the effect aboue writtin : Quhairanent it will pleis your lordfchipis to difpenfe with us, and all panes and vnlawis, quhairinto we or ather of ws, or ony of the perfones fummond vpone the faid Alfyfe, may ony maner of way be vnlawit or adiudget, for our noncompeirance, at the faid viij day of November infla^t : And your lordfchipis anfuer humlie we befeik.
[Fiat ut petitur.] (Sic fubfcribitur) Montroiss, Canrius. M. R. Young.

According to the quhilk Warrand, the Juftice continewit the faid dyet to the
faid xxij day of December nixtociini ; and ordanit the parteis to be fummond,
^nd ane Affyfe alfo to be fummond to the faid day ; and the cautioner to Hand
obleift for repoirting of the faidis letteris, deulie execute and iudorfate, agane
the faid day.

Nov, 17. — James Kynxaird in Inchtm-e, Williame Haitlie in Balgay,
and Williame Kynnaird, fone to the Laird of Kynnaird.
Patrik Bruce of Fyngalk and Johnne Kynnaird, hear of that Ilk, amerciated
in the pane of ane hundreth merkis, for ather of the faidis James, &c. for nocht
entrie of thame to half vnderlyne the law, for airt and pairt of the felloun and
crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Scher]), feruitour to the Laird of Ruthven ;
committit vpone the firft day of July lallbypaft, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun
and foirthocht fellony. And James Kynnaird, &c. to be denuucet rebellis, and
put to the home, &c.

Nov. 23. — James Cuming, fear of Altei', Johne Cuming, his feruand.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Thomas Hay of Edinvaill ;
committit the xx day of July lallbypaft, betuix the place of Alter and the toun'
of Edinvaill, vpoun fett piu'pois, provifioune and foirthocht fellony.

^Villiame Hay, as brother, and Robert Hay, as fone, to vmq'" Thomas Hay,
produced the letteris, dewlie execute, &c. — Alexander Rychardfoun, Minifter of
Dolefe, declarit vpoun his grit aith, tane vpoun ane bulk, that the faid James
Cuming wes heavelie difeifit with ane flux of natour, and ane flux of his body,
and that he wes fubiect to the faid feiknes ; And Mr Alexander Cuming offered
to prove that ' he may nocht travell,' &c. — Williame Cuming, fear of Enifyde,

1 Farm-steading.

428 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

as cautioner, was vnlawit for non-entrie of the faid James Cuming, in the pane
of ane thowfand mark, and for nocht entrie of Johne Cuming, in the pane of ane
hundreth merks ; and they ordanit to be denunceit, &c.

Nov. 24. — Letters of Horning given in by Robert Hay, feruitour to
Frances Erie of ErroU, to be regiftrate againll the pannell, with executions and
denounciatiounis, &c.

[Curia tenia per Archihaldum Ergadie Com'dem, Jiiftic'iartim Genertdem et
3IagiJirum Wdlehninn Hairt ejus deputatum principcdem.']

treason — ^amtsucfee n — (J^ppressiou — ^toutijrf if, ^t.

Jan. 12, 1604. — George Meldrum, younger of Dumbrek.

Dilatit, accufet and jierfewit be Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland, aduocat
to our fouerane lord for his hienes entreis, of the crymes following, to witt.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid George, haifing confauit ane deidlie feid, rancor and malice aganis Andro
Meldrum, his brother, he, accumpaneit with dyuerfe vtheris his complices and fervandis, to tlie number of ten perfones, or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir,' with hagbutis, dagis and pillolettis, expreflie
prohibeit to be borne, worne, vfet or fchot with, be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in the

monetli of or tliairby, the yeir of God I™.\X fourfcoir nyntene yeiris, being four yeir fyne, or

thairby, come to the ISIylnetoun of Dumbrek, quhair tlie faid Andro was, in fober and quyet maner
for the tyme, &c. ; and thair fet vpone him, and crewallie invaidit him for his Slauchter, and hurt and
woundit him in liis .... liand, fchoulder and face, to the effufioune of his bluid in greit quantitie :
And tliaireftir treflonabillie tuik the faid Andro captiue and prilfoner, had and conroyit him to the
place of Dumbrek, quhair the faid George detenit him as captiue, be the fpace of audit oulkis, or
thairby, in flrait firmance and captiuitie ; and thaireftir tranfportit him to the place of Ernefyde, quhair
the faid George and his fervandis keipit tlie (aid Andro in (Irait firmance, be the fpace of fyftene or
tuentie dayis, quhill he cfcaipit fra thame perforce : Vfurpand tliairby our fouerane lordis auctoritie
vpone him, in taking of the faid Andro, his hienes frie lege man, but'^ Commiflioune, and detening him
in captiuitie, be the fpace foirfaid ; committing thairby manifefl Treflbne : And als, for contravening
the tennour of the Actis of Parliament, in beiring, weiring and vfeing of the faidis Iiagbuttis and piftolettis. Item, fiorfamekill as the faid George, haifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice
aganis Andro Meldrum of Achquharteis, laitlie, in the monethis of September or October, the yeir of
God I'".Vj<^. yeiris, being accumpaneit with Patrik Scheill and Alexander Meldrum, his fervandis,
bodin in feir of weir, with Iiagbuttis and pillolettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament,
come be way of Hamefukkin to the place of Achquharteis, vnder filence and clud of nycht, about
foure houris in the moirning, befoir day ; and thair, the faid George daruit' him felff and his fervandis
in ane out-hous, belanging to the faid Andro, neir to the faid place, quhair he remanit quyet, quhill
about ellevin houris of the day, that the laid Andro jNIeldnim come furth to ouerfie liis awin turnes,*
and thair fet vpone the faid Andro Meldrum, and tieflbnabillie pat violent handis in his perfone, tuik
him captiue and priflbner, and convoyit him away with him as ane malefactour, fra bis faid duellinghous, and brocht him fouth oner to Andro Fyfes lious, in the Bnnow-mure of Edinburgh, befyde
Merchiniloune ; quhair the faid George detenit him captiue, be the fpace of thre or foure dayis tbairefter, quhill the faid Andro (' efchewit,' or ' efcaipiP) furth of the faid hous, by^ liisknawledge and aganis

Anayed in warlike manner. - Willimit. ^ Hid, concealed. ^ Concerns, business, affairs.

5 Until the said Amlreiv escaped. A word is omitted in the Record. ^ Beside, without or coutiarj- to his knowledge, unknown to liini.

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 429

his will : Vfuqiand thairthrow our foueraiie lordis authoritie vpone liim, in taking and keiping captiue
of the faid Andio Meldrum of Acquhaiteis, his hienes fiie liege man, but' coniiiiiffioune or auctoritie,
and committing thairby manifeft Treffone: And als, for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of
Parliament, in beiring and weiring of hagbutis and piftolettis. Item, fforfamekill as the faxd George,
liaifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice agnnis Mr Alexander Gibfone, ane of the Clerkis
of our fouerane lordis Counfell and Sellioune, he, accumpaneit with NicoU Jardane, Robert Jardane,
Johnne Johnftoun, callit Sicyne-fute, Johnne Ker, fone to the Tutour of Gradane, and Alexander
Bartilmo, with tua fute-boyis, ane company of cowmoune and notorious thevis, brigandis and niurtherouris, all bodin in feir of weir, with fuordis, hagbutis and piltulettis, expreflie prohibeit to be borne or
worne, as faid is, laitlie, in the moneth of October or September, the yeir of God, I"', fax hundreth and
ane yeiris, being adverteift of the fiiid Mr Alexanders dyett, be ane fellow callit Craik, the faid George
Meldrumis awin man, quhome he fend to efpy the faid Mr Alexanderis dyet within the Citie of St
Androis ; at the quhilk tynie, he fet vpone the faid Mr Alexander Gibfone, Mr Alexander Levinglloun, aduocat, and Robert Guthrie, fervand to the faid Mr Alexander Gibfone, within the boundis of
the fcherefdome of Fyffe, befyde the Watter-fyde of Dundie, quhair thay war in fober and cpiyet
raaner rydand for the tyme, dreiJand nn harme, iniurie, or perfute of ony perfones, hot to half levit
vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis : and thair crewaliie Invaidit thame for thair Slauchteris, and
compellit thame to rander thame felffis to the faid George and his compliceia foirfaidis ; and treflbnabillie pat violent handis in thair perfones, tuik thame captiues and prilibneris, had and convoyit thame
away with him out of the way, and befyde Couper-in Fyfe, (he being ane landit gentilman,) trellbnablie,
be way of maillerful Stouthreif, reft fra thame thair purflis, with certane gold and filuer being thairin,
extending to the quantetie of thre hundreth merkis or thairby ; and thaireftir convoyit thame to the
toun of Kinghorne, quhair he demittit - the faidis Mr Alexander Levingftoun and Robert Guthrie:
And thairfra convoyit the faid Alexander Gibfone, and brocht him with thame felffis ouer the tferrie
of Kinghorne to Leyth, and convoyit him captiue to Williame Kayis houfe in Leyth, quhair Serjand
MofTct come to thame ; and thairfra the faid George maifl treflbnabillie convoyit the faid Mr Alexander Gibfone captiue by-' the Palice 3et of Halyriulhous, throw ane gritt pairt of Louthiane and
throw Tueddell, to the toun of Melrois ; and befoir thair entrie within the faid toun, the faid George,
with his complices, devydit the gold that was in the tua purflis amangis thame, quhairof ilk ane of
thame gat tuentie nierkis, or tliairby, for thair pairtis ; and fra the faid toun of Melrois thay convoyit
the faid Mr Alexander captiue vnto Ingland, to George Ratleiffis houfe; quhair thai detenit him captiue and priffoner be the fpace of aucht dayis or thairby : Vfurpand thairby our fouerane lordis auctoritie vpone thame, in taking the faidis perfones, thay being his Maiefleis frie leigis ; haifing na power
nor Commiflioun to that effect ; in manilcft contempt of his Maieflie : committand thairby nianifefl
Treffone : Lyk as, the faid George, being ane landit Gentilman, committit maift treflbnabill Thift and
Stouthreif, in reifHng of thair purflis, and gold foirlaid being thairin ; And fidyk, for beiring and weiring of hagbutis and piftolettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament. OflF the quhilkis crymes
rejpecfhie aboue writtin, the faid George was fpeciall actour ; at the leifl, airt and pairt thairof. And
lafl, the laid George being indytit and accufit, fforfamekill as he, accumpaneit with Johnne MeldruW)
his brother, and dyuerfe vtheris, his complices, laitlie, in the moneth of November laflbypaft, being
bodin in feir of weir, with hagbuttis, dagis and piftolettis, prohibeit to be borne or worne, as faid is, be
our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament and Secreit Counfall, come to the place of Dumbrek, pcrtening
heritablie, and being in the lauchfull pofleflioun of Andre Meldrum, his brother, keipit be him and his
fervandis, and tuik the famyn place perforce, and held and detenit the lamyn be the fpace of levin
oulkis or thairby.^

' AVitliout. " Suffered to go, dismissed. °.Past. * This latter part of the Dittay is tlais slioi-tly given

in another place of tlie Record : ' And lor taking "of the place of Dnmbrcli, and keijiing of the saniyn aganis the
Kingis gaird, qnha, he vertew of ane Commissioiuie, was commanded to pas to the said lious and chairge liim to rander the samyn ; quhiik he dissobeyit.

430 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

ASSISA.

James Tennent of Kairnes, Williame Foullertoun of Arde, Jo. Creichtoune, Y' of Stratlmrd,

J" Kvnneir, younger of tliat Ilk, Alex' Falconer of Halkertoun, Da.Haddene,tutourofGlennageis,

Mr Patrik Balfour of Pitcullo, Jolinne Veitche of Dawik, Thomas Ker of Caveris,

George Mun-ay of Broclitoune, Williame Burnet of the Bairnes, Geo. Hereis of Kirktone of Eflie,

Arcl)ebald Ogilvie of Keillour, Aulay M'caulay of Ardincapell, Johnne Boyle of Kelburne.

For verificatioun quhairof, the faid Sir Thomas Hammiltoun jwoducet the faid
George Depofitiones, fubfcryuit with his hand, beiring his Confeffioun of the
haill crj-mes aboue fjiecifeit. Tlie Adiiocat afkit inftruineiitis, (1.) Of the fweiring of the AfTyis : (2.) That George Meldriim declaii'is he becumis in his Maiefteis will, for the taking and hurting of his brother, and for the taking of the
Guidman of Acqiiliariteis. (3.) Of George Meldrumis cuming in will, for the
offence done to INIr Alexander Giblbime and his company. (-1.) Of the reiding
of the pannellis Depolitiones to the Alfyfe judiciallie ; And (5.) In relpect thairof, and of liis Confeffioune thairof, in judgement, and becuming in will for the
haill Dittay, proteftis for WilfuU Errour, in cais thai acquit.

"V^ERDICT. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of the faid Alexander Falconer of
Halkertoun, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid George INIeldrum,
younger of Dumbrek, to be ffylet, culpabill and convict of the haill crymes
aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence, And thairfoir, the faid Juftice-generall and Mr Williame Hairt,
his principall depute foirfaid, be the advj'fe of John Erll of Montrois, chanceller
of this realme, and dyuerfe vtheris Lordis of his Maiefteis Secreit Counfall and
Seffioun, than fitting in judgment, as AlTeirouris, (ffinding the faidis crymes to be
treffbnable), be the mouth of Robert Scott, dempfter of Court, Ordanit the faid
George Meklrum to be tane to ane fcaffold, befyde the mercait croce of Edinburghe, and thair his held to be ftrukkin fra his body ; and all his landis, heritageiSj takkis, fteidingis, rowmes, poffefliones, coirnes, cattell, inficht pleuiffing,
guidis and geir to be fforfalt, efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane loi'dis vfe, as
convict of the faidis treflbnable ciymes. — Quhilk wes pronunceit for dome.*

I31r Williame Hairt, Jii/f ice-Depute.']

' dfitltr of tlje %t\mox,' ov * Conflict of (gltiifruint' — ^laus^Ui'
of ti)t (roIquI)oun3 — ^toutijif if — Cvcasou — drii't--raisin0, ^c.

[The proscription and tiie cruel and systematic persecution of the Clan-Gregor, for a long series
of years, although, in the abstract, a subject familial- to every reader of Scotish History, has hitherto
been very imperfectly explained. The Criminal Records, and the Acts of the Privy Council, throw
much ligiit on all the various branches of tliis extraordinary event. To save the necessity of future
repetition, it appears to the Editor to be necessary, at the outset of these proceedings, to give a very
brief sketch of the circumstances which led to ' The Field of the Lennox' — or ' The Raid' or
' Conflict of Glenfroon ;' and of those events whieii ultimately terminated in the Execution of
' ' The 12 of J;iini.ir, George Meldi'um of Diimbrck beheidit, for Oppression and uther odious crjTues." — Birrel.

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 431

the Laird of MacGregor, and of many others of his name. All the future oppression and persecution
of the race of the MacGregors ostensibly take their rise from this Conflict.

The Clan-Gregor, which, from whatever causes, had been for some time looked upon as an unruly
tribe, was, for some years previous to 1603, placed under the control of Archibald (seventh) Earl
OF Argyle, who, as King's Lieutenant in the ' Bounds of the Clan-Gregor,' was invested with very
extensive powers, and who, by his acceptance of the office, was made answerable for all excesses
committed by the Clan. In these circumstances, it might be supposed that it was Argyle's interest,
as it certainly was his duty, to have done all in his power to retain the Clan-Gregor in obedience
to the laws ; but, on the contrary, it appears that, from the time he first, as King's Lieutenant,
acquired the complete control of the MacGregors, the principal use he made of his power was artfully
to stir up the Clan to various acts of aggression and hostility against his own personal enemies, of
whom, it is known, Colquhoun of Ltss was one. It is to this crafty and perfidious system of the
Earl, therefore, that we must solely trace the feud between the Colquhouns and MacGregors, which
proved, in the end, so hurtful to both ; a result, no doubt, all along contemplated by this powerful
but treacherous Nobleman. But it is unnecessary to enlarge upon this point, as the Dying Declara*
tion of the Laird of MacGregor places in a very clear light the cruel and deceitful policy pursued by
Argyle, and which was too frequently resorted to by others, in those days, for quieting the Highlands.
It may be remarked, that this interesting document, besides undoubtedly bearing internal evidence of
truth, is corroborated, in almost every part of it, by the Public Records.

It is also to be remarked, as particularly worthy of notice, that at the period of this fatal Conflict,
both of the contending parties were, in a manner, equally armed with the Royal authority ; the
Laird of Luss liaving raised his forces under a Commission, emanating from the King himself ; while the
Laird of MacGregor marched to invade the Lennox, under the paramount authority of the King's
Lieutenant !

The popular accounts of this transaction charge the MacGregors with two atrocities, committed
after the battle, viz. the Murder of Sir Humphrey Colquhoun, who had fled from the field of battle, and
had taken refuge in the Castle of Bannachra ; and the Slaughter of a number of defenceless boys, from
the Grammar School or ' College ' of Dumbarton,' who, from curiosity, came to see the fight, and had,
by Colquhoun's order, been put into a barn for safety; where, on the success of the Highlanders, they
were said to have been murdered. In justice to the Clan-Gregor, it is but fair to mention that, on
investigating this subject, it clearly appears that Sir Humphrey was murdered in his Castle of Bannachrea, in July 1392, above eleven years before this Conflict, by some of the MacFarlans, under
circumstances of extreme atrocity. He was succeeded by his brother Sir Alexander, who was alive
a7ino IGIO. The then Laird of Luss must therefore have fled from the field of battle, leaving his vassals
to be cut to pieces by their victorious antagonists. As to the Slaughter of the schoolboys, it is enough
to state that this circumstance forms no point of any of the Dittays against those of the MacGregors
who were tried for their share in this battle, although every criminalact which could possibly be
adduced against each of them is carefully inserted in their Indictments. Such an atrocious fact could
not have escaped the notice of all his Majesty's Advocates, for such a length of time — and there was
no lack of informers. It is thought that this massacre is alluded to in the Records of the Privy
Council, Jan. 5, 1609, where it is stated, that ' Allan Oig MJntnach, in Glenco,' when aiding the ClanGregor at Glenfrune, ' with his awne hand, murdered, without pity, the number of forty poor perfons,
who were naked and without armour.'

According to the Editor's usual plan, some passages from contemporary MSS. are appended, in
illustration of the facts.J

1 So called, probably, from their education being conducted in tbe Collegiate Cburcli there, or under the auspices of
the Clergy of that ebtablishment, by virtue of some charitable endowment.

19

432 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

Jan. 20. — Allaster M'gregouu of Glenftra, Patrik Aldoche IM'gTegour, Williame IVrneill his feruand, Duncan Pudrache^ Rrgregour, and Allaster JVrgregour M'^kean.
Dilatit, acciifit and perfewit, at the inllance of Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of
Monkland, knycht, aduocat to our Ibiierane lord, &c. off the crymes following :
FoRSAMEKiLL as thay and ilkane of thame, accumpaneit with vmq'" Johnne
Dow, brother to the faid Allafter IVrgregour of Glenftra, and vtheris thair kin,
freindis, and of thair counfall, haifing conciudit the difti'uctioune of Alexander
Colquhoune of Lufe, his kyn, freindis and alya, and the haill lurname of the
Balquhannanis, and to herrie^ thair landis ; thay convenit to thamefelffis the
Clanhamrone,' the Clananverich,* and dyuerfe vtheris brokin men and foirneris,*
to the number of foure hundreth men, or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, with
hagbuttis, piftolettis, rauiTionis, mail3ie-coittis, pow-aixes," tua-handit-fwoirdis,
bowis, darloches, and vtheris wa^ipones, invrifme, incontraire the tennour of the
Actis of Parliament : And, for the performance of thair wicked conclufioune,
vpone the fevint day of Februare laftbypaft, come fordward, in arrayit battell, to
the Landis of Glenfrwne, pertening to the Laird of Lufe ; quhair the faid Laird
of Lufe, accumi)aneit with certane of his freindis, war convenit, be vertew of our
fouerane lordis Commiffioun, to refift the faidis perfones crewall interpryfes ; and
thair fet vjione him, his kyn and freindis, and crewallie invaidit thame for thair
flauchteris, Ichamefullie, ci'ewallie and barbaruflie murdreift and flew Peter
Naper of Kilmahew ; Johnne Buchannane of Buchlyvie ; Tobias Smallet, bail5ie
of Dumbarten ; Dauid Fallefdaill, burges thair ; Thomas and James Fallafdaillis, his fones ; ^Valter Colquhoun of Barnehill ; Johnne Colquhoun, feear
thairof ; Adam and Johnne^ Colquhones, fones to the Laird of Campftradden ;
Johnne Colquhoun of Dalmure, and dyuerls vtheris perfones, our fouerane lordis
leigis, to the number of feviu fcoir jierfonis or thairby ; the maift pairt of thame
being tane captiues be the faidis IVrgregouris befoir thai pat violent handis in
thame, and crewallie flew thame : And treflbnabillie tuik ^Villiame Sempill and
dyuerfe vtheris, our fouerane lordis frie legis, and convojat thame away captiue
with thame, and be way of maifterfull Stouthreif, flaw, reft and away-tuik fax
hundreth ky and oxin, audit hundreth fclieip and gait, fourtene fcoir of horfe
and meiris, with the haill plenifling, guidis and geir, aff the fourfcoir pimd land
of Lufe ; and at the famyn tyme, treflbnabillie raifit ffyre in the houflls and
barne-5airdis thairof, brunt, waiftit and diftroyit the famyn, with the coirnis
being thairin. And the foirfaidis perfones and ilk ane of thame ar airt and pairt

' Of the country of Balquliidder. * Spoil, plunder and devastate. ' Clan Cameron.

'' Querp, the Clan Ian Avericlie (Abrocli), viz. the IMacDonalds of Glencoe? ^ Sorners, persons

who vioU'iitly took free quarters, and committed acts of violence, having no fixed home. '' Morions,
coats of ninii, poll-axes. ' See Note, Vol. II. p. 4'26.

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 433

■ of the faidis crewall, horrible and treironabill cr3anes ; the lyk quhairof was
nevir committit within this realme : Committing thairby manifefl TrefTone, in
hie and manifefl contempt of our fouerane lord, his hienes auctorite and lawis.

ASSISA.

Sir Tliotna8 Stewart of Garnetullie,Johnne Blair younger of tliat Ilk, Thomas Fallafdaill burges of
Colene Campbell younger of Johnne Graliame of Knokdoliane, Dumbartene,

Glennorcliie, Moyfes Wallace burges of Ed"^, Juhnne' Herring of Lctliindie,

Alexander Men5ei9 of Weyme, Sir Robert Creycbtoune of Clwny, Williame Stewart, Capitane of
Robert Robertfoun of Strowane, l<ny', Dumbartene,

J°° Naper fiear of Mereliinftoune, Robert Robertfoun of Fafkeil3ie, Harie Drunimond of Blair,

Jolinne Blair elder of that Ilk.

For verificatioim quhairof, the faid Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland,
aduocat, producet the faidis perfones Depofitiones and Confeffiones, maid be
thame in prefens of dyuerfe lordis of his hienes Secreit Coimfall and Seffioun,
fubfcryuit with thair handis. — The Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis, (1.) Of the
fweiring of the AfTyfe, and proteftit for AVilfull Errour aganis thame, in cais
thay acquit. (2.) Of the fweiring of the Dittay be the Laird of Lule. (3.) Of
the jiroductioune of the pannellis Depofitiones to the Aflyfe.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Johnne Blair, elder
of that Ilk, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faidis Allafter ArGi-egour of
Glenfti-a, &c. to be fylet, culpable and convict of the crymes aboue fi)ecifeit.

Sentence. And thairfoir, the Juftice-depute, ffinding the faidis crymes to
be treflbnabill, be the mouth of James Henderfoun, dempftar of Court, Ordanit
the faidis perfones to be tane to the mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit vpone ane gibbet quhill thay be deid ; and thairefter thair lieidis, legis,
airmes and remanent pairtis of thair bodeis to be quarterit and jiut vpone publict
places, and thair haill landis, heritageis, annuelrentis, takis, fteidingis, rowmes,
pofTefliones, coirnes, cattell, guidis, geir and fowmes of money pertening to thame,
to be fforfaltit, efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the
faidis treflbnabill crymes.
DOCUMENTS illastratke r/'THE Field of the Lennox,' or ' Conflict

OF Glekfrune,' and of the Frocecdbigs against the Laird of MacGreGOR and his Clan.

(I.) Extract//-ot« Calderivood's MS. Church History, Aih-ocates Library, (Vol. V. p. 677.)
Upon the eiglit of Februar, a great company of Ibrners and brocken Highland men of the Clane
of Mackgrigore, the number of 400 men, came down to Lennox, to reave and fpoyle. The people
of the country conveened to make impediment. There were flaine of tlie country people, Ipecially
of the furname of Colquhoun, to the number of fourftore perfons or therby ; of tthich number were
landed men of good rank.'' The Laird of Luce himfelf, Chief of the Colquhouns, efcaped narrowly.

' In anotlier place called Daiiid. ^ The matter is thus noticed by Birrel and Fleming. ' The 9 of Feliiiiar

(1603,) thf Liiird of M<ich<iri(juur, witli four luiiuler of his name and facliomie, enteiit in the Lennox, ([nhair he
maid spiiilzie and siauchter, to the nwmher of CO honest men, hesjid ivemen and benrnis. He spairit nane unliair be

come' Binel's Diiiri/. ('Apr. 9,) Proclamatioun suniondin;,' all the WcCiregouris to compere and wnderly the law

for the slaiielitcr of the Laird of Luss, and the men of Uiimbartsme.' — Flaiiim/s MS. Chotiicle.

VOL. IL 3 I

434 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

Tbey carried away a tboufand head of cattell, befule other infight and plenilliing. It was reported,
tliat that was done at the inftigation of the Duke of Leunox his lady, feeking the wrack of the Laird
of Luce, wlio held of the King, and not of the Duke !

(IL) Extract /rom MS. Histonj of Scotland, Anon. Advocates Library, (A. 4. 35.)
Now on the fecund day of October (1603), the Laird of Arkinles takis in hand to the
Erll of Argyill, to tak the Laird of MacGregour ; and callis liim to ane bankatt' in his hous,
quhilk hous fluid within ane Loche ; and ihair takis him priflbner, to fend him to Argyill. And putting him in ane boitt, with fywe menne witli him, by'^ thame tliat rowil the boitt ; he, feing him felli'
betreiffit, gettis his handis lowfe ; and Ibiking him our burd that was narreft liim, he lowpis in tlie
waiter, and out-fowmis^ to the land. And fo efcheappis wntene,^ for the prefentt. Now tlie Erll
Argyill, perfeatfing that he wes efchapitt, he fendis to him, defyring him to cum to him, that he mycht
confer with him, wnder promeis to lett liim gang frie, gif thay culd nocht agrie. Wpoun the quhilk,
the Laiid McGregour come to him ; and, at his cuming, was weill reffauit be the Erll ; quha fthew
him, that he was commandit be the King to bring him in ; hot lie had no doubt hot his Majefty wald,
at his requeift, pardoun his offence ; and he fuld, with all diligenfe, fend tua Gentill menne to Ingland with him, and fuld with all diligenfe follow him felff. Wpoun the quhilk fair pronieiflis he was
content ; and come with the Erll of Argyll to Edinburgh ; quhair, on the 10 day, he was be the Gaird
conwoyit to Berwick, within Inglis grand, and fyne brocht back to Edinburgh. And on the 20 day
was hangitt at the Corfe, witli tenne of his kin and freindis hangit with him ; to the gritt difciedeit of
the Erll Argyill, quha wes the doare of the famin.'^

(in.) ExTRACTy)o>M Robert BirreTs Diary, MS., Advocates Library, (p. 138.)
The 2 of October (J603), Allester RI'^Gregour of Glainllre tane be the Laird of Arkynles,
hot efcapit againe ; hot efter, taken be the Earle of Argyill the 4 of Januar ; and brocht to Edinburghe
the 9 of Januar 1604, with 18 mae of his freindis, M'^Gregouris. He wes convoyit to Bervick be the
Gaird, conforme to the Earlis promefe ; for he promcfit to put him out of Scottis grund. Swa he
keipit ane Hieland-manis promes ; in refpect he fent the Gaird to convoy him out of Scottis grund :
Bot thai wer not directit to pairt with him, hot to fetche him bak agane I The 18 of Januar, at evine,
he come agane to Edinburghe ; and vpone. the 20 day, he wes hangit at the Croce, and ij (eleveii) of
hes freindis and name, upone ane gallons : HimfelfiF, being chieff, he wes hangit his awin hicht aboue
the refl of hes freindis.

(IV.) ExTRACTyrow Calderu'ood's MS. Church History.
Upon the 18 of Januar, Makgregore was conveyed be the guard who attended upon the Counfell
to Berwick, becaufe Argyle promiled to him, when he rendered himfelf, that he fould be caried to
Ingland : But a poll was appointed to meet him to cans bring them back againe, which was done I
Immediatly, upon the 20 of Januar, he and fundrie of his Clane were hanged in Edinburgh. Sevine
of thair number came in, long before, as pleadges for performance of certaine conditions, which were to
be filled by their chief ; hut they were hanged with the reft, without the knowledge of ane AfTyfe.
They were young men, and reputed honeft, for their own parts. The Laird of JNlakgrigore was lianged
a pinne above'the refl. A young man, called James Hope, beholding the execution, fell down, and
power was taken from the half of his body. AVhen he was caried to ane houfe, he cryed, that ' one
of the Highland men had Ihott him with ane arrow I' He died upon the Sabbath-day after.

* Invites liim to a banquet. * Forbye, over and above, besides. ^ Swims out, outstrips the boat hy his

swift swimming. ■• Untaken. * Fleming, in his Chronicle, (5IS. Adv. Library,^ thns records the event.

* The Laird of 3IcGregour hangit at Edinburgh and xj of his onhappie kin. They hang all nicht on the gallons.' —
This almost unexampled act of perfidy, on the part of Argyle, the King's Lieutenant, and the Justice-General of Scotland, gives a lamentable jiicture of the features of those inihappy times ; and it would appear that the government seemed
to think it no discredit to take advant;ige of such an infamous breach of trust.

37 & 1 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 435

(V.) The Laird of McGregours Beclaratiov^, pwdiicit the ti/me of Conviction.'^
I, Allester Magrigour of GlenHra, Confesse heir before God, that I have bein perfuadit,
movit and intyfit, as I am now prefentlie acculit and trublit for; alfe, gif I had ufit counfall or command of the man that hes Intyfit me,* I wald have done and comraittit findrie heich Murthouris raair ;
iFor trewlie, fen I was firft his Majelleis man,' I culd never be at ane eife, by my Lord of Argylls
fallliete and inventiones ; for he caufit M^CIaine and Glenchamrowne^ committ herfchip and flauchter
in ray roum of Rennoche, tlie quhilk caufit my pure men therefter to bege and lleill : AHb, therefter,
he moweit my brother and Aim of my freindis to commit baith herfchip and flauchter upone the Laird
of Lufs : Alfo, he perfuadit myfelfe, with meflage, to weir^ aganis the Laird of Boquhanene, quhilk I
did refuife ; for the quhilk I was contenowalie boftit'' that he fould be my unfreind ; and qulien I did
refuife his defire in that point, then he intyfit me with uther meflingeris, as be the Laird of Mi^knachtane and utlieris of my freindis, to weir and truble the Laird of Lufs; quhilk I behuffit to do for his
fals boutgaittis :'^ Then, qulien he faw I was at ane ftrait, he cawfit me trow' he was my guid freind ;
hot I did perfave that he was flaw' tlieria : Then I made my moyan '" to pleis his Majeflie and Lords of
Counfall, baith of fervice and obedience, to puneifche faultouris and to faif innofent men ;" and quhen
Argyll was maid forefein'^ thereof, he intyfit me to flay and llart fra thay conditiouns, caufing me to
undedland, that I was dilfavit ; hot with fair wordis, to put me in ane fuair, that he mycht gett the
lands of Kintyre in feyell" fra his Majeflie, begane to putt at me and my kin :" The quhilk Argyll
inventit, maifl, fchamfullie, and perfuadit the Laird of Ardkinlaifs to diflave me, quha was the man I
did maifl trefl into ; bot God did releif me in the mean tyme to libertie, maid narrowlie.'^ Neuerthelefs, Argyll maid the oppin brutt,'^ that Ardkinlafs did all that falflieid by" his knawlege ; quhilk he did
intyfe me, with oft and findrie meflages, that he wald mak my peace and faif my lyfe and landis, only
to puneis certane faltouris of my kin, and my innofent freindis'* to renunce tliair iurname, and to leif
peafeablie. Vpone the quhilk conditiouns, he was fuorne be ane ayth to his freindis ; and they fuome to
me ; and als, I haif his warrand and handvrytt therevpon. The quhilk promeis, gif they be honelUie
keipit, I let God be Juge I And at our meting, in oure awin clialmer, he vas fuorne to me, in witnes
of his awin freind. Attour,^^ I Confefs, befor God, that he did all his craftie diligence to intyfe me to
flay and defl,roy the Laird Ardinkaippill, M'^kallay,^" for ony ganes kyndnefs or freindfchip that he
myeht do or gif me.^' The quhilk I did refuis, in refpect of my faithfull promeis maid to M kallay ofbefor." Alfo, he did all the diligence he culd, to mowe me to flay the Laird of Ardkyndlas, in lyk

1 The Ori<,'inal of the very interesting aiul important Paper now given, is preserved in tlie General Register

House, and is in the hand of tlie tlien Clerl< of Secret Council, James Primrose. It is marlsed as ' Pjifsentit be

JIr WiLLiAJii: Hairt,' (of Levilands) as an article of evidence of his guilt, at his Trial. It will be recollected that
this person officiated as Justice Depute on the occasion. Glenstray Iiad surrendered to Argyll, on condition of his
being permitted to go to England; by which the former meant that he should visit the English Court, and have, if
possible, access to the King. It was obviously Argyll's policy to prevent this ; but, tliat he miglit fultill his promise, he
sent him, under a strong escort of troops, to l)cyond tlie river Tweed, at Berwick, where the soldiers, wheeling to the right
about, made MacGregor retrace his steps. He was two days only in Edinburgh, after his return from England, wlien he
was executed. — See Sir James Balfour's Annah,anA \os. II. and IV. of these illustrative documents. 2 i'i,e jj^ri

of Argyll, King's Lieutenant in the Bounds of the Clan-Gregor, since July, 1396 -Records of Secret Council.

' He had taken the usual oath to be his Majesty's ' houseliald-raan,' 27tli July 159G, as appears from the Record of
Secret Council. * Clan-Cameron. ^ Wage war. 6 Tlireatened. 7 Ueceitful coui'ses ; literally,

* round-about ways.' 8 Believe. ^ Slow, slack. ^^ Did my endeavour, moyen. ^^ Tliis point

is illustrated by an Original Paper, preserved in the General Register House, of date Jul. 24, 1599. '2 Advertised, informed. '^ Fee, feufarm. >* 'I'liis refers to the Royal promise of reward to Argyll, after I'eb. 7,

1603, for apprehending Glenstray ; which reward, as he had earned it, lie afterwards received ; and it w;is conlirmed
to him by the Parliament, 1607. ^^ This refers to that escape from Campbell of Ardkinglass, hereditary

Sherilf of Argyllshire, mentioned by Sir James Balfour and by Birrel. 16 Report. French, bruit. " Without, contrary to his knowledge. '* Such of them as were innocent of the crimes charged against the Clan generally. '9 Moreover. -0 Awlay Jlac.Vwlay. "' In the Lord Treasurer's Boo/is of Scotland. Nov. 1602, is

thefollowing entry : ' Item, to Patrik Mi^Omeis, messinger, jiassand of Edinburghe, « < Lettres to cliarge Ard Earle
of Argyle to compeir personallie befoir the Counsall, the xvj day of December nixt, to aiisuer to sic tliingis as salbe iiiquirit at him, tuiching his lying at await for the Laird of Ardincapill, vpone set purpois to have slane him, xvj li.
^* Glenstray and Mac Aulay had entered into a Bond of Clanship, May 27, 1591, in which the latter owns his

436 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

maner ; bot I neuer graiitit thorto :' Throw tLe qubilk he did invy me grettumly.' And now, leing
God and man feis it is gieidenes of warldlie geir quliilk caufis liim to putt at nie and my kin, and not
the Weill of the realme, nor to pacifie tbe famyn, nor to his Majelleis honour, hot to putt down innolent men, to caufe pure bairnes and infanttis bege, and pure wemen to perifch for hunger, quhen they
ar hereit of thair geir : The quhilk, I pray God, that tiiais faltis lycht not upon his Majeflie lieirefter,
nor upon his lucceffione. Quherfor, I wald beleik God that his Majollie knew the weratie, that at
tliis hour I wald be content to tak Baneifment, with all my kin that was at the Laird of Luffis
llauchter, and all utheris of thame that ony fait can be laid to thair charge : And his Majeftie, of his
mercie, to lat pure innofent men and young bairnes pas to libertie, and lerne to leifFas innocent men:
The quhilk I wald fulfill, but ony kynd of faill ;^ quhilk wald be mair to the will of God and his Majefteis honour, nor' the greidie, cruell forme that is devylit, only for leuf of geir, haueing nether refpect
to God nor honeftie !

dfidtj of <glenfi*iute — iHurUer — drirc--raisinfl;, ^r.

Feb. 17. — JoHNNE Dow M'Ewin M'Gregour, Patrik M'ilvarnoch,
his mail, Duncan ]\renliam J\rgregour, Duncan ]\rAllefter
Vrek, AUefter IM'Ewin Vcondochie, Jolinne INFean ^'^gregour, Ewin M^condochie clericli, Johnne Aminonoche M^gregour, Duncan Beg ]\rgregour "\^'^coull cliere, Gregoiu* M^NicoU
Jn Dalveicli, Jolinne Dow ]\rcondocliie Vewin.
Dilatit of certane ciynies of Murthoiu-, Tliift, Soiniing ; and for being at the
fleild of Glenfrune, in conipanie with vmq'^ Allafter Rrgregour of Glenftra," his
kyn and freindis ; and of the Slauchteris, ffyre-raifing, Reif and Ilerfchijipis
committit in the nioneth of tTebruare 1603 yeiris, aganis the Laird of Lnfe, his
freindis and pairtakeris, viz. (1.) Johnne Dow 31'^eiv'in JSI'^gregour, for his
intercowinoning with vmq''' Allafter M'gregour of Glenftra, vniq'" Patrik Aidauch
M^gregour and vtheris thair complices, quha war at the treflbnabill burning of
Robert Watterfones bainie of Kallechoit, and at the fteilling of the Laird of
^lercliinftounes oxin ; committit in September laft. IxK^r, of airt and jiairt of
the thiftious fteilling, furth of Andro Allanes houfe in Kipine, of fyve ky ; committit in October laft. Item, for airt and pairt of the tlauchter of vmq''' Johnne
Drummond in Drony of Cowgafk ; committit in Auguft laft. Item, for airt
and pairt of the fteilling of ane milk ^ow" fra Patrik I\rboricht, furth of his
duelling-hous of Glenmawak ; committit in September laft. AxD ficlyk, of
cownione Thift and cowmone reffet of thift. — (2.) Patrik M^Jdharnoch, lervand
to the faid Johnne Dow, of airt and pairt of the haill crymes aboue writtin ;
as being in conipanie Avith his faid maifter thairat. — (3.) Duncan 3rinJiam
Vgregour, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling fra Eduard Reidoche of

being a Cadet of tlie House of the former, and promises to pay him * the CxLV.'^Paper in the General Rcf/i.ster House.
1 his instrument had, as would seem, been discovered by the Government, and led to the suspicion, alluded to in u
former part of this work (See May 17, 1603), that Mac.Vulay had aided Glenstray in the feud of Gleufiuin. iMacAulay seems to have escaped death, by being under tbe protectioti of the Duke of Lennox, and forming one of his
tiain or ' Tail,' in the King's journey to England, to take possession of the English Throne.

Ardkinglass, as appears from the Book of Tai/munfh, M'as Glenstray's near kinsmai). ? Bore a great or

mortal grudge at me. 3 Without failure or evasion. < Than. 5 See Jan. 20, 1604. 6 E„e.

19

S7 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 437

fyve horfe and meiris ; committit in the moneth of r'W". fourfcoir and

fourtene yeiris. Item, of airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling fra Allafter
M^condochie Vic James Robielbne, in Callewin, of ten horfis and meiris ; committit in the moneth of yeiris, — (4.) Duncane M'' Allafter Vrek

in Fame, flbr airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling furth of the landis of Airliewicht of fourtie ky, pertening to the Laird of Bandrane ; committit ten yeir
lyne or thairby. Item, for the thiftious fteilling furth of the Laird of Strowanes
crandoche' of his haill inficht, worth I", lib.^ Item, for airt and pairt of the
llauchter of vmq'" Donald Dereif. Item, for airt and pairt of the thiftious
fteilling furth of the landis of Downance in Menteith, of fourtie ky, tuelf horfis ;
committit in the yeir of God P.V. fourfcoir audit : And for intercowmoning
with the Laird of M'gregour : And for cowmone Thift and cowmone reflTet of
thift. — (5.) Ewhi 3IcCon(lochie Clerich, ffor his trelTonabill intercowmoning
with the Laird of M'gregour, and fchawing of fauour and fupplie to him : And
for cowmone thift, and cowmone reffett of thift. — (6.) Johnne Dow M'condoc/tie
V<=ewhi, ffor treffonabill intercowmoning with vmq'* the Laird of IVrgregour,
and geving him fupplie and conforte. — (7.) Johnne Ammonache M'gregoHr in
Kingart, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling of fax fcheip furth of
Schandballie ; committit aucht yeir fyne or thairby. Item, for cowmone Thift
and cowmone relTett of thift. — (8.) Allajler ^I'ewin V'^condoclile, in Couldar,
ffor airt and pairt of the heirfchip of the Downance in Menteith ; and of the
llanchteris than committit ; and fpeciallie of the llauchter of vniq'" Andro
Grahame. — (9.) Gregour M'neill alias Cowanaclie, ffor airt and pairt of the
crewall Murthour and Slauchter of vmq''' the ffidler M'^killope, within his awin
hous in Dalvey ; committit at Anderfmes,'' I'", fax hundreth and tua yeiris.
Ite:m, ffor the thiftious refletting and treffonabill intercowmoning (of vmq'" the
Laird of M'gregour ?) eftir he wes difcharget be ijroclaniatioune. — (10.) Johnne
3tlccan V^gregour, in Glenogill vnder Tawie-barne, ffor the crewall Murthour,
flauchter and drowning of M'killopis wyfe, that duellt in Glenartnay, being in
company with vmq'° Patrik Aulach ; committit in harveft laft. Item, for
reffet of the brokin men of the M^gregouris, within his duelling-hous, and treffonabill intercowmoning with thaine, aganis his hienes Proclamatioun. — (11.)
Duncan Beg M'gregour V'coidl Chere, ffor airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour and flauchter of fevin fcoir perfones flane at Glenfrwne ; and heirfchip
than committit thairin, in the inoneth of ffeln-uare 1603. Item, for cowmoun
thift and cowmoun relTett of thift : And for the treffonabill intercowmoning
with vmq'^ the Laird of M'gregour, eftir he was difcharget be proclamatioune.

' Or craudoche, a Highland gpntleman's (hvelling-liouse, ^ £1000. ' St Andrew's day,

Apdrew's.mass, the 30th day of November.

438 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

ASSISA.

ISIr Moreis Drumtnond of Cul- Mungo Buciiannane in Tullie- Jacobi' Edmeftoun of 'Newtoun,

gljgrig cliewin, Dauid Druramond in Drymmen,

James SpreuU ffiear of Cowden, James Dennyftoune of Cowgi-ane, Johnne Naper of Kilraahew,
Colene Campbell of Abpiucbill, Tiiomas Fallafdaill in Ardoche, Johnne Mufcliet at the mylne of
Mungo Lyndlay of Ballull, Dauid Mufcliet of Orcheavdheid, Tor,

Robert Naper of Blak5airdis, Johnne Buchannane of Ibert, Harrie Mitchell in Darra.

The Aduocat aflvit inftrumeutis of the fweiring of the AfTyfe ; of Johnne
Dowis Declaratioune, that Patrik JNrilvarnoch his man hes hene with him this
tua yeir bygane, and is pairtaker of all his factis. The Aduocat, for verifeiug
the pojTitis of Dittay, producet the Kingis Proclamatioune, Actis of Secreit
Counfall, contenit in the buik of Secreit Counfall producet, and afkit infti-umentis thairvpoune : And proteftit for Wilfull Errour agauis the Aflyfe, in caife
thai acquit.

Verdict. The AlTyis, be the mouth of Dauid Drummond, chanceller, ffand,
pronuncet and declairit the faidis perfones to be ffylet, culpable and convict of
the jjerticuler poyntis of Dittay aboue writtin.

Sextexce. The Juftice-depute decernit and adjudget the faid John Dow,
&c. to be tane to the mercait-croce of Edinburgh, and tliair to be haugit vjioun
ane gibbet quhill thai be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis to be eicheit and
inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crjTnes.^

* dTirltf of (^Icnfruue* — .^latiijTjtfi' of tf)e (CoIquTjoiins, $i:c.

Mar. 1. — Neill M'Gregour in INIeirie (Mewie,) Patrik Gair M'gregour, Donald Roy IM'gregoiu', Duncane M^gregour, Donald

Graffiche M-^Cadanich.

Dilatit, accufet and perfewit for being in company with vmq'^ Allafter M^gregour of Glenftra and his complices, at the ffeild of Glenfrwne,^ and of airt and

pairt of the flauchter of fevin fcoir perfones, being all freindis, fervandis, affifteris

and pairtakeris with the Laird of Lufe at the faid ffeild, and of the heii'fchipis

thair committit be the laid Laird of M^gregour and his complices : And of the

ti'eflbnabill raifing of ffyre and burning of dyuerfe houffis, within the boundis

foirfaid ; committit in the moneth of Februare, the yeir of God I^.Vj". and thre

yeiris : And ficlyk, for intercowmoning with the faid Laird of M^gregour and

perfones foirlaidis, his complices, that war at the faid llauchter and heirfchip,

fen the committing thairof. — And als, the faid Patrik Gair jSI'gregour being

indyttit and accufet for the hounding out of his thre fones to the faid ffeild, and

murtliouris and flauchteris than committit vpone the faid Laird of Luffis freindis :

And of airt and pairt, red, counfall, foirknawledge, afliftance and ratihabitioune

' This person is so named in various places of tlie Record. * ' The 18th of Fi-bruar, 9 of the

name of MacGregor hangit, quho had lain lang in the Tolbuith." — BirreU ' See Jan. 20, IGOt.

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 439

of the faid miirthouris and lieirfchippis : And ficlyke, for the reffett and intercowmoning with the Laird of IVrgregour and his complices that war at Glenfrune, and reffetting of tliame with the bludie hand, fen the tyme foirfaid of the

faid heirfchip and llaucliteris.

AssrsA.
Mungo Lyndfay of Ballull, Conftene Moirtoim, Robert Bucliannane in Kippen,

Johiine Bucliannane, burges of Hew Glen of Lyntliillis, Robert Bncliannane Walterloune,

Dumbarten, Johnne Buntene of Ardoche, Dougall M'^farlen in Muraagaue,

George Buchannane in Ladrifch, Tliomas Naper of Baniekynrayne, Walter Blair of Fynnecli,
Thomas Fallafdaille, burges of Johnne Naper of Kilmahew, Dauid Hadilen (Ilaldene,) Tutour

Dumbarten, Johnne Serapill of Foulwoid, of Glennageis.

Verdict. The faid AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid Robert
Buchannane Walterloune, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faidis fyve perlones
to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the Iiaill crymes aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence. And thairfoir, tlie Juftice-dejiute, be the mouth of Robert
Scott, demi)ftar of Court, decernit and ordanit the faidis perfones to be tane to
the galloufe of the Burrow-miu'e of Edinburghe, and thairupoune to be hangit
quhill thay be deid ; and thair liaill moveable guidis to be efcheit and iubrocht
to his hienes vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.

Cijtft — 3Utstt of ilniitr ot MattBi-tQOi' — * iffitXH o( iBltntmnt,* ^t.

Mar. 2. — Malcolme M'couel cleuich (M'cherich,) in Innerloclilarg ; Duncan M'fadrik Vcoull Chere, in Innerlochlarg, vnder

the Laird of TuUiebardin ; Johnne M'coull Chei-e, in the Bray

of Balquhidder, and Neill M^Williame V^Neill.

Dilaitit of certane poyntis of Thift ; and for Intercowmoning with vmq'^ the

Laird of M^gregour, fen the Raid oi G\euh-\m&,\\z.{\.) Malcolme M'coidlClenche

{Cherkhe,) ffor airt and pairt, and benig on the grundis at the crewall Slauchter

of vmq''' Hew Stewart, ferveand to my Lord Athole ; committit threttie yeir

fyne, or thairby. Item, for airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Patrik

M^'gregour, in Glenbokie ; committit in the moneth of September, the yeir of

God F.V. threfcoir faxtene yeiris. Item, for geving of counfall to vmq"' the

Laird of Makgregour, his kyn and freindis, to pas fordward aganis the Laird of

Lufe to Glenfrune ;' and for convoying" the faid Laird of M'gregour agaitwart^

to the fyd of Lochloun, afoir the ffeild : And for airt and pairt of the flauchteris

and heirfchipis committit at Glenfrune be the faid Laird of M'gregour and his

complices, in the moneth of Februare 1603 yeiris. Item, for the trelFonable

Intercowmoning with the faid Laird of M'gregour, and Reffett of him and his

freindis and pairtakeris that war at tlie ffeild of Glenfrune, and geving of thame

herbrie, help and fupplie, in meit, drink and bedding, wittinglie and willinglie,

> See Jan. 20, 1604. ' Escorting. ' On the way or gait.

4-10 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

at dyuerfe tymes, fen thai war denuncet our fouei-ane lordis i*ebellis and declairit
tratouris, and fen his Maiefteis Proclamatioune, inhibeiting all our fouerane
lordis leigis to intercoM'mone, relfett or gif countenance or fchaw fauour to the
faidis rebellis. — (2.) Duncan 3I'/adriJe V^coidl clie'ir, flfor airt and pairt of the
Slauchter of the faid vmq"' Patrik M^gregour ; conimittit in September 1576
yeiris. Item, for geving of counfall to the Laird of M^gregoiu- to pas fordvvard
to the ffeild of Glenfrnne aganis the Laird of Lufe, and convoying him to the
fj'de of Lochloune, agaitward, to the faid ffeild. Item, for wilfuU Intercowmoning and geving of counfall to the Laird of JVrgregour, and convening Avith
him in dyuerfe meittingis and conventiounes, had and keipit be him and his
freindis, fen thai war denuncet his Maiefteis rebellis, for the INIurthoui-, Slauchteris and heirfchipis committit be thame at the faid ffeild of Glenfrnne, incontrair to his JMaiefteis proclamatioune. — (3.) Neill MilFiUiame V^Ne'dl, ffor the
trelfonabill Intercowmoning with the Laird of IVrgregour, his kin and freindis
that war at the murthour and heirfchipis in Glenfrnne, and refTett of thame within
his hous, and geving meit and drink to thame wittinglie and willinglie, at dyuerfe tymes fen thai Avar denuncet rebellis, &c. — (-1.) AxD ficlyk, Jolinne 3FcouU
Cheire, ffor airt and pairt of the creAvall Mm-thour and Burning of auchtene
houllialderis of the Clanlawren,' thair wyves and bairnis ; committit fourtie fax
yeir fyne, or thairby. Item, off airt and pairt of the Slauchter of ATnq'^ Hew
Stewart, ferveand to my Lord of Athole ; committit tlirettie yeir fyne, or thairby :
And in taking 2>airt with the Clan-Gregouris at the Heirfchip, committit the
tyme foirfaid, aganis the Tutour of Bofrak. Item, for Intercowmoning with
the Laird of M'^gregour and his complices that war at the ffeild of Glenfrnne,
fen thair denunciatioune ; and geving of conforte, fupplie and freindfchip to
thame, contrair the tennour of the Proclamatioune. Ite:m, for cowmone Thift,
cowmone refTett of thift, outputing and injjuting of thift fra land to land, fra
cuntrey (to cuntrey), baith of auld and new.

Verdict. The AfTife, be the mouth of Mungo Lyndfay of Ballnll, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faidis ]\Ialcolme, Duncan and Neill to
be ffylit, culpable and convict of the haill crymes and poyntis of Dittay aboue
writtin : And the faid Johnne M'^couU Cheire to be Clene, innocent and acquit
of the faidis crymes.

Sextexce. And thairfoir the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Robert
Scott, dempftar of Court, decernit and ordanit the faidis Malcolme M'coull and
Duucane MTadrik to be tane to the gibbet at the mercat croce of Edinburghe,
and thair to be hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis to be
efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.
' Tlie ^FLawrcns, or Maclarens, a Clan residing in Balqubidder.

37 & 1 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 441

^lau flljtcc — drir(r--raistns .

Mar. 2. — Dauid Armestrang, lone to Sancleis Niniane.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit of airt and pairt of the Slaixchter of vmq'' Johnne
Johnneftoun, Perfone of Tunnergartli. Item, for airt and pairt of the Slauchter
of Robert Currie, fervand to the Baillie of the Watter of Leyth, and thre
mafones with him, at the Oifleris-hous in the Lwn : And for the trefTonabill
Raifing of ffyre, and Burning of the faid Oifleris-hous.

Verdict and Sexteisjce. The fame Aflif?, as in the above cafe, pronounced
a fnnilar Verdict of Guilty againft Armllrang, who was hanged along with
M'^coull and M'^fadrik.'

iHasterfiil ^toiUl)rtif — Cijeft, ^c.

Mar. 10. — Thomas Hardie, lone to James Hardie of Bounmylnerig.

Dilatit of the crymes following, viz. Forlamekill as he, with his complices,
laitlie, in the moneth of Apryle laftbypaft, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht,
betuix nyne and ten houres att ewin, vmbefett the hie way and pafTage, betuix
Leith and Edinburghe, to Jaques De la Berge, ane Fleming and ftrangear, he
being rydand, in peceabill maner, vp fra Leith to the burgh of Edinburghe ; and
thair fett v25on him, tuik liis horfe be the held, and caufit him lycht fra his
horfe, and thaireftir rypeit him ; and thifteouflie, be way of maiftei-full flouthreif. Hall, reft and away-tviik fra the faid Jaques De la Berge twa imrfis, ane
mair and ane vther lefs, with ane grit quantitie of gold and filuer contenit
thairin, being for the maift pairt Inglis money : togidder with ane gold ryng,
fett with ane dyamond, with ane broun naig quhairon he raid : And he wes
airt and pairt of the thifteous lleilling, reiffing, refletting and away-taking
thairof. ItejM, ffor the thifteous fteilling, conceiliiig, refletting and away-taking
of ane blak horfe fra James Libbertoun, in Nethir Libbertoun ; quhilk horfe he
fauld thaireftir in Bow-caftell, in Ingland.

Verdict. The Afllfe, be the mouth of ... . Cokburne of Chouflie, chanceller, ffand, pronunceit and declarit him to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of the
poyntis of Dittay, &c.

Sentence. To be tane to ane gybbet, fl;andand beneath the mercat croce
of Edinburghe, and thaiiwpoun to be hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his
moveabill guidis, takis, fleidiugis, &c. to be efcheit, &c.

HiJorst, Cattle, anU ^Tjcfp-stealius.

Mar. 10. — Waeter Dauidsoun, callit of Callelie.
Convicted by the fame Afl^ife, and ordained to be hanged along with Hardie,

' Birrel remarks, ' 7 MacGregors and Armflrangs wer Iiangit at tlic croffe.'
VOL. II. 3 K

442 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

for ftealing of horfes, oxen and flieep, &c. from lands of Pittaliflieucli, belonging to
Dickfoiui of Buclitrig, Sir Johnne Cokburne of Onniftoun, kny', Jullice clerk,' &c.

13Ij- JFill/ame BoHhitilc, Jujlice-Deptife.']

Mar. 15. — Hectour Tru:mbill of Stanyledge ; Hector Trumbill of

Barnehillis ; George Trumbill, his brother ; and Gawin

Trumbill, thair father-brother.

Dilatit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Williame, James, Robert,

Johnne, Andro and Thomas Grameflawis, fones to vniq''' Johnne Grameflaw of

Lytill A^ewtoun.

Mr Robert Home of Carolfyde, Hectour Trumbill of Belfis and James Douglas
of Caveris, as cautioners, amerciated for non-entry of the pannels, viz. the two
firft in 400 merks ; and Douglas of Cavers, along with Trunibell of Barnehillis,
in 1000 merks, 400 merks, and 400 merks. The jiannels ordained to be deaoimced rebels, &c.

crattlc-stcaliitji — ^toutljrfif, ^c.

Mar. 20. — Joiinxe Rextoux of the Scheillis.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Steilling of flfourtene nolt fra James Burnet,
&c. Lyk as, in the moneth of September, the yeir of God I^.V. fourfcoir aucht
yeiris, or thairby, vmbefet the hie way and paffage to certane cadgeris at the
Brokin-mofs, quha wav dryveand thre or four jiakis of Inglis clayth, pertening
to certane merchandis, inhabitantis of the bui'gh of Edinburghe, and thair, be
way of INIaillerfull ftouthi-eif, flaw, reft and away-tuik fra the faidis cadgeris
foui'e pakis of Inglis clayth, and fpeciallie ane pak of Inglis cla}'th, pertening to

Gra)^, mercheand burges of Edinburghe, eftimat worth the fowme of

Thre thoufand merkis, money of this realme, &c. &c.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of JNIr James Home of Goddifcroft, all
in ane voce, fl'and the faid Johnne to be Cleane, innocent and acquit of the
haill crymes.

raiUuni)!)faiincr iHass rdrfirattU.

May 9. — Archibald Macbrek, burges of Perth.

Dilatit, accnfet and perfewit, be Mr Robert Lyntoun, Aduocat fubftitute to Sir
Thomas Hanmiiltoune, &c. for the crymes contenit in tlie Dittay following.

Archibald ]M brek, burges of Perth, Ye ar indyttit aiKlacculet; ftbrfamekill as it is ftatute and
oidanit, be our f'ouerane lordis Aclis of Parliament, and fpeciallie, be ane Act of his hienes fourtene

' The 10 of Ularcho, tvva notabill tbieffcs haiujit at the crosse, ane Thomas Ilardie, auil aue Davidson.' — Birrel.

37 & 1 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 443

Parliament, lialdin and begwn at Edinburghe vpone the aucht day of Junij, the ycir of God I"'.V'^.
fourfcoir fourtene yeiris, that in all tynies ciiming, all wilful! heiiaris of Mefs and conceillaris of the
fame fall be execute to the death, and thair iiaill guidis and geir efcheitit to his hienes vfe, as thay fall
be fund giltie and convict thaiiof, or declairit fugitiue for the fame, befoir the Juftice or his deputtis,
or the lordis of his Maiefleis Previe Counfall, as the faid Act at lenth beris : And trew it is, that Mr
Robert Abercrumbie, ane Jefuite and Preill, in the moneth of Marche laftbypall, in the oulk (jceek)
befoir Palme Sonday laft, being reflet and ludget, with his man, in the faid Archibaldis duelling hous in
Perth, ane haill nicht ; the fai<l Mr Robert maid the faid Archibald foirfene, that he was to fay ane
Mefs vpone the morne, airlie in the moirning, in George Bofuallis hous in Porthe, quhair my lord
InchafFeray and his famelie war ludget, and perfuaidit the faid Archibald to cum and heir the famyn :
Lykas, vpone the morne, airlie in the moirning, in ane of the dayis of the oulk befoir Palme Sonday?
the faid Mr Robert paft firfl over to the faid George Bofuallis houfe ; and the faid Archibald followit
him, and paft vp to the vpper Eifter chalmer of the faid ludgeing, quhair the faid Mr Robert Abircrambie faid ane Mefs : And ye, the faid Archibald, vvilfullie and willinglie (being of the treiv Religioun
befoir your away-paffing furth of this cuntrie, and in your abfence furth of the famyn, made defectioun
thairfra to Romifch Religioune), liard the faid Mefs, and reffauit the Communioun after the Romane
nianer ; and conceillit the faying and heiring thairof, quhill ye was challanget. For the quhilk wilfull
heiring of the faid Mefs and conceilling thairof, ye, the faid Archibald, being convict of the famyn,
befoir the Juflice-generall and his deputis, be Act of Parliament, ye aucht to be pwneifchet to the
daith ; and your'haill moveabill guidis and geir efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe : To the taikin,' ye
half confeffit the haill premiifes to be of veritie, be your Depofitiones, fubfcryuit with your hand ;
quhilk ye can nocht deny.

Vkrdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of James Nicolfomie, tailseour in Edinburghe, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Archibakl to be ffylet,
culpabill and convict of the Wilfull heiring of Mefs, wittinglie and willinglie,
but" compulfioun ; and conceilling of the fame, cpihill he was challanget ; accoirding to the faid Dittay, and accoirding to his Confeflioun maid thairof in judgement, and Depofitiones producet, fubfcryuit with his hand.^

\_3Ir IViUiawe Ha'trt, Juftice-Depiite.']

^laufitUi- — ?i?m-0e m\t\ Cattl(r--stcaling, &•(■.

May 15. — Johnne Batiesoun, alias Jok of the Scoir ; Archibald Batiefoun, alias Prikit vp Archie, brother to the faid Johnne ; and

Adie Batiefoun, brother to the faid Johnne and Archie.

JoK OF THE ScoiK, dilatit, flfor airt and pairt of the llauchter of vmq" Williame Tuedie of Olipher and thiftious fteilling of ane grit number of ky, oxin

and naigis furth of Tueddell ; committit threttie yeir fyne, or thnirby. Item,

ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of foure naigis furth of Sandieliiliis ; and of

threfcoir nolt furth of Langvrd. iTEsr, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of

four ky and tua horfe, with certane inficht, furth of Bankend in Craufurd-Johnne,

pertening to Thomas Weir ; committit tua yeir fyne. Item, ffor airt and pairt

of the fteilling fra William M'calla, in Glenbaithe, of ane meir, and certane inficht

' In evidence, or testimony whereof. ^ Without. ' The sentence is not recorded.

444 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

of his houfe ; and hurting and wounding of the faid Williame. Item, ffor airt
and pairt of the fteilling of tua naigis fra ane fervand of Sir Johnne Keris, furth
of the Si^ittellis. Item, ffor airt and jjairt of the fteilling of fyftene fcoir of ky
and oxin, with ane grit number of vtlier guidis, furth of my Lord gefteris
boundis ; coramittit a xviij yeir fyne, or thairby. Item, ffor fteilling and awaytaking of tua naigis fra Johnne Symfoun, with his cloik, quhinger and purfe,
quhaii-in thair was xxx f. Item, for cowmoun thift and cowmoun reflet of thift.
— Prikit vp Archie, dilaitit of airt and jjairt of the thiftious fteilling of
fourtie nolt, furth of the Schereff of Airis boundis ; and hurting and wounding
of ane fervand of the ScherefRs, in redding thairof. Item, for airt of tlie fteilling of tuentie naigis furth of Sandiehillis fra the puir cadgeris ;' coniniittit a
thre yeir fyne : And for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of ane of the puir
cadgeris, at that famyn tyme. Ite^i, for airt and pairt of the fteilling of fax
nolt furth of the Nethir Snab ; committit aucht yeir fyne, or thairby. Iteim,
for airt and j^airt of the fteilling of ane grit number of fcheip furth of Brigend,
pertening to the Laird of Fawlydes fervandis. Item, for airt and pairt of the
fteilling of xxxij oxin furth of Lammermure, pertening to the Laird of Innerleith. Item, for cowmoun thift and cowmoun reflTet of thift, &c. — Adie Batiesoex, dilaitit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq''' Johnne Naper, in
company of the faid Johnne his brother ; and fteilling of ane grit number of ky
and oxin furth of Clydheid. Item, for airt and pairt of the fteilling of the faid
Williame M^call his meir, and haill inficht of his houfe ; and hiu'ting of the faid
Williame. Item, for airt and pairt of the fteilling of ten fcheip furth of the
Hill-hous of Clyde, fra Gilbert Johnneftones men ; committit a yeir fyne. Item,
for the fteiling of tua naigis a foure yeir fyne, furth of Sandiehillis, fra certane
puir cadgeris. Item, for cowmoun thift, cowmone reflet of thift, outputing and
inputing of thift, fra laud to land, fra cuntrey to cuntrey, baith of auld
and of new.

Verdict. For the quhilkis crymes, the faidis thre perfones wer put to the
knawlege of ane AflTyle, and thai all, in ane voce, be the mouth of Donald
Thornetoun, burges of Edinburghe, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and dedairit the
faidis Johnne, Archie and Adie Batiefones to be ffylit. culpabill and convict of
the crj'mes aboue Ipecifeit, accoirding to thair DeiJofitiones, gevin vp be tharae
thairof, and Confeflioun of the famyn in Judgement.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercait croce of Edinburghe, and thair to be
hangit on ane gibbet, quhill thai be deid ; and thair haill moveabill guidis to be
efcheit and inbrocht, &c.

' The Caniers, wlio, for Ijire, transported goods on pack-saddles, &c. By means of this useful class,
most ])an of tile merchan<lise and heavy carriages were conveyed to all parts of tlie kingdom. They
usually travelled in companies, for mutual protection; but were often overpowered, and in many cases
slain, in faithfully defending the property committed to their charge.

37 & 2 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. ' 445

[Mir Williame Borthiiik, JtiJiJce-Depute.']

^laufiljter — 3Searin5 auU raeariits of 4PistoUts.

May 16. — Hectouh Trumbill of Lylllie (Lilliefleaf.)
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the Slaucliter of vniq'^ Thomas Ker (of Craling),
brother to the Laird of Farnihirft, and George Glaidner, his lervand : And for
contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring
of Piftolettis : And vtheris crymes contenit in our fouerane lordis letteris
direct thairvpoun.

Hectour Trumbill of Belfis vnlawit and amerciat, as cautioner, for nocht
entrie of the faid Hectour, in the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament ; and
the pannel adiudget to be denuncet rebell and put to the home, and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, as fugitiue fra his hienes lawis for the faidis crymis.

^laiisfjtrr.

May 18. — WiLLiAaiE Steavaut, brother to my Lord "Wliiltrie, Williame Stewart, fone to Sir Williame Stewart of Carftairis, kn'.
Dilaitit for the Slauchter of vmq'" Robert Cathcart, wryter.'
Maufe Aikman, relict of the faid vinq" Robert, producet our fouerane lordis
letteris, deulie execute ; and offerit hir felfT reddie to perfew.

The Justice continewis to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of Air, quhair
thay duell, or foner vpon xv dayis wairning. Andro Lord Stewart of 'W-hiltrie
and James Stewart of Lekprevik, become pleges and fouerties, coniunctlie and
feuerallie. Johnne Grahame of Knokdoliane relieved of his cautioun.

[Mr WiUiame Ha'irt, Jujike-Dppute.']

^Iau5l)tcv.

Jun. 6. — Williame M yddiljiest of Lilflie-Chappell and James Myddilmeft, his brother-germane.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of Thomas Ker of Craling, &c.-
Thomas Trumbill of Mynto, as cautioner, vnlawit in the pane of ane thoufand
merkis and four hundreth merkis for nocht entrie of the faidis pannels. The
Juftice ordainit thame to be denuncet rebell and put to the borne, and all thair
moveabill gviidis to be efcheit, &c.

iHurtrfv of X\}t ilaiilr of airanistoiut— ftmisljnunt of fticafeiitfl

on i\)t wmttl,

[Few Cases of Muhder have excited so lively an interest in the public mind, at the time of their
occurrence, as that of the Laird of Waruiston. He was a person of considerable note in Edinburgh, and nearly connected with the ancient family of Kincaid of that Ilk in Stirlingsliire, then in

I See Mar. 4, 1600. ' See May 16, I604.

446 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

possession of extensive estates in the counties of Ediiilnirgb, Linlithgow, &c. Jean Livingstoux,
the young and beautiful nmrdiess, was likewise a person of considerable rank, being a daughter of
John Livingstoune of Dunipace, and related to many of the first Families in Scotland.

The property of Warriston being situated about a mile from the City of Edinburgh, news of the
Murder instantly reached the proper authorities. Officers were dispatched, who succeeded in taking,
' red-hand^ ' the Lady Warristoun,' ' the faufe nourife,' as usual, the prime mover of tliis deed of
darkness and treachery, and her two ' hyred women.' Weir alone, the actual perpetrator, escaped for
a time, having refused to take the Lady along with him, in his flight ; saying, ' You iliall tarry flill ; and
if this matter come not to light, you (hall fay, " lie died in the gallery," and I ihall return to my
Malter's iervice : But if it be known, I ihall fly, and take the cryme on me ; and none dare purfue
you !' Being taken ' red-hand,' the parties were immediately put to the knowledge of an Assise
(without the formality of serving a Dittay, &c., as in ordinary cases), before the Magistrates of Edinburgh ; or the Trial may have perhaps taken place before the Baron-bailie of tlie Regality of BroughtOD,
within whose jurisdiction the property of Warristoun was situated, and sentence of death was passed
upon them. Unfortunatelj', the greater part of tlie Criminal Records of the City of Edinburgh are
lost ; and, after many fruitless searches, no trace of the proceedings in these Cases can now be elsewhere obtained. The result is thus briefly and quaintly stated by two contemporaneous writers :— .
' JoiiNE KiNCAiD of Wariftoune murderitbe his awin wyflFe and fervant man ; and her nurifche being
alfo upone the confpiracy : The laid gentilwoman being apprehendit, fcho was tane to the Girth-crofle,^
upon the 5 day of July, and her heid flruk fra her bodie, at the Cannagait-fit ; quha deit very patiently.
Her nurifche wes brunt at the fame tyme, at 4 houres in the morneing, the 5 of July.' — Sirrel's Diary.
' Upon Fryday the 4 (5) of July,^ (1600) the Lady Waristoun, daughter to the Laird of Dunipace, was beheaded in the Cannogate, for the Murther of her hulTjand. The Nuife and ane hyred
woman, her complices, were burnt in the Caftlehill of Edinburgh. The horfe-boy fled, being guiltie.'
— Calderwood' s Church History, MS. Advocates' Library.

An authentic and extremely interesting ' Memorial' of her ' Converfion,' ' with an account of her
carriage at her Execution,' was privately printed, in small Quarto, pp. 48, Edinburgh, 1827, from a paper
preserved among Wodrow's MSS. in the Advocates' Library, by Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe, Esquire,
to whose learning, ingenuity, and high accomplishments, the Public has been so often indebted. The
very limited impression of this niorccau recJicrclit', may plead the Editor's apology for stating, as briefly
as possible, that this ' Tractate' is entitled, ' A Wortliy and Notable iSlemorial of the great Work of
Mercy, which God wrouglit in the Converfion of Jean Livingflon Lady Warriftoun ; who was apprehended for the vile and horrible Murder of her own hufband, John Kincaid ; committed on Tuefday,
July 1, 1600; for which ilie was execute, on Saturday following: Containing an Account of her
obftinacy, earned repentance, and her turning to God ; of the odd fpeeches Ihe ufed, during lier imprifonment ; of her great and marvellous conltancy ; and of lier behaviour and manner of Jier death :
Obferved by one who was both a feer and hearer of what was fpoken.' From internal evidence, the
writer seems to liave been Mr James Balfour, the colleague of the notable Mr Robert Bruce. They
were the appointed Ministers, in the North-west part of Edinburgh.

^ The Cross, situated jiear the fiirtJty or sanctiiiiry of Holyrood, an ancient place of refuije, and still affording protection to debtors, when jiropei-ly registered ; \vh(t have liberty to walk within the i)reeinets, U-et^ ftumi the molestation of
their creditors. 2 Jt i^ pcohahle that the sentence hore, that the pauncls should he executed on the evening of

Friday the 4th day of July. 'I'he subseijuent early execution, at suin-ise next niorniiit^s was efl'ectcd, at the solicitation
of the family of Diniipace, who indecently urged the Magistrates precipitately to h'ad Lady Warristoun to the scaffold, before sunrise, shortly after three o'clock in the morning. Owing to a plan, evidently preconcerted, the ' iiurische'
and ' hyred woman' were burnt on the Castlehill at four o'clock, so that the po]iiilace, who might he so early astir,
Bbonld have their attentions distracted at two opposite stations, nearly a mile apart from each other, and thus, in some
ineasure, lessen the disgrace of Ihe public execution. It is recorded that the Laird of Duniiiace behaved with much
apathy towards his daughter, whom he would not so much as see previous to her execution j nor yet would he intercede for her, through whose delinquency he reckoned bis blood to be for ever dishonoiu*cd.

37 & 2 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 447

A great portion of this Memorial is occupied with a very affecting account of the state of lier mind,
and a faithful and striking delineation of its gradual opening and developenient, through the patient
and affectionate attentions of her spiritual advisers, from a state of perfect callousness and indifference
to every thing connected with Religion and the awful situation in which she was placed, to perfect
resignation to her fate, and a cheerful, but unfeigned repentance for all her past offences and crimes.
So far as relates to her Confession, it cannot be better related, than by quoting her own energetic
words. — ' I think I hear prefently the pitiful! and fearful! cryes wliich he gavo vviieii he was llraiigied !
And that vile fin wliicli I committed, in murdering mine own hulband, is yet before me. When that
horrible and fearfull fin was done, I defyred the unhappy man who did it, (for my own part, the Lord
knoweth I laid never my iiands upon him to do him evil ; but as foon as that man gripped him and
began his evil turn, fo foon as my iiulljand cryed fo fearfully, I leapt out over my bed, and went to
the Hall; where I fat all the time, till that uniiappy man came to me and rei)oited that mine hulLand
was dead ;) I defired him, I fay, to take me away with him ; for I feared Tryall ; albeit flefti and blood
made me think my father's moen' at Court would have faved me I' ' As to thefe weemen who was
challenged with me, I will alfo tell you my mind concerning them. God forgive the Nurfe, for Ihe
helped me too well in mine evill purpofe ; ffor when I told lier that I was minded to do fo, (he confented to the doing of it ; And upon Tuefday, when the turn was (lone, when I fent her to feek the
man who would do it, fhe faid, " I fhull go and feek him ; and if I get him not, I fliall feek another !
And if I get none, I ihall do it myfelf !" (This the Nurfe alfo confelfed, being afked of it before her
death.-) ' As for the other two weemen, I requefl that you neither put them to deatii, nor any torture,
becaufe I teflify they are both innocent; and knew nothing of this deed before it was done, and the
mean time of doing of it : And that wliich they knew, they durfl; not tell, for fear; for I had compelled
them to difiemble. As for mine own part, 1 thank my God, a thoul'and times, that I am fo touched
with the fenfe of that fin now : ffor I will confeflt; this alfo to you, that when that horrible Murder was
committed firtl, that I might feem to be innocent, I laboured to counterfeit weeping ; but do what 1
could, I could not find a tear : And fo now I fuffer; for tiie Lord would not have that high fin concealed, but would have it manifeft, as it is his gracious will to be done.'

Owing to the rank of Lady Warristoun, and the powerful influence of her father and his friends,
the manner of her death was, on their intercession, mitigated to decapitation by the well-known
' Maiden.' The usual form of death, for females, in such cases, was of the most ignominious and
ehocking description, — burning, after being strangled at a stake, — and in atrocious inilances, the
Criminal was ' brunt quick I' A very unbecoming zeal was displayed by her relations, to have her
executed as privately as possible, and at such a time as would be unknown to the populace. They had
tirst intended and applied for the unusual hour of 9 o'clock on Friday evening, as the time for her
execution ; which, however, was overraled. The ' Memorial' states, that, ' After 3 o'clock in the
morning, upon Saturnday, the INIagiftrates wer brought into prifon by her friends,^ to take her forth
to fuffer. Amongft them, fome were too earneft to hafl her away, that the might be execute, before
any fiiould know of it ; albeit flie was far otherwife minded, herfelf ; for Ihe purpofed not to have gone
furth till between 5 and 6 in the morning. On this, many, whom I will not name, came and liiid,
" Will you deprive God's people of that comfort which they might have, in that poor woman's death ?
And will you obflruct the honnour of it, by putting her away, before the people rife out of their beds?
You do wrong in fo doing ; for the more publick the death be, the more profitable it lliall be to many;
and the more glorioufe, in the fight of all who Ihall fee it," &c. The Magillrates granted alfo, that
Ihe might (tay till fun-rifing ; but her friends* were fo importunate that it was not granted !'

The youth and beauty of Lady Warriston have been much expatiated upon, in the whole of the

I Fr. ' mot/en,' influence, interest. ^ Tliis is rcmarlied by tlie wniter, for the LaJy Warristoii was beheaded

before the burning of the Nurse. ' Uelatious, * Blood- relatious.

448 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1604.

numerous popular ballads which were made on this occasion ; several of which are still sung and
recited in various parts of Scotland I To those who feel curiosity in such matters, reference may be
made to Jumieson's Ballads, I., 109, Kinloch's Ancient Scottish Ballads, p. 49, Buchan's Balla<ls, I.,

56, &c. Although, as the ' Memorial' expresses it, she was ' but a woman and a bairn, being the age

of 21 years,' ' in the whole way, as (he went to the place of Execution, (he behaved herfelf lb chearfully, as if Ihe had been going to her wedding, and not to her death ! When Ihe came to the fcaffold,
and was caiTyed up upon it, ihe looked up to the Maiden with two longfome looks, for Ihe had never
feon it before, &c. This I may fay of her, to which all that faw her will bear record, that her only
countenance moved,' although die had not fpoken a word I For ther appeared fuch a majefty in her
countenance and vifage, and fuch a heavenly courage in her geft.m-e, that many faid, " That woman is
ravilhed with a higher fpirit than a man or woman's !" '

' Tu^Jumm of her Confession, which almoA; was in a form of words, upon the four parts of the
fcaffold, to which flie prefented herfelf, was this.^

' " The occalion of my coming here, is to fliew that I am, and have been a great finner, and hath
offended the Lord's Majelly; efpecially, of the cruell murdering of mine own Imlband ; which, albeit
I did not with mine own hands, for I never laid mine liands upon him all the time that he was murdering; yet I was the divifer of it, and fo the committer I But my God hath been alwife mercifull to
me, and hath given me repentance for my fins ; and I hope for mercy and grace at his Majefly's hands,
for his dear fon Jefus Chrifl's fake. And the Lord hath brought me hither to be an example to you,
that you may not fall into the like fin as I have done : And I pray God, for his mercy, to keep all his
faitbfull people from falling into the like inconvenient as I have done I And therefore, I defire you all
to pray to God for me, that he would be mercifull to me I " '

Her conduct on the scaffold appears to have been most heroic. After her devotional exercises were
completed, ' then came to her one of her friends, with a clean cloath, to bind about her face.' To the
fastening thereof, she took out of her mouth a pin, and gave it out of her own hand. The minister,
after receiving her last farewell, ' could not abide longer befide her ; but immediatly left the fcaffold
and departed. But llie, as a conftant faint of God, humbled herfelf on her knees, and offered her neck
to the axe, laying her neck, fweetly and gi-acioufly, in the place appointed ; moving to and fro, till fhe
got a reft for her neck to lay in. When her head was now made fall to the Maiden, the Executioner
came behind her, and pulled out her feet, that her neck might be llretched out longer, and fo made
more meet for the flroak of the axe ; but Ihe, as it was reported to me by him who faw it, and held
her by the hands at this time, drew her leggs twice to her again, labouring to fitt on her knees, till
ihe lliould give up her fpirit to the Lord ! During this time, which was long, for the axe was but
flowly loofed, and fell not down haftily ; after laying in of her head, her tongue was not idle, but ftie
continued crying to the Lord, and uttered with a loud voice, thofe her wonted words, " Lord Jefus,
receive my fpirit ! O, Lamb of God, that taketh away the fins of the world, have mercy on me ! Into
thy hands. Lord, I commend my foul !" When (he came to the middle of this laft fentence, and had
faid, " Into thy band. Lord," at the pronouncing of the word " Lord," the axe fell ; which was diligently marked by one of her friends, who (lill held her by the hand, untill this time, and reported this
to me.']

Jun. 26. — Robert 'N^'^eir, fumtyme fervande to the Laird of Dynniepace.'
Dilaitit of airt and part of the crewall Murthoiir of vniq'" Johiine Kincaid of
Warieftoime ; committit (on Tuefday) the firft of Julij, 1600 yeiris.

Perseweris.
Patrik Kyncaid, tutour of Warieftoune, Thomas, Archibald and AdameKyncaid, allbrether to the defunct.

^ Her countenance alone would have excited emotion, although, &c. ' That is, she repeated her Declaration

or Confession at each of the four corners of the scaffold ; which was a stage or platform erected in the centre of the
street, at the foot of the Canongate, near the Girth-cross. ^ On the margin, ' Convict and brokin on the row,' (wheel. )

37 & 2 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 449

AssisA.
George Dewer in Plefance, Dauid Hoipis i'mytli, Julin Couttis fltynner,

Jobnne Gairdner thair, Heiiiie Kello in Leyth-wynde, William Chalmer in Brochtoun,

Johnne Henderfoun tliair, Jolinne Roger, Maifter of fence, Jolni Myller in the Caiino-inylne.

James Nicolfoun tailseour, Robert Taillifeir maltman, Williame Bannatyue thair,

Johnne Airmour merchand, Thomas Galloway of Cairnehill, George Roife thair.

The AfTyfe cheiffis Thomas Galloway cljanceller.

QuHii-Kis perfones of AlTyfe, being chofin, IVorne and admittit, efter acciilatioun of the faid Robert Weir, be Dittay, of the crymes following, to witt : FoKSAMEKILL as vmq'^ Jeane Levingstoune, Guidwife of Warieftoune, haifing confauet ane deidlie rancour, haitrent and malice aganis vmq'" Johnne Kincaid
of Warieftoune, for the allegit by ting of hir in the arme, and ftreking hir dyuerfe
tymes, the laid Jeane, in the moneth of Junij I^.Vj^ yeiris, directit Jonet Murdo
liir nwreife to the faid Robert, to the Abbay of Halyrudhous, quhair he was for
the tyme, defyreing him to cum doun to AVarieftoune, and fpeck with hir, anent
the crewall and vnnaturall taking away of hir faid hulbandis lyfe. And the
faid Robert haifing cum doun twyfe or thryfe to the faid vmq'" Jeane, to the faid
place of Warieftoune, he could get na fpeich of hir. At laft, the faid vmq'^ Jeane,
vpone the firft day of Julij, 1600 yeiris, directit the faid Jonet Murdo hir nwreife
to him, defyreing him of new agane to cum doun to hir ; quhairto the faid
Robert grantit : Lykas, at eftir none the faid day, the faid Robert cam to the
faid place of Warieftovin, quhair he fpak with the faid vmq'° Jeane, and conferrit
with hir, concerning the crewall, vnnaturall and abhominable murthering of the
faid vmq'" Johnne Kincaid. And for performeance thairof, the faid Robert AVeir
was fecreitlie convoyit to ane laich feller, within the faid place, quhairin he abaid
quhill mydnycht : About the quhilk tyme, he, accumpaneit with the faid vmq'°
Jeane Levingftoun, cam furth of the faid laich feller vp to the hall of the faid
place, and thairfra cam to the chalmer quhair the faid vmq'" Johnne was lyand
in his bed, takand the nychtis reft ; and haifing enterit within the faid chalmer,
perfaveing the faid vmq'^ Johnne to be walJinit out of his fleip, be thair dyn, and
to preife ouer his bed ftok, the faid Robert cam than rynnand to him, and maift
crewallie, with thair faldit neiffis gaif him ane deidlie and crewall ftraik on the
vane-organe,' quhairwitli he dang the faid vmq'" Johime to the grund, out-ouer his
bed ; and thaireftir, crewallie ftrak him on his bellie with his feit ; quhairvpoun
he gaif ane grit cry : And the faid Robert, feiring the cry fould haif bene hard,
he thaireftir, maift tyrannoullie and barbarouflie, with his hand, grippit him be
the thrott or waifen, quhilk he held faft ane lang tyme, quhill he wirreit him ;
during the cjuliilk tyme, the faid Johnne Kincaid lay ftruggilling and fcchting
in the panes of daith vnder him.- And fa, the faid vmq'° Johnne was crewallie

1 The jugular vein. It has often, but improperly, been supposed to signify the flank or iliac vein.
* This is precisely the mode which was, more than two centuries afterwards, adojjted by the infamous
VOL. II. ' 3 L

450 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

murdreift and flaine be the faid Robert ; and he is airt and part thairof : As at
mair lenth is contenit in the laid Dittay.

Veiumct. The Aflyl'e, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid Thomas
Galloway, chanceller, chofin be thame, fFand, pronuncet and declairit the faid
Robert Weir to be ffylit, culpable and convict of the crymes aboue fpecifeit,
mentionat in the faid Dittay ; and that in refpect of his Confeffioun maid thairof,
in Judgement.

Sentence. The faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of James Sterling, dempfter of Court, decei-nit and ordanit the faid Robert Weir to be tane to ane fkaffold, to be fixt befyde the croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be brokin upoune ane
Row,' quliill he be deid ; and to ly thairat, during the fpace of xxiiij houris.
And thaireftir, his body to be tane vpone the faid Row, and fet vp, in ane publict place, betuix the place of Wareftoun and the toun of Leyth ; and to remane
tliairupoune, ay and quhill command be gevin for the buriall thairof. Quhilk
was i)ronuncet for dome.

Jjtunincr of ?^ousf of 51an0]^olm — H^orse niiU Cattle ^tralins, ^r.

Jan. 11, 160.5. — Ingkie Aiiimestkang, in In3iehohne; Archie Airmellrang, the 31erchea>id, in the Hoilhous ; Niniane Armeftrang, in Tortwne ; Johnne Armeftrang, in the Hoilhous ;
Johnne Michelfoun, in Tortwne; Ci-iftie Airmeftrang, thair,
callit Nanji' Cr/Jf/e ; Johnne Thomelbun, in Dwmefcheilburne; Archibald Armeftrang of Flaflvholme; Archibald Armeftrang, callit Ncmjh Archie; Niniane Airmeftrang, callit
Itoiveis Niniane, in Murthome ; Criftie Airmeftrang, fone to
the Guidman of Langholme (Johnne Airmeftrang;) Mathow
Twrnour in Hoilhous, and Johnne Couthird.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the trelFonable Burning of the Houfe of the Langholme ; and taking of H^arbert Maxwall of Cavenfe captiue and priffoner : And
for the thiftious fteilling of certane horfe, nolt, fclieip, gait : And burning of
certane coirnis, pertening to the faid Harbert, Alexander Bell in Eikinholme,
Williame Bell in Gallofyde and George Irwing in Holmeheid ; eommittit in the

Burke and liis gang, at tlic West-port of Edinburgh, to suiFocate the wretched victims of their hellish
traffic. The quaintness of the ancient style even aggravates the horror of the scene.

' The cruel and horrible jiunishnient of death on the wheel, has ever been very infrequent in Scotland. Weir vi-as literally broken upon a cart-whed, as appears by the following entry in Robert Birrel's
Diary: ' Robert Weir broken on ane cart-wlieel, with ane coulter of ane pleuch, in the hand of the
hangman, for murdering the Laird of Warrillon, quhilk be di<l, 2 Julii IGOO.' The case of Weir is
the first recorded instance of such punishment having been inflicted. This lingering and agonizing
manner of execution, borrowed from the |)ractice of France, Germany, &c. had perlia])s been suggested
by the unprovoked and barbarous natun- of the murder. It was well calculated to make a deep im-
])re8sion on the minds of the people, corresponding in some measure to the great excitement created in
the public mind, by the occurrence of a deed of so deep a die, and perpetrated so near to the metropolis.

37&2JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 451

moneth of September, P.V^. fovirfcoir ane yeiris ; and vtheris crymes fpecifeit
in our fouerane lordis letteris.

Persevvaris, Harbert Maxwall of Kavenfe, AlexaTider Bell in Ekieholme, Williame Bell in

Gallofyde, George Irrving in Holnieheid.

Prelocutour for tlie pannell, Mr Johne RufTell, (advocate.)

It is allegit be the pannell, that be the lawis and Actis of Parliament, in all
criminall actiones, the pairtie defender audit to haif ane autentik coppie of the
Dittay and contentis of the fummondis : Bot trevv it is, that thair is na coppie
delyuerit to the defenderis, bot only tikkettis ; and for verifeing thairof, producet
the faidis tikkettis, viz. four in niunber : And thairfoir na proces.

The Justice repellis the allegeance, in refpect of the executiones.

The pannell atkis inftrumentis, that the Guidman of Kavenfe abydis at the
letteris and executionis, and of the vfing thaii'of. — It is allegit, that Johnne and
Criftie Airmeftrangis, defenderis, the tyme lybellit of the crymes lybellit, war
within yeiris {in juniority ;) the faid Johnne of the age of viij yeiris, and Criflie
of the age of foure yeiris ; and fa war nocht doli capaces ; and be the law of
this realme, can nocht be put to the tryell of ane Aflyfe.

The haill jierfeweris, vnderftanding that Archie Airmeflrang the mercheand,
Agnes Criftie Airnieftrang and Anneis Archie ar Innocent of the ciymes lybellit,
paffis fi'a thame: Quhairupoune thay aflvit inftrumentis. The perlevveris alio i)a(Rs
fra Roweis Niniane AmweiXvang fimpUciter ; quhairupon he alkit inftrumentis.

Mr Airthour Scott of Newburcht and Geniilfcleuch become pledge and fouertie
that Harbert Maxwall, his wyfe, bairnis, &c. fall be harmeles and flvaythles in
thair bodeis, landis, guidis and geir of the faidis Johnne and Criftie A., fones to
Johnne A. of th* Langholme ; the faid Johnne vnder the pane of ane thowland
pvindis, and the faid Criftie vnder the jiane of fyve hundreth pundis.

Continued to the air of ' Dumfreis, tertio Itineris, (vel fuper premonitione)
XV dierura.' (See Vol. II. p. 479.)

J$unuit0 tf)t Castle ot Eanriljolme, ^f»

Jan. 11. — Johnne Aikimesthang of Langholme.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the treffonabill Raifmg of fyre about Harbert
Irwingis hous in Murthholme, and burning ane grit pairt thairof: And lykwayis
for airt and pairt of the treffonabill Raifing of ffyre at the Caftell of Langholme,
and burning of ane grit pairt of the barnes, byres, ftables and vtlier office-houffis
of the faid Place of Langholme: And burning of the haill inficht pleneiding
being thairin ; togidder with thre barnes full of beir and corne ; and xxiiij
ftakJvis of corne, ftanding in the barne yaird ; and fourfcoir dargis' of hay, with

' Darg usually signifies a day's work, as much as one man can acconipHsh in a day, or ' dnyis-iverk,'

452 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

ane kilfull' of malt : And for airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling of threttie
nolt, with fax or fevin horfe and naigis, furth of the faid Place of the Langholme : Quhilkis all and fmdrie gnidis, geir, coirnes, horfe, nolt and remanent
guidis, pertenit to Harbert Maxwell of Kavenfe : committit be the faid Johnne,
the moneth of September, I^.V^. fourfcoir ane yeiris: And ficlyk, for airt and jiairt
of the ti'eflbnabill vfurpatioun of his Maiefteis authoritie vpone him, in taking in
of the faid Harbert Maxwall of Kavenfe captiue and prifToner ; and tranfpoirting him in Ingland, at the tjmie foirfaid. Item, for Bui-ning of Williame Bellis
houfe in Gallowfyde, with tua barnes full of beir, and tua llakkis of aittis {landing in his bai-ne-3aird : And for the thiftious fteilling fra him of tueutie nolt,
threfcoir fcheip and tuentie gait, &c. Item, for Burning of Alexander, Richerd
and Fergie Bellis houffis in Dikinholme, and fteilling threfcoir nolt, tua hvindreth fcheip and threfcoir gaittis : Item, for Burning and deftroying of Dauid
and George Irwingis duelling houffis in Holmeheid, with fax barnes full of beir
and corne, and audit roukis of corne, ftanding in thair corne-5aird, and tuentie
dargis of hay ; committit the tyme foirfaid ; vpoim fet piu'pois and prouifioun.
Sir James Johnneftoun of that Ilk of Dunfkellie, kny', as cautioner, \Tilawit
and amerciat in the pane of ane thoufand merkis money. — The Juftice adjudget
the faid Johnne Armeftrang of Langholme, to be denuncet our fouerane lordis
rebell, and put to the home ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Mar. 12. — Ringaxe" Airmestraxg, callit New-viakl Ringaiie, and
Will Airmeftrang of Rowan-burne.
Dilaitit of contravening the Actis of Parliament, in Reffetting and affifting
the Kingis Maiefteis rebellis, &c.
DiTTAY at the biftance of Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of MonMand, hiycht.

FoRSAMEKiLL Bs it is ftatute ami ordenit be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, that nane
rebell aganis his Maiefteis perfoune nor his authoritie ; and quha fa niakis the faid rebellioun, falbe
pwneift tliairfore, eftir the quantitie^ of that rebellioun ; As the faid Act beris. And als, be ane vther
Act of Parliament, it is ftatute and ordanit, that na maner of man, within this realme, wittanlie or
wilfuUie reflett, fupplie, mantene, defend or do favouris to ony of our fouerane lordis rebellis, and att
his hienes home, vnder the pane of deid and confifcatioun of all thair moveabill guidis ; and to be
accufit heirrpoun att particuler dyettis ; as the faid Act beris. And trew it is, that Johnne MuiTay
of Stable-Gortoune, Cuddie of the Bankhous, Criftie of Langholme, Andro of the Langholme and
Johnne Baittie of the Sciieill, fugitiues and outlawis, being denunceit rebellis and att the borne, att
the inftance of Bernard Lyndfay of the Grange, for nocht making redres and payment to the faid
Bernard, of the particuler guidis contenit in tiie Decreit obtenit be the faid Bernard aganis tliame, for
thair maifterfull Stouthreiff and Murtliouie, committit be thame, viz. For the raaifterfull ftouthreif fra
Archbald Lyndfay of his horfe and armour ; and ffra Williame Lyndfay, brother to the Laird of Co-

' KUiifiill. ' Niiiian. ' Extent, measure.

37&2JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 453

vintoune, of his horfe and armour; and fFra James Baillie, guij-fone to the Laird of Covintoune, of
his hors and armour ; and ffra James Lyndfay, of liia hors and armour ; fFra Jok Braidwod, of his
hors and armour ; ffra Thomas Fifcher, of his hors and armour ; fTra Robert Gybfoun, of his liors and
armour ; ffra Williame Thomfoun, his hors and armour ; Jok Fifcher, his hors and armour ; Jok Kay,
his hors and armour; ffra Alexander Lyndfay, his hors and armour; Johnne Tod, his hors and armour ;
Robert Kay, his hors and armour; George Brown, his horfe and armour: Cuthbert Boyd, his horfe
and armour ; Andro Haddo, Iiis hors and armour ; Jok Lyndfay of the Myll, his iiors and armour ;
vmq'"' Johnne Lyndfay and Edward Tynto, thair horffls and armour : Quhilkis vmq''* Johnne Lyndfay, Edward Tynto, togidder with Symone Fifcher, feruitour to Sir James Hamrailtoune of Libbertoune, wer crewallie flayne be the faidis perfones, in following of thame, to red" leill nipnnis guidis, in
oppin day-lycht ; the faidis rebellis being rynnand ane day forrow^ and heirfchip throw the countrey :
And Robert Hepburne of Aulderfloune, Leutennent of his Maiefleis Gaird, accumpaneit with ane
number of the faid Gaird, being direct to affifl and concur with the faid Barnard Lyndftiy, vpoune the
. . . day of Nouember laftbypaft, to poynd and diftreiujie the faidis rebellis guidis and geir, for the
valour^ of the faidis hors and armour, conforme to ane Decreit gewin aganis thame be Andro Lord
Stewart of Vchiltrie, Leutennent and Warden of the Wefl Marchis of this realme, in ane Court of
Redres, hauldin in the Tolbuith of Drimfreis, the xxix day of December, I'n.V'.lxxxvij yeiris : It is
of veritie, that thay and ather of thame, being foirfene of the faid Robertis cuming, thay being accumpaneit with the faidis rebellis, with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis liegis, all bodin in feir of weir,
with jakis, lanceis and vtheris wappinis, invnfme, raife in hoflile maner foirfaid, vpon the day foirfaid,
at aucht houris before fone ryfing, within the boundis of Eflc,* and thair mantenit, defendit, fuppleit
and affiftit the faidis rebellis, and fett upoun the faid Robert Hepburne and remanent his Maielleis
Gaird, in executioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in poynding of the faidis rebellis guidis ; perfewit thame of thair lyvea, and chaiflit thame be the fpace of aucht myles for thair flauchteris : And
fua, thai and ather of thame hes committit manifeft rebellioun aganis his Maiefteis authoritie ; and he
(they) oppinlie mantenit and defendit the faidis rebellis, being at his Maiefteis home, for the faidis
crymes : And thairthrow, hes contravenit the tennour of the faidis Actis of Parliament ; and the panis
tbairin contenit aucht to be execute aganis (them.)

The Aduocat takis inftruiiientis of the fweiring of the Afiyfe, and proteftis

for Wilfull Errour, in cais they acquit. The AfTyfe takis inftrumentis of the

pannellis Confeffioune maid be thame, that thai arraile and perfewit the Gaird.
Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Weir of Clowburne, chancillar, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faidis Ringan and Will to be culpabill,

ffylit and convict of the crymes aboue writtin.

Sentence. The Juftice-depute, be the mouth of James Henryfoun, dempftar of Court, decernit and ordenit the faidis Ringan and Will to be tane to ane

gibbet befyde the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be liangit quhill thay

wer deid ; and all thair raovabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

♦ dfalset* — |)ei}ur|) — * iHan-stotartns* — Cnirl ^ppicQsion.

Mar. 15. — Alexander Chene, in the Haltoun of Balhalvie, Alexanander Waftland, his ferveand, and Alexander Croy, feruitour

to the Laird of Auchterallane.

• To get restoration, &c. ' Literally, running a day-foray through the country, openly cairying

on their violence and depredations in broad daylight. ^ Value, ' avaiU Lat. volar. " Eskdale.

454 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

Dilaitit of Periurie and menfweiring of tliame felffis, in prefens of the Lordis
of Secreit Coiinfall.
DiTTAY, at the iiijlance of Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland, Aduocat.

F0RSAMEKII.L as thay and tliair complices, being perfewit befoir the Lordis of his hienes Secreit

Counfall, ffor cuming Tpoiin the xxvj day of December laft, att mydnyclit, to George Duncanis

duelling lions in Ardo, qnhair he, with his wyft'e and fanielie, wer in peciabill and quyet maner for the

tyme, takand the nychtis reft, lipning' for na iniui'ie nor oppreflioun to half bene offerit to thame ;

and thair, violentlie brak vjj the dur of the faid Georgis duelling hous, enterit thairin, and tuik the faid

George and his wyffe, fcho being grit with chyld, out of thair naikit beddis, band thame with coirdis,

and maift crewallie and vnmercifuUie, but- pitie or compallioun of the faid Geor<<is wyffis eftait, fcho

being grit with chyld, as faid is, ftrak and dang thame with roungis' and batounis brocht with thame

for the purpoife ; fa tliat the faid George wyfe almaift pairtit with baime ; and haifing maift fchamefullie firukin and leifcliit the faid George him felff with beltis : Committing thairby maift oppin Oppreflloune. For the qnhilk Oppreflioun, the faid George, haifing rafit cure Ibuerane lordis Letteris, and

thairwith fummond the faid Alexander Chene to conipeir before the Lordis of his hienes Secreit

Counfall, the fourtene day of March inftant, to anfuer to the faid Complaint ; and hai6ng, be vertew

of the faidis Letteris, lykwyfe furamond the faid Alexander Waliland and Alexander Crag to heir

witneflrng in the faid mater ; quhom the faid Alexander Chene, haifing falflie fubornit to periure and

nienAveir thame felffis, to depone falflie aganis thair knawledge and confcience in the faid mater, and

to conceill the treutli thairof : The faid Alexander Chene and remanent perfounes, compeirand before

the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, the faid xiiij day of March inftant, and being deiplie fworne, be thair

grit aithis, to depone and tell the treuth in the faid mater, and to beir leill and fuithfaft witnefling

thairin ; being vnmyndfuU of thair dewtie towardis God, and haifing na regaird nor reverence to our

fouerane lordis auctoiitie and lawis, and his hienes maift lionorabill Coimfall, falflie, be thair Depofitiounes, Periureit and iMenfweir thame felftis ; the faid Alexander Croy and Alexander Waftland

deponing, that thay wer nather prefent att the faid deid, nor knew nathing in the faid mater ; and the

faid Alexander Chene, be his Depofitiounis, declairit, that he fould be content to be hangit,^ in caice

it fould be provin or tryit that he ftrak the faid George Duncan or his wyft'e : And lykewyfe denying

that he had fubornit the faidis witneflis, or inftructing thame to deny or conceill the treuth : And

nochtwithftanding thairof, the faid Alexander and the faidis witneflis being re-examinat, hes all

deponit that thay wer all |)refent att the faid ft'act and Opprellioune, and that the faid Alexander Chene

ftrak the faid George Dniicane with ane rang, and beltit him naikit with ane fword-belt ; and wer all

prefent att the faid manifeft Opprefiioune : And alfs confeflit, that the faid Alexander Chene had inftructit, feducit and fubornit the faidis Alexander Croy and Alexander Waftland to Peiiure and MenAveir thame fi'lffis, and depone before the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, that thay wer nocht prefent with

him att the faid fact, and knew na thing thairof: And sa, thay and ilk ane of thame hes nocht only

committit manifeft Oppreflioun be the faid fact and hes Periureit and Menfworne thame felffis : bet

alfs, hes committit manifeft ffalfett ; and as periureit and fals perfonis ar nocht wortliie to leve ; aucht

and fould be pwneift, couforme to the Lawis of this realm and to the Conimoiin-Law ; in terrour and

example of vtheris faull-les' perfounes, to committ the lyke Periurie and ffalfet in tyme curaing.

ASSISA.

Robert Hog, fumtyme feruitour to my Lord of Marfchell, Johnne Ramfay of Quhytehill,
Dauid Wod, brother to the Laird of Balbegnocht, James Stewart, agent for my Lady Atholl,

Robert Crawfurd of Caverhill, Johnne Mowbray, portioner of Crawmond.

The remainder are burgefles, &c.

* Trusting tlirit no injury, &c. * "Witliout. ^ Cudgels. * Otlier instances are on record of witnesses perjuring themselves, and making this awful asseveration, being taken at their word. ' Svul-tess, devoid of conscieace.

37&2JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 4.55

Verdict. The AfTife, be the mouthe of the faid Johnne Ramfay, chanceller,
ffand, pronunceit and declairit the paniiell to be fFylit, culpable and convict of
the ciymes aboue writtin, conforme to thair Depofitiounis and Confeffioun.

Sentence. The Juftice-depute, be the mouth of James Stirling, dempftar
of Court, decernit and ordained the faid Alexander Chene to be tane to the
mercat croce of Edinburghe, and thair his held to be ftrikin fra his body : And
the faid Alexander WojUand to be tane to ane gibbet befyde the mercat croce
of Edinburghe, and thair to be hangit quhill he be deid : And the faid Alexander
Croij to be Ikurgeit throw the tonne ; as he that fyrft confeft the veritie : And
all thair movable guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as
fugitiue fra the lawis for the faidis crymes.

Mar. 28. — Johnne Spottiswoid of that Ilk.

Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the fellovm and crewall Slauchter of ■vnnq" Thomas Quhi2>po of Leyhouffis ; conimittit in the moneth of Jiuiij, the yeir of God
I^.VMxxxxv yeiris ; vpoun fet purpois, provifioun and foirthocht fellony.

James Tennant of Lynhous, as fouertie, ordanit to be vnlawit and amerciat in
the pane of ffyve hundreth merkis for nocht entry of the faid Johnne, to vnderly
the law, &c. ; and als, adiudget the faid Johnne to be denunceit our fouerane lordis
rebell and put to his hienes home, and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

cFaectitions, ^r.

Mar. 28. — Williame Stralxhaxe, mefTinger.

Dilaitit ffor the ffalfiefeing, fforgeing, Counterfuteing, devyfeing, fubfcryveing
and fignetting of foure fals Charges and Executiones, with the Denunciatioun
of Hoirning following thairupovme, ffalflie vfet and execute be him. Quhilkis
charges and deniuiciatioun, and everie ane of them, are, be Decreit of the Lordis
of Seffioun, of the dait the fevint day of Marche inflant, civillie and lauchfullie Improvin, and ffund be the faidis Lordis to be ffals and ffeinjeit in thame felffis, &c.

Verdict. The Affife, be the mouth of Peter M'^Dowell of Machermoir,
chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Williame (in refpect of the laid
Lordis Decreit, producet aganis him, ffinding the faidis Executiones to be ffalfe
and ffen3eit) to be Fylit, culpabill and convict thairof.

Sentence. The Juftice-depute, be the mouth of James Henderfoun,dempfter,
decernit and ordanit the faid AVilliaine to be fcurget throw this burgh ; and to
be depryuet of his office of mefliugerie and notarie, and nevir to vl<3 the I'amyn
in ony tyme cuming ; vnder the pane of hanging, but {ic'ithout) fauour ; as he
that was convict of the crymes aboue writtin.

456 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

?^nitinfl; — SeaoiinUins — iHutilation.

Apr. 9. — Patrik Carkettii.l of Markill, George Carkettill, his brother,
Johnne Broune, brother to the Laird of Colfloune, and Robert
Smyth, fervand to the faid Patrik.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Hurting, Wounding and Mutilatioun of James
Libbertoini, fervand to James Lord of Bahnirrienoch of his left eie ; and remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris.

Persewaris, James Libbertoune, Mr Thomas Hoip, Aduocat-fubflitute.
Prelocutouris for tlie perfewer.
The Laird of Henderftoun, Mr Robert Lyntoun, Aduocat-fubllitute for the Kingis Aduocat.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, the Laird of Waiichtouu, tlie Laird of Innerleyth, the Laird of Craigmyllor, Sir Johnne Preftoun of Valafeild, Mr Johnne Ridlell, Mr Alexander King, Aduocattis.
I\Iy Lord Prefident' produeet the Kingis Maiefteis Warrand ; quhairof the
tennour foUowis.
James R.

Justice, Juftice Clai'k and 5onre deputes, We greit 30W weill. In fe tryell of Jie particuler mater perfewit before 30W, at ])e inftance of James Libbertoun in Nefer Libbertoune aganis
Patrik Carkettill of Over Libbertoun and his complices, for ]ie mutulatioun of J>e faid James ; committit be Jiame in Jie nioneth of ... . laftbypall : In cais (it) be fund be 50W that ^e can nocht, for
])e prefent, reffaue ]ie tryall of ]»e faid mutulatioun, in refpect of ])e fchortnes of tyme intervening, and
before the expyring of 5eir and day eftir ]ie committing of ]<e fact ; and fn-a '^e falbe forceit to continew 5 our proceding in ]>e mater : In quhilk cais, it is our fpeciall will and pleafour, that 36 fall command the faidis perfounes to enter fair perfounes in waird, within ]ie Caftell of Blaknes, thairin to
remane, quliill thay be ffynit be our Counfall pair, for Jiair cryme and offence eoinmittit be |)ame; and
frome Jiame obtene Warrand for fair releif. Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe 5 our Warrand. Gewia
att Grenewiche, this tuentie day of March, 1605.

The Jiiflice continewis this dyet to the faxtene day of Maij nixtocum ; and
ordanis the perfones on pannell to entir in waird, within the Caftell of Blaknes,
within xlviij houris ; and to find cautionn to that eflfect.''

Sir George Preftoun of Craigmiller, kny', become pledge and fouertie, &c. ;
and that thay fall enter in waird, &c. thairin to remane, and onnawayis to
depairt furth thairof, qnhill thay be fred be ane AVarrand ; and that vnder the
panes following, viz. ffor the faid Patrik ane thoufand merkis, the faidis George
and Johnne ffyve hnndreth merkis, and the faid Robert tua hnndreth merkis.

Snterrmnimuuiiii; Sjoitl) iHac<Sir(rovo.

Apr. 26. — CoLENE Bruce in Middilhauc-h of Rnthven ^Huntingtour,)

Patrik Bruce thair and Alexander Bruce thair.

Dilaitit ffor the treftbnable Reftet, Supplie and Intercowmoning with Johnne

Dow Gait I'.rgregour, Johnne Dow ItFewin M'gregour and Gregour M'ewin,

' James Lord Balmerincth, President of the College of Justice. ^ The case

was farther delayed to May 29, but no entry occurs of that date ; so that it is likely the parties com-
^lounded with the Treasurer and private party, by payment of a stipulated fine.

S8&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 457

cowmone theivis, tratouris and rebellis to his Maieftie ; and that within thair
houffis in the Middill-hauch of Ruthven and dyuerle vtheris jjlaces, mony and
dyuerfe tymes, in the yeiris of God, l"'.Vy. and thre and foure yeiris ; eftir the
Murthour of Glenfrwne,' and eftir the faidis joerfones M'ar declairit rebellis and
tratouris, and all our fonerane lordis leigis war lauehfuUie prohibeit and difcharget to refTett, Inpplie, affift or intercommown with the faidis IVrgregouris,
rebellis and fugitiues, as faid is, vnder the pane of Treflbne.

For the quhilkis crymes aboue writtin, the faidis perfones on pannell becum
in our fouerane lordis will. Quhairupone Sir Thomas Hammiltoune (of Monkland, kny', Aduocat to our fouerane lox-d) afkit inftrumentis.

Aug. 6. — The Kimg's Will was this day declared against the pannels,
as follows.
James R.

James, be ]>e grace of God, King of Giitt Britane, Fiance and Ireland, defender of the
ffaitlie. To our Juftice, Jullice clerk and 30ur deputis, greting. Forfamekill as Colene, Patrick and
Alexander Bruces in the Mydilliauch of Huntingtour, being callit and convenit befoir 30W, ffor the
Aflifting, Reffett, Supplie and Intercovvmoniug with the Clangregour, aganis the tennour of our
Proclaniationes maid Jiairanent ; thay ar becum in our will for the fame : And albeit thay half incurrit
and mereit the pane of deathe, for that cryme, git We, of our fpeciall grace and mercie, ar content to
difpenfe with the rigour of the law ; and haif declairit and declaires our Will as followis, to witt : That
fe faidis perfones fall be Baneift the haill boundis of our dominiones, during ])e haill dayis of liair l)'ftymes ; vnder the pane of deid, and to be hangit but forder proces : And that tliay find fufiicient and
refponfall cautioneris and fouerteis, actit in the buikis of our Adiornall or Secreit Counfall, that betuix
tfie day and dait heirof, and the tuentie day of Augufl nixtocum, thay fall depairt and pafs furth of
our dominiones ; and nocht returne agane within }>e famyn, during thair lyftymes, vnder the pane of
ffyve thoufeand merkis, to be payit be the faidis cautioneris coniunctlie and feuerallie, in cais f e faidis
perfones or ony of thame fail5ie in the premifles ; the ane half of the faid pane to ws and our Thefaurer in our name, and ])e vjier half to Daui<l Lord Scone,' our Comptroller, befydis the pane of deid
to be incurrit be pe criminallis ])ame felffis ; with this prouifioun, that in caice the faidis criminallis or
ony of thame fall happin to returne within our dominiones, and nawayis commit ony violence, harme
or iniurie aganis ony of our fubiectis afoir Jiair apprehenfioun, in that caice fair cautioneris perfewand
and apprehendand thame, and prefenting thame to Jullice, the executioune of j)e faidis criminallis fall
liberat pe faidis cautioneris of all payment of the pecuniall fowme foirfaid : And gif thay fall happin
to commit ony violence or harme aganis ony of our fubiectis, eftir pair returning within our dominiones ;
in that caice, Jiair cautioneris to be fubiect to the payment of the pecuniall fowme foirfaid, and the
criminallis thame felffis to vnderly the pevfonall pwneifchment foirfaid : Commanding heirby 50W our
faid Juflice to pronunce this our Will judiciallie ; and to caus thir prefentis be infert in the buikis of
our Adiournall. Gevin att Grenewiehe, the . . . day of Junij, 1605.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Montrois, Commiffionar. Al. Cancell.'

Patrik Bruce of Fingafk and Mr Alexander Bruce, fear of Cultinalindie, become cautioners, and the Bond is regiftered at length ; the witnefTes are George
Bruce of Carnok, Sir Johnne Bruce of Airthe, knycht, Jolinne Kincaid, writer,
and Johnne Kemp, his feruitour.

' See Jan. 20, 1604. ' Sir David Murray of Gospertie, afterwards Viscount Stormont, whose

name so frequently occurs in the matter of Gowrie's Conspiracy. ^ Alexander Lord Fyvie, Chancellor, afterwards Earl of Dunfermline,

VOL. IL 3 M

458 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

May 9- — Gkokge Fourestek, lunityme lervand tomy Lord of Roxburcht.
Dilaitit, accufit and perfewit be James Skirving in Gilkerftouii of the Dittay

following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid George, liaifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis the
faid James Skirving, fuintyme in Ilumbie and now in GilUerftoun, for the allegit hurting of him ; the
faid George, to be revenget thairof, wilhout regaird of jullice, in the nioneth of Januar, tlie yeir of
God I'".V'^. fourfcoir fyftene yeiris, vnderftanding that tlie faid James was to cum furth of the Place of
Humbie, and to pas hame to his awiu duelling-hous, than in Huuibie mylne, he darnit him felff in ane
bourtrie bofs,' at the heid of Wolflatt ; and in the faid James bycuming, fett vpone him, and be way
of brigancie,'- vnder filence and chid of nycht, betuix audit and nyne houvis at evin, with ane fwoird and
quhinger in Ills hand, niaifl, crewallie perfewit him for bis flauchler, hurt and woundit him in his richt
airme and richt hand, and hes mutilat and made him impotent of the famyn ; and gaif him auchtene
bludie and deidlie woundis; and left him lyand for deid vpone the grund : And the faid George was
airt and pairt of the hurting, wounding and mutilatioune of the faid James Skirving; committit in
maner and at the tyme foirfaid, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellony.

Persewer, James Skirving, fumtyme in Humbie, and now in Gilkerltoune.

Prelocutour for the perfewer, Mr \Vnlter Bellendeu.

Prelocutouris for the pannell.

Mr Johnne RufTell, Sir Jedione Murray, My Lord Cranfloune, ^Ir Laurence M'^Gill.

It is allegit be the perfewer, that the jiairtie defender is at tiie home ; and

thairfoir na prelocutouris can compeir and defend in this jjerfute. — It is anfuerit

be Mr Johnne RulFell, tliat albeit he be at the home, and lauchfullie at the home,

yit he may compeir for the rebell. Secundo, the Hoirnhig is null, becaus the

pannell being than fervand to my Lord of Roxburcht,^ the denunciation at the

inereait croce of Edinbnrghe, and regiftratioune in the Schereffis buikis of Edinburghe is nocht lauchfull, nor accoirding to the Act of Parliament, bot fould haif

bene denuncet at Jedburcht, and regillrat in the Schereffis buikis of the Scherefdome of Roxburcht. — It is rejilyit be the perfewer, that my Lord of Roxburcht

duelt, the tyme of the denunciatioune, within the burgh of Edinbnrghe ; and

thairfoir the Hoii'ning, in the haill poyntis thairof, is fufficient ; and the Hoirning flandis vnreducet, quhairin he was charget, perfonallie apju'ehendit, to haif

fund cautioune for his comiJeirance, vpone xv dayis wairniug.

It is allegit be the pannell, that this matter can nocht be put to ane Aflyfe,
becaus he is perfewit for Mutilatioune, and nocht tane in recentl crimine, and
nocht charget vpon xv dayis wairning, nor na copjjie of the Dittay is geuin him.
Anfuerit be the perfewer, that he is fummoiid alreddie, vpone xv dayis wairning,
perfonallie appi'ehendit, and a coppie delyuerit, and put to the home, and be
vertew of Letteris of Captioun, tane and apprehendit and prefentit to jiannell.
— It is allegit that he is nocht fummond to this day vjjone xv dayis wairning ;

' Concealed himself in an elder bush. ' Robbery. Old Fr. hriganderie. ' Sir Robert

Ken- of Cessfurd was created Lord Roxburghe, anno 1600; and Earl, in 1G16.

il

38 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS 459

and gif he was furamond of befoir for this ciyme, be vertew of vther letteris, and
put to the home, the famyn Hoirning is null ; for the caufis aboue writtin. It
is anfuerit, the Hoirning ftandis vnreducet. — It is forder allegit be the pannell,
that befoir this matter pals to ane Aflyle, this mutilatioune man be tryit be
Chirurganes. It is anfuerit be the defender, that he referris the cognitioun of
the Mutilation to the AfTyle.

The Justice ffindis this matter to be be put to ane Aflyfe, nochtwithftanding the former allegeances.

It is allegit, that my Lord Juftice Clerk and his deputis can nocht be Clerkis
in this proces, becaus this perfewer is Tennent to my Lady Humbie, fpous to my
Lord Juftice Clerk,' to quhome he payis maill and deutie, and thairfoir na proces ; and Mr Walter Bellenden, as prelocutour for the pei-fewer, is brother-inlaw to my Lord Juftice Clerk ; and thairfoir my Lord Juftice Clerk can nocht
be Clerk in this proces. — It is allegit be Mr Johnne Ruffell, that, in refpect iMr
Walter Bellenden, prelocutour for the perfewer, compeiris and perfewis, and the
perfewer is Tennent to my Lady Humbie, his lordfliipis fpous, my Lord Juftice
Clerk can nocht be Juftice Clerk in this proces. It is anfuerit, that Mr Patrik
Bannatyne is ordiner clerk to the Juftice, to all the legis.

The Justice Ordanis Mr Patrik Bellenden, ordiner Clerk, toproceid as Clerk
in this proces.

Forder, it is allegit that na proces can be grantit, becaus my Lord Juftice
Clerk can nocht be Clerk in this proces, feing Mr Walter Bellenden, the prelocutour for the perfewer, is his brother-in-law ; as alfo, the perfewer is Tennent
to my Lady Humbie of the landis of Gilkerftoun and Gilkerftoun-mylne ; as alfo,
is tennent to my Lord him lei ft'. Anfuerit, thair is ane ordiner clerk, viz. Mr
Patrik Bannatyne, aganis quhome thair is na exceptioune, cpiha is ordiner Clerk
to all our Ibuerane lordis leigis. — The anfueris foirfaid meittis nocht the declinatour, becaus the alledgeance is proponit aganis the Juftice Clerk, without onj^
mentioune of Mr Patrik Bannatyne.

The Justice ffindis proces, and Mr Patrik Bannatyne to be clerk, vnles he
propones a relevant alledgeance aganis him as ordiner clerk.

Thaireftir the pannell and prelocutouris declairit that thai only propone the
declinatour foirfaid aganis my Lord Juftice Clerk, quhy he fould nocht be clerk ;
and ar content, that quhan his lordfchip is removet furtli of Jugement, in ref^Ject
of the declinatour foirfaid, gif fa be fund, Mr Patrik fall remane as clerk ; but"
preiudice of fic lauchfull exceptiones as may be proponit aganis him, the faid

' Sir John Cockburn of Orniistoxin, Lord .Justice Clerk, married Elizabeth, tbe eldest daupbter of
Sir John Bellenden of Auchnoule (by his second wife, Janet Seton), and widow of James Lawson
of Humbie. * Without.

460 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

declinatour being firft difcufllt. It is allegit be the pannell and his prelocutouris,
vnder proteftatioun that the formei' declinatour be firft difcuffit, and na vtherwayis, that ]\Ir Patrik Bannatyne can nawyis be adniittit to be clerk in this
proces, for tna cauffis ; ffirft, becaufe he is Dej)ute to my Lord Juftice Clerk, aganis
quhome the former exceptioune declinatour is proponit, and hes his office only
of his lordfliip prefentlie ; and fua the exceptioune competent aganis the Clerkprincipall, man be alfo competent aganis his Depute : Nixt, becaus Mr Walter
Bellenden, quha is i)relocutour, and Mr Patrik is thridis or ferdis of kyn to Sir
Johne Bellenden of Auchnoull, and James Bannatyne of Newtyle ar thridis or
ferdis of kyn ; and declairis that Sir Johnne Bellenden,' father to Mr Walter
and James Bannatyne, father to IMr Patrik, ather thair guidlchiris or grandfchiris war brether. — And Mr Patrik Bannatyne being IVorne, declairit that the
former alledgeance of kynreid was nocht trew.

The Justice ffindis proces ; and ordanis Mr Patrik Bannatyne to be Clerk to
this proces, quha is ordiner Clerk to all our fouerane lordis leigis, to the Juftice.

The pannel takis inftrumentis of the Juftice Interlocutour ; and proteftis for
remeid of law.

The Defender declairis- he will nocht feik the perfeweris ayth, vpone the verificatioun of the Dittay ; bot only craves quhat the perfewer produces to verifie.
The perfewer declairis that he fall fchaw his mutiiatioune to the Aflj-fe.

Vekdict. The Assyse, be the mouth of Williame Johnneftoun in Over
Keyth, chanceller, be pluralitie of voittis, fland, pronuncet and declairit the faid
George Fori-efter to be ffylit, culpable and convict of the Hurting, Wounding
and Mutilatioun of the faid James Skirviug of his richt airme and richt hand, in
maner fpecifeit in the faid Dittay.^

May 22. — Williame Thomesouxe in Reddene.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vjnq'' Niniane Ed5er.

Sir Andro Ker of Hietoun, knycht, become pledge and fouertie that he fall
compeir befoir the Juftice or his deputis in the Tolbuth of Edinbui-ghe, the
tuentie-fyve day of July nixtocum, to vnderly the law, &c. vnder the pane of
Ten thoufand markis ; quhairof the ane half fall be payit to the Kingis Maiefteis
Thefaurer, and the vther half to the pairtie perfeweris. — On Jul. 25, the Juftice
continued the cafe to the air of Roxburcht, ' tertio Itineris (vel fuper premonitione) XV dierum, Plegio, Joanne Ker de Bowdene.'

^lausljttr — j^Ijootiitci iMltf) liJistolcts autr (guns.

May 31. — JoHXNE Mure of Audiindrane,^ Johnne Mui-e of Craigflcene,

' Of Aucbnoule. * The Sentence is not contained in tlie Record. ' See ttie Trial of this

infamous man, Jul. 7, 1600, &c., for the atrocious Murder of Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzeaue, &c

4

38 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 461

Moyfes Lokhart, brother to the Laird of Bar, James Bannatyne in Chapel-Donall, Dauid Kennydie, younger of i\Iaxwaltoun, Charles Dah-umpill, burges of Air, George Campbell,

younger of Schankftoune, and Gilbert Kennydie in Machar.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit, be Richart Spens, in Vgftoune, as father to

Vmq'^ Richart Spens, feruitour for the tyme to Johnne Erll of Caflillis, and Sir

Thomas Hammiltoune of Monkland, Aduocat to our fovierane lord, for his hienes

interes, ffor airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'° Richart Spens ; and

for bering, wering and fchuteing of piftolettis and gunnis,^ contrair the tennour

of the Actis of Parliament ; committit vpovme the nynt day of December, the

yeir of God I^.Vj". and ane yeiris, vpoun the landis of Penn3^glenne.

Persewer, Richeid Spens in Vgftoune, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of Monkland, Aduocat.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, My Lord Vchiltrie, The Laird of Drunilanrig-, Tlie Laird of

Rowallane, Jofias Stewart (of Boningtoun), Mr Johnne Ruflell, Mr Willianie Oliphant.
(The two Mures, Lokhart and Bannatyne,) tuik thanie to our fouerane lordis
Refpett,^ jiroduceit, vnder the Previe Sell, of the daitt, att Falkland, the tuelff
day of Junij, the yeir of God I'".Vj''. and tua yeir, for the faidis crymes. Quhilk
Refpett the Jullice admittit ; and ordanit thame to find caution and fouertie to
fatisfie the pairtie, for airt and pairt of the faid llauchter : Lyke as, Matho
Stewart of DundufT, Jofias Stewart of Boningtoun, and George Cami^bell yoimger
of Schauleflovm become cautioneris and fouerteis with thame felffis, coniunctlie
and feuerallie, to fatisfie the pairtie, for aii't and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid
Richard Spens.

George Campbell alfo obtained ' oure fouerane lordis Refpett, produceit,
vnder the Prewie Seill ; of the dait, at Halyruidhous, the lafl day of November,
1602.' Matho Stewart of DundufF, Jofias Stewart of Boningtoun and Johnne
Mure of Auchindrane become pledgeis, &c.

The cafe was continued, as to the remainder of the perfons on pannel, to the
Jufl;ice-air of ' Air, tertio Itineris (vel fuper pi-eraonitione) xv dierum,'

iMr WilUam HairtofLemJandis and ^Ir WiniftmBorthuiJi;JvJlices-Deputes.']

i^utilation antr ©cmcm&vatioiu

Jun. 11. — Eduakd Johnnestoune, younger, mere-hand burges of Ed'.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Demembring of Johnne Broun, goldimyth, of
the thombe of his left hand; committit vnder nycht, the fevintene of May laft.

Perseweris, Jolinne Broun, goldfmyth, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of Monkland, Aduocat.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, The Laird of Johnneftoune, The Laird of W'aftraw, Mr Alexander
KinT, Mr Thomas Gray and IVL' Johnne Jolinneftoune (Aiivocates.)
It is allegit be the pannell, that this matter can nocht be put to the knawledge

' This is the first instance in the Record of the term ' (jun ;' ' haghut' huing the prevalent name
for that weapon. * Remission, respite.

462 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

of ane Affyfe ; becaus Ihe fact lybellit is committit vnder fcilence of nicht, and
the faid Johnne Bromie, being convenit befoir the Lordis of his hienes Secreit
Counfall, he is convict on ane manifeft Ryote, for the wrangus invaiding, trubbilling and molefting of the defender, his Avyf and fervand, vnder fdence of
nycht, and fna, quhatfumeuir fell out be that occafioiine, the fait was in the perfewer ; and of the law, albeit he had been flane, the faid defender had bene in
na danger : In refi)ect quhairof, the famyn aucht noclit to be put to the knawledge of ane Affyfe. For verificatioune quhairof, producet the Lordis of Secreit
Counfellis decreit, daitit the xxiij day of Maij laft, 1605. It is anfuerit, that the
allegeance nawayis meittis the Dittay ; feing the Dittay is the faid Johnne
Brounes perfute, for redrefs and pwneifchment of the Mutilatioune and Difmembring of him, quhairof thair was nather complent nor tryell, befoir the Secreit
Counllill ; nather can ony thing, done in that judgement, flay the puting of ane
relevant Dittay to ane Aifyfe, befoir the Juftice ; leing, the Counfall could nocht
l)e Judges to the famyn ; and the matter being put to ane Aflyfe, the Airyfouris
will try, quhither the fact was done in lauchfull defenfe of the pannell or nocht,
The Justice continewis this Interlocutour to the xviij of this inftant. ' Plegio, Waltero Ker, portionario de Diriltoune.'

(Jun. 18.) — On xviij June,^ The Juftice ffindis proces, nochtwithftanding
of the allegeance proponit the lafl dyett, and left at Interloqimtour. And eftir
the pronuncing of the faid Interlocpuitour, of confent of bayth the pairteis, continewis this perfute (quliill the) xxvij day of Junij inftant. ' Plegio, M'^" Joanne
Johnneftoune, aduocato.'

Dittay agaivfl Ediiard Johmieftoun, Younger.

FoR.SA^[EKILL as, vpone the fevintene day of Maij laftbypaft, vmler iiiclit, tliair fell out ane debait'

l)etuix the faid Eduaid Johnneftoune and Patiik Robeitroune, feiuitour to George Cuninghame, goldfmyth, burges of tlie Cannongait, vpone the hie ftreit of the burgh of Edinburghe, aboue the Stinkand-flyle' thairof : and for efchewing of hurt that micht liaif fall'm to ailher of the faidis parteis, the

faid Johnne Broune, amangis vther honeft niclitbouris, prciliit to redHhanie : Nochtwithftanding, it is

of veritie, that tlie faid Eduard Johnneftoune, perfaveing the faid Johnne Broun to cum and refift and

ftay his furie, he left the faid Patrik, and but'' offence gevin be the faid Johnne Broun to him, atlier be

word or deid, lie fett vpone the faid Johnne with ane drawin fwoird, and maift crewallie invaidit him

for his flauchter, hurt and woundit him in his left hand, to the effullone of his bluid in grit quanlitie ;

and lies Mutilat and difineniberit the faid Johnne of the thombe of his faid left hand, and cuttit the

famyn away ; and fa hes maid him alluterlie vnhabill to wyn his leving, in his airt of goldfmyth-craft ;

to his vtter wrak, and to the grit contempt of our fouerane lord, his hienes authoritie and lawis : And

the faid Eduaid Johnneftoun is airt and pairt of the faid Mutilatioune, demembring and cuting away

of the faid Johnne Brounes thombe of his faid left hand. For the quhilk he aucht and fould be pwneidiet, conforme to the lawis of this realme, in exampill of vtheris to commit the lyk, in tyme cuming.

I Jlr Williiime Olipliant is added to the Prcluciitvtiris, and on 2~ .Tune, Wr Tlinmas Craig. s An altercation and
scuffle. ' A narrow passage to the eastward of tlie entrance to Iladdo's-Iiold, New North Cluirch, and cek'biated

for similar rencontres. * Separate 5 Witliont ])rovocati(>n, excepting the proverbial fate of those who indiscreetly interfere in such matters. The ' redding-straih' wasuo child's play in those days, when sword and dirk were
the bwift ministers of vengeance !

38 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. .463

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the moutli of Dauid Fairlie, merchand burges of
Edinburghe, chanceller, for the maift pairt, ffand, pronunceit and declaii-et the
faid Eduard to be Clene, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt of the Mutilatioune, &c. ; in refiiect, vpone thair confciences, as thay haif tryit and confidderit,
the laniin proceidit vpone the faid Johnne's awin default ; and was committit
and done be the laid Eduard, the tyme foirfaid, in defence of him felfi', his wyfe
and fervand, quha war invaidit and moleftit be the faidis Johnne Broune and Patrik Robertfoune, vnder nycht. Quhairupoune the faid Eduard aflcit inftrumentis.

* SamftestttatQ*— Itlapc — Cl)ilti--muiUei'.

Jun. 18. — JoMNNE Brouxe, goldfmyth, burges of Edinburghe.
Dilatit for Vmbefetting of Katherene Rae, fpous to Eduard Johnneftoune,
younger, merchand burges of Edinburghe, and preifling to fForce hir ; and
cauffing hir to pairt with bairne.

Persewar, Eduard Johnneftoune, younger, merchand burges of Edinburghe.
Preloquutouris for the pannell, The Laird of Phillorth, Mr Johnne Ruffell, Mr James Donaldfoune.

The Justice continewis this matter to the xxvij day of Junij inflant.
DiTTAY agahijl Johnne JBroune.
(Jun. 27.) — FoRSAMEKiLL as, vpone the fevintene day of May laftbypafl, the faid Katharene and
Eduard, liir liufband, haifing fouppit in )>air fa}>eris hous, and being returning eftir fupper, about ten houris
at evin, fra fair faid fajieris houfe to pair awin ludgeing, in peccable and quyet maner, lipning for na harnic,
iniurie or perfute of ony perfones, bot to haif paft. in peceable maner throw the Hie-ftreit of fe laid
burgh of Edinburghe to fair faid ludgeing, vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis ; it is of verritie,
that Jie faid Johnne Broun, goldfmytli, accunipaneit with Patrik Robertfoune, burges of Aberdene,
perfaueing the faid Katharene to be hir felfl", allane, accumpaneit allanerlie' witli ane fervand woman ;
and finding ])e gaits to be quyet, fa that nane was ])airupone, to mark fair doingis, or to ftay thair
intendit fchamefull and villanufe interpryfe ; the faid Johnne Broun and Patrik Robertfoune refoluet
violentlie to haif ftbrcet fe faid Katharene and Iiir fervand woman : And for fis effect, the faid Johnne
come to the faid Katharene, and brak furth in luidiie vncumlie andvnhonneft fpeitiies to hir, beleiting
to haif perfwaidit hir to haif yeildit to his filtliie luft and beiftlie appetite ; and finding him felf difapointit of fat meane, he, in his beiftlie rage and furie, as ane pofl"eft with ane wikket fpreit, maifl
fchamefullie and erewallie giippit fe faid Katharene Rae be tlie gorget, and violentlie drew liir aff J>e
hie ftreit to ane cloife-beid,'' vnder ane fl,air; and fair erewallie, witii Iiis faldit neiffis, ftrak and dang
hir in the face, and caufet hir to blcid at mouth and neife in grit quantitie ; raif liir courciie^ and remanent ornanientis of hir heid, and cuift fe faniyn vnder his feit ; and, will) his kneyis, punchet ]ie faid
Katharene in the bellie, fclio being grit with chyld ; and had nocht faillit to iiaif abufet hir chaftitie,
gif f e faid Eduard, hir hulband, and vf eris nychtbouris (heiring hir and iiir faid fervand gif f e fpradie
and cry=) had nocht cum, with diligence, and releiuit hir furth of his cruell grippis. Be occafioune
quhairof, the faid Katharene was led liame to hir awin hous, quhaivin fcho hes layne conlinuallie bedfall
feufyne, in grit pane and dollour, vnder f e cuir of Doctouris and ciiirurganes ; fa that, vpone the x.\j
day of May laftbypaft, or ])airby, fcho pairtit with ane deid bairne ; and fcho hir feliF hes bene, and as

• Only. 5 Street, way. ' The immerous narrow alleys running downwards from the north and south sides

of the High-street of Edinburgh, are termed clous ,- the close-heid signifies the entrance to one of these passages.
* Tore her curtche, a sort of cap or head-dress. Old Fr. '-> Give the alarm ; the hue and cry.

464 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D.1605.

jit is, in gi-it bai'^ard and danger of hir lyfe : Committing Jiairthrow manifefl villany, vnder nycht,
witliin the fai<I huicli of Edinhurglie, vpone ))e Hie-ftreit Jiaiiof, C|uhilli fould be ane faiftie and place
of refuiige to all honed men and weinen ; fpeciallie, to the honell nychthouris, inhabitantis faiiintill ;
Lyk as, pe faid Jobnne Bronne is airt and pairt of the famyn villany and baibarus cryme : As alfo, is
aiit and paiit of tlie Slauchter and diftruetione of the faid Kathareoes infant bairne, quhairwith fcho
hes pairtit, be occaiioune foiifaid. For the quhilkis, the faid Jolinne audit and Ibuld be pwneifchet,
conforms to the lawis of J)is realme, as ane brigane' and Murtherour vnder nycht ; to the terrour and
exampill of vtheris to commit the lyk, in tyme cuming.

It is allegit that the Suniniondis is iiocht relevant ; in refpect the fact lybellit
is only ane naikit intentioune. It is anfuerit be the perfewer, that he conioynis
the haill crymes lybellit togidder, to be tiyit be the AfTyfe.

The Justice ffindis the fumniondis relevant, in refjject of the anfuer.

It is forder alledgit, that this matter can nocht pafs to ane AlFyfe, in refpect
it is tryit alreddie, befoir the Secreit Coiinfall, and ane Sentence gevin thairin
alreddie. It is anfuerit be the perfewar, that the Secreit Counfall ar nocht
Judges Criminall, and tliat na Precognition tane be thaine can be in jjreiudice
of decifioune to the Juftice, to put crymes to ane AfTyfe ; as was laitlie decydit
betuix Johnneftoune of Newbie contrair ^^'illianle Maxwall.^

The Justice remittis this matter to the tryall of ane Alfyfe.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Dauid Fairlie, merchand burges of
Edinburgh, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Jolinne Broune to be ffylet,
culpable and convict of the Invaiding and molefting of the faid Katharene Rae,
vnder nycht ; committit the tyme foirfaid, contenit in the faid Dittay : And declairit the faid Jolinne to be Clene, innocent and acquit of the Murthour and
diflructioun of the faid infant bairne, cominittit the tyme foirfaid ; in refpect
thair was nathing producit for verifeing thairof : Quhairupoun aither of the
faidis parteis advit inflrumentis.^

\_3Tr WiU'ianie Hairf, Jiiftice-Depute.']

Igamcsuclun — 2imesinri: tl)p roiwer of ^ctofiie— ^ijootinij ^istolets

— CaUins Cnptibf, ^r,

Jun. 2L— WiLLiAME Maxwall of Gribtoune, Barbara Johnneftoune,
his fpous, Elizabeth Johnneftoune, relict of vmq'" Johnne
Johnneftoune,appeirand of Newlne (mother to the faid Barbara.)
Dilaittit, accufit and perfewit, be vertew of the Dittay following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as, albeit be dyuerfe guid Actis of Parliamant and Secreit Counfall, refpectiue, oure
fouerane lord hes prohibeil and difcharget the beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and pidolettis vnder
nertane panes mentionet in the faidis Actis ; nochtvvithflanding, it is of treulh, that fic is the wikket
difpofitioun of fum perfones, quha preferring thair awin inordinat appetite and revenge, to the dew
reuerence and obedience of his hienes faidis lawis, thay and thair domeftik fervandis daylie and conti.

' Fr. hrirjand. " See Jun. 21, the following Case. ^ The Sentences are not Recorded.

38&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 465

iiuallie beiris and weiris hagbuttis and piftolettis, as tliair ordiner and accuRornet wappones ; of fet
purpois antl prouifioune to put thair vngodlie deterniinatioun to exetutioune, aganis fic of his liienea
peceable fubiectis, aganis qubom tbay beir ony queirell or haittrent : As natnelie, tlie faidis Williame
Maxwall of Gribtoun, Barbara Jubnneftoun Iris ipous, and Elizabeth Stewart liir mother, haifing, this
kngtyme bygane, borne ane lecreit and liid malice aganis the faid Robert Jobnn ^lloune of Newbie, in
refpect of the depeudance of certaine actiones, depending befoir the Lordis of Counfall and Seffioun,
tnovet be aither pairtie aganis vtheris ; and fpeciallie, ane actioune of Reduction intentit, and the
Summoiidis thairof lauchfullie execute, at the inltance of the laid Robert aganis the faid Williame
Maxwall, Barbara liis fpous, and the faid Elizabelh hir mother, for Reductioun of the Retour of vmq'''
Johnne Johinielloun of Newbie, that laft deceiffit, fpous to the faid Elizabeth, and for Reductioun of
liis Seafing following tliairupoun, and of certane vtheris pretendit Infeftmentis, allegit maid be him to
the faid Elizabeth his fpous, and to the faid Barbara his dochter : And ane vther actioun and cauiie,
perfewit be tlie faid Barbara and tlie faid William hir fpous, for his entreis, aganis the faid Robert
Johnnertoun, for randering to tliame the Toure and ftbrtalice of Newbie : And the famyn actioun being
oft and dyuerfe tymes callit, iri prefence of the fiiidis Lordis, and dyuerfe guid exceptiones and defenffis proponit be the faid Robert and his procuratouris in his name, quhilk as yit ar vndifcuffit, the faidis
Williame, Barbara his fpous, and the faid Elizabeth hir mother, nocht being content to abyde the
event of the faidis Lordis Judicatorie in the faidis cauflis, hot rather to contempne our fouerane lordis
authoritie and lawis, and to tak .Tuftice at thair awin handis, as gif tliair war na ordiner juftice within
this realme ; thay, during the faidis dependances, and eftir raifing and lauchfuU executioun of the faidis
Summondis, in maner aboue writtin, haifing confullit and devyfit with Johnne M'^Brair, Robert
Johnneftoune callit of Brwme, feruitouris to the faid Williame Maxwall, Thomas Jardane callet of
Birnok, Eduard Maxwall, brother to the Lairil of Conhath, and Thomas Jardane, fervitour to Johnne
Lord Hereifs ; the faidis fyve perfones immediatlie befoir namet, being all bodln in feir of weir,' with
jakis, fuordis, (teilbonnetis, lang gwnes, piftolettis, and vtheris wappones invnjine, prohibeit to be worne
in maner foirfaid, laitlie, vpone the xix day of Merche laflbypaft, be directioune, caufing, command,
hounding and convoy, reffett, afliflance and ratihabitioun of the faidis Williame Maxwall, Barbara
Johnnertoun his fpous, and Elizabeth Stewart hir mother, come ryding to the place of Neubie, pcrtening to the faid Robert Johnnertoun, and being in his peceable polfeflioun, than, and dyuerfe
monethis of befoir ; quhair the faid Robert was deidlie feik for the tyme : Eftir thay had fend bak
thair horfis fra thanie, quiiairby thair being thair findd nocht be knawin, thay privatlie, be the moyane
of the faid Elizabeth Stewart and Barbara Johneftoun, convoyit thame felffis, vnder clud and filence
of nycht, within the laiche' hall and houflis of the faid place of Neubie, inhabeit be the faid Elizabeth
Stewart and Barbara Johneftoun, be quhome thay war relil'tt within the faidis houftis ; and thair, the
faidis perfones, awaiting thair awin opportunitie, be way of foirthocht tfellony and hamefukin, and
vfurping vpone thame our fouerane lordis authoritie, befaiget and invaidit the faid Tour,'' thay being
in the faid Robert Johnneflounis pollertioune, as fone and appeirand air mail and of tail5ie'' to the
faid vmq''' Johnne Johneftoun of Neubie, his faithor: And the faidis fyve perfones mairt fcliamefullie,
crewallie and vnraercifullie preiftand, be violence and vnlawfuU force, to artiige and tak the faid Tour
and fortalice, invaidit and hurt tlie faid Eduard Johnnertoun, brother to the faid Robert, and mairt
crewallie fchot Iiim throw the body with ane piftolet ; and alfo mairt crewallie invaidit, hurt and
vvoundit the faid Airthour Johnnertoun, fervand to the faid Robert, in the face, with the fchot of ane
vther pirtolett ; to the effufioune of thair bluid in grit quantitie, thay being in cumpany and feruice
with the faid Robert, and in defence of him and his Tour and fortalice of Newbie; and than, per
force, he way of fioirthocht fiellony and Ilaniefukkin, as faid is, and vfurpeand and takand vpone
thanie our fouerane lordis authoritie, thay enterit within the faid Robertis Tour and fortalice of New1 In warlike array. - Low or uuder-Uall. ' Tower. ^ Son and apparent heir-male and of entail.

VOL. II. 3 N

466 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

bie, and tuik the faid Robert and tbe faid Airthour, his fervand, captiues and prilToneris ; the laid
Robert beiiia; lyand deidlie feik and bedfall within the famyn ; ciewallie invaidit tbame, band thair
handis behind ihair bakis, and violentlie and perforce fchot' thame and thair haill cumpanie furth of
the faid Tour, tliay being our fouerane lordis frie fubiectis. Quiiilkis crewall, fchamefull and abhominable crynies aboue writtiii, viz. Vl'urpatioune of our fouerane lordis auctoritie, Hamelukkin, Beiring and weiring of piftolettis, and remanent Invafiones, factis and deidis refpecliiie ihovie fpecifeit, was
done and coniniittit be the foirfaidis fyve perfones, of the fpeciall coniinand, liounding out, directioune,
conl'ulting, duvyfe, reU'ett, alliltance and ratihabitioune of the laidis Williame Maxwall, Barbara Johnelloun his fpous, and the faid Elizabeth his moder : And thairby, thay, and everie ane of thame, ar airt,
paij't, red and counfall, and ratiefearis of the faidis haill crymes aboue expremit, and everie ane of
thame, viz. Vfurpatioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie and Befageing and taking of the faid hous,
Convocatioun of his Maiefteis leigis, Beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and piftolettis, contrair the
tennour of the faidis Actis, Invaiding, fehniting, hurting and wounding of his hienes frie lieges and
fubiectis, and Invaiding and taking of tliame captiues and prilibneris, be way of Haraefukkin and
ffoirthocht ftellony, binding of thair handis behind thair bakis, fdiuiting and expelling of thame violentlie furth of thair awin houffis, but^ Commillioune ; thay being our fouerane lordis frie legis and
fubiectis, in maner foirfaid.

Pehsewaris.

Robert Johnneftoune of Newbie, Eduard Johnnelloune his brother, Airthour Johnneftoune, fervand

to the Laird of Newbie, Sir Tho' Hammiltoune of Monkland, kny', Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

Prelocutouris for the pannell.
The Laird of Gairleis, The Laird of Hempisfeild, Andro Ker of Fentoun,

Mr Alexander King, Mr Robert Lyntoun, James King.

It is allegit be Mr Alexander King, prelocutour for Barbara Johnneftoun, that
na proces can be led aganis liir, becaiis fclio being convenit ofbefoir, befoir the
Lordis of Secreit Counfall, vpone the haill contentis of this lybell, factis and
deidis lybellit, at the inftance of my Lord Aduocat and Robert Johnneftoune, perleweris, fcho is ail'oi\--,eit^ Jiinplicifer, be Decreit of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall ;
and that thairefter the faid Lybell was adniittit to the faid Aduocat and Robert
Johnneftone's probatioune, and thai fuccuinbit" thairintill : For verificatioune
quhairof, thay producet the faid Decreet-abfoluitour, of the dait, at Edinburgh,
the fecund Maij laft. — It is anfuerit be the perfeweris, the allegeance aucht to
be repellit, becaus nathing done befoir the Secreit Counfall, ather be Sentence
abfoluitour or condanipnitour can ftay the Juftice to proceid in ane Criminal]
caufe ; as was practiket" betuix Eduard Johnneftoune Younger and Johnne
Broune f And gif the Counfall can uocht judge vpone fa heich crymes as ar
lybellit, or geve ony penall fentence vpoune the famyn, conforme to the law,
thair precognitioune can noclit ftay the proceiding of the Juftice. Laft, the
fummondis befoir the Counfall was fund relevant, and the abfoluitour proceidit
vpone nocht probatioune ; and as crymes capitall can nocht be provin be Wit-

' Thrust, ejected. " Without. ' Absolved, acquitted, freed. * Yielded. * Decided,

made matter of precedent or practique. * See the preceding Case, Jun. 18 and 27, 1605.

38 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 467

nefTes, bot be the tryell of an Aflyfe, fa the nocht probatioune of the famyn, befoir the Counfall, can nocht flay the fame to jias to ane Affyfe.

It is anfuerit be the pannell, that the abfohiitour befoir the Lordis of Secreit
Counfall will flay the Juflice of ony fortler proceiding : And as to the Practique
betuix Eduard Johnnefloune and Johnne Broune, the famyn militatis nathing in
this caice. That in that caice, Johnne Broune was convenit befoir the Counfall,
for the wrangus Invaiding of Eduard Johnnefloune's wyfe, vnder dud and filence
of nycht ; and the proces befoir the Juftice was ane perfute, perfewit at the
inflance of Johnne Broune aganis Eduard Johnnefloune, for Mutilatioune ; fua
that the Decreit of Secreit Counfall nawayis met that perfute befoir the Juftice :
And alfe, as for the authoritie and power of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, the
perfeweris can nevir be hard to oppone the famyn ; in refpect thay authorizet
that judgement, callit and perfewit befoir thame, as Judge-ordiner, for the factis
lybellit, led and deducet probatioune eftir that the fummondis was fund relevant
in their fauouris, and thaireftir fuccumbit, as faid is ; and thairby, can nevir be
hard to impunge the faid Decreit and fentence. In refpect quhairof, the allegeance ftandis relevant. — The Aduocat adheris to his foi'mer anfuer.

The Juftice ffindis proces. Quhairupoune the Aduocat afl^is inftrumentis.

It is forder allegit, that we ar nocht difputing heir vpone the authoritie of the
Counfall or of the Juftice, bot infiftis only on this poynt, that thai ar maid fr6
of the fact afoir the Counfall. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, he is nather acquit
be ane Affyfe, nather yit be ane Remiffioune.

The Juftice Repellis theallegeance, locoquo; referving the pannelis informatioune
thairof to the AlTyfe. — TheAduocat takis inftrumentis of the Juftice interlocutour.

It is allegit that the Summondis is nocht relevant, in refpect that the ffactis
and deidis lybellit ar nocht capitall, and can nocht be put to the knawledge of ane
Affyfe. — The Aduocat anfueris, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis.

The Juftice ffindis the fummondis relevant ; and ordanis the famyn to be put to
the knawlege of ane Affyfe. — The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the Interlocutoui-.

ASSISA.

George Hadden of that Ilk, Robert Frenche younger of William Hay of Lynpluni,

Thomas Portions of Glenkirk, Frencheland, Johnne Tennant of Kairnis,

Willianie Twedie of the Wrae, James Fiemyiig of Spittel, Williame Sincler of Uoilling,

MrAlex^Menzies of Culterrawis, James Crawfmd, goldfuiyth, bur- George Ilay of Monktoune,
Patrik Lanctoun elder of Erlef- ges of Edinburgh, Ja' Cranftoun of Monktonliall,

hauch, Alex' Fairlie elder of Braid, .... SydlerfF of lluchlaw.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Affyfe ; and Proteftis
for WilfuU Erroiir, gif thay Acquit.

The Pannell repeitis the allegeance proponit ofbefoir to the Affyfe; and in refpect
that the Decreit of Secreit Counfall gevin aganis the perfeweris, efter probatioun

468 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

led be thame, in foro confradictorio, vpoun thair awin perfute, Barbara Johne^
ftoune is dcclairit ftrie of the haill faclis lybellit, the AlTyle can nawayis ffyle
hir. As lykwyis, Williame Maxwall and Elizabeth Steuart are ffiind Clene and
innocent of the deidis and factis lybellit ; that the famyn was nocht done of thair
caufing, command, (or) affiftance, but only of ratihabitionn,' eftir the committing
of the factis : That thai can nawayis be convict, be the Aflyfe, of the deidis lybellit, as done be thair caufing, command and affiftance, airt and pairt : And gif
thai be clanget, as thai man be of neceffitie, of the premiffis, thay can nawayis be
convict of this lybell, because ratihabitionn perfe nather is relevant, nor induces
a cryme : And forder, befoir the Stewart" of Annandaill, the haill pannel being
accuiet, as culpable of the factis and deidis lybellit, and tliairfoir to haif incurrit
the vnlawis for i'chedding of bluid ; thay ar Clanget be ane condigne Inqueift,
and fund iimocent, baith of the bluid and bludwyte ;'' as the Decreit, heirwith
producet, beiris. In reipect quhairof, the AfTyfe nawayis can ffyle or convict
thame ; and in cais thay do, Proteftis for manifeft and Wilful! Errour.

The Aduocat, for informatioun of the AfTyfe, and to the effect thay be nocht
led and inducet to commit Errour, acceptis the Deci-eit of Secreit Counfall
l)roductt be the pannell, togidder with the Teftimoniall of the clangeing of the
pannell befoir the Stewart of Annandaill, in fa far as the famyn makis for the
perfewaris, and na vtherwayis : And firft, allegis that the fummondis perfewit
befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfall was ffund relevant be the Lordis thairof,
and the famyn ffund provin, in effect and fubftance, agauis the faid 'Williame
Maxwall and Elizabeth Stewart ; and gif ony appeiralnce be of abfoluitour gevin
in fauouris of ony of the defenderis, the famyn proceidit vpoune the Depofitiones
of the "VA'itnefTes ; becaus Depofitiones of WitnefFes can liaif na forder fayth nor''
thay depone to knaw of thair certane knawlege ; and tliairfoir, that qidiilk is
nocht deponit be the Witneffis to be done, in thair prefence, ficlit and certane
knawlege, is nocht ffund provin, qidiairupoune abfoluitour may be gevin : Bot
becaus crymes, as thai ar vnavowabill of thame felffis, fa thai are de\'yfet and
done fecreitlie, in fic maner as na Witneffis can knaw the famyn ; and thairfoix-,
can nocht depone tliairintill ; thairfoir, be the lawis of this cuntrie, it is provydit, that crymes neidis nocht, nor may nocht be provin be Witneffis, bot are
referrit to the knawlege of ane fuorne AfTyfe ; quhais determinatioun, according
as thay ar perfuadit in thair confciences, is ane Tufficient warrand to thame felfis,
and ane ju(l caufe of convictioune of the pannell ; and it is fufficient to thame to
convict, gif thai find nocht cleii'lie, thay can iuftlie quyte '^^ And thairfoir, albeit"
the WitnefTes knew nathing, that was firft vfet, and thairby thair Depofitiones

' Confirmation or approval ; from tlie Law Lat. ratihaberc. ° Steward, Sencscallus. ^ The

bloodwit was a fine paid for the shedding of blood, ^ Than. ^ Acquit. '' Although.

38&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 469

gaif occafioune of fum abfoluitour, for laik of probatioun be thame ; yit that
warrandis nocht the Affyfe ; bot thai man ather ftyle, or commit Wilfull Errour,
in refpect of the notorietie of this Dittay ; to witt, that the Iloufe of Neubie was
tane, in maiier conteiiit in the Summondis, be the perfones quha for the farayn
hes bene continuallie fugitiue fenlyne ; tua of thame being WilHame Maxwellis
feruands, and the vther thre his fpeeiall freindis, haifing na entreis nather to tak
nor keip the houfe for thame felffis, on thair awin refpect, bot only at the defyre
and be tlie caufing and to the behnif of the faid Williame and haill remanent
defenderis : Quhilkis defenderis, pretending rycht to the faid hoiife and landis ; as
the verificatioune of tua feuei-all dependances for the famyn befoir the Lordis of
Seffioun, heirwith producet, beiris. The faidis defenderis, expreflie aganis the
Act of Parliament maid anent the flauchter and trnbbilling of parteis, in perfute
and defence of thair actiones, being the 219 of the Kingis xiiij Parliament, and
vtheris Actis maid thairanent, intyfet and caufet the fiiidis ffugitiiies violently to
Aflage and tak the laid houle, pei-few, invaid and demane' the faid Robert Johnelloune and his affiftaris being thairintill, in maner contenit in the lummondis ;
quhilk being committit be thame, thay nather pretendit nor retenit ony richt
or pofleffioune thairof ; bot only keipit the I'amyn, qnhill" Williame INIaxwall
come to thame in all haill ; to quhais behuif thay haifing tane the faid houfe,
thay incontinent delyuerit the famyn to him ; quha fend thame away vpone
his awin hoi"fe, and his freindis that come with him. And as to the Gentilwomen, the laid fact being lykwayis done to thair behuif, thay relfet and
hid the committeris, being of intentioun and prepai'atioune to commit the
lamyn ; and thai ran out of the ane into the vther ; and thairby fuppryfet
the faid Tour, vpone the occafioun, to the behuif, and of the ratificatioune
foirfaid : Lykas, be the Decreit, it is fund to be done of the ratificatioun of
the faid Williame Maxwall and Elizabeth Stewart ; quhilk ratihabitioune, of
Law, in ane matter done to the behuiff of ony man, is compairit and pwneifchet
as ane preceiding command, be the firft Law de vi et vl armafa, in the xiiij paragraph, in thir wordis : ' rect'ius eniin dic'itur in iwilejlcio rut'ihah'd'ionem mandalo comparari ;' to wit, it is richtlie faid, that ratihabitioune in crymes is richtlie
comparet to ane preceiding command : And the thrid Law of the faid Tit. in the
tent paragraph, in thir wordis, ' cum procurator armalus venit, et i})/e dominus
artiiis dejicijj'c videtur. Jiue iiiandauit, fine nt J/diaiius ait, rafuiii Jiahuit ; that
is to fay, quhan ane mannis fervand cumis airmit, his maifter is reput to half
expellit or reiectit with airmes, quhither he commandit, or, as Julian fayis, he
ratifeit the famyn. And thairfoir, feing thir fervandis and freindis come airmet
and did this violent deid, be ratihabitioun of the pannell, togidder with the
' Treat, use, handle. - Until,

470

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

Decreit finding the famyn, makis thame giltie thairof. Lyk as, the Act 151 of

the Kingis 12 Parliament, makis ane criniinall Summondis to be relevant, gif it

beiris that the defenderis ar airt and pairt of ane relevant cryme ; and it is

trew that tliat cryme is fund relevant be the Juftice, and remittit to the Affyfe ;

and the notorietie of the pannellis being airt and pairt thairof is befoir deducet,

feino- thair knawlege of the laid fact, thair benifeit rypet' thairby, and ratihabitioune thairof, is manifeft. And as to the clengeiiig producet, the famyn makis

atfauis the producer ; becaus the perfeweris, as pairtie grevit, and the Kingis

Aduocat, for his hienes entreis, being necefTar and only parteis, and the defenderis

knawing thair awin giltines, jnircheft and deducet ane led Tryell, befoir thair

awin ffreindis, being bayth Judges and AlTyfouris ; na pairtie haifing entreis

being prefent nor wairnit thairto. In refpect c^uhairof, gif the AfTyfe Clenge,

the perfeweris proteftis for Wilfull EiTour. — The Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis of

the fweiring of the Dittay be the perfeweris, in prefens of the Affyfe ; as lykwyis

the taiknis' producet, alfo fuorne be thame.

It is anfuerit for the pannell, to the alledgeance immediatlie preceiding, that

the Aduocat wald half the Affyfe, quha kennis^ nathing of the factis and deidis

lybellit, hot the commone bruit,^ and be thair awin allegeance, to ffyle, nochtwithftanding that the multitude of the Witneffes producet be the perfeweris

could nawayis preve the fact ; thay being Witneffes, duelleris vi)one the landis,

and round about the famyn ; and ane grit number of thame come to the deid,

and yit thay wad nocht tak it vpone thair confciences to depone ony thing by*

the verritie ; fua, the Affyfe, quha kennis far lefs, can nocht convict vtherwyis

nor" accoirding to the firfb probatioun. As to the fecund pairt of the allegeance,

the famyn contenis only ane repetitioun of the Dittay and taikinis, and mereitis

na forder anfuer nor is anfuerit ofbefoir. As to the thrid pairt, beiring that

Ratihabitioune eqiio paratur mandato, and allegeing the firft and thrid lawis tie

vi et vi annaia ; to that, it is anfuerit, that as, in cr'uninaUbus, Ratihabitioune

is never relevant ^je/'^/^, fua the famyn can be comptit na cryme, nor na grund

to convict the pannell ; ffor in ciymes, thair is thre thingis to be confidderit,

airt, pairt, and ratihabitioune : Airt, is command, or devyfe, or counfell of doing

of the deid ; quhairof we ar declarit innocent : Pairt, is participant of the ffact ;

quhairof we ar lykwayis declairit innocent : Itdtiliahilioime, is allowing of the

ffact, eftir the famyn be committit ; quhilk is nawayis drawin bak to ony of the

premiffes, in ci'iminall matteris : And albeit the faid Williame had allowit in

taking of the houfe, eftir it was tane and the deid committit, yit that makis

thame nocht giltie of the ffactis or deidis committit be the perfonis takeris of

the houfe, the tyme befoir or eftir the taking thairof. And feing the Witneffes

' Reaped. ' Tokens, evidence. ^ Knows. * Excepting the common report or talk of the
countrj'. Tr, bniit. ^ Past, besides. * Than.

38&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 471

examinat, be thair grit ayth, lies maid the pannell Innocent and clene of the
ffactis lybellit ; as lykwayis, thay ar declairit Innocent, be ane condigne fuorne
Inqueift, befoir thair Judge-ordiner ; the Affyfe can nawayis ffyle thame, except
thay commit manifeft En-our, and declair contrair to the probatioun ah'eddie
led and deducet, and depone contrair to thair awin confcience and knawledge.

Special Verdict of the Affi/e.

The Assyse removet altogidder furth of Court to fe Counfall-lious, quhair Jiai, be pluralitie of voittis,
electit and choifit the faid Alexander Fairlie of Braid in' Clianceller of the faid Affyfe ; and fairefter
refTonit and voittit vpone the haill heidis and poyntis of the faid Dittay ; and being ryplie and at lenth
advyfet fairwith, and with the haill taikines and writtis producet for verificatioune Jiairof, allegeances
and anfueris maid, hinc inde, in the faid matter ; thay re-enterit agane in Court, quhair thay, be fe
mouth of pe faid Alexander Fairlie, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faidis Willianie Maxwall, Barbara Johnnefloun his fpous, and Jie faid Elizabeth Stewart hir mofer, to be ftylet, culpabill and convict, as followis, viz. The faid WilUatne Maxwall of Gribtoun, to be ffylet, culpabill and convict off
airt and pairt with the faidis Eduard Maxwall, brofer to fe Laird of Couhaithe, Thomas Jardane callit
of Birnok, James Jardane, fervand to the faid Jolinne Lord Hereis, Johnne M'Brair and Robert
Johnneftoune callit of Brwme, of the violent taking of the faid Tour and ffortalice of Newbie ; comniittit be the faidis fyve perfones, the tyme contenit in the faid Dittay. The faid Elizabeth Steivart,
to be ffylet, culpable and convict off fe refTet of the faidis fyve perfones, quha committit fe crynies
fpecifeit in the faid Dittay, and of the Ratihabitioune of fe violent taking of Jie faid Tour and ffortalice
of Newbie : And fe faid Barbara Jolmnejimme to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the Ratihabitioune of the violent taking of fe faid Tour and ffortalice of Newbie, be pe faidis fyve perfones takeris
pairof. And ficlyk, ffand and declairit Jie faidis Williame Maxwall, Barbara Johnneftoune his fpous,
and Jie faid Elizabeth Stewart hir mojier, to be Clene, Innocent and Acquit of the haill remanent
crymes and poyntis contenit in the foirfaid Dittay, viz. of airt and pairt of Jie vfurpatioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in befageing of the faid hous, convocatioun of his Maiefleis leigis, beiring and
weiring of hagbuttis and piftolettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament, Invaiding, fchuitting, hurting and wounding of Jie faidis Robert Johnnertoun, Eduard Johnneltoun and Airthour
Johnnefloun, his hienes frie fubiectis ; and Invaiding and taking of thame captiues and priffoneris, be
way of Haniefukkin and ffoirthocht ffellonie, binding of Jiair handis behind Jiair bakis, and fchuitting
and expelling thame violentlie furthe of the houfe and ffortalice foirfaid ; committit be }ie faidis fyve
perfones, takeris Jiairof, Jie tyme and in maner aboue writtin, mentionet in the faid Dittay.

Jun. 25. — The Juftice continued the cafe to the 28th of Junij. ' Plegio,
Alexandro Stewart de Gairleis, I'ub pena in Acto i)redict.'

Jun. 28. — Alexander Stewart of Gairleis become jjledge and fouertie for
Williame Maxwall of Gribtoune, &c. to enter and prefent thame befoir the Juftice
and his dejnitis, in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, the thrid day of Julij nixtocum,
in the hour of caufe, to heir dome pronuncet vpone thame ; vnder the panes following, viz. ffor the faid Williame, vnder the pane of V" li. (£5000,) and for
the faidis Elizabeth and Barbara coniunctlie, vnder the pane of vther fyve thoufand pundis.

Jul. 3. — Alexander Stewart of Garleis of new becomes pledge and Ibuertie,
that thai and ilk ane of thame fall compeir befoir the Juftice or his deputes,

1 To the office of.

472 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

qiihair evir tliay or ony of tliame fall be charget, vpone xv dayis wairning, to
heir and fie dome pronuncet, &c. ilk ane of thame vnder the pane of tua thoufand merkis. Maxwall binds himfelf to ' warrand releif and kelp flvaythles' the
faid Alexander Stewart.

Jun. 26. — James Gledstaxes of that Ilk.

Dilaitit Ifor airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Thomas Peiblis, burges
of Peiblis ; committit in the moneth of Februare, I™VMxj yeiris, vpone the
landis of Kaidmure, befyde the faid burgh of Peiblis ; vpone fet purpois, pronifioune and ffoirthocht fFellony.

Perseweris.

Tliomas and Johune Peiblis, as fones ; JoLiiiie and Dauid Peiblis, fones to the faid Thomas, (Junior.)

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Laurence Scott.

The pannell tuik him to our fouerane lordis Refpett, producet be him, vnder
his Maiefteis Priuie Seill, of the dait the . . . day of Junij inftaut.

It is allegit be the perfeweris, that the Refpett producet be the pannell audit
nocht to be admittit, in refpect the famyn is grantit contrair to the Act of Parliament ; na Letter of Slanes being grantit be thame, for AfTythement of the
partie. — It is anfuerit be the pannell, the allegeance audit to be Repellit, in
refpect of the Refpett ; and that thai ar willing to fatisfie, conforme to the lawis
of this realme, and offeris Cautioune to that effect. — Quliilk Refpett the Juftice
admittit, and ordanit the faid James to find cautioune, &c. : Lyk as, Johnne Gledftanes of Wynningtoun-haudi and Mr Johnne Rutherfurd, bail^ie and burges of
Jedburgh, become bundin and obleift, coniunctlie and feuerallie A\'ith the faid
James Gladftanes of that Ilk, his felff, to fatisfie the pai'tie for the Slauchter of
the faid vmq'^ Thomas Peiblis,

iHuiUtr untffv Ctuct»

Jun. 27. — James Kyxnaird, fone to the Laird of Incheture,' Williame
Haitlie in Balgawie, Williame Kynnaird, fone to the Laird of
Kynnaird.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Siluefler Chopman in Kinclevin, conforme to
our fouerane lordis Letteris, raiiit and direct at the inftance of Mai'iovm Chopman, as mother, Margaret Scherp, as filler, the faid Siluefler Chopman and
Thomas Chopman in Ragolny, as mother-brether,' with the remanent kyn and
freindis of vmq'^ Johmie Scherpe, feruitour to the Laird of Ruthven, aganis the
faidis Williame, &c. and als aganis James Ramfay in Flaci'aig-mylne ; as t^iay
that war culpable and giltie of the crymes contenit in the Dittay following.
' Vmq'*^ Patoun Kynnaird. " Maternal uncles, mother's brothers.

38&3JAC. VI. CRISIINAL TRIALS. 473

FoRSAMEKiLL as tlie faidis Williame Kynnaiid, &c. liaifing laitiie, vpoiie the ffyft day of July, tlie
yeir of God, I™, fax hundieth and tlire yeiiis, conveiiit tliame felffis within tlie toun of Rait, quhair
the faid vrnq'"^ Johnne Scliarp was for the tyme, attending' the cuming of ceitane his freindis and gentilmen that war at the buiiall of the Laird of Bandane, and doand vlhciis his lauchfull cflFaiiis and
buffines, lipning for na harme, iniurie or perfute of ony perfones, hot to haif levit vnder Godis peax
and our fouerane lordis : And thair, in all hamelie and freindlie inaner, come to the faid vmq'^ Johnne,
and requeiflit him to pas with thame to the drink ; quha, vpone meir fimplicitie and benevolence, pall
to ane drinking hous with tlianie, and liaifing fallin in relTuning with the faid vniq'" Johnne, anent funi
fpeiches that paft betuix him and the faid James Ramfay in Flacraig-mylne a few dayis befoir ; the
faidis perfones in the meane tynie directit one of thair companie for the faid James Ramfay, defyreing him to cum to thanip, and tliay fuukl afllft him to be revenget on the faid vmq'« Johnne : At
quhais cuming, the foirfaidis perfones, togidder with the faid James Ramfay, being all bodin in ftir of
weir, with fuordis, quhingeris, gantillettis, plait-flevis and vtheris wappones, inunjiue, incontrair the
tennour of the Actis of Parliament, fett vpone the faid vmq'*^ Johnne Scherp, vnder treft, and maift
trateruflie and barbaruflie, everie ane of thame with thair drawin wappones foirfaidis, perfewit him for
his flauchter ; and as murthereris, tlievis and brigganis, liaifing drawin the faid vniq'"^ Johnne to drink,
as faid is, llrak the faid vmq^'^ Johnne in dyuerfe pairtis of his body, and gaif liim iiyne bludie and
deidlie woundis, viz. tlire (Iraikis in his held, thre in his bak, ane throw his wambe, ane vther vnder
his okfter, and tua ^-pone his fchoulder blaid : Off the quhilkis ftiaikis and crewall woundis the faid
vmq's Johnne immediatlie deceillit amangis thair liandis. And the faidis perfones, and ilk ane of
thame, ar airt and pairt of the faid crewall Murthour and Slauchter, committit vnder treft, vpone fet
])urpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellony ; in hie and manifeft contempt of our fouerane lord, his hienes
auctoritie and lawis ; and to the evill exanipill of vtheris, his Maiefteis obedient fubiectis, to commit
the lyk fchamefuU and barbarus crueltie and Murthour, in tymes cuming, gif the foirfaidis perfones
committeris thairof be fufferit to remane vnpwneifchet.

Verdict. I.auchfuU tynie of day biddin, and (the perfeweris) nocht compeirand,' the Juftice-depute patt the faidis Williame, &c. to the knawledge of
ane Affyfe, who all in ane voce, be the month of Robert Hog in Gaily, fnmtyme
fervand to my Lord Marfdiell, chanceller, ffand tlie faidis Williame, &c. to be
Clene, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt of the fellonne and crewall Slauchter
of the faid vmq'" Johnne Scherp, and haill circumftances aboue writtin. Quhairupoune the faidis defenderis afldt inftrumentis.

\_JMr WilUctme Hairt and Mr Williame Borthuik, Juftices-Beputes?^

iHasterful Cljcft — ^toutljrtif — ittftina: of Cattle, iVf.

Jun. 28. Johnne Ellote of Copfchaw, Robert EUote, his fone, Johune

Rutledee and Adam Rakefe, fervandis to the faid Johnne.
Being enterit on pannell, quha war fumniond be vertew of our fouerane lordis
letteris, purcheft at the inftance of Hectour Trumbill of Wauchope, Thomas
Trumbill, younger of Wauchope, George Trumbill, fecund lauchfull fone to the
faid Hectour, George Trumbill in Wauchope, Thomas Scheill thair, Hob Olipher
thair, Harie Trumbill thair, Fait Trumbill thair, Gawin Trundnll in Bullerwall,
■ Waiting. Fr. attender. '^ The matter had been compromised with the relations of the deceased,
&c. and by the absence of the pursuer, and no evidence being produced, the Jury acquitted the panncl.

VOL. II. ^ O

474 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

Adame Trumbill in Wauchope, and Ediiard Scheill in Langhauch : And perfewit be the faidis Thomas T. younger, and George liis brother, for tharae felffis,
and in name and behalf of the faid Hectour Trumbill of "\^'^aiichope thair fader,
and haill remanent perfonesaboue vvrittin, thair tennentis, of the crymes following.

DiTTAY againjl the Pannels.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faidis Johnne Ellote, &c. with thair complices, to the number of ane Hun-
(Ireth peifones, alfwell brokin-men and borderaiis of Ingland, as of Scotland, all bodin in feir of weir,
with jakis, fpeiiis, fteil-bonnettis, lances, lang-hagbuttis, daggis and piftolettis, expreflie prohibeit to be
borne, worne, vfet or fchote with, be the Actis of Parliament, laitlie, in the moneth of September, the
veir of God, I'", fax hundreth and tua yeiris, come opinlie, in the day lycht, to the landis of Wauchope;
and thair, be way of Maiflerfull thift and Stouthe-reif, flaw, reft and away-tuik, af the faidis landis,
fourfcoir of ky and oxin, ane hundreth fcheip, and tuelf horfe and meiris, pertening to the faidis perfeweris ; had and convoyit the famyn away with thame, and difpoiiit thairupoun at thair pleafour : And
thay and ilk ane of thame ar airt and pairt of the faidis crymes of Thift and Stouth-reif ; ffor the quhilk
thay audit and fould be pwneifliet, conforme to the lawis of this roalme, in exampill of vtheris.
Persew Ellis, Thomas Trumbill, younger of Wauchope, George Trumbill, his brother.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Alexander King, Robert Eliot, Mr Thomas Henderfoune.

The perfeweris proteftis for WilfuU Errour, in caice thay acquit ; in refpect of
the notorietie of the fact, and that thay haif gewin thair aithes thairvpoune.

Hectour Trumbill, elder, and the remainder of the purfuers, ffind Robert
Home, younger of the Heuch, as cautioner, that they ftiall ratify whatever
Thomas and George Trumbill do in their names, in this perfuit ; and ' Williame Erie of Angus band and obleift him, his airis, executouris and fucceflburis
to warrand, releif and keip fkaythles the faid Robert Home, his airis, executouris
and aflignais, of his cautiounrie foirfaid, and of all danger, perrell and expenffis
that he may incur thairthrow.'

^^EKDiCT. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Robert Wauch of Keip, chanceller,
ffand the faidis perfones to be Cleane, innocent and acquit, &c. Quhainipoun
the faidis perfones on pannell afkit inftrumentis.

[J/;- Williame Hairf, Jiijtice-Depute.'\

i^titilation anlJ ©rnumlbrntion.

Jul. 2. — JoHNXE Hamjiiltouxe, Perfone of Crawfurd-Johnne, Airthour Colquhoun, than his fervand, now in Kirmure, Gawin
Murray of Vdftounheid.
Dilaitt of airt and pairt of the Hurting, Wounding and Mutilatioune of Alexander Lokhart, Tutour of Wikketfchaw, of his left hand, and demembring of
him of his mid-finger, nerreft his littill finger, of his faid hand : And beiring
and weiring of piftolettis ; committit in Apryle, P.VMxxxv yeiris.

Robert Chanceller of Sheilhill become pledge and fouertie, that thai and ilk
ane of thame fall compeir befoir the Juftice or his deputis, the thrid day of the
nixt Juftice-air of Lauerk, or foner, vpoue xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the
law, &c.

38 & 3 Jac. VI CRIMINAL TRIALS. 4,75

Jul. 3. — Chairles Carutheris of Warrambie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq''' Roger Gordoun in Lochinkitt.

Persewer, Roger Gordoune, biother-fone.

Continued to the air of ' Annandaill, teitio Itineris, (vel fuper premonitione.)
XV dierum.'

dTorfiitfl (lapr.)

Jul. 3. — Wieeiame Beee, workman in Edinburgh.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Jonet Falconer in Karingtoun, ffor the fforceing of hir aganis hir will ; and drawing hir furth of the way at Boddorne-mure,
betuix Caringtoun and Lefuaid, and abufeing hir in ane coill-i)ott-hoill ; fcho
being ane 30ung maid of tuelf 3eiris of age, or thairby, &c. ; committit the xxj
day of Junij laftbypaft, about tuelf houres in the day.

Verdict. Eftir accufatioun of the faid Williame Bell, be Dittay, of the faidis
crymes, and verificatioune thairof be the faid Williamis Depofitiones ; the AlTyle,
be the mouth of James Ramfay in Caringtoune, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and
declairit the laid ^V" Bell to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the faidis crymes.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercait-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and all his moveabill guidis and geir
to be efcheit, &c.

Jul. 4. — James Tait in Kelfo, brother to George Tait of Bairerfe.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit by Williame Tait of Chirritreis, as father, ^Villiame and Johnne Taittis, his fones, as brether,with the remanent kyn and freindis
of vmq'' James Tait, fone to the faid Williame Tait of Chirritreis, ofli" airt and
pairt of the crymes following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid James Tait in Kelfo, with his complices, being all bodin in feir of weir,
with fuordis, knapfka-bonnettis,' lances and pillolettis, expieflie prohibeit to be borne, worne, vfet or
fchot with be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in the moneth of July, the yeir of God r".V''.
Ixxxxviij yeiris, haifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis tiie faid vniq''' James Tait,
come to the Grene of Chinitreis, qiihair the faid James was, in fober and quyet maner, &c., and thair
fe.t vpone him, and with thair piflolettis and fuordis, maift fchamefullie, crewallie and vnmercifullie flew
the faid vmq'" James Tait : And the faid James Tait in Kelfo is airt and pairt of the faid llauchter ;
committit vpone fett purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellony, in hie and manifell contempt of our
fouerane lord, &c.

Perseweris, Williame Tait, Johnne Tait, as brether,
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Craig, Mr Thomas Henderfoune.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, (amongft whom, Thomas Ker of Pryoraw, Thomas

' A steel bonnet, or skull-jnece.

476 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

Tait of the Hoill, and Johnne Rj'ddell, appeirand of that Ilk') be the month of
Johnne Mow of that Ilk, chanceller, ffand the faid James Taitt in Kelfo, to be
Cleane, innocent and acqiiit of airt and pairt of the laid Slaiichter. Quhairvpone
lie aflvit infirumentis.

[Jlr JViUiam Boirthuil; JiiJUcc-Bcpnte.']

2lUrjui*i) fcrfoi't t^)t ilorUiS of Couiuil auK Session.

Jxil. 10. — Mil WiLLiAME Caebraithe (Galbraythe), lUmtyme Minifter at Pennycuik.

Dilaitit of Periurie, in deponing contrair to his former Depofitiones, eftir he
was re-examinat thairnpone, in the caufe perfewit be the Tennentis of Laffuddane, contrair Sir Johnne Ker of Hirfell, knj'cht.

DiTTAY agabift the Pannel.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid Mr V>'illiame Galbraytb, compeirand befoir tlie Lordis of Counfall and
Seffioun, vpone the thiid day of July inftant, as he that was fummoiid to compeir befoir the faidis
Lordis, to heir witnefling in tlie caufe perfewit be the Tennentis of LefFudane agauis Sir Johnne Ker
of Hirfell, knicht, anent the reffait of certane evidentis and writtis be the faid Sir Johnne, pertening to
the faidis Tennentis, maid his Depofitioune as followis, viz. — ' Mr Williame Galbraithe, Miiiifter, of tlie age of fourtie yeiris, or thairby, folutusj^ Deponis, that in the yeir of God I^.V"^. fourfcoir fevintene yeiris (the fpeciall tynie and day rememberis nocht,) the Deponar, being in James Kingis
chalmer in Edinburghe, quhair lie prefentlie duellis, quhair he faw prefent, for the tyme. Sir Johnne
Ker of Hirfell, knicht, ane of the defenderis ; Oliver Sincler of Ravinfnuk ; Enoche Dewar, fervand to
the faid Olipher ; Adame Scheill, fervand to vmq'^' INIungo Tennent, and the faid James King ; and in
all the faidis perfones prefens, Oliuer Sincler prefentit vpone the buird,' in all thair prefens, ane littill
liox, coverit with ledder, of Flanderis mak ;* and the faid Oliuer faid to the faid Laird of Littildane,
" Thir ar the writis quhilk I pronieiflit to lat 50W fie;" and then the box being opnit, James King
luik out all the faidis euidentis furtli of the faid box, in all thair prefens, and red the famyn, ane be
ane. Interrogatus, vpone the perticuler contentis and daitis of ilk ane of the faidis euidentis, rememIieris perfytlie, that all the euidentis than red be the faid James King maid mentioim and difpofitioun of
tlie landis of Lefluddane and Newtoun; and rememberis that ane of the faidis Chartouris bure difpofitioun
of the foirfaidis landis of Lefluddane and Newtoun to Airthour Sinclair, and his airis mentionat thairin ;
and rememberis nocht of ony forder particuler contentis of the foirfaidis euidentis ; bot fayis, that thair
was ane grit quantitie of thame, all in parchement, and liaifland feillis : And immediatlie efter the reiding
of the faidis writis, thay war all put within the faid box agane ; and ane Obligatioun maid and writtin
in all the foirfaidis parteis prefens, beirand the faid Sir Johnne Ker to be bundin and obleill to the faid
Oliver Sincler in the fowme of Fyve liundreth merkis money, how fone he or ony of his fould obtene
the riclit of the landis of Lefliuldane : And this Deponer faw the faid Sir Johnne Ker fubleryiie the
iiiid Obligatioun ; and James King and this deponer fubfcryuit the fame Obligatioun, as witnes : And
at the famyn tyme, Sir Johnne Ker and his fervandis tuik away the faid box with thame, and the faid
Oliuer Sincler tuik the faid Sir Johnne Keris Band with him ; and fen that tyme, the deponer newer
^A.'^ ony of the foirfaidis euidentis, in ony of the defenderis handis, nor in nane vther perfones handis ;
reddens cmtjcifciende, becaus this Deponer was prefent, hard and faw as he deponit.' — Eftir the making
of the quhilk Depofitioune, the faid iSIr Williame Galbraithe being re-examinat, vpone the fourt day

' The remainder are fi'iiars. ^ According to more modern furm, ' purged of malice aiul parli.il counsel.'

' !!( aid, table. ' Jlanufacture, workmanship, muhe.

38 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. . 477

of July inflant, in prefens of ray Lord Clianceller and Laill remanent Lordis of SefTioune, lie paft fra
his former Depofitioun, maid be liim the faid thrid day of July, and declairit the famyn Uepofitioun to
be altogidder ffals and vntrew in the felf ; and that he was nevir in James Kingis Chalmer, quhair he
faw the euidentis delyuerit to Sir Johnne Ker, natlier yit faw he euir Oliver Sincler and Sir Johnne
Ker, togidder, in James Kingis chalmer; nor newir faw ane Ohligatioun fubfcryuit be Sir Jolinne Ker
to Oliuer Sincler ; nor nevir fubfcryuit the famyn as witnefs : And being inquyret, quha movit him to
mak the faid Depofitioune? Declairit, that D<indie Plumbar fchew him ane Ohligatioun, extractit and
fubfcryuit be the Clerk of Regifter, alk'git fubfcryuit be Sir Johnne Ker, quiiairin he was witnes, as
was allegit ; and bad him Depone, conforme to the Ohligatioun : The quhilk Ohligatioun, eflir the
ficht thairof, movet the deponcr to depone as he deponet ; and faid, that he gat only fra Dandle
Plumbar his dennar, yifterday, and fourtie fchillingis eftir his denner. As at niair lenth is contenit in
the faidis Depolitiones. Be the making of the quliilkis tua contrair Depofitiones, the fiiid Mr Williarae Galbraithe hes fchawin him felf to be manifeftlie Periuret, ffalfe, and vntrew : For the quhilk
Periurie and ffalfet he audit and foukl be puneifchet, conforme to the Lawis of this realrae, in exampill of vtheris.

Qiiliilk cryme aboue writtin, the faid Mr Williame confeffit to be of veritie ;
raid offerit him felff, and become in our foiierane lord and liis hienes Coiinfallis
Will for the famyn ; quliome the Juftice reifaiiit in will. And thairfoir the faid
Juftice-deiHite, at command and for obedience of ane Warrand directit to him,
of the dait, the tent day of July inftant ; fubfcryuit be my Lord Chanceller and
vtheris Lordis of his Maiefteis Secreit Counfall ; cjuhairof the tennour followis.

Decimo Jiilij, 1605. The Lordis of Secreit Counfall ordanis the Juftice-generall and his deputis
to gif this dome following, vpoun Mr Williame Galbraithe, eftir that be he convict of Periurie befoir
thame, or ])at he becum in will, v!3. That he fall be tane to the raercait-croce of Edinburghe, wilh ane
paiper on his held, declairand him to be Men-fworne, Peijuret and Infamous, and to Banifciie him the
lie of Britane for euir : And that he depaii t furtli of the faid He, betuix and the fyftene day of Augufl
nixtocum ; and ^if euir he repair within the famin He agane, without the Kingis Licence, or jit fall
remane within the famyn, and nocht depaiit furth Jiairof, betuix and the faid fyftene day of Augull
nixtocum, that he fall be execute to the daith, without any forder dome to be gevin vpone him.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Al. CANCELL(ariu3,) SECRET(arius,) Quhittixgham, K. Cokburxe.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the moutlie of James Henderfoune, dempfter of
Court, decernit and ordanit the faid Mr AVilliame Galbraithe to be tane to the
faid mercait croce of Edinburghe, and thair to ftand, for the fpace of ane hour,
or thairby, with ane paper vpone his held, contening thir woirdis, in grit letteris,
' Meksuorne, Periuret and Infahous:' And to be Bauifchet the He of
Britane for euir, &c.'

\_3Ir WilUame Hairf, Juflice-Depute.']

Jul. 23. — Patrik Lowrie, in Halie (Ayriliire.)
Dilaittit, accufet and perfewit, be Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland,
knycht, aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes entreis, off the crymes fol1 The terms of the Council's Warrant are recited.

478 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

lowing, viz. Fou confiilting with vmq'° Jonet Hunter, ane notorious Witche,
and qulia was execute to tfie daitli for Sorcerie and ^^'■itchcraft : Quliilk vniq**
Jonet and the laid Patrik, at AVitfonday, in the yeir of God V".Y\ and four yeiris,
convenit tliame felffis vpone the cowraoun waift Sandhillis in Kyle, niaift eweft'
to the burgh of Irwing ; quliair the Devill appeirit to thame and conferrit with
thame, vinq'" Katharene M^Teir, ane vther Witche in Halie, and Margaret Duncane in Lones being alfo in conipanie with thame, at the famyn tyme. And
ficlyk, the faid Patrik, being in company with the laidis vmq'" Jonet Hunter,
Katharene M^Teir and Margaret Duncane, Witches, Sorcereris and abuleris of
the peopill, att Hallowevin, in the yeir of God foirfaid, affemblit thame felffis
vpon Lowdon-hill, quhair thair appeirit to thame ane devillifche Spreit, in liknes
of ane woman, and callit hir I'elff Helen M'brune ; att the quhilk tyme, efter lang
confultatioune had be thame with the faid wikkit Sjjreit, the Devill, in the liknes
of the faid Helen MT)rune, prefentit to the faid Patrik ane hair belt ; in ane of
the endis of the quhilk belt appeirit the fimilitude of foure fingeris and ane
thorn be, nocht far differrent frome the clawis of the Devill : Lyk as, the famyn
belt, being prefentit be the faid Jonet Hunter to the perfones that paft vpone hir
AfiA'fe, the tyme of hir Convictioune for the faid cryme of Witchcraft, was brunt
in ane ffyre. L\K as, at dyuerfe tymes thaireftir, thay affemblit thame felffis, in
dyuerfe Kirkis and Kirk-5airdis ; quhair the faid Patrik, and remanent his alTociatis foirfaidis, raifit and tuik vj) findrie deid perfones furth of thair graves, and
(liimemberit the faidis deid corpis^ for the practi3eing of thair Witchecraft and
Sorcerie. Iteji, for airt and pairt of the Bewitcheing, be luchantment and
Sorcerie, of BelTie Saweris coirnes, and taking away the fubflance and fifnowme^
thairof, be the fpace of ten yeiris, yeirlie aftir vtlieris.* Item, for airt and pairt
of the Bewitcheing of certane milk ky, pertening to Johnne Fergufliill, younger
in Halie, at Beltane, I^.'Vj^ and foure yeiris ; quhairby the laid ky gaif na milk
hot bluid and worfome^ thaireftir. Ite:m, ffor cureing, be Inchantment and Sorcerie. of vmq'" JNIargaret ]\rguffok, callit ' the Witch of Barneweill,' hir horfe,
quhairon Icho raid ; committit a tuentie yeir fyne, or thairby. And ficlyk, ffijr
laying on of Sorcerie and Inchantment and devillery vpone Jonet Lowrie, the
ftreking of hir blind ; and be cureing and taking af of the faid Witchcraft af hir
agane, and reftoiringhir to hir former ficht. Item, for cureing and hel])ing, be
Inchantment and Sorcerie, of Elizabeth Craufurdis bairne in Glefgow, quha had
bene deidlie feik of ane ftrange iucureabill difeife, be the Ipace of aucht or nyne
yeiris ofbefoir, be taking ane clayth af the faid bairnes fface, and fayneing and

1 Nearest. ^ Tliis seems to have been a favourite ])ractire. It is elsewliere called '_yV«h'»y,'

(jointing) as may t'e seen in tlie description of the midnight orgies of Annie Samson and otliers of the
unhappy wights who suffered for tlieir deceptions of this sort. ^ ' Fushion (foison.) pith, strength,
flavour, &c. ■* For teu successive years. ^ Blood and purulent matter.

38 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 479

croceing with his hand the faid bairnes fface ; keiping of the faid clayth, be the
fpace of audit dayis ; and thaireftir, haifing returnit to hir with the faid clayth,
couerit hir face agane thairwith, qiiha fleipit a tua dayis altogidder, and walknit
nocht ; and at the tua dayis end, ane of the faid barnes eyne, that was of befoir
tynt, throw the faid difeafe, was reftoirit to hir ; and within fyve dayis tliaireftir,
the laid barne was, be the faid Inchantment, curet and niendit be the faid Patrik.
And finallie, for ane Cowmone and notorious Sorcerer, Warlok and abufer of
the peopill, be all vnlawfull charmes and devillifche Ineantationes, vfet be him,
this xxiiij yeir bygane.

For the qvihilkis crymes rejpect'me aboue writtin, the faid Patrik Lowrie was
put to the knawlege of ane Alfyfe. — The Aduocat aflvis inftrumentis of the
fweiring of Aflyfe.

Mr Dauid Myll,' being fworne, att the defyre of Patrik Lowrie, to mak Declaration of his brute^ and behaviour ; deponit that he wes bruteit and coniounlie
callit ' Pait J)e Witch !' And declaris, he gatt his fatheris malefoune,^ and faid he
wald mak ane ill end : And declaris, that he wes ordanit to niak his repentance,
for the brute and flvlander he fuftenit ; and that he maid his repentance.

And thaireftir the faid Patrik Lowrie defyrit the Juftice and Affyfe to trow''
the faid Mr Dauid Myll.

My Lord Aduocat proteftis for WilfuU Errour, in caice thay acquit him of
the Dittay.

Vekdict. Eftir accufation of the faid Patrik, be Dittay, of the crymes refpect'lue aboue Ipecifeit, and verificatioun of the faniyn, be productiouu of certane
writtis be the faid Sir Thomas Hammiltoun, aduocat ; the Aflyfe, all in ane voce,
be the mouthe of Johnne Wallace in Lonefe, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and
declairit the faid Patrik to be ffylet, culpabill and convict of the haill crymes
refpectiue aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence. The faid Juftice-depute decernit and ordanit the faid Patrik
Lowrie to be tane to the Cafl^ell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be wirreit at
ane ftaik, quhill he be deid ; and thaireftir, his body to be brunt in afches ; and
his haill moveabill guidis and geii-, gif he ony hes, to be efcheit, &c.

dTirt-iaisinii — Cafehtjj Captibe aitti iUvtsoner, ^t,

Jul. 24. — Ingrie Airmestrang in In3ieholme f Archie Airmeftrang
of Flaflvholme.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the treflbnabill Raifing of ffyre, [within the Houfe
of the Langholme ?] burning and deflroying thairof, pertening to Harbert Max-

' Probably the Minister of the parish where this unliappy creature dwelt. ' Report, fame,

reputation. Fr. bruit. ' Curse, malediction. •• Credit, believe. ' See Vol. II. p. 450.

480 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

wall of Kavenfe : Taking of the faid Harbert captiue and priffoner : Scliuiting of
liagbiitis and piftolettis, &c.

Mathow Fiudlafomi of Killeyth become pledge and fouertie for Ingrie, and
Archibald Batie, biirges of Dumfreis, for Airchie Airmeftraug, that thay fall
conipeir befoir the Juftice or his deputis, the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of
the fcherefdome of Dumfreis or Stewartrie of Annandaill, qiihair thay duell; or
foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the law, &c. ; aither of the faidis
perfones vnder the pane of Fj^ve himdreth merkis money.

Jul. 25. — George Axguse, notter ; James Blair, burges of Air ; Dauid
Kennj'die of Corffis ; and Gilbert Grahame, younger of Craig.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'*' Richerd Spens, fervand to
the Erie of Caffillis.'

Pekseweris, Ilicberd Spens, in Vgftoun, as father ; Robert Spens, liis fone, as brother.
The perfeweris paffisjiwpl/citer fra the faidis George Angule, &c. and declairis
thame to be Innocent of the faid Slauchter : Quhairupoun the faidis jjerlbnes on
pannell afliit inftrumentis, and i>roteftis for releif of thair cautioneris ; and that
thai be nocht callit or perfewit for the faid cryme, in tyme cuming.

Jill. 26. — Alexander Brunteeild of Hardaikeris, and NicoU Bruntfeild, fone to the Guidman of Eiftfeild.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Johnne Bruntfeild, younger
in Tennendrie.

Persewer. Prelocutouris for the pannell.

Robert Bmntfeikl, as brother. IMr Jolinne Ruflell, Mr Willianie Oliphant.

It is allegit be the pannell, that the defunct, for quhais flauchter thai ar perfewit, was flane at the home, for four feuei'all cauffis, contenit in the four Hoirningis prefentlie px'oducet be the pannell : Vpoun productioun quhairof, the pannell
tuik inftrumentis ; and the pannell pi'oteftit, that the producing thir Hoirningis
fovdd nawayis affirme thame to be culpable of the factis lybellit. — Continued to
Nov. 24.

Nov. 28. — Robert Bruntfeild, fiear of Todrig, and NicoU B. of Quhytehous become pledge and fouertie, conjunctlie and feuerallie, that thai fall compeir
befoir the Juftice or his dejiutis, the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the
fcherefdome, quhair they duell (Roxliurglie,) or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning ;
vnder the pane of ane thoufand merkis for the entrie of the faid Alexander, and
500 for the faid Nicoll.

' See Dec. 6, 1G03,

38&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 481

iHuilin* untiti' Crust — ^touti)rcif — 9Uultcr|), ^t.

Jul. 26. — WiLi.iAME RoiSE of Dunfkeithe.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Moiinkland, kny',
Aduocat to oiire fouerane lord for his hieues interes, of the cryines following, viz.

FoRSAMEKrLL as it is ftafute and oitlunit be our fouerane lordis Aetia of Parliament, that tlie Murthour or Slauchter of quiiatfumewir his Maiefteis liegis, quhair the pairtie is flayne vntler traift, credite,
affurance and power of the flayer, all fie Murtliouris and Slauchteris to be committit in tyme cuming,
eftir the dait of the faid Act, quliilk is of the dait the xxix day of Julij, the yeir of God, I^.V^-lxxxvij
yeiris, the famin being lauchfullie tryit, and the perfoune dilatit, IFund giltie be ane Aflyife thairof,
falbe Trealoun ; and the perfounes fund culpabill fall ffoifalt lyffe, landis and guidis : As the faid Act
att mair lenth beris. And trevv it is, that tlie faid VVillianie Roife, bailing contludit in his haert the
crewall MurtlM>ur and Slauchter of vraq^'' Alexander Gybfoune in Nig ; flFor performance of his wicket
intentioun, he, accumpaneit witli Farquhair Roife, domeftik feruitour to Nicolas Roife of Pitcalany,
Andro Graffich, fone to Alexander iM<^Gillieped(ler and Thomas M'conchie, vpoune the fourt day of
Februar laftbypaft, being Monunday, lie being vnder freindfchip and faniiliaritie with the faid vmq'''
Alexander, tryllit to meit the faid vmq''' Alexander, in Huchfoun Brabneris hous in Pitcallene ; quhair
the faid Wiilianie Roife and his compliceis foirfaidis, in ane maift freindlie and loving maner intertinneit, vnder traift of affurance, the i'aid vniq'*^ Alexander all the day, till the ewening, drinking and
making mirrie : And about audit houris alt ewin, vpoune the famin day, being ane dark nyclit, baith
mark and nioneles,! convoyit and brocht the faid vmq'" Alexander furth of tiie faid Huchfoun Brabneris
hous, and caufit him to vnderftand that he wald tranfpoirt him to his awiii hous ; att the quhilk tyme,
he maift tieftonablie drew and convoyit the faid vinq''' Alexander out of the way, to ane burne-fyde,
nocht far diftant fra the faid Huchfounis hous, he being than vnder the faid Williamis traift, credite
and afturance, lipning for na harine, iuiurie or hurt to liaif bene done to him be the faid VVilliame and
his complices, that war with him in his cuinpany, hot to haif bene preferuit and defendit be him thair.
Efter the faid Williame, in forme of freindfchip and familiarite, defyrit the fyclit of the faid vinq''=
Alexanderis fword, the faid Williame and his complices maift treafonablie difarmit him of his armour
and wappinnis tliat wes about him, and maift treafonablie murdreift and flew him, ffyrft be ftryking
aff his . . . . hand, nixt be gewing to liini ane crewall and deidlie ftraik in his held, with ane half lang
fword, and diueris vtheris crewall and deidlie woundis in diueris vtlieris pairtis of his body ; and thairby, maift crewallie and treifonablie, vnder traift, freindfchip and afturance, murdreift and flew the faid
vmqis Alexander Gybfoune ; and lie wes airt and pairt of the faid crewall and treftbnabill Murthour ;
fFor the quhilk he aucht and fould be pwneift as ane Traittour, viz. be fioirfalting of his lyft'e, landis and
guidis. To the takin- that he wes culpabill of the faid treffonabill fact, he immediatlie eftir the committing of the faid crewall Murthour, and to the intent the famin fould noclit haif cum to lycht, lie
delyuerit to the faid vmq'« Williame M^Stein, his cotter, the foum of foure fcliilling, and the faid
Farquhar Roife gaif vther four fcliilling, to the faid Andio Graficli, for bureing' of the faid vmq'- Alexander in the eird," or cafting of him in the fea : Lyke as, the faid vmq''' McStein and Andro Graficli,
being thaireftir tane and apprehendit for the faid fact, be thair Depofitiounis, grantit and confelfit that
the faid Williame wes the principall ftrykear and murdreifar of the faid vmq'" Alexander, with his awin
hand ; and att the place of execution, quhair thay I'ufFerit, tliay paft to death thairwith. To the takin
alfo, the faid Williame Roifis being perfewit before our fouerane lordis Juftice, to haif vnderlyne the
law for the faid cryme, he paft to the home, and continewallie fenfyne lies bene fugitiue thairfoir; as
the Lelteris prefentit beris. Item, the faid Williame, being indytit and accufit, ftorfameklll as it is
ftatute and ordanit, be diuerfe oar fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, fpeciallie, be ane Act of hiu
' Dark (hkVA) and moonless. ^ In token or testimony. 'Burying. * Earth, ground.

VOL. II. 3 P

482 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

hienes ellowint Parliament, begun and liauklin att Edinburgh, the xxix day of Julij, I™.V'\lxxxvij yeiris,
that in caice it fall happin ony landit men to be laucbfuUie and ordourlie convict of the crynies of
Commoun Tliift, Reffett of thift, or Stoutli-reift", in tyme cuniing, thay fall incur the cryme and payne
of Tretfoune, that is to fay, tinfall' and ftorfaltour of lyffe, landis and guidis ; as the faid Act att raair
lenth beris. And trew it is, that tlie faid Williame Koife of Dunlteith, being ane landit gentilman
and heretour of the faidis landis of Dunllceitli, accumpaneit with the perfounes foirfaidis, his complices,
immediatlie at the tyme of his treffljnabill Miutljering and flaying of the faid vmq'^ Alexander Gibfoun, in uianer and at the tyme aboue writtin ; he, be way of -Maillerfull Thift and Stouthe-reiti", treffonablie, violentlie and thiftiouflie flaw, conceillit, reffett, reft and away-tuik, fra the faid vraq'* Alexander, the fowme of ane hundreth merkis money, or thairliy, quhilk the faid vniq'^ Alexander had
vpone liim, and in his purfe, the tyme of the faid Williame Roili; committing of the faid treflbnabill
INIurthour an<l Slauchter foirfaid : and the faid Williame is airt and pairt of the Stouth-reif, fteilling
and away-taking of the faid money ; and tliairthrow, the faid Williame Roife, being ane landit gentilman, in inaner foirfaid, hes committit manifell Trellbune, and the panes and pwneilhment fpecifeit in
the faidis Actis of Parliament, viz. tynfall and fforfaltour of his lyfe, landis and guidis, audit and fould be
execute aganis him with all rigour, in exampill ofvtheris. To the taikin,that he, being culpabill of the faidis
treflbnabill crymes of Thift and iStoutlie-reift" and Murthour vnder treft.the faid Williame was perfewit criminallie thairfoir, befoir the Juflice and his deputis, to half vnderlyne the law for the famyn, in the moneth
of Maij laft bypalt, he than part to the borne, and hes bene continuallie fenfyne f ugitiue for the faidis crymes ;
As the faidis Letteris of Hoirning, producet judiciallie be our faid fouerane lordis aduocat, at lenth proportis. Lykas, be his awin Depofitiones, he lies confeffit the Murthour aboue writtin, and that he wes
airt and pairt thairof. Item, the faid Williame, being indytit and accufet, fl'orfaraekill as he, haifingthir
dyuerfe yeiris bygane interteneit and keipit in companie with him Marie Rannaldoche, ane harlot, committing Adulterie with liir, he being mareit with vmq'"' Agnes Rofe, his lauthfull fpous, and the faid iSIarie being with bairne to him, fcho and vmq'^' Williame M'ftene, fervand and hyred man to the faid Williame, togidder with the faid Williame him felff, confultit and concludit, at diuerfe thair tryflis and
meitlingis, the treflbnabill Murthour of the faid vniq''= Agnes, his lauchfull fpous, vuder treft, credeit
and aflureance ; lyk as, for performeance of thair wikkct purpois and intent ioune, the faid Marie, be the
faid Williame's directioun, gaif to the faid vmq'" Agnes, his fpuus, poyfonet drinkis ; quhilkis trelFonabill drinkis, noclit hailing wrocht vpone liir to the deith, bot the famyn, at findrie tymes, being vomeitit
bak agane be hir ; and finding himfelft' difapoyntit be that treflbnabill meayne,- and hir daitbe poflponit and delayit, he thairfoir of new confultit and devyfit with the faid Marie Rannaldoche and Williame M'Stene, quha, in the moneth of May, I'".\ j''. and foure yeiris, be the faid Williame's fpeciall
cauling, directioun and command, maifl. treflbnabillie, crewallie and vnmercifullie Strangallit and
win-eit the faid vmq''' Agnes, Ids fpous, in her bed, within hir awin hous, vnder filence and clud of
nycht; fl'or performeance quhairof, ha promeifl to the faid Marie Rannaldoche to marie and tak hir to
wyfe : Lyke as, the faid Williame M'Stene, being apprehendit for the treflbnabill INIurthour of the
faid vmq''' Alexander Gibfonn, and exaniinat be certane of the Miniftrie-' and gentilmen of the cuntrie.
Confelfit and declairit that he, at the faid Williame Roffis command and direction, accumpaneit with
the faid Marie Rannaldoche, murdreift and treffonabillie ftrangiliit the faid vmq'"^ Agnies, his fpous ;
{for doing of the quhilk treflJbnabill deed, the faid vmq''^ Williame i\PStene Confeflit he reffauit fra
the f.iid Williame, as ane rewaird for his panes, ane rig of heir,' togidder with the haill clething that
was vpone the faid Williamis bak the tyme of the faid Murthour, viz. his bonet, fark, coitt, doublet,
breikis, iiois, fokis and buittis. Lyk as, for tcftifiiatioun of the treutli of the faid treflbnabill Murthour, and that the faid Williame was airt and pairt thairof, the faid Williame, be his Depofitiones
maid in prefens of Mr Williame Hairt, Jurticc-depute, and the Bailleis of Edinburgh, the xxv of this
' Los-J. ' IMean, Fr. moyan. ^ Clergy. * Ridge of barley.

38&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 48.'J

inftant, hes confeflit that the nycht appoyntit be him and iiis complices for perfi rmeing of the faid
treironabill Muithour, he withdrew him felf furth of his awin hous of Dunfkeitli, frahis faid fpous, to
his chieff the Laird of Bahiagounes houfe, quliair iie remanit qiihill midiiyclit ; about the quhilk tyme,
his confcieiice being fa tiiichet and trubillit for the faid treflonabill fact, quhilk, be liis couiifall and
directioun foirfaid, was tliat nycht to be put in executioune, be the perfones foirfaid, he arraife out of
his bed, putt on his claithes and come to his awin houfe, of purpois (as he declairit) to half ftayit the
faid wicked fact: And he, finding tlie turne done afoir his cuming, he reteirit liim felf bak agaiie.
Quhilk treffonabill fact he hes continuallie fenfyne conceillit to the tyme of bis Exarainatioun foirfaid.
And tiiairthrow, he is airt, pairt, red and couiifall of the faid treffonabill Murthourand ftrangelling of
the faid vmq'' Agnes his fpous, vnder treft, and audit and fould be puneiihet thairfoir, conforme to the
tennour of the faid Act of Parliament. Item, the faid Williame, being indyttit and accufet, that he,
being ane landit Gentilman, as faid is, with his complices, cowmone thevis, in the monetb of ... .

the yeir of God thiftiouflie, and be way of Maiflerfull Tliift and Stouthreiff, (law, reft and

away-tuik, fra Williame Micain M'^Williame in Gany, tua fcbnip, had and difpoiiet thairupoune at his
pleafour; and he, being ane landit G^Mirilman, be committing of the faid maillerfuU tliift and llouthi-eifF, hes committit Treffone ; flFor the quliilk, he aucht and fouhl be pwneifchet, conforme to the faid
Act of Parliatnent. To the taikin, he being challanget for the famyn, maid redrefs and fatisfactioun
to the faid Williame M'ean, at command of Huiheon M'Tullie, iiis maifter. Item, for airt and pairt
of the tliiftious Steilling, conceilling, refletting and away-taking of ane ox, fra James Corbett in Arkbole, in the moneth of yeiris : And lie, being ane landit Gentilman, hes thairby committit Treffone, &c. Item, for airt and pairt of tiie fteilling, conceilling, reffetting and away-taking
fra Findla Manfoun, Minifler in Nig, in the moneth of October i"'. fax liundretli and foure yeiris, of
fax geife, had and convoyit the famyn away with him, and dilponit thairupoun : And the faid Williame, being ane landit Gentilman, hes thairthrow committit Treffone, he. Item, the faid Williame,
being indytit and accufet, ffor cuming with his complices, in the moneth of December, the yeir of God
jm_Vj''. and foure yeiris, to Dauid Faiines barne in Nig, and tbiftioudie, vnder lilence of nycht, brak
the faid barne, and flaw, conceillit, reffet and awaytuik furth thairof ane fek full of victuall, contening
fax firlottis. To the taikin, he come to the faid Dauid Fairne, and oiferit to get the famyn tryit furth'
to him, for ane rewaird ; and he was airt and pairt of the tliiftious lleilling, coiicelling and away-taking
thairof; and thairfoir, he being ane landit Gentilman, hes iiicurrit the cryme and pane of Treflbne.
Item, for airt and pairt of the steilling, conceilling and away-taking of faxtene fcheip, pertcning to
Alexander Manfoun, Donald Beroch and Andro Bane, in the monetlis of October and November laflbypaft, in the yeir of God I'".Vj''. and four yeiris, had and convoyit the (amyn away with him to the
Craigis of Dunfkeitb, quhair he flew the faid fclieip and call thair iiitrallis in the fea; and thairefter,
careit the boukkis' tliairof to his awin hous in Dunflteith, quhairin he and his complices did eit the
famyn: And he, beand ane landit Gentilman, bo committing of the faid theft and maiflerfull Stouth-reif,
hes committit Treffone, and incurrit the panis contenit in the iaidis Actisof Pailiament. Item, for Cowmoun thift, cowmoun reffet of thift, inputting and outputting of thift fra land to land, fra cuntrey to
cuntrey, baitli of auld and of new : And thairfoir, he being ane landit Gentilman, be committing thairof, hes committit manifed Treffone, and audit and fmiM be iiwiieilVhet conforme to the Actis of Parliament, viz. be ffoirfaltour and tynfell of lyfe, landis and guidis, in exampill of vtheris to commit tlie
lyk in tyme coming.

For the quhilkis crymes, the Juftice-depute ordaiiit the faid William Roife to
be put to the knawlege of ane Affyi'e, of the perfones following.

' Searched out, discovered. - Bulks, carcases.

484 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

ASSISA.

HacbeonRoire,fiearof Balmukie, Williame Dumbar of Hemprigis, Mark Mawer of Sfayfiies,
Alex"' Bane of Wtller Logie, Walter Kyiinaird of Cowbyn, Mr James Dunibar of Taibett,

Donald Tliornetoun, burges of Johnne Burgie in Haltoun, Capitane Andro Bruce,

Edinburgh, Alexander Watfoune in Grange, Robert Dumbar of Burgie,

Mr Rannald Bane, burges thair Alexander Cruikftiiank in Lyttill Patrik Dumbar of Blarie.
JaAdamfoun, burges of Kinlofe, Pynnik,

The Aduocat takis infti'umentis of the fwering of the Alfyfe ; and that 'Willianie Rofe grantit the Slauchter of \nnq'^ Alexander Gyblbune.

The Pannel, befoir his Convictioune, declairis that Ferquhair Roife wes nocht
in company with him at the flaucliter of vmq''' Alexander Gybfuime ; nather wes
he ather airt or pairt of the faid Slauchter.

Verdict. The AlTyle, be the mouth of the faid Mr James Dumbar, chanceller, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Williame Roife to
be ffylet, culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the treflbnabill and crewall
Slauchter and Murthour of the faid vmq'" Alexander Gibfoune, indueller in Nig,
committit the tyme foirfaid, vnder trell, allureance, freindlchip and familiaritie,
in maner aboue writtin : And als, ffand, pronuncet and declairit him to be ffylet,
culpabill and convict of airt and pairt, red and counfall of the treflbnable Murthering, ftrangling and wirrieing of the faid vniq''' Agnes Roife his fpous, committit the tyme foirfaid, vnder treft, credeit and aflureance, in maner as is aboue
writtin : And lykwayes, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Williame Roife,
to be Cleane, innocent and acquit of the haill poyntis of Thift, quhairof he wes
accufit be Dittay, in maner aboue writtin, and of everie ane of thame.

Sentence. For the quhilkis trelTonabill crymes of Murthour, of the quhilkis
he was convict in maner foirfaid, the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of James
Henderfone, dempfter, ordanit the laid ^A'illiame Rofe of Dunfkeathe to be tane
to the mercait croce of Edinburghe, and thair his held to be llrukin fra his body :
And decernit and ordanit all his landis, heritages, takis, fleidingis, i-owmes, poffeffiones, coirnis, cattell, inficht plenilTmg, guidis and geir, to be ffoirfaltit and
efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis treironabill crymes.

^Iauci:f)ter — ^Tjootins of J^acrljuts anU ^istoltts.

Jul. 30. — Dauid Jardane in Wnndeldyke, Alexander Jardane in Wandell, Johne Symfoun in Mylnehill, and twelve others.
Delaitit, accufet and perfewit for the crymes follo\A'ing, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLLas the faidis Dauid, &c. with thair complices, with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis
leigis, to the number of tuentie-foure perfones, or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, with jakis, fecreitis,
fpeiris, lleil-bonnettis, fwoirdis, hagbuttis and pillolettis, expreilie proliibeit to be borne, worne, vfet
or fchot with, be our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament and Secreit Counfall, vnder dyuerfe panes

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 485

contenit tliairintill ; haifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis vrnq''' James Cleilland'
(in Vnder-the-bank,) in the monetli of Jnnij, the yeir of God I™, fyve hundretii fouifcoir fourtene
yeiris, came to Wandeliiolme, upon Clyde, belyde Daviefcliaw, quliair the laid vniq''' James was, in
fober and quyet manei" for the tynio, ryding at the hunting, in company of Sir James Hamniiltoun of
Libbertoun, lipning for na harme, iniurie or perfute of ony perfones, bot to haif levit vnder Godis peax
and his Maiefteis, and thair fett vpone liim, fchot and dilafchet- thair hagbuttis and piftolettis at him,
quhairby tliay fchott him throw the body, and with fuoirdis, quhingeris aud remanent wapponea foirfaidia', liurt and woundit him in dyueife pairtis of his bodie, to the eifufioun of his bluid in grit quantitie : Off the quliilkis fchottis and flraikis, the faid vmq'<' James immediatlie thaireflir depairtit this
lyffe; and la, the laid vmq'° James Cleilland was crewallie and vnmercifullie (lane be the I'aidis perfones: And thay being all vpone the grund, purfuing him with fuoirdis and remanent wappones aboue
fpecifeit, thay and ilk ane of thame ar airt and pairt of the faid crewall Slauchter, committit vpouu
fett purpois, provifioun and foirthocht fellony ; in hie and manifefl contemptioun of our fouerane lordis
auctoritie and lawis, in ewill exampill to vtheris his hienes lieges to commit the lyk crewall Slauchteris.
Pekseweris, Gawin Kneilland, Roger Kneilland, as fones.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Johnne Ruffell, Robert Hammiltoun.
Verdict. The Affyfe, be the moutli of David Blair in Corflaw, cliancellar,
flfand, pronunceit and declairit the faidis Daiiid Jarden, &c. to be Cleane, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the laid vniq''' James, and
of the haill poyntis of Dittay aboue writtin.'

[3fr WiUiame Ha'irf et Mr WiUiame Boirihitik, Jiiflices-Depides.']

^lausfjtei- — ^t'ijooting of f istoUts.

Auff. 6. — Archibald Maxwaij, of Cowhill/ and Williaine Maxwall,
appeirand of Cowhill, his fone.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vniq" Robert Maxwall of Kirkhill (Kirkhous, or Croveftanes,) committit in the moneth of Junij 1583 yeiris :
And for beiring and weiring of piftolettis, coutrair the Actis of Parliament.
Pekseweris, Williams Maxwall (of Kirkhouse,) Chairles Maxwall, James Maxwall, Robert Maxwall, Dauid Maxwall, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr WiUiame Oliphant, Mr Johnne Rulfell, Mr Alexander King,
Sir Rob' Maxwall of the Schottis, WiUiame Maxwall of Gribioune, Eduard Maxwall of the Hillis.

DiTTAV agabijl the Pannell.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faidis Archibald Maxwall of Cowhill, and WiUiame Maxwall appeirand of
Cowhill, with thair complices, with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis lieges, to the number of fax
perfones, or thairhy, all bodin in feir of weir, with fwoirdis, fecreittis, gantillettis, plait-llevis, lang
hagbuttis and piftolettis, expredie prohibeit to be borne, worne, vfet or fchot with, be our fouerane
lordis Actis of Parliament, vnder dyuerfe panes contenit in the famyn, in the moneth of Junij, or
thairby, the yeir of God I", fyve huudreth fourfcoir thre yeiris, vpone deidlie feid, rancor and malice
confauet aganis the f^iid vmq'" Robert Maxwall of Kirhous, for teynding^ of the f lid Archibald Max-

■ Kneilland. The name was indifferently spelt K..ellland and Cleilland, at this period. ^ Old Tr. ,fo/«srf<T.

' With regard to the rest of the pannels, the pursuers ' past tVa' a number ; aud the retnmnder were reple-et t,. th«
resalitie of Ualkevth, be mv Lord of Mortoune.' ' See Nov. C, 1CU5. ^ I yt nug ms Iambs a,ul othee

small tythes, as having a heritable rii;ht to the teinds or tythes of Cowhill. The drawmg ol small tythcs was alw.j s
considered an oppressive act in Scotland, and had for a long period been disused.

486 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

wall of Cowhillis lambes and vtheris fmall teyndis, thay fett vpone the faid vmq'e Robert, vpone the
landis of Redbank, lyand witliin the parochin of Kivkhous, and stewaitrie of Kiikciibrycht, quhair he
was, in lobar and quyet nianer for the tymc, doand bis lefuU effaires and buffines, in teynding of
lambes ; dredand na evill, harme, iniurie or perfute of ony perfones, bot to haif levit vnder Godis peax
and our fonerane lordis ; and thair, fcbott tbair hai>butiis and piftolettis at him, and maift crewallie,
fchanipfullie and vnniercifiillie flew the faid vmq''^^ Robert Maxvvall : And thai and aither of tliame ar
airtand pairtof thefaid crewall Slauchter; quhairbythay haif nocht only comtnittit crewall Slauchter,
vpone fet purpois, pronifionn and foirthoclit fellony, bot in lyk manerhes contravenit the tennourof the
faid Actis of Parliament, in beiring-, weirinjr and IVhuiting of hagbuttis and piftolettis, and hes incurrit
the panes contenit tbairin, qiibilk aucbt and fould be execute aganis thame with all rigour, in exampill
of vtheris to abftene frome the lyk in tyni cuming.

It is allegit for Williaine IMaxwell, younger of Cowhill, that the tyme of the
committing of the fact lybellit, viz. in Junij, 1583, that he was nocht paft xij
yeiris of age, efjic non doll capax ; and can nocht thairby be put to the knawlege of an AfTyfe, for the crymes lybellit ; and offeris to prove his age inftantlie. —
It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, the allegeance aucht to be repellit, as nawayis
releuant to ftay the mater to pas to the knawledge of an Affyfe, becaus all thingis
in facto man be tryit be the Affyfe ; And albeit he had been minor, the contrair
quhairof is maift manifeft, yit the famyn procures na impunitie, in crymes of
this natour; fpeciallie, being committit eftir the manner lybellit.

The Juftice, nochtuithftanding of the allegeance, ffindis proces ; and Remittis
the cryme lybellit aganis Williame Maxwall to the knawlege of ane Affyfe ; and
Remittis to the Affyfe anent his age, to tak cognitioun thairin as thay think
expedient.

It is forder allegit, that this matter can nawayis pafs to the tryell of ane Affyfe,
becaufe the pannell, in the moneth of Februare, yeir of God I'^.V. fourfcoir
aucht yeiris, hes obtenit our fouerane lordis Refpett, quliairof thair is dyuerfe
yeiris as yit to ryn : As the Refpett producet beiris. — The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the productioun of the Refpett, be bayth the per'bnes on pannell. It
is allegit, that the Relpett is null, becaus the famyn is nocht paft be the Thefaurer and the Regifter, conforme to the Act of Parliament. It is anfuerit, aucht
to be Repellit, in refpect of the Refpett, quhilk is paft the Previe feill. — It is
forder allegit, that the Refpett producet is null, in refpect of the Act of Parliament, quhilk makis all Refpettis to be null, the famj'n nocht being grantit be
fatisfactioune of partie and Letter of Slaines' grantit be the pairtie thairvpoune.
— It is anfuerit, that the Act of Parliament allegit, is only temporall.^

The Juftice declairis, during the tjnne of this Refpett, he will nocht, for the

Slauchtir lybellit, put the pannell to ane Allyfe. — Qidiairvpouu the pannell afkit

inftrumentis.

* A writ granted by the nearest relations of the deceased, acknowledging themselves to be satisfied
for the slaughter. It frequently bore their consent to a free pardon by the King. * Temporary.

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 487

The Aduocat proclucet the Kingis Maiefteis Letter, direct to the Juftice, &c. ;
quhairof the termour foUowis.

James R.

Justice, Juftice Clerk and jour deputis, We greit 50W weill. Forafrauche as Archibald Maxwall of Cowhill and Williame Max wall his fone, being fumniond to compeir befoir 501V, in our ToU
buith of Edinburgh, the faxt day of Auguft inftant, to vnderly our law for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmqie Robert Maxwall of Croveftanes, and for contravening our Actis of Parliament, in beiring,
weiring and fchuiting with hagbuttis and piftolettis, as We are inforraet, intendis to vfe ane Refpett
allegit grantit to thame by ws, quhairof we nevir had ony knawledge : And gif ony be producet be
thame, the fame is fenifteruflie purcheft by our knawlege,' and contrair to our lawis, Actis of Parliament, and equitie. Thairfoir, it is our will, and We command 30W, that incontinent eflir the ficht heirof, 3e put to ane knawlege of Aflyfe, for beiring, weiring and fchuiting of hagbuttis and piftolettis :
And gif thay be convict, that 36 caus pwneifch thame conforme to our Actis of Parliament, by cutting
affair rycht hand; and forder as our faidis Actis prefcryues. And gif 30 delay the tryell of the
Slauchter, vpoune the productioun of the faid allegit Refpett ; than, eftir ])air tryell and pwneifchment,
for beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and piftolettis, in raaner foirfaid, 56 fall put them iii fure firnnnce
and helping within the ToUmith of Edinburgh, quhill we be adverteift of 3 our proceiilingis, and our
forder Will be lignifeit vnto 50W pairanent. This 56 fall nawayis faill to do, as 3e will anfuer pairupoune : Quhairanent ])ir prefentis fall be to 30W fufficient Warrand. Gevin at Houghtoun, ])e penult
day of July 1605.

And accoirding to the laid Warrand, the pannell ancht to be put to tlie knawlege of ane Aflyfe. — It is anfuerit be the pannell, that the Kingis Maiefl;eis Previe Letter is na fufficient Warrand to derogat the Refpett, pall the Previe Seill ;
fpeciallie, in refpect that fie privat Letteris ar reprobat be the Actis of Parliament.
— It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that fic previe Letteris as ar purcheft for ftay of
juftice, ar difallowit be Act of Parliament ; bot this Letter is direct, of certane
knawlege, and furtherance of juftice, and pwneifchment of ane odious cryine.

The Juftice ffindis as ofbefoir, for the Slauchter allanei-lie.

It is forder allegit, Ije the pannell, that that i)airt of the Dittay, concerning the
fchuitting of ane liagbut, can nawayis be jjut to the knawlege of ane Alfyfe, becaus thair is ane Refpett producet for the Slauchter ; quhilk Refpett is fund
i-elevant for the Slauchter, to ftay the pannell to pas to ane Aflyl'e ; and thair is
na thing contenit in the Dittay, for fchuiting, beiring and weiring of jiiftolettis
and hagbuttis, bot that the defunct was llane with ane hagbut ; quhilk is the
maner how the faid fact was committit : And as the fact is elydit be Refpett, fa
the maner of the committing thairof is fuperceidit be the faid Refpett ; fua that,
during the faid tyme comprehendit in the Refpett, nather can tlie pamiell be put
to the knawlege of ane Aftyfe, for the llauchter, nor fchuitting of the hagbut,
quhilk was the inftrument be the quhilk it is allegit the deid was committit. —
It is declairit be my lord Aduocat, in refpect of the Juftice Interloquitour, he
Reftrictis his fummondis only for perfute of the pannell for beiring, weiring and
' By sinister means, procured without our knowledge.

488 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

fchintting of liagbuttis and piftolettis : And allegis, that the Refpett producet can
noclit flay proces for that cryme; becaiisRefpettis, being odious of the Law, as grantit for inipunitie of crymes and ftay of juflice to pairteis greivit, thay can nevir be
extendit fauourahillie, be interpretatioun of the Judge, to ony forder nor (than) the
expi'efs woirdis thairof beiris : And thairfoir, the bering, weiring and Ichiiiting
with hagbutis and piftolettis, being ana cryme pwneiflieable of the Law, and
nawayis mentionet in this Refpett, the pardon of the cryme of Slauchter, contenet in the laid Refpett, can nevir be extendit to the vther cryme of fchuiting
with hagbntis, &c. ; fpeciallie, in refpect of the woirdis of the Refpett, pardoning the Slaucliter allanerlie, and of his Maiefteis Warrand producet ; quhilk
removes all doutt that evir his Maieftie had intentioun to pardoun the cryme of
the liagbuttis and piftolettis to the pannell. — It is anfuerit, that the Aduocattis
declaratioun alteris nathing the teimour of the Letteris, contentis thaii'of, and
Interlocutour producet. Thair is na mentioun maid in the Letteris of beiring
and weiring and fchuiting, bot only of ane fchot, be the quhilk it is allegit the
Slauchter was committit : And forder, the Refpett producet is nocht only extendit
to the Slauchter, bot all that niycht follow thairupoune ; quhilk was the fchuiting of the hagbut, be the quhilk the Slauchter was committit : And quhair it is
allegit, thiit the Ref])ett gi'antit for ane crj^me can nocht be extendit to ane
vther, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Refpett, and the coniunctioun of the
factis : And forder, of the Law and practik of this realme, ane Refpett or Remiftioune grantit of ane gritter cryme comprehendis lefs crymes, albeit na mentioun be maid of the lefs ; fpeciallie, haifing confideratioun, quhan the lefs crymes
ar ane pairt of the gritt crjnne, quhairfoir the Refpett is gevin, and all done
j-ii/'co conhwfii, at ane tj-me ; and the lefs cryme the inflrument of the grit,
quliilk is refpettit.

It is forder allegit, that this Refpett man comprehend the fchuiting with the
hagbut, in refpect it is exprellie ftatute, be Act of Parliament maid in the dayis
of King James the Fourt, Parliamento fexto, cap. 62, That in all Refpettis and
Remilhones, mentioun fall be maid of the gritteft cryme, fa that be the expres
meaning of the laid Act, the gritteft crj'me being remittit and contenit in the
Refpett, the lefs crymes man be lykwayis comi)rehendit thairintill ; fpeciallie, in
thir crjanes, quhilkis ar fa coherent and conioynet togiddei% that the Refpett or
Remiffioune comprehending the gritteft. of all neccliitie man comprehend the
leift. — It is anfuerit be the Lord Aduocat, that that Act of Parliament militatis
only, quhair thair is Remiffioune or Refpet, tans only for ane perticuler cryme,
and ane generall claufe of Remiffioun fubioj'nit thairto ; bot in this caice, the
Refjjett producet contenis only the cr_vnie of Slauchter allanerlie, witliout ony
generall claufe of vther crymes fubioynit thairto : In relpect quhairof, the allege39 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 489

ance audit to be repellit. — It is anfuerit, be the pannell, that tlie Refpet nocht
only coinprehendis the flauchter, bot alio all thingis that can follow thairupoun,
quhilk is the fchuiting.

It is forder allegit, be the pannell, that the cryme of fchuiting and weiring of
hagbuttis and piftolettis was nevir in vii'idi ohjeritantla, and fic a cryme quhairupoun ony accufatioun or puneifchment followit, befoir the Act of Parliament, iu
anno I^.V^lxxxxvij ; fra the quhilk tyme and Act, that cryme hes only bene
obferuet, and the pwneifchment contenit in the faid Act hes only had place. And
albeit, be Act of Parliament maid in anno P.VMxvij, it is ftatute and ordanit,
that the weiring, vfmg and fchuiting of hagbutis and piftoletis, fall be tynfall
{loss) of the rycht hand, yit be ane pofteriour Act, maid in anno P.VMxxix, the
pane of the fchuiting and \ieing is only pecuniall, contening the fowme of x li.
and tynfall of the hagbut or piftoll : And fa, haifing confidderatioun that this fact
is allegit to half bene done in anno 1583, lang befoir the yeir of God P.V.lxxxxvij,
the panes of the faid Act can nawayis be extendit aganes thir defenderis. It is
anfuerit be the Lord Aduocat, that the Act of Parliament, in anno P.VMxxix,
maid lang befoir the committing of the cryme lybellit, levis to the Kingis Maieftie, his optioun of the inflicting of the corporall pwneifchment for the faid cryme ;
quhaii-anent, his Maieflie hes declairit his will, be the Warrand producet.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that the Act of Parliament, maid in anno
Ixxxxvij, declairis the penaltie of the former Actis to haif place, with the additioune; fa that befoir the tyme, the Kingis Maieftie nevir declairing his Will,
his Maiefteis Will and penaltie man be only extendit fra the dait of tlie lad Act.
— The Aduocat anfueris, the maift folempne Declaratioune of his Maielleis \'\'ill
is be Act of Parliament.

The Juftice Repellis the allegeance, in refpect of the Act of Parliament, Refpett producet, and his Maiefteis Warrand ; and Ordanes forder proces.

It is forder allegit, be the pannell, that the pannell, for weiring and vfeing of
piftolettis, can nawayis be put to the knawlege of ane Aftyfe, becaus it is confeflit in the Dittay, that the weiring and fchuiting of the hagbut or piftolettis
was committit vpoune the landis of Reidbank, quhair the defenderis duelt and
remanit for the tyme ; and it is nawayis prohibeit be the Act of Parliament, bot
be the contrair, it is permitted to peribncs to beir, weir and fchuit hagbuttis and
piftolettis, within thair awin houflis, yairdis and cloiiris : And trew it is, gif ony
hagbut was fchott, borne or worne, the famyn was within the houfe of the faidis
landis, at the leift, hard be the yettis and durris thairof : And albeit ony ])erf()ne
wald fchuit and weir within his awin houfe, or at the yettis or within the cloiUis

VOL. II. 3 Q

490 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605tliairof, that is na cryme of the law. And now it man be refi)ectit, tliat thair is
na mail- in our Dittay, hot only the hairing, weiring and fchuiting, &c. ; vnder
proteftatioun, that the jiannell nawayis grantis the famyn.

ASSISA.

Johnne Lyndfay of Auchinfkeacli, Jo. Mertene, bail^ ie of Blaikfchaw, jNIichell Amlerfoun, binges of
George Reidik of Airdiie, AdameStnidgeounof ^lyllerland, Dunifieis,

Jolinne Tumour of Aidwell, Harbert Stnidgeoun of Ton'croee, Clement Ed3er of Kirkblane,

Williame Williamefoune, burges Johnne Kichiefoune, burges of Harbert M'kie in Preftoiiri,

of Dumfreis, Dumfieis, Robert Ed3er of BlaiklVliaw,

JoLne Slowane' of Garrocbe, Jolinne Gibloim, burges thair. Robert Rediche of Baineiion'rie.

Objection to an Affifor. — It is allegit that WilUamc Maxwall of JSIei-fi/de
can noclit pafs of this Affj^fe, becaus he was nocht of pertyte age, viz. vpoun the
age of xiiij j'eiris, the tynie of the committing of the fact Ij'bellit. — It is anfuerit,
be the Aduocat, the allegeance aucht to be repellit, in relpect of his prelent age.
— The faid ^ViDiame IMaxwall being inquyrit be the Juftice and fuorne, ' Quhat
age he was prefentlie of?' Declairit he was oiitwith xxv yeiris of age. — It is
allegit be the pannell, that the faid Williame Maxwall of Merfyde, the tyme of
the committing of the fact lybellit, was nocht foure yeir auld.

The Justice Repellit Jfll/ionie Maxwall, in refpect of his awin confeffioune,
quha declairit that he was tennent to Harbert Maxwall of Kavenfe.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the AlFyfe, and proteftis
for Wilful EiTour gif thay acquit : As alio of the fweiring of the Dittay be the
perieweris ; and that the defunct was llaue be Williaiue Maxwall appeirand of
Cowhill, be ane fchott.

Special Verdict of the Affife.

The faidis perfones of Aflyfe, be the mouth of the faid Johnne Lyndfay of AuchiulTceach, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit, all in (ane) voce, tlie faid Archibald Maxwall elder of CowLill to be Clene, innocent and acquit of the beiring, weiring and fchuiting of iiagbuttis and piftolettis,
committit vpon the faidis landis of Reidbank, in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of God I'^.V''. fourfcoir
thro yeiris : Akd ficklyke, ffand, pronuncet and declairit, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid
Chanceller, the faid Williame JSIaxwell, appeirand of Cowhill, to be ffvlet, culpabill and convict
of the beiring, weiring and fchuiting of ane hagbut; committit in the moneth of Junij, tiie yeir of God
I™, fyve hundreth fourfcoir thre yeiris, vpone the giund of the faidis landis of Reidbank, within aue
Ijjeir-lenth to the hous tliairof, pertening than to the faid Archibald Maxwall ; the faid \\ illiame Maxwall than being within the age of fourtene yeiris. Ix witnefs quhairof, the chanceller, for him felf,
and in name of the haill remanent perfones of AfTyfe, hes fubfcryuit thir prefentis with his hand.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Jhone Lyndesay.

Quhairupoun the faidis Archibald and "N^'illiam Maxwallis afkit actis and inftrumentis : and the faid Charles Maxwall, in name of our faid fouerane lordis
Aduocat, Proteftis for x'emeid of Law and ^Vilfull Errour aganis the faid AfTyfe.

' ' Allowane' in another place. ' A' was then a common prefix to many names in the south of
Scotland, as Amulligan, Aciiunan, Alasoue, Ahannay, <*cc.

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 491

\_Per Comitem de Ergyle, JujUciurium Generulem ; et 3Iagiflrum Wilelmiim

Haiti, ejus Deputaf urn J]

df ire--ralsiits — Burning: X\)t ^lace of EittlestU — ^lausljtcr —
* aanpt*— aUultcr^ — Cijcft, ^t,

Aug. 9- — Thoimas Jakdame of Birnok, Vmphra and Alexander Jardanes, his fones.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the trefTonabill Raifing of ffyre, burning and diltroying of the Place of Littillgill, with the haill laiche houlTis, barnes and byres
tliairof, and haill inficht and pleniffing being thairin ; and for the crewall Burning and flaying of vmq'*' Alexander Bail3ie of Littilgill, Rachaell Bail3ie, docliter to Mathow Bail^ie, now of Littillgill, and vmq''' Acliiefone, lervand

t-o the faid Mathow ; the faidis vniq"" thre perfones being all witln"n the faid
place the tyme of the burning and diftroying thairof ; comniittit in the moneth
of ... the yeir of God, I^V^ fourfcoir nyne yeiris. And ficlyk, for airt and
pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Robert Broun inCvdter ; connnittit in the moneth
of Junij, the yeir of God PV'lxxxxvj yeiris: And ficlyk, for airt and pairt of
the RajJt and Raviefching of Katharene Johnneftoune, fpous to ... . Airmeftrang of Arkiltoune ; connnittit in anno I'"V''lxxxxv yeiris : And for the cryme
of Adulterie, committit be him with hir, contrair the tennour of the Actis of
Parliament,' &c. &c.

Williame Creiclitoun of Darnehauche and Johnne Carmichell younger of Potiefchaw, as cautioners for the appearance of the pannels, vnlawit in the pane of
tua hundreth merkis for ilk ane of thame. The Jardanes ordained to be denounced
Re])t'ls, and their moveables to be efcheit, &c.

'\_31r WiUiame Borthuik, Jnjl'ice-Depiitel\

aSfjStiatiti).

Sep. 17. — Johnne Jak, alias Scott, fervand to Thomas Boirthuik, in

Roi fling.

Dilaitit of the abhominabill and monfl;rouous fact of Sodomie,^ &c.

Sentence. ' To be tane to the Cafl;ell hill of Edinburglie, and thair, he to

be firfl: bund to ane ftaik and wirreit thairat ; and thaireftir, with tlie faid meir

to be brunt in afches, as he that, vpone his awin Confeflloun, was convict of the

crymes aboue writtin ; and his haill raoveabill guidis to be eicheit to his Maiefl:eis vfe,' &c.

^ Tliere are also numerous acts of tlieft of liorsps, cattle, sheep, 8ic. enumerated, l)ut unnecessary
to be noticed here. ^ A case of a similarly disgusting description (tlie onhj instance in the early

part of tlie Record) was purposely omitted, Sep. 1, 1670. The crime (Sodomy) is designated ' wyild,
filthie, execrabill, deteftahill and unnaturall,' — ' Joliime Swan and Johnne Litller, I'mythis and I'eruandis to Robert Hannay,' tlie panneli, were liiicwise bunit on the Castle-hill of Edinburgh.

492 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1605.

Nov. 5. — WiLLiAME Jaedane in Yle, Johnne Carfane in Erfik, Fergus

Heroune at the Kirk of Glaftrune, Johnne Aflowane in Tyllochbloun, Nicoll Dungallbun in Claymadie, Robert IVrBay in

the Maynes of Quhithorne, James M'conene in Cariugdone, and

Harie Stewart in Lagane.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq''" Harliert Maxwall, callit

Ilarhert of the Coittis ; committit in September I^VIxxxxvij yeiris. — Johnne

Dumbar of Mj^nnieweik become plege and fouertie, that thai fall compeir befoir

the Juftice, the xvij day of December nixtocum.

(Dec. 17.) — Johnne Dumbar vnlawit in the pane of ane hundreth merkis,
for ilk ane of the faidis perfones : The Juftice ordanit that thay be denunceit
rebellis, &:c., and all thair moveabill guidis to be elcheit.

[3//- JVilUame Hairt, JiiJIice-Dejmte.'}

Nov. 6. — Haebaet Maxwali, of Kavenfe.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq" Sir Robert Maxwall of
Dynwiddie, knycht.

Persewaris, Archibald Maxwell of Cowhill,' Williame Maxwall, appeirand of Kowhill, Archibald
Maxwell, his brother, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland, knycht.

The Guidman of Kavenfe takis inftrumentis of this entrie, and proteftis for
releif of his cautioner.

The Juftice continewis the matter to the Air of Dumfreis, or foner, vpone
XV dayis wairning. Johnne Broune, of the Land, cautioner. — Archibald Myller,
bail5ie-depute to my Lord of INIoirtoune, of the Regalitie of Moirtoune, Proteftis,
that the Guidman of Kavenfe finding of Cautioune, preiudge nocht the previledge
of my Lord of Moirtones Regalitie ; quliilk the Juftice admittit.

iHuttlatimt mxH Mtmtmiivation,

Nov. 23. — RoBEKT M'^DOWELL and Johxne M'doWELL, fonesto Peter
MMowell of Macliirmoir.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Mutilatioune of Patrick Murdoche of Camlodden and Alexander M'^kie, his fervand, of thair richt handis.
Persewer, Patrik ]Murdoche of Camloddene, Alexander M'kie, his lervatid, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune (knycht), Aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Prelocutouris for the panncll, Mr Alexander King, Peter M'dowell of Macliirmoir, The Laird of

Mondurk, Robert Dougall, merchand.

Peter Mcdowell of Machirmoir become pledge and fouertie for Robert and

1 See Aug. 6, 1605.

39 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 493

Johnne IVrdowellis, his fones, that thay fall compeir befoir the Juftice or his
deputis, the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the Sherefdome of Kirkculdbrycht, or foner, vpoiie xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the Law,' &c.

\_Mr WilUame Borthuik, Ji/JIice-Dejmte.'l

Dec. 6. — Dauid Marsciiei.i,, meflinger.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Richard Spens.°
Continued to the Jiiilice-air of • Air, tertio Itineris (vel fuper premonitione),
XV dierum. Piegio, Roberto Stewart de Pitheveles.'

'-ti"

[J/r WilUame Hairt, Ji{ftice-Depute.']

iHuriJfi* — ,^i)ootinj3: of ll^agfiiits antr ^istolets.

Dec. 11. — Johnne Johnnstoune of Auchrynnie ; James, Johnne and
Patrik Forbes in Mylnebowie.
Dilaitit, acciifet and perfewit off the crymes following, viz.

Persewer, Alexander Irwing, as fader.
Prelocutouris (for tlie pannell), Mr Laurence M'gill, The Laird of Corfindae.

FoRSAMEKiLL as thai, with thair complices, with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis leigis, to the
number of ten perfones or thairby, all bodin in feir of weir, with jakis, fecreitis, lleil-bonuetis, plaitflevis, fpeiris, lance-flalffis, fuordis, quhingeria, gantillettis, hagbuttis, dagis and piftolettia, expreflie
probibcit to be borne, worne, vfet or fchot with, be dyuerfe our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament and
Secreit Counfall, vnder dyuerfe panes, nientionat thairintill ; hai6ng confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour
and malice, caufeles, aganis ymq'^' Robert Irwing in Baddis, laitlie, in the moneth of Februar laftbypaft, come to the toun and landis of the Kirktoun of Skene, quiiair the faid vmq''' Robert was for
the tyme, accumpaneit with certane freindis and nichtbouris in the cuntrey, at ane bankett, making
mirrie, lipning for na harme, iniurie or perfute of ony perfones, hot to haif levit vnder Godis peax and
our fouerane lordis ; thair, about ten houris at evin, vnder fileiice and clud of nycht, enterit within the
faid hous of the Kirktoun of Skene, quhair the laid vniq''" Robert was, as faid is, and fchot and dilafcbet
thair hagbuttis and piflolettis at him, quhairwith thai fchot him throw the body ; and thaireftir, with
thair fuordis, hurt and woundit him in dyuerfe pairtis of his body. Off the quhilkis fcliotis and crewall
flraikis, the faid vraq''' Robert depairtit this lyfe ; and fa, was maift crewallie flane and murdreift, vnder
uycht, be the faidis perfones; and thai, and ilk ane of thame, ar airt and pairt of the faniyn Slauchter
and Murthour, committit vpoun fet purpois, prouifioune and foirthocht feliony ; in hie and niauifeft
contempt of our fouerane Lord, his hienes auctoritie and lawis.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of Robert Watfoune in Auchincloche,
ffand, pronuncet and declairit, all in ane voce, the faidis Johnne, &c. to be Clene,
Innocent and Acquit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vniq'' Robert
Irwing ; and haill remanent poyntis of the faid Dittay.

' ' James Gordoune, burges of Kirkcubreycht (and 26 others) amerciat in payue of ane Imndretii
merkis,' each, for not appearing to pass upon the Assise of the JM'dowells. * See Jul. 25, 1605.

494 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

^amesiufeen — ^lausljttr.

Dec. 11. — Ml- Robert Iinvixci of Moncoffer, Daiiid Gray in the Lyn,
Alexander Maj^nie in Adieftoune, and Andro Many in Auchqnhartene.

Dilaitit of the crynies vnderwritten, viz.

Persewaris, Johnne Forbes of Mylnebowie, as father; Patrik Forbes, James Forbes, brether;
Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of ^lonkland, Aduocat.

Preloquutouris for the pannell, the Erie of Home, the Mailler of Marfchell, the Maifter of
^loirtoune, Mr Johne Ruffell, Mr Robert Lyntoune.

FoRSAMEKiLL as thai, with thair complices, with convocatioune, &c. laitlie, vpone the tent day of
Februar laftbypafl, haifing coiifauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis Johnne Forbes younger
in Mylnebowie, be thame felffis and thair complices, of thair fpeciall caufing, fending, hounding out,
reffettins with the bluidie hand, airt, pairt-taking, command, alliliance and ratihabitioune, come be way
of Hame-fukkin to James Hallis duelling hous at the Kirk of Skene, quhair the faid rmq''' Johnne
Forbes was for the tyme, doand his liefuU effaires and buflines, traifting na evill, &c. ; and thair violentlie brak vp the durris of the faid hous, enterit within the famyn, fet vpone tlie faid vrnq'"" Johnne,
and maift crewallie and vnmerciefullie flew the faid vniq''' Johnne, be geving of him of dyuerfe bluidie
woundis, in the wambe ; and thai and ilk ane of thame ar airt and pairt, &c.

The perfeweris i^niWs Jimp/icifer fra the perfute of Mr Robert Irwing, for the
crymes contenit in the Letteris. — The pertbnes accufet denyis the haill Dittay,
and haill circumftanees thairof ; alfweill of the Slauchter as of the beiring of piftolettis. Mr Johnne Ruflell, prelocutour for the pannell, declairis, that Dauid
Gray and Andro INIany war abfent fra the Slauchter ; and Dauid Gray, the tyme
of the committing thairof, was fleipand in his bed, and knew nathing of the
doing thairof, quhill' it was done.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of the faid chancillai', all in ane voce,
fFand the faidis Dauid, &c. to be Clene, Innocent and Acquit, &c.

[Apud Lyxlythgow, M?- WiUiame Hairt of Levelandis, Jiiflice-Dept(fe.'\

Creasoit—Qef lilting: W)t 3HirisUtction of t\)t ^ccrtt aTouucil— ?i?olU=
iutj; a <^fneral ^sjsemijln of tf)r i^ii'fe, aftfi* ficincj: cI)arseH, $it,

Jan. 10, 1606. — Mr Johxxe Fokbes, Miniller at the Kirk of Airfurd,
(Moderator.) Mr JoHXXE "Weesche, Minifter at Air, Mr
RoBEKT DuRiE, Minifter at Anftruther, Mr Axdro'DuxCAXE, Minifter at Carraill, Mr Alexander Strauchaxe,
IMinifter at Creiche, Mr Johxxe Scherpe, Minifter at Kilmany."
Dilaitit, accufet and i)erfewit be Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Monkland, kny',

' Until. - As the circumstances are so very fully detailed in the course of the following proceedings, it seems to the Editor only to be necessary to refer the enquiring reader to Wodrow's Chureh
Histori/, pp. 506 — 516 ; Hailes' Memorials and Letters, James I. pp. 1 — i ; Cook's History of the
CIncrch of Scotland, II. 160, &c. An elaborate account of this remarkable struggle is also given, by
lie learned Dr M-C'rie, in liis interesting Life of Andrew Jlelfille, \o\. II. p. '~0I, &c.

39 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 495

Aduocat to our fouerane Lord, for his hienes eiitreis, off the crjnnes of Ti-effone
fpecifeit in the Dittay following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as, be tlie firft Act of our fouerane lordis Parliament, lialdiii at Edinburgh in the
inoneth of Maij, I™.V''. fourfcoir four yeiri^, it is flatute and ordanit, that our Souerane Lord, his airis
and fuccellburis, be thame felffis and thair CounfaJlis, ar, and in tyme cuming falbe. Judges competent to all perfones liis hienes fubiectis, off quiiatfumeuir eflait, degre, functioun or conditioune that
enir tliay be, of fpirituall or temporal!, in all matteris quhairin thay or ony of thame falbe apprehendit,
fummond or charget, to anfweir to fic thingis as falbe inquyret of thame, be our faid Souerane Lord
and his Counfall ; and that nane of thame, quhilk lall liappin to be apprehendit, callit or fummond, to
the effect foirfaid, prefume ar tak vpone hand to declyne the Judgment of his hienes, his airis and
fuccelfouris, and thair Counfall, in the premilfes ; vnder the pane of Treflbne : Nociitwithstanding
it is of verritie, that the taidis Mr Joiinne Forbes, &c. being charget be our fouerane lordis Letterls,
raifit at the inilance of his Maiefleis Aduocat, for his hienes entreis, to conipeir befoir his Maiellie and
the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, vpone the xxiiij day of October laftbypaft, to half anfuerit for thair
vnlauclifull and contemptuous convening, proceiding and balding of ane pretcndit General! Affemblie,'
at Aberdene, the fecund day of July laftbypaft ; and appointing of ane new General! Alfemblie, to be
lialdin at Aberdene, the laft Tyfday of September thairefter; without the confent, and eftir the expres
refufeall of tlie Laird of Lowrieftoun,^ ins Maicfteis Commiffioner, being tlian prefent in AI)erdene ;
and in contempt of the charges of Hoirning, lauclifnliie execute vpone the firft day of the faid monetli
of July lartbyi)aft, at the faid niercait croce of tlie burgh of Aberdene, difcliargeing, in our fonerane
lordis name, all convening and balding of ony fic Affemblie, at tliat tyme and place, vnder the pane of
rebellioun ; and aganis the will and command of the Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfall, fignifeit to
tlie faidis Minifteris be tlie Counfallis Letter than delyuerit to thame be the faid Laird of LowrieItoun, befoir thair faid proceiding, beiring, that becaus thair Lordfchipis vnderftuid that the balding of
ane Aifeniblie, thair, at that tyme, wald heichlie offend his Maieftie, and be eflimat be his hienes ane
heich contempt, thairfoir it was thair Lordfchipis will and plefour, that the faidis Minifteris fould nodit
liald ane Aflemblie, at that tyme, nor mak ony indictioune of ane new Alit'inblie, but fuffer llie fimyn
to defert. As lykwayis, the faid Mr Johnne Welsohe, Minifter at Air, being charget to half comperit befoir tlie Loirdis of his hienes Secreit Counfall, the faid xxiiij day of October laftbypaft, to half
anfuerit for his vnlawfull refoirting to the faid burgh of Aberdene, vpone the fourt, fyft and faxt dayis
refpeclme, of the faid moneth of July laftbypaft ; and vnderftanding, as it was maift nottour and nianifeft to all men thair, how vndeutifullie and contemptuouflie the faidis Minifteris proccdit, in tlje lialdintr of thair faid vnlauchfull pretendit Geneiall Afti;mb!ie, to the contempt of his Maiefteis autboritie,
and of the directioune of the Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfall, in maner aboue fpecifeit ; neuertheles, the faid Mr Johnne Welfche, witliout all ordour, forme, neceflitie or preceding exampill, conveinit vnlawfullie with ane number of his complices, within the Kirk of the faid burcht of Aberdene,
the time foirfaid, and Ratiefeit and approvet the proceidingis of thair fiiid bretherene foirfaid, in balding of thair faid vnlauchfull Aftemblie, and making indictioun of ane new Aftemblie, as faid is, an<l
tuik inftrumentis thairupoune. And in refpect of the premiffis, all the foirfaidis Minifteris, being cliarget
as faid is, to compeir befoir the Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfall, to half hard and fene it ftunditi
and declairit, that thai had verrie contemptuouflie convenit thame felftis, and proceidit in thair faidis
actiones, the tyme foirfaid ; and thairfoir, tlie faid Affemblie, and approbatioun thairof, declairit vnlauchfull, and fua to be repute and haldin in tyme cuming; and thay to bepuneifchit in tliair perfones and

' Of the Church of Scotland. = Sir Alexander Straitoii of I.aurenstoun, knight, one of the Commissioners for the
Union of England and Scotland, July 11, 1604.. A Letter of Gift and Tension, for all the dayes of his lyfetyme of
the hlenche-deutie of the Lordschip of Scone, extending to 1000 merks, was Ratified by Parliament, July 11, 1000.
Vid. Acta Purl. Straiton was apirointed to represent the King, In Ecclesiastical Judicatories.

496 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

guidis, for thair ralauclifull convening, balding and approveing of the foirfaid Afferablie, in maner abone
writtin : And tlie foirlaidis Minifleiis, all compeirand befoir the faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, the
faid xxiiij day of October Jaflbypaft, to anfuer in tlie faid caufe, the famyn being ane actioun maift
competent and propper to the Jurifdictioun of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, becaufe the famyn concernit the tryell and puneifchment of aue heich offence, contempt of his Maiefteis authoritie, and diffobedience of his ^laieftie and Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfall : Neuertheles, the foirfaidis Minifteris, and ilk ane of thanie, treffonabillie declynit the judgement of his Maieflie and Lordis of his
liienes Secreit ConnCM Jimpliciter, be thair Declinatour, fubfcrpiit be everie ane of thair handis, and
gevin in be tlianio, in Judgement, befoir the faid Lordis ; to the quhilk, it being replyit be the faid Aduocat, that the famyn fould be Repellit, in refpect of the faid Act of Parliament, declairing all fie
Declinatouris to be null, and the proponeris thairof to incur the pane of Treffone : And, in refpect of
the quhilk anfuer and reply, your faid Declinatour was repellit be the faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, all in ane voce : The faidis Minifteris, neuertheles, perfillit fa obllinatlie thairin, that eftir the
famyn was repellit be the faidis Lordis, as faid is, quhairby thai could nocht pretend ony probable dout
or ignorance of thair Jurif<lictioun, the faidis Minifteris gaif in thaireftir, thaii- remanent Defenflis, in
writt, vnder proteftatioun ahvayis, that thai adheirit to thair faid Declinatour : Be proponeing quhairof,
as alfo be adheiring to the fame Declinatour, eftir that it was Repellit, thay, and euerie ane of thame,
lies committit Treffone, and fould incur the panes thairof.

Persewer, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Gray, Mr Tliomas Hoip.

The Loudis of Secreit Counsall, vnderwritten, tleclairis thay will affift

the Juflice, as Assessoueis in this caiife.

Assessors.
Johnne Erie of Montroife, James Lord of Balmyrrienoche, IMrJohnnePreftounof Pennycuik,

Alexander Erie of Dumferme- Sccretar to his Maieflie, and Collectour to his Maieflie,

ling. Lord Fyvie, Chanceller, Prelident of his hienes College Sir Richard Cokburne of ClerkingJohnne Erie of Mar, of Juftice, toun. Lord Previe Seill,

Alexander Erie of Lynlythgow, Mark Lord Neubottill, Johnne Lord Murray of TyllieGeorge Erie of Dunibar, Walter Priour of Blantyre, baime,

Patrik Lord Glamefs, Johnne Commendatour of Haly- Sir Robert Meluill of ]MourdocarAlexander Lord Elphingftoune, rudhous, ny, kny^
James Lord Abercorne, Sir James Douglas of Quhitting- Alex'' Mailter of Elpliingftoune,
Dauid Lord Scone, Comptroller hame, Lerinftoun of Kilfythe.

to his jNIaieflie,

It is allegit be tlie pannell, that thai audit to haif bene charget vpone xl dayis
wairning, feing thay ar to be aceufet for crynies of Treffone. — The Aduocat anfueris, that it is daylie practik, in bringing tlie perfones put in waird to pannell,
to put thanie luinmerlie to ane Tiyell ; and fpeciallie, the practik of the Laird of
Bonytoune, quha was tane and put in waird for the breking of his fatheris lioufe
and cofferis, and fteilling and away-taking of his fatheris euidentis, &c., was
brocht fra the waird to the bar, and put to ane Affyfe.

The Juftice Repellis the allegeance, and ffindis forder proces : — Quhairnpone
the Aduocat alkit inftrunientis.

It is forder allegit be JNIr Thomas Hoip, prelocutoiu" for the pannell, that this

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 497

matter can noclit pafs to ane AfTyfe, vpone the declinatour gevin in be thanie
aganis the fummondis perfewit contrail- thame, befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, in fa far as thay ar pei-fewit vpon the firft Act of Parliament, haldin in May
1584 yeiris ; becaus the meaning and intentioune of the faid law is only to eftableifche the Kingis Maiefteis royall i>ower and Jurifdictionne oner all perlbnes ;
quhilk the pannell, in all humilitie and fubiniffioiine, confeffis : And albeit the
faid law appeiris to be generall, and vniuerfallie to comprehend all matteris,
yit the famyn can nocht be vniwerfallie vnderftuid ; becaus, quhairfoeuir a law
fpeikis generallie, gif vpone the generall fpeiking, ony abfurditie or incommoditie may follow, quhilk may tak away former lawis, or confound dillinct and
diuerfe' jurifdictiones, eftableifchet be lawis ofbefoir, the famyn, in that caice,
man be reftrictit to thais matteris that may fall vnder the compts of the law ;
quhilk fpeciallie audit to half place, quhair the matter is odious : But fa it is, gif
this law war vniuerfallie vnderftuid, of all matteris, it fould follow, that the Jurifdictiones of the Secreit Counfall, the Lordis of Seffioune, and Juftice Generall,
quhilkis ar fupreme, Jurifdietiones Ciuill fould be counfoundit, infafar as the
woirdis of this law being attendit, na perfone being convenit befoir the Lordis
of Secreit Counfall for ane cryme quhilk is competent to the Juftice, or for ane
ciuill debt, quhilk is competent to the Seflioune, micht nocht, nor could nocht,
without the perrell of the Law, allege" that the Lordis of Secreit Counfall ar
nocht Judges competent in Criminall or Ciuill cauffis : Bot this is fie ane inconuenient, and fa inipropper for the caife, mynd and intentioune of the law,
that thair is na perfone will mak queftioune thairin : And as this M'ar competent in the diftinct Jurifdictionne of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, Seffioun, and Juftice, fua the famyn is alfe competent in Jurifdictionne Ecclefiafl;icall, quhilk is an feuerall and diftinct Jurifdictionne be the felf, haifing
the Warrand and grund of the word of God, and being authorizet be his
Maiefteis lawis ; fpeciallie, be ane Act of Parliament maid in anno r".VMxxix,
ane vther in the Ixxxj and Ixxxij yeiris ; fua that the pannell, being than convenit befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, in ane matter quhilk was altogidder
Ecclefiafticall, pertening to the Jurifdictioun of the Kirk, quhairof the cheif
poynt confiftit vpoun the lawfulnes or vnlawfulnes of the Affemblie haldin be
thame, thay micht lauchfullie, without the perrell of this law, half gevin in thar
Declinatour, declyneing the faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, as nawayis Judges
competent of the vnlawfulnes or lawfulnes of the Affemblie ; and in doing thairof, thay could nawayis, nor can nawayis be decernit to haif comniittit aganis the
faid law ; feing the faid law, poffibillie, can nocht be extendit bot to lie caiffes
quhilk hes nocht ane fpeciall, ane feperat, or diftinct Jurifdictioun, be the felflf ;

' Separate. ^ Plead. This verb is almost universally made use of tlirnngliout these Records,

and indeed in nearly the whole of the Forensic proceedings of that period, chiefly in that sense.

VOL. II. '^ ^^

498 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

and quhair, it may appeir, that the paiinell, in the Summandis befoii' the Secreit
Counlall, war nocht famekill ceitit vpone the vnlawfuhies or lawfuhies of the
AflenibHe. — As for the contemptuous convening being difcharget be his Maiefteis Letteris, aganis the requeift of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, and the Comraiffioner of the Kirk, quhilk matter mycht properlie appeir to pertene vnto the
Jurifdictioune of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, and that thairby the Declinatour man fall vnder the compas of this law ; it is anfuerit, that it fould nocht be
confidderit, quhat was the middis^ quhairupoune thay war convenit befoir the
Secreit Counfall ; hot the conclufioune of the Summondis man be attendit, feing
it is the conclufioune and nocht the premifles that maks the natour of the actioun,

quhairvpone ane caufe and grund ^ ; and vpone ane fact thair

may concur of the law twa actiones or ma,'^ quhilk ar dinofcef* be their concluiiones ; as in an actioune of fpuil5ie, perfewit ciuillie, the cognitioun thairof Avill
pertene to the Lordis of Counfall, the lybell being fa formet, that it concluid the
reftitutioiine of the guidis fpuil3eit ; and vpone that fame fact, the fpuil3ear may
be convenit befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, for Oppreffioune, the Summondis
concluding to heir and fie ordour tane with him for committing of the faid fact ;
fa that albeit the fact be ane, yit tua diuerfe conclufiones produces tua feuerall
actiones, the cognitioune quhairof pertenis to tua feuerall Juriidictiones. And
as this is trew, in all vther matteris Prophane, fa it is alyk trew, into the caife
intentit and perfewit aganis the pannell befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfall,
quhairin it audit nocht to be refpectit, qvihat was the deid quhairupoune thay
war fummond, hot it aucht to be confidderit quhat the fummondis concludit : Sa
that albeit the allegit fact or deid committit be thame mycht be punefchet be
the Secreit Counfall, and fa pertene to thair Jurifdictioune ; yit, feing the conclufioune beiris nocht allanerlie for the faid fact, qidiilk gif it had bene fa confauet, the pannell could nevir nor would nevir half declynit, lyk as, in facto, thay
haif nocht declynit the famyn ; hot concludis to heir and fie the AfTemblie haldin
be thame vnlauchfuU : Quhilk conclufioune makis the matter to be altogidder
Ecclefiafl;icall, only fubiect to the Jurildictioune of the Kirk eftableifchet be his
Maieftie and be the lawis of this cuntrie ; the actioune being comptit of that
nature, quhairof the conclufioune is, of all deutie and confcience thay aucht and
mycht haif declynet the famyn, without the perrell of the faid law; and thairfoir,
&c. SccumUie, It is allegit, that the Act of Parliament can nocht be extendit
to the Declinatour vfet and proponit be the pannell ; becaus in all Lawis, the
intentioune and reffone of the Law aucht to be attendit ; hot fa it is, that the
iutentioune f nd refibne of this Law was only maid, in fie matteris, quhair ony
perfone was fummond yi/yjcr iuqu'ircndis, as appeiris be the verrie expres woirdis
of the Law, faying, in all matteris quhairin fall be apprehendit, &c. fua that the
' Mwliuflij means, * Illegible. ' More. * Lat. dignoscere, distinguished, judged of.

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 499

law being only confauet vpone ane fingular' caice, it can na wayis be extendit to
ony vtlier caiffis or matteris, quhilk ar nocht expreffit in the Law ; and confequentlie, can nocht be extendit to the actioune perCewit aganis the pannell befoir
the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, becaus thai war nocht peri'ewitjhpcr iiiqiiirendis,
bot vpone ane perticular fact and lybell ; and the reflbne of this Law, quhnirfoir
it fould nocht m'lWiat fiiper hujiiircndis, becaus gif ony perfone, being lunnnond
fuper iiiqiiirendis, wald declyne the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, the fact nocht
being knawin to him, it war ane nianifeft contemptuous Declinatour of his Maiefteis fouerane authoritie, and ane exeilling of his perfoun fra his Maiefteis maift
royall power, quhilk war maift wortliie of the pane of Trellbne ; fua that this
reflbne, nocht being mHitat in the caufe of the perfute perfewit aganis the pannell befoir the Secreit Counfall, the faidis perfones, in vfing of thair Declinatour,
hes nawayis fallin vnder the compas of the iaid Law. And forder, tlie taid Law
can nocht be perticuierlie extendit aboue the perticuler caife nientioiiet thairintill quia odiofafimt reftriiigenda ; and that, be the confent of all Doctouris, is
countit odious, quhilk is aganis the dilpofitiomie of the Cowmoun Law, or quhilk
may preiudge a thrid perfones lauchfull rycht ; quhilk is the nature of this Law ;
feing by it the puneifment of Trellbne is imponet" vpone ane fact, quhilk nather
be the Cowmoune Law, nor be the Lawis of this cuntrey is treflbnabill. Tliiidlie, the pannell can nawayis be accufet for committing of Treflbne, be proponing
of the Declinatour, becaus, be the Law, the proponeing of the Declinatour is
nocht comptit ane treflbnabill deid, bot only prohibeit to do the ame, vnder the
pane of Trellbne ; fa that the Aflyfe, without committing manifeft Errour, can
nocht convict thame of the faid fact, as Treffone. ViimUie, the pannell can nawayis pas to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe, for the Declinatour, be vertew of this Act
of Parliament, becaus, fen the making thairof, viz. in the moneth of . . . ., aimo
1592, all lawis, actis, ftatutes and ordinances, quhilk may derogat to the Jurifdictioun of the Kirk ar abrogat and annullit ; lyk as, be the lame Law, it is
declairit be his Maieftie and the thrie Eftaitis, that the foirfaid Act of Parliament quhairupovn the pannell is accufet, being the 129 Act of the Parliament
haldin in Maij 1584, fall nawayis be preiudiciall, nor derogat ony thing to the
previlege that God hes gevin to the fpirituall office-beiraris in the Kirk, concerning heidis of Religioun, matteris of errofie,^ excommunicatioune, collatioim and
deprivatioune of Minifleris, and vtheris ficlyke eflentiall cenfouris ecclefiafticall,
expreflie groundit and hailing warraud of the woird of God ; be the qidiilk Law,
the Kingis Maieftie and the Eftaitis hes declairit, that the faid Act of Parliament
quhairupoune the pannell is accufet, fall nawayis be preiudiciall to ony Ecclefiafticall eflentiall cenfouris, foundit vpoune the woird of God, being of that natour quhairof the particuleris preceding thairin contenit ar : Bot trew it is, that
' Special, individual. ' Imposed. ^ Heresy.

500 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606:

the Generall Aflemblie is an elTentiall Ecclefiafticall ceufour, exprefslie warrandit
be the woird of God, and be that fame Act in the fourfcoir tiielf,' Ratiefeit and
approvin be his Maieftie, and decernit to be lauchful and Godlie in the felf, and
is of the lyk natour witli tlie particuleris contenit in the faid Act ; becaus the
intreiting of the lieidis of Religioiine, matteris of errafie/ excommiinicatioune,
collatioune and depi-iuatioune of Minifteris, ar proper pairtis of the General Affemblie, and of the office and Jnrifdictioun of the fame, et ejujilem ejl nature cum
I'nis jMrlibiis : And thairfoii-, the iiaunell, in the proponeing- of the faid Declinatour, haifing done nathing bot that quhilk pertenit properlie to the Jurifdictioune
of the Kirk, in defyreing the queftioune anent the faid Generall Affemblie to be
remittit to the Kirk, tliay did na wi-ang in proponeing of the faid Declinatovir,
nor yit can the faid Declinatonr be drawin in queftion, be vertew of the faid Act,
quhilk be the foirfaid pofteriour Act, in that poynt, is tacife abrogat be ane exprefs declaratioune, that the famyn fall uawayis be extendit to the eflentiall cenfouris of the Kirk ; fua that the pannell was in optima Jide, in refpect of the faid
pofteriour Declaratioun, to vfe the benifeit of the famyn ; and thairfoir, &c.

Thaireftir, the pannell for cleiring to his Maieftie of tliair intentioune in vfeing of the faid Declinatoui", hes declairit, and be thir prefentis declairis, that thai
nawayis thairby meanit to exeme^ thame felffis fra ony lauclrfull fubiectioun to
his Maiefteis royall authoritie, nor yit frome the Jurifdictioun of the Lordis of
Secreit Counfall, in ony thing quhairin ony vther fubiect is fubiect to thair
authoritie ; bot only, to haif that caufe, tuiching the lauchfulnes or \'nlawfulnes
of the faid Generall Aflemblie, being ane mater meir fpirituall, to be judget be
his Maieftie and the Kirk, as only Judges competent thairto, accoirdiug to the
law of God, and eftableifchet Actis of Parliament within this realme ; declaii'ing
be thir prefentis, that liis IMaieftie fould judge Ecclefiafticall matteris with Ecclefiafticall perfones, lyk as he judges Ciuill mattei-is with Ciuill perfones ; and
acknawledgeing thame ielffis, in all matteris Ciuill or Criminall, to be fubiect to
his Maieftie (and) all the lauchfull Jurifdictiones eftableifchet for fic caiftis within
this land ; vnto the c^uhilkis, in all humble reuerance, thay fubmit thame felffis ;
lyk as, in all Ecclefiafticall matteris, thai ar reddie to be judget be his Maieftie
with the Generall AfTemblie, and vtheris eftableifchet ordouris of the Ecclefiafticall Jurifdictes.

It is Axsuekit to the ffirfl allegeance, that the Actis of the Parliament
Ixxix and Ixxxj can mak na derogatioune to the Act of Parliament maid in Maij,
anno 1584, quhairupoun the Dittay is foundit, being pofteriour to thame, geveing expres Jurifdictioune to the Kingis Maieftie and Lordis of his hienes Secreit
Counfall over all perfones, ather fpirituall or temporall, accoirdiug to the tennour
of the faid Act : And as to the nature of the cans perfewit aganis the pannell
1 A.D. 1592, « Heresy. ^ Exempt, free.

39 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 501

befoii* the Loirdis of Secreit Counfall, accoirding to the tennour of the Dittay
and Decreit of Secreit Counfall producet, the Lordis of Secreit Counfall was maift
comijeteut Judges to the haill contentis thairof, alfweill anent the tryell and
puneifchment of thair contempt, as of the vnlawfulnes of thair Affemblie, at that
tyme and place, thay being exprellie difcharget be his Maiefteis Letteris of
Hoirning and be the Counfallis command, in writt, to hald na Affemblie at that
tyme, or indict ane new Affemblie to ane new tyme and place : Lyk as, thay
haifing proponit thair Declinatour befoir the faidis Lordis, the famyn was
Reiiellit, and Decreit gevin in the haill caufe ; in refpect quhairof, the Dittay
ftandis relevant. — To the J'ecuiid allegeance, anfueris, that the woirdis of the
Act of Parliament, anent Declinatouris to be proponit in actiones Jiiper inqnirenclis, befoir the Secreit Counfall, can nocht exeme the caife contravertit, fra
thair Jurifdictioune ; albeit that fauour was fchawin to the pairtie, to foirwairne
thame of the caufe thai war to anfuer : Bot generallie, the Law is vnderftand,
and hes alwayis bene interpreit, that all Declinatouris proponit in matteris competent to the Jurifdictioun of the Counfall ar of thame felffis treffonabill, as Avas
folempnatlie decydet in the Kingis Maiefteis awin prefence aganis vmq'° Mr
Dauid Blak : And tliairfoir the Declinatour i)roponit be the jiannell, and adheirit
to be thame, eftir the famyn was repellit be the Counfall, fallis vnder the woirdis,
meaning and tennour of tlie Act of Parliament. — To the thrijd allegeance, anfueris, that all crymes ordanit to be pwneift be the payne of Treafoun ar treffonabill.— To theffourt allegeance, anfueris, that tlie clans of the Act of Parliament, in the yeir of God I".VMxxxxij, being ane exceptioun frome the Act of
Parliament, in the yeir of God 1583, confermis the famyn Act, in all heidis nocht
expreflie exceptit ; lyk as, the exceptioun is only of heidis of Religioun, materis
of errafie, excommunicatioun, collatioun or deprivatioun of Minifteris, or ficlyke
effentiall cenfouris, fi)eciallie groundit and haifing warrand of the word of God ;
and it is of veritie, that the keiping of ane Affemblie at ane certane tyme and
place, and appointing of ane new Affemblie, aganis the Kingis Maieftie expres
charge vnder the payne of rebellioun, and aganis the will and command of the
Counfale, and aganis the difaffenting of his Maiefteis Commiffioner, is nather
ane held of Religioun, mater of errafie, excommunicatioun or effentiall cenfour ;
and thairfore, is nocht exceptit fra the faid Act, bot fallis vnder the prohibitioun
and danger thairof: And thairfore, nochtwithftanding of the alledgance and
dedaratioun foirfaid, the Dittay fould be putt to the knawledge of ane Affyfe.

It is lykwyife allegeit be the Pannell, that the Juftice can nocht putt thame
to the knawlege of ane Affyfe, for Treafoun, becaus thay ftand at the borne
vnrelaxit. — The Aduocat anfueris, that the Juftice hes admittit the preloquutouris to compeir in the faid mater ; and thairfoir the Dittay for Treafoun fould
be putt to ane Affyfe.

502 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I606.

The Justice admittit the faid pi-eloquutoiiris to compeii- as preloquutouris
ill the faid mater : And with anile of tlie haill AlTelTouris, in ane voce, in relpect
of the anfueris maid be my Lord Adiiocat, Ordaiiis the Dittay to be putt to ane
AfTyfe. — Quhairnpoune my Lord Adnocat aflvit inftrumentis.

V^SSISA.

Sir Jolinrie Home of Noith-Ber- SirArc)iil)al(l Sterlingof Keir,kny',Gawin Home of JoliiinefLleucIi,
uik, knyclit, Johnne Leviiigftouiio of Don ypace, Tliomas LevingftouiK' of P^utoun,

Sir George Home of Broxmouth, James Stliaw of Saucliie, Ro'LeviiigflouneofWefl-Quarter,

knyclit, elder, Mark Swyntoun in Iiiperkething, James Gib yoiniger of Carriber,

Sir James Forrefler of Garden, Harie Stewart of Cragiehall, Alexander Home of llentoune,

knyclit, George Home of Deanes, Sir Patrik Home of Pol wort, kny'.

The Adnocat afl<is infirnmentis of the admitting and fneiring of tlie Affyfe,
and eftir accnfationn of the perfonis on pannell, be Dittay. — The Adnocat, for
verificatioun of the Dittay, produceit the Declinatonr, fuofcryuit witli thair handis
acknawledgeit be thame felff in Jndgement ; Repetit the Act of Parliament ;
prodnceit tlie Decreit of Secreit Connfall, the charge of Hoirning, and the pretendit proces,' Inbfcrynit be the pretendit Moderatonr and the pretendit Clark
of the Generall Aflemblie, granting the relTait of the Connlallis Miffiue, of the
tennoiir lybellit, and the Declaratioiin of his Maiefteis Commiffioner, bering that
he difalTentit fra thair haill proceding ; and feing my Lord Jnftice, be the auife
of the haill Counlale prefent, hes dilcnlRt the pannellis haill defenffis, and ffnnd
the Dittay relevant ; and that thair r«?flis 11a forder to the Alfyle bot to declair,
quhidder the factis contenit in the Dittay half bene committit be the pannell or
nocht, the famiii fact being fa manifefllie provin be the writtis produceit, and
nawyife denyit be the pannell, bot ratifeit and renewit in Jndgement, as the
proces beris ; in caife thay acquit the pannell, the Adnocat proteflis for Wilfull
Errour and remeid of Law, with all regoiu-. — The pannell proteftis for Errour
aganis the AlTyfe, in caice thay fFyle thame of Treafoiuie. — The Aduocat afkis
inftrumentis, that the pannell confeflis to gefing in of the Declaratour.

Verdict. The Aftife, be the mouth of the laid Harie Stewart of Craigiehall,
chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faidis fax INIinifteris, and ilk ane
of thame, to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the treflbnabill declyneing of the
Judgement of his Maieftie and Lordis of his Secreit Connfall, conforme to the
Dittay aboue fpecifeit.

Warrant and Dome o/'Banischement^ pronuncet aganis the Minister is, in Pretoria de Lynhjthgow, xxiij die menfis Octohris, ICO6, per
Magifirum WilUehmnn Hairt de Prejhnne, Jiifliciarium Depidatu m,
[Oct. 23.] — CoMPEiRiT M"' Thomas Henderfoun and Robert Lyntoune,

' Tbe procedure which took place at their Assembly. ' It has been thought most convenient

to insert the ' Dome' here, rather than under its proper date.

89&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 50.'}

fubftitutis to our ibiierane lordis Aduocattis, and producet to niy Lord Juftice his
Maiefteis Warrand ; quhilk the Juftice caufit be oppinlie red in Judgement, and
ordanit the famyn to be infert in the buikis of Adiornall ; quhairof the tennoiufolio wis.
James R.

Whearas, in our Juftice-Court, held at Lynlytbgow, the tenth of Januare laftbypaft,
Mr Johnne Forbes, &c. war convicted of the cryme of Treffone, for pair contemptuous and trcffonable
declyneing )ie Judgement of us and ]>e lordis of our Secreit Counfa]], Jtmplicitcr, be a deciinatour iul>-
fcryuit with Jiair handis, andgevin in be fame, in Judgement, befoir the faidis Lordis of our Counfall ;
as in the faid proces of Convlctioune at mair lenth is contenit : And pe pronunceatiovn of the Dome
being by our Juftice, vpone grave and wechtie refj)ectis continewit, till our farder plefour war knawin
pairin, We now confidering pe grit infolence of that proud contempt, and quhat dangerus exampill it
micbt be, if it fould pas vnpwneifciied, haveing, in our accuftomed lanity, gevin to tliail'e declared
Tratouris moir pan fuflicient tyme to haif implored and maid humble fute for our mercie ; jit, finding
in thame nathing hot a continwing obdured obftinacie and wilfulnes, without likliehoid or appeirance
of refipifcence and repentance in thame, for pair former committed foleis : And albeit pe gritnes of
pail- offence, and fpecialUe in men of that functioun (quhais lyves fould be lanternes and lichtis to
vperis, to cary thame felvis in all deutie and obedience, and pairfoir pair ouerfightis requyreing pe moir
feveir animaduerfioun and pwneifchment,) hath moft iuftlie demereited the extremitie of the regour
to be inflicted vpone thame, for ane exampill to affray all vperis to attempt pe lyk ; jitt, becaus hcirtofoir that Law Iiaith nevir bene putt to executioun, quhairby fum men may perhaps pretend that pai
had pe moir j)robabill ignorance pairof, (albeit in reafone the fame can be no exeufe,) We haif witii
our wounted clemency, vpone that refpect only, fpared to inflict the rigour of the Law, at pis tyme :
It being our Will and pleafour, that our Juftice or his depute fould fence and affix a Juftice Court,
to be held at Lynlythgow, or ony vper pairt elfe that our Counfall fall think expedient, the xxiij day of
October nixtocum, and pair caufe Dome to be gevin out againft the faidis traytouris, to be Banisched
all our dominiones, during all pe dayis of pair naturall lyves ; vnderj)ane of daelh : And pe Dome
being pronunced, oure Will and plefour is, that pai be returned to pair wairdis, thair to remane for pe
fpace of ane moneth, for making pair preparationes for pair dcpairtour ; befoir pe expyreing quhairof,
gif pai do nocht depairt, wind and wedder fcrveing, oure Will and pleafour is, that ]ie ordinarie death
vfuallie inflicted vpone Traytouris be directed to be execute vpone thame : And gif pai fall noclit
depairte within pe faid fpace, or being depairtit, fall returne into oure dominiones, witliout our Licenfe,
thay fall incur pe pane of death, and all vper panes dew to perfones convict of Treflbne. Quhairanent
thefe prefentis fall be to our faid Juftice a fufficient Warrand. And becaus this our fpare dealing
and grit clemencie, extendit towardis thofe aboue named offendouris, in this thair fo haynous a cryme
and offence, may perhappes move in fura vtheris fum prefumptioun to think, that for trefpallis of this
qualitie no gritter rigour will be heireftir vfcd : ffor removeing of which pair foolifche opinione and
conceate, and that everie ane may haif notice of our full determinatioun in any fucbe lyk cafe heireftir,
Oure Will and pleafour is, that in our faid Juftice Court, to be keipit pe faid day, for pronunceing of
pe faid Dome, fpeciall intimatioun be maid, in open Court, by our faid Juftice, to all our leigis pair
prefent, that it is our refolutioun, that gif any heirefter fall offend, in fuch a heich trefpas, that pai fall
be proceidit againft with all feueritie ; and that the death dew vnto Traytouris fall be inflicted vpone
thame with all rigour ; the example of this our prefent Icnitie at pis tyme, nevir remayning any motiue
to induce ws to fchaw any fuch clemencie to fuch as fall commit pe lyk offence heireftir : And our
will is, that pir prefentis be recoirdit in the buikis of Adiornall, and that publicatioun be maid heirof
at the mercait croce of Edinburghe, and all vper places neidfull. Gevin at our Court of Ilamptone
Court, the xxvj day of September, 1606,

504 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

Accoirding to the quhilk Warrand, the faid Jiiftice-depute, be the mouth of
Henrie Wilfouue, deinpfter of Coiu't, pronuncet dome, and decernit and ordanit
the faidis perfones to be Banilchet all our fouerane lordls dominiones, during- all
the dayis of thair naturall lyves : And ordanis thame to returne to thalr Avairdis,
thairin to remane for the fpace of ane monethe, for making of thair preparatioun
for thair depairtour ; befoir the expyreing quhairof, gif thay depairt nocht, wynd
and wedder ferving, the faid Jullice-depute, accoirding to the faid Warrand,
decernis and ordanis the ordinarie daeth vfuallie inflictit vpone perfones convict
of Treffone to be execute vpone thame : And gif they fall nocht depairt within
the faid fpace, or being depairtit, fall returne within his hienes dominiones without his Maiefteis Licence, decernis and ordanis thame, accoirding to the faid
Warrand, to incur the pane of daeth, and all vther jjanes vfuallie inflictit vpone
perfones convict of Treffone : Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

I31r WiUiame Hairt of Preftotme, Jujlice-Depute.']

iHmUtv of X\)t tm^xtitw Hi X\)t wat%i iHaic]^ts.

^TiiE Clan or ' Name' of Armstrong was perhaps the most distinguislied of tlie warlike Thieves
of the Scotish Border, having possession of the largest portion of Liddisdale and the Dehateable Land.
For the exploits of many individuals of this name, reference may be had to the Works of Sir Walter
Scott, and especially to the Introduction to the Border Minstrelsy, and the Notices prefixed to ' Johnie
Armstrong' and ' Kinmont Willie,' he. The almost unparalleled act of bravery of the Laird of
BuccLEUCH, who achieved the deliverance of Kinmont Will from the Castle of Carlisle, in April
1596, has been adverted to in a former part of this Collection.' A very interesting ' Relation' of this
remarkable feat, taken from a contemporary MS., is also given in the Minstrelsy,' which the reader
will find well worthy of perusal. .This event is likewise narrated in the Anonymous History of Scotland,
already quoted ;' and as his Narrative is very brief, it has been thought proper to preserve a transcript
here. — ' Now Auld Will Armistrang of Kenmont being tane be Inglis men, and is wairdit in the
Caftell of Cairleill, within ane ilrait priiroune, and yrnils on him ; and being to thoill the tryall of the
Law, knew perfytlie that thair was no faifty for him. He vrittis in Scotland to his freindis, to fie gif
thay culd mak him releiff. Quhainipoun the Laird of Balclewcii pafl within' thrie fcoir tenne
horfe to the I'aidis Caftell, and with ladderis clam the fame, and brak the prilfoune ; and bringand the
faid Willlame Kinmwnt hame with him, he cauffit blaw his trumpett and cry fum flughorns,^ puttis
thetoune and cuntry in fie ane fray, that nene durfl; flirr: Quiiairby, he brocht the faid Will Kinmont
away, but^ ane flraik, to the grit honour of his cuntry. This wes done the fext day of Apryill, 1596.'

The Murder of Sir John Carmiciiael, knight, the Warden of the West Marches, sealed the fate
of many of the Armstrongs, and led to the adoption of measures of the utmost severity against all those
of the name who were thereafter convicted, or even suspected, of mal-practices.'' On Nov. l^, 1601,
Thomas Armstrang, ' fone to Sandeis Ringane,' was convicted for being accessory to this barbarous
act of butchery, and is the first instance on record, in Scotland, of a criminal having been hung in chains.
The above mentioned Anonymous Historian' narrates the event very quaintly, in the following terms.
' Now the Bordouris being werry eiiill brokin, thair war dyuerfe Reidis' in all fydis, bayth be Scotland

' Vol. I. pp. 36.3 365. '^ See Sam's Pnetkal Works, 8vo. 1821, A'ol. I. p. ISO. 'MS. Advocates'

Library, A. -l. 35. * Under the number of. ^ Slogans, war erys. "= Without. ' See Vol. II.

pp. 4.50, 4.51, and 152. * MS. Advocates' Library. ' For Raids, hostile incursions.

S9 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 505

and Ingland ; and the Erll of Angous, lieaffand gewin tlie famin owir, qulia wes Wardane, the
King niakis the Laird off Carmichall Wardane ; qulia, finding the Airmifirarjiujis to be the
gritted occafioune of the trubbillis, wes myndfull to pvneife fum of tbanio, quha wes notoiius theiffis ;
and thay heaffing intelligenfe thaiioif, lendis to liira ane broder of auld Williume Airmijtraijngis of
Kenmumt, quha wes callit Alexander Airmiftrayng, alias Sandeis Ringand. This Ringane being in
his curapany, and entiring in conferance witli the Wardanis, ffindis that tliair wes na frendicijip to be
luiiiit for at his handis ; and alfo, thair wes fum young nienne witii tlie Wardane, quIia begane to mok
this Ringan, be fteilling out of Iiis fuord, and putting 3okis of egis in the fkabert, quhairby the famin
wahl not draw ; quhilk he perfaiffing, faid, that " he awowit to God, that thai fuld fie his fuord outt,
and {if) lie and thay vent on the giond qubair he mycht be pairlie!"' And fuming hamo to his awin
hous, in this readge, fayis to his fonnis, that be wes " maid fchame of fom,"awowing to God, " to be
equall with the famin !" And knawing the Wardane to ryd on the morne, ho and his fonis fettis
for him with fum wtheris, and flayis him be the fchott of ane hagbutt. And thaireftir, for the famin
caus, this Ringane and his fonis wertane and executt to deitb, as Tratouris to his Maiefty, be putting
bandis in the Kingis Wardane. This was done the 16 day of Junij, ypiiis IGOO,'

Sir Walter Scott supposes the well-known verses, ' Avmjlrong's Good Night,' to liave been composed by Thomas Armstrong, who is called by liim ' Ringan's Tarn,' previous to his execution, Nov.
14, 1601. The reader is referred to the Minstrelsy for the exploits of the Armstrongs, and of other
Worthies of the Scotish Border, whose names frequently occur in the Criminal Records.]

Feb. 13. — Alexander Airmestrang, callit Sanclic (>/' Roaanehitrne,
Dilatit and accufet be Johnrie Coinnieudater of Halja-iiidhous, Ibiie-iu-knv to
vmq'" Sir Johnne Carmichell of that Ilk, knycht.

FoRSAMEKiLL as lie, accurnpaneit with Thorn Ainnftrang, fone to Saiideis
Ringane^ the faid Ringane and vtheris, his fonis and com2)lices, to the number
of fewintene perfonis, or thairby, commoune thewis and tratouris, the niailt
pairt being on horfljak, and he on fute ; came all bodin in feir of weir, with
hagbuttis and j)iftolettis, lance-ftalffis and vtheris wappinnis, invafiue, to the
Murthumleis ; qubair thai, in the moneth of Jiuiij, I'^Wj"., altogidder confiiltit and
dewyfit the crewall and treafonabill Slauchter of the faid vmq''' Sir Johxne
Cakhichell of that Ilk, knycht, Warden of the West Marches ;^ and for
performance thairof, paft fra Murthumleis to Coloneheid, quhair he and his complices lay att wait for the faid vmq'" Sir Johnne paffing by to ane Court ; and as
he wes, in fobir and quyet maner, pafTand by to the laid Court, vpoiie the ....
day of the faid moneth of Junij, quhilk wes to be hauldin in Lochmabene, he
and his complices fett vpoune him att the Raeknowis, quhair, with fchottis of
hagbuttis and piftolettis, thay fchot him throw the body, and crewallie flew and
murdreift the faid vmq'° Sir Johnne Carmichell, being his Maiefteis ^^^^rdene
for the tyme : And the faid Alexander Armftrang wes airt and pairt of the laid

' Where lie might avenge his own quarrel. ^ See Vol. II. p. 3G3, where ho was sentenced

to be ' banuit vp in irne-cheinis,' after having his right hand struck off. ^ Ifobert Binel gives

the following notice, in his Diary, .Jul. 11, 1600. ' The Laird of Carmichael buroit ; quha was llaine
be the Armllrangis and Carliles, he doing and executing his office of Wardanrie, vpone the 16 of
Junij befoir.'

VOL. II. 3 S

506 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

crewall and trefibiiabill Murthoiir, he being than vpoun the ground with his
complices, att the committing of the faid vngodlie fact : To the takin' he confeft
the famin be his depofitiounis ; lyke as, he, be Depofitioun, declarit him felfF to
be innocent of ony vther haynous crymes, except the foiriaid innocent" Slauchter
of the faid ATnq'*" Sir Johnne ; quhilk he declairit he wes brocht vpoun aganis
his will. Item, for commoun Thift, commoun Reflett of thift, inputting and outputting of thift, fra land to land, fra countrey to countrey, baith of auld and new.

Persewer, My Lord (' Johnne Conimendater' of) Halyiudhous.

AssisA.
Robert jM''brair of Almagill, Andro Ker of Mylnerig, Michell Adamefoun, flefcheour in

Johnne Weir, brother to Auclitie- Gylbert Halyday, merchand bur- Edinburghe,

fardell, ges of Edinburglie, Williame Mow, hatt-maker thair,

Rt Johnnellounne, biirges of Ed'', Allane Cathcart, ftaibler thair, Andro Greir, burges tliair,
Vthrid M'douell of Mondurk, Robert Daljell, Y"' of that Ilk, Alexander Bowie, llaibler thair,
.... Hunter of Polnmde, James Johuneftoune or Waftraw, J'™ Steill, fumtyme of Houftoune.

Vekdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of the faid James Johuneftoune, chanceller, ffaud, pronunceit and declarit the faid Alexander Armftrang to be ffylit,
culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter and Murthour
of the faid vmq'" Sir Johne Carmichell, conforme to his DeiJofitiounis. And als,
to be ffylit, culpabill and convict of commoune thift, commoune reflett of thift.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburglie, and thair to be
hangit vpoune ane gybet quhill he wes deid ; and all his movabill guidis to be
efcheit and inbrocht to our foueraue lordis vfe, for the faid crymis.

^laufjTjtci — .^fjootiitcr l^asljuts, $(t,

Feb. 21. — Adame Bkounfeild, in Gordone maynes.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the fellone and crewall Slauchter of vmq'* Thomas Cranftoun ; comniittit vpone the xxij day of July, the yeir of God V".V\
fourfcoir fyftene yeiris, within the boundis of the landis of Morieftoun, at that
pairt thairof callit the Kaine, be the fchot of ane hagbut throw his body ; vpone
fet jjurjiois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellony.

Persewer, Johnne Cranftoune, as brother.
Prelocutouris in perfute, Sir Johnne Cranrtoune of that Ilk, Mr Tliomas Cranftoune.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Williame Oliphant, Aduocat, James Brounfeild of Nether Maynes.
It is allegit be the pannell, that he can nocht be jjut to the knawlege of ane
Aflj'fe, vpone this Dittay, and crymes contenit thairin ; becaus the Kingis Maieftie
hes grantit his Remiflioune, vnder the Grit Seill." — It is anfuerit be the perfewer,
that this Remiflioune, anent the tynie of the committing of the faid (flauchter)
lybellit, meittis nocht the tyme fpecifeit in the Dittay.**

> In token or testimony whereof. ' Sic. ^ Apud Edin. Dec. 20, 1605. * ' In menfe . . .

1594, commiff.'

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 507

The Juftice admlttis the Remiffioune producet.

It IS allegit be the perfewer, that the RemifTioun vfet be the pannell, is contrair to the Act of Parliament, ordaning na Remiffioune to be grantit, without
fatisfactioune of pairtie, and productioune of ane Letter of Slanes, vtherwayis to
be null. — Anfuerit, the alledgeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Remiffioune ; and offeris cautioune to fatisfie the pairtie, couforme to the Lavvis of
this realme. — James Brounfeild in Nether-maynes, Johnne Brounfeild in Gordone-maines and the feid Adame (become) cautioune, coniunctlie and leuerallie,
for fatisfactione of pairtie, &c.

^laiisi)ter — ^Ijootius ?t?a5liut6 anb ^istolets.

Feb. 25. — Hew Campbell in Mauehline, fone to vmq'° Thomas Commendator of Halywoid.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the fellone and crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne
Glencorfe of that Ilk, be fchottis of hagbutis and piftolettis ; committit vpone
the xiv day of September, the yeir of God 1581 yeiris, vpone the ground and
landis of Gribtoune ; vpone fet jiurpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellonie.
Perseweris, Iffobell Glencorfe, fiftei- ; Robert Glencorfe, neir kynfman.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Robert Lyntoun.

Tuik him to our fouerane lordis Remiffioune, for the faid cryme. (' Apud
Edinburgh, Feb. 14, 1606.') Williame Campbell in Grienock-maynes, Alexander
Nifbet of Greneholme, and the faid Hew, become cautioune and fouertie, coniunctlie and feuerallie, to fatisfie the pairtie, as law will.

^lausfjter.

Feb. 26. — Williame M^intosche, fone to the Laird of M'Intofche ;
Angus Williamfoime of Termet ; Donald M'intofche, fone to
Perfone M^condowie ; Williame M' James, fone to James Glas ;
Angus M'Rannald, fone to vmq'" Johnne M^Augus ; Lauchlane Williameibne, eldeft fone to Angus.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'" Alexander Anderfoune in
Balnaglak and vmq'^ Johnne Barroue thair.

Persewer, Johnne Elphingrtoune of Balnaglak, as neir kynfman to the faidis Trnq'"" perfones.
The laid Johnne Elphinftoune, jierfewar, for himfelf, and takand the burding
on him for Thomas Anderibun, brother to vmq'" Alexander Anderfoune, paft
fra the perfute of the perfones on jjannell, ^^ro loco et tempore. Lauchlane M'intofche of Dynnachten becomes fouertie for the entrie of the perfones on pannell,
the thrid day of the air (of ' Inuernefe,') or foner, ^-pone xv dayis wairning ;
vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

508 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6O6.

asrfaftins t\)t Pace of mihivnit—^ttt, ^f,

Feb. 26. — JoHNNE Craufukd, fumtyme in Aiicliincloch, now in Auchinbotliie.

DUaitit of airt and pairt of the Breking of the Place of Kilbirnie ; and fteilling of certane euidentis and abuil5iementis, pertening to Johnue Craufurd of
Kilbirnie, &c. viz.

FoRSA-MEKiLL as lie, accumpaneit with Thomas Wilfoun in Wallafe, with divers vtheris thair complices, cowmoun thewis, in the moneth of Nouember, the yeir of God r".\'''. and twa yeiris, come to
the Place of Kilbirnie, the Laird being than furth of this realme, and his Lady being than in Grenok,
ten myle diftant fra the faid place of Kilbirny ; and thair, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht, brak the
faid Place, at the North fyde thairof, cnterit within the famin, and thiftioullie llall, concelit, reffett
and away-tuik, furth thairof, and furth of the cofteris than (landing within the faid Place, ane figuret
V€lvet goune, ane blew bend of taftetie, ane ryding cloik and lltirt of broun cullerit claith, wrocht with
filuer pafmcnt ; ane blak velvet dowblet, cuttit out and wrocht with filk cordounis ; ane pair of broun
vcluet breikis, wrocht with cordounis of gold ; ane lowfe goun of grograne, ane llcirt of broune fatene,
ane broun faittene dowblet, twa hwidis with craipis ; togidder with aue pair of blankettis, quhairin he
band all the faidis clathis and abul5ements : Quhilkis guidis and geir pertenit to the faid Johnne Crawfurd of Kilbirnie and his fpous. Lyke as, att the famyn tyme, he with his complices, brak vp the
faid Johnne Crawfurdis Charter-kill, Handing within the faid Place, and thiftiouflie llall, concelit, reffett and away-tuik, furth thairof, ane grit number of the faid Laird of Kilbirneis fpeciall euidentis and
writtis,' togidder with the faidis guidis and geir and abuljements, he and his complices had and convoyit away with thame, and difponit thairvpoun att thair pleafour; and he wes airt and pairt of the
thifteous (leilling, conceling, reffetting and away-taking of the faidis guidis, geir, writtis, euidentis and
vtheris aboue writtin, and of the breking of the faid Place, in maner, and att the tyme foirfaid ; quhilk
wes notourlie knawin. To the takin,^ he, with his wyfte and feruand-wemene, delyuerit bak agane
to the Lady Kilbirny, within the duelling houfe of Cutlibert Crawfurd in Parkfut, in prefens of the
fiiid Cutlibert Crawfurd, Hew Gawin in Boig, Williame Allane in Manis, Thomas Harvie in Broklirhill, Mungo Allane in Sarflie, Hew Starrie in Bankfyde, and George Kelfo in Brighill, the perticuler
abul^pnientis following, viz. the faidis cuttit out velvet dowblet, the broun velvet breikis, the lowfe
grograne goune, the broun fatene llcirt, ane broune fatene dowblet, the faid figurit velvet goune, the
faid broun ryding cloik and fkii't, with the faidis twa huidis, quhilkis wer thifteouflie (loUin and awaybrocht be him and his complices, furth of the faid place, att the tyme foirfaid ; To the takin alfo, he
being cxaminat him felff, in prefens of the ^Nlinifter, eldaris and deakinnis of the Kirk of Kilbirnie, he
grantit and confeflit the haifing of the faid blew taffatie bend, with certane of the faid Laird and Ladies
writtis and euidentis, bot wald nocht declair how he came be thame ; as the Extract of his Confeffioun,
lieirwith produceit to fchaw, beris : To the takin lykwayis, the faid Johnne, being charget of befoir to
find cautioune to half comi)erit before tho Juflice, at ane certane day bygane, to vnderly the law for
the foirfaidis crymes, he than, for dilfobedience of the faid charge, pall to the home; as the Hoirning
lykwayis fchawin beiris.

Persewaris, Johnne Craufnrd of Kilbirnie, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of Monkland, kny', Aduocat.
Prelocutouris for the paunt'll, Mr Johnne Ruflell, Williame Speir. wryter, Mr Patrik Hammiltoune.

The Laird of Kilbirnie takis inilrumentis of the prodiictioune of Thomas Wilfoune at the home, and lykwayis of the prodiictioune of the Letteris aganis

' Principal title-deeds and writings. * In token, or proof.

39&3JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 509

the cautioneris for the Entrie of Joliiine Craufurd, and of the roll of his AfTife ;
and ofTeris him reddie to perfew the faid Johnne for the crymes contenit in his
Dittay ; and proteftis, in refpect thairof, that he be relevit of his cautionerie.

Verdict. The Affife, be the mouth of Williame Orr in Lochrig, chanceller,
for the maift pairt, fTand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Johnne Craufui'd to
be Clene, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt of the breking, &c.

Mar. 7. — Niniane Airmestrang, callit Niniane of Tue'idanc, Andro
Henderfoime, fervand to the Laird of Mangertoune, Archibald
Airmeftrang, callit Va'ir Archie.
Dilaitit of the Slauchter of vmq'" Andro Smyth, and demembring of Thomas
Tueidie of his neife {nose.)

Perseweris, Johnne Smyth, fone to vmq'« Andro Smyth, Thomas Tuedie in Dwnfyre.

The perfeweris paffis fra the perfones in pannel, pro loco et tempore. — Robert Scott of Hayning become fouertie for the entrie of Niniane and Andro, and
Sir James Johnneftoune of that Ilk, for the faid Archibald, the thrid day of the
air (of Dumfries) or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the Law, &c.

iJfltutilatiou auU 30cmtmijiaticin.

Mar. 7. — Gawin Ellote of Fiddeltoune, callit Johne's Gcm'in.
Dilaitit for Difmembring of Thomas Twiedie in Dunfyre of his nife {nose.)
Robert Ellote younger of Fallinefche oftymes callit, as cautioner for the faid
Gawin, to half enterit and prefentit him befoir the Juftice this day, vnder the
pane of thre thoufand merkis ; as he that become fouertie actit in prefens of Sir
Williame Seatoun of Kylefmure, Sir Johnne Chairteris of Amisfeld, and Sir Jedione Murray of Elibank, kny'", his Maiefteis Commiffioneris, in aue Court of
Jufticiarie held be thame, within the tolbuth of Peiblis, the tuentie tua day of
December laftbypaft. The faid Robert vnlawit in the faid pane.

Cattif antJ 1[t?or0e ^tealin(j— #Iausf)ter— dTire-iaisins— ^Ijootiug
of i^istoltts — Cutting; UoUju Cimtier, ^r.

Mar. 19. Hectouh Trumbiel of Wauchope, George Trumbill his

fone, Adame Trumbill in Bullerwall, {' paji fra;) George
Trumbill in Howa, {' paJl fra;) Johnne Trumbill, fone to
Hectour of Wauchope, Hectour Trumbill of Stanyledge, {' paft
fra;) Andro Trumbill, brother to Bullerwall, {' jiojl fra;)
Hectour Trumbill in Clarielaw, and Thomas Trumbill of
Hoppifburue.

510 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit for airt and pairt of the crymes refpectiue following, viz.

For the thiftious Steilling, conceilling, refletting and away-taking, fra Margaret Truinbill Lady
Apotefyde, fuitli of the touii and landis of Hairivood, tua liundreth ky and oxin, threttie fcoii- of Iclieip,
tlirettie horfe and meiris, with the haill infieht and plenifling, worth the fowme of ane thowfand
pundis money ; committit in the nioneth of Junij, the yeir of God I"'.V''. fourfcoir auclitene yeiris
(1598). Item, for airt and pairt of the tliiftious lleilling, conceilling, reffetting and away-taking furth
of the landis of Apotfyde, of ane liiindrptli ky and oxin, tua hundreth fcheip pertening to the faid
IVIargaret, with hir liaill infycht and plenilling being within the faid place, worth V^ lib. ; committit
in Junij, the yeir of God foirfaid. Item, for airt and pairt of the thiftious fleilling, conceilling and
away-taking, be way of Maillerfull thift and ftonth-reif, furth of the faidis landis of Apotefyde, of
XXX ky and oxin, pertening to the laid Margaret Trumbill, with hir haill inficht plenifling, worth the
fowme of ¥<• merkis; committit in Januar, the yeir of God I'^.V"'. fourfcoir nyntene yeiris. Item,
for airt and pairt of the treflonabill and awfull Raifing of flfyre about the place of Apotfyde, and burning and diftroying of dyuerfe houHis within the fiiid place, togidder with tua horfis, price of the peice'
V'^ pund ; with certane infight and plenifling ; committit in the moneth of Maij, I"'.V^'. fourfcoii- nynetene yeiris : And for airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of ymq'"" Williame Lorane,= ane young
boy of xiij yeiris of age ; committit in the moneth of Julij, the yeir of God I"\Vj''. yeiris, within
the wood of Lorane, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun, auld feid and foirthocht fellony. Item, for airt
and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq''" Hectour Lorane of Harwoid, with fchotis of hagbutis and
pift^olettis ; committit in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of God I"\Vj''. and foure yeiris. Item, for
airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^' Lyell Broun, fervand to the faid Margaret : And als, for airt
and pairt of Steilling fra the faid ymq'*" Lyell, furth of his landis of Harwoid, of threttie ky and oxin,
threfcoir fcheip, thre horfe and twa meiris, with the haill inficht and pleniffing of his hous, worth the
fowme of thre hundreth merkis ; committit in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of God, I"'.V'' fourfcoir
aufhtene yeiris. Item, for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in beiriug, weiring and fchuiting
of hagbutis and piflolsttis, vpone the faidis landis of Harwoid, Apotefyde and remanent places foirfaidis, fchuitting and flaying of the faidis Hectour Lorane of Harwoid, and vmq''^ Williame Lorane,
his brother, the tymes refpectiue aboue writtin of the committing of thair faid Slauchteris. Item, for
contrauening the Actis of Parliament, in cutting doun and diftroying, in the monethis of Januare,
Febi-uare, Marche, and remanent monethis of the yeiris of God I"\V''. fourfcoir auchtene, 1599, 1600,
1601, 1602, 1603, 160^ and 1605, at the leift in ane ar vther of the faid monethis and yeiris of God,
of the haill grit growand trayis,-' within the woidis of Apotefyde, pertening to the laid Margaret Trumbill, \\z. ane thoufand birk treyis, fyve hundreth grit aikis, thre hundreth allouris, four hundreth
Laifaillis -^ and hes waiftit and deflroyit the faidis woidis.

Perseweris.

Margaret Trumbill, Lady Apotfyde ; Mr Robert Lyntoun, Aduocat, fubftitute to my Lord Aduocat.

Peelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Alexander King, Mr Lawrence M'^Gill.

Compeirit perfonallie Williame Erle of Angus, Lord of the Regalitie of
Jedbiirghe-fforreft, and producet his Seafuig, comprehending the faid Regalitie,
and defyrit to Repledge the particular jjeribnes following, duelling within the
faid Regalitie, viz. The Laird of Wauchope, George and Johnne Trumbillis, his
fones, and Thomas Trumbill of Hoppilburne, as houfliold man to Thomas Trum-

■ Price of each, £500. - Brother to the Laird of Harwood. ^ Large growing timber.

■' 1000 birch trees, 500 great oaks, 300 allers (elder, or mountain ash), 400 hazels.

39 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 511

bill younger of Waiichope, all cluelland within the faid Regalitie. It is anfuerit
be the Aduocat, that the pei-fones delyrit to be repleget can nocht be rei^ledget
for TrefTone, viz. ftyre-raifing,' contenit in the Dittay. — It is anfuerit be Mr
Alexander King, that thai aucht to be repledget, nochtvvithftanding of the Aduocatis allegeance ; beeaus (thair is) na Treffone, bot that quhilk is committit
aganis the kingis awin perfone. — It is duplyit be the Aduocat, that ffyre-raifing
is TrelTone ; and thairfore the faid perfones can nocht be repledget, bot fould
pafs to ane Affyfe, quhither it be committit aganis his Maiefteis perfone, or for
ony vther cryme impoirting TrefTone.

The Juftice, eftir probatioune led that the faidis perfones duelt within the
Regalitie, Admittis my Lord of Angus Replegeatioun, repledeand thame for the
haill crymes contenit in the Letteris, except the Treffone of ffyre-raifnig : And
my Lord of Angus, prefent, fand cautioune, viz. Adame Trumbill in Bullerwall.
to adminifter Juftice, in Lyntelleis, the xv day of Apryle nixt ; and the faid
Adame become cautioune for the entrie of the faidis perfones.'

The perfewer paffis fra Hectour Trumbill of Clarielaw, for the cutting and
diftroying of the greine-woid, contenit in the Dittay, j)ro loco et tempore.

Cvwsouai&U dTirt-raisiitfr — (jTattle-stealtHS — J<lau(rl)tci*, ^f ♦

Mar. 19. — Hectour Trumbii>e of Wauchope, George Trumbill and
Johnne Trumbill his fones, Hectour Trumbill of Clarielaw,
and Thomas Trumbill of Hopijiflxu'uo.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit of the crymes rejjiectiue following, viz.
The faiil Hectour Trumbill of Wauc/iope and Hectour Triimhill of Clarielmv, of airt and jjairt of
the treflbiiabill and awfuil Raifing of ffyre, vpone tlie landis of Harwod, and burning and diftroying of
fourtie dargis of turves,' pertening to the faid Margaret Trumbill Lady Apotefyde ; committit in the
moneth of Junij, the yeir of God, r".V'.lxxxxviij yeiris. Item, the faidis Hectour Trumbill, elder of
Wauchope, George and Johniie Trumbillis his fones, Hectour Trumbill of Clurielaic, and Thomas
Trumbill of Hoppijburne, ffor airt and pairt of the treflbnabill Raifing of iFyre about tlie Place of
Apotefyde, and burning of findrie honfiis of the faid Place, togidder with tua liorfis, worth ane tliouefand pundis, and liaill infyclit and plonifting within the faidis liouflis, worthe ane hundreth pundis ;
committit in the moneth of Maij, the yeir of God r".V''. fourfcoir-nyntene yeiris. Item, the faid
Hectour Trumbill of Clarielatc, for airt and pairt of tiie Steilling of tua hnndreth ky and oxin, threttie
fcoir of fcheij), threttie horfe and meiris, pertening to the faid Margaret Trumbill Lady Apotefyde ;
witii the haill inlicht and plenifting of hir houftis, worth the fowme of ane thoufand pundis ; committit
in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of God I"\V'. fourfcoir auchtene yeiris : And of the haill remanent
crymes of Thift, Slauchteris, Cutting doune of grene growand treyis and vtheria contenit in the Act
of adjudicatioun of Thomas Trumbill, of the dait of thir prefentis.*

' Being one of the pleas of the Ciown. " Tliis, evidently, is one of the instances Avhicli the F.(liti>i- has hefore referred to of the evil effects resulting from the Heritable Jurisdictions possessed hy the Barons of Scotland, before the Act, abolisliing sucli powers, was passed. The i)urpose of the • Keplcgialion' was undouliledly to (pKush all
proceedings, and suppress tlie administration of justice. ' Darg usually signifies a ilaifx-work. Tliis may, therefore,
signify a quantity of peats or turfs, eiiuiv.'Uent to the labour of forty days' work, in casting, &c. • See the tirst Dittay.

512 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of Williame Ryddell in ^^"oidhous,
chauceller, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the laidis Hectour
Trumbill of Wauchope, &c. to be Cleane, innocent and acquit of airt and pairt
of the ciynies perticularlie aboue fpecifeit.

r|)rft — ^lausijter — dTirtn-atsins, $i:t,

l\Iar. 19. — Thojias Trumbill, younger of Wauchope.

Dilaittit of airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling, conceilling, refletting and
away-taking fra INIargaret Trumbill Lady Apotei'yde, &c.'

The Juftice decernit and ordanit James Gledftanes, appeirand of Coklaw (as
cautioner for his entry), to be vnlawit and amerciat in the panes contenit in the
Actis of Parliament, viz. fFor nocht entrie of the faid Thomas, to the effect foirfaid, in the pane of Fy ve hundreth merkis money : And liclyke, Decernit and
ordanit the faid Thomas Trumbill, younger of ^Vauchope, for his non-compeirance, to be denuncet our fouerane lordis rebell and put to his hienes home, and
all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, &c.

^laugTjtcv.

Mar. 20. — Laurence Lord Oliphant.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Gilbert Gray in North Bandirrane ; committit in the moneth of September laft.

Perseweris.
Helene Rattray, the relict, Mr Thomas Hendeifoun, Aduocat-fubilitute to his Maiefteis Aduocat.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Williame Oliphant, iMr Alexander King.
My Lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the productioune and reding of his
Maiefteis Letter, direct to the Couniall ; quhairof the tennour followis.
James R.

Right truftie and weilbelouit coufeignis and counfallouris, We greit jow hairtlie weill.
Quhairas it is heavilie coinplened vnto us, be Patrik Gray, of the crewall Slauchter of vraq''^ Gilbert
Gray his fiil'er, by certane perfones fpeciallie houndit out be ]ie Lord Oliphant, and funi of ])ame being
liis domeftik feruitouris ; quhich offence doith lb muche J>e moir greve us, that now, quliair as in the
lait Bordouris and in ]>e verrie Hielandis of Jiat ourrealme, fair is fueh vniuerlall obedience, that nochtpeles in Jie venie hairt of Jiat cnntrey, and i'o ueir to ]>e ordiner place of residence of our Jultice Jiair,
fueh ane vyld fact fould be committed, without pwneifhment inflicted vpone the doaris fairof ; and Jiat
to delude our Juftice, any of our nobilitie J'air, abfenting him felf from ]ie actioun, lould hound out
vferis to execute his privat revenge, and be his craftie conveyance of fe malefactouris out of ]>e way,
fould tak away all meanis of ])e tryell of his awin giltines in that cryme ; quhich doing, inferring Co
dangerus ane preparatiue' as that nane of our fubiectis, gif Jiis be nocht prevented, can be in furetie of
his life. We ar Jiairfoir to recommend to 5 our fpeciall care and dilligence, as 3e rel'pect our pleaibur
and feruice, that na menis be vnaflayed by ■:;ow, to bring ]te treuth of ])is matter to light ; fFor as We
ar moft grevouflie olFendit with fe cryme committed, fo if Jie doaris be nocht apprchendit, ]>e matter

' See the first Dittay. - Example, precedent.

39 & 3 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 513

halylie tiyit, and juftice miniftrat accoirding Jiairto, it will fo much J)e nioir diftontent us. And fo We
bid 30W fairweill. From our Court at Quliyteliall, tlie eght of Januare, 1606.

Eftir the reiding of the quhilk Letter, my Lord Aduocat defyret, that, accoirding to the faid Letter, this matter fould be tryit, and my Lord Oliphant committit, quhill' the perfones contenit in the Letteris be exhibeit and prefentit to
juftice.

The quhilk day, Lawrence Lord Oliphant, being enterit vpone pannell, be him
felfF, with Mr Williame Oliphant and Mr Alexander King, aduocattis, his prelocutouris, exponet and declairit,' fforfamekill as he, being charget, be vertew
of our fouerane lordis Letteris, purcheft at the inftance of Patrik Gray, in North
Bandirrane, eldeft fone, Gilbert and Johnne Grayis, alfo fones, with the remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'' Gilbert Gray, in North Bandirrane, and Sir
Thomas Hammiltoune of INIonkland, knyclit, aduocat to our fouerane lord, for
his hienes entreis, to find cautioun, actit in the buikis of Adiornall, that he Ibukl
compeir befoir the Juftice and his deputis this day, and place, in the hoiu" of
caufe, to vnderly the law, fFor airt and pairt of the felloun and crewall Slauchter
of the faid vmq'" Gilbert Gray, allegit done and committit be the faid Laurence
Loi'd Oliphant, vpone the . . . day of Sei)tember laftbyjiaft, vpon the landis of
North Bandirrane ; at the leift, the famyn being done of the fpeciall caufing,
fending, hounding out, devyfeing, airt, pairt-taking, directioun, counfalling, reffetting with the bludie hand, command, affiftance and ratihabitioime of the faid
Laui'ence Lord Oliphant, as the Letteris beiris. For obedience of the quhilk
charge, he than fand ^Villianle Moncreif of that Ilk fouertie for his entrie, this
day and place, to the effect foirfaid ; ffor quhais releif and tryell of his innocencie in the faid matter, he compeirit, and offerit him felf reddie to abyde the
tryell of the law for the faidis allegit crymes, quhairof he was maift innocent :
difaflenting to all continuatioune. And in refiJect that the faidis Patrik, Gilbert
and Johnne Grayis, perfeweris fpecifeit in the faidis Letteris, being oft tymes
callit, compeirit nocht to infift in his lordfchipis perfute, for the crymes aboue
fpecifeit, proteftit for releif of the faid 'Williame Moncreif of that Ilk, his cautioner, of his cautionerie foirfaid ; and that he be nocht callit nor perfewit at
the inftance of ony pairtie, for the faidis crymes, in tyme cuming.

The Juftice continewis this matter to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of
the Iherefdome of Forfar, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning : And ordanis my
Lord Oliphant to find cautioime for his compeirance, to the effect and in maner
foirfaid ; quha fand Sir George Toures of Innerleyth, knycht, fouertie for his
entrie, vnder the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

' Until. ^ It is thus expressed in a sentence immediately preceding, ' My Lord Oliphant ofteris
liira felf reddie to abyde the tryell of the Law, diirafenting to all continuatioune; and leing thair is
ane fufficient number of noble men in this burgh to pas vpone his Aflyfe, defyres he may be put to the
Tryell of ane AlTyfe, inaantlie, for the crymes lybellit.'

VOL. II. ^ '^

514 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

^laufljtn* — aitaimti: anU ^ijootins of ?i?asimts, ^t.

Mar. 22. — Gilbert Gray of Bandirrane, Patrick Gray, liis fone, and
Williame Broim in Hagillaall.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slancliter of vmq'" Jolinne Slaifter of Oliphant
and of James Reid, fone to David Reid of Thridpairt, &c.

Compeirit Hew Reid, and prodnceit our fouerane lordis Lettres, deulie execute and indorfat, and aflvit inftruments of the productioun thairof ; and proteflit for his cautioneris releif, and offerit him felff reddie, with the affiftance of
the Kingis Maiefteis aduocat, to perfew Patrik Gray and Williame Broune for the
llauchter of vmq'^ James Reid, his brother. Compeirit Mr Johnne RulTell and
IMr Thomas Hoip, aduocattis, and prefeutit the Kingis Maiefteis Letter, quhairof the tennour foUowis.

James R.

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 50ur deputtis, We greit ;ow weill. Forfamekili as it is vnderfland to us, that our vtberis Letteris ar direct at the inftance of ])e kyn and freindis of vmq'^ James
Reid, fone to Dauid Reid of Thrid-pairt, and our Aduocat for ourintreis, iFor calling of Gilbert Gray,
tvcc. to vnderly our lavvis befoir 500', for airt and pairt of |ie Slautliter of ]>e faid vmq'' James, as our
I'aidis Lettres beiris : As lykwayis, for Convocatioun of our leigis in airmes, and beiring, weiring and
fchuiting of hagbuttis and piflolettis, aganis ])e tennour of our Actis of Parliament and Proclamationes,
maid and direct, expreflie proliibeiting Jie fame : Notlitwitlillanding, being inforraet Jiat ]ie faid Slauchter was committit, and ])e faidis forbidden wapones borne and vfet in the executioun of our Commiffioun, direct for fearcliing and apprehenfioun of Gilbert Gray, fumtyme fervand to Gilbert Gray of
Mekill Bandirrane, our denunccd rebell, for Jie crewall Slaucbterof rmq'*' Johnne Shiphird, for findrie
crvnies of Thift and vferis odious cryraes committit be him : And that vmq''' Johnne ^Nlailler of Oliphant, and ]ie faid vmq'"^ James Reid, in not nithftanding of our faidis Commiffioneris, andaflillingand
plane partaking witli ])e faid Gilbert our rebell, wer baith flane : ffor quhilk beiring, weiring and fchuiting with Jie faidis hagbuttis and piftolettis, our faid Conimiflioun, conteneing a fpeciall Remiffioun to
our faidis Commiffioneris, and all vtheris our i'ubiectis affilling fame, in executioun Jiairof : And confidering fairwith, fat ])e executioun of Jiis our Comraiflioun, in fat foirt, may terrifie pe lyk malefactouris to continew' in thair wicked deidis, contempt and rebellioun. It is f airfoir our Will, and We
command 30W, that vpone ]>e iicht heirof, ^e Hay all maner of proceiding againlt fe faidis Gilbert
Gray of Bandirrane, Patrik Gray his fone, and Williame Broun, for fe faid Slauchter of fe faid vmq'«
Maifter of Oliphant and James Reid, the beiring, weiring and fchuiting with fe faidis hagbutis and
piftolettis, or ony vtheris crynies exprefled in our faidis Letteris, alreddie raifit, or to be raifit aganis
fame for fe fame, in tyme cuming, fua fat fai may inioy fe benefeit of our Remiffioun, expreffit in
our Commiffioun foirfaid : As ^e will anfuer to vpone 50ur office and obedience ; Quhairanent f is prefent fall be ■;our fufBcient Warrand. Gevin at our Court, in Quhyteliall, fe penult day of Maij, 1604-.

Mr Robert Lyntovm, Adnocat. Inbftitnte to my Lord Aduocat, allegis an/e
omnia, the perfones perfewit audit to be enterit on pannel ; and thairfoir, in
refpect of thair nocht entry, delyres of the Juftice that thair cautioner may be
iTilawit, and thai, for thair nocht compeirance, adiuget to be denuncet rebell and
put to the home ; and that in ane Criminall perfute, accoirding to the daylie

' From continuing.

39&4JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 515

practik, the defenderis, befoir ony proces, fould be firft enterit. The laid Mr
Johnne Ruffell allegit in the coiitrair, in relpect of his Maielleis Warrand ; and
forder, that his Maieftie, be his auctoritie, may ather command the Jnftice to
hald Court or to continew the dyet, at his Maielleis plefour.

The Juftice, in relpect of his Maielleis Letter, producet, continewis this matter to the thrid day of the air,' or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, in the famyn
eftait as it was of befoir, aganis Patrik Gray and Williame Broune : And ordanis
Johnne Lyndefay of Evlik, cautioner, in refpect of thair nocht entrie this day
and place, to remane Hill cautioner, conforme to the Act of Adiornall maid thairupovme ofbefoir. Quhairupoun the laidis perfeweris and the faid Mr Johnne
Ruffell aflvit inllrumentis.

Cattle anU 1S?orse--stcalinir»

Jun. 13. — Robert Beiuope of that Ilk.
Dilaitit of airt and jjairt of the Steilling of certane ky and oxin, pertening to
Sir Johnne Ker of Hirfell, viz. fforfamekill as he, accumpaneit with Robert
Selbie of Bittilfdane, Loukie Dauidfovui and diuers vtheris, his complices, commoun and notorious thewis, broken men, in the moneth of November 1506
yeiris, cam to the faid Sir Johnnis place of Lytildane, and thair, vnder fylence
and cloud of nycht, brak vp the byre-dm-is of the faid place, and thifteouilie
ftall, concelit, reffet and away-tuik furth thairof faxtene ky and oxin, with fax
horfe and meiris, &c.

Persewer, Sir Johnne Ker of Hirfell.
Prelocutouris for tlie pannell, Tiie Lairdis of Pliarniherll, elder and y', Mr Johnne lluflell.

Verdict. Found by the Affyfe- to be ' Clene, innocent and acquit.'

Jun. 18. — Johnne Mcdowell of Freuchie ; Johnne M'dowell, his iervand ; Eufame Dunbar, Lady Garthland ; Alexander APdowell
of Barjarg; Alexander Neilfoun, fiear of Craigcaffie ;^ Patrik
M'dowell of Creoches ; Williame Bigholme in Galderioc-h ;
Gilchryll M'maifter, thair ; Vthreid ]\rkie in Innermellene ;*
and Nicol M'gowne in Trottincoroche.
Uilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Quintene Boyd ; committit
in the moneth of Apryle lallbypaft.

' Of Perth. " Chiefly feuars. The chancellar was Johnne Mow of that Ilk. Johnne Halyhurtoun of Mertonn, .James Ker of Steilftokhrayis, Johnne Rohfoun of Burvanes, and Patrik DikCoiiu
of Belcheftei-, are the only persons of note wlio appear on the Inquest. ^ ' Palt i'rijimplkiki:'

* ' Part haJimpUciter.'

516 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

Persewer, Adame Boyd, as brother.

The perfoiines enterit on pannell aflvis inllrumentis of tliair entrie, and proteftis for releif of tlie Laird of Mondurk, thair cautioner : And in refpect of thair
innocencie of tlie crymes lybellit, offeris thame felffis to the tryell of the law
thairfoir, and diffiifientis to all continuatioune. — The perfewer paffis fra the Lady
Garthlandjimjilicifer, in refpect of hir innocencie.

The Juftice Ordanis the remanent Defenderis to find caution to the thi'id day
of the air, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning.

Question off/te Pa/niels being entitled to their expenfes.

It is allegit be the perfones on pannell, that in matters Ciuill, proteftatioun
being admittit in fauouris of the defender aganis the perfewer, the Lordis are in
daylie vfe to modifie the parteis exjienffis ; mitlto mogis, in matteris Criminall,
a partie being perfewit and compeirand, offeraud him lelff to abyde the tryell of
the law, for the cryme quhairof thay ar indyttit, thair expenffis audit to be modifeit, and the perfeweris decernit to pay the famyn.

The Juftice declairis to this perfewer, gif he raife Letteris of new agane, contrair thir defenderis, vi)oune the crymes foirfaidis, gif thay fall happin to be
danget, he fall be adiudget to pay the defenderis expenffis, bayth for this dyet
and the dyet following : And ordanis the Clerk to tak cautioune of him at the
raifing of the Letteris to the effect ffoirfaid : QuhairiiJoun the perfones on pannell afl<it inftrumentis.

The ' Affyfouris' alfo protefted, that ' thai be nocht fummond heirefter, for
this caufe.'

^pprrssion — Catuiis Captibe — iWurtJtr.

Jun. 20. — T'homas Cai.deu in Clwnes, Johnne Oir in Calder, and
Walter IVFrobie Roife in Mekil Geddes.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Taking and Apprehending of vmq'® Dauid
Dumbar of Lochileis cajitiue and prefoner ; and convoying him captiue to Ergyll, and detening him in captiuitie, be the fpace of tuell oukkis.' And for airt
and pairt of the Slauchter and Murthour of Ainq'" Williame Lj^oun and vmq'^
Alexander Dauidfoun, feruandis to the faid vmq'" Dauid ; committit in the
moneth of October, the yeir of God I^.V.lxxviij yeiris, within the toune of
Aulderne.

Persewaris, Alexander Dumbar of Lodiieleis, (as fone,) Johnne Lyoun, as fone to vmq''^ Williame Lyoun, Andro Daiiiiifoun, as brother to vmq'*' Alexander.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Henderfoun, aduocat, Mr Henrie Kynroife.
The faidis Thomas, &c. tuik thame to our fouerane lordis Remiffioun, producit, vnder the Greit Seill, of the dait, at Halyruidhous, the thryd day of Apryll,

' Weeks.

40 & 4 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 517

the yeir of God, P.VMxxx and nyne yeiris ; Qiihilk Remiffioun, the Juftice admittit, and Johnne Campbell of Caldei-, with thame felffis, become cautioneris
and fouerteis, coniunetlie and leuerallie, to fatisfie the pah-tie, as law will.

[Curia Justiciarie J. d. n. Regis, tenia in Aula Inferiori de Ormejloutihall, per M. IVilliehmim Hairf, Jujliciurum Dej)ntatum.'\

MwxtitK Df a ^resnant aiToman — €i)illJ--nuiiUei\

Nov. 10. — Patrik Deanis, in Gilcherftoune.

Dilaitit of the crewall and vnnaturall Miirthour and Slauchter of vmq'"
Katharene Butler his fpous, and of ane infant bairne in hir wamb ; be ftreking
hir with his feit vpon the wamb, and with ane fwyngill-trie,' on the bak and
fchoulderis, and dyuerfe vtheris pairtis of hir body, fcho being with quik bairne
for the tyme ; be occafioun quhairof, fcho innnediatlie thaireftir, with the faid
bairne in hir wamb, dej^airtit this lyfe : Committit the fevint of Nouember
inftant, at his awin hous-dur in Gilcherftoune, betuix aucht and nyne houris at
evin, &c. ; conforme to his awin Confeffioune.

Verdict. The Affife, be the mouth of Johnne Harlaw in Laiftoune, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Patrik, conforme to his awin Confeffioune, maid judiciallie in thair prefens, to be ffylet, culpabill and convict of
the faid crewall and detaiftable Murthour.

Sentence. And thairfoir the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Johnne
Hammiltoun, dempfter of Court, decernit and ordanit the faid Patrik to be tane
to the ground quhair the faid fact was committit, and thair to be haiigit vpone
ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and all his moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

^lausi)tfr.

Dec. 19. — Eduard Nisbet, merchand burges of Edinburghe, and Thomas Nifbett, fone to the Laird of Nilbet.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq" James Carmichell, fone to

the Guidman of Vderine.

Perseweris, Riclierd Carmichell, biotlier, Willianie Carmitliell, fatlier brother, Marioun Caniiichell,

father-fifter ; and Mr Johnne Ruflell, Aduocat, Mr Robert Boyd, curators to tlie faid Richerd.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Alexander King, Aduocat, Sir Williame Cranftoune, Mr
Thomas of Morieftoune, Mr Johnne Nilbet, James Nilbet, merchand.
Compeirit Richerd Carmichell, &c. with Mr Johnne RufTell and Mr Robert
Boyd, curatouris to the faid Richerd ; and the faid Mr Johmie, as fpous to the
faid Marioun ; and producet his Maiefteis Warrand to the Jufl;ice ; quhairof
the tennour foUowis.

' The wooden-beam, or ' tree,' to which the plough-traces are attached.

518 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

James R.

Justice, Jiiftice Clark and jour deputes, We greit 30W weill. Having directit to continew tlie perfute of Thomas and Edward Nifbettis, for fe flaiichter of vmq''? James Carmicliell, quhill
the informatioun frcwin vnto \vs of fair committing of fat fact in fair awin defence, wai- fyrlt tryed
by our Couniall ; from quhom we iiave reflauit ane cleir tellimony of fair innocency of fat fact : And
being mofl willing that Juflice be adminiftrat to all our Iwving fubiectis : It is thairfore oure Will,
that 50W affix and keip jour Juitice Court againft the faidis perfoiiis, att iic place as falbe maiil convenient ; and putt fame to f e knawledge of ane Inqueift ; fo that the accufatiounes and defences of
both the pairtcis may be Weill confidered of by 50W, before that mater be adiudgeit: And that, nochtwithrtanding ony command or directioune gewin by ws or our Counfall in fe contrair; as 56 will
anfuer to ws vpoun 5 our office and obedience : Quhairanent firprefentis falbe 30urWarrand, Gewin
at our Court of Royltoun, the xiij day of October, 1606.

And ficlyk, producet our fouerane lordis Letteris of AfTyfe and Dittay fonnet
aganis the pannell ; and tuik inftrumentis of the productioune thairof. — The
pannell declairis, nochtwithftanding of thair innocencie of the Slauchter, they ar
content to enter in cowmoning, and to ofier fatisfactioune and alTytheraent for
the flauchter, at the ficht of freindis. — The perfeweris declairis, in relpect that
the bairne is minor quha perfewis ; and thairfoir, the remanent perfeweris can
nocht tak the burding of that mater vpone thame ; and defyret proces. Thairefter Mr Alexander King, prelocntonr for the pannell, producet his Maiefteis
AV^arrand, direct to the Juftice, for continuatioun of this matter to the xxviij
day of Januare nixt ; quhairof the tennour foUovvis.
James R.

It is our pleaflbur and Will, that je continew all actioune and proces before 30W, at
fe inftance of fe kyn and freindis of vmq'" James Carmichell in Dyfert, aganis Edward and Thomas
Nifbettis, for f e Slauchter of f e faid vniq''' James ; committit in f e monetli of ... . lartbypali ; and
nawyife proceid and grant ony proces thairin, before tiu; xxviij day of Januar nixtocum : ffor fe
quhilk 5 our delay and coutinewatiouii, thir prefentis falbe to 50W fufficient Warrand. Gewin at our
Court off Quhytehall, the nynt of December, 1606. To our Ry' truftie and weilbelouit, oure Juftice,
Juflice- dark, and fair deputis.

It is anfuerit be the perfeweris, that the faid Warrand of continuatioun aucht
nawayis to be refpectit be the Juftice ; bot nochtwithftanding thairof, the perfones now on pannell aucht prefentlie to be jjut to the knawledge of ane AfTyfe ;
for tua cauffis : ffirjl. In refpect of the former "Warrand producet, quhairin tua
fpeciall poyntis ar maift remarkable ; ffirft, his Maieftie thairby hes declairit,
that he hes reflauit na cleir teftimony of thair innocencie, be the tryell' tane at
Leyth, befoir the Counfall ; and thairfoir, accoirding to his hienes good affectioun to juftice, of his certane knawledge and proper motiue directit the firft
AVarrand : The nixt, is the command gevin thairin to the Juftice, with this
qualite,^ that he fall obey the famyn, nochtwithftanding of quhatfumeuir vther
command thair gevin be his Maieftie or Counfall in the contrair. Sectmdo, the

' Examination, precognition. * Qualification.

40&4JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 519

faid pretendit laft Warrand is direct expres coiitrair the Act of Parliament 1592,
quhilk fayis, it is ftatute and ordanit, be his Maiefteis fpeciall will and directioun, that na Wariand for continuatioun of Juftice Courtis fall be admittit be
the Juftice and his deputis, in tyme cuming. Lajl, iiocht only is it exprefs aganis
the faid Act of Parliament, hot aganis the daylie ordour and practik obferuet
baith befoir the Lordis of Counfall, in Ciuill cauffis, and befoir the Judice in
Criminal cauffis, that Warrandis purcheft be the fute of partie, finifter informatioun, and for ftay of Juftice, lall nevir be refpectit ; quhilk is alio conforme to
the cowmoun law. — It is anfuerit, that the haill allegeances audit to be repellit,
in refpect of the Kingis Maiefteis Wjirrand.

The Juftice, accoirding to his IMaiefteis Warrand and directioun, continewis
this matter to the xxviij day of Januare nixt : And oi'danis the perfones on pannell to be wairdit within the Tolbuith of Edinburgh to the faid day,' and the
AflTyfe, fummond to this day, wairnit, apud acta, &c.

Dec. 19. — JoHNNE and Wilmame Rutherfurd, fones to Stewin Ruth erfurd in Chatto, boirne vnder James Ker of Greneheill.
Dilatit, accvifet and perfewit be Dittay,

FoRSAMEKiLL as, thay liaifiiig confauit ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis vmq''' Tliomas
Bell in Spiddope-fute, in England, bccanfe he had hurt and lameit the liiid Willianic, vnderlianding
the faid vniq''^ Thomas to haif bene in his fomer-fcheill befyde the rellis,'-* in tlio moneth of Junij, or
thairby, laftbypaft, thay, vpoun cullour and in a counterfute forme, fein3eing thame fellhs to be in
feiking of ane kow tliat was tynt'' amangis the fcbeillis, come to the faid vmq'' Thomas Hell, in an
howp* callit Spittope-howp, quhair he wes, in fober and quyet maner for the tyme, with iiis vvyfeand
ane young lafs, milking thair ky; and thair, the faid William Rutherfurd, haifing ane grit grene kent
and fquarit batoun^ in his hand, eftir fum wordis paft betuix the faid Williame and the laid vmq'«
Thomas, he crewallie invadit liim for his Slauchter, and gaif the faid vrnq'"^ Thomas ane crewall and
deidlie llraik in his held, and claif the faniin afunder : Oti" the quhilk flraik he immediatlie thaireftir
fell doun deid. Lyke as, the faid Jolinne Rutherfurd, for quhais caufe the faid deidlie feid was confauit, ftude afyde, awaitting gif his brother had bene overthrawin, or the faid vrnq'"^^ Thomas, to haif
fortifeit and affiilit him. And immediatlie eftir the faniin Slauchter wes committit, thay baitii niett
togidder at the nik of the fell,« and hering the fpraich' ryife, and the countrey to follow tliame, thay
baith fled in Ingland ; quhair thay were fugitiue, quhilP tbair apprehenfioun for the faid Slauchter.
And fa, the faid Slauchter wes committit he thame ; and thay and ather of thame ar airt and pairt
thairof, vpoun fett purpois, provifioun, auld feid and foirthocht feliouy ; in hie and manifell contempt
of our fouerane lordis auctoritie and lawis, &c.

' There is no entry on Record of further ]>r(ii-eeding in this case ; hut it is likely the Nishets compounded with the
private prosecutors, and obtained Letters of Keniission. ^ 'j'lie summer seheills (.r sclnilUmis on tlu' ' felJs' or

hills, were temporary huts, for the use of those who attended the cattle diu-in;,' their 1,'razini,' on connuous, &c. 'Ihey
are still kept up in liiany parts of Scotland. It is the practice to dismantle them at the end of the grazing season.
" Lost. ' Or hviic, a sloping hollow between hills, a common term in the south of Scotland. Slach is synonimous. '' X large run(i, staff, or bludgeon, and a batoun or stick made sipiare, (('. c. with angular edges,) to give

a more severe and deadly blow. " Nik is a narrow cleft or opening, at the summit of two hills. ' Hue and

cry. By reference to the Works of Sir M'alter Scott, it will be seen with what astonishing alacrity the couiitry wa.
' raised,' on such occasions. The paunels showed no small address in effecting their escape. L ntU.

520 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1606.

Verdict. Eftir accufatioun of the pannell, be Dittay, of the crymes aboue
writtin, quhilk wes grantit be the faid Williame, and alhiterlie^ denyit be the

faid Johnne, the Affyfe, be the mouth of Murray of Brochtoun, chancellar, fand and pronuncet the faid Johnne to be Cleane, innocent and acquit of
airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'" Thomas Bell, and of the haill
heidis of the Dittay aboue writtin : And alfe, ffand, jwonuncet and declairit the
faid WiU'iume to be ffylit, culjiabill and convict of airt and pairt of the faid
Slauchter.

Sentence. For the quhilk caufe, the faid Juftice-depute decernit and ordanit the faid WiWiame Ritthcrfurd to be tane to the Caftellhill of Ed", and thair, his
heid to be ftrikkin from his body ; and all his movable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Brtaltfits into t\)t \yUtt of Corhjootilce — STafttiig: Captibe —
itturUei* — ^toutijiief, ^c.

Jan. 8, 1607 JoHXXE Ellott of Cappfchaw.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be George Hoppringill of Torvvoidlie, James and
Dauid Hoppringillis, as oyis," with the remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'^ George
Hoppringill of Torwoidlie, thair guidfchir,^ of the crymes following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid Johnne EUote of Copfchaw, Robert Ellote, callit Mairtenis Hob, and
Jok Airmeftrang, callit the Lairdis Jok,* with thair complices, with convocatioun of the haill Clannis
of the Airmeftrangis, Ellotes, Batiefones, Grahames and remanent Clannis, duelland alfweill on the
Inglis as Scottis Bordouris, all cowmone thevis, outlawis and brokin men, to tlie number of thre hundreth perfones or tliairby, bodin in feir of weir, with jakis, fpeiris, (leil-bonnetis, lance-ftalffis, hagbutis
and piJloletis, expredie prohibeit to be borne, wome, vfet or fchot with, be dyuerfe our Actis of Parliament and Secreit Counfall, in the moneth of December, the yeir of God I^^.V"^. threfcoir aucht yeiris,
(1568,) come fordward, in hofleill maner, baith on horfe and fute, to the Place of Torwoidlie, and
thair, vnder filence and clud of nycht, with foir-hammeris and geillis,^ dang up the jsittis* of the faid
Place, and be force and violence enterit within the famyn ; and tuik the faid vmq'<^ George [Hoppringill] furth of his bed, and convoyit him away, as captiue and prilfoner with thanie, to the Skaldeneife,
within the Sherefdome of Selkirk; and thair maift crewallie and vnmerciefuUie Murdreill and (lew
the faid vmq'^ George : Committing thairthrow, nocht only crewall and abhominabiil Murthour and
Slauchter, hot alfo Vfurpatioun of our fouerane lordis auctoritie vpone thame, in taking of the faid
vmq'" George Hoppringill captiue, but" power or commiffioun, he being our fouerane lordis frie lege.
And ficlyke, at the famjTi tyme, the faid Johnne Ellott and remanent perfones, with thair complices,
to the number aboue writtin, at the tyme foirfaid, brak up the haill kiftis, cofferis and lokfafl houfRs
within the faid Place, and thiftiouflie flaw, conceillit, reffet and away-tuik with thanie, furth of the
faid Place of Torwoidlie, and ilabillis thairof, fevintene horlls pertening to the faid vmq'"^ George, price
of the piece ourheid- ane hundreth pundis money ; togidder with the fowme of ane thoufeand pundis
of gold and money furth of the faid vniq''' George Hoppringillis purl'e. Item, thre liluer peiees,' wey-

' Altogether, wholly. ' Grandchildren. ' Grandfather. * A personage well known to the public,

from Tai'ious anecdotes contained in the Border ^litistrelfi/, and the graphic story contributed by Sir \yaUer Scotty
in that exquisitely beautiful Annual, ' The Keepsake,' for 1829 ; to which publication (pp. 186-192) the Editor
refers for interesting Notices of this Border worthy, his family and associates. * Forehammers, and joists or

beams. ^ Broke up the gates, " Without power. ^ Overhead, on an average, ^ The nature of

these massive pieces of plate is not elsewhere specified. They convey a favourable idea of the wealth and splendour
in which manv of the 15order Chieftains lived.

40 & 4 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 521

and fouifcoir vnces of filuer or thairby, price of the vnce fourtie fcliillingis. Item, tua duflane of
iiluer fpvnes, ilk fpwne weyand tua vnce of iiluer, price of the vnce fourtie fchilling: Togidder with
tlie haill bedding, naiprie, clething, abuil3enientis, inficht and plenifling being within the faid place,
worth the fowme of fyve thoufand merkis money of this realme, had and tranfpoirtit away with thame,
and difponit tliairvpoun att thair pleafour.

The Juftice deceniit and ordanit Williame Elliot of Fallinafcli, cautioner
and foiiertie foi- the entrie of the faid Johnne Elliot of Capfchaw, to be amerciat
and vnlawit for his non-entrie, in the payne of fyve hundreth merkis : And als,
adiudget the faid Johnne to be deiuuiceit our fouerane lordis rebell, and putt to
the home ; and all his movabill guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane
lordis vfe, as fugitiue fra his hienes lawis, for the faidis crymes.'

Sustice-Bejjute appoiitteiif.

Jan. 20. — The quhilk day Mr Robert Cokburxe, Aduocat, was creat
Justice-Depute ; and gaif his ayth defideli admhi'ijlrat'ione, during liis office.

\_Mr Rohert Cokhurne, Jitjilce-Depiite.']

ilfaliiUti) ^nent t\)t <&tntxti\ aSanU,

Jan. 21. — Sir James Johxnestoune of Dundiellie, kny' (of that Ilk).

Compeirit the Laird of Johnneltoune, and pi'oducet the Warrand vnderwrittin, fuperfcryuit be his Maieftie ; quhairof the tennour followis.

James R.

Justice, Juftice Clark and 50ur deputis, We greit 50W weill. rorfamekill as it is
knawin to ws, that thair ar diuerfe Criminall perfuitis movit at })e inftance of findrie perfounes agants
Sir James Johnneftoune of Dunlkellie, kny', his kyn, freindis, pairt-takeris, men, tennentis, feruandis,
and fie v])eris, for quiiom the (faid) Sir James is anfuerable, be jie Generall Band and law of our
realme; and that, fordiverfe crymes alledgeit committit be fame, befoir ]ie moneth of Apryll, I™.V'. thre
^eiris, quhilk wes ))e tyme of owre repair hither : Albeit it lie na\ieT our will nor mynd, tiiat the regour
of pe lawis be profecutit aganis thais perfounes for ony crymes or offences committit be thame before
J)e foirfaid tyme ; hoping tljat our lenitie fall move fame to keip our peax, and be )ie moir obedient
fubiects in tyme cuming; It is Jiairfore our Will, and We command ^ow, that fo on nawyis gif proces
in any of fe faidis Criminall perfuitis alreddie movet aganis the faid Sir James, his kyn, freindis, pairttakeris, men, tennentis, feruandis, and fic vjieris for quiiom lie is anfuerable, be J)e Generall Band and
lawis of our realme ; nor that 50 on nawyis direct any Criminall Letteris, for perfnit of Jie faidis perfounes, or any of fame, in tyme cuming, for any cryme or offence allegeit committit be fame or any
of fame, preceding f e moneth and tyme aboue fpecifeit ; nor nawyfe gif proces f airvpoune heireflir :
Dilchargeing ^ow fairof, and of all haulding of Courtis to fat effect, and of 50ur ofHre in fat pairt :
Difpenfand alfwa with fe faidis perfounes and everie ane of fame, anent ]iair non-com])erance att
quliatfumewir dyettis. As 36 will anfuer to ws fairvpoun : Quhairanent thir prefentis fulbe 5 our
fufficient Warrand. Gewin at our Court of Quhytehall, the faxt day of Apryll, l(i06 5eiris.

The Justice Depute continewis the admitting of this Wari-and to the fourt
day of Februar nixtocum : And ordanit the perfoune that ffand cautioun for

' The denunciation and letters are recorded, at full length, on Jan. 9.
VOL. II. 3 u

522 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

their entrie to this day, to find new cautioun for thair entrie to the faid fourt
day of Februar nixtocuni.

The lamin day Sir James Johnneftovxne (of Dunfkellie, kn',) becom pledge and
fouirtie for Jolinue Grahaine in DryfTe, Mungo Johnnfloun in Lokarbie, &c.

(Feb. 4.) — Sir James Johnnestoun of Dunflvellie, kny', is ' amerciat
for nocht entrie of the faidis fyve perfounis, for ilk ane of thame in the payne of
ane hundreth merkis.' He is alfo amerciated in 1100 merks, for the non entry
of Jolinne Joluineftoun in Howgill, and ten others.'

The Juftice adjudgeit the principall perfones nocht comperand to be denunceit
our fouerane lordis rebellis, and all thair movabill guidis to be efcheit."

Cutting (^loiDinti CimlJtr*

Jan. 28. — George Hexdersoun in Wynningtoiine.

Dilatit, accufit and perfewit be Robert Ellote of Reidheuche, of the crymes

following, that is to fay.

That quhair, it is expreflie provydit, ilatuteand ordanitbe our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament,
fpeciallie, be ane Act of the ellevint Pailiament, cap. Ixxxij, tliat quliatfuniewir perfoun or perfounis
wilfullie cuttis doune and deftroyis growand treis and coirnis, falbe callit and perfewit thairfore, before the Juflice or his deputis, at Juftice-airis, or perticuler dyettis ; and being convict thairof, to
be pwneiffit as thewis to the death ; as the faid Act at niair lenth beris. And trew it is, that the faid
George Henderfoun, with his complices, expres contrair the teunoiu- of the Act of ParHament, in the
monethis of Junij, Julij, Augufl, September and October rejpectiue, at the leirt, in ane or vther of the
faidis monethis, in the yeir of God I^.Vj'. and fyve yeiris ; and ficlyke, att the ffeifl of Martinies laftbypall, come to the faid Robert Ellottis wod, callit Birkwod, and thair, wilfullie, by^ the faid Ilobertis
knawledge or confent, cuttit doun and diftroyit, at ilk tyme, the perticuler number and quantitie of
growand treis following, to witt, ane hundreth grit growand birk treyis, thre hundreth grit growand
allouris, thrie hundreth grit growand heifTillis, with foure hundreth grit growand fauch treis ;'' quhilkis
giowand treis, the faid George and his complices had and traufpoirtit away with thame, and difponit
thairvpoune att thair pleafour ; and the faid George is airt and pairt thairof.

Persewer, Robert Ellote of Reidheiiche.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Heuderfoune, Mr Johnne Dempfter.

It is allegit be the pannel, that this matter can nocht be put to the knawlege
of ane Inqueift, becaus the perfewer fchawis na fufRcient entreis to perfew,
nather is this perfute raifit at the Kingis Aduocatis inftance. — Anfuerit be the
perfewar, that he referris the notorietie of his entreis to jierfew for the cuting
of the treyis lybellit, to the defenderis ayth ; in refpect that he knawis him to be
fufficientlie infeft in the woid lybellit ; and as to the fectmd pairt, anent the
Aduocattis compeii'ance, anfuerit, he may pei'few without the Aduocatis conipeirance. It is allegit be the pannell, that he can nocht be vrget, vpoune the

' (On margin) ' Nota, ordanit to be gewin out be fe Counfall.' ^ Nota, • this nocht ordanit

to be given out.' ^ Without, contrary to. ■* Birch, allar (alder or elder), hazel, and willow trees.

40 & 4 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 523

perfewaris exceptioune, to geve his ayth ; feiug the I'amyn will tend to the haizaird of his life. — The perfewer in the contrair.

It is allegit forder be the pannell, that this matter can nocht be Cryminallie
tryet, without a Ciuill precognitioune, before the ordinar Judge ; becaus the
farain is a maifterfuU depridatioune. — It is anfuerit, that the perfewer repeitis
the Act of Parliament, quhairupoune the funnnondis is foundit. — It is anfuerit be the pannell, that the Act of Parliament of the 1587, concernis the
puneifchment allanerlie ; and nawyis invertis nor derogatis the Act of Parliament made be King James fyft, Parliamento quarto ; and fpeciallie, feing of the
daylie practik, ffalfetis man be firft Ciuillie tryet, befoir it cummis to ane Criminall Judge ; Wilfull errovir in AflTyfe in Reductioun of Retoviris man be firll
Ciuillie tryit, befoir it tak effect befoir the Criminall Judge. — The perfewer, as
of befoir, i-epeitis the Act of Parliament.

The Juftice continewis this matter, and Interlocutom* vpoune the allegeances
foirfaidis, to the foiu-t of Februar nixt. The pairties and Aflyfe wairnit apudacta.
[3Ir Williame Hairt, JuJlice-DeputeJ]
(Feb. 4.) — The Juftice, nochtwithftanding of the allegeances maid be
the pannell, the laft dyet, Ordanis this matter to pas to ane Alfyfe.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Gledftanes of Winningtounlaw, chanceller, ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid George Henderfoune to
be Cleane, innocent, acquit, &c.

\^3Ir Hobert Cokburiie, Jiijl'ice-Depute.'\

Feb. 14. — Johnne Bek in Lytill Kirkbryde.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" James JVrCulloch of Barholme.

Feusewer, Tliomas M'Culloch in Baiholmc.

The faid Thomas tuke him to ane Remiffioune vnder the Grit feill, of the
dait the xxj day of Februar, 1606 ; and ficlyke, produceit ane Letter of Slaynes,
fubfcryuit be Elizabeth Kirkpatrik, relict of vmq'" James ]\rCulloch of Barholme, Henrie M'Culloch Iiir Ipous, and Thomas M'Culloch now of Barholme,
and Johnne M'Culloch burges of Kirkcubreycht, off the dait at Edinburgh,
and the xvij and . . . dayes of Febrviar, 1607 yeiris.

\_3Ir Willimne Hairt, Jif/Ilce-Depufe.]

mi\U])tmtt — ^oifti'i) — anuantatioit, ^c.

Mar. 10. — IssOBEL Gkeiksoune, fpous to Johnne Bull, warkman in
the Pannis.'

1 Prestonpans. Of all the Trials for Witclicraft, &c. hitlierto pul)li^lle(l from the Record, tliis is
perhaps the most absurd and outre ; and the circumstantial detail is piMJiaps unique. It is of course

524 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

Indytit, accufit and perfewit of the crymes vnderwritten, viz. Foe samekill as fcho, liaifing confauit ane crewall liaitrent and malice aganis Adam
Clark in Preftovmpannis, fcho has contineM'allie, this haill yeir and ane half hygane, vfit all develifch and vngodlie meanis to be avangeit vpoun him ; fpeciallie,
in the nioneth of Nouember, the yeir of God I^.Vj". and fax yeiris, betuix xj
and xij houris at ewin, the faid Adam being lyand in his bed with his wyfFe,
and his feruand woman being in ane vtlier bed ; att the qnhilk tyme, fcho, in
the liknes of liir awin catt, accumpaneit with ane gritt number of vtlier cattis,
in ane develifch nianer, enterit within liir hous, quhair tliay maid ane grit and
feirfuU noyfe and trnbill ; quhairby the faid Adam, than lying in his bed with
his wyffe, and feruandis that wer than in the hous, ajJiirehendit fie ane grit feir,
that thay wer liklie to gang mad : At the quliilk tyme, the Devill, in liknes of
ane blak man, apperit in the hous, eftir ane feirfuU maner, com to the feruand
woman, than Handing in the flure, and drew hir vp and doun the hous be tlie
hair, eftir he had caffin hir curfch^ afF hir heid, and caffin the famyn in tlie
fyre : Quhairvpoun the pure woman contractit fie ane grit feiknes, that fcho lay
bedfaft,, in grit danger of hir lyfFe, be the fpace of fax oulkis^ thairefter ; and as
yit lies noclit returnet to hir perfyte health ; quhilk is notourlie'' kriawin. — Item,
fcho wes accufit, fForfamekill as fcho, liaifing confauit ane deidlie feid, rancour
and ewill will, aganis vmq'" Williame Burnet in Preftoun-jiannis, fpous to Margaret Myller, wedow, fcho dewj'fit be all devillifch and vngodlie meanis to bereif
him of his naturall lyffe ; and for performance thairof, fclie, as ane manifeft Sorcei'er and Wich, in the moneth of Janviar, I^.Vj". yeiris, laid on ane feirfull and
vncouth feiknes on him, be calling in of ane tailzie'^ of raw inchantit flefch att
his dur : And tliaireftir, the Dewill, in liknes of ane naikit infant bairne, nichtlie, for the fjiace of half ane yeir, appeirit in his hous ; qulia apjieirit befoir the
ffyre, haifing ane inchantit pictour in his hand : And tliaireftir, the Dewill appeirit, in hir liknes, within the faid vmq'' ^Villianlis hous, before the ffyre thairof, and in diners vtheris pairtis within the faid hous ; quhair, in ane maifl, vnhoneft and filthie maner, fcho pifchit vpoun the faid Margaret Myller, and in
diverfe pairtis of the faid hous ; that in eiid,*^ the faid vniq'" Williame, haifing
iiamit the faid nfobell, be hir name, fcho iminediatlie thaireftir vaneifchit away :
Eftir the quhilk tyme, the faid vmq'" ^Villiame Burnet continewallie dwynit
and jiynit away, in the faid vnknawin feiknefs, for the fpace of thre yeiris, nocht
habill to obtene ordinar cuir ; and at laft, in the nioneth of September, or thairby, r^A^j". and ffy ve yeiris, he, in grit dolour and payne, departit this lyffe : And

given liteiri.'h/ horn the Bool>s of Ailjoiuiml. Tlie reader is left to draw liis own inference as to
tlie deadi (murder ?) of tlie luckless mate of Jofin Bull. ^ Curtcli, a kind of head-gear, or cap.

Fr. couTche. ' Six weeks. * Notoriously. '■' Taille, Fr. A piece, ' yohbct,' or cut.

' At last.

40&4JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 525

fa, wes maift dewelifchlie bewichit be hir, in maner forfaid ; and fcho is airt and
pairt of the faid vmq'" Williamis death and feiknes.— Item, accufit for cafting
of ane greit feiknes, be hir develifch meanis, vpoun Robert Peddan, in the
Pannis ; and that in the moneth of October, P.VMxxxxiij yeiris ; qiiha, haifing
remanit feik be the ipuce of ane yeir and auchtene onlkis, fwerving and vaneifching away;' and vfing all ordiner nieanis to recover his health, hot daylie growing war,^ att laft he callit himfelf to remembrance, that he wes addettit to the
faid Iffobell in nyne fchillingis and iiij d. ; and that, befoir the taking of the faid
feiknes, becaus he refufit to pay hir the faid fonme, vnto the tyme fcho delyuerit
to him certane plaittis that fcho kepit of his ; fcho then, eftir vtering of diuerle
blalphemous fpeichis to the faid Williame, faid, he ' fould repent itt !' And
' fould nocht half bayth his health and haill clathis togiddir I' Quhairvpoun, he
than come to hir, and fatisfeit hir the faid foume, and thryfe afkit his health att
hir, for Godis faik ; faying, ' Gif 3e half done me ony wrang or hurt, repair pe
famin and reftoir me to my health !' And thaireftir, the faid Robert Peddane,
within, xxiiij houris, recoverit his health. — Item, fcho wes accufit, that in the
moneth of Junij laftbypaft, or thairby, fcho, haifing wantit hir katt, be the fpace
of half ane yeir befoir, in hir bycumming the faid Robert Peddanes M-indow,
fcho i>att in hir hand and drew furth hir catt ; at the quhilk tyme, thar wes
working in the fattis^ ane brewing of guid new aill, quhairof fmdi-ie honeft
neychtbouris wes than drinkand ; hot be hir develifcli Incantatioun and Sorcerie,
fra that tyme furth, the faid brewing of aill turnit,* in fic foirt, tliat it becam
altogidder rottin and blak, thik lyk gutter-dirt, with ane filthie and pellilent
odour, that na man mycht drink nor feel the fmell thairof. — Item, being indytit
and accufit, fforfamekill as fcho, haifing confauit ane deidlie ewill will, haitrent
and malice aganis Margaret Donaldfoune, fpous to the fold Robert Peddane,
about Hallowevin, in the yeir of God I'^W^j". and fyve yeiris, fcho, in hir devillifch maner, come vnder fcilence and cloude of nycht to the faid Robert Peddanes
houfe, and enterit efter ane devillifch and vnknawin way within the faid houfe,
the faid Margaret Donaldfoune being than lying in hir bed with hir faid hufband, found fleeping; at the quliilk tyme, fcho drew the faid Margaret be the
fpald^ out of her bed fra her hufband, and violentlie rufchit hir to the fluir ;
be occafioun quhairof, the faid Margaret hir fpreit faillit hii', that fcho continewit ane lang fpace afound f and thaireftir, cuming to hir felff, fcho fell in
ane feirfull and vncouth feiknes, that anes in ilk xxiiij houris, her lied and
breill was fa vehementlie trublit, that fcho was, for the fpace of ane hour,
mad, and knew nocht quhat fcho did ; quhilk continewit the fpace of fyve or

• Swooning and fainting away. " Worse and worse. ' Vats or tuns. * Ale is faid to

be turned wlien it is affected by lightning, kc. ; milk, when soured l)y sun or heat, &c. A large nail is
usually thrown into the churn, to prevent tiiis disaster. By attracting the electric fluid, it is said to
preserve the contents sound. ^ Fr. epaule, the shoulder or shoulder-blade. '' In a swoon.

526 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

fax dayes thaii'eftei', in grit vehemencie : And at the fax dayes end, fcho heiring
hir felfF to be bruittit' with the faid wicked and devellifch turne, fcho defyrit
the nychtboiiris to caufe hir and the faid JMargret to drynk togidder ; qvihilk
being done, fcho recoverit agane hir health, and fa continewit in i>erfyte health,
the fpace of aucht or ten dayes : Eftir the quhilk time, fcho heiring hir name
to be fldanderit, and fcho to be namit a Witche, quha had fkill to lay on
and tak af feikues ; fcho, movit with rage and invy, of new agane, come to
the faid Margrattis hons, and fpak to hir mony devillifch and horribill wordis,
faying to hir, ' The fagget of Hell lycht on the, and Hellis culdronne may thow
feith in !'^ And with thais, and vther the lyk devillifch fpeicheis, fcho paft away.
Eftir the quhilk tyme, the foirfaid feirfnl feiknes tuke the faid Margaret ; quha
continewit thairin ilk xxiiij houris, for the fpace of ane houi-, be the fpace of
nyne oulkis^ togidder, in maid feirfull raaner ; \aito the tyme ane pure woman
come to the faid IMargrettis hous-dur, to aflv meit ; quha, feing the faid Margret
wifleit* with the faid feirfull feiknes, declairit to hir, that fcho was witcheit, and
had the rycht champ^ thairof ; Eftir the quhilk tyme, the feiknes ceiffit, and
came nocht to hir agane, quhill the beginning of December laft, that fcho, cuming
thair by hir dur, with ane creilP on hir bak, faid to hir, ' Away theiff ! I lall
half thy hairt, for bruittiug of me fa falllie !' And immediatlie thairefter, the
feiknes of new agane come vpoune hir ; quhairintill fcho hes bene maift havelie
vexit and trubillit fenfyne, to the xxvij day of Januar laft, that fcho and fcho
war confrontit togidder, and examinat, in prefeus of my Lord Juftice, of your
devillifche crymes abouewrittin. — Item, for ane commoune Sorcerer and ane
Witche and abufer of the peple, be laying on and taking af of feiknes and difeiffes, and vfeing all devilleifch and vngodlie meanis to wyn hir leving ; and
Vfer of chai'mes and vther devillefch jiractizes.

PERSEWAn, Adam Clark, finytli in the Pannis, Margaret Myller, relict of vuiq'"' Willianie Burnet,

llobert Peddaiie, and Margaret Robiefone, his fpous.

Prelocutour for the pannell, Robert Hammiltoune, John Bull in the Pannk.

Verdict. The Affj^fe, be the mouth of Dauid Seatoun, (bailsie in Tranent,)
chancellar, ffand, pronunceit and declairit the faid IlFobell Grierfoune to be flfylit,
culi)abill and convict of all and fnidrie the heidis and poyntis of Dittay aboue
writtin, and crymis contenit particulerlie thairin.

Sentence. The Juftice-deiuite, be the mouth of James Henderfoun, dempftar, decernit and ordanit the faid Iffobell to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be wirreit' at ane ftaik quhill fcho be deid ; and her body to
be briuit in affis, as convict of the faidis crymis ; and all hir movabill guidis to
be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crj'^mes.

• Issobel hearing herself to be reported. Fr. bniit. ^ Caldron may thou feetlie in. ^ Weeks,
' Visited, tormented. ^ Stamp, mark, token. '' Basket, creel. '' Strangled.

40 & 5 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 527

#oi-cstaU(ng anU SUecrvatins.

May 19. — Johnne Rkvll, indueller in Leytli.
Dilaitit for contravening the Actis of Parliament, in ffoirftalling and regraiting of tymmer.'

Persewer, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of Monkland, knyclit, Aduocat.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Alexander King, James King.

It is allegit be the pannell, that he can nocht be put to the knawlege of ane
Aflyfe for the cryme lybellit, becaus the tymnier lybellit was bocht be his fervand in Norruay, enterit in the tovvnes buikis, as his awin proper tymnier, and
hes payit his Maiefteis cuftome thairfoir : And for verificatioun thairof, producet
the entrie of the tymmer in the townes buikis of Edinburgh, as Iiis proper tymmer, and quhair he payit the cuftome thairof. — It is anluerit be my Lord Aduocat, that the allegeance aucht to be rejiellit, in refjiect nathing is producet to
preve the bying of the tymmer, be him felf or his fervand ; and is contrair to
the fiimmondis, quhilk beiris the ffoirftalling of tymmei*, befoir the farayn was
prefentit to marcat.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of James Forman, (water bail3ie,) chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Johnne ReuU to be ffylit, culpable
and convict of cowmone Regraiting and ffoirftalling of all foirtis of tymmer,
cumand and aryveand at the faid Poirt and hevin of Leyth, and fa to be repute
and haldin : And Clanget and acquit him of the haill remanent poyntes of the
faid Dittay. — Edward Edjer, merchand burges of Edinburgh, become fouertie
for the enti'ie of the faid Johnne the morne, to heir dome pronuncet, &c.

Sentence. The Juftice, being refoluet thairwith, and with the Act of Parliament maid thairanent, Deceruit and Ordanit the faid Johnne Reull to content
and pay to our fouerane Lordis Thefaurer and his deputis, the fowme of fourtie
pundis money of this realme of North Britane,' as penaltie defignat in the faid
Act of Parliament aganis cowmoune Regraiteris and ffoirftalleris, for the firft
fait. And als, ordanit the ffiid Johnne to find cautioune actit in the buikis of
Adiornall, to abftene fra all maner of foirftalling or regraiting of tymmer in
tyme cuming, vnder the pane of ane hundreth merkis.^

Slppointmtnt of a 3m0tiff--33tj)ute.

Jun. 2. — Mr Alexander Coluill, fone to Alexander, Commendator
of Culrois,
Gaif his ayth de fideli adminijlratione in the Office of Juftice-deputric ; and
thaireftir was creat and admittit Juftice-depute.

■ Timber. '^ This is the first time Scotland is so designated in this Rerord. Indeed it is very

unusual, even for a century after tliis period. ' Ed3er again becomes his suretie.

528 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

Jim. 26. — WiLLiAJiE Guthrie of Ravenfbie.
Dilatit of airt and pairt of the Slauchteris of vmq'" Patrik Gairdia of that Ilk,
and v'lnq''' Robert Gairdiii of Tullois, committit in the moneth of ... . I".V'.
tlirefcoir auchtene yeiris.

Persewer, Mr Robert Gairdin Younger of Blairtoune.

George Leflie, fiear of Kincragie, become plege and fouertie that he fall compeir befoir the Julllce or his deputis, the thrid day of the nixt Jutlice-air of the
fcherefdome of Abirdene, or foner, vpoiin xv dayis Avairning.

^lauffljtf r — Itebjiintr * ^MtV ov 23lafft--mail — ^toutjreif, ^f.

Jun. 27. — All ASTER Stewart INFgilliechallum, brother to Johnne
Stewart, alias Johnne Dow 3I''giUicchaUum of Tennandrie.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Dittay following, viz. That is to fay, of airt
and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Johnne Stewart of Bonfkeid ; committit in
the moneth of December, the yeir of God I'".Vj''. and fyve yeiris, betuix Dunkeld
and Atholl, vpoun lett purpois, provifioun and foirthocht fellony. Item, for
airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Stewart, fecund fone to the faid
vmq'^ Johnne Stewart of Bonflveid ; committit about Paifch,' in the yeir of God
I'^W^j". and lax yeiris, vpoun the landis of Kilbrochene. Item, for airt and pairt
of the Slauchter of vmq'" AVilliame Leith, att the Kirk of Crathie in Cromar ;
committ about tuell yeiris fyne, or thairbj^. Item, for cuming with Johnne
Dow, his brother, to the boundis of Strathardill, in the moneth of July laftbypaft, and comi)elling of the tennentis of the landis of Strathardill to pay tothame
ane fl^att^ of foure hundreth merkis or thairby ; committand thairby manifeft
Oppreffioune. Item, for the thiftious Steilling and reving, be way of maiflerfiill Stouthreif, fra .... Donaldfoun, chapman, of his pak, with certane merchandice thairin ; committit thre yeii'is fyne or thairby.

Persewer, Mr Robert Lyntoune, Aduocat-lubftitute.

ASSISA.

Alexander Dumbar, fcIierefF of Patrik Moncur of Cliapeltoun, Tlio" Farguifoun of Bcllewcbane,
Murray, Jobnne Moncur, fone to tbe Laird Williame Stewart of Kynnaird,

Sir Thomas Stewart of Garnetul- of Moncur, Colene Campbell of Botlie,

lie, knycht, Mr Alex' Hay of Kynmwdie, Angus Willianifoun of Termet,

Dauid Drummond, Chalmerlane Alexander Flerayng of Monefs, Robert Cliryllie, tail5eour, burges
to my Lord Drummond, Thomas Otterburne of Reidhall, of Edinburgh.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of Thomas Otterburne, chancillar, ffand,
pronunceit and declarit the faid Alexander Stewart to be ffylit, culpable and con-

' Pash, Lat. Pascha, Easter. ' A compulsory tax, contribution, or fine, somewliat similar (in

40 & 5 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 529

vict of airt and pairt of ilk ane of tlie pointis of Dittay, refpectlue aboue writtin,
and of the ciymes contenit in the famin, conforme to his Confeffiouu producet
in judgement, quhilkis he ratifeit.

Sentence. And thairfore, the faid Juftice-depute, be reafoun thairof, and
of his fpeciall Convictioun, of the tliiftious fteilling and reving, be way of mailerfull StouthreifF, fra .... Donaldfoun, chapman, of his pak and merchandiee
contenit thairin, be the mouth of Robert Montgomerie, dempftar, Ordanit the
faid Alexander Stewart to be tane to the mereat Croce of Edinburgh, and thair
to behangit vpoun ane gibbet.quhill he be deid ; and all his landis, heretageis,takis,
ftedingis, rowmis, poffeffiounis, coirnis, cattell, guidis and geir to be fforfalt and
efcheit, &e.

\i^lau(iljtti- of 91le.v.iutJn' 3toi-tJ ^jjunie.

Jul. 8.— Dauid Lvxdsay, fiear of Ed3ell ; Thomas Lyndfay, fone naturall and feruitour to Dauid elder of Ed^ell ; Harie Lyndfay,
fone to Dauid L. of Kynnettillis ; Mr Johnne Lyndfay, fumtyme Minifter at , fone to Johnne L. of Barrefe, feruitour to the auld Laird of Ed^ell ; George Lyndfay, brother to
the Laird of Covingtoune, alfo feruitour to the Laird of Edsell

elder ; Mr James Lyndfay, fone to L. of Brodland ;

Andro Stratoun ; Home, fone to Robert Home of the

Heuche ; Gawin Lyndfey, father-brother to the fxid Laird of
Covingtoune.
COMPERIT George Guthrie,feruitour to vmqi' Alexander Lord Spynie, and producet our fouerane lordis Letteris, dewlie execute and indorfat, purcheft att the
inftance of Dame Jeane Lyoun Lady Spynie, the relict ; Alexander Maifter of
Spynie, eldeft fone ; Dauid Erie of Craufurd Lord Lyndfay, &c., Sir Harie L.
of Carrieftoun, knycht. Sir Johnne L. of ^Voidwrae, knycht, as brether, with the
remanent kyn and freindis of vmq'° Alexander Lord Spynie ; to tak foiiertie of
the faid David, &c., that thai fould compeir befoir the Juftice or his deputis this
day and place, in the hour of caufe, to vnderly the law, for airt and pairt of the
Slauchter of the faid vmq'" Alexander Lord Spynie. Be the quhilkis Letteris,
the faidis perfonis war denunceit our fouerane lordis rebellis and put to the
home. \'pone the productioun quhairof, the faid George Guthrie afkit inftrumentis, and proteftit for releif of Harie Lyndfay of Carreftoune, cautioner for
reproductioune thairof.

this instance at least) to Blach-maU. Scatt, properly, was a feudal tax a-uiently pai,l, in Shetland,
to the King of Denmark; and at present Lord Dundas draws a considerable sum of bcatt; which is
understood^o be payable chiefly iu kind, e.g. butter and oil, &c.

VOL. II. ^ ^

530 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

Crf asoit — (Ctltfiration of ti)t iHass, ^c.

Sep. 25. — WiLLiAJiE MriiDOCHE alias j\rKiE, Preift, borne in Dunkeld.

Dilaitit, acc-ufet, and perfewit be Mr Robert Lyntoun, Aduocat, fubftitute to
our fouerane lordis Aduocat, For contravening his Maiefteis Actis of Parliament, in the ti-elTonabill faying of Mefs, at dyuerfe tymes, within the houffis and
places following, in the monethis of Januare, ffebruare, Marche, Apryle, Maij,
Junij. Julij, Auguft, September, October, November and December, in theyeiris
of God 1"".^"^ fourfcoir fovu-tene, fyftene, laxtene, fevintene, auchtene, nyntene,
lax hundreth, fax hundreth ane, tua, thre, four, fyve, and fax hundreth and fax
yeiris ; at the leift, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis and yeiris of God : And
that within the places and houffis of Strabogie, Boig of Geicht, the Lady Sutherlandis lioufe in Suderland, Dvvnrobyn, the Lady Auchindownis houfe, in Mr Alexander Leflieis hous, Patrik Butteris houfe, befyde Aberdene. Item, for faying
of ane Saul-mefs {soul-mass) for the Lady Aucliindoun, in ane pviir mannis houfe
in Strabogie, a littill eftir hir deceife. Item, in the Guidman of Carrones hous,
callit Grant, and in AVilliame Lellie of Com-akis houfe ; and in dyuerfe vtheris
places and houffis in the North ; being accumpaneit with dyuerfe our fouerane
lordis leigis at the faidis Meffis : Committing thairthrow the cryme of Treffione,
and incurring the panes fi)ecifeit in the faidis Actis of Parliament, maid aganis
the fayeris of Mefs, viz. tynfall and fforfaltour of lyfe, landis and guidis ; as at
mair lenth is contenit in the Dittay and Depofitiones maid be the laid Williame
thairupone.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouthe of Abrahame Hammiltoune, fmyth,
chancellar, in refpect of his Confeffioun, maid judiciallie, of the haill Dittay and
Dejjofitiones producet, ffand, i^roniniceit and declairit the faid Williame Murdoche to be ifylit, culpable and convict of the crymes aboue fpecifeit.

Thairefter, the faid Mr Robert Lyntoun, fubftitute to our fouerane lordis
Aduocat, producet ane Warrand of his Maiefteis, vnder his hienes hand-writt,
defyreand the Juftice, accoirding thairto, to i)ronunce Dome aganis the faid
Williame Murdoche, Preift, quhairof the tennour foUowis.

To OUR right truftie and weilbelouit coufeiis and counfallouris, the Erie of Dumfermeling, our
chanceller, and remanent Lordis and vferis of our Previa Counfall, in our kingdome of Scotland, thefe.

James R.

Right trustie and weilbelouit coufeingis and counfallouris, We greit 30W weill. Whearas,
ane Murdoch alias M''kie, Preifl, was apprehendit by the Bifchope of Murray, and is prefentlie in
waird, within the tolbuthe of Edinburghe, whear he hes lyne this long tyme paft : Our pleafour and
Will is, that 50W caufe him be proceidit aganis, in maner following: ffirft, that he be prefentit befoir
our Jullice fair, and abyde his ordiner tryell, whearin no dout he will be ffund culpable, vpone his awin
Confeffioun ; and than our pleafour is, that our faid Juftice do pronunce the judgement eftir following
aganis him ; in appointing him to be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburghe, being clad in his Mefs41&5JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 531

claithes, in the fame foime that he wes takin ; and eftir he hes bene prefentlt to the vew of the hole
people, he than be ftrypped of all his Mefs-clothes ; and the fame, with all his vther Popifch baggadge
that was apprehendit with him, to be piefentlie caft into the ifyre, fair reddie for the puipofe, to be
confwmed and brunt to afches: And jiairwith, that he be adiudget to be Banisciiet furth of all our
dominions, indureing his naturall lyfe ; vnder the pane of daith, in caice of his retume bak to ony pairt
of })e fame : And willing 30W to give vnto our Juftice particuler directioun heiranent, and to be cairfull to fee the fame, in everie poynt, execute, We bid 50W hairtlie fairweill. Frome our Court at
Theobaldis, the xvij of September 1607.

Sentence. Accoirding to the qiiliilk Warrand and directioun, the Juflicedepute decernit and ordanit the faid Williame Mtirdoche, preift, to be takin, on
Mononday nixt, to the mercait Croce of Edinburghe, cled in his Mefs-claytliis,
and thair to ftand chen3eit,' fra ten houris to tuelf befoir none ; and thaireftir,
ane fyre being kyndillit at the faid Croce, the faid Mefs-claithes to be caffin af
liim and brunt in the faid fyre, with all his vther Popifche baggadge that war
apprehendit with him. Quhilk folemnitie being vfet, Ordanis the faid \Villiaine
to be Banifchet furth of our fouerane lordis haill dominions, during his lyftyme ;
and nawayis to returne within the famyn, vnder the pane of daith : And to be
tranfportit bak agane fra the faid mercait Croce to the faid Tolbuith of Edinburghe, thair to remane cj[uhill ane fchip be in reddines to tranfport him, Quhilk
was pronuncet for donie.^

€vntl jj^pprtssion — iHtiitjer.

Nov. 5. — Williame Bonaii, in Condy.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Dittay following, viz. FoilSAMEKILl> as lie,
in the moneth of October, the yeir of God I^.Vj". and fyve yeiris, haifing requyret Patrik Philp in Condy, his coitter,^ to geve him the lane" of his horfe, for
leiding of certane his fchorne peis, than Handing ftoukit^ vpone ane pairt of the
faidis landis of Condie, occupyit be him ; lyk as, for fatisfeing of the faid ^Villiames defyre, haifing directit his naig, Avith vmq''^ Robert Quliyte, his fervand,
and ane fled," to the leiding of his pels. Trew it is, that the faid "\Mlliame,
vpone the . . . day of October, the yeir of God aboue writtin, at the faid vmq'"
Robertis cuming to the feildis, quhair the faidis peife war roukit," becaus the faid
Robert refuifit to tak on fic extraordiner burding as the faid naig was vnhable
to draw, he thairfoir maift proudlie and contemptiouflie loufet his belt, and with
the bukillis and remanent irnes thairof, maift crewallie ftrak the faid vmq''' Ro1 Chained. ^ ' Sept. 27, 1607. — A Preift, who had been a certaine time in waird before, in

the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, was brought down, on the mercat day, to tlie Mercat-croce, with ail his
Meffe-doaths upon him, wherewith he was taken, with his chalice in his band. He liayed at the
Croce from ten hours till twelve. Then all his Madi'-cloathes and chalice were burnt in a fire bellde
the Crofe, and hinifelf carried backe to waml'—Ca/derwood's 31 S. Church History. ^ Cottar.

^ Loan. ^ Put up in stouhs or shocks, to win or cure. '' Sledge, a sort of cart without wheels,

still in use, in mountainous district«i, for leading in meadow hay. turf, 8cc. Put up in rucks, ricks.

532 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

bert in tlie lieid and face, and with his feit and kneyis ftrak him in his breift,
bellie and fydis, and brak his haill intrallis within him : And thaireftii-, fchot'
him fra him doun ane watter-bra," quhair he fell in ane watter, and remanit
bleiding thairin ane grit fpace thaireftir, at month and neife ; be occalioun of
the quhilkis crewall woundis and llraikis, gevin to the faid A'mq'" Robert, he
immediatlie thaireftir tnik bed, quhairin he continewit bedfaft, in grit dollour and
difeafe, be the fi)ace of tuentie dayis thairefter, or thairby ; and at laft, vpone
the . . . day of November thaireftir, he depairtit this lyfe, of the faidis hurtis
and wovmdis ; and fa, he was maift crewallie flane be the faid Williame Bonar :
And he is airt and pairt thairof ; committit vpone fet purpois, prouifion and
foirthocht fellonie.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Williame Birfoun in Clow, ffand,
pronnncet and declarit, all in ane voce, the laid Williame Bonar to be Clenget,
innocent and acquit of the cryme abone writtin, and haill circumftances thairof.
Quhairvpoun the faid Williame afl\it inftrvimentis.

Nov. 6. — JoHNXE Forbes, brother to Williame Forbes of Corfindae.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slanchter of vniq'^ Williame Broun, fervand
to Johnne Irwing of Ardtanfurd, committit be him and his complices, callit ' the
CcniPAXiE AND SociETie OF THii BoYis,' vpone the landis callit the Peill of
Lumfannen, in the monetli of November, the yeir of God I'^.^^j". and fyA^e yeiris.
lTE:\r, for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Robert Merfar in Tombeg,
committit be him and his complices foirfaidis, in the moneth of Junij laftbypaft,
at Magnus Garioches hous, in Drumnahoy. And laft, for contravening of our
fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and piftolettis, daylie and continuallie, this thre yeir bygane ; Ipeciallie, for invaiding
and i^erfewing of Williame Irwing, brother to the Laird of Drum, and fchuiting
of ane piftolet at him, betuix his awin duelling hous and the Kirk of Kyncairdin,
in the moneth of July or thairby, r^-Vj"". and fax yeiris.

Pehsewar, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun. Prelocutoue in defence, Mr Johnne KuHell.

The Aduocat produceit the Dittay aganis Johnne Forbes, with the Letteris of
Hoii'ning, and defyrit proces. — Mr Johnne Ruflell producet ane Letter of Relaxatioune, be the quhilk he is relaxit fra the home, for the crymis contenit in the
Dittay, and thairupoun aflvit inftrumentis. — The pannell takis inftrumentis that
iia jiartie inliftis in the perfute of this Dittay, except my lord Aduocat. It is
allegit, that na proces can be led in this matter, becaus lie audit to be fummond
vpoune XV dayis wairning, feing he is the Kingis frie fubiect ; and for inftruct-
^ Forcibly puslied, shoved. ^ A brae or sloping bank above a stream.

41&5JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

533

ing thaii-of, citit the practik betuix the Montgomeries and Cuniiigharae, and the
vther of Newarkis. — It is anfuerit, audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Relaxatioune producet, beiring the pannell to haif bene at the home ofbefoir, for the
crymes contenit in the Dittay ; vpoun the quhilk Hoirning Commifrioune was
direct to apxn-ehend the pannell, rebell and at the home ; and being apprehendit,
is broeht fra the waird to the bar ; and thairfoir, na delay aucht to be grantit
vpoun XV dayis.

The Juftice findis i^roces, nochtwithftanding of the AUedgeance : Quhafrupone the Aduocat takis inftrunientis.

It is alledgit be the pannell, that the Juftice can nocht proceid in the mater
aganis Johnne Forbes, for the crymes contenit in the Dittay ; becaus, be Act of
Secreit Counfall, my Lord Forbes wes maid Juftice to pronunce dome (of) Baneifment aganis the faid Johnne ; quho hes pronunceit the faid Dome, in ane
Juftice Court, hauldin be him ; and gif he hes nocht pronunceit the lliid dome,
the faid Johnne offerit him to be Baneift, and to find cautioun, actit in the Buikis
of Adiornall, to pafs aff the countrey, vnder fic panis (as) the Juftice will modefie ; and thairfoir na jiroces : And for verificatioun thairof, produceit the Act
of Counfall ; and eikis,' that he was tane before the expyring of the tyme appointit to his baneifment. The Aduocat anfuerit, that the Act of Counfall can
nocht ftay proces ; feing that (there) is na thing produceit, declaring him to be
exilit ; nather yit is the Dome pronunceit : And (iclyke, the faid Johnne man" be
putt to ane AfTyfe, except he can fchaw Refpett, Remiflioun or clangeing ; and
alfe, the Aduocat acceptis the Secreit Counfallis oi'dinance.

It is allegeit, that the pannell can nocht be putt to ane Aflyfe for 3IerJar,
feing he wes ordanit to be Baneift for Brounis Slauchter ; and thairfoir the Sentence and dome of Baneifment ftanding, he can nocht be put to ane Aftyfe for
Merfai*. It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, the Argument makis him nocht lauchfnll to flae in Junij, he being baneift in March. Item, it is allegeit that na
proces for Merfaris flauchter, becaus he wes nocht apprehendit for the famin.
It is anfuerit, he wes att the Home for the Slauchter, and he may be challangeit
for tlie famin ; and produceit the Hoirning. — The Connnillioun of appreheniioune being produceit, it is alledgeit, that Coramiffioun fallis, in refpect of Affythement, and ane Act, makeand Arthour Lord Forbes Juftice, to pronunce
dome of Baneifment. It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that the cans of the Commiflioun wes rebellioun, quhilk wes nocht purget, quhill eftir his taking.

The Juftice ffindis proces, nochtwithftanding of the pannellis fyrft alledgance
maid, that Brounis Slauchter fould nocht be put to ane Aflyfe.

It is allegeit, of new, that gif ye will pitt the mater to ane Aflyfe, and be

' Adds fartlier, subjoins. ^ Must.

534 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

convict, ye can nocht pronunce na forder Dome nor' according to the Act of
Counfall. It is allegeit for the Slauchter of Merfar and weiring of piftoletis, he
can nocht be putt to ane Aflyfe, feing he wes nocht tane for that cryme ; and that
wes nocht in 7-erum natura quhen the Commiffioun wes grantit. It is anfuerit,
that the pannell wes fummond vpoiin xv dayis warning, for the faidis crymes ;
and being in waird, he may be brocht out and put to ane Aflyfe. And the Aduocat pi-oduceit the Hoirning aganis the pannell for the Slauchter of Merfar. —
The Letteris (of Hoirning being) produceit, it is allegeit that the famin s null,
becaus the laid Johnne Forbes is fummond only att the mercat croce of Abirdene. The Aduocat anfueris, that he aucht (to) reduce ; and the Juflice is
nocht Judge to the nulling^ of Hoirningis.

The Juflice Ordanis the mater to be putt to ane Inqueift, nochtwithftanding
of the allegeances. — The pannell offeris him felf in his Maiefteis Will, for the
weiring and fchuiting of jjiftolettis.

ASSISA.

James Cunningliam, father-brollier to tlie Laird of Barnis, James Dikfoun of Hirdrig, Andio Abircrumbie of Strarutbie, Williame Sydferff of Ruchlaw, Johnne Airmour, mercbeand burges of Ed\'

The Aduocat, for verificatioun of the Dittay, produceit twa Letteris of Hoirning, and the faid Johnne Forbeflis Depofitioimis, confefling the crymes contenit in the Dittay. — It is allegit aganis Harie Sldrvhig,^ that he can nocht be
reflauit on this Aflyfe, becaus thair is feid^ ftanding betuix the Laird of Drum,
on the ane pairt, and the name of Forbes, on the vther pairt ; and the Erie of
Marfchell, to quhom this Aflj'four is vaflall, is lifl:er-bairnes to the Laird of
Drum. It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit ; in refpect of the Act of Parliament
difcharging all feidis ; and that thair is na deidlie feid qualifeit betuix the Erie
Marfchell and this pannell. — The pannell, eftir reiding of the Dittay, denyis the
Slauchter of Robert Merfar, or that he was ather airt or pairt thairof. — The
Aduocat repeittis to the Aflyfe the pannellis Confeflloune, with the Letteris of
Hoirning for the crymes contenit in the Dittay and Act of Counfall. The Aduocat protefl:is for ^Vilfull Errour aganis the Aflj'fe, in cais thay acquit ; and
that the Aflyfe be reteanit in the Tolbuth, quhill the Kingis Maieftie and his
Counfallis will be knawin. — The pannell takis infl;rumentis of the Aflyfes determinatioun, in Clengeing of the pannell, for the Slauchter of Broun ; and defyres
the Jufl;ice to be advyfet with the Counfall, anent the dome, in refpect of the
Act of Counfall, producet be him in this proces.

Veedict. Eftir accufatioun of the faid Johnne Forbes, be Dittay, of the
haill crymes aboue writtin, and verificatioun thairof, be his Depofitiones, fub-

' Tban. ' Annulling, reducing. ' The remainder of the Assise composed of ' mercheandis.'
* Of that Ilk. ^ Feud, deadly enmity.

41&5JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 535

fciyuit with his hand, as alfo fubfcryuit be my Loi-d Halyrudhous and Mr Johnne
Preftoun, Collectour, prodiicet be my Loi-d Aduocat, togiddei* with the Letteris
of Hoirning, &c., the Affyfe, be pkiralitie of voittis, be the mouth of the faid
Williame Sydferf of Ruchlaw, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the laid
Johnne to be Clene, innocent and acquit of airt and paii't of the Slaucliter of the
faid Ymq'*" Robert Merfar : And ffand, pronuncet and declairit, be pluralitie of
voittis, the faid Johnne to be ffylit, culi>abill and convict of airt and pairt of the
flauchter of the faid vmq''' Williame Broun ; and for beiring, weiring and
Ichuiting of piftolettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament. And
that, in refpect of his awin Depofitiones and ConfelRoun producet, fubfcryuit
with his hand.

Sentence. For the quhilk caufe, the faid Juftice-depute decernit and adiudget the faid Johnne Forbes, be the mouth of James Henderfoun, denipller,
to be tane to the mercait Croce of Edinburgh, and thair, vpone ane fcaffold, his
heid to be ftrukin frome his body ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit and
inbrocht to his hienes vfe, as convict of the crymes aboue-writtin : Quhilk wes
pronuncet for dome.

^cvctv^ — Mitdjrraft — 3>ntantation — l^oisonina, ^c.

[The singvxlarity of the following Trial cannot fail to be i-emarked I)y all who
have bestowed any attention upon tlie history of the Superstitions of their native country. In illustration of several of the circumstances detailed, tlie Editor
considers that the Confessions of Issobell Haldane, preserved amongst the
Wan-ants of the Privy Council of Scotland, will prove an acceptable accompaniment. The Editor has not yet discovered whether that unfortunate woman suffered the usual death which awaited such a Confession. It is, however, but too
probable that she was put to death, by being ' brunt,' at Perth, in terms of her
own Depositions.]

Dec. 18. — Bautie Patersoun, taflcer in Newbottill.

Dilaitit of the cryme of Sorcerie and Witchcraft, in abufeing of the peopill
with charmes and dyuerfe foirtes of Inchantmentis ; and miniftring, vnder forme
of medecine, of poyfoneable drinkis : And of airt and pairt of the Murthour of
Johnne Myller in ffurd-mylne, about Martimas laft, and of vmq'= Elizabeth Robiefoune, be the faidis poyfonable drinkis, viz. For cureing of James Broun in
Turnydykis of ane vnknawin difeafe, be miniftrating to him of drinkis, rubbing
him with fawis' maid of dyuerfe grene herbis, and caufmg him pas hame to his
awin hous : and at his bed fyde to fitt doun on his kneis, thre feuerall nyditis,
and everie nycht, thryfe nyne tymes, to q/Ic his helth at all levbig iciditis, aboue

' Salves.

536 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1607.

and tinder the earth, in the name of Jesus. And thaireftir, ordanit the faid
James to tak nyne pickillis of qulieit, nyne pickillis of fait and nyne paces of
rowne-ti-ie/ and to were tliame continnallie vpone him, for his helth ; committino- thairby manifeft Soixerie and "Witchcraft. Itk:m, for abufeing of the people,
with ane certane watter, broclit be him furth of the Loch callit the Dow-Loche,
befyde Drnmlanrig, and cnreing of his awin bairne with the faid Loche watter,
be walcliiiig of the faid bairne, at everie nuke thairof, thvyfe ; and cafting in of
the bairnis fark" in the faid Loche, and leveing of the fark behind him ; affirming, that gif any fould come furth of the Loche, at that tyme, the patient wald
convalefe, and gif na thing appeirit to him, the patient wald die : And for
cayreing of the faid Loche watter to findrie of the cuntrie, that war vifTeit with
feiknes, or quhais beiftis war feik or foirfpokin f Speciallie, for the miniftrating
thairof to Alexander Clerk, in Creichtoun, for his helth ; be caufing him, at ilk
tyme quhan he liftit the ftoupe," quhairin it was, to fpaik thir woirdis : ' / lift
this watte); in the natne of the Father, Sone and Halij Gaijl, to do guid for
tliair helth for quhom if is liftit ;' quhilkis wordis fould be repeitit thryfe nyne
tymes. And for vfeing of thir charmes following, for charmeliiig of cattell ;
' / CIIJHME the for arroivfchot,fur dorfchot,for wondo-fchot,for ei/fchof, for
tungfchoie,for lever fchote, for lungfchote, for hertfchot, all the maijl, in the
name of the Father, the Sone and Hahj GaiJJ. Amen.' And for behaifing
him felf as ane cowrnone Sorcerer, in abufeing of our fouerane lordis leigis, thir
diuerfe yeiris bygane, be his devillifche practizes, V2:>one dyuerfe feik folk and
feik beftiall ; and vfeing of dyuerfe vther foirtis of Inchantment, expres aganis
the lawis of God and Actis of Parliament.

As at lenth is contenit in the faid Barteis Depofitiones, maid in prefens of the
Prefliiterie of Dalkeith, and Dittay formet thairupoune.

Verdict. The Allyfe, be the mouth of Tliomas Megget of Maiftertoun,
chancellar, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Bartie to be ffylet, culpable
and convict (conforme to his awin Confeffioun) of (he haill crymes aboue
writtin.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair to be
wirreit at ane ftaik, quliill he be deid ; and thaireftir his body to be brunt iu
afches ; and all his moveable guidis and geir, gif he ony hes, to be efcheit and
inbrocht to his hienes vfe, &c.

' The mountain-ash. Its vh'tues are even yet held in great repute, as a charm apjainst Witchrraft,
&c. - Sliirt. The purpose of so lioin'^- was to leave the disease on the shirt, and to make

an offering to the genius loci. In Ireland, at this day, ' Moly Wells' are commonly resorted to l)y tlie
sick, &c., who, after ablution and drinking of the spring, leave pins and pieces of rag, torn off som&
part of the patient's dress. ' Bewitciicd, charmed. * A sort of wooden bucket or pitcher,

used for holding or carrying water.

41&5JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 537

DePOSITIOUNES of ISSOBELL UALT)AiiF.,fufpecAt ofWlSCHCRAFT,

CoNFESsiT be hir the 15 of Maij 1623, asfollowis.

Being conveuit befoir the Seffioiin of Pertli, cftir piayeiis maid to God to oppin liir liairt and loufe
liii- toung to Confes tLe treuth :— Being afkit, ' Gif Alio lied onye Ikeill of cureinfr men, wemen or
bainieis that war difeifit ?' Selio anfuerit, that fclio had nane. Being requirit, ' Gif Icho cureit Andro
Duncanes bairne?' Anfuerit, that, according to the directioun of Jonat Kaw, fclio went with Alexander Lokart dwin' to the Turret-Port, tuik watter frome thence, being dwin ; brocht it to Andro
Duncanes houfe; and thair, wpone hir kneis, in the name of the Father, Sone and Halye Gooft,
weufch^ the bairne ! Eftir that, tuik the watter, with the bairneis fark, accumpaneit with Alexander
Lokart, and kuift^ baith in the burne ; hot in the going, fcho flcaillit* fwm, quliilk fcho rewis ane evill
rew,= becaus that if onye lied gone ower it, thay bed gottyn the ill.'^ Item, being afkit ' If frho lied
ony converfatioun with the flarye-folk ?' Anfuerit, that ten yeiris fyne, lying in hir bed, fcho wes
taikin furth, qubidder be God or the Deuill fcho knawis nocht ; wes caryit to ane hill-fyde : the hill
oppynit, and fcho enterit in. Thair fcho llayit tlirie dayis, viz. fra Thurifday till Souday at xij houris.
Scho mett a man with ane gray beird, quha brocht hir furth agane.

Item, that fame day Johne Roch deponit, that about that fame tyrae, he beand in James Chryftie the wrichtis buith, caufing the wricht niak ane cradill to him, becaus his wyft" wes neir the downlying ; the faid Iffobell Haldane com by, defyret him nocbt to be fa haiflie, for he neidit nocht ; his
wyfF fould nocht be lichter' till that tynie fywe oulkis,'^ and then, the bairne fuld neuer ly in the
craidill, hot be borne, bapteift, and never fouk, bot die and be tane away. And as the faid llfobelt
fpak, fo it cam to pafs, in euerie poynt.

The faid Iffobell being demandit, ' How fcho knew that?' Anfuerit, that the man with the gray
beird' tauld hir. Item, the faid Johne Roch deponit, that Margaret Buchaiiiian, fpous to Dauid
Rind, being in helth, at hir ordinare wark, the faid llfubell Haldane come to hir, and defyreit hir
mak hir for deith ;'" ffor befoir Fafluigis-ewin, quliilk wes within few dayis, fcho fuld be taikin away.
And as fcho faid, fo it wes ; befoir that terme the woman died. Being alkit, ' How fcho knew the
terme of lilr lyfe?' The faid Iffobell anfuerit, fcho hed fpeirit at that fame man with the grey beird,
and he hed tauld hir.

The xvj day of May 1623. Patrik Ruthuen, fkynner in Perth, compeirit and declairit, that he
being wifchit" be Margaret Horiiiftleuch, Iffobell Haldane com to fie him ; fcho com in to the bed
and ftrauchit'^ hir felf aboue him, hir held to his held, hir handis ower him, and fo furth, mumbling
fum wordis ; he knew nocht quhat they war.

The faid Iflbbell ConfefTit the faid cure; and deponit, that befoir the faid Patrik wes wifthit, fcho
mett him, and foirbad him to go till icho had gone with him.

The zix day of 3Iaij 1623. Compeirit Stephane Ray in Murotoune, and deponit, that thrie
yeiris fyne, that Iffobell Haldane haueing flollin fum here furth of the Hall of Balhouffye, he followit
hir, and brocht hir bak agane; fcho chaipil" him on the fchulder, faying, ' Go thy way I Thow fall
nocht win thy felf ane bannok of breid for yeir and day !' And as fcho threttinit, fa it cam to paa.
He dwynnit," hauelie difeifeit.

The faid Iffobell Confefiis the away-taking of the here, the dileife of the man, and aflflrmes, tliat
onlye fcho faid, ' He that delyueret me frome the ffarye ffolk flill tak amendis (on) the !' Item, the
fame day fcho confeft fcho maid thrie feueiall caikis, euerie ane of thame of ix curneis'^ of meill, gottin fra ix wemen that wer maryit madynnis ; maid ane hoill in the crowne of euerie ane of tlieme, and

'Down. 2 Washed. ' Cast, threw. ' Spilt some. ' Regrets or ri/ri liit Icily. " Mail any

one stepped over the place, the evil or disease would have been transferred from the sick child lo him. ' Li^litcr,

i. e. delivered of her child. * Five weeks. ^ This familiar spirit seems to be the same as ' Tliom Rail,'

mentioned in the extraordinary Trial of Bessie Duklop. '" Prepare for death. " Hewitchcd, /i/c-syjo/ira.

" Stretched. " Clapped. '• Pined away, without any apparent cause. " llaiidfiils, small iinautities.

VOL. II. ^ V

538 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

pat ane bairne throw it thrie tymeis, ♦ in the name of tlie Father, Sone and Halye Gooft,' to weraen
that pat the faidis hainies thryfe throw bakward, wfeing the faidis wordis. Item, the faid Iffobell
confeft, that fcho went, filent, to tl)e Well of Ruthuen,' and returneit filent, bringing waiter from
thence, to wafch Johne Gowis baime : Quhen fcho tuik the watter frome the Well, fcho left ane
pairt of the bairnes fark at it, quhilk fcho tuik with hir for that effect ; and quhen fcho cam home,
fclio weufche the bairne tlwirwith. In lyk maner, fcho Confeft, fcho had done the elyk to Johne
Powryis bairne.

T UK axvij day of MaiJ 1623. The faid IfTobell confeffit, that fcho had gewia drinkis to cure
baimeis ; amongis the reft, that Dauid Moreife wyfF com to hir, and thryfe for Goddis faik afkit help
to hir bairne that wes ane fcharge :^ And fcho fend furth hir fone to gether fochfterrie leaweis,'' quhairof fcho directit the bairnes mother to mak a drink. — Bot the bairneis mother deponit, that the faid
Iffobell Haldane, on-requirit, cam to her houfe and faw the bairne ; faid, ' it wes ane fcharge taikin
away ;' tuke on band to cure it ; and to that effect, gaiff the barne a drink ; efter the reiTait quhalrof
the bairne died.

WiLLiAME Young, Scribe to ]>e Prefbiterie of Perth, at command of fe famyne, with my hand.

JoNAT. Dauidsone, Notare Publict and Clerk to the Seffioune of Perth, at thair command and
directioune, with my hand.

\_3Ir WdUam Boirthuik, Jujlice-Depute.'\

^laufjTjter.

Feb. 3. — James Mure, Younger of Aucliindrane.^
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slaucliter of vmq'" Sir Thomas Kennedyie of
CiiUane and Williame Dalrumpill.

Persewer, Sir Thomas Hammiltoune of Bynnie, knycht.

Prelocutouris for the pannell.

Tiie Lairdis of Blair, Cauldwall, Heiffilheid, Rowallane, Mr Johnne Ruffell, Mr Laurence M''gill.

jNIy Lord Aduocat producet the Letteris deulie execute and indorlat, quhairby

the defenderis thairin contenit ar denuncet to the home. Mr Johnne Ruffell

producet Letteris of Relaxatioune, of the dait the thrid of Februare inftant ; be

the quhilkis the pannell is relaxit for the crymes aboue writtin. The pannell

takis inftrumentis of his entrie ; and efter reiding of the Suramondis, ofTeris

him felf reddie to abyd the tryell of the Law, for the crymes contenit thairintill ; and difaffentis fra all continewatioune. The Aduocat producet the Counfallis Warraud for continuatioune of this dyet to Fryday nixt ; and committing

the pannell to waird in the meane tyme.

The Justice, for obedience of the Counfallis Warrand, continewis this matter to Fryday nixt, and ordanit the pannell to Ije wairdit in the Tolbuith of
Edinburgh, in the meane tyme.

' The superstition of fetching water from Hob/- Wells, as they were and still are often called, was
very prevalent in Scotland, as well as in all Catholic countries. Some shred of dress belonging to the
diseased person was left on the brink of the well, in token of the disease liaving passed away along with
it. In Ireland, the bushes near to sucli wells are entirely covered with rags of every colour, as offerings to the Genius loci. ' Shaug, a creature pined away, by Witclicraft, an evil eye, &c. A
changeling. ' Leaves of an herb. Perhaps star-grass, bog-stai-grass. * Vid. Jul. 17, 1611.

41 & 5 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 539

[il//- WiUiame Hairf, Jujlice-De}mie.'\
Feb. 5.— The Justice continewis this matter to the lecuntl day of
Marche nixtocura ; and ordaiiis the pannell to be wairdit in the Tolbuith, in
the meane tyme.'

Feb. 5. — George Murray of Brochtoiine.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'° James MTuUoche, appeirand of Torhoufe ; committit in November laft.

Persewakis.
Jobnne M'^culloche, as brother ; William M'^cuUoche of Mertoune, Thomas M'^cuUoclie of Barholme.
The Justice continewis this matter to the morne.^

Feb. 6. — The jjerfewaris paflis fra the jjerfute of the Laird of Brochtoun
for the faid Slauchter, conforme to the cowmoning.^

iWutfTattoit.

Feb. 19 Johnne Duncaxe, elder, myller in the Brig of Hailes, and

Johnne Duncane, younger, meilmaker in Edinburgh.

Verdict. Fylit, culpable and convict of airt and pairt of the Mutilatioun
of Robert Dauidfoun of tua fingaris of his left hand ; committit be thame in the
moneth of September I^.Vj". and fax yeiris, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun and
foirthocht fellonie.

Sentence. To be wairdit within the Tolbuth of Edinburgh, thairin to
remane vpone thair awin expenffis, ay and quhill thay half fatisfeit the laid Robert Dauidfoun, pairtie, for his hurt and flvayth aboue writtiu, and obteue his
letteris of Slanes thairupoune : And aU'e, Ordanit thair haill moveabill guidis to
be efcheit to our fouerane lordis Ale, as convict of the faid cryrae.

^Iausi)ter.

Feb. 23. — WiLLiAME Keith, lone lauchfull to Alexander Keitli of
Auchquhirfk.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Mr Thomas Henderfone, Aduocat, fubftitute
to our fouerane lordis Aduocat, of the crymes following, viz. fforfamekill as,
vpone ffryday the nyntene day of ffebruar iuftant, the laid Williame liaifing
fallin out, in fom iniurious fpeiches with vmq'^ Thomas Colftoun, Inglifman, at
the drink, in GrilTell Ruffellis hous in Bruntieland ; he thaireftir rancounterit
with the faid vmq'" Thomas, befyde the fchoir of the faid biuxh of Bruntieland ;

I

It is again continued ; and Mure ordered to be kept in ward. - Plegio, Johanne Vaufe de

Bamebarroche. ^ Comnioning. It is likely that the private parties compromised the matter, and

that Letters of Remission were procured upon their joint application, on producing Letters of Shiins.

540 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

and thair, maift crewallie, with his drawin fwoird, ftrak the faid vinq'^ Thomas
vnder the left pape, and flew him thairwith : And the faid William is airt and
pairt of the flauchter of the faid vmq'" Thomas.

Perseweris, Ml- TiiOQias Henderfoiine, 3Ir Robert Foultis, aduocat.
Prelocutodr for the pannell, Mr JoLnne Ruffell.

ASSISA.

Aulay M'"caulay of Ardincapill, Arch"' Edmeftone of Ballintone, Hew Dal5ell, merchand burges of

George Murray of Brochtoun,' Johnne Ahannay, Provoft of Edinburgh,

James Lokhart of Ley, Wigtoun, Symone Brentoune, burges thair,

Williame Blair of Balgillo, Patrik Somervel, merchand George Redik,

. . . . Leith of Harthill, burges of Edinburgh, Geo. Rollok, portionerof Craigie,

Sir Alex'Colquhounof Lufsjkny', Donald Tliornetoun, burges thair, Vthreid M'dowell of Mondurk.

"\^EKDICT. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of the faid "\"threid ]\rdo\vgall of Mondurk, chanceller, fTand, i^ronuncet and declairit the faid Williame Keith to be
fiylit, culpable and convict of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'^
Thomas Colftoim; committit in maner and at the tyme fpecifeit in the faid Dittay.

Sentence. To be takin to the mercait croce of Edinburgh, and thair, vpone
ane flvafFold, his held to be ftrukin frome his body ; and all his moveabill guidis
and geir to be efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, as convict of the faid
cryme. Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

Feb. 24. — IssoBELE Tho.mesouxe, dochter to Robert Thomefoiin in
the Watter of Leyth.

Dilaitit of the crewall and vunaturall Murthour and diftructioun of hir awin
infant bairne ; committit be hir, immediatlie eftir hir delyuerie thairof, vpone
the aucht day of Februare infl;ant, fecretlie, within hir fatheris dwelling hous
in the ^Vatter of Leyth.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, in ane voce, be the mouth of Thomas Clerkfoun, butterman, chanceller, ffand, pronuncat and declairit the faid Iffobell, conforme to
liir awin Confeflioun, to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the crewall Murthour
and diftructioun of the faid bairn.

Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit, quhill fclio be deid ; and hir haill moveabill guidis, gif fcho ouy hes, to
be efcheit, &c.

Citasou — iHurfttr uniin* Crust, ^t.

Mar. 2. — James Watsoun, fone in law to James Hammiltoun of
Scheirell ; and James Hinchelwoid, feruitour to James Hammiltoun Younger of Spittelcheill.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt^ red, counfall and foirknawledge of the crewal Mur1 See Feb. 5, 1503.

41&5JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 541

thour of vmq" George Tuedie ; committit be the faicl James Hammiltoun of
Spittelcheill, vpone Sanct Leonardis-evin, in Nouember laft, within ane barne of
Spittelcheill ; the faid James, the tyme of the committing thairof, haifing confultit and devyfet the famyn witli Robert Craufurd, his gnid-brother, and with
the faidis James Watfoun and James Hinehelwoid, of the forme and maner thairof, viz. That the faid James Hinehelwoid fonld fecreitlie convoy ane mell' in
the barne, quhair the faid George Tuedie fould be murthourit ; and that the faid
George (his) bed fonld be maid in the laid barne, and the faid James Watfoun
to ly with him : Lyk as, about tuelf houris at evin, in the faid nycht, tlie faid
vniq'*" George Tuedie being lyne doun in his bed, within the faid barne, luiking
for the faid James Watfones cuming to ly doun with him, the faid James Hinehelwoid, James Hammiltoun and James Watfone come all in togidder within
the faid barne; and as the faid James Watfone was taking af his claithes. the
faid James Hammiltoun, with the faid mell in his hand, in prefens of the laid
James Watfoun and James Hinehelwoid, come to the faid George Tuedeis bedheid, and thair maift crewallie gaif him tua grit ftraikis in his heid, and Murdreift him thairby ; the faid James Hinehelwoid haifing brocht in the candill in
his hand, and delyuering the mell to the faid James Hammilton, to commit the
faid Murthour ; And eftir the committing thairof, the faid James ^Vatfone,
taking away with him the faid vmq'^ George Tuedeis horfe, with the fadill and
brydill, and the faid James Hinehelwoid heljiing the faid James Hammiltoun to
beir him to ane lyme hoill, ane littill frome the hous, quhair he wes bureit.

Verdict. The Affyfe electit and clioifit Hammiltoun of Sillertounliill^ chanceller, reflbnit and voittit vpone the poyntis of the faid Dittay, and
being ryplie and at lenth advyfet thairwith, togidder with the faidis James
Watfone and James Hinchelwoidis Depofitiones made be thame in the preiniffes ; thay, be the mouth of the faid Chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and dedairit
the faidis James Watfone and James Hinehelwoid to be ffylet, culpable and convict of airt, pairt, red, counfal and foirknawlege of the faid abhominable Murthour, and concerning of the famyn, fa lang eftir the connnitting thairof.

Sektexce. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis elcheit to our fouerane
lordis vie, as convict of the faidis crymes,

Cattlt--i3tfnlinrj;.

Mar. 11. Thomas Fraji, fumtyme lervand to James Hammiltoun of

Spittelfcheill.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling, conceilling, reffetting and
' Mallet, ^ Robert B&W^ie of Jeniftoun, Jolinne Grahame brother to Waftraw, and James

Mureheid younger of Lacliope, are the only other landed persons. James Levinglloun of Jerifwoid
was Bned 100 nierks for non-appearance.

542 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

away-taking of thre oxin and ane kow pertening to James, Loi'd of Babnirrinoch,
furth of his landis of IMulrum ; comniittit in the moneth of Auguft I^-Vj*^. and
fax yeiris. — ^'ekdict. Guilty. James Levinftouu of Jerifwoid, chanceller.

Sentence. To be tane to the mei-cait croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit quhill he be deid ; and all his moveabill guidis, gif he ony hes, to be confifcat to our fouerane lordis \^e.

[il/>' WiUiame Borthuik, JiiJ? ice- Depute.']
Mar. 18. — Johxxe Swan, burges of Dumbar.

Pehseweris, M'illiame Clerkfoune, brothei-fone, Johnne Kellie, fifler-fone, Jolmne Learmontb,
guid-fone, Williaiue Rutliven alio fone-in-law.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of vmq'"
George Clarkfoune, mei'chand bnrges of Dumbar : committit be hiin within the
faid vmq'° George awin barne, lyand at the bak of the toune of Dumbar, vpone
the fyftene day of Marche inftant, betuix thre and foure eftir none ; be geving
to him of ane crewall and deidlie ftraik vpone the left fyde of his heid, alangis
his vane-organe,^ with ane grit fork, quhairof he imrnediatlie depairtit this lyfe.
"\"ekdict. Guilty. Johnne Kellie, elder in Dumbar, chanceller.
Sentence. I'o be takin to the mercait croce of Edinburgh, and thair his
heid to be ftrukin frome his bodie ; and aU his moveabill guidis to be efcheit and
inbrocht to his hienes vfe, as culpable and convict of the faid cryme.

[3/r WiUicnne Ha'irt, Jiiftice-Depute.']

^orrtvir, asutdjrvaft, ^c.

Maij 27. — Beigis Tod, in Lang-Nydrie.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit, at the inftance of Mr Robert Foulis, Aduocat,
fubftitute to our fouerane lordis Aduocat, of the crymes of Sorcerie following,
viz. FoRSAMEKiLL as fcho, accumpaneit with vmq'^ Criftiane Tod, hir fifter,
Johnne Graymeill, Margaret Dwne and Erfche Marioim,' in the moneth of Auguft, the yeir of God 1".^^". four fcoir fourtene yeiris,' convenit tliame felffis, with
thair complices, all Witches and abufearis of the people, at Deane-fute of LangNydrie, quhair the Deuill appeirit to thame, and reprovet the faid Beigis Tod
verrie fcherplie, for hir lang tayreing ; to quhome fcho maid this anfuer, ' Sir, I
coidd wyn na foner !' And imrnediatlie thaireftir, thay paft altogidder to the laid
Beigis hous in Lang-Xydrie; quhair, eftir thay had drukkin togidder a certane
fpace, thay, in thair devillifche maner, tuik ane katt, and drew the lamyn nyne
tymes throw the faid Beigis cruik ;* and thaireftir come Avith all thair fpeid to

' Jugular vein, ° Irish or Higlilantl Marion, a personage wlio figured in the Witch Trials of

that period. ' A.D. 1394. ■• Of iron, on a hich the ' kail-put' is usually hung over the fire.

41 & 6 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 543

Seaton-thorne,' be-north the 3et ;- qiihair the Devill callit for the faid Criftiaue
Tod, and i^aft to Robert Smartis hous, and brocht hir out ; and as fcho was
cumand with him, fcho tuik ane grit fray,^ and faid to the Devill, ' Sir, quhat
will ye do with nie ?' Qidia anfuerit her, ' Tak na feir, for 3e fall gang to
30ur filler Beigis, and to ])e reft of hir cumpanie, quha ar ftayand vjione
30ur cuniing at the Thorne !' And thay theireftir paft altogidder, with the
Devill, to the irne 3et of Seatoun, quliair of new thay tuik ane cat, and drew
the famyn nyne tyines throw the faid Irne-3ett : And immediatlie thaireftir,
come to the barne, foiranent George Feudaris dur,'* quhair thai criftenit the
faid catt, and callit hir JMciigaret : And thaireftir come all bak agane to the
Deane-fute, quhair firft thai convenit, and cuift the kat to the Devill. For the
quhilkis devillifche practizes the faidis Crilliane Tod, Johnne Gray-nieill,
Erfche Marioun and Margaret Dwne wav convict and brunt. And the faid
Beigis Tod is airt and pairt of the cryme of Sorcerie and "Witchcraft aboue writtin ; quhilk wes nottourlie knawin : Item, fforfamekill as tlie faid Beigis Tod,
haifing fallin furth at variance with the vmq'^ Alexander Fairlie in Lang-Nydrie, fcho, to be revendget vpone liim and his bairnis, in tlie moneth of Juiiij
I^.VMxxxxj yeiris, be hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft, cuift ane heavie and vnknawin feiknes vpone Alexander Fairlie, his fone, quha vanifchet away^ with
vehement ftieiting and continuall burning at the heai't ; quhilk feiknes indurit
with him the fi)ace of tua monethis, that nane luikit for his lyfe ;" and nichtlie
the faid Beigis appeirit to him, in hir awin fimilitude ; vpone quhome he crj'it
coiatinuallie for help : And in the day, fcho appeirit to him, in fcbape of a dog ;
quhilk pat him almaift out of his witts : Vpone occafioun quhairof, the faid Alexander, his father, paft to the faid Beigis Tod, and efter he was reconceillit to liir,
maift earniftlie befocht hir to cum and remedie his fone of the faid feiknes ; qulia
refuifit to cum ; yit, at the eirneft defyre of Archibald Gallo^^'aJ', fcho, accumpaneit with hir tua fones, come to the hous, and fa fone as the faid Alexander faw
hir, he eftir that tyme became bettir and bettir, and convalefcit of the faid feiknes.
And fa, fcho committit manifeft devilrie and Witchcraft, in on-layiiig and aftaiking of feiknes, in maner foirfaid. And lykM'ayes, was acculet be the faid
Aduocat and Robert Woid, litfter, for the cafting of the lyk vncouth feiknes vpone
the faid Robert, be hir devilrie and Witchcraft, in the moneth of Nouember Lift.
Verdict. The Aft"yfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Dauid Seatoun, bail3ie of Tranent, ffylet the faid Beigis of the firft tua poyntis of Dittay aboue Avrittin : And, be i)luralitie of voittis, ffand, pronuncet and declairit hir to be Clone

' Tliorns wero favourite tivstinpf-places of wittlies as well as lovers. - To tlie north of tlie

pate. •• Frif^ht. OXAVr.frayntr. ' Door. ^ Swooned, fainted away. ^ None

tliouglit he could possibly survi\-e.

544 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

and acquit of the Sorcerie and ^Vitchcraft vfet be hir aganis the faid Robert
Woid, in laying the faid feiknes vjione him ; in manei' fpecifeit in the Dittay.

Sextexce. For the quhilkis tiia aymes, quhairof Ihe is convict, the Juftice
ordanit hir to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed", and thair to be wirreit at ane llaik,
and her body to be brunt in afches ; and hir haill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

[Curia Justiciarie /? d. n. Regis, tenia in Pretoria de LynhjtJigoic, vltimodie
Maij 1608,^;^/- M. WiUielmum Hairt de Prejloun, Jiijticiariiim Depiitatnmi\

ASSESSOURIS TO THE JuSTICE.

My Lord of Balmirrienocli,' My Lord Abercorne," ^ly Lord Lynlytligow,' Sir Peter 5oung.*

^fistiactintr ^Jtavls anU 3>cb3tls fidonsins to Wyt ^wttw.

May 31. — ^Margaret Hertsyde, fpoiis to Johnne Buchanuane, fumtyme fervand to liis Maieilie, and the faid Johnne Buchannane, for his entreis.'
Dilaittit, accufet and jierfewit be Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie, knycht,
Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

DiTTAY againjl the PanneU.

Margaret Hertsyde, 3e ar indyttit and accufet, fforfaniekill as ■^e, being many ^eiris in credeit
and fervice with oure fouerane lordis darrefl fpous, tlie Queiuis Maieflie, and liaifing reflauit many
grit benifeittis frame hir Maieftie, during ])e tyme of ':,o\\r feruice, at dyuerfe tymes, to 5 our heich
advancement, baith in credeit and welth : 3e, nochtwithllanding thairof, maifl, vnlaufullie and vudewtiefullie fubllractit, flaw and detenit frome hir Maieltie, furth of our fouerane lordis Palices of

in Ingland, at the leifl furth of ane or vther of our faidis Palices, ane Perle, of the valour andpryce of
ane hundreth and ten pund flerling, pertening to hir Maieflie ; togidder with dyuerfe vtheris perles, precious llanes, jowallis and goldfmyth wark, lykwayis pertening to his ^laiefleis darreli fpous, worth the

fowme of thre hundreth pund fterling; committit be 30W in the raonethis of , the jearis

of God I", fax hundreth thre, fax hundreth foure, fax liundreth fyve, fax hundreth fax, and I"'.yj"'. and
ievin 5elris ; at ]>e leift in ane or v])er of Jie faidis nionethis and :;eiris. For the quhilkis, je being fwome
and examinat, firft vpone the fyft day of October 1607, and ])aireftir vpone the thrid day of Nouember
laflbypaft, anent 3our vnlaufull hailing of findrie of hir Maiefteis jowellis ; and haveing declairit, vpone
;our grit aithe, that 56 had nane, and gif it war fund that -^e liad ony vther jowallis of wortli, quhilkis
pertenit to hir Maieflie, that }>e perticuleris than confeflit be sow, (quhairin the jowallis lybellit war
nocht comprehendit,) 50 acknowiegit that je had thame nocht lauchfullie : And lykwayis declairit, be
3 our faid Depofitioun, that at '^ our firft cuming frome Court to Scotland, 30 had delyuerit to hir Maieflie all ]ie jowallis quhairof 5e had Jie credeit,^ and nevir fenfyne had charge of Jiame, or mellit' with ony
of thame. Nochtwitiistanding quhairof, 5e Jiaireftir, vpone the faid thrid day of Nouember laft,
ConfeflSt that 36 had abftractit frome hir Maieflie ane gi-it perle, pertening to her hienes, quhilk cam
to 50ur handis, amangis ane number of counterfute ftanes, and many perles )>airwith : Quhilk grit
perle, 5e fauld, for ane hundreth and ten pund fterling, eftir that 56 had prefentit the fame, hung at
ane dyamond, to be fauld, to hir Maiefteis felf ; ffor the quhilk 33 era vet her Maiefteis pardoun, and

* For his interest ; only as hiu-band to the pannell. ^ Sir James Elpliinston, first Lord Balnierinoch, Lord

President of tlie Court of Session. See his Trial, 3Iar. 10, 1609. ^ .lames Hamilton, first Earl of Abercorn.

* Alexander, seventh Lord Levingston, "was created Eai'l of Linlithgow Lord I^ivingston and Calendai'. * Ilis

Majesty's * Eliiuo^inar' *>r Almonei', &c. '' Trust, charge of. ' INIeddled, had to do with. Fr. Meier.

41 & 6 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 545

be sour faid Depofitioun cum in liir Maiefteis gracious Will for it. And lykwayis Confeffit, be 50ur
Depofitioun foirfaid, that, without hir Maiefteis knawlege or gift, 36 had fauld and convenit to 30ur
awin proffeit and vfe, vther precious ftanes and perles, worth thre hundreth pund fterling, pertenintr to
hir Maieftie; and acknowlegit ))at 50ur ouerficht and offence committit, in melling with the jowaliis
confeflit be 30W at fat tyme, pat 30W in hir Maiefteis Will: And 36 ar airt and pairt of fefaidis
crymes : ffor pe quhilkis 36 aucht and fould be pwneifched, conforme to pe lawis and daylie practik
of 3 our realme.

Persewar, Mr Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynuie, knycht, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Williame Oliphant, Mr Thomas Iloip, Mr Alexander King,
Mr Johnne Ruffell, Aduocatis, Mr Robert Buehanuane, Minifter at the Kirk of Ceres, IMr Williame
Buchannane, Minifter at Methven.

The Aduocat producet our fouerane lordis Letteris, deulie execute and indorfate, purcheft at liis inftance, as Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes
entreis. The Aduocat, eftir cheifing of the prelocutouris for the pannell, producet his Maiefteis Warrand to tlie Juftice to proceid and minifter Juftice ; togidder with ane vther Warrand, directit to my lord Aduocat, to infift in this
perfute. — Mr Johnne Ruflell, for him felf and the reft of tlie prelocutouris, producet ane Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, commanding thame to
compeir, as prelocutouris, in defence of the pannell.

My lord Aduocat producet ane EiK to the D'lttay, for cleiring thairof, and
circumftances of the poyntis of Dittay contenit in the Letteris.

Margaret Hertfyde,o//w in carcere, andnowatlibertie, producetane Letter,conteninganedefyre,aneReuocatiounand proteftatioun,quhairof the tennourfollowis.

I, Margaret Hertsyde, acknawleging my long captiultie, and that I half bene feperat fra niv
huiband, dyuerfe tymes examinat and deniandit vpone fiudrie wechtie matteris and articles, to the
quhilkis I was forcet to anfuer, nocht being weill refoluit, bot be ])e contraire, being hevelie trubillit,
be apprehenfioun' of my hufljand, my felf, wairding of our perfones, and ceafing'' vpone our haill guidis ;
my Depofitionis nociit perfytlie kriawin to me^ and I being ane womsx\, juris ignara, nocht Jiaifing ih
guid memorie as is requifat in fie ane wechtie caus ; I defyre that now, being ane frie perfone, exhibit
in Judgment,'' my Declaratioun and Depofitioun may be producet, to the effect that I may reduce my
felf to ane perfyte memorie ; and, gif my Declaratioune be fet doun accoirding to fe treuth, I am content to abyde fairat ; vtliorwayis, in caice Jiair be any tiling omittit or erroneouflie declairit, that I may
be bard to con-ect my errour and eik' fairto, quhatfoeuir is omittit : And in cais of non productiouu
of my faid Declaratioun and Depofitiones, to the effect foirfaid, I, be fir prefentis, rcvolkis quhatfumeuir Depofition maid by me, concerning the lybell and Dittay Jiairin contenit, and haill contcntia ]iairof: And proteftis, in caice pe faid Depofitioun be producet, at ony time heiroftir, in this Judgement,
that ])e famyn be oppinlie red in my prefence, to the effect foirfaid.

The Pannell, vpone productiouue of the Eik to the Aduocat, defyrit tin's
matter to continew to the morne, to be advyfet thairupoune. My Lord Aduocat declairis, tliat he vffis this Eik producet, as ane qualificatioun and e.\])lanatioun of the Summondis ; bot intendis nocht thairby to challenge the perlewar
of ony new cryme ; and thairfoir defyrit prefent proces.

' Imprisonment. ''■ Seizing. ^ Presented in Court. ' Add, subjoin.

VOL. II. i3 Z

546 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

The Justice and Assessouris continewis this mater to the niorne, at viij houris ; ami hes delyuerit the Eik pioducet to tlie Prelocutouris, to he advyfet thairu])Oun.

Objections ogainjt the Aj)'e[]'ors.
(Jiiii. 1.) — It is allegit aganis Sir Peter ^oiinff, that he can nocht be
Aflefour in this caufe, becaus he is his Maiefteis domeflik feruitour ; and Margaret Hertfyde being callit in this Judgement for fteilling and fubftracting of
.Towellis pei'tening to hir jNIaieftie, qnhilk alio pertenis to liis Maieftie, na domeftik feruitour to his ^laieftie can be Judge or AlFeibur in this caufe. — To the
quhilk it is anfuerit, be the Aduocat, the allegeance is nocht relevant ; becaus it
hes bene practikket' in this Judgement, ofbefoir, that his Maiefteis fervandis and
domeftikis hes bene admittit vpone Air3'fes : fpeciallie, the practik of Barbara
Naper and Mr Thomas Cranftoun and George Craigengelt.^

It is allegit aganis my Lord of Lijnhjfhgow, that he can nocht be Aflefour,
becaus his Lordfchipis fpous and the Kingis Maieftie ar of kyn/ — It is anfuerit
be my lord Aduocat, the rekning was nocht relevant, becaus kyn to the King
makis nane fufpect, in his cans. — It is allegit aganis my I^ord Balmirrienoch,
that he can nocht be Alfefour, becaus the Aduocat being perfewar, be directioun
of the Quenis Maieftie, that the Aduocattis fpous and my Lord Prelident ar
ferds of kyn ; and la can nocht be Aflefour. — To the quhilk it is anfuerit, the
allegeance is nocht relevant ; and tliairfoir mereitis na anfuer.

The Juftice, be Interlocutour, ffinds that the noble men norainat Aflefouris
may fit as AflTefouris in this caufe, nochtwithftanding of the allegeances proponit
be the pannell in the contrair. Quhairupone the Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

My lord Aduocat declairit, that he infiftit nocht aganis Johnne Buchannane,
hot allanerlie as fpous to INIargaret (Hertfyde) for his entreis ; quhairupone
Johnne Buchannane aflcit inftrumentis. — The pannell acceptis the Summondis
and Dittay contenit thairin, as the famyn is qualifeit.

It is allegit be the pannell, that the Summondis is blank, bayth in the tyme
and place of the committing of the fact lybellit ; quhilk man be fillit befoir forder
jjroces. It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that the pannell man fay, quhairin the
blankis ar prejudiciall to thair defenliis. — It is duplyit, that the exceptioune
ftandis relevant, nochtwithftanding of the anfuer maid thairto, in refjject that
of the LaAV Ciuill thair is a folempne forme prefcryuit anent accufationis, tha t
thairin tjnne and place fall be determinat ; quia nan oportet in Crimiiiihus vagari : Lege libelloruni § de acciijlttiouihus, Sicjignijicajti, extra de lihcUi ohhitione. Bald. Confilio, 1420, vol. i v. Julius Clarus, paragrapho finali, queftione

' Decided, made matter of practique (practice) or precedent. '■' Witchcraft. ' Gowrie

Conspiracy. See Aug. 22, 1600. * Alexander, seventh Lord Levingstoun, married Lady

Helenor Hay, only daugliter of Andrew, seventh Earl of Errol. They were entrusted witli the care
and education of the Roval children.

41&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 547

xij. Speculator, in titulo defurtis, numero 2. Quhilkis folemniteis ar vniuerfallie obleruit, bayth in Scotland, and in the haill warld. And forder, thair is
ane grit neceffitie to condifcend vijoune the fpeciall moneth, becaus the Dittay
beiris, anno 1603 ; and it is nottour, that in dyuerfe monethis of the faid yeir,
hir Maieftie was refident in Scotland, albeit the Dittay heir the place to be, ' out
of his Maiefteis Palaces in Ingland.' — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that I
haif alreddie declairit the Crymes lybellit to half bene cominittit fen {since) the
pafling to Ingland, furth of fome of his Maiefteis Palaces thair ; quhairby the
Summondis is fpeciall aneixch, vnles the pannell wald allege, quhat particulcr
tyme and place wald mak the fact lybellit lauchfuU. — It is anfuerit, that my lonl
Aduocattis declaratiouii is mair generall nor the lybell ; and of the law, debet
prius conftare de delicto, &c., quhilk man be circumfcryit, tempore et loce dejinito. This Julius Clarus, libro v. Sententiarum — finali queftione, iv. et v.

Secundo, it is allegit that thai woirdis of the Dittay, ' fubfcryuit and detenit,' ar nocht relevant, etnonjimt verba juris, to infer aciyme. — It is anfuerit,
that the Lybell ftandis relevant, as it is confauet.'

Tertio, it is allegit, that the laft pairt of the Dittay, anent the generall woirdis
of ' perles, pretious ftanes and goldfmyth-wark,' is nocht relevant, becaus the
perticuler number is nocht defignet, and qualitie thairof ; becaus of the Law, in
furto rermn plurium, dejlgnundus ejt numerus ; quia, fine dejtgnatione numeri,
nan pofftint res intellegi, vhifuntplurcs. L. in actione furti, \ de ffurtis. In
aiiro infecto jtondus in facto etftgnafo numei'us et intefe color dicendus ef. And
the expres text of the fame matter, in L. // quis vxori, ^Ji tinea niargaretariini
furrepfa ef, dicendus eft numerus, et nonfatis eft res furreptus demonftrari per
ejlimationem : With this woird, that vpone ane generall claufe, neque in Ciuili
neque in Criminali, na proces can be grantit. — It is anfuerit be my Lord Aduocat, that the conclufione of the argument is, that gif he fra quhome ane
chen5e, or perles, or ane Jowell compofet of mony ftanes is ftown, can noclit condifcend vpone the particuler mimber thairof, the theif fall bruik the famyn, but
remeid^ of Law ; quhairof I refer the relevancie and confequences to the Juftice
and Alfefouris. — The pannell repeittis the exceptiones, quhilk is foundit v])one
the Law ; and as to my lord Aduocatis anfuer, it meitis nawayis ; becaus the
famyn fpeikis de corpore vnito et de gemmis inclufis in vno aura, and the exceptioun oppingis directlie the lybell ; becaus it condifcendis nocht vpone the ftanes,
Jowellis and goldfmyth-wark, quhilk ar bayth diflincta corpora, numero et, I'pecie.
mony of thame and of dyuerfe natures. To the quhilk is maid na anfiier.

Quarto, it is allegit, that, feing the Dittay is foundit and makis expres relation to certane Depofitiones, allegit maid be the pannell, at tua feuerall tymes, in
' Conceired, framed. " Without legal remedy or redress.

5-t8 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

October and November, thairfoir my lord Aduocat, of all reflbne, audit to produce the faidis Depofitiones, noclit only to the effect that the iJannell and hir
jn-elocutouris may confidder thame, for the caufe coutenit in hir firft Proteftatioun, bot alio, to the effect fcho and thay may be hard to refFone befoir the
Judge, aneut the conformitie and difconformitie of the faidis Depofitionis and
with the Dittay ; quliilk man be confidderit and tryit be the Judge ; feing the
lamjTi confiftis in jure : And gif this be nocht done, thair will follow ane grit
inconvenient, to wit, that the Affyfe, gif this matter fall pas to thair knawlege,
fall be forcet to reffone and difcufs vjjone the laid conformitie and difconformitie,
quhilk is nocht jiroper to thame, the famyn being juris et non facti. — It is anluerit be my Lord Aduocat, that vnles ather the pannell, be thair confent, or the
Juftice, be his luterlocutour, will ffiud the Summondis relevant, he can nocht be
aftrictit to j^roduce his probatioun.

QuiNTO, it is allegit, that the Dittay is nawayis relevant, fetting doun only
generallie that the perles, alleget fubftractit, pertenis to the Quenis Maieftie, and
nawayis coudifcending in quhais poffeffioun thai war, the tyme of the allegit
fubftracting thairof ; c^uhilk man be condifcendit ; for gif thai war nocht in the
Quenis Maielleis pofleffioun, than the pannell could nocht connnit Thift, in melling' thairwith ; for of the Law, in Lege prima, \Ji qui tejlamento Uher, Sec, it
is faid, quodfurtum ejl tantum jjo/Je/Jionis : And Baldus, Concilio 238, vol. ii.,
fayis, quod jJf'opriefafem nemo aJteri fubtraliere poteju &c. ; and gif thai M-er in
the pannellis iiofTeflioun, fcho could nocht commit Thift be difponing thair%-pone,
Lege, qui vas, ^ qui vohoitate, ff. de ffurtis, qui ex voluntate domini Jervum recepit, qui nequefur neque j)lagiariiis Jit, plufquam manifeftum ejl ; qtiis enim
voluntate domini hahens fur dici potefi, &c. — Anfueris my lord Aduocat, the
exceptioune audit to be repellit, in refpect of tlie lybell, vnles the pannell will
allege and inllantlie verifie, that fcho obtenit lauchfull poffeffioun of the guidis
lybellit, and had hir IMaiefteis confent and allowance to the alienatioun thairof,
quhilk is nevir fubfumit. — It is duplyit, that na pairtie, of the Law, can be compellit to propone, be peremptour (defence), or verifie the famj'n, except the
Dittay be ffund relevant : And forder, allegis, that gif my lord Aduocat will
produce the Dei^ofitioun, quhairupoune his lybell is foundit, the famyn Depofitionis will verifie, that the perles lybellit cam in the pannellis hand lauchfuUie.

Sexto, the pannell acceptis the fummondis and Dittay thairin contenit, fpeciallie that pairt thairof, beirand, that the faid IMargaret Avas mony j^eiris in
credeit and leruice with hir Maieftie, and hath reffauit many grit benefeitis from
hir ]\Iaieftie, the tjone of hir feruice, at dyuerfe tymes, to hir heiche advancement, baith in credeit and welth ; and that the faid IMargaret vndewtifullie and

' Meddling, intromitting. Fr. mekr.

41&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 549

vnnaturallie, at the tyrae lybellit, flaw, &c. : And allegis, that the Summoudis is
nawayis relevant aganis the faid Margaret, being ane woman of credeit, as is
confeft ; lyk as, it is nottour to the Judges and Affefouris, that fcho was ane fervand of credeit, at the tyme lybellit, befoir, and dyueris yeiris thaireftir ; fiia, of
neceffitie, in refpect of hir credeit, the maner and forme of the fteilling of the
ftanes and perles lybellit man be condifcendit vpone, viz., quhidder the famyn
was committit be force and violence, be breking vp of the durris of the houffis,
and lokis of the cofferis, quhair the famyn war ; or was done privelie, in the
uycht, be taking the famyn af hir Maielleis garmentis, or fra hir hienes jowellis,
or out of hir hienes cabinettis ; or that fcho, vpone the confcience of the faid
cryme, fled furth of hir Maiefteis feruice, and tranfportit the famyn with hir ;
quhilk may be condifcendit vpone, of all neceffitie ; becaus ther can nocht Thift
be committit, be ane fer\aud of credeit, except the faidis qualiteis concur, to manifeft violence ct animum furand'i in the feruand; quia, de jure, furtum fine
affcctio furandi fieri non 'poteft L. 1. ff. de ffurtis et ut ait Bart, ad L. 5, is qui
rem \ li tu Titium ff. de ffurtis. ffurtuvi ejl nomen juris, hoc ejl, non omnis
contrectatio rei aliene ejl ffiirtum, niji accedat dolojus animus furandi L. Potefl. et L. furtum ff. de vfu, &c.' — It is anfuerit to the faxt exceptioun, be my
lord Aduocat, that, nochtwithflauding thairof, the Summondis is relevant, becaus
the qualitie of the defender is nocht ane occafioune to extenuat the cryme, bot
to aggravat the famyn, feing the gritter credeit fcho had, fcho fould the mair
faythfullie difcharget the famyn : And it is expreflie lybellit, that it was fa far
fra the Quenis knawlege or confent, that the pannell fould half convertit ony of
thir jowellis to hir awin vfe, (in quhilk caice na policie neidit to half bene vfet)
gif hir Maiefteis confent had bene had thairto, that the pannell, to mak hir Maieftie to niifken hir awin grit perle, caufit liing the famyn to ane dyaniont, and
ofFerit to fell the famyn to hir Maieftie, as ane Jewell nocht pertening to hir felf.
Forder, the perfewar acceptis the inftance proponit be the defender, anent ane
fcheip-herd fteilland his maifteris fcheip, for the quhilk he may nocht be perfewit
Criminallie ; quhairin the perfewar is direct contrar to the defendar, and affirmes,
that of the law and cowmone i)ractik of the cuntrie, fcheip-hirdis fteilling fcheip,
committit to thair keiping be tliair niaifter, is ordinarlie hangit thairfoir : Lyk
as, Dauid Forrefter greve to my Lord of Menmuir, and Robert Loch, his fervand, being accufet for fteilling fra him of aittis, beir, woll and lynning daytli,
the fummondis was ffund relevant, albeit the greve liad charge of all theis
thingis, be his office, and had his maifteris credeit ; and being put to ane Aflyfe,
was convict for the maift pairt thairof : Quhairl^y, it is manifeft, that fervandis
put in truft and credeit be thair maifter, and fteilling ony pairt of the geir,
' ' Here a number of sentences abridged from the Doctors follow.

550 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

quliairof thay haif tlie keiping and credeit, ar ordinarlie put to the knawlege of
ane AfTyfe, and convict, gif thai be ffund giltie : And quhair, it is exceptit, that
in thift comraittit be ane fervand of credeit (forceing?') of duris or kiftis is reqiiifit, the perfewar affirmes to be ane abfurd allegeance. — It is anfiierit (replied),
that the pannell, in hir laft and faxt exceptioun, querrellis only the irrelevancie
of the Dittay, and nawayis nieanis to extenuat ane cryine conimittit be ane fervand ; for gif it be certane and tryit that ane fervand hes cominittit ane cryme,
lie is niaift worthie of double pwneifclnnent, hot the thing that the pannell contendis for in the exceptioune, is, that na Dittay for Thift can be relevant aganis
ane fervand of credeit, excejit fie qualities and actiones be coutenit, quhilk may
infer animuvi furandi ; and the inftances proponit be my lord Aduocat beiris,
that fervandis cominittand crymes and ffund culpable war juftifeit ;- quhilk nawayis meittis the laid exceptioun. — It is declairit be my lord Aduocat, for elchewing of difputatione vnneceffar, that he infillis only vpone tua poyntis of Dittay ;
to wit, the fteilling, &c. the grit perle of the pryce of an hundi-eth and x li. fterling, for the firft article ; and the vther jowellis, perles, ftanes and goldlmythwark, for the fecund poynt of Dittay : And vffis the haill reft of the lybell, nocht
as ane feueralP cryme, hot only for explanatioun and qualificatioun thairof; and
intendis nocht, at this tyme, to accufe the pannell of contrair^ Depofitiones.

The Justice, with advyfe of his Afielburis, ffindis the lybell and Dittay relevant ; nochtwithftanding of the haill exceptionis proponit be the pannell.

Quhairvpone my lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

It is allegit, peremptourlie, be the i)annell, that this Dittay can nocht be put
to ane Affyfe ; becaus of the law, ane fervand of credeit haifing the cuftodie of
his Maiefteis guidis, being willing to rander ane compt of his intromiffioune,
nevir haifing committit ony violent deid, can nocht be accufet of Thift ; the intromiffioun, fra the begyning, being lauchfuU : Bot trew it is, that Margaret
Hertlyde, as is confeft in the lybell, bothe the yeiris lybellit and dyuerle yeiris
of befoir, Avas, lyke as fcho is pi'efentlie, hir Maiefteis fervand, vndifcharget, with
credeit, and willing to gif compt of hir intromiflioun, nevir haifing committit ony
violent deid. — My lord Aduocat, of his awin motiue, nocht being inducet be my
Lord Juftice, bot at the pannellis defyre, producet the Depofitiones, quhairupoun
the Dittay is foundit ; quhilk he vfTis, at this tyme, for verifeing thairof; vnder
Proteftatioun, that this be na preparatiue in this Judgement,^ at ony tyme heireftir : And thairupoune aflvit inftrumentis ; and that this is the only Depofitioune that he vflis at this tyme. Quhairvpone the pannell alfo afkit inftrumentis.— My lord Aduocat allegit that the Depofitiouii producet, man" niak full

' Obliterated. ' Punislied with deatli. L. B. justificare. ' Separate or distinct.

* Contradictory. ^ That this be no precedent in this Court, '' Must.

41&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 551

fayth, and is valid, of the law, nochtwithftanding of the Reuocatioim inaid and
ingroffit yifterday in proees, be the defender ; becaus na Depofitioun is revocable, of the Law, quhilkis ar maid voluntarlie, in prefens of thame that hes
power to examine the ])airtie, without ony tortour or feir of tortour. And trew
it is, that this Depofitioune producet, was maid lauchfuUie and voluntarlie, and
thairfoir is nocht reuocable. Julius Clarus, L. quinto, § finali, queftione 55,
etq. 65, ver£acu\o, Jed qnero : And in refpect thairof, defyres the reuocatioune
producet to be reiectit, and the proteftatioun refuifet.

It is allegit, that the pannell can nocht be put to knawlege of ane AfTyfe for
hir intromiffioun and melling with the pedes and joMellis lybellit ; becaus it is
fet doun and confeft in the Depofitioun producet be my lord Aduocat, that the
faidis jowellis and perles Avar gevin be the Quenis Maieftie to the defender, for
the vfe thairin contenit ; quhiik vfe was accomplifchet and perfyttit to hir Maiefteis contentment; and as to the refidu, the defender, lupponing that hir Maieftie fould nevir re-demand the farayn, fcho difponit thairuj)oun, quhiik can nawayis be comptit nor eftemit ane cryme of Thift, of the Law : ffirft, becaus the
faidis jowellis and perles cam, fra the bcgynning, lauchfullie to the dcfenderis
poffeffioune, and fua fcho could neuir commit Thift, be dilponing thairupoun.
Lege, qui vas, § qui voluntate, ff. de furtis, &c. Lege, qui re ff. de cod. titulo,
qui rejibi commodata vel apudjb dcpofita, vfus eft non commiitit ffurtum, ])reci-
]me fi jiutaidt dominum confenjurum; ut Cuiacius, ad hcgem, Jl farem, ff.de
pro emptore non omnis rem aliemins fur did poti[ft,lcd itiitium pql]e[jionis
re/piciendum e/t, et fi initmvi pofteftionis jufluiu fuit, furtum fieri non potejl.
Nixt, the Confeffioun, contenit in the Depofitioun, can nocht be ane cryme ;
hecaxxa fur turn non potejl fieri fine affectuj'urandi; and the pannell had nocht
affectum furandi ; becaus the Depofitioun beris, fcho fupponit hir JVIaiellie fould
nocht re-demand thame ; And in this caice, that 1'hift can nocht be coniniittit, of the Law it is provin ; \ placuit de ivjlitutionibus, &c.' And this
aggreis verrie Weill with the Depofitioun, quhiik, in effect, meanis that hir
Maieflie had for^et^ the fainyn, and had thame pro derelictis ; fua that the
faid Depofitioun previs the Defenderis exceptioun and everie member thairof:
Quhiik DeiJofitioun my lord Aduocat can nawayis be hard to devyd ; feing, of
the Law, vhi actus eft legitimns inje, nunquam. prefumitur delictum, niji jirohetur. And to excufe the committer, Join negligentia JufiUcit creduJitas, iinmo
temeritas. Gothophredus. \ placuit. Alexander, vol. iv. Phelinus, cap. Jlcut
noxius. ac delicti extra de accujliiionihus. Baldus, Confilio 98, vol. v, &c. — •
And gifand' that qualitie anent hir credulitie war nocht inicrt in hir Depofi1 Various otiier clauses are l)ere shortly, but vciy obscurely and liastily cited. " Forgotten.

» Granting, alio wing^ for the sake of argument.

552 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

tiounes, yit of the law, quliair the poflTeffioun cumis lauchfuUie to ony perfones
haiidis, be the will of the maifter, gif ony queftioun ariyfe anent the ci'edulitie
or opinioiin of the jiairtie, qiihither he intervertit the pofTeffioun ammo furandi,
of the law, the opinioun or credulitie is provin be the parteis ayth : This is
decydit per Bartol. ad dictum 59 ' recfe,' quliair he difputis the faid matter ad
hngiim, on baith the fydis ; and concludis, in end, that the parteis ayth fould be
tane, clieiflie quliair the partie is abill to produce ony probable conjectouris or
argumentis, to cleir liir mynd and intentioun ; and quliair liir accufer is nocht
able to produce ony probable conjectouris, topreve the contrair ; and the coniectouris and i)refumptiones quhilk may infer malamfidem infurto, is fet doun in
the Law, in antentica, fi vero de exhihendis re'is. Lege Jl ffurtum, ff. de Adulterijs ; to wit, fi per vim, Ji clam, fi aufugit, fi i^erfona male et fufpecte fame.
Bot nane of thir conjectouris may be qualifeit aganis the pannell. Scho committit nather fraud nor violence : it was nocht committit be hir in the nycht ;
and the Depofitioun beiris the perle was favUd to George Heriot, hir Maiefteis
principall Jowellcr ; and gif tliair had bene ane intentioun of Tliift, in the paniiellis mynd, it can nocht be jirefumet that fcho wald half fauld the famyn to the
Jowaller quhom fcho knew wald fcliaw the famyn agane to hir Maieftie : And it
is conllant,' that fcho fled nocht away fra hir Maieftie ; bot, be the fpace of dyuerfe yeiris thaireftir, remanit in hir Maiefteis feruice, in grit fauour and credeit :
And quliat was hir eftimatioun, quhither fcho was repute ane pykex"^ or fteiller
or no, remittis to the conlcience and notorietie of the Judges. And as thair is
na furpitioun of Thift aganis hir ; fa, on the vther pairt, thair is mony vehement prefumptiones to mak cleir the mynd and intentioune of the pannell, quhilk
is nocht neceffarlie to be writtin ; bot referris the famyn to the Judges.

It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that nochtwithftanding the haill incompatible meinberis of the exceptioune, the Summondis ftandis relevant and cleirlie
verifeit be the Depofitioun producet ; fiirft, becaus the pannell had nevir lauehfull pofTeftioun of the guidis lybellit, feing the pofTeffioun of the fervand of the
maifteris guidis, to the maifteris vfe, is the maifteris poffeffioun ; nixt, the vfe
pretendit be the defender, to wit, to imploy the jowallis delyuerit be hir Maieftie to hir ; to wit, to bulk babeis,^ was nocht performet be hir, becaus thai war
nocht imployit to that vfe ; bot be the conti'air, the babeis buflvit and fent, and
thir Jowallis lybellit, fubftractit in maner lybellit ; quhairin the pannell had
nevir hir INIaiefteis allowance or confeiit ; and, of the Law, converting of ftuff to
vther vffis nor"* is commandit, is Thift, Lege 88 eod. titulo et Lege ^'i,ffnUo et
Jarc'inaior qui poUenda etfarcienda vejUmenta accepit,fi forte his vtatur eo con-

' Laf. lonstat. ^ A committer of petty \\\eh or jnckcry. ' Deck, adorn, or dress babies

(dolls) to the Princess. ' Than.

41 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 553

tractatione, eorum ffurtmn fec'iffe vkletur ; quia non oh earn caufam ah eo videatur accepta. And quhair, the pannell wald excufe thame felffis per animum et
exciifittionem delinquentis, that excufe is commone for all ofFenderis, and relevant
for nane ; nather can the defender pretend fimplicitie or guid intentioun, in refpect of the fraud vfet to cans hir Maieftie mifknaw hir awin perle, be hinging it
to ane dyamond, and prefuinptioune to offer it to be fauld to hir Maiefteis felf ;
and the Confeffioune producet, beiring hir vnlauchfuU intromiflioune with this
perle, and converting of it to hir awin privat vfe, man be ane neceffar cans of
convictioune, quia confeljio prohat contra confitentem, pro eo aufem non prohat.
Glofla in cap. finali in verb. Cunfejjio, verficulo, item, quod contra Je ; et ibi
poji alios ; Abbas, numero 13, extra de confejfis et confejfio qual'ijicata J'cindi
j)oteJi et pro parte rejici : Bartolus, in Lege, euni qui ff. dejurejurando. Julius
Clarus, 31, finali queftione 55 verficulo, po(Ji't quoquc reus ; affirmeing, that ane
Confeflioun, contening the Dittay, and haifing adioinit any qualitie that may
releve the Defender, audit to be reffauit aganis the jiroponer ; and the qualitie
adiectit can nevir be refpectit, vnles it be provin. Profper Pharinacius, queftione 81, numero 127, quando quis a princij)io negauit delictum, et puftca, vel
timore ptrohationum, vel ex quucunque alia cuuja, illiid quaVificate conjcjjus eji,
tunc racione doli qui pre/umitur ex precedenti mendatio et negatione, talis confejjlo fcindi potejl et pro parte acceptari, jwo parte impugnari. Et Boerius decifione 165 ; et Laui'entius, in practica cautelarum, cap. 28, numero 7, aiunt
ream fi qiialitatem adiectam non prohaverit, condamnari dehere in pcnam ordinariam ; quhilk is our direct caice ; feing the Depofitioun producet beiris the
Jowallis lybellit to haif bene hir Maiefteis, and fauld be the deponer, to hir awin
privat vfe, without hir Maiefteis knawlege or confent ; and the qualitie adiectit,
of hir reflaiieing of thame froine hir Maieftie to bulk babeis, is nather relevant ;
becaus fcho convertit nocht thame to that vfe, nor provin in ony way ; and thairfoir fould nocht be refpectit ; fpeciallie, feing the deiwnaris Declaratioun, in hir
awin fauouris, can nocht prove forder : And thairfoir, the Summoudis is relevant, and is cleirlie provin be the De])ofitioune.

It is aufuerit (replied), that the pofteflioun naturall of the perles lybellit, M-ar
in pofleflioun of the pannell ; and the pofleffioun-ciuill, quhilk hir Maieftie had,
fcho tynt and amittit it, be directing thame to the perticuler vfe ; quhilk pertir
culer vfe contenit in the Confeflioune, was fulfillit to her Maiefteis contentment ;
the intentioun of the partie being provin by her aith, accoirding to the Law, and
aftiftit be probable conjectouris, is fufficient to deir ony partie accufet, quhair
the pofleffioune cam lauchfullie to hir handis. The Confeffioun and Depofitioun
maid be the pannell can nodit be devydet, hot be the contrair, the famyn previs
hir exceptioune ckirlie. The lawis quhilk my lord Aduocat alledges, quhair

VOL. II. * -'^

554 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608Confejfio quuViJicata potejl Jchidi, is only trew, quhair ConfeffLo facti in Je ejl
crimen, ut in Honiicidio ; quhilk is the exampill, in the place of Julius Clarus,
citit be my lord Aduocat ; Jed Confejlo non potejl fcindi, of the Law, quhair the
Coufeffioun of the deid, without the qualitie of ffelonie, is nocht a cryme ; bot
is only trew in his \yvas^,funt vtroque jure prohihita et naturajiia delicta, cap.
circa delectionibus. 6 cap.^J vero aliqids dejenteniia Ej-xonununicationis. Bartolus ad legem, genero. ff. que notanttir Infamia ; et ad legem Ji cui § e'lfdem.
ff de Accujationibus ; et ad legem // ex lege. ff. de Adulterijs. Baldus, Confilio
l^Si, vol. V. cap. ejlote mijericordes, &c. ^ rede et Bartolus, ibi. The coniectouris aganis the pannell, in refpect of the offer maid to the Queen, is contrair
to hir Depofitioun, for it was nocht fcho, bot George Heriot quha offerit the
iamyn, eftir it (wes) fauld. The Lawis allegit be my lord Aduocat, hexj'ul/o,
&c., it is aufuerit thay contene onlie legem Communem ; and myne contenis exceptionein ; and the perticuler caifRs of the Ciuill Law can nocht be obferuit
with us, quia lariatur pena ; nam i?ijure penafurii ejl dupli apud nos capitalis. — My lord Aduocat repeitis the practikes concerning the lliiphird, my lord
of Meumuris grevis, and the Laird of Bonyngtones lleilling of his fatheris euidentis ; and jiroteftit that he may half ane fpeciall and direct anfuer to everie
article that is proponit or writtin in the proces ; fpeciallie anent Revocatioun,
and the effect of the probatioun be this Depofitioune.

The Justice, witli advyfe of my Lordis AfTefouris, ffindis, that in caice the
pannell will nocht conlent that the Reuocatioun of her Dejiofitiones maid at Dunfermeling be deleit, that the famyn lalbe Repellit ; in ref|>ect of my lord Aduocatis anfuer maid thairto. And alfo, with advyfe foirfaid, Repellis the foirfaidis
peremptour exceptiones jn'oponit for the pannell ; and Ordanit the Summondis
and Dittay to be put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe, to be verifeit, as accoii'dis of
the Law. — Quhairupoun the Aduocat atkit inflrumentis.

It is allegit be the pannell, that it is lauchful to hir to revoik quhatfumeiiir
Depofitionis maid be (hir) to hir preiudice : becaus the famyn war maid be hir
inetus caija, viz. carceris mefu, — et amijjionis bonorum, — et metu amijjionis
vite, — et reuerentia Pr/ncipis, — and want of hir hufband ; and the Confeflioune
bindis nocht the confeflbur, excejit he perfeveir thairin ; per legem primam,
de Quefrionibus. — The Aduocat, for anfuer, repeitis the Juftice and Ailefouris
luterlocutour. [My Lord Chanceller declairis, that he fall mak his declaratioun
to the Affyfe, cj^uhan he fall be inquyrit.']

' This is partially deleted. The uncommon nature of the Crime, and the interest of these pleadings,
have induced the Editor to insert the entire arguments. The real cause of the Criminal prosecution
of this servant of the Queen is understood to have originated in Mrs (afterwards Ladi/) Buchanan's
heing too deeply versed in certain Court intrigues ; and it was deemed necessary to get rid of her, even
in the face of the most strenuous remonstrances on the part of her Majesty.

41&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 555

AssisA.
Sir Johnne Preftoun of Valafeild, Harie Guidlet of Vphall, Jolinne Forbes of New,

James Somervell of Garidwoid, Mr Moreis Drummond of Auch- Jo" Scott, bailjie of Muflilburgli,
Johnne Hammiltoun of the termuthill, Thomas Efplene of Newbiging,

Grange of Kilmarnok, Andro Boyde, brother to Kil- Jo"Broune,bail3ieofMuffilburgb,

Mathow Baii3ie of Littilgill, marnok, Dauid Dundas of Preiftiuche,

Johnne Corbet of Ardbo, Ro'Logie, bailjie of Quenis-ferie, James Ilammiltoune of Garene.'

The Aduocat repetls the Depofitioun prodiiceit, and my Lord Jultice Iiiterloquutour, findand the haill Dittay relevant : And in refpect thairof, and of hir
becuming in will, in hir Depofitiones, proteftis for Wilful! Errour.

Verdict. The faid perfones of Assyse, be the mouth of the faid Dauid Dundas, chanceller, all in
ane voce, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Margaret Hertfyde to be ffylit, culpable and convict
of the vnlawfull and vndewtifuU fubllracting and detening frome our fouerane lordis darrell fpous, the

Quenis Maieftie, furth of his hienes Palices of in Ingland, at the leift furth of ane or

vther of the faidis Palices, of ane perle, of the valour of ane hundreth and ten pund llerling; togidder
with dyuerfe vtheris perles, precious llanes, jowellis and goldfmyth wark, lykwayis pertening to hir
Maieftie, worth the fowme of thre hundreth pund fterling, or thairby ; committit be the faid Margaret, in the monethis of , the yeiris of God r".Vj'^. thre, fax hundreth fuure, fax hundreth

fyve, fax hundreth fax and I'".'Vj<'. and fewin yeiris, at the leift in ane or vther of the faidis monethis
and yeiris : Lyk as, the faidis perfones of Alfyfe, be the mouth of the faid Chanceller, for the maift
pairt, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Margaret Hartfyde to be Clanget of the fteilling of the
faid perle, togidder with the remanent perles, precious ftanes, jowallis and golilfniytli wark foirfaid.
In witnefs quhairof, the chanceller of the faid Aflyfe hes fubfcryuit the faid delyuerance, with his
hand. (Sic fubfcribitur) Dauid Dundass.

lApttd Lynlylhgotv, Avg. 10, 1608. Mr WiUiame Hairt, Juftice-Depute.']
Dome contrair Margaret Hairffyde.
Aug. 10. — The quhilk day, Margaret Heartfyde and Johnne Buchannane^
hir fpous, for his entreis allenerlie, being prefentit vpone pannell, to heir his
Maiefteis will and plefour declairit aganis hir, as Icho that was convict be ane
Aflyfe, in ane Court of Julliciarie, haldin in the tolbuith of Lynlythgow, the
firft day of Junij laftbypafl;, &c. Conipeirit Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie, knycht, and producet his Maiefl;eis Precept and "Warrand, quhill< the Jufl;ice
caufit to be publictlie red ; quhairof the tennour followis.

James R.

Justice Generall, Juftice Clerk, Clark and 30ur deputis. We greit 30W weill. Quhair
AS, Margaret Hairtfyde was, vpone hir awin Confeffioun, convicted for fe vnlauchfull and vndewtiefuU abftracting and detening of certane jowellis belonging to our darreft bedfellow the Quene, and
fairupoun remittit to priflbne, till our further plefour fould be declairit concerning hir : We haif thocht
guid, be theis prefentis, to f.gniBe our faid plefour to 30W; quhich is, that 36 fall, with all convenient
expeditioun, caufe affix and fens' ane ordinaire Juftice Court, at our burgh of Lynlythgow; and fair,
(fcho and hir hufband, for his entreis, being prefent.) it be declairit, that howfoeuir the AlTyfe acqmt

. < Sir James Sandilandis of Slama.mo' is dekt.d from the roU of Assise. - John «-"-_';" =;";;;;;:,;:^^-;

Margarett Hartesyde, that had laynu longe i.. prissone heire, for the allege.t stealhng so.neot the i" ' ^ « '^(J^
the Courtiers talked, that it was for reuelling some of the Queins secretts to the Kmg, w.d. u ^^ ,'';-'', ™;^
wold not haue done,) was, by ane sente.,ce, condemned to perpetuaUe exyle, m the ly a,M es „i »'' •'>-'■ f 7'"'^"
to be ane infamous persone, in Aguste this yeir' (\W^.)-tiirJ. Sal/ourS Annals, II. <iO. I euc*, UM.

556 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

hir of the cryme of Thift, pt, in regaird that, vpone hii- awin Confeinoun, fcho was fund giltie, as is
afoirfaid ; in that refpect, We aceompt hir fact alfe infamous, as gif it liad bene done be direct llelth : And
that, feeing pair can be no dift'erence betwene the vnlawfuU raedling with any thing belonging to the
Quene, oiu- darreft. bedfellow, hir perfone, and our awin, and lykwayis that fe exarapill is mofl pernitious, and aliuterlie intollerable, that any face or cullour fould be pute vpone Jie coofening or abflracting frome a}>er of ws any pairt of our jowellis or moveabillis, by fuch as ar in trull, or half ))e keping
of thame. We mofl conclude, that fcho hes delt fo dilhonefllie heirin, as We account her als worthie
to be repute and declaired Infamous,' (lyk as, it is our plefour that 50 declair hir to be fo) as gif
fcho had bene directlie convict of Thift: j'i fall lykwayis declair, that it is our plefour, that fcho fall
with all expeditioun repay, out of the reddiell of hir and hir hulbandis gnidis, to Henrie Wardlaw,
Chalmerlane to our darrefl bedfellow the Quene, of hir Lordfchip of Dunfermeling, the liquidat valew
of theafe jewallis, contenit in hir proces, to be convertit to fuche vfe as our faid darrefl bedfellow fall
think convenient: And laftlie, 36 fall declair, that it is our plelour, that hir perfone fall be, for hir
faid dilhoueft oilence, confynit to Jie Yles of Orknay; thair to reraane, and nocht exceid the
boundis fairof, induring hir lyftyme ; vnder all hieft pane and charge : Quhich Dome being pronuncet, ^e fall caufe hir be faflie convoyit bak to our Caflell of Blaknes, ]>air to remane in fure tirmance,
till fcho find guid and fufficient cautioun, alfweill for payment of the faid fowme, contenit in hir proces, within fyftene dayis nixt eftir fcho falbe charget for the fame, as alfo for entrie of hir perfone, in
the place of hir confining, within fourtie dayis nixt eftir fcho fall be fred out of our Caftell of Blaknes : For Dome and performeing of everie of Jie which premiffes, theafe prefentis fall be vnto 50W
ane fufficient Warrand. Gevin at our Mannour of Theobaldis, Jie tuentie day of July, 1608.

Accoirding to tlie quliilk Warraiul, the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of
Henrie Willbun, dempfter of Court, Declairit the faid Margaret Hairtfyde to be
Infamous ; And lykwayis declairit and decernit the faid Margaret to repay,
with all expeditioun, out of the reddieft of hir and hir hufbandis guidis, to Henrie A^'^ardlaw, Chalmerlane to our fouerane lordis darreft bedfellow the Quene,
of her lordfchip of Dunfermeling, the fowme of foure hundreth pund Sterling
money, extending, in Scottis money, to the fowme of foure thouleand and aucht
hundreth li., as the liquidat valew of thois Jowellis, contenit in hir proces, to be
conA'ertit to fie vfe as hir Maieftie fall think convenient : And laftlie, decernit
and ordanit that hir perfone fall be, for hir faid diflioneft offence, confinet to the
lies of Orknay, thairin to remane and nocht exceid the boundis thairof, induring
hir lyftyme; vnder all hieft pane and charge. Quhilk was pronuncet for Dome, &c.
Mr Johnne Dal3ell, burges of Edinburgh, become cautioun and fouertie for
the faidis INIargaret and hir fpous, fur his entreis ; and they all, conjunctlie and
feuerallie, Band and obleift thame to pay and delyuer to the laid Henrie \V^ardlaw the faid fowme ; and that within fyftene dayis nixt eftir thay be charget to
that effect. And ficklyk, the faid Mr Johnne Dal3ell become bundin and obleift,
as cautioner and fouertie for the faid Margaret, that fcho fall entir hir perfone
in the place foirfaid of hir confining, within fourtie dayis eftir the dait of thir
prefentis, (the morne, viz. the ellevint day of Auguft inftant, being coinptit for
the firft day,) vnder the pane of Ten thowfeand merkis Scottis money, &c.

' (On the margin.) ' Thir woirdis of Infamie is ordanit to be deleit, conforme to his Maiefteis
expres WaiTand, infert in the Regiller of. Adiornall, Jie xv of December, 1619.'

41 & 6 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS.

OOl

James R.

Justice Generall, Juftice Clark and 3 our deputtis, We greit 30W weill. Quhair as, our
truftie and loyall feraitrix Margaret Heartsyde, tl)e fpous of Sir Jolinne Bucliannaiie, kny', was,
by the finillerous informatioun of certane liir vnfreindis for the tynie, perfevvit ciiminallie befoir 50W;
and being put to ane Affyfe, was Acquit and aflbil3eit of that fpeciall point of hir Indytement, which of
the Law fuftenit the famyn to be relevant to be tryit and cognofcet be thanie, and onlie was fund gillie of certain adminicles infert in hir Dittay, for qualificatioun of hir alledget cryine. Vpoun the
whilk convictioun, doome and fentence, accoirding to our Warrand and Declaratioun fairintill, in ane
Juflice Court, lialdin be jow, witliin our tolbuthe of Lynlythgow, vpone the tent of Auguft, 1608,
was gevin out againft hir, Declairing hir to be Infamous. Quhilk doome and fentence being maift
humlie and with grit patience and modeilie imbracet and vnderlyne be hir, and hir behauiour eontitiuallie fenfyne being verrie deutifuli. Tiiairfore, and that the foirfaid Doome gevin out againll hir
may nocht be a precedent, nor haif force heii'eftir, It is our gracious Will and plefour, that the foirfaid Declaratioun of the faid Margaret Heartfyde to be infamous, infert in hir proces, be haldin as
deleit furth thairof ; and on nawayis to be extractit or gevin out to ony perf'one or perfones, in tyme
cuming ; hot that this our Warrand and Declaratioun be infert in our Regifleris of Adiornall, for reponeing of hir to hir fame, aganill the famyn Sentence ; Whilk Vv'e command 30W to fie done. Sua,
nothing douting of jour cair and reddines heirintill. We bid 30W hairtlie fairweill. tlVome our Courte,
at Royftoun, the fyftenth day of Noueraber, 1619.

Jun. 21. — Mr Alexander Innes, fumtyme Minifter at Biniay.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slaucliter of vmq'^ Agues Lellie, relict of vmcx"

Douglas, proveift of Elgyii, and of vniq'" Willianie Hay, father-brother

to Williame Hay of Mayne ; committit vpone fet purpois, prouiliouu and foirthocht fellony.

James Hay 30unger of JVIayne, as neir kynfman to vmq" Williame Hay, his
guidfchires brother, and Alexander Bifchope of IMurray, as fone to vniq"" Agnes
Leflie, producet om- fouerane lordis Letteris, deulie execute and indorfat at thair
inflance aganis Andro Meldrum, callit of Dunibrek,' as cautioner and fouertie
for the entrie of Mr Alexander Innes, &c. and offerit tliame felfis reddie to perfew.

The Juflice ordanit the faid Andro to be vnlawit in the pane of tua hundretli
merkis, becaus the faid Mr Alexander Innes was at the home ofbefoir, and fugitiue for the faidis crymes : And ficlyk, ordanit the faid INIr Alexander, for his
nocht compeirance, to be denuncit rebell and put to thehorne; and all his moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

[M>- Alexander Coluill, Jiijlice-Dejmie.']

Cftasou, ^t,

Jim. 23. — JoHNNE Lord Maxwali..
Mr Williame Broun, ane of the clerkis in his Hienes Thefaurarie, producet
our ibuerane lordis Letteris, deulie execute and indorfate, vpone Johnne Lord
» ' Brother-germane to vmq'"= .... Meldrum, fumtyme of Dunibrek."

558 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

Maxwall ; be the quhilkis he hes paft to the home, for dyuerfe treffonable cryraes
contenit thairin ; and thairupoun afkit inftrumentis.'

Jun. 29. — Sir Robekt Gordoun of Lochinvar, knycht.
Dilaitit of the Slauchter of vmq'^ James Gordoun, liis padge.^
The Aduocat producet the Letteris raifit at his lordfchipis inftance, deulie
execute and indorfate vpone the faid Sir Robert, Johnne Gordoun of Airdis and
Johnne Gordoun of Collindach, cautioneris, coniuuetlie and feuerallie, for the entrie of the faid Sir Robert, to vnderly the Law, for the crymes contenit in the
Letteris. — Compeirit Mr Williame Oliphant, Mr Johnne Ruffell, and Mr Alexander King, Aduocattis, as procuratouris for Johnne Gordoun of jelftoun and
Johnne Gordoun of Collindach, be thair Letteris of procuratoi'ie Producet ; and
declairit na proces aganis thame, in refpect of the Proclamatioune ; and thairfoir,
can nocht be vnlawit. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that thair excufe can
iiocht be reflauit, becaufe thai ar nocht charget for thair awin perfonall compeirance, hot to enter the Laird of Lochinvar ; quhilk lauchfullie myclit be done,
thay being abfent. Secundo, the Raid has nocht as yit tane effect, and the cautioneris and principall pairtie ar yit in thir pairtis. — It is anfuerit be the procuratouris for the cautioneris, excvfatorio nomine, that thai ar nocht obleift to
attend at Edinburgh V])one the Leutennent, hot only at Hay, conforme to the
Proclaniatioiin, as place appointit vpone the viij day of July, to pas fordward to
the Raid ; and thairfoir the Juftice, in refpect of the Proclamatioun, can nocht
vnlaw the cautioneris.

The Juftice continewis his Interlocutour, vpone the faidis allegeances, to Setterday nixt, the fecund of July.

Jul. 2. — Compeirit Johnne Belfcheillis (Belches), aduocat, as procuratour
for Sir Robert Gordoun of Lochinvar, knycht, and his cautioneris, and producet
ane Warrand of the Counfell, fubfcryuit be my lord Chanceller and my Lord of
Dumbar, for deferting of this dyet : quhairof the tennour followis.

Justice, Juftice Clerk and jour deputis, it is his Maielleis Will and pleafour, that je defert pe
dyet appointit for tryell of Sir Robert Gordoun of Lochinvar, knycht, for fe Slauchter of his padge :
Ordinand alwayis the cautioneris, fand ofbefoir for his entrie, vpone xv day is wainiing, befoir 50W, to
vnderly the law for the faid Slauchter, to ftand. Quhairanent Jiir prefentis fall be jour Warrand. Subfcryuit with our hand, At Edinburgh, the fecond day of July, 1608.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Al. Cancell. Dumbar.

The quhilk dyet the Juftice defei'tit ; and ordanit the cautioneris to remaine
cautioun, as ofbefoir. Quhairupoun Johnne Belfches afkit inftrumentis.

1 See the Trials and proceedings against this remarkable person, and the Account of the singular
escape of Lord Maxwell and Sir James Maconeill from the Castle of Edinburgh, &c. in a future Part
of this Collection. ° Page.

41&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 559

[3Tr WilUame Hairt, Jujtice- Depute.]

Utsisitins tfit iaina's <Suaiti— CveasonabU ^lausfjter, ^c.

Jul. 14. — NiNiANE Ellote, foiie to Williame Ellote of Fiddeltouii,
Williame Ellote, fone to vmqle Johnne Ellote of Biu-negranes.'

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit in the proud and contemptuous Refilling of his
Maiefteis Guaird, and remanent crymes contenit in the Dittay following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as, the faidis Niniane and Williame, being fugitiue fra dyuerfe Juftice Courtis,
haldin be his hienes Comniiffioneris, at Jedburgh and Dumfreis, for cowmone Thift, cowmone reffet of
thift, outputing and inputting of thift, and for dyuerfe perticuler Thiftis, Murthouris, Slauchteris and
Oppreffionis ; as the Dittayis and actis, gevin out thairupoun, at lenth beiris : ffor the quhilkis crymis,
thay reteirit thame felf out of tliair awin cuntrie, to the Weft cuntrie, to feruice, quhair thay remanit
tliir dyuerfe yeiris bygane ; quhill that laitlie, the Lordis of his Maiefteis Counfall, vnderftanding quhair
thai wer, directit Sir Robert Hepburne of Alderftoun, knycht, Lieutennent to hia Maiefteis Gaird, to
tak and apprehend thame : Quha, vpone the tuelf day of July inftant, accumpaneit with vmq''' Williame Bail5ie and dyuerfe vtheris of the Gaird, come to the oiftler-hous' vpone the Laird of Watterheidis landis, quhair the faidis perfones had reteirit thame felfis vnto, for the tyme : And haifing, in
peceable maner, requyret thame to rander thame felfis to him and his companie, as haifing Commiffioun of the Lordis of Counfall to tliat effect: Nochtwithftanding quhairof, the faid Niiiiane and Williame Ellotes, the faid day, maift proudlie and contemptiouflie refiftit the laid Commiliioun, and in
grit contempt of our fouerane lordis auctorite, fchot furth of the faid hous at the faid Lieutennent and
his companie, his hienes Commiffioneris in that pairt, and Gaird, to the number of tuentie fchot of Hagbutis and Piftolettis ; and thairwith fchot and flew the faid vmq'« Williame Bail3ie, being ane of his
Maiefteis Gaird ; and nawayis wald rander thame felffis, nor cum furth of the faid hous, quhill, accoirding to the faid Commilfioun,' ffyre was raifit thairaboutis : Quhairthrow, to tliair former wrangis and
oppreffionis, hes conioynet haynous and crewall Slauchter with hagbuttis, and proud contempt of his
Maiefteis auctoritie : And thay and ather of thame ar airt and pairt of the faid crewall and prefumptuous Slauchter, and of beiring, weiring, fchuiting of piftolettis and hagbutis, and Haying the faid vmq'"'
Williame Bail3ie thairwith ; committit in maner and at the time foirfaid ; in hie and proud contempt
of his Maiefteis auctoritie and lawis.

ASSISA.

.... Carutheris of Howmaynes, Robert Power, burges of Ed"-, James Cranftoun, indueller in Ed',
Geo. Hereis, fumtyme of Effie, Thomas Hill, ane of the Gaird, Thomas Smyth, burges of Ed',
Johnne Trambill, ane of the Gaird, Johnne Leyis, burges of Ed^ Johnne Mafouo, burges thair,
Thomas Moffett, wryter, James Haitlie, ane of the Gaird, Robert Cryftie, burges thair,

Tho» Mow,b>^ totheLaird of Mow.George Smyth, burges of Ed^ R' Stewart, bailjie of Lynlythgow.

The Aduocat proteftis for WilfuU Errour, in cais thay Acquit. And alkit
inftrumentis of the Leutenentis Declaratioune to the AlTyfe, concerning the Commiffioune gevin be the Counfall ; and of the forme and maner, how the pannell
refiftit him and his companie, in the executioun thairof.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid Carutheris
of Howmaynes, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Niniane and

' They are, in another place, described thus,—' Niniane Ellote, fone to vmq'- Jok of Burgranes ;
Williame Ellote, fone to Will of Fiddeltoun.' _ "■ Hostler-house. Old Fr. hoslellerie. ' A

Commission, containing warrant of ' fire and sword."

560 CRIIUINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

^\'illiame Ellottis to be ffylet, culpabill and convict of airt and pairt of the
Slaucliter of the faid ^nnq'' Williame Bail3ie, and of beiring, weiring and fchuiting of liagbutis and piftolettis, and of the contemptuous i-efiftiug of his Maiefteis Gaird, in maner fpecifeit in the faid Dittay. — Sentence. For the qiihilk
caufe, the faid Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Johnne Cheiflie, dempfter of
Court, decernit and ordanit the faidis Niniane and Williame to be tane to the
Caftell-hill of Edinburghe ; and firft, thair richt handis to be flrnkin af thame, as
culpable and convict of the beiring, weiring and fchuiting of liagbutis and piftolettis, contrair to the Actis of Parliament ; and thaireftir, to be hangit vpone
ane gibbet, quhill thay be deid : And all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit and
inbrocht to his INIaiefteis vfe, as convict of the Slauchter and remanent crymes
abone writtin : Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

\_JIr JflNiame Hairt qfPreJloun and 'Mr Alexander ColuUl, Jvftkes-Deptites.']

CvtnsonalJle iHuiUtr, $^t,

Jul. 15. — JoHNXE MuKE elder (and James Mui'e Y") of Auchindrane.'
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the treffonabill Mnrthour and Slauchter of vmq'*
Sir Thomas Kennydie of Culzeane, knycht, and ^MUiame Caldwall (Dalrjnnple ?)
Persewar, Mr Robert Foulis, aduocat, fubflitute to our fouerane lordis Aduocat.

Co:mpeikit Gilbert Rols, Proveift of the College Kirk of ^Mayboill, feriiitour
to my Lord of Caffillis, and producet our fouerane Lordis Letteris, deulie execute and indorfate, the ane purcheft be my Lord of Caffillis and his hienes Aduocat, for his INIaiefteis entreis, aganis the Lairdis of Auchindrane elder and
younger ; and the vther Letter aganis the Lairdis of Bombie, Caldwall, and
Young Langfchaw, as cautioneris for the faid James Mure younger of Auchindrane, for his entrie this day and place.

The Aduocat producet the Counfalls ^Varrand, direct to the Juftice, for continuatioune of this dyet to the xxiij day of November nixt ; quhairof the tennour followis.

My Lordis of Secreit Counsall, viito ^ourlordfchipis liunilie ineanis and fchawia I, Johnne
Erle of Cassillis, that quhair I haif raifit criminall Letteris aganis Jolnine Mure of Aucliindrane
and James ]Mure his fone, for fair compeirance befoir Jie Juflice or his deputis, vpone the xv day of
July inftant, to vnderly the Law, for ]ie Slauchter of vmq''' Jie Laird of Cul5eane and INIurthour of
Williame Dalrympill, and hes caufit funriiond ane Afl'yfe to fiat eflect ; hot in this meane tyme, fis
expeditioun for Jie His hes intervenit, fua that nafer may I compeir, to concur with his Maielleis Aduocat in fis perfute, nor 3 it may the perfones fummond vpone fe Affyfe compeir, bot ar vpone fair
preparatione for fat feruice : And fua, feing fat f is delay proceidis nocht vpone ony occafioun of
mjTie, bot vpone neceflitie of his Maiefteis feruice, I maill luimlie beleik 50ur Lordfchipis to gif command to f e Juflice, (Juftice) Clark and fair deputis, to continew f e faid dyet to fum certane dyet,
eftir fis feruice in fe Yles. And becaus fe cryme laid to fair charge is treffonabill, that the faid Juf-
' See Jun. 23, 1002, Nov. 23, 1G08, Jul. 1611, &c.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 561

tice and Juftice Clerk caufe commit fe faidis perfones to waird, in the Tolbuith of Edinbarglip, bairin
to remane, vpone fair awin expendis, ay and quhill fe nixt dyet, to be appoyntit be 5 our lordfchlpis.
And 50ur lordfciiipis anfuer humlie I befeik. — [^Followis the Lordis delytierance.'] — Apud EdisBURGHE, xiiij July, 1608. The Lordis of Secreit Counfall, Ordanis and commandis J>e Juflice, Jultice Clerk and J>air Deputis to continew ])is dyet within writtin, to ])e xxiij day of November nixtocum :
And to retume Auld Auchindrane bak agane to his waird, within the Tolbuith of pis burch of Edinburghe : And to caus 3oni'g Auchindrane caus his former cautioneris confent, of new, to enter iiim
befoir the Juftice, pe foirfaid day, vnder tlie pane contenit in the former Act; and fail3ieing fairof,
that he find als fuflficient cautioun, to pe contentment of ])e Counfeli, for ])e fame effect ; and in ]<e.
itieane tynie, quhill J>is cautioun be fund, pat he caus Soung Auchindrane be coramittit to waird, within
pe Tolbuth of Edinburghe. (Sic fubfcribitur) Al. Cancell'.

Mr Johnne RufTell, prelociitour for Avikl Auchindrane, and Auchindrane him
felf, Offeris him felf to the tryell of the Law, for the crymes contenit in the Letteris ; difafenting to all continuatioune : And as to the Warrand producet, the
famyn audit nocht to he refpectit, in refjiect it is purcheft only he the pairtie.
Compeirit IVIr Johnne Ruffell, as prelocutour for the Lairdis of Bomhie, Cauldwell and Young Langlchaw, and allegit that thai can noclit enter James Mure,
younger of Auchindrane, in refpect of the Proclamatioune. — It is anfuerit be the
Aduocat, for Auld Auchindrane, that, in refpect of the Proclamatioun, the dyet
man continew, conforme to the Counfellis Warrand : And as concerning Young
Audiindrane, the cautioneris aucht to prefent him, or vtherwayis incur the vnlaw.

The Justice Ordanis the Auld Laird of Auchindrane to be committit to
waird, conforme to the Counlallis Warrand. Quhairupoun the Aduocat afliit
inftrumentis. And as concerning Young Auchindrane and his cautioneris, continewis this dyet, in the fame forme, force and effect as it is now, to the xxiij
day of November nixtocum : and ordanis the cautioneris that day, to exhibeit
the Young Laird of Auchindrane, vnder the panes contenit in the former Act :
And Ordanis Letteris, gif neid beis, to be grantit to the pairtie perfewar, for
chargeing of the faidis cautioneris to enter him the faid day.

Quhairupoun the faid Gilbert Rofs alkit inftrumentis.

IMr niniame Hairt, Juft ice-Depute.^

Cnttlc-steaUus — iJtlurtei*— ^'Ijootiirg of ^istoUts, ^c.

Aug. 13. James Hammiltoux of Spittlellheill.

Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit, be James Lord of Balmirrenoche, Prefident of
the College of Juftice, and Sir Thomas Hammiltoun, knycht, for his hienes iiiteres, of the crymes following, viz.

For airt and pairt of the thiftious fteiUing, conceling, reffetting and away-taking of thre oxm and
ane kow furth of the landis of Mulroun, pertening to the faid James Lord of Balminenoche ; committit in the moneth of Auguft, or thairby, the yeir of God I-.Vj'. an.l fax yeiris. Item, for a.rt and
pairt of the thiftious reffetting of ffyve oxin, within his landis of Spittelfcheill, qul>dk perten.t to \Vdliame Flint in Breichmilne, and wer thiftiouflie ftoUin furth of the landis of Breichmyll, in the moneth

•i a

VOL. Tl.

562 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

of September laftbypaft. Item, for airt and pairt of the thiftious SteillLng, conceling, refletting and

away-taking of tuell hydis furth of ane barklioill,' fra Cordiner, befyde Lauchop, committit

in tbe monetb of . . . I".Vj''. . . . yeiris. lTE>r, for aiit and ])airt of the crewall Murthour of vmq'^
George Tuedie, within the faid James Hammiltounis bame, in Spittelfcheill : committit vpoun Sanct
Leonardis ewin laftwas. Item, for contravening of oure fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring, weiring and fchuitting of piilolettis ; and fpeciallie, for Ichuitting ane pillolett att . . . . Lokart
of Ley, in the taking of yow ; committit in the nioueth of July laftbypaft. Item, ffor commoun Thift,
commoun Reffett of thift, inputting and outputting of thift, fra land to land, fra countrey to countrey.

AssisA.
Mr Patrik Lyndfay, indueller in Ed'', Mr Johnne Methven of Barnfeild, James Bail3ie of Hillis,
Jolmne Weir, feruand to my lord Angus, Sir Robert Scott of Thirlftane.^

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of the faid Johnne Weir, chancellar,
ffand, pronunceit and declarit the faid James Hammiltoim to be fFylit, culpabill
and convict of the haill crymes and poyntis of Dittay. — Sextexce. To be tane
to the Caflel-hill of Edinburghe, and thair his heid to be ftrikin fra his body ;
and all his landis, heritageis, takis, &c. to be fforfaltit and inbrocht to oiu- foverane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes. Quliilk wes gewin for dome.

[Curia Justiciarie, fenta in Pretoria burgi de Ed'' per Magi/tros Olivariitm Colljuniorem et Danidem Prymrois, Aduocatos, Jtijiiciarios Deputatos,perCommiJfionemDominorumSecretiConfdij.']

Sep. 29. — WiLLiAME NisBET in Newtoneleyis.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Gilbert Wauchope in Goddifcroft ; committit be him and vmq'* Thomas Richiefoime in Cokbiu-nefpethfcheillis, in the moneth of Aiiguft laftbypaft.

Compeirit Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie, knycht, aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes entreis, and jiroducet ane Commiffioun, grantit be the
Lordis of Secreit Counfall ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

My Lordis of Secreit Counfall, vnto 50ur Lordfcliipis huimlie menis^ and fchawis 30ur lordfchipis
puir oratrice, Marioun Heiflop, the relict of vmq''^ Gylbert Wauchop in Godifcroft, Williame Wauchope of Stoddincleuch, broker to )ie faid vmq''' Gylbert. That quhair, vpone fe . . . day of . . .
being ane Sonday, the faid vmq''' Gylbert wes crewallie and fchamefullie Murdreift, vnder fylence and
cloud of nycht, haifing najier fword, quhingar nor na vf er kynd of wapponis to defend him felff, be
Williame Nifbett in Newtounleis and his compliceis, vpon deliberat purpois and foirthocht fellonie :
Lykeas, the faid Williame being, be his Maiefteis Gaird, tane and apprehendit, with reid-hand, within
xxiiij houris eftir Jie deceis of ]ie faid vmq''^ Gylbert, was, be 5 our lordfchipis ordinance, putt to libertie ;
he finding cantioun that he fould compeir fis day, befoir fe Juflice, and vnderly |)e law for ])e faid
crewall Murthour : To )ie quhilk he wes ofbefoir fummond, and fat vnder ])e payne of thre thowfand
nierkis, the ane half Jiairof to his Maieftie and Jie v])er half to ])e pairtie grewit ; quha, conforme to
3 our lordfchipis faid ordinance, fand cautioun to pat effect : And We, being now maill willing to follow out the ordour of law aganis the faid Williame, and to fat effect hes fummond ane fufficient number of honed men for ane Aflyfe, the faid Williame and his faid cautioneris, taking occafioun of his
Maiefteis Juftice abfence furth of fe realme, labouris, be all meanis pofllble, contrair to all law and
' Tau-pit. * Tbe remainder of the Assise, burgesses. ' Complains ; literally, moans.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 563

reafoun, to elude the courfe and ordoiir of Juftice, and to liaif afer tlie faid dyett defert, tliat be and
his cautioneris may be fied of 5 our lordfchipis ordinance, and frullrat ws of all the effect of our jufl
perfuit ; or the mater to be continewit, to wearie bayth the perfewaris and J>e AflTyfe, except ;our
Lordfchipis, quha Aifferit him to be fred vpoun cautioun, haifing committit fo haynousand recent Murthonr, provyde remeid, be 5 our lordfchipis Act and ordinance, be eflableifling, in abfence of fe Juftice
ordiner, fum vjier Judge, be Commiffioun, for miniftrating juftice in fe faid cans and perfute, or be
vfer convenient ordour, as beft pleiftis 3our lordfchipis. Heirfoir We moft huimblie befeik ;our
honorable lordfchipis, quha is the only mantenaris of juftice and chaftiezaris of fie haynous cnormeteis
within pis land, in his Maiefteis abfence, to conftitute certane Judge or Judgeis, be Conimifiioun, coniunctlie and feuerallie, viz. Mr Oliplier Colt, jounger, Mr James Sandielandis, Mr Dauid Prymroli-,
to hauld Juftice Court and miniftrat Juftice in \ie faid perfute, that throw inlaik thairof the cours of
law and juftice may nocht be eludit and fruftrat ; and We that hes our blude fpilt and tane, be nocht
difappointit of pe ordiner cours of Law and juftice, and 30ur lordfchipis ordinance of finding of Cautioun be nocht inefFectuall. Accoirding to Juftice ; and 30ur lordfchipis anfuer maift huimblie we befeik.

l^Sic deliberatiir.'] Apud Edi, xxix Sepfemhris, 1608 Fiat Commijjio vt petitur. And the

Lordis Ordanis the Judgeis within writtin, to hauld Court this day, in Jie mater within writtin.
(Sic fubfcribitur) Al. Cancellarius. Lowthiane. Abircorne. Jo. Prestoune.

\Sic notatur iiifra.^ Apud Ed^, xxix Sej)tenib/-is, 1608. — The qiihilk day,
in prefens of the lordis of Secreit Counfall, compeirit, perlbnallie, Mr Olipher
Colt, younger, and Mr Dauid Prymrofe, Aduocattis, and gaif thair aith for doing
of Juftice, faithfuUie and vprychtlie, in the mater within writtin ; as tliay will
anfuer to God. J. Pkymrose.^

Philp Niftjet of that Ilk and George Lyell, ffiar of Stanypeth, vnlawit in the
panes of tua thowfeand pundis, for nocht entrie of the faid Williame, &c.

Williame Niftjet ordanit to be denuncet his hienes rebell, &c.

I31r Alexander Coltiill, Jujlice-Depute.']

Nov. 9. — Alexander Tulloche, appeirand of Tannacheis, &c.

Johnne Dumbar of Moynes, cautioner for repoirting of the Letteris, purcheft
at the inftance of Nonnand Torrie and remanent bairnes-of vmq''' James Torrie,
fumtyme in Logiehauch, aganis Alexander Tulloche, appeirand of Tannacheis,
James Tulloche, his brother, Williame Cuilc, in Forrefs, Rorie 3Pcoilxiecharchar, alias Rorie BvJ)ache, in Mordant, wA Donald M<^lauchlane thair, that thai
fould compeir befoir the Juftice or his depute this day and place, in the hour of
caus, to half vnderlyne the Law, for the Slauchter of the faid vmq'^ James Torrie
and vmq'^ Agnes Douglas, his fpoufe, &c.

Compeirit Mr Johnne Dempfter, Aduocat, as procuratour for Johnne Dumbar,

quha become cautioun for repoirting of the faidis Letteris ; and allegit, that,

nochtwithftanding of the nocht repoirting of the faidis Letteris, deulie e.\ecute and

indorfat, this day and place, conforme to the Act, that the faid Johnne Dumbar, as

' Clerk of the Privy Council. ' Alexander, Walter and Robert.

564 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

cautioner, fould nocbt be vnlawit ; becaus it is of veritie, that the faidis Letteris,
being deljoierit to James Dumbar, MefTinger (at arms), to haif charget the defenderis thairin contenit, to haif fund cautioime to haif vnderlyne the Law for
the crymes thairin contenit, the fyftene dayis being bypaft, within the quhilk the
Defenderis fould haif fund cautioun ; Alexander Tulloch, ane of the principall
defenderis, being joynit in marriage with Iflbbell Dumbar, mother to Alexander
Dumbar, fcheref of Murray, and principall of the cuntrie quhair he duellis, confpyret maliciouflie, with the faid Seherefl', and inftigat him to tak and apprehend
the faid Meffinger, be force, put him in waird, and thairby to prevene that he
had na power to denunce the faid Alexander and his complices to the home, for
nocht finding of the faid Cautioun, quhairby the faidis Letteris mycht haif bene
formerlie repoirtit, deulie execute and indorfate to this day : Quhilk Scheref of
Murray, vpone the fevint of October laft, eftir the charge gevin to the faidis defenderis, be inftigatioune foirfaid, barbaruflie maid eruptioun in Patrik Dumbaris
lious, in Gowfurd, quhair the faid Meffinger was for the tyme ; entering within
the faid hous, accumpaneit with the faid Alexander TuUoche and certaue vtheris,
to the number of fevin perfonis, or thairby, with drawin fuordis, a(rail3eit the
faid Meffinger : and eftir mony outragious woirdis, affirmeing to tak the faidis
Letteris from him, and to bereif him of his lyfe ; ffirft denudit him of his fuord,
gantiletis, dager and vtheris wapponis, tuik and apprehendit him, perforce, led
him captiue to the Caftell of Forres, being the faid Schereffis awin duelling hous,
and fua career privutus, bot' ony lauchfull \\"arraud : In the quhilk priffon the
laid Meffinger was detenit, maift wranguflie ; luiking at all tymes to haif bene
l)ereft of his lyfe, be the fpace of ten dayis ; and at laft, be interceffion of freindis,
the faid Scheref wald nawayis put the faid Meffinger to libertie, quhill" he had
forcet and compellit him to ryve^ our faid fouerane lordis Letteris, with the executiones vpone the bak thairof, with his awin handis. Lyk as, the faid Meffinger, for juftifeing the treuth of the faid matter, hes raifit his hienes Letteris,
be delyuerance of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, for chargeing the faid Scheref
and Alexander Tulloche and remanent pei-fones, thair afTociattis, to anfuer to the
faid complent. Quhilk allegeance, the faid Johnne Dumbar, cautioner foirfaid,
ofFeris him to verifie inftantlie, be productioun of the faidis Letteris, revin ; be
the faid Meffingeris awin Declaratioun, prefent at the bar, with his ayth of veritie vpone the ryveing thairof, and be the faidis Letteris raifit befoir the Counfall, beiring the laid complent. In refpect quhairof, the laid cautioner fould nawayis be vnlawit : At the leift, the Juftice can nawayis vnlaw the cautioner,
quhill the tryell of the premilTes befoir the Counfall. And thairupoun, the faid
procuratour, in name of the faid cautionei', aflcit inftrumentis.
' Without. ' Until. ' Tear in pieces.

42 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIxMINAL TRIALS. 565

The Juftice ordanit the faid Johnne Dumbar to be vnlawit in the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.'

[il//- Alexander Coluill, Jujiice-Depute.']

Crtasonable iWurtitr unUei- trust, ^c.

Nov. 23. — Johnne Mure, elder of Auchindrane, and Johnne (James)

Mure, younger of Auchindrane.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crymes following, viz. the Auld Laird, for the

Slauchter of vmq'" Sir Thomas Kennydie of Culzeane, knycht, and vmq'' Williame Dalrumpill : And the Young Laird, for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of

the faid vmq'^ Williame Dalrumpill.

Persewaris, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Byiinie, knycht, Aduocat to our fouerane lord for his

entreis, Johnne Erie of Caflilis, (Beffie Dahumpill, as mother.)
Prelocutoris for the pannell, the Laird of Caldivall, The Laird of Bombie, The Laird of Blair
jounger, Mr Williame Oliphant, Mr Johnne Riiffell, Williame JIure of Kanderftoune.
My lord Aduocat proteftis that this dyet may continevv, in refpect of the grit
diforder of this hous, this day ;^ vnto the tyme the Juftice tak ordour thairwith.
The Juftice continewis this dyet to the laft day of November inftant ; and
Ordanis the Laird of Auchindrane elder to be of new committit to waird within
the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, and Young Auchindrane to be committit to waird
within the Caftell of Edinburgh, thairin to remane quhill the faid day.

Nov. 30, 1608. — The Juftice, be directioune of the Counfall, continewis
this dyet to the thrid day of ffebruare nixtocum ; and Ordanis the paimell to
enter to thair wardis of new agane, &c, — Vnto the quhilk continuatioun the
Lairdis of Auchindrane baith difaflentit ; and nochtwithftanding thairof, and
in refpect of thair innocencie of the allegit crymes aboue writtin, offerit thame
felfis to the tryall of the Law for the famyn, and thairupon aflvit inftrumentis.

Feb. 3, 1 609.^ — The Juftice, be command of the Counlall, (continewis)
this dyet to the aucht day of ffebruare nixt. — (Feb. 8, I6O9.) The Juftice continewis the dyet to the thrid day of May nixtocum.''

^lausljttr.

Dec. 21. — Alexander Tulloche, appeirand of Tannacheis, and Wi\-
liom Cuik in Forres.

' This at first sight appears to be a very arbitrary mode of proceeding ; but his recourse against the
party would be reserved entire. ' The influence of these atrocious malefactors was kucIi, that

by false representations, and the incessant complaints made by them and their friends to the public, of
the oppression of the Lord Advocate, in cruelly delaying their case, though he knew them to be innocent, they succeeded in raising such a p<i|mlar ferment, that the Court hud to lie disniissed on this and
perhaps on other occasions. ' Sir Williame Hairt officiated as Justice-d('i)ute on this and the

following diet. ^ No farther notice of proceedings before the Court of Justiciary occurs until

Jul. 17, 161 L

566 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1608.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq''' James Torrie in Logiehauche,
and Agnes Douglas, his fpous. — Continewit to the fyftene day of Junij nixt.'

I31r WilUame Hu'irt, JHjUce-DeputeJ]

dfornncr— (Majje.)

Dec. 30. — JoHNNE EiiROLE, cowmone pod.
Dilaitit of the filthie and deteftabill cryme of the abufeing and fforceing of
Jonet Craig, ane young virgane of xj yeiris of age.

Persewar, Mr Robert FouJlis, Aduocat, fubftitute to our fouerane lordis Aduocat.
DiTTAY (igaiiift the PanneU.

JoHNNE Errole, cowmoun poft, je ar indyttit and accufet, fforfamekill as ^e, LaiBng fchaiken af
all feir of God, reuerance to our fouerane lordis lawis, or regaird to ciuill lioneflie, as a dillblute and
vyld perfonc, ouercum with tlie beiftlie rage of sour awin filtliie lull, about ane half 5eir fyne, or
Jiairby, to get 3 our filtliie appetite quenihet, drew acquentance with Jonet Craig, docliter to vrnq'*^
Andro Craig, mercheand burges of Edinburgh, ane honeft tnanis bairne, and ane 30ung virgane, nocht
paft: the age of ellevin 5eiris; and haifing forgadderit with hir, upone the Hie flreit of this burgh, vnderflanding hir to be at the fcole, maifl craftillie and vnhoneftlie feducet and tryllit hir to gang with
50W to Hanimiltones clofe-fute, quiiair ^e was myndit raailt barbaruflie to half abufet hir; and fan gaif
hir certane billis, with vther allureing woirdis, to gang with 50W: And becaus, at that tyme, 36 gat
nocht 3 our beiftlie defyre fatisfeit, perfauing the fimplicitie of the bairne, and how eafdie fcho micht
be cifcunivenit, 36, a tuentie dayis fyne, or thairby, eftir foure houris at evin, and ringing of the
Prayer-Bell, awaitit the faid Jonet at the niercat croce of this burgli, and be geving to hir of apillis
and vther frute, of new, agane maift craftillie feducet and intyfet hir to gang with 30W; quha, vpone
bairnlines and meir fimplicitie, haifing paft with 30W to Bellis-wynd-heid, 36 tuik hir in to ane bak
turnepyke, within the faid wynd, and behind the 3et Jiairof, maift filthielie forcet Jie faid bairne, and
did quhat in 30W lay to half carnall deilling with hir, and to haif bereft hir of hir virginitie : At the
quhilk tyme, fcho haifing cry it that 36 crewallie hurt hir, 3e maift barbaruflie and crewallie, to haif
30ur filthie appetite fatiat, pat 3 our handis vpone hir movth, that hir cryis fould nocht be hard, and
pairby ftoppit hir braith and almoft fuffbcat hir, and had nocht fail3eit to haif filthielie defloirit hir, gif
3e had nocht bene fkarrit be tua wenien at Jiat inftant. Lyk as, 36, perfeviring in 30ur former beiftlie
rage of luft, vpone the fevintene day of December inftant, being Satterday, at fyve houris at evin, 50
awaitit, of new agane, the faitl Jonet Craig at tlie mercate croce of this burgh, quhair fcho, with vther
honeft menis bairnis war playing thamc for ]>e tyme, and ]iair, with walnuttis, cheftennes and appillis
than gevin be 30W to hir, 36 maift craftillie feducet J)e faid bairne to gang with 30W; quha haifing
refuifet to gsmg with 30W, 56 maift forceablie harrillit hir doun the ftreit with 30W; and 30, being
demandit be dyuerfe perfones that met 50W, quhair 50 was taking hir to, 30 maift diflimulatlie and
falflie gaif thame anfuer, that fcho had bene frome hame all that day, and pat nane of the houfe knew
quhair fcho was, and Jiat Jiairfoir 30 was taking hir hame ; at the quhilk tyme, 50 tuik hir to \e faid
bak turnepeck in Bellis-Wynd ; quhair 3e, aganis fe bairnis will, tuik vp her claithes, and maift filthielie forcet 30ur felf to haif ado with hir, and wald nocht pairt frome hir quhill 36 gat 3our beiftlie
will fatisfeit, and was within hir body ; and fcho, haifing in maift pitious maner cryit, that 3e hurt hir,
3c, as ofbefoir, pat 50ur liand vpone hir mouth and held in hir braithe ; quhilk is nottourlie knawin.
Lyk as, 36 and |)e faid baii'ne being laitlie examinat, in prefens of fe Miniftrie and Magiftrattis of this
burgh, 36 and fcho haif confeflit pe treuth of fe preraiftia, be 3owr Depofitionis. Quhairin, 36 haif

' No farther notice of this case occurs on the Record. See the preceding case, Nov. 9, 1608.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 067

committit the maift haynous, deteftabill and odious cryme of Rapt, Raveifching and Violent fForceing
of the faid joung bairne ; the lyk quhairof aueht nocht to be namet within any Crilliane kingdom
fubiect to a Crifliane Prince, or amang Criftiane people reulit with guid lawis.

The Aduocat, for verifeing of the Dittay, producet the faidis Johnne Errole
and Jonet Craigis Dejjofitionis, fubfcryuit be his haud, and be certane of the Minifteris and Magiftrattis of Edinburgh and Elderis of the Seffioun of the Kirk ;
and in refpect thairof, Proteftis for Wilful Errour, in caice the Aflyfe Acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Williame Trumbill, mercheand in
Edinbui'gh, chanceller, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid
Johnne Errole to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the fforceing and abufeing of
the faid bairne, in maner, and at the perticular tymes and places aboue fpecifeit
and fet doun in the faid Dittay. — Sentence. For the quhilk caus, the faid
Juftice-depute, be the mouth of Johnne Lawfone, denipfter of Court, decernit and
ordanit the faid Johnne Errole to be tane to the Caftell-hill of this burgh ; and
thair to be hangit vi^one ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and all his moveabill
guidis, gif he ony hes, to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as
culpable and convict of the faidis crymes ; quhilk wes pronuncet for dome.

\_Mr Alexander Coluill, J iijiice -Depute. '\

Jan. 3, 1609. — James Hunter of Hagburne.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Steilling of ffourtie pundis furth of Robert
Hogis purfe, potter in the Potter-Raw (of Edinburgh) ; committit in the monetli
of October, I^.VMxxxxviij ; and Hurting of the faid Robert in his heid, and
leifing him for deid, at Theyuis corfe.'

Persewer, Robert Hog, potter.

Continued to the air of ' Roxbur', tertio Itineris (vel fuper premonitione) xv
dierum.'

\Sir Williame Hairt of Prejloun, Jiijlice-Depute.']

^Iausl)ttr,

Jan. 31. — Andro Airmestraxg of the Langholme, Ebbie^ Airmeftrang of Kirktonehill, James Airmeftrang of Cannabie, Thomas Airmeftrang callit the Mercheand, and Johnne Murray,
myller in the Cruikis.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ James Somervell in EirdhoufRs ; committit in the moneth of

Persewar, Robert Somervell, fervand to the Laird of Waftraw, as neir kynfman.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Laurence M^'Gill, Adarae Cunninghame, (Advocates.)

' Thieves' Cross. ^ Perhaps a clerical error for Ekhie (Hector,) a common name in the south at that time.

Hahhie was also a favourite name. It may, however, be a familiar abbreviation for Ebenezer, though the name wa^
unusual among the Armstrongs, whereas Ekltie was very prevalent.

568 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

The perfewar declairis, that at the raifing of thir Letteris, inforinatioun was
gevin to him that the perfonis aboue writtin, prefentlie enterit vpone pannell,
war culpable of the Slaucliter aboue fpecifeit ; and now, fenfyne, he is certanelie
informet, that thai, nor nane of thanie, war prefent at the committing thairof :
In refpect quhairof, and that thai ar altogidder Innocent of the faid cryme, he
paffis JimpHciter fra the perfute. Quhairvpoune the faidis perfones on pannell
and thair prelocutouris afliit inflrumentis.

[Curia Justiciakie, /r</. n. Regis, tenta in Pretoria de St Amdrois, decimo
3Iorc/J 1609, per Domintim WiUiehnum Hairt de Prejhun, JujUciarium
depu/(dti7n princijicdem.l

ASSESSOURIS.

The Erll of Durabar,i The Erll of Montroifer The Erll of Lowtheane,'

The Collectour,^ The Clark of Regifter,= My Lord Previe Seill,«

My Lord of Wrychtillandis,' Sir Robert Meluile of Murdocarny.*

©irasou— iCoiTtspontJiiTS iutti) ti)t i^opt, in t\)t iiins's iinme.

[The history of (Sir James Elpliinston) Lord Balmerinoch's Treason has been so fully related by Spottiswood, Johnstone, Calderu-ood, Robertson, Laing, &c. and by Mr Wood, in his edition
oi Douglas's Peerage and History of the Parish of Cramond, that it only seems necessary for the
Editor to supply the real facts, so far as they appear on the face of the Criminal Records ; and further,
by way of Appendix, to give a few authentic Letters, and other documents, which have been preserved.

Whatever may have been the real or alleged participation of this eminent Lawyer and Statesman
in this Treason, it seems clear, as Laing remarks, that ' if Balmerino deceived his master, it was neither
with a criminal intention, nor to a treasonable extent. But his ruin was secretly projected by Spottiswood, Dnnbar, and Cecil, his implacable enemies ; and, according to his own Narrative, much address and many secret intrigues were employed to persuade him, by a more ample and explicit Declaration, to exculpate the King. His life and estate were secured by promises ; his offices were to
remain at the King's disposal ; and, on these conditions, he acknowledged that the Letter was surreptitiously obtained, when James had refused to correspond with the Romish See.' Thus, in order that
he might fully exonerate the King, this unfortunate Nobleman was led into the fatal snare, and confessed more than the truth ; under the full expectation, doubtless, that not only would the Royal promise of sparing his life and fortune be observed, but that he would, after a short period of retirement
from the Court, be reinstated in all his lucrative and honourable offices.

It may be proper to remark, briefly, that Sir James Elphinston was tlie tliird son of Robert
third Lord Elphinston. He was successively a Lord of Session (Lord lunernochtie), one of the Commissioners of the Treasury, called ' The Octavians,' Secretary of State, and, Feb. 20, IGOi, was

' Sir George Home, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, was created Baron Home of Berwick, Jul. 7, 1604, (English Peerage,) and Earl of Dunbar, in Scotland, 3 Jul. 160.5. This celebrated person ivas also Chancellor of Exchequer, in England. The King em|iloyed hini as the chief leader in the restoration of Episcopacy in Scotland, in the
Parliament at Perth, Jul. 9, lUOO ; for which service, and fur acting as High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Cliurch of .Scotl ind, in a manner highly acceptable to the King, he was installed a Knight of the Garter,
May 20, 1609. * John fourth Earl of Montrose, afterwards President of the Council, married Maigaret, eldest

daughter of William first Earl of Gowrie. It was this nobleman who fought the remarkable combat with Sir James
Sandilands, 19 Jan. lG9a, at the salt-tron of Edinburgh, as recorded by liirrel. See Diary, p. 34-. ' Robert

second Eail of Lothian, who, when Master of Newbottk", b.id been Master of Requests to King James VI. ' ' Mr
Johnne Prestoune of Pennycuke.' ' Sir John Skene of Curriehill. ' Sir Richard Cocliburn of Clerkington.

' Sir Lewis Craig, one of the Ordinary Lords of Session. * Sir Robert M. ' of 111 iiit Hand' is named in Reg.

Mag. Sig. They were both E.\traordinary Lords of Session.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 569

created Lord Balmerinoch. In the same year lie was nominated one of the Commissioners to treat
for an Union with England ; and on March 6, 1C05, was appointed Lord President of the Court of
Session. Notwithstanding of his holding, at the same time, the ' incompatihle offices' of Lord President of the Court of Session and Secretary of State, (which, however, were in like manner enjoyed
hy his successor. Sir Thomas Hamilton, afterwards Earl of Haddington, &c.) ' yet he stemmed the
secret and corrupt influence of Dunbar, on the bench, with a spirit that probably accelerated his fall.''

The sentence of death, as is well known, was not carried into execution. His Lordship was allowed • Free-ward* in Falkland, and within one mile around that place. Having endured this nominal restraint for a short time, he was permitted to retire to Balmerinoch, his own estate, Avhcre he lingered
about three years, and at length died, of a broken heart, A.D. 1612.

His son, John Lord Balmerinoch, was formally restored in blood, and to the dignity of the Peerage,
by writ, under the Great Seal.']

Mar. 10. — James Lokd of Balmirrienochk.
Dilaitit of the trefTonabill, fraudulent, and furreptitious procureing of aue
Letter, paft be his Maiefteis hand, without his hienes knawledge, direct to Pope
Clement the Aucht, in the 3eir of God 1598, trelTonabillie adding (eftir the fubfcriptioun of the faid Letter) of the ftyles of ' sanctitas' and ' Fii.ius' to the
faid Letter ; and treflbnabillie affixing his Maiefteis Signet thairto ; connnittit in
the yeir of God 1598, or thairby : And treffonabill affifting Sir Eduard Drunimond, in his treffonabill trafficking, for the advancement of Papift courfes, at the
tyme foi'faid.

DiTTAY agahijf James Lord Balmerinoch,
James Lord Balmirrienoche, ye ar indytit and accufet of the crymes of Leafmaieftie and HeichTrelFone following. Forfamekill as, 5c, being lionouret and advancet be his Maiellie, noclit only to lieich
and eminent places in Seffioun and Counlall, bot alfo trullit witli the office of Principall Secretarie to his
hienes, quhairby ye war in dewtie bund, aboue all vthers, to half bene mofteairfuUof hisMaielteis honour
and preferuatioune ; nochtwithftanding quliairof, ye, preferring your awin vndewtifull and vnlawchfuU
privat refpectis, to his Maiefteis reputatioun and faftie, and being informet, in the yeir of God I"'.V'.fourI'coir auchtene yeiris, by your neir kynfman, Sir Eduard Drummond,^ [quhome ye knew to be ane profeffit
Papift, maift ferventlie affected to the furtherance of all Papifche courfes, and to liaif bene ane Secretare
to ane Cardinall at Rome, and thairfoir the vnfitter to half bene maid chofe of and trullit by yow, for
wryting or playing the clerkis office to his Maiefteis Letteris directit that way,] that he come to this cuntrie, directit be the Bifchope of Vaizon,' to deall for procureing of his Maiefteis Letteris of recommenl Laing's Hist. III. 57. ^ See Rehabii.itatio, Rerf. Maf/. Sig. Lib. xivm. No. 152, dated Aufrnst 4, 161.3.

• Marjory, the second daughter of Alexander second Loid Elpliinston, and paternal aunt of James, first Lord Balmerinoch, married Sir Robert Drummond of Carnock. .Sir Edward was perliaps her son, and cousin jjerniati of I.oril
Balmerinoch. * Robertson, in History of Scotland, and Wood, in Peerage of Scotland, <all liini Dnimnwnd : but

h« was William Chisholme, 2d of the name and surname. Bishop of Vaison, and paternal nepliew of tlie 1 st, wlio liad,
a short while after 1561, been, by Papal Brief, created Bishop of UnnWane ; and on liis tindinj; it inexpclient to
live in Scotland, he was appointed Bishop of \'aison ; wliidl situation he resigned, in favour of liis nephew, h hen he
became a Carthusian Friar of Grenoble. Both of these distinguished Churdnnen were younKer sons of the fromlix
family, Perthshire. Sir James Chisholme of Dnndurn and Cromlix, who was concerned in the Popisli Plot, in l.)!)3,
seems (j5a//o«;'s Aunaks, II. 29) to have bee., brother of tlie younger of the Bishops of A'aison. 'llie Cbisholmes
of Cromlix had, above a century, been hereditary Raillics and Justiciaries of the Ecclesiastical Lordslnp ot Dunblane,
and had furnished three Bishops of Dunblane ; James a.id William Cliisholmes, brothers, and their neplnw A\ illiam Chisholme, the elder of the Bishops of Vaison above mentioned. William Chisluilme In-I,,,., was lunsman ot .S.r
Edward Drummond and of Lord Bahnerinoch, though in what degiee is unknown.— 1 he Editor is .ndeble.l to the
industry and research of the Reverend Mr WacGregor-Stirling for the information contained in the preceding Note.
That learned gentleman has collected much original matter relative to the See of Dunblane, wli.ch it is hoped he
may, some time, be induced to lay before the public.

VOL. n. * ^

570 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

datioun to Pope Clement the Aucht, for makingr the faid Bifchope ane Cardinall ; being in grit hoip
that his Maiefteis recomtnendatroun to the faid place wald be ane grit furtherance to that his expected promotioun : Ye, nochttheles, nocht oidy trelfonabillie alfenting to the faid motioun, hot mott willinglie and readelie taking v])one you to be ane aflilter to him in that iniployment, did dyuerfe tymes
preafe Iiis Maieftie thairin, and did offer to his hienes the frame of fuche ane Letter as ye wald haif
had flgned, by his Maieftie, to the Pope ; whome yow fand, nocht only vnwilling to wryte at all, hot
abfolutelie to condarapne the motioun for correfpondence with fuch ane perfone ; who, alfweill in refpect of the irreconcpillabill contrarietie betuix his Maieftie (in refpect of his profelfioun in Religioon)
and the Pope ; as aifo, for that the faid Pope could nocht hot expect thofe tytillis and attributtis
whiche his Maieftie, out of his confcience, could nocht yeild htm, for any caufe quhatfoeuir : Ye, neuertheles, nocht deiifting frome your vndewtiefuU inftance, replyit to his Maieftie, moft craftillie, ' that
quhalcuir fchew of difcontentment his Maieftie vtterit againft Puritanes, ye could perfaue nathing hot
his ]Maieftie wald turne mair preceife nor any of thame I' Thairby, as it war, fpurring his Maieftie to
inclyne to fuch ane politique couife, which none hot foolifche or preceife fottis wald refuis to in>brace :
And nochtwithftanding of his Maiefteis oftin and flat denyallis, and refuifallis to barken to your motioune, ye nocht only defiftit nocht, (as ye aucht to haif done,) hot ftill refoluet to profecute your
treffonabill intent: Whearvpose, ye confpyret with the faid Eduard Drunimond, vpon the raeaynes
how to diffaue and beguyle his Maieftie, in the procureing of fuche ane Letter, and did devyfe and caufe
to be dran'in rp fuche ane Letter, with the faid Sir Eduardis Drummond hand, as frome his Maieftie
to the Pope, exprelfing thairin thankis for the Pope's kyndnes and favour, in former tymes, [albeit ye
knew in your confcience that his Maieftie nevir had any deilliag with the Pope, nather had he euir
expected, requyred, or reftkuet ony kynd of fauour frome him,] fubiopiing thairto ane recommendatioun of the Bifchope of Vaizon to be ane Cardinall ; thairby to be the moir able to further him in all
his effairis ; [nochtwithftanding that your felf, beft of all vtheris did vnderftand, by the moft conftant
anfueris gevin, at all tymes, by his ^laieftie, to your frequent and importune perfuafiones in that purpois, that his Maieftie wald neuir eonfent to haif any dealing or correfpondence with him,] and quhat
forder woirdis of compliment or fpecious promeiftis vpone his Maiefteis behalf yow did infert in that
Letter, [as weill appeiris yow did] by theafe wordis of that pamphelet of Tortus,' (quibus preter
CJEtera) your felf beft knawis. And for the better conveyance and paftage of this Letter by his Maiefteis hand, vow did contryue this courfe ; ffirjf, that it fould be fchiftit in amangft dyuerfe vtheris
Letteris to be figned ; fecundlie, that the fame, with the reft, fould be prefented to his Maieftie, at fum
tyme of his going out liaiftilie to the hunting, fo as, being on the fuddane furpryfed, he fould haif no
lafour to obferue and pcrufe the Letteris ; and, thridlie, that fuch woirdis of tytill and ftyle as ar
vfuallie gevin to the Pope, fould be forborne to be fet doun in it, leift perhappis his Maiefteis eye
lichting vpone ony of thame whilles he war figneing, he micht thairby tak occafioun to obferue that
Lettre, and fo difcouer your fraud ; and convenient fpaces being left for thame, tiiay fould efterwardis
be accemodatit and infert : According to quhich courfe, ye, abufing the truft repofit in yow be his
Maieftie, ane day, in the moirning, quhen his Maieftie was going to hunting, in haift, eftir that ye had
excufit yourfelff of cuming to truble his Maieftie with tlie iigneing of any Lettres, att fo vnfeafonabill
ane hour, in refpect, as ye informit his Majeftie, Sir Edward Drammondis ftay any langar in the
countrey wald hot irritat the Minifteris, and breid occafioun of jealofte and fals and fcandolous bruites ;'

' This alludes to the reply by Cardinal Bellarmine, xiiider the feif^ned signature ot' Matth.eus Tortus, to a
book published by King James, anuo 1607, under this Title, * Tkiplici nodo triples cunecs, or an Apology for the
Oath of AUef;:iaure against two Brieves of Pope Paul V., and th,e late I^etter of Cai'dinal Bellarmine to Blackball
the Arch-priest.' In ibis reply, the King is accused of having abandoned his former sentiments, in favour of the Roman Catholic Religion ; and the Letter to Pope Clement; VI II. is quoted, in proof, by his antagonists, who jissert, that
Lord Balmerino fell a victim to the King's orottked policy, and that that able and distinguished Nobleman had been
induced, through his devoted attachment to his royal master, to criminate himself, in a matter wherein be was really
ionocent, having merely acted by the King's express instructions. * Reports. Fr. bruit.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 571

and thaiifore, that ye wer forceit, att that tyme, to prefent his Difpatch to be fignet by his Maieftie,
contening no thing, bot fura two or thrie Letteiis, in Latine, to the Duikis of Florence, Savoy, and fuch
vtheris, in the faid Bifchopes recomniendatioun' : And thane, in place thairof, ye did prefent the faid
Letter to the Pope, and vther thrie, to fa niony Cardinallis in Rome ; and procureit tlie famin to be
figned, in place of thais nher Letteris, quhich only feruit for youre cloik, in the convoy of that bulfiiies :
Qiihiik being done. Sir Edward Drunimond, by your directioun, did efterwardis add and inlert the
Popes tytillis and ftyles, boith in the beginning of the Letter and in the end thairof, betuix the Letter
itt felff and his Maiefleis fubfiriptioun, as the word < Sanctitas,' and the word ' Filius,' and fucli
vtheris as ye thocht propper for the Letter to tiie Pope, (quhich verry twa wordis of ' Sanctitas and
' Filius,' his Maieftie had oftin before forewairnit yow, that he wald rather loife his lyife than wryte
any of thanie to the Pope) : And, be your directioune, the Letter being clofet by ane of your feruandis,'
his Maiefleis Signet (quhairof the keping wes committit to yow, be vertew of youre Office of Secretarie,) wes by yow, aganis the honour and dewtie of your place, truft, and credite repofit in yow be
liis Maieftie, moft vndewtifullie, falflie and trefTonablie affixit to your faid forgeit Letter.' Be occafioun quhairof, quhen his Maieftie cam efterwardis in queftioune, in the lait Quene of Ingland, of bliflit
memorie, hir tyme, by meanis of liir Anibafladoure, quho, in the ^eir of God r".Vl°. yeiris, expoftulattit
with his Maieftie concerning fuch ane Letter writlin by him to the Pope ; ye than, being alkit tliairof
be his Maieftie, did vterlie deny thair wes any fuch mater : Lyke as, for juftiBcatioun of yourdenyall,
ye fend Sir Edward Drummond, quho, att your defyre, being cum from beyond fea to this countrey,
ami being examinat thairof, did, att your perfwafioun, deny that he careit any fuch Letter to the Pope :
As alfwa, qahen Sir Edward Drummond wes committit to waird for this caus, within the Caftell of
Erlinburgh, ye becam ane ernift fuiter to liis Maieftie for his libbertie, and wes the meanis to obtene
itt ; quhairvpoun the faid Sir Edward being efterwardis to returne to Rome, ye delt erniftlie and inftantUe with him, to lawboure to recover agane the faid Letter to his handis, and to diftroy itt ; quhich
he promefit to do, gif be any meanis he could : And ye lykewyfe gaif his Maieftie full and ablolute
affureance, tliat that repoirt, quhairvpoune the faid lait Quene of fo wordie' memorie did expoftulat
witli his Maieftie, wes vterlie fals : And that nather his Maieftie had ewir writtin any Letter to the
Pope, nor yet that Sir Edward Drummond liad evir delyuerit any, in his Maiefteis name, to liim :
Quhilk ftrong denyall, to his Maieftie, of your and Sir Edward Drummondis giltynes in that mater, wes
the occafioun that movit his Maieftie to grant to Sir Edward Drummond his libertie : And altliocht
that the conftant finceritie of his Maiefteis pnjfeflioun in Rcligioun wes fo Weill knawin to the warld,
by his daylie word, writt, and praktife, as nather that lait Quene of happie memorie, nor the religious
people of the Eftait of Ingland did any langer dout of his Maiefteis innocence in this caice, howfone
ihay liad hard of his Maiefteis denyall tliaiiof, (as he mycht moft juftlie half done,) yit lay it nocht
in your handis ; bot, gif God had not movit thair heart to judge fo honorablie and juftlie of his Maieftie
in this caice, the jealofie and niiftruft of his Maiefteis finceritie in Rcligioun, being thus I'pred, in both
lealmes, mycht liaue reflauit fuch lucres and grouth, as mycht half liafardit thairby, alfweill the prefent
fecuritie of liis Maiefteis pevfoun and eftait, att that tyme ; as alfo, his Maiefteis happie aliening to his
juft clame and rycht, in Ingland : The ground of all this calumny and llvlandcr, and qulialfuniewir fuch
lyk hafardis mycht half foUowit heirvpoun to his Maiefteis perfoun and eftait, arryfing and having the
only fundatioun by this your occafioun and treflonabill dealing, quhilk weill apperit by the confequent ;
ft'or liow fone it pleafit God to call that Quene, of renownit remembrance, to his mercie, and his Maief-

' Had such a warm debate and alteroation, as that before recited, taken place, is it to be conceived as at all likely,
that a person of James's jealous disposition, would have signed such Dispal, lies and IJeconnneudato. y Letters, without first carefully perusing and scanniiii; every jdiiase contained in them ? Lnquestionaldy the Kii.« would either liave
postponed his hunting, or, at least, would have desired the papers to await his vetuni, when he eouhl at h-isure consider the import of such important documents. On the other hand, it must be admitted, that the ( onless.on ol Lord
B. is un,|ualified, and apparenllv sincere, and is conceived in the strongest terms which language could devise.
' Clerks to the Secretary of State. ' Pated at Holyroodhousc, Sep. 24., 1099. Worthy.

572 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

tie to the lauclifuU pofleflioun of his rycliteous inheritance, with moir perfyte ioy and vniuerfall applaufe
of all liis fubiectis, nor any vtlier Prince obtenit tlie pofleflioun of his piediceflburis Croun, his Maieftie,
alfweill by his fincere profeflioun as by liis actiounis and lawes, publeifling to the warld his nioft conflant zeale to niantene and propagat the trew Religioune, and to fuppres Papillrie, and all contrarie profeflioun, the hoil! Papiflis within tliis He, and fpeciallie, in his hienes Kingdome of Ingland, finding
thairby thame felftis vterlie difapoinlit of tliair former hoipes, foundit vpoun thais Letteris, quhairby
thay promefit to thame felffis all libertie and tolleratioun of thair fuperftitioun, in his Maiefteis dominiounis ; and efteming, that his Maieftie, in iiocht performing thairof, had delt wrongfullie and vniuftlie
with thame, nocht only did Clark and Watfoim and thair complices, Preills, and vtheris Papiftis, in
the fyrft yeir of his Maiefteis regime of Ingland, confpyre aganis his lyffe, pofteritie and eftait, bot alfo
the incomparable Conspiracie of the Powder Tressoun (exceeding in malice and crewaltie all vther
TrefTounis, that evir wes attemptit, in any aige or countrey) wes devyfit and profequutit by ane damnit
crew of merciles Papiftis, to the extieanic danger of liis Maiefteis nioft facred perfoun, his moft gratious Quene, thair Royall iflew and lioill body of that Eftait; for no vther quarrell, bot becaus thay
thocht thame felHis wrongit by his Maieftie, for nocht accompleifching the hoipis gevin by thais Letteris to all Pa|)iftis in his doniiniounis : Lyke as, fenfyne. Cardinal Dellermine, or Matheus Tortus, his
chaplain, and vtlieris, nioft impudent and infamous Popifch wryteris, haif, (fa far as in thame lay,)
preiflit by thair fals, calumnious and leing lybellis, groundit vpoun your trefl'onabill Letteris foirfaidis,
to ftein5ie (sully, stain) his Maiefteis moft pure, perfyte and vnfpotted reputatioun. Off the quhilkis
treflonabill crymes aboue wn-ittin, of furreptitious, fraudulent and fals fteling liis Maiefteis hand to tlie
faid Letter, without his Maiefteis knawledge, and contrarie to his Maiefteis declarit will, and treflonabill
aflixing of liis Maiefteis Signet to the laid fals Letter, and aflifting knawin profeflit Papiftis, in thair treffooable courfis, to the danger of fubuerfioun of Keligioun and overthrow of all trew profelTouris thairof;
and drawing his Maiefteis lyff, eftait, Croun of this realm, with his rycht of fiicceflionn to the Croun of
Ingland in moft extreme perrell, and bringing moft fals and fcandaious imputatiounis to his Maieftie,
both in poynt of honour and lleligioune, ye ar airt and pairt : And the famin hes bene done and committit by yott', and vtheris in your name, of your caufiiig, command, afllftance and ratihabitioun. For
the quhilkis tnironabill crymes foirfaidis, ye aucht and fould be pwneiflit, be fforfaltrie of your lyfl^e,
landis, and guidis to his Maieftie ; accoirding to the Lawis and practik of this realme.

Thk faid James Lord Balmirrenoch, being inquyret be the Juftice, gif he wald
defyre the affiflance of any freindis or Adiiocattis to be his preloquutouris, according to the benefite of the law and ordour of the Court, quhilk fould be obferuit to him ? He anfuerit, that he had neuer fa grit neid of preloquutouris and
(fa) grit neceffitie to fpeik ; the cans being fie as concernis his lyfte, his eftait,
and all that he pofTeft ; bot he faid, he had gritar neceffitie to keip filence, his
offence being fik as could admitt 11a excufe ; and his greif and forrow, that he
could haif fa far abufit the truft his moft gratious Souerane repofit in him, being
fa grit, as he defyrit na thing mair, than his cryme maj^ be notifeit to all men :
And feing, na freind wes acquent with his fact, lie defyrit nane to fee the miferie
thairof : And faid, he could delyre na Laweir to compeir and defend that fact,
quhilk him felff had fa oft and juftlie condemnett ; as no place wes left to him
nor any vther, to vfe ony defence thairin : And thairfoir, his awin liaert witnefTing moir aganis him nor ony vther could fay, he defyrit all men to knaw his
cryme to be als haynous as it is ; and did erniftlie intreat all thais that wer
prefent, and wifTit that all the warld mycht heir him, to declair two poyntis,

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL 'trials. .573

quhairof he wiffis his Maieftie to be cleirit : ffijtjl of all fufpicioun that his Maieftie was ony wayis acquent with the wryting of that vnhappie Letter, that fwa
his hienes innocencie and finceritie mycht be knawin to the haill warld ; ffor he
declarit, as he wald wifs God to be mercifull to his faull, in the grit day, that his
Maieftie wes moft falflie and vninftlie chargeit with that Letter writtiu to the
Paip ; and that he could newir draw his Maieftie to lyk, or with patience to
heir of that wickit motioun ; bot his Maieftie did vterlie and abfolutlie refuife,
vpoun ony refpect or conditioun, to wryte to the Pope, as ane mater altogidder
aganis his confcience to tak ony fic cruikit courfis, or to gif to the Paip thais
ftyles and attributes quhilk the Paip aftumit to him felf. Quhilk refulall could
nocht fatisfie nor content him, bot in his politik warldlie reach, as ane naturall
man, he went fordwart, in his awin vayne confait, aganis his Maiefteis declarit
will, to that quhilk he thocht fould (have) advanceit his Maiefteis tytill, as hopeing thairby to ftay the cenlure of the Paippis Excommunicatioun, intentit aganis
his hienes, quhilk he ferit mycht haif brocht him preiudice to his Maiefteis fticceffioun, nor yit could he be ftayit from his vnhappie courfis, by his Maiefteis
moft i-eligious refolutioun ; quha, att findrie tymes, proteftit and declarit to him,
that his hienes wald nevir burdene his confcience with ony fic vnlauchfull and
cruiket courfis, bot wald only leane and reft vpoun Godis Providence and his
awin rycht, with fic vther lauchfuU and rycht meanis as his IMaieftie mycht
juftlie vfe : Befeikand all gentilmen and vtheris prefent, to heir trew recoird of
his Confeflioun of fa haynous ane offence, committit aganis fa gratious and bountyfuU ane Souerane, qulio, be his vndeleruit fauour, had raifit his bafe fortoun fa
bountifullie, that his landis, guidis and lyffe could be na reparatioun for fa grit
ane offence.

The Jeamd poynt, quhairof he defyrit his Maieftie mycht be fred and cleirit,
is ane opinioun, quhicli ather fum in malice, or his freiiidis in the commiferatioun
of his eftait, mycht confaue and think, that his Maieftie, in ane mater of this
moment, (the fuggeftioun of ane Letter of Recommendatioun,) mycht ferue to
proceid with grit i-egoure and crewaltie aganis his lyffe and eftait ; bot he wald
haue thais and all vtheris to remember, that his Maieftie lies geviu mony teftimoneis of his clemencie, in materis gritlie concerning him ; and thairfure, thay
fould nocht judge of his Maiefteis difpofitioun to mercie, by his hienes proceiding, be juftice, aganis him, bot wiffit thame rather to turne tliair eis to his vnhappines, quha hes offendit his facred Maieftie, in fic ane poynt, as na favour can
be extendit to him, ^vithout the hurt and interes of his Maiefteis liouour, quhilk
being deirar to his hienes than his lyffe, he man think and confefs, that tuentie
thowfand fic lyves as his is, ar nocht to be compairit with it, or ballanceit aganis
it ; nor did he defyre that his lyffe fould be fpairit, att fa deir ane rait as the
leift tuich (Fr. tac/ie) of his Maiefteis honour.

574 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609Forder, he cravit pardoiin to proteft thais tua thingis, for him felff. Fyrft,
that he had na fie intentioune, as fum hes fuppofit, to draw in ony alteratiouu
of Religioun or tolleratioun, or quliat thay pleis to ternie it ; hot any meane
warldlie courfe and devyfe, quhilk he confaitit mycht be for the behuif of his
Maieftie, quhilk he proteftit to be of treuth. The Jicund thing is, he wald haif
na man to think, that itt wes any gayne or priuat commoditie that drew hira to
that wicket com-s ; ffor he pi-otellit that he nevir refTauit norexfpectedony reward,
from ony Prince leving, except from tlie Kingis Maieftie, his maifter, allanerlie.

And la concludit, that he had fpokin fa much of the treuth aganis him felff,
that he wald defyre na man to fpeik for him ; and wald gif als littill buffines to
the Aduocat, Juftice, Affeirouris and AfTyfe, as he could ; and was content that
the Dittay fould pas to the knawledge of ane AfTj-fe.

Ix refpect of the quhilkis, the Justice Ordanit the faid Dittay to be putt to
the knawlege of ane Affyfe, of the jjerfonis following. Thay ar to fay.

ASSISA.
Dauid Erll of Craufurd, Johnne Erll of Tullibar- Sir Robert Gordoun of

Lord Lyndefay, kc. din, Lord Murray, Lochinvar, kiiycht,

George Erll of Marschell, Allane Lord Cathcart, Sir Willi ame LevingLord Keith and Altrie, Grit Johnne Lord Saltoune, stoun of Kilfyth, knycht,

Marfchell of Scotland, &c., Dauid Lord Scone, Sir Joiisne Houstoun of

Johnne Erll of Wigtoun, Alexander Lord Garleis, that Ilk, knycht,

Lord Fleming, &c. , Williame iSlAisTER of Til- Sir Patrick Home of PolPatrik Erll of Kixgorne, lybardine, wart, knycht.

Lord Glammes, &c , Sir James Dowglas of Drumlanrig, knycht,

Quhilkis perfounnes of Aflyfe being chofin, fworne and admittit, and Inftrumentis tane thairvpoun, be our fouerane lordis Aduocat ; the faid James Lord
Balmirrenoch, being accufit be the faid Dittay, oppinlie red in judgement to him,
in prefens of the faid AlFyle ; and for verificatioun thairof, the Aduocat, haifing
l)roduceit the faid James Lord Balmirrenochis Depofitioun, fubfcryuit with his
hand ; togidder with his Letter, wi'ittin all with his hand and fubfcryuit be him,
contening his fpeich, vterit be him befoir the Lordis of his Maiefteis honorabill
Previe Counfall of Ingland, togidder with ane Letter fend be his Maieftie to the
Aduocat, contening fum of the Lord Balmerinochis fpeichis to his Maieftie, att
fie tyme as he preiflit to haif perfwaidit his hienes to wryte to the Pope : And
the faidis three writtis, being oppinlie red in judgement, in his prefens and in
prefens of the faidis Afl'yfouris ; quhairof the tennour foUowis.

And fyrft, followis the tennour of his Depositioun.

Att Falkland, the fecund day of Februar, the yeir of God I'°.Vj^ and nyne
yeiris. The Declaratioun and Coxfessioux of the Loud BalmerjiExocuE, concerning axe Iu^'I'ITLJ!, fraudidentUe and furreptitmijUe pro42 & 6 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 575

mreit to he writtin and fent from his Maiejlie to Pope Clement (VIII.)
in the yeir 1598 ; maid in prefens of my Lordis of his 3Iai(fteis Secreit
Counfall of Scotland, cflir namet ; The Earles ofDumhar, Wigtoun and
Lowtheane, the Lordis of Scone, the Jujlice Clark, the Collectour, Juftice
and Aduocat.
The Lord Balmirrenoche, being examinat, fworne and chargeit with fe oftence of praktefing
and furreptitious piocureing of ])e faid Letter, (quhairby hath growne ane mod fals and fcandalous
imputatioun to Iiis Maieftie, both in poynt of honour and of Religioun,) eftir diuers ineanis vfit by
him, of denyall, conceilling, transferring and extenuatting the faid offence, doeth att fe laft expreflie
acknawledge and confefs : That, in |)e ^eir of our Lord 1598, att J)e motioun of fe lait Archbifchop
of Glafgow,' his Maiefteis Amballiidour, tiian refident in France, the Bifchop of Vaizon,'^ and fum
vtheris, and att fe folicitatioun of Sir Edward Drummond, directit from ]>ame, for procureing of fum
correfpondence betuix his Maieftie and the Pa if, be the faid Lord Bahnirrenoche, affenting to ]ie faid
motioun, did diuers tymes preife liis Maieftie Jiairin, and did offer to his Maieftie the frani of fie ane
Letter as he wahl haif had (igned be his Maieftie to fe Paip ; quhom, quhen he fund notht onlie vnwilling to wryte att all, hot abfohitlie to condem the motioune, or any correfpondence with a perfoun
that did expect thais tytillis and attributes, quliich his Maieftie, out of his confcience, could nocht 5eild
him, for any caus quhatfumeuir ; lie, the faid Lord Balmirrinoche, confpyring with Sir Edward Drummond, on J)e meanis how to diliaue and begyle liis Maieftie, in J>e procureing fudi a Letter, with Jie
faid Sir Edward Drummondis hand, as from his Maieftie to fe Paip, exprcffing pairin (as he fayeth)
only thankis for J)e Paipis kyndnes and favour, in former tymes, with recommendatioun of ))e Bifchop
of Voyzin to be a Cardinal! ; thairby to be moir abill to forder him in all thingis neidfull fur his effairis.
For the better conveyance and pafthge of Jiis Letter by liis Maiefleis hand, the laid Lord Balmirrenocli
eonfefli;th this courfe to haif bene by him contryveit ; fgrjf, that itt fould be cheftit' in amangis diueris
vferis Letteris to be figned ; feciindlie, tliat tiie iiimin, with the reft, fould be prefentit to liis Maieftie,
att fum tyme of his going furth iiaiftelie, on hunting, fo as, being on the fudden furpryfit, he fould haif
nocht laifour to obferue and perufe the Letteris ; and thrydlie, that fuch wordis of tytill and ftyle (as)
ar vfuallie gevin to fe Paip, fould be forborne to be fett.doun in itt; leift perhappis his Maiefteis ee
lichting vpone any of Jiame, quhillis hewer figneing, he mycht fairby tak occafioun to obferve tliat Letter : and that convenient fpecis being left for fame, thay fould efterwardis be accomodattit and infertit : According to quhich courfe, he the faid Lord Balmirrenoch confefling, that he, abufeing the
trufl; repofit in him be his Maieftie, one day, in fe moirning, quhen his Maieftie wes going on hunting
ill haift, amangis vferis Letteris, writtin in Latine, to J>e Duikis of Florence and Savoy an<l fum Cardinallis, in favour of fe Bifchop of Veyzon, did alfo prefent to his Maieftie (haveing formerlie refulit
to wryte to fe Pope, and na thing fufpecting that any fuch fould be offerit to liis hand) the faid Letter to pe Paip, and procureit it to be fignit ; quliich being done, he the faid Lord Balmirrenoch confeflit, that by his divectioune. Sir Edward Drummond did efterwardis add and infert the Popes tytillis
and fl^yles, baith in fe beginning of pe Letter, and in fe end fairof, betuix the Letter itt felff and his
Maiefteis fubfcriptioune, as the word ' Sanciita& and the word 'ffilms,' and fuch vferis as he thocht
proper for ]>e Letter to fe Paip : And that, by his directioune, the Letter wes feilit vp be ane of his
feruandis, and the Signet alfo putt to itt. Concerning ].e Letteris to the Cardinallis, he the faid Lord
Balmirrenoch fayeth, that thay wer cloife fealit vp ; bot left without fuperfcriptioun, and fo delyuerit
to Sir Edward Drummond, to be directit be fe aduife of the (Arch)bifchop of Cilafgw: And that he
did efterwardis vnderftand, that two of fe faidis Letteris wer geWn to ^ Cardinallis Aldobrandino and

' James Beaton, (2d) Abbot of Aberbrothock, elected 1551, quitted the see in 15G0, and was restored by Act of
Parliament, in 1588. ' WiUiame Cbisholme. See Note on Dittay, p. 569. » Shifted, shuffled.

07I

CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

Bellarmine, nnd Jie tlirid to Cardinall Caietane, Protectour of the Scottifli Natioun. ftordermore, tlie
faid Lord Bahnirrenocli Confeffetli, tliat qulien his JNIaieftie cam eftenvardis in queftioun, in Jie lait
Quenis tyme, (by nieanis of hir AnibafTadour, that expoftulattit with his MaieftiCj concerning fuch a
Letter writtin from him to the Pope,) he the faid Lord Bahiiirrenoch, beincr allvit jialrof by his Maieflie, did vterlie deny tliat thair was any fuch mater : And lykwayis Confefleth, that lie defyred Sir
Edward Dnimmond (being cum att fat tyme from bc3ond the Seas, and examinat ))airof, vpoun fe
Lord Balmirreuochis fending for Iiim,) to juflifie his denyall ; and that Sir Edward Drammond did,
att his defjTe, accordinglie deny tliat he liad careit any fuch Letter to Jie Pope ; as alfo, that quhen
Sir Edward Drummond wes committit to preafoun for fis caus, to the Caftell of Edinburghe, he the
laid Lord Balniirrenoch becam ane ernift futear' to his Maieftie for his libertie, and wes the meanis
to obtene it ; quhairvpoun Sir Edward Drummond, being eftero'ardis to returne to Rome, he the faid
Lord BalmirrenochConfeflit, that he delt erneftlie and inftantlie with Sir Edward Drummond, to laboure
to recover agane the faid Letter into his liandis, and dellroy itt ; quhillv Sir Edward Drummond proniifit to do, gif by any meanis he could ; and that the faid Lord Balmirrenoch Jiairvpoun deflroyit the
copie of Jiat Letter, quliilk before he had retenit with him felff. J. BALMIllRENO''.

DUMBAR, WiGTOUN, LoWTHEANE, D. L. ScONE, (K'') COKBURNE,

S'' To. Hammiltousb, Jo. Prestoune, S"' W™ Haert.

Followis the tennour of

The Lokd Balmirrexoches Letter, wriftin and fiihjcryuit he him, contoihig his Speiches, vttered he him to the Lordis of' his hieiies Previe
Coinijal, in Ingiand.

My verrie honorable Lordis,

I FIND trew this day, in experience, tliat which I haif oft red and hard, that no exceiding joy
nor exceiding forrow can be cayried hot with filence. Leues cura loquuntur (fayeth the tragique)
ingentesjinpent. From this it is that Jie lieavie greif and vnfpeikable forrow of my hart and foul, for
my haynous offence aganis my nioft gratious Souerane, and his Maiefleis difpleafour that he hes moft
julllie conceaved aganill me, maUis me that I haif no wordis whoarwith I can expres Jie fame : Quhen
I luili vnto his JNlaielleis innumerabill fauoris beflowed vpone me, haifing raifed my fortounes (raoft
miferable and vnworthie wretch !) far aboue my mereit and my foule abufe of his IMaierteis truft : which
lies brocht this fals imputatioun vpone his Maiefteis vnfpotted innocencie : I think J>air is nothing in
me may amend the fame ; and J'airfoir 1 find no vther end of my forrow, hot, with the forlonie fone,'
to fay to his moft facred ^l&xeHie, peccatii in cceltim et in terram! — Wy ofl'ence is fo greit that it can
nocht be pardonet, — I am nocht worthie to be rekonet ony moir among his fubiectis or createuris I I
liaif fmceirlie confefllt the verltie of my fact, in all the circumftances, nocht for obedience, or to liberal his Maieftie, (as fura wald falllie geve out,) hot for Jie treuthes faik, and that his Maiefteis innocencie may be knawin to all the world : Bot allace ! what vnhappie man was I, that my devilifch affectioun and erroneous courfe fould haif led to ony thing foidil haif offendit my moft gracious Souerane I
Micht nocht his Maiefteis rair pietie, finguler wifdome, and vnfpotted finceritie, in all his actiones,
whearof I had fo long experience, taucht me, that quhen his Maieftie was vnwilling, and did refuis
fuche ane cruikit wordli^ courfe, the event of it could nocht prove bot vnhappie ! Thairfoir, fince his
Maiefteis foule is frie of it, let no pairt of the ftayne ly vpone his Maiefteis honour ; bot, geue' his Maieftie can nocht vtherwayis be liberat of this imputatioun brocht vpone his Maieftie by that devillifch
Letter, let najier my lyfe, my eftait nor credeit be fpared ; bot, as I haif all by his Maiefteis fauour,
fo, let all go, to the laft drope of my bloode, befoir any reproche for my moft haynous offence fould
be broght vpone his innocent IMaieftie : Bot my miferie, aboue all, is Jie gritter, that it behoved me
' Suitor. ' The Prodigal Si.n in the Parable. ' World] j-. « Gif, if.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 577

oflfend evin in tliat point whaiiin liis Maieftie hes ever bene moft tender, his confcience, which for
ana thowfeand kingdomes he wald nocht hurt, and his reputatioun for finceir deilHng, quiiilk hes maid
him famous throw all the world ! In all theafe, his Maiefteis extraordiner delyuerances, niiraculouflie
wrocht be God, for no caufe fo muche as for his Maiefteis incomparable finceritie of heart to God,
and juft dealing to all the world. My Lordis, it fall nocht be neceflar to tranfmit my Confeffioun to
Scotland, or to remit my judgement or tryell fair, fence for my offence, and his Maiefteis difpleafour
confauit fairupoun, I haif abfolutelie fubmitted my felf in his Maiefteis royall will. I rafer' my life
and all war takin, befoir I fould ly ony longer vnder this moft importable^ burding of his Maiefteis
heavie difpleafour. Thairfoir, my humbiil fute to 3 our lordfchipis is, that 36 will, in commiferatioun
of my miferablc eftait, move his Maieftie to be plefed to luike vpone my Confeffioun, accept my becoming in will, and but' more delay, declair what oucht be done for reparatioun of his Maiefteis
honour, which, to my greit greif, is tuiched be my moft haynous offence ; which, in all reuerance and
humilitie, evin with the laft drope of my bloode, 1 will obey and performe.

J. Balmerinc^.

FoUowis the tennour of the

Letter fend be his Maiestie to my Lord Aduocat, anent the ConFEREXCE betuix his Maiejlie and the Lord BalmerinocJie, hefo'ir the inirchejjing'' of his hiegnesfuhjcriptioun to the Letter to the Pope.

To OUR truftie and weilbelouit Counfalour, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun
of Bynnie, kny', our Aduocat, in that our Kingdome of Scotland,
James R.

Trustie and weilbelouit counfalour, Wee greit 30W weill. Quhairas, We haif concludit
to haif pe Lord Balmirrenoche tryed before certane our Juftices, by Comniiflioun, vpoun that his moft
trefTonabill and damnabill fact, committed by him, in the thifteous purcheffing and fleilling tlirowchof
Letteris, vnder our hand, directed to The Pope of Rome; We nociit being of })e knawledge fairof ;
bot vtherwayis, vpoun his moving of fat mater vnto ws, wer altogidder difalTenting fairfrome : We
haif thocht mete, (for 30ur better informatioun and gritar licht in ])is matter, and to ])e effect that 30W
may fairvpoun ground jour Dittay, and in his accufatioun vrge tiie fame as ane particular evidence
of his giltines heirin,) tofett doun, lb far as our nieniorie can ferue, the verie wordis of fe Conference
paft betuix ws att fat tynie, qulien he moved ws for fat Letter, quliich fo faldie and vndewtiefullie,
without our knawlege, he thaireflir purcheft to be paft our hand, about l^um nyne or ten jeiris ago.
One day, he infifted that We wald be pleafed to wryte a Recommendatioun to f e Pope, in favouris of
f e Bifchop of Vaizon, with a requeft for promoving of him to f e hatt :^ He than fchewit vnto ws, that
by the vther^ his continewall ftay att Rome, and by reafoun of the aduerteifraentis he wald niak from
tyme to tyme, he wald ferue for a fpie to acquent ws with quliat courfes they had there ; and that
therewith, it wald be a greit credite to f e Natioun to haif thair countreymen Cardinallis : At quliicli
tyme We fchewed vnto him, that We could nocht, in confcience, jeild vnto fe Pope thais tytillis
quhich he did affume vnto him felff ; and that We wald nocht, for any warldlie refpect, do that, quhairof We had no warrand in confcience : The wryting to fe Pope, in fuch Ibirt as he wald accept f airof, being vnlauchfull for ony trew Criftiaue : Vnto f e quhich, We do perfytelie remember, that he did
then anfuer, that nochtwithftanding quliatfoevir fchevv of difcontentment We vterit aganis Puritanis,
he could perceave no thing but We wald turne more preceife than any of Jiame, qulia for I'uch a fmall
mater as a naked Letter of Recommendatioun fould be fo fqueamifcli and nice. He farther added, att
f e fame tyme, that We fould nocht cair quhat wer done f airin ; bot willit ws to leuo to Sir Edward

' I would rather that my life, &c. ^ Unbcai'able, intolerable. ^ Without farther delay. ' I'locuiuig.

' A Cardinal's hat. ^ Viz. By the uniuternipted residence of the Bishop of Vaizon at Home, &c.

VOL. II. 4 D

578 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

Drummond and him the filling vp of thefe ftyles ; and We being ignorant Jjairof, and done without our
knawledge, itt could be no touch' nor greif to our confcience : Quhairvnto, We then anfuerit, tliat as
We evir difallowit of all dowble deilling, fo We loued nocht that flicht, bot wer refolved nevir to do
nor confent to any thing, but quiiat We woUie approve before fe hoill worlde : And nochtvvithflanding
of our reiterating of our dillyke fairof, 3it wes ])e famin moll tliiftiouflie pad our hand, without our
knawlege. And thinking fitt to acquent 30W with this particuler circuniflance, for 30ur better informatioun, We bid 30W farewell : From oure Court, att Quhytehall, the 9 Januarye, 1609.
Followis the teimour of,

His Maiesteis Warrand direct to the Assessouris.

To OURE rycht truftie and weil belouit Coufinges and Counfalouris, the Erles of Dumbar,
MoNTROlSE, LowTHEAN ; and ouF truflie and weill belouit Counfalouris, the LoRnis Previe
Seale, the Clark of Register, the Collectoure, Sir Lueis Craig.
James R.

Quhairas We haif directit our Aduocat to infift in perfute of fe Lord Balmirreno' before
our Juflice, for his mofl liaynous and deteftabill crynie and offence comraittit aganis ws, our honour
and reputatioun, We haif maid fpeciall choife of 30W, in pe foirfaid Tryall, to be AfTeflburis to fe faid
Juilice : And fairfore We ar to will3ovv to alfill him, and to fee juftice dewlie minillrat Jiairin, as 3e
wald do ws moft acceptable feruice : And thir prel'entis falbe 3our Warrand futBcient. Gevin att
Quhytehall, the thryd day of March, 1609.
Followis the tennoiu' of

His Majesteis Warrand direct to my Lord Aduocat, to perfew James
Lord Balmirrenoche.
To CURE truflie and weilbelouit Counfalour, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnle kny*, our
Aduocat, in fiat our kingdome of Scotland.
James R.

Trustie and weilbelouit counfalour, We greit 30wwell. This haynous oflfence committit
by the Lord Balmirreno' aganis our honour and reputatioun, being fo lang conceillit and now laitlie
difcoverit, niovis ws, for the clering of our innocencie, and freithing- owre felftis of thais wrangous imputatiounis quhich We haif hithertill vnderlyne, to geue ordoure for profequuting his Tryall, befoir our
Juftice, with all regour : And becaus the leift extenuating of fis offence can nocht bot breid in the
evill difpofit a diftruft of his giltines : And We being fuUelie auifet by thais of beft judgement, heir,
concerning the qualitie of J)at offence, to find pe famin, infafar as it is done aganis the fecuritie of fe
Prince, a fpeciall poynt of hie Trefloun and Lefemaieftie; ftor heirby, nocht only wer We brocht in
danger, botli in perfoun and eftait, bot alfo our lionour, credite, and reputatioun, moir deir vnto ws
then our lyffe, lies bene by Jie fame brocht in quoftioun : And fairfore, We will 50W to vrge the Judgement aganis him, as for a cryme of fe qualitie aboue writtin, that fo all exceptioun that may be maid
aganis proceding, afer of collufioun fairin, or in extenuatting the offence, may be removed, that juftice
may be dewlie miniftrat, and our innocencie, fo much fairby wrangit, may be heireftir clerit to fe haill
world : And perfwading our felftis of 30ur cair, diligence and dexteritie heirin, as 56 wald do ws acceptable feruice. We bid 30W fairwell. Frome oure Court, at Quhytehall, the nynt of January, 1609.
^'^ERDiCT. The faid James Lord Balmirrenoche ConfefTit the faid Dittay,
and haill contentis of the writtis foirfaidis ; and thaii'eftir, the faidis i^ei'founes of
Affyfe removed altogidder furth of Court to tlie Counfal hous of tlie faid Tolbuith, quhair thay being conv'enit togidder, fyrll electit and chufit the faid

' Fr. Taclie. ' Freeing, absolving.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 579

George Erll Merfchell Lord Keyth and Altrie, grit Marfchell of Scotland, Chancillar of the Aflyfe ; and tliairefter, reafonit and votit vpoun the poyntis of the
faid Dittay ; and eftir long reafoning thairvpoune, and being throuchlie refoluit
thairwith, re-enterit agane in Court, in prefens of my Lord Juftice and his Affeffoviris, and the faid James Lord Balmirrenoche ; quhair the faidis perfounes of
AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid Chancillar of the faid Aflyfe,
ffand, jjronunceit and declairit the faid James Lord Balmirrenoche to be Giltie
of the treflbnabill, furreptitious, fraudulent and fals fteling of his Maiefteis hand
to the Letter fpecifeit in the Dittay, without his Maiefteis knowledge, and contrair to his Majefteis declarit will ; and of the treflTonabill affixing of his Maiefteis
fignet to the faid fals Letter ; and afllfting knawin profeflit Papiftis in thair
treflbnabill courfes, to the danger of fubuerfioun of Religioune, and overthraw of
all trew profeflburis thairof ; and drawing his Maiefteis lyffe, eftait, Croun of
this realme, with his rycht of fucceflioun to the Croun of Ingland, in moft extreme perrell, and bringing moft fals and Icandalous imputationis to his Maieftie,
both in poynt of honour and Religioune : And of airt and pairt of the haill
treflTonabill crymes aboue writtin, att lenth contenit in his Dittay aboue fpecifeit,

Marschall, CanceUar'ms.

Quhairvpouu Sir Thomas Hammiltoune, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, afkit
inftrumentis.

Thaireftir, my lord Juftice, confulting with his AflTefllburis, Declarit to the
faid James Lord Balmirrenoche, that thay war nocht to proceid ony forder in
that bufliines, for the prefent, till thay fould knaw his Maiefteis forder pleafour :
Bot, in the meanetyme, aduifet him to bethink hiinfelff (haifing fa horribill ane
fentence pronunceit aganis him) quhat caice he ftuid into, wifllng him to lay his
compt with the warld, and draw neir to his God.

And thaireftir, gaif commandment to the Capitan of his Maiefteis Gaird to
convoy his body to his Maiefteis waird in Falkland ; thairin to be kepit in furetie, as he wald anfuer to his Maieftie, vpoun his dewtie and allegiance.

[Curia Justiciarie, /^ d. n. Regis, tenia in Pretoria hurgi de

Ed^, jirimo die menjls Aprilis \^Q^,per D. Will. Heart de

Prejfouv, Jiijliciarium, t^c]

Apr. 1. — The quhilk day James Lord Balmirreno' being prefentit on

pannell, to heir dome pronunceit aganis him, &c. the faid Juftice produceit the

VVarrand vnderwrittin.

'WKRVi.AT^iiJ'romhisMajeJly,J'orpronouncetng'DoOMagainJlLordBalmerinocli.

James R.

Sir Williame Haert of Preftoun our Juftice, We greit 30W weill. Forfamekill as James
Lord of Balmirreno' being convict by ane Aflyfe, in ane Court of Jufticiarie hauldin by 30W, iu oui580 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

tolbuith of Sanctandrois, tlie tent day of March inflant, of fe treffonabill crymes contenit in his Dittay
and convictioun ; wes pairvpoun reniittit till preifl'oun, quhill our forder Will and plefour wer knawin
fairin, concerning him : We have thairfore thocht meit, be J>ir prefentis, to fignifie our faid pleafour
vnto 50W, quhilk is, — That 30W with all convenient expeditioun caufe fens ane Juftice-Coiirt, to be
hauldin by 30W in our tolbuith of Edinburgh, and thair Decerne and ordane the faid James Lord Balmirreno' to be taken to fe place of Exerutioun, and fair to be demanit and execute as a Traitour ; his
heid to be ftrikin from his body ; and all his landis, heretageis, lordfthipis, baroneis, takis, fledingis,
rowmis, poflediounis, ofliceis, benificeis, coirnis, cattell, infycht pleneifling, goodes and geir, to be fforfaltit, efcheit, and inbrocht to our vie, as convict and guyltie of f e faidis treffonabill crymes : Anent fe
pronunceing of pe qubich dome, thir prefentis falbe 30ur WaiTand. Gewin att our Court of Quhytehall, the xxiiij day of March, 1609.

3[ij Lord of Balmirrienociiis Dome.
Apr. 1. Our faid Ibuerane lordis Justice, be the mouth of Andro
Quhyte, dempfter of Court, conforme to ane Warrand direct be his Maieftie to
him, Decernit and Ordanit the faid James of Bahnirrienoche to be tane to the
place of his executioun, and thair to be demanit and execute as ane Tratour ; and
his heid to be ftriikin fronie his body,' &c.

DOCUMENTS illustrative of Lord Balmerinoch's Trial.
I. Extract from an Anonymous History of Scotland, MS^
Ane litill befoir this,' Sir James Elphinstoun, Prefident and Secretar, went wp to Ingland;
quhair he was accufit, in prefenfe of the King and Counjell of Ingland, for heiche Treffoune aganis
his Ma'>', in counterfeitting the Kingis writt, and fending tha famin Letteris of Recommendationis to
the Peap, by' his Ma"'*^ knawledge. The quhilk being confeffit be him, he was thair difgreidditt^ of
his honouris quhilk he had befoir, as ane off the Counfell of Ingland : And thaireftir, was on the v day
of December brocht to Leith ; and on the fext day convoyit to Falkland, quhair he remaynit to the
10 day of March, 1609; and thane convoyit to Sanct Androife ; quhair, being putt to ane tryall of
ane Affyfe, was convict : And thaireftir convoyit to Falkland agane ; and on the lad day of Marche
was brocht to Edinbrughe ; and on the firft day of Apryill brocht to the tolbuyth, and thair, befoir the
Juflice, condanmil as ane tratour, and his heid to be ftrukin off; hot neather the day nor pleace decernit : Quhairupone, the fecund day of Apryill, he is conwoyit bak to Falkland, in waird.

II. Sir James Balfour's contemporary Account.^

In this fame mounthe of Nouember (1608), James Elphingftone Lord Balmerinoche, principall Secretary of Eftait to his Maiefleis, for the kingdome of Scotland, being this yeire challenged, in England, anent fome Letters wrettin be him, in his Maieilies name, to Pope Clement VIII. befor the
King did atteine the Croune of England ; hot he conftffed, (fimuiatly, as was thought by theffe that
wnderftood the Courte, and hou matters then went,) to liberat the King of fuche groffnes, being exaroinnd by fome Priuey Counfellers of botlie kingdomes ; that, in anno 1598, he liad wrettin to the
Pope, in his Maiefties name, for a Cardinalls hate, to be beiloued one Chijblme, a Scotts man, then
Bifchopeof Weafone in France, brother to the Laird of Crounerigges,'' in Perthfhyre ; in which Letter

' The terms of the ' Warrand' are repeated here. * Advocates' Library, A. "l. 35. Folio. ' This is preoeded by the following notice ; ' On the aucht day of Nouember, Ihair wes sik ane earthe ^uaik, throw mony pairtis
of Scotland, as the lyk wes not sein this mony day.' * A\ithoiit, past, contrary to. ' Degraded, stripped.

' See his Ansales, vol. ii. p. 29. ' A mistake ; Cromlix is the proper name.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 581

(he hauing gottin the Kinges hand to it) he ftyles the Pope • Beatijfum Paler,' with wther fuclie
phrafes ; which ahnoft wronged the Kings Iionor and reputatione, with all the Proteftant Princes and
States in Europe.

His trayell and puniilinient (he being a Scotts Nobleman) was remitted to the Juftice of Scotland ;
and he fent home thither, Avnder a guard, from Ihyre to fhyre ; of all wiche the King adwertifes his
Priuey Counfaill of Scotland, the 21 of the mounthe of Nouember, by Spotfwood, Archbifchope of
Glafgow.

After his arrivell in Scotland, he was firft imprilTond in Edinburghe Caftle, and from thence remoued to the Touer of Falkland ; and arraind at St Andrewes, in the fubfequent yeire ; and lentenced
to loffe his head: Bot, by the Kings fecrett commands to the Earll of Dunbar, he was againe remitted
to the cuflodey of the Lord Scone, as a cloffe priffoner, to be keipt at Falkland : And from thence was
enlarged, and confyned to his auen houfles in Angus ihyre, and Balmerinoche in Fyffe Ihyre ; qulier
he deyed of a feuer, and waicknes in his (loniache, fome few mounthes after the death of his arch-enimy
and competitor, Ceicill Erie of Salilburrey' (after quhonie) if aney tyme he had furwiued, (as was
talked by them that heft knew the Kings mynd) he had beine in grater crydit with his mailer then euer.

III. Extracts from the Records of the Privy Council of Scotland.

Mar. 4, 1609. The Privy Council, ' confidering that his facred Ma"'' hes fend down his faithful!
and worthy counfellour the ErU of Dunbar to be affiflant to this Tryall, the faidis Lordis findis it verie
meete, neceflar and expedient, for the grittair auctoritie and regaird to be had to that actioun, that the
faid ErU of Dunbar be accumpancid with a fuffieient noniber of the Nobilitie and Counfale ; fFor whiche
purpois, the faidis Lordis hes nominat and appointit Dauid ErU of Craufurd,'^ &c. to be prefent with
the faid ErU of Dunbar at the faid tryall, commanding thame, in his Majefteis name, to aliill the fame
tryall, by thair prefence, counfale and advife ; and fo to do and performe that which becometh faithfull, worthy and trew counfellouris to do, in a mater fo heichlie importing his Maieftie, in his honnoure,
fame and credite.'

Mar. 17, 1609. Warrant commanding the Director of Chancery ' to omitt the faid Lord of Balmerinochis name, furth of all fuehe Inftftinentis, Letteris, writtis and grantis to be pafl and exped the
Chancellarie, heirefter, wherein his name formarlie hes bene accuftumat to be infert.'

IV. Extract from the Earl of Haddington's MS. Collections.*
Mar. 28, 1609. Letter^ from his Ma"" to the Chancellar, commanding him to feafe the Lord
Balmerinois landis, try the rentis thairof, tlie maner of his purchafe, and wrongis done be him ; to be
tryed by indifferent^ Counfallouris, that the King micht tak ordour, for fati&factioun of thole quho
war wronged.

V. Letter from Williame Creichtoun, Jefuite, [to Sm Andrew

Moray of BalvairdJ'\
Right Worshippfull S",
My humble and heartlie dewtie rememberit. I haif hard with extreame dolour, the extremeties to

' He died at Marlborough, on Sunday, May 24, 1612, of a complication of di'opsy and scur\'y. Sir E. Jiri/dges'

Memoirs of the Peers of England, p. 481 His otiier * arch-eniraey' Dunbar predeceased him. ' Vpone Monnonday,

fourt of Februar, aduerteisment came that the Erie of Dunbar wes dead, vpon Wediiisday, threttie of Jamiar, 1611.'
HadingioiVs MS. Collections^ Adv. I^ibrary. * Here follow the other names before mentioned, already marke<l

as Assessors and Assise, together with Walter I^ord Buccleuch, Walter Lord Blantyre, James Lord of Bewlie (Sir
James Hay) comptroller, and Sir John Cocl^burn of Ormiston, Justice Clerk, who had probably absented themselves.
' Preserved in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh. ^ After a careful examination of the Wiu-rants of the Privy

Council, no traces of the original Letter are to be found. '' Disinterested, impartial. ' The envelop of this

I^etter h.is unfortunately not been preserved ; but, from internal evidence, Sir Andrew Moray of Balvaird seems to have
been the person to whom it was addressed. — Theoriginid is among the Demnylne MSS. Advocates' Library, A. 2, 40.

582 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609the whilkis S" James Elphingstoun Prefident of the Seflioun of Scotland is reduced, for the Letter fent to THE Pope and Cardinalis hy Mr Eduard Drummond ; and fpeciallye, becaus the Prefident
is fo neir to you by alliance. As twiching the Prefidentis ConfefTioun to haif fent that difpatche to
Pope and Cardinallis, without his Ma'""^' confent or comniandeinent, I will not mell nie with that ;
nor any thing what it may meritt ; hot, becaus I aflifted Mr Eduard Drummond in all that negotiatioun,
thinking it to be to the Kingis weill and fervice, and communicatioun of all the Lettres ' that was broght
for that eftairis, I thoght it expedient to informe you of the veritie of all. There was no thing wroght in
that negotiatioun, which was not thoght to be for the Kingis Maiefteis fervice ; which was, to procure
the Bifchope of Wefone advancement to the degrie of Cardinal! ; to the end, that his IMa''<^ fuld haif
in the CoUedge of Cardinallis, one of his trew and faithfull fubiectis, to advance his Ma'''''* fervice, and
dafche and flop that wiiich might be to his preiudice ; and fpecially, that thay fuld not excommunicat
his Ma''*', or abfolue his fubiectis from his obedience, as there was forae at that fame time biffie to
procure it : And therefoir, was alledgit, that fuche rigorous proceidingis in other Popes dayes did not
advance, hot hinder the Catholick caufe : And therfore, Pope Gregorius XIII. was conflrained to
grant to the Catholick, to acknowledge and obey the laft Q. of England, in all thingis ; which was expreflie againft the Catholick faith.* It was not gevin to vnderitand to the Pope, that the Kingis Maieftie was in any difpofitioun ather to come or favour the Catholick Religioun ; for the contrair was
conteyned expredie in the Letteris j^ faying, that albeit he remaned conftant in that Religioun in the
which he was nourifched, frome his cradle, yit he wald not be enimye and perfecutour of the Catholikes, fo long as thay fuld remaine faithfull and obedient fubiectis to him ; as indeed his ^laieftie had
evir done, vntil the horrible and barbarous Confpiracie of the Goone-pouder : ffor in Scotland, tothame
of our ordour,* who ar holden the moft odious, and perfecuted to the deathe be the Minifteris, he did
nevir vie more rigour nor to banifche tliame out of the countrey, and conflraine there parentis^ to obleis
thame, vnder paines, to caufe thame depairt. The calumneis of fum paffioned writteris, and fpeciallie
of him who anfueris the Apologie or traite, intituled ' Trino nodo triplex cuxeus;' who improperatis to the Kingis Maieflie to wald haif deceaved the Pope, to whome he gave hoip to favour or imbrace the Catholick Religioun, is onlie to difgrace, in what he may, the Kingis Maiefteis felf, and fome
Catholicks whome thay haitt without iuft caus, without veritie or charitie ; which fuld not be imputed
to all Catholickes, nor to the Cardinall Balarmine, who is not autliour of that booke. Amongfl
the Catholickes ar many honeft men, afl'ectioned to his Majellie fervice, in all things thay may with
goode confcience, and faiftie of the Catholik Religioun ; amongft whome I wald not be the hindmefl,
as I haif ever bene and falbe to my lyveis end. And heir I leif to truble your worfliip, with my humble
and heartly recomniendatiounis redoublet to your goode affectiounis, as to my L. Vicount of Fentoun ^
vour Vncle.'' From Auignox, the 27 of Januarye, 1609.

Your worfliip moll humble and afl'ectioned coufeing and fervant,
(No address) Williame Creichtoux.

VI. Letter Jrom Sir Thomas Hammiltoun to King James VI.*

Please your most Sacred Maiestie,
Haveing reflaued from the Earle of Dumbar, the Lord Balmerinoes ConfefTioun of his moll
heynous ofiFenfis, committed aganis your Maieftie, togidder with your Maiefties two Letters, contean1 The words ' and instructions,' .iddcd on the margin, in another hand, and deleted. * Inserted on the margin,

in the same hand, ' and sick service, who evir had done it, ather with or without C'ommissioun, apperis to mereit rather thanks and rcvaird nor hard traitment.' ^ On the margin, in another hand, afterwards deleted, ' and instructionis.' ' Jesuites and Seminary Priests. ' Blood relations. * The celebrated Sir Thomas Erskine of Gogar, who killed Alexander Ruthven, at Perth, .Aug. o, J600. He was created Eail of Kellie, Mar. 12,
1619. ' This seems to prove the Letter to he addressed to Sir Andrew Moray of Balvaird. See his ingenious
Letter to the King, Jul. 13, 1C08, No. XIX, (14.) of the Collections relative to Cowrie's Conspiracy, vol, ii. p.
.323. ' From the Original, preserved in the Denmylne MS. CoBections, Adv. Lib. A, 2. 40.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 58.3

ing fum mateiiall poyntis of his cairiage, in the practeifing of that mifcheivous pourpofe, not conteaned
in his Confeffioun ; I have, according to the jufte and wyfe direction of your priuie Letters, formed
his Ditlay, heirwith to be prefented to your Maieftie, to the effect that thefe treafonabill crymes, which
offered fo dangerous woundis to your immaculat fame and royall honour, being confidered be your
moft excellent jugement ; that which is imperfyte, in my frame of this Dittay, may be amended by
your Maiefties molt judicious cenfure.' I have alfo relTaued from my Lord of Dumbar the refolutions
of the graue and learned Ciuilians prefented to your Maieftie, concerning this fame fact, whairin thay
have exprefled thair fufficiencie in thair proflFeflion and faithfull affection to your Maiefties feruice ; bot,
being vnacquented with the grounds and courle of oure Criminall Juftice heir, have leaned to Aain
warrands, whairvpon I dar not weill relye : Becaus, I forefie that I am to perfew ane man, more ikilfull to pleade his lyfe nor any that wes broght to the bar in this your Maiefties kingdome tiiir hundreth
yeiris bygane ; and who may exfpect fuche aftiftance of the beft of oure lawers, as many vthers offendours, moft guiltie of hieft crymes, hes fund heirtofore : And albeit I think that the fentence gevin
aganis him be his owne confcience, and vndeniabill treuth of the cryme, confirmed be his ovvne Con.
feftion, fould tak from him all defyre of contradiction, and hope of any gude by his defence ; yet, knowing it to be my dewtie to be reddie for the worft which he or his affiftants can abill to intend, I fall
be cairefull fo to prepaire all thinges neceflar for that perfiite, as your Maieftie, with Goddis grace,
fall have full fatisfaction, by the performance of your royall commandement, in the verie forme and
fubftance whilk your Maieftie hes prefcryved. Gif the Judges do that dewtie, whilk in reafon and
juftice thay owe, and I dowt not will faithfullie performs to your Maieftie, fpeciallie, feing my Lord
of Dumbare'' is to be ane ey-wilnes of thair proceidingis, whois caire lies bene fuche in directing the
firft pairt of the proces, which lyes to mychairge, and exacting accompt of my diligence thairin ; that,
vfing the lyke with the reft of the Memberis of this Judgement, as I am alfured he will, thay will nether get leifour nor leive to neglect or ouerfie thair dewtie. In my chairge, his inftance fall be bot
fpurris to ane faft running hors ; yet can I not deny that his jugement hes availied to remark and reforme dyuers tilings to the better. So wifling to your Maieftie, in tiiis and all vther your Royall diffenis,^ moft honorabill and happie fucces ; and to myfelf, your Maiefties gi-acious acceptance of the
weak indeuours of ane moft faithfull hairt and affection in your Maiefties feruice, I commit your moft
excellent Maieftie to Goddis l>liffed protection. Ed'', this 9. Feb 1609.

Your moft facred Maiefties moft faithfull and moft bundin fervant,

S. Th. Hamilton.

VII. Narrative drawn up hy Lord Balmerinoch, containing an Hljiurical Account of the various Proceedings adopted againjl him, in England
and Scotland.

[Since the preceding sheets were sent to press, the Editor, being anxious to investigate the tnith
or falsehood of Lord Balmerino's Treason, has pursued as extensive an enquiry as his present limited
opportunities permit. It must be satisfactory to all who take an interest in such investigations to learn,
that the indefatigable Wodrow has preserved a Transcript of a Memoir, bearing every mark of authenticity, and which is said by Calderwood, in his MS. Cimrcii History, to have been prepared by this
unfortunate Nobleman, during his exile. Although somewhat prolix and verbose, which is common to

' This amended draught has been preserved by Sir James Balfour, and rcintains very minute anil laboured correotions. The King was very parti.-il to such employment, and the crafty Hamilton ministers here to the King's vanity, in
no measured terms. * The reader has already seen how ' earnestly' this Nobleman * travelled' with the Judges, &c.

in the matter of Logan of Kcstalrig's forfeiture ; and the corrupt modes which he scrupled not to adopt, to gain his
ends. .See this Coll., vol. it, p. 292, for another extraordinary Letter of Sir Thomas Hamilton to the Kinf and
also Robertson's Hist. ii. 223. Hailes' Memorials of James I. p. 16, &c. " It seems doubtful whether this is

a lapstis for * busines j' or whether the word * designs' is meant.

584 CRIMINAL TPxIALS. A.D. I609.

all similar compositions at that period, it must for ever set this point of History at rest ; and not being
written for the purpose of puhlication, hut professedly for the information of his personal friends, and of
the private perusal and instruction of his son, and for his warning, in the event of his entering into
public life, it is so much the more impressive, and carries with it an air of candour and truth, ' nought
extenuating,' nor ' setting down aught in malice.' — During the search which it was necessary to make
among contemporary MSS, the following remarkable passage, which occurs in Anderson's History of
Scotland, seemed to be worthy of preservation. ' His freindis and intereill fervantis maid the word
go ahrod, that the faid Prefedent not only had a Connniflion for wrytting of the faid Letteris to the
Paip and Cardinallis, hot alfo that he hade a RemilFion for the famyn, if ever tliei fould be querrelled ; as in fum miffur appeared ; for lie was no wayis ffiayed for the faid Sentence, be reafon, efter

his returning to ward, his imprifonment was enlarged flill mair and mair, till in 'he tuik feiknes and died. Bot for feir of bakcalling and renewing the faidis proces, he was quyetlie buried, no
man knawing quhar, except a few only of his awiu freindis. And within 3 or 4 yeiris efter, his haill
landis and honours was relloired bak again to his fon and children.'^]

This Letter' and Inflructions, written be Sir Edward Drummomid, with the reft of that Difpatche,
I prefented unto his Ma. Ihowing it was Drummounds difpatche for the Bifliope of Vizone. So all
the Letters were figned, without afking to whom they were directed, clofed and fent to the Archbifliope of Glafgow,'' to be directed at his difcretione. So Sir Edward receaved them not in Scotland,
but they were fent in Monfieur Bethun's packet, Icaft otherwife they might be intercepted. It may
be eafilie confidered how neceflar this fervice was for his Ma. as matters then went, there being fmall
hope of Englands favour ; Effex being then in his triumphe, and Valentine Thomas his procefle at the
very tyme in deducing, in his Ma' prejudice, to difable him in his clame to the Crovvne ; and what
refpect could I haue had then, other then my faithfull duty. For it proving, as it did, verie profitable
for his Ma. in fuch fort, as by directione from Rome, all the Catholicks in England prepared themfelves in armes and horfes, for maintenance of his Ma* title ; and, at Rome, the Spanifhe courfes were
crolled. It was reputed by them that truelie loved his Ma. the beft fervice that euer was done hime
in that kind; Likeas Sir James Lindfay's imployment followed after it, and fpeciall dealing with diverfe Catholicks of England, wherewith the greateft guiders of England being terrified, and Eflex
taken out of the way, the Earle of Salilburrie, then Sir Robert Cecill, by Lord Harie Howard, now
Earle of Souih-Hamptoune, fought means to his Ma., by Catholicks. They fought means to his Ma.,
and they were then the fared fort his (Ma.) had there : Likeas his Ma., in his firll Spceche in the Parliament-hous, extant in print, and a printed Proclamationo under his Ma'' hand, did not difemble how
farre, as a Prince, he was bound to Pope Clement, what great loyaltie and affectione he had found in
Catholicks, and ever, whilP that deteflable Powder Treafone (abominable in God's fight, and deteftable
and damnable to be remembered and recorded, by all meniorie,) his Ma. continued not farre from that
fame minde, wliill the policie of fonie curious heads, fearing led his Ma. lliould have looked more narrowlie in his owne eftate and their actions, and knowing his inclinatione to be tickle in thefe points of
Religione, fett him on work to that Triplici nodo triplex cuneiis, which procured that anfwere of Tortus, Bellarmin's Cliaplaine, unknowne, as I am crediblie informed, to Bellarmine, and not unknowne
to lome Ilats-men ther, to exafperate his Ma. not onlie againll the Court of Rome, and his owne fubjeets in England, but to vouchfafe his charitie upon me, againft whom their malice, although not deferved for any particular of my owne, is weill enewgh knowne. Their malicious intention, thus founded,
was Weill fecounded by the malice of my enemies at home, the infolencie of fome of the Biihops, and
ambition of ane, of whome I Jiad deferved better. The Plott is fecretlie contrived, that I fhall be
brought to a Confeflfione of it — his Ma. to difallow it — and, confequentlie, my undoeing.

' He is siiiil, liy Caldenrood, to have died in the end of May, 1612. See No. VIII. of this Appendix. ' Anderson's MS. Hht. (f Scot., Adv. Library, Fol. 652. ' A copy of the Letter to the Pope precedes this Memorial.
' James Beaton, second Archbishop. ' Until.

42 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 585

There came never anie thing of this to my knowledge, before I came to S' Albans, in the beginning
of October 1608, the verie night before I come to Roiftoun to his Ma. The advertifment that I had,
was, that I had procured Letters, unknown to his Ma., under his hand, to the Pope, whereby he had
promifed, that how foone he Uiould come to the Crowne of England, he ihould either declare him felf
Catholick, or at leaft he Ihould grant a toleratione to all Catholicks within his dominions ; and had
procured to make the Byiliope of Vaizon a Cardinall. The lafl part, becaufe it was true, I thouglit
it not to be denied ; but the firft, which was alluterlie falfe, I refufed.' At my coming to Koylloune
Sir Alexander Hay, (in whom I repofed as great truft as in my felf,) having formerlie perfwaded me,
mod traterouflie, that his courfe of accepting to be fecound Secretarie,'' which at firft 1 didiked, was a
plott of my enemies, to his prejudice and mine both ; and fo, had perfwaded my moft alfured and
worthie friend Mr Thomas Murrey of his h(ighnefs) affection to me, which I did over credulouflie
beleave. Coming to me, I compleaned that I was wronged, in fo much that I had not gotten more
tymous wairning of their calumneis and his Ma^ difcontentment againft me ; — excufed himfelf, that he
had fent me a packet, but that (I) had miffed it be the way; — that it was a mater that I needed not
to care fore, feing his Ma. defired no more, but to know the truth ; and would not be difcontent, if, in
the point of his Religione, he were not ingadged. So, I confefled the fimple truthe. He, in the meane
while, had his dailing, unknowne to me, with the Bifliop of Glafgow, who incenfed his Ma. that, fo
long as I was officer,^ their ftate could not be raifed i* And having affayed manie other means to difgrace me, could effectuat nothing. Having the authoritie of the greateft there to concurre to my overthrow, they did Co difpofe his Ma. as, without anie fliew of difcontentment, he alkes of me Sir Edward Drummonnd's Difpatche, and fpecialie, of that Letter to the Pope. I could not denie that which
was Weill knowne to his Ma. ; and that which was contained in Tortus book, was not farre different
from the truthe ; for the words are, (fpeakeing of his Ma.,) Literas humanitatis et officii plenasfcripJit ad PoNTiFiCEM Maximum, quibus prceter catera rogavit, ut exfuisfubditis aliquis Cardinalis S.
JR. E. crearetur^ But his Ma" promifles of conformitie or to alteratione of Religione aie not afcribed
to my Letter, but to the promiffes of fume of the Minifters. Nixt, his Ma. alked, ' if ever he had
confented to call the Pope his Father f I granted that he ftill refufed — and in that, I had prefumed,
for the good of his Ma. fervice, after his Ma. had fubfcribed the Letter, to caufe Sir Edward adile the
Pope's ordinai'ie ftiles ; wherin, if his Ma. conceaved anie offence, I was to crave his Ma. pardone to
be difavowed in that, and to cleare his Ma. fo farre as anie would tuiche him therewith.

This paft in Royftoun, on Sunday, in the morning, before Sermon, betuixt his Ma. and me, ])rivatlie, in his withdrawing chamber. Sir Alexander Hay, who had ftill his practifes with the Bilhop of
Glafgow, having learned of his Ma. how farre I confeffed, advifed liis Ma. tliat my Confeflione ihould be
retreated,^ in the hearing of fome others : And, to the end that I fliould not fufpect their intentione, at my

* Denied. * It is difficult to get at tlie truth of State intrigues, and to detect the real causes of such a change

as that referred to by Lord Balmerinoch in liis interesting Narrative, even at the time of tlieir occurrence. His
I^ordship is, no doubt, very particular in his details, which are likely to be correct; for his Narrative was evidently
intended for the perusal of those who must have had the best opportunities of knowing the facts. In a valuable
Collection of State Papers, preserved in the General Register-House, Edinburgh, transcribed by Sir Thomas Hamilton (Earl of Haddington,) there occurs a transcript of the original Warrant of Sir Alexander Hay's appointment
to the Office of Joint-Secretaryship, in the following terms.

' Heaveing choissing Mii Alexr Hay to I)e on of our Privie Counsall of that oin* kiugdome ; and thinking it
no way fitt that he sould still attend ws heir at Court, for Scoittis dispatchis, as depot tooiiy wtber, V\ e have tb.iirfoirjoyned him in office with the Lord of Bahnrrinocli, our Principall Secretar, (tjuho being eiiforceiil, be bis greitt
imploymentis in our service, to continew thair, for the moist pairt,) We intend to have the said Mr Alexr ane attendar
and resedentiare heir at Court, for the better dispatche of the effaires of that Kingdome. And our plesour is, that
yow caus tak his oath, as Secretarie wnto ws. Quhairanent thir presentis salbe your Warran<l.' [James K.]

To our i"j'cht trustie and weilbeloveit cusine and counsaltour, the Eril of Dumfermliiig,
our Chancellar of that our Kingdome of Scotland.

' Secretary of State. ' Episco|>acy could not be restored. Balmerinoch barl obtained large grants of Church

Lands, &c., and it was, therefore, his interest to jireserve matters in their present state, for fear of a resnmptii f

these livings taking place, which would thus strip him of a large portion of his income. '•" Ueliearsed, reiterated ; not retracted, which at first siglit it would seem to import.

VOL. II. 4 E

586 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

fecound Examinatione was prefeut but Sir Alexander Hay, whom yett (as God judge me, I truftoil
as my lelf.) There I confelFed, before his Ma., as befor, that liis Ma. ever dilaffented to yeild the
Pope any ftiles ; and, at the iiibl'cribing of the Pope's Letter, I acquainted liim no farther, but (in)
general!, that it was to Sir Edward Drummond's Dilpatch, anent the Bilhop of Vaizon. That I caufed
Sir Edward add the ftiles ; and for that, upon my knees, molt humblie I craved liis Ma. pardone.
Then, be his Ma. countenance, and Ibnie rounding' tliat pall betuixt his Ma. and Sir Alexander Hay,
I beganne to be in fome fufpicione. The King commanded me that I should repair to Londone, —
remaine there whill I knew his plealure — and in no cafe to repaire to the Queen's Court. Immediatlie, Sir Alexander Hay, the Biihops of Glafgow and Galloway conferred with the King, anent my
Confeflione ; and were dilcontent that I had not prefentlie lett it doun, under my hand ; yett, fearing
leaft I ihould have fufpected their policie, they would not then urge me anie farther.

The nixt Mounday I raid to London. Sir Alexander Hay and the laid Biihops raid before me ; and
Sir Alexander went to my Lord Salilburie, (and) acquainted iiim with all was part. Then begane I to
fufpect the courle, and to repent me I had gone fo farre. I lent to the Earle of Salitburrie, defired
I might have an aflignatioun to come to him ; who did returne anfiver, that he was advertifed from
his Ma. that I was commanded to keep my houl'e; and fo it was not fitt I ihould come to him. Thus
did I miltake his Ma-^ command ; for in that (I) was forbidden to repair to the Queen, then lying at
Hamptoun Court, I thought all other places, within Londone, were free to me. Likeas, I went to
Lambeth, to the Archbiiliop of Canterburie,' and to Whitlhall, to the Earle of Dumbar ; the faid Sir
Alexander allwife in companye with me, never giving me notice of his Ma^ pleafure to the contrarie,
wliilP I had it of the Earl of Salifburie ; of purpofe, as I have fince found it, to exafperat his Ma., as
a contempt not ordinarie there, where his Ma=* commands are verie ceremoniouflie oblerved. But, as
God Ihall judge me, I never heard anie other command from (liis) i\Li. but to attend his pleafwe at
Londone, and not to repaire to her iNL-i* Court.

Wedinl'day thereafter, Sir Alexander Hay, having repaired to his Ma. comes with a Note, under his
Ma. hand, commanding me that I fliould felt doune in writte the pafling of that Letter to the Pope,
and the circumftances, fo far as I could remember. Beginning then to apprehend the buflinelfe, and
having gotten warning of bis Ma* difpleafure, and tiie advantage my enemies prefumed they had
gotten, I become more fpairing; and by my Letters to his Ma. defired that I might be excufed that
I could not felt down the partictdars of that, under my hand, after fo long a tyme ; except that either
I were in Scotland, where my p.npers might bring me to remembrance, or that I had mett with Sir
Edward Drummound ; begging his Ma^ patience, whilP I might fend for him; which I oflered to
doe with convenient fpecd, who fliould bring with him the jult copy of that Negotiatione, and Ihould
give his ^la. and all the world latisfactione of the truthe. But that was not intended; but contrarie
to the truth, to big upon me an unjuft imputatione ; wherof the production of the Letter would have
made me cleare.

The Copie of the Letter fent to his Ma. t/w 12 of October (1608.)
Pleafe your moft facred Ma.

In thefe particulare points your INIa. did demand of me, fo farre as I can remember, I anfuer for your
Ma' fatisfactione ; That your ]\Ia. (of ray knowledge) did never command or direct any Letter to be
writtin to the Pope, neither was I prefent when Sir Edward Drummound moved your Ma. for any
fuch Letter. That your Ma. did never ftyle your Mf ' filius' in any Letter, but to your Motherin-law, the Queene of Denmark. That your Ma. did never writt ' father' or ' holinesse' to any.
As to the Letter written be your Ma. to Pope Cle.mext, although I doe remember that there was
fome fuch Letter, conteaning nothing but a Recommendatione of the Bilhop of Vaizone, I humblie
crave your Ma^ pardone, if I can make no declaratione how it was part, whill Sir Edward Dnimmound, who was the author, bearer and procurer thereof, be firft examined ; whom I am about pre-

' Private communings; whispering. * Archbishop Bancroft, formerly Bishop of London. ' Until.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 587

fentlie, with your Ma. permiflione, to fend for, by whom the whole circumftances of that mater ihall
be clearlie detected. For I proteft before God, for the prefent, I cannot perfitelie remember how that
mater was pad ; moft humblie craveing your mod facred Ma. (fuice I am moft willing, for your ^la"
obedience, to clear your Ma. of that before all the world) that in rememberance of my loving and affectionate humble fervice, yee will be pleafed to accord me the tyme and meanes, wherby the veritie of
my part in all that mater may be manifelled ; which as I doe expect, out of your Ma. princely accuftomed clemencie, fo ihall I ever pray, &c.

CopiE of the Letter fo his Ma. tJie 15 of October 1608.
I DOE remember that I moved his Ma. divers times to have written to the Pope, both to have
taken notice of his kindnelTe, and to have recommended the Bilhop of Vaizon ; and that his Ma. did
refiife, onlie for that he could not, with fafe confcience, yeild him thefe titles of < Father' and ' Holinefl'e,' which he' did allow: But if otherwife the Pope would have accepted his Ma. Letters, with
the Titles of other Temporall Princes, he would have written him. As to the circumflances of
pafTing of that Letter, I proteft before God I cannot call them to my memorie ; but by conference
with Sir Edward Drummound, and with fuch as ferved me at that tyme, and with fuch other adminicles as I will find in my own papers, I hope I fliall give his Ma. fatisfactione.

His Ma. not content to admit my delayes, remembring the circumftance of that negotiatione better
then I, he fetteth down a number of interrogationes, under his hand, with a Letter to the Counfell of
England, commanding them to examine me. Being brought before them, I at firfl, declined their
Judgement, till they declared that they would not take upon them to judge me ; but, following his Ma.
comroandement, to examine me and remitt me to my ordinarie Judge. In end, to all the particulars,
I anfwered, in fuch fort, that they could not mend therofelves, nor bring me in compaffe of any Law.
The Earle of Dumbar, the Lord Skoone and Sir Alexander Hay prefent. — Thereafter his Ma., being
difcontented of my unwillingneffe to cleare him, and to burthene my felf with the fault, yea to tak
upon me fome points (which his Ma. affirmed he remembered,) which, in truth, I could not call to my
memorie, the Earle of Dumbar directed the Lord Burlie^ to me, a verie favourable and faft Nobleman,
and who had, immediatlie before the Earle of Durabar's parting out of Scotland, renewed a friendihip
between him and me, which was the greateft caufe of my repair to Court, that it might be confirmed
there, before the Queen's Ma. ; and his Ma. fatisfied, by the Earles meanes, of whatfoever hard opinion he had conceaved either againft the Chanceler or me, by fuggeftione of the Bifliops. His credit
from the Earle of Dumbar was to advife me, for my own good, flnce it was confefied by me that fuch
a Letter was purchafed, and that his Ma. had denied it, that rather, ere the imputatione Ihould lye
upon his Ma., I Ihould take it upon me. When I obtended the perrell of my eftate, his Ma* difcontentment and their malice, the Lord Burlie gave in this afliirance, that my life, eftate, nor Ropar's
Reverfione Ihould be in no dangere. As to my Offices, to leave them to his Ma** difpofitione ; whither he would take them from me or not. I finding manie enemies there, and being ftraitiie keeped,
I enter, be the Lord Burleyes meanes, who from the beginning has ever keeped ane honeft part to me, in
a more particular freindihip with the Earle of Dumbar. And, becaufe the Lord Skoon and Sir William
Hart had diverfe tymes travelled with me to have maried one of the Earle of Dumbar's fifter-daughters, I was content to give him my eldeft fone to be difpofed upon in marriage at his pleafure, to give
the Palace and Park of Hallyroodhoufe ; and if he defired Reftalrige, he ihould have it for the price I
bought it. Thefe conditions, as the Lord Burlie told me, pleafed him, and fo he would take upon
him my protectione, if I would follow his advice, which I was content to do, knowing what power he
had, and how eafie it was to him to calme all ftormes ; allwife defiring him to carie his ail'cctione to
me fo fecreitlie, as the Biihops, Sir Alexander Hay, the Earle of Wigtoun and others my fniall friends,

' Viz. tlie Pope. ' Sir Micliael Balfour, created Lord Balfour of Burleigh, in Kiuross-sliire, Aug. 7, KiUG.

588 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

ihould know nothing of it. He was fo diligentlie allwife attended be fome of thefe, that after he had
appointed me diverfe meetings, he could never meete with me ; alwife, he affured me what ever the
Lord Burlie (liould fay, in his name, I might trull it, and he would performe the fame. And hearupon I defire my friends to enquire the Lord Burlie, if this affurance was not given be the Earle of
Dumbar, that my life, my eflate, and Ropar's lleverfione Ihould be fure ; as for my Offices, they
fliould reft in his Ma. difpofitione ; and it might be I would not want them.

The Earle of Dumbar thus entered in conditions with me ; and the Lord Burlie putt in truft, for
hime and me both, for all conditions on both parts. The firft directione was, that I Ihould writte a
Letter to him, defiring he fliould conveene the Earles of Salifburie, Northaraptone and Suffolk, befor
wliora I fliould grant all the King's Articles ; and thereafter writte a Letter to his Ma. to the fame
effect. He willed me to ufe thefe three Noblemen to ftrengthen his credit, that they being engadged
to be my friends, he might the more eafilie worke that he had undertaken ; and all the faid Noblemen
promifed upon their honours that they {liould be my friends, and would joyne with the Earle of Dumbar to fatisfie his Ma. All which I performed. Then was I delivered in the Earle of Dumbar's
keeping, who promifed that I fliould allwife be his priiToner ; and at my returning to Scotland I
ihould he wairded in the Caftle of St Andrewes. By this advife, I wrotte a becomniing in his Ma.
will, which tlie Lord Burlie gave him. He returned me an aufwer with him, that his Ma. was weill
pleafed with it, and all would go weill ; onlie, I was defired to adde this, that I would renew the fame
judiciallie, when I fhould be required ; which I did.

The CopiE of the Letter to his Ma. 24 of October 1608.
Moft gracious and dread foverane,
It is over great prefuraptione to offer to your moft princelie eyes thefe lynes, from the hands
which have fo highlie offended your moft facred Ma. ; but, becaufe it was continuance in my offence to labour to obfcure the cleare foule of your Ma* unfpotted integritie, and that the imputatione of my niifdemanour, which I juftlie deferve, may lye upon my felf, and your Ma' innocencie
cleared to all the world, I have truelie fett doun Iiere, how that Letter to Pope Clement, wherewith
your Ma. is falilie taxed, was, without your knowledge, paft your hand, amongft other Letters which
I did prefent to your Ma., by the abufe of your Ma'' truft, whereof I was not worthie. In the year
of God 1598, at the earneft fute of the late Archbilhope of Glafgow,' your Ma' Ambaffader then refident in Fiance, the Bifhop of Vaizon and divers others your Ma" weill affectioned friends and fervants, both in Italie and Fiance, who were verie earneft to have had fome correfpondents betuixt
your Ma. and the Pope. Sir Edward Drummond being directed by them in Scotland, to follow
that buflinefle, I prefumed divers tymes to move your Ma. therein ; and did offer to your Ma.
the frame of fuch a Letter as I would have figncd be your jNIa. to the Pope ; wliereunto I never
found your Ma. fo unwilling as your Ma. did altogether refufe to writte ; denying ever to writte
anie Letter, with thefe ftiles which the Pope did afTume to himfelf. But I being in my too great
zeale, and affured hops were given me by greater ftatefinen then my felf, of the benefite would
come to the ftrengtliing your Ma** title,^ by the Pope's friendfliip, overcome with weaknefle, and
prefuming that the fuccefle of my true intentione (hould efface the meniorie of my offence, I caufed
draw up a Letter, with the faid Sir Edward's hand, as from your Ma. to the Pope ; but verie fpairinglie, onlie containing thanks for his kindneffe and bygaine favour, with Kecomnicndatioiie of the Billiope
of Vaizone, your Ma* native borne fubject, to be made a Cardinall. To the which Letter, among
others of that kind, written to the Duke of Florence, Sawoy and fome Cardinalls, in favom-s of the faid
Bidiope, (all prei'ented be me unto your Ma. one day in the morning, when your Ma. was going a
hunting, in liafte,) your Ma. did fett your hand : For your Ma., finding the Letters all in Latine, and
the Bifliope of Vaizon's Recommendatione the fubject, and having formerlie refufed to writte to the

' James Beaton, the second archbishop of that uame. ' To the Throne of England.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. .589

Pope, did nothing fufpect that anie fuch thing flionld have been offered to your hand. And after
your Ma. had figned it, Sir Edward Drummond did adde the Pope's ftiles, both in the beginning, and
above your Ma"^ fubfcriptione in the end of it. Some Letters, two or three as I remember, figned be
your Ma. to fome Cardinalls, containing nothing but thankes and recommendatione of the laid Bilhope,
were given to the faid Sir Edward clofle, cafchetted, to be directed, by the BKhop of Glafgow's advice,
to fuch of them as were, in his judgement, befl affected to your Ma. : And I did hear, after, two of them
were given to Aldobrandine and Bellarmine, and the thrid to Cajetan, who was Protectour of the Scottith
Natione. Here was my firft fault of prepoflerous zeale, weakneffe, and prefiimptione. My nixt was
fear of your Ma'* difpleafur ; becaus the late Queen's Ambaffader having expodulated for your Ma'
dealling with the Pope, and I being aflced therof, be your Ma., I did pertinaciouflie denie that there
was anie fuch mater ; and for your Ma** belter fatisfactione, I moved Sir Edward Drummond to
returne into Scotland ; who, being examined, did at my defire jullifie my denial!, and that he had
earied no Letter for the Pope. I preffed him, verie inftantlie, at his returning, to labour to reteir the
faid Letter, and to deilroy it, fearing leaft the knowledge of it hereafter might breed your Ma* di(-
contentment, as it hes done at this tyme, to my exceeding great forrow. And becaufe my atteflatione in tliis kind, which I protell, before God and his angels, is true, and yett will not be a fufficient
liberatione of your princelie honour, which is dearer to me then my life, I am not hearby to beg anie
pardone, but that your Ma. in your moll rare and princelie wifdome, will take Aich courfe, but' any
refpect unto me, whereby your Ma* innoeencie and my offence may be made knowne to the world.
And Co, in all humilitie, attending to fuffer what your Ma. will impofe, and to obey whatlbever your
Ma. will be pleafed to command, I pray God grant your facred Ma., according to the finceritie of
your heart, a true and juft conltructione of all your actions befor all the world, and, after a long and
nioft profperous raigne, eternall felicity.

CopiE of my becomming in Will, 3 November, 1608.
Pleafe your moft gratious and facred Ma.,
As at the verie firll I did ingenoufly Confefl'e my offence, and have particularly fett doun under my
hand the whole circumftances of it, and likewife anfwering to the feverall interrogatours whereupon I
was examined, I have in everie point declared the veritie ; fo, ftill continuing moft defirous that your
Ma« honour ihould be free of any fuch imputatione, and my offence without anie longer delay knowne
to the world, doe, by thefe prefents, in all humilitie, freelie and ablblutlie fubmitt my felf, and become
in your Ma* Will ; that fince onlie againft your Ma. my offence is committed, to your Ma. will irrogat
unto me fuch punifliment as in your true juftice and princelie clemencie I have deCerved. And this
my becomming in Will, I will renew, or reiterat in Judgment, or without, fo oft as 1 Ihall be required.
After this, the Earle of Salifburrie caufes be drawen up, upon his Ma» Interrogatours and my Anfweres, a forme of a Depofitione, making everie particular deid to be Treafone— that I had traterouflie
confpired with Sir Edward Drummond to deceave the King, and fteall his hand to a Letter to the
Pope— that I had traterouflie caufed put the cafchett to it— and that I had commanded Sir Edward,
above the King's fubfcriptione, to wiitte ' Sunctitatis v. ohfequentijjimus filius,' fo like the King's hand
as could be— and fo, I had made him falllie to counterfoote the King's hand. This Depofitione being
offered to me to fubfciibe, I refufed (at) the firft ; becaufe it made that to be Treafone and treafonable
which was not ; fince the Letter contained nothing but meere complements, and a recommendatione of a
Scotirtiman to be a Cardinall ; and that ane Officers truft was greater then to procure a common recommendatione ; and the putting of the Cafchett to it was left's treafonable ; feing by that Letter his Ma*
honour, nor ftate, nor Religione, was not harmed, nor no damages nor inconvenience liad followed upon
it. The laft part was directly crimen falfi ; and as I had not deponed it, fo it was not true. Att this
meeting were prefent the Chanceller of England, Salilburie, Noi tbamptoun, Suffolke,' my lord Duke
' Without. » Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk. He was Lord Chamberlain at the time of the Gun590 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

of Lennox, the Earle of Dumbar, Sir Thomas Smith Clerk of the Counfell, and Sir Alexander Hay. —
Mv anfn-ere to the laft, the Chanceller granted to be true, and that it was but a mirtaking; and fo it
was mended, and that article deleated, in fo farre as it concerned the counterfooting of the King's
liand. As to the firft, my Lord of Salifburie anfwered me, that wliat they had fett doun was onlie to
give his Ma. fafisfactione ; and it was nothing to me, fincc his Ma. had accepted me in Will, was to
deale gratiouflie with me, and not to proceed judiciallie with me any more. Whatever might ploafe his
Ma., and in his Ma* opinion give the world fatisfactione, and clear his honour, fiuce it was not to
harme me, it was un6tt that I Ihould refufe his Ma. to give his Ma. what fliould pleale him, feing it
was not to prejudge me. And upon this alliirance, and the Earle of Durabar's former Declaratione,
that the King had weill accepted of my becomming in Will, and that my not fubleribing of this Depoiitione hindred the progreffe of the King's anfwere to Tortus booke, wherof this Depofitione behoved
to be a part, I fett ray hand to it, in prefence of the Noblemen and others above written, who, I am
lure, upon their honour, will not denie it. And hearnpon 1 defire my friends to inquire the Duke of
Lennox, the Earle of Dumbar, and Sir Alexander Hay.

Last, the King's Ma. having concluded to returne me in Scotland, becaufe all this matter was carried with a great lliow (as was faid to his Ma.) to cleare his honour, but in effect to difgrace me, and
make me odious, I was brought before the Counfell. (Not only) all the Noblemen, both Englilh and
Scotilh, (and) all the Judges were brought, but all the Court, fo many as the Counfell-Chamber could
contane. Tlie Chanceller declared the caufe of that folemne meettinge, made my Depofitione to be read,
and with a long harrange and many reafons did aggravat my offence, to his Ma* great praife ; and in the
end, remitted the matter to Scotland, to be judged there. Nixt, the Earle of Salijburie liad as long a difcourfe, all to difgrace me, to flatter the King, and to ihew his eloquence. Thridlie, tlie Earle of Northamptoune, to teftifie his zeale as a witnefle, how alien his Ma. was from anie dealing with the Pope, thefe
18 years be had keeped correfpondence with his Ma., damned all my proceedings. I had waiming the
night before that I was to be fo ufed, as the Lord Burlie,^ who had beene mediator betwixt the Earle
of Dumbar and me, being departed to Scotland, I was forced to fend for James Bailzie, a verie truftie
young man, to whom I am infinitlie bound, and who (nixt my Lord Burlie) was verie privy betuixt
the Eaile of Dumbar and me ; whom I delircd to ihew his lordfhip, that I underflood that I was to be
brought before the Counfell the nixt day, and that they were to raill upon me. That he ihould not
think it evill if I Ihould fay, for my owne defence, that which I would make good ; that there was no
point which they were to lay againll me, which I would not anfwere. He returned James Bailzie to
me, with this anfwere, earneftlie praying me, fince that was the lall that in that earand was to be done,
not for my preiudice, but for his Ma* honour and fatisfactione, that I would anfwere nothing ; but in
all humilitie acknowledge my offence, cleare and liberate his 3Ia., renew my becomming in Will, and
defire my Lords of Counfell to become intercelfors, that his ^la. would end the procefle, be his Declaratione. This would be moll acceptable to his Ma., who would be behind a peece of tapellrie,^ and
if I played my owne part right, his Ma. would be bell plealed. Which I alfo obeyed.

The Chanceller, in Counfell, produced his Ma* Warrant, declaring his JIa* Will, that I Ihould be
no more one of that bodie. Which Declaratione of his Ma* Will, having no Convictione nor Warrant,
but my becomming in Will was ane acceptatione of it ; fo, having declared a part of his Will, by no law,
therafter, he might have proceeded judiciallie with me. Lnmediatlie after the Counfell, the Earle of
Dumbar fent James Bailzie to me, to give me thanks ; and to Ihew how weill his Ma. was pleafed ;

powder Plot, and was, with Lord IMounteagle, the chief means of detecting that remarkalile Conspiracy. See Cartt,
III. 757 — Wbiwood's Mcmoriak, II. 171. SutT.ilk was turned out of his office, in 1618, for embezzlement, &c.

Sir Jlichael Balfour, Lord Bidfour of Burleigh. * This washy no means an uncommon practice of ' his

most sacred JIajesty,' and conveys no favourahle idea of the course of his proceedings, in this remarkalde transaction.
It reduces the whole matter to a mere stage trick, and a solemn mockery of the highest Tribunal and personages of
the Countrv.

42 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 591

and tliat liis Ma. would have that in wiitt, which I fpaive. Wliich alio I fett doune. And becaufe there
was fome words his Ma. (as he affirmed) defired to be added, whicli he affirmed I fpake,' the words
written with his hand, and brought to mc be the said James Bailzie, I infert with my hand and fubfcribed ; and fend them to him, with the faid James. And hearupou 1 defire, if need, that my friends
may inquire the faid James.

The fiimme of t/ie Counjell of Enff haul's proceedings, on Sundai/, l/ie 13 of November, 1608.
The faid day, in the after noone, the whole Counfell being conveened in the Counfell chamber, tlie
whole Judges, and all the Noblemen, both Scotifli and Englifli, that were at Court, the LordCiian'celLER* beganne averie grave fpeech, wherin he did earnelllie require audience and attentione, in refpect
of the great confequence of the mater he was to fpeake of. It was fo much the greater, that it was a
noviltie wherof he had never heard, nor (to his knowledge) in all his books read of any the like prpiident, ofbefore. It was of great confideratione, becaufe it did tuiche the Kings moll liicred Ma. an<l
royale perfone, both in his honour and his fafetie, wherein did confift the fafetie of the whole eftate.
The mater was alfo weightie, in refpect of the perfone whom it did concerne ; a Nobleman of Scotland, raifed to that eflate by his Ma' favour, and a Member of that board. As to the mater, becaufe
he might perhaps faile in the relating of it (which he was very unwilling to doe, in a mater of that
kinde and weight,) therefor he defired the Inftrnment, containing the Lord Balmerinoch his Confeffione, and figned with his hand, iliould be read. The fame being read, and acknowledged be the Lord
Balmerinoch to be his owne Confeflione, then he faid to the Lords of the Counfell, that lie did pcrceave,
by their countenances, that they all did looke on that mater as if it were a mater wherin they were to
give their fentence and judgement. But he prayed them not to thinke fo; and that he would releave
them of that burthen ; becaufe neither were they conveened to that end, neither was the faid Lord Balmerinoch brought down to make any anfwere ; becaufe that mater was tranfcendent, and of a greater
weight than that board, or any Counfell board, could judge of it ; but, becaufe it was a fact committed
in Scotland, be a Scotilhman, before his Ma^ happie comming to the Crown of England, they would
not doe that prejudice to Scotland, that was as ancient and free a kingdome ; as they are fo weill governed, witii fo many grave and ancient Noblemen ; whofe Nobilitie is continued and refervcd with a
faiTe greater refpect and antiquitie nor their owne ; fo wife a Counfell of Eftate, fo learned and grave
Judges, as in all thefe perfectionis they were nothing inferiour to them. Onlie, for the prefent, he
would point out and offer to their conliderations, that were prefent, fome heads of that Confeflione,
which had been the confequents of that fact ; and fo remitt it to the own Judgement,' and the Lord Balmerinoch to his own anfwere before his owne Judge. Firft, he defired they ihould attend the tyme
when his Letter was written ; to witt, wlien his Ma. was, in poffeliione, King of Scotland ; in his title
and undoubted royall defcent, apparent of England. How this fact might have perrelled him both the
one and the other, if it had been knowne that his Ma. had had any dealing with the Pope ; for, in Scotland, the moft of all the Nobilitie, gentrie, and whole bodie of the kingdome, being of the Religione
they prefentlie profeffe, would not have failed to have made infurrectione, if they had knowne that his
Ma. had any dealing with the Pope. In England, the late Queene, of happie meniorie, being a Prince
verie jealous and narrow looking in all his Ma^ actions, if Ihe had knowne that his Ma. had had anie
courfe with the Pope, (he would have quicklie objected unto his Ma., that fince he was taking a forrane courfe to flrengthen him, fpeciallie with tliefe who had fo often fuled' her life, fhe would likewile
take another courfe, for her owne prefervatione ; and fo might have endangered his Ma" juft dame.
Like as, in effect, the fame dealing comeing to her knowledge, llie did incontinent fend lier Ambalfader,
and did moft bitterlie expoftulat with his Ma. ; and the dealing, at that time, was denied ; and fo fmoo-

' Balmerino was thus led forward liy one piece of artifice after another, until, at length, lie was so completely in
Dunbar's toils, tliat retreat was impossible. " Sir Thomas Egertouu, Lord Ellesmere, afterwards (IGIG) created

Viscount Brackley. " To the natural and proper Court or Jurisdiction, in Scotland ; where he would be tried

by an Assise of his peers. ' Pursued.

592 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

tliered over. Nixt, lie did mightilie aggredge' the gieat inconveniences that had fallen out, all (as he
did affirine,) upon the dealing mentioned in that Confeflione ; firft, that it had given occafione of ane
infiuit number of fcandalous books and pamphlets to be written, wherin his Ma. was verie bitterlie
taxed ; and fpeciallie, lie did there produce Bellarmines late book, imder the infcriptione, which he did
read, of one wliofe name being Tortus, he did allude tlieninto that he was ahvife tortus.'' The parcelF
he read, was the fault found with Pope Clement's Breave ; wherbyhe did command the body and eftates of this kingdome of England not to admitt or receave a King, in cafe of the Queen's deceafe, but
a Catholickc ; and lb did exclude his Ma. from his jull title. To the which claule, contained in the
book of Triplici nodo triplex cuneus, Bellarmine made this anfwer, that by that Breeve, the Pope did
not meane to exclude the King, becaufe the name ' Jacobus' was not mentioned in it ; and witliall, the
Chanceller did oblerve, in the words he read, that Bellarmine did give the author of the book a lye, in
tlie word ' mentitur ;' nather could it be meant of his Ma., becaufe his fervants and Minifter had
given great hopes to the Pope, that ' non erat valde alienus a fide Catholica ;' and thereafter, ' quia
etiam Rex ipfefcripjit ad Pontijicem ipfm/i, Literas htunanitutis plenas, quibm, prater cetera, rogavit lit aliquis a Nationefua Cardinalis S. R. E. crearetur, per quern Jhcilius cum Pontifice resfuas
fractare po/Jet :' Which words being conforme to the Lord Balinerinoch's Depolitione, the fame had
given occaiione of the writting of that booke ; in manie parts wherof his Ma. was bitterlie tuiched.
Nixt, upone the occaffione, contained in that Depofitione, did grow all the Confpiracies that, fince his
Ma' conimeing to England, had fallin furthe ; for by this dealling with the Pope, unknowne to his Ma.
great hopes were given to the Catholicks, that when his Ma. Ihould come to the Crowne of England,
his Ma. Ihould either declare himfelf a Catholicke, or, at the lead, the Catholicks ihould have a toleratione of Religione, within his dominion ; wherof, finding tlienifelves diliiippointed, they did move their
Confpiracies. Forfcarcelie was his Ma. warmelie fett down in this kingdom of England, when Watfone the Preill and a number of his adherents did attempt againfl his Ma* royall perfone ; for the
which a number of them were aprehended and punillied. Nixt, upon it came the devililh intentione
and practife of the Powder Treafone, wherin was intended the taking away of the King, Queene and
their polleritie, the Counfell, Bilhops, Nobles, Judges, Gentrie, and whole bodie of the realmes ; for
the which a number were punillied, and a great many, in his Ma*' clemencie, fpaired. Therafter, that
none Ihould millake their proceedings, in the tryell and examination of the Lord Balmerinocli, he declared all the points therof, adding, that although it was a cafe might receive judgement in England, in
refpect it did concerne his Ma^ perfone, which liath fo many priviledges that it draweth all Judgments'"
after it ; and that the Lord Balmerinoch that was to be judged was prefent, and fo might receave his
judgement there, yett fuch was his Ma* refpect to his ancient native kingdome of Scotland, and they
were fo farre from encroaching upon the liberties therof, and knowing the tender regarde that the Nobilitie and Eftate would have to a mater that did fo liighiie concerne his Ma. ; after a long reiterated
difcourfe, in the praife and honour of that kingdome, Counfell, Nohilitie and government of it, declared,
that they would remitt the mater to receave judgement there.

Nixt, the Lord Treasurer' begane a verie grave fpeech. After the dew commendatione of the
Lord Chanceller, that had fpoken before ; that he was verie forie to have occafione to fpeack of a
mater of that kind ; but lince it did concerne, fo highlie, the life and honour of his moft facred Ma.
(wholi; life was dearer to him nor his owne) he Ihould be thought verie undutifull, being fo manie wife
bound, if he were filent in it. There, having given his Ma. his owne dew praife, at great length,'' he
did next adde that he was forie to fpeake of it, in refpect of the perfone whom it did concerne, — a
Nobleman, by his Ma* favour, a Counfeller of State, yea more, a Secretarie of State, and one againlt
whom, his deutie referved in this, he would be loath to have fpoken. The fume of his fpeech grew

' Aggravate. ' Crooked, perverse. ^ Portion, passage. * Jurisdictions, Tribunals. ' Sir

Kobert Ceeil, Earl of SiJisbury. Principal Secretary of .State. He succeeded to the office on the death of Sackvillc,
Earl of Dorset, in 1608. ' Well knowing his Majesty to be behind tlie tapestry !

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 593

to that fame end of my Lord Clianceller's former Speech, that his Ma' dealling with the Pope might
have breed him, in his owne liingdome, difobedience, and done him prejudice in his title to England ;
that if his Ma. had beene of the counfell of writting of that Letter to the Pope, he would affirme that
he had bowed his knee to Baal ; being defireous to eftablifhe, for his affaires, ane Advocat at Rome.
Nixt, by the words of Bellarrain's booke, tlien produced, he Ihew, that the Pope took upon him to
<!f clare the Crown of England elective ; becaufe, by the words of the Pope's Breeve, the eltate and
bodie of England were commanded, iirfl, ' non admittere ;' next, ' non injiitucre, nijl Regcm orthodoxnm
€t Calholicum' — fo the heretable defcent of the Crown of England was taken away, aud behoved to
be holden in almous^ of the Bidiop of Rome; that he would not be content to be Billiop of Rome,
but would have all Europe at his difpoiitione. And, in another place of the booke, he ihew ane conclufione more offenfive to his Ma. — ' ergo Rex Jacobus neque e/i Catholicus, nequeeji Ckrijiianus.'
That, for himfelf, he did never fay fo much of any CathoHck ; and that he did verilie beleave that a
true Catholick was Chiijtianus. Nixt, he fell out upon the office of a Secretarie, the great credit and
trufl; thereof; that in a Secretarie's bread is laid in ftore, the treafure of all the fecrets of the kingdome ;
that ^ffe and truft is of that nature, xh&t Jides qua femel accedit nunquam revertiliir ; — that he
feared, in tyme to come, his Ma. behoved ather to have no fuch officer, or ells divide the trufl of
maters of no importance to one, and common affairs to another ; — that of a King's hanil-wiitte, if it
may be caried by- the knowledge of the Prince, is more dangerous nor ane army of tuentio thoufand
men ; becaufe the one may be fore-feene, the other not. Nixt, in the nature of the fact, he compared
the King's Seall with his hand-writt; that the Great Seall was but the King's imago, but his handwritte was his minde ; but if any thing Ihoidd be added above the Great Seall, for hinil'elf, he would
think it verie near Treafone, leaving them to confider what it was to adde any thing above his Ma^
hand-writt. He defired to be excufed if he were a little kindled, and did remember the manie favours
he had of his Ma., that he poflefled manie places that were fitter for others, yett none iliould goe before him in trufl nor affectione.-" To tefiifie his Ma>* unwillingneffe to have dealing with the Pope,
he did remember how his Ma. refufed to receave anie AmbafTader from him ; and how he commanded
the Ambaflader Lieger in France, to fliew the Pope's Nuncio in Parife, that if anie of his Minilleris
in his name had promifed more then they had warrant, the Pope ihould not expect anie performance
therof from him. Laft, he made (as he called it) a punctuall difcourfe of all the proceedings in the
Lord Balmerinoch's Examinatione, and how his Ma'' memorie was a great deall better in that mater
then his ; and by his particular interrogations, had brought him to a Confefiione : And, after ane example and verie large commendatione of the Kingdome of Scotland, and wife and grave governement
of it, did reraitt the judgement of that mater to them, not doubting but they would proceed in it, as his
Ma" interefle and the weight of the mater did require.

After him, the Lord Privie Seale* had a Speech, wherof this was the preface. If lie had had
libertie of fpeech, as he had not, he would have chofen thefe two nol)le lords who had fo gravelie and
learnedlie fpoken to have gone before him ; for they had taken up the crope of all was to be collected
of the prefent mater, fo cleanlie, as they had left nothing behind to him to glean; but ho did remember to have read of the nature of the bee, that at firll comming upon the Howrp, Ihe did gather the
honie, and after the honey being collected, Ihe did gather the waxe. So would he, iince there was no

' In alms ; as an eleemosynary gift. ' Without, contrary to. ' The whole of these Speeches and

gratuitous affirmations were in reality addressed to tlie King ' behind the arras,' and they were all so constructed, by
these Court sycophants, as to be most palatable to the royal taste. The knowledge of tbis circumstance must sink
the speakers in the estimation of all who read such abominable rodomontade, aud convert all their fulsome adulation
into solemn mockery or absolute farce. ' The celebrated Heniy Hoivard, Earl of Northampton, who was

styled by the French Ambassador, Monsieur de Beaumont, ' one of the r/reutesl flatterers' and ealnmiiiutias that eetr
lived!' He was deeply involved in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury; but died before that atrocious affair w.as
publicly investigated. The private and intriKuing Correspondence between Kin;/ James and Cecil, previous to his
accession to the throne of England, was carried on through the medium of this individual. See Lord Ilailes' Letters, §t.

VOL. n. 4 F

594 CRIMINAL TRIALS, A.D. 1609.

honey left, gather up fome waxe to feale up the raatei* with. And firft, after a large commendatione
of his Ma'* fo manie rare and princelie qualities, whom that mater did fo highlie concerne, (which he
protefted he did not as a fycophant or flatterer,' hut as a true and faitliful Counfeller,) he did fay
fome thing of his affectione and dutie to the Lord Balraerinoch, with great forrow for his errour in
that kind, that he fhould have thought it a fave way for his Ma. to have left his affured true friend,
which was the Queene and Eflate of England, to follow after a ftranger, fpeciallie fince of his own
knowledge (for the fpace of 19 years) it had pleafed his Ma. to keepe intelligence with him. He
perfltlie knew that his Ma. was mofl unwilling to anie fuch courfe. Firfl, how in the 88 (1388) the
Bilhop of Dumblane cam in Scotland with fo many great offers ; and if his Ma. would have given him
anie, never fo little hope, the Pope would have ftayed that great Armado. Nixt, come Sir James
Chilholrae, who dealt in the fame courfe, and becaufe he did not prevaill, he did break his heart, and
fo died. Watfone the Preift having come in Scotland and dealt with his Ma., did confefle to his lordfliip, that he could never have more of his Ma. — but if ever he came to the Crowne of England, that
he would not come to break the law, but to keepe it: And that the faid Watfone, being in priffone,
fome few dayes before his executione, his lo. went, by his Ma* commandement, to examine him in
that point ; who declared to him, that he could never gett anie farther grant of his Ma. nor is before
faid : not-tlie-lelfe, to the end he might keepe the Catholicks in better difpolitione towards his Ma.
he did give them better hopes. That Sir James Lindfay did bring his Ma. a Letter from the Pope,
which he refufed, and would notfo much as fuflvr the fame to be unclofed. Laft, fince his Ma'' comming in England, there come one from the Duke of Lorane to his Ma., who being weill receaved,
as the Duke of Loran's fervant, having thereafter fecretly fliewed unto his Ma. that he was the Pope's
gentleman, and had fome directions from him to his Ma., he would heare no more of him ; and his
Ma. did niightilie eomplaine that the Duk of Lorane did ufe him in that kind. And hereupon did he
condemne the Lord Balmerinoch his courfe, in refpect of his Ma** unwillingnefle to have anie dealing
with the Pope. He faid farther, that if at that tyme when the Queen's Ambaflader did expoflulat,
the courfe had been revealed, the fault had been the lelle. That it was God's lingular caire over his
Ma., that by the coming funhe of fuch a book, at fucli a tyme, when the Lord Balmerinoch was prefent to reveale the truth, his Ma'* innocencie in it was fo cleared. And becaufe that fome doe jnftifie
the coui fs, becaufe of the good intentione of it, that he had read, that in good intentions three things
were requifit, 111, that they Ihould be in things indiflerent; nixt, that they Ihould not be contra precept um ; laft, that they Ihould not be in prejudicium tertia perjonce. Nather of which was obferved
in this ; becaufe it was not a thing indifferent to the King to keepe correfpondence with the Pope,
being a mater prejudiciall to his eftate ; next, that it was contra preceptiim, becaufe he was not of his
Religione ; laft, it was prejudicium tertij, becaufe the Queene of England was thereby interefled ; fo
as the intentione of it could not procure it anie allowance. Li end, after a large commendatione of
the countrie of Scotland, and his heft wiilies that the Kingdome of England would looke carefullie
in their honour, and not admitt everie one fo indifterentlie to it, following the example of Scotland, he did likewife remitt the mater to be tried and judged there ; not doubting but it would be
carefullie done, according to the weight of the mater and his Ma'* expectatione.

Thereafter, MY Lord Chanceller declared, that fince that Board was his Ma'* bodie reprefentative, and all the members of it were at his Ma" difpofitione, and alterable with the breath of his
mouth ; that it was his Ma'' pleafure, that the Lord Balmerinoch Ihould no more be one of that boord.
Wherupon he did produce a Warrand, figned be his Ma ; which being read by the Clerk of the Counfell, the Chanceller defired that all the Lords of the Counfell Ihould take notice of it.

' ' Hem!' His Majesty must have been a 'glutton' indeed, and his appetite for flattery altogether insatiable, if
these Speeches did not give him a complete surjtil f It is evident that this intriguing politician well knew what would
best please the royal palate. Strange as these things may now appear, such was the Kiug's taste, — and de gustibiu
non disputandum f

42 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 595

[^Tms, or near this, I wovfd have anjwercd, for my own jiijtificatione ; if that, by three feveral
commandemenls from the Erie of Diimbar, I had not been dcjired to the contrarie. James Saihie
was the carrier of the mej)ager\

To thejirji Speeche, it mijjlit have been anfwereil, tliat if the reverence and majeflie of the perfon,
(whom tlie mater was affiimed to tuich in honour and fafetie) the gravitie and eloquence of the fpeaker,
and the hatefull dlfpolitione wliich was againil tiie perfone which was to be cenfured, liad not extraordinarilie concurred, although the deed wanted a prefedent, yett nianie offences of greater importance
and more perrellous prefidents were fmothered up, with fiUence: And wher, ' it was now firft faid,
that the Letter might have procured his Ma. tlie tinfelF of the Crown of Scotland, which he had in
pofleffione ; tlier was no fucii appearance, becaule ther was no Scotilh man, of whatfoever qualitie, fo
little fenfible of his Soveran's wrong, but would rather have wiflied his Ma. to have had correfpondance politick much more with the Pope, before he liad been prejudged of his undoubted title to England, fpeciallie fiuce that Letter (nor no conftructione can be made upon it) does carie any prejudice
to Religione, or other conditione hurtful! ather to his Ma* honour or eftate. Nixt, where it was faid,
that the faid Letter might have loffed him the Crown of England, to the which he had undoubted
right apparent, becaufe the Queen might have taken exceptione att it, and fo inclinned fome other
way ; firft, it might have beene anfwered, that his Ma* title was not at her difpofitione, and if file had
been difcontent, there was no reafone ; for fince fhe did ever refufe to yeild him anie afFurance of his
fuccefTione after her, (and Spaine avowedlie, and France under hand, befides others, as competitors,
daylie talked of,) although he had laboured for the friendfbipe of all the Chriftian Princes in Europe,
upon juft and honourable conditions, and without breach of dutie to her, flie had no juft caufe of
offence : Befide that, fome did not fpair to talke of fome unfeemly plots contrived in England, about
that fame time, to his Ma'' preiudice. Secoundlie, where it was with great vehemencie and rare eloquence amplified, that that Letter had given fubject and occaflone to the writting of many pamphlets,
wherin his Ma. was bitterlie tuiched, it might have been anfwered, that by the contrarie, it had ftayed
tlie writting of many and doing of many worfe turnes, had procured his Ma'* good at the Court of
Rome, the favour of all the Catholicks of Europe, but fpeciallie in England ; and if his Ma. had been
offended by anie books, they have had other grounds than that idle Letter ; wherin BeUarmi7ie alledgeth not, that ther was anie more, but a Letter full of courtefie, and a requill for a Cardinall ; and if
it had contained any other thing whereby his Ma. had been ingadged to the Pope's advantage, it had
not been forgotten. Look therefore if the writting of the former books, or fome other conditions then
that Letter, hath not given occaffione of this offence. Thridlie, where it was laid that all the Popifh
Confpiracies did flow from that Letter, becaufe the Catholicks, finding themfelves difappointed of
their hopes, did attempt all thofe devililli Treafones, it might have been anfwered, that if that Letter
giveth anie fuch hope ather of the Kings Ma. being a Catholick, or toleratioue, then is the argument good ; but if not, then it holdeth not ; and thefe hopes mofl be found out another way, and the
authors of them charged with that imputatione.

Thefecound Speech, in fo fane as it was carried out with the firft, the fame aufwers might have
been repeated ; but, where it was faid, that if his Ma. had been of the knowledge of tliat Letter, he
would have bowed the knee to Baal, appointing ane Aduocat at Borne; — that conclufione holds no
more nor^ if it fhould be faid, that the Queen, for writting manie Letters to the Turk, and appointing
ane agent there, fhould have become a Mahumetan. Neither is there any that can doubt, but that
great Statfman, who bad the fpeech, does know verie weill, tliat Princes of difi'erent Religiones have
their Leagues and Amities, their intercourfes of Negotiations and civill affairs, without bowing their
knees to ftrange Gods. As to the invectives againft the Pope, they were all juft, and verie pertinentlie and eloquentlie delivered ; yett they did not aggravat that fact, neither was there any thing in
that Letter that did allow of them. As to the objections of violating the truft of a Sccretaric, that
' Whereas. ' Loss ; from lyne, to lose. ' Than.

596 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609could not be denied ; and fo the partie doth grant his offence, pretending onlie, that as ane expert
PLifician, in a difperat difeafe, or a perfitte Pilot, in an extraordinaiie tempeft, is not alwife tyed to
the precile rules of his art, fo lome things are permitted to Statfmen in their places ; and he, perhaps,
feing his Ma* great danger ; and that, for writting a ilile to a Pope, he would give his enemies fo
great advantage, and perrell a Kingdome, he did temerarioullie adventure his credit : And for that
was talked of the nature tiiat fides qua ubifemel recejjit nimquam reverlitur, that politick maxime
giveth ane anfwer,^ violandi regni caitfa, and the more is he excufable, that it was to bis mafler and
not to liinifelf ; and as he durft and fliould have adventured his life to have foughten for it, fo did he
perrell his trull to conferve it. To that, that a King's hand-writt, if it might be caried by his knowledge, was more dangerous than 20,000 men, that is an argument ab incommodo, which fince the deid
is pad long fince, and no harme followed upon it, neither to his Ma. nor his dominions, it followeth
no more. To that of the comparifon of the broad-feales to the King's hand, and what is the danger
to writte above any of them, belongs to the Judges and Lawyers, to determine ; but in the law of
reafone and civill juftice, where there is no fraud meant, no harme done, nor no inconvenience can
enfue, the fault is the lefie.

In tfie laji Speech, moft gravelie and eloquentlie delivered, becaufe it was for the moft part a narratione of particulars, tellifeing his Ma* unwillingnelfe to writt or have any dealing with the Pope, it
is like enou!j;ii to be true ; for if his Ma. had been willing, or wittinglie had felt his hand to the Letter, then there had been no fault committed, fo that canfeth the Confeliione of him who abuifed his
Ma* truft. And where as, his good intentioune to his Ma* fervice, did furnilhe him fome excufe, that
was mofl learnedlie taken away by three caveats, which the Divines doe require to make intentions
justifiable ; firll, that they be in things indifferent ; nixt, that they be not contra praceptwn ; thridlie,
that they be not hi prejiulicium tertii : To all which it migiit have been anfvvered, iirft, generaliie,
that the politicke courfes, fo Weill knowne to fo great a wife man in ftate maters, are not to be ruled
according to tjie ftrick rules of Divinitie ; and particularlie, to everie caveat there can be nothing
more indifferent, nor^ a free Prince to writte a kind Letter to his neighbour, and to make to him a
reafonable and jull fute, hurtfuU to no man ; as for the fecound, there is none of the commands that
did forbid the King to writte to the Pope, for io praceptum in that mater is to be uuderllood ; thridlie, by that Letter there is no prejudice done to anie perfone ; and fince his Ma. was by no League
nor Bond bound to the Queen in the contrarie, no man will think that his Ma. llioujd be anfwerable
to ane imaginary prejudice, there being nothing contained in the faid Letter that in any fort could
hurt her, or any other perfone. In all the Speeches, as they were moft gravelie and eloquentlie delivered, fo did they yeild, everie one of them, a rare and extraordinarie conimendatione to the countrie
of Scotland, tiie grave and ancient Nobilitie, the wife Counfell of Ellate, the learned Judges, and the
moft tender regard, in all their actions, to his Ma. ; wherof, as everie man did confider the end, fo
they ouglit" no finall obligatione to them, for their exceeding kindnefle.
CoPiE of the Speech which I fpak, indeid, to the Cou.nsell, after the three Harangues before written.

My verie honourable Lords, I find true this day in experience that which I had oft read and heard,
that no exceeding joy,-'' &c.

The Bifliope of Glafgow,'' I think, with the counfell of the Erie of Wigtoune,' defpaired, before
ray coming to Court, that the Letter to the Pope iliould doe me anie harme ; thinking, either that I
Ihould be denied it, or that it was of fo fmall confequence as it could import no cryme. They had

' Than. ^ Owed. ' See Vol. II. p. 578. Opposite the words * but alace I' &c, (line 10 fi-om bottom of tbe page,)
there is written on the margin, ' These words added at the E. of Durab.ir's desire, to please his Ma.' * John

Spottiswood, afterwards Lord Chancellor (1634). He was translated to St Andrews, 1615. ^ John, sixth

Lord Fleming, was created Earl of Wigton, Mar. 19, 1606. He married, 1st, Lillias, only daughter of John, 3d
Earl of Montrose ; 2dly, .Sarah, eldest daughter of John, Lord Hcrries, and relict of Sir James Johnston of that Ilk.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. ' 597

invented againft me fome interrogatoui-s, whereupon the King (liould have examined me, anent the
Powder Treafone, which were keeped doire from me, till immediatlie before my comming awav :
Then they were brought to me by my trufty friend Sir Alexander Hay, never letting me know of
them, albeit they had been in his hands three moneths before. The juft copie I have inclofed hearwith, and my anfwers. They are as frivolous as they are falfe ; alwife I will my friends may fee wliat
hes beene the malicious curiofitie of my enemies to my dilgrace. I fufpect the Bilhop of Glafgow,
the Earle of Wigtoun and Sir Alexander Hay ; and whatfoever the Earle of Wigtoun knew, was not
keeped from Kilifyth.'

In a Proclamatione, made at Wellminfler, the 22 of February, 1603, which is imprinted, there is
contained thefe words, in fpeaking of Foreign Princes: ' Among which forran powers, although We
acknowledge ourfelves perfonallie fo much beholden to the new Bishope of Rome, for his kind offices and privat temporall cariage towards us in manie things, as We Ihall be ever readie to requyte the
fame toward him, as Bifliope of Rome, in ftate and conditione as a fecular Prince :' Yet conferr this
Proclamatione with his Ma'* firft Speeche in the Parliament Houfe, which is alfo printed, wherein he
acknowledgeth his particular obligation to Pope Clement, whereby it may be prefumed, as matters
then were, what great difcontentment it could have beene to his Ma. to writte a Letter to him. Like
as, many other Negotiationes which his Ma. had with him are more nor notoriouflie known.
The funmie of the DEChARATioviEjfiibfcribed 18 November, 1608.

That at my firft Examinatione I did denie, extenuatt and transfeiTe the knowledge of that Letter;
therefore, I did Confefle, that, at the foliftatione of the Biihope of Glafgow, who was his Ma* Ambaffader, and the (Bifhope) of Vaizon, I laboured to have a correfpondence betwixt his Ma. and the
Pope, I moved his Ma. in it, and found him unwilling. Therafter, I coiifpired with Sir Edward
Drummond to gett a Letter under his Ma* hand to the Pope. Sir Edward drew up tlie Letter. I
faw the draught of it, and corrected it. That one day, in the morning, when his Ma. part to hunting,
I brought him a number of Letters to be figned, in favours of the Bifliop of Vaizone, to the Dukes of
Sauoy, Florence, and fome Cardinals ; among the which Letters I (lilfted in that Letter to the Pope,
having no fuperfcriptione in the beginning, nor above his Ma* name ; and fo gott liis Ma* name to it
without his knowledge. That the Letter contained nothing but thanks to the Pope for his bygane
kindnefle, and defire of continuance ; that he would be pleafed to advance the Biihope of Vaizone to
be a Cardinall, that his Ma. might have more intelligence of his affairs at that Court. That the Letters to the Pope were written in Roman Letters. I directed Sir Edward to writte the Popes ftiles
in the beginning ; and in the end, ' Simctilas and ' Filius.' That the faid Letter was caflietted at
my command, be one of my fervants who keeped the calliett.- That in the late Queen's tyme, fome
expoftulation being made by her Ambaflader anent the faid Letter, I did denie it, and caufed Sir Edward, being come home, juftifie my denyall, and that he had caried no fuch Letter ; being examined
therupon be fome of the Counfell. That he, being committed in ward, I laboured for him and procured his releefe. That I dealt earneftlie with him to returne the principall Letter, who promifed
to doe foe.'

[The NaiTative is here interrupted by Calderwood's own work. It is afterwards resumed, being
introduced by Calderwood in the following passage : ' About the beginning of December, the Secre-

' Sir William Livingston, Loril Kilsyth, one of the ordinary Lords of Session. ' A stamp rontrived to imitate the King's signature, to save him the manual labour of signing certain official documents. It is still in use, and
is applied to particular writs not requiring the royal ' Sign-manual.' ' Calderwood remarks heie. ' I'lie

President was sent back to Scotland as a prisoner, with a Guard attending upon him, to be furllier tryed. When he
came to Newcastle, he sent the Laird of I'itloure to informe Sir James Melvill how he was dealt with, for standing
for the freedome of our countrie, and crossing of the Uishopes and their proceedings ; and desired Jlr James to writte
to the good brethren at home, as he thought meet himself. When he came out of Newcastle, it was marked that he
shed tears, which was a verie base thing in him. At Berwick ^e was heard to utter tliese words, " I wish I had
beene made a sheep-keeper when I was made a schoUer. " '

598 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609tare Sir James Elphanftone, Prefident of the Colledge of Jnftice, came to Berwick, accompanied by
the Engliihe Guard and fome of the Earle of Dunibars fervants. He was received be the Captain of
the Scotilh Guard, Sir David Murrey Lord Skoone, latelie Comptroller, accompanied with the
Scotilh Guard and fome of his friends ; and was convoyed to vvaird to Fallwland. The manner of his
parting from London to this countrie he has fett doun himfelf, as hear followeth, continuing his former relatione.']

Order hearafter being taken about my returning, my Lord Dnmhar fent James Bailie to fliew me,
that there was Ibme of the Guard, onlie for a Ihew, appointed to attend me ; defireing I would not
take it in evill part. Tliey would ride witii their coats till they were pafl Royrtoun, where his Ma.
was; and from that, as other privat fervants. He fent me word divers times that he would meet with
me ; but wliill ' the Earle of Wigtoune and the Biihops were gone, he could not, for lufpicione.' So
the verie day they parted, in the morning at ten hours, his lo. came to my houle, although I had offered to make the travell ; but, becaufe I was under commandement, it could not be. All this tyme I
was attended to be two of his Gentlemen, wlio ufed me verie kindlie. The one was Alexander Auchinniowtie, brother to John Auchinmowtie ; the other, James Carmichaell, fone to Watt Carmichaell
of the Park ; to whome I wiflie my friends or to anie of theirs to be thankfull. At our meeting, I renewed to him what had pafl betwixt my Lord Burlie and me, my particular offers, for aflurance of his
Lordlliip's friendlhip, what I did expect mutuallie of him, as the Lord Burlie had promiffed in his name.
All which he was weill pleafed with, and how foone my trouble was ended, which lliould be upon his
coming in the countrie, he would enter in the due performance of every particular, and would eftablilh
luch an allyance with me as Ihould not be difcovered. I complained that my waird^ was altered, becaufe he had promiled that I IhouUl remaine in the Caftle of St Andrewes : He excufed the eftate of
the houle, and that he had as great credit in Falkland as in St Andrewes. Nixt, that the Lord Skoones
Warrant was fo flrait : His anfwer was, tliat that was onlie done for the falhione ; that the Biihops
and Sir Alexander Hay procured it ; but he would defire the Lord Skoon, by James Bailie, to ufe me
well. He delired me to keepe all I'ecret ; and, as he was a Chriftian, every thing ihould (be) performed
with no lefs care than I were his own brother, or his tuo daughters. He willed me not to be fufpicious of any his actions, becaufe it behoved him to follow the King's honour, pleafe the Biihops and
others that were my unfriends, in outward (liewes, that he might the more eafilie worke my turne to
my contentment. I think that he entered in a ipeciall friendlhip with my Lady Dmmmond, and gave
her that alTurance of my life, eftate, (and) Ropars office that he gave to the Lord Burlie.

Being come to Falkland to my waird, and more hardlie ufed nor I did expect, I directed to Court
my coufin Pitlowre to put the Earl of Dunibar in memorie. My worthie friend the Lord Burlie tooke
the pains likewife to go there, to make all former conditions I'ure ; and, as I was informed, his Ma.
directed no further, but that, in a Jullice Court to be holden at S' Andrewes, (for I defired it (liould
not be in Edinburgh,) I Ihould become in Will, and his Ma. to declare his Will, at his pleafure. But
when my Lord of Dumbar came to Edinburgh, and found that Sir William Hart (who had gotten a
promife of my ])lace in Seffione) to putt me to ane Aflile, and my Lord Collector^ to be AffeHbr, and
a number of Aflile that would convicte me upon my own Confellione, which is more than to gett me
in Will. The Earle of Dumbar having advifed with the Biihops, durlf leave nothing undone of eitremitie againft me ; and the Collector, being more circumfpect nor the reft of his fellows, and moft
defireous to have me fure, refolved the Earll, that none of my Depofitiones made in England would
ferve againft me, except I ratified them here. Whereupon, the coming of the Counfell to Falkland
was appointed ; and although I had been verie carelefTe of tlie mater, becaufe I was certified that there
was no more ado but to take me, judiciallie, in Will ; yett, knowing of their coming to Falkland, I

' Until. ' \iz. in case tlie Earl and Bishop should suspect collusion between the Cliaiicellor and Balmeriuo.

• nace of confinement. * Mr John Prestoun of Pennycuik.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 599

imagined at firft the caufe of it, and was refolved to liave pail from everie point of thefe Depofition-i,
except onlie the naiked veiitie of the deid, wherupone no crime could follow ; for mofl lawfuUie I
could have come againfl my Depofitione, becaufe it was made extrajudiciallie. And, in cafe they
would make the Counfell of England a judicatour, firft, it was fubfcribed, not before the Couiifell, but
in the Earle of Salifburie's cabinet, before fo many of the Counfell as are before mentioned ; nixt, the
Counfell of England could be no Judges competent to me, likeas I had lawfullie declinned them of
before ; farther, it was made upon the conditione above mentioned, wliich I would have referred abfolutlie to the Earl of Dumbar's oath ; /a/?, it was revocable, as made for fear of my life, or perpetuail
imprifonment in the Towre. If they would have made my Dittay Treafone, becaule it is fo called in
my Depofitiones, the calling of a deed Treafone, 710H mutat naturani facli ; as if I would confelle I had
tratorouflie confpired to kill one of the King's bucks, would not convict me of Treafone ; or that I had
treafonablie broken waird, being committed for fourtie pound of civill debt ; fo, the procurin" of a
common Letter of Recommendatione, containing no Treafone, prejudice to the King, nor Eftate, coulil
never be Treafone. And whear as, it was affirmed to tuiche the Princes honour, the King did never
refufe to acknowledge the Pope as a Catholick Prince, to whom he acknowledged himfelf bound : and
fo it was no dilhonour to him to writte to him, feing the greatefl. Princes in Europe doe it ordinarlie,
both of the Reformed Religione and others. That that Letter was prejudiciall to his Ma., his Religione, countrieand Eftate, it could never be verified ; for, except my own Depofitione, (revocked.as I
have faid,) there could be no other verificatione, either by writte or witneffes ; fo no honeft Judge or
Afliifror that had either confcience or honour could liave fuftained fuch a Dittay. And if tliey would
have made it Crimen Falji, out of the Lawes of the Majeftie, {Reg. Maj.) I would have denied that
my life could liave been judged be the Majeftie ; more then ane hundrelh kyne may be fatisfactione
for the King's Murlher, which the Majeftie calies killing. I remember, Mr Thomas Craige anfwered
to generaliter verui/i, generaliter falfum, in a civill mater, guibus cq/ibus tenetur hmres pratlare facluiii
paterniim, which is lefle nor my life. Laftlie, that word, Charta domini Regis, is not to be underftood
of a privat Milfive, wherby tiie King or a partie is not prejudged ; but a Charter, or evidence, wherbv
either the King or fubject may lofle his right. If they would have made it out of the Decretals, cap.
5, de Judiciis, albeit it fay, non effe immunein a Crimine FalJi, yett, according to all the Doctors, it
moft be underftood to hejcriptura damnofa etfratululenta, for omnc Crimen FalJi is not capitall, ubi
neque e/i damnum, neque ejfepotuit, but onlie to be puniihable arbitrio Jiidicis, pro ratione rei et per
fonarum. And this is the cleare refolutione of Julius Clarus and all the Doctors; fo that albeit I had
never confulted anie Advocat, nor had never any bookes to ftudie the mater, yett the light of reafone
was io cleare, as no Judge but Sir William Hart, whom I might have lawfullie declinned, would have
fuftained fuch a lybell.

The Earle of Dumbar, fearing I (hould alter, upon this new alteratione fent the Lord Burlie unto
me ; who, as he dealt ever honourable with rae, fo I was plaine with him, that I would not ftand to
my Depofitiones made in England, and that I would chailange the Earle, upon his oath, of the conditione made unto me at the fublcribing therof There was great iiiterceftione made that I would
have a regarde to the Earle of Dumbar's credit, and the advantage both my publick enemies and his
fecreit ill-willers would make, if that turne were not done to his Ma*' contentment; and that, however I might refirt his Ma. at this time, wherof the event, in refpect of the honeft difpofitione of the
Judge and principall Alfellor was uncertaine, yett I would be keeped in continual! prifone ; and, Ceing
the Earl of Dumbar was willing to fecure all things promilfed before, a fenteiice of Conviction was
no more hurtfull to me nor either a coming in Will, nor in entering in a conteftatione with the King,
having fo great enemies both at Court and at Iiome. In end, upone promiftes renewed, and my defire
of quietnefle, and that my enemies (hould acquire no more credit be my troubles, and conditiones paft
betuixt the Earle of Dumbar and me to ftand fure, I was content to abide at my former Depofitiones.

600 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

So the Earle of Dunibar, in prefence of the Lords of Skoone and Builie, both after particular aflurance and folemne oathe to my felf, renewed wliat he had promifed before, anent my life and eftate,
and that he knew perfectlie it was never his Rla* minde to (take) my life.

Nixt followed my Conviction at St Andrewes, wherin I was the onlie actor my felf, to give his Ma.
fatisfactione ; following, in every point, the Lord of Dumbar's directione, brought to me either by the
Lord Burlic or the Lord Skoone.

A CopiE of the Speech I had at St Andrewes, at the time of my Convictione.

There is none of yonr Lordfchips hut underfland fufficientlie that if I would lland contentiouflie
to my Defences, no Depofitione, made by me in England, could prejudge me in any Tryall Criminall
I was to fuflaine ; neverthelefle, as in all this actione, from the beginning, I have preferred the truth
of his Ma* innocencie to the prefervatione of my life and eftate,' fo I am fo farre from retreating what
I have faid there, before that noble and moll grave Counfell ; that if, in more cleare termes, I could
aggravat the juft defert of my own haynous offence, and make his Ma'' undefiled finceritie and innocencie kuowne to all the world, I would moft willinglie doe the fame. I were not wortbie life, if my
life, that lies had no liappinelle but under the glances of his benignitie, I lliould labour to be preferved,
with the fmalleft imputatioune that might ftaine his Ma'* honour. No man knoweth better his Ma"
naturall clemencie, and how unwillinglie his Ma. is forced with this fevcritie to profecute the truth of
this calhimnions imputatione ; which, by my abufe of his truft, is drawen upon his moft innocent Ma.
Therfor, I ratifie whatfoever I have formerly depouned ; and, if no otherwife his Ma'* honour may be
fufficiently exonered^ I willinglie offer my blood and poore eftate to expiat my offence ; and to teach
others, by my exampill, to goe no farther in thair niafter's fervice then they have fuflicient Warrant.

But immediatlie after the Ratificatioune of my Depofitiouns, in Falkland, the Earle of Dumbar
fent my Lord Burlie to Court, to fliew his Ma. what fatisfactione I had given, to procure me all the
favour he could, and to hold my friends there buffie. Likeas, the Eaile concluded, that immediatlie
after my Convictione, my brothers fone fliould goe poft to Court, for my Kemiflioune ; and that the
Lord Burlie fliould ftay his coming, and concune with him to that effect. And albeit it was promifed
to me, by my Lord Burlie, in the Earle of Dumbar's name, that Ropar's Reverilone fliould be fafe to
me, yett the faid Earle, fearing Sir Robert Ker's credit,- made me to yield to paffe that to him, which
was the heft hope I had of relief of my great debt, and help of my children. So as I have in all this, from
the beginning, allutterlie repofed upon the Earle of Dumbar ; and, by his onlie meanes, am brought in
this mifery, out of the which, if, according to his manie promifles, he releave me, I and all mine are the

' It may be proper here to notice, that Lord Balmerinoch, besides his numerous Offices, was possessed of very extensive landed estates, such as the baronies of Balmerinoch, Earnton, JBanie, Ealhtmby, Iniierpejf'er, Dingwall, JBalgregie and jRestalrig, &c. By his first wife, Sarah, daiii:bter of Sir John Mcnteith of Kerse, he had (1.) John, afterwards second Lord Balmerinoch, And by his second T\'ife, IMarjnry, daugliter of Ilugli Maxwell of Tealiug, he had
(2.) James, who was created Lord Couper. (3. ) Antie, maiTicd to .Vndrew, first Lord Frazer; and (\.) ]^Iary, married to John Hamilton of Blair See 'Wcod^s Peerage, &c. * The coiTupt favourite. Sir Robert Kerr or Carr.

who attended King James to England, and "was invested -with the Order of the Bath at his Coronation, for a long
period had unlimited sway at Court, and had the absolute disposal of all the Royal favours. He was successively
created Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, 161 1 ; Viscount Rochester, Jlar. 25,
1612; Knight of the Garter, May, 1612; Earl of Somerset and Baron of Brancepeth, Nov. 3, 1613; Chamberlain of the Household ; and sworn a Privy Councillor, the same year. The character of this infamous person, his
shameless marriage to the divorced Countess of Essex, the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, for which he and his
Countess were convicted. May 2i, 1616, (see Howell's State Trials, II. pp. 9ol to 1022); their subsequent release
from the Tower, Jan. 1621-2; and their pardon by the King, under the Gre.it .Seal, Oct. 7, 162i, in the face of his Majesty's solemn and awful imprecation, in reference to the murderers of Overbury, that ' IfI spare any that ake guiltt,
God's curse light ox me and jiy posterity roR ever !" All the circumstances of his life are so well known, that it
is only necessary to recall these few leading points to the reader's memory. He died in London, and was buried in
the Church of St. Paul's, Covent-Garden, Jul. 17, IGto. It may be interesting to refer to the numerous Jlemoirs
and Histories relating to this remarkable period, in illustration of the above remarks. In particular, reference may
be made to Lord Bacon's Works, I. 87, also to his Correspotidatce, and to Weldon's Court of K. James, p. 99, &c.,
for the almost incredible dissimulation practised by James on his parting with Somerset at Royston, when his fate
was for ever sealed, and when he had determined that ' he should see his face no more for ever."

42 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 601

more bound to him ; otherwife, there is a God in Heaven will have regard to his dealliiig ; and, either
here or hence, he will fuffer for it I The vile and deteftable ingratitude of Sir Alexander Hay, I am
fure, the Lord will not fuffer unpuniflied ! As for others of our Natione, who have little regards wherefore I fuffer at Engliflimen's hands, God forgive them ! The day will come, that they and theirs will
weepe for it 1 I pray God blefle his Ma. ; and that his undeferved rigour againft me (who, I am fure,
is perf waded, in his heart, I never thought ane undutifuU thought againft him, his Crown, countrie, nor
eftate,) be not layed to his charge, in that great day, when his crown and fcepter will be layed at his
feet, and he muft yeild a reckning of his ftewardftiip ! And, fo may I be judged, if I had anie other
courfe, in all that or anie other fervice that ever I was putt in truft of be his Ma., but his Ma" weale
and honour, and the libertie and good of my countrie, which is miferable, comming in a vile fervitude ;
the forefight wherof is all my wracke !

This the naiked truth of all this mater, written in fuch hafte, and at fuch occaliones as I could, in
refpect of my flrait keeping ; and whatever, for his Ma" fatisfactione, I have written or faid upone the
falfe promiffes and traterous intyfements of thofe whom I trufted, different from this my cleare and
true Depofitione, as God is my witnefle, it is falfe ! Falkland, the 10 of May, 1609.

Balmerinoch.

VIII. Calderwood's Account' of Lord Balmerinoch' s conduct, from the
period of his Conviction to his Death.

When he was brought from Falkland to Leith, after his Convictione at St Andrewes, and was
received be the toun of Edinburgh, in their armour ; when he came to Leith-Winde foote, or the
Nether-bow-Port, he was commanded to light off his horfe, for they receave no ryding prifoners. He
excufed hinifelf with the infirmitie of the goute in his feete ; and willed them to (hew him that much
courtefie, as to fuffer him to ride foreward. One of the toun. Handing hard befide, anfvvered Pamfara, tantara /' my Lord ! Now, when fome directed from the Counfell of Edinburgh, long before his
fall, requeifted him not to mainteane one of his dependers againft them, in ane actione they had
againft him, for they could be more ftedible^ to him then that man, he anfwered Pain/ara, tantara !
This taunt is now repeated to him with a taunt, and he was forced to light off his horfe. Thirdlie,
Its to be obferved, that the Doorae being delayed, after his convictione at St Andrewes, till his Ma"
farther pleafure were knowne, in the tolbooth of Edinburgh upon the firft of March, in profence of the
Juftice and the Lords of Counfell, after reading of his Convictione, that he Ihould be beheaded, quartered, and demeaned like a tratour, and his members to be fett upon the Ports, and cheif touns, yelt
he appeared to have fome good hope of releef. He would have fpoken fomething, but could not utter
his minde : The Earle of Dumbar commanded to remove him incontinent ! After dinner, he was convoyed to Leith-Winde- foote, and delivered to the Shireff of the (liire ; but nianie wondred wherefore
he was fuffered, when he went out of Edinburgh, to carie his fword about him. It was thought
ftrange that fuch a thing flioukl be fuffered in a condemned tratour. Some thought, therefore, there
was no danger; others thought he was caried to Falkland, that he might fuffer there, where the fault
was committed, and died after in difpleafure, fearing ever tlie worft. Fourtlie, it is to be obferved,

' See Cald. Church Hist. MS. Adv. Library, VII. 283. * An exclamation in some measure equiv.-aent

to ' Nonsense !' ' Humbug !' &c. expressive of contemptuous incredulity and derision ; and api)lied by tliose who have
a bombastic or high-sounding parade of empty words addressed to them, which, like the idle flnuiish of a trumpet,
seem calculated to convey no meaning. Perhaps this contemptuous expression took its rise from the lem.-ukably
alliterative and playful line of Ohl Emiius, a rough soldier, who sacrificed rather liberally to Bacchus, and who wrote
his heroics best when under the influence of the rosy God. Many of his verses smell strongly of the goblet !

' TuM TUIIA TERRIBILEI SONITU TARATANTARA DIXIT !'

The words tantafera, tantaferala, arc still used in Italy to signify nonsense, &c. ; and the French also familiarly use
tarare ! and tarare-pon-pon I ' pour marquer qu'on se moque de ce qu'on entend dire_ou qu'on ne le croit pas, &r.
Diet, de VAcad. Fran. 1813. This reproachful retort, and the taunt of the Edinburgh citizen, must have stung the
fallen courtier to the quick. ' Be of more service to him ; stand him in better steuJ.

VOL. II. "* ^

602 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6O9.

that about the fame time, the King's reply to MathcBus Tortus, with a monitorie preface to the Emperour and all Chriftian Princes come furth in print, no mentione was made in that booke of Sir James
Eiphinftoune's Confeflione or Depofitions ; which might have ferved to gieat ufe, to have purged him
of Tortus his imputations. Yea, when he was in England, and had come in the King's will, the King
could not be content till he fubfcribed his Depofitions, as Dunibar affured him ; becaufe the not fubfcribing hindred the progreffe of the Kings Anfwere to Tortus booke, quhairof his Depofitione behoved to be a part. He therefore fett too his hand, in prefence of fome Noblemen and others, as yee
may fee in his own Relatione. Becaufe the Depofitiones were ommitted in the Anfwere to Maikaus
Tortus,aiid upon other confiderations, manie doubted of the finceritie of this proceeding againll him ; and
fufpected, that he had taken upon him the crime to currie the Kings favour, he keeping his credit.
Mr Andrewes, indeed, in a Letter written the 23 of March to his Nephew Mr James, fetteth down
his opinioun in thefe words. Dejudicio quid egojentiam una verbo accipe ; inglorie fuit, efteterit, ut
ego prafentio, contra nos vera feria omnia etferio — ne/cit regnare qui ne/cit dijjimulare.^ Since heart
is free,' &c. Fiftlie, it is to be obferved that Bifhops, notwithftanding of his paines and dilligence
taken at Linlithgow, and the manie Proclamations penned be him, fpytfull enewgh againft the Minifters, they prove now at this tyme his great enemies, and none fo bufie to feeke his overthrow I It may
be, the fmall countenance he kythed, in Counfell, in favour of Mr John Murrey, or the like occafions,
have given them occafione to feeke his removell out of the way ; that another Statfman, more foreward
for their courfe, may be placed in his roome. But then we may fee the deep malice and hatred of
afpiring Prelats, that feek the overthrow of all that ftand in their way !

About the beginning of October (1609), there came a Warrant from the King to give libertie to
the Prefident to have free ward in Falkland and a myle about; he finding cautione not to efcape,
under the paine of Fourtie Thoufand pounds

Mr James Elpliingllone, Lord of Balraerinoch, and latly Secretary, ended bis dayes, about the end
of May (1612).

IX. LETTEiiyrom THE KiNG to THE Privy COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND, informing them of the Examination and Confeffion of the Lord Balmerinoch?

Right trullie and weilbeloveit cofines and counfallouris. We greatt 30W weell. Tyme, the moder
of trewth, haveing now difcovered and brocht to lycht that long obfcureid and moift heynous offence
and cryme committed be the Lord of Balmerinoch aganes our honour, credeitt, and reputatioune, and
which now by his cleir ConfeflTioune is manifefl to all the world, and We thairby purgeit of thoife
moifl wniuft and wrangous imputationes, quhilkis We did wnderly, by his foull abufe of that trurt
we had in him ; quhairof boith We and all our fubiectis have no fmall caus to thank God ; fince the
careage of the actioun, in the difcoverie of it, may juftlie be faid to liave bene done by Godis awin
finger ! And as We have hithertillis fpaired to acquent 50W parlicujarlie, with the hole circumllances
of his ConfeflTioune and Examinatioune, vntill fuch tyme as the fame wes here finiffched ; fo, by the
rycht reverent Fader in God and our rycht truflie counfallour the Arcbbiliiope of Glafgow, (quho
wes ana eie witnes and heirar of the fame, and now is returning thither,) 30W may be at lenth informed of the fame. Bot, becaus the Devill wants his awin fuppoiflis reddie to niak fall'e fubgeftiounes,
in preaflRng, by mifconftruing of thingis,to harme the trewth reveilied ; and that thair man be perhappis

' So in the original, but very obscure, and evidently a wrong reading. • Perhaps referring to the old saw,

* Since i^'ord is thrall and thought is free,
Keep well thy tongue, I counsel thee.'
^ This and the two following Letters are taken from a valuable Collection of State Papers transcribed by Thomas
Earl of Hadington, (Sir Tho. Hamilton,) preserved in the General Register House, Edinburgh; which did not come
to the Editor's knowledge till nearly the whole of the preceding .Appendix was printed.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 603

fum falfe rumouris and bruttis thair fpred, in extenuating tlie qualitie of the offence one his pairt, and
deryveing in fum fort a pairt of the blame of that mater on ws ; as it is a proud malapairt baldnes and
prefumptioune for the beft of our fubiectis to medill in ony thing that may concerne our credeit and
honour, without a varie good warrant ; and that all pretenlfes of millaking our trufling to wnrertane
reportis ar fo far to be mifregairdit, as thay rather julllie deferue the greater feueretie to be vfed aganes
fuche as will execufe thara felffis thairby ; fo, to reprefle fuch infolent wantonnes, in any of our fubiectis fair, who aither out of malice doe forge thame, or out of thair vaine, foleihe, and idill breanes
do frame thame, We will and command 30W to tak particular tryall of all fuche as hes bene or heirefter falbe fpreddaris of ony I'umouris or bruttis in this mater, wtherwayis nor falbe by the faid Arclibifhop reportit wnto 30W; and that 30W cans the rigoure and extreamitie of our lawis to be execut
aganes thame I that thairin We may have a fpeciall prooff quhat dew accompt 30W mak of our reputatioune and credit, which wnto ws (is) moir deirar nor our varie lyffe ! And referring all farder to
the Aixhbifliopis relatioune, whome We will 30W to trull. We bid 30W fairweill. From our Court,
at Royftoun, the 21 of November, 1608. [JAMES R.]

To our rycht truliie and weilbelouit cofinges and counfallouris, the Erll of Dumfermeling,
our Chancellar, and remanent Lordis and wtheris of our Privie Counsall of that our
Kingdome of Scotland.

X. Letter^/ww the PiiivY Council of Scotland to the Kixg.

Moift gratious Souerane,
We reflaveid your Ma. Letter of the 21 of November; and lies hard, at greitt lenth, the relatioune
made by the reverend Fader in God ':;our triiftie Counfallour the Archbilhope of Glafgow, anent the
Confeflioun and hole circumftances of that lang obfcured and moill heynous and inexcuiliabill offence
committit be the Lord Balmerinoch aganes 30ur credeit, honoiu-, and reputatioun ; qubairin, as fencibill and feeling memberis of fo glorious and gratious a head, finding our awin interellis, greift' and forrow that 30ur Ma* moft famous and vnfpotted name, honoure, and credeit, which jOur heynes hes to
this houre fo religiouflie confervit in all puritie, fould have beene fo wnworthellie, and in fo heich a
point, brocht in queftioun be ony of our number, quho hes that honour to be felectit be 3 our Ma. to
the cheifl" credeit of 30ur fervice heir; fo, with moilt joyfull, humbill, and tliankfull hartis to God, we
acqnawleg that greit blifllng and benefeit which it lies pleafit his Devyne Ma'"* to fchew wnto •^our
hieues by the detecting and difcoverie of that purpoife, and viudicatting the finceretie and innocencie
of 30ur royall hart frome all fufpitioune of the wrangoufe and wniull imputationes which 3our heynes
wnderlay thairin ; manifefting thairby his Devyne caire and Providence which he hes evir had over
3 our facreid perfoune, honour, and eltait, and in quhat deteftatioune he holdeth all practizes and purpoifles prejudiciall thairvnto. And quhairas, in the cenfuring of this fact befoir 30ur Ma* honourabill
Previe Counfall of that kingdome, thay, be 30ur Ma. directioune, (we doubt not) have remittit the
full tryall fairof to the lawis and formes of this country, with many demonltratiounes and oi)pin
Speaches, concerning the good opinioune thay have of the equitie of our lawis, and cinferitie of our
eflFectioune in 3 our Ma. fervice, we have not onely infinite occafioune, with all humilitie, firft, to thank
30ur facred Ma., and nixt thame, for fo refpective a refervatioune to ws of that whiche 30ur Ma.
knowis to be proper and dew to the privilege and freedome of this 3 our auntient and nobill Croune.
Bot we hop, God willing, to give wnto 30ur JNLi. a prooft", with all fidelitie, caire, and finciretie, we (all
profequute and follow out qubatevir it fall pleis 30ur facreid Ma. in 30ur princely wifdom to command,
als Weill in this as in any wtlier thing els, tuiching 3our bienes, in honour and eflate. And, in the
meantyme, if any of 30ur Ma. fubiectis hes bene or falbe fo wndewtifull, fooleilhe, and wnworthie, as
to give oute any falfe bruittis and rumouris aganes the wndonttit trewtb and varitic of this mater, or
to the extcnuatting pairof in any poynt, we fall not faill fo exactlie to examen, try, and puneillie the
famen, as wtheris falbe terrifiet to fall in the lyk errour heirefter. And fua, praying God ftill to vp604 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6O9.

bold jour facreid Ma. with all jour royall progenie wnder his Dewyne protectioune and fauflFgaird,
we reft for ever

3our Ma. raoft humbill and obedient Aibjectis and feruitouris,
A. Cancell% Santand^ Mar. Perth. Lotheane. Bugcleuche. Torphichen.
Halirudhouse. Beulie. Gairleis. Roiss. J. Cokburne. R. Cokburne.
S. T. Hamiltoun. Jo. Prestoun. S"' Robert Meluill. P. Rollok.
ED^ 6 December, 1608.

XI. Letteii,//w« the King to the Privy Council of Scotland, with
"Warrant^/- the enlargement of Lord Balmerinoch.

Right truftie and weilbeloveit confines and Counfallouris, We greete 30W weel. WnderstandING of the evill conftitutioun in heltli, and feiknes in body, of the leat Lord of Balmerinoch, by relI'oune of his detentioune and cloife keiping within our Palife of Falkland, and in the foire Toure'
fairof ; and liumill liite, for this caus, being mead wnto ws, for his enlargement, in fum foirt ; We
haif bene pleilTit to grant our Licence, for his libcrtie and friedonie, within our faid Palice and a myle
in circuite round about the fame ; upovin conditioun alwayis, that he doe not tranfcend the boundis
pre6xit ; and that he find fufficient refponfuall landit gentill men actit in jour buikis, as cautioneris and
louerteis for his performance of the laid conditioune, vnder the pane of xl" li.' vfual Scoittis money.
For whiche caus. We haue thocht meet to will jow to direct to the faid Court of Falkland, quhair his
prefent place and refidence of abode is, jour Clerk of Counfell, with the Licence heirwith fent, commanding jour faid Clerk to reffaue the foirfaid act of cautioun of fufficient landit men, boundin vnder
the foume aboue fpecifeit, for performing the conditioune aboue ^vrittin, of his conteining him felffand
not exceiding the boiuidis of his confynning ; and heirvpoun the faid Clerk to delyver vnto him the
foirfaid Licence, to be his warrand of this his enlairgment. And fo We bid jow ifairweele. Roystouke,
firft of October, 1609. [JAMES R.]

V*

Mar. 14, 1609.— John Glendoning of Dnimrafche.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the flaiichter of vraq" George Stewart, brother
germane to vmq'^ Mathow Stewart of Dunduf.

Persewar, Williame Stewart of Dunduf, brother-fone.
The Justice, of confent of ather pairtie, Coutinewis this dyet to the thrid
day of the Air,^ (' Kirkciddbricht?') or foner vpone xv dayis wairning.

• Fore or front tower. ' L.40,000. ^ What took place at the Juftice-air has not fallen

under the Editor's observation. It is likely the case was compromised by payment of a pecuniary fine
to the private prosecutor ; on which ' Letters of Shines' would follow, as a warrant for the King's Remission. In cases of Slaughter or unpremeditated Homicide, in a skirmish, it was a common manner
of withdrawing t/ie instance, for both parties to concur in a continuation of the diet to the Justice-air.
Another mode was to use influence with the ' Baron of the Regality,' &c. within whose jurisdiction
the parties resided, to repledge them to his Court, and where the matter was easily hushed up. The
King's Remission, in case of accidents, was also afterwards procured, lest future feud should occasion
a renewal <.f the prosecution, and perhaps terminate fatally to the homicide.
