VOLUME THIRD.

EDINBURCxH :

WILLIAM TAIT, PRINCE'S STREET ; AND

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMAN, LONDON.

M.DCCC.XXXIIL

I'KINTEO AT THE BANNATYNE CLUB PRESS BY BALLANTYNE AND CO.

Annex

TO

THE HON. DAVID HUME,

ONE OF THE BARONS OF THE COURT OF EXCHEQUER, IX SCOTLAND.

LATE

PROFESSOR OF SCOTS LAW,
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

AND

AUTHOR OF COMMENTARIES ON THE CRIMINAL LAW, &c. c<lc.

THIS THIRD VOLUME

OF A COLLECTION OF THE MOST ANCIENT TRIALS, NOW ON RECORD.

BEFORE THE

HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY,

IS, WITH EVERY SENTIMENT OF ESTEEM AND UESI'ECT,

DEDICATED

BY

THE EDITOR.

CRIMINAL TRIALS

AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY.

\_Sh' WilUanie Heart, Jitjllce-Depufe.']

Creasonaljle drirt--raisinci:— Cruel (i^pprtsmcm— Creiisoii — Brtalt--
inu 2MavU xrnt of i\)t CastUs of 2SIacIines9 auU iS^IJinl&ui-iil).

[The almost incredible wickedness and atrocious cruelty of Sir James Makconeill (Macdonald), the individual whose Trial follows, and the horrible facts which the reader will find therein
disclosed, afford a lamentable picture of the barbarous state of manners prevalent in the Western
Islands of Scotland, even at so comparatively recent a period as the reign of King James VI. Did
we not know that such outrageous proceedings were but too common in Scotland at this melancholy
period, and especially in the Highlands and Islands, which were then far removed from the feeble arm
of the Law, Sir James s misdeeds would hold a most conspicuous place in the dark catalogue of crimes.
Without entering into any narrative of similar acts of violence and bloodshed, but merely to shew that
Makconeill was not a solitary instance of the perpetration of such execrable deeds, and that he was bv
no means unworthy of his descent and kindred, the reader need only refer to a previous portion of this
Collection,' where a few of the acts of Angus Makconeill of Dinnievaig , liis father, and of Maclanc
of Dowart, his maternal uncle, are rehearsed.

It would be rather out of place to enter here into a detail of the frightful and bloody feuds and conflicts
between the contending tribes of Clandonald and Clanlain; which are fully recorded by Sir
Robert Gordon of Gonlonstonn, in his valuable Genealogical History of the Family of Sutherland,
who informs us, that these inveterate hostilities were long and fiercely ' prosecuted, to the destruction
almost of both their families !'^

Of the personal history of Sir James Makconeill little can now be collected, saving from the
Books of Adjournal and of the Privy Council, and from the public transactions in the Isles, after he
had effected his second escape from ' ward.' It is certain, that he could boast of a very honourable
descent, being sprung from the ancient Norwegian family of the Lords of the Isles, who long maintained their independence of the Scotish Crown, and used and received tiie title of Kings of the

' Vol. I. p, 224, Jan. 19, 1590-1. ' This is now rcndei'cd the more unnecessary, as the Editor has (since

this Notice was in typos) been informed l)y liis friend, Donald Grf.coky, Esquire, one of the Secretaries to the Society
of Antiquaries of Scotland, that lie is now engaged in preparing, for publication, a History or tiik Isi.rs and adjacent
Highlands, embracing a minute account of the various rebellions, feuds, and conllicts of the various taniilics, who,
after the fall of the I^ords of the Isles, rendered this part of Scotland a scene of almost uninterrupted warfare and
bloodshed : which Mr Grecjory purposes to compile from Original Documents, the result of a laborious investigation
into the Public Hecords, and other genuine and authentic sources of inl'ormation. Tlie ]>ublication of Mr Grfc.ory's
History of the Isles, &c. will save the lOditortbe necessity of giving many of the Documents which he had prepared
for publication, in illustration of various Trials; for they ought rather to form a part of such an historical work,
which is a great desideratum, and cannot fail to be favourably received by every lover of ScotiNh History.

VOL. IIL A

2 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609Isles. John of Yle, or de Insulis, eldest sou of John Lord of the Isles, was unquestionably
the common ancestor of the Macdonalds of Dunnivcg and Glynncs, the Marquis of Antrim, in Ireland, &c., and predeceased bis fatiier ; who, Nov. 15, 1369, gave his grandson Aligns as a hostage to
King David II, for his obedience, &c. Some of the descendants of this John, having settled in the
North of Ireland, acquired by force, and afterwards maintained by violence, the Route and the Seven
Glynnes,^ and soon distinguished themselves by their services against the Scots. Alexander MacDonell was, in 1557, for his valuable assistance, presented by the Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, witli a gold sword and silver-gilt spurs ; and others of the family were equally active against
their ancient mother country. A brother of this Alexander, named Sorley-huy^ having seated himself
elsewhere, built and fortiBed tlie strong Castle of Dunluce, in the county of Antrim : and, as being
of the Scotish-Irish race, was by patent, dated at Westminster, Apr. 14', 1573, created a free denizen of Irelaiui. Having rebelled. Sir John Perrot, Deputy of Ireland, took the Castle of Dunluce, with all his islands and loughs ; and, next year, Ijaving sued for the protection and favour of
Queen Elizabeth, he entered into Indentures for preservation of the peace, Jun. 28, 1536. Sorleybuy
married Mary, daughter to Con O'Neill,, afterwards created Earl of Tyrone. Their eldest son, Randal,
was created Eurl ofA/itrim,

The purpose of stating this connexion is to prevent Sir James ]\Iakcoxeill of Kintyre and Knokrynsay, the Chief or eldest son of the Chief of the powerful Clandonald or Clcai Ian More of Kintyre
and Hay, from being mistaken for another Sir James Makconeill, one of his Irish relatives (the second
son of this Sorley-buy), who, at this period, visited Scotland, and was honourably received by tho
King, when he had the honour of knighthood conferred upon him. He was afterwards created a Baronet,
liy Privy Seal, dated Southwicke, 20 June, and l)y Patent, at Dublin, Nov. 30, 1627, ' as well for his
service done unto him, as for his other virtues ;'^ and was known, in Ireland, by the title of Sir James
l\kic-Sorlye-Boye. The first notice of the latter Sir James, which the Editor has met with, is in an
Anonymous MS. History of Scotland, in the Advocates' Library, where mention is thus quaintly made
of him. ' The 20 day of Aprylle, (1597,) James M^coneill, alias Soirllbowy,^ cam to Ed'', quha
wes maid kny' be his Ma% the 24. This Schir James wes ane Scottis manne, of bluid, albeit his landis
lyis in Yrland. He was ane braw manne of perfoun and behaviour, bot liad nocht the Scottis toung,
nor na langage bot Eirfe.' Birrel, in his gossipping Diary, contents himself with remarking, that
' Serlie Bui cam to the toune, ane Hyland man.' And (May 4) ' James M'Oneill, alias Serle Bui,
The 7 day of Maii he went homeward ; and, for honour of his bonyalla, the canons shott out of the
Castell of Edinburghe.'^

With regard to Sir James Mahconeill of Knokrynsay and Kintyre, as he lived in a district so remote from the seat of Government, and seems to have had his hands full at home, the first known
mention made of him is — (Aug. 5, 1598,) ' M^Leane was flayne be M'coxeill,^ in Ylla, he being
nioder-brother to the faid Schir James M'^coneill, and ane of the braw man that wes in this cuntrey,
in his lyme. Thair wes flayne that day betuix thame, on baylh fydis, to the number off 150 menne.'

These few imperfect sketches prove that Mahconeill was reckoned a personage of considerable note,
even at Court, and in the Capital, previous to the King's accession to the English throne.

The next prominent circumstance in tiie life of Mahconeill which can now be collected, after the

' It Is worthy of remark, that, from the aj^o of Donald de Insults, who flourishpd in 1419, to Anpus, the father
of Sir Jumen of Knokrynsay, the lineal flescendants of Jahn de Insulis above noticed, resident in the Isles, are uniformly styled ' I>ords of Dniinoway and Glynnis.' A\'hether they merely assumed the title as feudal sii]>eriors of the
Irish liranch, or whether tlii-y were actually the proj>rietors of the soil, rif whom the Irish INIacdonalds held, IVIr
CM-egory will probably be enabled to explain. ^ The yellow-haired Somerled. 15. Lat. Sorlclits, or Sorlie, and

in Iri^ll and Gaelic, Samhairle, long a jirevalent nnniein the family <d"the Isles. ^ Lodge's Irish Peerage, I. 106.

' ' Surle-lJouie' is interlined. ^ Anon. Hist, of Scotland, ."MS. Adv. Library. * ' Neil (Hector) M'^^Lank

slaiiie, and twentie of his narrest I'reindis, and liis awen sone, be 31'-' Comicll ; thai ht-'uig at ane tryst, under
trust.' — Birrel.

42 & 6 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 3

period of his apprehension and imprisonment, is the extraordinary attempt to escape out of Ward, from
the Castle of Edinburgh/ which was so boldly planned, and so successfully accomplished by Jo/tn
Lord 3IaxiveU. The event is thus briefly described in the above mentioned Chronicle, where the cause
of Sir James Makconeill's failure is rightly attributed to the circumstance of his having been unable
to extricate himself from his heavy irons, whereby he dislocated or bi-oke his limb, in leaping over the
wall. This breaking of ward forms one of the leading Articles of Dittay against Makconeill. (1607,
Dec.) ' In the beginning of December, the Lord Maxwell, being wairded in the Callle of Edinburgh, devifeth a play^ for the keepers, whereby it behoved them to runne out of the houfe where he
lay. They lay afide their fwords ; Maxwell and another gentleman who came purpoflie to aflifl him,
with the advice oi MacJtoneill, take their fwords, cloffe them in a houfe, come to the Caftle gate, hurt
the porters, lappe the Caflle-wall at the utter-gate. Maxioell and his friend departed. MachoneiUy
becaufe he had the boyes^ on his legges, wrefled his kute'' in leaping; yett he creeped to a dunghill.
The crye^ rifing, he was diligentlie fought, found calling the muck upon himfelf, and was brought to
the Caftle agane. This fell furth in the gloming.'' The reft of the Wairders were keeped the Itraiter.
Clo/burne was intifed be thame, but refufed to breake waird.'

The anonymous Chronicler, before quoted, thus narrates the proceedings which followed on the
recapture of this refractory prisoner. ' Now as ye have hard befoir, Sir Janxts M'comill of Kintyre,
being in waird in the Caftell of Edinbroghe, was, one the 13 day of Maii (1609), brocht to the tolbuyth of Edinbrughe, and thair, befoir the Juftice, put to the tryell of ane Afly'ife, for findrie poyntis
of Treflbun, to witt, for Slachter, wnder treft, of fum Heland-men, in his awin hous of Kiiityre ; as
alfo, for diuerfe ffyris that he had raifTit, contrair the Act of Parliament ; and, in fpeciall, for the cryme
of Treftbune, in breking of the Kingis waird, and ftreking of his Maiefteis feruandis : And, being conwict, condamnit, as ane Tratour to his Maiefty, to haue hes held ftrukin off, — bot nather the day nor
pleafe defignit. Quhairwpone he was conwoyit bak to the Caftell, to remayne during the Kingis will.'
This History, unfortunately, terminates before Makconeill's final escape.

Without rehearsing the substance of the interesting Original Letters of Sir James Makconeill
and others, after the date of liis second escape, (which at length he effected, and made a successful
retreat to the Isles, and maintained himself and a considerable force which he had collected,) it is sufficient to mention, generally, that, according to Sir Robert Gordon, ' Sir James Mackonaldw&s, thereafter,
by tlie Earle of Argyle his meanes, warded in the Caftell of Edinburgh, and keipt priffoner ther a long
tyme ; from whence he efcaped, by the meanes and diligence of his coufen 3Iac1ircnald, who then fled
with him into Spain (' wher they were weill interteyned. And vpon the Earle of Argyle his flight from
Scotland to the King of Spain, they were both recalled home from thence by his Majeftie, into Eni;-
land, the yeir 1620; and had there ane yeirlie petiiion of ane thoufand merks fterling; wher Sir James
Mackonald remained vntil his death, which happened the yeir 1 6"26.' The Documents given in the
Appendix explain fully all that can now be satisfactorily ascertained, so far as is necessary to elucidate the details of this Trial. It is certain that Sir James was pensioned, and was permitted to reside,
without molestation, in England ; but it is not so easy to account for the extraordinary policy of the
King and his advisers, not only in sparing the life of so notorious a criminal and rebel, but in givin"-
him likewise so liberal a pension, for so many years

The arm of Government must have been weak indeed, when, after the forfeiture of Sir James, his

' Soe also Lord Maxu^Ws Trial, Jmi. 21., 1 (iOf), anil the Appendix of Original Documents, for fartlirr ]>articiilars
of this remarkable attempt. ^ Sport, frolic. =* A cant phi-ase for (ji/vvs, or heavy irons use.l foi- desperate

offenders. '' Sprained or dislocated his ankle. ^ Sprakltc ; hue and cry. "^ A fler sunset ; towards

nightfall. ' ' Dureinf; Sir James Macltonald \\\s stay in Spain, his brother Axr.i's ^VIackonald (.-l/jj/i/.f Oiy),

standiuff out against the Earle of Ar;iyle, wes traiiu'd into Kdinburi;h by the Lord Ochiltree and the ("aniplMlls, vpon
promise tosaitf his lytf : And the Castell of Dounnivaj,' wes randered vnto them, vpon the same termes. Nevertlu-bs,
the said Angus wes executed, and put to death, at his coming to Kdiuhurgh.' — Hist, of EurU of SulhcrUmd, p. 239.
See also this Collection, Jdl. .'>, Itilj.

4 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

brother Angus Oig sliould Lave been able, in defiance of the various Royal Lieutenants sent to reduce
him to obedience, to maintain the Castle of Duunievaig, until 1615 I The same barbarous policy
which Argyle adopted in reference to the MacGregors, was resorted to with Angus Oig ; who, under
promise of safety, was trained to Edinburgh, — also by the Campbells, his feudal enemies ; who had long
been eagerly soliciting, and, by their treacherous conduct, finally obtained, a grant of the ancient inheritance of the Macdonalds, — and executed for Treason !

Sir James Balfour of Kinnaird and Dcnmylne has fortunately preserved a body of original and
authentic information, relative to the state of the Western Islands, in his extensive and truly valuable
MS. Collections,^ which the Editor shall have frequent occasion to refer to, in the course of this Work.
A selection from these Original Papers, given from time to time, will better, and much more forcibly,
illustrate the causes and effects of those various commotions in ' the Isles,' which excited such lively
interest during King James VI's reign, than any detailed Narrative, which, OAving to the nature of this
Collection, must necessarily be brief.

After considerable research, the Editor has the satisfaction of being enabled to append to the ensuing
Trial, and to that of Angus Oig, a number of valuable Letters and Papers, taken from the Originals
still extant amongst the Records of the Privy Council of Scotland, and in the Advocates' Library.
These Documents will be found of considerable importance, as not only affording satisfactory elucidation of points connected with Sir James Makconeill's Trial, but as supplying much curious information relative to the state of the Western Islands, during that unhappy period.

The History of Scotland, so far as concerns tlie various Expeditions against the Islesmen, whicii
were fitted out at the public expense, as well as the numerous feuds and conflicts between contending
Chieftains and Clans, is necessarily meagre and unsatisfactory; and, as is well known to those who have
attempted such investigations, it is extremely difhcult to obtain authentic information on the subject.*

It may, however, be proper to remark here, generally, that, owing to the inaccessible nature of their
country, and the facilities which the natives possessed for carrying on a most harassing w^arfare against
any invaders, however well appointed and disciplined these might be, the most vigorous steps taken
by the ablest Royal Lieutenants or Commanders ever sent to quell the Islesmen, frequently proved
abortive or nugatory. At other times, the natives contrived to protract the warfare, without coming
to decided hostilities, in order that the season might elapse without any considerable advantages being
gained by their enemies ; and then, they liad the whole winter and spring to repair their losses, and to
arrange for a more vigorous resistance, should a landing be effected, during the next summer. On
almost every such occasion, the largest expeditions ever fitted out by the Privy Council of Scotland,
even when assisted by English vessels of war, (after King James had succeeded to the throne of England,) were bafHed by the ingenuity and military skill of this handful of hardy and active Islesmen.
Some of the Royal Lieutenants appear to have been furnished with large complements of troops ; but
this very circumstance, formidable as it might otherwise appear, frequently tended to their discomfiture. Tiie castles of the Island Chiefs were usually places of great strength ; and, on such occasions,
were well victualled ; and besides, many of them were, by nature, situated where the clumsy battering-trains then in use could not be brought to boar upon them. The setting fire to the wretched
huts of the natives, and laying waste the country, was attended with comparatively little loss to them.
Indeed, this was a measure often resorted to, on emergencies, by themselves ; for it deprived the more
effeminate Lowland troops of that shelter which was absolutely necessary for their health.

From the hour of their disembarking, the Royal troops knew no repose ; and they suffered the most
dreadful privations from cold, famine, incessant watching, and fatigue ; for the Islanders, besides iheir

' Preserved in the Library of the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh. » ]\Ir Gregory's Historical enquiries

must throw much light on every point connected with the Isles and adjacent Highlands ; and the authentic sources
from which his materials are derived, must stamp the highest value on the work he has undertaken.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 5

usual annoyances, harassed them chiefly during the night, l)y making continual attacks and skirmishes,
setting fire to their huts, tents, &c. Besides all these hardships, owiug to the tempestuous seas and the
imperfect state of navigation at the period, the invaders were frequently cut off from their supplies for
a long time. On the other hand, the vigilant Islanders, when they happened to be very hard pressed by
a determined pursuit and onset, merely flitted from one Island to another, in their curraghs or light
boats, which they easily carried with them over land ; and, almost before their enemies had prepared
to rest from their fatigues, they were surprised and attacked during the niglit.

The chief cause of the numerous successes gained by the Islanders over their invaders seems to iiave
arisen fi'om the minute knowledge which they possessed of the fastnesses of the country, and their
determination to avoid a general engagement. A common ruse de guerre was, for a party of active
men to make a bold attack on the encampment, as if to carry off plunder, &c., at a time when the
Royal troops were unprepared ; and when pursued, they gradually fell back on the hilly ground, so as
to lead their invaders into ambushes, which were frequently formed not far from the tents. In this
way great numbers fell ' in detail.' When the King's soldiers endeavoured to penetrate into the
country, in pursuit of the enemy, they appeared to meet with little actual resistance, but were artfully
decoyed farther and farther, by the occasional appearance of numbers of the Islesmen, as if in full
retreat. The Royal troops, as soon as they were considered to be fatigued with the day's march, were,
in their turn, severely galled, and the stragglers systematically picked off. Vigorous attacks were also
occasionally made on the main body; and, on their finally returning to the tents, they found their
guards killed, and the whole encampment plundered and destroyed by fire I

Thus, for want of a substantial enemy wherewith to contend, each campaign was, of necessity,
terminated before any decisive blow could be struck; and while the Royal troops were greatly thinned
in their numbers, by fatigue and famine, as well as by the ceaseless assaults of their enemies, the hardy
Islesmen, trained to hardships, and inured to almost daily privations from their infancy, thought little
of llieir toils and dangers. Indeed, they were often enriched by considerable booty, carried off from the
enemies' camps ; and, in reality, they almost always triumphed over their formidable, numerous, and
well- disciplined foes, by stratagem, and the skilful employment of the most approved tactics then
known in Highland warfare.^

May 13, 1609. — Sm James Makconeill of Knokiynfay, kny*.'
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the trelToiiable Raifeing of ffyre and burning of
the hous of Aflconiell in Kyntyre, in the moneth of Janiiare, r^.V'.lxxxxvij
yeiris ; and vtheris treflbnabill crymes, contenit in his Dittay vnderwrittin.

Sir James Makconeill of Knokiynfay, kny\ ge ar indyttit and acculet :
Forfamekill as, fronie 30ur verrie 30uthe, je, being tranet vp in all nianer of
crewall barbaritie and wiketnes, and following the pernitious exanipill of 50ur
godles parentis, kynfnien and cuntrie 2)eopIe, haifing connnitted infinit Opprelfiones and violences aganis lie perfoiies as 3e niillykit, in ])e cuntreyis of Kyntyre, Ila, and vtheris Hielandis lies of this Kingdonie, to the heich oflence of
(lod, difplefour of the Kingis Maieftie, contempt of his authoritie, and violatioiui
of his Lawis : P^or forder manifeflatioun of 30ure extreanie and maid viuiatiirall
inifchancie,^ vnderftanding ])at \>q fones of J)e vmq^" Tutour of Loui)e A^•ar in
3our faj^eris hous of Afkomell, in Kyntyre, and that the Laird of Loupe (quho
^ See Jul. 3, 1G15, &c. ^ Recklessness, wickedness, OKI Tr. meschaiiccte.

6 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609had flane ^oiir fader') was verrie defyrous to liaif ])air lyves ; 36, accuinpaneit
with 30111* bro]3er, Angus Oig, and the laid Laird of Loupe, with tua or thre hundreth barbarus, wikked and bludie Hieland-men, foirneris, and avowed maliefactouris, all bodin in feir of weir, with hagbutis, piftolettis and vtheris forbidden
wappones, vpone the . . .^ day of Januar (fyftene day is or })airby eftir gule) in pe
3eir of God, I^.V. fourfcoir levintene 3eiris, (1597) come in the nycht to the faid
hous of Aflvomell, quhair ])e faid Tutour of Loupis fones war, takand J)e nychtis
reft, lipning for no trubill, danger or invafioune to haif bene maid be ony man
aganis Jjame ; and invironed )je famyn, in all fydis, with grit numberis of 30ur
airmet men ; and about pe brek of day, calling in to tlieas who war within, to
rander ])e hous and ])ame felffis to 30W, thay, for feir of pair lyves and of J)e
mercieles crewaltie of 30W and 30ur bludie allifteris, refuifeing to rander ; albeit
36 knew that Angus IVrconeill,^ 30ur fajjer, was within the hous, with whome 36
had privat and freindlie melting and conference that fame nycht, and had pairtit
frome him in fic profeffioun of love and naturall deutie and reuerence, as 3e had
prefentit and gevin to him ane pair of piftolettis : NeuerJjeles, cafting of all
bandis and refpectis of conference, honeftie, and of nature, to 30ur fa])er, and to
30ur mo])er Fynwall Nikclane,* quhome 3e knew to be alio within J)e faid hous,
3e godleflie, barbaruflie, vijjrouftie and treftbnabillie, be 30ur felf and 30ur complices, in 30ur name, of 3our caufing, command, affiftance and ratihabitioun, fet
ffyre in all ])e four coirneris of j^e laid hous ; quhairby 30ur faidis parentis, and
haill remanent perfones being within J)e faid hous, being brocht at ]?e verrie inftant
to extreme danger of ))air lyves, and 3our moJ)er crying out to 30W, ' Thief !
Will thow burne thy mo})er ?' ge nawayis caufit ftay or (lokin^ ])e ffyre, bot fufferit ]3e famyn to rage, quhill*' pe ruif of Ipe hous began to fall ; and 30ur faper,
haifing fufferit moft crewall extremitie, and being brunt in thre or foiu* pairtis
of his body with ])at fyre, was forcet to rufch to the dur, quhair 36 had prepairit
ane number of grit treyis to be laid croce Ipe dur, ajjer to ftay his furth cuming,
to ])e effect he micht be brunt within the hous, or micht be fo hinderit in his
furthcuming, as he fould indoutitlie fall in 3our mercieles handis : Accoirding to
the quhilk proiect, he, falling amangis ])e faid treyis, was pudillit in ane myre'
be 30ur fervandis, in 3our ficlit ; and J^aireftir tranfportit, in his fark, to Smerbie,
tuo myles diftant from Afkomell, quhair 3e fetterit him in irnes, with ane vther

' Probably fatber-in-law ; tlie fatlier of IMargaret Campbell, his wife. ^ * Tlirt-ttolu' is partially

erased. ^ Angus Macdoiiald of Dynnievaig and (ilynnos. ^ -^Z^^? ' daughter,' is sometimes,

in the public Records, used as a prefix to the patronymic, in the case of a female. 3lac, ' son,' is the
masculine, though, in modern practice, generally used indiscriminately for the patronymic of both sexes.
i\V/d is considered to be a compound n\ ]Vi/?i and Mr, which i,s the genitive of Mac. Nik thus s'anifies
Daughter of the so7i of, or Grand-daughter (if. Tiiis Lady was a daughter of ^Madane of Dowart.
See Vol. I. '224, Jan. *9, I3S0-1. ' Quench, ilahc, extinguish. ^ Until. ^ Dragged

through a miry puddle.

42&6JAC. VI. CRIxMIXAL TRIALS. 7

of 30ur priiToneris, and detenit him in J)at moft vnnaturall, mercieles and miferabill eftait, be })e fpace of ane quarter of ane 3eir : And fua, be pe crewall and
wilfull ffyre-raifnig, conimittit be 30'\v, and vj)eris in 3our name, of3our caufmg,
command, affillance and ratiliabitioun, in maner aboue writtin, quhairof 3e war
and ar airt and pairt ; ge committit moft heigh and manifeft Treafone, and aucht
and fould be pwneift Jjairfore, accoirding to Jje Lawis and practik of this realme :
Quhilk is notourlie knawin, and 3e can nocht deny. Secuxdlie, ^e ar indytit
and accufet, fforfamekill as his Maieflie, (quhome J)e vvarld knowis, and J;is cuntrie hes evir experimentit to be ane moft godlie, juft, and gracious Prince,) detefting 30ur vnnaturall crewaltie and wikketnes, haifing caufit tak and apprehend
30W, and commit 30W to waird in pe Caftell of Blaknes, for J)e laid trelibnable
cryme of ffyre-raifing, committit be 30W at Ipe tyme and in maner foirfaid, and

many vtheris 30ur haynous offences and crymes, 3e, in the nioneth of ,

or jjairby, ])e 3eir of God 1604 3eiris, moft treffonabillie interprylet, be J)e affiftance of fum of 30ur auld com25lices, to haif treffonabillie forcet pe faid Caftell of
Elaknes : Quhilk purpois being difclofet and difapointit, and 3e, for 3our moir
faif keiping, being tranfportit to J)e Caftell of Edinburgh, 36 ]?air lykwayis interpryfet, in the moneth of . . . ., the 3eir of God I"\AT. and lax 3eiris, and prepared meanis to haif brokin 3our waird: And being alfo difapointit of that attempt, 36 war ]?airin detenit in irnes, till at laft, in the monethis of Nouember
and December, the 3eir of God 1607 3eiris, 36 trefTonabillie confultit, devyfet,
refoluet, and concludit with Johnne Lord Maxwall, and Robert IMaxwall callit
of J)e Tour, being bothe his Maiefteis ^Vardouris,' fforceablie, violentlie and trelfonabillie to force his Maiefteis Caftell of Edinburgh, and brek waird furth pairof ; conforme to J)e quhilk refolutioun, 36 and 3our laidis comi)lices, vpone pe

day of December, the 3eir of God r^.Vj^ and levin 3eiris, haveing prepairit all thingis necellar for executioun of 30ur devillilch proiect, be lubteill
meanis, maid 3our felffis maifteris of 30ur keiperis wapones ; and than rulching
furth of pe chalmer, and loking pame in within pe lame, quhairby thay Ibuld
na])er be able to ftay 30ur purpois, nor to dilcouer 30w,"3e come to pc Inner-3et
of the faid Caftell, quhair, being accumpanyeit with pe laid Lord ^laxwall and
Robert Maxwall, with drawin luordis in 3our handis, 36 trelFonabillie invaidit
Alexander Strujjeris,^ keiper of pe laid 3ett, for his llauchter ; and Ijccaus he,
accoirding to liis deutie, refifted 30W in 3our laid trefTonabill interpryie, 3e gaif
him dyuerle grit and dangerous woundis in his heid and airme, to the grit ellulioun of his bluid and danger of his lyfe ; and haifing left him l}iiig for dei.l, 3e
and jour faid complices forceablie and treftbnablie opnit })e faid Inner-jet, quhair

' Prisoners, persons detained in ward or captivity; not Warders, in tlie English sense of the word,
' Struthers.

8 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

^e lykwayis vnhoneftlie, crewallie, and treffonabillie hurt and woimdit Margaret
Pliillope, wyfe to the faid Alexander, in f)e heid, with 3onr fuordis, to ])e grit
efiufioun of liir bluid, and left hir alfo lying for deid : And then, haifing no forder refiftance, 39 3eid^ forwartis to Ipe Myd-3et of the faid Caftell ; and J)air 36
and pe faid Lord Maxwall treffonabillie invaidit Archibald Cunninghame, Maifter-porter of })e faid Caftell, for his flauchter ; and becans he wald nocht delyuer
to 30U' ])e keyis of ])e faid 3et, 36 gaif him anc grit and dangerus ftraik, in ])e left
airme ; be pe paine quhairof, and abundance of ]?e bluid rynning frome him, he
being almoft in found,^ 36 reft the keyis frome him, and treffonabillie forcet ])e
faid 3et, and paft furth pairat ; and than going to ])e Bak-wall, 3e and 30ur faidis
complices lap ouer ])e fame ; and })airby treffonablie brak J)e faid waird, and fled
to half efcaiped ; quhill'' 3e, being foUowit be ])e Conflable of pe laid Caftell, and
vj)eris, his Maiefteis guid and faithfull fubiectis, 36 war tane and brocht bak to
]7e faid Caftell. Quhilkis treffonabill crymes war moft wiketlie and contemptiouflie committit be 30W and 30ur faidis complices ; and 3e war and ar airt and
pairt l^airof : And ])airfoir aucht and fould be pwneifchet be tynfall and fforfaltour
of 3our lyfe, landis and guidis ; accoirding to pe lawis and practik of ])is realme.

The faid Sir James, eftir reding of the faid Dittay, produceit certane Articles ;
togidder with ane Inftrument, of the dait of tliir prefentis, quhair Margaret
Campbell, his fpous, paft to Mr Johnne RufTell, Aduocat, and prefentit him the
Counfallis Warrand to compeir in his defence ; quha refuifit to compeir, as the
Inftrument beris : And als produceit the Lordis of Secreit Counfall Warrand and
delyuerance, quhair thay grant Licence to procuratouris to compeir. Quhilkis
being red, the Aduocat tuik inftrumentis thairvpoun, and fpeciallie, vpoun the
productioun of the Warrand gewin be the Lordis of Secreit Counfall to Aduocattis to compeir. — The Aduocat produceit ane Act of Counfall, for his Wan-and
to infift in perfuit of Sir James M^connell.

Mr Johnne RufTell, Aduocat, compeirand judiciallie, in prefens of the Juftice,
declairit he wald nocht compeir in defence of the pannell, without his Maiefteis
fpeciall Warrand and Commiftioune, commanding him to compeir.**

The Juftice declairit and anfuerit to the faid Mr Johnne, that gif he wald
compeir, bayth the Act of Parliament gevis him Licence, and the Counfall lies
gevin him ane particular Warrand for his compeirance : And thairfoir, gif he

^ Went. ' In a swoon or fainting-fit. ^ Until. * Tliis refusal does not seem to have

proceeded from personal fear of tlie consequences of undertaking this defence ; for in numerous instances, this learned man undertook as desperate cases ; and in the present instance, he liad a special
Licence. It must have proceeded from the utter hopelessness of Makconeill's defence ; and the detestation naturally felt at the almost unparalleled cruelties committed by this ferocious barbarian. He
absolutely refused to appear, unless commcmded by his Majesty.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 9

will nocht comjieir, — (l^lny nocht the Jiigement ony langer. — The faid Mr
Jolinne refuifet altogidder to compeir.

Quhilk Dittay, eftir reiding thairof opj:)inlie in Judgement, the Jullice ffand
relevant : And thairfoir referrit the famyn to the knawlege of ane Affyfe, of the
perfones following.

ASSISA.

Audio Lord Stewart of Vcliiltre, Rob' Cliennen of Chemientoun, W'" Sinclair of May, younger,

The Laird of Drumlanerig, elder, Dauid Arnote of Cliapell, Mr Frances Bothuell, brotlier to

Sir James Douglas, kny*, James Tennent of Lennox, my Lord Halyrudlious,

Sir James Cunninghame of (Linlioufe,) Williame Trumbill of Airdrle,

Glengarnock, Tliomas Sibbald, Tutour of Jolmne Johnneftoun, Bail5ie of

Mr Robert Fawfyde, elder^ of Rankelour, the Watter of Leith,

that Ilk, Sir James Balfoure, brotlier to Jolinne Achiefoun, portioner of

Laurence Gordoun of Glenluce, my Lord of Burlie, Innerafk.

The faid Sir James produceit to the AlTyfe ane Warrand, fubfcryuit be his
Maieflie, allowing^ the taking of his father Angus M'^coneill, tlie maner, forme,
and circum fiances done thairin ; quhilk is of the dait, att ffalkland, the audit
day of Auguft 1.598 : Quhilk he tuik vp agane, and wald not vfe.

It was allegeit (by the pannell,) that ony verificatioun that is producet of Depofitiounis, tane be my Lord of Ergyll, can nocht be avail3eable ; in refpect nnLord Ergyll lies mellit with his blude and leving.

Our faid fouerane lordis Aduocat, for verificatioun of the faid Dittay, producet
to the faidis perfones of Affyfe, Angus M'^coneill of Dynnievaig, father to the
faid Sir James, and Fjaiwall Nickclane, his mother, thair Depofitiones ; togidder
with his awin Depofitiones ; made be thame, in prefens of the Lordis of his hienes Counfall ; for verifeing that article and poynt of Dittay, anent the raifeing
of the ffyre, and burning of the lious of Aflvomell. And ficlyk, for verificatioun
of the laft article of Dittay, rejieittit the faid Sir James awin Judiciall Confeffioun, maid be him in the faid Juflice and AfTyfouris prefence ; confeffing the
breking of the faid waird of the Caftell of Edinburgh : And als produceit, for verificatioun thairof, the faidis Archibald Cunninghame, Maifter-porter, and Alexander Strutheris, thair Depofitiones maid and fubfcryuit be thame, in prefens of
the faidis Lordis of Counfall ; quhilkis tua Depofitiones was ratifeit and approvin, in Judgement, be the faidis Ardiibald and Alexander, in prefens of tlie faid
Sir James : Quhilkis our fouerane lordis Aduocat alfo repeitit. And in refpect
thairof, proteftit for AVilfull Errour, in cais the faidis jjerfones of Alfyfe Claiige
or Acquit him of the faidis crynies.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of the faid Andro Lord Stewart of

* Sanctioning, permitting; not admitting or confessing, as the word usually signified, in ancient legal
pleadings.

VOL. III. B

10 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6O9.

Vchiltrie, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet and declarit tlie faid Sir James
IVrcoNEii.L of Kiiokiyiifay, knyclit, to be Giltie and convict of airt and pairt of
the Raifeing of fiyre in the hous of Afkomell and burning of the faniyn, accoirding to his Dittay, in all poyntis ; cleirlie verifeit to thame be his awin Depolitiones, and vtheris probationes producet in proces. And lykwayis, the faidis
perfones of AfTyfe, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Sir
James to be Giltie, culj)able and convict of the Breking of his Maiefteis waird of
the Caftell of Edinl)urgh : And of airt and pairt of the forceing of the 5ettis of
the faid waird : And of airt and pairt of Hurting and Wounding of Archibald
Cunninghanie, IMailler-porter, Alexander Strutheris and Margaret Phillope, his
fpous, ordiner fervandis and porteris of the faid Caftell.

Sentence. To be tane to the place of his Executioun, and thair to be demanit and execute as ane tratour ; and his heid to be flrukkin fromehis body;'
and all his landis, Iieritages, barroneis, takis, fteidingis, rowmes, pofTeiTiones,
coirnes, cattell, inficht plenifling and annuelrentis, guidis and geir jjertening to
liim, to be ffortaltit, efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe : as convict
and culpable of the faidis crymes.

APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL PAPERS.'

[The following Documents are carefully taken from the Originals, which are
preserved in Sir James Balfour's Collection of MSS. Advocates' Library. Had
the Editor been earlier informed of Mr Gregory's proposed History of the Isles,
&c. he would have left it to that gentleman to give the substance of them. It
was, however, too late to cancel this Appendix ; but indeed, this is the less to be
regretted, as it is believed that JNlr Gregory merely intends to give the spirit of
such Papers as the present, and to incorporate the information conveyed, in the
body of his work ; which is all that is necessary for fuch historical purposes.]

I. Deposition of Sir James Makconeill.^

At tlie Carti'll of Edinburghe, tlie xv day of Januare, 1608, in prefence of my Lord Aduocat,

and Mr William Ilairt, Jurtice depute, and Sir Jolmne Arnote, Thel'aurare depute.

Sir James ]\rcoxEiLL, knycht, fworne and demandit, How lang is it fen he lies bene detenit and

lialdin prifoner ? Deponis, that he wes tane be his fader, in Kintyre, vpoun informatioun maid to his

fiider, that he wes to tak fome courfe aganis liim ; and efter he had remanit ane certane fpace with his

fader, he wes delyuerit be his fader io Auchiiibreh,^ be whome he wes detenit ane certane ipace; and

' It has already been statnil, in the Notice prefixcil to this Trial, that Sir James IMakconeill was not executed ; but
that he again effected his escape, went to Spain, and retunicd in the reit;n of King Charles I, from whom he received
a large pension, and died a natural death, in Englaiul, in M'yUi. ' J'he remaining Papers fall more i)roperly

under the proceedings against Amjus Oi(j, Jul. 3, 1615, where they shall be inserted. ^ Prom the Original, preserved among the Warrants of the Privy Council, General Register House. ' Sir Dougald Campi)ell.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 11

thairefter delyuerit to the Erll of Ergijll, who keipit him whill he wes chargeit be the Couxsaill
to exliibite him ; quhilk he did at Sanct Johnnelloiin : ffia tliat, he wes fend to the Callell of Blaknes.
Demandit, yf at ony tyme he had tane his fader? Deponis, that lie tuke him in Kintyre, in ane houfe
callit AJJiomilne, the deponer haueing his hrutlier, young Angus, (and) a cumpany of the gentilmeu
of Kintyre with him. And tliat this wes about Candihues, aucht yeir fyne, or tliairby. Denyis that
lie rafed ony flfyre in the lioufe ; and depones, that he lies Wanand of Hes Majestie, allowing^ the
taking of his fader as gude feruice.

Anent the interprife of his Breking of Warde furth of the Caftle of Edinburgh, and demandit yf he
wes the firft movar to the Lord Maxuell, or yf the Lord Maxicell wes the mover thairof to him ?
Deponis, that vpoun Sonday at even, afoir the interprife, Robert Maxwell of Dyniciddie come to the
deponer, and tauld him, that within few dayis he fould heir the beft newis that he had hard this lang
tyme bigane ; and the deponer anfuerit, that he wald fane heir gude newis. And the deponer infilling with Robert, diuers times thairefter, to haif vnderltand quhat gude newis thefe wes? Robert evir
conceillit the mater, whill - Fryday thairefter, quhilk wes the day that thair interpryfe wes putt in executioun. And grantis, that the faid Robert cam to the deponer, al)out tua efter none, and putt him in
rememberance of the wordis that he had fpoken to him vpoun the Sonday preceding ; and tauld him,
that that nyght the Lord Maxuell wes to brek warde, and wald tak the deponer with him ; and craved
the deponeris opinioun, quhat he thoght of that mater? To whome it wes anfuerit, be the deponer,
that the executioun of that interprife wes fa fuddanelie to be done, that the deponer could gif no avife
thairin ; and he thoght that the Lord Maxwell fould haif communicat that mater to him felft", yf he
wald haif had him to be ane affifter thairin. And depones, that fchortlie thairefter, about foure efter
none, the Lord Maxwell come in to the deponer, fatt doun befyde him, drank tua pypis of tabaca,^
and fpak no thing of his interprife to the deponer, quliill the deponer pafl to the windo, to haif maid
waiter. The Lord Maxicell come to him to the windo, and tauld him, that he wes refolued tiiat
nyght to efchaip and brek warde ; and defyrit the deponer to prepair him to go with him ; for he had
men attending vpoun the yettis, to bald them oppin, and had horfes awaiting vpoun the feildis to cany
thame away :* And the deponer anfuerit to the Lord 3Iaxicell, that fik ane interprife required goode
advife and deliberatioun ; and deflril him not to be fuddane, hot to be weill advifit and refolved thairin.
To whome the Lord replyis, ' Tulhe, man ! fie interpryfes ar nocht effectuat with deliberationis and
advifments, hot with fuddane refolutionis !' And then the Lord caufit fetche in tua quartis of wyne ;
and, haveing maid fome confaitis of paflyme in the houfe, he defnit Williame Smfone, ane of the
deponaris keiparis, to gif him his fwerd ; whilk he refufeing to raiider, he Ihored the faid Williame,
held ane drawin quhiiijear quhilk he tuke fra Williame Maxwell, avowing to haif his lyfe, yf he landerit nocht the fwerd ; and fua, violentlie tuke the fwerd fra Simfone : Tuk ane vther fwerd fra James
Stewart, ane vther of the deponaris keiparis ; and tuke ane vther Averd fra Williame Armefiratuje of
tlie GyngelUs : And haueing the fwerdis, he then tauld planelie, that he wald brek warde ; and liivd
to Young Clqfburne, ' Yee ar heir for a civile caus, yf it pleis yow to go, yee falbe welcome 1* And
Clnfburne defifling, the Lord Maxuell, with Robert of Dymcidd'te, Williame of Kirhhoiis, and the
deponer, pall out of the chalmer, and come to the yettis ; quiiair fum of the portaiis wer liurte : Bot
denyis that he hurte ony of thame him felf. And fua, haueing forceit the yettis, they lap oner the
wall. Demandit yff William Maxicell delt with the deponer in this interprife ? Deponis, vpoun his
aithe, that he nevir delt with the deponer in that mater; and that he knawis no thing of Williames
doing; bot that he oppynnit the Nether-yett of the turnej)yke, quliare the deponeris chalmer is.

(Sic fubfcribitur) Sii J. Makdonall. S« T. Hamilton. S" J. Arnote. M" \\''*' Heart.

' A<linitting, approving of, .^cknowlc(]}^ing. * I'litil. ' This was a plirase in comnioii «so, shortly alter the

introdiirtioM of tobacco into Scotland. The Editor has seen tlii" term ' <niaff ' similarly iimmI. wliicli may he thcorijiin
ot ' u'hiff,' a vnl^'ur phrase now in use. ■• See the ]iarticulurs of this desperate and adinirai)lv executed Cbcape, in

the Trial of Jolin, Lord Maxwell, Juii. 21, IGOD.

12 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

II. Letter, Sir James Maclcconeill to the Diihe of Lennox}
Pleis youk Grace,

I AM in verie greit niiflery, as this beirar can tell. Your grace knawis I Lawe depended vpon your
fawoi", befoir I was put to this milerie ; and now, I wil befeik your grace to gett liis Ma'^''* power to talk
ordour with me, at your graceis curaing heir. I am willing to axceptt quhatt his INIa'^'^ wil beftovv on
nie, ather in my awin kyndly roume, or in oney vther pairtt of his Kingdwmes ; and fall find caiifione
for my obedience; quilk I will befeik your grace to report to his Ma^"", and fatt your grace will gett
me ]>att fawor as to be bainiihid, rather or I be in this miferie. As for my baftard brother, quha hes
brokin your graceis ward, iff your grace talk ane doing for me, and talk me in your awin hand, I fall
find ])e way he falbe putt in your graceis reverance, as he was befoir. Befeiking your grace to remember my miferie, and gett me libertie or banifmentt. I reft on your graceis faworable doing, quhatt I
vrett anentt Archibald, Your grace will hald it quyett till your grace cum hame.

From Ed" Castell, Your graces ferwand duiring lyfe,

27 Junij, 1607. S« J. Macdonall.

To my very gud Lord, my Lord DuiK of Lenxox.

III. Letter, Sir James Mahconeill to tlie King.
My gracious Soveran,
iNFAY it pleis your Maieftie to apardoune my importunitie, being inforfid fairto, throw the grett
mifery q"^ I aknawleg to hawe maift juftly deferuid, for my bypaft offences towardis God and your
^la*''': 3ett my foueran, your Ma^'*^ hes gracioufly forgiuein gretter offenceis; 3ea, the gretteft Trefon
3att euer was deuyfid aganft aney Prence, 5our hienes hes forgiwein. For Chryftis caus, Sir, ance
forgiue me my bypaft offenceis, and with Godis grace I fall euer behawe my felff deutiffully heirefter ;
and fall find caufion to obey quhatt your Ma^'^' will injune^ to me; befeiking fat fe Declaratioun of
your Ma***'' will may be fent to pe Confall ; feing, without pe fame I can gett na anfuer of ]iair Lordichipis. Humblie kifling your Ma^''^ handis, I commit your Ma**^ ewer to Godis protectione.

Your Maiefties maift humble and puir fubiect
From Edinbruche Castell, to be imployid to dethe,

28 of Junj (1607.) S" J. Makdonall.

To the King his maist excellent Maiestie.

IV. Letter, Sir James Malcconeill to the Earl of Caithnes.^

My verie honourable gud (lord,)
Feiring that your lo., to wliofe fauor I am fo much obifliid,* fuld not miftaik pe caus of this my
laft offence, in braicking of Ward, I haue beine this* bauld to vrytt to your lo. the only mofion quhilk,
1 proteft to God, maid me to braik Ward. It is trew, my lord, jtatt the Laird of Calder faid to lioneft men, wha can beir record, ])att how foever my pairt was anent Donnoveg, 5ett he had ane Warrand paft be HIS Ma'^'^s hand, quhilkis fe Confull faw nott, to command ])e Confall, prefently efter pe
fiiht of Jiatt Warrand, to putt me to exfecutioun ; and how lyttill refone I had to truft my lyfe to
('aider, your lo. felf and vthers of ])e Coimjhll \ir\^\\\s ; for, be his mifreport, he did all he culd to
have perallid my lyfe. And ]ns trewly was pe caus I fled with my avin lyfe, and for no miftruft I had
in HIS Ma'^'^* clemence, or in the Confallis fawor ; nor 3ett, for oney feir 1 had off oney thing fay culd
try aganes me, anentt Dunoveg ; for as 1 fai<l when 1 was in ward, I will fay now ; God is my vittnes, my pairtt, ever, anent ))e talking or keiping of Dunoveg aganes his Ma^'', hes beine ever nioft

' Tliis and tlie fdl lowing Letters are from tlic Originals preserved among the Dennv/lne 3ISS. Adv. Lil)rary.
\Vl)en procured from other sources, the circumstance is e\j>lained in the Notes. * Enjoin. ' George, fifth

Earl of Caithness. He married Jean, only daughter of George, fifth Earl of Huntley. * Obliged. ^ Thus.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 13

honeft and lyall ;' and efler all juft tryall, I will defy my onfreindis^ prive' vthervvayis. And fence
pe braik of Waird I maid with ]>e Lord Maxvell,* by^ my exfpectatione, to fis night I brak Ward lall,
be God him felf, I was ne^er privie nor a confenter to aney Piatt aganes iiis 'SIa^^ or my cuntre, I
raein his iMA^'^^ dominions. And now, feing my braik of Ward was nott, as God is my judge, for no
defyre of Rebelion, nor no vther deling,^ bott only for faiftie of my avin puir lyfe, I will moll humble
befeik your lo. fpeik fuch as is your freindis in Confall, Jiatt his Ma^^ micht be moveid, nott to tak
no herte or violent curfe " aganis me, onto® the tyme thatt ])air lo"^ will heir my Peticione. And give''
your lo. will gett me fat fawor that my Peticion falbe hard, and Jiatt oney whom I fall fend with my
Letters to 30ur lo. fall nott be trubled ; and I being advertefid by your lo., I will, be your lo''* advyfo,
do aney thing ])att may bell fatisfie ms Ma^'^ and Confall ; my lyfe, and tlie lyfis of thefe ])att
helpid to faif my lyfe being faiff. So, with pe rememberance of my humble deute, I reft
Your lo'=* puir freind euer to ferve you,

S" J. Makdonall.
To my verie honourable gud lord, my Lord Erle of Caittiines.

V. Letter, Sir James Makcoiieill to the Earl of Caithnes.
My verie honorable good Lord,
Pleas your lo., the ondeferued fauour and courtefee which I refaued by your lo , in lliowing your
felue ray frend, that tyme at Court, when my onfrendes did mifreporte of me to his Maieftie, makes
me now this bold to befeek your lo. to continew my frend, according to my reafonable futo. And, in
fpeciall, that your lo. will meane my caife to your frendes in Counfall ; for I proteft my beeng ten
yeeres in warde in the Callle of Edinburgh, and the difponeing of my kyndlje landes, made me not fo
much to tak that haiftie refolution to ellieap, as when I was affured, by his owine frendes reportes, that
my lyf wes geven over in the Larde of Caddelles handis ; who beeing, as your lo. knowes, nowife my
frend, or one to truft my lyf to; alwife^° now I befeek your lo., as yee fliall till death have my poore
fervice, try by the Counllill, yf vpone any conditiones, not diminilhinghis Maiefteis comoditie," I may
have this peece of old poflelTiounes, which is Ilia, to fufteane my felue and all my kinne that now fol_
lowes me ; that his Maieftie may have his owine, with honour and eafe, and wee to leeve in peace and
offend no manne, and I, getting furetie of my lyff and of this peece land, Ihall find fufficient fuiretie,
both for my obedyance and good ordour, keeping by all my kinne and frendes. As your lo. learn^ s in
this, or can be liable to do me fauour in getting me his Maiefteis peace, your lo. will aduertefe me.
And I befeech your lo., fo far as you can, crolTe the Campbelles to gett any employraentes againes
me — for they caire not how much they trouble the countree'^ and put his Maieftie to charges needles.
As for the Houfe of Dwnoveg, I tooke it from Calderis menne, in the fpoace of one day,'-^ — killed parte
of thame, vpone the Greene of the Houfe, — chaifed in the reft, — tooke there watter and the two Barmkines'* from tham, — and forced thame to yeeld in my will, the next morning. So I have the Houfe,
neuer to be gevin to thefe that is not worthie of it. But yett, his Maieftie may ever command it and
my felue, I feeng how I may leeve with the afllireance of my lyff and my poore frendes. So, abyding
your lo. aduertefment, with the rememberance of my humble feruice, I Ihall ever remaine,

Your lo. alTured frend to ferve yow,

Ila, 2 Julii. S" J. Ma K DON A 1. 1..

I BESEECH your lo. let me know how my lord Secretar is towards me ? — Or who is nioH for
Calder ? — Or how he is now thoght of be his Ma'^'" ?

To the Erle of Caithenes.

' Leal, loyal. ' Enemies. ^ Prove. * See Lord Maxwell's Trial, Jun. \\; K'Ci). ^ Ai;aiiivt ,

contrary to. " Design. ' Course. »* I'litil. 'If. '" At all events ; nevertheless. " riiuiiiaiy

interests; the King's Rental. '* Disturb the jtublic peace. '^ See p. 14, &c. " IV. Jhirlnicaiie, i. e.

projiuymiculum aulemurak ,- being the outer lortiiied works or ramparts of the Castle. There wer often several lines
of circunivallation, to prevent suijirisfis.

14 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1 609.

Vl. Letter, Sir James Mahconeill to the Earl of Caithnes.
My Lord,
Geve the Coil fall he ciuiiis to knaw wliom it was Jiatt Colder'^ fend to, he had the Warand for
talking my lyfe. The Pryar of Ardchattan " and JThiro/P his fone, Allan BLdoicgall is my authours ;
and they will not, nor can not deny itt. Alfo Calder's avin agent, James Movatt, maid no fecreitt
j'airof ; for lie tauld it both to the Erie of Craiifuird'^ and to M'intois.^ I wald not nov, becaus I
liad nott ane beirar of my avin, liaifart to vryt to ]ic Secrettar,'^ bott itt is only in your lo. and his lo.
J>att I trufl. I know Calde?' and ])e Ca)ul)eUis wilbe buiflie to feik imployment of fervice aganes me ;
bott the fame fall nott be neidfull, for your lo. and my Lord Secrettar may better bring me to that
quhilk falbe mod to his Ma'^*' commodite and fe quyetnes of ])e contre, without beftoving oney
chargis nor all ]'e Canibcllis liveand may or can do by iiis Ma^"^"* fors, quhilk I will ever except ; and
Iionour, and refpcck what jour lo. wryttis to me, onles the Confall dereck one to me. 5our lo. may
fend 5 our Letters to my lord TuiUibairne,"' to be fent be his lo. to the Officer of Lochaber, wlia will
fend I'ame to me whair ever I be. So abyding your lo. anfuer, I rell,

Your lo** ever to ferve you,
(Without date.) S'' J. Makdonall.

To my verie honourable gud lord, my lord Erle of Caittnes.

\''II. Letter, Sir James Mahconeill to the JBiJIiop of the IJles.^
My verie gud Lord,
I DOUTT nott bott, or^ now, your lo. lies hard of my braiking of Ward ; and ])e only caus quhilk
maid me ventour ])e fame, quhilk, as God knawis, was for no vther caus bott only for })e faifte of my
lyfe, quhilk Jie Laird of Calder laid was in his will only. Allwayis,^° prais to God, I am out of
Calder's denger; and jett, geve'' be oney meines I may have his Ma^^^^ gracius pardon to my felf
and thefe gentill men fatt afifted me, I will latt your lo. fe iiis Ma'^^ commodite fall novayis be
impaired, ])e pace of fe contrie fall novayis be trublid, nor his Ma'^^ putt to no chargis, be giveing
imployment to ]>e Cambellis, wha crawls ever to fiili in drvvmly'^ watters ; and pairfoir, I pray your
lo. deill with his Ma^^ and Confdl, for a continewatioun of oney wiolent curfe '^ to be tane be his
INIa"^^ aganis me, ontill yow may gett one of your avin to cum to me ; and with Jiatt man, or with your
lo. felf, geve I know how to fie you, I fall fend fuch Offers as I hop fall content iiis Ma^*= and Confall.
So, as my treft is and was ever in your lo., I pray you vryt to me, what I may luik for ? As for fat
erand of Dwnveg, God is my vittnes, I am inofent fairof ; and I pray your lo. try fat erand, as geve
I war in ward ; and I trefl je will find my pairtt liouefh So, luiking jour lo. anfver, I committ you
to God ; and reft Your lo'* ever att command,

Junij 3. S" J. Makdonall.

I pray your lo. gett me Lifence to fend ane man or boy with my Letters to your lo.
To my verie gud Lord, my lord Bishop off the Iyllis and Rapiio.

' John Campbell of Calilcr, or Caddell, as lie was often styled. * . . . Campbell. ' . . . M'Dougal of

Dixnollych, Laird of M'Doiigal. * David, eleventh Earl of Crawford. ^ Sir Lauchlan IMacIntosh of that

Ilk, whose father, Angus, had married Lady Jean Campbell, daughter of Archibald Earl of Argyle Domjlas. lie

was heritable Steward of I,ochaber, and one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to IVince Charles; and married
Agnes, daughti-r of J(din Grant of that Ilk. "^ Lord IJinning, afterwards Earl of Hadington. ' William,

second Earl of Tullil)ardine, who, for his services to the King, in the atfair of Cowrie's Conspiracy, Aug. 5, 1600, had
the heritable Sheritl'shiii of Perthshire. Ilis second wife. Lady Dorothea Stewart, being eldest daughter of J<din,
Ji/th Earl of Atboll, a!id the malt- line having become extinct, their eldest son J(din was created Earl of Atlioll.
* From the Original, i)ri'served among the Uoimi/lne MSS. Adv. Librai-y. Andrew Knox, Parson of Paisley, the
first Protestant IJisho]) of the Isles, was translated to the See of llajjhoe, in Ireland, but held both Bishoprics for
sometime. lie assumed botli titles. " Ere; before. '" At all events ; nevertheless. " If.

" Who ever crave to fish in ' troubled waters.' A well-merited, though bittei', sarcasm. '^ Course.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 15

VIII. Letter, Si?' Jcnnes Maliconeill to the JSiJliop of the IJles.

My verie good Lord,

Pleis your Lo. war not I hard your lo. was in Ireland, and could find no meanes to UTeit to yow,
I was not four nightes out of Ed"", quhan I would have writtin to your lo. as to one quliom I haue euer
found my friend. And now, my Lord, I proteft, albeet I was xij 5eires in waird, and all my kyndlie
landis difponed to ftrangeres, my lyff" left in his MaiefUes handia, 5ett the fame maid me not fo mvche
to braik ward as it did quhan I was offered be the Laird of Calderes awin freendis, quha can not deny
it, that his Maieftie, be his fecreit Warrand, had gevine ower my lyflF in the Laird of Calderes handis.
And now, my lord, I proteft to God my defyre is not to rebell or truble the Efteat of the cuntrie, bot
ferue his Maieftie with all humilitie, and mak my kin and freiiulis paceable men, iff I may haue his
Ma''*'^ pace, with the affuirance of my lyff and the lyfe of my puir freendis, and fome meanes to lulteane ws rather nor to fors ws, for want, to opres olheres. Heirfoir I befeek your lo., feing my Race
has bene tenne hundreth yeeris kyndlie Scottis men, vnder the Kinges of Scotland ; and \var I willing
to leive vpoun ane puir pairt of that quhilkis our foirbeiraris had, and I to find gud fuirtie for all that
becomes loyal! fubiectis to do, both for myfelf and my quholl kin that foUowes me, that 5 our lo. will,
as 3e euer did, interfeed for me at his Ma^'^"* handis to fie quhat grace or fauour 3 our lo. may obtein
to me ; and in fpeciall, to fie give, without diminilching his Ma^'''* commoditie, I may have the Hand
to my felf and my kin to fufteine ws ; wtherwayis that 50ur lo. will get that fauour that no hefte curie
falbe taine againes me, be geveing imployment to my onfreendis, till your lo. may have tyme firft to
Ipeek with me ; att quhiche tyme, albeit I gett not the Hand, 5ett, provyding his Maieftie will hauld it
in his awin hand, I will Ihaw your lo. how his Ma*'*^^ commoditie heir may be increffetl, and I to be
I'atisfiedj and this cuntrie to be frie of ony truble of me or my freendis.

As for this Houfe of Dunovege, I proteft to God, give aither his Maiefteis Gaird or your lo* men
war keepares of it, I wald neuer enter within it, albeit it war without keeping — bot finding in it fuche
as ferued them quha foght my lyf and landis, and quho crewally oppreft this puir Hand in fuch fort,
that I proteft to God thair deling was rather to waift it, nor mak it able to pay his Ma*'*^' rentes. The
fame maid me preferwe the hous ; and albeit that Hous coft his Ma''*^ muche money in putting it in
Calderis handis, it pleafed God tliat, in one day (I took it), with the lofe bot of one man. And now
if your lo. may get me ony fauourable conditiones be his Ma*'*^, 36 may alfuir 3 our felf I will give yow
the Hous, provyding it be in your handis, and nane of the CamhelUs to gett it. As your lo. does in
this, or is lyk to do, adverteis me. And fo, repofeing in your lo^^ conftand freendfchip, I committ
your lo. to God, and reftis Your lo'' ever afluired to command,

S" J. Makdoxall.

In hope, with Goddis grace, I will geve 5 our lo. 3itt ane better propyne, I pray your lo. fend me
ane Inventare' with this bearer, for I am far from the clock. S"* J. ^Iakdoxall.

To THE BiSCIIEOP OF THE IlLIS.

IX. Letter, Sir James Maliconeill to the Privy Counfall of Scotland. -

My verie honourable gud Lords,

Pleis 3 our lo'^, my offence in braiking ward fuld mak me to be loth to prefume to vrytt vuto ^our

lo\ 3ett, feiring the mofioun quhilk maid me to efchep fuld be vtherwayis thocht be 3 our lo'' nor the

trewth of my intencion, I am this'' bauld to deleaitt wnto 3 our lo"" the only cans quhilk maid me to

braik ward; and this is itt. The Laird of Culder faid to twa fewerall honell gentiUmen, patt how

' This is from a copy. The word should be 'mounter,' Fr. moiitre, a watch. * In a Letter IVoni Lord Binning

to Lord Tullibardin, Juri. 1.3, 1615, he states that the Council would not forward sucli Letters to tlie Kini; ; and that
' so long as he remaynes witliin his 31a'«s (loniiiiions, and hes societie and dealinij with rel)ellis and broken men, I
cannot exspect that his Petitions can be received be his Ma^'*^, rules he wold do such notable service ai/nnis some principall jRcbellis, as mujhl perswade his Ma''^ lo think him wourthie ofmercie !' * Thus.

IG CRIiMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609I'oever my tryall part anent the crand of Dwnoveg, 5ett he had ane Warand, in his avin keiping, pafl
be his Ma^^ quliiik ])e Confall iiovayis did fie, commanding, immediatly efter the prefenting pairof to
putt me to exfecutione, butt' farther profes ; and fo, my lyfe as itt war gevin be his Ma^^ over in the
liands of liim wha liad not only medlid with my kyndly lands, my frends lyfes, and withall ])e only
man who roportid warfl of my felf, to haue gottin my lyfe with my lands, Jie only feir jiairof maid me
Hie with my lyfe, and no dcfire of Rebelion ; nether aney miflruft I had of his Ma'^^^ clemencie, nor
of your lo'' favor ; nether wald I braik ward for oney thing (they) culd try aganes me, anent J»e erand
of Dunovcg ; for God is my vittnes I am inofent ])airof. And I befeik 30ur lo'^ try })e fame, as giwe*
I war in ward to be accufid, and I treft your lo" fall find my pairt, in all that buiffines, honeft and
loyall. And now I will, in all humilyte, befeik 3 our lo** to pite my cace, and grant me ])att fauor as
to I'ufi.r me to fend in ane humble Peticione to 5 our lo% be the quhilk I hop to give fuch fatisfaction
10 HIS Mate and 5 our lo'' as I may beft, to fatisfe liis Ma''^ will and your lo** in all thingis, my avin
lyfe and thefe wha hes afliflid me being faiffe. And, in fe meintyme, praye your lo'^ mofl humble,
befoir I be hard, not to wis^ oney wiolent curfe aganes me, ether to putt his Ma'^'' to exfpenceis, and
me to difparatione. So, befeiking ]ie grett God to move iiis Ma^^^ i,artt and your lo'^ to pite me,
according to the intencione I have to be ane paceable man, with the affuirance of my lyfe ; only luiking your lo^ will latt me knaw what fawor I may luik for, commiting your lo^ in Gods protextione, I
liumbly taks my live, and refts Your lo** humble fervitour,

Junij 3. S" J. Makdonall.

To my verie honourable gud Lords, my Lord Chancellar of Scotland, and the

remenent of his ^Ma^*^^ honourable Privie Consall.

X. Letter, Sir James McikconeiU to the Earl of Crawford.^

INIy verie honorable gud Lord,
It may be 3 our lo. think it flreng ])att I obfcuirid ray intencioun of braiking Ward, fra your lo., in
regair of our luif and familiarite ; 3ett I hop your lo. will exfeuis rae. For ])e reveilling pairof to your
lo. niicht do 50U hairme^ being whair 36 ar, and no fuirtherance to my intencione. Allwayis, as God
fall judge my faule, my braiking ward was nott throw aney miflruft I had in iiis Ma'^'® clemence, nor
in the ConfuUs fawor, nor 3ett for feir of oney thing culd try aganes me, anent J'att trefon of Dunoveg ; bott the only thing wliich moued me was only thatt I was credably informid, be honeft men, fatt
Calder faid it to (panie,) Jiatt howfoever \e erand of Dunoveg 3^d,^ he had ane Warand paft be his
]Ma^*^ ]'att com never in fe CoitfaUis ficht, commanding to put me to exfecutione, immediatly efter pe
prefenting Jiairof. Your lo. felf and 3Linlois^ micht heir James Movat fay ])ls ; bott my authors ar
better nor James. Allwayis,^ as I said aft* to 50ur lo. felf, when I was in ward, I will now fay ; fatt,
as God fall judge my faule, I was nevir airt nor pairt of the taking or keiping of Dunoveg aganes his
Ma"^*^, nor of no vther plaitt,^ fence ]ie braik of ward ])at I maid with ]ie Lord Maxvel till now, and
give'° efter fuch long mifere of imprifonment, lofe of lands, and kin, my braiking ward for \e faifte of
my lyfe, be thocht be 5e fenfuir of my onfrendis," fuch ane offence as will not be pardonid, I moft tak
pacience ; for I am better now, prais to God, nor'^ as I was ; and I will, as long as I livve, pray for
HIS Ma'^'' long and profperus regne. 3ett, feing give I be croft now, it cumis moir be my onfreinds
nor be iiis Ma'^''-. albeitt I will never preis^^ to Hue long in his Ma^^^ dominions, by''' his hienes ovin
will, altho I micht; I wow to God, or'^ I liwe"" ]'e contre, I, and moir nor I, fall ether lofe our lyfes,
or than I fall, God willing, liwe"" ane rememberance to my onfreinds ; I mein only fik of ]ie Camhellis
as wilbe my onfreinds, ]iatt itt falbe hard of when both they and I is deid and gone I I hop, to pair

' ^Vithout. * If. » Use. * David, rhvenlh Earl of Crawford. * Went. * Sir Latirblan

INIacIntONh of that Ilk. 'Nevertheless. "Oftcii-timcs. "riot. 'Mf. " Kiiemies.

"Thau. " Strenuously endeavour; press. " In ojiposition to. "Ere; before. ""Leave.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I7

Imall commodite: Bott I had rather gett Ihve^ to live in pace, and find gud fuirte for my obedience
and gud ordour. I wilh to God, with his Ma^^^^ contentment, 5 our lo. war ane fre man, both for
your avin weill and pe weill of 5 our friendis ; and feing itt lyis in your avin hand, better be fre nor
liwe ])air witli fik crofis as I knaw men will have in ]iatt place.- I heir maney of the Keipers of fatt
Cfl//f // ar putt in ward, for my braik ;^ bott, as God fall judge me, fair was nane of ])e keipers of fatt
Caftell fat ever I thocht to mak prive to my defing. I proteft to God, I love pe gud Coiijiahle and
all fatt is fair. I haitt none of fame ; bott I culd nott bott love my felf befor. Thair is nane within
fatt Callell to whom I am adebted, fat falbe oney wayis intreft"^ be me, if God grant me nis iNIa^^^
pace. I defyre Petie Gilcrijt keip my ftare.^ Ilemeraber on our laft difcourfo, fatt fame nicht I
braik ward, anent Margarett. Sik newis as may nott be thocht ofFencefive, I pray your lo. vrytt to
nie. My Lord Tuillihairne and fe men of Atholl, on ])at Fryday after I brak waird, perfewid me fo
hardly, fatt I was almoft tane. We loft our hors, and all our clais. His lo. maid me to gett mair
fpeid on fuitt, in one hour, nor'' I thocht to have gottin in ane 3eir, give'' fik fudent medefin^ had
nott bein aplyid to me. Liewing^ to truble your lo. with longer difcurfe, wifliing 30U ever all happines, I reft Your lo^ avin euer to command,

S'' J. Makdonali,.

I PRAY your lo. as 5 e do vther thingis, lovfe'° my mvntour" h^ Pettfindie, for 48 lib; and get my
buiks fra him, and fra Elizabeth Gib. Sho lies twa buiks. Commend me to Chriftiene. When your
lo. vrytis to me, send itt to my Lord Tidlibairne to be fent to me. For fum of your lo^ avin perticullar, I wald glaidly fe your man William Pattra, or oney of 5 ours ; the erand tuichis only 5 our felf.

To my verie honourable gud lord, my lord Erle of Crawfuird.

XL Letter, Sir James Makconeill to the Earl of Craufurd.

My verie honorable good lord,

I WES not four nightes out of the Caftle when I wrotte to your lo., but be not fure if your lo. hes
reflaued my Letter. I have now wrotten thir few lynes, praying your lo. to remember me jour promefe and conferrence with me. As for my felue, I am well, praifed be God, and all my kyndlie men
hes reffaued me moft glaidlie. I will do all I can to have his Ma^^^ peace, and find alfo good fuiretie
for my obedience and yeirlie dewtie^^ as may fuffice. And if my onefrendis crofe me, I treft in God,
how fo euer the mater go, to be evin with thame. I pray your lo. fee if it be poffible yee may gett
outher manne or boy to come fpeak with me, and aduertefe me moir of all your awin eftate and dyett,
and of all fuch newes as occurs. Any of my bookes that your lo. can gett, fend them to me, and vfe
your moyen to gett from the Erie of Atholl the bookes that wes tane from me at that onfett in Atholl.
They gatt the thrie converfiones of England, Burnes book, and it that Phillip fett out on the controverted heades, it 36 faw Makcartney wrotte, the Mekle old Cornikle, in wrett. Ther wes other
bookes that I remember not, hot your lo. may feek thame all to your felue. 1 pray your lo. gett me
word from Pittfindie, and try if I will gett my mounter and chifter'^ to lovle.

This wes the forme of the taking of Duneveg. We lay in ane buis" about the hous, till the Captane
and tuelf of his beft men com out. We perfewed ouer ralhlie or they come far from the hous. The
Captanes men fled, bot^^ liim felue and three or foure, they wer (lane. We jeid in at the vtter Barmkin with the reft, but they clofed the 3ett of the inner Barmkin. Or tuelf hours we took the vatter,

' Leave. ' Tliis evidently alludes to a jirdposal for breaking ward ; wltic-li, it may be eoiijeetnred, is tlic?

meaning of the Postscript. It is very piobable tliat tbis and otber of Sir .Tames IMakeoneill's Letters bud lieen intercepted. ^ Oil sns])i(ion of aitling his escape out of confinement. ' It is left to the reader to settle whether
tbis word is used for ' interested' or ' increased.' — It seems to signify that none of them coubl hope for reward from
him ; so that bribery was out of the question. '" The word is written so as to read sluiie or »tiirc. Tlie article
intrusted may therefore have l)euu some precious stone or jewel, or an order of merit. " Than. 'I/.
* Sudden or powerful mediciru'. "Leaving; ceasing. '" I^oose ; release from i)ledge. "Watch.
Fr. moiitrc. '^ Annual-rent. '^ I'rcdiably his cotVer or chest. Old Fr. clicslnm. " Perhaps for btis/i,
or thicket ; or, more probably, it may be a slip of the pen for ainbus/i. '■' Excepting ; saving.

VOL. III. C

18 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609tlie vtter tour, and the tuo Barnikyns from ihanie, and fett fyre to the 5ett of the inner Barmkin,
brunt it, killed and hurt feme of there menne in with our lliott ; for we Ihott from four in the morning till efter tuelfue. Tuo of myne wes killed, a Ihouldiour and ane boy ; tuo lightlie hurt. The hous
wes promefed to yeeld or ten hours the mom. And fo wes the Pryour and all that come out gatt
thair lyff and there cloathes.

I treft in God that all the Campbelles in Scotland, without ms MA^'=*powar, fliall not recouer it,
A) long as they live. I heare Patie Kilchrifl is troubled for me ; hot I protcfl to God he is innocent
of my break, and all that is in that Callle. No more, but remember me to all frendes, fpecialie to
Margrate, to Criftian, and all your owne frendes in the breathing; and alfo my homble feruice remembered, I refl Your lo. owin to command,

July 3, Fra Duneveg. S« J. Makdonall.

To The Eul of Cuaufurd.

XII. Letter, Sh- James Malcconeill to Lord Tiilliehardin}

My verie honorable gud lord,

Treuly the tyme lies beiue, when I wald never a luiked patt your father fone fuld perfew me lo

hardly of my lyfe ; for I proteft I was never fo hardly followid ; and was fo neir tane, patt your lo. felf,

and fum few with you, was within thre pair- to me. Bot I am mucli oblill to 5 our lo., for in faith

36 maid me to be ane better fultt-man, in one hour, nor I thocht to hawe beine in ane jier. Allwayis,^ feing itt was his Ma'^^^ fervice your lo. did, I forgiwe you with my hartt ; and I wilh att God,

my felf had ])e place to lerve his Ma'^^, quhilk in my hartt I fall ever do. And this offence quhilk I

have now committitt, I proteft to God, is nott for defyre of trubles or Rebellion, nether for oney miftruft

1 had in ins Ma"^*^^ clemence, or his honourable CoiifaU, nor 5ett throw feir of aney thing ]iatt can

be trycd ' aganes me, anent Jiatt erand of Dwnoveg; bot, as God knawis, my braiking Ward was only

for ])e faifte of my lyfe; for it is fertan, and I will gett vere honeft wittneflis, to whom the Laird of

Calder faid itt, ])att he had ane Warrand from his Ma^e, quhilk the Con fall never fawe, for to put

me to prefent exfecutione, efter ])e prefenting of fatt Warrand ; fo patt my lyffe was in Calder s will ;

and how lytill refone I had to truft to Calder, pairt of ^erCoJifall felf knawis ; for, not only all vther

vrangls he did me, he vrett both to his Ma'^^, and vtliers att Court and in Confall, (hawing, I was

giltie both of ])e talking and keiping of Dunoveg, pat jiairby my lyfe micht be tane. Bott now, ]iat

])e warld may fe his mailiih, whan I am, as I hop in God, out of his denger, I will fay to 30ur lo., as

I fall anfver to God, I am and was erer as inofent of \e tuiking or keiping of Dvnveg. aganes his

Ma'^ as 50ur lo. is; and when all is tryid, I defy my onfreindis to try^ viherwayis, be oney juft

tryell. And Jmirfoir, feing, efter fuch long mifere, and \e lofs of all my kyndly"^ lands, I bott only

fled with my awin lyfe, I hop pe Confall will evin pite me. And I befeik your lo. to be my freind,

fo far as 3e may, without offence to his Ma'^^; only, in moveing your freinds in Confall nott to be

over hefte," att 56 defyre of my onfreindis, to tak oney violent curfis aganes me, whairbe thay may

gett preferment, and cairis nott what may follow, in exfpence to his Ma^''-, or truble in ])e cuntre ;

quhilk fall nott be neidfuU : For, give^ your lo. will gett me an affurance, pat his Ma"^^ honourable

Confall will heir pe fame, I will give in fuch ane Immble Peticione to pair lo** in fullfilling his Ma^*^^

will, and J)air lo'^ in aney thing pofebill to me; my lyfe and liberte being only refervid : And give

HIS Ma^^ difpence with my lyfe, and offences, fall mak gud fuirte to truble no man, by^ ordour off

law. So luiking for your lo" anfuer, be pe Barron Rid's meins, commiting your lo. in God's protextion, I reft Your lo''^ aftUired freind to command,

Junij 2. S. J. Makdonall.

To my verie honourable gud lord, my lord Erle off Tullibairne.

' William, .secon<i Earl of Tullibardinc. See No. VI. Note. ' Three pair of buts ; three buts' lengths.

' Nevertheless ; at all events. * Verified ; proved ; established. ^ Prove ; establish. ^ The lands

which he held as ' kindly Tenant' to the King. " Precipitate; hasty. » If. ^ Contrary to.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 19

XIII. Extract of a Lbtteu Jt'ovi Sir Rorie MalidemV to Lord Binning-

{received June 30, 1615.)

Now, fmce I peifave Sir James {Mukoneilt) hes brocken warde, and come to Lochqubaber, and
out of tbat come to Moror and Knoddort, where he took per force a young youth, the fecund fone
of Gleiigarrie"^ on a worfe,' and keepes him ftill in cuftodie ; and the Captanes fone, a fon of Donald
M'^Allan M^'Ean, Captain of the Clan-Ronald. And thereafter, come to Sleat, to Donald Gorme's
bounds,* where he gott a bigg boat, with oares, faile, and taikleing ; and intercomoned at lenth with
Donald Gorme there ; and a nomber of Donald Gorme's folkes of Sleat, called Clann Tarlidi,^ is gone
with him. And thereafter, paffed till the Yle of Egga, where he mett Coill^ and his companyee,
togidder with his bafe fone, and a fone of Sir James 3Iahforle of the Route.'' And they ar in nomber, as I lerne, tuelfue or thretteinth fcore, at the prefent tyme. And whidder they go South or
North I can not tell, at the writteing heerof. It is niy advyfe to your lo. and Counfall, tliat your lo.
derect a ample command and charge, till all and findrie the Superioures of the Yles, till convocat
thame felues in armes, with a full Commiffion till ^ everie one of ws, till perfew the faid rebelles, by
lea and land, with fyre and fword, in this form, in thrie feverall armyes and companyees. That is,
Makclaine of Doivard'^ and Mahcleane of Lochbiiy'^^ in a companye and armie; Donald Gorme and
the Captane of Clann Ronald^^ in a other armie ; and I, the Lairde of Coill '- and Mackynnoim '^ and
my Lord of Kyntaile's '* forces, in a other companyee ; and lett euerie one of thir armies endeavoire
thamefelues in his Ma^'^* feruice ; and he that doeth beft; therein, have the greateft honour, and preferment, and reward of his Ma'^"^ and Counfall. And becaus the faid Sir James and his companyee
hes taken thamfelues to the fea, in two barkes and findrie other boates, it were expedyent that your
lo. and Coimfell would fend me ane Commiffioun and powar to embark any fliip I can apprehend, in
thir lies, to the better perfute of thame in thir lies ; otherwife, your lo. and Coxinfell till furnilhe out
two or three fliippes, well provyded^ to thir lies ; and derect one of thame to me, that I and they may
concure togedder, in his highnes feruice. And I defyre the lies Superiours to be devyded in three
ffactions, for this caus. Sir James and the rebelles of the Clamidonald ar of kynn, blood, and alia '^
to Donald Gorme and to the Captane of Claim Ronald ; and Sir James and his rebelles ar deedlic
enemies to Mackclene and his name, and they will never aggree in a ^^ companyee and armee. And as
for me, your lo. knowes verie well that I have geven a proof of my obedience and feruice to his
Ma^'e and Counfell allreddye, in taking, and apprehending, and delyuering my own name and blood,
the rebellis of the Lews ; i' and in making thefe landis peaceable to his Ma^'^. Lett the reft do the
lyk feruice now to his Ma^'^, and it is verie well knowen to his Maiestie and Nobilitie of Scotland, that my hous neuer rebelled, nor yett Ihall rebell

Your lo. humble feruitor at powar,

DuNVEGANE, 18th of June, 1615. S'' Rouie Makcleud.

Xn". Letter, Lord Tidlibardine to Lord Binning.
My verrie honourabill good lord,
I haue reffawit M'^Alkme 3IcEan, Capitane of the Clan Ronald, his anfuer of my Letter, quhair-

' Sir Rodeiick Makleod of that Ilk, and of Harris, called liorie More, who married a daughter of Donald MarAngus IMacAlister of Glengary. ' Donald MacDonell, afterwards of Scothouse ; who married Mary, tlaujjhter
of Sir James Macdonald of Sleat. ^ Unawares. * Of Sleat in Skye. ^ Clan Tarliih, tliat i^, the
descendants of Charles, * Coill Makgillespik. ' See Notice jjrefixed to this Trial. •* To. '■' Hector
Maclean of Howard, called Eachin Oi;,'. '" Hector Owr Maclean. He married a daui;hfer of Lauchlaii
INIore, Maclean of Dowart. " Donald MacAllan 3IacEan. " Lauchlan IMaclean of Coll ; who married
a dautjhter of Sir Itoderick Macleod of Harris. '^ Lauchlan MacKinnon of Stratiionliil, Laird of Mackimion.
Strathordill is in Skye. He was knij;hted before his death. '< Colin, second Lord Kintail, created Earl of
Seafortli, Dec. 23, 1G23. '^ Alliance by marriage. "^ One. " Lewis.

20 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609by I perceaue fat he is nocht previe to Sir James his biekking of Waiid, and is refoluit nocht to melP
with ])air couifiis, ffor Sir James and M<^Ronnald did all })at })ai culd, be meffages, to haue met with
Iiiin, vpone pretence to haue delyuerit him his fone ; bot he onnawyis wald have ony midling with
})ame, nor wald nocht reflaue his fone, becaus he wes in thair cumpany, without ane Warrand of 5our
lo^ of fe Counfell. Bot I heir pat fenfyne, qulian Sir James tuik ])e fea, he fend him frome him.
*S'/;- James, at his pafling out of Lochabber, wes onlie accumpaneit with fourtene men and boyis, and
M'Eonnahl followit him with fexteue men and boyis. They paft out ])at to M'Ean of Ardnamnrchais^ cuutrie, quhair I heir fat JSl'Ean him felff, with all his cumpany with him ; att pe leill, pair
is an gi-eat pairte of fame. He gat fum boiltis pair, and paft pairfra, langis pe coift ; bot he culd haue
no landing, nather in JJAllaiie BLEane his cuntrie, 3I'cleivd Hereis,^ nor Donald Gormis cuntrie ;■*
ffor pai pat forcis on all pe fea-poirtis, to ftop liis landing ; and I think pei had maid fum onfet on him,
if pair boittis had not bene all funk ofbefoir, for feir of fuppryling pame.

I heir he landit into pe lies of Rowme and Eg, quhair Coidl M'GiUefpic did meit him with ane
cumpany of hagbutteris, about pe number of fewin fcoir of men. Thair forme of melting, as I heir,
wes this. Sir James and his cumpany ftude in ane plaice be ])ame felilis, quhair pe wper with his
cumpany went round about liira, onis ;^ and at pe nixt going about, falutit him with pair woUy of
fchoittis ;G and continowit fua fchuitting and inviring'' of him, for pe fpaice of half ane hour; andpairefter com to him euerie man, particularlie,^ chapping handis.^ Wpone pe morne, pai conuenit all ].e
haill beftiall, horfe, and ky, to one plaice, quhilk pei thocht to haue flayne haill ;" bot, vpone better
aduyfement, pei flew onlie ane number of ky, for meat, quhilk pei caryit iramediatlie to pair boittis ; and
pairefter tuik pe fea," to pe number of Thre hunder men, of all. Cold^^ brocht him tua crearis,'^ with
fum wpir boittis pat Sir James him felf gat in Ardmurche, and fuppryfit in wpir pairtis. It is thocht
pat pei Iiaue tane pair woyage to Hay ; and if pe cuntrie be vpone pair gaird, as pai fuld, I think pai
lall nocht proffeit mekill. The occafioun of my mannis ftay ; it wes long befoir he could get tryelH*
quhair M'Allane 3I<'Ean wes ; for he wes buflie, in gewing of ordour, ])at Sir James fuld nocht land '=
on any of his Ifles ; and abfcuringi« him felff, pat pei fuld nocht get him. I vnderftand he hes fend
him Letteres to the Counfell, quhilk I think 30ur lo. knawis ofbefoir now. I will requeft30ur lo. to
lat me vnderftand, quhat directioun is cumit 5it frome iiis Mat'*', concerning Sir James M'^coneill, and
quiiat conclufioun 5our lo^ of Counfell hes taiken pairanent. Sua, hawing na farder at pis prefent,
committis 5our lo. to pe protectioun of God ; and reftis

3our lo. euir afllurit freind and femant,
Perthe, pe 24 of Junii, 1605. Tui-libardine.

I VNDERSTAND Gleiigarvie^"' is prefentlie in Ed"", and is trublit be my Lord Lowatt^^ in fome actionis
betuix Jiame. I wald requeft sour lo. to be his freind and to forder him hame ouir ; for I mynd to
meit with him, in his by-cuming, and fall lay him rycht to any thing pat concernis his Mat='« feruice,
to my power. And becaus he is dealler betuix me and 3I'Allane 3I'Ea7ie, Capitane of the Clan Roniiald, pleas 5 our lo. wret to me, quhat particular 36 wald haue me to lay to thair chairge ; and I fail
do ])e beil.

The pretext ])at Sir James 3I'coneill and M'lionnald myndit to haue vfit, to haue perfuadit 3LAIlane M'^Eane and Glengarry to haue taikin pair pairte, is pis auld actioun pat my Lord Loivat hes

' Meddle; interfere ; mingle. Fr. meler. * Macdonald of Ardnamurchan, Chief of the Clan Ian of

Ardnamurchan, a powerful branch of the Clandonald. ^ Sir Roderick MacLeod of that Ilk, commonly called

liory More. lie married a daughter of Glengarrie's, and was the founder of the families of Talisker, Eernera, Muiravenside, Hammer, Grisemish, &c. * See Note relative to Donald Gormc, (No. XXII.) III. 25. ^ Once.

" Volley ;/e« dejoie. ' Encircling. ' Separately ; individually ; one by one, " An impressive mode of

swearing feudal obedience, and to live .ind die in his service. '" Entirely; Avholly. " Set sail '* Coill

Makgillespik IMacdonald. '^ A rruyar, sort of large galley ; or rather a bark or sort of sloop. Cray is used in

(). E. in a similar sense. '^ Advice; satisfactory intelligence. '= Should not be suffered to effect a landing.

" Obscuring, concealing. " Donald Macdonald of Glengarrie (Donald Mac Angus MacAUster.) '« Simon,

seventh Lord Lovat. See History of the Erasers, by John Anderson, Esq. W.S. : a work of great ability and research.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 21.

aganis fame, and ])e taking of 3PA//ane M'^Etmes landis ouir his liead be Sir James Stemirt. In my
opinnioun, jour lo* of the Counfall fuld do weill to delay ])e dilcuffing of fir debaittis for ane qubyle
till fir wfer materis of Sir James war fetlit.

XV. Letter, Sir James MakconeUl to Lord Binnhtg.

My VERIE IIONOUnABILL GUDE LORD,

Pleis your lo. I wald haue writtin to your lo. long or now, had not 1 culd find no bearer, becaus
nane of my awin dar go thair. Aluyfe,^ I will euer think myfelf bund for the fauour your lo. fchew nie
at my being laft in the CnJfeU,'^ whanne God knawis vtheris wes bent to wrong me be thair fals accufationis; whofe feir, and the report they gave out that my lyfe was onlye in thair willis, was the onlyc
motione of the braik of ward ; and no intentione nor defyre I had, or lies, to live as ane Rebell or outlaw ; whiche traid, the Lord knawes, I abhore ; hot that I wald glaidlie live at libertye with my lyfe
faif. And now, my lord, I befeik your lo., for the fauour of God and my perpetuelle i'eruice, pitie me
and be my freind, that his Maiellie may be graciouflye moved not to jield to my vnfreindis, to ruit me
and my whole race out, being fyve or fex hundreth jeiris pofleffouris, and now willing to obey and ferwc
his Maiellie, in all humilitie, I, feing how I and my pure freindis may live ; and if jour lo. culd find the
meanis that nis Ma^^*^ and Coioi/a/l may be moved to let me pofles this pure Hand, paying for it as
anie vther may or hes jit ofterrit to do, and getting my pardone, fall find lufficient furetie, both for my
jeirlie dewtye and the peace and quyetnes of me and all that dwellis vnder me. Gif jour lo. may or
will do me any guid in this, I will not onlie be ane to do jour lo. guid leruice, hot, with Goddi^;
graice, let jour lo. fie my thankfulnes. befeik jour lo., for Goddis caufe, be playne with me, and
if HIS Ma^" may not be moved to let me haue this Hand, diminiffing nothing of his Ma^^^ commoditie,
that jour lo. will let me know, be jour advife, be what vther meanis iiis Mat*= may be moved to grant
ane generall pardone to me and all myne ; and that we may haue to fufteine ws in fum mealbur, leill
we be forcit, being without oure living, to opprefs vtheris. Thisabyiding jour lo. anlueir, committing
jow to God, I reft; 5our lo. euir to command,

Julij 1. Sir J. Makdonall.

My Lord, If his Maiestie be not willing that I fall be his heighnes tennent in Ha, for Goddis caufe
let his MA'r'^ hauldit in his awin hand ; for that is certane, I will die befoir I fie a Camjihell poUes it.
And HIS Ma'^'*' haulding it in his awin hand, his Ma*^ may haue ane thoufand merkis mair be fat, nor
Calder fuld pay ; I making it quyt of me and my kin, whiche I will do vpoun fuche reafonabill conditiones as I will fchow jour lo., if je may affure me that je may get his Ma^'*^ brocht to this poynt,
and in the meintyme no imployment' be gevin aganis me, till jour lo. fie how this may be brocht to
pas. As for this Iloufe of Dunevcg, which I tuik in four and tuenty houris from Cahleris menne, vour
lo. getting me fauour of iiis Ma^k, the houfe falbe to ferve nis Ma^", and neuer to be keipit aganis his
hienes. And if his Ma^^ awin Gaird or the Bifcliopes had bein in the Houfe, befoir God I wald
neuer perfew it; bot finding thefe in it, who crewellie opprefl; the pure cuntrie, wes the onlie fuittoris
of my lyfe and landis, I wald I culd do thame mair difgrace ! Referring all to jour lo. confideratione
and anfueir, I refi. 3our lo. euer to be commandite

Julij L S" J. Makdonall.

To MY Lord Secretare.

XVI. Letter, Sir James Malcconeill to Mr James Knox.
Right Worshipfull,
I HAVE, for fome bufiinefit, pairtly concerning your father, fent this bearer to Edinbnrirli ; and gevo

' At nil cvnnts. » Of KdiiilMirtili. ' This is taken from a copy. The sense appears to lie. that, in the

interim, no one should he employed against him by Commission, or Letters of lire and sword.

22 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

my lord he gone to England, I pray vow faill not, as yee refpect bis lo. well,i to fend his Letter to
him, with furetie that it may com to his handes ; for I havve wrotten to his lo. the thing that I hope
Ihall come to his lo. honour and credite ; and there is none leaueand vnder liis Maieftie that I will do
nior to, till do be, and do him all the honour and credite I can. Heir I will entreat yow, give^ 56 be
in Ed"", and any of my Letters come to 5 our hand, yee will delyver thamc to fuche as I have wretten
tbame to. And fo, repofeing in 50ur good will, and aflureing 50W I am to ferve and honour jour
father and 5 our felue, I reft 5our aflured frend to command.

From Ila, 4- Julij. S'' J. Makdonall.

{Pq/ljcript.) Sir,

Albeit it be too great paines, yet in hope I will, God willing, do 50W yett more feruice, fend ony
of ^owr fervandis with all the reft of my Letters to fuch as thay are derected to, and what anfwer
bees gotten, geve it to the berar. I reft 5our affuired frend,

S** J. Makdonall.

To Mr James Knox, fonc to my Lord Biiliope of the lllis and Raupho.

XML LETTER/ro77? ArcMhcdd CamphelP to Lord Bhi)iing,^ * a72e7it his
2)erfute of Sir James MahoncdV
Right Honorabell,
As I writt to 50ur lo. from the Wode of Meffen, SiR James M<'coneill and M'Ranald went
bv I'at way ; and, as I was informed, he had ftayed Wednifday night and Thurfday in ]Murthlie. So
I, heaving riddin Wednifday night and Thurfday all day, I wachit at Murthlie all fat night, bot fay
maid no ftay fair : Bot M^Ranald lent a man of his for a 50ung boy of his awin fat he had in Murthlie and convoyed him with him. On Wednifday, at night, they were in a pure man's houfe in Strabrane ; and on Thurfday, at night, ])ay wer in the Eaft end of Ranoch, quhair I might haue bene fex
liouris before fame, gif I had bene fartane of thair way. The Erie of Atholl'" was advertifed by fe
Brie of Mar, ^ and he followed fame. And on Fryday, in the moniing, com in fight of fame; bot
my lordis men had ran fo far, and his fpayis fat went before him fo wnprovedent, fat *S7/- Jeames and
his companie wer advertifed be Stroican his wyf,' quho is M<^Ranald his dochter. They wer forffed
to leive ])air horffis and clothes, and teake fame to fe wodis. The Erie of Athotl apprehendit Sir
Jeames his man, fat was with him in the Caftell, and quho ftayed efter him in f e Caftell fat morning
he brake ward, and too men of 3I'Eanaldis ; bot my lord tels me he difmift fame all. My lord, fo
far as I culd learne, the Erie was exceiding willing in this perfute, bot ])air was fum wronge done him,
fat I beleive his lo. as 5it knows not of. Thofe })at I fend to be before ])ame ar not as 5it returned,
nor no word from fame. I hope in God 5 our lo. fall heir fat fay haue mett ; for fay can hardlie pas
by fame. The Erie ofAtholl afluris me fat fair cam a compane of men to meit 3TRcmalcl. ^Nly lord,
if fair wer bot too bunder men and ane honeft commander on f e feildis, they wer not eabell to do any
thing be land ; nor culd fay haue tyme to mowe^ any to follow fame : Bot in treutli, if fay be permittit, they will no dout gi-ow ftronge. Sir Jeames man fat fe Erie ofAtholl apprehendit, told, fat
fay refoluit to burne Cadell'^ his landis of Mukarne ; and fat he thoglit a grait many Illenderis ver on
fail' courfe.'" My lord, fo fchune as I heir from thofe I derectit eftir fame, and fat I kno quhat courfe

' Weal ; advantage. ' If. ' Son of Sir James, and brother of Sir Jolin Campbell of Lawers. Afterwards

Sir Ari-hibald. ^ Sir Thomas Hamilton, afterwards Earl of Haddington, Secretary of State. * James, second

Earl of Athcdl, son and heir of John, sixth Lord Innermeath, who had obtained the Earldom, Mar. G, 1595-6. He
married Lady Mary Stewart, second daughter of John, fifth Earl of Atholl, by his stepmother, Lady I\Iary Ruthven,
and died without issue, anno 1G25. — Wood's Pceruyc. ' John, seventh Earl of Marr, who had been intrusted

with the education of Prince Henry, and was, in Dec. 1615, appointed Lord High Treasurer of Scotland. He married Anne, 2d daughter of David, second Lord Drunmiond, and died Dec. 14, \(i'.i\, xi. 11. ' Robert Robertson of Strowan mai-ried a daughter of Macdonald of Kepi)och. " Induce ; persuade ; move. * John
Campbell of Caddell or Colder. '" Were his abetters and maintained his cause.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 23

Sir Jeames teakis firft in hand, or quhich way lie teakis him to pe feie, I will, God willing, retunie ;
not douting bot mi/ lord Thefanrcr ^ will haue feme confideraiioun of my pcans,'^ as I fall be reddie at
all occaiions to adventur my felf in his Ma'''^^ feruice; I reft

From the Furd of Lyon, fis Setterday 3oxir lo. ewer to ferue 50W,

at xij houris of Jiat day. Ar. Campbell.

I pray 5 our lo. adverteife Cadell, ])at he may fend word to his men of Mackarney, to be war of
fe rebels.

To j)e right honorabell, and my fpefeall good lord.
My Lord of Binning, Secreter, &c.

XVIII. Letter, Ltord Binning to Archibald Campbell.

Loving freind,
I RESSAVED your Letters of the 15 of this moneth, from Dunoveg; bot now newes in thame ; because vpone the 12 day, I hard the fubftance of all that your Letter beares ; quhilk that fame 12 day
was written to Court be my Lord Chancellour. I am glad that my Lord is maifter of thefe ftrenthis,
and forie that all the principall men are efcaped, except Coll, who hes gottin conditions ; bot I hope
that my lordis diligence, wifdome, and gud luk, fall owertak thame, and red his Ma^"^ and the cuntrie of thair cummer, for if it fould fall vthervvayes furth (as God forbid) yow know quhat conftructions men wald mak of the great preparatioun maid be fea and land, at fo great charges to his Ma^'^,
without any effect, bot the wrak of the poore beggarlie tennentis of Hay and Kintyre. For, fmce *SV/-
James and his fone, with 31'' Rannald and his fone, and Glengarries fone, and BrSorle,^ ar all efcaped,
and Coll'^ pardoned, I know not quhat ringleaders thefe ar, whome ye wryt 3e ar to bring in. Allwayes, it is gud that tliair forces ar fcattered, without harme or danger ; yit, fo long as the heades ar
all to the fore,^ the Rebellioun will never be thought quenched. Quhairfor, I know my Lord will
have fuch cair as agrieth with his honour and his Ma^'"*^ expectatioun. I have no certantie of the
Thefaurer deputes dyet, bot I hope he will be heir about Hallowraes, and will afTuredlie performe his
promeis, yours being obferved, quhilk I hartelle wiflie. So, remembring my loving commendatiounis
to your brother Collin, and praying you to prevent your curious nighbouris in the adverteifments of
my lordis proceidingis, quhilk I wilhe may be profperous, I reft

Your verie loving freind, at powar,

[Binning.]*^

XIX. Letter yrow Sir Dot/gal Camjibell of Atichijibrck to the Chancellor

{received Ang, 4, 1615.)

Honorable good Lord,

My humble dewtie remembrit, pleafe 3our lo. to wit, that I am heer in the Tarbet, attending vpone

our enemies coming farder in the cuntrie. 3our lo, fall vnderftand, fuice my laft wryting to 50iir lo..

Sir James the traitour hes latlie directit out ane fi/rie croce'^ from the head of Lockerrane, quhair he

makes his refidence for the tymc, to the Tarbart, vpone the pretence that all manor of man betuix the

Mull of Kintyre and the Tarbart fould come and tak land of him. And to prevoino this, that the

cuntrie fould get no fkaith, I have directit for to get more affiflance of men throw Argyle and Lome.

3our lo. fall know that I was not anfuerit, according to my Commiffioun. The monyeft" that came

to me was anehundreth men; the number of the haill thrie hundreth men. Wilhing 3 our lo. to tak

ordour with the cuntries difobedience, for farder inconvenience; quhilk I fear will come to more

' Sir Kobpit Carr, Earl of Somerset, Iicld the ofTice at this time. ^ A gentle hint tiiat remuneration was

looked for, to ([uicken his zeal. ^ A son of Sir James MacSorle of tlie Uoiite, formerly mentioned, botli in this

Appendix and in the Introduction to tliis Trial. * Coll Macgillespick IMacdonald. ^ In being; existing.

'■ From a copy, marked by Lord IJinning himself. ' See Notes to Sir Waller Scott's Lady of the Lake, &r.

*" IMost ; grejitest number.

24 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609Ikaith, if they be not punifchit for tliair fault. I fall give vp in forow to your lo. the particular difobeyars. Thefe Rebels ar in readines with fyve niclitis provilioun and lone. Quhair they ar to mak
thair onfet I know not ; bot they ar mor in number than I wret to 3 our lo. in my laft Letter. I dowt
not bot 5 our lo. remembers the dait of my Coniminion, quliilk approchis neir to the fext day of Auy-ult ; quhaufor I thocht good to mak 5 our lo. forlein of this, that 3 our lo. may tak ane ordour farder
with thir Rebels. So, not troubling 5 our lo. with farder writ, committis 30ur lo. to the protectiouu
of the Almighty God. 3our lo. to be commandit to my powar,

Tarbart, 30 July, 1615. Auchinbreck.

XX. Lettek, Lord Binning to the Earl of Ar gyle, 5th Aug. 1615.

]My most hono'*'' good lord.
Thinking my felft' affiired that your lo. wald, according to 5our promeis, contenit in 3our Lettre
of the 24- fent to me, begin 30ur journey homeward vpone the nixt day, and end it, at fardeft,
within ten or tuell dayes ; I certified the Counfell Jiairof, and be Letteris to Auc/dnbrek and vtheris
officeris, wndowtedlie that 5 our lo. wald keip that dyet ; but now, wnderftanding 3our lo. cairlefnes of that weightie chairge, quhilk 50 have wTidertaine againis the Tratoris, who daylie growis
in number, force, and preliimptioun, becaus they find no refiftance, far les perfute aganis them,
quliairby they liave left fum forces in Ila, to keip Duneveg and Lochgorne ; and Makoneill felff
and lex hundreth with him, having maid thamefelffis mailteris of Kintyre, ar fo fwelled in pryde,
that they have fent the fyre-corfe * throw the cuntrie, and waimed all the inhabitants betuix Tarbert and the Mull of Kintyre, to tak their land of the Traitour Mahoneill. We heir of fo much
boldnes in the rebels and fear in the cuntrie people, as we exfpect daylie to heir of thair farder
futing \'pone jour lo. cuntrie of Argyle ; which 3our o^Tie people does fearfullie apprehend. We
ar affured of Auchinbrekes faithfulnes to His ^NIatie, and jour lo. do exceidinglie diftruft his gouernement, in refpect of his owne feiklines, the difloyaltie of many of the Irifche people, and boldnes and fubtilitie of the Rebels, too able to keep advantage of him. Nather will I conceall, that jour
lo. name'^ is envyed, jour owne autoritie and wounted ellimatioun infinitlie impared, be jour abfence
and neglect of jour cuntrie ; and releifF of jour freindis, engadged and wraiked for jour debtis : And
now, if jour lo. fall kythe ^ cairles, or flouthfull and Huggilhe in this great chairge, je will increas the
libeitie of jour ewil-willaiis, who have boldlie fpokin to jour difadvantage and difcredit, difcourage
hisMa^s good fubiects, embolden the Rebells, and mak jour talk more difficile nor^ jour lo. apprehends. My affectioun to my maifleris honour, and refpect and good will to jour lo. felff, makis me
to wTyt more liberallie ^ in this mater nor vtheris will, which I hope and requeft jour lo. may tak in
good pairt ; earnefllie befeiking jour lo., all empefchments removed, to come heir with all poffible
expeditioun and refolutioun, to go fordward with wifdom and diligence. 3our lo. will find that jour
fallowing jour owne will, aganis my opinioun, in purchafling ane Commiflioun in this fervice, to ane
particular number of the Counfell, will do hinder to the buflines. Bot the nixt belt mull be done;
nothing being able to remove all difficulties, but jour lo. prefence and diligence; which I recommend
to jour lo , as je affect jour maifleris favour and jour awne honour. So, luiking for jour lo. extreame diligence, to amend bypaft fleuth and ouerfights, I commit jour lo. to the protectioun of God.

3our lo. verie aft'ectionat to ferve jou,
Edr, the fyft of Augufl (1615.) [Binning.]

XXI. ExTRACT/;owi 3Ii?iufes of Privij Council, Jun. 20, 1615.'
The Marques of Hiintlye " hes gotten a verye ample Commiffion for perfute of the Rebelles, efpe-

' The Fiery-cross so often described by Sir Walter Scott in Tlic Lady of the Lake, &c. * Clan Campbell.

' Prove careless. * Than. ^ Freely. ^ From the Denmi/lne MSS. Adv. Library. ' George,

sixth Earl AUilfrst IVIarqiiis of Huntly, the same person who was concerned in the traitorous correspondence with
Spain, the burning of Dunibirsel, and slaughter of the Earl of Moray, &c.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 25

cialie of Macronnald^ and his fone, wlio ar Ijis owne tennentes; and the Counfale hes wrotten vnto
him to fend his fone the Erie of Enyee, ^. with dih'gence, to Lochquliaber, — to perfew the rebelles, to
tak, demolilhe, and deftroy Mahonnaldcs houfTes, to meddle with his whole goodes, and with tlie
goodes of fuch as did reffett and fupplie Sir James Makdonald and Makronnald, and not to come
out of that countrie, whill he afTuire the countrey to be keeped vnder his Maiefties obedience.

There is a Proclamation fett oute againes *S7/' James Mahdonald and his fone, Coill Macgillefpik,^
and fome otheres of the principall ringleadares in this rebellion ; conteaneing a reward to any fuch
perfone or perfones as will tak or flay onie of tharae ; to witt, for Sir James M'^Donald there is a promefe of fyve thoufand pundis ; for 3Iakronnald and his fone and Coill Makgillejpik, fyve thoufand
markes a peece; and for fome others of the rebellis, thrie thoufand markes. And there is a promefe
of pardon proclamed to fuch of the rebclls thame felues, as will tak, and exhibite, or flay onie of there
owene companie, being of a better rank and qualitie nor thame felues.

Sir James Makdonnald and 3Iakro7inald, in there going towardes the lies, took a fone and a fervand of tJie Larde of Glengarries ;* information whereof being made to Young Gletigarrye,^ he, with
fuch forces as he could mak vpon the fuddane, followed thame to the fea fyd, and in a conflictt betweene thame, he hes taken two of the principallis of Makronnaldes companie, ffor whofe releef Makronnald offerred delyuerie oft' Glengarryes fone ; hot Glengarrie refuifed to delyuer his two prifoners,
and hes promefed to exhibit thame heere within ten dayes.

Donald Gorme ^ and the Captane of Clannronnald "^ hes by there writtinges promefed to continew
in there obedience, and to do the bell of there endevoures in the perfute of the rebelles.

XXII. ExTRACTy)'6)w ' The Hi/lorie of King James the Sext,' {^imWJlied for

the Bannatyne Club!')
In the moneth of Maij (1615), Sir James Makoneill, eldeft fone to umquhile Angus 3Iakoneill of
Dunnevaig, who was before condamnit for certen crymis committed be him, and for efcaping furth of
the Cafl;ell of Edinburgli, in curapanie of Johne Lord Maxwell, as is before tauld, efcapit furth therof ;
becaus it was conftantly fupponit that he had gevin counfell, be word and writt, for the violent keaping
of that Caftell ; and fearing the cryme fould have bene tryit aganis him, be witnes, he tuik tlierfore
tyme and occafioun to efchew unpuneifl. This Caflell of Dunnevaig was ombefet be certen of the
Kingis Ihips, be fea, that nane of the Kepers fould efcape that way, nor be furneift with vivers be fea.
And the hiycht of Caddell, brother-in-law to the faid Sir James, took in hand to ombefet the fame be
land ; as he did ; and wan the fame. Sum of the preafoners he put to death ther; uthers he convoyit
faiflie to Edinburgh ; and the greatefl nomber efcapit, be fea, and became Pirats. In the meane feafone, the Erie of Argyle, having maid long refidence at Court, and underflanding that Sir James 3Iak'
oneill was deflroyand his landis and tennents, maid narrative thairof to the King ; and obtenit ane
ample Commiflloun of his Maieflie, to pas aganis him, with fyre and Avorde, and to appreiiend him,
ather quick or deid, as he befl; could; and i^o, haifted hitnfelf towart Scotland, with all Ipead, for the
purpofe. His voyage maid no good fuccefs, as falbe, God willing, declairit heirefter, at mair lenth.^

' Alexander McDonald or McRonald of Kcppai h or Gargavache. ' George Earl of Enzie, afterwards second

Earl of Ilmitlie, who was beheaded at Ediiilmrgh, Mar. 22, IG19. =* Father of Mister McDoiial.I, Lieutenant

to the great Marquis of Montrose in the civil wars. He was popularly styled Coll KcitacU, i. e. Left-handed C'cdl,
from which his son Alister took his designation of IVIcCdl Keitach, aluidged to Culhitlo. * Donald iAIac.Vngus

of Glengarrie. ' Alexander or Alister, faliier of the first Lord Macdonell of .Arras. <= Of Sleaf, railed

Sassenach, having been educated in England. lie married l\Iarv, daughter of Hector INfacLean of Dowarf, leaving
three sons. Donald More, the eldest, married Margaret, sister to Colin Lord Kintail; and dying, without issue, in l(ilG,
his nephew, Donald Gorme Oij, son of his brother Archibald, by Margaret, daughter of Angus Macdonald of I)unnivaigand Glynnis, succeeded. See (Archdall's) Lodge's Irish Pceraije, VII. 115. ' Donald Mc.Allan McEan.

" Edited by Thomas Thomson, Esquire, quarto, Edin. 1825, p. ^88. " The author either did not live to fulfil

this intention, or at least did not complete his History, which terminates abruptly, anno 1617.

VOL. III. D

26 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

XXIII. The Earl of Argyle's Report to the Privy Council of Scotland of his ComimJJlon of Lieiitenantry}

(1615, Sep.) Immediatlie oftpr tliat the Erlcof Ergijle had receavlt his Maiesteis CommifTioun
of Lieutennandrie over the Illis, lie addredit liiin I'olf, with all convenient diligence, in Duntroone,*
quhair the greateft pairt of his forceis did meete him. And being fuirlie inforniit, that the Traytour
Sir James ^FConeiU, and his complices, to the nowmer of fevin or ancht hundreth men of weere,
for that prefent in Kintyre, and of full intentioun thair to remane, quliilP tliay wer by the gritter
power forcit out of it, his lo. refoluit to mak ane onfett without ony delay, alfweill on thair vefchellis
as on the Rehellis thame felfHs ; and thairforc commandit the Laird of CaddcU, who had the conducting of the forceis of Lome, to mak his onfet on thair vefchellis, quhair he could heir thame to be,
ather in Yle of Giga, the Ile of Cara, or on the Maine-Land of Kintyre. Lykewyfe fo, his
Lordfchip gaif command to the Laird of Anchinhrek^^ and to fome fpeciall of Auchinbrekis freindis,
to merch over land to the Tarbart, with liis lordfchipis forceis of Ergyle. My lord him felft", being
accumpaneid with the men of Coule,^ went by Sea to the Tarbart, on the vther fyde of the Maine^
land. 3Ty lord went from Duntroone on the day of September, and wes that nicht in the Tarbart ; quhair Atichinhreh, with the men of Ergyle, did meete him that fame nicht. Coll 31'^illefpik
halving ** Coliiie Campbell of Kilberrie, fet out to him, come Avith fyftie men the foirfaid nicht to
Loch Tarbert, quhair he appreliendit the faid Coline, and fome foure or fyve with him, quhome he
maid his prifonairis. Airlie the nixt moirning, Coll 31'^illefpik, being on his way bak agane, towardis
the Ile of Cara, quhair he had left 3P Rannald, and his fones, and Sorle 31'^ James, who wer appointit
to remane in Cara, for helping of the Rehellis vefchellis ; he being on his way, as faid is, perfauit my
Lord of Ergyle his forces of Lome, failling towardis Gigza ; and fome of thame, haueing gone in the
bak fyd of Gigza, maid ane onfett on the Rebellis who wer in Cfira, hot wer preventit'' by fome of
the Laird of Largy ^ his fervandis, who perfauit my lord of Ergyle his forces going towardis Ergyle,
quhair the Rebellis wer, and fet on grite beikynis '-^ to mak thame warr.'° The foirfaid Ila not being
diflant frome land above twa or thrie myllis of fea, jit before the Rebellis could get away in thair
boitis, thair wer fome of 31^Iiannald his men appreliendit and llane. Coll 31'^illejpik, as faid is,
being on his way to the lie of Cara, wes adverteifl be a fervand of the Laird of Largyis, that my
Lord of Ergyle his forces had chaflit 31'^Ilanald and thofe that wer with him out of the Ile of Cara,
and had plantit thame felfHs thair; fo lie immediatlie was forcit to land in Kintyre. Some oi the
Erll of Ergyle his men, haueing foigadderit '^ with him in his landing, killit a fyftene or faxtone of his
men, and took his foure vafchellis frome him. 3Iy lord of Ergyle, the foirfaid day, fend his forces
of Couell and Ergyle, within twelf myles to the place quhair Sir James 31'^Coneill and his complices
wer ; bot he being adverteill that my f.ord of Ergyle his forceis wer comeing, by fea and land,
vpoun him, fled away to the Ile of Raehltc,^- quhair he remanit twa nichtis, and thairefter went to Ila.
My Lord of Ergyle being adverteift thairof, and heiring that his Ma**"'* fchippis wer arryvit at the Ile
of 31'^acharnnnili, his Lordfchip went with his forces of Lome and fome of the men of Ergyle, who had
thair vefchellis on that fyde of the Meane-land, towardis his Maiedeis fchippis ; quhair he was llorineflayd for the fpace of thrie dayis. And thairefter went to Loddummcs in Ila, a harbour convenient for
his Maiefteis fchippis to abyd in, and good for landing of his lordfchipis forces, out of the danger of

' Presented to the Privy Council liy ' ArchiliaM Ciimiibell,' (Brother to the I^aird of Liuvers,) ' seniitour to
ArchbtiM Erie of Ergyle,' Nov. 'i'A, Kilo. ' l'r(ilial)ly meant for Dunoon, of which the Duke of Arijyil is still

nominally tin; Ileritahle Keeper. Tlie Dun on which the ancient Castle stood is all that remains to jxiint out its site.
^ Until. ■' Sir l)iii;ald {'am]ilic]l. "' Cowell, a district of Argyle. '' Some words ajtpear to he omitted here,

such as ' set for,' or ' laid in \vait for.' ' I-'rusti'ated. " IVIacdonald, ancestor of Sir Charles 3Iacdoiiald

Lockhai't. " Lar^'e beacons. '" To make them aware ; put them on their guard. Such beacons were

usually large fires placed on the tops of the highest mountains or eminences, and carefully fed with tarred wood, &e,
until answered from adjacent heights. " Met ; rencountered. '^ Kachlin or Haclirin.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 27

the enemey. Haueing flayed thair twa dayis, for refrefcheing of liis men, and till he fould heir quhair
the RebcUis Aver, ininiediatlie being adverteift that Sir James, with his complices, wer in the JR'mdes of
Ila, and in a little He neir by, called Illannourftnj,viij Zon/ maid orifet on thame, by fea ; quhairin his
lordfchipis men wer preventit by fome, who fet on beakynis in the O of Ila, quhairby Sir James was
advertelt that my lord his forces wer comand on him, fo as Sir James, M'^Iia?ina Id and liis fones, and
Sorle 31'' James fled over that nicht to Lichdachele, ane He on the coaft of Ireland. CoU M<^iUifpik
haueing the keiping of the Castell of Dunyvaig and the Ile of Lochgorme, randerit thame bothe
to theJErll of Ergijle and Colin of Kilberrie, quhome he had taikin captiue ; and apprehendit I-.^phie,^
on of the principallis who followit Sir James, and deliuerit him to the Erll of JErgyle ; and I haue
prerontit him this day before your Lordfchipis, with vthcr fyve of Sir James his complices. Efter
that the Callell of Dunyvaig and force of Lochgorme wer taikin in, my Lord apprehendit fyftene of
the principall men of Ila, who wer leadairis of the poore ones, to follow Sir James ; whome he caufit
be execute thair. And haueing deliuerit the foirfaid Caflell of Dunyvaig and the force of Lochgorme
to the Laird of Caddell, his Lordjchip come frome Ila in his Maiefleis fchipis, and arryved in Lochilcarrane^ on the fextene day of October laft. His Lord/chip no fhooner come thair, than thair come
on of the faid Sir Jatiies his foUowaris who went with him to Ireland, and vndirtook to bring Tome of
my lordis fervandis to the place quhair he left the faid Sir James; and gif he were not to be
found thair, he wes fuire to find him in the toun of Galloway, in Ireland, in Vallentpie Blak his houfe,
or Robert Blah his houfe, thair ; two, who are alledgcit to be reflettairis of Jefuitis. My Lord being
thus fuirlie informit of the faid Sir James his proceidiugis, lies directit thretlie of liis men, in two
onfettis, to Ireland, efter him. As to Sorle JSLJames and the twa and twenty that he had with him,
thay ar in the Route and Glennes of Ireland :^ It is alledgeit that the fub-officer thair hes gevin thame
promeis of protectioun for two monethis. As to M'^Rannald and his fones, thay ar fled to Lochquhabir ; and my Lord his forces ar in perfute of thame thair. As to Glengarrie his fone, he is reffat in his fatheris boundis, and my Lord lies fome of his fervandis efter him. At my Lord his comeing to Kintyre out of Ila, he apprehendit fome of the principallis thair, who had followit *S7;' James,
and thofe who maid wairning to the Rebellis of the Erlt of Ergyle his forces comeing to Cara. Lykwyfe his Lordfcliip difmiffit Capitane Wood, Capitane Monhe, with his Maiefteis Scliipis, and the
Bark quhairin his Maiefteis cannoun and mlinitiouu wes, on the tent day of Nouember inftant.

As alfua, the faid Archibald Campbell gaif in the Articles following, qidiaironto he craved the
faidis Lordis aduife and Ansuer ; off the quhilkis Articlis and Anfueris the tennour followis.

Articles and Ansueris.

First, to inquire, gif your lordfchipis thinkis it not ane fufficient exoneratioun to the Erll of Ergyle,
that Sorle 31 James is in Ireland, and hes tua monethes Refpett,'* as is allegit?

Ansuer. The Lordis thinhis that the Lieidennent hes done his deiotie, and fould be exonerat of
Sorle M'James, gif he he in Ireland, as is alledgeit ; feeing, his lordfchipis CommiJJioun givis him
nocht jjouer to per few Sorle M'' James, in Ireland.

Secundlie, to crave thair Lordfchipis opinionis, gif thair Lordfchipis thinkis it nocht sufficient, that
^li 3I'Rannald his /b7ies may nocht be apprehendit be my Lord of Ergyle liis travellis, before my
Lordis comeing to the Commiffionairis, that my Lord prove in quhais boundis thay half had actuall
reiidence ?

Ansuer. G//' M'llannald and his fones can nocht be had (fore the Lieufenncnfs comeing heir, gif
the Lieidennent will verifie and prove quhair and by quhome they are rcffet, and iL'ithin whofe boundis
thay ha if thair actual rejidcnce, he dais his dcwtie, in that point.

TiiRiDLiE, to inquire thair Lordfchipis, gif Glengarrie Avill nocht be obleigt for his fone, it being cleirlie provin, that he has actuall refidance within his fatheris boundis ?

' IMCaphie of Colonsay. The moiha-n name is IMpFcc. ' I>och-Kilkcrraii. ' The proiicrty of Sir James

Mac-Soile-Boye, mentioned in the Notice to this Trial. ^ Kespite.

28 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

Ansuer. Glengarrie wilhe haldin to anf iter for liis fone, it bciJig provm that he is rejfet and hes his
actual refidence ivithin Glengarryis boundis.

FouRTLiE, to fchaw tbair Lordfchipis, that mi/ Lord of Ergyle findis the liaill cuntrey people of
KiNTYRE, Ila, Colonsay, Jura, and EiGA, guiltie in being in cumpany, and beiiing wapponis, and
mulluring with Sir James 3I''coneill, at fuclie tymes as he appointit; and in geving of meite, drink,
and harborie to him, his followaiis ; and for the mofl pairt thay neuir left Sir James, nather in Kintyre nor Ila, vntill he was conllrayned to leive thame; yit my Lordof Ergijle, finding the nownier
{o giite, and tliat thay alledgeit that it was throw jull feir that thay went with him, or fchew him ony
fauour ; thairfoir my Lord hes put to tlie knawledgement of ane AfTyfe, fuche as had commandiement
of companyis with him, who micht haue done feruice on Sir James and liis followairis, and bane left
thame at thair pleafoure ; and forbearis the refl, vntill he knaw the Commiffionaris pleafoure ; altho'
the extremitie of the law wald talc all thair lyveis.

Ansuer. The Lordis ar o/'the Lieutennentis opinioun, concerning this Article; hot thay willjirjt
acquent the Kingis Maiestie thairwith, and haue his Maiejieis mil and plea/our thairanent, afore
thay gif thair adui/e to the Lieutennent.

Fyftlie, to fchaw thair Lordfchipis, that the Castell of Dunyvaig and the Ile of LocnGORME, being randrit to the Erll of Er gyle, he hes delyuerit thame to the Laird of Caddell ; and defyris THE CouNSALLis allowance of the fame.

Ansuer. At the comeing of the Lieutennent and of the Laird of Cadell heir, this Article fall reffaue an anfuer.

(Saxtlie,) To fchaw thair Lordfchipis, that he who hes vndirtaikin to bring my Lordis fervandis to
the place quhair Sir James 3rCo)ieill hes refidence in Ireland, lliew my Lord, gif Sir James wer out
of that place, quhair he houpit to find him, he wald fuirlie be in the toun of Galloway, in Ireland,
ludgeit ather in Vallentyne Blakis houfe, or in Robert Blahis houfe, for thay dwell in that toun — and
hes a certane fowme of money payit vnto thame, yeirlie, for reffaueing of Jefuitis ; and Sir James had
his moyen maid, that be thair meanis, he fould be tranfportit out of the cuntrey.

Ansuer. The Lordis will wryte to the Lord Deputie of Ireland, concerning this Article.

[John, seventh Lord Maxwell, of the ancient and distinguished family of Caerlaverock, and
brother of the first Earl of Nithsdale, was a powerful but turbulent Border baron, and was one of
those individuals, whom a daring and restless temperament, and their crimes, have ' damned to eternal
fame.' He appears to have fallen a victim to an unhappy indulgence in those reckless and deadly
feuds, which were alike the disgrace and the curse of the Scottish Nobles and gentry, for many centuries.

In order more clearly to comprehend the history and causes of his crimes, originating in disappointed ambition, to which at length Lord Maxwell fell a sacrifice, and account for the hereditary feud,
which terminated in the perpetration of the disgraceful Murder for which he was eventually brought
to the scaffold, it seems necessary to premise, that his father, John, sixth Lord Maxwell, Warden of
the West Marches of Scotland, &c., had the address and fortune, shortly after the Execution of the
Regent Morton, to obtain, as in right of his mother, Lady Eeatrix Douglas, the Regent's second
daughter, a Charter to the Earldom of Morton, Jan, 5, 1381. This grant he had also interest enough
to get publicly ratified by Parliament, Nov. 19 thereafter. Lord Maxwell, however, did not long
enjoy the title of Earl of Morton, and the domains annexed to it ; — for, in Jan. 1585, the Attainder

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 29

was solemnly rescinded by Parliament/ and the title and estates were declared to revert to Recent
Morton's lawful heir. Sir Walter Scott informs us,^ that the Laird of Johnstone (John) was employed
to apprehend Lord Maxwell, who had been declared his Majesty's rebel, on account of his Religion,
&c. in 1585 ; and was intrusted with two bands of hired soldiers for that purpose, who were destroyed
by the Maxwells. Johnstone himself was subsequently defeated and made prisoner, and his house of
Lochwood taken and set on fire, ' that Lady Johnstone might have light to put on her hood !' This
Laird' shortly afterwards died of grief, in April 1586 ;* — and to these circumstances we must unquestionably ascribe the origin of the deadly hate between the two Clans, and especially between their chiefs.

Maxwell, thus balBed in his aspiring hopes, was speedily imprisoned on account of las religious
tenets, and for his share in the above-mentioned outrages. He was afterwards liberated, on condition
of leaving the country; and being strenuously attached to the Religion of the Church of Rome, he
shortly left Scotland, in the highest disgust. Having proceeded to Spain, he instantly offered his services to ' His Catholic Majesty,' who had, about that time, commenced active preparations for his
threatened invasion of England and Scotland, which he arrogantly intended to overwhelm and subjugate, by means of his ' Invincible Armada.' There, Lord Maxwell matured his plans ; and after being
furnished with pecuniary assistance, and having received full instructions from his new sovereign, he
returned to Scotland, in 1588, and immediately commenced to levy men on the Borders/ where his
influence was still indisputable. News of his Plot having reached Edinburgh, the most active preparations were made, and he was quickly surprised by the King in person, at Dumfries, made prisoner,
and his Wardenship of the West Marches bestowed on his rival, the Laird of Johnstone, the son of
the last Chief of that name, one of the most powerful of the lesser Barons on the Borders, and
ancestor of the Noble family of Annandale.

Sir James Johnstone of that Ilk, the new Warden, besides being thus distinguished by the Royal
favour, in being intrusted with so honourable and important an Office, was afterwards Knighted at the
Queen's Coronation, in 1590. However, owing to some political reasons, and principally, the King's
desire to conciliate his Roman Catholic subjects, by the display of a few popular acts of clemency, the
Wardenship was restored to Lord Maxwell, on his submitting to certain reasonable conditions. Tlie
frequent transference of so envied a dignity, and that, too, upon powerful rival Chieftains, was unquestionably providing fuel to feed the fire of ancient jealousy, and more recent deadly feud, which had
been rankling in the breasts of both parties, and only required the intervention of some such occurrence to be fanned mto the fiercest flames.

Besides the occasional skirmishes with the Maxwells, it appears that the Johnstones, as well as
Lord Maxwell, had given assistance to the Earl of Bothwell, in his numerous daring attempts in
1592, &c. It is probable that, on this account. Sir James had been warded in the Castle of Edinburgh,
either for his own personal conduct, or as responsible for his Clan, and for failing to give security, 8cc.
Nevertheless, it is certain, that (from whatever cause he was confined) he contrived to make his escape
from the Castle, Jan. 4, 1693.^ Through powerful mediation, the rival Chiefs were induced to enter
into mutual alliance, and bound themselves to support each other in all their lawful quarrels. On the
faith of this, the Clan of Johnstone concluded they had little to apprehend from xha justice of tiie new
Warden, provided they did not plunder any of the name of Maxwell. They accordingly made a descent upon Nithsdale, where they committed sundry depredations on the Lord Sanquhar, the Lairds
of Drumlanrig, Closeburn, and Lagg, and killed eighteen persons, who had ' followed their own
goods.' Counting upon the hereditary enmity subsisting between the two names, a Commission was
given to Lord Maxwell, who was instructed to pursue the Johnstones with all hostilities. Being

' Acta Pari * Tales of a Grandfather, 2(1 Series, I. 93. ' Jolm Johnstone of that Ilk. lie wan

appointed Warden of the West Marches and Justice in 1570. * Wood's Peeraije, 1. 73. ' Rohertsoii't

Hint. II. 357. Jiedpath's Border Hist. 6T4. Moyse's Memoirs. " See this Collection of Trials, I. 359.

30 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609informed of tliis, Johnstone obtained assistance from Annandale, and was joined by the Scots of Teviotdale, the Grahames and Elliots of Eskdale ; and besides, according to the Records of the Privy
Council/ * diners Englillimen, treflbunablie brocht within this realme, armed in plane Jioflililie,' &c.
On tlie other liand, Maxwell, contrary to Law, entered into ' Bonds of INIanrent' with the Lord
Sanquhar, Dnimlanrig, and others who had been pillaged by the Jolmstones, wherein they bound themselves to maintain each other's quarrels ; so that each party thus possessed a large force.

^Maxwell, in his capacity of Warden, and also as holding the King's special Commission, summoned
the Laird of Johnstone to surrender ; which he refused, on the ground of the illegal bonds into which
Maxwell had entered. The Warden, therefore, without further parley, sent forward Captain Oliphant
with some troops, to Lochraaben, to await his arrival in Annandale ; but the Johnstones, marching
suddenly upon them, killed the Captain and a number of his soldiers, and set fire to the Parish Kirk
of Lochmaben, whither a number had tied for slielter, but were thus forced to surrender. In revenge,
Lord Maxwell, intending to raise the inhabitants of the different towns in his aid, as his Majesty's
Lieutenant, entered Annandale ; but Johnstone, liaving obtained early information of his motions,
suddenly attacked him, and overthrew his forces, and slew Lord iNIaxwell ' and sindrie Gentilmen of
his name.'^ This fatal affair took place, Dec. 7, 1593, and is well known by the name of the Battle
OF Dryffe Sakds, having been fought close by the river of that name, near Lochmaben. Archbishop Spotswood remarks, ' Tlie Lord Maxwel, a tall man and heavy in armor, was in the chafe
overtaken and Itriken from his horfe. The report went, that he called to Johnflon, and defired to be
taken,^ os he had fometime'' taken his father ; but was unmercifully uled ; and the hand that he reached
forth cut off; but of this I can afBrm nothing. There always^ the Lord ^Maxwell fell, having received
many wounds. He was a Nobleman of great fpirit, liumane, courteous, and more learned than noblemen commonly are ; but al'piring and ambitious of rule.'"

The issue of the Conflict of Dryffe Sands, or battle, as it may almost be termed, (for Maxwell had
above two thousand men on his side, and it is stated that Johnstone had not quite so many,) was evidently accomplished by manoeuvre. Johnstone sent ' forth some prickers to ride and make provocation,'
after the Border fashion, which succeeded in drawing out a number of the other side, ' who, encountring witli a great company, were beaten and chafed back to the flail or main holl ; whicli, by their
breaking in, was wholly difordered. Johnflon, that flood on a piece of high ground, beholding the
ifTue of the fkirmifh, took the advantage of their confufion, and breaking upon them, without any
refiflance made, put them all to flight.'^ The :Maxwells suffered very severely, and in their retreat
great numbers perished. Tliey w^ere pursued through the streets of Lockerby, where they Avere cut
down in scores. Those who escaped bore on them, to their dying hour, marks of this fatal day, which
occasioned the proverbial phrase of ' a Locherhy UckJ to denote a frightful gash over the face or skull.
So dreadful was the carnage in this disastrous Conflict, that not fewer than Seven Hundred of the
Maxwells and their adherents were slain ! The routed enemy were pursued as far as the Gotterby-ford
of the Annan, where many were drowned.® It is worthy of remark that there still exist, in the Holm
of Dryfe, about half a mile below the old Church-yard of Drysdale,^ two very aged Thorn-trees, with
a tumulus at their base, called MaxwelVs Thorns^ evidently in commemoration of the fight, and probably marking the place where he fell.

It is evident, then, according to the sentiments of those times, imbibed from their earliest years, which

' See Trials, I. 305. * Ihul. and I. 3G0. Marj. Annals, p. hi. Balf. Ann. I, 394.. ' BirrelVs Biarrj, p. 19.
^ Viz. called or begi;i'd for cuiaiter. * Formerly or ])revi()usly granted ([tiarter to Johnstone's father, l)y taking

him prisoner, iiisteiid of jnUting him to death. '" At all events ; nevcrtiitless. " Spots. Hist. '101.

' Whatever ojiinion may lie entertained of the treasonable conduct of Johnstone, in thus openly resisting the King's
Lieutenant, merely liecausc he hapiiened to be his jiersonal enemy, it is impossible to withhold admiration at the masteilv manner in which thisskinnish was conducted, which showed military talents of a very high order. •* Statistical Account, IX. 424. " Q. d. DriifeS-dalc.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. .31

' grew with their growth, and strengthened with their strength,' that natural duty and filial piety
required such a feud should become hereditary, and behoved to be handed down from one generation
to another ! The attempts by the King and his Council to procure an effectual reconciliation, althougii
strenuously made and often repeated, at length proved abortive. The re-appointment of the Laird of
Johnstone to be Warden of the West Marches, in 159G,' appears to have served as a signal for the
resumption of immediate mutual aggressions. Birrel records ' an feight or combat betuix the Laird of
Drumlaurick and the Laird of Johneftoun and thair.affifteris/ Jul. 13, 1597 f — that, on May 27, 159S,
' the Laird of Johnefloun his pictor (was)hnng at the Croffe (of Ediidmrgh) with his heid dounwart,
and declarit ane manfworne man ; and upone the 5 of Junij, he and lies complices wer put to the
home and pronuncit rebellis at the Crofle, be opin Proclamation.'^ This gossipping Chronicler farther
informs us, that, on Jul, 2, 1600, he was ' rellorit to hes honours, at the Crofle of Ed"", be the Prodamatione of a Herald and four trumpettis.' It is likely that Sir James Johnstone did not long retain
the Wardenship at this time ; for, as may be seen in a former part of this Collection,^ Thomas Armstrang, < fon to Sandies Ringane,' was condemned to be hung in chains, &c. for the ^Murder of Sir
John Carraichael of that Ilk, Warden of the Vv'est Marches, in the month of June, 1600. How long
Sir John had filled that office has not yet fallen within the Editor's observation. From the above announcement by Birrel, that Johnstone had been ' reflorit to his honours,' it may be inferred that he
succeeded Sir John Carmichael, and once more held the ill-fated dignity of V\"arden of the West Marches.

The principal parties, as well as their dependents and kinsmen, lived at such mortal and bloody
feud, and the peace of the country was so much disturbed, that mutual friends, for their own personal
safety and comfort, suggested the expedient of an amicable and private meeting between Lord Maxwell
and Sir James, for finally arranging all their differences. At length, they were prevailed upon, under
solemn pledges, to meet at a particular spot, each having one attendant, on Apr. 6, 1608, when the
principals, with Sir Robert Maxwell of Orchardton, (Sir James's brother-in-law,) as a mutual friend,
having removed to some distance, to converse apart, a quarrel arose between the two attendants. Sir
James, having turned about to separate them, or to admonish them to keep the peace. Lord Maxwell
suddenly and traitorously drew his pistol, fired at him, and shot him through the back with two bullets.
There is some reason to suspect that this rencontre between the attendants had been plotted by Lord
INIaxwell, and arranged before the parties came upon the ground. From the evidence adduced, it is
evident that no provocation was given, but that Maxwell, without any previous intimation, drew his
pistol, and instantly shot Johnstone dead.*^

The perpetration of treasonable Murder, as ' Slaughter under trust' was then termed, was one which,
in any circumstances, but especially in such a country as Scotland, at the beginning of the seventeenth
century, could not be pardoned. Accordingly, notwithstanding Lord Maxwell's great connexions,
(having married Lady Margaret, only daughter of John, first Marquis of Plamilton, and being related
to many of the principal nobility of the kingdom,) the strictest search was made, and Lord Maxwell
was at length committed to ward, in the Castle of Edinburgh.

His admirably contrived, and boldly executed, escape from this fortress, is fully detailed in the
Appendix to this Trial. lie was denounced rebel for breaking his Majesty's ward and failing to underlie the law for the treasonable Murder of Sir James Johnstone. After this, his lordship took refua*'
abroad, where he remained till 1612, when he returned to Scotland ; but so hardly was he pressed, in
the Borders, that he had instantly to prepare for embarkation to Sweden. His kinsman, (icorrje. jiftli
Earl of Caitlmcss, dissuaded him from this project ; and easily prevailed on him to accept ot his pro1 Bi/mer's Fadera, XVI. 60 I). « Birrclls Diarij, 44. ^ lb. IG. ' Vol. II. .3G.3, Nov. 1, IGdI.

■^ lb. ID. " For a number of pxtremely iiitori'stiiiij and mlinito particuliu's, the reader is referred to Talcs of a

Graiifljiillicr, Seeoiid Series, whieh the Editor liad not had tlio ailvaiitat;e of penisinij, until this Noliee was written.
The dilficiilty of procuring minute and authentic inforniation on such points of liistory is best kiuiwn to those who
have made the attempt ; and even after the uuist laborious researcli, the most anxious eniitiiries often i>rove fruitless.

32 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609tection. He lured liiin to Castle Sinclair, under the pretence of affording him shelter and secrecy
until he could conveniently prepare for his voyage. The real motive of this treacherous Nohle, however, was, that he might obtain favour at Court/ by delivering up so great an offender.

Tlie Countess of Caithness, {Lady Jean Gordon, only daughter of George, fifth Earl of Huntley,)
who was Lord Maxwell's cousin, and greatly interested in his safety, was likewise deceived by her
husband, who had told her that a report was spread abroad tliat it was already known at Court that
Lord Maxwell was in hiding in Caithness ; and that it was necessary, for their mutual safety, to set off
for Edinburgh, to explain the matter ; and thus, time would be afforded for Lord Maxwell's escape.
The unfortunate Maxwell, then in poor health from his great exertions, was trained to leave Caithness,
and pass through Sutherland, in order that he might he taken there ; and thus spare the Earl the
imputation of having so basely violated the laws of hospitality I But so anxious were his servants to
execute their commission, tliat Maxwell was actually taken within the county of Caithness, conducted
to Thurso, where Captain George Sinclair^ was impatiently awaiting his arrival, and carried him back
a prisoner to Castle Sinclair, where he had so lately been apparently a favoured and honoured guest.

By command of M« Lords of Privy Coimcil, Lord Maxwell was shortly afterwards delivered up ;
and was, upon May 21, 1613, beheaded at the Cross of Edinburgh. It may be gratifying to know
that the Earl of Caithness obtained no reward for his most traitorous conduct ; — but, on the contrary,
his treachery served as a source of constant reproach to him and his family.

A variety of interesting Documents are appended, which throw great light upon this matter, and
upon the extraordinary state of the country at that period. If the Editor has been too minute or
prolix, it is hoped that the singular interest and importance of this remarkable passage of History will
prove his best excuse ; especially, when it is considered that the previous materials were so very
meagre and unsatisfactory.]

[^Apud Edinburgh, Jun. 24, 1609, p^^ Georgiinn Comitem Mar^fcall}^ Virtute Comm[ffionis, cle data apiid Grenwitchc, Jim. 6, 1609, et jyer omnes
Rcgnijlatus ; vnacum Jacoho Stewart jyro 3Iar}fcallo, Wdlelmo Hay pro
Conjudjidario, M. Roberto Ijermonth jiro Vicecomite de Ed\ et Dauide
JLijn dcfaij, A dl ii dicatore. ]

Jan. 24. — JoHNNE Lord Maxwall.
Sir Thomas Hammyltoun of Bynnie, kiiyclit, aduocat to our fouerane lord,
prodiicit, lykas he did diuerfe tymes ofbefoir, ane fummondis of Treaffoun, raiit
and perfewit be ovire fouerane lord and be his hienes Aduocat, agauis John Lord
Maxwell, to haue anfuerit to the pointis of the faid fummondis and to the
crymes of Treaffoun and lefe-majeftie contenit thairintill, the quhilk fummondis,
and realTones and caulFes thairin contenit, being firft red in prefens of the Lordis
of Articlis of this prefent Parliament, they fand the famyn fummondis relevant :
And thaireftir, this inftant day, the famyn fummondis of Treaffoun being red in

' In June, 1612, the Earl got in bad odour at Court by creating a broil on the High Street of
Edinburgh, where he assaulted George Lord Gordon ; and great slaughter might have been committed, but for the extreme darkness of the night, owing to which the parties could hardly distinguish their
own friends. ^ This person was bastard nephew to the Earl, and afterwards raised 150 men, and

joined the unhappy expedition of Colonel Ramsay and Captain Hay, who had volunteered to assist
the King of Sweden, in his war against the King of Denmark. * They were all miferablie cut in
peaces by the hours,' in their journey thither through Norway. — Gordons Hist, of Sutherland, p. 289.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 33

jn-efens of the faid lord Commiffionar and of the haill eftaittis of this prefent
Parliament, the faid Lord Maxwell, being tliryfe callit at the tolbuthe windo, to
Iiaiie anfuerit to the faid funimondis of TreaiToun ; and compeirit nocht, the faidis
haill Eftaittis ffand the faidis fummondis, rafit be oiire faid fouerane lord and his
hienes Aduocatt, aganis the faid Lord Maxwell, and the haill thrie relfones and
cauftes thairin contenit, and eiierie ane of thame relevant ; And thairfoir adniittit the famyii to the faid aduocattis probatioun. And immediatlie thaireftir,
the faid Aduocat, for preving of the pointis of the faid fummondis of TreafTomi
and haill reflbnes and cauffes contenit thairin, Repetit all the Depofitionis of the
Witnefles, examinat befoir the lordis of Articlis, and lordis of Secreitt Counfaill,
of befoir, ffor preving of the faidis haill thrie reffones and euerie ane of thame ;
togidder with diuerfe Actis of Parliament, lawes and conftitutionis of this realme,
Sir James M'Coneillis Convictioun^ for braking of waird ffurth of the Caftell of
Edinburgh ; Lettre of Horning aganis the faid Lord Maxwell, for nocht compeirance befoir the Lordis of Secrete Counfaill, to anfuer befoir thame, for his
breking of waird furth of the Caftell of Edinburcht, for the Burning maid be
him at Dalfeble, and for Slauchter of the Laird of Johnestoun ; with diuerfe
vtheris wryttis and probatiounes producit be the faid lord Aduocatt, for preving
of the foirfaid fummondis of Treaflbun, and haill thrie feuerall reflbnes and
caufles contenit thairin, and euerie ane of thame ; and renuncit forder probatioun : And thairvpoun the faid Aduocat aflvit Inftrumentis. And lykwayes,
the faid Aduocat producit, in prefens of the faid lord Commiflionar and haill
eftaittis, Lettres of Relaxatioun, beirand the faid Johne Lord Maxwell to be
relaxit, be James Dowglas, meflinger, fra the proces of all Horningis, at tlie
marcatt croces of Lochmaben, and Dumfreife, vpoun the xv day of JNIarch 1 609
yearis, and at the marcat croce of Edinbur*, be Johne Moncur, meflinger, vpoun
the xxiii day of Marche, the yeir of God abonewrittin : As at mair lentli is contenit in the faidis lettres of Relaxatioun, fubfcryuit be James Primrofe, clerk to
the Secrete Counfaill, of the date the fext day of Marche laftbipaft, and regiftrat
in the clerk of Regifteris buikis, the xxiij day of Marche, 1609 yeiris : And
vpoun the productioun of the faidis Lettres of Relaxatioun, the faid Aduocat
lykwayes aikit Inftrumentis, and defyrit the faid procefs of Foirfaltour to be
advyfit be the faidis haill Eftaittis.^
Summons of Treason and Forfeiture, &c. again fl John Lord Maxwell.
Jacobus, Dei Gratia, Magne Britannie Francie et Hibernie Rex, fideique defenfor ; dilectis noftris Leoiii Regi armorum, Hay, All)anio, Rofs, Rothefay,
Snawdoun, Merchemont, heraudis ; Dauid Brylbun, Alexandro Dowglas, Jacobo
Chalmeris et M. Willelmo Stewart, clavigeris ; Ormont, Bute, Vnicorne, Carrik,

» See May 13, 1G09, in the preceding Trial, Vol. Ill, 1, &c. "" Sec Acta Varl. 1G09, lU.

VOL. 111. E

34 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

figniferis, mintiis, et eorum cuilibet, coniunctim et diuifim, vicecomitibus nollris
in hac parte fpecialiter conftitutis, Salutem. Mandamus vobis et precii)imiis,
Quod funinioneatis legitime et peremptorie, coram teftibus, Joannem DomiNU3I Maxaveli. peribnaliter, fi eius perfonalem j^refentiam commode habere
poterjtis ; fni minus, per publicam proclamationem apud Cruces forales burgorum
noftronmi de Ediubur' et Drumfreis, et apud Arces de Carlaverok et Drumfreis, et domicilia dicti Joannis Dominum Maxwell, ante fuam a legibus fugam
et rebellionem ; necnon apud portum vulgo lie Jchore a7id j)eire ofLe'ith, aliaque
loca neceflaria, fuper premonitione fexaginta dierum, quia extra regnum noflrum
Scotie efle exiftimatur ; quod compareat coram nobis noftroue Commiffionario et
Jufticiario ac regni noftri Scotie ordinibus, in Parliamento noflro apud Edinburgh, vel vbi nos dictumve nollrum Commiffionarium et Jufticiarium, ac dicti
regni noftri ftatus pro tempore convenire contigerit, tenendo duodecimo die
menfis Aprilis i)roxime futuri, hora caufarum, cum continuatione dierum, ad
refpondendum nobis noftrove Commiffionario et Jufticiario, in prefato Parliamento ; necnon ad inftantiam dilecti et fidelis confiliarii noftri Thome Hammyltoun de Bynnie militis Aduocati noftri, pro noftro interefFe, pro ipftus Joannis
nefarijs, Iceleratis, et proditorijs Lefe Maieftatis criminibus infrafcriptis, per ipfum et alios eius mandato, perftiafione, conftlio, auxilio, et ratihabitione perpetratis et commiffis ; ac quarum confcius, particeps, ars et pars fuit et eft : Necnon dictus Joannes Dominus Maxwell ad videndum et audiendum per nos noftruinve Connniffionarium et Jufticiarium, ac dicti regni noftri Scotie ordines,
decern! fe crimina Lefe Maieftatis infrafcripta modo fubfequente commififte, penafque illas conftitutas, vitae, fcilicet, terrarum, et bonorum omnium, mobilium et
innnol)ilium, dignitatum, officiorum, jurium, aliorumque omnium, infra dictum
regnum noftrum ad fe pertinentium, vel que vllo modo ad ilium fpectare vel pertinere poterunt, amiffionem incurrifle ; ac dicta omnia bona, predia, terras, teneinenta, officia, dignitates, jura, et commoda quecunque, illi infra dictum regnum
noft:ru"m competentia, vel que ad ilium vllo modo fpectare poterunt, nobis Foriffecifte ; eaque ad nos pertinere et nobifcum in perpetuum remanere, juxta leges
et Regni noftri confuetudinem ; ob caufas et rationes fubfequentes. I^iprimis,
quod non folum chariffimi quondam avi noftri Jacobi V. Regis illuftriffimi conftitutione, in Parliamento fuo, anno 1528 promulgata, fed etiam lege per nos in
Parliamento noftro anno 1567 lata, cautum eft, quod quecunque homines infra
domicilia fuacomburunt,onniefque incendiarii edificiorum et frumentorum,omnefque alii voluntarii et maligni incendiarii, dictum crimen certo propofito et deliberato conftlio committentes, Lefe Maieftatis rei erunt. Ac certum eft:, quod dictus
Joannes Dominus Maxwell, ab ipfa juventute ad contumaciam, rebellionem, legum
et authoritatis noftre contemi)tum, tum natura et prava confuetudine deditus,

42 & 7 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 35

quiim plurimis Uteris noftris, in annis 1598, 1599, 1600, 1601, et 1602, fuh
peiia rebellionis ei imperatum fuiffet, vt redditus prediorum fuoruin de Duncow,
Trive, Grange, et molendini eiufdem, que jjars dominii corone noftre vnite et
annexate funt, et per dictum Joannem Dominum Maxwell et predeceffores fuos
tanquam emphiteutas feudifirmarios et tenentes noftros polTeffe fuerunt, perfolueret : Necnon vt rationes nobis de aliis redditibus et taxationibus infra fenefcallatus noftros Vallis Annandie et Kircudbricht, predictis annis, niultifque alijs
precedentibus, nobis debitis, tanquam dictarum i)rovinciarum et limitum SeneIcallus, vt ei ex officio incumbebat, nobis et noftris Scaccarii auditoribus redderet ;
et dictos redditus, deuorias taxationes, aliafque pecuniarum fummas, vbi debuerat,
fub pena rebellionis perfolueret : Ac etiam, vt coram Confilij noftri dominis, per
fe, in dictis annis compareret, ad refpondendum pro variis fuis contemptibus,
rebellionibvs, carcerum noftrorum efFractionibus, et violentis extra cuftodias
noftras eruptionibus, aliifque delictis et maleficijs per ipfum commiffis et perpetratis : Ii>le tamen, omnia noftra imperia et mandata pertinaciter contemnens,
eafque ob caufas multafque alias rebelliones ad cornu noftrum exiftens, quo
tamen omnem veiiie fibi a nobis Ipem prefcinderet, et flagicioliffimis criminibus
extremas legum penas mereretur, . . . die mentis Februarij, aut eocirca, anno
1602, comitatus Carolo Maxwell vocato de Kirkhous, Roberto Maxwell de Dunwiddie, et aliis fuis fatellitibus et criminum fccijs, ad numerum viginti liominum
illegitime convocatorum, galeis, lanceis, loricis, bombardis, fclojns, alijfque armis
prohibitis munitorum, pro inveterato odio et malicia, diu ante per dictum Joannem contra quondam GiiUelmum Johnejloun fratrem Wilkini Jolnieftoun de
Elchefchellis, et Joannem Johnejloun fratrem Jacobi Johneftoun de Hifliebra}',
concepta, ob capitales inimicitias inter Maxwellios et Johnestones, acceflit
ad villam de Dalfibbil, infra parocliiam de Kirkmicbaell et vicecomitatum noftrum
de Drumfreis jacen. ; ibique, per feipfum, dictofque Carolum Maxwell vocat. de
Kirkhoufe, Robertum Maxwell de Dunwiddie, aliofque feruos et focios fuos,
dictum Willelmum Jolineftoun, in dicta villa de Dalfibbill quiete et pacifice
degentem, nullafque iniurias, infidias, aut invafionem fufpicantcm, immanitcr et
maliciofe aggreftus, eundem infra liabitationis ftie domum in dicta villa de Dalfibbill fugauit ; vt omnis falutis fpes ei auferretur, dicti Willelmi domum, certo
propofito et per induftriam, proditorie incendit et flammis vaftauit ; cumque
ignis violentia dictum Willelmum erumpere coegiftet, crudeliter eum interfecit :
Ac ftatim ad domum Cidhherti Ih'attene, in eadem villa exiftentem, accedens, eam
pariter maliciofe, crudeliter, confulto et deliberato animo, proditorie incendit ; nc
dictum quondam Jacobum Johneftoun vocat. de Briggis infra eandem ^•i^•um
combuftit ; domumque dicti Cuthbcrti incendio penitus confumpfit. Eaque proditoria crimina ipftus Joannis Domini Maxwell confilio, mandato, auxilio, et rati36 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

liabitione, perpetrata limt ; dictufqiie Joannes Doniinus Maxwell eorum ars et
l)ars, vulgo airt and pairf, fuit et eft, et dictas penas Proditionis et Lefe Maieftatis iifdem criminibus, de jure conftitiitas, fubire et perferre debet. Secundo,
quia per nos et dicti regni noftri Scotie ordines in Parliamento noftro vndecimo
ftatutiun eft, quod Homicidium alicuins lubditi noftri, quando is qui trucidatur
exiftit lub fide, fiducia, allecuratione, et poteftate occidentis, vulgo mider the
tnijl, credit, ajjiirance> cmd jmicer of the /layer, onme tale Murtliurum et Homicidium impofterum committendum, Lefe Maieftatis crimen erit ; et qui illius criminis legitimo juris ordine convictus fuerit, vitam, terras, et bona omnia nobis
forisfaciet : Atque vcrnm eft, quod dictus Joannes Dominus Maxwell, vndecimo
die menfts Junii, aut eocirca, anno 1605, coram Dominis Secreti noftri Conlilij, in
gratiam et amicitiam cum quondam Domino Jacobo Johnestoun de Diin-
^fkellie milite rediit, ac omnium preteritarum inimicitiarum oblivionem fancte
promittens, in fignum fmcere reconftliationis et future amicitie fidem, et dextram
ei dedit, et ab omni iniuria, damno, invafione, et periculo, a fe, parentibus, affinibus, amicis, clientibus, feruis, alijfque omnibus affiftentibus fuis, impofterum
inferendo, fe dictum quondam D. Jacobum faluum et incolumem preftiturum,
magno interpofito facramento, promifit ; et Reconciliationis literas, vulgo one
Letter of Slaynes, manu fua fignatas, ad premifforum teftimonium et confirmationem dedit : Quarum fiducia illectum, dictum quondam D. Jacobum, quum
negligentius et incautius fe gerere dictus Joannes Dominus Maxwell intelligeret,
fumma fediflime vindicte cupiditate flagrans, confilium cum dicto Carolo Maxwell vocato de Kirkhoufe, in menfibus Martio et Aprili proxime preteritis, iniit,
quibus potiffimum dolis dictum quondam D. Jacobum Johneftoun in infidias
pertrahere et proditorie occidere poflit ; tandemque concluferunt D. Robertum
Maxwell de Sjiottis militem, nominibus vtrique charum et fidum, ad dictum D.
Jacobum in infidias pertrabendum maxime idoneum futurum ; ideoque vocato
ad fe dicto D. Roberto, dictus Joannes Dominus Maxwell diiigenter cum eo egit,
vt dictum quondam D. Jacobum ad colloquium ad fe pertraheret, vt et arctiorem
amicitiam et familiaritatem contraliere, et dicti D. Jacobi opera criminum fuarum
veniam obpredictarumrebellionum, multarumque aliarum, propter Literarum noftrarum in annis 1603, 1601', 1605, 1606, 1607, et 1 608, contra fe,fubpena rebellionis et ad cornu noftrumdenunciationis,directarum contemptum,a nobis obtinere
poftit : Quod quum dictus D. Robertus revera expeti exiftimaret, dicti Joannis
hortatu, fide prius ab eo data, congreftlun dum tutum et regrefliun pacificum et indemnem futurum, cum dicto quondam D. Jacobo fepius egit, eidemque tandem perfuafit vt dictum ]3ominum Maxwell vno tantum comitatus amico, fe arbitro, ad
effectum predictum pacifice conveniret, fancte promittens, nomine et mandato dicti
Joannis Domini Maxwell, acceflum et receflum ei fecurum, tutum, et incolumem

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 37

futurum ; quibus adductus perfualionibus et promiffis, dictus quondam D. Jacobus, lexto die menfis Ajirilisvltime elapfi, accito fecum GididmoJohneJtounYOd^U)
de LocJierhie, gladio, fine vllis alijs armis, accinctus, dictum D. Robertum ]\Iaxwell fecutus ad moram inter Artliurflane et Trailflat pervenit, vbi duos equites
adventum fuum operientes jiercepit, dictique D. Roberti hortatu paulatim in eo
loco fubllitit, donee D. Robertus progrediens dictolque duos equites Joannem
Dominum Maxwell et Carolum Maxwell vocat. de Kirklious effe perfpicien^,
adduxiffe fe dictum D. Jacobum Johneftoun ad deftinatum coloquium declarauit,
a dicto Domino Maxwell jurisjurandi privs dati, pro dicti D. Jacobi et Gulielmi
Johneftounes incolumitate, faluoque et tuto acceffu et recelFu a dicto colloquifj,
renouationem exegit ; et Dei nomine et Numine interpofito, a dicto Domino Maxwell pro feipfo et dicto Carolo Maxwell obtinuit : Siccjue dictum quondam D.
Jacobum Johneftoun, tot 2)romiffis et juramentis fidentem, ad locum colloquio deftinatum ad dictum Dominum Maxwell aduxit, et mutua data et accepta, vt inter
amicos fieri folet, falute, detectis caj)itibus congreffi, dicto Carolo Maxwell et Gulielmo Johneftoun imperarunt vt feorfum fubfifterent, iplique ad colloquium ita
l)rogreffi funt, vt, D. Roberto Maxwell medio, vnus ei ad dextram, alter ad fmiltram obequitaret : Dumque de rebus ob quas convenerant pacifice et vti videbatur
amanter colloc[uerentur, dictus Carolus Maxwell, ita vti prius inter eum et dictum Joannem Dominum Maxwell convenerat, ad dictum 'Willelmum Johneftoun,
contra quern conftitutum erat, acceflit ; et vt difcordie et rixe anfam nacilceretur,
adeo ingratum fibi ilium congrefTum efle affirmauit, vt ft illius caufam prius intellexiftet, ei fe hand affiiturum profiteretur. Refpondenti vero Gulielmo, fperare le
colloquii illius finem dictis nobilibus viris amicifque et clientibus eorum gratum
et vtilem futuram : Id fieri non jioffe Carolus alferuit, dictumque D. Jacobum,
omnefque alios Johnftones, latrones et proditores vocauit. Gulielmus autem, ne
fua culpa difcordie initium preberetur, dixit fe quamlibet iniuriam pailurum,
potius quam duorum colloquium difturbaturum ; et quamvis, tanta dicti Gulielmi
patientia fruftratus, Carolus nullam pugne occafionem inveniret : Illud tamen
quod prius intenderat onniino peracturus, dictum Gulielnuun, nee verbo nee facto
I)rouocatiis, crudeliter et proditorie parato fclopo invafit, et pallium et veftes eius
duobus globalis tranfmifit ; cujus fragore, et Gulielmi voce jn'oditorie vim vite
fue inferri clamantis, turbatus cpiondam D. Jacobus Jolmeftoun, ab eo fe coiivertens, et que tam fedi facinoris caufa effe rogans, dictus Joannes Dominus
Maxwell, a tergo, dicto Cjuondam D. Jacobo Johneftoun, nil tale metuenti, imininens fclopo, quern fub palio clam paratum habebat, in dictum D. Jacobum, proditorie directo, per humerum duabus glandibus plumbeis venenatis' in corpus et

' This circumstance oi the two lead bullets having been j)reriousIij poisoned, is a very btroiig
fact against Maxwell; and if borne out by the evidence, satisfactorily proves the deadly intention of

38 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

vitalia eiiis addictis, euin inliumaniter, crudeliter, fede, et jn'oditorie occidit ; ac ful)
fide, fiducia, affecuratione, et poteftate lua, vulgo vnder his truft, credit, ajjtirance,
and poicer, triicidaiiit ; contra fidem datam et amicitiam iiiitam coram dictis
Confilij noftri dominis, et dicti D. Robert! INIaxwell, intervento fepius juramento,
per dictiini Joaniiem Dominuin INIaxwell reiiovatam. Quorum criiiiiiium dictus
Joannes Doniinus ]\Iaxwell eft conlcius, et particeps, ars et pars ; ideoque penas
Lefe Maieftatis lis jure conftitutas, vt antea dictum eft, ftibire et perferre debet.
Tertio, quia, tam Communi gentium omnium quam Civili Romanorum Jure, et
regni noftri Legibus ftatutum, et vltra omnem memoriam recepta et approbata
confuetudine obfervatum eft, eum qui INlaieftatem publicam leferit, cuiufue opera,
confilio, dolo, malo, confilium initum eft, quo quis contra Renipublicam arma
ferat, aut qui Lefe Maieftatis reum in vincula conjectum dimiferit, Maieftatis
teneri : Ac vero manifeftum eft, dictum Joannem Dominum Maxwell, in Arcem
Edinburgenam, quia noftris Confilii noftri mandatis obtemperare pertinaciter
recufauerat, in cuftodiam miffum, confilium cum Jacobo M'Conneill dc
Diiiujvcg milite, in eadem Arce, ob multa Lefe Maieftatis et Proditionis crimina in vinculis detento, iniffe; quibus potiflimum rationibus de dicta cuftodia
violenter et proditorie, in Maieftatis noftre manifeftum contemptum et lefioneni,
erumperent, et aftito in fceleris confcientiam dicto Roberto Maxwell de Dunwidie, confj^irafle, ereptis cuftodum armis illis, fibi exitum e dicta Arce per vim
proditorie parare ; quod vt facilius perfecerent, ... die menfis Decembris, anno
1607, ad hilariorenl et liberiorem compotationem nouitatis, invitatis cuftodibus,
gladiifq. illorum per vim ereptis, ipfos deinde cuftodes in cubiculum obferatura
inermes incluferunt, et ad interiorem dicte Arcis januam armati accedentes
Alexandrum Stridheris ejus cuftodem, quia pro fua in nos fide eos exitu prohil)ere conatus eft, multis vulneribus, in capite, brachio, manu, alijfque corporis
partibus, faucium et prope exanimem proftraverunt ; et ob parem caufam Margareta Philop, vxore eius, barbare et crudeliter etiam vulnerata, per dictam januam interiorem ad mediam Arcis portam pervenerunt, vbi Arcliilnddum Cunijnghame illius cuftodem, claves tradere recufantem, proditorie etiam invaferunt, et
in brachio crudeliter vulnerato claves ei violenter eripuerunt ; et aperta per vim
porta proditorie erumpentes, muro qui Portam vrbis Occidentalem pertingit
trancenfo, dicti Joannes Dominus Maxwell, et D. Jacobus M'Connell, proditorie et

Lord Maxwell, who, in appointing this meeting, had unquestionably predetermined the destruction of
his rival. On the other hand, it seems clear that the Laird of Johnstone, his attendant, and Sir Robert
Maxwell, their mutual friend, were only possessed of their side-arms, the distintruishing mark of a
(lentleman at that period. It is well worthy of remark, that Sir Walter Soott relates, that ' while the
•gallant old knight lay dying on the ground, Maxwell rode round him, with the view of completing his
crime ; but Johnstone defended l)imself with his sword, till strength and life failed him.' It is unnecessary, liere, to enter into any detail on these points, as sucli copious illustrations have been given in
the Notice and Appendix to this Trial.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 39

violenter aufugerunt ; donee fub Caftellam noftri et aliorum fidelium fubditorum
iiifequentium diligentia, captiis et in carcere retractus eft, dictus Jacobus IVrConnell ; dicto Joanne Domino Maxwell celeri fiiga euadente : Sicque, Joannes Dominus IMaxwell Maieftatem noftram lefit, eiufque opera, confilio, dolo, malo,
confilium initum eft, quo arma contra nos per feipfum et dictos Jacobum dominum M'^Conneill et Robertum Maxwell de Dunwiddie lata funt, ac etiam dictum
Jacobum M^Conneill militem Maieftatis reum in vincula conjectum dimifit, dictorumque omnium Lefe Maieftatis criminum conlcius, et particeps, ars et pars
fuit et eft, et penas iis a jure conftitutas fubire et perpeti debet. Et PropteiiEA, dictus Joannes Dominus Maxwell ad videndum et audiendum, per nos, dictumve noftrum Commiffionarium et Jufticiarium, ac dicti noftri regni Scotie
ordines, decern! et ordinari, fe, predicta Lefe Maieftatis crimina, per feipfum et
alios ijifius mandato et perfuafione, confilio, auxilio et ratihabitione comififte et
perjietrafte ; ac eorum confcium et participem, vulgo a'lrt and jxiirf, fuifte et effe ;
ideoque penas dictis Proditionis et Lefe Maieftatis criminibus competentes ferre
et fubire debere, vite, fcilicet, et bonorum omnium, raobilium et immobilium, terrarum, tenementorum, dignitatum, officiorum, jurium, aliorumque omnium ad
fe fpectantium, amiffionem et confifcationem ; dictafque terras, predia, bonaque
omnia, mobilia et immobilia, dignitates, officia, jura, aliaque omnia ad dictum
Joannem Dominum Maxwell fpectantia et pertinentia, vel que ad ilium fpectare
et pertinere vllo modo potuerunt, nobis confifcari, ad nos pertineri et perpetuo
nobifcum in proprietate permanere ; Et vlterius, in premiftis refpondendum et
juri parendum : Intimando dicto Joanni Domino Maxwell, quod fiue, dictis die
et loco, cum continuatione dierum, comparuerit, ftue non, nos tamen dictufue
nofter Commiflionarius ac Jufticiarius, et dicti regni noftri ordines, in premiftis,
jufticia mediante, procedemus et procedent. Infuper fummoneatis ad comparendum coram nobis, noftroue Commiffionario ac Jufticiario, et dictis regni noftri
ftatibus, in dicto Parliamento, dictis die et loco, bora caufarum, cum continuatione, ad perliibendum fidele teftimonium in premiftis, fub pena legis : Et prefentes literas debite executas et indorfatas earundem latori reddatis. Et vos qui
l)refentes executi fueritis fitis ibidem dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum,
coram nobis dictoue noftro Commiftionario et Jufticiario, ac tribus regni ordinibus, portantes vobifcum veftre fummonitionis teftimonium, in fcriptis, pro premiffis aut ipfos teftes. Ad quod faciendum, vobis et veftrum cuilibet, coniunctim
et divifim, vicecomitibus noftris in hac parte, noftram j^lenariam virtute prefentium committimus poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio noftri magni Sigilli, Ai)ud
Edinbur* vigefnno fexto die menfis Januarii, anno doniini millefuno fexcentelimo nono, et regni noftri annis quadragefnno fecundo et fexto.

The quhilk fummondis, Avitli the executiounes and indorfatiounes thairof.

40 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

being this inftant day red, in prefens of our fouerane lordis Commiffionar and
Eflaittis of Parliament, firtl in Latine and thaireftir in Scottis, the faid Johne
Lord Maxwell, being oft tymes callit of new at the tolbuth window of the faid
burclit of Edinbiircht, to haue compeii.it, &c. And he nocht compeirand to haiie
defendit in the faid mater, and to haue anfwerit to the faid fummondis, the faid
Sir Thomas Hammyltoun of Bynnie, kny', Aduocat to our fouerane lord, defyrit
the fliidis Ellaittis declaratioun, gif the reffouncs of the faid fummondis wer relevant aganis the faid Lord Maxwell. The quhilkis Eftaittis fand the faid fummondis, and the reffones and cauffes thairin contenit, and euerie ane of thame
relevant. Thairfor the faid Aduocat, of new, for preving of the foirfaidis thrie
reffounes and euerie ane of thame, beirand and contenand as is abone writtin,
repetit all the Depofitiounes of the WitnefTes, examinat befoir the faidis Lordis
of Articlis, and Lordis of the Secrete Counfaill, refpectiue, with diuerfe Actis of
Parliament, Lawes and conftitutionis of this realme, Sir James M'Coneillis Convictioun, &c. with all vtheris wryttis and probatiounes producit ofbefoir, this
inftant day, be the faid Aduocat, ifor preving of the foirfaidis fummondis of
TrealToun, and hail thrie reffounes and cauffes contenit thairin, and euerie ane of
thame ; and defyrit the faidis Eftaittis of Parliament to advyfe the probatiounes
foirfaidis led and deducit in the faid mater, and to pronunce thair Sentence of
Parliament thairintill, according to the famin probatiounes, and thair confciences :
And thaireftir, the haill wryttis, Depofitiones of AVitneffes and probatiounes being
red, fene, and confident be the faidis haill Eftaitis of Parliament, and they thairwith being ryplie advyfit.

Verdict, The faidis Lord Commiffionar and Eftaittis of Parliament, ffindis,
decernis and declaris, that the faid Johne Lord Maxwell Committit and did
oppin and manifeft Treffoun, in all the pointis, articlis and maner contenit in
the faid Summondis : And thairfoir, it wes gevin for dome, be the mouth of
Dauid Lyndfay, dempfter of Parliament, in maner and forme as followes :

Sentence. This Court of Parliament fcliawes for law, the faid Johne Lord
IVIaxweel to haue committit and done all the foirfaidis crymes of Treaffoun
and Lefemajeftie, be him felf, and vtheris of his caufing, command, affiftance and
ratihabitioun, aganis oure faid fouerane lord and his authoritie ; and that he is
and Aves giltie and pairtaker, airt and pairt, of the famin crymes of Treaffoun ;
all in maner at lentli contenit in the reffounes of the faid fummondis : And thairfoir, Decernis and Declairis, that the faid Johne Lord IMaxwell audit and fould
A'nderly and fuffer the paynis competent to the faidis crymes of Treaffoun and
Lefemaieftie, to wit, the tynfall and confifcatioun of his lyfe, and all his guidis,
moveable and vnmoveable, landis, tenementis, digniteis, offices, riclitis, and all
vtheris thingis belanging to him ; and all the faidis landis, rowmes, and all gudis

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 41

moveable and vnmoveable, digniteis, offices, riclitis, and all vtlieris belanging and
pertening to the faid Johne Lord JMaxwell, and quhilkis may ony way belang
and pertene to him, to be confifcatt, to pertene to our faid Ibuerane lord, and to
remane with his Maieflie for euir in propirtie. And this I gif for dome.

APPENDIX OF Original Documents, illustrative of the Trial of

John Lord Maxwell.

I. Depositions taJcen lefore the Lords of Privy Council, relative to the
Efcape of Loud Maxwell a?id Sir James Makoneill y/ow tlie CajUe
of Eclhi h iirgh }

(L) Deposition" of Archibald Cunynghame, Majler Porter oftlie Cajile of Edinhurgh.
At the Caftell of Edinburgh, the xv day of Januar, 1608.
Archibald Cunynghame, ^Nlairter porter of the Caflell, Avorne and demandit wliat he knawis
of tlie mater foirfaid of the breking of Warde ? Deponis, tliat lie, being fittand in liis chalmer in the
yett,^ lie fend his boy to haue fetchet him a drink : In the meantyme, WiUiame Maxuell of Kirkhous
come to the deponer and defyrit him to oppin the yett; and tliat immediatlie the Lord Maxuell him
felf come and cryed, ' ffals knave, oppin tlie yett !' And the deponer refuleing, and begynnand to haue
fpokin to the Lord, he cryed agane, ' ffals knaif, oppin tlie yett !' And with a (h-a\vin Averd gaif tlie
deponer ane greit ftraik vpoun the arme ; and mynting^ again to haif ftruckin the deponer, he wes llayed
be Williame Maxwell of Kirkhous, who threw the keyis frorae the deponer, efter that he wes hurte,
and op])ynit the yett. And deponis, that the Lord Maxwell wald haif (lane the deponer, wer uocht
he wes llayed be Williame of Kirkhous.

(2.) Deposition of Alexander StriUhers, Porter oftlie Cajlle of Edinhurgh,
Alexander Struthers, Porter, Avorne and examinat vpoun lils kuawlege of the intorprile foirI'aid, deponis, that Williame Maxwell of Kirkhous come to the yett,' and cryed, ' Porter, oppin the
yett, and latt me cute !' And the deponer having oppynnit the yett, Williame Maxwell pail oute,^ and
then patt his bak to the wickett of the yett, to haif flayed the deponer fra clofing of it : And the deponer
preafing to haif clofit the yett, the Lord Maxwell and Sir James Mconeill and llobert of Dynwyddie
come to the yett; and the Lord Maxwell, with a drawne Averde, flraikthe deponer vpoun the hand,
and Sir James gaif the deponer ane flraik with ane Averd vpoun the lieid : And thay haueingpatl oute
at that yett, the deponeris wyfte melting with tliame betuix the yettis, and trying to have relevit the
deponer, liir hulband, the faid Sir James gaif hir ane llraik vpoun the held ; and that I'cho reliiuu'd
fundrie vther llraikis, hot knawis nocht who gaif thame.

(3.) Deposition of Sir James MahoneUl, knight.
At the Caftell of Edinburglie, the xv day of Januaro, 1G08, hcS'
(4.) Second Deposition of Archibald Ciininghaim', Majier Porter of the dtjlle of Edinburgh.
Apud Ed", XX Junij, 1609. Witnesses producil be the Adrocat, for preving of the Third
Pvffoune of TrrlJoun ancnt the Prehing of Ward fiirth of the C'<(Jiell of Edinburgh.
Archibald Cunningiiame, Porter of the Caftell of Edinburgh, of the aige of Ixij yeiris, or thaiiby, deponis, that vpoun the fourt day of December, the yeir of God 1607 yeiris, this deponar for the
tyme, about fy ve horis befoir fupper, fittand in the niyd Porter-hous of the Caftell of Edinburgh, and

' Tlip following Dt'i)ositioiis aro taken from the Originals, preserved in his !\Inji'sfy's General Ke^ister House,
E(linl)nr;;li. '' In the (niard house, at the inner gate. ^ Kssayiu;:. ' \"v/.. the sicuml t;ale, kept hy the

under Porter, or ' Keepar of the Inner-yett.' ' As a visiter permitted to see his liicnds in ward. ' See

his Trial, May 13, 1009, XtA, III. page 10, where this Taper is given at length.

VOL. III. F

42 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609the key being in the wikit of the faid inid-3ett, Williame Maxvell of Kiikhous cummis furthe of the
Caflell, and defyris this deponar to oppiii the vvikett ; and as the deponar was vilHng to liaif oppinnit
the faid wikett, tlie Lord Maxvell come vpoun this deponar with ane drauin fuerd, faying, ' Fals knaif !
oppin ]>e 5ett, or ellis I fall hew the all in bladdis I ' The deponar anfuerit, ' Schamit theif ! quhat ar 36
doand heir ?' And then the Lord Maxvell incontinent ftraik at this deponar with his drawin fuord,
and niwtilat him of his left arme ; and gif the faid Williame Maxvell had nocht fiivit the deponar from
the faid Lord Maxvellis furie, he had ilane the deponar. Then the Lord Maxvell oppinnit the wikett,
and he and Sir James Makconeill pafte furthe thairof, and paft to the veft Caftell vail that gois to the
Weft-poirt of Edinburgh, and haveing chvme that wall, the faid Lord Maxvell efchapit with fuitlit'
flycht ; and the Conflable of the Callell, with vtheris keparis thairof, apprehendit Sir James Makconeill, and brocht him bak agane and pat him in the irnis ; and Williame Maxvell left the Lord Maxvell at the vtter 3ett, quhair he was lykvayis tane by the Conflable; and hard nocht quhen Alexander
Strutheris, keipar of the Inner-port, was forcit and hurt be the Lord Maxvell ; and nevir hard any
tumult quhill the Lord Maxvell come vpoun him felf.

(5.) Second Deposition of Alexander Stnithers, Keeper of the Inner Yett.
Alexander Strutheris, kepar of the Inner-5ett of the Caflell of Edinburgh, of the aige of l''
3eiris, or thairby, mareit, deponis. That vpoun the ferd day of December, 1607 yeiris, this deponar,
about fyve horis at night, fittand in the Liner-porter-hous of the Caftell of Edinburgh, and haveing the
keyis of the Inner-5ett hyndand ^ vpoun his arme, Williame Maxvell of Kirkhous, feruand to the Lord
Maxvell, come to this deponar and defyrit him to oppin the 5ett, and the deponar haveing oppinnit the
inner weiket, and the faid William Iiaveing paft furth thairof, the faid William ftayit the deponar to
cloife and loik the weikett of the Inner-5et, and in the mentyme of the ftryifF, Johne Lord Maxvell,
Sir James Makconeill, and Robert Maxvell of the Tour, all thrie with drawin fuordes in thair handis,
come to this deponar, and the Lord Maxvell with his fuord firft ftraik at the deponar, and cuttit his
left hand : Thairefter Sir James M^'coneill and Robert Maxvell, ilkane of thame, gaif him bluidie
ftraikis in his heid, and the deponar cryand < Fy ! Trefibun !' Margaret Philp, his vyiiF, come furthe
to help the deponar, (quha was lykvyis voundit be the foirfaidis perfonis,) and gat four bluidie ftraikis
in his bodie : And in the mentyme, quhill Robert Maxvell and this deponar war in gryppis and ftryifif,
the faid Lord Maxvell and Sir James M'coneill paft furthe of the faid Inner-3et, the quhilk Inner-5et
this deponar than lokit and held in the faid Robert Maxvall, quha incontinent thairefter lap the faiil
Caftell vall, and elhapit furthe thairof; and within ane hour thairefter this deponar faw Sir James
M''coneill brocht within the faid Caftell be the Conftable, quhair he 5 it remanis, lyand in irnis.
(6.) Deposition of Thomas Home, Conjiuble of the Cajile of Edinburgh.
Thomas Home, Conftable of the Caftell of Edinburgh, of the aige of Ix yeiris, or thairby, mareit,
deponis. That vpoun the faid ferd day of December, 1G07 yeiris, the twa Inner-portis of the Caftell of
Edinburgh being forcit and opinnit be the Lord Maxvell and Sir James MacConeill, efter that thai had
hurt the tua portaris, and had loppin the wall aboue the Veft Port. This deponar, vpoun the cry of
the wechemen, foUovvit tham with diligence; and as he cam neir the Banes,* certane men at the Weft
Port tauld to this deponar, that ane of tham that had brokin ward was lyand in ane meiddane,^ and
had irnis vpoun him : And thairefter this deponar brocht Sir James M'coneill bak agane to the Caftell
of Edinburgh, quhair he yit lyis in irnis. And the deponar faw the faidis tua Portaris bayth hurt,
quhen lie come in with Sir James M'coneill to the Caflell of Edinburgh agane.

(7.) Deposition of William Sj/mfone, foldier in the Cajile of Edinburgh.
Williame Symsone, ane of the I'uldaris of the Caftell, of the aige of xxvj yeiris, or thairby, mareit,
deponis, that vpoun the ferd day of December, 1607 yeiris, about fyve houris, befoir fupper, the Lord

' Hasty, precipitate. ' Fifty. ^ Ilangiiii,'. ^ The Hastiludium, or ' Barras,' under the Casth;, where,

for a long scries of years, the Tilts and Tournaments had heen lu-lJ. It was situated near what are still called the
King's Stables, at the ^Vest Port of the city. » A midden, or dunghill.

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMIXAL TRIALS. 43

Maxvell come to Sir James j\I<'coneillis chalmer to pas his tyme, according to liis cuftome ; quhair war
prefeiit, for tlie tyme, the Lord Maxwell, Sir James, Young Cloilburne, Robert Maxvell of the Tour,
William Maxwell of Kirkhous, William Armllrang of the Gingillis ; and efter that the Lord Maxwell
and his colligis had marchit throuche the chalmer, he way of paftyme, for the tyme, he come to this
deponar, quha than vas Ipeciall kepar of Sir James M'coneill, and haveing put his hand within this
deponaris fuord gardis, preiffit to haif drawin the famin, hot being impedit be tliis deponar, the Lord
Maxvell tuik from William ^laxvell his quhinger, and held the lamin to this deponaris breilt, fueiring
with ane great ayth, that gif lie lat nocht the fuord cum, he luld llik him with that quhinger. Then
tliis deponar, for feir of his lyifF, deliuerit his fuord with the fcabert to the faid Lord Maxvell, and
thairefter the Lord Maxvell come to James Stewart, his awin keper, and William Armftrang, and tuik
from thame ilkane of their fuordis ; and gaif ane of tlie fuordis to Sir James M'^coneill, the vther to
Robert of the Tour, and kepit the thrid to him felf, vtterand tliir wordis, ' All gud fellowis that luiffis
me, follow me ! For I fall ather be fuitlie of the Caflell ]ns nycht, or ellis I fall loife my lyiff !' And
then the Lord Maxvell and his colligis haveing pall furthe of the faid Sir James chalmer, he clolit
within the famin chalmer. Young Cloilburne, William Armeftrang, James Stewart, and this deponar,
and fefchynnit the famin dure with the catbande, that thai mycht nocht oppin the famin ; faying, he
vowit to God, tliat, ' Gif ony of them fuld cry, he fuld cum bak agane and tak thair lyiffis I' And this
deponar liaveing maid the dure fall within, cryit furth at the Southe vyndow towartis the Welt Port,
' Treflbun ! Trefibun !' And be that cry the men of the Veft Port come and apprehendit the faid Sir
James M'^Coneill.

(8.) Deposition of William Armejirang in the ChcngilUs.
William Armestrong in the Chengillis, of the aige of xxx yeiris, or thairby, mareit, deponis
covformis immediate preceden. Gulielmo Symfouii, in omnibus; reddens eandem caii/Jum J'cientie ;
becaus that famin nycht that the Lord iNIaxvell and Sir James M'coneill paft furthe of the Caltell of
Edinburgh, this deponar was prefent in Sir James M^'coueillis chalmer, in cumpanie with the Lord
Maxvell and remanent perfonis foirfaidis, all myrrie be drinking of wyne. This deponar faw the Lord
Maxvell tak the thrie fuordis from the foirfaidis thre perfonis, and paft furthe of the dure, and clois
the famin efter him, faying, ' Gif ony of tham cryit, he fuld tuk thair lyiftis !' And this deponar was
ane of tham that was clofit within the chalmer, be the Lord Maxvell ; be reflbune that he refuiflit to accumpanie the Lord Maxvell, in breking ward.

II. Depositions fa/ie7i he/ore the Lords of Prhij Council^ relative to the
Treafovahle Murder qfSm James Johnstone of that Wc.

(0.) Deposition of Sir Fobert 3Iaxurll of Spottis.
At Ediuburglie, the xxviij day of Aprile, IGOS, In prefence of the Lords of Secrete Counfaill.
Sir Robert INIaxwell of Spottis, fworne and examinat vpoun the forme and maner of the Slaughter of the Laird of Johnlloun, and of the faid Sir Roberlis awne cariage and behaviour, in that mater ;
Deponis as followis : Fiiji, that the Laird of Jolinnftoun del'yrit the deponar, being in his houfe of
Lochwood for the tyme, to fpeik tlie Lord Maxwell, quhen lie fand the oportunitie, to fic yf the deponar could mnk a good in the materis betuix thame. To (luhom the deponar anfuerit, that he wes a
feiklie man, and had no credite at the Lord Maxvvellis hand; becaus the Lord Maxwell haid evir a
midyking of him, becaus he maryed Johnnltones fuller. And deponis, that he faid to the Laird of
Johnnftoun, that he had no will to mcll in tiiat turne, becaus it wes ^o weghtie a mater; and the Lord
was a pereilous man to haif ado with 1 And denyis that evir he proponit that mater to the Lord Maxwell, in the Laird of Johnnftonis name, as haveing directioun from him. Deponis, that audit or
nyne dayis afoir the Slaughter of tlie Laird of Jolinnftoun, the Lord Maxwell fend Edward Maxwell,

44 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609fone to the Laird of Tynwall, to the deponer, to defyre liim to * come and fpeik witli his lordlhip.' And
the deponer, miflyking the mefliiiger, refuifit to jjang to my Lord, faying that he flood in that eftait
that he micht not weill fpeik with him. And yit the principall caus that movit the deponer to refuile
to go with him, wes tlie millyking of the meifiDger, fering that he fould reveill it. Thairefter, that
fame day, the deponer fend Johnne Maxwell, l»is awin fervand, to ray lord, to vnderftand his 1. will
and pleafonr, and defyre his 1. to fcliaw ony thing he had to fay to the faid Johnne, als yf the deponer
haid hene prefent : And that my lord refuifit to fciiaw ony thing to Johnne, quhill he mett with the
deponer him felff ; and willit Johnne to tell the deponer, that he defyrit to meitt with him at efter
none. Quhairvpoun the deponer raid to liim to Kirkennane hill ; and at thair meeting, my lord fayd
to tlie deponar, ' Coline, it wes for this caus I fend for 50W. 5e fee my eflait and danger I Hand in ;
and I wald crave 30ur counfell and avife, as ane man that tenderis my weill.' To quhom the deponer
anfuerit, that the mater wes fo far pafl, as hardlic could he gif his 1. ane counfaill ; and gif he haid a
counfaill, lie wald gif him the beil he could. The deponeris opinioun wes, that he fould keipe him
quiet, and do no thing quhilk micht oft'end the Kingis Maieflie farder nor he had done ; and that he
Avald move the noblemen, who wer his freindis at Court and Counfell, to report the beft of him to his
MaielUe and Counfell. And the Deponer fperit at him ' Li quhat eftait his 1. and his nichtbouris, the
Barones of the countrey, ftood into?' His anfuer wes, that he could not weill tell that him felff.
Vpoun tliir fpeiches, thay fell in fpeiking with the Laird of Johnnftoun ; and my lord defyrit to gett
liim knawledge, yf the Laird of Johnnftoun had bene ane platter aganis him, fen thair aggreement ?
And quhat he micht look for att his handis in tyme comeing? The Deponeris anfwer wes, that he
knew no thing of that mater, whill he haid fpokin with Johnnftoun, or gottin his anfuer, in wryte ; and
at that tyme he could not raeete with him, becaus he wes to ryde to Edinburgh for fome of his awne
adois. And my lord defyrit the deponer to wryte in his awne name to the Laird, to vnderftand quhat
certantie my lord micht liaif of him. And my lord promefit to fend to the deponer, in wryte, the headis
quhairvpoune the deponer fould forme his bill to the Laird, the nixt morneing ; quhilk my lord did.
And the deponer faid to my lord, ' Yf this be a mater that jour 1. thinkis, hi jour hairte, je can tak vp
and reraett to the Laird, I will very willinglie travell in the mater and do the beft I can ; vtherwife,
I defyre nocht to mell in it.' To quhom my lordis anfuer wes, that of all evillis the leaft wes to be
tane, feing he had at the Kingis commandment done it alredy. Yf hefaw ony willingnes in the Laird
to do his dewytie to him, he wald willinglie pas it over, and if he reifauit ane reflbnnable anfiver of
the Laird, he wald be content to meete with him, at ony convenient place : And promeft, that he fould
keepe honneftlie, for his pairt and tliefe that wer with him, providing it war keepit quiet, for boitli
their weillis. And upoun the morne, the deponer reftliuit the headis in a Tickett fent to iiim to his
awne houfe ; qidiairvpoun my lord defyrit him to wryte to the Laird ; quhilk the deponer thinking
miftie, the deponer wryte bak agane to my lord, and fend his Tickett clofit in lies awne Bill, fchawing my lord that he wald not deale in that turne, quhill he fpak with his lordfchip, and that he haid the
Heidis mair cleiilie I'ett doun. Quhairvpoun my lord write bak to the deponar, and defyrit him to
mcit his lordfchip at the Kirk of Butill : And the deponar comeing thair and milling my lord, and
perfaving fome perfonis attending to meit his lordfchip, the deponer raid away, and wald not meit with
him at that tyme ; and left ane fervand to tell my lord that he haid bene thair, and was riddin away :
And that fame nicht, my lord caufit the deponeris man come bak to the deponer, and defyre him to
meit him, about the fetting of the fone, befyd the place of Butill, at the water fyd ; quhilk the deponar
did : And the deponer afking of him quhat he meaiiit be tliefe Articles and headis he had fent vnto
him ? My lord anfwerit, that he wes not a good wreater, and wald not commit the truft of this to ane
vther ; alwife, his meaning wes, that the deponer fould defyre the Laird to cleir him felff that he had
not bene a dealer aganis him in tyme bigano, and to lat my lord vnderftand quhat he micht look for
at his handis in tyme comeing. According to the quhilk, the deponer wryte to the Laird, and get his

42&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 45

anlVer witlnn tua or thrie nichtis. And deponis, that he promeift to my lord, yf his lordfchip wer in
thefe fieldes, that he fould gett his lordlcliipis ane (oivii) anfuer, and bring it to him ; hot yf his lordfchip wes not in thefe fieldis, tlie deponer fould be in 'J'eniglis vpoun Monunday tliaireft<!r, quiiair my
lord fould find him. According to the quhilk, my lord appointit his man, Johne M'brair, to attend
the deponer at Terriglis ; and efter the deponer lichtit (ali(//tted), Johne M'brair defyrit him to go
and fpeik with my lord, who attendit him befyd Haliewode. And deponis that tliay niett in the wod,
quhair the deponer lute my lord fee the Lairdis anfwer in wryte ; quhilk he red, and (was) Weill content thairwith. And thairefter, the deponar takand my lordis faitlifull promeis, with my lordis hand
ftrekit in the deponeris handis, that he, nor the man he fould bring with him, fould do no wrang, hot
keepe honnelllie, quhidder thay aggreit or not, my lord, with the deponer, fett down the tryilt to be
vpoun Wodnifday thairefter, beyond the Houfe of the Beal, betuix thrie and four efter none ; quhair ather
pairty fould come accumpanyed with one onlie, and na vtheris to be prefent hot the deponer : And my
lord promeift to bring Robert Maxwell of the Tour with him, or ane vtlier quliom the deponer fould lyk
als Weill of, for quhom my lord fould be anfuerabill. And, pairting with his lordfchip, the deponer, vpoun
the morne, raid down to the Laird of Johnnftoun, and tauld liim of the appointing of the tryilt ; who
being verie willing to it, and his faitlifull promeis to keepe honneftlie, for his pairte, he, with the deponov
and Willie Johnnftoun of Locurbie, come, vpoun the morne thairefter, agaitward to the tryift, within a
myle or thairaboute to the place appointit ; and in the way, the Laird fay ^ to the deponer, that quhatevir
courfe he tooke with the Lord Maxwell, he wald ever referve his dewitie and allegeance to the Kingis
Ma^'*', and that he wald counfell my lord to begyn with Sir Williame Crauftoun, to be at ane point with
him, that by his meanis and procurement the Erll of Dunbar micht be intreatit to interceid for his lordfchip, at the Kingis handis ; and fua, comeing within a myle to the place appointit, the deponer lute
the Laird fie quhair my lord wes ; and the deponer caulit the Laird ftay thair, and he raid fordward to
my lord, who wes attending at the place appointit, as faid is, and tauld my lord that the Laird was come,
according to the appointment ; and that he repofit fo grite traift and confidence in my lord, that he wes
onlie ryding vpoun ane amling naig ; and that Willie of Lockarbie wes with him and na mae, as his lordfchip himfelflf faw. And than the deponer of new took my lordeis promeis for keeping of his former
promeis and credite, and quhilk my lord frielie gaf : And my lord deftrit the deponer to tak Charlis Maxwellis promeis lykwife, who wes with him ; quhilk the deponer refuifit to do; and wes verie mifcontit
(mifcontent ?) that Charlie wes thair. And than my lord promefit to be anfwerable for liim. Sua the
deponer raid bak to the Laird, and broght him fordward, and took the lyk promeis of the Laird that he
fould be anfwerabill for his man Willie Johnnftoun : And afoir the deponer come from my lord, baith my
lord and the Laird coramandit Charlie Maxwell to ryd af theme, and not to go towardis Willie Johnnftoun.
And the deponer and the Laird gaf the lyk command and directioun to Willie Johnnftoun to ryd af them,
and not to go toward Charlie Maxwell. And fua, my lord, the Laird, and the deponer mett ; and
mutuall falutatiouuis paft betwix tliame, and they raid togidder, the deponer in the midis, my lord on
his left iiand, and the Laird on his richt hand ; and efter fome fpeiches, my lord direclit his langwage
to the deponer, and the Laird and the deponer directit thair langwage to my lord ; and ryding thus
way, and thair bakis to the vther tua, the deponer lookis about and faw Charlie Maxwell go fra the
place quhair he wes appointit to ftay, directlie towardis Willie Johnnftoun, and efter fome few fpeiches
betwix thame, quhilk the deponer hard not, the deponer faw Charlie Maxwell fciioote a pillolett at
Willie Johnnftoun ; quhairvpoun Willie gaf a fchoute and cryed. And thairefter the deponer clappit
to my lord, and preill to haif tane him be the brydle-renzeis, and, milling his renzeis, gat ane grip of
his clok, quhilk he puUit to him — and cryed to my lord, ' Fy ! my lord ! Mak not ^our I'elft' a Tratour
and me boith !' To quhom my lord anfuerit, ' 1 am wytles !' ^ With this, the Laird of Johnnftoun llippit af -^ the deponer, and wes ryding for relief of his awne man; and my lord foUowit him, and behind
' For saitl. * Free »i wijte or blame. ' Slii)t or stole away uiipcrci'ivcd.

46 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

his bak, fliot liim — and raid his way : And tlie Lairdis horfe making fome fturr,^ his girdis " brack,
and the Laird fell ; and efter his fall gat vp agane ou his feitt : And Charlie come agane, and oflferrit
findrie flraikis ; bott gat not leave to do any harme.

ROBERT iMAXWALL of Spottis.

Tenet cum principali, J. Prymrois.^
(10.) Deposition of WUliam Johnjton of Lockerby.
Apld Ed'', decimo nono Junij, 1609. Witnesses producit for jireveing of the Sccund Reffbun
of Trejfoun anent the Slaughter of the Lard of Johnejtoime.
WiLLiAME JoHNESTOUN, callit of Lockcrbic, of the aige of xl yeiris, or thairby, mareit ; deponis,
that vpoim the fext day of Aprile, tlie yeir of God 1G08, this deponar cumraing to the place of Lochvod, about ane efter none, the Lard of Joiinestoun tuik this deponar to the clois, and faid to hira,
' 5e ar velcum, for I haif ane gritar turne ado with 50U nor ewir I had befoir tliis day; I am to meit
with the Lord Maxvell, and :;e fall go with me, and loip on vpoun 5 our horfe, and raik fordwart to
Lytill Lochwod, quhill I owirtak 50W, and let nane ken quhair 56 ar rydand to.' Immediatlie ihairefter the Lard of Johncfloun and Sir Robert 3Iaxvell of Spottis owirtuik this deponar within ane
myle from the Lochwod ; and thei raid altogidder towartis the place appoyntit, quhill thai come to the
Cowart-croce, quhilk was within a myle quhair the Lord Maxvell and Charlis 3Iaxvell was huiffand * on horfbak togidder. Then Sir Robert ^Maxvell directit the Lard of Johneftoun and this deponar to ftay thair, qidiill his returne to thame, or ellis that he gif thame ane fingto cum fordwart, quhilk
was be haldin vp of his nepkyn vpoun his wand end.^ Schortlie thaireftir Sir Robert Maxvell Gumming from tlie Lord INIaxvell, about the mydway betwix the faidis pairteis, the faid Sir Robert held
vp his nepkyn vpoun his wand end ; and vpoun that finge the Lard of Johneftoun and this deponar
raid fordvart to the faid Sir Robert. At thair meting the faid Sir Robert fliew to the Lard of Johneftoun, that the Lord Maxvell, accumpaneit with Charlie Maxvell allane, war awayting vpoun thair
cumniing, and that the Lord Maxvell inquyrit of Sir Robert quho vas with the Lard of Johneftoun ?
The quhilk Sir Robert anfuerit, that he had tauld to the faid Lord Maxvell, that this deponar was
onlle in cumpanie with the Lard of Johneftoun ; and that tlie Lard of Johneftoun, for fecrecie of the
tryft, was rydand vpoun ane naig, and had left his beft liors behind him. Then the Lard of Johneftoun anfuerit, that he was weill content that Charlis Maxvell vas rather thair nor ony vther, be refsoun he was Johne Murray of CokpuUis fifter-fone ; and at that famyn tyme. Sir Robert tauld to the
faid Lard of Johneftoun, that he had tane the Lord Maxvellis ayth and promeis, vpoun his fayth and
honour, that he fuld meit fairlie, and depairt fairlie. And that the Lord Maxvell defyrit the faid Sir
Robert to tak Charlis ayth thairvpoun ; the quhilk Sir Robert refulit to do, faying, that ' he wald haif
na promeis hot the Lord Maxvellis awin promeis for his man.' Lyk as, at that famin tyme, Sir
Robert tuik the Lard of Johneftonis aylli and promeis, be his hand laid in his, that he fuld meit fairlie
and depairt fairlie with the Lord ^Maxvell, quhiddor thai aggreit or nocht. Immediatlie tliairefter Sir
Robert raid to the Lord Maxvell, the Lard of Johneftoun and this deponar followand adreicbe ;^ and
tliaireftir, Sir Robert liaveing an ftiort fpace fpokin witli the Lord Maxvell, they turnit towartis the
Lard of Johneftounc, and the Lard of Johneftoune towartis thame; and eftir falutatioun, the Lord
Maxvell, the Lard of Johneftoune, and Sir Robert, raid togidder to and fro, the faid Sir Robert being
in the niyddis ; bot quhat thai fpak togiddir kennis nocht, be reflbune the faid Charlis and this deponar
ftayit about ane pair of but-landis, or thairby, from thame, as Sir Robert Maxvell had directit tham
of before : And fchortlie eftir that the faid Charlis and this deponar had ftayit pairt and findrie," the
faid Charlis Maxvell cumniis firft to this deponar, and faid to this deponar, ' Gif I had knawin of this
tryift, tlie Lord Maxvell rather cnld nor fuld haif brocht me heir.' The deponar anfuerit, ' I hoip in

' Growing restive. * Girtlis. ' Clerk to the Piivy Council. * Riding; literally, Aoo/?;)</.

s The end or point of his riding switch. * Leisurely, loiteriiigly. " Apart and separate, or asunder.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 47

God, Cliarlis, ^e fall noclit rew of 5 our cuniming heir ! For fir twa noble men hes bene lang in variance,
and I hoip now fai fall aggrie.' I'lien Charlis anfuerit, that ' The Lard of Johnfloune was nocht able
to mak ane amendis, for the great ftayth and injurie he had done to thara !' This deponar anfuerit,
that ' The Lard vald cum in vill, and do to his powar to fatisfie the Lord and his freyndis.' Charlis
anfuerit, that ' The faid thryift, was onlie maid to the prejudice of the faid Charlis and his freyndis, for
that man' (luikand towartis the Lard of Johnefloune) * had focht his wraik ; and thairfoir we fuld nocht
half met 50W, for 36 ar all Traitouris !' The deponar anfuerit, < Charlis, fay quhat 5e will ])is day, I
will mak no anfuer thairto, be refloune of my maifleris promeis.' Then Charlis faid, that ' 5e ar all
Tratouris ! be reflbun 56 flew Francie of Carlile vnder treft.' Then this deponar anfuerit, ' Say quhat
je will this day, I will gif 50VV na anfuer ; hot within ane day or twa, gif 56 will fend 50ur man to me,
I fall fatisfie 50W.' And incontinent vpoun that laft fpeiche Charlis fchott ane piftolet at this deponar, and llioit him throuche the cloik ; and than this deponar preifllt to haif flioit his awin piftolett,
and it mifgaif, cryand ' TreafToun V And tlie Lard, vpoun that cry, raikit fordvart from the Lord
Maxvell ; and then the Lord IMaxvell, with his pillolett, llioit at the Laird of Johnellonn behind his
bak ; at the quhilk flioit the Lard lliortlie thaireftir fell, and incontinent Charlis ihoit ane vther ilioit
at the Lard and this deponar, being baytli flanding togidder : And this deponar, preilfaud to haif put
the Lard vpoun this deponaris meir, quha throuche waiknes vas vnhable to loup on, the deponar fett
the Lard vpoun the grund ; and the deponar balding the Lard vp, and inquyring quhat he had to fay,
the Lard luikand vp to hevins and faid, ' Lord haif mercie on me I Chrylt haif mercie on me I I am
difTavit.' Then the Lord Maxvell cryit to Charlis, ' Cum away.' Then the faid Charlis anfuerit,
' My Lord, will ^e ryld away, and leif this bludie thelf behind 50U ?' Then the Lord anfuerit, ' Quhat
rak of him — for the vther hes anewche !' And then thai bayth raid away togidder.

III. (11.) CoNTEMroRARY NARRATIVE of the Efcape of Loud Maxwell
and Sir James MAKONEiLLy} ow the Cajile of Edinhurgh, taken from MS.
Hijlory of Scotland}

Now, my Lord Maxwell being put in ward, in the Caftell of Edinbrughe, and nocht feing how he
was to be releiffit, dewyflis with Schir James M^Coneill and Robert Maxwell of Dinwiddle, quhat
way he and thay mycht efcheap. And on the fourt of December, he callis ane gritt number of the
Keiparis of the Caftell into his chalmer, quhair he drinkis theme all fow ; ^ and defyring quhilk of
thame voir the beft fuord, he gaif ane fuord to Schir James M'^^Coneill, and heaffand ane him feltF,
drawis to the Chalmer dur and lokis them all in. And thay thrie palfis fordwartt to the 5ett, quhilk
he had canflit ane feruand of his to keip the 3ett fra nocht cuming to ;^ hot the porterris, nocht being
willing to lett thame go, maid refiftance : Bot my Lord Maxwell, being refolvvit to depairtt, ftrak the
Maifter porter, and wondis him in his airme ; and alfo findrie of the reft ; and ane woman, that maid
fum refiftance, thay hurtt alio : And vinnand out at the inner-3ett, he lopis the wall. Schir James,
Jieaffand the irnis* on him, lie, lowpand the toun wall, hurttis his leg; quhairby he was nocht abill to
fteir ; and fo was tane and brocht bak in the Caftell. Bot the Lord Maxwell, heaft'aml liorfe prepairitt,
raid his wayis, and Robert Maxwell of Dunwody with him. Quhairat the King was werray far
offenditt ; and maid Proclamatioune, that naiie fould refett him, wnder the payne of deathe. Bot
Maxwell remaynand in the cuntry, thocht thatt the Laird of Jolmeftoun had the wyt of all his truliill :
And ieing that thair was (na) meanis to gett the Kiiigis gude will, bot be the Laird of Jolineftoune
moyane, quha had llayne his fader, as 3e have hard, and had cauilit the King compell him to tak him
be the hand, he was in ane grit reade aganis the Lard of Johneftoune, bot buir the fame within him
felff. And on the wther pairt, the Laird of Johneftoune, thinking that this wes the beft tyme to

' Advocates' Librai'y, A. I. 35. ' Drunk, intoxicated. ' From rlosiiii; or sluittiiiij. * retlers.

48 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

winue tlje hairtt of my Lord Maxwell, giff (be) his meanis and trawell he mycht piirches his Maieftyis
gude will to his loidfcliip : Quhaiiwpone, he fendis to Schir Robert Maxwell of Orchortt-toune, knyS
quha had mareyit the Laird of Jolnieflonis lifter, as, alfo, Johneftoun had mareyit his fifter, to trawell
with3Iaxwell, to fie gif he wald fpeik with him : And quhat he wald direct him, in that turne, he wald
do to the wttirmeft of his power. The qiiliilk the iaid Schir Robert did, and brocht tharae to ane
meitting, the fext day of Apryll, the ^eir of God 1608; and Chairlly Maxwell with my Lord, and
Williame Johneftoun of Lochirbie with the Laird of Johneftoun, Thay mett on the hill befyde the
pleace of Ellifcheillis, the faid Schir Robert being with tliame ; quhair thay, being mett, the tua fevwandis rydis a pairt off thame, leaffand my Lord and the Laird and Schir Robert ; bot, or euer thay
had conferrit ony fpeace, the tua ferwandis fallis in wordis, and alio in fchottis of piftollattis, the fame
cuming be this Chairlly INIaxwellis motioune : The quhilk, quhen the nobill menne feis, Johneftoun
crj'is, ' Fy! Red !''and fpurris to thame. And my Lord, being ryding with piftollattis, cumis behind
Johneftoun and fchuttis him throw the hartt, quhairof he fallis : And yit his cuiTadge maid him to draw
his fuord ; bot being Ichott neir to the hairtt, he fallis deid. The Lord Maxwell, feing him fallyn deid,
giffis him na ma ftraikis, bot rydis his wayis. Bot albeit he had gottin his lyff, 3it he gat the fame with
fchame, it being gottin wnder trylting. Quhairfor the King eftemeit the fame as Treflbun, being done
vnder tryft.

IV. Letters,//*o?« the King and Privy Council of Scotland relative to

LoED Maxwell.

(12.) LETTER//-om THE KiNG tO THE PrIVY CoUXCIL OF SCOTLAND, QS tO the cfcapc of LoTcl

Maxwell from the Caftle of Edinburgh.'^

RiCHT truftie and weilbelouit coulingis and counfallouris, We greitt 50U weelle. The leatt efcheap
of THE Lord Maxwell furth of our Caftell of Edinburgh, haveing gevein to ws moir nor juft caus
of difcontentment at his foly, We have thocht meitt heirby to direct 50W how to proceid aganes him.
And firft. We will this Proclamatioun, heirwith fent, to be publeilfed at all placeis neidfull ; and that
50W jiairefter tak ordour for tryall of all reifeattares and fuppleares, and caus the extreametie of the law
to be profequit aganes thame. And alfo 50U fall, upon reftait heirof, prefentlie fend chairges of Treffoune, for the randering of his Callellis and houflis, and 50U fall put garefounes and keiparis in everie
one of the fame, to be interteined v])on the rentis belonging to the houflis, wnto fuch tyme as We doe
tak farder ordour thairwith. And als, our will is, that 50U give particular directioune to fuche as fall
reflave the Caftell of Lochmabene, that thay mak delyverie of the fame to our rycht truftie coifing
and counfallour the Erll of Dumbar, or to ony wther quhome the fiiid Erll of Dumbar fall direct, with
our wther WaiTand, for reflaveing ])airof. Furthermore, 50U fall caus chairge the principallis of the
laid Lord Maxwell his name and followaris, being ony way men of mark, to find cautione and fuertie,
wnder gritt pecuniall panes, that thay fall noway reftailt, fupplie, nor intercommoune with him. 5ou
fall in lyk maner gave fpeciall ordour to our garifoune, wnder the Lord of Scones command, and als
to that wther, wnder Sir W'" Cranftounes chairge, that thay mak fpeciall fearche, for the faid Lord
Maxwell his taking and apprehending. And heirof, willing 5 ou to be cairfull, and to omit nothing that
may haiften ane exempler pwneilhment vpon him, for his prowd contempt, We bid 50W fairwelle.
From our Court at Roystol-ne, this 14 of Dec. 1607. [JAMES R.]

To our rycht truftie and weilbeloveit coufiugis and Counfallouris, the Erll of
Dumfermling, our Chancellar and remanent Lordis and otheris of our Privie
CouNSALL in that our Kingdome of Scotland.

' Agree; separate; make up your (niarrel. * From a Collertion of State Papers formed by the first Earl of

Hadington (at that time Sir Thomas Hamilton), preserved in the General Register House.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 49

(13.) Letter from Sir Thomas Hamilton to the King}
Pleafe your mofl facred Maieftie,
KxowixG that your MaielVie will exfpect and requyre of me ane difchaiige of ray dewtie, in per*
forming vom* Maieflies commandemont, gouin for pcrfewing the Lord Maxuell and Sir James
INIakoneill, for thair treafonabill breaking wairde furth of your hienes Caflell of Edinburgh, becaus
I have hard that fum, whois opinion may have place in fum of the circumftances of thair tryell, inclynes
to juge, that, vnles the crymes for the whilk tliay wer iniprlfoned have bene treafonabill, that tliair
break of wairde can not import Treafoun, I have bene the more folifl to incpiyre of tliair vther offeufis,
which may be found treafonabill of the law : And albeit the Examhiation and re-examination of Sir
James Makoneill I have had fmall aduantage, in refpect of his refolution to deny all the poyntis of his
crymes, at the Slauchter of his vncle, and taking of his parentis, whilkis might infer Treal'oim ; yet I
hope that fufficient information fall verie fchortlie cum, of the trewth of his mofl heynous and vnnaturall factis, from thofe to whom my Lord Chancelar lies writtin, to that effect. As to the Lord Maxuell, I have hard of his raifing of fyre at Dalfibbill, whan he flew Willie Johneftoun, callit of Eichiefchiellis and ane vther Johneftoun ; bot becaus he hes fenfyne had the honour to be admitted to your
Royall prefence, I wald not prefume to fummond him for that fact, whill firfl I fould knaw your Maiefleis mynde thairanent ; the knaulege whairof fall lead me to proceid or defill. The progres of the
Commifllonars at the mynes ^ I hope your Maieflie hes hard from thamefelfis^ and what I know 1 have
writtin to my Lord of Durabar ; becaus I fand him moll defyrous to vndeilland the fucces of that
whilk concemit your Maieflies feruice and contentment. Swa, attending mofl humblie your ^Nlaieflies
farder pleafour for my directioun, I pray God long to bleffe ws with the continuance of your moft
gracious regne, and your Maieflie with all honour and wifled contentment. Ed**, this 28 Januar, 1608.
Your mofl facred Maieflies moft humbill and bundin feruand,

S. Tii. Hamilton.

(14.) Letter//'ow the King to the Pririj Council to apprehend Loi'd 3IaxiceU.^
Right truftie and veilbeloveit confines and Counfallouris, We great 50W weell. We ar informed
that, notwithftanding of the trefTonable fact committit be the Lord Maxwell in efchaiping fourth of our
Caftell of Ediiiburghe, and in forceing and hurting of the keipares and poirtaris of the fame, and of
our fpeciall commandis and Proclamatiounes fend doune for his taking and apprehending, that, nevertheles, in plane contempt of our authoritie, that he oppinley travellis throuche the countrie, accumpaneid with no fewar than twentie horfe, and hes mead his repairc, at fyndrie tymes, to our buriih of
Drumfreis ; quhiche infolence is no way tollerabill, and fkairfe excuflabill one -^our pairtis, that on v of
GUI- declarit tratouris fould afiume to theme felffis fo mutcho libertie, without controlment. And thairfoir, our pleafour and will is, that vpoim reffait heirof, 50W direct that our Gaird, wnder the command
of the Lord of Scoone, to repair to the burglie of Dumfreis, and tliare, with that (Jaird, wnder Sir W''
Cranftounes chairge, to make a prefent diligent fearchc for the faid Lord Maxwell, and either to apprehend him or put him out of thoife boundis. Thairwith alfothe Baillies of Drumfreis wald be chairgit
to compeir befoir 50W, and if 30wcan try any thing of thair knawledge of the faid Lord Maxwellis
being in thair touiie. We ar to will 50W to inflict ano exemplare pwneilhment vpone thanie, baitli by
fynning and wairding. And als, 30W ar to proceid in rigoure, according to the warrant of our lawis
aganes all reffeattares and accompaniaris of the faid Lord, that fo wtheris may be affrayed frome coming
within the compas of the lyk contempe. And, remitting thofe matteris to qour fpeciall cair, We bid
30W faiiweill. At our Palice of Quhvthall, the 2 of Feb''J, 1608. [James ]{.]

' From tlie original, prrsorved anioiif; tlie Denmylne MSS. Adv. iJbrary, * At this jicriod tlio King nas

deludiii!^ himself as to the discovery of silver mines, &c. ' I'rom Iladington MS. General llegister House.

VOL. III. G

50 CRIxMIXAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609-

(15.) ExTRACT/ro»2 Letter, the Privy Council to the Kin(/,^ relative to Lord Maxwell, ^c.
Moist sacreid soveragne,

We Iiave hard, to our gritt greift* and forrow, by the report of 5 our Ma. Secretare and be the Inllructiounes committit be 5our moill facred Ma. to liis credeit, how far jour hienes is difcontented
with the governament of this Eftaitt, as of the haill miffordouris and accidentis that fallls out heir. . . .

As to tl)e particular profequuting of tlio Lord MaxweUis reflettares, tliair is a nwmber of thame
callit, fynned, and wairdit. The relt ar lummondid to particular dyettis, and falbe pwneifchid. As
to the particular Slauchter of Cowhill, that feid is weall knawin to jour Ma*'S and no conapleut of it
maid by ony to the Counfall, and thefe bretlier of Kirkhoufe had alvvyis favour, bot not for the Counfall ; and the committer of it is come in England. And quhairas jour Ma. is informed, that thefe who
wer appoynted to profequut the Lord Maxwell hes keipit companie with him, theafe that hes commandement of ^ our Ma^ Guairdis humlie craves tryall of that calumnie ; as alfua, that that Cove,
quhilk is the allegit place of his refleat, may be defigned ; for we cannot find any countrie man that
knawis any place in Nithifdaill or Galloway that careyis that name

The tryall of that royat, at Drunifres, wes wnder tryall befoir jour Ma. directioune cam, and falbe
profequuted with all regour.

The buriall of the Lord Maxwall wes a calumnie quhairwith many mo (than) jour Ma. is importuned ; for he lyis flill wuburied quhair he wes. And lykwayis the llaucliter of Johnefloune of Howgill ves alyk falfe.*

Al. Cakcells. Lotheane. Vchiltrie. Baljierinoch. Scoxe. Halirudhovs.
S. T. Hamiltoune. Beuhe. Comptroller. Jo. Pkestoun.

(16.) Letter, the Privy Council to the King, for Iii/iruclionesJ^
Most gracious Souerane,
According to joure Maiefteis directioun. We wryte for the Laird of Johnnfloun, his moder and
goode dame, to vnderftand of thame, gif thay wald perfirt in the perfute of that Petitioun, exhibite vnto
jour Maieftie in thair names, whairby thay craved iuflice to be execute vpoun the fForfeyted Lord
Maxwell, for the Slauchter of the laite Laird of Johnnfloun ? Thay come all to this burgh, and the
Laird of Johnnfloun, with his moder and Tutour, prefentit thame felffis before ws, and declairit that
thay wald infill in that perfute and profequutioun of that mater, according to the tennour of thair
Petitioun. The auld Lady Jolmnftoun, through feiknes and inhabilitie of hir perfone, being vnable to
compeir before ws, baueing, with grite difficultie, come to this burgh for this fame errand, we directit
and fend the Biihop of Caithnes, the Lord Kildrymmie and Lord Preuey Seale to hir, to vnderfland
hir will and pleafoure in this mater ; vnto quhome fcho declairit, that fcho come heir puqjofelie for that
mater, and that fcho wald infift, accoirding to the tennour of the Petitioun ; fua that now thair reftis no
farder bot ^oure Maiefleis will and pleafoure to be declairit, quhat forder joure Maiellie will half to
be done; wherein, althoght the conclufione of joure IMaiefteis Lettre beiris, that we fould proceid to
the adminiftratioun of iuftice, jitt, in refpect of a worde caffin in the preface of the Lettre, beiring
that jour Maiellie had not as jitt gevin a direct anfuer to thair Petitioun, we half prefomed, firll, to
acquent jour Maieftie afoir we proceid ony forder ; and whateuir it fall pleis jour Maiellie to direct,
in this mater, falbe immediatlie and without delay execute. Thair was a Petitioun gevin in this day
vnto ws be Robert Maxwell, bruthir to the faid laite Lord, with fome offeris to the pairtie ; bot, becaus
the mater concernit not ws, we wald not mell thairin ; alwyfe, we half heirwith fend the fame to joure

' From the JIadimjton MS. General Register House. The remainder of the Letter (which is very loii!,') relates
to a great variety of subjects, entirely un<onnecteU with each other. '' The date of this Letter is omitted, but it

must be between Apr. ib and May 9, 1G08, * From Original Denmijlne MSS. Advocates' Library.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 51

Maieflie, to be confidderit of as 3 our Maieftie fall tliink goode. So, praying God to blilTe your Maieftie with all happynes and felicitie, we reft

Ed", 28 Aprile, 1613. 3our Maiefteis maift obedant fubiectis and feiuitouris,

Al. CancellS. Hamilton. Mar. Glencairne. Ales'* Hav. Linly'^'g"'. Glasgow. Kincohne.
To THE King his moft facrod and excellent Maieftie.

V. (17.) Offers of Submission hy Lord MAXWELL^br the Settlement of all
differences between him and thejiirviving relatives of Sir James Johnstone
of that Ilh, knight.'

Thir Offerris following ar maid be me, Jobnne, fumtyme Lord Maxwell, for my felff, and in
name of my kyn and freindis, to , now Laird Johnftoun, and his Tutouris and Curatouris,

Dame Sara Maxwell Ladie Johnftoun, younger for the tyme, his mother, Dame Margaret Scott Ladie
Johnftoun, elder^ his guddame, and to thair kyn and freindes, for the vnhappie Slauchter of vmq''^ Schir
James Johnftoun of that Ilk, kny*, committit be me.

In the first, I humblie confes my offens to God, the Kingis Maieftie, and to the foirfaidis perfones, for the faid vnhappie flauchtir, and declairis my felff to be maift penitent thairfoir; craveing firft,
mercie at the Almichty God for the fame, nixt, favour and grace of the Kingis Ma^''', my fouerane
lord, and forgifnes of the great oftens done to the foirfaidis perfones ; teftifeing be my foleme aith, vpone
my faluatioun and condempnatioun, that the foirfaid vnhappie flauchter was nawayis committit be me
vpone foirthocht fellonie or fett pnrpois, bot vpone meir accident : Lyk as, for cleiring thairof, I am
content to purge my felff be my greit aith in publict, quhair it pleiftis the parteis to appoint, and tlo
quhat farder homage falbe thocht expedient.

Secundlie, I am content, not onlie for my felft', bot for my haill kyn and freindis, to forgiff the
flauchter of vmq'*" Johnne Lord Maxwell, my fathir, committit be the faid vniq^'' Laird of Johnneftoun
and his complices, and to- mak all perfones quha wesather gyltie, culpabill, or airt and pairt of the faid
flauchter, in fecuritie thairfoir, fua that thai nor nane of thame fall nevir be trublit for the fame be me,
nor be nane of my kyn and freindis, directly nor indirectly, in tyme cuming ; and, for that effect, fall
mak fik forme of fecuritie as fall agrie with reafoun.

Thridlie, becaus .... Johnnftoun, dochter to the faidvniq'<" Sir James, wes, by the fuddant and
vnhappie Slauchter of hir faid vmq''^' father, left vnprovydit of ane fufficient tocher, and for the better
avoyding of all inimitie that may arryfe betuix the houflis of Maxwell and Johnftoun, and for mair
fuir eftablifching of freindfchip amangis thame in tyme cuming, I am content to marie and tak to my
wyffe the fuid , without ony tochir.

FoLRTLiE, I defyre that the Laird of Johnftoun may be mareit to Dame .... Maxwell, eldeft
dochtir to Johne Lord Ilcreis, and fifter dochtir to me, quha is a perfon of lyke aige with the Laird
of Johnftone. Lyk as, I falbe obleift to pay to the faid Laird of Johnftoun, in name of tochir with my
faid fifter dochtir, tuentie thowfand merk Scottis ; and quhat farder falbe thocht expedient, be the ficht
of freindis.

Fyiftlie and laft, I am content, for the farder fatisfactioun of the houfe of Johnftoun, to be Banifchit liis Maiefteis dominions, for the fpace of fevin 5eiris, and farder at the will and plefour of the
Laird of Johnftoun.

Thir Offeris to be augmentit, at the ficlit and difcretioun of newtrall freindis, to be chofyn to that
eftVct. Vnder proteftatioun alwayis, that thir Offerris befoir wryttin, maid vnto the pairtie, be nawayis
offenfiue to the Kingis Maieftie, nor to his hienes Couiifall.

' I'Vom Sir James Dulfoufs MS. Cvllcciions, Advocates' Library.

52 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. IC09.

VI. (18.) Supplication hy Robert Maxwell, brother to John, fometime
Lord Ma.vweII, to the Lords of Privv Council, to intercede with the
King, and with the private projecutors, S<f}

^Iy Lordis of Couxsaill, vnto 5our 1. humblie menis and fchawis 50ur 1. fervitour, Robert
Maxwell, brothir to Johime, fiimtyme Lord Maxwell : That quhair, it ia not vnkuawin to 5 our 1. the
niiferabill ellait of my laid brothir, bo the offences committit be him, to his God, the Kingis Maieftie, to
tlie Marques of Hammiltoun and that name, and to the Laird of Johnneftoun and his freindis, befyde
nianifald vjieris mifbehaviouris ; for ])e quhilkis (being now, tlu'ow liis niiferabill eftait, brocht to pe
knawlege J'airof) he moill humblie cravis mercie of God, favour and grace of his Maieftie his Prince,
and forgifnes of his offence done to the Marques of Hammiltoun and his freindis, and to the Laird of
Johnneftoun and his freindis : Lyk as, for cleiring of his penitencie for pe offence committit be him in
Slauchter of )'e Laird of Johnneftoun, he, with all humbilnes of niynd, is maift willing to mak fatisfactioune to the pairtie ; vnder proteftatioun, that the offer of fatisfactioun to ]>e pairtie fuld nawayis be
offenllve to his Ma"'^' nor 5our 1. And his haill freindis haifing, for'fat effect, caufet pen certane Offeris
in his name, to half bene prefentit to the Laird of Johnneftoun, his mopir, and guddame, and for presenting thairof, haifing delyrit and eirniftlie entreitit certane of ]'e Miniftrie of Ed"", and fum of the
Bifchopis to half prefentit the fame ; thai and all v]ier men of qualitie hes alluterlie refuilit fe fame,
without pai had jour 1. Warrand for fat effect : Sa fat now fair reftis na mania quhairby fe Offeris
may cum to fe pairteis handis, except jour (1.) will athir appoint fum perfones to prefentthe fame, or
vferwayis that jour (1.) wald convene ])e pairtie befoir jour 1., that fe fame, in jour 1. audiens, may
(be) red and delyuerit to fame. Heirfoir, I maift humblie befeik jour (I.) to haif confideratioun of
f e premift"es, and fat jour 1. wald gif directioun to fum of f e Miniftrie of jns burgh to prefent f e faid
Offenis, or vferwayes, that jour (1.) wald call fe pairtie in jour prefens, to fe effect foirfaid. And
ficlyk, that it micht pleis jour 1. to acquent f e Kingis Maieftie, our fouerane, of f e willingnes of my
brof er, boith to fatisfie f e pairteis offendit, and maift humblie, and with all dewtifull obediens, to fubmit him felff"in his Maiefteis handis : — And jour 1. anfuer.

VII. Notices rehdive to Lord Maxwell's Execution, his behaviour and
dying Confejfions on the Scaffold^ Si,c.

(19.) Account taken from the Denmylne MSS.^
Vpoun the xviij" of this monethe adverteifment being maid be the baljies of Ed"" to the late Lord
^laxvell, that vpoun the nixt Fryday, xxj of this ISIaij, juftice wes to be executed vpou him, at tlie
mercat croce of this burghe of Ediuburghe, and he willed to prepair his confcience and difpofe him
felff to die, he profefllt to thame his willingnes to abyde the pleafour of God and his Prince, and
obtenit Licence of the Counfall that fuche ane number of his freindis micht haue acceffe to fpeik with
him, as he fuld requyre, by name. He had diuerfe conferences with lindrie of them, in prefens of ane
of the Baljies, bot refuifled to reftaue ony afllftance or confort from the Minifteris, profefling him felff"
not to be of thair Religioun, bot ane Catholik Romane ; wherby, it being foirfene be the baljies of the
toun and wtheris, that gif he fuld at his death enter in any difcourfe of that fubiect befoir the people,
it micht breid offence and fclander, he wes defyrit, and yelded to bind him ielff, be promeis, to forbeare
at his death all raentioun of his particular opinioun of Religioun, except the profeflioun of Criftianitie ;
whiche he fenfyne repented, as he declared to the baljies, when they wer bringing him to the fcaffald,
whare he declared that as he had iuftlie deferuit his death, fo he wes reddie patientlie to fuffer it, afking mercie of God for his finnis, and hartlie wiiliing that his Maieftie micht be gratioullie pleafed to

' From the Denmylne MSS., Advocates' Library. ' Advocates' Library.

42 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIiMINAL TRIALS. 53

accept his lyf and blood as ane different^ puniihment of his offences ; and to relent, and renioue iiis
wrathe from his brother and hous, being pleiiied to rellore his brother to the rank and place of his
predeceilbure, where lie niicht, and, as he hoped, wald, do his Maiellie guid and faithfuU feruice, as
his foirbearis had done to his Maiefties Royall progenitouris. Nixt, he alkit forgiuenes of the Laird
of Johneftoun, his mother, grandmother and freindis, acknawelegeing the wrong and harme done to

theme, with proteflatioun that it wes without dilhonour or infamie (for the worldlie pairt of it for lb

wer thefe his wordis reported to me.) He lykwayis crawed pardoun of Polloke, Calderwode, and his
wther freindis, being prefent, acknoweleging, that whareas he was borne to haue bene authour cf thair
honour and faiftie, he had procured to thame hairme and difcredit. And then he retired him felff neir
the block, and maid his prayeris to God ; which being ended, he tuike his live of his freindis, and of the
bal5ies of the toun ; and, fuffering his eyes to be covered with ane handcourchef, offered his head to
the axe, and fuffered deathe, the xxj of Maij, at four a cloke in the efternone.
(20.) 'iHoTiCE from Minutes of the Privy Council.'^

Maij 18, 1613, Ane Warrand pafl and exped to the Proueft and Bal3ies of Edinburghe, to tak
the lait Lord Maxuell to thair mercat croce, vpoun the xxj of this inllaut, and thair to cans llrik his
head from his body. The delay of tua dayis wes thocht raeit to be grantit, to the effect he micht haue
leafer to be refolued ; and that the Minifteris micht haue tyme to confer with him, for his better
refolutioun.

(2L) 'i^ OT ICE preferred bi/ Calderwood?

The Lord Maxwell was beheaded at the mercate crofle of Edinburgh, betuixt three and four after
noone. He died confortlefle, having none of the Miniftrie prefent to pray for him, or make exhortation to him or the people. He defired them not, neither was he content to receave informatione from
them tuiching his Religione. This executione was procured be the Laird of Johnftons friends, fpecially
be Sir Robert Ker, Erie of Rochefter, the chief guider of the Court at that time. Papifls, neverthelefs, tooke boldnefs to profefle their Religione, in fundry parts of the country ; for it was well known
to them, that Maxwell fuffered not for his Papiltry.

(22.) Notice by Sir James Balfour,'^

The 21 day of this mounth, Johne Lord Maxwell of Caerlauerock, was takin from the Tolbuith of
Edinburghe to the mercat Crofle of the fame, quher, on a fcaffold, he had his head chopped ofte from
his bodey, for the flaughter of the Laird of Jhonftone.

Jim. 28. — Henrie Blak, Capitane of the Caftell of Kirkwall (Orkney),
William Kirknes, Robert Hammiltoim, ^^^illiame Daiiidlbim,
alias Ueriecoh, Magnus Bankis, alias Jolinncjhun, Kx^ Dundas, Magnus Draver, Gilbert Brabner, fudartis,' and keiparis
of the hous of Grenecroft ; Johnne Reid in Selflvarie, Gilbert
Blak in Farray, Malcolme Mowat in Etha, and James Mowat,
thair.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq''' Donald Grote, (of Wairis,)
Walter Grote, and James Stewin, all in Duneanifbey.

' Sufficient? « Minutes of Privy Council Proceedings, Dcnmylne JISS., Adv. Library.

5 MS. Church History, Adv. Library. ^ Ba/f Ann. II. 42. ^ Soldiers.

;54 CRIxAIINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609Williame Sinclair of Etlia, oftymes callit, as cautioner for repoirting the Letteris diielie execute and indorfate and perfewing tliairof, purcheft be Margaret
Grote, the relict of vmq'" Donald, Malcolme, his fone, Johnne Grote, brother to
vinq" Walter, and Allafler Stewin, as brother-fone to vmq" James Stewin.

Compeirit Mr Johnne Manfoun, feruitour to my Lord of Kathnes (Caithness),
and producet ane AVarrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, anent the deferting
of this dyet ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Justice, Juftice cl«'rk and 50111- dojmtis. Forfamekill as the xxviij day of Junij inflant Is appointit to Henrie Blak, Malcolme INIowat, Williame Kirknes, and certane vferis fair complices, tennentis and feivandis to ]ie Eri.e of Orknay, for ])air compeiraiice befoir 30W, to vnderly tlie law fof
])e Murtliour of vmq' ' Donald Grote of Waiiis, and fum vtlieris, tennentis and fervandis to ])e Erle
OF Caitiines : And feing, all differences and queftiones /landing betuix the faidis Erles of Orknay
and Calthnes ar reconfiliat and agroit, except fe faid Murthour, the perfute quhairof, be baith the
faidis Erics confentis, is continewit to ane vjier dyet, to be perfewit, afei befoir fe Juftice or his deputis in the bur' of Ed"", or in Caithnep. Thairfoir, theas ar to command 50W to defert ]ie faid dyet,
and defift fra all proceiding ])airin ; difpenfing with the perfonall compeirance of ]>e pairtie. Quhairanent thir prefentis falbe 5 our Wairand. Subfcryuit with our handis, att ED^ ]>e xxvij day of Junij,
](j09. Al. Cancell""^^*. Dumbar.

The Juftice Defertit the faid dyet : Quhairvpoune the laid Mr Johnne afkit
inftrumentis ; and proteftit for the faid Williame Sinclair of Etha, his releif of
his cautionerie ; quhilk the Juftice admittit.

33uvm'iTrr tijt i^U(t oi SlittlerriH — ^laiicjljttv — ^tnuUjrtif—
^ovsit anti Cattlc--^tealintr, ^c.

Aug. 9. — Tho:mas Jakdaxe of Birnok, and ^^mphra Jardane his fone.^
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'*" Jolinne Tuedie of Southwoid, . . . Broun of Coulter, Williame Campbell of Walwoid : And certain
other crymes of Thift, &c.

Persewaris, Elfpeth Bail3ie, mother to ymq'"^ Johnne Tuedie; Beffie and Sibilla Tuedeis, his
filleris; Robert Tuedie, his brother; Williame Broun, brother to vmq'^' Robert Broun; Williame
Broun, as fone to the faid Robert ; Mathow Bail5ie, brother to vrnq^*" Alexander Bail5ie ; and as fader to vmq''" Rachaell Bail5ie, perfewis Vmplira Jardane allanerlie ; Charles Campbell of Horfcleuch, neir kjmfman to vmq'*^ Williame Campbell of Walwoid ; Hew Campbell of Garallane, for hirafelf ; Johnne Farquhar in Cavill, for himfelf ; George Slowane in Knokburne, for liimfelf ; Williame
Campbell, as fone to the faid vmq'^' Williame ; Charles Murray, for liimfelf. Sir Thomas Hammiltoune
of Bynnie, kn*, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes entreis.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, The Laird of Lammyngtoun, The Laird of Carmichell, The Laird
of Covingtoun, Williame Carmichell of Rownetriecorfe, Mr Johnne Ruflell, Aduocat.
DiTTAY again ft TJiomas Jardane.

For aiit and pairt with tlie faid Vmphra, his fone, of the trelfonabill Raifeing of ff'yre, burning and
diftroying of the Place of Littilgill, with the haill offices, liouffes, barnes, inficht and pleniifing, being
thairintill, worth the fowme of fFyve thowfeand pundis ; committit vpone the faxt day of July, I'".V''.

' See Jul. 30, Aug. 9, and Nov. 5, 1G05.

J.3&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 55

fourfcour nyne jeiris : And of the treffbnabill burning to deid, at that fame tyme, within the faid
Place, of vniq''= Alexander Bail3ie of Littilgill, Rachaell, dochter to Matthow Bailjie, now of Littilgill, Andro Achiefoun and Katharene Forrefl, ordiner fervandis to the faid vrnq^** Alexander, within
the faid place. Item, fFor airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq''' Robert Broun in Coulter ;
coramittit be the faidis Thomas and Vmphra, in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of God I"'.V'^'. fourfcoir
faxtene yeiris, vpone the Grene of Coulter, with fchottis of hagbuttis and piJtolettis. Item, ffor airt
and pairt of the fleilling of the hors, pryce of the peice ane hundreth pundis ; with ane grit ox, prvce
thairof fyftie merkis, pertening to Williame Broun in Coulter ; committit be him and the faid \ mplira,
his fone, at Mertines, or thairby, in the yeir of God I"'.V^". fourfcoir faxtene yeiris. Item, fibr airt
and pairt of the Slauchter of Johnne Tuedie of Southwoid, committit be the faid Thomas and Vmphra his fone, vpone Harlaw-mure, befyde St Ninianes Kirk, in the moneth of July, I"\Vj^'. yeiris.
Item, fFor airt and pairt of the Steiling of faxtene fcheip furth of the landis of Scornefald, pertening

to Johnneftoun, put be him vpone the faidis landis in girfeing ; committit be the faid

Tliomas and Vmphra his fone, in the yeir of God I^.Vj". yeiris. Item, iFor airt and pairt of the
thiftious Steilling, at the leift refetting of faxtene ftowin fcheip, ftowin at his command be vmq'*^ James
Thomefoun his man, in the moneth of November, in the yeir of God r".V'.lxxxxix yeiris. And
ffor Cowmoun Thift, and Cowraoun Reflet of Thift, fra land to land, fra cuntrie to cuntrie, baith of
auld and new; preceiding the nynt day of Maij, I'^.Vj*". and fyve yeiris.

DiTTAY aga'iNjl Vmiiilira Jardane.

Indytit, accufet and perfewit of the crymes perticulerlle aboue writtin : And als, accufet and perfewit of the crymes refpectiue and perticulerlie following, viz. For airt and pairt of the Steilling of
ellevin nolt^ price of the peice ten pundis, pertening to Johnne Farquhair in Cavlll, furth of his duelling hous thairof; committit be the faid Vmphra and his complices, in the yeir of God r".Vj''. and
tua yeiris. Item, for airt and pairt of the Steilling of ane hors and ane meir, price of the peice ane
hundretii merkis, fra George Slowane in Knokburne, furth of his duelling hous thairof; committit be
the faid Vmphra and his complices, vnder filence and clud of nycht, in the moneth of Junij, the yeir of
God I'", fax hundreth and foure yeiris. Item, fibr airt and pairt of the taking fra William Craufurd
in Silliehoillis, furth of his duelling hous in Silliehoillis, of ane nalg, pryce thairof fyftie pundis ; committit be him and the faid Thomas his father, in the yeir of God I'", fax hundreth and thre yeiris.
Item, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling, be way of maiflerfull Thift and Stouth-relf, fra
Charles Murray, of tua hors, price of the peice, ane hundreth merkis; togidder with his cloik, fuord,
piflolettis, fleilbonet, and purfe, with threfcoir pundis, being thairin ; committit be the faid Thomas
and Vmphra Jardanes, vpone the Brokin-calfay, betuix Davlefihaw and Littilgill, in the yeir of God
jm^yc fourfcoir fevintene yeiris. Item, ffor airt and pairt of the ftelUlng fra Hew Campbell, fone to
Hew Campbell in Garallane, furth of his landis of Eiftmark ;' committit be the faid Vmphra and his
compliceSj in the -^eir of God r^.V'Jxxxxix yeiris.

For the qiiliilkis crymes relpectiiie aboue writtin, the laidis Thomas and
Vmphra Jardanes tuik thamefelfis to our Ibuerane lordis Reniiffioun, producet
be thame, vnder his hienes Grit feill, of the dait the nynt day of May, the yeir of
God P". fax hundreth and fyve yeiris. Quhilk Remiffioun the Juftice adniittit.

Lyk as, the faid Thomas Jardane, elder of Birnok, being in{l}'tit and
accufet.

For putting handis in vmq'e James Thomefoun, his man, binding of him hand and fute ; and at his
awin hand, bot^ ordour of Law or ony Commiflioun gevin to him, drownet and execute to dalth the

' The articles stolen arc not detailed in the Record. - Witiiout.

56 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6O9.

faid vmq'^' James Thomefoun, his man, in Robertoun burne ; and fa, is and was airt and pairt of his
daith and flauchter ; committit in the moneth of November, the yeir of God I™, fyve hundreth fourfcoir nynetene yeiris. Item, ffor Cowmone Thift, Covvmone lleffet of Thift, ontputing and inputting
of Thift, fia land to land, fra cuntrie to cuntrie, at d>'uerfe tymes, fen the moneth of :May, in the yeir
of God I™, fax hundreth and fyve yeiris ; quhilk is the dait of his Remilfioime. And siclyk, the
faid Vmphra Jardane his fone, being indyttit and accufet, flbr airt and i)airt of Steilling of ane broun
liorfe of four yeir auld, price ane hundreth merkis, fra Andro Slowane in Laneheid, furth of the landis
of Watterheid in Cumnok, in the moneth of Junij, I"\Vj^-. and fyve yeiris. Item, flfor airt and pairt
of the Steilling fra Williame Rankene of ane gi-ay hors, pryce thairof I^" li. furth of the landis of Boigcorroche ; committit in the moneth of Junij, I">.Vj'-. and fyve yeiris. Item, Ifor airt and pairt of the
lleilling of fourfcoir hogis,i price of the peice fyftie fchillingis, furthe of the landis of Woulfcruikis,
within the barronie of Douglas, pertening to the Erie of Angus and his tennentis ; committit in the
moneth of October, the yeir of God I"\Vj. and fax yeiris. Item, flFor airt and pairt of the Slauchter
of vmqi^' Williame Campbell of Walwoid ; committit be him and his complices, at tlie Kirk of Douglas,
be hurting bira, deidlie, in his heid and vtheris pairtis of his body, in the moneth of October, or thairby,
V^N". and foure yeiris; at tlie leift, fen the yeir of God I"", fyve hundreth fourfcoir fevintene seiris ;

quhairof he depairtit tliis lyfe, in the moneth of l"\\'f. and fax yeiris thairefter. Item, flFor

Cou-mone Thift and Reflet of Thift, kc. fen the dait of his faid Remiffioun, viz. the nyntday of Maij,
I'".\j''. and ffyve yeiris.

The paunell and thair preloquutoiiris dedarit thay will nodit feik delay,
iioditwitliftanding thay ar nodit lummond, and lies nodit gottin ane copie.
Quliairvpoiin my Lord Adiiocat advit inftrumentis. — The pannell ail^it inftrumentis, that na partie competent to perfew thame, bot the perfonis aboue writtin.

The Advocat allegit that Mr Johnne RiifTell can nocht be hard to compeir and
defend, becaus the pannell ar att the home. — It is anfuerit, that defenjio eft juris
iiaturaVis ; and thay haif obtenit ane delyuerance of Relaxatioun (from the horn )

The Aduocat in tlie contrar, becaus he producet Hoirning aganis the pannell.

— The Aduocat paffis fra the allegance.

The pannell allegis, that na proces can be led aganis thame, for ony cryme
committit be thame, preceding the moneth of Maij Vj'. and fyve ; becaus his
Maieftie hes grantit thame ane Remiffioun, for all crymes committit be thame
before the faid moneth. Quhilk Remiffioun thay produceit ; and tuik inftrumentis
thairvpoun ; and this but^ preiudice of thair defence aganis ony vther cryme. —
AUeo-is the Aduocat, this Remiffioun can nocht Hitisfie for the Slauchter of vmq'^
Johnne Tuedie ; becaus it is gewin only to Alexander Jarden ; nixt, becaus it is
grantit vpoun ane fals caufe, viz. vpoun fatisfactioun of partie, quhilk is nocht ;
for the mother, or brother, and the fifteris of Johnne Tuedie ar nocht fatisfeit.

The Aduocat afkis inftrumentis, that the pannell vfis the Remiffioun for the

haill crymes contenit in the Dittay, preceding the dait of the Remiffioun.

It is allegeit, that the Remiffioun is null, be Act of Parliament, quhair the
pairtie is nocht fatisfeit ; and na cryme contenit in the Remiffioun is fatisfeit. —
1 Young sheep of a year old, or unshorn. * Without.

43&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 57

The Pannell anfiieris, that the Remiffioun ftandis ; and thay ar content to find
Cautioun to fatisfie the pairtie.

Allegis the Aduocat, the Remiflioun can nocht be extendit to Williame Campbell ; becaus it is jH'ovydit, that itt fould nocht extend to ony Slauchter, bot thais
quhilk ar committit fen the fourfcoir auchtene yeiris.' — The Aduocat afkis inllrumentis, that Mr Johnne RufTell grantis the Slauchter ; bot it wes committit
befoir the fourfcoir and auchtene yeiris. — It is allegeit, that the Slauchter of
Williame Campbell can nocht be putt to ane Alfyfe ; becaus thay offer to prove
that he levit tua yeiris eftir his hurting ; and that he fall offer to be verifeit to
the Affyfe, that he reparit to kirk and mercat, be the fpace of twa yeiris eftir
his hurting.

The quhilk day, Sir Alexander Jardene of Apilgirth, togidder with Thomas
Jarden of Birnok, and Vmphry Jarden becom fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, to fatisfie all parteis for the quhilkis the faidis Thomas and Vmi^hry vfit
Remiffioun, as Law will.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of that poynt of Dittay, anent
the Slauchter of Williame Campbell ; fuorne be Williame Campbell his lone.

Quhilkis feuerall crymes, aboue writtin, being nawayis comprehendit vnder
the faid Remiffioun, and haillilie^ denyit be the faid Thomas and A'^mphra to be of
verritie, the Juilice referrit to the knawlege of ane Affyfe of theperfones following.

ASSISA.'

James Tailjiefeir, in Strangcleucli,"* Williame M'"Call of Boighous, Mairtene Mure, in Boigend,
Williame Wallace of Wallacetoun, George Dunbar of Knokfchyn- Williame Chamlay, in Nethirtoun,
Johnne Broun, in Scliaw, noclie, Mungo Reid of Drumfork,

James Tail3iefeir, in Abingtoun, Anthone Couthird, 50unger, in Jolinne Robfoun, in Craigheid,
James Wallace of Boigheid, Nethii'toun, Johnne WiUbun, in Cruik,

Jo. INIakmorrane, elder of Glafpen, WUliame Craufurd, in Creoche, Johnne Thomeloun, in Bankond,
Ja^ Makmorrane, y"" of Glalpen, Dauid Durie of Hielare, Patrik Wilfoun, in Craig.

The Aduocat aflvis inftrumentis of the fwering of the Affyfe ; lykas, the perfewaris and defendaris, hinc indc, Proteftis aganis the Affyfe for Errour, gif thai
follow nocht thair knawlege in this matter.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of the laid Dauid Durie of Iliellar, chanceller, in prefens of the Juftice and Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counfall, thair
prefent, ffand, pronunceit and declairit, be pluralitie of voittis, the faid Thomas
Jardanc elder of Biniok, to l)e ffylet, culpa])le and convict of airt and pairt of
the drowning and puting to daith of the laid James Thomelbun, his man, committit be him in maner and at the tyme Ipecifeit in his Dittay : And the laid
Vmphra Jardaiie to be ffylet, culpable and convict of airt and pairt of the Slaucli-

' Since the year 1598. ' Wholly. » This Assise, n'uictcin in number, is one of the

largest which the Editor recollects to have observed as being sworn and oHiciating on any Criminal
Trial, in Scotland. ■* ' Strankla,' in another place.

VOL. III. H

5d CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

ter of vmq'^ Williame Campbell of Walwoid, committit fen the yeir of God I'^.V.
fourfcoir feviiiteiie yeiris ; in maner contenit in his Dittay : And ficlyk, ffand,
pronuncet and declairit the faidis Thomas and A'mphra, to be Clene, Innocen t
and Acquit of the remanent crymes contenit in the faid Dittay, nocht comprehendit vnder the faid ReniifTioun, viz. of the Steilling of the faid Andro Slowanes bronu hors, of the quhyte-gray hors pertening to Williame Rankene, and of
the fteilling of the faidis fourfcoir hogis ; in maner, and at the tynie contenit in
the faid Dittay : And ficlyk, of Commone Thift and Cowmone Reflet of Thift,
&c. fen the faid nynt day of May, P.Vj^ and ffyve yeiris.

Sentence. For the quhilkis tua Slauchteris, contenit in thair convictioun
abouc fpecifiet, committit be tliame, as faid is, the Juftice, be the mouth of Jolinne
Laufone, dempfter of Court, deceniit and ordanit the faidis Thomas and Vmphra
to be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburghe, and thair heidis to be ftrukin
frome thair bodeyis ; and thair haill guidis, geir, inficht and plenifling, to be
efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, as culpable and convict of the tua
Slauchteris aboue fpecifeit. Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

?^amtsutlun— astmemJjiation^

Sep. 14. — Andro Hendersone, fone of vmq"" Johnne Henderfoun,
merchand burges of Edinburghe.

Dilaitit,accufet andperfewit of the crymes contenit in the Dittay vnderwrittin.

FoRSAMEKiLL, as ye, haifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour and malice aganis Williame and
Adaine Montgomereis, tua honeft men, merchandis burgeffis of Edinburghe, for concuring, affifting,
iiianteiiing and fortifeing of Dauid Johnneiloun, ane of the Bailleis of the faid bur'^, in the executioun
of his office, in the taking and apprehending of yow at your motheris hous, about ten oulkis* fyne or
thairby, for tlie crewall and fchamefull hurting and wounding of ... . Harper, than your motheris
f'ervand, in tlie lieid, to the grit efFufioun of hir bluid ; ye, in revenge of the Law, haveing ferchet and
focht tlie faid Williame Montgoraerie dyuerfe tymes at the yet* of his duelling hous, be way of Haraeluckin for his (lauchter, leitlie, vpoun the fecund day of September inftant, being bodin in feir of weir/
with ane grit battoun and ane fuord, awaittit the faidis Williame and Adanie Montgomereis in Libbertones-wynd-heid, at the yet of the faid Williames duelling hous thair, as thay war, in fober and
quyet maner for tlie tyme, cumand frome thair mercheand-buthes, a littell afoir aucht houres at evin,
hame, towardis tlie faid Williames duelling lious, dreidand na evill, harme, iniurie, or perfute of ony
pcrfones, within fic ane reformet toun, hot to haif levit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis :
And thair ye, vnder nycht, fet vpone thame, and crewallie invaidit thame for tliair Slauchter, flrak at
the faid Adarae with the faid battoun, preifling to haif ftrukin him thairwith in the heid, and to haif
fellit him : Quhilk ye had noclit failjoit to half done, war nocht, be the Prouidence of (iod, he drew
his dager, for defence of his lyfe ; vpone the quhilk' ye brak the faid battoun. And finding yow difapoyntit of your firft intentioun, quhilk was to haif ftruckin the faid Adame in tl)e heid with ane battoun, ye thaireftir drew your fuord, and of new ft;tt vpone him, and crewallie invaidit him for his flauchter, hurt and woundit him thairwith in the left hand, to the eifulioun of his bluid in grit quantitie ; and

' Weeks. ' Gate. ' Arrayed or provided in warlike mjinner. * Upon which dagger.

43&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 59

hes deniembrit Lira of thre fingaris of his left hand ; committit be way of Haraefuckin and biigancie,
vnder filence and clud of nycht, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun, precogitat malice and foirthocht fellonie :
And ye ar aiit and pairt of the faidis cryraes, committit in maner foirfaid : In hie and manifeft contemptioun of om- foverane lordis aiithoiitie and lavvis, in evill exampill of vtheris to commit the lyk
barbarus, crewall and inciuill crymes and offences,, within ane refoimet citie, gif ye be nocht rigorouflie
pwneifl tliaiifore, be ane feueir and examplarie pwneilliment, conforrae to tlie lawis and practik of this
realme. To the taikin/ ye^ eftir the committing of the laid crewall fact;, fled vp the Hie-gail to the
Over-bow/ quhair ye was apprehendit with the drawin bludie fuord in your hand, and was committit
to waird, within the Tolbutli of Edinburgh, quhairin ye haif remanit, in the irnes, quhill now that ye ar
brocht to the bar, to be tryit and pwneifchet as faid is.
Persewaris, Adame Montgomerie, Williame and Alex'", his brothers, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun, &c.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Johnne Ruffell, Mr Oliver Colt, younger, Mr James Halyday.

My Lord Aduocat paffis fra that poynt of Dittay of Mutilatioun, pro loco et
tempore ; and infiftis vjione the Difinembring.

It is allegit, that the difmembring of ane finger, tua, or thre, audit not to be
put to the tryell of ane Aflyfe, quia non eji crimen ; et digitus non ejl memhrum,
Jed tantum purs memhri ; and for verificatioune thairof, allegit the lawis and
textis of Julius Clarus, and the Ciuill Law. — It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit,
in refpect of the Dittay and daylie practik of this judgement.

The Juftice ffindis proces ; and repellis the allegeance.

The pannell acceptis the Dittay ; and takis inftrumentis of the conclufioun of
the Dittay, beirand puneifchment conforme to the lawis of this realme. — It is allegit, that gif ony difmembring was done be the pannell, (nocht granting the famyn,) that the famyn was done in his awin defence ; in fa far as thair was tua
perfewaris of him, viz. Adame Montgomerie and his brother, the ane haifing ane
battoun, and the vther ane dager ; and thairfoir, the fact lybellit, done be the
pannell, was lauchfull. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the Dittay. — The pannell defyres the perfewer, prefent at the bar, to
geve his aithe, quhidder the pannell did the hurt to him in the pannellis defence ;
or gif the pannell perfewit him firft ; quhairupoun the Aduocat afkit (inftrumentis.)

Adame 3Iontgomerie, ju'efent, vpone his grit ayth, declairit, that Andro Henderfoun was the firft fetter vpone him, in his brotheris clofe, at his ganging hame
to liis hous ; quhair, with ane battoun, he invaidit the deponer, of purpois to
haif fellit him thairwiih ; quhilk the deponer foirfeing,^ drew his dager and kepit"
the ftraik of his battoun thairupoun : And thairupoun and thaireftir, Andro
Henderfoun fteppit bak and drew his fuord ; at quhilk tyme, the deponer tuik
vp Henderfones cloik, quhilk he cuift about his left airme and left hand, of purpoife to gaird himfelf thairwith : And that the faid Andro thaireftir, with his

• In proof or testimony. ^ Up the High Street to the Over or Upper Bow, now called the

West Bow. ' Perceiving, ybr<?5eem^. * Caught the blow; A'<y>/>/Mlie stroke.

60 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

liiord, gaif him aiie llraik vpoiie his left hand, and throw the cloik, tua ply/
cuttit the deponer, and ftrak fra him his thre fingeris.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Dittay be the jierfewar,
in jn-efens of the Alfyfe ; and proteftis for Wilfull Errour, gif thay acquit. —
Mr Johne RufTell producet ane tiket of fax perfones, as witneffis, quha can dedair to tlie Affyfe, that the pannell was perfewit be the tua brether, the tyme
contenit in the Dittay ; and that the hurt was gevin to Adame, be the panndl,
in his awin defence ; and thairupoune aflvit inftrumentis. — The Aduocat anluerit, that thair is na neceffitie to the AlR'fe to reffaue ony witneffis, becaus
thai ar witneffis thame felfis,^ and duellis within this burgh, and vnderftandis
that this fact was committit be the pannell, in maner contenit in the Dittay ;
and proteftis for Wilfull Errour, gif the Aftjde acquit.

^"erdict. The AlTyfe, he the mouth of Dauid Fergufliill, mercheand, Proveift of the burcht of Air, chanceller, all in ane voce, ffand, pronunceit and dedairit the laid Andro to be Giltie, culpable and convict of the difmembring of
the laid Adame Montgomerie of thre fingeris of his left hand ; committit at the
tyme contenit in the Dittay, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellony. — Efter publicatioun of the quhilk Convictioun, the Justice ordanit the
laid Andro to be tane bak agane be the Magiftratis of Edinburgh to his waird,
M ithin thair tolbuitli thairof ; thairin to remane in lure keiping, in the irnes, as ane
convict perfone, quhill he war forder advyfet anent his dome and pwneifchment.
(1610, April 1 8.) — The pannel was prefented at the bar, by ' Robert Bannatyne, ane of the Bailleis of Edinljurgh,' by virtue of an Act of the Privy
Council, dated at Edinburgh, April 12, 1610 ; in conlequence of his Majefty, ' in
his princelie wifdome,' having fignified to them his Will.

Sentence. For obedience of the c|uliilk act and ordinance, the Juftice, be
the mouthe of Johnne Laufoun, dempfter of Court, decernit and ordanit the faid
Andro Henderfoun to be Baneift our fouerane lordis haill dominionis, during his
lyftyme ; and nocht to returne agane within the famyn, vnder the pane of deid :
And thaircftir, ordanit the faid Andro to be tane bak agane to his waird, be the
I\Iagiftrattis of Edinburgh, to the tolbuitli of the faid burgh, thairin to remane
with the remanent wairdouris, quhill he be reddie to imbarque ; and that ordour
be tane for convoy and tranfpoirt of him to his fchip.

' Two folds tliick. 'L^X. plica. ^ This is a strong illustration of the anomalous office of an

Assisor or Juryman, in early times. From the peculiar mode in which he was chosen, from among
those of the pannel's peers, who were resident nearest the i'pot, and knew the common report of the
country, he was himself presumed to be a witness ; and, in many instances, de facto, was a witness of
the wliole circumstances of the case; — but it is obvious that this very circumstance must have frequently proved a real disqualification to the honest discharge of so important a duty. For the history
of the ancient modes of chonsin": Assises, 8cc. see the valuable Commentaries of Baron Hume, Burnet on the Criminal Law, Mudaurin's Trials, &c.

43 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 6l

I31r Alexander Colu'dl, Jnjlice-Depide.']

^\m\^\)Xtx of aie.tnut(ci* ilovtr ^pnuie,

[Sir Alexander Lindsay, Lord Spynie, whose life unhappily fell an untimely sacrifice to one
of those deadly feuds, which the demon of domestic strife then too frequently, indeed almost universally, stirred up in the breasts of our Scottish Nobility and Gentry, of all ages and ranks, urging them
to the commission of the most frightful excesses and crimes, and whose wrath and rancour, even the
nearest ties of relationship could not appease, — was the fourth son of David, ninth Earl of Crawford.
Having accompanied King James VI. to Denmark, in his matrimonial expedition, and enjoying his
Majesty's intimate personal friendship, the King, on his return to Scotland, in fulfilment of a promise
then made, erected the lordship of Spynie, Kinnedder, llaffart, and other lands in the shires of Elgin,
Banff, and Inverness, formerly pertaining to the See of Moray, into a free Barony, and conferred upon
him (then designed ' Vice Chalmerlane to oure fourane lord') the title of Baron of Spynie,' iNIay 6,
1590. This Letter is so extremely characteristic, that the Editor needs no apology for transferring it
from the original to this Collection,^
* San die,

' QuHiLL-' youre goode happe fumeis me with I'um better occafion to recompence youre honelt and
faithfull feruice, utterid be your diligence, and cairfull attendance upon me, fpeciallie at this tyme, lett
this aflure, in the inuiolabill worde of your awin Prince and maifter, that quhen God randeris me in
Skotlande, I fall irreuocablie, and with confent of Parliament,^ erect you the temporalitie of Murraye
in a temporall Lordlhipp, with all honouris thairto apparteining : and lett this ferue for cure of youre
prefent difeafe. From the Caftell of Croneburg, quhaire we ar drinking and dryuing our, in the aulde
maner. J. U.'

He also obtained another Charter, creating him a Peer of Parliament, Apr. 17, 1593.^ This distinguished Nobleman married Jean, eldest daughter of John, tenth Lord Glammis, she being also the
relict of Robert, Master of Morton, and of Arcliibald, Earl of Angus. It is probable that this marriage
took place on the suggestion, or through the influence, of the King, who thus notices the Countess in
one of his Letters ; — ' Mind Jean Lyon, for her auld tout will make you a new horn !'

In order to arrive at the facts relating to this feud, a hw quotations shall be made from contemporary sources, the only authentic and satisfactory mode of treating such a subject in a Work of this
description. We are informed by Birrel and by Sir James Balfour, that previous to the fatal skirmisli, when Lord Spynie was slain, there had been a similar rencontre, also on the streets of Edinburgh, on the 17th day of June, the fame year; which the authorities and the citizens had been wholly
unable to put down. That aftair is thus related, in the expressive language of the day.

* The 17 of Junij, (1605,) ane Combat or tul5ie foughten at the Salt-tron of Ed'', hetmx the Laird
of Ed'^le, lounrjer, and hes complices, and the -^oung Laird of Pitarrow, \Vf chart. The faucht laflit
frae 9 hours at night till 11 at night, twa hours! Thair wer fundrie hurt one both fydes, and ane
Guthrie flaine, w})ich was Pitarroics man ; ane verie prettie 30ung man. The 18 day they wer accufit befoir the Counfell, and wardit.'"^ — ' The 17 day of Junij, a combat betuix the Lairdcs of Ed-^ell
and Pittarroic, one tiie Ileiglie Streite of Edinbrughe I The fight lulled from 9 in tlie night till almoll
2 in the morning, befor they wer feparated ! In this fight diuers wer hurte ; and one only killed. They
wer fumond to compeir befor the Lordes of liis INIaiefteis Priuey Counlaill, and wer botlie of them
committed to priflbne.'^ Sir Thomas Hamilton, tluin Lord Advocate, preferves the following interesting notices in his Minutes of the proceedings of the Privy Council,^ wliiili tend to throw much

' Be(i. MiKj. Si;/. Lib. xxxvii, No. 41.3. " It has liceii piiblislicd licCne. See Dali/ell's Fnu/ments, A]ip. 83.

Wood's PccrcKje, II. 517. And -a fur-simile of the Letter has been given by Mr J. T. Gibson Craig, in his Contribution to the IJannatyne Club, l>einj|; ' Tapers relative to the Marriage ol' King .Tames the Sixth.' ' Until.
* Acta Pari III. 650. * Rnj^ M<hi. Siy. Lib. cxxxix, No. 110. nohcitsvii's Procccdim/s, p. \26. " Birrets Dianj. ■ Uu/futtrs Anmtlts, U. 7. » Lord lludiiujlons MSS. Adv. Library," A. l. 22.

62 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

Jiglit on the matter. ' Ei'TIR the Combat in Ed"" hctuix ooung Pittarro arn\ Mr Alex'' Linclfcq/,^
vpoune the xvij day of Junij, vpone the morne thairefter, Au/d Pittarro and his fone, and my lord
Chancellaris meflage, be his feivand, is fend to thame to keip Jjair houflis, and certane ))air bairnes
thairin ; and that thair not obeying and doing ])airof gif occafione of the fkaithe and flauchter that followed : Thaiifoir thay n'er commandit to enter in the Caltell of Ed'' ; and furthe pairof, Pittarro elder
and younger to the Blakness, and Edzell to Dunbartane. That fame day, or the nixt day thairefter,
vpoun the Laird of Edzellis Supplicatiouno, bearand, that he wes informed, that the Lordis, haveing refpect to the Slauchter of WUliam Guthrie, feiuitour to Pittarro, had commandit him to waird,
albeit he vnderftude ])e faid Guthrie to have reffaued na woundis, hot to have been fmored^ iu the
throng ; at his defyre, thay ft-nd for Dauid Pringall, ])at liad handlit him, and examined him vpone
his woundis, and quhidder thay war deidlie or not? And alfo directed Dauid Bailzic and twa vther chimrgiens to vefie the corps, and hand ]iair report; quhilk monie thocht ane ftrange and extraordinar forme.'

The occasion of this preliminary quarrel probably arose out of some family difference, which, it would
appear, the heads of the respective Houses could not prevent. Sir David Lindsay, Younger of
Edzell and of Glenesk, married Margaret ^^'isllart, who, likely, was sister of young Pittarrow.

The cause of the second quarrel, which unfortunately resulted in the death of Lord Spynie, can be
more satisfactorily accounted for. ' David Likdesay, younger of Edyel, feeking to revenge the flaughter of his Uncle, Mr Walter Lindefay, whom David, Majter of Crauford, had killed, as he lay in wait
of the faid Majter, (who was then, by the deceafe of his father, fucceeded in the Earldom,) through a
pitiful raiftake, did invade Alexander Lord Spynie, and killed him inflead of the other ! The Nobleman's death was much regrated, for the many good parts he had, and the liopes his friends conceived,
that he Ihould have railed again that noble and ancient Houje of Cratvford to the former fplendor and
dignity ; all which periihed with him. He that was in place, and efcaped the peril, being a bafe
unworthy prodigal, and the undoer of all, that, by the virtue of his anceftors, had been long kept together.'^— ' The 5 day of July, in rewendge of the Slachter of Sir Walter Lindfay, the young Laird
of Egell fettis for the Maijler of Cratvfnrd in the hie toune of Edinbrughe ; the Lord of Spynnie being
with the Maifter, quha was trauelland betuix thame, to liaue had thame agreitt, the Maijler being his
broder-fone, and Eagill his filler-fone ; and being bayth Lindfayis, had grit reflbne to niowe (him) to
reweill to hauo them at concord ;"* hot this perfuitt being betuix nyne and ten houris at nycht, thay culd
nocht knaw ane be ane wther ; Egell being the number of audit men, in geir ; and thair being nane with
the Maijler bot nvj Lord of Spynnie and the Lairdof Drumlaynerig,^ quha being all hurt with fchottis
and ftraikis, the MaiJier hurt and my Lord of Spynnie with niony llraikis, thay had gottin ane DrU'
meldry fchott throw the airrae ; Eagell paffis his wayis in faiftye, and his folkis with him. The Lord
of Spynnie depairtit off the faid hurttis, the 16 day of Julij ; bot the Maijler recowerit his healthe, bot
■with grit lofs of his blude.'^

This unhappy Feud was kept alive for many years, and was productive of mutual misery to every
member of these families. The diet was not finally deserted against the Eai'l (formerly the Master)
of Crawfurd, until Jun. 9, 1613.*'

Before closing this Notice, it is proper to state, that Sir David Lindsay, elder, was called Lord
Edzell, from the circumstance of his being one of the Ordinary Lords of Session, having succeeded
his brother, Sir John Lindsay of Balcarras, the Parson of Menmure (Lord Menmure), on the appoint-

' Tills Notice is precoded, in Lord IludiiujUm'x JSIbmtes, by the fdllowinj,' remark. ' Edzell ciiid Pittarro committed to waird ; becaus thair neglecting to conteiine thair sones in thair houses (as thay war commandit be my Lord
C/uinccUare) was the occasion of tumult and slauchter. At desyre oi my L^ord of Edz(dl, the deid corpes of William
Guthrie wes uisited be the Builzeis of Edinhuft and the Chyrurgians, that saw him examined, gif his woundis wer
mortall, and gif he died of thame?' * Smothered ; sulfocated. ' Spotswood's Jlist. p. 50-k * Had

great reason to move him to rule (or exercise lus authority) to reconcile them. ' Sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, ancestor of the Marquis of Queensberry, a powerful baron, who was most active in sMj)pressing distiu'bance*
on the Borders. ° Anon. Hist. Scot. MS. Adv. Library, A. -l. 3j. ' See this CoUuctiou under that date.

43 & 7 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 63

ment of that distinguished person to the office of Secretary of State, Feb. 23, 1597.' He was the
eldest son and heir of David, eighth Earl of Crawford ; to which title Lord Edzell would have succeeded, had not his father generously conveyed hack the title to David ninth Earl of Crawford, the
grandson of David the seventh Earl, who liad disinherited his sons for their ' unnatural barbarity' to
him.- In order to cement that transaction, and to preserve tlie most intimate terms with the House
of Crawford, Sir David married Lady Helen Lindsay, the daughter of the person who had tlius obtained the Earldom on his father's voluntary resignation, viz. David ninth Earl of Crawford, wlio had
been a steady adherent to the interests of Mary Queen of Scots ; and who married Margaret, daughter of Cardinal Beaton, in April 1346, However piously this respectable man was inclined to preserve the most friendly terms, the deadliest passions seem to have rankled in the bosoms of his son,
the Young Laird, and of David, Master of Crawford, the only son of David the tenth Earl,' who had
succeeded his father previous to Dec. 11, 1581,^ and died, Nov. 22, 1G07. At the date of this Trial,
therefore, the Earl of Crawford, alluded to in these proceedings, and in the Letters, he, is the
eleventh Earl, who, at the time of the skirmish on the streets of Edinburgh, was Master of Crawford.
« The Young Laird of Edzell' was Sir David Lindsay, younger of Edzell, and of Glenesk, and as
has already been remarked, married Margaret Wishart, one of the family of Pittarrow. His father
having been interdicted from giving him harbour, in any of his houses, ' he built for himself a small
Castle called AuchmuU, in the parish of Edzell, and another, called Innermusk, in Lochlie, as lurking
holes, while he was forced to skulk several years, for the murder of Lord Spynie.'^

The Appendix of Original Papers which follows, contains all the additional information on the subject of this deadly Feud, which the Editor can at present obtain.]

Sep. 19. — Sir Dauid Lyndsay of Edzell, kny*, (Lord Edzell,) ane

of the Senatouris of our foiierane lordis College of Juftice,

and Mr Alexander Lyndfay of Canterland, his fone.

Dilaitit for the Slauchter of vmq'^ Alexander Lord Spynie.''

Compeirit and prodiicet ane Act of the Secreit Counfall, extract furth of the

huikis thairof, be James Prymrois, ordiner clerk, of the dait the tent of Augufl

laftbypaft, beirand, that this fix of September inftant was appointit to Dauid

Erie of Craufurd, of his avvin confent, for him felf, and takand the burding on

him for the remanent perfones contenit in the Act, to perfew the faid Sir Dauid

and his faid fone, for the forefaid allegit Slauchtir. Accoirding to the quhilk

Act, and tennour thairof, the faid Sir Dauid and Mr Alexander his fone offeris

thame reddie to abydc tryell for the Utid allegit Slauchter, quhairof thai ar altogidder innocent. And protcttis, becaus na partie comi)eiris to perfew, that thai

never be hard heireftir to infill in the perfute for the faid allegit Slauchter ; and

thairupoune ativit inftrumentis.

' Wood's Peerage, I. 165; but accord iiii; to Lord ITailcs" Catalogue, Fell. 23. 1598. lie was afterwards one of
tlie Commissioners of Treasury and lOxelu-quer, called from their number (he Ocfaviaiis, .Ian. .J, I.j!*.'); and was
in I\Iar. 159.5 appointed I>ord Privy Seal; and, likewise, was Cliancellor of the University of St Andrews, &c.
- Pcrr(i(je, ibid, and 1. 379. ^ Who married I.ady (irizel Stewart, eldest daughter of .John foiirllt Karl of

Atholl. * Uoof/'.v Peerage, I. 380. livy. May. ,S'(V/. xxxv. 4{)7-7(j9, itc. ^ Shilisticul Account cj

ScolUmd, X. 102, whicli asserts that ' tuk Casti.k or IOdzki.i.' is one of tlie most magnificent ruins any where to be
met with. It consists of two stately Towers, evidently in different styles, and luiilt at dilferent jieriods. Tliese are
connected by an extensive wall ; and large wings went backwards from the Towers. Tradition says that the square
Tower, the most ancient, was built and possessed by the Family of Stirliiuj, from whom it descended to Lindsay of
Glenesk. « See Jul. 8, 1G07, and Jun. 2 and 9, 1613. It ajipears that he died of his wounds, July 16, 1()1.5.

See the foregoing Notice prefixed to this Case.

64 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I609.

Compeirit Gilbert Rynd, feruitoiir for the tyme to vrnq*^ Alexander Lord
Spynie, and in name and behalf of the Lord Sj^yneis bairnes, proteftis, that
quhatlunieuir be done in this Judgement and Jiiftice Court this day, preiudge
nocht the perfute to be movet at the inllance of the faid vmq'^ Lord of Spyneis
bairnis, for thair fatheris Slauchter : And thairupoun alkit inltrumentis.

Appendix of Documents illustrative of the preceding Case.

I. Letter, tJte Laird of Edzell to the King.^
Maist sacred Souerane,

It may pleife 5 our Ma'"' albeit I Iiawe ftayit hier in Ed'" ane yeir and three moonthifs bygane, erawing ewer to be tryit of the onhappie Slachter of my wmq^' Lord of Spynie, quhairof I protelt befoir God find jour M'^' I am maiil innocent, my Lord of Crmvfwrd'^ will nather call me thairfoir, nor
llaye, baithe privative and pwbliklyo, yea in face of yo"" 31''*^'^ ho" ^ Priwye Counfell, to caluminat me :
Quhairfoir, feing my modefte moowife'* nocht my Lord of Crawfivrd T\^i\ye to conlider my innocencye, I maift liuimlye pray your M' " to direct yo'" Thefaurar and Advocatt to call and pwt me to
ane honed and onfulpect Triall ; and being tryit innocent, that I maye hawe furetye to liewe in peace,
to ferwe y"" M"=. I hawe fwfferit manye injureife, fpecialye fyiwe of my fervitomis fchott with pi(-
toillis and hwrt, yithes nocht complenit ; — my felf alfo, during the fpace foirfaid, nocht wairdit onlye,
bot banilliit from my verteu ; and yit my Lord of Crawford his inlblence no'^ moowit nor flayit from
feiking of my wraik. Praying yo*' M'*^" to confuler and to caufe ordour be pwt to the premiffis, I
pray God to grant y'" M''^ ane lang and profperus reigne, and to bliss yo"^ Royell progenie. Sa killing
huimlye y"" liandis, I refl ewer,

Ed", 1608. 16. Aug. Yo*" Sacred M**^'** maift humill and obedient fubiect and fervitour,

To His MAIST sacred M^^, Edzell.

II. Extract//wh Letter, the Privy Council of Scotland ' To the King his most sacred ami

excellent Jla'''^, Mar. 28, 1609,' ^

Thair wes a Petitioun prefentit vnto ws, in name of the Laird of Edyell, complaining that
the Erll of Craufurde, vnder the pretext and cullour of a Commiffioun granted be your Maieftie
to fome of his domeftiquis and feruandis, for perfute of the Criminallis for the Lord of Spyneis
slaughter, intended to perfew and aftedge his House of Edyell, wlierein his mouablis and euidentis^ ar, and his ludgeing in this burgh whair he prelentlie duellis ; and fua, vnder the pretenfe of
Law, and of your Maiefteis auctoritie, to execute his privat revenge aganis him ; and thairfoir, he craved, that this Comraiffioun, and the executioun thairof, aganis him and his Houflis, myght be lufpendit and difchargeit. We could not judge vpoun the tennour and natour of this Commiflioun, becaus
it wes never Ihawne nor prefentit in Counfaill, and, as we ar informed, it is nouther regiftrat nor
fignett; and we wold not prefome nor tak vpoun ws to difcharge your Maiefteis Commiffiounj Avithout
your heynes awne allowance ; alvvayes," becaus Edyell hes found cautioun not to rellet thir hornaris
in his faidis HoulTis, vnder the pane of ten thoufand merkis, we half fufpendit the executioun of the
faid Commiflioun againis the faidis tua HoufTis, allanarlie,'* vntill the tent day of Aprile nixttocome,
that in the meantyme we may know your Maiefteis will and pleafour thairanent, and in all vtheris
Coramiflionis of the lyk nature, not prefentit nor Ihowne in Counfaill.

' Denmylne MSS. Adv. Library. * David eleventh Earl of Crawford, who, at the date of the rencontre

at which Lord Spynie was killed, was the Master of Cruiiford. ^ Honourable. * Moves. * Denmylne

MSS. Adv. Library. The Letter, wliich is very long, craves instructions on a great variety of subjects. ' Titledeeds of his property. ' Nevertheless. * Only.

43 & 7 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 65

III. Letter, the Laird of Edzell to the King.^
Maist Sacred Soverane,

It may pleife your Maiefte, Being advertefit that the Erlle of Crawfwrd hes fent exprefs to
your liienes of that certane Lettres as written be me to my fone, and recoverit be him within the
Howfe of AuchinwH, quliair my fone was wont to dwell ; quhilkis informis, it was my will and command to llaye the wmq" Lard of Spynie, and fa, plotter and contriver of that vnhappye and wyilld
flauchter ; thinkand thairbye to awert your Maiefles woontit fawor from me, and to difgrace me at the
liands of all honeft men ; I hawe chofine and prefumit to tak the hardiment huimblye to pray your
hienes nocht to giwe credit to anye copye of anye Lettre cwming from the handis of my enemyifs,
wnto the tyme the principal! be tryit ^ to be wrettin, fubfcriwit, or directit be my felf ; for I proteft,
in prefence (of) God, I newer had anye fick innaturall and ongodlie interpryife in my hart, mekle
lefs directit the doing thairof. And to mak this mair manifefl to all the world, I have inventit ' Improbatioune, that all liwing may know liowe injufllye I am vfit be the Erlle of Craicforde, and howe
he quha was the beginner of all thir trowblifs, be the Murder of my wmq" brother Sir Walter '
onder traift, wald nowe eik ^ craft to his cruelteis ; and in place of repentance, be fals calumnyes, wald
alfo bereawe me of my fame and lyiff, albeit I hawe ewer beine, and yit am maill willing to abyed all
ordinar tryell of Lawe. Farther, I moft alfo regrait that the faid Erlle, being laitlye at Cowrt, hes
privelye obtinit ane Commiffione wnto ane numer of hes rioterifs and defenderis, for ferching of my
fone; and onder colour thairof, hes intentit nocht onlye to furpryife my howfe of Edzell, quhair my
haill ewidentis, and of vther freindis yit remanis, hot alfo to berawe me of my lyift" within my awin
Iwdging in Ed"". And to the effect foirfaid, wearifs daylye piftollettis and hagbwttis, prohibitit be your
Maiefteis Actis, alledging ewer they ar feiking Rebellis. For remeid quhairof, and my awin fecuritie,
in refpect of the reafonis foirfaidis, fpecialye, becaufe your Maieflies honourabill Priwye Counfell hes
alreadye grantit ane verie ample Commiffioun, excepting onlye my Howfe of Edzell, within the quhilk
I hawe fwnd Caiitione nocht to recept '^ my fone, nor anye of theife Rebellis, onder the paine of ten
thowfand merkis, toties quoties, I will maift huimlye praye your Maieflie to direct ane Warrant to
your hienefs Priwye Counfell of this countrie, to fufpend the lafl priwatlye obtinit CommifTione, as
your INIaiellie will hawe me free of that fchaddowe,'' be the quhilk my ondeferwit enemye crawis *"
my lyiff and land ; for vtherwayis, the Counfell, for the reverence they carye to that CommifTione
feygned be your hienefs, will nocht mell ^ thairwitb. Hoping for your Maiefleis woontit protectione,
nowe, fa mekle the rather that I am fo oukyndlye, onnaturalye, and without deferwing, trwblit be
that Howfe, ^^ of the quhilk ewer of aid, nocht onknowin to your Maieflie, in thair trowblifs, I hawe
fa Weill meritit vtherwayis. Yf I find nocht fecurite bier, I wilbe forcit, altho' be fea, in refpect of
my aige and inhabilitye, vpon XTiy kneife to beg the faming " at your hiechnefs felf. Thws, mail! humblye kiffing your hienefs handis, and praying the Eternall lang to preferwe your Maiellie and Royell
progenie, I reft ewer,

Your Sacred Maiefleis maift humble and obedient fubiect and ferviteui-,

Ed", 1G09. Penult. Mart". Edzell.

[The following Trial, in addition to the preceding Case of the feuds of the Lindsays, affords another,
among tlie many melancholy instances, of the < deadly feuds' which unhappily existed in Scotland at

' Denmyhie MSS. Adv. Library. « .Tudicially proved. ^ Should be iw^r/i^fV , raised. « Sir

Walter Lindsay of Balgavies, who was murdered betwixt Brecliiu and tlie Tlacc of Kd/.ell, Oct. 25, 16')5. See
Jun. 2 and 9, IG13, &C-. ' Add ; join. "^ Kesett. ' Pretence; mockery, * Craves.

* Meddle ; interfere. Fr. melcr, '" Wi, the House of Crawford. " Same.

VOL. in. I

66 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A,D. 1609.

tliis period. The arrogant Captaix Janies Stewart of Bothwell-ynuir, second son of Andrew Lord
Ochiltree, well known as tlie Eakl of Arran, and vvlio had been successively Governor of the
Castles of Edinburgh and Stirling, Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Chancellor of Scotland, was, in the
year 1596, slain, in revenge for his rigorous procedure against his uncle, at Symontoun, near Douglas,
in Lanarkshire, by Sir James Douglas of Parkhead, nephew of the Regent 3Iorton. Archbishop Spotswood thus notices these remarkable events.

' A little before thefe ftirs with tlie Church, Captain James Stewart (who had been fometirae
Chancellor, and carried the title of the Earl of Ar rail) was killed by James Douglas of Tortherald.
This man, after he was put from Court, had lived obfcure, in the North parts ; and was entertained by
the Lady Salton, his li(ler-in-law. Being in hope to come again by the office of Chancellary, which
was yet void, by the death of Lord Thirlejfan, he canae South, and had a long conference with the
King, which did greatly encourage him ; but till matters might be better prepared, he took purpofe to
vifit his friends in Kyle. Taking his journey by Symington, nigh unto Douglas, he was advifed by
his friends in thofe parts to look to himfelf, and not ride fo openly, becaufe of Tortherald, that lived
not far oft", whofe uncle he had followed (as he fpake) to the death. His reply (as he was a man proud
and dirdainfiill) " that he would not leave his way for him, nor for all the name of Douglas 1" being
overheard by a fellow, and reported to Tortherald, did fo inflame him, the old ulcer remaining uncured
— as he avouclied, " to have his life, at all hazards!" So, getting intelligence that he had taken
horfe, he made after him, with three of his fervants ; and overtaking him in a valley called Catjlack,
after he had flricken him from his horfe, did kill him without refillance. It is faid, that when Captain James faw the horfemen following, he afked, " How they called the piece of ground on which
they were?" And when he heard the name of it, he commanded the company to ride more quickly —
as having gotten a refponfe to beware of fuch a part I He was a man full of violence ; and, when he
was in place of rule, executed it with much cruelty — which was now paid home in the end I' ^ Mr
Wood^ relates, that * his head was cut off, and carried on the point of a lance, in a kind of triumph,
through the country ; and his body was exposed to dogs and swine before it was buried ! ' In accordance with the usufil feelings of those times, dictated by a blind and barbarous revenge, (which was,
in those days, considered merely as indicating proper spirit in a man of gentle blood,) Sir James was,
in his turn, murdered on the streets of Edinburgh !

Two contemporary writers thus briefly state that fact to have occurred, simply, as a matter of course :
— ' The fewint of Julij^ James Douglas of Torthoruall flayne be WiUiame Stewartt, fone of Sir Williame Stewartt, in rewendge of Captane James flauchter.'^ — ' The l-i day of Julij, this yeire, James
Douglas of Torlhoricall was killed, one the Heighe ftreeit of Edinbrughe, betuix 6 and 7 lioures in
the morninge, by William Steuart, fone to Sir William Steuarte ; qulio efcaped.'^ — ' The 18 day of
this fame mounth (May, 1613,) the Lord Ochiltrie folemlie, by his grate othe, purged himfelue (in
prefiMice of the Lordis of his Ma'"'' Priuey Counfaill,) in being airte or pairt, oreaney wayes accefforey
to the Murthour of the Lord Torthorell's father ; and fj thay war reconceilled by the Lordes, hartily
chapen handes, and mutually embracing one ane another.'^

A very interesting Letter from the Privy Council to the King, taken from the Hadington MSS.,
General Register House, is appended. It gives the most authentic account of the matter which can
now be procured. J

Sep. 20. — AxDRO Lord Stewaut of Vchiltrie, and Andro Stewart, his

fervand.

Dilaitit of the Slauchter of vmq'* James Lord Torthorell. Compeirit and

producet ane Act of Secreit Coiinfall, extractit fiirth of the buikis thairof, vnder

1 Spotswood's Church Hist., 433. ^ wood's Peerage, I. 123. ^ ^^^^j. ffigf^ Scot. MS.,

Adv. Library. 28. " Balf An?i., II. ' Ibid. 42.

43&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 67

the figne and fubfcriptioun of James Piymrois, Clerk of Counfall, of the dait the
tent day of Auguft lafll)ypaft ; beirand, that Williame Lord Douglas and James
Lord Torthorrell compeirit jierfonallie befoir the laidis Lordis, and promeill in
thair prefens, that betuix and the tuentie day of September than nixtocuni,
quliilk is this day, thay fould ather perfew the faid Andro, criminallie, befoir his
Maiefteis Juflice and his deputis, in the Tolbuthe of Ed', ffor airt, pairt, red and
counfall of the Slauchter of vmq'^ James Lord Torthorrell, or ellis, that thai
fould reconceill thame felffis with the laid Lord ^\•hiltrie, and be agreit with
him. — And in relpect, that thai tuik betuix and this day to perfew liim, quhilk
is the laft day contenit in the Act ; thairfoir, the faid Lord ^^chiltrie, for tiyell
of his innocencie of the faid allegit cryme, now compeiris, and offeris him reddie
to abyde the tryell of the law, for airt, pairt, red and counfall of the faid Slauchter ; quhairof he is altogidder Innocent, difaffenting to all maner of continuatioun ; protefting, that the faid Williame Lord Douglas and James Lord Torthorrell, nor na vtheris perfones be hard to perfew him for the faid allegit cryme,
in ony tyme cuming ; in refpect that thai nor nane of thame compeirit to infifl
in this perfute.

And lykwayis, the faid Lord Vchiltrie afkit inftrumentis, of the entrie and
productioun to the Juflice of Anch'o Stewart, his fervand, to abyde quhatfumeuir tryell can be laid to his charge, for the faid allegit Slauchter. Lykas, the
faid Andro Stewart, for liimfelf, being perfonallie prefent, offerit himfelf to the
tryell of the law, for the Slauchter aboue fpecifeit ; quhairof he declairit him
felf to be maift Innocent ; difaiienting to all continuatioune ; and thairupone
afkit inftrumentis.

Letter, the Privy Coimcil to the King, anent the Slauchter of the Lord

TorthorualU

Most sacreid soufchAVNE,
TiiAiR lies ane wnliapjjie accident fallin out heir, this hiorning, betuix fex and fevin of the clok,
hy tlie (lauchter of James Doixjlas of Torthorwell, committit be W" Stewart, fone to wmq" S'' IT"
Sleu'art, quho^ althocJit the principal! pairtie liad acgreied with tlie faid wmq^' James, and rcllaveit
AlJ'ytliment and fatisfactioune to his awin contentment, the faid W" niidvnew this acgrenient, pall to
the liorne for not geving aliurance, and awaittit the occaiioun of tliis morning ; quha, finding the faid
James fimplie accumpaneid vpon tlie Hie Slreit, a httill beneth Croce, he dil])aratlie lett upone \\\m,
and, with ane ftraick, flew him ; and the gaitt'' being quyett, he efcheapid. We Iiave caulfit chairge
the partie compeire and anfuer, and fall i)r<)fcqnut and follow out all wtlier ordinarie courfe of law and
juflice quhilk is vfuall and accudunied in the lyU caiiiis. And, in cais of his not conii)eirance, liiU
caus denunce him, and fairvpone fall direct Commifliounes to the ordinarie Magiftratis of the country
for the perfute of him, with Proclamatiounes, conteining a promos of rewaird to ony pcrfounes (pdio
will tak him. Quhairof we half thocht meitt to mak 5our ficred .Ma''"' accjuented, and in all revcratice
fall conformc our felffis to quhatfumevir forder directioune it fall pleis 3our hienes to give in tlii^ niatcr.

' Trom the Earl of Hadington's MS S., General Register House. • Street.

68 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

And faa, praying God to grant wnto jour facreid Ma. a long, Iiappie, and profperous regnne and
eternall felicitie, we roll jour Ma, nioill huiubill and obedient fubjectis and fervitouris,

A. Canceli.s. Dl'mbar. Crafurd. Lotheane. Lovat. Blantyre. Balmerinoch.
IIaliroodhous. Burly. R. Cokburne. S. J. Skrymger of Dudop. S. T. IIamiltoun.

[Date not preserved ; but Jul. 7 (or 14) 1608.]

CJiltr-iHuititr*

Nov. 9. — Beatrix Weir, fpous to Jolinne Ferrie, buikbinder.
Dilaititofairtaiidpairtofthedi(lructioiiiiofauiiifaiitbairne,procreatinAdiilterie.
Compeirit James Hainmiltoiin, feruitour to iny lord Aduocat, and producet
ane Warrand of the Secreit Counfall ; qiihairof the teniiour followis.

Justice, Jullicc Clerk and jour deputtis. Forfamekill as the nynt day of November inltant is
appointit to Beatrix. Weir, fpous to Jobnne Ferrie, bulk-binder, and Beille Pook, dochter to Williame
Pollok, for ])air compeirance befoir 30W, to vnderly the lawis for the crcwall, barbarus and detellable
Murthour of the faid Beatrix bairne, procreat be liir in Adulterie: And feing the faid Beatrix conftantlie abydis be hir denyell of that odious and vyld fact, thinking ])airby to efchew pwneifchnnent,
althocht the faid Beffie Pollok hes confeflit ]>e fact and Murthour to half bene committit be fame two,
and conflantlie ftandis be hir Confeflioun. — It is our Will pairfoir, and We command 30W, to continew
the faid dyet for a fyftene dayis, to ]>e effect, in this meayne tyrae, the tua wemen may be confrontit,
and fuche ordinarie meanis as may difcouer and bring to licht tlie certane treuth of that matter : And
that 50W gif ordour and directioun for committing thame bothe to llrait waird, within the Tolbuth of
Ed"", thair to remane quhill the nixt dyet to be appointit for ])air tryell : ftbr doing quhairof, thir prefentisfall be jour Wairand. Att Ed'", the fevint of November, 1609.

Jo. Prestoun, S"*. R. Cokburne. L. Craig, CP Reg".

Conforme to the qiihilk Warrand, the Juftice committit the faid Beatrix ^Veir
to Waird, &c.^

asattcjcraft— SitJmiitistenitci: (ifncjantetr 2D vinfe*

Nov. 9. — James Mure in Mynniehagen.^
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of Bewitching of Margaret Wicht in Dalmellingtoun,
and taking fra hir of hir Wittis, be miniflrating to hir of ane Inchantit drink.*

Persewar, Margaret Wicht. Prelocutour for the pannell, Jofeph Myller, Aduocat.

The pannell takis inflrumentis of his entrie, and ofTeris him felf to the tryell of
the Law, diffaflenting fra all continuatioun; and proteflis for releif of his cantioun.

The Justice, in refpect thair is na fufficient number of Aflyfe compeirand this
day,^ continewis this dyet to the 3 day of the (Juftice) air (of the iliire of Air),
or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the law for the faid cryme, vnder
the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament ; quha fand Sir Johnne "Wallace
of Carnell, kny*, cautioner for his entrie, to the effect foirlaid.

1 No entry appears to show tlie result of this matter. ^ A depender of the Mures of Auchinr/m«eand Minihagan. See their Trial for Murder, Jul. 17, 1611, he. ^ All the Assisers

al)sent, eighteen in number ; ' ilk ane of thame vulawit in the pane of ane liundreth merkis.'

43 & 7 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 69

(1610, Feb. 7.) — For the relief of his cautioneris, and tryell of his awin
innocencie of the faidis alegit crymes/ he now compeiris,and maiftwillinglie offeris
him felf to the tryell of the law for the faniyn, difalTenting fra all continuatioun.
And in refpect that the faid Margaret nor na vtheris compeiris this day to inlUt
iu his perfute, for the faidis allegit crymes, and that this is the fecund dyet keipit
be him, for abyding tryell thairof, haifing cum threfcoir myles, or thairby, to
that effect ; and that the famyn perfute is bot malicioullie inventit aganis him,
be the faid Margaret, for liir awin previe advantage, be raifmg of Letteris aganis
him ; and the perfones fummond be hir vpone his Aflyfe, of quhome fcho hes
reflauit grit fowmes of money in compofitioun, to abyde at hame : Proteftis, in
refpect of the premiffes, for (Sir) Johnne Wallace of Carnall his releif of his cautionerie, and that he be nocht callit, trubellit, or perfewit, at the inftance of the
faid Margaret, or ony vther pairtie, for the allegeit crymes aboue fpecifeit ; nather yit that my lord Juftice fuffer Letteris to be direct aganis him to that effect,
in ony tyme cuming : Quhilk proteftation the Juflice admittit, &c.

[^Sir Williame Ha'irt, Juflice- Depute.']

I^iu ting autr 3iaountJin(j — ^i)ootiitci: of jiistoltts*

Nov. 17. — Alexander Fuenche, brother to Johnne Frenche, Tutour
of Thorny dikis.^

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of tlie Hurting and Wounding, with fchottis of piftolettis, of George Home of Baffinden and Andro Home, his brother, as in the
following DiTTAY.

FoRSAMEKiLL as it is expreflie provydit, ftatute, and ordanit, be the Actis of
Parliament, that na manner of perfone nor perfones tak vpone hand to beir, weir,
or fchute with hagbuttis or piltolettis, or have the famyn in tliair cumpanies,
ojipinlie, outwith houfTis, vnder the pane of cutting of thair riclit hand ; as the
faidis Actis of Parliament at lenth beiris : And trew it is, that the faid Alexander French, accumpaneit with Johnne French, Tutour of Thorn}'d}'kis, his
brother, and vtheris thair complices, nocht only lies borne and worne pillolettis
vpone thair perfones and in thair cumpaneis, oppinlie and avowedlie, within
dyuerfe jjairtis of the boundis of the fcherefdome of Beruik, and bail3erie of
Lauderdaill, thir dyuerfe yeiris bygane, daylie and continuallie, as thair ordiner
wappones ; bot alfo, the faid Alexander and Johnne, his brother, being furclie
informet, that the faid Andro Home was to cum furtli of the faid Place of Bai-

' Having been summoned to appear before tlie Justice this day. " The j)ursn('rs passed fnuii

the pursuit of ' Patrik Cranflouu of Corlhics, Robert Ker of tlie Schaw, I'atrik Tait, and Williame
Crandoun, his tua fervandis, Johnne Frenclie, callit the Bajiard, lone naturali to Robert iTenche of
Thornydykis ; and Thomas Erikyn.'

70 . CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

fuulen to Reidpetli, for doing of certane his necelTar effairis and buffines ; thay,
vpoiie the xxv day of September laflbypaft, being bodin in feir of weir, with
fecrettis, plait-flevis, lances, hagbuttis and piftolettis, lay at await in the faid
Andro his hie way, befyde Fawnes-furd, and thair fet vpone him, and crewallie
invaidit him for his Slanchter, fcliot and dilafdiet^ thair hagbutis and piftolettis
at him, hnrt his horfe, and chaiiit him felf to the Place of Carolefyde ; contravening thairby the tennour of the faid Actis of Parliament. Be occafioun of the
quhilk perfute, thay being raifit in the cuntrie, and the bruit pafTand, that the
faid Andro was flane and tane in to Carrolefyde, and the famyn haifing cum to
the faid George knawlege, he, to try the certantie thairof, lap on vpone horfebak, and cam ryding to the Place of Carolefyde, in fober maner, him felf allane,
lipning for na harme, iniurie or perfute to half bene done to him, — the faid Alexander French, accumpaneit with his faid brother, and vtheris thair complices,
nochtwithftanding of the former iniurie done as faid is, being bodin in feir of weir,
with hagbuttis, piftolettis and vtheris wappones, invafiue, convenit thame felffis
at the Chapel-wallis befyde Corft)ie and dykis" thairof, quhair thai lay darnit^
in fecreit maner, awaiting, gif ony wald cum and revenge the former deid ; and
thair, at the Chapell-dykis, in the faid George cuming to the faid Place of Carolefyde, vmbiefet his hie-way, and maift crewallie invaidit him for his Slauchter, fchot and difcharget thair piftolettis and hagbuttis at him, quhairwith thay
fcliot fewin bullettis in his left thie, hurt and woundit him thair with, to the
effufioun of his bluid in grit quantitie : And the faid Alexander is airt and pairt
of the faidis crymes ; and hes thairthrow incurrit the panes and punifchment
prefcryuit be the faid Act of Parliament.

Peusewaius, George Home of Baffindene, Alexander Home, his brother; Sir Thomas Hammiltoun.
Prelocutour for the pannell, Mr Williame Oliphant.

It is allegit aganis the firft article of the Dittay, anent the generalitie of the
beiring and weiring of piftolettis, that the famyn is nocht relevant, nocht condifcending the fpeciall tyme and place, quhair and quhan the famyn war borne
or worne. The Aduocat declairis he perfewis the pannell for beiring and fchuiting of hagbuttis and piftolettis, the tyme lybellit, outwith the boundis of his
duelling houffis, cloiffis and yairdis. Andro Home, ane of the perfewaris, declairis, that in his perfute be the Tutour of Thornydykis, Alexander his brother
was in comjiany with him, with ane lance ; the Tutour haifing piftolettis, and
fchuitting at him thairwith.

It is allegit be Alexander French, tliat this Dittay can nocht be put to the
knawlege of ane Aftyfe ; under proteftatioun, that he nawayis grantis the Dittay, becaus the famyn was done within the Place of Corft)ie, and yairdis thair1 DeJlafcheTy Old Fr. to discharge, to let off. - Walls, stone fences. ^ Hidden, concealed.

43&rJAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 71

of. — It is anfuerit be my lord Advocate, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the
lummoiidis and place thairin defignit, viz. outwith the Place of Corfljie ; nather
yit was the Place of Corfljie the faid Alexander Frenches duelling place.

It is allegit for the laid Alexander, vnder proteftatioun foirfaid, that the faid
Alexander, the tynie lybellit, and the fpace of the moneth befoir, duelt and maid
his refidence within Corfbie ; lyk as, the perfewar, George Home, alTiftit witli
Ibme perlones, bodin in feir of weir, Math hagbiitis and piftolettis, i)erfe\vit and
invaidit the faid Alexander, and fchot thair hagbuttis and piitolettis at him, he
being then ganging within the corne yaird of Coribie, at the barne-diir thairof ;
of the quhilk fchot the barne-dur can yit record : And vnder proteftatioun, that
he nawayis grantis ony fchuting, as he fchot nocht, he aucht nawayis to be put
to the knawlege of ane Inqueift for the faid cryme lybellit, becaus he mycht liaif
lauchfullie borne and worne piftolettis, and vfet thame for his awin defence,
within his awin duelling place, he being perfewit, as faid is. — Anfueris, vnder
proteftatioun, that I nawayis grant Coribie to be the defenderis duelling place ;
that he aucht to be put to the knawlege of ane AflTyfe, becaus the fact lybellit
was committit outwith the place of Corfbie and yairdis thairof, in the place lybellit ; nather is hagbuttis or piftoletis wajjpones of lauchfull defence.

The Justice referrit the famyn to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe.

George Home of Baffinden, be his aithe, declairit, that Alexander French,
being outwith the dykes of Corft^ie, fchot ane piftolet at his fervand Johnne
Baird, the tyme contenit in the Dittay. The faid Andro Home, his brother,
lykwayis fuorne, declairis, that he, being perfewit be Johnne French, Tutour of
Thornydikis, with hagbuttis and piftolettis, the tyme lybellit, the faid Alexander Frenche, his brother, folio wit him with ane lance in his hand, being vpone
fute, and perfewit him. The faid George Home, be his ayth, declairis, that
Alexander French, this tua yeir bygane, lies borne and worne i)iftolettis, as his
ordiner wappones ; contrair the Actis of Parliament. — Upone the quhilkis Declarationis, be the perfeweris athis, gevin as faid is, aflvit inftru^nentis.

Verdict. The Aft'yfe, be the mouth of Johnne Cranftoun in Baffinden, chanceller, for the maift part, Clenges the faid Alexander Frenche of beiring, weiring and fchuitting of hagbuttis and piftolettis ; and of fchuiting of hagbuttis
and piftolettis at Andro Home, brother to George of Baflinden ; and of the tua
firft articles of Dittay foundit thairupoun : And all, in aiie voce, ffindis the faid
Alexander to be Giltie of his being in cum])anie with (Till)ert Cranftoun ; (piha,
the tyme contenit in the Dittay, fchot ane hagbute or piftolett at (ieurge Home
of Baffinden, and hurt him thairwith in his left thie ; quhilk Ichote was fcliote
be the faid Gilbert, outwith the barne-yaird-dykis of Coribie, the faid Alexander
being remaning within the barne-yaird for the tyme.

72 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

The Justice ordanit the faid Alexander Freiiclie to be committit to waird,
within the Tolbnth of Edinburgh, thairin to remane vpone his awin expenflis,
vnto the tynie he war advyfet with the Coimfall, anent his dome, to be pronuncet thairupoune.

Nov. 17. — JoiixxE Fkenche, Tutoiir of Thornydikis, and Gilbert
Cranftoun, father-brother to Patrik Cranftoim of Corlbie.
The Justice ordanit Laurence Symfoun of Craighous and James Sandilandis
of Gillifwallis, cautioners for the faid Johnne, to be in amerciament in the pane
of ij' merkis, for his nocht entrie ; and Robert Hepburn in Eift Fentoun, brother to the Laird of Craig, as cautioner for the faid Gilbert, in the pane of ij*"
merkis : And ficlyk, that the faid Johnne and Gilbert fould be denuncit rebellis
and put to the home, and all tliair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

lUsttttnci: ant( iHaintaintnri: ^Ic.tantJer lUitpejt ■— (SoiMde's

Conspirafi?*

Nov. 17. — Dauid Spalding of Effmtullie
Compeirit with M"' Williame Olijihant and Henrie Balfour, his prelocutouris,
quha enterand him felf vpone pannell, exponit and declairit, that fforfamekill as,
vpon finifterus informatioun gevin to the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, command
was gevin be thair lordfchipis to Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie, kny\ Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes entreis, to perfew him befoir the Juftice or his deputis, for the allegit treffonable RefFetting, fupplieing, and maintening of Alexander Ruthven, burges of Perthe, his Maiefteis declarit tratour,
within his duelling places of Effintullie and Enoche, at the tymes particulerlie
fet doun in the faid informatioun ; lyk as, criminall Letteris being direct at the
faid Aduocattis inltance, aganis the faid Dauid, be the quhilkis he was charget
to find cautioun actit in the buikis of Adiornall, that he fould compeir befoir the
Juftice or his deputis, this day and place, and vnderly the Law for the faidis
allegit crjmies, and vtheris contenit in the Letteris direct thairuj^oun, quhairof
he is altogidder innocent : ffor obedience quhairof, vpoun the fourt day of July
laftbypaft, he ffand Harie, Lord St Colme,^ cautioner for his compeirance this
day, &:c. ; for quhais relief, and tryell of his awin innocencie, he now compeirit ; diiraffenting fra all maner of continuatioun : And in refpect our fouerane
lordis Aduocat, nor iia vtheris his lordfliipis informeris wald infift in his per-

^ This Nobleman was tlie second son of James, Lord Down, and brotlier of James, Earl of Moray.
He had the monastery of 8t Colme's Inch and lands belontrinj: thereto, erected into a temporal lordshij), with the title of a Peer of Parliament, as Lord Saint Colme. He died Jul. 12, 1G12.

43 & r Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 73

fute, tiiik inftrumentis, Sec. ; and proteftit for his faid cautioneris relief ; and that
he him felf fould nocht be callit,trnbillit, nor perfewit for the allegit crymes aboue
mentionet ; bot that lie fould be affoW^eit Jimplicifer thairfra, in all tyme cuming.

^U'iluncj: a iiJtvson iJoitI)in tf)c SToIlioot!) ot ^tiinhnvQi), tjuriucj; ti)t
MttinQ ot tjje ICovtJs of ^tssioir.

Nov. 18 Mr JoHNNE Kerr, fone to Andro Ker of Mylnerig, and

George Lokhart, feruitour to the Laird of Corftorphin,
younger.
Bilaitit, accufet and perfewit, be Bittay, of the Crymes following.

FousAMEKiLL as, be Act of our Ibuerane lonlis tlirettene Parliament, liis Maieftie and eflaittis
ordanit, that qulio euir f'ouldflrek or liurt in any tyme tliaireftirj any perl'one within the Vtter-Tolbuth
of Ed', the tyme that the Lordis of Seflloun fittis for adniinillratioun of Juftice, fal incur the pane of
daith ; and fall be accufed criminallie thairfoir : Without regaird quhairof, and of tliat refpect and reuerance quhilk it became the faidis ^Nlr Johnne and George, or ather of thame, to haif borne to tlie
Lordis of SeflTioun, being convenit in the Inner Tolbuthe of this burcht, for adminiflratioun of Juftice
to his Maiefties legis, and thairby reprefenting his Maiefties perfone and authoritie ; the faid Mr
Johnne, vpone the auchtene day of November inftant, cam to the Vtter-hous of the faid Tolbuth,
calHt the Mid-hous, and feing the faid George Lokhart, feniitour to the Laird of Corftorphin, Younger,
following liis maifter, in companie with my Lord of Kilfithe,^ defyrous to enter within the faid lious ;
and he beiring grudge and malice aganis tlie faid George, vpone fum former difcoirdis betuix the faid
Mr Jolmes father, liim felf, and his vmq^^ brother Andro Ker and tlie faid George Lokhart, the faid
Mr Johnne ftuid in the faid dur, and wald nocht fuffer him peceablie to pas by, bot forceablie rufclied
the faid George, in the bygoing, and had almoft ftrukin him to the grund ; and imniediatlie thairefter,
drawing his dager, invaidit liim thairwitli, and ftrak at him for his Slauchter; and ftrak the faid George
throw the cloik, within the laid hous, and had nocht faillit to haif ilane liim, gif the faid Mr Johnne
liad nocht bene ftayit and red be fum gentilmen being prefent for the tyme, qulio wer comniandit be
my Lord of Kilfith to red '^ thame ; and tuik the faid Mr Johnne to waird, for liis faid oft'ence :
Quhaiiby he hes tranfgrefled the faid Act of Parliament, and incurrit the panes contenit thairin.
Lyk AS, tlie faid George Lokhart, vpone the faid auchtene day of November inftant, about nyne
liouris, or thairby, bcfoir none, haifing of lang tymo of befoir confauit ane deidlie feid, haitiTiit, and
malice, aganis the faid Mr Johnne Ker, fone to the faid Andro Ker of Mylnerig, for certane iniurious
langage paft betuix ihame, and for the faid George hurting of Andro Ker, brother to the faid Mr
Johnne. in the hand ; and this day, finding the faid Mr Johnne ftanding in the dur of the Mid-Iious
of the faid Tolbuth, quhilk cumis in frome the bak-tiunei)eck thairof, the laid George violcntlie rufching the faid Mr Johnne fordward within the faid dur, immediatlie tliaireftir drew his dager, and ftrak
at the faid Mr Johnne thairwitli, f<)r !iis llauchter, vpone the heid, with the faid dager ; and had nocht
faillit to haif Ilane him, gif the faid George had nocht been ftayed be fum gentilmen, being prflent for
the tyme, quha entred betuix thame, and be commandiment of my Lord of Kilfithe, in quhois prefence
the faid cryme was committit ; quha caulit apjircheiid the faid (Jeorge, and put him in waird : (^uliairliy
he hes lykwayis tranfgreOit the faid Act of J'arliament, and incurrit the j)anes thaiiin contenit. — To

' Sir Willinm Livingston of Kilsyth, one of tlic ordinary Lords of Session, and nfti-rwards a Privy Connrillor.
&r. * 'I'o si'jiai'ato tlicm ; liy no means a safe or easy office in tliose times, when ' (pihingaris' and ' ]>i>toIets'

were the swift messent,'ers of vcnjieance. Tlie redder s ]>oi-ti<>ii, in an affray of tliis sort, herame ])i'overliial — for lioth
jmrties often joined in piinishiiig his temerity ! Hence, tiie reddiuij-strui/t was fre<iuently one of the deadliest in the
' tuilzie.'

VOL. in. K

74 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609.

the taikin, tlie faid Lordis of Seffioun, baiffing callit tliame, and ather of thame, befoir thair LordIcliipis, for tryell of tlie faid crymo, thay, be the faidis perfones awin Confeflioun, and Depofitioun of
dyuerfe famous witnelies, fand that the faidis ]Mr Johune and George, and ather of thame, had contravenit tlie faid act ; and Ordanit thame to be put to ane Tryell for the famyn.

Eftir reidiiig- of the qiibilkis tua Dittayis, and accufatioun of the faid Mr
Joliiiiie Ker and George Lokhart, be verte\v tliairof, our fouerane lordis Aduocat, for verifeing tliairof, producet the faid Mr Johnne and George awin Confeflioun, togidder with certane Depofitiones of dyuerfe famous ^ WitnefTes, fuorne
and examiiiat in prefens of the Lordis of Seffioun, in the faid matter.

The pannell, JMr Johnne Ker, denyis that poynt of Dittay, quliair he was
' within the Tolbuth,' the tyme of the committing of the cryme ; bot was vpone
the Hair and entrie of the dur. Lyk as, the faidis perfones on pannell, being
inquyret, judiciallie, be the Juftice, Gif thai had any thing to fay, quhy the faidis
Dittayis producet aganis thame fould nocht be put to the knawledge of ane
Allyfe ? ffor anfuer thairto, maifl humlie acknowlegit and confeffit the premilTes
to be of veritie ; and referrit thamefelffis in his Maiefteis will for the famyn. In
refpect quhairof, the Juftice Ordanit the faidis perfones to be tane bak to waird
to the Tolbuth of Ed^ thairin to remane quhill his Maiefteis will war fchawin
thairanent.

5l]^amt!3ut!ttrt— iHurtJer xxntitv trust*

Nov. 22. — Johnne Stewart, lone to vmq''' James Lord of Doun, (brother-german to Harie Lord St Colme.)"
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the murthour of vmq'^ Johnne Gib in Over LefIbddie ; committit in the moneth of Junij 1608 yeiris.

Persewaris, Beflie Dik, the relict of vmq''' Johnne Gib. Sir Thomas Hammiltoun.

The faid Johnne Stewart, being accufet of the laid llauchter, maift humblie,
vpone his kneyis, in prefens of the Juftice and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, Coiifeffis the flauchter, and craves God and the Kingis Maieftie pardoun ; And
offeris to the partie quhat fatisfactioun he is able to content thame with, be the
advyfe of his frendis. Quhairupoun the Aduocat aflcit inftrumentis.

The Aduocat producet the Dittay, following.

Johnne Stewart, fone to vrnq'*^ James Lord Doun, 3e ar indytit and accufet : Forfamekill as 50,
hauing confauet ane deidlie feid, haitrent, and malice, aganis vmq'^ Johnne Gib in Over Leffedie,
caullos, without ony occafioun gevin be him to 50U; bot only, for ane fuddane difcord falling furth
betuix ^our horfe-boy and fervand, quhairof the faid Johnne was altogidder innocent and ignorant, 56,
vpone the . . . day of Junij, the 5eir of God r".Vj''. and audit 5eiris, drinkeand at Keltieheuch, in the
Iious of Johnne Greve fair, avowit maifl crewallie and malicioufly to bereif ]>e faid vmq''' Johnne
Gib of his lyfe : And for perfornieing ]iairof, being inftantlie bent to feik him at his awin hous, and je
being (layit be James Craufurd, and fum vtheris quha hapuit than to be in 30ur company, 5e, to red

' Persons of good fame and credit. ' So described in the second diet. See Note to Nov. 17, ]C09.

43&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 75

30ur felf of pat irapefchment,^ faythfullie prornittit and gaif 50ur hand^ to the faid James Craufurd,
that 56 fould nocht ]>at nycht go towardis the faid Johnne Gibis hous, bot ))at 56 wald lyd towardis
the brig of Gairny : Nocht withllanding quliairof, fa fone as 56 gat 5 our horfe, 56 raid in all haift to
je faid vmq'« Johnne Gibis hous, in Over Leffodie, about ]>e glomyng of the nycht,' and chopping''
at fie dur, and calling vpone him be his name, he being than lyand in his naikit bed, takand the nychtis
reft, and feiring na iniurie, invafioun, nor harme to haif bene done to him, be any perfones, and fpeciallie by 50W, quha in all tyme preceiding had bene in profeffit freindfchip with him, and had relfauit
dyuerfe plefouris and gratitudis of him, fa fone as he hard 5 our voce, inftantlie raife in his fark,^ and
oppint his dur to 30W ; quhair 36, without ony cans, vpgeving of freindfchip, or adverteifmg him of his
fkaith or danger, flraik him with 5 our dager in the breift, neir the heart, and gaif him Jiairwith ane
deidlie wound, vnder treft, freindfchip and credeit: Of the quhilk wound he depairtit this lyfe within
les nor fourtie aucht houris ])airefter. And fua, 56 maift crewallie and vnmerciefullie flew the faid
vmq^ ' Johnne Gib, vnder chid and filence of nycht, within his awin hous, be way of Hame-fuckin and
vnder treft ; to ])e grit contempt of our fouerane lord, his hienes auctoritie and lawis, &c.

To THE TAiKiN,^ that, incontinent paireftir, 5e returnet bak to the faid Johnne Grevis hous iu Keltieheuch, and calling fuvth vpone NicoU Rowane, inquyret of him, ' quhais man "^ Johnne Gib was ?'
Quha anfuerit, that ' he was my Lord Chancelleris man ;' 3e faid, ' and ^ he war the Devillis man, 5e
])ad gevin to him the thing that wald flaik ^ him I' To the taikin alfo, fat vpone pe mome faireftir,
36, cuming in, in the moirning, to ane houfe in Aberdour, quhair James Baveredge, in Keltieheuch,
and Alex'' Kellok war drinking, ^e demandit at James Baveredge, ' Quhat newis ?' Quha anfuering,
that * He hard na newis that was guid 1' and, ' That 36 mycht haif bene in 30ur bed that nycht, quhan
36 gaif that hurt to Johnne Gib, quhairof he wald die !' 5e, taking out 30ur bludie dager, faid, < he
could nocht be the war,i° becaus 3e had gevin him bot ane po'' I' ^^ To the taikin lykwayis, 3e, beinocharget to find cautioun, to compeir befoir the Juftice, at ane certane day bygane, to haif vnderlyne
the law for the faid cryme, paft to ])e home ; quhairat 30 haif lyne continuallie fenfyne.

The Justice continewis this matter, aneiit Johnne Stewartis tiyell, to Fryday nixt, quhill ^" he be advyfet with the Counfell.

(Nov. 24.) — The Justice Ordanis the pannell to be put to ane AfTyfe ;
nochtwithftanding his becuming in Will, the lafl dyet.

ASSISA.

Williame Trumbill of Airdrie; Johnne Dunbar of Mynnieweik; William Cuming of Ernefyde ;
The Laird of Partoone, 30unger ; Johnne Johnneftoun of Raiocleuch, tutour of Jolinneftoun.'^

The pannell of new agane Confeffis the Dittay, and craves Godis niercie, &c.

A^ERDICT. Eftir accufatioun of the faid Johnne Stewart, be Dittay, and the
faid Johnnes Judiciall Confeffioun, maid in jirefens of the Juftice and AfTyfe,
granting the faid fact ; and maift; Immblie, vpone his kneyis, craveing God, our
fouerane lord the Kingis Maieftie, and the partie, pardoun thairfoir ; the laid
Aftyfe, be the mouth of the faid Johnne Johnneftoun, chanceller, all in ane voce,

^ Hindrance, old Fr. ^ j^ polemn mode of aflirmation and promise, still used amongst the peasantry of Scotland ; and considered as sacred and binding as an oath. ^ Twilight. ' Knocking at the door. ^ Night-shirt. ** In toAcw ; proof, or testimony of the altove. " Feudal vassal. ^ If; an. ^ Literally, quench ; slolicn, or s/a/w. '" Worse. " Probably ioY power, only one blow or stroke. ' Purr is still used, to denote a push made by a bull or
an ox, he. when he runs at and gores another. '■' Until. '^ The rest were ' mcrcheandis,'

and persons of no note.

76 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1609ffaiul, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Johnne Stewart, accoirding to his awiri
Judifiall CoiifefTiouii, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the crewall Murthour
and llauchter of the faid vrnq'^ Johnne Gib : conimittit in maner, and at the
tyme fpecifeit in his Dittay.

Sentence. To be tane to the place of his Executioune, and thair his heid
to be ftruckin from his body ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit and
inbrocht to his hienes vie, as convict of the faid cryme. Quhilk was pronuncet
for dome.

8B taring of Hl^^asliutia antJ ^^istoletsi— ?3erj«ri2»

Nov. 22. — RoBEKT JoHXXESTOUN, feruitour to my Lord Forbes.
Dilaitit of the beiring and weiring of liagbuttis and pillolettis, contrair the
Actis of Parliament ; and of Periurie, as the Dittay beiris.

Persewak, Sir Thomas Hatnmiltoun of Bynnie, knyS Aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Preloquutouris for the panncll, Mr Alexander King, Mr Johnne Ruffell, Mr Robert Learmonth.

My Lord Aduocat produceit ane Decreit of the Lordis of Counfall, decerning
the faid Robert to haif contrauenit the Actis of Parliament, in bering and wering
of hagbutis and pistolettis ; of the dait, at Ed", xxvij of Junij. The Aduocat
infiilis vpoun the beiring and weiring of hagbutis and piftolettis, quhairupoun
the pannell alkis inftrumentis. My Lord Aduocat produceis his Maielleis
Letter, as Warrand of this j^erfute.

It is allegit be Robert Johnneftoun, that he can nocht be put to ane Affyfe,
for weiring of liagbuttis and piftolettis, lybellit ; becaus, be Act of Parliament,
in November, 1600 yeiris, it is Ipeciallie provydit, that fic perfonis as fall be
perfewit befoir his hienes and Lordis of Secreit Counfall, and tryit be probatioun
of Witnefles, giltie of bering and wering of hagbuttis or piftolettis, fall nocht
incur the corporall punifchmcnt in the former Actis, be anii)utatioun of the rycht
hand ; hot only to be imncifchit, be wairding of thair perfonis, efcheit of thair
guidis-moveabill, or i)ayment of fic jiecuniall fowines of money as his hienes and
lordis of Secreit Counfall fall declair : And trew it is, that in the perfute, intentit
be my lord Aduocat, quha is now perfewar aganis Airthour Lord Forbes, for
the particuler factis contenit in the perfute intentit thairupoun ; hot fpeciallie, of
his Lordlchip being accumpaneit with Dauid Forbes of Petlethie, his brother,
^Villiame Garioche, younger of Kinftair, and the faid Robert, now enterit vpone
pannell, was challanget per exprejjum ; in maner as is contenit in the laid Decreit : Be the quhilk Decreit, the faidis Lordis of Counlall, nocht only tuik tryell
anent the faid Lord Forbes, for him felf, hot alio anent the faidis ^A'illiame
Garioche and Robert Johnneftoune thair beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and
piftolettis ; and finding thame giltie thairof, ordanit the faid Robert Johnne43&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 77

iloun and Williaine Garioclie to be committit to the tolbuth of Ed", and that for
weiring and beiring of piflolettis, in the tyme contenit in the Dittay : And thairfore, the faid Robert Johnneftoun can nawayis be put to ane Affyfe. And for
verificatioun, producet the Act of Parhament, with the Decreit of Couniell. —
It is anfuerit, be my lord Aduocat, that the Act of Parhament ordanis na procelTes intentit befoir the Juftice for weiring of hagbutis and piflolettis to Hay,
hot quhair the faidis defenderis has been perlewit befoir the Lordis of his Maiefleis Secreit Counfell, be his Maiefteis Thefaurer or Aduocat : And the Decreit
of Secreit Counfell produceit beiris na actioun to half bene intentit or perfewit,
be his Maiefteis Thefaurer or Aduocat, befoir the Counfell, aganis the pannell,
for thecryme contenit in the Dittay. Thairfoir, the Decreit of Counfell producet
can nocht ftay proces.

It is allegit, that the Juftice can nocht proceid aganis the pannell, for the
Periurie, in refpect thair is na Warrand gevin for his perfute thairfoir. And
forder, the Warrand producet refolues only anent the puneifchment to be inflicted,
be amj)utatioun of his rycht hand, he being convict of beiring and weiring of
piftolettis. — To the quhilk, it is anfuerit, be my lord Aduocat, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Warrand gevin to him be the Lordis of Secreit Couniell
to perfew the pannell, baith for the beiring and weiring of piftolettis, and for the
Periurie contenit in the Dittay.

The Justice contiuewis this matter to the xxiiij injtantis, quhilk is Fryday ;
and ordanit the pannell to be tane bak agane to waird.

(Nov. 24.) — The Justice, halting acquentit the Lordis of his Hienes
Secreit Counfall with the proces perfewit be his hienes Aduocat, aganis the faid
Robert Johnneftoun, for bering and wering of hagbutis and piftolettis, and with
the haill allegeances and defenffis proponit hinc inch be thame, and anfueris maid
thairto ; Eftir reding of the Act of Parliament and Decreit of the faidis Lordis
of Secreit Counfall, quhairupoun the defenderis alledgeances and defence is
foundit, and produceit for verificatioun thairof ; ffindis, with expres auife of the
faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, that this mater aucht nocht to be put to the
knawiedge of ane AfTyfe, in refpect of the foirfaid Act of Parliament, and Decreit
of the faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, produceit : And Ordanis the laid Robert
to be tane bak agane to the Tolbuthe of Ed^ thairin to remane, vpone his awin
expenffis, quhill he fatisfie his hienes Thefaurer, accoirding to the Counfall
modificatioune,

Dec. 29. — WiLLiAME Guthrie of Ravinflie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Patrik Gairdin of that Ilk ;
committit in INIaij I'".^. Ixxviij.

78 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

Perseweris, Kobert Gaiidin, oy^ to tlie defunct, Mr Tho^ Heiulerfoii, fultfiitute to the Lord Aduocat.
Prelocutour for the pannell, Mr Thomas Hoip.

The pannell takis inftrumentis of his entrie ; and producet ane Refpett, vnder
the Previe Seill, of the dait, Jan. 24, 1600, maid and grantitfor the fpace of xix
yeiris : And, in refpect thairof, allcgit that the Juftice could nocht put him to
the tryell of ane Aliyfe. — It is anliierit, that the Refpett is null ; in refpect,
conform to the Act of Parliament, he fould haif fatisfeit the pairtie, and fchaw
ane Letter of Slanes thairupoune.

The Justice admittis the Refpett producet ; and Ordanis the pannell to
find cautioun to fatisfie the partie ; qulia fand Alexander Guthrie, ffiear of that
Ilk, cautioune with himlclf, to fatisfie the partie ; conforme to the lawis of this
realme.

[*S'/> WiUiame Heart, Jujike-Bepute.']

AsSESSORKS JUSTICIARIO.

Mr Jolinne Preftoun, Prefident,* Walter Lord Blantyre, My Lord Previe SelU,^ My Lord Kilfyth.'*

33nvl)arcti6 iHiutrtr— ,^!}ootincj: iiDitlj tJagijutis, ^t.

Feb. 2, 1610. — James Goudoun, in Over Auchinrath, eldeft fone to
Johnne Gordoun of Liecheftoun, and Alexander Gordon n of Oxhill."'

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slaiichter of vmq^' Alexander Abircrumbie of
Pitmedden. Perseweris.

liectour Abircrumbie of Wefthall, Adamo, M^ Walter, and Robert Aborcrumbie, all fones ; Williame
Abercrumbie, as oy ; Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie, kny^

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Alexander King, Mr Tliomas Mawer, The Laird of Lefmoir.

DiTTAY agaiufl the Pannels.

PoRSAMEKiLL as the faidis James Gordoun and Alexander Gordoun, with thalr complices,
with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis logis, to tlie number of fyftene perfones, or thairby, all bodin
in feir of weir, with jakis, fecreittis, iteil-bonnettis, lance-flalffis, fuordis, lang culveriiigis, dagis, and
piftolettis, expredie prohibeit to be borne, worne, vfet, or fchote with, be the Actis of Parliament,
vnder the panes mentionat thairintill ; vpone the tueliF day of Marche, the yeir of God I'".V''. Ixxxxiij
yeiris, liaiBng confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour, and malice aganis the faid vmq^'' Alexander Abercrumbie of Pitmedden, fet vpone the faid vrnq'*^ Alexander, at the Mofs of Cokftoun, lyand within the
icherefdoni of Elgyn and Forres, quliair he was pafTand his tyme at the halkiiig, but"^ ony company,
except his fak-oncris, in fober and quyet maner, dreidand na evill, harme, iniurie, or perfute of ony
perfone, bot to haif levit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis ; and thair, expres contrair the
tennour of the Actis of Parliament, fchot and dilafchet' tuentie fchote of hagbuttis and piftolettis at
the faid vmq'*' Alexander; quhairby thay fchote dyuerfe and lindrie bulletis in dyuerfe pairtis of his
body : And haifing circuit him round about, that he was nocht abill to efcaip, thay thairefter pat violent handis in his perfone, tuik frome him his awin horfe, and cuift him vpone ane bachillane naig,*'

' Oe or Oi/e, grandson. ^ Of Fentonbarns, rrcsidont of the College of Justice. = Sir Richard Cockhum of Cleriiingtoii. ■* Sir William Levingston of Kilsyth, one of the Ordinary Lords of Session. ' The

case was argued before the Justice- Depute on Jan. .'jl ; and in consefiuence of objections being started to the production of a Remission in favour of Alexander Gordon, and of a Relaxation granted to James Gordon by the Duke of
Lennox, &c., the Justice continued the diet to this day. * Without. ' Old Fr. dclascher, to discharge, &c.

A foundered jade of a horse ; selected, no doubt, for the greater dishonour, and to give greater pain to the wounded
man by its unsteady and jolting motion. S/iauchiliuiul has a similar signification.

43&7JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 79

quhairvpone tliay convoyit bim, as ane captiue and priffoner, the f[)ace of ane myle, or tliairhv, fra the
laid Mofs, towardis the Place of Liechefloun : And being the lentb of ane half myle to the laid Place,
ane of the perfonis that war of thair companie, of the fpeciall knawlege of the reft, haifing ane charget
hagbut in his hand, charget with tln-e buUettis, prepairitfor the purpois, at thair fpeciall command and
directioun, behind the faid vmq''' Alexanderis bak, fchot lilm with thre bullettis throw the body ; and
thaireftir, maift barbarullie and crewallie, with thair drawin fuordis, cuttit him all in peces ; and, as
monfteris in nature, left nocht fax inche of bis body, airmes, legis, and heid vndeVydit, and cut alunder :
And la, was maift raonftrouflie and crewallie flane and Murthorit be the perfonis foirfaidis : And thay
and ilk ane of thame ar airt and pairt of the faid crewall flauchter ; and aucht and fould be puneirt
thairfou-, and for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in beiring, weiring, fchuitting, and flaying
with hagbuttis and piftolettis, in maner foirfaid.

The faid James and Alexander Gordoun tuik thame to tua feueral RemissiONES, producet be thame, for the ciymes aboue writtin. The ane, grantit be
our fouerane lord, vnder his hienes Grit Seill, to George Marqiieis of Huntlie
Erie of En3ie Lord Gordoun and Bad5enoche, Sir Thomas Gordoun of Ghvne,
kny\ the faid James and Alexander Gordones, and dyuerfe vtheris perfones, tliair
aflifleris and pairt-takeris, for thair trefTonable cuming, in opin hollilitie and
armour, to the landis of Auldquhannoquhen and Glenlivat, aganis Archibald,
Erie of Ergyle, his Maiefteis Lieutennent for the tyme, and aganis his Maielleis
oift and cumpaneis, vnder the faid Erles leiding and command, in the moneth of
October 159-1 yeiris ; and for the Slauchter of quhatfumeuir perfone or perfones,
committit aganis his Maieftie or his hienes Lieutennent foirfaid, quhais names
ar haldin as for expreffit, in the faid Remiffioune ; and namlie, for the Slauchter
of vmq'^ Robert Frafer, his hienes Herauld, &c. As the faid Remiffioun, of the
dait at Ilalyrudhous, the fecund day of Apryle, 1C03 yeiris, in the felf proportis.
— The vther of the faidis Remiffiounes, grantit be Ludovick, Duik of Lennox, his
Maiefteis Lieutennent and Juftice, ouer the North pairtis of this realme, for the
tyme, Remittand Johnne Gordoun of Licheftoun, the faid James appeirand thairof and ^Villiame his fones, Alexander Gordoun in Fernauchtie, and ^Villiame
Ewin, fervandis to the faid James ; flbr thair treffonable being in cumpanie,
affifting, airt and pairt-taking with George, fumtyme Erie of Huntlie, ffrances,
fumtyme Erie of Errole, and certane vtheris his Maiefteis declairit traitouris
and rebellis, at the lait Conflict aganis Archibald Erie of Ergyle, &c.

It is allegit, befoir Interlocutour, be Mr Alexander King, that now he may
compeir for James Gordoune, becaus he is relaxt ; quhilk relaxatioune he producet.— It is allegit, be my lord Aduocat, the Relaxatioune is null ; becaus it is
execute at Ed', and nocht at the mercait croce of the head bur' of the fchyre. — It
is anfuerit, the Relaxatioun is guid aneuch at the mercait croce of Edinburghe.

It is allegit that the perfones on painiell can nocht be put to ane AHyfe, becaus thay half obtenit Remiftioun fra the Duik of Lennox, quha had Connniflioun of his Maieftie to that effect ; quhilk Remiflioun he producet. It is alle80 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

git, that the RemifTioune is null, geviii be the Duik of Lennox ; becaiis his Commiffioun gevis him power to grant Remiffioun, be advyfe of his Counfall ; lyk as,
the Remiffioun producet beiris, ' with advyfe of his Counfell,' and yit nane of
his Counfell hes fublcryuit the famyn. It is anfuerit, that theair is na fi^eciall
perfones nominat Counfallouris in the Remiffioune, and thairfoir thair is na
neceffitie of thair fubfcriptioun ; and haldis him at his Remiffioun, quhilk he
referris to the Lordis. It is forder allegit, that the Remiffioun is nocht pad the
Seillis, and is exped be ane qulia had na place in the office of Thefaurcr for the
tyme ; and forder, the faid Remiffioun has paft the Regifter, and thairfoir fould
pafs the Seillis.— It is anfuerit, thair is na neceffitie of paffmg the Seillis, leing
it is g-rantit be his Maiefteis Connniffioun.

The Justice, with advyfe of his Affeffouris, appointit be the Lords of Secreit Counfall, ffindis, that this matter can nocht be put to the knawlege of ane
Affyfe, in refpect of the Remiffiones producet. And ordanis the pannell to find
cautioun, for fatisfactioune of the partie perfewaris, accoirding to ordinance of
the Lordis of Seffioune.

Quhairupoun the perfones on pannell aflvit inftrumentis : And ffand my Lord
Saltoune and the Laird of Lefmoir cautioneris, conjunctlie and feuerallie, to
fatisfie the parties : And the Laird of Lefmoir become obleift to warrand my
Lord Saltoinie.

The perfewaris protellis, that this perfute now intentit l)e thame, and Interlocutor aboue written, gevin thairupoun, be nawayis preiudiciall to thame in ony
vther perfute movet aganis the pannell, in ane vther nature or qualitie, in ony
tyme cuming : Quhilk the Juftice admittit. — Lyk as, the pannell proteftit in the
contrair : and affiit inftrumentis thairupoune.

Jul. 25. — WiLLiAME Guthrie of Ravinfbie, lauchfuU fone to vmq^^
Alexander Guthrie of that Ilk.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Robert Galrdin of TuUois ;
committit vpone the Mure callit Carbundow-mure, in the hie-way betuix Brechin and Dundie, in the moneth of Nouember, 1589 ; vpone fet purj^ois, prouifioun, and foirthocht fellony.

Persewaris, Robert Gairdin, as only fone to vinq''' Robert Gahdin of TuUois ; Mr Robert Gairdin, appeirand of Blairtoun ; CommifTar Clerk of Aberdene, as neir kinfman ; Mr Robert ffoullis, fubflitute to our fouerane lordis Aduocat.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Johnne RufTell, The Laird of Guthrie.

The faid Williame Guthrie tuik him to our fouerane lordis Refpett, gevin and
grantit to him be his Maieftie, vnder the Previe Seill, for the faid Slauchter, for

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 81

the fpace of nyntene yeiris eftir the dait thairof ; quhilk is of dait, at Halyrudhous, the xxiiij day of Januar, T^.V^. yeiris ; and in refpect thairof, allegit, that
the faid Dittay could nawayes be put to the knawledge of ane AfTyfe, for the
faid Slauchter. — To the quhilk it was anfuerit be the Aduocat, that the Refpett
is null, becaus, conforme to the Act of Parliament, na Ref2)ett nor Remiffioun
can be grantit without fatisfactioune of partie ; and this perfewar nocht being
latisfeit, the Juftice audit to put the pannell to the knawledge of ane Affyfe.

The Justice, nochtwithflanding of the Aduocattis anfuer, eftir reiding of
the Dittay and Refpett aboue fpecifeit, Admittis the faid Refpett ; and ordanit
the pannell to find cautioun to fatisfie the partie perfewar, conforme to the lawis
of this realme ; but preiudice alwayis of his lauchfuU defenffis : Quha, for obedience of the faid Juftice ordinance, ffand, with him felff, Alexander Guthrie
ffiear of that Ilk, cautioneris, &c.

(^ifeitei) antr ^ctlauU, ^r»

[As tlie subsequent Trials of Patrick, second Earl of Orkney, ' and of Robert Stewart^
and others, contain tlie most ample information relative to the infamous and almost unparalleled cruelties and oppressions committed by this tyrannical individual, ao;ainst the unoffending Inhabitants of
Orkney and Zetland, it is unnecessary, in this place, to anticipate tlie extraordinary circumstances
which are there detailed. The Editor has been at much pains to procure the most autlientic Documents, in illustration of these very remarkable Trials ; to which the reader is referred. They contain
the fullest and most minute accounts of the shocking atrocities committed by this savage and relentless Noble, whose life, estates, and honours, were at length forfeited, in atonement, so far, for his
frightful crimes. He was beheaded at the market-cross of Edinburgh, Feb. 6, 1614.]

Aug. 2. — Pateik Earle of Orknay Lokd Zeitland, &c.

Dilaitit of certane TrefTonable crymes, at lenth fpecifeit and fett doun in our
Ibuerane Lordis Letteris, vnderwritten :

FoLEOwis t/ie iennom' of' the Lefferis (Dittay.)

James, be the grace of God, King of Grit Britane, ffrance and Ireland, defender of the faith. To our Louittis [Johnne Blinfell, Hay Herauld] Meffengeris, our fchereffis in that pairt, coniunctlie and feuerallie, fpeciallie conditute,
greting. fforfamekill as it is humlie meanit and complenit to ws be our truftie
and weilbelouit counfalour Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie, kny', our Aduocat, for our intreis, vpone Patrik, Erle of Orknay, Lord Zeitland, &c. :
That quhair, it is expredie ftatute, ordanit, and obferuet, be our lawis and
Actis of Parliament of this our realme, and be the Cowmoun Law and conluetyde inviolabillie obferued in all Chriftiane and ciuile Nationes, that quha euir

' See Feb. 1, 1615. ^ The Trial of Robert Stewart, ' bafc fone to vmq>'- Patrik, lait Erie of

Orknay,' and others, will be found under Jan. 5, 1615, of the present Collection.

VOL. III. L

82 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

dois Treafone aganis the Kingis perfone, or his Maieftie ; or vfurpes vpone
thame his fouerane authoritie, in poyntis of royall foueranitie, falbe pwneifched
as Tratouris. And trew it is, and of verritie, that the laid Patrik, Erie of Orknay, altogidder viiinyiidfull of that dewtie, quhilk, be the bandis of nature, fubiectioun, and allegeance, he aucht^ to ws, and infinite fauouris and benifeitis
reffauit be him frome ws, lies, be him felff, and vtheris in his name, of his cauieing, command, relTet, affiftance, and ratihabitioune, in contempt of ws and our
auctoritie royall, committed and jjerpetrat the moft (cruel) and trelbneable crymes
following, at the tymes and in maner vnderwrittin : And was and is airt and pairt
of the famyn. Ix the firft, the faid Patrick, Erie of Orknay, be him felff, his
deputis, Magiftrattis, and Judges, aj^pointed and depute be him, in the offices of
Scherefschip, Stewartrie, and Bail3erie of our fcherefdome and bifchoprik of
Orknay, and lordfchij) of Zeitland, rejped'me, of his caufing, command, aflillance,
and ratihabitioune, monethlie and ilk moneth, in the yearis of God I"".V^ fourfcoir nyne, 1590, 1591, 1592, 1593, 1594, 1595, 1596, 1597, 1598, 1599, 1600,
1601, 1602, 1603, 1604, 1605, 1606, 1607, 1608, 1609, and ane thoufeand fax
hundreth and ten yeiris, at the leifb in ane or vther of the faidis monethis
and yeiris, jjerfewed, accufed, proceidit, and pronunced dyuerfe decreittis and

fentences aganis vmq'^ Sir Patrik Bellenden of Evie, kny*, Balfoure

of Montquhanie, Robert Menteithe of , Williame Bannatyne of

Gairfay, Sinclair jounger of Etha, Bruce of Cwltmalundie,

Heurie AVardlaw his fervand, Adame JMudie,^ with mony vtheris our faitlifull
and obedient fubiectis of the countreyis of Orknay and Zeitland, accoirding to
lawis trelTonabillie maid and practized be him felff, direct contrair and repugnant to the lawis of our realme, and Actis of our Parliament, maid be ws and
our maifl noble progenitouris, Kingis of this our realme, to quhome only the
power to mak lawis belongis, as ane peculiar poynt of our and thair regall foueranitie ; and thairby decernit thame to half committit capitall and trelfonable
crymes ; and of his awin prefumptioun and vfurpatioun of our authoritie royall,
without ony warrand of ws, lies trefTonabillie difpenfit with the poyntes of death,
and ordanit the faidis perfones quha war convict and condemned, in maner
foirfaid, only to be banifched furth of the faidis bovmdis of Orknay and Zeitland ; and lies trefTonabillie adiudget thair landis, guidis and geir to be fforfaltit and efcheit to him felff. As also, the faid Patrik, Erie of Orknay,
be him felff and his foirfaidis, in the monethis and yeiris of God foirfaidis,
att the leift, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis and yeiris, trefTonabillie
perfuadit, induced, counfallit, and commandit AVilliame Sinclair of Etha,
Henrie Sinclair of Tenquhie, Mr Robert Henderlbun, Williame Irwing of Saba,
and mony vthir gentilmen of the faidis countreis of Orkney and Zeitland, to
^ Owes. - A blank of about six lines is left hero in the Record.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 83

fubfciyve and delyuer to him ane Band callit Band-mutus/ and thairby obleife
tliame felffis and thair airis, that thai fould feme and mantene him aganis quhatfmneuir j:)erfones, without ony referuatioiin of wsf and that thay fould nevir
heir nor knaw his hurt or fkaith, bot fould reveil it within tuentie foure houres,
witliout ony exceptioun of impoffibilitie or diftance of place, contrarietie of wind,
wedder, or vther impediment ; vnder the pane of tynfell ^ of Ij^fe, landis, and
guidis ; contening alfo this claufe, ' that gif it happin that pe contravening of
this Band, be ony of the faidis fubfcryveris, fould (fall) nocht cum to J)e faid Erles
knawlege, quhill ^ eftir the committeris deceife, it fould (fall) be leifum to him to
try the famyn eftir ])air daithis aganis ]?air airis, and pwneife J)air faidis aris as
he mycht half done the princijoall offendour : And that the faid probatioun of
J)air contravening of the faid Band fould (fall) be fufficient be tua witneffis :
Bindand lykwayis the faidis Gentilmen and vtheris of the cuntrie to be judged
be the faid Erie ; and nevir to feik to King, Counfell, nor Seffioune !' Quliilk
Band the faid Erie hes debaited to be lauchfull, and hes confeft the reifaueing
and haveing thairof ; althocht it be maift vnnaturall, uniuft, tyrannicall, impoffible, and treffonable ; bindand men to impoffibilities, and inioyneing to thame,
in caice of contraventioun, the paynes of Treafone, ffor naiked conceilling and
nocht reveilling his flvaith, generallie, in ony matter ; it being of verritie, that
no man hes power to prefcryve or exact fuch paynes, bot only fouerane poyntes,
and that in matteris treafonable allanerlie. Quhairby, the faid Erie hes manifeftlie and treafonablie ullu'iDed vpone him our royall authoritie and princelie
power, in j^oyntis of our abfolute foueranitie. Lyk as, the faid Patrik Erie of
Orknay hes treffonablie tane vpone him, in the faidis yeiris and monethis, at the
leift in ane or vther of thame, to call and perfew befoir him and his pretendit
deputtis and Judges, in his pretendit Jurifdictiones of Orknay and Zeitland,
Adame Mudie, and many vtheris our frie and obedient fubiectis ; and eftir his
pretendit maner, haifing accufed and convicted thame of dyverfe crymes, hes
nocht only pronunced aganis thame the Sentence of Banifchement, and fforfaltour to him felff of thair landis and guidis ; bot thaireftir componed, tranfacted,
and agreid with thame, and trealbnablie vfurped our royall authoritie and fouerane power, be Remitting to thame the faidis capitall crymes ; quhilk no man
hes power to do, within this our realme, bot the King and fouerane of the fame.
As LYKWAYIS, the faid Erie, bereifing our faithfull fubiectis of the benifeit of

^ Query, Band-miduKS 9 A l)ond for mutual protection and defence, secretly and solemnly bindinfrtlie obli«i:ants to maintain each other, in their quarrels, ' against all deadly.' Tiiese illegal engagements were formally put down by various Acts of Parliament ; as ' Bonds of Manrent' were the principal means of encouraging and keeping alive those deadly feuds which disgraced the country, and rendered the state of society in Scotland very insecure, and in many instances almost intolerable. * Without even reserving their lawful allegiance to the kintr. -^ Loss. ^ Until.

84 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

our peale and generall protectioiine, and the fredome of thair travelling and
traffique be lea and land, lies, in the yeiris and monethis foirfaidis, att the leill
in ane or vther of thame, dilcliarged the i^afTageis and ferreis of Orknay and
Zeitland, that nane Ibuld half entreis or outgoing furth thairof, without his Palport and Licence ; and did incarcerat, in ftokis and irnes, the fervandis of James
Stewart of Granielliy, for tranlpoirting of Robert Menteithe his guidbrother,^
without his licence ; and cauled incarcerat the fervandis of Frances Mudie, for
tranfpoirting thair faid maifter ; — the men of Sowna, for tranfpoirting Williame

Bannatyne ; — and the men of Flottay, for tranlpoirting of ,

thair maifter ; held and detenet thame captiues and priffoneris, in irnes, ftokis,
cloils-prilfone and firmance, dyuerle dayis and oulkis ; " vfurpeing thairby, moft
treftbnablie, our authoritie royall, and bereifing our lauchfull fubjectis of the
vfe and benifite of thair natiue libertie, dew to thame, in thair frie paftlige and
traffique, vnder our peace and protectioun, throw all the pairtis of this our kingdome, be lea or land. And nocht content thairwith, the faid Erie, leifing na
foirt of extraordiner Oppreftioune and trefoneable violence vnpractized aganis
the faidis Inhabitantes of Orknay and Zeitland, at the tymes perticulerlie aboue
reherfet, at the leift in dyuerle of the monethis and yeiris foirfaidis, lies compellit the niaift pairt of the gentilmenis tennentis of the faidis contreyis of Orknay
and Zeitland to work to him all nianer of work and laubour be fea and land, in
rolling ^ and failling his fchipis and boittis, working in the ftane-querrel,'* wynning and beiring fm*th thairof ftanes and red furth thairof, laidning his boittis
and fchellopes ^ with ftane and lynie, and loifeing the fame, bigiiig his park
dykes, and all vther foirtis of ferveill and paynefull laubour, without atlier ineit,
drink, or hyre.*^ And, to conclude the vtter rwyne of the 2)oire(l'ouris of the
faidis landis and Yles, lies, in the faidis yeiris and monethis, att the leift in
dyuerfe of the fame, impofed, exacted, and trelTonabillie vplifted frome thame,
dyuerfe grit and exorbitant taxationes and impofttiones, quhilkis na man may
laiichfuUie do, within this our realme, bot We, of our fouerane power allaneriie ;
vlurpeand thairby, maift treftbnabillie, vpone him, our authoritie royall. FiNALLIE, the faid Erie, in the faidis monethis and yeiris, at the leift in ane or
vther of thame, lies treftbnabillie difcharget the faidis Inhaljitantis of Orknay or
Zeitland, to by or fell meill, malt, ineit, drink, filche, flefche, butter, nolt, fclieip,
or ony vther commoditeis, without his Licence, vnder grit penalteis ; lykas, he

' Brotlier-in-lavv. - Weeks. ' Rowing with oars. ' Stone quarry. ^ SIikIlops ; small vessels. '^ This inhumanity of the Earl of Orkney appears, by existing docunients,

to liave been carried to the most frightful excess — and the lives of the unfortunate natives rendered
utterly wretched, worse than the condition of galley-slaves, or that of the Christian captives in Barbary — being only paralleled by the ' Egyptian bondage and oppression of the children of Israel^ under
King Pharaoh I' Reference may be made to the Trials and Documents before quoted.

44&8JAC. VL CRIxMINAL TRIALS. 85

hes oft and dyuerfe tymes, with all rigour, exacted the faidis penalties aganis
findrie of the faidis Inhabitantis, for thair lauchfull hying and felling of thair
fommoditeis and necellhris without his licence. QuiiiLKis Treafonable crynies
ahoue writtin, and ilk ane of thame, war done, committed, and perpetrat be the
faid Patrik Erie of Orknay, be him felfF and his complices, and vtheris iji liis
name, of his caufeing, command, affiftance, and ratihabitioune : And thairb}% the
faid Patrik Erie of Orknay hes committed Treafone aganis ^Vs, and hes trelfoneabillie ufurped vpone him the poyntis of oure foueranitie, and infeperable
pairtis of our Royal power and authoritie : And he is airt and pairt thairof :
And aucht and fould be pwneifched thairfoir, be the paynes of Treafone, with
all rigour ; in example of vtheris to attempt the lyke, gif fa be. Oure Wii.i. is
IIeiufoir, and We charge yow ftraitlie, and command, that incontinent thir
our Letteris fene, ye pas, and in our name and authoritie command and charge
the faid Patrik Erie of Orknay, committer of treafoneable crymes aboue writtin,
in maner foirfaid, vpone fourtie dayis wairning, to find fufficient and refpoiiihll
cautioun and fouertie, actit in our Buikis of Adiornall, that he fall compeir
befoir our Juftice or his deputis to vnderly our lawis for the famyn, in our Tolbutli of Edinburgh, the fecund day of Auguft nixtocum, in the hour of caus,
vnder the paynes contenit in our Actis of Parliament : And that ye charge him
j)erfonallie, gif he can be apprehend it, and failzeing thairof, at our Caftell of
Edinburgh, quhairin he hes his remaning for the prefent, and be oppin proclamatioun at the mercat croce of our burgh of Edinburgh, to find the laid fouertie
actit, in maner foirfaid, within fax dayis next aftir he be charget be yow thairto ;
vnder the pane of rebellioun, and putting of him to our home. The quhilkis
fax dayis being by paft, and the faid fouertie nocht being fundin, that ye incontinent thaireftir denunce the faid Patrik Erie of Orknay our rebell, and put him
to our home, and efcheit and inbring all his moveabill guidis to our vfe, for his
contemptioun; and caus Regifter thir our Letteris, with your executiones tliairof,
within fyftene dayis thaireftir, conforme to our Act of Parliament made tliairanent : And gif he find the faid fouertie, that ye fummond ane Alfyfe heirto,
nocht exceiding the number of fourtie five perfones, quhais naimes ye fall relI'aue, in Roll, fubfcryuit be the compliner ; ilk perfone vnder the pane of ane
hundreth merkis. Accoirding to Juftice. As ye will anfuer to ws thairv])()un.
The quhilk to do. We commit to yow, coniunctlie and feuerallie, our full i)()\ver,
l)e thir our Letteris, delyuering thame be yow, deidie execute and iiidorlhte
agane to the beirar. Gevin vnder our Signet at Edixijukgii, the fourt day of
Junij, and of our regnne the aucht and fourtie thre yeiris, 1610.

Ex deUhcraiionc Duminorum CoufiUj. J. JJaxxatyxe}

' Writer to die sigjnet, and nearly related to tlic now celebrated (leorire Haiiiiatync.

86 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

FoLLOWis the iennour of the Executiouxe^ of the faidis Letteris.

Vpoun the tuentie day of Junij, the 5eir of God I'", fax hundreth and ten 5eiris, I Johnne BlinSELLIS, Yla Herauld, paft, at command of tliir our fouerane lordis Letteris, within wiittin, to his
Maiefteis Castell of Ed"; and thair, with my difplayit coit of airmes, and be found of trumpet,
foundit be Siluefler Ramfay, trumpeter, I commandit and cliarget Patrik, Ekle of Orknay, perfonallie apprchcndit, witliin the faid Caftell, and delyverit to him ane juft and autentik coppie of the
laidis within writtin Letteris, fiibfcryuit with my hand, to find fufficient and refponfall cautioun and
fouertie to the Juftice Clerk and his deputtis, actit in the buikis of Adiornall, that he fall compeir
l)efoir the Juftice or his deputis, day and place within fpecifeit, in pe hour of caus, and vnderly the
Law for the trelibnabill crymes within reherftt ; within fax days nixt eftir this my charge ; vnder the
pane of rebellioun and puting of him to the Iiorne. This I did, eftir the forme and tennour of tbir
our fouerane lordis Letteris, in all pojTitis ; befoir thir Witneftis, George Klrkwoid, Albanie herauld,
Robert Logane, meflinger, Siluefter Ramfay, tmmpeter, and Williame Dalglefche, poft in Ed'', with
dyuerfe vtheris. And for the raair verificatioun of this my Executioun, fubfcryuit with my hand, my
fignct is affixt. Johnne Blinsell, Hay Herauld. (L. S.)

Thair eftir, my Lord Aduocat producet ane Warraiid of the Lordis of his Maiefleis Secreit Coiinfail, direct to my Lord Juftice, ffor continuation of the faid
dyet, to the nynt day of Auguft inftant. Off the quhilk Warrand the tennour

followis.

Justice, Juftice Clerk and 50ur deputtis. fiforfamekill as the fecund day of Auguft nixtocum,
being appointit to Patrik, Erle of Orknay, for his compeirance befoir 50W, to vnderly the Lawis,
for certane crymes fpecifeit and contenit in the Letteris raifed J'airanent : Neuertheles, for fome fpeciall confiderationes of his Maiefteis feruice, it is oure Will, and we command 50U to continew the
faid dyet; to the nynt day of the faid moneth of Auguft nixtocum ; conforme to the ordour obferuet
in the lyk cailTis : Whearaneut, thir prefentis falbe 50ur Warrand. At Edinburgh, the xxvij day of
July, IGIO. Al. Cancell^ Dumear.

The Justice, for obedience of the faid Ordinance, continewit the faid dyet to
the faid nynt day of Auguft inftant.

My Lord of Orknay takis inftrumentis of his compeirance, and declairis quhat

' The Legal antiquary will peruse this curious document with much interest. The ' pomp and circumstance' of Hay Herald, arrayed in his tabard, and attended by Albany Herald, and their respective
Pursuivants and Witnesses, after a flourish by one of the trumpeters attached to the Herald's College,
personally apprehends, as it is legally termed, the Earl of Orkney, and formally charges him, by virtue
of the Royal Letters. The present unmeaning and empty form employed by Messengers-at-Arms
(being still attached to the Lion King-at-Arms College) bears traces of this ancient ceremony; and
still, in the event of the party being denotmced rebel, the instnmient bears this to have been done,
* after three several blasts ' of a horn or trumpet, at the market-cross of the head burgh where the
rebel (^Jictionc juris) resides, or where his usual domicile is situated. If ' furth' of Scotland, the ceremony is supposed, by a practical fiction, to be denounced at the market- cross of Edinburgh, pier and
shore of Leith ; but in tnith, it is effected by the Messenger sitting snugly in his chamber, perhaps up
eight or ten pair of stairs, signing an attestation, which is also subscribed by two witnesses, termed
concurrents. It is in the recollection of some practitioners of the Law, that a few Messengers, of the
old school, actually went to market-cross, pier and shore, and in these ' good old times,' every man was
' his own Tnimpeter I' A rigidly conscientious person of this class, actually carried a model of a horn
in silver, regularly perforated, and at each of the places requisite gave ' three several blasts,' by
breathing through this curious instrument, much to the edification of the bystanders, who naturally
inferred the man to be insane ! But he sternly performed his duty, ' through good report and through
bad report,' in despite of all such taunts ; and was, moreover, the best employed Messenger of his day.

44 & 8 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 87

evir allegit ciyme is fett doim in his Dittay, he had fufRcient power and anthoritie grantit to him to do the fame ; nocht granting thame to be crymes : As fall
be juftifeit be him, in the awin ^ tyme and place.

(Aug. 9.) — My Lord Aduocat producet ane Warrand of the Lordis of
his Maiefteis Secreit Counfell, anent the continuatioun of this dyet appointit for
my Lord Orknayis tryell, to the faxtene day of Auguft inftant.^ The Erie of
Orknay afkit inftrumentis of his entrie ; and offerit him felff to the Tryell of the
law, for the allegit crymes contenit in the Letteris, nochtwithltanding of the
faid continuatiomi.

(Aug. 1 6.) — The Justice Ordanit this dayis dyett, appointit for tryell
of my Lord of Orknay, &c. to defert ; in refpect that my Lord Orknay was nocht
prefentit upone pannell.

(Nov. 22.) — My Lord Aduocat producet the fummondis, &c.^ Thaireftir
my lord Aduocat jDroducet to the Juftice, ane Warrand of the Secreit Counfell,
direct to him, anent the continuatioune of this dyet to the nyntene day of December nixtocum.^ My Lord of Orknay takis inftrumentis, &c.

(Dec. 19-) — Another Warrant is produced for continuatioun of the
trial to Mar. 8, ' nixtocum,' dated Dec. 19, 1610 : and is ligned ' Al. CancelF.
Jo. Preftoun. Blantyi'e. R. Cokburne. Kilfythe.'

\_3fr Robert CoJchurne, JujUce-Dejmte.l

(1611, Mar. 8.) — A Warrant, dated March 7, 1611, is again produced,
continuing the Trial to ' the fyftene day of May nixtocum,' figned by the Chancellour, ' Jo. Preftoun. A. M. Elphingftoun. R. Cokburne.' — My Lord of Orknay takis inftrumentis of his entrie, and nochtwithftanding of the quhilk '^^"arrand of the Counfell, offeris him felff to the Tryell of the Law, for ony crymes
that can be laid to his charge ; dii^ai^'entmg Jimplicite?' to all forder continuatioun.
The Justice Ordanit the faid Erie of Orknay to be returnit back agane to
his waird.^

[Sir WilUame Hairt, Jujlice-Depiite.']

Aug. 29. — Mr Andro Creichtoun, brother to the Laird of Innernytie.^'
Dilaitit of the Declyning of his Maieftie and Lordis of Secreit Counfal Judgement ; and thairby committing Treafoun, contrair the Actis of Parliament.

* In its own, or in its proper time and place. - The Warrant is verbatim tlie same with the

former; and is subscribed by the Lord Chancellor and Earl of Dunbar. It is dated Aug. 9, IGIO
^ The Letters and Execution are repeated. '^ In same terms as the others. Dated Nov. 20, IGIO,
and signed by ' E. Glencairne. Sanctandrois. Blantyre. Jo. Preftoun. K. Cokburne.' ^ An attested copy of the above proceedings, by Sir Jolin Cokburn of Orinestoun, knight, Clerk of Justiciary,
is preserved in the General Register House, with various other papers relative to Orkney. ** See

Amot's Crim. Trials, p. 37, G7, and 328. The Case of Ogilvie the Jesuite, 1615, in this Collection, &c.

88 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

DiTTAY agaivjl the Pannell.

Mk Robert Ciieiciitoun, brofer to the Laird of luneniytie ; 56 ar Indytit and acculet: ft'orfamekill as, 36, being takin, be directioun of the Lordis of his Maiefteis mofl honourabill Pre vie Counfall, and bro^lit befoir })ame, vpone tlie faxtene day of Angull inftant, to be examinat vpone fum matteris concerning his Maioflie and tlie eltait of tliis his Kingdome, and requyred be thair Lordfchipis
to gave 3our aith to thame, tliat 56 fould faithfullie and treulie anfuer to thame, and declair the verritie of fiulie thingis as fuld be demanded of ;o\v, 56 treafoneabillie refuifed to ackuovvlege his
Maiellie and the faidis Lordis of his moll honourabill Previe Counfall to be 3 our Judges, bot niaift
treafoneabillie declyned )iair judgement: And efier ]>at pai had put5ow in remembrance of fat deutie
and fubiectioun quhilk je audit' be our faid fouerane lord, both in refpect 56 was his naturall borne
ful)ject witliin })is reahne, and ]iat 36 war now actuallie refident within |)e famyn : And that, be Act
of Parliament, maid in })e monetli of May, the 3eir of God r".V^'. four fcoir four 3eiris, our faid fouerane lord was declairit, be him felflf and his Counfall, to be Judge competent to all perfones his hienes
fubjectis, of quliatfumeuir dcgre, functioun or conditioun thay be of, fpirituall or temporal!, in all
niatteris quhairin thay or ony of thame fould be fumniond or charget to anfuer to ; and that nane
fould tak vpone hand to declyne the Judgement of his hienes and his fucceffouris, or pair Counfallis,
in the premifles, vnder pe pane of Treafone. Lyk as, for 5 our better informatioun and refolutioun, ])e
faid Act of Parliament was than fchawin and red to 30W : je neuerfeles, vnnaturallie, rebellioullie, and
treafonahlie perfilling in 30ur mifchevous purpois, ftill refuted to ackuowlege fe Jnrifdictioun of his
Maieftie and his Secreit Counfall. Lyk as, vpone the xxiiij day of Augufl inftant, 3e being of new
broght befoir pe Aiidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, and admonifched and exhorted to acknawlege and
amend 30ur treafoncabill oflence, and to acknowlege his Maiellie to be 5 our fuperiour, and his hienes
and pe Lordis of Secreit Counfall to be 30ur lauchfull Judges, and to half jurifdictioun over 30W, 56
anfuered, as of befoir, that 3e was navvayis better refolued, bot that 3e ftill abaid be 3 our former Depofitioun and anfueir, that his Maieftie and the Lordis of Secreit Counfall was uocht 3 our fuperiouris
or Judges. And fua, 5e haif treafonabillie contemned and declyned the authoritie of our faid fouerane lord and ]'e Jurifdictioun of his hienes and Lordis of his Secreit Counfall ; and j'airby haif incurret
and fould fuffer the paynes of Treafone, to be executed aganis 50W, in 3 our body, lyfe, landis, guidis,
fame, and memorie ; in example of vtheris : Quhilkis 36 can nocht deny ; in refpect of your Depoiitiones, extant, and heir producet in Judgement, fubfcryuit with your hand; moll cleirlie verifeing all
))e premilliis.

Eftir reiding quhairof, and accufatioun of the faid Mr Andro, be vertew of
the fame, and Confeflioun maid be the faid Mr Andro, in judgement, to the
Juftice, granting the treuth of the faid Dittay, and abyding ftill at his former
Depofitiones ; quhairiipone inftrumentis was tane be our faid fouerane lordis
Aduocat, the Juftice referrit the faid Dittay to the knawlege and" tryell of ane
AlTyfe of the perfones following : Thay ar to fay ;

AssisA.
James Stewart of Gramellaw, Robert Menteith of Eglifchaw, Thomas Lyell of Murchill, ^'^lhreid
Mcdowell of Mondork,''' Mr Robert Henderfoun of Holland, Mr Gilbert Gordoun of Chirnes.'

Quhilkis perfones of Aftyfe being chofm, fworne, and admittit, eftir accufatioune of new agane of the faid Mr Andro Creichtoune, be Dittay, of the faid
treafonable cryme, quhilk in the faid Juftice and perfonis of Aftyfe awin pre-

' Owed. " Chancellcr of the Assize. ' The rest of the Assise, * mercheandis/ &c.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 89

fens and audience of new agane was grantit and confeft, judiciallie, be the faid
Mr Andro to be of verritie ; the faid Sir Thomas Hammiltoun, for forder verificatioun of the faid Dittay, producet the faid Mr Andro Creichtoiies Depoiitiones, fubfcryuit with his hand, in prefens of the Lordis of his Maiefleis nioft
honourabill Previe Counfall, and repeittit thairwith the Act of Parliament, the
pannellis Judiciall ConfefTionn, maid in prefens of the Juflice and AlTyfe ; and
thairupoun afldt inftrumentis ; and proteftit for Wilfull Errour aganis tharne, gif
thai acquit him.

Verdict. That the faid Mr Andro was Culpable and convict of the trelfonable Declyneing of his INlaieftie and Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfall to
be his Judges, accoirding to his accufatioun aboue writtin, contenit in his Dittay, fufficientlie vcrifeit to thame be his Depofitiones, produceit to thame, fubfcryuit with liis hand ; as alfo, be his Judiciall Confeffioun, maid in the Juftice
and thair prefence.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercait croce of the burgh of Ed', and thair
to be hangit and demanit as ane Tratour ; and all his landis, heritages, tenementis, annuelrentis, takis, fteidingis, &c. to be flforfalt and efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as culpable and convict, &c.^

[il/r Alexander Coliiill, Jujlke-Depitte.']
(1611, Feb. 27.) — The quhilk day, Mr Andro Creichtoun being, at command of the Counfall, broclit furth of waird out of the Tolbuth of Ed', and prefentit vpone pannell, to heir Dome of new agane pronuncet vpone him, the Juftice ordanit the Counfallis Warrand vnderwrittin, delyuerit to him be my Lord
Chanceller, to be oppinlie red in judgment, viz.

Justice, Juftice clerk, and 5001- deputtis. Forfamekill as althoght Dome and Sentence was pionouncet aganis Mr Andro Creichtoun, bro])er to f e Laird of Iniiernytie, ordaning him to haif bene
tane to the place of his Executioun, and \a\v to be hangit and vjierwayis demanit as ane tratour, for his
trellbnabiil declyneing of the Kitigis Maieftie and his Counfallis judgement, and for certane vtheris
treffonabill crymes fpecifeit and contenit in the Sentence and Dome of Conviciioun pronunced aganis
him : Neuertheles, it lies now plcfit the Kingis Maieftie, out of his ac'cuftomed gracious dilpodtioun
to clemencie and mercie, to mitigat the rigour of the Sentence pronuncet aganis the laid Mr Andro,
and to Ordane him to be Banifchet his Maiefteis haill dominions ; and nevir to returne agane within
the fame, during his lyve tyme, vnder the pane of deid, to be execute vj)one him without forder dome
or Sentence to be pronuncet aganis him. Thairfore, 30W iall, vpone }>e iicht heirof, appoint and fet
ane Juftice Court, cans })e faid Mr Andro to be exhibeit befoir 50W, and pronunce new Sentence
aganis him, confornle to his Maiefteis gracious fauour, clemencie and mercie, Ordaning him to be
Banisched his Maiefteis haill dominions, and nevir to returne agane within the famyn, during his
lyftyme, vnder the payne to l)e Hangit quhill he be deid, without ony f(uder dome or Sentence to be
pronunced aganis him ; and that, for contravening of fis prefent Sentence. Eftir the |)ronuMC»ing
qubairof, 30W fall caus returne him bak agane to his waird, thairin to remane, quhill the commoditie

' ' Mn. The Dittay, with the pannellis Depositiones, gevin vp to my lM)rJ Atluorat the day foirsaid.'
VOL. III. M

90 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

be had of fome fchip going out of the cuntrie ; quhaiiby he may be caryed to hir be ])e Magiftratis of
Ed'", and fua fend away. And this 50W faill iiocht to do : Whearauent ])ir prefentis fall be jour
Warrand. At Ed", the xxvj day of Februar, 1611. JAMES R.

The Juftice, for obedience of the cominaiid thairiii coiitenit, be the mouthe of
Alexander Kennydie, dempfter of Court, decernit/ &c. Whilk was in'onimced
for Dome.

iS/r WiUJam Heart, Jtt/lice-JDejmte.'}

^\nnQ])Uv—3>\\ttvto\m\mninv^ toitlj Jieljels— Creasanaljle Cfjeft

antj ^toutjjceif, ^f»

Sept. 6. — WiLLiAME Douglas of Lyncluden and Grenelaw,^ (callit

IViU'iame of P'mxerie,) eldell fone and appeirand air of Willianie Douglas of Baitfurd.

Dilaitet of dyuerfe crymes of Slauchter ; beiring and weiring of piftolettis ;

and of the treiTonabill crymes of thift committit be him, he being ane landit

Gentilman ; in manner fpecifeit in his Dittay, vnder writtin.

FoRSAiMEKiLL as je, haifing confauit ane deidlie ffeid, rancour, and malice, without ony caus, aganis
vmq'*^ Thomas Softlaw, burges of Dumfreis, vpone the fyft day of Apryle, or ])airby, the jeir of God
I'^.Vj'". and fewin jeiris, and haifing eonvocat with 50W Johnne Cunninghame, jour feruand, and
v])eris deboifchet men, jour complices, to ])e number of tuentie perfones, or pairby, all bodin in feir
of weir, with lance-ftalfis, fuordis, quhingeris,^ and with hagbuttis and piftolettis, prohibeit to be
borne or worne be dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, came to the Brigend of Dumfreis, quhair the faid
vmq'^' Tiiomas was, in quyet and fober raaner, vnder Godis peax and the Kingis ; and pair, je fearcelie
fet vpone him, and perfewed him for his flauchter, hurt and woundit him with jour piftolettis, and
vtheris wappones foirfaidis, in ])e heid, and dyuerfe v])eris pairtis of his body ; to the eft ufioun of his
bluid in grit quantitie ; off the quhilkis ftraikis and w'oundis he fchortlie fiaireftir depairtit this lyfe ;
and fa, was crewallie and vnmerciefullie flane, be jou, and jour faidis complices, of jour caufmg, command, affiflance, and ratihabitioun ; and je ar airt and pairt Jiairof. To the taikin,'^ that je, and jour
faidis complices, being charget to find cautioun to compeir befoir J>e Juftice, and vnderly ])e law for
fe faid Slauchter, je part; twyfe to the home for pe faid cryme, as the Letteris of Hoirning heirwith
producet verifeis. — Item, 3e ar indytit and accufed, as airt and pairt of j^e crewall and fellone Slauchter of vniq'*^^ Eduard Maxwell of Croftoun, committed at ])e Brigend of Dumfreis, vpone the

day of September, or Jiairby, the jeir of God I'".Vj<'. and aucht jeiris, be jow ])e faid Williame
Douglas of Linduden, Johnne Schillingtoun, jour fervand, Johnne Greir, fuordflipper at the Brigend
of Dumfreis, and Johnne Dempfter in the College of Lincluden, quho of jour fpeciall caufing, fending, hounding out, airt and pairt-taiking, reffet with the bludie hand, aififlance, and ratihabitioun, with
fair fuordis, lances, and vjieris wappones, invafiue, invaidit and perfewit J)e faid vniq''' Eduard Maxwall, for his Slauchter, and hurt and woundit him in fe lieid, and dyuerfe pairtis of his body, to pe
grit effufioun of his bluid. Off the quhilkis woundis he nevir thaireftir convalefced ; bot lying in extreame and deidlie payne, be ])e fpace of fyve or fax dayis, in end, vpoun the . . . day of September,

' The words of the warrant repeated. - The family of Douglas of Penzire was descended from George Douglas, the third son of Sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, who was killed July 22, liS-t, near Lochmaben. Williiim of Penzire married .Agnes, second dawghter of John, sixth I-ord INIaxwell, (the father of John the seventh I^ord
Maxwell, whose Treason, escape, &c. foiTn part of this Dittay,) by Lady Elizabeth Douglas, second daughter of
David, seventh Earl of Angus. This circumstance explains satisfactorily that part of the Dittay which refers to
his resetting, and other transactions with Lord Maxwell, his brother-in-law. ^ A short sword or hcuujer ,- a

kind of cutlass. * In token, proof, or testimony whereof.

44&8JAC, VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 9I

or fairby, the 5eir of God 1608 5eiris foirfaid, he depairtit this lyfe ; and fua, was crewallie flane be
50U and 3 our faidis complices, of ^cur caufing-, command, reffet, afiiltance, and ratihabitioun : And je
ar aii't and pairt })airof ; ffor jie quhilk, 50 haif lyne at ]>e borne thir tuo 5eiris bygane. 5e ar alfo Indytit, ftbrfamekill as pe faid Johnne Greir, being tane with the bludie hand, and immediatlie efter |)e
committing of fe faid crewall Slauchter of })e faid vrnq'*" Eduard Maxwall, being committit to Waird
for ])e fame, in our fouerane lordis ordiner PrifTone and Pledge-chalmer of Dumfreis, and ]>a\Y keipit
priflbner in the irnes, be the fpace of foure dayis, the faid Johnne Schitlingtoun, 30ur fervand, at ^our
command, and be 30ur fpeciall convoy and afliftance, haveing provydit him felf of gavillokis,^ crawimes,- fyles, and vferis work-lov/mes,^ furneift and prepairit to him be 50U and 50wr meanis, come
vpone the . . . day of pe faid moneth of September, or fairby, and 5eir of God foirfaid, and in the
nyght feafoun brak J)e voult and pend * of ])e faid prifone, and fchure * af pe irnes, quhairin the faid
Johnne Greir was loked, and violontlie and forceablie relevit him furth of our fouerane lordis Prifone
foirfaid, and cayreid him to 30ur duelling hous in Lyncluden, wheir 56 reffet, keiped, and interteneid
him dyuerfe dayis, nychtis, and oulkis ^ faireftir : And fua, 50 ar airt and pairt of the contemptuous,
infolent, and violent broking of our fouerane lordis prifone, and taking furth pairof, violentlie and perforce, of the faid Johnne Greir, giltie and captiue for ]ie faid crewall Slauchter of })e faid vrnq'*" Eduard Maxwall of Corftoun, and of ]>e wilfull reflet, fuppiie, and intertenement of ]ie faid Johnnie Grier,
giltie and fugitiue for fe faid crewal Slauchter ; and audit and fould be pwneifched with the lyk and
felf fame paynes quhilk ])e law lies prefcry ved aganis ]>e faid principall malefactour, for his crymes
foirfaidis. To the taikin,^ that ]>e faid Johnne Grier and 36 war bothe fugitives, and at Jie home, for
])e cryme foirfaid. — Item, 3e ar indytit of 30ur treaflbunabill Intercowmoning with Johnne fumtyme
Lord Maxwall,^ in the toun of Dumfreis, and in the Caftell-3aird jiairof, and dyuerfe vtheris places
within the fcherefdomes of Nyddifdaill, Annandaill, Kirculdbrycht, and Galloway; and for Reifeting
and fuppleing him in 30ur hous of Lyncluden, and vperis 30ur duelling places, in pe moneth of December, the 3ear of God I'".Vj'^. and fevin 3eiris, and in ])e monethis of Januar, ffebruar, and remanent
monethis of ])e ^eir of God 1608 ^eiris, at J)e leill dyuerfe dayis and nychtis of ])e faid ;eir, eftir that
he had committed nottour and manifeft Treafone, be his violent and forceable breking Waird furth of
]7e Caflell of Edinburgh, vpone the fourt day of December, or ]iairby, ]ie 3eir of God r".Vj''. and fevin
"3eiris, and perfewing the Porteris and Keiperis jiairof for Jiair Slauchter, hurting and wounding dyuerfe
of ])ame in findrie pairtis of |)air bodeis, to ]>e grit eft'ufioun of y)air bluidis, and perrell of J)air lyves ;
and preiffing, fo far as in him lay, treafoneabillie to relief Sir James M'coneill, detenit in irnes and
ftrait prifoun within ])e faid Callell, for dyuerfe odious and treafoneabill crymes ; ^ flbr })e quhilkis
manifefl Treafones, the faid Johnne Lord Maxwall was noclit only denuncet rebell and tratour, and
all our fouerane lordis legis difchaiget, be Prodaniatioun, to iiitercowinone with, reflet, or fuplie
him, vnder pe panes of law; hot alfo, he fforfaltit, be Decreit of Parliament, for ])e famyn. To the
taikin, that 50, being dyuerfe tymes cliargot to compeir bofoir ]ie Counfell, to anfuer for ])e faidis crymes
of Reflett, fuppiie, and intercowmoning with ])e faid Johnne, fumtyme Lord Maxwall, 30, knawing
30ur awin giltines, difobeyit the charge, and pafl to J)e home ; at the quhilk ^e haif lyne continualiie
fenfyne vnrelaxit. — Item, ^e ar indytit and accufet, fforfaniekill as Johnne Lord Hereis, being directed
be ]>e Lordis of his Maiefteis Secreit Counfall to tak and apprehend 30W and Eduard Maxwall of
Craigtoun, ane nottour rebell and fugitiue, for Tliift, Stouth-reif, ffyre-raifing, fuppleing and aflilling
my Lord Maxwall, and dyuerfe vtheris treafonable crymes, quhilk ])e faid Eduard him felf declared
vnto 30W ; the faid Lord Hereis, vpone the fyftene day of Augull lallbypall, cuming, for executioun

1 A lever used by ((uarriers of stone, a pinch or prize. » Crowbar. ^ Tools. * \'iiult ami arch.

* Literally A7je«rf«/, as with a reaping-hook. "^ Weeks. ' In testimony or proof' whereof. • See

May 13 and Jun. 21, KiOO, &r. That nobleman was beheaded, at the Cross of Edinburgh, May 21, 1G13. See
also Appendix. • See bis Trial, III. 1, &c. Jun. 2-1, 1C09.

92 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

of the faid directioune, to tlie lious of Johnne Coutliird, in Reid-Caftell, whear je, with ]>e fald Eduard, and dyueife 30ur complices, war then ailemblit, and lie him felff, and his fervandis, commanding
50W and ])e faid Eduard, in our foueiane lordis name, to be tane with him, and to randir 5our felfis
and ^our wappones, c;e tieafounabillie difobeyit ]>e faid charge, and with 50ur fuordis, piftolettis, and
vferis vnlauchfull wapponis, invaidit and perfewed the faid Lord Ilereis and his fervandis for pair
Slauchter, hurt and woundit Jolinne Geddes, Johnne Coutliird, and dyuerfe vtheris of thame, in fmdrie pairlis of ))air bodeyis, to the grit effulloun of fair bloudis, violentlie and forceablie hinderit thame
to tak the faid Eduard INIaxwall, rebel!, rcleifit him fra jmme, and gaif him meanis and occafioun to
efcaip furth of the faid hous ; and fua, violentlie and treafonabillie withiluid the faid Lord Hereis,
haifing the Counfallis command and directioun to tak 30W and ))e faid Eduard INIaxwall, liandiug
rebell for Treafone, as faid is ; and affillit and tuik pairt with him, in his treafoneable withftanding of
the faid Lord Hereis, and in his treafonable pcrfewing of ))e faid Lord and his companie, for J)air
Slauchter, and had ane piftolet vpone 50W at pat tyme : And 30 ar airt and pairt pairof; as 30ur
awin Depofitioun, fubfcryuit with 30ur handis, and pe Depofitioun of fum of thais that war pvefent at
^our apprehenfioun, cleirlie verifeis. Item, 3e pe faid Williame Douglas of Grenelaw and Lyncluden, eldell fone and appeirand air of James Douglas of Baitfurd, 3e ar indytit and accufed, flforfamekill as ^e, being ane landit Gentilman, and heritable proprietor of the faidis Landis of Grenelaw
and Lyncluden, and dyuerfe v)ieris landis and heritages, haif committed the treafonable crymes of
Tliift and Stouthe-reif vnderwrittin, be 30ur felf and 30ur complices, and vperis in 3our name, of 30ur
caufing, command, reffett, affiftance and ratihabitioun, quhairof 3e war and ar airt and pairt, that is to
fav, ffor ^our coming to Dauid Welfches chalmer, in the place of Grenelaw, and treffonabill breking
vp, perforce, of his lettrone' pair, and fteilling furth pairof xxxv li. money, or pairby, quhairof pair was
tuo half ducattis, pertening to the vmq^'' Proveill of Lyncluden, his maifter, quhairof 5e fone paireftir
wiffillit- ane half ducat with Alexander Gordoun, violor in Wigtoun, for fyve raerkis ; quhilk being
tryit and maid nottour to all pe Proveiftis fervandis and haill nychtbouris in the countrie, and cuming
at lafl to the Proveiftis awin knawlege, he was fo heichlie offendit with 30W for pe fame, that he
boiftit^ ap«r to droun^ 30W, or at leill to put 50W af pe cuntrey, and nevir to do 30W any benefeit or
guid ; quhilk 36 heiring paiiof, be pe counfell of the faid Dauid Welfche, paft in to pe Proveift chalmer in Grenelaw, quhair he was lyand in his bed, and pulling 30ur breikis and fchankis^ af 30ur
kneyis, 30 fat doun befoir him vpone 30ur hair kneyis, cravet God and liim pardoun and forgevenes,
for pat 30ur offence, and fwoir and promeiflit to him nevir to do pe lyk thaireftir. Quhilk treafoneable Thift was committed be 30W, about nyne 5eir fyne, or pairby; quhilk 36 can nocht deny; lyk as
the famyn is cleirlie verifeit be pe Depofitiounes producet. Item, 3e ar indytit and accufed for pe
trefonable Steilling, conceilling and away-taking frome Thomas Fergufoun, feruitour to pe faid vmq-''
Proveift of Lyncluden of an Angell of gold, and fum filuer, furth of his purfe, in the 3eir of God
r".Vj'". and tua 3eiris, or pairby. Item, 3e ar indytit and accufet for the treafonable Steilling, conceilling and away-taking, vnder filence and cloud of nycht, of tuentie-aucht pecis of gold fra Johnne,
fumtyme Lord Max wall, committed be 30W in the place of Langholme, quhair 36 war lyand in the
chalmer with the faid Lord Maxwall, in the 3eir of God 1605 3eiris, or pairby. To pe taikin, 56 wiffillit ane of pe faidis peces of gold, being ane double-doubill piltolet, in an oider-hous befyde the Langholme ; and ^e was paireftir apprehendit, and challanget wiftelling fum vper of pe faidis peces, in Dumfreis : ffor pe quhilkis crymes, 36 war indytit and arreiftit to pe Juftice Court haldin be my Lord Erie
of Dumbar, liis Maiefteis Heich Commiflioner, in the Middile fchyres, in July, 1609 3eiris; and was

' Literally a reading-desk or pulpit where prayers are read, from O. Fr. letrin, lectrin, lutrin. It is frequently
employed to signify n box, chest, or desk for hohiing jiapers, &c. » Exchanged; ' chatu/ed ;' sometimes spelt

quhiss'ellit. ^Threatened, as Lord of the Kegality, and entitled to sit as Criminal Judge on his trial. * A

common punishment, in the inferior Judicatories, for Theft, &c. ' A kind of long hose.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 93

fugitive fairfoir. Item, 3e ar indytit and accufet for jour treafonabill breking of Jolinne Grahame in
the Gait, his kift,' vnder clud and filence of nyclit, and maiflerfull and thiftious Steilling and reveing,
furth of \>ii faid kift, of ft'ourtie-foure pundis, being all foure-merk-peces, pertoning to ]>e laid Johnne,
committed be 50W in ))e jeir of God 1601 jeiris. Item, 5« ar indytit and accufed for jour treftbnabill
airt and pairt of ]>e fteilling, reifing, and away-taking and conceilling of ane kow, perteniiig to Meg Miller in Croftis, with ])e haill infight of liir hous ; committed be 50W in Julij laftbypaft : To th e taikin, ^e
brocht ane kift full of meill to (and?) anelynning wob of hiris,* and fauld (tliame?)in Johnne Graiiames
of the Gait. Item, 5<? ar indytit and accufet for jour treafonable Stouth-reif of ane naig, pertening
to Robert Symontoun at ))e Myliie of Corfemichell ; committed in July 1610, laftbypaft : To he taikin,
je wald nocht reftoir pe naig eftir he was tryit vpone jow, quhilP je gat fyve pundis money frome ])c
faid Robert for ])e farayn. Item, 3e ar indytit and accufet for ^our Maifterfull and treafonable Stouthreift' of ane naig from Jolmne M'gill in Grenelaw, in Auguft, 1610: To fe taikin, ;e was rydand
on him, immediatelie befoir je was tane. Item, 3e ar indytit and accufet for :;our treafonable
Stouth-reif of ane kow, frome Robert Welfche in Dillovodie; committed three jeir fyne, or ))airby; quhilk was than inftantlie ilane and difponit vpone in jour hous. Item, 5« ar indytit and
accufed for jour treflonabill Stouth-reif from Johnne Johnneftoun in Lynduden, of ane kow, tua
qeir fyne, or jiaiiby ; and caufit flae and difpone vpone hir, in jour hous, at jour plefour. Iteni,
3e ar indytit lykwayis, for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring and
weiring hagbuttis and piftolettis vpone jour perfone, and in jour companie, oppiidie, outwith houftis,
within pe fcherefilome of Drumfreis and ftewartrie of Kirkculdbrie ; and J)at monethlie and daylie ; at
the leift, in ane or vper of fe monethis, in ]>e jeiris of God r".Vj''. fevin, 1608, 1609, 1610 jeiris :
To the taikin, je was tane with ane piftolet vpone jow, quhilk je prefentit to Johnne Geddes at iour
taikiiig. Item, 3e ar indytit for Cowraone Thift, Cowmone Relfett of thift, outputing and inputting
of thift, fra land to land, fra cuntrie to cuntrie, baith auld and new, notourlie knowin. Be the quliilkis
Treafonable crymes aboue writtin, and ilk ane of them refpectiue, committed be sow, and vj)eris in
jour name, of jour caufmg, command, afliftance and ratihabitioun, as faid is, and quhairof je war and
ar airt and pairt, je haue deferuet and incurrit the paines of Treafone, quhilkis fould be execute vpone
jour body, lyfe, landis and guidis : And je half ftorfaltit to the Kiugis Maieitie, ;our haill landis,
fteidingis, rowmes, pofleffiones, takis, contractis, bandis, reuerfiones, richtis, fecuriteis, hoip and appeirance of fucceffioun, and all v])eris landis, rychtis, guidis and geir quhatfumeuir, moveabill or vnmoveabill, quhilk je had, or quhilk je mycht haif appertenit, or ony wayis haif bcfullin to sow, and
|)e famyn fould be adiudget to haif befallin to our faid fouerane lord, and to appertene to his hienes,
and to remane with him, his croun and fuccefiburis, now and in all tyme curaing.

Eftir prodiictioun of the faid Dittay, be our faid fouerane lordis Aduocat, the
faid ^^'illialne Douglas was put to the tryall of ane Allyfe of the perfones following, viz.

ASSISA.

Williame Creichtoun of Ryhill, Thomas Hunter in Rurne, George M'ne in Lynduden,

Alexander Maxwall of Logane, Williame Douglafs of Lache, 'i'homas WeUVhe thair,

Johnne Broun of Mullennis, James M' llerik of tlie Kerne, Niniane Myller in Ryhill,

James Mairtene in Airdis, Johnne Greirfoun of Ingliftoun, Hew Douglas of Belliebocht,

Jo" Fairies in Carfe of Kynneill, Jolmne Carmicholl elder in Spothe, Rodger ra<i;(>ane of Xewtoune,

My lord Aduocat afkit inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Allyfe. (L) My
lord Aduocat producet the tua Letteris of Iloirning for the Slauchter of vniq'*
Thomas Softlaw, togidder w ilh ane Dittay aganis the pannell, and j)uhlicatioun

' Box, chest. « Hers. ^ After you was publicly accufed of the theft, until you got L,5, he.

94 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

of his abfence, and Declaratioiin of his being fugitiue fra the Juflice Court,
haldin at Drumfres be my Lord Dinnbar, for the faid Slauchter. (2.) Lykwayis,
my lord Adiiocat prodncet tiia Hoirningis aganis the pannell, for the Slauchter
of Eduard Maxwall of Troftoun. (3.) For verificatioun of the thrid Article of
Dittay, refpecttis the tua Hoirningis producet. (4.) ffor verifeing the fyft {foiwih)
Article, my lord Aduocat repeittis the notorietie of my Lord Maxwallis fforfaltour, and producet tua Hoirningis aganis the faid Lord Maxwall, togidder with
Letteris of Publicatioune aganis all our fouerane lordis legis, that nane fould
reflet him : As alfo producet Letteris direct aganis the pannell, quhairby he was
charget befoir the Counfall, and paft to the home for diflbbedience. (5.) ffor
verificatioune of the f'jft Article, repeittis the Judiciall Declaratioun maid be
my Lord of Dumbar, anent the "NA^arrand gevin to my Lord Hereis, for apprehending of the pannell and Eduard Maxwall of Craigtoun : And ficklyk, producet Letteris of Hoirning, beiring the faid Eduard Maxwall to be fugitiue. (6.)
Repeittis, for verifeing ihej(ixt Poynt, the notorietie of the cryme with certane
Depofitiones. (7.) ffor verificatioun of the 7 Poynt, producet his Depofitiones,
togidder with his Indytement at the Jufl:ice Court of Dumfreis, and of his being
fugitiue thairfra. (8.) ffor verificatioun of the Piftolettis, repeittis his Depofltioun producet. (9.) ffor verificatioune of the quhilkis thiftious crymes, treffonablie committit be the pannell, and that thairin he hes committit Treflbne, my
lord Aduocat jiroducet the pannellis Infeftment of the Landis of Lyncluden, togidder with ane Contract fubfcryuit betuix him and the Lard of Lochinvar, fubfcryveinghim felf to be 'ffiear of Lyncluden ;' and repeittis that Act of Parliament,
beiring Landit Gentilmen, committing Thift, to incur the cryme of Treafone.

Eftir reiding of the haill poyntis of Dittay, the pannell confeflis the famyn to
be of veritie, for ffeir of his lyfe ; and thairfoir becumis in his Maiefteis Will. —
My Lord Aduocat repeittis the writtis producet, and the Act of Parliament
maid againft the committeris of Thift, be(ing) landit Gentilmen ; and in refpect
thairof, Proteftis for Wilfull Errour againft the Aflj-fe, gif they will acc[uit. —
IVIy lord Aduocat declairit to the pannell, that nochtwithftanding of the admitting of the Afl'yfe, he is content, gif it be admittit be the Juftice, that the pannell fall be reponit to his defenflis, and haif the afliftance of his prelocutouris to
that effect ; and lykwayis, to obiect aganis the perfones of Affyfe, gif he hes ony
lauchfull exceptioun to propone aganis thame, albeit it be nocht the forme of
this Judgement : And thairupoun afkit inftrumentis. Nochtwithftanding of the
quhilk offer maid be my lord Aduocat, the pannell offeris him felf in his Maiefteis Will, for the haill crymes contenit in his Dittay.

Veedict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Williame Creichtoun of Ryhill, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Williame Douglas of Lyncluden,
to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the Reffet with the bludie hand of Johnne

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 95

Greir, principall committer of the Slaiichter of vmq'* Eduard INIaxwall of Troltoun, immediatlie eftir the committing thairof: And fielyk, to be ffy let, culpable
and convict of the haill ciymes of Treafone, and vtheris crymes at lenth fpecifeit
and lett doun in liis Dittay, aboue mentionet.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouthe of Alexander Kennydie, dempfter of
Court, decernit and ordanit the faid Willi ame Douglas to be tane to the Mercatcroce of Edinburgh, and firft, his richt hand to be ftrukin frome his body ; and
thaireftir, the faid AVilliame to be hangit at the Mercat-croce vpone ane gibet,
quhill he be deid : And all his landis, heritages, &c. to be fforfaltit and efcheit
to our fouerane lordis vfe, as giltie and culpable of the faidis treffonabill crymes :
— Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

^orc era? — Wiitf i)f vaft — i^urtitr ♦

Sep. 7. — GmssELL Gairdnek, relict of vmq'^ Johnne Baird, burges of
Newburgh.
Dilaitit of certane crymes of Witchcraft and Sorcerie, committit be hir, in
maner and at the tymes fiDecifeit in hir Dittay following.

Persewaris, Mr Robert Foullis, fubftitute to our fouerane lordis Aduocat; Alexander Wentoun in

Newburgh, for hiinfelf, and as Informer.
Prelocutour for the pannell, Mr Johnne Ruilell, (Advocate.)

In J)E first, for on-laying, be Witchcraft and Inchantment, of ane grevous
difeas and leiknes vpone the faid Alexander Wentoun ; quhairin he lay in a feirful madnes and ffurie, pe fpace of ten oulkis ^ togidder ; and in end, for af-taking
of pe faid difeas and grevous feiknes af him, be certain directiones gevin, and
v])eris devillifche practizes vfet be hir, for his recoverie ; committit be hir in the
moneth of Februare laftbypaft. Item, for hir devillifch Sorcerie and A^^itclicraft,
practizet be hir, in laying on the lyk feirfull difeas and vnknawin feiknes vpone
Williame Anderfoune, wricht in Newburcht, for certane allegit injuries done be
him to Andro Baird, hir fone ; in the quhilk grevous feiknes he continewit the
fpace of ten dayis togidder, tormentit in maift feirfull maner ; and af-taking of
pe fame feiknes, be hir, be rejieiting thryfe of certain woirdis, quhilk fcho termet
prayeris. And fidyk, for Bewitching of ane kovv, pertening to pe faid Williame, quhairthrow pe haill milk that fcho J)aireftir gaif was bluid and worfam r'
committed be hir devilrie and Inchantment, in the monethe of IMaiJ lallbyi)all.
Item, for pe Bewitching, be hir devillrie and Inchantment, of James Anderione,
fone to Margaret Balfour in Newburclit, in on-laying of ane grevous feiknes and
difeas vpone him ; quhairof, in ane grit ffurie and madnes, witliin foure dayis
eftir on-laying ])airof, he deceiffit ; and J^airthrow, for airt and i)airt of his Mur-
' Weeks. ^ Blood and corrupted or purulent matter.

96 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

thour and deid/ committed be hir, in \>e 5eir of God I'^.Aj". and fyve 5eiris.
Item, for ane cowmone and notorioUv^ Witche and abufear of pe people, by laying on of feiknes vpone men, wemen, bairnes, and beftiall ; and be geving of
drinkis, and vfeing of viper vngodlie practizes, for af-taking of J)e faidis feiknelfis and difeafes ; and be confulting with the Devill, and feiking of refponffis fra
him, at all tymes this fourtene or fyftene 3eir bygane, for effectuating of hir
devillilch intentiones.

It is allegit be Mr Johnne Ruflfell, as ordiner prelocutor, as he allegit, for my
lord (Archbifliop) of St Androis,^ that my Lord Juftice can nocht proceid in
this matter, aganis the pannell, vnto the tyme a Precognitioun be tane of the
cryme of ^^'itclK•raft, for the quhilk this pannell is to be accufet ; conforme to
ane CommifTioun gevin to my Lord of St Androis, and certane Nobill men, to
that effect. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that thair is na lie Commiflioun
grantit, natlier is the Commiffioune producet ; and albeit thair war ony fie Commifiionne gevin, the famyn is nawayis derogatorie to my lord Juflice Jurifdictioun ; hot that the pannell man be put to ane AfTyfe, for the crymes lybellit.

It is allegit be the pannell, that the firfl pairt of the Dittay is nawayis relevant ; nather is the samyn relevantlie qualifeit, bot altogidder friuolus and
generall ; and thairfoir, can nocht be put to ane AfTyfe. It is anfuerit be the
Aduocat, that the allegeance is nawayis relevant, bot man be repellit, in refpect
of the Dittay and circumflances thairof.

The Justice remittis the Dittay to ane AfTyfe, to be cognofcet and tryit be
thame.

The Aduocat afkit inflrumentis of the chefing and fwering of the AfTyfe ;
And proteltis for Wilfull Errour, in caice thay acquit hir; in refpect of the uotorietie of the Dittay, and takinnis^ gewin to ilk poynt of the Dittay, and of the
fwering of Alexander Wentoune.

It is allegit that Sfei'in Phllp can nocht be refTauit vpone this AfTyfe, becaus
Philpis wyfes guidame'* and the perfewar Alexander AVentounes mother war
fifleris. — The faid Stevin Pliili)is ayth being tane thairupoune, declairit thai
war fib,' bot knawis nocht how neir of kyn thai war. — James Dui'ie repellit be
the Juftice, af this AfTyfe, in refpect of his dedaratioune and ayth gevin thairupoiui, that he buir the pannell at na guid will. — It is allegit aganis Robert
Allane, that he can nocht be admittit AfTyfour, becaus Anderlbnes wyfe, quha
is pairtie offendit in the Dittay, and Allane are thridis of kyn,*' as was reknit.

The Justice admittis Allane vpone this AfTyfe, for the haill poyntis con-

^ Deatb. "^ George Gladstanes, wlio was translated from the See of Caitljiiess, anno 1606 ;

but was not consecrated Archbishop, until 1610. ^ Proofs. ^ Grandmother. * Of

kin, consanguinity, or relationship by blood. '' Within the third degree of consanguinity.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 97

tenit in the Dittay, except vpoun the article coiifauit in preiudice of Anderlone's
wyfe allanerlie/

It is allegit that George Henderfone can nocht be admittit vpoun this AfTyle,
becaufe the pannell hes Letteris of Lauborrus againft him, cxiihairupoun fcho hes
gevin hir ayth of hir bodelie harme. — Anfueris, nocht relevant, becaus the Letteris ar raiflit fen" the pannellis apprehenfioun for the fact lybellit, and 'i<i\\ the
Coimfallis ordinance, appointing hir to be tryit.

The pannell, befoir the outpaffing of the Aflyfe, takis inftrumentis, that na
poynt of the Dittay is fuorne to the Aflyfe, bot^ the ffirft Article, anent Alexander Wentoun, allanerlie.

The Aduocat defyres, for forder informatioun to the AfTyfe of the pannellis
Giltines of the haill crymes lybellit, that the Minifteris^ Declaratioun, anent hir
lyfe, tred^ and converfatioun ; as alfo, Dauid Orme, Bailzie of Newburcht, ayth
and declaratioun of that pairt of the Dittay, concerning Anderfones wyfe and
bairnis, be refTauit. — It is anfuerit be Mr Johnne RufTell, that thair Declarationis
can nocht be relfauit, except thai war inlert as perlewaris in the Summondis.

The pannell proteftis that the Declaratioun to be maid be Mr Johnne Cauldcleuche, Minifter, in this matter, quhairupoune fcho is dilaitit, be nawayis
relpectit or advertit vnto be the AlTyfe. — Mr Johnne Calddeuch, Minijler^
being fuorne raaift folemnelie, be the Juflice, Deponis, that a fourtene yeir fyne
this Griffell Gairdner was than fufpect to be ane wicket woman, and ane Sorcerer ; and be the Depofitiones of the Witches execute for Sorcerie and Witchcraft, at Abernethie, Falkland, and Newburcht, fcho was reput to be ane manifeft Witch ; bot becaus thair was na precedent fact qualifeit aganis hir, the
Prelljiterie thairfoir delayit hir Tryell and accufatioun. And as concerning hir
lyfe and converfatioun fen fyne, fcho lies bene fufpect to be ane "S'errie e^-ill woman ; and for hir privat revenge aganis fic as fcho buir ony malice vnto, hes
vfet devillifche and vngodlie meanis, be Sorcerie and Incantatioun, to lay on
dyuerfe grevous difeaffis on thame ; and fpeciallie, on the periones let doun in
hir Indytement ; quhairthrow the cuntrie and parochin' quhairin fcho ducUis
hes bene gritlie fclanderit, in fuffering fic ane perlbne vnpwneill : For the quliilk
cans, the Prefbiterie, efter tryell of tlie former offences done be hir, alfweill to
the perfones contenit in hir Dittay as vpone dyuerfe vtheris that ar nocht nominat thairin, direct the Deponer, as thair Moderatour, to notifie the treiith of
the lU'cmifTes to the Counfall, that fum ordour niiglit be tane anent liir Tryell
and pwnifchment. — Quhairupoun my lord Aduocat alkit inftrumentis.

' Only, alone. This remarkable decision of tlie Justice, liowevor inconsistent with modern ])ractice,
was by no means infrequent durinf^ the reign of Kinj; James VI. '^ Since. ' Excepting.

* Clergyman of the parish of Newhurgh. * Trade ; employment ; occupniion. ^ See the King'tj

Letter to this Minister, relative to Gowrie's Conspiracy, in this Collection, II. '.Ml. ' Parish.

VOL III. N

98 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, for the maift pairt, be the mouthe of Williame Ramfaye, burges of Newbiirgh, chaiiceller, ffaiid, i)roniincet, and declairit the faid
GrifTell to be ffylet, culpal)le, and convict of the haill crymes aboiie mentionat.

Sentencf,. The Juftice Decernit and ordanit hir to be tane to the Caftell
hill of Edin', and thair to be wirreit^ at ane ftaik quhill fcho be deid ; and thairefter hir body to be brunt in alches ; and all hir nioveabill guidis and geir to be
elcheit and inbrocht to our foueran lordis vfe.

^m'Qt auU CattIr--stcanit0,

Oct. 23. — George Broun, fone to James Broun, in Cokpen.

Dilaitit, accuffet, and perfewit be Dittay, at the inftance of Robert Erie of Louthiane, and Mr Thomas Henderfone, Aduocat, fubllitute to our fouerane lordis
Aduocate, of airt and pairt of the fteilling of ane waith naig'^ a tua yeir fyne, or
thairby. Item, of fteiling of ane naig*' furth of the Park of Newbottill, pertening to Mr Alexander Ambroife, Miniiler ; and of ane Itaig,'' pertening to
Thomas Stewinfoun, fofter' of the faid Park ; committit ane yeir and ane half
fyne, or thairby. Item, for the fteilling of ane blak meir,^ pertening to Johnne
Fyndlafone, furth of the croftis of Leflie ; togidder with ane blak ftaig, pertening to James Clerk ; and ane little foirdy" ftaig ; committed vpone the xxviij and
xxix dayis of September laft. Item, for the fteiling of thre oxin, pertening to
my Lord of Louthiane, furth of Newtoun-maynes ; committit the xxvij day of
September laftbypaft.

Verdict. The Aftyfe, be the mouth of Barnard Borthuik in Caringtoun, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid George Broun to be ffylet, culpable,
and convict of the haill crymes of Thift, contenit in his Dittay aboue fpecifeit.

Sentence. To be tane to the Park of Newbottill," and thair to be hangit
vpone ane gibbet quhill he be deid ; and all his landis, heritages, annuelrentis,
heritabill bandis, and vtheris his guidis and geir quhatfumeuir pertening to him,
or quhairvnto he is provydit, to be fforfaltit and efcheit to our fouerane lordis
ufe, as convict and culpable of the faidis thiftious and treffonabill crymes.

Compeirit Mungo M'^Call, bailzie of Edinburgh, and eftir convictioun of the faid

George Broun, and pronunceatioun of his Dome, afkit inftrumentis of his entrie

vpone ])annell ; and that he was delyuerit af the toun of Edinburgis handis, be

the Juftice, to my Lord of Lothiane, to be execute, conforme to his dome.

' Strangled. - A strayed horse ; or perhaps a horse kept for waithe or hunting. It may be

slated, however, that the general acceptation of the term < tvaithe horfe,' is a stallion wlio escapes
from pasture, and wanders in quest of mares ; hut in tliis instance, lie seems to have been icayf, or
Htraved. •'' Hiding horse. A young unbroken horse ; a staliion. ^ Forester. ^ Mare.

■' Sorrel-coloured ; reddish. * The practice of executing Criminals near the spot w])ere their

crime was committed, did not seem to be mucli attended to at tliis period ; but this is one among the
few instances of a pannel, tried ia Edinburgh, being carried to some distance and executed for the
greater example.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 99

Cijeft, ^c»—df 01101131110 tlje (Gipsies, ^c,

Nov. 30. — Elizabeth Warrok, dochter of ... . Warrok in the Potterrow, [Edinburgh].
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the thifteous Steilling, conceilling, reletting and
away-taking of ane filuer mafer/ pertening to Quintene Bouftoun, niercheand
burges of Edinburgh, a thre yeir fyne or thairby. Item, for ane cowmone
Vagabund and follower of the Gipfeis, and taking pairt with thame in all thair
thiftis and juglareis this ten yeir bygane, contrair the Actis of Parliament.
Item, for ane cowmone reffetter of Thift.

Verdict. Fylet, culpable and convict of the faidis crymes.^

(Dec. 8.) — Sentence. The Juftice Ordanit hir, togidder with George
Ramsay, fone to Nicoll Ramfay in Lefuaid, (quha become in will, for certane
5owis^ ftowin be him furth of the landis of Libertoun, pertening to the tennentis
thairof, quhilkis war reftorit bak agane to the awneris, &c.) to be Scurget
throw the Burgh of Edinburgh : And to be Banischet the haill liberteis thairof, and nevir to be fund within ffoure myles thairto ; vnder the pane of deid,
viz. The laid George Ramfay, vnder the pane of Hanging, but^ forder Dome ;
and the faid Elfpeth, vnder the j^ane of Drowning," but forder Dome or Law, to
be haldin or pronuncet aganis thame.

i^iraci), ^c»— ^ ^l)t ^usliscje l^irattis'— <!^ppi*rssion, ^t.

[The transactions of the bold and lawless men, whose trial ensues, and the violence and murders
perpetrated by other Pirates, natives of both countries, but chiefly Englishmen, after the accession of
King James to the British throne, excited the liveliest interest at the time, both in Scotland and England. Instead, however, of entering into a lengthened detail of the crimes and the punishment of these
desperadoes, the Editor will content himself by giving the result of pretty laborious searches, in an
Appendix of Original Documents, which sets the matter in the clearest point of view. The sources
from which these various and highly interesting Papers have been procured, are, as usual, noted,]

Dec. 8. — Peter Love, borne in Lewis,''' in Suffex ; Johnne Cokis, borne
in Walderfweik in Suffolk ; Williame Hollane, callit ' tlie
Batiinian,' borne in SufiV)lk ; Dauid Howart, AVelchman ; Nicolas Phillopcs, borne in ^^^^illis ; Jalperd Staftiird, Irifchman ;
Anthony Colenis, borne (in Tregwne) in Cornel-fcyre,'' in Ingland ; and Abrahame Mathie, Inglifchman.
Dilaitit of the crymes of Pjlrracie, contenit in thair Dittay, viz,

' Mazer, or drinking cup. Mazers were usually, of old, made of the maple-tree. " The sentence
is not recorded. ^ Ewe-sheep. ^ Without farther sentence or trial. •' The usual punishment of death inflicted upon women for theft, &c. In cases of Treason they were l)eliea(led — and for
Murder, VV'itchcraft, he. burning at the stake was adjudged. It seems to liave been then considered
barbarous, as well as indelicate, to ha7ig females, for any crime. ^ Most probably Lowestotle,

Suffolk, which was likely pronounced Loives or Lewes, by popular corruption. " Tregony, in

the county of Cornwall, navigable by barges from Falmouth.

100 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

FoKSAiMEKiLL as from 3owr verrie 5outli, as pernicious and wicket Impes of
the Devill, being gevin ower to all Ibirtis of villaneis, robereis, and oppreffiones,
nawayis to be allowed within any Chriftiane cownione-welth, fchaiking af all
lauchfull tredis and callingis, but^ feir of God, reuerence to the Kingis Maieftie
or his hienes lawis, 3e betuik 5onr lelffis to ])at damnable tred of Pirracie, as
rooges, thevis, and fea-robberis, pillieing- and oppreffing all maner of people, of
quhatfiuneuir nationn or cuntrie, cuming within ]>e compas of 30ur mercieles
power : And namelie, be committing of the perticuler Pirraceis, heirfchipis,^ and
barl)arus Opprediones vnderwrittin, quhairof 50 and ilk ane of 30W ar airt and
pairt, in manner as followis. In ])e firit, 3e and ilk ane of 30W, being in companie with Capitane Cowart, Capitane Barret, and dyuerfe vtheris 30ur complices, notorious Pirattis, Revearis," and Sea-robberis, in the monethis of Maij
and Junij laflbypaft, lowfed af Ireland," in J)is fchip callit pe Preame,^ quhairin
3e was takin and apprehendit, be NeilljVrCloud of Lewis and his clan,&c.; 3e faillit
toAvardis ])e French coift, quhair 3e, be way of Pirracie, fauclit, afrail3eit, buirdit,
and be plane force tuik, ])e number of fax fchipis and tua boittis; the firft ])airof,
beinganelnglifch fchipof petoun of Baftable ;' the nixt,aneFrench fchip; thethrid,
ane French Ichip; the fourt, anelnglifch fchip; the fyft,ane pink" of Dunkirk; the
faxt, ane Dutch fchip; and paireftir, tua fifcher boittis; ffurth of ])e quhilkis fchipis,
and fpeciallie furtli of jje French fchipis, 36 pilleit, maifterfullie ftaw,^reft and robbed fevin hundreth Indiane hydis, with tua himdreth pundis Sterling of gold and
money ; and ficlyk, tuik J^e faid Dutche fchip, c^uhilk 36 brocht with 30W as ane
pryfe to Ireland, laidnit with ane hundreth kiftis^"of fuccour,'' tuakiftis of filverplait, ane kill full of ryellis of audit ;^" togidder with ane box of Jewallis, the box
being of filuer and mo])er-of-perle, of tua fute lang, and coverit with reid crammafie veluet, in ))e quhilk was four baifer-ftanes,'^ with certane bloode-llanes and
dyuerfe dyamontis and precious ftanes of grit valew. Lyk as, 3e pilleit and
robbed furth of Thomas Snellingis bark, in South-Hamptoun, tua kiftis of
quliyte fuccour, tua pakis of cannell,^^ ane hundreth littill barrellis of conferves,
tua grit barrellis of pepjier, fourtene bagis of ginger, ane barrell of cufcheneilV^
of ane hundreth wecht ; quhilk box with Ipe xxix filuer plait, with Jje cannell,
gynger, pepper, cufcheneill and hydis aboue writtin, 3e turnet out of ])e faidis
fchipis vnto J)e Preame, and cayreit pe famyn to J?e Lewis,^'^ quhair Ipe famyn was
tane, -within this prefent fchij), be Jje Hieland men. Lyk as, 30, in pe monethis

^ Without. '^ Pillaging. ^ Plunderings. •* Persons who live by plunder, who bereave

otliers by violence of their property. ^ Loosed and set sail oft'tlie coast of Ireland. ^ Priam ?

■ Barnstable, in Devonshire. * ' A small ship built with a round stern, the bends and ribs compassing so as that her sides bulge out very much.' — 13aikij. ^ Stole. ^° Chests, boxes.

^' Sugar. '- Rialls, or Pieces of eight. '•' Bezoar- stones, supposed to be an antidote against

poison. ^* Cinnamon. '•^ Cochineal, a scarlet dye. ^^ The Island of Lewis, one

of the Western Islands of Scotland, the property of the Clan M'Leod.

44 & 8 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 101

foirfaidis, pilleit and robbed fiirth of pe faid Dutche fchip, and Inglis fchipis, ])air
victuallis, faillis and men, quhome 50 compellit to lerue 30W, as Haves, in all feriieill and flauirch exerceiffes ; and brocht the faid Pink to the Blak-rok, in Ireland,^ quhair pe faidis Capitane Barrett and Capitane Cowart, with nyntene of
))air company, pad on fchoir, and was ]?air fuppryfet ; Ipe faid Pink tane and
ajiprehended be certane boittis with men that come af J)e fchoir : And 56, for feir
of apprehenfioun, eftir ane combat fell out betwix 50W, pe faid Capitane Love,
and Ipe flcipper of the fchij) callit pe Preame, loufet out of J)at raid," and come
with ane futlierlie wynd to the Lewis, quhair 3e tuik and apprehendit Thomas
Flemyng (Ricliiefone) in Anftrujjer, and his fchip, and ane Flemifche bufche,"'
out of pe quhilk bufche 3e tuik fyve Flemyngis, and pat in hir fyve of 50ur awin
companie ; quhilk ])aireftir, be ftorme of wedder, was feperat frome 50W and drevin to Schyteland, quhair pai landit, and detenit ]?e faid Thomas Richiefone and
his fchip with 30W, to be 30ur gaird. in the Lewis ; ay and quhill 30 and. thay,
with the faidis tua fchipis, war tane and apprehendit be the Hieland men. And
56 and ilk ane of 30W ar airt and pairt of the Robereis and Pirraceis aboue writtin : To ])e taikin, 36 and ilk ane of 30W, at pe leift fum of 30W, hes Confeffit
pe haill premiffes to be of veritie, be 30ur Depofitiones. Item, for cowmone and
notorious Pirattis, Sie-Revaris and Robberis, Spuil3iearis'* and revearis of leill^
menis guidis, alfweill on fie as land, quhaireuir 3e mycht apprehend pe famyn.

ASSISA.

James Lokhart of Ley, Mathow Baillie of Littilglll,*^ &c.

The Aduocat afkis inllrumentis of the fwering of the AfTyfe : And for verifeing of the Dittay, repeittis thair Depofitiounes producet.

Vehdict. The Alfyfe, for the maid pairt,^ be the mouth of the faid James
Lokhart of Ley, chanceller, fFand, pronuncet and declairit the faidis audit perfones on pannell, to be ffylet, culpable and convict of the haill perticular Pirraceis and Robberies perticulerlie let doiin in the faid Dittay.

Dome. To be tane to ane Gibbet vpone the Saudis of Leytli, within the
fflodes-mark, and thair to be hangit quhill thay be deid : And all thair moveabill
guidis and geir pertening to tliame, and being in thair jio^feffioun the tyme of
thair taking, alfweill fchij) as guidis, geir, jewellis and vtheris being witliin the
famyn, to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vie ; as culpable and
convict of the faidis crymes.

' There are two places bearing this name ; one in Sligo bay, the other four miles distant from Dublin. 2 Jload-stead. ^ A Dutch Hwhing-vessel, called a huss. * Spoilers. ^ Leal,
loyal. '' The remainder of the Assise, merchants. " By a marking in the Record, it appears that sei-Cfi of the Assise, including the chancellor, voted for Cleansing or Acquitting the prilbners ; probably from some remarkable deficiency in the evidence adduced by the public prosecutor, for
popular feeling against the Pirates was very strong; and slender evidence in such instances was, in
those days, enough to convict such panuels as those who were at the bar.

102 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

Appendix of Papers ileustrative of Trials for Piracy.
I. Letter A^eill JSPdoud of Harris to the Privij Council}

My LoTvDIS of Courifell. My dewitie (and) femice being remeniberit, I reffauit your 1. Lettre
frome this beirair, Patrik Greve, defiling me to delyuer him the Inglifhe Pirott, whiche wes tane be
my men, with all hir eq.uipjjage and ap parrel ling. Suiflie, my Lordis, I wes not at the takeing thairof, for had I bene thair, I loidd haif fend the faid Pirott, as Iho wes tane, to his Ma. and Counfell ;
for fuirlie I delyuerit hir to the faid Patrik, with all her mvnitioun, as I reflaiiit hir my felff, to witt,
with all hir faillis, towis, and tua ankeris, with xiiij peele of grite eairte peeleis,* with hir Capitane
and nyne of his. As for ])e reft, tliay war flayne at the taking of jie faid Pirott, and foure Dutcheis'
that wer tane be the Capitane, audit dayis befoir the hulk paft to the Meane-land ; for I wald nocht
hald thame as prifounairis, in refpect thay war takin perforce be the Capitane, with twa that deceiftit ;
and I did keepe ane Scottis man in my awin cumpany, to"* forder aduife. So I reft.

Lewis, the IG of October, 1610. Neill Mf'CLOUD.

II. Triae of Thirty EngliJJi Pirates, hefore the Vice- Admiral of Scotland,
his Deputes, and certain Lords of the Privy Council.
[The following' remarkable Trial is taken from an Official Extract preserved
in the Charter-room of the City of Edinburgh ; and is presented in this
Appendix, in illustration of the extent to which Piracy had been practised, and
of the unrelenting severity with which it was universally punished in this country, as well as in England. The Editor begs to acknowledge the ready and liberal access which has been afforded to him, and the polite attention of the TownClerk, in facilitating this and former researches. A very interesting Letter by
the Privy Council to the King, which follows, (No. III.) fully explains many minute
circumstances, and the course of proceedings adopted by them to check Piracy, and
prevent, as far as possible, the recurrence of such atrocious and daring crimes.]

CURIA JUSTICIARI.E AD3IIRALITATIS SCOTIjE, tenia in Pretorio burgi dt
Edinhnrghe, coram Domino Jacoho Weymis de Bogie milite, Vice Admirallo Scotia, et Magijiris Roberto Lermonth et Archibaldo Atchefone Advocatis, AdmiraUis deputatis ac Suprem(S Curia; dicttc Admtralitatis Prefidentibus (prefentibus ibide?)i noJimdlis ex 7iobHiJfimo Ordine
Senatorum, Regice 3IajeJIati a Secretis Co7iJiliis) vigejimojexto die menjis Jidij, anno Domini millefimo fexcentefimo et decimo. Curia affirm at. u
The quhilk dav, in ])refens of the faid Judges, fittand in judgment, Compeirit perfonallie Maifter
Robert Cokburne, Advocat, Procuratour Fifcall of the faid Admiralitie, fpeciallie coiiftitute, and producet ane Dittay aganes certane Pirates, Sie-thives, and Rivers,^ to the number efter mentionat ; indytting thame and ilk ane of thame vpoune the committing of certane manifeft barberous robereis and
maifterfull ftealthes vpoune the Sie, thir dyvers yeires bygane ; togidder with ane Precept of the faid
Great Admirall of Scotland, fummonding ane number of famous perfones to pas vpoune the faidis Pirates thair Affyfe ; and to determine thairin affirmcdive or negcUive, conforme to the faid Dittay, as they
knew or fuld be fpeirit*^ at thame, vnder the panes thairin contenit ; and defyrit juftice to be miniftrat

' From Orig. in Denmi/Ine Coll. ofMSS. Adv. I/ibrary. This I>etter is superscribed 'Jesus.' * Perhaps

' pieces' mounted on carriages, similar to the heavy ship guns long in use on board of Pirate-vessels. ' Flemings;

Dutchmen. * Uutil. ' Ecivcrs ; robbers. " A«keii ; enquired.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 103

in the faid mater, conforme to tbe lawis and practique of this realm e, rait and cuftome of the faid Admiralitie, aganes the perfones Criminallis vnderwrittin ; quha, and ilk ane of thame, as they ar efler
norainat, enterit and war prel'ent vpone pannell. Off the quhilk Dittay and Precept, the tenor followis.

Folloicis the iennour of the Dittay.
INTRANTES.
Capt. Wm. Randell, Rodger Codgen, Afchtoim Courtney,

Captane Johnne Parkins, Richard Robiefone, Robert Croudis,

George Nicolfone, Alexander Wifche, William Peirfie,

Jacob Janfone, Johne Frieman, Thomas Peirfie,

Thomas Thomlene, Edward Briix, Johne Grafe,

Robert Em, AVilliam Tail30urj Robert Weft,

Andro Rawling, Johne Web, Johne Schiphird,

Walter Cornifche, Richard Robifone, Francis Richtop,

Cornelius Jacobfone, Benedict Ferres, Nicolas Dartnol],

Johne Williames, Francis Wallacej Johne Dawfone,

gea ar indyttit and accufit of 50ur lyffes, That 5e and ilk ane of 50\v, in nianer, and at fe tymes refpectiue efter fpecifeit, haveing fchaiken aff all feir of God, and dew obedience to our foverane lord
the Kinges Maieftie, within quhais dominions 3ea and everie ane of 30W war borne, mifregairding his
Maiefteis auctoritie royal, and loveabill lawis of his hienes realraes and kingdomes, and contempnand
all humane focietie and honeft forme of traid and liveing, as becom Crilliane men borne within fua civill
kingdomes, quhairin the trew feir of God is profeffit and fe Holie Evangill preichit ; takand 50ur felffes
to ane maift wyld, barbarous, favage, inhumane, and crowell foi-m of lyff, hes amaffit^ :^our felffes in
crewis and vnhappie companeis, in maift hofteill and cruell maner, with all ingyneis of ffyre-wark and
vapons invafive, of fet purpos and intentioune to live as commoun roberis, thives, murthereris, and opin
Pirates be Sie. Lykas, 5ea and everie ane of 50W, in maner and at l^e tynies efter mentionat, hes
coraraittit the wyld, filthie, and abhominable Reiffes, Thiftes, Robereis, and Piraceis efter reherlit, als
Weill in forren Seis as within his Maiefteis awin Seis and watteris, not onlie aganes his Maiefteis
freindis, confiderates, and allayas, bot alfo aganes his Maiefteis frie leiges, being in thair lauchfull traidis
of navigatioun, by lying in thair wayes, and thair, maift cruellie and barberouflie, by way of Thift, opin
Reiff, Roberie, commoun and avowit Piracie, perfewing of thame in all hofteill maner, as faid is, taking of Jiair perfones captives, puting of thame in feir and dredour of })air lyves, robeing and reiveing of
thame of Jiair fchipes and gudis, drowning, flaying, and tortering of ))air perfones, maift vnniercifuljie,
ranfomyng, and be fetting of vthers vpoune fchoir in barberous and vncouth" pairtes, leift ^our cruell
practeiflis and Piraceis fould have bene be thame detectit ; and be practeifting of all vtlier Sie-Tliifts,
Robereis and Piraceis, as is particularlie efter deducit. Quhairof ^ea and ilk ane of 30W ar fj)eciall actoris, doeris, airt, pairt, red, and counfell ; quhilk sea can not deny, Quhairby, ^ea and ilk ane of 50W
hes demereit and worthilie incurrit the panes of death, to the terror and exempill of vtheris to attempt
])e lyk cryraes in tyme earning ; according to the prefcript of liis Maiefteis lawis, and the maift loveabill cuftome of this kingdome. And namelie, 30W Capitane Willidm Randell, xhnn Captane of Jie
Schip callit the Guypiiound,-' vpoun the firft day of Julij, or pairby, IGOi) :;eiris, being at ]ie Long
Hand, in Ireland, ane plaice of refort of all Pirates and opin Roberis, acompaneit with ;ow the faidis
Jacob Janfone, Thomas Thomlene, Roger Codgen, Richard Robifone alias Dih Covpcr, Alexander
Wifche, Johne Frimaiif George Nicolfoun, Edtcard 13rux, Afchtoun Courlncy, and Robert Croudis^

' Joined ; gathered ; coufederated. ' Strange ; unfritjuenlcd. ' Griflin ; or, as it is here euipliatically styled,

Grip-hound.

104 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

with dyveris vtheris 50ur complices, haveing amaffit 50ur felffes togidder, with all hofteill maner, within
the faid fchip, as faid is ; And 30W the faid Capdane Juhne Parkins, being tlian Captane of the
Schip callit ]ie Iuon Pryse, being lyand in the fame Rod^ of Long Yland, with sour fellow Pirates
and complices, in the faid Schip, bodin and furnifchit lykwayes in hofteill maner, as faid is, acompaneit with Captane Harvie, Captane Coivvard and dyvers vther Pirates, Sie-Roberis, and Reifferis,
confultand, lurkand, and waittand vponne ]ie practeiffiiig of all kynd of Robereis and Piraceis, vpoun
all manor of perfones without exceptioune ; ^ea firft devydit 30ur felffis, in maner efter following, viz.
5ea the faid Jacob Janfone, TJwmas Thomkne, likhard Rohijone, Roger Codgen, Alexander Wifche,
Johne Friman, George Nicolfone, Edward Brux, Afchtoime Courtney, and Robert Croudis, the faid
Captane Williame RandUl being than abuird in the faid Captane Wdliame Parkins Schip foirfaid,
in the faid month of Julij or fairby, at the leift vponne dyvers days of the famyn moneth, haveing confultit and plattit with the faid Captane Harvie maift thifteouflie and piraticallie reft and away-tuik ])e
faid Captane Randellis Schip, and tuk faill and corns toward the Weft-waird, vnder the conduct of
f e faid Captane Harvie, quhom 5ea all, of commoune confent, than choylit for jour Captane ; and cumand fordward, in the lattere end of ])e faid moneth of Julij or Auguft, in the faid jeir 1609, at ]>q
leift vpoune fum dayes of ^e famyn monethis, refpectiue, jea onbefet,^ perfewit, and burdit,' at ]ie
leift ane great number of :;ow, at command and be advyfe of the reft, ane puir fifchar-man and his hot,''
and robit him of his wictuallis and all that he had. And thairefter, in the faid moneth of Auguft, at
])e leift vpoun fum dayes Jiairof, jea the faidis Pirates aftbirfaidis onbefet and perfewitt, in all hofteill
maner, ane French Bark, cumand from ]ie New-found-land, quhair 36 forceablie enterit abuird of fe
fame, robit and reft ]'e haill victuallis being j^airintill. And thairefter, in the faid moneth of Auguft,
October, November, December, or vpoune fum dayis of fe faidis monethis, refpectiue, jea, haueing returnit bak agane to Ballendrse, vpoune the Weft pairt of Ireland, and haueing trymit^ jour faid
Schip, and talking faill and cours to |ie Seis for catching of 30ur prayes,*^ vpoune dyvers dayes of ])e
faidis monethis iramedlatlie aboue writtin, or fum of thame, 303 then forgadderit with Captane Peirfie,
ane comoune and deitelftabill Pirat and Sie-river, and joyning 30ur felfF in vnhappie focietie with him,
vpoune ]>e thrid day of }ie faid moneth of November or jiairby, or fum dayes of pe famyn, being afF
and on with the North Cap,'' or neir thairby ; and thalr, all togidder of on mynd and wickit refolutioune,
avaitting and lurking for catching of sour pray, jea the faidis Pirates immediatlie affoirfaidis, forgadderit with ane Schip of Midilburgh callit the Sanct Johne, quhairof Daniell Abeg was maifter, being than boun to Lighorne^ in Italic, and thalr 3ea altogldder being actoris and deid-doeris, airt, pairt,,
red, and counfell with vtheris, in all hofteill and forceabill maner, invadit and perfewit ])e faid Schip,
buirdit, reft, and variet^ hir away to the Coft of Barbaric to Sancticruce, quhair jea and everie ane of
30W forceablie extrudit and pat out ]ie faid Capitane Harvie ; and haveing electlt Capitane Barrett to
be 30ur Captane, enterit into fe faid Dutch pryfe, and gave ]'e faid fchip callit tlie Gryphound to ]ie
faid Captane Peirfie and his company ; and ]iair vlolentlle tuik William Sanderis and Michaell Paterfone his boy, with fex mo captiues and prlfoneris ; and fua deteinlt thame in the faid Schip, quhair the
faid Captane William Randell and CajHane Johne Parkins being arryvlt at Sophie in Barbaric*
with sour haill crew, and vlcket companie foirfaid, enterit 3our felffes in focietie with fe faid Captane
Barrett, and thalr jea all, accompaniet and alfiftit with the faid Captane Peirfie, being tua Schipes
togidder, in the monethis of December, Januar, Februar, Marche, Apryll, Maij, Junij, at the leift
vpoune dyvers and fnndrie dayes of the faidis monethis, or fum of thame, paft to the Weft Yles,^*' quhair
jea haveing rancounterit at fe Yle Sanct Michaellis with tuo Englifch Schipes, and jsair 3ea, with all
kynd of hofteill maner, invaldlt and perfewit the faidis tua Schipes, buirdit thame, and reft and robit
thame of ])air haill victuallis, and vther furnitur being Jiairintill. Lykas, alfo 30 ])e fadis Pirates immediatlie aboue namet, in the faidis monetl)is of December, Januar, Februar, March, Apryll, Maij,

' Road ; road-stead. * Attacked ; beset. ' Boarded. * Boat. ' Trimmed ; refitted. " Prey;

booty ' The North Cape. * Bound for Leghorn. ° \Vore away ; varied her course, &c. '" The Azores.

44&8JAC.VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 105

Junij laflbypaft, at ]>e leift vpoune fura or dyveris dayes "pairof re/pectiue, ^ea, being boune altogidder to pe
North Cap, and haveing forgadderit and met with ane French Schip, 5ea all and everie ane of 50W, actoris,

airt and pairt with vthers, maid cruellie invadit and perfewit an French Schip, callit ,1

quhilk 50 violentlie raanit and buirdit^ reft and cariet Iiir away, and maid pe haill cumpanie and trew
men being ])airintill 50ur prifoneris and captives. And ficlyk, vpoune fe nixt day })airefter, being
vpoune fum dayes of ]ie faidis monethis re/pectiue, at that fame plaice, or neir by to ]>e North Cap,
:;ea haveing forgadderit with ane Dutch Prem, ^ea altogidder being actoris, airt and pairt with vtheris,
iu all hofleill maner, invadit and perfewit ]ie faid Schip, mariit and buirdit liir, tuik all her men and
companie captives and prifoneris, and brocht ]>e faid Scliip, with hir haill laidnyng, gudis and geir, to
fe Coil of Ireland, at ]ie faid Long Yland ; in the quliilk journey, 5ea the faid Robert Em was prefent, and voluntarie enterit in thair companie, and remanit with thame fenfyne, in all ]'air roberis. Ax
the quhilk Long Yland, in the faidis monethis of December, Januar, Februar, INIarch, Apryll, Maij,
Junij, or fum dayes of pe faidis monethis refjject'nie, haveing flrukin faill and caflin anchor, and thair
50W the faidis William Peirfie, Thomas Peirjie, Johne Williames and NicoU Dartnoll, being thair
prefent, vpoune fe fchoir, as maifterles men and vagaboundis, cuniing of fet purpos from Londoune
to Ireland to fe faid Long Yland, being ane comoune plaice of refort of all Pirates and Roberis to
enter in the wickit fellowfchip of Roberie, 5ea all, of 50ur awin voluntar accord, and of devyce and plat
foirfaid, com to }ie faid fchip, quhairin the faid Captane Parkins, Captane Pandell, and ]iair wickit
companie wer, and enterit in the faid fchip callit pe Dutch Pryfe, as aflifleris with fe foirfaidis vther
Pirates ; And haveing, in fe faidis monethis refpectiue aboue writtin, or fum dayes jiairof, louffit and
maid faill thairfra, vpoune ]'e fame Coll of Ireland, 5ea alltogidder forgadderit with tua French fchipes,
and pair, in all hofleill maner, as faid is, maift cruellie invadit and perfewit j^e faidis tua French Schipis
and pair companie, and violentlie buirdit thame, reft, and robit, and pillied^ thame, and away-tuik pe
faidis Schipes, with ])e haill gudis and geir being pairintill ; and pat ]'e haill men and companie on
fchoir, in findrie vncouth and barberous pairtes, to pe mercie of pe Seis ; And thairefter, 5Pa all, the
foirfaidis Pirates and 50ur complices, in the faidis monethis of December, Januar, Februar, March,
Appryll, Maij, Junij, and Julij inflant, vpoune fum or mae days of pe faidis monethis refpectiue., be
florme of wedder being driven to pe faid Long Yland, and thair haveing caffin anchor, and haveing
met and forgadderit, confultit, plattit and devyfit with Captane E[l'on, Captane Bijchop, and vther
Pirates and Sie-Roberis ; In this mene tyme, 30W the faid Robert Waji, Walter Cornijche, William
Tailzour, Francis Wallace, Francis Eichtop, Cornelius Jacohfone, Johne Schiphcrd, Richard Robifone, callit Dik pe Hoyfer, Johne Gryfe, Andreiv Rawling, Johne Web, Benedict Ferres, and Johne
Dawfoune, enterit in ibcietie and affiflance with pe faidis Captane Parkins and Captane Randell, and
pe reft of pair wicket crew, of 50ur awin voluntar accord, 5ea being all maifterles men and vagaboundis,
as faid is. Lykeas, vpoune fum of pe dayes of pe faidis monethis refpectiue abovewrittin, 5ca loullit
all togidder, and tuk faill fra the faid Long Yland, and cam in 50ur cours to ))e Coft of Norroway;
and thair, haueing foirgadderit with ane Flemis fchip, being laidnit tlian with cornes, and thair ;ea, in
all hofteill forme and maner, as faid is, enterit abuird of J^e faid fchip, tuik hir and hir haill laydnyng,
gudis and geir, and robit hir of hir curceabilP gudis being pairintill, and detenit pe faid fchip in jour
companie captive and prifoner be pe fpace of four dayes or pairby. And siclyk, in the faidis monethis
of December, Januar, Februar, March, Appryll, Maij, Junij, and Julij inftant, and vpoune fum or
vther dayes of pe faidis monethis refpectiue, ^ea all, perfifting in 50ur vngodlie and deteiftabill traid of

lyff, haveing foirgadderit vpoune jie fame Coft of Norroway, with ane Dutch Schip, callit ,"*

5ea, being actouris, doeris, airt, pairt, red and counfell with vtheris, in all hofteill maner, as faid is, violentlie perfewit and enterit abuird, manit and tuik pe faid fchip and her haill cumpany, as prifoneris and
captives, and made ane pryfe of ]>e famyn. And als, s<^w, j'e foirlaidis Pirates, in the monethis

' The name is left blank. ^ Pillaged ; plundered. ^ Meicluui tulle ; staple. ' Left blank.

VOL. III. O

106 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

immediatly affoirfaidis, at )>e leift vpoune fum or findiie dayes of })e famyn, continewallie lurkaiid
and awaitting for 30ur pray, haveing foirgadderit vpoune )ie Cofl of Norroway with tua Dutch fcliipes,
quhairof J)e ane was ane Soliip of Danlkene, quhilk Sthip 5ea all as actoris, doeris, airt, pairt, red
and counfeil with vtheris, in all hoflell forme invadit and perfewit, as faid is, buirdit ]ie fame, robit and
llrypit ])e haill companie being ])airintill oft' thair gudis and geir, reft and tuk out of ]'e faid Schip of
Danlkene 'tua peice of ordinance. And lvkwayes, in the liiidis monethis of December, Januar, Februar, Marclie, Appryll, Maij, Junij and Julij inftant, or vpoun fum or vther dayes of ])e faidis monethis
refpectiue, ;ea, tlie foirfaidis Pirates and Sie-Tliives and Rivers, being actores, doeris, airt, pairt, red and
counfeil with vtheris, haveing foirgadderit vpoune ]ie Coft of Zetland, within this Kingdome, with ane
Carvall of Zermouth, quhairof Mr Muriall was mailler, and in all hofteill forme, as faid is, perfewit and
invadit ])e faid fchip, as laid is, robit and away-tuik furth ]7airof, fra the faid Mr Muriall tuentie-fyve pund
llriviling ; and from tua Falconeris, being pafinigeris boune to Norroway for byiiig of halkis,' four pund
llriviling; and thairwithall tuik Johne Colman and Peter Inkiping furth })airof, as captives and prilfoneris witli ;oiv; and cariet thame quhairje pleaflTit. And also, in the faidis monethis refpectiue immetliatlie above writtin, and vpoune fum dayes thairof, lurking and awaiting continewallie for the corapailing and catching of ;our pray, vpoune trew fubiectes, 5ea haveing fene and foirgadderit with ane Bark of

Cathnes, vpoune ]'e Coft of Zetland, quhairof was maifter, 5ea the foirfaidis Pirates, at J)e leift

])e maift pairt of 50W, and 30 all as actoris, doeris, airt, pairt, red and counfeil with vtheris, vnder cloud
and filcnce of nycht, invadit and perfewit ]ie faid Bark, buirdit ]ie famyn, ftrak and brak vp ]ie kiftes
and vther lokfaft lumes'' being Jiairintill, robit and tuk furth jiairof ane hundreth merk fterling ; and
tuk furth ane certane number of fteikis^ of braid-claith pertening to ]ie faid maifter, and cariet fe
famyn to ^our fchipes. And 5ea and ilk ane of 30W gat 5our fkair' of ))e faidis robit gudis, and fua,
at this felff fame tyme. And vpoune ]ie dayes of ]ie monethis re//jec^me foirfaidis, haveing ^our cours
direct towardis Orknay, thair to have lurkit, landit at pe Caftell of Kirkwall, and com to ]ie toune
jiairof, (luhair qca and ilk ane of 50W, as opin and avowit Pirates and Sie-Roberis, behavit 5our felffis
maift barberoullie and baftlie, being eveir and at all tymes drukin, and fechtand amanges 50ur felftis,
and fubiecting and giuing of 3our felffis ovir to all kynd of wyce and villanie. Lykas, 56, ]>e faidis
Robert Croudis, Richard Rohifone, callit fe Hoyfier, and Andro Rmcling^ in jour madd and drukin
humoris, perfifting than in :^our accuftorait traid of Piracie, violentlie and perforce enterit and buirdit
ane bark pertening to my Lord Erll of Orknay, lyand vjioune ]ie fchoir, oft' plane plat and intentioune
to have robit, fpoljiet, and reft hir ; quhair 56 was, in that attempt, tane and apprehendit. Lykas,
<e, ))e foirfaidis Pirates prefent on pannell, and ilk ane of 50W, war thair lykwayestane and aprehendit
with the faid Dutch Schip, being laidin with hydis, leid, canon, arteil^erie and vther furnitur ; and 5ea
and ilk ane of 30W ar actouris, doeris, airt, pairt, red and counfeil of ]ie fimyn cryme, and of all and
findrie ))e premiftes ; As 36 and ilk ane of 30W can nocht deny, and ar all comoune Roberis, Thives,
and Rivers, auld and new.

FoUowis the tenor of the Precept.

Ludouik Dux OF Lennox, Erll of Darnlie, Lord Torboltoune, Metbvene, and Obigney, &c. Great
Admirall of Scotland : To our Louittis, &c. [It is unnecessary, in this place, to insert the Precept of
Executions at length, which are in common form.]

Quhilk Dittay and Precept afl'oirnamet being producit, in prefens of the faidis Judges, and the

foirfaidis haill Pirates and Criminallis indyttit, compeirand and enterand vpoune pannell, as faid is, the

faid Procuratour Fifcall afkit inftrumentis and Act of Court thairvpoune : And than defyrit the faidis

Criminallis to be put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe ; and for that eft'ect defyrit the faid Aflyfe to be

callit, and the foirfaid Dittay red, as is aboue-ceauit,^ in prefens of the pannell and peribnes of Aflyle ;

' Norway was celebrated for the best breeds of falcons, &c., for the sport of hawking, then so much in vogue.
• Literally, looms ; implying lockers, chests, &c. in which valuable goods and money were stowed away. ^ Webs ;

pieces. * Share, portion. ' Perhaps for ' conceavit.'

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 107

quilhk defyre the faidis Judges thoclit reffonabill, and tliaiiToir Ordanit the ofticeiis of Court to call
the names of the faid AfTyfe, efter the Cleikis publict nominalioun, conforme to tlie Precept aboue
writtin, direct tliairanent ; quhairof the names compeirand followis.

Nomina Assis/e.
John Landis, merchand, James Borthuik, merchand, Williame Duff, fkiper,

Robert Halyburtoun, merchand, Johne Mairtene elder, fkiper, Williame Ridoch, fkiper,

Johne Maffoune, merchand, Johne Mairtene younger, Ikiper, Johne Watfone, flviper,

Johne Mitchelhill, merchand, William Weir, fkiper, Johne Moir, fkiper,

Johne Hutchefone, merchand, Johne Wilfonne, fkiper, "William Mureheid, merchand.

Quhilkis perfones of Affyfe being refTauit, be conlent of the haill Criminallis being vpoune the
pannell, quha declairit they had na obiectioune nor imputatioune againes thame, nor na caus quhy to
repell and let thame or ony of thame: In tlie qnhilk refpect, the foirfaidis Judges tuik the faidis perfones of Aflyfe and ilk ane of thame deiplie and folemplie fuorne, vpon thair greit aithes,^ that they
and ilk ane of thame fuld leill fuithfay and na fuith coiiceill, for na thing that be mycht, hot to determine verilie vpoune the faid Indytment, be thair pairt of Hevin, and as they foiild anluer to God at
the dreadful! day of Judgement : Qulia inftantlie paffit vpoune the faid Affyfe. And thairefter caufit
raid the foirfaid Dittay to the pannell, in prefence of the faid Afiyfe, in maner and conforme to the
particular tenour and contentes above mentionat. Quhilk Dittay being judiciallie red, with findrie
taikins'-* and iiiformatiounis of everie ane of thair giltines ; compeirit the haiil perfones of the pannell,
and heirand the famyn, being accuffit thairvpoune, could fchaw na lauchfull nor reffounabill caus of
thair innocencie of the faidis erymes layd to thair charge ; ilk ane of thame for thair awin pairtes, conforme to the faid Dittay, and according to thair awin Depofitiounis red to thame, and in pn-fens of
the faid Affyfe, quhilk they Confeffit; and referrit thame to the Tryell of the faid Affyfe. Quhairvpoune the faid Procuratour Fifcall afkit inflrumentis and Act of Court ; and defyrit the faid Affyfe
mycht be removet out of Judgement, and to be incloifit, to the eflfect they mycht give thair Verdict
and determinatioune thairintill, according to thair aithes ahedie folemplie gevin in manner foirfaid.

Verdict. Quhilkis perfonis of Affyfe, being removit out of Judgement and incloifit, electit and
choyfit all with ane confent, the faid James Borthuik, as chanceller of the faid Affyfe ; and efter lang
deliberatioune, reiding of the faid Dittay, togidder with the faid perfones Criminallis thair Depofitiounis,
and vther notices and informatiounis, and als with thair Confeffioune vpoun pannell, being ryplie and
at lenth advyfit, and all aggrieand in ane voice, but difcrepance or varriance, be the mouth of the faid
ames Borthuik, chancellar, reenterand agane in Judgment, Decernit and Declairit, and Decernesand
Declaires, the foirnamet haill perfones Criminallis on pannell, and everie ane of thame, to be Giltie,
airt and pairt of the foirfaidis Robereis and erymes contenit in the faid Dittay, and Fyllit and Fyllis
thame and everie ane of thame thairof, and (that) of everie heid, point, and circumf^ance of the faid Dittay.— Quhairvpoune the faid Procuratour Fifcall lykwayes alkit inftiumentis ; and Remittit the Dome
to the faidis Judges.

Followis THE Dome,
At command of the faidis Jvdgcs, he the mouth of Patrick Lercraunce thair Demf>Jiei- of Court.
FoRSAMEKiLL as the faidis Captane William Randell, &c.,^ prefent on pannell, and everie ane of
thame, ar flFund, be ane conding Affyfe, Giltie, art and pairt of the committing of certane vyld Robereis,
Piraceis, and ReifHs, contenit in the faid Dittay immediatlie befoir writtin, quhairfoir 1 adiudue thame
and ilk ane of thame to be tane to the Peir and fchoir of Leith, within the Sie-fluid and mark thairof,
and thair to be Hangit vpoune ane gibbett till they be deid. And Ordanes the foirfaid greit Dutche

' This singular form of oath ilhistrati's in tlie strorgi'st inaniior the aiionialous oflice of a Jury-man, in those
times ; they being called as ivilncsscs of the facts charged against the pannel, as well as Assisors, as has formerly been
explained. * Proofs; evidence. ^ The names of all the prisoners recited here.

108 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

Scliip callit the Pryfe,' liaill arteil5iiie, ornamentis and apperrelling tliairof, hydis, leid, and vther furnitur being tliairintill, apprehendit with thame, and all vtheris moveabill gudis and geir, to be el'cheat
and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis ufe (but preiudeice to my Lord Admerall of the efcheates of Pirates
and Sie-Roberis in tyme cuming). And this I give for Dome.

ExTRACTUM per me, Jonnnem Young, Scribam et Clericum Principalem dictce AdmiraUtatis
Scoti(c,Jub mdsjigno et fuhfcriptione tncmualibus. (L. S.'-*) Joannes Young.

III. Letter, fhe Privy Council of Scotland to the King, ' anentthe Inglifclie
Pyratis^^ {Captains Randall and ParJcins, c^c.)
Most gratious and sacred Souerane,
Vpoune advertifment gevin to ws that fome Pirott fchippis had bene feene in the mouthe of the
Firth,* and the fame fecundeit by the complaintes of a grite many of your Ma*^*'''^ fubiectis, bothe on
the Weft Coaft and heir on the Eift, of tlie vnquietnes and hafaird of paflage, by reafToun of the frequencie of Englifche Pirottis on the fea ; and fpeciallie, of one of Caithnes, who, in his paffing home,
wes robd of all that he had : And boith by him, and the repoirt of otheris who mett fome of thefe
Pirottis on the fea, being certifyed, that they wer gone toward the Orknay Ylandis, We, being moved
and grevit with the complaints of your Ma*'*^® poore people, and being loathe to impefche^ your Maiefleis vtheris weyghtie afFairis, with the aduertifment thairof, whill'J we had done fome thing thairin
oure felffis ; and wilheing that, in a mater of this qiialitye, (admitting hardlie ony delay, wherin the
omitting of the prefent occafioun micht do much harme,) your Mati*" fould rather find ws cairfull of
our dewytie, then vtherwayes remiffe or negligent, we did heirupoun prefentlie direct thrie of the belt
fchippis at that tyme within the harbour of Leithe, weill mannit and furneiffit with all weirlyke prouiiioun (your Ma*''"'' awne fchip at that tyme not being arryved heir.) And hauing gevin vnto thame
expres directioun and charge to make fearche, and to follow quhidderfoeuir thay could apprehend thofe
Pirottis ; and our Schippis having mett with thame vpoun the coaft of the Mayne-land of Orknay,
thay having tua faillis, the one a Schip aboue 200, the vther a Choife-pinnace'' of 100 (twn of birth, ^)
efter a bloodie conflict, in whiche tua of oure men wer killed and lindrie hurte ; the Pinnace, being
excellent in failling, maid choife rather by flicht to faife hir felfF, then, by ony langer ftay, to abyde
the hafard of taking : and albeit Iho wes followed for a fpace, yitt did ilio ftill gayne gi-ound. Wheriipoun, the perfuite being left of, the vther gritt Schip in the meane quhyle being boordit, wes broght
away be oure fchippis ; and in hir wer takin to the nomber of threttie able men, befydes fome few
prifounaris, whom thefe Pirottis did keepe aboorde. W^ho, after thay had bene dewlie and feuerall
tymes examined, at laft all thefe threttie wer putt to thair tryell and found guiltye : Of whiche nomber xxvij ar execute and putt to deathe ; of whome thair were tua Capitaines, by name Capitaine Perkynis and Capitaine llandelU The other thrie are repryvit and continewit vntill fuche tyme as your
Maiefteis pleafour be knowne, in regairde that thair is hoip, by tliair forder examinatioun, to learne
oute fome thingis tuitcheing the eftait. We haif alreddy difcouerit fome mater of abufe, hoiping to

' There is in the Charter-room of the city of Edinburgh, from which the .ibove remarkable Trial has been taken,
a Gift or tiik Escheat of tin- Dutch Ship noticed in tlie foregoing ' Dome,' passing under the Privy Seal, and dated
at Edinburgh, Aug. 7, KilO, in favour of ' Thomas Young, induellar in oure burgh of Edinburgli, his airis and
assignayes ane or ma;' wliicli narrates that tliese Pirates ' wer justlie and wortlielie execute to the dead, vi)oun the
morne tliaireftir.' ' The ancient Seal of the Court of Admiralty is remarkable, haTving a Vessel of War in full

sail, with the arms of Scotlaiul, England, and Ireland, on three sliields introduced in the centre of the smaller sails ;
and on tlie main-sail is a large escutcheon of pretence, containing the quartered arms of the Duke of Lennox, as
Hereditary Lord High Admiral, with the motto, ' Keip.' 'I'he legend is, * ' Sigillvji. Oificii. Admibalitatis.
Regxi. Scocie.' * From the Original, preserved in the Dennu/lne MSS. Adv. Library, A. 2. 40. It is also

transcribed by the Earl of Haddington, in his MS. Collection, General Register House, Edinburgh, but probably
from an imperfect scroll or copy, as there ai'e many miuute variations. The most important of these are noted here.
^ Of Forth. 5 Fr. ; hindrance. « Until. ' Called a ' Chase-pinuace' in Had. MS. ** Added

in Had. MS.

44&8JAC. VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 109

find more oute, wherby this grite increffe of Piracye hathe bene by fome, far agania thair deiiyteis to
your Ma*'*^, too muche fofterit and mantenit ; bot of the particularis of the fame, as vnwilling to commit thame to wryte, your Ma'^''' falbe certifyed at lenth by your Maiefleis Secretarye of this Kingdome,
who is fchortHe to maii his repair thither. In the mean quhyle, tlie perfonis of thofe men whoie lyves
ar fpaired falbe faiflie keept and maid furthcomeand, ather for forder examinatioun heir, or, vpoun
knovvlege of your Maiefleis pleafour, falbe broght thither to be tryed. Thair wer alfo mony pregnant
prefumptionis that howeuir thefe men now fpairit wer deprehendit in the focietie of the reft, that the
fame wes more by enforcement then by confent, which wes^ affirmed by the moft parte of thame who
war executed. This company of Pirottis did interteyne one whome they did call thair Perfoune, for
faying of Prayeris to tliame twyfe a day, who belyke ather wearyed of his cure, or fearing'' the eufeiiing
(dainger and^) deftructioun of his flock, had foirfaikin thame in Orknay, and priuelie convoying him
felfF over land, wes at lenthe defcryed and deprehendit in the burgh of Dundie ; and being broght
hither, did fo cleirlie confes and gif evidence aganis the reft ; and, being confronted, broght mony of
thame to confeflioun. Thair being heirwith fome likliehoode that his ftay with thame had bene by
conftraint, we half heirvpoun, in lyke foirt, continewit him frome being putt to tryall vntill your Ma'''^''
pleafour be knowne.

We do vnderftand, by aduertifement from Orknay, that thair be fome fyve or fex Pirottis mo deprehendit ; bot quhidder thay be of this company or not, it is vncertane ; alwayes, we do expect thame
by the firft occafioun of any fchipping that dothe come from thenfe. And ftnce none of ws ar ignorant, that by reafoune of aduertifements, not onlie frome all the corneris of your jNIa"'^* awin dominionis, bot alfua frome foreyue pairtis, your Ma*^'" hes newer almoft ony intermiffioun or refpitt, (your
Maieftie, by Godis Prouidence and to your fubiectis vnfpeakable happynes, being the great Occeane
vnto whiche all revaris and brookis do rinne,) as in dewytie we could not omitt to acquent your Maieftie hierwith, fo the feir of troubling your Maieftie with too long a Letter hathe moved ws to refer
the particular'* relatioun of all the incidentis in this bufynes to a more proper occafioun. And conceiTiing all fuche other directionis as it pleifit your Ma*''', ather by Commiflioun fent be the Lord Burley, or by Letteris wryttin vnto ony of ws, concerning the Marques of Huntley, the Erll of Errole,
or ony vther mater worthie of the advertifing, your Maieftie falbe certifyed^ of all thefe oure procedingis by the Secretarie, at his repair be your Maieftie. And fo, praying God to blifle your Maieftie
with a long, happy, and profperous reignne, we reft for ever,

Your Maiefteis moft humble and obedyent fubiectis and feruitouris,
Edinburgh, 27 July, 1610. Dunfermeline. Dumbak.

To THE King his moft facred and excellent Maieftie, &c.

IV. ExTRACTy>07?^ 3Iinutes of Privy Council Proceediugs,^ Jul. 4, 1615.

There is one Captane Maisone of Lyne, with fyve or fex others of his companye, in warde
within the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, upon verie probable fufpitiounes of Pirracye. The eftate of the
caufe is this. Captane Majon, fome foure yeeres fence, or therby, having purchafed a yeere Tak^
of the AfTyife-hering^ of the Northe Ylles ; and vpoun occafion of his haunting of the YUes that yeere,
having enterred in fome acquentance with the Bilhope of the Ylles, and liaveing tranfported him to
and from Yreland,^ he procures of the Biiliop, in the moneth of Apryll, 1(512, a Leafe of a lytle Ylle
called Rona ; bot neuer com to tak pofleflion of the Ylle, nor to try the worth thairof, whill'° this yeere.

' The Had. MS. reads, ' And the same also.' ^ ' Fcirscing,' in tlie Had. MS. * These words added

in tlie Had. 3IS. * ' Plaine,' in Had. MS. = ' Aduertyset,' in Had. MS. <■ Denmijlnc MSS.

Advocates' Library, A. 4. \o. ~ One year's lease. "* A tax paid to the Crown ujion the <iuantity of herriiis^s

caught at the fishery; which, owing to the expense of collection, was usually farmed out annually. " Andrew

Knox, Bishop of the Isles, and Abbot of Icolmkill, had livings in Ireland. lie was translated to the see of Ilaphoc.
in Ireland, anno 1622. '" Until.

110 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1610.

Hes a pretty bark, wherewith this laft yeere bygone lie made fundrye voyages betweene Amfterdame
and Lyne, haveing none in equyppage' but fex perfones. This yeere, when he refolues to come to
our Ylles, he takes in at Yairmouth one Captan Wilman, who had beene a notable Pirott, and had
obteaned his Maielleis Ileiniflioii, with two of his brether: And pretending, as he affermes, to come
to Rona to have taken poUI-ffion of the Ylle, and to have tryed the fiilieing there, (althoght he was
nouther prouided with fait, trees, victualles, nor no kynd of outredd for the filheing,) he comes firft
to Orknay, where he takes in other two perfones, the one to be a cook and the other to be a pyllot,
and makes his adreafs for Rona ; l)ut the winds being contrarious, and not darring tak land there, he
comes about the Ylles to Mull, where he flayed foure dayes. In which tyme, there comes to M'cleane
a derection and CommifTion from the Counfall, for the perfute of Coll M'gillefpik and the others Rebells of Ila.'- Captane r>Iarone being acquented heerwlth, he ingyres him felf in that feruice, geveand
M'claine to viiderftand that he would hal'avd his perfon and ftip in perfute of the Rebelles, vpon hope
of his jNIa^'''^ confideratioune and rewarde for his feruice. M'^clane geveand truft to his difcourifis,
encurages him to follow that enterpryfe ; and furniflies him with fome victuales, for lie had lytle or
non of his owne : And fo, leaving M'claine his country, he comes bak againe that fame way he went,
towardes Rona; and haveing flayed there fome half a day, and getting information that the Rebells
wer in the Lews, he derectis liis courfe from that towardis Orknay, to tak in mo men, as he pretended,
for the bettar flrenthening of him againlt the Rebelles. In Orknay he taks in fex men, which made
his nomb<?r to be feavintenth perfones. And whereas he lliould have gone to the Lews, he directes his
courfe for Zetland, and from tliat to the coafl of Norroway, where, going into a bay under a craig,^
and lying there at ankar couertlie vnder the craig, there comes by a lliip of Copmanhouen.^ Vpon the
fio-ht wherof, Mafones fhip immediatlie loufes, followes the Copmauhouen lliip, takes her, and bringes
her in to the bay, takes the wholl equippage^ oute of her, which wer four or fyve peifones, and flowea
thame in Miifones fliip.

Captane Mafone, to excuile him felue of this deide, makes this difcourfe, that when he came to
Zetland, Captane Wilman perfaveing ther voyage lyk to proof fruitles, there was no appearance of the
Rebelles, he layed to his charge, and earneftlie delt with him to go feek fome adventur by fea; and
becaus he refuifed to yeeld to fuch a vnhonefl and vnlawfuU motion, Captane Wilman flirred vp the
wholl companye of his fhip againeft him, vfurped vpon him the charge and comniandement of the
fhip, depryved him of all charge, and took him aganefl his will to Norroway ; and when the pryife
wes pcrfewed, flowed him heneth — and at lafl patt him in the pryife, whiche wes a ould lek*" fliip,
with three of his company that would not yeeld to follow Wilman, fpoilled him of his owne fhip, whicii
wes a tiglit and good lliip, and fett him to the fea, to the haifard and perrell of his lyf.

For difcouerie and tryelng of the troth of this difcourfes, the Counfall hes been verie carefull in the
examinatioun of fuch of Captane Mafones companye as ar broght heere, and by there examination it
is funden that (there) wes neuer any mater of conteftation betweene Maifone and Wilman, that Willman flirred vp the companye againefl Maifone ; and that tliere was neuer once fuch motion in the fliip,
concerning that mater ; that Mafone difwaded none of his companye to joyne with Wilman, nor neuer
told ony of thame that Wilman had a purpofe for Pirracye ; but that thay aggreid verie well in all
thingis. And the Maifler of the Copmanhouene fhip fayd planelie, that Mafone wes aboue,'' in his
fhip, when he wes- perfewed and taken ; and when his fhip wes broght in to the bay and faflened
to the other fliip, that Mafone enterred in his fhip, and that ^^'ilman and he fuped togidder and made
mirrye vpone the prouifion that wes in his fhip, and drank out his wyne and his heir; and that Mafone lay all night in the pryife, and vpon the morn called for the Maifter of the pryife, and tould him
that he behoofed to tak his fliip, feeing Wilman had taken his fhip ; and fayes, that vpon the morne,

' Crew. ' See Papers appended to the Trial of Sir James IVIakconeill, III. 1, &c. ' Rock. ^ The

common name then in use for Copenhagen. ' Crew. " I>eaky. ' On deck.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. Ill

both fhippes loufe and come togidder the fpace of foure myles, to witt, Maifon in the pryife, and Wilman with the wholl companyee, except three men and a boy, in Mafones fliip ; and when they findered, there wes gryte mirth amonges tharae, with drinking mony good nightis; and the Maifter of the
pryfe fayes forder, that liis ihip is iij*^^ dollouris bettar nor^ Mafones fliip.

The two companyees being findered, Captane Mafone come bak againe till Orknay in the Copmanhouen pryife, of purpofe, as appeires, to have taken in fome ma- men; but beeing guyltie, in his owns
confcience, of Pirraeye, he durft not tak land, but took him to the fea, and by ftorme of wedder wes
dryven upoun the coafl of ('aithnes; and being lyand there, in a harborry, he wes boorded by a fone
of the Larde of 3Iarkles, and he and his foure men were taken and fend heere.

Captan Wilman in Mafones Ihip part bak againe to that fame bay from which they loufed, and the
nixt moniing took a ihip of Ruflok, loadned with fiflies, and fet the wholl companyee of the Ihip,
being nyne in nomber, vpon a rock in the fea, and keept onlie one with thame ; and Wilman come
with the pryife and Mafones fhip till Orkney vpon a Sunday, and he paft to land and wes enterteaned
by the country people, and fome come aboorde and wer mirrie with him. Vpon the morn, being
Mononday, two of the Lairde of Grymmijpiyes Ibnes, and one Robert Elphinjioun^ comes aboorde of
the pryife, wherin Wilman and his fkippar war both for the tyrae ; and haveing fome conference and
fpeatch with thame, and efpying there flrength, they commanded Wilman to rander ; and he refuifeing,
the youngeft of Grymmijfayes fones immediatlie gave him a deadlie Itroak, wherwith he dyed prefentlie ; and at that fame inftant killed the fkippar by an other flroak. And fo, the Captane and fkippar being both killed, the reft of the companyee and both fliippes randered. In this meantyme there
is a Waughtar lyand in Zetland, attending the Flemes Fleitt ^ at the fifcheing, and being enformed
by Mr Williame Levingjloxin fchiref-depute, that a Pirote with a pryife wes gone by towardes Orknay, this Waughtar, refaueing a pylote from the Schiref-depute, followes the Pirote to Orknay, and
comes directlie to this fame harborry where the Pirott and the pryife lay, takes thame both and bringes
thame to Leyth, faying, that he had a command and directioun from his 3Iaifteris, the Eftates, that
what euer Pirrottes he fand in the Scottiflie Seas, he Ihould tak thame and prefent thame witii there
fhippes and goodes to the Kinges Maiefties Counfall here. The Orknay men who killed the Pirrott
and his fkippar followed the Waughtar, and greeveouflie complained of the wrong alledged done to
thame in taking of the Ihippes af there handes, which thay ])ad recouered with the hafard of there
lyues ; and they alledged that they wanted findrie of there goodes which they had put in the fliippes,
they being of purpofe to have broght thame aboute to Leyth. The Captane of tlie Waughtar excuifed
him felue, that he knew nothing that they had recouered the fliippes ; but believing the fliippes wer
flill in the pofleflion of the Pirrottes, lie tooke thame and broght thame heere to the Counfall — and
tuitching the goodes which they alleged they wanted, the Captane conftantlie aft'ermed, and ib did the
Orknay Pylote, that the Shiref-depute delyuered him, that they wanted not a pennie worth of that
which he gott in the fhippes. The Counfall accepted verie well of the Waughtars doings, hes returned him bak, with thankes, and hes propyned* him with a coup of Ix vnce ^ weiglit.

Directioun is geven for delyuerie of the Copinanhouene fliip to the ownar, lie geveand fome reafbnable fatisfactioun to the gentlemen who recovered the fame from Captane Mafone.

Bycaus the owners of the fliip of Ruflok are not beer to refaue there fhip and goodes, and becaus the goodes will not keepe in the fhip, therefor derectioun is geven to rou|) and fell the wholl
goodes beeing within the fhip, and to mak pennie of the fame ; to be furth-cumand to the ownaris,
whan they fhall come heere ; they geveand reafonable fatisfactioun to the g<'ntleineii who recowered
tlie fliip and goodes from the Pirrottes.

' More valuable than. " More. ' Flemish Fleet. * Gifted ; presented. ' Sixty ounces.

112 CRIMINAL TRIALS.^- A.D. 1610.

iHutilation antr Sememljratinn*

Dec. 19. — James Forrester, fone to vmq^^ James Forrefter, ffatherbrotlier to Sir Robert Forrefter of Strahenrie, kny'.

Dilaitit, accufet, aud perfewit be Mr Dauid Anderfoun at Ballingarrie, off
airt and pairt of the Mutilatioiin of the faid Mr Dauid of his richt airme ; committit vpoiin the tuentie day of October P.Vj^ and nyne yeiris, foiranent^ the
faid Mr Dauidis duelling-hoiis dur, at the Kirk of Ballin3erie ; vpone fett purpois, prouifioun, and foirthocht fellonie.

The pannell, eftir reidiiig of the Dittay, acknowlegis the offence ; and maift
humblie craves God and his Maieftie pardoim, and the pairtie, for the fame ; and
offeris him felff in his Maiefteis Will thairfoir.

"\"erdict. The AfTyfe, in ane voce, be the mouth of Andro Cokburne in
Treatoun, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid James, conforme to
his awin Judiciall ConfefTioun, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the faid
Mutilatioune.

In refpect quhairof, the Juftice ordanit the faid James to be committit to
waird within the Tolbuth of Edinburgh, thairin to remane, as ane convict perfone, quhill he be advyfet with the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, anent his Dome,
to be jironuncet aganis him for the laid cryme.

[3/r Alexander Colvill J ujlice -Depute.']

C!)eft—df ivt--raisiitti— ^laufii)tev— a^ntercommunturr iJoitT) tje ODIait
<i3rtcrov— dficrijt tit M\\tm% ^t.

[The interest which now attaches to the proscription and subsequent history of the Clan MacGregou, induces the Editor to prefix a few explanatory remarks to the present Trial ; and especially
relative to ' The Fecht' or ' iTiirmifch' of ' Bintoiche,' which is taken notice of in the Dittay. The
difficulty of obtaining accurate information regarding such proceedings, and the obscurity in which
almost all Highland transactions at this period are involved^ render this the more necessary ; and it is
lioped will plead the Editor's apology with those who deem such enquiries uninteresting.

This Fight or Skirmish of Bintoich, then, is likewise known as < the Chase of Ranefray,' having been
fought, partly, as would seem, at both places ; or more probably the Fight took place at Bintoich, and
the Chase or pursuit reached as far as Ilanefray. ' The Book of TaymoulU ^ thus narrates the transaction :
— < Attoure, Robert Campbell, fecond fone to the Laird {of Glenurquhay) Sir Duncan, perlewingane
great number of them {the Clan Grcyor) through the countrie, in end overtuik them in Kanefray, in
the Brae of Glenurquhy; quhair he flew Duncan Abrok INIakgregor, with his fon Gregor in Ardchyllie, Dougall INIakgregor M^'Coulchier in Glengyle, with his fon Duncan, Charles Makgregor (M'^^)
Cane in Bracklie, quha was principallis in that band ; and twenty utheris of thair compleifes flain in
the chaifs.' A contemporary historian, Sir Robert Gordon, in his History of the Earldom of Sutherland,^ p. 247, says of this afl'air, that ' here (meaning at Bintoik, which he had previously mentioned)
Robert Campbell, the Laird of Glen-Vrquhic his fone, accompanied with fome of the Clanchamron,

* Directly before or opposite. * An extremely interesting Family Chronicle, containing valuable notices of

Highland History, and illustrating the genealogy of many families in those disti'icts. The Original is in possession
of the Noble family of Bicadalbane, and, as the Editor has been informed, is likely to be privately printed for the use
of THE Banxatyxe Clcb. ' This curious work might with much propriety have been styled a History of Scotland.

44&8JAC. Vi. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 113

Clanab (M^Nabs), and Clanronald, to the number of tuo hundred chofen men, faught againft three
fcore of the Clangiegar ; in which Conflict tuo of the Clan-Gregar were flain, to wit, Duncan Aberigh,
one of the Chieftanes, and his fone Duncan {Gregor ?) Seaven gentlemen of the Campbell's fyd
wer killed ther, though they feemed to have the victorie '

It appears rather singular that the slaughter of one of the ClanGregor, at the very time when that
Clan was the subject of Letters of fire and sword, should, by tiie Government, be held a crime ;
more especially when the MacGregors were again in the very same predicament.]

Mar. 2, 1611— Jolinne M^kewin, in Kilbiycle ; Archibald M^ilvoyll M*^^-
lowrin, Donald INFinowie, in Glenclio ; Duncane Caird
M^gregour, Patrik M'ean Dow M'gregour,Allafter Bowie
M^gregoiir Cleraclie, Dougall IM'gregour Clerache M'-
gregour, Duncane M'neill M'gregour, [Donald M'eandich
M'gregour,^] Johnne M^andro.
Dilaitit, accufet and perfewit be Mr Robert Foullis, fubftitute to Sir Thomas
Hammiltoun of Bynnie, kny', Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intereis, of the crynies refpectme following, viz. — The faid Johnne M'eivin, ffor
airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling of tuelf fcheip fra the Barrone M'caflan,
furth of his landis of Innerthonoling ; committit in the moneth of Auguft laftbypaft 1610 yeiris. Item, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling of tua
gait^ and ane fcheip fra Adame Colquhoun in Poirt, furth of the landis of Banrie, in the moneth of December P.Vj'. and fax yeiris. Item, ffor airt and pairt
of the fleilling of ane pair of pleuch-irnes fra Williame Myller in Schennekillis,
furth of the landis of Schennekillis, in the moneth of Apryle I'^.Vj". and aucht
yeiris. Item, ffor cowmoun Thift and cowmone ReiTet of thift, inputing and
outputing of thift, &c. And for daylie Intercowmoning and keiping cumpanie
with the M'GREGOURis, affifting and taking pairt with thame, in all thair thiftious deidis, heirfchipis, robreis and opprefTiones, this thre or four yeir bygane.
— The faidis Archibald 3Pilvoi/ll 3I'Loivren ,andDo)iahl 3PInnoicie, fervandis
to Allafler and Allane M'Indowie in Glencho, ffor airt and pairt of the trelfonabill Raifeing of ffyre about Johnne Stewartis hous in the Camrone, in the Lennox, in the moneth of December laflbypafl ; affageing of Duncane, James, and
vmq^^ Johnne Stewartis thairintill ; And ffor airt and pairt of the flauchter of
the faid vmq^^ Johnne Stewart, at the tyme foirfaid. — The laid Duncane Caird
M'Gregoni\ ffor cowmone Thift and RefTett of thift, outputing and inputing of
thift, &c. And ffor daylie Intercowmoning and keiping of tryllis and confultationes, with the 3I'Gregouris, aflifting and taking pairt with thame in all and
fmdrie thair thiftis, reiffis, and opprefTiones, committit be thame this thre yeir
bygane. — The laid Patrik 3Pcan Donie J\PGregof(r, ffor being in company
with the M'Gregouris, at the fecht or flvirmifch of Bintoiche, in the moneth of
Apryle I'".Vj''. and four yeiris. And ffor airt and pairt of the trefTonable

^ * Tane bak agane to waird, and nocht put to ane Aflyfe.' ^ Goats.

VOL. in. P

114 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

Raifeing of ffyre, burning of the Caftell of Acliallader, and of tuentie houflis in
Glenlochie ; and for the crewall Slauchter of ffourlcoir ky^ at the faid fecht.
And ficklyk, ffor airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vniq'^ Patrik Dow M'nab, and
ane feruand of the Laird of Glenvrcheis, naniet IVrLayne, baith llane in the faid
fecht of Bintoich. And, ffor cowmone Thift, cowmone Reffet of thift, outputing and inputing of thift, &c. And, ffor Intercowmoning and keiping cumpanie
with the 3I'Grcgouris, in all thair wiket deidis, &c. — The faid AUaJler Boivie
M'Grcgour, ffor Cowmone Thift and cowmone Reffet of thift, outputing and
inputing of thift, fra land to land, fra cuntrie to cuntrie : And ffor Intercowmoning and keiping daylie tryftis and conventiones with the M'^GregouriSy and
taking plaine pairt with tliame in all thair violent and thiftious deidis, thir
dyuerfe yeiris bygane. — The faid Dougall M'Gregour Clerach M'^Gregoiir,
ffor the crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Gregour M'^Gregour, fone to vmq'^ Duncane
Abroche ]\rGregour, be fclmteing of him with ane arrow behind his bak ; committit in Auguft l^^.Vj". and four yeiris. Item, for Intercowmoning with the
M^Gregourls^ contrair the tennour of his Maiefteis Acts and Proclamationes,
at dyuerfe tymes, fen the jniblicatione of the faidis Proclamations. — The faid
DiDicane M'Neill M''Gregoiir, ffor cowmone Thift, cowmone Reffet of thift,
&c. And als, ffor Intercowmoning with the M Gregotms, affifting and plane
pairt-taking with thame, in all thair thiftious deidis, thir dyuerfe yeiris bygane.
— The faid Johnne M^Andro, ffor airt and pairt of the Burning of Johnne
Ste\v artis lious, and Slauchter of the faid vmq'® Johnne Stewart ; committit in
the laid moneth of December, PWj'. and ten yeiris ; at the leift, for keiping
cumpanie \vith the faidis Archibald IVrilvoil M'Lauren and Duncane M^Innowie,
and the remanent perfones thair complices, quha come furth of Glenco, to the
doing of the faidis crymes.

ASSISA.

Johnne Buntene of Aidoche, Johnne Buchannane, Williame Colqulioun,

ParlaneM'Walterof Auchin- Andro Cuninghanie, Mr Malcolnie Colquhoun,

vannell, Johnne Logane, fiear of Drum- Malcohne Crawfurd, feruitour
Mungo Buchannane in Tillie- chapoll, to the Laird of Blair,

chevviu, James Colquhoun, feruitour to Robert Blair,

Tho** Fallafdaill of Ardoch-beg, the Laird of Kilbirnie, Dauid Drummond,

Johnne Stewart in Canirone, Robert Bradie, feruitour to the Duncane Monzics.
Jo" Smyth in Auchindovvnanrie, faid James Colquhoun,

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of the faid Thomas Fallafdaill, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairet the faidis Johnne IVrewin in Kilbryde, Archibald M^lvoill, Donald JVrinnowie, Duncane Caird M^Gregour, Patrik ^Feandow
M'Gregour, Allaller Bowie IVrGregour, and Duncane M'Neill M'Gregour, to be
ffylet, culpable and convict of the feuerall crymes refpectiuc aboue writtin, con-

' Cattle ; hine.

44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 115

tenit in thair Dittayis : And the Hiid Dougall M'Gregour Clerach, to be ffylet,
culpable and convict of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vinq^^ Gregour
M'Gregonr, committit be the faid Dougall, he being within the age of tuelf yeiris
for the tyme ; and liclyk, for Intercowmoning with the ]\rGregouris, conforme
to the Article of his Dittay. And ficlyk, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid
Johnne M'^Andro, to be Clene, innocent and acquit of the Burning of the faid
Johnne Stewartis lious in Camrone ; and Slauchter of the laid vmq^^ Johnne
Stewart ; and remanent poyntis contenit in his Dittay.

Sentence. The Juflice, be the mouth of Alexander Kennydie, demi)(lerof
Court, decernit and ordanit the faidis Johnne 3I'Ew'ni, Dtiucane Caird M"-
Gregour, Pcdrik M'Indoiv M'Gregour, AUaJler Bowie M'Gregoiir, and
Duncan McNeill M^Gregonr, to be tane to the Burrow-mure of Edinburgh,
and thair, in the ordiner place of Executioun, to be hangit quhill thay be deid ;
and all thair landis, heritages, guidis, geir, moveable and vnmoveabill, &c., to
be fforfaltit and efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, as convict of the faidis crymes.
— And fuperceidis the pronunceing of Dome vpone the vther thre, quhill he be
advyfet with the Lordis of Secreit Counfall thairanent : And ordanit thame to
be tane bak agane to their priffone, kc.

[3Tr Robert Colihurne, Advocate, Jnjlicc- Depute.']

^\m^\)itx — M)t^tsi\\\% hjitf) f istoUts, ^f.

Mar. 8. — Johnne Carutheris in Netholme, fumtyme feruitour to
Robert Lord Sanquhair.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall and vnmerciefuU Slauchter of vmq'^
Andro Lyndfay of Ralliarrell, brother to vniq^*" James Lindfay of Fairgirth, and
feruitour for the tyme to my Lord Hereis, be fchuiting of him throw the body,
with ane piftolett ; committit be him and be George Graham, feruitour for the
tyme to the faid Robert Lord Sanquhair, at the Well end of the Brig of Dumfreis, vpone the xvij day of September or thairby, about the doun-fetting of the
fone, in the yeir of God I™ fyve hundreth fourfcoir faxtene yeiris ; off the quhilk
fchotte, and be dyuerfe vtheris crewall and deidlie woundis, gevin to him with
lliordis, quhingeris, and vtheris forbiddin wappones, he fchortlie thaireftir depairtit this lyfe.
Persewaris, James Lyndfay of Fairgirth, Hew Lynd/ay, his brotlier, as brether fones; Sir Thomas

Haminiltoun of Byiinie.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Hoip, Aduocat, Mr Johnne Dauling, The Tutour of

Bombie (William M^'Clellan), The Laird of Enterkyn.

The Aduocat producet the Dittay, and takis inftrumentis thairupoun. — The
pannell producet Letteris of Relaxatioun, quhairl)y he is the Kingis frie lege. —
The faid Johnne Carutheris producet ane Remiflioun, for all crymes preceiding

116 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

the dait thairof, and takis him thairto ; and in refpect thairof, can nocht pas to
ane AflTyfe. Off the quhilk Remiffioun, of the dait at Quhytehall, the xvij day
of November, the yeir of God I'^.Vj^ and fax yeiris, grantit to him and to Alexander Erie of Home, Lord Jedburgh and Dunglas, Sir Johnne Home of Huttonehall, kny\ and dyuerfe vtheris thair complices, the tennour followis.

Remission in favor of the pannell, the Earl of Home, S^c,
Jacobus, Dei gratia, Magne Britannie, ffrancie et Hibernie Rex, defenforque fidei, Cancellario
noftro falutem. Quia, ex noftris fpecialibus gratia et fauore, ^aimi^imns Alexatidro Comiti de Home,
dotnino Jcdhurt et Dunglas, et Jacoho Cranfloun in Huntlie-woid, omnem rancorem animi noftri, fectam regiam et actionem quem feu quas contra dictas perfonas habuimus, liabemus, feu quouifraodo in
futurum habere vel clamare poterinius, pro arte et parte Oppugnationis et Interfectionis quondam
Leonardi Hailli in Pleuland, intra domum fuam de Pleuland, et Incenfionis et Combuftionis ejufdem
domus per ipfos, in menfe Octobri, anno domini millefirao quingentefimo octagefimo octauo commifs.
Ac EciAM Remilimus dicto Alexandra Comiti de Home, Domino Joanne Home de Huttone hall,
militi, Magijtro Samueli Home, ejus fratri, Thome Tyrie Tutori de Dramkilbo, Alexandro et Joanni
Frenches, fratribus quondam Roberti French de Thornydykis, Joanni Home in Kello, Roberto Home
in Huttone, Rvherto Auchiticraw fervitori dicti Comitis de Home, Joaiini Cranjlonn filio Joannis
Cranfloun de Moreftoun, Niniano Chirnefyde feruitori dicti Comitis, Waltero Trumhle de Ramflat,
Roberto Home filio Willielmi Home de Aytoun, Williclmo, Niniano %i Archibaldo Homes, filiis quondam Willielmi Home de S* Leonardis, et Joaxni Cauutiieris, et eorum cuilibet, omnem rancorem
animi noftri, fectam regiam et actionem quam feu quas contra dictas perfonas aut eorum quamlibet
habuimus, habemus, feu quouifmodo in futurum habere vel clamare poteriraus, pro arte et parte Interfectionis quondam Willielmi Lauder, Balliui burgi noftri de Lauder, vocat. Williame at the Wefi-Poirt,
intra Pretorium noftrum de Lanark ; ac pro arte et parte proditorie Incenfionis et Combuftionis dicti noftri
pretorij per dictas perfonas, in menfe Maio, anno domini millefimo quingentefimo nonagefimo octauo
commifs. Ac pro omni actione et crimine que defuper fequi aut contra dictum Comitem feu aliquam
reliquarum perfonarum antedict. inde quouifmodo imputari poterint : Et pro omnibus alijs criminibus,
tranfgrcffionibus et ofFenfis quibufcunque, per dictum Comitem, vel aliquam reliquarum perfonarum
fupra fpecificatanim, vllo tempore preterito, datam prefentium preceden. commifH (Proditione in noftram porfonam, Raptu mulierum, et flFabricatione ffalfe et adulterate monete, tantummodo exceptis.)
Quia dictus Comes, pro feipfo, ac nomine reliquanim perfonarum antedict. eius complicium, partibus
pro dictis Interfectionibus, ac etiam Balliuis, confulibus et communitati dicti noftri burgi de Lauder,
pro reparatione noftri Pretorij antedicti, fatisfecit, prout nobis lucide conftat. VoBis Precipimus et
mandamus, quatenus Literas noftras RemifTionis noftro fub magno figillo, in forma Capelle noftre debita, fupra nominatis perfonis, fuper premiflis, fieri faciatis. Datum fub fecreto figillo noftro, Apud
Quhytehall, decimo feptirao die raenfis Novembris, anno domini millefimo fexcentefimo feptimo, et
regnorum noftrorum annis quarto et quadragefimo.

The Aduocat allegit that the Remiffionn is null ; becaus, be Act of Parliament, it is fpeciallie provydit, that na Remiffionn fall be grantit for Slauchter
without fatisfactioun of pairtie, and is null be way of exceptioun ; and this pairtie is nocht fatisfeit, ergo, &c. — The pannell offerris to find cautioun to fatisfie
the pairtie, conforme to the lawis of this realme ; and allegit that his Maiefteis
Remiffioun anes being grantit, can nevir thaireftir be callit in queftioun, conforme to the daylie practik of this realme ; and repeittis the lyk practik of Aber44&8JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. II7

crumble of Pitmedden contrair Gordones, quhair the lyk Remiffioim was fuftenit,
vpone finding of cautioun.

It is forder allegit, that this Remiffioun nather defignes quhair the pannell
duellis, nather is the cryme it felff fpeciallie expreffit in the Remiffioun ; and
thairfoir, except the faid fact war fpeciallie expreffit in the Remiffioun, and the
pannellis duelling and refidence fpeciallie defignet, the faid Remiffioun is null,
and can nocht be admittit. — It is anfuerit, that the pannell is remittit be his
Maieftie for Burning of the Tolbuth of Lauder, and Slauchter of the Baillie of
Lauder, and all vtheris crymes preceiding the dait of the Remiffioun ; and was
than fervand to my Lord Home, qulia lies tene Remiffioun ; and the faid Johnne
Carutheris name is infert in the Remiffioun with the remanent perfones committeris of the faid Burning and Slauchter, as being in cumpany with him at that
fact : Quhilk defignatioun of his name to be Johnne Carutheris, with his ftyle,
and that he is the perfone remittit, he offeris to preve be famous witneffes prefent at the bar. — My Lord Aduocat defyret that my lord Juftice and JufticeClerk fould notifie this matter to the Counfall, and to defyre tliair Lordfchips to
wryte to his Maieftie, to vnderftand of his Maieftie, quhither this Johnne Carutheris be the perfone quhome his Maieftie lies remittit or nocht.

The Juftice continewis this mater to this day aucht dayes, the xv hijlantis.
(Mar. 15.) — The Juftice, befoir Interloquitour, inquiret of the perfewaris,
gif thai wald verifie ony vther perfone to be namet Johnne Carutheris nor {than)
this perfone on pannell, quha was at the fact at Lauder, and wald inftantlie preve
the famyn ? To quhome the perfewar anfuerit, that he wald verifie that thair is
dyuerfe vtheris fa namit, but had nocht witnefles prefent ; and could nocht verifie
that thair was ony vther Johnne Carutheris at the Burning of the Tolbuth of
Lauder. — And the defender, being inquyret, Gif he wald verifie him felf to be
the perfone fpecifeit in the Remiffioun ? Anfuerit, that he wald verifie the famyn
be the witneffes prefent at the bar. And for verifeing thairof, producet Johnne
Cranftoune, Niniane Chirnefide, Patrik Chirnefide, and Alexander Haitlie. It
was allegit be the Aduocat, that thai can nocht be reffauit as witneffes in the faid
matter, becaus they ar infert in the Remiffioun as Jocij ejufdem crim'mis with
the pannell, at the fact of Lauder. — Thaireftir it was anfuerit be the pannell, that
thai aucht to be reffauet, feing thay war nocht at the Slauchter of Lyndfay, for
the quhilk he is this day perfewit ; and fa war nooht Jocij ill'ms criminiii.

The Juftice reffauit Johnne Cranftane, &c. : Quhilkis all being fuorne, Declarit, that this Johnne Carutheris, prefent vpone pannell, was in feruice and
companie with my Lord Home at the Burning of the Tolbuth of Lauder, and
is the felf-fame Johnne Carutheris fpecifeit in the Remiffioune : Quhairvpoun
the pannell afldt inftrumentis.

118 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D.l6n.

The Justice, be Interloquitour, Admittis the RemifTioun producet; and Ordanis the pannell to
find cautioun to fatisfie the pairtie perfewar, confoinie to the lawis of this realme ; accoirding to the
niodificatioune of the Lordis of Seflioun : And als, that the Reniiffioun fall be exped tlirow the SeillU
within fourtie dayis, conforme to the Act of Parliament, vnder the pane of tua Imndreth pundis :
And that being done, tlie faid Johnne Carutl)ens to be put to libertie.

For obedience qiiliairof, the faid Joliniie Cariitheris ffand Williame M'Clellane,
Tutoiir of Boiiibie, with him felff, cautioun to fatisfie the pairtie ; conforme to
the Lordis modificatioun. Lyk as, Jolinne Cranftoun, brother to my Lord of
Cranftoun, obleift him to expeid the faid RemifTioun throw the Seillis, within
fourtie dayis, under the pane of iij" merkis.

Mr Johnne Hay, in name of the Bailleis of Edinburgh, tuik inftrumentis of
the faid Johnne Carutheris entrie vpone pannell, and of the Juftice Interloquitour aboue writtin, and the pannellis finding of cautioune aboue fpecifeit ; and
in refpect thairof, and that the Juftice had ordanit him to be put to libertie,
Proteftit that tlie Bailleis of Edinburgh fould incur na harme nor inconvenient
for fetting of him to libertie. Quhilk proteftatioun the Juftice Admittit, provyding the faid Johnne Carutheris be uocht arreiftit at the inftance of ony vther
pairtie, for ony vther caufe.

^lljttiinQ: tvtm il^t Maitf of tje Sisks*

Mar. 15. — Gilbert M'adame of Watterheid; Donald M^millane of
Knokingarroche ; Robert M'^adame of Smeiftoune ; George
M'adame, thair ; Johnne M^'nacht of Doungeucht ; Gilbert
Achannane of Murdochat; Robert FergufTone of M'killieftoune ; Johnne Mi<ill, elder ; Johnne M^kill, younger ; Williame Makadarae of Craigullane ; Thomas Gordoun of Crago ;
Johnne Neilfon of Corfok.
Dilaitit for the allegit contravening of his Maiefteis Proclaraatiounes, in noclit
accumpaneing and pafTmg fordwardis with Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie, his
Maiefteis Lieutennent, in the profecutioun of his hienes feruice, towardis the
reprefling of the infolencics of certane the difobedient Inhabitants of the lies of
this kingdoine ; accoirding to his hienes Proclamationes maid to that effect, in
the monethis of Maij and Junij, the yeir of God l^.Vj'". and audit yeiris.^

Compeirit judiciallie the faidis Gilbert, &c., and in refpect that thai and everie
ane of thame had furneiftit furtli fufficient able men to the faid Leutennent in
the foirfaid Expeditioun, and thairupoun had purcheft the faid Lord Leutennentis Teftificat, with his Licence to abyde at hame them felffis, and noclit to pas
fordward with his Lordfchip, in the faid Airmie : Quhilk Licence thay producet

' See Notice prefixed to the Trial of Sir James Makconeill, May 13, 1609, Vol. III. p. 1, &c.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 119

in Judgment to the Juflice, vnder the faid Lord Leutennentis fubfcriptioun,
daitit at Air, the xxvij of Julij, I'^.Vj". and aucht yeiris. And proteftit, that thai
nor nane of thame fould be ony wayis trubillit, vnlawit, or perfewit for the
cauffis aboue mentionet ; hot that thai and ilk ane of them fould be Afroil3eit
fimplidter thairfra, in tyrae cuming : Quhilk Proteftatioun the Juflice admittit.
And in refpect that the faid Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie, his Maiefteis
Lieutennent foirfaid, being perfonallie prefent, quha affirmet the Licences aboue
written, and granting thairof to be of veritie, Ordanit that nane of the perfones
foirfaidis fould be callit or trubillit for abyding fra the faid Raid of the lies, in
ony tyme coming. Quhairupoun the faidis perfones aflcit inftrumentis.

Mar. 16. — Johnne Hammiltoun of Hairfchaw; Gawin and Archibald
Hammiltoun, fones to the faid Johnne ; Symone and Williame
Hammiltoun, brether to Hairfchaw ; Williame Hammiltoun,
brother-fone to Hairfchaw ; James Lyddell, fone-in-law to
Hairfchaw ; and Mathow goung, in Langlie.
Dilaitit of the Slauchter of vmq^^ Johnne Findlay in Eglifchem ; quha was
flane at the Kirktoun of Eglifchem, vpone the xvij of fFebruare, 1611.

Persewar, Arcliibald ifyndlaw, as brother to vmq'" Johnne Fyndlaw.

The Juftice, of confent of pairtie, continewis this matter to the thrid day of
the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdorae quhair the perfone abouewrittin duellis ^
(Lanerk.)

[/S'/V Williame Heart, Jitjiice-Depnfe.']

Maij 22. — Johnne Kennydie of Blairquhan, and Johnne Bairdis,
brother germane to the Laird of Kilquhin3ie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the felloun and crewall Slauchter of vmq'* Patrik
Ahannay of Kirkdaill, Proveiil of Wigtoune; committit be thame and tliair complices, with fchottis of hagbuttis and i^iitolettis, at the Cruves of the ^V^atter of
Crie, in the moneth of December, I^.Vj". yeiris, vpone fet purpois, prouiiioun,
and foirthocht fellonie : And for beiring, weiring, and fchoitting of hagbutis and
piftolettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament.
Persewaris, Patrik Ahannay of Kirkdaill, as fone to vniq'^' Patrik A. ; Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of

Byris, knyS Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for liis Maiefteis iutereis.

PRELOCUTOURIsfor tlie pannell, My Lord of CafTillis, My Lord Vchiltrie, Gilbert lloifls ; Mr Johnne

lluflell, Mr Thomas Hoip, and Mr Laurence M' gill, Aduocatis.

The pannell acceptis the fummondis, and fpeciallie that pairt thairof quhair

' ' Ple[<ijs, Huffone Montgomerie de Anchiuhuid, et Joannii Hammiltoun de Hairfchaw, pro omnibus; et ipfi ad relevand.'

120 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

the defunct was fchot with peiftis* or dropis, with ane charget hagbiit. It is
allegit, that this matter can nocht pas to ane AflTyfe ; becaiis his Maiellie, of his
Ipeciall grace, hes gevin to the perfones on pannell ane Remiffioun, quhilk thai
])roducet to the Jiiftice, of the dait at Edinburgh, the xviij day of Maij inllant :
And offcris Cautioune to fatisfie the pairtie. — It is anfuerit that this Remiffioun
can nocht ftay the matter to pas to ane AfTyfe ; becaus, be Act of Parliament,
in anno 1593, it is provydit, that all Remiffiones ar null that ar purcheft eftir
ane pairtie paffis to the home for the tyme ; quhilk allegeance is relFauit be way
of exceptioun, the pairtie nocht being fatisfeit. — It is anfuerit,^ that this Act of
Parliament is nocht in vlridi ohjeruantia, nor lies nocht tane effect in this Judgement of befoir : Quhilk allegeance he offeris to verifie, be my Lord Caffillis, and
vtheris heir prefent.

The Juftice continewis Interloquitour vpone this allegeance to ffryday nixt.
(Maij 24.) — My Lord Aduocat, befoir Interlocutour, pafTes fra his lordIchipis former allegeance : Quhairupoun the pannell takis inftrumentis.

The Juftice, be Interloquitour, Admittis the Remiffioun producet be the perfones on pannell and thair prelocutouris ; and Ordanit thame to find fufficient
and refponfall Cautioun and fouertie to fatisfie the pairtie grevit ; conforme to
the lawis and daylie practik of this realme.

Quhairupoun the faid Johnnie Kennydie of Blairquhan and Johnne Bairdis
afkit inftrumentis : And ffor obedience of the faid Juftice Ordinance, nominat
my Lord of Caffillis, my Lord Vchiltrie, Sir Robert M^clellane of Bombie, knyS
Williame Cunninghame of Capringtoun, and Sir James Kennydie of Culjeane,
as cautioneris, coniunctlie and feuerallie for thame ; lyk as, being all perfonallie
prefent, in prefence of the Juftice, Band and obleift thame, coniunctlie and feuerallie, thair airis, executouris and affignais, to fatisfie the pairtie, viz. the kyn
and freindis of the faid ymq^*" Patrik Ahannay of Kirkdaill, ffor the flauchter
aboue writtin ; conforme to the Lawis of this realme.^

' Pellets, small shot ; but, most probably, wliat is now termed shigs. ^ Replied. ^ Tlie arguments are thus expressed in an after part of the Record. As the point started is interesting, and
the Counl'el enga<,'ed were the most eminent of their day, it has Jbeen deemed proper to preferve the
arguments at length. — ' It being peremptourlie allegit for the pairt of the faidis perfones on pannell,
be Mr .Tolinne Rufiell, witli concurrence of Mr Tliomas Hoip and Mr Laurence M'gill, Aduocattis,
thair proloquitouris, that tlie faid fummondis and Dittay could nawayis be put to the knawlege of ane
Ali'yle, becaus our fouerane lord, of his fpeciall grace and mercie, had gevin and grantit to tl)ame ane
Reniiflioun for the faidis crymes, and producet the faid Remiflioun, part the Grit Seill, of tlie dait at
Edinburgh, the xviij day of Maij inllant; quhairvnto thai tuik thame felffis, and oflPerit refponfall cautioneris and Ibuerteis, at the bar, to fatisfie the pairtie for the crymes contenit in the faid Remilfioune,
accoirding to the niodificatioun of the Lordis of Seffioun, lawis and practik of this realme. To the
quhilk it was anfuerit bo our fouerane lordis Aduocat, that the foirfaid allegeance aucht to be repellit,
and the pannell, nochtwithllanding thairof, fould be put to the knawlege of ane AfTyfe; becaus, be Act
of Parliament maid in anno 1593, it is llatute and ordanit, that na Refpett nor Remiflioun be grantit
at ony tyme thaireftir to ony perfone or perfones palfand to the home for Thift, Reif, Slauchter,

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 121

The pannels bound themfelves to relieve their cautioners ; and the cautioners
alfo obliged themfelves to free each other, pro rata, &c.

Jun. 7. — Roger Gordoun in Glafniche, and Johnne Glendoning of
Drumrafche.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ George Stewart, brother to
vmq'® Mathow Stewart of DundufF; committit the xxj^ of September, 1601
yeiris, vpone fett purpois, prouifioun and foirthocht fellonie : And als, for beiring, weiring, and fchuitting of hagbuttis and piftolettis, contrair the tennour of
the Actis of Parliament.

Persewaris, Williarae Stewart of Dunduff, Johnne Stewart, brether fones.

The perfewaris producet the Letteris deulie execute and indorfate vpone the
faid Roger Gordoun and Johnne Glendoning ; and als, vjJone Alexander Gordoun
of Hillis, Williame and Robert Gordones, his tua brether, Robert Gordoun of
Bannernie, Alexander Creichtoune in Garrick, and Thomas Creichtoun in Balcaffie, quha ar paft to the home for the crymes contenit in the Letteris : And
vpone the productione thairof, afkit inftrumentis ; and proteftit for the cautioneris relief for repoirting thairof.

Continewit to the morne. Plegio, Wilelmo M^cuUoche de Mertoun.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Johnne Ruflell, Aduocat, The Laird of Lochinvar.

(Jun. 8.) — The perfewaris declairit, in refpect that this Roger Gordoun
is only airt and pairt of the Slauchter, and noclit principall actor of the fact, and
thairfore, vnto the tyme the principall maliefactouris be apprehendit, quhairby
the pannell his giltines or innocencie of that crewall flauchter may be tryit, defyres that he may be continewit to the thrid day of the air [Wigtoun], or foner,
vpone XV dayis wairning ; and that cautioun be fund be him to that effect, vnBuming, or Heirfchip, &c. quhill the pairtle fkaithed \_v\z. until tlie party shall previously have received pecuniary satisfaction or damages for the loss sustained] be fiill fatisfied : And gif ony fic Refpet
or Remiffioun fould happin to be grantit, bofoir the pairtie grevit be firft fatisfeit, the faniyn fall be
null, and of nane availl, be way of exceptioun or reply, without ony forder declaratour. Bot trew it is,
that the perCones on pannel, lang befoir the purcheffing of the laid Remiffioun, war dehunced rebellis
and at the home, and war declairit fugitiues fra his hienes Lawis for the faidis crymes contenit in
thair Dittay ; the pairtie nawayis being fatisfeit as 5it: And thairfoir, the laid Remiliioun vfet and
producet is null, be way of reply. And for verifeing thairof, producet the Extract of the Hoirning
aganis the pannell. — To the quhilk it was duplyit be the pannell, that tliay ofterit thame to preve, be
my Lord of Caffdis, and tua Minifteris, at the bar, that fatisfactioun was oflerit be thame to the pairtie grevit, lang befoir thair paffing to the home, or purclielTing of Remillioun ; quhilU was refuillet :
Secundo, it wes nevir m viridi ohjhrvuntia that the foirfaid Act of Parliament was authorifet in this
Judgement; nather yit could euir his Maielleis fauour and pardoun, being anes grantit, be callit thaireftir in queftioun. And thairfoir, takis thame, as ofbefoir, to his Maielleis RemiUioun ; and ofierit
cautioun to fatisfie the pairtie.'

^ In the act of caution the slaughter is stated to have been committed on the ' ellevint.'

VOL. III. Q

122 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

der the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament. [^Plegioy JVdelnw M'culloche de Mertouu.']

The Laird of Mertoune amerciated ' in the pane of ffyve hnndreth merkis, for
iioclit entrie of the faid Johnne Glendoniiig' on June 8, and Glendoning ordained
to be denounced rebel, and all his ' moveabill guidis to be efcheit,' &c.

Jun. 28, — PaTrik JMaxwall of Newwark.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Robert Montgomerie of
Skelniourlie, and vmq^ ^^'illiame Montgomerie apperand of Skelmourlie ; committit in the moneth of I'".VMxxxiij yeiris.

Persewar, George IMontgomerie.

The Laird of Newwark jn'oducet ane Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, direct to the Juftice, anent the deferting of this dyet, for the reffonis contenit in the Suplicatioun gevin in to thair Lorfchipis thairanent ; with ane Command on the bak of the faid Supplicatioun and Warrand aboue writtin, commanding the Juftice to tak cautioun of atlier of the pairteis, befoir thair cuming
out of Judgement, that thai fall remane and keip waird within this burgh, quhill
Tyfday nixt ; and that thai fall compeir befoir his Maiefteis Counlall the faid
day, vnder the panes following, viz. of Newwerk, vndir the pane of tua thowfand merkis, and George Montgomarie, vnder the pane of ane thowfand merkis.
Quhilk Warrand is daitit at Edinburgh, the xxvij day of Junij 1611 inftant. —
For obedience of the quhilk Warrand, and ordinance thairin contenit, the Juftice
Defertit the faid dyet ; and Ordanit the faidis tua pairteis, h'mc iude, to find cautioun for thair compeirance befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfell the faid day,
viz. the fecund day of Julij, vnder the panes aboue fpecifeit : Lyk as, for obedience of the faid Juftice ordinance, compeirit Williame Lord Kilmaweris, and
became plege and fouertie for the faid Patrik Max wall ; and ficlyk, compeirit
James Dunlope of that Ilk, and become fouertie for the faid George, &c.

[The Records of the Court of Justiciary do not afford sufficient information regarding the facts
connected with the following Case ; and, as it relates to individuals of considerable rank, the Editor
thought it proper to select even such meagre notices as those which do occur. The Young Laird of
Closehurn seems to have been one of the active spirits of these times, and to have been engaged in a
laudable share of affairs of honour, and in quarrels quantum sufficit, and ' befitting his degree I'

In Lord Iladhifjtoiis MS. Collections, the following remarkable entry occurs, under date Feb. 27,
1610. ' The Lady liempisfeild, haveing defyred Andro Quhyt, keiper of the Tolbuith, to bring to
hir 5oung Cloilbvrne, who wes in the Tolbuitli wairdit, to fpeak with hir in his houfe ; he doing it at
her defyre, 5oung Cloifljurne fchiftit him felff away, ftbr the quhilk caus, fcho being put in the Tolbuitli, and thairafter tranfported to the Caftell, focht Licens of the Counfall to be tranfported to the

44.&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 123

toune ; quhilk the Lordis refuifletl, vnles fcho wald aither enter Joung Cloifburne, or find cautioune
to fatisfie all pairteis be quhome he wes wairdit or arreifled.' '

Closeburn's escape had been effected by his exchanging clothes with the Lady Hempisfield, a method which has often proved successful in similar emergencies. It may be remarked, that the jailor's
house was commonly attached to, or rather consisted of one or more apartments of, the prison.]

Juii. 28. — Alexander Kirkpathik, fone to Sir Thomas I^rkpatrick
of Cloifburne, kny'.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ James Carmichell, fone to
Johnne Carmichell of Spotlie.

Persewaris, Johnne and William Carmichell.

The Juftice, of confent of jDairtie, continewis this clyet to the xxiiij of Julij
nixt. [Plegio, D. Tho. Kirkpatrik de Cloilburne, milite.]

(Jul, 24.^) — The Juftice, of confent of pairtie, continewis this mater to
the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome of Dumfreis, or foner
vpone fyftene dayis wairning : And ordanis cautioun to be ffund for that effect.
[Plegio, D. Thoma Kirkpatrik de Cloifburne.]

Creasoit— iifturtfer uirtn* Crust,

Jun. 29. — Peter Weir, fumtyme in Goittnow in Rig.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter and Murthour of vmq'^
Johnne Hammiltoun, merchand burges of Edinburgh ; committit, vnder treft,
vjDone the fevint day of November 1608 yeiris, befyde Monharig burne-fute.

Persewaris, Jonet Small, the relict ; Patrik Hammiltoun, as brother ; Sir Thomas Hammiltoun

of Byres, knyt^, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intres.

Prelocutour for the pannell, Robert Bannatyne, wryter.^

DiTTAY agah}Jl Peter Weir, the 'pannell.
FoRSAMEKiLL as vmq'^ Johnne Hammiltoun, merchand burges of Edinburgh,
haifing conqueift'* and acquyret to him felf the richt of certane landis, occupyit
and poffeft be Johnne Weir in Over Quhytecleuch, the laid Peter "Weir, and
Margaret Weir in Bagra ; and haifing thairupoun obtenit Decreitis of Removeing, aganis thame and remanent tennentis and occupyeris of the laidis Landis ;
and for diffobedience of the charges of Hoirning, haifing denuncet the laid Peter
owr fouerane lordis rebell, and put him to the home, the faid Johnne Weir, Mungo
Weir, his brother, the faid Peter Weir, and INLtrgaret Weir, conliiltit and devylet
amangis thame felffis, how to bereiff the laid Johnne Hammiltoun of his lyfe :
And for effectuating thairof, caufit certane freindis travell with him, and to cum
in tryfting,^ and to meit at Monharig, to cowmone" tliairui)one ; and affixt the

* Minutes of the Proceedings of the Privy Council, Had. MS'S. A. 4. 22. Advocates' Library.
* The pursuers marked at this diet, are designed ' Johnne C. of Spotlie, Williaine C". his lone.'
' One of the brothers of the celebrated George Bannatyne, in honour of whose valual)le compilation
of early Scottish Poetry, the Club of that name was formed. ^ Purchased, in rontra-dislinction

to having inherited. ^ By special agreement or appointment. ^ Commune.

124 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6ll.

fevint day of November I"'.Vj^ and aucht yeiris to that effect : Lyk as, the faid
vmq'" Johnne Hammiltoun, for keiping of the faid tryft, accumpaneit with James
Creichtouii in Bar, being cuming rydand furth the hie way, in fober and quyet
maner for the tyme, vpone the faid fevint day of November, to the appointit
place aboue writtin, the faidis Johnne AVeir, Peter Weir, Mungo Weir, and
]\Iargaret Weir, accumpaneit with dyuerfe perfones thair complices, being bodin
with fuordis, qiihingeris, kent-ftalfis and otheris wappones invajiue, darnit^ thame
felfis in the hie way, })efyde INIonharig, quhair thai lay at await for the faid
vmq'^ Johnne Ilanimiltones by-cuniing ; and thair, vnder treil and friendfchip,
maift crewallie invaidet him for his flauchter, drew him af his hors, and with
quhingeris, gaif him threfcoir" bludie woimdis, in dyuerfe pairtis of his body, to
the effufioun of his bluid in grit quantitie ; and crewallie flew and murdreift him
out of hand : And the faid Peter was and is airt and pairt of the faid Murthour.
7''o the taikin, he and the faid Margaret Weir, being in cumpanie with the faid
Johnne AVeir, com to the faid James Creichtoun, and drew him doun af his hors,
and held him be force doun, quhill the faid vmq'^ Johnne was murthourit out of
hand ; quhairthrow the faid James mycht nocht releif him.

James CreicJitoun, being fuorne, Declairit, that he, being in company with the
defunct, the tyme lybellit, vpone the grund of the Land quhair the fact was
committit ; and thair, this Peter Weir, with Margaret Weir, drew him af the
hors and held him doun ; quhairthrow he was nocht able to defend the defunct.
— Quhairupoun my Lord Aduocat afkit iuftruments ; and Proteflis for Wilfull
Errour, gif the Atlyfe acquit.

Verdict. The Aifyfe,^ being ryplie and weill advyfet thairwith, togidder
with the faid Peteris Depofitiones, producet be our fouerane lordis Aduocat ; togidder with the Letteris of Hoirning, quhairby the faid Peter was fugitiue fra his
hienes lawis, for the faid cryme, lykwayis producet, for inftructing of the Dittay ;
thai, be the mouth of Robert Phillope, burges of Sanquhair, ffand, pronimcet,
and declairit the faid Peter Weir to be ffylet, (be pluralitie of voitis,) of airt and
pairt of the Murthour of the faid vmq^^ Johnne Hammiltoun.

Sentenx'E. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair his held
to be flrukin from his body : And his haill guidis and geir to be efcheit to our
fouerane lordis vfe, &c.

rrtasxin— .^Iaut3:i)tti-— iHurlJfr mxt^tx Cnist, ^c,

[The Trial of tlie Mlkes of Auciiindrayne may, without hesitation, be pronounced to be one
of the most remarkable, in the wliole range of the Criminal annals of this, or perhaps of any other country.
In it are unfolded their most hidden transactions, and the secret springs of their most private and craf-

' Concealed. ' Tliree score ; sixty. * Among their number were George IMiixwell of Druincowtrane,

and James M'Morrane younger of Glaspen.

44 & 9 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 125

tily contrived plots, all of them leading to the perpetration of crimes so singular in atrocity, and of so
deep a die, that one can hardly expect to meet with their parallel, even in the pages of Romantic fiction.
By the clew, now afforded, may be traced almost the secret thoughts of two of the most accomplished
and finished adepts in crime — individuals who murdered by rule, and who carried forward their deadly
schemes of ambition, by means of a regularly connected chain of plots and stratagems, so artfully contrived, as to afford them every reasonable prospect of success — and even in tlie event of the entire
failure of their plans, almost to ensiue their escape from suspicion ; at the least, in their estimation, to
warrant their security against ultimate detection, and consequently exempt them from the penalty of
capital punishment.

Ambition and the lust of power appear to have been the immediate procuring causes oi" all the crimes
in which these infatuated men were involved. Theirs was not the sudden burst of ungoverned passions, which might have hurried them on to the commission of a solitary deed of frightful but unpremeditated violence — nor were their crimes the consequence of ancient Feuds, inherited from their restless and vindictive ancestors — nor yet had they the too common apology that they originated in impetuous assaults made upon them, and that their hasty quarrels sprung from a fiery and unbridled temper, which had unfortunately terminated in fatal results. On the contrary, the whole of their numerous
attempts and crimes may be characterised as cool, calculating, and deliberate acts, anxiously studied,
and by slow and patient, but sure degrees, matured and prosecuted, for a long series of years, until
at length ' the measure of their iniquities overflowed,' — and the unlooked-for concurrence of an extraordinary train of circumstances, the most unlikely to have happened, eventually led to a triumphant
discovery of their enormous crimes.

It is quite unnecessary here to enter into any detailed account of the facts connected with the crimes
of these individuals. Their leading features are already familiar to all, ever since the publication of
' AuciiiNDRANE, OR THE AYRSHIRE Tragedy,' from the pen of Sir Walter Scott; in the preface
to which dramatic sketch, the origin and progress of these dark transactions are so fully discussed,
that the Editor begs simply to refer the reader to a reperusal of that work.

In addition to the information contained in the ' Dittay,' and in the pleadings in this Trial, the
Editor has been anxious to collect and lay before the reader the most remarkable circumstances connected with the history of the elder and younger Mures. For this purpose he has for some years pa«t
used all exertions to extend his researches in every direction, where authentic illustrative Documents
and Records could be procured — and he has now the satisfaction of appending to this higlily interesting
Case a variety of Papers, which may almost be said to throw all the light tliat can now be reasonably
expected, on proce6dings which occurred now above two hundred and twenty years ago.

For the sake of saving too copious quotations in this work, the Editor has, through the liberal permission of the Curators of the Library of the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh, published in a separate volume ' The Historie of the Kennedvis,'' from the Original MS. in their valuable collection. That History, besides the numerous interesting notices of the Mures of Auchindrayne, Sir
Thomas Kennedy of Colzean, who ultimately fell their victim, the Earls of Cassilis, &c., enters most
minutely into the Feuds and Conflicts of the Kennedies, Mures, Crawfords, 8cr., and satisfactorily developes the causes out of which the various crimes of Auchindrayne and his son sprung. The state
of society, and the habits and manners of the people of Carrick, are very graphically delineated by the
author, who was evidently an eye-witness of the many interesting transactions he has recorded.

For the purposes of the present Introductory Notice, it is enough to state, as in reference to the
persons who principally figure in this dark tragedy, that so far as respected birth, the Mures op
Auchindrayne were of most respectable and ancient extraction, and were connected with many of
the most opulent and influential families in Ayrshire. They also for a considerable period held a con-

' A limited impression of tlie ' Historie or tux; Kennedyis' has been printed, uniformly with the works of the
Bannatyne and Maitland Clubs, and may be had of the Publishers of this Collection.

126 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

spicuous station in all the transactions and feuds of tlie district of Carrick. There is no reason to
doubt that the Mures of Monyhagen and Auchindrayne (which last title was only latterly assumed by
them) were cadets of the very ancient and honourable Family of Mure of Rowallan, now represented
by the present Marcliioness of Hastings, as Countess of Loudoun, &c. In confirmation of this fact.
Sir William Mure of Rowallan, knight, in his History of that House,' states, that Afidrew 3Iure of
Monyhaycn, the first of the family, was either a son or a grandson of Sir Gilchrist Mure, who died
circa ann. 1280. It does not appear how or when they became possessors of the Lands of Aucliindrayne; but it is certain, that previous to the Wars of Bruce and Baliol, Auchindrayne (i. e. the Field
of Thorns) belonged in property to Robert Brown ; and was, upon his forfeiture, granted by King
Robert the Bruce to Henry Annan. By a Charter, dated March 16, 1498, James 3Iure of Monyhagen
granted certain lands, in Wigtonshire, in favour of James Mure, his son, and Margaret Wallace, his
spouse. One of the witnesses to this deed, is John Mure, ' grandlon and heir aj)parent of the faid
James ;' which shews him to have been a very old man at that period, and that he was born circa 1430.
This Joh7i Mure must have been the grandfather of the old Laird of Auchindrayne, who figures in the
present Trial.

It is pretty evident, as appears from a Charter of Novodamus of the Lands of Leffenhill, dated
Sept. 29, 1671, by Chalmers of Gadgirth, in favour of John Mure of Auchindrayne," that the elder
Mure must have been nearly eighty years of age at the period of his execution ! The grantee is described as heir of John Mure of Monyhagen, ' proavi,' who had in like manner had a Charter of same
Lands from Campbell of Loudoun, Sep. 2, 1530.^ — This John Mure, who obtained the above mentioned Charter 1671, married Bethia Hamilton, daughter of Hamilton of Dalzell, by whom he had at
least one son James, who probably predeceased him — for he conveyed Auchindrayne to his brother
Hugh Mure, whose son or grandson sold it early in the last century ; and the Family, it is believed,
is now extinct in the male line.

To return to John JIure Elder, and James Mure Younger of Auchindrayne, the subjects of the
following Trial, it is worthy of notice, as proving their rank and consequence in the most convincing
manner, that John Mure tlie elder married Margaret Kennedy, second daughter of Sir Thomas Kennedy of Bargeny, (ohiit, Nov. 7, 1597,) by Lady Agnes Montgomery, sister to Hugh, third Earl of
Eglinton, — and that James Mure the younger married Helen, second daughter of Sir Thomas Kennedy of Colzeaii, Tutor of Cassilis, by Dame Elizabeth MacGill, daughter of David MacGill of Cranstoun-Riddell, King's Advocate, and relict of the celebrated Robert Logan of Restalrig.

On occasi(jn of Jolm, fifth Earl of Cassilis, going on his travels to France, he conferi'ed the BailLIARY OF Carkick upon the elder Auchindrayne, for all the period of his life, an office of high trust
and respectability, having tlie Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction of the whole of that extensive and populous district. It had previously been enjoyed by Kennedy of Blairquhan, one of the most powerful
Chiefs of the name of Kennedy. The Earl had previously given Auchindrayne grants of a five-merkland and a two-mcrk-land, in return for his fealty and service ; and besides, ' the laid Johne to be one
his chargis euer quhan he ves out of Carrik.'* Through the influence, as was asserted, of Sir Thomas
Kennedy of Colzean, the Tutor of Cassilis, this office was recalled on the Earl's return, which probably gave rise to the deadly grudge of Auchindrayne, and, after the lapse of many years, eventually
terminated in his murder. After the period of this recall, Auchindrayne returned to the allegiance of
the Laird of Bargany, and took a most active lead in all the feuds of that disturbed country.

As the most copious materials occur in the Illustrations appended to the present Trial, and in the
' Hiftorie of the Kennedyis,' relative to all the transactions of Auchindrayne, the Editor will not en-

' Writton in or prior to lGo7, and printed from the original IMS. Ci-own 8vo, Glasgow, 1825. ^ lie was

eldest son of Sir John Alure (>/' Aucliiii(lriii/iie, wlio was eldest son of Jiuiics ]\fiire i/ouii(/er of Aucldndruyne, executed
along with his father for the ^Iiirdi-r of Dalryni|)le. ' See I'articuhir Register of Sasines for Ayrshire, II.,

61.3, where numerous entries oceur; but it would he foreign to the purposes of the present work to enter into lengthened genealogical detail and proofs. * See Ilistorie of the Keiinudyis, 4to, Edin. 1B30, pp. 18, 19.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 127

croach on the prescribed limits of tliis work, by entering into farther detail. It is hoped that enough
is there given to gratify the most anxious enquirer.

Among other curious matters which are mentioned in the present Trial, there occurs the ancient and
almost universal superstition, that the body of a murdered person bleeds at the approach^ or at least on
the touch, of the Murderer ! This test of guilt, or ordeal, is so remarkable, that the Editor has made
every investigation which his opportunities admit ; and lays the result before the reader, in the Appendix.]

Jul. 17. — JoHNNE Mure of Auchindrane, elder; James Mure,

younger of Auchindrane ; and James Bankatyne of Chapeldonall.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the treffonabill Murthour of vmq'^ Sir Thomas

Kennydie of Culzeane, knycht, Tutour of Caffilis, vnder truft, &;c. ; committit

be the faid Johnne Mure of Auchindrane elder, in forme and maner, and at the

Ipeciall tyme fett doun in his Dittay. And als, for the treffonabill Murthour

of vmq'^ WiLLiAME Dai-Rumpill, in Air ; committit be the Hiidis Johnne

Mure, elder of Auchindrane, (James Mure, younger of Auchindrane;) and James

Bannatyne, in forme and maner alfo contenit in the Dittay, produceit be our fouerane lordis Aduocat aganis thame.

Persewaris, James Kennydie of Culzeane, as fone to vniq'*? Sir Thomas Kennydie of Culzeane,
knyS Tutour of Caffillis ; Beflie Dalrumpill, as mother to vraq^e Williame Dalrumpill ; Sir Thomas
Hammiltoun of Byres, knycht, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes interes.
Prelocutouris for the perfones on pannell.
Mr Johnne RufTell, Aduocat; Mr Thomas Nicolfone, Aduocat; Jofephe Myller, Aduocat.

My lord Aduocat producet the Dittay aboue (under) writtin.
Dittay agawjl John Mure, elder of Auchindrane i James Mure, younger

of Auchindrane I ajid J amf.s BA'^iS!ATY'SB,fometime in Chapeldonane.

Johne Mure, elder of Auchindrane, James Mure, younger of Auchindrane,
and James Bannatyne, fumtyme in Chajieldonane, Ye and everie ane of yow, for
your owne pairtes, refpectiue, ar Indyted and accufed of the haynous, crewall,
and treafonabill crymes vnderwrittin : Forsamekile as, be Act of Padement,
maid be oure fouerane lord and Eftaittis of this kingdome, in the moneth of
July, 1587 yeiris, cap. 51, it is ftatute and ordaned, that the IMourthour or
Slauchter of whatfumever our fouerane lordis liegis, whair the pairtie flayne is
vnder the traiftj credit, affurance, and power of the flayer, all fik ]\Iourtliour and
Slauchter to be committit efter the dait of the laid Act, the famin being laiifullie
tryed, and the perfoun dilaited, ffund guiltie be ane Affyfe thairof, fall be Treafoun ; and the perfones ffund culpabill, fall forefault lyfe, landis and guddis.
And treav it is, that ye, the faid Johne Mure, elder of Auchindrane, haiving,
without any jufte caufe, confpyred the Mourthour of vmq''' Sir 'I'iioimas KenNEDIE of Cullayne, Jniichf, in the moneth of Januar, or thairby, 1597 yeiris,
accurapanyed with fevin or aucht of yout complices in the faid iuterpryfe, came

128 CRIMINAL TRIALS.' A.D. 1611.

to the Towne of Maybole, and being furelie informed that the faid Sir Thomas

wes than roiipi)ing, vpon the day of the faid moneth of Januar, in the

howfe of Sir Thomas Nifbett in Maybole, and wes to pafs, efter fupper, from
that pairt to his owne howfe ; ye and your laid complices, bodin in feir of weir,^
with hagbiittis and piftolettis, and vtheris forbiddin and vnlaufull wapinis,
dairnit" your lelf, vnder filence of night, about nyne or ten houres at evin, in
ane obfcure place, by the whilk^ the faid Sir Thomas Kennedies paflTage laye ;
and, lb fone as }'e perfaued him, ye fercelie fet vpon him, perfewed him with all
violence and crueltie for his llauchter, fchot and delafchit* at him ane great
number of fchottis of hagbuttis and piftolettis, and ftill chaiffit and perfewed
him ; whill,^ be the Providence of God, and releif of honeft nightbouris, he wes
delyuered from your crueltie. For the whilk vylde and barbarous offence, ye
being fummond to vnderly the law, (wes) forced be your owne notour guiltines to
go to the home. That feid and inimitie wes fchortlie thairefter removed, not
onlie be publict and fworne reconciliation maid betuix the faid vmq'^ Sir Thomas
Kenned ie and yow, the faid Johne Mure of Auchindrane, hot alfo confirmed and
ftrenthened, be allyance and mairiage of your eldeft fone vpone the faid Sir
Thomas his dochter; whairby the faid vmq'^ Sir Thomas wes drawin vnder fik
traift, affurance and freindfchip with yow, that he, lipning^ altogidder to the
fame, vpon the tent day of May, the yeir of God 1602 yeiris, being of intentione to ryde to Ed" for his laufull buffines, and having no lefs cair of your turnis^
nor of his owne,^ he fend his feruand, Lancelot Kennedie, to wryte aduerteilinent
to yow, tliat he wes to tak liis journay touardis Ed"" vpon the nixt day, whilk
wes the ellevint day of May, 1602 yeiris, or thairby ; to the effect ye might meit
him vpon the way, at the Duppil, a littill be-weft the burgh of Aire, and informe
him of fik buflines as ye wald defyre him to do for yow in Ed^ Whilk aduerteifment, being writtin at defyre of the faid Lancelot Kennedie, be Mr Robert
Mure, than fchole-maifter of Aire, your kinfman, he fent that his Letter to yow,
with ane fcoUar boy, being in his fchole for the tyme, called WiUiame Dalriimpill ; whilk letter cumming to your handis that efternone that it wes writtin,
vmq"' ^^^alter ISIure in Cloncaird being than in cumpauie with yow, in your
place of Auchindrane, ye difpatchit bak the faid William Dalrumpill, in haift,
directing him to retui-ne to Maybole with diligence, and to deny that he had met
with yow, or delyuered the Letter to yow : And incontinent thairefter, confulted and refolued with the faid vmq''' Walter Mure of Cloncaird, to aduerteis
Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrquhie, your gude-brother," of the certaintie of the

' Arrayed in warlike manner. ^ Hid, concealed. ^ Past which. "* Let off, fired.

Fr. delascher. ^ Until. ^ Trusting, confiding. '' Affairs or matters. ^ Than of his own.

' Brother-in-law.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 129

faid vmq'^ Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cullayne's journay, and of the way whilk he
intended to ryde, advyling the faid Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrquhie to vfe
that occafion to Mourthour the faid Laird of Cullayne, in reuenge of the Slauchter
of the vmq'^ Laird of Barganie ; wliairof the Laird of Cullayne wes altogidder
innocent : And conforme to your faid develifli refokition, ye, having aduerteifed,
and perfuaded, and inltigat the faid Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrquhie to interpryfe the faid treafonabill Murthour, alfweill be your melTage fend to him be the
laid vmq^^ Walter Mure of Cloncaird, as be ane vther Letter fend be yow to him

with Makadam, your eldeft fones feruant for the tyme ; the faidis

Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrchie and the faid vmq''' Walter Mure of Cloncaird,
accumpanied with fyve or fax of thair complices, vmbefet the faid vmq'^ Sir
Thomas his hie-way, neir the pairt whair he had tryfted to meit yow, and vpon
the faid ellevint day of May, 1602 yeiris, be your aduerteifment, counfall, and
inftigatioini foirfaid, cruellie and treffonablie Mourthoured and flew him, vnder
traift, credit, and aifurance ; of your caufing, command, counfall, and ratihabition ;^ ffor the whilk treafonabill cryme, the faid Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrquhie llandis forfaltit be Parlement. Notwithftanding whairof, ye, at all
tymes fen the faid treafonabill Murthour, affifted and fujiported the faid Thomas
Kennedie, bothe within this cuntrie and fen Ids going furth thairof ; and lies keiped
ordinar intelligence and correfi^ondence with him. And ye, the faid Johne Mure
of Auchindrane, ar airt and jiairt of the faid cruell and treafonabill Murthour,
and aucht and fould be forfaltit, and vnderly the pvneifment of treafon for the
fame. Lyke as, ye, feiring the difcouerie of your guiltines of the faid Treafonabill Mourthour, be the taking, tryall, and examinatioun of the faid Williame
Dalrumjiill, for efchewing thairof, ye caufed quyetlie convoy him to your place
of Auchindrane, immediatlie efter the faid Murthour ; and caufed your wyfe
keip him quyet within the fam, fumtymes within the barne and fumtymes in the
turnepyke-heid f appoynting James Cuninghame, your feruand, to cairie his meit
to him for the maill pairt, and to ly in bed with him ; helping him verie quyet and
fecret from all vtheris. And nevertheles, finding that, pairtlie be his weireing to be
keiped as ane clofe prifoner, nd pairtlie be the difcouerie of fum of your feruandis,
who got knouledge of his being in your liowfe, that he might be more publictlie
difcouered, and ye thairby tryed^ guiltie of the faid Mourthour, ye fend him to
Loch-Ranfay, in Arrane, to the Laird of Skelmurlie,^ your freind,"' convoyed be
your feruandis, Johne Mure called the 13a7TOun, and James Gordoun, now flabler
in Ed", and at that tyme your houfliald feruand ; wliare he, being deteaned for

^ Confirmation. Law Lat. ratihahere. '^ The top of the turnpUic or ciioular staircase, common

to the towers and residences of the principal families in Scothind, at this ])eriod. In tlie course of the
Trial, it is specified that he was kept ' in ye cJialmcr in })e turnepyke-hoid.' ^ Found on trial to

he guilty. "^ Sir Robert Montgomery. ^ Blood-relation; one related by the ties of consanguinity.

VOL. 111. B

130 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

your caufe, ane laiig fpace, and he lykwayes weireing to remayne in ane barbarous cuntrie, amang rude peopill, who nothing reguairdit him, being ane ftrenger
to thame, leivand vnder ane counterfute name of WiUiamc 3Iure, as ye had
directed him ; efter fum difcord betuix him and ane of the Laird of Skelmurhes
leruandis, he came bak to yow to Auchindrane, whair ye caufed keip him
darned' in the barne and turnepyke-heid refpectiue, till ye learned that your
freind James ]\Iure of Fleit wes going to the Warres in the Low Cuntries ; and
than ye, be your felf and your Lady, perfuaded the faid James to tak the Hiid
Williame to Flanders with him ; wliilk he confenting to do, your wyfe gaue to
the laid James ane naig, to help to mak the faid Wiliiames expenfis ; and ye
recommended to him the cairefull and faif tranfport of the faid Williame Dalrumpill, and fend the laid James Gordoun, your feruand, to convoy thame and
await vpone thame, to the Place of Cauldwell, in thair way to Leith. Lyke as,
the laid James Mure of Fleit fend the faid Williame to Flanderis to the Warris ;
whair he ferved dyueris yeires, and reffaued dyueris woundis, and fullained many
vther miferies in the fame : Whairthrow, he, becumming defyrous to returne to
his natiue cuntrie, ye no foner hard of his hame-cumming, bot incontinent thairefter ye fend for him to the duelling howfe of Walter Mure in Glenheid of
Auchindrane ; and thairefter, vpon the .... day of September, or thairby, the
yeir of God 1607 yeiris, ye directed the faid James Cuninghame, your feruand,
to convoy him from the faid Howfe of Glenheid to James Bannatynes houfe of
Chapel-Donald ; and cafting yow, to forgadder with him be the way,^ ye, the
faid Joline Mure, elder of Auchindrane, and ye the faid James Mure, eJch'Jlfom
and apperand aire of the faid Johne Mure, elder of Auchindrane, meitting with
the faid Williame Dalrumpill, in the hieway, betuix Auchindrane and ChapelDonald, ye keiped cumpanie with him be the fpace of aucht myles, and held
d\aiers pourpofes, fpeaches, and conferences with him ; tryed of him the eflait
of the Low Cuntries, and fmdrie vther materis ; till ye, cumming altogether to
the houfe of Chapel-Donald, ye, the faidis Lairdis of Auchindrane, defyred the
faid James Barmafjjne to keij^ the faid IViUiame Dalriinip'dl, whom ye than
named ' Williame Montgommerie,' whill he fould vnderftand farther of your pourpofe : And fending vpon the morne thairefter, being Setterday the .... day
of September, 1607 yeiris, for the faid James Bannatyne, ye, the faid Johne
INIure, elder of Auchindrane, defyred him to bring to yow, to the Saudis of Girvan, the faid Williame, about ten houris at evin ; whairin he^ obeying yow, at
his cumming with the faid Williame, he fand yow, the faid Johnne Mure of

^ Secreted, concealed. " Contriving' that you slionld, as if by accident, meet with him on the

road. ' On the martrin there is written, ' he iimpHe lipninir (trustinir) to traift and freindichip,

cam fimplie to yow,' but without a mark where it is meant to be taken in. The Dittay in Hadington's
MS. Collections seems the original scroll, and bears numerous corrections, in his own hand.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 131

Auchiridrane, and James Mure, your eldeft laufull fone, attending tliame :^ And
at your meitting, ye, the faid James Mure, demanding whair the boy wes ? And
the faid James Bannatyne, fchawing to yow whair he had lichted fra behind
him,^ he pail fordward to yow, the faid Johne Mure ekler of Auchindrane ; wha,
fchawing to him that boy wes he wha broght to yow the Letter of aduerteifment of Cullaynes dyet before his IMourthour, and that ye hauing vfed diuers
meanes to put him by the way, for efchewing the difcouerie of your pairt and
guiltines of the faid Mourthour, he ftill returned within the cuntrie ; whairby
ye, feiring that he fould be the meanes of your wraik, ye wes forced to refohie
to mak quyte of him : And the faid James Bannatyne, perfuading yow rather
to giue him fumwhat and fend him away of new, when, as he had ahnoft perfuaded yow, and that he and ye wer returning towardis your fone, to move him
to allow of the faid refolutioun, fo fone as ye approched neir vnto him, he
crewallie invaided the faid "William e Dalrumpill for his flauchter, rufched him
to the ground, and, fetting his kneyis vpone his airmes, he pat his handis in the
faid Williames throt, and thairwith worried and flew him : In the whilk fact,
ye, the faid Johne Mure, elder of Auchindrane, helped, with your owne handis,
to hald him downe and fmore^ him. And incontinent thairefter, ye, the faidis
Johne Mure, elder of Auchindrane, and James Mure, your fone, and ye, the faid
James Bannatyne, taking ane fpaid and fchule, reddie prepaired be the faid James
Mure for the pourpoife, caill^ liollis in the fand to have buried him ; whilk ftill
fchutting and filling with fand and water, fwa that ye wes not abill to get his
corps covered, ye, the faidis James Mure, younger of Auchindrane, and James
Bannatyne, cairied his deid corps in the Sea, fa far as ye could waid, and left his
corps thair, to be cairied to the mayne Sea,^ be ane vtterlie wind ;" notwithftanding whairof, within fyve or fax dayes thairefter, the wind and tyde broght bak
the dead corps of the faid vmq'® Williame, neir to the pairt where ye had mourthoured him : Whilk being tryed,' and the authoris of his Mourthour referched, be all laufull meanes, the conftant and vniuerfall bruit ^ and oi)inion of
the haill peopill of the cuntrie, blamed yow and evrie ane of you of the fam :
Lykeas, in treuth and veritie, ye thrie are the verie and onlie Murthouraris and
flayeris of the faid vmq'^ AVilliame Dalrumpill, vnder your traift, credit, affurance, and power ; in refi)ect that he wes knowne to you, the faid Johne Mure,
elder of Auchindrane, at the tymes and in maner before fj)ecified ; and wes not
onlie knowne to yow, the faid James Mure, younger of Auchindrane, whan lie
wes ane fcoller in Maybole, and whan he wes keiped in the place of Auchindrane,

^ Waiting for lliem. Fr. attendre. ^ Alighted from liorseI)acI<, on wliidi Biinnatyno ami Dalrumpill had ' rode double' ^ Smother, suffocate. This horrid manner of death is in all rcspiMts

the same as that lately pursued hythc infamous jB»/-A'e and his associates ! ' Ca>t, dug. ^ The

Ocean. ^ Aw off-shore wind. "^ Examined or investigated by the proper legal authorities.

^ Report. Fr. bruit.

132 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

in anno 1602 yeiris, befoir his going to Arrane, and efter his bak-cumming
thairfra to Auchindrane ; bot alfo at his going fra Glenheid to Chapel-donald,
whan ye, the faidis Johne INIure of Auchindrane, and James Mure, your eldeft
fone, convoyed him to the howfe of Chapel-Donald, recommended him to the
faid James Bannatyne, and left him in the keiping of the faid James Bannatyne ;
and, thairefter, fend for him to cum to yow to the Saudis of Girvan ; whilk
meffage he obeyed, and moft willinglie and reddelie cam to yow; whan he, being
vnder your traifl, credit, afTurance, and power, ye treafonablie flew and murdreilTed him, in maner aboue-writtin : And yow, and evrie ane of yow, ar airt
and pairt tliairof, and audit thairfoir be Decerned to forfeit lyfe, landis, and
gudes, and to am it all landis, heretageis, takkis, fleidingis, rowmes, polTeffionis,
teyndis, cornis, cattel, gudes and geir, titillis, proffitis, commodities, and rightis
whatfumever, directlie or indirectlie perteaning to yow, or ather of yow, at the
committing of the faidis JMurthouris, or fenfyne, or to the whilk ye, or any of yow,
had richt, clame, or actioun.

It is alleget be the pannell, that na proces can be led aganis thame, becaus
thai ar nocht fummond to this dyett. — My lord Aduocat anfueris, that thai war
lunnnond for thir fame crymes of befoir, and being prefentit and enterand, wer
wairdit,^ fum of thame in the Caftell of Edinburgh, and vtheris in the Tolbuith
of Edinburgh ; and being accufet for Treafone, may be brocht furth of thair
wairdis, and put to ane Affyfe. And for verification of the premiffes, producet
the Letteris of Horning, quhair thay being fummond, paft to the home, for
nocht finding of cautioun to compeir and vnderly the law.

The pannell defyres xxiiij houris to be advyfet with the Dittay, becaus the
matter, fubftance, perfones, and fubiect of the firft Dittay is alterit. — The Aduocat in the contrair, becaus the Dittay and the firft Letteris agreis in fubftance,
tuiching the Murthour of Sir Thomas Kennydie and Willyame Dalrumpill. —
The pannell anfueris, thay differ in circumftances.

The Aduocat thairefter produceit the firft Summondis, and defyret the famin
to be red ; and the Juftice to advyfe, quhidder thai differ fra the Dittay, in fubftance, or nocht. — The Justice Ordanis proces, without delay.

The Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, aflvit inftrumentis, that James
Bannatyne is accufet and pannellit with thame, in this proces. — My Lord Aduocat declairis, that he inftftis vpon the Summondis, as it is treffonabill.

It is allegit, that this Act of Parliament, quhairvpone the Summondis is
foundit, was nevir in viridi ohferuaniia, in this Judgement, quhill this perfute.^

1 Imprisoned, kept in ward. ^ That the act in question was never ohserved in the practice of

this Court ; and that this is the first instance of its having been founded on.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 133

— It is anfuerit, that this Act of Parliament hes tane effect agaiiis Thomas Kennydie of Drummorchie.

It is allegeit, that the alTumption of the firft pairt of the Dittay, aggreis nocht
(with the) woirdis of the Act of Parliament, in thir woirdis, ' vnder power, trull,
credeit, and affureance ;' becaus the Laird of Auchindrane had na power over
the Tiitour of Caffilis : And as to the woird of ' affurance,' it is repoirtit in the
Summondis, that thefeid was taikin away, and thairfoir, na affureance. — To the
quhilk it was anfuerit, be the Aduocat, that the allegeances aucht to he Repellit,
in refpect of the Dittay. For, it is fufficientlie knawin, that foure perfones may
haif ' power' over ane ; and the pannell, haifing gevin aduerteifment and directioun to fax to Hay the Tutour, thair was mair nor fufficient power : And as to
the reft of the allegeance, * credeit, truft, and affurance,' the Dittay ftandis relevant, feing thair was na feid ftanding, and thairfoir, behovet to be flane under
truft.

It is allegit, that the Dittay can nocht be relevant, vnles the famyn beir that
the pannell was actviall committer of the cryme ; becaus the Act of Parliament
beiris, quhair the fact is committit and done be ane man, haifing power and authoritie of the perfone flane ; hot fa it is, that the pannell was nocht prefent at
the committing of the fact ; and fa the perfone flane was nocht vnder his power.
— It is anfuerit, that the Dittay ftandis relevant, in refpect that the Pannell was
airt and pairt of the fact ; and thairfoir the allegeance aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the Dittay.

The Justice ffindis the Dittay relevant, and Ordanis the famyn to be put to
the knawledge of ane Affyfe, except the pannell fay f order.

It is forder allegeit, that the naikit aflertioun of power, authoritie, and affurance, except the jDannell had bene prefent at the committing of the fact, is nocht
relevant. Item, thair can na proces be led vpone this Dittay, feing the famyn
is foundit vpoun ane writ quhilk is nocht producet. Anfueris, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay. — It is allegit, that the Dittay is nocht relevant to
infer Treafoun, becaus it is never fubfumeit in the Dittay, that the Laird of
Cullane was vnder the power of Auchindrane. Anfueris, vffupra, that the famyn
aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay. — It is allegit, that the wryting of
ane Letter be Auchindrane to Thomas Kennydie is nocht relevant to infer, that
the pannell was airt and pairt of Cullanes flauchter. Anfueris, audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay. — It is allegeit, that thair is na thing qualifeit in
the Dittay, that the cryme was committit be the pannellis caufmg, counfall, or
command ; becaus counfell can nocht infer airt or pairt. Anfueris, aucht to be
repellit, in refpect of the Dittay.

The Justice Repellis the haill former allegeances ; and ffindis proces.

134 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

It is allegeit, gif the principal flayeris fallis noclit vnder the danger of the
Act of Parliament, the perfones nocht prefent, and yit accufet of airt and pairt,
can nocht fall vnder the danger of the faid Act : Bot fa it is, that the Tutour of
Caffillis was nocht vnder the power or alFureance of Thomas Kennydie of Drummurchie, principall flayer; and na aflTureauce betuix thame, bot feid Handing
betuix thame. It is anfuerit, that thair was na feid Handing betuix Drummvrchie and the Tutour of Caffillis ; and thairfoir the faid allegeance aucht to be
repellit, in refpect of the Dittay, as it is fett doun.

The Justice Repellis the allegeance, in relpect of the Dittay.

Forder, allegis that the principall actouris is nocht difcuffit. Anfuerit, aucht
to be repellit, in refj^ect of the Dittay beiring airt and pairt ; and that the principall committcris ar fugitiue, and thairby lies tane the cryme vpone thame.

It is allegit, concerning tlic SJaucliter of Dcdrumpill, that the auld Laird repeitis the haill allegeances maid aganis the Act of Parliament, vnder treft, credeit, power, affiu-eance, &c. And for Young Auchindrane, fayis, that Dalrumpill was nawayis vnder his power, credeit or affureance ; becaus it is nocht qualifeit, that he was vnder the young Lairdis power ; and thairfoir, can nocht infer Trealbne aganis him. The Aduocat anfueris, aucht to be repellit, in refpect
of the Dittay.

The Justice, be Interloquutour, Suftenis the Dittay, as it is confauet, alfweill
aganis the young Laird as his father. — Quhairvpoun the Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

ASSISA.

SirJamesScryinfreonr of Dudope, Duncane Bayne of Tulliche, Williame Sinclair of Blaufe,

kny', elder, Coiidable of Dundie, Dauid Weir of Auchtiefardill, George Seatoue of North-Rig,

Sir George Elphingftoun of Patrik Stewart of Baithe, Johnne Corbett of Arboill,

Blitliifn-od, knyS Vthreid :M'^^Dowell of Mondork, Patrik Carkettill of Markill,

James Scrymgeour, younger of Robert Merfer of Salens, Johnne Kneilland of Fofkane,

Dudope, Mathow Brifbane of Raflene, Sir Dauid Woid of Craig, knycht.

IMy lord Aduocat tuik inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Alfyfe. My lord
Aduocat aflvit infl:rumentis of the fweiring of the Dittay, be Beffie Dalrumpill,
moder to vmq'® Williame Dalrumpill, in that article thairof, concerning the Murthouring her fone.

Thaireftir, my lord Aduocat, fTor verificatioun of the Dittay to the perfones of Afl\Te, repeitit to thame the notorietie of the fforfaltour in Parliament
of Thomas Kermydie of Drummvrchie, for the treflbnabill Murthour of the
Laird of Cul5eane ; repeitit the Hoirning vfet aganis the faid Thomas, Cloncaird, T'homas M^Alexandcr, and remanent thair comjilices ; and the citatioun
of the Laird of Auchindrane elder, for the faid crymes, in anno 1602 ; producis
the Hoirning vfet be the Laird of Cul5eane aganis Auchindrane, fTor the intendit

44 & 9 Jac. VI. CRIxMINAL TRIALS. 13.5

Murtliour of the faicl Laird of Cul3eane, in anno 1597 ; and repeittis the Laird
of Auchindranes Confeffioun thairof, in Judgment. And for verificatioun of the
faid Laird of Auchindrane elder his giltines of the Laird of Cul5eanis Murthonr, and of the giltines of his fone and James Bannatyne, of the Murthour of
WiUiam Dah*umi)ill, producet the Hoirning execute aganis thame for the faid
cryme, in ffebruar 1608; quhairby, thay ganging to the home, and fleing frome
the Law, thay haif tane vpoune thame the giltines of the laidis crymes.

To prove that Auchindrane elder reJfauH the Letter fent to him be Mr Robert
Mure, contening aduerteifment of Culleanis dyet, and broght to him be Williame
Dalrumple, Walter Mure of Cloncaird being prefent, producet the DepolUion of
James Mure of Fleit, markit with the Letter O. jxtghia terl'ia ; the Depofition
of James Gordoun, O. p. 5 ; the Young Laird of Auchindranes awin Declaratioun, O. p. 6. And that M'^Adame carreit aduerteifment from Auchindrane to
Thomas of Barganie thairof, produceit James Gordones Depofition, markit with
the faid Letter O. p. 10.

For Auchindranes hnoivlege of CnUanes Murthour, vfes the Depofitioun of
the Laird of Cauldwell, markit with the Letter G. p. 1, beirand, that Auchindrane fchew to them, that he knew of CuUanes Murthour, befoir it wes done,
and wald nocht ftay it. And vfes lykwayis the Depofition of James Mure younger
of Auchindrane, his fone, O. p. 6, beirand, that he knew that liis father was
hevelie fufpectit of the Slauchter of the Tutour of Caffillis.

To verifie Auchindrane's helping of Williame Dalrumple in his hous of Auchindrane, in the chalmer in the turnepyk-heid, and in the barne of Auchindrane,
fchortlie eftir the Slauchter of the Laird of Cullane ; vfes the Depofitioun of
Young Auchindrane, E. p. 6, and D. p. 5 ; the Depofitioun of Johnne Mure of
Woidland, L. p. 6 ; the Depofitioun of Johnne Mure, callit Blak-byres, O. p. 1 ;
and of James Gordoun, O. p. 5 et 10.

To verifie Awchmilv^nQ^ fending of Dalriimple to Arrane, quhilk Aucliindrane
denyes ; vfes the Depofitioun of Patrik Dalrumple, H. p 5 ; of Johnne JMure, in
Blak-byres, O. p. 1 ; of James Mure of Fleit, O. p. 4. ; off James Gordoun, O. p.
Set p. 10.

To verifie DalrumpilliH fending to Flanderis, be Auchindrane, quhilk Aucliindrane denyis ; vfes the Depofitioun of Walter Mure in Glenheid, A. p. 2 ; off
Johnne Mure, in Blakbyres, O. p. 1 ; of James Mure of Fleit, O. p. 2 et 3 ; of
James Gordoun, O. p. 5. — And that the Lady Auchindrane caufit Williame Dalrumple change his name, and call him felf Williame Mure ; vfes the Depofitioun
of James Mure of Fleit, O. p. 9 ; and of James Gordoun, O. j). 10.

To preve Williame Dalrumpellis being in Walter Mure of Glenheidis hous,
efter his returning frome Flanderis, to wit, vpoiie the Thurifday befoir his jMur136 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161L

thour, quliilk Auchindrane deiiyis ; vfes the Depofitioun of James Dalrumpill,
G. p. 1 et 2 ; and of ^A\ilter Mure, in Glenlieid, A. p. 2.

To preve the hr'mghig of William e Dalrumple from Glenlieid, be James Cimninghame, at directioun of the Laird of Auchindrane, quhilk he denyis ; vfes the
Depofitioun of AWalter Mure, in Glenheid, A. p. 2 ; and of James Gordoun, O. p. 5.

I'o preve the Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, thair meiitmg ivith
Williame JDalrumjile^ in the way betuix Auchindrane and Chapel-Donane, and
keiping cumpanie and conference with him the fpace of fevin or aucht myles,
quhill thay thre and James Cunynghame come to Chapel-Donane, quhilk Auchindrane preffis to deny ; vfes Auld Auchindranes Depofitoun, E. p. 2 ; and Young
Auchindranes Depofitioun, E. p. 7 ; the Depofitioun of Andro M'Allexander,
B. ; Johnne IMure of Woidland, C. ; Patrik Bannatynes Depofitioun, D. p. 1 ;
Young Auchindranes Confeflioun, D. p. 5 ; James Dalrumjiles Depofitioun, G.
p. 1 et 2 ; Williame Roife, L. p. 5 ; Johnne Mure in Carvell, L. p. 1 ; James
Bannatyne, M. p. 1.

To verifie the bringing of Williame Dalrumple, be James Bannatyne, to the
SaNDIS of GmvEN, to the Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, and MuRTHKRING HIM vNDER nycht, in that place ; making ane hole for his burrall,
and catling of him in the fea ; vfes the Depofitioun of Johnne Mure of Woidland,
C. ; Patrik Bannatynes, D. p. 1. ; James Dalrumpillis, G. p. 1 et 2 ; Dauid
IMerferis Depolitioun, L. p. 4 ; Williame Roife, L. p. 5 ; Johne Mure in Cairve,
L. p. 7 ; James Bannatyne, M. p. 1 et 2 ; Johne Mure in Blak-byres, O. p. 2 et
1 1 ; James Gordoun, O. p. 5 ; James Pennycuiks Depofitioun, maid 27 of Maij ;
the Young Laird of Auchindranes Depofitioun, F. p. 2, beirand, that he hard be
the bruit of the cuntrie, that his father knew of Dalrumples ]\Iiu*thour, becaus
lie was fugitiue.

To verifie that Auchindranes denyall that he hnew Williame Dalrumple, or
that he brocht him ]\P Robert Mures Lettir, is vntrew ; and that he knew him,
and reifauit the faid Letter from hiin ; vfes the Depofitioun of James Dalrumple,
G. p. 1 et 2 ; James Mure of Fleit, O. p. 3 ; James Gordoun, O. p. 5 ; the Del)ofitioun of James ]\Iure, younger of Auchindrane, D. p. 5.

To verifie James Mure, younger of Auchindrane, his Jmaidege of Williame
Dalrumpill, and of his keiping quyet in Auchindrane ; and of his being at hame,
immediatlie befoir his Murthour ; and his father and the deponneris melting and
conference with him in the way betuix Auchindrane and Chapel-Donane, the
day befoir his Murthour, and thair cuming altogidder to Chajiel-Donane that
nycht ; produceit the Depofitioun of the faid James Mure, younger of Auchindrane, D. p. 5. Item, the Depofitioun of the faid Laird of Auchindi'ane younger, D. p. 7.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 137

To verifie the dilligence, craft, and fubtilitie vfet be the Lairdis of Auchindrane, to fuppres and efchew the tryell of Williame Dalrumpillis INIurthour, and
of thair awin giltines thairof ; ffirft, my Lord Aduocat vfes the verificatioun of
thair intentioun to Murthour Hew Kennydie of Garriehorne, onlie devyfet and
attemiDtit be thame, to cullonr thair going to the home, and to efchew the haynoufnes of thair fleing fra the law and tryell of thair giltines, of fic ane horrible
and abhominable Murthour as Dalrumpillis ; the Depofitioun of James Dalrumple, K. p. 1 et 2 ; and the Depofitioun of James Bannatyne.

Defyres lykwayis the AiTyfe to haif confideratioun of thair continuall refoirt
and friendfchip with James Bannatyne, eftir the faid Murthour; and thair being
at the home for the famyn ; thair fufFering the reproches and iniuries, be woird
and deid, offerit be him to thame, quhilk thay wald nevir haif induret, gif thai
had nocht bene affrayit, that, thai difcoirding with him, he fould haif difcoverit
thair giltines of the faid Murthour ; vfes the Depofitioun of Patrik Bannatyne,
D. p. 3 ; the Depofitioun of Auld Auchindrane, M. p. 3 ; and of James Mure of
Fleit, O. p. 3.

The geving be the young Laird of Auchindrane to James Bannatyne, ane
Lyfrent Tak of his rowme of Chapel-Donane, all writtin with Young Auchindranes awin hand, contening fourtie penneis be yeir of deutie, denyit and menfuorne be Young Auchindrane ; and thairefter confeffit, quhan the Tak was recoverit and producet, E. p. 8.

The deilling of Young Auchindrane, be him felff and his freindis, with James
Bannatyne to go to Ireland, and furneffing of him, to that effect, ane boit, meit
and drink, quhilk Young Auchindrane denyit ; vfes for verificatioun thairof, the
Depofitioun of Allane Pjq)er, L. p. 3 ; Dauid Marfchellis Depofitioun, N. p. 1 ,
et O. p. 4 et 8 ; Dauid Mure, in Girven, his Depofitioun, O. p. 4 ; and James
Bannatynes, O. p. 8.

That Young Auchindrane wrait ane Letter with the faid James Bannatyne,
and in his fauour, to Thomas Kennydie of Drummurchie, the Kingis forfalt
Tratour ; vfes for verificatioun thairof, the Confeflioun of the faid Young Laird
of Auchindrain, O. ji. 7 ; and the Depofitioun of Williame Kennydie of Garfar,
O. p. 8.

To preve that the fermes (rents) of Chapel-Donane, was continuallie payit to
James Bannatyne, fen his banifinnent ; vfes the Depofitioun of James Roife, tennent thair, L. p. 5.

To preve the furneifing of plenifiing, money and necefiliris be the Auld Lady
Auchindrane to James Bannatyne, continuallie, fince his going to Ireland ; vfes
the Depofitioun of Williame Pyper, L. p. 1 ; Dauid ^larfchell, L. p. 4 ; Williame
Roife, L. p. 5 ; James Roife, L. p. 5 ; James Gordoun, O. p. 10 ; and be Auchindranes awin Letter fent to James Bannatyne; Moyfes Lokhartis Letter to James

VOL. III. s

138 CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

Bannatyne ; Young Aucliindranes Letter fent to James Bannatyne ; the Lady
Audiiiidranes tlire Letteris to James Bannatyne ; and hir Letter to James
Bannatynes wyfe.

The jierfewar defyres the AfTyfe to haif confideratioun, as of ane verrie materiall circumftance, that James Ciminghame, being the man imjDloyit be Auchiudrane to keip AVilliame Dah-umple qiiyet in the place of Auchindrane, and to
convoy him fra Glenheid to Chapel Donane, the nycht befoir his Murthour,
quhairby he, being for the tyme, his actuall fervand, and in his hous of Ballachtoiile the nycht of Dalrumpillis Murthour, and thairby mair abill to haif difcoverit the circumltances of the Murthour nor {than) ony vther ; the Laird of
Auchindrane hes abfentit him, for efchewing of tlie faid tryell : And how the faid
James Cuninghame, being in the Laird of Caldwallis hous, and the Erie of Abercorne geting knawledge thairof, haifing, as ane Counfalour, commandit Caldwall
{Mi(7'e) to exhibeit Cunninghame befoir the Counfell ; he, contrair to his promeis,
fufferit him to efcaip : He being challangeit for it befoir the Counfell, grantit the
promeis, and declairit that Cunninghame was fent to his hous be the Lady Auchindrane ; and that, contrair to his promeis, he fufferit him to efcaip ; ffeiring, gif
he had enterit him befoir the Counfell, he ibuld haif done liarme to his freind.
For the quhilk, he become in the Counfellis will ; as his DeiDoiitioun beiris, H.p. 1.

As lykwayis, how Auchindrane elder directit the faid James Cunninghame,
by the way to the Laird of Yaynes hous, in Angus, caufing him change his name,
and to call him felf WiU'iame Bronn, and geving him that name, quhan he recommendit him to the Laird of Vayne, albeit the man was the faid James
Cuninghame ; Quhilk Auchindrane denyis ; bot the contrair is provin be James
Gordoun, O. p. 5 et 10; be the Laird of Vayne, O. p. 11 ; Andro Lokhart, O.
p. 12, and George Blakis Depofitioun, maid at Lundoun, 28 Maij.

Forder, it is defyrit that the AfTyis will conlider the grit fubftance contenit in
the Letter writtin be Auchindrane to his fone, with his awin hand, impudentlie
denyit be him ; and nevertheles cleirlie verifeit be the Depofitionis of Dauid Drummond, feruitour in the Caftell, E. p. 15 ; and be Thomas Home, Conftable, ihid.;
and be the Declaratioun maid be my Lord of Mar, in Counfell ; quhilk the Lordis
of Secreit Counfell, prefent in this Judgment, hes verifeit.

Thay haif to confidder the Lady Aucliindranes adverteiffing of James Bannatyne, be Letters, of all the Dyettis of proces led betuix the Laird of Auchindrane
and her fone ; and hir recommending of him to Thomas Kennydie of Drummurchie, hir brother ; provin be Williame Pyper, L. p. 1 ; James Gordoun, O.
p. 10 ; and be hir awin Miffaue Letter to James Bannatyne.

The Lady Aucliindranes abfenting hir felff, and iiocht compeirance befoir the
Counfall, quhan fcho wes charget thairto, vnder the pane of Hoirning, to compeir and Depone hir knawledge of the crymes quhairof hir hulband and fone ar

44&9JAC. VI. CRIxMINAL TRIALS. I39

accufed ; Thomas Mure, fone to Aucliindrane, and Andro Sinclair, half brother
to Aucliindrane, thair going to the home, for nocht compeirance to depone in
the faidis crymes, quhilk of neceffitie man be prefumeit to proceid of the Hay
maid to thame be Aucliindrane, elder and younger, for feir that thair Depolitiones fould difcouer the giltines of the faidis Lairdis. The lyk man be preiumet of Thomas Wallace, Joline MVaig, and dyuerfe vtheris of the Lairdis fervandis, going to the borne, for the lyk caufe.

Thay half alfo to confidder verrie cairfuUie, the Laird of Auchindranes hyreiug James Pennycuik to go to Ireland to Murthour James Bannatyne ; denyit
be Aucliindrane, and verifeit be the Depofitioun of the faid James Pennycuik, and
George Small his fervand. And the lyk directioun fent be Auld Aucliindrane
with George Blak to Ireland, to Williame Carmichell younger of Rowntriecroce ; verifeit be the Depofitiones of George Small, O. p. 11, and be the Examinationes of the faid James Pennycuik and George Blak, in Lundoun, in May
laft.^

Laft, thay half to confidder the Letter fent be Auld Auchindrane to the Laird
of Stair,^ and the forme of Band fend thairwith, to half bene obtenit, fubfcryuit
be the Laird of Stair, and his freindis, of the name of Dalrumple.

In refpect of the quhilkis premiffes, verifeing the crymes lybellit, and liaill
materiall circumllances thairof, with fo cleir euidences and manifeft probatioun,
as na man could half expected, in fo covered and craftie INIurthouris ; quhairby
all dout of obfcuritie and fcruple is cleirlie removet ; in caice the faid Affyfe or
ony pairt of thame fall happiii fo viihappelie to forget thame felffis, as to clange^
the faidis Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, or the faid James Bannatyne, quha lies Confeffit his awin giltines, in Judgement ; my lord Aduocat proteftis for Wilfull and manifeft Errour ; and for all payne that of the Law can
follow thairupoune.

It is Ansuerit be the pannell to the perticuleris aboue writtin,that the famyn,
nather in liaill nor in pairt, audit to be refpectit; and fpeciallie, in fa far as the
famyn is foundit vpone Depofitioun of Witnelfes ; becaufe, it is fpeciallie provydit
be the Act of Parliament, maid in the yeir of God 1"'.^. fourfcoir fevin,^ cap. 90,
that in all cauffes Criminall, the liaill proces and probatioun, and vther inftructiones quhatfoeuir, ather be Writ or Witneffis, fall be alleget, reifonet and deducet
in prefens of pairtie acculit, in face of judgment, and na vtlier wayes ; quhilk is
accoirding to the Cowmoun Law ; feing na witneffes can be relfauit contra non

' It may he statpd liore, once for all, tliat unluckily tlie Depositions, Letters, and otiier productions, wliicli are liere so rejijnlarly quoted by their proper numbers and pages, are lost ; at least, if
among- the Records of the Justiciary Court, are in a room tilled with h)ose and unarranged papers, tied
up in bundles in such a manner, as to render any ordinary search entirely hoj)eles8 — as it would occupy
many months' constant investigation. 2 Jylm Dalryraple, chief of that name. ^ Cleanse ; find

innocent, acquit. '' Anno 1587.

140 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

citatum ; to the effect that the pairtie may be hard to oppone aganis thame.
And trew it' is, that all thir Depofitiones and writtis, vfet be my Lord Aduocat,
and fpeciallie the faidis Depofitiones of Witnefles, hes bene reflauit out of prefens
of pairtie ; the pairtie nevir being liimmonit to obiect aganis thame, done extraiudiciall, and noclit in Judgement : And thairfoir, quhatfoeuir the Lordis of
Counfall, per medium inqiiifitioiiis, hes done of befoir, out of prefens of pairtie,
audit nawyis now to be refpectit be the Affyfe ; accoirding to the decifioun of
the Act of Parliament : ffor, as in Ciuile cauffes, na faytli will be geviu to ony
Witnefles out of prefens of partie, multo minus in Crimincdihiis.

And now, anfuering perticulerlie, ffirft, as to the Forfaltour of Thomas (Kennedy) of Barganie, (Drummurchie,) thair is na thing producet. Nixt, he wes nocht
forfalt for the factis lybellit, hot only for the burning of the houfe of Auchinfoule.
Tertio, it tuiches noclit our caufe. As to the Hoirningis, the pannell vfes fyve
feuerall Relaxatiounes of Auchindrane, elder and younger, rejpectiue ; quhilk
thay producet. And albeit the Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, war
put to the home, for thair nocht compeirance, the firft dyet, yet that importis
na taking of the cryme upone thame ; becaus, thay being giltie for vther crymes,
and fjieciallie, fchuiting of piftolettis, ffor the quhilk thing mycht haif bene
]nvneifl be the lawis, thay durft nocht compeir, quhill firll thay had obtenit ane
Remiflioun of the faidis crymes, quhilk thay mycht lauchfullie do ; becaus, thay
knew certanlie, that thair going to the home wald be purget be thair compeirance and offer to Tryell. As lykwayis. Young Auchindrane compeirit at the
firft Dyet ; and alfo Auchindrane elder wald haif enterit willinglie, and to that
effect offerit to compere^ and tak his Remifllioun for the piftolettis, but culd
nocht obtene the famyn ; as is notour to my Lord Chancellar and Thefaurer.^ —
As to the repetitioun of the Depofitioun of James Mure of Fleit, and James
Gordoun, it is anfuerit, utjiipra. And forder, in caice the pairtie had bene
wairnit, as he was nocht, he wald haif repellit the faid James Muir, he being ane
vagabund, without ony refidence, nocht worth the Kingis vnlaw f and richt fua,
that he was denunceit rebell and put to the horne, for fteilling of tua liorfe and
thre oxin fra the Tutour of Nuntoun ; and alfo, for fteilling of ane quliyte naig
out of the landis of Skeltoun. Lyk as, the Tutour of Bombie, to move him to
be ennemie to Auchindrane elder and younger, and to depone aganis thame, he
aggreit* the Tutour of Nuntoun and the faid James Mure, anent the fteilling of
the faid guidis. And forder, the Laird of Blairquhand hes promeift him geir
and guid deid, to depone aganis thame ;^ and (Mure) hes now becum his fervand.

^ Compromise ; make a composition, or purchase his Remission from the Crown. ^ Both of

wliom, it will be remembered, were then sitting as Assessors. ^ Not being wortli, i. e. unable to

pay the fine or amerciament to the king, for his own appearance, &c. ^ Reconciled them,

and made up their quarrel. ^ For the reason of Blairquhan's feud with Auchindrayne, see

Hist, of the Kennedyis, p. 19, &c.

44 & 9 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 141

And as to Gordoun, can nawaiyis be refpectit, becaus he was nocht audit 3eiris/
the tyme of the committing of the factis quhairvpone he was examinat. Lyk
as, the pannell defyres that Gordoun may be prefentit in prefens of the Aflyfe,
and confrontit with the pannell. — Forder, it is allegit be the pannell, that the
Depoiitiones for (of?) the faid James Mure and James Gordoun, and all vtheris of
the lyk nature, aucht nawayis be refpectit ; becaus, it is of veritie, that the lybell
and Dittay confifts of tua pairtis ; the ane fubftantiall, to infer the pwneifchment
lybellit, viz. the committing of the factis lybellit ; and the advyfe, confent, perfuafioun, inftigatioun, caufing, command, counfall, and ratihabitioun, quhilkis ar
the only fubftantiall poyntis contenit in the lybell and Dittay : And the reft of
the poyntis of the faid Dittay are only prefumptiones, coniecturis, and liklienes.'*
And feing, the fpeciall caufe quhy the Juftice Suftenit the lybell, was the advyfe, prefumptioun, inftigatioun, counfell, command, afliftance, and ratihabitioun
gevin, be the Auld Laird of Auchindrane, to the faidis Thomas Kennydie,
for Murthouring of the faid Laird of Culzean ; and that thair is na thing
of the faid fubftantiall poyntis provin be nane of the Depofitiones ; quhatfoeuer Depofitiones is maid be the faidis tua perfones, or ony vther remanent
Witneftes, in materis of the lyk nature, anent ony probabilities or prefumptiones, albeit thai war maift violent prefumptiones, and indoutit, thay can
produce na fentence condampnatour^ in Criminall cauffis, bot only ar adminicles to the tortour and queftioune. And forder, the Depofitiones of the faidis
tua perfones, being only anent the reflait of ane Letter, nocht contening the contentis and qualitie thairof, can nawayis induce ony prefumptioun, far lefs probatioun. Item, it is to be rememberit, that thir Depofitiones tuiches nocht
Young Auchindrane. Item, tuiching that pairt of Young Auchindrane, and
Caldwallis Depofitioun, thay prove nathing, nather of the fact, nor yit of the
knawlege. As alfo Young Auchindranes Depofitiones previs far les ; becaus he
mycht liaif lauchfullie deponit that his father was fufpect befoir he was pannellit.
And forder, as to the Depofitiones of Young Auchindrane, and Johnne Miire
of Woidland, thay can work nathing, feing thai preve na pairt of the Dittay, or
factis thairin contenit ; ffor as to Young Auchindranes Depofitiones, anent his
knawlege of Dalrumple to half bene in his fatheris hous, that previs na pairt of
the Dittay. And, quhair it might appeir, be the faid Depofitioun, and vtheris
Depofitiones conforme thairto, that the faid Laird of Auchindrane is improvin,
as quha deponit that he never knew the faid Dalrumpill, — it is anfuerit, that the
fame can impoirt na probation of ony pairt of the Dittay ; becaus, gifaiid' and

1 Eight years old. ^ Probabilities, likelihoods. ^ Condemnatory. * Giving or

allowing for the sake of argument, but not granting; a common form of expression used in ancient
legal proceedings, when Counsel was illustrating a point by arguments, &c.

142 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. IGIL

noclit gTantand that the pairtie pannellit had maid ane leifmg,i or vareit and
bene inconftant, and fa waverit in his Depofitioun, the fame can impoirt na probatioun ; fpeciallie, quhair the faid vntreuth, Sic. is nocht in the fubftantiall
pairtis of the Dittay, hot in vther accidentis and externall circumftances. And
as to Johnne IMure of AVoidlandis Depofitiones, it can nawayis be refpectit, for
tliir particular cauffis :— ffirft, he is tennent removeable^ to the Erie of Caffilis, and
liis houiliold fervand ; nixt, he is Chalmerlane and factour to ane grit pairt of
his lordfchipis landis ; bot in fpeciall, is Bailzie of the Barronie of Dalrumple.
ScciuicHie, he was vpone the ground, in companie with the Erie of Caffillis, at
the flauchter of Barganie, at quhilk time Auchindrane was deidlie hurt. ThrkU
lie, he was alfo in companie with the Erie of Caffillis, at the perfute of Auchindrane, in his awin hous. FonrtUe, he was in companie with Hew (Kennedy)
of Garriehorne, and his convoy throw the landis of Auchindrane, quhair he come
in bragging maner, and focht Auchindrane at his awin hous. Fijftlie, befoir he
was examinat befoir the Counfell, the Erie of Caffillis caufit him fett doun fic
woirdis as his lordfchip thocht expedient, and to be fubfcryuit with his hand ;
quhilk he nawayis durft alter, befoir the Counfell ; etjk prodih tejtimon'uim . The
quhilk writ was prcducet to him in Counfell, befoir he wald depone ; quhairby
he micht keip my lordis injunctiones.

Item, as to the Depofitioun of Johnne Mure of Blahhyres, it previs na pairt
of the Dittay, becaus he deponis nathing of knawledge that he hes of Auchindrane, bot a repoirt that he had of vther fervandis. And forder, the faid Johnne
could nevir haif bene witnts fra the beginning, ffor thir cauffis : — Becaus, he (lew
the Laird of Auchindranes feruand callit Williame Geddies, for the quhilk he
was baneifchet the countrie ; nixt, he come in vpone fair promeiffis and conditiones maid to him be the Erie of Caffillis, to purches to him ane Remiffioun for
that Slauchter, and for the quhilk cans, he proineifit to the laid Erie to depone
quhat he defyret : And laft, the faid Johnne IMure hes intrufet'' him fclf in ane
grit pairt of Auchindranes lands, and thereby* thinkis to bruik^ the famyn.

As to Pairik Dalrumples Depofitiones, na fayth can be gevin thairto, becaus
he is uncle to the murtherit man.

It is anfuerit, to the Depofitioun of IFalier Mu7'e, and to the reft of the Depofitiones befoir the allegit Prell)iterie, that the faidis Depofitiones can mak na
faith ; becaus thai ar extra-judiciall, na proces depending aganis ony pairtie, na
pairtie haifing intres being callit, bot only ane naikit conventioun of tua or thre
Minifteris, nocht Preffiiteriallie convenit, quha had na power to tak fic Depofitiones : And as the faidis Depofitiones, gif thai had bene tane to the faidis Mi1 An untruth or falsehood ; leasing. - Tenant at will. ^ Intruded ; thrust himself into.

4 By perjury, or giving false evidence, &c. ^ Ei'joy ; possess as his property.

44&:9Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 143

nifteris in ane Ciuile cans, wald half maid na faith, far les in ane Criminale.
SecmiiUie, the faid Walteris Depofitioiin previs na pairt of the Dittay : And
albeit the Depofitiones war trew and valid, yit thay ar ineffectual! ; becaus, albeit
it war grantit that Dalrumple was fend to Flanderis, that impoirtis noclit the
probatioun of ony Dittay.

Item, it is anfuerit to James Dalrumples Depofitioun, that the flime can nawayis work aganis thir perfones pannellit : Becaus, in the firft pairt of the faid
Depofitioun, he deponis nothing aganis thame : And as for the lall pairt, beiring ane plott to mak ane onfett vpone Garriehorne, the famyn can nawayis work
aganis the perfones pannellit ; nather can his Depolitioun be regairdit, in refpect
he deponis his awin turpitude, viz. the forgeing and contryveing of the llauchter of Garriehorne devyfit be him felf, as is confeffit ; and quhilk devyfe of his,
he counfellit the perfones pannellit to put in executioun ; and fua, he being devyfer and contry ver of the fact, he can rievir be hard to depone in preiudice of
the perfones pannellit. And to jiurge the onfet maid vpone Garriehorne be
Young Auchindrane, the verritie is, that the cans of that onfet was accidentlie,
they meitting togidder at the end of the Toun of Air, and Young Auchindrane
melting him in the way, had jufl caus to mak the onfet vpone him : ffirft, becaus
he had tane his fatheris bluid, and nixt, he was at the Slauchter of his motherbrother.^ And forder, the faid James Dalrumpillis DejDofitioun can nawayis be
refpectit, becaus he is ferdis of kyn^ to Williame Dalrumpill, quha is llane, and
is fecund and thridis to the Laird of Cul3eane. And forder, befoir he was prefent in Counfell to depone, he was movet to depone the famyn, vncitet,^ be my
Lord of Abercorne, quhairof he maid adverteifment thairefter to the Laird of
Auchindrane and defyret him to fett him ; becaus he had put all that he had, be
fubmifTioun, in Sir Claud Hammiltones handis.

Item, as to the Depofitioun of 3I'^AIlexandet\ it preves na pairt of the Dittay nor factis lybellit, hot rather purges the famyn ; and forder, can mak na faith,
becaus it declairis, that the Laird is of Auchindrane war content to cum and
tuich tlie corps,* fua that^ thay mycht do the famyn in Air, my lord of Cadillis
nocht being thair. And to verifie the famyn, produces ane Inftrument.'^ And
forder, at tliat tyme Young Auchindrane was deidlie hurt ; and fa could nocht
cum. And forder, the faid Depofitioun can nawayis be refpectit, becaus it is
extra-judiciall, and one in prefens of the partie adverfar, viz. the Erie of Caflillis.

^ Uncle ; mother's brother. ^ Witliin tlie fourth degree of rehitioiiship. ^ Witliout liaving

received lawful citation. * Alluding to the well-known jjopulnr test, or oi(h'al, of cdlliiig Kjjon the accusedor suspected jierso?i to come forward and touch the corpse of the murdered partii ! 'I'lie su[)erstitious
notion then held was, that the corpse would bleed, immediateUj on the ajyproach or touch of the MuT'
derer ! Powerful use of this circumstance has been made by Dramatists and writers of Komance. See
a variety of interesting notices in the Appendix to this Trial, with an enquiry into the origin and practice of our ancestors in sucli cases. ^ On condition ; provided that, &c. "^ A Notarial attestation.

144 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

Item, as to PatriJe Hannatijne's Depofitioun, it aught nawayis to be refpectit,
for tliir cauffis : — Firjti becaiis he is fecund and thridis of kyn with Cul3eane,
quha is ane pairtie accufer ; as alfo to the Erie of Caffillis : Nixf, becaus he is
brother to James Bannatyne, quha is^/bcius crimmis, and is callit and accufet for
the famyn cryme : And lajl, his Depofitioun can mak na fayth, becaus the famyn
proceidis onlie ex andihi, be relatioun of his brother James Bannatyne ; in the
quhilk Depofitioun, he confelTes the faid James Bannatyne to be thryfe contrair^
in his relatioun. And fua, his Depofitioun, depending vpone ane contrair relatioun, makis na fayth. — Aganis the haill Depofitiones depending vpone James
J^annatynes relatioun, it is allegit, — gif James Bannatynes fall, all his relationes
man fall.

And forder, as to WilUame Roifes Depofitione, it is allegit, that the famyn
can iiocht be refpectit, becaus Williame Roifes wyfe and the Laird of Cul3eane
ar thrydis and ferdis of kyn. As alfo, his wyfe is father-fifter to James Bannatyne, quha is accufet of the fame crymes. — It is allegit aganis the Depofitioun of
Jolinne JSlui'e in Cnrve)\ that the famyn can nawayis be refpectit : Becaus the
famyn is only ane relatioun made be James Bannatyne : Secundo, becaus the
famyn is contrair to the Dittay ; in fa far as the Dittay beiris, that James Bannatyne, haifing brocht Dalruinple to the Saudis of Girven, left him behind him,
and raid forwardis to the tua Lairdis of Auchindrane, quhair the Auld Laird
conferring with him, the Young Laird paft to the faid Dalrumple ; and eftir ane
fpace, Auld Auchindrane and Bannatyne cuming neir thame, he Hew him : And
in this Depofitioun it is confeflit, that James Bannatyne fould half faid to the
Deponer, that Young Auchindrane drew this Dalrumpill after him, and flew
him ; quhairby it is euident, that James Bannatyne is contrair, infafar as the
Depofitioun beiris, conforme to the Dittay.

As to the Depofitioun of James Bannatyne, it aucht nawayis to be refpectit,
for thir argumentis. — Firft, becaus he hes tane the cryme vpone him, and for
the famyn hes maid offeris baith to the Kirk and pairtie : Secundlie, he ftandis
yit at the home vnrelaxit : As alfo, is vnder the cenfure of excommunicatioun ;
and fo is natlier Godis man nor the Kingis : ThridUe, he is fecund and thridis
of kyn to the Laird of Cullane and the Erie of Caffillis : Ferdlie, he is cum in
vpone promeis and conditioun of his lyfe, quhilk was fet doun to him be Jofias
Stewart, bruther to my Lord Axhiltrie, James Stewart, and the Laird of Girvenmaynes ; and his Band geviii to that effect, that he fall cum baith faif to Scotland and returne faif to Ireland. Eftir melting and conference in Ireland, and
quhat he had fett doun the conditiones, he come over to Buit to his coufmg the
Laird of Cames,^ to quhome he fchew the conditiones, and brocht Cames brother,

^ Contradictory. " From Ireland to the Island of Bute, to his cousin, . . . Bannatyne of Kames.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 145

callit Rannald Bannatyne, with him to the Largis, quhair he mett with James
Stewart, quha brocht him to Kilwinning ; and than Jofias and James Stewartis
mett with him befyde Irwing, to haif fett doun the conditiones perfytlie, for his
fiire returning to Ireland, qiihilk foiild haif bene put in Rannald Bannatynes
handis ; hot, vpone fair promeffis, he was movet to leve Rannald behind him :
And thairefter, he wes brocht to my Lord of Abercorne, with quhome he was
tuentie dayis, or thairby : And thairefter, he was fend to Cliddifdaill, to the
Laird of Corhous ;^ and fua, be this jDrogres, it is evident, quhat hes bene the
indirect deilling of James Bannatyne, fra the beginning. Speciallie, quhan foeuir ane pairtie is accufet for ane cryme, and is fugitiue for the fame, as in this
caife, he can nevir be hard, be his Confeffioun and Depofitioun, to work ony
preiudice to ony vtlier pairtie ; nather can his Depofitioun work, fa mekill as
the tortour, to the parties, vnles he firft be fubiect to the tortour him felff ; as is
obferuit in the Juftice Courtis of all Chriftiandome : Nather can his Depofitioun
be regairdit aganis Young Auchindrane, becaus the famyn proceidis vpone malice aganis him ; infafar as he was informet that Young Auchindrane had offerit to the Thefaurer, for cleiring of his awin innocencie, to fet cautioun, vnder the
pane of Fourtie thowfeand pundis, to exhibeit the faid James Bannatyne befoir
the Juftice :^ And it is nocht to be prefumet, that ane man giltie of ane haynous
cryme, being at his awin libertie, wald willinglie cum in to his awin deid,^ bot
vpone promeifTes and conditionis. And forder, this argument is infallable ; na
gritter fayth can be gevin in this matter to James Bannatyne, nor gif ^ Dalrumple,
vpone his deid-bed, had maid his Declaratioun that he was flane be Auchindrane,
elder and younger : Bot trew it is, that na fayth wald haif bene gevin thairto,
without vther probatioun. This was cleirlie decydit, quhan as Robert Ramfay,
notter in Stirling, was execute to the death, confefiing that the Inflrument of
Denunceatioun maid be him felf, quhairto he was notter aganis the Tennentis of
Halbarnes and Auldliftoune, was fals, and paft conftantlie to the deid with it ;
yit, quhan as the cans of Improbatioun was advyfet be the Lordis of Counfell,^
thay refpectit nather his firft, fecund, nor tlirid Depofitioun, in preiudice of the
producer, accoirding to the Cowmoun Law ; becaus the Confeffioun of ane malefactour may weill preiudge him felf, bot na vther.

It is Anfuerit to the remanent Depofitiones, depending vpone James Bannatyne's relatioun — audit nocht to be refpectit, vt Jupra.

As to the Depofitiones of James Pennycuil', thay aucht to mak na fayth, be-

^ Bannatyne of Corlious, in tlie county of Lanark. ^ Tlioy omit a material part of tlip offer,

viz. to present him ' deud or alive I' It being their purpose to have him murdered in Ireland, />// outhority, and thus for ever to liave suppressed evidence of their nefarious wickedness ! -^ Death.

* Than if Dalrymple upon his deatli-bed. ^ Wlicn the process of Reduction, for the purpose of

annulling and setting aside the Instmment, was advised before the Civil Court.

VOL. III. T

146 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

cans lie is ane perfonage infamous and notoriouflie knawin to be infame ; he is
denuncet rebell and put to the home at the iiiftance of Capitane Williame Rig,
for fleilling of his cloick and his fuord, accumpaneit with fevin vtheris, betuix
Leyth and Ed% vnder chul of nycht : And this Hoirning, ftanding for ane manifefl Ryote and Oppreffioun, is fufficient to mak him infame : And produceit
the Hoirning for veryfeing thairof : Secnndlie, the Depofitioun of James Pennycuik can nocht be regairdit, in refjiect the lamyn is improvin, in the fpeciall
poynt thairof, befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfell ; in fa far as he, haifing deponit the Obligatioun reffauit be him from Auchindrane for the fowme of Fourfcoir pund, to haif benegevin for ]Murthering of the faid James Bannatyne — the
contrair thairof was verifeit befoir the faidis Lordis, and the faid Obligatioun
(proven) to haif bene gevin for borrowit money : Lyk as, the Witneffes quha war
examinat thairupoun, dej^onit, that thai faw the numeratioun^ of the faid money.
And fua the faid deponer being improvin, in the maift fubftantiall poynt of his
Depofitioun, thair aucht no credeit to be gevin to the reft. Forder, the faid
Depofitioun concernis na pairt of the Dittay, nather fubftantiall nor circumftances thairin contenit. Laft, he is teftis fingularis, deponeing vpone his awin
turpitude, viz. that he was hyret to the Slauchter of ane man ; and thairfoir,
his Depofitioun can nocht be regairdit ; fpeciallie, haifing confideratioun to the
circumftances thairof, viz. that vncoactit or compellit, he paft furth of Scotland
to London, to mak his Depofitioun to his awin guid-brother,^ Sir James Hammiltoun, in the quhilk he confeffis him felf to be reftranit fra his allegit pretences, and to mak the faid Depofitioun for the love and reverence he bure to
my Lord of Abercorne, quhome the perfones pannellit acknowleges^ as pairtie.
Quhilkis liaill circumftances, concurrand with the notorietie of his bypaft lyfe,
verefeit be the Decreit of Secreit Counfall, his Depofitioun can mak na fayth.

As for the Depofitiones of George Blah, the famyn can mak na fayth : becaus
lie depones that the Laird of Auchindrane fould haif hyret ane Williame Carmichell, being ane difcreit Gentilman, integre fame, is nevir examinat thairupoun; and fua the laid Georges affertioun, being teft'is fuigularis in that Depofitioun, can nocht worke.

To the prefumptioun obiectit aganis Young Auchindrane, beiring, that gif
he had nocht bene giltie of the JMurthour of Dalruinple, he wald nocht haif
fufferit the iniurious woirdis and langage of James Bannatyne ; it is anfuerit,
that gifand the prefumptioun war trew, } it it is nawayis pregnant to infer
Treafone aganis Young Auchindrane, feing na fubftanciall fact is provin. And
forder, the cans of his forbeiriiig of him, at that tyme, was, in refpect the faid
James Bannatyne vtterit his iniurious woirdis and boifting, in his drukinnes,
' Telling, or counting out of the money. ^ Brother-in-law. ' Recognise,

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I47

quhairvnto he is alvvayis fubiect. As lykwayis, it was 11a honour' to Yount'
Auchindrane to put handis in his awin man, being in that eftait : Lykas, he was
reconfeillit with him, at the requeift of Williame Kennydie of Garfar, quha was
examinat befoir the Counfell. — It is anfuerit, to the prefumptioun concerning
the Tak^ maid be Young Auchindrane to James Bannatyne, quhilk Young
Auchindrane denyit that he nevir gaif any to the faid James, quhilP the famyn
was provin and producet, &c. ; that tlie famyn prefumj^tioun is nawayis fufficient to infer the cryme of Treafoun ; becaus the fame is nocht ane prefumptioun concerning the committing of the cryme l}'bellit, bot only ane illatioun*
vpoun ane vnneceflTar confequence ; ffor it nawayis followis that, albeit ony Gentilman gaif ane Tak, for nocht, to ony of his fervandis or dependeris, that thairfoir he was airt and pairt with him in committing of ane treffonabill act ; vnles
it war fufficientlie verifeit to half bene done for that cans ; nor yit dois the productioun of the Tak mak Young Auchindranes Depofitioun to be vntrew ; becaus it is neuir provin that the Tak was gevin to James Bannatyne ; bot, be the
contrair, the famyn was tane out of Thomas IVrAllexanderis kift, in quhais
handis it was confignit, quhill the conditiones betuix thame war endit ; viz. that
the faid James fould haif maid richt to Young Auchindrane of the fowme of 1""
(1000) merkis, quhilk he had vpone Langfchawis land, quhilk he could nocht
than prefentlie do, in refpect the faid James had maid his aM'in wyffe allignay
thairto ; quhilk Affignatioun is producet in judgement : Nather is it probable
that gif the Tak had bene maid to the faid James, conforme to the prefumptioun, bot the famyn wald haif bene jnit in his awin hand, and nocht configuit
in ane thrid perfones hand.

[My Lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of James Bannatynes Declaraticun
maid judiciallie be him ; quha being demandit, ' Gif the Tak grantit to him be
Young Auchindrane Was delyuerit to him felf ?' Declarit, it was firit delyuerit
to him, and thairefter, be confent of him felf and Young Auchindrane, it wr.s
put in the handis of Thonias M'^Allexander, vpone Auchindranes feir that the
deponent had allegit the productioun of that Tak fould haif done him grit harme.]
As to the Depofitioun of AUane Pijper, it audit nocht to be rej})(.ctit, becaus
he is tennant to my Lord of Cafiillis of the foure merk land of Sallachan ; and
forder, the faid Depofitioun proves nathing, nather of the fubftance nor circumflances of the Dittay. As to the Depofitioun of lli/liame Roi/e, can mak na
faytli ; becaus his wyfe and the Laird of Cullane are thridis and ferdis of kyn :
And forder, the i^ayment of the maill and deutie inferris na prefum])tioun. As
to the Depofitioun of JFilliame Pypei\ aneiit the Lady Auchindranes furneiffing
of James Bannatyne, aucht nocht to be refpectit, becaus he is man, tennent, and

Mt would liave been dishonourable. * Lease, or tocA. ^ Until. inference. Lat. ?7/(///o.

148 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

lervand to the Erie of Caflillis ; as alfo, is tennent removeable to the Erie of the
foure merk land of Sallachaii ; nixt, he fauld his inaifter Ardmillane and Thomas
of Bargany to my Lord of CafTillis ; for the quhilk he promeift him V merkis.
It is anliierit to the prefumptioiin anent the Laird of CaiddwalUs Dejjofitioiin,
of the fuffering James Cunninghame to pas away, contrair to his promes, that
the famyn is nawayis pregnant aganis the perfones jiannellit, feing thair is na
fact or dcid contenit in the fame, allegit to be done be thame. It is anfuerit, to
the prefumptioun refulting vpone the Letter producet — Firft, the fame wirkis
nathing aganis Young Aiichindrane, becaus it is ane Lettir allegit writtin fra his
father to him, never relfauit be him ; and fa can infer na preiudice aganis him :
Item, it can work nathing aganis the father, becaus the famyn is nocht fubfcryuit
be him ; lyk as, he denyis the famin being re-fent ; and thairfoir, he nocht confeffing the famyn, nor being fubfcryuit be him, can work nathing aganis him :
And quhair as, it wald appeir the fame to half bene delyuerit to the Counfell be
my Lord of Mar, quha is allegit to half reffauit the famyn fra the Conftable,'
quhilk Conftable is allegit to haif reffauit the fame fra Dormond, ane of the ordineris of the Caftell ; and the faid Dormond is allegit to haif reffauit the famyn
fra Auchindrane elder, to haif bene delyuerit to his fone : The famyn can mak
na fayth, ffor albeit ray Lord of Mar and the Conftable thair Depolitiouns may
be trew, as the perfones on pannell will nocht impunge the famyn, yit it followis
nocht bot that Dormond hes bene fubornet be the vnfreindis of the faidis perfones to mak the faid narratioune to the Conftable : to the effect that thairby he
mycht caus ane falfifeit Letter cvmi in the Counfallis handis : — And to mak the
faid mater mair cleir, the faid Laird of Auchindrane elder offeris to preve and
verifie inftantlie, be dyuerfe famous witneffis fubfcryveand, and, in fpeciall, be
James Pennycuik, ane of the perfones producet aganis him, and vtheris, &c.,
that Eduard Mekiljolme, fumtyme feruitour to James Prymrois,^ come to the
Laird of Auchindrane, tliay being baith wairdit in the Tolbuthe, and faid to
him, ' Sir, I haif fene 30ur writ ofbefoir;' and being demandit, ' Quhair?' anfuerit, ' I was imployit to covmterfute ane Letter of 3ouris, allegit directit be 30W
to J)e Caftell of Ed' to 30ur fone,'^ the quhilk contenit ane half-throche of paper*
on bayth pe fydis, and was nocht fubfcryued ; the quhilk I counterfute as neir
30ur hand writt as I think was poffible.' Being demandit, ' How was it be ])is
writt quhilk I am now wryting ?' Anfuerit, ' It was fumthing fmaller.' Being
demandit, ' Quhat was ]^e caus ])e Letter was nocht fubfcryuit ?' Anfuerit, ' It
was to mak the matter mair fufpitious !' ffor, fayis he, ' it wes gevin me vpone

' The Constable of Edinburgh Castle, viz. Thomas Hume. ^ Clerk to the Privy Council.

* Directed from Old Auchindrane, then in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, to his son, tlien in ward in
the Castle. * A half through, or half a sheet of writhig-paper, then usually of the size which is

now termed < foolscap.'

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 149

ane grit fecreit in the Tolbuthe, and I nevir reveillit nor opnit pe matter quhill
now !' James Pennycuik fpeiris at him, * Quha gaif 30W this ?' Anfuerit, ' I
will keip J)at to my felfF !'

As for the doingis of f/ie Lady Auchindrane, the famin can nawayis preiiidge
hir hufband or hir fone, fcho being ane woman ; and hir abfenting of hir felff was
for ane lauchfull caufe, viz. feiknes, authorizet be ane lauchfull Tellimoniall.

As for Thomas Mure and the reft going to the home, for non compeirance,
it can be no pregnant prefumptioun to infer Treafone vpone the jDerfones pannellit.

Eduard 3IeJdU-Johnne, being fend for, and prefenting him felff, fuorne and
examinat, deponis, that he reflauit the Letter direct be Auld Auchindrane to his
fone, being wairdit in the Caftell of Ed", ffra my Lord of Mar, in prefens of Archibald Prymrois, writter, to be coppeit be the Deponer. Eftir the coppicing
qiihairof, the deponer, ane grit fpace thaireftir, cuming to the Tolbuith of Ed',
and finding the Laird of Auchindrane wryting at ane buird, he come to him and
faid as followis : ' Laird of Auchindrane, I think I haif fene 3our writ ofbefoir.'
Quhairvnto Auchindrane anfuerit, * Quhair faw 36 it?' The Deponer replyit, ' I
remember I coppeit ane Letter verrie lyk 3our writ, quhilk I reifauit to coppie
fra ane Noble man !' Bot wald nocht declair to him the Noble man his name
that gaif the directioun : And as to the alleget declaratioun than maid be the
deponer, that he counterfute the faid hand writt, denyis the famyn ; bot that the
famyn was coppeit be him, be directioun, as faid is. Quhairvpone my lord Aduocat afldt inftrumentis.

Archibald Prymrois, alfo prefent, being fworne, Declairis, that he was jDrefent
quhan my Lord of Mar delyuerit the Letter to Eduard Mekil-Johnne to be coppeit ; quhilk my Lord than declarit, was interce2)tit betuix Auld Auchindrane
and his fone ; and the famyn Letter being than prefentit be my lord to the Deponer, he verrie hardlie could get the famyn red, being fa evill writtin and evill
fpellit ; Bot to put Auchindrane in remembrance anent that matter, the famyn
Letter being producet to the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, eftir intercei)ting thairof, and fchawn to the Laird of Auchindrane, and he than inquyrit, ' Gif he knew
that Letter or the hand writ thairof ?' Auchindrane anfuerit, ' It was nocht his
hand-writ, bot was verrie lyk it.' And being defyret to reid the Letter, he red
the famyn in thair Lordfchipis prefens, verrie diftinctlie, without ony ftope : At
quhilk tyme, the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, my Lord of Dumbar being prefent,
caufit Auchindrane wryte with his awin hand ane particuler anfuer of all that
was demandit him in that matter, to the end thai mycht the better recognofce
and try quhidder the famin was writtin be him or nocht : And forder, the deponer knawis nocht. — Quhairvpoun my Lord Aduocat alfe atkit Inilrumentis.

In fortificatioun of the Verificationis producet be the Aduocat, and vfet

150 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6II.

to the Affyfe, iny lord Advocat affirmes, that it is lauchfull and vfuale to the
Lordis of his Maiefteis Secreit Coulifell to examine Witneffes, out of prefens of
pairtie, in all crymes treflbnable ; qiihais Depofitiones being producet to the
AflTyfe, niakis full faith, vnles thai be impugnet be fum lauchfull particular exceptioun proponit aganis the faniyn ; and can nocht be impugnet, for want of
power in the examinatouris ; or the Uepolitiones was relTauit, the ])annell nocht
being callit thairto. — The Depofitiones of James Penmjcuih and George BlaJf,
tane at Court, ar lauchfull, as tane by expres command of the Kingis Maieftie,
and in prefens of ane of the Lordis of his Counfell of this Kingdome. — It is
abfurd to excufe the pannellis going to the borne, for the trelTonabill cryme lybellit, for feir, gif he had compeirit, to half bene challanged for piftolettis ; feing,
his being fugitiue for this cryme, inferris aganis him prefumptioun of Treafoun :
And in caice he had compeirit, his fchuitting of piftolettis without ony harme
done with thame, wald liaif inferrit na forder danger, nor {than) the panes of ane
fyne. — The perfewar neidis nocht to produce Thomas Kenmjde'is fforfaliour for
tliis cryme, becaus the famyn being deducet in Parliament, is judget nottour to all
the fubiectis, and na man can pretend ignorance thairof. — The Relaxationes producet, purges nocht the prefumptioun of thair giltines of the crymes contenit in
the Hoirningis ; becaus, Auchindrane elder was nocht relaxit fra the hoirning,
for lying (in wait) for Collayne in Mayboill, qvdiill efter his reconciliatioun with
the pairtie ; at the quhilk tyme, na man was to perfew him : Nather Mas he relaxt fra the borne for the trelfonable crymes lybellit, quhill he was tane and imprifonet in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, and fa could nocht elchew his tryall. —
To the obiectioun aganis James Mure of Fleit, it is vntrew and malicious :
And he being confrontit with the Deponer, Auchindrane proponit na objectioun
aganis him, that tuichet ather his fame or welth. — Attour, the perfewar takis
inftrumentis, that the Erie of C({j]lUl^, being fuorne, in prefens of the Affyfe,
vpoun the obiectioun offerit to be verifeit be his aith, lies declairit the fainyn to be
vntrew. And lykwayis, that Sir JViUlame M^clellane of AucMeanc^ /jW^', being
fuorne vpone the poynt of Thift, and reconciliatioun thairof, offerit to be proviu
be his aithe, he declairit the faniyn to be vntrew : And forder, he declairit, befoir the Adyfe, that gif ony imputatioun could be laid to James Mure for the
fufpitioun of that Thift, the famyn was cheflie to be iinput to Auld Auchindrane,
quha houndit him out to the doing thairof. — To the obiectioun aganis James
Gordouu, for his youthe, the tyme of the factis quhairvpone he hes deponit, anfueris that he was paft ten yeir aulcl, befoir the committing of the firft of the
faidis factis ; And being now ane man of j^erfyte age, may lauchfullie depone of
thingis done quhan he was young, the famyn being recent in his memorie. — Attour,
the faid James, being confrontit with the Laird of Auchindrane, he than deponit

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 151

nathing aganis his perfone, age, nor lauchfulnes of his Depofitioune. — To the
generall objectioun, that the Depofitiones in Criminall caufTis makis na probatioun, hot ar prelumptionis and cauffis of tortour, it is manifeftlie vntrew, and
contrail* to the Law and practiques of this cuntrie. — To the objectioun, that the
Depofitiones concerning M?' Robert Mures Letter ar generall, and preves nathing,
it is vntrew ; becaus the Depofitiones contenis, that the Letter buir adiierteiihient
to Auchindrane of the Laird of Culaynes dyet to Edinburgh. — For the Depofitiones maid be Caiddwell and Young Auclihidrane, referris the confideratioun
of thame to the Affyfe, it being out of dout, that nather Young Auchindrane
wald hurt his father, nor Caldwell his freind, be thair Depofitioun. — The objectiones aganis Woidlund ar proponit in jeaft ; becaus at all tymes quhan he cumis
to the toun, he viffeitis the Defenderis, his freindis,^ in ane freindlie maner. —
For Johnne 3Iure, callit of Bkdihijres, he was Auld Auchindranes houlliald
fervand, fa lang as he had ane hous, and fenfyne lies duelt in Blakbyres, vjjone
Auchindranes land, familiar with his Lady and him felf, frie of all perfute, coiivictioun, hoirning, or fufpitioun of cryme. And the perfewar takis inftrumentis
of the Erie ofCaffillis Declairatioun to the AfTyfe, that his lordfchip nevir maid
promeis to Blakbyres, to purches^ to him Refpett, Reiniffioun, or vther fauuour,
for his compeirance. — The Depofition'is maid to the Prejbherie, ar verrie lauchfuU and forinell; haifing the force of ane Inquifitioun, for tryell of ane murthourit
man and the authoris thairof.^ — Walter Mure was tenent and fervand to the
pannell, and convoyit by the way"* by his meanis, becaus he mycht haif controllit
his denyall of his fending James Cuninghame to the faid Walter Mures hous for
Williame Dalrumple. — James JDalrumple his Depofitioun is lauchfull, albeit
thai allege it to be maid to his awin turpitude, and that, be his awin confeffioun,
he is foc'ius crimhiis; becaus in abhominable and extraordiner crymes, fie as
Murthour vpone fet purpois, complices ar lauchfull Witneflis, and thair Depofitionis makis full faith ; becaus it is confident be the Law-makeris, that fic fecreit
and denyable crymes, can nocht pofliblie be provin, hot be complices. James
Dalrumpillis kynreid with Cullayne and the Erie of CafTillis, can nocht mak
him liifpect, becaus he is fifler-fone^ to the Lady Auchindrane, and fifler-bairnis"
with Young Auchindrane, and fa jirefumet of the Law to heir gritter affectioun
to thame.

The perfewar defyres the AfTyfe to remember Auld Auchindranes Declaratioun, in thair prefens, that James Dalrumpill maid him adverteilinent to fet

^ In diis instance, and indeed generally throughout this Trial, the term ^freind' signifies relative or
blood-relation, as in the preceding reference to Caldwall, &c. "^ Procpre. ^ An inquest or

precognition held for the purpose of discovering the perpetrators of a murder ; and for bringing them
to justice for their crimes, if guilty. ^ Put out of the way. ^ Nepliew. '^ Cousingerman.

152 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161L

him,^ quhilk detectis his fauour to the defenderis, and his vnwillingnes to depone
to thair prejudice.

Patrik Bannatijnes Depofitioiin man mak fayth, becaus it was maid quhan
he was the Kingis lauchfull fubiect, frie of all ciyme ; and his kindreid with
the Erie of Caffillis, can nocht mak him fufpect ; becaus, fen the feid,^ he hes
bene in fpeciall freindfchip and familiaritie with the Defenderis ; quhilk thai
can nocht deny : Nather can the faid Patrikes Depofitioun, nor the Depofitioun
of ony of the remanent Witneffis, be impungeit, as foundit only Jiipe?' aiiditu, and
be relatioun of James Bannatyne ; becaus that relatioun was maid be James,
quhan he was in verrie grit freindfchip with the Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder
and younger, and reffauit many fauoris and fuppoirtis fra thame. — The Defenderis impungis Johiiue Mure in Curveris Depofitioun anent the pulleing
of Williame Dalrumpill af James Bannatynes hors ; hot never anfueris to the
materiall poyntis thairof, anent thair fending of Cuninghame for Dalrumple
to Glenheid ; convoying of him to Chapeldonan ; fending for him to Girven
Sandis ; and Murthouring of him thair. — James Bannatynes Depofitioun man
mak full fayth, albeit he be at the home, and excommunicat for this cryme ;
but hoirning and excommunicatioun can nocht work famekill aganis him as
his awiii Confeffioun ; c|uhilk Confeffioun can nocht Hay him to be Witnes,
feing he is fo neceffar a ^Vitnes, as without him na probatioun can be had in
this cans, bot be his Depofitioun ; except, be the Confeffioun of the remanent
defenderis, quhairof thair is no hoip, in refpect of thair effronterie, obftinacie,
and induratioun. His kinreid with the Erie of Caffillis and Cullzeane is proponit in fcorne ; becaus the Lairdis of Auchindrane can nocht deny, bot that the
faid James was profeffit pairt-taker with thame, in all feidis and querrellis aganis
the Erie of Caffillis, and affiftit thame in the Invaiioun of Garriehorne for his
Slauchter. Thair allegeance, that he comes in vpoun promeis and conditioun of
his lyfe, is abfurdlie qualifeit, as grantit be thame quhois protectioun and faif
conduct can (nocht) faif ane hair of his heid. Thair allegeance of his malice
aganis Young Aucliindrane is impertinent, in refpect of Young Auchindrane
furneiffing and fending of him out of the countrie, and recommending of him, be
his Lettres, to his uncle ; and of the fauour and help maid to the faid James
Bannatyne fenfyne, be the Lady and the pannellis remanent freindis. Quhair
thay propone, that he wald nocht half willinglie cum in to his awin deid ; it is
faiffer for him to cum in and depend vpone Godis fauour and the Kingis mercie,
or fail3eing thairof to die, weill prepairit in ane Chriftiane refolutioun, vpone
the fcaffold, nor'^ to liaif bene inhourlie danger to half bene murthourit, be procurement of the Defenderis, as he mycht haif bene in danger — ^^nocht haifing lafour to haif callit for Godis mercie.

^ To cite liira as a witness. ^ Feud. ^ Rather than.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 153

Robert Itamfmj'is practique is impertinentlie citet in this caice ; becaus he
deit for his manifeft periurie, and falle and contrail* Depofitiones, juftlie working agauis him felff ; quhilk maid nocht the euident* to fall, and fa verifeit na
pimifcheable falfet aganis ony vther. Bot heir, thair is ane actuall Murthour,
quhairof the Lairdis of Auchindrane ar provin als giltie as James Bannatyne. —
The perfewar takis initrumentis that James Penmjcu'ih', being folempnelie fuorne
befoir the AfTyfe, hes ratifeit, in thair prefens, his haill Depoiitiones maid in Ingland. His Hoirning makis him nocht infamous, becaus it proceidis vpone ane
Decreit of Secreit Counfell, quhilk can nocht be gevin in ane mater impoirting
infamie ; befyde, that fen" thefaid Hoirning, he remanit prilToner dyuerfe oulkis
in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, quhair ony man that lyket to half accufet him
mycht haif drawin him to pannell, in defpyte of his heart. — The Depofitioun of
Mr Johnne Edmejfoun aganis him can nocht be refpectit ; becaus Mr Johnne
is infamous, being deprehendit and tryit authour of ane infamous lybill aganis
the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, Seffioun, Prelattis of this Kingdome, and Magiftrates of this Burgh. — Quhair thay allege that James Pennycuikis Depofitioun
concernis nocht this Dittay, the perfewar declairis, that he vfes his Depofitioun
as ane probatioun of ane confequent fact, quhilk cleiris exceidinglie the preceding Murthour of Dalrumple : ffor Auld Auchindrane wald nevir haif hyret ane
man to haif murthoret James Bannatyne, gif James Bannatyne had nocht bene
able to haif verifeit aganis Auchindrane ane mair dangerous cryme. He is nocht
meirlie teftisjiug^dcms, becaus his Depofitioun is llrenthened by the Depofitioun
of his fervand George Small; and his Depofitioun vpone his allegit turpitude
can nocht repell him in this caice ; becaus he is, in effect, ane complice with
thame aganis quhome he deponis, and lies purget his giltines thairof, be his
tymous repentance, and defifting frome the profecutioun of the faid purpois. His
Depofitioun can nocht be clydif^ be ony thing writtin to him be Sir James Hammiltoun ; becaus that Depofitioun is maid judiciall, alfweill be his Declaratioun,
befoir the Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfell, in Ingland, and be his approbatioun of his haill Depofitiones, this nycht, in prefens of the Afiyfe. George
BlaJds Depofitioun is verrie famous," and can nocht be drawin in fufpicioun,
vpoun the allegeance of ony malice confauet for want of fourtie merkis of fie. —
Young Auclutidrunes fuffering of the iniureis offerit to him be James Bannatyne, fi;andis cleirlie verifeit be the reiterat Depofitiones of WiU'tam Keiunjdie
of Gar far, he being confrontit with Young Auchindrane. — Auld Auchindranes
denyall of his Letter to his fone, can nocht be refpectit, feing it is fo cleirlie verifeit to the Counfell, be Dauid Dormond, and Thomas Home, Conflable of the

^ The writing or Title-deed referred to in liis case. ^ Since. ' Evaded ; got quit of. Lat.

elidere. ■^ Worthy of credit.

VOL. III. U f

154 CRIMINAL TRIALS. - A.D. 1611.

Caflle, and the Erie of Mar, qulio ar WitnefTes aboue all exceptioim, that the
lamyn was fend be Auld Auchindrane to his fone. — The perfewar repeitis the
Depofitiones maid be Archihahl Pnjmrois and Ecluard MeJiiU-Johnnc, in judgement ; and namelie, that pairt, quliairby Archibald Piymrois callis my Lordis
of Counfell treulie to memorie, that Auld Auchindrane, at the verrie firil ficht
of his Letter, red the famyn fo ryplie and perfytlie, as gif he had it perquier,'
quhilk no vtlier man, nor" the wryter of the Letter, was able to haif done. Repeitis lykwayis the laid Eduard Mekill-Johnnes Depofitioun, quhairby the treuth
of his coppying of Auchindranes Letter to his fone, at the defyre of ane mod
honourabill and famous Noble-man, detectis the knaverie and complote of- ane
focieatie of malefactouris and dyverfe.^

Finallie, the perfewar repeitis the juft fufpitioun confauet vpone the pannellis
abfenting of his wyfe, fone, and brother.

The Defendehis allegis, that the Young Laird of Auchindrane is frie of
the prefumptioun of the Hoirning, becaus he compeirit at the day. — Auld Auchindrane is nocht pannellit for lying at wait aganis the Tutour of Caflillis, at May-
])ole ; and fua, na prefumptioun can arryfe vpone that Hoirning. As for the
reft, thay ar purget be compel ranee. — As for that pairt anent James Gonloun,
he being confrontit with Auchindrane, he oj^ponit nothing at that tyme, ather
concerning his youthe or vtherwayis ; anfueris, that was nocht the place convenient ; bot now, dehito tempore, in this Judgment, he proponis the famyn,
conforme to the Act of Parliament ; and all vtheris of the lyk nature. — It is anfuerit to that article, ' that Depofitiones ar manifeft probationes,' that the Depofitiones vpone conjectouris and prefumptioimis of na Law nor practique, ar manifeft probatione, bot only fufficient to induce tortour : And trew it is, that all
the Depofitiones lybellit ar vpone conjectouris. — ff'^alfer Mure, eftir that Auchindrane younger Vv'as twyfe enterit, and Auld Auchindrane lang in the Tolbuthe,
was duelling actuallie in his awin hous, tane and apprehendit be the Erie of
Caflillis, and demittit be his lordfchip ; and fa, his abfenting him felf can nocht
be prefumet for this caufe. — The malice of James Bannatijne towardis Young
Auchindrane is deir, becaus he will preve, be James Gordoun, ane of the witneftcs producet aganis him, that James avowit to haif Young Auchindranes lyfe,
becaus he offerit to the Counfell to inbring him vnder the pane of Fourtie thoufand pundis. — The Depofitione of Mr Johnue Edmejtoun is nocht vfet as ane
fufficient probatioun ; but his Depofitioun, with the vther Deponer with him,
aganis quhoine thair is na fufpitioun, is mair pregnant to tak away James Pennycuikis Depofitioun, than James Pennycuikis Dej)o(itioune is to infer Treafone :

^ By heart ; by rote. Fr. par cceur. ^ Excepting ; but. ^ Detects the knavery and plot

(conspiracy) of a society, or association, of malefactors and bankrupts {dyvouris )

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 155

As James Pennycidh is at the home, fa George Small, his feruand, is at the
home, for the fame fact ; and George Small deponis nathing in fpeciall. — Laft, the
perfones on pannell defyres your honouris of the Affyfe to haif confideratioim of
the lybell and Dittay ; as the famyn was admittit be my Lord Juftice, viz. that
the fpeciall poynt making the famyn relevant, was, that Thomas Kennydie of
Ciil3eane was flane be the advyfe, inftigatioiin, caufeing, command, counfell, and
ratihabitioun of Auchindrane elder, quhilk is the firft pairt of the Dittay ; quhairin, thair is nathing provin aganes Auchindrane elder, of thofe fubftanciall poyntis;
nather can the famyn be ony wayes imputtit to Auchindrane younger. And as
for the fecund pairt, quhilk is lybellit conjunctlie aganis Auchindrane elder and
younger, and James Bannatyne ; the fubftantiall pairt quhairof is the allegit
committing of the Slauchter of vmq'^ ( Williame) Dalrumpill : And the reil of the
haill lybell, ar only accidentis, conjectouris, and prefumptiones ; and feing na
pairt of the fubftantiall poyntis is provin, albeit the haill actiones, prefumptiones,
and conjectouris war provin, quhilk is nocht grantit ; off all law and equitie,
obferuit in all cuntreyis, the maift that can be inferrit thairupoune, is the tortour of the perfones aganis quliome the prefumptiones ar militant ; quhilk fpeciallie man half place in the perfone of Young Auchindrane, aganis quliome few
or nane of the prefumptiones ather contenit in the Dittay, or proponit by^ the
famyn, dois militat.

Verdict of the Assise. Quhilkis perfones of Affyfe, eftir accufatioun of
the faidis perfones on pannell, be Dittay, of the Treffonabill and ere wall Slauchteris and Murthouris refpectiue, aboue fpecifeit, and fuering that article thairof,
anent the Murthour of the faid Williame Dalrumj^le, be the faid Beffie Dalrumple, his mother ; and eftir productioun of the haill Depofitiones aboue writtin,
and vther writtis and probatioun for cleiring of the Pannellis giltines of the
faidis crymes, be our faid fouerane lordis Aduocat ; the faidis perfones of Aflyfe
remouet altogidder furth of Courte, to the Counfal-hous of the faid Tolbuthe ;
quhair thai, be pluralitie of voitis, electit and choifet the faid Sir James Scrymgeour of Dudope, kny\ chanceller ; Reffonet and voitit vpone the crymes contenit in the faid Dittay, and haill circumftances thairof; and ])eing r57)lie and at
lentil advyfet thairwith, togidder with the haill writtis and probatioun vfet and
producet be our fouerane lordis Aduocat, for inftructing thairof; togidder with
the Pannellis objectiones proijonit be thame, and thair jH'eloquitours aganis the
famyn, with my Lord Aduocattis anfueris maid thairto ; thay reenteiit agaiie in
Court, quhair the faidis perfones of Adyfe, be the moutli of the faid Sir James
Scrymgeour of Dudope, kyn', thair chanceller, Pronuncet and gaif furth thair
determinatioun vnder writtin, fubfcryuit be the faid chancelleris hand, quhairof

the tennour foUowis.

' Independeut of ; besides ; ^riy.

156 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

" The Afryfe,for the maill pairt, efter relToiiing andvoiting vpone the firft article
of the faid Dittay, ffind Johnne Mure elder of Auchindrane to be Giltie,
culpable, and convict of airt and pairt of the treffonable and crewal Miirthour of
vrnq'" Sir Thomas Kennydie of Cul3eane, kny', committit in forme and maner
contenit in the firft pairt of the Dittay. And ficlyk, the faidis perfones of Affyfe, for the maift pairt, ffindis and dedairis the faid Johnne Mure elder of Auchindrane, and Ja:mes Mure of Auchindrane younger, and atlier of thame, to
be Giltie, culpable and convict of airt and pairt of the treffonable and crewal Murthour of vniq'^ ^^^illiame Dalrumi)le, in maner fpecifeit in the Dittay. — ANDlaft,
thai all, in ane voce, ffindis and declairis the faid James Bannatyne, callit of
Chapel-Donane, to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of airt and pairt of the faid
treffonabill Murthour of the faid vmq'^ Williame Dalrumple, committit be the
faidis perfones, in maner contenit in the Dittay."

Sentence. Efter the pronunceing and declairing of the quhilk determination and delyuerance of the faidis perfones of Affyfe, " The Justice, in refpect
thairof, be the mouth of Alexander Kennydie, dempfter of Court, decernit and
adiudget the faidis Johnne Mure of Auchindrane elder, James Mure of Auchindrane younger, his eldeft fone and appeirand air, and James Bannatyne, callit of
Chapel-Donane, and ilk ane of thame, to be tane to the mercat croce of the
burclit of Edinburgh, and thair, upone ane fcaffold, thair heidis to be ftrukin
frome thair bodeyis : And all thair landis, heritages, takis, fteidingis, rowmes,
poffeffiones, teyndis, coirnes, cattell, inficht pleniffmg, guidis, geir, tytillis, proffeitis, commoditeis, and richtis quhatfumeuir, directlie or indirectlie pertening to
thame or ony of thame, at the committing of the faidis treffonabill Murthouris,
or fenfyne ; or to the quhilkis thay, or ony of thame, had richt, claim, or actioun,
to be forfalt, efcheit, and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe ; as culpable and
convict of the faidis treffonabill crymes."

Quhilk was pronuncet for dome.

APPENDIX OF Papers and Documents illustrative of the Trial

OF THE Mures of Auchindrayne.
I. Letter hy Sir Thomas Hamilton of Uyres, knight, to a Nobleman at
Court, relative to the Trial of the Laird of Auchindrayne and his Son, ^c}

[The following Letter is a lougli drauglit of a Letter transmitted by Sir Thomas Hamilton to
some Nobleman liigli in power and favour at Court, (probably the corrupt Earl of Somerset) ; and is
evidently intended for the King's perusal. This successful Lawyer and Statesman knew well how to

' Deo. 11, 1601 Now, on tin: tent of Decetnl>pr, ane wariance being betuix the Erll of Cassillis and the Laird

of Bargany, thay mett in C'arrik, quiiair the Laird of Bargany and sindrie wtheris war slayne, and diuerse Gentilmcnne hurtt. This was on 11 day of December, ItOl. And on the 12 day of Maij, 1602, Thomas Kennedy, brother to tlic I>aird of Bargany, sb;w Schir Thom.is Kennedy of ("olzcane, knyt, qulia had beine Tutour of Caisillis, in
the rewendge of theshiuchter off his brother. The quhilk Fead continewis as yitt onreconseellit. — Anon. MS. Hint,
of Scotland, Adv. Library, A. 4. 35.

4i4&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 157

please his Majesty's taste for flattery— but, if this is to be taken as a specimen, King James must have
been much more of a glutton than an epicure ! In the same Collection from which this is taken
{Hadingtons 3ISS., Adv. Library, Edinburgh), there is preserved another diaught, which is evidently the original, and is extremely corrected and altered— but it is so characteristic, that it shall also
be preserved here in the original state, though merely a fragment.

' HONORABILL AND VERTUOUS LoRD,

< Being inforraeit be aue wourthie freind, that your lordfchip wes very defyrous to have ane trew
and ample relatioun of the proces deduced aganis the Lairdis of Auchindrane elder and younger, for
the Mourthouris of Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cullayne, knight, and of Williame Dahimple, I wes exceeding glaid to have rencountred that occafion to offer to your lordfchip this difcours, as an earnefl
of my faithful dirpofitioun to expres my thankfulnes in matters of greater moment, when ever God
fould grant me the abilitie to performe any feruice worthie of your honour, and correfpondent to that
great obligatioun whairin your fingular fauour and courteflis haue exceidinglie engaged to your lo.
Bot when I had written at lenth, all that did concerne that pourpofe, and had it reddie to be fent to
your lo., report cumming to this cuntrie of his Maiefteis gracious pardoun granted to James Bannatyne, whairas I did confaue that all men wald acknouledge it as ane commendabill effort of his Maiefteis moft jufte, gracious, and judicious clemencie ; yet, finding that fome deuelilh peopill als venoniouflie inclyned to find mater of calumnie in his Maiefteis moft vertuous actionis, as the wefp to fuck
poyfon out of the fweiteft and moft holefome floures, I have delayed my firft proiect, to fend to your
lo. the fimpill difcours of the proceding aganis thofe malefactouiis, quljill (^until) efter Tryell of all
that has bene murmured aganis his Maieftie in any circumftance of this action, I might mak the more
full and perfyte report, alfweill of the materiall circumll^ances of the proces, as of thefe incidentis,
whairin his Maieftie, having expreffed his rare and wounderfull iugement, his vnalterabill conftancie
and ']

[HoNORABILL AND VERTUOUS LoRD.]

Knawing, by informatioun of ane wourthie freind, that efter your lordfchip hard the vulgar report
of the conuictioun and pvneifment of the Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, for the
Mourthonr of Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cidlaytie, knicht, and of Williame Dalrumpill, yovv did
defyre to have a full and verie particular relation of the whole proceidingis of that mater, becaus my
being ey witncs from the beginning to the laft act of that proces, makis me abill to giue ane true
accompt of euerie circumftance thairof ; and the great fauoris and courtefleis reffaued of your lo. have
ingaged me in ftronger bandis of dewtie nor' want of abilitie will permit my feruice to difchairge ; I
haue prefumed to fend to your lo. tliis difcours, rude, informal!, and voyde of all ornameutis except
treuth, as ane earneft of my defyre to proue thankfull to your lo. and obedient to your commandementis ; whilk fould haue foner cum to your lo. handis, had not this tyme of vaicance- impeded me to
find, fo fpeidelie as I did wifli, the helpis of fum fcroUis of the lawers and clerkis, to whom the deduction of that j)roces was fpeciallie committed ; I did couiecture that your lo. cheif refpect in this defyre
wes to have the jujlice of his Maiejieis directionis, in that action, maid als manifeft to the worlde as
thay ar in the fight of God, and perfuafion of his owne confcience (albeit his prouidonce, wifdome,
juftice, and mercie have fund peopill als abill to fuck venome owt of thefe Royall verteues as the
wefp to extract poyfoun furth of the moft beautifuU and healthfull floures, whilk in thay owne place,^
I have remarked, naikedlie, as does heft befeme treuth,) acknowledgeing how vnhabill I am to giue
the dew lufter to thefe eminent and abundant vertues ; and thairfore, if your lo. fall ever think that
proces wourthie of the fight of the worlde, I know your wourth and bontie has gevin your lo. power
and ane great many rare and excellent fpirits, who will be glad to beftovv the beft floures of thair ingyne and learning, to giue the right foyle to that whilk may concerne his Maieftie, in fame, or your lo.

' Than. * Time of Vacation, when tlie Courts of Justice do not sit, and when the Lawyers are freri'ieiitly in

the country, ' The own or proper place.

158 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

in contentment. And, to the effect the proces may the more eafelie to vnderftand, before I cum to
the Report thairof, I will premit (premise) ane trew NaiTation of the firft motiues which invoked the
Laird of Auchindranes evill nature in the labirinth of thole mifchevous interpryfles ; which, be the
juftice of God, and liis Maiefleis admirabill prouidence and inflexibill conftancie, being brocht to light,
have overtlirowne his life and fortunes.

Ane TiiEW Narration of the jirjl Motiues whkh involued the Laird of
Auchlndrane' s evill Nature, S^c.

Your lo. hes heir the particular Difcours of ane Proces, whilk, vpone dyueris refpectis, many wyfe
men have judged to be verie memorabill. Sum, remarking tlie bad nature of malicious men, who, meafuring be thair owne raerciles difpofition, the affection of vther menis hairtis, can never hope to refTaue
frie pardon of thofe wliom thay liave mightelie offendeit ; and thairfore, forgetting the courtiffie refTaued of thofe who have remitted to thame great iniuries, faillies nocht to requit thair gude with evill ;
and at their firft aduantage, to bereave thofe of thair lyfe from whom thay reflaued thair owne, as Auld
Auchindrane did to Sir Thomas Kennedie of Ctdlayne.

Vtheris, did confider, with horrour, the craft and diligence of the Devill vfeis keip in his bondage
thofe who he anis fetteris in his fnaires ; offering to thame allurementis to facilitat to thame the Interpryfes, whilk, in thair worldlie confiderationis thay judge moft liklie to procuir the wiflied endis of
thair proiectis ; as Aidd Auchindrayne s refolution to cut af all meanis of difcouerie of liis guiltines of
Cidlayncs Movrthour be the Mourthouring of Dcdrumpill ; wliairin liis fin apperis to have bene fo
odious in the fight of God, as, for his pvneifment, God permittit his fone to be inuolued in the guiltines of that fam haynous cryme, as ane preparatiue of the vtter ruyne of that houfe : Whilk fucceiding
altogidder contrare to thair expectatioune, and the verie elementis concurring to the difcouerie of thair
fecret fin, that did not oppin thair eyes and hairtis to fie that manis wit is fillie before God, and that
thair ftrenth is bot duft ; bot thay fall be bhnded witli the prefumptioune of thair owne jugement ; and
thairby thinking, tliat if Bannatyne, who wes ey witnefle and actour with thame oi Dcdrumpilis Murthour, wer killed, that thair refled no vther meanes to proue thame guiltie thairof ; wliilk being conftantlie denyed be thame, wald lykwyes cleir Aidd Auchiiidrane of Cidlaynes Murthour. Thay intended to vfe Penieciike in the Murthour of Bannatyne ; and feiring left Peniecuke might efteruardis
difcouer that he had bene moved be Auld Auchindrane to kill Bannatyne, being fugitiue, as pairtaker
with Auchindrane and Iiis fone in Dalrumpilis ^lurthour, it audit (to) put all men in jufte fufpicioun
that it wes done, for cutting away the meane of the difcouerie of Dalrumpilis Murthour ; thairfore it
wes thought expedient that Quintene Mure of Auchneill fould kill PennicuJie, in reuenge of his Mourthouring Bannatyne ; and fwa, Auchneill, knoweing no thing of Dalrumpilis Murthour, and being not
onlie innocent of Bannatyne's Murthour, bot the avenger thairof, he fould be frie of all fufpicioun of
the fyrft Murthouris, and thay fecured of all probatioun that could have bene led aganis thame thairanent ; wli'ilk being difapoynted, be Pennicukis remorfe, and James Bannatyne s refolutioun to end
his dangeris and miferies, ather be his Maiefteis mercie, or, be ane fetled refolutioun, to accept his
death, as the juft pvneifment of his great finnis, in patience. It is evidentlie remarqued that the courfes,
grounded vpoun the prefumptioun of ane manis owne wit, ar the verie inftrumentis whilk God vfes to
confound thame in the folie of their owne imaginationis.

Nather could wyfe men neglect to admire, how loath the Devill is to quyte his polfeflioun of ane
finneris foule ; having fo contended to menteane Auld Auchindrane in his denyall and impenitence,
that efter his convictioun, when his conftancie could nothing availl him, thair wes no appearance that
he fould aither confes or publictlie repent the crymes for which he was condamned ; wliill (taitil) efter
ane notabill conflict betuix his fone ( Young Auchindrane) and the Devill, who ftill perfuaded him,
that thair wes no hope of mercie to ane finner, who had wilfullie and oft periured him felf, with horribill execrationis ; fum godlie Bifchoppis and Minifteris, be lang conference, and many comfortabill af44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 159

furanceis gevin to bim of the reddines of Godis frie grace and meicie to all finneris, who, with viifeyiied
repentance, ar difpleafed for thair finnes ; and can difpofe thair foules to hope for pardoun, and beg it
at his liandis; — he wes moved to mak plane and particular declaratioun of the vnhappie Miirtliour of
DalrimpiU, comniittit be bis father and him felf, according to Bannatynes Confeffioune and thair convictioun. Quhairby, finding his confcience wonderfullie difburdened, and his foule fullie repleineiffed
with afTured hope of Goddis abundant mercie ; did cheirfullie difpole him lelf to death, as the only way
to ane better and ever permanent lyfe ; and vfing bis befl, perfuafionis to bis father, that as they wer
joyned by bloude, and lykwayes conioyned in the equall guiltines of fo bynous ane fin, fo he vvald
confent that thay might joyne in repentance and trew conuerfioun ; be did fo muche pervale with him,
that being affiited be the godlie travels of the BiA-bopis and Minifleris, the fatlier wes broght to fo frie
and fenfibill contritioun, as, in the lafl houres of thair lyfe, and at the tyme of thair death, thair godlie
refolutioun to mak baifl to reflaue the eternall joyes, whilk thay exfpected alluredlie at Goddis mercifull bandis, gave als great confort to the bebalderis of thair Executioun, as thair wicked lyves bad
bene ofFenfiue, to thofe who knew the actionis thairof.

The dependance of this Proces kept menis myndis in great fufpens, dyuerflie dillracted, in the exfpectatioun of the incertane event thairof; the vulgar multitude, alwayes piteing fuche as ar miferabil,
without refpect of the dangerous confequence of the impvritie of fuche crymes, wiiliing faiftie and releif of the prifoneris : wyfe and godlie men, longing for the plaine diftouerie and exemplar pvneifment
of the haynous tranfgreflburis, whairof, in thair confcience, thay judged the defendaris culpabill ; and
vthers, difallowing the preparative of the long imprifonement and rigourous Tryall, ever glaid to fie
the appeirances of thair efcaip ; till God, in his owne appoynted tyme, be fuche meanes as ar before
reherfed, didjuftlie determine this long dowtfum caufe.

And albeit I have many tymes earnilUie coufidered, both the groundis of this caufe, and meruellous
incidentis and accidentis in the progres thairof, yet no thing hes ever appeired fo ftrange and extraordiner to me, as the blindnes or rather malice of ane great number of oure peopill of all fortis ; who,
forgetfull of oure happines in the wyfe, equitabiil, clement, and moderat regime of oure mofl excellent
King, became dowtfull of the jufl;ice of his directionis, in this caufe, [For whan I call to memorie,
the whole courfe of his lyfe, from bis firfl conceptioun to this hour, and do compaire the fame with
the regnes and lyves of vther Kingis, I think we have more reafon, with tbankfulnefs to God, to acknouledge his regne, to be the renouatioun of ane golden aige, nor be^ malicious pryeing in liis holie
intentionis and jufte doingis, to refemble thofe, who, vewing moft pure and precious jeuellis, dois not
fo mutche delyte thair eyes with the prefence thairof, as exercife thair curiofitie to efpy tafches'* in
thame.] For God, having, as it dois weill appeir, decreed in bis eternall wifdome, to appoynt oure
King to be the inllrument of more happines to this He, nor' in oure wiibes we durfl haue requyred :
knowing, that the wonders of his preferuatioun, and of the happines of bis moll rare, moft excellent,
and moft diflicill actionis, fould mak bis Maieftie more auguft and venerabill, it fall be eafie to any
man, who fall with ane honeft mynd and vnpartiall ey, confider the courfe of bis yeiris, mailifeftlie to
remark, that it hes bene ane contineuall exercife of perfyte virtue, beautified with the ouercumming of
all fuche difficulties as the wifdome and courage of man could foircaft ; and whan the dangeris did exceed that meafour, than did God vifiblie interpone the ftrenth of liis owne band, as the pledge of bis
loue, and prouf of his caire, not to fuffer a King, fo neceflar for the Chriftian worlde, to be ouer fuddenlie tranflated thairfra, to thofe blifiingis, whilk in end he lies prejiared for him, amang his moft deir
Elect. Bot to deduce the abrege of bis lyfe to the owne right ordour, we muft acknowledge, that it
pleefed God, in his eternall wifdome, to affigne the meanis of bis convoy vnto this worlde, to be the
Lappie conjunctioun of two of the moft nobill, beautifull, and hopefuU Princes, who at that tyme wer
to be fund vpoun earth;"* tliefuces^ whairof, being forefene be the Devlll, in his viperous wifdome, to

' Than bj'. » J"laws, blemishes. Old Fr. tasche. ^ Than. * Henry Uarnlcy and 3Iary Stewart,

Queeu of Scots. * Success.

160 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

be the ouerthrow of his kingdome, in this Ile,^ he did ftir vp vnfaithfull fubiectis to be inftruraentis of
fo terribill tempeflis and deidlie ftormes, that his Maiefteis lyfe wes, in his motheris wombe, reduced
lb neir to the diirris of the death, as tlie tender and mofl delicat flay of that faire excellent lady, be
tlie accurfcd poyntis of the crewall daguers of hir faithles treafonabill fubjectis, Murthcuring in hir
owne prefence ane of hir feruandis f hot as liir courage, furpaffing the imbecillitie of hir fexe, and
ouercuniming her dangeris, did oft'er this ritche prefent to the worlde, in the yeir of God 1566 ?
whairbye^ his Royall parentis, hauing confaued fo extraordinarie joy, as thay did accompt it to be the
perfectioun of thair earthlie felicitie. God, wlio will not fuffer thofe who he hesdeftinat^ to ane more
happie habitatioun, to abufe thame felfis with the delytis of the vayne fchaddowes of this lyfe, fuffered
the hellifli complottis of damned fubiectis, fo far to prevaile aganis thame, as the vertuous actionis of
the King his father, being interrupted be that mofl execrabill Tragedie, praclifed and performed be
that infamous and never-aneuch abhorred traitour, Bothuell, aganis liis lyffe. The contageous exampill of that vnnaturall Treafoun, did fo infect the mynd of ane great number of hir Maiefleis powerfull fubiectis, that thay wer not afrayd to ryfe in oppin rebellioun aganis hir, lay violent handis vpoun
hir facred perfoun, confyned hir libertie within the miferabill boundis of the wylde and vnwholfome
Craig of Lochlcrin., force hir to the abdicatioun of hir Royaltie ; and whan, as the dexteritie of hir courageous devyfe, faithfullie aflifled be fum of hir vncorrupted fubiectis, had fred hir furth of that
miferabill bondage, hir rebellis did fuddanlie affembill thair forceis, and in oppin Battell, ouerthrowing
that number of dewtifull fubiectis who did affifl hir, did fo maliciouflie purfue that victorie, as fcho
could nocht find in the whole boundis of that lairge Kingdome, which was hir natiue inheritance,
ane place of faif retrait ; wharby hir hard deflinie, dryving hir to feik refuge in England, fche found
be effectis, that ' incidit in Scyllain cupiens vitare Caribdim,' not enioyeing in it hir libertie one
houre, during the whole fpace of eighten yeiris of Jiir lyfe fpent in that Kingdom. Bot thefe afflictionis of hir lyfe, did fa flrengthen hir mynd aganis the terrouris of death, and prepaire hir fo happelie
for the entrance to ane better lyfe, that whan the cataflrophe of hir miferies brocht hir to reffaue death,
efter ane manner fo rare and vnaccuftomabill to ane Princeffe of hir birth and eftait, as the hardefl
harted beholders, touched with the flrangenes of that rigourous exampill, were driven to extreme grief
and compaffioun ; hir godlie refolution and invincibill courage wes fo conflant, that fcho appeired
nocht onlie content bot joyfull, that God, haveing vfed hir troubles in this lyfe for ane expiatioun
of hir fmnes, had gevin hir fo full affurance of his mercie and fauour, whairof fcho pronieifed to hir
felf, be the beginning of that dayes paflage, ane mofl bliffed and endles fruitioun. — Be thir meanes,
his Maieflie being deflitute of thefe helpes of Royall educatioun, whilk the caire and knoulege of fo
excellente parentis wald have procured to him, and flanding fubject to the danger of the cruell plottis
of thofe who, having treafonablie overthrowne his parentis, could never think thame felf frie of impunitie for fo vnpardonabill Treafoun, fo long as he, who, befyde the commoun interefl of Princes in the
pvneifment of vfurpeing Traitoures, wes bund, be dewtie of bloude and nature, to pvnes thofe who
had vfed fo butcherlie violence aganis the lyves, libertie, and eflate of his parentis. Yit God, in his
Providence, did fo cairefullie watche over hira, as haveing difperfed that tracheourous combination,
and with progres of tyme turned thair wittis and vapines* of thefe rebellis to wourk aganis vtheiis ;
his Maiefleis lyfe wes not onlie thairby prefcrved, bot his quarrell wes be thame reuenged. During
this tyme and thir dangerous paffages, his Maieflie, growing in graceis and yeiris, and finding his
realme fo miferablie difordered, as be the ciuill factionis and warris, not onlie the accuflumed barbaritie of the Bordouraris and Hielandmen wes increaffed, bot, be infectioun, had fo polluted the whole
cuntrie with cnieltie and dilfenfions, that publict factionis, and privat deidlie feidis, did fo difquyet
everie manis eflait, as thair jakkis, knapfcaes, plait-fleves, and pifloles, wer als ordinar apparrell, to the
mofl pairt, as thair doublettis and breachis ; becaus, whatever wes the caufe of thair conventionis or

' In allusion to the overthrow of the Papal power in Scotland, and the blessings to follow from the Reformation
of Religion. ^ Alluding to the murder of Dnvid Ri^zio. ' Predestinated. * Wappinius ; weapons.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I6i

meittingis, fightis or frayes wes the occafioun of thair departing, not onlie at Parlementis, conventionis, tryflis, and mercatis, bot lykwayis at Churche-yerdis and Churches, and places appoynted for
exercifes of Religioun. The purgatioun of fo extraordinar and vniverfall conuptioun, being the tafk

of his Maiefteis^

Bot that which I liave ever thoght moft ftrange and vnnaturall, in all this actioun, is, that efter fo
many, fo lairge and fenfibill praiffes of his Maiefteis pietie, juftice, clemencie, extended to all the cornaris, and almofl to all the particular ^ perfones of his Kingdome, fo many fubiectis fould haue bene fund
who, in fauour of two men of fo wicked lyfe, fould fo lightlie have regairded, and fo maliciouflie detracted his Maiefteis directionis, gevin for tortouringof Young Auchhidrane, and refufing libertie to him felf
and his father, efter fo many yeiris imprifonement : Never confidering how his Maieftie, being evrie
way jufte and equitabill, had, in thir menis particular, fo fmall caufe to vfe thame with rigour, that if
the afpired opinion of his cleir confcience had not certanlie perfuaded him of thair guiltine«, he wald
never have either vexed thair perfones, or reftrained thair liberties, agauis the courfes of ordiuar juftice of his kingdome.

It is foulifli prefumptioun in fubiectis to think, that the Kingis whom God hes chofen as Ijis lieutenantis, to regne ouer fo great Nationis, fould haue liairtis of no greater excellence than the vulgar fort ! If God had not prepaired the hairt of Solomon, in his youth, to command the houris
child^ to be devyded betuix hir and hir neighbour who claimed the leving bairne, what Judge in the
world could certanlie have determined to which of the two the living childe did belong? Whilk nevertheles, Salomon, be ane fentence, feming at lirft moft cruell and vniuft, did in end moft admirablie
determine,* to the manifeftatioim of the fingular wifdome, whilk God had put in the Kino^is hairt.

When oure King, the trew Salomon of oure aige, and the moft Godlie, wyi'e, and learned Kin^
that ever bure ane Regall crowne in any Chriftian kingdome, trewelie reprefenting, having fra his owne

infancie gevin fo extraordinar promiftis of his jugement ^

The juft determinatioun of the Proces which did long depend aganis the Laird of Auchindranb
and his eldeft fone, having greatlie contented the myndes of manie faiihfull fubiectis ; not that thay
did reioice iu the calamitie of Gentilmen of that fort,^ bot becaus thairby, thejuftice of God, in the difcouerie and pvniefment of moft fubtill and dark crymes, was maid manifeft to hard hairted and vnbeleiving peopill ; hes alfo buflied many menis pens to fend the report thairof to thair freindis abroad;
whairin, albeit at firft I did intend to keip filence, and remit the publicatioun of that memorabill actioun to thofe who wer mqre curious and fkilful nor myfelf ; yet, calling to my remembrance fum
notabill circumftances, which, during the incertane event of that procedure, did giue bauldenes to peruerfed peopill, to calumniat the true juftice of his Maiefteis direcliones ; which now, to his differued
commendatioun, is approued to the whole worlde ; I have fince thought it my duetie, truelie to informe
your lordfliip (whom I know to be fo curious and cairefull of no thing as of his Maiofteis honour) of
the whole fubftance of that perfute, craving your Lo. pardoun, if omitting fum parcellis, fcairce neceffarie to be recorded, I fall tak bouldcnes, in place tliairoP, to remark, that in the courfe and proores of
the moft notabill actionis of his Maiefties lyfe ami regne, whairof no Prince's aige and fortune liatlie
ever bene more fertile, liis holieft, happieft, and moft jufte intentionis have never bene frie of the bitter fting of calumnious detractaris.

In this Difcours, I will not follow his methode, qui in medias res non/ecus ac nolas auditorem
rapit, bot ftudie to mak the mater fo plane to your Lo. as poffibill I can, be deductioun of the occafionis whilk inuolued Auchindranes evill nature, in the labcrinth of thefe mifchevous interpryfes, which,

' This is left unfinished; a page is loft blanlv to fill up the rest. * Individual. ^ TluMveli-known story of ' the
Judgment of Scdomon.' Sir Thomas had, in the course of the lonj; digression whieli lie made regarding tiu' King's ' rise
and progiess,' touched on very dangerous ground, and tiavelied very far out of his way, for the purpose of lavishing tlie
most fulsome ]traise ; being certain that the Tetter would lie subjected to his Majesty's jierusal. < Terminate ; result.
' Here the scroll again breaks olF, and three blank jiages are left, for iarther digression and (lattery. « liauk •

condition in society.

VOL. IIL X

162 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

be the jullice of God and his Maiefteis inflexibill conftancie, being broght to light, have ouerthrowne
his lyfe and fortunes.

Be birth, he (John Mure of Auchixdraxe) wes a Gentihnan of wourfchipfuU difcent, fucceiding to that inheritance, which his predicefiburis in blonde and name had poflefled almoft foure hundreth
yeires. By marriage of tlie dochter of Sir Thomas Kennedie of Barganio, one of the mightielt fubiectis in the cuntrie whair he dwelt,^ having increfled the llrenth of his freindfchip and prelumptiouu
of his hairt ; and tliinking, tlmt no thing could impeid tlie abfolute power of Barganies freindfchip, in
Carrik, hot the Erie of CqffilUs hoivfe, whilk, be ane long difcent of vertuous Nobilmen, for wourthie
feruices done to thair Princes and cuntrie, had diflerued and reflkued fo lairge recompenlis in landis,
honouris, and jurifdictionis, as extending thair branches in all the cornaris of that cuntrie, and keiping
faithfull dewtie and obedience to thair Prince, they had, be lawful meanes, obteaned aduantage of honour and commandement oner all thair nightbouris ; till of lait, the father of this Erie deceaffed, and
leiving his fones infantes, thair did not reft of that cheif howfe, any man, abill to menteane the dignitie and rightes thairof, hot for Sir Thomas Kennedie of CuUcnjne, brother to the deceafled Erie, and
vncle and Tutour to this Erie of Cafiilis ; whom, vpoune emulation and invie, before mentioned, Auchindrane intended to Murtliour : ftor which pourpofe, having afToriat to him felf nyne or ten Weill chofen compliceis, thay, vpon the day of (January), or thairby, in the yeir of God 1597, come

to the towne of Maybole, whair the Laird of Cidlayne maid than his ordinar refidence, and tryeing^.
that he wes at fupper in the houfe of (Si?-) Thomas Nifbet-, and wes thairfra to go to bed to his owne
ludgeing; Auchindrane and his complices darned' thame felfis in (Sir) Thomas Nill)etis gairdine,
throw which the Laird of CuUaynes way lay to his owne howfe, and, in his paflage, having delaifched*
at him aucht or ten fchot of hagbuttis and piftojettis, in the boundis of ane llrait allay, yit he being
faif of any hurt thairwith, and perfaving thame with thair luourdis, moft cruellie to perfew his lyfe,
he being alone, (becaus his feruandis, not thinking that any man had reafon to oflFer him harme, ditt
not attend him,) he was forced for his faiftie to flie ; in which chaice thay did approche him fo neir,
as lie had vndoutedlie bene ouertane and killed, if he had not aduentured to rin afyde and coner him
felf with the mines of ane decayed houfe, whilk, in refpect of the darknes of the night, they did not
perfave; hot ftill followed to his ludgeing, and fearched all the corneris thairof, till the confluence of
the peopill of the towne^ reforting, whair thay hard fuche a fray, forced thame to retire. For which
fchamefuU and barbarous attempt, the faid Sir Thomas Kennedie of Cullayne, having focht redrefs be
law, did thairby dryve Auchindrane in fuche danger of ruyne, as necelTarlie did conftrayne him to
couer his malice with fchew of repentance : And for fatisfactioun of his bypaft offence, and gadge^ of
his futine dewtie, to offer his eldeft fone in marriage to Sir Thomas Kennedie's dochter : Whilk, be
iuterceffion of freindis, being accepted, and thairefter the marriage accompleilTed, tlie Laird of Cullayne did fo affect the gude of the Laird of Auchindrane and his hovfe, as it was no lefs dere to him
nor'' his owne ; confidering, that in thair hopes and wiffies, it wes to be poffelTed be the pofteritie of
thair conioyned difcentis.

In which termes, materis continowed, vpoun CuUayne's pairt, faitlifullie and in hairt, and vpone
Auchindranes, in trefonabill profeffionis ; whill,^ be the deceas of Sir Thomas Kennedie of Barganie^
his fone, Gilbert Kennedie of Barganie, ane young Gentihnan of great courage, fucceiding to him, his
inexperienced youth wes feduced be Auchindrane to beleve, that the tyme wes proper to raife his
houfe, from the fecund place in the cuntrie to the firft, be the ouertlirew of the Erie of CaJJUis houfe ;
whilk he proponed not to be diflBcill, for many probabill reafonis : Wliich, finding approbation, in the
ambitious mynd of the young Gentihnan, all occafionis of haitrent wer fo foftered be feditious inftrumentis on ather fyde, that in fchort tyme the pairties wer broght to fuche profeffion of inimitie, as the
Laird of Barganie, intending, in contempt of the Erie, to go by his 5et,^ in his palTage from Aire to

' In the Bailiary of Carrick and shire of Ajt. * Ascertaining after enquiry; discovering. ' Concealed; hid;

secreted. ^ Let off; fired. 0\A Vr. delasclier. ^Maybole. "Pledge. ¥v. yaije. 'Than. * Until.

* Contemptuously to go past the Earl's gate, without so much as enquiring after his health, he being his Chief, &c.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 163

... 4 , and the Erie, refoluing rather to die nor' digefl that publict indignitie ; having bothe

ftrenthened thame felfis with fuche forceis, as vpon fo fuddane occafioun thay could affenibill ;* tliay

rencountred vpon the ffeldis, neir the Erleshowfe of , whan ffoure orfTyve hundreth men

tntring in ffight, it wes verie liklie that the eagernel's of the Cheiffis fould have broght thair peopill to
great butcherie, if JBargank'S courage liad not carried him fo lieadlong to the rafche invafioun of the
Erles peopill, lying at cover, vnder the advantage of ditches, as him felf raffaving ane deidlie niuilvet
fchot, and Anchmdrane, being alfo maid vnliabill to brak his horfe, be ane verie dangerous fchot in the
tlieigh, thair trowp, wanting leaderis, fled, and left the feld to the Erles better fortune.

Which, no thing abatting Auchindranes malice, he did not ceafe to flir vp Thomas Kennedie, brother to the lait (layne jBar^/anzV, to be afliftand to him, in daylie ambufches, for the Erles death ;
whairin, not prevailling, in n^fpect of the Erlis power and circunifpectioun ; at laft, Auchindnme, determining rather to ouerthrow honour, promts, confcience, and all bandis of dewtie, nor^ to mifs fum
fort of reuenge ; he concludit to Murthour the before named Sir Thomas of Cullayne, ane mater moll
eafie to be atcheved ; becaus the Gentiluian wes, in his owne conlait, fullie fecured of all parrell fra
thair factioun, for that he had abdeaned from affifting his nevew the Erie in his querrell aganis Barganie, alfweill becaus he wes godfather to Gilbert Kennedie of Barganie, as that his mother and the
Erles grandmother be his father, wes ane dochter of the honfe of Barganie : Which refpectis, making
him exceidinglie to regrait thair vnnaturall ininiilie, he thoght it more agreabill to his dewtie to referue him felf newtrall, in thir vnhappie diffentionis of his kinfmen ; thairby, to watche occafionis and
referue equall credit and trufl of bothe pairties, to be ane inftrument of thair recouciliatioun, nor be his
kyndnefs to one of his kinfmen, be vnnaturall and vndewtifull to the vther.

In this eftait, being onlie intentive to his owne adois,'* whilk in the moneth of , in the yeir

of God ..... .,^ did requyre his refort to Edinburghe, thair to confult with his lawers in his v/echtie buffines ; he fend his feruand to Maybole, to feik Auchindrane, and aduerteis him of his purpofe ;
with direction, if he miffed him thair, that he fould certifie him, be Letter, of his intended journay ; to

the effect Auchindrane might, wpon the nixt day, meit him vpon the way, at , and informe him of any thing he wald wifli him to do for him in Edinburghe, feing it wes hot one travell for
him to do his freindis buffines and his owne. This ftruand of Cidlaynes, miffing Auchindrane in
Maybole, defyred Mr Robert Mure fcholemaijter at Maybole, to wryte ane Letter of that fubftance to
Auchindrane ; who did fo, and fent it be ane boy of his fchole, called Williame Dalrumpill, who
finding Auchindrane at his houfe of Auchindrane, with his cufing, Walter Mure of Cioncaird, ane
deidlie ennemie to the Erie of CaJJillis ; fo fone as lie fand him felf certified of Culluynes pourpofe
and dyet, he difmiffed the boy, commanding him to returne bak in haift, caireing the Letter with him ;
directing him farder to fchaw to his maiiler and Cwllayne's man, that he had not fund him at his howfe :
And immediatlie thairefter, refolued with his cufjng Cioncaird, tbat this occaliouu of reuenge of i?ayganies Slauchter, be CuUaynes Murthour, wes nocht to be oncflipped : And, efter fum deliberatioun,
concluded vpon the choife of the actouris, and nianerof the execution ; making aduerteifment thairof»
alfweill by Letter fent to Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrquhie, be 3Iakadam, futeman to Young Auchindrane, as by meffage to Cloncairde ; who, finding TJiomas moftreddie to embrace that opportunitie,
the faid Thomas Kennedie, Walter 3Iure of Cioncaird, and foure or fyve feruandis with tliame, weill
airmed and horfed, convoyeing thame felfis neir the way ajjpoynted be Cullaynes Letter, for his meitting with Auchindrane, did ly at await, till Cullaynes by-cumming; who, being in full fecuritie of his
dangerles eftait, ryding vpoun ane paifllng naig,'' and having with him ane feruand onlie, thay fuddenlie furpryfed him, and with thair piftoles and fuourdis gaue him ane number of deedlie woundis :

I Tl

rii.an. * See a fnl] account of tlicso iiroct'c<lii)(,'s in ' Tiik IIisToniK or tuk Kknnkdyis ' bclori! referred to

and also Okiginal i'Ai'Kits in this Appendix. '■> Uatiier tiiaii lie dejirived of some sort of revenfje against tiie name

of Kennedy. ' Affairs; concerns. ' Uth May, KJO^. '• A j.acinc, aml.iiiii; nai; ; a hackney, for his journey ; not a swift and powerful liorse, by which he might jxjssildy liave escaped. See ' Tlie Historic of tlie Kennedyis,'

164 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

And, noclit content to haue fo barbarouflie and traitrouflie bereft him of bis lyfe, fpoyled him of ane
thowfand merk of gold, being in his purfe, ane number of golden buttonis vpon his coat, and fum ringis
and vther jouallis : For the which villanous fact, the actuall Mourthouraris being firft outlawed and
thairefter fforfalted, and Aitchitidrane, vpoun vehement prefuraptionis of his devyfe and eaufing execute fo execrabill ane cryme, being fummond to vnderly the law, did bouldlie compeir : And feing that
the perfewaris, for want of fufficient evidences, wer not than to aduenture his Tryell, fearing that
he might be clenged/ and fo, perpetuallie fred of that cryme ; whan he faw them adiourne thair
perfute, he feemed greived thairat, as bragging exceidinglie of his innocencie, whairof he had geviu
pruif, be oifering him felf to tryell of law, if thair wer within the kingdome any man of Cidlaynes
kinred or freindfcliip, who wald advow^ him any wayes participant of the devyfe or executioun of that
Murthour, he wald reddelie offer him felf in that querrell to the tryell of Combat to the death : And fo,
wanting ane pairtie,-' wes difmilled ; more frie, in the perfuafioun of the moil pairt of fuche as wer prefent,
nor in his owne confcience, whilk giveinghim many alarmes, that fo long as Dalrwnpill, who wes cai'rier
of the Letter, wes within the cuntvie, the mater might be difcouered be him. Heiring that Young Cullayrie, fone to Sir Thomas Kennedie, had begun to try him verie rudelie, Auchindrane drew Dalrumpill to
his l)0ufe, and keiped him cloife, be the fpace of nyne or ten oulkis;'* whairwith the boy weireing exceidinglie, he fent him thairefter to the Ileof Arrayie, to the Laird of Skehnurlie,^ liis great fieind, willing him to keip him as ane boy of Thomas Kennedie of Drumvrqidiies : Whair he being reffaued and
reteaned ane long fpace, the boy, finding him felf neglected and vnprovyded of many necelTaris, returned to Munctoun, to the houfe of ane vncle of his owne -^ which came no foner to Auchindranes
knouledge, hot incontinent he fent for him to his houfe of Auchindrane, whair he of new kept him cloife,
whill, be paction witli ane of his coufingis, called James Mure of Fleet, he fend him to Leith, to be
tranfported to the Low-cuntries, to ferve as ane fodgeour in the Lord Balclevclds Hegiment ;~' hoping that
he might aither thair end his life, be fuche accidentis as daylie befallis to fouldiouris, or at leaft be fecure from difcouerie or perfute of fuche as he did (land in feare off. But whan the fenfeles blindnes
of his confcience had gevin fentence of perpetuall fecuritie to him from all difcouerie of his abominabill
tranfgreflioun, in refpect of Dalriimpillis abfence, be the fpace of fyve or fax yeiris ; the ey of Goddia
juflice, whilk never fleipis, convoyed him back to Aire, the place of his natiuetie, whar, having onlie
Itayed with his mother and filler ane night or two, he did addrefs himfelf to Auchindrane, who, aduerteifed of his returning, and thairby flinged with fearfull tormentis of confcience, he tuke ordour for
Dalrumpillis flay in the howfe of his feruand, Walter Mure of Glenheid: And the nixt day, in the
afternone, being the .... day of September, in the yeir of God . . . .,^ he fend his houlhald feruand, James Cuninghame, to bring him to him ; and rencountering Avith thame, in his way from his
liowfe of Auchindrane to ane vther howfe of his, called Ballachtoivle,^ him felf and his fone, Young
Auchindrane, had conference with Dalrumpill ane great pairt of the way, till they came neir the Houfe
of Chapcldonan,^^ perteaining, by inheritance, to Auchindrane, and poffefled be his tennent and allye,"
James Bannatyne, with whom tliay left that night WilUame Dcdrumpill , calling him be ane changed
name, ' Wdliame Montgomerie :' Whair he flayed all the next day, whill, be directioun of Auld Auchindrane, James Bannatyne did bring Dalrumpill, about ten a clok in the nightj to the Sands of Girvan, whair Jolme Mure, elder of Auchindrane, and James Mure, younger of Auchindrane, wer attending'* thair cuming : At meitting, Auld Auchindrane begane to declaire to his man Bannatyne that he

' Literally cleansed ; acquitted. * Avow; openly challenge. ' Pursuer or prosecutor. ■* Weeks. * Sir

Robert Montgomery, lie married Margaret, eldest daughter of the Laird of Drumlanrig, Sir William Douglas.

* It cannot be traced who this individual was. ' Siii Wai.tkh Scott, who raised a regiment of his name, and
served in the Wars of Maurice, Prince of Orange, against the Spaniards. For his singular merit and services, he was,
IVIar. 16, IGOG, created Lord Scott of Buccleuch, being the first person of that celebrated Family who had been ennobled. His son, Walter, second Lord Scott of Buccleuch, also commanded a Regiment in the service of the States
of Holland, and was created Earl of Buccleuch, Lord Whitchester, and Eskdale, Mar. 1(5, 1619. ' 1607.

• Situated near Girvan. '" Situated about a mile and a half from Girvan, ou the sea-shore. " ' Kinnisman
to his wyfe' is deleted, and * allye' interlined. '^ Waiting. Fr. attendre.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 165

had bene in perpetuall feare, fince Cullaynes Slaughter, to be difcouered as guiltie thairof ; — that for
efchewing that danger, he had fent furtli of the cuntrie this Dalrumpill, who broght to him the Letter
of aduerteilment of Cullaynes dyet ; and whan as he had materis at that poynt, as be his trauelis^'
Young Cullayne and Thomas Kenmdk wer maid to allow of the conditionis whilk he had fet downe
for reconcilialioun of thair querrell, for the Murthour of Cullaynes father, this man wes vnhappelie
returned, be whom his whole devyfe wald be difapoynted, and his danger renewed. That he faw no
remeid hot to red Dalrumpi II (uvth of this lyfe, fince he could not vtherwayes be kept out of his way.
Whairvnto Bannatyne making anfuer, that it wes ane cruel pourpofe to Murthour the poure innocent
youth, fpeciallie feing thay might fend him to Ireland, to be faiflie keiped thair, till the agrieance wes
perfytted betuix Cullayne and Drumvrquhie : Auld Auchindrane femed to inclyne fumwhat to that
expedient ; and in the uncertaintie of his rcfolution, turning towardis the pairt whar his fone iluid, of
pourpofe, as appeired, to have coufulted with him, Young Auchindrane perfaved thame no foner (draw)
neir, bot, thairby affuring himfelf of thair affiilance, in executioun of that whilk his father and he liad
formerlie concluded, he did violentlie inuade Dalrumpill, rulhed him to the ground, and never left him
till, helped by his father, with his handis and kneis he had ftrangled him. And then, thinking to have
buried him in the Sandis, whirby no mark fould remayne''' wljilk might raife any fufpicion of his
Murthour, in that place, thay preafled to mak vfe of ane fpead and fclioule whilk Young Auchindrane
had broght with him for the pourpofe ; bot finding that no hole wes foner cafTm be thame in the Sand,
bot wes alfone filled agane with the water and fandthat fchot in it, thay wer forced, efterlang travell,
to draw him in the fea, alsfar as they durft wade, hoping that ane vtterlie wind^ fould carie his deid
corps to the Coaji of Ireland : Whilk not fucceiding according to thair expectatioun, the corps flaying
all the nixt day in the verie place whar they left it, they pafTed that day in meruelous anxietie, for feir
of difcouerie ; till the nixt night, fearcheing the corps to have buried it, they could not, be any fearche,
find it, becaus the winde had carried it to the Sea, whair it wes tofled continouallie be the fpace of
fy ve nychtis, till the Fryday following, that God, deineing (deigning^ to vfe that meane, for manifeftatioun of thair hid iniquities, broght Dalrumpilis corps bak to the verie place whair, fex or feven dayis
before, he had been Murthoured : Whilk being perfaved be fum cuntrie peopill, the corps wes cairied
be thame to the nixt Churche yaird, and thair buried.

Bot the report of fo llrange ane accident, having raifed fufpicion in the Erie of CaJJilis and fum of
his friendis, who had heard of Dalrumpilis returning in the cuntrie, that it might be he had pairt in
that turne, it wes thoght fit be the Erie and dyueris of the Miniitrie* of that boundis, that intimation
fould publictlie be maid in Aire, being the heid burgh of the fchyre, and at the Paroche-Kirkis to
landward, that I'uche ane corps, being fund deid vpoun the coalt, wes to be fene at the Churche of
Girvan. Whilk being accordinglie publeifled, the corps wes raifed, and amongs vtheris, fighted be
Dalrumpils mother and \nsjijler, who efter diligent coufideration of the proportion and markis of his
bodie, allured thamefelfis and vtheris, that he wes the mourthoured man I The opinion of Auchindranes guikines of that Murthour becam fo vniuerfall, as it began to be talked of amongis his owne
feruandis and in his owne houfe, and thairby himfelf, his fone, and thair man Bannatyne, ^o confuled,
as thay knew not how to cleir thaime felf of that vylde imputation ; till going to Aire, and meitting
with James Dulrumpill,^ cufing germane to Young Auchindrane, by his mother, he did intorme
thame of the fchamefull opinion wes had of thair guiltines of that foule Murthour ; advyfuig thame,
that feing it wes not faif for thame, to ofter thame felfis to the Tryell of Law, for ane Murtliour, whairof
all men thoght thame fo guiltie ; and if thay, being challanged be the Erie of Cajillis, Ibuld be fugitiue for fo haynous a cryme, thair freindis could not with credit do for thanie.'^ It was fitter, that
they fould kill Hew Kennedie of Garriehorn, fervant to the Erie of Caflillis, for dyueris proba-

' Pains ; trouble. ^ 15y burying hiin within the flood-mark ; so that, on the reflux of the tide, all marks of

the struggle and foot-marks, &c. might be eflaced. ^ An off-shore or outward win<l. ' Clergy ; INIinisters.

' ' Sisteris sone to the Lady Auchindrane, and so cusimj,' deleted. * Support or muiutuin them, while fugitive.

166: CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. IGIL

bill querrellls whllk thay had againft liim : Wlialiof the occafion did prefentlie offer, in refpect of
his being fingill ' in Aire ; whilk being done, thay might ever pretend, that the danger of that cryme,
and feir of the rigour of the Erie, wes the onlie cans for the whilU thay wer fugitiue I In whilk caice,
nevertheles, tliair freindis might, without reproche, do for thame ; becaus, albeit the fact wes viilaufull, it wes not diihonefl, fiiice it proceided vpoun profefFed querrelis, and might be done publictlie ;
and ^o, thay be fugitiue, without infamie ! They prefentlie imbrafed the expedient, and provyding
thame felfis of pidoles and vther airmour, thay invaided Gariehorne,^ fchott tliair pilloles, and vfed
all vther meanes to have killed him. Bot finding, that it wes ane mater more ditiicill, to ouirthrow
ane gentilman, airmed with gude courage, in ane laufull defenCe, nor^ to Murthour innocent men,
voyde of apprchenfion of danger and meanes of defence, all that thay reported of that inuafion, Aves
ane hurt of Young Auchindrane in his right hand, whairby lie became almoll lame of it.

Be this new iniurie, the Erle of Cassillis perfaving that thair lyves wald end, befoi;e thair malice aganis him fould diminilli, he refolued to flrengtlien him felf be all fuche aduantage as Law fould
giue him ; and having chalenged thame bothe for the Murthour of Dairy mpill, and for the Inuafioun of
bis feruand with prohibit vapinis,"* thay go to the home ;^ profellingalwayes, that if thair viing piftoles
aganis Goriehorne might be remitted to thame, thay wald ever be reddie to enter and abyde Tryell of
Dalrumpillis Murthour. Bot his Maiellie, being trevvlie informed of thir proceedingis, efter ferious
confideratioun of the circumflances, than confiiued fo conftant ane opinion of Auchindrane and his
fones guiltines of Dalrumpillis Murthour, that he affured him felff, that if thay wer tane and dewlie
examined, thay wald vndoutedlie be brocht to confefs it. And thairbye, infpyred with his accuftomed
zeale to juflice, gave fecret Commifiioun to the Erie of Abercorne, that he wald not omit ony occafion
to apprehend thofe fufpected perfonis ; whairin the Erles diligence had fo gud fucces, that within
fchort fpace, he did rencounter and tak Auld Auchindrane, and enter him prifoner in the Towbuith
of Edinburgh ; whairof, hes fone had no foner knouledge, bot imagining with him felf, that it wer
eafie for his father and him felf to conceall thair crymes, be obflinat fecrecie, if Bannutyne fould not
be broght, by examination and confrontation, to reueale the treuth and difcredit thair denyall ; he inftantly raid \o BaUiutrae, whair Bunnntyne wes for the tyme, perfuaded him, for all thair faifties, to
retire to Ireland ; provyded and furneifi^ed him with victuallis and neceHaris, anebot*^ for his tranfport,
recommended him, by his Letteris, to his vnde Thomas Kennedie of Brumvrquhie^ gave him aflurance that be liis abfence, he fould not tak any proffeit of the land quliilk he had of thame, nor no vther
help, whil thay wer abill to mak to him. And he^Bannatynes remove, bs'cumiiig confident, did fufpend his
Homingis, be cautioun for his compeirance to vnderly law ; defyring no thing fo muche as that he might
l)e precipitatlie put to ane AfTyfe ; vpon hope, that the lak of verification, in ane mater fo clandeftine and
obfcure, and the afllftance of his great and gude freindis, fould procure to him vndouted abfoluitour ;"
and thairby, being frie of all dangeris of law, wald be more abill to procure his ffatheris libertie and declaratioun of hisinnocencie. Bot, being anis entered, examined, and vpon great caution^ lett to libertie,
and thairefter bis cautioner chairged to re-enter him, he, remitting no jote of his former confidence,
compeired the dayappoynted, and being than re-examinat, and be the commendabill indullrie oi my Lord
Chancelar, and vtheris of the Counfall, appoynted for his Tryull, drawne in fum materiall contrarietie ;
vpoun fignification thairof to his Maieftie, directioun wes returned, that not onlie he fould be reteaned,
bot if he wer obflinat, fould be coerced, he Tortour, to difcouer the trewth I Whilk being accordingly
performed, be thofe of his Maieflies Counfall, to whois fecrecie and faith that chairge wes committed ;
the Young Auchindrane, ■^2\vi\\e confirmed be the ftrenth of his great courage, vnhappelie beftowed in

' Single ; unaccompanied. ^ Ilew Kennedie of Gariehorne, ciilled in the Act of Secret Council, Feb. 5, 1C02,

' The Giddman of Ihc BaUot," probalily fioni beiiiu; Lessee or luc/ismaii of tliat farm. " Than. * Wappiimis,

weapons, which were by Act of Parliament prohibited from being used by jirivate gentlemen, excepting in his JNIajesty's service. ' Permit themselves to be denounced rebels and put to the horn, by virtue of Letters of Horning

passing under the Signet, rather than present themselves for tri-.il, as was previously arranged. * Boat.

' One of the forfeited murderers of Sir Thomas Kennedy. " Acquittal. Lat. absolcere. ' Bail ; security.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIxMINAL TRIALS. I67

pruiffis of that kynd, and pairtlie be the craftie advyfes and aduerteifments of his ffather, convoyed to
him be the counfile of fum thair welwillaris, who tuke the advantage of tlie caireleflbes of thair keiparis ; he did endure the extremitie of that infufferabill torment, with fuche conftancie, that whairas, it
wes hoped tliat the veritie of the accufation and extremitie of payne fould have forced him to aue trew
Confeflioun, the event proved {"o far contrarie, as he refoluing, with filence, and foufFrance of ane
fchort payne, to redeme his libertie, and to adde the hope of many yeiris to liis lyfe.

The mofl pairt of thofe who hard of the event of that Tryall, the forme whairof wes muche raiflyked, did confaue fo conflant opinion of his innocencie, as not onhe the vulgar fort did publeis the
fame, and regrait the extraordinar rigour vfed aganis him, hot fum Nobilmen and Counfallouris did
affift his Supplicationis for his libertie, alledgeing many reafonis, why, with reafon, it could not be refufed him : That ane man of his birth and qualitie had reffaued hard aneueh meafour, being put to
Tortour for ane cryme whilk nather did concerne his Maieflies perfone nor eflait, albeit, efter fo gude
pruif of his innocencie, be his fingular conflancie in fuffering that tryell ; whilk no tiling could liave refifled, hot the integritie of ane vnfpotted confcience ; he fould not be ouercharged with ane fecund oppreflioun, in denying to him his natiue and laufuU libertie ; lince he did oft'er aither to vndergo prefent tryell, or, if his ennemies did rather chufe, to prorogat it to ane tyme more fit for thame, he wes
content to find caution, not vnder the pane of ane thoufand merkis prefcryved be Act of Parlement to
ane man of his eflait, hot, for removing of all fcruple of his not compeirance, he fould bind his freindis
vnder the payne of Twentie Thoiifand poundls for his re-entrie, whanfoever he fould be chairged to that
effect : Which wes fo oft requyred and vehementlie preaffed, that my Lord Chancellar, ouercum with
the continouall importunitie of Young Auchindranes favouraris, did yeild, that aduerteifmeut fould go
from the Counfall to his Maiestie, of Auc/midranes fate, and of the inclination of ane great pairt of
the Counfall to yeild to the fam. Whairwith, his Maieltie, no whit diverted from his former refolution, figuified his pleafour to be, that in no caice, nor vpoun no condicioun, he fould have ony libertie ;
being refolved in his confcience, that he Aves mofl guiltie of that Mourthour ; and that God, in his
juftice and appoynted tyme, wald manifeft the fam : Whairby, my Lord Chancellar, ftrenthened be
the exprefs Warrand of his Maiellies directioun, proceiding of his Royall motiue and certain knouledge, did fo dewlie obey his Maieflies command, that many tymes thairefter, whan the mofl pairt of
the Counfall, abufed with vntrew probabilities, and inclining to muche prepofterous pitie, did preafs
that Young Auchindranes Supplicatioun might be red and refaue anfueir from the Counfall, be the
voices of the mofl pairt of thofe who wer prefent, according to the inflitutiou thairof and cultume inviolablie obferued.

My Lord Chancelar, perfaving, be thair vttering of thais preconfaued opinions, that be pluralitie of
voces it wald be ordaned that libertie fould be granted to Auchindrane, vpoun caution, vnder great
fowmes for his re-entrie whan he fould be chairged ; did oppone to thair opinioun, grounded vpoii the
vfuall forme of that judicatour, his Maieflies expres commandement, proceiding from his abfolute
Royall power, whilk he wald never bring in queflioun, fnice no man could deny that his Maieflie,
vpon caufes knowne to him felf, might commit and reteane in wairde any of his fubiectis, who iu his
confcience he knew to differue the fam ; and that it wes prefumption to his fubjectis, fpeciallie Counfallouris, any wayes to contell in that poynt, efter his Maieflies laufull pleafour fo oft and fo expreflie declaired.

My nobill Lord, it war heir verie eafie for me to juflifie the courfe of his Maiesties proceiding in
this particular, and not onlie refute the popular errour of the prefumptuous multitude, hot alfo, with
infallibill reafonis, to condemn the vntymous pitie of fum of better I'ort, natlier remeuibring the obligatioun of thair place, nor the pruiffis of fo many bypall accidentia, whairin his Maiellie, voyde of all
paffioun and particular,' and onlie moved by confcience, and loue of juflice, had fumwhat diuerted from
' Partiality ; bias, or leanbig to the quarrel or cause of either of the parties.

168 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

the common pathe of oidinar Juftice, without refpect to popular murmour ; fo let the world to fie, in
end, be his moft notabill conclufionis, how his purpofes, tending to vnpartiall Juflice, wer affifted be
the fauour of God, and be heavenlie infpirationis, conducted to endis, confortabill, and almoft miraculous I Bot, becaus I falbe more abill perfitlie to performe that pairt, wlian in the end of this actioun I
falbe flrengthened be the credit of ane faithfull and confcionabill Aflyfe, and muche more be the Confeffioun of the pairties, extorted be the power and Prouidence of God, I will referue it that place ; and
following furth the courfe of this Narratiue, fubioyne thairto the Judicial Procedure and Sentence,
whilk was never thoght to be in the way of any probabill expectatioun, till the Erie of Ahercorne, by
fecret and inftant dealling with fum of his freindis m Ireland, fand meanis to tak James Bannatyne,
and bring him to Scotland, to his howfe of Paiflay ; whair Bannatyne, efter the reherfall of all that
Tragedie of Baln/mpills Murfhour, having fubioyned the maner of his owne taking, whairin he feimed to acclame fum promeis, maid for the laiftie of his lyfe : The Erie did forthwith judge that dealling, fo contrare to his honour and his Maieflies intention, as he inftantlie aflured Bannatyne, that he
never did intend to have him vpon any futche conditionis. Bot being vnwilling that whan he fould
be prefented to juftice, he f(mld reproche to him the brek of eondicion maid be any whom he had imployed for his apprehenfioun, whairby the heararis might tak libertie, aither to beleve or not beleve
BannatyJie's afiirmatioun, and thairby bring his honour in queft;ion ; he gaue to him libertie to go frie
out of his houfe, with aflurance, that for the fpace of ten dayes he fould be vnpurfewed be him or any
of his, geving him fpace to provyde for his faiitie, aither within this realme, or be removing furth
thairof; aduerteifing him thairwithall^ that that terme being expyred, he wald beftow his owne travels
and the affiftance of all the friendis he had in the world to apprehend him, whairever he might be had,
either quick or dead ! So Bannatyne., being left to ane bodelie libertie, whilk neuer fred him of terrour
of confcience, and fear of death, alfwell in refpect of the fuorde of his Maiefteis Juftice hanging aboue
his head, as that endles perfute, whilk he knew the Erie of Abercorne did intend againft him ; bot
moft of all, in refpect of his knouledge, that Auchindrane had, of lait, devyfed and practeifed many
meanes to caiife Murthour him in Ireland, thairby to prevent the danger quhilk Bannatynes Confeflioun
might bring vpon him, if, be falling in tJie Erie of Abercornes handis, he fould have bene broght to
Ed"", examined and confronted with him and his fone : Being alfo informed, that whan Young Auchindrane caufed deale with the Eric of Diimbar for his libertie, he had offered that his cautioneris fould
bring Bannatyne in, aither quick or deid ! The Erie had verie judiciouflie anfuered, that he did well
believe that Young Auchindrane, being frie, wald vnfaynedlie do his beft to bring in Bannatynes head,
whairof for his pairt he wald be forie, as lofiiig ane of the beft meanis of the difcouerie of thair guiltines, whairof he in his confcience wes refolued I Thir confiderationis did force Bannatyne to proftrat
him felf at the Counfals feit, offering him felf, without any condition, to reveill the whole treuth of
that Murthour, and to verifie all that he fould fay in Auchindrane and his fonis face; hoping, be the
aftiftance of Gods gude Spirit, to bring thame to ane Confeflioun of that vndenyabill treuth ; onlie
craiving, that if the Counfall fand him trew in all his fpeachis, and to be ane meanes to difcouer the
wickednes of thefe men, who, having drawn him vnhappelie in the participation of thair mifchief, had
{"o ingratelie and wickedlie devyfed to Murthour him felf, thar Lordfchips wald be pleafed to recommend him to the Kingis raercie, whois pleafour he fould joyfuUie fultill, wer it in liis lyfe or in his
death !

He wes commanded to mak ane trew Narration of the maner of I)alrum])ils death ; whilk being
writt be the Clerk of Counfall, and Atdd Avchindranc broght in and examined and confronted with
him, and being contrare to him in all the poyntisof his Depofitioun ; affermingimpudentlie, that Bannatyne wes feduced and conduced be his vnfreindis(e«<';M2V*), for defyre of his lyfe and landis, to avow thefe
vntreuthis vpon him. Thay wer fo directlie oppofite to vtheris, as Auchindrane appeiied more craftie
and Bannatyne more fimple and trew in his Depofition ; bot bothe of thame fo confident, that not

41&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 169

onlie evrie ane of thame menteaned thair owne Declaratione ; bot wliare as Banuatyne had proftiat
him felf vpon his kneis, and directing his eyes and handis to Heaven, liad, with tearis, exhorted Auchindrane ' to liave remorfe of his great wickednes, and to confes that Murthour, whilk God wald not
fufFer liitn any longer to conceale ! AflUring him, that if lie had bene innocent of that cryme, all the
land of the Kindome, 56^ the faiftie of his owne lyfe, fould never haue perfuaded them (him) to prejudge his maifter, who he had fo deirlie loved and followed in many dangeris, whairin he had aduentured his lyfe and eilait, without feir or refpect of the bell fubiectis in the cuntrie.' — Auchindrane
anfuered, that ' he hoped God wald nocht fo reiect him, as to permit him to confefs fo infamous vntrewth of hira felf, and douted not bot God wald move Bannatyne to beir witnes to his innocencie,
and how, be what perfones and meanes, he had been feduced falUie to accufe him I'

Whairby, the Counfall, being broght in admiration^ of fo great obflinacie, and hopeing that the fone,
being confronted with :Bannafi/ne, might be fund perhappis lefs confident: When thay wer broght in
thair prefence, and e/?*imined, confronted, re-examined, and tryed, be all the bell meanes that the experience orjugement of wyfe and well affected Counfalouris could affurd ; nothing wes hard bot direct
contrarieties, confidentlie confirmed be execrabill oathes ! So dyueris whole dayes being fpent in Examination of thefe pairties, and many WitnefTes who wer thoght ony wayes abill to furneis light to thia
obfcure caice.

At laft, whan no hope of any farder difcouerie wes expected, the Lordis of Secreit Counsall
concluded, that vpoun the .... day of July inllant, thefe perfones fould be put to thair tryall : And
for that pourpofe caufed Summond ane fufficient number of Gentilmen of gud report, to pas vpon tliair
Assyse; and did lykwayes appoynt my Lords Prefident,^ Secretar,' Jullice Clark, ^ Meidhop,^ Kilfyth,'' and Wrightifland/ to be Assessouris to the Juftice in this Angular caufe, whairin the inclination of the peopell wes fo fauorabill to Auchindrcme and Ids fone, that verie many did allege, that it
wes requifit that Bannatyne fould be firft put to an Aflyfe ; and being convict, as of neceflitie he behoued to be, in refpect of his owne Confeffioun, and Execute to the death, as he had well defferved ; his
conftant ratification vpon the fcaffald of his former Depofitionis, and feilling the fame with his bloude,
at his death, might than put thame in fum opinion oi Auch'indrane s ^xyAxm^?,, whairof vtherwayes thay
had never fene any appeirance. Bot the Lordis of Counfall, thinking it more agreabill to reafon, that'-*

[thofe ?] who wer thoght all guiltie of ane fact, fould go to ane com [mon Aflife?]

and that the gentilmen of Affyfe, whois confciences [might?] fulleane the chairge of the

Judgement to be gevin in fo we [ightie ?] a caufe, fould have all the thrie Defendaris at ones

in thair prefence, that fo thairby thay might be refolued of whatfoever thay fould think fit to demand
of thame. Thair Lordfchipis followed thair firft ordonnance, and vpon the faid [17''>] day of Julie,
efter ellevin a clok, curaming to the ordinar place of Jugement, did caufe bring the Defendaris from
thair feueral prifonis to the bar, whair Sir Thomas Hamilton of Byres, Knight, his Maiefties Aduocat,
compeiring as perfewar, did exhibit ane Dittay aganis the faidis Defendaris, defyring my loud Justice to put thame to the Tryall of ane Aflyfe ; who, intending no wayes to preiudge the Defendaris of
the benefite of Law, gave to thame libertie to name thofe whom thay defyred to be forefpeakeris ^^ for
thame in thair defence ; who naming '^ [< iVIr Johne Rufl^ell, Aduocat, Mr Thomas Nicolfone, Aduocat, and Jofephe Myller, Aduocat,'] thay wer prefentlie called be thair names ; and having accepted
vpon thauie the Defenfe of the Lairdis of Auchindrane, elder and younger, the Dittay wes oppinlie
red in jugement: Aganis which James Bannatyne did not oppone anything; bot declaired, that as he
wald not vfe any defence why this mater fould nocht pas to the knouledge of an Aflyfe ; fo when tlie

' Yea. * Astonishment. ^ Sir John Preston of Fenton-barns, President of (he Comt of Session. ^ Sir

Alexander Ilay. * Sir John C'ockburn of Orniiston. " Sir Alexander Dniinniond, an Kxtraordinary

Lord of Session. ' Sir William I.evingston, an Extraordinary Lord of Session. •* Sir Lewis Craig.

° The MS. torn at this and the folh)\ving j)laees, whicli the Editor has siiiii)lied from eonjectiire, within brackets.
'" Counsel, or Prelocutors. " Left blauk. The names within brackets are taken from the Uccord.

VOL. III. Y

170 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

AfTyfe fould be cliofen, he fuld mak thair burding light, granting in tliair prefence fo muche of the
Dittay as concerned him, albeit he tuke God to witnes, that he wes the maift innocent of the thrie.

Thairefter M^^ Johne RulTell and Thomas Nicolfoun, having exponed to my Lord Juftice the
groundis of the caufe, the qualitie of the Defenderis meriting fauour and refpect, the rigour vfed aganis
tbame in thair lang captiuitie, and extraordinar Tortour of the young man, did craive, that thay might
have the benefite of law, whilk allowed to the Defendaris citatioun vpoun fiftene dayes wairning ;
whairby, rellaving the Copie of the Summondis, containing the Inditement to the whilk thay wer to
anfuer, thay might, be that fpace, be advyfit of thair wyfe freindis and It-anied Counfall, to prepair
thair jufle Defenfis. Whairvnto it wes anfuered, be his Maieflies Aduocat, that thair defyre could
not be granted in this caule, be reafoun, the crymes whairof thay wer to be accufed wer treafonabill ;
in which caice, ane prifoner, being broght from liis Maiefleis prifon to the bar, wes, be the ordour of
this Judgement,^ put to prefent Tryall, without any delay or continewation ; whilk, with no reafons,
could be granted to thame at this tynie ; becaus, thrie yeiris ago, thay had bene fumraoned for the
fame crymes, vpon xv dayes wairning ; at whilk tyme, they going to the home, for thair contumacie,
the Auld Laird wes takin be his Maieflies Comniiflion, the Young Laird relaxing his [Summondis
and entering] had bene deteaned be his Maiefties du-ection ; fo that they had not onlie fyvetene dayes,
hot full thrie yeires to prepaire thair defenfis.

The Defenderis than alledged, that the fummonds, produced be the Lord Aduocat, could not jufllie
feclude thame of thair defyre of delay, becaus the Dittay this day produced be him, wes fo different
from the tenour of the ould Letteris, in many fubftantiall heidis, and did fo aggi'avat the cryme, be
many circumllances, nowayes mentioned in the former Letteris, that it wes eafie to my Lord Juflice
and the Lord Alfeffouris to difcerne, that no thing conteaned in the former Letteris, could have gotin
thame information to prepaire thair Defenfes aganis the tenour of the Dittay now layd to thair chairge.
Which, being confidered be the Lord Juflice and Affeffouris, and the auld Letteris and prefent Dittay
exactlie conferred ; '-' be Interlocutour, thay ordained prefent proces, refufing to give the Defendaris
any vther copie of the Dittay, or delay of proces, till the nixt day.^

II. Proceedings before the Privy Council of Scotland, hi reference
to the Feuds and Conflicts recorded m the lyreceding Tried, &^c,

(i.) Warrant of Privy Council, (Apud Edinburgh , Decimo tercio Decemhris, 1601,^ commanding
the Earl of CoJJiUis to fet Mure of Auchindrane and others at liberty.
FoRSAMEKiLL as it is vnderfland to the Lordis of Secrete Counfall, that at the lait Conflict and
Combat, quhilk hapnit and fell out betuix Johxne Eri.e of Cassillis, and certane his freindis, on
the ane pairt ; and Gilbert Kennedy of Bargany, and certane his freindis, on the vther pairt, vpoun
the ellevint day of December inflant ; the faid Erie tuik and apprehendit Mure of Auchindrane, Dauid Kennedy of Maxueljtotm, and certane vthers of the faid Laird of Auchindrane and
Barganyis feruandis ; and prefentlie lies tbame in his cuftodie and keiping : And in refpect of the
"Slauchter and bluid quliilk hapnit and fell out at the faid Conflict, it is verie fufpitious that the faid
perfonis fould be fufferit to remane in the povvar and handis of the faid Erie. Tiiairfoir, the faidis
Lordis Ordanis Letteris to be direct, chairgeing the faid Erie of Cajfdlis to defifl and ceis fra all proceiding aganis the perfonis foirfaidis, tane and apprehendit be liim at the faid Conflict, be vertew of
his office of Bail5erie, or of ony powar or commiffioun grantit to him for that effect; difchairgeing him

' The practice of this Tribunal. ' Collated; compared with each other. ' Here the Narrative ends

abruptly. As the Report of the Trial is so full, it is likely that the writer had abandoned his original intention of
giving a report of the proceedings which took place at the Trial — but merely to resume his Narrative, and continue
■it down to the period of their execution. This, however, if ever completed, has unfortunately been kept out of the
scrolls. An account of the subsequent conduct of these atrocious criminals between the period of their condemnation
and execution, must have possessed great interest.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 171

thairof and of his office in tliat pairt : As alfua, cliairgeing the faid Erie to caus fett the faid Laird of
Auchindrane and Dauid Kennedy of Maxueljioun, and all vtheris perfonis tane be him at the faid
Conflict, at frie libertie, within the toun of Air, without ony violence or harme to be maid to tharae
be the way, within tuentie four houris nixt efter the chairge ; vnder the pane of rebellioune, &c. And,
gif he failjie, &c., to denunce him rebel), &c.

(ii.) Warrant of Privy Council, (^Apud Hulyruidhous, quarto Februarij, 1607,) to denounce John

Mure of Auchindrane and others.
Sederunt.
Lennox, Fyvie, Lowdoun, Kinlofs, Previe feill, Kilfyth,

Chancellar, Vchiltrie, Maifler of El- llaliruidhous, Aduocat, Tracquair,

Angus, Newbottlc, phingftoun, Thefaurar, Collectour, Brunt-Iland,

Mar, Spynie, Rofs, Comptrollar, Clericus Regiftri, Sir Patrik MurWyntoun, Roxburgh, Dunkeld, Jullice-Clerk, Elimofinar, ray.

Anent oure fouerane lordis Letteris, raifed at the inllance of Sir George Home of Spott, knycht,
his Maiefleis Thefaurer, and Mr Thomas Hammiltoune of Drumcairne, his Maiefleis Aduocat, for his
hieues enterefe ; makand mentioun : That quhair, vpoun the ellevint day of December initant, Johne
Mure of Auc/midrane, Thomas Kennedy of Drummurchy, Hew Kennedy of Bennan, Walter Mure
of Cloncard, Hector Kennedy in Bargany, Johne M^alexander in Auchingregane, Thomas M'alexander
his broder, James Bannatyne in Chapeldonane, Johne Catheairt of Carltoun, Johne Cathcart c^ounger
of Carltoun, Johnne Ecclis of Kildonane, Williame Irwing, Thomas Wallace feruitour to the Laird of
Bargany, Johne M'alexander of Dalreoch, Thomas Dalrumpill brother to the Laird of Stair, Gilbert
Kennedy in Pynmachir, Gilbert Ramfay feruitour to the Laird of Bargany, Mofes Lokhart brother to
the Laird of Bar, Dauid Kennedy in Maxvelftone, Alexander Kennedy fone to Hew Kennedy in
Craigneill, Robert Kennedy feruitour to Walter Mure of Cloncard, Mairtene Wilfomi in Newwark,
Robert Campbell in Carmychell, Williame Cauldwell of Lochirmofs, Williame Kennedy in Garfer,
Johne Mure of Craigfkeane, Johne Mure in Quhytleyis, Robert W^allace of Holmifloun, George Angus
notar in Air, Symone Gilmour thair, Peter Hammiltoun tliair, Andro Kennedy tliair, Henry Dalrumple thair. Hew Kennedy thair, James Blair thair, Johne Blair thair, George Dumbar thair, George
M'almont thair, James Dumbar thair, and .... Kennedy cowpar thair, with convocatioun of his
liienes leigeis, to the nowmer of ... . perfonis; all bodin in feir of weir, with jakis, cordettis,
fecrettis, lancis, and vtheris waponis, inuojiue, and with mufcattis, hacquebuttis, and piilolettis, prohibit to be worne be the lawis of this realme, Actis of Parliament and Secrete Counfall, come
furth of the burgh of Air, towardis the toun of Mayboill, refoluit and difpofit to haue attemptit fome
heich interpryfe aganis Johne Erle of Cassillis, in cais thay had found him vpoun the feildis:
Lykes as, thay perfaving the faid Erie and fome of his frendis and fervandis to be vpoun the feildis,
befyd the toun of MayboU, thay immediatlie fet vpoun thame, fchot and difcbairgit a nowmer of mufcattis, haquebuttis and pillolettis aniang thame, qutiairwilh thay flew vmq'" .... Spence, maifler of
boulhald to the faid Erie, and hurt and woundit findrie vtheris of his fervandis : Quhairthrow, as thay
haue convocat his hienes leigis in amies, without powar or commidioun, fua haue thay violat his hienes
lawis and Actis of Parliament, maid aganis the beiring and weiring of hacquebuttis and piflolettis ; and
with thatj thay haue brokin his hienes peace, to the diflurbanceand fchaikin lowfe of the haill ellaitof
that cuntrey, without remeid be prouydit. And anent the chairge gevir^to the faidis Johne Mure
OF Auchindrane, &c. to haue compeirit perfonallie, befoir the Kingis Maieflie and Lordis of Secrete
Counfall, at ane certane day bigane, to haue anfuerit to the premillt3s, and to haue vndL'Hyne fic ordour
as fould haue bene tane thairanent; as alfua, tuicheing the obferuatioun of his hienes peace and keiping
of guid reuU and quyetnes in the cuntrey, vnder the paine of rebellioun and putting of thame to the
home : With certi6catioun to thame, and (^if) thay fail3eit, Letteris fould be direct Jiuiplicitcr to put

172 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

thatne thairto : Lyke as at mair lentli is conlenit in the faid Lettcris, executionis and indorfationis thairof. Quliili<is being callit, and the faidis Peifewaris oompeiiand perfonallie, and the faidis Johne Mure
of Auchindrane, &c. being oftymes callit and not con)peiiand, The Lordis of Secrete Counfall thairfoir Ordains Letteris to be direct, to denunce thame rebellis^ and put thame to the home, and to
efcheit.

(iii.) Decreet of Absolvitor, (Apud Ilaliruid/ioiis, qu'into Fehruarij, 1602,) by the Privy
Council, in favor of John Earl of Cassillis and others, '■for convocatioun of his hienes
lieges, and beiring and tveiring of hacquebuttis and pi/iolettis, breking of his hie?ies peace.'

Sederunt.
Chancellar, Fyvie, Blantyre, Secretar, Prevey feill, Kilfyth,

Ergyll, Lowdonn, Haliruidhous, Comptrollar, Aduocat, Sir Patrik Murray?

Angus, Roxburgh, Thefaurar, Collectour, Tracquair, Elimofinar.

Anent oure fouerane lordis Letteris, raifed at the inflance of Sir George Home of Spot, knycht,
hie hienes thefaurer, and Mr Thomas Hamniiltoun of Drumcairne, his Maiefleis Aduocat, for his hienes interefle ; niakand mentioim : Tiiat quhair, vpoun the ellevint day of December inftant, Johnne
Erle of Cassillis, Johne Corrie of Kelwod, Hew Kennedy of Penqhuirry, Johne Dauidfoun of
Pennyglen, Oliver Baird of Cullein3ie, Patrik M'ilveane elder of Gremmat, Johne M'ilveane 30unger
of Gremmat, Hew Kennedy of Garryhorne, vtherwayis callit the Guidman of the Ballot, George
Fergufoun of Thraif, Alexander Schaw tutour of Gremmat, Johne Mure of Wodland, Johne Mure of
Kingmarloch, Johne Dik of Barbefburie,' Hew Kennedy of Dangar, Anthone Kennedy 50unger of
Barfalloch, Johne Mure merchant in Mynyboill (Maybole), Quintene Crawfurd younger of Silliholl,
Johne Kennedy of Smetoun, Williame Kennedy of Turneberry, Johne Campbell in Barnefurd, Johne
Smyth younger in CaffiUis, Johne Calderwode in Girmeriloune, Johne Fultoune in Giltryhill, Johne
Fultoune in Mofend, Alexander Baxter porter, Williame Harlaw hagbutter, Robert Fultoun in Giltryhill, Johne Fultoune in Bargennoch, Dauid Fultoun his brother, Thomas Fultoune in Giltrie, Thomas Wode in CafTiUis, Quintene Tod in CafllUis, James Dauidfoun in Burnemoith, Johne Dauidfoun
his fone, Johne M'colme in M'"colmefloun, Johne Malcome in Blairbouy, Johne Bell in M^'colmefloune,
Thomas ^lortoune in Caffillis, Johne Mortoun his broder thair, Johne M'cary thair, Johne Smyth ia
Dalrumple-holnie, Williame Huntar thair, James Corry in Bray of Dalrumple, Dauid M'"quhorta in
Batlewand, William Campbell in Bra thair, Robert Cunynghame in Bateiftoun, Johne Smyth in Drumgoblis, &c." all men, tennentis, fervandis, and proper dependaris vpoun the faid Erie, with convocatioun of his iNIaietteis leigeis, to the nowmer of hundreth perfonis, all bodin in feir of weir,

witli jakis, fleil-bonnettls, corflettis, lancis, and vtheris waponis invafiue, and with hacquebuttis and
pillolettis, prohibite to be worne be the lawis of this realme and Actis of Parliament; come in hoflile
and weirlyk maner furth of the toun of Mayboill, and lay at await for vmq'^' Gilbert Kennedy of
Bargany, his freindis and fervandis, as thay wer comeing the hie way fra the burgh of Air towardia
the faid Lairdis awne duelling hous, and invadit and perfewit thame of tliair lyffis, fchot and difchairgit a nowmer of hacquebuttis and pillolettis at thame, quhairwith findrie of tlie faid Laird of Barganyis cumpany wer hurt and woundit ; and at that fame tyme, thay fchamefullie, cruellie, and vnmercifulliey/ru' thejaidvmq'^ Gilbert Kennedy of Bargany : Quhairthrow, as thay haue convocat bis
Jiienes liegeis in airmes, without ony lauchfull Warrand or authoritie, fua haue tliay violat his hienes
lawis and Actis of Parliament maid aganis the beiring and weiring of hacquebuttis and piftolettis, and
with that, thay liaue brokin and diifoluit his hienes peace in that cuntrey; quhairby mony inconvenientis are lyke to fall out, to the trouble and difquyeting of the haill cuntrey, without remeid be provydit. And anent the chairge gevin to the faidis Johne Erie of Caflillis, Capitane Johne Forrejier,

' Barbestoune. * A List of one hundred and thirty more names follows. Tliey are unnecessary to be inserted

here, though they might no doubt be of some local interest. None of them are persons of rank.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 173

Mr Criftopher Cokburne, Quintene Craufurd, Patrik Reidpeth, Williame Maitland, Williame Flemyng, Alexander Forbes, houfliold-men to tlie faid Erie, Antbone Kennedy ^oimger of Balfcberoch,
Artbour Kennedy bis brotber, Mr Williame Boyd, Andro Cuningbame, Dauid Girvan, Tbomas Kennedy, Dauid Catbcairt, Alexander Baxter, Williame Harlaw, Dauid Craufurd, Dauid Gray, Jobne
Blair, alfua bis houflioldmen and fervandis, Jobne Corrie of Kelwode, Hew Kennedy of Penqubirry,^
kc. to haue compeirit perfonallie : As alfua anent tbe cbairge gevin to tbe faid Erie of Caifillis, to
haue enterit and prefentit tbe perfonis particularlie aboue writtin befoir tbe Kingis Maieilie and Lordia
of Secreit Counfall at ane certane day bigane, to baue anfuerit to tbe premiffes, and to baue vnderlyne
fie ordour as fould baue bene tane tbairanent ; as alfua, tuicbeing tbe obfeniatioun of bis bienes peace
and keiping of guid ruell and quyetnes in the cuntrey, beirefter, vnder tbe paine of rebellioun and
putting of tbame to tbe borne, witb certificatioun to tbame and^ tbay fail5eit, Letteris fould be direct
Jimpliciter to put tbame tbairto ; lyk as at niair lentb is contenit in tbe faidis Letteris, executionis, and
indorfationis tbairof. QuniLKis being callit, and tbe faidis perfewaris compeirand perfonallie, and
the faid Johne Erie of CoJfdUs being lykwayis perfonallie prefent, for him felf, and in name of the
remanent defendaris foirfaidis ; quba producit tua Commiffionis, fubfcryuit be bis Maieflie, and pafl
his bienes Regifter and Signet : The ane aganis Blaquhcoie yoimger,^ Girvenmanis, Hew Kennedy of
Bennan, Tbomas bis brother, and Walter Mure of Cloncard, qubais names ar infert in tbe faid Commiflioun witb bis Maiefteis awne band, knawing thair mifdeidis, geving powar to the faid Erie of Cafflllis to convocat bis bienes liegeis, and to fearcbe, feik, tak, apprehend and perfew, icith fyre and
Jioord, tbe perfonis aboue writtin, and to weir bacquebuttis and piflolettis to that effect ; as the faid
Commiflioun, of tbe dait the nynt day of Julij, the 5eir of God I'".Vj'^. and ane 5eiris, at lentb beiris :
And tbe vther Commiflioun, direct to tbe faid Erie, for tbe perfute, taking, and apprehending of Robert Gordoim of Barnerino, Alexander Gordoun of the Hillis, Williame INP'neilie, Alexander M'kie
of Balfeir, and Tbomas Kennedy of Drummurchy, as fufpect gilty of Murthour, Oppreflioun, and
RefTett of Thift; as in tbe faid Commiflioun, geving powar to the faid Erie to convocat liis bienes
liegeis, afliege houflis, raife fyre, and perfew tbe faidis perfonis witb all extremitie, and beiring dait
the tuentie-ane day of July I'^.Vj''. and ane, at lentb is contenit : Be vertew of tbe quhilkis Commiffionis, the faid Erie allegit, that he had laucbfullie proceidit in the liaill actloun aboue writtm, qubairvpoun he wes accufet, feing tbe faid Thomas Kennedy of Drummurchy and tbe faid Walter Mure of
Cloncard, and dyuerfe vtberis his Maiefteis rebellis, vpone qubome tbe faid Erie prefentlie producit
Horning deulie execute and rogiftrat, and qubaftandis 5it at tbe borne vnrclaxt, wer prefent and vpoun
tbe grund witb the faid vmq'*^ Gilbert Kennedy of Bargany, tbe tyme foirlaid ; and the faid Erie,
being in executioun of his Maiefteis Commilfionis, in fearcbing and feiking of the faid Tbomas, and
of tbe remanent perfonis thairin contenit, all that fell out in that mater wer laucbfull. Quhairunto
it wes anfuerit be tbe faid Mr Tbomas Hammiltoun, that the faid firft Commiflioun can be na Warrand
nor authoritie to tbe faid Erie ; becaus that lang befoir the coniniitting of the crymes aboue writtin,
qubairvpoun he is now accufit, the fame Commiflioun wes difchairgit be his Maioftie, for the baill
perfonis thairin contenit, except Young Blairqubane ; and lauthfuU intimatioun and publication wes
maid to the faid Erie of tbe faid difcbairge, lang befoir tbe faid tyme, viz. in tbe moneth of Auguft
laftbypaft ; qubilk tbe faid Aduocat referrit to tbe faid Erles aitb : And fua, in refpect of that difcbairge, and that tbe faid Laird of Blairqubane Younger wes not in cumpany with the faid Laird
of Bargany the tyme foirfaid, tbe fame Commiflioun can be na Warrand to tbe faid Erie : And as
to the laft Commiflioun, it was anfuerit be the faid Aduocat, that the fame can be na fufticient
Warrand to the faid Erie ; becaufe the fame Commiflioun wes not deulie regiftrat aganis the faid Thomas Kennedy of Drummurchy, hot bis name infert thairin, lang efter the fame wes part the Hegifter

' Here the remainder of tbe names are rej)eate(l. ' If. ' 15]air([ulian.

174 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D, 1611.

and Signet : And tliair was na powar nor licence contenit in the faid lafl Commiffioun for beiring and
weiring of liacquebuttis and piflolettis ; and feiiig liis Maiefteis Regifter is the reuU be the quhilk the
faid CommilTionri foidd have been directit, the fame can be na Wairand to the faid Erie : Vuto the
quhilk it wes replyit be the faid Erie, that, albeit the firft Commiffioun wes difchairgit aganis the haill
perfonis contenit thairin, except Young Blaquhane, ^it it llude in full force and effect aganis him ;
and he being his Maiefteis rebell, and continewing difobedient to his Maieftie, and being a ordinary
hantar and keipar of cumpany with the faid Laird of Bargany, oftymes of befoir and fenfyne, and fufpectit to haue bene with him that day, lie had gude Warrand and powar to fearche him quhaireuer he
mycht get knawlege of his being: And as to the faid laft Cominiffioiui, it wes replyit be the faid Erie
that he had a fpecial ^^'arrand and directioun fra his Maieftie, to the Keipar of the Regifter, to regifter
the faid Commiffioun, as it wes producit to the Regifter ; quhilk Warrand he producit befoir the
faidis Lordis ; fua that it was lauchfull to him to infert ony names thairin, quha wer rebellis, or gilty
of fie crymes, in his plefour : And albeit tltair wes na mentioun maid in the laft Commiffioun of hacquebuttis and piftolettis, 3it, in refpect of the firft Commiffioun ftanding vndifcharget, as faid is, and that
the laft Commiffioun ^if him powar to vfe all weirlyk ingyne quhilk he could deuyfe for apprehenfioun of the perfonis thairin contenit, the executioun of the fame, in forme and maner as It fell out,
was lauchfull : And forder, it wes replyit be the faid Erie, that he being the ordinar Judge and Magiftrat of the cuntrey, and not a privat perfone, thair fould na fie difchairge haue bene purcheft quhill '
firft he had bene wairnit to the geving thairof, and that the perfonis, in quhais fauour the fame wes
grantit, had gevin thair obedience to his Maieftie, and purgit thame felfhs of the Horningis quhilkis
thay vnderlay. With the quhilkis Anfueris and Replyis, and dyuerfe vtheris the rellbnis and allegationis of baiththe faidis pairteis, the Lordis of Secrete Counfell being weill and ryplie advyfet, — The
Lordis of Secrete Counfall Findis and Declairis the tua Commiffionis aboue written, producit be
the faid Erie, to be guid, valid, and fufficient ; and that thairby he had gude powar and authoritie to
fearche and feik the faidis perfonis, and vfe the fame Commiffionis. And thairfoir the faidis Lordis
A{i)o\\ze\?i- Jimpliciter the faidis Defenderis fra that pairt of the faidis Letteris, tuicheing the convocatioun of his hienes liegeis, and beireing and weiring of hacquebuttis and piftolettis, and broking of his
liienes peace : And Decernis thame quyte thairfra in all tyme comeing, and of all offence (that) may
be impute to him in the vfing of the faidis Commiffionis.

(iv.) Act of Privy Council, The Laird of Cidlane againji Williame M'^Phadrik?
Anent our fouerane lordis Letteris, reafit at the inftance of James Kennedy of Culzeane, makand mentioun : That quhair, albeit his Maieftie, be the fpace of aucht yeiris fyne, maid and fet furth
diuerfe edictis and Proclamatiounis, prohibiting and difchargeing all his heynes leigeis, that nane of
thame fould re ftet, fupplie, nor intercommoun with Thomas Kennedy, Thomas M'^ Alexander, Thomas
Wallace, and William Irving, during the tyme of thair rebellioun and remaneing at the borne, for the
odious, cruell, and deteftable Murthour of vmq''' Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzeane, father to the faid
complenair, conimittit be thame, in maner fpecifeit in the faid Proclamatioun, vnder certane panes mentionat thairintill. Nochtwithrtanding, it is of treuth, that William M'^Phedrice, fervitour to the Laird
of Girvanmania, hes continewalHe, and almaift ilk day fen the dait of the faid Proclamatioun, aganis
the tennour of the fame, reffett, fuppleit, and intercommonit with the faid Thomas M^Alexa.tider, and
remanent rebellis abouenanieit, within his awin duelling houfe in Air ; hes kei|)it niony tryftis and
meitingis with him, as namelie, vpoun the xxvj Junij, I"'.Vj. and aucht yeiris, the faid Thomas M' Alexander being in his dwelling hous in Air; and informatioun thairof being maid to Johnne Erll of
Cassillis and the faid Complenair, and thay haueing warrand, power, and commiffioun for the perfute of the faid Thomas M' Alexander, and being than vpoun the feildis agaitward* towards him, it is

' Until. 2 Absolves; acquits. ^ Jieyist. Seer. Cone. (Acta), Aug. 3, 1G09. * On the road or c/ait to

apprehend him,

44 & 9 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 175

of treutli that the faid William M^'Phediice, being vpoun the knawlege and counfall of the faid Erll
and the faid Complenaris faid purpois aganis the faid Thomas, he lap on hoife and convoyit him felf
fecritelie away to the faid hous, quhair the faid Thomas wes for the tyme, and thair intercommvnit
with him, reveilllt, and difclofit vnto liim the faid purpois and plat layd doun for his perfute : And
that he mycht the more fauflie efcliew, the faid William M'phedrice horfit him on his awin horfe, and
pat him away; in heich and proud contempt of his Maiefleis auctoritie and lawis. For the quhilk the
faid Williame audit to be perfewit and pvnift in his perfone and guidis, to the terrour of vtheris to
commit the lyke heirafter. And anent the chairge gevin to the faid William JM^'phedrice to haue compeirit perfonalie before the Lordis of Secrite Counfall this prefeut thrid day of Auguft inflant, to haue
aufuerit to this complaint, and to haue hard and fene fic ordour tane thairanent, as appertenit ; vndir
the pane of rebellion and puting of him to the home: with certificatioun to him and^ he failjet, Letteris fould be d'lvectjimplicifer to put him thairto ; lyke as at mair lenth is contenit in the faidis Letteris, executionis^ and indorfationis thairof; quhilkis being callit, and the faid perfewar compeirand
perfonalie, and the faid Defender being oftymes callit, and not compeirand, The Lordis of Secrite
Counfall thairfoir Ordanis Letteris to be direct to Officearis of airmes, fchireffis in that pairt, chargeing thame to pas and denunce the faid Williame M'^Phedrice his Maiefleis rebell, and to put him to
the borne ; and to efchete, 8fc.

(v.) Act of Privy Council, The Kinyis Aduocat againjt Johnne Mure?

Anent our fouerane lordis letteris, reafit at the inflance of Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie,
knycht, aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intereffe, makand mentioun : That quhair the
cruell, unworthie, and deteflabill Murthour of vmqi'^ Sm Thomas Kennedy o/" Cw/^eawe, hmjcht^
and of vmq'" Williame Dalrumple, fone to Williame Dalrumple in Aire, haueing thir mony jeiris
bigane lyne obfcure and hid, and no perfyte difcouerie nor knawledge being had of thefe who wer the
cheiff and principall divifaris, practizaris, and confpiratouris in the fame Murthour, the faid Aduocat is
now informed that the perfonis following, thay ar to fay, Johnne Mure, cook in Auchindrane, Tliomas Wallace, feruitour to Avmhiwdtv&nQ, Andre M^alexander, fometyme feruitour to James Bellindane^
in Chapildonane, James 31'^caig, fone to Adam M'caig, in Girvane, and George Small, in Plefance,
doeth knaw fomething in that mater, and can gif fome liclit, evidence, and probable prefumptioun and
circumftanceis, for cleiring of the fame : Quhairfore, neceifar it is, that thay be examinat heirvpone, in
prefence of the Lordis of his heynes Preuey Counfall. And anent the charge gevin to the faidis Johne
Mure, cook, Thomas Wallace, Andro M^ Alexander, James M'caig, and George Small, in Plefance, to
have compeirit perfonalie, befoir the Lordis of Secrite Counfall, this prefent xx day of Juiiij inllant, to
have anfuerit to fuche thingis as fuuld have bene fpeirit at thame tuitching the Murthour of the perfonis foirfaidis, vnder the pane of rebellioun and puting of thame to the home ; with certificatioun, &c.
The Lordis ordanis Letteris to be direct, &c., chairgeing to pas and denunce the faid perfonis, who
compeirit not, his Maielleis rebellis, and put thame to the home ; and to el'chete, &c.'
(vi.) SusPENsiouN, James Bannatyne, in Chapeldonall.^

Anent oure fouerane lordis Letteris, reafit at the inftance of James Bannatyne in Chapeldonall,
makand mentioun, That quhair as, he is informed he is denuncit rebell and put to the home, be virtew
of Letteris, reafit at the inflance of Johne Evil of Cajfillis and Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Bynnie,
knyS his Maiefleis Aduocat for his heynes intereffe, flfor the coiuplenair his allegeit not conipeiring perfonallie before the Lordis of Secrite Counfall, at ane certain day bygane, to haue anfuerit to aiie complaint maid be the faid Erll and Lord Aduocat vpoun him, tuiclieing hisallegit beiring and weiring of

' An, if. 2 Beg. Seer. Cone. (Acto), Jun. 20, IGIl. ' IJamiatyiic. At tliis prriod the name Daniiatyne

was iiifiitfeiently spelt, Ballendyiie, IJollciiden, l?a!matyiii', an<l Ballaiityiie. ^ A similar entry occ-urs, of the same

date, to denounce ' Thomas Muke, sone to {Johne) Mure ofyliic/iindrai/nc, and Andko Simlak, lutlff-hrother to the
Laird of Auchindrane, for not appearing to answer at ane certane day bygane.' ^ lieijinl. iSccr. Cone. {Acta),

Sep. 27, 1611.

176 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

hagbuttis aiul piflolettis, and invaiding and perfewing of Hew Kennedy of Garrihorne and Thonias
M'^quhary, boith feruitouris to the faid Erll, and fchooting and difcbairging of piftolettis at tliarae, &c.
The Lords fiifpended the faid L.etteTS,Jinipliciter, on the ground of Bannatyue's not having been cited
to appear, &c.

III. Proceedings in Parliament, as to the Forfeiture of Thomas Kennedy
of JJrummurchleyfor the J3urning of Auchinjbidl, — Murder of Sir Thomas
Kennedy^ ^c.

(i.) The Forfaltrie of Thomas Kennedie.

Apr. 26, 1G04-. — Sir Thonias Hamiltone, King's Advocate, took inflruinents of the Production of
the Summons of Treafon and executions, &c. in Parliament.^

Jul. 11, 1604. — The Summons and other documents were again produced in Parliament,^ which
were of new veriBed in prefence of the Lord Commiflioner, (John Earl of Montrofe,) and haill
Eftaittis : And ficlyk, the laid Aduocat produceil Lettres of Relaxatioun, relaxand the faid Thomas
Kennedie frome all proces of Horning led and deducet aganis him, for quhatfumeuir caufe. And
thaireftir, the faid Tliomas Kennedie being thryfe callit at the tolbuith windo, to haue anfwerit to the
faid Sunimondis of Treaffoun, he comperit nocht to anfuer thairto, and thairfoir the faid Aduocat
(eftir that the foirfaid caus of the faid Summondis of Treaffoun wes fundin relevant be the faidis haill
Eftaittis aganis the faid Thomas Kennedie of Drummurchie) fFor preving of the pointis of the faid
Summondis of Treaffoun aganis tlie faid Thomas Kennedie, and of the reflbun and caus contenit thairin, repetit the Depofitiounes of the Witneffes relfauit, admittit, fvvorne, and examinat in prefens of the
faidis haill Eftaittis vpoun the foirfaid reflbne and caufe ; and alfe repetit the notorietie of the fact of
the Burning, and the faid Thomas Kennedie acknawlegeing his awin giltines, and taking of the faidis
crymes vpoun him, throw being fugitiue and denuncit Rebell for nocht comperance befoir our faid
fouerane lordis Juftice and Lordis of his hienes Privie Counfall refpectiue, in maner contenit in the
Lettres of Horning rafit thairvpoun : And lykwayis, the faid Aduocat producit diuerfe vlheris wryttis
and probatiounes, for preving of the faid Summondis of Treaffoun, and defyrit the faidis Eftaittis of
Parliament to advyfe the foirfaidis probatiounes, and to gif furth thair Dome and Sentence thairintill,
according to juftice. And thaireftir, the foirfaidis haill probationis and Summondis of Treaffoun being
red, hard, fene and confiderit be the faidis Eftaittis, and they thairwith being ryplie advyfit, the faidis
haill Eftaittis of Parliament Findis, Decernis, and Declaris that the faid Thomas Kennedie of Drummurchie hes comniittit Tkeassoux, in Kaifing of the faid Eyre, and Burning of the faid Place of
AuCHiNSOULL, in maner fpeceifeit in the foirfaid Summondis: Ani> thairfoir, Decernis and Ordanis
THE Dome vnderwrittin to be prouuncit and gevin furth aganis him, be the mouth of Dauid Lyndefay,
dempfter : Off the quliilk Dome, the tennour followis.

Dome. This Courte of Parliament fchawes for Law, that the faid Thomas Kennedie of Drummurchie hes committit Treaffoun in Raifing of Eyre and Burning of the faid Place of Auchinfoull,
pertenyng to the faid Duncane Craufurde, the tyme and in maner fpecefeit in the faid Summondis of
Trealfoun, perl'ewit be his hienes faid Aduocat, for his grace entres, aganis him : And thairfoir Findis
and Declaris, That the faid Thomas Kennedie lies amittit, and tynt, and Foirfaltit for euir, all his
landis, heretages, rowmes, pofleffionis, gudis, and geir quhatfumeuir, belanging to him ony maner of
way, and quhilkis he hes, had, niiclit haue, or clame, within this Realme of Scotland : And Decernis
the famin to haue appertenit and to appertene to our laid fouerane lord, to be confifcat, and to remane
with his hienes, as his propirtie, in all tyrae cumming. And als Findis and Declaris, that the faid
Thomas Kennedie hes amittit and tynt his fame, lionouris, and dignitie : And he to be pvnift as
ane Tratour, conforme to the Lawes of this realme. And this I gif for Dome.
' Acta Pari iv. 260. » Acta Pari iv. 267.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I77

(ii.) The Summondis of Tressoux ofvmq'^ Walter Mure of Q,ho^c xxk-qii^ pajl fra fimplio'Utr

he oxir fouerane Lordis Aduocat}
Jul. 11, 1604. — The quhilk daylNIailler Thomas Rollok, depute for Sir Thomas Hammyltoun of
Monkland, knycht, Aduocat to our fouerane Lord, and in his hienes name reproducit, in prefens of
ane nohill and potent lord, Johne Erie of Montrofe, Lord Grahame and JMukdok, Great Commiflionar
of this prefent Parliament, and in prefens of the haill Eftaittis thairof, the Suramondis of Treaffoun
vnderwrittin ; quhilkis wer producit be the faid Aduocat, ofbefoir, at Edinburgh, in prefens of the
Lordis of Articlis, vpoun the tuentie aucht day of Aprile laft bipafl : Off the quhilk Summondia of
Treaflbun the tennour followes.^

[Summons of Treason ogainji Thomas Kennedy of Drummurclde and Walter Mure of Cloncarde}~\
Jacobus, Dei Gracia Rex Anglorum, Scotorum, Gallorum et Hibernorum, &c. Fideique defenfor :
Dilectis noftris Leoni Regi Armorum, Albanie, Snawdoun, Merchemont, Rothefay, Hay, Rofs, Bute,
Carrik, Ormond, Vnicorne, figniferis ; Dauid Bryfoun^ Robert Stewart, Alexandro Dowglas et Jacobo Chalmeris clauigeris noflris ; necnon Joanni Ferguffoun et Joanni Wilkefoun nuncijs, et eorum
cuilibet, coniunctim et diuifim. Vobis precipimus et mandamus quatenus legitime fummoneatis ThoMA^i Ke'shevie de Drnnwwrc/iie, fratrem germanum quondam Gilberti Kennedie de Barganie, perfonaliter, fi ejus perfonalem prefentiam habere poteritis, feu aliter apud locum fui domicilij et habitationis; ac etiam apud cruces forales burgorum noltrorum de Air, Irving, MayboU ac aputl portus iioltros de Air et Leith, et alia loca neceflaria, fuper premonitione fexaginta dierum, eo quod dictus
Thomas de prefenti extra regnum noftrura Scotie morari dicitur. Necnon fummoneatis legitime RoBERTUM ^NIuRE, fratrem germanum et heredem apparentem quondam Walteri Mure de Cloncarde,
Joanetam Mure eius fororem germanam, perfonaliter, fi eorum perfonalem prefentiam habere
poteritis, vel fecus apud locum fuorum domiciliorum et habitationis ; ac etiam dictos Robertum et
Jonetam aliofque agnatos et cognates diclj quondam Walteij Mure de Cloncard, omnefque alios interefle habentes vel habere pretendentes, necnon Tutores et Curatores dictorum Robert] et Jonete Mures,
fi quos habent, apud dictos cruces forales dictorum burgorum noflrorum de Air, Irving, Mayboll, et
alia loca necelTaria, quod compareant coram nobis et noflris Commiffionarijs et Locum tenentibus^ necnon coram Regni noflri Scotie Ordinibus, Edinburgi, vicefimo die menfis Aprilis proxime futuri, in
Parliamento noflro incipiendo decimo die dicti menfis, hora caufarum, cum continuatione dierum ;
ad refpondendum nobis, necnon ad inflantiam dilecti et fidelis noflri confiliarij Domini Thome
Hammyltoun de Monkland, militis, noflri Aduocatj, pro noflro intereffe, dictum viz. Tiiomam
Kennedie de Drummurchie, pro fua nefaria, fcelefla, facinorofa, et proditoria Occifione et Interemptione quondam Thome Kennedie de Coiff militis'' per fe fuos complices et confortes fecum confpiratores in dicto Homicidio, per fummum nefas vt fequitur, perpetrato, vndecimo die meniis Maij;
anno domini 1602: Necnon pro fuo fceleflo, nefario, et manifello Furto, cum violenta rapina coniuncto, vulgariter vocat. Stuth-reijf, marfupij feu crumene dicti quondam Thome Kennedie de Coifl'
militis, cum magna pecunie fumma auro et argento fignato, fummam duorum millium mercarum
extenden. quam dictus quondam Thomas cum eo portabat; cum varijs annulis aureis, geramatis et
alijs, ac multis fibulis aureis diploid! tunice et femoralibus dicti quondam Tiiome conlutis, ad valorem mille libranim extenden. in ipfb actu Homieidij perpetrat. : Necnon pro I'ua proditoria et
nefaria Obfidione, per feet fuos complices, ad numerum quinquaginta virorum ai'matorum, Manfiouis et
Maneriei terrarum de Auchinsoull, jacen. infra vicecomitatum noflrum de Air; ad quod, per occafionem fubfcriptam, dilecta confanguinea noflra Jeanna Comitissa de Cassellis, coniitata li'ptem
vel octo feruis ac comitibus confugerat, falutis fue caufa, cum dicta Domina Jeanna et eius ferui iter

' Acta Pari. I\'. 271. * Here the Summons which luis already been given is inserted. ' To prevent

repetition, tliis Summons (which is a transcript of the other ag^ainst Drummurchie, with the additions relating to
Cloncard) lias been preferred. * A mistake for Cassilis. However, Sir Thomas was often so designed.

VOL. IIL Z

178 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

facerent adomicilio fuo de Inciie in Gallouidia, verfus aliudfuum domicilium in Villa de Mayboll,
in halliatu de Carrik et infra viceconiitatum noftium de Air, decimo octauo die menfis Maij vltinio elapfi,
1C03. Et pro maleuolo, crudeli, nefario, abliominabili, et fcelefto Incendio iNIaneriej, in quod, caufa
euitandi periculi mortis, dicta Domina Jeanna ComitiHa de Caflellis et ferui fui confugerunt; e quamanfione et manerie de Auchinfoull, cum idem manerieni combuflara effent vndique et conflagraret, metu
mortis vehementia flammaruni ot fumi egredi coacti iunt, vbi pofl cgreffum dicte Domine Joanne ComitilFe de Caflellis quondam Hugo Kennedie, frater germanus et heres apparens dilecti noflri confanguinej Joannis Comitis de Cafll-Uis, Domini Kennedie, Joannes M^ilveiane junior de Grwmett, Joannes Dik de Barljaftoun, Andreas Cunynghame in Knokdone, Quintinus Craufurde, Robertus Hay,
Willielmus Kennedie, ferui et comites dicte Comitifll' pro tempore, per dictum Thomam Kennedie de
Drummurcliie et fuos complices captiui facti funt, et vt infra dicitur abducti, et in privatis carceribus
detenti. Et propterea, dictum Thomam ad videndum et audiendum fe crimen Lefe-Maiellatis per
decretnm et cenfuram noftri Parliamenti et regni Scotie Statuum incunifle ; et ideo, tanquam ream,
Lefe-]Maieflatis puniri debere, capitali et vltimo fupplicio ; necnon amiflione omnium bonorum fuorum,
mobilium et immobilium, terrarum et tenementorum, que dictus Thomas in regno noftro Scotie habet,
habere, vel clamare poterit, in futurum. Necnon, dictos Robertum ]Mure, fratrem germanum et her
redom apparentera dicti quondam Walterij Mure de Cloncarde, et Joneta.m Mure eius fororem germanam, omnefque alios cognatos et confanguineos dicti quondam Walteri, ac tutores et curatores diet.
Roberti et Jonete, fi quos habent, omnefque alios intereffe habentes vel habere pretendentes, ad videndum et audiendum, per regni noflri Ordines in Parliamento nollro fupradicto decerni et declarari, quod
dictus quondam Waltenis Mure de Cloncarde fuit et efl reus Lefe-Maiefl;atis, vt qui fuit actor, factor,
et perpetrator diet, criminum cum dicto Thoma Kennedie de Drummurchie modo et forma quibus
infra dicitur. Pro quibus eiufdam quondam Walteri memoria et fama damnari et aboleri debet, ac
eius omnia bona mobilia etimmobilia, terre, tenementa, et omnia alia que habuit in regno noftro Scotie,
vel habere potuit. ad nos pertinere decemi debeat ; et quod ab eifdem dictus Robertus frater et Joneta
eius foror, omnefque alij ab eo defcendentes, debent excludi imperpetuum, propter rationes et caufas
fidjfi-quentes. Propterea quod in Parliamento noftro tento apud burgum noftrum de Edinburgh, in
Scotia, vicefirao nono die raenfis Julij, anno domini 1387, per nos et tres dicti noftri regni Ordines ftatutum eft, quod fi contigerit aliquem fubditorum noftrorum dicti regni Scotie, qui habet terras fibi hereditarie pertinentes, viz. vt vulgariter in dicto ftatuto dicitur oi^y landit man, fore legitime et fecundum juris ordinem, aliquo tempore poft dictum ftatutum futuro, de manifefto furto et vi rapine admifto,
id eft Stouth-reiff' effe couvictos, incurrent propterea crimen et penam Lefe-Maieftatis, hoc eft omifiionem et forisfacturam vite, terrarum, et bonorum ; prout in dicto ftatuto apertiflime continetur, Sed
lie eft in reiveritate, quod dictus Thomas Kennedie de Drummurchie, et prefatus quondam Walterus Mure de Cloncarde, cura fuis complicibus et confortibus, numero feptem, armis, machinis bellicis, et fclopis, prohibitis et lege vetitis, inftructi, et equis infidentes, dicto duodecimo die menfis Maij
1602, exiftentcs Rebelles et ad cornu noftrum pofiti, prout per Literas noftras et denunciationem rebellionis clare conftare poterit; et ex precogitata felonia dictum Thomam Kennedie de CoifF militem,
imparatum et non-opinantem, ac iter facientem, vno feruo comitatum, a domicilio fuo de Coiff" verfus
dictum burgum noftioim de Air, ac Inde profecturum Edinburgum negotiorum fuorum gerendorum
caufa, apud Capellam Sanctj Leonardi nuncupat. dimidio miliaris a dicta Vrbe de Air diftan. aggrefli
iunt, ac eundem invafenint machinis bellicis ac lanceis transBxerunt et crudeliter occiderunt, et furto,
rapina, et vi furtum coraitante, id eft le Stouth-reif, ex marfupio et cruraena dicti quondam Thome
Kennedie de Coiff predictam fummam bis mille marcarum in auro fignato, lie Roif-iiobillis, et Fyvepund-pdces, Angell-nohilli$, et Portingull-doucaltis, violenter furati font et abftulerunt, cum varijs
annulis, gemmatis, ac alijs, et multis fibulis aureis diploidi tunice et femoralibus dicti quondam Thome
confutis, ad valorem mille librarara extenden. Pro quoquidem crimine, coram Jufticiario noftro vocalic

44 & 9 Jac. VI. , CRIMINAL TRIALS. 179

vt lege fubirent, contumaces facti Rebelles declarati funt, et ad cornu noflrum pofiti, prout per Litoras noftras et denunciationem rebellionis fatis clare conftare poterit. Ac etiam ftatutum e(t, per aliud
actum Parliamenti illuftiiffime memorie quondam Jacobi V. Scotorum Regis, avi nollri, tenti et incboati, apud Edinburgh, vicefimo fecundo Januarij, anno ]338, quod fi quis combuferit aliquos in domibus fuis, reus Lefe-Maieftatis erit : Ac etiam, quod omnes Combuftiones domorum vel granorum, et
omnia Incendia voluntaria feu malitiofa, fiant crimina Lefe-Maie<tatis ; idque in odium Incendiariorum, quos leges propter criminis atrocitatem feuerius plecti jubent ; ficut in eodem ftatuto plenius
continetur : Quodquidem ftatutum in Parliamento noftro tento apud Edinburgh, quinto die mcnfis Decembris, anno domini 1367, repetitum et renovatum eft, idque nierito creO.-ente in regno noftro Incendiariorum numero et audacia ; prout in dicto ftatuto pofteriori latius continetur: Sed fie eft, quod
dictus Thomas Kennedie de Drummurchie et dictus quondam Walterus Mure de Cloncarde,
comitati circiter quinquaginta armatis equitibus, per infidias obfiderunt iter dicte dilecte confanguinee
-noftre Jeanne Comitisse de Cassellis, proficifcentis e domicilio de Inche in Gallovidia, in vicecomitatu noftro de Wigtoun, verfus aliud domicilium fuum in Villa de Mayboll et balliatu noftro de
CaiTik et vicecomitatu de Air, die xviij" menfis Maij, anno domini 1603, et equis citatis in dictam dilectam noftram conianguineam, et eius feruos ac comites, impetum facientes, iter et viam publicam
deferere, metu vite fue, compulerunt : Ilia autem cum refvgii caufa verfus Manlionem quandara de
-AuCHiNSOWLL, quam tum mhzh'ii&hdA Duiicanus Crawfurde de Auchinfowllf cum comitibus et feruis
i'uis citatis equis accurreret ; qui locus, cum ad effugium commodus videtur, et viderunt ex eo loco
xJilectam confanguineam noftram feruos et comites eius nifi domo incenfa extrabi non pofte, illico illato
igni domum et eius ambitum vndique incenderunt, e qua crefcente fumo et inumpentibus flammis, ad
extremum periculmxi omnes rodacti, in manus dictorum Latronum Incendiariorumque dilecta noftra
confanguinea cum fuis feruis et comitibus, deditione facta, captiui devcnerunt; ex quibus vnus, nomine Joannes M'grane, flammis fuperatus predictam domum combuftam egreflus priul'quam rel'pirare potuerlt, crudeliter et nefarie gladijs et machinis bellicis, a dictis Tlioraa et quondam Waltero et
complicibus predictis crudeliter inlerfectus eft : Ac reliqui comites dicte noftre confanguinee, viz. Hugo
Kennedy, frater germanus et heres apparens dicti dilecti noftri confanguinei et confijiarij Joannis
domini de CafTellis, Joannes M^ilveyane junior de Grwmett, Joannes Dik de Barbeftoun, Andreas
Cunynghame de Knokdone, Quintinus Craufurde, Robertus Hay, Willelraus Kennedy, per dictos Latrones, Predones, et Incendiarios captiui facti funt, et eoruni arbitrio abductj, et per eos in domibus,
foUalicijs, et Caftris de Ardftinchell, et lie Coiff" de Craignett, infra dictum vicecomitatum noftrum de
Air, proditorie cuftoditi et detenti funt, per dies quindecim, aut eo circiter; Nee ab ilia captiuitate liberati et redempti fuerunt, donee per fe et fidejuffbres fuos obligarentur, quod dictum dilectum confanguineum noftrum Joannem Comitem de Cafiellis, cui vt domino et hero fuo feruire tenebantur
oranino defererent, et fi fecus facerent, magnam pecunie fummam foluturos fe promitterent, compuhi.s
etiam diris feipfos deuouere, fi contra fecifient: In quo^ non folum Latrocinii, Stuthreif, Infidiationis
viarum, ac proditorij Incendii crimine irritati funt ; fed etiam, proditorie Vfurpationis authoritatis noftre reos fefe facerent. Ac vt hec omnia uotoria fiant, idem Thomas Kennedie de Drummurchie ac
dictus quondam Walterus Mure de Cloncarde vocati coram Dominis Secreti Confilij nofiri refponliiri
predicto proditorio crimini Inccndij et Captionis dictarum liberarum perfonarum et liegiorum noftrorum
et aliis fupramentionatis, contumaces eifecti funt ; Ac propterea etiam Rebelles nobis declarati et
denunciati funt ; prout in Literis noftris, ea de re executioni mandatis, latius continetur. Quare, dictus Thomas Kennedie de Drummurchie, ])er Decretum et cenfuram Parliamenti noftri et rejiui
noftri Ordinum crimen Lefe-Maieftatis incurrilie decerni ; et idco, tanquam reus Lefe-Maieftatis puniri
debet capitali et vllimofupplicio, necnon amifiione omnium bonorum fuorum, niobilium et inunobilium,
terrarum, et tenementorum, que dictus Thomas in regno noftro fcscotie habet, vel damare et haherc
poterit in futurum ; ac etiam per dictum noftrum Parliamentum et regui noilri Ordines decerni et

180 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

(leclarari debet, quod dictus quondam Walterus Mure de Cloncarde fuit et eft reus dictj criminis,
Lefe-Majeftatis, vt qui fuerit actor, factor, et perpetrator diet, criminum refpectiue fupramentionat.
cum dicto Thoma Kennedy de Drummurchie, modo et forma antedict. ; pro quibus, etiam eiufdem
quondam Walteri memoria et fama aboleri et damnari debent ; ac etiam eius omnia bona, mobilia et
immobilia, tene et tenementa, et omnia alia que habuit in regno noftro Scotie, vel habere vel clamare
potuit, vel prefatus Robertvs et Joneta agnati, cognati, confanguinei, et omnes ab eo difcendentes, habere vel clamare ])otuerunt, in futurum, ad nos perlinere decerni debent, et ab eifdem dictus Robertus
nunc frater germanus et dicta Joneta foror germana dicti quondam Walteri, et omnes alii ab eo difcendentes, afcendentes, collaterales, et alii quicunque, excludi debent imperpetuum, propter rationes et
caufas I'uprafcriptas ; intimando fupradictis perfonis, et eorum cuilibet, refpectiue, quod fiue dictis die
et loco cum continuatione dierum comparuerint, fiue non, nos, dictufque nofter Jufticiarius in premiffis,
juflicia mediante, procedemus et procedet. Insuper, citetis peremptorie, coram teftibus, Alanum
Cathcart de Drumjowan, Petrum Algeo feruum Magiftri Jacobi Donaldfoun Aduocati, Dauidem Craufurde, Alexandrum Craufurde feruos Domini de Kerfe, Duncanum Craufurde, Joannem Mure de
Tarquyne,^ Jacobum M^'artour in Knokdone, Gilbertum Mure de AuchinfouU, Gilbertum Kennedy de
Monunfioun, Arthurum Kennedie filium Dauidis Kennedie de Balfcheroche, Joannem Wilfoun in
Dalrumpill, Archibaldum Gellis coquum, Hugonem Kennedie de Garryliorne, AUanum M'tir in Layne,
Jacobum Gowdie in Lauderdall, Jacobum M'^trutour in Traboyak, ad comparendum coram nobis dictoue noftro Jufticiario, dictis die et loco, cum continuatione dierum, ad perhibendum fidele teftimonium
in caufa predicta, fub pena legis. Et prefentes Literas debite executas et indorfatas earundem latori
reddatis. Et vos qui prefentes executi fueritis, litis ibidem dictis die et loco, coram nobis feu dicto
noftro Jufticiario, portantes vobifcum fummonitionis veftre teftimonia infcript. pro premiffis vel ipfos
teftes. Ad quod faciend. vobis et veftnim cuilibet, coniunctim et diuifim vicecomitibus noftris in
hac parte, noftram committimus poteftatem. Datum fub teftimonio noftri magni figilH, apud Edinburgh, xiij die Februarij IGOl, et regni noftri Scotie tricefimo feptimo, anno Anglie, Gallic et Hiberaie
primo.

The quhilk Summondis, with the executiounes and Indorfationes thairof, wer producit be the faid
Sir Thomas Hammyltoun of Monkland knycht, Aduocat to oure fouerane lord, in prefens of the faid
Erie of Montrofe, Great Commiffionar of this prefent Parliament, and haill Eftaittis of the famin Parliament, firft vpoun the tuentie fext day of Aprile laft bipaft ; and thaireftir the famin wes producit in
thair prefens, and prefens of the Lordis of Articlis, upoun the tuentie aucht day of the faid moneth of
Aprile laft bipaft : Vpoun the quhilk tuentie aucht day of Aprile, the faid Sir Thomas Hammyltoun,
Aduocat to oure fouerane lord, in his liienes name, pa^Jimpliciter fra the perfute of the faid Robert
Mure, brother germane and apperant air to the faid vmq'^' Walter Mure of Cloncairde, and JoTiet
Mure liis fifter, and thair Tutouris and Curatouris, for thair intereffis ; as alfe, paHJimplicifer frome the
haill reflbnes, haill pointis and articlis contenit in the faid Summondis of Treaffoun, beirand and contenand as is abonewrittin, fua far as the iamin extendis or may be extendit to the faidis Robert and
Jo7iet Mures. Lyk as, alfo this inftant day, in prefens of my Lord Great Commiffionar and haill
Eftaittis of Parliament, the faid Sir Thomas Rollok, Aduocat depute, in abfensof the faid Sir Thomas
Hamyltoun, principall Aduocate, lykwayes \miijimpliciter frome the perfute of the faidis Robert and
Jo?icf 3Iures, and thair faidis Tutouris and Curatouris for thair intereffis; and alfe ^sSi Jimpliciter
frome the haill reflbnes, haill pointis and articlis contenit in the faid Summondis of Treaffiiun, fua far
as the famin extendis or may be extendit to tlie faidis Robert and Jonet Mures, and thair faidis Tutouris and Curatouris : Lykas, the faid Sir Thomas Hammyltoun, principall Aduocat foirfaid, vpoun
the faid xxviij day of Aprile laft bipaft, had paft fimpUciter frome the famin, of befoir, in prefens of
the faidis Lordis of Articles. Vpoun the quhilkis haill premiffis, the faid Robert Mure, for himfelf
and his faid fifter, afkit Inftrumentis.

' In Act. Pari. IV., 269, he is described Johne Mure de Carquliene.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 181

IV. Lord Fount ainhall's Ahstract of the Case ofWIure of Auchindrayne}

The flory of the fact is remarkable. Auchindrane, having conceived a deadly feud againft the
Tutor of Cassillis, comes one day to Maybole, with intention to kill him, aflaulted him under
night, thought to have killed him, had he not been refcued by fome of his neighbours. For wliich fact,
Auchindrane and his complices paft to the home. (The Horning was produced by the Advocat.) At
lenth, this enmity was taken away, not only by publick and fworn reconciliation, but alfo by marriage of the faid Auchindrane s eldejl fane on the Tutors dav^hter. After which, the Tutor lived
with Auchindrane in all friendlhip, truft, and affurance imaginable. And going in to Edinburgh, and
willing to do Auchindrane s bufmes there, as weill as his oune, he caufed his man leive at the Schooltnajler of Air his houfe, a Letter for Auchindrane, fignifying tliat he was going for Edinburgh to-morrow, and would gladly meet with him at the Weft end of Air, at the Duppils, or^ he went. This
advertifement was fentwithafchoolboy called William Dalrimple, who delivered it to old Auchindrane, fitting with Walter Muir of Cloncaird ; who, immediately upon his reading of it, fent back
the boy, and entreated him to fay, that he had neither got him, nor delivered him the Letter. Then,
refolved with the faid Weaker, to advertife Thomas Kennedy of Drummurchy of the certainty of
Culzain's journey, and the way he intended to ride ; advifing him to ufe that occafione to revenge himfelfe on him. The advertifement, with this advice, (he) fends with on^ Macadam, as is clearly
proven by the Depofition of Witneftes. Drummurchy, by the advertifement, counfell, and inftigation
foirfaid, waites the gentleman, in the place he had tryfted* Atichindrane ; and moft treafonably murthours him. Wheirfor,^ Drummurchy ftands forfaulted by Act of Parliament.

He, having turned fugitive, was much aflifted and fupported by Auchindrane ; who, fearing that
difcovery of his acceffion to the faid treafonable Murther might be made by the faid William Dalrumple ; to efchew it, caufed him firft to be fecretly conveyed to his houfe, wher he keiped him long
quiet ; at laft, fent him to Arran, to the Laird of Skelmorly. After fome tyme, returning from thence,
he fent him away with one that was going to the wars in Flanders, hoping he fould never fee him
againe. Wheir, having ftayed fome tyme, the boy longed to returne. Being returned, and Auchiiidrane getting notice theirof, he was troubled — immediately fetched him to his hous, and put him with
ane James Bannatvne, in Chapeldonald, his tennent; whom he caufed fetch him with him to the
Sands of Girvan, at 10 a'clock of even ; wher they murdered him, and throw him iu the Sea, fo far
as they could waid.

This treafonable Murder, with all its circumftances, is moft clearly made out, by the Depofitions of
WitneiTes, who alfo deponed of a fpeciall friendlhip after that, pretended to the faid James Bannatyne ; fo that they gave him a life-rent Take^ of Chapeldonald. Then they perfuaded him to go out
of the way to Ireland, giving him a Letter of recommendation to Drummurchy : And after he was
there, he lacked for nothing. Frequent correfpondence betwixt him and Auchindrane and his wyfe:
Then, caufed James Cunninghame, his feruand ther, who knew of their concealing of William Dalrumple, abfent himfelf, for efchewing of tryall. Alfo, the Lady Auchindrane, for the fame reafon,
abfented herfelfe. — Proven by Witnoffes, that Auld Auchindrane would have hyred James Pennycuich to go to Ireland, and their to murther Bannatyne. — Then he wrote to Stairs, that becaufe lie
was bruited for the (laughter of William Dalrumple, he was willing to tranfact with him theirfor.''

' From Fount. Ahstract of Books of Adjournal, MS. Adv. Library. It was thought proper to prosorve tin; acooiirit
given by this eminent Lawyer ; — but at same time, it appeiirs uiiiieccssary to point out to the reader in how many
particulars his traditional Account diifers from the Record ; whicli ren(U'rs it i>robable that his lordsliip wrote from
memory, or noted down the facts from rei)orts then prevalent. * IJefore ; ere. ^ One. ' Appointed

to meet. * F(tr wliich fact. " Tack ; lease. ' That is, he was willinij to enter into terms of compromise with the relations of the deceased. As tliey Avere not wealthy, he considereil lie could, through tlie mediation of their Chief, the Laird of Stairs or Dalrymple, easily bribe them to silence; so as eitlier to procure from them
' Letters of Slains,' or at all events, get them to abstain from prosecuting him and his son for the INIurder.

182 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

All which are fo clear evidences and manifeft probations, as could hardly be expected, in fo covered
and crafty Murthers.

V. Illustrations relative to the popular Superstition of touching the
Corpse of a 3Lirclered j^erson, as an Ordeal or Test for the discovery
of the Innocence or Guilt of suspected Murderers.

(L) Opinions entertained by the Ancients on the subject of the Blood.
From the earliest periods of History, sacred and profane, it appears to have been the general
opinion of mankind, in all Nations, that the soul, as well as the vital principle, had their existence in tlie
blood. This idea was greatly strengthened by the strong and repeated testimonies afforded in the Sacred
Scriptures, under the INIosaic dispensation; where it is expressly laid down, as an undeniable principle, that
THE BLOOD, with the spirits therein contained, is the seat and support of life.'^ Without multiplying
quotations from the Pentateuch, which are extremely numerous, it is enough for the purpose of this
enquiry, to instance the frequent injunctions of Moses to the Children of Israel, to abstain from blood.
One of the most remarkable of these passages is, < Blood with the life thereof tohich is the blood
thereof shall ye not eat ;'" — and the same injunction was repeated throughout the Law of Moses, in
almost every various form, which the wisdom and sagacity of the Legislator could devise. It is not
unworthy of remark, that the early Christians strictly observed this command, which had been repeated
by the Apostles, to abstain from ' things strangled, and from blood.' This Divine command having
been given to the Jews, in the subordinate instance of abstaining from the blood of the lower animals,
in making use of their flesh for the ordinary purpose of food, it was by no means unnatural that they
should have thence concluded, that the life or vital principle resided in the \Aoo A after Death, even
after its particles were apparently dissolved, and after the whole mass had returned into its native dust.
A similar opinion is to be found in Lucretius^ and other profane writers, as Empedocles, Critias,
&c. who held that the soul was a stiffusion of blood about the heart — and consequently, that it is (lie
blood itself. *^ According to this opinion, Homer gives death the epithet, purple : zro^ipv^ioi ^dyarti. —
Iliad, V. 5, 83 ; — Virgil likewise alludes to it : ' Purpuream vomit ille animam' — .^neid ix., v. 349.
' Undantoque animam diffundit in arma cruore.' — ^neid x., v. ult. Nor are we without frequent instances of this in our English poets. Milton says of Abel,

' He fell, and deadly pale,
Groan'd out liis soul with gushing blood diffused.'
Sir Robert Blachmore also has the following passage :

' Gasping he lay, and from the griesly wound
The crimson life ebb'd out upon the ground.'
Lee, in the tragedy of Nero :

' With many a wound she made her bosom gay ;
Her wounds, like floodgates, did themselves display.
Through which life ran in puqjle streams away.'
And Cowley, David 4 :

' His life for ever spilt, stain'd all the grass around.'
It was likewise a very early popular opinion, among profane Greek and Latin authors, that the blood

' Gen. ix. 4. See also Levit. &c. passim. * In modern times, that highly distinguished physician, Harvev,

the discoverer of the circulation of the blood, maintained the hypothesis, t\mt t/ie bluod was actualli/ possessed of a living
principle, and that the life of the whole body is derived from it ; in which opinion he was supported by the celebrated
Mr John Hunter, and other anatomists and pliysicians of eminence. It would be foreign to the subject of this Notice
to enter minutely into the opinions of modern writers, Avho are extremely divided upon the point. ^ ' That they

know well, the soul consists in blood.' Creech's Lucret. 15. iii. p. 43. * Aristotle de Anima, lib. I. c. 2 ; Cicero,

'J'uscul. 1 ; Macrohius on the dream of Scipio, lib. I. c. 14 ; Tertullian of the Soul, cap. 4.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 188

springs naturally towards that part whence a blow is received ' — and they also affirmed that the soul
pursued with enmity a Murtherer of the body.^ In conformity with this latter idea^ we find that the blood,
according to the ancients, and especially the Jews, was figuratively, but most emphatically, represented as
crying to Heaven for vengeance! — and that that cry could only be appeased by the shedding of the bloo<l
of the Murderer. In the powerful language of Holy Writ, the Almighty, when denouncing Cain, the
first murderer, is represented as exclaiming to him, ' The voice of thy brotJier' s blood crieth unto me
from the ground !'

^Accordingly, in pursuance of this sentiment, the Jews had an Avenger of blood, who was the next
of kin to the murdered person — and whose awful, but imperious, duty it was, relentlessly to pursue the
Murderer to the death.

There is no doubt that this ancient opinion of the Vfe being in the blood, continued to be entertained
by THE EARLY CHRISTIANS of the Western Churches of Europe, so late as the tenth century. An able
writer^ asserts, that ' the Holy Church throughout the world did, in its first and purest, and even in
the darker ages of the tenth century, or later, observe and keep the precept to abstain from eating
blood — and that the Churches of the East and of the South, to this day, reproach the Western Church
with the violation of this Apostolical constitution.' On this point it may likewise be remarked, that
Tertullian is said to have written in defence of the doctrine, that the soul was indissolubly connected
with the blood.

From these few scattered hints, the application of the doctrine to the instance in question appears
to be natural and easy. The soul of a murdered man was considered to linger about the body until
the Murderer could be convicted, and his blood shed to appease the manes of the deceased. According to the remains of this superstitious principle, which are still to be traced in modern times in various countries, but especially in Great Britain and Ireland, and in Germany, &c., the prevailing idea
was, that (even after the blood was dried up and the corpse decayed and mouldered into a mere
skeleton, nay, though disjointed into separate bones and fragments) the touch or presence of the
Murderer would act upon these decayed relics, and that the life or blood would, upon Appeal bein"-
made, return to manifest the Murder.

A very curious instance of this branch of the superstition has been preserved by Sir Walter Scott,"*
who, in an early work, relates the circumstances in his usual felicitous manner : — ' Two vouno- men,
going a-fishing in the river Yarrow, fell out ; and so high ran the quarrel, that the one, in a fit of passion, stabbed the other to the heart with a fish-spear. Astonished at the rash act, he hesitated whether to fly, give himself up to justice, or conceal the crime ; and, in the end, fixed on the latter expe^
dient, burying the body of his friend very deep in the Sands. As the meeting had been accidental, he
was never suspected, although a visible change was observed in his behaviour, from gaiety to a settled
melancholy. Time passed on, for the space of fifty years ; when a smith, fishing near the same place,
discovered an uncommon and curious bone, which he put in his pocket, and afterwards showed to some
people in his smithy. The Murderer being present, now an old white-headed man, leaning on his
staff, desired a sight of the little bone. But how horrible was the issue ! No sooner had lie touclml it,
than it streamed with purple blood ! Being told where it was found, he confessed the crime, was condemned, but was prevented, by death, from suffering the punishment due to his offence.'

(2.) Institution of the Bahr-recht or Law of the Bier, and Form oftJie Ceremonial.

There cannot be a doubt that, from very early times, Tests or Ordeals were instituted by the
common consent of almost all Nations, for the detection of hidden and atrocious cases of Murder,
which had baffled all the ordinary methods of judicial scrutiny. The mysterious doctrines taugljt by
the Metaphysicians of the dark ages, on the subject of an universal srjmpathy and antipathy existin"-
in nature, would lead those who believed in their theories to approve of such an obvious Test as that

' See quotation from Lucretius, ' Llque petit corpus,' &c. in Del Riu's and De L'Ancrc's notices. * Piito, &c.

' Dr Deacon. * Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, II. 425.

184 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

of compelling suspected persons to come forward and tovch the murdered corpse — and accordingly, the
Bahr-recht, or Law of the Bier, was early recognized, even by Judicial authority, throughout all
civilized Europe. It is extremely probable, that such a striking ceremonial as that just referred to,
would first be seized upon by the Clergy ; for it would tend, in a great measure, to strengthen their own
hands, while it would also promote the interests of ' Holy Mother Church ;' and, at the same time, the
almost miraculous discovery of secret crimes would directly lead a superstitious and ignorant people
to give God the glory, and to ascribe to His immediate presence and intervention, the detection and
subsequent punishment of the Murderer.

Perhaps it may be premised, that, properly speaking, the recognized Ordeals or Appeals to the
immediate interposition of God, being what was termed the Vulgaris Purgatio, or Judicium Dei,
were the Judicium Ferri callidi, Aquce, et Ignis, i. e. Trials by red-hot Iron, Fire, and Water.
In process of time, the Judicial Combat, the Ordeal of the Cross,^ and the Crosned,^ or consecrated bread and cheese, were added to the other Appeals. In the East, no less than nine Ordeals
are still in use, viz. the Balance, the Fire-ordeal, the Water-ordeal, the Poison-ordeal, Trial by the
Cosha or three draughts of consecrated water, the Rice-ordeal, the Ordeal by hot oil, the Ordeal by a
red-hot Iron ball or lance-head, the Ordeal by Dharmarch, or drawing forth from a jar of certain Images,
cloth, &c. Amongst all these various forms, the touching of a Murdered corpse is not reckoned as a
proper Ordeal ; but, as will be immediately shown, it was adopted and recognized as a Test, or popular Ordeal, both on the authority of the Church and of the Criminal Tribunals of civilized Europe.

In regard to the Form of the Ceremonial, it must have been extremely imposing; and especially, when regulated by the Church, who increased the otherwise solemn spectacle by Processions,
the exhibition of their holy relics, lighted tapers, and all the usual machinery of the Romish
Clmrch, was admirably calculated to have inspired the guilty mind of the already conscience-struck
Criminal with awe and terror, and eventually compel him to confess his enormous crimes, in the face of
the assembly.

The mangled body of the murdered person was stretched upon a bier, covered with a fair linen cloth,
and placed before the High- Altar ; when, after a procession of Priests hymning an anthem, the suspected
person was conducted forward to the High-Altar, where, after performing his devotions, the face of the
deceased was uncovered before him. He was then called upon to place one hand upon the mortal
wound, and often the other upon the mouth of the deceased — and, in that posture, to invoke Heaven to
attest his innocence — at the same time calling down its curses and instant vengeance on his head, should
he, after such asseverations, be guilty. If, on his approaching the body, or during the above ceremo-

' Two pieces of wood were prepared exactly like each other; but on one of them was the form of the Cross. Both
being wrapped up in fine wool, were laid on the altar, and after prayers, &c., a Priest approached the Akar, and took
lip one piece, which if it proved to be tliat on which the Cross was cut, the accused was found innocent. Other solemnit'es, unnecessary to be noted, also took place. ^ This ])riniitive Ordeal was thus performed. A piece of barley

bread and a piece of cheese were laid upon the Altar; and, after various Prayers, at length the Priest fervently petitioned, that ' if the party accused was guilty, God would send his angel Gabriel to stop his throat, that he might not
be able to swallow that food.' This ended, the accused advanced to the Altar, took up the bread and cheese, and commenced eating. If he swallowed deliberately and freely, he was declared innocent — but if he could not swidlow them,
he was pronounced guilty ! Tbis coincides with the Eastern Ordeal of the Rice, &c., and originates in this well-
-known circumstance, that persons labouring under vicdent mental excitement, such as accusation of a crime of which
they are conscious of yuilt, are, in a great measure, deprived of the natural supply oi saliva necessary for the process of
mastication and deglutition ; and, consequently, it would generally happen, that the strong mental struggle under
which the accused was suffering, would be the means of preventing his fulfilling, what, at first sight, appears so foolish
and simple a Test. It is hardly necessary to remind the reader, tliat barley bread which has been baken for several
Ixours, requires a considerable quantity of litjuid to enalile one to swallow it. The pungency of the cheese would act
as a sufficient stimulant to assist an innocent person who was required to undergo this Ordeal ; but would merely
increase the confusion and hasten the discomfiture of one whose mouth was .ilready parched with conscious fear and
remorse. It was almost universally noticed, that the (juilhj greedily snatched lai-ge mouthfuls, under the mistaken
idea of getting sooner over with it ! — and that usually a second or a third attempt to swallow produced cough and
constant choking, so as to force tliem to desist, and either to confess their crime, or permit sentence to be passed against
them in silence. On the other hand, innocent persons leisurely ate the portion given them, with little or no inconvenience. It will be found, upon examination, that many similar Ordeals and rites proceeded on the like minute
knowledge of natural causes.

M&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 185

nial, the blood should gush from the raouth, nostrils, or wound — this was held sufficient evidence of
his guilt.

The reader may here be reminded, that the Ceremony, thus shortly and imperfectly described, was
only reserved for extreme cases, where all legal proof had failed ; and where there was strong circumstantial evidence to implicate the party accused, either as ' guilty actor, art, or part' of the iNIurder.
It is impossible to state precisely what Nation first practised this Ordeal, — but it was obviously founded
on a deep knowledge of human nature. Few even of the most hardened and practised villains could
have undergone such a Test unmoved ; and when it is considered that the act was performed in the
presence of the Judges, Clergy, and the accusers, it would generally be easy to distinguish between
the confusion of an innocent person accused of the crime, and the terror and conscience-struck countenance and demeanour of the Murderer; and even should he have nerve enough to brave the worst parr
of this severe Ordeal, his very confidence and studied boldness would prove the means of his detection.

The accidental bleeding of the corpse, also, might overthrow the assumed courage of the Murderer,

and, in fact, was often the means of producing the most abject Confession of the crime ; and compelled
the recreant felon to utter cries for mercy, which even the torture had failed to extort.

Nothing can so well illustrate this remarkable Ceremonial, as the following powerful passa"-e from
the pen of the greatest living writer of this age, who has bestowed much attention on such subjects ;
and has done more towards the elucidation of the manners, customs, and superstitions of this country
than any preceding author. ' The eastern window, richly and variously painted, streamed down a
torrent of chequered light upon the high altar. On the bier placed before it were stretched the mortal remains of the murdered man ; his arms folded on his breast, and his palms joined together, with
the fingers pointed upwards, as if the senseless clay was itself appealing to Heaven for vengeance

against those who had violently divorced the immortal spirit from its mangled tenement

The face was bare, as were the breast and arms. The rest of the corpse was shrouded in a windingsheet of the finest linen^ so that, if the blood should flow from any place which was covered, it could

not fail to be instantly manifest He paused before the Bier, and his voice faltered, as he

swore by all that was created in six days and six nights, by Heaven, by Hell, by his part of Paradise,
and by the God and author of all, that he was free and sackless of the bloody deed done upon the
Corpse before which he stood, and on whose breast he made the sign of the Cross, in evidence of the
Appeal. No consequences ensued. The body remained stiff, as before. The curdled wounds o-ave
no sign of blood.' *

Another writer, to whom the Antiquities and History of England has been vastly indebted for the
large stores of information rescued by him from sources which may be termed as generally inaccessible, even to the great bulk of antiquaries, has, in a posthumous work, professedly undertaken for the
purpose of illustrating the Superstitious observance now under consideration, embodied the result of
his enquiries in the following striking passage.^

' Baron. At thy request th' Ordeal is prepared :
I grant thee this appeal ! What, though it claims
With me no faith ? By custom authorized.
Let it be made. At least, this good results.
We better satisfy the common mind.

Benedict. Experience, good my Lord, has often proved

' Sir Walter Scott's Fair Maid of Perth, vol. ii. p. .30G. » StnUt's l\s( of Guilt, or Trails of Ancient Super stil ion ; Quarto, I.ond. 1808, p. 79; — a posthumous work of the cflebratod English Anti<[uary, Joseph Sfrutt,
published by his son. Uiifortunateiy I\Ir Strutt did not live to compose the notes which he had intended to prepare
illustrative of this remarkable subject, which would have put the rublic in possession of all that was worthy of
knowing about it. As it is, the Editor has done his best to pave the way, by providing materials for some abler
and more successful Antiquary doing justice to such an enquiry, in a regular treatise.

VOL. III. 2 A

186 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.U. 1611.

That Providence, in such Appeals as these,

Has manifested suddenly its power,

And struck the guilty mind with sharp remorse —

Enforced confession — or abash'd tlie heart,

That, coward-like, th' offender has shrunk back

Confused, and manifested signs of guilt

Too plain to be mistaken.

Bar. I, indeed.

Have heard such tales. — Well, Father, then proceed.

Ben, Before the lioly Altar lies the corpse —
Here let th' accused come — and come with him
All his accusers — no exception made :
They all must touch the body. 'Tis with us
To scrutinize with care each countenance —
For then 'twill be an index of the heart,
Unless the heart be callous to all good,
Devoid of feeling, nay, be changed to stone.

Bar. Proceed — and may success clear up my doubt !
But miracles, I ween, are out of date.

Ben. Let young Fitzhugh approach — and bring with him
All his accusers. — Now begin the rites.

[_A procession of])riesis, singing a dirge — and when ranged on both
sides of the altar, conclude zvith a chorus.

Ben. Henry Fitzhugh, come forward ! — Touch the corpse —
May Holy Saints protect the innocent !

Henry. Thy mangled body, Dorothy, I touch—
And make, with all my soul, Appeal to Heaven !
Ah ! could those ghastly wounds hot speak, they would
Proclaim mine innocence ! — But I submit.

Ben. Pass on, my son. — You see, no change appears —

\_Aside to the Baron.
Come forward, liis accusers — and first, thou,

[To Grim.
Most loud against him — touch, and make Appeal !

Grim. Why should I touch her ? No ! I will not yield
To such fond Superstition ! — I stand not
"VVithin the pale of accusation ! — No !

Ben. \Vhat then can hinder thee to make Appeal ?
If thou be guiltless, Heaven is thy friend I

Grim. Or friend or foe, I will not make Appeal !

Ben. Thou art afraid. — Thy conscience is not clear !

Grim. 'Tis false ! — Fm innocent ! — Well, if I must
.Join in the folly What is to be done ?

Ben. Look up to Heav'n, and touch the breathless corpse.

[Grim strikes his hand dow?i suddenly — a9id then starts from the body.

Ralph. See ! Where Grim touch'd, the blood has gush'd afresh !' —

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 187

(3.) Opinions relative to the abstract question^ wltether the Corpse of a Murdered person bleeds
on the touch of the Murderer ? And the causes and consequences of such an exhibition.

It is the Editor's conviction, that the most satisfactory, as well as the most faithful, manner of
treating matters of an abstruse and forgotten description, such as the Superstition under examination
is, to afford to the reader miscellaneous extracts from writers of various ages and countries, who have
commented on the subject. Besides being the plan laid down at the outset of this work, this mode
enables the reader to examine their theories and conclusions in the very language of the respective
authors themselves, many of whose works are now of rare occurrence, and are very seldom consulted,
excepting for the explanation of similar facts.

In the preceding remarks it has been shown that the ancient opinion Avas, that the Soul of a Murdered person lingered about the body, until appeased by the discovery of the foul deed, and by the
subsequent shedding of the Murderer's blood. It is obvious, therefore, that on the original institution
of this Test or Ordeal, during the earlier and in the dark ages, the purpose of requiring the accused to
prove his innocence before the Corpse, originated in the idea and belief, that by the Murderer's approach, and especially by his polluted touch, the Soul was excited to an instant manifestation of its indignation, bi/ appearing in the form in which it tvas supposed to subsist, viz. in that of blood.

(i.) To commence, then, with the examples alluded to, Delrio,^ who is the great authority on such
subjects, remarks, ' Cadaver coram occifore, propter prsecedentem contactum, fanguinem folet fundere.
Refp. Varias reddi caufas, quidam miraculo tribuunt ; quidam cafui, quo factum fit aliquando, ut cadaver turn cruorem mitteret, cum praefens erat reus Homicidii. Recenfui alio loco multas hac de re
sententias et auctores laudavi :^ Neque adhuc dum video, quid folidius adferatur ilia antipathia, ex
vehementi odio occifi in occiforem ; quod qualitatem latentem et arcanam imprelTerit corpori, cum
cadavere permanentem : Et hue referendum illud Lucretii :

Idque petit corpus mens unde ell faucia amore.

Namque homines plerumque cadunt in vulnus, et illam

Emicat in partem fanguis, unde icimur ictu.

Etfi cominus efl, hoflem ruber occupat horror !
Ut fit vivi amantis et mortui hoftis comparatio.' ' — In treating of Ordeal by Water he thus expresses himself: — ' Octavum argumentum, tefte Biyisfeldio, Indicium homicidii ex cadauere fanguinante coram occifore petitum, videturfoli Diuino miraculo adfcribendum : Ergo fentiendum fimiliter
de fagis fupernatantibus ? Refpondeo, quid de antecedente fentiam, hoc opere non femel me indicalfe ;
fed efto, fit adfcribendum miraculo : An eadem ratio huius proba3 ? Dicis non probas. Ego qui
nego difcrimen dabo. Nulla in fanguis ilia mifilone caufa fubefl fufpicionis de pacto cum Da'mone :
nihil ilHc mifcetur fuperflitiofi : non queritur illic a Deo fignum ; et proinde nee Deus tentatur,' hcJ^

(ii.) He also mentions in another place :^ — ' Ex communi opinione Doctorum et Judicum, fi cadaver pofitum coram reo fanguinem eraittere inciperet vel ex vulnere, vel ex ore, vel ex naribus, hoc indicium quidam magni faciiint, et de (jus cum alias a me difputatum hoc eodem opere. Ego iitud indicium nunquam exillimarem fufficere ad torturam, quicquid graves dootores quidam in coiitrarium
dixerint.s Moveor, quia vere eft indicium remotum, et quafi prodigiofum, de cujus cum non conftat,
et incertifllmum, quod nuUo jure vel caufa juridic6 probata nobis conflat, et tortura maximi eft prejudicii. Quare nifi accedant fama, mina^, inimicitiai, vel fimile adniiniculum, nunquam ad torturam ex

' Disquisitioiium Magicanim libii sex, &c. Martini Ddiio, Edit., VrnetitK, IGOG. JAh. i. cap. .'3, q. 10. ' Coinment. in Octaviam Senecii', ver. 127. ' Sic Lcmnius, lib. 2 ; De occultis iiadira- miraciilis, cap. 7; Langiiis, cpist.

40. Pictorius, Dialog. 9 ; Gemma, lib. 1 ; De caractcrism, caji. G. ' Uclrio, Lib. iv. cap. iv. fiiiwst. v. (]«■

proba aqua; frigidic, &c. ^ Uclrio, lib. v. p. 25. " Post A7i(/. et Parid. Bucriiis decis. IGG ; Blunchus de ind.

ad 1. fin. de qiia?st. n. lOS ; Carrer. tract, de indie. ; Indi. 27, u. 2; Novel, regu. 181; iMenoc. de arb. cas. 270,
n. IG ; et de pra-su. 1. ], q. 89, n. 128; et alii.

188 CRIJMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

hoc indicio Deum timenti judici procedendum, affirmsivit I^arina, nu. 136 poll Ant. Gomez, lii. fufe et
prudenter hoc difcutientem d torn. 3 cap. 13 a num. 15, et Mar/ii. in piact. et diligenter num. 181.
Mafcard et alios.

(iii.) Another author, who was Counsellor of State to King Louis XIII of France, makes the
following interesting observations, under the Title, — ' Des attouchemens des Hommes : Sfauoirji
rn Jleurtrier/'opproc/uod, on touchant le corps d'vn Jiomme qti'il a meurtry, en pevtfaire reiallir du
fang. — ' Je coramenceray par ce traict commun, que le Corps d'vn homme meurtry, eflant touche ou
approche de Meurtrier, fait reiaillir du fang, tefmoignant qu'il entre auffi-tofl en accufation, et crie vengeance contre luy, voulant comme tirer a compaffion tous ceux qui le voyent, et comme les efmouuoir
a luy en faire auoir railon. Theodoric vit dans vne efcaille ou tect de poilfon, qui luy fut feruy a
table, la telle de Symmachus, qu'il avoit tue, laquelle le mena^oit, verfant du fang en quantite, dequoy
il eut fi grande frayeur, qu'il en mourut bien-toft apres. Et ne fjay fi ce qu'on dit y ell necelfaire
i)u"il faut que ce foit vn corps fraifchement affalTine. Veu qu'vn homme d'honneur, faifant le procez a
vn Meurtrier, m'a alfeuro, 'que, I'ayant approche du corps qu'il nioit auoir tue, ietta du fang par le nez
alTez abondamment, apres le feiziefme iour de I'homicide commis. Sur quoy Del-Rio dit, qu'il ne
voit aucune raifon plus folide que celle de I'antipathie qui ell entre le Meurtry et le Meurtrier, etlear
haine, la quelle aggraue certaine qualite latente et cachee, et la tient imprimee dans le corps demeurant
encore auec le cadauer; employant la-deffus ces vers de Lncrece : " Idque petit," &c.^ Comme f'il
auoit quelque conuenance et raport, entre vn amy viuant, et vn ennemy mort I

' Mais la verite eft, qu'on ne fcauroit colligor de la nulle forte de charme, caufe par la veue ou par
I'attoucheraent, vn corps mort eftant bien d'autre nature, que celuy d'vn homme viuant. Et de dire
que c'est quelque dilfenfion cachee, qui lefmoigne I'inimitie qui ell entre eux, laquelle ce corps ainli
outre, faict encore paroillre apres la mort, le declarant par cefte emilTion de fang. On ne ffauroit
rendre nulle raifon valable de celle diflenfion. Et fe peut dire, qu'aucuns ont auance et tenu cefte experience pour veritable, pour I'auoir parauanture effayee ou veue vne feule fois et par cas fortuit. Car
il fe peut faire que le corps d'vn homme mort, qui a deraeure feize iours gifant en repos en quelque
lieu, eftant remue pour fouffrir quelque vifite de Chirurgiens, efraouuera par ce mouuement le fang qui
fell retire es veines, et le fera fortir en abondance. Mais cela n'arriuera pas pluftort en la prefence du
Meurtrier, que du Juge qui luy faict le procez, ou deuant quelqu'autre que ce foit.'-

(iv.) Through the kindness of Dr Samuel Hibbert, late Secretary to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, F.R.S.E., &c. whose philosophical, geological, and antiquarian researches have justly
entitled him to a very conspicuous rank in the literature of his country, the Editor has an opportunity of giving the following interesting extract from a rare volume in his Collection, entitled,
— ' Pliysiologia Epicuro-Gojjhido-Charltoniana: or a Fabrick of Science Natural, upon the Hypothefis of Atoms, &c. &c. By Dr Walter Charleton, Phyfician to the late Charles, Monarch of Great
Britain.' London, 1654. In this singular treatise, the author, in discussing ' the cause of the fresh cruentation of the Carcass of a Miirtheredman, at the presence and touch of the Homicide,' thus expresses
his opinion : — ' The cruentation (and, according to fome reports, the opening of the eyes'^) of the Carcafs of a Murthered man at the prefence and touch of the Homicide, is, in truth, the nobleft of antipathies : And fcarce any writer of the fecrets or miracles of nature, hath omitted the confideration
thereof. This Life in Death, Revenge of the Grave, or loud language of lilent Corruption, many venerable and Chriftian Philofophers have accounted wholly miraculous or fupernatural, as ordained and
effected by the juft judgement of God for the detection and punilhment of the inhumane Alfalfine !

' The same verses as in Dtliio's quotation are here repeated. ^ De L'Axcre, Consiiller du Hoy, Liid. XIII.

en son Conseil d'Estat, sur l" Iiicredvlilc et Mvsaeancc dv Sortilege. Quarto, I'aris, 1622, fol. 153. The curious
reader is likewise referred to the following old authorities, — Vair, 1. 2, c. 10, De Fascino. Dtl Rio, de Coutactu.
Lemnius, de Occultis natura? iniraculis, cap. 7, &c. ' See the Case of June Nvrkott, afterwards (juoted, p. lL»2.

44 & 9 Jac. Vr. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 189

And, left we lliould feein too forward to expunge from tlie mind of any man the belief of tliat opinion, which to fonie may be a more powerful argument than the exprefs command of God, to deterr
them from committing- fo horrible and execrable a crime as Murder, we Ihall fo far concurr with them
as to conceive this effect to be Divine only in the in/iilution, but meerly natural in the jjroduction or
immediate cavfes. Becaufe the apparence i'eems not to tranfcend the capacity of natural means, and
the whole fyndrome and feries of its caufes may be thus explained. It is an opinion highly confentaneous, that in every vehement paffion there is formed a certain idea, as well of the object whereupon
the imagination is moft intent, as of the good or evil connected unto, and expected from, that object ; and
that this idea is, as it were, impreffed, by a kind of inexplicable figillation upon the fpirits, at the fame
inftant the mind determineth to will the prefent profecution or avoidance of the object ; fo that, by
tiie mediation of the fpirits (thofe angels of the mind), the fame idea is tranfmitted to the blood, and.
Through the arteries, ditfufed into all parts of the body, as well into the nerves and mufcles, which are
infervient to fuch voluntary motions as are requifite to the execution of the decrees and mandates of
the will concerning the, profecution or avoidance of the object. This being fo, we may conceive that
the phanfy of the perfon afhiulted by an affaffine, having formed an idea of hatred, oppofition, and revenge ; and the fame being charactarized upon the fpirits, and by them diffufed through tbe blood ;
though the blood become much lefs fluid in the veins after death, by reafon the vital influence and puliifick faculty of the heart, which animated and circulated it, is extinct, yet, becaufe at the prefence of
the Murderer, there ilfue from the pores of his body fuch fubtile emanations as are confimilar to thofe
which were emitted from him at the time he ftrove with, overcame, and killed the patient ; and thofe
emanations entering the dead body, doe caufe a frclh commotion in the blood, remaining yet fomewhat fluid in its veins, and, as it were, renew the former colluctation or duell betwixt the yet wholly
uncondenfed fpirits of the (lain and thofe of the Homicide ; therefore is it that the blood, fufleriug an
jeftuation, flows up and down in the veins to feek fome vent or fallyport, and finding none fo open as
in that jiart wherein the wound was made, it iflues forth from thence ! And where the Murthered perfon is deftroyed by ftrangulation, fuftbcation, or the like unbloody death, fo that there is no manifeft
folution of continuity in the fkin or other exterior parts of the body, in that cafe it hath been obferved
that the carcafs bleeds at the mouth or 7iofe, or both ; and this only becaufe in all vehement ftrivings,
and ef])ecially in colluctation for life, the fpirits and blood flow moft plentifully into the arteries and
veins of the head, as is vifible by the great rednefs of the eyes and face of every man that fights ; and
where the blood fixeth in moft plenty, there will be the greatcft tumult, seftuation, and commotion
when it is ferment, agitated, and again fet afloat, by the DiAordant Efiluvias emitted from the body
of the neer approaching or touching Murtherer — and, confequently, there muft the veflels fuft'er the
greateft ftrefs, diftenfion, and difruption, or apertion of their orifices.'

This passage fully explains the extraordinary opinions which were formerly entertained by the most
eminent physicians, in England, during the reign of King Charles II.

(v.) Dii IIiBBERT likewise transmitted the following extract from the well-known work, entitled,
' Ludovici Lavateri Theologii eximii do S|>ectrls, Leinuribus, varlifque prfefiigitionibus Tractatns ver
aureus.'' — ' Aliquis a latronii)us interceptus fuit ; accedentibus latronibus ad cadaver, Tfo/m c<>?pit receiitemfaiigvinem JiiUare, aut aliis (ignis pi a^fentiani latronis fignificari. Plato, 1, Leguni 1,' tradit eoruni
qui occifi funt aninias, iiepe interfectorum animas hoftilitcr ii.fcquitendi. Marfdias Fitinus forte contingere putat, ut occifi hominis vulnus etiam jacente cadavere in cum qui vulneraverat, fi modo ille
cominus inftet, vulnus ipfum infpiciens, fanguinem rurfus ejiciat, quod quidem evenire Lucrdins aflirmarlt, et Judices obfervarint. Dido apud Viry. niinetur JEneic: Et cum iVigida mors aninia fe duxerit artus, omnibus umbra locis adero ; dabis, improbe, psenas. — Similis locus eft apud Herat, et alios

' Lugduni Batav. Apud Ilcnricum Verbiost. Anno ICo9. * Lib. xvi. cup. 6, Do Aninionim Iniiiuiit.

•e

190 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

Poetas. Latio afledit nienfa?, everfo poculo, vinum per folidum lignum menfse maiiavit omnium magna
admirationc'

To conclude these Notices, the Editor, without offering farther observations on this branch of the subject, presents a variety of other extracts, all bearing on the same point, and tending to show the universal concurrence of Lawyers, Divines, Historians, Physicians, and Philosophers, in the ancient opinions
already related as obtaining so general a belief over the civilized world, and especially in Europe.

(vi.) * In a fecret Murther, if the dead carkafle be at any time thereafter handled by the Murtherer,
it will gufli out of blood ; as if the blood were crying to Heaven for revenge of the Murtherer.' — King
James VI, D<x:monologie, p. 136.

(vii.) ' I HAVE heard, by credible report, that the wound of a man murthered, renewing bleeding
at the prefence of a dear friend or of a mortal enemy. Divers alfo write, that if one pafs by a murthered body (though unknown), he iliall be ftricken with fear, and feel in himfelf fome alteration, by
nature.' — Scot's Discovery of Witchcraft, p. 170.

(viii.) • Who can alleage any certaine and firme reafon, why the blood runnes out of the wounds
of a man murdred, long after the Murder committed, if the Murderer be brought before the dead
bodie ? Galeotus INIartius, Jeronymus Maggius, Marfilius Ficinus, Valleriola, Joubert, and others,
liave offered to fay fomething thereof. — Who (I pray you) can Ihew why, if a defperat bodie hang
liimfelfe, fuddenlie there arife tempefls and whirlewinds in the aire ?' — Living Librarie, fol. Lond.
1621, p. 283.

(ix.) • Why dead bodies bleed in the prefence oftlieir Murtherers 9 Becaufe nothing is io hidden from
Jultice as Murder, they ufe not only torments of the body, but alfo the torture of the foule, to which
its paffions doe deliver it over, of which Feare difcovering itfelfe more than the reft, the Judges have
forgotten nothing that may make the fufpected perfon fearefull. For, befides their inteiTogatories,
confronting him with witneffes, fterne lookes, and bringing before him the Inllruments of Torture, as
if they were ready to make him feele them, they perfuade him that a carhaje bleeds in the prefence
of his Murtherers, becaufe dead bodies being removed doe often bleed ; and then, he whofe confcience
is tainted with ihc/i/fitcrefs of the fact, is troubled in fuch fort, that by his mouth or geflure he often
bewrayes his own guiltinefTe, as not having his firlt motions in his owne power.' — Five Philqjl queji.
anfivered, 4rto, Lond. 1653.

(x.) In the Athenian Oracle, I. 106, there is inserted a particular relation of a coqise falling a-bleeding at the approach of persons supposed to have in any way occasioned its death. The phenomenon is
thus endeavoured to be accounted for. ' The blood is congealed in the body for two or three days,
and then becomes liquid again, in its tendency to corruption. The air being heated by many perfons
coming about the body, is the fame thing to it as motion is. 'Tis obferved that dead bodies will bleed
in a concourfe of people, when Murderers are abfent as well as prefent ; yet legillators iiave thought
fit to authoiize it, and ufe this trial, as an argument at leaft, to frighten, though 'tis no conclufive one
to condemn them.' Vid. also p. 193.

(xi.) ' It is a thing known, yea, by many undeniable inllances witnefled, that marvellous difcovery
of concealed Murder, by the bleeding of the body, upon the touch of the Murderer ! ' I confefs, it

' ' What is it that should make men's guilt so legible oft in their countenance, even when they study most to conceal it ; and thus cause them give their tongue the lie, yea, bewTay to bystanders whether they will or not some

44 & 9 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I9I

ihould be hard to affert the lawful and wairantable practice of fuch an y\ppeal to fo extraordinary and
llupenduous a fign from the Lord, where Scripture goeth not clearly before us. But, on the other
hand, fuch a thing fo furely tried for fuch an end, and in the cafe where all ordinary means of difcovery have been wanting, I think, calleth us to a ferious remark thereof, while it Co vifibly feemeth to
witnefs his hand who doth make inquifition for bloodi'

(xii.) Sir Kexelm Digby takes it for granted that a Corpse often bleeds on such occasions — and
thus accounts for the phenomenon. ' And to this caufe, peradventure, may be reduced the llrange effect
which is frequently feen in England, when, at the approach of the iMurderer, thejlain body fuddenhj
bleedeth afrejh. For certainly the Sonls of them that are treacheroufly Murdered by furprife, ufe to
leaue their bodies with extreme unwillingnefs, and with vehement indignation againfl them that force
them to fo unprovided and abhorred a paflage I That Soul, then, to wreak its evil talent againlt the
hated Murderer, and to draw a jufl and defired revenge upon his head, would do all it can to manifeft
the author of the fact I To f peak it cannot — for in itfelf it wanteth the organs of voice ; and thofe it
is parted from are now grown too heavy, and are too benummed, for to give motion unto : Yet fome
change it defweth to make in the body, which it hath fo vehement inclination to ; and therefore is the
aptefl for it to work upon. It rauft then endeavour to caufe a motion in the fubtileft and mofl fluid
parts (and confequently the mofl moveable ones) of it. This can be nothing but the blood, which
then being violently moved, mnjt needs yvjh out at thofe places ichere it Jindtth ij)ue /'

(xiii.) Extract from a Letter, the Rev. H. Cross, Caithness, Jun. 11, 1712, to the Rev. Robert
Wodrow.* ' Some Murthers in this cuntry have been difcovered, by caufebig fufpected perfons touch
the deid corps ; which upon their touchinyhave immediatty bled ; wherupon fome have confclfed guilt,
and have been executed. I cannot tak up time in telling the particular circumftances thereof.'

(xiv.) Mr Burnett,^ in treating of presumptive evidence, remarks, that ' in various Trials for Murder, we find the notion of tJie corpse bleediny, if touched by the Murderer, a circumstance founded on.
In Steioart Abercomhies Case,^ we see it stated, in the Information for the prisoner, as a circumstance
in his favour, that he had, without fear or dread, gone and touched the body of the person murdered.
And in the Case of Howatson,^ before Lord Justice-Clerk Cockburn, we find it stated and insisted on
as a strong circumstance of suspicion against him, that he had refised to go to the lifting of the corpse.
This even is stated as one of the circumstances in the Interlocutor of relevancy; and perhaps rightly
so, on the supposition oi the popular belief of the Murderer's touching the corpse.'

(4.) Particular instances tvhere the Corpses of Murdered Persons have been touched, as a
Test of Guilt — Remarkable Criminal Trials, in lohich this circumstance was founded
on — The opinions of Lawyers, &c.
(i.) The earliest recorded notice which tlie Editor has been able to find, in British History, of thus
superstitious custom, is in Buchanan's History of Scotland ;'' who relates, that, in A.D. d~/'2, after the
atrocious Murder of King Duffus'' by the assassins hired by Donald, Governor of the Castle of Forres, they ' carried him out so cunningly a back way, that not so much as a drop of blood appeared,'

secret trouble .and sore they have within ? Doth it not clo.nrly show the power of Conscience, wliich IkiIIi ^lu-h authority on men, tliat witliout violence or constraint IVoiii others, tlotli even (brce them to confess the tniiii, and supply
the room of witnesses.' — Flemlii</n Fii/Jilliiii/ of the Scripture, 3(1 edit. (ilas;;. 168 1.

^ Ibid. * WoDKovv MSS. Orig. Letters. Quarto, XIX. ' IJemarkahle Providences.' Adv. Library, iMlinliurgh. No traces can he had of the particular instances to which the Kev. Gentleman alludes. They would doubtless prove of much interest, could they be still discovered. '' IJunictt on Crimes, p. 629. (Note.) * Jan.
and Feb. 1718. '' James Ilowatson, tried for IMurder, at Dumfries, I\Iav 1727. " Hucluman's History of
Scotland, Ed. 17G2, i. 247. ' Son of King Malcolm L He was murdered A. D. 972.

192 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

&c. — ' The executioners of that bloody fact were sent out of the way by Donald ; because there is an
opinion, received from our ancestors, which as yet obtains amongst the vulgar, That blood tmll issue
from a deadhodi/, many days after the parti/ s being murdered, if the murderer be present ;_/ma^<
as if the fact had been neivly committed.' This takes it for granted, that tlie understanding was, that
the TOUCHING of the corpse must have been infinitely more available, towards the discovery of the
Murderer.

(ii.) Rapin' records a circumstance, as having occurred at the interment of King Henry II. of
England, A.D. 1189. That monarch having fallen sick at Chinon, caused himself to be carried into
the Church, before the Altar ; whore, after confessing himself, and expressing repentance, he expired.
' His corpse was removed to Font-Evrand, in Anjou, where he was buried, according to his own order.
An extraordinary accident rendered the funeral of his body very remarkable. His son Richard (^Cceur
de Lion) coming to meet the funeral pomp, in order to attend his father to his grave, upon his approach the blood in great abundance gushed out of the mouth and nostrils of the corpse ! Richard,
thouo^h naturally very hard hearted, was so moved at this sight, that he burst out into tears, and openly
accused himself of being the occasion of his father's death.' Hume''- adds, that * he exclaimed, agreeabhf to a vulgar superstition, that lie was his fathers Murderer !'

(iii.) But, witlwut attempting too laborious an investigation of our early Historians and Chroniclers on so insulated a point, it is enough for our purposes to preserve the memory of such Cases as
have been peculiarly striking, and which have occurred nearer to our awn times. Accordingly, one of
the most remarkable instances of Touching as a Test of Murder,^ is the Case of the Murder of Johan
NoRKOTT, wife of Arthur Norkott, the incidents of which were fortunately preserved amongst tlie
i)apers of Sir John Maynard, Sergeant at Law,'* and afterwards one of the Lord Commissioners of tlie
Great Seal of England, &c. who noted the particulars at the Trial, at the bar of the King's Bench, 4th
Car. I. (1628.) This eminent Lawyer's Notes are followed here, as closely as possible, in his own words.

' Johan NorJiott having been murthered, the queflion was. How Ihe had come by her death ? The
Coroner's Inqueft, on view of the body, and Depofitions of Mary Norkott, John Okeman, and Agyies
his wife, inclined to find Johan Norkott Felo defe; — for the evidence perfuaded the Coroner and
Jury that flie was found dead in her bed, the knife flicking in the floor, and her throat cut — that the
nif ht before, Ihe went to bed with her child, her hulband being abfent — and that no other perfon, after
ihe had gone to bed, came into the houie — the Examinants lying in the outer room, and they mull needs
have feen or known if any flranger had come in. Whereupon the Jury gave up to the Coroner their
Verdict, that Ihe was Felo defe.

' But afterwards, upon rumour among the neighbourhood, and their own obfervation of a variety o.
circumftances, which manifefled, that fhe did not, nor, according to thofe circumflances, could poflibly murther herfelf — the Jury, whofe Verdict was not yet drawn into form by the Coroner, defired
that the Body, which had been buried, might be taken up out of the grave. The Coroner afl'ented to
their defire ; and thirty days after her death, flie was taken up, in prelence of the Jury and a great
concourf'e of people ; and, in confequence of what tranfpired, the Jury altered their former Verdict.

' The perfons accufed were tried at Hertford AJJizes, and Acquitted; butfo much againfl the Evidence, that Judge Harvey exprefied his opinion, that it were better an Appeal were brought, than fo
foul a murder fliould efcape uupunillied.

' Rapin, Fol. LoiHl. 1784, i. 221. « Hume a JIUt. of Emjland, 8vo. Edin. 1805, i. 484. S.c also Deved.

Abb., p. 547. Drompton, p. 1151. Mat. Paris, p. 107. » See also Gent. May. (Sep 1731,) i. 395. Ellis's

Brand's Popular Antiquities, ii. 543. ' See Hoicell's State Tn'aZs, xiv. 1324. Butespeciiilly Historij nf'ike Works

of the Learned, for the yenr 1739, Art. 12, to which curious publication Sir John Maijnard's Papers were orijfijially communicated by Dr Rawlinson.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 193

♦ Accordingly, at the enfuing Eafter term {Pafcha, 4 Car.), tliey were tried on the Appeal, which
was hrought by the Young Child againft his father, grandmother, and aunt, and her liuftand Okeman.^
The Minijler of the Parijh'^ where the Murder was committed, dcpoled, " That the Body being taken
up out of the grave, thirty days after the party s death ; and lying on the grafs, and the four defendants
being prefent, were required each of them to touch the dead body. Okemans wife fell upon her knees,
and prayed to God to ihew a Token of her Innocency, or to fome fuch purpofe — her very words I have
forgot. The Appellees did touch the dead body ; — whereupon the brow of the dead, which before was
of a livid and carrion colour,' begun to have a dew or gentle fiveat arife on it, which increafed by degrees, till the fiveat ran dmvn in drops on the face. The brow turned to a lively and frefJi colour, and
tJie dececfed opened one of her eyes andjhut it again : And this opening the eye was done three feveral times. She likewife thrujl out the ring or marriage finger three times, and pulled it in again ; and
the finger dropped blood from it on the grafs"

' Sir Nicholas Hyde, Lord Chief JiiJIice, feeming to doubt the Evidence, aflced the Witnel's,
" Who faw this befides you?" Witnefs. " I cannot fwear what others faw — but my Lord, (faid he,)
I do believe the whole company faw it ; and if it had been thought a doubt. Proof would have been
made of it, and many would have attefted with me." The Witnefs obferving fome admiration'' in tlie
auditors, he fpake further. "My Lord, I am Minifter of the Pariih, and have long known all the
parties ; but never had any occafion of difpleafure againft any of them, nor had to do with them or
they with me, but as I was Minifter. — The thing was wonderful to me, but I have no intereft in the
matter; but as called upon to teftify the truth, that I have done." — Whereupon, applying himfelf to
the Chief Jii/iice, he fiid, " My Lord, my brother, here prefent, is 3Iini/ler of the next Parijh adjacent— and I am affured faw all done that I have affirmed."

' Therefore that perfon was alfo fworn to give Evidence, and did depofe, in every point, viz. the
fweating of the brow — the change of the colour — opening of the eye — and the thrice motion of the finger, and drawing it in again. Only, the firrt Witnefs added, that he himfelf dipped his finger in the
blood which came from the dead body, to examine it — and he fwore he believed it was blood /'

Sir John Mctynard adds, ' I conferred (my Notes) afterwards with Sir Edward Poivell, Barrifler
at Law, and others, who all concurred in the obfervation-^ — and for myfelf, if I were upon oath, can
depofe, that thefe Depofitions (efpecially of the firft Witnefs) are truely reported, in fubftance.'

' The other Evidence was given againft the Prifoners, viz. the Grandmother of the Plaintitf, and
againft Okeman and liis Wife — that they confefled they lay in the next room to the dead perfon that
night, and that none came into the houfe till they fountl her dead the next morning; therefore, if ihe
did not Murther herfelf, they muft be the Murtherers. To that end further proof was made.

' Firfi, That Ihe lay in a compofed manner in her bed, the clothes nothing at all difturbed,and iior child
by her in bed. — Secondly, Her throat cut from ear to ear, and her neck broken ; and if Ihe firft cut
lier throat, (he could not break her neck in bed, nor contra. — Thirdly, Tljere was no blood in the bed,
faving there was a tincture of blood on the bolfter whereon her Iiead lay — but no fubftance of blood
at all. — Fourthly, From the bed's head there was a ftream of blood on the Hoor, which run along till
it ponded in the hollows of the floor, to a very great quantity ; and there was another ftream of bloo('.
on the floor at t)ie bed's foot, which ponded alfo on the floor, to another great (piai\tity, — but no continuance or communication of blood of either of thefe two places from one to the other, neither upon
tfie bed— fo that ihe bled in two places feverally : And it was depofed, (that on) turning up the mat
of the bed, there were clotts of congealed blood in the ftraw of the mat underneath. — Fifthly, The

' The iiulividiiiils on whose Depositions the oriiriiial "S'crdict liad been pronounced. ^ ' A very reverend i)ersoii,

as I guessed, of about seventy years of ajje. His testimony was delivered |,'ravely and temperately — but to the great
admiration {wonder, astonishment) of the auditory.' '^ ' That was tlie verbal expression, in ttrmiitis, of the Witness.'

* Wonder, astonishment, amazement.

V^OL. III. 2 B

194 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D.161I.

bloody knife was found in tlie morning flicking in tlie floor, a good dillance from the bed ; but the
point of the knife, as it fluck, was towards the bed, and the haft or handle from the bed. — Sixthly,
There was a print of the thumb and four fingers of a left hand. Sir Nich. Hyde, Chief Juflice, faid
to the Witnefs, " How can you know the print of a left-hand from the print of a right-hand, in fuch a
cafe ?" Witnefs, " My Lord, it is hard to defcribe — but if it pleafe that honourable Jmlge to put his lefthand upon your left-hand, you cannot poffibly place your right-hand in the fame poflure." Which
being done, appeared lb.

' The Defendants had time to make their Defence — but gave no evidence, to any purpofe.

' The Jury departed from the bar — and returning, Acquitted Oheman, and found the other three
Guilty ; who, being feverally demanded, " What they could fay, why Judgement ihould not be pronounced ?" faid nothing — but (faving that) each of them faid, *' I did not do it I I did not do it !"

' Judgement was given accordingly, and the Grandmother and the Hufband executed ; but the Aunt
had the privilege to be fpared execution, being with child.

' I inquired if they coufefled any thing at their Execution ; but did not, as I was told.'

(iv.) The next case which shall be mentioned, is that of Marioun Peebles,^ cdias Pardone,
spouse to SwENE, in Hildiswick, who was, on March 22, 1644, sentenced to be strangled at a stake,
and burnt to ashes, at the Hill of Berrie, for Witchcraft and Murder. Marion and her husband
having ' ane deadlie and venefical malice in her heart' against Edward Halcro in Overure, and being
determined ' to dellroy and put him down,' being ' transformed in the lyknes of ane pellack-quhaill,
(the Devill changing her fpirit, quhilk fled in the fame quhaill,') and the faid Edward and other four
individuals being in a fishing-boat, coming from the*Sea, at the North-banks of Hildiswick, * on ane
fair morning, did cum under the faid boat, and overturnit her with eafe, and drowned and devoired
thame in the fey, right at the lliore, when there wis na danger wtherwayis.' The bodies of Halcro
and another of these hapless fishermen having been found, Marion and Swene ' wir fent for, and

brought to fee thame, and to lay thair hands on thame, dayis after faid death and away-calling,

(]uhaire thair bluid was evaniflied and defolved, from every natural cours or caus, fliine, and run ; the

faid umquhill Edward bled at the colUr-bain or craig-bane, and the faid ,^ in the hand and

fingers, gujhing oid bluid thairat, to the great admiration of the beholders — and revelation of the judgement of the Almytie I And by which lyk occafionis and miraculous works of God, made manifefl, in
^Murders and the Murderers ; whereby, be many frequent occafiones brought to light, and the Murderers, be the faid proof brought to judgment, conuict and condemned, not only in this Kingdom, alfo
this countrie, but lykwayis in maifl forriu Chriftiane Kingdomis ; and be fo manie frequent precedentis
and practifing of and tuitching Murderis and Murdereris, notourlie known : So, the foirfaid Murder
and Witchcraft of the faidis perfons, with the reft of their companions, through your faid Huiband's
deed, art, part, rad,^ and counfall, is manifefl and cleir to all, not onlie through and by tlie foirfaid
precedentis of your malice, wicked and maliflies* practifes, by Witchcraft, Confeflionis, and Declarationis of the faid urn quill Janet Frafer, Witch, revealed to her, as faid is, and quha wis defyrit by
him to concur and aflill with you to the doing thereof; but lykways be the declaration a?id revelatio7i
of the juflice and judgcmentis of God, through the faid ifjuing of bluid from tlie bodies /' &c.

(v.) A similar and very remarkable instance is related in the following Trial : In the Dittay of
Christian Wilson, alias the Lanthorne,^ accused of Murder, Witchcraft, &c., (which is founded

' See Dr HibherVs Hist, of Orknay, &c. to which this remarkable Trial is appended. * The name left blank.

^ Rede ; advice. ^ Malicious. '' The name given her at her baptism by the Devil. From Collection of

Original Documents, belonging to the Society of Antiiiiiaries of Scotland, MS. As a specimen of the other charges,
take the following; " Williame liichardsonc, in Dalkeith, haiving felled ane hen of the said Cristi.ines with ane stone,
and wpone her sight thcrof did imediatly threatne him, and with ane frowneing countenance told him, that he
' should newer cast ane vther stone !' And immediatly the said Williame fell into ane franicie and madnes, and

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I95

upon the examinations of James Wilson, Abraham Macmillan, William Cricliton, and Fyfe and George
Erskine, &c. led before Sir William Murray of Newtoun, and other Commissioners, at Dalkeith, Jun.
14, 1661,) it is stated, that ' Ther being enimitie betiiixt the fuid Chriftiane and Alexander Willbne
her brother, and Ihoe having often tymes tlu-eatned him, at lenth, about 7 or 8 nionthes llnce, altho'
the faid Alexander was fene that day of his death, at three houres afternone, in good health, walking
about his buffneffe and office ; yitt, at fyve howres in that fame night, he was fownd dead, lying in his
owne howfe, naked as he was borne, with his face torne and rent, without any appearance of a Ipot of
blood either wpon his bodie or neigh to it. And altho' many of the neiboures in the toune (Dalkeith)
come into his howfe to fee the dead corpe, yitt flio newar offered to come, howbeit her dwelling was
nixt adjacent thairto ; nor had llioe fo much as any feiming greiff for his death. Bot the ^Minilter and
Bailliffes of the towne, taking great fufpitione of her, in refpect of her cairiage, comandit that flioe
lliowld be browght in ; bot when flioe come, flioe come trembling all the way to the howfe — bot
Jhoe refiiifed to come nigh the corps or to tuitch it, faying, that flioe " nevir tuitched a dead corpe
in her lyfe I" Bot being earneflly defyred by the Minilter, Bailliffes, and hir brother's friends who was
killed, that flioe wold " bot tuitch the corpesfoftlie," flioe granted to doe it — but before flioe did it, the
Sone being fliyning in at the howfe, flioe exprefl her felfe thus, humbly defyring, tliat " as the Lord
made the Sone to fliyne and give light into that howfe, that alfo he wald give light to difcovering of
that Murder /" And with thefe words, flioe tuitcheing the icound of the dead man, veriefaftlie, it
being whyte and cleane, without any fpot of blod or the lyke ! — yitt imediatly, tchill her fingers was
wpon it, THE BLOOD RUSHED owT OF IT, to the great admiratioune' of all the behoulders, who tooke
it for difcoverie of the Mtirder, according to her owne prayers. — For ther was ane great lumpe of tlelh
taken out of his cheik, fo fmowthlie, as no rafor in the world cowld have made fo ticht ane incifioune,
wpon flefli, or cheis — and ther wes no blood at all in the wownd — nor did it at all blead, altho' that
many perfones befor had tuitched it, whill^ flioe did tuitche it ! And the howfe being fearched all
over, for the ftiirt of the dead man, yitt it cowld not be found ; and altho' the howfe was full of people
all that night, ever vatching the corpes ;^ neither did any of them tuitch him that night — which is
probable* — yitt, in the morneing, his fliirt was fownd tyed fall abovvt his neck, as a brechame,^ non
knowing how this come to pafs ! And this Criflian did immediatlie tranfport all her owne goods owt
of her own howfe into her dowghter's, purpofing to flie away — bot was therwpon apprehendit and iniprifoned.'

(vi.) The next instance which shall be cited, refers immediately to the Case of the Mures of
AucHiNDRANE ; being an extract from a ' Relatione of quhat pall betwixt the Commitie'' and Mr
James Mitchell,' &c.'' January 18, 22, and 24, 1676. In thu course of the pleadings as to the
lawfulness of inflicting Torture, the following interesting passage occurs. " Bot in this preparative,
the practife is wnparalelled, to put a perfon to it be fuch a Tortoior, to turne (contrarie the cowrfe of
nature and expreffe law of God) to be his own accufer ; no, not in Peiter Aroy, the Highland Rober

tooke his bed, anil newer rose agane, but died wltbina few dayes ; Ami in the tyme of his sicknes, he alwayes crye<l
owt, that the said Cristiane wes present bet'or him, in the liknes of ane ijray catt ! And some tyme eftir his death,
James Richardsone, nephew to the said A\'illiame, being a boy jdaying in the said Cristiane her yaird, and be calling
her //«/////er/(r, shoe threatned, that ' if he held not his peace, shoe sowld eawse him to die the death his nephew (xincle)
died of!' Whairby it would appearc that slioe tooke wpon hir liis neplieas (^uncle's) death."

' Wonder ; .amazement. * Until. 'I'hat is, many previi)us trials liad been made of other persons siis])e('ted, or

of those who were near neighbours, perhajjs living at enmity with the deceased, who had voluntarily ollered thenjselves to this solemn ordeal, or had been railed upon thus publicly to attest their innocence of his blood. ■' Holding the hjke-tvake. ^ Can be proved, by testimony or probation. '" The large collar which goes about a

draught-horse's neck. •* Of the Estates of rarliament. ' Wixlrow's MSS. as to ' the Sujf'criii(/s,' Adv.

Lib. xxxvi. Quarto, No. 2. This Docunu'ut relates to the Tortures used to Alilchdl, who had been accused of an
attempt to Murdei', by shooting a pistol at Arclibishop Sharj)e,iiu(\ the Jiis/iop of Oihneij, Jul. 0, IGG8, &c. 29 Car.
II, Jan. 7, IG77. See for the particulars of her 'i'rial, Salin, Slate Trials, p. 331', &c.

196 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

and Miirtbrer ! Bot he, being legalie convicted liimfelf, was put to the Torloivr, to caufe Lim declaire
who was his confederals and aflbciats in committing of fucb horrid crymes. Bot if any man Ihall object that abowt the Laird of Auchindrane, I anAver : 1ft, Thair is no paritie in the cawfe ; becawle he was accufed of an horrid and privat Murther, quhair thair was altogethei'penurie of WitnelTes, and not of a deutie contraverted be Apoftats : 2dly,GoD, in afoveraine and Angular way, witnefed
it from Heaven, hy his oit>n immediate hand, and j)roved the Deed againjl him ! viz. the Corpes of the
man Murthered, being buried in Girvane Kirk-yard, as a man call away at fea, and caft owt thaire,
tJie Laird of Coleaine, whofe fervant he had beine befor, driming^ of him in his fleipe, and that he
liad a mufe-marke wnder his left pape ;- and when he awook owt of his flei|x?, wpon fearch, found it
to be trwe — came to the place, and taking wpe the Corpes owt of the place quhair they were buried,
found him to be Murthered. Wpon which, hefumofied in all the men in that pairt, to toicch the Corpes,
as the cvjlom xcas infuch cafes ; and all compeiring, except the faids Laird and his Jon, who were the
Murtherers ; and his dwelling lioufe and familie being neire to the place, ane yowng chyld of his,
Marie Mure be name, feing the people, went to the place ; and when^Jlie dreio neire to the Corpes
(to the admiration of all the people,) did fpring owt tvpon her in abundance of blood ! Wpon which
they were apprehended and put to tryell."

(vii.) A VERY singular incident is related by Laiv, in his ' Memorialls.'^ Two men Imving been
executed at Glasgow, Jun. 14, 1683, for the Murder of a gentleman (David Monroe) at Inchbellybridge ; in consequence of the enormity of the offence, their bodies were appointed to be hung up in
irons. For this purpose, the bodies of the Criminals were conveyed to the spot, where, accordingt o
the terms of the Sentence, they were to be gibbeted. Law relates, that " Though their entrails were
taken out, and their bodies cleanfed from all blood, yet when it (the body of one of the culprits) came
to the place where the Murther was committed, did giijli out in blood, in the arm which was cut ;
teftfied to be a truth by the beholders ; which was a teftimony of their guilt !"

(viii.) Of a like nature with the last instance, a strange story is told in the Biographia Scoticana,
which has likewise been elsewhere repeated. That a few days after Mr James Guthrie was executed,
and his head placed upon the Netherbow Port of Edinburgh, Middletotis coach coming down that
way and passing through the Port, several drops of blood fell frotn the head upon the top of the coach ;
— which, as the legend goes, ' all their art and diligence coidd not wipe off T Physicians were called,
and desired to enquire if any natural cause could be given for this event — but they could give none !
" Tliis odd incident being noifed abroad, and aU means tried, at length the leather was removed, and
a netv cover put on ! ! ! But this was much fooner done, than the wiping off the guilt of this great and
good man's blood upon the ihedders of it, and the difgrace from this poor Nation !"

(ix.) Few instances of this description are entitled to the consideration which the following Case
possesses, as well in a legal as in a philosophical point of view. In the very remarkable Scotish
Trial of Philip Stanfield,* for Parricide, (executed Feb. 15, 1688,) the circumstance of the body
of Sir James Stanfield of Newmills, who was Murdered near Haddington, in Dec. 1687, having bled
on the touch of his son Philip, the Parricide, was urged and argued with the utmost earnestness, in
Court. James 3Iuirhead, Surgeon, one of the Witnesses, swore, that " upon the prifoner's affilling
to lift the body of his deceafed father. Sir James Stanfield, after it had been fewed up,^ and clean linen

' Dreaming. * A mouse mark under his kft breast. ' Law's Memorials, p. 252. ^ See Howell's

State Trials, XI. 1371 Salmon's State Trials, p. 610. — Foxmtainlialls Decisions, I, iSl. — See aho Fuujitainhalfs

Diary. — Amot's Criminal Trials, p. 33, Note. ' The body had been opened and examined, by Judicial authority,

for the purpose of determining the precise cause of the deceased's death. The surgeons to whom this remit had beeu
granted, reported, that Sir James had died from strangulation, not from drowning — and that the idea of felo de se,
which had been attempted to be proved by the son, was utterly impossible.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. I97

put on, it DARTED OUT BLOOD through the linen, from the left Jide of the neck, tvhich the paniiell
TOUCHED — but, that when lie (the Witnefs) and the other Surgeon, James Crawford, put on the
linen, and flirred and moved the head and neck, before, hejaiv no blood at all T'

This fact was corroborated by other Witnesses — and it is, perhaps, worthy of notice, as the most
striking peculiarity of that Case, that Sir James had not been stabbed, shot, or assassinated by the
cutting of his throat — but was strangled, and then thrown into a water ; so that there was no no external xoound on the neck.

A singular feature in this Case of Stanneld, is the rank and eminence of the Public prosecutors, Sir
John Dairy mple, younger of Stair, Sir George Mackenzie, and the gravity with which these superstitious circumstances are argued. The Dittay states, '< When his father's dead body was fighted and
infpected by Chirurgions, and the cleir and evident figns of the Murder had appeared, the body was
fewed up, and mofl carefully cleaned ; and his neareil relations and friends were defired to lift up his
body to the coffin :' And accordingly, James Row, merchand (who was in Edinburgh at the time of
the Murder), having lifted the left fide of Sir James, his head and fhoulder, and the faid Philip the
right fide; his father's body, though carefully cleaned, as laid is, fo as the leaft blood was not on it,
did (according to God's usual method of discovering Murderers) blood afrejh tipon him,
and defiled all his hands; which flruck him with fuch a terror, that he immediately let his father's
Jiead and body fall with violence — and fled from the body I — And, in conflernation and confulion,
cryed. Lord, have mercy upon me ! — and bowed hinifelf down over a feat in the Church, (where the
Corpes was infpected,) wiping his father's innocent blood off his own murdering hands, upon his cloaths!"
But as the arguments are fortunately preserved, and as they shew many of the peculiaiities of these
superstitions, asd give the reasonings of the most eminent Lawyers of that time, it may be proper, and
can hardly fail to be interesting, even to the general reader, to enter a little into details.

Sir Patrick Hume? Counfel for Philip Stanfield, urged, that this is but a fuperftitious obfervation,
without any ground, either in Law or reafon. And Carpzovius relates. Part 3, ciuefl. 122, no. 31,
that feveral perfons had been unjuftly challenged, and that he, in his own experience, hadyeew a dead
body bleed, in prefence of the perfon who was not guilty ! And Matheus de Criminibus is of the
fame opinion, Tit. 16, de quefiionibus, num. 12, " de fanguine porro de Cadavere profluente, quod dicitur id de plurimis experimentis comprobetur^ tamen cum experimeuta falfa fint — ratio vero idonea
nulla reddi poflit, non pulaverim indicium ad Torturam fufficiens effe, non enim fapicntis Judicis elt
incerto experimento credere, quod certa ratione dirimendum eft." And the truth is, the occajion of
the dead body's bleeding was, tiiat the Chirurgion that came out to vifit the body did make an incifion about the neck, which might be the occafion of the bleeding ; — and alfo the very moving of the
dead body, when it was taken out of the grave and out of the coffin, might occafion the bleeding ; efpecially, feeing the body did not bleed for fome time after, which certainly was made by the motion
and by the incifion : As alfo^ a further eviilence that it could not be the defender's touching tlie body,
the Chirurgions did lykewais touch the body, as well as he, and feveral others prefent ; fo that the
bleeding could no more be afcribed to his touching, than the touching of the other perfons prefent.

Sir James Dalrmyple, Lord Advocate, anfwered, that " although tlie deceafed's fervants had made
a mxdiny uncnt the Burial, till the Corps werejightcd, yet the i)aniiel caufed bury the Corps that lame

' This may, no (loiil)t, have boen resortpd to, for tlic purpose of proviiifj Plillip's p;irti('i]>:itioii in tlic [Nliirdcr — but,
of itself, tliis ccn'mony is still nnivcrsally obscrvi'd in the niiildit' anil loucr ranks of life; and is a most alfi'ctinjf
spectacle to those who are so di'eply interested. It is called " the chestinj;" or " cothninn" of the corpse — a duty almost never (in Scotland) intrusted to hireliii|^s — but is most solemnly pei'forined by the nearest relations, as the last
endearinj; act of respectful and ailVxtionate reijard, which they can oifer, to the breathless remaitis of those who had
been nearest and dearest to them. ^ Aloii}; with this gentleman were Sir David Thoirs, ]\Ir William Monniepenny, and Mr William Dundas, us counsel for tlie prisoner.

198 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

night* without fliewing them !" After Warrant for raifing the body had been obtained, the infpection by
Surgeons, and the touching, as before detailed, took place; when the pannel let his father's head fall to the
ground, and cried out, O God I — and ran away and went to a defk in the Church, where he lay groaning
and in confufion, and durll never return to touch the Corpfe. And that as there could no natural reafon
be given, but an ordinar and xcomlerful Providence of God in this kind ofdifcoverij of Murder, fo the
fact was never more evident and fure. Though half a dozen of perfons were bearing the Corpfe, no
maris hands were bloody hut thepannels ! That the Corpfe being two entire days in the grave, in that
weather and feafon, the blood, by the courfe of nature, was become flagnant and congealed — fo that
the former tofling and lifting of the Corpfe, and even the incifion itfelf, had occafioned no fuch effuiion, but only fome water or gore — but upon thejirjl touch of the pannel, the Murderer, there appeared abundance of liquid florid blood !

Sir David Thoirs, in reply, argued, that the falling of blood from the wound could neither be a
ground nor prefumption for guilt — and though the pannel was furprifed to fee his father's blood, yet
the fame did only proceed from natural duty and affection, and not from any appreheniion of guilt I
Sir Patrick Hume added, that he offered to prove, that the pannel had tottched his father s body before
the inciJio7i, and it did not bleed.

Sir George Mackenzie, in his addrefs to the Jury, afferts that ' God Almighty himfelf ivas phajed
to hear afliare in the tejiimonies which we produce ; that Divine power which makes the blood circulate during life, has oft-times, in all Nations, opened a paffage to it, after death upon fuch occajions, —
but mo/i in this cafe r

The fentence of the Court was, that he (liould be < hanged on a gibbet till he be dead — and his
tongue to be cut out and burnt upon a fcaffold — and his right hand to be cut off and affixt on the Eall
Port of Haddingtoun — and his body to be carried to the Gallowlee, betwixt Leith and Edinburgh, and
there to be hanged up in chains,' &c.

(x.) Besides the class of notices which has already been afforded, it is natural to expect that vestiges of so prevalent a superstition should appear in the ancient Popular Poetry of all Nations. The
Editor's present leisure and opportunities do not admit of his entering upon so wide a field as that just
alluded to, for the illustration of such an enquiry. It is sufficient to mention, generally, that such traces
do appeal- in the Ballads of Scotland, England, Germany, and other European Nations. The ancient
Romance also, and the Drama of all these countries, abound with allusions to this superstition ; and
some of them make use of the ceremonial of touching the Corpse, as a powerful aid in exciting the feelings, and in heightening the interest of the reader, or auditory.

As a specimen of one of the Scotish Ballads illustrative of this superstition, the Editor may cite the
conclusion of the Romantic Ballad of Young Huntin, or Earl Richard,"^ as it is too long for insertion
at length : —

' « Put na the wite' on me," she said,

" It was my may* Catherine I"
Tlian they hae cut baith fern and thorn,
To burn that maiden in. —

' It wadna tak upon her cheik,

Nor yet upon her chin,
Nor yet upon her yellow hair,

To cleanse the deidly sin !

' The same night the body had been found in the water, having been incrusted with frozen ice, owing to the inclemency of the season ; the Miirder having been perpetrated in the month of December, during a storm. * See
Minslrelsy of the Scottish Border, II., 4^0 — Herd's Ballads — Chambers's BaUads, &c. ' Blame. ■• Maiden.

44&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 199

' The 3Iaiden toucKd the clay-cauld Corpse,

A DRAP IT NEVER BLED ;

The Lady laid her hand on him,
And soon the ground was red !

< Out they hae ta'en her, may Catherine,

And put her mistress in.
The flame tuik fast upon her cheik,

Tuik fast upon her chin,
Tuik fast upon her fair bodye —

She burn'd like hollin green I' *

(xi.) Before concluding these notices, it may be remarked, for the benefit of the curious inquirer into
the superstitions of his native country, that absurdities greater by far than this Test or Ordeal have been
gravely stated and maintained, even before the Supreme Criminal Tribunal of Scotland. Perhaps the
most extraordinary instance of this description occuiTed in the Trial of the Marquis of Argyll,'^
before Parliament, 1661, where the Indictment, after setting forth a variety of alleged Murders and
cruelties, proceeds, ' That the Lord from Heaven did declare his wrath and difpleafure againft the
aforefaid inhumane crueltie, by flriking the tree whereon they' were hanged in the faid month of
June, being a lively frefli growing afli-tree, at the Kirk-yard of Dimoone,^ among many other frefh
trees with leaves. The Lord ftruck the faid tree immediately thereafter, fo that the whole leaves
fell from it, and the tree withered, never bearing leaf thereafter, remaining fo for the fpace of two
years ; after which, being cut down, there fprang out of the very heart of the root thereof a fpring
like unto blood, X)opling up, running into JeveralJIreams all over the root; and that for feveral years
tliereofter,^ till the faid Murderers or their favourers, perceiving that it was remarked by perfons of all
ranks reforting there to fee this Miracle, they caufed houck out the root,*^ covering the whole with
earth, which was full of the faid matter like blood 1'

There cannot be a doubt that the foregoing Case, monstrous and shocking in the extreme as it is,
is merely an improvement upon the popular Superstition we have been considering ; and the inference
they wished to deduce from the whole matter is, — that ' hlood will have blood,' — that God will not
suffer Murder to pass over unavenged, even in this world ; — and farther, that if man fails to discover
guilt, the Almighty will, by extraordinary and even miraculous means, disclose the Murderer's horrid
secret.

' Green holly. « State Trials, (old Edit.) III. 422, and VII. 379 — Hoicell, XI. 1380. " The rersons

thus mercilessly murdered by the commands of Argyll, and massacred by his followers, were thirty-six in number ;
•who were hanged on this single tree, being ' special gentlemen of the name ai Lamond, and vassals to Sir James Lamond of Innerin,' (that Ilk.) And on the same day, they ' Murdered witli durks, and cut down with swords and
pistols,' a number of otlier unhappy creatures, among whom John Lurnond in Aucliinshallach, ' who being about the
age of fourscore years, &c. they most cruelly and barbarously stabbed with durhs and shanes at the ladder-foot.' The
Provost of Rothesay was shot through the body thrice, yet finding some life in him, they thrust at him with durks
and skanes, and at last cut his throat witli a long durk ; others they cast into holes, their victims ' spurning and
wrestling, whilst they were sulTocated with earth ; having denied to them any time to recommend themselves to God !'
These are part of the atrocities of the INIarquis's followers, detailed in the remarkable Dittay above alluded to ; and
besides this, they murdered and massacred a number of innocent women, and inhumanly left their bodies as a prey t(t
ravenous beasts and fowls, and ' young and old, yea suckling children, some of them not one month old !' The reader
is referred to the State Trials for other jiarticulars, which are too circumstantial to be enumerated here. ''An

ancient Castle on the Clyde, of which the Family of Argyleare still the nominal heritable Keepers. It has long since
been razed with the ground. The Dun, on which it was situated, has a very i)eculiar and commaiuling form, and is a
beautiful and picturesque object froin the opposite coast, and from the river. The ' Kirk-yard' is still surrounded by
lofty trees, '"• Quid's Melanwrjihoses are a ti-ille to this ; but still such execrable and almost blasiihenious ravings

were not only tolerated, but gi'avely discussed before Tarliament ! It ought, however, to lie kept in mind that tlie fanaticism which then prevailed had a large share in producing this gross and shocking exhibition, which can only be
viewed as solemn mockery of all judicial proceedings, and indeed of every thing sacred. " Dig up; extirpate.

200 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

Jul. 24. — Alexander Dumbak, Younger of Kilbowak •/ Robert Dumbar, his brother ; Niniane Duinbar, lone to Williame Dunibar
of Hemjirigis ; James Dunibar, fone to Gawin Dumbar, Arche-
(leane of Murray ; Thomas Falconer, feruitour to the laid
Alexander.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Alexander Dumbar of Waftfield (Scheref of Murray) ; comniittit the firft day of Junij laft : And contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in beiring and ichuiting of piftolettis, &c.

Persewaris.

Jolinne Dumbar of Waflfield, as brother to the defunct ; Sir Thomas Hammiltoun.

Prelocutouris for the Pannell.

Mr Johnne Ruflell, Mr Thomas Iloip, Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, Aduocatis ; the Conflable of Dundie,

elder, tlie Laird of Monymuflc, tlie Laird of Halkertoun,

The Juftice, of confent of ather parteis, continewis this dyet to fTryday nixt.
The AfTyle wairnit apudacia, ilk perfone, vnder the pane of twa hundreth merkis.

(Jul. 26.) — The Juftice continewis this dyet, as ofbefoir, with confent of
ather pairtie, to Wednifday nixt, &c.

(Jul. 31.) — The perfewar paiTisJtmpliciter fra the perfute of the perfones
on pannell ; and is content that thai be put to libertie. Quhairupoune the pannell aflvit inftrumentis.— Compeirit Patrik Dumbar of Blarie, and producet the
Counfallis Warrand to the Juftice, quhairof the tennour followis.

^Varrand /or i/ie DiiwJ)aris lihertie.

Justice, Juftice Clerk, and 50ur deputis : Quhear as, Alexander Dumbar of Kilboyak,'^ (^^O ^^"^
to be prefentit befoir 30W this prefent day, to vnderly the lawis for ]ie flauchter of vmq^*^ the Scheref
of MuiTay : And We, vnderftanding that ])e pairtie perfewar will noclit infift in the perfute of ])ir
])erfones, hot ar content and will confent that ])ai be put to libertie and fredome : Thairfoir :^ovv fall
tak guid cautioun of thame, that ])ai fall compeir befoir his Maiefteis Juftice, the thrid day of ])e nixt
Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quhair ])ai duell,^ or foner vpone a fyftene dayis wairning, and vnderly
}ie law for the Slauchter foirfaid ; vnder J»e panes coutenit in the Actis of Parliament: And this cautioun being fund, 50W fall put them to libertie and fredome, and fuffer })ame pas quhair \?i\ pleis :
Quhairanent pir prefentis fall be jOur Warrand. At Edinburgii, the laft day of Julij, 1611.

Al. CAXCELL^ Jo. PrESTOUN.

Patrik Dumbar of Blarie and Robert Falconer of Ballandro became cautioune
for thame, coniunctlie and feuerallie, to the effect aboue writtin.

The Juftice, accoirding to the directioun of the former Warrand, ordanit the
faidis perfones on pannell to pas frie, and nocht to returne to the laid Tolbuthe
furth of the quhilk thai war brocht. Quhairupoune Alexander Clerk, ane of the
Bailleis of Edinburgh, afl\it inftrumentis.

* See Jul. 31, 1616. 2 xjjg j-ggj ^f jjjg nanggg ^re recited. ^ Elgin.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 201

Jul. 31. — MoYSES Fa, Dauid Fa, Robert Fa, and Jolinne alias Willie
Fa, Egiptianis.
Dilaittit for Abydiiig and remaining within this Kingdome, they being Egiptianis ; contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament.

The ^giptianis Dittay.

MoYSF.s Fa, Dauid Fa, and Joiinxe Fa, 3e ar indytit and accufet ; That quliair, be Act of Parliament haldin at Edinburgh the xxiiij day of Junij, the 5eir of God r".Vj''. and nyne jeiris, it was ftatute and ordanit that all the vagabundis, foirneris" and cowmone thevis, cowmonlie callit Egiptianes,
fould haif pafl furtli Jiairof, and nevir retuniet within }ie famyn, eftir ))e fiifl day of Augull, the foirfaid
5eir of God T'^A'j^". and nyne 5eiris, vnder the pane of deathe : And that it fould be leifum to all his
Maielleis guid fubiectis, or ony of thame, to caus tak, apprehend, impriffone, and execute to death, all
nianer of Egiptianis, alfweill men as wemen, as cowmone, notorious, and condempnet Thevis, only to
be tryit be ane AlTyfe, that ])ai ar callit, knawin, repute, and haldin in' Egiptianis: Nocht])ELEs, ;e
and ilk ane of 50W being vagabundis, foirneris, cowmone thevis, repute, callit, and haldin Egiptianis,
in contempt of his Maieflie and his Lawis, hes prefumet to remane in tliis Kingdome, and lies nocht
depairtit and abiddin furth pairof, fen pe laid firlt day of Augufl, ])e jeir of God I'",Vj^. and nyne ;eiris
foirfaid ; bot be the contrair, je and ilk ane of 30W hes remanet within this Kingdome, in contempt of
|)e faid Act of Parliament, and ar notoriouflie knawin to be Egiptianis, and fua repute and haldin :
And fairfoir 50 and ilk ane of 30W aucht to be demanit to ]'e death, and fufi'er ]ie panes pairof ; conforme to the faid Act of Parliament.

Peusewar, yir Robert Foullis, fubftitute to our fouerane lordis Aduocat.

The Pannell, viz. Moyfes Fa, producet ane Licence, grantit to him be the
Counfell ; quhilk the Aduocat acceptis, ifi quantum. — It is allegit be the Aduocat, that the conditiones fpecifeit in the Licence grantit to Moyfes Fa is nawayis
keipit be the pannell, viz. that he fould find cautioun for fulfilling the perticular
injunctiones fpecifeit in his Licence : Quhilk cautioun,"* for his nocht entrie afoir^
the Counfel, is vnlawit in the pane and penaltie of ane Thowfeand pundis; and
the cautioner being charget for payment to the Thefaurer of the faid penaltie,
hes pafl to the home : And thairfoir, in refpect of the wordis of the Act of Parliament, and of the nocht payment of the penaltie, as alio in refpect that the conditiones fpecifeit in the Licence is nocht keipit, the faid Moyfes Faw hes fallin
vnder the danger of the faid Act of Parliament, and the pane of daith inflictit
vpone liim ; and the remanent perfones, his complices, aucht and fould be pvneift to the daith, conforme to the faid Act : And proteflis for WilfuU Errour
aganis the Aflyfe, gif thai acquit, according to the faid Act : And produces the
Counfallis Act contrair the cautioner, quhair he wes vnlawit in the Ibwme ;" togidder with the Letteris of Iloirning vfet aganis him : And repeittis the Depofitioun of James Ballache, teftifeing the faid Moyfes being in companie and focietie M'ith the Egi])tianis, and of his geving Band to the faid James, for redreffing of dyuerle Thiftis : And repeittis the Act of Parliament to the Allyfe.

' See Jul. ID, 1616. ^ Who forcibly take free quarters, &c. ^ As. ^ Cautioner;

surety. ^ Before. ^ The sum or amount.

VOL. III. 2 C

202 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

The Juftice, nochtwithftanding of the allegeance proponit be the faid Moyfes
Fa, vpone the pretendit Licence producet be him ; and in refpect of the anfueris.
maid thairto be the Aduocat, referrit the famyn Dittay to the knawlege and
tryell of ane Affyfe.

Verdict. The AfTyfe all in ane voce, be the mouth of Williame Murehead,
mercheand burges of Edinburgh, ehanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the
laidis Moyfes Fa, Dauid Fa, Robert Fa, and Jolinne alias Willie Fa, notoriouflie
knawin to be Egiptianis, at the leifl fua repute and haldin, to be ffylit, culpable,
and convict of contravening the tennour of the faid Act of Parliament, in thair
contemptuous remaining and abyding within this kingdome, continuallie, fen
the faid firft day of Augull, in the foirfaid yeir of God I™, fax hundreth and
nyne yeiris, exjwes contrair the tennour of the faid Act.

Sentence. To be tane to the Burrow-mure of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit quhill thai be deid : And all thair moveabill guidis and geir pertening to
thame, to be efcheit and inbi:ocht to our fouerane lordis ufe, asi culpable and convict, &c.

^^jitjinn from tjje laaitJ of iiyt %%\m,

Sept. 17.— JoHNNE M'MiLLANE in Merlkelloch, Johnne M'^Millane in
Bank, and Cuthbert M^millane in Drumreifche.

Dilaitit for contravening of his Maiefteis Proclamatioun, maid in the yeir of
God I".Vj'. and aucht yeiris, in nocht paffing fordward with his Maiefteis Lieutenant to the Raid of the His.

For releif of thair Cautioneris, and in. refpect that thai thame felfis ar na ffriehalderis nor landit gentilmen, haifing nather landis nor rentis, hot ar removeable
Tennentis, and fa nocht comprehendit vnder the faidis Proclamatioun, thay thairfoir compeirit this day and place, in the hour of cans, and offerit thame felffis to
the Tryell of the Law, and to vnderly the rigour thairof, gif it war fund that thai
war ony wayis comprehendit vnder the faid Proclamatioun : And forder, offerit
to mak the Kingis Maieftie affignay to thair haill landis and heritages within
this realme, gif thai ony had, at that tyme. In refpect of the quhilk premiffes,
and of thair compeirance this day and place, in the hour of cans, and offer
maid be thame in maner aboue fpecifeit, thay Proteftit for thair cautioneris releif ; and that thai fould onnawayis be callit, charget, or trubillit for the faid
allegit cryme in ony tyme cuming.

ISiZmti anlJ S^ntertommundtg "^iiiy Mx ^Itxm^tK mutjben, ^c*—

Nov. 7. — Dauid Spalding of Effmtullie.
Dilaitit of the treffouable Reffet and Intercowmoning with Mr Alexander

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 203

Ruthven, fone to vmq'^ Alexander Ruthven of Freland, and fiippoirting of him
with money and vther intertenement, he being his Maiefteis declairit Tratour,
fforfalt in Parliament, and fugitiue, for airt and jjairt of the treaffonable affifling and pairt-taking with Johnne, fiimtyme Erle of Gowrie, Alexander
Ruthven his brother, in the treffonable Confpiracie devyfet aganis his Maieftie,
at Perthe, vpone the fyft day of Aiiguft, 1600 yeiris.

The Juftice continewis this dyet to the fourt day of Marche, qiihilk is the firfl
Wednifday thairof : And ordanit the defender to find cautioun for his compeirance that day. Plegio, Johanne Spalding de Inner rij dray.

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, Mr Andro Aytoun.
(Mar. 4, 1612.) — My Lord Advocat defyres that this mater may be continewit to the tuentie day of Maij nixtOcum, in refpect that, be his Maiefteis
Letter, directioun was gevin that probatioun fould be miniftmt to the Affyfe, of
the pannellis giltines of the fact lybellit : And that, in the meane tyme, his
Maieftie may be acquentit with the informeris llaknes in the perfute.

The Juftice continewis this matter to the tuentie day of Maij nixtocum.
Plegio, utfupra.

Prelocutouris in defence.
Mr John RufTell, Mr Andro Aytoun, Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, Mr James Oliphant.
(Mali 20, 1612.) — Compeirit Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Byres, kny',
Aduocat to our fouerane lord, and declairit, that informatioun was gevin to him
be his Maieftie, to follow furth this perfute aganis the pannell, his Informeris
furneifling probatioun in that matter, vtherwayis to defift : And in refpect na
diligence is vfet be the Informeris in this eirand, for fortherance of this perftite ;
he thairfoir declairit, that he wald nocht infift in perfute of the pannell, at this
tyme, bot defyret that the dyet fould defert. — Quhairupoun the pannell and his
prelocutouris afkit inftrumentis, and proteftit, that he be nocht callit, charget, or
perfewit for the crymes aboue fpecifeit, in ony tyme cuming. And nochtwithftanding of the premiftes, in refpect of his innocence of the faidis allegit crymes,
as he affirmet, offerit him felff inftantlie to the tryell of the Law, dillaflenting to
all maner of continuatioun ; protefting alfo, that na Letteris be direct aganis him
for the faid Cryme in tyme cuming ; becaus this is the fourt dyet keipit be him
in this matter.

J^InufjJtcr.

Nov. 8. — JoHNNE Farquharsoux of Innerchald, Alhifter Farquliarfoun, his brother, Donald Farquharfoun younger, Allaller
Farquharfoun, his brother, James Farquharfoun in Achalater,
Johnne Robertlbun of Straloch, alias Barronc Rcid, Johnne
Gairdin in Balliemoche, Findia Farquharfoun in Glenylay.

204 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161L

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ James Clerk in Auldranie ;
committit in anno 1610 yeiris.

Compeirit Thomas Sinclair indueller in Edinburgh, and Robert Auchinlek,
wryter, as procuratoiiris, fpeciallie conftitute be Elfpeth Kow the relict, and be
Andro Howie, now hir Ipous, for his entreis ; and be vertew of the Letter of
Procuratorie grantit to thame, of the dait at Aberdene the third day of November inftant, fubfcryuit be James Dauidfoune and Mr Andro Clerk connoteris,^ in
name, and at command, of the faid Ellpect and hir fpous, paft fimpliciter fra the
perliite of tlie liaill perlbnes on pannell, &c.

The pannell proteflis that thai nornaneof thame be callit or perfewit for the
faid allegit (laughter in ony tyme cuming.

Nov. 27. — \Villia:\ik Fokbes of Monymuflv.
Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit off the crymes following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as vpone the nynt day of Maij, the 3eir of God l"\ V^". fourfcoir 3eiris, vmq''^ Alexander Men:;eis, fone to vniq''' Gilbert Men3eis of Culrie, Proveift of Aberdene, being directit be the
laid vniq'"^ Gilbert Menjeis of Culrie, liis father, to viffie^ ane Halk-neft appointit be him to haif bene
keipit and preferuet to our fouerane lordis vfe and plefoure,^ within the Craig* of Findoun, pertening
lieritabillie to the faid Gilbert Men3eis, oy^ to the faid vmq''^ Gilbert Men5eis of Culrie, lyand within
the Scherefdome of Kincairdin ; the faid vmq'*^ Alexander Menjeis, eftir vifitatioun of the famyn, and
that he had ordanit the tennentis of the faidis landis of Findoun to geve earned attendance to the keipino' of the faid halk-nefl'' for his Maiefleis vfe, as faid is ; he being in fober and quyet maner retumeand thairfra, cumand agaitwardis to the burghe of Aberdene, trufting in the meane tyme na inquietatioun, truble, harme, nor iiiiurie to haif bene done to him, be ony perfones ; hot to haif frelie paft furth
,the liie way, as his hienes frie fubiect, in refpect that he had oflendit na man, nather be word nor deid :
Ncuerlheles it is of veritie, that the faid Williame Forbes of IMonymufk, accumpaneit with Alexander

llobertfoun, Thomas Dik, and Mylne, then liis fervandis, and vtheris thair complices, with

convocatioun of our fouerane lordis legis, to the number of aucht perfones, or thairby ; bodin in weirlyk maner, with fecreitis,'' fleil-bonettis, gantiletis, fuordis, culveringis, and piftolettis, expreflie prohibeit to be borne, worne, vfet vpone thair perfones or in thair companeis, privatlie or oppinlie, outwith
houffis, or fcliote with, be the Actis of Parliament, vnder the panes thairin contenit ; vpone the faid
nynt day of May, the yeir of God foirfaid, the faid Williame Forbes, with his complices, came tyniouflie hi the moirning, befoir the fone-ryfeing, to the Cairne^ of Loriefloun, lyand within the fcherefdome foirfaid, quhair thay darnet'-* thamefelffis, maift obfcuirlie, behind the faid Cairne, with thair

' Co-Notiirirs. ^ Inspect. ■'' King James VI., like many others of his ancestors of the Royal House

of Stuart, was passionately fond of the sport of Hawking, and appears to have spared no expense in procuring the
finest breeds, from various parts of Scotland (chiefly from the North of Scotland and from the Western Islands and
Orkney.) The choicest kinds seem to have been brought from Denmark and Xorwaj' ; and, in many instances, the
Falconers, who had trained them in those countries, were taken under the King's immediate protection and patronage. ' Craig, a precipitous rock or crag. * Grandson ; oe. "^ The books of the Lord High Treasurer abound with entries of payments to men ' for watching a halkis-nest' at such a place, so as to secure the brood,
and give timely notice when they were fledged and ready to take wing. ' A shirt of chain-mail, secretly worn
imdcr the ordinary di'ess. * A heap or pile of stones, commonly erected on an eminence, which marks the place
of sepulture of some remarkable persons. Cairns were often reared to preserve the memory of a remarkable Murder,
Sic. ^ Concealed ; hid.

45 & 9 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 20.5

charget culyeringis, placet vpone reflis,* awaiting the faid vmq''^ Alexanderis bycuming, for his (lauchter : Lyk as, thay lay at await for his flauchter behind the faid Cairne, continuallie, fra befoir the loiieryfeing, quhill about aucht houris in the raoirning; till at lafl, haifing perfauet the faid vmq^*^ Alexander foliter, him felf allane, in fober and quyet maner, cumand by the faid cairne, thay, af thair rellis,
difcharget thair culveringis at hino, or euir he was circumfpect of tharae ; and thairwith fchote him
throw the heart and body with tua bullettis ; and thairby, maift fchamefuUie, crewallie, and vnmercifullie flew him, upone fet purpois, prouifioun, be way of Brigancie,'- in vmbefetting the hie way, and
ffoirthocht ffellonie : And nocht being fatisfeit thairwith, thay feing him fall doun deid with the faid
fchote, thay incontinent thaireftir rufchet fordwaris to him, and with thair fuordis and quhingeris mailt
fchamefuUie, crewallie, and tirannouilie gaif the faid Alexander nyue bludie woundis about his heart,
nochtwithftanding that thay had perfauet him lyand deid and flane be thame of befoir : As also, at
the famyn tynie, be way of fbouthreif, flaw,^ reft, and away tuik with thame his fuord, quhinger, cloik,
and uther graith being vpone him ; had and convoyit the famyn with tharae, and difponit thairupoun
at thair plefour : And the faid Williame Forbes of Monymullc is airt and pairt of the faid crewall
Slauchter of the faid vmq^'' Alexander, and of the Maiflerfull ftouth-reif of his fuord, quhinger, cloili,
and vtheris aboue writtin. For the quhilkis, and for contravening the tennour of the faid Act of Par.
liament, in beiring, weiring, and fchuiting of the faidis Culveringis, dagis, and piftolettis, he aucht and
fould be puneifl, conforme to the Lawis of this realme.

Persewaris, Gilbert Menzies of Pitfoddellis, as eldefl brother-fone ; Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of

Byres, kny*, Aduocat, &c. ; Dauid Menzeis of Tilliepowreis, as brother.

Prelocutouris in defence. My Lord of Mar, My Lord of Moirtoun, Mr Thomas Henderfoun,

Mr Alexander Peiblis, Mr James Oliphant, Aduocattis.

Efter the reiding of the faid Dittay and accufatioun of the faid "\A''illiame
Forbes of the faidis ciymes, the Aduocat, with the pairteis perfewaris aboue
writtin, his informeris, befoir all forder proces, paft fra that article of the Summondis anent the * Stouthe-reif,' ^jro loco et tempore : As alfo declairit, that he
wald nocht infill vpone that woird of the Dittay beiring ' foirthocht fellonie f
And adherit allanerlie* to the Slauchter and committing thairof, in maner contenit in the Dittay, be fchottis of hagbuttis and i^iftolettis ; and in beiring and
weiring of the faidis hagbuttis, contrair the Actis of Parliament : Quliairvi)one
inftrumentis was tane be the faid Williame Forbes of Monymullv and his 2)relocutouris ; quha, nochtwithftanding thairof, offerit thame felffis reddie to defend
for the faidis crymes paft fra. And as concerning the Slauchter aboue writtin
and remanent crymes lybellit, allegit that the Juftice could not put the famyn
to the Tryell of ane Affyfe, becaus nocht only had the faid Williame obtenit tua
feuerall Letteris of Slanes fra tua of the bretlier to the defunct, in refpect of thair
fatisfactioun contenit thairin ; hot alfo, the Kingis Maieftie, of his fpeciall grace
and mercie, hes, be his Letteris of Remiffioun, pardonit and remittit the faid
Williame Forbes of Monymulli for the faidis crymes : And for verificatioun

^ When the culvering or musket was first introduced, the barrel was so heavy as to require a separate staff, called a rest, from which a deliberate aim could be taken. The circumstance of the culverings being placed upon their rests, is noted as an aggravation of the crime, and a strong i)roof of
the malice of the parties. Specimens may be seen in Grose, or in the more recent publication ot
Meyrick on Ancient Armour, &c. ^ Fr. brigand, brigancie. ' Stole. * Alone ; only.

206 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161L

thairof, producet tua feiierall RemifTiones, baith vnder the Grit Seill ; the ane, for
the Slauchter aboue writtin, daitit vpone the xxvij day of Junij laft, and the
vther, daitit vpone the firft day of Auguft laftbypaft, for beiring and weiring of
tlie hagbuttis and piilolettis ; and vpone the productioun thairof aflcit inftrunientis. To the quhilkis RemifTiones, and his Maiefteis pardoun fet doun thairin, the faid ^Villianie Forbes tuik him felff, and offerit cautioim to fatisfie fa mony
of the kyn and freindis of the faid vmq'® Alexander as ar nocht fatisfeit ah'eddie,
accoirding to the modificatioim of the Lordis of Seffioim, and thair Declaratour
to be gevin thairintill.

Quhilkis tua RemifTiones, the Juflice admittit ; and ordanit the faid Williame
Forbes of Monymufk to fhnd the faid Cautioun for the parteis fatisfactionn, in
maner aboue fpecifeit : Quhairupoun the faid Williame Forbes afl^it inflrumentis.

And for obedience of the faid Juflice Ordinance, ffand Williame Forbes of PortLethem cautioun with him felf, coniunctlie and feuerallie, to fatisfie fa mony of
the kyn and freindis of the faid vmq^^ Alexander, as ar nocht fatisfeit alreddie,
for the Slauchter aboue fpecifeit ; conforrae to the modificatioun of the faidis
Lordis of SefTioun, and thair declaratour to be gevin thairintill, as law will :
Quhairupoun the faid Gilbert Menzeis of Pitfoddellis, as eldefl brother-fone, and
the faid Dauid Menzeis, as brother to the defunct, afkit actis and inflrumentis.

iHurtrn* iinUer toloxw ot ilato—Svobjninfi: tov a pett|) Crime, kc*

[The Case which follows seems to have taken its origin from feelings of vindictive malevolence, on
the part of a Notary in Lanark, a dependent of the Laird of Lee ; who, to gratify his base and revengeful temper, adopted the plan of conspiring against his patron's life and fortune, by accusing him of
Murdering a poor man, under colour of Law ! This tale was so well got up, that the Lord Advocate
entertained his complaint, and raised Criminal Letters against Lockhart. A more effectual channel
was likewise made use of by Weir the Notary, who directly complained, through the Marquis of Hamilton, to the King, who was at all times accessible to such accusations of oppression ; from the double
motive of desire to redress the wrongs of his injured subjects, and from his overmastering * greed of
filthy lucre :' for many were the schemes resorted to by the British Solomon to enrich his coiFers with the
proceeds of the heaviest fines and pecuniary compositions which could be exacted, as peace-ofFerings, to
appease his Majesty's inflexible justice I A doubt having arisen in the mind of the Editor as to the truth
of the accusation contained in the Criminal Record, he made a pretty extensive search, and has fortunately been enabled to trace the matter to its origin. Without proper vouchers having been produced,
the reader would naturally have inferred, from a close inspection of the Record, that the Lord Advocate had been tampered with by some powerful friends of this influential Baron of Lee — and that
Lockhart had been really guilty of the atrocious crime imputed to him by his accusers. The Letter
from the Privy Council to the King, and the Deposition of Weir, which are appended, satisfactorily
explain the matter, and clear the character of the Laird of Lee from the slightest suspicion on this score.]
Dec. 3. — James LOKHART of Lie.
Dilaitit for Drowneing and puting violentlie to death of vmq'^ James Watfone,
in Auchcat-burne, and vtheris crymes fpecifeit in his Dittay.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

207

In refi^ect of the Advocate's abfence, he proteftis for relief of Johnne Lokhart
of Bar his cautioner : And he farther protefted for relief of George Aiichinlek
of Balmanno, cautioner for * his compeirance befoir my Lord Juftice and his deputis, in the Tolbuth of E', x'pone the xx day of December inftant, and that he
be nocht haldin to compeir the faid day,' &c.

Dec. 20. — Compeirit James Lokhart of Lie, quha proponit and declairit,
fforfamekill as he being charget, &c., in the moneth of October laftbypaft, to find
cautioun to haif compeirit befoir the Juftice or his deputis, vpone the faxt day
of November thairefter, now laftbypaft, in the hour of cans, to haif vnderlyne
the Law for the allegit Murthour and putting to death of vmq" James ^Vatfone,
vnder cuUour of Law ; as he that was convict of fie meane crymes, as, be the
Lawes of this realme, the dome of death could nocht be inflicted vpone ; and
for certane vtheris allegit crymes, at lenth Qjecifeit in the Letteris direct thairanent. The faid James Lokhart of Lie, the tyme of the geving of the faid
charge, being furth of this realme, in the pairtis of Ingland, yit nevertheles, be
the advyfe of his freindis, in his abfence, efter knawlege gevin to thame of the
faid charge, and for efchewing of the danger of Hoirning contenit in the faidis
Letteris, in caice of difobedience, George Afflek of Balmanno became cautioner
for his entrie, the faid faxt day of November, to vnderly the Law for the faidis
crymes ; at the quhilk day, the faid George Afflek haifing, in refpect of the faid
Laird of Leyis nocht returning, obtenit of the Lordis of Seffioun thair Lordfchipis Warrand, direct to the Juftice, for continuatioun of the dyet that day, to
this prefent day : The Juftice, for obedience of the faid Warrand, of confent of
my lord Aduocat, perfonallie prefent that day, as perfewar, continewit the faid
dyet to this day. Lykas, the faid George Afflek than become cautioun, &c.

In refpect that my lord Aduocat nor na vther pairtie com2)eirit this day and
place, as perfewaris, to infift in his perfute, being oft tymes callit to that effect,
thairfoir Proteftit for releif of the faid George, &c. Quhilk Proteftatioun the
Juftice admittit : Quhairupoun the faid Laird of Lie afkit inftrumentis.

I. Letter, the Privy Council ofScotla?id to the King,

Most gracious and sacred Souerane,

According vnto your Maiefteis directioun, fend vnto me, for trying of thole contradictorie informatiounis maid to your Maieflie be the Marques of Hammiltoun' and the Laird of Lee, anent

the executioun of vinqxihih James Watfomi, and fetting to libertie oiJaiinct Forrcjt, his fpous, I caufit

wame the Marques and tlie Laird of Lie to compeir this day, for iuftifeeing of thair informationis. The

' James, .<;fCo«r/ IMarquis of Ilainilton, a nobleman high in favour with the Kiiip, wlio granted liim the Abbey of
Aberbrothoek, wlilch was erected into a temporal Lord-ship, appointed liim a Privy ("ouiicillor, one ol'tlie Cientlemen
of the Bed-Chamber, Lord Steward of the Household — and subsequently, create<l him an English I'een with the
titles of Baron Knnerdale, and Earl of Cambridge, Jun. IG, IGlf). Besides other gieat aitpnintments, he w.ls High
Commissioner to the Parliament at Edinburgh, August l, 16:^1, and wa^s. installed Knight of the Garter, Jul. 7,
1623. He died at Whitehall, Mar. 2, 1G24-5, tetat. 36. He married Lady Anne Ciuiinghame, fourth daughter of
James, seventh Earl of Glencairn.

208 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 16IL

Marques coiHpeiit be Sir Joline Ilammiltoun, his brother, who affermed, tljat Jedeone Weir, notair in
Lanerk, and Clerk of the proces led againis the faid vmq''' James Walfoun, declairit and Ihew vnto
the Marques, tliat this Watfone and his Ipous wer onlie callit and convict, and Watfoun execute, for
lleillinfr of ane lamb, and that the wyffc, after her convlctioun, wes fett at libertie. And for verificatioun of this his affermatioun, he exhibite the faid Jedeone Weir ; who, vpoun examinatioun, confeffit
that he had gevin this informatioun to the Marques, as alAva to your Maiefteis Aduocat, the tyme of
the railiiiir of the ('riminall Letteris aganis Lie ; as your Maieilie, be his Depofitioun, heirwith fend
vj), will perfave. The Laird of Lie compeirand, aft'ermed conftantlie, that this Watfoun wes callit and
convict, vpoun his awin judiciall Confeffioun ; and accordinglie execute, for the fteilling of nyne fcheepe.
And for verificatioun heirof, he produceit the proces, writtin euery woi'de with Jedeone VVeiris awne
hand ; whilk, being Ihowne vnto him, he could not deny the fame.

This is all that hes bene tryit iu this mater; vvhairby it appeiris, that the Marques hes bene abufed ^
be the faid Jedeone Weir, who, vpoun fome priuat paflioun and mifcontentment aganis the Laird of
Lie, maid this informatioun. And as for the wyfFe, thairwes no thing verifeit aganis hir, hot the flealinor of ane lamb, confeffit be hir felf. Whairupoun llie wes dimittit,^ in refpect that the Affife could
irif no venlite asanis iiir. At this examinatioun, I wes affifted be the Archiebifchop of Glafgw,^^ the
Erll of Glencairne,* the Lord of Scone,^ the Prefident,"^ Preuie Seill,'' Secretair,^ Juflice Clerk,^ Aduocat,'" and Sir Robert Meluill ;" who all thoght meete that Warrand and directioun fould be gevin for
lieierting of the dyet appointit for the Laird of Lies tryale ; whilk accordinglie wes done, whill tjje
forder knowledge of your ]Ma'''* gratious will and pleafour heiranent, whairvnto I fall conforme my
lelff. And fo, with my liumble and hairtie prayeris vnto God, recommending your facred ]Ma'''' and
all your royall progenye to his faderlie and devyne protectioun, I reft for ever.

Your Maiefleis moft humble and obedyent fubiect and feruitour,

(Edinburgh), 28 Nouomber, 161 L Dunfermei.ixe.

To THE KiNc; his mcft fucred Majellie.
IL ' Jedeax Weir, Ids DErosixioux, 27 Nouemh. 1611, anent Laird Lie Lcckhurdy
referred fo i?i (lie foregoing Letter.

Jedeone Weir, notair in Lanerk, fn'orne, and demandit vpoun the forme and maner of the Dittay
and accufatioun of vmquhile James Watfoun in Lie Mure, and Jonnet Forreft, his fpous, and of the
couvictioun and cxecutioun following thairupoun : Deponis, that the faid vmquhile James and his fpous
wer only callit and perfewit for the flealing of ane lamb ; and that thay wer convict thairof : And that
the faid James Watfoun wes drownit for the Healing of the Iamb ; and that the faid Jonnet Forrefl,
his fpous, Aves fett at libertie : And that this Deponner wes Clerk of the proces ; and that the proces
is writtin with his avvne hand ; And this he deponiis fo fer as his memorie fervis him. And deponis,
that he gaif this informatioun to the Marques of Hammiltoun, as alfua to Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of
Ijyri*, knight, his Maiefteis Aduocat. Tenet cum principali, J. Prymrois.

Dec. 12. — Daiid Donaldsoux, chopinan in the Cannogait.

Duped ; imjxiscd upon. ^ Dismissed simplicifer from the bar. ^ John Spotiswood, the

Church Historian, kc. * James, scvejith Earl of Glencairn. ^ David. ^r*^ Lord Scone, who,

while he was Sir David Murray of G(!ppertie, was successively Cup-bearer, Master of tl;e Horse, Captain of the King's Guard, ai:d Comptroller. For the share he had in rendering the King so essential
service, on occasion of (Jowrie's Conspiracy, he |jot the Barony of Ruthven, with the Abbacy of Scone,
which last was erected into a t«niporfil Lerilship ; and he was afterwards created A'iscount of Stormont. <^ John Preston of Fenton Darns, President of the College of Justice. ' Sir Richard

Cokl)urn of Clerkington. * Sir Thomas Hamilton, afterwards Earl of Hadington. ^ Sir John

Cokburn of Ormistoun. "' Sir Thomas Hamilton. ii Of Bruntisland, one'of the Extraordinary

Lords of Session.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 209

Dilaitit of the ffalliefeing, fforgeing, and counterfuteing of ane fals Affignatioun, &c. fpecifeit in his Dittay following.

Persewaris.
Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Byres, kny^, Johnne AHlmnder,' indueller in the Cannogait.

Dauid Donaldsoun, chopman in the Cannogait, ge ar indytit and accufet,
fforfaniekill as 3e, haifing ingyret^ 3ourfelf in the acquentance of Johnne Alfchander, indueller in the Cannogait, ane piiir, aged, fimiDle^ man, wanting childrene
and freindis ;'* of let purpois to mak 3our advantage, vnlauchfullie, of him, and
to defraud him of that fmall portioun of geir quhilk relied^ to him for his intertenement,*' in his decriped and decayed age ; and be jour flattens and fubtelteis,
promeiffing to him jour afTiflance in his actiones and effairis, with his intertenement in jour houfe ; haifing J)airby obtenit of him credeit to handill and pervyfe
his writtis and euidentis ; je, in the moneth of September, or jjairby, in the jeir
of God I™.Vj^ and ellevin jeiris, thiftiouflie flaw and conceillit frome him, and
retaynit in jour handis, tua Obligatiohis maid to him ; the ane Jjairof, of the
dait the xxj day of Januar, I'^.VMxxxxviij jeiris, quhairby Johnne goung in
Budingftoun was obleifl to pay to him the fowme of ane hundreth pundis, and
failjeing pairof to infeft him (in) ane annuel-rent ; and the vj)er, of the dait the
fyft day of Februare, I^.Vj''. and ten jeiris, quhairby Johnne and Thomas
Carffis was bund to the faid Johnne Alfchunder to pay to him J)e fowme of ane
hundreth and tuelf pundis : And redelyuering to him pe refl of his writtis, je
affirmet to him, that je had delyuerit to him his haill writtis and euidentis. And
eftir that je had thiftiouflie flowin fra him his faidis Obligationis, in maner and
at pe tyme aboue fpecifeit, and had confident with jour felff that pe faidis Obligationes wald be vnproffitable to jow vnles je war maid affignay ftairto, and
knawing alfo that pe puir man was nocht altogidder fo fenfles as to denude
him felf of his haill guidis, geir, obligationes, and dettis in jour fauour, being
ane flranger, to quhome he was niiwayis obleifl, and quhome he had no relfone
to trufl with his haill moyane and eflait ; je, falllie, wiketlie, and effrontellie
refoluet to fforge, counterfute, and ffalfiefie to jour felf and jour awin behuife
ane Affignatioun to the faid Johnne Alfchunderis foirfaidis Obligationes and
haill remanent guidis and geir : ffor performeance quhairof, knawing that je
behovet to haif pe affiflance of fum man quho wald tak v^Jone him pe name and
reprefent the perfonage of the faid Johnne Alfchunder, je firfl delt with ....
.... Ramfay, ane aged begger, to j^lay that perfonage ; and eftir je had craftillie intyfed him to confent |)airto, jit foirfeing^ with jour felflf the grit and mony

1 Alexander. ^ 7^ ingratiate, by artifice and circumvention. From Lat. i?i, and fft/ro, to twist
or turn round ; to entwine, &c. ^ Weak ; facile. * Childless, and having no blood-relations,

&c. to care for him in his old age. * Remained. 6 Livelihood ; maiutenance. ' Foreseeing

VOL. in. 2 D

210 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1611.

differences, in faiiour and ftature/ betuix him and pe faid Johnne Alfchunder,

wald eafilie bewray 5our falfet, 56 delt with Cuthbert, cordiner in

the Kowgait, quha haifing refuifet to be actoiir in fo pernicious and wiked
ane interpryfe, at laft 5e delt with Johnne Henrie, cobler in the Cannogait,
and finding him bothe fit and willing to play the pairt of fo damnable a tragedie, and knawing that gif his face fould be fene bare and vncoverit, it wald
be J)aireftir eafilie difcoverid, that he haifing the ficht of bothe his eyis micht
eafilie be difcernit from Johnne Alfchunder, quho is blind of one of his eyis, 36
caufit ]}e faid Johnne Henrie cover one of his eyis and pe fyde of his face with
ane blak clothe, vpone the tuelf day of November laftbypaft, and than informet
him fufficientlie of all the circumftances necelfar to be vfet be him in the reprefentatioun of the perfone of the faid Johnne Alfchunder, for accompleiffmg 5our
wiket, pernicious, and fals purpois : And immediatlie I}aireftir, convoyit him with
^ow to the toun of Leith ; and ]?air travellit with Patrik Glasfurd, notter, to
forme ane Affignatioun to 50W of the foirfaidis Bandis, and of the faid Johnne
Alfchunderis haill remanent guidis ; quhilk being done at 5our defyre, ^e J}aireftir convoyit the faid Johnne Henrie, cobler, to pe wryting-buithe of the faid
Patrik Glasfurd in Leyth, in quhais prefens, and in pe prefens of Archibald Norwell, connotour,^ and dyuerfe honeft witneffes, altogidder ignorant and innocent
of 5our falfe, dilfaueabill, and wdket purpois, the faid Johnne Henrie, cobler,
quhome 56 fuppofed in place of pe faid Johnne Alfchunder, and quho, of 5our
fpeciall caufeing, command, counfell and perfuafioun, taking vpone him, falfelie
and mifchantlie,^ pe name and perfonage of pe faid Johnne Alfchunder,, gaif command to the faidis connoteris to fubfcryve to 50W and in 5our fauouris the foirfaid
Affignatioun* to the faid Johnne Alfchunderis Obligationes and guidis. Quhilk
being done, and fubfcryuit be pe faidis Notteris and witneifes infert ; and pe Notteris, for difchairge of J)air deutie, haifing proponit to 30W, that reffone and confcience requyret that 3e fould provyde for pe pure auld man Johnne Alfchunderis intertenement, during his lyftyme, 5e confented that ])ai fould forme ane
Bak-Band, obleilfand 30W to him to J)at effect, during his lyftyme ; quhilk 36
fubfcryued and delyuered to the faid Johnne Henrie, afl^irmeing him felf falilie
to be the faid Johnne Alfchunder : And fchortlie Jjaireftir 3e caufet regiftrat the
foirfaidis Obligatiounes, and gaif in the faid Affignatioun to the Regifter ; and

^ In point of looks, complexion, personal appearance, and stature. ^ Co-Notary. ^ From

O. Fr. mesc/ia/it, wicked, worthless, &c. ^ By the Law of Scotland, blind or maimed persons,

and th(tse who cannot write, may execute Last-wills and deeds of the greatest importance and solemnity,
through the medium of two Public Notaries, who, in presence of four or more witnesses, read over
and explain the nature of the Deed to be then completed ; and on getting the instructions of the party,
write out an official and Notarial schedule, or ' docquet,' as it is called, attesting the fact, and stating
precisely the reason of their being called upon to subscribe the deed in question. On the Notaries
adhibiting their official signatures — the witnesses likewise, in attestation of the fact, subscribing their
names — the writing is perfectly valid in Law.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 211

J?airupoim and vpone the faid fals Affignatioim 50 raifet Letteris of Poinding
and Intromiifioiin, and falflie, wicketlie, and thiftiouflie mellit^ and intromettit
with fourtene fcheip pertening to the faid Johnne Alfchimder, flew and difponit
vpone tiia of thame, fauld and difponit vpone the reft, and waifted and confumed
the price J^airof in fatisfeing the gkittonie of 5oiir deboifched^ affbciattis : And
being callit befoir pe Lordis of Secreit Counfell, 56 abaid at pe verritie of the
faid Affignatioim, vpone 5oiir grit aith, and vpone the perrell of 5our lyfe :
Lykas, 5e haifing abiddin Jjairat, in prefens of the Lordis of Seffioun, and periuredlie avowed the fame to be ane trew evident, eftir that be f)air dilligence in
5our Examinatioim, ^e was put frome all cullour of juftifeing ])airof, '^it 56 maliciouflie and impudentlie preifed to cleir 5our felfF, and bring wrangus impiitatioun ]3airof vpone 3our innocent wyfe and hir ffather. Quhairby, 36 haif committed the crymes of Thift, Impoifture, Perim-ie, Falfet, and DilTaitful fuppofitioun of ane counterfute perfonage, falflie, wiketlie and diflaueabillie to affume
and vfurpe the name and perfonage of the faid Johnne Alfchunder, to his diflait,
preiudice, and manifeft oppreflioun, in maner aboue writtin. For the quhilk, 56
aucht to be exemplarlie puneifchet, as ane Theif, abufear, impoftm*e, and periiired falfer, and perfuader of ane pernitious villane to vfurpe, afliime, and tak
vpone him the name and perfonage of ane of his Maiefteis trew fubiectis, for his
diflait and ouerthrow.

The perfones of Aflyfe being chofin, fuorne, and admittit, eftir accufatioun of
new agane of the faid Dauid Donaldfoun, be Dittay, in thair prefens and audience, of the crymes aboue writtin, and eftir productioun to thame, be our faid
fouerane lordis Aduocat, of ane Decreit of the Lordis of Seffioun, of the dait the
ellevint day of December inftant, ffinding and declairing the foirfaid Affignatioun allegit, maid and grantit to the faid Dauid Donaldfone be the faid Johnne
Alfchunder, in maner fpecifeit in his Dittay, to be ffals and fen3eit in the felf,
forget, and devyfet be the faid Dauid ; and thairfoir, decerning and ordaning him
to be punefchet in his perfone and guidis thairfoir with all rigour, in exampill
of vtheris.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Mathie, bonat-maker, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet and declairit the faid Dauid Donaldfoune to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of the crymes of Thift, Impofture, Periurie, Falfet, and Diffaitful fuppofitioun of the faid Johnne Henrie, cobler, ane counterfute knaif,
falflie, wiketlie and diffaueabillie to affume and vfurpe the name and perfonage
of the faid Johnne Alfchunder, ane puir, aget, Ample man, to his diffait, preiudice, and manifeft Oppreffioun ; in maner fpecifeit and at lenth fett doun in the
faid Dittay.

^ O. Fr. meskr^ to intermeddle, &c. ^ 0. Fr. deshauche, debauched, worthless, &c.

212 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D, 1611.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be
bangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and his haill moveable guidis and
geir to be efcheit and inbrocht to our fouerane lordis vfe, as culpable and convict
of the faidis crymes : — And lykwaj'is, Ordanit thir woirdis, ' For thift, for
FALSET, FOR IMTOSTURE, AND PERIURIE,' to be writtin in grit letteris vpone
tua feuerall pai)eris, and affixt, ane vpone his bak, the vther vpone his breift,
the tyme of his executioun. Quhilk was pronuncet for Dome.

\^Sir Williame Heart, Jujlice-T>epute.'\

AssESSOREs nominat to the Jujtice he the Lordis of Secreit CouvfelL
Mr Johnne Preftouu of Pennicuik, Prefident of the College of Juftice ; Sir Richard Cokburne of
Clarkingtoune, Lord Previe Seall ; Sir Alexander Drummond of Medope ; Mr Williame Oliphant
of Newtoun.

* Snbasion*— Ca&inti: Captibe— S(2ltannir S^aiaJjuts, ^t,

Dec. 21. — Williame Douglas, Yovmger of Drumlanerig.^
Dilaitit of the Invaiding and perfewing of Williame Kirkpatrick of Kirkmichell ; and for \Turj)atioun of our fouerane lordis royall pouer and authoritie, in
taking him Captiue and Priflbner at Dreffitland, and thairfra tranfpoirting him
to the place of Drumlanerig, quhair he vpas detenit ; and keiping him in cloife
prilTone, within the Tour of Drumlanerig, for the fpace of fax or fevin dayis, or
thairby, he being our fouerane lordis frie lege ; committit vpone the fyftene day
of July, 1610 yeiris : And for contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and piftolettis.

Persewaris, Williame Kirkpatrik, appeiraiid of Kirkmichell ; Sir Thomas Hamrniltoun of Byres, kny^

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Alexander King, Mr Thomas Hoip, Aduocatis ; my Lord of Angus ;

my Lord of Wigtouu ; Sir James Douglas elder of Drumlanerig; my Lord Sanquhar.

It is allegit — na proces at Kirmichellis inftance, becaus he is rebell ; and producet the Hoirning for verificatioun thairof, at the inftance of the Laird of Cloifburne elder, for nocht payment of the pryces of certane victuall. It is anfuerit,
audit to be repellit, in refpect he is rekxt ; and producet the Relaxatioun thairupoune. — It is forder allegit, that he is at the home for nocht payment of the
Taxatioune. — Thaireftir, my Lord Aduocat declairit that he had Warrand of his
Maieftie to perfew, and conforme thairto, declairit he wald inlift in the pannellis
perfute, for the crymes contenit in the fummondis.

It is allegit be my Lord Aduocat, that this Hoirning for the Taxatioun aganis
Kirkmichell can nocht debar him to perfew, becaus, be Act of Parliament, in
anno 1597, it is appointit that all Hoirningis execute aganis ony pairtie, fall
ather be producet judiciallie, or in prefens of ane Notter and foure witnefTes :
And trew it is, that the Regiftratioun thairof is contrair to the faid Act. It is

' See the Case of Alexander Kirkpatrick, sone to Sir Thomas K. of Gloisburne, kny*, Jun. 28, 161L

45 & 9 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 213

anfuerit that the Act of Parliament in anno 1597 is tane away by a pofteriour
Act of Parliament, viz. in anno 1600. — It is allegit be my Lord Aduocat, that
this Hoirning is nocht competent in the perfone of the pannell, feing it is nocht
execute at the pannellis inftance for ane criminall caufe ; and forder, the pairtie
perfewar is relaxt, albeit he haif nocht his Relaxatioun vpoun him. It is anfuerit, it is verrie competent to allege na proces at the inftance of the perfewar,
fa lang as he ftandis rebell.

The Juftice, with advyfe of the Affeflburis, ffindis na proces at the inftance
of Kirkmichell, fa lang as he ftandis rebell, vnrelaxt. — Quhairupoun the pannell
aflvit inftrumentis.

My Lord Aduocat declairis he infiftis, for his Maiefteis intreis, in perfute :
quhairupoun the pannell afkit inftrumentis.

It is allegit, that my Lord Aduocat man (must) condifcend in the Summondis :
2^/V/?, that the pannell, anent the beiring of Piftolettis, thai war borne on his
perfone : Secundo, gif thai war borne in his companie, man^ condifcend vpone
that perfone : Tercio, nonfuit doloy becaus gif any was borne in his cumpany, it
was by^ his knawlege. — It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis beiring that the Laird of Drumlangrig and his complices, at the leift ane
or vther of thame, buir piftolettis at the tyme lybellit, viz. thais quha ar expreffit in the Summondis, and euerie ane of thame, at the leift ane or vther of thame.

The Juftice, with advyfe af the Afleffouris, ffindis the fummondis, as thai ar
fett doun, to be relevant, beiring that the pannell, with thair complices, lurkit
and darnit^ thame felfis in maner lybellit. — Quhairupoun my Lord Aduocat afkit
inftrumentis.

It is allegit, that the pannell can nocht be convenit for Wdliame Dovglas of
Reidhous, becaufe the faid Williame, being convenit for piftolettis afoir the
Counfell, was fynet be the Covmfell thairfoir ; and j^roducet ane Decreit of Counfell, for verifeing thairof : And in refpect of the Act of Parliament, in anno 1600,
can nocht be perfewit afoir the Juftice, for that cryme, of new agane. — It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis. It is allegit, that Williame Douglas being perfewit at the inftance of the pannell, befoir the Counfell,
for bering of piftolettis, and the (injury) done to the pannell the tyme lybellit ;
as the Decreitis beiris : It is thairby tryit,* that the beiring thairof was in Kirkmichellis companie, and nocht in the pannellis company : Sccundo, feing Douglas is fynet befoir the Counfell fen that cryme, as be the faid pofteriour Act of
Parliament he fuld nocht be of new perfewit befoir the Juftice for that cryme,
2)er confequentknn the pannell can nocht be perfewit as haifing Douglas in his
companie. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat, that it is a verrie evill confequence,^

* Must. 2 Without ; contrary to. ^ Concealed ; hid. ^ Decided. ^ A very false conclusion.

214 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161L

and the allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis.-^It is allegit
for Hob Hunter, that he was deid before the tyme lybellit ; quhilk he offerris
to preve, be WitnefTes prefent at the bar. — It is anfuerit, that that probatioun
can nocht be redlmit, bot man be tryit be the Affyfe. — It is allegit that the Sumniondis is nocht relevant, except the perfones contenit in the Summondis war
the pannellis houfliald ferwandis, or cum furth of his houfe with him, be his
directioun, and that thai^ war borne ex mea Jcientia : And that na fact or deid
is done with piftolettis to the hurt of ony perfone, quhilk is nocht expreft in the
Summondis. — It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Act of Parliament and Dittay foundit thairupoun : And forder, feeing the lyk perfute lies oft
tymes bene decydet and fund relevant in this Judgement of befoir, defyres my
lord Juftice to advert thairvnto. — It is anfuerit be the pannell, that the preceis
wordis of the Law is not to be refpectit, bot animn et ratio leg'is, for the Lawmaker is nocht to puneife perfones for haifing piftolettis in thair cumpany by^
thair knowlege, bot'^ the breker of the Law be fchuting of jiiftolettis, and beirino- of thanie of purpois to offend thairwith. — Anfueris the Aduocat, aucht to be
repellit, in refpect of the Act of Parliament, quhairto he referris him felf.

The Juftice, with advyfe of the Affeffouris, Repellis the allegeances, in refpect
of the lybell as it is fet doun, except for Reidhous, quhilk the Juftice continewis
that matter quhill^ the Counfell be advyfet thairwith.

It is forder alleget for the pannell, that feing the Judge has ffund the Dittay
relevant, in refpect he and his complices darnit and lurkit in maner lybellit ;
that thairfoir, the pannell can nocht be convenit for JVilUame Douglas beiring
of piftolettis ; becaus it is cleir, be the Decreit of Counfell producet, that Beidhoiis wes vpone the Ball-grene, playing with him, Kirkmichell, the haill lycht,
and fa poftibillie could nocht be darnit ofbefoir in the leglit ; and the perfewer
is nocht able to afferme that thai war darnit eftir the boilfpelP diffoluit. — It is
anfuerit be the Aduocat, it is nawayis contrair, feing Williame Douglas mycht
haif bene in Kirkmichellis company afoir none, and with the pannell (efter none).

It is allegit be the pannell, that the taking of ane man is nocht capitall, bot
is only perfewit as ane Ryote befoir the Counfell ; and producet tua practikis^
led afoir the Counfell for the lyk crynie. — It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the cowmoun Law and practik obferuit befoir the Juftice in the lyk
perfutes ofbefoir : Repeittis Dumbrekis practik, ]\rgregouris, and Fintreis for
verifieing thairof. — It is anfaerit, for Dumhrehis practik, that he is nocht fa

' Viz. the pistolets. "^ Without. ^ Unless. * Until. * After the party broke

up. This term is commonly written and pronounced Bonspeil, signifying a contest between two parislies or parties at < curling on tlie ice, ardiery, golf, &c. It is likely, in the present instance, to
have been a match at ' ffv/J] ' or, more probably, foot-hall, both of them favourite games in Scotland.
The Ball-greai favours this conjecture. ^ Decisions ; instances ; parallel cases.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 215

mekill convict for taking of the Kingis frie lege, as for Tliift and Stoiithe-reif ;
quhilk he referris to his convictioun. — It is allegit be the Adiiocat, that Dumhreic
is convict of Treffone, for the taking and detening of Meldrum of Aquhorteis,
and Andro Meldrum his brother. Allegis the lyk for M'Gregoun's, quha war
bayth convict and put to the death for the faidis crymes : And as for Fhitrie,
the Summondis was ffund relevant, albeit he was abfoluet be J)e Affyfe. — It is
anfuerit be the pannell, thair was ma^ cryme conioynet in thair Dittayis, nor^
iiinple Taking only, and niair nor ane Taking ; and the Law Ordanis exoxithun
Privati career is, only to be ane cryme, loeo, ' Jiihens^ codiee, * de Privatis carceribiis,' et Baldus ibid. : Quhilk Law is alfo derogait be ane pofteriour Law in
that famyn Title, be quhilk {exereitium) 2Jrivatl earceris is only punifchet pena

and the practyk of ... .Ms only to puneife ^9(?w« pecuniuria ; and allegit

Julius Clarus.'*

It is allegit, the Laird of Kirkmichell, the tyme of his taking lybellit, w^as at
the home, and be vertew of Letters of Captioun, was tane be the Scheref of the
fchyre, quhome the pannell affiftit allanerlie^ in the Taking : And producet the
Hoirning and Letteris of Captioun, be the quhilk the Scheref-Depute, Robert
Creichtoun, was charget to tak him, being rebell. It is anfuerit, that the allegance aucht to be repellit, in refpect the Letteris quhairupoun the Laird of Kirkmichell is denuncet war fui'pendit/i)?i2)licifer, inforo eontradietorio, and he relaxt
be the fpace of ane half yeir of befoir. — It is allegit be the pannell, that the tyme
of Kirkmichellis taking, thair was na Relaxatioun fchawin, and na knawlege
was gevin of his Relaxatioun to the Schireff ; and fa he was in optima fide in
taking of the Kingis rebell, nocht knawin to him to be relaxt : And forder producet ane Act, quhair Robert Creichtoun was conflitute Scheref-depute. It is
forder allegit, that gif the Scheref had been perfewit for Taking of the Kingis
fre lege, nocht knawn to him to be relaxt, bot charget to tak him ; as na Dittay
could be relevant aganis him, in lyk manner, na proces aganis the jDannell for
being in his companie, and affifting the Scheref at that tyme. — It is anfuerit,
aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis, Decreit fufpending the Hoirning, and Relaxatioun producet ; and the lybell beiring that Young Drumlanerioand his complices hurt and woundit Robert Creichtoun for flaying them to Hay
Kirkmichell ; and fua can nevir allege that thai affiftit him in execution of his
office.

It is forder allegit, that this Dittay can nocht be comptit ane cryme, in relj^ect
the perfone tane was the Kingis rebell ; and for verifeing thairof, repeittis the
Hoirning producet for nocht payment of the Taxation ; and thairfoir the Dittay
can nocht be put to ane Affyfe : Quhilk Hoirning is daitit the xj of Februar

^ More. 2 Tlian. ^ Obliterated in Record. "» An old Commentator. ^ Only ; merely.

216 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

1601. It is aiifuerit, that it is nocht onlie for Taking of the Kingis frie lege
that the pannell is convenit, bot for Vfurpatioim of the Kingis authoritie. — It is
allegit, that except the perfone tane, the tyme of his taking, had bene the Kingis
frie lege, it can nocht be fund that the pannell vfurpit the Kingis authoritie. —
It is anfuerit, that the taking of ony perfone but^ Commiffioun of the Prince is
Vfurpatioun of the Kingis authoritie, quhidder he be rebell or nocht.

The Juftice continewis, with advyfe of his Afleffouris, Interlocutour vpone
the former allegeances to Tyfday nixt.

It isforder allegit, that as of the Law, hannitus pofejl imptine occidi,Jic multo
fortius capi et incarcerari ; quhilk is expreflie decydit be Baldus, in the foirfaid Law ' Juhens,' codice * de Privatis carceiihus, numero finali : And be Julius
C\ai'\is,h. Jente?iiiarmu J Homicidio. — It is anfuerit be the Aduocat,that Bamiiti^
of the Cowmoun Law, was only thay quha war declairit rebellis for ane capitall
crynie. — It is duplyit for the pannell, that of the Ciuill Law, that Banniti war
allweill rebellis for crymes, as for pecuniall fowmes ; and for preving thairof
citit Julius Clarus, \j. Jententiarum § Homicklium.

The Juftice Continewis Interlocutour, with adyfe of his AfTeftburis, to Tyfday
nixt."

Dec. 24.— Compeirit Willlame Douglas, yoxinger of Drumlanerig, quha
declairit that he oflferit him felf reddie to anfuer and abyd tryell vpone the Summondis and Dittay, at the inftance of his hienes Aduocat : And als, is content,
that nochtwithftanding the Laird of Kirkmichell be rebell, and was declarit be
Hoirning the laft dyet, to pas fra the faid Hoirning vfet aganis him, and that
he liaif place and perfone to ftand in Judgement aganis him, and to infift in his
perfute on the Summondis and Dittay producet aganis him : And in refpect
thairof, the pannell defyret my Lord Juftice to pronunce Interlocutour vpone
the allegeances and anfueris maid in this cans vpone Setterday laft, quhilk was
the laft dyet of this proces.

The Juftice Defertis this dyet, and that in refpect that my lord Aduocat and
the Laird of Kirkmichell, parteis perfewaris, quha war oft tymes callit to infift
in this perfute, compeirit nocht to that effect. — Quhairupone the pannell afkit
inftrumentis ; and that nochtwithftanding thairof, he offerit him felf to defend
accoirding to the Law, for the haill crymes contenit in the Dittay.

(Apr. 24, 1612.)— My Lord Aduocat declairit that he wald infiil for
baithe the crymes contenit in the Summondis, alfweill for taking and incarceration, as beiring and weiring of piftolettis. — The pannell, ffor cleiring of liis In-

^ Without. ' [On the niarpin of the Record,] " This haill proces preceiding, he ane Act maid

rpono the xxiiij day of Apryle, 1612, is he the Juftice, with advyfe cf the Lordis of Secreit Couiifell,
ordauit to he deleit furth of the Buikis of Adiornall," &c.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 217

iiocencie of the firft pairt of the Summondis, concerning the taking of the Laird
of Kirkniichell, &c., producet ane Letter, fubfcryuit be the Laird of Kirkmichell,
and certane famous Witnefles ; qnhairof the tennoiir foUoM'is.

I, William Kirkpatrick, appeirand^ of Kirkmichell, Teftifeis and declairls, that fe tymel went
with 3oung Drumlanerig to the place J)airof, quhilk was vpone the xv day of July, r^.y]*^. and ten
5ein9, it was at my fpeciall defyre to gang with him, for efchewing of farther inconvenient to my brother and fie vtheris as war in my companie, for allegit wrangis done to his fa])er ; quhairof I was innocent : And declairis fat I wes nocht tane ]iair againft my will ; and that efter I come to the Place of
Drumlanerig, I was honeftlie and courteouflie interteneit, haifing frie libertie to pas quhair I pleifit, as
ane frie Gentilman : And being on the morne paireftir oft and dyuerfe tymes requyret be Soun"-
Drumlanerig to pas quhair I pleafet, I refufet to go forth, in refpect of fum informatioun I had reflauit .
and remanet pair againft his will, quhill he forcet me to pas away, alwayis with fic forme of courtefie
as he could vfe to fic ane Gentilman : And that I was nawayis detenit nor keipit as Captiue or Priffoner : And that ]>e Letteris raifit at my inftance aganis him befoir pe Juftice, was by^ my knawlege
or advyfe : Quhilk I teftifie to be of treuthe. And confentis ]iat ])ir prefentis be infert and regiftrat
in the Buikis of Counfell or Adiournall : And to that effect, Conftitutis Mr Alexander King, aduocat,
my Pro"", to compeir and confent to ])e regiftering heirof ; quhilk is writtin be Williame Penman, wryter
in Edinburgh, and fubfcryuit with my hand. At Ed"*, the ellevint day of Januar, the 5eir of God I'".
fax hundreth and tuelf 3eiris, befoir ])ir Witneffes, Thomas Greirfone of Bariarg, James Greir his
brof, Sir Williame Greirfone of Lag, kny*, James Dowie, wryter, and George Bryce, inferter of fe
dait and witneffes heirintill. Kirkmichell, 5ounger.

Lag, witnes, Thomas Griersone, witnes, James Griersone, witnes,
J. Dowie, witnes, George Brtce, witnes.

Compeirit the faid Mr Alexander King, as pro' for Williame Kirkpatrik, younger of Kirkmichael, and defyrit the famyn to be infert and regiftrat in the Buikis of
Adiornall, to the effect foirfaid ; and alledges, that the faid cryme of Taking and
Incarceratioun of Young Kirkmichell, can nawayis be put to the knawlege of ane
Aftyfe, in refpect of the faid Letter and contents thairof : And for better lecuritie,
defyret, as of befoir, the faid Letter and Declaratioun to be infert and regiftrat in
the Buikis of Adiornall, therin to remane adfuturam rei memoriam.

My Lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the productioun of the faid Letter
and Declaratioun thairin contenit. The Pannell declairis he will vfe na vther
defence in this matter, bot the allegeance immediatlie preceiding, and reninices
all vther exceptiones proponit be him in this cans of befoir for this cryme, or
competent to him aganis the fame. My Lord Aduocat producet His Maiesteis
Letter, and defyret the claufe following, infert thairintill, quhilk concernis this
perfute, to be infert in the Buikis of Adiornall ; quhairof the tennour followis.

And as for that vther poynt of your Letter, concerning the forder following of that perfute intentit
aganis 3oung Drumlanerig, fforafmuch as We underftand that he, being laitlie reconceillit to Kirkmichell 50unger, is to compeir befoir our Juftice at ])e day and place fpecifeit in 50ur laft Suinmoiulis
raifit againft him, and |)airby (for clearing him fellf of that cryme quhairof he is accufet) to alledge
that he did naper violentlie apprehend, nor detene the faid Kirkmichell. It is f airfoir our fpeciall

' Ilcir-apparent. ' Contrary to ; without.

VOL. IIL 2 E

218 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

pleafour, that at J>e foirfaid dyet 50\v continow jour perfute againft him, and that vpone his allegeing pe
foirfaid exceptioun, ;ow do demand of him, gif he will nocht lialilie rely pairupoun, renunceing all vther
exceptiones formerlie proponit in his (h^fence : And vpone his Declaratioun that he will do Co, 30W fall
than infill for remitting ))e Tryell and furder confideratioun fairof to the Lordis of our Counfell ; infifting, in the meane tyrae, earneftlie, that theafe vther exceptions heirtofoir vfet in his defence, being
fo dangerous, and by no prefident warranted, may nocht heireftir be recoirdit in the Regifteris of Adiornal, as lauchfuU or tollerable Defences to be proponit in the lyk Caiflis, in ony tyme cuming :'
Quhairin, nawayis douting of 30ur cair and reddines, We bid 30W flPairweill. Frome our Court, Att
QuHYTEiiALL, the nynteneth of Merche, 1612.

And in refpect thairof, and of the allegiance proponit be the pannell and his
Judiciall Declaratioun, that he renunces all his former Defenflis, proponit of befoir in this caufe, for this cryme, or competent to him aganis the lamyn, except
vpone the particiiler allegeance foundit vpone Kirkmichellis Declaratioun aboue
nientionet, fublcryuit be him, and producet be the pannell this day ; ffirft, defyres,
accoirding to his Maiefteis commandment, that the tennour of the former Defenflis proponit be the pannell in this caufe, be deleit furth of the Regifter of Adiornall ; quhilk the Juftice hes prefentlie ordanit to be done : And nixt, defyret my
lord Juftice, that he will be advyfet with the Counfell, concerning the allegeance
aboue writtin, proponit this day be the pannell. My Lord Aduocat declairit
that he paft fra the 23erfute of the pannell, for the laft pairt of the Summondis,
for the beiring and weiring of piftolettis at this tyme and place : Quhairupone
the pannell aflvit inftrumentis.

Interlocutor and Decijion of the Jujlice and Lords of Secret Council.

The Justice, In refpect of this Letter producet be Mr Alexander King, fubfcryuit be the Laird of
Kirkmicliell, and circumrtances contenit thairin, with advyfe of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, ffindis
that this matter can nocht be put to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe : And ficlyk, in refpect that the
pannell hes this day paft fra the haill former Defenlfis proponit be him in this caufe, for the faid cryme,
of befoir, in maner contenit in his former Declaratioun, the Juftice, with advyfe of the Lordis of Secreit
Counfell, fittand this day in Counfell, Ordanis the haill former allegeances proponit in that matter of
befoir, to be deleit furth of the Buikis of Adiornall.

Quhairvpone my Lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis ; lyk as the pannell alfo
alkit inftrumentis,. vpone the firft pairt of faid Interlocutour.

Feb. 12, 1612. — Robert Scott and Adame Scott, Bailleis of Hawik ;
Jok Scott, belman in Hawik ; Williame Donald, alias
Nymhill, in Hawik ; John Lidderdaill, thair, callit Jok
the Deacorte ; Hob Scott, thair, callit Hoh the Lonkie ;

^ It is obvious that steps had been taken by the Officers of the Crown, in this remarkable Case, to
procure the private agreement of the parties ; and on this being effected, the ' dangerus' Defences, so
boldly and ably urged by the eminent Counsel and fore-speakers, would forthwith be expunged from
the Record ; or, at all events, never be permitted to be cited as precedents in future. The Defences
were accor(lin<:ly withdrawn, on this understanding, that the matter would be privately adjusted by
the Lords of the Privy Council, as umpires. No deletion appears on the face of the Record.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 019

Jok Schorte, thair ; and Williame Johnneftoun, feruitour

to 3Iario7ies Hoh.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ Johnne Ellote in Redden,
callit Johnne of Rynfiegill, committit within the faid Jok Schortis duelling hous
in Hawik, in the moneth of July, the yeir of God I^.Vj". and ten yeiris.

Persewar, Beffie Ellote as relict, with the ffyve fatherles bairnes, &c.
pRELOCuTouRis for the pannell, Mr Thomas Nicholfoun and Lawrence Scott, Advocatis.

The perfewar producet the Letteris deulie execute and indorfate ; and in refpect thairof, and that fcho offeris hir felf reddie to perfew, proteftis for the
releif of George Elphinglloun of Glenfakifbarneheid, and Williame Elphingftoun his brother, of thair cautionerie.

It is allegit, that the Dittay is nawayis relevant to be put to ane Affyfe, in
refpect that the Dittay beiris that he was fund lying deid in the Irnes ;' bot it is
of verritie, that vpone the morne thaireftir his committing to waird,^ he hangit
him felf in his awin belt ; and fa, haifing defperatlie put hands in him felf, the
pannell can nocht be put to the Tryell of ane AlTyfe, as airt or pairt of his death. —
It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit, in refpect the allegeance is contrair to the lybell.

The Juftice remittis the matter, anent the Slauchter of the defunct, and tryell
of the treuth of pannellis allegeance, concerning the putting handis in him felf,
to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe.

AssiSA, Jok Ellote, in Braidlie, Will Scott, in Branxholme, George Airmeftrang, in Grundunfyde.^

Rohert Layng, being fuorne, in prefens of the pairtie and AfTyfe, and being
inquyret concerning Jok Ellotes death, quhat he kenis thairof ? Deponis, he is ane
mercheand ; being in the Kirkjaird of Hawik priking fum (kyiinis,^ and heiring that Jok Ellote was hingand in the ftepill,^ come, vpone the repoirt thairof,
into the lleepill, quhair he faw the defunct hingand, in his awin belt ; quhilk
belt he cuttit, and thair being lyfe in the defunct, was broclit out, bot fliortlie
thaireftir he deceift. — Rohert Scott, being examinat and folempnelie fuorne in
the premifTes, ejl conformis iwecedenti, in omnibus

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of James Greiff in
Bowmanehill, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis perfones, and
ilk ane of thame, to be Cleane, innocent, and acquit of airt and pairt of the
Slauchter aboue fpecifeit. — Quhairvpone thai, and ilk ane of thame, aflvit actis
and inftrumentis.

* Irons, or fetters. ^ After his commitment to prison or confinement. ^ Niniane

Quhigholme in Peilbrae, (now written Wliiyttam or Wigham,) and nine other ' Aifyfouris' names follow. * Being a leather merchant. ^ The accomodation for prisoners (in Enjiland as
well as Scotland) was at this period of the most wretched description. Steeples were often tilted up
with fetters in their square or lower parts, riveted into tl e wall, where these luckle>s victinis were
detained until Trial, without any Jail allowance. In cases of Witchcraft, he, iron collars were added ;
and it is highly prohahle that cases of suicide were hy no means infnquent, owing to the desperate
circumstances of these miserable creatures. See Sir IValter Scott's Letters on Demonology, i<4c.

220 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

" Rodger Scot, Capitane of the Airmetage, Robene Ellote of Dunlabyre, Robene Ellote of Copfthaw, Frances Ellote liis brother," and nine others of leffer note, " vnlawit and amerciat, ilk ane of
tharae, in the pane of ane hundreth naerkis," for thair noclit compeirance to haif paft vpoue the Affyfe.

a^rr^tci'cntf ^pctcljcs atrainst tijt liiixQ, W Council, ^c*— CJcft, ^c*

Mar. 11. — WiLLiAME TuEDiE, callit Coill-Ztoill, in Heuchbrae.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of certane poyntis of Thift, &c. : And for certane
vnreverent and difdanefull fpeiches vtterit be him aganis the Kingis Maieftie,
his hienes Counfell, and Juftices of peax.

D ITT AY againji the Pannell.

FoRSAMEKiLL as it is flatute and ordanit, be dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, alfweill maid in his hienes
avvin tyme, as in hishienes predicelTouris tyme,of guid memorie,that na maner of perfone or perfones prefume nor tak vpone hand to vtter or geve out fclanderous, reprochefiill, or treffonabill fpeiches, afer be
woird or writ, aganis nis Maiestie, his Counfell or Nobillitie, vnder the pane of deid ; as the faidls Actis
at lenth beiris : Nochtivithflandiug quhairof, it is of verritie, that pe faid Williame Tuedie, in the moneth
of December lallbypaft, haifing conimittit, ofbefoir, dyverfe Oppreffiones aganis findrie of his hienes
peccable subiectis, and fpeciallie aganis Richerd Powrie, Minifter at Dawik, quha haifing complenit
vpone j'e faid Williame Tuedie to the Jiillices of peax within the Sherefdome of Pciblis for jie famyn,
thay directit Johnne Mathiefone la Stobo, and James RufTell, tua of the Conftabillis of the faid Scherefdome, to fummond and arreift him, to compeir befoir thame, in the Tolbuth of Peiblis, at ane certane
day, to haif ordour tane with him for the faidis Oppreffiones ; quha, accoirding to pair directioun, cam
and fummond and arreiftit pe faid Williame, firft in his Maiefleis name, and than in the name of fe Lordis
of his hienes Secreit Counfall, and of the faidis Juftices of peax, to the effect foirfaid ; nochtwithftanding quhairof, he, altogidder vnmyndfull of his deutie, firft towardis his God, our Souerane lord, and
Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfallis auctoritie, and of the faidis Juftices of peax, his hienes Judges
and ordiner ^Nlagiftrattis ; noclit only irreverentlie, reprochefullie, and fclanderuflie vtterit and gaif
vnfemelie fpeiches to the faidis Conftables againft the faidis Juftices of peax, be faying that he ' wald
nocht gif ane fcab of his eife for thame!' And defyret thame ' to cum and kifs liis erfe !' Bot lykwayis,
the faid Williame, at Jie fame tyme, maift trefTonabillie, vnreverentlie, fclanderuflie, and vndewtiefullie
faid to the faidis Conftables, that he ' wald nocht gif ))e fcab of his erfe' for his facred Maieftie and
Lordis of his hienes Secreit Counfell; an<l bad ' his Maieftie and thame cum and kifs his erfe I' And
fua, be vttering of the faidis treffonabill, vndeutlfull, vnreverent and fclanderus fpeiches, he hes contravenit ])e tennour of ]ie faidis Actis of Parliament, and incurrit the panes of death appointed aganis
fe contraveneris ]iairof : Quhilk aucht and fould be execute vpone him, with all rigour, to the terrour and exampill of vferis. And ftclyk, being Indytit and accufet, flFor cuming, in pe moneth of
November 1583. to Carrane-mouth, in Stobo-hoip, and pair thiftiouflie ftavv,' reft, and away-tuik, fra
tua cowmoun Tlievis, xxiiij auld fcheip, quhilkis war ftowin- be fame furth of Cliddifdaill : And for
letting the faidis Thevis to frie libertie, and nocht prefenting of fame to ])e Juftice. Item, ffor airt
and pairt of the fteilling and away-taking of ane beir ftak,-^ contening tuelf fchevis of heir, committit
in Januar, IGOO 3eiris. lTE>f, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of ane quhite wedder-lamb, pertening
to Williame Ruftell in Eiftertoun of Stobo, furth of the Knovell-fald ; committit in the moneth of
Junij, IGOl 5eiris. Item, ffor airt and pairt of pe Slauchter of vrnq'*^ Eduard Curres in Braidfurd, be
cafting of ane ftane at him, quhairwith he ftrak him ane deidlie ftraik on the hert; be the quhilk ftraik,
he tuik bed and dwynet in pe fpace of ane 3eir, and in end deceiffit of Jie faid hurt ; committit in Junij,
1596. Item, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of ane blak 3eild* kow, fra James Foulden in Harro of

'Stole. 'Stolen, • Stack of barley. * Barren ; not giving milk.

45&9JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 221

Stobo, furth of the Hammer-bank, callit the Braid-flak-heid, iu the moneth of November, 1607 5eiris.
Item, fFor airt and paiit of the fteilling fra Patrik Mathiefone, in Harro, of ane quhyte 3ow,^ furth of
fe grund of Harro, in the moneth of December, 1607 3eiris. Item, for dryveing to ane bucht'' at fe
Blak-hill-ftell, in Harro-heid, of aucht 50wis, pertening to Johnne Alexander, in Harro-heid : And ffor
the thiftious clipping of the faid aucht fcheip, and fteilling and away-taking of the haill aucht fleiffes
of well; committit in the moneth of Junij, 1602. Item, fFor airt and pairt of the fleilling, cuttingdoun, and away-taking of tuelf grit allour-treyis,^ furth of Dawik-woid, in the moneth of Auguft,

1607 jeiris. Item, ffor airt and pairt of the Murthour and Slauchter of Mathiefone, his

fpoufe, be flriking her in dyuerfe pairtis of hir body, quhairof fcho deceiflit ])aireftir. Item, ffor Cowmone Tiiift, Cowmone Reflet of Thift, outputting and inputing of Thift fra land to land, fra cuntrie
to cuntrie, baith of aul<l and new.

Persewar, Sir Thomas Hammiltoun of Byres, kny*, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Laurence M<'gill and Mr Dauid Aytoun, Aduocatis.

It is allegit, that the pannell aucht to half bene citet vpone xv clayis wairning. It is anfuerit, aucht to be repellit, in refpect the pannell is brocht furth of
waird to the Bar ; quha hes bene wairdit this foure monethis for the crymes
lybellit. — It is allegit that Johnne 3IathirJbne can nocht pas vpone this AfTyfe,
becaus he is pairtie and vpgeter of the Dittay, and is Conftable, to quhonie the
allegit fpeiches was vtterit. Aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the perfute at the
inftance of the Minifter of Dawik, quha perfewit the pannell afoir the Counfell,
for injurie done ; and the faid Johnne Mathiefone was akedie reffauit Witnefs,
and examinat be the Counfell ; and fa may be ane Affyfour.^

ASSISA.

Johnne Mathiefone, Conflable of the parochin of Stobo; James RufTell, Conflable thair;
James Rammage, Conflable thair ; Johnne Reidfchaw in Wefler Hoprew ; Adame RufTell, fmyth thair.*

The Aduocat, for verificatioun of the Dittay, ^c, producet ane Decreit of the
Lordis of Secreit Counfell, finding the fpeiches aboue writtin to be cleirlie provin ; and proteftit for Wilfull Errour, in caife thay Acquit. — The pannell afkit
inllrumentis, that nane compeir to fweir the Dittay.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid Johnne Mathefone, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Williame Tuedie to
be ffylit, culpable, and convict of the fclanderus, reprocheful, and vnreuerent
fpeeches vtterit be him aganis his Maieftie, his hienes Secreit Counfell and Juftices of the peace, in maner fpecifeit and contenit in the firft Article of his Dittay, and Decreet of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, producet, for verificatioun
thairof : And as to the remanent crymes aboue writtin, contenit in the faid Dittay, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Williame to be Cleane, innocent, and
acquit thairof. — Quhairvpone the faid Williame afkit inftrumentis.

* Ewe. ' ' Etce-hucht,' a pen or fold, where sheep are sheltered at night. ' The aller

or alder-tree. •* The admission of this person and his fellow-Constables, was contrary to every

principle of justice; and very strongly shows how extremely arbitrary the proceedings of the Court
were, at this period. * Ten other names are inserted, but they were persons of no note.

222 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612

The Juftice continewis the pronunceatioiin of Dome, to ffryday next, that in
the meane tyme he may tak advyfe with the Lordis of Secreit Counlell thairanent.

(Mar. 13.) — Sentence. The Jullice, with advyfe of the Lordis of his
hienes Secreit Counfell, be the mouth of Alexander Kennydie, dempfter of Court,
decernit and ordanit the faid Williame Tuedie, in Heuchbra, to be ScuHGET
through the Burgh of Edinburgh : And thaireftir to be Banischet furth of
his INIaiefteis haill dominionis : And nawayis to returne agane within the
famyn, vnder the pane of hanging to the deid, but^ forder Dome: And being
fcourget throw the towne, that the Magiftratis of Edinburgh returne him bak
agane to his waird, within thair Thevis-hoill, thairin to remane quhill ane
fcliip be provydit to tranfpoirt him furth of his Maiefteis dominions, in maner
foirfaid.

Mar. 13. — Alexander Frenche, Tutour of Thorniedykis,'^ and James
Wicht, at Gordoun-myhie, his lifter-fone.
Dilaittit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'* Johnne Cranftovm, brother
to Patrik Cranftoun of Corfbie ; committit be thame vpone the grund and landis
of Bonn, in the Merfe, vpone the tent day of Februare laftbypaft, be wounding
of him in the heid, leg, and dyuerfe vtheris pairtis of his bodie, to the efTuiioun
of his bluid in grit quantitie : Off the quhilkis flraikis and deidlie woundis the
faid vmq'^ Johnne nevir thaireftir convaleflit : hot, vpone the firft day of Merche
inftant, depairtit this lyfe, of the faidis hurtis and woundis.

Persewar, Patrik Cranlloun of Corfbie, as brother.

The perfewar, be his grit aithe, deelairis that he lies moft cans to perfew : And
fueris the faid Dittay to be of verritie, and takis inftrumentis thairupoun ; and
Proteftis for "WilfuU Errour, gif the AlTyfe Acquit. As alfo, for verificatioun
thairof, haifing vfet and producet the DejDofitiones of certane famous Witnefles,
quhilk was oppinlie red in Judgement.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Hew Bell in Blithe,
chanceller, ffand, proiiuncet, and declairit the faid James Wicht to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the crewal and vnmerciefull Slauchter of the faid vmq^^
Johnne Cranftoun. And ficlyk, for the maift pairts, Declairit the faid Alexander Frenche, to be ffylet, &c. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of
Edinburgh, and thair, thair heidis to be ftrukin frome thair bodeis ; and all thair
moveable guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, as convict, &c.

' Witliout. " See tlie Trial of Sir Patrick Chirnesyde of East Nisbet, and others, Nov. 8,

1616, for Forcible Abduction and Marriage of Adam Frenche of Thornydykes, &c.

45&10JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 223

SUaiU Of (^lenfvbjue— dFiien-afstns— ^lau^Jten

May 8. — Dougali. M'^gregour alias Dougall M'candochie, Callurn
M^gregour callit M^calexter Jcoir^ and Duncane M^carlich
Cul3ame M'^gregour.
Dilaitit for being in companie with the Laird of M^gregour and his
complices, at the Raid and ffeild of Glenfrwne/ in the moneth of ffebruare 1603
yeiris, aganis the Laird of Lufe, his kyn and freindis : And for being in cumpanie with the Laird of M'^gregour, at the burning of Barnehill, pertening to
Colene Campbell of Laweris,^ quhair thai flew nyne men and thre bairnes ; Robert Abroche M^gregour, and Johne M^ffadrik, being thair with thaim.

The Juflice continewis the puting of the perfones foirfaidis to ane AfTyfe to
Thurifday nixt/ — Thaireftir, the perfones on pannell, be Ordinance of the Coimfall, war ordanit to be delyuerit to the Erie of Lynlythgow, and he to hald Court
vpone thame, conforme to ane Commiffioun gevin to the faid Erie to that effect.

Cv^nsonalile aJitUrcommuniitg iMitlj 3>o1)it, sometime itorU

ilfraa:toen, ^c*

May 16. — Niniane Airmestrang callit Ninianes Thome, fone to
Thomas Airmeflrang ; and Johnne Amulliekyn, in Cruikis.
Dilaitit ffor the trefTonabill Reifet, fupplie, Intercowmoning, and accumpaneing
of Johnne, fumtyme Lord Maxwall,^ his Maiefleis declairit Tratour, fforfalt
in Parliament, for dyuerfe crymes of Treafone and Lefmaieftie, at lenth fpecifeit
and contenit in the proces and dome of fforfaltour deducet aganis him : And
namelie, the faid Johnne Amulliekyn, for Reletting, Suppleing, and Intercowmoning with the faid fumtyme Lord Maxwall, within his awin duelling hous in
the Cruikis, and in his barne thairof, vpone the tuentie fax day of Apryle laftbypafl ; at the quhilk tyme, he haifing reffauit fra the faid fumtyme Lord Maxwall the fowme of ten pundis ; he, for obedience of the faid Lord Maxwallis directioun, pafl thairwith vpone the morne thaireftir to the Toun of Dumfreis, to
the faid Niniane Airmeflrang, quhair thay bocht ane hagbut and ane pair of
fchone,^ quhilk was delyuerit be the faid Johnne Amulliekin to the faid Niniane,
to be gevin to the faid fumtyme Lord ; conforme to the faid Johnne Amulliekyn
his Depofitioun, maid be him inprefens of my Lord Chanceller, and vtheris Lordis
of his Maiefleis Previe Counfell : And ficlyk, the faid Niniane, for Intercowmoning and keiping companie with the faid Johnne, fumtyme Lord Maxwall^

' M'-allaster scoroch, q. d. bitck- toothed. ^ See Jan. 20, 1G04. ^ xj,;., person is understood to have been Colin Campbell of Aberuciiill, and the Barnehill, which is here stated to have
been burned, is likely to have been some appendage of that property. * In consequence of the

subsequent order, no further proce<lure took place before the High Court of Justiciary. ^ See

his Trial, Jun. 24, 1609, &c., III., 28, &c. ^ shoes.

224 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

declairit Trcatour, in the faid moneth of Apryle laftbypaft, be the fpace of fy ve
dayis togidder, in the Langwoid and Schillingtonehill ; and for bringing of ane
hagbut fra James Louk, and delyuering the fame to the faid Lord Maxwall, his
IMaiefteis dechiirit Tratour ; and bringing of the faid vther hagbut, with the
pair of fchone reffauit be him fra the faid Johnne Amulliekyn, within the toun
of Dumfreis, and delyuering the famyn to the faid Lord Maxwall ; as at lenth
is contenit in thair Dittayis. In doing quhairof, the faidis Johnne and Niniane
had committit manifeft Treafone : And thairfoir, according to the Lawis of this
reahne, had incurrit the jianes and pwneifchment of tynfell^ and fforfaltour of
lyfe, landis, and guidis, to be inflictit vpone thame ; to the terrour of vtheris.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Dauid Bail3ie, burges of the Cannogait, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit, all in ane voce, the faidis Johnne
Amulliekyn, and Niniane Airmeflrang, and ather of thame, to be ffylit, culpable,
and convict of the crymes aboue fpecifeit in thair Dittay ; and that in refpect of
thair awin Judiciall Confeffioun and Dej^ofitiones producet. — Sentence. To
be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill thai be deid : And all thair landis, heritages, guidis, and geir, gif thai
ony half, to be fforfaltit and efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe, as convict, &c.

Jun. 3. — Gawin Horne in Inner Kethie, and libbel Jak, mother to the
faid Gawin.
Dilaitit, accufit, and perfewit, that thei with their complecis, being bodin in
feir of weir, with fwordis, durkis, and vther vapones invqfiue, laitlie, vpone the
faxt day of Januar laftbypaft, haifing confauit ane deidlie feid, rancour, and malice caufles, aganes wmq'^ Patrik Low in Naderdaill, came vnder ftlence and clud
of nycht to the toun of Nether Kethie, quhair he was going hame to his duelling
hous, in maift peciabill maner, vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis, and thair
Vnbefet his hie-way and pafllige,^ and crewallie Invaidit him for his Slauchter,
hurt and voundit him in his body and breift, with durkis and fwordis, to the
effufione of his bluid in grit quantitie : Of the quhilkis hurtis he newer convaleffet, bot contine\\'iiig bedfaft in grit dollour and difeis thairof, vnder the cuir
of chirurgeanes, be the fpace of fourtein dayes, or thairby ; quhill at laft, the faid
vmq"' Patrik, vpone the tuenty day of the faid moneth of Januar, depairtit this
lyfe : And fwa wes crewallie and vnmercifullie flane be thame ; and thei and
ather of thame wer airt and pairt of the faid crewall Slauchter.

> Loss ; (Ipprivation. 2 Waylaid ; lurked, or lay in ambush for, for the purpose of * befetting*'

See various Trials in this Collection, where this phrase repeatedly occurs. The highway was likewise
said to be ' unibelet,' when one party blocked up the road with his retainers, for the purpose oi daring
his rival to pass — or to give battle, and thus force a passage, if he could.

45 & 10 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 225

Persewar, Aiulro Low as fone. Prelocutour for the perfewar, Mr Willianie Livingfloun.
Prelocutour for the pannell, Mr Johnne RufTell, Aduocat.

Proteftis for Wilfull Errour in caife they Acquit.

Mr Johnne Ruffell takis inftrumentis, that tliair is nane to fvveir the Dittay
hot ane young boy of faxtene yeir awld ; and fwa can mak na faith. — Produces
ane inllrument fubfcryuit be the Juftice of Peax and the Conflabill, for verificatioun of the Slauchter of vmq'® Patrik Low and cleiring of the famyn, fubfcryuit be the faid Conflabill, Johnne Innes of Knokcorth, ane of the Conftabillis of
peax ; and fchawis that Williame Smairt confeffit that he hurt and voundit the
faid vmq'^ Patrik. — Quhilk cryme the pannell alluterlie denyit.

Veiidict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of George Leflie in Drumblair, chanceller, for the maift pairt, ffand, pronuncit, and declairit the faidis Gawin Home
and Iffobell Jak to be Clein, innocent, and acqueit of airt and pairt of the faid
Slauchter.

Qliitimci: imxn tje liaiU of tje S^slcs^

Jun. 5. — Robert Maxwall of Potterak, Alexander Fergufone of the

Yle, Johnne Charteris in Redingwoid, Johnne Wallace in Carnejeill, Thomas Edjer in Holme, and Mr Samuell Kirkpatrik.

Dilaitit for Contravening the Proclamatioun in abyding fra the Raid of the

Yles, in anno 1608.

Persewar, Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie.

My Lord Vchiltrie paffis fra perfiite of Mr Samuell Kirkpatrik. He alfo
paffes from the purfuit of Hew Douglas and Thomas Douglas in Dalcene. —
Williame Greir provin to be feik, be the Depofitioun of Johnne Broun, Minifter
of Glencairne. — James Fergvfoun of Crochedow, provin to be feik, be the faid
Minifteris Depofitioun.

The Juftice continewis this matter to the morne, i7i eodemjiaiu quo nunc ejl.

Jun. 6. — In refpect na pairtie compeiris this day to infift in thair perfute, Proteftis for thair cautioneris releif ; and that thai be nocht charget or

trubillit for the faid allegit cryme, in ony tyme cuming. And thairupoun aflvit

inftrumentis.

iHulilaticin autr 23tmtm()tattoit,

Jun. 12. — Williame Rutherfurd of Synewallis, and George Well
his feruand.
Dilaitit for the Mutilatioun and Demembring of James "Weir, feruitour to
Williame Weir in Softlaw ; committit in ffebruar 1611, of the formeft finger of
his left hand.

VOL. III. 2 F

226 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

Persewer, James Weir.

Prf.locutouris in defence.

Sir Robert Stewart, Mr Johnne Rutherfurd, Mr Johnne Ruflell, Mr Johnne Dauling.

James Weir, feruitour to Williame Weir in Softlaw, Dilaitit of airt and
pairt of tlie iMutilatioun of Williame Rutherfurd of Synewallis of his ....
hand, at tlie leift of the mid-finger thairof ; committit in ffebruar 161L

Persewar, Williame Rutherfurd of Synewallis.

pRELOCUTOURis in defence.

The Laird of Blaikwoid, The Laird of Lamniingtoun, The Laird Symontoun,

Tlie Guidman of the Caveris, Robert Hammiltoun, Aduocat.

It is allegit be Mr Johnne RuiTell, that the Dittay is altogidder irrelevant ; and
thairfoir can nocht pas to ane AfTyfe : And as to that article of the Dittay, concerning the demembring James Weir of the finger, quhilk is the only point that
fould be tryit in this Judgement, nather mutilatioun nor demembratioun is relevant ; becaus, except the haill hand had bene cuttit af, it can nocht be comptit
demembratioun ; and the finger is nocht ane member, ^/Zy/ tantiim eft jmrs menihri. It is forder allegit, that this Dittay aganis Rutherfurd and his man can
nocht pas to ane AfTyfe, becaus, gif ony mutilatioun or hurting was done to
Weir, the famyn was done in Rutherfurdis awin defence, he being in fober
maner pafland out the hie-way, convoyand ane gentilman to his hors ; at quhilk
tyme, vnder nycht, Weir, with ane drawin fuord, invaidit Rutherfurd ; and fa,
gif ony hurt wes gevin to Weir, it was in Rutherfurdis defence. — It is anfuerit,
that the Dittay is relevant, nochtwithftanding of the allegeance ; and defyres the
AflTyfe to cognofce, quhidder the famyn was done in Weiris defence or nocht ;
quhilk Weir altogidder denyis. — It is allegit be James Weir, that the lybell at the
inftance of Williame Rutherfurd aganis him can nocht pas to ane AfTyfe ; and
gif ony mutilatioun was done to the faid Williame Rutherfurd, the famyn was
done in Weiris awin defence.

Compeirit, Williame Lord Cranftoun, Com mi (Hon er for his Maieflie, and defyret my Lord Juflice, that thir tua perfutes, movet in this Judgement, may be
remittit to the CommifTioneris, to be tryit befoir thame, feing the factis lybellit
was done within the boundis of thair CommifTioun : And ficlyk, feing thair is
ane Court affixt to be haldin within the boundis thairof, quhair juflice fall be
miniflrat to ony pairtie, conforme to the Lawis of this realme.

The Juflice continewis this matter to Thurifday nixt, vnto the tyme he be
advyfet with the Counfell, concerning my Lord of Cranflones defyre.

Lawburrows are granted at the instance of the parties against each other, viz.
' Mr Johnne Rutherfurd become fouertie and Lauborrus for Synlawis and his ferwand, &c. vnder the pane of ffyve hundreth merkis, and thre hundreth merkis.
William Rutherfurd of Synlawis for the faid Mr Johnne, vnder the pane of thre

45&10JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 227

hundreth merkis. And James Douglas of Todhoillis for George Weir of Blaikwoid, and for the pannell James Weir, vnder the pane of ane thowfeand pimdis,
and thre hundreth merkis.'

Thaireftir the Juftice abfolutelie, without forder continuatioun of this matter,
Remittit the tryell of baith thir actiones, perfewit be ather pairtie aganis vtheris,'
to the Commiffioneris, to be cognofcet and tryet be thame as accoirdis of the Law.

^(jiUinty from tje IXniti ot tljt aisles,

Jun. 25. — Robert Hereis, in Lafoun, and five others.^
Dilaitit for contravening of his Maiefleis Proclamatioun, in nocht paffing fordward with Andro Lord Stewart of Vchiltrie, his hienes Lieutennent, to the Raid
of the Yles, in anno 1608.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Johnne Halyday, Mr Johnne Belfis.
The perfones on pannell takis inftrumentis of thair compeirance, and declairis
that thay war nawayis fubiect to the tennour of the Proclamatioun ; in refpect
thai ar nather Erles, lordis, barrones, feweris, frehaldcris, or landit gentilmen ;
and gif the famyn can be tryit^ that thai war fic men, the tyme of the making
of the faid Proclamatioun to the faid Raid, thay ar content to affigne, and be thir
prefentis affignis, thair haill landis and heritages to the Kingis Maieflie, &c.
And in refpect thair is na pairtie perfewer prefent to infift in thair perfute, proteftis for thair cautioneris releif, and that thai be nocht callit or perfewit, for this
matter, at ony tyme heireftir.

Jul. 1. — Robert Forbes, fone to James Forbes of Mylnebowie.
Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit by Dittay following. — Forsamekili. as he,
accumpaneit with Williame Forbes, callit of Mylnebowie, and Patrik Forbes his
brother, now rebellis and att the home for the cryme vnderwrittin, and diueris
vtheris thair complices, haifing confauit ane deidlie feid, rancour, and malice
aganis the faid vmq'^ Johnne Ker, vnderftanding him to half bene att the Kirktoun of Skene, att the mariage of his wyfes fifler ; thay, vpone the fyftene day
of October laftbypaft, darnit thame* in the hie-way, betuix the faid Kirktoun of
Skene and the faid vmq^^ Johnne Ker guidfatheris hous, hi . . . ., quhair the
faid vraq^'' Johnne had his refidence for the tyme ; and thair, bodin^ with fwordis,
dageris, gantillettis, and vtheris wapponnis invafnie, lay att Avait all that day for
the faid vmq'^ Johnnis hame-cumming : Lyke as, about the cwening, vnder filence and cloud of nycht, the faid vmq^** Johnne, lipning for na ewill, harme, or

* By both parties against each other. * This case was continued from Jun. 23. ' Proved ;

instructed. '^ Hid ; concealed themselves. * Furnished ; provided.

228 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

iniurie of ony perfonnes, bot to half pad hame to his hous in peceabill maner,
viider Godis peax and our Ibucrane lordis, liaifing tane his hors with ane young
woman on behind him ; in his hame-paffing to his faid guidfatheris duelling
hous, was vmbefett in the hie-way, ])e the foirnameit perfones ; quhair, befoir
ewir he wes aduertefit of thame, thay, with thair wappinnis foirfaidis, maift
Ichamefullie flrak him fra his horfe, and maift crewallie invaidit him for his
llauchter, gaif liim twa crewall and deidlie ftraikis in the heid with their fwordis,
and hurt and woundit him in dyverfe pairtis of his body ; to the effufioun of
his bhule in grit quantitie : Off the quhilkis crewall womidis, he newir thaireftir convaleft, bot continewand in grit dolour and payne thairof, vnder the
cuir of cherurgeanis, be thelpaceof ellevin oulkis^ or thairby thaireftir ; quhill^
at laft, the faid vmq" Johnne Ker, in the moneth of Januar laftbypaft, deceiffit
of the faidis deidlie woundis ; and fvva wes crewallie and vnmerciefullie llayne
be the faidis (perfones) : And the faid Robert Forbes is airt and pairt of the laid
crewall (lauchter of the faid vmq'" Johnne Ker ; committit vpoun fett purpois,
prouifioun, and foirthocht fellony.

Persewar,
Johnne Ker at the mylne of Clwney, as father ; Alexander Gordoun of Clvvny, afTifler in this perfute.
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Johnne llulTell, (Advocate.)

It is allegit, that this matter can nocht pas to ane Affyfe, becaus in November
1611, eftir the allegit hurting, this perfewar haifing intentit actioun befoir the
Counfell aganis Williame Forbes of Mylnebowie, and Patrik Forbes, his brother,
committeris of the ilauchter, to half hard and fene thame decernit to half committit ane oppin and manifeft Ryote and Oppreffioun : ffor preving of the quhilk
complent befoir the Counfell, the faid Johnne Ker vfet the pannell as ane witnefs to verifie the fame ; and fua, liaifing anes vfet him as witnefs in the faid
matter, thai can nevir be hard to follow him as pairtie. For verifeing quhairof,
producet the Counfellis Act, and ane teftificat of his fummonding, fubfcryuit be
Alexander Watfone, meffinger. Anfueris, thair was na witneffe led in the proces afoir the Counfell ; and albeit at that tyme na knawlege of the pannellis giltines was cleirlie knawin, yet that can nocht liberat him fra pwneifchment, his
giltines being tryit'^ thaireftir.

The Justice remittis the fame to the AfTyfe.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, be the mouth of Alexander Thome in Eifter Cairny,
chanceller, all in ane voce, ffand, pronunceit, and declairit the faid Robert Forbes to be Cleane, innocent, and acquitt of the llauchter of the faid vmq'^ Johnne
Ker ; and of airt and pairt of the faid Slauchter.

' Weeks. ^ Until. z' Proved ; established.

45 & 10 Jac. VI. . CRIxMINAL TRIALS. 229

Jul. 3 — Thomas Maxavall of Arenyning,^ brother to Alexander Maxwall of Logaiie ; Johnne Huttone, meffinger in Carlingwark.
Dilaitit of the crymis fett doun in the Letteris and Dittay following. FoiiSAMEKiLL as the faid Thomas, accumpaneit with Johnne Maxwall, fone to the
laid Alexander Maxwall of Logane, now fugitiue and at the home for the flauchter vnder writtin, vpone the tuentie nyne day of Apryle laftbypaft, haifing conlauet ane deidlie feid, rancour, and malice againft vmq^^ Johnne M^nacht of Kilquhannatie, and vnderftanding that thair was ane tryfl^ affixt to be keipit at the
toun of Carlingwark, betuixt him and Dauid Maxwall of Newark, the faid day ;
the faid Thomas and Johnne, his brother-fone,^ and vtheris thair complices,
bodin^ with fuordis, quhingeris, and vtheris wapponis inuafiue, come to the faid
toun of Carlingwark, quliair the faid vmq'° Johnne M'^nacht was rydeing vp and
doun, attending vpone the faid Dauid Maxwall of Newwarkis cuming, in fober
and quyet maner for the tyme, lipning for na harme, iniurie, or perfute of ony
perfone, bot to haif levit vnder Godis peax and our fouerane lordis ; and haifing
firll violentlie drawin him af his horfe, and thaireftir compellit him to pas with
thame in to Johnne Huttone meffengeris hous, in Carlingwark, tliay thair, efter
dyuerfe ruche^ and hard fpeiches vtterit to him, drew thair quhingeris and fuordis,
and within the faid hous perfewit him for his flauchter : The faid Thomas ]Maxwall grippit him be baith the airmes, and held him, vnto^ the tyme the faid Johnne
Maxwall, his brother-fone, gaif him tua Itraikis, the ane at the hert, and the
vther on the left airme : Off the quhilkis, he immediatlie thaireftir deceiffit ; and
fa was crewallie and vnmerciefuUie flane be the faidis Johnne and Thomas Maxwallis : And thay and ather of thame ar and war airt and pairt of his faid flauchter ; committit vpone fet i^urjjois, prouifioun, and foirthocht fellonie ; in hie and
maiiifeft contempt of our fouerane lordis auctoritie and lawis.

Persewaris, Johnne M'naclit, burges of Edinburgh, neir kynfinan ; (Capitane) Charles Getldes
of Rachan ; [Margaret Gordoun, Lady Kilquhannatie, the relict, with the thrie fatherles bairnes, kyu
and friendis of vmq''^ Johnne Maknaciit of Kilquhannatie.]

Prelocutouris for the pannell, Alexander Maxwall of Logane ; Johnne Maxwall of Couhaithe ;
Robert, Maiiler of Maxwall ; Mr Williame Maxwall of Caveris ; Mr Alexander King, Aduocat ;
Adame Cunninghanie, Aduocat; Sir Robert Maxwall of Spottis; The Guidnian of Cowhill.

The perfewaris, vnderftanding Johnne Huttone to be innocent of the flauchter, pafles Jimpliciier fra his perfute ; quhairupoune Johnne Huttone afkis inllrumentis.

Veiidict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of James Cannane of Killochie, chancellar, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Thomas JMaxwall to

^ In the Dittay called of Aremein. ^ An appointed meeting. ^ Nephew. ' Provided ;

furnished. ^ Rough ; uncouth. ^ Until.

230 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

be Clcanc, innocent, and acquit of the flaucliter of the faid vmq''' Johnne IM'nacht
of Kilquhannatie, and of being airt or pairt thairof.

Alexander Maxwall of Loj,'ane become plege and fouertie for Thomas M. his brother germane —
and Capitane Cliarles Ge(hles of Kachan, and Johnne M'nacht, mercheand burges of Edinburgl), ather
of thame become pleges and fouerteis for vtheris,' that thai and ather of thame fall obferue and keip
his Maielleis peax to all our fouerane lordis legis, and nawayis to molefl or trouble thame in thair
perfones, guidis, or pofrt-fTiones, vtherwayis nor^ be ordour of law and juftice; ather of thame vnder
llio pane of flyve hundreth nierkis.

iHuvtrcr xmtitv trust— ^Inucrljtec—CIjcft*

Jul. 11. — Petrie M'GiLLiEYoiiiCHE in Brachloche.
J3ilaitit of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of Duncane M^allafter and
M'gilliecreift,^ his tua fifter-fones ; and for dyuerfe poyntis of thift, (viz.) For
airt and pairt of the crewall and abliominabill Murthour vnder Trufl of vmq"
Duncane M'allafter, his fifter-fone, be Ichuitting him with ane hagbut throw the
body ; comniittit in the nioneth of Apryle, the yeir of God I'^Wj". and thre yeiris.
Item, for airt and pairt of the thiftious lleilling, at the leift reletting, of fourtie
Icheip, pertening to the Guidman of Campbell-Burnet. And for airt and pairt
of the thiftious (leilling of tua oxin and ane kow, pertening to Johnne Leith in
Edingerroche ; committit a tua yeir fyne, or tliairby. Item, for airt and pairt
of the lleilling fra Adame Leith of foure oxin ; committit a tuelf yeir fyne, or
thairby. Item, for cowmoun thift, cowmoun reffet of thift, outputting and inputting of thift, fra land to land, fra cuntrie to cuntrie, baith auld and new.
Persewar, INIr Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, Aduocat to our fouerau lord.*

ASSISA.

Williame Forbes of Monymufk, George Jope in Cowclarachie, Mr Johnne Home, fervand to the

Younger, Johnne Woid in Mylnebowie, Laird of Frendraucht,

Mark Mawer of Mawerftoun, Andro Meldrum of Duinbrek, Johnne Forbes, feruitour to my
Fdniond Gradane in Kiidoche, Alex.Irwing, Younger of Lenturk, Lord Forbes,
Williame Lummifden, brother to I'atrik Mortimer, George Gordoun, feruitour to the

the Laird of Cufchnie, Mr Patrik Grant, Minifler at Laird of Lefmoir,

Tho'' Cowie, burges of Abirdene, Cromedaill, I\Ir Robert Elphingfloun, Tutour

of Glak.

Verdict. The AlFyfe, be the mouth of the faid Williame Forbes of Monymufk, chanceller, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Patrik
to be ffylet, culpable, and convict, according to his awin Confeffioun, fet doun
in his Depofitioncs, of the crymes fT/pi-'ctiue aboue fpecified.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburgh, and thair, vpone
ane gibbet, to be hangit quhill he be deid : And all his landis, heritages, &c.,

' For each other. ^ Otherwise than by form of Law. ^ No mention is otherwise made

in the Dittay or proceedings of this murder of iM'gilliecreist. * He appears here for the first

time, in the Record, as Lord Advocate.

45&10JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 231

guidis and geir pertening to him, to be fforfault and efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe,
as convict and culpable of the faidis thiftious and abhominable crymes.

Jul. 17. — Submission betwixt George {Ji/fh) Erle of Caithnes,

(William) Lord Berridaill, his fone, and {Jon^feven/h)

Erle of Sutherland.^

Compeirit Mr Johnne Manfone and Mr Johnne Sinclair, feruitouris to George

Erie of Caithnes, and producet ane Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit

CouNSALL, anent the deferting of the criminall perfutes appointit, hinc inde,

aganis the Erles of Caithnes and Sutherland, to be difputit and refTonit afoir the

Juftice this day : off the quhilk Warrand the tennour followis.

My Lordis of Secreit Counfell, vnto 5our lordfchipis humlie meanis* and fchawis, we 5our feruitouris, George Erle of Caithnes, Lord Borriedaill, his fone, fFor our felffis, and

in name of our friendis and fervandis, quho ar charget in tlie matter vnderwritten : That quhair, pe
xvij day of Julij inflant is appointit vnto ws for our compeirance befoir pe Juftice and his deputis, in
the Tolbuthe of Edinburgh, to vnderly the Law, for the flauchter of Neill Nathmarne ; the hurting
and wounding of Johnne Gordoun of Golfpitour, Donald M' ky, fiear of Far, and fome vther friendis
and feruandis to the Erle of Sutherland; the taking and detening prifToner of Angus M^Williame ;' and for certane vtheris crymes, fpecifeit and contenit in the Letteris raifit and execute aganis
ws at J)e inftance of ]ie faidis perfones, and of his Maiefteis Aduocat for his hienes intreis : Lyk as, J)e
Juftice intendis to proceid in ]ns matter aganis ws, althocht it be of verritie, that howbeit we wer moft
willing and reddie to haif fubmittit our felfis to the Tryell of the lawis, for pe hail! crymes contenit in
the faidis Letteris ; and for this effect, to haif prefentit our felffis in judgement befoir the Juftice the
day foirfaid : 3it it was 50ur lordfcliipis plefour to burdene ws with ane Submiffioun of all matteris
queftionable betwix ws and the Erie of Sutherland, and M'ky and pair freindis; in the quhilk Subniiflioun, ]nr matteris ar fpeciallie and perticulerlie comprehendit : And feing thay ar now in jour
lordfchipis handis, vnder Submiftioun, as faid is, the dyett appointit to ws afoir ]>e Jullice audit to
defert. Heirfoir we befeik jour. lordfchipis to geve command to the Juftice, Juftice clerk, and J)air
deputtis, to defert pe faid dyet, and to defift and ceife fra all proceidingjiairintill, and to difpens with
our perfonall compeirance : Quhairanent ])ir prefentis falbe vnto thame a Warrand, and jour lordfchipis anfuer.

Apud Ed", .T?y ,/<<//;■, 1612. ffiat ut jwtitiir. Al. Caxcell\ J. Prymuois.

At command of the quhilk AVarrand, the Juftice ordanit baithe the dyettis
appointit, hinc hide, to this day to defert.

Lykas, Johnne Gordoun, appeirand of Sydra,"* compeirand perfonallie in judgement, in name of Sir Robert Gordoun, brother to my lord of Sutherland, Duncane M'^ky, fiear of Far, Johnne Gordoun, appeirand of Gordoun of Gollpitour,

' Vid. Jul. 30, 1G12. In order to a proper understanding of this Feud, reference may be made to
Gordon's History of the Family of Sutlierldnd, Edinburgli, 1813, p. 317, &c. It wouhi occupy too
much space to give a suitable outline of the various disputes in which these families were embroiled.
'Complains; literally, ?y<oa/?*. ^ '^//a* Ilerrach (llerraugh). * The eldest sou of

John Gordon of Sidderay.

232 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

and producet the Letteris raifit be tliame, and remanent complineris infert tliairin, agaiiis my Lord of Caithnes, my Lord of Berriedaill, his fone, and remanent
defenderis thairin contenit ; be the quhilkis, thay and everie ane of thame ar
charget to find cautioun for thair compeirance befoir the Jnilice or his deputis,
this day and place, in the hour of cans, to vnderly the law for the flauchter of
Neill Nathnear, vmq" Airthour Smyth, taking captiue and prisoner of Angus
M'"\\'illiame, aliufi Herrach, but Commidioun ; and dyuerfe vtheris cryraes fpecifeit in the laidis Letteris— afkit inftruments, and proteftis for relief of the faid
Sir Robert Gordoun, kny', of his cautionerie.

Clan <!^vcsor»

Jul. 28. Gregour Beg M'gregour, fone to vmq'^ Gregour IVFeane ;

Gregour M'Allafter Gal t ^ Johnne M'inleithe f Jolinne Dow

IVrgilliephadrik V'robert ; Allafter IVrallafter V'coule ; Patrik

M 'gregour Craiginfche ; Duncane M'coule cheir; Patrik Roy

JVrGregour, fone to Johnne M'phadrik, in Rannache ; Gregour

M'eane Vcoulcheir ; Johnne Dow Moir JVrgregour, in Rora.

Being all prefentit vpone pannell, dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit be Dittay, at

the inftance of Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny\ Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intreis, of the crymes refpectiue following, viz. The

faidis Gregour Beg M'gregour, Gregour 3I"Allafter Gait, Jolinne Bow

M'inleith, and Johnne Dow M' g'llliephadrkh V'roherf, ffor airt and pairt of

the treffonabill raifeiiig of ffyre, burning and diftroying of the haill houffis and

biggiiigis of Glenlocha and Achallader : And for the Slauchter of M'coleane, bowman to the Laird of Glenvrquhie, with dyuerfe vtheris perfones, to
the number of aucht perfones : Burning of thre 30ung bairnes, dochteris to
Johnne IM'kifchak : And for Steilling of fax fcoir ky and oxin furth of Glenlyoun, committit in Apryle, 1604. And ficlyk, the faidis AllaJUr M'aUaJier
V'coide, Patrik M'gregour Craighiche, Duncan 31'^couJe cJieir, Gregour
M'eane V^coule c/ieir, and Patrik Roy M'gregour, fone to Johnne IVrfadrik in
Rannache, being indytit and accufet, ffor airt and pairt of the burning and diftroying of the haill houffis and bigingis vpone the fourtie merk land of Abervrchill, pertening to Colene Camp])ell : And for the Slauchter of Duncane Wobfler, Johnne Seatone, Patrik Stavache, Johnne ]\rgillievorich : Burning of the
thre dochteris of Johnne JVrkifchak, Heilling and away-taking of auchtene fcoir
ky, faxfcoir peife of horfis,' aucht fcoir fcheip and gait, pertening to the faid Co-

* The stranger, or travelled. " M'iiileiclie, son of the leech, or doctor. Query, M^indreiche?

son of rough, or dark Jolm. ^ One hundred and twenty />/ece of horses, as we say head of oxen.

45 & 10 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 233

lene : And lykwayis for burning of the mylne of Bolquhafter, with the haill
houffis, and bigingis vpone the grund and landis of Carne, Downe, and Dillater,
pertening to Robert Campbell of Glenfalloche, and of his haill lioufTis and biggingis vpone his landis of Ardcanknockaur ;^ committit be thame in the moneth
of Junij, 1611. Item, the faid Gregour M'gregour Beg, ffor airt and pairt of
the Slaiichter of vmq^^ Solomon Lany, alias Buchannane ; committit at the Kirk
of Kilmaheug, at tuentie yeir fyne, or thairby. Item, the faid Johnne Dow
GilUephadriJi, ffor airt and pairt of the fleilling and away-taking furth of Glenfynles of ane grit heirfchip^ of ky and oxin, pertening to the Laird of Liife and
his tennentis : And Slauchter of vmq^^ Johnne Reid, wobfter, and Patrik Lang,
lervand to the Laird of Lufe ; committit vpone the faidis landis of Glenfinles, in
the moneth of December, 1602. And (iclyk, the faid Johnne Dow Mo'ir
M" gregour, in Rora, ffor fleilling and away-taking of ane grit number of guidis,^
pertening to my Lord Ogilvie, furth of Glenylay : And ficlyk, for taking and
keiping of the Ileand calit Ileand-Varnak,^ againfl his Maiefleis Commiffioner,
and herreing^ and oppreffing of the haill tennentis and inhabitantis of the cuntrie about ;" taking and inbringing of thair haill guidis and befliall, to the number of aucht fcoir ky and oxin, xviij fcoir fcheip and gait, quhilkis war eittin and
flane be thame, wihin the faid Ileand.^ Item, the haill foirnamet perfones indytet and accufet, ffor cowmone thift, cowmone reffet of thift, cowmone foirning,^
and oppreffing of his Maiefleis peccable and guid fubiectis ; and for Intercowmoning with the refl of the furname of M^gregouris, fugitiues and at the home,
and ffurneifTing of thame with meit, drink, and money ; and keiping of tryflis,
counfallis,and gadderingis^ with thame, contrare the tennour of his Maiefleis Proclamationes — war all put to the knawlege of ane AfTyfe of the perfones following.

ASSISA.

Colene Campbell, appeiiancP" of James Campbell, femitour to the Johnne M'dowgall of Raray,

Glenvrquhie, Laird of Lundie, Duncan Menzeis of Comeieil'e,

Johnne M'farlane of Arrochar, Duncane Campbell, Capitane of Williame Sterling of Achyle,

James Campbell of Laweris, Carrik,^^ Mr James Schaw of Knokhill,

Dauid Drummond, feruitour to Johnne Drummond, feruitour to Johnne Buntene of Ardoche,

my Lord of Perthe, my Lord of Perthe, and Chal- Mr James Kirk, feruitour to my

Alexander Menzeis of that Ilk, merlane of Stratherne, Lord of Argyle.
Alexander Schaw of Cambufmoir,

The Aduocat takis inflrumentis of the fweringof the AfTyfe, and proteflis for

* Ardchenachrochtan, the now celebrated inn and farm at the Trossachs. - Plunder, or spoil.

3 Stock, cattle. * A small Island, near the western extremity of Loch Katrine, on its north shore,

opposite Portnellan. ^ Spoiling ; plundering. ^ Circumjacent. ' The Clan-Gregor liad a

garrison here, in January 1611 ; and were besieged by Campbell of Glenurchy's second son, Robert
Campbell of Glenfalloch, who abandoned the siege, owing, as is alleged in the Booh of Tdymouth, to
a storm of snow. ^ Taking free quarters by violence, &c. ^ A])pointed meetings, councils, and
gatherings, or convocations. ^° Heir-apparent. ^^ Captain of the Castle of Carrik, on the banks
of Lochfyne.

VOL. III. 2 c;

284. CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

Wilfull Errour, in caice thay clange the pannell of the ciymes contenit in thair
Dittay ; in refi)ect of the notorietie thairof, and of thair Confeffioun.

A'eiidict. Eftir accnfatioiin of the foirfaidis perfones enterit vpone pannell
of the crymes refpeciiiie aboue writtin, be our faid Ibuerane lordis Aduocat,
qiihilk was verifeit be thair Depolitiones and Confeffiones, maid in prefens of
ane grit number of the faidis perfones of Affyfe, the faid Dauid Drummond,
chanceller, in name of the faid Affyfe, all in ane voce, exponit, pronuncet, and
declairit the faidis perfones on pannell, in refpect of thair awin Confeffioun, to
be ffylit, culpable, and convict of the crymes refpectiue aboue fpecifeit, contenit
in thair Dittayis. — Sentence. To be tane to the Burrow-mure of Ed', and
thair to be hangit quhill thai be deid ; and thair haill landis, heritages, and annuelrentis, takis, poffeffiones, guidis and geir j^ertening to thame, to be fforfalt
and efcheit to his hienes vfe, as convict and culpable of the faidis crymes.

^InuijTjtcr — (i^nnntl ortraintb to satisfi) t\)t ^ribatt ^^artp,

n£itix)ttI)0tantrincj: of Xi)t funs's iUmission, anb * Ettttrs

of plains* from t\)t Orltirst ^ou of t\)t Btctasrlio

Jul. 29. — WiLLiAME Murray, fone to Williame Murray in Glasfurd,
fumtyme fervand to James Hammiltoun of Evindaill.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Archibald Stevinfoun, in Gallowfarvene ; committit with fchottis of hagbuttis and piftolettis,
vpone the xxiiij day of Marche, V^.Y'f. and aucht yeiris.

Persewaris, Archibald and Thomas Stevinfones, as fones ; Agnes Finlay, as relict; Gawin Steviiifone, baxter, burges of Ed'', as neir kynfman.

The faid Williame tuik him felff to our fouerane lordis Remiffioun, grantit to
him vnder his hienes Grit Seall, vpone the nynt day of Januar laftbypaft, beirand,^ that his Maieflie, of his fpeciall grace and mercie, had pardonet and forgevin
the faid Williame all actioun, cryme, and offence that mycht be imput" to him,
for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq^^ Archibald ; and in refpect
thairof, and of his Maiefteis clemencie, mercie, and pardoun expreffit thairin, allegit, that the Juftice could nav/ayis put him to ane Affyfe, for the faid crymes.
— To the quliilk it was anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the foirfaid Remiffioun
is null, and thairfoir fould nocht be admittit ; in refpect, be Act of Parliament,
maid be oiu* fouerane lord and thre Eftaitis, in the monetli of Julij, 1593, cap.
174, it is cxpreflie provydit, llatute and ordanit, be his Maieltie and Ellaittis
foirfaidis, that na Refpett nor Remiffioun be grantit to ony jjerfone or perfones,
at na tyme thaireftir, that paffes to the home for thift, reif, flauchter, burning,
or heirfchip, quhill the pairtie (kaithed^ be firfl fatisfeit ; and gif^ the famyn be

' Bearing. * Imputed. ' Until the party injured, &c. * If.

46&10JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 235

vtherwayis grantit, without fatisfactioun. of pairtie, all fie Refpettis and Remiffiones to be null, alfweill be way of exceptioun as reply : And trew it is, that the
pairtie perfewar is nawayis fatisfeit, conforme to the faid Act ; and thairfoir,
nochtwithftanding of the foirfaid Remiffioun, the pannell fould be put to ane
Aflyfe, for the faid cryme.

To the quhilk it was duplyit be the pannell and his prelocutouris, that the
foirfaid Remiffioun man^ be admittit, in refpect the famyn is grantit vpone the
ficht of ane Letter of Slanes gevin be Andro Stevinfoun, eldeft lauchfull fone to
the faid vmq'^ Archibald, and nerreft of kyn to him, with confent of Agnes Finlay his mother, and Mathow Thomefone, his vncle, beiring fatisfactioun maid to
the faid Andro for the faid flauchter : And for verificatioun thairof, producet
the faid Letter of Slanes, of the dait the penult day of Julij, I™.Vj^ and ellevin
yeiris : And vpone the productioun thairof, togidder with the Remiffioun aboue
writtin, aflvit inftrumentis.

The Justice, in refpect of the Letter of Slanes producet, Admittis the Remiffioun ; and ordanis the pannell to find cautioun to fatisfie the pairtie, conforme to the lawis of this realme. — James Murray of Guidifburne, and Gawin
Murray of Vdftounheid, become cautioneris, &c.

Jul. 30. — Donald M'^ky, hear of Far, Johnne Gordoun, younger of
Golfpitour, and vtheris.^

Dilaitit ffor being airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ Johnne Sinclair of
Stirkco, and James Sinclair of Dyn, and remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris.

Compeirit perfonallie George Murray, feruitour to my Lady Sutherland, quha
produceit ane Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, &c. off the quhilk the
tennour followis.

Justice, Juflice clerk, and 30ur deputis. Quhairas, thair ar Letteris direct at pe inflance of Georo-e
Sincler of Dyn, as brother to vmq'« James Sinclair of Dyn, and mother-brother to vmq>'^' Johnne Sinclair of Stirkco, and Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for liis
hienes intreis, aganis Donald 3Pkij, fiear of Far, Johnne Gordoun, 50unger of Golfpitour, Adame
Gordoun in Geartie, 3Iurdo Neill, Jolinne Williamefoun in Achines, jNeill M'allajter XciUjhun m\(\
Doncdd Myller, feruitouris to the faid Donald M'ky, fiear of Far, and remanent perfones defendoris,
])air complices, contenit in the faidis Letteris, chargeing thame to compeir befoir 30W, in tlie Tolbuth
of Edinburgli, the penult day of Julij inftant, to vnderly the law, for airt and pairt of tlio Slauchter of
pe faidis ymq'*" Johnne and James Sinclairis. And feing all niatteris quelliouable betuix tiik Eule
OF Sutherland and M'ky, and ])air kya and freindis, on the ane pairt, and the Erle of CaithNES, his kyn and freindis, on the vther pairt, is be our moyaiie and travollis Aibniittit; in the (juliilk
Submiffioun the faidis tua Slauchteris of ])e faidis Jolinne and James Sinclairis ar fj)t'c-ialli(' comprcliendit, and ])e decyding })airof reftis in our handis, to be difcuHit be ws. It is ])airfoir our Will, and

' Must. 2 Vid. Jul. 17, \^\'L

236 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

We command :;ow to desert ))e faid dyet appointit to ]>e faid penult day of Julij inftant, for tryell of
pe faidis crymes, and nawayis to proceid in vnlawing of the faidis perfones defenderis, or Jiair cautioneris ; difpenfing with thair non-compeirance, in that refpect : Quhairanent J)ir prefentis fall be to
50W ane fufficient Warrand. Subfcryuit be ws at Ed^, the xxv day of July, 1612.

Al. Caxcell^ Lotiiiaxe. Sr T. Hamiltoun.

At command of the quliilk Warrand, the Juftice ordanit the faid dyet to defert, &c.

Jul. 31. — James Hall of Foiilebar; Mr Williame Hall, indueller in

Dumbarten, his brother-germane; Thomas Stewart, at the

Ferrie-boit of Inchynnane.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq^^ Johnne Montgomerie, younger of Scottiftoun ; committit with fchottis of hagbuttis and piflolettis,

within the burgh of Renfrew, in the moneth of November, the yeir of God P.V.

fourfcoir nine yeiris : And als, for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in

beiring and weiring of hagbuttis and piflolettis, fchoiteing and flaying of the

faid vmq'^ Johnne Montgomerie younger thairwith, at the particuler tyme and

place aboue mentionet.

Persewaris.

Johnne Montgomerie, elder of Scottifloun, as father ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny^
Prelocutouris for the pannell, Mr Alexander King, Mr Laurence M''gill, Aduocatis.

Sir Johnne Buchannan of that Ilk, kny*, become fouertie for Thomas Stewart
his entrie, vpone xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the law for the flauchter aboue
writtin, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament. — The faid James
Hall, and Mr Williame Hall, his brother, tuik thame felffis to tua feuerall Remifliones, grantit to thame be our fouerane lord ; the ane beirand, that his Maieftie, of bis fpeciall fauour and grace, remittis and gevis pardoun to the faidis
James Hall of Foulbar, and to Mr Williame Hall, his brother, for airt and pairt
of the flauchter of the faid vmq^^ Johnne IMontgomerie Younger of Scottifl;oun,
and for all actioun and cry me that may follow thairupoun, or may be imput to
thame thairfoir ; quhilk is daitit at ffalkland, the aucht day of Julij, the yeir of
God r^'.V^ fourfcoir fyftene yeiris (1596), vnder his hienes Grit feill : The vther of
the faidis Remifliones beirand, that his Maieftie, of his fpeciall grace and mercie,
gevis pardoun and remiifioun to the faid James Hall, feruitour to Archibald Erie
of Argyle, and to the faid Mr Williame Hall, his brother, and to ather of thame,
for all cryme and offence that mycht be laid to thair charge, ffor thair beiring,
weiring, or fchuiting witli hagbutis and piflolettis, contrair to his Maiefleis
Actis of Parliament, at ony tyme bygane, preceiding the day and dait of the

46 & 10 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 237

fame Remiffioun, quhilk is daitit at Edinburgh, the tent day of Julij inftant,
I'".Vj^ and tuelf yeiris.

The Justice admittit the famyn, nochtwithftanding of dyuerfe allegeances
maid be our fouerane lordis Aduocat in the contrair ; and Ordanit the faidis perfones vpone pannell to find cautioun to fatisfie the pairtie, conforme to the lawis
of this reahne : Quhairupone the faidis James and Mr Williame Hallis afkit inilrumentis : And for obedience of the faid ordinance, fFand, with thame felfis,
Williame Sempill of Foulewoid, and James Wallace of Johnnftoun, cautioners
for thame, to fatisfie the pairtie, &c.

^lauuJjttr, rommitttlj hv a ^outj) fourtttn pears of atjc*

Aug. 26. — James Middeltoun, fone to vmq^^ Robert Middeltoun,
tail5eour, burges of Edinburgh.

Dilaitit off airt and pairt of the ere wall Slauchter of vmq^^ Clement Mauchane,
fone to vmq'* James Mauchane, mercheand, burges of Edinburgh, be ftreking of
him with ane durk, vnder the fchorte ribbis, vpwardis, on his left fyde, the lenth
of audit or nyne inches, vpone the diaphragma, or midreid, quhilk is ane noble
pairt ; committit within the burgh of Edinburgh, within the duelling lious or
ludgeing of Alexander Hunter, burges thair, vpone the threttene day of Auguft
inflant : Off the quhilk crewall and deidlie flraik fa gevin to him, he nevir thaireftir convalefchet, hot immediatlie thaireftir taking bed within the foir chalmer
of vmq"'' Henrie Lummifden, chirurgane, to the quhilk he was led and cayreit,
remanit bedfafl in grit dollour and pane, vnder the cure of chirurganes, the
fpace of nyne dayis togidder, or thairby ; and at laft, vpone the xxij day of Augufl inflant, about nyne houris afoir none, he depairtit this lyfe, of the faid deidlie flraik : And fa, was crewallie flane be the faid James Middeltoun, vjione fet
purpois, prouifioun, and foirthocht fellonie ; in hie and manifefl contenqjt of
our fouerane lordis auctoritie and lawis.

Persewaris, Mr James Mauchane, as brother; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny', Aduocat

to our fouerane lord.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Johnne RufTell, Mr Laurence M'gill.

The perfewaris producet the Dittay, with the roll of the Affyfe, and defyret
proces. — The Justice Ordanit the Dittay to be red.

Mr Laurence M'^gill, prelocutour, in name of Johnne Carmichell, decone of
the Tail3eouris, Alexander Miller, tail5eour to his Maieflie, and of the mother
and certane vtheris tlie pannellis freindis, befoir ony forder proces, and to efchew
forder difputatioun in this matter, offerit to the perfewaris, that for thair fatisfactioun for the flauchter aboue writtin, that thai war content to caus the pannell ather imbrace the Sentence of perpetuall Banifchment ; or vther wayis, to
thair power,^ to mak fic vther fatisfactioun, baith of honour and guidis, to the

^ To the utmost extent of their means.

238 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

perfewar, as be the advyfe of friendis foiild be inioynet to him, his lyfe being

faifit. The laid ]\Ir James ]\Iauchaiie, as brother, and perfewar of this mater, for

anfiier dechiirit, that, feing- his brother is flane, aganis the Law of God and his
Maiefteis lawis and Actis of Parliament, refuifet altogidder to enter in capitulatioun of agrement of this matter ; and thairfoir delyret that juftice be miniftrat,
accoirding to the lawis of this realme.

The Justice, in refpect of the perfewaris anfiier and defyre aboue writtin,

Ordanis proces.

It was allegit be the pannell and his prelocutoiiris, that this matter fould nocht
pas to the knawlcge of ane Atfyfe ffor tua cauflis ; JfirJ}> becaiis he is nocht wairnit vpone fyftene dayis wairning, conforme to the Act of Parliament ; fecundo,
he was nocht tane in flagranti crimine ; in refpect be the Dittay it is affirmet,
that the fact was committit vpone Thurifday the xiij day of Auguft inftant, and
vpone the fyftene day of the faid moneth, being Setterday, was tane be the Magiftratis of Edinburgh, as fufpect giltie and culpable of the laid fact, albeit^ the
INIagiilrattis of the laid bur* had na power fa to do, the tyme limitat to thame
being expyret, viz. xxiiij houres allanerlie^ eftir the committing of the fact; and
fa, he nocht being tane in fragranti crimine, bot within thre dayis eftir the
allegit time of the committing thairof, the pannell, of all ecpiitie, aucht to haif
bene fummond vpone fyftene dayis wairning. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the foirfaid allegeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay
beiring the (lauchter to be committit vpone the xiij day, be the pannell, and he
to be tane and apprehendit be the Magiftratis vpone the xv day thaireftir, and
committit to waird ; quhairin he hes remanit to this hour. And fa, the Slauchter being committit recentlie, and the pannell tane thairfoir in fragranti crimine, he aucht to be put to ane Affyfe, but^ ony citatioun preceiding ; fpeciallie, in
refpect he is brocht fra the prilTone to the bar, be the Magiftratis, his takeris.

The Justice Ordanis the pannell to pas to ane Aflyfe, nochtwithftanding
of the former allegeances.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that my lord Juftice can nocht put the pannell to the knawlege of ane Aftyfe, for this cryme ; becaus, be ane text of the
Cowmone Law, (h delictis puerornm, the fyft of the Decretallis, it is fpeciallie
declairit, that rninoris within xiiij yeiris of age committing crymes, ar nocht doU
capaces, quliilk can nocht be eftimat to be done be thame ex certafcientia ; and
thairfoir, can nocht be perfewit thairfoir : Lyk as, in the accident that fell furth
be the fcolleris of the Grammer-fcole of Edinburgh, in Haying of Jolinne M^morrane, being ane bail'^ie, and in the executioun of his office, this allegeance being
proponit in the perfute intentit aganis thame for the faid Slauchter, it was ffund,
be Interloquitour of the Judge, in retpect of thair minoritie, that thai war nocht
1 Although. * Only. ^ Without.

46&10Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

239

doli capaces, and fa wer afToilzeit/ and na perfute followit fiirth aganis tliame :
Quliilk practiqiie the pannell repeittis, and fayis, that in refpect of the Cowmonelaw and practique aboue writtin, he being minor et non doll capax, he can nocht
pas to ane AflTyfe for the faid cryme. Secundo, the flaiichter aboue writtin was
nocht committit vpone fet purpois or foirthocht fellonie ; in refpect thair was
na querrell betuix the defunct and the pannell of befoir, bot only the defunct
miffing his dager, quhilk was tane fra him be Capitane Erflvine, quha alfo was
with him in companie, and was caffin vp be him vpone ane almerie heid,^ the
defunct, for wanting thairof, challanget the pannell, and maifl outrageouflie
abufet him, baith with langaige and ftraikis f lyk as, the pannell, finding him
felf fa vfet, and feing ane durk vpone the buird befyde him, tuik vp the faid
durk and defendit him felf thairwith, vpone the quhilk durk, haldin out be the
pannell for his awin defence, the defunct ran him felf ; and fa was the cans, him
felf, of his awin llauchter : And thairfoir, fould nocht pas to ane AfTyfe.

To the quhilk it is anfuerit, be my lord Aduocat, that the foirfaid allegeance
of minoritie fould be repellit, becaus it is nocht condifcendit be the proponer of
the faid James Middeltones age, quhidder he be pall xiiij yeiris or within the
famyn, quhilk of neceffitie man'* be condifcendit vpone ; becaus he being pail xiiij
yeiris of age, eft doli capax, and fua may be perfewit and pwneift to the daith
for the llauchter : Alwayis,^ to mak the matter cleir to my lord Juftice, it is
affirmet be the perfewer that he is pall fevintene yeiris of aige, befoir the committing of the llauchter, as is manifell, nocht onlie be ocular infpectioun, bot be
the extract of the tyme of his birth furth of the Regiller of the Kirk-buikis of

Edinburgh, he being baptizet vpone the 23 day of Julij PWMxxxxv. As to

the practique allegit betuix Johnne M'^morrane and the Chanceller of Caithnes
fone, and the rell of the bairnes, quhome the pannell allegis to haif bene perfewit
for the faid Johnne ^rmorranes llauchter, it is certane that all the bairnes tliat
war perfewit and accufet for that llauchter war within fourtene yeiris of a'^-e ;
and thair was na Interlocutour gevin in that caufe, bot the matter was tane vp
be his Maielleis expres Warrand. — And acceptis the Confeliioun of the durk in
his handis, and Slauchter thairwith.

Thaireftir the pannell, for fatisfeing the defyre of my lord Aduocatis allegeance,
condifcendis that he was within fourtene, at the leid lyftene yeiris of age, the tyme
of the committing of the llauchter lybellit. And quhair, it is allegit and aflirmet
that the haill bairnes perfewit for Johnne JNrmorranes daitli war within fourtene
yeiris, thair is na thing producet to verifie the famyn. And laft, as to the Tef-

* Absolved; tlismissed. ^ Cast or thrown by liim on the top of a cupboard or press. ' Both
by words aud blows. * Must. * Nevertheless ; at all events.

240 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

timoniall prodiicet be the perfewar, anent the pannellis baptifme ; ffirjf, it is
anfuerit, that iia fayth can be gevin thairto, becaus it is nocht regiftrat ; fecundo, it hes iia witiieifes ; tert'io, of the La\y, Uiftihus et non tejlimonijs credendum

ejl. The perfewar repeitis his former anfwer, with the Teftimoniall extractit

furth of the Kirkis Regifter.

The Juftice Repellis the allegeances proponit be the pannell ; and Ordanis him
to be put to the kuawlege of ane AfTyfe.

ASSISA.

Jo" Quhyte,culteller,burges, Ed"", Patrik Craig, meicheand, burges James Cathkyn, Hbrar, burges of
Johnne Naper, tailjeour in Poket- of Ed"", Ed"",

fleve, Johnne Mitchelbill, mercheand, Dauid Laufone, mercheand, burJohnne Gilbert, tailjeour in the burges thair, ges thair,

Cannogait, Patrik Meayne, couper, burges Thomas Cuthbertfone, culteller,

Johnne Smyth, mercheand, bur- thair, Troyalus Laufone, baxter, burges

ges of Ed"", Robert 3oungj maltman, of Ed"",

Clement Ruflell, mercheand, bur- James Halyburtoun, mercheand, Johnne Johnnefloun, tail3eour,

ges thair, burges of Ed"", burges of the Cannogait.

It was allegit aganis Johnne Quhyte, that he can nocht be admittit vpone this
affyfe, becaus vitro citroque gc^ltfe hoc negotiOi in furtherance of this perfewer,
in perfute of the pannell ; and defyret the Judge to tak his ayth thairupoun, and
to purge him of partiall counfall ; quha being luorne, declairit, that he had gevin
na partiall counfall in that matter : In refpect quhairof, the Juftice admittis him
vpone the AfTyfe.

The Defender, eftir his accufatioun be Dittay of the Slauchter aboue writtin,
vpone his confcience, denyis the famyn ; and allegit, that thair was nathing producet to the AfTyfe to verifie his giltines of that fact.

My James Mauchane, perfewer, and brother to the defunct, being fuorne, gaif
his ayth vpone the Dittay, that he had juft cans to perfew the pannell for the
flauchter of his brother : And repeittis to the AfTyfe the notorietie of the flauchter, in maner fet doun in the Dittay. — My Lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of
the fweiring of the AfTyfe ; and repeittis, for their forder inftructioun, the offer
maid be the pannell to the perfewer, ather to imbrace the fentence of Banifchment, or vtherwayis, in honour or guidis, to mak fatisfactioun to thair power ;
quhairin the pannell hes confeft his giltines of the fact, in maner fet doun in the
Dittay. And j^roteftis, in refpect thairof, for Wilfull Errour aganis the AfTyfe,
in caice thay acquit. — It is allegit be the pannell, that the offer allegit maid be
him to the pairtie perfewer, in the begyning of the caufe, was nocht maid be him,
bot be Johnne Carmichell, deacone of the Tail5eouris, and vtheris his brether, the
pannellis freindis and weill-willeris, out of thair a win box,^ quhilk offer was
' Out of the box or funds belonging to the Incorporation.

46&10JAC.VL CRIMINAL TRIALS. 041

iioclit maid to induce ony Confeffioun of the crjane, ^fed ad evitandum litigation em. — My Lord Adiiocat, as ofbefoir, rej)eitis the offer, and notorietie of the
fact coinmittit ; and proteflis for Wilfull Erroiir, gif the Affyfe acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid James
Cathekyn, buikfeller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid James Middletoun
to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the crewall flauchter of the faid vmq'^ Clement Mauchane ; commititt at the tyme and in maner fpecifeit in the faid
Dittay. — Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of John Dow, dempfter of
Court,' decernit and adiudget the faid James to be tane to the Mercat-croce of
Ed"", and thair his heid to be Itrukin frome his body ; and all his moveable
guidis and geir, gif he ony hes, to be efcheit and inbrocht to his hienes vfe, as
convict of the faid Slauchter.^

^orst antJ ^Ijtrp ^tralinti— Cj)tft— JJrrjur|)»

Sep. 18. — Alexander Irwing, fone to vmq'^ Gilbert Irwing of Wyfbie, James Irwing, fone to vmq'^ Williame Irwing, brother to

the faid vniq'*" Gilbert.

Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit, be Dittay, at the inftance of Williame Mannecht in Edit, and Alexander Wilfone, gairdner thair, and be Sir Williame Olij)hant of Newtoun, kny*, aduocat to our fouerane lord, off the feuerall i^ointis of

Dittay following, viz.

For airt and paiit of fteilling and away-taking of thre lynnlng wobbis furtli of the lioufPis of Gulielandis, pertening to ane pure woman tliair ; committit in Julij, 1610 yeiris. Item, fFor airt and pairt
of the fteilling of fevin naigis and meiris^ furth of tlie landis of Moufwall and Drummwre ; committit
in the moneth of October, 1610 yeiris. Item, ft'or airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling and awaytaking of audit fcheip furth of Dronnok, fra James Quliyte thair; committit in September, 1609.
Item, ff"or airt and pairt of the fteilling and away-taking of tua naigis and ane mere, pertening to Johne
Gillefpie, and George Ker, in Robiequhat ; committit in October, 1610. Item, ftor airt and pairt of
the thiftious fteilling and away-taking of fax oxin furth of the landis of Lochirgrane, within Drummwre ; committit be the laid Alexander, in the yeir of God I'", fax hundreth and audit yeiris. For
the quhilkis feuerall crymes, the faidis Alexander and James Irwingis being arreiftit to the Juftice
Court, haldin be the Commiflioneris in the Tolbuthe of Dumfreis the fyftene day of October, r".Vj''.
and ellevin yeiris, thay, for thair non-compeirance, war declairit fugitiues and put to the home, as
rebellis and fuL;itiues, for the laidis crymes. Item, the faidis James and Alexander Irwingis war indyttit and accufet, at the inftance of the faidis perfewaris, ffur airt and pairt of tlie fteilling and awaytaking furlli of tlie waird of Edit of ane gray naig, pertening to the liiid Williame Mannetht, and of
ane broun naig, pertening to the faid Alex'" W'ilfoun, gairdner in Edit; committit vnder filence of
nyclit, vpone the firft day of Auguft lailbypaft ; quhilkis tua naigis war brodit Soutlie ower be tliame
to Ed"" to Thomas Lokeis Iious, at the Waft-Poirt thairof, quliair thai war keipit for the Ipace of thre

' This person appears, for the first time, as dempster, in the Recoid. * Sre Nov. 18, 1618, when, after six

years' imprisoniiu'iit, tli« party relents, and INIyddiltoan goes into voluntary exile for life. This arranj;en)ent is sanctioned by the Privy Council and the Justice, to whofti the matter had previously been submitted, ' Riding horses
and mares.

VOL. 111. 2 H

242 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1612.

(layis and thre nyclitis ; and vpone the . . . day of the faid moneth, being Mononday, the ordinar mercat day of the faid burgh, * piefentit thame to the horfe-mercat thairof to be fauld, quliair the faidis
tua horflis war challanget in thair pclleirioun, be Airthour Forbes of Sonnahony ; and thai thairefter
appreliendit and comniittit to waird witliin the Tolbuth of Ed"", thair to haif remanit quhill thair tryell.
Item, flur airt and pairt of the lleilling and away-taking of ane horfe furth of the Heuch of Duris,
pertening to Thomas Frafer, fone to tlie auld Laird of Duris ; comniittit in Junij laflbypaft. Item,
flFor airt and pairt of the fleilling, conceilling, and away-taking of ane blak horfe, pertening to Johnne
Clark in Auchrofle ; committit in the moneth of Maij, I'".Vj'^. and ten yeiris. Item, fFor the deteftable
and odious cryme of Periurie, in tlie periureing and menfweiring^ of thame felffis, the tyme of thair
examinatioun and vptaking of thair Depofitiones ; the faid James Irwing, be liis grit aithe, aflBrmeing
him felflf to be namet Johnne Poole, quhairat he ftill abaid quhill the contrair was verifeit vpone him,
and he maid to confefs the treuth thairof; quhilk was alfo fworne and affermet be the faid Alex'' Irwing, that the faid James was namet Johnne Pole. Item, thay and ather of thame war indytit and
accufet for Cowmone thift, Cowmone reflet of thift, fra the South to the Northe, and fra the Northe
to the Southe, in outputing' of the famyn.

My lord Aduocat, for verifeing the firll point of Dittayis, producet ane Precept of the Commiffioneris, be the qvihilk the pannell ar denuncet fugitiues, for
certane poyntis of thift gevin vp aganis thame ; and repeitis the fueiring of the
Dittay he the tua perfewaris, anent the lleilling of thair tua naigis : And in
refpect thairof, and of the notorietie of the pannellis thiftious lyfe, proteftis for
Errour, gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Abercrombie, in Leith, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis Alexander and James Irwingis to
be ffylit, culpable, and convict of the haill crymes refpectiue^ aboue expremit. —
Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed", and thair to be hangit vpone
ane gibbet, quhill thay be deid : And all thair guidis and geir to be efcheit, &c.

Nov. 5. — Johnne Hay, fervitour to James Henderfone, chirurgane.
Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit be Crifliane Adamefone, the relict of vmq'^ Niniane Paterfone, ftaibler in Ed", and Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny^,
Aduocat to our fouerane lord, of the crymes following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL as the faid Johnne Hay hailing, in the moneth of Maij bypaft, hyret and conducet
the faid vraq^*" Niniane Paterfones horfe to Roifling-mylne, for hame-bringing of ])e faid James Henderfones bairne ; and ])e faid Niniane haifing pafl with him, of purpois, at his lichting,* to haif attendit
vpone his faid hors, the faid Johnne Hay, be the way, directit the faid Ymq^*" Niniane to ryn befoir, and
to attend^ his curaing, becaus he was him feliT to repair to Lefuaid, thair to fpeik with his fa]ier and
vtheris his freindis ; lyk as, about ten houris at evin, the faid Johnne, haifing cum to the faid mylne,
altogidder ouerfet with drink, and fa, nawayis being able at that tyme of the nycht, and in fa beiftlie
ellait, to governe him felf, let be to haif horlet and cayreit befoir liim his faid maifleris bairne, without
danger of bothe ]iair lyves ; becaus fe faid vmq^<^ Niniane maid fum oppofitioun and refillance to that
liis intentioun, in ryding at fat tyme of the nycht ; he fairfoir, in his beiftlie rage and furie, ran vpone

' Now held on Wednesdays. '^ Manswearing. ' Selling ; disposing of. * Alighting. ^ Await.

Fr. atlendre.

46&10JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 2i3

Lim, and with his kneyis and feit poflit^ him vnder his feit, Left and dang* him in ]>e heid, bellie, breillis,
and fydis, and brak and birfet^ his haill intrallis within him : And nocht being fatisfeit with that his
crewall and outragious abufe, the faid vmq^*^ Niniane, being liffin vp on his feit, the faid Johnne come
to him and hurrilHt him maill violentlie over the brae befyde ])e mylne, of purpois to liaif drowned him
in the dambe, quhilk, be refTone of ]ie faid downeward fall, he had nocht fail^eit to half done, war
nocht, be ]>e Providence of God, he was haldin and flayit be ])e ftobe and rute of ane trie, his face and
lieid, nochtwitliftanding, being maift fchamefullie demanif* and hurt, be occafionn of ])e faid fall : Off
the quhilkis llraikis, hurtis, and woundis, fa gevin to the faid vmq^'' Niniane, in maner foirfaid, he nevir
])aireftir convaleffit ; hot being borne and cayreit hame to his duelling hous, tuik bed, quhairin he
remanit bedfafl, in grit dollour and payne, continuallie ]iaireftir, to ])e tyme of his daithe ; and at lenth,
vpone Lambes day^ paireftir, quhilk was pe firfl day of Augufl laflbypaft, he deceiflit of ]>e faidis hurtis
and woundis ; and at ])e hour of his daith, and dyuerfe tymes ofbefoir, during his feiknes, left his deid,^
and J)e only caufe ]iairof, vpone f>e faid Johnne : And fa was fchamefullie, crewallie, and vnmercifullie
flane be f e faid Johnne Hay ; and he is airt and pairt of ])e faid crewall flauchter, committit vpone fet
purpois, prouifione, and foirthocht fellonie ; iu hie and mauifefl contempt of his hienes auctoritie
and lawis,

Pkelocutouris in defence, Gilbert Hay, as fader to the defender ;
Mr Lawrence M'^^Gill, Adame Cuninghame, Johnne Elphingftone of Schank.

It is allegit, be the pannell, that this lybell is nocht relevant, in refpect the
perticuler day of the moneth of the allegit committing of the fact lybellit, is nocht
condifcendit vpone. — To the quhilk it is anfiierit be the perfewar, that the allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Summondis beirand the cryme lybellit
to be committit, be this defender, in the moneth of May laft ; and that be the
ftraikis gevin to the defunct, at that tyme, he deceiffit thairof in Auguft thaireftir.

The Justice, nochtwithftanding of the allegeance, in refpect of the perfewaris anfuer, remittis this matter to ane AfTyfe.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Thomas Inglis,
burges of Ed', chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declarit the faid Johnne Hay to
be clene, innocent, and acquit of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'^ Niniane, and of
airt and pairt thairof. — Quhairupoim the faid Johnne Hay aflvit inflrumentis.

Nov. 24. — Thomas Mowat, fumtyme fervand to Williame Lord Keith.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the thiftious lleillingand abftracting fra Williame
Lord Keyth, his maifter, of ane purfe, togidder with fax fcoir Angellis of gold,
being thairintill, vnder nycht, furth of ane foir chalmer in Ed"^, quhair his faid
maiiler was ludget for the tyme ; committit vpone the xiij day of JMarche lall.

This cafe was continued to Dec. 23, Jan. 29, Feb. 5 and 12 ; and at length

' Pushed. ¥i: pousser. ^ Beat and struck. ^ Bruised. It is sometimes in the Record

expressed by ' 6rr//?,' burst. * Used ; treated. •'' Lammas-day, 1st August, or the Feast of

St Peter ad Vincula (in bonds) ; supposed to be so named, because lambs were offered at tiiis Mass, in
commemoration of the command of our Saviour to the Apostle, ' Feed my Iambs.' This metaphorical
expression was, as usual, seized upon by the Romish Church, and converted into a source of substantial profit. '^ Death.

244 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

was prorogated to the Juftice-air of ' Sterling, tertio Itiiieris, vel fiiper premoiiitioiie XV dierum.' No procedure is recorded, laving thefe continuations, owing
to the ablence of Lord Keith, &c.

* Bng^lmij iJimttis'— JJinin) — CI)cft

Feb. 2, 1613. — Joiinne Dauidsoux, borne at Ratleiff, befyde Lundoun,
Johnne Lowis, borne in Cairleill, baith Inglifch Pirattis.

Dilaitit of Piracie and Thift, committit vpone dyuerfe his Maiefteis fubiectis,
bothe in Ingland and Scothuid, viz.

For the thiftious Iteilling of ane fchip-boit furth of Ratleif ; committit vpone
the fourtene day of Januar laft, and paffing thairwith to the fie : And for airt
and pairt of the buirding of ane catche or oifter-bott, and thiftious away-taking
of the famyn, vnder lilence of nycht ; and paffing thairwith, furth of the river of
Tliames to Liefwall, quhair thai buirdit ane Harwadge Hoy, and be way of niaifterful thift and ftouthe-reif, reft and away-tuik furth thairof ane piece of (lufF
worth threttie fchillingis flerling, togidder with breid, beir, and vther victualHs :
And thairfra, foraneiit Harwadge,^ perfewit and buirdit ane Yarmouth bark,
and tuik furth thairof thre caidis of reid heiring, and ane half barrell of quhyte
heiring, with the barkis topfaill, the llxipperis cloik, and ane (land of apparell,
laid over with filuer laife : And thaireftir, come to Yarmouth-Raid, quhair thai
perfewit and buirdit ane Scottis bark, pertening to Alexander Law in KirkcaldiCj
invaidit the flvipper with his companie, being thairin, hurt and woundit the laid
Alexander Law, (kipper, in the heid : And for dyuerfe vtheris crymes of Pirracie,
at lentil fpecifeit in the Dittay.

Quhilkis (' feuerall crymes') war confeffit judiciallie be thame to be of verritie.

Vekdict. The AfTyfe, be the mouth of Walter Lukkie, fkipper in Leyth,
chancellar, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis Johnne Dauidfoun and
Johnne Lowis to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the perticuler crymes of Thift
and Pirracie aboue fpecifeit. — Sentence. To be tane to the Sandis of Leithe,
within the fluid-mark thairof, and thair, vpone ane gibbet to be hangit quhill
thay be deid ; and all thair moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

J^irc-raisina — Jiuriniijg: — iHuitrn— Ci)tft — 3j)iniri)*

Mar. 30.— Neill M'claud, fone-naturall to vmq^' Rorie M'cfaud, fumtyme of Lewis.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Burning of dyuerfe houffis, erectit and

biggit be the Lairdis of Balcomie, Airdrie, A\^ormeftoun, &c. vpone the Isle

OF the Lewis, and for dyuerfe vther crymes, fet doun in his Dittay following.

' Opposite to Harwich.

46&10JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 245

Neill Makci.aud, fone naturall to vmq^'' Rorie M'claml, fumtyino of Lewis. 3^ ar indytlt and
accufet, fforfamekill as, from jour verrie jouthe, je being tranet vp in all maner of barbarous crewaltie
and wiketnes, and following J^e pernitious example of jour godles parentis, kynsfolk, and cuntrie
people, haifing committit innumerable oppreffiones, heirfchipis, and violent factis aganis fic perfones
as 36 miflyket, duelland within the cuntrie of the Lewis, and vtlieris Hieland Yles pairabout, to
the heich oflfence of Almychtie God, difplefour of the King's Maieilie, contempt of his royall authoritie, and violatioun of his hiencs lawis ; fl'or forder manifeflatioun of jour extrrame and vnnaturall
mifchancie,^ vnderftanding that the Kingis mofl excellent Maieflie, for repreffing of the abhominable
villaneis, crewalteis, and oppreffiones committit be jow and jour aflociattis duelland within \<e Yleand
of the Lewis, out of his princelie wifdome, had directit ane grit number of his hienes peceable and
guid fubiectis furth of ]>e Lawlandis, bodin^ with all maner of furnitour, and neceflar prouifioun for
fair intertenement, towardis J)e faid He of ])e Lewis, thair to haif plantit and fett doun Tonnes and
Villages, and to haif eftablifchet all guid ordour and ciuilitie ; of purpois, pairby, to haif extirpat and
ruteit out fe name of barbaritie furth of thais pairtis : 3e, accumpaneit with Tormond 31' claud, jour
broker, and with tua hundreth barbarus, bludie, and wiket Hielandmen, foirneris and avowed maliefactouris, ancient inhabitantis and lawles perfones witliin the Lewis, quhome je convenit to ^our felff,
to refifl and withftand the purpois and godlie intentioun refoluet vpone be his Maieilie, anent ])e
quyeting of fat cuntrie — come, all bodiu in feir of weir,^ with bowis, darloches, tua-handit-fuoirdis,
hagbuttis, piflolettis, and vperis wappones invqjtite, in oppin and hofteill maner, about a fourtene jeir
fyne, or J>airby, to the faid Ileand of the Lewis, quhair vmq''^ VVilliame Lord Pittinweme, the
Laird of Worme/ioun, the Laird of FingajTc, the Laird of Balcomy, the Laird of Airdrie, accumpaneit with (iyuerfe lulandis Gentilmen, his Maiefleis peceable and obedient fubiectis war landit, and
in planting of dyuerfe houffes, pairtlie of tymmer, and pairtlie of flane and faill,^ for fe tyme, lipning
for nothing lefs nor to haif bene invaidit and withftuid in thais fair verlious^ proceidingis ; and fair,
maifl fearcelie invaidit and perfewit the faidis Lawland Gentilmen and fair companeis, maifl crewallie

murdreift and flew vmq'" Robert Traquair, vmq''^ James 3oung, vmq'*^ Wedderburne, and

dyuerfe vtheris, to the number of tuentie tua perfones, maid trelibnabillie put handis in the perfone
of the faid Laird of Balcomie, be taking him as captiue and priflbner : As also, maift treflbnabillie
raifit flfyre, brunt and diftroyit to the grund the haill houflis erectit vp be thame, with fe victuall and
furnitour of meill, malt, and vtlier prouifioun, to the availF of tuentie thoufeand merkis : And faireftir, be way of maifterfull Thift and Stouth-reiff, thiftiouflie flail and away-tuik the haill horfis, ky,
oxin, fcheip, and vther beftiall, pertening to f e faid Lauland gentilmen, to the availl of ten thowfeand
pundis. And je, the faid Neill, ar airt and pairt of the faidis treflbnable and barbarus crymcs, and
was fe fpeciall ringleider and Chiftane, with the faid Tormond, jour brofer, in putting of the famyn
to fic mercieles executioun : quhilk je can nocht deny. Item, 3e ar Indylit and accufet, fl'orfamekill
as Johnne Pullet and Robert Blair, burgefles of Perth, iiaifing pail, with ane Scliip pertening to thame,
to Loche-Brwme, to the fifcheing, je, vnderflanding fairof, come with ane number of thevis and lymmeris, jour afll)ciatis, to f e number of fourtie men, or f airby, all bodin in feir of weii" ; and haifing
devydit jour companie in tua feverall companeis, and enterit in tua boittis, je faireftir rowit af fe
land towardis the faid fchip ; and fair, as Pirattis, Thevis, and Sea-robberis, eftir difchargoing of dyuerfe mufcattis, hagbuttis, and vferis ingynes of fyre-work at the faid fchip and companie J'airof, je
buirdit the famyn, iptromettit with the haill furnitour, mercheandice, wynes, claitlie, and vfer prouifioun being fairintill, difarmet the merchandis, flvipper, and marincris, and tuik af fame ]'air haill
clething, and abuljementis,'' pat tua (of) fe companie of the faid fchip a land, and in maid piticfull ^
maner murdreifl and flew fe reft of the companie, to the number of fevin or audit men ; and |iainttir,

' O. Fr. meschancie, meschancetc, wickednoss. * Provided. ^ In wailikc array. * 'I'liickly cut turf, of a

particular quality. ^Virtuous; honourable. ° Value. " Dress ; apparel. ■* Titeous.

246 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

difponit vpone tlie faid Seliip, nierclieandice and guidis being fairin, at ])air plefour: And the faid
Neill was and is airt and pairt of tlie Thiftis and crewall IMurtliouris aboue writtin. Item, 3e ar indytit and accufet, fforfamekill as 50, peifeveiring in sour former devillifche and abhominable tred of lyfe,
je, accompaneit with dyucrfe thevis, foirneris, and brokin men, 30ur complices, to the number of thre
hundreth perfones, or ))airby, all bodin in feir of weir, with fuordis, durkis, bowis, darloches, hagbutis,
niuibattis, and piftolettis, refolveing with 50ur felff to putt the haill Lawland Gentilmen being than
within the faid Ileand of fe Lewis to ])e fuord, quhairby thay nor na vferis fould haif any power or
cominaiuliment in that Ileand to withlland 50ur wiket attemptis, in the moneth of Apryle, the 5eir of
God ^".^ j''. and ievin 5eiris, je of new agane come to that pairt of the laid Ileand, quhair ])e faid Lawland Gentilmen had biggit dyuerfe Townes and Villageis, and erectit dyuerfe houffis : And the bettir
to bring ;our wiket refolutioun to pas, 5e, in freindlie maner, humbillit and offerrit 5our felffis to becum peceable and obedient people, and defyrit thame to accept 30W in feruice, to quhome 5e wald be
willing to do all manor of guid and fleidable' offices, as 5e fould be imployit, in regaird 5e fand (as
■^e declairit) ])air cuming to ])at land to be for na evill intent, bot for guid : And ])e faidis Gentilmen,
beleveing ;our fair promeilTis, and lipning nathiiig les ])an that ony Treafone fould haif bene practijet
be 50W, haifing grantit 50W fum ouerfight,^ 36, with 30ur affociattis, maift trelfonabillie, vnder truft
and freindfchip, and in ]ie dark and maift quyet tyme of the nycht, enterit within the Campment belanging to the faid Lawland Gentilmen, raifit flyre, and brunt and dillroyit with fyre ane hous erectit
and pertening to Sir George Hay of Nether Liff, ane vfer hous pertening to the Laird of Airdrie, ane
v]'er hous pertening to the Laird of Wormejfoitn, ane v]ier hous pertening to Johnne Dalglcjfche, with
dyuerfe vJHTis houffis, newlie buildit within the faid Ileand, and alangis Jie Sea coifl ])airof, brunt and
dillroyit the haill victuallis, furnitour, iuficht and plenilTing being within the faidis houllis, to the availl
and ellimatioun of ten thowfeand pundis : And at ])e famyn tyme, maift crewallie Murdreift and Slew
vrnq^-^ Patrik Giffert, fervand to the Laird of Airdrie, with dyuerfe vtheris fervandis and office men
within the faid Campment, in jiair cuming out of ]ie faidis houffis, to fave thame felffis frome the rage
and violence of the ftyre, being all his Maiefteis faithful! and guid fubiectis : And 56, the laid Neill,
ar and war airt and pairt of the faidis treflbnable and crewall factis. And finallie, 36, the laid Neill,
m regaird of ;our former abhominable lyfe, feiring 3our awin apprehenfioun, and haifing, for 30urgritter furetie and releiff, fled af ))e Mayne and Continent-land to ane Craig callit Birfay, ane myle within
ane Loche, quliilk 36 mannit and fortifeit with men, niunitioun, and all maner of prouifioun for 30ur
intertenoment ; and haifing alfo tua boittis provydit, for 50W and 30ur complices paffiige and repalfage
fra ])e land to ])e faid Craig, 56, with jour aflbciattis, during jour abyding within the faid Craig, and
keiping jiairof, come a land, and ran dyuerfe furrowes' throw the cuntrie, and in maill thiftious maner
flaw, reft, and away-tuik with 50W, to fe faid Craig, dyuerfe guidis and beftiall fra pe inhabitautis of
the countrie about, namelic, fra GiUicchallum ISFallaJler Coide and GillicchaUum 3IcConeill, fra aj)er
of thame, tuelflf ky and oxin ; quhilkis, with dyuerfe heirfchipis of coirne, victuall, and vther neceflaris,
flowin and reft be 30W, was tranfpoirtit be 30W to ])e faid Craig, in maift thiftious maner; quhairupoun 36 difponit and interteneit 30ur felffis at jour plefour: And 3e, the faid Neill, was airt and
pairt of the faidis crymes. To the taikin, je haif confeffit the haill premilfes to be of verritie, the tyme
of jour lait Examinatioun, in prefens of the Lordis of his Maiefteis maift honourabill Previe Counfell.

The paiindl, be the intcrpretatioiin of Aiidro Monro, Duncane Cimiiinghame,
and James Logie, fuorne to the trew iiiterpretatioim of all that fall be anfuerit
be the pannell/ Confeft the haill poyiitis of Dittay producet aganis him. Quhair-

^ Serviceable. '^ Oversight; superintendence. ^ Forays. * This is one of the earliest

instances on record of sworn Interpreters being allowed to Ilighlandmen or foreigners. The practice
liad no doubt been common long before this period, though the circumstance has not been entered in
the Books of Adjournal.

46 & 11 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 047

upoune the Aduocat tuik inilrumentis. In refpect of the qiihilk Judiciall Confeffiouii, the Juftice referrit the famyn to the Tiyell and knawlege of ane AfTyfe.
And for forder verificatioun of the faid Neillis giltines, producet his Depofitiones
tane in prefens of the faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall, confefhng the haill premiflTes to be of verritie. And in refpect thairof, Proteftis for Wilfull Errour
aganis the Atfyfe, gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Dauid Weymes,
flvipper in Leyth, chanceller, fFand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Neill^ be
reafone of his awin Judiciall Confeffioun, to be fFylet, culpable, and convict of
the haill treffonable crymes of ffyre-raifeing, Burning, Murthour, and feuerall
Thiftis at lentil fett doun in his Depofitiones, and Dittay foundit thairupoune. —
Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and thaireftir, his held to be ftrukin
frome his body, and affixt and fet vpone ane priket, aboue the NeJ)er-boll Poirt'
of the faid burgh : And his haill landis, heritages, takis, fteidingis, rowmes, poffeffiones, guidis, and geir, pertening to him, to be forfalt and efcheit to his I\Iaiefteis vfe, &c.

May 19. — JoHNNE Weir, callit of the Quhytecleuch ; Mungo Weir, his
brother.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq^^ Johnne Hammiltoun, mercheand burges of Edinburgh ; committit be thame in the moneth of September,
the yeir of God P'^.Vj'. and aucht yeiris : And ficlyk, the faid Mungo Weir, for
airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq^^ Walter Couthird, in Crawfurd- Johnne ;
committit at Lambes laft, be fchuiting him throw the body with ane piftolett.

Persewaris, Jonet Small, the relict of vmq'^' Jolinne Hammiltoune ; Williame Hammiltoun, as
brother ; Johnne and Mungo Couthirdis, as fones to vmqi« Walter Couthird.

ASSISA.

Johnne Gordoune of Earlfloun, Johnne M^mathe of Corfbank, Eduard Creichtoun of Peiltoun,

Johnne Creichtoun of Craufurdftoun, Harie Gordoun of Kilflure, Johnne Mafone, burges of Ed^*

Quhilkis crymes war judiciallie confeft be thame to be of verritie, in prefens
of the faid Juftice and Affyfe.

Verdict. Fand the faidis Johnne and Mungo, accoirding to thair awin Judicial! Confeffioun, to be ffylet and convict of airt and pairt of the faid Slauchter.— Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinl)urgh, and thair, thair
heidis to be ftrukin frome thair bodeyis : And all thair inoveabill guidis and geir
to be efcheit, &c.

1 The Nether-Bow-Port. ~ The rest of the Assise were burgesses.

248 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.U. 1613.

Juii. 2. — Dattd Eri.e of Crafukd ; Harie Lyndfay, callit of Blariefaddt'ii ; Harie Stewart, fone to vmq'^ James, Lord Stewart of
Newtoun ; and Johiine Bellenden, fervandis to the faid Erie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq^^ Sir Walter Lyndfay of Balgaweis ; coniniittit betuix the Citie of Brechin and the Place of Edzell, vpone the xxv day of October, 1605 yeiris.^

Peksewaris, Margaret Lyndfay, as dochter ; Duncane Hunter of Ballagane, hir fpous;

Sir Williame Olipliant of Newtoun, kny*.

Pkelocutouris in defence, Mr Alexander King, Mr Robert Lermontlie.

Continewit, of confent, to the ix day of Junij inftant. My Lord of Tulliebairne' cautioun for the entrie of the pannell, this day aiicht dayis, the ix injiantis.
.Tun. 9. — ^Margaret Lynd with confent of the faid Duncane Hunter
of Ballagan, hir fpous, for his entreis, being baith perfonallie prefent, paffisT^^w/-
'pl'idter fra the perfute of the faid Dauid Erie of Crawfurd, &c., and renunces
all actioun, inftance, and perfute quhatfumeuir, &c. And forder, producet to
my Lord Juftice, his Maiefteis Remmiffioun grantit to the faid Erie and remanent his complices, enterit vpone pannell for the faid flauchter, daitit at Newmercat, the xxiiij of Noueniber, I"^^'J^ and aucht yeiris, togidder with tua feuerall Letteris of Slanes, the ane grantit be Dauid Lyndfay of Balgaweis, fone to
the faid Sir Walter, daitit the xx of Nouember, 1607, the vther gevin and grantit
be the faid Margaret, witli confent of liir faid fpous, daitit the fevint day of Junij
inftant, beiring fatisfactioun and AiTythement to be maid be the faid Erie to
thame for the foirfaid Slauchter, &c.

Tin: Justice Admittit the proteftatioun, and Ordanit the faid dyet appointit
to this day to defert ; as alfo, that Johnne, Lord Lindfay of Byres, Harie Lyndfay of Kinfawnes, and Maifter of Tilliebairne, cautioneris for the faid

Erie, fould be fred and exonerit, &:c.

Snrrst — ^li uUrnj*

Jun. 16.— James Stewart, fone to Allane Stewart, Capitane of Dalkeith.

Dihiitit, acculet, and perfewit be Sir "Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, knycht,
for his hienes intreis, of the cryme vnder Avritten, viz. Forsamekill as the
abhominable, vyld, and filthie vyce of Inceft, being fa odious and deteftable in the
prefence of Almychtie God, and be the fame eternall God his expres woird, fa
cleirlie condemi)nt.d : Thairfoir our fouerane lord, out of his godlie difpofitioun
and zeale, be dyuerfe his hienes Actis of Parliament, hes exprellie ftatute and
ordanit, that quhatfoeuir perfone or perfones cominittis the faid abhominable

' See tills Collection, Jul. 8, 1607, and Sep. 19, 1609. ^ William, second Earl of TuUibardine.

46 & 11 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 249

ciyme of Inceft, fall be pwneifched to the deith ; as the faidis Actis of Parliament in thame felfRs proportis : Nochtwithftanding qiiliairof, it is of verritie,
that the laid James Stewart, being mar^it with Aleilbun Clogie, his lauchfiill
fpoiis, dochter to Johnne Clogie, cordiner, burges of Edinburgh, maid Ichamefiillie, but^ feir of God, or refpect to our fouerane lordis la wis, hes gevin the vfe
of his body to Katharene Clogie, his wyfes filler, in the monethis of Marche,
Ajn-yle, and Maij, I'".Vj^ and tuelff yeiris, in his and hir journeying togidder
betuix the burgh of Edinburgh and the toun of Elgyn, and within the faid toun
of Elgyn : In the quhilk filthie and inceftuous copulation, fcho hes procreat to
him ane bairne ; committing thairthrow the deteftable crymes of Inceft and Adulterie, to the heiche difplefour and offence of Almychtie God, violatioun of the
Kingis Maiefteis lawis, and evill exampill of vtheris to ryn in the lyk filthie and
abhominable vyce, gif the famyn be fufferit to remane vnpwneift.

Verdict. Fylet, culpable, and convict of the faid cryme. — Sentence. To
be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be wirreit at ane ftaik,
quhill he be deid ; and thaireftir his body to be brunt in afches : And all his
moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

€])ttt—^\anv^i)ttv—^kt--vamn(i~ cJ^pprtssion, kt.

Jun. 22.--DUNCANE MTatrick JVrGiiEGOUR, Allafter Cafe (Cafs)'
IVrgregour, Johnne Dow IVrcondochie Vayne IVrRobert, Patrik Roy ]Vrcoulecheir, Ewin Crowbache^ ^rgregour, Johnne
M'neill Corroche.'
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of dyuerfe pointis of Thift, Slauchter, Burning, and
Oppreflioun following, viz. The faid Duncane M'^patr'iclc M'gregour, ffor being
in cumpanie with Gregour IVrcondochie Glen, at the burning of the Callell of
Achallader and landis of Glenlocha : And ffor being at the ffeild of Benvek,*
quhair vmq'^ Patrik Dow M^'nab, Donald Campbell Oig, fone to Johnne Campbell, and dyuerfe vtheris, to the number of fevintene perfones, war flane : And
ffor airt and pairt of the flauchter of vniq^*" Allane ]\rdougnll, fervand to the
Laij-d of M'coule. The faid Allajier Cafe M' gregour, ffor the ere wall flauchter of vmq'^ Neill MVeyane, chopman, be ftreking him in the bellie with his awin
knyfe, quhairof he deit : Item, ffor cowmone foirning, thift, and opj)refiioun.
The faid Johnne Dow M^condocli'ie Vayne, ffor being at the fleild of Glenfynles,
and of airt and pairt of the heirfchip,^ reft and tane away af the Landis, pertening to the Laird of Lule and his tennentis : lTE]\r, ffor airt and ])airt of the
fteilling of certane ky and horfis, pertening to ^Valter Sterling of Ballagan, furth
of the parochin of Campfie : Item, ffor being in coinpanie with the reft of the

^ Without. * Sliort-tenipered ; passionate. ^ Deformed. * Hasty ; precipitate. * Bintoik ? <3 Spoil ; booty ; plunder.

VOL. III. 2 I

250 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

ClaN-Gregour at the Burning of Abervrclile, and heirfchip brocht furth thairof : As alfo, ffor airt and pairt of the Slaiichter of vmcx'" Johnne M'gillip, ane
fidler, vnder my Lord of 'J\illiebairne : And for cowmoun Thift and foirning.^
The faid Fatnh Roy M'coule-cheir, ffor being in companie with Duncane Mewin JSrgregour, callit the Tutour,^ at the Burning of Abervrchle, quhair
fevin men war llane, thre bairnes war brunt, tuentie ky and oxin war ftowin,
reft, and away-tane : And for Cowmone-thift, Soirning, and Oppreffioun. The
faid Ew'ni Crowhach M'gregour, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of ane meir
fra Robert M'laren : And ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of tua horfis fra M'-
Innerich, in Cregan : And for breking of ane puir mannis hous in Kynnaldie,
taking of the faid puir man and binding vp his eyne, and fteilling and awaytaking of the haill infidit pleniffing of the faid hous : And for fteilling of ane
kow fra Donald IVrconeill Vayne, furth of Johnne Stewart Neillbnes landis.
The faid Neill Corroche, ffor being in companie with the faid Duncane IVrewia
IVrcrecour, callit the Tiifour, at the Burning of Abervrchle, and flauchter and
heirfchip aboue writtin, committit be thame : And ffor aflifting and taking pairt
with the rebellis and fugitiues, that tuik in the He callit Ileand-Vernache ; and
in taking in to the faid lie of aucht fcoir ky and oxin, auchtene fcoir fcheip and
gait, ftowin, reft, and away-tane fra the Inhabitantis of the cuntrie about : And
ficlyk, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of ffyve ky fra James Chifliolme, Dondrwne : And for cow^mone Thift, Soirning, and Oppreffioun.

War all fax put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe of the perfones vnderwritten.

ASSISA.

Wr James Kirk, fervand to my Johnne Buntene of Ardoclie, Allafter M'Rannald of GargowLord of Argyle, Patrick Colquhoun of Trafeill, oclie,^

Johnne Stewart Neilfoun of Gra- Allafter Colquhoun V^" James, George Stewart of Down e-Machniche, in Calvin, reif,

Johnne Makfarlane of that Ilk, Robert Alexander, notter in Johnne Stewart of Pitfowrie,

DauidDrummond, callit the dial- Drymniene, Patrik Stewart of Balliachan,

merlane, Johnne Buchannane, fervand to Dauid Chirnefyde of Poflb.

Alex"" Schaw of Cambufmoir, my Lord of Madertie,

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of the faid Johnne M^farlen of that Ilk,
chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis fax perfones vpone pannell,

^ Taking free quarters by force and violence. * The Tutor of Glenstrae, styled, in the

Record of Secret Council, 21st December, 1613, < Duncan M'Ewin of Moirinfche, Tutour of Glenftrae.' In the game Record, 31st January, 1611, he is spoken of, to the prejudice of his Ward, as
' now callit the Laird ;' and, in the Justiciary Record, 8th May, 1612, as * the Laird of M'-
Gregour !' In a Letter from the King, from his Court at Roystoun, 23d October, 1611, to the
Scottish Council, (who took it into consideration 17th November following,) he is described as ' Duncan M' Ewne, alias Duncane the Tutour.' He was cousin-german of Allaster INL'Gregor of Glenstrav, executed at Edinburgh in 1604; and was Tutor to Gregor M'Gregor, otherwise John Muixay,
nephew and heir of Allaster, and who, on the King's recommendation, was restored to the Lands of
Glenstray, in 1624'. Duncan the Tutor assumed the protective surname of Douglas, in compliment,
probably, to the Dowager Countess of Argyle. ^ Lineal ancestor of Macdonald of Keppoch. In

the Record, he is sometimes styled ' the Laird of ALRaunald.'

47&11JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 051

be reffone of thair awin Coiifeffiones, maid in prefens of tlie maift pairt of the
faid Affyfe, to be ff\det and convict of the haill crymes aboue rcherfit.

Sentence. To be tane to the Biirrow-Mure of Edinburgh, and thair to be
hangit vpone the cowmoun gibbit, quhill thay be deid : And all thair inoveabill
giiidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to oure fouerane lordis vfe, as culpable and convict of the faidis crymes.

— ^Inu0{)ttr anlr ^i)n 11 cjl) in tj of (Dxtn, kc.

Aug. 3. — Donald Daug^ M'^allane, fervand to Johnne Calder; Donald M'eane V'Allafter Bayne ; Johnne M'fyndlay M'quiben.

Dilaitit of the crymes 7'efpeciiue following, viz. The faidis Donald Darg
M'allane, and Donald 3Peane V'allafter Baijne, ffor being in companie with
Johnne and Donald Calderis, fones to Thomas Calder in Delneis, vpone the xxj
day of Maij laft, at the treffonabill Raifeing of ffyre, burning, and diflroying of
the Hall, kitching, and remanent office-houffis within the precink of the clois of
Clwnes, pertening to Colene Campbell of Clwnes : And ffor airt and pairt of the
faid ffyre-raifeing and burning. As alfo, ffor airt and pairt of the Slauchter of
four horfis and meiris, being vpone the landis of Clwnes at that tyme, pertening
to the tennentis thairof : As alfo ifor cuming, vpoun the xxiiij day of the faid
moneth, bak agane to the faidis landis of Clwnes, and thair, for airt and pairt of
the Burneing of the haill houffis and biggingis within the ]\Jyd-toun of Clwnes,
callit the Thornyfurd, and Burning of tua barnes and ane liable, in the Nethertoun, quhilkis war left vnbrunt ofbefoir : And ficlyk, ffor airt and pairt of the
crewall Slauchter and Hocheing^ of threttie held of ky, oxin, and vther bediall,
pertening to Mr AVilliame Campbell of Breachlie his tennentis ; conmiittit vpone
the XXV day of the faid moneth of Maij laft : And ff'or airt and pairt of the
crewall and vnnatural Slauchter of fourtie heid of guidis, within the Forreft of
Leonache ; committit vpone the Mononday befoir St Colmes-inefs laft. As also,
the faid Johnne M'fijndla ^Pquihen, off" airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'''
Patrik ]\Fgreflie Roy in Budzet, with ane durk ; committit be him a tua yeir
fyne, or thairby : And for being in cumpanie with Robert Abroche M'gregour,
his kyn (and) freindis, Thevis and Soirneris, be the fpace of ane moneth, in dyuerfe tliair wiket and thiftious deidis.

QuhilkDittay was verifeitbe the faidis perfones Depofitiones, producet in i)roces.

The Aduocat repeittis the Depofitiones alreddie producet, and in the Clerkis
keping ; takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Affyfe ; and jn-oteftis for AVilfull Errour, gif thai acquit.

' Red-skinned ; ruddy-coniplexioned. Roy signifies red-haired. * Hani-stringiiig.

252 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

ASSISA.

George iSIonro of Tarrell, Johnne M'"gillievorich, fervand James Borthuik of Locbehill,

Alexander Bayne of Logie, to Colene of Bothe, Johnne Stewart of Apyn,

Hew Campbell of Ballangowne, James Dumbar of Bothe, Mr James Kirk, fervand to my

Lord Argyle.^

^''erdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Alexander Bayne of
Logie, chanceller, ffand, proniuicet, and declairit the faidis thre perfones on pannell, accoirding to thair awin confeffione, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of
the cryines refpectiue aboue fpecifeit. — Sentence. To be tane to the Burrowmure of Edinburgh, and vpone the cowmone gibbet thairof to be hangit, quhill
thay be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

^txiutjjrtif— Cj)tft— JStarinfj: antr ^J)ootinrj: of g^acfliuts an5j

4J is to lets, ^t.

Sep. 3. — Gilbert Cranstoun, father-brother to vmq^ Patrik Cranftoun of Corfbie.

Dilaitit of the crymes following, viz. For the thiftious fleilling, conceilling,
and away-taking, be way of Maifterfull thift and Itouth reif, furth of the liable
of Corfbie, of ane gray ftanet horfe,^ pertening to Patrik Cranfloun of Corfbie,
his brother fone ; committit be him vpone the tent day of July laft. Item, for
airt and pairt of the thiftious Iteilling, conceilling, relTetting, and away-taking
of tua fcheip, pertening to Andro Vaiche in Hammiltoun, vpone Lyne watter ;
and of four fcheip pertening to James Tuedie, his fervand ; and of tua fcheip
pertening to Johnne Stewart, in Stobo ; tua vther fcheip pertening to James
Fouldane, thair, &c. ;^ Aowin be the faid Gibert and his complices, furth of the
boundis of Hammiltoun, vpone Lyne Commoune, in the moneth of ifebruar,
I'^.Vj". and tuelff yeiris. Item, for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in
beiring and weiring of hagbutis and piftolettis, and fchuitting of George Home
of BafTmden thairwith, in his left thie ;^ committit in the moneth of September,
1609 yeiris. Item, for Cowmoun Thift, and cowmoun reffet of thift, outputing
and inputing of thift, fra land to land, fra cuntrie to cuntrie, baith of auld and new.

Verdict. Fylet, culpable, and convict of the haill crymes aboue writtin. —
Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit
vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and all his moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

I^tarintr, ^ai)incj:, ant» CtUliration of tjt iHass, %ct.

Sep. 14. — Mr Robert Phillope, Preift; James Stewart, callet t/ftwe*
of Jernjalem.

' The rest of the Assise were tradesmen. " Stallion. ' It is unnecessary to detail the various
other petty thefts narrated in the Dittay. * Thigh.

47&11JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 253

s

Dilaitit of faying and heiring of Meffis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of
Parliament, &;c.

FoRSAMEKiLL as, be dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, fpeciallie be the fyft Act of our fouerane lordis
firft Parliament, and be the firft Act of his hienes fourtene Parliament, it is fpeciallie provydit, llatute,
and ordanit, that na maner of perfone or perfones, of quhatfumeuir degre or conditioun thay be of,
prefwme nor tak vpone hand to fay Mefs within this kingdome, or jit heir Mefs, nor be prefent pairat ; vnder the pane of deid, with confifcatioun of thair haill moveabill guidis ; as the faidis Actis of
Parliament in thame felffis proportis : Nochtwithftanding quhairof, it is of verritie, that the faid Jlr
Robert Phillope, Preirt, quha reflauit the ordour of Preiftheid in Rome, haifing remanit furth of this
kingome fen the jeir of God I^.V*^^. fourfcoir nyntene jeiris, ftudeing the Catholique Romane Religioun ; in the moneth of Maij lallbypaft, he returnet hame to this cuntrie, oif purpois and intentioun (as he hes declairit) to convert faules to the Romane Religioun ; fen the quhilk tyme
of his hame cuming, viz. in the monethis of Maij, Jmiij, and Julij laftbypaft, ffor performeing of
his former Idolatrous intentioun, expres contrair the tennour of pe faidis Actis of Parliament, as
ane Seminarie Prieft, and perverter of his Maiefteia guid fubiectis frome the trew Religioun, profefTit prefentlie within ])is realme, he hes feducet and conferrit with dyuerfe of his hienes fubiectis,
doing quhat in him lay, be 'his fals and hereticall doctrine, to pervert fair faules from the treutb,
and to convert thame to his erronious opinioun : And for that effect, hes, within the faid fpace,
faid and celebrat, to fe number of fax or fewin Meffis, in dyuerfe pairtis and places of pis realme,
fecreitlie, in dyuerfe houffis within the famyn, namelie ; And of the faidis MefTis was faid be him in
grit folemnitie, with his Mefs-claithes, confecrat alter, Mefs-buik, and with his vtherfuperftitious rites
and ceremoneis belanging pairto, within foure or fyve myles to the burgh of Dumfreis, INIr George
Aflowane, fone to the Laird of Garroche, being Clerk pairto, and bringer in of the fyre to lycht ])e
candillis ; quhairin the faid Mr Robert hes contravenit pe tennour of the faidis Actis of Parliament, and
incurrit the panes and pwnefment mentionat pairintill, quhilk aucht and fould be execute vpone him,
with all rigour: Lykas alfo, it is of verritie, that James Stewart, callit of Jeriifalem, indueller within
the burgh of Ed'', being ane oppin and profeflit Papift, keiping and beiring companie Avith Jefuitis,
Seminarie Preiftis, and excommunicat traffiqueing Papiftis, and ane cowmone reflbner in all companeis
for pe faid Romane Religioun, aganis pe trew Religioun, profeflit be his Maiefl;ie and his liienes loyall
fubiectis within this his kingdom, expres contrair the tennour of pe faidis Actis of Parliament, in the
monethis of Januare, Februare, Marche, Apryle, Maij, Junij, Julij, Auguft, September, October, November, December, in the jeiris of God I™, fex hundr«th and nyne, fex hundreth ten, fex hundreth
ellevin, and fex hundreth tuelff jeiris,^ at the leift, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis and jeiris of
God, he hes hard and gevin his bodielie prefence to dyuerfe Meflls, faid be dyuerfe Preiftis within this
realme, in dyuerfe places of pe fame ; and naraelie, the faid James Stewarty avowing himfelf to be ane
Catholik Romane, in pe jeir of God I.".Vj^. and nyne jeiris, or pairby, was prefent at ane Mefs faid be
Mr Patrick Anderfon, Jefuite, within his duelling hous of Patrik Abercromhie in E(K, in the Jxiird of
Leyis land, befyde the buriall jaird of the faid burgh : Lyk as, the faid James Stewart, accumpaneit
with the faid Johnne Logane, portioner of Reftalrig,* about ane quarter of ane jeir paireftir, was prefent at the heiring of ane vtlier Mefs, quhilk was faid in the faid James awin duelling hous in Ed"", a
littill aboue the Nether-boll-Poirt, quhair he duelt for pe tyme, be Johnne Burd, Preift, qulia was
brocht to pe faid hous be pe faid Johnne Logane to the effect foirfaid, nane being prefent at that INIefs
hot pe Preift, the faid James Stewart and his wyfe, with the faid Johnne Logane, and ane vther blak
man. Item, fchoirtlie paireftir, the thrid Mefs was faid within the faid Jantes Stewartis duelling
hous in the Cowgait of Ed"", quhair he duelt for pe tyme, the laid James being prefent him felff at the
heiring and faying pairof be the Preift. Be the quhilk wilfull heiring and prefent-being at pe faidis

' ' There was a Messe the same moneth ( May 1 6 ' 3) in Edinburgh, in James Stewart's house, who wes called James
of Jerusalem. The Preist and the said James fled. Sundry of the company were taken and wairdit.'^ CaWeriroocf's
MS, Church Hist. Adv. Lib. * See his Trial, immediately following the present.

254 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

feuerall Meflis refpectiue folrfaidis, the faid James Stewart hes contravenit pe tennour of the faidis
Actis of Parliament, and hes incurrit the panes and pwneifchment mentionet pairintill, quhilk fould be
execute vpone him with all rigour, to the terrour of vjieris.

Quliilk Dittay being reel, in prefens of the faidis Mr Robert Pliillipe and James
Stewart, and thay accufet, be vertew thairof, of the feuerall crymes aboue fpecifeit ; thay and aither of thame confeffit,in face of judgement, that thai had contravenit his Maiefteis lawis and Actis of Parliament, in heiring, faying, and being
prefent at dyuerfe MefTis, in maner fpecifeit in thair Dittay, ffor the quliilk thay
offerit thame felffis, and become in his Maiefteis will ; Quhairupoun inftrumentis
was tane be my Lord Aduocat.

Nochtwithftanding quhairof, the Juftice ordanit thame to be put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe.^ — The Aduocat, for verificatioun thairof, repeittit to the faidis
perfones of Alfyfe thair former Judiciall Confeffioun maid of thair crymes, aboue
fpecifeit ; and thairwith producet thair Depofitiones and ConfefTiones, maid in
prefens of dyuerfe Lordis of his Maiefteis Pre vie Counfall, and of the Minifteris,^
fubfcryuit with thair awin handis ; and tuik inftrumentis vpone the productioun
thairof.

Verdict. Fylet, culpable, and convict of the contravening of his Maiefteis
Actis of Parliament, viz. the faid 3Ii' Robert PhiUipe, for faying of the feuerall Meflis fet doun in his Dittay ; and the faid James Stewart, for heiring and
being prefent at the feuerall Meffis, alfo fet doun in his Dittay : conforme to
their awin Depofitiones, and ratificatioun thairof in judgement.

The Justice Ordanit the perfones convict to bereturnet to waird,^ thairin to
remane, in ftrait firmance, vnto the tyme Dome be pronuncet aganis thame.

(Nov. 19.) — CoMPEiEiT Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kiiy', Aduocat to our fouerane lord, and producet ane Warrand, direct fra the Lordis of his
hienes Counfall to the Juftice ; cjuhairof the tennour followis.

Justice, Juftice clerk, and 5our deputis : 3ow fall, vpone the fight heirof, appoint ane Juftice
Court to be haldin within the Tolbuthe of Ed'', at fuche convenient and lauchfull day as 50VV fall think
meit; and ])air call befoir 30W James Stewart, callit of Jcrvfalem, and Mr Robert Phillope,
Preirt, and pronunce Dome aganis thame, vpone the Sentence of convictioun ajreddie gevin aganis
))ame, as followis, to wit : Decerne the faidis James Stewart and Mr Robert Phillope to be Banischet
his Maiefteis dominiones ; and to depairt furth fairof, within the fpace of ane moneth ; and nevir to
returne agane within the famyn, without his Maiefteis Licence had to that eftect, vnder the pane of
deid. Quhairanent ]»ir prefentis fall be 3 our Warrand. At Ed", the xvj day of November, 1G13.

Al. Cancell*. Sanctandrois. Argyle.

' Dome' pronounced, according to the terms of the above Warrant.

Sep. 16. — JoHNNE Log ANE, portioner of Reftalrig.
Dilaitit for the wilfull heiring of ane Mefs, and being prefent thairat, in com-

^ All tradesmen. * Of the gospel ; clergy, ' Prison.

47 & 11 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 255

panie of James Stewart, callit of Jerufalem ; qiihilk Mefs was faid in James
Stewartis hous, a littill aboue the Nether-boll-Poirt of Ed"", quhair he duelt for
the tyme, in the yeir of God I"", fex hundreth and nyne yeiris, or thairby, be
Johnne Burd, Preift.^

Andro Logane of Coitfield j^roteflis, in refpect of the entrie of the pannell this
day, that the vnlaw quhairin he was adiudget the lad dyet,^ be nocht biiikit nor
gevin out aganis him : And producet the Counfallis Warrand, fubfcryuit be my
Lord Chanceller, daitit the xv of this inllant, Ordaning the faid vnlaw nocht to
be buiket ; hot the faid Johnne Logane, for quhome he became cautioun, and now
enterit vi)one pannell, to be jnit to ane Tryell for the cryme fjiecifeit in his Dittay.

My lord Aduocat producet the Dittay ; and efter reiding thairof, defyret the
pannell to be put to the Affyfe for the crymes fj^ecifeit thairintill.

It is allegit be the pannell, that, as to the firil Act of the firft Parliament
halden be our fouerane lord and Eftaitis, he can noclit, be vertew thairof, incur
the pane and pwneifchment of daith mentionat in the Dittay, becaus the maift
that the faid Act extendis to, is only daith to be inflictit for fie as the thrid tyme
fall be fund culpable and convict of heiring of Mefs, or beis wilfullie prefent at
the heiring thairof : And trew it is, that in the faid Dittay, producet aganis him,
thair is only mentioun maid of ane Mefs hard be him : Igifu?', &c. — To the
quhilk it is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that he infiftis only in perfute of the
pannell for contravening the firil Act of his Maiefteis fourtene Parliament, maid
aganis wilfull heiraris of Mefs, fen the moneth of Junij 1594, quhilk is the dait
of the faid Act, quhairvpone the Dittay is fpeciallie foundit : In refpect quhairof,
the jDannell fould be put to ane Aflyfe, for heiring, and wilfullie being prefent at
ane Mefs, in maner, and at the tyme contenit in the Dittay.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that he can nocht be put to ane Afiyfe for
contravening the Act of the xiiij Parliament, becaus he nevir was prefent at ane
Mefs within this realme, hot anes, fen his cuming out of Flanderis, quhilk is four
or fyue yeir fyne ; and the Act audit only to be extendit aganis fie as lies hard
mony Mefiiis : Lykas, the pannell was drawin to the faid Mefs be fenifi:rous informatioun, and at the inftigatioun of James Stewart, quha inveitit hiin to his
hous to the heiring thairof ; and fa, in effect, come thairto contrair his will ; fibr
the quhilk cryme he is inaifi: penitent, and craves firfi; God, and nixt his Maieftie and Counfall, and the Kirk, pardoun for the famyn : Lyk as, in refpect of his
penitence and greif for the faid offence, he was reflauit in fauour with the Kirk

' The Dittay is conceived in terms precisely similar to tlie preceding case. ^ On Sep. 14. This
marking is inserted — * M°. Tlie Guidman of Coitfeild being vnla\vit])ia day, for nocht entrie of Johnne
Logane, portioner of Reftalrig, to haif bene tryit for ]ie faid crymes ; the Act of buiking fairof, be pe
Counfallis Warrajid, was (in refpect of Johnne Loganes entrie in waird) difcharget.'

256 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

and Seffioun of the parochin quliair lie duellis ; and lies fenfyne borne office in
the Seflioim thairof, refoirtit contiimallie to the heiring of the woird, and at all
tymes was prefent at the celebratioun of the Communioun and miniftrationn of
the Sacranientis : Protelling, be God's grace, to contiiiew aiie trew and conftant
Profefibur of the trew Religioun, prefentlie profeffit within this realme, to his
lyves end ; and for the offence aboue writtin maill humlie becumis in his Maiefteis will. — It is anfuerit be my lord Adubcat, that the allegeance maid be the
pannell is na relevant caufe, of the Law, to flay the pnting of him to the tryell of
ane Alfyfe, vpone the Dittay lybellit ; becaus all perfones man be comptit wilfull heiraris of Mefs that cumis voluntarlie thairto, and patientlie abydis and
heiris the famyn ; and it is nocht allegit be the pannell that he was corapellit to
cum and heir that Mefs ; natlier can the famyn be fuftenit, except he purge the
famyn be ane violent deid compelling him to refoirt thairto : And albeit the
pannell hes communicat fenfyne, and borne office in the Kirk, he anis haifing
wilfullie hard ]\Ies, quhilk is ane cryme caf)itall, be the faid Act of Parliament,
na deid done be him, without his Maiefteis pardoun and Remiflioun paft, can
purge that cryme : And forder, to mak it knawin that he was ane wilfull heirar
of the Mefs lybellit, it is affirmet that he come to James Stewartis lious at the
Nether-boll, and brocht with him Johnne Burd, Preifl, quha cravet feruice,
James Stewart then being Helping in his bed ; and being walknit, he anfuerit,
that for releif of his confcience he was content to heir him : And than the Mefs
was faid in the faid James Stewartis hous, qvihair thairefter thay dynet altogidder.
This is verifeit be James Stewartis awin Depofitioun, fubfcryuit with his hand,
and heirwith producet, for verifeing the premifTes,

The Justice Repellis the allegeances aboue writtin, and ffindis the Dittay
relevant ; and Ordanis the pannell to pas to the tryell of ane AfTyfe, for the
cryme lybellit.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Thomas Fifcher,
mercheand, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Johnne Logane,
conforine to liis awin Depofitioun, fubfcryuit with his hand, and ratificationis
thairof maid in judgement, in thair prefens and audience, to be ffylet, culpable,
and convict of the heiring of ane Mefs faid be the faid Johnne Burd, Preifl,
within the duelling hous of the faid James Stewart ; in forme and maner, and
at the perticuler tyme fpecifeit in the faid Dittay.

The Justice Ordanit him to be tane bak agane to waird within the Tolbuth
of Ed", thair to remane quhill Dome war pronuncet vpone his former convictioune, &c.

(Nov. 26.) — The Lord Advocate produced a Warrant of the Privy Council, dated ' at Ed', the xvj day of November, 1613,' ordaining the Juflice to ' pro47 & 11 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 257

nunce Dome aganis him, vpon ])e Sentence of Convictioun alreddie geven aganis
him, as folio wis, viz.'

Sentence. That he mak payment to his Maiefteis Thefaurer depute and
RefTaiier, in his Maiefteis name, of the fowme of ane Thowfeand pundis money,
as a fyne impoilit vj^one him.

Sep. 24. — JoHNNE Ramsay of Pryoiir-Lethame.

Dilaitit for the filthie and abhominable ciyme of Inceft, committit be him with
Margaret Ramfay, his awin dochter : As alfo, for airt and pairt of the crewall
Murthoiir and flauchter of vmq^'' Williame Olett, his awin fervand ; and remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris.

Mr Vmphra Blinfchell, Aduocat, as bail3ie and procuratour for George, Archebifchope of St Androis, Lord of Regalitie thairof, quha exponit and declairit that
the faid Johnne is duelland within the boundis of the regalitie of St Androis,
and thairby is fubiect to the faid Lord of Regalitie, his judgement and jurifdictioun, for the crymes aboue fpecifeit : And thairfoir Proteftit, that quhatfoeuir
war done be the Juftice this day, fould nawayis preiudge the faid Lord of St
Androis, nor his jn-ivilege of Regalitie thairof.

Michell Ramfay of the Forther vnlawit and amerciat in the pane of fyve hundreth merkis, for nocht entrie of the faid Johnne. And ficlyk, that the faid
Johnne, for his nocht compeirance, be denuncet rebell and put to his hienes home ;
and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.^

;ffixt--xaimio;^^oii0)ms o( Cattle— (J^pprtssiun, ^t.

Nov. 5. — Thomas Calder, in Delneis ; Robert Caddell (Calder), fone
to Johnne Caddell in Flines.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the coming to the landis of Clunes, pertening to
Colene Campbell of Clwnes heretablie, and maift trelfonablie and awfullie Raiing
of ffyre in the hall, chalmeris, barnis, byris, and lc-hc'i})-coit thairof, and l)urning
and diftroying of the famyn, and be Maifterfull Oppreflioun, hoching" and flaying
of thre meiris {mares) and ane horfe, pertening to the faid Colene ; committit
vpoun the xxij day of Maij laftbypaft, vnder fylence and cloud of nycht. And
ficlyk, for cuming to the faid landis of Clunes, on the xxiiij day of the moneth of
Maij laftbypaft, att tuell houris in the day licht, and willfullie, awfullie, and
treffonabillie Rafmg of ffyre, in ane toun,' callit in Erich' Andraanc, and in

1 No farther notice is taken of this case, which had likely been quashed by Archbishop Gladslanes,
(translated from the See of Caithmss, A.D. 1606,) or privately compromised witliin his Regality.
- Hamstringing, ^ Farm-steading. '* Gaelic.

VOE. III. 2 K

258 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6l3.

Scottis Thorne-furd ; and to the Cot-toun of Cliine, and Burning and diftroying
of the famin, togidder with the haill infycht and pleneiffing, pertening to the faid
Colene Campbellis tennentis thair : And IVa, for committing of oppin and manifeft Treafoun.

Persewaris, Colene Campbell of Clwnes ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, knyS Aduocat, &c.

The Juftice, of content of the perfewaris, Continewis this matte to the fyftene day of December nixt.

(Dee. 15.) — James Cuming of Alter, cautioner for the faid James, vnlawit
and amcrciat in the pane of tua hundreth merkis, for his non-entrie ; and Colene
Campl)ell of Both, cautioner for the faid Robert Calder, in the pane of ane hundreth merkis : And the pannels Decernit to be denuncet our fouerane lordis
rebellis, &c., and all thair movable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

iHurtrti— C!)tft— dTirt-vnising*

Nov. 24. — Allane Camroxe alias M'Eandowie of Loch5ell ; Eugen
Camrone in Caldort ; and Allane Dow in Clinfchphairne, &c.

Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of Johnne
Camrone, alias Bodache, Allatter Camrone of Glennevas, and vmq"" Ewin IVFconeill Vewin, and remanent crymes of Murthour, Slauchter, Thift, and ffyreraifeing, at lenth fpecifeit and fett doun in the Letteris.^

James Gordoun of Knokafpek, as cautioner, for repoirting the Letteris, deulie execute and indorfate, purcheft at the inftance of Marie Neane Jeane Oig, the
relict of the faid Johnne ; Meriorie Ewin, the relict of the faid Allafter ; Marie
Neane Lauchlane Vallane, relict of vmq'^ Ewin ; with the remanent kyn and
freindis, producet the faidis Letteris, deulie execute, &c., be the quhilkis thai ar
all denuncet rebellis, and ])\xt to the home.

(Lis urp a tio 11 ot i^ins's autJ)oriti)— 53tistrtit>inrj: tjrttn Corn, kc*

Nov. 26. — Williame Forbes, elder of Monymuflv ; Robert, Johnne,
and Mr James Forbis, his tlire fones ; Johnne Forbes, callit
of Burnegranes ; James Geillis and Johnne Farquhar, domeftik feruitouris to Monymuflv ; and George Raitt, in CoifF.
Dilaitit for vfurpatioun of his Maiefleis authoritie, in taking of Williame Dowgat, (Duguid ?) feruitour to George Gairdin ; committit the 24 of Julij lall :
And for contravening the Actis of Parliament, in cutting of certane grene growand coirnes, pertening to Gilbert Men5eis of Pitfoddellis, growand vjoone his

landis of

Persewaris, Gilbert Men5eis of Pitfoddellis ; Williame Dougat, feruitour to George Gairdin ; Sir
Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny', Aduocat.

' The Dittays are not inserted in the Record.

47&11JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 259

The Juftice, with advyfe of my lord Aduocat, Continewis this dyet to the
thrid day of the Air (of Aberdeen), or foner, vpone xv dayis wairniiig ; and Ordanis cautioim to be fund be the pannell. Plegio, Joanne Kynnaird de eodeni.

€nttmv; antr Ststroninrj; Corn.

Nov. 26. — Mahgaret Iiiwing, Lady Pitfoddellis ; Gilbert Men5eis of

Pitfoddellis, hir fpoiis, for his entreis ; Dauid Knowis, his domeftik fervand ; Johnne Ramfay, his greif; Johnne Philp,

Williame Daveny, Williame Dougatt, and Johnne Ramfay.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the contravening of our fouerane lordis Actis of

Parliament, in cutting and diflroying of coirnes ; committit in the moneth of

July laflbypaft. Persewaris.

Williame Forbes, elder of Monymufk ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoune, knyt, Aduocat.

This cafe^ alfo continued to the fame Air. Plegio, Pitfoddellis.

^latici:i)tti%

Dec. 1. — Hew Somervell of Drum.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vraq^^ Johnne Bryfone, in Gilmertoun, be gevin to him of dyuerfe ftraikis, hurtis, and woundis, with ane lang
battone or girth-Hing,^ in his fydis, fchoulderis, breift, and bellie, and dyueris
vtheris pairtis of his body, at the dur of his duelling lious in Gilmertoun, vpone
the xxiiij of September laft ; off the quhilkis ftraikis, he haifing tane bed, and
remaning bedfaft the fpace of audit dayis, in grit dollour and pane, deceiflit
thairof vpone the firft day of October thaireftir.

Persewaris, Agnes M'^indo, the relict ; Patrik and Margaret Bryfone, as bairnes.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Hoip, Mr Laurence M'gill.
It is allegit be the pannell, that the Dittay is nocht relevant, in fa far as it is
nocht qualifeit thairin, that the cryme M^as committit vpone foirthocht fellonie ;
without the qidiilk war condifccndit vpone, na cryme can be inferrit : And thairfoir, as the Dittay is qualifeit, it can nocht pas to ane AfTyfe. And forder, it is
affermit be the pannell, that the faid Johnne Bryfonis death nawayis proceidit
vpone ony ftraik or hurt gevin to him the tyme lybellit ; bot be the contraire,
the faid Johnne, that fame day of the allegit relfaueing of tlie ftraikis, pail to
the Coilpot-hill, and thairfra with his coillis' come to Ed", quhair he lauld the

' It is obvious that the preceding cases arose out of the deadly feuds which then raged between the
families of Monymusk and Pitfoddels. No information is afl'ordod by tlie Record, how these Cases
terminated — but from their withdrawal to ' the Air,' it is likely they were coniproniised by the intervention of mutual friends. " Dr Jamieson interprets this word to signify a pole from which a
girth, gird, or barrel hoop is made. ^ Coals. Gil.mekton, at that period, as well as now, was
famous for its collieries and stone quarries, and appears to have been, even in these early times, peopled
by a most I)aibarous and regardless race. The recent atrocious case of Rape and Murder is too fresh
in the ])ublic mind to require any farther notice of the proverbially savage nature of the colliers and
carters inhabiting that village. A bare allusion to the evidence adduced in that shocking Ti ial is more
than enough to justify the preceding observation.

260 CRIMINAL TRIALS, A.D. 1613.

famyn ; and palTing hame, that fame nyclit, to his awiii hoiis, lay doun haill and
feir ;^ and his haill famelie being vifFeit with the hett-fever^ be the fpace of ane
moneth ofbefoir, the faid Johnne being alfo viffeit thairwith, in audit dayis thaireftir, fa reaget thairin, that in end, at the tyme lybellit, he deceiflit of the faid
ffever, notourlie knawin to the haill cuntrie about. And fa, can nocht pas to
ane AfTyfe, for ony cryme fet doun in the fumniondis.

The Juftice ffindis the Sumniondis relevant, nochtwithftanding of the former
allegeances : and Ordanis the famyn to pas to ane AfTyfe.

ASSJSA.

Mr Pat. Edmefloun of Wowmet, Nicoll Crawfurd, in Nether Lib- Mr Jo" Wardlaw, in Libbertoun,

George Ilanilav, Nether-liouffis, bertoun, Symone Henderfoun, lliair,

Robert Eddillaw, in Lefuaid, Henrie Arnote, in Lefvvaid, Dauid Ramfay, in Petblieid,

Nicoll Ramfay, thair, Michaell Craufurd, at Libber- Geo. Pacok, in Nether Libbertoun,

Gilbert Hay, thair, toun-Kirk, Thomas Andro, in Lefuaid.

It is allegit be the pannell (that) George Ramfay, Robert Eddiflaw, Nicoll
Ramfay, can nocht be relfauit vpone his AlTyfe, becaus thai ar tennentis, haifing
na frie landis of thair awin ; and the pannell being ane landit Gentilman, within the degrie of ane Barroune, balding his landis of Drum, and vtheris jiertening
to him, immediatlie of the Kingis IMaieftie, fould thairfoir be tryit be his peiris,
viz. be Barrones ; at the leift, the maill j:>airt of thame fould be in that rank ;
igitur, &c. Repeitis the former allegeance aganis the remanent Affyfouris of
the lyk (jualitie.

The Juftice, vpone tryell of the faid George Ramfay and remanent Affyfouris rank and eftait, finding thame to be honeft, fubftantious men, Admittis
thame vpone the faid Affyfe.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Thomas Andro, in
Lefuaid, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Hew Somervell of
Drum to be Cleane, innocent, and acquit of the faid flauchter.

raitrl)rraft— JJoisoniitti— Crtasonaftlt i^lurtrn%

[T{iE Case of Robeht Erskine, which follows, and the subsequent Trial of his three sisters,
Helen, Isobel, and Annas,^ aiford very lamentable proofs of the baneful effects of an all-engrossing
spirit of covetousness. There cannot be a doubt that the sordid avarice of these individuals, habitually
indulged, and permitted to acquire the entire ascendency over their minds, rapidly terminated in the
perpetration of the highly revolting crimes for which their lives were justly forfeited to the offended
laws of their country.

It is melancholy to reflect that these atrocious criminals, whose cold-blooded and calculating crimes
form the subject of these Trials, were immediate descendants of the eminently good and pious John
Erskine, Baron of Dun, and Superintendent of Angus and Mearns, one of the most active promoters
of the Reformation of Religion in Scotland, whose character and public services are well known. This
excellent man died Mar. 12, 1591, in the 82d year of his age, having, throughout his long and useful
life, bestowed much of his time in attending to the religious and moral education of his children and

' Whole and sound. » Probably tbe Scarlet fever. ' See their Trial in this Collection, Jun. 22, 161-1.

47 & 11 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 261

their numerous descendants. The Superintendent was the eldest son of John Erskine of Dun, by Margaret Ruthven, daughter of Sir William de Ruthven, first Lord Ruthven, and relict of Alexander,
second Earl of Buchan. He married Lady Elizabeth, third daughter of David, seventh Earl of Crawford. John Erskine, the next Baron of Dun, married Margaret, eldest daughter of James, y//?A Lord
Ogilvy of Airlie. His son, John Erskine of Dun, married Margaret Keith, second daughter of Robert Lord Altrie, last mentioned. This Baron was succeeded by John Erskine of Dun, who married
the Honourable Margaret Lindsay, daughter of Sir Alexander Lindsay, first Lord Spynie, (slain 1607,)
and was probably the father of Robert and his sisters, Helen, Isobel, and Annas. David Erskine of
Dun, the brother of these criminals, and father of their victims, John and Alexander Erskine, married
Jean, eldest daughter of Patrick Maule of Panmure, by Margaret daughter of John Erskine of Dun.

It must therefore be obvious, owing to the high respectability of the ancient Family of Dun, and the
rank and power of the numerous connexions of the pannels, that every influence must have been used
for averting the stain of a public Trial and an ignominious execution ; but their crimes were of too deep
a dye to admit of the public prosecutor waiving this imperative duty.

One very striking feature of this remarkable Case is, that the brother was urged forward to the perpetration of this crime by the repeated suggestions and solicitations of his sisters ; who, wi^i desperate wickedness, goaded him forward to consent to the act. These wretched females were both the
prime movers and the actors in this shocking tragedy. Their brother appears to have been a passive
instrument in their hands.

It only remains for the Editor to state, that, after much research, he has only been able to procure
the following notices, from an authentic source.^

(Nov. 30, 1613.) * Robert Erskine, vncle to the Laird of Dynne, being examinat be foureof
the Counfell, depute to that effect, vpon the practize of poifone aganes his tua nephewes, the brether
of the Houfe of Dynne; after dyuerfe denyallis and confrontationes with fome who avowed that mater
vpone him, he is come to a cleere Confeffion of the haill treuthe of that mater ; to wit, that he wes a
deallar, confultor, and confentar to the Murthour of his tua nephewes by poyfone ; and that his thre
fifteris wer the firft movearis of him to that wicked deide, that therby he might atteane to the right of
the leving of Dynne. Direction is gevin to the Juflice to putte him to the tryall of the lawes, and
Commiflion is gevin to the Erie of Mar to apprehend the three fifteris, and fome otheris gevin vp be
the faid Robert, as guyltie, and to prefent thame heare to there tryell.' — (Dec. 1, 1613.) ' Robert
Erfkyne wes this day execute for the practize of poifone, wherin he wes a counfellour and confentar
againes the tua bretheriue of the Houfe of Dynne.']

Dec. 1. — Robert Erskyn, fone to Johnne Erfkyn, appeirand of Dwn,
callit Johnne of Logy.
Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit, be Sir Williame Olipliaiit of Newtouii, kny^
Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes iiitereis, of the cryines following, viz.

DiTTAY agahiji llobert Er/kiju.
FoRSAMEKiLL as, bc the Law of the Almychtie God, loveable Conftitutiones
of all Chriftiaiie kingdomes, and Municipall Lawis of this reahne, all ^^ltt'hcraft,
Sorcerie, Confultatioun with AVitdies, feiking- of help or refponles of thame, and
vfearis of Poyfone or Poyfoneable herbis, (j[uliairthro\r ony Crilliane man, woman, or bairne may take hearme, is prohibeit and difcharged, vnder the pane of
deid, confifcatioim of all the offendouris moveabillis, and dyuerfe vtheris grevous

' Minutes of Privy Council Proceedings, Denmylne MSS. Adv. Library. Balf. Annales, H. 44.

262 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

panes and pwneifchmentis, at moir lenth expreffit in the faidis Lawis, Actis, and
Ordinances : Nochtwitlillanding quliairof, it is of veritie, that ])e faid Robert
Erfkyn, being blinded with tlie godles and infatiable delyre of J)e landis and
leviiig of Dwn, and knowing perfytlie that he could nevir attene to be full Laird
Jjairof, fo long as Johnne and [Alexander] Erflvynis, the tuo lauchfull fones of
vmq''' Dauid Erfkin, his elder lauchfull brother, was on lyfe : fTor removeing of
the quliilk impediment, vpone a pretendit mifcontentement confauet be him and
his thre fifteris, Klbbell, Helene, and Annas Erfkinis, becaus vmq'^ Erfkyn of Dwn, quho was fone-in-law to the Laird of Pitcur, vpone his deid-bed
had nominat Johnne Erfkin, Minifter at St Ceres Kirk, to be Tutour Teftamenter to the faidis tuo 5oung boyis, his brother-fones, and that be pe faid nominatioun of Tutorie, the faid Robert, as nerreft agnat of bluid to thame, was
defraudit of the charge of J^ais bairnes and J)air Eflait ; albeit J^e faid Robert his
cheif difcontentment was, becaus, be J)e furvieving of the faidis tuo bairnes, 5our
{his) ryclit of fucceffioun to the faid leving was impeidit. The faid Robert, ])airfoir, ffor removeing of the faid impediment, in his devillifch difpofitioun, convenit to him felff his faidis thre fifteris, Iffobell, Annas, and Helene, within the
Place ^ of Logy, about Mydfomer, in the 5eir of God I™, fex hundreth and ten
5eiris, and Jjair treited, confulted, deliberat, and refolued vpone the deftructioun
and Murthour of J)e faidis tuo 5oung childrene, his bro])er-fones,- be Witchcraft
and Poyfoun : And for this effect, tuo of his fifteris, haifing proponit to ane
Dauid Blewhous, that gif ^ he wald viidertak to get ane Witche, that, be ftim
fmifterous meanis, wald tak away the lyves of ]?e faidis tuo boyis that war betuix
pe faid Robert and the leving of Dwn, that ])e faid Dauid fould reffaue for his
rewaird ane pofTeftioun, for his lyftyme, out of the landis of Dwn, and fyve hundreth merkis of filuer ; and promeift to cans J)e faid Robert, vpon the morne
J)aireftir, ratifie to pe faid Dauid the former conditioun : Lykas, fchortlie J)aireftir, pe faid Robert, cuming to the faid Dauid Blewhous duelling hous, and haifing
forgadderit* with him J)air, he ])an demandit of pe faid Dauid, quhat he had done
concerning the puri^ois iinpairtit be his fifteris to him, anent pe diftructioun of
pe faidis tuo bairnes ? And becaus, be pe anfuer maid be him to pe faid Robert and
his fifteris, the laid Robert could nochtget his wiket purpois effectuat be pe faid
Dauid Blewhous, thairvpone the faidis Annas and Helene, his tua fifl;eris, of the
fpeciall caufeing, fending, hounding out, airt, pairt-taking, counfell, and de\yfe,
paft, in ane evening, fra pe faid Place of Logy, over pe Cairnemonth, towardis pe
Mure-ailhous, and j^air forgadderit with ane woman, quha namet hir felf Jonet
Irwing, ane notorious Witche and abufer of pe people ; and eftir conference with
hir in the faid purpois, thay, for accomplefchment ]?airof, reffauit of hir ane grit

^ Mansion-liouse. ^ Nephews. ^ If. ■• Met.

47&11JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 263

quantitie of herbis, quliilkis war broclit with thame (with iniunctioun how to vie
the faidis herbis) hame to Logy. Quhilk being- fene be J)e faid Robert, in Jjair
handis, and he altogidder diftrufting that thais herbis war hable^ to do that wiket
turne for the quhilk Ipai war brocht, fFor clering of his dout, he, togidder with
Johnne Kirk, pall over pe Month towardis the Mure-ailhous, qiihair he confultit
and conferrit with the faid Jonet Irwing, Witche, off quhome at ])at tyme he reffauet ane full refolutioun that pe herbis delyuerit be hir to his fifteris was forceable aneuche to effectuat Ipe former wiket turne : Lyk as, fchortlie ]}aireftir, pe
faid Robert, returning hame agane, he concurrit and confultit with his fifteris
in all ])air wiket refolutiones, to J)e tyme that ])e faid poyfoneable drink was
geviu be |)ame to the faidis tuo boyis ; quha ]?aireftir, be Ipe faid Robert his counfall and advyfe, tuik pe faidis herbis, and fteipit J^ame amangis aill ane lang
fpace ; and Jjaireftir, it being in deliberatioun betuix pe faid Robert and his fifteris, quhidder it fould be cafilin out or vfet, in end, it was vniformelie aggreit
and concludit amangis thame, that pe drink quhairin the faidis herbis war fteippit fould be gevin to the faidis tuo boyis : ffor accompleifchment quhairof, tuo
of the faidis fifteris, accumpaneit with Gilbert Campbell, his horfe-boy for pe
tyme, haifing alfo in companie with thame the faid Johnne Erjane, the eldeft
of the faidis tuo boyis, paft altogidder furtli of Logy to pe burgh of Montrois,
quhair J^e vther boy with his mother remanit and duelt for pQ tyme ; and ]jair,
of pe faid Robert Erflvine his knawlege, counfell, and devyfe, the faid poyfoneable drink was gevin to the faidis tuo boyis, his brother-fones : Quhilk drink,
eftir pmr reflaueing ]?airof, wrocht fo violentlie vpone ])ame, that immediatlie
Jjaireftir thay tuik fie ane extraordiner preife^ of vomeiting, that na perfone expected for J^air lyfe : Be occafioun of the quhilk j)oyfoneable drink, fa miniftrat
and gevin to thame, the faid Johnne Erjhine, the eldeft of the tuo, contracted
fie a deidlie difeas and feiknes, that his flvyn turning all blak, and his haill nobill pairtis inwardlie confumeing, he daylie and continuallie J)aireftir dwynet^ in
grit dollour and pane, to the tyme of his death, viz. to the terme of Witfonday
laft ; at quhilk tyme, he in maift lamentable maner deceifllt, of the faid vennemous and poyfoneable drink, vttering befoir his death thir or the lyk woirdis, to
all fie as war prefent, " Wo is me, that I evir had richt of fucceffioun to ony
landis or leving ! ffor gif I had bene borne fum pure coitteris fone, I liad noclit
bene fa demanet," nor fie wikket practizes had bene plottit aganis me for my
Landis !" And fa, was crewallie and treftbnabillie Murthoret ; and be pa foirlaid
vnlawfull and poyfoneable drink, cuttit aff be pe faid Robert Erflvine, his uncle :
And he was airt and pairt of the faid treafonabill Murthour, and of pe dnmnal)le
confulting and devyfeing with the faid Jonet Irwing, ane notorious Witche, ffor
' Lat. hahilis. ^ Literally, jyress. ^ Pined away. •* Treated.

264 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1613.

making and miniftrating of J)e faid poyfoneable and vennemous drink, for the
faidis tuo bairnes Murthour and deftructioun. Lykas, the vther of the faidis
tuo boyis remanis as 5it fair viiTeit with intollerable payne, and feiknes vniuerfall
throw his haill body, be occafioun of the faid drink gevin to him at ]?e time
foirlaid ; off quhais lyfe J)air is na lioip. To the taikix of the quhilkis premises, J)e faid Robert being examinat be the Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counfall ; quhairupoune, eftir lang deilUng with him ])airintill, in end, come to his
Confeflioun, in maner fpecifeit in his Depofitiones : Lyk as, he being charget, bs
vertew of Criminall Letteris, to haif compeirit and fund cautioun that he fould
vnderly the Law for pe faidis crymes, was, for his nocht finding cautioun, denuncet to the home, and declairit fugitiue fra his Maiefteis Lawis, for the crymes
aboue fpecifeit ; at the quhilk Hoirning he hes ever fen fyne remanit vnrelaxt ]3airfra. As J)e faidis Letteris of Hoirning, producet aganis him, in the felf proportis.
Eftir reiding of the quhilk Dittay, and accufatioun of the faid Robert Erfkine,
be vertew thairof, of the crymes aboue expremit, quhilkis war Confeffit be him
to be of verritie, the Juftice, of his awin confent, referrit the famyn to the Tryell
of ane Affyfe of the perfones following.

AssrsA.

Mr Ja^ Durehame of Duntervie, Sir George llamfay of Dalhouflie, Johnns Beatone of Falay,

Mr Francis Bothuell, brother ger- Mr Alexander Seatoun of Gormok, Patrick Maxwall of Newark,
mane to vrnq'"^ Johnne, Lord Cuihbert Cunningharae, Proveill Aulay ]M^'caulay of Ardincapill,
Halyrudlious, of Dumbarten, Duncane Menzeis of Comerie,

Robert Falconer of Ballandro, ^Menzeis of Weyme, Mathow Bailzie of Littillgill.

Sir Jobnne Prelloun of Vallafeild, Patrik Aucbterlonie, Dunlope of that Ilk.

Quhilkis crymes the faid Robert Erflvine of new, in the faid Affyfe prefens
and audience, confeffit and acknowlegit to be of verritie. Quhairupoun inftrumentis was tane be our laid fouerane lordis Aduocat ; and quha, for the faid Affyfe forder refolutioun. producet to thame the faid Robert Erflvines Depofttiones,
fubfcryuit with his hand, and dyuerfe of the Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counfall ; togidder with the faidis Letteris of Hoirning, beiring him to haif bene
fugitiue fra his Maiefteis lawis, continuallie fen the committing of the faid fact.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Mr James Durhame
of Duntarvie, chanceller, be reffone of his former Depofitiones, and ratificatioun
thairof, maid in judgement, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Robert Erflvin to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of airt and pairt of the Murthour and
diftructioun of the faid Johnne Erflvine, his brother-fone, be miniftrating to him
and his faid brother of the poyfoneable drink, in maner fpecifeit in the faid Dittay.— Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair his
held to be ftrukin from his body : And all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.^

1 See the Trial of Helen, Issobel, and Annas Erskine, Jun. 22, 1614.

47 & 11 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 265

S^nisr antr ^tjttp stealing*

Jan. 28, 1614. — Peter Dauidsoun in Heddene ; James Wallace, fumtyme duelland in Dundie ; and Donald Smyth in Diimbarten.

Dilaitit as follows, viz. The faid Peter Dmddjoun ffor the thiftions fteilling,
conceilling, refletting, and away-taking of ane cnt-luggit llanet naig, monfehewit and ftug-taillit */ togidder with ane foird baffoned meir," haifing thre
quhyte feit, alfo llug-taillit, a faxtene myles be3ond Beruik in Ingland ; committit abont Mydfomer laft. Item, for the thiftious fteilling and away-taking of
ane gray ambland meir, with ane littill foired meir, a fevin or audit myles abone
Annik/ in Ingland ; committit at Lambes laft, &c. And the faidis James JFal-
/ace and Donald Smyth, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious fteilling, conceilling,
reffetting, and away-taking of tua horfe, furth of the landis of Kerfe, &c. &c.

Verdict. Fylet, culpable, and convict, conforme to thair awin Judiciall Confeffiones. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to
be hangit quhill thai be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

CJtft of Citle-trttlrs, ^r*

May 20. — Patrik Eyiot, fone to Finlay Eviot in Mwretoun, and fumtyme fervand to Patrik Eviote of Mwretoun.
Dilaitit, acculit, and perfewit be Sir Williame Oliphant, &c. and Johnne Mathow of Balhoufty, of the crymes following.

DiTTAY agahiji the PannelL

FoRSAMEKiLL as Jolinne Mathow of Balhouffie, in the moneth of Apryle, the jeir of God I'", fex

hundreth threttene 5eiris, haifing repaiiit towax'dis the Citie of St Androis, to haif procuret Confirraatioun of certane liis landis, haldin be him of fe Proveifl of fe Auld College fairof; and haifing tane

his euidentis* with him to that effect, lyke as, vpone the 26 day of the laid moneth of Apryle, being

the Sen5ie-ffair-day ^ of St Androis, the faid Johnne Mathow, being within pe faid burgh, in his cuming

alangis the Hie ftreit J^airof, accumpaneit only with Alexander Blair, than his fervand, quha than had

cayreing vnder liis airme the faid Johnne Mathow his wallet, quhairin thair was ane grit number of

his evidentis and writtis, with tua pair of filk fchankis,'^ ane pair of worfet fchankis, ane pair of fyne

filk gairtanes, with ane certane quantitie of gray veluet, and vther fmall neceifaris pertening to liini,

all bund vp togidder within tlie faid wallet ; and at J^air cuming foiranent Robert Ruffell liis liable,

quhair })e faid Johnne Mathowis horfe was ftablet for ])e tyme, the faid Alexander Blair, his fervand,

haifing than pafl in to the faid flaibleris houfe, to geve the faidis Johnne Mathowis horfe fum corne ;

and in this nieane tyme, haifing laid doun ])e faid wallet, with the faidis euidentis and vtheris foirfaidis

being fairin, vpone \ie buird -^ it is of verritie, that ])e faid Patrik Eviote, fervand to the faid Patrik Eviote

of Myretoun, of the fpeciall caufeing, directioun, hounding out, and command, reliett, ailiftance, and

ratihabitioun of his faid mafter, being for the fpace of tua or thre dayis ofbefoir, ever attending and

following adreich^ vpone the faid Johnne Mathow and his boy, in all pairtis of ))e faid Citie of St An-

' A crop-eared stoned horse, mouse-coloured and dock-tailed. ^ A soiTel-coloured mare, marked with white

on her face. " Alnwick. * Title-deeds. * Synod-fair. * Stockings. ' Table. " JJodying,

and following at a little distance.

VOL. III. 2 L

26(5 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1614.

(hois quiiairvnto tliay maid ony repair : And liaifing perfauet tlie faid Alexander Blair pafs fra his
mailleris hak, and to enter within ))e faid Robert Ruffellis duelling-hous, and pair to haif laid doun
])e faid wallet vpone the bnrd-heid ])airof, in manor foirfaid ; in maill thiftious maner, he convoyed him
felf within ])c faid Robert Ruflellis hous, as the faid Alexander Blair was in geving corne to his
maifleris horfe, and thiftiouflie pall vp, flaw, conceillit, reflet, and away-tuik furth pairof, the faid wallet, with the evidentis, filk fchankis, worfet fcliankis, fdk gairtenis, gray veluet, and vferis his ueceffaris pertening to him, being all bund vp togidder ]iairintill, had and tranfpoirtit the famyn away with
him to fic pairtis and places as he pleifit, nevir making ony reflitutioun nor redelyuerance ]>airof to the
faid Johnne Mathow, jufl awner of the famyn, to liis grit hurt and perrell of ]>e fecuritie of his landis,
be abftracting and withholding of ]'e faidis evidentis ])airof. Axd ficlyk, ffor the thiftious fteilling and
away-taking of ane pair of blankettis, pertening to the Lady Balhouflie ; and of ane pair of fyne marrillit' plaidis, pertening to Roife of Cragie. And for cowmone Thift, and Reflett of thift, &c.

Verdict. Fylet, culxiable, and convict of the haill thiftious ciymes aboue
fpecifeit.

The Justice Continewis the pronimceatioun of Dome to the morne : And
Ordanit the jiannell to be committit to waird, in the meane tyme.

IMay 21. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caflell-hill of Edinburgh, and
thair to be hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be deid : And all his moveabill
guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Cafeinci: Captibc — ^lautr!)tet%

Jun. 1. — WiLLiAME I\riNTOSCHE of Effie ; Martene ^rewin Vewir ;
and Lauchlane M^coneill Vlauchlane in Bancher, (and others).

Dilaitit for the taking of Colene Campbell of Clwnes captiue and j^rifToner ;
And for the (lanchter of vmq'^ Donald M'intailzeour, and vtheris crymes.

Colene Canip])ell of Clwnes producet the Letteris, be the quhilkis thay ar denuncet rebellis, and put to the home, for noclit finding cautioun to haif compeirit,
&c. And producet lykwayis ane Warrand, fubfcryuit be my Lord Chanceller,
Secreter, and Thefaurer, for deferting the faidis Letteris aganis Duncane ]\Pintqfche of Aherairdoiir, Williame M'lauchlane Vwilliame M'intolche, Angus
Rofs, fervand to Williame JVrintofche in Boirlum, and Williame Bayne JVrconeill V'allafter Vayne, in Delnavert.

ConsuUincj: \x^\X\) OTitrljts— ^^oisonincj — Cvtcisonaljlt iHiutrtn

[The Editor begs to refer the reader to a short introductory Notice prefixed to the Trial of Robert Erskine,^ the brother of the pannels, whose crimes form the subject of the following Trial. It
only seems necessary in addition to state, that he has been so fortunate as to obtain the following
authentic memorials' of the proceedings against these unhappy victims of ungoverned passions, and
of base and unbridled avarice. Their fate is written in letters so legible, that he who runs may read.

(Dec. IG, 1G13,) — " The tua fifteris of the deceafled Robert Erskyne, who iulllye fufferred

' Variegated; mottled; marbled; or chequered. * See Dec. 1, 1613. ' From Dcnmylne MSS.

Adv. Library, " ^Minutes of Privy Council Proceedings." See also Balfoufs Annates, II., 53,

47&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 267

deathe, for the practyfe of Witclicraft and Poyfon vfed be him agaiiift his tvva iiephevves, the breetherine of the House of Dynne, are brought to this Toun ; and being- examined, are obdured in a
conftant denyall of all that mater, nochtvvithilanding that there late brother pafl conftantlye to deathe,
witli avowing that deteflable cryme vpone thame, as being tlie firft devyfares therof, the motionaris
therof to him, and the executoures therof in there own perfones. Thay are to be confronted with on
who affifled thame in confell and executioun of that deede ; and thairefter, in caife of there perfeveerance in there denyall, thay are to be pute to the Torture."' — (Jun. 22, 161 4.) " The xxii day
of Junij nixt is appoyntit for the Tryell of Helene and Issobell Erskenis, for the Poyfoning of
the twa brether of the Hous of Dynne ; and directioun is gevin to the Juftice and his Maiefleis Aduocat to proceid in the perfute, tryall, and punifchment of that mater accordinglie." — (Jun. 23.) " The
thrie fifteris of the Houffe of Dinne wes this day pannelled, accoofed, and convicted of the Poyfonoing of there two coofinges, the brether of Dinne ; and Sentence is geven aganes thame to lofe there
heades ; whilk wilbe execute vpon the xxiiij of this inftant."]

Jun. 22. — Helene Erskine, Iffobell Erflvine, and Annas ErOvvne,

Sifteris to vmq'^ Robert Erflvyne, brother to the Laird of D\rn,

and dochteris lauchfull to vmq'^ Johnne Erflvine, aj^peirand

of Dwn, callit Johnne of Logie.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Poyfoneing of vmq^° Johnne Erfkine, thair brother-fone,^ be miniftrating to him and to Alexander Erfkine, liis brother, of ane

poyfoneable drink ; of the qiihilk the faid vmq'^ Johnne Erfldne depairtit this

lyfe ; committit about Witfonday, in anno 1610 yeiris.'

Persewar, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*^^, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

Puelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Wilfone, and Mr Laurence M' gill, (Advocates,) Mr Johnne

Erfkine, Minifter,'* Mr Williame Keithe, Patrik Bruce.

Mr Thomas Wilfoun and Laurence M'^gill, Aduocatis, jH-oduces ane Warrand
of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, be the quhilk thai war charget to comjieir for
the thre fifteris on imnnell, in thair defence ; and in refpect of the fchortenes of
tyme quhairupoun thay ar charget, and of the wechtines of the cans quhairupoun
the pannell is dilaitit, defyres my lord Juftice to grant ane continuatioun to ffryday nixt, that in the meyne tyme thay may liaif lafure to advyfe with the pairtie in the cans. — The Aduocat anfueris, that na continuatioun can be grantit, in
refpect the perfones on pannell was charget vpone fyftene dayis wairning ; and
ane autentik coppie of thair Dittay was delyuerit to thame, at the geving of the
faid charge.

The Justice Ordanis proces ; and the Summondis to be red.

It is allegit be the pannell and thair prelocutouris, that the Dittay is nawayis
relevant, in thre feuerall poyntis, viz. JJlr/h in the allegit confulting with Jonet
Irwing, Witche, nocht condifcending vjione the woirdis of confultatioun, or quliat

' The Editor has found no satisfactory evidence to establish tliat the Torture was actually ])ut in
force, in this Case. - Their Nephew, wlio was the heir-apparent of David l^rskine, their eldest

brother. ^ The ' Dittay' is a mere echo of tlieir brother Robert's, and is therefore uuijccessary

to be inserted here. See Dec. 1, 1G13. '' At St Ceres Kirk.

268 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1614.

refponfe was gevin to tlie paimell be the Witche. Sec undo, anent the allegit
reirauiiig of the vennemous or poyfoneable herbis, for the vfe contenit in the
Dittay, non relcvat, except the perfewar war Ipeciall vpone the names of the
herbis, and qualitie thairof. Tertio, as to the allegit iniunctiones gevin for vfeing of the faidis herbis, non relevat, except the perticuler woirdis of iniunctioun
war fpeciallie let doun in the Dittay. — To the quhilk it is anluerit, that the allegeance audit to be repellit, in rclpect of the lybell, quhilk he vfes coniunctim in
the haill pointis, as is qiialifeit, viz. that the pannell paft and confultit with ane
Witche, fra quhome thay reflauit the poyfoneable herbis, with iniunctiones how
to vfe the famyn, for the away-taking and diftructioun of thair brother-fones,^
in nianer fpecifeit in the Dittay ; in refpect quhairof, the Dittay fould pas to the
knawlege of ane Afiyle.

The Justice ffindis the Dittay relevant, coniunctim ; and nochtwithftanding
of the allegeance, Remittis the famyn to ane AfTyfe. Quhairvpone the Aduocat
aflvit inflrumeutis.

ASSISA.

James Douglas of Todhoillis, Adame Cunniiigliame of Cliapell, Mr Robert Stratoun, in Strathe,

Mr Jofeph Hadden, Willianie Somervell of Pole, Mr Robert Purves, in Ballacbe,

Thomas Craigingelt of that Ilk, Johnne Norie, in Brechin, Johnne Moncur, in Blacok-mure,

Thomas Iiiglis of Eiftfcheill, Mr Thomas Ramfay, thair, Johnne Barclay, in Balmakellie,

James Somervell of Spittell, Robert Barclay, at Marie Kirk, Johnne Barclay of Johnnltoun.

The Aduocat, for verificatioun of the Dittay, produces ane Letter writtin be
Mr Airthour Erfkine, the pannellis father-brother,^ thair Confeffioun of the cryme
lybellit, and thair penitence for the fame ; with a defyre of his lordfchipis fupplie
and help, to tranlpoirt thame furth of the cuntrie.

The laid Letter being prefentit to Johnne Erflvin, Minilter, now Tutour of
Dmii, and being inquyret gif the famyn was the faid Mr Airthouris hand-writ
or nocht, Declairit that the famyn was everie woird the hand-writ of the faid
INIr Airthour. Quhairupoun the Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

7'haireftir my lord Aduocat i)roducet the Depofitiones maid be vmq'® Robert
Erflvine, thair brother, quha jiaft to the deid at the Mercat-croce of Ed^ that
the pannell war the only firfl proponeris of that wiket fact to him ; and that the
famyn was connnittit and done be the perfones on pannell, in maner fpecifeit in
the Dittay. — Repeittis the affirmatioun maid judiciidlie be Dauid Blewhous of
his former Depofitiones ; quhilk my lord Aduocat caufet reid ouer to Blewhous.
Producet lykwayis the Depofitiones maid be Gilbert Campbell, and Johnne Kirk,
in the faid matter ; and defyret the Affyfe to cognofce thairupoun ; And proteftit for A\'ilfull Errour, in caice thai acquit the pannell of the faidis crymes.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, be pluralitie of voittis, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit
^ Nephews. ^ Paternal uncle. ^ Death.

47 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 269

the faidis Iflobell, Helene, and Annas Erfkynis to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the haill ciymes fpecifeit in the faid Dittay ; and that be the repoirt and
Declaratioiin of the faid Thomas Craigingelt of that Ilk, chanceller.

Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Ed', and thair thair heidis to
be fti'ukin frome thair bodeyis : And all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.
Dome of Banischement vpotie Helene Erjldne.
(Mar. 22, 1615.)— Helene Erfkine, ane of the thre lauchfull dochteris of
vmq'^ Jolinne Erfkine, appeirand of Dwne, callit JoJmue of Logic, being brocht
furth of waird, out of the Tolbuith of Ed"", quhairin Icho had remanit fen her
laft convictioun, and prefentit vpone pannell, to heir Dome of new agane pronuncet aganis hir, as fcho that was convict and the dome of daith pronuncet
aganis hir, &c. Ane Act o/* Secreit Counjall was prefentit, and delyuerit to
the Jullice ; quhairof the tennour followis.

Apud Ed**, decimo Jexto die meiifis Marcij^ anno Domini millefimo fexcentejimo decimo qiiinto.
FoRSAMEKiLL AS, by the executioun to the daith of Robert Erjkinc and his tuo filleris, the impoyfoning of the tuo bretherene of Dwne is fufficientlie pwneifched : And whearas, thair lenianeth 3 it,
in fure cuftodie, for the fame offence, Helene Erskine, who being raoir penitent, thogh les giltie,
than the reft, doith mereit the moir commiferatioun : His Maiestie is thairfoir graciouflie plealit to
fpair hir lyfe, jit fo as fcho fall nocht efchaip the pwneifchment of hir pairt of the faid offence ; bot
J)at fcho be Banisched out of this kingdome, during hir lyftyrae. Thairfoir, the Lordis of Secreit
Counfall, accoirding to the Kingis Maiefteis will, plefour, and directioun, fend vnto thame in this matter, Ordanis and commandis his Maiefteis Juftice, Juftice clerk, and ])air deputis, to appoint and fet
ane new Juftice Court, to be haldin be thame in the Tolbuthe of Ed'^, at fuch tyme as thay pleis (to)
affix ; and fair to call the faid Helene befoir thame, and to pronunce new fentence and dome aganis
hir; ordaning hir to be Banisched this kingdome, and nevir to returne agane within the fame during
hir lyftyme, without his Maiefteis Licence had and obtenit to ])at effect ; and to depairt furth of this
realme, within the fpace of fourtie dayis eftir J)e pronunceing of the faid new dome, vnder the pane of
deid : With certificatioun to hir, and' fcho failjie, and depairt nocht furth of this realme, within the
terme foirfaid prefcryuit vnto hir ; and being depairtit furth of ])i8 realme, yf fcho returne agane witliin
the fame, without his Maiefteis Licence had and obtenit to that effect, that the pane of deid falbe execute againft hir, witliout fauour or mercie.

ExTRACTUM de Libris Actorum Secreti Confilij f. d. n. regis, per me, Jacobum Prymrois,
clericum ejufdem, fub meis figno et fubfcriptione manualibus. Jacobvs Phymhois.

The Justice, for obedience of the will and ordinance thairin contenit, be
the mouth of Johnne Dow, demjifter of Court, Ordanit, nochtwithllanding of
the former dome of daith firfl pronuncet, the laid Helene Erflvine to be BaNISCIIET, &;c."

Jun. 25. — JoNET Broun, dochter to Johnne Broim in Bigger.
Dilaitit, fforfamekill as Johnne Stewinfone in Bigger, haifing this laft yeir
' An ; if; in case. ^ The terms of the Warrant are repeated, verbatim, in the Record.

270 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1614.

gottiii ane bairiie with liir, in the filthie ciyme of fforiiicatiouii, fcho, for avoiding the fc^ander and pwneifchnient, conceillit the laid bairne, fua that nana of
the parochin knew hir to haif bene thairwith ; and about the moneth of Marche,
or thairby, laft, being cum to the tyme of hir delyuerie, fcho pall furth of hir
fatheris duelling-hous to the feildis, neir to the faid toun of Bigger ; and without
feiking of ane nieidwyfe, or vther ordiner help, fcho travellit, and was delyuerit of
ane quik niadin-l)airne ; quhilk chyld fcho ftrangillit immediatHe, and tuik the
fame to ane dyk-fyde outwith the faid toun of Bigger, and coverit the famyn
with ane number of turves : And fa, be neglecting the ordiner meanis in hir
birth, fcho crewallie nnirdreift and flew the faid bairne.

The pannell denyis the Murthour of the bairne ; and fayis that the bairne
deit fchortlie efter the beiring, being ane lafs-bairne ; and being deid, fcho eirdit^
the famyn in the grund of ane truff llak,^ in maner fpecifeit in the Dittay.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, be the mouth of Williame Flemyng of Perfilandis,
chancellcr, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Jonet to be ffylet, culpable,
and convict of the Murthour and diflructioun of hir faid infant bairne, conforme

to hir Dittay. Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed', and thair to

be hangit quhill fcho be deid : And hir moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Jun. 25. — Andeo gULE, borne in Clermond, vnder the Laird of Dairfie.

Dilaitit and accufet for the fleilling and away-taking of tua pair of fcheittis,
ane pair of blankettis, ane littill panne, and ane fuord, pertening to Williame
Perfone, in the Hill of Bathe. — Gran tit the famyn to be of verritie, and era vet
God mercie thairfoir ; and offerit him felf in our fouerane lordis will, and his
hienes Juftice will, for the faidis crymes : Quhome the Juftice reflauit.

Sentence. To be Scuuget throw the burgh of Ed', and to be Banischet
furth thairof for euir : And gifeuer he war apprehendit for Thift heireftir, fould
be hangit to the deid, but fauour.

arattlr-stcaltnfl— ^Iau5l)tn%

Jul. 15. — Gilbert Johnnestoun, brother to Gawin Johnnefl:oun in
Annand-holme.
Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit, be Hew Douglais of Dalwein, as fone, Sir
Robert Dowglais of Carfchogill, as neir kinfman, of vmq''^ Hew Dowglais of Dalwein, ffor airt and pairt of the thifteous Steilling, conceilling, and away-taking,
vnder (ilence and dud of nycht, furth of the landis and Maines of Dalwein, of
tlirettie fax heid of ky and oxin, pertening to the faid vmq"" Hew and his ten-
' Earthed ; buried. * Peat or turf stack.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 271

nentis ; committit be him, and vtlieris his complices, cowmone and notorious
thevis, rebellis, and fugitiues, vpone the xxviij day of Auguft, I'^.V". fourfcoir
feviutene yeiris : And liclyk, ffor airt and pairt of the ere wall Murthour and
flauchter of the faid vmq'^ Hew Douglas of Dalvene, in the following and redding
of the faid guidis, at the tyme foirfaid ; vpoun fet purpois, prowiiioun, and foirthocht fellonie.

ASSISA.

Johnne Lyndfay of Auchinfkeocli, Mr Samuel Kirkpatrik of Auchinlek,

Robert Johnnefloun of Vamphra, Williame Johnneftoun of Lokerbie,

James Greir of Pitfillan, James M^Math of Schaw,

Capitane James Hunter, burges of Ed'", Johnne Bell, burges of Edinburghe.^

Verdict. Fylit, culpable, and convict. — Sentence continewit quhill the Juftice war advyfet with the Lordis of his Maiefleis Previe Counfall thairanent.

Jul. 16. — Sentence. The Juftice, ffor obedience of ane Ware and,
direct to him be the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, fubfcryuit be my Lord Prelident,
my Lord of Roxburgh, my Lord of Bynning, Secretar, my Lord of Blantyre,
and be my Lord of Kildrummye, be the mouth of Johnne Dow, demiDfter, decernit and ordanit the faid Gilbert to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed', and thair
to be hangit vpoun ane gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and all his moveabill guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

Dec. 9. — Sir Patrik Hepburne of Vachtoune, kny* ; James Ker, Patrik Dikfoun, Dauid Allan (Ellem), Patrik Mortoun lie wart,
Andro Gyller cuik, George Quhyt horflveipar, Diones Smart
huntifman, Williame Carfrae fcheiphird, Williame Drummond,
all feruitouris to the faid Sir Patrik.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the flauchter of vmq'^ Robert Broun, feruitour to
Mr Richart Dowglais of Brokhollis.

Patrik Dowglais, baxter, burges of Ed"", producit the Letteris, dewlie execute
and indorfat, purcheft be Johnne and George Brounes, as brether, and the faid
Mr Richart, as maifter and neir kynfman of the faid vmq'^ Robert, and our fouerane lordis Aduocat, and proteftit for releif of his cautionerie ; the quhilk the
Juftice admittit. — Mr John Hepburne of Gilmertoun, as cautioner for the faidis
Sir Patrik, for his releif of the faid cautionerie, producet the Counfallis AVarrant,
ordaning this dyet to be defert, &c.

Justice, Juftice clerk, and 50ur deputtis : fforfamekill as the nynt day of December inftant is appointit to Sir Patrik Hepburne of Vachtoun, kny*^, James Ker, Patrik Dickfone, Dauid Eilom, and
vtheris, his feruitouris, for thair compeirance befoir 50W in the Tolbuith of Ed', to vnderly our lawis
for the flauchter of vmq'« Ro'^ Broun, feruitour to Mr llichart Dowglais : And feing ])e pairteis arnow

' The rest were burgesses of Edinburgh.

272 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

ao-reit, and lies chopin' haiidis, in prefence of diueris of our Nobiletie and of his Maiefteis Counlall :
Theis ar thairfoir, in his Maiefteis name, to command 50W to defert the faid dyet, and forbeir all
forder proceidincr ]'airintill : Quhairanent ])ir prefentis falbe 50ur Warrant. At Ed", the fewint day
of December, I'".Vj' . and fourtein 5eiris.

Al. Caxcell% Al. Mar. R. Caitiines. LynlVgow. Kin-gorne. Lotheane.

^ijjl) Crtason— iUsistintr tf)t mincr^s 3Litx\Umnt nnti 5)is dforrts

— iUiJtllion in (J^rfuiti), kt.

[The proceedings which were adopted against Patrick Earl of Orkney, in the years 1610 and
1611, have already been noticed in a former part of this Collection ;" and as the Rebellion in Orkney, as a matter of history, has been recorded in almost every History of Scotland, it is unnecessary
here to enter into any minute detail or recapitulation. Owing to the relationship which existed between the Earl of Orkney and the King, and the high favour in which that Nobleman had long stood
with his Majesty, eveiy device appears to have been resorted to, on the part of the Privy Council and
tlie Lord Advocate, for the purpose of enabling the Earl to prove his innocence of the former accusations of cruel Oppression and Tyranny, which had been brought against him by the wretched inhabitants of Orkney and Shetland, after they had submitted, as long as was consistent with human nature,
to endure such barbarous treatment. The Earl was accordingly confined in Edinburgh Castle; and in
the meantime, the Privy Council deputed the Bishop of Orkney to enquire into the truth of these
serious charges, and to report to them within a reasonable time.

Owing to his attempts to escape from ward in Edinburgh Castle, the Earl of Orkney was conveyed, as a state prisoner, to the Castle of Dumbarton ; where it was considered he would be in more
sure custody, and would, besides, be farther removed from the intrigues in which it had long been conjectured he was busily engaged. Notwithstanding of the vigilance of his keepers, he contrived to instruct his ' bafe fon,' Robert Stewart, one of the subjects of the following Trial, to proceed to
Orkney, under the pretence of uplifting the rents which were due by his tenants, but, in reality, his
design was to seize upon the Castle of Kirkwall and other strengths in Orkney, which had been confided to the custody of the Bishop, the Sheriff, &c., to raise the standard of Rebellion, and, finally, to
throw off' his allegiance to the Crown of Scotland. The Earl had anticipated that, by means of the
money to be thus raised, he would easily overcome the fidelity of his keepers, or otherwise provide the
means of his own escape. Having ordered ammunition and other supplies to be procured from Norway, he calculated, that in those remote regions, which were rendered almost inaccessible during
many months in the year, at that period, when the art of navigation was at so low an ebb, he might
assume the despotic rule of these Islands, as an independent Prince.

The successful termination of the Earl of Caithness's Commission of Lieutenancy, the capture of the
Castle of Kirkwall, and all his remaining strongholds, the capitulation and unconditional surrender of
Robert Stewart and the other rebels, together with the subsequent execution of the ringleaders in this
Rebellion, for ever dispelled the absurd reveries and the wicked plots of this guilty man, who was
doomed, in February 1613, to forfeit his life upon the scaffold. Reference is here generally made to
his two Trials, for the sake of brevity.

It only remains to state, that Caldertcood, in his MS. Church History,' preserves the following
notice of the Execution of these unhappy and deluded criminals. — (Jan. 6, 1615.) ' Robert Stewart,
fone naturall to the Erie of Orkney, with other five of his complices, convicted of treafonable taking,
keeping, and defending of the Caftle of Kirkwall and the llrengths in Orkney, were hanged at the
market crofle of Edinburgh, and died penitent. The faid Robert confelTed his father, the Earle, who

' Struck; shaken hands. » Vol. TIL, p. 81, &c. ' Calderwood's Church Hist., MS. Adv. Library.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 273

then was warclit in tlie Caftle of Edinburgh, commandit him to doe that which he did ; but eranted he
gave him a contrare-mand, before he entered in executione. The Gentleman, not exceedin'i- ^2 years
of age, was pitied of the people, for his tall ftature and comely countenance.'

As the details of this Rebellion are entirely unknown to the public, the Editor has the pleasure of
laying before his readers a mass of Original State Papers, Dispatches, Examinations, Confessions, and
other interesting Documents, which he has appended to this Trial, and to that of the Earl of Orknev,
Feb. 1, 1615. As usual, llie sources from which these Illustrations have been procured are noted ; and
it is hoped, that llie whole will be considered as an acceptable addition to the history of that period.]

Jan. 5, 1615. — Robert Stewart, bafe foiie to Patrik, lait Erie of Oikiiay ;^ Thomas Blak, alias Dowglas, fumtyme Clialmerlaiie and Bail5ie to the faid Erie ; Archibald Murray,

wricht in Birfay ; Andro Mairtene, fumtyme fervand

and fecretar to the faid lait Erie ; Alexander Layng, alio

his fervand ; and Thomas Layng, indueller in Kirkwall.

Bilaitit of the TrefTonable taking and furprifing of his Maiefteis Castell of

Kirkwall, Kirk, and Steiple of Kirkavall ; treffonable refilling of the

Erle of Caithnes, his Maiefteis Lieutennent ; and vtheris treifonabill crymes,

contenit in thair Dittayis following.

DiTTAY agahijl Robert Stewart and others.
Forsamekill as, albeit it was mair nor nottour and manifeft to 50W, that
our fouerane lord the Kingis Maieftie, and Lordis of his hienes Previe Counlhll
of f)is Kingdome, had depute and authori5et Sir James Steivart of Kille'ith , kny',
to be Chalmerlane of the Erledome of Orknay and Lordfchip of 5eitland ; tpiha,
])e relTone of pe faid office, nocht only became in poffefTioun, in vplifting to his
Maiefteis vfe of ])e haill rentis, cafualities, and deuties of the faid Erledome, lordIchip, and leving J)airof, hot lykwayis, be him felf, his fervandis, and fubftitutis,
obtenit the charge, cuftodie, and keiping of J)e haill Palices, Houffis, Caftellis, and
ftrenthis within the famyn ; fpeciallie, J>e Caftell of Kirkwall, the Hous and Palice of Birfay, and remanent houffis fumtyme pertening to ])e faid Patrik, lait
Erie of Orhnay. As alfo, 5e, ])e faid Robert Stewart, being bundin, vpone 3>ur
grit aithe, nocht to half repairit to Jje boundis of J)e faid cuntrie of Orknay <uid
^eitlantl, without his Maiefteis Licence, grantit to 5o\v for that effect ; noclitwithftanding quhairof, it is of verritie, that 56, the faid Robert Stewart, being
oft tymes thraitnet and minaftet be the faid lait Erie sour father, vpone a milcontentment confauetbe him aganis 50W, ffor 3our fu})p()let overgeving of ]ie liiid
Caftell of Kirkwall and vtheris Houffis tane and keipit l)c 30W, maift trolloiiabillie fchaiking af 5our allegeance and ol)edience to our fouarane lord, and ])referring the vnhai)pie plott and counfall of 50ur faid ffather to the dew reucrenci'
and regaird of his IVIaiefteis authoritie and lawis, and thairwith making fchip-
' See Trials of Patrick, Earl of Orkney, Aug. 2, IGIO; and Feb. 1. 1015.
VOL. III. 2 M

274 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

wrak of 50ur faith, honour, and credeit, quhairin ^e fluid bund vpone 5our grit
and folemne aitli, as faid is : Off the fpeciall caufeing, fending, hounding out, command, counfall, devyfe, and directioun of the faid lait Patrik, lait Erie of Orknay,
50ur ffather, in the moneth of Maij laftbypaft, or J^airby, expreflie aganis 5our
former faith and former promeis, adrefTit 5our felff furth of thir pairtis to the
faid cuntrie of Orknay ; quhair 5e, togidder with Patrik Halcro, quha alfo was
imployit and directit be 5our faid ffather to afTift 50W in 5our intendit Rebellioun, convenit to 5ovir felffis the faidis Archibald Murray, Thomas Blah, Andro Mairtene, Alexander L'jggat, and Thomas Layug, with dyuerfe vtheris
mwtinous and evill difpofet perfones, 5our alfociatis, plotteris, and practi5eris
with 50W, in 5our haill rebellious and trefTonabill courfes following : And j^///,
be 3our craftie and fubteill meanis, convoyit and pofTefTit 5our felff and 5our alfociattis within J)e Pal ice of Birfay, and violentlie expellit furth ]?airof Barnard
Stewart, Keiper of the famyn ; drew in to 5our felff, within the faid lious, to the
number of threttie perfones, bodin with hagbutis, mufcatis, poulder, leid, and
vther maner of weirlyk preparatioun : Lykas, the taking of the faid Hous and
manning ])airof, in maner foirfaid, be 50W and 5our rebellious affociattis being
maid knawin to Mr Johnne Fynlayfone, Schereff depute ; and he, in regaird of
his office, and for preventing of 5our intendit Rebellioun, haifing affemblit ane
grit number of the bed affectionat gentilmen and cowmonis of |?e cuntrie, in the
faid moneth of Maij, or J)airby, laftbypafl, cuming fordwardis to the faid Hous
of Birfay, tane and keipit be 30W and 5our rebellious affociattis, as faid is ; and
haifing, at his cuming J^airto, be found of trumpet, in our fouerane lordis name
and authoritie, caufit charge 50W to cum furth of his Maiefleis Hous, and to
rander ])e famyn to him, as Judge and Magiftrat of ])e cuntrie, vnder his Maieftie, without forder trouble to follow J)airupoun, under ])e pane of TrelTone ;
56, with 5our affociattis, nocht only maifl treffonabillie and contemptuouflie difobeyit })e faid charge (and) refuifet altogidder to rander the faid Hous, but fchote
furth })airof dyuerfe fchotis of hagbutis and mufcatis at ])e faid Schereff and his
companie, than cled^ with our fouerane lordis authoritie, in J)e executioun of his
office, and geving of J)e former charge : At quhilk tyme, the faid Schereff and his
cumpany being vnwilling to encounter with 30W, be way of deid, than left 50W
with 50ur rebellious company, within the faid Hous, and returnet to Kirkwall,
of intentioune to haif flayit 5our Rebellioun fra haifing ony forder courfe. Bot
5e, altogidder myndet to pas fordwardis ])airintill, eftir ])e Schereffis de2)airting
fra the faid Hous, convocat 3our rebellious company togidder, and be the fpace
of ane moneth togidder, keiping 3our daylie confultationes and meitingis with
vther,^ 3e ])air plottit, devyfet, and concludit the trefTonabill intaking and man-
^ Clothed. ^ One another; each other.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 275

ning of the Kirk and Steijile of Kirkwall, the Caftell ])airof, and Place of the
5airdis, the flauchter and ruiting out of J)e Schereff, Ipe ConimilTar, and fic as wald
tak pairt with thame aganis 50W ; and for this effect, convocat to ';ow pe haill
parochineris and cuntrie people about, pat 5our felff with thame in airmes, and
at tua feuerall tymes maid 5our mufteris and wappone-fchawingis, and mufterit
togidder the number of nynefcoir joerfones, furneift and airmet, for pc maid pairt,
with corflettis, hagbuttis, poulder, leid, lances, and vther weirlyk preparatioune :
Quhilkis perfones, fa convocat be 50W, 56 brocht altogidder within the faid Hous
of Birfay and v]?eris houffis J^airabout, quhair thay war feiftit and bankettit be
50W : 5o^^i* Captanes and Commanderis war than chofin, and mony pronieifTes
and vowis maid, that na bak-ftarting fould be, fra 5our intendit Rebellioun, be
ony of 50 w, at ony tyme thaireftir, hot to tak eafakP pairt with vther to^ pe
tyme Ipe lait Erle of Oekxay war repofTefRt to his ancient and former government in that cuntrie. At quhilk tyme, ffor 5our gritter affureance of pa
faidis vowis and promeiffis, ane Band was plottit, maid, and devyfet be 30 w and
30ur rebellious affociattis, all writtin be pe faid Andro Martenis hand ; quhilk
being prefentit and producet to 5our haill rebellious company be 50W, the faid
Band(eftir grit aithes maid vpoun 5our fuoirdis') was fubfcryvit be fa mony of 50W
and 5our company as could wryte ; and fa mony as could nocht wryte put to })air
markis, and gaif Jjair folemne aithes to abyde ])airat to ])air lyves end ; quhairin thay war bund to die and leue with 50W, and to tak eafald pairt with 50W, in
all 5our treffonabill courfes, aganis all perfones quhatfumeuir, his Maieftie, our
gracious fouerane, nocht being exceptit, nor liis royall authoritie fet aj)airt ; committing thairthrow oppin and manifeft Treffone. Lyk as je, ffor bringing to
pas of 5our former Rebellioun and devillifch conclulioun, about ane moneth or
jjairby ]?aireftir, vnderftanding that pe Schereff and Commiffar war in fecuritie
within the Toun of Kirkwall, nocht expecting ony fuddane perfute, refolveing
with 5our felffis to half pe Schereff in 50ur power, either deid or quik, 3e, the
faid Robert Stewart, accumpaneit with the faid Archibald IMurra}-, Thomas 131ak,
Andro Mairtene, Alexander Leggat, Thomas Layng, and v];eris, jour rebellious
affociattis, to the number of threttie perfones, all bodin with hngbutis, mufcatis,
poulder, leid, and all vther weirlyk prouifioun, vpone the xvij day of Julij lailbypall, come frome the faid Place of Birfay towardis pe faid Toun of Kirkwall,
of intentioune to haif affailjeit pe faid Schereff within his ludgeing, and liaihng
rankit jour companie at pe Bowa-croce, je J)air reflauit adverteifment of }ie Schcreffis being within the Caftell ; and ])airthrow, finding jour felffis difajjointit of
jour expectatioun, je pair difcharget jour volie of mufcattis, and enterit within

' Literally, one-fold ; steadfast ; true, &c. ^ Until. ^ An ordinary form of niililary oati), on

such occasions; whicb was borrowed from limes of tLe remotest antiquity.

276 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615

the Toiin, qiiliair 59 abaid all that nycht, quliiir the morne Jjaireftir ; att quhilk
tyme 50, ^itli Patrik Traill, ^Villiame Paterfone, and vtlieris 50111- aflbciattis,
come to the duelling hoiis of Bernard Stewart, within the Toun of Kirkwall,
about the brek of day, in the moirning, pryfet vp his bak 5et,^ enterit within his
clofe, dang at his hall dur with ane garroun ;'^ and riocht getting en trie, went
about ];e laid hous to the hall window, quliair efter vp-dinging of pe faid window, the faid Arcliibald Murray, in grip[)ing of Bernardis hagbute, was hurt be
him with ane rapper* in the liand. Eftir the quhilk tyme, 5e, liaifing reteirit
3our felffis bak agane to Birfay, and finding with 3our felffis that 3our rebellious
courfes had tane bot littil or na effect ; 5e, to haif the famyn broclit to ane finall
poynt, convenit 3our liaill forces togidder, and eftir deliberatioun tane be '^ow,
the faid Patrik Halcro, with J)e faidis Thomas Blak, Archibald Murray, togidder
with tuentie perfones of 30ur rebellious number, of ])e fpeciall directioun of 30W,
J)e faid Robert, j^aft all, bodin in feir of weir, with mufcattis, hagbuttis, poulder,
leid, and vther weirlyk furnitour, to the faid Toun of Kirkwall, and J)air, vnder
nycht, furpryfet and tuik in Ipe Kirk and Steiple ]jairof, f|uhilk 36 furneift with
men, munitioun, poulder, bullet, and vper neceffer prouifioun for balding and
keiping of the faid Steiple : And vpone J)e morne })aireftir, 3e, pe faid Robert,
vnderftanding of pe guid fucces had be Halcro and his companie, in pe wynning
and taking in of pe faid Kirk and Steiple, 3e, accumpaneit with the faid Thomas Layng, Andro Mairtene, Alex"" Leggat, and vjjeris 3our rebellious affociattis,
to the number of threfcoir fouldiouris and men of weir, come fordwardis to Ipe
faid Toun of Kirkwall, in oppin and arrayit battell, with founding of trumpettis,
itreking of drumis, fchuiting of mufcatis, in figne of triumph and victorie, and
all vjjer weirlyk advancement ; the faid Patrik Halcro and his affociattis of 3our
rebellious troupe being than within the Steiple, fchuteing out J^airof at all perfones that durll kithe in 3our contrair,'' and founding vp J)air borne to 30W, for
3our forder incurragement to proceid in 3our trelfonabill attemptis. And being
enterit within the Ihid Toun, maift treffonabillie affaget the laid Caftell, and
compellit pe Keiperis pairof to rander the famyn, thay being bot of a few num^
ber, and noclit able to withftand 30ur violent affault ; quhilk being tane in be
30W, 36 immediatlie ])aireftir cuttit the brig'' J^airof for 30ur gritter furetie : At
quhilk tyme, ^e lykwayis treffonabillie tuik, be force, J)e Houfe and Place of pe
5airdis, with the Victuall-hous, and fealit vpone pe haill furnitour of meill, malt,
and vther prouifioun for keiping ])airof : At quhilk tyme, 30 treffonabillie pat
handis in the perfone of pe faid Mr Jolmne Fynlafoun, Scheref, being than within pe faid Caftell ; as alfo, come to the duelling hous of the faid Barnard Stewart,

^ Until. * Forced up his back-gate by means of a lever. ^ Beat at \m ball or front

door with a beam, used as a battering ram, to siiattor the door to pieces, or to start it from its binges.
' Kapler, orsmall sword. ^ Come forward to take part against you. '' Drawbridge.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 277

vnder filence and chid of nycht, brak vj) liis durris, and tuik him violenthe and
aganis his wih fnrth of his bed, led him cai)tiue and prillbner to pe laid Caftell
of Kirkwall, quhair he and the faid Schereff war keipit in ftrait firmance and
captiuitie be the fpace of fyve dayis togidder ; and l^aireftir war cayreit and tranlpoirtit, as captiues and prifToneris, to certane crawis or fchipis, to be l)rocht foiith
to fic places as ^e had apjjointit ; thay being his Maiefteis loyall and faithfuU
fubiectis, doing quhat in pame lay to half flayit the courfe of 5our former Rebellioun. The a^erritie and trew repoirt of the quhilkis 5our trelToiiabill and
deteftabill villaneis cuniing to the eiris of His Maiestie and Lordis of his
hienes Pkevie Counsall of this kingdome, and thay, for the mair fpedie
flaying and repreffing of the faidis enormities, haifing burdenit and imi)loyit
George Eele of Caithnes, as Leutennent and Commiffioner for his Maieftie
to pas over with forces to the faid cuntrie of Orknay ; and for that effect,
ane grit number of fouldiouris and men of weir being wadgct and liftit,
vpoun his Maielleis charges ; as alfo, certane peces of ordinance, poulder, bullet, and v])er furnitour for battering of Jje faidis ftrenthis and holdis fiirpryfet
and keipit be 50W ; togidder with tua fchipis and ane pynnadge, being alfo
frauchtit, alfweill for tranfpoirting of pe faid Leutennant and his companie,
with pah' furnitour and vther victuallis be fea, as convoying and overtaking
of pe faid Ordinance, poulder, and bullet towardis the faid cuntrie of Orknay,
for paciefeing of 3our former Rebellioun, and trubillis raifit be 50W ])airintill :
5?, making littill or na accompt J)airof, nor of J)e pernicious example gevin
be 50W to vtheris his Maiefteis guid and peccable fubiectis, in vtheris pairtis of
his dominionis, in plane contempt of his Maieftie and of his royall authoritie,
vpone knawlege gevin to 50W of the faid Leutennentis over-cuming, in maner
foirfaid ; 56 maift treffonabillie convenit and mufterit 5our liaill forces and cumpaneis togidder ; and for augmenting of 5our number, drew in dyueris of ]?e
cuntrie people, quhilkis war preft and forcet, l)e 5our tyrannic and oppreffioun,
to tak pairt with z,ow in 3our former Rebellioun, making vp in number ane airmie of ffyve hundreth men, airniit for 3our guaird and defence, in lb dam])nable
ane cans. With the quhilk number of airmet fouldiouris, 56 marchet furtli in
battel array, out of pe faid Toun of Kirkwall, towardis the Carnels, dyuerle
dayis of jje moneth of Auguft laft, of purpois ])air to haif withflud and rcfiftit
pe faid Leutennent and his fchipis landing: Lyk as, eftir ])e faid Leutennent
and his cumpanie war landit, 50% accumpaneit with the number aboue writtin,
being all'bodin in feir of weir, with hagbuttis, mufcattis, poulder, leid, enfignes
difplayit, and founding of drunnnis, rankit 3our felfhs in battell array, at the
Baw-feild, ane littil fra the faid Toun of Kirkwall, quhair 3e, be Ichuiting of
50ur mufcattis, maift treffonabillie maid refiflance to the laid Leutennent and

278 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

his companie, in |)air fordward-cumiiig to the faid Toun, thay being cled with
his Maiefteis authoritie and Conimiffioun to repres 5our Rebellioun : And vpone
the tuentie foure day of pe faid moneth of Aiiguft, Robert Wynrahame, ane of
his Maiefteis Herauldis,' cled with his hienes difplayit coit of airmes, accumpaneit with Johnne Johnneftoun, trumpetour, ]\Ir \Mlliame IMoffet, Gilbert Dundas, and Johnne Moftet, as witnefTes, accoirding to the directionne of his Maieftie and Counfall, and of ])e faid Erie of Caithnes, his Maiefteis Leutennent, being
repairing to the ]\Jercat-croce of Kirkwall, thair to haif charget 50W, in his Maiefteis name and authoritie, be found of trumpet, to haif randerit the faid Caftell, Place of the 5airdis, Kirk, and Steiple, and vtheris houffis and ftrenthes
keipit and haldin be 50W and 50ur rebellious aflbciattis, 5e, and 5our airmet fouldiouris and men of weir, nocht only treftbnabillie ftayit and maid refiftance to
the faid Robert ^Vynrahame, his Maiefteis Herauld, in nocht fuffering him to
repair to J?e faid Croce, for difcharge of his MelTage, hot maift prefumptiouflie
pat violent handis on his perfone, tuik him, with the faid trumpetour and witneflis, as captiues and priftbneris, and cayreit him to the faid Place of f)e 5airdis,
quhair thay war keipit and detenit be 30W as priftbneris be ]>e fpace of nyne
houris, or Jjairby, ane pairt of ]?e faid Herauldis coit was revin ; and efter delyuerie of the faid charge be him to 50W, J)e faid Robert Stewart, for randering of
the faidis Houftis, his Maiefteis letteris and charges was tane be 30W frome him,
quhilkis ar keipit be 30W as 5it ; And nochtwithftanding J^airof, pe faidis Houffis and Caftell was maift trelfonabillie keipit and haldin be 50W. VpouN the
fordward-cuming of the quhilk Leutennent, with his forces, towardis the faid
Toun, 5e finding 5our felfis vnhable' to keip the feildis, or to hald him out of the
Toun, 5e maid 5our flicht and retreit to ])e faidis Kirk and fteiple, and to the
faid Caftell and Place of the 53ii'dis : And dyuerfe fchotes of ordinance being
fchote at })e faid Caftell, Steiple, and vperis Houftis fortefeit and keipit be 50W,
with dyuerfe meftages fend to 50W for Jje peccable overgeving Jjairof, 5e neuirj)eles maift rebelliouftie dilTobeyit the faidis meftages and charges, and treftonabillie fchote furthe agane at the faid Leutennent and his companie, and flew with
the faidis fchottis, Williame Irwing, lauchfull fone to vmq'^ Williame Iruing of
Saba,^ James Rieliefoun, Andro Adamefoun, William Robertfoun ; and hurt and
woundit James Kneilland, Andro Purves, AMUiame Flemyng, and Alexander
Sudderland, thay being his Maiefteis fervandis and faithfull fubiectis, than in
feruice with the laid Leutennent ; treftbnabillie keipit and held the faid Steiple
the fpace of fourtie audit houris paireftir, or Jjairby ; and held and keipit
the faid Caftell be the fpace of ffyve oulkis, or Jjairby ; nochtwithftanding of
fevin fcoir fchote of ordinance fchote ])airat, and that ane grit pairt ];airof was
' He was ' Yla' or Islay Herald. ^ Lat. vihabilis. ^ Elsewhere called of Cava.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 279

batterit and dung doun with the force of the faid cannoun. Off the quiiiijvIs
TrefTonabill ciymes aboue writtin, viz. the TrefTonable dilFobeying of the chairo-e
gevin be Ipe faid Schereff, in his Maiefteis name and authoritie, ffor randering of
the faid Houfe and Palice of Birfay, eftir pe intaking ])airof ; the TrefTonable
convocatioun and raifeing of men of weir, and muftering of thame in airmes, to
J)e number foirfaid, and cuming fordwardis with a pairt of thame in battell-aray
to pe faid Bowa-croce, for the llauchter of the faid Schereff; tlie TrefTonabill
forgeing, making, and fubfcryveing of the foirfaid Band, for taking pairt with
the faid Robert, in his former trefTonabill courfes ; and caufeing the fubfcryveris,
and v])eris ])air aideris and afTifteris, be folemne aithes, to fueir to die and leve
with him, aganis all maner of perfones, his Maieflie our facred fuerane noclit
being exceptit ; the TrefTonabill taking and furprifing of pe faid Caftell of Kirkwall, Kirk, and Steiple Jjairof, Place of the 5^ii'dis, and vtheris houffis, mannit
and keipit as faid is ; the TrefTonabill taking of J)e lliid Mr Johnne Fynlafoun,
Schereff, and Barnard Stewart, captiues and prifToneris, being his Maiefteis trie
and faithfull fubiectis ; the TrefTonable refifting of the faid Erie of Caithnes, his
Maiefleis Leiitennent and CommifTioner, in vfeing of his faid CommifTioune, with
his cumpanie and men of weir, and flauchter of his Maiefleis faithfull fubiectis,
being in his Maiefteis feruice ; and beiring out of the faid afTault maid be the
faid Leutennent, to the faidis Caftell, Kirk, and Steiple ; the TrefTonabill taking
of pe faid Robert Winrahame, his Maiefteis Herauld, being directit be his Maieftie and Counfall, with his Maiefteis difplayit coit of airmes, to charge the faid
Robert and his companie, to rander the faidis Honflis and ftrenthis, be vertew
of his Maiefteis Letteris direct for ])at effect ; and TrefTonabill difTobeying of the
faid charge, and taking of the letteris and charges fra J)e faid Herauld, and keiping })airof, in maner foirfaid ; ^e, the faid Robert Stewart, Andro Mairtene, Thomas Blak, Archibald Murray, Alexander Legget, and Thomas Layng, and ilk
ane of 30W, ar airt, pairt, red (advice), and counfell; att the leift, of ane or vtlier
of the faidis TrefTonabill crymes, committit be 50W and 5our rebellious allbciattis
aboue writtin ; off the fi)ecial caufeing, fending, hounding out, airt, pairt, counfell and devyfe of the faid Patkik, lait Erle of Orknay ; quhilk is notourlie
knawin. Lyk as, ^e haif ConfefTit the famyn, be 5our Depofitiones. — Foil the
quhilkis 56 audit and fould be pwneift and denuncet as Tratouris ; to ])e terrour
and exampill of vj^eris to attempt the lyk Rebelliouii heireftir.

My Lord Aduocat producet ane Warrand of the Counfell, direct to his
Lordfchip, anent the formeing of the Dittay aganes the perfones on pannell, and
thair perfute for the crymes contenit in the Depofitiones ; quhilk ^\'arrand is
daitit the 28 December, 1614. My Lord Juftice and Juftice Clerk producet, alio,
ane Warrand, direct be the Counfall to thair Lordfchipis, for balding of Court,

280 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

and miniftrating of Jiiftice vpone the perfones on pannell. My lord Aduocat
prodncet the Dittay ; and conforme to the Counfallis Warrand, and for obedience
thairof, declairit, he was reddie to infill in the pannellis perfute, for the crymes
thairin contenit ; and thairnpon afkit inftrumentis.

The pannell being afkit, Gif thai had ony prelocutouris for thame to defend ;
or gif thay had ony thing to allege, quhy the Dittay producet be my lord Aduocat fould nodit pas to the knawlege of ane AfTvfe ? For anfuer thairto, Robert
Stewart declairit, that thai wald vfe na prelocutouris, bot God, in this matter.

ASSISA.

Mr Robert Henderfoun of North Andro Anderfoun.alfoliisfervand, Williame Sinclair of Tullope,
Rannaldfav, Henri Sinclair, alio his fervand, Andro Purves, indueller in Ed"",

Ednard Scola, fumtyme Sclieref James Hanimiltoun, wrycht, Williame Robiefoun, thair,

of Orknay> James Workman, paynter, burges Clement Kincaid, thair,

George Mowat of Sewnane, of Edinburgh, George Redik of ,

James Irwine, fervand to my lord Jolinne Quliyte, wricht, burges of Robert Keith, mercheand burges
(Erie of Cathnes), the Cannogait, of Edinburgh.

It is allegit be Thomas Layng, ane of the perfones on pannell, that George
Mowat, James Irwing, (and) Andro Anderfoun ar fervandis to my lord of Caithnes ; and thairfoir, hai nor nane of his lordfchipis fervandis can pas vpone the
pannellis Alfyle ; in refpect, that the faid Erie and his fervandis war perfewaris
of the pannell within the Toun of Kirkwall, Kirk, Steiple, and Caftell thairof ;
and thay war tane and apprehendit be him (the Erie), and (thay) behavet thame
felfis as pairtie, in thair perfute of thair lyves. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat,
that the allegeance audit to be repellit ; in refpect my lord of Caithnes and his
fervandis had na particular^ of his awin aganis the pannell ; bot only was iinployit as Commiflioner and Leutennent for his Maieftie to pas to Orknay, and
thair, in his Maiefteis name and authoritie, to apprehend the perfones on pannell, for thair Rebellioun, and balding and furpryfeing of his Maiefteis Caftellis
and Houffis tliair : fibr how fall the pannellis giltines of the crymes contenit in
thair Dittay be tryit,^ bot be fic as beft knawis the verritie of the factis mentionat thairintill ? And thairfoir, nochtwithftanding of the faid allegeance maid
aganis the Erie of Caithnes fervandis, they aucht to be admittit vpone this Affyfe.^

The Justice Adinittis the Erle of CAiTnyBsJervandis vpoune the Affyfe, nochtwithftanding of the allegeance ; and that, in refpect of my lord Aduocatis anfuer maid thairto.

* Quarrel; feud. - Proved; established. This forcibly illustrates the remarks which

have frequently been made, in various parts of this work, regarding the anomalous character of a Juryman ; wlio was generally selected, as personally knowing the facts of the case ; and was therefore consider! d as best qualified to return a true verdict, being in fact a witness in the Trial ; and accordingly,
deciding on his previous knowledge, whereby he was liable to be biassed by his prejudices.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. ogi

[Privilege of his Majejli/s Servants in the Castle of Edinburgh, as being
exempted from paffing upon A [fifes.']

James Hammiltoune, vvriclit, and James Workman, fFor tliame felffis, and in
name of the remanent ordiner fervandis of his Maiefteis Castele of Edinburgh, fummond to pas vpone this Aflyfe, declairit, in refpect thai war ordiner
fervandis to his Maieftie within the faid Caftell, and thairfoir war, be the Law
and daylie practik, exemit^ fra all maner of AfTyfes, defyret, accoirding to thair
privilege, tliay fould nocht pas vpone this AfTyie. — My Lord Aduocat declairit,
that thair paffing vpone this Affyfe fould nawayis preiudge thame of thair Previlege : And thairfoir, feing this perfute is a matter that concernis his Maieftie
him felff, for Rebellioun committit aganis his royall authoritie, he thairfoir defyret my Lord Juftice, that thai fould be admittit vpone the faid AlFyfe, vnder
proteftatioun, that thair Previlege be nawayis hurt or preiudget heireftir.

QuHiLK Proteftatioun maid be my Lord Aduocat, in fauouris of the ordiner
fervandis of the Caftell, the Juftice Admittis; and Ordanis thame to be Aftyfouris at this tyme, but^ preiudice of thair Privilege.

My Lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Affyfe ; and eftir
reiding of the Dittay, and the pannellis accufatioun, be vertew thairof, of the
treftbnabill crymes mentionet thairintill ; ffor verificatioun thairof, j^roducet my
lord of Caithnes Commiflioun of Leutennendrie, grantit to him, to the effect thairin contenit, of the dait the faxt da}^ of Auguft, 1614 laft ; the pannellis haill
Depofitiones, maid be thame in prefens of the lordis of his hienes Previe Counfell ; and thair Confefliones, mentionet thairintill ; togidder with Robert Wynerahame, Herauld, his Executioun^ and deforcement, with the forme and maner
thairof, at lenth infert in the faid Executioun, fubfcryuit and ftampit be him ; all
ratifeit and approvin (be his grit aith Judiciallie tane be the Juftice) to be of
verritie, in prefens of the pannell : Quliilk Ueclaratioun his lordfchip repeitis to
the Affyfe, witli the Judiciull Confeflioun maid in thair prefens be the faid Robert {S(ewa?i), of his giltines of the haill Dittay; and be Andro 3I(irtene, of
the wryting of the Band, and being within the Caftell with Robert the tyme of
the AfTault maid thairto be my Lord of Caithnes ; the Judiciall Confeflioun maid
be T/tomas J3laJi\ of his taking and balding of the Steiple ; the Judiciall Confeflioun maid be Archibald ^Lurraij^ of his being in the faid Steiple, and cuining
with Robert to the Caftell, at the intaking thairof, and cutting of the brig ; the
Judiciall ConfefTioun maid be Thomas Layug; of his being with Thomas Blak

' Exeemed, exempted. " Without. ' An oflicial attestation by Heralds and Messenu'ersat-arnis, that they had executed tlie (hity entrusted to then). After the rou!;Ii usage ot" Islay Herald,
aheady related, and his subsequent ' J'Jxccution.,' it is startling enough to the mere Englisii reader, to
be informed of his appearance before tlie Justice, and his making oath, and so forth.

VOL. IIL 2 N

282 CRIMINAL TRIALS. ' A.D. 1615.

and Patrik Halcro, at the taking of tlie Steiple ; and the Judicial Confeffioun
maid be Alexander IjCggef, of his keiping of the Houfe of the 5airdis vnder the
faid Robert and his companeis aganis the Leutennent : And in refpect of the
preniilfes, proteflis for ^Mlfull Errour aganis the Affyfe, gif thai Acquit.

Robert Steavart offeris him felff in his Maiefteis will, ffor the haill crymes
contenit in his Dittay. — Archibald Murray offeris hiin felf in his Maiefteis
will, ffor being in cunipany with Robert, at the cutting of the brig of the Caftell, eftir lurpryiing thairof.

Special Verdict o/fJie AJfyJe.

The Assyse, all in ane voce, be j^e mouth of ]'e faid IMi- Robeit Ilenderfoun, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declaiiit tlie foiinamet perfones on pannell to be Giltie and convict of the perticuler crymes
following-, to wit : The faid liohert Stewart, bafe fone to J^e faid Patrick, lait Erie of Oiknay, to be
Giltie, cidpable, and convict of the treflonabill difobeying of the charge gevin be ye faid Mr Johnne
Fynlafone, Sdiereft' Depute, in his Maiefleis name and authoritie, for randering of |ie Hous of Birfay,
eftir liis craftie taking and furpryfting thairof: Off the trelfonabill convocating and rafeing of men of
weir, and muttering of thame in airmes, to the number of nyne froir perfones, and cuming fordwardis
with a pairt of thame, in battel! aray, to the Bowa-croce, of intentioun to haif flane the ScherefF: Off
the treffonabill fforgeing, making, and fubfcryveing of ane Band, for taking pairt with the faid Robert
in all his trelfonabill courfes, and in caufeing the fubfcryueris and vtheris fair aideris and affifteris, be
])air folemne aitbes to fueir to die and leve with liim aganis all maner of perfones, his Maieftie our
facred fouerane noclit being exceptit : Off the treffonabill taking and furpryfeing of ]>e faid Caftell of
Kirkwall, Kiik and Steiple of ])e faid Toun, with the Place of the jairdis, and vtheris Houffis pertening to liis Maieflie within the faid Toun : Off airt and pairt of pe treffonable taking of pe faid Mr
Johnne Fynlafoun, Shereff depute, and of Barnard Stewart, captiues and priffoneris, thay being his
Maiefteis frie and faithfull fubiectis : Off the treffonable refifting of fe Erie of Caithnes, his Maiefteis Leutennent and Commiflioner, with his companie of men of weir, in executioun of his Commiffioun ; and of thellauchter of dyuerfe of his Maiefteis faithfull fubiectis, being in his Maiefteis feruice
with the faid Leutennent. And in the treftbnabill beiring out of ]5e faid Affault maid be the Leutennent aganis ])e Steiple, Caftell, and vtheris ftrenthis keipit be him within the faid Toun of Kirkwall :
Off airt, pairt, red, and counfell of the treffonable taking of Robert Wynrahame his Maiefteis Herauld, cled with his Maiefteis coit of airmes, being directit be his Maieftie and Counfell to charge pe
faid Robert Stewart and his rebellious affociatis to rander ]>e faidis Houffis and ftrenthis, be vertew
of his Maiefteis Letteris to that effect : And of the treflonabill diftbbeying of the charges, and taking
fra the faid Herauld of his Maiefteis Letteris and charges, and keiping fairof, in manev fpecifeit in his
Dittay: And that, conforme to ]>e faid Robert and his complices Depofiliones ; and of his Judiciall
acknowledgment of his giltines of ]>e faidis crymes, and of his Judiciall offer of becuming in his Maiefteis Will, as giltie and culpable Jiairof. The faid lliomas Blah, alias Douglas, to be ftylet, culpable, and convict of the treffonable furpryfeing and taking in of the faid Kirk and Steiple of Kirkwall, and balding the famyn aganis ]ie Erie of Caithnes, his Maiefteis Leutennent : Axd for cuming
fordwardis with ])e faid Robert Stewart, in oppin and arrayit battell, aganis fe Leutennent at ])e
Baw-ley ; and withftanding of him and his companie, a littill after his landing, and repairing towardis
the Toun of Kirkwall for difcharge of his Commiffioun : And for the treftbnabill aflifting of fe faid
Robert Stewart, in all his trelfonabill interpryfes aganis Jie faid Leutennent and his companie, fra liis
intaking of fe faid Kirk and Steiple, to ])e tyme of fe randering ]iairof to J)e faid Leutennent. The
faid Archibald Murray, to be Giltie and convict of the treftbnabill plotting, and being vpone the
counfell with the faid Robert Stewart, within the Palice of Birfay, of pe taking and furpryfeing of pe

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. • 283

Kirk and Steiple, and of pe faid Caftell ; and })aireftir, accoiiding jiairto, ffor ]ie treflbnabiU cuming
with Patrik Halcro, Thomas Blak, and vtlieris, and taking and fuipiyleing of the faid Steiple : Axn
in the treflunabill afTilling of fie faid Robert in taking and furpryfeing of the faid Caftell, and cuting
of pe brig ])airof, eftir ]iai war maifteris of ]'e fame : And of the treflbnabill keiping of ]>g Houfe and
Palice of Birfay vuder Robert, as Maifter ])airof, to the tyme he was charget be the Leutennent to
rander the famyn. The faid Andro 3Iartcne, to be Giltie and convict of tlie treflbnabill making of j)e
Band fpecifeit in the Dittay, and devyfeing J)airof: And of his trelibnabill being within the faid Caftell with Robert, and balding fairof aganis the Leutennent : And of airt, pairt, red, and counfall with
])e faid Robert Stewart, in his haill Rebellioun in Orknay, in manor contenit in his Dittay. The faid
Thomas Layng, to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of his treflbnabill being in companie with Robert
at his cuming with difplayit benner, in battell aray, to the Bowa-croce, of intentioun to half (lane pe
ScherefF: And of the trefl^onabill taking and fuppryfeing of pe Kirk and Steiple of Kirkwall : And of
his treffonabill being in company witli Robert, at his cuming with fFyve hundreth men in airmes to the
Baw-Ley, aganis the Leutennent : And for his cuming bak to the Place of the 3airdis, and remaning
pair with Robert till a littill befoir fe randering of the Hous Jiairof ; conforme to his Depofitiones.
And the faid Alexander Legget, to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of the treflbnabill aflifting and
being in companie with the faid Robert, with difplayit benner, at J)e Bowa-croce : And for being in
companie with Robert, and alfifting liim aganis the Leutennent, in keiping of fie Houfe and Place of
f)e 3airdis: And for the trelTonable aflifting and taking pairt with the faid Robert, and being in companie with him at the Carnefs, in refifting fe Leutennent f)air ; conforme to his Depofitioun.

Vpone the quliilk determinatioim of the faid Aflyfe, my lord Aduocat afl^it
inflrumentis.

Sentence. In regaird of the quhilk convictioun, my Lord Justice, be the
mouth of Johiine Dow, dempfter of Court, Ordanit the faidis perfones on pannell to be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be Hangit vpone
ane gibbet, quhill thay be deid : And all thair landis, heritages, takis, fteidingis,
rowmes, poffeffiones, guidis and geir to be fforfalt and efcheit to his hienes vfe,
as Giltie and Convict of the faidis treffonabill crymes.

APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS^
Illustrative of the Trial of Robert Stewart and others.

I. Minutes of the Proceedings of the Privy Council of Scotland.

(L) Jan. 14, 1614. — Robert Stewart, bafe fone to the Erle of Orknay, being broclit befoir THE Counsell, for giveing of fuirtie not to repair to thefe boundis, without ins Ma'^'"^ Licence ;
the Bischope of Orknay lies gevin his word and promeis for liini ; and the Counfell lies tane Jiis
awin aithe and promeis, that he iall not repair to the faidis boundis. And this courfe is tane be the
Bifchopis advyfe and fpeciall procurement.

(2.) Jun. 28, 1G14. — The Erle of Orknayis bafe fone having latlie gone to Orkney, nganis his
faith and promife maid to the Counfall in the contrair ; and he having tane with him foine fouldiouris,
and furpryfit the Place of Birjwall (Birfay) in Orkney, the Counsall, vpoun the firll informatioune maid to thame thairof, directed charges aganis liim for randering of the Iloufc; and with that,
thair wes ane Proclamatione direct, prohibiting all his Ma^'^'^ fubiectis to fupplie him with ouie uecef284 - CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

iairis, or to mak payment to liiin of ony of tlie dewtyis of Orkney or Zetland. The chairges for landering of the Houfe being execute aganis liim, he immediatlie caufes found his trumpet vpoun the heid
of the Houfe, and difchairges xxx or xl fchote of mufcat at the Officer and witnelfes, as wes this day
affirmit in prefens of the Ccunfall be Sir James Stewart of Killith? Whairvpoun the Counsall
has expod aiie Comniiflione to him, in ample forme, for perfute and afladgeing of the Houfe, with all
kynd of force and wearlyk ingyne.

(3.) Jul. 28, 161-t. — The Ekle of Orknay his bafe fone, accorapanyeed with three or four fcore
of perfones, doeth yett continve there foolifche courfes in Orknay, and ftill keepes the Houfe of Birfay. There lies becne fome conferrence in the Counsall anent the fuppreffing of his infolenceis ;
and it is thoght be the mod parte of the Counfale, that Sir James Stewart, in refpect he is Schiref,
Judge, and Chalmerlane of the countrie, Ihould be employed in that bufynes. The queftion Itandes
anent the forme, how Sir James (hall go there, and how he llialbe accompanyed ? Some ar of oppinion that the forces of the countrey ar fufficient to fuppres this Rebellioun, althoght the authoures.
wer ten tymes mo in number. Otheres ar of oppinion, that it is hard for Sir James Stewarte to
hazard him felf with the countrey people; and that it is expedient that he have three fcore men, vnder
wages, to attend vpon him. The Counsale, at there nixt meeting, ar to tak fome courfe in this
bufynes.

(4.) Jul. 29, 161-t. — Sence the wrytting of the Notes aboue written, there is fure aduerteifment
come from Orknay, that the faide Erie his bafe fone lies furpryfed tlie Churche and Steple of Kirk'
wall, and the Girnell-hoife, (whiche ar places of gryte ftrength,) and that the Scheref depute hes
reteered him felf to the Caftle, where he is inclofed be the Bafiarde ; and that there is a publict and
oppen Rebellioun profeffed and avowed in that countrey. The Counsale, beeing enformed heerof, this morning airlie (the "29 of this inftant) thay conveened in the Over Counfale-hous ; and Sir
James Stewart beeing at lengthe hard anent his refolution and purpofe in this bufynes, he hes vndertane to go there in perfone, and to adventur and hazard his owne lyfF in the fuppreffeing of this Rebellioun. He hes gotten a Commiflioun to tak vp fyve hundiethe men, vnder wages, and he is verie
bufye to amalfe this companyee togidder, at the leaft fa mony as vpon the fuddane he may gett ; and
both be found of trumpett and ftryking of drwm, warning is geveu to all fuche as will ferue to
adreafle thame felves to him, to inroll there names and refaue there pay. He is of oppinion that withiu
three or four dayes he ili;dl have iij'' Ihouldioures in redtlynes, wliome he entendes to fend away be
fea with the firft occafion. He is to go him felue, be land, accompanyeed with fuch voluntares of his
kin, frendlhip, and acquentance, as he may enduce to go with him ; of whome he is of opinion to mak
vp a companyee of three or four hundrethe men. The Lord Lovat hes promefed him the afTiflance
of two or three hundreth liable footemen, well furnilhed in all thinges neceflar. There is a ample
Conimiflion of Lieutennandrie and Jufticiarie exped vnto him, for the perfute of the lymmaris, with
fyre and Avorde. Proclamationes ar exped againes all betweene fextie and faxteine yeeres, within
the boundes off Caithnes, Sutliei'land, and Orknay, to go fordivard with Sir James, and to affill him
in this feruice ; and a other Proclamatione, prohibiteing the reffatt, fupplee, or furnilheing of thir Rebelles with ony thing confortable or neceflar vnto thame ; with a promefe of pardoun to fuche of thir
Rebelles (who ar not clieef ), that will leave the Bajtard, addrelfe thame felues to Sir James, and do
feruice worthie of favour,

All fchippes and velhelles bowne to Orknay ar flayed, till Sir James and his company be imbarked
and away.

Sir James will, God willing, have his whole forces togidder to fett fordn'art, him felf be land, and
his footemen be fea, withiu fyve or fax dayes ; and aduerteifment Ihalbe fra tyme to tyme fend vpe,
of the progres of his proceidinges, and of his fuccefl^ in his feruice.

' Afterwards Lord Ochiltree.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 285

(5.) Jul. 7, 1614 Informatioun being maid to fume of the Couxsall, that ane poilt-boy was

cum frome Orkne?/ with L.eUres to the kit Erle of Orkney, and that he was to returne agane with
ane anfuer to theis Lettres, directioun was gevin for the feircheing of him : Lyikas, he was apprehendit
vpoun the fyft of this inftant within this Burgh, and producet befoir the Coutifall, with ane number
of Letteris, the moft pairt of thame direct to Caitnes men. Becaus the pofl-boy was to go towardis
Orkney, that way, he was verie llraitlie examinat vpoun many particulaiis ; whois Depositiouk,
with the copie of that Letter fend be the Erie to his fone Robert,^ is heir incloifit, imediatiie vpoun his
examinatioun. Thrie of the Gaird was directed to Dumbartane to mak feirche for the Erie his
wryttis ; and to bring frome thence one Scharp, the Erie his fervand, by whome his Letteris is writtin. They depairted frome this Burgh upoun Twyfday the fyft of this inftant, about ten of the clok
at night, and come to the Cajlell of Dumbartane the morne tliairefter, about fyve of the clok in
the efternone, hot could not have entrie; being anfuerit be f'um fervandis from the wall-heid, that
the Conjlabill was in Edinburgh, and that one Robert Knok, wha had the chairge of the Hous wnder
the Conjlabill, was in the Toun of Dumbartane ; and whill his return the 3ettis could not be oppined. The Gaird, vpoun this refufall, going to the Toun, they forgaderetl,* in the mid-way betuix
the Cajlell and the Toun, with the faid Robert Knok ; vnto whome they haveing impairted thair Comiffioun and warrand, he tauld thame plainlie, that thair was no entrie to be had, that night, within the
Ca/lell ; and appoynted thame the morne, at awght of the clok. They haveing preceiflie keipit that
tyme, and come to the Cajiell-iett, thair was many idill ceremonies vfed, befoir they could haue entrie ;
and at laft, being refTaued within the Caft.ell, Sharp was amifling, and had ellcaiped ; and feirche being
maid for the Letteris and wryttes, thair was ane number of comptis and wryttes gottin, hot ferving
nothing to the purpois. ,

Thair is an ampill Commissioun paft and exped to Sir James Stewart, Shereff of Orhnay, and
his deputtis, for the perfute and affaidgeing of the Houfe of Birfay, with fyre and fword, and for
apprehending Robert Stewart, and exhibitioun of him befoir the Counsall.

(6.) Aug. 3, 1614. — CoMMissiONis being paft and expeid to Sir James Steicart of Killcith, for
fuppreffingof the Rebellione in Orkney; and he being in the preparatioune of his forces to haue
gone thair for that eirand ; and promeife being maid to him, be the Lord Lovatt, of fum thrie or four
hundrethe Hiland-menne, to haue aflifled him in that feruice ; fum Gentlemen of the Cuntrey of Orkney, being heir, and feiring that fuche a number of peple as wald accumpany Sir James wald be a greit
burdyn to the pure cuntrey, and that they wald appeafe the cuntrey people at thair pleafure, they
thairfore delt with Robert Montcith of Eglefchaio to mak ane ouerture to the Counsall, for doing
of this feruice, with les chairges to his Ma^'b and greittare eafe to the cuntrey nor ponil)lie could be
done be Sir James, Robert Monteitii being admittit to audience, he hes offerit and vndertane,
in refpect of the freindfchipe and aflurance whilk he will find in the cuntrey, to do this feruice, with
the fupplie of threefcore fouldiouris allanerlie,' and ane Herald and Trumpett, at his Ma^"«=* charges,
with atie fhip to tranfport, lie hes vndertane to recover the liaill lloufes and ilrenthes tane and hauldin
in that countrey aganis his Ma'"^ ; and outher to apprehend the Rebellis, or then to put theme of the
cuntrey: He hes vndertane, yf ony Houfes or ftrenthes be aftl-adged, to raife the feage within fourtyaucht houris aftir his cumming in the cuntrey. And for the performance of thir his Offeris, he hes
offerred the Erie of Caithnes and James Sincler of Murchill cautionouris.

Sir James Stewart being hard vpoun the Otleris maid be Robert Montcith, he hfs wiliinglie aggreit
that the chairge of the feruice be commiltit vnto hiin. Wliilk acconiiiiiilie is donf ; and lie is to imbark with his forces betuix and the tent of this inftant; and he lies prcfriitlic il'inl away fum of the
Gentlemen of the cuntrey, to haue the liaill cuntrey in reildines to atteiui' his laiuliiig.

' See this Appendix, No. (20.) ' Ileucouut'jred ; met with. "Only. < Await.

286 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

(7.) Aug. 24, 1614. — The Earle of Caitiines,! with two fliippes well provyded with all warrelyk prouifion, made faile towardes Orknay, vpon tlie xx of this inftant, haveing the wynd verie
fauorable ; and it is looked that he wes in Orhncnj vpon the 22 of this inllant, in the morning. How
fone ony adueiteifment fliall come from liim, or ony otheres in that countrey, his Maiestie Ihall gett
notice thereof, with all convenient diligence.

(8.) Oct. 5, 1614. — Direction is geven to the Captane of the Guarde, to fend tuelf of his company to Dumbartane, and to bring frome thence, to this burghe, the Earle of Orknay. And
direction is gevin to the Shiref of Dumbartane to affift the convoy of the Earle from Dunbartane to
tlie Falkirk, v^hevc the Shireff of Linlithgow is to receaue him, and to mak his convoy frome thence to
this burghe.

(9.) Nov. 17, 1614. — The Erle of Caithnes, having left the Laird of Ratter, his brother, as depute for him, in the Officeis of Justiciarie and Sherefship of Orknay ; and having
gevin directioun to him to demolilhe the Cq/iell of Kirkioall, conforme to the Warrand of the Counfalirend to him for that effect, the faid Laird of Ratter, by his Petitioun, gevin in this day to the
CouNSALL, meanit him felf," that he wes a Gentleman of fmall moyene,' liaving nouther landis nor
rentis in Orknay ; and that his remaining thair vnder the burdeyne and chearge of the faidis Officeis,
wald draw him, in lliorte tyme, to fpend all his rentes, to his greit hurt and inconvenient ; befydes the
neglect of his awin affaires and bufynes, at home. And thairfoir, his defyre was, that he might vnderlland, vpoun what conditioune he fould remaine in that cuntray, and vpoun whofe chargeis and expenffis the Houfe fould be dimoliflied ? His Petitioune being hard and deulie confiderit, the Lordes
lies allowit vnto him ane hundreth markes monethlie, dureing his aboade in that cuntrey, for his charges
and expenflis. And tuitching the dimoleifching of the Houfe, thay haue ordanit him to do the turne,
and the expenffis that he fall beflow thairvpone, according as the fame falbe verified and teflified be
the ByJiop of Orknay, vnder his hand, falbe repayit vnto him be the Thefourare Depute.'^ And whareas,
the remaning of the Laird of Ratter in that cuntrey, wilbe chargeable to his Maiestie, the cuntrey
being now reafonable weele failed, without appeirance of ony new commotioun or trouble ; thairfoir,
his Maieftie wold be pleafit to rcfolue vpone fome courfe, anent the Gouemament of that cuntray, and
whom his Maieftie v/ill putt in the trufl of that charge; to the effect that, vpoun the fignificatioun of
his Maieflies pleafour thairanent, the Covnfall may tak ordour, and gif directioun thairin accordinglie.

II. Dispatches from the Earl of Caithness, &c. to the King and

Secretary of State,^ &c.
(10.) Letter, the Earl of Caithness to Liord Binning. {Aug. 25, 1614.)^

Right honorabill my verie goode Lord,

Pleis your lo. We aiTyved at Caftell Sincleir vpoun the 22 of this inflant ; whair I ftayit that
night, and aduerteifed the Caithnes men to be reddie to follow me to Orknay, when I fuld command
theme. I irabarked with me about threttie of theme, and cam to Selwik, within tuo myles to Kirkwall, vpoun the 23, about fex eftir none.

The 24 I fent the Herald with Notairis, Meflingeris, and Witnefles to mak proclamatioune at Kirk-

' The procrastinating conduct and vacillation of the Pkivy Council, in a matter which bore such a formidable
aspect at its commencement, says very little for their ability or zeal, in the discharge of their important trust. The
only apology which can be framed for them, is the circumstance of their subserviency to the King, \vho was resident
at so great a distance, and without whoaejiat they dared not take any important step. * Made supplication and

complaint ; liumbly remonstrated. ' Means; fortune. From Fr. moi/m. * In the Books of the Accounts

of the Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, Gen. Register House, the following entry occurs, under date April, 1615.
' Item, to ane Poistpassand to Edr. to my Lord Chancellar, at Dunfermling, to subscryve ane Commissioun for Walter
Richie, for demolishing of the Castei.i- of Kirkwall, xxiiij s.' * Thomas Lord Binning, afterwards Earl of

Melrose, &c. ; which last title he afterwards exchanged for the Earldom of Haddington. ^ From the Original

in the JDenmijlne CvU. of 31 SS. Adv. Library.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 287

wall ; who wes prefentlie taikln, as lie entered the Towne, mofl iniuriouflie and dlfpytfullie abufed,
bothe in word and deid ; the Letters taikin frome him be Robert ; and him felf, with ane Minider, and
all otheris that accurapanyed him, keipit in diuerfe houfes, all that day, till the evening ; to whiehe they,
the fame day, did ad this alfo, that to the number of thrie hundreth menne, with difplayed enfigne, did
fort^ out of the Towne, and maid prouocatione to me, whair I lay vpoun the Ihip-board. For that the
Proclamationes (were) thus impedit, I wes forced vpoun the 25 to wreitt diuerfe Letteres, and fend
throuche the cuntrey, to aduerteis and command the Gentlemen and vtheris to refort to me ; in whome,
for the mofl pairt, I did not find that reddie willingnes whiehe I expected ; fo that I wes forcit to fend
to Caithnes, for fupplie of my owne menne ; who, cuming to me vpoun the 26, and having then affembled about two hundreth of the cuntrey menne, we tuik land ; and at the fame tyme, about ten houris,
we landit the battering peice with hir careage, whiehe, by great force of men, and fome difficulties
throuche the deipnes of the foyll, wes prefentlie, and with all pofllbill diligence, drawin neir tuo myles,
towardis the Towne ; and the fame day, about thrie aftirnone, planted at Weyland, within ane half
quarter of myle to the Caflell. We merched in good ordour, with colouris difplayed ; and as we approched, the Rebellis forted out,' boafting that they wold fight with ws, thought we had bein tuentie
to one ; and having their Ordinance in reddines to haue played vpoun ws from the Caflell, Stcpill, and
Tour of the 3eardis, and difchairgeing one or tuo of the fame againfl ws, fo foone as we cam vnder their
fight, I commandit the Cannoners^ to finite at the Caflell ; who did their pairt fo weill, that be the
fecund fchott one of the turrettis vpone the heade of the Houfe wes pearfed and almolt beaten doun,
to the great terrour of the Traitouris ; and other thrie being Ihott, one aftir another, did all hit, hot not
hurt fo muche.

In the meantyme the Rebellis being provoking and braking ws vpoun the Ball-ley, to the number of
fex fcoir men, our Captanes and fouldiouris went directlie, and with goode courage, toward theme —
and without ony refiftance or hurt did compel theme to retreat fchamefullie. In whiehe flight, about
fyve of preifed poore menne of the cuntrey did abandon theme.

The Captanes, fouldiouris, and Gentlemen of the cuntrey, with thair menne, did prefentlie follow
theme at their heillis, entered the towne the fame night about fex houris, inclofed theme in their holdis,
and now pofTefles the Towne. That night I ludged about the Ordinance, and guairdit it and our
felffis with the refl of our menne.

This day we ar bufie about the landing of the great Peice of Ordinance, that we may batter bothe
-the Caflell and the other Houfes, which annoyes ws and our men in the Towne ; and mak our feruice
the fchorter.

The Rebellis ar mofl obflinate, and maliciouflie refolued to hold out to the deathe, thought I have
fent Minifleris and their owne freindis to inflruct, admonifli, and threattia theme.

Their is heir no bread, nor drink, nor vther victuallis to be had for pryce, prayer, or command ; Co
that I mufl ather feik prefent releif of fome victuall from Caithnes, or fuffer the fouldiouris to flarue
for want. And if they fall endure and continew in thair obflinacie, as they haue wowed to do, thair
will not be pouder, leid, billettis, nor matche to ferue for this feruice ; in the which I fie great dangeris, and manie more difficulties then I culd foirfie.

In refpect whairof, I will intreat your goode lo. to acquent my Lord Thefaurer and remanent Counfallouris ; and with all cair and diligence prouyde, betyme, that money, pouder, pillettis, and chieflie
fum reafonabill quantitie of victual], whiehe can not be had heir, may be fent to be difpenfed and fold
to the fouldiouris and vtheris that haue neid, vpoiui reafonabill pryce ; whairby our great necefTities
may be fupplied, with litle or no hurt to his Ma'''*' money.

As thingis fallis out, fo fall your lo. be aduerteifed from tyme to tyme. And now, after the trew

' Fr. made a sortie. ' Artillcry-nicii.

288 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

narratione of our proceidingis and prefent eflaitt, I refer the confideralione and cair of all to your lo.
wifdome, and fall euer reft, Your lo. euer to be commanded,

Caithnes.
To the rig])t honorabiil my verie goode lord, my Lord of Binning, his
Maiefteis Secretare of Scotland.

(11.) The Erll of Caithnes Letter to my Lord Thefmirar 'Depute}
My verrey gud lord and cousing,

I HAUE reflauit fiiulrie of ^our II. moft kynd Letteris, and 50ur 11. greit cair in fending all thingis
necefliir for ending of this feruice. I can not gif 30ur 1. dew thankis ; hot I will account it ever to
procede of ]>e lufe ])at ^e heir to his Ma''''^ and lufe ^e caryit to me as 3our kynnifman, quhome 50ur 1.
fall ever hauepouer to command me, fo long as I braith. It hes pleafit God, of his mercie, the penult
of ])is iiiftant, to mak ane finale end of ]>is feruice in my handis. The forme, maner, and all ])at hes
hapnit, I haue writtin at greit lenth to my gud Lord Secretar. I haue directit ])e Pinage home and ])e
Bark* pat come lall ; .and hes difchargit the Captane, Officeris, and fouldaris, pe laft of pis inflant. 1
grant pis feruice hes bene expenfiue to his Ma'^*^ ; hot quhat hes bene wairit,^ I hoip at my cuming to
put it all vp agane, be mvnitioun, to pe Cqjiell of Ed''. I hop to bring with me more then tuentie
thoufand merks worth of brafin ordinance.^ As for my panis, hazard, and travellis, I will remit that
to his mofl facred IMa^'^^. This,* leving to fafche^ 50ur 11. with mony woirdis, I end, willing 5our 11.
ever to efteme of me as ane kynnifman pat 30ur 11. fall have ever pour to command, according to my
pitlie. This taking my leif, I commit sour 11. to God, and I fall ever reft

5our 11. coufing, ever reddie to be commandit, Caithnes.

At Kirkwall Castell, pe laft of September, 1614.

(12.) The Erie of Cathie s Letter to the Secretary rejjiuied 10 Od. 1614.

My verrie speciall good Lord,
In refpect 30ur Letter, dailit from Ed" the fyfte of September, and come in my hands the fourteint
of this inftante, declaring ^our lo. diligence for expeding of all neceffars for this feruice, quhich I half
more nor neid for daylie, I and all that is heir with me hes bote feruice with thir moft bluidie and barbarous Rebeles and Traitouris. Tliay haue killed four, and the laft is ane Willeam Iruine, ane Orknay Gentleman,* one quho, fince his deathe, I have hard was ane inoyenour, and ane greit freind to
the Traitour. God is juft in his judgementis, for amongs ws all ftariding by him he is fchote dead,
vpoune the nyntente of this month, at twa houres in the after none ; ane cuntrie man of rnyne fchote
througlie the arme ; and ane fouldiert fchott behind beneth the bak ; and one (laine in the Caftell. All
this is done this laft dayis Ikirmifche. Thair is not one day that I am idle, except the Sabothe. My
lord, I will afture ^our lo. thay ar moft defperat and cruel! Tratours, and (this) is ane verrie ftrong
hould, and nothing can do to tiiame except the cannone.

Quhair 30ur lo. hes fett doune in 5our Letter of his Ma*^'''* advyfe, that I fould be fpairing to grant
pardone to notorious Rebellis and malefactoures, my lord, God forbid pat I fould tak vpone me to
grante ony pardone to ony quho hes fo heighlie offendit his facred Ma^"'. Befoir his Ma'^''^' were not
repairit, to his honour, be all the lyft'es of thir bluidie Tratoures that is within this diuilifch Caftle, I
(wald) rather be buried. Heirfoir, my lord, I will be plane with 3our lo. as to ane faithefull counfellour

' From the Orii^inal, Tienmyhie AISS. ' Two vessels -wliii'h had been sent with supplies and dispatches to this

Expedition, which were known by the name of the Pinnace and the Barque. ^ Expended. ■* See Notice to

the Trial of the Kiirl of Or/met/. ' Thus. " I""r. ; trouble. ' From a copy j)reserved in the Denmylne

Collection of MSS. Adv. Library. * ' In this siege the lieutenant lost four men only ; namely, William Iricyn,

son to William Irwyn of Saba, James Hichardson, Andrciv Adamson, and William liobiiiso?! ; who were killed all by
shots from the Castle. Many were wounded and hurt, but thereof recovered.' — Spotswood's Hist. p. 520.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 289

to his Maieilie. I find none bot the name of Si?iclar in all this land hot hes bene in counfell of this Rebellioune, or eles aiit and pairt ; for thair is ane Band, fubfcryuit be seuin hundred of this cunlrie
people, to Robert Stewarte and Patrik Halcro, to die and leiiie with tliame. This Rebellioune was
devyfit in Ed"" Caftell in Winter laft ; and giue God grant me that gud fortune to get on lyue Robert
Steivart or Patrik Halcro, his ^laieflie will hear of good fporte. I haue Andro JIartine, quhonie I
mynd, quhen I find occalioun be Sea, to fend him to be examined be your lo. of his Ma'' * moil honourable Priuie Counsall. I haue caufit liim fubfcryue his awin Depolitioune, vpoun the quhilk
jour lo. will get mater eneuche to gar him fpeak Scottis, giue he lyk to blot his mailler to be the
bounder out of his fone to do all that he hes done.

I cannot nor may not Itop the Inhabitantes of this Tonne from fpeiking with the Traitoures, geving
of thame meit and drink, making thame advertiflit quhat I am doing, and making daylie and nightlie
advertifmentes of all that thay can aither heir or fie. I will intreat your lo. to mak me advertifit, with
diligence, of the Counsels mynd quhat I fall do to thame, both men and wemen ? I have takin
nyne or ten men of Birfay, quho was with Robert, and was platters with him in this Rebellioune,
and fpeciall keiparis of the Hous of Birfay, quhom I mynd to put tn ane Affyle ; and giue thay be conuict, to hang thame, for ane exemple to vthers.

My lord, this feruice is not lyk to have fo haiflie ane end as I would. Your lo. knawis my Commiffioune grantit to me is no longer than two moneth ; of the quhilkis thair is fyue weikis and more
outgone: And, giue it will pleas your lo. of his Maiefties Priuie Counfell hould me heir, till it pleas
God that I putt ane finall end to this mifchante Rebellioune, I would haue ane new Commiiiioune,
with all priuilege neidfull, to^ the feruice be endit ; for I protefl to God I neuir, nor nevir fall, curate
ane cuntrie that may be compairitt in falfett to this cuntrie people I I vfe thame both with lenitie and
fair formes, as t/ie Bifchope will informe your lo. ; and for all ])at I can do, thay haue thair fecret moyen
and traffecke with the Traitores. And as for 3Ir Johne FinJaJoune,- thair is no remaneing heir to
him, giue-^ I wer once oute of this cuntrie; for man, wyffe, and bairne baits him to the deatlie. Thay
haue myntif* twyfe to kill him, fince his comeing heir with me, war not I ;^ bot now, feing thay fie me
to tak plaine pairte with him, thay ar begune to behauld him.

Since the beginning of this Letter, I haue ftayit to wryte to your lo., hoping evir vpoune better
news. The Bark and poift came heir the twentie twa or tuentie thrie,^ with all permiflioune necefiar
for the feruice : And efter thair arryvall, I fent to thame in the Caftell, if thay wold cum out and put
thamefelffis in ins Maiesteis will, Jlniplicifer, I wald lett thame cum out.

The penult of this inftante, it hes pleafit God, of his mercie, to end this feruice in my hands. Tiie
Houfe is myne, Robert in my hands, and all cunied to me except Patrik Halcro, quhom as yit I haue
not feine. All is cumd to his Ma'^'''' honour, prailit be God. I haue fex Uaine to me ; many hurte.
The fouldier I wraite was hurte is dead. I will aflTure your lo. it is one of the Itrongell Iloulies in
Breltane ; for I will bring with me to your lo. cannone billetts, both brokkin lyk gouite balls vpoune
the Caftelle, and clovin in twa hallbs. I could not till now enter withe extremitie with the followars
of Robert, till I was maifter of the Houfe, for fear of making more adoe, feing the Ilouie was ^o llrong ;
bot now I fall not be flaw to puneifch feuoirlie, to mak exemple to vthers to play the lyk. Prel'entlie,
I am going to drink his Ma''"* good healthe vpoune the Caftell heid. 3Ir Jokne Finhifoune would
haue the Caftle in keiping, bot I will not till I heir from iiis Ma^'" and your lo , feing it hes coftc
his Ma'''^^ fo deare, and I and myne the dangeour of our lyffes. I will not geiue it him quho fo beiftlio
gaiue it ouer for four fchote of mufcate. Always,'' quhat your lo^ of his Ma^'--* Priuie Counfell will
command me, vpone your advertifment, I will follow, and geiue the Houfe to quhome your lo- pleafis.

' Until. ^ The Sheriff Depute, whose oppressive cruelties iniide him to be detested by the inlialiitauls (if Orkney. ' \i. < Attempted j aimed. '■" Had it not been lor me. " The "J^d or •^;Jd of September.

' Nevertheless.

VOL. III.* 2 o

290 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

I am to expeid the Bark and Pinnage to your lo. with all diligence, and this day to difcharge the Capitane, Officers, and foldiers, the la(l of this moneth.

INIy lord, by your lo. good caire of me, it lies pleafit his Maieflie to graunte me ane Remiffioune, and,
to lionour me of that I am vnworthie, to prefer me to be one of his Ma''''* mod honourable Priuie
Counfell. I cannot fay more bot this much, I fall preife to my deathe toflryue, withe invye, for loyaltie
and obedience ; and hopes in my Saviour to do his Ma*''" more better feruice nor this, or then to die ;
for I protell to God, I craue no grittar honour in this earthe then, by my death in his Ma''*'^ feruice,
my treuth and loyaltie may be knawin at my end.

As to your lo. manifold good will, and pruiffes I haue euir had of your lo. fauour, vnmeritit be me,
your lo. fall haue this aliiirance of me, I fall euir be your W, and^ ye fall neuir fpeak or do anything
to me bot as ane trew and faithfull feruand to his Ma'^^ and one pat fall euir pleafe, fo far as lyis ia
me, to be anfuerable to his Ma^'^'* lawis. Thus, crauing your lo. pardone that I am fo longfum,^ I mofl
humblie tak my leiue, committing your lo. to the tuitioune of the Almychtie; and I fall euir reft and
remaine Your lo. euir bund to ferue yo' lo. [Caithnes.]

At Kirkwall Castell, the lafle of September, 1614.

QuHAT cair and qidiat panes and haifard I haue beine in fince my comeing heir, I will remitt to
vthers to declair; bot befoir it had not proceidit as it hath done, I rather I had bene buried heir. I
affure your lo. the Cannonar hes don his dewtie in this feruice.

(13.) Letter, the Earl of Caithness to the King.'
Pleis ^our most sacared Maiestie,

I haife taikine this boldnes to wryt thir lynes, fins it pleifit jour moll grafius Maieflie to honour rae
fo far as to mak fchofe of me before many thoufandis of jour fubiectis of grytter vourthe, and of more
vailloure and vifdome then I, to vndergo this feruice of the Orcads, quhiche, praifit be to God, is
endit now. This lafl of September, the Caftell is in my handis. The Kebellis for the raoft pairt
taikin, to difpone vpone at ^our Maiefleis plefoure ; and all the coimtray maid pefTabille. And now,
I haif no more ado heire, bot to do vther directiouns, gifine me be directiouns and command, be jour
Maiefleis mofl honorabille Counfell. And quhan I haife maide ane accuut to thame, conforme to my
imployment, I mynd, if it wille pleis jour ^Nlaiellie that I cum to jow, to haife that honour as ane kife
of jour Maiefleis mofl grafius hand ; houping in God to do jour Maiellie more exfeptabille feruice then
this, and'' euer jour Maieflie haif ado, or thene to lofe my lyfe ; for I proteil to God, I craife no
grytter honour in this eird nor to die in jour Maiefleis feruice, that be my end jour Maieflie may knaw
my effectioune and trouthe. Thus, mofl humblie talking my line, my feruice euer remembered, I end,
coramiting jour Maieftie to the tuitioune of the Almightie. I fall euer remane

Your iNIaiefleis mofl humbille and obedient denoted feruand, to the deithe,

KiRKLALLE Castlle, the 1 October, 1614. Caithnes.

(14.) Letter, the BiJIiop of Orhiey to L,ord Binning, Secretary of State.

("RefTaued 15 Oct. 1614.) ^

Right honourable my very good Lord,

It wes nather of cairelefues, negligence, nor oblauioune, that my lord and I did not wryte fo frequentlie ; bot our inflante cair and diligence to bring the feruice to fum happie end, did hauld ws from

wryting, till we did fie the expectit fruit of laubours, which we knewe wauld not be vnpleafing to his

Ma"^"^ and iour honouris. I hoip my Letters witii the lafl poifl, James Ga'trdner, and Robert Winrame, relatiue to the former, fall prevent thir and geiue fatisfactioune to your lo. in all anent the end-

' If. * Prolix ; tedious. ^ From the Original, Denmylnc MS. Collections, Adv. Lib. * If.

' From Copy, preserved in Denmylne Cvll. of IVISS. Adv. Libniry,

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 091

ing of tins actioune, quhairin thair is nothing promefit nor done, quhilk is not agreable to liis Ma''<^s
pleafour and your lo. defyre. Eobert (Steivart) and Patrick Halcro, ar tranfportit this day to be
exhibite to your lo. The reft ar keipit priffonars in the Caftle ; and my lord and I (efter that Roherte
and Patrik Halcro be difpatchit with Viing May^ and ane lufficient number of hable men to guaird
thame) ar prefenllie going lo examine euirie one ; and the nixt day, God willing, thay fall fuffer judgement and condigne puneifment. The winds, })ailes, friaws, raines, ar fo extraordinarie in thir places,
that all had bene done and accompleifTed befoir this day, giue*^ it had bene pofliblc. Andro Marline,
quho was fent with Robert Winrahame, would be weill examined be your lo. I Jioipe to cum by
THE Band itfelf, quhairof I fent the coppie with his Depofitiounes. Thair is one 3Iargarel Bicchane?
fpous to Simeone Steivarl, and now Adulteres to Patrik Halcro, quho hes revealit and confeffit to me
more then any other. If your lo. think that hir Depofitiounes or prefence falbe neceflar, direct me,
and it fall be obeyit ; for I purpofe to put hir oute of this cuntrie, for hir Adulterie. Anent the
Articles fent in my laft Letters to your lo., I befeik you to advyfe, and adverteis. And fince your
lo. hes geuin me afTurance of the pafllng of my rightes, (for the quhilkes 1 fall euir be cairfull to expres my thankfulnes, in all dewtie and feruice,) I fall be difpofed at your lo. pleafour, aither to come
South wMth the Earle, or ftay heir a litle efter, for my awin builines, or ony feruice fall be committit
or commandit to me. As for other things, your lo. will kuaw thame be my Letters writtin to my
Lord Theafurar. So praying God euir to fauour, profper, and preferue your lo., I reft

Your lo. awin alfured and obliged in all dewtie,
Kirkwall, 6 Oct., 1614. [Ja. B. of Orcads.]

(15.) Letter, the Earl of Caithness to horcl B'uinhig.'^

(" Reflaued 15 Oct. 1614.")
My most speciall good Lord,
I RESSAUIT 30ur Letter, datit at Edinburgh the twentie, &c. and cam in my handis the fourte of
October. Befoir the reffett of your lo. Letter, I wrait greit lenth of the haill proceedingis heir, and
of the ending of this feruice that God of his mercy hes maid to come, vtherways nor any man expectit.
My lord, war not I vfed the mater fo cannelie,^ and maid Patrik Halcro to faill thame that was thair
in the Caftell, it wald haue bene ane longfura faidge ; for I proteft to God the Hous hes neuir bene
biggit by^ the confente of the Diuil ; for it is one of the ftrongeft houlds in Britane, without fellow.
I fie be HIS Ma^'^^ Letter direct vnto your lo^ of his intentione to Robert Stewart, quliilk I thank
God I haue nather fend to him, hot this, and vpoune that conditioun he cam out : Quhilk couditioune
was in this forme, gif he wald come furth and put \\\m{it\i Jim jjlic iter in his Ma*"^^^ will, to difpone
vpoune him at his Ma'"'** pleafour, I fould keip and preferue liim from euerie danger of my folkis, till
his Ma*''"^ pleafour and will wer knawin. He defyrit that I wald promife vpoune my honour to preferve him, till I brocht him to his Ma'"". That I plainlie refufit ; for I faid I could not promeis that
my felffe might haue acces to his Ma^''", without the fpeciall licence of the Lordis of his Ma""- moft
honourable Priuie Counsell. To conclud, he plainlie fubmittit him felf to his Ma^''"* will. Bot
befoir he did this, Patrick Hcdcro had left him, and faid plainlie to him, in the Caftle, ' he wald
geive it ouer.' Quhicli maid him come out, vpoune the foirfaidis condiliones, and no vtherways. As
I fall anfuer to God, Robert Steivart hes no fardcr of me ; for I fpak with him, and liiicllit that he
wald neuir geiv over that Hous to be Torterit, and to be conipellit to reveill vpoune his father, to be
his wrak. I finding this, I defyrit, gif he wald let Patrik Halcro cum oute and fpeik with mc,
vpoune that fam plaidge that was in for him. He plainlie refuiit. I feing it fo, I maid me to be
Weill contentit with his anfweir, and faid, ' I wald go fordwart with the fiedge.' He paft to the
Caftell ; and in his companie I put in fecret woord to Patrik Halcro, to fie giue the morne he wald

> Sinclair of May. * If. ^ Buchanan. See her Deposition, Nov. I, IGl i. * Trom a ropy in

Dcnmylne MSS. Adv. Library. ^ Had not I handled (or managed) the matter so cautiously. * Without.

292 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

cum out and fpeik with me, in the Kirk, vpoune plaidges; quho grantit, and cam fuith to me. And
efter four lioures conferens, he and I l)and to hand, I maid him to 5eihl, that lie waUl giue it ouer and
mak the Hous to be in my handis, vpoune conditioune I fould promeife him his lyffe — quliilk I did.
Then he willit me to caus ane Minijier come in and preiche to thame, quhilk he fould (vfe) meanis
that the reft Ibuhl be contentit to lieir ; and fo, he fould mak the mater fo that he fould be out of fufpitione, to* the gritteft pairte of tliame war out of the Cartel! ; and as they cam out, to geiue thame
fair countenance. And fo, be thir meanis, Patrik Halcro maid the Hous and all thefe that war thair
to be in my handis.

The Procedingis and Ceremoneis tuik mekle of audit dayes, quhilk was the occafioune that your
lo. was fo long of getting word ; quhairfoir I crane your guid lo. to haue me appardonit ; for praifu be
God, albeit the word hes bene long of comeing, it is good quhen it comes I

I luik ])at my word and proineis gevin to Patrik Halcro fall not be fulfillit. Befoir it wer, I rather
be in my grave.'-' As to the reft I haue in my handis, except Robert Stewart, (they) falbe hinged within
twa dayis at the Caftell yett,' with fundrie vtheris of the cuntrie men that war ring-leaders to Robert,
to the exemple of vtheris. Tiie number that fall hang, that was in the Caftell, is twelue. 1 haue fent
Robert Stewart and Patrick Halcro to Castell Sinclair, to be fuiilie keipit thair, till 1 haue done
all that your lo. hes gevin me Commiflioune : For now, fince the feruice is done, I have no pleafour
to byd heir, for the wedder is both euill and varient, and fo is the people; for he that wald rewle heir
hes both neid of wit and manneheid, and manie earis and eis. Quhair 50ur lo. willes me to conforme
all my actiounes to his Maiesties mynd, I hoipe in my Sauiour neuir to do, fay, nor think that fall
be oflFenfiue to his Ma*''". Befoir, willingelie, I did any thing that war ottenfiue to his Ma^'^ I rather
be buried quik. As to this peece of fmall feruice, I think it bot ane beginning ; hot give his Ma''*^ haue
ony feruice of grittar importance, I houpe ather to die, or giue his iNIa'"' ane grittar pruiflfe of my
aflFectioune and luife. Thanking your guid lo. for the grit cair your lo. hes had that I fould wante
nothin"- that fould furder this feruice, in my panes, I can render your lo. no farther than the affuirance
and continewance of my feruice, as I fall euir remane, Your awin

. Kirkwall, 7 Oct., 1G14. [Caithnes.]

(16.) The Artici.es Jent he the Erle of Caithnes to the Secuetar, to

he rejoined he the Counsall.

(" Reflaued 10 Oct. 1614.")

I. Pleas your Honorable lo. to refolue and direct, quhat fall be done witli the Castell, which is
now in my cuftodie? Whither it falbe repaired or demolillied ? Thocht it be ane ornament for the
totvne of Kirkwall, and may be eftemed ane place of refuge and fecuritie for the hoU cuntrie, in tyme
of forrane Invafions, if any fould liappin to be, 5it fince it is nather neceftare for any ordinarie feruice
of his Ma^"", nor ane Hous filt for the habitation of his Ma"^'' Ofticiaris, and may be mor eafilie takin
be forrane foes, in cais they fould inveid, then recovered agane from them ; I remit it to your lo. wifdome, to ccnfider what falbe done with it.

II. Pleas your lo. to giue fome diiectioun for gouernment of thir people. The prefent Officer,
the Skereff-dejmt,^ is hated, to the death, be all fortis of men ; is of no fufficient qualities for fuch a
place and office ; and by his former evill demanor, is h contemned of the bafeft, that he fall neuir,
bv all appaience, recouer credit, authorltie, and regaird heir; 5ie,^ iff he remane heir after me, he is
in danger of his lyff, and fome new broyl may arryfe.

1 Until. ' Such cold-blnodi'd and ])eifidi»)iis treatlieiy has seldom been eqiiallfd. A King's Lieutenant

binding himself by the most solemn engagements to a IJebel on giving up a stronghold, without loss of blood, that a
free pardon shall be granted to him — and yet, in his Dispatches, strenuously recommending that his pledge shall be
recalled, and that the repentant Rebel shall be put to death, without mercy ! ^ Gate. ■• Mr John

Fiulaysone. ' Yea.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMIXAL TRIALS.

293

III. Thocht ther be frreat fpoyll and loffe of liorfe, cattcll, friieip, hoatis, and now of armour which
belonged to his ]Ma^'*=, jour lo. wald be plefed to give direction quhat falbe done with tliat which
remanis, and may be recouered from vniult deteiners, that his iMa"*= be not defrauded and hurt.

IV. For BiRSAY, wliich was the j)lace whence the trubies did fpring, your \o. may be pleafed to
confider, whither it falbe demolilhed or keiped, with fome allowance; and be whome?

V. The Ordinance, which is in the Caftell and 3eardis, in number 8 of brafe and fax of irone, falbe,
God willing, tranfported vpone the fchippis, with all the armour whiche can be had.

VI. Robert Stewart and Patrik Halcro falbe keiped and brocht with my felf.

Caithxes.

(17.) Letter, Lord Binning to his brother Mr Patrick Hamilton}

Brother,

This morning, John Stewart is arryued from Orkney ; and hes broght in his iliip, be direction of the
Erie of Caithnes, foure of his Prifoneris, with thair Depofitions ; whom I have re-examined this forenone, and have fend to yow tlie copies of thair Depofitions fent from Orknay, and of my examination
of thame this day ; togetlier with the copie of the Letter which the Si/chop of Orhuuj fent with thame.
Thay ar now in the Towbuth, in the Irne-houfe,- becaus the Chancelar and Counfall will be in this
Towne tliis night. I will advyfe with thame, whether it be more fit to execute thame to-morrow, or
to delay thair Execution for fum dayis, leaft thair fuddane death might mak the detaiuars of the Caftell of Kirkwall more defperat and obftinat.

The Erle of Caithxes, with great dexteritie, hes maid himfelf maifter of the Steple and Howfe
of the Yairdis. He has no loffe, prayfed be God, hot of two of his men flayne and ane hurt. We ar
perfuaded, that all the prouifions which thay requyre, be thair Letter, wer in Orknay before thair Letter came to my handis. I have this day fent to Leith two hundreth bullets for the canon and batard,'
and am provyding all vther necelTars, which fall be reddie this night and imbarked to-morrow, God
willing, to the effect the lliip make faile the morne, if God grant thame profperous wind.

This I have thoght fit to wryte to yow, to be fignified to iiis Ma^'^ and my Lord Chamberlane ;
thinking that the copie of the Bifchops Letter, and the prifoners' Depofitions, ar the befl information
I can giue yow.

I pray yow recommend to his Ma'"'' and my Lord Chamberlane the fauorable and fpiedie expedition of the Erie of Caithenes and Bifchop of Orknayis buffnes ; and vfe all poffible hai/l in the return
of HIS !Ma"^s commandments. So, in haift, I commit yow to God. Ed", this 13. Sep. (1(>14.)

Your loving brotlier, Binning.

I have fend for the Jujlice-depute and Ju/iice-Clerk, and aduerteifed my Lord Chancdar, who
came yellernight to Pinkie, and will be heir tiiis efternone.

To my beloued brotlier, MaiJIcr Patrik Hamilton, at Court.

III. (18 ) Band of Association subsciiiyit by the Rebellis in

OllKNAY.V

Be it kend till all men by thir prefentis, Vs, the Gentlemen of Orknay, after fubfcrivand :

Forfameikle as, by the freqtient intrantis of cxtraniers in this countrie, the eltate of the commonwealth

is in danger, and like to perifclip, throw the corruj)tion of the Lawes, partialitie of Judges, the greid

of Officeris, and Oppreffion of Magiflratis ; quhilk dwanger"' the poor ones vnder the yock of fervi-

' Mr Patrick Hamilton was the fourth son of Thomas Hamilton of I'l ii-stfu-ld ; antl was a]>|>oinlo«l liuler-Serretary of State to his brother. He usually resided at Court, for disjiatch of .ScoltiNJi altairs ; and tended, in no small
measure, towards elevatitis his biother's fortunes to the almost uupreeedeiiled station and ofiiees whieli he siueessively
held. ^ The Iron-house, or Cm/e as it was termed, was construeted for tlie safer euslody of desperate offenders,

in the Tolbooth of Edinburi^h, wheiiee they were easily conducted to the Court-r n, and to execution, without the

danger of rescue. ^ Petard; battering piece. ' I'rom a collation of two Cojiies, preserved amongst the

Dmmylne Coll. of MSS. Adv. Library. * Dings, drives.

294 CRIxMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

tude and llaverie ; conluming his Ma"*^^ rentis in their own adoes, but ' vtilitie or good fervice to his
Ma*'*^. QuiiiLK to prevent, by afliftance of God, and favour of his moft excellent Ma''"^ our fouerane
Lord, We, be the faith and truth of our bodies, now touching the Evangel of oure Saviour Jefus
Chrift, Bindis and Obleiflis vs, coniunctlie and I'euerallie, as neid requires, to be in readines by our
perfons, with oure fervandis, kin, freindis, and dependares, in armour, to repreffe all oppreffions and
iniquities quiiilk fall happin to be intendit aganis tlie commonwealth of this countrie, at any tyme
hereafter ; Ava that better order may be eliablifched, whereby God eternalle may be pleafed, and our
Souerane lord obayed and ferved, according to oure dewty, in all refpectis. And that this may be
the better effectual, Wee Bind and ObleilFe vs and our afoiiTaidis, to concur, attend, and depend vpon
Robert Stewart, lone naturall to oure native Lord and ^Nlaifter Patrik Erle of Orknay, as our
Heade and Commander, during the abfence of his father, and to mentyne and defend him be our
bodies, goodis, and geir, in execution of the premiffes, and all other lawfull actions and affaires
quhilkis he Ihall have to do at ony tyme hereafter, vnder the payne of Periurie and everlafling defame :
Because the faid Robert Stewart is reciproquallie bundin and obleift to vs, that he Ihall take no
weightie matter in hand, without confeut and aflent of vs, at leaft any two of vs, under the lame payne,

BE this prelent, fubfcryved with oure handis, as followis, At the .... day . . . . , the

yeare of God I'". Vj''. fourtene yeares.^

R. Steward. Pa. Halcro, to the detli.

Pat. Gordon, with my hand. Thomas Douglas, to death.

Thomas Lowat, to jie dei*. Gilbert Gray, to ])e deithe, with my hand.

Robert Moavat, with fe hart and handis. Willame Sinclare, to the dethe.

Johne Reid,"' O. S., in Svvrne, in Marwick, to the dethe.

R. Saleter, to J)e dethe ; Belie of Birfay. O. Q., in Marwick, to fe dethe.

Willame Kerktoune, to the dethe. Robert Gray, to the dethe.

R. L, in Gerfettar, to the dethe. T. St., in ^larwick, to the dethe.

R. S., in Niffohous, in Marwick, to ]>e dethe.

IV. Examinations A^'D Depositions of the Rebels, &c.
(19.) Deposition of Duncan Mitchel, ' Poijl-hoy in Edinburgh.'^

At Edinlntrghe, thefyft day of July, 1G14. In prefencc of the Lordes of Binning, Secretary, the
Prefident, Thefaurair-depide, Clerk of Begijier, Aduocat, Sir Alexander Drummond, and Sir
Andre Ker.

DuNCANE Mitchell, Poifl in Edinburghe, fworne and examinat, deponis, that quiien the Erll of
Orhiay was caryed from this Towne towardis Dunhartane, the Erll directit the Depouner with a
Letter to his fone Bohcrt, who wes in Orknay for the tyme ; and the depouner paft with the Letter
to Orknay, and dolyverit the fame to the faid Bohcrt, fra whome he reffauit ane anfucr, in wryte, to
the Erll; and broght the fame heir with him to this burgh of Edinburghe : And after he had flayit
heir twa dayis, he paft with the Letter to Dunhartane, and delyuerit it to the Erll.

Deponis, quhen lie delyverit the Letter to Bobert, tlie faid Bohert wes in Birfay ; and fiiyis, tliat
he had a verball directioun and meffage from the Erll to Bohert, that yf he had the Houfe of Birfay
in his keeping, that he fould keepe the fame to the Erllis vfe ; for the Erll faw lille apeirance of re- "
leif.^ And yf the Houfe were not in his keeping, that he fould vfe the beft, raeanes he could to come
be it; and that he fould lift frome tlie Tennentis fo much of thair mailles and dewyteis as he could
gett ; and that Jie fould keepe the Houfe, in maner foirfaid.

Deponis, when the depouner come to Birfay, Barnard Steuartis wyffe had the keeping of the

' Without. ' The various dates are not preserved in the copy of this Bond. It is asserted that no less than

Seven Hundred persons sij,'ned it. See p. 289. ^ A rude attempt at the shape of a heart follows this person's

subscription. * From a transcript preserved among the State Papers in The Denmylne Coll. of MSS. Adv.

Library. ' From imprisonment.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 295

Houfe, and that Robert Stetcart had onlie fyve perfones witli him in the Houfe : And the yett was
keept, as the depouner thoght, be one of Robertis leruandis. And the depouner flayed in Birfay
fouretene nightis : And in the mean tyme of his being thair, Robert fend to Kirkwall, for fome ma
company, and for mufcattis, poulder, and leade ; and fayis that xviij peiTonis, or thairbv, armed with
raufcattis, come to Birfay ; and at thair comeing, thay then avowit the keeping of the Houfe ; tooke
and broght in fome of Barnard Steuartis goodis to victuall the Houfe, and payit not for thame.

Deponis, that afoir the depouner come away, the Sheref -depute, accompanyit with thre or fourefcoir
perfonis, come and lay aboute the Houfe, and fend in Meflage to Robert Steuart, defyring him to
come oute, and he wald gif him libertie for xiiij dayis to remayne in the cuntrey, to vplift the TakmailHs' whilk he alledgeit wes dew to his fader, for auld byrunis -r And that Robert refuifit to come
furthe. Quhairupoun, the Sheref cnuCit charge the Houfe to be randerit ; quliiik wes refuiiit be Robert, with I'ound of trumpett, and difcharge of fome mufcattis out of the Houfe. Lyke as, t/ie Sherefdepute fchoit in at the Houfe, with the fchoit quhairof one Downye Lyell wes hurte. And the depouner ftayed hot ane night, after the Houfe was chargeit. And fayis, tliat Robert caufit prepair ana
boit to tranfporte the depouner, be water, to Caithnes ; and he fend with him a Letter to the Erllf
and by tung bad him inquire, quhat the Cou?i/ell wes doing in his bufynes — and quhat wes the Erllis
will that the faid Robert fould do in Orknay ? Denyis, that he broght ony meffage from Robert, to ony
perfonis within this burghe.

Deponis, that vpoun Thurifday, the lalt of Junij, aboute tua of tlie cloke in the efter noone, the
depouner come to Dunbartane, and fand the Evil walking in the cloife ; and he delyuerit Robertis
Letter to the Erll. And when the depouner tauld the Erll that the Houfe of Birfay wes tane, the
Erll anfuerit, ' Tiie Devill flick him ! He might haif tane ane better Houfe 1' And forder, deponis,
that the Erll faid, ' The Devill ftick his foollis head I' (meaneing be Robert,) ' He might haif mellit
with the Scheref- depute — and yf he had maid him quyte of him, he wald haif had lefle ado !' And
forder, deponis, that the Erll faid to him, Yf his fone had affail:;eitt the C(fiell of Kirhwall, the
Keeparis thairof wald haif delyuerit the fame to him, becaus they wer the Erllis auld feruandis 1 And
deponis, that the Erll defyrit the depouner to commend him to thofe who affiflit Robert in the Houfe.
And fayis, that vpoun the morne the Erll caufit his man, Shairp, write ane Letter to his fone ; whilk
wes vnfubfcryuit be the Erll, and had no directioune on the bak. And the depouner relfault lykewayes ane Letter from Shairp to Robert Steuart, without fubfcriptioun or directioun on the bak, laulf
onlie ane corfe,^ that it might be knowne frome the other Letter. And quhen the depouner come
away, tlie Erll defirit him to will Robert ' to keepe the Houfe ; and in no caife to randcr the fame :
And, or* he war tane, it wer better for him to dee with honnour — ffor he wald be putt in perpetuall
warde, yf he wer tane !' Deponis, that the Erll inquirit, ' quhat fauour Robert liad of the Commonis,
and yf thay refortit vnto him ?' And defyrit Robert < to fend him money, of that quliilk he fould gett
frome the Tak-men, for auld reflis.' And fayis, that nane wer prefent, quhen the Erllis Letter wes
writtin, hot the Erll, his man Shairp, and the depouner. Duncane Mitchell.

(20.) CoriE of the Erie his Letter to his Sone.

(Appended to Duncan Mitchell's Depofition.)

Robert,

I HAVE red and confidderit your Letter. Yow haue done verie weill in wryttiiig of yotir Letter in

fe forme 56 do ; hot I feir it fall do littill goode. Alwayis,^ 56 fall do the beil with it, gif we have

ado with it; hot it may be we haue no thing ado with it ; for th;iir is v])cr materis heir to think vpoun

nor fuclie thingis, as that I beleive his Maiestie thinkis littill of thcis inateris. Tak tent that your

Holy ffafer betray 30W not, as he did befoir. The berar fayis, je gaif him hot fax pundis. Trewlie

' Rents of possessions let upon Lease. " Arrears. ' Cross or niark. ■• Ere ; rather than. '•" Nevertheless.

296 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

it is littill aneutrb to cum and go. Gif yow cum in tins cuntrie vpone onie conditioun, the Tolbuith
will be your belt ; flfor quliat conditioun beis proraeifl 50\v be onie in Orknay, tbay bot (koine 50W ;
flFor the Counfall will not kenne * quhat conditioun thay mak to 50\v. Seing qe haue pioceidit fo far
as ^ow liave done, thair is no being heir for 30W. War not^ Kinclcvin and fe Bijchop, my Lord had
not feine Dtunhartane, at this tyme. This berar fayis, he will venture to fetche fuche money heir as
yow will gif him ; bot yow fend Jo" Prence with it ; for heir he is ane honeft man to 50W. Tak his
Band, and tend it with l)e beirar, for that that 50W delyuer vnto him ; for my lord hes more than
miflare^ of it. Reftis, the laft of Junij, 16 1^.

PosTSCRiPi'T. Cans gif the berar ane coitt,^ for he is wirthe^ it ; and latt him haif his haill waidges ;
for I will liaue nane to gif him, when he cunis heir. His wadgea is fyftene pundis. Haifl fe berar
Leir agane, for we will get no more iilwer frome the Thefaurer. Lat him not flay xxiiij houris,

(21.) Devositio'S of Barnard Stet{a?'t.^

At EniNBURGiiE, the xj of Augnji, IGU. In prefence of my Lordis Binning, Prefident, Thefaurer-depufe, and Adiwcat.

Barnard Steuart, fworne and examinat, deponis, that Robert Halcro of Cava tauld to the depouner, that he faw a Letter directit be the Erll of Orknaij to his fone Robert; quhairby, the Ertt
willit Robert to tak the depounaris lyffc. Demandit, yf he wes perfuadit or delt with, be the Erll, to
joyne with his fone Robert, in the prefent Rebellioun in Orknay? Deponis, that he being informit
that the Erll had gevin ane Commiflioun to his fone Robert, to intromett with eertane dewyteis of
Orhnay ; the depouner part, to the Erll, and demandit of him, yf he had gevin ony fuche Commiflion
to Robert, becaus he feirit that Robert, vndc.r culfour of that CommifTioun, wald mcll with the depounaris geir? And that the Erll anfuerit, ' Yf Robert be gone to Orhnay, the King nor yow will
be able to mend it — and it is your beft to beholde him I'

The faid Barnard Steuart, for explaining his former depofitioun, deponis, that he haueing faid to
the Erll, that feeing the Duke of Lennox and the Erll of Marr had intreated iiis Maiestie in his
fauour, that thairfoir, he had done verie happelie, in directing Robert to Orknay. And the Erll, feameing to be in a choler and anger at thir fpeecheis, thrawing'' his bearde with his hand, laid to the depouner, ' Yf Robert be gone to Orhnay, the King and yow will not mend it — and your beft wilbe
to beholde him !"

The faid Barnard being demandit, at quliat tyme he gatt knovvlege of the Letter directit be the
Erll to his fone Robert, to take the depounaris lyffe? Deponis, that after Robert had bene in Birfay
fyftene dayis, and beliavit him felfe fomequliat civillie; and thairefter, had maid him felf, publidie and
be force, mailler of Birfay, and expellit the depouner furtlie thairof, and detenit his wyfFe aganis hir
will, the faid Barnard directit Robert Halcro of Cava to perfuade Robert to putt his wyffe to libertie ; and after conference had be Robert H(dcro with Robert Stewart, for that purj)ois, at Robert Halcrois bak-comeing from Birfa, he declairit to the depouner, that Robert Steuart had Ihowne him a
Letter of the Erll of Orhnayis to his fone, commanding him to tak the faid Barnardis lyffe,

Barnard Steuart.

(22.) Depositions of Thomas Blacl\ Thomas Layng^ Archibald Murray^

and Alexander heggalt.

At Edinburghe, the xiij day of September, 10 14. ///, pnfence of the Lord Binning, Secretar.
Thomas Blak, borne in the Mernis, and one of the Baillies and Chalmerlaine to Patrih, laite Erll
of Orhnay, examinat, deponis, that quhen Robert Steuart tooke the Caftell of Kirkwall, this depouner

' Recognise. ' Had it not been for the interference of Kiiirlevin and the Bisliop, &c, ^ Necessity; need.

* Coat. ' Worthy; deserving. * From transcript in Denmijlne Coll. of MSS. Adv. Library. ' Twisting,

43 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 297

wes in the Steple of Kirkwall, and xii perfones with him. Tlie faid Thomas, being defirit to dcclair
the fimple treuthe of all his pairt in the Rebellioun of Orkxay, deponis, that, when Robert Steuart
had tane the Houfe of Biifay, the Schereft* part, and caulit the houfe to be randerit, quhilk wes refuifit,
and this depouner pafl with the SheretF to aflifl him, and bioght with him twa hundreth men, and
flayed ane night with the Shereff, and vpoun the moine the depouner come bak with the Shereff ; and
fayis, that aboute tuentie dayis thairefter Robert Steuart fend Patrik Halcro and Williame Paterfoun
to the depouner, to will him to come to Robert, to mak and perfyte his comptis of the reftis, whilkis
he was awand to his fader ;^ and the depouner, according to thair defyre, pafl voluntarlie to Robert, to
the Place of Birfay, and flayed thair with him ane night, and come bak agane to his awne houfe, and
provydit xvij lb. to pay Robert, quhilk he caryed bak to him the nixt day. Quhilk all wes done after
that the depouner had bene prefent with the Shereff and forceis of the cuntrey, at the chargeing of
the faid Robert and his compliceis, to delyver to him, as his Ma'^''^^ Commiflioner, the Houfe of Birfai/,
vnder the pane of Treffoun : And that the faid Robert had not onlie difobeyit the charge, but fchoit
fome mufcat fhoitis at the Shereff and his company.

Thairefter the depouner come to the Steple of Kirkwall, the day befoir the Caftell wes affedgeit be
Robert, and enterit thairin with Patrik Halcro, Archibald Mtirray, Thomas Layng, and fome otheris,
to the nomber of ten perfonis. And how fone Robert and his company come in fight of the Toun of
Kirkwall, he caufit found his trumpettis, and the depounaris company, within the Steple, blew thair
home. And fa fone as Robert come and tooke the Callell, Patrik Halcro, Archibald Murray, and
Thome Laing pafl oute of the Steple to Robert ; and thair flayed onlie three or foure in the Steple
with the depounar ane night or twa. And howfone the Caflell wes affured in Robertis polfelTioun,
he fend in fome otheris to the depouner, and maid his nomber to be tuelff perfonis, with whome the
depouner keept the Steple till the Erll of Caithnes his comeing to Orkney. The depouner grantis
that Archibald Murray and Alexander Leggatt wer at the taking of the Caftell.

Deponis, that he aggreit with the Erll of Caithnes, for him felfl", and in name of the refl of his companie, anent the randering of the fleple ; and he procurit leve of the Erll to carye out of the Iteple
his victuallis, armour, and quhat els he had in the fleple pertening to him felf or his company ; and
grantis that he wes Captane of the companie, being within the Stepill, and maid appointment with
the Erll, in maner foirfaid. And declairis, that Patrik Halcro, Archibald Murray, Gilbert Gray,
Johnne Guild, and Andro Martine, wer farrefl vpoun Robertis counfeill of ony in the haill company.
Grantis, that euery man within the Steple had a mufcat, and thay had onlie fax pund of poulder
amang thame. Grantis, that he boght fome trunfcheour plaittis,"^ and ane pott, with fome linning
cloathe for thair furnifhing in the Steple. And fayis, that Robert fend him in ane feddor bed. And
the depouner had ane boy of his awne with him all this tyme.

The faid Thomas Blak, being deiplie fworne, and demandit, yf he afkit of Robert, quhat wes his
purpois or drift in this Rebellioun; or by what meanes he wald beare it oute? Deponis, he nevir
afkit any fuche quedioun of him. Grantis, that the Erll of Caithnes had the Steple maid fuir vnto
him or 3 it wes renderit ; and that Johnne Guild had delt with the Erll in that mater. And this depouner, how foone the Erll fend vnto him, randerit and come furthe to him ; and maid apixtiiitment,
for him felf and his fouldiouris, to rander the fleple to the faid Erll; who, be his moyen, forniarlie
maid with Johnne Guild, had the Steple in his pouer, befoir the deponner returnit vnto it.

Deponis, that thair was no bloode fpilt be thame within the Ste|)le, except that one of thamo iVhc.it
Robert Chalmers throughe the hand, the tyme that the CommilJiiir of Orlmay wes iiuiolit within the
Place of the Yairdis: And the faid Robert Chalmers wes affilling tiie Commillair in defence thairof.

Thomas Layng, fworne and examinat, deponis, that, at his laite being in England, quhen he wes
comeing home, Thomas Davetlie gaif to the depouner tua Letteris, in Skairlburgh,' to bring home to

' Till' arrears of rent, &c., which he was owing to his fiither. » Trenchers. ' Ere; before. * Scarboroui;li.

voi>. III. 2 P

298 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

the Erll of Orhiay, quliich lie delyuerit to the Erll. And deponis, that he being one of tlie Keep,
aris of the Cojldl of Kirkiuall, vnder Sir James Steuart, thair fell oute fome difference and variance
betuix the Shereff and the depounar, anent his paiit of the contentatioun ^ quhilk he fould haif had for
taking of the Pirott Schip ; wherupoun the deponar fled from the Town of Kirhmll to Robert Steuart,
and ftayit with him thair ten or tuelf days, befoir his coineing to Kirhvall. And the depouner wes
with Tiohert qulien he come with difplayit banner and trumpett to the Bow-Croce, accumpanyed with
ane huudreth men in arnies, or yairby.

Grantis, that he wes one of thefe who furprifit the Kirk and Steple of Kirkwall, and that he flayed
in the Steple with Putrik Halcro and Thomas Blak tua dayis.

Grantis, that he wes with the Shereff quhen he chargeit Bohert to rander the Hovfe of Birfay,
quhilk Robert dillobeyit, and fhoit fome fhoitis oute of the Houfe at the Shereff. And grantis, that
ane moneth efter this, the depouner pafl to Robert Steuart, and joyned with him.

Deponis, quhen the Cfi/idl wes tane, the depouner wes in the Steple, and after the Ca/iellwea randerit to Bohert, the depouner left the Steple and went to Bohert, and remanit with him in the Place
of the Yairdis, quhill the Erll of Caithnes come in the cuntrey. Deponis, that he accompanyit Bohert,
quhen Bohert, with fyre hundreth men, went to the ffeildis aganis the Erll of Caithnes, his Ma^'es Lieutenant ; and that Robert muflerit aganis the Erll, at the Bal-ffeild, and vtheris pairtis about Kirkwall.

Archibald Murray, in Birfay, folemnelie fworne, and demandit, quhen he fpak firfl with Robert Steuart after his conneing to Orknay ? Deponis, he fpak firfl with him in Kirkwall, hot denyis that
Bohert impairted vnto him ony mater of this Rebellioun at that tyme.

Deponis, that the interprife of the taking of the Caflle and Steple of Kirkwall wes maid firfl in
Birfay, and that Patrik Halcro, Andro 3Iartyne, Tliomas Blak, Gilbert Gray, Alexander Leggatt,
Thomas Layng, and the depouner him felf, wer all vpoun the conference, counfaill, and plott of the
takin" of the Callell and Steple of Kirkwall, and the mater wes plotted tuentie dayis afoir it wes putt
in executioun. And fayis, that Bohert Steuart maid the depouner and the refl to vnderftand that his
fader wes in miffing, and oute of the Cajtell of Dunbar tane ; and that he wes to come to Orknay, and
fitt doun Erll a^ane. The beleif quhairof maid tharae to follow Bohert in his interpryiffis.

Deponis, that Alexander Leggatt was with Bohert Steuart the firfl time quhen the depouner mett
with Bohert ; and that thair wes no fpeecheis betuix the depouner and Bohert, hot chopping of handis
at that tyme.

Demandit, vf thair wes ony purpois amangis thame in Birfay aganis the Shereff? Grantis, that
Bohert Steuart, Patrik Halcro, and Thomas Blak, had fpeecheis and conferance in Birfay anent the
takin"^ of the Shereflis lyffe; and when thay come to the Steple, the mater wes commvnicat to the
depouner : And then Thomas Blak pafl frome it. And deponis, thay had llioit the Shereff in the Kirk
at that tyme, yf he had not beene gangand with the Commjjfair.

Deponis, that quhen the Steple wes tane, the Keeparis held thame quiet quhill Robert come to the
Bow-Croce ; and then Bohert foundit his trumpett, and they within the Steple blew ane borne; and
the depouner flayed hot ane nicht in the fleple. And sayis, that Patrik Halcro was commandair of
the Steple qulien Bohert Chalmers wes hurte : And efter that, Thomas Blak commandit within the
Steple ; and that 77/o/«a5 affiflit Robert in all fuche thingis as he commandit. And deponis, that the
Steple wes fauld '■'- be Johnne Guild, twa dayis befoir it wes randerit be Thomas Blak.

Deponis, that after he left the Steple, he addrefl him felf to Robert Steuart, and flayed with him all
the tyme, till within audit tlayis afoir the Erll of Caithnes comeing thair.

Deponis, that he wes with Bobert at the perfute and taking of the Cajiell. And that the Shereff
wes keept prifounair fyve dayes after he wes tane.

Grantis, that he was commandit be Bohert to go to Birfay and to keepe the Houfe, whilk he did;
' Remuneration j salvage. • Sold ; betrajed.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 299

and keept the fame till the Erll of Caithnes come and caufit charge the Houfe ; quhilk charge the
depouner obeyit, and come to the Erll.

Deponis, that Willia?»e Guddell come furthe of the Caflell, and randerit him felf to the Erll of
Caithnes the day befoir the depouner wes fend from Orknay; and that it is commounlie reportit that
the faid Williame aft'ermis, that Patrik Halcro hes the Erll of Orknayis Warrand for taking the Cajtell
of Kirkwall.

Alexander Leggatt, feruand to Patrik fometyme Erll of Orhnay., fworne, and demandit, how
foone he fpak with Robert Steuart after his comeing to Orknay ? Deponis, he fpak not with him quhill
tuentie dayis after he come to Orknay.

Grantis, that he wes in this cuntrey at Beltane lafl, and that lie mett twyfe with the Erll of Orknay, and fpak with him and his fone Robert in the Cartel! of Edinburgh. He denyis that the Erll or
his fone Robert had ony conference with the depouner anent the Rebellioun in Orkney.

Denyis, that he was in Birfay with Pohert quhen the Houfe wes chargeit.

Grantis, that he wes with Robert tuentie dayis afoir Robert tooke the Cajtell i and that he wes with
Robert quhen he mufterit at the Bow-Croce.

Deponis, how foone the Caftell wes tane, the depouner ftayit with Robert Steimrt in the Place of
the Yairdis, quhill he hard of the Erie of Caithnes comeing.

Grantis, that he wes with Robert quhen Robert mufterit at the Caiones, afoir the Erll of Caithnes
landit ; and that he wes in the Yardis quhen Robert mufterit at the Bal-ffeild aganis the Erll of Caithnes ; and that the depouner had the charge of the keeping of the Place of the Yardis fouretene dayis.

Deponis, that he come furthe afoir the cannoun flioite, being defirit be the Erll of Caithnes to come
furthe afoir the flioiting of the cannoun. And the depouner randerit the Place of the Yairdis to the Erll.

Deponis, that Robert Steuart, fone to Alexander Steuart of Flatt, had the principall charge of the
keeping of the faid Houfe, and that thay wer aboute the nomber of fourty men, appoiutit be Robert
Steuart, bafe fon to the Erll, to keep the Houfe to his behoofe.

Alexander Leggatt re-examinat, and deeplie fworne, and demandit, vpoun quhat occafioun he
went to the Erll, quhen he mett with him in the Caftell of Edinburghe, about Beltane laft ? Deponis,
that lie being in warde, and haueing ane penfioun of victuall and filuer of the Erll, he paft to the Erll,
and defyrit of him ane precept and warrand to the Chalmerlanis or Takkifmen to mak him payment
of the biganes ^ of his penfioun. And that the £'r// refuifit to gif ane precept, and faid, he fould ' gif
directioun to his fone Robert to anfuer him.' And Robert tauld to the depouner, that he had ane
directioun frome his fader in the depouneris favour.

Deponis, that Thomas JBlah, Archie Murray, Robert Sclaitter, Gilbert Gray, and Robert Mowatt
<f Gerftftair, were moft familiar with Robert Steuart, and farreft vpoune his fecreitis.

Deponis, that Duncane 31itchell, the poift, caryed Letteris from Robert Steuart, efter the taking of
Birfay, to the Erll his fader.

Demandit, quhat Gentilmen of the cuntrey come voluntarilie in to Robert, after the taking of the
Cajtell? Deponis, that nomberi^s of people of all rankis come in to hin), as namelie, the Laird of Jlalcro, Frances 3Iudie, the Laird of Grymjuyis fone ; and deponis, that Frances JIudic I'aid to Robert,
that xxiiij Rebellis wald mak five hundreth men. Tiie depouner knavvis nocht yf tliir men come in
to Robert to affift him in liis Rebellioun ; hot thay eate and drank with him. Deponis, tliat Gconje
Traill furneift Iheep to Robert.

Thomas Blak, re-examinat, and deiplie fworne, deponis, that efter the Shercjf' had been at Birfay, and gevin charge to Robert Steuart to delyuer the Houle, the depouner being in conipanic with
tJie Sh ere ff] that the depouner refortit findrie tymes to JUiJIiy to Robert, -.un] ])iili and come at liis ph-aiour.

Deponis, that he knawis no thing of Thomas Layny or Alexander Lcyyatt, concerning thair coun-

' Bygones; arrears.

300 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

iaill gevin to Bohert Stcuart ; bot tlie depouner fufpectis that Archihald Murray wes familiar and
preuie^ with him.

Thomas Layng, re-exaniinat, and Avorae, deponis, that the tyme that he wes in tlie Sieple, he wes
keept aganis his will be Thomas Blah and his companye ; and deponis, that all thefe who joyned i?ohert, outher- fubfcryvit, or, yf thay could not fubfcryve, fwoir to die and leive with Robert. And
Tliomaa Blah wos one of thefe who fubfcryvit ; and the depouner hard the Roll red, wherin the fubfcryvaris wer contenit, whofe names wer Thomas Blah, Gilbert Gray, Johnne Reid, Andro 3Iartme,
and fome vtheris whome he remembers not.

Deponis, that after the firft taking of the Steple, Patrih Halcro wes Capitane ; and when the Cajtell
wes tane, Thomas Bhdi wes Capitane ; and that the haill company, that come fiom Birfay to tak the
Steple, come freelie and willinglie for that earand ; and that thair wes no violence or force vfit aganis
ony of thame to compell thame to go to that earand ; and the depouner come all the way fra Birfay
to the Steple, and faw no man forceit be the way.

Deponis, that he hard that Pettie'" Murray, who went in the Ship with the Shereffsxid the depouner
to Orhnay, caryed ane Letter frome the Erll to his fone, Robert, being in Birjay,

Thomas Blak, re-examinat, and demandit, yf he knawis that Robert Steuart tooke ane Band or Oathe
of thefe who joyned with liim, that thay fould die and live with him ? Deponis, that he knawis no fuche
thing.

Thairefter, the faid Tliomas gi'antis, that he fubfcryuit the Band to die and live with Robert, and
that thefe who could not fubfcryve did fweir vpoun thair fvverdis ; and that the effect of their Band
and Oathe wes, that thay fould efauldlie'' tak pairt with Robert, and die and live in the cans. And that
Patrih Halcro, Gilbert Gray, Johnne and Patrik Gordoun, Johnne Guild, and the depouner, with
Andro Martine, fubfcryvit the Band. And rememberis not -^'i Alexander Leggat fubfcryuit the Band.

The depouner knawis not quhat Gentilmen of the cuntrey affillit Robert with poulder, bullett, victuallis, or counfaillis.

Deponis, that Johnne Guild and Patrik Traill wer the takaris oHhe Kingis Herardd, being accompanyit with a nomber of thair aflbciatis ; and the depouner come furthe of the Steple with his company
to the Place of the Yairdis, and did freindlhip to the Herauld.

Archibald Murray, re-examinat, and demandit, yf he wes fworne be Robert to afTifl him ? Deponis, that Robert sv^exi no fuche Oathe of the depouner, becaus lie wes his faderis auld feruand, and
knew that he neidit not to tak ony fuche Oathe of him. And grantis, that he tooke the fubfcriptionis
and oalhis of vtheris, who wer not his faderis auld feruandis.

Denyis, that thair wes ony violence or force vfit aganis Thomas Blah, in his going to the Steple ;
bot that Thomas wes als fordwart, and pafl als willinglie thair, as ony of the companie.

Thomas Lavng, re-examinat, grantis that Robert Steivarf, being informit be fome who faw the
Herauld going to the Croce, that he wes to mak fome Proclamatioun or chargeis, the depouner hard
Robert Steumil gif directioun to fome of the fouldiouris in the Caftell and Steple, as namelie, Johnne
Guild, to go and tak the Heraidd, and not fuff'er him vfe his Lettevis and charges ; and that conforme
thairto, Johnne Guild tooke him, and brought him in to the Place of the Yairdis ; and the depouner
hard that Johnne Guild tooke him be the Coate of Armes, and preafl to haif tane it af him ; bot he
knawis not yf the Coat wes revin.^

Alexander Leggatt, re-examinat, deponis, that 77/o>«05 jB/*-//!; and his fouldiouris wer the takaris
of the Heraidd ; and the depouner hard Robert Ste^vart gif directioun to the fouldiouris, to go and flay
the Heraidd fra vfeing of his Letteris and chargeis, and to bring him mio the Place ; whilk directioun
wes performit be Thomas Blak and Johnne Guild.

' Privy; in his confidence. * Either. ^ Patie ; Patrick. * Sincerdy ; heartily. Efauld, or aefald,

literally one-fold ; upright, without dupUdti/. A double and deceitful character was then termed twa-fauld. * Torn

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 301

Denyis, tijat he fuhfcryuit or faw tlie Band ; hot knau-is that tliair wes ane Baud fubfcryuit, and
Oathis gevin to die and hve with Robert in the caus; and fuche as could not fubftryve the Band, patt
thair markis to it.

(23.) Andro Maihtenis Confeffiotin.

At Kirkwall, tlie xiiij day of Septendjor, 1614, I, Andro Mairtink, being examined be my
Lord Lmetennent,^ and my Lord Bifchop of Orknay,'^ anent my intelligence of the caufis quhy Rolerl Stewart, fone natural) to Patrik Erie of Orhnmj, come to Orknay in this laft fomer ? — Be quhais
directioune he came heir ? — And for quhat purpofe ? — Hes anfuered as followis :

First, that quhen I Ipak with him in Birfay, lie fchew to me ane Commiffioune, fubfcryuit be his
father, to mak compt with all the Tak-raen of the cuntrie, and reffaue payments of all reflis,^ and dehtis
jufllie awand to his father be thame, of the crope fex hundreth and ten (1610), and all yeiris preceding
the comeing of my Lord Bifchope to Orknay; with powar alfo to medle and intromett with all his
father's befliall and moveables, and to difpone thairon. I fpeirit gif he had ony vther thing ado ? —
and he faid, ' Yis' — hot he wald not tell me. Item, I faw ane Letter that came frae his father to him,
be Patrik 3hirray, beiiar, haueand this claufe in it — ' That gif he fped not weill heir, that he fould
addres himfelf to Murkle, to remane quliill tyme feruit better ;' hot I remember not of the refl of the
conteutes. Item, anent any conditioune betuixt him and Patrik Halcro, throw his fatheris directioune,
I am na way vpoune that fecret ; bot it appeiris thair be fum wrettin conditioune amangs tliame ;
becausi faw gritt anger, with a fear betuixt thame, for wanting of ane Letter that was a milfing among
hands, and Patrik fend out ane boy to the l^oune to mak inquifitioune for it ; bot quhither thay gat
it or not, I knaw not. And I faw thame ryue"* my Lords fubfcriptioune from ane Letter, and thay
caifl the body of it in the fyre, and keipt the fubfcriptione. Item, about the .... day of September
efter, as the Cannone was twyfe fchott in the night at the yrne yett, it patt ane greit feir in thair
hartes. Then Robert fpeirit at me on the morue, quhat I thocht of it ? And I faid, that * all was lyk
to go wrong.' — ' This is a fair matter,' faid he, (fpeikand of his father,) ' tliair was neuir thing lukkit
Weill yit quhilk he devyfit — God gif I had neuir kend his turnis 1' Item, quhan the coinmounaris wer
trauelland for peax, I advyfit Robert to offer cautioune for his perfonal comperance befoir the Loi'dxs
of Counfell, gif the Lietietennant wald geife him libertie to go to Edinburgh. He anfuerit to me, and
faid, that ' he wald not do fo — for the Counfell wold vfe him with Tortouris, quhill he reveillit his
fatheris intereffe in this mater — and that wold he neuir doe I' Heirvpoun, I collectit, that all quhilk this
yung man hes done, wes be the counfell of his father; quhilk is a great pitic, except it pleas God and
his Ma*'** to be mercifull to liim. And as for my being with him, I wold neuir haue bene a nycht in
his companie, giue I could haue had nieit and drink any vther way, as all the cuntrie knawis quhat
neceflitie and miferie I was reductit vnto, be pouertle. Item, I remember that a great number of this
cuntrie men hundit him till folies, and maid ane Band of Concurrence and Alfdlance to him, quhilk
he caufit me to wryte ; and a gritt number fubfcryuit the fame, quhen I was not with him ; bot the
contents of the Band and fubfcriptiounes ar in his awin keiping, and my memorie cannot feme me to
remember on the particulars ; bot the writt will declaire. A. Martvne.

(24.) Depositions o/Johne Bun'SBjai/if/ffJei/i and Vihc to die ; Ui'ihin vp
hy James, Bischope of Oiiknay, in the faid Johne his chahner, vpon
the thrid of October, 1614.

Imprimis, the faid Johne deponit and confefl, that the Earle of Orknay font him over with

' George, Karl of Ciiitliness. ^ James I,aw, formerly ^Miiiisfer ol' KiiKliston, \va< promoted to the See of Orkney, in aiiuo IGOG; where he remained till he was translated to (Jlasgow, I'jiO. ^ Arrears. * Tear.

302 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

his fone Robert, to aflift liim to collect and leceaue fome debtis refting vnpayed by diuerfe TakiAnen
of the crop 1609 and 1610 yeares ; and promiirt'd to allow him ane Thoufand markis therof, for his
fies. Secondlie, when he allcit of the laid Eurle, ' Why he would fend the faid Robertto Orknay,
fieing he wes ane young man who appeirandlie wald trouble the countrie ?' Deponit, that tJi£ Earle
anfwered, that ' it was not ane matter to him to know' — and that he wold ' heare other newes or it
wes long I' TmiiDLiE, being afked, yf he knew any direction given by the faid Earle to Robert for
taking of the Houfes and iutrometting with the Rentis ? Deponit, that he faw ane Letter wes broght
from f/ie Earle be Patrik Murray in Kirkwall, in the quhilk the faid Earle wrote to Robert, that
' vf he and Patrik Ualcro could not at that tymefind opportunity to take the Houfes, that they fliould
go over quietlie to Murkell, and remayne ther vntill they fand fitt tyme and occafion, and all thingis
wer made readye for talking of the faidis Houffis. Ferdlie, being afked, why Robert, at his firft
coming to Kirkwall, did not take the Caftle, feing, by his own confeflion, he might have had it deliuered vnto him be the fouldiers ? Anfwerit, that it was becaufe he thoght not the tyme fitt ; and thingis'
wer not prepaired.

JOHNE BURNE, Ja. B. OF OrCADS.

Ro. CoLTART, Notar publict, witnes.

(25.) Deposition o/*Andiio MAiiTiXE,76'/TiVo;- to the Earl of Orhiey.

At Edinburghe, the tent day of October, 1614. In prefence of my Lordis Secretair, Preuie
Scale, Thefaurair depute, and Aduocat.

Andro Martine, feruitour to Patrik, fometyme Erll of Orknay, demandit, who wryte that copie
of ane Band, whilk wes prefentit and Ihowne vnto him ? Deponis, that he acknawlegeis the Band to
be his awin hand-wryte.

Demandit, quhair and quhen the Band wes fubfcryvit ? Deponis, that he knowis no thing of the
fubfcryveing tliairof.

The faid Andro, being examinat vpoun his grite and folemne oathe, and demandit, who wryte the
principall Band ? Deponis, that, in his opinioun, he thinkis that he write the principall Band, quhairof the copie wes producet.

Demandit, vf he fubfcryult the" Band ? Dcnyis the fubfcryveing thairof, or that he wes prefent quhen
onv manne fubfcryvit it.

Demandit, yf he faw ony mannis fubfcriptioun at the Band ? Denyis, that evir he faw the Band
vnfauldit, at ony tyme, fen he wryte it ; and he faw no manis fubfcriptioun at it.

Graiitis, that Robert Steuart, bafe fone to the Erll, tauld to the depouner, that Gilbert Gray and
Robert Moicalt fubfcryuit the Band, and that Robert Sclailter, Baillie of Birfay , markit the Band.

Denyis, that he hard or faw ony man fweir that they fould keepe the conditiounis of the Band.

Demandit, quhair he faw the Lftteris that Patrik Murray broglit from the the Erll to his fone
Robert 9 Grantis, that he faw it in Birfay, in the hinder-end of July lafl. ,

Demandit, quhat conference he had with Robert anent that Letter ? Deponis, he hard Robert fay
in ane anger, that he wald not go to the Laird of 3Iuirkill, as he wes defirit be the Letteris, hot that
he wald remane in the countrey.

Demandit, yf he faw Robert Stewart and Patrik Halcro ryve the fubfcriptioun from ane Letter of
the Erll of Orknayis ? Deponis, that he faw thame ryve it in the Cajiell of Kirkwall, the day after
the Erll of Caithnes liad tane the Place of the Yairdis. And grantis, that thay wer in a grite anger,
for ane other Letter of the Erlis that wes in miffing; and that thay lend ane boy oute of tlie Caftell
to Margaret Buquhannanis houfe to feeke the Letter ; hot the depounair knawis not yf thay gatt
the Letter. And the depouner knawis not quhat wes the contentis of the Letter quhairfra the fubfcriptioune wes revin.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 303

Deponls, that the boy, who wes fond for the Letter, wes towed * over the Cajiell wall be tlie deponer,
and tliat he come back agane ; bot the depouner kiiawis not yf he gatt the Letter.

Demandit, vpoun quhat hoipis Robert hekl the Cojtdl ; and by quhat meanis he thoght to worke
his releiff ? Deponis, that the depouner being weyreit in the Cojtcll, and defyrous to be oute of it,
becaus he miflykit tlie purpois, he write ane Letter, witli ^ one Puterfon, to William Bellenden, craving his advyfe and couiifell quhat lie foukl do ; to wlionie William Bellendene iend anfuer, defyring
the depouner to come oute, by what meanis Ire coukl belL And the depouner having in»i)orted this
to Robert Stewart, and craving libertie of him to go oute, becaus he could ft-rve him, for no purpois,
within the Houfe ; at the firft, Robert diflixadit him to go oute, for feir of the Erll of Caithnes crueltie :
And the depouner haiving faid to Robert, that ' this interprife wes not lyke to frame weele ;' — Robert
anfuerit, that ' thay wald be able aneughe to halde oute, ffor niony alterationis wald occur, quhairby
thay might keepe the Cajlell, as namelie, the coming of the Spanzeirdis, the practifes o/" Papists,
and the truble whairin the Count Pallatyne wes :' Quhilkis alterationis wald procure thame
releif, as Robert laid to the depouner.

Demandit, who of tlie cuntrey people fleirit vt^ Robert and afTiftit him in this Rebellion 9 Depones,
that Gilbert Gray, Robert 3Toa'aft, Robert Sclaitter, Baillie of Birfay, Williarae Sinclare of Lye,
Gilbert Grayis fone, and his goode-fone Gerfetter,^ wer the principallis who fteirit him vp.

Demandit, quhat conference he had with Alexander Leggatt concerning ony directioun he broght
frorae the Erll to his fone Robert ? Deponis, that he rememberis not quhat conference wes betuix
thame thairanent.

Demandit, yf he wes in Birfay when Robert Steiiart fend Letteris to his fader with Duncane
Mitchell, the poift ? Grantis, that he wes in Birfay at that tyme ; and that the depouner, be Robertis
directioun and informatioun, write ane Letter, in his name, to the Erll his fader ; quhilk Letter Robert
rave ;•* and wryte over ane Letter him felf. Deponis, that the contentis of the Letter written be the
depouner wes, to tell the Erll, that Robert wes come to Orknay to tak vp his debtis ; and that he wes
iroublit be the Sheriff, and forceit to leave the Toun of Kirkwall — and that he had tane him felff to
Birfay— and that the Shereff had conuenit the cuntrey, and come to Birfay and perfewit liim ; and had
hurte ane man, and flayn ane doig in at the windois ; bot he wes niyndit to hald oute aganis the
Shereff.

The depouner denyis that he knew the contentis of the Letter written be Robert him felf to the
ErU.

(26.) Andro Martinis Letter to the Secretar.
My Lord,
Since your lo. examined me fo fickerlie vpoune my intelligence concerning the grund of the ReBELLIOUNE begun in Orknay be Robert Stewart and Putrik Ilalcro, and gart me fwear to be plaine,
your lo. will excufe me that for5et this : Quhen Robert and I was in conference, on a tyme, he faid,
that ' Gif his father had bene willing, and vfit the counfell of vtheris, quhen he was in Edinburghe
Caflle, he might haue cumdaway ; for thair was men anewofterit to haue cumd orfente men with him
to Orknay ; bot he wold not cum away, becaus he durlle not brek waird.' I fpeirit ' I low many he
might haue gottin to haue cumd with him ?' He anfuerit, ' Four or fyue Thowlimd, giue ^ he had
pleafit.' Bot he tauld me not quhat men thay war. Of this I tliocht good to mak your lo. aduertifment, for faiftie of my aithe ; and hopes that your lo. will interceid for me, ]iat, be his Ma'""^ clemencic,
I may be remitlit for being with Robert in companie, at this vnliappie tyme of mifcrie ; I brand aged
and depauperat, able^ to die of hungar, giue I had not gottin lielpe be him in meit and think. Bot I
nevirbuireairmes, maid mufleris, nor watched againfl ins INIa''*" Lieutenant, eftcr I liard of his purpofe. This 1 referre to your lo. gud difcretioune ; and gif ony vther thingis fail cum to my niemorie,

' Let down by a <om;, or rope. * By. ^ Kobi-rt MowiUt. See p. 299, &c. ♦Tore. ^ U.

' Lat. habilis.

304 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

quhilkis ar omittit at the piefent, I fall aquent your lo. tliaiiwith. He faid alfo, that quhen they fpak
with Sir James Conneill,^ that Sir James wiffit him felffe to be at hame, and the Erie of OrhiayU)
haue bein in Orknay, to do for thame felues ; the ane in the Weft, and the vther in the North. So,
confeiding in his Ma'^"=® clemencie, and your lo. aftectioun toward me, I reft, 8cc.
Edinburghe, in waird, the tent of October, 1G14.

(27.) The Depositions (^/'Mahgarite Buchanan, taken vp the fir ft day
of November, 1614, he fore Joline Sincler of Ratter, James, Bj/Jiop of
Orliiiay, and Johne Buchanan.

First, the laid 3Iargarife depones and confeflis, that Pulrik Halcro had ane coffer ftanding in his
motheris chalmer, in Kirkwall. Secoundlie, deponis and confcftis, that, vpon the Sonday efter that
the Erie of Calhenes come to the Yairdis in Kirkwall, the faid Patrik fent downe to hir the key of
the faid coffer, and defired hir to bring vnto him tlie writtis and Letters whilk wer lockit vp in the
fame, of whilk writtis Ihee had ane Warrant of the Erie of Orknay, whereof none did knaw but him
felf. Thihdlie, iliee deponit and confeft, that when Ihee had receaved the key of the faid coffer,
ihee went and oppeiued the fame, and fand two writtis only in the fame, whilk lliee red prefentlie,
and baith of them were fubfcrived by the Earle of Orknay. Fourtlie, deponit and confeft, that the
ane of them wes ane Band and Warrand for the faid Patrih, for to take and keipe the Castle
OF Kirkwall, wherfoever he might moft convenientlie ; allowing vnto him therefore, the double of
the allowance quhilk the Conftables and Keipar of the Caftle had ordinarlie of before. Fiftlie,
deponit and confeft, that the other writt contened the names of fic as iliould be aflbciatis and afftfteris
vnto liim in the faid interprife ; as namelie, Thomas Laing, Alexander Legatt, Helias Kneland, and
vthers whofe names fliee can not remember. Sextlie, deponit, and confeft, that prefentlie after iliee
had red and confidered thefe two Writtis, Ihee broglit them, hir felf, to the Caftell, and delivered them
to Patrik Halcro out of hir owne hand, Sevintlie, deponit, that when Patrik had red the faid
Band, he gave it in like manner to Robert Stewart to reid ; who, after that he had red ilt, rave'^ it
with his handis in fmall peices, and trampitt it vnder his feitt. Aughtlie, deponit, that Patrik
Halcro wes not content with the ryving' of it, as flie perceaved by his countenance and geftur ; and
when ftiee fayed vnto Robert, ' Fye vpon yow. Sir ! Why hawe yee done that ? It had bene better
to have keipte it !' Deponit, that baith Robert and Patrik faid, ' that that Bakd fliould not do
hurte in tyme coming' — and that ' The Earle of Orknay lliould not want his head for it !' Nyntlie,
Deponet, that Patrik Halcro was reiding the other writt, wherein the names wer contened, when
Robert rave the Band — and that Ihee knawes not certanlie what became of that writt ; but that, in hir
iudgement, it wes riven ' alfo.

Ja. B. of Oreads, J. Sincler of Ratter, Johne Bucanane.

Thir former Depofitions were writtin be me, Robert Steivart, Minifter at Hoy, at direction of
James B. of Orknay. Robert Stewart, Minifter, witli my hand.

(28.) Deposition o/John Sharpe,,/^/-zy<;?/ to the Earl of Orhnay.

At Edinburgh, the firjl of November, 1614, injrrejence of my Lordes Chancellar, Secretar, Prejident, Preuie Seall, T/ica/'aurar depute. Clerk of Regijter, and Aduocat.

Johne Sharpe, fervand to the Earle of Orknay, fworne, and demanded when he entered in feruice with tlie faid Earle ? Depones, that he entered in feruice with him in the moneth of Junij, or
Julij, 1G13.

Demanded, what lie knowes concerning the Rebellioun in Orknay ? Depones, that he remembers that within fex weeks after he come to tfie Earle, the Earle caufed the deponer write a Me-

' Sir James Mahoneill. See his Trial, III. 1, &c. ^ Tore. ^ Tearing. ^ Torn.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 305

moriall in tliir tearmes, ' Yow fliall go to Orkney ; yow fliall fett Takkes, and reule tlie countrey, as
yow (lid before. Yow Ihall fend (hippes to Norroway, for fucli tliinges as yow niifter,' efpeciallie, for
poulder.' And this Memoriall wes wrotten in the Cajile of Dunbartane. Depones, that Robert
Stewart, the Earles bafe fone, wes not in Dunbartane when this Memoriall wes wrotten, but canae
there within xiiij*'' dayes thereafter. Depones, that the Earle patt this Memoriall in his pocquett ;
and the deponer neuer faw it thereafter. And knows not what come of it. And fayes, tliat tliis
Memoriall wes wrotten by my Lordes own dyteing.-

Depones, that thereafter, when my lord wes in the Cajlle of Edinburgh, the deponer, by my lordes
dyteing, wrote a new Memorandum, aggreeable in fubftance to the former ; with this addition, ' Yow
fliall put furth of the countrey of Orknay, fuche as hes no thing to do in it.'

Demanded^ yf he hard ony conferrence betuix the Earle and Robert anent the Rebellioun in
Orknay ? Depones, that he hes hard the Earle findrye tymes invey againes Roberts, for geveing over
the Houfe of Kirkwall to the Bijliope of Orknay, calling him ' a feeble beaft !' And he hard Robert fay,
< Yf he had the Houfe againe, he wald keep it better I' And the Earle anfwered, that ' he trowed
he wald do no better.' And he hes flndrie tynies hard the Earle defyre Robert to < prove a prettie^
manne yf the Houfe come againe in his handis ; flPor it wald fland him to his lyfF !'

Depones, that sSier Robert wenX, to Orknay, the deponer wrotte a new Memorandum, hy the Earles
dytment, to Robert, bidding him choofe new Takmen,"* and tak vp his reftes.^ And the remanent of
this Memorandum, in fubftance, wes aggreeable to the former Memorandums. And this Memorandum
wes wrotten in the Cajlle of Edinburghe.

Thereafter, when Robert wes gone to Orknay, the deponer, by the Earles dyteing, wrote a MifTiue
from the Earle to his fone Robert, oute of the Cajile of Edinburgh, willing him to follow his Memoriall,
in all thinges. And depones, thai' the Earle wold not fubfcryue this Letter, for fear of interception by
the way ; and the direction, on the bak of the Letter, wes in thir wordes — * For Robert.'

Depones, there wes a vther Letter written by the deponer for the Earle, in the tyme of his beeing
in Edinburgh Cq/tle, bearing, ' Yow fliall fpeak the countrey menne, and try yf thay will tak your
pairte ; and yf the countreymen will tak your pairte, yow Ihall reteir your felf to Caithnes, and ftay
there, and proceede no thing whill I fend yow worde.' And depones, that Duncane Mitchell, the
Poaft, caryed the one of thir Letteres, and Patrik Murray carryed the other Letter : And that this
laft Letter wes not fubfcryued, wanted date, and had direction one the bak, ' For Robert,' And all
thir Letters and Memorandumes were dyted by my Lord him felue.

Denyes that euer he hade conferrence or speatche with Robert anent the Rebellioun. Depones,
that the Earle had copies of all the Memorandumes and Letters wrotten be him, and keepd thanie in
his pocquett.

Depones, that Duncane Mitchell, the Poaft, broght a Letter from Robert oute of Orknay to the
Earle, beareing, < It will pleafe your lo. to tell the Counjall in my name, that I am come to Orknay,
and am going thorroughe the countrey to tak vp your lo. debtes ; and that I wes jjerfewed by the
Shiref and wes conftrained, for faulfetye of my lyft", to tak the Place of Birjay for my re fudge.' The
deponer is of oppinion, that this Letter wes wrotten for an excufe of Robertes proceedings.

Depones, that the Earle caufed wrot(! a Letter to Robert, in the deponeres owne name, flioweing
Robert, that ' yf he come in this countrey, he wold be hanged.'

Denyes that he hard ony fpeatche betuix the Earle and Mitchell, the Poaft, when he broght Robertis
Letteres to him.

Demanded, wiio wer prefent, at the wroteing of the Earles laft Letteres fend with 3Iitihell, the

' Want ; stand in nerd of. ^ Enditing ; dictation. " Gallant ; brave. ' That is, to recall the

whole of the Leases granted by the Bishop or other administrators nnder the new regime; and to give the Lands to
new tenants, who would be subservient to the Earl. * Arrears of rent.

VOL. III. 2 Q

306 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Poaft ? Depones, that none were prefent but the Earle and the deponer. And that Mitcliell, the
Poaft, ftoode by but hard nothing.

Depones, that Mitchell, the Poaft, tauld the deponar, that Robert had taken Birsay; and that one
Mudye come from Kirkwall to Birfay with Robert ; and that one Gray aflifted Robert in keeping of
the Houfe ; and that the Shiref come and perfevved the Howfe ; and that there was Ihooteing in and
Ihooteing oute ; and that one Doivny Lyell wes hurt, and one Doig flayne.

Depones fordar, tliat after the Guard come to feek the deponer, the Earle derected the deponer to
Orknay ; and bad him awaite vpone his fone, and do as he wold command him. And the deponer,
aflting of the Earle, yf he wold wrote a Letter with him, the Earle anfuered, that ' he wold notwrotte,
fFor he feared the deponer wold be taken by the way ;' and he faide forder to the deponer, that Robert
wold not let him want. John Sharpe.

(29.) Deposition o/ Robert Stewart, ^hafefond' to the Earl of Orkney.

At Edinburgh, the xiiij day of Nouember, 161-1. In prefence of my Lord Chancellour, the Erll

of Caithnes, the Lordis Secretuir, Preuie Scale, Thejaurair depute, and Aduocat.
Robert Steuart, bafe fone to Patrik Erll of Orhnny, humbHt on his knees, and deiplie fworne;
and demandit, vpoun quhat occafioun, and by whofe inftigatioun he maid the Rebellioun in Orknay ? Deponis, that he being in grite neede and neceffitie, and vnable to keepe this Toun for dett, he
paft to Orknay to tak vp fome of his faderis auld reftis, quhairwith he thoght to mak his furniffing
oute of this cuntrey. Depones, that his fader haueing confauet ane grite offence aganis him, becaus
that he, at the firft taking of the Cajtell of Kirkivall, randerit the fame bak agane to the Bifchop ;
his fader, for that cans, wald Ikaiillie kenne^ him, or gif him ony mantenance. And deponis, that his
fader directit him to Orknay, with Commilfioun to raell" with his reftis, and to intromett with his
goodis in the cuntrey ; and that his fader advifit and counfallit him to repair the ourfight and wrang
he had committit by deliuering of the Caftell to the Rifchope ; and if by ony meanes he could come be
this Caftell, to tak it agane. And deponis, that his fader gaif him fome Memoriallis, in wryte, quhilkis
wer writtin be the depouner him felf, to bis faderis directioun ; and the Memoriallis boore, that yf th&
Cajfell come in his handis, he fould fend a Schip to Norroioay, for poulder, bullett, and fuche other
neceffar prouifioun as wer fitte for keeping of the Houfe.

Grantis, that in this tyme of his being in Orknay, he reffauit tua or three Letteris from his fader ;
whairof one wes delyuerit to the depouner be Patrik Murray, the contentis whairof wes, that he wes
informit the Houfe of Birfay wes tane ; and he advifit the depouner, yf he wes not able to keepe the
Houfe, that he fould reteir him felf with Patrik Halcro to Caithnes.

Grantis, that he reftauit ane other Letter from liis fader, fend with Dnncane Mitchell, the Poift,
and that the fubftance of that Letter wes, for taking and keeping of the Houfles, yf the depouner could
come be thame.

Grantis, that his fader, findrie tymes, faid to him, that he wald efchaip oute of warde, and come to
Orknay.

Deponis, that he acquentit not Patrik Halcro with his intentioun to tak the Cajtell, quhill the Shereff
perfewit the depouner at Birfay. And grantis, that at that tyme he commvnicat to Patrik Halcro
the contentis of his faderis Letter fend to him with Duncane Mitchell, the Poift ; and that Patrik
willinglie yeildit to joyne witli him in tliis Rebellioun.

Denyis, that Patrik Halcro reffauit any Letteris fra the depounaris fader.

Deponis, that his fader vfed all the uieenis he could to half gottin money, to half fend with the depouner to Orknay, to haif furneift him in thingis neceffar for this interprife ; hot he could gett nane.
Grantis, that he write to his fader with Duncane Mitchell, the Poift, fchaweing how the Schereff
' Recognise; countenance. * Literally, meddle; iiplift tbe arrears of rent, &c.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. . 307

had procedit aganis him in perfute of hira at Birfay, and quhat had fallen oute amang thame in that
actioun.

Demandit, what hoipis he had of affillance frome ony cuntrie people heir? Deponis, lie had no
hoipis of affiftance from this cuntrey people.

Deponis, that his fader verie oft, in publict audience, wald invey aganis the depouner, and quarrell
him for randering of tlie Cq/iell to the Bifchop. R. Stewart.

(30.) Deposition o/Patrick Halcro.

Patrik Halcro folemnelie Avorne and demandit, quhat he knawis concerning the beginning of the
Rebellioun in Orknay ? Deponis, that in Somer, higane a year, the depouner paft to Dunbartane
to vifite the Erie of Orkncnj ; and that the Erie, in a priuat conference betuix thame twa, afkit of tlie
depouner, ' Yff, be ony nieanes, he could come be his Houffis agane in Orknay ?' To whome the
depouner anfuerit, ' Your lo. lies been over lang in flarting. Your lo. had done weele, yf yow had
caufit keepe thame better, quhen your lo. had thame I' And the Erll replyit, * That can not now be
mendit. Is it not yitt pofTible to gett the Houffis agane ?' And the depouner anfuerit, ' It wilbe hard
for your lo. to gett that done, vnles your lo. haif affuirance of the cuntrey people to iland be yow and
affift yow.' And then the Erll faid, ' Thay ar a companie of fals people, I can not lippin^ in one of
thame ; hot I mynd to fend my fone thair, quha wilbe your pairt. Will yow affift and tak pairt with
my f(me ?* And the depouner at the firft planelie refuilit to follow his fone in that earand, faying,
' he wes over feble a Capitane to follow, in fuche a purpois !' Bot the Erie haveing delt forder with
hira, to follow his fone at his comeing to Orknay, the depouner, in end, promeift to follow him, and
to tak parte with him at his comeing to Orknay.

Deponis, that after Robert come to Orknay, he fliew to the depouner, in fiirfay, the Letter writtin
be the Erll his fader to him ; willing him, yf he wes not able to keepe the Houfe of Birfay, to reteir
him with the depouner to Caithnes. And grantis, that at that fame tyme he promeift his affiftance to
Robert, and to tak pairt with him.

Grantis, that according to ane other Memoriall, directit be the Erll to Robert, for fending to Norroway for poulder, they fend ane Ihip to Norroway for poulder, bot the Caftell was randerit or the
poulder come home : And the depounair heiris that threefcoir barrellis of this poulder come in the
Erll of Cathnis handis.

Deponis, that at the firfl; playing of the cannoun, Robert being in his bed, the depouner come to
him, and afkit of him ' quhy he wes lyand in his bed, feing the cannoun had difchargeit fax fohoit?'
And he demandit of i?o^^er/, ' How he thoglit this mater wald left?' And tauld him, ' he wald not
be able to hald oute. It wor gude for liim to tak liim to the Sea !' To whome Robert anfuerit, ' I
will not tak me to the Sea ; my fader will then fay, I haif feblie gevin ouer his Houfe ! I will rather
hald oute quhill the Houfe be dung downe abone my heade, or'^ I rander my felf to the Erll of Caithnes, or yitt to the Counfell, to be tortourit, quhilF I confes aganis my fader, the thing that may be his
wrack and myne !'

Deponis, that Robert faid to the depouner, that < his fader wald come to the cuntrey, and thay wer
n expectatioun that the Erll wald brek warde.' P. Halcro.

[3Ir Alexander Colnile, JuJ^ice-Depitte.l

^Utsrttintr oi (Srtjnptians— * Joljniuc dfaii)/

Jan. 25. — Wii.liame Auciitehlony of Cairiiy.
Dilaitit for contravening the Actis of Parliament in relletting of Egiptianis ;
' Rely ; trust. * Before ; ere. * Until.

308 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

fpeciallie of Johnne Fall/ aiie notorious Egiptian and Chiftane of that vnhappie
Ibirt^ of people.

Mr James Olipliant, Aduocat, fubftitute to Sir Williame Olipliant, his father,
Aduocat to our fouerane lord, producet the Letteris deulie execute, &c. — Compeirit Dauid Lyndfay of Balgaweis, excufator'io nomine for the faid Williame,
and declairit that the faid Williame was lyand bed fail and deidlie feik, nocht
habill to travell to keip this dyet, and offerit him felff cautioun for the faid Williame his compeirance, befoir my Lord Jultice, the thrid day of the nixt Jufticeair of the Sherefdome quhairin he duellis, or foner, vpone fyftene dayis wairning. — Quhilk excufe the Juftice, with confent of the perfewar, admittit, &c.

Crmsoit, %zt.

[Patrick Earl of Orkney, the infatuated and ambitious individual, whose guilty life at length
terminated ignominiously upon the scaffold, was nearly related to King James VI., and at one period
stood high in favour with his prince. As the particulars of the crimes for which his life was forfeited
to the offended Laws of his country are rehearsed in his former Trial,^ and in that of his natural son,
Robert Stewart,'* reference is made to these Cases, and to the illustrative Papers appended to
them. The various Histories of Scotland may also be consulted, in which the fact of the Rebellion
IN Orkney is very briefly noticed, owing to the want of proper materials.

Although his crimes were of a very remarkable description, and indicative of a cruel and bloodthirsty disposition, it must not be supposed that this Nobleman was a rude and unpolished barbarian,
"wholly unskilled in the modes of civilized life. On the contrary, much of his earlier life had been spent
at Court ; and his daring crimes and overweening ambition alone prevented him from rising to the highest eminence, as a Courtier. Like many other unlucky Courtiers of that age, he seems to have been
obscured by the prevailing star of that corrupt and wortliless favourite, Kerr or Carr, Earl of Somerset,
who secretly undermined him, and embraced every opportunity of blasting his character and fame, in
the King's estimation. Having thus fallen into disgrace at Court, the Earl of Orkney appears to have
commenced a reckless warfare against all civilized society, and to have formed the mad project of
establisliing himself as an independent and despotic Prince, in his Island Kingdoms of Orkney and
Shetland ; and in due time he had also resolved upon entirely shaking oft' the yoke of allegiance to the
Crown of Scotland.

Having retired to Orkney, he committed such excesses, that, within a very few years after the
accession of King James VI. to the English throne, the oppressed people of Orkney presented numerous supplications for redress, and loudly complained of their intolerable grievances. These complaints
were directed to the Privy Council, (who appear to have been unable to afford any formidable check to
his despotic craelty,) as well as to the King himself. Sharp remonstrances were at first used, but with
little effect ; and at length the Earl's oppressions became so formidable in their character and degree,
that the Lord Advocate found it necessary, in order to quiet the cLimours of the people, to bring him
to public Trial. Still, however, it appears to have been thought possible that he might be reclaimed ;
and the King used every means to delay matters coming to fatal extremities. Contrary to general expectation, the effects of long imprisonment seemed only to aggravate the rancour of his cruel disposition.
He employed all his time in meditating projects for his escape from confinement, so that he might wrest

' The celebrated Johnnie ' Faw.' « class j society. ^ ^ug. 2, 1610, II. 81. * Jan. 5, 1615, III. 273.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 309

his Castles out of the hands of the constituted authorities ; and then boldly to defy the King and the
Privy Council of Scotland, after having declared his independence of the kingdom of Great Britain.

The most effectual check which was given to these mad projects, was the sequestration of his revenues, and the withholding from the Earl all supplies, excepting such as were necessary for his bare maintenance, as a state prisoner. This rigorous step, however, appears to have been carried too far, and to
have suggested to the Earl the idea of sending his ' bafe f'on,' llobert Stewart, to Orkney ; where, after
he had uplifted his ' bygone rents,' &c., he might secretly convey a considerable portion of them to him,
to enable him to bribe his guards. When thus provided, he directed his son to use every endeavour to
obtain possession of the Castle of Kirkwall, and of the other strengths formerly belonging to the Earl ;
leaving it to himself to effect his escape from Dumbarton Castle, to which he had been conveyed for
greater security. So jealous were the Privy Council of the machinations of this restless and ambitious
Nobleman, that after long petitioning, and causing him to endure great privations, it was not until Jan. 28,
1614, that they allowed him, out of his large revenues, the paltry aliment of ' 4 lib. Scotts per diem I'^

Robert Stewart did, no doubt, succeed in his rash attempt ; but in that he was mainly favoured by
the accidental circumstance of the high unpopularity of the Sheriff; who, on account of his oppressive
conduct and cruel exactions, was detested by the inhabitants so deeply, that, in order to get rid of his
thraldom, they even consented to join ' the Baflard' in his treasonable schemes, judging, perhaps, that
so long an imprisonment, and such severe discipline in the school of adversity, must necessarily have
changed the temper and habits of their natural and rightful lord, whose return they were led by Robert
conBdently to expect. This feeling was very strongly marked in the ' Band of Affociation, fubfcrived
by the Rebellis in Orknay,' which is given in the Appendix. In that interesting document, ' the frequent entrantis of extraniers,'^ ' the corruption of the Lawes, partialitie of Judges, the greid of officeris,
and oppreffioun of Magiftratis,' are dwelt upon as intolerable grievances.

The expedition of George, Jifth Earl of Caithness, the King's Lieutenant, eventually succeeded ; and the ringleaders in the Rebellion, as has already been seen, were executed by that person, who,
it will be remembered, had formerly rendered himself infamous by his treacherously delivering up his
kinsman, Jo/m Lord Maxwel, to government, after having lured him to Castle-Sinclair, under the mask
of friendship and protection.-' The reader will find, from Documents preserved in the Appendix, that
the Earl of Caithness intruded himself into this Commission, by eagerly volunteering his services to
the Privy Council, so as, if possible, to ingratiate himself with his Sovereign, by quelling a Rebellion
which had excited the observation and alarm even of the Court of England."* It is not a little interesting, among all his specious pretexts, to detect and expose the secret springs which appear to have actuated that selfish and cold-blooded Nobleman in undertaking so repulsive an expedition as that against
the Rebels in Orkney. Under the mask of patriotism, zeal for his Majesty's honour, and his pretended
desire for restoring the peace of the country, it is not difficult to discover the basest motives of hereditary and personal revenge and deadly feud against the fallen Earl of Orkney ; as well as a secret
design to procure the whole, or at least, a considerable portion, of his extensive territories, as a reward
for his patriotic services. But a little research enables us to perceive, that a rooted hatred had long
existed between the Earls of Caithness and Orkney, which had frequently broken out into open strife.
As an extraordinary instance of the spirit of wanton cruelty and mischief in which these hostilities were

' Balfour's Annah, II. 50. ^ The natives of Orkney, liaving long been accustomed to be jiidged by tlie laM's

of Denmark, were peculiarly offended at tlie introduction ofjbreit/n laws, judges, and setlbrs in their country, which
was the policy too suddenly adopted by the Sheriff and other officers to civilize tlie jieople. So strongly did they
resent these and the otlur aggressions of the forcif/neis, that they gladly forwarded the Hastard's views for the expulsion of their hated taskmasters. ^ See this Collection, Vol. III., 3.3, &c. Gunlan's llist. of Sutherland, p. 30l.
* The Earl of Caithness got a pension of a thousand crowns for his services, and was, shortly after his return,
made one of the Lords of the Privy Council of Scotland, and was in a fair way to realize all the ol)iects of his ambition, had not his overreaching spirit led him into a train of iniquities which terminated in the ruin of himself an<i Lis
family, which for many generations did not recover this shock.

310 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

carried on by the former, a quaint, but striking passage may be cited, from the graphic pen of Sir Robert
Gordon ;* who states, that in the year 1608, some of the Earl of Orkney's servants had been forced to
land in the country of Caithness, ' by a contrarie wind and vehement flonne of weather. Y\v% the Earl
of Catteynes maid them drunk ; then, in a mocking ieft, he caufed Iheave the one fyd of their beards
and one fyd of their heads ; lafl of all, he conflrayned them to tak their wefliell, and to goe to fea in
that ftormie tempell ! The poor men, feareing his farther crueltie, did choyfe rather to commilt themfelves to the mercie of the fenfeles elements and rageing waves of the fea, then abyd his furie. So
they entered the flormie Seas of Pentlay-Firth (a feaifull and dangerous arme of Sea between Cat'
teynes and Orhnay'), whence they efcaped the furie tliereof, by the providence and affiftance of God,
who had compaffion on them, in this lamentable and defperat cafe, and directed ther courfe ; fo that
they landed faiflie in Orknay. This affront and indignitie wes highlie taken (not without juft reafon)
by the Earle of Orkiiay, who complained tlierof to the King and his Counfell. His Maiestie did
write to the Councell of Scotland to punilh the Earle of Catteynes feveirlie, after dew tryall, as haveing committed a fact againft his authoritie. But when both the Earles of Catteynes andOrhnay came
to Edinburghe, readie to informe one againll another, they aggreid all their privatt quarrells, by the
mediation of freinds, lert/F they/Iiould 7-eveile too much of either s doings ! So this controverfie was pafl
over with filence ; and fome acknawledgement was maid by the Earl of Catteynes to tlie Earle of Orknay, as a fatisfaction for abufing his fervants,' &c.

The intriguing Earl of Caithness at length brought ruin upon himself and his family, by endeavouring < to mak the Lord Forbes wearie of his landis in Catteynes.' This benevolent purpose he tried to
effect by constant oppression of his tenants and servants, in virtue of his office of Sheriifship, which he
had obtained from the Earl of Huntlie, on his marriage with Lady Jean Gordon, his sister. He secretly
caused incendiaries burn all the corns standing in the corn yards of Sansett, in November 1615 ; and,
to remove suspicion from himself, industriously rumoured abroad, that the Fire-raising had been done
by Mackay's tenants, with whom the Forbeses were then at feud. The matter, liowever, having soon
been disclosed by the actual perpetrators, the Earl was closely prosecuted ; and he only obtained his
Remission '^ after a long interval, 1st, By engaging to satisfy his numerous creditors ; 2dly, by resigning into the King's hands the Sheriffship and Justiciary of Caithness ; 3dly, by engaging to present to
justice the malefactors whom he had employed to burn the corns ; and, lastly, to resign to the Bishop
of Caithness the House of Strabister, with certain Feu-lands of that Bishopric, amounting to the yearly
value of 2000 merkis Scots, in augmentation of the Bishop's scanty revenues. His son, Lord Berriedale, was imprisoned for these debts for above five years ; but the Earl himself obtained a ' supersedere,' or protection from legal ' diligence,' from the Privy Council. The creditors, however, < apprized,'
or sequestrated, all his lands. He was denounced Rebel in 1621, and his own son. Lord Berriedale,
applied for and obtained a Commission to pursue his father ! After five years' imprisonment, lie was
released for that purpose, on finding due caution to return to ward after having executed his Commission. In September 1623, Lord Berriedale and Sir Robert Gordon, the King's Commissioners, having
taken the field against the Earl of Caithness, he precipitately fled to Orkney, intending to go thence
to Norway and Denmark. Castle Sinclair, and his other Castles of Aerigell and Keasse, were immediately taken possession of in the King's name ; and the Commissioners succeeded in pacifying the
country of Caithness.

George, fifth Earl of Caithness, after having passed a miserable life, died, a victim of disappointed
ambition, and in comparative obscurity, in Caithness, in the month of February, 1643, at the advanced
age of 78.

1 Hist, of the Family of Sutherland, p. 258. * The author of the History of King James the Sext, p. 391, says
he became in the King's will, who decerned thus : to pay to the party offended 2000 merks ; to renounce his pension
of 1000 crowns ; to renounce his Sheriffship; and that he ' sould caus the Bishop be ansuerit of his spiritualldewtle
ther ; and sould redres all quarrels and faultis to peax.'

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 311

But to return from this digression, the only person among the Rebels, whose life was saved, was
Patrick Halcro. He had been instrumental in bringing about a surrender of the Castle of
Kirkwall, and had proved the means of preventing much bloodshed, which otherwise must have been
occasioned, had the Rebels persisted in their Treason.^ The advisers of the Crown, tlierefore, recommended him as a fit object of mercy ; and more especially on account of the terms which he had proposed to the King's Lieutenant, at the time of the suiTender.

It has formerly been observed, in reference to the Earl of Orkney, that he had originally
been in high favour with the King ; and that, in point of exterior, he was a person of courtly
manners and polished address. So anxious was the King for his release, that certain Lords of the
Secret Council were empowered to offer him the keepership and profits of either of the Royal Palaces
of Holyroodhouse, Linlithgow, Stirling, or Falkland, with Ten Thousand pounds of rent, on condition
that he should renounce all right to the Earldom of Orkney, and resiga the same in the King's hands.
But so infatuated and blindly perverse was the Earl, and so intent was he on accomplishing the objects
of his visionary ambition, that he absolutely refused these conditions ; having, previously to that time,
instructed his son to hazard the mad attempt for which they both forfeited their lives. An anonymous
author,'' already quoted, has given a most faithful and remarkable portrait of the princely habits and
lavish expenditure of Patrick Earl of Orkney, when he resided in his own territories, surrounded by
his vassals and dependents. His sketch cannot fail to be generally interesting. '" He had a princelie
and royall revenew ; and indeid behavit himfelf ther with Ilk foueraintie, and geve^ I durlt fay the
playne veritie, rather tyranicallie, be the lliaddow of Dence Lawis,^ different and more rigorous nor^
the Municipall or Criminall Lawis of the reft of Scotland ; wherby, no man of rent or purfe mycht
enjoy his propertie in Orknay, without his fpeciall favour ; and the fame deir boght. Wherby it
followit, that fitchit and forgeit faultis was fo devyfit aganis manie of them, that they wer compellit, be
emprefonment and fmall rewaird, to refigne ther heritable tytlis unto him ; and geve he had a Iteve*'
purfe and no rent, then was fum cryme devyfit aganis him, wherby he was compellit to lofe ather half
or haill therof, geve not lyff and all befyd I And his pomp was fo great ther, as he went never from
his Caftell to the Kirk, nor abrod utherwayis, without the convoy of fiftie mufcaters and uthir gentilmen of convoy and gaird. And ficlyk, before denner and fupper, ther wer thrie trumpetters that
foundit ftill till the meat of the furft feruice was fet at table ; and ficlyk, at the fecond fervice ; and
confequentlie, efter the grace. He had alfo his Ihips directit to the Sea, to intercep Pirats, and collect tribut of uncouth fiihers,'' that came yearlie to thefe Seyis. Wherby he maid fik collectioun of
gret gunnis and uther weapons for weare, as no Hous, Palice, or Caftell, yea all in Scotland wer not
furneift with the lyk ; and yit all this provifioun was fpuljeit, in his aweu tyme, be the violent hand
of the Erie of Caithnes."

It only remains to the Editor to state, that this haughty Earl, according to Archbishop Sjwtstrood,^
' took his Sentc nee impatiently ;' on which account, ' fome Preachers were defired to confer with
him, and to difpofe his minde towards death. But they, finding him irrelblute, intreated for a delay
of the Execution ; which was granted to the fixth day of February. At which time, he was brought
unto the Scaffold, guarded by the Magiftrates of the City, and in the fight of many people beheaded.'
Calderwood^ gives a fuller account of his death, in these terms. (Feb. 1, 1615.) ' Patrik Earle of
Orkney was arraigned in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh ; and beane Inqueift of the Nobles and Barrones,
was convict of Treafone, for the late Rebellion in Orknay. It was thought, that if he had not,

' Sir Robert Gordon says, ' This Patrik Ilacro was aftorward in ffccxi favour witli Earle George (Caitluu-ss),
and Weill intcrteyned by liiin for this service.' — Hist, of Siitlwrland, p. .'jOI. ' ' Tin; Histouie and Life or

King Ja.mks the Sext,' printed for (he Jlamuitipw Club, 182,i, (J^narto, p. ',i'S(i. Mf. * Orkney was

then governed by Danish Law, which was most ini(|uitously ajiplied by the Karl and his deputies. ' Than.

" Stiff ; well fed. ' Fishers who came from Ilolland and oihvr fortiijn countries. * Spotswood's Hist,

Fol. Lond. 16G8, p. 520. " Culd. MS. Church Hist. Advocate's Library.

312 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

20 dayes before, confefled, that he was the author of the faid Rebellion, and come in the King's Will
for the fame, that hardly he could have been convicted, be any Law. The wifer and elder fort of the
Nobilitie with-drew tlicmfelves from his Affife. He had fent to the Court to obteine favour; but no
appearance of returning ane anfwere. Tlie Minillers, finding him foe ignorant, that he could lliarfe
rehearfe the Lord's prayer, intreated the Counfell to dt-lay his Executione fome few dayes, till he were
better informed, and receaved the Lord's Supper. Their Petitione was affilled with the requeill of
fome Noblemen, and granted. Soe he communicate upon the Lord's day, the 5th of February ; and
was beheaded, at the Market-crofle of Edinburgh, upon Tvlonday the 6 of Februar ; when Sir Robert
Ker, Earle of Rochefler, was decourted. The King laid the blame of his death on him ; but late, as
his cuftorae was, when matters was paft remedie I It was obferved that this moneth is fatall to the
King's blood.'

The reader is once more referred, for details, to the Appendix of Illustrative Documents
annexed to the Trial of Robert Stewart and others, Jan. 5, 1615; and to the Papers annexed to
the present Trial.]

\_Doviifnis IViUielmus Heart de Prejloim, miles Jujticiarius.~\

ASSESSOURIS TO THE JUSTICE.

Alex" Erle of Dunfermelixg, Chanceller, Sir Johnne Cokburxe of Ormefloun,

Thomas Lord of Bynning, Secretar, Sir Alexander Hay of Quhitburgh,

Mr Johxxe Prestoux of Pennycuik, Prefident, Sir Williame Levingstoux of Kilfithe,
SirGedioxe Murray of Elibank,Thefaurer-depute, Sir Alexaxder Drummoxd of Meidhope ;
Sir Richard Cokburxe of Clerkingtoun, all Sexatouris of the College of Justice.

Feb. 1. — Patrik Erle of Orkiiay, &c.

Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit be Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kuy*,
Aduocat to our fouerane lord for his liienes intereis, of the feuerall crymes of
Treafone andLefe-]\Iaieflie, at lejith fj)ecifeit and fet doun in the Dittay following.
DiTTAY againjl the Earl of Orkney.

Patrik Eri-e of Orknay, &c. 5<^ ar Indytit and accufet, fforfamekill as,
certane and fure informatioun being gevin to our fouerane lord, the Kingis
moft excellent Maieftie, and to ]>e Lordis of his hienes Previe Counfall of this
Kingdome, of the manyfold Iiiiureis, Tyranneis, and haynous Opjireffiones,
practi3et be 50W vpon dyuerfe his Maiefteis peceable and guid fubiectis, duelland
within the boundis of Orknay and 5eitland : Lyk as, for the better ftay of the
quhilkis, 30ur former Tirranie and Oppreffioun fra haifing forder courle, and for
the mair exact and fubflantious tryell of 30ur giltines pairof, 56, be his Maiefteis
fpeciall directioun, being committit to waird, within the Caftell of Dumbarten,
to half remanit ])airin, cpihill ordour had bene tane with 50W, as appertenit : It
is of verritie, that 5e, vpone occafioun of the reftrante of 3our former libertie,
freitting in 30ur awin niynd ])airat, nocht only during the tyme of 30ur wairding, devyfet all indirect and vnlawful meanis and moyane for 30ur brek and
efcaipe furth of ])e faid waird, albeit fkarrit and hindreit, throw the fidelitie of
3our keiperis fra doing ))airof ; hot lykwayis, maift treffoneabillie and vndewtifullie fchaikand af 30ur allegeance and dew obedience to our faid fouerane lord.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 313

to quhais bountiefull clemencie 36 war fa gritlie bund, 56 maift treffonabillie
plottit, devylet, and concludit the lait treffonabill Rebellioun, ^"proir, and Infurrectioim, profecute and followit fiirth be 5our devyfe and directioun within the
faid cuntrie of Orknay ; in fiiafar as vmq'^ Robert Stewart, 5oiir bafe fone, eftir
mony thraitningis and ininatorie fpeiches vtterit be 50W aganis him, for his
fimplicitie in randering and overgeving of his Maiefteis Caftell of Kirkwall to
James Bifchope of Orknay, quha than had CommifTioun of his Maieftie to command all Caftellis, Houffis, and flrenthis within the boundis of Orknay and
5eitland, and quha, be vertew of the fame CommifTioun, acquyret poffeffioun of
the faid Caftell of Kirkwall and remanent Houffis and Palices within the bounds
aboue writtin : As also, eftir J)e faid Robert his reconfiliatioun with 30W agane,
vpone conditioun that he fould vndertak quhatfoeuir defperat courfe 5e fould
command him to follow, off 30ur fpeciall caufeing, fending, hounding out, command, counfell, devyfe, and only directioun, quhome 5e alfo furneift with perticuler
iniunctiones, fet doun be 50W in writ, how he fould carie and behave him felfF in
that 5our treffonabill intendit interpryfe, he, in the moneth of Maij, or ])airby, laftbypaft,, paft furth of ])ir pairtis to ])e cuntrie of Orknay, and|)air, haifing forgadderit with Patrik Halcro, quha alfo was fpeciallie imployit and directit be 30W, to
aid and affift him in that vnhappie buffines, and to quhome 3e gaif ane fecuritie, in
writ, of certane landis, rowmes, and fteidingis, vpone conditioun that he fould
tak pairt with the faid Robert, 3our fone, Jjairintill : First, accoirding to 3our
directioun with the affiftance of vmci^^ Thomas Blak, Archibald INIurray, Andro
Mairtene, Thomas Layng, Alexander Legget, and dyuerfe vtheris ])air rebellious
affociatis, the Houfe and Place of Birfay was treffonabillie furpryfet and tane in
be thame, &c.^ The making of the cjuhilk treffonabill '\"2)roir and Rebellioun
within the faid cuntrie of Orknay ; the Treffonabill Surpryfeing and taking in of
the faid Place of Birfay, Place of the 5airdis, Caftell of Kirkwall, Kirk and Steiple
Jjairof, and remanent his Maiefteis Houffis within pe laid cuntrie of Orknay,
keiping and balding of the famyn, in maner foirfaid, and haill trellbnable practizes following |?airupoune, M^ar haillilie plottit, devyfet, forget, and concludit be
30W, and the famyn war maift treffonabillie put in executioune be the faid vmq""
Robert, 3our bafe fone, and his rebellious com})anie ; off 3our fpeciall caufeing,
fending, hounding out, airt, pairt-taking, counfall, devyfe, and only directioune :
Lyk as, dyuerfe Letteris and mellages pafl betuix 30W and })e laid Robert, 3our
fone, eftir 3our treffonabill taking of J?e faid Place of Birfay, incurrageing him
})airby to keip the faidis Houffis, and to follow furth pe reft of your iniunctiones
gevin to him in that 3our treffonable interpryfe : Lyk as, pe faid vinq'*" Robert,

' Here tlie whole particulars of the treasonable transactions detailed in Robert Stewart's Trial are
rehearsed, which it is unnecessary to repeat in this place. J'id. Jan. 5, 1615.

VOL. III. 2 R

314 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

50111* fone, and dyuerfe vtheris his aflbciatis, being examinat vpoim Jje verritie of
])e premifTes, in prefens of the Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counfall, be ))air
Depofitiones, hes grantit and confeffit, that J)e faid Rebellioun was firft intendit^
be '^ow, and profecute and followit f iirth be 30111- fpeciall directioun and command,
gevin to the faid Robert, 5our fone, and Patrik Halcro, to aid and affift him
pairintill : And ficlyk, be the Depofitiones of James Lyoun, Johnne Scherp,
Dnncane Mitchell, the faid Patrik Halcro, and dyuerfe vtheris perfones examinat in that matter, 5our giltines of the faid Rebellioune is cleirlie verifeit and
provin : Lyk as, the laid vmq'^ Robert, 5our fone, the day that he was accufet
and perfewit for the trelTonabill crymes aboue writtin, befoir he was prefentit
vpone pannel], being re-examinat, of new, in prefens of dyuerfe Lordis of his
Maiefteis Previe Counfall, nocht only maift conftantlie abaid at all his former Depofitiones maid be him, concerning that Rebellioun, bot alfo eikit" Jjairto, that 5©
gaif to him lelfT ane perticiiler AVarrand, in writt, to pas to the faid interpryfe,
and to recover the faid Caftell agane vnder his power ; as alfo, that ^e delyuerit
to the faid Patrik Halcro ane fecuritie, in writt, of certane landis and rowmes,
vpone conditioun that he fould interpryfe the recoverie of the faid Caftell,
and aftift Robert j^airintill : Quhilkis Confeftiones and Declarationes was alforatifeit and renewit be the faid Robert, vpone pannell, in prefens. of the Juftice
and Aftyfouris afoir his Convictioun, and vpone the fcaffold, in pi-efens of the
haill people, immediatlie befoir his executioiin. Lyk as, the faid Robert, 50ur
fone, and his aftbciattis, was convict and execute to the daith, for the haill treffonable crymes aboue fpecifeit, as done and committit of 5our fpeciall caufeing, counfell, and directioun ; as the proces of J)air convictioun, heirwith producet, beiris.
And finallie, 5our lordfchipis felff being prefentit, vpone the tuelff day of
Januar laft, in prefens of dyuerfe Lordis of his Maiefteis maift honourabill Previe Counfall of this kingdome, 56 ])air, be 50ur Depofitioun, fubfcryuit with 5our
hand, acknowlegit and confeflit the geving of the directioun be 50W to 5our vmq^^
fone Robert, and vtheris his aftbciattis, for pe furpryfeing, taking, and detening
of the faid Caftell of Kirkwall, craveing God and his Maiefties pardoun for that
50ur offence, and in all huinilitie and fubmiffioun offerit 5our felff" in his Maief-,
teis Will for ])e famyn : As 5our Depofitioun, heirwith producet, mair cleirlie
teftifeis : Quhairin, 5e, as the principall devyfer, fortifiear, and fteirar vp of Ipe
faid vmq'^ Robert, 50ur fone, to the practizeing of the former Rebellioun, hes
committit oppin and manifeft Treftbne aganis our fouerane lord, the Kingis moft
facred Maieftie, and his royall authoritie : And 5e ar airt, iwiirt, red, and counfalour of the haill treftbnabill practizes aboue writtin : ffbr the quhilk, 56 aucht;

^ Contrived ; purposed ; set on foot. ^ Added.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 315

and foiild be demariit' and puneifl as ane Tratour; to the terrour and example
of vtheris to abftene fra the lyk heireftir.

PERSEWARjSirWilliameOlipbantof Nevvtoun.knyS Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his liienes intereis.

Prelocutoukis in defence,
Mr Alexander King, Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, Mr Alexander Peiblis, James King, Aduocattis.

Mr Alexander King, Aduocat, producet ane Warraxd of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, for himfelf and the remanent prelocutouris, to compeir this day,
in defence of the Erie of Orknay, for the crymes contenit in his Dittay. — The
foirfaidis Assessouris, nominat to concur with the Juftice in this proces, war
fuorne : Aganis quhome na oppofitioun was maid be the pannell : Quhairupoun
my Lord Aduocat aflvit inflrumentis.

My Lord Aduocat producet the Dittay, and defyret proces aganis the pannell for the treflbnable crymes thairin contenit.

The Dittay, be command of my Lord Juftice and his AfTeffouris, being red,
and the pannell accufet, be "^'ertew thairof, of the feuerall poyntis of TrelTone and
Lefe-Maieftie thairintill, it is allegit, be my Lord of Orknay and his prelocutouris, that feing thair ar mony grit and haynous poyntis contenit in the Dittay,
and that the famyn war nocht knawin quhill^ now to the pannell, and na coppie
thairof was gevin to him, quhairvpoune the pannell and his prelocutouris mycht
half confultit, quhilk audit to half bene done ; defyret, thairfoir, ane tyme to be
grantit to the faidis Prelocutouris, that thay mycht advyfe with my Lord of
Orknay thairupoun. — It is anfuerit, be my Lord Aduocat, that the pannell is
brocht fra the Kingis Waird to the bar, and accufet of crymes committit aganis
his Maiefteis authoritie, quhairof he is nawayis ignorant : Na coppie of his Dittay fould half bene gevin to him, nor na delay fould be grantit, in Tryell thairof; hot, conforme to the daylie practik of this Judgement, quhair ane perfone
challenget and committit to waird for Treflbne, and brocht to his Tryell, the
Dittay quhairupoun he is accufet is fummerlie difcuilit, without delay or continuatioune. — It is allegit he the pannell, that he was nocht wairdit for this cryme,
Ipecifeit in his Dittay, bot for vther crymes ; and this Tredbne, quhairupoun he
is now dilait and accufet, is committit during the tyme of his imprillbnement :
And feing, the only caus quhy his jirelocutouris craves this delay to be grantit,
is allanerlie^ to confer with his lordl'chip, anent the verritie of the factis lybellit,
quhidder he may plead giltie or innocent thairof: Defyres, as ofl)ef()ir, ane convenient tyme to be grantit to thame to confer with the Erie thairupoune.

My Lord Aduocat takis instrumentis of the pannellis declaratioune, that he
was wairdit for vther crymes; and that the crymes lybellit was committit fen
his wairding : And as to the continuatioun cravct be his j)relocutouris for ane
' Treated, ^ Until. ^ Alone ; only.

316 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

convenient fpace, na delay foiild be grantit, in refpect his lordlcliip can pretend
na ignorance of the crymes contenit in his Dittay, feing he hes bene dyuerfe
tymes examinat thairupoun be the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, vpone the verritie
thairof.

The Justice, with advyfe of the Aireffouris, Repellis the pannellis allegeance ;
hot, ex gratia, Grantis ane half hour to the pannel and his prelocutouris to be
advyfit thairupoun. — Quhairupoun my Lord Aduocat allvit inftrumentis.

The pannell, with his prelocutouris, haifing reflauit vp the Dittay, and removet
thame felffis apairtto the Counlall-hous to be advyfet thairupoun, returnet within
the fpace grantit to thanie for that effect ; and Declairit, that thai wald nawayis
inipunge or dilpute aganis the relevancie of the Dittay : And as to the verritie
of the crymes contenit thairintill, fpeciallie the directiones allegit gevin to hes
vmq^^ fone, Robert, to practize the Rebellioun lybellit, denyis any fic directioun :
And gif any connnand may be inferrit gevin to his fone, it was nawayis to commit any fact or deid to the offence of liis Maieflie, or his heines authoritie ; hot
to pas over to Orknay, and to tak intromiffioun with his Houffis, guidis, and
geir being thairintill, vpone mere ignorance and fimplicitie ; nawayes thinking
that ony fic command fould infer TrefTone, or ony vther cryme or offence aganis
his gracious Souerane. And, thairfoir, fleing fra all forder defence of his awin
innocencie, hes his refudge to his Maiefteis grace and mercie : And, as of befoir,
craves God and his Maieftie pardoun for his overfight and negligence on this
poynt ; and in all humilitie and fubmiflioun cumis in (his) hienes Will for the
famyn : And ratifeis his former Depofitioun, in everie point.

The Justice referrit the faid Dittay to the tryell of the honourabill perfones
of AfTyfe vnder writtin, qulia war lauchfullie fummond to that eflfect.

ASSISA.

James, Erle of Glencairne, Dauid, Lord Scone, Williame, Lord Kilmaweris,

George, Erle of Wentoun, Williame, Lord Sinclair, Johnne Grant of Freuchie,

Johnne, Erle of Perthe, Johnne, Lord Hereis, Sir Patrik Hepburne of Wauchtoune,

Robert, Erle of Lot.-thiane, James, Lord Torphichene, Robert Arnote of Fairny,

Williame, Erle of Tilliebardin, Hew, Lord Sempill, Sir IIarie Lyndsay, elder of Kynfawnes.

, My Lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fueiring of the AfTyfe : And for
verificatioun of the Dittay, vfes the haill Depofitiones of the WitnefTes producet ;
pairtlie fubfcryuit be the pairteis, and ])airtlie be the Lordis Examinatouris ;
fpeciallie, the Depofitiones of the WitnefFes mentionat in the Dittay : Produces
the Letter of Tak' grantit be his Maieftie to Sir James Stewart, contening the
CommifTioun of Scheref fchip : Repeitis the notorietie of Mr Johnne Fynlafones
office of Schcreff deputrie : Repeitis the Commiffioun producet, grantit to my
Lord Bifchope of Orknay ; and lykwayis, my Lord of Caithnes CommifTioun ;

^ Lease.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. _ §lf

with the thre feiierall Letteris direct to Robert Wynrahame, Yla Herauld, and
executiones thairof : Repeitis the Criminall proces led and deducet aganis vmq'*
Robert Stewart, and remanent perfones his complices ; with the Sentence and
dome pronouncet aganis thame, beirand that the liaill crymes thairin contenit
war done and committit be thame and thair complices, of my Lord Orknayis
Ipeciall directioun and command : Repeittis the tua Miffiues, writtin be Johnne
Scherp, at my lordis command, as he affirmes, quhilkes war gottin vjione Duncane Mitchell : Repeittis the Warrand direct be my lord, to eftablifche the keiping of the Caftell of Kirkwall in the perfone of Patrik Halcro : Repeitis the
Depofitioun of Patrik Halcro and the faid vmq^^ Robert thairanent : Produces
the Band fubfcryuit be the cuntrie people, for taking eafald pairt with Robert,
in the former Rebellioun practizet be him in Orknay : Produces ane Cliarter,
grantit be my lord (Earl of Orknay) in fauoures of Patrik Halcro, fublcryuit at
the Caftell of Dumbarten, of certane landis in Orknay, for taking pairt with the
faid Robert Stewart in the faid Rebellioun, albeit that caufe be nocht exi)reftit
in the faid Charter : Repeitis the Judiciall Confeflioun maid be my lord, vpone
the tuelf day of Januar laft, quhairin he hes Confeffit, that the Caftell was furpryftt be Robert, his fone, be his directioun : And the faid Erles cuming in (his
Majefty's) will for the famyn : Repeittis the haill Depofttiones maid be Robert,
befoir he was pannellit ; his Depofitioun maid the famyn day that he was pannellit ; his Judiciall Declaratioun vpone pannell ; and his Declaratioun vpone the
Scaffold : With the Depofitiones of Patrik Halcro, James Lyoun, Johnne Scherp,
Duncane Mitchell, Duncane M'claren, Barnard Stewart, Mr Michell Mair :
And in fpeciall, thair Depofitiones maid to the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, being
confrontit with the Erie : Repeitis his lordfchipis cuming in Will, this day ;
and fpeciallie, his ratificatioun of his former cuming in Will, vpone the tuelf of
Januar. And thairupoun aflvit inftrumentis : And Proteftis for AVilfull Errour
aganis the perfones of Atfyfe ; and that thai fall incur the lyk cryme and puneifchment of Treafone quhairvpoun the pannell is accufet, gif thai acquit him
thairof.

Verdict. The Aftyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of James, Erie of Glencairne, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Patrik, Erle of
Orknay to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of the treftbnable Rebellioun committit be vmq'^ Robert Stewart, his bafe fone, and his rebellious aftbciattis, within the cuntrie of Orknay : Quhilk was done and committit be the faid Robert
and his complices, of the fpeciall caufing, connnand, devyfe, and directioun of
the laid Patrik, Erie of Orknay, his ffather ; in forme and maner fpecifeit in the
Dittay and Depofitiones producet be our faid fouerane lordis Aduocat, for verificatioun thairof; fpeciallie, conforme to the faid Erie of Orknay his awin DepoSIS CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

fitioun prodiicet and fubfcryuit with his awin hand, and this day ratifeit and
renewit be him in judgement ; ffor the quhilk he is cum in his Maiefteis wilL

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of Johnne Dow, dempfter of Court, Ordanit the faid Patrik, Erie of Orknay, to be tane to the Mercat-croce of the burgh
of Ed', and thair, vpone Fryday nixt, the thrid of this inllant, betuix tua and
thre hoiu'is eftir none, his heid to be ftrukkin from his body : And all his landis,
lordfchipis, leving, heritages, takis, fteidingis, rowmes, polTeffiones, offices, digniteis, rentis, guidis, and geir, to be fTorfalt and efcheit to our fouerane lordis
vfe, as culpable and convict of the faidis treffonabill crymes.

[It has been thought proper to preserve the following entries. The absence
of so many AssisoRS, on such an important occasion, must doubtless have been
occasioned by the " grit ftorme and feafone of the 5eir." It is proper, however,
to remind the reader, that Calderwood asserts that they * ivithclrew thenifehes

from his JJpfe.'Y

CoMPEiRiT Hew Dunbar, wiyter, excvjcttorio nomine for Hew Lord Lowdoun, and declairit to
]>e Juftice, that ]ie faid Lord of Lowdoun was paft Jie age of thre fcoir 5eiris, vifleit with dyuerfe bodielie infirmiteis, fpeciallie ane grit doUour,^ and fairnes in Iiis richt leg ; quliairthrow, in J)is grit ftorme
and feafone of the 5eir, he is nocht hable to travell to the keiping of this Juftice Court, to haif paft;
upone fe Erie of Orknayis Affyfe, conforme to charge gevin to him for fat effect, witliout the grit
haizaird of his lyfe : And producet ane Teftimoniall ])airupoun, fubfcryuet be James Greg, Minifter
at Lowdoun, Mr George Walker, Minifter at the Kirk of Auchinlek, and Mr Alexander Wallace,
Minifter at Galftoun. Quhilk Teftimoniall, and excufe mentionat fairintill, the Juftice admittit.
Quhairupoun the faid Hew Dunbar afkit inftrumentis ; and proteftit that fe faid Lord of Lowdoun
fould be fred and relevit of his vnlaw.

Compeirit lykwayis Mr James Oliphant, Aduocat, excufatorio nonune for Thomas Abercromby
OF THAT Ilk, and declairit, that he was hevelie difeafit of ane fall; and Jiairthrow vnable to travell to
this dyet, to pas vpone the Erie of Orknayis Afl)'fe, without grit hazard ; and producet, for cleiring pe
veritie Jiairof, ane Teftimoniall fubfcryuit be Mr Williame Glas, Minifter at Dunkeld, and be dyuerfe
of the Elderis of that parochin. Quhilk Teftimoniall and excufe ))e Juftice admittit, &c.

Compeirit ]>e faid day, Thomas Fallafdaill, Proveift of Dumbarten, exctifatorio nomine for Alexander CoLQUHOUN of Luse, and declairit that he was vifteit with ane grit feiknes, and nocht hable to
travell to the keiping of this dyet, being fummond to pas vpone the faid Erie of Orknayis Aifyfe ; and
jjairupoune producet ane Teftimoniall, fubfcryvit be Mr W^alter Stewart, Minifter at Kilpatrik.
Quhilk the Juftice admittit, he.

The quhilk day James Marqueis of Hammiltoun, Williame Erle of Angus, Johnne
Erle of Montrois, James Erle of Murray, Patrik Erle of Kinghorne, Alexander
Erle of Home, Alexander Gordoun of Clwnie, Sir Alexander Falconer of Halkertoiin,
Sir Robert Bruce of Clachmannane, James Haddene of Gleimageis, Sir Williame Stewart
of GairnetuUie, Johnne Buchannane of that Ilk, Sir Robert Gordoun of Lochinvar, and Williame Douglas aiypeirand of Drumhtnrig, being oft tymes callit, he. and nocht compeirand, thay,
and ilk ane of thame, for Jiair non-compeirance, war unlawit, and amerciat in the panes contenit in the
Aclis of Parliament.

> See this Coll. III. 312, &c. * Tain; trouble; disease.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 319

APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS,

Illustrative of the Trial of Patrick, Earl of Orkxay.'

(1.) Letter, the King to the Privy Council of Scotland y * anent the opprejjed

People of Orhnmj.' ^

Right truftie and weilbeloveitt cofmes and counfanouris, We gieitt 30W weell. Haveing red that
30ur Lettre, fent with }ie Commissioune defyreitby thofe oppieflit peopill, complenantis vpoune the
Ehll of Orkney; houfoevir, the fame is groundit only vpone civil Horningis, and that the Commiffioune conteanes leveying of menne, befeiging of houffis, realRng of flyre, and difpenfatioune for
Slaughter in the vfeing of it, togidder with a Warrant of concurrance for the country peopill of
Caithnes, which is thocht man^ breid a farther wnquyetnes ; and that the lyk Commiifiounes hes
not bene grantit, except quhair the Rebellioun wes for a criminall caus : 3it, haveing dewlie confidderit the miferie of the poore diftreflit peopill, whofe hard fameilhing eftait is worfe than death •
the nomberis of thame, whiche is a great prefumptioune that fume of thame hes over iufl caus ; thair
continowall outcryis and exclamatiounes heir, to the gritt fcandell of our kingdome and Counsell
thair, as if Oppreflioun wer tollerated thairin, and that the Counfall Aver cairles to remedy it : And
then, THE Erll of Orknayis awin contempteons Rebellioune, nevir preaflfing aither to fatisfie the
pairtie, or relax him felf fra the home : The contenowance of whiche difobediance, albeit for a civeill
caus, can have na better conflructioune of ws, than that it is becum of the natur of a criminall. We,
vpone the refpectis foirfaidis, being loath that the diftreffid fould not have the benefeit of our releifF,
and the proud and rebellious not feill the weight of our iuft wreath and indignatioun, have concluidit
to grant the faid Commiffioun, in forme as it is defyrit, and hes figned and fent heirwith wnto ^ow :
Bot, as We have evir bene wnwilling to condem ony pairtie wnhard, and f>airwith loth to cut aft' a
member quhair pair is any hope of recoverie pairof, We heve thocht meit to will 30W, by oppiu Proclamatioun, chairge the Erll of Orknay to compeir befoir 50W the fecund day of Marche nixtocum, for to give all dew and reffonable fatisfactioun that may be iuftlie demandit of him be ony who
prefently ar complenantis one him, fo as We be no farder troubleid and importuned with thair Petitiones \^ with certificatioun to him and* he faill of his appeirance that day, that not only the foirfaid
Commiffioune falbe grantit to thofe quho prefentlie defyres the fame, in fuche forme as itisfocht, bot
thay, in the executioune fairof, falbe affifled with our power and authoritie, boith be fea and land, for
the puniftiing of his Rebellioune. And if he do cum ])air, at the day foirfaid, 50W fall tak fum good
ordour that he may be furthcummand,^ wntil fuch tyme that he have aither cleirit or fatisfeit all compleanares aganes him. And in cais of his not corapeirance, 30W fall thane expeid this prefent Commiffioune, and delyver it to the pairteis futtareis ;'' and 30W fall give wntill thame fuche Warrands for
concurrance of the cuntry, or quhatevir ellis may furder the profcqutting of the Comniiflioune. For
doeing quhairof, thir prefentis falbe 30ur fufticient Warrant. And willing 30W to be cairfull in the
fpedie directioune of this Prodamatioune, as 30W wald efchew our rcprooft", ftor ony neglect of tyme
pairin, We bid 50W fairwell. Fromje our Court at Chetfoorde, the 6 of December, 1G08.

[JAMES R.]

To our rycht truflie and weilbeloveit cofmes and counfallouris, the Erll of Dumfennling, our Chancellar, and remanent lordis and wtheris of our Privie Counsall of Scoitland.

' Reference is particularly made to the large Collection of Papers appended to the Trial of Robert Steuart and
others, for their Rebellion in Orkney, which all relate to this present Case. Sec this Collection, \a\. III. p. 2^'.i, &c.
* From a C<)i)y preserved by Lord HaddiiKjtou in his IMS. Collection of State l'a])ers. ' I\Iii>t. * The

number of Supplications and complaints from tiik Pkovi.k of Ohknf.y to tmk Kim: himself was very f;'"''at : but he
delayed taking any step until importuned to grant this ('ouimission ; wliidi, though at length he sul)S(ribe<l, was
clogged with the additional delay of ordering the Privij (aiuiicU to charge t/ic Karl of Orlnwii, of new, to ajipear before
them; so as, if possible, to divert tlte. Karl U-mn his criminal courses. IJut he had long <H)nteuined the I'roclauiatinn!^
and chargesof ttie Council ; and this new charge would merely appear to him as a fresh proof of their imbecility ; and
as he could ' call the King his cousin,' so he hoped that the Council would not dare to molest him in his Island
Kingdom. * If. * Forthcoming. ' Suitors; petitioners.

320 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

(2.) Note of the Conference had he the Secretare and Aduocat^ ivith the

Erie of Orhncty^

My Lord Aduocat and I repaired to the Caftell of Ed"^ to the Erle of Orknay, and declaired to
him tliat We had commandement from his MA'r"^ to examine him, vpon tlie caufes of the Rebellion OF Okknay. He declaired, that lie wes innocent and ignorant thairof. That Sir James
Steivart^ came to the Callell of Ed' to him, and fchew that his fone Robert wes gone to Orknay,
whoes actiones thair might breid offence to iiis Ma'^'*= and danger to the Erie ; who anfwered, that
want of meanes had forced Robert to gang thair, to vplift fum reflis^ of the Tennantis dewties auchtand
to the Erie, to help to fupplie tJie Erles wantis and his owne. That fince it wes evill tane, he wald
wryte to Robert, that he might retire fmth of Orknay, defyring that Sir James wald caufe convoy his
Letter to his fone, and command his doaris to giue ouerfight to Robert to tranfport him felf to Caithjies. That he neuer wrait any vther Letter to Robert fince he went to Orknay.

It being rcplyed be ws, that efter Robert hatl tane Birsa, and difobeyed the chairge vfed be t/ie
Sheref-depute to rander that Houfe, vnder the payne of Treafon, he had writtin to the Erie, who, having reffaued his Letter from Duneane Mitchell, Poift, he had writtin bak to him with the laid Poift,
He denyed the wryting of any fuch Letter to his fone ; and when he faw his feruand, John Schairp,
of mynd to wryte to Robert with that Poift, he had difchairged him to wryte ; and that Schairp had
defyred him not to find fault, that he might fend his owne privat Letter, anfuering to that which he
had reffaued from Robert j hot that nather Schairp nor Jlifchell, being broglit to his prefence, wald
fay any thing to the contrarie of this his declaration : Wliich is the fubftance of all that he wald fay
to ws in that poynt ; adding, that no thing proceiding from him had occafioned the Rebellion ;
bot that the extreame rigour vfed be 3Ir John Finla/bn to the cuntrie people, and the wrong intended be 3Ir John to the cuntriemen, who, with great haifard of thair lyves, had forced the Pirates,*
and tane thame and thair fchip, had difpofed thame to Rebellion. And that thay had perfuaded
Robert to affift thame aganis Jlr John Finhtjhn, and to be head to thame in thair interpryfes.

Being demanded, what condicion he had made to Patrik Halcro, for his joyning in this Rebellion?
Denyed that he knew him familiarlie, or even had to do with him ; and that no thing had moved
Halcro to mell in thefe turnes bot his great affection borne to Robert, his fone. Farder, we could not
induce him to grant, in ony circumflance, of the proceidingis of his fone in his Rebellioun, We declaired to him, that what he concealed of the cairiage of this interpryfe wald be detected be his fone Robert, John Schairp, and Mitchell, who wer all in handis. He anfuered, that he wes confident that
thay could fay no farder nor he had declaired to ws.

(3.) Examination of Patrick Earl ofOrhiei/, and Re- Examination of John

Schairp and Duncan Mitchell.

At Edinburgh, the fecund day of Nouember, 1614. In jrre fence of my Lord Chancellour, ecretair, Prefident, Preuie Scale, Thefaurair-depiUe, Clerk of Regijler, Aduocat, and Medope,

Patrik, Erle of Orknay, fwome and demandit, yf he knawis Tliomas Layng? Deponis that
he knawis him, and that he wes fome tyrae his feruand ; and rememberis not yf Thomas Layng broght
ony Letteris to him oute of England.

Demandit, yf euer he had ony purpois or intentioun to half brokin warde ? Deponis that he had
nevir ony fuche purpoife or intentioun to haif brokin warde.

Demandit, yf he gaif ony directioun or warrand to his bafe fone Robert, anent this Rebellioun in

' Sir AVilliam Oliphant of Newton. ° From the Original, in the Denrnylne Coll. of MSS. Adv. Library,

holof;;rai)h of Lord liiniiing, afterwards E.irl of Haddington, &c. ' Of Killeith, aftcrwai'ds Lord Ochiltree.

* Arrear of rent and duties, &c. * See this Collection, Vol. III. &c.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 321

Orknay, and for taking oithe HouJJis of Birfay and Kirkwall? Deponis, he never gaif ony luclie
directioun to liis fone.

Demandit, yf lie write ane Letter to his fone with Patrik Murray ? Grantis, that he write fuche
ane Letter, and that the contentis thairof wes onlie to defire his fone to leave the cuntrey of Orknay,
and to reteir him felf to Caithnes to the Laird of Murhill.

Demandit, yf he write ane Letter to his fone Eohert, with Dtmcane Mitchell, poifl, and what wes
the contentis of the Letter ? Deponis, that he rememberis that he caufit wryte ane Letter to Eohert
with the faid Dimcane Mitchell, when the Depouner wes caryed fra the Cqjiell of Edinburgh to Dunbartane, bot he rememberis not of the contentis of the Letter ; nather knawis he yf he fubfcryuit the
Letter, or how it wes directit on the bak.

Demandit, quhat verball directioun he gaif to Dimcane Mitchell, the poift, to cary to his fone Robert
at that tyme ? Denyis that he gaif him ony verball directioun, bot onlie to defyre his fone to gett
him money.

Grantis, that Duncane Mitchell broght him ane anfuer fra Robert, bearing, that he had tane the
Hoiife of Birfay, becaus the Schereff perfewit liim. And that he had no other place of refudge to
keepe him in ; and that his man Dotony Lyell wes hurt.

Denyis, that he fend ony directioun to his fone with Dimcane 3Iitchell anent the taking of Birfay,
or that he had ony conference with Mitchell at his bak-comeing fra Orknay, anent Robertis taking of
Birfay, or anent the perfute of the Schereff.

Demandit, yf he wryte to Patrik Halcro to tak Barnard Steuartis^ lyfFe ? Denyis the fame.

Grantis, that Patrik Halcro come to Dunbartane, and the Depounair mett with him thair. And
denyis, that thair wes ony fpeeche or conference with thame, bot generall woirdis ; and fayis, that he
nevir fpak fax wordls to Patrik Halcro.

Demandit, yf he had ony conference with Barnard Steuarte, anent his fone Robertis going to Orknay ? Deponis, he neuir conferrit with him vpoun that fubiect.

Demandit, yf he caufit his man Johnne Schairp wryte ony Memoriallis to his fone Robei't 9 or yf
the Memoriallis contenit a directioun to his fone to fend to Norroway for poulder ? Denyis, that ony
fuch Memoriallis wer writtin be him, or at his directioun ; and the depouner rememberis not of ony
Memoriallis writtin be him to Robert.

Demandit, yf he had ony conference with his fone Robert, at ony tyme, for geving ouer of the Co/-
tell of Kirkwall to the Bi/chojye 9 Deponis, that he fand fault with his fone that he had geviu ouer the
Houfe, without taking Liventair, vnder the Bifchopis hand, of the goodis within the Houfe. And he
had no other caus of offence aganis his fone, for that earand.

Denyis, that euir he had ony conference with his fone, after the geving ouer of this Houfe to the
Bifchope, anent the taking of the Houfe agane ; or that he bad his fone prove any prettye man, yf the
Houfe come in his handis agane.

Demandit, yf he gaif ony directioune to Johnne Schairp to wiyte ane Letter to his fone Rubcrt,
willing him to follow his Memoriallis? The depouner rememberis not of ony fuche Letter.

Demandit, yf lie wryte ane Letter to his lone Robert, willing him to trye the cuntrey people, yf
thay wald tak his parte ? Denyis the writting of ony fuche Letter.

Demandit, quliat directioun he gaif to Johnne Schairp to carye to Orknay? Deponis, that he
directit him not to Orknay, bot fend and directit Iiim heir to his Manfieis Coutifdl, with Letteris to
the Erll of Glencairne, to do^ for him at the CounfaUis handis. And fayis, planelie, that the faid
Johnne Schairp had no directioun from the depounair to go to Orknay ; and that the faid Johnne
being comeing to this burgh, and getting informatioun at the Coicde-bridyc that Duncane Mitchell wes

' Keeper of the Castle of Birsay, who had been appointed by Sir James Stewart of Killeith, tlic new Chamberlaia
and SheriiT-piiucipal of Orknay, under the King. * To act or procure for hiiu.

VOL. III. 2 s

322 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

tane, and tliat the faid Johnne wald be tortouiit yf he come to the Coioi/cU, the faid Johnne thairvpourt
tooke occafioun to efchew.'

Demandit, yf he caufit raak ane bed for his fone Robert, in his awne chalmer, witliin the Cajlell of
Edinburgh, tua nightis afoir his going to Orknay? Deponis, that he caufit to mak his bed in his
clialnier, becaus the wyfe of the Houfe quhair he lay, in the Caftell, wes grite with childe and at the
poynte of hir delyuerye.

Denyis, that he gaif directioun to Johnne Schairp to write aue Letter in his awin name to Robert
Steuart, to Ihaw him, yf he come heir that he wald be hangit.

Demandit, quhat he meaned be that pairt of his Letter writtin to his fone Robert, quhilk Letter wes
gottiu vpoun Duncanc Mitchell, quhaiiby he allowit of the forme and tennour of Robertis Letter
writtin to him ? Deponis, that he meaned no thing, hot allowit that RoberthdiH writtin the fimple treuthe.

Demandit, quhat wes his meaneing in the other poynte of the Letter, bearing, ' thair is other materis
heir to think vpoun nor fuclie thinges as thay. I beleve iiis Maiestie thinkis litle of tliefe materis?'
Deponis, that the deathe of the Prince,^ and the trouble quhairin the Counte Palatyne' wes lyke to be,
through the invafioun of the Spaniard, maid the depouner to beleve that his Maieflie had other thingia
to think vpoun nor"* Orknay. And tuicheing that poynte of the Letter, beareing, that ' yf his fone
come heir, the Tolbuthe wald be his bed,' the depouner meaned no thing, hot that he wald be wardit,
bolhe for his debt and taking of the Houfe. And grantis, that the Letter bearing thir headis wes all
writtin be the depounaris directioun.

Denyis, that euer he had conference with JPatrik Halcro, or fend ony worde or meflage to him contening a promeis of rewarde, yf he wald affift Robert, his bafe fone, in his Rebellioun,

Johnne Schairp, re-examinat, deponis, that afoir he come oute oi Dunbartane, he knew that the
Gaird wes feikand him ; and the Erll of Orhncuj tauld to the depouner, that the Gaird wes feikand
him. And deponis, that the Erll, in plane termes, directit him to go to Orhmnj ; and fayis, that the
Erll gaif to the depouner ane Letter, directit to the Erll of Glencaime, purpoifiie to haif Ihowne the
fame to the fouldiouris of the Cajtell of JDunbartdnc, yf he had beene ftayit be thame, and to mak
thame to vnderfland that the Erll of Orhnay had directit him heir to the Counfell. And fayis, that
€ie Erll of Orhxaij forbad the depouner, in ony caufe, to gang to Edinburghe ; hot to gang to Dundee,
and Ava to Orhmnj.

The Erll of Orknay, being confrontit with Johnne Schairp, vpoun that poynte of his Depofitioun, tuitcheing the directioun gevin to Schairp to go to Orhnay, and tuitcheing the occafioun of the
Letter writtin to the Erll of Glencaime, the Erll is direct contiair to Schairp, in that poynte ; and
Schairp al)ydis conflantlie be his Depofitioun.

The faid Johnne Schairp his formair Depofitioun, maid in prefence oi the Co?«//t// yifterday, the
firfl of this inftant, being red in the audience of the faid Erll of Orhnay, the faid Johnne Schairp
abydis conflantlie be it, as a trew Depofitioun ; and the faid Erll denyis the fame, except in fo far as
he lies confcll be his awne Depofitioun.

DrN( ANE MiTc HELL, poift, his Dopofitioun, maid in prefence oi the Counjhll vpoun the fyft day
of Julij 16 ll, being red, in the audience of the Erll of Orhnay, the faid Duncane Mitchell floode to
it, as ane trew Depofitioun ; and the faid Erll denyit the fame.

(4.) Examination of the EarlofOrhucy, Patrik Halcro, andHohert Stewart.

At Edixiurghe, the xv day of Noucniber, IG14. In prijhice of my Lord Chancellour, the Erllis
of CaJJillis and Caithnes, the Lordis Secretcnr, Prefident, Preuie Scale, The/aurair-depute, Justice Clerh, Clerh of Regijler, Aduocat, Sir Andro Ker,and Sir Alexander J^rummond.

Patrik Erle of Orknay examinat and demandit, yf he gaif ony directioun to his fone Robert

' Escape. * Henry, Prince of Wales, wh»A\e A in November, 1612, at Saint J.imcs's. ' The Palst/rave, or

Count Palatine, whose marriage with Princess Klizabeih had been delayed, on account of Prince Henry's death, till
the moiitli of February following, 1613. * Than.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMIA^AL TRIALS. ' 303

anent the Rebellious ix Orkxav, or for taking oi tlte HonJJls of KirhivallmA Birfay? Deponis,
that he nevir gaif ony fuch dhectioune to his fone.

Deniandit, yf he had ony conference with Patrik Halcro, at his being in Dunhartane, anent the
taking of t/ie HoHfisofKirJuraU and B'ufay? Deponis, he liad no fuche conference with Putrih ; and
that he nevir delt with Patrik to affill his fone, yf he come to Orknay. Denyis alfua, that he fend
ony directioun to his fone Robert or to Patrik Halcro for fending to Norroxvay for poulder.

(5.) Patrik Halcro, re-examinat, humblit on his knees, and deiplie fworne ; and liis Depofitioune, maid yiflernight, being red vnto him, and he deniandit vpoun the veritie tliairof, he, vpoun liis
grite and folemne oathe declairit, that his Depofitioun wes trew ; and he ratifeit the fame, and ^ald
Hand to it.

■' (6.) Patrik Erll of Orknay, deiplie fworne, and confrontit with Patrik Halcro, vpoun the
contentis of his Depofitioun, maid yifternight, in prefence of the Cotuifall ; the faid Erll denyit tlie
haill contentis of that Depofitioun. And tlie faid Patrik Halcro conftantlie aflfermed and avowit, in
the Erllis prefence, that the Erll directit him to tak the Cajiell of Kirkwall, and to affifl his fone
Robert in that earand ; and that his haill Depofitioun wes trew. Quhilk bein"- red, in the Erllis
audience, wes denyit be him, faying, he rememberit not that evir he had ony fuche conference with
Patrik Halcro, vpoun that fubiect.

■ (7.) Robert Steuart being of new prefentit befoir the Counfaill, and his Depofitioun, made
yifternight, being red vnto him, and he deniandit of new vpoun the treuthe and veritie thairof, he
deponit and declairit, vpoun his grite oathe, that the fame wes of veritie.

(8.) Patrik Erll of Orknay, confrontit with his fone Robert, vpoun the contentis of Robertis
Depofitioun, maid yifternight, as faid is, the faid Erll denyit tlie fame : And the faid Robert, in the
Erllis audience and prefence, affermed and avowit the fame to be of trewthe and veritie, as it wes
writtin and red in the Erlis audience.

(9.) Depositions of James Lijoun, hafe fone to the JMafter of Glammh, Mr
Mkliael Mah\ and Duncan M'CIellane.

At Edinburgh, the nyntene day of Nouetnher, 1614. In prefence of my Lonlis Chancellour,
Secretair, Clerk of Regijler, and Aduocat.

James Lyoun, bafe fone to the late Mr of Glammis,' folemnelie fworne and deniandit, Yf at ony
tyme he paft to Danbartane to viftte the Erll of Orknay ? Deponis, that in foninier bigane two veir,
tJie Erll of Orknay fend Mr Michaell 3Iair, then his Secretarie, to the depouner, lie l»eing in the iioade
of the Cannogait for the tyme, with a commiftloun, defyring the depouner to come to him to Punbartane. Wherupoun the depouner raid with him to Dunbartane. And at liis comeing thair, the Erll
layed to his chairge, yf he wald afTift him to brek warde oute of the Cajtell of Dunbartane ? And at
the firft, the depouner refuifit to haif ony dealing in that mater, Bot being earniftlie delt with be the
Erll, and mony fair promiftes maid by the Erll to him, in end the depouner yeildit to do his beft endevoiris to help the Erll to efchaip, and to convoy him to Orknay. And deponis, that the faid Mr
Michael Mair wes vpoun Mc 7^/7//,? counfaill, in this mater; and proponitthe fame to the depouner, in
the way, as they wer ryding to Dunbartane. And after the depouner had imbraceit this conditioun, he
and the faid 3Ir Michaell had diuers conferences and fpeecheis, anent the meanes and poflibillityis to
effectuat thair interprife. And deponis, that the faid J//- Michaell was imployit be the l^rll to deale
•w'lih the Laird of Cluny, to imbark him in this interprili;. And the fiiid Mr Miihadl, \\\\\\ the
depouner, had fpeiches with Clany vpoun that fubiect, at the Toun (f Lciihe, on the Linkis ; ard the

' This pers(»n was proImMy son of tlic Hon. Sir Thomas Lyon of Aiildltar, socoikI son of J<ihii, scvoil/i Lord
Glammis. He was stylfd /lie Master of Clamiim, anil enjoyed the iuijiortant o(lJce of Lord High Treasurer about
the period of ten years, from IjSO to 1 J9j.

324 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Laird promeift to gif his afliftance and furtherance in that mater. And for this effect, they appointit
a tryift and meeting to he at Striuihng, vpoun the Satterday thairefter, and the depouner and Mr
Michaell mett vpoun Satterday, at night, at Striuiling ; and Cluny came not quhill Sonday, in the
moirning, hot fend his man Dauid Gairdin thair, vpoun the Satterday, to excufe his ahfence. And
when thay mett altogidder vpoun the Sonday, thay reafouned vpoun the meanes how to gett the Earll
out of the Caflell ; and refolued to tak him oner the wall hy a cord, and aue inftrument of irne,^ whiche
the depouner caufit mak. And Mr Michaell promeifit to prepair the tow.^ And it wes aggreit that
when all thingis wer in reddynes for tJie Erllis efchaip, he fould proceid as yf he had fome earand ado
in the Houfe, and fend his three Keeparis, one efter another, for difpatche of his earandis ; and then
he fould come away. And thay aggreit to bring fome horffis to Dunhuh-Hdl, to haif convoyit tJie
Erll and his companie away ; and ane horfe fould haif bene broght to the Caftell-wall, for the Erll him
felf ; and Cluny fould haif broght thir hordis to Glajgow, hot Cluny broght not the horlFes with him.
And the depouner raid to Dunhartane, and the faid Mr Michaell tauld the Erll that the depouner
was come, and all thingis Aver prepairit and in reddynes for liis efchaiping. And tlien the Erll began
to fant ; and maid choife, rather to fuborne the Portair nor^ to haifard to come over the wall ; and fo
delt with the Portair vpoun that fubiect ; who reveillit the fame to the Laird of BucJiannane, who had
the charge of the Houfe for the tyme.

Deponis, that at Martymes, in the yeir foirfaid, the faid Mr Michaell Mair come of new to the
depouner, he being in the heade of the Cannogait for the tyme, with a commifiioun frome the Erll to
come Weft to him agane to Dunhartane. And the depouner refuifit to go Weft, faying, that « he
wald mell no forder with the Erll, nor in nane of his courfes.' To whome MaiJIer Michaell anfuerit,
* I fee this man (meaneing he the Earle) hes not the giace of God in him ; I will lykewayis haif no
forder dealling with him !'

Deponis, that after Robert Steuart, bafe fone to the Erll of Orknay, wes come out of Orknay, and
fred of warde for keeping of the Cajiell of Kirhwall aganis the Bifchop of Orknay, the depouner, in
deling with Robert in this Toun, delt with him that he wald mak his addrefle to Courte ; and thair vfe
his credite to gett Iiis Maiefteis fauour : And fayis, that Robert wes willing to haif gone to Courte, hot
maid his excufe vpoun the want of money, and liis faderis offence againis him for geving ouer of the
Houfe of Kirkwall ; and Robert intreated the depouner to ryde with him to Dunbartane, and to interceid for him with liis fader, bothe for his fauour and fome money : And the depouner yeildit to lyde
with him, and thay raid togidder to Dunhartane, and ftayed thair hot ane night. And the depouner
knawis not yf the Erll fpak with Robert that night. And vpoun the morne, the Erll directit the
depouner with a Letter to the Erll of Cafjillis,^ being in Carrik for the tyme, for fome money. And
Robert Steuart raid with the depouner to Carrih. And when thay come bak agane to Dunbartane,
the Erir^ wald not looke vpoun Robert, calling him ' Feble vnworthie beaft !' vfeing mony imprecationis and curfles aganis him for geving over of the Houfe, faying, he < wes the wraick of him and his
eftate !' And the depouner being reddy to come away frome Dunhartane, the faid Robert come to him
to the Toun of Dunhartane, defiling him to go againe and fpeeke his fader in his fauouris, and to tell
him that he wald tak fome difperat courfe, and go oute of the cuntrey, yf he could not procure his
fauour. Wherupoun, the depouner went bak agane to the Caflell, and eirniftlie delt with the Erll in
Robertis fauour ; hot the Erll could not with patience heir of him, hot gaif oute mony invectiue and
difpytefull fpeecheis aganis him, calling him ' Fals, feble beaft,' for geving ouer of his Houfe. And in

' Probably a pulley, liaving a strong,' iron to fasten or hook upon the battlements of the Castle, so as to save the
necessity of drivint; in a staple, which would necessarily occasion noise. * Rope. ^ Tlian. * John,

fiflh Earl of Cassillis, who married Jean, only daughter of James, fourth Lord Fleming, and relict of John Lord
Maitland of Tliirlestane, Chancellor of Scotland. Through lier intrigues, he procured the office of Lord High
Treasurer, in 1590, for which he was utterly incapable; and retired from it in disgrace, with the loss of 4^0,000
merks, &c. See History of the Kennedies, Quarto, Edin. 1830. ^ Of Orkney.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 325

end, the depouner haueing promeiil in Robertis name, that Robert wald do ony thing the Erll wald
command him, the Erll thairvpoune become to be more calme, and to gif eare to the depounaris
fpeeches in Robertis fauour. Wherupoun, the depouner broghte Robert to the Erie, and tauld to the
Erll, that Robert wald do ony thing that the Erll wald bid him ; to whome the Erll anfuerit, that
Robert had not a fpirite nor courage to follow ony interprife ; and Robert haveing craved of the Erll
his fader, that he might haif a ryght of the landis of Weftraue or Steanehoufe, the Earll wald yeild to
gif him no thing, quhill firft he had repairit the wrang he liad done, in giving oner of his Houfe ; and by
recouering of the fame agane, to play the pairt of a man. And the Erll haveing defirit the depouner
that he wold gif him his worde and promeis, in Robertis name, that Robert fould go to Orknay and
recouer the Houffis agane, the depouner refuifit to gif his promeis or word, faying, ' Robert wald jpeke
and promeis for him felff !' Whairupoun Robert, in the depounaris audience, promeill to the Erll to go
to Orknay, and to tak in the Houffis agane. And then the Erll acceptit of him, faying, he ' fould
want no thing, and that he wald aduance him fo far as he might. And fo, the depouner haveing aggi-eit
the Erll with Robert, the depouner left thame. And as he wes coraeing away, Duncane M<=Clellane,
the Erllis poifl, followit the Depouner to the Toun of Dunbartane, willing him to go bak agane to my
Lord ; and the depouner refuifit to go bak, becaufe he vnderftoode that the purpois of his bak-calling
wes to haif delt with him to haif gone with Robert to Orknay. And the depouner meeting at that
tyme with James Annand, fometyme the Erllis feruand, in Dunbartane Towne, the faid James altit
of the depouner, ' yf he had aggreit the fader and the fone ?' And the depouner anfuerit, ' thay wer
aggreit,' and that ' Robert muft neidis go to Orknay, or thair wilbe no lyfFe for him 1' To whom James
replyit, < TJie Erll is ane vnhappie man ! He knawis Robert can do no goode in Orknay. His purpois is to bring him to the fcaffolde, and to bring the fclander of his bloode vpoun the King !' And
vpoun theraorne, the depounair raid fra Dunbartane towards Edinburghe ; and ^I*" Clellane, the poill,
come to Edinburghe with him. And within tuentie dayis thairefter, Robert Steuart come to Edinburghe, and lichtit at Henry Raes houfe, and afkit of him whair the depouner wes ? And Henry Rae
broght Robert to the depouner in George Lafonis houfe in the heade of Peblis-wynd, quhair the
depouner ludgeit ; and Robert tauld to the depouner that he had vndirtane the interprife of Orknay,
and wes refoluit to go thair. And the depouner afking of him, how he wald be prouydit and furneift
with money ? Robert XmlA him, that he had a Letter frome liis fader to one Jo/ume Smithe, his fader's
raercheant in S* Androis, to advance him iij« merkis of filuer. Whairupon Robert and the depouner
paft to S' Androis to haif gevin the money, and haueing ftayed thair audit dayis, Johnne Smith
refuifit to gif the money, vnles he had a Band vnder the Erllis hand, for the haill moneyis he was awand
him afoir, including thairin the filuer now to be gevin, with the annuelP of the haill. And deponis,
that thay onlie reflauit at that tyme fra Johnne Smithe xx lib. to defray thair chargeis. Deponis forder,
that at thair comeing oute of S' Androis, M'^clcllane, the poift, come to Robert with Letteris fra the
Erll his fader ; and the depouner faw and red ane of the Letteris, whilk wes a lang Memorandum, full
of iniunctiounes how Robert fould carye him felf in Orknay, bothe anent the taking of the Houllis, the
intromiffioun with the Erllis rentis, and what men he fould putt oute of the cuntrey. And the depouner
rememberis weele of ane fpeciall poynte of the Memorandum, to witt, that Robert fould fend the Erllis
creare,^ laidnit with beare and fait goodis, to Brein, in Norroway, and thair fell the fame, and by
poulder^ and bullett with the money that fould be gottin thairfoir. And that, aboue all thingis, Robert
fould fee that the Houffis wer weele furneift. And Bl'clellane come bak with thame to Leitlie. And
deponis, that then thay raid to Dunbartane, and Robert Hayed at the fmithis houfe outwith the Toun,
and the depouner raid fordwart towardis the CuJIell. And the Erll, being aduerteill that thay wer come
to the fmithis houfe, he fend Johnne Burnc, his feruand, to haif fiayit thame at the fmithis houfe. Antl
the depouner forgaddering with Johnne Burne, in the way betuix the fmithis houfe and the Ca/iell,
' Annualrent ; interest. ' A sort of vessel. ' Purchase gunpowder.

326 CRIMINAL TRIAXS. A.D. 1615.

Johine Burne delt with tlie depouner to go bak, faying tliay had done evill to come, ffor the Counfall
wald be in fufpicioun tliat thay had fome puipois for thair going to Orknay. And he tauld the
depouner, that tliey wald not gett accefs to tlie Eill, yltt the depouner wakl not be flayed, hot come
fordwart to the CaJteJl-yett, and craveing entrie, he wes anfuerit ouer tlie wall be one Robert Knox, who
had the charge of the Houfe, that he wald not gett entree. Whairupoun, the depouner come bak, and
being in ane grite anger, becaufe he could not gett entrie, he faid to Johnne Burne, that he fould reveill
all thair practizeis to the Covnfell, feeing he could not get payment of the moneyis addebtit be theErll
to him, Deponis, that Johnne Burne aflcit of the depouner, yf he had prouidit ony men, in Angus, to
tak with him to Orknay ? And the depouner maid him to beleve, that he had prouydit fome men in
Angus, who wer goode fellowis, to haif gone thair. And the depouner named fome of their names :
And he did this purpoiflie, to haif gottin payment of his moneyis.

Deponit, that Johnne Burne haveing fliowne to the Evil the depounaris difcontentment for the want
of his moneyis, and that he had avowit to reveill thair interprife, the Erll, fearing the reveilling and
difcouerie thairof, fend to the depouner Avith the faid Johnne Burne xx f. Sterling ; quhilk being
refuifit be the depouner, the Erll fend vther xx f. to him.

Deponis, that when he come bak to the fmithis houfe, he faid to Robert, < he perfavit that the Erll
had no vther courfe bot to bring him to the fcaffold !' And Robert, waging his head, with a grite
fiirhe, anfuerit, ' I feare it falbe fwa !'

(10.) Maister Michaell Mair, feruand to Mr Johnne Scott, Directour of the Chancellarie,
fworne, and demandit, ' yf he knawis of ony purpois that the Erll of Orknay liad to brek warde ?
Deponis, he knawis that thair wes fome fpeeches betuix the Erll, the Laird of Cluny, and James Lyoun,
vpoun that fubiect.

The Depositioun maid be James Lyoun, in that pairt thairof concerning the Erll of Orknay liis
purpois to brek warde, and the conferenceis, meetingis, and refolutionis tane thairanent, betuix the
Laird of Clunye, James Lyoun, and the depouner, being red to the faid 3Ir Michaell ; and he being
demandit, yf the fame wes trew ? Deponis, that he acknowledgeit the Depofitioun to be trew, as it wes
writtin, except in that parte thairof concerning the fuborning of the Portair, whairof the depouner
knawis no thing. In ceteris covformis.

(11.) Duncaxe Mf'CLELLANE, poill to the Erll of Orknay, fworne, and demandit yf he knawis ony
thing of the Erll of Orknay his purpoiffis anent the Rebellioun in Orknay ? Deponis, he knawis
na thing thairof, and denyis that euir he hard ony conference or fpeeche betuix theErll, Johnne Burne,
James Lyoun, and Robert Steuart, or ony of thame, anent the Erll his purpois to brek warde, or anent
the fending of Robert to Orknay.

Grantis, that the Erll of Orknay fend the depouner with tua Letteris to Robert Steuart and James
Jjjoun, and the depouner come to this toun to haif gottin thame heir ; and miffing thame heir, he paft
to S*^ Androis, and forgadderit with thame comeing oute of the Toun, and delyuerit the Letteris to
thame. And fayis, that Robert Steuart and James Lyoun tauld to the depouner, ' yf thay had gottin
filuer in S' Androis, that thay wald haif gone to Orknay ; bot feeing thay gatt not filuer, thay could
not go.' And the depouner, haueing gone bak to Dunbartane with this anfuer, the Erll fell oute in
bitter fpeccheis aganis Robert, calling him ' Fals, feble knaife !' * Villaine !' and ' Pultrone !' And ' he
fould hang him with his awne hand !'

Deponis, that he hard the conference betuix Robert Steuart and James Lyoun be the way, as tliay
come frome '^^ Androis, to witt, yf thay had gottin fduer in S' Androis, that thay wald haif gone to
Orknay and tane the Erlles Houffis. And the depouner tauld thir fpeecheis to the Erll, when he come
bak to Dunbartane ; whereat the Erll wes heidilie commovit, faying, ' Robert was ane feble beafl,' —
and ' Or^ he wer not hangit, he fould hang him with his awne hand ; becaus vnworthelie he had left his
Houflis, and had not grace to win thame agane !'

' Ere ; rather than.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

327

Deponis, tliat at this fame tyme, James Lyoun faid to the depouner, < YfF we go to Orknay, no man
fall haif the credite ' of carying our Letteris to and fra, hot yow.'

(12.) Depositioun, Robert Steuart, the Earl of Orhieij, James Lyoun, and

Mr Michael Mair.

At Edinburghe, the xxij of Nouemher, \Q\i. In prcfence of my lordis Chancellair, the Erll of
Caithnes, the Secretair, Thcfaur air-depute, Clerk of Regijier, and Aduocat.

Robert Steuart, bafe fone to the Erll of Orknay, fworne, and demandit yf he knawis James
Lyoun, fone to the lait Mr of Glammis ? Depones, he knawes him very weele.

The Depositioun maid be James Lyoun, vpoun the xix day of Nouember inflant, in that poynte
thairof tuitcheing the faid James his iiiterceiding with the Erll of Orknay, in fauouris of his fone Ttohert,
the Erllis refufaill to accept of him quhill he yeildit and piomeirt to go to Orknay ; and tuitcheing all
the fpeecheis paft betuix thame in that mater, being red to the faid Robert Steuart, and being demandit,
yf the fame wes trew ? The faid Robert acknowledgeit the Depofitioun to be trew, as it is writtin and
fett doun.

The haill Depofitioun foirfaid, maid be the faid James Lyoun, being red to the faid Erll of
Orknay, and he being demandit, yf the fame wes trew ? The faid Erll deponit, that the fame wes mofl
vntrew. And deponit, that the faid James Lyoun delt with him fmdrie tymes to haif brokin wairde,
becaus his lyfFe wes in dangeir ; and that he ever refuilit to harken to James, in that mater. And
deponis, that he wes ever in ane anger with his fone Robert, becaus he hantit James Lyonis company.
And fayis, confidently, that he had neuir conference nor fpeeche with James Lyoun, anent Robertis
going to Orknay.

(13.) The Erll of Orknay, James Lyoun, and Mr Michaell Mair, being confrontit, vpoun
that point tuitcheing the faid Erll his purpois of breking of warde, and the conferenceis, fpeecheis, and
meffageis paft in that mater, conforme to the Depofitiounis maid thairanent, the faid Erll, vpoun his
oathc, denyit the fame : And the faidis Maifter Michaell iNIair and James Lyoun, vpoun thair grite
oathe, avowit and affermed the fame to be trew.

(14.) The faid Erll of Orknay, Robert Stewart, and Jmes Layoun, being confrontit, vpoun
the vther poynte of the faid James Lyonis Depofitioun, tuitcheing the Speecheis and Conferenceis
betuix thame anent the Rebellioun in Orknay, and how Robert wes imployit and directit in that
earand ? The faid Erll, vpoun liis oathe, denyit the fame : And the faid James Lyoun and Robert
Steuart^ vpoun thair oathe, avowit the fame to be trew.

Feb. 14. — JoHXNE Maxwall, callit Achilles Johnne, in Duinfreis.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slaucliter of vniq''' Jolnine JNIakcnlloche, mercheand burges of Kirkculdbryclit ; conimittit be the laid Jolinne IMaxwall and be vmq^^ Johnne Maxwall, fone natural to vmq''' AVillianie Maxwall of
Aucliinlarie, vpone the landis of the Kirkhous, within ane quarter of a inyle to
the faid burgh of Kirkculdbryclit, in the moneth of November, the 5eir of God
I"", fex hundreth and threttene 5eiris, be geving to him of tua dcidlie llraikis in

^ Trust. We shall confide in no one but you, to caiTy our Letlers to and fro.

328 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

the lieid, togidder with fyftene bhidie woundis in his breift and bellie, and vther
fyftene bkiidie and deidlie ilraikis vpone the bak and fydis ; quhairof he immediatlie deceiffit.

Persewaris, Tliomas M^'Culloche of Baiholme, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny^
Prelocutour in defence, Mr Thomas Wilfone, Aduocat.

Eftir reiding of the Dittay, it was allegit be my lord Aduocat, that na
prelocutour can compeir for defence of the pannell, for the cryme aboue writtin,
l])ecifeit in the Dittay ; becaus, immcdiatlie eftir the committing thairof, Letteris
war direct, at the inftance of the kyn and freindis of the defunct, aganis the
pannell, be the quhilk he was charget to find cautioun for his comi)eirance befoir
the Juftice or his deputis, at the day thairin contenit, of lang tyme bygane, to
haif vnderlyne the law for the faid cryme ; quhilk charge, nocht only he difobeyit
and maifl contemptioullie pafb to the home, hot alfo lies remanit fugitiue fra his
liienes lawis continuallie fenfyne, for the faid fact : And producet the Hoirning,
deulie regiftrat, for verifeing thairof. — To the Cjuhilk it is anfuerit, be the pannell
and his prelocutour, that, nochtwithftanding of the faid allegeance, he aucht to
haif prelocutouris to defend, becaus he is relaxt fra the faid proces of home ; and
producet his Relaxatioun for verificatioun thairof: Quhilk the Juftice admittit ;
and ordanit his prelocutouris to be admittit to defend : Quhairupoun the pannell
aflvit inftrumentis.

It is allegit be the pannell and his prelocutour, that the Dittay producet
aganis him come nevir to his knawlege ; and thairfoir, befoir ony forder proces
be grantit in that matter, he audit to haif a fyftene dayis grantit to him, to be
advyfet thairupoun. — It is anfuerit, that the allegeance aucht to be repellit, in
refpect he haifing committit the fact, vpone the notorietie quhairof, and for
tryell of the pannellis giltines, Letteris war direct, be the quhilk he was charget,
vpone a fyftene dayis w^airning, to find cautioun for his compeirance, as faid is,
befoir my lord Juftice, at a day contenit in the faidis Letteris ; and for his difobedience was denuncet and put to the horne : And for cleiring thairof, repeitis
the faidis Letteris of Hoirning producet.

The Juftice Repellit the allegeance, and Ordanis the matter to pafs to the
tryell of ane Aft'yfe, vnles the pannell fay forder.

ASSISA.

Robert Vans of Campfurd, Airthour Kennydie, fervand to Johnne Tumour, Schereflf-Clerk

Patrik Vans of Lybrek, my Lord of Caflillis, of Wigtoun,

Peter Mcdowell of Machirmoir, Patrik Murdoch of that Ilk, James Hair, indueller in Ed'',

Patrik Ed5er, burges of Wigtoun, Hew Gordoun of Grange, Gilbert Agnew of Mureifliaith,
Pat. Hammiltoun, burges of Ed"", Alexander Gordoun of Littill Alexander Agnew of Trong,

Archibald Stewart of Fintillache, Mondurk, Rt Makknab, burges, Quhithome.

My lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Aflyfe ; and for

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 309

cleiring to thame of the paiinellis giltines of the cryines contenit in the Dittay,
repeittis the Hoirniiig producet, beiriiig him to be fugitiue for the cryme ; As
alfo, defyret Mr Robert Glendoiiyng, Miiiifter at Kirkculdbiycht, and Eduard
Forrefler, CommifFar, thair, thair aithes and declaratioun to be tane, quhat thay
knaw anent the pannellis giltines or innocencie, in the faid matter, for the AfTyfe
forder informatioun.

It was affirmet be the pannell and his prelocutour, that the matter now being
put in thair handis, thay fould nocht refpect the perfewaris informatioun and
afTertioun in this perfute ; hot altogidder denyit the fact lybellit to be committit
be him ; in refpect he, at the allegit tyme of the committing thairof, was alibi,
viz. in the Place of Teilling in Angus, lying deidlie feik, quhilk is ane hundreth
myles diftant fra Kirkculdbrycht, quliair the Slauchter was connuittit ; quhilk
he wald verifie, be fufficient and famous WitneJfTes, gif tyme war grantit to him
to produce thame.

Mr Robert Glendoning, being fuorne, Declairit, he could nocht remember that he knew Johnne
Maxwall vpone pannell of befoir ; bot as to the veritie of the fact lybellit, it is of treuth, that vpone
ane Fryday, at evin, in the moneth of November and 5eir lybellit, thair come tua litill men to the Touu
of Kirkculdbrycht, with Letteris of Captioun, of purpois, as the deponer was informit, to truble vmq't^
Johnne M'culloche, quhairof he was maid foirfene be ane of the honeft nychtbouris of the Toun : And
the deponer, vnderllanding quhair JoJjnne M'"culloche was, adverteifl him thairof, and defyret him to
hald him felf out of the way ; quhairvpone M'culloche efchewit that nycht : And vpone the morne
thaireftir, being Setterday, the day of liis fludie,^ he, heiring of the Slauchter of Johnne M'culloche,
come to the boundis quhair it was committit, quhair he faw tua deid men, Johnne M'culloche being
maill crewallie flrukia with ane quhinger, baith on his breift and bellie, and vpone his bak. And forder
knawis nocht.

Eduard Forrester, Commiffar, fuorne, and demandlt, quhat he knawis anent the verritie of the
premifles ? Declairit, that he faw Jolmne Maxwall, prefentlie vpone pannell, within the toun of Kirkculdbrycht, the day of the Slauchter, immediatlie befoir the committing tliairof ; quha, togidder with
vniq^'^ Johnne Maxwall, his afTociat, come yp to the deponeris chalmer, and ofFerit to agrie with him
anent the Confirmatioun of ane Teflament ; and within ane fchorte fpace thaireftir, liard of the committing of the faid flauchter. And forder knawis nocht.

My lord Aduocat repeittis the Minifter and Commiffaris Declaratioun ; and
Proteftis, in refpect thairof, for WilfuU Errour aganis the perfones of Allyie, gif
thay acquit.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouthe of the laid Peter
Mcdowell of Machirmoir, chanceller. Hand, pronuncet, and declairit the laid
Johnne Maxwall to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of airt and pairt of the faid
flauchter, &c — Sentence. To be tane to the ordiner place of exccutioun,
within the burgh of Ed^ and thair his held to be Itrukin frome his body : And
all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

^ Viz. the day he studied or prepared his sermons for the following Sabbath.
VOL. III. 2 T

330 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Cmison— Stcliniitir tijt miitrr's ^ntijoviUj—^lltQingi ti)t ^upr^-
mnw of tijt JiJojpt— ^^taviiitj: nnti StiviuQ iHass, kc.

Feb. 28. — Trial of John Ogilvie, Jesuite.

[The proceedings adopted against the Roman Catholics and Jesuits, at different periods, after
the time of the Reformation of Religion in Scotland, form a prominent part of the Ecclesiastical and
Political History of the Country. Owing to the obscure and repulsive appearance of the Criminal
Records, much valuable information has necessarily escaped the observation of the historian ; but
although the subject is one long since forgotten, it appears to the Editor to belong to the duty he
imposed upon liimself when he undertook the present Collection, to rescue from oblivion all those
Trials which have preserved entire the memory of such events.

Among the most remarkable of those persecutions maybe reckoned the Case of John Ogilvie, a
Jesuit, of Scottish extraction, who was a son of Walter Ogilvie of Drum. After an absence of twentytwo years in foreign countries, he returned to Scotland, in the month of May 1615, for the purpose
of promoting the growth of the Roman Catholic Religion. There is little doubt that he was one of
those enthusiastic individuals, who, at the imminent risk of fortune, and of life itself, scrupled not to lend
himself a willing instrument for the accomplishment of some daring, dangerous, and destructive plot,
which at that time characterised the whole of the ever-restless and ambitious proceedings of the followers
of the Church of Rome, from the date of the formidable, but presumptuous, attempt of the Spanish
Armada, and of the Gunpowder Plot, downwards. During the reign of King James, both before and
after his accession to the English throne, seldom did a year pass over without some rumours of fresh
attempts of the Jesuits against his life, or against the Religion, as by Law established, in England.
There can be no doubt, from a perusal of the State Papers and Histories of this period, that some new
attempt on the part of Spain and her auxiliaries was about to ripen into action, when the early detection and execution of numerous emissaries of the Society of Jesus frustrated its execution.

Without occupying more space, the Editor has merely to mention, that a Special Commission having
been granted to the Provost and Bailies of Glasgow, within whose jurisdiction Ogilvie was
taken, his Trial is not recorded in the Books of Adjournal, but was reported by the Commissioners
and their Assessors to the Privy Council, from whom their powers directly emanated. There cannot
be a doubt that the Report of this Case was drawn up for publication, with the view of being extensively circulated in England. The phraseology is carefully revised, so as to be perfectly intelligible
to an English reader; and though imprinted at Edinburgh by Andro Hart, immediately after the Trial
took place, it must have been revised by some person skilled in the English Law, and familiar with
its technicalities and practice.

The present reprint has been taken from a copy of the valuable Original Edition, in the Library of
the Faculty of Advocates, Edinburgh.

Ctdderwood, a determined enemy to Episcopacy, has preserved the following curious memorials of
these events, in his MS. History of the Church of Scotland,'^ which the Editor has thought worthy of
being inserted in this place : —

Oct. 161-1. ' About the beginning of October, Mr John Ogilbie, the Jefuit, was appreliendit
in Glafgow. He had feduced fundry young men, and of the better fort of the people; and faid
MafTe, in fundry places, within Toun. When the (Arch) Bischop (of Glasgow)^ challenged liini
for his hardnefl'f,^ he anfwered, that " he hoped to have more freedome, ere it were long." Wherupoii,
the Bi/hoj) buffetted him !

' About the beginning of November, the (Arch) Bishop of St Andrews* fone, 3Ir Alexander

' From the Adv. Library MS. ' John Spotsvrood, the well-known writer of the Church History. He was

translated to the See of St Andrews on the demise q( yirchbishup Gladstanes. ' Hardihood; effrontery. * ' Mn
Geokce Glapstains, Bishofe or St Andrews, departed this life, in the Castle of St Andrews, on the 2d day of

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 331

Gkdjlanes, aprehended Moffett, a Mefle-Preift, at St Andrewes ; who was prefented before the Lords
of Secret Coii n/ell upone the 10 of December, and was wairded in the Cajtle of Edinburgh, Some
things the Bi/hops behoved to doe againft Papists, for lioneflies fake, leaft they Ihould feeme to be
advanced to perfecule Minifters profeffing purity of Difcipline and God's worfhip.

' Upon the 6 of December, 13 or 14 of the Inhabitants of Glafgow were convicted for hearing of
MafTe, and Refetting a Maffe-Preill, in Court holden be the Bijhope and thrie of the (Council), who
bed gotten Commiffione, at the King's directione, to try. The brute' went, that tliey were to be
headed, drawin, and quartered ; but they were in no danger. Ogilbie, theJefuit, was brought in to
Edinbxirg, and examined be the BiJIiop and fome of the Lords of Secret CounJ'ell, to move to confeffe
where he had been refett, where he had faid MefTe, &c. He was not fuffered to take deep fome nights
and dayes together! His braines being lightfome, fecrets were drawen out of him, but came not to
the knowledge of the people. Moffett, the Preift, was examined be the BiJliop of St Andrewes and
his afTociats.

' About the middfl of Januare (1615), a Warrant was fent from the King to fine fome of the
receipters of Ogilbie the Jefuit, and hearers of Mefles, in Glajgoio ; and to bani(he fome others of
them out of the King's dominiones. About the end of Januar, the King fent doun a courfe to be
vfed in trying of Jesuits, their refetters, and hearers of Mefle. This feemed rather a hindrance to
the executioun of juftice upon the perfones prefently guiltie, then to mean in earnell the repreffing
of Papifts.

' Upon the lafl of February, Ogilbie the Jefuit, one of the Ogilhies of the Honfe of Drummurc,
was arraigned and pannalled before the Proveiji and Bailliffes of Glafgo^c, tlie King's Judges in that
part. At his Examination, before fome of ^^e Coimfell and the Bifliop, he being afked, whither the
King, being excommunicat be the Pope, the Pope might depofe him, and loofe his fubjects from
the Oathe of allegeance ? Anfvvered, and fubfcribed his anfwers with his hand, that lie thought the
King and his Counfdl no competent Judges to him, in that matter ; and therfor, would not directly
anfwere them tuiching it, but before the Pope, his ordinar Judge, and his fubflitutes 1 For this his
declinator, he was convicted, in prefence of findry Noblemen, appointed be the King to be prefeut.
He avouched, boldly, that he regarded not the Acts of Parliament nor the King's authority, foe farre
as they were repugnant to the Popes authority ! Yett had he fmall courage when he come to the
Scaffold — died heartleife and comfortleffe — could not commend himfelfe to God, at the Miuiller's
defire — but did it after the defire of the hangman.

' Some interpreted this Executione to have proceeded rather of a care to bless the King's Governement, then of any fincere hatred of the Popilh Religione. Some denied that it was done to be a
terrour to the fmcerer fort of the Miniilry, not to decline the King's authority, in ony caufe whatfoever.* He was the firfl Preiji or Jc/uit that was executed, lince the Bajturd Bijhop of St Andrciccs
was lianged.'^

INIay. Many times before, because his face was disfigured, he had liis night-lionnet drawn down to his nose, when
the ministers of St Andrews enquired, " If they should pray for him publiclily ?" lie answered, " It was not yet
time !" Soe he was never prayed for publickly, but the same day that he depai'ted ; and that was done without his
knowledge. Unwilling was he to die, or to suffer any honest man of the INIiiiistiie near him, either to waken his
conscience, or comfort him. At the desire of his wife and children, he subscribed some few lines, when-in he
approved the present course, to jtrocure t}te Kinifs favour to them. His Hesh fell otf him in hnnjts. Notwithstanding
of the great rent of his Uishoprick, he died in the debt of tuentie thousand i)ounds. This man wiis both ambitious and
covetous. Papists and hainous offenders were winked at, for bribes given to his servants and deju^udcrs. In bis (irst
diocesian Synod of Fife he sat in ])omp with his velvet cushion before him, and his Clerk, 3Ir .loliu MitchclKonne,
beside him. — BIr Gcorqe Qladstuiiis, IJisiioror St Ani)kp:\ves, was buried, upon the seventh of June, in St Andrewes.
A cannabie (canopy) of blacke velvet was caried above the cofline, be fonre men, and yett the corpes was not in the
cotfin, but buried soone after his death. 31r William Cowptr {liisiiov or Gai.i.owav) made his ifunei-all-soi nione,
full of vile flattery and lyes, and knowne to be sae be the ])eo|>le, and therefor was he derided. It was rei>orteil that
THE King bestowed ten thousand merkes upon his buriell.' — Caktcnrooits (liiirc/i Hist. jl/N. Adv. Lib.

' Report ; Fr. bruit. * This had frequently taken place, as may be seen by referring to the former porticms

of this work. ' Referring to the celebrated AKcuuisuor John IIa.milto.n, natural son id" James, firat Eail of

332 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Tbe anonymous author of ' the Historie of King James the Sext'* shortly, but forcibly, narrates these transactions, in the following terms : — • During this fame time and year, in the citie of
Glafgotv, ther hapnit a man, callit ]Mr Johnne Ogilbie, Jejliit, to be apprehendit ther, be the Archehijchop and his men, becaus he was tryit*^ fufficientlie to have fayed MefTe ther, to fum inhabitants and
citizents of that toun ; and famonie as wer tryit, wer all empreafonit in the Cajiell of DumbartaTW^
ther to remayne upoun ther awin expenfis ; and thereftir relaxit, and confynit for a pecuniall foume,
for contravening the Act of Parliament ; and fand cautioun, under great fowmes of money, ather-' of
them, not to commit the lyk fault or cryme agayne. The Jefuit,in the meyne tyme, was convoyitto
Edinburgh, and ther keapit in ftrait waird, and a gaird of men, be the fpace of eight dayis, with fmall
fuftentatioun ; a7id compellit and withhaldin, perforce, from Jleep, to the great perturbatioun of his
brayne, and to compell him ad deliriinn ! ^ And being convoyit therfra to Glajyow agane, certen
temporall queflions wer objected unto him, as naymlie, geve^ the King was heid of the Kirk,
within his awin dominions, or nocht ? To the whilk he anfwered, " No," &c., and fo, confequently, to
uther thrie. For the whilks, he was put to the cognitioun of a jure, and be them fund giltie of Treafoun
and Leze-Majertie ; and fo was condamnit to be hangit to tlie death ; whilk was alfo accompleifl.'

The enquiring reader is referred, for farther particulars, illustrative of this singular subject, to the
various Collections of State Papers, and to the Histories of Scotland, especially Spotsicood's History,
where the matter is fully discussed by the Archbishop, who, it may be kept in mind, was one of the
Assessors, and the leading examinator, in Ogilvies Trial. The Editor appends to this remarkable
Tract the Examinations of all the persons suspected of having joined Ogilvie, in the celebration of
Mass, &c., including the declinator of the Jesuit himself, which he has taken from an attested copy,
preserved in the Denmylne Collection of MSS., Advocates' Library.]

A TRVE RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST

JOHN OGILVIE, A JESUIT,

Executed at Glasgow, the last of Februarie, anno 1615.

Containing fundrie Speeches vttered by him at his Arraignment,

and others, that affifted the Commiffioners deputed for his

Triall : with all that palTed at his Execution.

2Tet. 2. 10. " Audaces, et fibi placentes, dominatum defpiciunt, et non horrent dignitates

convitiis inceffere." — Tertul. adveijus Hermo. " Hermogenes hsereticus loquacitatem,

facundiam exiflimat, et impudentiam conllantiam deputat, et nialedicere fingulis

officiumbonse confcientise iudicat." — Cyprian dedvplicimartyrio. " Nonftatim

martyr eft qui occiditur, occiduntur piratje, et ficarii, fupplicium non

fa!cit martyrem, fed caufa."

Edinbyrgh, printed by Andro Hart, anno 1615.

To the Reader.
It hath beene thought needfull, that a true and perfect Relation of the whole proceedings againft
John Ogilvie, a Jefuit, lately executed at Glafgow, iliould bee publilhed ; as well for fatisfaction of

Airan, who was hanged in Stirling, Apr, 1, 1570. See Reliquicc Diva Andrea ; Keith's Catalogue of the Bishops;
the works of the liev Dr M'Crie, &c.

' Printpd for the Bannatynk Cr.uB, Edinburgh, 1825. ^ Proved. ^ Either; each. ^ This barbarous mode of extorting Confession had been prevalent in cases of Witclicraft, where the criminals were supposed to
be under the direct dominion of Satan. Human nature could not long stand so exquisite a torture. The suspected
parties were often driven into a state of drliriuni ; and in many instances, they must have been glad to confess any
thing which may have been proposed by their examiuators, to escape from a life held bj such a miserable teniu'e. ' If.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 333

tlioi'e, who (lefire to be informed of his behauiour, during the time of liis imprifonnient, and at hia
arraignment and execution, as to obviate the mifreportes of the enemies of true Relegion, who wreft
and draw all thinges, without refpect of trueth, to their owne aduantage. It is knowne within tliefe
few yeeres, Henry Garnet and Edward Oldcorne, Englilh Jeluites, being called in quellion, for that
prodigious and damnable Powder-treafon ; although it was proved by cleare euidences and tlieir own
coufeffions, vnder their owne handes, that tliey were fpeciall authors and actors in it, and for the lame
were executed by publicke juilice, not in a corner, but in the open cities of London and Worcefter ;
yet (fuch is the Ihamelefie impudencie of that feet) by printed apologies they haue beene iuftified ;
and, which is more, inferted in a Catalogue of their Martyrs, fet foorth at Rome, anno 1608, by the
licence and permiffion of their fuperiours. By which maner of doing, what may be expected, in this
particular, at their handes, any man may eafilie perceiue. Euery thing they are about to doe, (bee it
neuer fo great a mifchiefe,) they cloake with the mantle of Religion : and if the flatutes of the kingdome ouer-take any of them, either for practifes againll the King, or fowing the feed of rebellion
amongfl the fubiectes, it mufl bee fuppofed (forfoothe) they fuffer all for religion. Now were it fof
and that, according to the law, for MafTe faying they were punilhed to the death, they could not glorie
in it, nor rightly challenge the crowne of martyrdome, tlieir Maffe beeing a vile and idolatrous feruice,
flatly difagreeing with the faith of Chrift, and trueth of the Gofpell. But it is not fo ; albeit wee haue
fuch flatutes, for the reflraint of Maffe abomination within this kingdome, they are not able to iuflance
any one, who, for the trangreffing thereof, to this houre hath fuffered. His Majefties proceedings with
them haue beene more gentle : where death might haue beene inflicted, milder courfes haue beene
taken : imprifonment for fome ihort time, and baniiliment foorth of the realme, haue bene the lliarpefl
puniihments ; fo vnwilling was his Highneffe to force, or once to feeme to force, the confciences of
any men whatfoeuer. And to fay that which trueth is, if this vnhappy mifcreant, who nowe hath his
reward, had not difcouered his traiterous minde, openly difauowing his Majefties authoritie, and ftood
to the maintaining of the Popes power, for dethroning kings, and freeing fubjects from their oathes of
alegeance, hee had felt no harder raeafure then others, although the circumftances of his fault were
much greater ; but his peruerfe fpeaches, and infolent cariage beyond all credite, his fowing of doctrines tending to open rebellion, the hande of luftice could not forbeare. What was it, in the hearing
of multitudes of people to affirme, ' that he would returne or abide in the kingdome, contrary to the
lawes, and his Maiefteis commandements? to value his Highneffe authoritie with his old hatte, and
the Acts of our Parliament with a rotten figge ? to fay, it was treafon to fweare with the oath of
alleageance to the King, and that his Maieftie, by vfurping the Popes power, had loft the right of the
kingdome ?' Yet thefe, and diuers other more treafonable fpeeches, he vttered at his anaignement,
which are fet down in the proceffe, fo far as could be remembred ; for all could not be kept in mind.
I am perfwaded, the honefter minded of thofe of his own profeffion will in their hearts coudemne, and
judge him juftly to haue fuffered ; for, praifed be God, the Jefuits arte liath not fo fan-e preuailed, in
planting fuch opinions in the hearts of people, but euen amongft the aduerfaries themfelues, they are
many that doe no wife approue their feditious and proditorie doctrines. And here, to all our Catholickes (they will be fo called) in tliis kingdome, if nothing further may be obtained, and that ftill they
wil lye in that fuperftition, wherein they haue bene nuzled, I wilh at leaft fo much wifdome, as to
beware of Jefuites policies, and not to thinke their practifes the caufe of the Catholicke C'hurche. It
is not religion, as one hath well obferued, they ftriue for, but foueraignitie. It will not content them
to haue the Romilli faith and ceremonies embraced ; the crownes of kings, their fcepters and fubjects,
muft all be at the Popes deuotion. This is their fpeciall worke, and the ell'ect of their bliiule obedience, that fpeciall vowe, I meane, which they, befides the three vowes common to other orders, vow
and fweare at their receptions. To this point runs all their feruice, to make the Pope the lord of all
the earth ; emperours, kings, and princes his dependants ; to be remoued, altered, changed, depofed,

SSI CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

and killed, when it pleafeth his holines to giue commiirion. Mariana, a Jefuit, counteth it a wholforae meditation for Kings, to think they may be killed, not only lawfully, but with glory and commendation to the doers. And Caesar Baronivs, in liis A/males,'^ recites a brieue of Pope Vrban the
Second, fent to Godfrede, Bifliop of Luca, wherein hee declares, that they are not to be efleeraed
murtherers, who, burning with the zeale of their Catholicke mother, kills excommunicates. The words
of the Refcript are thefe : ^^o?i illos homicidas arbitraiuur, qui adverjus excommufiicafos, zelo catholixiCB matris ardentes, eonnn qiioflihet tntcidajpi contigerit. Bellarmine, that great Doctor, in his controuerfie, De Romano Pontifice,^ liath thefe exprefTe words, Papa jwtejl mutare regna, et nni auferre
atq. alteri conferre^ tanqntim finnmus princepsfpirituaJisJi id ncceffarium fuerit ad animariimfalutem.
That is, the Pope, as chiefe fpirituall prince, may change kingdomes, and take them away from one,
and giue them to another, if it be necefTarie for the faueing of foules. But Francifcus Suarius, in his
late booke intituled, Drfenjio Fidei Catholicce, goes beyond all this, faying, that any, to whom the Pope
permits the doing, may kill or expell the King, who is by fentence depriued, or, which is all one, if he
be declared to haue committed the crime, which by law deferues that penaltie ; and if the Pope neglect
to giue power, the lawfull fuccefTour may take the execution to himfelfe ; and if he faile, the communitie of the kingdome fuccedes in that right ; to wit, to kill and expell him. His wordes are thefe :
Pqjl fentcntiam condemiuitoriam regis, de regni privatione, latam per legitiinam pote/tatem, vel quod
perinde e/f, pqji feidentiam declaratoriam criminis habentis talem pcenam ipfo iure impofitam, jtoteji ille
qui fententiam tulit, vel cui ipfe commiferit, regem privare regno, etiam ilium int€rJiciendo,Ji aliter non
potuerit. In the fame place '? Si Papa regem depomit, ah illis tantum poterit expelli, vel interjici
quibus ipfe id commiferit. Quodji nulli executione)n imperet, pertinebit ad legitimum in regno Juccefforem, vel Ji 7ivllus inventus fuerit, ad regnum ipfum fpeetabit. And that no man fliould thiuke this
his priuate opinion, amongfl the approbations prefixed to the worke, yee haue, in cenfura Academics
Complutenjis, this faide : Nihil eji in toto hoc opere a nojlro omnium Jenfa dijcordans, quum de hoc re
Jit omnium nojirum eadem vox, idem animus, eademquefcntentia. That is, there is nothing in all tliis
worke, which is not agreeable with our mind, feeing herein we haue all one voice, one opinion, and
x)ne iudgement. Nowe if this bee the minde of all, it is high time they were all met with, and that
celeri po'na, by a prefent difpatch. The knightes templars, erected, as is thought, by the princes of
France, to preferue their conquefl in the Holy Land, when, by keeping the rules of their inftitution
in tJie firfl yeeres, they had piu'chafed a great reputation of holynelfe, and thereby drawne to themfelues an infinite wealth, became at lafl intolerable to kinges, and by one uniforme confent, in the
Councell of Vienna, were condemned, and the order abolilhed. The order was of a longer Handing
by much then our Jefuites, but to kinges nothing fo dangerous. The writers that mention them, do
not agree vpon the caufes of their generall hatred, and leaue the reader in fiifpenfe, wliether iuflly they
merited extermination or not : But pofteritie ihall haue an aduantage in vnderftanding the doctrine of
Jefuites by their printed bookes, and their feditious practifes, by the attempts they haue made againfl
the eflates and Hues of princes. Secta hcec rebellis ejl, et nocens regibus. A rebellious feet they are,
and hurtfull enemies to kings, cruel affaiins, teaching difloyaltie, and plotting the deaths of princes,
which all Evrope, and thou, France, by the reft, can teflifie. O kings, when ihall ye awake, and take
it in your harts to fulfil Gods decree ? When iliall yee vindicate your crownes from the vniuft ufurpations of the prieft; of Home ? Shal the difgrace and violence done to fome of your facred perfons for euer thus lye vnauenged ? We know it Ihall not: But God hath his day, who will patiently
attend. In the meane time, I Ihall wilh the Catholikes of this kingdome to confider and looke more
deeply in their profeffion, then they yet haue done. The myfteries of the Romilh Religion are not
feene at the firft. Surely, fome of our Papiftes doe not know them, efpecially that principle, which biadea

> Tomo 11. page 802. » De Pont. lib. 5. cap. 6. ' Lib. 6. cap. 4, num. 18.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 335

them to obey the Pope againft al the world. Suarius^ hath taught them, that it is to be field as an
article of faith, that the Pope hath power to depofe kings ; and that hee who denyes this power to the
Pope, denyes the Catholicke faith. By this is there no meane left to bee a Catholike, and remaine
the Kings loyall fubiect. To beleeue the Popes power is fuch, is vndenyable treafoii : To refufe
it, is to renounce Catholick religion ; which lall, I perfwade myfelfe all true and naturall Scots will
choofe, and of the choife fliall it neuer repent them. I befeech God to open their eyes that are clofed,
and giue vs all to be contented with the Scriptures of God, which, by themfelues, are able to perfect
vs vnto euery good worke. Farewell.

A TRVE Relation of the Proceedings agahjl Iohn Ogilyie, a lefuit, efpecialhj at his Arraignement and Execution^ which ivas at Glajgow, the lajl of
Fehruarie^ heeing on Tuefday, 1615.

John Ogilvie, alias Watson, (for, according to the maners of his feet, he
was multinominis, a man of diners names,) came into Scotland at Martimes 1613,
and making his refidence for the moll part of that winter in the north parts of
Scotland, tooke his journey to England a litle before Eafter. Where, giuing out
to fome of his countrey-men, that he had a fupplication for fome wrongs to prefent to his Majeftie, hee attended the Court fome two moneths ; and falling in
acquaintance with a gentleman of the Weft countrey, after his pretended bufinefle was done, or the occafion difappointed, he returned into Scotland with the
faide gentleman, in the beginning of lune thereafter. Vpon this familiaritie, and
other intelligences giuen him, he came to Glafgow in Auguft following ; and
finding a kinder receipt by certaine perfons in that citie, (who for that crime
haue fmce bene juftly condemned,) then either he expected, or became them to
haue gi-anted, he made fome haunt and refort thither at fundry times, till at laft
he was detected, and, by the direction of the Archbilhop of Glafgow, who at that
time kept his refidence within the citie, apprehended and committed to prifon.
It was the fourth of October, a litle after foure of the clocke in the afternoone,
when perceaued to bee ouertaken fomewhat in company, his examination was
differred to the morrow after. There was found with him two or three litle
bookes, containing directions for confeffioun ; his budget being in the houle
where he kept at night, was conuoyed out of the way by one of his familiars,
and prefented the next day after, fearch beeing made by the magiftrates of tlie
citie, therein was found his Maffe garments, chalice, altar, and the rcll of tliat
ftuffe, with letters not fit at this time to bee divulgate. Amongft others, a uarrand to difpenfe with thofe who pofTeft church-liuings, after this tenor, 7//0 ad
difpenfationem de twnis ecclefiajlicis p)oteris difpenjarc nt rctincant qua' pofu
denti dummodo in pios vfas aliquid impendant pro indicio ConJi'JJ'arii dilpcnliin-

' Propofitio h(cc, Papa potejiatcm hahct ad dqionendos rcgcs hcreticos ct perfi/ians, inter dogmata
fidei tenenda et credenda eft. Infra: Si abjuratur htec potellu!^, abjuiatur catholica fides. Lib. 6,
.cap. 8, num. 8.

336 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

lis. Plee had in the famin maile diuerfe Reliques, peeces of wood, bones, and a
tufte of Ignativs hair, the founder of the lefuites order, which I thinke was his
chiefeft iewell.

In his examination, which was the next morning, before the Archbifliop of
Glafgow, the Bifhop of Argyle, the Lords Fleming, Boyde, and Kilfyth, the
Prouefl of the citie of Glafgow, S. Walter Stewart and S. George Elphingfton,
knights, he confelled his true name to be lohn Ogilvie ; that he was borne in
the North of Scotland, and had bene foorth of the countrey 21 yeeres ; that hee
liued at Grats, in a colledge of the lefuites, and was receiued in their order ; that
lie returned into Scotland by the command of his fuperiour, and was to Itay
there vntill hee were recalled, if no other impediment fliould offer. Being required to giue his oath, that he fliould declare nothing but truetli, in fuch things
as fliould be demanded ; he anfwered, ' that he would take oath, but with fome
exceptions, namely, if hee were demanded in any thing that touched his eftate
and life, or that might endanger thefe or any of them, he would not anfwere,
likewife if the fame tended to the preiudice of others.' And when it was replied,
that, his exceptions being admitted, his oath was as good as no oath, feeing any
queftions that could be propofed, would concerne fome of thefe, he was induced
at laft to giue a fimple oath, which he did vpon his knees ; and riling vp from
the ground, faid, ' I Avill neither lie nor sequiuocate, but what I fay flialbe truth ;
and what I am afked, if I find it impertinent for me to anfwere, I will fay nothing, or declare plainly I will not tel.'

Then being inquired of his comming in Scotland, the time and bufines he
came to do, anfwered, ' his bufines was to faue foules.' Touching the time when
lie came into Scotland, anfwered, * In the lune before :' where hee was deprehended to ajquiuocate, notwithftanding of his proteflation ; for he meaned of his laft
comming, and was afked concerning the firft. But the time at that examination
was not vnderllood. Being inquired of the places where he had bene receiued,
denyed to tel ; and if he had faid Maffe in any place, he anfwered, ' hee would
not fay any thing that might worke jireiudice to himfelfe or others :' and becaufe
he had profeffed that hee would not lie, the reply he commonly made to fuch
queflions, was, * I will not tell you.'

The Lordes, finding him thus obftinate, returned him to a chamber in the
Caftle, which was prepared for him, nothing lacking that was requifite for one
of his qualitie ; and there hee was kept to the 8 of December. Now and then
conference was giuen him by diners of the Minifters, in all which, heate and
choler was efpyed much to oner-rule him. The fcliole diftinctions he had in readineffe, and thereby, when hee could not fliift the argument, made femblance to
euade. But of Holy Scripture (as he feemed not to be well acquainted there48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 337

with), he made little reckoning, denying it ftill, after the lefuites maner, to bee
the onely rule of faith.

The 12 of December, he was prefented at Edinburgh, before the Lords Commiffioners, aj3pointed by his Maiefties MifRue for his examination and tryall ;
namely, the Lord of Binning, Secretary, the Lord of Kilfyth, Sir Gidion Murray, Thefaurer-deputie, and Sir William Oliphant, his Maiefteis Atturney-Generall ; to whom he anfwered in al that was proponed, as of before at Glalgow.
There, the letters intercepted with him were prefented, which he acknowledged
to be his ; yet beeing demanded, touching certain particulars contained in them,
he denyed to giue ther lordftiijis any fatisfaction : And howbeit there was no
perfwafion omitted, that might haue induced any good nature to a better relblution, it auailed not. So as their lortllliips, perceiuing nothing but a pertinacious
refufing in him to anfwere to points moll realbnable, and withall apprehending
his flay at Court, in the lad fummer, to haue bene for fome worfe feruice then
he could fpeede in, determined, according to the power giuen them, to extort by
torments another confeffion : which being intimated to him, and he rejilying that
he was ready to fuffer what they pleafed, it was thought fit to proue him with
the moft eafiefl forme of tryall that could be ufed. And here, it being remembred, that in the tryal of fome criminal perfons, it was found that nothing helped
more to find out the trueth of the faults wherewith they were charged, than the
with-holding of their naturall reft ; it was aduiied, that he fliould be kept without fleepe for fome nights, which was accordingly done : and during which time
it was perceiued, that hee remitted much of his former obftinacie, and falling to
difcouer certaine of his receauers in Edinburgh, gaue hope, that, by gentle ufage,
hee would bee drawne to giue their lordfliips contentment.

In the meane timejChriftmaffe approaching, at which time there is an ordinarie
celTation from the affaires of Counfell and SefTioun, the Archbifliop of Glafgow%
beeing to repaire homewards, and vnwilling to difcharge himfelfe of that prilbner,
till hee might at leafure worke him to a better minde, obtained tlie fauour of
their L. to retaine him, in his companie, for a fourth-night after, or till hee llioulde
returne himfelfe to Edinburgh.

It pleafed his Ma. in this time, whileft he was remaining at Glafgow, to fend
a CommifTion to the Archbifliop of Glafgow, the Lord Bifliop of Argyle, the
Lord Fleming, S' George Elphingfton, and lames Ilammilton, Proneft of the
citie of Glafgow, for trying the faid lefuit his opinion, touching his Ilighneffe
royal power, and the Popes claimed jurifdiction, maintained by Bellarmine,
Suarius, and others of that fort. The queftions were thefe :

1. Whether the Pope be iudge, and haue power, lujynituaHhus, ouer his MaVOL. III. 2 U

338 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

ieftie, and whether that power will reach oner his Maieftie, euen in temporalibus^
if it be in ordine adJpirituaUa^ as Bellarmine affirmeth ?

2. Whether the Pope haue power to excommunicate Kings, (efpecially fuch
as are not of his church,) as his Maieftie ?

3. Whether the Pope haue power to depofe Kings, by him excommunicated ;
and in particular, Whether he haue power to depofe the King his Maiefty ?

4. Whether it be no murther to flay his Maiefty, being fo excommunicated
and depofed by the Pope ?

5. Whether the Pope haue power to aftbyle fubiects from the oath of their
borne and natural allegeance to his Maieftie ?

Vpon the 18 day of lanuarie, the forefaid queftions being red diftinctly vnto
him, and he required to declare his opinion thereanent, anfwered as followeth :

To the firft, ' That hee thought the Pope of Rome ludge to his Maieftie, and
to haue power ouer him, injpirifiialihus, if the King be a Chriftian :' and where
it is aflved, if that power will reach ouer his Maieftie, in temporallbus ? hee fayes,
* hee is not obliflied to declare his opinion therein, except to him that is ludge
in controverftes of religion, which hee acknowladges to be the Pope, or fome one
hauing authoritie of him.'

To the fecond hee anfwereth, * that the Pope hath power to excommunicate
his ]\Iaieftie :' and where it is faid, that the King is not of the Pope his church,
hee faith, * that all who are bai)tized, are vnder the Popes power.'

To the third, where it is aflved, if the Pope haue power to depofe his Maieftie,
beeing excommunicated ? Anfwereth, ' that hee will not declare his mind, except
to him that is ludge, in controuerfies of religion.'

To the fourth, whether it bee lawfull to flay his Maieftie, being excommunicated and depofed by the Pope? Anfwereth, utfupra. nv/oi j'

To the fift, whether the Pope hath power to aflbile fubiects from their borne
and naturall allegeance to his Maieftie? Anfwereth, utfupra.

In all thefe Articles, he was particularly refoned with by the Archbifliop of
Glafgow, Mr Robert Boyd, Principal of the College, a man of rare erudition,
and i\Ir Robert Scot, one of the Minifters of the citie ; where it was alio fignified vnto him, that it concerned him in no lefle then his life, what anfwere he
fliould make ; if he fliould ftand obftinate in thefe he had giuen, he might know
what fauour was to be expected for his other crimes. Not the leff*e, ratifying all
that formerly was faid, hee added this further, ' that he condemned the oathes
of fupremacie and allegeance proponed to be fworne in England,' and would
needes haue the writer to infert thofe wordes ; to all which hee put his hand,
fubfcribing thus, Iohannes Ogilyeus, Societatis Icfu.

Thefe anfweres beeing fent to his Majeftie, vnder the teftification of the fore48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 3J9

faide Commiffi oners, his highnefle gaue order to the Lordes of the Priuie Counlell, for his triall; which was appointed to be at Glafgow, the lad of Februarie.
Immediately after, the Archbifliop of Glafgow directed the Proueft and BayUes
of the citie vnto him, to lignifie that TuelUay following was appointed for his
arraignment ; and that hee would not bee accufed for Mafle faying, or any thing
elfe that concerned his profeffion, but for the anfwers that hee had made to the
demands propofed to him by his Maiefties Commiffioners. They declared alfo,
that if hee fliould, vpon better refolution, recall thole anfweres, and apply himfelfe to giue his Maieftie fatisfaction, in other j^oints, which of deutie hee was
obliflied vnto, the faid Archbifliop would vfe his credite with his highnefle and
the Lordes of the Priuie Counfell, for his fafetie. His anfwere was, ' that he
thanked his lordfliip, for the good will and kindnefle offered; but he was fo little
minded to recall any thing hee had faid, as when hee came to the place, hee
would make a commentarie vpon his anfweres.'

The Minifters of Glafgow, accompanied with Maifl:er Williame Struthers, one
of the Minifters of Edinburgh, did alfo vifite him, fome two dayes before, aduiflng him to the fame purpofe, and offering him their beft counfell and comfort.
His anfwere was, ' That he had refolved what to doe ; and if hee ftoode in neede
of their comfort, hee flioulde advertife.*

The Earle of Lowthiane, trufting by conference to bring him to a better minde,
went vnto him at diuers tymes, uflng many perfuafions to draw him from his
obftinate courfe : but nothing could jn-euaile with him, as in the i)roceedings ye
fliall perceiue.

The Araignment of Iohx Ogilyie, on Tuefday the laft of Februarie, in
the town-houfe of Geasgow, before lames Hamnnlton, Proueft of Glafgow,
lames Bell, Coline Campbell, and lames Bradvvood, Baylies of the citie,
luftices appointed by fpeciall commiflion for that bufmes, by the Lordes of
Priuie Counfell. The forefaid Iudges being aflifted by the honourable
Lords there prefent: — lohn Archbifliop of Glafgow, James IMarques of
Hammilton, Robert Earle of Lowthiane, AVilliam Lord Sanquhar, lohn
Lord Fleming, Robert Lord Boyde, and Sir Walter Stewart, Baylie deputie
of the regalitie of Glafgow.

On Tuefday, the laft of Februarie, a litle after 11 of the clocke, in the forcnoone,
the Court beeing fet, ]\Ir William Hay of Baro, Commiflar of Glafgow, deputed by
fl)eciall commiflion from Sir William Oliphant of Newtouii, his iMajeflies Atturney Generall, produced the Inditement following : togetlier with the citation vied
againft thofe who were to palfe vpone the jurie, and the roll of their i)articular
names, fubfcribed with liis liand, according to the cuftome obferued in thofe cales.

340 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

The Ixditement of Iohn Ogilvie, Iesuit, after the forme of the law of
Scotland. — loHX Ogilvie, by your fubfcription, a Prieft of the late execrable
order of Iesuits, you are indited and accufed, That, forafmuch as God, the author
of all righteous gouerneraent, hauing eftal)liflied Kings and Magiftrats his lieuetenants vpon earth, for repreffing of violence, oppreffion, and vice, and the promouing of pietie and juftice, hath, in his particular grace and fauor, bleffed this
countrey with a more ancient, juft, and permanent delcent of lawfull Kings, than
any other nation of the world ; and extended our felicitie beyond the happines of
our anteceiTors, by the juftice, wifdome, and clemencie of his Maiefteis profperous
reigne ; and hath not onely rewarded his Maiefteis zeale and righteoufnes with
wealth and peace, but alio honoured and ftrengthened him with the acceflion of
the moft mightie and flourifliing kingdomes of England, France, and Ireland.
Which viftble fauours, proceeding directly from Gods moft bountifull hand,
mooued the whole Eftates of this kingdome, aftembled in the Parliament holden
at Perth, the 9 of lulie, 1606, To acknowledge his Maiefties foveraigne authoritie, princely power, royall prerogatiue, and priuilege of his crowne, ouer all
eftates, perfons, and caufes whatfoeuer, within the kingdome : And all in one
voice, faithfully promife to maintaine, defend, obey, and aduance the life, fafetie,
honour, dignitie, foueraigne authoritie, and prerogatiue royall of his facred Ma^
jeftie, and priuiledges of his crowne : And to withftand all perfons, powers, and
eftates, who fliould prefume, preafte, or intend any wayes to impugne, hurt, or
impair, the fame : As alfo, his Maieftie, with aduife of the whole eftates of this
kingdome, in the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, the 22 day of May, anno 1584,
ratified, ajiproued, and perpetually confirmed, his Majefties royall power and authoritie ouer all eftates,as well fpiritual as temporall, within this realme: And ftatuted
and ordained, that his Ilighnefte, his heyres and fucceftburis, by themfelues and
their Counfelles, were, and in all times comming fliould bee, ludges, competent
to all perfons, his Highnefte fubjectes, of whatfoeuer eftate, degree, function, or
condition that euer they be of, fpiritual or temporall, in all matters wherein they
or any of them fliould be apprehended, fummoned, or charged to anfwere vnto
fuch things as fliould be inquired of them, by our faid foueraign Lord and his
Counfell : And that none of them, who fliould be apprehended, called, or fummoned, to the effect forefaid, fliould prefume or take in hand to decline the
judgement of his Highnefte, his hayres and fuccelTours, or their Counfell, in the
premiftes, vnder the paine of treafon: And likewife, by the 48 Act of King
lames the Firft his Parliament, and diuers other Parliaments thereafter, it is
ordained, that all the King liis lieges line and be gouerned vnder the Kings lawes
and ftatutcs, and vnder no lawes of other countries and realmes, vnder the paines
of treafon, and others ; (as is) particularly expreffed in the Acts before mentioned,

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 341

and other lawes of this kingdome. Notwithftauding whereof, it is of trueth and
veritie, that you, hauing renounced your natural 1 allegeance and deutie to your
natiue and righteous King, and caft off all reuerence, refpect, and obedience to
liis foueraigne authoritie and lawes, and dedicat'^d your mind and actions to the
vnlawfuU obedience of forraine powers, aduerfaries to his Majeftie; and refolving,
fo farre as in you lieth, to feduce his Majefties fubjectes from the faith and allegeance due to his Majeftie, repaired to his countrey, in the moneth of lune laft
paft, or thereabout, and by your conferences, intifements, auricular confeffions,
Maffe-faying, and other fubtle and craftie meanes, indeuoured your felfe, not
onely to corrupt many of his Maiefties lieges, in religion, but alfo to peruert
them from their duetifull obedience due to his Majeftie, till you were difcouered
•and apprehended by the Archbilliop of Glafgow ; who, with diners his Maiefties
Counfellers, and others his good fubjectes, ufed all Chriftian and charitable
meanes to bring you to the fenfe of your hainous offences, and delire of amendment thereof: But they, lofing all their well-intended labours, were (in refpect
of your peruerfe obftinacie) commanded by his Majeftie, to enter to your examination, and the tryall of your hainous crimes and tranfgreflions. And efpecially, the faide Archbifliop of Glafgow, and many others of good ranke and
qualitie adjoined to him, by his Majeftie, for your examination, hauing, vpon
the 18 day of lanuarie laft, called you before them, to examine you vpon fome
particular interrogatories, prefcriued by his Majeftie to be demanded of you, as
directly concerning his Majefties mofte facred perfon, life, crowne, and eftate.
And chiefly, you beeing demanded by them, whether the Pope hath power to
depofe Kinges, beeing excommunicated ? And in particular, if he haue power to
dejoofe the Kings Majeftie, our foueraigne, l)eing excommunicated by him ? You
anfwered, treafonably, that you woulde not declare your mind, except to liim that
is iudge in the controuerfies of religion, whom (by your anfwere made to the
latter part of the firft interrogatorie, demanded of you that day) you declared to
be the Pope, or any hauing authoritie from him : Albeit, by the Acts of Parliament, and lawes of this Realme, made in the yeeres of God 1560 and 15(57, it is
ftatuted and ordained, that the Biftiop of Rome (called the Pope) lliall haue no
iurifdiction nor authoritie within this Realme, in any time conniiing : And
thereby, not onely declined treafonably his Maiefties iurilUiction, allowing of the
Popes iurifdiction, which is difcharged by Acts of Parliament, as faid is ; but
hath committed moft danmable and high treafon, in not acknowledging that the
Pope hath no power to depofe his Maieftie, who, holding his crowne and authoritie abfolutely, fouerainly, and innnediatly of God, may not be depolbd by any
earthly perfon, power, or authoritie. And thereafter, being demanded. If it be
lawful! to ftay his Majefty, being excommunicated and depofed by the Pope ?

342 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

you anfwered, \itfupra ; wliicli was, that you M'oulde not declare your mind till
you were before the Pope, or others hauing authoritie from him : Thereby, not
onely declining, trealbnably, his Maieflies jurifdiction and authoritie royall ; but
by your not anfwering clearely, that it is altogether vnlawfuU, damnable, and
diabolicall, once to thinke that it is lawfull to flay his moft facred Majeftie, you
haue committed moft hainous, pernicious, and vnpardonable treafon. And laftly,
being demanded, If the Pope had power to afToile his Majefties borne fubjectes
from their naturall allegeance ? you anfwered, nt Jiipi'ct : and thereby, both
declined, treafonably, his Highnes iurifdiction and authoritie royall, in refufing
to anfwere before his Maiefties Counfellers and Commiffioners forefaid, in one
matter, meerely concerning his royal jiower ouer his people, and their fubiection
to his Maieftie : and alfo committed wilfull and deteftable treafon, in not acknowledging, profeffedly and prefently, that none on earth had power to affoile his
Maiefteis fubiects from their naturall fubiection and allegeance to him. But
that it may bee knowne that your treafon proceeded of forethought fellonie and
obftinate refolution, you freely and vnrequiredly did adde to your forefaid
anfweres, this damnable conclufion, that you condemned the oathes of fupremacie
and allegeance giuen to his Maieftie, by his fubiects, in his Dominions ; wherby
it is apparent, that your erand to this Countrie hath beene, to infect his Highnefte fubiects with the poifon of your peftilent and treafonable opinion forefaid,
to the fubuerfion of Religion, ouerthrow of his Maiefties authoritie and crown,
and deftruction of his moft facred perfon. And albeit, the courfe of all his
Maiefties life and reigne, hath manifefted how vnwilling hee hath euer beene to
ufe the feueritie of his Lawes againft thofe who hath faid and heard Mafle, and
otherwife controuened the Acts of Parliament made againft idolatrous papiftrie,
and practifers thereof, within this Kingdome ; defiring rather to reclaime them,
by inftruction, from their errours, to the knowledge and profeftion of the trueth :
And when he found them obdurat, and of defperate refolution, relieuing the
countrie of the dangerous progrefTe of their courfes, by their imprifonment and
baniflnnent, whereof you had fuch experience, in the perfones of your owne
complices, condemned for their manifeft crymes, as might verie probablie haue
made you to haue expected the like ; if anie memorie of your natiue duetie and
borne allegeance had poftefted your mind : But you, beeing altogether deftitute
thereof, by the three laft articles of your Depofitions aboue written, you haue fo
plainely difcouered, that you profelfedly approue the meanes, and wifli the effect,
of the ouer-throwe of his Maiefties eftate, the deftruction of his Higlmefte perfon,
and feduction of his natiue fubiectes from their fubjection and duetifuU obedience ; that thereby, and by euery one of your forefaid anfweres, you haue committed mofte hainous, deteftable, and vnpardonable treafon, and deferuedly

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 343

incurred the moll rigorous paines therof to be executed vpon your body, lands,
and goods, with all extremities, to the terrour of others.

The Inditement being read, Maifter William Hay, fubflitute for his Maiefties
Atturney, opened the fame, to the effect following. — Albeit the Inditement of
it felfe be cleare enough, and reprefenteth fufhciently to my Lordes luftices, their
honourable Lordfliijis heere affifting, and to your felfe, lohn Ogilvie, who ftandes
there accufed, the weight and gravitie of the crime by you committed, yet I
fliall refume it to you in few words, that your anfweres may be the more diftinct,
and without miftaking.

You are not accufed of faying Maffe, nor of feducing his IMaiefteis fubjectes
to a contrarie religion, nor of any j^oint touching you in confcience, properly; but
for declining his Maiefties authoritie, againft the lawes and ftatutes of the land,
and for maintaining treafonable opinions ; fiich as we, of this Realme, haue not
heard by any auowed. The ftatutes, mentioned in your Inditement, make it
treafon not to anfwere the Kings Maieftie, or his Counfell, in any matter which
fliall be demanded : You beeing examined by my Lord Archbifliop of Glafgow,
and other honourable perfons adioyned to him, by his Maiefties fpecial Commiffion, refufed to anfwere vnto diuers interrogatories proponed to you by their
Lordfliips ; and, at the fame time, profeffedly auouched the Pope of Rome his
iurifdiction, which, by the Lawes of the countrie, is many yeeres fmce plainly
difcharged : Therefore, haue you incurred the penaltie contained in the ftatutes,
and the famine ought and fliould be executed vpon you.

It is further laid vnto your charge, that you, being demanded in the particulars,
namely. Whether the Pope hath power to depofe the Kings Maieftie, our foueraigne ? Secondly, Whether it be lawfuU to flay his Maieftie, being depofed by
the Pope? Thirdly, Whether the Pope hath power to aftbile his Maiefties fubiects from their naturall allegeance, or not ? You denied to giue any anfwere,
touching any of tliele points, except yee were inquired thereof by the Pope, or
others hauing authoritie from him ; and fo not acknowledging that his IMaiefties
crowne and authoritie is held immediately and fouerainely of God, the author of
all gouernement ; that it is deteftable, once to thinke, that his facred Maieftie
may bee lawfully killed ; and that no man hath power to affoile his Maiefties
fubjectes from their naturall allegeance to his nighneffe : You haue. in thefe
points, and euery one of them, committed nioft hainous treaibn ; for tlie which,
what you fay in your own defenfe, I fee not. And yet further, that it may be
feeue, how defperate your refolution is, in al thefe points, althogh you were not
required concerning the oaths of fupremacy and allegeance giucu to liis ]\Iaieftie
by his fubiectes, ye freely, and out of your owne motiues, condemned thefe oathcs,

Sa CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

as impious and vnlawfull. Thereby hath it appeared, what a wicked and treafonable mind you fofter againft his INIaieftie, our foueraigne. If you fliould
deny it, heere are your anfvveres, fubfcribed with your owne hand, wliieh ye
cannot but acknowledge ; them I defire to bee read, as likewife the feuerall
llatutes of Parliament, which you are alledged to haue tranfgreffed ; and therer
after, lince his Maieflie is pleated that the ordinarie courfe of tryall be kept
vnto you, you iliall haue libertie to fay for your felfe, either againft the rele-i
vancie of the Inditement, or verification produced, what you thinke beft.

Then were read the ftatutes of Parliament, mentioned in the Inditement, and
the faid lohn Ogilvies anlwcres to the demands projioned vnto him ; which he
acknowledged for his owne, and the fubfcrijDtion thereto fubioyned : after which,
hauing licence of the Court to fay what he coulde for himfelfe, he fpake to this
effect : — ' Firft, vnder proteftation that I doe no way acknowledge this iudgement, nor receiue you, that haue that Commiflion there produced, for my iudges,
I deny any point laid againft me to be treafon : for if it were treafon, it would
bee treafon in all places, and in all kingdomes ; but that,' faith he, ' is knowne
not to be fo. As for your Actes of Parliament, they are made by a number of
partiall men, the beft of the land not agreeing with them, and of matters not
fubiect to their forum, or iudicatorie, for which I will not giue a rotten figge !'

* Where I am thought an enemie to the Kings Maiefties authoritie, I knowe
none other authoritie he hath, but that which he received from his predeceftbrs,
who acknowledged the Pope of Rome his iurifdiction. If the King,' faith he,
' will be to me as his predeceffors were to mine, I will obey and acknowledge
him for my King ; but if he doe otherwife and play the runneagate from God,
as he and you all doe, I will not acknowledge him, more than this old hatte !'

Heere the Archbifliop of Glalgow interrupted his fpeech, defiring him to
deliuer his mind in a greater calme, and with more reuerent fpeeches of his
Maieftie (for he vttered thofe things in a vehement paffion, and as one tranfported
with fury) ; liee remembered him, that hee was accufed vpon his life, before
iudges that were authorized by his Maiefties Commiffion : to decline the iudgement, or raile againft his Maiefties authoritie, was bootlefte, and in a man of his
profeflion, being an Eccleftafticke, very fcandalous. He fliould rather take another
courfe to amend what he had offended in, and recall his former anfweres, if they
had not proceeded from a deliberate purpofe ; or if hee were refolute to maintaine
them, to doe it with reafon, and in a moderate fort ; that this were his beft,
either for iuftifying himfelfe, and the opinions he held, or for mouing the Iudges,
and their Lordfliips that were affifting, to commiferat his cafe : he aduertifed
him withall, to be more temperate in his fpeeches concerning his Majeftie, otherwife he would not be licenced thus to offend.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. . CRIMINAL TRIALS. 345

To this, Ogilvie made fome litle aiifwere, ' That hee would take the adiiertifement, and fpeake more coklly :' howbeit, hee woiikl neuer acknowledge the
iudgement, nor thinke they had power to fit on his life, but faid, * And for the
reuerence I doe you, to ftand bare-headed before you, I let you know it is, ad
redempt'ionem vexationis, et non ad agnitionem ludicii.

The Aduocate here infifted, that feeing all his anfweres tended to decline the
iudgement, and that hee brought no reafon why the Inditement fliould not goe
to a tryall, that the lurie fliould be chofen and fworne at the Barre, according

to the cuftome.

The Names of the Iurie.

SirGeo.ElpbingftonofBlythfwood, Hew Crawfurd of lordane-hill, lohn Dunlop of Powmilne,

Sii" Thomas Boyd of Bonefhaw, lohn Carfchore of that Ilk, lohn Stewart, burges of Aire,

SirJ^EdmeflonofDuntiaith, elder, Hew Kennedy, prouefl of Aire, lohn Dumbar, burges there,

lames Murehead of Lachope, William Makarrel of Hill-houfe, lames lohnflon, burges there,

lames Roberton of Ernock, lames Blaire, baylie of Aire, lohn Cunningham of Rawes.

It was allowed the prifoner to challenge any of the fore-named perfons, and to
oppofe vnto their admiffion : who faid, ' He had but one exception for them all :
they Avere either enemies to his caufe, or friendes ; if enemies, they coulde not
bee admitted vpon his triall, and if they were his friends, they fliould ftand
prifoners at the Barre with him.'

The Iurie, being knowne to be all difcrete and fubftantiall j^erfons, were
inftantly fworne and admitted.

Then was the Inditement read againe, in the hearing of the Iurie, and the
euidences ftiewed them for verification thereof, which of before were produced.
And the prifoner, beeing of new remembred to fay what hee Avoulde for liimfelfe,
for the better information of the Iurie, fpake tliefe things following :

* I wifli thefe Gentlemen to confider well what they doe. I cannot bee tried
nor iudged by them ; and whatfoeuer I fuffer here, it is by way of iniurie, and
not of iudgment. Inim'ia efl^ non indicium. I am accufed of treafon, hot haue
done none offence, neither will I begge mercy.'

' This is ftrange,' fayetli the Archbifliop, ' you haue done none offence, and yet
you are come in his Maiefties kingdome, and hath laboured to peruert his Ilighneffe fubjects ; both of thefe are againft the law : In this haue ye not offended ?'

' Not,' he anfwereth ; * I came by commandement, and if I were even now
foortli of the kingdome, I fliould returne : neither doe I repent any tiling, but
that I haue not been fo bufie as I fliould, in that which yee call peruerting. I
hope to come to Glafgow againe, and to doe more good in it. If all the liaires of
mine head were prieftes, they fliould all come into the kingdome.'

* And doe you not,' fayeth the Archbifliop, ' efleeme it a fault to goe againft
the King his commandement, efi)ecially in this point of dilcharging you his kingVOL. III. 2 X

346 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

dom. If a King liaue any power within his kingdome, it feemes hee may rid
himfelfe and his countrey of thofe with whom he is offended ; and it fauoures of
great rebehion to fay otherwife.'

To this Ogilvie replyed, * I am a fiibiect as free, as the King is a King : he
cannot difcharge me, if I be not an offender, which I am not.' And being afl^ed,
for what offences he might be dilcharged by the King ? Anfwered, ' in the cafes
of theft and murther.'

* All this while,' faid the Archbifliop, * you come not to anfwere any thin'g to
the points of your Inditement. Why did you decline his Maiefties authoritie,
and refilled to fliew your oj^inion anent the Pope his power in depofing Kings,
and loofmg fubiects from their oath of allegiance ? And when it was aflN:ed you,
if it were lawfull to flay the King, being depofed and excommunicated by the
Pope, which any loyall hearted fubiect will abhorre to think of, why did you
uot fmijily condemne it as vnlawfull ? For in that you doe not condemne it, you
fliewe your felfe of the opinion of the refl of your feet, who in their bookes
maintaine, that it is both lawfull and commendable to flay Kings, if the Popes
commiflion goe foorth once for it.'

* For the declining of the Kings authoritie,' fayeth he, ' I will doe it flill in
matters of religion, for with fucli matters hee hath nothing to doe ; neither haue
I done any other thing, but that which the Miniflers did at Dundie ; they would
not acknowledge his Maieflies authoritie, in fpirituall matters, more than I ; and
the befl Miniflers of the land are flill of that minde, and if they be wife, will
continue fo.'

Tlie Archbifliop replied, ' that he was miflaken, both in the place and matter ;
for it was not at Dundie, but Aberdein, where eight Miniflers, meeting to a
General Affemblie, contended not againfl the Kinges authoritie, but that the
Affemblie called to that place and time, could not be difcharged by his Maieflies
CommifTioner : Neither fliould the fact of a few, taken at the worfl, be eileemed
the deed of the whole. Thefe haue bene puniflied for their offences, and fome
of them haue confefTed their errour, and bene gracioufly pardoned by his Maieflie:
All good ]\Iiniflers profefTe otherwife, and our religion teacheth us to acknowledge
his IMaieflie, our onely fupreame iudge, in all caufes. The King is keeper of both
Tables, and his j)lace bearcs him not onely to the ruling of his fubiects in iuilice,
and preferuing equitie amongfl them ; but euen to maintaine religion and Gods
j)iire worfliip, of which he fliould haue principal care. Your lord, the Pope,
hath not onely denyed this authoritie to Kings, which God giueth them, but
ufurpeth to himfelfe a power of depofing and killing, when he is difpleafed; and
it were the lefle to be regarded, if this his ulurpation had gone no further then
your pennes ; but you haue entred, by this pretended right, the throats of the

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 347

greateft Kings, as your practife vpon the two laft Henries of France beares
witneffe. You are not able to lay fucli imjiutation vpon vs, nor our profeifiou,
which teaches, that, next vnto God Almightie, all men are bound to feare, feme,
and honour their Kinges. But what anfwere you, touching thefe demandes ?
Hath the Pope power to depofe the King ? Or is it not murther to kill him,
being depofed by the Pope ?'

* I refufed of before,' faid hee, * to anfwere fuch queftions, becaufe in anfwering, I fhould acknowledge you iudges in controuerfies of religion, which I doe
not. I wall not call holy things to dogges.'

' And is it,' faid the Archbilliop, ' a point of faith, that the Poj^e may depofe
his Maieftie ? Or do you think it a controuerfie in religion, AVhether his Maieftie
(whom God faue) may be lawfully killed or not ?'

To this Ogilvie replied, ' It is a quellion amongft the Doctors of the Church,
and many hold the affirmatiue, not improbably : A Councill hath not yet determined the point ; and if it lliall be concluded by the Church, that the Pope hath
fuch power, I will giue my life in defence of it, and if I had a thoufand Hues, I
would beftowe them that way, if they will make an article of faith of it.' Being
vrged to declare his owne opinion, efpecially in that point, whether it were murther to kill his Maieftie, being depofed by the Pope, he anfwered, ' that he would
not fay it were vnlawfull, though he fliould faue his life by it.' Then going on
with a long fpeech of the Pope his power, affirmed the King to be fubject to him,
by the vertue of Chriftes faying to Peter, Pa fee oves meets. * That if the King
offended againft the Catholicke Church, the Pope might punifli him afwell as a
fliepheard or the poorell fellow in the countrey. That in abrogating the Popes
authoritie, the eftates of Parliament had gone beyond thair limites, and that the
King, in vfurping the Popes right, had loft his owne. uVam qui rcq)itjus alieniim,' fayeth hee, * perditjus adjiium.^

Beeing aflved touching the oath of allegeance, why he did condemne it, and
the famine being read vnto him, he faid, ' It was a damnable oath, againft God
and his trueth, and that it was treafon to fweare it ; becaufe it brought the Kings
perfon and ftate in danger ; fince this kingdome,' fayeth he, * was Chriftian, the
Popes fujireme power was alwayes acknowledged ; this being caft off, (as we fee
in the Act of your Parliament,) againft all reafon and confcience, and fubiectes
forced to fwear to a matter fo vnlawfull, what maruell that attemptes and dangerous courfes be taken againft him ? Iu(}\i}lma lex cjl, uf quce agit aliquis, talla
patiatur. But would the King leaue off his vfurping vpone the Pope, hee might
liue without feare, afwell as the King of Spaine, or any other Chriftian ])rince :'
And with this hee intermixed fome fpeeches, of his owne feruice, and the leruice
of other lefuits done to his Maieftie, whereof hee faide, ' Neither Biihoj), uor

348 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Minifter, nor all the Bifliops and Minifters in his Maiefties kingdomes, had done
or could doe the like.'

The further hee proceeded in fpeaking, his fpeeches flill grew to hee the more
intollerable ; therefore the Archbifliop of Glafgow, willing him to make an end,
did clofe all with fome wordes to the lurie, to this effect. Gentlemen, and others,
who are named vpon this Affife, though I minded to haue faide nothing, but
iitten heere a witnefle of the proceeding, I haue beene forced, by his proud and
impudent fpeeches, fomewhat to replie ; and mull, with your patience, fay a little
more. It is this fame day, two and twentie weekes paft, that this prifoner fell
into mine handes ; iince that time hee hath had leifure to thinke enough what
courfe was fitteft for himfelf to take, for fatisfying his Maieftie, whome he had
offended : neither hath he lacked counfel and aduife, the beft that we could giue
him. Befides, hee hath found on our parte nothing but courteous dealing, and
better intertainement then (I muft now fay it) hee hath deferued. Mine owne
hopes were, that hee would have followed another courfe then I fee hee hath
taken, and not llande to the anfweres which hee made to thofe demandes, which
were moued vnto him by his Maiefties Commiflioners, and you haue feene : But
if his anfweres at the firft were treafonable, they are nowe fo little bettered, as
in all your hearinges, hee hath vttered fpeeches mofte deteftable, made a commentarie worfe then the text was, and fliewed himfelfe to carrie the minde of an
arrant and defperate tratour. You perceiue, he obfcures not his affection towardes
the Kinges Majeftie, our foueraigne, in all his fpeeches ; preferring the Pope to
his Majeftie : And, which is more intollerable, affirmeth the Kinges Maieftie to
haue loft the right of his kingdome, by vfurping vpon the Pope. Hee will not
fay it is vnlawfull to kill his Maieftie ; hee fayeth, it is treafon for fubiectes to
fweare the oath of allegeance ; and meaneth fo much, in his laft wordes, as the
Kinges Maiefties life and eftate cannot bee alTured, except hee render himfelfe
the Popes vaffall.

Thus hath hee left you little to doe : except that his Majefties pleafure is, the
ordinarie forme bee kept with him, youflioulde neuer neede once to remoue : all
his fpeeches haue beene fo ftuffed with treafon, that I am fure the patience of
the Noble-men, and others heere prefent, hath beene much prouoked.

In al that he hath faid, I can marke but two tbings alledged by him, for the
Popes authoritie ouer Kinges : the wordes of our Sauiour to Saint Peter, Pqfce
ones meas, Feede my flieepe ; and the fubjection of Kinges, efpecially of our
Kinges, fmce the kingdome became Chriftian, to the Pope. For the wordes of
our Sauiour, howe little tbey feme his purpofe, I haue no neede to tell you. To
feed the flieepe of Chrift, is not, I hope, to depofe Kinges from their eftates, nor
to inflame the heartes of fubjectes againft princes : much leffe to kill and difpatch

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 349

them : Wee are better taught then to bee deceiued with fuch glofles. Saint Peter
made neuer that fenfe of thofe wordes, and teacheth vs a farre other doctrine, in
his firft Epiftle, fift chapter, and fecond and third verfe.

I will not fpende time with fuch purpofe, onely this I mufte faye, that whatfoeuer was Saint Peters prerogatiue, the Pope of Rome hath nothing to doe with
it : for hee cannot bee Saint Peters fucceffour, that hath forfaken his doctrine,
and gone againft his practife directly, both in that and other points of Chriftian
faith. And for the antiquitie of his ufurped power, I may juftly fay, that Matter
Ogilvie is not well feene in antiquitie, or then fpeaketh againft his knowledge,
when he faieth, that this power of the Pope was euer acknowledged by Chriftian
Kinges : The Biflioj^s of Rome, for many yeeres, made no ftich claime, neither
did Emperours or Kinges euer dreame of fuch fubjection : Long it was ere the
Pope of Rome came to the height of commanding Kinges, and not till hee had
oppreffed the church, vnder the pretext of Saint Peters keyes, bearing downe all
the Bifliopes within Chriftendome : which hauing done, then hee made his inualion vpon princes, and that by degrees. The hiftories of all ages make this
plaine, and the refifting hee found by Kinges in their kingdomes, teftifieth that
they neuer acknowledged his fuperioritie. Of our owne, howbeit, as wee lye
farre from his feat, fo had wee leffe bufinefle, and fewer occafions of contradiction ; yet can I make it feene, in divers particulars, when any queftion fell out
anent the prouilion of Bifliops and Archbilliops to their places, the Bulles of
Rome were fo little refpected, as the Kinges predeceffors haue always preferred
and borne out their owne choice, and the interdictions made upon the realme, by
thefe occafions, not without fome imputation of weakneffe to the Sea Apoftolicke,
haue beene recalled. The fuperftitions of Rome were amongft vs laft embraced,
and with the firft, by the mercies of God, fliaken off : Whatfoeuer you bragge of
your antiquitie, it is falfe, both in this and all the pointes of your profeffion elfe,
which I could cleare, if this time or place were fitting. But to you of this lurie,
1 haue this only more to fay, you are to inquire vpon the veritie of the Inditement, whether fuch and fuch things as are alledged to be committed by him,
haue beene fo or not ? You haue his fubfcription, which hee acknowledgeth ; you
heare him felfe, and how hee hath mofte treafonably difauowed his IMajefties
authoritie : It concernes you onely to pronounce, as you fliall find verified by the
fpeeches that you haue heard, and the teftimonies producetl. For tlie reft, the
Juftices knowe fufficiently what to doe, and will feme God and his Majeftie,
according to the Commiflion giuen them.

Maifter William Hay, Aduocate for his Majeftie, aft^ed inftrumentes vpon the
prifoners treafonable fpeeches vttered in the hearing of the lurie, and his ratification of the former anfweres made to his Maiefties Commilfioners : Likewife, for

350 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

the further clearing of the Inditement, repeated the Actes of Parliament mentioned in the faid Inditement, with the Act of Priuie Coiiniell, made anent his
Maielties fiipremacie, and the oath of allegeance : And delired the lurie deeply
to weigh and confider the peruerle and diuelifli difpofition of the partie accufed,
to the effect they might, without fcruple, proceede in his conuiction. And according to his place, proteiled for AVilfuU Errour, if they fliould acquite him of any
point contained in the faide Inditement.

[Verdict.] The perfons named vpon the lurie remoued to the higher hoiife,
which was prejiared for them ; and hauing elected Sir George Elphingftone chancellar, all in one voice, found the prifoner Guiltie of the whole Treafonable
crimes contained in the Inditement. — [Sentence.] Which being reported by
the faide Sir George Elphingfton, and confirmed by the whole lurie, then returned
into the Court, Judgement was giuen, by direction of the luflices. That the faide
lohn Ogilvie, for the Treafons by him committed, fliould be Hanged and

QUARTEKED.

The Archbifliop of Glafgow demanded, if Ogilvie would fay any thing elfe?

Ogilvie anfwered, ' No, my lord, but I giue your lordfliip thankes for your
kindnefTe, and will defire your hand.'

The Archbifliop faid, ' If you fliall acknowledge your faulte done to his Maiefl:ie, and craue God and his Highneffe pardon, I will giue you both hand and
heart, for I wifli you to die a good Chriftian.'

Then Ogilvie afl^ed, * If he fliould be licenfed to fpeake vnto the people ?'

The Archbifliop anfwered, ' If you will declare, that you fuffer according to
the Law, juftly for your offence, and craue his Maieftie pardon for your treafonable fpeeches, you fliall be licenfed to fay what you pleafe ; otherwife you ought
not to be j^ermitted.'

Then faide hee, * God haue mercie vpon mee !' And cryed alowd, * If there
be lieere anie hidden Catholickes, let them pray for me ; but the prayers of hereticks I will not haue.' And fo the Court arofe.

[Ogilvie's conduct at the time of Ms Execution.]
Aeter iudgement was giuen, by the (pace of fome three houres, he remained
in the place where he was conuicted, liauing leafure graunted him to prepare
himfelfe for death. Hee continued a while vpone his knees at prayer, with a
colde devotion ; and when the houre of execution approached, his handes being
tied by the executioner, his fpirits were perceiued much to faile him. In going
towardes the fcaffold, the throng of people was great, and he feemed much
amazed ; and when he was vp, Mafter Robert Scot and Mafter William Struthers,
Ikliuifters, very grauely and chrifl:ianly exhorted him to a hiunble acknowledge48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 351

ment of his offence, and if any thing troubled his mind, to ditburthen his confcience. In matters of religion, they faide, they would not then enter, but
prayed him to refolue and fettle his minde, and feeke mercie and grace from
God, through lefvs Chrift, in whom onely laluation is to bee found. Ogilvie
anfwered, ' That he was prepared and refolued.' Once he faid, ' That he died
for religion ;' but vttered this fo weakly, as fcarfe he was heard by them that
flood by vpon the fcaffold. Then addreffing himlelfe to execution, he kneeled
at the ladder foot, and prayed. Matter Robert Scot, in that while, declaring to
the people, that his fuffering was not for any matter of religion, but for haynous
treafon againft his Maieftie, which hee prayed God to forgiue him. Ogilvie,
hearing this, faide, * He doeth me wrong.' One called lohn Abircrvmbie, a man
of little wit, replied, * No matter, lohn, the moe wrongs the better.' This man
was feene to attend him carefully, and was euer heard atlving of Ogilvie fome
token before his death ; for which, and other bufnielfe he made with him, he was
put off the fcaffold.

Ogilvie ending his prayer, arofe to goe vp the ladder, but ftrength and courage,
to the admiration of thofe who had feene him before, did quite forlake him ; he
trembled and fliaked, fayng, he would fall, and could hardly bee helped vp on
the top of the ladder : He kiffed the hang-man, and faid, Maria, Mater gratice,
oraprome; O nines ArigeU, orate pro me; Omnes Sanct'i, Sanctceque, orate pro
me : but with fo low a voice, that they which Hood at the ladder foote, had fome
difficultie to he are him.

The executioner willed him to commende his foule to God, pronouncing thefe
wordes vnto him, ' Say, lohn, Lord haue mercy on mee! Lord receiue my foule I'
which he did, with fuch feebleneffe of voice, that fcarcely hee could be heard :
Then was hee turned off, (his left foot for a fpace taking holde of the ladder, as
a man vnwilling to die,) and hung till hee was dead. His quartering, according
to the iudgement giuen, was for fome refpectes not ufed, and his body buried in
a place that is kept for male-factors.

This was the ende of that vnhappie man, in whofe death, any man that had
eyes might fee what a graceleffe and comfortlelfe religion Poperie is : The power
of religion manifefteth it felfe chiefely in the lioure of death : The fight of a reconciled God, the affurance and perfwafion of fauour through Chrift, furniflieth
fpirite and boldneffe, and maketh a man willing to depart and quite this life:
But Popifli religion teacheth vncertainetie of faluation, and leadeth a man to
other fauiours, who can neither helpe nor comfort, in the houre of death, ^^'llat
maruaile, that men, who leane to fuch rotten and vnprofital^le helpes, lacking
and difappointed of the affiftance they hoped for, lliewe a fciiiit and cowardly
minde at their laft !

352 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615,

This onel}^ I haue further to aduertife, that fince liis execution, wee haue
vnderftood, by fome perfons who viftted him, at times, during his imprifonment,
that, amongft other his fpeeches with them, hee faid this, " That if hee had
efcaped his apprehenfion at this time, and lined till Whitfonday next, hee fliould
haue done that which all the Bilhops and Minifters, both in England and Scotland, flioulde neuer haue helped ! And, if hee might haue liued at libertie vnto
that time, hee woulde willingly haue beene drawne in peeces with horfes, and
haue giuen his bodie to haue beene tormented !' Whereof, what fliall any man
collect, but that this villane was about fome delperate enterjirile ?

God, that in mercie hitherto detected and difapointed the malicious devices of
the wicked againft his Church, continue with vs his fauour, and giue vs to
depend ftedfaftly on his prouidence. And to all the enemies of God and the
King, let it befall, which wee haue feene vpon this wicked and accurfed perfon.
Amen.

FINIS.

Depositions qff/ic Jesuite and Papijts examined at Glafgo, 5 Oct. 1614.'

Apud Glasgow, the fyjt day of October, 1614. THiR/)er/ow«, tcnderivryttin, wer exami?ieit, in
pre/ens of my Lordis of Glajgow and Argyle ; my Lord Flemyng, my Lord Kilfythe, my Lord
Boyde ; the Laird of Mynto, Sir George Elphingfloune ; James Hammiltoune, Prove/i ; James
Bell, James Braidwood, Colin Campbell, Baillies.
Robert Heygait, being inquyrit, how lang lie hes bene acquent with this Preiji? Anfwerit, that
lie neuer faw him nor fpak with him bot witliin ]nr twa monethis fyne, or ])airby ; and J^at he come doun
to him to his awin buithe, and gat fum paper fra him ; and ])aivefter 5eid with him to Mr William
Steioartis lious, to get ane chopein of wine, quha callit him felf ane hors-cowper, and wes going to
Kyntyre to by hors ;- and imployit him to by ane hors. And })airefter, callit him felf ane Preijl. Bot
of his name he is ignorant; and neuer fpeirit for it. And being inquyrit, gif he enterit withe him in
Relicioun ? So confefl ; and })at he brocht \\\\\\ Xo Mareoun TValkeris hous ; and faw his buikis :
And beleivit that he fpak to him ; and pat he contentit him of ]'e Sacrament of pe body of Chrift ; and
pat he is ane Catholik. And being inquyrit, gif he defyrit him to geive him ane Mefs? Confeft he
defyrit pe famyn ; and liard pe famyn at pe faid tyme : And pat ])air (wes) with him Mareoun Walker,
William Menteithe, Mathoio Adatn, Thomas Forret, James Ferret. And being fpeirit, gif pis Preift
wes gone to Sir James Clelandis hous or not ? Hard Williame Menteithe fay, pat he wes gone pair.
And being inquyrit, gif pe Lady Maxwell wes at ony Mefs heir, within pis fchort fpace, or at ony Mefs ?
Denyit pat he euer faw hir. Bot he knawis ])at pis Preift fpak with hir, pe lall tyme ftho wes heir,
and pat pe faid Preijt faid to him, pat he wes ane of the Societie of Jesus. And being inquyrit,
how pat pe freindfchip and acquentance of pe faid Preifi wes maid with James Stewart ?' Confeft, pat
lie wes pe bringer of pame togidder to confer ; and pat pe faid James ftandis ftill in his former Rcligioun ; and pat pe faid James wes defynis to fpeik with pe faid Preiji, and he wes ernill to haif pe
faid James of his Religioun, bot he Avald not giue his name pairto. And alfo confeft, pat pair wes ane
wper Mefs faid in pe faid Mareoun Walkeris hous, be pe faid Preifl, within tua dayis pairefter ; and

' From tlie Original attested copy, in the Dcnmjlne, Coll. ofMSS., Adv. Library. * To purchase horses.

* Styled James of Jerusalem, who figui'es in this Collection, \ol. 111. &c.

48 & 12 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 353

Jfat ])air wes prefent ])e faid William Menteith, Mareoun Walker, Dauid Maxwell, brother to NetcWark ; and fat fair wes ane wfer Preijl in fis Toun, quha ftayit ane day heir, and went Eift-throw.'
And knew not his nanae ; hot he callit him I'elf Oyilbie. And being inquyrit, gif fair wes ane wfer
Mefs faid be f is Preijl, in his awin hous, or nocht ? Confeft fat fair wes ane faid fair ; and fat he
wes Clerk to fe maill of fir Meffis him felf ; and fat his wyf knew not fairof, bot fufpectitjfe I'amyn.
And at fat tyme, quhen he fould haue gone to haue bocht f e hors, he raid to Sir James Clelandis
hous. And fis he declairit be his great ayth. Robert Heigait.

Andro Symmer, declarit, fat he drank with fis Prei/i'm James Stewartis conipanie, quha iiityfit
him to his Religioun ; bot he wald not grant to him : And fat f ai reffonit wpone Religioun togidder.

Andro Symmer.
The Preist being inquyrit, quhat his name wes, he nameit him felf Johnne Ogilbie, fone to
Waltir Ogilbie of Drum : and fat he hes bein out of fis cuntraye fir twentye twa 5earis : And ))at
he ftudiet in fe Colledgis of Olmis and Graitis ; and remanit in Olmis twa jeir, and in Gratis fyve
3eir ; and fat he hes relTauit fe Ordoiir of Preijihuid in Paris ; and come hame in Scotland befoir
now, and remanit fex oukis, or f airby : And fat he now come hame about May lait, or f airby : And
confeft fat f e budget,^ producit on fe buird befoir him, wes his awin. And fat he wes ane of fe
ordinar Jefuittis: And being afkit, quhidder the Popis Jurifdictioun extendit ouir the Kingis dominiounis, in fpreitwall matteris ? AfFermit conftantlie f e famyn ; and wald dye for it.

Johannes Ogilbeus, Societatis Jefu.
James Forret, confeffis, be his great ayth, fat he knew not fis Preijl all fe tyme fat fe Erie of

Eglingtoun wes heir. And wes fend for be him, be , fervitrix to Mareoun Walker, quho

delt with him to come and heir f e Mefs : And for fat effect appointit wfer morne ; at quhat tyme
he keipit : And fe Mefs wes faid be fe faid Preifi ; being prefent, Robert Heygait, Mathow Adam,
William Menteithe, Mareoun Walker, Thomas Forret, his brother. And declairit, fat he wes neuer
at ony Mefs befoir or eftir. And fat fair wes ane wfer man, quha callit him felf Daicnie, feducit
him to fat Religioun, quhairinto he fan in ane manir agreit : And fupponis, fat fe faid Dainiie had
directit fis Preijl to him, to draw him forder on : quha perfwadit him to leive the Kirk — quhilk he did
fen fyne ; quhairof he cravit God forgewnes. And confeffit, fat, befoir he rellauit fe Melfe, fat morning,
he maid a Confeflioun to fe faid Prei/i, quha gaue him ane abfolutioun, and tuik f e Sacrament.

J. Forret.
James Stewart, being inquyret, quhen he knew fis Prei/i? Be his great ayth, declarit, fat he
knew him tuentie dayis fyne, or f airby ; and fat Robert Heygait maid his acquentance with f e faid
Preijl, And eftir f e drinking of ane clioppine of wyne, he went with ]ie faid Preijl to fe jaird of
Mareoun Walker, quhair he confemt with him anent his Religioun, and wald nawayis jeild to liiin.
Bot he had ane guid exfpectatioun of him, and maid him acquent ])at he had ane Mefs to fliy; bot he
wald not go to it. As to his name, he knawis not fe fam. J. Stewart.

WiLLiAME Menteith, being inquyrit, gif he knew fis Prejf. or not ? Anfwerit, fat he faw him
in fis Toun ane monethe fyne, or f airby ; and fat he wes in his companie, in the hous of Mareoun
Walkeris ; and fair hard fis Prei/f fay ae Mefs ; and denyit ony mae. And jiaireftir, being confronlit
with Robert Heygait, confeft fan he hard thrie Meflis, twa fairof in Mareoun Walkeris, and ane wj'cr
in Robert Heygaitis ; and fat he tuik fe Sacrament. And being inquyrit, quhair he gat his beginning
of fat Religioun? He anfuerit, fat lie firft wes inftructit thairiii, being fervand to fe Laird Kcrs,
jounger, be fe Lady Angus, and Arckibald Douglas, in ])e Place of Moungtoun, bcfyde Air, ten or
twelf 3eiris fyne, or fairby. And declairit, fat Thomas Forret tauld him of )>is Prcji ; and ])at
Robert Heygait iuformit him fat f e faid Thomas was of fat Religioun. As ale, declairit, ))at lie faw
Johnne Wallace of Corsjlat at fe Mefs, in Robert Heygaitis hous, faid be j'e foirfaid Prejt.

Wm Menteithe, w' my hand.

' Probably to Edinburgh ; he went through the town to the eastwaid. '■' rortmanteau, or s.mall trunk.

VOL. III. 2 y

354 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Thomas Foruet, being inquyrit, quhair he had firft acquentance with pis Preifi 9 Declairit, he faw
him firft in Mareoun Walkeris hous, being fetchit in to him be Robert Heygat, and after lytill conference
with him aneiit ])e Religioun, he defyrit him to cum to INIefs, quhilk he did ; and befoir \q reffauing
fairof, he maid his Confeffioun, and reffauit abfolutioun ; and pairefter tuil< ])e Sacrament. And ]7at
fair wes prefent at fe faid Mefs, Mr Johnne Muym, 3Iareoim Walker, Mathoiv Adam, Robert Heygait, James Forret, William Mentdth ; and wes at na Mefs fene fyne, feing be ])e fycht pairof he
defjjylit pat Religioun. And pat pe remanent lykwayis reffauit pe Sacrament.

Thomas Forret.

Mathow Adam, being inquyrit, how long he had embracit pe Popifch Religioun? Declarit, pat,
about fyve ^eiris fyne, or pairby, he had his entrie pairto in Danjkin ; and hes fence reifauit pe Communioun. And pat he had acquentance with pis Preiji four oukis fyne, or pairby, be pe moyen of
Robert Heijgait. And ficlyk, in fomer laft, wes acquent with ane Daxvnie, ane Preijl, in Mareoun
Walkeris hous ; and pat he wes at thrie Meflis ; pat pis Preijl faid ane in Robert Heygaitis, and twa
in Mareoun Walkeris hous. And being afkit, quhat his profeffioun is prefeutlie ? Anfwerit, pat he
wes of pe Religioun, be pe lawis of pis realme. Mathow Adam.

Mr Johnne Mayne, being inquyret, gif he knew pis Preift or not ? Declairit, be his ayth, he knew
him in Mareoun Walkeris hous, to pe quhilk he wes brocht be Robert Heygait ; quhair he confeffit
him felf to pe Preijt, reflauit obfolutioun, befoir he hard pe Mefs and reHauit pe Sacrament. And pat
pair wes prefent Mareoun Walker, James Forret, Thomas Forret, Robert Heygait, Mathow Adam.
William Menteithe. And pat, as 5it, he awowis pat Religioun, and profefTis pe famyn, quhill he be
better refolnit. Mr J. Mayxe.

Johnne Wallace of Corsfat, being inquyrit, gif he wes at a Mefs faid be pis Preijl, or not, in
Robert Heygaitis hous ? Confeffit, pat he wes prefent pairat, and brocht pairto be pe faid Robert
Heygait. Johnne Wallace..

This is the true copie of pair Confessiounis. Glasgow.

^uiionting: of ^^aitntssts— J^trjun)— ^Iau(jj)ttr, ^r.

Mar. 8. — Robert Graham, calUt of Langboddome ; Robert Dunlope
and George Wat, woblleris^ in Edin"^ ; Adame Blaiklok, duelland at the Weft-poirt of Ed' ; James Boyle, wobfter in Edin"" ;
Johnne Hammiltoun, tail5eoiir thair ; Adame MofTet, chopman ;" Williame Tok, beltmaker at the Waft-poirt ; James
Or, flefcheour in Crawmound.
Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit, be Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*,
Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his hienes intreis, off the feuerall crymes vnderwrittin, contenit in thair Dittayis, eftir fpecifeit, viz.

Dittay againjf Bohert Grahamefor Suhorning of WitneJJes and Perjury.

The faid Robert Grahame: Forfamekill as it is expreflie provydit, ftatute, and ordanit, be

dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, fpeciallie, be the 80 Act of the fext Parliament of our fouerane lordis

darreft guidfchir. King James the Fyft, of famous memorie ; and be the 22 Act of the fyft Parliament,

and 48 Act of the faxt Parliament of our fouerane lordis darreft mother. Queue Marie, of worthie

memorie, that all lie perfones as induces ony man to heir ffals Witnes, or ar feducearis or corrupteris

of W'itneflis, induceing pame pairby to depone ft'alflie, that all fic perfones fall be pwneifchet in thair

perfones and guidis, with all rigour, according to the difpofitioun of the Cowmone Law, baithe Canone,

' Weavers. * It does not seem cleai- whetlicr this denotes shopman, or chapman (pedlar), a dealer in small

wares. The latter, however, is tliought n>ost likely.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 355

Ciuile, and Statutes of this realme, that is to fay, ather be peirfing and boiring of Jiair tungis, confilcatioun of fair moveable guidis, and fie vther pvvneifchment to be inflictit vpone thame, accoirding to
the difcretioun of the Lordis : Nochtwithftanding quhairof, it is of verritie, that ]>e faid Robert
Grahame, being ane fraudulent and fals man, fludeing and imploying his witis thir mony ^eiris bygane,
how, be craft and diflait, to fuborne and feduoe dyuerfe perfones to be WitnefTes in findrie actiones,
alfvveill depending befoir the Lordis of Seffioun as vther Judicatories of this realme : And making vp
to him felf a plane tred and profeffioun Jiairof, He, for ]7e manifeflatioun of his forder (kill and knawlege in the faid profeffioun, vpone hoip and efperance of his expectit gayne, vnderftanding laitlie, that
fair was ane Actione of Spuil3ie intentit and perfewit befoir the Lordis of Seflioun, at the inftance of
Mark Gledftanes, indueller in Ed'', aganis James Guidlet and vtheris, his complices : the faid Robert
Grahame, as ane oppin and manifeft coofiener and dilfaver, with wonderfull peartnes and double
deilling, firfl addreflit him felff to the faid Mark Gledllanes, and difcoverit to him the haill fecreittis
of his actioun ; declairing to fe faid Mark, how he had bene in Muffilburgh, and had conferrit with fum
folkis ]iair, quha had reffet fum of }ie faid Markis guidis and geir, that was fpuil3eit frome him be ]>e
faid James Guidlet; and that ]iai war in grit feir leifl ]>e faid Markie fould prevaill in his faid aetioune :
At quhilk tyme, lykwayis, the faid Robert Grahame, raaift falflie and craftillie, declairit to the faid 3Iark,
that he wald find out dyuerfe men to be WitnefTes, quha vnderftuid of the fpoliatioun of his guidis ;
andofferit frelie to him, for gayne and comi.cditie, to bring thame to him, and to caufe thame beWitnefles
for preving of his actioun : Lyk as, accoirding ])airto, the faid Robert Grahame, vpone hope of gayne and
commoditie, in the letter end of Januar laftbypafl, or fairby, convenlt to himfelff Adame Moffet, chopmau
in Ed'', Robert Dunlop, wobfler fair, George Wat, wobfler fair, and Williame Tok, beltmaker Jiair ;
quhilkisfoure perfones he maiit fraudulentlie perfuadit and inducet to vndertak to be Witneflis, to depone
in the faid caufe, in fauouris of the faid Markie Gledftanes, aganis the faid James Guidlet, albeit fai knew
natliing of the verritie f airof. Lyk as, fe faid Robert, immediatlie eftir his induceing and fuborning
of the faidis Witneffis, to fe effect foirfaidis, for acquyreing of his forder gayne, pail and reveillit fe
haill premiffes to the faid James Guidlet, and put him vpone the counfell fairof : The verritie of the
quhilk knaverie and diffaitfull deilling of the faid Robert Graham being detectit to the Lordis of
Counfell and Seffioun, and f ai, vpone diligent examinatioun of fe faid Robert, and f e Witnelies foirfaidis, haifing ryppit vp the haill fecreit of all fair proceidingis ; and in end, finding fe faid Robert
Grahame to be hot ane falfe and leying lymmer, the faidis Lordis brocht him to this poynt; and, of his
awin confent, maid him to bind him felf and to be content, that in caice it fould be fund be the faidis
Lordis, that he ony wayis vareit in his Depofitiones f aireftir, t/iat he Jbuld he content to be iiasgit but
fauour ! Lyk as, f e faid Robert, being dyuerfe tymes f aireftir folemnlie fuorne, in prefens of the haill
Lordis, to declair fe verritie, vpone ane only poynt, viz. quhidder or nocht ))e faid Robert firilproponit
fe purpois to the faid Mark Gledffanes him felf, anent the bringing to him of f e faidis Witnclii's, for
preving to him of his caus, or gif fe faid Markie focht him firll to that effect ; the laid Robert, eflir
dyuerfe examinationes and folemne aithes maid be him, haifing conftantlie declairit fat the faid Mark
firfl come to liim and proponit fat matter; in end, fe faid Robert, as ane nianifefl periuret and lii-ing
lymmer, be his pofteriour Depofitioun,acknowlegit and confeffit, that he firff addroliit iiini li-Iff to Mark,
and maid the firfl motioun of fe faid matter to him : In the cairfuU and exact trycll of the (piliilk
matter, be the faidis Lordis of Seffioun, thair lordfchipis, be fair fcntence and dorrcit, nocht only lies
ffund and declairit the faid Robert Grahame to be ane fraudulent and fals fuborner of (he liiidis
Witneffis, feduceing, be craft and diffait, vpone hoip of gayne, thame to depone in the faid caus betuix
Gledftanes and Guidlet, quha vnderfluid nathing ])airintill : Bot lykwayis, be the fame fentence, lie is
fund and declairit to be ane fraudulent and fals luborner of Witncfti-s, bo craft and diiliiit, in dyuerfe
vtheris actiones and cauflJ-s ; fpeciallie, in the fraudulent fuborning and feduceing of Witnellea
in the caus of fpuil3ie perfewit be Quintene Braidfute aganis Couplaiid ; and lykwayis, in the caus of
Divorcement perfewit be the Lady Torthorrell aganis my lord hir hulband, and in dyuerfe vjieris

356 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

actiones and caufTis, nioveing the faidis Witneffes, be his intyfeing and fals Subornatioun, to vndertak
vpone thame to heir teftimonie, and to preve and affirme for treuthe, that, quhairof thay of thame
felffis war altogidder ignorant. And be the faid Sentence, he is ffund be ]>e faidis Lordis to haif
frequenthe hantit that damnable tred of lyfe, with wonderfull peartnes and double deilling, betuix
pairteis, fo fynelie proveing fe diffaver, chopping, changeing, and triking at his humour, fra hand to
hjind, that quhairas ]>e faid Robert was evin now, be his inventiones and forgereis of his brane, about
])e on-drawing of fum one pairtie to his defignes, quhilk he wald proraeis and avow to mak guid, fo
incontinent ]iaireftir he wald difcover and detect all to the vther pairtie, quhome lykwayis, be his falfe
furmifes, he wald induce to fum contrarie motioun ; in baith, intending nathing hot double and fals
deilling, to the preiudice of aither ^ pairtie. And in end, in the faid Robert his tryell and exaraiuatioun,
in prefens of the faidis Lordis, he is ffund, be ]>air faid Decreit, to be dyuerfed,^ and many tymes
menfuorne, and periuret ; as the faid Decreit beiris. And Jiairfoir, the faid Robert, as ane manifeft
feducer and Corrupter of Witneiles, induceing and intyfeing thame, for his awin lucre and gayne,
falilie, aganis fair knawlege and confcience, to depone in dyuerfe cauffis, fpeciallie in the cauffis aboue
writtin ; quhairof he is declairit giltie, be the faidis lordis Decreit, and alfo conforme to his volunter
offer aboue fpecifeit, quhairby he, of his awin confent, was content to be hangit, in caice he war fund
to varie in his Depofitiones, and ])airthrow menfuorne ; and as a falfe and periuret diffaver, aucht and
fould vnderly the pwneifchment of death, in maill exemplarie maner, to ]>e terrour of vtheris.

DiTTAY again ft Robert Dunlop, S^c.Jbr Perjury and Falfe-witneffing.
The faidis Robert Duxlope, George Wat, and Adame Blaiklok; fforfamekill as, by
dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, it is expreflie provydit, ftatute, and ordanit, that all fic perfones as beiris
ffals Teftimonie and Witnefting, in ony caus quhatfoeuir, falbe pwneifched to the death, according to
])e Difpofition of pe Cowmone Law, baith Canon, Ciuile, and Statutes of this realme : And trew it is,
that the foirnamet perfones, nochtwithftanding of the faidis Actis, haifing moift wilfullie plunget and
fetterit thame felflis in matteris of damnable ffalfetis, and iniuft beiring of VVitnefling, with fic euidence
of precogitat Periurie, that albeit thay war confcious of Jiair awin malicious and falfe intentiones, 5it
wald thay rwne heidlongis, and combine and vniformelie agiie togidder to mak merchandice of fair
confciences, refolveing with thame felffis, to heir teftimonie, and effrontedlie for veritie to avow, that
(howfoeuir in it felff) 5it to thame vnknawin, thay being inducet pairto, nocht famekill vpone the
hoipis and promeiflis of expected gayne, as out of thair continual hant and confuetude of leying,
quhilk, throw cuftome in thame, did tume to nature ; quhairin be degrees, thay haifing attynit to fic
fynes,^ that gif fair courfe fairin had nocht happelie bene interruptit, the eftait of ony quhatfoeuir,
without exceptioun, mycht haif bene generallie endangerit : And namelie, the foirfaidis perfones, and
everie ane of tham, be the convoy and craftie dealling of fe faid Robert Grahame, callit of Langhoddome, ]iair pylef and leader in fis fair vnconfcionable tred of lyfe, haifing fauld thame felffis to all
maner of mifchief, and making fchipwrack of all ffaith and honeftie, nocht only vpone refiauit commoditie and gayne be thame and everie ane of thame, laitlie fra Mark Gledftanes, indueller in Ed"^, offerit
thame felffis to depone, as Witneflis, in ane caus perfewit be him aganis James Guidlet, befoir the
Lordis of Seffion, quhairof thay war altogidder ignorant ; and quhairin the faidis Robert Dunlope and
George Watt war maift deiplie Avorne to geve trew Teftimonie ; albeit, in fair examinatioun, fair
fals and damnable proceiding, by f e vigilant panes tane be the faidis Lordis, was maift happilie brocht
to licht : Dot lykwayis, the faidis Robert Dunlope and George Watt, nocht as rafche and rekles liearis
be officious leftimoneis, hot as Witneffis deliberately ffals, haifing quyte banifched the feir of God, quha
is fe witnes of confcience, 3e^ aganis'"' fair knowledge and confcience, being corruptit and feducet be

' Each. * Contradictory; varying in his evi<lence. It is probable, liowever, that this infers that he was a

f/vroi(r or bankrupt, which was considered most infamous. ^ lletinemcut. Y\\ finesse, ^ VWmX. ^ Yea.

' Against, or contradictory to.

48&12JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 357

greid of gayne and guid deid, Les gevin fals and vntrew Teftimonie, in ane actione and caus peifewit
be Williame Cant aganis Thomas Gray, in the quhilk Maiioun Ciufurd, fpous to the faid Willianie Cant,
in abfence of hir hufband, was fpeciall doar : And the faid Adame Blahlok gaif the lyk flfalfe and
vntrew Teftimonie, in the actioun and caus perfewit be ])e faid Quintene Braidfute aganis Couj)laud.
As everie ane of |?air Depofitiones, tane in prefens of the haill lordis, teilifeing ])air acknowledgement
of the foirfaidis ftalfettis, in ])e felfl' beiris. And ])airfoir, the faidis perfones, and ilk ane of thame, as
fals and periuret WitneHes, of certane knawlege, and aganis the licht of ])air awin confciences, deponeing in the faidis cauflis, as faid is, cleirlie tryit by the faidis Lordis, aucht and fould rellkue J'air dew and
deferuit pwneifchment, to the terrour and example of vtheris.

DiTTAY againjl Johnne Hammiltone, S^cfor Perjury and Falfe-witncjfing.
As ALSO, the faidis Johnne Hammiltoun, Adame Moffet, and Williame Tok : fforfamekill
as, albeit, be the foirfaidis Actis of Parliament, it be exprellie provydit, flatute, and ordanit, that all
ffals WitneiTes, and faules ^ perfones, offering thame felffis, for greid and perticuler gayne, to beir ffals
Witneffing in ony matter ; and all fic as conduces with ony perfone, to that end and effect, ar Ordanit
to be pwneifchet be Banifchment, peiifing of fair tungis, difmembring of pair hand, and be vther panes
and pwneifchmentis provydit be difpofitioun of the Cowmone Law ; and forder pwneifchment to be
inflicted vpone thame, accoirding to the difcretioun of the Lordis of SefTioune : Nochtwithftanding
quhairof, it is of verritie, that the faidis Johnne Hammiltoun., Adame Moffet, and IVilliame Tok, being
corruptit with promeiifes of rewaird, and be relfait of guid deid and vther wayis, war feducet and intyfet
to be ffals Witneflis, wilHnglie and wittinglie offering thame felffis, vpone hoip of rewaird, to geve ffals
Teftimonie, in preving of certain actiounes, altogidder vnknavvin to thame ; namelie, the faid Adame
Moffet and Williame Tok, conforme to pair Depofitiones maid be thame in prefens of the haill Lordis
of Seffioun, fauld and conducet thame felffis for rewaird, to be ffals Witneffis in the Actioun of
Divorcement, perfewit be the Lady Torthorrell aganis the Lord of Tortiiorrell, hir
hufband ; as alfo, in ane actioun of Spuil3ie, perfewit befoir the faidis Lordis, at the inftance of Mark
Gledjianes aganis Guidlet: And ficlyk, the faid Johnne Hammiltoun, conforme to his Depofitioun,
maid in prefens of the faidis Lordis, fauld and conducet him felff, as ane ffals Witnes, to haif deponit
in the faid actioun of Devorcement, perfewit be the faid Lady Torthorrell aganis hir hulhand : And
albeit the faidis actiones war altogidder vnknawin to thame, 5it the foirnameit perfones, and ilk ane of
thame, aganis thair knawledge and confcience, maifl forwardlie and malapairtlie, vndertuik to verifie
and preve the famyn ; quhilk wikket intentioun thay had noclit failjet, wittinglie and wilfullie, to liaif
put in practize, gif thay had nocht bene lattin,^ be the intervening tryell tane be the faidis Lordis of
Seffioun, alfweill be pair Confeffiones, as vther cleir and euident probatioun tane pairintill : And ]»airfoir, thay, and ilk ane of thame, as perfones feducet and intyfet to beir ffals Tellimonio, anent the
probatioun of the foirfaitlis caufles, quliairof thay war altogidder ignorant, aucht to relliiue J>.iir dew
and deferued pwneifchment, to the terrour and example of vtheris.

DiTTAY againjl James Boyle, ^^-fof Suhoi'iihig of Witnefjcs.

In lyk maner, the faid James Boyle, &c. in the lait tryell and examinatioun, taine of Jiini in prefens
of the Lordis of Seffioun, he, conforme to his awin Confeflioun and Dcpoiitioun, and vther probatioun
had aganis him, is fund to haif delt with dyuerfe Witnelles, fuborning and inducoing thame to Di'|)one
in dyuerfe actiones, quhairof the faidis Witnefles war altogidder ignorant ; Ipeciallie, in the laid actioun
and caus perfewit be ])e faid Williame Cant aganis the faid Thomas Grai/, quhairin, be ]'e laidis
Lordis Sentence and Decreit, he is ffund to liaif pall the boundis of deutie, and nocht a littil to haif
overfene him felff, haifing fa heichlie tranfgreffit pairintill, that his offence, in that behalfe, requyres
' SauUess, void of soul and conscience. ' ' Ld," hindered, prevented.

358 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

heichlie to be pwneift : And fairfoir, as ane nianifeft Suborner and feducer of Witneffis, aucht and
fould reflaue his dew and deferued pwneifchment, to ]ie terrour and example of v])eris to abflene fra
the yk heirefter.

DiTTAY agmnjt James Or, for SlaugJiter.

And laft, the fald James Or : fforfamekill as, vpone the faxt day of Marche inflant, the faid James,
in his paffing furtli of fe burgh of Ed'" to Crawmond, liaifing forgadderit with Johnne Chirrilie in Crawmond, vpone the Grene Jiairof, thay haifiiig pafl in to the duelling hous of Thomas Mathiefone pair,
quhair thay draidc togidder ane hour or Jiairby : And the faid James and Johnne haifing ])aireftir come
furth of ]ie faid hous, certane fpeiches haifing fallin out betuix thame, and be occafioun of a lie gevin
be ]'e faid Jolinne Chirritie to the faid James Or ; he, in his beiftlie rage and furie, drew ane knyfe or
braig, with the quhilk he ftrak ])e faid vmq'"' Johnne Chirritie ane crewall and deidlie ftraik aboue his
left pape;' off the quhilk flraik, he imraediatlie, within ane hour faireftir, depairtit fis lyfe ; and fa, was
crewallie and vnmerciefullie flane, vnder nycht, be ])e faid Jame Or : ffor the quhilk, he was tane in
Jiagrante crhnine, and being examinat J)airupoun, hes confeffit the premifles to be of verritie.

My lord Aduocat producet the Dittay ; and eftir reiding tliairof, in refpect
the perfones on pannell could allege nathing aganis the relevancie thairof, to flay
proces, defyret the famyn to pas to the knawlege of ane Aff^i^e ; and producet
ane roll of the perfones lauchfullie fummond to that effect. Quhilkis perfones
of AfTyfe being chofin, fuorne, and admittit, eftir accufatioun of the faidis perfones, be Dittay, of the crymes re/])ecthie aboue writtin, quhilkis war verifeit be
productioun of the faidis Lordis Decreit, and thair awin Depofitiones, maid in
prefens of the haill Lordis of Seflioun : As alfo, the faid Slauchter was verifeit
be the faid James Or his awin Confeflioun, maid in Judgement, in prefens of the
Juflice and AfTyfe.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of James Raulftoun,
mercheand burges of Edinburgh, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit, conforme to the
Depofitiones and Decreit producet, and the faid Judicial ConfefTioun maid be the
faid James Or, the foirnameit haill nyne perfones vpone pannell to be fylet, culpable, and convict of the feuerall crymes and pointis of Dittay aboue mentionet.

Sentence. The faid James Or to be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh,
and thair his heid to be ftrukin fra his body ; and all his guidis and gear to be
efcheit, &c. : And ficlyk, the faidis liohert G?ahame, Robert Diiulop, George
Wat, and Adame BlaiJdok, to be tane to the faid oMercat-croce of Edinburgh,
and thair to be Hangit, quhill thay be deid ; and all thair moveable guidis to be
efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe : The faidis James Boyle, Jolinne Uammiltoun, and
Adame Moffef, to be firfl Scourget throw the burgh of Edinburgh, fra the
Caftell-hill to the Nether-boll thairof, and Brunt with ane hett irne vpone the
cheik, and thaireftir Banifchet this realme of Scotland ; and nevir to be fund
agane within the famyn, without his Maiefleis Licence, vnder the pane of deid :

^ Breast.

48&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 359

And laft, that the faid IVilUame Tok be lykwayis Scourget throw the faid
burgh, and thairefter Banifchet this reahne ; and nevir fFund agane within the
famyn, without his Maiefteis Licence, as faid is, vnder the pane foirlhid.

^ttciiufi: ** Cvi^ssonalilt, ISIaspIjtmous, antj IDamnaljIt ^pcicfjcs'*

against i\yt iiiing*

[The Trial of John Fleming, elder, in Cockburnspalh, which follows, is so remarkable in its
nature, and the Sentence of death pronounced upon the unfortunate pannel, is so frightfully disproportioned to the pretended crime for which he stood charged, that, did it not occur in the authentic
Records of a Supreme Tribunal, and were it otherwise unvouched, no honourable mind could for an
instant admit the probabihty of its truth. Had mention been made of this fact in any private correspondence of the period, or in contemporary Memoirs or Annals, it would liave been at once discredited by all, as an unprincipled libel on the character of our British Solomon ! Unhappily, however,
for the character of King James VI, the event here recorded is too true, and there can be no doubt that
it did actually occur. The names of otiier victims to the same insane ideas of justice, are inscribed, in
characters of blood, on the pages of our Criminal Records. It is unnecessary to recapitulate such
instances, at any length, in this place. It is enough merely to refer the reader to the Cases of Dihsoun, Aug. 3, 1596;^ Temienf, Oct. 10, 1600;^ Cortiuall, Apr. 25, IGOl;' and Hoss, executed Sep.
10, 1618."]

May 17. — Johnne Flemyng, elder, in Cokburnefpethe.

Dilaitit of dyuerfe treffonable, blafphemous, and damnable fpeiches vtterit be
him to Johnne Lawder, Minifter, aganis our fouerane lordis mod facred perfone,
&c. viz. FoESAMEKiLL as, Johnne Lauder, Minifter at Cokburnefpeth, haifing
laitlie reprehendit and fund fait with the faid Johnne Flemyng, becaus his fone
repairit nocht to the Communioun ; faying to the faid Johnne, that * albeit he
contemnit ])e ordour and difcipline of the Kirk, 3it the Kingis mod gracious
Maiellie, quho is a moft religious and godlie Prince, and vnder whois bliffet
governament the trew Religioun and difcipline of the Kirk is eftablifchet and
advancet, wald nocht fuffer fuche contempt and diffobedience pas over vnpwneifched :' the faid Johnne Flemyng, vpone delyuerie of the faidis fpeiches,
fchaiking af all feir of God, and that reverent refpect, quhilk in confcience, bofoir
God, and in his deutie and allegeance, he auchtHo iiis Maiestie, moft trelfonabillie, blafphemouflie, and mifchantiie*^ replyit to J)e faid Minifter, in thir woirdis :
' ffeind nor the KiNa fchoote to deid or J^e morne — and that he die of |)e falling
feiknes !' And it being demandit of the faid Johnne, quhat movct liim to vtter
fuche blafpliemous and horrible fpeiches aganis his JMaieftie ? — maid this fcornefull and difdainfuU anfuer : ' War nocht^ the King and his lawis, he had noclit
M^antit his landis — and J^airfoir, he cairet nocht for ])e King — for hanging M-ald
be pe worft of it !' Be the vttering of the quhilkis danniable and blafphemous

1 See this Collection, I. 385. '' Ibid. II. 332. ' Ibid. II. 310. '' Ibid. III. under the

above date. ^ Owed. "^ Wickedly. O. Fr. vieschantme7it. ' Had it not been for ilie King, **vio.

360 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

fpeiches aganis his Maieflie, he had committit moft haynous and vnpardoneable
Treffone. Lyk as, he being convenit and prefentit befoir the Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counsell for the faidis fpeiches, the faidis Lordis of Secreit
Coimfell hes tryit the famyn to be of verritie ; and thairfoir, Ordanit him to be
pwneift exempJar'ie, to the terrour of vtheris.

Tlie Dittay being red to the pannell, (he) maift humblie offerit him felf in his
Maiefteis Will, for the faid crymes : Quhairupoun my lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis. Quliilk Dittay was verifeit, be productioun of the Connfellis Decreit.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Cuthbert Mure,
furriour in Edinburgh, chanceller, ifand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Johnne
Flemyng to be Giltie and convict of the faidis Treffonable Speiches vtterit be
him, in maner fpecifeit in his Dittay. — Sentence. To be tane to the Mercatcroce of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit quhill he be deid : And all his moveable gnidis to be efcheit, &c.

May 30. — Johnne Brand, Student in the Colledge of Philofophie of
Eds fone to vmq'^ Johnne Brand, Miniller at Halyrudhous.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the felloun and crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Williame
King, fone naturall to James King, Aduocat ; committit vpone the xxvij day of
Maij inftant, vpon St Leonardis Craigis, neir to the faid burgh, befyde the Parkdyke of Halyrudhous, be llreking of him with ane drawin knyfe, vnder the left
pape ; quhairof he immediatlie deceiffit.

Persewaris, James King," Aduocat, as fader; Mr Alexander King, Aduocat; Mr Adauae King,
ane of the Commiffaris of Edinburgh, as fader-brether.

The pannell acknowledges the Dittay to be of verritie, and craves God, and
our Souerane lord, and the pairtie, maift humblie, pardoun for the fact : And gif
any meanis of fatisfactioun (refervand his lyfe) may be acceptit, accoirding to his
habilitie, is maift willing to fulfill the famyn, accoirding to the perfewaris iniunctioun : Bot gif na vther thing hot his bluid will mitigat the jjerfewaris wraith,
offeris the famyn to be pwneift accoirding to the Law ; defyreing the Lord,
throw the mereitis of the precious bluid of his Sauiour Chryft Jefus, to be mercifull vnto his faull !

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Johnne Mafoun,
mercheand in EdS chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Johnne
Brand, accoirding to his awin Confeflioun, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of
the Slauchter of the faid vmq'^ Williame King. — Sentence. To be tane to the
mercat croce of Ed', and thair his held to be ftrukin frome his body : And all
his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

48 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 361

CrtcisonaiJlr ^jTirt-raisins in Conl-pits,

Jun. 10. — JoHNNE Henrie in Littill Faufide.

Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewet, be Sir Willianie Olipliant of Newtoun, kny\
Aduocat to our Ibuerane lord, for his hienes intereis, of the crymes vnderwrittin, viz.

FoRSx\3iEKiLL AS, albeit be the 146 Act of our Souerane lordis tuelf Parliament, haldin at Ed' vpone the fyft day of Junij, 1592 5eiris, makand mentiouu
that his Maieflie and eftaittis, for J^e better pwneifchment of the wiked cryme of
fetting ffyre in coil-heuches^ be fum vngodlie perfones, vpon privat revenge and
difpyte, half |)airfoir Statute and Ordanit, be vertew of the faid Act of Parliament, that ])e committing of the faid cryme, in ony tyme J^aireftir, fall be Treffone ; and that the committeris of ]?e faid haynous and detettable cryme, being
ordourlie convict J^airof, fall fuffer and vnderly fic pwneifchment in pair bodeyis,
landis, and guidis, as is dew be the law in caufes of Trefone : As in the faid Act
of Parliament at lenth is contenit. Nochtwithftanding quhairof, it is of verritie,
that ])e faid John Henrie, being a fervand and workman within the Coil-heuch
of Littill Faufyde, and j^airthrow bell acquentit with the haill fecreit palfages
and pairtis of the faid heuche, haifing confauet ane deidlie rancour and evill will
aganis Mungo M'call, now of Littill Faufyde, becaus ])e faid Johnne had nocht
that libertie and commandiment vnder him quhilk he had vnder Johnne Leviiiglloun, his predicelTour ; in a devillifch difpyte, and to pe wrak and diftructioun,
nocht only of the faid Mungois coil-heuch, hot to f)e grit preiudice of ])e cuntrie
and Cowmounwelthe, in the monethis of ffebruar, March, and Apryle, in the
5eir of God F.Vj'. and fourtene 5eiris, at the leift, in ane or vther of the faidis
monethis, immediatlie eftir })e faid Mungo M'call acquyret the rycht and polfeffioun of the faid coilheuch, come, vnder filence and chid of nycht, to J)e faid
Coilheuch of Littil Faufyde, and enterit]?airintillbe ane previe hoill and palfadge
of his awin, and maift treffonablie pat ffyre within the faid heuche, of purjjois
and intentioun to burne and diftroy ]?e famyn and haill coillis being ])airiiitill :
Lyk as, for the gritter fecrecie and doun-halding of the laid ffyre, he nyclitlie,
be pe fpace of tuentie dayis togidder, refoirtit to the faid heuche in fecreit mauer,
ffed, and nureifchet pe faid ffyre, lloppit pe haill air and vent hoillis with ftray,'
quhairthrow pe faid ffyre fould nocht be difcoverit : Be reafone of tlie quliilk
ffyre, and flopping of the haill air and vent hoillis, thair arraile lie ane pellilVrous and foule air within the heuche, that nane of })e workmen war able to work
])airintill ; quhairvpone, and be pe pulling furth of ane bottell of ftray furth of
ane hoill in the faid heuche, quhilk hoill was callit ])e faid Jolmne Ilenreis vue,*
' Coal-pits. 2 Straw. ^ Perliaps for view, prospect.

VOL. III. 2 Z

362 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

the vehemencie of ]?e faid ffyre was difcoverit. Be pe committing of ])e qiihilk
deteftable fact, he hes committed maift haynous and vnpardoneable Treflbne.

The pannell denyis the Dittay ; and takis inftrumentis that na pairtie infiftis
in his perfute bot my lord Aduocat ; and that thair is nocht ane fuorne Dittay.
My lord Aduocat producet Thomas Cochrane, his lordlchipis informer, quhais
aithe he defyret to be tane, anent the treiith of the Dittay.

Thomas Cocherane, greif ^ at Littill Faiifyde, being fuorne vpone the verritie
of the Dittay producet be my lord Aduocat, declairit that Johnne Henrie was
giltie of ]>e cryme contenit ]?airintill, bot he wald n away is follow nor perfew him
for the famyn, in refpect he had na intereis ; quhairvpouu my lord Aduocat
afkit inftrumentis.

The Aftyfe being fuorne, my lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of thair fueiring ;
and proteftis for Errour gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, being ryplie and at lentli advyfet thairwith, togidder
with the taikynis" and Depofitiones producet for inftructing thairof, be pluralitie
of voitis, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit, be the movithe of Alexander Penman
in Lyttill Faufyde, chanceller, the faid pannell, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict
of the treftbnable cryme fpecifeit in the faid Dittay. — Sentence. To be tane
to the Mercat-croce of Ed", and thair to be hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill he be
deid ; and his heid thaireftir to be ftrukin frome his body, and put vpone ane
prik, fixt and fet vp vpone the landis of Littill Faufyde, befyde the faid Coilheuche : And all his moveable guidis, gif he ony hes, to be efcheit, &c.

I^amtisurliru— ^lau0!)tcr*

Jun. 22. — Alexander Dauidsoun, in Wefter Kerfe.
Dilaitit of the crewall and vnnaturall Slauchter of vmquhile George Suord,
liis fone in law, be ftreking of him with ane lance-ftalff in the bellie, and gorring
his puddingis, within the faid George awin duelling lious in Wefter Kerfe, vpone
the xxix day of Maij laft : Off the quliilk ftraik he deceiflit, vpone the tuelf day
of Junij inftant ; committit vpone fet purpois, prouiftoun, and foirthocht ffellonie,
in hie and manifeft contempt of his hienes authoritie and lawis.

Persewaris, Patiilv Suoird and Johnne Suoiid, as brether.

Verdict. The Aftyfe, being ryplie and at lenth advyfet thairwith, togidder
with the faid Alex" his Judiciall Confeflioun and acknowlegement of the faid
haynous cryme to be of verritie, and his penitencie for the famyn, be pluralitie
of voittis, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Alexander Dauidfoun to be
ffylet, culpable, and convict of the faid crewall Slauchter. — Sentence. To be
tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed"", and thair to be heidit ; and his haill moveabill
guidis to be efcheit, &c.

* Grieve; overseer. ^Proofs; toliens ; evidence.

48 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 363

iHutiliitioit mxH Btmtmftration*

Jun. 30. — JoHNXE PiTscoTTiE of Loiicardie, Colene Pitfcottie, his
elcleft fone.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Mutilatioim of Margaret Stewart, fpous to
Thomas M'^dufT of Glenelwart, of hu- richt airme ; committit vpone the xxix day
of Augufl, 1613.

Persewaris, Margaret Stewart, Thomas Duff of Glenelwart, hir fpous.
The perfewaris paffis fra the perfute of the pannell, for the crymes contenit in
the Letteris, pro loco et tempore. Quhairiipone the pannell afkit inftrumentis.
. The Juftice continued this cafe ' to the thrid day of the Air (of Perth) or
foner, vpone xv dayis wairning.' Rohert Creichtoiin, brother to the Laird of
Innernytie, became cautioner for their appearance, &c,

M^y Cmison— Calling: aittr ^ttainiiijj X\)t Castit of 53nnnitbairj:
— aatsistintj: M\\^'% ilicuttnant, ^r,

[A-s the Editor has already entered so fully into the subject of the Rebellion in Ilay by Sir
James Maconeill, &c., it is unnecessary to occupy further space here ; more especially as 3Ir Gregorys
Historical Researches, already far advanced, are exclusively devoted to the elucidation of such points.^

The following interesting memorials have been preserved by Caldericood, in his MS. Church History,'^
which the Editor believes will prove an acceptable illustration of this subject. They have been
discovered since the former sheets were sent to press. ' Sir James M^'konnell efcaped out of the
Cujile of Edinburgh, where he had been wairdit the fpace of eighteen years, upon the 24 of Maij, the
day after Angus Ooge, his brother, and eight or nine of his complices, were brought to Edinburgh.
It was thought that he efcaped not without the privity of thefe who had credit. In the beginning of
July, he entered in Ila, with a number of men of the Isles, and, within three or four dayes after his
landing, took tJic Cci/tle, flew the Captain and other three or four. His forces increaiing, he went out
of and fpoiled the lands belonging to the Earl of Ar gyle, compelled the tenants to pay him their maills
and duties, and keeped about him five or fix hundreth men. Upon the eight of July, Angus Oge^
brother to Sir James 31'^konnell, and his complices, were hanged at the ^Market Crofs of Edinb''. They
affirmed that George Grahame affured them, in the Chancellours and Counfells name, that they would
pi'ocure the Kings favour and fafety, both of their lives and lands, if they would render the pledges ;
and defired them to keep the Houfe till tlte King's favour were obtained, or elis they had not made
refinance to the King's Lievtennant. Becaufe the faid George was not troubled by the Counlell or
any other, the people thought hard of it. — Aug. 16. The Earl of Argile came to Edinburgh, fent
from Court be the King to pafl"e upone Sir James 3I''KonneU. He had CommiOlone to warne and
raife the Sherifdomes nixt adjacent, and to wage Ihouldiers, upon the King's charges. One of the
King's Ships, and four pinnages, were fent by Sea, with cannon, muflvct, powder, bullet, picke, and
corflet. The Coiof/ell gave their directione, upon the thrid of Augufl. About the ujiddell of September, their forces drawing near to others,^ Colinc Campbell of Kilbcrrie, and Ibnie with him, were
furprifed and taken be Coll Mackgilefpicke and his followers. 3Ir Donald Catnjibell, that Gentleman
of the Houfe of Caddell, accompanied with fix or feven hundreth men, went out of Argiles Campo, and
furprifed, in a fuddane. Col 3Iachgih'fpich and his con)panye ; killed fome, tooke others, and hanged
fome. Col him felf and the moft, part hardlie efcaped. Sir James, and fo many as nnght Hie with him,

' See Vol. III. p. 1. * Advocates' Library. ' Each other.

364 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

fled out of Kintire to I la. All his followers could not flee, becaufe Mr Donald Campbell had ceafed
(seized) upon many of the boats. Argilc, finding it dangerous to remaine long in the fteikls, winter
drawing one, for it now was midd-October, and his company diilblving, practil'ed with MachgUcj'picke.
Co/ rendered the Castle of Dunnivege, Coline Campbell of lulberrie, and himfelf to the Earle.'
A number of Original Papeus are appended to this Trial, which, in addition to those already
furnished, aflford ample and suitable illustrations of this remarkable passage of History. But for 3Ir
Gregori/s work, the Editor would have deemed it his duty to have made still further researches. To
that gentleman's History, reference is made for the minuter particulars attending that subject, and, in
general, for all other topics connected with the Feuds and Insurrections which took place in the Isles
and West-Highlands.]

Jul. 3. — Angus Oig M'donald/ AUafter IVrallafter, Angus IVrallafter,
Allafter ]\rarliclie, Jolmne IVrcondocliie, Johnne Gair M'lnoylane.
Dilaitit of the trelTonable taking, keiping, and detening of his Maiefteis Caftell
of Donj^vage, in Yla, and refilling of the Laird of Caddell, his hienes Leutennent and Commiffioner, &c. ; as in the Dittay following: — Forsamekilk
AS, thay, accumpaneit with Coill 3I''gillel])ich and vjjeris, pair complices, all
rebellis and brokin men,^ to the number of ffyftie perfones or jjairby, in the
moneth of November laft, maill treffonabillie convocat thame felffis in airmes,
come fordwardis in oppin and arrayit battell to his Maiefteis Caftell and ftrenth
of Dynnievaig, in Yla ; and jjair, be craft and policie, tuik in the faid Caftell,
whilk thay ftuffit^ and furneiffit with mufcattis, hagbuttis, poulder, leid, and
vjjer weirlyk furnitour,^ for balding Jjairof : Quhilkis treftbnable practizes, fa
interpryfet be thame and thair complices, being maid knawin to the Lordis of
his INIaiefteis Secreit Counfell ; and thay, for redres of the laidis rebellis enormiteis, haifing directit the Laird of Caddell,^ with companeis of wageit men of
weir, as Leutennent to his Maieftie, with ane Herauld," and trumpettar, to charge
thame, in his hienes name and authoritie, to rander the faid Caftell, and to
recover the famyn fyrth of ])air liandis. Lyk as, the faid Leutennent with his
forces, togidder with the faid Herauld and trumpeter, haifing cum to the faid
cuntrie of Hay, to the effect fuirfaid, the foirnamet perfones, with J)air rebellious
aftbciattis, vnderftanding j^airof, directit furth ane grit number of ])air rebellious
cumpany aganis the faid Herauld and trumpeter, and maift treftbnabillie ftayit
and interruptit thame fra cuming fordwardis to J)e faid Caftell, for geving of the
faid charge ; quhaiithrow, for feir of ])air lyfes, thay durft nocht cum fordwardis
to the faid lious : Lyk as, eftir his Maiefteis Leutennent had plantit him felf
with his forces round about the faid Caftell, and had falutet the faidis rebellis,

1 See May 13, 1609, he, and Note to the Introduction to Sir James MaJiccneiU's Trial, Vol. III.
p. 1, Sec. — ^and Vol. 1. p. 22\, where the Trial o'i Angus BlaJiconeiU, his father, occurs. ^ Outlaws,

and men attached to no particular Clan, who, for pay and the hope of plunder, would join in any enterprise. ^ Provisioned. ' Furnishing ; provision. ^ Campbell of Calder, or Caddell.
^ ' Robert Wynrahame, Albany (Ylay) Herauld.'

48 & 13 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. -65

being ]}airin, with nyne fcoir fchottis of ordinance, fchote be tliame ])airat, the
faidis perlbnes on j^annell, nochtwithilanding of pe faid Affault maid be ]je faid
Lieutennent to J)e faid Caftell, maift treffonabhe held out, keipit and detenit ]je
famyn aganishira,he being cled with his Maiefteis anthoritie, as Leutennent and
Commiffioner, for releifing j^airof ; and treffonabillie fchote furth agane, out of ])e
faid Caftell, at pe faid Leutennent and his companie dyuerfe fchottis of mufcattis,
and ]?air\vith flew Capitane Craiifurd, with foure vther of his ?>Iaiefteis faithfull
fervandis and fubiectis, quha war in feruice with the faid Leutennent, in the
executioun of his Commiffioun. And the faidis perfones on pannell, and ilk ane
of thame, ar airt and pairt of the faidis treffonable crymes.

My Lord Aduocat producet the Dittay, with the roll of the Aflyfe ; and
defyret proces.

ASSISA.

Mr Rannald Bayne, burges of Ed'", Huclieoun Frafer of Kilboig, James Sprewle of Cowden,
Andro Meldrum of Dumbrek, Williame Cunningheam of Dolpliingtoun.'

The Aduocat, for verificatioune of the Dittay, producet the pannellis Depopoiitiones, and takis inftrumentis vpone the productioun thairof, &c. And proteflis for Wilfull Errour, gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouthe of the faid James
Sprewle, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis perfones on pannell,
and ilk ane of thame, conforme to thair awin Depofitionis, and approbatioun
thairof in judgement, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of airt and pairt of the
haill treffonable crymes contenit in the Dittay. — Sentence. To be tane to the
Mercat croce of Ed"", and thair to be hangit vpone ane gibbet, quhill thay be deid :
And all thair moveable guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht: And all thair landis, heritages, and annuelrentis pertening to thame, to be fforfaltit to his Maiefteis vie, &c,

APPENDIX OF DOCUMENTS,
Illustrative of the Trial of Angus Oig M'donald, &c.
I. Offeris to he iwejentit to our maijl grat'wus fouerane and his hienes honorahill Conn fall, in the name of Angus 3P Donald of Dicnavaig, his frcindis
and follow eris.

First, with all humelite, I adiieir to my former Offeris, maid and fubfcryuit with my hand, in
prefens of the Counsall, at Glafco, in the yeir of God !■".¥)'. and fyf yeir, and delyuerit to nu/ Lord
of Shone to liaif bene fchawin to his Maiestie ; promefing to perfonne euory heid of the laniin.

Secondlic, I offer my felf to abyid the tryell of the lawis of tiiis iiis Mx'''-^ realmo, twicliing my
obediens to his hienes and Co»/«//?« derectiones, in all poyntis ; and keiping of all dewateisappertenyng
to a loyall fubiect, ewir len his M'^''^ part to mak relidons within his hienes kingdom of In(.land.

' The remainder ' bur-resses of Ed^.'

366 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

Thridlie, feing I half compleitlie payit all bygane males' of his hienes propper landis, Avithin Iyla
and Kyntyir, pofcffit be me, heirtofoir, and hes obtenit iiis Ma"^ Comtrollerris difcbarge thairof,
I offir, in lyk manir, in all tym cuming, during my lyftym, to mak thankfull payment of the full Rentall
of the faidis landis, wnto the quhilkis I and my foirbeiiis hes bene kyndlie tenentis -^ and that termele
and yerle,^ wnder the pane of tynfall' of all kyndis of rycht, tytill, or pofTefTioune that I can cleame to
ony landis within ony pairt of his Ma^es dominionis ; his hienes refpecting for the prefent the Wa/i
landis o/Tyla, quhill thai be pleneifchit and raanwrit.^

Ferdle, I ofBr fufficient cautioune, within the Laiv-Iandls, that I falbe obedient to the lawes of this
HIS INI'T'^s cuntre of Scotland ; and to that effect, fall compeir befoir the Coimjall of the laid realme,
vpone lauchfull premonitione, quhairfoewir the famin fall fit.

Fyftle, I offir to concur with thais quhomvnto it fall feme guid to (his) bines to gif Commiflioune,
with my haill freindis and foUowaris, and to fet fordwart and afill fie reformatiouue of the barbarite of
thir cuntreis of the Wast and North Iyles of this his Ma^'s kingdome of Scotland, as it fall
pleas his hienes belt to dewyfe, be thir prefentis, fubfcryvith with my hand, At Kilnachtane, in
Iyla, the aucht of September, 1606. Angus M'donall of Dwnevaig.

II. Letter, Angus MHlonall of Dwnwaig to the King. Sep. 10, 1606.

Pleis 30UR excellent Ma"^,
It is knawin to ;our Ma"^*^'^ honorabill Counfcde, within 50ur hienes realme oi North Britane, quhat
hes bene my behaviour evir fen 50ur hienes palt out of thir the North pairtis of jour Ma^^'* dominioun ; how many futtis, and how mony oiferis of all dewiteis that it become a loyall fubiect to his
dred fouerane, I haif maid to }iair Lo. ; and how that, efter I haid fullilie fatisfeit and compleitlie
payit all byrun maillis addebtit be me to jour Ma^^'^ Comptroller, I obtenit his difcbarge ])airuponn.
I fend with his lo. to haif bene prefentit to jour Ma^'e certane fpeciall Offeris, fubfcryuit with ray
hand, befoir jour hienes Counsale in Glefgw, in the moneth of Junij, 1605, of the quhilk I haif as
jit receavit na anfuer nor^ quhat jour Ma"^ refoluis and derectis me to do ; and being refufit of
Licence to haif cum and prefentit my felf perfonalie befoir jour hienes, to haif maid my awin
fupplicatioun out of my awin mowth, I am enforceit to mak the famyn be a mediat perfone, jny Lord
Bifchop of the Iijles,' quhome-by I haifgewin credeit to ofl'er, in my name, to jour Ma^'e my lyfe and
all jtat I may command, to be vfit as it fall pleife jour hienes direct ; befeiking jour Ma'^'^, for the
caufe of God, to refpect my aige and puir eflait, and to lat me knaw jour hienes awin mynd, fignet
with jour Ma^^'3 awin hand ; and gif it mycht pleife jour Ma"^'^ to continew me the pofi"eflloun of
thais kyndlie rowmes,^ quhilkis my forbearis^ and I hes haid of jour [NIa^'^ and jour hienes royall
progenitouris, I fall nocht onlie paye the dewiteis and maillis vfit and wount Jiairfoir, bot alfo fall find
fufficient fouertie for obedience to jour Ma'^^'^ lawis, in all poyntis, and in all tyme cuming; orvpirwayis, that it mycht feim guid to ^our Ma'"'^ to let me kend,'° how and quhairupoun I fall leive; for
it falbe knawin, I fall feik na vther refuge bot onlie jour Ma"^^'^ clemencie, nor na vther leiving bot
that quhilk of jour Ma'^^'^ princelie liberalitie it fall pleis jour hines beflow vpoun me ; as at mair
lenth the beirar will informe jour Ma'^'^. And fua, I befeik God to blifs jour hienes with a long and
profperous ring. 5our Ma*"^^* maill humbill and obedient fubiect,

Iylaye, the tent of September, 1606. Angus M'donall of Dwnwaig.

' Mailb, rents, feii-dutips, &c. * Feudal Tenants, termed Jiindli/, from the circumstance of their being natives,

born on those lands whidi had been possessed by their ancestors for many generations. Such persons were seldom
ejected, so long aa they paid the almost nominal rents of those lands, which they were thus permitted to occupy by a
sort of hereditary title, after the decease of the former tenant. They were styled Naliii in old Charters. ^ Termly

and yearly. * Loss; forfeiture. * Stocked and manured. ^ Than. ' Andkew Knox, of the family of

Ramfurly, who had been Minister of Lochwinnoch and Paisley, was aitpointed Bishop of the Isles, Apr. 2, 1G06,
having been the first Protestant Bishop of that See. Reference may be made to the Trial of Sir James Mackoncill,
Avpendix, * Possessions held by bim as ' hjndlie Tenant.' ^ Ancestors. '" Know j understand.

48&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 367

III. Letter, the Privy Council to the King. May 27, I6O8.

Most sacred Souerane,
This beirar, the Bifchope of the Ills, liaueing the occafioun to repair to your jNIaieftie for fome
materis concerning the feruice in the Ilis, We haif cominittit vnto him the relatioun vnto your facred
Maiestie how far we haue procedit in that bufynes, and what courfe is tane for the furtherance and
profequution of that feruice, vnto whofe fufficiencie remitting all thingis, We pray God to grant vnto
your Maieftie, efter a long and happy reigne, etemall felicitie. From your Maiefteis burghe of
Edinburghe, the 27 of May, 1608.

Your Maiefteis moll humble and obedient fubiectis and feruitouris,

Al. Cancell^. Abercorne. J. Balmerino^. D. Scoke.
Bewly. Halyrudhous. Jo. Prestoun.
To THE KiNGis mofl excellent Ma"^'^.

IV. Letter, Lord JFchiltrie to the King. May 27, 1608.

Most sacred and gratious Soueran,

I ressavid your Ma'^'^'^ Lettir, with Alijter Ogis RemifTioune, and falbe cairfuU to gif vnto jour
Ma^'^ full contentment and fatisfactioune in everie particular of the Letter. I haif reteinit the
Remiffioune in my handis, quhill I haifFane certaintie of AJiJferis conformitie ; quhairin I expect to
find him anfuerable, in fome meafour, to that great favour quhilk it bes plefit jour ^NIa"^'^ to beftow
wpone him. In all wtheris jour Ma^^'® directionis, quhairin it fall pleis jour facred Ma^'" to burdene
me, I fall haif ane fpeciall cair and regard to approve my felfl" worthie of that trufl quhilk jour hieneg
repofis in me ; having na wthir thing jit to acquyt jour heines ineftimable favouris, hot ane hart difpoiit,
in all finceritie, to difcharge that dewtie quhilk jour Ma'^'^ expectis, and quhilk to my awin credit
appertenis, and to facrlfice my lyffe and all that I haiflP, in the executioune of all ;our Ma^''-'* royall
directionis. And fua, recommending jour facred Ma'^"^, with jour royall progenie, to the protectioune
of God, I reft 3o'^ Ma'^''^^ moift humbill and obedient feruitour,

Edinburgh, the xxvij of Maij, 1608. Al. Wcheltrie.

To the Kyngis moift excellent Ma"*^.

V. ' Copy of the Lieutennentis Letter to the Counfall, to he fend to
Courte ivith Sir Alexander Hmjis Letter, (|c.' Aug. 18, 1608.
Pleis jour Lordschipis,
I CAUSIT wey oure ankeris and depairtit from Yla tlie 14 of this inftant, at efter none, and arryved
at Doxoart, in Mule, the 13 of the fame monethe ; and that with gryte difHcultie, in refpect of the
greateft tempeft of wedder and contrarie tyddis, quhairby we wer put in great dangeir all ])at nycht;
quhairthrow I failit downs ane of the maftis of my awne fchippe. Att oure out-comeing from Yla,
we mett the Iiujl'ijlie gallay, with ane vther Ihipp, that caryis the niunitioun and ordinance, the quhilk
gallay, yf it haid not pleafit God to haif givin hir that luke' to aidier in the Soinid of Yla, llio could
not haif efchaipit faiff, in refpect of the gryte tyddis heir, and hid gait to pas tinow, the quhilk llio
appeiris to be verie vnmeit : And finding liir nawife fufficientlie furneift witli victuall, to reniane heir
to avait on this fervice, yf it war hot for the fpace of audit dayis ; and not being certane of ony
victuallis to come heir to furneilh hir, hot onlie, at my fpecifill requeift, iSir WiUiainc StJohnne, his
Maiesteis Admirall heir, hes tane vpoun him, out of his awne furnitour,' to I'tipplic hir with viveris,
quhill bak adverteifment come from your 11.; and feing we have no fervice in thir Yhoulis that liio is
meit for, and knowing hir to be gryte expenffis to His M^'", vpoun the avilement with the Admirali

' Luck ; good fortune. ' Provisjou368 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

and remanent Capitancs of the Inglishe fleitt, and efpecialie with liim wlia is prefent Govcrnour
of fair, wha be painfull experience knawis, and lies declaiiit to ws, how difficile it is to keepe hirfaiif,
vncaflin away, lett bee to do ony good office with hir, I haif thocht good to crave your 11. aduife,
quhidder Hio falbe direct bak agane to England, with all expedition, as we think all expedient — or
yf llio fall be continewit heir — and to what vfe, and how Iho falbe furneifl — for we knaw not. As
to the fliip caryare of the batterie and inflrumentis appertening thairto, albeit we think not meit to
keepe the ihip heir, hot remit hir bak with the gallay, for hir better prefervation, yit, for fundrie cauflis
tending to the forder and finall ending of this fervice, we think it expedient to keep the munition with the
inflrumentis, the quhilk I fall fie to be put in fic furitie, as I falbe anfwerable to his Ma"'^ and your 11.

Tliir thiiigis I liaif thoglit good to comnivnicat vnto 30ur 11., imparting vnto 5owr 11. oure opinioun
heir, and craving your 11. forder refolutioun in the premifles, quhilk I think, God willing, to follow
furth. Vpoun tlie 16 of this inflant, I directit CommifTionaris to the Honfe of Dowart, quhairin
M'Clayne haueing his refidence for the tyme, promefit to delyuer the Houfe ; the quhilk he did
vpoun the 17 of this inflant. I reflUveing the fame, hes furneifl with men and viveris that Houfe to
be keipit during his Ma'^^^'^ and 50ur 11. pleafour. I haif proclarait Courte to be haldin, the xxiij of
this inilant, in Arrqje o/'Mull, when I think, be Godis grace, to tak ordour with ]iat Yland, in executioun of ]iat pairt of my Commiffioun, in diflroying of lumfaddis,^ birlingis,- and Hieland gallayis.

I find this ane gryte difficultye, that in refpect of the great nomber of theis valliellis, quhilkis ar
intertenyit vpoun the mayne-flioir, quhilkis ar ^o offenfive to ilie Yllifineriy that onles thay keepe the
lyk counter with ]iame, thay can not efchaip thair oppreffioun, nather can I juftlie fpoil^ie ]iame ]iairof,
vnles the lyk ordour be tane with thefe that ar vpoim the mayne-lhoir, oppofith to the North and
West Yllis ; and thairfoir, yf it wald pleis 30ur 11. to gif me lyk pouer and Commiffioun, for the
aboleifliing of fic vafchellis vpoun the mayne-flioir, as I haue with in the Yllis, I fall do accordinglie
with boith. The quhilk Commiffioun I expect, with diligence ; into the quhilk Commiffioun, I wald
defyre your 11. to include the intaking and affedgeing and dimoleilheing of all fic Houffis vpoun the
mayne-fchoir, apperteneing to ony Yllifman, or that may be ayd or reflett to ony fugitiue rebell out
of THE Ylles.

I will not trouble ^our 11. with farder Letteris quliill mair occafioun be oflferit; hot, requeifling jour
11, to haifl bak anfuer, becaus I can not depairt out of this Yll, withoute reffett of the fame, I reft,

Be jour -11. alwlfe to be commaudit,

Dowart, in Mull, 18 Auguft, 1608. A. Vchiltrie.

VI. Letter, the Privy Council to the King. Oct. 6, 1608.

Most sacred Souerayne,
This Nobleman, the Lord Vchiltrie, whome it pleafit your heynes to prefer to the charge of Leutennandrie of the Yllis of this your Maiefleis kingdome, hes, with verie greate cair, pane, and
travellis, and with greate hafaird of his perfone, broght that feruice to ane goode perfectioun, by the
entrie and exhibitioun befoir ws of a noumer of the principallis and Chiftanes of the Ylles ; and by
his awne promeis and Band, to mak fome otheris of thame, whome he hes not prefentit, anfuerable
and obedyent ; as mair particularlie he will informe your facred INIa"^. And fua, recommending him
to your Maiefleis gratious regaird and confideratioun. We pray God to blilfe your facred Maieflie
with all happynes, and reflis for evir.

Your Maiefleis mofl humble and obedyent fubiectis and femitouris,

Al. Cancell^ Argyll. Craford. Bukclughe. Abercorne. Blantyre.
Edinburgh, 6 October, 1608.
To the Kingis mofl excellent Maiestie.

' Lymphads. ' A hirlin is a small sort of vessel, peculiar to the Western Islands of Scotland.

43 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 369

VII. Letter, tlie Privy Council to the King. Oct. 13, 1608.

Most sacued Souerane,
The beirar, the Bifchop of the Yllis, having the occafioun to repair towardis your facred Maiestie,
we haif thoght meit to accompany liim with this our teflimonie and approbatioun of his dewtiful cariage
and behaviour in your Maiesteis leruice, in the Yllis, wherin he lies caryed him felfF with verie
goode credite and reputatioun ; and is able, be his counfall and advyfe, (in refpect of his awne credite
and freindfliippe amang the Yllifmen,) to do vnto your Maiestie goode feruice thair. And fua,
recommending him vnto jour facred Maiestie, and moft huimelie befeiking your heynes to heir him,
in fuche thingis as lie will propone, anent the profequutioun of this feruice, We pray God to bliiTe your
facred Maieflie with all happynes and felicitie, and reftis for ever,

Your Maiefteis moft humble and obedyent fubiectis and feruitouris,

Al. CANCELL^ RoSS. ToRPHECHIX. BuKCLUGHE. HaLYRUDHOUS.

Cl^ IIeg"'. a. Elphinston. S. T. Hamilton. Jo. Prestoun.
Edinburgh, 13 October, 1608.
To the Kingis moft excellent Maiestie.

VIII. The CoTiB Ai>^gvs Og'e.'s Ji/;ft Lbttbti to Si?' Oliver Lamhert. (No date.)
My honorabill good Lord,
I have receavet your Letter, and hes vnderftand be jour meaning, that 56 wuld hawe me to rander
this Hous to yovv into the Kyngs name. My Lord, as to that, if I had not receavit ane better
Warrand frome m^ Lord Chancier and Counjell of Scotland to rander thame this Hous of Dukywege, I vvald obey your lo. or any wj)er fubiect, hawing his Maiesteis Warrand. ]My lord, if je
doubt of this, fend me jour awin Secretar, or anie wj)er fat can reid, and I Ihall let him fie my Warrand frome the Comifdl, defyring me to keip this Cqjiell, wnto the tyme that his Ma^'^ wilbe' declairit
to me. The quhilk my Warrand fall teftefie. And if yow will trouble me, efter I hawe obeyit his
highnes will, be yow alTurit that I fall complayne to his Ma^*^'^ Counjell. Not troubling jour lo.
any forder, comitts yow to God. Frome Dunyvvege, the 14 of this inftant month. And if je will
fend any of jour awin men, je fall hawe frie paifage to pas and repas to and fro.

Your friend, to your deferwing, Angus Og Ma''donall.

IX. ^-xjiix ACT from MmvT'E^ of Priiri/ Council Pi'oceedings. A])!-. 1614.

The House of Dvnyveg, in Yla, being pofTeffed and keeped be the Bischop of the Yles
his brother, and two or three fervandes, the fame Iloufe hes bene of late I'urpryfed and tane be one
Ronnald Oig, alegeand to be Baftard fone to vmq'*^^ Angus M'^coneill of Dvmjvcg, whom the laid
Angus did neuer, in his tyme, acknowlege to be his fone. This Ronnald, being a vagabound fellow,
without ony certane refidence, come latelie to Yla, and finding the Houfe to be but llcndcrlie keeped,
refolued to furpryfe and tak the fame : And for this effect, he and his complices, being four or fyue
in nomber, retered thame felues to ane wood, neare by the Iloufe, whair thay made fonie laderes, and
with thame, one day, airlie in the morning, tl»ay clam the vtter wall, keeped thame felues obfcuro
whill the yettes were opined ; and then they took the Houfe, and put (he Bj/hopes folkes oute thereof.
The reporte whereof comeing to young Angus 3rconcill, laufull brother to Sir Janus, who wes within
fex myles of the Houfe for the tyme, he immediatlie, according to the cuntrie faffioun, lend the Fyrecrofe^ athorte the countrey, warning all the countrey people, who wer affected to his ALmesteis
obedience, to ryfe, and concur with him in the recouerie of the Iloufe. And Co he, with Inch affiflance as come to him, inclofed the Iloufe. Thay within held good for fex dayes, being weel prouyded

' ProLalily tliis should be read, " wnto the tyme that liis ISIaT'ks „iii salhe." ' Tlio Fiery Cross. See l/ic

Lady of the Lake, and other works of Sir Walter tjcott, for illustnitioiis of this remarkable ciisioni.

VOL. III. 3 A

370 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

with pulder, lunt,^ and buUett, whereof thay fand good flore in the Houfe ; and thay wer prodigall
anough in beftowing the fame vpon the befeagares ; bot in end, perceaueing that thay war not able to
keepe the Houfe, thay in the niglit efliued^ at a bak yett, in a litle boat with fex oares, which lay at
the Caftell ; and took with tliem fuch goodes as thay fand in the Houfe.

Ayigns followed thame, bot what farder has fallen oute, is not as yitt come to the Counfelles knowledge. >S'/> James Jl'coneill is t/ie Counjelles inforniar of all this bufynes ; and as he fayes his brother
hes offered to delyuer the Houfe bak againe to the BiJIiopes fervandes, who refuifed to reffaue the
fame. The Coiinjell haveing hard at lenth Sir James difcourfe, made in this earand, and looking
fliortlie to heere from the Erie of Ergyle, or els frome the Bijhope^ the conftant and certane truthe of
all this mater, thay haue referued all deliberation hearin, till thay heere from the Bifiope or Erie,

X. Sir James McDonald his Offeris.

First, I offer, if it might pleafe his Ma"^ of his clemencie to give me Ilay, I would pay eight
thowfand merkis yearlie thairfoir ; and find fufficient cautioun of Lordis and Barrounes for good payment and obedience, be my felfe, and all the Clannis that Ihall dwell there : And craves but a fevin
yeare Tak, to try me.

Secondlie, I offir, if his Ma'^'^ pleafe to hold Ilay in his awin hand, to mak it worth Ten Thowfand merkis yearlie to his Ma^'^ ; and to tranfport my felfe, my brethir, and my kin to Ireland, or
to whatlumewir other place iiis Ma"'' will appoynt ws; and his highnes to give ws one yearis duetie
or rent of Ilay, to by land with ; and in the mein tyme, I Ihall go with the Bijhop of the Iles, and
fhall, God willing, ather get the Houfe and his pledgis, without any chairgis to his Ma^i^, or than
retume heir to mynd my owne waird, within fourtie dayis. Provyding, if I get this done, I haue
affurance of his Mat^ and Counsall, that my felf and my brothir Ihall get leave to go, prefentlie
thereafter, with my lord Bijliop to Courte, and get a kifs of his Ma^'^ hand ; and my cautionaris fhall
remaine bound for me, that I and my brother ihall returne bak heir to his Ma^'^^ Counsall, to
abyid fuch order as it Ihall pleas his highnes to injoyne to ws. And I (hall leive my fone heir, as
pledge for my performance in all, and for fatisfactioun to his Mate and Counsall. I Ihall bring
Rannakl M<'aUaJter, who firfl took the Houfe, and Ronnald M''donald Vatlich, to fuffer for their
fault ; and CoU 3I''gUlaJpie to be keipt in Irnes, during his Ma'^''^* pleafour. My cautioneris falbe
the Erie of Tidlihairne, Lord Burlle, Sir Ronnald M'^Sorle, Johnne Campbell of Cadell, Malcum
Tojlie,'' and the Laird of Grant ; every one for Fyve Thowfand merkis — and my fone to die if I faill.

And laji, I offer, without ony conditioun of land or money, that if it pleafe his Ma'^'^ to give me
libertie, vpon fiuh furetie by cautioneris as I am able to performe, or pledgis, I Ihall tranfport my felf
and my brothir and kin out of all his Ma^'^^ dominiounes, having his Ma^'^^ Letter of Recommendatioun to the Estaittis of Holland ; and libertie to tak vp men, if we be imployit; with his
;\j^TiEs fiie pardoun for all byganis.

J'irt-raising— Cljrft— lUstt of Cljcft

Jul. 1-1. — JoHNXE ]\rALLASTER IVrjAMES, ill Daill of Rotliieiiiurchus ;

Andro IVrallafter ]\rJames, in Kynveachie ; Johnne Dow

IVrkay, in Duchill.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the trefTonable Raifeing of ffyre, Burneing and

deftructioim of the Houffis and bigingis pertening to vmq'^ George Dunbar in

' Match. - Escaped ; eschetved. ^ Probably meaning the Laird of Maclrdosh,

48 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 37I.

Clwne ; and thiftious Steilling and away-taking of theliaill infycht and pleneiffing,
guidis and geir, being within the faidis Houflis, to tlie availl of ane tliowfeand
merkis ; at the leift, of the thiftious Reletting of the faidis guidis and vtheris
contenit in the Letteris direct thairupoune, eftir the thiftious fleilling thairof be
Dauid JVrWilliam and his complices ; committit in October, 1598 ';eiris.

Persewar, Mr Robert Dumbar, fone to the faid vrnq'*^ George Dumbar.

The Juftice, with advyfe of my lord Aduocat, continewis this matter to the
thrid day of the next Juftice-air of the fchereffdome of Innernes, quhairin thay
duell, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the law for the crymes aboue
fpecifeit : And ordanis cautioun to be ffund for the defenderis compeirance to
that effect ; vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

Johnne Roife of Glenbeg, as cautioner for the entrie of the perfones on pannell,
tuik inftrumentis of thair entrie ; and proteftis he may be fred of his cautionrie.
Gregour Grant of Gartmoir become fouirtie, that thai and ilk ane of tliame fall
compeir, &c.

[Sir WilUame Hearty Jujiice-Depute.

AssESsouRis to the Justice, In this cause,— My Lord Archbischopof St Androis; Sir Gedione Murray, Tliesaurardepute ; My Lord Clerk of Register, (Sir Alexander Hay of VVhitburgh) ; My Lord of Kilsythe.]

Creasunaftlc IXt^ttimv^ uf Jl^swits antr Craitiduitti: iiJaiitsts, kt.

[After the details which have already been given in the Case of Ogilvie,' it seems unnecessary
to occupy farther space in attempting to elucidate the present Trial. It must, however, be interesting
to the reader that there should be preserved, in this place, some remarks made by Calderwood, in his
larger MS. History,^ which strongly depict the popular feeling, in relation to these State prosecutions
against the Jesuits.

* William Sinclare, Robert Wilkie, (and) Cruikihanks were convicted, upon the fourteen

of Auguft, for Refetting the Jefuils above named, and hearing of Mafle. The day following, betwix
four and five afternoone, they were brought furth, with their hands bound, to the Scaflold, fett up
befide the CrofTe, and a gallows in it, according to the cuftome of Executione. While a great multitude of the people was gazing to fee the Executione, there was a Warrant prefented to the Magiflrats
of Edinburgh, to flay the Execution ; foe they were carried back again to their wairds. The people
thought this forme of dealing rather mockery then punilhment !']

Jul. 14. — WiLLiAME Sinclair, agent in Edinburgh; Robert Wilkie,
browdinfter^ in the Cannogait ; and Robert Cruikfchank,
ftaibler in Ed^
Dilaitit of the treffonable Refetting of Mr James Moftett, Mr Johnne Ogilvie,
and Mr Johnne Campbell, Jefuites and Traffiqueing Papillis, within thair duelling houffis, dyuerfe dayis and nychtis, in the monethis of Augult, September,
and October laftbypalt, &c. viz.

DiTTAY agalnjl the Pannd.

FoRSAMEKiLL AS our mofl gracious and facred Souerane lord, furth of )>at godlie zeill ever borne

» See his Trial, Vol. III., p. 330, &c. « Church Hist. MS., Adv. Library. = Luibroidtitr, a lucrative

employment in those times ; not browstcr, or brewer.

372 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6l5.

be his Maieftie to pe mantenance of tlie trew Religioun, prefentlie (to tbe honour and praife of
Almychtie God) profeflTit and eftablifchet within this Kingdome, and for the ruteing out of all Papifticall and Idolatrus Religioun, with the blinded profefTouris Jiairof, furlh of the famyn ; be mony godlie
lawis and Actis of Parliament, deulie maid and publeill, alfweill in his hienes minoritie, as fince his
acceptatioun of the governanient in his awin perfbne, lies nocht onlie expreflie flatute and ordanit, that
na profeflit Jesuite, Se.minarie Preistis, nor Traffiqueing Papistis (being all fuorne ennemeis
to his lacred Maieilies croun and eflait) be fund within this his hienes realme, or ony part of the famyn,
vnder dyuerfe capitall panes mentionat Jiairintill ; hot lykwayis, be dyuerfe vtheris guid and godlie
Lawis, Actis, and conflitutiones of Parliament, fpeciallie, be the 120 Act of his hienes tuelf Parliament, haldin at Ed"" vpone the fyft day of Junij, 1592 5eins, his Maieflie and Eftaitis than convenit,
hes, be vertew of the faid Act, decernit and declairit, that in tyme ]iaireftir following, the Ressetting
of the faidis Jesuitis, Seminarie Preistis, and Traffiqueing Papistis, aganis the Kingis
Maieftie and Religioun, prefentlie profeflit within this realme, is and fall be ane juft caus to infer the
crvme and payne of Tressone aganis the faid recepteris :^ As the faid Act of Parliament, ratifeit and
approvin in dyuerfe his Maielleis Parliamentis, haldin fenfyne, in the felft' proportis. And albeit it
be of verritie, that vmq'*^ Mr Johnne Ogilvie, alias Watjbne, Mr James Moffett, alias HaJyhurtoun,
and 3Ir Johnne Campbell, alias Sinclair, all profeflit Jesuites and Mess-Preistis, with dyuerfe
vtheris of that vnhappie and curfet feet, war directit frome Rome, this laft 5eir, 1614, be the Pope
and his Cardinallis, to cum to this cuntrie and vtheris pairtis of his Maiefteis dominiones, to put
in executioun, na dout, fum feirfuU and treflbnabill conclufioune, as perfoues maift meit for fie ane
dangerous imploynient ; and haifing, accoirding to ])air commiflioun, cum to this cuntrie, in the monethis
of Junij or Julij, the ;eir of God foirfaid ; quhair, eftir ]iair cumming ])airto, in all pairtis and companeis quhair thay refoirtit, fpeciallie, the faid Mr Johnne Ogilvie, ane vyld and abhominable Tratour,
quha iufllie reflauit his deferuet pwneifchment, be J»air perverfe fpeiches and infolent cariages, maifl
trefTunabillie and oppinlie condampned and difavowit his Maiefteis fouerane authoritie, fetting vp and
manteining, in place ])airof, the Pope of Rome his vfurpet power for excommunicatting, depofeing,
and dethroneing Kingis, and abfolueing fubiectis from the othe^ of pair naturall allegeance ; intending
na les, be thais Jiair treffonabill fpeiches and informationes, nor^ to haif waknit and fteirit vp ane oppin
and feirfuU Rebellioun. Thir perniceous and vnhappie mifcreantis, fcbakin loufe be ])e authoritie
of ]mv Generallis, to put in executioun fie trefl"onabill attemptis, nochtwithftanding of his Maiefteis
Lawis and Actis of Parliament maid aganis the recepting of thame and vtheris of Jiair devillifche feet,
war, in the monethis of Julij, Auguft, September, and October laftbypaft, at the leift, in ane or vther
of the faidis monethis, maift trefl"onabillie reflett, harbourit, and interteneit be 50W, and everie ane of
;ow, viz. the faidis Williame Sinclair, Robert Wilkie, and Robert Crtiikfchank, within ])air (50ur)
duelling houfll^s, in maner as followis ; that is to fay : The faid Mr James 3Ioffett, alias Hahjburtoun,
ane profeflit Jesuite, a Preist, and Traffiqueing Papist, haifing cum to this burgh of Ed^ to
pervert, be his erronious doctrine, our fouerane lordis fubiectis fra ]ie trew Religioun prefentlie
profeflit, was, for that efiect, maift treflTonabillie refl"et, harbouret, and interteneit be the faid Williame
Sinclair, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis of Julij, Auguft, September, and October laftbypaft,
dyuerfe dayis and nichtis, within his duelling hous in Ed' ; and all neceflar comforte, releif, and intertenement miniftrat to him, at all occafions, as gif he had bene (ane of) his Maiefteis faithfull and loyall
fubiectis and profeflimris of ]ie trew Religioun; eftir he was knawin to J^e faid Williame Sinclair
and his wyfe to be of the contrair'' Religioun, be ]»e informatioun of ane James Colt, he keipit daylie
focieatie and companie with fe faid Jesuite, vpone the ftretis, keipit tryftis and meittingis with him
and with the faid ymq'*-" Johnne Ogilvie, ane notorious Tratour, within the duelling houfe of Robert
Wilkie, in the Cannogait, and duelling hous and ftable of Robert Cruihjchank, and within the Abbay

' Receivers ; resetters. * Oatli. ^ Than. * Opposite ; adverse.

48&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 373

Sairdis, and in dyuerfe vtheris pairtis of this burgh of Ed*" and fuburbis ])airof ; committing jmirtlirow,
maifl oppin and vnpardonable Treflbne, and according to the faid Act of Parliament, incurring jiairthrow the panes and puneifchment expreffit ))airintill. Lyk as, the faidis Jlr James jMoJf'ctt, Mr
Johnne CampheU, and Mr Johnne Ogilvie, all profeffit and avowed Jesuites, war, in ane vtlier cf
the faidis monethis, treffonabillie reffett, hurdit,* keipit clofe, with thair horflis and proviiioun, be the
faid JRohert Cruikjchank, llaibler, within his duelling hous and ftable in Ed"", be the fpace of dyuerfe
dayis and nychtis, war interteneit be him ])airintill, and furneill with all maner of conforte, help, and
releifF, accoirding to his habilitie, committing fairthrow, oppin and manifell Thessoxe, conforme to
the faid Act of Parliament. And ficlyk, the faidis Mr James Moffett and vmq'"' 3Ir Johnne Ogllcie
war maifl trefI()nabiHie reflet, harbouret, and interteneit, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis, be the
faid Robert Wilkie, within his duelling hous in the Cannogait, of certane knawlege that tliay war
Jesuites, infafar as three feuerall Messis^ war faid be the faid Johniie Oy'dvie, within jour chalmer,
of jour fpeciall knawlege ; to the quhilkis Messis, dyuerfe perfones maid pair refoirt, and the faid
Robert keipit the dur, and was quhyles within and quhyles without. Be the wilfuU and treflbnable
Refl^etting of the quhilkis Jesuites, Seminarie Piieistis, and Traffiqueikg Papistis, profeflit
and avowed enemeis to his Maiefleis perfone, Croun, and eftait, and trew Religioun prefentlie
profeflit, and that within thair duelling houflis, and vtherwayis, as is aboue declairit, the foirfaidis
perfones, and ilk ane of thame, accoirding to the tennour of the faid Act of Parliament, lies incurret
the pane and pwneifchment of Tressone, viz. to be pwneifl; and demanit' as Tratouris, and ))air haill
landis and guidis fforfalt and efcheit to his Maiefleis vfe ; to the terrour of vtheris to abftene fra the
lyji heireftir.

WiLLiAME Sinclair, eftir reiding of the Dittay, declairit, that it is of treuth
that he hes offendit God and the Kingis Maieflie, by ReflTetting of Mr James
Moffet, Jefuite, in the nioneth of October laft ; quhilk he did only vpone limplicitie :"* And denyis the Reflet of Mr Johnne Ogilvie, or Mr Johnne CumpheU^
Jefuites, at ony tyme : As alfo, denyis the Refletting of the faid Mr James
Moffet, in the monethis of July, Auguft, and September, fet doiin in the Dittay.
My lord Aduocat acceptis his Confeflloun, in that he acknowlegcs his Relletting
of Moffet, in the moneth of October ; and adheris only thairto, aganis ^Mlliame
Sinclair.

It is allegit be AVilliame Sinclair, for him felfF and remanent perfones vpone
pannell with him, that the Dittay is nocht relevant, nathor can the Ihiiiyn be
put to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe, except it war fpeciallie condifceiidit thairin,
that Mr James Moffet faid Mefs, and was a traffiker aganis the Kingis Maiellie
and the Religioun. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, the allegeance audit to
be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay and Act of Parliament, beirand diflinctlie,
that nocht only the Relfetteris of the Sayeris of Mels committis 'J'rellono, hot
alfo the Refl*etteris of Jefuites, Seminarie Preiftis, and Trafiiking PapilU's aganis
the Kingis Maiefl;ie and Religioun, committis Treflbne. And trcw it is, tliat
the faid Mr James Moffet is ane notorious Jefuite, and ane trafliker aganis the
Religioun profefl^it within this realme, as is confeflit be the faid \\'illiame Sinchiir

' I>iterally, hoarded ; concealed with extreme caution, as one would a hoard of nionoy. ^ JMasses.
^ Used; treated. * Goodnature; without any treasonable intent.

574 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

him felf, in his awin Depofitioun, beirand, that Moffet declairit to him, that he
was cmn to this cuntrie to venter his lyfe for the faiftie of faules that war in
danger ; and fa, was fiifficientlie knavvin to the faid Williame, that he was ane
Jefuite and traffikeing Papift aganis his Maiellie and Religioun : Be recepting
of the quhilk Jefuite thaireftir, he has fallin vnder the danger of the faid Act of
Parliament.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that he can nocht pas to ane Affyfe for the
Recepting of Jefuites, except, conforme to the Act of Parliament, made in anno
1593, cap. 164, he had reffet thame, Jcie?iter et jjrudenfer, be the fpace of thre
nychtis togidder, or thre nychtis at feuerall tymes ; be the quhilk Act, it is provydit, that gif it be fa tryit,^ that the perfone convict for the Jlr/t fait, his efcheit
fall fall ; ffor the fee inid fait, fall amit^ his Lyfrent ; and (ffor) the thrkl fait, fall
incur the crymes of Treflbne. And thairfore, except the faid Recept be fa tryit,
the Dittay is nocht relevant. — It is anfuerit, that the allegeance audit to be
repellit, in refpec the faid Act of Parliament nawayis derogattis the Act of
Parliament quhairupoun the Dittay is foundit : And thairfoir, nochtwithftanding of the faid allegeance, fould pas to ane Aflyfe.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that be the Act of Parliament maid in
anno 1600 5eiris, cap. 18, thair can be na forder exactit of the Recepteris of
Jefuites, hot ane pecuniall payne ; quhilk he is content to pay, accoirding to the
Lordis modificatioune : And thairfoir, the Dittay for Treffone can nocht pas to
an Affyfe. — It is anfuerit, that the allegeance audit to be repellit, nochtwithllanding of the faid Act quhairupoun the famyn is foundit, in refpect the famyn
nawayis derogatis the Act of Parliament maid be his Maiellie and Eftaittis, in
anno 1592, bot ratifies the faid Act in everie poynt.

It is allegit be the pannell, that he can nawayis pas to ane Aflyfe for ReflTetting of the faidis Jefuites, natlier is the Dittay relevant aganis him, in refpect,
be ane Act of Parliament maid at Edinburgh, in anno 1609, cap. quinto, it is
thair planelie explanet and declairit, that all Actis maid ofbefoir aganis the
Refletteris of Jefuites, &c. liaif full force, and be put to dew executioun aganis
the faid Reffetteris, fa fone as intimatioun and denunciatioun beis maid of the
faidis Jefuites, Seminarie Prieftis, and vtheris contenit thairin, at the MercatCroce of the heid burgh of the fchyre quhair thay duell, and Mercat-croce of
Edinburgh ;^ bot fa it is, that thair was na intimatioun nor denunciatioun maid
at ony Mercat-croce of the faid 3Lr James Moffet his name, befoir his Refletting
within the pannellis hous, to be ather a Jefuite, Seminarie Preifl:, or of ony vtlier
ordour : And thairfoir, the faid Dittay for his Recept can nocht pas to ane Aflyfe.
— It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the explanatioun repeitit be the pan1 If it so turns out upon Trial. ^ Lose. ' As the commune forum.

.49 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 375

nell, fet doiin in the faid laft Act of Parliament, nawayis derogatis or takis away
the former Act of Parliament maid aganis the RefTetteris, quhairupoun the
Dittay is confauet ; hot be the contrair, the laid Act is Ratifeit, and ordanit to
half frie ftrenth, effect, and executioiin, accoirding to the tennour thairof ; and
the explanatioun of the faid Act, in anno 1609, is only in fauouris of lie as
RelTettis Papiltis ignorantlie, nocht knawing thame to be Papiftes, or of ane
contrair Religioun : Bot it was fufficientlie vnderftuid to the pannell, befoir
Mqffettis RelTet, that he was ane Catholik ffather, and was cum to venter his
body for the Catholik Faith, as is confeffit be his Depofitioun : And thairfoir,
the faid allegeance aucht to be repellit, and the pannell pas to ane Affyfe.

Interlocutor of Relevancy.
The Justice, with advyfe of the Affelfouris prefent, Repellis the haill allegeances proponit be the pannell ; and ffindis the Dittay relevant : And Ordanis the
famyn to be put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe.

ASSISA.

Thomas Fifcher, merclieand bur- Robert Halybruntoun, mercliand Dauid Williamefone, elder, merges of Edinburgh, thair, cheand thair,

Eduard Johneftoun of Ryhill, Jolinne Inglis, fkynner thair, Capitane James Hunter, burges

Williame Cocherane, mercheand Nicoll Vduard, mercheand tliair, thair,

burges of Edinburgh, Williame Nemok, tai^eour thair, Alexander Broun, elder, merDauid Mitchell, merchand thair, Thomas Weir, peuderer thair, cheand thair,

Alexander Speir, mercheand thair, James W^eill, mercheand thair, Jo. Fairlie, younger, burges thair.

My lord Aduocat takis inflrumentis of the fuering of the Affyfe : And for
VERiFiCATiouN of the Dittay, producet the pannellis Depofitiones, viz. the
faid William Sinclairis Depofitioun, all writtin and fubfcryuit with his hand ;
^nd the vther tua Depofitiones maid in prefens of dyuerfe Lordis of his Maiefteis Secreit Counfell, confefUng thair particular Reletting of the Jefuites, in
maner fpecifeit in thair Dittay, and thairupoun aflvit inflrumentis ; and jn'otellis
for Wilfull Errour, gif thay Acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Dauid Williamefone
elder, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis Williame Sinclair,
Robert Wilkie, and Robert Cruilcjchanlc to be ffylet, culpaljle, and convict of
the treffonable Reffetting of the faidis Jefuites, in maner fpecifeit in thair Dittay ;
accoirding to thair awin Depofitiones, producet for verificatioun tliairof.

Sentence. To be tane to the places of thair Executioun, and thair to be
execute to the daith, and vtherwayis demanit as^Tratouris : And all thair landis,
guidis, and geir to be fforfalt and efcheit to his ]\Iaiefleis vfe.

Aug. 15. — The quhilk day, the Justice being fitand in Judgement,
ane Warrand was producet be him, and ordanit to be red, quhilk was direct
to him fra his Maieflie, &c. viz.

376 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

James R.
To our truftie and weilbeloult Sir Willtame Heart, kny*, deputy Juftice generall, in our kingdome of Scotland. Quiiair as, Williame Sinclair, Aduocat, Robert Wilkie, imbroderar, and on
Cruikfehank, a ftaibler, ar convicted and condemned of Treaflbne, for tlieWilfuU Recept and fupplieing of Moffet tlie Jefuite : It is our plefour, that 36 proceid to the finall pronunceatioun of the
Sentence and Executioun of the pwneifcliment provydit by our Lawis in the lyk caices againft thame,
with all convenient expeditioun : For doing quhairof, thefe prefentis fall be 50ur fufficient Warrand.
Gevin at Sarifburrie, tlie 26th of Julie, 1613.

For obedience of the qiihilk Warrand, the Juftice ordanit the faidis Williame
Sinclair, Robert Wilkie, and Robert Cruikfehank, to be broglit furth of Waird to
the Mercat-croce of Edinburghe ; and thair to be Hangit vjione ane gibbet, quhill
thay be deid : And all thair landis, heritageis, guidis, geir, and vtheris pertening
to thame, to be fforfalt and efcheit to our fouerane lordis vfe, &c.

Eftir the pronunceatioun of the quliilk Sentence, the famyn was intimat to
thame be Johnne M'Nacht, bail3ie of Edinburgh, to quhome directioun was gevin
be the faid Juftice, for caufeing put the famyn to executioun, conforme to the
Warrand aboue fpecifeit.

Aug. 30. — Being of new agane brocht furth of Waird, and prefentit
vpone pannell, be the Bailleis of Edinburghe, as thay quhais dome and executioun thairof, &c. was of our fouerane lordis meir mercie and grace delay it and
fuperceidit. The Justice, for obedience of his Maiefteis pofteriour Warrand,
direct to my lord Archebifchope of St Androis, My Lord of Bynning his hienes
Secretar, and Sir Gedione Murray his hienes Thefaurer depute, quhairof the
tennour followis, pronounced Sentence accoirdingly.
James R.
Whearas, We ar credlblie inforraet, that Williame Sinclair, ane Aduocat before fe SefRoun,
Robert Wilkie, browdinfter, and on Cruikfehank, ane flaibler, is convict of Treafone, for Reffetting
of ^loffet and Ogilvie the Jefuite : It is our pleafour, that Williame Sinclair and Robert Wilkie, be
Banifchet our dominiones during our plefour : And that ]ie faid Cruikfehank be Banifehet the toun
of Edinburghe during our plefour. Gevin at Sallfberrie, the xxvij day of Julij, 1615.

Quhilk Dome and Sentence, the faidis perfones, in all humilitie, imbracet
and acceptit vpoun thame, &c.

[Curia Jvfiiciarie, f. d. n. regis tenia in Pretoria ciuitatis Glufguen. per D. Will. Heearf^

CmisnnnlJlc lUscttinci: nf Jrsuits— ^taiintj of iHass, ku

Sept. 5. — Sir James Ci-eili.and (Kneilland) of Monkland, kny*,

Williame Maxwall of Cowglene,' Robert Vrie, wryter, burges

of Paiflay.

Dilaittit of the treftonable Reffetting of Mr Johnne Ogilvie, Jefuite, within

thair duelling houflis : And heiring of dyuerfe Meffis faid be him thairintill ;

' See their Examinations appended to the Trial of John Ogilvy, Vol. III., 330.

49 & 13 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS. 377

contrail- the Actis of Parliament ; comraittet in the monethis of July, Auguft,
and September, 1614 yeiris ; at the leift, in ane or vther of the faidis monethis.

Persewak, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny', Aduocat to our f'oueraue lord.

Prelocutouris in defence, The Laird of Keir, the Laird of Mufchett, the Laird of Pollok,

Johnne Cranftoun, INIr Johnne Halyday, Aduocat, Mr Thomas Pollok, Aduocat.

The Jullice, with advyfe of my Lord of St Androis, my lordis Kilfythe, Clerk
of Regifter, and his Maiefteis Aduocat, continewis this matter to the faxt day of
December nixt, to be tryit at Edinburghe : And Ordanis the pannell to find
Cautioun for thair entrie that day and place, in the hour of cans, vnder the
panes following, viz : The faid Sir James Kneilland, vnder the pane of Ten
Thowfeand merkis ; the faid Williame Maxwall, vnder the pane of Fyve
Thowfeand merkis ; and the faid Robert Vrie, vnder the pane of Fyve Hundreth
merkis money.

The jDerfones on pannell offeris thame felffis to the Trj^ell of the Law for the
faid cryme, diffaffenting to the faid continewatioun ; and thairupoun advit inftrumentis : And for obedience of the faid Juftice Ordinance, the faid Sir James
Kneilland ffand Sir Johnne Home of Pluttonehall cautioner for him ; the faid
Williame Maxwell ffand Sir Johnne Maxwell of Pollok, kny*, cautiouner for
him ; and the faid Robert Vrie ffand Alexander Cocherane of that Ilk, cautioner
for him, that thai fall compeir befoir the Juftice and his Deputis, in the Tolbuth
of Edinburghe, the faid faxt day of December nixt, in the hour of cans, and
vnderly the Law for the faidis crymes, vnder the feverall panes aboue writtin.

CoMPEiliiT Harbert Maxwell, burges of Edinburghe, and producet ane
Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, anent the deferting of the dyet
appointit for tryell this day.

Justice, Juflice-clerk, and 50ur deputis : 3e fall, vpone the ficht heirof, defert the dyet appointit
for Tryell of Sir James Kneilland of Monkland, Williame Maxwell of Cowpleii, and Robert Vne,
burges of Paiflay, the faxt day of December nixtocum, ffov the UeHiitting of vmq''' Mr Johnne Ogilvie,
Jefuite : Anent the quhilk, thir prefentis falbe 50ur Warrand. Subfcryuit At Ed", Jie xxiij day of
November, 1615. Saxctandrois. S** J. Murray. Alex'* Hay. S"* J. Oliphant. Kilsyth.

The pannell difaffentis to all forder continuatioun ; and i)roteftit, in rclpect
that this is the fecund dayet keipit be thame in this matter, firft at GlalgoN\',
and now at Edinburgh, that their cautioneris be frecl, viz., Sir Johnne Home of
Huttonehall for the faid Sir James, and Alex^ Cocherane of that Ilk, for the laid
Robert Yvie.

%}tavinQ of iHass, ^^r,

Sep. 13. — Mil James MoFFET, alias Hal yeuiitoun, ane Jefuite Preifl.
Dilaitit of the Trcffonal)le Hearing of ]Mafs within tliis cuntrie, fpeciallie
within the place of Auchindoun, a tuentie yeir fyne or thairl)y : And for conVOL. III. 3 B

378 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1615.

travelling tlie Actis of Parliament in refoirting within this cuntrie, he being ane
Jefuite and Seminarie Preift, directit from Rome, to peruert his Maiefteis fubiectis from the trew Religioun ; and vtheris ciymes contenit in his Dittay.
DiTTAY againjl M?' James Moffet.
[The i)reambie is similar to those which precede, and founds upon the Act
29th July, 1587. It then states,]

" That 30, being tranet vp at fcoles and Colledges within this Kingdom, and haifing accorapleifchet
50ur courfe in the College of St Androis, qxihair 56 was laureat ; and liaifing |)aiieftir applyit 50ur
niynd to the fludie of Theologie, and dyuerfe tymes maid 50ur privat exerceiffis within fe New
Colledge J'airof, je, in jour awin fuHfclie opinioun, playing the rwnigait^ frome the trew Religioun, firft
fludeit and profefllt be ;ow within this Kingdome, adreiHt 50ur felf to the place of Aucliindoun, quhair
56, agauis the faidis Actis of Parliament, hard ane Mefs, and was prefent at fie Celebratioun pairof,
the Auld Laird of Aucliindoun and Mr James Gordoun being prefent withe 30W, at the lieiring of pe
faymn : Lyk as, ^e, hainng fchortlie })aireftir paft fm"th of this cuntrie to Rome, in Italie, and haifing
])air rellauit the ordour of a Jefuite Preifl, and haifing remanit furth of ]ns cuntrie be the fpace of
tuentie yeiris togidder, ftudieing to J)e faid Roman Religioun, 5e being ane profefRt Jefuite, expres
contrair the tennour of the foirfaid Act of Parliament, and in manifeft contempt ))airof, and of his
INIaiefleis royall authoritie, in the moneth of Julij, 1614, returnet to this realme, be directioun of
Claudius Aquaviva, jour Generall, off plane purpois and intentioun to pervert and feduce his
Maiefleis fubiectis frome the trew Religioun prefentlie profefTit ; refoirtit in dyuerfe pairtis of this
cuntrie, fpeciallie, within the burgh of Edinburghe, Cannongate, and Citie of St Androis, quhair 56
was tane, apprehendit, and brocht to this burgh of Edinburghe, and Tolbuth ]iairof, quliairin 56 haif
bene detenit pritfoner, as ane Jefuite Preift, and a perverter of ]ie Kingis Maiefteis fubiectis from the
trew Religioun, prefentlie profeffit," &c.

The pannell, efter reiding of the Dittay and his accufatioun of the ciymes
mentionet thairintill, offerit him felff in his Maiefteis AVill for the famyn :
Quhairupoun my lord Aduocat afkit inftrumentis. — Thairefter my lord Aduocat
producet the Wakeand following : —

Justice, Juftice-clerk, and 50ur deputis : 3ow fall appoint a Juftice Court to be haldin in the Tolbuth of Ed' at fuche convenient day as 50U think goode ; and ])airin 50U fall put Mr James Moffet,
Preift, to the knowlege of ane Aflj^fe for fuche crymes as fall be gevin in Dittay againes him, be his
Maiefteis Aduocat, and proceid and minifter Juftice vpone him, conforme to fe lawis of this realme ;
Bot yf the faid Mr James fall happin to rum in his Maiefteis will, 30W fall pronunce his Maiefteis will
as followis, to wit : That the faid Mr James fall be Banifchet his Maiefteis doniiniones, and nevir
return agane within the famyn, vnder the pane of deid : And tliat he act him felft", judiciallie, to depairt
and pas away betuix and fuche a day as 30W fall appoint, and nocht to returne vnder the faid payne:
And forder, that he ftind cautioun actit in the Bulks of Secret Counfall to this fame effect, vnder the
pane of Thre thowfand merkis, to be incurrit be iiis cautioner, befyde the pane of deid to be execute
vpone him felff, in caice he failjie in the preraiftus. And this Dome being pronuncet, and he haveing
actit him felff, that 30W fend him bak agane to his waird, quhill the faid caution be fund, and quhill
a fchip be in reddines quliairin Ik; may be tranfpoinit. Quhairanent pir prefentis fall be 3our Warrand.
At Edinbur'^, the xxiij day of Auguft, 1G15,

Al. Cancells. Saxctandrois. Scone. Binning. J. Prestoun. Al. Dru.mmond.

' lluiiiiijate ; rcrief/ada.

49&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 379

' Sentence was pronounced accordingly. Ke was adjudged to * depairt and
pas away furth of his Maiefteis dominiones, betuix and the tuentie day of October
nixtocum, wind and wedder fervand.'

Nov. 29. — James King, fumtyme of Barro ; Alexander Lummifdene

of Clova ; Mr Gilbert Arnauld, indueller in Aberdene ; and

David King in Hoy, in Orknay.

Dilaitit, accufet, and perfewit at the inflance of Elizabeth Seatoun, only dochter to vmq^^ Alexander Seatoun, than ffiar of Meldrum, Johnne "\^rquhart of

Craig-Fintrie, hirXpous, for his intereis, Jolinne Seatoun now of Meldrum, &c.,

off airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq^'' Alexander Seatoun, with

fchottis of hagbuttis and mufcattis ; committit vpone the landis of Barro, in the

hie-way betuix Meldrum and the Kirktoun of Bourtie, vpone the xxviij day of

Auguft, 1590 ; And ficlyk, ffor beiring and Ichuitting of Hagbuttis, mufcattis,

and jDiftolettis, &c.

Mr Robert Fairlie, feruitour to Mr Alex. King, Aduocat, produceit ane Warrand of his Maieftie, daitit at Newmarket, the fixtenth of November, I6l5, anent
deferting this dyet. The Diet was deferted accordingly.

itttttrs Df <ir.rtmpti<in

In EAVouii OF THE Provost, Bailies, Council, and Community of

CI)t Burn!) ot mtv'Httn.

Dec. 2. — Compeirit perfonallie Mr Thomas Nicolfone, Aduocat, in name
of the Provofb, &c. of Abirdene, and producet to my Lord Juftice Lettei^s of
Exemptioun, vnder the Previe feill, quhairof the tennour followis.

James, be the grace of God, King of Scottis : To all and findrie our fchereffis, llewartis, Judice,
Juflice Clerkis, Tliefaurer, Aduocat, and all vtlieris Judges and minifteris of our Lawis, thair deputis
and officeris, prefent and to cum, leigis, and fubiectis, quhonie it efteiris, to quhais knawlcge tliir our
Letteris fall cum. Grating. Wit 50 ws, vnderllandiiig that the Provoll, baillcis, counlall, and conimunitie of our burglie of Aberdene, ar oft tymes atteicbet and Aimmondit to pas vpone Inqueillis
and Affyfis to our burgh of Ed'' and utheris pairtis outwith J)air boundis and Jurirdiitioncs, in crynies
committit far diftant fra thanie, quhairof thay ar altogidder ignorant ; and tliat thay had ane Exemptioun to the effect vndervvrittin gevin and grantit to thame be ws, with advyfs of vmij''' our rycl)t trell
coufing James Erie of Moirtoun, Lord Dalkeith, kc. Regent to ws our realme and legis for the tyme;
as the famym Exemptioun, of the dait at Aberdene, the thrid day of September, the ^eir of God
jmyc threfcoir fourtene ':;eiris, deulie and ordourlie part and adniittit in the Jullice Court haldin at our
faid burgh of Aberdene, immediatlio Jiain^fter, be vinq''' Sir Johnne Ik'llemlen, our.Iuliiee clerk for the
tyme, at mair lenth beirs. As also, confidering, how vpone the occadoun of CommiHioncs of Leutennendries and Jufliciareis, grantit in fauouris of the Noblemen of the cuntrie, or to vtheris, for
adminiftratioun of Jullice palling vpone our llebellis, and diforderit porfones for revenge of privat

380 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

quarrellis and contraverfeis betuix pairtie and pairtie; the faidis Proveifl, bailleis, counfall, and comraunitie ar oft tymes drawin furth of fair awin Toun to vtheris pairtis of the cuntrie, to the grit hazard
of J)air lyves and vvrak of pair guidis ; albeit, that accoirding to the libertie of frie Eurgh, quhair with
thay and ]iair predicelFouris ar infeft and foundit, thay aucht only to attend vpone our felff, being in
the ffeildis in proper perfone, or with our Leutennent, in defence of our realme aganis forane nationes.
And haifing confideratioun, that our faid Burgh of Aberdene lyis within the North pairts of our
realme, far dillant fra ws, and of the guid, trew, and thaukfull feruice done to ws and our predicefTouris
be the Proveill, bailleis, counfall and communitie of our laid Burgh, alfweill in tyme of weir as of
peace ; and of )>air reddie and deutiefull obedience towardis ws, quhairof we haif daylie pruif and experience, and refpecting ])air guid mind to continew ])airin hereftir : Thairfoir, we haif gevin and
grantit, and be thir our Letteris gevis and grantis to the Proveift, bailleis, counfall, communitie, burgeffis, craftifmen, and induelleris of our faid Burgh of Aberdene, prefent and to cum, fpeciall Licence
to remaue and abyde at hame fra all Raidis, Conventionis, Oiftis, AfTemblis, Airmeis, Gatheringis,
Wappon-fchawingis or Weiris, to be maid be ony our Juftices, be CommifTioun of Leutennendrie,
Julliciarie, or vther CommilTioun quhatfumeuir, to be grantit be ws, or meiting of tharae in ony pairt
within our realme in tyme cuming, except J)at aither our felff be prefent in proper perfone, or that our
Leutennent, accumpaneit with the remanent of our realme, be vpone the defence of the cuntrie, aganis
forane nationes, or that our felff pas for repreffing of Rebellis and Traitouris, aganis our perfone within
the cuntrie : And fra all compeirance or palling vpone ony AfTyffis or Inqueifbis, in quhatfumeuir
crymes or actiones, (except fic crymes as ar committit within our faid burgh, friedome thairof, and tua
myles about the famyn,) Exemis^ and difcharges thame and ilk ane of thame Jiairfra, during all the
dayis of fair lyftymes. And willis and grantis fat fay in doing f airof fall incur na payne, fkayth,
cryme, nor danger in fair perfones, landis, or guidis, nor be callet nor accufet f airfoir criminallie nor
civillie, be ony maner of way, in tyme cuming, nochtwithftanding ony our Actis, flatutis, ordinances,
Letteris, proclamationes, or charges quhatfumeuir, fpeciall or generall, maid or to be maid in the contrair ; anent the quhilkis, and all panes contenit f airintill. We haif difpenfit, and be thir our Letteris
difpenffis with the Proveift, bailleis, counfall, communitie, burgelles, craftifmen, and induelleris of our
faid burgh, prefent and to cum, for euir. Disciiargeing heirfoir, 50W, all and findrie our ScherefBs,
Stewartis, Juftices, Jullice clerkis, Thefaurer, Aduocat, and all vtheris Judges and minifteris of our lawis,
50ur Deputis and officeris, prefent and to cum, off all calling, accufeing, atteiching, arreifting, fummonding, wairning, poynding, trubiJling, or ony wayis intrometting with the faidis Proveift, bailleis, counfall,
communitie, burgedis, craftifmen, and induelleris of our faid Burgh, prefent or to cum, fair landis or
guidis, in ony wayis, in tyme cuming, for fair faid remaning and abyding at hame fra our faidis Raidis,
Airmeis, and vtheris foirfaidis, and fra all and findrie Inqueftis and Affyflis, to be committit, as faid
is ; and of ;our offices in fat pairt, be thir our Letteris. Gevin vnder our Previe Seill, At Dalkeithe,
the faxtene day of Maij, the 3eir of God I"\ ffyve hundreth fourfcoir tuelff jeiris, and of our regnne
the tuentie ffyve 5eir.

Per Signaturam manibus f. d. n. Regis ac Secretarij fubfcriptam.

[Z). Will. Heart, JuJllc'iariusi-deputatHs;

AssESSORES Jufticiario, D. Alex. Drummond de Meidhoip, D. Will. Levingftoun de Kilfythe,

Senatores CoUegij Jufticie f. d. n. Regis.]

33ai1icirous ^Iau(j!)tn- antr iHaimintrxif ^Ijtcp— <i!)p|)rt!Ssion, ^r»

[The following Case is altogether unparalleled, even ia the annals of Border or Highland revenge.
On account of its singularity, it has been considered necessary to make some investigation into the

' Exempts.

49 & 13 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 381

subject, for the information of the curious enquirer. The story is so forcibly told in the proceeding
before the Criminal Court, that the Editor shall not weaken its effect by attempting to rehearse the
facts in this place. It is enough for the purposes of this Collection, that the reader is informed, that
the property of Howpaslot, an esate of one of the most ancient branches of the name of Scott, liavins",
by some means, come into the temporary possession^ of Sir James Douglas of Drumlaurig, a powerful
Border Baron, who had distinguished himself by the activity with which he aided the suppression of
the disturbances on the Marches, the Lachj Howpaslot appears to have been roused into fury at the
very idea of the domains of her ancestors coming into the hands of a Douglas. She therefore instantly
held a council of war in the Town of Haivick, of which Dnimlanrig was the Superior, in the month
of April, 1615, at which she and her friend, Jean Scott of Satchells, presided. The bravos and ruffians
who figure in this Trial, and of whom every Clan had a few to do their worst work, at once undertook
to execute the orders of these infuriated females, and, as will be seen by the subsequent proceedings,
they succeeded in effectually preventing Dnimlanrig from ' plenifllng,' or stocking, the farms. These
villains greedily engaged to maim and destroy the whole of the sheep which had been brought to
the grounds ; and this cruel and barbarous act they performed in a manner almost too horrible to be
related.

Sir James Douglas did not long survive the perpetration of this atrocious fact, having died Oct.
16, 1615. He was succeeded by his son Sir William, who was afterwards created Viscount of
Dnimlanrig, Lord Douglas of Hawick and Tibbers, Apr. 1, 1628 ; and Earl of Queensherrij, Jun.
13, 1633. Sir William actively pursued these heartless ruffians, and was^uccessful in bringing all of
them to deserved punishment. In the Appendix to this Trial, tlie reader will find a characteristic
Letter from this Nobleman to his kinsman, Murray of Lochmaben, the Original of wliich the Editor
has fortunately discovered in the Advocates' Library.

In an interesting communication from Sir Walter Scott, Bart., on the subject of this Trial, with
which the Editor has been favoured, some interesting particulars are detailed, regarding the Scotts
of the Border. No apology need be made for enriching these pages with the following extract : —

' Our Name were very clannish. 1 have, for the time, in my possession, a Band or Association
between Sir Walter Scott of Branxholm, knight, Laird of Buccleuch, and about fifty of the most
important men of his kin and Clan, [dated 3d June, 1589.] It proceeds upon an Association made
to the same purpose by Sir Walter Scott, the father of the Chief, and is calculated to secure
against any Clansman taking any " room" or possession over the head of another of the Name. Any
one who was accused of having done so, bound himself to stand by the award of five men, to be
mutually chosen, bearing the Name of Scott. Even if the Chief should encroach upon the possessions
of any inferior person of the Name, he declares he will submit the cause, in like manner, to tour
persons of the Name of Scott ; which shows an independence on the part of the Clansmen wliich I
was not prepared for. The Band is the property of my cousin and relative, William Scott, Esquire,
of Haehurn. It seems to have been calculated to prevent kinsmen from going to law with each other,
and to secure a species of justice within the Clan, to the advancement of the " guid and godlie purpoles" of their Chief. The "guid and godlie purpofc" oiihe Cordiner and the Suchlcr seems to have been
intended for the same reason. Howpaslot was an old inheritance of the Scotts, and, on whatever
grounds Douglas possessed it, returned to the Name again. Douglas, you are aware, was Lord of
Hawick, to which Euccleuch afterwards succeeded.

' Of the people mentioned in the Trial, I know little. Satchdls is probably the place of the name,
lying on the Ale or Teviot, now part of John Corse Scott of Syntons property. The individual termed

' It is by no means unlikely that Howpaslot was ' conqueist' by means of Wadset, Ajiprisiiii;, or other legal * Diligence j' for it is certain, that it was but a short ])eriod in the occupation of l/ic Laird of' J)nivil(ntri</ or bis Tenants.
The summary mode by wliich his ' (/itidis' were disposed of, uiay have precipitated his bringing these matters to u
close, and his accepting of a pecuniary accommodation.

382 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

William Scott, called in Satchells, raay have been the father of Walter Scott of Satcliells, the Historian
of the Clan, terming himself,

An old Soulilier, and no SchoUer,

And one that can write nane,

But jull the letters of his name.'
The singular work liere quoted by Sir Walter Scott, a copy of which is in the Editor's Collection, is titled, ' A true History of feveral honourable Families of the right honourable name of
Scot in the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, and others adjacent. Gathered out of Ancient Chronicles, Hiftories, and Traditions of our Fathers, by Capt. Walter Scot. Edinburgh, printed by the
Heir of Andrew Anderfon, Printer to his moft facred JSIajeJly, City, and Colledge, 1688.' It was
composed by the author at tlie very advanced age of Eightij-eiyht ! He states that he was fifty-seven
years in active service, abroad and in Scotland, having entered the army at the age of twenty-nine.
Although he boasts of being illiterate, he seems to have had much of the spirit of a staunch Member of
the lioxhurghe, Hannatyne, or Mailland Clubs — for he concludes his extraordinary work with the
following ' I^ Envoye'

' Therefore be gone my Book, flretch forth thy Wings and fly

Amongfl the Nobles and Gentility:

Thou'rt not to fell to Scavengers and Clowns,
'. . But given to worthy perfons of Renown !

The Number's few Eve printed, in regard

jNIy Charges have been great, and I hope Reward ;

I cauf'd not print many above twelve-fcore.

And the Printers are engaged that they Ihall print no more !'
The Editor, thinking that the Original Contract or Band of Association between the heads
of the powerful Families of the names of Ker and Scott, will prove most acceptable, as preserving
the memory of times so powerfully depicted by Sir Walter Scott in many of his works, he has,
after examining the ancient Records, procured a transcript, which is also appended to the present
Trial. So able an abstract of the renewal of this ' Band' has been given by Sir Walter Scott, that
it has not been deemed necessary to apply for liberty to present the reader with a copy of it.]

Feb. 20, 1616. — George Scott, cordiner in Hawik, ' the Souter,' callit

Mct7'io7ies Georcl'ie ; ^^^alte^ Scott, fone to Braidis

Andro ; Ingrem Scott, and Jok Scott, callit the Stickler.

Dilaitit of the crcwall and barbariis Slauchter of tlirefcoir fcheip, or tliairby,

perteining to the Laird of Drumlangrig ; committit vpone the Landis of Howpaflot, in the monetli of Apryle lall, conform to the Dittay following.

DiTTAY agahijl George, IValfer, Ingram, and Jok Scot, alias the Suckler.

FonsAMEKiLL AS, albeit be dyuerfe loveabill lawis and Actis of Parliament,
it be exprellie provydit, flatute, and ordanit, that all Slayers of Horffis, oxin, or
vther cattell and guidis,^ fall be eftemit and pwneift as Thevis ; as the faidis
Lawis and Actis of Parliament in tham felffis proportis : Nochtwithftanding
(juhairof, it is of verritie, that fic is the perverfe dilpolitioim of dyuerfe perfones,
fj[uha, i^referring ])air awin privat grudge, and revenge arryfmg pairui^oun, to

* Stock ; sheep.

49&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 383

the dew reuerance and obedience of his IMaiefteis authoritie and lawis, ceiflis
nocht to profecute and follow furtlie all godles and indirect nieanis to eflectnat
Jjair malice, be fie monftruons and vnliard of crewaltie, as the lyk qnhairof lies
nocht bene hard amangift the ivyld Irifch and favadge people, let be within any
reformet and ciuile pairt of his Maiefteis dominionis : And namelie, the perfones
perticulerlie aboue writtin, be the inftigationn, na dout, of fum perfones of
gritter qualitie and conditioun nor tliame felffis, vpone confiderationn, that Jie
landis and leving of Hoicpajlet war deulie and lawfnllie conqneill and acqnyret
be vmq'^ Sir James Douglas of Drumlangrig^ Iniycht, and he jjairby letlet in
poffeffioun Jjairof, be pleniffing of the famyn with his beftiall and gnidis ; thay
and vtheris of ]?air vnhappie focieatie, altogidder diidaneing that ])e laid Laird
of Drumlangng fould inioy or poffeffe ony landis or polfeffiones within that
pairt of this kingdome; and Jjairfoir, plotting and de\yfing all godles and
vnlauchfnll meanis how to interupt his peccable poiTeffioun of the faidis Landis,
and to lay the famyn waift, and Jjairby to mak thame vnproffitable to him and
his pofteritie — in the moneth of Apryle laftbypaft, the faidis George Scott,
lV(dtei' Scott, Ingrem Scott, and Jok Scott, callit t//e Suclder, haifing affemblit
and convocat to thame felffis Wdliame Scott, callit in SatcheUis, and vtheris,
])air complices, ffirft keipit ane generall meitting within ))e Toiui of Hawdc,
quhair, in })air devillifche counfell, it was concludit and aggreit vnto amangis
thame, that, within a fyve or fex dayis }}airefter, they fonld all meit togidder,
vnder nycht, vpone the faidis landis of Hoivpajlct, and j^air to flay and diltroy
the faid Laird of Di'iwdangrigis haill beftiall and guidis being Jjairupoun :
Lyk as, accoirding to the foirfaid damnable conchifionn, the faid George Scott,
accumpaneit with the faid Wdliame >,9co//, callit of SatfcheiUis, vpone the . . .
day of \)e faid moneth of Apryle laftbypaft, come, vnder filence and chid of
nycht, fra the faid Toun of HawiJc, to Eilrig-hurnefute, and the faid WiUiame
Scott being than muffellit ;^ at the qnhilk place, the laid Jok Scott, callit the
Suchler, met with thame ; and Jjairfra, thay tlire paft vp the watter, ])e the
fpace of thre quarteris of ane myle, to ane Clench," callit liiniij-clcucJie, betnix
Edrig and Howpajlet ; qnhair, accoirding to J)e former appointment, the faidis
Jfattie and Ingrem Scottis met with thame : lira the qnhilk place tha}- fonre.
accumpaneit with the faid Wdliame Scott, callit of Satjcliellis, come to tlie liiidis
landis of Howpajlet i and ])air, being bodin^ witli fuordis, bandit ftalftis, and
vtheris wappones, provydit be thame for })e purpois, in ane C'loncli-lyde, (piiiMir
])e faid Laird of Driimlangrig his fcheip war lying in ])air lairis,^ maift barbaruflie and inhumanelie, as favadge and crewall boillis, dellitnte of iinturale

' Disguised ; vivffled. Old It. cmmuseU. '^ A rocliv ascent, or rliff. It also signifies a cleft or
hollow between precipitous baidis, &c. ' Furuislied. ' Beds ; folds.

384 CRIMINAL TRIALS. .' A.D. 1616.

reafone, with ])air drawin fuordis and vtheris wappones foirfaidis, ran throw ])e
haill flok of fcheip, flew, lamet, and men5et^ to the number of threfcoir of the
faid fcheip, quhairof fouretie or Jjairby war flaue, be ftreking of" j^air heidis, and
cutting thame in tua throw ])air bakis ; and the refl: of thame, ]?air fpaldis^ and
legis wer fbrukin away fra tlianie in maift barbarous maner, and war fa left
fpreuleing in ]?air deid-thrawis^ vpone the gi'und of the faidislandis ; committing
pairthrow maift haynous and vnhard of Crewaltie and Oppreffioun : And the
faidis perlbnes aboue complenit \'pone, and ilk ane of thame, ar airt and pairt of
the faidis crewall, monftrouous, and vnhard of crymes : ifor the quhilk, thay
audit and fould be pwneift be ane exemplarie pwneifchment, to the terrour and
example of vtheris to commit the lyk heireftir.

The veritie of ]?air giltines of the quilkis haynous crymes is cleirlie provin,
be the Taikixis^ following, viz. 1. Be the Depofitiovm maid be Ipe laid Jok
Scott, callit t/ie Suclder, quha was fend for be the Lady Hoavpaslet to cum
to f>e Toun of Haivik ; and at his cuming, haifing met with ])e Lady, and with
Jeane Scott, callit of Saf/chelUs, and with Jje faid George Scott, callit Mariones
Geof'clie, at pe Croce of Hawih, it was pair concludit amangis thame, that the
Laird of Drumlangrigis fcheip fould be all flane : And for that effect, accoirding
to J)e appointment than maid, a thre dayis ]?aireftir, Jok the SiicMer come to
Eilng-l)urne-fute, quhair, in the glomeing,^ he mett with the faid Mariones
Georclie, and with WilUame Scott, callit in Satfchellis, quha was with ]}ame in
companie ; quhilk W'llliame Scott was than mufTellit. Lyk as, at ]?e faid George
Scottis defyre, the faid Joh the SncJder paft with 50W and the faid Willie Scott
vp the watter, the fpace of thre quarteris of ane myle, to ane clench callit Bii'iiiecleuche, betviix Eilrig and Howpajlett, quhair ])e faid Wattie Scott and Ingrem
Scott met with thame, the faid JVattie and Ingrem haifing plaidis and blew bonnettis : ffra the quhilk place thay paft togidder to the lands ofHoivpaJlet, quhair
the faid Laird of Driunlangrigis fcheip lay, and ])air flew ])ame, in maner fpecifeit in pe Dittay and ])e faid J oh the Suclderis De2)ofitioun. — 2. To the taikin
lykwayisjthe faid George Scott perfaveing )}at the Suclder Avald nocht pas forwardis to the committing of the fact, he Jjairfoir drew his fuord, and ])airwith
thraitnet the Suclder, that gif he paft nocht with him and thair complices to |)e
deid, he fould hew the Suclder j^airwith in peces. — 3. Lyk as, in regaird of the
former Depofitioun fa maid be the Suclder, the faid George Scott being prefentit
befoir my Lord Jujlice Cleric, my Lord Aduocat, and my Lord Jujiice, and
examinat ])airupoun ; the faid George was content to tak the giltines of })e faid
cry me vpon him, gif the Suclder wald affirme the vereitie ]?airof, in his face :

' Maimed. ^ Off. ^ Shoulders. O. Fr. espaule. ^ Struggling in the agonies of

death. ^ Tokens ; proofs. ^ TwiHght ; after sunset.

49&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 385

Lyk as, the faid George and the Suckle?', being confrontit, he ratifeit and renewit
his former Depofitioun and haill circumftances ])airof in the laid George face ;
and ofFerit to haif fochin pe Singular Combat with the faid George, vpone the
verritie Jjairof. — 4. To the taikin lykwayis, ])e faid George, haifing ane dog
named Hyde-the-baftard, he being convenit at dyuerfe tymes with his compan3eonis, brak out in thir woirdis, faying, * Sa lang as I and my Baftard brother
levis (meaning be his dog), HowpaJJef fall noclit plenifche.'^ — 5. To the taikin
alfo, eftir J)e flauchter of the faid fcheip, the faid George being fufpectit J^airof,
and vrget be James Douglas to geve ane tell,^ quhair he was J)at nycht of pe
barbarous flaying of thame ; becaus he could nocht geve ))e faid teft and cleir
him felff ])airof, he querrellit the faid James Douglas J^airupoun, within the
Towne of Haw'ik, and prefentit ane bendit^ piftolet to him, of purpois to haif
flane him Jjairwith ; quhilk he wuld half fchote, gif he had nocht bene ilayit be
James Weymes, Johnne Scott callit Bony Jony," and James Lechen, quha tuik
J)e piftolett frome him. — 6. To the taikin lyk wayis, the faid George, being
examinat in ]?e premiffes be ])e faidis Lordis Examinatouris, vpone the xxviij of
December laft, and being demandit, quhair he was the tyme of the keiping of
the Juftice Court of Jedburgh ? Declairit, that lie come the day of the balding
of the faid Juftice Court to the Toun of Jedburgh, quhilk was vpone ane Tliurifday ; and vpone the Tyfday and ^Vedinfday of befoir, was alfo in Jedburgh, in
maner fpecifeit in his Depofitioun : Lyk as, the faid Geoige being removet for
a tyme, and of new re-examinat, he was contrair to his former Depofitioun,
declairing, ])at vpone the Sonday, Mononday, Tyfday, and Wedinfday befoir the
Court, and vpone the Thurifday, the day of balding Jjairof, he was within the
Toivn of Uawih, accumpaneit with the perfones fet down in his pofteriour Depofltioune. — 7. To the taikin alfo, the faid Walter Scott, at his cuming with
Joh the Suclder to Birniecleuclie, the faid Joh the Suclder, haifing refufet to pas
forwardis with him to J)e flaying of ])e faid fcheip, the faid Walter, nochtwithftanding his refuifeall, earneftlie delt with him to cum fordwardis, faying to him,
' JoK, thow art als giltie alreddie as thowcanft be, cum fordwardis |)airfoir with
ws to the deid ; and ])aireftir, thou fall gang with us Northc, quhair we will be
Weill trett and interteneit ; for we haif ane place prepairit for our redett."' —
8. To the taikin lyk wayis, the faidis Walter and Ingrem Scottis, the tyme of
pair lait apprehending in pe Northe, being inquyret, gif oiiy of thame knew Jok
the Suclder f Thay denyit to J)air takeris" that evir tliay knew him : Bot l)eing
brocht to waird to ])e Tolhuth of Ed", quhair })e faid JoJe being prefentit to

1 Shall not be stocked. 2 p^oofor testimonial. ^ Cocked. * ^o»«/A or handsome,

Johnnie. ^ Reception and concealment. ^ Examinators.

VOL. 111. 3 c

386 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 16X6.

thame, thay nocht only knew, bot be his name afkit him faying, ' Quhat now,
Jok ! How come thow heir — and quhairfoir ar thow wairdit^ in this hous ?' Sa
that be ))e taikinis aboiie written, J)e faidis perfones giltines of the faid fact is
cleirlie provin.

Persewaris, Williame Douglas of Druralangrig, SirWilliarae Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*^, Aduocat.

Prelocutouris in defence of George, Wattie, and Ingiem, allenarlie,

Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, Laurence Scott, Adame Cunninghame, Aduocattis.

Efter reiding of the Dittay fet doun in the fummondis, at command of my
Lord Juftice and AlTeffouris, it is declairit be Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, as prelocutonr
for George, Walter, and Ingrem Scottis, that he acknowlegis the cryme fet doun in
the Dittay to be haynous and worthie of condigne puneifchment ; bot as to the
Dittay it felff (nocht granting the cryme thairin mentionet to be of veritie)
againis the pannell, alledgis the famyn is nawayis relevant to pas to the knawlege of ane AfTyfe ; nather can the committing of the fact lybellit infer daithe,
becaus the grund and fundatioun thairof is vpone tua Actis of Parliament, the
firft quhairof is the 100 Act of his Maiefteis fevint Parliament, haldin in October 1581, quhilk is only extendit agains the flayeris and hocheris^ of horflls,
oxin, and vther cattell, the tyme of laubouring the grund ; and the vther Act is
tlie 82 Act of his hienes ellevint Parliament, haldin vpone thexxix of July 1587,
quhilk is only ane Ratificatioun of the firft : Bot the Dittay beiris only the
Slauchter and Hocheing of fcheip, quhilk is nawayis expreffit nor prohibeit be
the faidis Actis : And, thairfoir, the Dittay and Actis of Parliament being
difconforme, the famyn can nawayis pas to ane Affyfe ; fpeciallie, in refpect na
penall Statute may be forder extendit nor^ the famyn is fet doun j^^f exprejfum :
quhilkis Actis he defyret to be red.

It is anfuerit be my Lord Aduocat, that the mynd and intentioun of the lawis,
and making thairof, man^ be advertit vnto, quhilk is the jDuneifchment of all
haynous and deteftable crymes, committit be quhatfumeuir way and be quhatfumeuir perfone : ffor, als it is eftemit ane haynous cryme, be the faidis Lawis,
to lioche ane ox or ane horfe, fa the cryme is far moir haynous to flay and cut
af ane haill flok of four or fy ve fcoir fcheip, and thairby to difplenifche and lay
waift ane gentihnannis pofTeffioun and rownie ; quhilk the haill lawis and Actis
of Parliament, vnder the name of ' ^ther cattell,' exprefslie forbidis, and concludis
puneifchment agains the committeris : In refpect quhairof, the Dittay is maiil
relevant to pas to ane Affyfe, nochtwithftanding of the allegeance aboue writtin.

The Justice Repellis the allegeance ; and ffindis the Dittay relevant to pas
to the knawlege of ane Affyfe. Quhairupone the Aduocat aflvit Inftrumentis,
' Imprisoned. ^ Hamstringers. ' Than. * Must.

49&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 387

ASSISA.

Thomas Wauche of Schawis, Robert Hunter in Halywoid, Adame Trumble in L)Titlawis,

Johnne Coluile in Preiftoune, Ilodger Padjeane of Newtoun, Peter Broun in Durifdeir,

Gilbert Greirfoun of Beocbane, Thomas Greirfoun of Barjarge, Johnne M^morrane of Glafpene,

George Lyell in Spachbouffis, Archibald Men3eis in Enoche, James WilUamefone in CraufurdMalcolme Dalrumpill of Wat- Patrik Hair in Glenquhirrie, toune.

terfyde, Rob. Phillope, burges of Dumfreis,

Objections againji certain AJJifors pq/Jifig tqjo?i the Tuque. fl.

It is allegit aganis Thomas Wauche, that he can nocht be reflauit vpone this Affyfe, becaus lie
duellis nocht within the foure-halfis-about. Anfueris, aucht to be repellit, in refpect he duellis within
the Kingdome of Scotland, and he is fummond to pas vpone the tryall of ane haynous cryme. — The
Juflice admittis him vpone the Aflyfe.

It is allegit aganis Johnne Coluile, that lie can nocht pas vpone this Aflyfe, becaus he is tennent to
my Lord of Angus, quha is cum to Ed' at the defyre of the Laird of Drumlangrig to aflift this
perfute. Anfueris, aucht to be repellit, in refpect the Erie of Angus nocht prefent, nather as perfewer
or defender. — < Admittis.'

It is allegit aganis Gilbert Greirfoun, that he can nocht be admittit, becaus lie is tennent to the
Laird of Lag, quha is prefent at the bar, aflifling the Laird of Drumlangrig in this perfute. Anfueris,
aucht to be repellit, in refpect he is ane fewar and na removeable tennent. — The Jullice, vpone the
geving of Gilbert Greirfones ayth, that he is ane ffewar, and that he gaif na partiall counfell, iu
preiudice of the pannell, admittis him vpone this Affyfe.

It is allegit aganis Robert Phillope, that he can nocht pas vpone this Aflyfe, becaus he is the Laird
of Drumlangrigis penfioner — The Jufl;ice, in refpect of Robert Phillipis ayth, gevin be liim, that he is
nocht Drumlangrigis penfioner, and that he hes na guid deid of him, hot as ane vther gentilman of the
cuntrie refpectis and honouris him, Reffaues him vpoun the Aflyfe.

It was, eftir his admifliioun and reffaueing, allegit be Laurence Scott, in name of tlie pannell, that
Robert Phillope can nocht pas vpone this Aflyfe, becaus he is Bail5ie Clerk to the Laird of Drumlangrigis Regalitie. Anfueris, he can nocht be declynet nor put af the Aflyfe, eftir his ayth tane, and
purgatioun of partiall counfall ; fpeciallie, feing it is vpone tryell of ane cryme, quhilk is factum
obfcurum et clandejlinum. — The Juflice ordanis him to remane ane Affyfour.

Thaireftir, |the Dittay being of new red, in prefens and audience of the
Aflyfe, with the Taikynes producet be the perfewer for verificatioiin thairof, it
is allegit be Mr Thomas Nicolfone, in name of George Scott, Walter and Ingrem
Scottis, that the Taikynnis jn-oducet and red for cleiring of the Dittay, fould
nawayis be refpectit be the perfones of Inqueilt, natlier ar the faidis Taikynnis
concluding argumentis to verifie the Dittay. And Jfuji, the Depofiliones maid
be Jok Scott, callit the Stickler, fould nawayis be refpectit, becaus he being
apprehendit for the famyn fact, and haifing confeflit him lelff to he Jociu.s eiitfdem criminis, his Depofitioun can nocht work aganis ony honeft man quha is
innocent; and thairfoir fould nocht be refpectit. Sccundo, as to the Taikin
foundit vjjone George Scottis dog, albeit the famyn be na grund to infer the
Slauchter of the fcheip lybellit, 5it he denyis it. Tertio, the Taikin for flaying
and querrelling of James Dovglas inferris nathing ; becaus he was nocht bund
to confefs or fchaw him any tefl: quhair he was the nycht of the flaying of the

388 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

fcheip ; and as to the Taikin it felf, denyis the famyn. Quarto, concerning his
Depofitioim maid be him, quhair he was the tyme of the Jullice Court of Jedburgh ; the famyn inferris nathing for probatioun of the Dittay ; And as to his
contrair Depofitioun, that lie was in Ilavvik, it can nawayis infer him to be
culpable of the cryme. And allegis, that the haill former Taikynnis previs na
thing aganis W(dter and Ingrem Scottis. Item, the laft taikin anent Walter
and lugrem, that tliay war tryet the tyme of thair taking, gif thai knew JoJe
the Such'Ier ; thair granting or nocht granting thairof can nawayis infer thame
to be giltie of the fact.

The Laird of Drumlanerig, being fuorne, and his aithe tane thairof, gif^ he
hes juft caufe to perfew the pannell for the crymes contenit in the Dittay, as
giltie and culpable thairof? Declairit, that this Dittay is fuorne to him to be
of verritie, be honed and credible men, viz. that George, Walter, and Ingrem
war thre of thame that was at the flauchter of his fcheip, in maner Ijiecifeit in
the Dittay : And thairfoir, be his aytli, declairit that he hes juft cans to perfew
thame, as doaris of ftc ane odious fact. And as to Jok Scott, callit the Stickler,
he hes alfo hard of his meitting and keiping tryftis with thame in that matter ;
hot, in refpect he is nocht certanelie informet that he was at the doing of the
deid, he can nocht perfew him as ane principall committer : And finallie, declairit,
that gif he war nocht i)erfuaidit, in his confcience, that the faidis George, Wattie,
and Ingrem Scottis war the fpecial flayeris of the fcheip, (be quliais directioun
the famyn was done, remittis that to thame felffis,) he wald nocht haif followit
thame thairfoir. — Quhairvpone my lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

]\Iy Lord Aduocat, for jireving of the Dittay, repeittis the Laird of Urumlangrigis ayth and Declaratioun : Producet the Depofitiones of Jok Scott, callit
the Stdder ; and repeittis his ratificatioun thairof in judgement, and conftant
affirm at ioun of the veritie thairof in the vtheris thre faces :" And lykwayis,
repcitis the Actis of Parliament red, quhairvpone. the Dittay is foundit : And
defyres the AfTyfe to confidder the haynoufnes of the cryme ; and Proteftis for
WilfuU Errour aganis thame, gif thay Acquit the pannell thairof.

\'i:iiDiCT. The Affyle, all in ane voce, be the mouthe of the faid Thomas
AVauche of Schawls, chanceller, fland, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis George
Scott, Walter Scott, and Ingrem Scott, to be ffylet, culjiable, and convict of the
actual Haying of the faid Laird of Drumlangrigis fcheip, in maner fpecifeit in
the Dittay : And ficlyk, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Jok Scott, callit
the Slider, to be Culpable, ffylet, and convict of being vpone the counfell and
foirknawlege of the fact aboue writtin, and in keiping of dyuerfe tryftis and
meattingis with the vther thre, conforme to his awin Dejjofitioun : And Clengis
1 If, ^ When confronted with them.

49&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 389

him of the actuall deid, be fleing away fra the doing thairof, befoir it was committit.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of Johmie Dow, dempfter of Com-t,
Decernit and Ordanit the faidis George Scott, Walter Scott, and Ingrem Scott,
to be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair to be hangit vpone ane
gibbet, quhill thay be deid : And all thair moveabill guidis and geir to be efcheit
and inbrocht to his Maielleis vfe, as culpable and convict of the crymes aboue
fpecifeit. And lykwayis, Ordanit the faid Jok Scott, call it the SucMer, to be
tane bak to waird, thair to remane vnto the tyme he (the Juftice) be advylet
with the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, anent his dome.^

APPENDIX ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE PRECEDING TrIAL.

I. Letter, the Laird of DrumJanrig to ISliirratj of LochmahevJ

Right worthie and lowing Brother,
3e remember, in on of ray former Letteres, I fchew 50W, ])at I had gotin fum tryalF of tliat uyld
and barbarous uillanie quhilk was coraitit, in ]7e flaying of my fcheip, quhen I was lafl at Court ;
quhairin I did than write J>e more fpairinglye, being lothe (in refpect of 5owr giiter aflPaires) to trubill
30W with it, till I had brocht it till fum further cleirnes ; quhilk now I have done, and lies tuo fallowis
prefentlie in liand fat war actoris in it; pe on callit Jok Scott the Sukler, quho hes confeffit pe fimpell
treuth, in all poyntis, both of his auin pairte, and fe reft ]iat war with him at fat filthie actioun ; to
wit, Geordie Scott the Soutor, callit Mariounes Geordie, Watt Scott, callit Braidis Wattie, Wdlie
Scott, callit of Satchelis, and Ingriun Scott. This Succler, in his Cojifeflioune, he condifcendis cleirlie
both vpoun fe tyme, place, and forme of thair melting and pairting, with all wther takinis and circuraftances fat pafl amongfl thame, quhen they war togidder (as his Depolitioun beiris.) Nochtwitliftanding this vther, callit Geordie Scott the Souter, (quhom I have alfo in handis,) ftandis 3it to his
denyall, altho they be many grit prefumptiounis of his guiltinefs; aluayis* the Suckler, being fundry
tymes examinat and confrontit with him befoir the Lordis of Counsall, he abydis conftantly at
everye poynt of his firft Confeffioun ; and oflPeris, noclit only to fecht the Souter on it, bot all J'e relt,
everie on of thame efter another, quhenfoeuer they can be had, gif it will pleis his MA'""-and the
Counsall to fuffer him. The vther thrie ar fugitiues for that and vther crymes of Thift and Slaucliter; and, as I wnderftand, ar all out of the countray, fum in Irland, and fum ollis quhair ; vtherwayis,
befoir this tyme, I think I had fund meanis to haue gotin thame in liandis, (;it according till our auKl
Scottis proverb, ' Ane 5ule feill may be quat at Pafe 1' Quhen porliaj)is they may imagin it be
forgot.) In the meintyme, let me intreit 50W, fat 56 will do me that fauowr to motioun this niaiter
to HIS Ma'^"', quhairby I may have it, by his Letter, recommended to fe Counfall, nocht only for fe
exact tryall and punifchment thairof to f e daithe, for f e wrang that is alredie done, bot alfo to terrifie
all other malefactoris from attempting fe lyk heirefter; quhilk, I protefl to God, I ponder more in
refpect of fe preparatiue and confeqnens fat may follow thairvpoun to fe preiudice of fe comounweill of fe countray, in cais it be lichtlie paffit over vnpunifchit, than for any particular of my awin.
Now, gif 56 find it expedient, it war nocht amis, feing the ShavJ/cr^ and Sccreia}*' (quha knawis Jie

' It is likely that the Suckler had been promised his life, when he turned informer ; but being a most dangerous
character to turn loose on society, tlie i)ublic prosecutor aj)pears to have been instructed by the Council to rake up
a few of his former misdeeds, and have him cleverly put out of the way. See the followiiii; Case, .Inn. 21, ]G1().
* From the Original, preserve<l, among the i)«i7m//;/eil/6'<i>. Adv. Library. ' Proof; evidence. ' Nevertheless.

' The Lord Chancellor, Alexander Earl of Duufcrmline. ^ Thomas Earl of Haddington.

390 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

haill eftate and progrefs of this buflines) ar to be with his Ma^'*^ at Court, that je fould haue thame
neir-hand by, qiihen -^e propoun it to his Ma^"^ at Court, in cais he hapin to defyre thaii- opinioun in
it. And this, I weld befeik 50W to do with all ]>e conuenient haift 30W can, fat I may have 50wr
anfuer with his Ma"'^® Letter befoir ])e feuinth or aucht of ])e nixt month, becaus I do intend, God
willing, at ]>at tyme, to have thir tuo fallowis, at leill on of thanie, put to the tryall of ane Affyfe ; at
quhilk tyme (if nocht befoir thane) I do afFuir my felf ])at God fall mowe ]>e hart of him quho ftandis
moft obflinatlie to his denyall, euin to confefs the treuth, as ]ie other hes done : albeit thair be fum
buflie-headit men heir, quhoni I will nocht name at this tyme, ])at wald wis ])e contrair ; and ar deiling,
be all meanis poHibill, fo far as in thame lyis, to ))at effect; hot be ]>e grace of God, and his Ma'^'"
fauowr, with ;owr help, I howp to difapoynt })ame. As for the reft of my particularis, I truft 30W
will nocht be forgetfull of thame ; and when 30W find 50wr auin tyme, will let me knaw, fat 1 may
luik for in fame. So I hawe no more to fay, bot ahvayis efter on^ I reft,

3owris in quhat I can to ferue 30W,
Edinburt, the vi day of Drumlangrig.

Januar, 1616.
30W will do me fe fauowr to prefent my humbill feniice to 30wr lady.
To liis muche honoured and worthie brofer Johne Murray of Lochmaben, Grume of his Ma.
Bed-chamber, Thes.

II. " Contract betuix the Scottis and the Kerris."

(It has already been noticed, in the Introduction to the present Trial, that the Editor has been fortunate enough
to discover the Original Band or Contract referred to by Sir Walter Scott, preserved in Record of Deeds,* Mar.
23, 1564. This remarkable and interesting document is preceded by a solemn entry in the Register, in these words,
" In presens of the Lordis of Counsale, compeirit (Sir) Walter Scott of Br mix holme, with his Curatouris vndirwrittin, personalie, except ane nobill and mychte lord, James Duke of Chatteaulrault, quha compeirit be Maister
Dauid Borihuik, his procuratt, one that ane pairt ; and Sir Walter Ker of Cesfurde, kny*, for him self, and takand
the burding vpoune him for his barnis, and the remanent of his kynd frendis, specifeit and contenit in the Contract
vnderwrittin, personale, on that vther pairt ; and gaif in the samyn, subscriuit with thair handis, as foUowis; and
desirit the samyn to be insert in the Bukis of Counsale, and to haue the strenth of ane Act and Decreit of the Lordis
thairof, and thai to interpone thair auctoritie to the samyn," &c.

It is only necessary, farther, to refer the reader to the valuable annotations of Sir Walter Scott, appended to ' The
Lav of the Last ]\Iinstrel,' for a perfect knowledge of the deadly Feuds which had so long raged between two of the
greatest Border Families, the Scotts and Kerrs, to 'staunch' which was the professed object of the present Band.)

At Edinburghe, fe xxij day of Marche, the 3eir of God P".V^'.lxiiij 3eiris. It is appointit,
aggreit, and finale concordit, betuix rycht honorabill menne, Sir Walter Ker of Cesfurde, knyt,3
for him felf, and takand fe burding vpoune him for his barnis,^ and for his bruder ilTar^ Co?n?nendater
of Newhottle, and his barnis; Johnne Hicme of Coldc7ihi(nms, and his baimis ; Andro Ker of FawrfoMW/2/(/e, his bairnis and breder ;^ Thomas Ker of 3Iarfingtoun, his fader-bruder,^ and fair bairnis ;
George Ker of Lyntoune, his bairnis, his oyis," and bruder-bairnis f Richard Ker of Gaitfchaiv, his
bairnis and breder ; Aiidro, Williame, and Johnne Kerris, brether to Sir Thomas Ker of Pharnyhirjl, hwf ; Marh Ker of Kippefchatv, and his fone Ttohert Ker of Bothtowr; Robert Ker elder,
burges of Edinburgh ; and all vf eris fair barnis, brether, kynne, freindis, menne, tennentis and fervandis,
except fe freindis vnder fpecifeit, nocht comprehendit vnder fis appoyntment, one fat ane pairt; and
Walter Scott of Branxholme and Bukcleuch,^ with confent and aflent of ane rycht michte

' Always after one ; steady; unchangeable. ' General Register House, Vol. VII. fol. 1.31. ' Ancestor

of the Ducal Family of Roxburyhi: He married Isahd, daughter of Sir Andrew Kerr of Ftrnihirst. * Children.

3 Brothers. ^ Uncle. ' Grandchildren. ^ Xejihews and Nieces. " He married Lady Margaret

Dom/las, eldest daughter of David, seventh Eurl of Antjus, niece of the Regent Morton. This great man died Apr.
17, i J74-. It was his son who performed the matchless exploit of relieving Kinmont Will, Apr. 13, 1596, from the
Castle of Carlisle, being accompanied with a mere handful — only 200 horse !

49&13JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 391

and noble lord, James Duike of Chatteaularault, Erie ofArane, Lord Hammiltomie, &c. ; Sir Johmie
Maxwell of Terreglis, hnj/ ; Sir Johnne JBellendene of Auchnoule., huj , Jullice Clerk ; Maifier
Johnne Spens of Conde, Aduocat to our fouerane Lady ; Andro Murray of Blak-Barony, Michell
Balfour of Burl ye, Thomas Scott of Haning, and Robert Scott of Thbijlatie, Curatouris to ]'e (aid
Walter, for fair interes, for him felf, and takand J)e burding vpouue bim for iiis haill Surname,
and pe Relict and bairnis of vmq'" Sir Walter Scott of Branxholme, kni/, bis gudefcbir,' and als for
Williame Cranjfoune of that ilk, bis bairnis and breder, the bretber of vmqubiie ])e Laird of Chijhohm ;
Johtme Glaidjianis of that ilk, and bis bernis; James Langlandis of that ilk, and bis bairnis; Walter
Vache of Syntoun, and bis barnis ; and for James Ormijtoun of that ilk, conditionally, as foUowis ; and als,
for all v])eris bis kynne, freindis, fer^andis, nienne, tennentis, aOiilaris, and pairtakeris, one pat vper pairt ;
in maner, forme, and effect, as efter followis. That is to say, ])e faid Lard of Bukcleucht, nor na
vper for qubome he takis burding, as faid is, fall ony way perfew pe faid Lard of Cesfurde, nor na
vper comprebendit vnder pis prefent appointment, criminale nor civilie, for ony Slaucbter or blude committit in tyme bipaft, and is content to be perpetuallie fecludit Jiairfra, per pactum de non petendo ; and
fall neuer move actioun, beir hatrent, grudge, or difplefour fairfor, bot bury and put pe famyn rnder
perpetuale fdence and obliuioune ; and to leif in perfite amite, lufe, and Crifliane nychtburheid, in ail
tyraes cuming. Providing alwayis, ]iat beirby patpe faid Lard of BuKCLEUCHT,and all vperis quliame
he takis burding, be na wayis preiugit anent pair actionis qubatfumeuir pat ))ai baif intentit or may intent
aganis Sir Thomas Ker of Phairneyhir/i,kny^, Sir Andro Ker of Hirf ell, kny\ Robert Ker of Woidheid,
Johne Haldane of that ilk, Gilbert Ker of Prymfydloch, James Ker of Torbet, Robert Ker of Grudem^
Andro Ker of Hietoime, pair barnis, brether, and feruandis, and all vperis pat ar nocbt comprebendit
vnder pis appointment ; bot pat pai may perfew and obtene pe famyn as pai think maift expedient, be
pe law; and pat becaus pe faidis perfonis, being requirit be pe faid Lard of Cesfurde to cum with
him, and to do pair devore, for pair pairt of pis appointment, hes refufit to do pe famyn ; and als, becaus
pat in pis prefent appointment, pair is na proffett nowther gevin nor takin, qubairby pe faid Lard of
Bukcleucht, and his frendis and vperis foirfaidis, ar preiugit anent pair faidis actionis; and pat it is
pe exprefs mynd of all pe pairteis prefentlie contractaris, pat pe famin be fullelie refervit : And ficlyk,
vpone pe vper pairt, pe faid Lard of Cesfurde, nor na vperis qubome-for he takis pe burding, fall
in ony wyife perfew pe faid Lard of Bukcleucht, nor na vperis his kynne, freindis, fervandes,
menne, tennentes, affiflaris, or pairt-takaris, criminale or civile, for ony flauchter or blude committit
in ony time bipafl; and is content to be perpetuallie fecludet \?L\vh-a., jjer j^ictum de nan petendo ; and
fall nevir move actioun, heir hatrent, grudge, or difplefour pairfoir, bot bury and put )ie famyn vnder
perpetuall lilence and obliuioune, and to leif in perfite amite, lufe, and Criftiane nychtbourheid, in all
tyme heirefter. Attour, it is heirby expreflle and faytbfullie contractit, pat for mair fair renioveing,
flenching,* and away-putting of all inymite, hatrent, and grudge, ftandand and confavet betuix ]>e faidis
pairteis, throw pe vnhappie flauchter of pe faid vraq'" Sir Walter Scott of Branxholme, kny*,^ and for
pe better continuance of amite, favour, and freindfchip amangis pame in tyme cimiing, the faid Sir
Walter Ker of Cesfurde, hxy^, fall, vpoun thexxiij day of Maiche inllant, cum to the 1\\rroche
Kirk of Edinburcht, now comraonelie callit Sanct Geillis Kirk, and pair, befoir none, in fycht
of pe pepill prefent for pe tyme, renerently vpone his kneis afk God mercy of pe flauchter foirfaid ;
and ficlyk, afk forgevenes of pe fame fra po faid Lard of Bukcleucht, and his freindis, qubiikis
falhappin be pair prefent ; and pairefter promife, in pe name and feir of God, pat he and bis freindis
fall trewle keip pair pairt of pis prefent Contract, and fall ftand trew freindis to pe liiid Lard of
Bukcleucht and his freindis, according heirvnto, in all tyme cuming. The quhilk pe faid Lard

' Grandfather. * Staunching ; extinguishing. ' Tliis great man was unhappily slain on the streets of

Edinburgh, in October, 15o2, To pave the way for a lasting rct'oiii-iliation bctwi-cii the Cluns, a Uoinisbion wju
granted to Sir Walter Kerr of Cessfurd, and to John Kerr of rcrnihirst, under the Great Seal.

392 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 16l6.

OF BuKCLEUCHT fall reucrentle accept and reflaue, and promife, in ]>e feiv of God, to remit his grudge,
and neuer remember J^e fame ; bot Tall obferve and fulfill his pairt of ]>'\s prefent Contract to ]>e faid
Lard of Cesfurde, according to ])e tennour j^airof, ficlyk, in tyme curaing. AndbIs, Thomas Ker,
fecund foiie to ]ie faid Lard of Cesfurde, fall, God willing, folempnizate and compleit ]ie band of

matrimony, in face of Chriltis Congregatioune, with Scott,^ filler to )ie faid Laird of BukCLEUCHT, betuix ]>is and ]ie lafl day of Maij nixttocum, but ony tocher^ to be payit be hir faid bruder,
or ony v]ier freindis with hir: And \e faid Lard of Cesfurde fall provide })ame ane honeft and
reflbnable fuftentatioune and leving, efterand^ to jiair ellait and conditioune ; and als, fall caus J)e faid

be infeft in her virginite, in coniunct-fee or lifrent, with hir faid future fpous, and fair airis

lauchfullie gottin or to be gottin betuix ])ame, quhilk fail^eing, ])e faid Thomas airis quhatfumeuii', in
all and haill landis or annualrent of ]ie availl of ane hundreth nierkis be qeir, to be haldin of fe Superiour be Refignatioun or Confirmatioune, at ]ie plefour of hir faid bru]'er ; and ))aireftir, fe faid

to be infeft in coniunct-fee or lyfrent with hir faid future hulband, at his and his faid faderis gude will
and pleafour, in fik landis and leving as ])ai pleis mak hir; quhilk is referrit in fair will. And ficlyk,
George Ker, eldeft lone and apperand air to fe faid Andro Ker of Faxcdounfyd, fall, God willing,
folempnizeatand compleit fe band of matrimony, in face of Chriflis Congregatioune, with Jonett Scott,
fader-fifter to fe faid Lard of Bukclewcht, fa fone as pai fall be of perfyte age and habilitie for
mariaffe, but payment of ony tocher to be payit be him, or vfer hir freindis with hir. Axd gif it fall
happin fe faid George to deceis, befoir fe compleiting of fe faid mariage, fan and in fat cais, his nixt
bruf er fat falhappin to appeir or fucceid air to his faid fader or him, fall marie the faid Jonet, tocherfre ; and ficlyk, fai^eing of hir be deceis, befoir f e faid mariage, fan and (in) fat caife f e faid George,
atid fail3eing of him be deceis, his nixt bruf er foirfaid, fall folemnizeat and end mariage with hir nixt
filler fat falhappin fan be alyve, tocher-fre ; and fua, falang as f e faid Andro fall haif ane fone, and
the faid Jonet ane filler, fe ane to marie fe vfer tocher-fre, as faid is ; ay and quhill mariage be anis
complete amangis fame: And gif (it) falhappin fe faid mariage to failjie in fe faidis Georgis or ony
vfer his brederis defalt, fan and in fat cais, fe faid Lard of Cesfurde, be the tennour heirof,
obliffis him and his airis to pay and deliuer the fownie of ane thoufand merkis to f e faid Jonett, or to
hir vfer fifter to quhome fe faid mariage fall fail5e, within XL dayis nixt eftirfe faid fail3e be knawin.
Attoure, becaus fe faid Lard of Cesfurd hes ofbefoir requyrit and defyrit, vnder fe forme of
inftrument. Sir Thomas Ker of Pharnyhirji, kmf, Sir Andro Ker of Hirfell, kny*, and Gilbert Ker
of Prymfydloch, for fame and fair freindis to adheir, concur, and affifl to him in fis prefent aggreance,
and fat fai haif refufit f e famin, as is aboue writtin, thairfoir fe faid Lard of Bukclewcht, nor his
airis, fall nocht aggre with fame, or ony of fame, by'' fe awyfe of fe faid Lard of Cesfurd and
his airis ; and gif it falhappin f e faid Lard of Bukclewcht, or his airis, to aggre with f e faidis Sir
Thomas, Sir Andretc, and Gilbert, or ony of fame, by* fe awyfe of fe faid Lard of Cesfurd,
befoir f e completing of mariage betuix f e faid George or ane of his brethir with the faid Jonet or ane
of hir fifteris, as faid is, without fe faid Lard of Cesfurde be previe and confent fairto, than and
in fat cais, f e faid George, nor nane of liis brethir, falbe haldin or aflrictit to compleit f e faid mariage,
bot falbe fre fairof ; nocht withftanding fis prefent Contract, and ficlyk as gif the famyn had neuir
bene maid. Axd lik wyife, gif it falhappin f e faid Lard of Bukclewcht to aggi-e with f e faidis
perfonis, or ony of fame, eftir fe completing of fe faid mariage betuix ony of fe faid Androis fonis
and fe faid Jonet, or ony hir filleris, by* fe avyife of fe faid Lard of Cesfurde, than and in fat
caife, fe faid Lard of Bukclewcht obliflis him, with auife of his Curatouris foirfaidis, to content

' Janet, the eldest sister of Sir Walter Scott of Buccleuch, was married to Sir Tltomns Kerr of Fernihirst, in anno
1569; 2. Margarkt, to Sir John Johnston of that ilk; 3. Elizabeth, to ' the Captain of Crawford,' Sir John Carmichael of 3Ieadowriat. — Wood's and Crawford's Pi eragrs. * Without any dowery or marriage-portion. ^ Effeiring i corresponding. * Without ; coutraiy to ; independent of.

49 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 393

and pay to f e faitl Lard of Cesfurde ]>e foume of ane thowfand merkis, as for ]>e tocher of ]'e faid
Jonet, or ony v})er her fifter fat hapnis to be neareft, witliin xl dayis nixt eftir ]>e faid aggreance, gif
it happynnis to be maid, as faid is ; but' ony exceptioune or remeid be vertew of fis prefent Contract,
quhairby fe faid mariage fuld be tocher-fre, as is aboue fpecifeit, to be proponit or allegeit in ])e contrar. Providing alvvayis, pat gef ]>e faid Lard of Blkclei cht aggre with ]ie faidis Sir Thomas,
Sir Andro, and Gilbert, or ony of fame, with auife of fe faid Lard of Cesfurde, than and (in)
})at cais ])e faid Lard of Cesfurde fall not laubonr nor defyre fat pair oflFeris, ellis^ offerit, be
diminiffit, bot rather fat f ai be augmentit. And 3it, mairouer, becaus fair is particularelie deidlie
Feid and actionis betuix fe faid Walter Ker of Cesfurde, knycht, and fe faid James Ormjlonne
of that ilh, thairfoir fai falbe compromittit^ in Dauid Spotifwod of that ilk, and Thomas Hoppringill of
tJmtilk, to be chofin for fe pairt of fe faid Lard of Cesfurde ; and in James Langlandis of that ilk,
and Nicholace Ru]>erfurde of Hundley, hnycht, to be chofin for fe pairt of fe faid Lard of Ormjtoune ;
and in odmanne and ourmanne,* in caife of vareance or dilcord betuix fe faidis Jugis, to be commonele^ chofin be bayth f e faidis Lardis of Cesfurde and Bukcleucht, anent f e taking, be f e faid
Lard of Ormjloiine, of fe landis of Nether Ancrome and Bailleie f airof, in Tak, our fe faid Lard of
Cesfurde held, it being his kyndlie rowme** of befoir, as he allegis ; and anent f e llauchter of vmq''* ....
Be/l, fervand to f e faid Lard of Cesfurde : And als, anent all vfer materis, actiones, querrellis,
and debeittis betuix fame ; and fai to be bund to abyde at f e decreit and fentence of f e faidis Juges
and ouermanne, or maift pairt of fame, deliuerand in f e faidis materis, qnhilkis falbe haldin to deliuer
fairin, betuix f is and fe firll day of Auguft nixtocum ; and ane compromit'' to be maid fairupone, and
extendit in ampill forme, as vfe is in fie caifTis. And gif it falhappin f e faid Lard of Ormjtoune to
reclame fra fe Decreit to be gevin be fe faidis Jugis and ouermanne, or maift pairt of fame, and nocht
to abyde fairat, and fulfil bis pairt f airof, as he fall be ordanit be fe fame, than and in fat caife, fe faid
Lard of Bukcleucht fall refufe him, and fall nowther manteine, fortife, nor affift him fairefter, in
ony tyme cuming; bot fall tak pairt and fortife, in honeft and lefura^ maner, with fe faid Lard of
Cesfurde, in his contrar. And gif fe faid Lard of Cesfurde falhappin to reclame fra fe faid
Decreit to be gevin as faid is, than and in fat caife, f e faid Lard of Bukcleucht fall tak pairt with
fe faid Lard of Ormjloune. And finale, fe faidis pairteis, be fe tennour heirof, bindis and obliffis
fame and fair airis, fat fai and perfonis abouewrittine, for quhame fai haue takin burding, refpectiue,
for fair awin pairtis as faid is, fall in all tyme cuming keip and retene amite, freindfchip, lufe, favour,
and kyndnes, ilkane to vferis,^ without ony grudge, or occafioune to be mouit in fe contrar, be fame
or ony of fame, to vferis,'" be ony maner of way, in tyme cuming. And gif it falhappin ony contraverfe or pley to fall betuix ony of fe freindis abouewrittin, comprehendit vnder fis prefent Contract,
for taking of vferis fleding or rowme," owther in tyme bigane or tocum, thanne and in fat caife, ]'e
mater falbe firft fchawin to fe faidis Lairdis of Cesfurde and Bukcleucht, be quhais avife fe
faidis pairteis fai cheis '* foure frendis, with ane ouermanne as fai can aggre one, for ending and deciding of fe faid contraverfe ; and gif f e pairteis can nocht aggre one f e faid ouerman, fan and (in) fat
cais fe faidis Lardis of Cesfurde and Bukcleucht fall cheis ane ouermanne quhame fai can
aggre one ; quhilk ouermanne being chofin be fame, it fall nocht (be) lefum to f e pairteis to refufe
him, bot to approve and chufe him: and gef fe faidis Laiidis can nocht aggre one fe faid ouerman,
than and in fat cais, fai fall liuimle fwte'^ and defyer fe Quenis Maiestie and Counsale to cheis
ane ouermanne ; quha being chofin, fe pairteis falbe haldin and bund to Hand content with him, and
to abyd at his and f e Arbitratouris delyuerance, or maiJl pairt of j'ame delyuerand ; vpon )>e contra-

' Without, &c. * Alieatly. ' Compromised ; referred to the arbitrament of. < I nipire and

Oversman. ^ Mutually. " Certain ]>roj)erty held by him and his niicestors as lii/iidlif h limits. ' Award;

Decreet Arbitral. * Lawful. " To eaih other ; each party to tiie otlier. "'Ka( bother. "Tor

taking each other's farm-steading or possession. "' lilect ; choose, '' INIake suit; petition.

VOL. III. 3 D

394 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6ia

verfe ])at falhappin to be debatabill for ]>e tyme, but ^ ony declaratioune to be maid in ]>e contrar.
And for obferuing-, kepinpr, and fulfilling' of all and lindre ]ie premifles, a]ier of ])e faidis pairteis bindia
and obliflis jiame faitlifuUie to v])eris,'^ in ]>e mai(l ftrait forme and ficker flile of obligatioune can be
dewilit, but^ fraud or gyle, na remeid nor exceptioune of law quiiatfumeuir to be proponit or allegeit
in ]>e contrar ; renunceand )'e famin, for ]iame, ]>air airis, executouris, and affignais, for now and evir,
be ])ir prefentis. Axd for Jie mair fecurite, ]>ai ar content J)at ])is prefent Contract be infert and
regillrat in ])e Bukis of Counfale, and decernit to liaue ])e llrenth of ane Act and Decreit of pe Lordis
pairof ; and })at Letteris and executoriallis to be direct pairvpone, for compelling of afer of ])e faidis
pairteis to fulfill ])e fiimyn, for Jiair pairteis, to vjieris, in forme as efferis : And for acting and regiftrating beirof, ])e laidis parteis niakis and conllitutis, be })ir prefentis,^ \_Mai/ier Dauid Borthuik'j
thair vndowtit and irrevocabill procuratouris, gevand and coramittand to ])arae, coniuuctle and feuerale,
])air full power, expres bidding, and chairge, to compeir befoir ])e Lordis of our Ibuerane Ladeis Counfale, quliatfumevir dayis and place lauchfull; and ])air defyir ])is prefent Contract to be regillratt in
J)e faidis Bukis of Counfale, and fe faidis Lordis to interpone ])air auctorite fairto ; promittand^ to
abyd fernie and flabill, &c. Ix Witxes of ])e quhilk thing, baytli J)e faidis pairteis and Curatouris
abouewrittin, for ]iair intereis, lies fubfcriuit |)is prefent Contract with fair handis ; and als Damk
JoxET Betouxe,^ }ie relict of ])e faid ww^" Sir Walter, hes, in figne of hir confent to fe premiffes,
fubfcriuit fe famin with hir hand, day, jeir, and place foirfaides, befoir fir Witneflis, Sir James Dmv'

glas of Drumlanrig, hnycht, Johne Stewart of Trocquair, Patrik Murray of Falloivhill,

Murraij of Colqnde, and Thomas Sinclair, Writter to ])e Previe Seall, with vjieris diuerfe.

[_Sic fubfcribitur'] Walter Kek of Cesfuiid. Walter Scot of Blkclewch. Jaxet

Betoune, Lady of Bukclewch. JamesJ Thomas Scot of Hanyng.

M. Johxe Spexs, Curatour aboue writtin. Johne Maxvell. J. BellenDEXE, as Curatour. Rokert Scot of Thirlstaxe,^ with my hand at pe

' pen, led be Dauid Laute, Notare Publict.^

III. B A'SB Jidifcremt at Kelso, he the Baronis, &c. of the Scheref domes of

Berwik, &c. 6tli April, 1569.

(Thk Editor believes that little apology will be deemed requisite for once more encroacbing on the limits (rf" this
work, in his desire to preserve, in this place, the following remarkable document, the original of which is deposited in
the General Ileguster House, Edinburgh. The reader will readily perceive, that it is chiefly from an extensive
perusal of such original and authentic Papers, that he can expect to arrive at a minute knowledge of the internal state
of Scotland during the darkest periods of our History.)

Be it Kekd till all men be ]>\v prefent letteres, We the Baronls, landit men, Gentilraen,
Inhabitantis of the Sciierefdomes of Berwik, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Peblis, and Proveflis and
Baillies of Burrowis and Townis within fe faids boundis, in name of fe Inhabitantis of ])e farayn,
vndcr-fubfcriuand, to be bundin and obleifl,and be pe tennour heirof,bindis and obleiffis ws to fe Kingis
Maiestie, oure fouerane lord, and his deareft coufing James Erll of Murray, Lord Abernethic,
Regext to his hienes his realme and lieges, as followis : That is to say, iforfamekill as ray faid

' Without. * Each other. ^ Without. * In all deeds where a clause for Registration is inserted,

a blank is left to insert the name of the Procurators. In the present instance, all the parties appeared personally,
with the exception of the Duke, who had granted a procuration to the person whose name is filled up, according to
custom, in the Register. ' Promising. " This able Lady has been rendered immortal by Sir'Wulter

Scott, in his Lay of the Last IMinstrcl. She was daughter of John Bcatoun of Creich, and possessed the hereditary
abilities of her familv to such a degree, that the superstition of the vulgar attributed them to magic. After her
husband's murder, she rode at tlie head of her Clan. ' James Duke of Ciiastelherault, who uniformly adopted this

princely mode of subscribing his name. ^ Ancestor of Lord Napier ; a better swordsman than an expert clerk.

° It was by no means unusual, at that period, that persons of considerable rank were but indifferently skilled in scholarcraft. All business of importance was of old transacted by churchmen or notaries ; the ofiice of which last was
frequently performed by priests, who thereby added considerable emoluments to the revenues of their monastery.

49 & 13 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. ^95

lord Regentis grace hes at all tymes, and fpecialie fen his acceptatioun of )ie regiment of ))is realme,
takin greit and paynefull travellis in |)e quieting of ]>e bordouris ])airof, and namelie of ])e rebellious
people Inhabitantis of ]ie cuutrie of Liddisdaill, and vtheiris Thevis, And we having regard to the
innumerabill flauchteris, fyre-rafingis, lieirfchippis, and detellabill enormities, dalie committit be pame
vpoun ]>e peceabill and trew fubiectis of ]ns realme, in tymes bipaft, quliairin ])ai ar nocht abill to execute
})air crueltie, gif we, in ]ie feir and obedience of God and our louerane lord, aufauldie^ concur togidder
to refift pame, Thairfoir we, and euerie ane of ws, underfcrivand, be thir prefent letteres, avowis and
declairis our felffis obedient fubiectis to the Kingis Maiestie, oure onelie fouerane lord and his authoritie, and profeffit inymeis to all Thevis, Inhabitantis of theCuntrie of Liddisdaill, Eskdaill,
EwiSDAiLL, and Annanderdaill ; and in fpeciall, to all perfonis of pe fuirnames of Armestrang,
Ellot, Niksodn, Croser, Littill, Batesoun, Tiiomsoun, Irwing, Bell, Johnnestoun",
Glendonyng, Routlaige, Hendersoun, and Scottls of EwiSDAiLL,and wferis notorious Thevis,
qnhair euir ])ai dwell, and to ]iair wyffis, bairnis, tennentis, and feruandis; Obliffand ws, Jiat we nor nane
of ws at ony tyme heireftir, fall reliet, fupple, or intercommoun witli ony of l)e faidis Thevis, Jiair wyffis,
bairnis, or feruandis, or gif j'arae meit, drink, hous, or herbry ; or fuller ony meit, drink, or victuallis
to be bocht, had, or cairit to Jmme, furth or throw our landls, baillieries, towTiis and boundis, quhair
we may lett :' Nor 5it fall we tryift or haue intelligence with ])ame, in previe or apairt, without knawlege and leif of the Wardane obtenit to fat effect : Or fuffer fame to refort to INIarcattis or tryiftis,
throw oure boundis : Nor 5it permit fame, fair wyffis, bairnis, tenentis, or feruandis, to dwell, remane,
or abyde, or to paflure fair gudis^ vpoun ony landis outwith Liddisdaill, except fic* as within viij
dayis eftir fe dait heirof, fall find fufficient and refponfall fouerteis^ to the Wardenis of the
Marches and their clerkis, that f ai fall reforme all enormities committit be ])ame in tyme bipafl, and
keip gude rewle in tyme cumming, and be obedient to f e Lawis, quhen f ai falbe callit vpoun : And
all vtheris not findand fe faid fouertie, within fe faid fpace, we fall perfew to fe deid with ffyre,
Averd, and all vther kynd of hoftilitie, and expone^ fame, and all fing in fair polfeffioun, in pray to fe
men of weir, as oppin and knawin inymeis to God, the King oure fouerane, and this Commoun-weill,
without fauour, aflurance, or freindfchip, Renunceand all kyndnes, Bandis, promeiffis, aflurances, and
conditionis, fat we or ony of ws hes enterit in with fame, in ony tyme bigane, befoir fe dait heirof,
as we will anfuer to God, and vpoun our dewitie and allegeance to our fouerane lord his authoritie,
and Regent foirfaid. And in caife we failjie in ony pairt of fe premiffis, or revelis not fe contravenai'is of fis Band, gif we knaw fame, we ar content to be pvneill fairfoir, according to the Gknerall Band, and panis contenit fairin. As alsua,^ in caife in fe refdlence or perfute of ony of fe
faid Thevis, it falhappin ony of fame to be flane and brint, or ony of ws and our freindis to l)e harmit
be fame, we fall euir efleme fe qwerrell and deidlie Feid equall to ws all, and ilill neuir aggre with
f e fame Thevis, hot togidder, with ane confent and avyfe : And in f e menetyrae fall tak afauld, trew,
and plane pairt, ilk ane with vther, and fpecialie, fall affifl the Lard of Bukclewcu, and vtheris
Lardis maiil eweff to fe faidis Thevis, at all occafionis convenient. This our prefent Band quiiill
f e firft day of Auguft nixtocura in full effect and force inviolablie to endure, to ])e effect a perpetuale

' Sincerely; heartily; literally, onr-fuhlli/, without duplicity. Even to this day, twa-fihl, twufttcid, &c. are
employed to denote f/ou6Ze or deceitCtil persons. '^ Hinder. ^ Docks of sheep, or cattle. ■* Such

persons. * Cautioners. ^ Expose ; give them up. ' Nearest in point of local situation. It must he

confessed, that this very remarkahle Document gives rather an tinfavouralile view i>( the state of the Jhinhrs at the
commencement of the reign of King James VI. ; but reference to other ' Hands' and State I'apers, which are faithfully conveyed to the pulilic in the works ol' Sir Walter Scolt, Jitd/xif/i's lionler History, and similar sources of
information, ]irove the picture to he correct and unexaggerated. 'i'he inliueiu-e of tuu King aiul his Lieutenants
was hut small, when opjiosed by the more powerful Ihiroiis ; wlio could, in an incredibly sliort s])ace of time, by means
of their signal-fires, &c. alarm the country, aiul gather a juodigious f«)rce, with which they could easily overwhelm
the royal troops. The usual poli(;y of the Crown, therefore, was to appoint, as WAKiir.Ns or Tin: Maik iiks, the most
stirring spirits of the time; who, vain of their ' brief authority,' were cajidcd into the measures of the King ami
Council, and thus preserved ' guid rewle' on the IJorder. The private Feuds of tlie several Clans were also turned by the
Govci'nment to good account ; and by means of such ' 13ands' as the present, the more unruly tribes were kept in check.

396 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6l6.

and perfyte ordour anent ]ie repreffing of ]>e faidis Thevls may be takin in \>e menetyme. In Witnes
QuiiAiROF, we liaif fubfciyuit ])e famyn with our liandis, as foUowis, Ax Kelso, ]>e fext day of
Aprile, the 5eir of God !'".¥'=. three fcoir nyne 3eris.

S» Nicholas RcTHERruRB of Hundoley, Anhro Ker. Alex»* L. Home.

lj„yt. Gilbert Ker of Prinsydlouch. Walter Ker of Cesfurd.

Jhone Rltherilrd of Iluntkill. Johne Edmestouke of yiit Ilk, knj-t. Bukclewth, knyt.

Jhone Mow of yt Ilk. Williame Dowglas of Cavers. Thomas Ker of Fernhirst.

UiCHAKDRuTHERiuRDjProvestofJedbur'. Jhone Haldank. Williame Ker.

James Scott, Baillie of Selkirk. Thomas Trumbuel of Bederowll. Patrik Murray of Faulahill.

James Gledstanes of Coklaw. Richart Rutherfurd of Edzersfone. Walter Ker of Dolphiustone.

Watt Scott in Beilhaueh. Allexander Cokburn. Akdw

Watt Scott of Tuscbelaw. Robert Scot off Edilstane. Andro Ker of ffa . . .

Hector Turnbull, Tutor of Mynto. Thomas Makdowell, T. Cranstoune of yt Ilk.

Clthiiert Cranstoun of Thirlstanemaiiis. Thomas Ker of Nether Howdane.

Robert Scott, Baillie of Ilawyke.

^Dttp-^ttalintj— Commoit Cljtft antr 3tttset oi €l)ttt

Jim. 21. — JoK Scott, alias callit Jok the Saltier, fone to Thome Scott
in Nether Braidlie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the thiftious Steilling and away-taking fra Adame
Almoufe, ane of the Laird of Chifliohnes tennentis, furth of that pairt of the
landis of Chifliolme callit Mouflie, occupyit be the faid Adame, ffoure fcheip
pertening to him ; committit in the moneth of October, 1612. Item, off tua
fcheip, viz. ane 3ow^ and ane hog,^ pertening to George Scott, callit of Deringflouu, furth of his landis of Caftell-hill ; in the moneth of Februar, 1613. Item,
off ane blak 50W, pertening to Rowie Scott, callit Rowie of Huttikill, furth of
the Lyn befyde Eilrig ; at Mertimes, 1614. Item, off fevin 50W fcheip, pertening to James Rowie in Raeburne, ffurth of the landis of Raeburne, in Efkdaillmure; in the moneth of October, 1613 yeiris. Item, ffor cowmone Thift, and

cowmone RelTet of Thift.

Persewaius, Rowie Eatie, callit James Rowie; Rowie Scott, in Vtterfyde ; Walter Scott, his fone;

informeris to his Maiefteis Aduocat: Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*^.

Prelocutour in defence, Mr Vmphra Blindfchellis, Aduocat.

The pannell denyis the haill poyntis of Thift contenit in his Dittay.

ASSISA.

Frances Airmeftrang, callit of Andro Airmeilrang of the Kirk- Walter Gledftanes of Quhytelaw,

Kynmonthe,' toun, Robert Wauch of Hoip,

Williame Airmeftrang, his fone, Williame Airmeftrang in Nether Robert Scott in Schellifwoid,

in Gryftaill, Wrae, Robert Airmeftrang, callit i?a/to«,

Alexander Armeftrang in Wallis, George Langlandis of that Ilk, Williame Airmeftrang, callit

Johnne Ellote of Fallin-afche, Lancie Airmeftrang in Quhit- Bald,^

Thomas Airmeftrang in Gingillis, hauch, Hectour Trumbill of Clarielaw.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, having refTonit and voittit vpone the pointis of the

' The two principal columns contain autograph subscriptions, the third is all written in the same hand.
* Ewe. •^ A year-old sheep. * A descendant of Kinmont Will, famous in History and

Border Ballad- ^ Hauld, bold ; intrepid. Bald-headed was uniformly written and pronounced held.

'4>9ScUJac.VL criminal TRIALS. 397

Dittay, and being ryplie and at lenth advyfet thairwitli, togidder with dyuerfe
Depofitiones producet be our fouerane lordis Aduocat, for verificatioun of the
faid Jo/c Scott his giltines of the faidis crymes ; as alfo, vpone confideratioun had
be thame to the fweiring of thais tila pointis of Dittay, fuorne in their prefens
be the faidis thre perfewaris ; thay all, in ane voce, be the mouth of the faid
George Langlandis of that Ilk, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the
faid Joh Scott, callit the Suckle?', to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of airt and
pairt of the haill poyntis of Thift aboue fpecifeit ; and of cowmone Theft, and
Reflet of Thift. — Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and
vpone ane gibbet thair fet vp, to be Hangit quhill he be deid : Aiid all his guidis
to be efcheit, &c.

^Ul?Ptians ov (J^ipsits ctinttmptuousli) rtpairincj: nnXi ahitiinti

Mtijin ti)t 3Utalm»

[The following is one of the instances of the persecution of the once fornaidable race of Gipsies,
whose numbers were so considerable, as to excite the legislature to make various enactments for their
banishment and extirpation. Notice of this pursuit has been preserved in the Denmylne MSS. Adv.
Xibrary, among various Minutes of the Proceedings of the Privy Council of Scotland, in the following
brief memorandum. August 28, 1616. " Anent that mater of Egiptianis, now lyand in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, thay war only convict for contraveining the Act of Parliament, in not depairting
furth of the Kingdome ; and no vtlier cryme was layed to thair charge, and no cryme is knavvin whairvpone thay may be challengit. The Counfell, according to iiis Ma-'*^® direction, hes gewin Warrand
for flaying the pronouncing of Dome, till his Ma^'^^ farder pleafour be knawin."

The Editor has found no other trace of the fate of these unliappy creatures ; but it is hoped that the
King contented himself with ordering their banishment from tlie country, under the usual certification.]

Jul. 19. — JoHNNE Faa, Egiptiane^ ; James Faa, his fone ; Moyfes Bail5ie,
Egiptiane ; and Helene Broun, fpous to Williame Bailie,
Egiptiane.
Dilaitit of contravening of the Act of Parliament, maid in anno 1609 yeiris, in
thair contemptuous repairing to this cuntrie, being repute and haldin to be Egiptianis, and abiding thairintill, nochtwithftanding thairof, &c. viz.

Dittay againjf Jolinne Faa, c^r.
Foes AMEK ILL as, be Act of Parliament, haldin at Edinburgh, vpone the
xxiiij day of Junij, FWj''. and nyne 5eiris, it is expreflie provydit, flatute, and
ordanit, that all Vagabundis, Soirneris, and cowmone Thevis, cowmonlie callit
Egiptianis, fould depairt furth of ]>& kingdome, and remane perpetuallie furth
|?airof ; and nevir to haif returnet agane within the famyn, nor be fund |iairintill,
eftir |)e firft day of Auguft j^aireftir, in the foirfaid 5eir of God r".A'j'. and nyne
3eiris, vnder the pane of deid ; and that it fould be lieiiini to all his Maielteis

1 See Jul. 31, 1611.

398 CRIMINAL TRIALS. - A.D. 1616.

guid fubiectis, or ony ane of thame, to caus tak, apprehend, impriffone, and
execute to death, all inaner of Egiptianis, alfweill men as wemen, as cowmoun,
notorious, and condampned Thevls ; only, to be tryit be ane AlTyfe that thai ar
callit, knawin, rej^ute, and haldiu Egiptianis : As the faid Act of Parliament at
lentil proportis. Nochttheles, it is of verritie, that the foirfaidis perfones,
being Egiptianis, fua callit, knawin, repute, and haldin, in contempt of pe faid
Law and Act of Parliament, as Vagabundis, lies lurkit and remanit within this
kiiigdome, feii pe making and publicatioun of the faid Act, and nawayis lies pafl
away furtli J)airof : At p»e leifl, aganis ])e tennour of pe faid Act, hes, fen Ipe faid
firft day of Auguft, 1609 5eiris, repairit within this cuntrie, and ar tane and
appreliendit as Vagabundis, and maifterles lymmeris^ and thevis, reput and
haldin, knawin and callit to be Egiptianis ; quhairin thay and ilk ane of thame
hes contravenit ])e tennour of pe faid Act of Parliament, and incurrit ]?e panes
and pwiiefchment inentionet J)airintill ; quhilk aucht and fould be inflictit vpone
thame, with all rigour, to ])e example of vj^eris of J)air race and vnhappie Companie to efchew pe lyk heireftir.
Persewer, Sir Williame OHpliant, kny*. Prelocutor in defence, Mr Thomas Wilfoun, Adnocat.

It is allegit be the pannell and tliair prelocutour, that the Dittay is nawayis
relevant to pas to ane Aflyfe, in refpect it is nocht fubfumet thairintill, that the
perfones dilaitit was within the cuntrie, the tyme of the making and the publicatioun of the faid Act of Parliament, quliilk is the grund of this perfute ;
iiather yit is the j^annell tane and appreliendit for ony Thift, Soirniiig, or Opprefliouii, nor accufet thairfoir : Off all quhilkis crymes, thay ar willing to byde
ane tryell : And thairfoir, the Dittay, as it is fet doun aganis the pannell, can
nocht pas to ane Affyfe. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance
audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay and Act of Parliament.

The Jullice Repellis the allegeance ; and Ordanis the pannell to pas to ane
Aflyfe.

^^ERDicT. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Thomas Creichtoun, mercheand in
Edinburgh, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis Johnne Fact,
James Faa^ his fone, Mojifes IJaihie and Helene Broiuiy all Vagabundis, and
repute and haldin to be Egiptianis, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of contravening the tennour of the faid Act of Parliament.

The Juflice Continewit the prouiiceatioun of Dome vpone the perfones foirfaidis, quliill he be advyfet with the Lordis of Secreit Counfall : And ordanit
thame to be returnit to waird, to the Tolbuth of Edinburgh, in the meyne tyme.
Jul. 24. — Sentence. The Juflice, in refpect na cautioun could be ffand

* In our old Laws, tliis term was always applied to denote a worthless scoundrel, a professed thief,
or reiver. At present it is applied solely to females of loose character.

50 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 399

be thame, for thair departour furth of his Maiefteis dominionis, and that thai
fould never returne agane within the famyn during- thair lyftymes, ilk ane
of thame vnder the pane of ane thowfeand merkis money ; accoirding to ane
Ordinance of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, direct for that effect, vnder my Lord
Chancelleris fubfcriptioun, daitit the xxiiij day of Julij inftant ; be the mouth
of Johnne Dow, dempfter of Court, Ordanit the faidis Johnne Faa, James Faa,
his fone, Moyfes Bail5ie, and Helene Broun, Egiptianis, and fa reput and lialdin,
tane and apprehendit, to be tane to the Burrow-Mure of Edinburgh, and thair
to beHANGiT quhill thay be deid ; and all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit,&c.
Quhilk was pronuncet for Dome ; and that, conforme to the Ordinance of the
Lordis of Secreit Counfell, of the dait above expremit.

Jul. 31. — Alexander Dujmbar of Kilboyak, and others.'
Dilaitit for the Slauchter of vmq^^ Alexander Dumbar of Waftfield.

Persewaris, James and Thomas Durabaris, as brether.

The Juftice, for cauffis moveing him, fpeciallie, that the i)airties war vnder
the termes of aggrement, Ordanit the dyet to Defert.

Usurpiutj: i)i^ iHajtstits ^utfioriti)— Conbocation ot t|)t Elitirrs—
iHuiUtr xnxtitv Cofour ot Etiixj, $i:t,

[The particulars of this very remarkable and keenly contested Case''' are so fully narrated in the
proceedings which follow, and in the various Histories of the Fanvly of Gordon and Sutherland, that
it is unnecessary for the Editor to add any thing farther. It only seems proper to give, in this place,
the following notice from the MS. Collections of Sir James Balfour, preserved in the Library of the
Faculty of Advocates ; which, though only relating to the preliminary arrangements, forcibly shows the
spirit with which such matters were conducted, even before the Supreme Criminal Tribunal of the kingdom, where the parties were connected with noble and powerful families. — August 28, 1G16. ' This day
being appointit to the Laird of Geicht, Johnne Gordon, Shenf-dcpute of Aberdein, and the relt
of thair complices, for thair compeirance before the Juftice and his deputis, in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, to vnderly the lawis for the flaughter of vmq'*^ Frances Hay ; the Sheref-depute, accompanyed
with fum Gentilmen of the name of Gordon, and vtheris, came to this burgh, with outwarde lliow,
and apperance to have prefented himfelfF to his tryell ; and by liis Petition, gewin in this day to the
Counfell, he craved Licence to fum Gentilmen of his name to accompany and aflift him at the Bar :
Which was gi-antit to fex perfones felected and maid choife of be himfelil". The Erie of Er roll came
lykwayes heir, for perfute of that mater, he haveing procurit ane Licence from the Counfell, convenit
at Abcrdene, for his cuming heir ; with conditioun that he fould keip his lodging, and not como furtli
thairof, without the CounJelUs Warrand. Ho, be Petition gewin in this day to the CoinijUl, cravit
Licence that he miglit go to the bar, to afllft the perfute of that mater ; bot, in regaird he was excommunicat, it was not thought expedient that he fould go in perfone to the bar, becaus it was fufpectit

1 See Jul. 24, 1611. On Jan. 15, 1617, " Sir Williame Hairt, his Maiefteis Juftice, Ordanis the
dyet to defert." Whereupon George Duff, writer, protests for relief of the cautioners, he. - See

also two entries immediately following this ; and especiallv, that of Georrjc Gordon of Geicht, Feb. 2G,
to June 27, 1617.

400 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6l6.

that the excommunication would be obiectit aganift him, to debar him from proces : And als, becaus
HIS Ma^'^s Advocat was pairtlie perfewar in the Letteris, who wald profecute that mater, als weill
as if the Erie war prefent. The Court being fenfit, the Jujiice, Jujtice Clerk, with the haill memberis
of the Court, and the pairteis perfewaris being all prefent, and the Sheref-depute being conftantlie
looked for to corapeir, he notwithftanding abfentit him felfF; and is thairfoir declairit fugitiue, and
liis cautioneris vnlawit.']

Aug. 28. — JoHNNE GoRDOUN of Clubifgoule, Scherref-depute of Aberclene.^
Dilatit ffor airt and pairt of the Vfurpatioim of our Souerane lordis royall
power and authoritie, in the arrogant and prefumptuous cuming, with convocatioun of ane grit number of his Maiefteis legis, vpone the xviij day of December
I'".V'. and fyftene yeiris, to the duelling hous of WilUame Hay of Logyruif;
and without ony lauchfvll Warrand, authoritie, or Commiffioun, puting violent
handis in the perfone of vmq^' Frances Haij.fone to vrntf George Hay of
Ardlef/ta?)ie,hYii\g'mg him perforce and aganis his will furth of the faid hous,
cayreing him with ane grit number of men in airmes to the burgh of Aberdene,
as ane captiue and priiToner ; committing him in priffone, within the ludgeing
of George Gordoiin of Ge'ichf, ane of his principall takeris, callit " the Bony
Wyfes Inner in the Gallowgait of Aberdene, keiping and detening him in maift
ilrait firmance thairintill, be the fpace of fourtie aucht houris ; nocht fuffering any
man of his kyn or freindis to haif accefs to him, during all that tyme : Committit
be the faid George Gordoiin of Gekht, WiUiame Hay, his fone in \aw,Johnne
and Alexander Gordones, his brether, James Baird his feruand, and vtheris thair
complices. Off the fpeciall caufeing, fending, hounding out, airt, plane pairttaking, counfelling, devyfeing, command, afTiftance and ratihabitioun of the faid
Johnne Gordoun Scherref depute of Aberdene, and quha, during the tyme of the
faid Frances imprillbnement within the faid Inne, refoirtit dyuerfe tymes thairto
with the faid Laird of Geicht, to countinance and affift the vnlauchfull keiping
and detentioun of the faid vmq'^ Frances thairintill : And ficklyk, the faid
Johnne Gordoun of Clubbifgoule, pretendit Schereff depute of Abirdene, being
giltie in his own confcience, befoir God, of i)arcialitie and preoccupyit opinioun,
and knawing weill aneuch that the tyme of his priuilege, gif he ony had, was
expyrit ; notwithftanding thairof, to the heich offence of Almichtie God, contempt
of our Souerane lordis princlie power, and to the grit fcandall of the Juftice of this
kingdome, ffor his prefumptious and arrogant vfurpatioun and afTumeing to him
felff, with ane evill confcience, of the place and office of the Criminall Judge, in
prefenting him felff in Judgement, and fetting doun thairintill as Judge, ffenceing
of Court, and calling and accufeing befoir him of the faid vmq^^ Frances Hay,
for the allegit Slauchter of vmq'^ Adame Gordoun, brother germane to the faid

» Seo Feb. 2G, 1617, &c.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 401

Laird of Geicht ; and for nocht admitting and fuffering prelocutouris to compeir
and defend the faid vmq'^ Frances, the tyme of the faid perfute ; bot be the contrair, debarring 31r Wdliame Barclay, Aduocat, quha was reddie to compeir
in his defence, and quha had mony guid and fufficient exceptiones to haif proponit, to haif ilayit^ his puting to the knawlege of ane Affyfe, for the (aid allegit
cryme ; be fending of George Leflie of Kincragie, with ane commiffioun to the
faid Mr Williame, difchargeing him, vpone the perrell of his lyfe, to compeir in
the faid Frances defence ; and affureing him, gif he fa did, fra he war anes doiin
the ftair,^ thair fould be tuentie quhingeris put intil him : And fua, for debarring
of the faid vmq'^ Frances, and defrauding him of the benifeit of lauchfull defence,
quhilk God and nature hes indifferentlie allowit vnto all men : And for the maift
partiall proceiding aganis the faid vmq'^ Frances, nochtwithftanding of the premiffes, in putting him to the knawledge of ane Affyfe of ane number of perfones
felectit and maid chofe of be the faid Laird of GeicJd, perfewar, and his freindis,
and altogidder adictit to thair mynd and directioun ; quha, accoirding thairto,
convictit him of the faid allegit Slauchter : And for the partiall and wilfull pronunceing vjDone the faid convictioun, of the Dome and Sentence of daithe aganis
the faid vmq^^ Frances, to loile his held : And for that effect, maift partiallie
and vndeutifullie, aganis the office of ane Judge, delyuering of the faid Frances
bak agane to the faid Laird of Geicht and his complices, the pairtie perfewaris,
quha tuik him to thair awin privat prifTone ; and vpone the morne thairefter,
caryeit him furth at ane bak 5et, to ane hole betuix tua mottis,'' quhair thay
crowned thair tragidie with fo boutcherlie mangling and demaning'' the puir
gentill-man, be geving to him fex feueral ftraikis vpone his fchoulderis, held, and
nek, as the lyk hes nevir or feldome bene hard or fene : And fa, vnder the pretext and cullour of law, and fcandall of Juftice, ffor the crewall and barbarus
maffacaring and flauchterof the faid vmq^^ Frances, be the faid Johnne Gordoun,
fcheref-depute, his pretendit vfurpeing Judge ; quha thairthrow in a heich degrie
hes contemjmit and abufet his Maiefteis royall name and authoritie, in making
it a cloke and cover to the revenge of the perticuler querrell of him felff and his
freindis. In maner fpecifeit and fett doun in the criminall Letteris direct aganis
him thairupoun.

The Juftice, be the mouth of Thomas 5<^""g»^ dempfter of Court, Ordanit
Adame Gordoun of Boighoill (as cautioner and fouertie for John Gordon's entry)
to be vnlawet in the pane of ffyve hundreth merkis, for the noclit entrie : And
that the faid Johnne Gordoun fall be denuncet our fouerane lordis rebell, and put
to his hienes home ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &:c.

' Delayed ; prevented. * By the time he got down stairs. ^ To a liollow betwixt two

moats or fosses ; tlie ground being probably selected, or constructed, so as to prevent a rescue of the
unhappy victim of their barbarity. ■* Using; treating. ^ Who appears in this olHce for the first time.

VOL. III. 3 E

402 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6l6.

iHurtier inxtitv Colour of IS.ab), ^r.

Alio-. 28. — George Goudoun of Geicht/ Williame Hay, his lone in

law ; Jolinne Alexander, Robert and Patrik Gordones, brether

to the faid Laird of Geicht ; Johnne Gordoun of Clubifgoule,

Scheref depute of Aberdene ; Williame Gordoun in the Maynes

of Geicht, fervand to the faid Laird ; Johnne Sinclair, brother

to the Laird of Achannachie ; Andro Nicollbun, fervand to

the faid Williame Hay ; Patrik Cantlie in Airdifferie, and

Andro Mylne, ffalconer.

Dilaitit for the ufurpatioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie, &c." at the inftance

of Mariorie Keith the relict of vmq" George Hay of Ardlethame, as mother ;

George Hay, as brother to vmq'^ Frances Hay, fone to the faid vmq^^ George

Hay of Ardlethame; and of Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny', Aduocat to

our fouerane lord, for his hienes intreis. The faid Mariorie, &c. producet the

Letteris deulie execute and indorfate ; vpone the productioun quhairof, the faidis

perfewaris afkit inftrumentis, and proteftit for releif of thair cautioneris.

iHurtrcv tintin- Colour of ilab), ^u

Auo-. 28. George Gordoun of Geicht, and others above mentioned,

and James Baird,' in the Maynes of Geicht, fervand to the
Laird of Geicht.
Sir William Oliphant of Newtoun, kny^ producet his Maiefteis Letteris deulie
execute and indorfate, raifit at his lordlchipis inftance, as Aduocat to his Maieftie,
for his hienes intreis allanerlie."

jTorrtljlc ^ijUurtion nntr iBarriafie of a i^linor, b)itI)out Sabing:
oijtaiiuti X\)t laijoful ronstnt of !)is iJ5uartriaus.

Nov. 8. Sir Patrik Chirnesyde of Eist Nisbet, Alexander

Cranftoun of Burnecaftell, Johnne Cranftoun, brother to Williame Lord Cranftoun, Williame Home of Hardeifmylne, and
Williame Moffet, his fervand.
Dilaittit of violent Rape and Raveifching,^ taking, and detening of Adame
Frenche of Thornydykis, ane ^oung bairne fcarce paft xiiij 5eiris of age, furth of
the Toun of Hadingtoune ; and thairfra tranfpoirting him to Rymmiltoun-law,

' See Fel). 26, 1G17. ^ As in tlie previous case. ^ This person is omitted (probably by a

clerical error) in the former case. '' Alone; solely. ^ These terms, in the Ancient Criminal

Law of Scotland, as has l>een frequently noticed in this work, signify merely the act of carrjnng ott"
by violence, or asrainst the will of the party so abused. The term employed to denote Rape, as now
understood in Scotland and England, was ' Forceing.' ' Rapt' and ' Raveifching' only inferred what
is at present technically termed ' Forcible Abduction.' A stronger illustration of the meaning formerly
attached to these phrases could hardly be adduced than the present Trial.

50 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 403

and thairfra, as ane captiue, to Eift Nifbet ; and thairfra to Beruik, quhair, but
{without) confent of Sir Johnne Home of North Beruik, Donatour to the Gift of
his Waird and IVIariage, he was mareit to Jean Chirnefyde, dochter to the faid
Sir Patrik ; committit in the moneth of November, 1615 5eiris.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Alexander Peiblis, Johnne Belfis, INIr Robert Fairlie, Aduocatis.

Prelocutouris in perfute, Sir George Home of Manderftoun, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun.

Persewaris, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*, for his hienes intreis ; Sir Johnne Home of

North Beruik, knyS as Donatour to the Waird of the faid Adame French mariage, for his intreis.

The Aduocat, with Sir Johnne Home of North Beruik, kny', as perfewaris,
produces the fummondis. Eftir reiding thairof, the Aduocat produces, for Sir
Johnne Home of North Beruik his entreis, the Gift of the faid Waird and Mariage of Adame Frenche of Thornydykis.

The Pannell, befoir farder proces, defyres my lord Juftice to heir Adame
French of Thornydykis, j^refentlie in Judgement, quha is the perfone allegit
ravifchet and tane away, to mak his awin Declaratioun of the forme and maner
thairof ; and thaireftir, thay fall cum to thair Defends in the cause. — ]\Iy lord
Aduocat DifalTentis to ony Declaratioun to be maid be the faid Adame Frenche,
in this matter ; and defyres the pannell to cum to thair awin allegeances, quhy
the fact lybellit fould noclit pas to ane Alfyfe.

The Juftice Ordanis the pannell to propone thair defenflis aganis the lybell
and relevancie thairof.

Adame Frenche of Thornydykis, being perfonallie prefent, difaifentis fra this
perfute ; and thairupoun afkit inftrumentis.

It is allegit be my lord Aduocat, that the difaffenting of Adame Frenche fould
nocht be refpectit, becaus he is naither perfewar nor defender in the cans ; and
the Aduocat, with the perfewar, haifing fufficient entreis for the King, may perfew. — It is anfuerit, that my Lord Aduocatis anfuer touching the perfute, movet
be his lordfchip and Sir Johnne Home, nawayis can ftay this young Gentilman to
difaffent i\m\\h a, Jed valeat cum j)roceJf 11 quantum valere potejt.

It is allegit be the pannell and thair prelocutouris, that Sir Johnne Home hes
na intreis to perfew this cans, being criminall ; becaus his only intreis is as Donatour to the waird and marriage of Adame Frenche ; quliilk Gift, pcrje^ can geve
him na entreis to perfew criminallie, becaus, be the Gift of Waird, he hes nather
entreis in 'perfonam neque in rem : In petyb?iam, becaus this young Gentilman,
befoir the intenting of this cans, was i)aft fourtene yeiris compleit, and lies electit
and cliofui Curatouris to him, for adminiftratioun of his perfone : In rem, he has
na entreis, becaus howbeit it may ajipeir be the Gift producet, that Sir Johnne
Home is Donatour to the Waird of this young Gentilman, yet, in rei veritate, res
aliterjehaheti as Sir Johnne Home will nocht deny, and as lall be maid cleir to

404 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

the Judge ; in fa far as (at) tlie tyme of vmq'* Robert French deceis, father to
this young Gentihnan, haifing tua father-brether^ on lyfe, viz., James and
Johnne Frenches ; James haifing ane cair of the bairnes educatioun and flanding
of the hous, delt for the Gift of the Waird and Mariage, to the vtiHtie of the
bairne ; hot, becaus he was nocht hable to difcharge that adminiftratioun of the
bairne as become him, in refpect of dyuerfe trubbillis and cummoris" he come
vnto, he makis chofe of the faid {Sir) Johnne Home of North Bentih, as ane
truftie freind to him and the bairne, borrowis his name to the faid Gift, and
infertis his name thairintill ; nocht that the faid Sir Johnne fould rype^ ony
connnoditie thairof, hot vfeing the faid Sir Johnnes name, nocht being hable to
dilcharge the office him felff. For cleiring^ of this, it is of verritie, that nochtwithflanding of the inferting of the faid Sir Johnnes name in the Gift, the faid
vmq'" James French intromettit with the haill leving pertening to the faid
bairne, during his lyftyme, keipit the faid bairne in his cuftodie, at leift was in
the cultodie of his guidfchir on the mother fyde,-^ within the place of Hardiesmylne, and that but" interruption, challenge, or queftioun made be the faid Sir
Johnne, anent the cuftodie of the bairne, or vplifting of the maillis^ and deuteis
of his leveing : For forder qualificatioun of this argument, it is lykwayis of
verritie, that eftir the deceis of the faid vmq'*' James Frenche, vmq^^ Johnne
Frenche, younger brother to the faid James, being fervet and retouret air'' to
the faid vmq'" James his brother, nocht only intromettit with the faid vmq'®
James his leving, bot lykwayis with the haill rentis of the faid bairnes leving,
Tutorio nomine, the faid vmq'" Johnne being feruet and retouret Tutour to him ;
quhairby it is cleir that this Gift of Waird of the faid minor can gif the faid Sir
Johnne no intreis to perfew this caufe, his name being only borrowit to it, as
faid is. Lyk as, thair is actioun depending at the inftance of the bairne and his
Curatouris befoir the Lordis of Seffioun aganis the faid Sir Johnne for his intromiffioun with the maillis and deuteis of his landis, and for transferring and tranflating of the Gift of the Waird in the perfone of the minor, as tane to his awin
beliuif, and the faid Sir Johnnes name only borrowit thairto. And fa, haifing
nather entreis in perfonam neque in rem 7ni?ioris, his Gift can geve him na intreis
to perfew this cans. SeconcUie, albeit it war grantit, as it is nocht, that the Gift
was tane to the behuif, utilitie, and proffeit of the faid Sir Johnne, yet the Gift
of the Waird can geve the faid Sir Johnne na intereis to perfew this cans, being
ane Criminall perlute, without the expres concurfe, afhftance, and ratihabitioun
of the faid minor him felff, aganis quhome the Rapt lybellit is allegit to be com-

^ Paternal uncles. * Literally cnmhcrs, encumbrances, difficulties, embarrassments ; but in

this instance it denotes strife, feud, he, as the word tlien denoted. ^ Reap. •• Elucidating.

* Maternal grandfather. ^ Wit'iout. '' Rents, ^ Served and retoured heir.

50 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 405

mittit ; qulia noclit only refuiffis to concur and affifl the faid Sir Johnne ; hot,
be the contrair, compeiris with the defenderis, and affiftis thame ; affirnieing all
that was done be thame, to be laiichfullie done, and quhat was done to him was
at his awin defyre, and be his awin fpeciall confent.

It is anfvierit, be my lord Aduocat, and the faid Sir Johnne Home, that the faid
Sir Johnnes entreis is fiifficientlie qualifeit and inftructit for perfute of the actioim
lybellit, feeing it is lybellit that he is Donatour to the Waird and marriage of
Adame Frenche, aganis qvihome the haill wrongis lybellit war committit, being
our fouerane lordis frie lege ; and that the cuftodie and keiping of minoris, quhais
landis fallis in our fouerane lordis handis be reflbne of Waird, properlie pertenis
to the Donatour of the Waird and Mariage : Lyk as, it is expreOie qualifeit in
the faid Summondis, that the faid minor was in the faid Sir Johnnes poffeilioun
mony yeiris befoir the tyme lybellit, furth of quhais i)oireffioun it was nocht
lauchfuU to the defenderis nor nane of thame to mell^ with him, in maner
lybellit, nor tak him furth of his poffeffioun : Lyk as, complent being made of
befoir be the faid Sir Johnne, befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, aganis the
fpeciall perfones his away-takeris, viz. Williame Home and Williame JMoffet,
the faid Sir Johnne was fFund to be ane pairtie compliner to call for exhibitioun
of the faid bairne ; in quhais favour ane fentence was gevin and pronuncet, ffinding and declairing that the faidis Williame Home and Williame Moflet had
committit ane verrie grit offence and ane moft j)ernicious and wiket preparatiue
and example, in trayning and taking away the faid Adame Frenche out of the
faid Toun of Hadingtoun,quhair he was placet at the fcole be the faid Sir Johnne ;
in refpect quhairof, the faid Sir Johnne lies indoutit ryclit and intreis to perfew
the actioun lybellit; and fijeciallie, to informe and concur with our fouerane lordis
Aduocat, quha hes fpeciall entreis be him lelff, in his hienes name, to perfew the
crymes lybellit. As ffor the impertinent^ difcourfe, that the riclit of the ^Vaird
was tane to the behove of the bairne be the advyfe of vmq''' James and Johnne
Frenches his father-brether, that alledgeance is nather releveant nor inftructit ;
and fa, na refpect audit to be had thairto : And yit, to anfuer to the firft pairt,
anent James intromiffioun, the allegeance is altogidder irrelevant ; for albeit he
had intromettit, that eftablifches na richt of the Waird in his perfone, hot the
Donatour had fufficient intreis to perfew the intromitteris with the maillis and
douteis of the Waird landis: And, to mak the matter mair manifert, James deceill
within fyftene dayis efter Robert his brother : Lyk as, vmq'*' Johnne was ane
actuall feruand to the faid Sir Johnne, during his lyftyme, eftir the dait of the
faid Gift. And as to the laft pairt of the fecund allegeance, beiring that the
faid Adame French difaffentis fra the perfute, and concurris with the defenderis,
^ 0. Fr. tnesler, to intermeddle ; to interfere. " Irrelevant ; not pertinent.

406 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I616.

affirmjmg that all [that] was done to be done of his awin confent, it is anfuerit,
as of befoir, that his dilairentiug fra the perlute can nocht preiudge ony of the
perfewaris : And as to the lafl pairt of the faid allegeance, quhilk appeiris to be
I)roponit aganis the intreis, it is rather affirniatioun that the faid Sir Johnne hes
intreis nor^ oppofitioun aganis the famyn ; and gif it fall pleis the pannell to propone it, as ane defenfe in the caufe, thay fall haif ane direct anfiier ; ffor, be the
proponing of that allegeance, it is grantit that the Donatour hes intreis ; and that
he is Donatour, it is verifeit be the Gift producet : Bot to mak this matter cleir,
it is anfuerit directlie, that ane cryine being committit aganis pairteis quha hes
intreis, the Confefiioun of the pairtie offendit can nevir tak away thair intreis,
nather yit the Kingis intreis efter committing of the cryme, ffor, albeit wrang
had bene done to ane maior,^ and the maior wald renunce the actioun, that can
nawayis preiudge the Kingis Maiefteis intreis, nor na vtlier pairtie quha is preiudget ; as is cleir in the haill article of the Cod. L. vnica Codice de Raptii Virginum, et Lege Baptores, C. de Epijcopis et Cler'icis : And to mak this matter the
mair cleir, it is fpeciallie declairit be the Act of Parhament maid in October 1612,
that the declaratioun of the perfone ravifchet fall nawayis preiudge the Kingis
Maieftie of his intreis to perfevv the committer of the cryme : And to cleir this
matter forder, the faid Adame Frenche, eftir his away-taking, be ane Letter, all
writtin and fubfcryuit with his awin hand, grantit and confeffit that he was tane
away aganis his will and \Tidone ; as the Letter heir with producet beiris.

To the quhilkis it is anfuerit be the pannell, that the allegeances proponit be
thame aganis the faid Sir Johnne Homes intreis ftandis relevant, nochtwithllanding of my Lord Aduocattis anfuer ; becaus the defendaris affirmes conllantlie,
that of the Law nor Practique of Scotland, the Donatour of the Waird or
INlairiage of ony perfone hes na actioun criminall competent to him for ony wrang
done to the minor, without the concurfe of the minor quha is offendit, bot that
the Gift of the Waird inferis to the Donatour only ciuile actioun, per Je : And
liowbeit the keiping of the minor during the Waird pertenis to the Donatour,
yit gif the minor be paft xiiij yeiris, et Jicfui juris, divertis him felf willinglie
out of the companie of the Donatour, pafTis forwardis to the electioun of his
curatouris, thair is na actioun competent of the law to the Donatour, for exhibitioun and dely vering to him of the minor. Lyk as, Williame Home being fummoned befoir the Counfell, for exhibitioun of the faid Adame Frenche, and being
be Ordinance of the faidis Lordis, thaireftir, fequeflrat in the handis and cuftodie
i)i James Ai'chhifchope of Glqfgow, vpone ane Supplicatioun gevin in be the
faid Adame him felf to the faidis Lordis, the faidis Lordis, be thair Decreit,
Ordanit the faid Adame to be put to libertie to pas and repas at his plefour, nocht-
* Rather than the contrary argument. " A person arrived at lawful age, or majority.

50 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 407

withftanding of the Gift of the AVaird difponit to the faid Sir Johnne Home,
quhais entreis could be na impediment to Hay the faid Adames libertie : Lyk as,
conforme to the faid Decreit, being put to libertie, he frelie, volunterlie, and
willinglie repairit to the Place of Eill Nifbet, quhairin he hes remanit fenfyne,
as to ane fpeciall freind ; and, gif neid beis, the faid Adame, be his awin Declaratioun, will declair his intentioun of paffing to Eift NiiTjet. And for inftructing
thairof, produces the bairnes grevis,^ to be confulerit be my lord Juftice, defyreing the famyn to be red as ane fpeciall pairt of the proces. As to the Letter
producet be my lord Aduocat, the faid Adame denyis the fame altogidder to be
his hand writt, and thairfoir na refpect fould be had thairto : Lyk as, the faid
Adame being perfonallie prefent, Judiciallie declairis he can nocht vvryte ; and
this Letter producet be my Lord Aduocat was writtin by" his knawlege in the
Guklman of Manderftones hous, the tyrae of his fequeftratioun ; and in cace it
war his hand writt, it could mak na faith in judgement, being direct be ane
minor. As to the Act of Parliament producet, quhi4k is in anno 1612, the
alledgeance foundit thairupoun militatis nawayis in this eirand, nather is this
perfute foundit vpone that Act of Parliament ; and quhan as my lord Aduocat
foundis a perfute thairupoun, it fall half the awin anfuer.^ Igitur, &c.

The Aduocat, for him felf, and for the pairtie, repeittis his former anfueris,
with this additioun, that the minor being in the Donatouris pofTeflioun of his
Waird and Manage, lyk as, he was be the fpace of fyve yeiris befoir the Rapt
lybellit, could nocht haif been tane out of his poffeffioun, in maner contenit in
the Summondis ; and the away-takeris of him avicht to be pwneift accoirding to
the defyre of the Summondis. As to the impertinent difcourfe, that the AVaird
was tane to the behuif of the bairne, thair is nathing producet to verrifie the
famyn ; and albeit it war verifeit, it is altogidder irrelevant, in relpect of the
former anfuer ; and fpeciallie, in refpect that the Defenderis had na intreis, in
maner lybellit, to haif mellit with the minor : And quhairas thair is mentioun
maid of the electioun of his Curatouris, thair was na Curatouris chofm tlie tyme
of the committing of the crymes lybellit, quliilk was done in November 1()L">.
the Curatouris being alledget chofin in JuliJ thaireftir, I6l6. And quhair
mentioun is maid of the bairnes libertie and fequeftratioun, that is nawayis pertinent to this purpois, in refpect of the lybell. Igifitr, 8cv.

It is allegit be the pannell, that the electioun of the Curatouris be Adame
Frenche in July 1616, is fufficient, nochtwithftandiiig of his away-taking of befoir ; and that be reflbne that howbeit the Curatouris was nocht chofm befoir

' Frohah\y f/rievances. There is marked on the luargin of the Record, ' Tliir pievis tane vp ami
keipit he my lord Juftice.' '^ Without; heside ; contrary to. ^ Its own, /. e. a special answer

to the pursuit so founded.

408 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

the allegit Rapt, yit he was maior befoir the allegit Rapt, paft fourtene yeiris of
age, &c. Ig'itu?', &c. — It is anfuerit thairto be my lord Adiiocat and the perfewar, that iia relpect aucht to be had, quhidder he was paft xiiij yeiris of age the
tyme of the committing of the crymes or nocht, qiiha being at that tyme in the
cuftodie and keiping of the Donatour to the Waird, and na curatouris chofin to
him, the defenderis had na intres to haif mellit with him, as is lybellit. And
quhair it is allegit, that the Mifliiie ufet and producet for the faid Adame, aucht
nocht to be refpectit, in refpect of his minoritie ; it is anfuerit, that the famyn
aucht to be refpectit, being all writtin and fubfcryuit with his awin hand : And
to convert that argument aganis the defenderis, na refpect aucht to be had to
his Declaratioun, nather be word or writ this day, in relpect of his minoritie.
As to the Teftimoniall jiroducet for his age, na refpect aucht to be had thairto,
for the relTones aboue writtin, fpeciallie, in refpect he was baptizet the xij of
November, 1601, and was tane away in November 1615, fua that it is nocht
conftant^ thairby, quhidder he was paft xiiij yeiris or nocht the tyme of the
Rapt lybellit. Igitur, &c.

It is allegit for the Defenderis, that the Dittay is nawayis relevant to infer
aganis thame ony criminall perfute, nather can thay pas to the knawlege of ane
Inqueift thairfoir ; becaus the fact contenit in the Dittay, it is vel Raptiis vel
Plagium : Rciptus, of the Law, it is nocht ; becaus raptus et raptura of the
Law is only concerning Virginis, and nocht more. Cap. de Raptu Khg'mumy
toto titido : — Bot quhidder it be vel Raptura vel Plagium, yit the Dittay is nocht
relevant, becaus ad crimen Plagii vel Raptura, oportet accedat et itderveniat vis
et violentia : Oportet dejure ut deportatur de loco in locum, clandejline, violen^
ter, and that his freindis and kinefmen be debarrit fra haifing accefs to him,
quhairby he is depryvet of the libertie of ane frie ledge : Bot fa it is, that nane
of thir perticuleris, without the quhilkis the Dittay can nocht be relevant, is fet
doun in this Dittay ; ffor firft, thair is no violence nor violent fact fet doun
tliairin ; it is nocht lybellit that he was violentlie, quyetlie, and clandeftanlie
tranfpoirtit fra place to place ; or that he was detenit, quaji in carcere ; or that
he was debarrit fra his freindis, or fra haifing accefs to his freindis, or thay to
him ; bot be the contrair, it is affirmet in the Dittay, that he frelie, volunterlie,
and willinglie paft with Williame Home, his mother-brother,^ out of the Hous
of Mr Williame Bowie, quhilk inferris a frie away-cuming, being with his
mother-brother, and nerreft of his kyn, haifing na kyn of the father fyde knawin
to him : And fa, the Dittay is altogidder irrelevant. As to that jiairt of the
Dittay, beiring that the remanent defenderis are airt and pairt thairof, thay can
nocht pas to ane Aftyfe vpone that point of the Dittay; becaus, gif thair be nocht

' Clear ; apparent. ^ Maternal uncle.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 409

ane cryme committit be the principallis, nor a relevant ciyme fet doun againft
thame, the perfones can nocht be alledgit to be airt and pairt thairof ; and albeit
it war relevant for the principallis, it is nawayis relevant aganis the remanent
perfones, as airt and pairt ; becaus airt and pairt, of the Law, is, quijrroclet vel
auxilitim vel confilium ; aiLvilinnt, vel ante factum, vel in facto, vel pojl factum :
Thair is nather auxiliuni nor conjilium relevantlie lybellit aganis thir defenderis,
neque ante factum, in facto, vel j^ojt factum ; ffor thair is nathing lybellit aganis
thame, hot that he was firll tranfj^oirtit to Rymmiltone-law, and thaireftir to
Eill Nifbet ; and that thaireftir he was mareit to Jeane Chirnefyde, quhilk is na
qualificatioun of violence cum matrimonia fant libera dejure ; and the mariage
of ane minor, eftir his compleit age of xiiij yeiris, quha lies confenfum of the Law,
can nocht be comptit ony violent fact, becaus it proceidis of his awin propper
fact ; fpeciallie, feing the mariage proceidit vpone the Proclamatioun of his bands,
publictlie, in the paroche kirk, quhilk takis away the griind of the argument of
violence vfet aganis him. Igitur, &c.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, for verifeing of thair Summondis, and haill
memberis thairof, that the famyn is verrie relevantlie confauet, and aggreis witli
the Lawis and practique of the realme of Scotland, Ciuile, and Commoun Law,
and Lawis of all Nationis maill ciuile, Ingland and ffrance ; and thir anfueris ar
proponit be him to verifie all the memberis of the propofitioun contenit in the
Summondis, and to elyde^ the exceptiones proponit be the pannell, baith for the
principallis, and thais that ar callit for airt and pairt : And as to the ffirfl member of the propofitioun, the perfewaris alledges, that the famyn is fufficientlie
verifeit be the haill article of the Cod. L. noiio, Tit. 20. ad Legem Fabiam de
Plagiariis ; lyk as, be the Lawis and practique of this realme, the taking of ony
frie perfone is capitall, and fumtyme thocht to be treffonable : It was fund to be
capitall aganis George Meldrum of Dumhreh, for taking of 3Ir Alexander Gibfone ; lyk as, he was perfewit and i)wneiil to the death thairfoir : 77/6' Jlarquisof Hunilie, and the JErles of Craufurd and Bothuell, \\ar perfewit crimiiiallie,
for the taking of vmq'^ Thomas Maijter of Glammes, and put to the knawledge
of ane Inqueiit. As concerning the Ravifcheing, that pairt is verifeit to be
capitall, be the Act of Parliament maid in the dayis of King James the Fyft, of
worthie memorie, in the monetli of Marclie, 1540, cap. 118; and fidyk, be the
foirnameit Act, in October, 1612 ; l)e the Ciuile Law, the fame member aiient the
Ravifcheing is capitale, toto Titulo et Lege vnica de llaptu Vir^inum et Lege
Raptores, Codice de Kpijcojjis et Clericis : And albeit the faidis Lawis chieflie
makis meiitioun of violence committit againft AVemen, yit the Clots and haill
Jurifconfultis relblues, that the lame lawis lies place quhair ane man is ravilched :

' Cut off ; redargue, hat. clidere.

VOL. III. 3 F

aiO CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

And albeit iia violence war lybellit, yit thair is fufficient circum (lances lybellit
to infer the violence ; beiring directlie, that quhan the faid Adame Frenche
defyret to be bak agane to Hadingtoun, the principall perfones defenderis, at the
lei ft WiUlame Home, Alexander Cranjloun qf^Ioriefloun, and WiUiame Moffet,
of the fpeciall caufing, connfalling, and devyfeing of the liaill perfones contenit
in the Sunnnondis, had the faid Adame in thair power, and tauld to him jilanelie
that he fould nocht returne, bot that it behovet him to go to Eift Nifbet, to
marie the Lairdis dochter; and tliis was done be thame, eftir that the faid
Adame was tane and apprehendit be the faid WilUame Home, (and) was craftillie movet, perfuaidit, and intyfet to pas with thame furth of Hadingtoun, of
intentioun to haif vifleit 3Iargaret HaitUe, his guidame, and fifteris, albeit that
was nocht thair intentioun ; bot that followit quhilk thay proponit to thame
felffis frome the begynning, to keip him in thair handis quhill he war mareit
with J^'ijl NlJbetis dochter : Lyk as, he was quyetlie and fecreitlie convoyit and
cayreit fra Hadingtoun to Rymmiltone-law, in the Merfe, than the duelling-hous
of the faid Alexander Cranftoun of Morieftoune, and thairfra, be the faid Williame Home, Alexander Cranftoun, Johnne Cranftoun, and Williame Moffet, to
the Place of Eift Nifljet ; and thairfra, furth of the realme of Scotland, to the
Toun of Beruik in Ingland, quliair he was fecreitlie mareit clandejUne : Quhilk
anfuer is fufficient to infer the conclufioun of the lybell, in refpect of the circumflances contenit in the Dittay : And yit to mak the Dittay relevant, of the Law,
albeit thair war na violence lybellit, quhan pairteis are feducet and intyfet, the
cryme remanis capitall, as is contenit in the lybell ; and alleges Godfredus, ad
dictam Legem llaptores, et Bald ibidem ; Farinacius de Delictis carnis, queft.
146, Tit. 16, numero 40; ChefTa. de coufuetudine Biirgimd. Rub. 1, pag. 57 r
Salicotus ad dictam Legem vnicam. Cod. de Raptii Virghium, quhais woirdis ar
thir fchortlie, ' quod perjuafio dolofd, in taUhu.s, 2jIus eji quam violenta tractio'
Forder, be ane expres Statute maide be Henrie the Third of France, it is ordanit, that quhofoeuir fall be fund to haif fubornet or intyfit ane chyld, minor,
and within xxv yeiris of age, without confent of thair parentis, or vtheris in
quhais cuftodie thay ar, falbe pwneift to the daithe, without ony pardoun. This
Law was fet doun, per expreffam, in the grit Code of the faid King Henrie,
Lib. 60, Tit. 2", Stat. 8". Lyk as, in the fevint buik of Papon, de crimine Raptiis, it is expreflie ffund and declairit, that ane Woman, for feduceing or intyfeing of ane young man to marie hir dochter clandejline, was condampnit to the
daithe. Lyk as, be the Lavvis of Ingland, this cryme is pwneift with fyve yeiris
inipriftbnement, and ane grit fyne at the Princes will ; and this Law was fet
doun quhair ony perfone is ravifchet fra thair parentis, tutouris, or guardianis :
And of this Law mentioun is maid in the ^o^ leif of the Regiftar of the Lawis

^0 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 411

of Ingland. Julius Clarus, ^ Rapfus, num. 6, ait, * Raptiim viri etiam puyiiri
jiena Raptiis, acji Vh'go rapta ejfet' Be the Lawis of the ]\laieftie of Scotland, Quo)i, Attach, cap. 95, cle Raptu heredis Mar'itagmm dehentis, et ejus
pena, <|c. Be the felf fame Law of the Maieflie, in fmdrie pairtis, Ravifching
of Men or Wemen, whois Mariage pertenis to the Prince, is appointit to be
criminallie perfewit befoir the Juftice. And laft, Ravifcheing is fa odious ane
cryme in Scotland, that the famyn is excej)tit furth of Remiffiones, as ane cryme
maifl haynous and deteftable. — In refpect of the quhilkis alledgeances, proponit
for verificatioun of the propoiitioun contenit in the Summondis, the Dittay is
relevant aganis the haill perfones on pannell. And that pairt of the lybell, ' airt
and pairt,' is verrie relevant aganis all perfones, and fpeciallie appointit to be
lybellit be Act of Parliament ; and the Law is verrie expres in that, that all the
perfones that concurris and affiftis the fact quhilk is capitall, ar all culpable as
the committeris thairof : Bot in this caice, it is lybellit expreflie, that Williame
Home and AVilliam Moffet intyfet and tranet^ the faid Adame furth of Hadingtoun, and convoyit him to Rymmiltounelaw, quhair he was reffauit be the faid
Alexander Cranftoun ; quhilk Alexander and Johnne Cranftoun convoyit him
thairfra to Eill Nifbet, and thairfra altogidder to Beruik, quhan he was mareit
clajideftiue, as faid is, and reffauit be the faid Laird of Eiji Kijhet, and keipit
be him quhill he mareit with his dochter, purpoillie done to preiudge the laid
Sir Johnne Home of the double availl of his Mariage ; quhilk makis the haill
pannell nocht only to be affifteris of the fact, bot airt and pairt, and direct doaris
thairof. And to verifie that he was feducet, intyfet, and cayreit away aganis his
will, repeittis the foirfaid Letter, all writtin and fubfcryuit with his awin hand ;
and the Decreit gevin to the Secreit Counfall, ffinding ane wrang done, be the
away-taking of him. And thir argumentis ar proponit, nocht only to verifie
the propoiitioun of the Summondis, bot alfo to elyde the exceptiones projionit
be the perfones on pannell aganis the relevancy of the Dittay.

To the quhilk it is ansuekit be the perfones on pannelland thair prelocutouris,
that the pannellis allegeance proponit aganis the irrelevancie of the Dittay llandis
relevant, nochtwithftanding of all the arguments j^roponit be my lord Aduocat
aganis the famyn : ffor, as to the Lawis Ciuile, French Lawis, Inglis (Lawis,
and) Municipall Lawis of this realme, thay ar verrie pertinentlie citit be my lord
Aduocat, for confirmatioun of the propoiitioun of the Dittay, and to infer the
conclulioun thairof, gif the fubfumptioun war relevant, quhilk is factum ; llbr
it is nocht contravertit with^ my lord Advocat, that Raptiis Virgiiiis, Ravifcheing of wemen, vel crimen Plagij, as the taking of his Maiefteis frie lege, is capi-

' Trained ; led away craftily, or by stratagem. ^ It is not controverted, even according to the

doctrine laid down by the Lord Advocate.

4>1^ CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1616.

tall of the Law, and may be criminallie perfewit at his Maiefteis Aduocattis
inftaiice ; hot the queftioun in this judgement^ is, quhidder gif this pannell half
committit ony of thir crymes, at the leift quhidder the famyn be relevantlie
lybellit to infer the cryme cravet ; ffor his lordfchip will nocht deny, that of the
Law, to aither of thir crymes thair audit to intervene vim et violentiam, and the
remanent circumftances allegit be me ofbefoir, viz. Ahcliictio per violentiam,
Ueporfatio de loco in locum clanclejline, Seclufio parentum, quhairby nather of
thame fould haif accefs to the pairtie ravifchet, and detenit, and withaldin fra
thair kyn and freindis, quajl et tanquam in carcere ; fua that without thir circumftances concur in this caice, it can nather be Raptns nor Plagium; and confequentlie, thay can nocht pas to the knawlege of ane Affyfe thairfoir. As to the
inftances citet be my lord Aduocat, betuix DumbreJe and Mr Alex"" Gibfone,
nixt betuix vmq'^ Thomas Maijfer of Glammis and the Erles of Huntlie, Craufurd, and JBotliuell, thay militat nathing in this caice ; ffor as to Dumhrek, he
expreflie committit crimen Plagii, in taking of the Kingis Maiefteis frie lege,
quyetlie and clandeftinlie, by^ all his freindis knawlege, be plane violence and
force, being accumpaneit with ten or tuelf perfones in hofteill and weirfair maner,
with wappones prohibeit to be borne or worne, tranfpoirting of him from place
to place vnder nyclit, debarring his freindis to haif acces to him, and be carieing
him to the Caftell of Harbottill, in Ingland ; fua that the pwneifchment inflictit
vpone him was dew, accoirding'' to the fact. As to the fecund inftance, anent
the Maijier of Glames, it lykwayis far les militatis in this caice, ffor it is nottour, as my lord Juftice, his AfTeffouris,'* and my lord Aduocat knawis rycht
Weill, that the Erles of Huntlie, Craufurd, and Bothuell, being banded againft
the Kingis Maiefteis authoritie, deprehendit the faid MaiJler of Glanwufs, in
the Kingis Maiefteis high way, chaiflit him to the Hous of Kirkhill, and pat
ffyre thairto, cpdiilk inferris crimen Plagij of the Law, and ane gritter puneifchment : And as to that part of the Dittay, beiring that the faid Adame was
intyfet and feducet, that is nawayis relevant to infer ane cryme, ffor ffraud is
nocht capitale, of^ the Municipall Law of this realme, nor yit accoirding to*' the
practique of the fame : And as to the Lawis citet to infer the famyn to be
crimen capitale, and fpeciallie the Law of the Maieftie, Quon. Attach., I oppone'^
the daylie cuftome of this Judgement, the Municipall Law of this realme, and
fpeciallie the Act of Parliament in anno 1612, ffor it is expreflie fet doun in the
Dittay, that the faid Adame Frenche come with the faid Williame Home out of
•the faid Mr Williame Boweis hous, the famyn can infer na Rapt ; nocht only

^ Court ; tribunal. ^ Without; against; beside. ^ Corresponding ; conformable. "• It was

the uniform custom, in all cases of diHiculty and interest, for several Members of the Privy Council
to sit in judgment with the Justice, as Assessors. Their names are only occasionally inserted in the
Record in remarkable Cases. ^ According to. ^ Corresponding with. ■ Oppose.

50 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 413

for the argumentis, that he was, fid juris, pad the age of xiiij yeiris, hot his
being in companie with his kynfmen, can nocht infer ane Rapt, fpeciallie,
quhair he is nocht detenit j^er vim nee molentiam fra the prefens of his freindis.
And quhair as, my lord Aduocat affirmes the Manage to haif bene clandeiline,
and fa, nocht lauchfull, the contrair is affirmit — it was nocht clandeiline ;
becaus thair preceidit Proclamatioun of Bandis,^ the mariage was maid publictlie in the paroche Kirk, within the town quhair the parentis of the Gentilwoman had relidence, off the fpeciall confent and affent of the faid Adame ;
the faid Williame Home being prefent at the time of the geving of his confent,
and in companie with him, being his mother-brother. And fua, thair being
nathing qualifeit in the fubfumptioun of the Dittay to infer ony violence, the
pannell can nocht pas to the knawlege of ane Affyfe thairfoir : ffor as to thais
wordis let doun in the Dittay, that thai wald nocht fuffer him to pas bak agane,
thair is nathing producet to inllruct that point of the Dittay, nor na pairt
thairof, tuicheing the allegit fact ; ffor, be the Cowmone Law and diuerfe Doctouris, fie as Julius Clarus, Baldus, Hoftienfis, and remanent Doctouris treittand
de crimine Plagfj vel Haptu Virginis, thay concluid the famyn nawayis to be ane
cryme quhairvpone ony pairtie may be accufet criminallie, except thair concur
violence and violent deidis to that effect. This is cleir in the Cowmone Law,
Digeft. de Incendio, Rapina, et N^aufragio, &c.; fua that the haill Doctouris and
Cowmone Law concludis, that nunquam Jit Raptus fine vi et violentia. Igitur, &c.

The Perfewaris repeitis thair former anfueris, with the haill argumentis
proponit for verificatioun of the propofitioun of the Summondis : and lykM'ayis
repeitis the Summondis, and haill pairtis thairof, quhilkis ar relevantlie lybellit,
as ane direct anfuer to the laft argument proponit. And as to the confent of
the faid Adame, anfueris as ofbefoir, that ane fact capitall being committit, the
pairtie aganis quhome the famyn is done may mak na^ confeflioun nor declaratioun to the prejudice ather of the Kingis Maieflie, or the j)airtie interreift.^
Igitur, &c. — To the quhilk it is anfuerit, that the pannell declairis, that as yet
thai haif proponit na alledgeance vpone ony contrair Confelfioun of the pairtie ;
bot gif ony fie allegeances he hes to propone, referues the famyn to be proponit
fuo loco : And thairupoun aflvit inftrumentis.

The Justice continewis Interlocutour vpone the allegeances foirfaidis, and
anfueris maid thairto, to the morne, the nynt of November inllant. The pairteis
and Affyle wairnit, ajjud Acta : And Ordanet the pannell to find Cautioune for
thair compeirance the morne, to the effect foirfaid.

The Laird of Eifi: Nifbet elder, become fouertie for the entrie of Alexander
Cranfl:oun of Burnecaftell, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.
' Bans. - Is not entitled to make any confession, he. ^ Interested.

414 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I616.

— The faid Alexander become cautioime for the entrie of Eift Nifbet, Johnne
Cranftoun, Williaine Home, and Williame Moffet, the morne, vnder the panes, &c.
]\Tov. 9. — The Justice, befoir Interloquitour to be pronouncet be him
in the matter, Ordanit the perfones on pannell, and fiklyk the faid Sir Johnne
Home of North Beruih, huycht, perfewar, to find cautioun for keiping of his
Maielteis peace, in nocht trubilling and molefting of vtheris,^ by way of deid, in
thair bodeyis, landis, or guidis, vtherwayis nor by ordour of Law and juftice,
under the panes following, viz. The faid Laird of Eift Nifhet, the faid Sir
Johnne Home of North Beruik, and Alexander Cranfonn, ilk ane of thame
vnder the pane of fyve thowfeand merkis ; and the faidis Johnne Cranfoun and
Williame Home vnder the pane of I"' (1000) merkis, for ather" of thame.

James Faufyde, younger of that Ilk, become plege and fouertie for Sir Patrik
Chirnefyde ; Johnne, Maifter of Cranftoun, for Alex' Cranftoun ; Alexander
Chirnefyde, younger of Eift Nifbet, for Johnne Cranftoun ; and the faid Alexander Cranftoune of Burne Caftell, for Williame Home, that thai fall keip his
Maiefteis peace, and that Sir Johnne Home of North Beruik, kny*, fall be
liarmles and flcaithles of thame in his body, landis, pofteffiones, and guidis, and
onnawayis^ fall be moleftit nor trubillit be thame or ony of thame thairintill,
nor be na vtheris of thair caufmg, fending, hounding out, command, reflet,
afliftance, or ratihabitioun, quhome thay may ftop or lat,'* directlie nor indirectlie,
vtherwayis nor be ordour of Law and Juftice, &c.

Sir George Home of JVIanderftoun, Johnne Home, younger of Aytoun, and
Dauid Home of Wedderburne, younger, become pleges and fouerteis, coniunctlie
and feuerallie, for Sir Johnne Home of Northberuik, that Sir Patrik Chirnefyde,
&c. fall be harmeles and fkaithles, ^c.^

(Nov. 20.) — My lord A duoc at, befoir Interloquitour,declairis he will
nocht infift any forder at this prefent, in perfute of the perfones on pannell, for the
crymes lybellit : And in refpect of the haynoufnes of the fact, and evill preparatiue" and confequence quhilk may follow, defyres that cautioun may be tane of
the defenderis for thair entrie, vpone a fyftene dayis wairning, to abyde tryell
for the famyn, &c. — It is allegit be the pannell and thair prelocutouris, that in
refpect of the allegeances proponit, alfweill dilatour as peremptour in this caufe,
and of my Lord Aduocattis anfueris maid thairto, quhilk lyis at Interloquitour,
his lordfchip, as perfewer, can nocht be hard to refeiir fra this perfute ; nather
can the pannell be aftricted to ffind cautioun, feing thay ar willing, vpoun my
lord Juftice Interlocutour, to defend thame felffis, as accoirdis of the Law : And
in all humilitie abydis his lordfchipis Interloquitour thairupoune.

1 Each other. - Eacli. ^ In nowise. '' Hinder. ^ In the same terms as above.

° Precedent ; example. '' Resile ; draw back.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 415

Mr Alex"" Peiblis, as prelocutour for Adame Frenclie, perfonallie prefeiit,
produces ane Supplicatioun to my lord Juftice, for his lordfchipis inforinatioua
in this caus, anent the faid Adames paffing away ffurth of Hadiugtoun with the
pannell, and that the famyn was of his awin frie will and confent ; and defyret
the famyn to be red, and to remane in proces ; and fakis inftrumentis vpone the
productioun thairof. — It is allegit be my lord Aduocat, that eftir his Dedaratioun aboue writtin, that he defiftis fra this perfute, the perfones on pannell, and
far les the faid Adame Frenche, quha is nawayis convenit, ather as perfewar or
defender in this matter, can be fufferit to produce ony informatioun or vther
allegeance in this caufe ; nather audit my lord Juftice to admit the productioun
thairof, eftir the Declaratour foirfaid.

The pannell defyret the SupjDlicatioun foirfaid to be red, befoir my Lord
Juftice geve any Interloquitour, quhidder my lord Aduocat may refeill j^^if'^ <?^
Jimpliciter, vel pro loco et tempore. — The Supplicatioun gevin vp agane to the
pannell, at command of my lord Juftice.

The Justice ffindis that my lord Aduocat may verrie weill defift fra this
perfute and tak vp his proces, feing he is perfewar of the caus ; and that, nochtwithftanding of the alledgeance maid be the pannell in the contrair.

The pannell takis inftrumentis of the productioun of the former Supplicatioun
be Adame Frenche, and that the faid Adame Frenche is perfonallie prefent,
reddie to declair, baith be woird and writ, that he paft away with his Motherbrother of his awin frie will and confent. — My lord Aduocat, in the contrail;,
fayis the famyn fould nocht be admittit.

The parties find caution ' that thai fall compeir befoir the Juftice, or his
deputis, the thrid day of ])Q nixt Juftice-air of the Scherefdome quhair thai duell
[" Beruik"], or foner vpone xv dayis wairning, to vnderly the law for the crymes
aboue fpecifeit ; vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.'

Nov. 13. — Robert RoBEiiTSOUNE,feruitour to James Fawfyde, younger

of that Ilk.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq''' Johnne Faufj-^de,

fervand alfo to the faid James Faufyde, be ftreking him in the bellie with ane

knyfe, within the barne of Faufyde, vpone the tent day of November inftant ;

quhairof, vpone the tuelf day of this inftant moneth, he deceiffit.

Peusewar, James Faufyde, Younger of that Ilk, as mailler.

The pannell Confeflis the cryme, and craves Godis and the pairteis pardoun,
and mercie for the famyn.

416 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161^.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, all in ane voce, be the moiithe of Johnne Hall in
Preftoune, chanceller, ffand the faid Robert to be Culpable and conuict of the
faid crewall Slauchter.— Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair his held to be ftrukin frome his body ; and all his moveabill
guidis to be elcheit, &c.

Dec. 20. — Alexander Cuik, Notter, Schereff clerk of Beruik.
Dilaittit of Falfet, committit be him in his office of Notarie, in geving out tua
feuerall extractis of ane Seafing, of tua feuerall daittis : And of Periurie, eftir he
was folemi)nelie fuorne, in prefens of the Lordis, to declair the veritie in the
premiflis.

DiTTAY agahiji the Pannell.

FoRSAMEKiLL AS, it is expreflie provydit, ftatute, and ordanit, be dyuerfe Actis of Parliaraent,
maid aganis talfe Notteris, atid falfe periuiet Witneffis, that gif ony Notter committis fFalfet, and beis
convict and fund giltie ])airof, (he) fall be pwneifl to the daithe : And ficlyk, quhair ony Witnes
depones ffalOie, fall lykwayis be pwneiit, be pearceing of pair tungis, and efcheitlng of all Jiair moveabill guidis ; and forder pwneifchment to be inflictit in the perfone of ]ie faidis ffals Witnefles, at
the ficht of and difcretion of ]ie Judge, accoirding to the qualitie of pe fact : As ]>e faidis Lawis and
Actis of Parliament in tliame felffis proportis. Noclitwithllanding quhairof, it is of veritie that ])e
i&v{ Alexander Cuih, being iniployit as Notter be Johnne Home of Slegden for geving Seafing to him
of fe Landis of Eifler Pleulandis, giftet and difponit to him be our Souerane lord, as vaikand ' in his
Maiefteis handis be ]<e flforfaltour of vrnq^*" Frances Erie Bothitell ; and that, conforme to ane Precept
direct furth of ]'e Chancellarie to Adame Cokburne, Schereff depute of Jie Scherefdome of Beruik for
\e tyme, vnder j^e Quarter Seill, for geving Seafing to ])e faid Johnne Home jiairof ; and to extract
and draw furth to him ane Inllrumeut jiairupoun ; the laid Alexander maill ffalllie and erroneouflie,
for iiis avvin gane and lucre, extracrit out of his Prothogoll^ tua feuerall Extractis of J)e foirfaidis
Inflrunientis of Seafing, of tua dyuerfe daittis, the ane of ]ie dait ]ie xxiij of Februar 1592, and the
v]ier in anno 1593: As pe faidis tua Extractis producet, vnder ]ie faidis Alexanderis fubfcriptioun,
beiris. Lyk as, in reijaird of ]>e faid ffalfe Extract of J)e foirfaid Seafing, ane actioun of Improbatioun
being intentit, and as :;it depending befoir fe Lordis of Sefliioun, at ]ie inftance of his INIaiefteis Aduocat,
and Walter, Lord of Bulclcuch, as heritour of ]'e Lordfchip and barrony of Haillis, quhairof ])e faidis
landis of Eifler Pleulandis ar pairt and pertinent, and lykwayis at ]ie inftance of Alexander Haitlie,
burgos of Ed"", as takifman ])airof, aganis ])e faid Johnne Home, ffor improving of \e foirfaid Inftmment of Seafing, extractit be Jie faid Alexander Cuik, and gevin to ]ie faid Johnne Home of the faidis
Landis ; and ]ie faid Alexander being dyuerfe tymes fummond in ]>e faid actioun of Improbatioun, to
baif gevin Teftimonie and declaratioun pairanent ; and, in end, compeirand befoir ])e faidis Lordis,
vpone the tuelf day of December inftant, and being examinat in fair lordfchipis haill prefens, anent ])e
trew dait of ))e foirfaid Inftrument of Seafing, and being folempnelie fuorne to declair ]>e verritiepairin,
the faid Alexander Cuih than affirmet, conftantlie, that ])e trew dait of ]ie faid Seafing was vpone ])e
xxiij day of Febj-uar, 1591, to the quliilk he was Notter; and abaid at ]ie Extract of ]ie Inftrument
gevin furth be him to ] e faid Johnne Home ]iaiiupoun ; and Jairwith declairit that ]'e vther Extract
of }ie fame Seafing, drawin furth be him to Alexander Haitlie, beiring dait ]ie xxiij of Februar, I"'.y'',
' Lat. vucurc. Fr. vaquir. ' I'rotocol-look — an official Register ordained to be kept by every Notai"y.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 417

fourfcoir threttene, was fFalfe ; And ])e faid Alex"" being Jiaireftir, vpone tlie xviij and xix dayis of pis
inftant moneth, re-examinat, in |)e faidis Lordis prefens, and folempnelie fuorne to declair ]ie verritie,
concerning ]>e dait of ])e faidis tua Extractis, he vareit fra his former Depofitiones, maifl impudentlie :
Lyk as, his Prothogoll buik was viciat be him, in ])e dait foirfaid, fcoiring out ' primo,' and putting iu
' tertio ;' and ])airefter fcoiring furth ' tertio,' and wiyting agane ' primo.' Quhairin lie hes declairit
him felffto be ane flals and infamous Notter; and be his contrair Depofitiones, maid in his examinatioun, to be ane manifell fi'als and menfuorne Witnes : Lyk as, ])e faidis Lordis of Counfell, be J)air
Decreit, gevin vpone his tryell and Examinatioun, hes fund J)e faid Alex"" to be ane ffals Notter and
manifeft Periuret Witnes : As the Extract Jiairof, vnder ye fubfcriptioun of mi/ Lord Clerk of Regi/ler,
daitit ]>e xix day of Jiis inftant, togidder with his Depofitiones, maid in prefens of ])e faidis Lordis,
beiris. Lyk as, for verifeing of his flPalfet aboue writtin, ])air was ane Band maid be him to the faid
Alexander Haitlie, quhairin he obleift him felfF to ftand and abyde at the Inflrument extractit be hira,
daitit ]>e 23 of Februar, 1593, he procureing his Maiefleis Remifiioun for ])e famyn. Foil ]>e quhilk
ffalfet and Periurie, committit be ]>e faid Alexander, he aucht and fould be pwneift to ])e daith, in
example of vtheris.

ASSISA.

James Levingftoun of Jerifwoid, Jo" Keir, mercheand burges,Ed'', Thomas Mulliekyn, mercheand

George Logane of Bonytoun, Patrik Somervell, mercheand burges of Edinburghe,

James Nafmyth of Pofl"o, burges thair, James Halyburtoun, mercheand

Jofeph Douglas of Pompharfi^oun, Robert Halyburtoun, mercheand burges thair,

JohnneGairdin,merchand burges burges thair, Jo" Mitchelhill, mercheand burges

of Edinburghe, Jo" Keir, fkipper, burges thair, thair,

James Douglas in Lugtoun, Johnne Reid, indueller in Leyth, Rob. MotFett, merch<* burges thair.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiriiig of the Aflyfe : And for verifeing of the Dittay, producet the tua Inftrumentis of Seafmg, vnder the pannellis
fubfcriptioun, baith to ane effect, of dyuerfe daittis : Producet lykwayis, the
pannellis feuerall Miffiue Letteris, direct to Alexcntcler Ilaitlic, beirand, that the
Seaiing extractit to him, of the dait the xxiij of Februar, r".V'. fourfcoir threttene, was the trew Extract, and that he wald abyd thairat : Producet alfo,
dyuerfe Letteris, writtin be the pannell to WilUame Ker, beirand tliat the
Seafmg extractit to him, of the dait the xxiij of Februar r".V'. fourfcoir ellevin,
was the trew Extract, and that he wald abyde thairat : And ficlyk, producet ane
Letter, direct be him to the Lordis of Seffioun, being feik for the tyme, all
writtin and fubfcryuit with his hand, teftefeing the faid Extract gevin to the
faid WilUame Ker, daitit in anno 1591, to be the only trew Extract : Producet
alfo, the pannellis Depofitiones, maid be him in prefens of the Lordis, beiring
the Confeffioun of the Extract of the Seafmg in anno 1591, to be the trew Extract, and the vther, of the dait 1593, to be ffals: And vpone his Re-examinatioun, beiring the Seafmg gevin in anno 1593 to be trew, and the vther in anno
1591 to be ffals : Togidder alfo with his Prothogoll-buik, alfo producet, quliair
it is twyfe mendit in the dait of the faid Sealing. And laft, producet the
Lordis Decreit, fiinding the pannell to be ane flalfe Notter, and ane manifell

VOL. III. 3 G

4.18 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1617.

periuret Witnefs. And vpone the productioun thairof, afkit inftrumentis ; as
alfo vpone the pannellis Judiciall Coiifeflioiin of the faid ffalfet.

Qiihilk crynies he Coufeliit, judiciallie, in thair prefens and audience, to be of
verritie ; and cravet God mercie for the famyn.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, all in ane voce, be the moiithe and declaratioun of
the faid George Logane of Bonytoun, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit
the laid Alexander Cuik to be ffylit, culpable, and convict of the faidis crymes,
fpecifeit in his Dittay. — Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Ed',
and thair, as ane ffalfe Notter and Periuret ^V^itnes, to be Hangit vpone ane
gibbet, quhill he be deid ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

' [Sir WiUiame Heart of Prejloune, JuJUce-Depute.

AssEssouRis TO THE JusTiCE, nominat be the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, conforme to thair lordfchip Actis of Counfell, daitit the xx of Februar, 1617.
Sir Richard Cokburne of Clerkingtoun, kny^ Sir Alexander Drummond of Meidhope, kliy*;

Lord Previe feill ; Sir Andro Hammiltoun of Reidlious, kny*; and

Sir Williame Levingfloun of Kilfythe, kny* ; Sir James Skene of Curriehiil, kny^.']]

^Usurping {)is iHaKSti)'s ^utTjoritt)— JHuiUn* untrtr Colour of ?lai»»

Feb. 26, 1617. — George Gordoun of Geicht.
Dilaitit of "\Turpation of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in the violent and
vnlauchfull taking of vmcx'^ Frances Hay, fone to vmq^® George Hay of Ardlethanie, ffurth of the Place of Logyruif, pertening to Williame Hay, fhear of
Brunthillis, his brother-in-law, vpone the xviij day of December, 1615 yeiris ;
bringing him as ane captiue and priflbner to the burgh of Aberdene ; keiping and
detening him in captiuitie, in a priuat hous or ludgeing of the faid Laird of
Geicht, within the Gallowgait, callit ' the Bony wyfe's Inn,' for the fpace of
ffourtie audit houris, or thairby, &c."
Peusewaris, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny^, Aduocat to our fouerane lord, for his Maiefteis

intreis ; Mariorie Keith, as mother to the faid vrnq'*^ Frances Hay.

pRELOCUTOUUis in defence. The Laird of Clwny, (Alexander Gordoun,) the Laird of Strathdoun,

Mr Thomas Nicolfone, elder, ]Mr Alexander Peibles, Mr Robert Fairlie, Aduocattis.

The Justice and Assessouris, with the advyfe of ather pairtie, alfweill
perfewar as defenderis, continewis this dyet to Fryday nixt, the laft of this
inftant. The i)erfones of Aifyfe wairnet apnd Acta ; ilk perfone vnder the pane
of thre hundreth mcrkis.

Alexander Gordoun of Clwny become fouertie for the entrie of the faid Laird
of Geicht, &c., vnder the pane of ffy ve thowfeand merkis money.

* All ordinary Lords of Session, with the exception of Sir Alexander Drummond, who was an
Extraordinary Lord. ^ See Aug. 28, 16 IG, where the Dittay is inserted. The great importance

of this remarkable Case induces the Editor to preserve all the useful information which is to be gathered
from the Records.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 419

[Sir WiUiame Heart and Mr Alexander Coluile, Jullke-Depufes.']

PfiRSEWARis, Sir Wiir.ame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny' ; Marioiie Keith, as mother; George Hay, as
brother to the defunct ; Williame Hay, ffiear of Brunthillis, George Hay, his brother.

Prelocutouris in perfute and fortiBcatioun thairof, Frances Erie of Errole, Laurence lord Oliphant,
My Lord 3eftei"> Alexander Keilh of Ludquharne.

Prelocutouris in defence, George Marqueis of Huntlie, My lord of Eglingtoun, My lord Vifcount
of Lauderdaill, My lord Ochiltrie, Mr Thomas Nicolfoune, and Mr Alexander Peiblis.

Feb. 28. — The lord Adiiocat producet his Maiefteis Warrand, anent
the perfute of the pannell for the crymes contenit in the Summondis, daitit at
Quhytehall, the 17 of ffebruare inflant ; and defyret the famyn to remane in
proces.

Eftir reiding of the Dittay, it is allegit be the pannell and his prelocutouris,
that thair is dyuerfe fubftantiall heidis contenit thairintill, quhilkis ar nawayis
infert in the coppie gevin to thame be the Meffinger executour of the Summondis ;
and producet the coppie, fubfcryuit be the Meffinger, for verificatioun thairof:
And in refpect that na autentik coppie is delyuerit, defyres ane continuatioun of
this dyet to the morne, to the effect thai may be advyfet with the Dittay, and
vpone thair Defenffis to be proponit be thame aganis the famyn. — It is anfuerit
be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance foirfaid audit to be repellit, and na
continuatioun fould be grantit, in refpect of the Summondis and Executiones
thairof, producet, beiring ane autentik coppie to be delyuerit to the pannell :
And forder, thair was na neceffitie to charge the pannell, or to geve him ane
coppie of the Summondis, hot only to his cautioneris, quha become fouertie for
his entrie to vnderly the law for the crymes lybellit.

The Juflice Repellis the allegeance ; in refpect of my lord Aduocatis anfuer.

Thaireftir the pannell, nochtwithflanding of my lord Juflice interlocutour,
defyres ane convenient tyme to be grantit to thame to reid and confider the
Summondis producet ; and that thai may half libertie to remoue thame felffis
apairt, to aduyfe thairupoun. — Quhilk the Juflice grantit ; and ordanit the Summondis to be gevin vp to the pannellis prelocutouris, to be advyfet thairupoune.

It is allegit be Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, for the pairt of the pannell, that he
did na wrang in taking of ffrances Hay 'pr'ivata authoritate ; l)ecaus it is of
verritie, that vpone Fryday, the fyftene day of December, immediatlie preceiding
the day of his allegit taking, quhilk was vpone the xviij day of the faid month,
the faid vmq'*" F'rances Hay had flane vmq'" Adame Gordouu, brotlier to tlie
pannell, for the quhilk he fled ; and fa, the faid Laird of Geicht, being tlie avenger
of bluid, viz. the eldefb brother of the laid Adame, it was lauchfull to him to
ferche and feik the malefactour, to the effect be mycht be prefentit to the Juflice :
Lyk as, be Act of Parliament, maid in the dayis of King James the fhril, of
worthie memorie, Parliamento fexto, cap. 89, the Scheref and liaill cuntrie is

420 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1617.

commandit to ferche and feik the man-flayer, being certifeit of the Slauchter ;
and fa, niekill mair niycht the avenger of bhiid, be doing na wrang in the
taking : Lyk as, eftir the taking of him, he jirefentit him to the ScherefF but^
ony hurt of fence, or iniurie done to him : And that it is lauchfull to ony of the
people, alfvveill as to the avenger of bluid, it is cleir, be ane verrie trew example ;
ffor gif ane Theif fleill ony mannis guidis, it is lauchfull to the perfone fra
quhome the guidis ar Itowin, to convene his kyn and freindis, and raife the
cuntrie, and perfew the Theiff fa lang as he is infuga., ay and quhill he apprehend him, or put him out of the cuntrie ; and this he may do but ony Warrand
of ane Magiftrat ; as is cleir and nottour be the daylie practique of the cuntrie :
I^rgo, in this cryme of Slauchter, quhilk is of far gritter importance than Iteilling of guidis, it was lauchfull to ony of the people, multo magis the avenger of
bluid, to apprehend the malefactour, and delyuer him to the Juftice : And as it
was lauclifull to the pannell to ferche, feik, tak, and apprehend the malefactour,
and delyuer him to the Juftice, evin fa it was lauchfull to him to do the famyn
with conuening of his freindis, (nawayis granting he did the famyn,) and with
quhatftimeuir airmes ; ffor vtherwayis, this abfurditie fould follow, that the
malefactour fould efcaip, and the innocent perfone fould be flane ; in fa far as, gif
the innocent perfone fall preife to apprehend the malefactour airmet with hagbutis and piftolettis, namelie, haifing the benefit of ane houfe, it war eafle for
him to fla tic as focht him ; and fa he fould nocht be apj)rehendit. Secunclo, for
this cans he did na wrang, becaus it is an reule of the Law, that concejjo aliquo
extremOy concedimtur omnia media, per que j)ervenitur ad illud; than it is
fubfumet, gif it was lauchfull to tak the man-flayer, as is afoir provin, ergo, it
was lauchfull to vfe all the midiffis^ be the quhilk he fould be taken, baith of
airmour and vtherwayis.

It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, to the Jirjl pairt, anent the avenger of
l)luid, thair is nather Law nor reflbne can mak the Laird of GeicJit the avenger
of bluid, bot only the Kingis Maieftie, his Juftice, and vtheris haifing power
and authoritie of his Maieftie. As for the argument proponit vpone the Act of
Parliament maid in the dayis of King James the ffirft, the allegeance foundit
thairupoun is altogidder irrelevant, impertinent, and altogidder repugnant and
difconforme to the Act ; be the quhilk, it is ftatute, that the Man-flayer fould be
perfewit be the Schereff*, and the cuntrie to concur ; and gif the malefactour
be tane be the Schereff, he fould be put in fare firmance, quhill^ the Law be done
vpone him ; and gif he be tane reid-hand,^ to be done with that fone.^ It is
nevir allegit that the ScherefF followit the allegit malefactour, nather that he was

* Witliout. 2 Means. ^ Until. * With the red or bloody hand ; instantly after

commission of the fact. ^ Sun ; day ; before sunset of that day.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 421

tane with reid-hand ; fua that the allegeance is altogether irrelevant, quhilk is
founded vpone that Act, as direct repugnant thairto : And as to that pairt of
the allegeance, beirand that the Laird of Geicht tuik and apprehendit the allegit
malefactour, that alledgeance contenis ane grit abfurditie, haifing nather ^Varrand, grund, nor fiuidament, nather of the Lawis of the realme, nor of the
Ciuile Law ; feing, be the Lawis of this realme, the ScherefF is appointit to
follow the Man-flayer; and be the Ciuile Law, it is noclit leifum' to ony privat
man to tak and apprehend ony perfone, without ane Commiffioun and ^^'arrand
frome the Magiftrat : Leg. Nemhiem^ Cod. de exluhendis Reis, lib. 9, Tit. 3,
Leg. vltima, Neminem exhibendum ejje injudicioprecijnmiiSy iiiji de cuius exkihitio7ie Judex j)ro?iU7iciauerit. Item, Bartolus, ad dictam Legem : Et Domaderius, cap. 15, num. 40, idem aflerit : Et toto titulo, Codice de Plag'iariis : Et
lege Raptores, de Epifcopis et Clericis : Item, Julius Clarus, ^ finali queft. 31,
in principio : Be the quhilkis premifles, it is cleir, that ane privat perfone, and
fpeciallie the pairtie, had na power to tak the allegit malefactour. As to the
argument proponit vpone the example of the profecutioun and following of ane
Theif, it is altogidder impertinent to this purpois ; feing the Theif is followit, in
ipfo actu, immediatlie eftir the committing of the cryme, with the guidis and
geir of the followeris ; quhilk is permittit be the Lawis of this realme, be the
Actis of Parliament maid thairanent, and the vniuerfall confuetude of the fame,
it is lauchfull to ony man, in following of his awin guidis and geir, to apprehend
the Thevis ; and albeit the Theif be flane in the following, the Slayer is maid
frie be the lawis of the realme. It is abfurditie to think that the Schereff him
felff may follow ony man committer of the Slauchter, and inftantlie put handis
in him, at his awin hand, niji in flagranti crimine, quhilk is nocht allegit in
this caice ; and albeit he war tane in flagranti crimine, or reid-hand, as the
Act of Parliament beiris, the Law ought to be done vpone him within that
fone. And quhair it was allegit, that gif it war lauchfull to the Laird of Geicht
to perfew or tak him, it was lauchfull to tak him M'ith convocatioun of our
fouerane lordis legis, and with wapponis forbiddin ; it is anfuerit, that the firft
propofitioun is altogidder abfurd, in refpect of the firil anliier maid be the
perfewaris ; and confequentlie, the taking with convocatioun of his ffreindis, and
forbiddin wapi^ones, feing he had na authoritie, nather to tak, nor beir forbidden
wapponis : In refpect quhairof, the firft allegeance, and haill argiimentis thairin
contenit, audit to be repellit.

It is duplyit for the pannell, that his allegeance proponit ofbefoir ftandis
verrie relevant, nochtwithftanding of ony anfuer maid thairto ; and quhair the
famyn is querrellit,^ that thair is no law that makis the avenger of bluid, hot

' Lawful. ^ Disputed ; argued.

422 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1617.

the famyn pertenis only to tlie Kiiigis Maieftie, it is anfuerit, that the pannell
makis no qiieftioun thairin quo ad execut'ionem ; hot the Law callis him the ane
avenger of bhiid, quia hahet Jufi lyrojequendi fecundum formam juris. As to
that pairt, alledgeing the difconformitie betuix the allegeance and the Act of
Parliament, it is duplyit, that thai ar verrie conforme ; becaus be baith the
Actis allegit, the Kingis haill legis ar commandit to concur and affift the taking
of the malefactour with the Scheref, ergo, tliair was na wrang done, feing the
Schereff was in ferching ; and in refpect that he could nocht ferche in all pairtis ;
and the notorietie of the fact, and the maliefactouris fleing, being in fuga, and
fa taking the cryme vpone him, quhatfoeuer was done be the pannell man be
eftemit as concurring with the Slier e fpeciallie, haifing refpect, that the
pannell tuik the malefactour but ony wrang or hurt of his body, or iniurie done
to him, and referuit him faif but ony iniurie, quliill he was prefentit to the
Schereff, &c.'

The Justice, with advyfe of his AfTelToris, Continewis all forder difputatioun
in this mater to the morne, the firft of March, 1617. — The Laird of Clwny
again becomes his furety.

\_3Ir Alcjca?ider Coluile, Jujtice-Depufe.l
Declixature of the Judge.
]\Iar. 1. — It is allegit be the pannell, that Mr Alexander Coluile can
nocht be Judge in this caufe, in refpect he is fourtis of kyn to the Countes of
Errole ; my Lord of Arrole, hir hufband, being perfewar, viz. The faid Mr Alex"^
Coluiles grandame was ane dochter of the Houfe of Lochlevin, quha is ane ; the
faid IMr Alexanderis guidfchir, tua ; the faid Mr Alexanderis father, thre ; and
him felf the fourt : And referris the probatioun of this rekning to Mr Alexanderis awin ayth of verritie. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that this Declinatour can nocht be reffauit this day, becaus Mr Alexander Coluile, being Jufticedepute in this Judgement, quhilk is ane ordiner and Supreme Jurifdictioun, na
declinatour audit to be proponit aganis him ; at the leift, na kinreid' fould be
ony cans to declyne him. Secmido, the declinatour can nocht now be relTauit,
becaus the Court being fenfit yefterday, he fitting as Judge, the perfewaris and
defenderis compeirand with thair prelocutouris, thair is ane Interlocutour pronuncet in this cans ; and eftir pronunceing thairof, ane peremptour exceptioun
(was) proponit be the pannell aganis ane member of the Dittay ; eftir the quhilk,
ane declinatour can nocht be proponit.

To the quhilk it is anfuerit be the pannell, that the declinatour exceptioun

^ It has not been deemed expedient to insert the wliole of the arguments of the parties in this keenly
contested case, wliich are extremely prolix, and occuj)y above sixty pages of the Record. The opening of the pleadings has been given as a specimen of the procedure of the Court at this early period.
* No objection on the ground of kinilred or relationship.

50&14JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 423

ftandis relevant, nochtwitliftanding of my lord Adiiocattis twa anfweris; namelie,
the ffi/ft beirand, that Mr Alexander is ane Ordiner Judge of this Court, creat,
electit, and fuorne ; that pairt of the anfuer iio7i relevat ; becaus the creatioun
and adniiffioun of Mr Alexander Coluile takis nocht away the pannellis exceptioun declinatour, exfuperveniente catifa, vpone confanguinitie of bluid to the
perfewar ; ffor than it fould follow, that in an actioun perfewit befoir the Lordis
of Seffioun, quha are fupreme Judges of the land in ciuile cauffis, at the inltance
of ane perfone, quhais brother is ane of the Lordis of Seffioun, it fould follow
that he fould be Judge to his brother, perfewer in the cans perfewit be him
aganis ane vther, quhilk can nocht be : As to ihe/ecu7ul member of the anfuer,
beirand, that the pannell can nocht be hard to propone this Declinatour this
day, be relTone that in ane Court haldin yifterday in the famyn caus, Mr
Alexander fat as Judge, befoir quhome the pannell proponit dyuerfe exceptiones dilatour and peremptour, aftir the proponing quhairof, the pannell can
nocht be hard to propone ony exceptioun declinatour, be reffone that ane
exceptioun declinatour is the firft exceptioun fould be proponit in judgement ;
— to the quhilk it is anfuerit, that nochtwithftanding of the faid fecund anfuer, the excepientis declinatour ftandis relevant aganis the faid Mr Alexander
Coluile, be reffone thair was ane fufficient judgment and judicatorie eftablifchet
yifterday by' the faid Mr Alexander, to wit, Sir Williame Heart, ordiner Juftice,
quha fat in judgement, and pronuncet Interloquitour in this caus ; fa that this
exceptioun, gif it had bene proponit yifterday, could nocht be refpectit, becaus
the Judgement had bene ane perfyte Judgment without him, quhilk is nocht
this day in this caice ; and fua, be the prefens yifterday of the faid Sir Williame
Heart, and his abfence this day, the caice is alterit : In refpect quhairof, the
exceptioun ftandis relevant, nochtwithftanding of the anfuer. And forder, quliair
it is anfuerit, that Mr Alexander Coluile is Juftice-generall, in criminarihiis,
thair can no exceptioun of confanguinitie be proponit aganis him as depute, it
has nather Law to fuftene the anfuer, and it is aganis the daylie practique ; ffor
thair is na Judge in Scotland that hes that priuilege to fit in caufa confan<j;uinei,
bot only the Lordis of Seffioun ; quhilk is done of neceffitie, for vtherwayis tliair
will be no judgement thair, quhilk is nocht in this caice, — ffor the removeing ot'
ane only Judge may be fuppleit be the fitting of ane vther, vhi uon ejl penuria :
And this w^as practizet in the gritteft pannell that was in our dayis, betuix tlie
Lairdis of Caddell and Ardkinglas, for the flauchter of the Laird of Caddell ; in
the quhilk, the Juftice-depute was fet,^ as being dei)ute to the Erie of Ergyle,
quha bakit^ the perfute ; lyk as, the Kingis Maieftie haveing chofin dyuerfe
Judges faccejfme eftir vtheris, thay war all dedynit, pairtlie vpone confanguinitie with the Erie of Ergyle, and pairtlie as being penfioneris to fic as afliftit
^ Forbye ; besides ; independent of, ^ Declined. ^ Backed ; countenanced ; supported.

424 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1617.

the perfute ; and namelie, Mr Thomas Henderfoiin, Commiflar, was fet, becaus
he was within greis '-defendant with the Hoiis of Bafs ; and Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, as penfioner to my Lord Ogilvie, quha fortifeit the perfute.

It is allegit be the perfewaris, that the declinatour aucht nawayis to be reflauit
for the refones proponit of befoir ; and fpeciallie, that this Court is a Supreame
Court in fuo i^enere, vix. in crim'malibus, and that the faid Mr Alexander Coluile
hes ah-eddie fittin and voittit in this caufe, eftir the proponeing of dilatour and
peremptour exceptiones thairin, na declinatour exceptioun being proponit aganis
him : And quhair it is allegit be Mr Alexander Peibles, that the Lordis of
Seflioun will be declynit, viz. ane brother may nocht judge in ane vther brotheris
cans, nor the fone in the fatheris cans, et e contra ; that is of verritie, in refpect of
ane fpeciall Act of Parliament maid thairanent ; but in all vther cauffis, thair is na
exceptioun, nather of affinitie nor confaguinitie, that will declyne ony of the Lordis
of Seflioun. As to the in*actique allegit concerning ArJdnglas proces, that aucht
nawayis to be refpectit in this Judgement, becaus the Juftice Generall was pairtie
perfewer, and afliftit the perfute, and fa nane of his deputis could fit ; bot we ar
nocht heir in that caice.

The Justice, with advyfe of his Affeflburis, continewis Interloquitour vpone
the allegeances foirfaidis, and anfueris maid thairto, anent the declinatour proponit aganis him, to Tyfday nixt. — The Affyfe wairnit apud Acta for thair
compeirance the faid day, ilk perfone vnder the pane of ffoure hundreth merkis.
Declinature of two of the AJJeJJors.
Mar. 4. — It is allegit be my lord Aduocat, that my Lord of Meldhoip
can nocht be AfTefTour to the Juftice in this cans, in refpect my Lord Marqueis
of Huntlie, and my Lord of Meidhopes wyfe, ar within greis-defendant, viz. :
My Lord Mart^ueis is ane ; his Lordfchipis mother, the Countes of Huntlie, tua ;
and hir father, James Duik of Chattellerault, third ; on the ane fyde : And the
Bifchope of St Androis, brother to the Duik, ane ; the Laird of Blair, his fone,
tua ; and my Lord of Meidhopes wyfe, the Laird of Blairis dochter, the third ;
on the vther fyde. In refpect quhairof, he can nocht be Afleftbur.

It is lykwayis allegit be my Lord Aduocat aganis Sir Andro Hammiltoun
of Reidhous, that his lordfchip can nocht be Affelfour to the Juftice in this caufe ;
because my Lord Marques and he ar ferdis of kyn, and fa within greis-defendant,
viz. : my Lord IVIarqueis is ane ; his Lordfchipis mother, the Countes of Huntlie,
tua ; James, Duik of Chattellerault, hir father, thred ; and Beatoun, the Duikis
mother, quha was lifter to the Laird of Creiche, fourt ; on the firft pairt : —
And ficlyk, the Laird of Creiche-Beatoun, brother to the Duikis mother, ane ;
the Lady Balcleuch, dochter to the faid Laird of Creich, tua ; my Lord of
Reidhoufe mother, the faid Lady Balcleuches dochter, thrid ; and my Lord of

* Certain degrees of near relationship, called degrees-deJendcmU

50 & 14 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 425

Reidhous, him felff the fourt. In refpect of the qiihilk rekning, the veritie
quhairof is fufficientlie kiiawin to my Lord him felff, he can noclit be Adeffoiir
in this caufe. — It is anfuerit be Mr Thomas Nicolfoiin, as prelocutour for the
pannell, that he can nocht be bund to geve ane anfuer to the tua alleg-eances
foirfaidis, foundit vpone the declinatour of the tua Affeffouris ; becaus in the laft
Court haldin on Setterday, the firft of this inftant moneth of Marche, thair was
ane Declinatour exceptioun proponit be the pannell aganis the Juftice him felff,
quhy he could nocht lit as Judge in this caufe, viz., that he was within greisdefendant to the Countefs of Errole ; my Lord of Errole, hir hufljand, being ane
perfewar. To the quhilk declinatour, dyuerfe anfueris, duplyis, and triplyis war
proponit, quhilk as yit ar nocht defcuffit, bot the Judge continewit Interloquitour
vpone the faid exceptioun-declinatour to this day : And thairfoir, ante omnia,
befoir ony alledgeance may be had ather be perfewer or defender, Interloquitour
man^ be firft pronuncet vpone the faid allegeance, conforme to the ordour of the
proces ; quhilk man be done of neceffitie ; for, gif the Juftice ffind the declinatour
relevant, quhilk will be provin be his awin aith of verritie, than confequentlie he
can nocht ftt as ane Judge ; and gif he be removet as Judge incompetent, he can
nocht pronunce Interloquitour in the allegeances proponit aganis my Lord of
Meidlioip and my Lord of Reidhoufe as Affelfouris, quhidder thay may be
Affeflburis or nocht, qui vhi non eft Judex, ihi nee jiffejjor, nee procejjus, nee
fententia interloquutoria, liiifeontejlatio, necfenteniia dejinitiua : And thairfoir,
quhill firft it be pronuncet vpone the foirfaid declinatour proponit aganis the
Judge him felff, thair can na allegeance be proponit or difcuffit aganis the
Affeflburis.

It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, as of befoir, that the faid Declinatour aganis
the Judge, as Juftice-depute, can nocht be reffauit, in refpect of the eftait of the
proces.

The Juftice continewis the dyet, and Interloquitour vpone the exceptionesdeclinatour aboue written, to Fryday nixt, the fevint of JMarclie inftant : And
Ordanis Cautioun to be of new fund be the pannell for his entrie that day, to
vnderly (the Law) for the faid cryme, vnder the j^ane of ffyve thow^land mcrkis.

The Affyfe wairnit thairto, ajmcl Acta, ilk perfone vnder the pane of ffyve
hundreth pundis money.

\_3li^,Tanies liannatipie and Mr Alexander Coluile.']

COMPEIRIT judiciallie Williame Hay, feruitour to my lord Erie of Errole,
and producet ane Commiffioun of Jufticiarie, vnder his Maiefteis Cafchet^ and
Court fignet, fubfcryuit be my Lord Chanceller, my Lord of Mar thefaurer, and

' Must. '^ A silvor stamp, hearing an exact fac-simih of the King's signature, invented for the

purpose of abridging labour to the King, whose subscription is required to so many documents. It
is still in use, and is affixed to certain writings not requiring his jMajesty's < sign-manual.'

VOL. III. 3 H

426 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1617.

my lord Marqueis of Hammiltoiin ; quhairby Mr James Bannatyne of Neutyld
is conftitiite liis JNIaiefteis Juftice be Commiffioun. As aUb producet thairwith
ane Act of Counlall, beiraiid the laid Mr James acceptatioun of the faid Commiffioune of Jufticiarie and office thairof, and gevinghis ayth in thair lordlchipis
prefens, for his faithfull dilcharge of the laid office. Of the quhilk Commiffioun
and Act of acceptatioun and creatioune, the tennour followis :

Commission in favour of Mr James Bannatyne of Newfyld.
James R.

James, be the grace of God, King of Grit Britane, France, and Ireland, defender of \e faithe. To
all and findrie our legis and fubiectis qulionie it efleiris, to quhais knawlege tliir our letteris fall cum,
greting. Forsamekil as George Gordoun of Geiclit, being callit and convenit befoir our Juftice, in
our Tolbutbe of Edinburglie, to liaif vnderlync ]'e law for ]>e taking, detening, and execntioun of
vuiq''' Frances Hay, and for beiring, weiring, and fchuiting of liagbutis and piftolettis, and for ]7e
perfute and invafioun, hurting, wounding, and mutilatioun of the thre brether of Brunthillis ; in nianer,
and at )'e tynie fj)ecifeit and contenit in the Criminall Letteris direct ])airupoun : And dyuerfe dyettis
being keipit to this effect ; in end, the matter lies refTauit ane delay and continuatioun, by the age,
infirmitie, and feiknes of Sir Williame Heart, quho may nocht attend ])airupoun ; and by ane declinatour proponit aganis ]Mr Williame Coluile, colligue to ]'e faid Sir Williame, in the office of Jufticiarie,
fuathat now the delay and hinder of Juftice proceidis vpone the want of ane vnfufpect Judge. Quhairfore, We, with advyfe of the Lordis of our Secreit Counfall, haif maid and conftitute our louit Mr
James Bannatyne of Neiotyld, oure Juftice in that pairt, to the effect vnderwritten ; Geveand, grantand,
and committand to him our full power and commiffioun, expres bidding, and charge, to vfeand exerce
the office of our Juftice in all and findrie thingis concerning the Tryell of jie faid George Gordoun of
Geicht, vpone the perticuler crymes and pointis of Dittay fpecifeit and contenit in ]ie Criminall
Letteris raifet aganis him. And for this effect, to fence, hald, and continew Juftice Courtis, ane or
ma, within the Tolbuth of our burgh of Edinburgli, fuitis to mak be callit, abfentis to amerchiat, and to
creat otbceris and niemheris of Court neidfull, if neid beis ; and in the faidis Courtis the faid George
to call, be Dittay to accufe, and him to the knawlege of ane Afljfe to put ; and as he fall happin to
be fund culpable or innocent of ]ie crymes contenit in the faidis Criminall Letteris, or ony of thame, to
cans Juftice be miniftrat vpone him, conforme to ]'e lawis of our realme; Affyffis neidfull to this
effect, ilk perfone vnder fuche panes as fall be thocht meit, to fumraond, wairne, chufe, and caus be
fuorne, and generallie all vjier thingis to do, exerce, and vfe, quhilkis for executioun of )ns our Commiffioun, ar requifite and neceiilir ; ff'erme and ftable balding, and for to hald all and quhatfoeuir thingis
fall be lauchfullie done heirin. Gevin vnder our fignet, Att Edinburghe, ])e fourt day of Marche,
and of our regnne ]>o xiiij and fiftie 5eiris, 1617.

Al. Cancells. Al. Mar. Hammilton.

Apud Edinburghe, quarto die menjis Marcij, anno domini millefimo Jexcentefimo dccimo Jeptimo,
Red, paft, voittit, and allowit. J. Prymrois.

Act of Acceptation hy 3Ir James Bannatyne.

Apud Ed"", quarto die menfis Marcij, 1617. The quhilk day Mr James Bannatyne of Neivtykl,
being maid and conftitute ourfouerane lordis Juftice, for trying of George Gordoun of Geicht, vpone
the crymes fpecif(?it and contenit in the Criminall Letteris raifit aganis him, at the inftance of the
mother, brojier, and freindis of vmq''' Frances Hay, aiid at the inftance of the brether of Brunthill, and
of our fouerane lordis Aduocat, for his hienes intreis ; as in the Commiftioun maid to the faid Mr James
I'airvpoun, of the dait of thir prefentis, at lenth is contenit. The faid Mr James compeirit perfonallie,
befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, Acceptit the faid Commiffioun vpone him, and gave his aithe

50 & 14 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 427

that he fall difcharge the faid Commlflioun vpiichtlie and faithfullie, accoirding to his knawlege ; as he

will anfuer to God and the Kingis jNIaieflie Jjairupoun.

Extractum de libris Actorum Secreti Conjilijjl d. n. Regis, per me Jacohuin Prymrois Clericum
ejufdem,fuh meisjigno etjiihfcriptione mamialihus. Jacobus Puymuois.

\_jMr James Hannatijne and 'Mr Alexander CoIuiIe.~\

Mar. 7. — The Juftice contiiiewis this matter to the morne, the audit of
this inftant. The AfTyfe wairnit thairto, apud Acta, &c.

The Laird of Geicht proteftis, that the j)roductioun of the faid Commiffioim of
Jufticiarie, and fenceing of this dayis Court, fould nawayis i)reiudge him of his
declinatour the nixt dyet, nor ony vther declinatour proponit be him of befoir in
this caufe. — My lord Aduocat proteftis in the contrair.

\_3Ir James Bannatyne.']

Mar. 8. — The perfewaris, nochtwithftanding- of the former declinatour
projionit aganis the tua AlTeiTouris, ar content that thai remane AffefTouris in this
caus, conforme to the Counfellis Act maid anent thair conftitutioun ; and paffis
fra the faidis declinatouris.

Mar. 11-1 2. — The 'difputatiounis' proceeded at great length, on both fides,
on this day, * Tyfday the xj inftantis,' and the following day, on the merits of
the caufe. They are very prolix, and unneceffary to be inferted in this place.

Mar. 13. — The Juftice and Afteftburis, ffor obedience of ane Wahrand
of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall producet be my Lord Juftice Clerk, continewis
this Juftice Court, and all forder difputatioun in this caufe, to the auchtene day
of Junij nixtocum ; and Ordanis the pannell to find cautioun, &:c.

Justice, Juftice Clerk, and 30ur deputis. 3ow fall, vpone the fight heirof, continew 50ur Court
and dyet appointit for Tryell of George Gordoun of Geicht, ft'or the taking, detening, and executiouii
of vraq''' Francis Hay ; and for \q beiring and weiring of haquebutis and piftolettis ; and for Jie perfute
and invafioun of the bre]ier of Brunthillis, vntill the auchtene day of Junij nixtocum ; takand new
cautioun, conforme to fe ordour : Quhairanent thir prefentis fall be ^our Warrand. Att EdR, tlie
xiij day of Marche, 1617. Al. CancelLs. Al. Mar. Bwning.

My lord Aduocat declaris that he confentis to the former continewatioun, only
becaus of his Maiefteis Letter, direct to the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, in that
matter, and vpone na vther refpect. — The parties find caution for keeping of his
Majefties peace, &c.

(Jun. 18.) — The Juftice, be directioun of his Maieftie, contineAvis this dyet
to the xxvij of Junij inftant, &c.

(Jun. 27.) — The Juftice, be directioun of the Kingis Maieftie, declairit be
my lord Aduocat, Continewis all forder difputatioun in this proces, and tryell of
the i^erticuler crymes rejjjccfme contenit in the finnmondis, to the thrid day of
the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome rpihair the ])airtLMs, nlfweill perfewaris as
defenderis, duellis (' Aberdene'), or loner vpone xv da}'is wairiiiiig : And Ordanis

428 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 161T.

fhe Laird of Gekht to find Cautioiin for his compeirance, to the effect and in
maner aboiie writtin, vnder the pane of ffyve thowfeand merkis, conforme to his
Maiefteis directioun, reportit be his Maiefleis Adiiocat, as faid is.

The faid Laird ffand \Villiame Gordoun of Rothemay, ffear of Cairnebiirrow,
fouertie for his entrie, &c.

SJ^lr Alexander Coluile, JifJIice-Dejyufe.']

Mar. 14. — Ai-EXander Thomesoxe, flvynner, biirges of Edinburghe,
brother to Johnne Thoinefone, Leyth ; Johnne Guthrie, alias
callit "NVilliame Laird, and Jonet Cuthbert.
Dilaittit of the crynies of Adulterie, comniittit be thame, in maner, and at the
tymes fpecifeit in thair Dittayis.

The pannell acknawleges the crymes contenit in thair feuerall Dittayis, and
craves God and the Kingis Maiefteis pardoun ; and offeris thame in his Maiefteis
will thairfoir.

Verdict. The AflTyfe, be the moiithe of George Carnebie, indueller in Ed',
all in ane voice, ffand the faidis perfones to be ffylet, culpable, and convict. —
Sentence. In refpect of the quhilk convictioune, the Justice, conforme to
ane Warrand of the Kingis Maieftie, quhairof the tennour folio wis :

To our Justice Generall of our Kingdome of Scotland, and his deputis quhatfoeuir, quhome
thafe prefentis may concerne ; and to all and each of tliame.
James R. Quhairas, by expres Warrand and command frome ws, our Aduocat is criminallie to
accufe and perlew befoir yow one Alex'' Thomefoun and one Jonet Cuthbert, tuo famous and notorious
Adulteraris: Althogh thair cryme and offence thairin be capital), and mod, by our Lawis, infer payne
of death airainft thame, :;it, out of our princelie grace and mercie, We ar plefed to mitigat the feveritie
or extremitie of Law in thair behalf. Requyreingyow, by thefe prefentis, in caice of pair convictioun,
to ordane the faid Alexander to be Banifched our dominiones, and his efcheit to be furthwith vptakia
for our vie be our thefaurer : And that ]ie faid Jonet be Banifched our burgh of EdS and the pairtis
of ])e cuntrie jiairabout. In which behalf, and for performeing of fe whole premifTes, thef» falbe to
yow ane Warrant fufficient. Gevin at Whytehall, the 26th of Januare, 1617.

Ordanit and Adjudget the faid Alexander to be banifched his Maiefteis haill
dominionis, and nocht to returne within the famyn at na tyme heireftir, without
his Maiefteis Licence, vnder the pane of deid ; as alfo, that his haill moveable
guidis be efcheit, &c. And ftclyk, Ordanit the faid Jonet to be banifchet furth
of the burgh of Ed' and tuelf myles thairaboutis, and nawayis to be fund thairintill, at na tyme heireftir, without his Maiefteis Licence, vnder the faid pane of
deid. And as concerning the laid Johnne Guthrie, Ordanit him to be tane bak
to the Toll)uth of Ed', therein to remane in fure firmance, vnto the tyme Dome
be pronuncet againft him.

50&15JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 429

Sentence againJlJohnne Guthrie, alias WilUame Laird.
Compeirit Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, knycht, Aduocat to our fouerane lord for his hieiies intreis, and producet his INIaiefteis Warrand, direct to the
Juflice, quhairof the tennour followis :

To our Justice Generall of our Kingdome of Scotland, and his deputis quhatfoeuir, wliome
thefe prefentis may concerne ; and to all and each of thame.
James R. Quhairas, by expres Warrand and command from Ws, our Aduocat is criminallie to
accufe and perfew, befoir yow, on Johnne Guthrie, for manage of tuo wyfes, and koiping (befydis
tliame) of a thrid woman for his concubene ; wliiche being a cryme fo odious and intoUcrable amongft
Chriftianes, and mereiting to be moft exemplarie puneifcbed : Thease ar fairfoir exprellie to will and
command yow, in caice of the faid Johnes convictioun, to caus pronunce and execute Dome and
Sentence of Death aganis him, accoirding to )ie ordinance of our Lawis maid for pwneifcliment of
fuche ofFenderis. In which behalf, and for performeing of fe whole premiffes, thefe fall be to yowane
Warrand fufficient. Gevin at Whytehall, the 26th of Januar, 1617.

The Justice Ordanit the faid Johnne Guthrie, alias Laird, to be tane to ane
gibbet, befyde the croce of Ed"", and thair to be Hangit quhill he be deid ; and
all his moveable guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, ^c.

\_Arcliibald Earl ofErgijle, Jiiftice General; 3Ir Alex. Coluile, his dejnite.']

Jul. 16 — Johnne Kirkpatrik, feruand to Mr Walter Kynnynmonth
of Callinche (Kilduneane.)
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Andro Kynnynmond, fone
to Dauid Kynnynmond of that Ilk ; committit vpone the tent day of Junij lailbypaft, viz. The faid Johnne being in companie with Mr Walter Kynnynmond,
apjjeirand of Kilduneane, his maifter, Jedione Kynnynmond, brother to the faid
Mr Walter, Patrik Kynnynmond, fone to the faid Mr Walter, Hew Dik, feruand
to the faid Mr Walter, Thomas Fentoun, meffinger citiner' in St Androis, Thomas
Fentoun, his fone, thair, Johnne Cleilland, and .... Cleilland, fones to Robert
Cleilland of Fermlavv, and . . . Broun, citinerof St Androis, with convocatioun
of his Maiefteis leiges, to the number of tuentie perfones, or thairby, all bodin
in feir of weir, with fuordis, daigeris, i)lait-flevis, hagbutis, and piftolcttis,
exprellie prohibeit to be borne, w^orne, vlet, or fcliote with, be the Actis of Parliament ; haifing confauet ane deidlie feid, rancour, and malice aganis the faid
vmq'^ Andro, vmbefet^ his hie way and paffage, vpone Cires-mure, ane myle or
thairby fra the burch of Coui)er ; quhair he, being only accumpaneit m ith ane
fervand of his awun, war, in fober and quyct maner, for the tyme, cumiiig fuith
of the hie way, lipning for na harme, &c., and thair fct vpone the faid vrnq'"
Andro, fchot him throw the body with hagbutis, and crewallic hurt and domanit^

* Citizen ; inliabitant ; probably inferring that he was not a free burgess. * Beset ; blockaded ;

* waylaid.' ' Abused. Literally, treated ; used.

430 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1617.

him and his feruand with fuordis, in dyuerfe pairtis of thair bodeyis, to the
efFufioiin of thair bkiid in grit quantiteis : Off the quhilkis (woundis) and hurtis
gevin to the laid vniq^'' Andro, he immediatlie deceifht, &c.

\"erdict. The Affyfe, be phirahtie of voittis, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit
the faid Johnne to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of airt and pairt, &c.

The Juftice fuperceidis the pronunceing of Dome, &c.^

[3ir Alexander Coluile^ Juftlce-JDepute.l

(CIjiltr--iHurtrn%

Jul. 24. — Bessie Dunc ane, feruitrix to George Craig in Eifter Dudingfloune.

Dilaitit of the crewall and vnnaturall Murthour and putting to death of ane
young infant nian-bairne of hir awin, immediatlie eftir the beiring thairof, be
putting it vnder the lira of the bed quhairuiione fclio lay ; and thaireftir lying
thairuijoun, and fmoiring" the faid infant to deid : committit in ane bak hous of
the faid George Craigis, vnder nycht, vpone the fourtene day of Julij inftant ;
Williame Borthuik, fone to Johnne Borthuik in Waller Dudinglloun, ane young
boy of xviij yeiris of age, being the father thairof.

The faid Beffie, with teiris, in grit penitencie, confeffit the Dittay to be of
verritie ; and cravet God mercie for the famyn.

^''eiidict. The Alfyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth of Johnne Levinglloun,
bail'^ie of Dudinglloun, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Beffie, in refpect
of her awin Judiciall Confeffioun, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict, &c.

Sentence. To be tane to ane gibbet at the mercat croce of Ed"", and thair
to be Hangit quhill fcho be deid ; and all hir moveabill guidis and geir, gif fcho
ony lies, to be efcheit, &c.

Nov. 17. — Mr Johnne Mureheid, Notter in Tueidmouthe.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the formeing and wryting of ane fals nyntene-yeir
Tak,^ and counterfuteing of vmq^^ Johnne Nifbet of Swannisfeild his fubfcriptioun
thairto (allegit fetter* of the faid Tak) eftir his deceife : And of periureing him
felf, in maner fet doun in his Dittay.

The i)annell allegit that my lord Juftice can nocht be Judge competent to him,
in this matter ; becaus he (the pannell) is ane ftranger, quha hes duelt and had
his continuall refidence out of this cuntrie within the toun of Tued-mouth, in
Ingland, thir dyuerfe yeiris bygane ; and thairfoir, conforme to the Act of Par-

' No faitlior entries occur ; so that it is probable a Remission was granted. " Smothering ;

suffocating. ^ A Lease for nineteen years. ^ The landlord or proprietor of the ground,

who set it in Lease.

51&15JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 431

liaraent, audit to be remandit fra this Judicatorie to the Juftice of Iiigland, at
the leift, to the Bilchope of Dureham, within quhais diocie he duelt, tlie pamiell
being ane Ecclefiafticall perfone, fervand at the Kirk of Tuedmouth : And laft,
he appaillis to his Maiefteis mercie and clemencie ; and offeris him felf in his
hieues will, for the ciymes contenit in the Dittay.

My lord Aduocat, for verificatioiin of the Dittay, producet the pannellis
Depofitiones, with the fals Tak, quhilk is fund to be ffals and ffen5eit befoir the
Lordis of Seffioun, and in refpect thairof ordainit to be cancellat and diftroyit :
And anfuerand to the allegeances maid be the pannell, fay is, that nochtwithftanding thairof, he audit to be put to ane Affyfe, in refpect the Act of Parliament allegit, is only in fauouris of lie perfones as duellis in Ingland, and being
citet for flauchter, thift, burning of lioufTis, and vtheris crymes, perticuleiiie
expreffit thairin, quhairof the cryme lybellit is nawayis comprehendit, and ar
fugitiue thairfoir ; and the pannell, cuming willinglie to this cuntrie to beir
witneffing in ane matter betuix tua Scottis perfones, was nawayis fugitiue : And
as to the privilege of his profeffioun, that he is ane Ecclefiallicall perfone, fayis
that the famyn aggrages his offence : And thairfoir, fould be juillie puneift for
the ffalfet and Periurie confeffit be him and contenit in his Dittay.

The Justice, nochtwithftanding of the pannellis allegeances, Remittis him
to the tryell of ane Affyfe.

ASSISA.

Ednard Johnneftoun, Proveifl of Annan, James Douglas, baihie of Dalkeith,

Johnne Ramfay, merclieand burges of Ed'', James Nafniyth of PolFo.^

Verdict. The AfTife, all in ane voce, be the declaratioun of Eduard Johnneftoun, chanceller, ffand the faid Mr Johnne to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of
the fforgeing and fformeing of the faid fals Tak ; and of counterfuteing of the
faid vniq''' Johnne Nifbetis fubfcriptioun thairto, eftir he was deid ; and Periureing of him felff, in maner fpecifeit in his Dittay. — Sentence. To be tane to
the mercat croce of Ed% and thair vj^one ane gibbet to be Hangit quhill he be
deid ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Jan. 9, 1618. — Thomas Meldiiu:m of Idene,^ Walter Grant, his fervand,

James Grant in Tulliebo, his brother, and Jolmne Roils.

alfo his feruand.

Dilaitit of Vfurpatioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in cuiiiing, vndor

filence and chid of nycht, to Johnne Meldrum of Ordley his duelling hous of

^ The remainder are ' mercbeandis in Ed'".' George Drummond of Cattifidhok (Cat's-c/dow), ]Mr
Jolinne Rutlierfurd, Proveifl of Jedburgh, and six others, wore each ' vnhuvit in ]'c pane of ane liiuidreth raerkis,' for not passing on the said Assise. '^ See Nov. ;20, 1618, &c.

432 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

, and tliair, be way of Hamefucken, clymming the walls tliairof, tirring^

the ruif of the chaliner quhair he lay bedfaft, iiocht weill convaleffit of ane fever
quhairwith he was afflictit and viffeit, be the fpace of tuentie foure oulkis
ofbefoir : And for taking of him furth thairof, and cayreing him as ane captiue
and iirifToner to the place of Idene, quhair he was detenit in privat and llrait
priflTone, be the fpace of foure dayis and foure nychtis ; vrgeing him, all that
tyme, to ditbharge certane actiones quhilk he had depending aganis the faid
Thomas : And for the liaill remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris : Committit
vpone the audit of Maij, 1612 yeiris.

Persewar, Jolinne Meldrum of Ordley, Sir Williame Olipliant of Newtoun, kny*, Aduocat to

our fouerane lord, for his liienes intreis.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Hoip, I\Ir Thomas Nicolfone, Mr James Lawtie.

The Justice, for obedience of the ^Varrand of the Counfell, direct to him,
fubfcryuit be my Lord Chanceller, continewis this dyet to the xvj inftantis :
And Ordanis the jiannell to find cautioun for tliair compeirance that day, vnder
the panis contenit in the Actis of Parliament. — Patrik Meldrum, ffiear of Idene,
become fouertie for the faid Thomas, his father, &c.

(Jan. 1 6.) — Continued, byWarrand of the Secreit Counfell, to thexxj inftant.

(Jan. 21.) — The Juftice, of confent of pairtie, continewis this matter to
the tlirid day of the nixt Juftice-air of Aberdene, or foner, vpone xv dayis
wairning. George Seatoun of Schettin and the faid Patrik Meldrum become
pleges and fouerteis, coniunctlie and feuerallie, &c.

[J/r Alexander Coluile, Provajt of Kilmondy, Jtijiice-Depute.']

Jan. 14. — Williame Johnnstoun, callit of Loherhie; Archebald J.,

his brother; Mungo and Hercules J.,fones to the faid Williame;

Williame J., fone to vmq'® George J., in Lokarbie ; Williame

J., in Grenefyde ; Thomas Harkiies, in Lokarbie; Johnne

Chalmer, thair ; Andro Chaliner, tliair ; Johnne Johnneltoun,

fone to Dauid J., in Cleuchheid ; Williame J., in Auldwallis ;

Patrik J. of Mylnebank, his brother ; Johnne J., in Turmour,

callit of luoharhie ; Andro J., his fone ; Archy Halyday, in

Turmour ; Andro Chalmer, thair ; Johnne Beil, in Lokarbie ;

Francis Bell, thair ; James Kennydie, in Bektoun ; Andro

Chalmer, in Dames.

Dilaitit of airt and jiairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ James Johnneftoun, in

Kirktoune ; committit with convocatioun of our fouerane lordis leigis, vpone the

' Forcing a passage, by breaking through the roof. Fr. tirer ; and A. S. fT/r-an, to tear.

51&15JAC. VI. CRIMIFAL TRIALS. 433

XXV day of April, 1617, be geving to him of dyaerfe crewall and deidlie woundis
in the heid, left airme, left hand, and left pape :^ Off the quhilkis he nevir
convaleffit, fpeciallie of the woundis relfauit in his heid, threfcoir and nyne
banes being tane furth thairof ; and at laft, vpone the firft day of December laftj
he deceiffit, being vnder cure of the faidis woundis fevin monethis and ten
dayis of befoir.

Persewaris, Agnes Johnneftoun, the relict, Sir Williame Olipliant of Newtoun, kny*.

Prelocutouris in defence.
Mr Thomas Nicolfone, Mr Alexander Peiblis, ^Ir James Oliphant, Adame Cuninghame.

The Juftice, of confent of pairtie, continewis this dyet to the xxv of Februar
nixt, and Ordanis the jDannell to find cautioun for thair entrie that day, vnder
the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament : Quha for obedience of the faid
ordinance, ffand James Johnnftoun of Waftraw, and Archibald Douglas of
Kelheid, brother to my lord of Torthorrell, bayth perfonallie prefeut, caulioneris
and fouerteis, conjunctlie and feuerallie, for thair re-entrie, &c.

(Feb. 25.) — Compeirit Mr James Oliphant, and producet ane Warrand of
the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, procuret be the (faidis) perfones (on pannel), daitit
the xix day of Februare inllant, be the quhilk the Juftice is ordanit to continew
this dyet to the xxvij day of Marche nixtocum, &c. Which defn-e was granted ;
Robert Johnnftoun of Raecleuch becoming cautioner for the pannels' entry.

Persewar, Andro Johnnefloun, as fone.
Prelocutour in perfute, Sir Robert Gordoun of Lochinvar, kny*.*

(Mar. 27.) — It is declairit be the pannell, befoir thai cum to thair allegeance,
be way of informatioun to the Juftice, that it wald pleis his Lordfchip vnderftand,
that the matter fell furth eftir this maner. My Lord of St Androis that now is,
being Archebifchope of Glefgow for the tyme, haifing ane cair to haif the haill
Kirkis within his dyocie^ fufficientlie plantit ; and eftir vizitatioun, cuming to
the Kirk of Dryfdaill, quhair it was fund be him that the waiter of Dryfe ran
fa violentlie, eftir ane fpeat,^ throw the haill kirk yaird and landis adjacent
thairto, that the Kirk it felff was liklie to becum ruinous and decay, except the
courfe of the faid watter had bene divertit and drawin ane vther way thairfra :
For remeid quhairof it was aggreit, with confent of the haill gentilmen of the
parochin, that the faid watter lould be divertit ane vther way ; and accoirding
thairto, it was appointit, that vpone the faid xxv day of Apryle, the faid Williame
Johnnftoun, with aftiftance of the parochin, fould cum, with fpaidis and IMiuiles,
to mak ane watter-gang : In the doing quhairof, the faid vmq"'' James Johnnftoun,
with his fones, come bodin in feir of weir, and maid interrui)tioun to tlie perfones
foirfaidis that war cafting the faid watter-gang, and invaidit and perfewit dyuerfe
of the perfones that war working, for thair flaiichter ; be occafioun of the quhilk

^ Breast. ^ These in addition to the persons abovenamed. ' Diocese. ■• Flood.

VOL. III. 3 I

434 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

perfute and invaiioun ane ftraik was gevin to the faid vmq'^ James vpone the
heid A^'ith ane fpaid or fchiile, be quhat perfone the pannell knawis nocht : Eftir
the quhilk ftraik he convalefTit, and was at tua feuerall Juftice-Courtis in
Jedburgh ; was aifo at the Parliament in Ed' ; raid in dyuerfe pairtis of the
cuntrie, and within Ingland ; and thaireftir, fell feik of ane fever, quhairof he
deceiffit ; as is nottour to the haill cuntrie.

Quhilk being preniittit/ it is allegit peremptoiu'lie for the pannell, that thay
can nocht be put to ane AflTyfe for the cryme lybellit, in refpect the faid vmq**
James Johnnftoun, for quhais llauchter thai ar perfewit, was Dane at the home,
and deceifTit vnrelaxit thairfra, ffor ane criminall caufe, viz. ffor airt and pairt
of the Slauchter of vmq^'' Hew Dowglas of Dalvene. Igitur, &c. — To the quhilk
it is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the allegeance audit to be repellit, becaufe
the faid vmq'^ James was relaxt fra the faid Hoirning : And producet the
Relaxatioun for verificatioun thairof^ — It is duplyit be the pannell, that the
Relaxatioune producet meittis nocht the Hoirning ; becaus the faid vmq'^ James
Johnnftoun is relaxt fra the borne lang eftir the tyme 15'bellit of the ftraikis
gevin to him quhairof he deceiffit, to wit, lang eftir the xxv day of Apryle,
1617, he nocht being relaxit quhill the xxviij of October thairefter. — To the
quhilk it is anfuerit be the perfewaris, and allegit,^ that the Hoirning quhairupoun the faid allegeance is foundit is null, becaus the faid vmq^^ James
Johnnftoun being defignet be the faid Letter of Hoirning to haif ane certane
duelling-place, viz. in Tvvnnergarthe, the tyme of the raifmg thairof, he is nather
charget perfonallie nor at his duelling-place, quhilk audit to haif bene done ; he
being ane Scottis fubiect, duelland within Tvvnnergarth, quliair he duelt the
tyme of the geving of the charge to him, be oj^pin proclaniatioun ; lykas, he
duelt thairiii dyuerfe yeiris ofbefoir. — It is anfuerit be the pannell aganis the
allegeance, foundit be the perfewaris vpone the nuUitie of the Hoirning, that the
faid allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the privilege and Difpenfatioun
fet doun in the Letteris of Hoirning producet, quhilk fuftenis the charge gevin
to him, be oppin proclamatioun at the croce of Dumfreis, to be als lauchfull as
gif he war charget perfonallie or at his duelling-place, for the reflbne fpecifeit
in the Letteris.

It is allegit be the perfewaris, as to the Relaxatioune and allegeance maid
thairujioun, that the faid Relaxatioun is lauchfull and fufficient in the felff ;
becaus the famyn is pui'cheft be the faid vniq^* James, and he lauchfullie relaxt,
be vertew thairof, lang befoir his daithe. — The pannell repeittis thair former
anfuer.

* Premised. ' On margin, ' 1 Aprilis, 1618. This Relaxatioun gevin vp agane to Andro

Jolmufloun, producer thairof.' ^ Pleaded ; urged as a plea.

51 & 15 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 435

It is fforder allegit be the pannell and thair prelociitouris, that thai can nocht
be put to ane AiTyfe for the ciyme lybellit, becans the laid vmq'^ James Johnnitoun was flane and deit at his Maielleis home ffor ane criminall caufe, viz. ffor
the fteilling of tua horfe pertening to James JVrmathe in Knokinhair ; committit
be him in the moneth of September, 1597 ; ffor the quhilk, being perfewit
criminallie befoir the Juftice, and charget to vnderly the Law within the tolbuth
of Ed"", vpone the xxj day of Januar, 1607 yeiris, was, for nocht finding of
cautioun, denuncet and declairit fiigitiue fra his hienes lawis for the faid ciyme :
And ffor verificatioun thairof, producet the Extract of the Hoirning. — To the
quhilk it is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the Summondis and Dittay aucht to
pas to ane Affyfe, nochtwithflanding of the allegeance proponit be the pannell,
foundit vpone the tua criminal Hoirningis producet ; becaus the faid vmq'^
James Johnnftoun of Kirktoun was nocht only relaxt fra the firft Hoirning befoir
his deceis, bot alfo becaus it is fpeciallie provydit be Act of Parliament, maid in
the moneth of October, 1612 yeiris, that all perfones duelland vpone and within
the boundis of the lait Bordouris of this kingdome, fpeciallie within the boundis
of the fcherefdome of Dumfreis and llewartrie of Annandaill, quliair the faid
vmq'^ James duelt, ar fred and relevit of all and quhatfumeuir criminell cauflis
that could be laid to thair charges, ffor quhatfumeuir ffyre-raifmgis, flauchteris,
thiftis, and ftouthes, or vther criminall cauffis quhatfumeuir, befoir his Maiefleis
going in Ingland, quhilk was in Apryle, 1603 yeiris, &c.

The Justice continewis Interlocutour, vpone the allegeances foirfaidis, to
Wednifday nixt. The Affyfe wairnit aj)iid Acta, ilk perfone vnder the pane of
ij*' merkis. Williame Douglas, younger of Cafchogill, become fouertie for the
entrie of the haill perfones on pannell, he.

(Apr. 1.) — The Jullice, be directioun of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall,
Ordanis the perfones on pannell to find cautioun for thair entrie and compeirance
of new agane, befoir the Jullice or his deputis, the thrid day of the nixt Julliceair of the fcherefdome or llewartrie quhairin thay duell ; or foner, quhan or
quhair it fall pleis his Maiellie, vpone xv dayis wairniiig, &:c. AVilliame Douglas
of Cafchogill plege and fouertie, &c.

Feb. 13. — Hew Falconer of Innerlochtie ; Hew Falconer, his lone ;

Frances Hay and Alexander Hay, fones to AMlliame Ilay of

Mayne ; Thomas Grant, brother to James Grant in Daltulleis ;

Lauchlane Grant of Wefter Elcheis ; Johnne Grant, his lone.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the invaiding, hurting, and wounding of Thomas

Grant of Cardellis, and llauchter of vmq'" Fatrik Grant, his lone ; committit

within the burgh of Elgyn, the xj of November lall, 1617.

436^ CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.-

Persewaris, Thomas Grant of Cardellis, as father; Johnne Grant, appeirand of Cardellis, as
brother ; Sir Willianie Oliphant of Newtoun, knycht, for his Maiefteis intreis.

The Justice, of confent of atlier pairteis, and accoirding to ane directioun
gevin to his lordfchip be the Lordis of Secreit Coimfall, continewis this matter
to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quhair the defenderis
duellis, (Elgyn,) or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, &c.

Sir Alexander Gordoun of Clwnie, kny\ become fouertie for the faid Thomas
Grant, vnder the pane of tua thowfeand merkis ; Sir Alexander Falconer of
Halkertoun, kny*, become fouertie for the faid Hew Falconer and his fone ;
James Hay, appeirand of Mayne, become fouertie for Frances and Alexander
Hayis, his tua brether ; and Robert Innes of Balvany for Lauchlane and Johnne
Grant — ^all vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

Mar. 18. — Wili;iame Johnnstoun, callit of Lockerbie, and Johnne
Carutheris of Rammerfcaillis.
Dilaittit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'" Criftopher Wigholme,'
burges of Sanquhar ; committit in Junij, 1594.

Persewar, Niniane Wigholme, as fone ; Sir Williame Oliphant, knycht.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr James Oliphant, Adame Cuninghame, Aduocattis.

The perfewar paffis fra the perfute of the faid Johnne Carrutheris pro loco et
tempore. — It is allegit for Williame Johnnftoun, that he can nocht be put to
the knawlege of ane Affyfe for the crymes lybellit, in refpect his Maieftie and
Eftaittis, be Act of Parliament, maid in October 1612, hes, for the reffone
mentionet tliairintill, geving ane generall pardoun to all maner of perfones
duelland within the boundis of the lait Bordouris of this Kingdome, for all
maner of crymes committit be thame preceding his Maiefteis going in Ingland,
&c. — To the quhilk it is anfuerit, that the allegeance aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the fummondis beiring the fact lybellit to be perfewit be the pairtie,
with concurfe of his Maiefteis Aduocat ; quha is fpeciallie exceptit in the faid
Act, and hes power, be vertew thairof, to perfew.

The Juftice continewis Interloquitour to Fryday nixt; and Ordanit the
pannell to find cautioun for his compeirance, as alfo for theentrie of his brother,
the faid day. — Robert Somerwell of Smailhomes become fouertie, &c.

(Mar. 20.) — The Justice ordanit cautioun to be ffund, that the faid
Williame and Frances fall compeir befoir the Juftice or his deputis, the thrid
day of the Juftice-air of the fcherefdome or ftewartrie quhairin thay duell, or
foner, vpone xv dayis wairning. — Robert Somerwell of Smailholme, and Williame
Johnnftoun of Currielaw, become pleges and louerteis, &c.

' This name is now written Wigharn, and Whigam.

51&15^Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS: 43T

Mar. 18. — Robert Syimmer, fone to the Laird of Baljordie.
Dilaittit of the crewall Slauchter of vmq^'' Daiiid Graham, fone to vmq'^ James
Grahame of Leuchland ; committit vpone the xxix day of Apryle, 1616 yeiris,
vpone the Hauche of Infche, neir to the Mekill-mylne of Brechin, be ilrekiiig
hira throw the body with ane rapper-fuord ; quhairof, within fex or fevin dayis
thau'eftir, he deceiffit.

Persewer, James Grahame, as brother to the defunct; James Keith of Harviefloun, brother-inlaw ; Sii" Robert Grahame of INIorpliie, neir kinfman ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*.

Prelocutour in defence, INIr George Symmer.
The pannell, being acciifet be Dittay, of the llauchter of the faid vmq^^ Dauid
Grahame, denyis the famyn, with the haill circumftances fet doiin in the Dittay,
concerning the faid llauchter.

AssisA.
Dauid Lyndfay, in Brechin, Dauid Gairdin of Lawtoun, Johnne Cob, citiner of Brechin,

James Ramfay, thair, Patrik Guthrie of Kinblakmontli, WilHame Carnag-y, fkynner, burges

Johnne_ydny of Kethik, James Halyburtoun, mercheand of Edinburghe,

James Smyth, in Brechin, burges of Edinburghe, Williame Ruthvene of Bandane,

Andro Thoraefoun, thair, Johnne Peter, wryter, burges thair, Williame Elder, tail5eour, burges

Johnne Anderfoun, burges of Laurence Heiring, brother to of Edinburglie.
Montrois, Lethindie,

Verdict. The AfTyfe haifing reflfonit and voittit vpone the pointis of the
faid Dittay, and being ryplie and at lenth advyfet thairwith, togidder with the
Letteris of Hoirning producet be his Maielleis Aduocat, beiring the faid Robert
to haif bene denuncet rebell in Maij, 1616, for nocht finding of cautioun to haif
compeirit befoir the Jullice to haif vnderlyne the Law for the faid llauchter ;
ffor the quhilk fact, he lies bene fugitiue and furth of the cuntrie fenfyne ; togidder with ane Commiffioun, and vther probatioun producet alfo be his hienes
Aduocat, for inftructing the faid Dittay — thay all in ane voce, be the mouth of
the faid Johnne Vdny, chanceller, fand the faid Robert to be Fylet, culpable,
and convict of the faid Slauchter.

Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair his heid
to be llrukin frome his body ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

3^ntnT0inmuniu(i: iDitJ) ti)t €hin=(i5vtQox\

Mar. 18. — Coeene Bruce, fumtyme duelland in the INIiddilhauch of

Huntingtour.

Being brocht furth of the Tolbuth or Waird-hous of Edinburgh, quhairin lie

hes bene wairdit thir dyuerfe monethis bygane, and prefentit vpone pannell, be

directioun of the Lordis of Secreit Counfal), to heir and fie the dome vnderwrittin pronuncet aganis him, as he that became in his Maielleis will of befoir.

438 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

ffor the aflifting, reffett, fupplie, and intercowmoning with THE Clangregour;
and accoirding to his Maiefteis will than publeift and declairit, vpone the faxt
day of Augiift, 1605, was ordanit to be Banifchet his Maiefteis haill dominiones,
uevir to be ffund agane within the famyn, vnder the pane of deid, for the faid
ciyme. — (See this Collection, II. p. 457.)

Sentence. The Juftice of new agane, conforme to ane Warrand and delyuerance of the Lordis of Secreit Counlall, fubfcryuit be my Lord Chanceller, and
be my Lord of Mar, Grit-Thefaurer, daitit the xvij day of Marche inftant,
Ordanit the faid Colene Bruce to be Banifchet, as ofbefoir, his hienes haill
dominiones, and nevir to be fund within the famyn, vnder the pane of deid, but
forder fauour : Lyk as, to be returnet bak agane to the faid waird be the Magiftratis of Edinburgh, to be keipit be thame thairin, in fure firmance and captiuitie, vnto the tyme a Schip be prepairit, quhairin he may be tranfpoirtit.

^laucrJter at a dfunnaL

Jun. 10. — JoHNNE JonxxESTOUN of Tunnergarthe ; Blench Bell, his fpous Q pq/i fra) .
Johnne, alias Jok^ Williame, ffrances, and James, four fones to the faid Johnne ;
James Johnefloune ; Andro Johnelloune, in Kirktoun ; Williame, ffrancie, and
George, his thre brether ; Dauid Bell, callit of Craighous ; Williame Johneftoune,
in Hilbank ; Johnne, his brother ; Williame and Johnne Johnneftoune, in Schaw ;
Williame J. in Hilbank; Johnne, his brother; James Johnneftoun, in Hill Q pa/i
fra); Patoun Bell, in Yle (^paji frd^; Jok Burges, in Kirkhoufles Qpajifrd)\
Jok Johnneftoune, in Fouleraw Q pa/if rdy, James Johnneftoune, foue to Twnergarthe ; ffrances J. in Myreheid ; James J. in Court ; James Bell, in Twnnergarthe
(' /?o/^/ra') ; Johnne Bell, in Holmheid (^ pajifrd)\ George Johnneftoune, fone
to Johnne Johnneftoune of Twnergarthe.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Frances Johnneftoune,
brother-germane to Williame Johnneftoune of Lockerbie ; committit vpone the
xxj day of Apryle laft, at the Buriall of Thomas Johnneftoun, 5ounger of Fingland, befyde the Kirk of Twnergarthe, and 5aird thairof.

Persewaris, Williame Johnneftoune of Locherbie, brother; Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*.

James Johnneftoun of Waftraw became fouertie for the entrie of James of the
Hill, the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quhair he duellis ;
or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning. — Johnne J. of Twnergarth, fouertie for the
entrie of Patoun Bell, Jok Burges, Jok J. of Fouleraw, and James Bell of Twnergarthe.— And Johnne Carmichell in the Maynes, fouertie for the entrie of
Johnne Bell in Holmeheid.

The Justice, of confent of the perfewaris, continewis this dyet aganis the
remanent perfonis nocht paft fra, to the fevint day of Auguft nixt ; and Ordanis
thame to ffind fouertie for thair entrie that day.

James Gordoun of Buithill, brother to Lochinvar, fouertie for the entrie of

51 & 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 439

Johnne of Twnergartlie and his fones — Johnne of T. fouertie for Frances of
Myreheid, &c. — Johnne Gordoim of Hiffilfeild, for Andro J. in Kirktoun, &c.

(Aug. 7.) — The Juftice, of conlent of pairtie, continewis this dyet to the
xviij of November nixt. — Niniane Johnneftoiin of Powdene, cautioner for
Twnergarthe and Andro J. of Kirktoun — and thay, conjunctlie and feverallie,
for the entrie of the remanent perfones.

(Nov. 18.) — Continued to the thrid day of the nixt Juflice-air of Dumfreis, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning.

^Itititjjjtn* at a dTuntvaL

Jun. 10. — James Johnnstoux of Waftraw; William J. of Locherbie;
Archibald, his brother ; Nicolas Cairleill, Ipous to the faid
Williame {^ imJlfrcC), and others.^
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ Andro Johnnftoun, fone to
Johnne Johnnftoun of Twnergarthe ; and Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne J., brothergermane to Andro J. of Kirktoun ; committit the xxj day of Apryle lall, within
the Kirk-5aird of Tounergarthe, at the Buriall of Thomas Johnnftoun, 5ounger

of Fingland.

Persewaris.
Sir Williame OHphant of Newtoune, kny*, Aduocat to our fouerane lerd ; Johnne Johnnftoun of Tvvnnergarthe, as father to the faid vrnq'*^ Andro ; Johnnftoun of Kirktoun, as brother to the faid vmq''' JohnneThe fame procedure takes place in this cafe as in the preceding; and is finally,
on Nov. 18, continued to the Juftice-air of Dumfries, &c.

2^ap(^— dforcinci: antr sjamtfuni) ^^jusintj:, ^t.

Jun. 17. — Mil Dauid Weduerburke, indueller in Dundie, and Andro
Cryftie, indueller in Leith.

^ The other pannels follow : — Mungo Johnnftoun, fone to the faid Williame ; Williame J., brotherfone to the faid Williame of Loclierbie ; Andro Chalmer, in L. {' pnjt frd) ; Johnne C. and Andro C,
his tua fones, thair {' Jiq/i fra); Williame Brydane, in Gymnionbie {<■ paji fra) ; Mathow Brydane,
thair {' pq/ifrd); Heckie Johnnftoun, thair {' pajifrd); Andro Grahame, in Locherbie; Williame
Grahame, in Weftwoid {' paji fra') \ Hercules Johniiftoune, in Locherbie; INLirgaret J., wcdow, in
Nitholme (y' p<[ff frd) ; Williame Kennedie, younger of Hallaithes ; Johnne K. of Ilallaithes {'■pajtjra') ;
Johnne Chalmer, in Studrigis (' jm/ifrd) ; Tliomas Ilarknes, oiftler in Locherbie ; Johnne Johnnftoun of Turmour, callit of Locherbie ; Dorathie J., his fpous (' pf[/l fra') ; Andro J., his eldeft fone;
Andro J., brother to the faid Johnne of Twrmour ; Williame J., alio his brother; Johnne Hell, his
fervand (' j(;r//?/ra') ; Thomas J. of Fingland; Johnne J. in Burfs, callit of Fingland; Johnne J.,
callit Gawinis Johnne; Gib Mundell, in Lairdholme ('pft/ifrd); Adie Blaiklok, thair, callit of
Birflcay (' pq/^fra'); Hercules J., callit t/ie Bajlard, in Locherbie; Johnne J., fone to Williamf J. of
Auldwallis (' ;w/^//-a') ; George J. in Mylnebank ; Johnne J., fone to Dauid J. of Cleuch-heidis ;
Mungo Kennyd'ie in Aftork; Andro Irwing, alias Myller, in Wyliehoill {^ paji fid); Mathow Thorbrand, thair {^ paflfrd)\ Williame T., thair Q pnf frd) ; James Graluune, in (iuhyteftanebill i^' paji
frd) ; Thomas Manekftoun, in Midge-bray {'pajtfrd); Dauid M., thair ('pq/ifrd) ; Symone Hall,
thair (' pajtfrd) ; Johnne Corrie, in Preiftbuttis ; Gawin Smyth, thair ; Thomas Johnnftoun, callit
Geordeis Thome, thair; Johnne Kennydie of Hallaithes {^ ]}(!/(/>'<(')

.440 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 16m

\ Dilaitit of the Poirceing and fchamefuU abufeing of Jonet Crambie, dochter
to vmq^^ George Crambie, burges of Briintieland, and Jonet Broune, hir mother ;
committit within the dvvelling-houfe of Alexander Anderfone in Brimtieland,
vpone the xxvj day of Marche laft. ::

Persewaris.

Jonet Brown, as mother to the faid Jonet Crambie ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*.

PRELOCUXauRis in defence, Mr Thomas NicolCoun, Mr Vmphra Blindfchell, Mr Johnne Ruffell.

It is allegit be the pannell and thair prelocutouris, that na proces can b
grantit in this matter, nather can thai (be) put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe
for the cryme lybellit ; becaus the faid Jonet Crambie, fjieciall pairtie perfewar,
to quhome the allegit cryme is done, is nocht prefent to perfevv thame-for the
famyn. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance aught to b
repellit, in refpect that the mother is prefent, and is reddie to perfew, quha is
fufficient ; or ony of the kyn and freindis to perfew, with concurrence of his
Maiefteis Aduocat. — It is replyit be the pannell, that the mother is only for her
(awin) intereis ; quha can nocht perfew thame for the allegit cryme, t pairtie
allegit offendit being on lyfe. — It is anfuerit, that the allegeance aucht to be
repellit, in refpect of the former aufwer.

The pannell defyres the mother to be folemnelie fiiorne, vpone the verritie of
the Dittay, befoir thai cum to thair defenfe. — The mother refuifes to geve her
aith vpone the Dittay, as it is qualifeit, in refpect fcho was nocht prefent ; bot
declairis that hir dochter paft faif and haill furtli of hir hous ; and come bak
agane to hir hous fchamefullie abufet, &c. ; quha than repoirtit to hir that fcho
was forcet be the pannell, in maner fpecifeit in the Dittay. — The pannell takis
inftrumentis, that the mother refuiffing to fweir ; and jDrotellis for remeid of
law, for thair fchamefull fclander.

The Justice Ordanis the pannell to ffind cautioun for thair compeirance the
thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quhairin thai duell,^ or foner,
vpone XV dayis wairning, to vnderly the law for the famyn, vnder the pane of
I"" merkis for ilk ane of thame. — Mr Johnne Elphinftoun, indueller in Leith,
become fouertie for the faid Andro, vnder the pane of I"" merkis. Andro Watfone, bail';ie and burges of Bruntieland, become fouertie for the faid Mr Dauid,
vnder the faid pane.

Jun. 20. — James Steavaut, fone to vmq''' Johnne Stewart of Kilpatrik.

Dilaitit of the cryme following, viz. fforfamekill as, he haifing confauet ane

deidlie ffeid, rancoui*, and malice aganis Andro Cuninghame in Belliemichell, in

' Forfar and Edinburgh.

5]&16Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 441

Arrane, in the moneth of IVIaij laft, come bodin in feir of weir,' with ane fuord
and vther wappones, inuafiue, to the faidis Landis of Belliemichell, of purpois
to haif darnet' himfelf in the broine/ neir to the faid Androis hoiis, thair to haif
murthouret him : In his cuming to the quhilk brome, being elpyit be ane ....
Jerveife, fervand to the faid Andro, quha was addreffing him felf in to the faid
Androis hous, to geve him adverteilment of the faid James being thair ; the

faid James followit the faid Jerveife, and befoir he could cum to his

mailleris hous, ouertuik him, and with ane fuord flrak him in the bellie, and
flew him thair with.

The pannell confefTes the Slauchter of .... . Jerveis ; and offeris to fatisfie
the pairtie and the Kingis Maieltie for the famyn, feing nane perfewis him bot
his Maiefleis Aduocat, for his hienes intreis. — Tlie Aduocat takis inftrumentis
of the pannellis confeffioun of the cryme.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, be the mouth of Mr Donald Camj^bell, chanceller, all
in ane voce, in refpect of the faid James Judiciall Confeflioun, ffand and declairit
the faid James to be ffylet, culj^able, and convict of the Slauchter of the faid
vmq'^ .... Jerveis. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caftle-hill of Edinburghe,
and thair his held to be ftrukin frome his body ; and his haill guidis and geir
to be efcheit, &c.

rijtft

Jul. 2. — Gilbert Ellote, callit Gih the Gcih^art!'
Dilaitit of the thiftious fleilling of ane purfe fra Johnne Airmeftrang, callit of
the Holme, vnder lilence and clud of nycht, within the duelling hous of Alexander
Young in Selkirk, in the moneth of ]\Iaij laft, be taking the faid purfe, with
ffourtie pundis being thairin, furth of the faid Johnne Airmeftrangis breikis, in
maift thiftious maner ; and drinking often merkis of the money that was thairin ;
and abitracting the reft of the ffourtie pund, vnto the tyme the famyn was
challanget vpone him, and reftoirit bak agane thaireftir to the faid Johnne
Airmeftrang, awner thairof.

The pannell declairit that he nawayis ftaw' the purfe, in maner Ipecifeit in
the Dittay ; bot allanerlie, that he being in Alexander Youngeis hous, in Selkirk,
Tyfeing in the moirning, ffand the purfe vpone the fflure of the chalmer ; quliilk
he retenit, and fpendit of the money that was thairin ten merkis allanerlie,'' in
recompance to the faiffer ;' and reftoirit the faid purfe, Avith the reft of tlie money

^ Furnislied in warlike manner. '^ Concealed ; hidden. ' \Uoon\ ; j)l(nif(i f/cnis/a.

* ' Williame Jolinstone of Wamplnay, called (/ic Gallionl, was a noted freebooter. J lis iiom dc
guerre seems to have been derived from the dance called iJk ddUUinl. The word is still nsed in
Scotland to express an active, fjay, dissipated character.' — Jitirdcr Miustrclsif, i. 2.S0. It is right,
however, to inform the reader, that this sobriqmt was very prevalent on the Border. ^ Stole.

** Only. "^ Salvage money, and for restoring what was lost.

VOL. III. 3 K

442 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

being tliairiii, to the faid Johrine Airmftrang, fa foiie as he vnderftuid the famyn
pertenit to him; affirnieing, that the faid Jolinne Airmeftrang wald nawayis iiifift
aganis him for Thift. — The Adiiocat aiifueris, that his Declaratioun maid can
nodit be refpectit ; hot he fould be put to ane Affyfe, in refpect of his depofitioim
maid be him, in prefens of the Juftice, confeffing the fleilling of the purfe and
money thairintill, in maner fpecifeit in the Dittay.

The Juftice Ordanis him to pas to ane Affyfe, nochtwithflanding of his former
allegeance and Declaratioun maid be him thairintill.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the mouth of Johnne Scott of Sundeliflioip, chanceller,^ for the maifl pairt, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Gilbert to be
ffylet, cul2)able, and convict of the away-taking furth of Alexander Youngis hous
in Selkirk, of the faid Johnne Airmeflraiig his purfe, with ffourtie j^undis being
thairintill ; quhilk purfe was delyuerit bak agane to the faid Johnne, and haill
fowme aboue fpecifeit, except ten merkis thairof allanerlie : And Clanges him of
the fteilling of the famyn. — Sentence. To be Scuuget throw the burgh of
Edinburgh ; and alio to be actit to be Banifchet furth of this realme, and neuer
to be ffund agane within the famyn, without his Maiefleis Licence, vnder the
2)ane of deid, but fauour.

The faid Gilbert actit himfelf to depairt furth of this realme, within xx dayis
eftir the dait heirof ; and nevir to be ffund agane within the famyn, without his
hienes Licence, vnder the pane of deid.

Jul. 8. — JonxxE Menzeis and Andro Men5eis, brether to Williame

J\len3eis of Caftelhill ; Raulft' Dal5ell at the mylne of Durifdeir,

James Barbour in Colymme, Hectour ]Vr"Quhyn3ie in Thornehill, Jonet i\rRone, fpous to Johnne AVilliamfoun in Dufdeir,

Johnne Williamefone hir fpous for his intreis, Marioun M'^Rone,

fifter to the faid Jonet.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter, vnder nycht,

of Patrik Douglas, fone to Hew Douglas of Balliebught ; committit the fyftene

day of Marche laft, at the gavill of the faid Johnne Williamfones hous, in

Dufdeir, in his ganging furth of the toun of Dufdeir to the place of Moirtoun.

Persewar, Hew Douglas of Belliebucht, Sir Williame Oliphant, kny'.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Nicolfouu, Mr Lueis Stewart, James King.

The Juflice, with confent of my Lord Aduocat, continewis this matter to the

thrid day of the nixt Juflice-air of the Scherefdome of Dumfreis, or foner vpone

fyftene dayis wairning ; and ordanis the pannell to find Cautioun for thair

re-entrie to that effect. — The Laird of Dal3ell, elder, and Williame Men3eis of

^ The remainder are merchants and burgesses of Edinburgh.

52 & 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

443

Caftelhill, become pleges for Johnne and Andro Men5eis— and Robert Douglas
of Cafchogill for the entrie of Hectour M'^Quhyn^ie.

[The Case which follows, affords one among numerous other instances, of the unhappy consequences
resulting from the deadly feuds, which occurred almost daily; and strongly points out their prevalence
in Scotland, to a very lamentable extent. Si?- James Balfoitr, in his Annates,^ states, that ' the Young
Laird of Cultmalindie- Bruce, in Perthlhyre, killed Tojhohe Laird of 3Iinewaird, fifler fone to Sir
James Campbell of Lawers, in the toune of Perth. Cidtmalindy, the committer of the flauirhter, fled.'
But Fleming, in his MS. Diary or Chronicle,^ gives a much more minute detail of this affair, in the
following passage, extracted from the Original MS. :— ' VrouN Midfomer-day, the xx of Junij, 1618
yeiris, at twa efternoon, {Dauid) Tofcheoch of Monivaird yotnigcr ^Aine in the South-gait of Perth be
Lourence Bruce younger of Cultmalindeis, his brother, and diueis thair aflbciates. The twa that was
with Monyvaird, the ane deidlie hurt, bot deit not; the vther, his richt hand clene flrukin fra him.
This done iu a moment of time. All the committeris thairof efchewit out of the towne,befoir any of
the townis-men hard of ony fnche thing.'J

Jul. 29.— Peter Blair, brother-germane to Andro Blair of Gairdrum.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the ffelloiin and crewall Slauchter of vmq''' Dauid
Tofcheoche, 30unger of Monyvaird ; and Demembring of Dauid ]Mallodie, his
feruand, of his richt hand ; committit within the burgh of Perth, vpone the xxiiij
day of Junij lall.^

The faid Andro (as cautioner for his brother) nocht compeirand nor enterand
the faid Peter, the Juftice ordanit him to be in ane amerceament and vnlaw, viz.
tua hundreth merkis : Lyk as, the faid Peter was decernit, for his nocht compeirance, to be denuncet rebell and put to the home, and all his moveabill guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

^latitrJttr— iDnntmliratidn*

Jul. 29. — Lawrence Bruce, appeirand of Cultmalundie ; Alexander
Bruce, his brother; Williame Oliphant of Gafk ; Laurence
Oliphant his brother; Alexander Fleming of Monefs; ^Villiame
Douglas of Annatroche ; Johnne New, fervand to my Lord
Oliphant; Donald Paterfonclervand to the ^Maifter of Oliphant,
and George Tyrie, mefhnger in Perthe.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the above flaugliter, &c.

Eduard Tofcheoche, elder of Monyvaird, as flather o vniq''' Dauid Tofcheoche,
3ounger of Monyvaird, produced the Letters deulie execute and iiidorfate \\^(^\\\\
Peter Blair, brother-germane to Andro ]51air of Gairdrum ; be vcrtew (piliairof
the faidis Laurence, &c. ar denuncet rebellis and put to the home, for noclit

' Orig. MS. Adv. Library. « Orig, MS. preserved ia Adv. Library. ' See Dec. 4,

1618, Nov. 17, 1G19, Mar. 12, 1G23.

444 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

finding of cautioim for thair compeirance this day and place, in the hour of cans,
to haif vnderlyne the law, &c. ^^poun the productioun of the quhilkis Letteris,
the faid Ediiard, with Archibald Campbell, brother to the Laird of Laweris,
afldt inftrumentis ; and Proteftit for releif of George Bifchope of Orknay, cautioner.

Jul. 29. — Alexander Heryie in Innerrowrie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ George Robertfone, fervand
for the tyme to Patrik Con of Auchry ; committit within the duelling hous of
Thomas Chalmer in Turray, in anno 1599 yeiris, be Itreking him in the bellie

with ane knyfe, quhairof he deceift.

Persewar.
Alexander Soure, as brother on the mother fyde, and ferwand for the prefent to tlie Lah-d of Skeane.

Prelocutouris in defence.
Frances Erie of Errole, Tlie Erie of Rothes, The Laird of Balquhanne, (Johnne Leflie,) Mr Thomas

Nicolfoune, Aduocat.

The perfewar, with Mr Andro Skene, producet Hoirning aganis the pannell,
(pihairby he is denuncet vpone the xxv of Julij inftant, for nocht finding of
cautioun to compeir this day to vnderly the law for the faid cryme ; and thairupoun afldt inftrumentis, and proteflit for his cautioneris relief, in refpect na
repoirt was maid to the officer, of the finding of ony cautioun, quhairby ane AfTyfe
mycht haif bene fummond. — The pannell takis inflrumentis of his entrie, and
proteftis for his cautioneris releiff : And as to the Hoirning producet, allegis the
f'amyn is null, in refpect cautioun was fund be him for his compeirance lang
befoir his denunciatioun, viz. vpone the xxiij day of Julij of befoir : And as
concerning the Slauchter lybellit, he offeris him felf to the try ell of the Law for
the famyn, as altogidder innocent thairof, difafTenting to all maner of continuatioun ; and thairupoun afkit inflrumentis.

The Justice continewis this dyet to the fecund of December nixtocum ; and
Ordanis the paimell to ffind cautioun for his entrie that day, vnder the panes
contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

The pannell, for obedience of the Juflice ordinance, fTand Jonnne Leflie, fiiear
of Balquhane, cautioune for his compeirance befoir the Juflice or his deputis,
the faidis day and place. — The faid Alexander Her vie being fuorne, maid fayth
that he dred' bodelie liarme of Alexander Soure (Sowre), infafar as he had
afiirmet, in pre fens of dyuerfe famous" perfones, that ' gif he gat nocht his intent
befoir the Juflice, that he fould wair^his mother fone vpone him alfo !' And thair-

' Dreaded ; feared. - Persons of good fame and credibility. ^ Literally, expend ; i. e. that

he would hazard his own life in his endeavour to be revenged of him.

62 & 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 445

foir, defyret Lauborrus of him. — The faid Alexander Soure declairit he had na
cautioune, becaus he was bot ane puir man ; and offerit cciutionem jurator'mm}

The Justice Ordanit him ather to find cautioun and lauborrus for the
indemnitie of the pannell, vnder the pane of ij*" merkis, or ellis to be tane to
waird, to remane thairin quhill cautioun war fund.

Comj)eirit Mr Andro Skeane, and become fouertie and lauborrus for the faid
Alexander Soure, that the faid Alexander Hervie fall be harmeles and fivaythles
of him in his perfone, landis, and guidis ; and nawayis to be moleflit or trubillit
be him thairin, nor be na vtheris of his caufmg, &c. vnder the pane of tua
hundreth merkis.

(Jul. 30.) — Alexander Gourlay of Southane, in Fyfe, become plege, fouertie, and lauborris for Alexander Sowre, &c. Mr Andro Skeane relieved.

(Dec. 2.) — The Justice, in refpect nane of the Aflyfe compeiris, continewis all tryell in this matter to the thrid day of the nixt Jullice-air of the
Scherefdome of Aberdene, &c. — Johnne Leflie, fiear of Balquhane, become
fouertie and lauborrus for the faid Alexander Hervie, that the faid Alexander
Sowre fall be harmeles and Ikaithles of him, &c. vnder the pane of foure hundreth merkis.

Jul. 30. — Johnne Broune.

Dilaitit of the lleilling of ane purfe, with xxij li. being thairin, in Carnewath
mercat, vj)one Mydfomer-day lalt, quliilk pertenit to James Walker, cordiner in
Lynlythgow ; and he being fchortlie thaireftir challenget, made reftitutioun of
the faid purfe and money bak agane to the faid James.

Verdict. Convict of the lleilling of the faid purfe. — Sentence. To be
Scurget throw the burgh of Edinburgh, and Brunt''' vpone the cheik : And to
be Banifcheit his Maiefteis haill dominiones, fpeciallie this his kingdome of
Scotland ; nevir to be fund agane within the famyn, vnder the pane of deid, but^
fauour.

^ftirtriuQ: tA an infamous Pasquil atjainst X\)t ^rotisj) Option, ^r*

[The Case of Mr Thomas Ross forms one of a series of sanguinary and barbarously vindictive
acts of King James VI, wliich, unquestionably, must leave an indelible stain on his memory and
cliaracter, as a despotic and cruel tyrant. It lias already been frequently shown, in the course of this
work, that whenever there occurred the slightest attack on his personal dignity, or any speech, lampoon,
or other writing, at all infringing on his kingly prerogative, &c. his Majesty was relentless in the severity of the punishment, wliich he never failed to cause be inflicted on the luckless olVeiuler. As so
many shocking Cases of this description have already been given in the present Collection, it is enough,
without fatiguing the reader with any recapitulation, barely to refer him, among other cases of a

* Juratory caution. -Burnt; liranileil. ^ Witliout.

446 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6l8.

similar nature, to tlie Trials of Diksoun,^ Aug. 3, 1569; Towent,- Oct. 10, IGOO ; Cornuall, Apr.
25, 1601 ; and Fleming,* May 17, 1615; which are the leading instances of the insane and bloodthirsty spirit above alluded to.

With regard to tlie facts attending the case of Mr Thomas Ross, there seems to be no reason for
doubting that they occurred almost exactly as they are narrated in the abstract of the Dittay, which
lias been preserved in the Books of Adjournal. In casp, however, that this example should prove
infectious, the Record informs us, that the offensive papers were ' gevin vp agane to my lord Aduocat,'-' to be destroyed — ' as nocht worthie to remane in ane Regifter, to offend the earis or eyis of the
polleiitie !' Every search lias been made in the Dvnmylnc Collection of MSS., and other Collections
in the Advocates' Library, the Warrants of the Privy Council of Scotland, and other similar sources,
but no trace can now be had of the Theses and Annexa, which must have proved very interesting and
curious at this distance of time.

In order that the reader may have an opportunity of judging for himself, the Editor has made every
enquiry in his power, for the purpose of elucidating this disgraceful and sanguinary page of the personal
liistory of ' the British Solomon.' Sir James Bulforn-''^ gives the following account of this extraordinary tragedy. " The 20 of Auguft, this 5eire, 3Ir Thomas Rqffe, a brother of the HoufTe of
Cragey, in Perthjhyre, was fentenced by the Juftice-Generall to lofTe his head," at the Crofle of
Edinbrughe ; and therafter, the fame head to be affixed one the jayle — for propofinge certane villanous
and opprobrious Thefes, in defamatione of his auen natiue countrey and countreymen, and affixing
them on a Church- dore, in Oxeford, before fermon, one a Tucfday ; offring them to be publickly
difputo, and himfelue (miferable wretclie!) to defend them. This fentence was put in executione
within 2 dayes therafter."® — Another authority^ narrates the proceeding thus. " Mr Thomas Ross,
Minifter at Cargill, having been convicted by an AfTize, at Edinburgh, of writing, at Oxford, in
England, againft the Scots Nation, Avas executed at Edinburgh.'^ His right hand was firft flricken
off; thereafter, he was beheaded, quartered, and put npon the Ports. He was of the Houfe of
Craigie, being a Ion of John Rofs, Laird of Craigie, and went to Court. He wrote very unnaturally,
and whereof he was not wife, againll the Scots Nation. He was conveyed to Scotland in a fiiip.
Mr Thomas Rofs was infane, and his infirmity was pled in his defence. He affixed to the door of
St Mary's Church, in Oxford, a Latin Thefis, in which were ten propofitions ; wherein lie attempted
to prove, that the Englifh ought not to allow fo many of the Scots to remain among them. The King
was ridiculoufly iiicenfed, and inflead of confining him, as one in liis condition needed to be, he fent
liim to Scotland, along with ffrict orders that he Ihould fuft'er death. "

It seems very singular, when all circumstances are considered, that so remarkable an occurrence has
been entirely passed over in silence by Sj)otswood and Calderwood, in their Church Histories.

There cannot be a doubt that Mr Thomas Hoss was a man of an ancient, influential, and highly
respectable Family ; and the Editor believes, that having embraced Episcopacy, he had gone to prosecute his studies in Oxford. It would appear, from the preceding notices, that Ross had previously

1 See Vol. I. 38j. » Ibid. II. .3.32. = IhU. II. .34-9. •• Ibid. III. 359. ^ Sir William

Olipliant of Newton. "Annates, MS. A<lv. Library— and II. 70, Edin. 1824.. '" In September 1618,

Ulr T/iomas Ros, sone to the Lard of Cragie, wes, for \Teting:, at Oxfurd, in Ingland, ajranis the Seoltis nationn,
beinj; send to Scotland be schij), convict be ane Assyse, his richt hand first struckiii aff, thaireftir beheadit." — IMS.
Adv. I/ibrary. * An obvious oversight of Sir James lia/Jliur, who had jirobably noted down the day of his

intended execution — omitting to rectify the date, after the King's Warrant had been received. ^ The Rev,

Janus Scott's transcript of the l^iarij or Chruinclc of Jolin Mercer, wiio was app((inted Town-Clerk of Perth, Oct. 6,
1C2.3, and lived to a great age. Orig. in Adv. Library. The Editor has the pleasure of notifying, that this interesting Diary is preparing for ])nblicatir.n by liis friend Janus Jilaiilmeiil, lCs(jiiirc, as his contribution to thk INlAiTLAXn
Ci.iK, the Members of which have chiefly directed their attentiini to the jirinting of Historical works illustrative of
Scotish affairs. '" " 2 Sep. 1(318. Mr Thomas lloss, Minist.;r at Cargill, went t<i Court; and thair, for

sum infamous vrrittingis, and railling aganes the Scottis Natioun, werie oniiaturallie, being on of the sones of the
Uous of Cragie; quhairof he wes not wyise. He wes headit in Edinbruyhe, quharterit, and putt wpoii the Portis."
•^Fl-ming's (Mircir's) C/iron. MS. Adv. Library.

52 & 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 447

been Minister of Cargill ; and as he is so designed in tliese accounts, it is likely that he had not been
deprived of his living before the period of liis execution. The conduct of King James in the whole
of this matter, and his barbarous treatment of Ross, become altogether inexplicable, when it is considered, that at this very time, he was struggling to force Episcopacy upon the people of Scotland, as
the permanent and established Religion of the country. In such circumstances, it seems strange
indeed that he should have so rancorously pursued so zealous a convert to the forms and tenets of the
Church of England, at the precise time that that person (a Jlinister, too, of the Kirk of Scotland) was
doing every thing in his power to qualify himself for effectually pleading and maintaining the establishment of Episcopacy — a measure so near James's lieart. Hoss, however, had, for the indulgence of some
mad and absurd frolic, written the Pasquil or Thesis in question, and affixed it to the Church-door of St
3Iarys, Oxford., as was then usual at all the great Universities in Europe, where public disputations
were often held.^ It was pleaded by the unfortunate man, that he liad done so in a fit of insanifi/,
which seems to have been credited by his contemporaries ; — but all these circumstances combined,
could not induce the King to save his life ; on the contrary, they only hitlanied liis rage the more
against poor Ross.

The only thing which can be urged in palliation of the rigorous sentence, which the King insisted
on being put in execution, is, tliat at the time when King James succeeded to the English Throne,
and for a long time after, the Scotch were peculiarly unpopular in England, and such swarms of needy
adventurers had travelled southward, that not only were the greatest jealousy and hatred manifested on
the part of the English, but it actually became necessary that a legislative enactment should be made, to
prevent bloodshed and scenes of violence throughout the country. As remarkable instances of the ran.
corous feelings which existed against the Scotch, a curious passage maybe cited from Calderwood," which
forcibly illustrates the state of the public mind, in England, upon this subject. — ' The Scotishmen
lying at Court were in danger of their lives, be reafone of the great malice of the Englilh conceaved
againfl tliem. Sir John Ramfays brother fmote the Lord Montgomcries brother on the face, with a
rod, for a lie given him at a Horfe-race. There were prei'ent about ane huudreth Scotilh-men, all in
danger to be maffiicred, if the Englilh had not been flayed by a Counfellor. James Maxwell, one of
tlie Gentlemen of the King's Chamber, pulled ane Englilhman's eare till it bleade. Oure countrymen durfl not repair foe frequently to the Exchange or Comedies as they did before. The Lord of
Kinlq/Je was in great danger at a Comedie, but was convoyed fccretly away be ane aged gentleman,
who was Weill acquent with his father. This lybell was affixed in open places, —

' The Scots noE whippe our Noblemen with uods — They kill our, fencers tratkously uxder trust.'
' The Lord Sanquhar indcid hired two Scotiihmen to kill ane Englilh ft-iicer, who, lix or iVaven
years before, had putt furth his eye at fencing ! They killed him in an Innes, whilles he was putting
the cupe to his head. To content the Englilh, the King confented that Sanquhar Ihould be hanycd.
For the greater contempt of our Nobility, he was hanged among a nuud)er of Theavcs I'

It is barely possible that the King may have discovered certain indications at Court, which, in a
manner, forced him to sacrifice Ross, for the purpose of checking in the bud any future attempts at

' It may be estucmed worthy of remark here, that a shadow of this ancient custom is still observaMe at the
Scotish Bar, wliere, jjrevioiis to the inaiiijiiration of eaeh camlidate for admission into the body of the I'aeully of
Advocates, a Tlu-sin, with its Anncra, is )ml)licly notified on the walls of the Parliament- I Iou>e — and esjieeially at
the uulcr-duor of tliiit Hall. It intimates that a pulilic disimtation, " J^ispiitnti.i Jiiriilica," is to be held oti a eertain
day, under the uusi>iees of the Dean of Faculty ; and the siibjcet-matter of the 'J'lic-is is thus iu)tilied. ()ri;;inaHy,
the candidate had stoutly to maintain his ground against all comei's, in the Latin tongue. It is almost nnnecessiu'y
to add, that tins JJisjjiilitiio Juridica has now degenerated into a jdeee of em()ty form ; in |)oint of fact, it is "elegantly
understood" — as no dis])utation whatever takes i)lac(', exee]>tiiig that which is apt to arise with the printer and bookbinder, who are the only i>arties at all benefited by this edifying solemnity. It is high time that such nn useless waste
of money should be prevented — and the sum at present bestowe<l in this way appropriated to the support of the
splendid Library under the charge of the raculty. * C/iitrv/t J/i^luri/, Adv. J/ibrary, MS. u<l ami. 1G12.

448 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

fomenting these national jealousies. This, however, is merely matter of conjecture, and the only
plausible apology which can be adduced for the perpetration of so tyrannical an act.

A very extraordinaiy instance of the same insane rage upon the part of the King, we learn from a
rare Poem, entitled, a ' Counter-bufte to Lyfimachus, Junior, calling himfelf a Jefuite ;' quarto, 1640,
pp. 16;^ where the fate of Stekcovius, a Pole, is alluded to. That stranger had unhappily appeared
in Scotland in the dress of his native country, which attracted the attention of the idle, and brought
down upon him the derision and abuse of the populace.

' Hither he came, clade all in antique fort,
Where feen in flreets the fubject of a fport, ,

He foone became to childifh gazers, who
- With Itriecks and clamours hifs him to and fro,

Till forced he was with Ihame and fpeed to pack him.
And to his feet and loathfome cabin take him !'
Nettled at such rude and inhospitable treatment, he published ' a Legend of Reproaches' against
the Scotish Nation, shortly after his return home ; which, having reached the ears of his * most
sacred Majesty,' he procured the arrest and execution of the hapless Stercovius I This out-herods
Herod, with a vengeance I The death of this Pole was accomplished at an expense to the King of no
less a sum than six hundred pounds sterling — an immense sum in those days. The instrument whom
James employed was one Mr Patrik Gordon^ a subject of Scotland, then resident in Poland. With
a dexterity for which the sapient James was celebrated, he attempted to extort the price of this
innocent man's blood from the Royal Burghs of Scotland ! It is believed, however, that he was foiled
in that attempt, by the Privy Council declaring themselves incompetent judges of the matter.^.

In a very curious Collection, privately printed at Edinburgh, 1828, ' A Third Book of Scotifli
Pafquils,'^ the cases oi Ross and Stercovius are particularly noticed ; and a copious extract from
the ' Counterbuffe' is there given. That singular Poem introduces Ross's story thus — which is enough
for our present purpose.

. . . . * A Scot of ancient race,
A fchoUer, too, as thou art, lived a fpace
In England's Court ; and for fome private hate,
A Pafquill did againft his country wreat,
As thou haft done in fouler fort ; more full
Of vild afperfions from thy phrantick fkuU !
Well, then, King James of lafting memorie, who
Could not brook that any calumnie
Should be afperft upon his native land —
After fome tryall there, he gave command
The Lybeller Ihould home go, and fuftaine
Of doome unpartiall laws th' unpitied paine.
And here being tryed, judged, and adjudged, they fand
That he (hould lofe his head and faultie hand ;
Which llraight was done, in public view — and fo
I thinke the matter with thyfelf will go !'
The Famil'Y of Ross of Craigie, near Perth, were probably a branch of the Family of tl)e
ancient Earls of Ross, and were reckoned among the most respectable Families in the shire. Many

' A copy is in the valuable Collection of David Laing, Esquire. * Probably the author of tlie ' History of the

Valiant Bruce,' in heroic verse. Dort, 1615 ; quarto. ^ See Decreet of Lords of Privy Council, in Cliarter-Tcom

of the City of Edinhuryh. * Prefatory Notice, xii. The two preceding ' Uooks' beai' date, 1827, and 1828.

52 & 16 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 449

particulars concerning tliem are to be found in History so early as the reign of Robert Bruce, and in
the records of the Religious Houses at Perth, to which they were benefactors. Nisbet, in the Appendix
to his second Volume,' gives a list of some of the distinguished Families in the Kingdom to whom they
were allied.^

It cannot be disguised, that however honourably born this family may have been, various members
of it figured in Books of Adjournal, and others of them suffered the last punishment of the Law, for
their crimes. John Roise of Craigie, James and Williame Roise, his brothers, Jolm Roise, servant to
vmq''" James Roise in Maitlandis, Lancelot Moncrief, servant to the Laird of Craigy, were, along with
William Lord Ruthven, Henry Lord Methven, and others, brought to the bar of the Court of Justiciary, Nov. 12, 1571, for Oppression, Hamesucken, Convocation of the Lieges to the number of two
hundred armed persons, besieging the Place of Dupplin, &c.^ This appears to have proceeded entirely
from one of those deadly Feuds which were unhappily so common in Scotland at that time. Their
antagonist was Laurence Lord Oliphant. But the most atrocious instance which the Editor can at
present recollect, occurs in Fleming's Chronicle,'^ under date Apr. 8, 1G08; where it is recounted, that
• Patrik Eviot, brother-german to the Laird of BaUiotiJjie, wes murtherit in Blelok be his wife,
JoNET Ross, quha wes air to the Lairdfchip of Craigie and Kynfawnes, both. He wes fchote with

ane gun in his bed, fleiping, be James M^Nair. Thairefter, they wer both taikin and execute and

brunt, efter they wer hangit, in the Playfeild of Perth, the 17 of Maij, 1608. The heid and arme
putt wp on the Caflell-Gawill-Port.' It will be recollected how narrow an escape Patrick Eciot,
the husband of Jonet Ross, had previously made, when he was attacked by Sir Henry Lindsay of
Carreston.^

After the death of Jonet Ross, the heiress of Craigie, (who seems to have wished to transfer, bv
marriage, her large estates to lier blood-stained paramour, James 31'^Nair,) her uncle, Robert Ross,
succeeded to the Estate of Craigie. T/ie Laird of Balhousie at this time was Colin Eviot. The
Reverend Mr Scott informs us, that "Patrick, his brother, had suffered trouble and loss by a sentence
of Parliament, for the friendship he had expressed to the Earl of Gowrie, in 1600. The Eviots had
been proprietors of the lands of Balhousie and Muirton, near Perth, for more than three hundred years.
They were great benefactors to the Religious Houses, especially to the Black Friars' Monastery, at
Perth ; and some of the younger sons of the Family were in Clerical Orders. Colin Eviot was
succeeded by his son Patrick, who, before 1618, had sold the lands of Balhousie to John MutthexL\
and was himself designed Patrick Eviot of Muirton. He was married, and had children."

The reader's indulgence is requested for the minuteness and prolixity of this Notice ; which, however,
has proceeded from the Editor's anxiety to throw all the light in his power on so extraordinary a Trial.]

Aug. 20. — Mr Thomas Roise, foiie to vmq^'' Joliiiiie Roife of Craigie.
Dilaitit of the devillifclie and detellable fforgeiiig, ffeii5eiiig, l)lal]>heiiious
vttering, and by writ publictlie expofeing, of ane villaneous, infamous, and
devillifclie Writt, all writtin with his awin hand, concerninge ane Pasqueill
or These ; togidder with ten feuerall abhoniinable akticles or ArrEXDiCES,
confirmeing the famyn — that all Scottisivien audit to be fchote'' furth of the
Court of Ingland, excepting his gracious Maiestie, his fone, and ane verrie
few vtheris, and that the Inglischmen ar niichtillie blindet, fylet, and dillauet,

^ Nisbeis Heraldry, App. to Vol. II., p. 23. - See MS. Transcript of Mercer's Chronicle, before

quoted, and noticed by the Reverend Mr Scott, Adv. Library. ' Sec this C<tllectioM, \o]. I.,

p. 25. * Advocates' Library, MS. ^ See this Collection, Vol. II., p. 401) ; Feb. 1, 160L

^ Ejected ; thmst out by violence.

VOL. III. 3 L

450 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

(althocht quik-fichtit vthenvayis,) that thay fould fuffer fic ane vnproffitable and
pernitious multitude and filthie aff-lcoureingis of people to radge aud dominire
within thair boundis and intrallis, &c.

My lord Aduocat producet the faid Mr Thomas Roife Dittay, togidder with
ane directioun of tlie Counfell, vnder forme of Act, ordaning him to perfew the
faid Mr Thomas for the crymes thairin contenit.

DiTTAY againjl Mr Thomas Roife.

Mr Thomas Roise, fone to vmq'^ Johnne Roife ofCragie,^Q arindytit and
accufet, FoPvSAMEKiLL AS, albeit it be expreflie provydit, flatute, and ordanit,
be dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, aliweill maid be his JMaieftie as be his hienes
progenitouris, of worthie raemorie ; fpeciallie, be the 43 Act of the fecund
Parliament of King James the hrft, intitulat, ' that Lieling-makeris tynes thair
lyfe and guidis :' And ficlyk, be ane Act maid be King James the fecund, the 100
Act, contenit in the aukl prentit Actis of Parliament, the foirfaid Act is
ratifeit in all pointis, and Ordanit to be put in executioun in all tyme'cuming ;
be the whilk, it is llatute, * that Lealing-makeris fall tyne lyfe and guidis to the
King, and be at his ^^'ill :' As lykwayis, be the 134 Act of the aucht Parliament,
haldin be his Maieflie, our darrell fouerane, him felff, and his hienes Eftaittis,
in the moneth of Maij, 1584 ; and in the tent Parliament, haldin alfo be his
Maieftie and his Ellaitis, the tent of December, 1585, articulo primo, intitulat,
' Authouris of fldanderous fpeiches or writtis falbe pwneifchet to the deathe.'
Quhilkis Actis ar ratifeit and aj^provin in his Maieileis fourtene Parliament,
haldin the aucht of Junij, 1594 : And be dyuerfe vtheris Actis, alfweill maid be
his ]\laiefteis felff as his Maiefteis progenitouris of renowned memorie, that all
Liefmg-makeris and telleris of thame, quhilk may ingender difcord betuix the
Kingis Maiellie and his people, quhair euir thay may be gottin, fall be challanget be thame that power lies, and tyne thair lyfe and guidis to the King ; and
that nane of his fubiectis, of quhatfumeuir functioun, degrie, or qualitie, fall
prefume or tak vpoiie hand, privatlie or publictlie, in Sermones, declamationes,
or familiar, conferences, to vtter ony fals, ilvlanderous, or vntrew fpeiches, to
the difdayne, reproche, or contem})te of his Maieflie, his Counfall, and proceidingis ; or to the dillionour, Iiurt, or preiudice of his hienes, his parentis, or
progenitouris ; or to meddle in the effairis of his hienes and his eilait, fteiring
vp his hienes fubiectis to miflykiiig, leditioun, or vnquyetnes ; and that nane
prefume or tak vpone hand, publictlie to declame, or privatlie to fpeik or wryte
ony purpois of reproche or fl\lander of his Maiefteis perfone, eftait, or gouvernament ; quhairby ony miflyking may be movet aganis his hienes and his nobilitie,
and loveing fubiectis, in tyme cuming ; vnder the pane of death, to be inflictit
vpone thame vrith all rigour : As the faidis Actis of Parliament in thame felffis

^»2& 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 45t

proportis. A^ochtWithstandixq quliairof, it is of verritie, that ye, the faid
3Ir Thomas, in the moneth of Julij laftbypail, contrair to the tennoiir of the
faidis Actis of Parliament, hes falllie, Iklanderuflie, calumniouflie, difpytefullie,
and devillifchlie, within the toun of Oxfard, in Ingland, fforget, ffen5eit, and
blafphemouflie vtterit, and be writt expofet publictlie to be red and defendit be
yow, (as ye affirme by your devillifche writt,) within the Vniueesities of
OxFURD, Cambridge, Parets, and vtheris places mentionet in that villaneous,
infamous, and devillifche Writt ; all writtin with your awin hand, in Latine,
ane Propofitioun or Thefe, contening ten feuerall abhominable articles and
(appendices), confirmeing the famyn, that all Scottismen audit to be fchote
furth of the Court of Ingland, (excepteing his gracious Maiestie, his fone,
and ane verrie few vtheris,) and that the Inglischmex ar niichtilie blind,
fylet, and diffauit (althocht quik-fichtit vtherwayis) that thai fould fuffer fie ane
vnprofRtable and pernitious multitude and filthie aff-fcoureingis of people to
radge arid dominire within thair boundis and intrallis. To the quhilk Propofitioun, ye haiff fett doun and fubioynet ten feuerall fals reafones, leafing! s, and
vntreuthis, for confermeing your devillifche propofitioune. (Quhilkis ten reafones
ar repeitit in this place as ane pairt of your Dittay, hot purpoifiie omittit and
left out heirof, as nocht worthie to remane in ane Regifi:er, to offend the earis or
eyis of the pofi;eritie.^) The quhilk blafphemous, iniurious, flvlanderous, and
devillifche propofitioun, and ten reafones, as ye terme thame, fubioynet be yow
thairto, for confirmatioun thairof, all writtin with your awin hand, ar ffals and
manifefl leafingis and vntreuthis ; and war affixt be yow (maift impudentlie, as
ane liear and defamear of your countrie and natioun, nocht worthie to haif inioyit
the naturall air thairof) vpone the Mcu ie-lCuh-dur oi the faid Vniuersitie of
OxFUiiD, vpone ane Twifday, being ane preiching-day, in the faid moneth of
Julij lafl:, as the people war difiblueing and flvailling fra the fermone, and as
DocPmr Godwene, Vice-Chancellour of the Vniuerfitie o/'Oxfurd, wascuming
out of the Kirk ; to the intent the famyn mycht be publictlie red and difperfit
amangifi: his Maiefteis fubiectis of Ingland : Off plane purpois and intentioun
thairby to haif fl;eirit thame vp to the crewall, barbarous, and vnmercifull
murdering, maffacreing, and affafine of the haill Scottis people, alfweill noble
men and counfalouris as vtheris of the Scottis natioun quhatfumcuir, his
Maiefi;eis guid fubiectis and fervandis, attendantis vpone and about iiis Maiesteis royall perfone in Court ; quhilk could nocht haif bene' accomplifchet
without the extreme danger and perrell of iiis Maiesteis facreid perfone, his
gracious Quene, and of the Princes hienes. In the doing quhairof, ye haif

* (Marked on the margin,) ' Thir Thefis, with the argumentis or reafones fubioynet ]>airto, ar geviu
vp agane to my lord Aduocat.'

452 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

fforget, maid, and writtin innumerable leafingis, ifalfe, flvlanderoiis, and vntrevv
fpeiclies and wiytingis, quhilk mycht liaif ingenderit difcoird betuix his Maiellie
and his guid fubiectis ; to the difdane, reproche, and contempt of his Maieftie
and his noble progenitouris and thair proceidingis, and of your natiue countrie,
nocht worthie to haif the name of ane borne fubiect thairin ; and thairby, hes
medlit with his hienes effairis, eilait, and gouvernament, maid ffalflie, barbaruilie, and vnnaturallie ; contravening thairthrow (ye being ane Scottisman,
albeit vnworthie) the tennour of the Lawis and Actis of Parliament thairof, and
incurring defervetlie the panes and pwneifchment aboue written, mentionet
thairintill ; quhilk audit and fould, in maift exemplarie maner, be inflictit vpone
yow, with all rigour ; to the terrour and example of vtheris to attempt the lyk.
Quhilk is mair nor nottour, and ye can nocht deny.

My loud Aduoc at producet the faid Mr Thomas Roifs Dittay, togidder with
ane directioun of the Counfell, vnder forme of Act, Ordaning him to perfew the
faid Mr Thomas for the crymes thairin contenit.

The faid Mr Thomas, eftir reiding of the Dittay, and his accufatioun of the
crymes mentionat thairintill, acknowleges and confeffes the famyn crymes to be
of veritie ; declairing that the Thesis producet war writtin be him furth of
ane mad and diilemperat humour, being inops mentis for the tyme ; quhilkis he
now, from his heart, repentis ; craueing God, his Maieftie, and haill cuntrie
people' j)ardoun for that his offence : And ofTeris him felff in his Maiefteis will,
being a gracious Prince, quhais Royall difpofitioun, in all his proceidingis, hes
ever inclynet rather to mercie, quhilk is the riclit hand of God, nor^ to the
rigour of Juftice, quhilk is his left hand : Defyreing thairfoir, in all humilitie,
my lord Juftice and Lordis of his Maiefteis Counfall prefent,^ to interceid at his
Maiefteis handis, for fauour in his behalff.

My lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the pannell his Judiciall acknowlegement and Confeffioun of the cryme contenit in his Dittay.

The Justice ffindis the Dittay relevant, and Ordanis the famyn to be put to
the knawlege of ane Affyfe of the perfones fummond to that effect.

ASSISA.

James Somerwell of Spittell, Johniie Levinftoun of Hayneing, James Hopprlngile of Heriote

Jaraes Levingftoun of Jerifvvoid, Robert Johnnftoun of Wamfray, mylne,

Patrik Hunter of Hiltarvet, Ja^ Douglas, portioner of Lugtoun, Robert Pliillope, ScherefF-clerk

Joluine Acliiefoun, portioner of Eduard Jolmnefloun, elder, bur- of Dumfreis,

Inuerefk, ges of Edinburgli, Mr James Ord,

George Redilc, Shereff-depute of Jolmne Ker, portioner of Duding- George Carnebie, burges of Ed%

Kirkcudbrydit, floune, Hew Rois of Balnamukie.

Eftir fweiring of the AfTyfe, the faid Mr Thomas of new agane, in thair
* CouHtrymeu. ^ Tiian. ^ Sitting as Assessors. Their names are not recorded.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 453

prefence and audience, confeffes the wry ting and affixing of the Theses and
Appendices following thairupone ; and that the Theses producet ar the
famyn that was writtin and affixt be him : And as of befoir, he offeris him felff
in bis Maiefleis will for that offence.

My lord Aduocat takis inllrumentis of the fweiring of the Affyfe : and for
verificatioun of the Dittay, produces the foirfaidis Thesis or Propositioun,
with the ten fals and vntrew argumentis or reasones following thairupone,
all writtin with the faid Mr Thomas awin hand. Repeittis the faid Mr Thomas
Judiciall Confeffioun, firll maid in prefens of the Juftice, and thaireftir renewit
be him in the faid Affyfe prefens and audience ; and his becuming in his JMaiefteis will, as guiltie and culpable of the faidis crymes : And lykwayis jjroduces,
for the faid Affyfe forder informatioun, the faid Mr Thomas awin Depolitiones
maid and fubfcryuit be him at Edinburgh, the xj Auguft inftant, in prefens
of his lordfchip, as his examinatour, nominat and appointit be the Lordis of his
Maiefleis Secreit Counfell. And in refpect thairof, and that the faid Mr Thomas,
eftir reiding of his Depolitiones to him judiciallie, in prefens of the Juftice and
Affyfe, abydis thairat, and that thairby the faidis crymes ar clerlie verifeit and
provin with fa manifeft probabilities ; in caice ony of tliame acquit the pannell,
(as he thinkis nane of thame will be fa voyde of knawlege or confcience fa to do,)
Proteftis for wilful and manifeft Errour, with all perrel of the Law that may
follow thairupoune.

Verdict. The Affyfe,^ being ryplie and at lenth advyfet thairwith, togidder
with the villannous and infamous Pafqueill or Tliefes, and damnable Appendices
fubioynet thairto ; his Judiciall Confeffioun and acknowlegeing thairof, and
becuming in his Maiefteis will for the famyn, as altogidder giltie and culpable
thairof; his fubfcryuit Dei^ofttiones, producet be our fouerane lordis Aduocat,
for cleiring and inftructing of the faid Dittay ; togidder with the feuerall Actis
of Parliament quhairvpone the faid Dittay is foundit ; thay all in ane voce, be
the repoirt and declaratioun of the faid Johnne Levinftoun, chanceller, ffand,
pronuncet, and declarit the faid Mr Thomas to be Giltie, culpable, and convict
of the faid devillifche fforgeing and expofeing, be writt, of the faid villannous and
ffalfe Thefes, and ffalfe and damnable Appendices fubioynet thairto ; and affixing
the famyn (thay being manifeft leyis and vntreuthes) vpone the faid Ivirk dur,
in forme and maner fpecifeit in his Dittay ; and of the famyn Dittay, and haill
crymes contenit thairintill, and of contravening, thairthrow, the tennour of the
faidis Actis of Parliament ; quhairby he hes incurrit and fallin vnder the danger,

^ Mr Alexander Hammiltoun of Kiupflas ; Ilaulf Ker, bail^ie of Lauder ; Robert Montray of Seyfeild, Allardice of Skadowie; Charles Cainiecrole of Birkriicip ; .loliiiiie I'aterlone, Schcreffclerk of Fyfe; Johnne Haillie in Sneip ; Dauid UamCay in Pethheid of Leluaid, Portions of

Glenkirk, and Robert Creiclitoun, brother to Innernytie; ilk ane of thame vnlavvit in the pane of ane
hundreth merkis, for thair nocht compeirance vpone the faid Mr Thomas AHyfe.

454 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

and within the comiDas of the panes and pwneifchment mentionet thairintill,
juftlie merited be him.

The Justice, in regaird of his convictionn, Ordanit him to be tane bak to
waird, and to be keipit in irnes, quhill his Maieftie by acquentit with his convictioune, and (pihat exemplarie i^wneilchment fall be execute vpone him for his
offence.

Sep. 10. — Sentence. The Juftice, conforme to ane Warrand and directioun of his Maieftie, direct to my Lord of Bynning, his hienes Secreter/ be the
month of Johnne Dow, dempfler of Court, Ordanit the faid Mr Thomas to be
tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburgh, and thair, vpone ane Icaffold, firll his rycht
hand to be ftrukin aff, and thairefter his heid to be ftrukin frome his body : And
his heid to be thaireftir affixt and fet vpone ane irne prik vpone the 2^ether-bolU
Poirt; and his laid rycht hand to be alfo affixt vpone the If^aji-Poirt of the faid
burgh of Edinburgh : And his haill moveable guidis and geir,&c. (gif he ony lies) to
be efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe, as convict and culpable of the faid haynous cryme.

CuiUA JusTiciARiE, c^c. jwr M. Rob. Fabiie, Jufticiarium f. d. n. Regis, Jiac
in parte, virtute CoinmiJfionisDominorumSecreti Confilij ^fpeciallter conjtitut.

Nov. 4. — V/alter Scott, fone to Johnne Scott in Newwark.

^ The following extraordinary composition lias fortunately been preserved among the Denmylne
3ISS., Advocates' Library — but tlie King's ' Warrand and directioun' has probably been too pithy to
have been filed by that oI)seqiiioas courtier the ' Secretar,' even in his private Collection, as being
considered too strong meat for posterity ! Having the fear of his ^Majesty before his eyes, he perhaps felt
that his own head and hand might be called on to answer for disobeying the strict injunctions given him.

INIOST SACRED SoUERAN'E,

The furious wretche Maister Thomas Ros, wes, according to your Majesties comraandement,
put to his tryall, and conuicted of the haynous crymes conteaned in his diueliih Pafquil, produced for
verificatioun of his guiltines, to the AHyfe. The Dome is delaied till your Ma'T"^ be pleafed to llgn.fie
your royall determination in it.

His malitious freneiie is fo mixed with prefumption of his owne wourth, as he thinkis the vfe of his
learning and eloquence neceffar to the world ; and that his paflioun having furneilFed fo much Jluf, in
fo bad a pourpofe, he is able, in ane fubiect fo wourthie and true as the commendation of your Royall
guiftes of bodie and mynd, and mofl princelie actions, to kytlie miracles in dew publeiffing thairof!
To this fenfe, lie fpak in jugement : And leaning to your Maiesties euer gracious clemencie, multiplied exemples of diuine and humane Hiftories, to the commendatioun of the famous Princeis who
had gracioullie pardoned heigh oftences ; adding exemples of manie, who being tranfported be paffion
to madnes, had thairefter recouered thair fetled jugement, and done great and wourthie materis ;
promeifing no les of liim felf.

Your Majesties Aduocat has wyfelie confidered, that the infame of his Dittay mentis not to be
infert in the Regifter of the Adiornall. Alwayis I haue fent to James Douglas the copie of the proces,
that when your Ma^"^ defyres to fie it, he may haue it reddie, and may conceale it from all vthers.
So exfpecting the fignification of your Majesties farder pleafour, anent this vnnaturall and furious
foole, I befeik God long to preferue your Maiestie in perfection of all honour, happines, and
contentment.

Your moft facred Maiefteis moft humble, faithfuU, and bund fubiect and feruant,
ED^ 22 Aug. (1613.) Binning.

To THE KiNGis moft facred Maiestie.

52 & 16 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 455

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of tlie hurting, wounding, and mutilatioun of Adame
Dalg'leifclie, fone and appeirand air to Johnne Dalgleifclie of Deucliar, of thre
fingeris of his left hand; committit in the moneth of Auguft, I6l7 yeiris, at
Muriefones-hill, befyde the burgh of Selkirk, vponc fet purpois, prouifioun, and
foirthocht fellonie.

Persewaris, Adame Dalgleifche, Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*.
Prelocutour in defence, Mr Thomas Nicolfone, Aduocat,

It is allegit be the pannell and his prelocutour, that this matter can nocht be
put to ane AiTyfe ; becaus, gif ony hurt or mutilatioun was gevin be him to the
perfewer, nocht granting the famyn, it was done in his awin defence ; infafar as^
vpon the fevint of Auguil 1617, the pannell was fet vpone be Adame Dalgleifche,
j)erfewar, neir to the toun of Selkirk, and was crewallie hurt be him : tlbr the
quhilk, the faid Adame, vpone the xxvj day of Marche 1618, being fummond
befoir the Scheref of Selkirk and his deputis, to vnderly the Law for the hurting
and wounding of the faid Walter Scott, defender, in the held, to the effulione of
his bluid in grit quantitie, was, be ane Alfyfe of xv fworne men, ffund gyltie,
and convict of the bluid and bluid-wyte : And producet the Rolment of Court,
for verificatioun thairof, vnder the fubfcriptioun of Alexander Wilkiefoun, clerk
of the faid Schereff-Court. Secundo, the Dittay is nawayis relevant to pas to
the knawlege of ane AiTyfe, becaus miitilatio ejl tantum ampufatio memhri ; and
thair is na member cuttit af, ffor the perfewaris haill hand, and fingeris thairof,
ar yit extant be occulour infpectioun ; and he is able to move his hand and
fingeris, and to grip thair with.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the allegeances foirfaidis audit to be
repellit, in refpect of the fummondis and Dittay producet ; with ane Teftimoniall
of the Chirurganes, fublcryuit be the Deacone and tlire of his bretherene, tefbiefeing the mutilatioun, togidder with the perfewaris awin mutilat hand, mutilat
in thre fingeris thairof fchawin judiciallie to the Judge. And as to the Rolment
of Court producet, na refpect lould be had thairto, the famyn being altogidder
null and repugnant to the lawis of this realme ; be the quhilk, ane Sentence is
gevin out in ane Criminall matter, the pairtie accufed nocht compeirand, convictand him of ane cryme ; quhairas, be the Law, (he nocht being prefent nor
compeirand,) he audit nocht to haif bene put to ane Alfyfe ; hot the niaill that
could haif bene done be the Schercfl' in that Jiidicatorio, was allanerlie, to haif
vnlawit him in pena contumacle : And albeit the Sdicrelf and his depute wald
geve out his or thair Teftimoniall, that the faid Adame Dalgleifche, quha is
mutilat, was the perfewar, na refpect fould be had thairto, becaus that is na pairt
of thair office: And thairfoir, na refpect foidd be had to the Rolment of Court.

To the quhilks, it is replyit be the pannell, that tlie Rolment of Court is
fufficient to inftruct his allegeance ; becaus, quhatevir the pannell did, it was in

456 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

his awin defence, in refpect of the forme of proceiding vfet in the Scheref Court,
quhilk is, to put the pairtie acculet to ane AlTyfe, albeit he be abfent and compeiris
nocht ; alwayis,^ it is fufficient to inftruct tliat pairt, that he is convict of the
bhiid and bluid-wyte, and was contumax^ and conipeirit nocht ; quhairupoun he
tuik the cryme vpone him : And as for that pairt of the allegeance maid be the
pannell, that the taking away of the finger is nocht amputatio memhri, becaus
the finger is nocht memhrum^ hot pars memhri, as layis Baldus, Leg. 7ionJiint
liber i, fF. de Jlatu liominum, — whois wordis ar, Nota, digitus non dicitur memhrum
^fed pars officiaUs memhri ; etjic amputans digitum non dicitur amputare mem"
brum : And Bartol. Confilio 201, fayis, Q/ieritur numque digitus fit memhrum ?
Refpondetur quod non, Jed potitis parsfiue ojficium memhri ; per Legem, non
funt liheri, ff. dejtatu hominum. — Tertio, the perfewar is nocht mutilat in thais
thre fingeris, becaus he is able to grip with tliame and hald ; and fa thay ar
nocht vnproffitable. — L({fi, thair can na payne of the body be inflictit, albeit the
thre fingeris was mutilat, as is allegit ; becaus na pane corporall can follow, feing
na death followit ; hot only ane arbitrarie and pecuniall payne, to be modifeit
be the Judge.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, to that pairt of the allegeance proponit, that
the cutting af of ane finger is nocht mutilatiomi, it is nocht pertinent to this
purpois ; becaus the perfewar complenis that he is mutilat of thre fingeris, quhilk
ar nocht cut aff, hot mutilat and maid vnhable, quhairby he lies nocht the full
and rycht vfe, nather of his thre fingeris, nor yit of that hand : And as for the
mutilatioun it felf, and verritie thairof, it is verifeit be oculour infpectioun, and
be the Chirurganes Teftimoniall producet : And quhair it is allegit, that the
Rolment of Court producet, is only vfet hot to verifie that the perfewer is
culjiable of the bluid and bluid-wyte, repeitis the anfuer maid thairto of befoir,
with this eik,^ that the Schereff had na power to put him to ane Affyfe, he nocht
compeirand ; fa that the Declaratioun maid be the Inqueift, audit nawayis to be
refpectit : And as to the Schereff*, he had nocht power to geve ony Declaratioun
thairupouii ; and the pairteis contumacie and abfence is na caufe to convict him
of the bluid or bluid-wyte ; and becaus of his abfence, he could be na forder
convict hot in payment of the vnlaw ; fua that, in refpect of the premiiTes, na
refpect audit to be had to the Rolment of Court or ony pairt thairof : And
albeit a pairtie be contumax and compeir nocht, that contumacie convictis him
nocht of the cryme ; vtherwayis, gif ane pairtie war contumax, it war nocht
neidfull to put him to ane Affyfe of new, quhilk war ane grit abfurditie ; feing,
ffndrie perfones being fummoned to compeir befoir the Juft;ice Generall and
vtheris Judges in Criminall cauffes, thay purge thair contumacie, and offer
thame felffis to ane tryell ; and cowmonlie thay ar clanget be the Affyfe ; as was
' At all events. ^ Contumacious ; showed contempt of Court by not appearing. ^ Addition.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 457

ffund in this Judgmeut, betuix Ciinninghame and WyVie. And as to the
Doctouris of the Law allegit, na refpect aucht to be had thairto in this Judicatorie, in refpect of the inviolable practique obferuet within this realme ; quhairin,
mutilatioun of ony pairt of ane mannis perfone, be the quhilk he is fruftrat of the
rycht vfe thairof, is put to ane Aflyfe determinatioun ; the Juftice advyfes and
refolues vpone the pwneifchment, be advyfe of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell.

The perfewar Reftrictis this Lybell to the mutilatioun of the thre laft fingers
of his left hand allanerlie.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that he can nocht be put to ane Aflyfe for
the mutilatioun lybellit ; in refpect, gif ony hurt or mutilatioun be gevin to the
perfewar, it was done be the perfewar him felf, in drawing of his awin fuord the
tyme lybellit ; quhilk he has dyuerfe tymes confeffit to Andro Scott Chirurgane,
and vtheris ; and defyres the perfewaris ayth to be tane thairupoun.

The perfewar, being folemnlie fuorne vpone the lafl allegeance, anent the
mutilatioun be him felf with his awin fuord; he, be his grit aith, denyit the faniyn;
and affirmet that he was mutilat be Walter Scott, defender, and na vther :
Quhairupoun my lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

The Justice ffindis the Dittay relevant ; and remittis the famyn to the tryell
of ane Aflyfe.

ASSISA.

Robert Trumble of Huttrilburne, Johnne Trumble of Howdene, James Kene, bail3ie of Selkirk,

James Pringill in Tynneis.^

The perfewar, be his grit ayth, fwore the Dittay to be of verritie : Quhairupoun my lord Aduocat afldt infl:rumentis. And in refpect thairof, and of the
Chirurganes Tellimoniall producet, with the evidence of the mutilatioun, be
fchawing of the perfewaris mutilat fingeris, Proteftis for Wilfull Errour, gif the
Aflyfe acquit. — The pannell repeittis the allegeances maid be him of befoir, now
to the Aflyfe, fpeciallie, that pairt thairof, that the cryme was committit in his
awin defence, and that he was perfewit be the perfewar, and is convict thairof,
and of the bluid and bluid-wyte, as the Rolment of Court beiris.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth and declaratioun of James Wauch in
Selkirk, chanceller, ffand the faid Walter Scott to be flylet, culpable, and convict
of the mutilatioun of the faid Adam of thre fingeris of his faid left hand, in
manner and at the tyme fi^ecifeit in the faid Dittay.

The Justice, in refpect of the former convictioun, Ordanit the pannell to
find caution for his compeirance befoir the Jufl;ice or his deputis, in the Tolbuth
of Edinburgh, the ellevint day of November inftant, to heir fic Dome and
pwneifchment to be inflictit vpone him for the laid cryme, as fall be inioynet be

^ The rest of the Assise were persons of no note.
VOL. III. * 3 M

45a CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

the Lordis of Secreit Counfall : And that he onnawayis depairt furth of the
burgh of Edinburgh, in the meane tyme ; vnder the pane of ffyve thowfeand
merkis money. — George Scott of Caftelfyde, Robert Scott of Hertwoidmyres,
Walter Scott in Loquharret, and Williame Mitchelhill, burges of Selkirk, become
cautioneris and fouerteis, &c.

No\^. 11. — Continued to the xiij day of Januar nixt.

(Jan. 13, 1619.) — The Justice, of confent of Adame Dalgleifche, perfewer, continewis the pronunceing of Dome, to the tent day of Februar nixtocum.

(Feb. 11.) — The dyett desertit, be directioun of the Thefaurer for the
Kingis pairt ; in refpect the pairteis ar agreit be ray Lord of Balcleuches Decreit
gevin thairin, to quhome the matter was fubmittit.

Nov. 11. — Gawin Nisbet, fone to Robert Nifbet of Dal5ell, and James
Scott in Ardblairis.
Dilaitit of airt and jjairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ James Hammiltoun in
Brigbrae ; committit at ane Oifler-hous, callit the Woman-hill, in the moneth
of . . . ., 1617.

Persewar, Robert Hammiltoun, as brother.

The Juftice, of confent of aither pairtie, continewis this dyet to the thrid day
of the air (of Lanerk), or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning, &c.

[3/r Alexander Coluile.']

Cuttinti: antr Carrpinci: abjai? t\i <^voh)inci: Ciml)ti%

Nov. 18. — Dauid Spalding of Effintullie, and Alexander Robertfone
of Myddill Downie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the cutting down of certane grit growand treyis,
and away-taking thairof, furth of Johnne Erie of Mar his Forreftis and woidis,
within the boundis of Braemar, Cromar, Strathdie, and Glengarie.

In refpect of thair compeirance, offerit thame felffis to the tryell of the Law,
as altogidder innocent thairof; and protellit for thair cautioneris releif ; and
that thai fould nocht be trubillit or charget for the faidis allegit crymes.

Nov. 18. — James Myddiltoun, fone to Robert Myddiltoun, tail5eour,

burges of Edinburghe.^

The famyn day compeirit perfonallie, in judgement, Robert Wynrahame,

Herauld, and producet ane Supplicatiouii, quliilk was gevin in to the Lordis of

his Maiefteis Secreit Counfall, be James Myddiltoun, fone to Robert Myddiltoun,

* See Aug. 26, 1G12, where the whole particulars of the Trial are inserted.

52 & 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 459

tail5eour burges of Edinburglie, anent the faid James puting to libertie ; togidder
with the faidis Lordis of Secreit Counfall thair Warraiid and delyuerance on
the bak thairof. Off the quhilk Supplicatioux and delyuerance the tennour
followis.

Mx Lordis of Secreit Counsall, vnto 50ur lordfchipis humlie nieanis and fchawis I, 3our
feruitour, James Mydiltoun, fone lauchfuU to vmq'<^ Robert Mydiltoun, tail3eour burges of Ed"", That
quhair, vpone occafioun of that vnhappie accident of the flauchter of vrnq'*" Clement Mauchane, committit be me, I was takin, prefentit to juflice, and convict for J»e fame, and the dome of death was
pronuncet aganis me accoirdinglie tliairfoir : And ]ie pairtie, from tyme to tyme, thir fex 3eiris bygane,
haifing gevin eir to the offeris of AfTythement,' quhilkis war by me and my freindis maid and oft'erit
vnto tbame ; in end, by fubmiffioun of J>e matter vnto 50ur lordfchipis Sentence and Decreit, as gevin
and pronuncet fairintill, quhairby I am decernit to be Banischet pe realmes of Scotland and Ingland,
and ordanit never to returne agane within the fame, without Licence and confent of Sir Johnne
Cokburne of Ormeltoun, kny*, Juflice clerk, and Mr James Mauchane, brother to the faid vmq'^
Clement Mauchane, 6rft had and obtenit pairto, vnder the pane of deid, to be execute vpone me without fauour ; conforme to ])e Sentence and dome alreddie gevin and pronuncet aganis me in ])is matter.
Accoirding quhairvnto, I am maift willing to act my felff in ])e buikis of Adiornall : In confuleratioun
quhairof, I humblie befeik 50ur lordfchip to geve Warrand and command, heirby, to the Jultice clerk
and his deputis to tak me actit in the buikis of Adiornall, in maner and to the effect foirfaid, vnder J)e
pane aboue writtin : Quhairanent J>ir prefentis fall be vnto fe Juflice clerk and his deputis ane Warrand
fufficient : And ^our lordfchipis anfuer.

Apud Ed*, xvij Nouembris, 1618, The Lordis Ordanis the Juflice, Juflice clerk, and his deputis,
to appoint and fet a Juflice Court, and to tak ]iis fupplicant actit in ])e buikis of Adiornall, that he fall
depaiit furth of the realmes of Scotland and England, within pe fpace of ane moneth eftir ])e dait
heirof; and returne (nocht) agane within ]ns realme, vnder the pane of deid: And he haifing actit
him felff, as faid is, Ordanis J)e faid Juflice to cans put him to libertie : And Ordanis this fupplicant,
that, during the tyme of his remaning within ]ns cuntrie, he hant^ nocht Kirk nor mercat, and that he
weir nocht a fwoird.

Al. Cancell^ Sanctandrois. Lauderdaill. Carxagy. J. Prymrois.

And accoirding to the faid Warrand, the faid Robert Wynrahame defyret
my Lord Juftice to tak the faid James Mydiltoun actit ; lyk as, the faid James
Mydiltoun, immediatlie thaireftir, being, be directioun of the Juflice, brocht
furth of vvaird be George Foulis, his Maiefteis Maifler Cun5eour,' and ane of the
f)refent Bailleis of Edinburglie, and prefentit vpone pannell, conforme to the
foirfaid Supplicatioun and Warrand on the bak thairof, maift willinglie become
actit, bund, and obleift, that he fall depairt and pafs of the reahnes of Scotland
and Ingland, within the fpace of ane moneth, &c.'* Quhairvnto my Lord Juftice
interponet his authoritie and Decreit : And in refpect of the former Act, and for
obedience of the faid Warrand, Ordanis the faid James Mydiltoun to be frod and

* A compensation or solatuun, by way of fine, paid to the relations of the murdered ])arly.
* Haunt ; frequent. ^ Coiner ; Master of the Mint. This oflBeer (George Eoulis of Kavelston)

was the son-in-law and successor of George Bannatyne, tlie far-famed Compiler of the greatest
body of Ancient Scotish Poetry now extant ; iu honour of whom tlie Literary Association, termed
THE Bannatyne Club, assumed his name. '' As above narrated.

460 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

relevit furth of the faid Tolbuth and waird of Edinburghe be the Proveift and
bailleis of Edinburghe.

The faid James Mydiltoun, oUm in career e^ and now at libertie furth of waird,
Ratifeis, approves, and affirrnes the Band maid and fubfcryiiit be him and his
freindis, anent his Banifchment, &c., and payment of the fowmes of money thairin
contenit, &c.

Nov. 20. — Pathick Heroun of Kierochtrie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^'' Robert Gordoun of Bairnairny ; committit within the duelling hous of Andro McDowell, mercheand in
Monygof, in the moneth of September laft.

Persewar, Alexander Gordoun of Barnernie, eldefl fone.

The pannell proteflis for his cautioneris releif ; and offeris him felf to the
tryell of the Law, for the faid allegit cryme, quhairof he is altogidder innocent ;
difaffenting to all maner of continuatioun.

The Juftice Continewis this dyet, of the perfeweris confent and defyre, to the
thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the fdierefdome quhair the pannell duellis,
(Wigtoun,) or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning. And ordanis cautioun to be ffund
be him for his entrie to that effect, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of
Parliament : Quha fund Sir Patrick IVrkie of Larg cautioun for his entrie, &c.

^surpinci: i^ins's91uti)oriti), i^i) taluittj: Captibe anlr sPttainincj:, ^c

Nov. 20. — Thomas Meldrum of Idene ; ^ Walter Grant, his ferv^and ;

James Grant in Tilliebo ; Jolinne Roife, fervand to the faid

Thomas.

Dilaitit for taking and apprehending of Johnne IVIeldrum of Ordley captiue

and priffoner, furth of his duelling houfe of Ordley, vpone the viij day of Maij,

1612 yeiris, vnder nycht; cayreit him to the faid Thomas duelling hous of

Idene, quhairin he was detenit, in privato careere, be the fpace of foure dayis

and foure nychtis ; and thairfra, cayreit him to Sir Alexander Gordoun of

Clwneis hous, quhair he was detenit, in iwivato curcere, the fpace of tua dayis

and tua nychtis ; and thairfra broclit him, as ane captiue, all the way to the

burgh of Edinburghe, to the duelling hous of Alexander ^Vatfone, quhairin he

was detenit, in i^rivato careere^ as ane priffoner, the fpace of xxiiij houris :

Vfurpeand thairby his Maiefteis authoritie vpone thame, in taking and detening

of the faid Johnne, in iwivato career e, but" Commiffioun or authoritie, be the

fpaces foirfaid.

Persewaris, Johnne Meldrum of Ordley ; Sir Williame Oliphant, kny^

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Hoip, Mr Tliomas Nicolfone, elder.

' See Jan. 9, 1618. - Without.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 461

It is allegit be the pannell, that na proces can be grantit at Johnne IVIeldruinis
iullance, becaus he is rebell and at his Maiefteis home ; anu producet fyve
feuerall Hoirningis for verifeing thairof. — My lord Aduocat declairis he infiftis
in the perfute for the I^ngis Maiefteis intreis aganis the pannell, quha had na
power to tak and detene the faid Johnne, in maner lybellit.

It is allegit be the pannell, that gif the Dittay war trew, (nocht grantand the
famyn,) that thai did na wrang in taking and detening of the faid Johnne
Meldrum, becaus the tyme of his taking, he was rebell and at the home ; and
repeittis the Hoirningis producet for inftructing thairof: And as the pannell
could nocht be callit for Slauchter of ane rebell at that tyme, far les can thai be
perfewit for his taking. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, as perfewer,
that the exception audit to be repellit ; Jffirjti becaus he infiftis vpone the haill
lybell coniunctim, as ane cryme to infer the conclufioun thairin contenit, viz.
taking and detening of Johnne Meldrum in privato career e, as the lybell beiris :
Seeundo, adheirand to the firft anfuer, geveand^ the faid Johnne had bene rebell,
the pannell had na Warrand to tak or apj^rehend him, thay nor nane of thame
being Magiftrattis, haifand na Jurifdictioun, power, nor commiffioun ; feing the
pannell could nevir haif bene accufet for fuffering a rebell to pas vp and doun the
cuntrie, nather warthayaftrictitof the Law^ totakhim,nather myclit thay tak him.

It is duplyit be the pannell, that the exceptioun ftandis relevant, nochtwithftanding of the anfuer, infafar as the Kingis Maiefteis rebell can haif na benifeit
of his Maiefteis Lawis ; and thairfoir, as nocht being the Kingis frie leige, it
was lauchfull to the pannell to tak him ; and in the Law it is cleir, quod eapere
Bannifum miieu'ique permitt'itur^ L. finali Cod. de Mcdejicis et Maehematicis ;
Baldus in Lege prima. Cod. de Summa Tr'initate : And the reflbne of the Law
Is, qtiia Bannifus hahetur pro fugit'wo ; et fugitivum qiuUhet potejl eapere ;
Bald, in Lege qui bonis. Cod. qui bonis cedere : And it was nevir practizet in
this Judicatorie, that Hoirning being obiectit and producet, ather for hurting,
flaying, or taking of ony man, proces was grantit. And it being now oj)ponit,
that the perfone tane was the Kingis Rebell, the pairtie perfewit was nevir, nor
can nevir be put to the knawlege of ane Affyfe. Lykas, it is allegit, that the
Laird of JJrumlangrig,hemg accufet for taking of Kirkmichell, was nocht put
to ane AfTyfe. It is forder eikit to the allegeance, that the pannell had ane
fpeciall intreis to tak him, becaus he was rebell and at the home for nocht
removeing fra his landis of Woidheid, quhilkis landis of "W'oidheid he violentlie
pofteflit, and oppreft the tennentis. Lyk as, the faid Thomas Meldrum of Iden,
finding the faid Johnne Meldrum to be nyne or ten tymes his JMaiefteis rebell,
and haifing letteris of Captioun to tak and apprehend him, the faid Johnne being

' Giving or granting, for tlie sake of argument. • Bound by law.

462 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

ane fiigitiue and ane howlat/ nocht appeirand in the day ; and it being cum to
the pannellis knawlege, the tyme lybellit, that he was cum, vnder filence of nycht,
and enterit within the houffis, the pannell, vpon fuddantie, being adverteift by the
fpyis, nocht haifing the occaiioun" of ane meflinger, was forcet of neceffiticj^j/'op^^r
2)ericidumfiige,io pas him felf, with his awin domellik fervandis, and to feafevpone
the faid Johnne, of intentioun to exhibeit him to Juftice, he being his Maieiteis
rebell for cauffes Criminal!, fie as for invaiding the Guidincm of Ha r thill, &c.,
as the Hoirningis beiris : Lyk as, with all convenient dilligence, the pannell
brocht the faid Johnne Meldrum to Edinburghe, of intentioun to exhibeit him
to juftice ; and in the meane tyme, he being fealit vpone and put in waird, at
the inftanceof dyuerfe j^erfones, baithfor dett, ryottis, and oppreffiones. Quhairvpone the pannell meanit him felff ^ to the Lordis of Secreit Counfell ; quha, be
thair Warrand and directioun, vpone the xxj of Maij, I6l2, Ordanit the faid
cautioun for obferveing his Maiefteis peace, and his perfonall compeirance, quhan
euir he fould be charget thairto, vnder the pane of V™ (5000) merkis, as the
Ordinance, heirwith j^roducet, beiris. Sua that the pannell, being in lirofecutione
'proprie injurie, for freithing* him felfF and his tennentis of ane manifeft oppreffour, et quiim latitabat tanquam fugitivus^ as faid is, he was in optima fide to tak
him ; and nather the captor nor detentioun can be comptit criminall, becaus it is
lauchfull, cnilihet ex populo, to tak ane notorious malefactour, and to exhibeit him
to juftice ; and his detentioun is nocht culpa, becaus he was prefentit to juftice.
It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat to the firft pairt of the Duply, that he
repeitis his former anfuer ; for albeit ane rebell may nather perfew nor defend
in judgement, that is na reafone quhairfoir everie privat man fould tak him at
his awin hand, and detene him in his privat hous, as is fet doun in the lybell.
Quhair the defender wald compair ane rebell cum hannito, nocht grantand to the
Law allegit, quhilk makis na mentioun de Bannito, fifor Bannitus wasproperlie
callit he quha tranfgreflit aganis the Empyre or the Eftait. As to the allegeance
proponit aganis all the perfeweris rebelliones, thair is nocht ane proponit for ane
criminall caufe perfewit criminallie ; and as to the haill ciuile Hoirningis, repeittis
as of befoir. And quhair it is allegit, that he was rebell at the inftance of Thomas
Meldrum him felff, ane of the pannell, for nocht removeing fra his landis of
Woidheid, it is anfuerit, that albeit he was pairtie aganis him, that gave him na
authoritie to tak him at his awin hand, fpeciallie being duelling and remaning in
his awin hous, and vpone his awin heritage of Ordley, and nawayis being fugitiue
fra his Maiefteis lawis at that tyme. As to the Hoirning vfet aganis him, at
the inftance of his Maiefteis Aduocat for the tyme, the Guidman of Hearthill

' Owl. Such porsfins were likewise often termed night-hawks. ^ Opportunity ; convenience.

^ Made tsuit ; complained. * Freeing ; ridding.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 463

and his bairnis, is na Criminall Hoirning, becaiife it proceidis frome ane perfute
agitat afoir the Comifell ; and ffbrder, to purge that Hoirning, he was relaxt
thairfra, lang ofbefoir, viz. in anno 1609- As to the Letteris of Captioun
producet, na refpect fould be had thairto, becaus thair is an executioun producet,
quhairuiDoun I tak inftrumentis, defyreing the haill blankis thairintill to be
fcoirit ; and allegis, that na refpect fould be had thairto, becaus the Letteris of
Captioun ar nocht direct to him, nor to nane of the perfones that concurret with
him in the taking of the faid Johnne Meldrum : Lyk as, na refpect aucht to be
had to the faidis Letteris of Captioun, becaus thair is na executioun producet.
As to the Warrand of the Secreit Counfell, producet, the perfewar acceptis the
famyn, and alledges that this Warrand, gevin vpone the xxj of Maij, 1612, could
be na Warrand to the perfones on pannell, nor nane of thame, to haif tane him
vpone the aucht day of Maij preceiding, and to haif keipit him in privatis car^
cerihus to the faid xxj day, quum career eji meri imperij, et non competit privato ;
and ane Ordiner Judge lies nocht power to keip ane perfone tane /// privafo domo
attour ^ the fj)ace of xxiiij houris. Sua, infiftand vpone the haill lybell coniunctlie,
ais is eonfauet, the haill argumentis proponit for the pannell audit to be repellit.
"It is forder exceptit be the pannell, that with the Hoirningis producet, and
allegeances foundit vpone the rebellioun of the perfewar, the defender did na
wrang to tak or detene the perfewar, for the reffones foirfaidis. And quhair it
is allegit, that he mycht nocht detene him, quia eareer ejl meri ijnjjerli ; ffirj},
it is allegit, that quhan ane rebell is tane ad Jmnc Jinem, to prefent him to the
Judge Ordiner, thair is na wrang done, quhilk is in this caice ; as is decydit
in the Law laitlie allegit, quod ait Pretor, Si dehitorum ff. Digeft. que in
fraudem creditonim : And thairfoir, feing the defender tuik the perfewer, being
ane rebell, and detenit him quhilF he brocli him to the fait of Jullice, and thair
prefentit him, thair can be na vfurpatioun of the Kingis authoritie : And as for
the fpace of detentioun, it may be langer or fchorter, accoirding to the diftance
of the place ; as is cleir in Julius Clarus, L. quinta ^ finali, // capfus, et aJiquis
potejl ilium detinere, et captum Judici prefentare, etiam pojlfepiem dies. And
the fame Clarus fchawis, quhair it w^as practizet contra Dominum Joannem
Stephanwm, qui Ju?'e)?ije2)f em ^^^^^ detinuit, ^c. Jed cum co?}ipertu)nJ)ferit, quod
JTudici et officialis ohtulerif, ahfolutus fuerit. — Secundo, it is nocht capitall, hot
the gritteft pane that is inflictit is, tot dies manere in carcere pul>Ueo, qnot ilium
in privato incluferit : fibr albeit Lex vnica, Cod. de privato carcere, appointis
it penam maiejtatis, yit it is mendit be the nixt Conflitutioun immediatlie thaireftir following, quhilk appointis the pane foirfaid. Ita Cujacius, &c. : And, gif
neid beis, fall be provin be the confuetude of all Nationes ; and gif privati

' More than ; above. ^ Until,

461 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1618.

carceres (qiihairin tliay ar done be manifefl vfiirpatioiin) ar nocht capitall,
midto minus can the pannell fall under ony cor2:)oralI pvvneifchment, haifing tane
ane manifeft oppreffour, and prefenting him to Jufcice. Lnji, as to the Relaxatioiin fra HarthiUis Hoirning, it is null, becaus the Kingis Aduocat and the
pairtie is thairintill ordanit to be funiniond, quhilk is nocht done.

My lord Aduocat, anfuerand to the ffiril i:)airt of the fecund allegeance, fayis,
that the perfewer is formallie contrair to the pannell, and that the lybell contenis
ane fufficient Criminall cans, to put the pannell to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe :
And quhair it is allegit, that the pannell brocht the perfewer and prefentit him
to ane .Judge, defyres the i)annell to condifcend vpone the name of the Judge to
quhonie he was jirefentit ; ffor it is treuthe, that quhan he was brocht to Ed%
he brocht him to the calfay,^ and than tuik inftrumentis of his fetting to libertie ;
and thairefter, certane of his creditouris, be vertew of Captioun, tuik him and
pat him in waird. And quhan it is allegit that the taking of perfones and
keiping of thame in ^^^'ivfitis carcerihits is nocht capitall, the direct contrair is of
verritie ; becaus the faid cryme is nocht only capitall, bot, be the rigour of the
Law, is trelTonable ; as was decydit befoir the Juftice General aganis the Erles
of Huntlie and Crafurd, ffor taking of the Maijier of Glames. As to the
practique of the Laird of Driimlanrig, in that caice it was alleget, for defence
of Dfiindangrigt that Kirkmichell was tane be vertew of Letteris of Captioun,
direct to the SchereffofNidifdaiU, and na Interlocutour was pronuncet in that
caufe, becaus the perfewaj- j^aft fra the perfute thairof, j^f'o loco et tempore. In
refpect quhairof, the lybell ftandis relevant ; and, nochtwithftanding of thefaidis
allegeances maid be the pannell in the contrair, fould be put to the knawlege of
ane Affyfe.

The Justice continewis his Interlocutour to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice
air of the fcherefdome of Aberdene, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning — Patrik
Meldrum ffiear of Iden become fouertie for the entrie of the faidis Thomas
Meldrum of Iden, his father.

^laitgijttr— ^Drse-sttalincj:*

Nov. 20. — JonNNE Meldru^ni of Ordley.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Criftian Watfone, fpous to
Alexander Bythe fumtyme in Scottiftoun, in manner fpecifeit in the Letteris ;
committit in Marche J 614 ; And for airt and pairt of the Steilling of tua horfis
fra Thomas Meldrum of Idene ; committit in September, 1608.

Persewaris, Alexander Eytlie, as fpous; Tliomas Meldrum of Idene ; Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*.
Prelocutour in defence, Mr Vmphra Blindfchellis, (Advocate.)

' Causeway ; the paved i)ublic streets within the gates.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. ' 4^5

The Justice continewis this dyet, for tryell of baithe the crymes aboue
written, to the thrid day of the nixt Juflice-air of the Sherefdome of Abirdene,
&c. — Mr Williame Levingftoune become fouertie, &c.

^Iausl)ttr— IBemtmfiraticiiT*

Dec. 4. — Williame Stewart, at the raylne of Dalcrove.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vinq'*" Daiiid Tofcheoche, younger
of Mony vaird, and of airt and pairt of the Demembring of Dauid Malloche, his
ferwand, of his rycht hand ; and remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris ;
committit the 24 of Junij laft, within the burgh of Perthe.^

Compeirit Hew Campbell excufatorio nomine for Annas Grdhame Lachj
]\Ionyvair(ly and producet the Letteris deulie execute and indorfate, togidder
with ane Teftimoniall, fubfcryuit be the faid Annas, and be Mr Johnne IMenteith
Minister at Mon3ie, and Mr Dauid Drummoud Minifter at CreifF, teftifeing the
faid Annas Grahame to be newlie delyuerit of hir birth ; and thairthrow, vnhable
to travell to the keiping of this dyet and perfute of the faid Williame Stewart
for the faid cryme : And in refpect thairof, proteftit for releif of the Lairdis of
Laweris and Inchebrakie, cautioneris for repoirting and perfute of the faidis
Letteris.

The Justice continewis the dyet to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of
the Scherefdome of Perthe, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning ; and ordanis the
pannell to find cautioun for his re-entrie. Plegio, Wcdtero Stewart de Heildoun.
Persewar, Dauid Malloche, furatyme fervand to vmq^^ Dauid Tofcheoche.
(Feb. 25, 1620.) — The perfewer declaris, that at the tyme of the raifing
of the Letteris aganis the pannell, informatioun was gevin to him that the faid
W"* Stewart was in companie with Laurence Bruce of Cultmalundie, Alexander
Flemyng of Monefs, Alexander Bruce, and remanent perfoues thair complices,
at the away-flreking of his hand ; bot fenfyne, he hes tryit^ that he is altogidder
innocent thairof, nather was he vpone the grund at the committing of that fact :
In refpect quhairof, he ])Siffis Jimplicite?' fra the faid Williame his perfute.

Continued to the air of Perthe, tertio Itineris, or foner, vpone xv dayis
wairning. Thomas Layng, indueller in Leyth, cautioner.

Jblaugjtcn

Dec. 9. — Robert Campbell, fone to Colene Cami)bell, burges of
Glefgow.
PersewaRIS, Thomas Symfoun at the Waft-poirt of Edinburghe, as brother to the defunct; Sir

Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kiiy'.

' See this Collection, Jul. 29, 1G18, and Nov, 17, 1G19. » Troved ; ascertained.

VOL. III. 3 N

466 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1619.

The pannell takis inftrumentis of his entrie, and offerris him felfF to the tiyell
of the Law for the faid allegit ciyme ; affirmeing him felff to be altogidder
imiocent thairof ; and difalTentis to all forder continuatioun, in refpect that, to
the keiping of that dyet, and cleiring of his innocencie of the allegit Slauchter
aboue writtin, being out of the cuntrie this threttene moneth bygane, he being
maid foirfene' thairof, be Letteris direct to him, and reffauit be him in S^mne,
he hes cum furth of Spaijne, and left his affairs thair vnperfyttit, haifing na vther
errand to returne hame bot to cleir him felff of lie ane haynous imputatioun ;
quhairof he is innocent.

iNTEnLocuTOR. The Juilice continewis this matter, and all tryell to be tane thairintill, to the
thrid day of the air (Renfrew), or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning ; and Ordanis the pannell to find
cautiouD for his re-entrie to that effect, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament : Difchargeing in the meane tyme all letteris to be direct aganis him or his cautioner, except he be refident
within the cuntrie for the tyme, nocht vpone the poynt of his voyadge ; nather that ony Letteris be
direct in the tyme of wynter : And declaris, that in caice he be charged vpone the poynt of his
voyadge, for his compeirance vpone a fyftene dayis thaireftir, in caice at the day of compeirance it be
allegit be his cautioner that he could nocht guidlie enter hira, becaus he was boun^ to his voyadge furth
of the cuntrie the tyme of the geving of the charge, refpect and confideratioun fall be had to the faid
allegeance, the famyn being lauchfuUie verifeit and provin to be of veritie : And laft, the Juftice
Difcharges the haill perfones fummoned vpone this Affyfe fra all compeirance herein in tyme cuming,
in refpect this is the fecund dyet keipit be thame, and nathing is done thairintill, &c.

I^CuRiA Jii/iiciarie Jl d. n. Hegis, tenia in pretorio de Edinhurghe, per M, Patricium Sandis,
Jii/iiciariumjl d. n. Regis, hac in parte, virtute Commijfionis Dominorum Secreti Conjilij.'^

Jan. 15, 1619. — Andro Wast, mafone burges of Dundie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ Alexander Tail3eour, his
prenteis, be throwing ane four-futtit llule at his breift and heart, and geving
him ane deidlie flraik thairwith ; committit within his awin duelling hous, in
Dundie, in the moneth of Januar, I6II ; quhairof he deceifb, in Februar thaireftir, being cayreit fra Dundie to his fatheris hous in Elgyn, in ane horfe-litter,
in grit dollour and payne, quhair he deceiffit of the faid deidlie hurt.

Persewaris, Johnne Tail5eour, mafone burges of Elgyn, as father ; Sir W. Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*
" - Prelocutour in defence, Mr Alexander Peiblis.

It is allegit be the pannell, that the Dittay, as it is qualifeit, is nawayis relevant
to pas to ane Affyfe ; becaus it is cleir, be the Dittay, that eftir the allegit ftraik
gevin to the defunct with the ftule lybellit, he travellit the fpace of fourfcoir
myles frome Dundie to Elgyn ; quha, eftir his coming to Elgyn, be the exces of
travell, he contractit ane fever, quhairof he deceift. — It is anfuerit be my lord
Aduocat, that the allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay beiring
the defunct to haif reffauit ane deidlie ff;raik, quhilk was the caufe of his daithe.
* Acquainted. ^ Prepared ; furnished ; equipped.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 467

The Justice ffindis the Dittay relevant ; and Ordanis the famyn to be tryit
be ane AfTyfe.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fueiring of the Affyfe ; and thaireftir
declairit, that feing they ar all induelleris in Dundie, to quhome the treutli of
this matter was beft knawin ; and that the defunct reffauit ane deidlie ftraik,
quhairof he deceift, proteftis for WilfuU Errour, gif thay acquit. — The pannell
proteflit in the contrair, affirmeing that the Defunct paft haill and feir ^ furth of
Dundie to Elgyn, and travellit Ixxx myles thaireftir, vpone fute.

Verdict. The Affyfe, be the repoirt and declaratioun of Robert Moreife,
merchand in Dundie, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit, all in ane voce,
the faid Andro Waft to be Clene, innocent, and acquit of the faid crewall
Slauchter.

^UnQf^ttv—ihoot in r.tcnljpatioir, hv Mitntssts, rtfustlj*

Jan. 15. — James Scrymgeour in Balquhadlie.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Eduard in Acharne,
be ftreking him ane deidlie ftraik in the heid, in September 1617 ; quhairof he
deceiffit in Januar thaireftir.

Persewaris, Johnne Eduard, as fone ; Dauid Eduard, as brother; Sir W. Oliphant, kny*.
Preloquitouris for the pannell, Mr Thomas Hoip, Mr William Oliphant, younger.

It is allegit be the pannell and his prelocutouris, that the Dittay is nawayis
relevant to pas to ane Affyfe, nather in the diftinct memberis nor coJijunctim ;
nather can ony Homiceid be tryit or pwneift, except the famyn proceid vpone
ffoirthocht ffellony. As to that member of the Dittay, beiring the defunct to
haif bene beft and dung with ane rung,^ 7ion relevat to infer ane cryme. Secundo,
as to that article thairof, quhair the pannell haket his heid with ane quhinger,^
(nocht granting the famyn,) it is na capitall cryme, hot ane ryote ; the tryell
quhairof pertenis to the Counfell. Tertio, quhair it is allegit, that he was ftrukin
to the grund, and hurt in his nobill pairtis, non relevat, vnles the perfewar condifcend quhat intrallis or noble pairtis was brokin. Quarto, as to that point of
the lybell, quhilk is the chiefeft member, beiring, that be occafioun of the haill
ftraikis preceiding, he dwynet and pynet away to the tyme of his daith, /iifllo
modo relevat, vnles he fay j^ojilh/e, that he deceift be thais ftraikis ; ?ia?n non clici
potejl prehere occajionem mortis, nijijit cauja mortis. — It is anfuerit be ni)' lord
Aduocat, that the allegeance foirfaid aucht to be repellit, in rcfpect of the lybell
beirand, that the defunct deceift of the ftraikis lybellit.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that the Dittay, as it is mendit, is nawayis
relevant ; becaus the preceiding qualificatioun can nocht be efteniit caii/am mortis,
except it war lybellit, that the defunct, inimediatlie eftir the allegit ftraikis, he

' Whole and sound, or hearty. * Basted and violently struck Avith a cudgel or heavy staft'.

^ Hacked or iwtcJied his head with a sort of han'^er or short sword.

468 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 16ig.

fell doun in found ^ to the grund ; or ellis, that be the llraikis he contractit a
deidlie difeafe and lay bedfaft, ather iinniediatlie eftir the llraikis to be the caus
of a fupervenient difeis ; ffor be the co^vmoun confent of all Laweris, vidniis non
dicitur caufa mortis^ qitando a die vidneris vjque ad vigejimum primum diem
nulla fnpervenit fehris vidnerato. Panormitanus, ad Cap. prcjbiteriumy extra
de Ilomicidium. In the quhilk place, Panormitan and all the Canoniftis confentis, quod hoc fit judicium medicorum ; ffor if ony ffever had followit, gif he
had convalelfit thaireftir, the ffever falling out vpone the ftraik was na caufe of
deathe ; mtdto magis in this caice, na fever following vpone the allegit flraik
gevin. In refpect quhairof, the Dittay is nawayis relevant, hoc autento maxinWy
that in the Dittay it is confefl, that the perfone flane was threfcoir ten yeiris of
age, fa that it was nocht pofTible to him to reffaue deidlie woundis, and to leave
in health fa ang but^ feiknes.

It is anfuei'it be the perfewaris, that the allegance audit to be repellit, in refpect
of the Dittay beiring deidlie woundis, in maner qualifeit in the Dittay ; and that
he dwynet and continewit in grit pane to the tyme of his deceis.

It is duplyit be the pannell, that my lord Aduocattis reply is only in refpect
of tlie lafl member ; and thairfoir the vther tua, as nocht relevant, fould be fcoiret
out of the Suramondis.

My lord Aduocat declairis, he infiftis vpone the Dittay conjunctim, as it ife
confauet. — The pannell allegit in the contrair, that it can nocht be conjoj'^net. —
It is allegit pe7'emptorie be the pannell, that it can nocht be afiirmet that Johnne
Eduard deit of the allegit ftraikis, in refpect of the lybell, quhilk beiris, that he
levit be the fpace of fouue monethis (albeit, in rei veritate, he levit quhill a thre
dayis befoir Faflrenifevin,^ quhilk was the 18 of Februar) : becaus fecundinn
fententiam omnium medicorum^ nullus lethaliter vulneratus ijofefl vivere vltra
quadraginta dies. Jul. Clarus ad f Homicidium, vbi iiibdit, quod ita ohfervat
conwiunisjtilus^ etji vulneratus poji illatum vulnus amhulaverit, non prof umitur
decejjijje ex vidnere. Lege vnica. Cod. de Emendationefer varum. Bartol. ad
Legem finalem, ff.jicarijs, particulo preterea extvade Clerico percujjore. Pharmacius de Homicidio, Tit. 14, queft. 125, num. 46, vbi teftatur de communi
medicorum opinione, Vulneratum qui vltra quadraginta dies vitam porrigit, iion
prefumitur ex vulnere decejjijffe. And be all thair confentis, gif the pairtie nocht
onlie leave,^ hot alfo gif he leave in healthe, without feiknes, and walk vp and
doun in healthe, as ane haill man, the fpace of thre dayis, it is accoirdit, that
the wound can nocht be the caufe of daithe : And the grund ^ of this is tane out
of the law of Moyfes, Exod. cap. 21, ver. 21. Off the quhilkis it is fubfumet,
nocht onlie that the defunct levit fourtie dayis, bot neir-hand foure tymes fourtie

^ In a swoon or fainting fit. ^ To live, in health, so long without sickness. ^ Fasten'a-eFe j

the day before the commencement of Lent. ^ Live ; smvive. ^ Ground ; warrant.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 469

dayis, ffor he deit vpone the 16 or 17 of ffebruar 1618 : During the qiihilk tyme,
he was nocht onlie trie of feiknes, nor nevir lay bedfaft, except in the ordiner
tyme of reft, in the nycht ; bot alfo, he walkit vp and doun the cuntrie and
parrochines about, as ane haill man, and nevir tuik bed quhill aucht dayis befoir
his deceis, at quhilk tyme he was tane with ane fever, quhairof baith he and his
wyfe deceiffit. — Nather can the accufer, quhilk is the defunctis fone, be hard to
allege in the contrair ; becaus, at Martimes thaireftir, he forcet his father out of
his awin hous ; and the particuleris of this exceptioun the pannell offeris to prove
be Witneffes, quha are fummond be the Lordis delyuerance : Quhilkis Letteris,
proceiding vpone the faid delyuerance, thay produce, and defyres that the WitnelTes may be callit and admittit thairupoune. L({ff, the lybell can nocht be
fuftenit ad hiinc effectumy to pwneis the pannell to death, becaus nullum Honiicidium morte jyunitur, niji homicidium dolqfum et deUheratum Jioe ex felonict ;
aut culpofum vel cqfucde 7ion puniuntur ad mortem. And for proveing of this
propofitioun, the pannell cites the third Parliament of King James the ffirft, cap.
51, Quhair the Eftaitis diftinguifches betuix Slauchter of fuddentie, and Slauchter of ffoirthocht ffellonie ; and declairis ffellonie to be pwneift be death ; bot
the vther, that the pairtie tl-^aithed fall follow, and the pairtie trefpaffand defend,
accoirding to the courfe of the auld Lawis of this cuntrie : And (iclyk, in the 6
Parliament of King James the ffirft, cap. 95, quhilk contenis the fame diftinctioun,
and clofes this article, that gif it be ffoirthocht ffellonie, he fall die thairfoir.
Vpone the quhilkis it is fubfumet, that it was nevir lybellit, nor can be lybellit,
that this Slauchter was committit vpone ffoirthocht ffellonie ; bot be the contrair
it is trew, that quhateuir the pannell did, he did it as maifter to Findhiy Ramfay and vniq'*" Johnne Eduard, being baith his tennentis, et fic dans operam ret
licite ; in fa far as Johnne Eduard, being decernit in Court, in Junij 1617, of his
awin confent to haif done wrang in teilling and fa wing' of ane peice of land
pertening to the faid Finlay Ramfay ; and be the Act of Court, the officer was
ordanit to pas the tyme of fchering, and fcheir and leid the coirnes, as lawin
vpone Finlay Ramfayis grund ; lyk as, the faidis coirnis war arreiflit be the
officer, vpone the fext of Junij 1617 ; and thaireftir, in the tyme of fcheiring, the
faid officer haifing paft to the grundis, and fchorne the coirnes, and being leiding
the famyn away, the faid Johnne Edward cam maift proudlie and coiiteiiiptuouflie (his maifter being vpon the grund), and defoircet the officer in his prelciis ;
quhairupone the officer brak his wand :^ Lyk as, the defunct being connnandit
be his maifter to defift, he maift proudlie repynet contrair his Maiefleis lawis ;
and the pannell being prefent, haifing ane littill flalff in his liand, ftrak tlio
defunct thairwith vpone the held, and did no forder; nochtwithilanding quliairof,

^ Tilling or plougliinp^, and sowing. ^ Broke his staff or wand of office, symbolical of liis being

deforced, as it was termed, i. e. violently and forcibly interrupted in the execution of his ofHce.

470 CRIMINAL TRIALS, A.D. I6l9:

the defunct proudlie cayreit away the coirnes to his awin 5aird, walking foimdlie
vpone his feit, without ony appeirance of hurt. And for verifeing thairof, producet the deforcementis.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, to the firft allegeanee, proponit per emptor le^

the Ifimyn aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay, Lawis and practique

vniuerfallie obleruit in this Judgment, and all vther Criniinall Courtis within

this realme, quhairin Dittayis ar evir fund relevant, and remitted to the knawr

lege of ane Inqueift, being lybellit and fet doun in maner as this Dittay is lybellit;

and that the perfone offendit deceiffit throw the hurtis and woundis gevin to

him : And quhair it is meanit,^ that he furvivet efter the geting of the hurtis

the fpace of fyve monethis, that jjairt is nawayis relevant mair nor was the firft ;

in refpect that the Dittay beiris, that the defunct was hurt and woundit vpone

the nynt of September 1617, and he deceffit thairof vpone the aucht or nynt of

Januar thaireftir, 1618; quhilk Dittay beiris lykwayis, that he dwynet continuallie fra the tyme of his hurting to the hour of his daith. — Quhair it is allegit,

that Witnesses aucht to be refTauit vpone this allegeanee, anfueris, na Witneffes

can be reffauit in Criminall cauffis, conforme to the Lawis of this realme, except

in matteris of TrelTone : And albeit Witneffes mycht be reffauit, yit thay can

nocht be reffauet vnto the tyme the allegeanee be ffirft ffund relevant ; and gif it

war fFund relevant, thair aucht na "Witneffes be reffauit befoir the Affyfe, feing

the haill poyntis confiftis in facto, and the tryell thairof is remittit to the Affyfe,

quha becumis bayth tryeris and Witneffes thairin r And as to the Lordis deliuerance grantit for fummonding the Witneffes, it aucht nocht to be refpectit, becaus

it is privat, and grantit be the Lordis parte non citata. As to the laft allegeanee,

beiring, that na man fould be pwneift to the daithe, except it be done vpone

ffoirthocht fellonie, the perfewer denyis that propofitioun altogidder, in refpect

of the vniverfall practique of this realme ; be the quhilk, all perfones criminallie

perfewit for Slauchter ar put to the knawlege of ane Inquieft, and pwneift to

the daithe ; this lybell contenand ane verrie relevant caufe, qualifeit with all the

eircumftances neceffar aganis the pannell, as committer of the Slauchter, with

all eircumftances of the Law requiiite.

It is duplyit, that Witneffes may be examinat befoir the Affyfe, vpone the
treuth of the exceptioune peremptour ; and being remittit be the Judge, with
the lybell, to the Inqueift, thay may cognofce thairupoun, and vpone the Witneffes Depofitiones, fa far as the famyn may gene tliame licht concerning the
fact : And be fpeciall Act of Parliament, maid in his Maiefteis xj Parliament,

1 Represented. Literally, complained. - For an elucidation of the ancient practice upon tliis

point, reference is made to ?.Ir Hume's valuable Commentaries on the Criminal Law of Scotland. The
present case affords ample illustration of the doctrines held relative to the Law of Evidence, in matters
Cnminal, at the commeiiceiuent of the Seventeenth Century.

MSc 16 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 471

cap. 90, it is ftatute, that all writtis, WitiiefTes, and other probatioim, fall be led
and deduced befoir the AfTyfe, and that for try ell of the treuthe, quia jirobationes in criminalihus debent ejje luce meridiana danores : Lyk as, AVitneffes
war admittit in the Criminall caufe perfewit be StraucJiane aganis GeiUh JolinneJloune. And quhair it is affirrnet, that the Warrand is purcheft for fummonding of WitnefTes, parte non c'ltata^ it is nocht ane Warrand again ft juftice, hot
for fortherance of juftice, and cleiring the treuthe. And as to the laft, the famyn
is foundit vpone tua Actis of Parliament, quhilk can nocht be derogat be ane
contrair cuftome ; lykas, my lord Aduocat is nocht hable to fchaw quhair this
exceptioune, being proponit, was repellit.

Interlocutor of Relevancy.

The Juftice Repellis the haill allegeance, in refpect of the Dittay, and
anfueris maid be my lord Aduocat in fortificatioun thairof. And Ordanis the
Dittay, quhilk is ffund relevant, to pas to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe.

Quhairupoun my lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

The Juftice, in refpect thair is nocht ane number of fubftantious perfones,
landit men, accoirding to the qualitie and rank of the defender, prefent, to i:)as
vpone his Aflyfe, Continewis all forder tryell of this matter to the thrid day of
the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quhair the defender duellis, or foner,
vpone fyftene dayis wairning : And ordanis the pannell to find cautioun for his
re-entrie to that effect, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament; with
this reftrictioun, that na Letteris be direct furth in this matter befoir the firft
day of Junij nixt.

. ' Quhairvpone the faid James Scrymgeour, defender, afkit inftrumentis ; and
quha, for obedience of the faid Juftice ordinance, ffand Johnne Scrymgeour of
Ballanfcho cautioner, to the effect, and vnder the panes foirfaid,

\J^lr Pafrik Sandls, Jujlice-Depute.']

^laujjjttv rommitttti at a BritfaL

Jan. 29. — Johnne Swyne, fervand to the Laird of Randicfurd.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the ere wall Slauchter of vmq'" Johnne IVr'cairtour,
fervand for the tyme to Jonet Mayne, wedow, in Menftrie, be ftreking him with
ane durk in the bellie, quhairof he deceiffit ; committit at ane brydell,' in the
evening eftir fupper, within the fayd Jonet Maynes duelling-hous, vpone the
xxij day of December laft, being Tyfday befoir 5^^^^-^

Persewar, Gilchryfl, M<'cairtoiir in Buttergafk, as father.

The pannell confeflis the cryme, and cravis Godis mercie and jiardoun for the
famyn.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, ITand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid
' Bridal (bride-ale), wedding. ^ Yule, or Christmas,

472 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I619.

Johnne S^v^me, conforme to his awin Judiciall Confeffioiin, to be flfylet, culpable,
and convict of the faid Slauchter. — Sextexce. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of
Edinburgh, and thair his lieid to be llrukin frome his body ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Jan. 29. — Bessie Weir, lervand to James Lowrieftone in Over Gogar.

Dilaitit of the crewall and vnnaturall Murthour of hir awin infant bairne,
borne and brocht furth be hir, in fornicatioun, to James Threipland in Biggar;
committit vpone the xx day of Januar inftant, about midnicht, within ane 5aird
lyand to the faid James Lowrieftones hous in Over Gogar, immediatlie eftir hir
delyuerie thairof.

Verdict. The AiTyfe, all in ane voce, be the mouth and declaration of Robert
Wilkie in Rathobyres, chanceller, in refpect of the faid Beffie hir Judiciall Confeffioun of the faid cryme, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit her to be culpable and
convict thairof. — Sextexce. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and
thair hir heid to be ftrukin frome hir body ; and all hir guidis, gif fcho ony hes,
to be efcheit, &c.

[^Mr Alexcmdei' CohiiU, Juftice-Deptite.'\

Feb. 3. — Habbie Rae in Moufwall, Pait M'keg, fervitour to the Laird
of Lag, and twenty others.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Carutheris, callit of
Dormont ; committit vpone the fecund of Januar laft, with fchottis of hagbutis
and piftolettis, within the dwelling-hous of Johnne Mundallis in Torthorrell.

Persewaris.

Margaret Jolinneftoun, as mother; Frances Carutheris, as brother ; Sir Williarae Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*,

Prelocutouris ill defence, Mr Thomas Hoip, Mr James Hammiltoune.

Continued to the Juftice-air of Dumfries, * tertio Itineris, vel fuper premonitione XV dierum.'

^laucrJUr.

Feb. 3. — Ja^ies Douglas of Moufwall ; Johnne and Williame Greirfones, his fervandis ; Johnne Carleill, fone to Thomas C. in

Bankis ; Johnne Blak in Moufwall ; and Habbie Dikfone, thair.

Dilaitit for the above Slaughter. Thefe perfons were all * denuncet rebellis,

and put to the home, for nocht finding of cautioim for thair perfonall compeirance.'

(Jul. 21.) — Continued to the air of Dumfries, tertio Itineris, &c. Johnne
Lord Fleming, cautioner.

52&16JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 473

iMr Alexander Colu'de of Blair, JujUce-Depute.']

Mar. 10. — Mr Thomas Douglas, iMinifter at Balinirrieiiodie.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Tlioinas Creichtoun of
Bodurncraig ; committit betuix Balmirrienoche and Couper in Fyfe, vpoue the
xiij day of Februar laft, 1619.

The Juftice, in refpect of the feiknes of Jeane Cannelie, tlie defunctis relict,
quha can nocht be prelent to concur in this perfute, continewis this matter to
the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the Scherefdome of Fyfe, or foner, vpone
fyftene dayis wairning : And ordanis the pannell to find cautioun for his re-entrie;
quha ffand James Douglas of Moirtoun, portioner of Gogar, &c.

CvtasonalJle iHuvUer untrrr trust, n*ttiit, antr assurance.

Apr. 2. — JoHNNE Maxwell of Garrarie, and George Maxwell, his fone.

Dilaitit of the crewall and odious Murthour under truft, credeit, and alFureance, of vmq^'' Johnne M^Kie of Glafliak ; committit vpone the viij day of Julij

1618 ; in forme and maner fpecifeit in the Dittay producet againll tliame, viz.

DiTTAY agabift Johnne ^faxwaU of Garrarie, and George 2*Iaxwall, hisjbne.

FoRSAMEKiLL AS, in tlie ellevint Parliament lialdin by our fouerane Lord and Ellaittis of tliis
kingdome, att the burgh of Ed'', the xxix day of Julij, 1587, cap. 51, it is Hatute and Ordanit, tiiat
the Murthour and Slauchter of quhatfumeuir his Maiefteis legis, quhair the pairtie (lane is vnder the
truft, credeit, aftlireauce, and power of the flayer, all fie Murthour and Slauchter to be committit eftir
the dait of thefaid Act, the famyn being lauchfullie tryed,and theperfones dilaitit fund gil tie thairof be ane
Affyfe, fall be TrefTone ; and being fFund culpable, fall fforfalt lyfe, landis, and guidis ; as in our faid
Act of Parliament at mair lenth is contenit. And trew it is, that the faid Johnne Maxwall of Garrarie, haifing, in his politique and craftie maner, vpone fie conditiones of fatisfactioun and recompence
beft knawin to him felf, conqueift and acquyrat fra the faid vmq''' Johnne M'Kie of Glajjhh his haill
worldlie moyane^ and eftait ; and thairby drawin liim to liis daylie companie and attendance, alAveill
within his lious of tlie Garrarie, as vther pairtis of the cuntrie quhair lie maid his repair and reiidence,
he, furth of his avaricioufe and churlifche difpolitioun, lotheing and weireing* of the faid JohnneM'^Kie
his companie, in the moneth of Julij, in the yeir of God I'".Vj'. and auchtene yeiris, to red and exoner
him felf of his cumpanie, devyfet and concludit in his devillifche heart, the pitifuU'" and trelioiiable
Murthour of tlie faid vmq'*' Johnne 31'^Kie, as followis ; and finding the faid vmq''' Johnne to be
alwayis under his truft, credeit, alfureance, and power; in fa far as, be tlu? fpace of iiyne nionethis, or
thairby, preceidiug the tyme foirfaid of the faid intendit INTui thonr, the laid vmc)'' Johnne was for the
maift pairt refoirting and making his daylie refidence with him, at bed and buird, within his IVacc of
Garrarie, fua that thairby na fufpitioun of iniurie to be done be the faid Johnne Maxinill towardia
the faid Johnne M'Kie coidd be thocht vpone be him ; the fiid Johnne Miixwall, for elVcctuaiing of
his treffonable and devillifche plott, vpone the xviij day of the faid moneth of.Iulij, in the yeir of CJod
foirfaid, knawing the tyme of the faid vm(|''" Johnne M'Kie liis dyet, in cuining to his IIous of Garrarie, vnder the filence and dud of nycht, accumpancit with the faid Gcortje Ma.iuuill, his fon<', and
vtheris thair complices, bodin' with fuordis and vtheris wapponis inita/ire, in the laid vnuj''' Johnne
his cuming to the i'aid Place of Garrarie, pat violent handis in bis peri'one, band baitli his handis and
' Means. * Getting fiitigiieU or wearied. ' rilet>u>. ' rurnished ; iirovidiU.

VOL. III. 3 o

474 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I619.

feitt, and tliaireflir, in maift crewall and mercieles maner, playing the pairt of hangmen and buniowis,'
with ane hair tedder,^ fliangillit and wineit liim to deid ; and Iiaifing, be that violent and crewall meane,
bereft him of his lyfe, thay thaireftir cayreit liira to ane peit mois or burne, callit the Burne of Ranie/ioun, within ane half myle to the faid Hous of Garrarie, quliairin they Hang him : And fa, the
faid vmq'*" Johnne 3LKie of Glajfak was maid treffonabillie and crewallie murdreift and flane be the
faid Johnne Maximll of Garrarie, and George. 3IaxwaU, his fone, he then being vnder thair truft,
credeit, afTureance, and power, in maner befoir deducet; and thay, and aither of thame, ar airt and
pairt of the faid treffonabill and barbarous Murthour, committit vnder truft and credeit ; vpone fet
purpois, prouifioun, precogitat malice, and foirlhocht fellonie, in hie and manifeft contempt of our
fouei-ane lordis autlioritie and lawis, and expres aganis the tennour of the faid Act of Parliament ;
incurring thairthrow the pane and pwneifchment aboue writtin, expreflit thairintill, viz. as Tratouris
and Murthouraris of the faid vmq^^' Johnne 3FKie, vnder truft, to fforfalt thair lyvis, landis, and guidis,
to the terrour and example of vtheris to attempt the lyk heireftir.
Persewaris, Niniane M^Kie, eldeft fone to the defunct ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*,

Aduocat to oure fouerane lord.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Alex. Peiblis, Mr Laur. M^gill, Adame Cunninghame, Aduocattis.

• The Aduocat prodiicet his Maiefteis Warrand, daitit at New-mercat, the 13
of Januar, l6l9, commanding him to infill in the pannellis perfiite, for the
Murthour contenit in the Dittay: Quhilk Warrand his lordfchip tuik vp agane.

My lord Aduocat declairis, that he is nocht prepairit, at this tyme, to perfew

in this matter ; and thairfoir defyret the famyn mycht be continewit to the fevint
of July nixt. — The pannell, with thair prelocutouris, altogidder difalTentis to the
faid continuatioun, and offerit thame felffis inftantlie reddie to abyde the tryell
of the Law for the faid cryme, as altogidder innocent thairof ; and thairupoun
afldt inftrumentis.

The Juftice, nocht withftanding of the pannellis offer and declaratioun, continewis this dyet to the faid fevint day of Julij nixt ; and Ordanis the pannell to
be tane bak to waird to the tolbuth of Edinburgh.

The pannell offeris cautioune for thair compeirance the faid day ; and allegit,
in refpect thairof, thay fould nocht pas to waird.

The Juftice Ordanit thame to geve in their Supplicatioune to the Counfall,
be quhais Warrand and authoritie thai war committit, and to crave thair libertie
and fredome furth thairof, vpone thair offer of cautioun to thair lordfchipis, for
thair entrie, the day foiriaid ; and accoirding as the Counfall fould command, in
that matter, it fould be obeyit.

Prelocutour in defence, My Lord Maxwall.-'

(Jul. 7.) — The Justice, be directioun of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall,
and conform e to thair Lordfchipis expres Warrand, continewis this dyet, and all
tryell to be tane thairintill, to the xv day of December nixtocum : And Ordanis
the pannell to find cautione for thair compeirance and re-entrie that day, to
vnderly the law for the faid Murthour, ather^ of thame vnder the pane of thre
' Old Fr. hotirreau, an executioner. ^ ^ ijair tether or halter. ^ In addition to the above

Prelocutors. ' Each of them.

52 & 16 Jac. VL criminal TRIALS: 475

Thowfeand merkis. Quha, for obedience of the faid ordinance, ffand Eduard
Maxuall of Hillis cautioun.

In refpect of the qiihilk cautioun fund be thanie, the Juftice ordanit the Provofl and Bailleis of Edinburgh to j)ut them to-libertie furth of thair waird, &c.

[AssESSORES JusTiciARio, Dom'miis Willielmus Levingjloun de Kiljithe, et Dominits Georgius

Ei^kin de TnnerteiU, Senatores CoUegij Jiifl'icie.']

Prelocutouris in perfute, My Lord of Gairleis, The Laird of Larg-M'Kie.

Prelocutouris in defence,' The Maifter of Maxwall; The Guidman of Hillis; Edward Forrefter,

CommifTar of Kirkcudbrycht ; Johnne 3oung, notter.

(Dec. 15.) — The pannell takis inllrumentis of thair entrie ; as alfo, that
m7j Lord of Gairleis compeiris to perfew thame of thair lyves ; and proteltis for
thair cautioneris releif. — The perfewaris producet the Dittay, with the Letteris
and Roll of Affyfe ; and proteftis for thair cautioneris relief, and defyret proces.
The perfones on pannell denyis the haill crymes contenit in the Dittay, and
paffis fra all difputatioun aganis the relevancie thairof ; and offeris thame felfhs
to the try ell of ane honefl and vnfufpectit Affyfe.

ASSISA.

Johnne Dalrumple of Schalloche, Jolinne Maitland of Clonliie, Andro Craufurd of Barquharrie,
Andro Bruce of Bofark, Johnne Kirkpatrik of Bracho, Dauid Welfche of CoUielloun,

Williame Middlemeift, Conftable Gilbert Baird of Kilhin3ie, Walter Cant of Wafl-mylne,

of Dumbartene, George Logane of that Ilk, James Birnie of Browbrie,

Duncane Hunter of Ballagane, Willianne Cunninghame of Pol- Malcolme Dalrumpill of WaterWilliame Creichtoun of the Hill, quharne, fyde.

It is allegit be the pannell, that Johmie Dalrumple can nocht pas vpone thair Affyfe, becaus he is
nocht ane landit man of that qualitie and rank quhilk fould be admittit to pas thairupoun ; the faid
Johnne Maxwall of Garrarie being ane landit Gentilman, in the rank of ane Barroun, worth thn;
thowfeand merkis of 5eirlie rent, and aboue. Secimdo, the faid Johnne is vfet and producet be my
Lord of Gairleis, ane of liis perfewaris, as ane Witnes befoir the Counfell, and lies gevin his Depofitioun
in this matter alreddie ; and in refpect thairof, can nocht be ane Affyfour. Tertio, he is man, tcnnent,
and fervand to Jqjiah Stewart, quha lies affiftit this perfute fra the firll begynning thairof, and behavet
him felf as pairtie. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance aucht to be repellit, as
altogidder irrelevant, the faid Johnne Dcdrumple being ane Gentilinaii of guid fame, and haifing lufficieat moyane of his awin, quhairupoune he levis : And his Depolitioun maid be him as ane Witnes
can nocht ftay him to be ane Affyfour: And as to that pairt, that he payis maill and deutie io Jqfias
Stewart, wha is pairtie aganis thame, noji relcvut, becaus he is nocht ane perfewar, nor compeiris nocht
in this Judgement to perfew, natlier payis he ony deutie to him hot for his teyndis, quhilk teynd-dcutie
can nawayis ftay him to pas vpone this Affyfe. — It is allegit be the pannell, that, with the teynd-deutie,
he is alfo fubiect to the faid Jofias in daylie feruice. — The faid Johnne Dalrumple being fuorne,
declaris lie is no forder fubiect to Jqfuis, bot only in payment of his teyud.

The Juftice admittis Johnne Dalrumple, and Ordanis liim to be purget of partiall counfall ; quha,
being of new fuorne, declarit he had geviii na partiall counfall, in this matter, in fauouris of this perfewar aganis the perfonis on pannel ;— quha was thairfoir admittit.

It is allegit aganis Walter Cant of Weflmylne, that he can nocht be admittit vpone this Affyfe,

' In addition to the Prelocutors who are alreadv noted, under date, Ai)ril '2, and Jul. 7.

476 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 16J^.

becaus he is noclit duelland witliin Galloway, nor the foure halfis thairabout, conforme to the Act of
Parliament, in anno 1579. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance aucht to be repellit,
becaus he is duelland within Scotland; and the Act of Parliament citet is only in matteris of Perambulatioun, for tryell of niethis and marches, and is nocht extendit to the crymes of Slauchter and
Mutilatioun, &c. — It is allegit, that he can nocht be admittit, becaus of the foirfaid Act of Parliament,
for ex argumento a paritate rationis, gif the perfones of Inqueift, in matteris of Perambulatioun, man
(must) be induellaris within the boundis of the Scherefdome quhair the landis lyis, or foure halfis about,
multo magis, in tryell of a Slauchter or Murthour committit, fouldthe Affyfonris be induelleris within
the boundis of the Scherefdome quhair the fact was done, or four halfis about. — Anfueris, Statuta
JiintJIrkti juris, et non admitlent exteiijionem.

The lyk exceptioun proponit aganis Andro Bruce of Bofark, quha duellis nocht within the Sherefdome, or foure halfis about. — My lord Aduocat repeitis his former anfueris for Andro Bruce.

It is forder allegit that Walter Kant is man, tennent, and fervand to my Lord of Murray, quha
affiflis this perfute ; and thairfoir, can nocht pas vpone this Affyie. The faid Walter being fuorne,
gif he be man, tennent, or fervand to the Erie of Murray? Declairis, he is ane of his Lordfchipis
vafTallis, and haldis his landis of him in flew.

The Juflice, nochtwithflanding of the former allegeances maid aganis the faidis Walter and Andro,
and that the faid Walter is ane ff'ewar, Admittis thame vpone the Affyfe.

It is allegit aganis Duncane Hunter of Ballagane, that he can nocht pas vpone this Affyfe, becaus
he is ane removeable tennent to the Laird of Drumlangrig, quha affiflis this perfute, and is within
degreis- defending to the Lord of Gairleis, perfewar. The Laird of Ballagan being fuorne, declairit
that he is Driunlangrigis vaffall, and na remoueable tennent ; quhome the Juftice, in that refpect,
admittit.

It is allegit aganis Eduard 3Iaxtoall in Laroche, that he can nocht pas vpone this Affyfe, becaus
non hahet in bonis, and is nocht worth the Kingis \Tilaw. Secnndo, thair is bluid and deidlie ffeid
Handing betuix the pannell and him vnreconceillit. Tertio, he is alreddie reflauit witnes, and hes
deponit in this matter, being producet be my Lord of Gairleis to that eftect. — Anfueris, becaus he hes
alreddie deponit as ane Witnes, he may the mair cleirlie be admittit ane Affyfour.

The Juftice, in refpect thair is na penurie of Affyfouris, Ordanis him to ftand by.

David Welfche of Colliejtoun admittit, of confent.

The lord Aduocat, for verificatioiin of the Dittay, producet ane Teflimoniall,
fubfcryuit be dyuerfe Gentilmen and vtheris, tellifeing the forme of Glajfak'is
binding, the tyme of his out-taking of the burne ; and that he hes bene firft
Itrangillit, befoir his calling thairin. As lykwayis, producet the pannellis Depofitione, with the Dejiofitiones of dyuerfe famous "SMtnelTes, relTauit and examinat
be the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, in that matter ; and thairupoun alfo afl<it
inftrumentis ; and proteftis, in refpect thairof, for Wilful Errour, gif the Affyfe
acquit. — The pannell proteftit in the contrair, gif thay convict thame of that
deteftable cryme ; quhairof, vpone thair kneyis, with grit and folerae aithes, thay
affirmet thame felffis to be altogidder innocent.

Verdict. The Alfyfe, for the maift pairt, be the mouth and declaratioun of
William Cunninghame, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis
Johnue Maxicell of Garrarie, and George Maxwell, his lauchfull fone, to be
GiLTiE, culpable, and convict of airt and pairt of the treffonabill and barbarous

52 & 17 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 477

Murtliour of the faid vmq''' Johnne 3PKie of GlaJJliJc, committit be tliame in
forme and maner fpecifeit in thair Dittay.

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of Andro IVrcairtney, dempfter of
Court, adinget thame to be tane to the Mercat-Croce of Edinburgh, and thair,
thair heidis to be flrukin frome thair bodeis : And all thair landis, heritages,
tenementis, annualrentis, takis, fteidingis, rowmes, poffeffiones, coirnis, cattell,
inficht pleneiffing, guidis, and geir, to be fforfalt and efcheit to our fouerane
lordis vfe, as culpable and convict of the faid treffonable and deteftable cryme :
Quhilk was pronuncet for Dome.^

Jun. 2. — NoRMOND RoBiESOUN, fone to Robert Robiefoun, mercheand
burges of Sterling.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Hurting and Wounding of Johnne Robene,
fone naturall to Johnne Robene, notter, burges of Sterling, in the calling of him
doun to the grund, and louping vpone his bak with the haill force of his body ;
and thairthrow breking of his bak-bone, and mutilating and making him impotent thairof, he being ane young boy of nyne yeiris of age, or thairby ; committit
in the Valay of Sterling, in the moneth of September, 1617 yeiris.

Persewaris, Jolmne Robene and his father; Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*.
Prelocutour in defence, Mr Thomas Nicolfoun, elder, Aduocat.

The Juftice continewis this dyet to the thrid day of the air of the fcherefdome
of Sterling, or foner, to ane fyftene dayis wairning ; and ordanis the pannell to
find cautioun for his re-entrie. Robert Robiefoun, mercheand, his father,
becomes cautioner.

Jul. 2. — Johnne M'^dowell of Freuche.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Alexander M'^kie
of Balfeir.

Persewar. Prelocutour in defence.

Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*. Mr Thomas Hoip.

The Juftice continewis this matter to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of

' Sir Jolinne Dumhar of Mochrum, kny* ; James Kcnnydie of Crugiltoun ; Alex. Dumbar, ai)p('irand
of Mochrum ; Hew Kennydie of Areis ; Adame Ahannay, burm's of W'iiitoun ; Robert Ma.wvall of
Barvannok ; Vtbreid Campbell of Areis ; Joliiiiie Carutlicris of W'adfiite; Ilaric Ciiiniiiii;lianip of Kildonnane ; Johnne Broune, younger of Caillatyre ; George Gordouii of l>ailkcoche ; Johnne M'dowell
of Freuche; Patrik Ahannay of Kirkdaill ; Alex. M'culloche, appeirand of Netoun ; Alex. Cunninghame of Powtoune ; Fergus Dumbar, burges of Stranraer; and Adame Lyndfay, burges of Quhithorne,
vnlawit, for thair nocht compeirance vpone the faid AH'yfe ; ilk ane of thame in the pane of ane hundreth merkis.

478 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6I9.

tlie fcherefdome quliair the pannell duellis, (Wigtoun.) or foner, vpone xv dayis
wainiing. Plegio, Pat M^dowall de Creeches.

Jul. 11. — JoHNNE Murray, fone to Thomas Murray, in the Stanehous
of Geicht.
Dilaitit of the invading of Andro Mekh'um of Rothiebirlbane, his maifler, in
euming out the hie way betuix Kynrofchyre and the fferrie-fyde : Hurting and
Wounding him, with ane fuord, in the heid and face, of purpois to haif flane him :
And thaireftir, Steilling and away-taking, be way of maifterfull Thift and
Stouth-reif, of his maifteris bonnet-caice, togidder with tua pair of filk fchankis,^
tua pair of filk gairtanes,^ tua pair of rofes^ of taffitie, tua fmall lynning fchankis,
thre bonnet mutches,'' thre pair of handis,^ fyve overlayeris,*^ ane peirlet lane^
ruff, tua naipkynnis, ane kame-caife,'' with ane brufch, with certane vther
neceffaris, being within the famyn, worth tua hundreth pundis ; by and attour^
certane writtis and euidentis, ^" being alfo thairintill ; committit in the moneth of
Maij laft.

Pehsewaris, Mr Andro Meldrura of Rothiebirfbane ; Sir Williame Oliphantof Newtone, kny^

The Juftice, in refpect thair is nocht ane fufficient number of Affyfe compeirand, continewis this dyet to the xxj inflantis : And Ordanis the pannell to
be tane bak to waird, to the faid day.

Andro Frafer of Staniewoid, William Keyth of Seatoun, James Seatoun,
brother to the Laird of Mony, Mr Robert Elj^hingftoun, Tutour of Glak, Johnne
Ogilvie, 5ounger of GlafTall, and Alexander Frafer, indueller in Leyth, nocht
compeirand on Aflyfe, the Juftice ordanit ilk ane of thame to be vnlawit in the
pane of ane hundreth merkis.

ASSISA.

Robert Frafer of Durres, James Ilervie of Elrig, Nicoll 3ule, mercbeand,

James Cheane, in Elrig, Andro Hervie, his brother, Johnne Penman, mercheand,

Mr Robert Elphingfloun, Tutour James Keith of Craig, Mathow Bail^ie of Littilgill,

of Glak, Mr James Stewart, Commiflar Johnne Fairholme, mercheand,

James Gairne of Bkkfurd, of Dunkeld, Thomas Broun, lokfmyth.

Johnne Arbuthnot of Carncgaw, Clement Runell, mercheand,

Jul. 21. — The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring of the Aflyfe ;
and producet the pannellis Depofitiones, for verificatioun of the Dittay ; and
proteftis for Wilfull Errour, gif thay acquit, Src.

Verdict. The Aflyfe, be the mouth of the faid Mr Robert Elphingftoun,

* Silk stockings. '^ Garters. ^ Rosettes for the knees. ^ Caps. ^ Probably a

sort of mittens or gloves. ^ A broad folding collar, falling over the shoulders and worn below

the ruff, which was fastened about the neck. "^ A pearled lawn ruff? ^ Comb-case.

^ Over and above: '" Writiu'jrs and Title-deeds.

53 & 17 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 479

chanceller, ffand, iH'onuncet, and declairit, all in ane voce, the faid Jolmne
Murray, conforme to his awin Judiciall Confeffioiin and Depofitiones producet,
to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the liaill crymes aboue expremit.

Sentence. To be tane to the mercat croce of Edinburghe, and thair to be
Hangit, quhill he be deid, and all his moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Cafeincr tijt i^inij's :ff'vtt Eirgt— jTamisJjins one ot tijt ^it^tsi to

BtatI) * in p rib a to rarrtrr*'

Nov. 10. — Patrick Cowie, in Kincairdin ; Johnne Dow, his fervand ;

Johnne Anderfone, cordiner thair ; Thomas Cowie, querriour

thair ; and Dauid Miller, falter in Eifter Kincairdin.

Dilaitit of the taking and keiping of vmq'" Thomas Dauidfoun, hynd and

fervand to Alexander Lealk, in Porter, be the fpace of fyftene dayis, in pricafo

carcere, within the faid Patrik Coweis hous ; and thairfra cayreing him to the

pitt of Tullieallane, quhair, throw want of intertenement,^ he fFamifchet and deit

of hunger ; and remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris.

Persewaris, Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*^; Alexander Leaflc, as INIaifler.

The Juftice continewis this matter to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of
the Scherefdome quhair the defenderis duellis, (' Clakmannane,') or foner, vpone
XV dayis wairning : And Ordanis thame to find new cautioun, &c. ; qulia ffand
Sir George Bruce of Carnok, kny*, perfonallie prefent, for thair re-cntrie.

iHutilatixin antr iBtmtmljratirsn*

Nov. 17. — Williame Oliphant of Gaflc.
Dilaitit for airt and pairt of the Demembering of David Malloche, fervand for
the tyme to vmq'^ Dauid Tofcheoche of Monyvaird of his rycht hand."

Compeirit Lawrence Oliphant of Coudie, and producet ane Warrand of the
Lordis of Secreit Counfall, direct to my Lord Juftice ; quhairof the tennour
followis.

Ware AND of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall.

Justice, Juftice clerk, and 50iir deputtis. Forfamekill as the xvij day of November inflant is
appointit to Williame Oliphant of Gafk, for his conipeirance befoir 50\v, to vnderly the Lawis for the
Mutilatioun and Difmembering' of Dauid Malloche : Nochtwithllanding-, accoirding to the Kingis
Maiefteis expres Warrand, command, and dircctiouns in this matter, theafe ar to command 30W to
continew the faid dyet to the tuentie fyve of Fobruar nixtocum ; to the effect, in the meane tyme, the
faid Williame may tak fome courfe for fatisfactioun of his pairtie : And that x,o\\ tak cautioun of the
faid Williame for his perfonall compeirance the faid day, and difpenfe with him and his cautioner for
his nocht compeirance at this dyet : Quhairanent thir prefentis Hilbe 5()ur Warrand. At Ed"*, the xvj
day of November, 1619. Al. Cancell''. Mar. Melrois. Lauderdaii.l.

The Juftice continewis the faid dyet to the faid xxv day of Februar nixtocum ;

^ Sustenance. ^ See Jul. 29 and Dec. 4, 1018. ^ Peter Oliphant of Rescobie.

480 •CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. I6ig.

and Ordanis cautioun to be fund for the faid Williame Oliphant his compeirance
that day, &c. — Gilbert Adamefoim of Scoureing-burne become fouertie, &c.

(Feb. 25, 1620.) — Compeirit Laurence Oliphant of Condie, and producet
ane Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, quhairof the tennour followis.

Justice, Juftice clerk, and 50ur deputtis. Quhair as, the xxv day of Februar iiiilaiit is appointit to
Williame Oliphant of Galk, for his compeirance befoir 30W, to vnderly the law for the flauchter of
the Laird of Monyvaird, and mutilatioun and demembring of Danid Malloche, his fervand, of his
Tycht hand,' and vtheris crymes fpecifeit in the Letteris raifit tliairanent : Neuertheles, this is to
command sow to contlnew the faid dyet to the nynt day of Junij nixtocum, vpoun new cautioun,
conforme to the ordour : And that 50W difpens with the perfonall compeirance of the pairtie: Quhairanent thir prefentis fall be jour Warrand. At Halyrudhous, the xxiiij of Februar, 1620.

Al. Cancell**. Mar. Melrois. Lauderdaill.

Sir Johnne Carmichellof Medo\vflat,Capitane of Craufurtl, becomes fouertie,&c.
(Jun. 9, 1620.) — The dyet deferted, by command of another Warrant,
fiffned ' Al. CancelF. Melrois.'

o

[If it were necessary still farther to prove the melancholy effects of the deadly
FEUDS which raged in Scotland i>revious to the Eighteenth Century, perhaps
few better illustrations could be adduced than what is contained in the present
Case. The following affecting document is taken from the Denimjlne 3ISS.,
and requires no comment.]
Letter, the Privij Council of Scotland to the King, relative to the deadly
Feud he t ween the Lairdis of Cultmalundie and 3Ionyvainl.~
Most sacred Soueraxe,
Whereas your Maiestie was pleafit, tua yeiris fyne, or thairbj'-, to recommend vnto ws the fatling
and remoueing, by ane amicable forme and maner, the deadlie ffeade ilanding betuix the Lairdis
OF CuLTMALiNDiE and MoNYVAiRD and thair ffreindis,^ vpoun occafioun of the (laughter of the
Laird of Monyvaird ; and to move the pairtie greened to accept of fuche Offeris as the offendaris
inight reafounablie performe : We accordinglie wrote for fa mony of the flVeindis as we know to haif
cheif intereffe in that mater, and vfed the bell roeanes we could to haif broght the fame to fome freindlie
dreffe ; bot that dyet being caffin af, vpoun alledgeance tliat fome of the fpeclall ffreindis wer omittit
and not writtin for, we appointit a new dyet, and wrote for the whole flfreindis that wer gevin vp, who
returnit thair anfwer to ws, in write, vnder tliair handis, that thay could not medle in that mater, nor
tak burdyne for Monyvaird, wlio is the principal! pairtie haueand interefie, in refpect of his minoritie.
Whairunoun the mater defertit, and we could go no forder thairin. At this fecund dyet Cultmalundie
eldair exhibit befoir ws Offeris, in write, vnder his hand, maid to tlie pairtie, contening the fowme
of ane Thowfand crownes for the Affythement of that Slaughter, with the Banilhement of Alexander
Bnice Jiisfoiie, and George Ttp-ie, Meffinger, who wer alledgeit to be the actuall ilayaris of Monyvaird, during your Ma** plefour : And at that fame tyme, we caufit him gif fatisfactioun to Duncane
Cam-phell and Dauid Mallodie, who wer deadlie hurte quhen Monyvaird was flayne, by payment
making to thame of twa Thoufand pundis : Quhairupoun thay haif gevin ane difcharge of thair interefle in that mater ; as the fame produceit befoir ws beiris.

' The local saying, —

' Afi- hands is fair, plav — Davie IMali.och says Xay I"

seems qiiai II tly to allude to this incident. ^ Sir James JJal/our's MS. Collections, Adv. Lib. ' Blood-reLuions.

^&17Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 481

This ffeade lias altogidder vndone Auld CiiUmalmidie ; for his eftait is exhauflit and wrackit, and
he is bocoine vcrie walk of his judfroniont and vnderftanding, by the greif that thir troubles hes broght
vpoun liim; whilkis wer the occailoun of his wyffis deathe, and of the exyle and baniihement of liis
fones and freindis, now be the fpace of foure yeiris; in the quhilk exyle, tua of his frciiulis of goode
rank and qualitie hes depairtit this lyfFe.

This being the effect of oure dealing in this buliynes, We haif beene intreated be the pairtie, humelie
to prefent the fame to your Maiefteis confideratioun. And lb continewing our vnceliant prayeris vnto
God for youre Ma'* long and happie reignne, We refl,

Youu Ma>^ humbill and obedient (ubiectls and feruitouris,

Al. Cancell% Mau. Melros. George Hay.
Halierudiious, xxj of Marche, 1622.
To THE King his moll facred and excellent Maiestie.

^nlKxn^ Cnptibt— iHurlJtr— iWasttrfiil rijtft niitr ^toutTjrcif.

Dec. 8. — Duncan E Campbell of Glenlyoim.
Dilciitit of airt and pairt of the violent Taking- and Apprehending of vmq'"
Allane JVrrannald in Swynnart, cayreing and keiping hiin captiue and prifToner
ane nycht, within the faid Duncane his Place of Megernie '} And for Murdreifing
him with dnrkis, vpone the niorne eftir his taking, ane myle or thairby fra the
faid Hous : And be way of Maifterfull Thift and Stouth-reif, lleilling and awaytaking fra him of his purfe, with ane thowfeand pundis of gold and lilver being
thairintill ; committed in anno 1601 yeiris.

Persewar, Angus M'Kannald of Viladill, as brother.

The Justice continewis this matter to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air
of the Sherefdome qnhair the defender duellis, (Perth,) or foner, vpone xv dayis
wairning.

Archibald Campbell of Glencarradell become cautiouner for his re-entrie.

MnVntw

Dec. 8. — JoHNNE MoiTT in Walthouffis, abone Newbottile.
Dilaitit of the crewall and vnnaturall Murthour and Slanchter of Beffie Broun,
his vmq'^ fpous, be ftreking hir in the heid, and wounding hir thairin with ane
grit kent,^ to the effufioun of hir bluid ; connnittit be him v])one ane Setterday,
at evin, in the moneth of October lail ; quhairof fcho deceiffit within tuelfl'
liouris thaireftir.
Persewer, Sir Williame Olipfiant, kny'. Prklocutour in defence, Mr Alexander Cuming.

It is allegit be the pannell, that na proces can be led aganis him, vnles thair

^ In Glenlyoun, Perthshire. In the preface to Douglas's Baronage, notice is taken of a very remarkable Red-book, ((in Leavar-didrif/,) written in the Celtic character, which was destroyed in the fire
which consumed Miggerny Castle, It is there remarked, that ' some extracts from this book are in
the hands of several Families in the Highlands.' See likewise, Prefatory Notice to History of the
Kennedies, Edinburgh, 1830. 4to. ^ gjaij-^ ^^^. eudgel.

VOL. III. 3 i>

482 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1619.

war ane pairtie informer to affift his Maiefteis adiiocat, and to fueir the Dittay
to the AlFyfe, the Dittay being ffiind relevant to pas thairto ; and feing nane of
the kyn and freindis of the woman (lane compeiris to perfew, or to informe his
IVIaiefteis Aduocat in this perfute, the Jiiftice can noclit put him to ane Aflyfe,
— It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance is impertinentlie prol)onit be the pannell ; and fayis, that albeit the freindis of the pairtie flane and
he wald collude^ togidder, yit, feing the Prince wantis ane fubject, be the fact
committit, the Kingis Aduocat hes verrie guid intreis to perfew, without ony
informer : And thairfoir, nocht only fould the Dittay pas to ane AfTyfe, hot he,
for committing of the ffact lybellit, fould be exemplarie pwneift for the famyn,
being tiuid giltie thairof.

Verdict. The Affyfe, for the maift pairt, be the mouthe of Thomas Hog,
in Eifthouflis, chanceller, fFand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Johnne Motte
to be ffylet, culi)able, and convict of the faid Slauchter. — Sentence. To be
tane to the Caftelhill of Edinburghe, and thair his heid to be llrukin frome his
body ; and his haill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

^I.iu0]^tn-— a^tarinrr nntr ^Jootincj: ot ^.tiofinis mxU ^i^Mti^.

Dec. 22. — Johnne Lyddell of Halkeritoun.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Bell, fervand to
Johnne Lord Borthuik ; committit vpone the landis of Hauch-heid, vpone the
audit of October laft, quhair the faid Johnne Lyddell, with ane charget hagbut
in his hand, invaidit the faid vmq'^ Johnne Bell for his flauchter, fchote him in
his lichting" af his horfe with tua buUettis, at the left pape, throw the heart ; and
flew him with the faid fchote : And for contravening of the Actis of Parliament,
in beiring and fchuiting of hagbutis and pifl:olettis, &c.

The Juftice, of confent of aitlier pairtie, continewis this matter to the nyntene
of Januar nixt : And Ordanis the pannell to be returnet to Waird to the Tolbuth of Edinburghe, out of the quhilk he was tane.

Persewaris, Barbara Levingfloun, the relict; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny', his

Maiefteis Aduocat, for his liienes intreis.

Prelocutouris in defence, James Lyddell, in Leyth ; Mr Johnne Cranftoun, Miniller thair;

Mv Laurence M'gill, and Mr Dauid Prynirois, Aduocattis.

(Jan. 19, 1620.) — It is allegit be the pannell, that the Dittay in that point
thairof, ' airt and pairt,' is nocht relevant, except the perfewar condifcend vpone
the names of the perfones that war complices or alTociattis. — Anfueris, audit to
be repellit, in refpect of the Act of Parliament, fuflening airt and pairt to be

^ Enter into collusion with each other, to defeat the ends of public justice. ^ Alighting.

•53&17.^AC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 483

relevant aganis any perfone accufet of ane ciyme. — The ^^^nnell denyis the haill
Dittay to be of verritie.

The Justice remittis the tryell thairof to the AlTyfe.

Barbara Levingftoun, relict, being folemlie fvvorne, deelairit, that the Dittay
is of verritie ; and that fclio hes juft cans to perfew the pannell for the Slauehter
of hir hulband. Quhairvpoun my lord Adiiocat afkit inltriimentis, and Proteftis
for '\Vilfiill Errour aganis the Aflyfe, gif thay acquit : As alfo, tuik inftrumentis
of the productioim of the hagbut, quhairwith the faid vmq^^ Johnne Bell was flane.

Vekdict. The AfTyfe, be pluralitie of voittis, ffand, pronuncet, and deelairit
the faid Johnne Lyddell of Halkerftoun to be Clanget, innocent, and acquit of
the faid Dittay, and haill crymes aboue writtin mentionet thairintill.

In refpect quhairof, the Jullice ordanit him to be put to libertie fiirth of the
faid Tolbuth of Edinburghe, quhairin he was wairdit, and na langar to be
detenit thairintill for the faidis crymes ; he making fatisfactioun to the javellour^
for his expeuffis.

^IaucrJ)tei\

Jan. 19, 1620. — Alexander Grahame, fone to vmq'^ Dauid Grahame,

in Arduthie, and Johnne IVrkane, fone to Mllliame

IVrkane, burges of Montroife.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauehter of vmq'^ Mr Alexander Keith, brother

to Sir George Keith of Drumtochtie ; committit be thame, in companie of Robert

Grahame, brother to the faid Alexander, vpone the Saudis of Montrois, vnder

nycht, vpone the tent of December laft. -

Persewaris, Sir George Keith of Drumtochtie, kny', James Keith of Harvieftoun, Mr Williarae

Keith, brother to the defunct ; and Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*.

Prelocutoukis in defence, Mr Alexander Peiblis, Mr Roger Mowat, Aduocattis.

The perfewaris producet Hoirning aganis Robert Grahame, fone to Dauid
Grahame of Arduthie.

The perfones on pannell offerit thame felffis to the tryell of the Law, for the
crymes contenit in the Summondis, quhairof thay deelairit thame felffis to be
innocent ; diihiTenting Jimplicifer to all forder continuatioun. — My lord Aduocat
declairis that this Slauehter was committit vnder nycht, quhairof as yit na certane
licht of the pannellis guiltines thairof is brokin vp ; and thairfoir, delyres thame
to be put vnder cautioun, for thair re-entrie, vpone xv dayis wairning.

The Juftice continewis this dyet to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of
the Scherefdome quhairin the pannell duellis, (Forfar,) or loner, to ane fyftene
dayis wairning.

* Gaoler ; jailer. Old Fi'.Jctvilknr.

484 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1620.

^lautjTjttn

Jan. 21. — JoiiNXE Duncane, baxter^ in Duding-ftoun.
Dilaitit of the cre^vall Slaiichter of vniq'^ Jobnne Buchannan, baxter, indueller
of the Cannongait ; committit in the hie-way betuix Eifter and Wefter Dudingftoim, vpoue the faxt of Januar inftant, be ftreking of the faid Johnne Buchannane with ane knyfe, vnder the left pape ; quhairof, within tuelf houris thaireftir, he deceiifit.

Persewaris, Margaret Robertfoun, the relict; SirWilliame OUphant, kny*.

Tlie i)annell acknowleges the cryme, and craves God, his Maieflie, and the
pairtie pardoun thairfoir.

A'ekdict. The AlTyfe, all in ane voce, in refpect of the pannellis Judiciall
Confefrioiin maid be him, confeffing the faid cryme to be of verritie, ffand, proimncet, and dedairit the faid Johnne Duncane to be ffylet, culpable, and convict,
&c. — Sentenxe. To be tane to the Caftell hill of Edinburgh, and thair his
heid to be ftrukin from his body ; and all his moveable guidis to be efcheit to
his hienes vfe, as convict of the faid cryme.

Feb. 25.— James Reoche.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter, vnder nycht,
of vmq'^ Alexander Sandiefone, fervand to Hew Falconer of Innerlochtie ; committit in September, vjione Michelmes Evin, in anno 1618, at the 5ett of Innerlochtie, in Haying the faid James, and refilling him and his brother in the lleiling
and away-taking of the faid Hew Falconeris horfe furtli thairof, be fchuteiug
the faid Alexander throw the body with ane piftolett.

Persewaris, Hew Falconer of Innerloclitie, his mailler ; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*.

It is alleget be the pannell,that the allegit Slauchter was nocht committit be him ;
bot the defunct, being ravifcheing ane woman, the pannellis brother being thair
I^refent, and he in companie with him, imployit thair help to preferve the woman
and to fet hir frie ; for the quliilk, the defunct, haifing ane knyfe in his hand,
invaidit the pannellis brother thairwith ; quhairupoun the pannellis brother, for
his awin faiftie, drew ane piftolet frome his fyde, and fchote the defunct thairwith ; and fa, the fact being committit be his brother, the pannell can nocht be
perfewit thairfoir. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance aucht
to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay beiring him to be airt and pairt of the
defunctis flauchter ; and that the Slauchter was committit be thame in the fteilling
of ane horfe fra the defunctis mailler, haifing cum that eirand to the Hous, at
that tyme of the iiycht.

* Baker.

$3&irJAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 485

ASSISA.

Mr James Stewart of Lady wall, Mr James Forbes of Hauchtoun, Alex. Farquliar, tailjeour burges of
Walter Hay in Forrefteris-fait, Jolmne Roife, proveill of Nairiie, Edinburgb,
Williame Douglas of Erlefmylne, Mr Dauid Stewart, and Johnne Caddell, burges of

Alex"" Brodie, chalmerlane of Patrik Weyraes, fervandis Edinburgh,

Kinloife, to the Earl of Murray, Alex. Home, burges thair,

Dauid Dumbar in Tarves, Thomas Hunter, burges thair.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fuering of the AlTyfe ; and producet,
for inftructing the Dittay, the pannellis Depofitioun, maid in prefens of the
Lordis of Secreit Counfell ; and proteftis for Wilfull Errour, gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The AiTyfe, all in ane voce, ffand the faid James Reoche to be
ffylet, culj)able, and convict of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq'*
Alexander, committit vnder nycht, in the lleilling of the faid Hewis horfe. —
Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair his held to
be ftrukin frome his body ; and his haill guidis confifcat to his Maiefteis vfe.

Mar. 8. — Johnne Rogersoun, in Bratmurelland.
Dilaitit of the crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Katharene Broun, fpous to Hew
Broun in Windiehillis,^ be (by) cuming be (by) way of Hamefuckin to hir duelling
hous in Windiehillis, in the moneth of Apryle 1613 yeiris, quhair fcho was in
fober maner for the tyme ; and thair crewallie invaidit hir for hir llauchter,
becaus fcho had houndit hir dog at his fcheip ; tuik hir be the fpaldis," and
violentlie flang hir over tua kyis^ bakis ; thaireftir threw hir fydis to ane tymber
beds'* and thairby brak hir haill intrallis within hir ; and thaireftir, with his feit
and handis, crewallie punfchet and ftrak hir vpon the bak, wambe," and f}'dis,
and brak hir heart-jDypes thairwith ; fua that thairby fcho tuik bed, and keipit
the bed the fpace of fax dayis, or thairby, continuallie vomeiting hir heart-bluid ;
and in the moneth of Maij thaireftir, fcho deceiffit of the faidis hurtis ; and fa,
was crewallie and vnmerciefullie llane be the faid Johnne Rogerfonne : And he
is airt and pairt of the faid flauchter ; committit vpone fet purpois, prouifioun,
and foirthocht fellonie, as at lenth is contenit in the faid Dittay.

Persewar, Hew Broun in Windiehillis, as fpous to the defunct.
Prelocutouris in defence, the Laird of Cloidjurne ; Adanie Cunninghame, Aduorat.

The pannell ofTeris him felff to the tryell of the law for the crymt^ fuirfaid,
quhairof he is altogidder innocent.

ASSISA.

Johnne Padjeane, younger of Newtoun, Thomas Wauche, elder of Schawls,

Mr Alexander Flemyng, minifter at Dalgarnok, Thomas Wauche, his lone.*'

' The crime is thus briefly described in another place, — ' be geving hir dyuerse bauch, blae, and bludie siraikis, in
dyuerse pairtis of hir bodie.' * IV. ipouls, shoulders. • Cows. * That is, dashed her with violence

against or upon a wooden bedstead. ' Belly. " The rest of the Assise are persons ol no note.

48^ CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1620.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the repoirt and declaratioun of the
faid Mr Alexander Flemyng, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declarit the faid
Johnne Rogerfoun to be Clene, innocent, and acquit of airt and pairt of the
flauchter, and haill circuniftances thairof fpecifeit in his Dittay.

dfxircrni)— dfalsct— Countcvftitinig: a ^ufisniptitin to a falst Moxxti.

Apr. 20. — Thomas Dempster, fumtyme of Mureflc.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the ffalfiefeing, fforgeing, and devyfeing and
counterfuteing of the fubfcriptioun of ane ffalfe Band of Reuerfioun, &c. fpecifeit
in his DiTTAY following, viz.

FoRSAMEKiLL AS, albeit tlie faid Thomas, be his birth, was ane gentihnan borne, provydit, be
vertcw of his parentis and predicefiburis, to the fucceflioun and richt of dyuerfe landis, rowmes, and
pofleffiones ; the quhilkis, be his leud and godles mifgovernment, ar raaill fchamefullie and vnvvorthielie
fpenditand put away, to the inipoveiifching alfvveill of him felff, as preiudice and difapointment of his
poileritie: 51T tlie laid Thomas, altogidder fenfles of tliat his miferable cairage, nawayis being raovet
tbairwith, bot rather refolveing to rwn heidlongis in all godles and cruil^et courfes, as a man fauld and
gevin over to the practize of the famyn ; amangis vtheris, his vnlauclifuU and damnable proceidingis, a
fourtene ;eir fyne or ]iairby, he maift falflie, fraudulentlie, and diffaitfullie plottit, devyfet, forget, and
drew vp ane falfe and counterfute Band, conteuing the tennour of ane fals and limulat Reuerfioun, as
gif the famyn had bene maid and fubfcryuit be umq''' Walter Barclay of Toiveis, quhais name and
fubfcriptioun was alfo falflie counterfute be the faid Thomas, with the Witnefles fubfcriptiones infert
tliairintill ; bcirand in effect, that the faid vmq^'' Walter Barclay confefTit and grantit him to haif reflauit
fra vmq^^ James Dempjfer of Auchterles, his father, ane Reuerfioun maid and fubfcryuit be vmq'« Patrik
Barclay, fumtyme of Toivie, his father, in fauouris of vmq^*^ Johnne Erie of Buchan, Lord of Glendovachie, fubfcryuit at the Caftle of Banff, tlie firft day of July 1547 5eiris, for redemeiug and outquyteing fra the faid vmq^'' Patrik and liis airis, Lairdis of Totcic, of the Landis of Collane, with the
ffifcher-heaven and remanent pairtis, pendicles, and pertinenlis of the famyn, lyand within the Lordfchip
of Glendovachie, and Sherefdome of Banff, vpone payment and delyuerance of ane hundreth angellnobles gold and wedit ; with ane nyntene 5eir Tak, eftir the Redemptioun, contening frie Office and
jurifdictioun of Bail3ene, with payment of tlire-fcoir merkis, as for the 3eirlie maill thairof allanerlie :
And that be vertew of the foirfaid fimulat Band, the faid vmqi« Wcdter Barclay of Toiveis obleifl; him
to delyuer bak agane the famyn Reverfioun to tlie faid James Demjijler, father to the faid Thomas, at
quhat tyme or how fone it fould liappin him, and his airis, to be dillreflit or put at for delyuerie,
or exhibitioun of the famyn, be the airis maiU of the faid vrnq'"^ Llrle of Buchan, and vtheris haiffand
richt thairto ; and tbairwith to pay to tlie faid James Dempjier and his airis, the fowme of ten thowfeand pundis of liquidat expenflis, in caice of failjie : As the faid Band, contening the tennour of the
faid fals Reuerfioun, with dyuerfe vtheris clauffes at lenth fet doun thairintill, all falflie fforget, devyfet,
and counterfute, firft be tlie faid Thomas, and thaireftir wrlttin over at his command and directioun be
Airthour Meldrum, Scule-maifter and Reidar at Kintor, and ante-daitit be him, at the faid Thomas
command, at Lambes laft, daitit at Mure-e(k, the firft day of October 1585, be the fpace of threttiefoure 5eiris of befoir, in the felff proportis. Lyk as, in ane actioun of Improbatioun intentit laitlie
befoir the Lordis of Counfell and Seflloun, at the inftance of Sir Patrick Barclay, now of Towie
elder, and Patrik Barclay younger his fone, with concurrence of our fouerane lordis Aduocat, for
improbatioun of the foirfaid Band and Reuerfioun, ingroflit thairintill, the faidis Lordis of Counfell and
Seflioun, efter tryell tane be them in the premifles, lies ffand and declairit be thair Decreit, gevin vpon^

53 & 18 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 487

the fecund day of Marche inftant, conforme to the faid Tliomas awin Confeflioun and Depolitioun,
fubfcryuit be his awin hand, in tliair haill Lordfchippis prefens, that the foirfaid Band and Reuerfioun
foirfaid, ingrofTit thairintill, is fals and fenjeit, falflie forget, fabricat. and devyfet be the faid Thomas,
and the faid Airthour 3Ieldrum, at his command and directioun : And that the faid Airthour, be his
command and directioun, counterfute the names and fubfcriptiones of Patrik Chalmer, Alexander
Frajer, and Alexander Wafjoim, tlire of the Witneffes infert thairintill : And tliat the faid Thonuis
him felff counterfute, and pat to with his hand the name and fubfcriptioun of the faid vraq'*^ Walter
Barclay of Towie, allegit maker of the faid Band, with the names of Georye LejUe, and James Lines,
uther tua Witneffes infert thairintill : And in refpect thairof, the famyn Band was, be thair Lordfchipis directioun, in thair Lordfchipis prefens, immediatlie cuttit, cancellit, and deflroyit, and declairit
to mak na fayeth in judgement, nor outwith, in tyme cuming : And the faid Thomas, for his former
ffalfett, (was) alfo Ordanit be the faidis Lordis Decreit to be pwneift in his perfone and guidis, conforme to the lawis of this realme ; quhilk aucht and fould be execute vpone him with all rigour, to the
terrour and example of vtheris to attempt the lyk. As the faidis Lordis Decreit, togiddor with the
faid Thomas, his awin and the faid Airthour Meldrumes Depofitiones, confeffing cleirlie the ffalfet
aboue writtin, producet be our faid fouerane lordis Aduocat with the Dittay aboue fpecifeit, for verificatioun thairof, at lenth beiris.

The pannell allegit, that in refpect the fFalfe Reuerfioun quhairupoun he is
accufet, was nevir vfet nor abiddin at be him, to the hurt of the Laird of Towie
or ony vther, that thairfoir the Juftice could nocht put him to ane Affyle. — It is
anfuerit be my Lord Aduocat, that the allegeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect
of the Dittay, and of the Lordis Decreit, quhairupoun the famyn is foundit,
ffinding the Reuerfioun to be ffalflie fForget be the pannell, and that the Laird
of Toiceis fubfcriptioun was falflie counterfute, and put thairto be the pannell ;
and thairfoir Ordaning him to be pwneift, conforme to the Lawis of this realme.

The Juftice Repellis the pannellis allegeance, in refpect of the anfuer ; and
Ordanis the Dittay to pafs to ane Aflyfe.

ASSISA.

George LoganeofBonytoun, elder, James Halyburtoun, mercheand, Archibald Law, goldfmyth,

Williame Lauder, bailjie of Patrik Elis,50unger, mercheand, Harie I loip, mercheand,

Dumbar, Capitane Patrik Heiring, George nammiltoun, mercheand,

Malcolme Stevinfoun, Tutour of Johnne Dougall, mercheand, EduardJohnnertoun, mercheand,

Hirdmefloun, Johnne Schaw, mercheand, Williame Cryftiefoun, tail^our.

Michell Ramfay of Forther, Johnne Smyth, mercheand,

Vehdict. The AfTyfe, be the repoirt and declaratioun of the faid Chanceller,

all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Thomas Dempfter to be

ffylet, culpable, and convict of the haill ffalfettis fet doun in his Dittay above

writtin. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and tliair

his heid to be ftrukin frome his body ; and all his moveable guidis and geir

pertening to him to be efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe, &:c.^

^ The frequency of the crime of Forgery, during some years preceding the date of this Trial, seems
to have induced the Public Prosecutor to make several severe examples. Not a few of the criminals
were persons of considerable rank in society, who, by desperate courses, had been reduced to the worst
shifts to procure the means of subsistence.

488 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1620.

Jun. 14. — Robert Hodge in Si^itteltoun, and James Mitchell, myller

at Dalmahoy mylne.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter and Murthour of vmq'^ Patrik

]\Iitchell, flxynner ; connnittit in Marche laft or thairby, be ftreking him with

kentis and flaillis, in dyuerfe pairtis of his body, and douking him in the mylneleid or dam of Dalmahoy-mylne ; quhairof he within xxiiij houris deceiffit.

Persewak, Johnne Mitcliell in Langfyde, as father.
Prelocutouuis in defence, Mr Robert Lermontlie, The Laird of Dalmahoy.

The Juftice continewis this dyet to ffryday nixt.

Jun. 16. — CoMPEiRiT Johnne Mitchell, perfewar, and declairit that the
i^erfones on pannell ar altogidder innocent of the crymes contenit in the Letteris ;
and thairfoir he i^aH /in/plici/cr fra tliair perfute, as innocent thairof. — The
pannell takis inltrunientis of the perfewaris Declaratioun, and pafCmgJimpIicifer
fi-a thair perfute ; and nochtwithftanding thairof, offeritthame felffis to the tryell
of the Law for the faid allegit crymes, feing thair is ane fufficient number of
honeft men heir prefent, quha war fummoned be the perfewar to pas on thair
AHyle, and quha bell knawis the verritie of that matter ; and thairfoir, as of
befoir, defy ret my lord Juftice that thai mycht be put to ane try el], &c.

The Juftice, in refpect of the perfewaris declaratioun and paffing fra the
pannellis perfute, Ordanis the dyet to defert ; and na Letteris to be direct aganis
thame, in this matter, in ony tyme cuming, at the inftance of thir perfewaris.

iHuititr rommittttJ luxtitv Crust mxti ffxitiitiaijip,

Jun. 16. — Harie Gordoun of Haddo.

Dilaitit of the crewall Murthour and Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Johnneftoun,
fervand and neir kynfman to the Laird of Caflvieben, be fchuiting him throw the
body with ane double mufket, cliarget with fyve bullettis, vnder truft and
freindfchip, at the dur of the faid Hareis duelling-hous, the xxiiij of Marche laft.

Robert Johnneftoun, in Corfliill, as father to vmq^^ Johnne, togidder with Sir
Williame Oliphant, producet the Letteris, deulie execute and indorfate, &c.

The Juftice Ordanit Adame Gordoun of Boighoill, as cautiouner, to be vnlawit
for nocht entrie of the faid Harie, in the pane of Tua hundreth merkis : And
ficlyk, that the faid Harie be denuncet rebell and put to the home, and all his
moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Jun. 16. — Donald Neilsoxe of Aflint, Neill Neilfone, his fone, and
Neill M'^Eane Allafter.

53&18JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 489

Dilaitit for taking vmq*^ Donald JVrAlIafter VEane V'Henrie, binding him
hand and fute, and calling him in ane boit ; and thaireftir cayreing him to ane
craig^ in the Sea of Clafneffie, in Affint, quhair the lie overflowing the faid craig,
he was pitiefullie^ drownit and cayreit away to the grit Ocean-fie ; and fa,
crewallie Murthouret be thame.

Michaell Anderfone, tail3eour in the Potter-raw, as cautioner, amerciated for
nocht repoirting of the Letteres deulie execute and indorfate, and perfewing
thairof, purchelt at the inllance of Johnne M^Angus VHenrie, neir kynnifman
of the faid vmq'" Donald, viz. 1 00 merkis for the faid Neill M'Ean Allafter ; and
for the vther tua defenderis, ather of thame in tua hundreth merkis.

^Taugljttr*

Jun. 20. — WiLLlAME JoHNNESTOUN, elder of Kellobank ; Williame
Johnnelloun, jounger, his fone ; and Johnne Johnneftoun,
alfo his fone.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Williame Johnnelloun of
Kynnel-heid ; committit in anno 1619.

Persewar, Jeane Johnneftoun, as dochter.

AssiSTERis of the perfute, Robert Johnneftoun, callit of Moflbpe, Thomas Johnneftoun of

Beirholme, James Johnneftoun of Erfchag.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Nicolfone, elder, Mr Laurence M^gill (Advocates.)

The perfewaris paffis Jimplicifer fra the pannellis perfute, for the crymes
foirfaidis : Quhairvpone the pannell aflvit inllrumentis.

Continued, ' for the Kingis pairt,' to the third day of the next Jullice-air, or
fooner, on xv days warning.

Cal^ino: raptibe aitb piwduei— ^ppitssitin, ^t*

Jul. 12. — WiLEiAME Gariociie, fone to James Garioche of Kinllair,
and Thomas Anderfone in Awfurd.
Dilaitit for being in companie with Alexander Forhes, fumtyme of Joiveis,
vponethe xxj day of Januar, 1620 lall, bodin^ with foure piftolettis and tua lang
gwnes, fuordis, durkis, and vtheris wappones invajiue ; and cuming airlie in the
moirning, befoir the brek of day, to the duelling-hous of George Garioche, in
Tuliechetlie, fone-in-law to Johnne Bonar, in TuUiechetlie, quhair the faid Jolmne
was, in fober and quyet maner, for the tyme, lying in his bed ; and be plane force
and violence entering within the faid hous, pat violent handis in the i)erfone of
Barbara Forbes, ane fervand thairof, drew hir to the ITyre, and in maill barbarous and crewall maner held hir aboue the famyn, thraitning to call hir thairin,
^ Crag, or rock. ' Piteously ; lamentably. ^ Furnished ; provided.

VOL. in. 3 Q

490 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1620.

and to burn liir quick,' gif fcho reveillit noclit to thame quliair the faid Johnne
Bonar was : And lykwayis, ffor the putting violent handis in the perfone of
Robert Broun, ane vther fervand of the faid hous, and balding ane drawin durk
to his breift, thraitning to flrek him thairwith, gif he alfo reveillit nocht to
thame quhair the faid Johnne Bonar was for the tyme : And lall, vpone knawlege gevin to the faid Alexander Forbes of Toweis and his comjilices, that the
faid Johnne Bonar was in his bed within the faid hous, ffor thair cuming to him
to his bedfyde, and drawing him furth of his bed in maift violent maner, taking
him captiue and prisoner, and cayreing him furth of the faid hous be the fpace
of tua myles, to the watter of Lochell, and douking" him dyuerfe tymes thairin ;
and thair compelling him to yeild to the furneiffing to the faid Alexander Forbes,
and deljTiering to him of ffyve hundreth merkis money ; and becaus of the faid
Johnne Bonar his refuifall of performeing thaireftir of his promeis, ffor cayreing
him with thame, as ane captiue and priffoner, to the duelling-hous of Robert
Merfar of Edindowie, and keiping him thairin, as ane captiue and priffoner, be
the fpace of tua dayis and tua nichtis togidder : And for beiring and weiring of
hagbuttis and piftolettis, contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament.

Compeirit perfonallie the faid Williame Garioche and Thomas Anderfones,
and maift williuglie offerit thame felffis to the tryell of the law, difaffenting
JimpUciter to all maner of continuation : And thairfoir proteftit for thair cautioneris (Mr Williame Forbes of Craigievar, and Alexander Hill, litfter,^ burges
of Aberdene) releif. — Compeirit on the vther pairt, Johnne Forbes, elder of
Brux, as procurator, fpeciallie conftitute, for the faid Johnne Bonar, perfewar,
and be vertew of ane Letter of procuratioun, fubfcryuit with his hand, of the dait
the aucht day of July inftant ; bearing, that the faid Johnne, in regaird of his
grit age and inhabilitie to travell to the keiping of this dyett, and that he
vnderftuid the faidis Williame and Thomas, quha had fund cautioune, Avar
innocent of the haill crymes aboue writtin, Ordanit the faid Johnne Forbes of
Brux to \)as Ji}?ij)liciier fra thair perfute, &c. Quhilk proteftatioun the Juftice
admittit.

J^oust-lircalunrs:— ^tdutljrtif— €:]&cft

Jul. 21. — Patiuk Grant of Davachmoir ; Duncane Grant, in Weiler
Bunlody ; James M'^allafter Vic Eane Oig, in Inchebroun ;
Ewin M^neill Vquyane, in Littill Clwne.
Dilaitit for breking of Johnne Grant of Glenmorieftoun his hous of Belmacaene, in "\''rquhart ; breking vp of fourtene lokit kiftis ^ being thairin ; fteilling
and away-taking of certane guidis and geir being within the faidis kiftis, all
pertening to the faid Johnne Grant ; committit in Apryle, 1615 yeiris.
1 Alive. ^ Ducking. ^ Dyer. ■• Locked chests.

54&18JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 49I

Persewar, Johnne Grant of Glenmoriefloun.

The perfewar paiTisJimplicite?' fra the perfute of the faid Ewin ; and declairis
him to be innocent thairof.

Continued to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quiiair
thay duell, or foner, vpone xv dayis wairning. Johnne Grant, appeirand of
Ballindalloche, become fouertie, &c.

Cafeincr raptibt— <ii)pprt!S)sion— ^tarbinu to trtatj*

Jul. 26. — Robert M^coule, in Weller Kindrogine ; Robert Glas, thair ;
and Johnne Bowy M^kerra Dowy, in Straloche.

Dilaitit for Ufurpatioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in taking of vmq'^
Allafter JVrgiUiemule, in Innerridrie, ane limple puir man, furth of the duelling
hous of Johnne Roy ^rgilliemule, vpone the landis of Bordland, within the
fcherefdome of Perthe, binding him hand and fute, and cayreing him, as ane
captiue and priffoner, with thame to the Caftell of Blair, in Athole, and ftryjjpit
him naikit of his claithes, and thaireftir calling him in the pit of the faid Caftell,
quhair, in the deid tyme of winter, viz. in December laft, he fameifchet Avith
hunger and cald, eftir he had remanit foure dayis and foure nichtis thairintill :
And thaireftir cayreing him out of the faid pitt to ane gibbet (being deid) vpone
the landis of Blair, quhair thay hang him vp as ane malefactour, but power or
commiffioun gevin to thame, or ony preceiding tryell tane of his guiltines of
ony cry me.

The Juftice ordanit Johnne Ferguffone of Belnacult, in Straloche, as cautioner
and fouertie, to be vnlawit for nocht entrie of ilk ane of the faidis perfonis, in
the pane of ane hundreth merkis ; And liclyk, that thay fall be denuncet rebellis
and put to the home, and all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

iinutiiia: anb raouiibins— StmrmiJiatioit*

Nov. 3. — Johnne Stewart of Hulreid ; James Elaikwoid, his fervand ;
and Johnne Pollok, fone to Johnne Pollok, in Caldcoittis.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewali Hurting and A^^^unding of Johnne
Allanfone, fone to Andro Allanfone, in AVaterfute, in his held, be geving to him
of fevin bludie woundis thairintill, tua crewali woundis in his fchoulderis and
airmes : As alfo, of difmembring him of his thombe and thre fingeris of his left
hand ; committit vpone the landis of Gorballis, pertening to Sir George Elphingftoun of Blythefwoid, kny', in his cuming frome Glafgow to his fatheris hous, in
Watterfute, in the moneth of Junij laft ; vpone fet purpois, prouifioun, and ffoirthocht ffellonie.

Persewar, Jolmne Allanefone.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Iloip, Mr James Haramiltoun.

492 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1620.

It is allegit be Mr Thomas Hoip, as prelocutour for Johnne Stewart of Hulreid, that the Dittay can nocht be put to ane AfTyfe aganis the faid Johnne, nor
his men, becaus per Legem, fi quis in rixa, &c. ; qiihair ane perfone, callit for
ane cryme and is fugitiue thairfoir, the remanent perfones, his allegit complices,
enterand, can nocht be tryit be ane Affyfe, or perfewit for the famyn : As alfo,
he takis inflrumentis of that poynt of the Dittay, beirand the fact lybellit to be
committit vpone foirthocht fellonie. It is forder allegit be Mr Thomas, that the
Dittay is nawayis relevant to pas to ane Affyfe, for Difmembring, feing the
perfewar wantis nocht ane member, hot onlie his thombe and tua fingeris, quia
digitiif! )wn ejl memhnim,Jecl tantum imrs memhri.

IMr James Hammiltoun, as prelocutour for Johnne Pollok, takis inflrumentis,
that the perfewar is willing to pas fra the faid Johnne Pollokis ^QYix\ieJimj)Ucitet\
as altogidder innocent of the cryme lybellit ; and proteftis, in caice he perfew
nocht Pollok, that the perfewaris cautioneris be vnlawit : And thairfoir, in refpect
of Pollokis innocencie, he offeris him to the tryell of ane Affyfe. Takis inflrumentis alfo of the perfewaris declaratioun, beirand that he nevir faw the faid
Johnne Stewart and remanent perfones on pannell befoir his cuming to the grund
of Gorballis, that day of his hurting thairupoun ; as alfo, that Johnne Stewart
faid theafe wordis at that tyme, ' It is ane mervellous matter we can nocht get
James Pollok and Johnne Allanfone red !'

The Juflice repellis the allegeances aboue writtin, concerning the Law allegit
be Mr Thomas Hoip, and concerning the difmembring, in refpect of the Dittay :
And Ordanis the famyn to be put to ane Affyfe.

"W.RDICT. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, ffand the faidis Johnne Stewart, James
Blaikwood, and Johnne Pollok to be Clene, innocent, and acquit, &c,

Nov. 17. — James Mure, in Dalmahoy,^ and Thomas Aikman, thair.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Weir, in Dalmahoy ;
committit with flanes, rungis,^ and vtheris wappones invafiue, vpone the lafl day
of September laflbypafl, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun, and foirthocht fellony.

Persewaris, Margaret Wynraliame, tlie relict; Thomas and William Weir, brether.
Prelocutour in defence (for Thomas Aikman), ]Mr Robert Lermonthe.

^''erdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, ffand the faid Thomas Aihnan to be
Cleane, innocent, and acquit : And ficlyk, that the faid James 31ure is Giltie,
culpable, and convict of the faid flauchter. — Sentence againji Mure. To be
tane to the Mercat croce of Edinbarghe, and thair his held to be flrukin frome
his body ; and all his moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c.

1 See Jun. U, 16-20. ^ Cudgels ; staves.

54 & 18 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 493

Dec. 1. — JoHNNE Broun, tail5eour, hantand' in Craufiirdmure.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall Slaucliter of vmq'^ James Williamfone,
in Glengeich ; comniittit the xxvj day of November laftbypaft, within the duelling hous of Johnne Gibfone, elder, in Craufurdtoun, be hurting him with ane
fuord in the held, airmes, and vtheris pairtis of his body ; quhairof, vpone the
morne thaireftir, being the xxvij day of November, at tuelf houris in the day,
he deceiffit.

Persewaris, Syraone Williamfone, burges of Edinburghe, and Robert Williamfone, brethir to tbe
defunct ; James Williamfone, brother-in-law ; Sir Williame Olipliant, kny^

ASSISA.

Mathow Bail5ie, of Littillgill, Thomas Johnnlloun of Beirholme,

Mr James Bailjie, fone to Mathow, Williame Tailiefeir of Herklaw,

Johnne Makmath of Corfbank, Johnne Vmphray in Glenmuklek.'^

The faid Robert Williamfone, brother to the defunct, fuoir the Dittay to be
of verritie ; Quhairvpoun my lord Aduocat afkit inftrumentis ; and proteftit for
Wilfull Errour aganis the AlTyfe, gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the declaratioun of the faid Mathow
Bail3ie, chanceller, ffand the faid Johnne Broun to be ffylet, culpable, and convict
of airt and pairt of the faid crewall Slaucliter. — Sentence. To be tane to the
Mercat-croce of Edinburghe, and thair his heid to be ftrukin frome his body ;
and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Dec. 15. — Sir James Max wall of Calderwoid, kny'; Alexander

Lyndfay of Dunrod ; Johnne Lyndfay, his brother naturall ;

and James Maxwall, fone to Williame Maxwall of Newlandis.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slaucliter of vinq'*' Alexander Lekkie of that

Ilk ; committit in September 1601 yeiris.

Persewaris, Alexander Lekkie of that Ilk, as fone ; Adame Cuninghame of Markinfche, the
fpous of Euphame Maxwall, relict of the faid vmq''' Alexander, for his intreis ; Sir Williame
Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*, Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

Prelocutour in defence, Mr Thomas Hoip, Aduocat.

The Juftice, conforme to ane Warrand of the Secreit Counfall, direct to him,
quhairof the tennour foUowis :

Justice, Juflice Clerk, and jour deputis. Quhairas the fyftene day of December inftant is appointit
to Sir James Maxwell of Calderwoid, kyn*^, W'" Maxwall of Newlandis, James, J", and James Maxwallis his fones, Alex"" Lyndfay of Dunrod, and James Wauchope in J>e Airdis, ftbr pair compcirance
befoir 50W, to vnderly the lawis for the Slaucliter of vmq''" Alex' Lekkie of pat Ilk : Nochtwithllauding,
for certane cauffis moveing ws, it is our will, and we Command 50W to continew pe faid dyet, vntill the

' Dw^elling, but having no fixed residence. ' The rest of no note.

494 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1620.

fextene day of Januar, in the 5eir of God I'".Vjc. tuentie tua 3ems : And that 3e tak new cautioun of
thame, conforme to the ordour. Quhairanent thir prefentis fall be 30ur Warrand. At ED^ the tuelf
day of December, 1620.

Al. Caxcell^ Mar. Melrois. Nithisdaill. Lauderdaill. Carnegy.

Continewis this dyet to the faid xvj day of Januar, in anno foirfaid. — Sir
Alexander Hamniiltoun of Innerweik, knyS elder, and Alexander Levingftoun
of Belftane, become pleges and fouerteis for the entrie of the faidis Sir James, &c.
(Jan. IG, 1622.)— Sill James Maxwall compeirit, and perfonallie producet
ana Waurand of the Lordis of Secreit Connfall, proceiding vpone ane Supplicatioun gevin in by thair Lordfchippis ; qnhairof the tennour followis.

My Lordis OF Secreit Counsall, vnto 3001- L.humlie meanis^ and I'chawis, we 50ur feruitouris,
Sir James Maxwall of Calderwoid,^ fone to vmqie Williame Maxwall of Newlandis, Alex"" Lyndfay
of Dunrode, and Jo"^ Lyndfay, his brother naturale, That quhair, the fextene day of Januare nixtocum
is appointit to us for our compeirance befoir his Maiefteis Juflice, to vnderly the Law for the Slauchter
of vmq'e Alex'' Lekie of that Ilk, at the quhilk day the Juftice intendis to proceid in this matter ;
albeit it be of verritie, that be ]ie mediatioun and travellis of fome weill affectit Noblemen, Barrones,
and Gentilmen, commoun and indifferent^ freindis to both us pairteis, who hes deltand travellit betuix
us, for bringing of this vnhappie ffeid, whilk hes bene of fo long continuance betuix our Houffis, to
fome termes of aggrement and reconfiliatioun : Thay broght ])e matter to this poynt, that I, ])e faid Sir
James, fall fuperceid and continew the profecutioun and following out of }ie actioun of Reductioun,
quhilk I half prefentlie in dependance befoir ]ie Lordis of Counfall and Seffioun, aganis fe faid Laird
of Lekkie, and that I fall fuffer the fame to reft and fleip* till pe faid faxtene day of Januar nixtocum ;
and that the Criminall dyet foirfaid, appointit for our Tryell befoir pe Juftice, fall be continewit till
Witfonday nixt ; to the effect, that in this meane tyme, forder travellis may be tane for bringing of
the ffeid and querrell betuix us to ane more happie and finall conclufioun : And with this appointment
of freindis, bothe we pairteis reftit weale fatisfeit and content. Thairfoir we befeik 50ur Lo.
to geve command to ])e Juftice, Juftice clerk, and J^alr deputies, to continew f>e dyet foirfaid, appointit
for our compeirance befoir thame, to vnderly the Law for J)e Slauchter, vnto ])e faid terme of Witfonday nixtocum ; and that ]iai difpenfe with our perfonall compeirance, and tak new cautioun for us,
conforme to ])e ordour : And to difcharge thame of all proceiding aganis us in the mean tyme, and of
thair offices in that pairt, quhill J)e faid terme of Witlbnday : W hairanent thir prefentis fall be ])air
Warrand. And 30ur Lordfchipis anfuer. \_Folloiins the Lordis delyuerance.~\ Aw d ^n^, quarto
Decembris, 1621, fftat ut petitur, to the xix day of Junij nixtocum : Becaos the Erie of Mar, being
perfonallie prefent, teftifeit ]>e confent and appointment within writtin.

Al. Caxcells.

For obedience of the quhilk Warrand, the Juftice continewis this dyet in the
fame forme, force, and effect, with all tryell of the pannell for the Slauchter aboue
writtin, to the laid xix day of Junij, &c. — Sir George Elphingftoun of Blythefwoid, kny^ became fouertie for the entrie of the faid Laird of Calderwoid, &c.

(Jun. 19, 1622.) — The Laird of Calderwoid producet his Maiefteis Letter
following :

^ Complains. * It is likely the following words are omitted in the record, through a clerical

error : ' Kny*, James Maxwall,' sone, 8cc. ^ Disinterested. * When no proceeding takes

place in suits before the Court of Session for year and day, the process is technically said to fall
asleep, and is revived by a Summons of Wakening, &c.

54 & 18 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 495

James R.
Trustie and weilbelouit, We greit 50W weill. Whair as, We be crediblie inforraet that Sir
James Max ivall of Calderwoid, km/, 2inA Alexander LimlJ ay of Dwnrod, \v\i\\ thear complices, ar
fummond, to vnderly our Lawis, for pe Slauchter of vmq'« Alexander Lecky of that Ilk, alleadged
committed be thanie, We ar well pleafed to grant vnto the faid Sir James a Refpitt for the fame,
during the fpace of certane monethis eftir the dait heirof : And thairfoir haif thought goode, by thefe
prefentis, to will and requyre 50W not to medle in any wyfe, nor to tak cognitioun of the faid caufe,
till the fyft day of October nixt. Wherein We expect 30wi- conformitie to our pleafour. Gevin at
our Court of Grenewiche, the firfl of Junij, 1622.

The Juftice continewis, &c. Sir Johnne Hammiltoun of Lettrik, and James
Maxwall of Kirkconnell, cautioneris, &c.

Prelocutouris in defence, Jofeph Myller, Aduocat ; Archibald Hammiltoun, Commiffar of Lanark.

(Oct. 5, 1622.) — Joseph MYLLEUproducet tua feuerall Teftimoniallis,the
ane fubfcryuit be the Minifter of Lanark, and dyiierfe elderis of the Seflioun of
that Kirk ; and the vther fubfcryvet be the Minifter of Carlouk, and certane of
the elderis of that Kirk, tellifeing the deceife of Sir James Maxwall of Calderwoid, kny* : And vpone the productioun thairof alkit inllrumentis.

The Laird of Dunrod prefentit to the Juftice ane Letter of his Maiesteis,
quhairof the tennour folio wis.

I'o o'" truftie and weilbelouit, o"" Juftice, Juftice clerk, and J)air deputeis whatfoeuir.
James R.
Truftie and weilbelouit. We gi-eete 30W well. Whairas, We haue bene pleafed to write to o>" Counfell, willing thame to employ their beft meanes, for reconciliatioun of Sir James Maxwell of Calderwoid and Alexander Lekkie of that Ilk : We haif lykwayis tliocht by thefe prefentis to will and
requyre 50W nocht to proceid in the criminall actioun intendit aganis the faid Sir James Maxwall and
his complices, for the Slauchter of vmq^e Alexander Lekkie of that Ilk, till je fall vnderftand by C faid
Counfell that fai haif gevin vp all forder deilling in that matter. So, exfpecting 50'- conformitie to this
o'" plef ■", we bid 30U fare weill. Gevin at Windefore, the feavinthe day of Aug-uft, 1622.

Conforme to the quhilk directioun of his Maiellie, the Juftice deferris all
proceiding aganis the pannell.

The faid Johnne Lyndfay difaflentis to the faid continuatioun, and afRrmes
him felf to be innocent of the faid Slauchter ; and thairfoir offeris him felft' prefentlie to the tryell of the Law for the famyn. — The Juftice Ordanis him, with
the remanent defenderis vpone pannell, to find cautioun. James Lyndfay of
Scheillis, and Alexander Levingftoun of Belftane, become cautioneris, &c.

I3fr Robert Fairlie, Jujlice-Depiite.']

Caltincrraptibrmintr's free liecjcs— Cruel oppression— iHurljer, ^u

Feb. 7, 1621. — James Park in Cathkyn, and George Park in Wefter

Gremlear, his brother.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Taking of vmq'" Williame Knox, in Cathkyn,

furth of his duelling hous, vnder filence of nyclit, and with cudgellis and rungis

befting and dinging him in the breift, fydis, bak, and bellie ; thairby breking

496 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1621.

and briifeing his haill intrallis and nobill pairtis within him, fetting thair feit
betiiix his leggis vpone his ball-cod/ and forceing thairby his llanes to loup vp
in his lifkis f binding him thairefter with ane coird, or hair-tedder, to ane horfe
and ane fled,^ and cayreing him with thame as ane captiue and priffoner to the
toun of Hammiltoun : Off the quhilkis hurttis and dedlie woundis, he deceiffit,
in the moneth of Januar; the famyn being done to him in the moneth of
October of befoir, in the yeir of God I™.VMxxxxvj yeiris.

Persewaris, Johnne Knox, as fone; Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Tho** Hoip, Mr Ja^ Hammiltoun, Mr Lueis Stewart, (Advocates.)

It is allegit be the pannell, that the Dittay contenis tiia feuerall crymes ; the
firft, for taking and apprehending of his Maiefteis frie lege but^ Commiffioun,
quhilk is trefibnable ; the vther cryme, for Murthour and Slauchter of him, in
in maner lybellit. As to the firft cryme, quhilk inferris the cryme of TrefTone,
non relevat^ becaus, taking without irapriffoning in prhato carcere^ and detening him thairin, i^er fpacium viginti quatuor liorarumy can nocht, be^ the law,
infer pencwi pf'ivati carceris. And as to the Murthour lybellit, 7ion relevat to
pas to ane Aflyfe, except it war condifcendit, at quhat tyme he contractit the
deidlie feiknes, eftir the geving of the ftraikis quhairupoun daith followit, as is
alleggit in the lybell. My lord Aduocat conioynes the tua crymes lybellit, and
concludes thairin only j^enam capitis to be inflictit vpone the committeris ; and
thairfoir defyres the Juftice to put the haill lybell coniunctim to the knawlege
of ane AfTyfe. — The perfewar, Johnne Knox, declairis that he will nocht perfew
at this tyme, becaus the fpeciall perfones that ar fummoned, and beft knawis
the treuth of the pannellis giltines, ar nocht prefent : And thairfoir, defyres that
the matter may continew to ane fyftene dayis wairning, and the pannell put
vnder new cautioun. — The pannell dilaflentis to the faid continuatioun ; and in
refpect, thair is ane fufficient number of AfTyfe prefent, all fummoned be the
perfewar, offeris thame felffis to the tryell of the law for the haill crymes lybellit ;
quhairof thay declair thame felffis to be altogidder innocent : And proteftis, in
refj)ect of thair former offer, that thay be nawayis trubillit or perfewit for the
faidis allegit crymes, in ony tyme cuming.

The Juftice continewis this matter to ane fyftene dayis wairning ; and ordanis
the pannell to find cautioun, &c. Williame Anderfone, portioner of Littil
Govane, became cautioner, &c.

[Mr Alexander Colnile, Jnjlice-Depute.']

^suvjpin^ icing's autfjorit})— Caluntj raptibt Ut.

Feb. 9. — Richard Grahame of Hofpitalfcheillis, and Robert Merfar,
meffinger in Abirdene.^

' Testes. * Reins. ' Sledge, or cart without wheels. * Without. * By.

" Cautioners, ' George Erie of Marfchell, and James Garioche of Kinftair.'

M & 18 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 497

Dilaitit for ciiming to Patrik Farquliar, burges of Abirdene, his duellinghous thair, and maift violentlie, but ordoiir of Law/ or concurrance of the
Magiftratis of the faid burgh, and without ony Commiffioun or vther Warrand,
putting violent handis in the perfone of the faid Patrik Farquhar, taking him
furth of his faid hous ; and thairfra, cayreing him, as ane captiue and priifoner, to
the faid Richerd Grahames Hous of Overcraig : As alfo, for cayreing him to the
priflbne of Stanehyve, quhairin he was keipit be the fpace of tuentie dayis :
Lyk as, he was keipit and detenit in the faid Richerd Grahames Hous, tanquam
in 'privato carcere^ be the fj^ace of tuentie foure houris ; vfurpeing thairby our
fouerane lordis authoritie vpone thame : And tic lyk, for tranfpoirting him to
the duelling hous of Mr Williame Reid in Cowie, quhairin he was keipit in
llrait firmance the fpace of vther xxiiij houris : Vfurpeing thairby our fouerane
lordis authoritie vpone thame.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr James Olipliant, Mr Roger Mowat, Aduocattis.

The faid Patrik Farquhar declairit, that the faidis Letteris war altogidder
raifit but" his warrand, and by^ his knawlege ; and without ony informatioun
gevin be him to our fouerane lordis Aduocat, or to the faid James Keyth,* or
ony vther thairintill : And thairfoir, he renuncet all actioun Criminal or Ciuile
that he had or could allege aganis the faid Richard and Robert, and paft 7??wjyUcitei' fra thair perfute, as altogidder frie and innocent thairof. — My lord
Aduocat declairis, that thair is collutioun and fecreit aggrement betuix Patrik
Farquliar and the perfones on pannell ; and defyres the pannell thairfoir to be
put vnder new cautioun, for thair compeirance of new agane, vpone xv dayis
wairning, for his Maielleis intereis allanerlie. — Johnne Grahame, indueller in
Edinburgh, becomes cautioner to the above effect.

My lord Juftice Ordanit na letteris to be direct furth agan is the pannell, at
the inllance of the faid Patrik, for the crymes foirfaidis, in ony tyme cuming, in
refpect of his former declaratioun.

Feb. 22. — JoHXNE Bellenden, indueller in Edinburghe.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ James Dalmahoy, burges
of Edinburgh.

Persewaris.

Agnes and Helene Dalmahoy, fifteris ; Sir Johnne Dahnahoy of that Ilk, kyn* ; Andro Ker of 5aii''

Prelocutouris in defence, James Borthuik of Newbyres, Mr Laurence M'Gill.

The Justice, of confent of j^airtie, continewis the dyet to the fevint of Marche

* Without legal warrant. * Without. ^ Beside ; past ; without ; contrary to. ■* Of

Harviestoun, cautioner for producing the Letters duly executed against the pannel.

VOL. III. 3 R

498 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1621.

nixtocum. And ordanis the pannell to be tane bak to waird, thair to remane
qiihill the faid day.

Mar. 7. — Con tine wis this matter to Fryday nixt, the nynt injlantis.

Mar. 9. — The perfewaris j^affis fra the perfute of the pannell, ^^ro loco
et tempore.

Mar. 30. — Mr James BAIL5IE, fone to Mathow Bail3ie of Littilgill.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ James Dalmahoy, merchand
burges of Edinburgh.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mathow Bail3ie of Littilgill, Mr James Hammiltoun.

The faidis Mathow, and Mr James, declairit, that Mr James Bail3ie, his fone,
the tyme of the geving of the charge to him, for his compeirance, was and is as
yit hevielie difeafit with feiknes, that he is nocht able to travell to the keiping
of this dyet, &c.

Johnne Loverance, Minifter at Robertoun being folemplie fuorne, declairit,
that he is Minifter at the Kirk of Robertoun, and within this thre dayis vilTeit
Mr James Bail5ie within the parochin, quhair he was lying bedfaft, heavilie
difeafet with feiknes, and nawayis of habilitie to travell, vpone horfe or fute, to
the keiping of this dyet ; as he fould anfuer to the grit and Almychtie God.
—Johnne Dunfyre in Robertoun, alfo fuorne, is conforme to the faid Johnne
Loverance, Minifter. — Mungo Inglis thair, lykwayis deiplie fuorne, depones
conforme to the Minifter.

The Juftice ordanit cautioun of new agane to be fFund for the faid Mr James
Bail3ie, that he fall compeir the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of Lanerk, or
foner, vpone xv dayis. The faid Mathow becomes cautioner.

\^Ir Hohert Fairlie, JvJiice-JDejmte.']

iHurtrtr mxtitx trust, rrtUit, antr assurance*

Apr. 13. — George Erle of Caithness, and James Sinclair in Diran.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the crewall and treflbnabill Murthour and
Slaughter vnder truft, credit, and aftureance of vmq'^ Thomas Lyndfay in Scraibfter in Kaithnes ; committit be thame and thair compliceis, in forme and maner
fl)ecifeit in the Letteris.

Robert Monro of Aldie, Commiflar of Kaithnes, as brother on the mother
fyde, to the faid vmq'® Thomas, produceit the Letteris deulie execute and indorfate V2)one the faid Erie and James Sinclair, be the quhilkis, thay and ather of
thame ar denuncet rebellis and put to the home, for nocht finding of cautioun,
to haif compeirit befoir the Juftice or his dejiutis this day.

The Juftice, vpone the productioun of the faidis Letteris deulie execute,

54&19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 499

indorfat, and regiftrat, adjudget the faid Erie and James Sinclair, in refpect
thairof, and of thair nocht compeirance perfonallie this day, to be ffugitiues fra
his Maiefteis lawis for the faid treffonabill Miirthour, as culpable and fugitiue
thairfoir.

[^Mr Alexander Coluile, Juftice-Depute.l

' ^ovrtintj:'— 3Uapt»

Jun. 27. — James M^nacht in Igif3aird, and Thomas Weir in Gairdingholme-fute.
Dilaitit of the fforceing of vmq^^ Jonet JVrrone, fervand for the tyme to Thomas Weir in Gairdingholrae-fute, and abufeing hir, in the moneth of November,
1620 yeiris, in fic foirt, that within tuentie dayis thaireftir fcho deceiffit.

Persewar, WilHame Campbell, coufing- germane to the defunct.
pRELOCUTOURis in defence, Mr Lueis Stewart, and Adame Cuninghame, (Advocates.)

The pannell defyres to vnderftand the perfewaris entreis to perfew ; and that
he declair how neir of kyn he is to Jonet M^rone. — The perfewar declairis he is
coufing-germane to the faid vmq'^ Jonet, viz. fcho was his father-lifter dochter ;
and thairfoir lies guid intreis to perfew. — It is allegit be the pannell, that he can
nocht be eftimat ane lauchfull perfewar, becaus the perfewaris father was the
defunctis baftard-brother ; and fa, of the Law, can nocht perfew, his father being
baftard ; the verritie quhairof referris to the perfewaris ayth : Quha declairit
the allegeance to be of verritie.

The Justice, in refpect thair was na lauchfull perfewar to infift in this perfute, Ordanis the dyet to defert.

The pannell takis inftrumentis thairupoun, and affirmes that thai ar altogidder
innocent of the crymes lybellit ; and gif ane lauchfull perfewar, ather for the
parteis or the Kingis entreis, war prefent, thay wald maift willinglie offer thame
felffis to the tryell of the law for the faidis crymes ; and difalfentit, fimpliciter,
fra ony continuatioun, without ony exceptioun to be proponit aganis ony lauchfull perfewar or perfones of Affyfe, being honeft and vnfufpect perfones ; protefting, in the meane tyme, for thair cautioneris relief, fund for thair compeirance this day.

Jul. 19. — Henrie Baird, at the Mylne of Mukard.
Dilaitit of the crewall Slaughter of vmq^'' Robert Huttone, duelland within
the i)arocliin of Mukard, befyde Caftell Campbell, be cafting of ane otter-ftalfT,
with ane tua-granet fork of irne at the end thairof, at the faid vmq''" Robert,
quhilk peirfit him in the bellie, quhairof he immediatlie thaireftir deceilfit ; committit vpone the nynt of July inftant, vpone fet purpois, prouifioun, and ffoirthocht ffellonie.

500 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1621.

Persewar, Johnne Huttone, at the Kirk of Mukard, as brother to the defunct.

The pannell confeflis the fact, and craves God mercie.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, ffand the faid Henrie Baird, conforme
to his awin Judiciall Confeffioun, to be fFylet, culpable, and convict of airt and
pairt of the faid Slauchter. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thaii* his heid to be ftrukin fra his body ; and all his moveable guidis
to be efcheit, &c.

iConijciratitin ot Eirtjtsi— g^tariitci: oi l^attlmts— ^lauujjttr, $ct.

Jul. 20. — WiLLiAME Douglas of Drunilangrig ; James Douglas of

Mouffell, his brother ; Johnne Douglas of Killievarrene, his

brother naturall ; Robert Greir, younger of Lag ; and others.^

Dilaitit for contravening his Maiefteis Actis of Parliament, in making of

convocatioun of his hienes legis : And beiring and weiring of hagbutis and piftolettis : And for airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Thomas Coupland in

Cafchogill : And demembring of Robert Douglas, fone to Sir Robert Douglas of

Cafchogill, kny*, of his left lug r Committit in Maij laftwas, vpone the tuelf day

thairof, at the JMols of Cafchogill.

Persewaris, Margaret Corfbie, the relict; AYilliame, Robert, and Thomas Couplandis, as fones ; and

Conpland, as dochter to tlie faid vmqie Thomas ; Sir Robert Douglas of Cafcliogill, kny*,

as father to Robert Douglas, and maifter to vmqi^ Thomas.
PuELOCL'TOUUis, Mr Thomas Holp ; Mr Thomas Nicolfon^, younger; and James Dowie, wryter.

Conboration ot Hicfjts— Mcannrj: ot .ij^acjljuts— ^laucrJter, kt.

Jul. 20.— Sir Robert Douglas of Cafchogill, kny'; Robert Douglas,

liis fone ; Jobnne Paterfone, in Cafchogill ; Thomas Paterfone,

thair ; Williame Coupland, thair ; Hob Coupland, thair ;

Mathow Cowane, thair ; and twenty-feven others.

Dilaitit for contravening of the Actis of Parliament, in making of convocatioun

of liis Maiefteis legis ; beiring and weiring of hagbutis and piftolettis ; and

invaiding of the Laird of Drunilangrig, his brother, and remanent perfewaris,

Avith fchottis of hagbutis and piftolettis ; committit at the Mofs of Knockconnie,

pertening to Dauid Douglas, heritour thairof, vpone the tuelf day of Maij laft.

' The rest of the pannel^^' were, ' Duncane Hunter of Ballagan ; James Johnnfloun of Lochhous ;
James .Tohnnfloun, callit Braikinfi/de, James Johnnftoun, callit Crqftheid, James Douglas, an(t
Robert (irahiime, all four fervandis to the faid James of Lochehous; Archibald Douglas, fervand to
the Laird of Moufii^ll ; Robert Creichtoun, (one to .... Creichtoun of Craufurdtoun ; Thomas Bell,
fone to lieidcloke; James Douglas, callit in Glenmeid ; Chriilie Airmellrang in Bigholme, his fone
in law; Andro Hunter in Auchitd)aitlie ; James Douglas, Thomas Mairtene, Joimne Paterfone, callit
thefuhler, all fervandis to the faid Lah-d of Drumlangrig; Hob Hunter in Ci-arieknow ; and Johnne
Rig, meflingcr.' -' Ear.

55 &, 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 501

Pbrsewaris, Williame Douglas of Drumlangrig ; James Douglas of MoufTell, his brother; Johnne
Douglas of Killievarrane ; James Jolinnftoun of Locliehous ; Robert Dal3ell, fone natural! to Sir
Robert Dal5ell of Eliok, kny* ; Sir Williame Oliphaiit of Newtoun, kny'.

Aiie Warrand was producet to my lord Juftice, quliairof tlie tennour follovvis.

Justice, Juftice Clerk, and 30ur deputis ; fforfamekill as the tuentie day of July inftant is fet and
affixed for perfute of Williame Douglas of Drumlangrig, and certane his fpeciall freindis and kynfmen befoir 50W, for ])e flauchter of vmq'^ Thomas Coupland, with hagbuttis and pillolettis ; as alfo
for perfute of Sir Robert Douglas of Cqfchogill, and certane his freindis and pairt-takeris, for makiri"
of convocatioun of his Maiefteis legis, and beiring, weiring, and fchuiting of hagbutis and piftolettis,
contrair his Maiefteis Actis of Parliament ; as the Letteris, Jiitic inde, raifit be ather pairtie thairintill,
beiris : And becaus, be the mediatioun of freindis, the faidis actiones ar liklie to pak up and a"-rie,
and that no forder truble be had amangis ]iame pairintill : It is pairfoir our will and plefour, that ;e
continew the faidis dyettis to the thrid day of ]m nixt Juftice-air of the Scherefdonie quliair be iaidis
pairteis duellis, or foner, vpone fyftene dayis wairning; difpenfand with thair nocht compeirance befoir
50W this day, and takand new cautioun for ])e haill perfones re-entrie contenit in the Letteris, to that
effect, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament. Quhairanent thir prefentis fall be to 30W
ane fufficient Warrand. Subfcryuit at Edinburgh, the xx day of July, 1631.

Hammiltoun. Al. Caxcell^ Mar. Melros.

The Juftice continewis the faidis tua dyettis to the thrid day of the nixt
Juftice-air of the Scherefdome of Dumfreis, quhairin the haill perfones duellis,
or foner, vj^one fyftene dayis.

Compeirit perfonallie Douglas of Caveris, Scheriff of Teviedaill, and

become fouertie for the faid Williame Douglas of Drumlangrig : And ficlyk,
Johnne Wilfone of Croglene, James Men5ies of Enoche, and Malcolme Dalrumpill of Enoche, fouerteis, conjunctlie and feuerallie, for Sir Robert Dal:;ell of
Eliok, James Douglas of Moufell, &c , that thay fall compeir, &c. — And on the
vtlier pairt, compeirit Sir Williame Douglas, younger of Cafchogill, kny\ and
become plege and fouertie for his father, and haill remanent defenderis, &c.

\_Mr Bohert FcdrUe^ Jiiftice-Depuie.']

^laucrljter— Witarinig: of ^a^ljuts anU Distorts, ^c.

Aug. 24. — Capitane James Johnnstoun of Thornik.

Dilaitit of the felloun and crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ \Villiame Jolinnftoun
brother germane to Robert Jolinnftoun of ^Vamfray : And for contravening of
the Actis of Parliament, in beiring, weiring, and fchuiting of hagbutis and
piftolettis, and flaying the faid vmq^" Williame Jolinnftoun thairwith ; and remanent crymes contenit in the criminall Letteris.

The Juftice ordanit James Jolinnftoun of Braikanfyde, cautioner for t'le faid
Capitane, to be vnlawit and amerciat, for nocht eiitrie of the faid Capitaiie, in
the pane of ffyve hundreth inerkis : And ftclyk, that the faid Capitane James,
for his nocht compeirance, fall be denuncet rebell, and i)ut to the home ; and all
his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

502 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1621.

[Mr Alexander Colidle, Jifft ice-Depute.']

^Iau(jTjter in ^intjle Coinhtit, or ButI, ^Wt in dforeisit MtUct.

[The following Trial is one which possesses considerable interest and importance, as well from the
light which it throws on the application of the Laws of Duelling, in Scotland and in the Low
Countries, as from the rank and situation of the parties implicated. Captain Harry Bruce, who had
subsequently been employed to superintend the martial exercises of Charles, Prince of Wales,
afterwards the unfortunate King Charles I, was rigorously pursued, by the vindictive and mercenary spirit of the relatives of Captain John Hamilton., in the Supreme Criminal Tribunal of Scotland,
after he had long before been honourably acquitted by Court Martial in Flanders — under the impression, no doubt, that they would either extort a large sum of money from this new Court favourite,
or procure his ruin or death. The Duel or Single Combat referred to in this case, and into which
Bruce had been dragged by the rashness and insolence of his antagonist, had taken place no less
than about seventeen years previous to those proceedings !

The reader may here be referred to the Case of " Capitan Johns Rig, Archeour of the Gaird of
France," in a former part of this Collection, Vol. II., p. 382.]

Nov. 14. — Capitane Harie Bruce, feruitour to the Prince his
Hieiies.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slaughter of vmq^^ Capitane Johnne Hammiltoun ; committit in ane Singular Combat, in the Law Countreyis of fflanderis,
in (DDio I'^.Vj". and fyve yeiris.

Persewaris, ^Margaret Hammiltoun, as fifler; Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*.
Prelocutour in defence, Mr Robert Foullis.

The pannell producet ane Warrand and command of the Lordis of Secreit
Counlall, quliairof the tennour follovvis.

Act of the Lords of Privy Council.

At Edisbur^, the threttene day of November, the jeir of God I"", fex hundreth tuentie ane jeiris.
An est the Supplicatioun prefentit to the Lordis of Secreit Counfall be Capitane Harie Bruce, feruitour to THE Prince his Hienes, makand mentioun, that quhair, the xiiij day of November inftant is
appointit vnto him, vpone the coniplent oi Margaret Hammiltoun, as fifter, with the remanent kyn and
freindis of vmq''^' C<'//>?Vrt«e./o/i««e//f//«;«//to2<«, ffor his compeirancebefoir the Juftice or his deputis, in
the Tolbuthe of Ed% to vnderly the law for the Slauchter of ))e faid vmq^*" Capitane Johnne Hammiltoun,
committit be the faid Capitane Harie, in ane Singular Combat, in the Laio Countreyis of fflanderis,
fome fevintene 3eiris ago ; lyk as, the Juftice intendis to proceid aganis him, in that matter, althoght
it be of verritie, that gif refpect be had to the nature and qualitie of the perfute, and to the circumflances of the Slauchter, quhan, quhair, and vpone quhat occafioun it fell out, it will be fund that the
tryell thairof can no \vay be propper nor competent befoir the faid Juftice, nor in no vther Judicatorie
within this Kingdome ; becaus the faid Slauchter was committit outwith his Maiefteis dominiones,
■within the territoreis of the Ejfaitis of the Law Countreyis, in ane Singular Combat, quhairvnto the
faid Capitan Harie was vrged and drawin by the gritteft refpectis of credeit and reputation quhairwith aGentilman could be aflail5eid : And howeuir the faid Capitane Johnne Hamiltoun and he be
boine Scottifmen, and in that refpect obleift in all fubmiffiue deutcis of allegeance to thair naturall
Soverane, jit the tyme of that vnhappie flauchter, aud dyuerfe jeiris befoir, thay war bothe in actuall
feruice, and fuorne Officeris to the faidis EJiaitis, and alfe far fubiect to thame and to thair Judgement
and Jurifdiclioun, in all matteris, alfweill impoirting lyfe and death, as guidis and geir, as gif thay had

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 503

bene tliair naturall-borne fubiectis : And thair was no difference betuix thame and the iiatiues of the
cuntrie, in pointis of fubiectioun to the faidis Ejlaitis and ])air lawis, tlie faidis Ejlaitis, at that tvrne,
being fair fouerane Judges in all matteris, of quhatfumeuir qualitie, occurring within thair boundis.
And twitcheing the matter it felff, the treuth is, as was clerlie verifeit befoir the Comifall of Weiris^
eflablifched be the faidis Ejiaitis, for trying and cenfureing of matteris of this kynd, that the faid
Capitane Harie was dyuerfe tymes challenget to the Combat be the faid vniq'*^ Capitane Johnne
Hammiltoun, nochtwithftanding of the mony offeris maid be the faid Capitane Harie to geve him all
dew fatisfactioun and reffone, in the matter contravertit betuix thame, that, in refpectiue termes of
confideratioun, could be craved ; bot the moir the faid Capitane Harie efchewit his Challange, he was
fo much the moir earneft in following of the fame, obiecting vnto the faid Capitane Harie the reproche
of cowardice, and protefling to abufe him, in his private revenge, accoirdinglie : And fo, the faid Capitane Harie, finding him felff interefl and tuiched in fo heigh a poynt of credeit and reputatioun, quhilk
being anes loft, was nevir to be recoverit, bot wald cary with him to the grave ane infamous imputatioun, and an ignominious fpott of vnworthie cowardice ; and haifing refpect, fairwithall, to his birth and
parentage, quhilk he was lothe to blemifche, in a matter of this kynd ; and aboue all thingis, haveing
euir befoir his eis the equitie of his cans, with ane full and conftant affureance, that God, who is ])e
trew fercheour of the heart, and vpone quhois devyne Prouidence the event of fuch duellis dependis,
wald iuftifie his pairt, in that uniuft Challange quhilk was revertit vpone him, he acceptit and vndertuik
the Challange, quhairin it plefit God to juftifie and cleir the equitie of his caus, by making the faid
vmq'® Capitane Johnne to vnderly the dew defert of Iiis errom- and rafchenes : Quhairvpone, the faid
Capitane Harie, being callit befoir the faid Counjall of Weir, and the forme and circumftances of fe
famyn being narowlie examined and ryped vp be thame, the qualitie of the faid Capitane Harie and
pe faid umqjg Capitane Johnne, thair perfones being fworne and actuall Officeris in the airmie, making
thame fubiect vnto the faid Counfall of Wear, and punifcheable be the lawis of that Ejlait ; thay ffand,
that fe faid Capitane Harie had done nothing vnbefeameing the deutie of a fouldiour, fuppoirtit with
the teftimonie of a good confcience : And ])airfoii", reftoirit him to his place and charge, quhairin he
ferued with good credeit dyuerfe 5eiris J^aireftir. And quhair as, he looked that this forme of tryell,
vfet aganis him be the faid Counfall of Wear, who wer only Judges to him in this caicc, fould haif
fecuret and warranted him frorae ony new perfute, 5it the fifter and ffreindis" of the faid vmq'e Capitane Johnne callit him, for ])e fame Slauchter, befoir his Maiefteis Juftice, in the fax hundretli and
fyve jeir of God ;^ quhairof informatioun being fend vnto him frome hence, he maid his addrefs to iiis
Maiestie, acquentit his hienes with the perticuleris of this matter, and all that proceidit Jiairin ; quho,
eftir confideratioun fairof, nocht only vtterit his difcontentment that ony fuch matteris fould haif bene
walknit heir, bot his Maiestie was graciouflie plefit to grant vnto the faid Capitane Harie his
Remiffione for that deid, and wrait a Letter vnto the Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counjldl ffor
difchargeing the Juftice to meddle in that matter : Quhilk Remiflioun and Letter being delyuerit to
the lait Erie of Dumhar, and prefentit vnto the faidis Lordis, as fome of thame reraemberis ; the fleuth
and negligence of thofe who war trufted with the faid Capitane Harie his effairis, fufferit his Letteris
to perrifche; and the matter has euir reftit and fleipit fenfyne till now. And quhairas this matter is
alreddie tryed and cenfured by thofe whome it properlie concerned, humblie thairfoir defyreing the
faidis Lordis that thay wald geve command to the Juftice, Juftice clerk, and tliair deputtis to defert
the faid dyet, and to defift and ceis fra all proceiding thairintill ; lykas, at mair lenth is contenit in the
faid Supplication. Quhilk being red, hard, and confidderit be the faidis Lordis, and thay being jmirwith
Weill advyfet, the Loudis of Secreit Counsall ftindis it verrie necefiar and expedient, that ]>ai
vnderftand nis Maiesteis Will and plefour in this matter, afoir thay gif ony fiiiall I'eiitence or

* Council of war; court-martial. ' Blood-relations. ' Anno 1605; a mode of expression by no means

infrequent in pleadings, &c., for the sake of brevity.

504 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1621.

directioun thairanent : And thairfoir the faidis Lordis Ordanis and commandis his Maiefteis Juftice,
Juftice clerk, and tliair deputis, to continew tlie faid dyet to the tuentie nynt day of Marche nixtocum,
and to defilt and ceis fia all forder proceiding ])airin, quhlU the laid day ; takand new cautioun of this
fupplicant, for his compeirance to his tryell the faid day, conforme to the ordour obferuet in fuche
calces ; to the effect that in this meane tyme the faidis Lordis may half convenient tyme and lafure to
informe his Maiestie anent the ellait of this matter; and to attend his Maiesteis gracious Will
and pleafour pairanent. For quhilk purpois the faidis Lordis Ordanis ane Miffiue Letter to be writtin
to his Maieftie.

ExTR ACTUM de Lihris Actorumfecreti Confilij,/. d. n. Regis, per meJacohum Prymrois, clericum

ejttfdenufuh meisfigno etfuhfcnplione manucdihus. Jacobus Prymrois.

Accoirdiiio- to the quhilk Act, and for obedience of the ordinance mentionet

thairintill, the Juftice continewis this dyet, with all tryell to be tane for the faid

crynie, to the faid tuentie nynt day of Marche nixtocum.— Mr James Bruce,

indueller in Edinburghe, becomes cautiouner for his entry, &c.

(Mar. i^9, 1622.) — Compeirit Mr James Bruce, indueller in Edinburghe,
as he that was cautioun for the faid Capitane Harie his entrie, and producet

Act of Secreit Counsall.
Apud Halyruidiious, xxvj die menjis Martij, anno dom. I"'.Vf.xxij<'. The Lordis of Secreit
Counfall, accoirding to ane Warrand and directioun in writ, figned be the Kingis Ma"^, and this
day prefented vnto thame, Ordanis and Commandis the Juftice, Juftice clerk, and ])air deputis to Defert
])e dyet appointit to Capitane Harie Bruce for his compeirance befoir thame, to vnderly the law for
])e Slauchter of vmq^^' Johnne Hammiltoun, and to defift and ceife frome all proceiding aganis him at
this dyet. Quhairanent the Extract of fir prefentis fall be vnto thame a Warrand. ExtractUxM, &c.

Jacobus Prymrois.
Followis alfo the tennour of his Maiesteis Letter and directioun to the
Lordis of Secreit Counfell, anent the premiffes.
James R.
Right truftie and weilbelouit coufingis and counfalouris, and richt truftie and belouit counfalouris,
W^e greit 30W weill. We war pleafed to wryte to 50W about tuelf jeiris ago, concerning Capitane
Harie Bruce, willin"- that no legall proceiding fould be permitted to be vfed aganis liim for ]ie Slauchter
of vmq''" Jo' Hamiltoiin, in refpect that ]ie famyn was committed out of oure dominiones ; And now,
being crediblie informed, that of late fome half gone about to reveive fat perfute, nochtwithftanding of
our former commandement, We half thoght guid, by theis prefentis, to will and requyre 50 w to difcharge
o' Juftice generall, Juftice clerk, and fair deputis, and all vferis o'' Judges and ofhceris quhatfumeuir,
to grant ony Summondis or proces againft fe faid Capitane Harie for pe foirfaid Slauchter, or in ony
wayis prefume to medle or call him in queftioun for pe famyn. And thus, moft earneftlie recommending to ^o"^ fpeciall cair, We bid 30W fairweill. Gevin at o"" manno'' of Theobaldis, the xiiij of Marclie,
1622.

Accoirding to the quhilk Act of Counfall and ordinance thairin contenit, the
Juftice DESERTIT THE DYET aboue writtin.

Appendix to the Tuial of Captain Harie Bruce.

[Several Cases have alreadj* occurred in the course of this Collection, illustrative of the state of the Law and practice,
in Scotland, as to Duelling, interchanging of Cartels, and Slaughters committed in Single Combat. The preceding Trial is one of much interest ; and the subject led the Editor to make some enquiries into various affairs of

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 505

honour, which had happened ahout the same period of this King's reign. Among others which have hitherto been
noticed in this work, none appear to have excited greater interest than the quarrel between the sons of Lord CranSTOUN and of Sir Gedeon Murray, wliich had nearly terminated in the most ftital manner. Although unconnected
with the Case of Captain Harie Bruce, the following documents throw much light upon the opinions and p.actices of
the Nobility and gentry in feuds and affairs of honour. It has been thought proper to preserve them in this place,
as a memorial of transactions which tend to give a complexion and character to the spirit and genius of those times.]

I. LETTER^•ow^ the Privy Council of Scotland to King James VI., relative to
the Challenge, c^c. hetween the funs of Lord Cranstoun and of Sir
Gedeon Murray.^

Pleas your most excellent and sacred Ma^'e^
As We hope that your highnes hathe long fince vnderflood of fum Challenge of Combat
betuix the fecound fone of the Lord Cranstoun and Sir Gedeon Murray his fone, begun
betuix the yowthes, vpon licht cawflis of veiie fmall moment ; and of the ordour taken be ws for
preventing thame meiting, and calling of thame to there anfuer; and of the cowrfe taken for there
reconciliatioun, whiche wes done in prefens of the hole Counsall, wheirby all probabilitie of forder
Challenging betuix the pairteis then, in appeirans, wes removed ; fo when, vpon privie inforraatioun
maid to ws, fum fear was apprehendit of a new breache betuix the pairteis, by interchangeing of
Cartellis privilye betuix thame felfis, whowever we wald have bene forye that the folyeis of the
childrene, or the hard event which follow fuche accidentis, fuld have empaired or diminifched the love
and affectioun which heirtofoir haith bene and doeth ftill continew betuix there parentis, (bothe of
quhome hailhe worthelie deferved, and have behaived thame felfis mofl dewtifullye and faytlifullye as
thay have bene imployed in your Ma''*^^ fervis,) yit heirin we war fo muche more julllie moved to
adverte to fuche a noveltye, that efter a reconciliatioun once maid befoir your Ma*'*^^* Counsell, ather
the keiping of your highnes peace fuld be fo lytle regairdit, or the ordour takinby ws for the obferveingtherof fo far contemned, as that any durfl prefume or attempt any new quenelling. Wheirvpon
both the fatheris wer chairged to compeir, and bring with thame and exhibite there fones ; whiche
being accoirdinglie and dewtifullye obeyit by bothe of thame, efter a verye hard and exact tryall'
takin, in regaird of the vnwillingnes of aither^ of the yowthes, vpon thair firfl queftioneing, to confefs
what new matter haid pafled betuix thame; at laft, it being found that the Lord Cranstounis
fone wes the Challenger, by a Cartell, wrettin efter the reconciliatioun maid ; we thervvpon committed him cloife prifoner in the Cajtle of Blahnes. The other, whowevir, being provoked, yit, in
regaird he did obfcuire and conceale it, (being fome prefumptioun that he intendit to keip the meiting,
and fo to mak a breache of your Ma*"^ peace,) wes adiudget to be committed in EcT Cajielt, in frie
wairde, haveing haid fredome granted vnto him furth thairof within xlviij houris, and confyued within
this Burghe and amyle abowt the fame; whereas, the faid Lord Cra?i/ioimis/o/te,t\nvi'omtene dayes
pail, haveing lyin cloife prifoner in Blaknes, and in the mean whyle making fuite often by Bill^ to be
releived, confeffing, in mofl humble maner, his offence, and offering all fatisfactioun that fuld be
injoyned be ws, wes, by directioun, brocht from the i)lace of his iuiprifonment by the Lievtenncnt of
your Ma""=^ Gaird, and prefented befoir ws ; where, in the prefence of Sir Gedeon Jlurrai/ and his
fone, he did humblye, vpon his knies, craive pardoun of your Ma''"= for the offence done, and did
intreat ws to be fuitters for the fame to your facretl highnes, on his behalf; haveing heirwithe confelled,
alfo, the great wrong he haid done vnto your Ma^'''^ Counsell, in prefwming to renew ony C'liiilli-nge
efter reconciliatiounes maid ; and theirwith vttering mofl apparent lignes of inward forrow for olVeiiding
of his fo loveing father, vnto whome he knew this his bypaft behaviour wes fo diilaillefull, as without
ony intercefTioun he culd expect at his handes no favour. He then to tlie pairtie challanged, in pre-

' Dnimylnr MSS., Advocates' Library, A. 2, 10. * Enquiry ; examination. * Both. * A Bill,

or * Supplication' to the Lords. of Privy Council.

VOL. in. 3 s

506 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1621.

fence of bothe fathers, did there confes the wrong he haid done him, offering him what fatisfactioun
he wald demand ; and did there proteft, that howevir, in his yowthfull folye, he haid afcryved the laft
reconciliatioun as a niaiter extorted by conflraint or command of the Counsell, that yit nottheles
this his prefent aggriement wes of meire affectioun, whiche he intendit all bypafl eylift,^ abolilhed to
conlinew heirefter.

There wes Aim jealowfye in this mater takin by Sir Gedeon, as that the Lord Cranstoun,
wliowevir not a direct vrger of his fone to this Challenge, haid nottheles intendit to tak fome advantage,
to the preiudice of the credite and honour of him and his fone ; and by the fpeiches delyvered by Sir
Gedeon in our preiudice, we did coiiceave no lefs : Bot yit, that this impreffioun, not being cleirit,
might tak no deiper roote, we then did queftioun the Lord Cranstoun theirof ; who, in prefence
of Sir Gedeon, by his great oathe, vnrequyred, did protefl. that he wes fo far from countenaunceing or
allowing of his fones actioun and cariage in this bufynes, as on the contrarye, thefe fevin yeiris part, no
incident whatfoever that haid interveyned haid fo muche greivit him ; and that he did afluire him felf
that Sir Gedeon wes no les in confcience perfwadit, fnice he haid foirwairnedhim, immediatlie vpon
his knowledge of the firft Challenge ; and vpone his fones depairtour the laft tyme frome him, fufpecting
the humour of the yowtlie, and yit, vpon his confcience, noclit knowing of any thing intendit, did of
new certifie Sir Gedeone of his fearis. Whiche declaratioun, being delivered with fo great atteftationes by one not muche accuftomed to fweiring, did not onlye remove all fcruipule and jealoufye frome
Sir Gedeon, as he then affirmed, but left none of the beholderis vnfatisfyed, and fullie perfwadit of
tliat Noble-mannis innocencye. The Counsell, haveing taken ane verye flrictand exact tryallof all
circumftanceis whiche might inferre any the leaft fufpitione of the Lord Cranstounis allowance,
airte, pairte, or connivence at his fonis actioun, in the examining wherof, the farder that we did drywe
we ftijl fand the fatiier the more clcare of all imputatioun ; and, in our judgement, Sir Gedeon is
fullye perfwadit theirof; lykas, in our prefence he did profefs no lefs. And howevir, that heirvpon all
pairteis, bothe eldar and younger, wer reconceiled, yit, becaws of the offence done to your INLv^'^ by
James Cranstoun, in preffing to renew any querrell, efter aggriement ones maid in prefence of
Counsell, we have theirvpoun adiudget the faid James Cranfioun, that betuix and the firft of
October nixt, he fall depairt your Ma*^'*^^' dominiones, and remaine furthe of the fame, and naway returne
bak, vntill that your INIa'^^^ fpeciall Licence and Warrant be purcheft ; and have takin fovertye and
cawtioun, bound vnder a great fowme, for that effect. And becaws there wilbe a neceflitye of provifioun to be maid by the father for the fones furneifing, in his going beyond See, theirfore we have
committed him prifoner in his father's owin keiping, vntill the tyme of his depairture ; who is to reftraine»
endureing that fpace, his fone of all fuche libertye, wheirbye any furder harme might be feared.

And albeit the reconciliatioun and aggriement wes fullye maid, fo as in our judgementis there did
not remayne the leaft fcruple of any furder grudge amonges the pairteis, yit the noveltye of the
caice, and the hairme whiche the impunitye thairof might produce, if vpon this example, others who
haif bene formerlye reconceilit, wald now preife to renew and reviue there olde querrellis, we culd
nocht, in our dewtye to your Ma'^'^, fuffer this to go vnpunifched ; whiche moved ws, (however earneaftlie and humblye entreated by Sir Gedeon Murray to recall our Sentence and determinatioun
aganis the faid James Craun/toun,^ nottheles, for ane exemplarye punifchment, and efferying" of others
to commit^ the lyk infolence, to continewour refolutioun takin in the maiter for his Banischeing, as
faid is. As lykwayis, ather of the two fathers bund and obleift, not onlye for thefe there fones, betuix
whomc this Challenge hes paft, bot for all others of there fones come to mannis aige, everie ane of
tliame vnder the payne of Ten Thowfand merkis, that thay fall keip your Ma'''^'* peace, that no
Cartellis falbe fent by the one to the other; and that the pairtye vuto whome any falbe fent, fall

, ' Offence; from ocithi.'; nnd IccJere. Danish, oi'cr^asf, molestia, incommodum. * Aflfraying; ten'ifying. Fr«

fffrai/ant, ' A strange form of speech, then in use, to express 'from committing.'

55&19JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 507

immediatlie, with all poffible diligence, acquent the Couufell with the Challenge feiit to him •
otherwayes the payne foirfaid to be incurrit. And hoipeing that nothing heirin is left vTidone, whiche
in fie a caice wes requifite, and fiillye expecting your Ma'^'^^ good allowance and favorable conllructioun of our proceidingis, wifcheing tliay may prove good niettall when thay come to the tryall of the
trew tuitcheftone, vnto whome we do mofl humblye pray for the continuance of all happines, We doe
reft Your facred Maiefteis raoft humble and obedyant fubiectis and feruitouris,

Al.Cancell^. Dumbar. Wigtoun. Kilsayth. J.Prestoun. AlexrHay. S.T.Ha.milton,
Edinburgh, the tent of Auguft, 1610.

To THE King, his moft facred and axcellent Maiestie, &c.

II. Letter, the Privy Council to the King}
Most gratious and sacred souerane,

We reffauit your Maiesteis Letter, twitcheing your Ma**^^ cenfure^ of that lait committit ryott
be THE Erll of Lotheane, and anent the fyne whilk your Maiestie wold haif to be impofed
vpon him for that caus ; whairin, as your Maiesteis moft excellent and rair wifdome in the cenfureing of that mater fo iuditiouflie, by the circomeftanceis fett doun in your Maiesteis Lettre, and the
directioun gevin be your Maiestie anent the pvnifching thairof, is verye weele vA'arrandit with infallible groundis of iuftice and reafoun ; yitt, becaus fuclie heich fynes in ryottis of this qualitye bathe not
bene vfuall to be impoifed vpoun ony perfonis heir, we wilbe bauld to intreate your Maiesteis
fauour, for a mitigatioun of the fyne to Thrie Thoufand nierkis, whiche in all oure opinionis is anfuer-
^ble^ to the qualitye of the offence committed. He is full prifonner, and fall fo continew whill the
pairtye in fome meafour reftaue fatisfactioun. And howeuir this ouerfight, by^ all oure expectationis,
hes fallen oute in his perfone, we hoip that this your Maiesteis cenfure of him, will mak him moir
confideratlie and refpectiuelie to looke to his future cariage and behaviour.

^ - And whereas your MAiestie doeth mervell that no tryale hes bene tane be ws of the infolencie
committit be the Lord of Cranstonis fones aganis the Erle of Lotheane, it will pleis your
Maiestie we did nevir heir of ony complaint in that mater, the pairtye being filent, and no informatioun gevin be him thairin : Alwayes,5 we haif caufit demand of him, yf he will perfew? He hes
promeift to gif informatioun to your Maiesteis Aduocat, and to furneis probatioun ; whairin we
ftiall tak fuche exact tryall, and accordinglie inflict fuch pvnifliment as the courfe of iuftice, in fuche
a caife, requireth. And fo, praying God to blifle your Maieftie with all contentment and happynes,
we reft for ever, Your Maiefteis moft humble and obedyent fubiectis and feruitouris,

Al. Cancell®. Argyle. Montrose. Glencairne. Balfour. Glasgow.
Edinburgh, xv May, 1611.

To the King, his moft facred and excellent Maiestie.

Dec. 5. — AxDiio Wischert of Mwretouii.
Dilaitit of the fcliamefull fforceing and defloiring of Beffie Leflie, dochter
naturall to George Leflie of Auldcraig, aganis hir will, fcho being aiie }'oung
virgane noclit paft ellevin yeiris of age ; committit in maner and at the tyme
fpecifeit in the Letteris.

Persewaris, Beffie Leflie, George Leflie of Auldcraig.
Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Laurence M''GiIl, Mr Roger Mowat.

^ Dcnmylnc M S S. Adv. Library. 'Judgment. ^ Commensurate j corresponding to. ^Contrary

to ; against. * Nevertheless j at all events.

508 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

The pannell offeris him felfF to the tryell of the Law for the cryme contenit
in the Letteris ; quhairof, as he allegit, he is innocent ; and difafTentis fra all
iiianer of continuatioun : And protellis, in refpect of his compeirance this day
and place, to vnderly the law, and that thair is nocht ane fufficient number of
AfTyfe prefent, that na Letteris be direct aganis him in tyme earning ; fpeciallie,
in refpect this perfute is malicioullie intendit aganis him, being ane man of thre
fcoir ten yeiris of age, at the inftance of the faid George Leflie of Auldcraig,
quha compeiris nocht this day to affift this perfute.

The Juftice ordanit the Aflyfouris, lauchfullie fummoned and nocht compeirand, to be vnlawit. — Levingftoun of Donypace become cautioun for the

laid Andro his entrie, vpone xv dayis wairning, &c.

[Curia Justiciarie, f. cl. n. Regis, tenia in jiretorio cle Edlnhurghy xx
MarciJ 1622, jjer Magijirum Alexcmdrum Coluile de Blcd)\ Jujllciarium ;
necnon jier Uoininum Wtdlerum Stewart de Mynto, halUvum Regalitatis
de Glejgow, virtute cujiijllam deUhercdionis Dominorum Secreti Confdij.~\

AssEssouRS TO THE JusTiCE, appointit be the Lordis of Secreit Counfall :
James Arcliebifcliope of Glefgow/ Sir George Erfkyne of Innerteill,^ Mr Jo" Weymes of Craigtoun.'

INIar. 20, 1622. — Margaret Wallace, fpous of Johnne Dynning, mercheand burges of Glefgow.

Dilaitit, accufed, and perfewit of the feuerall articles and poyntis of Dittay
following. Dittay againjl the imnnel^ Margaret Wallace.

FoRSAMEKiLL AS, albeit be the devyne law of Almychtie God, fet doun in
his facred woird, fpeciallie in ])e 20 chap, of Leviticus, and 18 chap, of Deideronomie, aganis Jje vfearis and practizaris of Witchcraft, Sorcerie, CharmeING, and SoTHESAYiXG, and againft the seikeris of help and refponffis of
thame, thraitning and denunceing to ]>& committeris of lie devillifch practizes the
pwneifchment of daith. As alfo, be dyuerfe Actis of Parliament, and Municipall
lawis of this Kingdome, alfweill publeill and fet furth be his Maieltie, in his
awin tyme, as in the dayis of his maift noble progenitouris ; namelie, be ]?e 73
Act of the Parliament, haldin be his hienes darrell moper, Quene Marie, of

' James Law, formerly Bisliop of Orkney. In the year 1615, he succeeded Archbishop Spottiswood,
the well-known author of the Church History published in his name; and died in November, 1632.
" Lord Innorteil, one of the Ordinary Lords of Session. ^ An Ordinary Lord of Session.

* This Dittay contains only the four Articles or points of which the Assise convicted this victim of
superstition. The nature of the remaining points are clearly defined in the very interesting pleadings,
wiiich the Editor has carefully preserved at length, in consequence of their marking, in a striking
manner, the prevailing opinions held by the most eminent Scolish lawyers, on the subject of Witchcraft, &c. The suhject is so extraordinary, that it was tliought advisable to print tiie pleas and arguments without curtailment.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 509

worthie memorie, it is expreflie provydit, ftatute, and ordanit, that na maner of
perfone or perfones, of quhatfumeuir eftait, degrie, or conditioun thay be of,
prefume, nor tak vpone hand to vfe ony maner of Witchcraft, Sorcerie, or
^egromancie, nor gif thame felfis furth to half ony fic craft or knawlege, thairby abuifeing his hienes people and fubiectis ; and that na perfone feik ony help,
refpons, or confultatioun at ony lie vfearis or abufearis foirfaidis, vnder the pane
of death, alfweill to be execute vpone the vfear and abufear, as to the feiker of
the refpons or confultatioun ; as in the faidis Lawis and Actis of Parliament at
mair lenth is contenit. NociiT with standing quhairof, it is of verritie, that
the faid Margaret Wallace, fchaiking of all feir of God, reuerence or regaird to
our fouerane lordis authoritie and lawis, haifing confauet ane deidlie haitrent and
evill will aganis Cnthhert Greg, couper, burges of Glefgow, becaus of certane
fpeiches vtterit be him aganis hir and vmq^" Crijliaiie Grahame, ane notorious
Witche, and laitlie execute for Sorcerie and Witchcraft, at Witfonday a tlire 5eir
fyne, or ]?airby, the faid Margaret Wallace, furth of ))e malice of hir heart,
promeift and avowit that fcho fould mak the faid Cnthhert, within few dayis J)aireftir, nocht of habilitie to work or wyn to him felf ane caik of breid ; accoirdiug to
the quhilk devillifche promeife and damnable vow, the faid Cnthhert fchortlie
thaireftir, be the faid Margaret hir devillifche Inchantment, Sorcerie, and Witchcraft practizet be hir vpone him, he was vifleit and grevouflie trubillit with ane
llrangevnnaturallandvnknawin diifeis,mailt crewallieand lamentabillie tormentit
with continuall fueiting, be the fpace of fyftene dayis togidder, and J^airby wes
brocht to fic infirmitie andwaiknes,nane expecting his lyfe,that he was nocht liable
to Heir or move himfelf : And the faid 31argaret, as ane "Witche and Sorcerar,
being fufpectit as the onlayer and caufer of the faid grevous and heavie diffeis,
was fent for by certane of })e faid Cuthhertis freindis, and requeiftit to cum and
vizeit him ; and eftir mony malicious refuifallis maid be hir, in end fcho come to
him ; at quhais cuming, fcho, to manifeft hir fkill for his help, tuik him be ])e
fchaikill-bane^ with the ane hand, and laid hir vther hand vpone his breift, and
without ony word-fpeiking, faif only be moveing of hir lipis, pafl fra him at that
inltant ; and vpone })e morne Jjaireftir, returning bak agane to the faid Cnthhert,
fcho tuik him be f>e airme and bad him aryfe, quha at that tynie, and fyftene
dayis befoir, was nocht abill to lift his legis without help ; 5it fcho, haifing vrget
him to ryfe, and taking him be the hand, as faid is, brocht him out of liis bed,
and ]3aireftir led him but^ the hous ; quha, immediatlie })aireftir, be hir Sorcerie
and Charmeing practizet be hir, walkit vp and doun J?e fluir, \\ ithout lielp or
fuppoirt of ony ; and fra that tyme quiklie recoverit and convalcllit of ])e former

^ Wrist. ^ To anotlier npartmont. In small houses, consistiner merely of a * hn£ and a ' hat,'

the ' hut' is the outermost room or kitchen ; the ' ben' is a better sort of tipurttnenf, where, upon trreat
occasions, company is received. The master and mistress usually sleep in the ' beu' or inner room.

510 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

grevous difeais : Qiihairin pe faid 3Iargarethes committit manifell Sorcerie and
Witchcraft, in laying on and taking af feikneffis, be hir devillifche meanis, vfet
and practizet be hir vpone the faid Cuthhert, in maner foirfaid. And ficlyk,
about foure 5eir fyne, or ])airby, the faid Margaret Wallace, being within ])e
duelling hous oi Alexander Vallange, mercheand burges of Glefgovv% and haifing
fallin in ane grit and fuddane feiknes within J)e faid hous, fcho incontinent ])airefter, as ane confulter and feiker of help and refponffis of Witches and Sorceraris,
inflrunientis of the Devill J)air m aider, fend for vmq^^ CrijViane Grahame, ane
notorious Witche, and quha is laitlie convict and brunt for hir devillerie and
Witchcraft, practizet aganis dyuerfe his Maieiteis guid fubiectis, in Glefgow and
J?airaboutis ; quhilk vmq^^ Crijtiane Grahame, haifing cum to the faid Margaret
to J)e faid Hous, fcho tuik Jje faid Margaret fiu*th Jjairof to hir awin buith,^
quhair, be the faid Crijilane hir devillifche charmes practizet vpone the faid
Margaret, the faid 31a?garet was curet of hir former fuddane feiknes. And
Jje faid Crijtiane Grahame, with the faid Margaret IVallace, cuming togidder
bak agane to the faid hous, and at ]?e turnepek-fute ])airof, meitting with
Margaret Vallange, dochter to the faid Alexander, thay, at })e leift ane or vther
of thame, laid pe faid crewall feiknes, be }?air Sorcerie and Witchcraft, vpone the
faid Jlargaret Vallange, ane 5oung infant bairne, quha immediatlie ]}aireftir, in
grit fuddantie, fell doun to })e grund, the haill power of hir body being tane
away frome hir ; and with jDitiefull fcreiches, fchoutis, and cryis, lying in that
horrible payne, nocht hable to arryfe, was tane vp be Margaret Montgomerie
hir mo]?er, fpous to pe faid Alexander, and broclit in be hir in hir airmes to J)e
hous, and pair remanit with continuall fchouteing and crying, nocht being of
habilitie to move or gang be pe fjiace of xxiiij houris ]?aireftir, c|uhill^ pe faid
Margaret Wallace, vnfent for, come in to vizeit hir ; lyk as, Jje faid Margaret,
as fone as fcho luikit vpone pe faid bairne, declairit that it was the fuddane
tranfe or difeis that fcho had tane the day befoir, and pairfoir willit and defyret
the bairnes mother to fend for Crijtiane Grahame to cure and releif hir ])airof :
And the faid Margaret Montgomerie haifing abfblutelie refuifit fa to do, faying
to hir, ' fcho wad commit hir bairne to God, and nocht melP with the Devill or
ony of his inftrumentis,' the faid Margaret Wallace maift blafpliemouflie
and devillifchlie anfuerit agane, that ]je faid ' Crijiiane Grahame could do als
mekill, in that eirand, in cureing of that difeais, as gif God him felff wald cum
out of Hevin and cure hir — and albeit f)e deid-ftraik^ war laid on, fcho could
tak it af agane — and without hir help ])air could be na remeid to the bairne !'
Lyk as, fchortlie )?aireftir, without the motheris knawlege, the faid Crijtiane
Grahame was brocht in be pe faid Margaret Wallace to \q. faid bairne ; at

^ Her husband's booti), or sliop. " Until. ^ Fr. mtler. ■> Literally, death-blow.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 511

quhais cuming, the faid 3IargYtret liftit vp ])e bairnes lieid, and the faid Criftiane tuik hir be ]>q fchaikill-bane/ and brocht ])e bairne furth of hir bed, quhair
fcho was lying bedfaft in grit payne of befoir ; and ];airefter, fetting hir doun vpone
ane lluile, witli fonie croces and fignes maid vpone hir, and be vttering of dynerfe
woirdis, (nocht knawin quhat thay war,) reftoirit hir to hir helth. Quhairin, the
faid Margaret JVallace hes planehe declairit hir felff to be ane oppin and nianifeft confulter with the faid Crijiia?ie Gra/iame, ane notorious Witch, and ane
feiker of help and refponffis of hir, in her devillifch airt ; alfweill for cureing of her
felfF, as in practizeing with her, be Sorcerie and Witchcraft, to ])e cure and help of
pe faid Akwander Vallange bairne, in maner and forme aboue writtin : And J)e
faid Margaret Wallace is airt and pairt of ]je devillifch practizes abouewrittin,
practizet be the faid Crijiiane Grahame, at the time and in maner foirfaid. To
the taikin,'' the faid Crijiiane GraJiame^ the day of hir accufatiovm and perfute,
being ]>e xxvj day of October laft, 1621, willinglie, of hir awin accoird, in Judgement, befoir hir convictioun, the AlTyfe being inclofet, affirmet, and with oppin
fpeache declairit, that J)e faid Margaret Wallace was airt and pairt with hir in
all hir wiket deidis ; and reffauit fra hir fum cullourit filk and worfet, for practizeing of Witchcraft againfl fic j^erfones to quhome ])e faid Margaret buir invy;
and quhan willinglie fcho wald nocht geve pe faid Margaret fic materiallis, the
faid Margaret^ as fcho faw thame in ]?e faid Cr//?/rt7z<?* handis, wald violentlie
reif J)ame from hir : Lyk as, vpone the morne j^aireftir, fcho being at J?e ftaik
befoir hir executioun, ratifeit and renewit the haill prerailfes to be of verritie.
Item, a tua 5eir fyne, or Jjairby, Margaret Mure, dochter to vmq^^ Archihald
Mure, burges of Glefgow, being hevelie difeafit with ane ftrange and vncouth
feiknes, and nocht liklie to haif recoverit ])airof, the faid Margaret Wallace^
geving out hir felfF to haif (kill in ])e cure of the faid feiknes, fcho come to the
duelling-hous oi Dauid Scheirar, couper, burges of Glefgow, and ]?air finding
Marioiin Mure, his fpous, fa]?er-fifter to the faid Margaret Mure, lamenting
and weiping for the faid Margaretis feiknes, the faid vmq"" Crijiiane Grahame,
be Jje faid Margaret Wallace hir devyfe and directioun, a littill ])aireftir, come
to J)e faid hous ; and ]?e faid Margaret Wallace, being acquentit \^'itli J)e cans
of ]?e faid Mariones greif, defyret J)e faid Crifliane Grahame to help ])e bairne ;
quhais anfuer was to the faid Margaret Wallace, that the laid Margaret JTallace and fcho behovet to go firft to the place aggreit vpone betuix thame, quiiilk
place was knawin to J)e faid Margaret hir felff: Accoirding to the quhilk appointment, the faid Margaret Wallace, with the faid Crijiiane Grahame, i)afl, that
fame nycht, betuix ellevin and tuelf houris, vnder lilence and clud of nycht, to
the 5aird of James Fynlaij, burges of Glefgow, quhair thay remanet the Ipace
' Wrist. ^ In token, testimony, or proof whereof.

512 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

of ane hour togidder, practizeing Sorcerie and Witchcraft, for cuiring of pe faid
bairne, and taking the faid feiknes af hir, be vnlaiichfull nieanis ; lyk as, ])at
famyn nycht, the faid feiknes wes tane af pe faid bairne, and fcho convalefTit
Jjairof. To the taikin, the faid Margaret JFaUace, in hir going to pe 5aird J)at
nycht, tynt hir pantoun ;^ lyk as, pa faid Marioun Mure, for J)e foirfaid cuir,
gaif to J)e faid Margaret Wallace and Criftlane Grahame ane guife," with ane
pynt of wyne, within aiicht dayis |)aireftir. Ite:m, a tua 5eir fyne, or jjairby,
ane difcoird haifing fallin out betuix Alexander Boig, fmyth in Gorballis, and
J)e faid Margaret JFallace and Jolinne Dijnnitig, hir hufband, about the bying
of ane irne ftudie'' to Williaiue Weymes, mercheand burges of Glefgow, ane
coniplant was maid vpone him be pe faid Margaret to Sir George Elphingjloun
of Bllthefwoid, hmj\ his maifler ; and becaus fcho reffauit na amendis at J^efaid
Sir George handis, becaus he tryit^ hir complent to be vniuft, and only maid
vpone malice, the faid 3Iargaref, maift impudentlie, in prefens of pe faid Sir
George and his Lady, James PolloJi, and George Thomefone, his tennentis,
ojipinlie thraitnet and avowet to do to pe faid Alexander Boig ane evill turne :
ffor effectuating quhairof, fcho, be hir Devillerie, Sorcerie, and Witchcraft, prepairit and practizet be hir, laid ane crewall and feirfull feiknes vpone

Boig, the faid Alexanderis bairne, of foure 3eir auld, within few dayis ])aireftir ;
quhilk bairne, with continuall fueiting and vomeiting, deceiflTit within tua dayis
thaireftir. And laft, pe faid Margaret Wallace is, and hes bene thir audit or
nyne 5eiris bygane, ane cowmoun confulter with Witches, fpeciallie with the
faid Criftiane Grahame, Katharene Blair, and vther ^Mtches and Sorceraris,
and ane feiker of help and refponffis of thame, alfweill for hir awin cm'e and
releif of dyuerfe feikneffes and difeaffis quhairwith fcho hes bene vilTeit, as for
pe cure and help of hir freindis and acquentance in J)air feikneffes and difeaffis ;
as alfo, for pe overthrow and diftructioun of djn.ierfe perfones, men, wemen, and
bairnes, be Sorcerie, ^Mtchcraft, Cliarmeing, and Incantatioun, and v]?eris devillifch and vnlauchfull meanis, exprellie prohibeit and forbidden be the Lawis of
Almychtie God, and Municipall Lawis of this kingdome ; thairby abufeing the
people, and puting thame in grit dreddour^ and feir of hir and of hir devillifch
practizes, vlet and practizet be hir aganis fie of our fouerane lordis peccable
fubiectes to quhome fcho hes borne ony grudge, or vtterit ony malicious thraitningis. Be the committing of ]?e quhilkis pcrticular practizes aboue writtin, as
alfo be the banting, vfeing, and frequenting of pe vnhappie focieatie and corapanie of J)e faid Witches and Sorceraris, inflrumentis of the Devill, fauld and
gevin over to him for committing of all maner of mifcheif, and in affifting and

* Slipper. Fr. pantouJJe. ^ Goose. ^ Purchasing of a smith's stithy, or anvil,

♦ AiTCertained upon examination. * Dread ; terror.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 513

taking pairt with tliame in pe practize of all foirt of Witchcraft and Sorcerie,
and in the feiking of help and refponffis of thame, haith for cureing of vnnaturall
and vnknawin leikneffes, and for pe malicious inflicting and laying on of dyiierfe
feirfull and horrible leikneffes and difeaffis vpone dyuerfe peribnes, for J)air
overthraw and diftriictioun, in maner foirlkid, the faid ^Largaret WnUace lies
contra venit the tennour of ])e faidis Lawis and Actis of Parliament, and incurrit
the panes and pwneifchment of daitli fet doun J)airintill ; quhilk audit and fould be
execute vpone hir, with all rigour, to ]?e terrour and example of vtheris heireftir.

Persewaris, Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, kny*; Alexander Boig, fmyth in Gorbellis ; Joliiine
Robeitoun, querriour, burges of Glefgow, for thame felffis, and as informeris to his Maielleis
Aduocat of the haill pointis of Dittay.

Prelocutouris in defence, Johnne Dynning, mercheand in (Glefgow) ; Mr Alexander Peiblis,
Mr Robert Lermonth, Mr Thomas Nicolfone, younger, (Advocates.)

CoMPElRiT Sir Walter Stewart of Mynto, kny*, and producet ane delyuerance
of the Lordis of Secreit Counfell ; quhairof the tennour followis.

SuppLiCATiouN of Lsudowh, Dn'ih of Lennox.

My Lordis of Secreit Counsall, vnto 30ur LI. humlle meanis and fchawis I 30ur feruitour,
LoDOUiK DuiK of Lennox, lord and heritabill Bail3ie of the Regalitie of Glefgow, and Sir Walter
Stewart of Mynto, kny*^, my depute of pe faid Bail5erie : That quhair, ]ie tuentie day of Marche iiiftant
is appointit to Margaret Wallace to compeir befoir the Juftice, in the Tolbuith of Ed', to vnderly the
law for fum poyntis of W^itchcraft laid to hir charge : And quhair as, fcho duellis within Jie boundis
of my Regalitie, and fua is fubiect to me, my office and Jurifdictioune, 5it I will nocht contell in that
poynt, nor fland out aganis ])e courfe tane be 50ur LI. for hir tryell ; hot for the preferuatioun of ])e
liberteis and privileges of my office and Jurifdictioun, my humble defyre and Petitione vnto 50ur Lo.
is, that my faid depute may be admittit to fit with his Maiefleis Juftice in the tryell of the faid Margaret, and to judge J>airin with him accoirdinglie — and 50ur Lo. anfuer.

[^Followis the Lordis delyuerance, vpone the hak of the foirfaid Sttpplicatiozm.']

Apud Edh, xix Marcij, I"\Vj'^.xxij. Fiat ut petitur. Al. Cancell^ Mar. Melrois.

Vpone the productioun of the quhilk delyuerance, the faid Sir Walter aflvit
inllrumentis.

The Justice Ordanit the faid Sir Walter to fitt doun with him, with the
remanent Affeffouris.

The Dittay being red, and the ffir ft Art tele thairof, concerning hir laying on
of ane grevous feiknes vpone Cuthbert Greg, cou])er, burges of Glelgow, be
Sorcerie and Witchcraft, and aff-taking of the faid leiknes be the lyk devillilclie
and vnlauchfull meanes ; as the ffirfl Article beiris ; quhilk the pannell hailliiie
denyit. — It is thaireftir allegit be Mr Alexander Peiblis, as prelocutour for the
pannell, that the Dittay and ffirfl Article thairof can nawayis be i)ut to the
knawlege of ane Affyfe ; becaus it is nocht lybcllit, nor fet doun in the Dittay,
that the fact lyl)ellit was done be the pannell, or the feiknes inflictit be hir.
Nixt, it is nocht lybellit qiiibus medi'is, qnWiis modls; et (jiul)u.s malls (trt'it>its, the
famyn was accomjileifchet ; becaus Witchcraft can nocht be accomplifchet as

VOL. III. 3 T

514 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

Witdicraft, bot^ be cliaracteris, fignes, croces, poyfonet watteris, poyfonet afches,
poyfouet oyles, powderis, figures, pictouris, poyfonet herbis, ruittis, vennemous
oyles, woirdis, fpeiches, by incalliiig and invocatioun of the name of Sathan, quha,
at the accompleifchment quhairof, hes promeift to geve his prefens to thame ;
witliout the quhilkis, or ony of thame, Witchcraft can nocht be accompleifchet :
Nather is it ly belli t, that this fact and deid allegit is committit be the pannell,
be ony of thir meanis : And fa, that Article can nocht pas to ane AfTyfe.— To
the quhilk it is anfuerit be my lord Aduocat, that the allegeance audit to be
repellit, in refpcct of the lybell and liaill poyntis thairof, tane conjnnctim ; be the
quhilk it is affirmet pofiliue, that this feiknes was laid on be the pannell vpone
Cuthhert Greg, be hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft ; and he purget, and relevit, and
reftoirit to his helth be hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft : And fa, the Dittay, as relevant in that poynt, fould pas to ane Aflyfe.

It is forder allegit be the pannell and hir prelocutouris, that the woirdis ' laying on and taking af ' ar altogidder generall, and can nocht pas to ane Aflyfe,
nevir condifcending in fpeciall quhat was done ; as is fet doun in the former
definitioun of Witchcraft. — To the cpihilk it is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that
thair is no neceffitie to condifcend vpone the forme of the on-laying and aftakiiig of feiknefles, quhidder ba woirdis, fignes, croces, and vtherwayis, the
perfewaris nawayis being previe thairto, nather can thai be vrget to condifcend
thairupoun, feing the Witches, practizeris of that vnlauchfull and godles meane,
ar beft acquentit with the poyntis of thair awin craft : And thairfoir, it being
lybellit, relevantlie, that, be hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft, the feiknes was baith
laid on and tane af be hir, the famyn fould pas to the knawlege of ane Aflyfe,
as relevant.

It is forder allegit be Mr Thomas Nicolfone, as prelocutour for the pannell,
that of the Law multa indicia dehilia nunquam faciunt indicium induhitatuin,
quia nunquam ea que naiura Junt duhia poOunt facere rem induhitafum ; ut
tnulfa iutcgra vnmnfanum, multa non alba vnum album. This is the oi)inioun of
Pharinacius, and of Delrio in his 5 feet. pag. 728; at the leifl:, except that thair
war ane coherence and necefl^ar fubordinatioun of ilia multa indicia. Bot fa it
is, in this poynt of dittay, thair is confufet feuerall articles, quhilkis, per Je, ar
indicia dehilia ; and thair is na coherence amangis thame felffis, in fa far as the
promeifllng to do him ane evill turne, and the fubfequent feiknes, ar nawayis
coherent, nather can the ane follow vpone the vther. Secundo, circumjlantie
indictionum fine quibus ad inquifitionem non proceditur Junt quis, quando, vbi,
cum quibus, quomodo circum flaniia , quomodo eji huic vfui, vt quibus injtrumentis
factum cfje dicatur, vt fmt jmlveres, vnguina determina mortuorum. And quhair
it appeiris to be allegit in the reply, that de medijs non potejl conftare, becaus

' Excepting ; unless.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 515

thay are knawin only to the Witches and thair Mailler, thair is heirin aue
manifefb equivocatioun, in fa far as be the determinatioun of the haill traiteris
(le Veneficijs^ hec duojlmt difperata figna media ; it is grantitjine medUs^ condifcending vpone medijs, a lybell may Hand relevant ; becaus hec SATAXAftrcdagemata quibus ille naturaUter vtatur med'ijs Jant plerumque incognita; hot of
all neceffitie, to the lybelling of ane deid of ^Vitchcraft, accedere oportet ^fiiper^
Jlitionem vt dicatur vfiupajje res aliquas facta velverha quejcipiant incantationem
vel dicatur nominatim exercnijje actum aliquem qui ex communi malejiciorum
2)raxi ad malijicium dirigitur. This is Delrio's opinioun, ceitting the haill
treiteis de Venejiciis, in his thrid feet. pag. 711 ; et libro 5, feet. 16, pag. 774.
And the premifTes, fa authorizet be the haill learnet wryteris, ar of infallible
verritie ; for this reafone, becaus thair can be na deid of Witchcraft lybellit relevantlie, bot man^ be fa lybellit, as it is poffible, ^;^;'^r;7/w« naturam, to the Affyfe
to cognofce thairupovn ; bot it is fubfumet, that except funi fenfible actioun or
iigne, or vther thing be lybellit, it is impoflible to the Atfyfe to cognofce thairiipoun, quia nihil ejl in anima quod nonfit prius injenjii.

The perfewaris repeittis tliair former anfuer, foundit vpone the haill memberis
of the Dittay, tane coniunctim ; quhilkis memberis coheris verrie pertinentlie —
a promeis to inflict the feiknes, and laid on — the on-laying of the feiknes, be
Inchantment, as the Dittay beiris — and the taking be the hand of the perfone
vizeit with the feiknes, and releifing him thairof be moveing of hir lipis, &c. :
And as for the tryell of the AlTyfe, the deidis ar verrie jjublict and knawin ; and
referris the verritie thairof to the Depolitiones of the Witnelfes alreddie tane,
and to be tane in that matter, and to the Affyfe awin knawlege. — The paunell
adheris to thair former exceptioiin, vncondifcending in fpeciall, quibus modis,
quibus mediis, et quibus mails artibus to infer ^Vitchcraft.

The pannell quarrellis that pairt of the lybell be the quhilk it is faid, that fcho
inflicted the feiknes be Witchcraft, nocht condifcending quhat maner of Witchcraft was vfet for inflicting thairof. And quhair it is faid, that the memberis
coheris, becaus of a promeife and the eff'ect following, the pannell oppones the
authority oi Pharinatius, confirmet be Delrio, in the 718 page of his 3 feet.;
quhair it is faid, immo mine^ delictum J ubfecutum inimicia non Jufficiunf ad
penam fortilegij ; quia hujufmodi indicia Jimt tantuni reniola. As lykwayis, a
llronger authoritie, pag. 717 ; quhair it is affirmet, and bakit with reflbne,^ in thir
termes, mine Jubjecute damno — et fi male fame fit minans indicium, Jioit in/erturn ratio potcji enim pars offenfa alios habere ininiicos qui hoc tegmine prcter
fchelus perpetrarunt : Nather is thair neceffitie to afiirme aliunifccifc; becaus
the poffibilitie of ane inftance aganis ane generall reule evinces the incertantie
* Must. 2 Threatening expressions. ' Backed, seconded by argument.

516 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

thairof : Add'ifur, quod in criminalihiis nunquam ex prefiimptionihits jyroceditur
ad condcmuationem Jed prohationes dehent ejffe luce meridiana dariores. And
as to the vther pairt, concerning the af-taking of the feiknes, thair is na deid
lybellit bot ordinarie deidis of vizeiting a patient, be a freind or a phifitioun, to
wit, graipping of the puUes or chaikill-bane and breift, quhilk is the lleiring of
the Ipreittis-vitall, and is the ordiner behaiiiour vlet and practizet be the vifitouris of ony patient ; and becaus that eftir thais ordiner remedeis the patient
arraile, and that fcho maid him to ryle, ejl elenchus dUhiJ. And forder, the
pannellis former authorities man^ be refpectit, becaus thair is na contrair practeis
producet. — My lord Aduocat repeitis his former anfuer.

The Secund Article of Dittay being red, and the faid Margaret being accufet

thairby, viz. that vpone a difcord fallin out betuix hir and Johmie Robertouu,

querriour, a thre yeir fyne, fcho thraitnet and avowit to be avengit vpone his

flelche ; quhairvpone a difeis was inflictit be hir vj^one him, quhairin he yit

continewis, and that be hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft practizet be liir vpone him.

— It is allegit be the pannell, aganis the faid fecund Article of Dittay, that the

famyn is nawayis relevant anent JoJinne Rohertoun ; being altogidder coincident

with the former Article, and cayreing thairwith far les probabilitie nor" the

former; ffor thair is na member thairof relevant to infer Witchcraft, for fa mekill

thairof as confiftis in fact, tuiching Rohertoun his inhabilitie to work this thre

yeir bygane, throw the inhabilitie of his feiknes, quhilk is manifeft fals in the

felff : ffor it is evident, be oculer infpectioune, to luik to him prefentlie at the

bar, that he hes fufficient ftrenth of body to work : As alfo, it fall be verifeit, gif

neid beis, that he, being an querriour of his craft,'^ hes wrocht, thir dyuerfe yeiris

bygane, to dyuerfe perfones, namelie, to Sir George ElphingJIoun of BUthefivoid, George jinderfonc in Jf^oidji/de, and to the pannell, be wynning of Itanes

furtli of the querrell ;^ and repeitis the former allegeance maid againft the ffirll

Article. Igitur, &c. — To the quhilk it is anfuerit be the jjerfewaris, that the

allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay, quhilk is relevant in it

ft' If. And as to that point confifting in facto, the perfevvar referris the tryell

thairof to the WitnelTes producet and to be producet, and to the perfones of

Al]yfe,quha audit to cognofce vpone the liaill poyntis of Dittay, confifting in facto.

It is forder allegit be Vxv Thomas Nicolfone, that the faid fecund poynt of

Dittay is altogidder irrelevant ; becaus of the Law, indicium minarum et damni

J'nhfecuti, quhilk is the only fubftance of this point, and is nawayis relevant of

tlie Law, quotics delictum ex inter vallo dicitur fuhfequutum \ bot fa it is, in this

Dittay, it is lybellit, that the thraituing of Johnne Rohertoun, and the inflicting

of the difeis, was within this yeir and tliis half, quhilk is ex intervallo ; And

* Must. 2 Than, ' To bis trade. * Stone quarry.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 517

quhair as, it appearis that this feiknes is inflicted immediatlie eftir ane vther
thraitning maid to the wyfe of Jolinne llohertoun, nuUo modo 7'elevat ; becaus
vt mine et damnum fahfecutum faciunt indicium, oportet vtjit eadem perjhna cui
mine et damnum dicuntur inferri; fa that the thraitning to the wyfe, and inflicting feiknes vpone hir huftand, is na relevant poynt. Item, mine et damnum
Jiihjecutum nullum omni no faciunt indicium, niji mine fuerint Jpecijicate, J'cu de
eodem quod fuhfecutum ejl infpecie ; ffor ane general thraitning to do ane evill
turne, nocht condifcending vpone the fpeciall evill turne, can haif na coherence
with ane fpeciall (Ivaith following thairaftir, to mak it venefice; becaus mine et
damnum Juhjecutum ar comptit aliquale indicium maxime refpectu predictionis,
as ane maner of futhe-faying ; and that can be comptit na futhe-faying quhilk
ony man could lykwayis foirtell by^ ane Witch e, viz. predicere de genere etjuhJecutum ejfefpeciem. — My lord Aduocat adheris to his former anfuer.

The Thrid Article of Dittay, anent ane difcord that fell out betuix the
pannell and Jonet Harper, and of ane thraitning and vow maid to mak the laid
Jonet Harper in a worfe cais nor^ hir poyfonet fwyne ; and anent ane feirfull
feiknes quhairin fcho fchortlie thaireftir fell be the pannellis Sorcerie, Incantatioun, and Witchcraft — It is allegit be the pannell and his prelocutouris, that
the thrid Article is nawayis relevant, nevir condifcending quhat maner of Inchantment fcho was bewitchet with, and be quhat factis and deidis this was done, and
quhat was vfet be the pannell for that effect. — It is anfuerit be my lord Aduocut,
that the allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay.

TYiY.ffijurth Article of Dittay, anent the pannell hir being within Alexander
Vallange hous, cjuhair fcho fell in ane grit and fuddane feiknes ; and hir fending
for vmq'^ Crijiiane Grahame, ane notorious Witche, and confulting with hir for
hir relief of that feiknes ; and eftir the faid Crijiiane hir cuming, of the pannellis
paffing out of the faid Alexander Vallange hous to hir awin buith, with the faid
Criftiaiie, quhair fcho was charmet and curet ; and thaireftir the fame feiknes,
be devillerie and Witchcraft, cafTin vpone Alexander Vallange bairne; and anent
the faid Crijiiane Grahame hir cuming with the pannell to the bairne, and
cureing hir, be taking af agane of the faid leiknes ; and for airt and pairt of the
af-taking and on-laying of feiknes, and of af-taking the f imyn agane af the faid
bairne with the faid Crijiiane ; and confulting and practizeing of \Mtclu'raft
with hir for that effect, &c. The famyn being red, and the pannell indytit
thairof — It is allegit be the pannell and hir prelocutouris, aganis the liiid fourt
Article, that the firft pairt thairof is nawayis relevant, beiring that fcho contractit ane fuddane difeile, and for cureing thairof, fend for Crijiiane Grahame,
ane notorious Witche, except it had bene exi^reflie lybellit, that the tyme the
^ Besides ; forhrje ; independent of. '^ Tiian.

518 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

pannell fend for liir, fcho was ane notorious Witche, of the pannellis knawlege,
and that fcho fend for hir as ane notorious Witche, ad linnc effectum, to cure
hir of that difeis : And it is nocht lyhellit nather, that quhan Cr'ijiiane come,
the pannell confultit with hir as with ane Witche; ffor, it is fupponit^ that ane
Notter- war hangit for ane ffals Inflrument, and he had gevin the excipient ane
Seifing tuentie yeiris afoir, is that Seafing, gevin fa lang hefoir, ffalfe ? Na mair
can that be ane poynt of Dittay, the pannellis fending for Crijiiane Grahame,
except fcho was knawin to hir at that tyme to be ane Witche. The fecund
member is nawayis relevant, beiring that fcho curet the pannell in the buithe,
for that makis ane contradictioune, that fcho was deidlie difeafet quhan fcho
come, and thaireftir raife and pafl to the buithe, and thair was curet. The thrid
member is nawayis relevant, beiring that the pannellis feiknes was caffm on the
bairne, being lyhellit that the famyn was done be the pannell, or be Criftiane
Gi'ahame, or l)e ane or vther of ws (thame). The fourt member is nawayis
relevant, becaus it is confeffit in the Dittay, that the pannell was curet in the
buithe ; and thaireftir come out of the buithe to the hous, and cuift it on the
bairne : Gif the pannell was curet in the buith, quhair was the feiknes ? Hoc
eft inipqfllhile. As to the reft of the poyntis of that Article, that fcho come
doun to the hous, vnfent for, quhair the bairne was ; that can be na poynt of
AVitchcraft. That the pannell declairit it was the feiknes fcho had, non relevaf,
except it had bene verifeit and tryit^ that hir felf had bene bewitchet. And as
for that member thairof, defyreing to fend for Crilliane Grahame to help her,
non relevat to infer Witchcraft, except fcho had knawin the faid Crijiiane to be
ane notorious Witche. As to the reft of that Article, quhilk the pannell altogidder denyis, vpone hir aith and confcience, quhan the judge demandis hir ;
and albeit it war grantit, yit it is na poynt of Witchcraft, hot rather Blafphemie,
and blafphemous fpeiches, quhilk can nocht coheir with this lybell of AVitchecraft ; hot is content, quhan evir fcho fall be tryit and fund giltie, to vnderly the
pwneifchment of the lawis of the cuntrie. That j^oynt of the Dittay, that
Crifliane Gi'ahame come at the pannellis defyre and curet the bairne, is nocht
relevant to infer the cryme of Witchcraft aganis the pannell, except the famyn
had l)ene done at hir fpeciall command, malis artihus et venejicis artibus, for the
hailling of hir. It is nocht lyhellit that the famyn was done be the jiannell, or
at hir command, or be ony Sorcerie or Witchcraft vfet be hir for that effect :
And ps to Crijiiane GraJuune, quliat fcho did, the pannell can nocht be pwneift
thairfoir. And as to Crijiiane Grahames j^retendit Confeffioun, quhilk is nocht
producet, it can nocht be refpectit, quia ejl dicta facia died criminis ; nather is
the famyn relevant, albeit it war trew, as it is nocht, ffor hir confeffioun can nocht
' Supposed, or argued, for the sake of illustration. ^ Notary publict ^ Pxx)ved ; established legally.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 519

work aganis Margaret Wallace, quia dic'itje effefociam dicti criminis ; et d'lcente
Jejbciam criminis non crediting quia exjuo dicfo eft infamis et fic tejlimonium
j)erJiihere non pofeji; jyrecipuc, quia malejici, vencjici qui adfortilegos divinqfque
concurrunt nullatenus ad teflimonium funt admittendi. And quliair as it may
ajDpeir, that in crimine vencfici, vt in cajii excei^to, etiam infames admittuntur ;
hoc verum non eft nifi cum dupliciti cdutela, vna quod confeffio infamis fit jurata
non enim ei creditur nifi tejii, et non tejli niftjurato : The fecund cautell is, ?io?i
fdemfacit dictum focij nifi conjirmatum fit in tormentis. Dammoderius, Tit. de
Reprohatione.

The perfewaris allegis, that the haill allegeances i^roponit aganis the flburt
Article ancht to be repellit, in refjiect of the Article and haill memberis thairof?
tane coniunctim ; and qiihair it is allegit that the Article is noclit relevant, except
it war affirmet that 3Iargaret JVallace knew Crijiiane Grahame to be ane
Witche, that jjairt aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the exjores woirdis of the
Dittay, beiring, ' that the faid Margaret Wallace affirmet that Crifiane
Grahame had als grit knawlege as God him felff, and as gif God him felfF wald
cum out of Hevin and cure hir ! Albeit the deid-flraik war laid on, fcho could
tak it af agane !' As to the argumentis joroponit aganis that pairt of the Dittay
foundit vpone the Depofitiones of Crijiiane Grahame, that pairt is verrie relevant, and the argument is only proponit aganis the probatioun ; to the quhilkis
argumentis fufficient anfueris fall be maid the tyme of the verificatioun of that
poynt of the Dittay ; at quhilk tyme, it fall be maid cleir, baith be Law and
practique, that in matteris of Treffone and Witchcraft, and vtheris caices exceptit?
wevnQn, focij ciiininis, and infame^ perfones ar admittit Witneffis.

The pannell, adheirand to hir former allegeance, affirmes that that member of
the Article of Dittay is nawayis relevant, becaus fcho is fummond to anliier to
ane lybell of Witchcraft, and that pairt of the lybell inferrit be the perfewaris
repeiting thais odious and vnrehairfable fpeiches, as ane argument of the pannellis knawlege of Grahame to haif bene ane Witch, the famyn ar woirdis of
Blalphemie : Quhilkis being plane Blafphemie, (nocht granting the fpeiking
thairof,) fcho is nocht haldin to anfuer to that pairt thairof, in this perfute ;
nather clois the lybell conclude ony thing aganis the pannell, to infer hir to haif
knawlege that Crijiiane Grahame was ane Witche, (vnder proteftatioun, tlie
pannell denyis thame altogidder to be of verritie, as ofbefoir,) yit the famyn
being hot woirdis, can noclit infer ane cryme of Witchcraft, it nocht being
confeffit be the pannell to be trew ; nather can it furneife a Dittay of "Withcraft,
quhairvpone fcho may be accufet, nor rej^ute nor eflemit a Confeflioun, noclit
being maid judiciallie, bot allegit fpokin be ane wyfe to ane vthcr, vpone certaiie
* Persons declared, or considered, infamous by law.

520 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622^.

altercationes arryfeing amangis thame. Igitur, &c. And to the anfuer defociis
criminum, thair is na anfuer maid fpeciallie to that pairt, qiihair it is faid, non
crediturfucij tejiimouio, nifi conjirmatur tormentis. As to ony Confeffioun maid
be Graliame eftir hir convictioun, nihil operatur, et non relevat to put the
pannell to ane AlTyfe tliairfoir.

TiiT.fftjft Article of Dittay being red, anent the cureing be Sorcerie and
Witchcraft of 31argaret Mure, dochter to vmq^' Archibald Mure, of ane ftrange
and vnknawin difeafe, be taking af the faid feiknes af the faid bairne, be the
help and affiftance of Crijiiane Grahame, and confulting with the faid Crijiiane
thairanent, being a notorious Witche ; the faid 3Iargaret Wallace, with the
faid Crijiiane Grahame, haifing pail, vnder filence and ckid of nycht, to the
-^aird of James Fijndlaij, burges of Glefgow, quhair thay abaid togidder the fpace
of ane hour, practizeing Sorcerie and Witchecraft for cureing the faid bairne,
and taking the faid feiknes af hir ; as at lenth is fet doun in tlie faid flfyft
Article : And the faid 3Iargaret being accufet thairof— It is allegit be the faid
Margaret and hir prelocutouris, that the Mdffijft Article is nawayis relevant,
nor na pairt thairof; nevir condifcending in fpeciall quhat fcho did, quhat
Sorcerie or Inchantment fcho vfet or applyit, or quhat was practizet be hir for
taking af the feiknes af the bairne ; nor yit condifcending vpone the meanis of
Sorcerie or Witchcraft, quhidder be fignes, woirdis, croces, incantatioun, invocatioun of the Devillis name ; without the quhilkis. Witchcraft can nocht be
accomplifchet. — It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the allegeance audit to be
rei)ellit, in refpect of the article of Dittay, beirand the feiknes to be tane af the
l)aiine be the pannellis Sorcerie and Witchcraft, practizet be hir and Criftiane
Grahame, for the bairnes help, and cure thairof be vnlauchfull meanis.

The Sa.vt Article o/Diftaij being red, and the faid Margaret accufet thairof,
viz. that fcho, haifing confauet ane deidlie haitrent aganis Robert Mure, mercheand burges of Glefgow, thraitnet him wdth mony outragious fpeiches, faying
to him, ' Thow fall gang hame to thy hous, and fall bleid at thy noife ane quart of
l)luid, bot fall nocht die quhill {until) thow fend for me and aflv me forgivenes ;'
quhairvpone fchortlie thaireftir, be the faid Margaret hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft practizet vpone him, he contractit ane grevous and fuddane feiknes, quhairof
he deceiffit ; quhilk is confeffit in prefens of Witneffes — It is allegit be the
pannell and hir prelocutouris, aganis the faxt Article, that the famyn is nocht
relevant, for the particuler anfweris and argumentis maid to the haill Articles
ofbefoir, quhilk the pannell repeittis, and everie ane of thame, as ane fufficient
allegeance, brevitatis cavfa, to flay the famyn to pas to ane AlTyfe : And as to
hir pretendit Confeffioun, maid in prefens of Witneffes, can nocht be refpectit,
becaus eft Confcjfio extra-judicialis que non tenet confitentem nifiin jiulicio fac^

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 521

tam : And albeit it war grantit, as it is noclit, that fcho maid ony fic Confelfioun, fcho may refeilP thairfra ; and fa is na relevant poynt to pas to ane
AfTyfe ; quhilk is confirmet be the authoritie of Sai.icotus, L. finali, codice de
P/'obatio?iibus ; pt'ohaf/o?iem/e?i Confrffionemfjmntefacfmnj^ofeft reiifi revocare,
et confejjus non eft condemncuidus n'lji conjiet de cor pore delicti, id ejl damnum
datum ejfe maJiJicium facinoris. Libro ] de Contraverfiis, cap. 28. Item, we
haif ane expres text. Lege prima, J Diviis, fF. de Queftionibus ; ConfeJJiones
reorum pro explondis facinorihus haheri non oportere, et Confeffio cjctrajudicicdis nonfufficit ad qualijicationem delicti. Julius Clarus, Lib. 5, ^ finali,
quell. ^^, num. 2. Immo Confejjio facta coram Judice nonfedente pro tr'ibunali
eji tanquam facta privata et ex ea reus non potejt condemnari.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the faxt Article is verrie relevant, being
tane coniunctim, becaus it contenis ane promeis to do the deid, the doing of the
deid, and the confeffioun thaireftir of the doing thairof. And as to the Confeflioun, that the famyn is maid extra-judiciallie of ane cryme committit, that
extra-judiciall Confeffioun is lauchfuU and valid to condampne the pairtie quha
hes confeffit. Dammoderius, cap. 54, num. vltimo. — It is duplyit be the pannell,
that the famyn is contrair to the text, and Dammoderius fpeikis na thing of ane
extra-judiciall Confeffioun; and repeitis thair perticuler anfuer maid to the
particuler Articles of Dittay ofbefoir. — The perfewar alfo repeitis the haill
particular anfueris maid ofbefoir.

The Sevint Article qfJDittaf/hemg red, and the pannell accufet thairby, that
a ffy ve or fex yeir fyne, fcho being convenit befoir the Seffioun of the Kirk of Glafgow, and accufet be 3Ir Archibald Glen, Minifter at Carmunnok, ffor rayleing on
the faid vmq'^ Robert Mure, brother-in-law to the faid Mr Arcldbald, and raleing
on Elfpeth Arbulde, his mother, and for taking away of the faid Robert Mures
life be Sorcerie and Witchcraft ; and that the faid Margaret, in revenge thairof,
fchortlie thaireftir, be hir Sorcerie and Witchcraft, laid ane feirfull and vnknawin
feiknes vpone the faid Mr Archibald, quhairof, be continuall fueitting, he
deceiffit ; and fi, was airt and pairt of his daith ; quhilk fcho hes confeffit, fenfyne, in prefens of witneffies. It is allegit and anlucrit be the pannell, vtfupra,
againft the Jevint Article, baith anent the fact and pretendit Confeflioim lybcllit,
ffor thair is na thing qualifeit of Sorcerie, or Withcraft, or InchantnuMit, done
to the faid Mr Archibald : for the treuth is, that the man deceiffit of ane confumptioun of his lichtis ;^ natheris it lybellit that fcho inflictit ony thing vpone
him be fignes, croces, inchantit herbis, oyles, claithes, or ony vthcr meanis. —
The perfewaris anfueris, that the faid allegeance audit to be repellit, in refpect
of the fevint Article of Dittay, relevant in the lelif, and anfueris maid ofbefoir.
' Witlidraw ; retract ; resile. ^ Lungs ; i)ulin()iiary coiisumj)ti(iii.

VOL. IIL 3 U

522 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

The Audit Article being red, and the pannell indytit, fforfamekill as fcho,
haifing confauet ane deidlie haitrent aganis WilUame Mure, flefcheour, a fyve
yeir fyne, for calling CnjViane Grahame * ane rank Witche,' fcho, in revenge
thairof, come to the faid WiUiame, vpone the Hie Streit of Glefgow, and in grit
wraithe faid to him, * Go thy wayis hame, bludie boutcher that thow art, thow
fall nevir fie the calfay^ agane, bot Hill fuddanlie fchute to deid in thy awin
chyre !' ^ Accoirding to the qiihilk thraitning be the faid Margaret hir Sorcerie,
Devillerie, and Incantatioun, ane feiknes was laid vpone the faid JFilliame, and
vpone the morne thaireftir, in his awin chyre, in grit fiiddantie deceiffit : Quhilk
fcho hes confeffit to be of verritie, in jDrefens of Witneifes ; and fa is airt and
pairt of his death. — It is allegit be the pannell aganis the Audit Artide, ut
Jiipra, with this eik,^ that thair is nathing qualifeit thairin of Witchcraft done
be hir to him, bot that fcho gaif him evill woirdis, and be thais woirdis he
deceiffit. As to the pretendit Confeffioun thairin contenit, anfueris thairto ut
J'upra. — My lord Aduocat repeittis the woirdis of the Dittay, and former anfueris
maid be him to the haill former poyntis thairof.

It is forder allegit be the pannell and hir prelocutouris to tJie Nynt Artide^
anent the bewitching of Allane Speiris, in maner thairin fpecifeit, without
offence of my lord Aduocat, that all thais Articles contenit in the Dittay ar meir*
fabulous, refolveing only vpone ' he faid and fcho faid.'^ And forder, oppones
to his lordfchip all the authoriteis foirfaidis ; and na practiques in the contrar
ar producet, bot ane naikit affertioun. — My lord Aduocat repeittis the Dittay,
quhilk is verrie relevant, and als relevant a Dittay as ever was maid in Scotland,
vpone fic a fubiect ; quhilk is mair relevant in everie article nor the Dittayis
producet aganis Barbara Naper, Eufame M'caheane^ and Agnes Sampfone,
quha war put to ane AlTyfe, and convict, &c.^"

The pannell addis forder, that damnum injecutum ex lotigo intervallo is nocht
relevant ; pag. 717, Lib. cpiinti, fectionis tertij Martij Dalrio.

The Tent Article of Dittay being red, and the pannell thairby accufet, beiring
that a tua yeir fyne, or thairby, ane difcord falling out betuix hir and Alexander
Boig, fmytli in Garboillis, about the hying ^ fra hir and Jolinne Dynning, hir
hufband, of ane irne fludie to WiUiame Wemyes, fcho thraitnet to do the faid
Alexander ane evill turne ; ffor performeing quhairof, fcho, be hir devillerie and
A^'^itchcraft practizet be hir, laid ane ere wall feiknes vpone the faid Alexanderis
bairne, fa that, with continuall fueitting, within tua dayis the bairne deceiffit,
&c. — And ficlyk, the Laji Artide of Dittay being red, and fcho alfo accufet
thairof, beiring hir to haif bene thir audit or nyne yeiris bygane ane cowmoun

' Causeway, or stroet. - Chair. ^ Addition. * Merely. " Mere matter of idle

hearsay, williout foundation in truth, and not supported by legal evidence—* says lie and ' says site.'
^ See their Trials, in this Collection, Vol. II., pp. 230, 24;2, and 217. 7 Purchasing.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 523

confulter with Witches, fpeciallie with Criftkme GraJiame, Katharene Ulair,
and vther Witches and Sorceraris, and ane feiker of help and refponfles of
thame, baith for diftructioun of dyiierfe perfones, men, wemen, and bairnes, be
Sorcerie, Witchcraft, and Incantatioun, and vtheris devillifche meanis, ex2:)renie
forbidden be the Lawis of Ahnychtie God, and Municipall Lawis of this Kingdome ; as alfo for cureing and help of hir felf, in dyuerfe feikneffes, and of dyuerfe
hir freindis and acquentance, &c.

It is allegit be the pannell and hir prelocutouris againft the Tent Article^
that the famyn is nawayis relevant, for the argumentis befoir proponit, with this
additioun, that in accompleifcheing of Witchcraft, practizeing thairof, the maner,
forme, and qualitie of Inchanting is neceffarilie requyret, qiihilk is nocht heir
lybellit ; nather that thair was ony Witchcraft vfet be the pannell be ony Article
of the Dittay, and be woirdis, fignes, croces, ruitis, herbis, poyfone, or be inchantit
pictouris, fpeiches, or be invocatioun of the Devillis name, without the quhilkis
Witchcraft can nocht be accomplifchet. — As to the JLaJl memher of the JDitfaij^
it is fa generall, that it mereittis na anfuer. As to that poynt of the Dittay,
anent confulting with Criftiane Grahame and Katheroie Blair, that is altogidder
generall and irrelevant, nocht condifcending vpon the tyme and place, quando et
vl)i, nor yit condifcending quhairvpone thay confultit, quhidder vj^one Witchcraft
or vthirwayis ; and that the pannell, the tyme of thair meitting, knew thame to
be Witches, and confultit vpone Witchcraft with thame as Witches : And quhair
as, fcho helpit hir freindis, wo;^ relevai,iiOQ\\t condifcending thair names, or c[uhairwith thay war helpit. Item, it is anfuerit to that pairtof the Lybell, jt>tv' tofum,
quhair it is faid, that the pannell inflictit difeaffis, be Inchantment, and Sorcerie,
and Witchcraft, nocht condifcending quhat foirt of Inchantment or Sorcerie ;
quia vt inquifiiio fit valida, oportetfit dara, certas delicti quaUtcdes et circum'
Jlantias continens, de qiiihus jiqjjet Judex jndicare : Bot, r/c' incautamcntis in
genere nemo Judex j)oteJijudicare : J^Jrgo, the fpecies of the Inchantement man^
be expreffit befum figne or fpeciall deid ; et ratio eji, quia ne per incertitudinem,
generalitatem, et ohfcuritatem toUatur reo defenfio. Delkio, Lib. 5, feet. 2,
pag. 617. I argu, afimili, iff it war lybellit, that a man had burfl out ane vther
manis guttis with rolling over ane beift vpone him, non relevat, excei)t ye fay
quhat beift, and fie ane beift as mycht liaif done it ; fior ane mous could nocht
haif done it ! Ewin fua, it being only lybellit, it was done ' be Inchantmentis :'
And gif thay war fpeciall, I wald contend, that thai war naturall meanis, and na
Sorcerie. And thairfoir, the generalitie is altogidder irrelevant, takand away my
exceptioun ; for gif thai war fpeciall, we mycht relfone and difpute quhidder thay
war Inchantmentis or no Inchantmentis.

> Must.

524 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

Item, per totum to the liaill lybell, von relevat * vncouth feiknes,' except it
war in lyk raaner qiialifeit, qiiliat is vncoutlie ;^ ffor quliat can the Aflyfe cognofce
quhat is vncouth or nocht vncouth, it nocht being* condifcendit quhat is ' vncouth
feiknes,' quhilk is to be judget be thame quhidder it be vncouth or nocht ? And
for the fueiting, miJlo modo relevat, for the proponer fuat" in ane feiknes ane
haill moneth, and fueitting is ane naturall purgatioun. Igitur, &c.

The Aduocat repeitis the haill Articles aboue writtin, quhilkis ar fpeciall in
thame felffis.

The Justice and Assessouris continewis thair Interloquitour, vpone the
haill allegeances aboue writtin, to the morne ; and Ordanis the pannell to be tane
bak agane to waird, in the mean tyme. The Alfyfe wairnet ajmd Acta to compeir agane the morne, the xxj iujiantis, in the hour of cans ; ilk perfone vnder
the 2)ane of tua hundreth merkis.

Interloquitour oftJie Judges and jijjejjouris.
Mar. 21 . — The Judges andAffeffoviris, be thair Sentence-Interloquitour,^
Repellis the haill allegeances aboue writtin, in refpect of the Dittay, and anfueris
maid be his Maiefteis Aduocat, in fortificatioun thairof. And as to the lajl
Article, quhilk is generall, ffindis the famyn relevant, with ony ane of the ten
Articles of Dittay, et non perje : And thairfoir, Ordanis the famyn to pas to ane
Alfyfe, viz. the haill ten Articles of Dittay, as relevant ; and the laft general
Article, with ony ane of the ten.

ASSISA.

Jolinne Lawfoune, nieicheand Robert Bell, wrycht thair, Airtliour Gllmour, mercheand,

burges of Glefgow, James Mitchell, tail5eour, James Fallis, mercheand,

Jo" Dikfouiie, mercheand thair, Patrik Bell, elder, Johnne Boyd, mefoune,

Andro Fales, mercheand thair, Wiiliame Aiiderfone, cordiner, Johnne Anderfoun, cordiner,

George Louk, mercheand thair, Johnne Gihnour, mercheand, Andro Ker, cordiner, burgeffes of
Wiiliame Neilfoun, maltman thair, Glefgow.

Objections againjt AJJifers.

It is allegit be the pannell aganis Johnne Dihfone, that he can nocht be admittit vpon hir AlTyfe,
becaus thair is inimitie and evill will betuix Johnne Dynning, the pannellis hufband and him, vnreconceillit this ten yeir bygane : Lyk as, the faid Johnne Dikfone, being dyuerfe tymes travellit with to
be reconceillit with the faid Johnne Dynning, refuifet. — It is anfuerit, the allegeance aucht to be repellit
as nawayis relevant, becaus inimitie is na cans, except he fay, that thair was bluid betuix thame. — It is
forder allegit, that he can nocht be admittit, becaus he lies behauit him felf as pairtie, and hes gevin
partiall Counfall, in preiudice of the pannell ; in fa far as fcho, being tane be the Proveift, Bailleis, and
Counfall of Glt'fgow, without ane Warrand, out of hir awin hous, was put in waird in the Caflell be
thame : In the quhilk taking and committing of hir to waird, the faid Johnne Dikfone wes ane fpeciall
aHiller of the faidis Proveft and Bailleis. — It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the allegeance mereitis
nocht ane anfuer, feing he did nothing but the dutie of ane honeft citizen and burges, to affift the
Magilhat to apprehend a malefactour, being fufpect of lie haynous crymes. — Johnne Dikfone, being
'Strange; iiulcsci ibable. * Sweated. ^ Interlocutory sentence, or judgment.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 525

folenilie fuorne, and declairing tliat, to his knawlege, tliair was nevir difcord nor inimitle betulx Jolinue
Dynning and liim, the Juftice thaiiupoun, and vpoue his declaratioua that he had gevin na partiall
counfall in tliis caufe, admittis him.

It is allegit aganis Walter Sterling, mercheand, tliat he can (noclit) be vpon this Aflyfe, becaus he
is brother-in-law to vmq''' Rohcrt Mure ; thair being ane fpeciall poynt of Dittay fet doun aganis tlie
pannell, for allegit iniurie done to Robert Mure. — Anfuerit, autht to be repellit, becaus thair is na
perfute movet aganis the pannell be the kyn and freindis of Robert Mure, and thairfoir fould be admittit.
— It is forder allegit, that Walter Sterling, brother-in-law to Robert Mure, can nocht be admittit, becaus
ane Dittay being fet doun aganis me for ane wrang done to Robert INIure, ilk poynt of Dittay is fund
relevant and ordanit to pas to ane AfTyfe ; the faid Walter can nocht be ane Affyfour aganis me, being
perfewit vpone rny life. — My lord Aduocat anliieris ut fupra, that nochtwithftanding thairof he fould
be admittit, except Robert Mure, or fum of his freindis, war ather perfewaris or defenderis, or
vpgevearis of the Dittay, or Informeris to his Maiefleis Aduocat thairin. — The Justice Ordanis
Walter Sterling to Hand by; and to call ane vther.

It is allegit againfl Wdliame Neiljbne, elder, that he can nocht pas vpone tliis AfTyfe, becaus he is
brother- in-law to Jolinne NicoU, wryter, quha hes behauit him felft'as pairtie, in geving informatioun
of the Dittay, and is prefent at the bar aflifling the perfewaris in this perfute. — Anfueris, the allegeance aucht to be repellit, becaus Johnne Nicoll is nocht a perfewar, nor the Summondis is nocht raifit
at his inftance. — Williame Neilfoun, being fuorne, and purget be his ayth of partiall counfall, is admittit
be the Juftice.

Williame Anderjbne, cordiner. It is allegit aganis him, that he can nocht be admittit vpone this
AfTyfe, becaus the pannell, haifing fkill in chirurgerie, fauld to liini fum drogis, quhilk he haifing poftponit the pannell in payment, fcho thairfoir perfewit him be ordour of Law thairfoir ; quhairvpone ane
inimitie fell out betuix thame, quhilk is yet vnrecouceilit.— The faid Williame, be his grit (aith) being
purget of partiall counfall, is admittit,

Verificatioun of the perticuler j^oynt'is of D'ltlay.

My Lord Aduocat takis inftruinentis of the fweiriug of the Alfyfe ; and, for
verificatioun of the perticuler poyntis of Dittay following-, vfes and produces the
probatioun and Witneifes efter fpecifeit. And firft, for Verificatioun of theffirji
Article {of Dittay) anent Ciithhert Greg, produces Charles Poltoh and Jlargaret Dynu'uig as Witneffis, defyreing thair Depofitiones to be tane.

Chahiis Polloh, couper, burges of Glefgow, fworne judiciallie, and examinat in
prefens of the Judges, pairteis, and Adyfouris, and purget of partiall counfall,
mareit, of the aige of threttie yeiris, declairis, that a thre yeir fyne, or thairby,
ane differ^ being betuix Cuthbert Greg and Criftiane Grahame, for ane dog
quhilk Criftiane defyret fra him, and herefuifet, anlliering to hir agane, * I rather
5e and my huffie" baitli (meaning be 3Iargaret ll'^allace) war brunt or'5e get my
dog ! ' Quhairof 3Ia?garet IVallace getting knawlege, fcho comes to Cuthbert
and fayis to him, ' ffals land-loupper lounthatthow art, fayis thow that Criftiane
Grahame and I fall be brunt for ^Vitclles ? I vow to God I lall do to ;e ane evill
turne !' And declairis, that, within foure or fy ve dayis thaireftir, the laid Cuthbert fell feik. Being inquyret, gif he hard hir fay thir woirdis, ' that he (Jhe)

^Quarrel; differe^ice ; altercation. * Cummer; gossip. ^ Rather than.

526 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

fould mak Mr {him), within few dayis, noclit of habilitie to wyn aiie caik of
breid ?' Denyis that he hard fic woirdis— bot only that fcho fould ' do him ane
evill turne.' Sayis, he faw Cuthhert Greig> the tyme of his feiknes, fiieitting and
brocheing' in ane vncouth feiknes, fairlie handillit, quhairby he was nocht able
to gang ; bot knawis nocht how lang he fwat, or abaid in that eftait. Demandit,
gif he faw Margaret AVallace cum in to Cuthbert, at ony time of his feiknes ?
Declairis, he faw hir nocht within that hous ; and forder, knawis nocht aneni
that ffirfl Article of Dittay.

Margaret Dynnhig, the fpous to Andro Lennox, fuorne and examinat vpone
the ffirfl Article, concerning Cuthbert Greg, and defyret to tell the treuth, fa far
as flie knawis thairanent ; Depones, that the tyme of Cuthbertis feiknes, the
deponer and Margaret Montgomerie, with JMargaret Wallace, pall all thre
togidder vp to Cuthbertis hous, to vilTeit him, the tyme of his feiknes ; at thair
in-cumming, declairis, fcho faw Margaret Montgomerie, with Margaret Wallace,
pafs to his bed-fyde quhairin he lay, and that the faid Margaret ^^^illace fat
doun with hir bak to him, the deponer hir felf nocht being able to wyn ben the
hous, becaus of the thrang of peopill in the hous, at that tyme : And forder
knawis nocht.

Foil the Second poynt of Dittay, concerning Johnne Hohertoun, querriour,
defyres the faid Johnne Robertoun, as perfewar, his ayth to be tane, and that
poynt of Dittay to be fuorne be him, gif he has juft cans to perfew the pannell
as giltie thairof ? Quha, being folemplie fuorne, declairit, that the faid Margaret
Wallace avowit ' to be avengit vpone his fflefche ! ' And that fchortlie thaireftir,
conforme to the Dittay, the feiknes was laid vpone him ; and thairfoir, hes juft
caus to perfew the faid Margaret, for that poynt : And eikis^ thairto, that fen the
making of that vow be hir, he was nevir able to wyn him felff fyve f. (fliillings.)
Quhairvpone my lord Aduocat aflvit inftrumentis.

Chairles PolloJc being producet, and fuorne vpone the fecund Article of Dittay,
anent the faid Johnne Robertoun, querriour ; declairis, he knawis na thing thairof,
except allanerlie, that he faw him hevelie difeafit.

As to the Thrid Article of Dittay, referris the notorietie of the pannellis
giltines thairof to the AlTyfe.

For verificatioun of the ffourt Article, my lord Aduocat producet Criftiane
Grahames Depolitioun, tane be my lord Archehifchope of Glefgow. As alfo,
produces Marioun Mitchell, the fpous of Johnne Hunter, and defyres hir to be
examinat, and her Depolitioun to be writtin.

Marioun Mitchell, tlie fpous of Johnne Hunter, tafker,^ fuorne, and examinat

* Commonly pronounced hroiching ; in the last stage of exhaustion, through profuse perspiration.
The Enrilish word sweltering conveys something of the same meaning. ^ Adds ; subjoins.

^ Day-labourer.

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 527

vpoiie the ffourte Article of Dittay, in prefens of the Judges, AfTyfouris, and
parteis, judiciallie, Depones, that four yeir fyne, or thairby, jNIargaret Wallace
and Robert Stewart come to the duelling-hous of Alexander Vallange, in Glefgow, quhair the deponer was fervand for the tyme, and callit for ane choppin of
aill ; quhilk was broclit be ane boy to thame, namet James Symfone ; and in
drinking thairof, betuix Robert Stewart his taking the cope and offering it to
Margaret Wallace, the faid Margaret tuik ane fudden brafche of leiknes, vnknawin
to the deponer quhat feiknes it was, quhairin the faid Margaret was fa extremelie
handillit, that fclio was liklie to ryve hir felff :^ Thaireftir fcho cryis, * Bring me
hither my deir burd !' — And Margaret Montgomerie, the guid-wyfe of the hous,
being prefent, anfueris hir, * Quhilk deir burd wald ^e half? I beleif,' fayis fcho,
(thinking it had bene Johnne Dynning, hir huftand,) ' he is nocht at hame !'
'Na,' anfuerit Margaret Wallace, * bring me Criftiane Gruhame^ my deir burd !'
All this quhyle, Margaret Montgomerie was balding hir be the ane hand, and
Criftiane M^clauchlane be the vther. Thaireftir, at hir defyre, Robert Stewart
paft, and with grit dilligence brocht Criftiane Grahame to hir, at quhais fuddane
cuming, Margaret Montgomerie fayis to Robert, * Jefus faif ws ! I beleif thow
hes met her be the way !' And Criftiane Grahame anfuerit, * ffayth, he met me
nocht, bot come and brocht me out of my awin chalmer ; and fra I hard that
my burd was fa difeaftt, I fped me hither !' Sayis, thaireftir, that Criftiane
Grahame tuik Margaret Wallace be the fchaikill-bane,^ and kift hir ; and in hir
airmes cayreit hir doun the ftair, faying to hir, ' Nothing fould aill hir.' Eftir
quhais outgoing, Margaret Vallange, dochter to the faid Margaret Montgomerie,
ane infant bairne of fonre yeir auld, followit thame doun the ftair ; and in the
ganging out at the 5et,^ over the dur-threfchold, fcho fell doim in a fuddane and
grevous payne, and grat vehementlie. Incontinent thaireftir, the faid Margaret
Wallace come bak agane, and declairit that the bairne was greting at the ftairfute ; and defyret hir mother to bring her vp. And thaireftir, the bairnes mother
cuming to hir and taking her vp, the bairne cryis, ' Mother, mother, ding me
nocht, for thair is ane preyne ■* rafchet throw my fute ! ' And the bairne, being
brocht vp to the hous, grat continuallie all that nycht, and quhilP the morne at
that fame tyme of the day. The Deponer forder declairis, that fcho and the
bairnes father and mother fit vp all that nycht, and walkit*^ the bairne ; and that
vpone the morne thaireftir, the faid Margaret Wallace come to viflit the bairne,
and defyret Margaret Montgomerie, hir mothir, to fend for Criftiane Grahame,
making all that tyme ane grit mone^ for the bairnes feiknes : To quhome ]Margaret Montgomerie anfuerit, ' I haif nothing ado with Criftiane Grahame, and

* This attack was probably a hysterical aftection, or rather a kind of convulsion fit. ^ Wi-Jst.

^ Gate ; wicket. ' Pin. ^ Until. "^ Watched. "^ Moan ; lamentation.

528 CKIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

will noclit fend for Iiir ! ffor gif God lies laid on tliat feiknes on my bairne, he
will, at his awin plefonr, tak it af agane !' Sayis thairefter, that Margaret Wallace maid anfuer to hir, ' Gif 36 knew of Crilliane Grahame Ikill, and qnliat fcho
can, 3e wald noclit rcfnife to fend for hir ; for fcho can do alfe mekill as God in the
Hcavin !' Deponis forder, that fchortlie thaireftir, Margaret Wallace, by ^ the faid
Margaret Montgomereis knawlege, brocht the faid Crifliane Grahame in to the
lious, the bairne being lying as ane deid ftock in the bed, and haifing gevin over
greting for the tyme ; and at thair incoming, ane help of grene webbis" being
lying on the fluir, Margaret Wallace lap over the fame, and cnmis to the bairne,
and takis hir vp ont of hir bed, and fettis hir on Crifliane Grahames knie ; and
declairis, that eftir the bairne had iittin ane fchorte fpace vpone the faid Criftianes knie, fcho grew better, and eftir that mendit.

For verificationn of the ffijft jmjnf, my lord Adnocat prodncet certane Depofitiones tane befoir the J3iJchope of Glejgow f with ane vther Dei)ofitioun tane
befoir the CommH)ar of Glefgow i as alio, prodncet certane Depofitiones tane be
the faid ArchehiJcJiope, at command of the Secreit Connfall ; and thair with prodnces Andro Mure, chirurgane, as Witnes ; defyring him to be fuorne, and his
Depofitioun to be writtin.

Affdro Mure, chirurgane, mareit a fevintene yeir fyne, of the age of xlij yeiris,
fuorne, and purget of partiall counfell ; being inquyret, quhat he knawis concerning the ffyft Article of Dittay, red in his audience ? Depones, he knawis
notliing of Margaret jNIures feiknes fpecifeit in the faid Article, except that he
himfelf, cuming doun the Brig-gait,' he faw Crifliane Grahame cum furtli of
Marioun JNIures lious ; quha thaireftir come to the deponer, and defyret him to
gang in to the faid Marioun : And the deponer, at hir defyre, hailing paR in to
the hous, at his incuniing ane roiflit hen was fett doun on the buird ;^ and the
deponer, with Dauid Scheirar and the faid ]\Iarioun Mure, fat doun at the buird
togidder ; and witliin ane fchorte fpace thaireftir, Margaret Wallace come in to
thame : Declairis, at Margaret Wallace incuming, ane guife " was fett doun on
the buird : And the deponer, perfaveing that lie intertenement wald draw him
to charges, he payit his choi)pine of wyne and come his way, and left the refl of
the cumpanie behind him. And forder knawis nocht.

For verificatioun of the Saxt Article, Sevint, and Aucht Articles, produces
the Depofitioun of Alexander Montegomerie and vtheris, fubfcryuit be my Lord
of Glefgow ; togidder with ane Teflimoniall of the Minifler, teflifeing Mr Alexander Montgomerie his feiknes, that he was nocht able to travell, without liazard

' Without; contrary to. ^ Webs of newly weavod, or unbleacluMl, linen clotli. 'James Law,

Arclibisliop of (ilasgovv ; who had Itcen translated from the See of Orkney; a?i/io IGIO. ■* The

liridjre gate of Glasgow. ^ A roasted fowl was set upon the table. ^ Goose.

S5 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 529

of his lyfe : And referris the iiotorietie of the pannellis giltiiies of the faidis
Articles to the Affyfe.

For preveing of the Nynt Article of Dittaij, produces Robert Dykes, Johniie
Pincartoun, Thomas Wilkyne, and Johnne Thomefone, as ^Mtueffes, defyreing
thair Depotitiones to be tane, for the Affyfe better informatioiin.

Robert T)}j]iis, maltman in Riiglen, mareit, fuorne and examinat, in prefens
of the Judges, Affyfouris, and j^airtie, in judgement, vpone the A^nt Article, to
declair the verritie, and purget of partiall counfell. Depones, that at command of
vmq'^ Allane Spens, the deponer come to Johnne Dynning, and defyret ane licht
of his ehrand,^ and, conforme to the Dittay, the ellwand was brokin ; and a
fyftene dayis thaireftir, or thairby, the faid Allane Spens being in Glefgow, and
fleing ane fchoure,^ come befoir Johnne Dynningis buthe-dur,^c^uhair the deponer
hard Margaret Wallace, Johnne Dynningis wife, fa}^ thir woirdis to Allane,
* Away, deboifchet knave !' Depones, the faid Allane Spens fell feik ; bot knawis
nocht how fone eftir thais woirdis war fpokin this feiknes fell^ to him. Declairis,
he come in to him the tyme of his feiknes, and faw him hevelie difeafit with
continuall fueitting.

Thomas Wilkyne, burges of Ruthirglene, mareit, fuorne in prefens of pairtie,
Judges, and Affyfouris, in judgement. Depones, he knawis nocht ]\Iargaret Wallace, befoir his cuming to Edinburgh. As to that Article of Dittay concerning
Allane Spens feiknes, declairis, he was hevelie difeafit with ane fuddane and
grevous feiknes, quhairof he deceiffit ; bot knawis nocht cphat or quha war the
cauferis thairof.

Johnne Thomejhne, burges of Ruthirglene, mareit, and fuorne vpone the nynt
Article of Dittay red to him in judgement, in prefens of the jjairteis, Judges, and
Aflyfouris, is conforme to the faid Thomas Wilkyne.

Johnne Pincartoun, fuorne and demandit vpone the nynt Article, quhat he
knawis thairintill ? Depones, he was narrell dur nychtbour' to Allane Spens, and
faw Johnne Dynningis el wand brokin, at quhilk tyme the faid Johnne Dyning
and Allane Spens war likelie to go by the earis for breking of the faid elwand.
Declairis, that he hard Margaret Wallace, fcho being prefent with liir hulband,
fay to him, ' Go 3our wayis joy, let him allane,' (meaning be Allane Spens,) * I
fall tak ane amendis thairof !' Sayis he knew that Allane Spens fell in ane heaA'ie
difeas, bot knawis nocht quhat was the cans thairof.

Foil verificationn of the Tent Article of Dittay, my lord Aduocat vies the
aithe and declaratioun of Alexander JSoig in Garboillis, perfewar tliairof, and
defyres that Article to be fuorne be him to the Affyfe, for thair better informa-

* Ell-wand, yard measure. * For shelter from tlie shower. ^ Sliop door. * Happened.

5 Next-door neighbour.

VOL. III. 3 X

530 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

tioun: Qiilia being fiiorne, declairit that lie had jufl cans to perfew the faid
Article, as is fet doiin tliairintill, aganis the i^annell.

Produces alfo George Thomefone and James Pollok, WitnelTes, defyreing thair
Depofitiones to be reflauit for preving of the faid tent Article of Dittay.

Geo?-ge Thomefone, diiellaud vnder Sir George Elphingftoun of Blithefwoid,
knyS fuorne and examinat in judgement, Quliat he knawis anent the faid tent
Article of Dittay ? Depones conforme thairto, that he hard Margaret Wallace
and Alexander Boig flyteing with vther ; and that fcho faid to him, in a grit
rage and furie of mynd, that fcho fould ' do to him ane evill turne,' — or fould
' gar get to him ane evill turne !' And within thre dayis thaireftir, the faid Alexander his bairne fell feik, and deceiflit of fueitting and vther grevous panes.

James Pollok, gairdner to Sir George Elphingftoun, fuorne and examinat
vpone the faid Article, Depones, he being working at the hedge within the 5aird,
he hard Margaret Wallace and Alexander Boig flyteing togidder ; and that in
hir anger fcho faid to him, fcho fould ' do to him ane evill turne !' And fchortlie
thaireftir, his bairne contractit ane feiknes, and deceiflit.

My lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the Witnes judiciall declaratioun aboue
writtin ; quhilk he repeitis to the Aflyfe, with the vther Depofitiones producet
be him.

The Justice and Assessouris continewis this dyet to the morne. The
AfTyfe wairnit to be prefent the morne, at xj houris ; ilk perfone vnder the pane
of iij" merkis.

Objections he the Pannell to hir iweiemlit Confessioun, and haill

Prohatioun adducet.
Mar. 22. — It is objectit be the pannell and hir prelocutouris aganis
h'w pretendit Confefjioun, maid be hir befoir the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, that
the famyn can preve nathing of the haill Dittay, nor na pairt thairof. And as
to that pairt of liir allegit Confeffioun, quhair as fcho confefTit ' that fcho was
content, in caice it fould be provin that fcho was in Cuthhert Gregh' hous, to
grant the haill Dittay !' Anfueris thairto, that is na Confeffioun of the Dittay,
nor of na pairt thairof ; ffor the Dittay is fet doun upone Witchcraft, and that
the pannell practizet Witchcraft vjwne the perfones contenit in the Dittay, be
Sorcerie and Inchantment ; fcho lies nocht confefTit the famyn be hir Depofitioun,
nor na pairt thairof ; fua that hir Depofitioun can be na probatioun of Witchcraft, nor of practizing thairof ; hot only, that gif it fall be provin aganis hir,
hir being in Gregis hous, quhilk fcho hes denyit, fcho hes thairin committit onlie
a lie, and being perfewit and provin, is content to vnderly the pwneifchment
appointit aganis Leafmg-makeris. Secundo, be the Confeffioun contenit in hir

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 531

Depofitioim befoir the Counfell, fcho is only content, gif that haill Article be
provin aganis hir, than to confes all the reft to be trew ; hot albeit it be provin
that fcho was in the hous, it is nocht confeflit thairby that fcho was ane Witche.
Tertio, it is nawayis provin be the Depolitioun prodiicet, that fcho was within
the hous, becaus thair is only ane woman jn'oducet as a Witnes to verifie the
fame. It is forder allegit, that thair can be na probiitioun vpone that hir Confeffioun maid befoir the Counfell, becaus the famyn is na poynt of Dittay.

It is anfuerit be the perfewaris, as to the obiectioun maid againft the Depofitioun maid be the pannell befoir the Counfell, that obiectioun audit nocht to be
refpectit, in refpect of the Judiciall Confeflioun maid befoir the Lordis of Counfall, quhilk bindis hir ; be the quhilk it is manifeft, that fcho lies denyit the
treuth, in refpect of the probatioun led be dyuerfe of the ^Vitneffes producet,
verifeing hir to haif bene in Gregis hous the tyme of his feiknes, quhilk the
perfewaris referris to the Inqueiftis knawlege and \Mtnefs Depofitioun. And
defyres it may be rememberit to the Affyfe, quhat fentence was geviu aganis
Patrik Cheijue, vpone the lyk Depofitioun.

It is forder allegit be the pannell, that the Depofitioun maid befoir my Lord
of Glefgow, the famyn can niak na fayth, in refpect his Lordfchip had na warrand to that effect. — It is anfuerit be the jDerfewaris to that obiectioun, that the
famyn aucht to be repellit, in refpect of my Lord of Glefgowis Judiciall Declaratioun maid be his Lordfchip, that he had ane fpeciall Letter direct to him be
the Lordis of Secreit Counfell, for taking of the faidis Depofitiones, and of the
article fubioynet to hir Depofitiones fubfcryuit be the Clerk of Counfell.

It is allegit be the pannell, that nather the ffirft nor fecund Depofitioun of
Cr'ijilane Grahame can be refpectit : ,ffirji, becaus it is nather liir jDrincipall
Depofitioun, nor Extract thairof ; nocht the principall, becaus it is nocht fubfcryuit be hir, nocht the Extract, becaus nocht (fubfcryuit) be ane Clerk of Court :
Secundo, can preve nathing, becaus it is maid, fcho nocht being fuorne to that
effect : Tertio, it is maid be the pairtie being abfent aganis quhome it is deponit,
qulia, gif fcho had bene requyret, wald haif compeirit, and offerit to haif bene
confrontit with hir ; qiiha, gif fcho had bene confrontit, wald haif denyit the
famyn : Lyk as, fcho cum of fet purpois to the Tolbuth, befoir hir Convictioun,
and offerit hir felff to haif bene confrontit, quhilk was denyit. LajK hir Depofitioun can work nathing aganis the pannell, being ane condampnet j)erione ; and
the Depofitioun aucht nawayis to be refpectit, except it war inftantlie verifeit be
the proces, that befoir the making of the faid Depofitioun, or the tyme of the
making thairof, that the faid CrifUan Grahame had confeflit the haill ])oyntis of
Dittay than laid to hir charge : ffor as the M'oirdis ar conlhuet, tliay ar Ipokin
be compariefone, that eftir fcho had denyit the poyntis of Dittay laid to Im*

53^ CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

charge, and declairit liir felf to be altogidder innocent thairof, and the pannell
being at that tynie ane honeft woman, liia repute and haldin, fcho fayis, * fcho
was als frie of Witchcraft as fcho or ony vther in the toun !' Forder, the Confeffioun can nocht be refpectit, becaiis it is nocht maid befoir ane Judge haifing
power to tak her Confeffioun, thair being na Commiffioun producet for taking
of the faid Confeflioun. Nixt, the Depofitioun beiris nocht that fcho was ony
wayis interrogat or fpeirit^ at, and is nocht maid in judgement, becaus the Affyfe
was than inclofet, being than hir Judges. Lad, it beiris nocht that this pannell
was airt or pairt of ony Sorcerie, hot of fic deidis as fcho did, and confeffit to
liaif done : And referris to the AfTyfe, hir Confeffioun, that fcho was innocent of
all. And as to the worfettis,^ thay ar na pairt of Witchcraft, be reveing^ or
drawing tliame furth of hir purfe.

It is anfuerit thairto be the perfewaris, that the obiectiones maid aganis the
tua De])ofitiones producet is nawayis relevant, and is nocht to be refpectit be the
Affyfe, becaus the famyn is fubfcryuit hQiny Lord Archh'ifchope ofGlefgow, as
Lord of the Regalitie, and quha was prefent the haill tyme of Criftiane Grahames
tryell, nocht onlie as Lord of the faid Regalitie, hot alfo as being ane of the
Lordis of his Maiefteis Previe Counfall ; and thairby, be vertew of his office and
authoritie, haifing fufficient power to tak cognitioun of quhatfumeuir ryote or
offence committit to ony of his Maiefteis fubiectis, be quhatfumeuir maner of
way, within that pairt of his dyocie,^ or ony pairt of the kingdome. Igitur, &c.
— To the quliilk it is anfuerit be the pannell, that the Depofitioun was nocht
fubfcryuit be )n?/ Ijord of KUfijihc, to quhome the Commiffioun was grantit, hot
is allanerlie fubfciyuit be the Proueift and Bailleis of Glefgow, quha ar pairteis :
Lyk as prefentlie, at the dyteing heirof, Gabriell Cunninghame, ftanding at the
bar, hes profeffit him felff to l)e a pairtie and informer to my lord Aduocat. Laft,
her Depofitioun can nocht be refpectit, becaus fcho alleges hir felff to be participant of the fame cryme ; and fa hir Depofitioun, of the Law, can mak na fayth,
except fcho had confeffit fcho had maid hir Dejiofitioun or Confeffioun eftir
tortour.

To the quhilk it is anfuerit be the perfewaris, that the faidis Depofttiones ar
fubfcryuit be the Proveift and Bailleis of Glafgow, quha war a pairt of the
Cominiflioneris nominat and appointit to the tryell of the faid Criftiane Grahame,
as alfo fubfcryuit be vther tua men of grit credeit, viz. Mr Johnne Bell and ]\Ir
Robert Scott, Minifteris of Glafgow, quhais fubfcriptiones ar fufficient to geve
authoritie to the Depofitiones, as evir has bene fund in this judgement, in all
matteris of Witchecraft, and fpeciallie, in the proces of Euphame M'caheane,
Barbara Xaper, and ^Ignes SamjiJoini. The laft pairt audit nocht to be
. * Enquired, "^ The coloured worsted threads formerly noticed. ^ Stealing. * Diocese.

55 & 19 Jac.VI. criminal TRIALS. 533

reQ^ectit, in refpectyoc^' criminis ar reflauit and admittit in all crymes of Treffone, Erracie/ and Witcliecraft.

Quhairvnto the pannell and liir prelocutouris anfueris to tliais tua memberis
of my lord Aduocattis anfueris, that the tua Minifteris befoir quhome Criftiane
Grahame liir Depofitioun was maid, that thai war honefl men, it is noclit denyit ;
bot it followis nocht, becaus thay are honeft men, thairfoir thay had power to
tak hir Depofitioun, in ane matter concerning hir lyfe, without Commiffioun.
For anfuer to tlie proces allegit aganis Eiiphame ISPcaheane, Barhara N^aper,
&c., agreis thairto, in regaird thay war examinat be Mr James Carmichell, to
quhome fpeciall Commiffioun was gevin for that effect. Lafl, it is declairit be
the pannell, that evin in the cryme of Erracie or Lefe-maieftie, a pairtner of
anecryme^ is nocht to be credited without tortour; and repeittis the tortouring
of Sprofe in Treffone, becaus he was jDartiner of the Trelfone.

It is objectit be the pannell and hir prelocutouris, aganis the Depofitioun
maid be Margaret Grahame, dochter to Crifi:iane Grahame, befoir the Commiffar
of Glefgow, it can nocht be refpectit ; ffirfi:, becaus it is not maid judiciallie,
befoir ane Judge haifing power to that effect : Secundo, befoir ane Commilfar,
without ane Commiffioun, quha had na power in matteris of Witchcraft, and
vtheris concerning lyfe and daithe : Tert'io, was nocht requyret "Witnes befoir
ane Judge haifing Commiflioun, nor fworne to that effect : Quarto, hir Depofitioun can nocht be refpectit, in refpect of hir age, fcho nocht being pafi; xviij ^
yeiris : Qidfito, in all hir Depofitiones, nevir a word deponet that fcho knew
Margaret Wallace to be ane Witch e, or a practizer of Witcliecraft ; bot only tliat
hir mother and fi^ho pafi; to the 5aird togidder, tynt hir pantoun, quhilk was put
one agane be Criftiane Grahame, &c. : JL/id quhair, it is affirmet in the Depofitioun, that fcho tuik ane fcliooe, and pat in fum feidis thairin, that is nocht
lybellit, and can nocht be refpectit, becau& nathing followit thairupoun : LaJ},
na Depofitioun can be refpectit at all, of ony perfone, as AVitnes, bot only fie as
ar producet in Judgement,^ to the effect tlie pannell may object aganis thame,
quhidder thay may depone aganis hir or nocht. And thairfoir, of all Law, it is
inviolablie obferuet, that na faith is gevin to Teftimoniallis, bot as Witneffes, in
a matter of fourtie Ichillingis.

It is anfuerit be the perfewar, as to the allegeance and objectioun aganis 3Iargaret Grahame, the famyn aucht to be repellit, it being tana befoir ane JudgeOrdiner, judiciallie, viz. the Commiffar of Glelgow : And as to hir age, fcho hes
deponet fcho is paft xiiij yeiris, quhilk is referrit to the Affyfe knaMlogo ; and
that than fcho mycht haif mareit lauchfullie, mekill mair to beir witnefiing in

^ Heresy. ^ Particeps crimmis. ^ Sic; xiij ? ■* This is the first time that this

objection is recorded as having been started by the Counsel for the pannel.

534.V CRIMINAL TRIALS. " A.D. 1622.

obfcure factis, fic as ony thing concerning vmq'^ Criftiane Grahame and Margaret
Wallace, quhais conipanie fcho refoirtit daylie. And forder, the perfewar referris
to the Affyfe knawlege, quhatthay knaw of hirDepofitioime ; and fpeciallie, gif
it was grantit befoir my Lord of Glefgow, the pannell hir felff, and fura of the
Inqiieift : And forder, producet the dome and fentence of convictioun to the
Affyfe, quhair the Proveifl and Bailleis of Glefgow war Commiffioneris appointit
and fet for tryell of Criftiane Grahame, and fa had power to reffaue Criftiane
Grahames ayth, for haifing Commiffioim thairto.

It is anfuerit be the pannell, as to that pairt of the anfuer anent Margaret
Grahames age, the Depofitioun producet beiris na fic thing. — My lord Aduocat,
for anfuer thairto, declairis, he produces ane vther Depofitioun of hiris of the
fame dait, beiring hir former age : Quhilk is referrit to the Affyfe.

Item, the pannell anfueris to that poynt, anent the productioun of Criftiane
Grahames Sentence of Convictioun, that the pannell acceptis the fame ; and
proteftis that the perfewaris repetitioun thairof, for inftructing of the Affyfe, anent
that alledgeance proponit be the pannell, that Criftiane Grahames Depofitioun,
beirino- Margaret Wallace to be airt and pairt of all confeft be hir to half done,
preves nawayis hir to be giltie of Witchcraft ; becaus the convictioun producet,
beiris hir to haif denyit all the poyntis of the lybell anent Witchcraft ; and fcho
confeffes that fcho was pairt-taker of fic thingis as fcho confeffes hir felff to haif
done, it man {miijl) be of na deidis impoirting Witchecraft. — The laft objectioun
proponit be the pannell is nocht to be refpectit, in refpect of Criftiane Grahames
Confeffioun and convictioun producet ; quhairin fcho is convict of tua poyntis,
conforme to hir awin Confeffioun, viz. the fecund and fourt poyntis of Dittay
quhairupone fcho was indytit. — It is anfuerit be the pannell, that the faid convictioun proceidis vpone the admitting of the haill Articles thairof to the knawlege of ane Affyfe, fua that the finding of hir giltie of ony of the Articles is nocht
the grund of the fentence of Convictioun ; ffor tliais tua Articles, a pairt qiihairof
fcho is convict, was nocht relevant without the haill Articles had bene admittit ;
and forder, thir tua poyntis quhairof Grahame is convict, is na poynt of our

Dittay.

It is objectit be the pannell aganis Marioiui 3I?/res Depoiitioun, fubfcryuit
be my Lord of Glefgow, the famyn can nocht be refpectit, for the reffones foirfaidis ; with this additioun, that gif the faid Marioun Mure war now producet
as Witnes at the bar, fcho wald be repellit ; for this reffone, becaus be the Depofitioun it is confeffit that fcho is father-fifter to the bairne quha is alleget to haif
bene bewitcliet or curet be the pannell, as being within degreis-defending to the
laid bairne mentionet in the Dittay. And forder, it is objectit, that fcho had
gevin partiall counfall in the caus, quhilk defens is tane fra us be productioun of

55 & 19 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 535

ane Teftimoniall, and nocht hir felflf. And repeittis all the reft of the objectiones
aganis the vther Teftimoniall. — The laft objectioun audit to be repellit, in refpect
of the Depofitioun of ISIarioun 3Iiire, tane be my Lord of Glelgow, qiiha had
Commiffioun of the Counfell, as he hes deponit, and is teftifeit be James Prymrois,
clerk of the Counfell. Lyk as, the lamyn Depofitioun is fubfcryuit be the Laird
of Mynto, and the Proveift and Bailleis of Glefgow, Commiffioneris for Try ell of
the faid Criftiane Grahame : And as to the objectioun, that fcho was within
degreis-defending to the bairne, it is anftierit directlie, that Commiffioun be the
Counfell for hir examinatioun, the jjannell being prefent, and nathing objectit be
pannell in the contrair, is fufficient to elyd^ that pairt of the faid objectioune.

It is objectit be the pannell aganis the Depofitioun of Mr Alexander Montgomerie producet, that the famyn can mak na fayth, it nocht being maid befoir
ane Judge, nor he fuorne to that effect ; nor nane inquyreing lie thing of him :
And fpeciallie, audit to half bene fummond befoir ane Judge-Ordiner, and to
half deponit judiciallie ; in refpect that letteris war direct, fummonding him to
compeir befoir the Juftice in this judgement, and lies nocht comjDeirit, being
fummond to that effect ; and fpeciallie, his Depofitioun could nocht half bene
reffauit gif he had compeirit, becaus it wald half bene objectit contrair him, that
he and Margaret Montgomerie are brother-bairnes of the hous of Hefil-heid,"^
quhais dochter is allegit to half bene witchet, be ane fpeciall poynt of Dittay
gevin in aganis this pannell ; and fa, his extra-judiciall Confeffioun out of all
judgement, fubfcryuet be him without Witnes, could nocht be refpectit. — To the
quliilk the perfewaris anfueris, that this laft objectioun aucht to be repellit, in
refpect of the Teftimoniall producet, beiring Mr Alexander to be feik, fubfcryuit
be ane Minifter, quhilk excuifes his abfence : Quhilk Dejjofitioun is referrit to
the tryell of the Affyfe.

In refpect of the quhilkis Depofitiones and Verificationes producet to the perfones
of Inqueift, for thair forder informatioun of the pannellis giltines of the perticuler poyntis of Dittay aboue written, Proteftis for Wilfull Errour aganis thame,
gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The Affyfe, for the maift pairt, Fyles Margaret Wallace of
thefirji Article of Dittay,^ anent Cuthbert Greg, couper, and haill circumftances
thairof : And ftclyk, all in ane voce, ffyles hir of the J'ufirt poynt of Dittay, and
haill circumftances mentionet thairintill, anent the conliilting with vniq'" Crif-

^ Cut oft', &c. L.Vit. elidere. '^ The Montgomeries of Ilazellicad, a respectable family in Ayrsliire.
^ The Articles of Dittay of vvhicli the paiinel is found guilty, arc rehearsed at length at the coniinencement of the Trial, being the only part of the Dittay preserved at full length in the Record. The
rennainder of the points are pretty largely recapitulated in the preceding arguments, which are of great
importance, as they completely illustrate the state of the Law and practice on this extraordinary
subject. More freedom of discussion was permitted in this Trial, than in any of the previous cases of
a similar nature.

536 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

tiane Grahame, ane notorious Witclie, for cureing of liir felff of aiie fiuldane
difeafe, be taking the famyn of hir, and laying it vpone Alexander Vallange
bairne ; and tliaireftir cureing the faid bairne of the faid difeafe, in forme and
maner fpecifeit in the Dittay : And lykwayis, for the niaill pairt/ ffyles hir of
ihefyft poynt, anent the cureing of IMargaret Mure of the feiknes quhairwith
fcho was vifTeit, be Sorcerie and ^^''itchecraft, and confulting with Criftiane
Grahame for that effect, in maner contenit in the faid^y^/ Article : And in lyk
maner, all in ane voce, ffyles hir of the tent Article of Dittay, and liaill circumftances thairof, anent the feiknes laid vpone Alexander Boig his bairne, be
Sorcerie and Witchcraft, in maner fpecifeit in that Article : And lafl, all in ane
voce, ffyles hir of the generall poynt, as ane cowmoun confulter with Witches,
thir audit or nyne yeiris, namelie with vinq''' Criftiane Grahame, laitlie convict
and brunt for ane notorious Witche, and with Katharene Blair, and vther
^Vitclles, and feiken^ of help and refponfTis of tliame, alfweill for cureing of hir
felff of dyuerfe feikneffes, and cureing of hir ffreindis and acquentance, as for
inflicting of dyuerfe crewall difeifTis vpone dyuerfe perfones to quhome fcho buir
ony haitrent ; and diftructioune of tliame thairby, be devillrie, Incantatioun, and
Witchcraft, expreflie forbidden be the Lawis of Almychtie God, and municipall
Lawis of this realme. And Clanges hir of the haill remanent jjoyntis of
Dittay, and crymes thairin contenit.^

Sentence. The Juftice, be the mouth of James M'^cairtour,'* dempfter of
Court, Ordanit the faid Margaret Wallace to be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed^
and thair to be wirreit^ at ane ftaik to the deid ; and hir body tliaireftir to be
brunt in afches : And all hir moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

Mar. 27. — Mr Johnne Stewart of Dowellie, and Thomas Stewart,

his brother.

Dilaitit of airt and jiairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Johnne Low in Gairnetullie ;

coinmittit A'pone the xviij of Januar, 161-i yeiris.

Peusewauis, James Low, as brotlier; AndroLow, burges of Perthe, neir kynfman; Sir W. Oliphant.
Pkelocutouris in defence, Mr Lueis Stewart, Mr Robert Lermontli.

It is allegit that this matter can nocht pas to ane AfTyfe, in refpect thai half
obtenit his Maiefteis RemifTioun, vnder his hienes Greit Seil, quliilk thay vie
and produce, daitit the xxiiij day of Marche, I6l8 yeiris. — The Juftice ordanis
the pannell to find cautioun to fatisfie the pairties ; quha, togidder with James
Soutter of the Mylnetoun of Fornoclit, band and obleift thaine, &c.

^ ' By a plurality of voices,' as it was more recently expressed. ^ Seeking. ^ ' Johnne

Lawfounc, chanceller.' ^ Who appears for the first time in this office. ^ Strangled.

55&20JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS, 537

a^ntnrommuninri: bjitl) tDe iHar(25rt0cirs— ^Iautj:{)tci*— CijtCt—

Apr. 23. — JoHNNE Mom M'eane Cheue^ Chamroxe (Cameron), and
Duncane (Moir) M^eane Cliamrone, his brother.
Dilaitit of the crymes following, viz. The faid Johnne JMo'tr, ffor being in
cumpanie with vmq'® Allafter M^Gregour of Glenflra, Johnne Dow INFOregour,
his brother, and vtheris tliair kyn and freindis, togidder with the Clan-Chamrone and Clan-Auveroche, and vtheris brokin men and foirneris, to the number
of ffoure hundreth perfones, convocat in battell array, vpone the landis of
Glenfrune^ jDertening to the Laird of Lufe,^ in ffebruar, 1603 yeiris ; quhair
vmquhile Alexander Colquhoun of Lufe, accompaneit witli certane his freindis,
war convenit, at that tyme, be vertew of oure fouerane lordis Commiflioun, to
refift the faidis M^Gregouris cruell interi^ryfes and intentiones. And for
airt and pairt of the Iteilling and away-taking of fex hundreth ky and oxin,
audit hundreth fcheip and gait, fourtene fcoir horfe and meiris, with the haill
pleniffing, guidis and geir of the four-pund-land of Lufe, pertening to the
inhabitantis thairof. And ficlyk, the faid Duncane Moir M'eane Chamrone,
ffor being in companie with Robert Abroche,'* Johnne Dow INFallafter,^ and
vtheris thair complices, ane audit yeir fyne, or thairby,*' at the Slauchter of vniq'^
James Men5ies, brother to the Barrone of Comerie, and Burning of his hous ;^
and fa was airt and pairt of the faid flauchter, and burning of the faid hous.
To the taikin,** he lies confeffit that he paid tlire hundreth merkis to the
Barrone of Comerie and his freindis, in AfTythement^ of the Slauchter and
Burning ; as at lenth is contenit in the Dittay.^*'

Persewar, Sir Williarae Oliphant ; Johnne Colquhoun, indueller in Leyth, as informer.

The perfones on pannell, being enterit, declairit that nane of the freindis of
the Barone of Comerie could perfew thame for the Slauchter of James Men;eis ;
becaus thai had reflauit fatisfactioune for the Slauchter and Burning, fra Duncane. And the faid Johnne Moir confeffit his being at the ffeild of Glenfrune,
bot denyis that he did ony fkayth thairat.

^ John ' the large,' the son of vTohn of < the mouse colour.' ' See this Collection, II. 430, for

an account of the Battle of Glenfruin, &c. ^ Luss, on the banks of Loch-Lomond. * McGregor. Named Ahroche after his father Duncane, viz, ' of Lochaber.' '' It appears from tlic Records

of the Privy Council, that he was killed in February, IGll. ^ Robert Abroche received the Royal
pardon, previous to December, 161;^. '^ As the Menzieses were both interested and most

zealously active in furthering the cruel persecutions directed against the Clan-Ciregor, so they were
particularly obnoxious to the veng(?ance of that Clan. "* In testimony or token whereof.

^ That compensation shall thee nought avail,
Which erst necessity, not Justice gave;
Howe'er in others it be held sustainable —
But shall be quoted as sound proof of guilt,
And practical confession of thy crime. Afion.

'° The Dittay is not preserved on record.

VOL. IlL 3 Y

538 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

-The Juftice Ordanis the Dittay to pas to the knawlege of ane AflTyfe, &c. ,

ASSISA.

Johnne Naper of Kilmahew, George Nicoll, cuik in Ed", Vmphia Colquhoune, indueller in

Johnne Darleitli of that Ilk, James Mitcliell in Chapeltoun, the Caunogait,

Johnne Danielftoun of Dal- Johnne Williamfoun, thair, Willianie Buohantiane, thair,

quhenie, Willianie Govv in Urymmene, Adame Clerk, litfler in Edinburgli,

Mungo Buchannane in Tillie- Robert Moriefoun, burges of Patrik Colquhoun, alias Cowane,

chevin, Dumbartane, tail3eour in Edinburgh,

W'" Buntene in Auchinfoule, George Mitchel, ftaibler thair.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the
faidis Johnne and Duncane to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the crymes
7'cfpectiue aboue writtin. — Sentence. To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Ed"",
and thair, thair heidis to be ftrukin fra thair bodeyis ; and thair guidis to be
efcheit and inbrocht to his Maielleis vfe, &c.

Jun. 22. — Andro Trumble in Belfches, Robert Ker in Bewlie, James
5ouiig in Belfches, and Dauid Tnimble in Luftruthir.
Dilaitit of Suborning of Witneffes, and for beiring of ffalfe-witnelTing.
My lord Aduocat producet the Dittay, with ane Warrand direct to the Juftice
be the Lordis of Seftioun, for putting the pannell to the tryell of ane Aflyfe, for
the crymes fpecifeit in thair Dittay.^

ASSISA.

Gilbert Ker of Lochtour, Willianie Ker of Lyntoun, Johnne Glendonyng of Drumrafche,
George Kincaid, niercheand in Edinburgh, JNIr Thomas Ker, fone to the Guidman of Yair.^

My lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fueiring of the Affyfe ; and for
verificatioun of the Dittay, producet the Depofitiones maid in prefens of the
Lordis of SefTioun, fubfcryuit be my Lord of Melrois,^ in irrcjentia JDominoram ;
And alfo, producet ane Decreit of the faidis Lordis, vnder the fubfcriptioun of
Mr Thomas Hay, clerk, daitit the xxij of Junij inftant, ffinding and declairing
the faid Andro Trumble to be a periured and ffals man, and ane corrupter and
Ibducer of WitnefTes to depone ffalflie ; and alfo, ffinding the faidis Robert Ker,
James 5onng, and Dauid Trumble, Witnelfes foirfaidis, feducet be the faid
Andro, to be in lyk maner perjuret and ffalfe \Mtne(res ; in refpect, thay firlt
declairit be thair folemne aithes, that thai war nawayis feducet, be the faid Andro
Trumble, to beir ffals witnes in his caufe of Spuil5ie, perfewit be him aganis
Willianie and Walter Mydilmeftis ; and thaireftir, being mair ftraitlie and
narro wlie examinat, confeftit the verritie of the faid feductioun, and the ffalfet of
thair Depofitiones. And vpone the productioun thairof, afkit inftrumentis, and

' The Dittays are so extremely prolix and uninteresting, tliat it has not been deemed necessary to
insert them here. " The rest burgesses. ^ Sir Tliomas liammilton of Binning, &c. afterwards

Earl of Hadington, Lord President of the College of Justice, &c. one of the greatest men of his time ,

55 & 20 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 539

proteltit for Wilfull Erroiir aganis the faidis perfones of AlTyfe, gif thay acquit ;
fpeciallie, in refpect of the paunellis offering thanie in his Maiefleis will for the
faid crymes.

Verdict. The Affyfe, all in ane voce, be the repoirt of Nicoll Ed5er,
mercheand burges of Edinburghe, Chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit
the faidis Andro, Robert, James and Dauid, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict. —
Sentence. The faidis Andro Trumhle, Rohert Ker, imi\. James ooioig, to be
tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburgh, and thair to be Hangit quhill thai be deid ;
and thair haill moveabill guidis to be efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe. — And the faid
Dauid Trumhle to be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburghe, and thair his
toung to be pearcet with ane hett boitkyn ; and thaireftir Banifchet this realme,
and nocht (thaireftir) to be fund thairintill, vnder the pane of deid.

Assisoiis Jified for behiff ahfent.
Sir Williame M^Dougall of M'cairftoun, Sir Jolinne Scott of Newburgb, Raulf Ker, bail^ie
of Lauder, Sir Robert Scott of Thirlflane, Williame Jobnneftoun of Lockerbie, Williame Bortliuik,
elder of Johnnftoun-bunie, Sir Archibald Murray of Blakbarrony, Mr Jolinne Home of Swanfclieill,
James Fairbairne of Wefl Gordoune, Johnne Elphingfloun of Scbank, Alexander Cranftoun of Moriefloun, Johnne Cranftoun of Thornydykis, Sir Robert Scott of Hayneing, Dauid Vaufe of Blaufe,
Williame Home of Hardeifmylne, Williame Bennet, feruitour to the Erie of Roxburgh, Johnne
Symontoun, younger, of that Ilk, Gilbert Ellote of Stobis, Robert Logane, ffiear of Bonny toun, Mr
Johnne Ker, clerk of Selkirk, Adame Gairdin, mercheand, — and twelve others, mercheands, — ' ilk
ane of thame, for thair nocht compcirance, to pas vpone the faid Affj fe, war vnlauit in the pane of
ane hundieth merkis.'

Caluittr raptibe— ^fourging— ^IciugDttv, kt.

Jun. 26. — Sir Williame Keyth of Ludquhairne, kny', and Hew
Charteris, his fervand.
Dilaitit for allegit airt and pairt of the Taking and Apprehending of Alexander Pedder, niyller at the niylne of Feachfeild, vnder nycht, furtli cf his
duelling hous, mother-naikit as he was borne ; and for cayreing him, as ane
captiue and prillbner, to the Place of Feachfeild, and brekiiig vp of the 5ettis
and durris of the faid place ; fcurgeing him with fuord-beltis and horle-brydillis
vp and doun the hall thairof, to the effufioun of his bluid. And ficlyk, for
allegit Eiirt and pairt of the daith and Slauchter of vmq'" Andro Frafer, ane young
infant bairU'C, fone to Andro Frafer, younger of IVJukallis : And for contravening the Actis of Parliament, in beiring and weiring of hagbutis and pilloiettis

Persewaris, Andro Frafer, younger of Mukallis, as father ; Alexander Pedder, myllcr ; Sir Williame

Oliphant of Newtoun, kiiy', Aduocat to our fuuerane lord, fur his hienes entreis.

Prelocutouris in defence, Mr Thomas Hoip, Mr Roger Mowat.

Compeirit the faid Sir Williame and his fervand, togiddor with tlie faid prelocutouris, and exponet and declairit, that thai war inforniet, Criminall Letteris

540 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1622.

war dli-ect out aganis tliame, vpone threfcoir dayis wairning, at the inflance of
Andro Frafer, &c. cliargeing tliame and certane vtheris^ to find cautioun for
thair perfonall compeirance this day and place, in the hour of cans, to vnderly the
law for the above allegit crymes : For obedience of the quhilk charge of Hoirning, and tryell of thair innocencie of the faidis allegit crymes, the faid Sir
Williame Keyth, and Hew Chairteris, compeirit and ofFerit tliame felffis of the
Law, as altogidder innocent thairof. And in refpect na pairtie compeiris to
infift in thair perfiite, being oft tymes callit to that effect, proteftit for thair
cautiouneris relief, and that thai, na nane of tliame on nawayis fould be callit or
perfewit for the faidis allegit crymes, in ony tyme cuming ; and thairupoun aikit
iuftrumentis.

Johnne Forbes, eldeil fone and aj^peirand air to Mr Duncane Forbes of
Bannagafk, as cautioner and fouertie, for repoirting the above Letteris, deulie
execute and indorfate, and perfute thairof, &c., vnlawit vnder the panes following, viz. vpone the faid Sir Williame Keyth, and Nathaniell Keyth of Coklaw,
ilk ane of tliame vnder the pane of v" merkis ; and vpone ilk ane of the remanent
defenderis, in the pane of ane hundreth merkis.

I^oust-ljri'alunci:— C|)tft

Jul. 3. — Andro Rutherfurd, fumtyme fervand to Mr James M'^Gill
of Cranftoun.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the breking of the faid Mr James M''gillis Place
of Cranftoun, and breking vp of ane kift," within the ^Voman-llous^ thairof,
pertening to Malie Newlandis, and fteilling xxx li. furtli thairof; corninittit in
Maij laft.

The pannell ofFerit him felff in the Kingis Maieftie and the Laird of Cranftones will, for the faid cryme : Quhairvpone, the Juftice ordanit him, of his awin
confent, to be Banifchet the parochin of Cranftoune ; and at na tyme heirefter to
be fund thairintill, vnder the pane of deid. And ordanit him to find cautioun
for his compeirance vpone fyftene dayis wairning, to vnderly the law for the
faid cryme, gif in ony tyme cuming he beis fund within the faid i^arochin ; quha
fund Thomas Rutherfurd in Borthiuk-manes cautioun for that effect.

;ffivt=vnm\xQ—M^\nQ\)tti\

Jul. 24. — Donald M'^Angus of Glengarie.

^ There were ' Nathaniell Keyth of Coklaw, Williame Keyth, fone to Alex. Keyth of Bodome,
Robert Marfchell, Gilbert Wairdene, Gilbert Hucheoun, and Alexander Forbes, all feruitouris to
the faid Sir Williame ; Johnne Keyth, fone to Alex. Keyth, vncle to the faid Sir Williame, George
Keyth, callit Caithnes, George Johnne Dow M'farlane, Alexander Fordyce, and Thomas Murray,
feniitouris to the faid Nathaniell Keyth, vncle to the faid Sir Williame.' ^ Chest. ^ Px-obably that part of the Offices of Cranstouu, where the female domestics resided.

56 & 20 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 541

Dilaitit of the treflbnable Raifing of ffyre, Burning of xxvij Houfles, with the
inficht being thairin, pertening to Mr Johnne M''Ken3ie, Archedeane of Rofs ;
and Slauchter of dyiierfe his tennentis.

Persewar, Mr Johnne M'"Ken5ie, Archedene of Rofs.

The perfewar paffis fra the pannellis perfute ^j/*o loco et tempore, for the
crymes contenit in the Letteris.

The pannell offeris him felff to the tryell of the law for the faidis crymes, as
altogidder innocent ; and difaffentis to the faid continiiatioun. And for obedience
of the Juflice ordinance, ffand Sir Donald Gorme of Slait, kny*, perfonallie prefent, cautione for his entrie, to the effect foirfaid.

aatstttiitfl of a Stsuit-Pritst

Aug. 6. — Andro Hathowie, burges of Glefgow, and Jonet Pollok, his

fpous.

Dilaitit of the treffonabill Recept of George Mortimer, ane Jefuite Preift, &c.^

Verdict. The Affyfe, be pluralitie of voittis, be the repoirt and declaratioun

of George Moore of Powmadie, chanceller, ffand the faidis Andro and Jonet to

be fFylet, culpable, and convict, &c. — Sentence. The Juflice, conforme to ane

Warrand of the Lordis of his Maiefleis Secreit Counfall, decernis and ordanis

the faidis Andro and Jonet to be Banifchet furth of this kinp'dome of Scotland.

during all the dayis of thair lyftymes : And to be committit to waird, thairin to

remane, quhill cautioun be fund to the Proveifl and Bailleis of Glefgow, for

obedience of the faid dome, and thair nocht returning agane ; vnder lie panes, as

fall be fet doun be the faidis Proveift and Bailleis, in thair Act to be maid

thairupoun.

[ilfr 'Robert Fmrl'ie, Jifjlice-Depute.']

Sep. 20. — Henrie Kynloche, fumtyme poft-maifler, indueller in the

Cannogait.

Dilaitit of the thiftious fteilling of ane blak cloik, lynet throw with blak

veluet, ane grograne tafiitie cloik, lynet with figuret fatene, and tua pair filk

fchankis, pertening to Alexander Lord of Kildrymmie, furth of his Place, at the

bak of the Palice of Halyruidhous ; committit in November 1621 lallbypaft.

The pannell confeffis the cryme fpecifeit in his Dittay, with all humilitie :
Seing the guidis llowin ar reltorit to the rychteous owner thairof, offeris him
felff in the Kingis Maieflie and his liienes Counfellis will, for the faid cryme.
Wakrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall .
Apud Halyrudhous, decimo quinto menjis Maij, 1622. FoRSAisfEKiLi, as Ilenrie Kinloclie,
fumtyme poft-maifler in the Cannogait, being tane and put in waird, within the Tolbuthe of the Canno-
' The Dittay, which is recorded at length, is similar to those already reported.

542 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1623.

gait, quhairin he prefentlie retnanls, ffor certane poyntis of Thift committit be him : OflF the quhilkis,
neceflar it is that he be tryed, and that fome pwneifchment be inflictit vpone him, to the teiTOur of
vtheris to offend in the lyk lieireftir. Thairfoir, the Loidis of Secreit Counfall Ordanis his Maiefteis
Juftice, Juflice-clark, and thair deputis, to appoint ane Juflice Court to be haldin in the Tolbuthe of
Edinburghe, at fuche ane day as thay fall think expedient ; and to cans the faid Henrie to be exhibeit
and producet befoir thame ; and thair to accufe him of the faid cryme of Thift, accoirding to the perticnler Dittay, that fall be gevin in aganis him. And Ordanis his Maiefteis Aduocat to infift in the
perfute of him ; and gif the faid Henrie fall confes tlie faid cryme, and become in his Maiefteis will
for the fame, that than thay pronunce dome and fentence aganis him, ordaning him to be Banift the
realmes of Scotland and Ingland, and nevir to returne agane within the famyn during his lyftyme,
vnder the pane of deid, Extractum, 8cc. Jacobus Prymrois.

Sentence was pronounced in conformity to tliis Warrant.

*Bnpt tiiiti 3ttnbi!sf)in0'— (dTorrifilc Sllitjurtion)— ^trultn;t)»

[The following brief notice of an ancient Crim. con. Case, affords a specimen of the mode in which
affairs of gallantry were managed in the Western Islands and Highlands of Scotland. Sir LauchLAN M^FiNGANE (MacKinxon) of Stratliardill, having fallen in fancy with Mary M'^ Cainiell (^MacDonald), the wife of Ranald of Benbecula, makes the best use of his winning arts, and carries off the
lady, by violence, from her husband. It would appear, from the charge of Adultery being also preferred
aeainst this kniglit eiTant, that the consent of the lady had in all probability been previously obtained to
tlie arrangement. Ranald M'^ Allan V'.Ean, the injured husband, was brother to Donald 31'^ Allan
M'^Ean, Captain of Clanranald, and grandfather of Donald MacDonald of Benbecula, who"
became Captain of Clanranald, anno 172.5. This gay and captivating deceiver, Sir Lauchlan, was one
of several Hebridian Chiefs, who had been knighted by King James VI, in the latter part of his
reign, to ensure their more ready acquiescence in the schemes so zealously projected by him, for the
civilization of their semi- barbarous tribes. A Gift of his Escheat was granted by the King, Dec. 12,
10-22.'

The Editor begs to refer the reader to the forthcoming work of Mr Gregory, already alluded to,
for more copious illustrations of matters connected with the Hebrides and West Highlands.]

Nov. 8. — SirLauchlane MTixgane of Stratbardill, kny*.

Dilaitit of the Rapt and Raveifclieing of Marie jVrconneill, filter to Sir Donald
IVrconneill of Slait, and fpoufe to Rannald ]\rallane Veane of Cafteiyvirrie ;'^
committing Adulterie with liir, and remanent crymes contenit in the Letteris.

James Logie, wryter, producet the Letteris deulie execute, indorfate, and
regiftrat ; quhairby the faid Sir Lauchlane is denuncet rebell, and put to the
home, for nocht finding of cautioun, to haif compeirit to haif vnderlyne the law.

Mar. 12, 1623. — Wili.iame Oliphant of Gafk, and Alexander Flemyng of Monnefs.^
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmquhile Dauid Tofchcoch of
Mouyvaird.*

' See Record of the Privy Seal tirnX History of the Macdonalds. * Castletirrim. ^ Peter

Oliphant of Rescohie, and Johiine Erie of Wiutcun, cautioners for tlie pannels' entry. * See Jul.

29, IG18, &c.

56 & 20 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 543

Compeirit Mr James Campbell, fone to the Laird of Laweris, for him felff, and
in name and behalf of the remanent kyn and freindis' of the faid vmq'^ Dauid,
and in name of Annas Grahame, Lady Mony vaird, and pall fra the faid Williame
01ii)hant of Gafk his perfute, p?o loco et tempore.

Compeirit perfonallie, Mr Jolinne Oliphant, as procuratour for Williame Oliphant of Gaflc, and producet ane Warrand and delyuerance of the Lordis of
Secreit Counfall, commanding the Juftice to defert the dyet appointit this day
for the faid Williame Oliphant ; quhairof the tennour followis.
Warrand of the Secret CounfeU, concerning WiUkime Oliphant of GaJh,for MoTiyvairdis Slattchter.

My Lordis of Secreit Counsall, vnto 50ur ll.^ humble nieanis and fchawis, I, 30ur feruitour,
Williame Oliphant of Gajk : That quliair, I am charget to compeir befoir liis Maiefteis Juftice, in
the Tolbuth of Edinbm-ghe, vpone ])e xij day of Marclie inftant, to vuderly the Law for the Slauchter
of vmq^^ Dauid Tofcheoche of Monyvaird, and vtheris crymes fpecifeit in tlie Letteris raifed thairupoun. Lyk as, ]ie Juftice intendis to proceid aganis me in that matter, albeit it be of venitie tliat
HIS Maiestie, being treulie infonnet of the forme and maner how that vnhappie Slauchter fell out,
and how that dyuerfe come to ])e flFray quho war bothe ignorant and innocent of the Slauchter, and
wald haif bene lothe to half bene actoris tiiairin, or to haif medlit thairwith ; his Maiestie was ]iairupoun graciouflie pleifit, by his Letteris writtin and direct to 50ur Lo., to recommend to ^our Lo. the
fettling of that ffeid^ by fome amicabill and freindlie dreffe, and by making of fuche Affythemcnt^ and
fatisfactioun, as convenientlie may be performed : And in the meane tyme, it was his Maiedeis expres
will, and fpeciall command, and directioun vnto -^our 11., that all proces Criminall and Ciuill aganis me,
for thatcaus, fould reft and ceis, till fome generall courfe war concludit vpone and tane in that matter :
As his Maiefteis Letter, exhibeit vnto 5our 11. in the fex hundreth and nyntene 5eir of God beiris.
AccoiRDiNG quhairvnto, jour Lo. hes nocht onlie gevin Warrand to defert findrie dyettis, quhilkis
formerlie war appointit for my tryell in this matter, hot with that 50ur 11. tooke verrie grit panes, in
tua or thre feuerall dyetis, to haif fetled this ffeid, and caufed wairne ane grit number of Jlonyvairdis
Ipeciall freindis to that effect : And at })ir dyettis jour 11. caufit fatisfactioun to be maid to Duncane
Campbell and Dauid Malloche, who war bothe deidlie hurte and woundit at the flauchter of Monyvaird, the on haiveing his hand cut aff, and |)e vther being deidlie woundit in the heid ; hot anent ])e
fatisfactioun for 3Io?iyvaird is Slauchter, whairin thair was verrie honorable Offeris maid ; the fame was
caflin af, be refone of Young Monyvairdis minoritie, his ffreindis in the mean tyme refuifing to medle
pairin, or to tak burding for him ; fua that ]'e nocht fetling of this bulilnes proceidis nocht frome the
default or vnwillingnes of the offenderis, quho in heart and atfectioun wold do mair nor goodlie thay
may in ]iat matter, hot frome the refuifall of 3Ionyvairdis freindis to deale thairin, during his minoritie.
In confideratioun quhairof, I man^ maift humlie befeik sour 11. to geve command to ]ie Juftice, Juftice
clerk, and ))air deputtis to defert })e faid dyet, and to defift and ceile fra all preceding aganis me or my
cautioneris }>airintill ; difchargeing thame ])airof, and of ]>air offices in that pairt, till Ibme generall
courfe be takin for ])e finall fettling of that ffead. And jour 11. anfuer. (ftbllowis ])e delyuerance on
the bak })airof.)

Apud Edinburghe, xj Marcij, 1G23. Fiat iitpctitur,

Geo. Cancell". Mar. Moirtoun. Wigtoun. Roxburgh. Melrois.
Lauderdaill. R. Cokburne. All. Uammiltoun. J. Prv.mhoi.s.

The Juftice, for obedience of the faid Warrand, and command ihairiu, Ordanit

' Blood-relations. '■' Lordshi])s. ' Feud. * Compensation or solatium paid to the

deceased's nearest of kin, on account of being deprived of their rclutioii. * Must.

54.4 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A,D. 1623.

the faid dyet to desert agaiiis the faid WiUiame Ollpliant : And of confent
of the faid Mr James Campbell, coiitinewis the dyet aganis Alexander Flemyng
ofMonnefs, to ane fyftene dayis wairning; and cautioun to be fund be him for
his entrie to that effect.

Johnne Erie of Wigtoun of new becomes cautioun for the faid Alexander, to
enter him befoir his Maiefteis Juftice or his deputis, the tlirid day of the nixt
Juftice-air of the fcherefdome quhair he duellis, (Perthe,) or foner, vpone xv
dayis wairning, &c.

Jun. 4. — Thomas Gowdie, mercheand, burges of Dumfreis.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq^^ Harbert M'kie, younger,
in Dumfreis ; committit vpone the laft day of December laftbypaft ; be geving
to the faid vmq'*' Harbert M'^kie, at the Brig-end of Dumfreis, of ane grit and
deidlie llraik, with his fute, in the faid vmq^" Harbert his fecreit pairtis ; ane
vther, at the left pape, vpone the heart ; and ane thrid, on his left fchoulder,
quhairby his fchoulder-bayne was ftrukin out of joynt : Off the quhilkis flraikis
he nevir convalelTet, hot being inftantlie borne liame to his hous, tuik bed ;
quhairin he lay bedfafl, in grit doUour and payne, of the faidis hurtis, vnderthe
cure of chirurganes, be the fpace of tuentie dayis thaireftir ; and, in end, vpone
the xxvj of Januar thaireftir, now bypaft, he deceifiit of the faidis hurtis and

woundis.

Persevvaris. Prelocutour Prelocutouris

Katharene Ed^er, relict ; for tlie perfewaris. in defence.

Agnes Maxwall, mother ; Johnne Maxwall of Mr Lueis Stewart,

Eduard and Johnne INPkie, his Conhaithe. Mr Thomas Nicolfoun,

tua brether. younger, Advocattis.

The pannell, eftir reiding of the Dittay, to informe the Juftice of the fecreit
proceidingis of thir perfewaris, and how maliciouilie thai proceid aganis him,
declairis, that thair was nevir querrell nor difcoird betuix him and vmq^^ Harbert M^kie, for quhais flauchter he is wranguflie and injuftlie perfewit ; bot as
the treuth is, ane contra verfie falling out betuix ane Thomas Craik and the
pannell, in craveing of ane fowme of money addetit be Craik to him, and fmn
woirdis and dry cuffis^ being gevin be ather of thame to vther, the Bail5ie of the
Regalitie of Lyncluden, viz. Johnne Maxwall, brother to Kirkconnell, within
quhais Regalitie the contraverfie fell out, for putting the pairteis to quyetnes,
commandit thame to waird, quliill cautioun war fund for keiping his Maiefteis
peace ; quhairvpone, the faid vmq'° Harbert IVrkie, with ane number that aiTiftit
him, laid liandis vpone the pannell, brocht him, with grit violence, to the Waird-
* Dry blows, i. e. upon which no blood had followed ; fisty-cuffs.

56 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 545

hous, jjat him in the ftokis ; and becaus the buittis that was than vpone his
legis wald nocht, convenientlie, be ftowit and placet within the lioillis of the
ftokis, thai maid infolentlie ftrak him vpone his bak, dnngdonn the over^ bar of
the ftokis, and dancet thairupoun with thair feit and kneyis, as alfo vpone his
breift and bellie, quhairthrow he was ahnoft confoundit in that painful agony.
And quhair, in the Dittay, it is allegit, that thair wes ftraikis gevin to the laid
vmq^^ Harbert, quhairof he deceiffit ; the verritie thairof is, that ane yeir or
thairby, of befoir, he being ftrukin in at the left pape be ane Ahannay, with ane
durk, a fevin inches or thairby, with grit difficultie was than curet, bot never
fullilie convaleflit ; fua that the corruptioun" gaddering witliin the wound, raifit
vpone him ane new fever, quhairof he deceiffit; as is ftifficientlie knawin to the
haill countrey. Lyk as, it was declairit be the laid vmq'" Harbert to dyuerfe
inhabitantis of the faid burgh of Dumfreis, that, lang befoir that contraverfie of
the pannellis, he was ftrukin in the fecreit pairtis, quhilk he ever declairit
would be his deid. And fa, the premifTes being coniidderit, the faid perfute is
maift wranguflie inventit, and vpone greid of geir to be obtenit of this pannell be
thir fchameles perfewaris ; and, vnder cuUour of juftice, thay half followit furth
this perfute aganis him, albeit the defunct him felf, in prefens of his chirurgane
and vtheris, cleirlie abfoluit and fred the pannell of all perfute done to him. —
Quhilk being premittit,^ for informatioun, it is allegit be the pannell and his preloeutouris,that this Dittay can nocht pas to ane Affyfe, becaus the faid vniq'*" Harbert
M'^kie, the perfone allegit flane, the tyme lybellit of his flauchter, was rebell and
at his Maiefteis home, for ane criminall caufe, viz. ffor nocht compeirance befoir
his Maiefteis Commiffioneris within the Tolbuthe of Jedburgh, vpone the tuentie
fevint day of Apryle, I'^.Vj^ and nyntene yeiris, in ane Juftice court, haldin be
thame the faidis day and place, to hair vnderlyne the law for beiring and weiring
of hagbuttis and piftolettis, and contravening the Actis of Parliament maid thairanent. And for verificatioun thairof, producet the Letteris of Hoirning, «Sjc.

Continued to the thrid day of the nixt Juftice-air of Dumfreis, &c. — The faid
Thomas Goudie, defender, be liis aitlie gevin, declairit that he dred^ bpdelie
harme of the faid Eduard M'^kie, ane of his perfewaris ; and thairfoir defyret
cautioun and lauborreis of him, conforme to the ordour, vnder fic pane as his
lordfchip fould pleis modifie. Jolmne Max\vall of Conhaithe become fouertie,
&c., vnder the pane of ffyve hundreth merkis money, folt'ea qiioties.

^\ti\\ts,\)itx of tijoo iHardTarlants— 3Sarl)aroui3 rorturr antr saliaijc
JHurtrtr i3f a Bur!)anait ibij some of t\)t Clan iHaMfaiianr,

[In the whole range of the Criminal Records of this country, remarkable though' they unquestion-

' Upper. * Purulent or corrupted matter. ' rreuiiscd. * Dreaded.

VOL. III. 3 Z

546 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1623.

ably are, the Editor believes it would be difficult to point out a Case possessing incidents of such
varied and frightful interest, as those brought forward, so prominently, in the following Trial. It is not
his intention, in this place, to recapitulate the leading facts of the present truly horrible Case. He has
not been able to throw much additional light upon the facts recorded in the Books of Adjournal from
contemporary documents. All that he at present deems worthy of remark is, that tradilion has preserved pretty accurate outlines of the general features of this ' Romance of real life* in the district
where they occurred — an additional proof, were such requisite, of the fidelity with which historical
and extraordinary events are handed down, from father to son, in the Highlands of Scotland.

The oidy Paper which the Editor has discovered, illustrative of the other side of the question, is the
* Supplication,' preserved among the Warrants of Puivy Council, which is appended to this Trial.
That document is given here as an act of common fairness to the Clan MacFarlane. The reader
is left to draw his own conclusions as to the relative demerits and guilt of the several parties.]

Jun. 6. — George Buchanane, in Gartincaber; Jolmne B., his fone ;

Patrik B., fone to George B. of Arcliinar (Auchmar) ; Patrik

IVrwreift, his fervand ; Johnne Beg Biichannane, in Ballindewar; Johnne B., his fone; Johnne Keir, in Gartnahinch ;^

Thomas Buchannane, in Drongie ; and Archibald B., his

brother.

Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ Duncane ]\rfarlane, fone

to Andro Moir ^rfarlane, in VonefTene ; committit vpone the faxt day of Apryle

laft, within the toun of Kippienoche, in Drummond, in the Lennox.

Persewaris. Prelocutouris Prelocutouris

Robert and Thomas M^farlane, for the perfewaris. for the pannell.

as brether ; The Young Laird of M'failane ; Alexander Douglas of Maynes ;

Sir Williame Oliphant, kny*. ^Ir Dauid Pryrarois. jNIr Robert Nairne.

Conipeirit the faid Robert MTarlane, &c., and producet the criminal letteris,
deulie execute and indorfate, vpone the haill perfones defenderis aboue writtin ;
and offerit thame felffis reddie to perfew the defenderis for the faid cryme, and
defyret proces.

The faid Alexander Douglas of Maynes, cautioner for the entrie of the haill
defenderis, with ]\Ir Robert Nairne, Aduocat, producet ane Warrand and command to the Jullice, proceiding vpone the following

SUPPLICATIOUN, gevin into the Lorclis of Secreit Counfall, he the foirfaidis
haill defenderis^ and in thair names.
My Lordis of Secreit Counsall, vnto 5our Lo. humlie meanis and
fchawis We, 5our feruitouris, Patrik Buchannane, appeirand of Auchmar ;
George Buchannane, in Gartincabir ; Johnne Buchannane, his fone ; Johnne
Buchannane, in Ballindorne ; Johnne Buchannane, his fone ; Thomas Buchannane, fone to vmq'^ Williame Buchannane, in Blairneborg ; Archibald Buchannane, his bro]?er ; Donald Keir, in Gartnahinche ; and M'caula, ferui-

' Perhaps for Gartranich, or Gartrahnich.

56 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 54^

tour to the faid Patrik Biichannane : That qiiliair, the faxt day of Jimij inftant
is appoiiitit viito ws for our comjieirance befoir the Juftice or his deputtis, in the
Tolbuth of Edin^ to vnderly the law for the Slauchter of vinq''' Duncane
IVrfarlane, fone to vmq'® Andro Moir INFfarlane, in Kipnoche : Lyk as, the
Juftice intendis to proceid aganis ws in the faid matter, althoght it be of verritie,
that g'if 5our 11. war informed of J?e certane treuth of this buffines, how and
vpone quhat grand and occalioun the Slauchter fell out, and quhat juft caus of
wraith and difpleafour was gevin to vs thairin, we perfuaid our felffis that 50ur
lo., in honnour and juftice, wald nocht think this perfute to mereit ony fauour :
For the treuth is, that pe faid vmq''' Andro Moir M'^farlane^ quho, during the
whole courfe of his vnhappie lyfe, was knowin to be ane notorious theif and
lymmer, haifing ftowin fum goodis frome certane of his Maiefteis guid fubiectis
in THE Lennox, fome foure or fyve 3eiris fince, or ])airby ; and ])e laid vmq'^
WiUiame Biichannane, out of his trew haitrent and deteftatioun of luche the-^
vifche doingis, haifing maid fome inquierie, and having tane jjanes and travell
to fpeir out and try the goodis, in end, he tryed the goodis to be ftowin be the
faid vmq'® Andro 3Ioir M'farlane, who, by courfe of Juftice, was conftraned to
mak redres and fatisfactioune for the fame : And the faid vmq'^ Andro, haifing
confauet ane deidlie haitrent and malice aganis f)e faid vmq'* Wd/'iame for
fpeiring^ of thir goodis, he refolued, out of the pryde and malice of his wikked
heart, to be revenged vpone him, eftir Jje moft deteftable and crewall maner tliat
the heart of him could devyfe : And knowing that the Gentilman was accuftomed at fome tymes, for his recreatioune and paftyme, to go to J)e hunting, in
]>Q Mure aboue the Ducher, he maid chofe and took hold of that occaftoun to
do his turne ; and haueing, be fome previe moyane, bene maid acquentit with
\>Q Gentilmannis dyet for his j^aftyme, he, accumpaneit with his tuo foncs, and
fewin or audit vtheris lawles lymmaris,^ come to the faid Mure, and lay at await
for the Gentilman ; and howfone he come ])air, about audit of J?e cloke in J)e
moirning, without ony company bot foure hunting doggis, thay layed hand is
vpone him and band him faft, that he inycht not fteir ; and haifing confultit
amang tliame felfis, eftir quhat forme and maner thay fould difpatdie him, thay
refolued, in end, that his prefumptioune and malai:)eartnes to fpeir out J)e faidis
goodis deferued ane extraordiner deathe, by torture ; qiihilk tliay maid him to
vnderly, the fpace of ten houris, in maner following, to wit : Thay band him faft
to ane trie, at the laid hour of audit in the moirning ; and everie hour thairet'tir,
till fax at niclit, quhilk maid vp ten houris, thay gaif him thre crewall ftraikis
with ane durk, in fuche pairtis of his body as war nocht to bring prefent daithe ;
and haifing this way inaggillit him m ith threttie ftraikis, till })e full number of

' Enquiring ; searching after. '^ Thieves ; worthless characters.

548 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 162.^.

ten houris war outrwn, tliay than gaif him pe laft deidlie ftraik, at the heart ;
quhairwith lie fell deid to the ground ! And haifing tirred^ him naiked, becaiis
his towng was the inftrument quhairby, as thay alleged, he offendit, in fpeiring
out of ])e former Itowin goodis, tliay cuttit his throte, tooke his toung out of his
heid, flew his foure dogis, cuttit ane of thair toungis out, and pat it in the Gentilman his mouthe ; and pat his toung in the dogis mouthe : And nocht content
lieirwith, hot the forther to fatisfie ])air inhuman and barbarous crewaltie vjione
the naked corpis, thay flitt vp his bellie, tooke out his whole intrallis, and pat
thame in ane of the dogis belleis, eftir thay had opnit the dogis bellie and tane
out his intrallis, quhilkis thay pat in ])e Gentilmannis bellie : And fo left him
l}^and naked, and the foure deid dogis aboiie him ; qiihair he lay aboue the eard
the fpace of audit dayis thaireftir, or" he was found : FoR the quhilk deteftabill
boutcherie and Murthour, thir lymmeris being callit to thair tryell, befoir his
Maiefteis Juftice, thay tuik the cryme vpone thame, and pall to the home ;
quhairat the faid Anclro remainit till ])e hour of his deathe, and the reft of his
complices remanis J?airat as 5it : Aganis quhome 5our Lo. paft ane ampill Cominiffioun, for ]?e perfute of thame with ffyre and fuord. And quhair as, this
deteftable and moir than barbarous Murthour fould haif bred, in the heart and
confcience of thois lymmeris, fome remorfe and fealling of this fyn, and ane
abftinance and forbearance frome all forder impietie, 5it pe faid Anclro continewit in his accuflomet thevifche trade of Thift, ReafFe, and Oppreffioun, and
could nevir be reclamed Jjairfra, till the hour of his deathe : And, for his laft
Thift, he, a littill befoir his deathe, ftaw an ox fra me, the faid George Bucliannane, and cayreid the famyn to ane Houfein ^ quhair he and his

wyfe hes thair ordiner reffett ; and how-fone we vnderftuid of the fteilling of
the ox, we followed the tred^ directlie toward the faid houfe ; and haifing fend
for the Erie of Pearfh^ his Officer, to afTift ws in rypeing*^ of the HoufTes J)airabout, the lymmar and his faid fone, being in the Houfe foirfaid, and }?air guiltie
confcience flanding vp aganis thame, as ane burreaw'^ to tak vengence of thame,
thay difguifet f)ame felffis in weamenis apparell, and preift" to flie away ; whilk
being perfaued be ws, and we thinking that, thay keipit nocht J)e ordiner paife
of wemen, and 3itt nawayis fufpecting that thay war the lymmaris, we foUowit,
in a foft pace, to remark quhat courfe thay held ; and the faid Duncane M'farlane, luiking over his fchoulder, and feing ws follow, he turnes about, and prefentit ane lang hagbute at ws ; quhilk being fyred, by the Prouidence of God,
mifgaue : And with that, he and his father drew }>air fuordis, and come dryveand

* Violently stripped, by tearing off the clothes. ^ £j.g . before. ^ Left blank. * Tread ;

foot-marks — probably by means of the sleuth-hound, or blood-hound. ^ As Lord of the Regality,

wliose Bailie would, upon application, grant warrant to search, &c. ^ Searching. "^ Fr. hourreaU^
a hangman ; an executioner. ' Pressed ; made every effort.

56 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 549

vjoone ws with all ])air force ; and or evir we preift to perfew thame, tliay gaif
me, the faid George, ane deidlie ftraik, whairat thay flrak me deid^ to the grund,
and in the opinioun of the reft of my companie I was a deid man ; and thay
hurt and woundit vther thre of ws : And fua, we finding no longer tyme, with
furetie, to be beholdaris and fufferaris, we tuik ws to our juft and lauchfull
defence, quhairin the vnhappie lymmer was worth ielie flane, and his fone, who
vnhappielie was in companie with him, and who maid the firft onfet with his
hacquebut or euir we knew quhat he was, was lykwayis killed ; the fader being
rebell and at the home for pe Murthour foirfaid, and he and his quhole bairnis
being pe moft notorious lymmeris of that Clan. And howeuir it may be obiectit,
for Ipe pairt of pe young man, that he was noclit accelTour to pe Murthour foirfaid, and that he fould nocht be pwneift for his fatheris deid, it is of treuth that
continewallie fen pe fader was rebell for the Murthour foirfaid, the faid Duncane,
his fone, remanit and attendit vpone him, was airt and pairt with him in all his
thevifche and wicked deidis ; and in affifting and taking pairt with his fader
aganis ws, in our juft and lauchfull defence, was flane : At quhofe lyke-walk,
that nycht, the ox foirfaid, ftowin be pe fader and pe fone, was flane and eittin.

This being the trew and Ample difcourfe of all that hes paft in this buffines.
We humblie prefent the famyn to 5our Lo. conflderatioun, quhairby 5our Lo.
may perfaue how mifchantlie^ and barbaruflie the innocent andhermeles Gentilman was murdreift and flane, and quhilk was pe ground and occafioun of the
fucceiding flauchteris ; quhairin, becaus ])air is grit appeirance of diforder to
arryfe, to the difturbance and brek of pe peace of pe countrey, feing the ClaNFarlane gois about J^air privat revenge, and our freindis [the Buchanans]
on pe vj)er pairt, will be cairfull of J)air awin defence : We will humlie befeik
5our Lo. to tak fuche courfe and ordour heiranent, as 5our Lo. fall think fitteft
for the peace of pe Countrey ; and we, for our pairtis, will be willing to vnderly
quhateuir 30m* Lo., in honnour and juftice, fall prefcry ve to ws. And becaus this
can nocht be done vpone the fuddane, bot will requyre fome tyme and lafour to
be tane ordour with and fatled ; We moft humlie befeik 5our Lordfchipis to
geve command to pe Juftice, Juftice-Clerk, and j^air deputis, to desert pe faid
dyet, and to defift and ceis fra all proceiding aganis ws thairin, or calling of our
cautioneris for our entrie ; difchargeing thame ])airof, and of Jjair offices in that
pairt : Quhairanent ])ir prefentis fall be J^air Warraiul.

And ^our Lordfchipis humlie I befeik.
Ordinance of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, on the above Supplication.

Apud HalynidJious, quinto Junij^ 1623. The Loudis Ordanis and commaiulis the JiUlice,
Juftice Clerk, and ]»air deputis, to continew the dyet within writtin to ))e xiiij day of Junij inllant :
' Insensible ; in a dead swoon. * Old Fr. mcschankmentf wickedly.

550 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1623.

And Oidanis tliir complineris to mak Offeris to the pairtie, and to prefent the Offeris to ]ie 3oung
Laird of M'farlane, yf he be in the toun, and to ]'e fpeciall freindis attending this dyet, quhonie
the faidis Lordis Ordanis to remane in this toun of Edinburghe till fome ordour be tane for falling of
the matter within wiittin, and for the peace and quyetnes of ]ie Countrey. And Ordanis the Juftice
to diipens with the perfonall compeirance of ]>e pairtie, vpone new cautioun, conforme to ]>e ordour.

Geo. Cancell-, I. P. D.

And thairwith alfo producet Offeris, in writt, conforme to the Ordinance
aboiie writtin ; qiihilk was prefentit be the Yoiuig Laird of Buchanuane to the
Juftice, to be delyuerit to the Young Laird of M' Farlane, alfo perfonallie prefent.

The Justice, for obedience of the Counfallis ordinance, Continewis the dyet
to the xiiij itijiantis : And Ordanit the perfewaris to confidder vpone the Offeris
in the meane tyme : And ficlyk Ordanis cautioun to be fund for the haill defenderis re-entrie that day, vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

Mr Dauid Prynirois proteftit, that this Warrand, and Offeris prefentit this day,
nawayis prejudge the perfewaris of thair lauchfull perfute, for the flauchter of
thair freind and kinfman.

The Laird of Maynes become cautioun for re-entrie of the haill defenderis,
contanit in the Letteris, the day foirfaid, &c.

Jun. 14. — CoMPEiRiT perfonallie, THE Laird of MTarlane, elder,
as Cheiff to the perfewaris, and defyret proces on the ane pairt ; and on the
vther pairt, Compeirit Alexander Douglas of Maynes, as cautioner for the defenderis entrie this day, and producet,

^^'ARRAND of the Loi'dis of Sccreit Counfall^ SjC

My Lordis of Secreit Counfell, vnto 3our Lordfchipis hunilie meanis^ and fchawis I, 50ur feruitour,
George Buchannane, appeirand of that Ilk : That quhair, for obedience of ':;our Lordfchipis ordinance,
I, in name of my freindis quho war callit for the llauchter of vrnq'*^ Duncane M'^Farlane, haif maid
Offeris to the pairtie ; quhairia I haif oflFerit, that thay, or I, in ]iair names, fall fubmit thame felffis to
]ie Erles of Mar, Menteith, VVigtoun, and Linlithgow: As J^e coppie of my Offeris, heirwith
producet, beiris. Whairanent, as 5itt, thay haif returnet no anfuer ; fua that it appeiris my Offeris ar
reiectit. And gif jour Lordfchipis fall nocht 6nd thir Offeris to be fufhcient, I, in ])air names, offeris
to cans thame fubmit all thair differences to :^our lordfchipis, and to do tliairin as ^our lordfchipis fall
think meitt. Heirfoir, I befeik jour 11. to confidder of thir Offeris, and to do thairin as jour 11. fall
think meit for ]ie peace of ))e cuntrey. And becaus the matter can nocht be prefentlie fettled and put
to ane poynt, that jour Ips. will geve a new Warrand to the Juflice, Juftice- clerk, and ])air deputis,
to continew pe dyet appointit to my freindis for ])air tryell befoir thame, vnto fuche reffonabill day as
jour lips, pleiflis. And jour lips, anfuer.

Apud Halyrudhous, duodecimo Junij, 1623. The Lordis of Secreit Counsall Ordanis and
Commandis the Juftice, Juftice-clerk, and ])air deputis, to proceid and minifter juftice in Jie matter
within written, aganis Johnne Buchannane, fone to Johtine Beg, and Archihcdd Bucluuniane, fone to
vmq'"^ WUIiame Dow. And to Defert })e dyet for ]ie remanent perfones charget to compeir to vnderly
])e Law for J)e Slauchter within writtin : Quhairanent ]iir prefeiitis fall be vnto ]ie faid Juftice, Jufticeclerk, and ])air deputis, a fufficient Warrand. Geo. Cancell.

' In presentia dominorum (Secreti Consilij.) ' Complains; literally, moans, or bemoans.

56 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 551

The Jiiftice Ordanis the Dyet to Desert vpone the liaill defenderis
infert in the Letteris, except as above ; and juftice to be profecute and followit
furth aganis thame, conforme to the ordour. And Ordanit tlie faid Alexander
Douglas, as cautioner foirfaid, to be vnlawit for nocht entrie of the faidis Johnne
and Archibald Buchannanes, in the pane of ane hundreth merkis for ather of
thame. And ficlyke, that the faidis Johnne and Archibald fall be denuncet our
fouerane lordis rebellis, and jjut to the home ; and all thair moveable guidis to
be efcheit, &c.

APPENDIX TO THE PRECEDING TrIAL.

Supplication hfj the Kin and Friends of vmq^ Duncane 3I"'F(U'Iane to
THE Lords of Privy Council.^

My Lordis of Secreit Counsell, vnto yo*" Iop^ humelie menis and fchawis we, yo"" feruitouris,
the KIN and freindis^ of vmquhile Duncane M^Farlane, fone to vraquhile A/idro MFarlane,
in Kipnoche : That quhair, the laid vmquhile Duncane, a young boy of the aige of xvj yeiris, or
thairby, being moll IhamefulHe and cruellie flayne be certane of the name of Buquhannane, vpone
fett purpois, prouifioun, and foirthocht fellouny ; we, foiibeareing to atone priuie revenge, and in mofl
fubmiffiue obedience to his Maiestie and his Lawis, liaueing refolued, be the ordinar courfe of
iuflice, to follow out the tryall of that flaucliter; we, for this effect, raifed Letteris, and charged the
Criminallis to thair tryall befoir his Maiesteis Juftice, vpoun the faxtof this inftant: At the quhilk
day, we, lookeing tliat the courfe of iuftice fould haif had place, conforme to the Lawis of the Kingdome, notwithftanding, it is trewthe, that yo' loP% vpoun the llnifter and wrong informatioun of the
pairtie, concerning the flauchter of vmquhile Williame Dow Buquhannane, w"^ thay aggregeit^
with fuche circumftances, and after fuche a deteftable nianer, as might raak we, who ar innocent, to
feame odious.

And towcheing the occafions of the flauchter of the young boy and of liis fader, and of the forme
and maner thairof, grantit ane Warrand for continewatioun of our dyet, till the xiiij of this inftant;
by the quhilk, not onlie we, hot the Gentlemen of the Cuntrie, who ar fummoned vj)oun the Afnfe, ar
verie far preiudgen and troublit, and the courfe of iuftice is inten'uptit and hinderit ; and we perl'uade
oure felftis that yo"" Iop** in yo'' awne honourable regaird and difpofitioun to iuftice, wald neuir haue
grantit fuche ane Warrand, yf yo'' loP'* had bene treulie informed anent the flaughtair of the innocent
and harmles young boy ; ftbr althoght we will not preafe to extenuat the flauchter of vmquhile Williame Doiv, who, to our regrait, wes mifcheantlie'* and vnworthelie flayne, yitt we may treulie afferme
vnto yo'' loP"*, that anent tlie forme, maner, and circomftanceis of the flauchter, as is punctuallie fett
doun in the Petition givin in to yo' IoP"" ; and anent the forme, maner, and occafiouns of the llaucliter
of the young boy and his fader, as is lykwayes fett doun in the Petitioun, and q"^ wes the ground
whervpoun yo"" Iop** wer moved to grant the faid continewatioun, tlie pairty lies verie far ouerfene
thame felflis, and paft the boundis of modeftie ; and hes abufed yo"" loP** with thair finifter and wrong
informatioun ; quhilk, yf thay be able to iuftifie and mak good, as thay haif I'ett doun in the Petitioun,
firft, anent the maner of the flaughter of Williame Dow, and how that the flaughter of the boy proceidit vpoun occafioun of thair following of ane ftollin ox, quhilk thay alledgeit in thair Bill* wes
ftolliu be the faid Andro, and eattin at his lykewalk ;*■ and that the boy, Jifiilling his fader, prefeiitit ane
hagbute, w"^ mifgaif, and thaireftcr concurring w' his fader in perfute oi the Duqiduuinaniii wes flayne ;

' From the Original, preserved among the Wdrrdnts of Secret Council, General Register House, Edinburgh.
' Blood-relations, 'Aggravated. * Wickedly j O. Fr. mcschantcmvnt, ' Bill of Supplication.

* See this Trial, p. 549.

552 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1623.

we ar content, without forder ceremonie, to tak the pairtie be the band,^ and to renunce o"^ Crimiiiall
perfute againes thame : ffor the treuthe is, that thay come to the boyis houfe, quhairof he wes tennent
to the Erie of Perthe, vpoun fett purpois and provifioun ; and the boy, apprehending his danger, after
he hard the ilioute raifed be thame, he fled for fanlftie of his lyffe ; whome thay foUowit ane lang
way ; and haneing ouertane him, and he being thair prifoner, thay broght him bak half ane myle, and
in cauld bloode, cruellie and barbarouflie flew and manglit him, but* pitie or compaflioun, with xviij
deadlie woundis, with durkis ; and liaueing caffin him on his bellie, quhair lie lay deade vpoun the
ground, thay, the forder to fatisfie thair raige vpoun the poore corps,^ cuttit his bak in tua with fwerdis.

This is the fimple trewthe of the buflynes, w"^ we will ftand to : And thairfoir, we will humblie
befeike y*" loP^ to caus thair Petitioun to be exhibite be the faidis perfonis befoir yo'^ lor^, to the intent
the trewthe of the circumflanceis of the flaughteris, as thay ar fett doun in the faid Petitioun, may be
examined be yo'' loi'% and ordour tane thairin accordinglie. And feeing, we half, in all modeflie, and
w*^ grite patience, as humble and deutifull fubiectis [to his Ma^'^^J focht the benefeit of his Lawis,
We humelie befeeke yo'' lopP^ that the fame may be grantit vnto ws, and that no forder continewation
be grantit to o""* pairty : And yo'' IoP^ anfuer.

Delivekaxce by the Lords of Privy Council. \_0n the bach of the foregoing Petition."]

Apud Halyrudhoufe, decirao Junij, 1623. The Lordis Ordanis a MaifTer to pas and warne both
the pairtyis, the Barone of Achyll, Dauid Drummond of Innermaith, and Mr Alex'' Seatoun of
Gargonnoh, to compeir befoir the Lordis, vpoun Tburifday nixt, to heir and fie ordour tane in the
mater within-writtin, as accordis. Geo. CA^XELLs.

^J^jsmrjpation of ii)t i^iincj^s tiutijoritt)— Caluitci: raptibt, ^r*

Jun. 18. — Alexander Gordoun, appeirand of Erlefloun, and James
Gordoun, meffinger.

Dilaitit of the Vfurpatioiin of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in taking and
apprehending of Johnne Glendoning of Drumrafche, and keii)ing him captiue and
prifiToner be the fpace of thre houris, in iwhuto carcere, he being his Majefteis
frie lege, and thai haifing na po"wer nor commiffioun for that effect ; committit
in Februar, or thair by, laft.

The perfewar \^2i^\^ fimpl'iciter frae the pannellis perfute : Quhairvpoun thay
afkit inflrumentis.

The Justice ordanis cauticvm to be ffund be the faid Alexander, for his
entrie, vpoun xv dayis (wairning) for the Kingis pairt ; quha fund Vthreid JVPDowell of Mondurk, fouertie, &c.

iUstttinu of a stoItJt J3urst, ^u

Jun. 18. — JoHXXE Douglas in St Leonardis, and Agnes Muftard his

fpous.

Dilaitit of the Thiftious Refetting of ane llowin purfe, with ffyve hundreth

pundis of gold ; and tua jewellis being thairin, worth thre thowfeand pundis ;

pertening to Sir Johnne Scott of Newburgh ; ftowin fra him be Margaret

Ahannay.

' To be reconciled. ^ Without. ' By way of retaliation, no doubt, for the horrible butchery

committed upon the person of Buchanan, before referred to. * Probably for outher, i, e. either party.

56 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 553

Persewaris, Sir Johnne Scott of Newburgh, Sir Williame Oliphant, kny^
Prelocutouris in defence, The Laird of Maynes, Mr Laurence M'Gill, James King.

Eftir the reiding of the Dittay, and accufatioun of the panuell of the ciymes
thairin coiitenit ; it was allegit be the panuell and thair iDrelocutouris, that the
firll pairt of the Dittay is nawayis relevant, anent the refTett of the ftowin purfe
and jewellis thairin ; vnles the jprincipall fteiller war firft callit, and atlier convict
and pwneift for the cryme, or ellis declarit fugitiue thairfoir : For, gif the
principall fteiller thairof, viz. Margaret Ahannay, war accufet in this judgement,
for the faid allegit cryme, it wald be allegit and verifeit be hir, that gif ony
purfe was apprehendit or gottin be hir fra the perfewar, that it was preciujn
jMclicitie, gevin be him to hir. And thairfoir, quhill firft fcho be callit, na proces.

The Justice, in refpect na dilligence isvfet aganis the faid Margaret Ahannay,
Ordanis the pannell to find cautioun for thair re-entrie, vpoun xv dayis wairning : Quha fand James Douglas, portioner of Lugtoun, and Williame Douglas,
hatmaker, burges of Edinburghe.^

Jun. 27.— CoiLL M'GiLLESPiK McDonald in Collonfay, Archibald McDonald, his fone, and four others, ' feruitouris to the faid Coill.'
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the fellone and crewall Slauchter of vmq'^ Malcolme
M'^phie of Collonfay, Donald Oig M'phie, Dougall M'phie, Johnne M'^quhirrie,
and Ewir Bayne, alias Quhyte ; committit in Februar laft.

Persewaris, Marie M'"donald, the relict; Donald OigM^phie, as fone; Katharene, Anne, and
Fynwall M'^phies, as dochteris to vrnq^*' Malcolme ; Murdoche M^phie in Hay, as hrother to
vmq'« Donald Oig, and Dougall M^'phie, and as nerreft of kyn to vmq'*' Johnne and Ewir.

Johnne Quhyte, wryter, producet the Letteris duelie executed, &c. and
proteftit for releif of Archibald Campbell, brother to the Laird of Caddell,
cautioner for repoirting thairof. — Coll M'^allafter, ffiear of Dounfkey, as cautioner
for the faid Coill, &c. vnlawit, for nocht entrie of ilk ane of the faidis i)erfones,
in the pane of ane hundreth merkis. And ficlyk, the Juftice Ordanis that the
faidis Coill, &c. fall be demmcet our fouerane lordis rebellis, and all thair moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

WuMng^ Captibt mxti ^trantjlintj:, ^r*

Jul. 2. — Johnne Grant of Glenmoreiftoun, Finlay INPean Roy in
Invermoreiftoun, and Alexander Dow M^ean Roy, his brother.
Dilaitit for Vfurpatioun of our fouerane lordis authoritie, in taking of vmq'"
Donald M^ffindlay V'norofiche, mercheand, vpone the landis of Glenmoreiftoun,
binding his handis behind liis bak, and cayreing him, as ane malefactour, to ane
' It is likely that this pursuit was abandoned. At least no farther notices occur in the Record.
VOL. IlL 4- A

554i CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1623.

woid neir to the landis of Glenmoreiftoiui ; quhair tliay, as hangmen, hang him
vp vpone ane trie of the faid woid, and wirreit him to deid ;^ and thaireftir cuttit
him doim, and, with thair durkis, gaif him dyvierfe ftraikis in the hreift and
bellie, to the cffiifioune of his hluid in grit quantitie ; and thaireftir, cayreit him
to ane burne-bra,^ vnder the quhilk they bureit him, be calling the faid bray
vpone him ; committit in the moneth of September, 1602 yeiris.

Pkrsewaris, Fynlay Mk-finlay V'norofyche, in Kiutaill, as brotlier ; Sir Williame Olipliant of
Newtoun, knyS Aduocat to our fouerane lord.

James Logy, wryter, producet the Letteris, duelie execute, &c., and proteftit
for releif of Mr Alexander ^rken3ie of Culcovie of his cautionrie.- — Patrik Grant
of Carroun, as cautioner for the pannell, Ordanit be the Jullice to be in ane
amerciament, for nocht entrie of the faid Johnne Grant, in the vnlaw of V
merkis ; and of ather of the faidis Fynlay and Duncane, in the pane of ane hundreth merkis.

\_3Ir Alexander Colnile, JiiJlice-JDepute.']

Jul. 9. — James Stew^art, Stewart-depute of Menteith ; Duncane
Stewart, his brother-germane, and others.^
Dilaitit of the Slauchter of vmq*^ Robert M^phatrick Campbell, and vmq'^
Malcolme M'"call ; committit in Apryle laft, vpone the landis of Dochallie, on
Lochow-fyde.

l^TJUAia.ftmiUter.
Aelaster MThatrik Vallasteh, in Balquhidder; Robert Dow
M'condochie VJames, thair ; Duncane Cure Stewart M'inrie, thair ;
Archibald Stewart, thair ; and Williame M^phatrik Stewart, thair.
Dilaittit for the crymes aboue writtin.

Persewar, Patrik Campbell, in Kenderoclie, brotlier to vinq'«^ Robert.
The Laird of Keir takis inftrumentis of the entrie of the fourtene on pannell
(Stewarts), and protellis, in that refpect, for his awin releif, as cautioner, &c. ;
and as to Duncane Stewart, declairis he lies fallin feik, fen his cuming to Edinbiu'ghe, and thairfoir could nocht compeir. — Sir Mungo Murray proteftis for his
releif, as cautioner for the others, ' the ffyve men of Bahpdiidder.'

The Justice, with conlcnt of the perfewar, continewis this matter to ane xv
dayis wairning ; and Ordanis the pannell to find cautioun for thair entrie. —
The Laird of Keir, and Sir Mungo Murray, of new become cautioneris.

' Strangled liim to death. ^ Burn-brae, a sloping bank, along the foot of wbicli aburn or rivulet

runs. ^ Their names are, Alexander Stewart, alias M'can, in (ileimnglas ; Johnne, Archibald,

and Andro Stewartis, his thre I'oiies ; l*atrik Stewart of Stragartuay ; Johnne Stewart, his brother ;
Robert Stewart, fone to Antho Stewart of Blairgarrie ; Patrik M'Kyndlay Gill, in Glenfinglas ;
Walter IM'eandowie, alias Stewart ; Johnne JNT intyre, f(>ruitour to James Stewart ; Gilliechreill
Dewar, Duncane M'eane Vaill, and Donald Reoch, i'ervand to the faid James Stewart.

57 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS.

555

My Lord of Murray, prefent, obleift him to Warrand and releif the Laird of
Keir of his former cautionerie, &c.

Jul. 23. — JoHNNE Rate, and Alexander Deane, cramer.^

Dilaitit for the breking of the yairdis^ of Barnetoun, Piltoun, Barnebougall,
Craikcruik, Cragyhall, Langhirdmeftoun, Carlowrie, and Libbertoun, and dyuerfe
vtheris yairdis, within Eift and Weft Louthiane : Steilling and away-taking
furth thairof, off dyuerfe herbis, bie-flveppis,'' fyboes,'' plantis, kaill-feid, artechoiffis,^ diftilled watteris, plaittis and trunfcheouris," with ane tyn-ftoupe," furth
of the place of Langhirdmeiftoune ; committit at dyuerfe tymes, within this
moneth bygane.

The i^erfones on pannell confeffis the Dittay, and crymes thairin contenit.

Verdict. Fand the faidis Johnne and Alexander, conforme to thair awin
Judiciall Confeftioun, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict, &c.

The Juftice Ordanit thame to be tane bak to waird, thair to remane quhill
he be advyfet with the Lordis of Secreit Counfall, anent the Dome to be pronuncet aganis thame, for the faidis crymes.

Jul. 25. — Sentence. The Juftice Ordanit the faidis Johnne Rait and
Alexander Deane to be tane to the Burrow-mure of Edinburghe, and thair to be
Hangit quhill thay be deid ; and thair haill moveable guidis to be efcheit, &c. •
And that by virtue of the following Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Counfall.

Justice, Juftice dark and 50ur deputis. 3ow fall pronunce Sentence of daith againft Johnne Rait
and Alex' Deane, cramer, who was convict ofbefoir in MulFilburghe, for the breking of 5airdis and
fteilling of findrie bie-fkepis furth of the fame ; and who, fince thair apprehenfioun, haif of lait bene
convict befoir 50W of the fame crymes ; committit be thame fince thair laft convictioun and pwneifnient
following thairupoun. And that 50W caufe the Sentence of daith be execute vpone thame: Quhairanent theil'e prefentis fall be vnto 50VV ane fufficient Warrand. Gevin at Halyrudhous, the xxiiij day
of July, ]G23.

Geo. Cancell^ Glencarke. Nitiiisdaill. Oliphant. Hamiltox.

0outv)j—lWiitdja'att

Aug. 1. — Thomas Greave.
Dilaitit of dyuerfe poyntis of Sorcerie and Witchcraft following, viz. : For
cureing of the perfones following, be Sorcerie and A\"itchcraft, to wit : Ane fone
of Archibald Arnote in the Wayne, of ane heavie and vncouth" feiknes : Ane
fone of Andro Geddis in Freuchie, alfo hevilie difteifit : Ane bairne of Thomas
Kilgoures in Falkland, vifTeit with ane grevous feiknes. Item, ffor cureing, be

^ Iluxter ; one who keeps a petty booth for the sale of small wares. - Gardens. ^ Beo'

hives. * A young or small sort of onion. * Artichokes. <* Trenchers. " Tin flagon.

^ Strange ; unusual ; unaccountable.

556 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1623,

Sorcerie and Witchcraft, and making of certane croces and finges,' off Dauid
Chialmer in Lethame, and be caufeing wafche liis fark^ in ane South-rynnand
watter, and thairefter putting it vpone him ; quhairby he reffauit his helthe.
Item, ffor cureing of ane woman in Ingrie, befyde Leflie, of ane grevous feiknes,
be taking the feiknes af hir and puting it vpone ane kow ; quhilk kow thaireftir
ran woid/ and deit. Item, ffor cureing off Alexander Laufones bairne, in Falkland, of grit feiknes, be Sorcerie, and making of certane fignes, and vttering of
dyuerfe vnknawin woirdis. Item, ffor cureing of ane woman, duelland befyde
Margaret Douglas, of ane grit and panefuU feiknes, be drawing hir nyne tymes
bakward and ford ward be the leg. Item, ffor cureing of Michaell Glaffies wyfe,
in the Mylnes of Forthe, of ane grevous feiknes, be cauffing brek ane hoill in the
wall, vpone the North fyde of the chymnay, and putting ane hefp^ of yairne thre
fevTral tymes furth at the faid hoill, and taking it bak at the dur ; and thaireftir,
caufeing the faid Michaellis wyfe ix tymes pals throw the faid hefp of yairne,
and thairby to procure hir help. Item, ffor cureing, be devillerie and Witchcraft, of Williame Kirkis bairne, in Tulliebule, of the feiknes callit Morbus
caducus,^ be llraiking bak the hair of his held, taking ane lang claith, with
certane vnguent and vther inchantit matter, furth of ane buift," and rowing^ the
bairne nyne tymes within the faid claith, vttering, at ilk tyme of the putting
about of the claith, dyuerfe wordes and croces and vther f.gnes ; and be that
meanis pat the bairne afleip ; and thairby, throw his devillerie and Witchcraft,
curet the faid bairne of the faid feiknes. Item, vnderftanding that Johnne
Fifcher, in AchalanOvay, was hevielie difeafit of a grevous and vnknawin fever,
vpone aduerteifment gevin to him thairof, he caufit bring the faid Johnne
Fifcheris fark to him ; quhilk fark being brocht, the faid Thomas, turning it
over, cryit out at that inftant, * Allace ! the Witchcraft appointit for ane vther
hes lichted upone him !' And, luiking at the breift of the fark, he tauld ' that
the feiknes was nocht cum as 5it to his heart.' And eftir fome croces and fignes
maid be the faid Thomas vpone the fark, delyuerit the fark to Jonet Patoun,
the faid Johnne Fifcheris mother, commanding hir, with all fpeid to ryn to him
thairwith ; and declairit to hir that ' Gif fcho come thairuith, befoir his heart
was affaulted,' he fould convalefe ; At quhais cuming to him with the faid fark,
the faid Johnne hir fone was deid. Ite:m, ffor practizeing of dyuerfe poyntis
of Sorcerie vpone Williame Beveridge, in Drumkippie, in Salen, and cureing
him thairby of ane grevous feiknes, be caufeing him pas throw ane hefp of
yairne thre feuerall tymes ; and thairefter burning the faid help of yairne in ane

' Crosses and signs. " Sliiit. ' Mad. * A hasp of yarn is equal to twelve ' cuts,'

or six ' heer.' Each ' cut' goes six score times round the reel. ^ E])ilppsy, or the falling sickness.
Perhaps it may refer to consumption, ' dccai/' or ' decline.' ^ Out of a small box or chest.

■ Wrapping ; rolling.

57&21JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 557

grit ffyre, quhilk tiirnet haillilie blew. Item, ffor cureing of Margaret Gibfones ky,^ in Balgonie, be putting thame thryfe throw ane hefpe of yairue, and
calling of certane inchantit watter, inchantit be him, athort" the byre ; and
thairby making thair milk to cum to thame agane, quhilk thay gaif nocht ane
moneth ofbefoir.^ Item, at Martimes, 1621, Elfpeth Thomefone, fifter to
Johnne Thomefone, portioner of Pitwar, being vifTeit with ane grevous feiknes,
the faid Thomas com to hir hous in Corachie, quhair, eftir fichting and grij)ping
of hir, he promeift to cure hir thairof ; and fo this effect callit for hir fark, and
defyret tua of hir nerreft freindis^ to go with him : Lykas, Johnne and Williame
Thomefones, hir brether, being fent for, paft with the faid Thomas, in the nicht
feafone, fra Corachie towardis Burley, be the fpace of tuelffmyles ; and inioynet
the tua brethir nocht to fpeik ane woird all the way ; and quhat euir thay hard
or faw, nawayis to be effrayed, faying to thame, ' it mycht be that thai wald
heir grit rumbling, and lie vncouth and feirfull apparitiones, bot nathing fould
annoy thame !' And at the ffurde be-eift Burley, in ane South-rynning watter,
he thair wufche the fark ; during the tyme of the quhilk wafching of the fark,
thair was ane grit noyfe maid be ffouUis,^ or the lyll beiftis,*^ that arraife and
flichtered in the water. And cuming hame with the fark, pat the famyn vpone
hir, and curet hir of hir feikens : And thairby committit manifell Sorcerie and
Witchcraft. Item, if or cureing of Williame Confines wyfe, be Sorcerie and
Witchcraft, be caufing hir hufband heit the coulter of his pleuch, and cule the
famyn in watter brocht from Haly Well of Hillfyde ; and thaireftir, making
certane coniurationes, croces, and fignes vpone the watter, caufet hir drink
thairof for hir helth ; and thairby, be Sorcerie, curet hir of hir feiknes. Item,
ffor cureing, be Sorcerie and Witchcraft, of James Mwdie, with his wyfe and
childrene, of the fever ; and namelie, in cureing of his wyfe, be caufeing ane grit
ffyre to be put on, and ane hoill to be maid in the North fyde of the hous," and
ane quik hen ' to be put furth thairat, at thre feuerall tymes, and tane in at the
hous-dur, widderfchynnes ;'■• and thaireftir, taking the hen and puting it vnder
the feik womanis okftar,"^ or airme ; and thairfra, cayreing it to the IFyre, quhair
it was haldin doun and brunt quik thairin ; and be that devillifch maner, i)ractizet be him, curet hir of hir feiknes : ffor the quhilk, the faid Thomas relfauit
XX lib. fra hir hufband. And laft, ffor commoun Sorcerie and Witchcraft,
practizet be him, and abufeing the people thairby ; expres aganis Godis dcvyne
Law, and Actis of Parliament maid aganis Sorceraris.

Verdict. The Affyfe, being ryplie advylet thairwith, togidder with certane

' Kine; catde. ^ Atliwait ; across. ^ Which they had not yielded for the space of a

month. * Kinsmen ; relations. ^ Water-fowl. '^ Little ' beasts ;' ScoUicc, for some

sort of small birds or fowls, such as snipes, &c. "^ A hole to be made in the north wall of the

house. ^ A live fowl. ^ Backwards ; contrary to the course of tlie sun. *" Arm-pit.

558 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

Depofitiones prodiicet be Mr Johnne Cowdoim, Minifter at Kynrois, Mr Edmond
Myles, Minifter at Cleifclie, Mr Robert Cohiile, Minifter at Cleifche, ffor verificatioun thairof ; thay, be the declaratioim of Williame Dempftartoun, chanceller, fiand, proniincet, and declairit the laid Thomas Greave to be ffylet,
culpable, and convict of the haill poyntis of Dittay aboue writtin. — Sentence.
To be tane to the Caftell-hill of Edinburghe, and thair to be Wirreit at ane
ftaik, quhill he be deid ; and his body tliaireftir to be Brunt in afches, as culpable
and convict of the laidis crynies of Sorcerie and Witchcraft.

^flirts of t\)c Clnfesjijp of 3iustinan)--f!:tnn-al antr iHastn* of tjt

Ctrtmonirsi, Set*

Nov. 28. — Sir Archibald Naper of Merchinftoun, kny', Thefaurerdepute to our fouerane lord of this Kingdome, producethis Maiefteis Gift, grantit
to him, vnder his hienes Previe feall, of the Offices of the Clerkschip of
Justiciarie-Generall, and Maister of the Ceremoneis at the Creatioun of all Erles, Lordis, and Barrones, and of all vther folemne Aflembleis,
quhair honourable ceremoneis ar accuftomat and neceflarie to be vfet, within
the kingdome of Scotland ; with all richtis, privileges, liberteis, feyis, cafualteis,
proffeitis, and deuteis quhatfumeuir, pertaining and belonging thairto ; during all
the dayis of the faid Sir Archibaldis lyftyme : Vacand in his Maiefteis handis,
])e dimiffioun of Sir Johnne Cokburne of Ormeftoun, kny^ laft Juftice Clerk, and
INIaifter of the laid Ceremoneis. Dated at Royftoun, the fext day of November,
1623. — Which Gift was ordanit to be infert in the Regifteris of Adiornall, ad
futuram memoriam.

Commission of Snstiriarp,

in favour of Sir George Erskine of Innerteill.

Jan. 23, 1624. — My Lord of Innerteill, as Juftice to our fouerane Lord,

producet his Maiefteis Commiffipun of Jufticiarie ; and defyret the famyn to be

infert in the Regifter of Adjournal, ad futuram memoriam.

James R.
James, by the grace of God, King of Grite Biitane, France, and Ireland, defender of the fFaithe :
To all and findrie our leigis and fubiectis whome it effeiris, to whofe knowledge thir our Letteris fall
come, greating. Forsamekill as, the place and Office of the Justice of this our Kingdome is now
voyde, and the adminiftratioun of JuJlice, in matteris propper to that judgement, cealfes by the abfence
of thofe who formarlie fuppleit that place : And whear as, the frequent occafioun, daylie occurring
within this our kingdome, requyres a prefent choife to be maid of fome fufficient and qualifeit perfone
to exerce the faid place and office : And We, vnderftanding the goode aftectioun of our truflie and
weilbelouit counfalour, Sir George Erjkine of Innerteill, to do ws feruice, and that he is a perfone of
found and vpricht judgement, and vtherwayis accompleifchet and furneift with giftis anfuerable to the

' From the peculiarity of this document, it has been thought right to preserve it entire, without abridgement.

57 & 21 Jac. VI. criminal TRIALS. 559

(lignitie of fuche ane Imployment : TJiairfoir, We half maid and conftitute, and he the tennour lioirof
makis and conftitutis, the faid Sir George our Justick, and geves to him the Office thaiiof, with all
honnouris, digniteis, prevelegis, and prerogatiues belonging thairto ; to be poffell, bruiket, vfed, and
exerced be him als frelie and amplie, in all refpectis and conditiones, as bny vtheris liis prediceflburis
in the faid Office formeilie bruiket the fame ; with power to him to fenfe and hald Juflice-Courtis
within the Tolbuith of our burghe of Edinburghe, and vtheris pairtis of our Kingdome, accoirdine as
the neceffitie of oure feruice fchall requyre, and to proceid and miniller juflice in all and fiudrie matteris occurring in that judgment, and vpone all perfones of quhatfomeuir qualitie, that fall be prcfentit
in judgement befoir him, to abyde thair tryell ; and accoirding as thay fall be fund Guiltie or Innocent
of the crymos to be obiectit vnto thame, and to be laid to thair chairge, to caus jultice be minillrat vpone
thame, conforme to the lawis of our realme : AfTyfTes neidfuU, to this effect, vnder the vfuale and
accuflomed panes, to fummond, wairne, choofe, and caus be fuorne ; and to creat officiaris and momberis of Court neidfuU ; and all vther thingisneidfull towardis the executioun of this our Commiffiouu
to do and vfe, whiche laughfullie, in fuch caifes, may be done ; fferme and ftable balding, and for to
hald all and quhatfomeuir thingis fall be laughfullie done heirin. Chaiugeing heirfoir yow, all
our faid leiges and fubiectis, to reuerence, acknowledge, and obey our faid Juflice, in all and everie
thing tending to the executioun of this our Commiffioun : As yow and everie ane of yow will anfiveir
to us vpone the contrair, at your perrell. This our Commiffioun, dureing our will and pleafour, and
ay and quhill we difcharge the fame, to indure. Gevin vnder our fignet, Ax Ed'*, the tuentiu day of
Januare, and of oure reigne the Ivij and xxj yearis, 1624.

Geo. Cancell**. Melros. Lauderdaill. R. Cokburne. Kilsayth.

W. Oliphant. A. Hay. Ar. Naper. J. Hamilton.

[Sir George EtJJajne of InnerteiU, laiyclit, Juftice.']

Jan. 23.— Capitane Johnne Faa, Robert Faa, Sainuell Faa, Johnne
Faa younger, Andro Faa, Williame Faa, Robert Broun, Gawin
Trotter, all Egiptianis,Vagabountlis, and commounThevis, &c.
Being enterit vpone pannell be the Magiftratis of Ed^ dilaitit, accufet, and
perfewit be Sir Williame Olipliant of Newtoun, kny^, of the crynie vnderwrittin,
viz. FoKSAMEKii-E AS, ffirfl, be Act of Secreit Counfall, maid in the nioneth of
Junij, or thairby, in the yeir of God 1603, and Proclamatioun following thairupoun, commanding and chargeing the Vagaboundis, Soirneris, and commoun
Thevis, commonlie callit Egtptianes, to i)as furtli of this Kingdome, and to
remane perpetuallie furth thairof, and nevir to returne agane within the Ihmyn,
vnder the pane of daithe ; quhilk Act of Secreit Counlall, and Proclamatioun
following thairupoun, be the 13 Act of our Ibuerane lordis 20 Parliament, lialdin
at Edinburgh vpone the 24 of Junij, the yeir of God ICOO }elris, is ratifcit,
approvin, and confirmet be his Maieflie and Eftaitis of Parliament than convcnit ;
and the fame Act ordanit to half force and executioun, cftir tlie firft day of
Auguft nixt thaireftir following, in the foirfaid yeir of God P^.Vj'. and n} iie
yeiris ; eftir the quhilk tyme, gif ony of the faidis Vagaboundis callit E(;ir560 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

TIANES, alfweill wemen as men, fall be fund within this kingdome, or ony pairt
thairof, it fall be leafiun to all his ]\Iaiefteis goode fubiectis, or ony of thame, to
cans tak, apprehend, impriffone, and execute to death, the Ihidis Egiptianes, ather
men or wemen, as commoun, notorious, and condempned Theves, by ane Alfyfe,
only to be tryed^ that tbay ar callit, knawin, and repute and haldin Egiptians :
In the quhilk caice, quhatfoeuir of the Affyfe hapins to clange ony of the foirfaidis perfones, Egiptianes, pannelled as faid is, falbe perfewit, handillit, and
cenfuret as comniitteris of WilfuU Errour. As the faidis Actis of Secreit
Counfall, Proclamatioun following thairupoun, and Act of Parliament aboue
writtin, deulie publeift, in the felff proportis. Nochtwithftanding quhairof, it is
of verritie, that the foirnamet aucht perfones impannelled, and ilk ane of thame,
being Vagaboundis, Soirneris, cowmoun Thevis, callit, knawin, repute, and
haldin Egiptianes, in plane contempt of his Maielleis lawis and Actis of
Parliament, hes proudlie repairit to this kingdome, remanit and abiddin within
the famyn, and nawayis depairtit nor pall furth thairof, fen the faid firll day of
Auguft, 1609 yeiris, appointit for thair away-paffing; incurring thairthrow the
pane and pwneifchment aboue writtin, mention et in the faid Act of Parliament.

ASSISA.

James Lokhart, elder of Lie, .... Leith of Hairthill, WilHame SydferflF of Ruchelaw.^

Verdict. The AfTyfe, for the maift pairt, be the declaratioun of the faid
James Lokhart of Lie, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faidis perfones (being all "\^agaboundis, and repute and haldin for Egiptianis) to be Giltie,
culpable, and convict of contravening the tennour of the faid Act of Parliament, &:e.
The Justice continewis the pronunceation of Dome, vpone the former^ convictioun, to the morne ; that in the meane tyme he may advyfe with the Lordis
of Secreit Counfall thairanent : And ordanit the pannell to be tane bak to waird,
in the meane tyme.

Jan. 24. — Sentence. To be tane to the Burrow-Mure of Edinburgh,
and thair to be Hangit quhill thay be deid ; and thair haill moveabill guidis,
gif thay ony haif, to be efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe, &c.*,

(2?Siptinns— ^orntrs, kc. (jTnnaltsO

Jan. 29. — Heeene Faa, the relict of vmq'^ Capitane Johnne Faa; Lucrece Faa, fpous to James Broun ; Elfpeth Faa, brether-dochter
to the Capitane ; Katharene Faa, relict of vmq'® Eduard Faa ;

* Proved ; established. ^ The remainder are burgesses of Edinburgh. James Hopper of

Bourliouffis, the Laird of Coulter-Cuming, .... Ogilvie of Boyne, .... Maxwall of Cowhill,
and six others, (' niercheandis,') are ' vnlawit 100 merkis ilk ane of thame.' ' Preceding.

* See the following article, Jan. 29, and Mar. 22, where the proceedings against their helpless widows
are recorded.

57&21JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 561

Meriore Faa, fpoiis to James Faa ; Jeane Faa, the relict of
vmq^^ Andro Faa ; Helene Faa, the relict of vmq'^ Robert
Campbell ; Margaret Faa, dochter to vmq'^ Eduard Faa ;
IfTobell Faa, the relict of vmq'" Robert Broun ; IMargaret ^'allantyne, relict of Johnne Wilfoun ; Elfpeth Faa, dochter to
vmq''' Henrie Faa.
Dilaitit for contravening the 13 Act of his Maiefleis tuentie Parliament, haldin
at Edinburgh, the 24 of Junij, 1609 yeiris, maid aganis Egiptianis, chargeing
thame, allweill wemen as men, to pas furth of this kingdome, and to remane
perpetuallie furth thairof ; and nevir to be fundin within the famyn, eftir the
firft day of Augufl thaireftir, in the faid yeir of God 1609, vnder the pane of
deid : And the foirnamet perfones, being all Theves, Vagaboundis, and Egiptianis, fa repute and haldin, and tane as people of that vnhai)i)ie race and focietie,
hes, be tliair remaning within this kingdome eftir the tyme foirfaid, appointit
for thair away-paffing furth thairof, contravenit the tennour of the faid Act of
Parliament, and incurrit the pwneifchment aboue writtin, mentionet thairintill.
Verdict. Giltie, culpable, and convict of the contravening of the foirfaid
Act of Parliament. — Sentence. To be tane to the place of thair executioun,
in fome convenient pairt, and thair to be Drowned quhill thay be deid ; and all
thair moveabill guidis, gif thay ony haif, to be confifcat to his Maiefleis vfe, &c.
(Mar. 22.) — The above perfons, together with Alexander Faa, fone
to Eduard Faa, Johnne Faa and Francie Faa, fones to vmq'^ Capitane
Johnne Faa, and Harie Broun, brother to vmq^'' Robert Broun, being broclit
furth of waird, and prefentit of new agane vpone pannell, as thay that war
convict of Egiptianes, and the Dome of daith pronuncet aganis ellevin of
thame, vpone the xxix day of Januar laft, the executioun quhairof was fuperceidit, be the Lordis of Secreit Counfallis Warrand and directioun, vnto the tyme
our fouerane Lordis will and pleafour war knawin thairanent.

His Maiesteis 'Letter and Directioun fent to the Conn fall.

To our right truftie and right weilbelouit counfalour, Sir George Hay of Kynfawiies, kny', our
Chanceller, and to our right truftie and right weilbelouit coufuiges and counlalouris, and vtheris
our tniftie and weilbelouit counfalouris, the Erles, Lordis, and vtheris of our Previe CouxSELL, in our kingdome of Scotland.
James R.
Right truftie and right weilbelouit counfalour, right truftie and right weilbelouit coufens and
counfalouris, and vtheris our truftie and weilbelouit counfalouris, We greete yow well. We hauo
vnderftood, by your Letter of the 29 of Januar laft, that a noinber of thefe Theeves and couiitt'ifootod
Vagabondis, commonlie callit Egiptianis, being apprehendit be your directioun, war therefiir put to
a Ciiminall tryell, and being lawfullie convicted, that eight of the men wer executed, and that the reft,
being ailher childrene and of lefte-age, and wemen with chyld, or gi-ving fucke to cliildrene, 3e haue
therfore committed thair perfones to prilibne, fuperceiding tlie executione of tlic Sentence pronunced
VOL. IIL 4 B

562 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

aganis thame, till yee fliould acquaynte ws, and know oure further pleafoure thairanent. In whiche
regaiid, thele are to certefie to yow, that as We allow well of the courfe taiken for executeing of the
men, fo now, m colde bloode, (thefe children and weemen haueing beene foe long kepte prifoneris,)
and cheflie in refpect of that which yee wryte to be the prefent ellaite of mofl part of thefe weemen,
We can not bot inclyne to pittie and compaffion of them. Wherfore, as We ar willing that their
lyues be fpared, foe that nather thame felues, nor any others of that kynd may be therby em,
boldned to prefume vpone our clemencie, yee fall caus thame act them felues to depairt, with thair
childrene, furth of that our kingdome, between and fuch a competent day as yee Ihall think fitting, for
that effect, to prefcriue ; vnder the payne of deatli, to be inflicted (without any forder procefs or dome)
vpone them, wherfoever they can be apprehendit within our faid kingdome, efter the faid day. And
for your putting them to libertie, (nochtwithftanding the Sentence pronunced againll them,) vpone
condition foirfaid, thefe llialbe vnto yow a Warrant fufficient. And foe We bid yow farewell. From
our Honour of Hampton, the 13 of 3Ierche, 1624.

The Justice, conforme to his Maiefteis Letter and clirectioun, caufit the haill
Egiptianis aboiie writtin, i)refente(l vpone pannell, act thame felfRs, lyk as thay
and ilk ane of tliame, of there awin frie motiue, and with the bleffing of God to
his Maieflie and Counfall, become actit and obleift to depairt and pas away with
thair childrene furth of this realme ; and nevir to be fund thairintill, eftir the
tuentie-tua day of Apryle nixtocum, vnder the payne and pwneifchment of
daith, without ony forther proces or doome, to be inflicted but fauour^ vpone them,
quhaireuirthay fall be fund or apprehendit, within this kingdome, eftir the faid day.

Crtasonaijle mxti iflasttvful Ci)tft mti MontU'tit

Mar. 3. — [Dame Mahgaret Ogilyie, Countess of Mauschell,^]
Sir Alexander Strauchane of Thoruetoun, kny', (hir
fpoufe,) and Mr Robert Strauchane, Doctour in Phifik.
Dilaitit of the MaifterfuU Thift and Stouthe-reiff, ffurth of the Place of Benholme, pertening to vmq''' George Erle Marshell, of certane his Lordfchipis
jouellis, filuer-plait, houfliald-ftuff, gold, filuer, euidentis, writtis, and vtheris
guidis, at lenth expreffit in the criminall Letteris direct thairupoun, at the
inftance of our fouerane lordis Aduocat; committit in October 1622, a littill
befoir the faid Erles deceife.^

Persewar. Prelocutouris in defence.

Sir Williame Oliphant, kny^ Mr Thomas Hoip, Mr Lueis Stewart.

The perfones enterit on pannell takes inftrumentis of thair entrie, and proteftis
for releif of Sir George Afflek of Balmanno of his cautionerie. There was prelented the following

Warrand of the Lordis of Secreit Couvfall.

Apud Eii^,Jecundo die men/is Marcij, 1624. The Lordis of Secreit Counfall, ffor fome fpeciall

' Without favour or mercy. ' Daughter of James, sixth Lord Ogilvy of Airly. She was the second wife of

Genrge., fifth Earl Marischal. ^ He died at Dunottar Castle, A\n-. 2, 1G23, in the seventieth year of his age. He

had studiod at several foreign Universities, and was an accomplished and learned individual. Besides his Embassy,
he had filled the high office of Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland, by Commission under the
Greut Seal, Jun. C, 1G09.

57 & 21 Jac. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 563

confiderationes moveing thame, Ordanes and commandis the Juftice, Juftice-clerk, and tbair deputis,
to continew the dyet appointit to Dame Margaret Ogilvie, Countes of Marsciiell, Sir
Alexander Strauchane of Tliornetoun, hir fpous, and vtheris perfones fpecifeit in the Ciiniinall Letteris raifit |iairnpoun, ffor ])air compeirance befoh- ])e Juftice, vpone the tlirid day of Marche iuftant, to
vnderly the Law for the crymes of Thift and Stouthe-reiif of the houlhald ftuff, infight plenlftin"-,
filuer plait, and vtheris goodis pertening to the lait Erie of Merfchell, and at lenth fpecifeit in the
faidis criminal] letteris raifit at ])e inftance of his Maiefteis Aduocat, vntill the fecund day of Julij
nixtocum ; takand new cautioun of ]>e defenderis, for J)air compeirance that day, conforme to the ordour.
Quhairanent pe Extract of fis Act fall be vnto pe faid Juftice, Juftice-clerk, and tbair deputis, ane
fuflBcient Warrand.

ExTRACTUM de Libris Actorum Secreti Conjilij, f. d. n. Begis, Sfc. Jacobus Prymrois.

Sir George Afflek of new becomes cautioner for the faidis Dame Margaret, &c.,
vnder the panes contenit in the Actis of Parliament.

\^Mr Alexander Coluile of Blair, Jiiftice-Depute.']

(Jul. 2.) — Another Warrant, dated ' at Halyrudhous, the firfl day of
July' — and figned by ' Geo. CancelP. Mar. Morton. Linlithgow. Melros. Lauderdaill. Aw. Carnegie' — directs the cafe to be continued ' vntill the xxvij of
July inftant, vpone new cautioun :' — * And that yow difpens with the perfonall
compeirance of the Lady ]\Iarfchell and Doctour Strauchane.'

(Jul. 27.) — A THIRD Warrant, dated * at Halyrudhous, the xxij of July,'
and fubfcribed, ' Geo. CancelF. Mar. Melrois. Lauderdaill. J. Kokburne. Kilfayth.' — David Levingftoun of Donypace becomes cautioner for their entry on
the aucht day of December nixt.

(Dec. 8.) — No procedure is entered in the Record of this date.

[*S'/;' Geoi'ge Erjkine of InnerteiU, huf, Jujlice.l

Cvrasonalilt antr iHasttrful Cjjtft, ^r*

Mar. 3. — Jainies Keith of Benholme.
Dilaitit of airt and pairt of the treflbnabilP and theft ious fleilling, be way of
Maifterfull-thift and Stouthe-reiff, in the moneth of October, 1622 yeiris, ffurtli
of the Place of Benholme, off ane grene coffer, pertening to viiiq''" George Ekle
Marschell, with the jowellis and vtheris vnder writtin being thairintill, alfs
pertening to his lordfchip, viz. of Portugall ducattis, and vtheris fpaces^ of foreigne
gold, to the availP of tuentie thowfand pundis, or thairby ; threttie-lax dullane
of gold buttones ; ane ritche jowell, all fet with dyamontis, quhilk the laid vmq'*''
Erie refTauit as ane gift gevin to him the tyme he was Amballadour in Denmark,
worth fex thowfeand merkis ; the Queue of Denmarkis pictour in gold, let about
with ritche dyamontis, eflimat to fyve thowfeand merkis ; ane jafp flane for

' Treasonable, as being committed by a landed Gentleman, in terms of an Act of Jac. \'I. ' Species. 3 Worth ; value.

564> CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

fteming of bluid,^ eftimat to fyve hundreth French crownes ; ane chen5ie ^ of
equal 1 perle, quhairin was foure hundreth perles gritt and fmall ; tua chen5eis
of gold, of tuentie-foure vnce wecht ; ane vther jowajl of dyamontis fet in gold,
worth thre thoufeand merkis ; ane grit pair of bracelettis, all fett with dyamondis,
pryce thairof fyve hundreth crownes ; the vther pair of gold bracelettis, at fex
liundreth pundis the pair ; ane turcas^ ring, worth ten French crownes ; ane
dyamond fet in ane ring, price xxviij French crownes ; with ane number of vther
fmall ringis, fet with dyamondis and vtheris ritche llanes in gold, worth thre
hundreth Frenche crownes ; mair, fextene thoufeand merkis of filuer and gold,
reddie cun5eit,* quhilk was within the faid grene coffer ; togidder with the haill
Tapeftrie, filuer-work, bedding, and vther guidis, geir, and pleniffing, being
within the faid Place, particulerlie fpecifeit and fet doun in the Criminall Letteris
direct aganis the faid James Keyth of Benholme and his comj^lices.^ As also,
for airt and pairt of the thiftious lleilling and away-taking, be way of maifterfull Thift and Stouthe-reiff, in the moneth and yeir of God foirfaid, furth of the
faid Place, of ane grit clothe bag, with the faid vmq'^ Erie his haill euidentis^
and writtis of his landis and leving of Benholme, and vtheris his landis and
barroneis, being thairintill ; and remanent capitall crymes contenit in the faidis
Criminall Letteris, &c.

Andro Barclay of Vnthank, as cautioner, is decernit and ordanit to be in ane
amerciament, viz. for nocht entrie of the faid James Keyth, in the pane and
vnlaw of ane thowfeand merkis : And ficlyk, that the faid James be denuncet
our fouerane lordis rebell, and put to his hienes home ; and his haill moveabill
guidis to be efcheit and inbrocht to his Maiefteis vfe, as fugitiue fra his hienes
lawis for the faidis crymes.

^ttnling^ Corn, ^c .

Mar. 24. — Harie Menteith of Panfteid ; James and Williame, his tua

fones ; Andro Menteith, fone-naturall to the faid Harie ;

Johnne Menteith, callit of Balderftoun ; and fix others.

Dilaitit of the thiftious lleilling and away-taking, furth of Thomas Kincaid

of 'Wariefloun his barnes of Saltcoittis, in the Eift-Kerfe, lyand in the barrony

' Various virtues were anciently attributed to certain precious stones, such as the present, {stemming
of blood,) as antidotes against poison, he. The following curious entry occurs in the Books of the
Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, P'eb. 9, 1504. — ' Item, to the faid ]Villiame \_Foular, potingary,]
for ANE BLUDESTANE, and thre vnce v]>ir ftuf, for the Quene, for bleding of ])e nefe ; eftir ane R.
(recipe) o( 3Iai/ier JRobert Schaic, xx'ij f.' « chain, or string. ^ i^urquois. Mieady

coined. * The above highly interesting detail shows, in a very striking point of view, the

immense wealth which was accumulated and enjoyed by many of the Scottish Nobility at this period.
Other portions of this Collectivni prove that considerable riches were possessed by some of the
smaller Gentry, where such a display might not have been expected. ^ Title-deeds.

57&22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 56^

thairof, and fclierefdome of Sterling, off threttie bollis of aittis, faxtene bollis of
pels, and tuentie bollis beir, pertening to the faid Thomas Kincaid.

The perfewar producet our foiierane lordis Letteris, be vertew qiiliairof the
faidis perfones, and ilk ane of thame, ar denuncet rebellis, and put to the home,
for nocht finding of cautioun to haif compeirit, &c. ; and proteftit for relief of
Johnne Kincaid j)ortioner of Gogar, his cautioner.

\_3Ir Alexander Coluile of Blair, Jiijlice-Depide.~\

Jun. 5. — James Galbraith, in Lekkie.
Dilaitit of the Murthour and Slauchter of vmq'^ James Broke in Kirkpatrik,
his brother-in-law ; committit vnder nycht, betuix Kirkliftoun and Corltori^hin,
in thair cuming furth the hie-way togidder towardis Edinburgh, in the moneth
of Apryle lall, in the begynning thairof.

ASSISA.

James Tennent of Lynhous, James Burnet of Barnes,

Johnne M^'Farlane of Arrochar, Alexander Lokhart of Braidfchaw.'

The pannell confedis, in prefens and audience of the Aflyfe, the Murthour and
Slauchter contenit in his Dittay.

Verdict. The Affyfe being ryplie and at lenth advyfet with the Dittay,
togidder with the faid James Galbraith his awin Confeffioun maid in judgement,
with his Depofitioun maid be him, vpone the thrid day of Junij inftant, in
prefens of the haill lordis of Counfell and Seffioun, confeffing the Murthour aboue
writtin, thay all in ane voce ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid James to be
ffylet, culpable, and convict. — Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-croce of
Edinburgh, and thair his heid to be ftrukin frome his body ; and his haill guidis
and geir to be efcheit, &c.

®|&cft— ^laucrJter— dFfre--raij3inci:— a^ntertommunincr hjitl) i\)t

Jul. 17. — Johnne Roy M'farlane, fone to Andro of Gortane, and

others.^

Dilaitit of the feuerall crymes of Thift and Slauchter following, viz. The faid

Johnne Roy M'farlane, ffor airt and pairt of the Slauchter of vmq'^ "\A'illiame

M'^clane in Blairvak, fervand to vmq'^ Duncane M'farlane of Blairvak, for the

tyme; committit vpone the thrid day of October laftbypaft, I6i23 yeiris : And

* The rest of the Assise were tradesmen. James Tennent, chanccller. 2 •pjjp remainder of

tlie pannels were, ' Johnne Bej? M''c'auife M'farlane (in Stukewa), Duncane M'corric M'ewin (M' farlane in Ardlowio), Johnne M'innair M'farlane in Ciarboyle, Thomas Moir M' farhiiic, ((one to Duncane Dow M'farlane in Morlajj^ane,) Allaller Blair (in Brachairiie), Johnne (Dow) Blair, his Tone,
Johnne Gar M'gilliemichell, (leruitour to Robert Abroche M'Gregour,) Duncane Bayne M'cartnay,
(feruand to Robert Abroche INl'gi'egour.)'

566 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

ficlyk, for airt and pairt of the treffonable Raifing of ffyi-e, and Burning of the
houfe of Abervrchill, pertening to vmq^^ Colene Campbell of Abervrdiill, being
in company with Johnne Dow MTondochie Bayne, his maifter, and vtheris his
complices, at the faid Burning ; committit a ten yeir fyne, or thairby. Item,
the faid Johnne Beg M'Caujfe Mlfarlane, ffor the thiftious reffetting of ane blak
kow,quhilk was flowin be Johnne Roy M'Williame IVrfarlane, furth of the landis
of Balliemoir, fra Andro M' Williame M'farlane, in the moneth of December laft :
And ficlyk, for airt and pairt of the lleilling of tua ky furth of the landis of
Clofwrak, pertening to Callum M'farlane, indueller thair : And alfe, for airt and
pairt of the thiftious fteilliiig, at the leift reffetting, of ane blak horfe, ftowin be
Duncane IM'corriche M'eane M'farlane, furth of the cuntrie of Argyle ; committit
in ]\Iarche laft. lTE]\r, the faid Duncane 3Pcorrie M'eane Mlfarlane, ffor airt,
pairt, and being in company with Johnne Roy IVrWilliame M'farlane, at the
lleilling of ane broun kow, a four yeir fyne, or thairby : And for airt and pairt
of the fteilliiig of nyne lambes, pertening to Johnne M'^corrie M^farlane and
Patrik ]\rcorrie IVrfarlane in Ardinulrig, furth of the Mure of Ben-Mourlig, in
the moneth of Junij I^.^^j^.xxiij yeiris : And alfo, for airt and pairt of the fteilling of ane gait^ furth of the landis of Glencroe, in the moneth of October, the
yeir of God I^.Vj". tuentie tua yeiris : And in lyk maner, for airt and pairt of
the fteilling of ane blak horfe out of Argyle, in the moneth of Merche laftbypaft :
And for thiftious fteilling of ane fcheip fra vmq^'' Malcolme M'^farlane, in Innerfnamet,- in the moneth of Julij, 161 6 yeiris. Item, the faid Johnne M^Innair
3Ilfarlane, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of ane broun kow furth of the
landis of Glencroe, furth of ane grit number of vther ky, in dryveing thame to
the INIercat, to be Umld ; committit a feviii yeir fyne, or thairby : And ffor airt
and pairt of the fteilling of ane blak kow, a four yeir fyne, furth of the faidis
landis of Glencroe. Item, the faid Thomas Moir M^farlane^ fone to Duncane
Dow, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of fyve ky, pertening to George Maidlanes in Letter, and vtheris, the Laird of Kilfythes tennentis : And ffor airt and
pairt of the fteilling of nyne lambes, furth of Craigcoftane,^ pertening to Patrik
Glafs IVrfarlane thair, in the moneth of Junij, 1623 yeiris : And ffor airt and
pairt of the thiftious reffetting of ane ftowin kow, quhilk was ftowin be Callum
M^cauife in Clakbowie, fra Colene Campbell of Ardkinglas, in the moneth of
November, 1622 yeiris : And ffor ane commoun foirner^ and oppreffour, vpone
dyuerfe his Maiefteis fubjectis : And for common Thift and Reffet of thift. Item,
the faidis AUaJter Blair in Bracherie, and Johnne Blaii\ his fone, ffor airt and
pairt of the fteilling of foure ky, furth of the landis of Difcher, in Menteith, a

' Goat. 2 Inversnaid ? ^ Afterwards the residence of Rob Roy M<^Gregor, who acquired

this property in anno 1705. ^ One who oppressively takes free quarters, &c. by violence.

57&22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 567

fyve yeir fyne, or thairby, qiihilk pertenit to ... . Logane, fervand to the Laird
of Aucliinbrek. Item, the laid AUaJtei\ ffor the fteilliiig of tua oxiii fra the
Laird of Buchannane, furth of the landis of Salloche, a fyve yeir fyne, or thairby.
lTE]\r, the faidis Allafter, and Johnne Dow Blair, his foiie, ffor the thiftious
fteilling of thre ky, furth of the landis of Drongie, perteniiig to Robert Campbell
of Drongie, a foiire yeir fyne, or thairby: And forder, for the thiftious recept^
of tua llowin horfe, flowin be the faid Robert Abroche, furth of the North pairtis
of this realme, a yeir fyne, or thairby. Item, the faid Allafter, ffor the thiftious
reffetting of ane grit quantitie of the guidis and geir reft, flowin, and away-tane
furth of Balwill, be Robert Abroche, Johnne JVPcairtour, Donald Darleith, and
vtheris thair complices, quhilkis pertenit to Johnne Fallafdaill, bail5ie of Dunbartane : And laft, the faid Johnne Blair, ffor fteilling of ane kow, furth of the
landis of Clofrak, pertening to Parlen IVrneill, thair, a foure yeir fyne, or thairby.
Item, the faid Johnne Gar 3I'gilUemichell, ffor airt and pairt of the thiftious
fteilling, be way of Maifterfull Thift and Stouth-reiff, furth of Murray, in the
North, fra dyuerfe of the Inhabitantis thairof, in the moneth of Julij laft, of
ffyftie ffyve oxin and ky, with dyuerfe horfe, fcheij), gait, inficht and pleniffing,
quhilk war drewin^ be the faid Johnne Gar, and be Robert Abroche, his maifter,
and vtheris thair complices, to the Waft pairtis of this realme, quhair the Ihmyn
was fauld and difponit vpone to thair vfe : And ficlyk, for ane commoun Soirner
and OpprefTour, in keiping daylie and nychtlie company with Robert Abroche
M'^gregour, and pafling with him throw dyuerfe pairtis of the cuntrie, foirning
and committing oppreffioun vpone dyuerfe his Maiefteis fubiectis, inhabitantis
thairintill ; forceing and compelling thame to furneife nieit, drink, and vther
prouifioun, aganis thair will, and without payment of ony money for the fame ;
in hie and manifeft contempt of his Maiefteis auctoritie and lawis. Item, the
faid Duncane Buijne 3I''cartnay, ffor ane commoun Soirner and Oi)prefrour ;
fpeciallie, for cuming to the duelling-hous of Neill M'claren in Innernandie, in
the heid of Balquhidder, in May laft, and thair forcet and compellit him to
furneife to the faid Duncane, nieit, drink, and vtheris neceifaris ; and becaus ane
kid was refuifet be the faid Neill to be flane and eittan, at the faid Duncaues
defyre, the faid Duncane thairupoun maift creM'allie invaidit the faid Neill for
his ftauchter, gaif him ane crewall and deidlie wound in the heid, to the elfuftoun of his bluid in grit quantitie ; quha, be occafiouu of the faid ftraik, buiiig
irritat with rage and furie, with ane grit caber^ in his hand, rynnand at the faid
Duncane in revenge thairof, ftrak Donald M'^Intyre (quha was ane redder^) in

^ Reset. ^ Driven. ' A larpo rafter, beam, or joist. * A i)oace-niaker, who, in this

instance, got the reddincj-straik, the proverbial recompense of those who, through tlicir [:Mn\ nature,
endeavour to separate angry combatants. The foregoing details afVord a highly unfavourable picture
of the state of society, in ' Hob Roy's country,' at the close of the reign of James VI.

568 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

the foirheid, and fellit and flew him thairwith ; and fa, the faid Duncane was
au't and pairt of the Slauchter of the faid vmq^' Donald M'Intyre : Item, ffor
cuming to the faid Neill M'darens hous, vnder nycht, and fteilling furth thairof
of his haill inficht pleniffing, guidis, and geir, to the availl of fourtie pundis money.
The foirnamet haill perfones, dilaitit and accufet of the crymes refpectlue above
writtin, haifing denyit the famyn to be of verritie, war put be the Juftice to the
knawlege of the perfones following.

ASSISA.

Jolinne M''failane of Arrocbar, Duncane INI'Innoyer in Gortane, Parlane M<^Corrie in Ardleifch,

James Garbraitlie in Garbell, Patiik Roy INMnnoyer, Patrik M'farlane in PuUochre,

Dou"-all :M'far]ane in Tullicbin- Andro M^farlane in Drumfad, Jobnne Dow M'-failane,

tjii]]^ ]\Ialcolme M^'Williame in Dovvne, Donald Dow M<'farlane,

Tlioraas Mi'farlane, Duncane M'farlane in Port- Harie Dow, feruitour to Jobnne
Jobnne M' farlane in Kenmore, Cbapell, Erll of Mar, &c,

Duncane M'failane, thair, Jobnne M'^Innoyer,

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, be the repoirt and declaratioun of the
faid Andro M'farlane in Drumfad, chanceller, ffand the faidis perfones on pannell, and ilk ane of thame, to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the feuerall crymes
aboue writtin. — Sentence. To be tane to the Burrow-mure of the burgh of
Edinburgh, and thair to be Hangit quhill thay be deid ; and all thair moveable
guidis to be efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe, as giltie of the faidis crymes.

^Jttp antr Cattle ^teaKng, ^u

Jul. 21. — Adie Vscheu, borne in Birkinhauch, in Liddifdaill, fervand
to Robert Ellote of Reidheuche.
Dilaititof airt and pairt of the fteilling of fex ky {cattle) furth of SchewingfcheillCaftell, pertening to Williame Heroun of Chipchefe, in the moneth of November
laft : Item, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilHng of fextene gaitis (goats) furth of Emmetifliauch,pertening to Will Charletoun of Emmetifliaugh ; Will Vfcher, his fone,
being in cumpany with him at the fteilling thairof; committit in September laft :
Item, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of tua ky furth of Hafilfyde, in Ingland,
the ane blak, the vtlier broun, pertening to Williame Chairletovm of Hafilfyde ;
committit be him and the faid Will Vfcher, his fone, in October laft : Item, ffor
airt and pairt of the fteilling of an yellow brandit ox, furth of the landis of
Heifilefyde, in the faid moneth of October laft, pertening to the faid Will Chairletoun ; tlie faid Will Vfcher, his fone, being in companie with him at the committing thairof: Item, ffor airt and pairt of the fteilling of fextene gaittis furth
of the landis of Leipieleifche, in October laft ; quhilk pertenit to Mathew Robfoun of Leipieleifche ; the faid Will, his fone, being with him at the fteilling
thairof : Item, ffor fteilling and away-taking, about Hallowmes laft, of tua fcheip

58&22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 569

furth of Richartoun-fute, pertening to Archie Henderfoun, and Jolinne Robiefoun, thair ; committit be him and the faid Will, his fone : Item, flfor airt and
pairt of the fteilling, furth of Burnemouth, of fyve fcheip, pertening to Johnne
Nixyne, thair; the faid Will Vfcher being at the fteilling thairof: Last, ffor
airt and pairt of the fteilling of fFyve fcheip, about St Thomas-Eviu laft, fra
Johnne Ellote, callit the Dod, and Johnne Eliot, callit the Gycle : And ffor
commoun Thift and Reftet of Thift.
Persewaris, Mr (Williame) Heroua of Cliipcliefe, Will Chairletoun of Hifliefyde, Sir Williame

Oliplmnt of Nevvtoun, kny*, Aduocat.

ASSISA.

The Laird of Riddell, Ragnell (Reginald ?) Bennell, Johnne Govane of Cardrono,

Williame Middlemeft of Chapell, The Laird of Mertoun, James Douglas of Cowthroppill.

George Ker of Newhall, Andro Ker of Brounlandis, Patrik Cranftoun of Corfbie,

Andro Douglas of Prieftoun, W'" Trumble of Pliillopehauche, Robert Ed;;er of Wodderlie,

Williame Benuet, James Nayfmyth of Poffo, Robert Lauder of that Ilk.

Verdict. The Aftyfe, all in ane voce, in refpect of the faid Adie his Judiciall
Confeflioun of the crymes foirfaidis to be of verritie, be the mouth of the faid
Laird of Riddell, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit the faid Adie Vfcher
to be ffylet, culpable, and convict of the crymes foirfaidis. — Sentence. To be
tane to the Burrow-mure of Edinburgh, and thair to be Hangit quhill he be
deid ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

^T)trp iiixti Cattle ^ttcilincr, kc,

Jul. 21. — Will Vscher, fone to the faid Adie Vfcher.
Being prefentit vpone pannell, in prefens of my Lord Juftice, Confeffit him
felfF to be Giltie and culpable of the particular Thiftis contenit in his ffatheris
convictioun : And ofFerit him felfF in his Maieftie and Counlallis will for tlie
famyn. — Sentence. The Juftice, in regaird of the laid Will ATcher his
minoritie, nocht being paft faxtene yeiris of age, with advyle of the Lordis of
Secreit Counfall, ordanit the faid Will to be Baneifchet his Maiefteis haill
dominions, and nocht to be ffund thairintill in ony tyme cuming, without his
Maiefteis Licence, vnder the pane of deid, &c.

\_Sir George ErJIdne of Innerte'dl, km/, Jujlice.']

iHurtJtr mxtitx trust— ^toutljiTif—^^Jirarn, vVr.

Nov. 3. — JoilNNE BliouN, flvipper in Bruntcillaud ; Robert Broun,

mariner, his fone, thair ; Dauid Dowie, burges and awner

thair ; and Robert Duff, in South Quenis-flerrie.

Dilaitit and accufet of airt and pairt of the fchamefull, crewall, and vnmerciefull Murthour vnder truft of thre Spanifche mercheand young men ; and fteilling

VOL. IIL 4( c

570 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

and appropriating to tliame felffis, be way of Maifterfull Thift, Southe-reifF, and
Peiracie, off the guidis and mercheandice being within thair fchipis-boddome,
pertening to the faidis Mercheandis ; committit a thre yeir fyne, or thairby, in
thair cuming fra the Poirt of S' Johnnes, in Spayne, to Callife, be calling the
faidis thre Spanifche INIercheandis over-burde, and thaireftir appropriating of
thair guidis and mercheandice to thame felffis, and making money thairof, to
thair a win vfe.

Persewar, Sir Williame Olipliant of Newtoun, kny\ Aduocat.
DiTTAY againfi the perfons on pannell.
JoHNXE Broun, fkipper in Bruntieland, raaiiler and owner of ane quarter of the fchip vnderwritten,
Robert Broun, your fone, awner of ane vtber quarter thairof; Dauid Dowie, mariner, burges of
Bruntieland, awner of the half thairof; and Robert Duff, indueller and mariner in South Queniffferrie, Ye ar indytit and accufet, Forsamekill as the traffique and commerce betuix mercheand
and mercheand, in expoirting of eommoditeis frome ane cuntrie to ane vther, hes, in all weill-governet
Kingdomes and Commoun welthis, bene eftiniat the ground and fundamentall caus, nocht only of grit
welth and ritches to the inhabitantis, but alfo ane grit help and furtherance to intertene freindfchip
and correfpondence betuix Princes ; quhairthrow mony loveabill Lawis, vpone guid advyfe and deliberatioun, hes bene publeift and fet furth be thame and thair eftaitis, for advancement of thair tred, and
reiking out of fchipis and vefchellis for the better vphald and continuance thairof; and thairupoun, tlie
art of Xauigatioun, with the perfones expert thairintill, alfweill for thair llcill and dexteritie in failling,
as fidelitie in that tred, be the faif convoying of the merchandis and paflangeris, with thair merchandice
and guidis, committit to thair trufl, hes becum famous and of goode eftiraatiouu throw the haill world :
Lyk as, the failleris of this Kingdome, being, for thair fkill and fidelitie in that tred, nathing inferiour
to ony vther cuntrie, people, or natioun, haif commonlie, in regaird thairof, bene farefpectit be ftrangeris
in forayne pairtis, that thay, with thair fchipis, lies bene preferrit in feruice to ony vther people quhatfumeuir. Nochtwithllanding quhairof, it is of verritie, that ye and ilk ane of yow, fchaiking of all feir
of the Omnipotent and Almychtie God, regaird to the ancient goode fame of this cuntrie and kingdome
of Scotland, quhairof ye ar namet maifl vnwortlilie to be inhabitantis and natiue borne people ; as alfo, to
the grit obloquy, fchame and reproche, and oppin difcredeit of the haill failleris of this kingdome refoirting to fl'orayne pairtis, prejudice and difapointing of all lauehfull commerce and tred with ony of the
Mercheandis of the famyn, and imploynient of the haill feafairing men with thair fchipis and barkis in
tyme cuming, a thre yeir fyne or thairby, ye being in S' Johnnes, a Sie-poirt within the Kingdome

and dominioun of Spayne, togidder with the fchip callit , quhairof ye, the faid Johnue Broun,

was mailter and awner of ane quarter, and ye, the faid Dauid Dowie, awner of ane half, and ye, the
faid Robert Broun, awner of the fourt quarter ; and being frauchted be ane Gil3eane Thafktone, a
Span^aird, to pas fra the faid Poirt of S* Johnes to the Poirt of Caillife, with ane laiding of Walnuttis,
chellanis,' and certane Spanifche irne ; and accoirding thairto, haifing tane in the faid laiding, togidder
with thre Spanifche young men, quha war directed be the faid Mercheand to await vpone the difcharge of the faid Merchandice, and to make mony thairof at the faid fchipis arryvell at hir appointit
Poirt aboue writtin,^ ye, befoir your cuming abuird of the faid fchip in S* Johnnes, plottit, contry vet, and devyfet the crewall and barbarous Murthour of the faidis thre ftrangeris, and the appropriating to your felffis of the haill guidis and merchandice imput within the faid fchip ; and drew vp ane
Band to that effect, quhairvnto ilk ane of yow, with the remanent equippage of the faid fchip put to
your handis ; and thaireftir, cuming all aboird, heafit vp faill, and pall to the Sea : And being in the
middis of Sea, far frae ony land, ye, vpone fchaniefuU and damnable greid and covetoufnes, vpone fet

' Chestnuts. * As supercargoes.

58 & 22 Jac. VI CRIMINAL TRIALS. 57I

purpois, deliberatioun, and ffoiitliocht fFellony, fulifchilie apprehending that the al-feing eie of tlie
Almychtie did nocht luik doun, nor wald bring to licht your niaift liorrible and deteftable Murthour
and Pirracie, ye being alfo fecundit, aidit, and affiftit be James Hall in Kirkculdbrycht, Jolinne Gibfoun in the Erles-fferrie, James Carrane in Tradache, in Ireland, Robert Kincavill, cuik of the fchip,
with ane Irifche boy, uamet Thomas Cur; all of yow, being nyne in number, within fchip-buird, ye
maift crewallie and vnnaturallie, aganis the Lawis of Nationes, haifiiig the faidis thre ftran"-eris in your
power, and for the vnlauchfuU acquyreing and appropriating to yoUi- felffis of the faidis guidis and
merchandice, violentlie, and but* pitie or commileratioiui, threw them all thre ouerbuird, ane eftir vther
in the rageing feas ; and thairby crewallie and vnmerciefullie, vnder trufl, credeit, and aflureance,
Murdreifl and bereft thame of thair naturall lyves ; thay haifing na refudge nor bak-dur to efchew
your crewaltie : Quhilk being done, ye, in plane mokage" and fkorne of the Almychtie, as gif his
devyne Maieflie had appro vin that your horrible fact, maid ane Prayer, and fang vp ane Pfalme :
And thaireftir, as Thevis and maillerfull Sea-robberis, divertit your curfe fra Callife,^ and pad with
your faid fcliip and laiding thairof to Myddilburgh in jeilland, quhair the faidis walnuttis and chellanes
war fauld and maid money of, be ane or vther of yow, in name and to the behuif of the haill company
and equippage ;* and tlie famyn money, thaireftir, was pairtit amangis yow : Lyk as, the irne was brocht
hame to Brvntieland, quhair the famyn was fauld, for reddie money. — Committing thairby maill horrible
Murthour and Slauchter vnder trull and credeit, the faidis thre llrangeris being vnder your power and
command, within your fchip ; and lykwayis Maillerfull Thift, Stouthe-reift" and Pirracie, in appropriating of thair guidis and mercheandice to your felffis : Off the qnhilkis, ye, and ilk ane of yow, ai- and
war fpeciall actouris, airt and pairt ; and thairfoir, aucht and fould, in maifl exemplarie raaner, be
pwneifl, to the terrour of vtheris.

My lord Aduocat, eftir reiding of the Dittay, and the paiinellis accufatioun of
the faidis crymes, at length fet doun thairintill ; and that in refpect na obiectioun
was maid be the pannell or ony vtheris in thair names, aganis the relevancie
thairof, defyret my lord Juftice to put the famyn to the tryell of ane Affyfe of
the perfones fummond to that effect.

My lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fweiring and admiffioun of tlie
AflTyfe, and that na obiectioun is maid aganis thame be the pannell. And for
Verificatioun of the poyntis of Dittay and crymes thairin mentionet, producet
the Depofitioun maid be the foure perlones on pannell, viz. the faid Johmie
Broun, Robert Broun, and Dauid Doweis Depotitiones, maid be thame in prefens
of the Laird of Bombie, the CommifTar of Kirkculdbrycht, and the Bailleis thairof,
vpone the xxviij day of Auguil laft, confeffing the Murthour and thiftious taking
and appropriating of the guidis and mercheandice to thame felffis. Togidder
with the faid Johnne Broun and Dauid Doweis Depofitioun, tane in prefence of
the Erie of Melrois, vpone the xv of September laft. Produces alfo the Depoiitiones of Robert Duff, tane in prefens of the faid Erie of Melrois, on the vij day
October laft, beirand the faid Johnne Broun, and Dauid Dowie, to be carters of
the firft Mercheand overburd. Produces the pamiellis haill Depofitiones maid
be thame in prefens of my Lord of Melrois, vpone the nynt day of October laft.
Togidder with the Depofitioun of Robert Kincavill, cuik of the fchip, and ane of
* Without. 2 Mockery. ^ Calais. ^ Crew.

572 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

the equippage thairof in that veadge,^ tane in prefens of James Weymes of Bogy,
Vice-Adniirall at Kirkcaldie, vpone the 28 of Jiinij laft. With the Depofitioun
of the faid Robert Duff, maid in prefens of my lord Aduocat him felff, vpone
the 27 of October hift. And laft, vfes and produces the Declaratioun of Robert
Meluill and Robert Cellok, vnder thair hand-writt and mark put thairto, detecting and oppening vp the pannellis giltienes of the haill poyntis contenit in thair
Indytement. And vpone the j^roductioun of the verificationes aboue writtin,
aflvit inftrumentis : And proteftit for WilfuU-Errour aganis the perfones of
AlTyle, gif thay acquit the pannell of the deteftable crymes aboue written.

Verdict. The AlTyfe, all in ane voce, be the repoirt and declaratioun of
Stewin Pliilp, elder, mercheand in Dyfert, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and
declairit the haill foure perlbnes on pannell to be Giltie, culpable, and convict of
the crymes above fpecifeit. — Sentence. To be tane to the Mercat-Croce of
Edinburgh, and thair to be Hangit vpone ane gibbet, cxiihill thay be deid : And
thaireftir, thair heidis to be ftrukin fra thair bodeyis : And tua of them to be
fet vp vpone prikis of irne at Leith ; and the vther tua to be fent to Brnnteil'
land, to be fet vp vpone prikis thair : And thair haill moveabill guidis to be
efcheit to his Maiefteis vfe.

[3/r Alexander Coluile, Jujlice-Deimte.']

Nov. 13. — Harie Listoux, indueller in the bak of Plefance (of Edinburgh), callit the Bak-Raw.
Dilaitit, fforfamekill as the faid Harie, haifing, without ony juft cans, confauet
ane deidlie haitrent and evill will againft vmq^^ James Mayne, feruitour to Robirt
Young, maltman, burges of Edinburghe, with ane fettillit purpois and refolutioun to bareiff him of his lyffe, be on meine or vther ; laitlie, vpone the laft day
of Auguft laftbypaft, come in the twielicht, eftir fetting of the fone, betuix fevin
and aucht houris at evin or thairby, to the faid Robert Young, his peife-land,
befyde the Seanis," near to the Burrow-mure of the faid burgh, quhair the faid
vmq'" James was in fober and quyet maner for the tyme, keiping his faid maifteris peife, and vtheris his coirnes, than growand and ftanding ftoukit^ vpone the
ground of the faidis landis ; and thair, the faid Harie, being bodin with ane grit
rung or battone in his hand, and with knyves and vtheris invafiue wappones,
firft vpbraidit the faid James INIayne with woirdis, alledging that he was ane
commoun Theiff, and had ftowin ane grit number of the faid Harie his beanes
and peife, growand neir to the faid Robert Youngis land, and lyand contigue

' One of the crew in tliat voyage. ' Sciennes, so called from a religious house dedicated to

St Katherine of Sienna, in the immediate vicinity of Edinburgh. ' Cut down and put up in

stou/ts, ricks, or shocks.

58&22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 573

thairto ; and thaireftir, becaus the faid James purget him felff of that cahimnie,
and anfuerit him, be woird, that he was als honell as him felff; the faid Harie,
thairupoun, ran vpone the faid James, and rwfchet him (being ane aget man of
threfcoir fourtene yeiris of age) to the grund, dang him in the heid, craig,*
fchoulderis, and fydis with the faid battoun, lap vpone his breifl and bellie with
his feit and kneyis, punchet him as alio vpone the heart, and thairby brak and
birfet his intrallis and noble pairtis ; in maifl infolent maner cuttit his cleitliing
in peices with knyves, and thaireftir liarrellit and drew him be the heillis the
fpace of ane quarter of ane myle af the faidis landis, to ane laicli volt in S' Geillie
Grange, and impriffonet him thairintill, tanquctm in privafo carcere, he being in
the deid-thraw :^ Lyk as, within thre houris efter his imputing within the faid
volt, he deceiffit of the faidis flraikis : And the faid Harie, vnderftanding of his
daith, to fuppres the Murthour of the faid puir man fra the warld, caufit him to
be bureit fecreitlie in the nycht, in ane obfeure place. And fa, the laid vmq'^
James Mayne was fchamefullie, crewallie, and barbaruflie jNIarthouret, and
thairefter fecreitlie bureit, be the faid Harie and his complices ; and he is airt
and pairt thairof ; committit vpone fet purpois, prouiiioun, and foirthocht
fellony.

Persewaris. Prelocutouris in defence.

Jonet Watfoun, the relict ; Euphame Cuninghame, The Laird of Innerleyth, The Laird of Lugiifler-dochter ;3 Sir Williame Oliphant, knycht ; toun, Mr Lueis Stewart, and Mr Johnne

Robert Young, as maifler. Oliphant, Aduocatis.

It is allegit be the pannell, and be Mr Lueis Stewart, his prelocutour, eftir
reiding of the Dittay, that the famyn is nawayis relevant to pas to the knawlege of ane AlTyfe, as it is fett doun ; nawayis affirmeing thairin, that the pannell
was the actuall committer of the flauchter lybellit ; and fua, nocht concludand,
cle homine ocdjb, the famyn can nocht pas to ane AlTyfe. — It is anfuerit be my
lord Aduocat, the allegeance aucht to be repellit, in refpect of the Dittay beirand ^;^?' exprejjum, that the defunct reffauit dyuerfe flraikis with ane battoun in
the heid, and was punchet in the breifl and bellie, and his hail noble pairtis
brokin within him ; and be occafioun thairof the defunct deceiffit ; quhilk was
gevin to him be the pannell, and that he deceiffit off the famyn flraikis gevin to
him be the pannell, the tyme lybellit.

It is allegit, that the Dittay contenis dyuerfe and feuerall^ memberis, ilk member thairof being ane cryme be the felff, viz. ffirfl, that the defunct was finikin
with a battoun 2 2. His claithis cuttit with knyves : 3. Tlie defunct was liarrellit
be the heillis af the landis lybellit, to the Grange : 4. Was caffm in ane laiche
volt, tunquam in iwivato carcere, quhairin he was detenit captiue and i)ri(roner ;
quhairin, it is afhrmet, that the defunct deceiflit : Quhilkis, being feuerall crymes,

' Throat ; neck ^ Half dead ; in the throes, or agonies, of death. ^ Niece. * Separate.

574 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624.

man {nuist) be difciiffit feuerallie. The Aduocat declairis that he conjoynes the
haill ciyines- togidder, and devydis na pairt of the Dittay ; and fayis, that the
famyn is verrie relevant, as it is fet doun, to pas to the knawlege of ane Affyfe.

It is allegit be the pannell, that the famyn can nocht pas to ane Affyfe, becaus
he offeris him to prove, be fufficient Witneffes prefent at the bar, that the faid
James Mayne deceifRt be hanging himfelff within ane laiche volt in the Grange,
eftir he was committit thairin for fleilling of certane beanis and peife, and eftir
he had remanit thairin the fpace of tua or thre houris ; qnha was brocht thairto,
frie of ony hurt or woundis, in ony pairt of his body. — It is anfuerit, aucht to
be repellit, in refpect the allegeance confifting in facto ; and gif ony probatioun
be tane, it man be jn'oponit to the Affyfe, qulia, for thair informatioun, may tak
the Witneffes declaratioun, gif thay fall think it expedient, or reject the famyn.^

The Justice Ordanis the Dittay to pas to the knawlege of ane Affyfe : And
the exceptionn proponit be the pannell, anent the defunctis putting handis in
him felff, feing it confiftis in facto, Remittis the tryell thairof to the

ASSYSE ; AND THE PROBATIOUX TO BE VSET BEFOIR THAME.

ASSISA.

Mr Johnne Cant of the Grange, Jolinne Stevinfoun, maltnian, Robert Wilfoun, beltmaker,

Johnne Marfchell, burges of Ed', Johnne Lowrie, mailman, James Johnneftoun, maltman,

Adame ^Marfchell, maltman thair, Adame Bar, tailjeour, Frances Stevinfoun, chirurgane,

Johnne Campbell, ftaibler thair, Robert >Moubray, fuordflipper, Johnne Fluiker, chirurgane,

Johnne Bordland, litfter, Johnne Ahannay, baxter, Johnne Clarkfoun, fmyth.

It is allegit be the pannell aganis ffrances Stevinfoun and Johnne ffluiker,
cliirurganes, that nather of thame can be adraittit vpone this Affyfe, becaus
thay half behavet thame felffis as pairteis, in paffing, at the defyre of the perfewaris, and for guid deid gevin to thame, to the defunctis graiff, fevin dayis
eftir his buriall, and taking him vp and lichting the deid corpis, ffor ane pre-

^ This Case is most important, as being the first on Record, where the Lord Advocate voluntarily
admits of Witnesses being examined before the Assise, in relation to facts arising out of the assertions contained in the Dittay. The practice formerly was for the Advocate, as public prosecutor,
previous to framing the Dittay, to examine the pannell and such witnesses as could be obtained,
immediately after the commission of the crime, before the Lords of Privy Council, or a Commissioner;
and the Declarations, Confessions, and other evidence so produced, were founded upon in Court.
Thev were there held as conclusive, and not liable to be redargued by leading of fresh evidence at the
time of the Trial. The want of attention to this circumstance, or rather the ignorance of the ancient
mode of procedure in matters Criminal, would induce any one, at first sight, to form a very erroneous
estimate of the policy, and more particularly of the administration of our Laws. The notion seems
anciently to have been, that it was an act of flagrant contempt ia a pannel to dispute the validity of
tlie evidence led before so high a tribunal as that of the Privy Council, and probably in the face of
his own repeated Confessions or Declarations, on being examined, previous to trial. The Justice,
therefore, repelled any attempt on the part of Counsel for the pannel bringing forward Witnesses in
proof of his innocence; until, at length, the voice of the country prevailed, and the Assise were
MADE JUDGES OF THE Law AS WELL AS OF THE FACT. It is not a little singular to observe here,
that one of the Assise (the very Justice of the Peace in the vault of whose house the alleged suicide
took place, and who was afterwards chosen Chancellor of the Assise) is brought forward as the principal evidence, along with three of his servants !

58&22JAC. VI. CRIMINAL TRIALS. 575

cognitioun in fauouris of this perfewar, anent the tiyell of this mater. — It is
anfuerit be the Aduocat, the allegeance is nawayis relevant to flay thame to be
admittit vpone this Affyfe ; becaus, quhatevir was done be thame in raifeing and
lichting of the corpis, was done be command of the Bailleis of Edinburghe.

Robert Young, perfewar, being fuorne, gif he has juft caufe to perfew this
Dittay as it is fett doun, declairit, that he has juft caus to perfew, vpone this
reafone only, becaus he, haifing gottin knawlege of James Maynes daith, and
cuming to the Grange to vnderftand the forme thairof, and haifing feane the
deid corpis, defy ret Mr Johnne Cant to keip him vnbureit quliill the morne at
nyne houris, that his wyfe and freindis (micht) come to fie him ; quhilk the faid
Mr Johnne promeift fould be done ; and nochtwithftanding thairof, he was
bureit, be the pannellis fervandis, lang befoir fex houris in the moirning : And
thairfoir, in refpect of his buriall, fecreitly, by^ promeis, he had juft caus to
perfew the pannell, as giltie of the faid James Maynes daithe.

The Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the fueiring of the AfTyfe, and of the productioun of the defunctis claithes be the relict, all cuttit be the pannell, the tyme
contenit in the Dittay : And proteftis, in caice thay acquit, for Wilfull Errour.
— The pannell proteftis in the contrair, gif thay ffyle ; and that the Witneffes
may be tryit for preving that the only caufe of the defunct his daithe proceidit
fra his glutting violent handis in his awin perfone, be his feirfull and crewall
hanging him felf, and thairby devoiring him felff to daith, within ane laich volt
of the Grange, pertening to Mr Johnne Cant, ane of the AlTyfe, eftir the pannell
had apprehendit him in his jDeife, and tane him with tua grit wallat-full of
fcheillit beanis, ftowin be him af his peife-rig, and brocht him to the faid Mr
Johnne Cant, as Juftice of Peace, to half remanit with him vnto the tyme he had
bene tryit and pwneift for the faid Thift. And for cleiring of the veritie of
the foirfaid allegeance to the faid Affyfe, defyret the Witneffes following, all
prefent at the bar, viz. the faid Mr Johnne Cant, ane of the Affyfe ; Robert
Stark, James Scott, and James Wallace, his thre fervandis ; James Borthuik,
indueller in Edinburghe ; James M'^Corne, in the Seanis ; ^Villiame Mure, fervand to Robert 5oung, ane of the perfewaris, and Johnne Girdwoid, alfo his
fervand, to be callit vpone and examinat be the faid Affyfouris, eftir thair
incloifeing.^

Verdict. The faidis perfones of Affyfe thaireftir removet altogidder furth
of Court to the Affyfe-houfe, quliair, be jiluralitie of voittis, thay electit and
chuifet the faid Mr Johnne Cant in chanceller : And thaireftir, the faidis haill

^ Contrary to. ^ This seems an extraordinary step. The Assise, after they are enclosed in the

Assise-house, call before them and examine the Witnesses offered, without the direction of the Judge,
or the interrogation of Counsel for either party.

576 CRIMINAL TRIALS. A.D. 1624,

Witnesses being fuorne and examinat be thame, thay all, but^ difcrepance, cleirlie verifeit be thair declarationes, that the faid James Mayne come vpoiie his feit,
without ony hurt, as ajipeirit, in ony pairt of his body, to the Grange, a littill
afoir fex houris at evin, the day contenit in the Dittay, being brocht thairto be
the pannell, for the caule contenit in his exceptioun ; and being put in the laich
volt, at the defyre of the pannell, to be keipit thairin be the faid Mr Johnne
Cant, as Juftice of Peace, vnto the tyme he war tryit, and that Robert Young,
his mafler, war brocht to that effect ; he, within tua houris thaireftir, the volt
dur being lokit vpone him, was fund hingand in tua horfe girthes or coirdes,
deid, and his moutli fameand ;" and thairby, that he had devoiret^ him felff. Eftir
quhais try ell and examinatioun, the faidis peribnis of Affyfe reffonit and voittit
vpone the poyntis of the faid Dittay, and being ryplie and at lenth advyfet thairwitli, togidder with the Detositiones aboue writtin, maid be the faidis Witnesses, thay re-enterit agane in court, quhair thay all, in ane voce, be the repoirt
and declaratioun of the faid Mr Johnne Cant, chanceller, ffand, pronuncet, and
declairit the faid Harie Lilloun to be Cleane, innocent, and acquit of the flauchter
and murthour of the faid James Mayne ; and of airt and pairt thairof.

Qahairvpoun the faid Harie Liftoun and his prelocutouris ail\it inftrumentis.

Nov. 19. — Jaffhay Ir^ving of Robgill.

Dilaitit of the filthie and deteftable crynie of Inceft ; committit be him with
Agnes Cairletoun, fpous to vmq'^ George Irwing of Bonfchaw, his brotheris
wyfe ; quha buir to him, in that filthie copulatioun, thre fones, namet Frances,
George, and Edward Irwingis, and ane dochter ; quhilkis war all baptizet in
Ingland ; contrair the tennour of the Actis of Parliament.

IMy lord Aduocat takis inftrumentis of the pannellis Confeffioun ; and proteftis for \Vilfull Errour, gif thay acquit.

Verdict. The AfTyfe, all in ane voce, in refpect of the faid Jaffra his Judiciall Confefiioun, ffand, pronuncet, and declairit, be the repoirt and declaratioun
of Raulff Ker, burges of Lauder, chanceller, the faid Jaffra to be ffylet, culpable,
and convict of the faid cryme of Inceft, contenit in his Dittay. — Sentence.
To be tane to the Mercat-croce of Edinburghe, and thair his heid to be ftrukin
from his body ; and all his moveabill guidis to be efcheit, &c.

* Without (liflFerence in theii' testimony. I Foaming, or frothing. ^ Destroyed. Lat.

devorare.

GENERAL APPENDIX.

VOL. III.

t 4 D

APPENDIX.

*^* Since the preceding Volumes were sent to Press, various important
Papers having been discovered by the Editor, iUustrative of facts
narrated in the Trials, it has been thought proper to preserve a
selection from them in this Appendix.

No. I.

Papers relative to the Deadly Feud between the Earls of
Eglinton and Glencairn, &c.

I. Letter, the King to the Privy Council, 'for tryall of the authouris of
the Conflict hetuix Erie of Glencairme and the Maijier of Wintoun, at St
Johnefioun'^ Angujl 6, I6O6.

Right truftie and welbelouit Coufins and Counfelloris, We greet 50W well. The report of that
broyle whiche did fall furth in the toun of Perth, betuix the Erll of Glenncairne and the
Maister of Wintoun, immediatlie befoir the laft feffioun of Parliament keipit thair, did oftend ws
muche ; fpeciallie, in refpect of j^e circuniflances of "J^e tyme and place, quhen as, (befide the greit
hazard in bringing many of the Nobilitie then prefent in the toun, to have enterit in blood with
vperis, and thairby to haue revived that new mortified monflres of deidlie feed,) it wes a reddie
way to haue flayit the progres of ])at feffioun of Parliament, to ])e greit preiudice and hurt of ))e Eilait,
and to ]ie hinderances of all our fervices thair. Quhairvpoun, We ar moved the nioir ernertlie to
defire the knawledge of pe beginning of ])e mifdemoanour, and quhairvpoun the famin proceidit, and
whiche pairtie wes firll author thairof. And tliairfoir, have thocht meet, heirby, to will 30W to tak
particuler tryell befoir ^ow of ]ie firft beginning of that truble, how the famin fell furth, and wliiche of
the tuo pairteis began the invafioun ; and thairwith to try, whidder it wes vpoun a precogitat or foirthocht intentioun, or if pe fame fell furthe be mere accident, or chaud mele, vnintendit be ony of the
tuo pairteis againll the vfer? And heirof, willing 30W to certifie ws, particularlie, of the whole treuth
of that matter, in all the circumftances of the famin, oure plefour is, that, in the mein tyme, fpeoialle
directioun be gevin be 50W to our Justice genehall, heiche Constable, or thair deputies, or
to ony v])er Judges appointed by Commiffioun to proceid criminallie in the tryall of that matter, to

' From MS. CoUectmi of State Papers, by Sir Thomas Hamilton, afterwaiJs Luii of Melrose and Haddington.

VOL. in. 4 D

580 APPENDIX.

defert all dayis, and to fufpend and continew all proceffes intendit befoir tharae be ony of thefe pairteis
againfl v]>er, ay and quhill our foider plefour be fignifieit vnto thame, efter We bane dewlie confidderit the tryall taikin be 30W ia tliat matter. And fo We bid 30W licht hairtlie fairwell. From our
Manowr of Greinwiche, ])e 6 of Auguft, 1606. [JAMES 11.]

To our truflie and welbelouit coufins and counfellouris, the Erll of Dumfermling,

onr Chancellour, and remanent Lordis and vjieris of our Counsall of Estait, in oure

kingdome of Scotland.

II. Letter, fhe Privy Council to the King, as to Deadhj Feud between the
Earls of Eglinton and Glencairn, and Lord SempiUy6<f} Aug. 27, 1G06.

Most sacked Souerane,

According to 50ur hienes directioun, fignified vnto ws by 50ur Ma^^'^ faithful] counfellour the
Erll of Du.mbar, we did call and convene befoir the Counfell the Erllis Eglintoun and
Glencairne, and the Lord Sempill, with a nwmer of thair freindis, whome we knew to haue
cheifeft interes in the prefent feed ftanding betuix thame, and efter that we had declairit vnto thame
the greit paines and travellis whiche 50ur facred Maiestie took in 50ur awin perfone, for extinguifcheing of the name and memorie of deidlie feedis, what good fucces had followed vpoun 50ur
Maiesties travellis, in fum of the greittefl feedis of this kingdome, and how that 30ur Ma'''*
had now recommendit vnto the Counsell the removing this feed, whiche hes bene of fo long
continwance, and be reffoun of Jie minoritie of the Erll of Eglintoun could not whill now tak
effect, we burdinit thame with a Subraiflioun, conforme to the Act of Parliament. The Erll of
Glencairne pretendit that thair wes a quarrell betuix him and Eglintoun, and that a Submiffioun
wes vnnecelFar ; and, in end, he directlie refuifit to fubmitt, becaus the SubniilRoun imported aganis
him of the Slauchter of vmq^'' the Erll of Eglintoun, which he wald never tak vpoun him ; bot
offeris him reddy to tak tryall of the lawis for that Slauchter ; whiche tryall, in his pairt, aucht to
preceid the Submifliouu. We rememberit him of ane Submiffioun fubfcryvit be himfeltf in this fam
matter, aggreable, in evrie word, to that whiche wes now defirit when this matter wes lali in handis
afoir THE Counsell, in Februar 1601. Bot he, ftanding vpoun his innocencie of that Slauchter,
refuifit to fubmitt. Eglintoun maid no refuifall, bot pretending fome excufe vpoun the fchortnes
of the wairning, he only craved a continuatioun to be advifit with his freindis, becaus this wes the fivft
tyme that ever he wes chairgit in this matter, for his Maiestie; and the Lord Sempill verry
frelie, for 30ur Ma^'"^ fatisfactioun and obedience, without ony ceremonie, oflPerit to fubmitt. We
have grauntit vnto Eglintoun, with his awin confent, the 20 day of November nixt, to be advyiit
with his freindis, and to come prouydit in this matter. We have no affurance of the Erll of GlenCAiRNEs obedience, bot we hope that he will conforme himfelff to 3our Ma"*^* plefour: And the
Lord Sempill will be obedient.

We had lykwayis in hand the proces of Glasgow, whairin we haue fund verrye greit infolence
and ryatt committit be Mynto and a number of the commonis of the toun ; and hes committit the
perfonnes guiltie to waird within the burghe of Linlithgow, whill 30ur Ma''''*^^ plefour be knawin.

This is all we haue done at this melting, wherof we haue thocht meet to mak 3our facred Ma^'^
acquainted ; to the effect 3our hienes may give directioun tliairin, as 30ur Ma'^'^ fall think good ;
which we fall profequute and follow out. And fua, praying God to blifs 30ur facred Maiestie with
a long, happy, and profpcrous reignne. We reft

jour Ma''^'** niaift humble and obedient fubiectis and fervandis.^

Lynlithgow, 27 of Auguft, 1606.

' From tlie same MS. Cull, as the preceding. * The subscriptions have not been transcribed by Sir Tliomas

Hamilton, in his transcript.

APPENDIX. 581

No. II.

SOCIETIE AND COMPANIE OF THE BOYES.

Letter^-0/w the Privij Council to the Marquis ofHunthj} Jan. 20, 1607.

Efter our verry hairtty cominendationis to 50ur good lordfchipis, We ar informed of a verry greit
infolencye begvn and lyk to grow to a greiter heicht within the boundis of 50ur 11. office be Johnne

GoRDOUX, callitof GeycJie, Forbes of Coijindae, Patrik M'inneir, and fura vperis, quho,

having aflbeiat vnto thame feluis ane number of dobofchet and lawles lymmerris, calling thame feluis
Ye Societie and company of Boyes, thay haue moft vnlaufullie and feditiouflie bund thame feluis
in ane fellowfchip, with aithis, vowis, and proteflationis of mutuall defence and perfute ; and ]iat euery
one of ])air quarrellis falbe comoun to all ; and that the purpofe and interpryfe of ony one of thame
falbe profequuted, bakkit, and followed out, be the hale Societie, againfl all and quhatfumeuir,
without refpect of perfouns. Lykas, thir fame lymmaris keipis thame felffis togidder, committing oppin
and avowed reiffis, heir-fchippis, and vperis enormities, in all pairtis, quhair thay may be maifteris and
commaunderis. Quhilk proud and deteitable attempt, as it is odious to be hard of in a peceable
eftait, fubiect to a Prince whome God hes airmit with power and force able to fuppres the fame;
fo the fame caryes with it no lyttill fclander and preiudice to your II. honour and creddit, that
within 3onr boundis, quliair 3our 11. may commaund, fuch ane handfull of lymmaris dar prefume to
attempt fuche interpryfes ; and We ar certane fat the knowledge heirof being broght to his Ma^"^, will
mak his hienes wonderfullie till admeir 50ur 11. long patience and connivance, in not apprehending,
punifcheing, and fuppreffing of thir lymmaris ; and quhat conftructionis may be maid heirvpoune to
HIS Ma^'^ againfl 3 our 11., we remitt to 50ur 11. confideratioun. Alwayes,^ we ar heirby to requeifl
and defire 30ur 11. that, with all convenient fpeed, 30W tak ordour for apprehending of the faidis perfones, and fome v]7eris the Chyftanes of that laules Societie, and put thame heir befoir the
CouNSELL ; and that 30ur 11. profequute withfyre andfword the haill reft of thair followaris, and never
leue of J>e perfute of thame whill they be apprehendit, pvnift, and altogidder fupprefl ; as 30W refpect
HIS Ma"^^ feruice, the peace of pe cuntry, and 30ur awin credite, honour, and reputatioun, and as
30ur 11. wald efchew that hard cenfure and conftructioun which his Ma^'*^ man^ mak of 5our behaviour, in this point. Sua we commit 30W to God. PrOxM Edinburghe, fe 20 of Januar, 1C07.

To our verry honourable good Lord, the Marquise of Huntly.''

No. III.
Trial of the Mukes of Auchindraxe.*

Letter, the Earl qfCaJJlUis to the King.^ Dec. 3, I6O8.
Maist sacred Souerane,
It may pleis 5our gracious Ma^'^, I Iiaue taikin this bauldnes, vpone the farder tryall of the

' From IladdiiKjIov's MS. Cull. * Nevertheless; at all events. ' JMust. * A Letter from the

Privy Council, Dlh Feb. ](JC8, directs liini, by nis Maji.stv's comniand, between and ISfar. 10 next, to jirejiare to
depart out of the kingdom ; and to jjivc assurance for discharjje of his oflices, during his ab^ence. * See this

Collection, III. 121', &c. " Vvmxi Damijlne MS^. Adv. Library.

582 APPENDIX.

trechrous Murthouris of my vncle the Laird of Culzeaine, and of the boyi quha careit the
Lettir of his dyett, committet be the Laird of Auchindraine and his fonne ; and now farder
cleirit, be the greit paine and cayr of my Lord Chancelare, quha has broicht them to fik contrarietie in thair Depositionis, that all indifferent men may be peifwadit off thair guyltines of bayth
thais Murthouris. Nochtwithftanding quhairof, thai ftill continew in ane denyall. I wald maift
humehe befeik 50ur Ma^'e that it micht be 50ur jNLvt^'s g,acious plefoure to graunt ane Warrand
to THE Chanceller and Counsall of Scotland to putt thame to ye buittis,^ quhairthrow
thai may be broicht to ])e raair evident Confeffioun. So, maift hartlie vyfling 50ur Ma^^'s lang profperitie and happinefs for euer, I remane,

3our Ma. maift humbill feruant and fubiect,
Edinburghe, the thrid of December, 1608. Cassillis.

To the King his maift excellent Maiestie.

No. IV.

Papers in fakther illustration of the Trial of Mr Thomas Ross.

{See Vol. III., ly. 415.)

[The circumstances attending the Case of Mr Thomas Ross are so very remarkable in their
nature, that it was deemed proper to institute a still more rigorous search after the grounds and
Warrants upon which his almost unexampled Trial was founded. After having carefully examined
the Acts of the Privy Council, and many other authentic sources, the Editor has the satisfaction of
having at length discovered the identical copy of his Trial, which had been transmitted to Court, for
the information of King James VL Besides the proceedings which have already been printed, it
contains a translation of the offensive Thesis and Annexa, which, as has already been seen, were
ordered to be taken up by the public prosecutor, and upon no account to enter the Records. Annexed
to it are the Depositions of the unhappy man, which, in expectation of a free pardon, he voluntarily
emitted before the Privy Council of Scotland. The original draught of the King's Letter to the Secret
Council, to bring him to Trial and execution ; and, in compliance with the King's known wish, their
cruel recommendation, that Ross should suffer an ignominious death, have also been obtained. These
interesting documents were found in a Volume of Sir James Balfour s invaluable 3IS. Collections,
in the Advocates' Library, which had accidentally been mislaid when the Editor conducted the
former enquiry.

The reader has here the painful satisfaction of finding, that the conduct of King James and his
Councillors was still more inexcusable than had at first been conjectured. It is now clearly proved,
beyond the shadow of a doubt, that the Pasquill, or Thesis in question, had not h^en printed or
industriously disseminated by its unhappy author ; but that it had merely been aftixed on the door of
the College, — that, de facto, no person had read it, excepting the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, to whom
it had been brought by a student, — that this student, instantly on the Thesis having been hung up, had
only perused a few lines of the Paper, and brought it, without delay, to his superior, — and that, after the
examination, confession, and inipris<inment of Ross, the Vice-Chancellor had transmitted the Thesis
to Court, requesting instructions how the poor man should be disposed of.

' Willlain Dalrymple. * The torture of the boots. The younger Auchindrane was put to the torture,

which he bore with remarkable fortitude.

APPENDIX. 583

That Ross was insane, as well as in the most abject poverty, there can now be no doubt. Altogether, indeed, liis Case is one of the most pitiable on record.

It only remains to tlie Editor to state, that he is indebted to George Smythe, Esquire, Advocate,
for the following authentic information, regarding the Family of Ross of Craigie, at and shortly
previous to the period of Mr Thomas Ross's execution, Sep. 10, 1618. Such additional notices and
evidence as have fallen under the Editor's observation are inserted in the foot-notes, along with the
verifications of Mr Smythe's memoranda.

< I. John Ross of Craigie appears to have been the father of (1.) John Boss of Craigie. (2.)
James Ross of Creytoun, who acquired certain lands at the East end of Forgundenny from Walter
Oliphant of Newton, in Feb. 1539 i^ He married Marjory Stewart; by whom he left a daughter,
Janet,- who married Patrick Lyndfay of Dowhill.^ (3.) Thomas Boss of MaUlands, who was
killed at the battle of Pinkie.* Grissell Duncanson, his relict, afterwards married Alexander Crighton
of Forgound.^ His son, James, was killed in an affray with the Oliphants, Nov. 12, 1571.°

< II. John Ross of Craigie was infeft in the Lands of Hilton Malar, Sep. 17, 1539.'' He was
served Tutor-at-law to Janet Boss, his niece, Mar. 17, 1543.* He is mentioned by Knox, in his
History of the Reformation,^ along with " the penfionars of the Prelates, Oliver Sinclair, and utheris,
who were faithful to them in all things," and informed them of all proceedings at Court. He married
Isohel Liddell,^^ who had previously borne a number of children to Patrick Hepburn, Bishop of Moray,
so notorious for his gallantries. He was killed at Pinkie, and left four sons and three daughters."
(1.) Thomas. (2.) John. (3.) James, who had a Charter of the Lands of Pilheveles to him and
Catlmrine M^gie, relict of umqi" Alexander Menzies of that Ilk, his spous, Apr. 7, 1566. '^ He afterwards married Janet Bohertson, relict of umq'*^ Thomas Fowlis, burges of Perth. '^ He left no issue;
for his brother, John, was served heir to him, Nov. 3, 1582.'* (4.) William. (5.) Barbara. (6.)
Aliso?i. (7.) Grissell.

' III. Thomas Ross of Craigie raan-ied Jean Hepburn ; by whom he had one daughter, 3Iargaret;^^ who married John Seytoun, ap])arent of Lathrisk. Jean Hepburn was infeft in the lands of
Hilton Malar, in liferent. After the death of Thomas Ross, she married Peter Oliphant of Turings.'^

' IV. John Ross of Craigie succeeded, as heir of entail, to the lands of Craigie, upon the death of
Thomas. He married Agnes Hepburn; and had by her, (1.) Patrick, who married Beatrix Charterhouse {Charteris^ She was infeft in the lands of Hilton Malar, in liferent, Apr. 9, 1575." After
his death, which took place before that of his father, his relict married Robert Leckie, apparent of
Kypdarroch.^* (2.) MrBobert i?o55,'^ who was infeft in the estate of Craigie, and was designed " fiar
of Craigie" before his father's death, which took place about 1601.^'^ He married Margaret Eviot.
He seems to have sold tlie lands of Craigie to Mr David Moncreif, son of William Moncreif of that
Ilk, before 1620. (3.) Mr Thomas Boss, the unfortunate subject of the preceding Trial. (4.)
Andreio^ ^'

' Sheriff Rrcords of Perthshire, Jan. 12, 1573. * May 20, 1588, James Lindsay, apparoiit of Dowliill, was

served heir to Jonct lios, his mother, in a jiiece of land and orchard in the barony of Forgundennie ; and lli.shing in

the Water of Earn Inqui.sit. Relorn. Terth, (1055.) '^ Sh. Etc., 3i\\\. \2, lol'S. * Ibid. Apr. 22,

1573. ^ Ibid. Jan. 12, 1573. « See this Collection, I. 25. ' ^7;. Itvc, Nov. 3, 1591. ^ Ibid.

9 Knox's Hist, of Ref., p. 28. '» Sh. Rcc, Mar. 14, 1550. " ////(/. Jan. 5, 1549. '* Ibid. Ajr.

28, 1573. '■'Ibid. Jun. 12, 1577. " Ibid. '•' She was retoured heir to her father, in

the lands of Mayler, lying within the barony of Craigj', Feb. 19, 1574. — IiKjuix. Jirtorii. Perth, (36. ) '* S/i.

Rec, Jan. 15, 1574, and Apr. 20, 1575. ' Apr. IG, IGOO, Peter O/ijt/imit cf Tuiinys, havini; aciiuired an annualrent of 150 merks out of the IVIaynis of Malar, BarclayVhaiuh, &c., in tlie barony of t'raij;;y, from .Johu Ros of
Crag?/, nnd Agnes Hepburn, his spouse, under reversion of 1400 nicrks, with tlieir joint consent, sells liis ri-ht to
Mr John MoncreiiT of Easter Moncreilf, and Jane Spens, his spouse. This was confirnie<l by (iiailer under the
Great Seal, Jun. 28, IG02.—R g. Mag. Sig., XLIII., 2()2. " Sh. R,c., Jun. 9, 159G. "* Ibid. rud. hco.

" It appears, by the Great Seal Itegister, that, on May 21, 1G02, Robirt Ross (if Cragij, in consideration of the price
of 4150 merks, sold to Christian JMoncreif, eldest daughter of AViliiam IMoncrcif <if that Ilk, the INlill of Craigy, with
the Mill-lands, and three quarters of the town of Ciaigy, lying in the liaioiiy of Craigy and Sherilldoni of Perth.
This Charter of Sale was confirmed by King James VI," Juli. 28, \m2.—R<g. Mag. Sig., XLlll., 2G1. *" Sh.

Rec, Oct. 13, 1598, and Jan 13, IGOI. '' Ibid., Oct. 9, 1591.

584 APPENDIX.

To these notices, tlie following additional information may be annexed.

V. Mr Robert Ross of Craigie, above mentioned, seems, from entries in the Kirk Session Records of Perth, to have been reduced to a state of the utmost poverty and destitution. Mr James
Scott, in his Extracts from these Records, has the following melancholy entry: — ' On the 21st of
November, 1620, Andrew Boss, in name of 3Ir JRobert Ross, sometime of Craigie, his brother, produced before the Session tlie said 3Ir Robert's Supplication, showing his present misery, and divers
diseases wherewith he is vexed, craving support. Three pounds were taken out of the Thesaury and
delivered to the said Andreiv, to give this brother.' ^

The Editor has not been fortunate enough to obtain any material information regarding the personal
history of Mr Thomas Ross. From his own Depositions,- however, it is abundantly clear, that he
must have endured great privations while in England. In that document he actually asserts, in tlie
most solemn manner, that he was driven, by his desperate circumstances, to adopt the unhappy step
which ultimately proved the cause of his destruction, in the vain hope, that the wit and talent he had
thus exhil)itcd in so bad a cause, would not only plead his apology with the King and Court, but
become the means of his future advancement. 3Ir Scott merely remarks, as in reference to this matter, that ' it appears, from a Supplication to the [Kirk] Session, a considerable time before, that Mr
Thomas Ross had been a long time in the Prison of Edinburgh.'

In conclusion of the disagreeable subject, it is only necessary to add one other entry, from the Kirk
Session Records of Perth. It is pleasant to remark, that that charitable body had all along acted in
the kindest manner towards this truly imfortunate family; and farther, that they appear to have been
actuated by the same pious feelings, in numerous other cases of a similarly distressing description. —
' Jan. 9, 1621. Mr John Guthry, Minister, reported, that he had given thirfT/ shillings, which he had
received from the Thesaury, to Andreio Ross, to bear his expenses, when he passed to the visitation of
[^his brother^ umquhil 3Tr Thomas Ross, before his execution.'^

The Editor has failed in tracing the period when Ross was admitted a Master of Arts, and at what
University, although he was politely assisted in his enquiries by the Reverend Dr Lee, who gave
him access to the Rolls of the Universities of St Andrews and Glasgow. He fears he has already
encroached too much on the limits of this work, and now leaves the reader to draw his conclusions as
to the usage and cruel fate of the unfortunate IVIr Thomas Ross.]

I. Letter, ike King to the Privfj Council of Scotland , with injlructions
as to 3Ir Thomas Itojs^ [Sine data.~\

RiGHTE truflie and righte welbeloued cofen and counfellour, and truftie and welbeloued counfellour, WEE greete yow well. Wee fende yow here enclofed, a Libelee, (written by a villanous caytiffe,
or rather monlter, of our owne contrie,) whiche, in time of Difputations at Oxforde, was affixed
vpon a gate of one of the Colleges, as Theses to haue bene difputed : And a fcholler, hauing taken
doune and red the 6rfl fix lines, (not daring to be confcious to him felfe of reading furder of fuch
purpos,) prefentlie caried to the Vice Chancellour ; who, fufpecting who mighte be the penner,
fente for him ; and hauing gotten his Confession, that not onlie he was the author, but likewife, that
he wolde maintayne all to be trew which he had fette doune therein, the Vice Chancellour difcreetelie
and dewtifullie committed him clofTe prifoner to the Caftle of Oxforde, and fente the Libelle to vs,
that WvE mighte declare oure pleafour, bothe concerning it and the author. Whiche, his difcreete
cariage, hath, in our iugement, deferued to be, by a Letter of thankes frome our wholle Counselle,

' Mr James Scott, Minister at Perth's Extracts from the Kirli Sessmi liccords of Ptrlh, II., 8, &c. * See

tliis Appendix, p. 588, &c. * Scotl's Extr.icts from Kirk Session Records of Pirth, II., 8. '' From tbe

Originiil draught, preserved amongst the Denmylne Papers, Adv. Library. It is carefully corrected, and interlined
in many places.

APPENDIX- 585

there acknowledged. Wee likewife fende yow the perfon of the man, to be cenl'ured by yow, willing
yow fiifte to examine him, and thereafter aduefe of the forme of punilhment whiche yee fall thinke
fitte to be inflicted vpon him. For, although by the Lawes of this onr kingdome, it be not permitted for
to vfe extraordinarie punilhementes, yat hath it euer bene lawfulle for the Kinges there, to deuefe and
inflicte puniflimentes, according to the qualitie and nature of the offence, which in this particulare can
be no leffe then Treafon[!] For if no man make queflion but that the writing of an inuectiue' againfte
THE King and his progenie is Treafon, in the liigheft degree, and in our opinion it is a grevous faulte,
(and WEE could moreeafilie forgiue the writeing againfte our felfe,) then- againfte the wholle Nation
frome whence wee ar fprunge. And if it wer a mater capitall in Germanie for Stahcoius' (being
a German, a mere ftranger to Scotland, and one who, perchance, had bene hardlie vfed by fome particulare perfon there) to haue written againft that wholle Kingdome, how much more mufte it be
capitall to this fellow, who, being Scottes borne, hath fo villanouflie, filthilie, yea, and falllie, defamed
his owne contrie, by writing in fuch forte againfte his contriemen, the fpecialler of our feruantes, [and
perfuaded a courfe to be taken againft them, which pofliblie could not be performed, without manifeft
danger and manifeft violence againft our felffe,'*] and fo much the more is his offence greeuous, as
that, by the fpace of two monethes before, he continuallie vaunted that he wolde do fuch a feate. It
is therefor our pleafour, that yee aduife vpon his punilhment, and hauing refolued, that yee aduertife
vs with all expedition. So fare yee well.

II. Letter, the Privy Council of Scotland to the Kiug. Jul. 30, 1616.

Most sacred souerane,

We relTaued youre Maiesteis Letter, with the infamous Libell writtin be that wretched and
vnhappie fellow Rosse, and we imparted the fame to youre Maiesteis Counsell ; who, with all
dew reuerence and moft humble thankis, doe acknowledge youre Maiesteis iingulair cair and prudent directioun, alfweill in this, as in all otheris thingis importing the credite and reputatioun of this
youre Maiesteis Kingdome; and thay half writtin thair awne thankis to The Vice Chanctllaire of
Oxfoorde, for his wyfe and kynd refolutioun and proceidingis, in that mater.

We haif aduifed with the Libell, and with the Lawis and Conftitutionis of this Kingdome, maid
aganis the writtaris and fettaris oute of fuche infamous Libellis ; and we find the fame to be capitall,
and pvneilhable in the heigheft degree. This fellow is not as yitt come heir; and becaus of the
approitcheing vacauce,^ and diftblueing of the Counsell, we haif gevin directioun to The ^Lvoistratis of Edinburgh, howfoone he fall aryve, to committ him cloife prifounair in thair Irne-Ho^ife^
and to lay him in irnis ; and vpoun thair aduerteifment, we fall couvoene and examine liim ; and
accordinglie, we fall gif directioun for his tryall and convictioun, and fall luperceid the proimnceing of
Doorae, till we vnderftand youre Maiesteis forder pleafour, anent the forme of his pvniihenient.
Oure opinioun is that he falbe Hanged at the Mercalt-Croce of Edinhurghe, and his heade aflixt on
ane oi the Port is. But in this we fubmitt oure felflis to your INIaiesteis directioun; quhairunto we
fall conforme our felffis. And fo, praying God to blilie your Maiestie with a lang and happie
reignne, we reft

Your Maiefteis moft humble and obedyent fubiectis and feruitouris,

Ah. Cancell\ Binning. S. W. Oliphaxt.
Halvrudhous, penult July, 1G16.

To the King his moft facredand excellent Maiestie, &c.

' The original words had been * such an execrable iniiectiuo.' * On tluMnajgin, ' tliat (ine slioiiid write ajjainst

his own countrie.' ' See the Introduction to liuss's Trial, III., \t. l-lo, &c. ' The words witiiin brackets

are added on the margin. * ' Vacance ;' vacation. " Their .strong iron room, or ' cage,' as it wiis afterwards

called, in which desperate criminals were confined previous to their execution.

586 APPENDIX.

III. FoIIoicis THE These, with the Appendices adionet thairto, tranjlated}

That all Scottismen audit to be tlirowin fuithe and expellit out of the Court of England,
(excepting liis gracious Ma"^'"-, liis fone, and few vtheris,) and tliat ])e Inglischmen ar niiclitielie
blindit, deceavit, and fylet, albeit tli.ay be vtlierwayis ane Natioun full of eyis, and quick-ficbtit, that
fufl'eris fo vnprofbttable and pernicious a multitude and pudle of rafkallis to rage and bear dominioun
within thair eutrallis and bowellis. OIF quhilkis blafphemeis (^e haif writtin) that 56 wald rander and
follow out the maill jull reafones, by Godis grace, at ane vther occafioun, moir lairglie and accuratlie,
bothe by profe and verfe. Bot now 50W put furth 50ur finger to fcliaw only the fontanes, and theafe
in few number, be reflbne 50 inlaikit lafer^ and helpis to performe the famyn.

I. Sanct Jerome, Augustin, and Strabo wryttis, that Scottismen of auld war men-eitteris,
or eatteris of menis flefche ; and trewlie, (as 5e belevo,) for as 3it the flefche whilk the ancient Scottis
fwallowcd llikis in the jawis and teith of the Courtioures, quhairby thay ar provoikit to fuche ane
infixtiable avarice and intollerable pryde.

II. JosEPiius wryttis, in liis booke againfl Appion, that, in the tyme of Amenophis, King of /Egipt,
tliair raget and rauaget vp and doun tua hundreth thowfeand lipperis in TEgipt, quha, by vnlauchfuU
meanis, and by mervellous craftines and fubtillitie, emptied and pilleid^ all J>e fubflance and riclies of
y^gipt ; whilk wald Iiaif bene haillilie vndone, gif this vnhallowit men5ie'* had nocht, by the wifdome
of the King and Nobillis, bone caflin out and expellit : Sua, peace and peace,^ the King and CouNsall of England fall be vndone, and go doun, iff this companie or band that robbis Kingdomes and
landisbe nocht fent bak to thair wounted feattis and llallis.

III. The feaven leane ky** of Pharao confwmet and d ftroyit the fevin fatt and weill fed ky, and 5it
war nocht fatisfeit ; and the fevin deaff and toonie '^ earis of corne, blafled with tlie Eafl wind, fvvallowed vp the fevin big and fatt eares, and war nocht filled ; Swa, thefe Courtioures, by thair begynniiiff, and offsprinir, and fiift eflait, being moft miferable, thay diftroy, overturnes, and confumes IngLAND, ane maid plentieful cuntrie ; and ar nocht ^it filled with fo grit and evill conqueiffit^ritches,
acquyret by the fchipwrak of fe haill Kingdome of England.

IV. Thay quha, in ])air 50uth-heid,^ war trwbillit with famine and hunger, can nocht, quhan thay ar
cum to thair full growne aige, by no ])lt'ntie, be fatiat i^" Sua, it befallis vnto thefe, quha of maill fklender
bpoynning, by mad niiiriement and Iport of Fortoun, ar cayreid vp to the heichell top : St^a? g'f pair
war gevin vnto his maift bountiefull and liberall Maiestie ane thowfeand philofophik flones, quhairby
the haill Oceanus micht be convertit in gold : 5itt, thefe wald nocht be filled, gif the Cantabrik or
Bifkay Sea of Spayne, war gevin vnto thame to drink ; thay wald nocht fuffer ane thriftie bird to drink
ane drope thairof.

V. Thay fpend more in ])air gairtanes, and ribbens^' in the latchettis of thair fchooes, than J^air
fatheris beflowis in ])e intertenement of ]iair haill famelie. O quhat tymes ar thefe I O quhat maneris
be thefe I O the infamy of the world and reproche of the earthe ! Now ])air is mony Smerde Magiens,
but thay vaunt thame felffis fa to be.

VI. These Scottis Courtioures (verrie few exceptit) haif the difloyaltie or vnfaithfulnes of the
Carthaginiaiiis ; the menfworne aithes of the Pin ygianis or Trojanes ; the luxurie of the Perfians ; the
avarice of JNIydas, King of Phygia ; the crewaltie of the Elledonis, ane people of Sythia ; (quhilk
people fmgis at pair parentis funerallis, and drinkis in 3air Ikullis, and eattis fair flefche mingled with
vther beiflis ;) tlie prophanitie of Epicurus ; the deceat of Synon ; niair wyld than a carian, a bettill, or
clok vndor the wingis of ane Eagle ; thay vfe the fpuil3eis i- of Spartacus, (this Spartacus was a Thra-

' From the. identical copy of the Dittay, wliicli had been transmitted for the King's inspection, preserved among
Sir James Balfour's MS. Collections, Adv. Library, Edinburgh. ^ Wanted leisure. ' Pillaged; plundered.

* Train ; company; gang. ^ So, or in like maner, piece-meal. •■ Seven lean kine. ' Empty. * Illgotten, or acquired. " Youth ; minority ; less-age. '" Satiated. " Garters and ribands. '^ Spoils.

APPENDIX. 587

cian fenfer^ quha with Chyfus and Oenomaus brak out of the Fence-Scole of Lentulus, and dreflit ane
airray of fervandis, and overcame Clodius Glaber liis airmy, and fpuil3eit all Campania, and overthrew
Lentulus airmy and Cafllus troupes, hot was defait by CrafTus,) and the fearcenes of Vinatus (the
Portugall Lufitanius, quha frome paflor become ane hunter, and ])aireftir the chiftane of ane airmy,
trublet the Romaynes, and defait tliame in Spayne, and at lenth was llayne be treaflbne, procureit be
Coepio), and the leallngis of the Candians or Cretes.

VII. Vnto his fcbyneing and royall Ma^'k, be vntrublet liealth and increfe of glorie ! Bot God,
frome the heavnes, perfew tliefe Courtioures with blak fyre and briuiftone I I (hall, £o Ion"- as 1 leave,
for thair diflructioun, fchaw my felfF Coriolanus, and nocht Theniiftocles ; that is to fay, ane oppia
ennymie, and nocht ane fecreit freind.

VIII. O Inglische I Inglifche ! The raofl expert and wyfeft Natioun in weir,^ the terrour of the
Span5aird, triumparis over France and Guyene by fo long a tyme, in quhat benumbnes or droufines
ar 3e fallin ? 3e, qulia in weir and battell ar intometable,^ now 50 fall go doune quikiie by diHait, at
vayne appeirances of imaginarie matteris, and by the toyis of fals accufaris and delatouris, in quhome
thair is nocht fo niuche fauorines or witt as in the quhyte of ane egge ! jitt all the wealth and commodities of 50ur moft flurifcheing kingdome, is cayreit away in boittis and crearis,* thiftiouflie, to
Scotland; and incontinent, being lielpit with jour awin comraoditeis, thay will vtterlie trampill vnder
fute 5our Natioun and countrie, and will cut jour throttis with jour awin fuorde, befoir :;e be awar I
Quhat a patient Socrates will indure theafe iniureis ! Quha may nocht fnuff or fmell gritter fchortlie
to follow ?

IX. 3e haue gottin out of Scotland ane mofl worthie Prince ; nocht ane thowfeand Kingis, counterfute Stage-playeris, quhytted tombes !^ Thair is hingand al)0ue ;our heidis, or lying vpone ;our
fchoulderis, ane moir hard fervitude and fchearpar captiuitie than over Nationes quliilkis ar fubdewid
and overcum by weir I For, eftir the Romanes had overthrawin, iu weir, the Syrianis and tlie ^'Egiptianes, thay gave tharae to be governet be thair awin cuntriemen ! Thay exactit only tribute dew
frome the vanquifched ! Sail, thairfoir, thofe barbarous people pofTefs and injoy the firft places, in
Courte, in Counfale, in Kirk, in Nobilitie, in Landis, offices, functiones, and giftis of Ingland ? Thair
furlie, the libertie and glorie of England is evanifched ! Now, England is haillyly*^ delyuerit over in
the handis of Scottis Courtiouris, and the Judges half enterit ]iair nekis vnder the ^oke of theiffis ! O,
the Warld is turned vp fyde doun 1 We ar now overturned vnto the auld mafs and chaos of confuiioun I Lett fum revendge fpring out of my bones, that may cheflize with fyre and fuord the Scottis
Court and her pofleflbures. Geve tliankis, je Scottis Courtioures, vnto my povertie, and nocht vnto
the barrannes and penurie of my ingyne, gif I airme nocht all Injrland to cut jour throttis. Bot the
Lord preferve ever more his awin annoynted, both weilhelouit and electit !

X. Remove this flinking pompe, pudle, and triffles of the Scottis Court, and pride of this hautie,
fekles,' and impotent commontie. Thane, fall thair be few in jour boundis that fall be bcggeris, nidie,^
ragget — than, the treyis, gibbettis, and galloullis of all the cuntrie fall nocht be laiden with the wecht
of the hangit vp carcadges !^ The Scottifmen, as loch-leitches, and wormes in coirnes, drinkis out
the fap of :^our cuntrie, and foukis out jour nierclie,'° by inlaik quhairof fo many ar led and drawin to
thift and robberie ! Thofe Courtioures draw out gritter welthe fiuth of :;our bowellis, by ;our kiiowlege,'^ than France, Germany, and Spayne, is able to aftoird ; quhilkis guidis, whan thay ar thus pullet'"
away, quhat fall ])e maifterfull and niedie cowmontie'' of Ingland do or vndertak, bot to call thame

• Fencer; gladiator. ' War; tlie art military. ^ IiidoinitaMo. * IJtials and cr ars. C'rears were

a sort of vessel much in use in the Western Islands, to which they aiijii'ar to have lieen iieciiliar. ' W'liited

sepulchres. " Wholly ; entirely. 'Weakly; feehie, S;c. "" Needy. " Carcasses. '° .Siirks

out your marrow. " ^\'ith()Ut your knowled};e ; secretly ; by stealth. '* rcihajts, lor ' pillril ,' pillaged]

plundered. '^ Destitute and needy ' commonalty,' or connnon pcojde.

VOL. HI. 4 E

588 APPENDIX.

felfis heidlong in ane golft',' quhilk mycbt leave- fufficientlie, without manis hearme, glf thofe howlattisr
and ftymeis' war fcliote^ away.

O, wortbieft Inglilcliinen ! Wey tlie force and reafones of this my Counfall, quhairof I haif fkairce
recited the tent pairt ; and 30 fall perfave that I am come to 50ur cuntrey as ane hellhfull ftarr, quhilk
thir Courtioures haif drowned witli the fea wallis, as the Lycaonian Starr, or Vrfa Maior, to quhome it
war ane villanie to liave fo drowned fuche ane flarr,

Bot we fall nocht all die to day vnrevendget !

IV. Followis the tennour o/'tiie Depositiones of Mr Thomas Roifs,
At Edinburgh, the ellevint day of Augufl, 1618. In prefens of Sir Williame Oliphant of Newtoun, his Maiefteis Aduocat.
Mr Thomas lioiss, humblet on his kneis, and deiplie fuornevpone his folempne oathe, fayis, that
he will declair the treuthe. in all and everie thing that fall be demandit of liim. Demandit, yf the
Thesis, and Appendices J^airof, producet and fcbawin vnto him, and writtin on thre fydis of paper,
be his awin hand-writt ? Depones and grantis, that thay ar his awin hand-writt — and that na vther
perfone wrait ane word or Lettir pairof.

Demandit, qubat moved him to wryte them ? Depones, that he, being ane gentilman bornp,
depryved of all benifeit that he micht expect of his fatberis eflait, and being reducet to the extreme
point of miferie and povertie, and haveing reflauet mony infupportable iniureis of his cuntrie men, at
Courte ; he, beintr efibamed to beg, and difdaneing to fteill, and haveing no meanis quhairby to intertene^ him felff, ffinding no comforte nor releif of his contriemen at Courte, he fairfoir, being in difpair
and mad, out of his diftemperat humour and frenyfie, and fair aganis his heart, without ony fetled
refolutioun, and without ony purpois to do evill, bot to fchaw the greif of his heart, and to move pitie
and compaffioun towardis him, wrait thir Theses ; thinking, that the wryting ]>airof, in this his mad
humour and difpofitioun, wald raj'er procure pitie nor^ wraithe, at his Ma^'*^* handis ; and that God,
peradventure, wald raoue his Ma^^^"^ heart, who is a prudent and wyfe Prince, to think that the
deponer was drevin, vpone plane miferie and neceflitie, to wryte thame ; and fat fairfoir his Ma'^"'
wald pitie bis diftres and miferie, and help him : And he apprehendit that fome weill-myndit Courtioures wald interceid for him, and fchow his Ma^'e that he quho had done fo weill vpone a evill
fubiect, wald do far better vpone a goode fubiect, gif he war imployed ; bot, yf it fould pleis God to
move HIS Ma^'^ to think vtherwayis of this matter, and to tak it in evill pairt, it behooved the
deponer to abyde Codis will and the Kingis Male's.

Demandit, quhat he did with tliir Theses, eftir the wryting thairof ? Deponis, that he affixt thame
on a dur of the Kirk, callit St Maries Kirk, at Oxfurde, vpone Twifday, being a preiching day,
in the monetb of July laft, immediatlie as the people war diffolueing frome the Sermone, and as
Doctor Godwene, Vice Ciiancellour of the Vniuersitie of Oxfurd, was cuming out of the
Kirk. And depones, that immediatlie eftir ])ai war affixt, ane man, quhome the deponer knowis nocht,
tooke thame doun, and cayreid thame to fe Vice-Chancellour. And grantis, that the Theses now
producet and fcbowne vnto him ar ]ie fame verrie Thefes, and that fame Paper quhilk he wrait and
affixt, as fjiid is.

Demandit, yf at ony tyme afoir ])e wryting of the Theses he was in conference with ony perfones
liairanent? Depones, that ane monetb afoir the affixeing of the Theses, he was in conference with
be Vice-Chancellour; and regrated vnto him liis hard eflait and conditioun, and the vntliankfulnes of
liis countrie men, the Courtioures, quho wer his gritt vnfreindis.7 And he fchew theVice-Chancellour that he had a purpois to go to France, and intreited him that he mytht haif a viaticum'^ to tranf-

' Gulf. '' Who inij^ht live, &c. ^ Owls and bats. ^ Thrust ; driven. * Support ; maintain.

" Thau. ' Enemies. " In this sense, viaticum seems to have been a term cnijiloyed to denote a charitable contribulio:i raised bv authority, within the Universities, for enabling poor students to undertake joiu-neys to foreign i)arts, &c.

APPENDIX. 589

pbirt him. Quhairmto the Vice-Chancellour 5eildit. Bot the deponer being efchamed to go tlirouf^h
the Colledges to collect the fame, he reffauit only foure or fyve pund Sterling, and fpendit it as he
gat it ; quhairas, gif he had reflauit all that wald haif beene gevin, in caice he had tane panes to go
throuche the Colledges to haif collectit it; or yf he had gottin ony viaticum frome his Ma"^'*^, he
wald nocht haif writtin thir Theses, bot wold haif gone to France.

Grantis alfo, that he regraited the vnkynd deilling of the Scottis Courtiouris towardis him, to Sir'
Harie Schaveill, Principall of Eittin CoUedge, befyde Wyndfoir ; bot denyis, vpone his gritt aithe,
that he impairted his puqiois to wryte the Theses, outlier' to the Vice-Chancellour or to him.

Demandit, be whofe advyfe he wrait thir Theses? Or, yf he had conference with ony perfone
thairanent ? Depones, vpone his grit oathe, that he had no advyfe, counfall, nor informatioun gevio to
him in that matter; bot being at Greenwitche, a littill eftir lie went to Oxfurd, he addrefl him felff
to one of THE KiNGis Chaiplaines, quho is a heiche^ tall man, and was walking in Grenewitche Hall
for pe tyme. His name he knowis nocht. And he intreited the Chaiplane to tell the Kingis ]\Ia^'",
that he was borne away ; and that he had long waited on, without ony help or firj)poirt ; and that he
was now drevin to grit povertie ; and that he wald pray God for the weilfair of his Ma^"^ and his
childrene — bot, for his cuntriemen, the Courtiouris, quha had bene fo vnthankful vnto him, he fould
rather be lyk Martius Coriolanus vnto tham, nor' Themillocles.

Grantis alfua, that afoir his paffing to Oxfurd, he forgaderit with on Jolinne Line, Scottifman, a
taillour, duelland in Titler ftreit ; and that he tauld him, that wer not for fe refpect and reuerance
that he cayreid to his Ma'''^, he was halflingis myndit (yf he gat nocht fome fuppoirt to carye him
to France) to fett vp fome Theses, aither in Oxfurde or in France, againft the Scottis Courtioures, and
that it was goode for the King to fend fome of thame away. And the deponer defyret Johnne Line
to acquent the Kingis Ma"= heirwith, be Petitioun ; and he craved Johnne Lynes advyce, how he
micht efchew the wryting of thefe Theses ; bot Johnne Lyn had no advyce in the matter. And fayis,
vpone his grit oathe, that he nevir reveillit forder of this matter to ony perfone, bot fo far as he hes
confeft, concerning the Chaiplane and Johnne Lyn. And denyis, vpone his oathe, that evir he trave
out or difperfit ony coppeis of thir Theses.

Demandit, yf at ony tyme eftir he had meditat vpone the wryting of the Theses, and afoir his
affixing of the fame, he communicat the matter to ony perfones, or fcliew ]>e Theses vnto thame ?
Depones, that he only reveillit the matter to his oift'* in Oxfurd, callit Johnne Ewing, taillour, and
to his wyflfe, in this maner, to wit, that he was going to wryte fomething quhairof the haill fcolleris of
Oxfurd wald fchortlie get knowlege, and wald heir of it ; thairfoir, let me be quyet a quiiyle, and lett
no man truble me. And this was xxiiij houres afoir ]>e affixing of the Theses.

Demandit, how it was knowne that he had writtin and aifixt the Theses ? Depones, that the A'^iceChancellour knew his hand-writt, and fend for the deponer within a quarter of ane hour eftir the
affixing of the fame, and afkit of the deponer, ' Gif he had writtin thame ?' Quhilk the deponer grantit.
Quhairvpone the Vice-Chancellour fend him prifoner to the Callell of Oxfurde ; quhair he was llraitlie
keipit ten dayis ; till thre Scottifmenne of the Gaird war fend to bringe him to Courte. Denyis that,
during his abode in Oxfurde Caftell, he had fpeiche with ony perfones aneiit this matter, bot-"^ with his
keipparis and vtheris prilfoneris ; quho aikit of him, the caul'e quhairfoir he was wairdit ? To quliome
he anfuerit, becaus he had writtin fome littill thing aganis his cuntrie-men, the Courtioures, advyfeing
THE King to fend fome of thame hame.

Depones, that quhen he come to Courte, he was putt in a Inne, bciyde Charing Crocc, (juliair he
Hayed thre nychtis and two dayis ; and that he was examinat be the Duke of Lennox,'' the ISIarqueis

'Either. * High. 'Than. '' Host ; laiidlonl. * Unh'ss ; rxrcpt. * Luilnvick, .srr«H(/ Diikp of

Lennox, who had held some of the hi^liest honours in Scotland. lie was (ireat C'lianilterluin, I, old \V\^\\ Admiral,
and Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland, 1^07. 'I'lie Duke of Lennox was snrressively created
Earl of Kiciimond, (Oct. G, 1G1.3,) Karl of Newcastle and Duke of itichmoiid, (May 17, \ii2'A,) Master of the
Household, first Gentleman of the King's Hedchanilier, and one of the Knights Companions of the Order of the
Garter. He died Feb. 16, 1621', atat JO, without being survived by any of the issue of either of his three marriages.

590 APPENDIX.

of Hammiltoun,^ the Vicount Fentoun,^ the Lord Ilay,^ and Sir Williame Alexander.* And |>at ])airefter he was convoyed to (a) fchip of Preftoun, lyand at Southwark, be Mr Johnne Broun and Patrik
Logane, Scottifmenne, and be ane Inglifchman of tlie Gaird. M. T. Ros,^ with my hand.

T. W. Oliphant.

No. V.

Documents relative to the ' Egyptlvnis,' or Gipsies.

[In many parts of the preceding Volumes, Trials have been inserted, from
time to time, regarding the remarkable Asiatic people, commonly known in
early times, in Scotland, by the name of Egyptians. It seemed to the Editor
to be desirable to afford to the enquiring reader some traces of their wanderings
in Scotland, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries; and for that purpose,
he has examined as many of the earlier Records as his opportunities have, at
present, permitted.

It is sufficient, for the purposes of this Collection, to remind the reader, that,
from whatever country that singular race took their origin, (which, though there
be much room for difference of opinion on the general question, was assuredly
Oriental,) and whatever the causes may have been which prompted their emigration, or occasioned their expulsion, from their native soil, this wandering people
first made their appearance in Europe early in the fifteenth century. They
succeeded, in spite of numerous decrees of expulsion and persecution, in making
good their settlement in various kingdoms, and especially in the countries of
Poland, Germany, Hungary, France, Spain, Italy, England, and Scotland. It
is very remarkable, that, although they have now been resident in Christendom
for nearly ybz/7' hundred years, they have preserved themselves as a separate and
peculiar race, in all the countries where they have sojourned ; and have all along
been characterised by their distinctive manners, customs, language, and superstitions, which have been kept almost pure and unimpaired, from the date of their
first emigration. Indeed, few instances have occurred, in any country, where ^any
considerable portion of them have steadily settled in towns, or followed any

' James, second Marquis of Hamilton, a great favourite of King James VL He was created an
English Peer, by the titles of Baron of Ennerdale, in Cumberland, and Earl of Cambridge, June 16,
1619 ; was a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Steward of the Household, and Lord High Commissioner
to the Scottish Parliament, 1621 ; and Knight of the Garter, Jul 7, 1623. Died Mar. 2, 1624-5,
(ttat 36. ^ Alexander, Viscount of Fentoun, eldest son of Sir Thomas Erskine of Gogar, created

Earl of Kellie, Mar. 12, 1619; and father of Thomas, second Earl of Kellie. Obiit, Feb. 1633.
^ John, eighth Lord Hay of Yester, created y/rs< Earl of Tweeddale, Dec. 1, 1646. ^ Of Menstrie, the celebrated Peet, who ol)tained a (Jrant of Nova Scotia, in America, by Charter, Sep. 10,
1620. He was created Viscount of Stirling, 8cc., Sep. 4, 1630; and Earl of Stirling, Viscount of
Canada, and Lord Alexander of Tullibody, .lune 14, 1623: and died at London, Feb. 1640, but was
buried at Stirling, Apr. 12, 1641. ^ ' Mr Thomas Ross, prclent Minifter at Cargill,' obtained

a Gift, under the Privy Seal, of the Vicarage of Cargill, with the fruits, rents, teinds, &c., and
' with the Maiife and gleib thairof,' lyinu: within the diocese of Dunkeld, and sheriffdom of Perth ;
'•during all the dayis of his \yhymfi.'-— Register of Presentations to Benefices, Vol. Ill, Jul. 26, 1606.

APPENDIX. 591

sedentary or useful handicraft. On the contrary, they have literally wandered
from place to place, seldom remaining above a few days in one spot, " living in
tents," and subsisting by plunder or knavery.

In those kingdoms, where they have effected a steady footing, they have all
along been distinguished by the name of Bohemiaxs, Gitanos, Zixgaui or

CiNGARI, ZiGEUNERS, TziNGANYS, GiPSIKS, and EGYPTIANS.

As so much has been written regarding the origin and history of the Gipsies,
by HoijJand, GreUmanu, &c.^ it is only necessary to premise these facts, in the
briefest manner. The reader will find several very curious and interesting essays
on the history of the Scottish Gipsies, written in a pojjular and entertaining
form, in the two first volumes oi Blackwood's Magazine, and also in the Encyclopaedias. The Editor has just been informed, that a work is at present preparing for publication, which jH-ofesses to embrace all that is known regarding the
history of these wanderers, especially in the various districts of Scotland, which
renders it still less necessary to enlarge in this place.

It may be remarked, that in the fifteenth century, THE EGYPTIANS uniformly,
in the numerous countries to which they migrated, gave themselves out to be
Christian Pilgrims — and their leaders assumed the titles of Kings, Dukes,
Counts, or Lords of Little Egypt ; from which country they always pretended they had been expelled by the Saracens, on account of their Religion.
Certain it is, that at present they appear to profess wo religious belief whatever, and they lead the most immoral lives, and herd together like hordes of
savages, in a promiscuous state, wholly unknown to any other race now extant
in Europe, living " without God and without hope in the world." With their
characteristic cunning, it is likely that this assumption of the appearance of PiU
grims was only in accordance with the superstitious and prevailing customs of the
times. Under this character they had the address to impose upon almost all the
Sovereigns of Europe, and obtained passports and privileges from them ; and even
the Pope himself was not protected from their artifices, by his boasted infallihiUtij.

In examining the Books of the Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, the following entries occur. They are here laid before the reader, without further comment.

' Jul. 17, 1492. Item, to Peter Ker to pafle to the King' to the Ilwnthall,'
to get the Letteris fubfcrivit to the King of Rowmais, iiijf.

* Jul. 19. Item, to the King of Rowmais meflinger, at the Kingis command, XX li.

' Maij 2, 1501. Item, to Peter the 3Iori/enc,^ quhen he pafiit his way to
France, iij li. x f.

' Hoi/land's Survey of the Gipsies — Grellman. Hume on Crimes. 3Iaclicnzic' s Ohs. on tlie
Statutes, &c. See also Acta Pari. ; Burnet's Hist, of Reformation, c^cc. * James IV. ' Of

Glenfynlas, or Glenartnay, where the Kin>r was in use to resort at liiat season of the year. * It

appears by other entries in tlie Records, that tliis person, and certain ' More laj/cs,' were minstrels
and servants to the Queen.

592 APPENDIX.

' Maij 10, 1502. Item, to the Eri.e or Grece, be the Kiiigis command,
xiiij f.

* Jim, 28. Item, to axe Knycht of Grece, be the Kingis commande, vij lib.

* Item, for arie ring of gold, fet with ane dyamant, and tua rubyis, in maner
oi flour de lice, iiij lib.

' Feb. 24, 1503. Item, in Drumfreife, to Teter the Moriene, ixf.
' Dec. 11, 1504. Item, quhen the More lafs^ wes crillinit, giffin to put in the
caudill, ix f.

* Apr. 22, 1505. Item, to the EGYPTiAXis,be the Kingis command, vij lib.

* 1530. Item, to the Egiptianis that danfit before the Kixg, in Halyrudhous, xl. f.'

These are the only early notices the Editor has hitherto met with, in that
valuable Record. It is very probable, however, that some of them have no
reference to Egyptians. A variety of other documents have been obtained from
the Records of the Privy Seal, &c., which follow this brief and imi)erfect notice.]

I. LETTERy/-o?>^ King James IV. to the King of Denmarh, in favour of
Anthony Gawitif Earl of Little Egypt, 8^c. A?ino 1506.^

Illustrussime, &c. Anthonius Gawino, ex Parva Egypto Comes, et csetera ejus comitatus,
gens afflicta et miferanda, dum Chriflianam oibem peregrinationes ftudio Apoflolicse Sedis (ut refert)
jufTu, f'uorum more peregrinans fines noftri regni dudum advenerat, atque in fortis fue et mil'eriaruni
hujus popidi, refugium, Nos pro humanitate imploraverat ut noftros liraites fibi impune adire, res
cunctas, et quam habet focietatem libere circumagere liceret. Inipetrat facile quse poflulat iniferorum
hominum dura fortuna. Ita aliquot menfes bene et catholice, (fie accepimus,) hie verfatus, ad te,
Rex et Avuncule, in Daciam tranfitum parat. Sed Oceanum tranfmifTurus noflras Literas exoravit,
quibus celfitudinem tuam horuni certiorem redderemus, fimul et calamitatem ejus gentis Kegise tuse
munificentise commendaremus. Ceterum errabundse Egypti fata, morefque et genus eo tibi quam
nobis credius notiora quo Egyptus tuo regno vicinior, et major Imjufmodi hominum frequentia tuo
diverfatur imperio. llluftriflime, &c.

II. Letter, wider the Privy Seal, hy King James V. in favour of * Johnne
Fair, Lord and Erie of Little Egypt:^ Fet). 15, 1540.

James, be ]ie grace of God, King of Scottis : To oure Schereffis of Edinburghe, principal!, and
within the conflabularie of Hadingtoun, Berwik, Koxburghe, Selkirk, Perth, Forfar, Fife, Clakmannane, Kinrofe, Kincardin, Abirdene, Banf, Elgin and Fores, Name, Innernefe, Linlithq^^', Peblis,
Striviling, Lanark, Renfrew, Dunbertane, Air, Drumfreis, Bute, and Wigtoun ; Stewartis of Annanderdale, Kirkcudbryclit, Menteithe, and Stratherne ; Baillies of Kile, Carrik, and Cunynghame ; and
faire deputis ; Proveflis, aldermen, and baillies of oure burrowis and cieteis of Edinburgh, Hadingtoun,
Lawder, Jedburgli, Selkirk, Peblis, Perth, Forfar, Cowper, Sanctandrois, Kincardin, Abirdene, Banf,

' Dec. 2, 1512, she is styled tlie ' Quenis hhk vimlin,- and on Feb. 1G12-13, 'Blah Elene.' And on Jul. 19, 1513,
' Bluk ManjariV gets a payment of xlviij s. They do not appear to have been Egyptians, but Negroes. The notices,
however, are so curious that they are given along with the rest. * MS. Rv(j. 13. B. II. Taken from Pinkcrton's

Hist, of Scotland, quarto, Lond. 1797, vol. ii. p. 444. ^ Beg. Seer. Siff. xiv., 59. A very unfaithful transcript

of this document had formerly been published in the Appendix to Madauiin's Criminal Trials.

APPENDIX. 593

Elgin and Fores, Name, Innernefe, Linlithq'^, Striuiling, Lanark, Glafg^^', Ruthirglenne, Renfrew,
Dunbertane, Air, Drumfreis, Wigtoun, Irwyne, Kirkcudbricht, Quhitterne; and to all v]>eris Sche.
refBs, Stewartis, provellis, auldermenne, and bailleis within oure realrae, greting. Forsamekill as
it is huimlie inenit and fchewin to ws be cure louit, Johnne Faw,Lord and Erle of Litill Egipt ;
That quhair he obtenit oure Lettres vnder oure grete feile, direct to 5o\v, all and findry oure faidis
Schereffis, flewartis, baillies, proueflis, aldermen, and baillies of burrois, and to all and findry v],iris
havand autorite within oure realme, to affill to him in executioune of juftice vpoun his cumpanyand
folkis, conforme to fe lawis of Egipt, and in punifBng of all faim fat rebellis aganis him : NeuirJ)ELES, as we ar inforrayt, Sebastiane Lalow, Egiptiane, ane of \>e faid Johnnis cumpany, with his
complices and pairt-takaris vndir-writtin, fat is to fay, Anteane Donea, Satoxa Fango, Nona
FiNco, Phillip Hateeyggow, Towla BAIL30W, Grasta Neyn, Geleyr Bailjow, Bernard
Beige, Demer Matskalla, Notfaw Lawlowr, Martyne Femine, rebellis and confpiris aganis
]>e faid Johnne Faw, and hes removit fame alluterly out of his cumpany, and takin fra him diuerfe
fovmes of money, jowellis, claithis, and vfris gudis, to fe quantite of ane grete fovme of money, and
on na wyfe will pafs hame with him, howbeit he has biddin and remanit of lang tyme vpoun fame,
and is bunding and oblifl to bring hame with him all fame of his company fat ar on live, and ane teftimoniale of fame fat ar deid : And als, f e faid Johnne hes tlie faid Sebastianis Obligatioune, maid
in Dunfermling, befor our Maifter houlfald, fat he and his cumpany fuld remane uitli him, and on na
wyfe depart fra him, as the famin beiris. In contrar fe tenour of f e quhilk, fe faid Sebastiane, be
fuiifter and wrang iuformatioune, fals relatioune, and circumventioun of ws, hes purchefl our writin-ns,
difchargeing him and fe remanent of fe perfonis aboue writtin, his complicis and pairt-takaris of the
faid Johnnis cumpany, and with his gudis takin be fame fra him, cauflis certane our liegis afllft to
fame and fair opinionis, and to fortify and tak fair pairt aganis f e faid Johnne, fair lord and maifter ;
fua fat he on na wyfe can apprehend nor get fame to haue fame hame agane within f aire awin cuntre,
eftir f e tenour of his faid Band, to his bevy dampnage and fkaithe, and in grete perell of tynfall of his
heretage, and expres aganis juftice. Our will is heirfor, and we charge 50VV ftraitlie, and commandis, fat, incontynent fir our Letteres fene, 5e and ilk ane of 50VV, within f e boundis of ^our Offices,
command and charge all our liegis fat nane of f aim tak vpoune hand to reiiet, alfift, fortify, fupple,
manteine, defend or tak pairt with fe faid Sebastiane and his complices aboue writtin, for na
buddis norvfer way, aganis the faid Johne Faw, fair lord and maifter ; bot ])at ]iai, and ^e, iiilikwife
tak and lay handis vpoune fame quhareuir f ai may be apprehendit, and bring f aim to hira to be pvnilt
for fair deraeritis, conforme to his lawis : And help and fortify him to pvnis and do juftice vpoune
fame for fair trefpaffis : And to ])at eflfect, len to him 50ure prefonis, ftokis, fetteris, and all vfer
thingis neceftar fairto, as je and ilk ane of 50W, and all vf eris oure liegis, will anfuer to ws ])airupoune,
and vnder all hieaft pane and charge fat eftir may follow; fwa ])at fe faid Johnne have na caus of
complaynt heirupoune in tyme cuming, nor to refort agane to ws to ])at effect, nochtwithftanding ony
oure writings finifterly purcheft, or to be purcheft, be fe ft\id Sebastiane, in fe contrar. And als,
charge all oure liegis, fat nane of faim moleft, vex, inquiet, or trouble ])e faid Johnne Faw and liis
cumpany, in doing of fair lefuU befynes, or vf erwayis, within our realme, and in fair palling, remanyng,
or away-ganging furth of fe famyne, vnder fe pane aboue writtin : And liclike, ]'at ;e command and
charge all ikippars, maifteris, and marinaris of all I'chipijis within oure realme, at all I'ortis and Ilavynnis quhair fe faid Johnne and his cumpany lalhappiu to relbrt and cum, to reiaue him and fame
f airin, upoune fair expenfes, for furing of fame furth of oure realme to f e partis b('3ond ley : As f ai
and ilk ane of fame ficlike will anfuer to ws fairupoune, and undir ])e pane forliiid. Sl'bsckilit with
oure hand, and under oure Priue Seile, at Falkland, ])e fiveteine day of Fobruar, and of oure reigne
the xxviij 3eir. Svh/'cript. per Regem. [JAMES R.']

' Ri(j. Sec. Sitj. XIV. f. 59. — Vide also Ai)r. 25, 1553, and Apr. 8, 1551', Reuiiss.ioii of Aiidro law, &c., for
murder of Niuiau Smaill.

594 APPENDIX.

III. Precept to the Earl and Lord of Little Egypt ; grant/?ig power to hini
to hang and punijli all Egyptians icithin the Kingdome of Scotland. Dated^
May 26, 1540.

Prececeptum Litere Johannis Wanne, filii et lieredis quondam Johaxnis Fall, Minoris
Egipti Comitis ac Domini, et Magistri EorpTioRUM, infra regnum Scotie exillen. — Dan.
fibi potellateni predictos Egiptios ad fibi obediend. et parend. plectere et punire, &c. Apud St
Andros, Mali 26, 1540.1

IV. Act of the Lords of Council, relative to John Faw,' 8^c. Jun. 6, 1541.

The quhilk day, anentis the complaintis geviu in be Jiioxe Faw, and his brether, and Sebastiaxe
LowLAw, Egiptianis, to THE King's Grace, ilkane plein3eand vpoun vther of diverfe faltis and
iniuris : And that it is ajrgreit amang tliame to paffe hanie, and to haue tlie fame decydit before the
Duke of Egipt : The Lordis of Comifale, being avifit with the pointis of the faidis complaintis, and
vnderftanding perfitlie thegret thiftisand feathis done bethefaidis Egiptianis vpoun our foverane lordis
liegis, quhaireuer thai cum or refortis : Ordanis Lettres to be direct to the Proveflis and Bailies of
Edinburgh, Sanct Jhonllonn, Dundee, Monrofe, Aberdene, Sanct-androis, Elgin, Forrefe, and Inuernefe ; and to the Schirefis of Edinburgh, Fif, Perth, Forfair, Kincardin, Aberdene, Elgyn, and Forefe,
Banf, Crummarty, Inuernefe, and all vtheris Schirefis, flewartis, proveflis, and bailies, quhair it happinnis the iaidis Egiptianis to refort, — to command and charge thame, be oppin proclamatioun at
the mercat croces of the heid Burgh of the Scherefdomes, to depairt furth of this realme, with their
wifis, barnis, and companeis, within xxx dayis efter thai be charget therto, vnder the pane of deid :
Notwithflanding ony vtheris Lettres or privilegis grantit to thame be the Kingis grace : Becaus his
Grace, with avife of the Lordis, hes difchargit the famin, for the caufis foirfaidis ; with certificatioun,
and-^ thai be fundin in this realme, the faidis xxx dayis being paft, thai falbe tane and put to deid.

V. Respite, granted to the Captain of the Egyptians and his three fons, for

the Slaughter of Ninian Smaill}

Ane Respitt maid to Andro Faw, Capitane of the Egiptianis, George Faw, Robert
Faw, and Anthony Faw, his fons ; for airt and pairt of the Slauditer of umquhile Niniane SxMAIll,
fervand to John Lard, Smith ; committit and done in the moneth of Marche, the yeir of God l'".V'',
liij yeiris, upon fuddantie : and for all actioun and cryme that may follow thairupoun : And for the
fpace of xix yeiris to indure. At Lynlythgow, the xxiij day of March, 1553.

\l. Respite to John Faw, and other Egyptians, for the above-mentioned

Slaughter. Ajjr. 8, 1554.5

Ane respitt maid to Johnn Faw% Egiptiane, Andro George, Nichoah George, SebasTIANe Colym, George Colym, and uthers Egiptianis, now being within this realme ; for arte and
parte of the Slauchter of umquhile Niniane Small ; committit within the toun of Lintoun — 19 years.
At Linlythgw, Apr. 8, 1554.

VII. Act of Privy Council,' anentfome Egiptianis.' Nov. 10, 1636.*^

Apud Ed", 10 Novembris, 1636. Forsameikle as Sir Arthure Douglas of Quhittinghame

haveing latelie tane and apprehendit fome of the vagabound and counterfut theives and limniars, callit

Egyptianis, he prefentit and delyverit thame to the Shereft'-principall of the lliirefdome of Edinburghe, within the conftabularie of Hadington, quhair they have remained this month, or thairby ; And

' This short entry is all that occurs in Reg. Sccr. Siy., under the above date. * Acta Dom. Con., XV., 155.

» If; an. * Beg. Seer. Sig., XXVII., 3. " Beg. Seer. Sig., XXVII., 36. « Beg. Seer. Concilia

APPENDIX. 595

quhairas, the keeping of tbame longer within the faid Tolboitl), is troublefome and burdenable to the
toun of Hadington, and foflers the faids theives in ane opinion of impunitie, to the incourageing of the
refl of that infamous byke' of lawles limmars to continow in thair theivilli trade : Tiiairfoir, the
Lords of Secret Coitnfell ordans the Shireff of Hadlnton or his deputs to pronunce doome and
SENTENCE OF DEATH aganis fo iTianie counterfoot Theives as ar men, and aganis fo manie of the
weomen as wants children, Ordaning the men to be Hangit, and the weomen to be Drowned :
and that fuche of the weomen as hes chihh-en to be Scourgit throw the burgh of Hadinton and
Brunt in the cheeke : And Ordanis and commandis the Proveft and Baillies of Hadinton to caus this
doome be execute vpon the faidis perfons accordinglie.

No. VI.

Offices of the Clerkship of Justiciary-General and Master of

THE Ceremonies, &c.

{See Vol III., 2^. 558.)

[In reference to the preceding entry in the Record, it may be interesting to
insert the following- singular Letter from Mr Alexander Colville, Justice-Dei)ute,
to Viscount Annan, which has been recovered from Sir James Jjalfunr's MS.
Collections, on account of its throwing some farther light on those important
appointments ; and besides, it is a curious document, and is highly characteristic
of the parties concerned, and of the spirit of those times. It has also been
thought proi^er to present to the reader a notice which occurs in the Books of
Adjournal, containing the appointment of Sir George Elphingstoun of Blytheswood, knight, as Sir Archibald Napier's successor, in the first year of the reign
of King Charles I.]

I. Letter,^ 3Ir Alexander Coluile, Jtijiice-Depuie, to Vijcount Annan^

Dec. 20, 1622.
Right Honorable,

Your Lo. ihall be advertilfed that he who is prefentlie Justice Clerc, {the Lard of Oriucjtoun,)
is fo afflicted with extreame aage, blindnes, and vther infirmities, that he is altogither difinabled atlier
to valk abrod, or difcharge his place ; and by all appearance, is not long to furvive. And becawfe it
concernes me fo neir, that feruis his Ma'"''*- as Juflice deput, to be veil or ewill yoked,' in cace it
pleis God that I liwe, I haue aduentured thir few lynis, being confident of 3our lo. goodnes, that his
Ma"*^, by ^our lo. informatioun, micht be the better prepared aganis the iinportunitie of vnfitt Tutors^
for that place (of Juflice clerk), quhilk audit nocht to be giwen to thois that I'utt'' it, hot to tliois that

' Usually applied to denote a liive or nest of wasj)s, wild bees, or liorm-ts. ' Denmylne MSS. Adv. I.ilirary.

' Sir John Murkay, a /^ro^rr/te of the Earl of IMorton, anil a distinfjuislied favoni'ile at Court, was siicci'^sively
Gentleman of the Bed(;haniber, and IMasti-r id' the Horse, &c to .lames ^'I, He actiiiircd i;rcat wealth and estates;
and was created Viscount or ANNANi;,and Lord Murray of Lochmaben ; and afterwards Kaiu.oi' Annankai.f, Mar.
13, 1624-5. * Well or ill yoked ; having a good or bad partner, or coadjutor. * Suitors; apidicants. • I'etition for.

VOL. IlL 4 F

596 APPENDIX.

ar vortliie of it. And as tiie lywls of men ar mor pretious tlien their goods, fo lett the vortliines of
him be refpected, to quliome the lywis of men ar to be tiufted ; for if he quho is to be inclofed with
Alfyfurs, (quha for the tnofl ar rud and ignorant,) depending much vpone the (Lord Jullice) Clerc
his informatioun ; if he, I fay, be not a found confcientious man, and frie of baife bribrie, lie may
prowe a pernitious inftrument, and be the cavvfe that iniquitie may be committed ; as wee haue 5it in
memorie, of on Thomas Scot of Ahotijliall, quho was Juftice Clerk to King James the Fyft, of
happie memorie, quho being flrukin with a terror of confcience, at the hour of his death, for his ewill
cariage in that place, dyed in difperatioun, crying, * L am damned I I am damned I' 3it among all
vjieris, 50ung men, and men of great Clannis ar mofl dangerous for that place. Ceacing farther to
fafche 5our lo. earis, and referring all to qour lo. prudence ; vilhing, that, by a happie election of fuch
ane Ofticiar, God may gett glorie, his ]\Ia'^'*= contentment, and the people fecuritie, by getting right
quhen thair lywes Ihall be in queflion, and 50ur lo. praife and thankis for being a good inllrument.
Thus, refting confident that jour lo. will tak my boldnes in good part, I refl,

Your lo. affectioned and humble feruitour,
Ed«, 20 Dec. 1622. A. Coluille.

To the right honorable his fpeciall good lord, my Lord Yicount of Annan.

II. Extract y>•ow^ the Boohs of Adjournal , Dec. % 1625.

(Dec. 2, 1625.) — Sir George Elphingstoun of Blythifwoid, kny*, ane of the Lordis of his
Maiefteis Previe Counfall, producet ane Gift, grantit to him be our lait fouerane lord, James the faxt,
of moft happie memorie, vnder his hienes Previe Seill, off the Offices of * Clerk of our JustiCIARIE Generall, AND Maister OF Ceremoneis at the Creatioun of all Erles, Lordis, and
Barrones, and of all vther foleme Affembleis, quhair honourable Ceremoneis araccuftomet and neceflar
to be vfet, within this our faid Kingdome of Scotland. — Quhilkis Offices ar now vacand in our handis
and at our gift and difpolitioun, be dimiffioun maid thairof in our handis be Sir Archibald Naper
of Merchiltoun, kny', thefaurer deput of our faid kingdome of Scotland.' Dated ' AT Bissame, the
nyne and tuentie day of Auguft, the jeir of God 1624', and of our regnne the 58 and 22 jeiris.'

The faid Sir George gaif his aithe dejideli adminijlratione in the faid Clerkfchip of Julliciarie, in
prefence of the faid Juflice depute.

No. VII.

Remarkable Examinations and Confessions of persons accused of

Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c.

[Among the circumstances which peculiarly characterize the earlier Criminal
proceedings of Scotland, as well as those of England, France, and GeriviANY, &c., none are more prominent than the unmitigated rigour v\ ith which
the profession as well as the practice of A\'itclicraft, Sorcery, and Necromancy, were
punished. The hecatombs of innocent victims, whose lives were sacrificed to
satisfy the gloomy superstitions of Nations termed Christian and civilized, but

APPENDIX. 597

who, in reality, were only emerging from a state of semi-barbarism, sufficiently
attest the justice of this observation.

After the period of the Reformation from Popery, the Legislators of those
countries which had embraced the new Religion, seemed to vie with each other
in the zeal which they manifested in ' rooting out from the land' every vestige
of the professors of these ' works of darkness.' In Scotland, as the reader has
already had ufficient opportunity of remarking, great exertions were made
during the reign of King James VI, when hundreds of helpless creatures were
destroyed, under form of law, — for those who were tried before the High
Court of Justiciary bore a very small proportion to the very great numbers
who were tried and condemned by the Lords of Regaeities, Baron
Bailies, and by the Royal Commissioners. A very striking fact, mentioned
by Haron Hume in his valuable Commentaries,^ may be here briefly noted,
that ' no fewer ih.an fou?'feen Commissions ^ for Trial of AVitches were granted,
for different quarters of the country, hi one sederunt^ of the 7th of November,
1661 ; which year seems to have been the most fertile period of this sort of
accusation !' It is projier to remark, that such Commissioners had very ample
powers granted to them ; for their Commissions were expressly conceived for
the examination and trial, &c. of so many persons, nominatini, and a large blank
was commonly left for the insertion of such other persons as might be * delaited,' or accused, during their sittings. Besides this, their jurisdiction extended
over considerable districts of country. As one unhappy creature was almost
universally induced to accuse several others of the same crime for which he
or she was to suffer, and as the evidence taken in one Trial was hekl to be
conclusive in other cases, where the pannels were thus proved to be ' notour
Witches,' it was competent for these Commissioners to try any number of ])ersons, and to 'justify them to the death ;' ii practice which they were by no means
slack of performing.

Many very painful Trials for Witchcraft, &c. have already been laid before
the reader ; but perhaps there cannot be adduced a more touching i)r()()f of the
nefarious wickedness which must have l)een perj)etrated in Scotland, during the
reign of King James VI, than the following memorandum, which is ])reserved
by Thomas, Earl of Haddington, (a noted instrument of the King in all cases,
of whatever description,) in his Minutes of Privy Council })roceedings.' lie
relates, under date December 1, l608, — ' The Ei{lk of Mar declairit to the
CouNSALL, that liim wemen wer tane in Jho'ichfoKn, as \\'itcmfs; and l)eing

^ Hume on Punishment for Crimes, II., .559, - Grantod Ity tlic Lords of Privy Conncil.

3 Haddinyton MSS., A. 4, 22. Adv. Lil)iary. Wliilo Sir Tlinnuis Unm'dloiu lio held the f:n'at
Offices of Secretary of State, Lord Advocate, President of tiat ColUyr of Justice, &c. ; and in all of
those stations forwarded his master's views with unremitting zeal and ability.

598 APPENDIX.

put to ane AfTyfe/ and convict, albeit thay perfeverit conftant in thair denyell to
the end, 5it thay wer burnit quick,^ efiir fic ane creivell maiier^ that fum of
thame deit in clefpai?', remmceancF andhlafplicmeand; and vtheris, half brunt,
hrak out of the fjre, and ives cajl in quick in it aganCi quhill^ thay wer brunt
to J)e deid.'

It is hardly necessary to remind the reader, that matters were no better in
England ; where, as he must perfectly recollect, the most shocking atrocities
were perpetrated, during the reigns of Charles I and Charles II, and also
under the Puritans of Oliver Cromwell's time. The infamous proceedings,
publicly authorized, of Hopkins the Witch-finder, and other worthless impostors, who pretended to be able, by certain cruel means practised by them, to
detect real and counterfeit Witches, are also well known, and are highly calculated to bring discredit on the judicial proceedings of any country. Upon the
evidence of these wretches, added to that of the ignorant and superstitious
peasantry, and of the equally superstitious Clergy of those times, the lives of
hundreds were w^antonly sacrificed, to satisfy their diseased appetite for the marvellous ; while other misguided individuals, conscientiously no doubt, thought,
that by acting thus, they were * doing God service.'

Sir Walter Scott having so largely discussed this extraordinary subject
in his recent work on Demonology and Witchcraft,^ it would be as presumptuous as it is unnecessary for the Editor to enter farther into the matter. In
that curious and able work, the learned author, in his usual felicitous style,
notices numerous Examinations and Confessions of persons accused of Witchcraft, in Scotland, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Of these, the
most remarkable documents unquestionably are the Confessions of Issobell
GowDiE and of Janet Breadhead ; which, indeed, may safely be pronounced
to be by far the most unique and wonderful, in the Records of this, and perhaps
of any other country. The Editor has been induced, in compliance with the
repeated desire of literary friends, contrary to his own private opinion, to annex
to this work the Confessions of these unhappy women, and a few other similar
Examinations. Such declarations were commonly taken before Presbyteries,
or certain Special Commissioners, who usually ranked among their number the
leading Clergy of those districts where their hapless victims resided. The
details of all such cases, and, in particular, those which are now annexed, are
repulsive and shocking to every well-regulated mind ; but, as recording the
superstitions and crimes common at the period in question to all the civilized

• Before the Baron Bailie of the Regality of Broughton, near Edinburgh ; one of the most extensive jurisdictions, of that description, in Scotland. ^ Alive ; i, e. without having been previously
' n-irreit,' or strangled. ^ Renouncing their baptism. * Until. ^ Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, by Sir Walter Scott, Bart. Lond. 1830.

APPENDIX. 599

nations of Europe, they will by many be deemed, in some measure at least, of
historical importance ; although at same time, it must be confessed, they afford
a lamentable exhibition of the human mind, at its lowest ebb of degradation.]

I. Deposition o/'Jo/^/^ Kincakl {Witch-finder)} relative to the 'Devils mark
found on Patrik JVatJbn and 3Ianie Haliehurton?

At Dirlton, ^ of 3eiiis. The quliilk day, in prefeiice of All(exan)cler Levingtone of (Salt)coitis, James Borthuik, Chalmerlane of Dirlton, Johne Stalker, baii3ie tliuir, James
Foirman, Drem, Mr James Achefoun, in North Beruik, and Williame Daliell, notar, Patrik
(Wat)son, in Weft Fentoun, and Menie Hallyburton, his fpous, bruited and long fufpect (of)
Witchcraft, of thair awne fre-will, vncompellit, heiring that I, Johne Kincaid, vnder fubfcryvand, u'cs
in the toune of Dirltone, and had fome fkill and dexteritie in trying of the Divellis marke, in the
perfonis of fuch as wer fiifpect to be Witches, came to the BroadhaU, in the Cajtell of Dirlton, and
defyrit me, the faid Jo. Kincaid, to vfe my tryall of thame, as I had done on vtheris ; vvhilk when I
had done, I fand the Divellis marhe vpon the bakfyde of J»e faid Patrik Watson, a little wnder the
point of his left Ihoulder, and vpon the left fyde of the faid Menie Halliburton hir neck, a little
aboue hir left flioulder ; vvhairof thay war not fenfible, nether came furth J'airof any bloode, efter I had
tryed the famen als exactlie as euer I did any vthers. This I teftifie to be of veritie, vpone my credite and confcience. In witnes qufjairof, I have fubfcryvit thir prefentis with my hand, day and place
foirfaid, befoir thir witneffis aboue fpecifeit.

(Sic fubfcribitur.) J. K. Alex. Levingtone, witnefs. Ja. Borthuike, witnes.
JoHNNE Stalker, witnes. James Forman, witnes. INI. J.
Achesone, witnes. W. Daliell, witnes.

{Lidorfed.') Teftificat of J(ohnne Kincaid,) finding the witches mark vpone Manie Haliburtoune.

II. Confession of Manie HaVihiirtonf'

At Dirltoun, the ^ of .... , 1649. In prefence of Johne (Stalker) bail5ie of Dirlton,

James Levington, thair, Jo" in Lawhill, thair, James Speir, Richard Ferguflbn, Wa. Hanady,

and Wa. Daliell. Compeirit Manie Halliburton, prifoner within the Cajtdl of Dirlton, fufpect
of the cryme of Witchcraft, dilaited guiltie be Agnes Clerkson, lait fufferrar for the faid crymo, as
alfo be Patrik Watsone, fpous to the faid Menie, who lykevyfe fufferit thairfoir; and confeffit,
that auchteiu yeir fyne, or thairby, hir dochtir being feik, fcho firft fent for Patrik Cryflijbne in
Abirladie, to cum and cure hir dochter, and he refuiling, went hirfelfF for him, who refufed to cure

hir; and within '^ dayis thairefter came the devill, in licknes of a man, to hir hous, calling

himfelff a phifition, and faid to hir, that he had goode falves (and namelie oylifpek") whairwilh he
wold cure hir dochtir; and aggrieing with him for fome of his falves, quhilk he gave hir, fho gave liim
tuo Inglis ihillingis : He than depairted, and promifed to come agane within eight dayes, whilk
accordinglie he did ; bot or^ he went away the firft tyme, llie gave him milk and breade ; and Patrih
Wat/one comeing in, he fent for a pynt of Ale : Bot at the fecond comeing, he ftayit all night, and
vpone the morne airlie (^Patrik being furth) in came the Divell and lay doun with hir, (ft ho being
5it in bed,) and had carnall copulatioun with hir, his nature being cold : Ho delyroit hir to renunce
Chrift and hir baptifme, and become his fervand ; quhilk fcho ilid : And fayes, that hir dochter had

' From Original, in General Rctjister House, Edinbiirj^li. ^ lie is elsewhere designed 'the coniinoiin i)ricker.'

^ Obliterated in Orijf. * Troni Orig. Gcii. Register House. ^ Obliterated. * Left blank in Grig.

'Oil of spike or spikenard. ^ Ere ; befoi'e.

600 APPENDIX.

the wyte' of all liir wici(l(nefs) ;^ wiffing flio had nevir bene borne. — This Depofition wes renewed,
in all the particulars, by the faid Manie, in the forfaid place, on Sunday the firftof Julij, 1649, before

Alex"" Levingtoun of Saltcottis, James ^ , j Johne Stalker,

, W'm Daliell, and Mr Jo" IM'Ghill, miniiler at Dirltoun.

M. J. Makgiiill, Alex. LevIxXgtone, witnes ; J. Bortiiuik, James Lauder,
JoHNNE Stalker, W. Daliel, Williame Daliell, Walter Marshall.

Jul. 2, at Hadintoun. Whilk day, the Presbiterie, having red and confulcred the former
Depositions and Confession oi 3I(tuie IluUburton, flind the fainyne a fufficient ground forfuting*
the Judge competent to grant a Comniiffion for trying and judging her according to Law.

J. Stirling, CR

III. Act of Piuvy Council aneut GeilUs J olinnjloiin,fuf peeled of the crime

of Wllchcmft!'

Anent our fouerane lordis Letteris, reafit at the inftauce of Gelis Johnnstoun, relict of vmquhill
Johnne Duncane in ^luffilburgh, makand mentioun, That quhair fome malitious perfonis, liir vnfreindis,
liaueing dilaitit her to the Presbiterie of Dalkeith, as a perfon fufpect of Witchcraft, the
faid Prifbiteiie hes thairvpone convenit hir before thame, and hes haldin hir in proces before them, thir
fevin oulkis'^ bigane ; albeit it be of voritie, that the faid complenair is ane honnefl woman, who hes
levit thir threttie yeiris in the toun of IMuffilburgh, in gude fame, credeit, and reputatioun ; and wes
nevir fufpected nor bruted"' with ony fuche develifche and deteflabill doingis ; and fcho hes at all
tymes prefentit hir felff before the faid Prisbiterie, quhan thay callit for her felfF to tliair tryallexaminationis, and quliatfumeuir forme of procedoure thay pleafit vfe aganis hir : And althocht the
cryme of Witchcraft be ane of the heich pointis of the Croune, proper to be tryit before his Maielleis
Jurtice and liis deputis, and quhairin the faid Prisbiterie can have no warrand, auctoritie, nor
jurifdictioun to cognofce or determine, neuirtheles, thay continewalie fafche^ the faid complenair with
citationis and fummondis to compeir before thame, purpoiilie, as appeiris, to bring hir fame, credite,
and reputatioun in quellioun, and to lay vpo<in hir this fouU and havie fclander of fa deteftable a
cryme, quhairof fcho is mofl innocent ; and gif thay had ony prefumptionis aganis the complenair of
liir guiltynes of the faid cryme, tliay fould liaue gevin informatioun thairof, outhir^ to the Lord of
Regalitie quhair fcho duellis, before quhome the faid complenair hes fund cautioun to be anfuerable
for this fame deid, quhanevir fcho falbe callit; or then, to his heynes Justice Generall and his
deputis ; and fould have concurrit, be thair informatioun, to the perfute of hir, and fould not liaue vfit
fuche a prepoflerous forme of proceiding before thame felffis, quhich can produce na kynd of fentence
nor determinatioun. In refpect quhairof, the Ministeris of the faid Prisbiterie audit and fould
be difchargit of all proceiding aganis the faid complenair, in the mater above writtin, for the caulfis
foirfaidis. And anent the charge gevin to Mr Andro Blakhall, Minifter at lunerelk ; Mr Patrik
Tumour, Minifter at Borthuik ; Mr William Penman, Minifler at Creichtoun ; Nathaniell Harlaw,
Minifler at Ormeftoun ; Mr Alexander Ambroife, Minifler at Newbotle ; Mr Johne Nymbill, Minifler
at Cranftoun ; and Mr George Ramfay, Minifter at Lelfwaid ; all Ministeris of the Presbiterie
OF Dalkeith, being convenit for the tyme within the Kirk of Dalkeith, to haue compeirit be ane or
tua of tiiair number, fufticientlie inftructit, for the reft, before the Lordis of Secrite Counsale,
this prefent day, to haue hard and fene thame difchairgit of all proceiding aganis the faid complenar
in the mater foirfaid, and of thair officeis in that pairt : Lyke as, at mair lenth is contenit in the faidis
Letteris, executiounis, and indorfationis thairof. Quhilkis being callit, and the faid perfewar com-

' Blame. * Wickedness. ' Obliterated. ■* Suiting; petitioning. ^ Acta S.creti Consilii,

General lle^'ister House, Edinburgh. " VV'eeks. ' Reported. ^ Trouble. O. Fr. faschcr. " Either.

APPENDIX. GOl

peiiand, be William Duncane liir fone, and Mr George Ramfay, Moderatour of the PielLlterie of
Dalkeith ; Nathaniel] Harlaw, Minifter at Ormefloun ; Mr Patrik Turnour, Minifter at Borthuik ; and
Mr William Penman, Minifter at Creichtoun ; witli f'ome vtheris of the faid Prifljiterie being perfonallie
prefent, the reafTonis and allegationis of the pairteis prefent being hard and coniiderit be the Loidis
of Secrite Counfale, and thay ryplie aduifit thairwith, the Lordis of Secrite Counfale Dischairgeis
the Mirnjieris of the faid Prejbiterie of all proceiding aganis the faid Gelis Johiinftoun, in the mater
foirfaid, and of all thair officeis in that pairt ; and Remittis the faid Geillis to be perfewit and tryit,
outher before tlie Juftice-Generall and his deputis, or before the Lord of the Regalitie of Dunfermling, as accordis of the Law; but' preiudice alwyfe to the faid P re fbiterie to vfe all ordinar and
lauchfull meanis, quhairby thay may get tryall, be vtheris, of the faid Gelis Johnnjtoun hir practiceis
and dealing in the faid cryme of Witchcraft ; and to gif informatioun thairof to the faid Jullice Generall
and his deputis, or to the Lord of the Regalitie of Dunfermling and his deputis, before quhome juftice
falbe miniftrat, conforme to the lawis of this realme.

IV. Confession ofJonet IFaffone ; and Notices relative to Chriftiane Wilfone
and Jonet Paijloun, all accujed of Witchcraft^ June 16GJ.'

JoNET Watsone confeffed, that in Apryle laft; bypaft, or thairby, flioe being at the huiiell of the
Lady Dalltoiijie,^ ther was ane rix-dollar given to Jean Buf/hane, to be pairted among a certain
number of poore folks, wherof Ihoe was one. And the faid Jean Bugliane did run away with the
faid money, fo that fchoe gott no pairt of it. And fchoe come home to hir awne houfe, being verrie
grieved and angrie at it, wiflied to have a mendfe of Jean Biighane. Vpone the which the Deivill
apeired vnto her, in the liknes of a?te prettie hoy, in grein clothes ; and afked, ' What aild her? And
what amendfe Ihoe wold have, he Ihould give her.' And at that tyme the Deivil gaive hir his markis ;
and went away from her in tlie liknes of ane hlak doug : — And conftantlie, for three dayis thairefter,
ther was a great bee come to her ; and vpone ane morning, when fhoe was cheinging her fchirt, it did
fit down vpone her fhoulder, (flioe being naked,) wher llioe had one of the markis.

As alfo, about the tyme of the laft Baille-flf'yre night, Ihoe was at a ^Nleitting in Neictoiin-dein
with the Deavill, who had grein cloathes vpone him, and ane blak hatt vpone his head; wher fchoe
denyd Chrift, and took lier felf to be the fervant of the Dei v ill. Wherfor Ihoe acknoweledged
that fchoe was, from her heart, forrowfull for the doeing of it. And likewife, lie then gave her a new
name, and called her ' Weill-dancing Jenot' — and promifed her money at the nixt Meittincf.

And alfo, that vpone ane vther night, the Deivill was verie heavie vpon lier in her bed. As
alfo, fchoe confeffed that Bejfie Mojjit^ ElJ'peth Grahame, and Jenot Mikeljoha come to her houie, and
tooke her away to that Mealing ; when tliey all danced togither : At which tyme, when fchoe reiiunced
her baptifme, the Deivill laid his hand vpon her head, and bad her ' give all ower to liiin that was
vnder liis hand,' and flioe did fo. Quhilk haill premilles llioe confefted, in prefeiis of the vnder
fubfcryvers, without compulfione.

W. Calderwood, (Minifter of Dalkeitli,) Williame Scott, (Bailie of Dalkeitli.)

And. Macmillone, witnes. Rob'^ IIakdik, witnes. Joiine Foohd, witnes.

Henrie Wilsone, witnes. Ja. Calderwood, witnes. Alex. A : D Dkksones mark.

William Bryson, witnes. Ja. Vterside, witnes.

' Without. ^ Ori{i;inal in MS. Coll. of Sod ty of Antiquaries of Scolhitid. This Proof \vas li'd iindor n Coinmission, June G, 1G6I, ' direct be the Kingis Maiestie, with consent of the Estnitis of rarliiinii-nt,' to Sir William
Murray of Newtouii, Sir .James Ki<'har(lson of Smeiton, Patiick Scott of Lan^'schaw, IMajor .Fohii I{if;i;ar of \\'<i<ilmot, &c. ; who examined a {(reat variety of WrrciiEs. Tlieir t'oNi-KssioNs, liowever, are uninteresting' and common,
place, with tlie exception of this and the other lOxtracts which follow. ^ Lahv MAiuiARKT C'AUNKtJiE, daughter

of Uavid, Earl of Southesk, spouse of Willium, Lord Ramsuij, created Earl of Dalliousic, June '^9, 1G33.

602 APPENDIX.

V. Deposition as to the Devil carrying off a Witch in a Whirlwind, S^c.

At Dalkeith, tlie 10 of Junii, 1661. — The quliilk day, William Scott, Bailiffe, haveing
ordained fome of the neiglibours in the toune of Dalkeith to be in redines, the morrow eftir, for
guardeing of Chuistiaxe Wilsone, a Witcli, to Nidrie, to be confronted their by ane vther Witche ;
and Joline Steivin, being one of the number ordained to be in redines, faid to Jennot Cooke,i that
he wes ' goeing the morrow to convoy the faid Christiane to Nidrie,' as afoirfaid, and that he wold
goe and mak his gun cleans, for that pur])ofe ; to the which Jennot anfweired, ' Will not yow think
it a fport, if the Deivill rail'e a whirrell of wind, and tak her away from among yow by the gette '^
the morrow !' And it fell out, that in paffing a burne,^ when they wer nigh Nidrie, their arofe futche
a fudden temped of wind, which was like to blow the compagnie off their foot — and it did blow
the faid CInilliane Wilfone down in the water ....*, fo that for a long tyme they could not gett
her vp againe — it being a faire and calme day, both befor and efter. Witnesses, Johne Stevin, James
Wilfone, candill maker, Thomas Richardfone, wright, Beffie Waker, Jonett Bruntoun, and James
Blaikie, baxter.^ Joiine Stiwene, witnes. James I. W. Wilfones mark.

VI. Deposition of John Kincaid, in Tranent, ' the comon pricher^ as to

finding the Devil's marlc on Jonet Paiftoun.

Dalkeith, 17 Junij, 1661. — The quhilk day, Jonet Paistoun, being dilaitit, as is aforfaid,
THE Magistkat and Minister caufed Johne Kinhaid,^ in Tranent, the comon pricker, to prik her
— and found tuo marks wpon hir, which he called the Devill his markis, which apeared indeid to
1)6 fo, for ihoe did nather find the prein"' when it was put into any of the faid markis, nor did they
l)lood wheii they were takin out again. And qulian Ihoe was afked, ' Quhair fhoe thoght the preins
wer put in ?' Shoe pointed at a pairt of hir body diltant from the place quhair the preins wer put in
— they being preins of thrie inches, or jiairabout, in lenth. Quhilk Johne Kinkaid declairis upon his
oath, and verifies by liis fubfcription to be true. Witnesses Jiairto, Mr W'" Calderwood, Minifler at
Dalkeith, and Williame Scott, Bail3e : Martin Stevinfone and Thomas Calderwood, Elders ; Major
Archibald Waddell, Johne Hunter, David Douglas.

I. K. W. Calderwood, Minifler. Williame Scott, Bail5ie.
Martin Stevensone, Elder. Thomas Calderwood, Elder.

VII. Confessions of Iffohell Goivdie,J}jous to John Gilbert, in Lochloy.

(1.) Issobell Gowdies first Confession.

At Aulderne,^ the threttein day of Aprill, 1662 yeiris. In presence of Master Harie
Forbes, Minifler of the Gofpell at Aulderne; William Dallas of Cantrey, Shereffe deput
of the (hereffdom of Nairne ; Thomas Dunbar of Graing; Alexander Brodie, Y'" of Leathin ;
Alexander Dunbar of Boath ; James Dunbar, appeirant therof ; Henrie Hay of Brightmanney; Hew Hay of Newtowne; William Dunbar of Clune ; and David Smith, and
Johne Weir, in Auldern; Witnesses to THE CONFESSION efter fpecifeit, fpokin furth
of the mouth of Issobell Gov^jhy., Jpous to Johne Gilbert, in Lochloy.

The quhilk day, in prefence of me, Johne Innes, Notar Puhlict, and WitnefTes abownamet, all
vnder fubfcrywand, the faid Issobell Gowdie, appeiring penetent for hir haynows finnes of Witch-

' Another Confessing Witch. * By the way. ^ Rivulet. ' Obliterated — but it looks like * sfrei/me.'

■' Baker. " The counterp.irt of the English Matlicw Ilophins, the Witch- Finder, whose villainous impostures

deprived many poor creatui-es of their wretched existence. " A long pin, or bodkin, which tliis fellow used for

pricking. " A Piirish and Burgh of Barony in the Shire of Nairn, on the ^Murray Frith.

APPENDIX. 603

ci-aft, and that Iho haid bein ower lang ia that lervice ; without ony compulfitouiis,! proceidit in hir
CoNFESsiONE, in maner efter following-, to wit. As I wes goeing betuix the towues^ of Drumckwhi
and the Headis, I met with the Divell, and ther covenanted, in a maner, with liim ; and I promeifit to meit him, in the night time, in the Kirk of Aulderne ; quhilk I did. And the firft thing I
did ther that night, I denyed my haptifnie, and did put the on of my handis to the crowneof my head
and the vther to the fole of my foot, and then renuncet all betuixt my two handis, ower to the Divell.
He wes in the Readeris dalk, and a blak book in his hand.^ Margret Brodie, in Aulderne, held me
vp to the Divell to be baptifed be him ; and he marked me in the Ihowlder, and fuked owt my blood
at that mark, and fpowted it in his hand, and, fprinkling it on my head, faid, ' / baptife the, Jaset,
in my aioin name !' And within a quhill we all remoowed. The nixt tym that I met with him ves
in the Neiu Wardis of Injlioch, and haid carnail cowpulation and dealling with me. He wes a meikle,
blak, roch^ man, werie cold ; and I found his nature als cold within me as fpring- wall- water. Somtynies
he haid buitis and foraetymes flioes on his foot ;^ but flill his foot ar forked and cloven. He void be
fomtymes with ws lyk a dear, or arae. Johne Taylor and Janet Breadhead, his vyfl",'^ in Belntaheith,

Doicglas, and I my felf, met in the Kirk-yaird of Nairne, and ve railed an vnchriftened child

owt of its greaff; and at the end of Breadleyis corn-field-land, juft oppofit to the 3Iilne ofXairne, we
took the faid child, with the naillis'' of our fingeris and toes, pikles of all fortis of grain, and blaidis of
keall,^ and haked^ thaim all verie fmall, mixed altogither ; and did put a pairt therof among the mukheapes^° of Breadleyes landis, and therby took away the ftVuit of his cornes, &c. ; and we pairted it
among two of our Coevens.'^ Whan we tak cornes at Latnhes,^- we tak hot abowt two Iheawes, whau
the cornes ar full; or two ftokis of keall, or therby, and that giwes ws the fruit of the corn- land, or
keall-yaird, whair they grew :^^ And it may be, we will keip yt while Yewll or Pace, ^* and than devyd
it araongfl ws. Ther ar threttein perfones in my Coven.^^

The lafl tyme that owr Co vex met, we, and an vther Coven, wer dauncing at the Hill ofEarlfeat;
and befor that, betwixt Moynes and Bowgholl ; and befor that we ves beyond the Meikle-hurne ; and
the vther Coven being at the Doionie-hillis, we went from beyond the Meikle-burne, and went befyd
them, to the howflis at the Wood-end of Injlioch ; and within a qwhyll went horn to our howfiis.
Befor Candlmas, we went be-eafl Kinlqffe, and ther we yoaked an plewghe of paddokis.'^ The
Divell held the plewgh, and Johne Yoicnge in Mebe/loicne, our Officer, did drywe the plewghe.
Paddokis did draw the plewgh, as oxen ; qwickenswer fowmes,^^ a riglen's borne wes a cowter,*^and
an piece of an riglen's borne wes an fok. We_^went two feuerall tymes abowt ; and all we of tlie Coevex
went ftill wp and downe with tlie plewghe, prayeing to the Divell for the fruit of that land, and
that thiftles and brieris might grow ther.

When we goe to any hous,^^ we tak meat and drink ; and we fill wp the barrellis with owr oven-^

' Indicating, in the outset, that no tokture or compulsion had been resorted to, for the purpose of extorting Confession ; but that she came forward, and vohnUai'ili/ made lier Declaration, bewailing her former oft'ences. * I'armsteadings. ^ It is a singular circumstance, that in almost all the Confessions of M'itches, their initiation, and
many of their meetings, are said to have taken place within Chukciies, Churchyards, and consecrated groinid ; and a
certain ritual, in imitation, or mockery, of the forms of the Church, is uniformly said to have been gone through.
* Rough ; hairy; Jiirsntc. * Throughout this Confession,_/i;o^ is used iorfcct. " See Iut Confession, which follows tliis, (No. VIII.) ' Pai'ings of the nails. In such incantations, the nails and, joints, &c. of dead men were
commonly made use of. ^ Kail-hludes ; the leaves of cole wort. '•' J/uc/u'd ; cho]>ped. '" Dung-lieaps ;
middens. " Companies; Witches' Conventicles. Perhaps from Lat. couvenirc. 'I'he word cove is still in use
(in the Gipsy, flash, or slang Vocabulary) as an associate, chum, or companion, &c. "' I.amnuis : 1st August.
" This symbolical mode of tfiking the fruit, crop, or produce of land, &c., is frefjuently alluded to in \\'itch-Trials.
The soil ajiparoilli/ horn only straw and empty ears ; but the real i)roduce was, ia due season, conveyed to the barns
of the enclianter. The milk of a dairy was taken by means of a hair Icl/tcr, rope, or halter, j)assing under llie door,
and attached to one of the stalls where the cattle stood, &c. The Witch procured the entire produce by ' milkiiKj the
tether P Another method is afterwards recited in this Coni-ession. " Until Christmas or Kuster. '^ The
number thirteen is still proverbially called ' tlir Diils dozen,' in Scotland. ''* Yoked a i>lou;,'h of frogs. '" Doggi'ass, or (ywic/f-grass, served for soivmrs or .suams ,- being the traces, cliains, or iron links, by which, ot old, tlie oxen
were yoked to the ])lough. The soivmc (noyme) was lastened by a hook to the soule or .suh (swivel. ) " The coulter
of the plough was formed of the horn of a half-castrated ram, called ariylen; q. d. a i idyi l-rum. '"•' Enter by
steiilth. ''" Awin ; own.

VOL. III. 4 G

604 APPENDIX.

pifh again ; and we put boofomes^ in our beds witb our bufljandis, till ve return again to tbem. We
wer in the Earle of Murrey es- bous in Dernvay, and ve gott anewgb tber, and did eat and drink of
tbe beft, and browgbt pairt witb ws. We went in at tbe windowes. I baid a little borfe, and wold
fay, ' Horse and Hattock, in the Divellis name !'^ And tban ve void flie away, qubair ve void,
be ewin^ as ftrawes wold flie wpon an hie-way. We will flie lyk flrawes quban we pleas; wild-ftrawes
and corne-ftrawes wilbe horfesto ws, an^ ve put tbaim betwixt our foot, and fay, ' Horse and HatTOK, IN the Divellis nam !' An quban any fies thes flrawes in a wbirlewind, and doe not fanctifie tbem felues,*^ we may Iboot tbem dead at owr pleafour. Any tbat ar Ibot be vs, tbeir fowell
will goe to Hevin, bot tber bodies remains witb ws, and will flie as borfis to ws, als fmall as llrawes.'
I was in the Downie-hillis, and got meat tber from the Qwein of Fearrie, mor tban I could eat.
The Qwein of Fearrie is brawlie clotbed in wbyt linens, and in wbyt and browne cloatbes, he. ; and
THE King of Fearrie is a braw man, weill favoured, and broad faced, &c.^ Tber wes elf-bulUs
rowtting and fkoylling wp and downe thair, and affrigbted me.^

' Busoms ; brooms. * Alexander SiewAri, fourth Earl of Moray. ^ The following remarkable circumstances were communicated to the ingenious John Aubrey, Esq., F. R. S., by one Stewart, a tutor in the family of
James, second Loud Duffl's ; from whose recital, Stewart states, he had it, and that his lordship had it from his
father, Alcxamhr, first J^ord Uuffus, -who had, in like manner, heard the tradition from William Sutherland of
Dnffus, giMnd lilt her of James, Lord Duffus, who died about the year 1G26. It closely corresponds with the particulars contained in the Depositions of Isabel Goivdie and Janet Brcadliead, in reference to this branch of Fairy superstition. As Aubrcrfs work is now exceedingly scarce, little apology is required for (j^uoting the interesting communication, which he has, fortunately, preserved at length : —

' As soon as 1 read your letter oflMay 2\, (169-t,) I called to mind a story which I heard long ago, concerning one
of the JjOiin Duffus (in the shire of Murraij) his predecessors; of whom it is reported that, upon a time, when he
was wiilking abroad in the fields, near to his own house, he was suddenly carried away, and found the next day at
Paris, \n the French King's cellar, with a silver cup in his hand. That, being brought into the King's presence,
and questioned by him, " Who he was?" — and " how he came thither?" He told his name, his country, and the
place of his residence; and that on such a day of the montii (which proved to be the day immediately preceding),
being in the fields, he heard the noise of a whirlwind, and of voices crying " Horse and Hattock!" (this is tbe
word which the Fairies are said to use when they remove from any place ;) whereupon he cried " House and
Hattock !" also ; and was immediately caught up and transported through the air, by the Fairies, to that place :
Where, after he had drank heartily, he fell asleep, and before he awoke, the rest of the company were gone, and had
left him in the {)osture wherein he was found. It is said the King gave him the cup which was found in his hand,
and dismissed him.

' This story (if it could be sufficiently attested) would be a noble instance for your purpose; for which cause I was
at some pains to en(|uire into the truth of it, and found the means to get the present Lord Duffus's opinion thereof;
which shortly is, that there has been and is such a tradition ; but he thinks it fabulous. This account of it his
Lordship had from his father, who told him that he had it from his father, the present Lord's grandfather. TJieie
is yet an old silver cup in his lordshi/i's possession still, which is culled " the Fairy Cur," — but has nothing engraven
upon it except the arms of the Family.

' The gentleman by whose means I came to know the Lord Duffus's sentiment of the foregoing story, being tutor
to his lordship's eldest son, told me another little passage of the same nature, whereof he was an eye-witness. He
rejtorts, that when he was a boy at school, in the town o/" Forres, yet not so young but that he had years and capacity both to observe and remember that which fell out, he and his school-fellows were, upon a time, whipi)ing their
tops in the Churchyard, before the door of the Church. Though the day was calm, they heard a noise of a wind, and,
at some distance, saw the small dust begin to arise and turn round ; which motion continued advancing till it came
to the place where they were : Whereupon they began to bless themselves. But one of their number (being, it seems,
a little more bold and confident than his companions) said, " Horse and Hattock with my top!" And immediately they saw the to|> lifted up fiom the ground, but could not see what way it was carried, by reason of a cloud of
dust which was raised at the same time. They sought for the top all about the place where it was taken up, but in
vain ; and it was found afterwards in the Churchyard, on the other side of the Church. Mr Steward (so is tbe
gentleman called) declared to me that he had a perfect remembrance of this matter.' — Aubrey's Miscellanies, p. 209.
' Like ; even as; in like manner as. > And ; if. " The children in the kirkyard of Forres (see the

preceding Note on Horsf and Hattock) appear to have been ade])ts in this branch of the Fairy creed ; which was, no
doubt, familiar to all classes of the peasantry of Scotland, as numerous traces of it are to be found in various districts,
at the remotest distance from each other. ' The above details are, perhaps, in all respects, the most extraordinary

in the history of Witchcraft of this or of any other country. Any comment would only weaken the effect of such
veiy remarkable descriptions. " It is a thousand pities that the learned Examinators have so piously declined indulging the world with the detailed description of these illustrious personages. Under the singularly descriptive powers
of Issobel Gdwdir, much might have been learned of P'airy-land and its Mythologj'. " It is evident that Issobers

gossipping had again been cut short here, as irrelevant. Not so the more objectionable parts of her Confession, which
were obviously drawn out of her, and listened to with the utmost complacency by her reverend inquisitors.

APPENDIX. 605

When we tak away any cowes milk, we pull tlie tow, and twyn it and plaitt it in the vron"' way, in
theDivellis name ; and we draw the tedder (fua maid) in betuixt the cowes hinder foot,^ and owt betuixt
the cowes forder foot, in the Divellis name ; and therby tak with ws the kowes milk. We tak (heips
milk ewin fo. The way to tak or giev bak the milk again, is to cut that tedder. Whan we tak away
the ftrenth of anie perfones eall,^ and giwes it to an vther, we tak a litle qwantitie owt of each barrell
or ftand of eall, and puts it in a flowp, in the Divellis nam ; and, in his nam, with owr awin handis
puttis it amongft an vtheris eall, and giwes her the ftrenth and fubftance and heall of hir nei-ditbouris
eall. And to keip the eall from ws, that we haue no power of it, is to fanctifie it veill. We set all
this power from the Divell ; and when ve feik it from him, ve call him ' owr Lord !'

Johne Taylor and Janet Breadhead, his wyff, in Bellnakeith, Be//ie Wiljone, in Aulderne, and
Margret Wil/b?ie, fpows to Donald Callam in Aulderne, and I, maid an pictur of clay, to diflroyMe
Laird of Parhis mealP children. Johne Taylor browght horn the clay, in his plaid newk ;' his wyff
brak it verie fmall, lyk meall,^ and fifted it with a fiew,^ and powred in water among it, in the Divellis
nam, and vrought it werie fore, lyk rye-bowt ;'' and maid of it a pictur of the Lairdis fones. It haid
all the pairtis and merkis of a child, fuch as heid, eyes, nofe, handis, foot, mowth, and litle lippes. It
wanted no mark of a child ; and the handis of it folded down by its fydes. It was lyk a pow,'^ or a
flain gryce.^ We laid the face of it to the fyre, till it ftrakned ;^° and a cleir fyre round abowt it, till
it ves read lyk a cole." After that, we wold roll it now and then ; each other day^^ tlier wold be
an piece of it weill roften. The Laird of Parkis heall maill children by it ar to fuffer, if it be not
gotten and brokin, als weill as thes that ar borne and dead alreadie. It ves rtill putt in and taken out
of the fyre, in the Divellis name. It wes hung wp wpon an knag. It is yet in Johne Taylor's hows,
and it lies a cradle of clay abowt it.| Onlie Johne Taylor and his wyff, Janet Breadhead, Bejie and
Margret Wilfones in Aulderne, and Margret Brodie, thair, and I, wer onlie at the making of it. All
the multitud of our number of Witches, of all the Coevens, kent^^ all of it, at owr nixt meitting
after it was maid. And the Witches yet that ar vntaken, haw thair awin poweris, and owr poweris
quhilk we haid befor we wer takin, both.^* Bot now I haw no power at all.

Margret Kyllie, in , is on of the vther Coven, Mcjlie Hirdall, fpous to Allexander Po/s,

in Lonheid, is on of thaim ; hir fkin is fyrie. Ijjbhell Nicoll, in Lochley, is on of my Co even. Allexander Elder, in Earlefeat, and Janet Finlay, his fpows, ar of my Coevens. Margret Ha^fljein, in
Moynes, is on ; Margrat Brodie, in Aulderne, Bejfie and Margrat Wilfones, thair, and Jenti Marten,
ther, and Elfpet Ni/hie, fpows to Johne Mathoxo, ther, ar of my Coven. The faid Jean Mairtcn is
Maiden '^ of owr Coven. Johne Yoivng, in Mebeflowne, is Officer to owr Coeven.

Elfpet Chifsholme and IJfohell More, in Aulderne, Magie Brodie, , and I, went in

to Allexander Cumings litt-hows,''' in Aulderne. I went in, in the likenes of a kea," the laid Elfpet

Chifohn wes in the fhape of a catt. Ifohell 3Ior wes a hair, and Magie Brodie a catt, and '^

We took a threid of each cullor of yairne that wes in the faid Allexander Cuming his litt-fatt,'^ and
did cafl thrie knots on each threid, in the Divellis name ; and did put the thriedis iu the fatt, witherfones'''" abowt in the fatt, in the Divellis name ; and thairby took the heall ftrenth of the fatt awav.

'Feet. * Strong ale. 'Male. '' In the nook, or cornej', of his plaid. * Pounded, or jiowdorcd

it, like meal. * To make the plaster fine, and free from earthy particles. ' Probably a sort of Ntir-aboiit,

or hasty-pudding, made of rye-flour. * In another Deposition it is thus expressed, ' lyk a /)('//■ vr fia(/(ii:' A

feadge was a sort of scone, or roll, of a pretty large size. Perhaps this term signifies, as large as the <|uantity of dough
or paste necessary for making tliis kind of bread. " A Hayed sucking jtig, after being scalded and scraped. '" Shrivelled with the heat. " Red like a coal. '- Each alternate day. '■' Knew. " This is suiuetliing new
in Witch stories, and lets in additional light on these charms. '^ Each Coven appeiu's to have had an Om-icek
for the men, and a I\Iaii)>:n for the women ; but whetlier the province of these personages was to preside over them,
or to act as messengers, to call them together, does not seem so certain. '" Dye-house. '' Jackdaw.
" This and the preceding spaces are left blank in the Deposition. "' Dying-vat. ** Widdersliins, contrary
to the direction and ordinary course of the sun.

606 APPENDIX.

that it could litt nothing hot onlie blak, according to the culor of the Divell, in quhoes nam we took
away the ftrenth of the rycht culouiis that wes in the fatt I

All quhilkis of tlie piemiffes, fwa i'pokin and willinglie Confefl and declaiiit furth of the mowth of
the faid Ijjohell, in all and he all thingis as is abow felt downe, I, the faid Johne Innes, Notar Publict,
haw writtine thir prefenttis ; and with the faidis Witneffes abow namet, in farder teftimonie and witneffing of tlie premilTes to be of weritie, We haw fubfcry wit the famen with our handis, day, yeir, and
place aboue fpecifeit. Joannes Innes, Notarius Publicus.^

IMk Haky Forbes, Minister at Auld Earn, Attestis. W. Dollas of Cantray, Shereft'-deput, Attestis.

A. Bkodie, witnes to the said Confetione. Hbn. Rose, Minister at Nairne, Attestis the forsaid

Hew Hay of Newtown, Attestes. Declaratione, as to the principal substantials.

W. SuTUERLAND of Kinsterie, Attestis these Confessionis. George Phinxie, in Kirkmichacl, Attestis,

Jo. Weir, in Aulderne, Attestis.

(2.) ISSOBELL GOWDIES SECOND CONFESSION.

Att Aulderne, the third day of May, 1662 yeiris, abowt the howris of two or thrie in the efternoone, or therby: In prefence of Master Harie Forbes, &c.^

The quhilk day, in prefence of me, Joline Innes, Notar Publict, and Witneffes, all vnder-fubfcrywand, the faid Lssobell Gowdie, profeffing repentance, &c.^ Efter that tym ther void meit hot
fomtymes a Coven, fomtymes mor, fomtymes les ; hot a Grand Meitting void be about the end of ilk
Quarter. Ther is threttein perfones* in ilk Coeven ; and ilk on of vs has an Sprit to wait wpon ws,
quhan ve. pleas to call wpon him. I remember not all the Spritis names; hot thair is on called
' SwEiN,' quhilk waitis wpon the faid Margret Wilfon in Aulderne ; he is ftill * clothed in grafs-grein ;
and the faid Margret Wilfon lies an niknam called, ' Pikle neirest the wind.' The nixt Sprit
is called ' IIorie,' who waitis wpon Beflie Wilfone, in Aulderne; he is flill clothed in yallow ; and

hir nikname is ' Throw the corne yaird,' [ ].^ The third Sprit is called < The

RoRiNc; LYON,' who waitis wpon Iffobell Nicoll, in Lochlow; and [he is flill clothed] in fea-grein ;
her niknam is ' Bessie Rule.' The fowrth Sprit is called ' Mak Hector,' qwho [waitis wpon
Jean] Martein, dawghter to the faid Marget Wilfon ; he is a yowng-lyk Devill, clothed ftill in grafs-
[green. Jean Martein is] Maiden to the Coven that I am of; and hir nikname is ' Over the
Dyke with it,' becaws the Divill [alwayis takis the] Maiden in his hand nix him, quhan ve

daunce Gillatrypes {' and quhan lie void lowp from he and (he will fay,

' Ower the dyk with it I' The nam of the fyft Sprit is ' Robert the [Rule,' and he is ftill clothed
in] fadd-dun, and feimis to be a Comander of the reft of the Spritis ; and he waittis wpon Margret
Brodie, in Aulderne. [The name of the faxt Spirit] is called ' Theiff of Hell wait wpon hir
SELFE;' and he waitis alfo on the faid Beffie Wilfon. The name of the fevinth [Sprit is called]
* The Read Reiver ;' and he is my owin Spirit, that waittis on my felfe, and is ftill clothed in blak.
The aucht Spirit [is called] ' Robert the Jackis,' ftill clothed in dune, and feimes to be aiged. He
is ane glaiked gowked Spirit! The woman's [nikname] that he waitis on, is ' Able and stowt!'*
The nynth Spirit is called ' Laing;' and the woman's nikname that he vaitis wpon is < Bessie
Bauld.'^ The tenth Spirit is named ' Thomas a Fearie,' &c.^° — Ther wilbe many vther Divellis,
waiting wpon [our] Maister Divell ; hot he is bigger and mor awfull than the reft of the Divellis,
and they all reverence him. I will ken them all, on by on, from vtheris, quhan they appeir lyk a man.

' His Latin dorquet, with his motto, * Amor mens crucifixiis. IGGl,' arc affixed. It is unnecessarj' to preserve this,
as it is in common form. ' As in preceding Deposition. ^ The same preamble is repeated, with the account of her
baptism and carnal dealing, &c., in similar terms as in her preceding Confession. * The Ueil's dozen. ' Ever ;

always. '' This paper is unluckily very much mutilated at the ends of the lines; which mutilation commences here.
Where the sense can be made out, the words are conjecturally supplied, within brackets ; if not, a small blank is left
in this transcript. ' Probably a dance then popular among the vulgar. *• Viz. Bessie Hay. " Viz. Elspet Nishie.
'" lssobell, as usual, appears to liave been stopped short here by her interrogators, when she touched on such matters.

APPENDIX. 607

Qulien we reafe the wind, we tak a rag of cloth, and weitts^ it in water; and we tak a beetle^ and
knokis the rage' on a ftone, and we fay thryfe ower,

' I KNOK this ragg wpon this llane.
To raife the wind, in the Divellis name ;
It fall not lye^ vntill I pleafe againe !'
[Whan] we wold lay the wind, we dry the ragg, and fay (thryfe ower,)
' We lay the wind in the Divellis name,
[It fall not] ryfe quhill we (or I) lyk to reafe it again !'
And if the wind will not lye inftantlie [after we fay this,] we call wpon owr Spirit, and fay to him,

' Thieffe I Thieffe I conjure the wind, and caws it to [lye ].'

W^e haw no power of rain, hot ve will reafe the wind quhan ve pleas. — He maid vs beliew [. . . .

] that ther wes no God befyd him.

As for Elf-an-ow-heidis, the Divell ihapes them with his awin hand, [and fyne deliueris thame]
to Elf-boyes, who whyttis and dightis^ them with a lliarp thing lyk a paking neidle; hot [quhan I
wes in Elf-land ?] I faw them whytting and dighting them. Quhan I wes in the Elfes howflis, they

will haw werie them whytting and dighting; and the Divell giwes them to ws,

each of ws fo many, quhen Thes that dightis thaim ar litle ones, hollow, and bofsbaked I^ They fpeak gowftie'' lyk. Quhen the Divell giwes them to ws, he fayes,

' Shoot thes in my name,
And they fall not goe heall hame !'
And quhan ve fhoot thefe arrowes (we fay) —

' I shoot yon^ man in the Divellis name,
He fall nott win heall hame !
And this falbe alfwa trw ;
Thair fall not be an bitt of him on lieiw V^
We haw no bow to llioot witli, but fpang'" them from of the naillis of our thowmbes. Som tymes
we will miffe ; hot if thay twitch," be it beaft, or man, or woman, it will kill, tho' they haid an jack'^
wpon them. Qwhen we goe in the Ihape of an haire, we fay thryfe owr :

' I SALL goe intill ane haire,
With forrow, and fych, and meikle caire ;
And I fall goe in the Divellis nam,
Ay whill I com horn [againe I]'
And inftantlie we ftart in an hair. And when we wold be owt of that Ihape, we vill fay :
' Haire, [haire, God fend the caire !]
I am in an hairis liknes juit now,
Bot I falbe in a womanis liknes ewin [now.]'
When we void goe in the liknes of an cat, we fay thryfe ower,

' I SALL goe [in till ane catt,]
[With forrow, and fych, and a blak]fliot I
And I fall goe in the Divellis nam,
Ay quliill I com hom again I'

' Wet. * A piece of flatted wood, somewhat resembling a rricket-bat, which washerwomen use for knookiin;

clothes, in cleansing them. ^ Rag. * lie allayed. ^ Shapes and trims them as a eiupciiter, witli i-djjed-tools.

" Boss also signifies hollow, or empty. Perhaps this expresses that these Elves were diminutive and luunp-buckcd
creatures resembling the trows or trolls of FAiuy SurEiisTrnoN ; whose propensities are uniformly described us being
malignant, and hostile to mankind. ' Roughly ; crossly ; grullly. " Yonder. The preceding and following

rhymes are probably unique, even in the history of Trials for Wirt mckaft, and show, in a very forcible manner, the
criminality of t}» bigoted, though learned and well-intentioned, individuals who dragged forwaid such wretches to
public trial and,Xn ignominious death. " Ou life; alive. '" Jerk. " Touch. " A coat of

mail ; defensive'Sfc^QiJp'.--

608 APPENDIX.

And if ve [wold goe in ane cravv, then] we fay thryfe ower :

* I SALL goe intill a craw,

With forrow. and fych, and a blak [thraw !
And I fall goe in the Divellis nam,]
Ay quhill I com home again !'
And quhen ve void be owt of thes fliapes, we fay :

' Catt, catt, (or craw, craw,) [God] fend the a blak fliott ! (or blak thraw I)
I wes a catt (or craw) juft now,
Bot 1 falbe [in a woman's liknes evin now.]
Catt, catt, (or craw, craw,) God fend the a blak fliot ! (or a blak thraw I)
Giff we, in the [fliape of an catt, an craw, an] haire, or ony vther liknes, &c., go to any of our
neightbouris howflis, being Witches, we will [fay,]

[' I (or we) conjure] the Goe with ws (or me) !'
And prefentlie they becom as we ar, either cats, hearis, crowes, he, and goe [with ws whither we
wold. Quhan] we wold ryd,' we tak windle-ftrawes, or been-flakes,^ and put them betwixt owr foot,-'

and fay thryfe,

* [Horse] and hattok, horfe and goe,

Horfe and pellattis, ho ! ho !'*
And immediatlie we flie away whair [euir we wold] ; and lead our hufbandis fould mifs vs owt of
owr beddis, we put in a boofom, or a thrie [leggit floole befyde thame,] and fay thryfe ower,
* I LAY down this boofom (or ftooll,) In the Divellis name,

Let it not fleir [Quhill I] com again !'

And immediatlie it feimis a voman, befyd owr hufbandis.

Ve can not turn in the lik[nes^ of ] Quhen my hufband fold beeff, I vfed

to put a fwellowes feather in the hyd of the beall, and [fay thryfe,]

' [I] PUTT owt this beeff in the Divellis nam,
That meikle fdver and good pryce com hame !'
I did ewin fo [quheneuir I putt] furth either horfe, noat,*" vebs," or any vther thing to be fold, and
ftill ^ put in this feather, and faid the [famin wordis thryfe] ower, to caws the comodities fell weill,

&c thryfe ower,

Owr Lord to hunting he [is gone]

marble ftone.

He fent vord to Saint Knitt ^

[Quhan we void heall ony for, or brokin limb, we fay thryfe ower,]

He pat the blood to the blood. Till all vp flood ;

The lith to the lith. Till all took with ;

Owr Ladie charmed hir deirlie Sone, With hir tooth and hir townge,

And hir ten fingeris

In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Halie Gaist I^"

' Ride. * Bean-stalks. ^ Vor feet. * See Note to * Horse and hattock,' p. 6041. ' There is

a ti'adition in Morayshire, that Witches could not appear in the shape of a dove or a lamb ; the one being emblematical of THE IIoLV Spirit, the other being the emblem of the Agnus Dei. Perhaps the hiatus might not improperly
have been so supplied. " IVull, cattle. ' Webs of cloth. *• Uniformly; constantly; always. " After this

fragment, a considerable portion of the MS. is unfortunately torn oil". It is jirobahle that the two first lines of the
next Charm are mutilated. '" It has been often remarked by the Editor, in the course of the numerous Witch

Trials which occur in this Collection, that a great proportion of the charms, in use to be repeated by these unhappy
women, were actually paraphrases of portions of the Mass-Iiooh — and in some eases, such as in the Case of Annie
Samson, there appears to have been used doggrel versions of the Creed, &c. ! Others were taken from ancient popular
rhymes and songs, such as the above fragment, ' Our Lord to hunting he is gone,' &c., which, unfortunately, is
mutilated.

APPENDIX. 609

And this we fay tliryfe over, ftraikingi the for, and it becomes beall. 2^'', For the beax-shaw »
or pain in the heance,^ — ' Wee ar heir thrie Maidens charming for the bean-ftraw ; J)e man of tlie Midleearth, blew beaver, land-feaver, maneris of ftooris, the Lord fleigged* the Feind with liis holy candles

and yeird foot flone ! — Thair Ihe fittis, and heir fhe is gon I — Let hir nevir com heir ao-ain I' S'l''

For THE Feaveris, we fay thrife over, ' I forbid the qwaking-feavers, the fea-feaveris, the landfeaveris, and all the feaveris that ewir God ordained, owt of the head, owt of the heart, owt of the bak
owt of the fydis, owt of the kneyis, owt of the thieghes, fra the pointis of the fingeris to the nebes^ of
the toes; owt fall the feaveris goe, [fom] to the hill, fom to the hap, fom to the flone, fome to the
ftok. In Saint Peiteris nam, Saint Panllis nam, and all the Saintis of Hevin : In the nam of the
Father, the Soke, and of the Halie Gost 1'^ — And when we took the frwit of the filhes from
[the] filheris, we went to the lliore, befor the boat wold com to it ; and we wold fay, on the fliorefyd, thrie feuerall tymes ower,

* The fiflieris ar gon to the fea,

And they vill bring hom filhe to me ;

They will bring them hom intill the boat,

Bot they fall get of thaim bot the fmaller fort !'
So we either fleall a fifh, or buy a fifli, or get a filh from them [for nowght,] an or ma.' And with
that we haw all the fruit of the heall^ filhes in the boat ; and the filhes that the fifliermen thamfelues
will haw, will be bot froath, 8cc.

The firft woyag that ewer I went with the rell of owr Covexs wes [toj Plewghlandis ; and tliair
we fliot an man betuixt the plewgh-ftiltis, and he prefentlie fell to the ground, wpon his neife^ and
his mowth ; and than the Divell gaw me an arrow, and cawfed me Ihoot an voman in that feildis ;
quhilk I did, and Ihe fell down dead.'o In Winter 1660, quhen Mr Harie Forbes, Miniller at Aulderne,
wes feik, we maid an bagg of the gallis, flelh, and guttis of toadis, pickles of bear," pairingis of the
naillis of fingeris and toes, the liewer of ane hair, and bittis of clowtis. We fteipit this all together,
all night among watter, all baked '^ throw vther. And whan we did put it among the water, Satan
wes with ws, and learned ws the wordis following, to fay thryfe ower. They ar thus,
' He is lying in his bed, — he is lyeing feik and fair;
Let him lye intill his bed two monethis and [thrie] dayes mair I
2iJ, Let him lye intill his bed, — let him lye intill it feik and fore ;

Let him lyne untill his bed monthis two [and] thrie dayes mor I
31J, He fall lye intill bis bed, he fall lye in it feik and fore ;

He fall lye intill his bed [two monethis and] thrie dayes mor I'
Quhan we haid learned all thes wordis from the Divell, as faid is, we fell all down [wpon owr]
kneis, with owr hear down ower owr fliowlderis and eyes, and owr handis lifted \vp, and owr eyes

' Stroking; gently rubbing. ' The ho7ieshave or honeJuiw, signifies the Sciatica. From :ni annisin<;, published specimen of the Exsiooii Dialect, Devonshire, it appears, tliat tlie term is also known in England. The
peasantry of that district use a singular Charm for its cure. ' The patient must lie upon his back, on the bank of
the river or brook of water, with a straight staff by his side, between him aud the water; and must have the lollowing words repeated over him, viz.

" lioneshave right — Boneshave straight —

As the water runs by the stave — Good for Boneshave !"'
They are not to be persuaded but that this ridiculous form of words seldom fails to give (hem a jicrfect cure.' K.viiwur
ScoldiiKj. P. 8. Note. Mlaunch. "i Affrighted ; terrified. * Nibs ; extremities. " It appears

very singular to us who live in the Nineteenth Century, that Satan should have taught his servants to invoke tuk
Saints, and even tuk IIoi.v Thinitv. Tlie charms recited by his disciples are usually tVagnieiit.^ of ancient ."Monkish
rhymes ; and most of tlicm were such as many good Roman Catholics of the lower ordeis, even in these timcN, would
not scruple to use, for the sui)posed cure of their bodily ailments. ' One or moie. " \\'liole. ■' Xose.

'" Issobell ])reviously explained, that these poaching excursions took jdace, when the Witches were careering in midair, mounted on windle-straws and bean-stalks, &c. The Dkvji. usually made them jiick up such of the Elf-arrows
as fell short of or missed their mark. " Grains of barley, m-bcur. " Hacked ; minced into small pieces.

610 APPENDIX.

[ftedfalllie fixed wpon] the Divell ; and faid the foifaidig wordis tbryfe ower to the Divell,
ftriktlie, againft !Maifter Harie Forbes [his recowering from the faid feiknes.] In the night tym we

cam in to Mr Harie Forbes chahner, quliair lie lay, Avith owr handis all fmeared [

out] of the bagg to fwing it wpon Mr Ilarie, quliair he wes feik in his bed ; and in the day tyme

[_ ane of owr] nwmber, quho wes moll familiar and inlimat with him, to wring or

fwing the bagg [wpon the faid ]Mr Ilarie, as we could] not prevaill in the night tym againll him ;

quhilk wes accordinglie done. Any of [ ] comes in to your howfTes, or ar fet to

doo yow evill, they will look vncowth lyk, thrawn [ ] hurlie lyk, and thair

clothes ftanding owt. The Maiden of owr Coven, Jean Mairten, wes [

We] doe no great mater without owr Maiden.

And if a child be forfpoken,^ we tak the cradle [ ] throw it

tbryfe,'^ and than a dowg^ throw it ; and then fliakis the belt abow the fyre [ and

then caft it] downe on the ground, till a dowg or catt goe ower it, that the feiknes may com [ . . .
wpon the dowg or] catt.

All quhilkis wer fwa fpokin furth of the mouth of the faid Issobell Gowdie, &c.*

[Indorfed] Ed'', 10 July, 1662. Confidered and found relevant be the Justice Depute.

' Tak cair of this peaper. See the Juflice deputis judgement of it. Show this to the Commiffioneris.'

Haveing read and confidered the Confessions of Isobel Gowdie, within contened, as particularlie Sathax, Renunciation of Baptifm, with diverfe malefices, I find that a Commiffion may be verie
jufllie pafs, for hir lafl Tryall. (Sic fubfcribiter) A. Coluille, (Juftice-depute.)

(3.) Issobell Gowdies third Confession.
At Aulderne, the fyfteiu day of May, 1662 yeiris, In prefence of Mafler Harie Forbes,
Minifter of the Gofpell at Aulderne, Mr Hew Rosse, Minifter at Nairn ; Johne Innes of
Edingeith; Heav Hay of Newtoun ; Mr Alex Dunbar, Schoolmafler and Seflion Clerk of
Aulderne ; George Phinney, in Kirkmichaell ; and Johne Weir, and Androw Eafie in
Aulderne ; and many vtheris, Witnessis to the Confession efter fett down, fpoken furth of
the mouth of Issobell Gowdie, fpous to Johne Gilbert in Lochloy.
The quhilk day, in prefence of me, Johne Innes, Notar Publict, and Witnefles all vnder fubfcrywand, the faid Issobell Gowdie, appeiring to be moft penetont for hir abominable finnes of Witchcraft, moft ingenwoflie procedit in hir Confession therof, in maner efter following ; to witt. Firll, as
I wes goeing betwixt the townis of Drumdeivin and the HeacUs, the Divell met with me, and thair
I covenanted with him, and proraeifit to meit him, in the night tym, in the Kirk of Auklcme ; quhilk
I did. He flood in the Readeris dalk, and an blak book in his hand ; quhair I cam befor him, and
renuncet Jesus Christ and my baptifme ; and all betuixt the foale of my foot and the croun of my
head, I gaw frielie wp and ower to the Divell. Margaret Brodie, in Aulderne, held me wp to
the Divell, wntill lie re-baptifed me, and marked me in the flioulder, and with his mouth fucked
out my blood at that place, and fpowted it in his hand, and fprinkling it wpon my head and face, he
faid, * I baptife ye, Janet, to my felff, in my own nam !' Within a whyll therefter we all removed.
And within few dayes he cam to me, in the Neio Wardis of Ivjhoch, and ther haid carnall cowpulatioun with me. He wes a werie meikle b1ak roch man. Pie will lye als hewie wpon ws, quhan he
hes carnall dealling with ws, lyk aii malt-feckc. His memberis ar exceiding great and long ; no mans
memberis ar fo long and bigg as they ar. He wold be amongft ws lyk a weath horfe amongft mears.
He wold lye with ws in prefence of all the multitud ; neither haid we nor he any kynd of lliame ; bot

' Bewitched. ^ This seems to allude to passing the child, &c., through an eiulianted hoop, ring, or belt, a very

common popular charm in those days. '' Dog. * Tlie same form and subscriptions as in the preceding

Confession, with the Notarial Attestation, &c. of John Innes,

APPENDIX. 611

efpeciallie he lies no fhame with him at all. He wold lye and hawe carnall dealling with all, at euerie
tym, as he pleafed. He wold haw carnall dealling with ws in the fliape of a deir or any vther fliap
that he wold be in. We wold never refufe him. He wold com to my hows-top in the Ihape of a
crow, or lyk a deir, or in any vther Ihap, now and then. I wold ken his woice, at the firfl heirinf of
it, and wold goe furth to him and haw carnall cowpulatioun with him. The youno-efl and Iwfliefl
women will haw werie great pleafbur in their carnall cowpulatioun with him, yea much mor than with
their awin hufbandis ; and they will haw a exceiding great defir of it with him, als much as he can haw
to them, and mor ; and never think fliame of it. He is abler for ws that way than any man can be
(Alace ! that I fould compair him to ane man I) onlie he ves heavie lyk a malt-feck ; a hudg nature,
verie cold, as yce.

He wold fend me now and then to Aulderne fom earandis to my neightbouris, in the Ihape of ane
hair. I wes on morning, abowt the break of day, going to Aulder/ie in the fliap of ane hair, and Patrik
Papleyis ferwandis, in K'dhiU, being goeing to ther labouring, his houndis being with them, ran efter
me, being in the (hape of an haire. I ran werie long, hot wes forcet, being wearie, at lafl to take my
own hous. The dore being left open, I ran in behind an chift, and the houndis followed in ; bot they
went to the vther fyd of the chill ; and I was forcet to run furth agane, and wan into an vther hows,
and thair took leafour to fay,

* Hair, hair, God fend the cair !

I am in a hearis liknes now,

Bot I fall be an voman ewin now !

Hair, hair, God fend the cair I'
And fo I returned to my owin fliap, as I am at this inflant, again. The dowgis will fom tynies get
fom byttis ' of vs, quhan ve ar in hairis,^ bot will not get ws )<illed. Quhan ve turn owt of a hairis
liknes to owr awin fliap, we will haw the byttis, and rywis, and fcrattis^ in owr bodies. Quhan we
void be in the fliap of cattis, we did nothing but cry and wraw,* and rywing, and as it ver, wirrieing on
an vther ; and quhan ve com to owr awin fliapes again, ve will find the fcrattis and ry wes on our fkins,
werie for. Quhan on of vs or mor ar in the fliap of catis, and meitt with ony vtheris owr neightbouris,
we will fay,

' DiVELL SPEID THE GOE THOW WITH ME 1'

And imniediatlie they will turne in the fliape of an catt, and goe with ws. Qulion we wilbe in the fliap
of Crowes, we will be larger than ordinar crowes, and will fitt wpon brenclies of treis. We went in
the fhape of rewkis^ to Mr Robert Donaldfones hows, the Divell, and Johne Taylor^ and his wyff,
went in at the kitchen chimney, and went down wpon the crowk.^ It wes about Lamhcs,"' in anno
1659 ; they opened an vindow, and (we) went all in to the hows, and gott beilie and drink thair ; bot
did no more harme. — W^e went in to the DowJiie-hillis ; the hill opened, and we cam to an fair and
lairge braw rowme, in the day tyra. Thair ar great bullis rowtting and Ikoylling ther, at the entrie,
quhilk feared me.^

Bot that quhich troubles my confcience mofl,, is the killing of feverall perfones, with the arrowes
quhich I gott from the Divell. The firfl woman that I killed wes at the Pleicyh-htndis ; alfo I killed
an^ in the Eafl of Murrey^ at Candlmas^° laft. At that tyme Beffie WUfon, in Alderne, killed on
thair ; and Margaret Wil/bn, ther, killed an vther; I killed alfo James Dick in Canniecavill : Bot thu
death that I am mofl of all forrio for, is the killing of William Bower, in the MiUuwnc of Moyncs ;
Margaret Brodie killed an voman, waihing, at the Burne of Torres ; Beffie Wilfoiie killed an man at
the BiiJIte of Stridheris ; Beffie Hay in Aulderne killed an prettie man called Dunbar, at the Eift

' Bites. ^ In the shape of hares. ' Tears and scratches. ^ Calcrwaul, like cats. * Hooks.

" The rrooJi, on wliich the ' kail-pot' hangs, over the fire. ' Lammas, the 1st day of Aupist. ■■ Alarmed,

frightened me. See her Com ession, Apr. 13, 1GC2, page CO-l. " Ane; one. '" The pui'ification of the

blessed Virgin Mary, Feb. 2d.

VOL. III. 4 II

612 APPENDIX.

end oi the Towne of Forres, as lie wes coming owt at an galtt ; Margaret Brodie in Aulderne killed

on David Blak, in Darnvay. Janet Breadhead, fpows to Johne Taylor, told me, a litle befor fhe

wes apprehendit, that Margaret Wil/bne in Aulderne fliot Alexander Hiwheon, in Aulderne ; Janet

Breadheid Ihot Johne Falconer, in the Park. The mofl of ws all wer ther, at that tyme. BeJJie

Wiljonc killed on William Man, at Burgle ; Margaret Wil/bne killed on Johne Lee, and Janet

Breadheid killed a fuyn ' at Burgle ; Bejie Wilfone in Aulderne, on an firft JNIonday of the Reath,

took a bagg maid of hairis lieweris,* the fleih, guttis and gallis of toadis, naillis of fingeris and toes,

and fwinged it on an young man called Thomas Reid, and he died. BeJJie and Margaret Wiljones

in Aulderne, Johne Taylor and his wyff, Margrat Brodie and I, and the Divell, wer together, and

Mr Harie Forbes, Minifter at Aulderne, goeing to Moynes. The Divell gaw Margret Brodie an

arrow to Ihoot at him, quliilk ihe did ; bot it cam fliort ; and the Divell cawfed tak it wp again. We

deliret to Ihoot again, bot the Divell faid, ' No ; we wold not gett his lyflfat that tyme !' The Divell

cawfed me to flioot at the Laird of Park,^ as he was croceing the Burne of the Boath ; bot I milTed him.

We wold goe to feuerall howffis, in the night tym. We wer at Candlmas last in Graingehill,*

quhair we got meat and drink anewgh. The Divell sat at the held of the table, and all the Coven

abowt. That night he tlQimi Alexander Elder^ ia Earlfeat, to fay the grace befor meat, quhilk he did ;

and is thus :

* We eat this meat in the Divellis nam,

With forrow, and fych,^ and meikle fhame ;

We fall dellroy hows and hald ;

Both fheip and noat in till the fald.

Litle good fall come to the fore

Of all the rell of the litle ftore !'

And than ve began to eatt. And quhan ve haid endit eatting, we looked fleadfafllie to the Divell,

and bowing owrfelwes to him, we faid to the Divell,

' We tliank the owr Lord for this !' &c.

The wordis which we fpak, quhan we maid the pictur, for diflroyeing oi the Laird of Parkis mealN

children, wer thus :

' In the Divellis nam, we powr in this water among this raowld (meall,)''

For lang duyning and ill heall ;

We putt it into the fyre.

That it mey be brunt both flik and ftowre.

It falbe brunt, with owr will,

As any ftikle^ wpon a kill.'

The Div^ell taught ws the wordis ; and quhan ve haid learned them, we all fell downe wpon owr

bare kneyis, and owr hair al)owt owr eyes, and owr handis lifted wp, looking fleadfafl wpon the

Divell, ftill faying the wordis thryfe ower, till it wes maid. And then, in the Divellis nam,

we did put it in, in the midft of the fyre. Efter it had fkrukned^ a litle befor the fyre, and quhan it

ves read lyk a coale, we took it owt in the Divellis nam. Till it be broken, it will be the deathe of

all the meall children that the Laird of Park will ewer get. Caft it ower an Kirk, it will not brak

quhill'" it be broken with an aix, or fom fuch lyk thing, be a man's handis. If it be not broken, it

will lafl an hundreth yeir. It hes ane cradle about it of clay, to preferue it from Ikaith;" and it wes

roflen each vther day, at the fyr ; fom tymes on pairt of it, fom tymes an vther pairt of it ; it void be a litle

wat with water, and then roflen. The bairn void be brunt and roften, ewin as it ves by ws. It vanted

' Sow. * Hares' livers. ' Jolin Hay of Park. * Belonged to Brodie of Lethiu. * Sighing ;

lamPiitation. " The rest was prohably omittefi in writing down the Confession, as being blasphemous. ' It

js writtin mcaU in the other Confession ; and the metre (such as it is) requires this liberty. Mowld signifies
' earth' or ' dust.' * Stubble. ^ Parched ; shrivelled. "* Until. " Hai-ni ; injury.

APPENDIX. 613

Lo mark of all the pairtis of an child, little lippis, &c., and the handis of it folded downe by its fydis.
Johne Taylor and Janet Breadhekl his wyfF, Be/peand Margret Wiljoncs in Aulderne, and I my felfe,
with THE DiVEi-L, wer onlie at the making of it ; hot all the multitud of all owr Coevens got notice
of it, at the nixt meitting ; for all owr aclis and deidis, betuixt grett Meittingis, mofl be geven accompt
of, and notted^ in his book at each Grand Meitting — hot all my owin Co vex gott notice of it werie
fchortlie. The Divell him felf cam to me, to my awin hows, and bad me meitt him in Johne Tayloris
hows, to help thaim to mak the faid pictur. All the Coven did fflie lyk cattis, keas, liairis, and
rewkis, &c. hot Barbara Bonahl, in Brightmanney, and I, flilP read on an horfe, quhich ve void mak
of a flraw or beein-flalk.^ BeJJie Wiljone wes ftill in the liknes of a rewk.

Quhan we ar at meat, or in any vther place quhateuir, the Maiden of each Covex fittis abow the
reft, nixt the Divell ; and flie fervvis the Devill, for all the old peopill that he cairisnot for, and
ar veak and wnmeit for him. He will be with hir and ws all lyk a weath-horfe efter mearis ; and
fomtymes a man, hot werie wilfull* in carnall cowpulatioun at all tyms ; and they ewin fo als wilful!
and defirows of him. Som tymis, among owr felwis, we wold be calling him ' Blak Johne,' or
the lyk, and he wold ken it, and heir ws weill aneughe ; and he ewin then com to ws, and fay, ' I ken
Weill anewgh what 5e wer fayeing of me !' And then he void beat and buffet ws werie for. We wold
be beattin if ve wer abfent any tyme, or neglect any thing that wold be appointit to be done. AUex^
Elder, in Earlfeat, void be werie oft beattin. He is hot foft,^ and cowld never defend him felf in the
leift, hot greitt and cry, quhan he void be fcourging him. Bot Margret WilJ'on, in Aulderne, wold
defend liir felf fynlie, and caft wp hir handis to keip*"' the ftroakis off from hir; and Bejjie Wiljone
wuld fpeak cruftie with hir townge, and wold be belling again to him ftowtlie. He wold be beatting
and fcurgeing ws all wp and downe with cardis'' and vther fliarp fcurges, like naked gwhallis; and
we wold be ftill cryeing, ' Pittie 1 pittie ! Mercie I merci^, owr Lord !' Bot he wold haw neither
pittie nor mercie. Whan he void be angrie at ws, he wold girne at ws lyk a dowge, as iff he wold
fwellow ws wp. Somtym he void be lyk a ftirk, ahull, a deir, a rae, or a dowg, he, and haw dealling
with ws ; and he void hold wp his taill wntill we wold kifle his arce. And at each tyme, quhan ve
wold meitt with him, we behoowit to ryfe and mak our curtefie ; and we wold fay, ' 3e ar welcom
owr Lord r — and ' How doe 56, my Lord !' &c. Quhan we wold tak the furit'' (fruit ?) away of
anie perfones midden or dunghill, we wold fay thus, (when we wold putt haiked flefti of an vnchriftned
child, dowgis and flieipis flefli, and pairingis of naillis, &c., all haked throw- vther) : —

' We putt this intill this ham,^
In our Lord the Divellis nam.
The firft handis that handles the.
Brunt and fcalded fall they be I
We fall diftroy hows and liald,
With the flieip and nout'° intil the fald,
And litle fal come to the fore
Of all the reft of the litle-ftore !'"

We killed an ox, in Burgie, about the dawing of the day, and we browght the ox with ws honi to
Aulderne, and did eat all amongft ws, in an hows of Auldenie, and feafted on it.

The Devill wold giw ws the braweft lyk money that ewer wes coyncd ; within fowr and twantie
houris it void be horfe-muke.'^ Alace ! I deferw not to be litting heir, for I haw done fo manie evill

' Noted; recorded. * Constantly; always; uniformly. * Bean-stalk. * \Vanton. ^ rncoiirageous ; simple ; unresisting. " K<p ; ward ofT. ' Scourges made of cords — not ' cairds,' or instruments

used in curding wool, flax, &c. " The Editor never before met with this word ; it evidently means ^trl•Ilgth,

spirit, ' fushion,' (Fr. /visoJi) ; that is, the fertilizing i)<)wer. "Ilame; home; destination. '" Xolt ;

rattle. " The last four lines are the same with the conelusion of the \Vitch-c:kacf, in this Confession, p. 012.

'* Horse-dung. In other Witch cases, money thus procured is usually said to have been turned into ' sclaitt-stanis.'

614 APPENDIX.

deidis, efpeciallie killing of men, &c. I deferw to be reivin wpon iron haiTOwes, and worfe, if it culd
be devyfit I

And quhan we tak away the fruit of cornis, at Lambes,^ we tak an wooU-llieeir, and cuttis or clips
onlie tlirie flakis- of it, and plaitis vther thrie rudis togither, and fayes,

' We cutt this come in our Lord the Divellis nam,
And we fall haw the fruit of it ham !'

And this thryfe ower ; and fo we haw the fruit of that field. Ewin £0, quhan we tak keall or the lyk,
&c. And we lay all vp till Yewll, Pace, or Halie dayes ; and pairtis it among vs, and feaftis on that
togither.

Wpox the quhilkis all and fundrie of the premifTes, fwa fpokin and willinglie Confeft be the faid
IJJbhell Goivdie, I, the faid Johne Innes, Notar publict, haw wretten thir prefentis, and with the
Witnefles abow and vnder namet, haw fubfcryuit the famen with our handis, day, moneth, place, and
yeir abow fett doun.

Joannes Innes, Notarius Publicus.''

Mr Hart Forbes, INIinister of Auld Earn, Attestis.

Hen. Rose, Minister at Nairne, Attestis the foirsaid Declaratioun, as to the principal substantials.
Hew Hay of Newtoun, Attestes. Jo. Weir, in Auldearne, Attestis.

George Phixkie, in Kirkmichael, Attestis.

(4.) IsSOBELL GoWDIe's FOURTH CONFESSION.

At Aulderne, the tuantie fevinth day of May, 1662 yeiris. In prefence of Master Harie
Forbes, Minifter at Aulderne; Patrik Campbell of Boath; Mr Allex** Dumbar, Schoolmafler and Clerk of the Session of Aulderne ; George Phinney, in Kirkmichaell ; Hew Hay
of Xewtowne; and Johne Weir, in Aulderne; Witnesses to the Confession oflssoBELL
GowDiE, fpows to Johne Gilbert, in Lochloy.

The faid day, the faid Issobell, profeffing repentance for hir former fumes of Witchcraft, and that
(he had bein ower long in the Divellis fervice ; without ony compulfitouris, proceidit in hir Confession, in maner efter following : That is to fay. I acknowledg, to my great grieflf and Ihara, that
fyftein yeiris fince I denyed Father, Son, and Holie Gost, in the Kirk of Aulderne ; and gaw over
my bodie and fowll to the Divell ; he flanding in the Readeris Daft, oi Aidderne, and an blak book
in his hand : Margret Brodie, in Aulderne, held me wp to the Divell, quhilP I did this, andquhill
he marked me one the fhoulder, and fowked out my blood thairat, and ipitted it in his hand, and
fprinkled it on my head, and baptifed me ' Janet,' in his owin nam. Efter that, he had camall
cowpulatioun with me, in the New Wardis of Iiifhoch ; and ilill thairefter, fra tym to tym, at owi*
pleafour.

The names of the Coeven ar thes.^ J3e/Jie Wilfone, in Aulderne; Janet Burnet, ther ; Eljpet
Nijliie, ther; Margret Brodie, ther; Margret Vif/bne, ther; BcJJie Hag, ther; Johne Taglor, in
Belmakeith; Janet Breadhead, his fpous ; Barbara Itonald, Ijfohell Nicoll, in Lochloy; my felf,
with Jean Mairten, our Maiden ; and Johne Young, in Mebelloun, owr Officer. The names of
owR Divellis, that waited upon ws, ar thes. Firft, Robert, the Jahis ; Sanderis, the Read
Heaver ; Thomas, the Fearie ; Swein, the roaring Lion; Thieffe of Hell, Wait trpon hirjelf;
Makhectour ; Robert, the Rule ; Hendrie Laing ; and Rorie. We wold ken them all, on by

' Lammas, Ist August ; Festum S. Petri ad Vincula. * Stalks ; stems. ^ The long Latin docquet and

motto, before referred to, are annexed. * Until. * The principal purpose of this renewed Examination

seems to have been to get a more detailed account of the persons composing her Coevek, &c., besides getting a
solemn Confirmation of her foi-mer Declarations ; so that the rest of that unhappy Society might in due time be
brought to Trial and punishment.

APPENDIX. 615

on, from vtheris. Som of thaim apeirit in fadd-dun, fom in grafle-gi-ein, fom in fea-grein, and fom in
yallow. The Nik-xames that the Divell gaw wnto ws wer, Pikell neirest the vixd, this
wes Margret Wiljones niknam ; Beffie Wiljones niknam ves Throw the corn-yaird ; Eljpet
Nijliies niknam ves Bessie Bald; Jean 3Iairtenis niknam, quho ves Maidex, is Ower the dyk
with it ; Beffie Hayes nikname is Able axd Stout.

I haw fein the Elf-arrowes maid. The Divell dights' them, and the Elf-hoyes quhytes^ them. We
got ewerie on (of) ws fo many of thaim from the Divell, to Ihoot at raen.^ I my felf killed on William Boicer, at Miltoun of Moynes. This griewis me m or than any thing that I ewer did. Margret
Brody killed an woman, wafliing, at the Burn of Tarras, BeJJie Wiljbn killed an man, at the Bxi(h

of Strutheris. BeJJie Hay killed on Dunbar, at the Eafl end of the town of Forres, cominoowt at a gait. Margret Brodie Ihot at on David Blah. Margret JJll/bue killed on Alex'' Hucheon, in
Auldern. Janet Breadhead, now in prifon, killed Joh7ie Falconer, in Park. Ther were thrie killed
Eaft the cowntrie, at Candlmas laft : I killed on, Margret Brodie on, and BeJJie Wiljbn on. I Ihot on
James Dik, in Connicavell ; 3Iargret Brodie kiWed on W'" Cruhjliank; Margret liljon killed owJohne
Ley ; Janet Breadhead killed a fuyn, ^ alfo Ihe killed an vther man at Bnrgie ; and Beffle Wiljbn
killed on thair, namet W"^ 3Ian. We killed an ox, and brought it to Be//ie Hayes hows, in Aulderne ;
and we did eat him thair. I fliot at the Laird of Park, as he ves croflTing the Burn^ of Boath ; hot,
thankis to God now, that he preferwit him. Be/Jie Hay gaw me a great cuffe,'^ becaus I milled him.
Margaret Brodie\ fliot at 3L- Harie Forbes, at the Standing-llanes, hot Ihe miffed ; and fpeirit,
< If file fould (hoot again ?' And the Divell faid ' Not ! — For we wold nocht get his lyf at that tym.'
We intentit" feuerall tymes for him, quhan he ves feik. BeJJie Hay, Jean Mairten, the ^Maiden,
BeJJie Wiljon, Margret Brodie, Eljpet Nijhie, fpows to Johne Mathoxv, and I mylelf met in BeJJ\e
Wilfones hows, and maid an bag againft him. The bag wes maid of the flelh, guttis, and gallis of
toadis, the liewer of a hear,^ pikles of corn; and pairingis of naillis of fingeris and toes ; we fteipit all
night among water. The Devell learned ws to fay thes wordis following, at the making of the bag : —
' He is lying in his bed — and he is feik and fair,
Let him ly in till that bedd monthes two and dayes thrie mair !
He fal ly in till his bed, he falbefeik and fair —
He fall lye in till his bedd monethes two and dayes thrie mair I'
And quhan we haid faid thes wordis, we wer all on our kneyis, our hair abowt owr Ihowlderis and
eyes, holding wp our handis to the Divell, that it^ might deftroy the Aiid 3Ir Harie, It ves intentit
that ve, coming in to his chalmer, in the night tym, we fould fwing it on him. And bocaus we prevailed not at that tym, BeJJie Hay vndertook and cam in to his chalmer to wiiit him, being werie
intituat with him ; and Ihe brought in of the bag in hir handis, full of the oyll thairof, to haw fwoAvng
and caflen dropis of it on him ; hot ther wer fom vther worthie ])orfons with him at that tvm, by
quhich God prevented BeJJ\e Hay, that Ihe got no harm don to him, hot fwang a litl of it on the
clothes of the bed quhair he lay.

Johne Taylor and his wyff, Bejfie and Margret Wiljbncs, and I, maid a pictur for the Laird of
Parkis mail! children.^° Johrme Taylor brought horn the clay in his plaid newk ; his wytV lifted it ;
we powred in vater in a cowg" amongfl it, and wrought it for,'- and maid a pictor of it, lyk a child, als
big as apovv. It vanted no mark of the imag of a bairn, eyes, nofe, mouth, litle lippies, and the hands
of it folded doun by its fydis. The vordis that we faid, quhan we maid it, ver this ; —

• Dresses. ^ Blocks them out. ' See the Confession of Apr. 13, 1CG2, where Issobell tells us they

were licensed to sport, in this manner, when riding on straws through the air ; and that they had power to kill all
who did not sa?ic7i/)/ themselves, &(;. ' A sow. ^ On good authority, IsaobcU mu\ her master ought to

have known, that the Laird was out of their power while crossing a running stream. " A sjnurt slap, or blow.

' Tried ; essayed. ^ A hare's liver. • Viz. Their charnied liag, '" See the former Confessions.

" A sort of wooden dish. '* Sore ; extremely.

616 APPENDIX.

< We put this water among this meall,

For long dwyning^ and ill heall ;

We put it in intill the fyr,

To bum them vp both flik and flour,

That be brunt with our will,

As any tlikill'^ on an kill ! '

The Divell fitton on an blak kifl. Ve wer al on our kneyis, and owr hair about our eyes, looking
on THE Divell ftedfaftlie, and owr handis lifted vp to him, faying the vordes ower. And by this the
bairnis died, &c. All this, with a great many mor terrible thingis, the faidis Witnelfes and Notar
hard the faid Ijjobell Confes, and molt willinglie and penetently Ipeak furth of hir ovin mouth. Ix
witnes quhairof, W'e haw fubfcryuit thir prefenttis, with owr handis, day, yeir, and place, abow fett down.
Ita est Joannes Lines, Notarius Puhlicus, in Jidem premijjbrum, rogatus et requijitus, Jlihfcribo.

Joannes Innes, No'""^ Publicus.

Mr Hary Forbes, Minister of the Gospel, at Old Earn, Attests.
W. Sutherland of Kiristerrie, Attestis. Hew Hay of Newtoune, Attestes.

All. Dunbar, Schoolmaster and Clerk to the Session of Oldearne, Attests.
George Phinxie, in Kirkmichel, Attests. Jo. Weir, in Aiildearne, Atteasts.

VIII. Confession of Janet Breadhekl,fpoi{fe of John Taijloi\ in Belmakeith.

At Inshoch, the fowrteinth day of Aprill, 1662 yeiris. In prefence of Patrik Dunbar of

Benaferrie,^ SherefF principall of the SherefFdome of Elgin and Forres ; Hew Hay of Newtowne ;

Archbald Dunbar, in Meikle Penick; Archbald Dunbar, in Lochloy; Walter ChalMER, in Balnaferrie ; James Cowper, in Inlhoche ; Johne Weir, in Aulderne ; and ane great

multitud of all fortis of vther perfones ; Witnesses to the Confessions and Declaratioun

efter fett downs, fpokin furth of the mowthe of Janet Breadheid, fpous to Johne Taylor, jn

Belmakeith.

The quhilk day, in prefence of me, Johnne Innes, Notar Publict, and Witnefles abownamet,

vuderfubfcryuand, *[the faid] Janet Breadheid, profeffing repentance for hir former finnes of

Witchcraft, and that flie haid bein over long in the [famin] fervice ; without any preffuris,^ proceidit

as foUowis, to witt. First, I knew nothing of Witchcraft wntill I wes mari[et with] my hufband,

Johne Taylor ; andbit wes he, and Elfpet Kiihie, his mother, that entyfed nie to that craft. And the

firft [thing] that we did wes, we maid fome drowgries,^ of dowgs flelh and flieipis flelh, againft

Johne Hay, in the Mure ; and therby took away his comes, and killed his horfe, noat,7 Iheip, and

vther guidis ;^ and layed it abowt his liows, to tak away his awin lyft'e; and therefter, he Ihortlie died.

Onlie my motliei-in-law and my hufband did this, to leanie me ; and this wes my firll [lelfon]

from them, &c.^ When they gott me to confent to this craft; firfl, they haid me to the Kirk of

Nairne, in the nyclit [tyme;] and the Divell wes in the Readeris dafk, and an book in his hand.

And at that meitting, Beflie Wilfone, in Auld[erne;] INIargret Wilfone, fpows to Donald Callam,

thair; Margret Brodie, thair ; Barbara Friece, ther; Helen Inglis, fpows to William [ ] thair;

Janet Burnet, thair; Elfpet Makbeith, thair; Elfpet Niiliie, fpows to Johne Mathew, in Aulderne;
Mariore Taylor, [fpous] to Robert Barrie, ther; Beflie Hay, ther; Archibald Man, ther; Mariorie

' Pining; lingering sickness; gradual wasting away. * Stubble. ' The Dunbars of Balnafeny and

Westfield were hiritabh Sheriffs of Murray. ■* A considerable part of this paper having been destroyed by mice,

the Editor has supplied the blanks from conjecture, after a careful comparison with other similar Examinations.
The words so supplied are put within brackets. ^ Without the application of torture, or other ' legal compulsitouris ;' voluntarily. * Drugs ; enchanted charms. ' Nolt, cattle. * Farm stock; ' bestial.' * A

pretty experiment, indeed, for enticing a novice to be initiated !

APPENDIX. 617

Man, his daughter, ther; Elfpet Makhomie, relict [of] wmq^^ AUexander Huchefon, ther; Beflie
Friece, fpous to Johne Gilbert, ther; Iffobell Friece, fpows to Andrew Miller, ther; Agnes Torrie,

fpows to William Yowng, ther ; Elfpet Chifolme, fpous to vmq" Makhomie, ther ; AUexander Elder, in Earlfeat ; Janet Finlay, his fpows ; Elfpet Laird, in Miltoun of Moynes ; Johne
Robertfon, in Leathin ; Grifall Sinklar, his fpows ; Allexander Sheipheard, in Miltoun of Moynes ;

Janet Man, his fpous; Mariorie Dunbar, in Brightmanney ; Kyllie, in Velter Kinflray;

Allexander Ledy, ther; Elfpet Gilbert, in Leathinbar; Agnes Brodie, in Leathin; Janet Smith, fpows
to Robert Frafei', in Arry; Befly Peterkin, in Torrich ; Allexander Bell, in Drumdewin, a charmer;
Iflbbel Nicoll, in Lochloy; Beffie Young, ther; Elfpet Falconer, fpows to James Inglis, in Penick;
Beflie and Margret Hucheons, ther; Walter Ledy, ther; wer all ther that night. Johne Taylor, my
bufband, wes then OfKcer; hot Johne Yowng, in Mebeftoune, is now Officer to my Coe[ven.]
Quhan I cam firfl. ther, the Divell called tham all be thair names, on the book; and my hufband,
than [Officer,]' called thame at the dore. And when that was done, Beflie Wilfon, in Auldeme,
fat down nixt the Divell ;- [Beflie] Hay, thair, fat nixt him, on the vther fid; Janet Burnet fat
nixt hir; and Elfpet Nifliie, fpows to the faid Johne [Mathew,] fat nixt BeflTie Wilfon, hir mother.
She wes the Maiden to hir motheris Coeven. All the refl. fat downe [as] they to cam.^

The nixt thing, efter quhat wes done that night, the Divell lay with them all abowt. And then

for me, my hufband prefented me, and be and Margrat Wilfon, in Aulderne, held

me vp to THE [Divell to] be baptifed : And efter I haid put my on hand to the foallis of my foot,
and the vthir hand to the [crown of] my head, and renunced my baptifme, and all betuixt my two
handis to the Divell, the Divell [marked me] in the flioulder, and fuked out my blood with his
mowth, at that place ; he fpowted it in his hand, and [fprinkled it] on my head. He baptifed me
thairvith, in his awin nam, ' Christian.' And than immediatlie thairefter, [they all returned] eacli
to ther awin howflis. Within fyw dayes thairefter, he cam to me to my hows, quhan my hulb[an(l
was furth,] in the morning, at the plewgh, to fie the mark quhich he gaw me ; and he did lye with me
in the naked [bed,] and haid carnall cowpulation with me; and gaw me ane piece of money, lyk a
tefl;ain. He was a meikle, roch, blak man, cloven footed, werie cold ; and I fand his nature within
me als cold as fpring-well-water. He promeifit to fie me again, within eight dayes, quhilk he did, and
haid carnall cowpulatioun with me again, and gaw me an vthir piece of money, lyk the firfl ; hot they
both turned read,'* and I got nothing for thaim. He cam again within twantie dayes, and flill^ once
in the twantie dayes, and lay with me at each tym continually.

[We] met in the place of Darnvay'' nixt that, and thair we did eat and drink, &c. Efter that, we
void Hill meit [euerie] ten, twelve, or twantie dayes continwally.

Whan we haid Great Meittingis, Walter Ledy, in Penick, my [huf]band, and Allexander Elder,
nixt to the Divell, wer Ruleris ; and quhan ther wold be but fewar, I my felf, the deceaffit Jean
Suthirland, BeflTie Hay, Beflie Wilfone, and Janet Burnet wold rule thaim. The firll thing that we
did, except the taking of meat, wes taking of the cornis of Drumdewan, and [then] pairted that

aniongil ws. 2dly, We flioat noat" in plewghes. 3dly, Agnes (irant, who wes brunt on the

hill of ... .,^ gott hyre from Elfpet Monro, to deftroy the Lairdis of Park and Lochloy, and thair
[pofleritie.] And then I and my hufband, Elfpet Nifliie, and Beflie and Margret Wilfones, in
Aulderne, con[veened] our felwes with the Divell, in Elfpet Nilliies hows ; and then touk dowgis
flelli, and iheipis flefli, and [baked] it werie finall with an aix, and fcithed it an liaill fornooii in a pot,
among water : And than I took it owt; and the Divell, with his awin hand, did ])ut it in a llieipis

' See IssohiU Gowdia's Confessions; wliere it is stated tli.it tliis wortliy was ()i iuku to a Coven. • Slic

being Maidkn to tlie Cuvcn. ^ As they happened to come in; i)roiniseuoiisly. * Ued. * Uniformly;

constantly. " The seat of the Eaki.s of jMokav. Sec IssobcU Gotvdie's Confessions. ' Shot noil, or
cattle, In ploughs, with elf-arrows. " Left blank, in the original.

618 APPENDIX.

bagg, and lie fteiring it ftill^ abowt with his handis. We wer wpon our kneyes, owi- hair about owr
eyes, and owr handis lifted up, and ve looking ftedfaftlie wpon the Divell, praying to him, repeatting the vordis quhich he learned vs, that it fould kill and deftroy the Lairdis of Park and Lochloy,
and thair meall-children and pofteritie. And then we cam to Inlhoch, in the night tym, and fkatered
it wpon, and down, abow, and about the gait, and vther places quhair the Lairdis and thair fones wold
mofl haunt; and then ve, in the lyknes of crowes and rewkis Hood abow the gait, and in the treis
opofit to the gait. It wes apointed fo, that if any of them fould twitch- or tramp wpon any of it, als
veil! as it or any of it to fall on thaim, it fould ftrik thaim whh byllis,' &c. and kill them : Quhilk it
did ; and they Ihortlie died. We did it to inak that hows airles.* It wold wrong non els hot they.
And it wes Keathren Sowter, that wes brunt,^ that [fliot] William Hay, the lad Laird of Parkis brother, for'' on Gilbert Kinley. It wes only that bagg that wes the death of both the laft Lairdis of Park.
Alfo, four yeir fince, I and my hufband, lifobell Gowdie, fpows to Johne Gilbert, in Lochloy, and
Beffie and Margret Wilfones, in Aulderne, maid [a pictur] of clay, lyk the Laird of Parkis eldeft
fone. My hulljand brought liom the clay in his plaid [newk. It] ves maid in my hows; and the
Divell him felf with ws. We brak the clay werie fmall, lyk meil, [and] fifted it with a fiew, and
powred in vater amongfl it, with wordis that the Divell learned vs, [in the Di]vellis nam. I
brought hom the water, in a pig," out of the Ilud-wall.^ We wer all wpon owr [kneyes,] and our hair
about owr eyes, and owr handis lifted vp to the Divell, and owr eyes ftedfaft looking [vpon him,]
praying, and faying wordis which he learned ws, thryfe ower, for deftroyeing of this^ Lairdis [meall]
children, and to mak his hows airles. It wes werie fore wrowght, lyk rye-bowt. It was about the
bignes of a feadge or pow. It was jufl maid lyk the bairne ; it vanted no mark of any maill child,
fuch as held, face, eyes, nofe, mowth, lippes, &c., and the handis of it folded downe by its fydis. It
ves putt to the fyre, firfl till it fcrukned,"' and than a cleir fyre about it, till it ves hard. And then
we took it owt of the fyre, in the Divellis nam ; and we laid a clowt abowt it, and did lay [it]
vp on a knag, and fometimes vnder a chift. Each day we void water it, and then rofl and bek" it ;
and turn it at the fyre each other day, whill i^ that bairne died ; and then layed it vp, and fleired ^^ it
not wntill the nixt bairne wes borne : And then, within half an yeir efter that bairn wes borne, [we]
took it owt again out of the cradle and clowt, and void dip it now and than among water, and beck
[it] and roft it at the fyre, each other day once, as ve did againft the vther that ves dead, wntill that bairn
[died] alfo. All quhilkis of the premiffes, fwa fpokin and willinglie Confeffit and declarit furth of
the mouth of the faid Janet Bred[heid,] in all and be all thingis as is abow fett downe, I, the faid
Johne Innes, Notar Publict, haw writtine thir prefentis, and with the Witnesses abownamet, in
farder teflimonie and witnefling of the premiffes to be of veritie, We haw fubfcryuit the famen with
our handis, [day, month,] yeir, and place abow fpecifeit.

Joannes Innes, Notarius Piihlicus.'^'^

Hew Rose, Minister at Nairne, Attestis thir premisses, confessed in my presence, Aprile 15, 1662.

Mr Hary Forbes, Minister of the Gospel at Old Earn, Attestis.

Archibald Dukbar, witnes, Attestis. W. Sutherland otf Kinsterie, Attestis the premisses.

[Johne "\Ve]ir, in Aulderne, Attestis; Confessed in my presence, Apryll 15, 1662.

J. Colter, Attestes. W. Chalmer, witnes to the premisses, confest in my presentis, 15 of Apryll.

Hew Hay Attestes the premisees, Confest 15 Appryll, 1662.'^

' Ever ; constantly. ' Touch. ^ Boils. * Heirless. * For Witchcraft. ° At the

instigation of. " Earthen jug, or jar. ® The Rood, or Holy-Cross, well. " The present Laird's

male children. The last two Lairds are stated to have been destroyed by the charmed bag. '" Got parched, or

shrivelled ; s/irunli. " Bake. '^ Every alternate day, until that child died. '^ Stirred. " The

long Latin docquet is annf xed. '^ Some farther marking bad at one time been on the margin ; but only a few

of the letttrs at the end of each line now remain. It appears to have been the Judgment of the Justice-depute, from
a fragment of a Memorandum on the back of the Confession ; so that it is probable she had been tried at one of the
* Justice- Airs' — and of course would, on her own Confession, be condemned to be burnt.

APPENDIX. 619

No. VIII.

Continuation of No. XVIII. of the General Appendix of
Documents illustrative of Gowrie's Conspiracy.

{See Vol. 11.^9/^. 299 to 313.)

When the Editor was in the progress of completing his collection of materials for illustrating the truth of the Earl of Gowrie's Conspiracy against
King James VI, one of the Volumes of Sir James BaJfoufs MSS. had been
misplaced. Since that time, however, the Editor has had the advantage of again
inspecting that truly valuable repertory of historical information, and now submits a few more of those highly interesting Papers, which, he is happy to notice,
place the conduct of the celebrated 3/r Robert Bruce in a much more favourable
point of view. In justice to the memory of that eminent individual, it has been
thought proper to insert them in this Appendix. Throughout the protracted
controversy between Bruce and the King, the latter, obviously, had the worst
of the argument — and tyrannically put down his able but dauntless and j^ertinacious antagonist by a most unlawful stretch of arbitrary power, after he failed
in all his attempts at foiling him with his own weapons.

The relentless persecution of Bruce must, assuredly, be accounted an additional blemish in the character of King James VI, by every unprejudiced person. The reader is once more referred to the text, and to the documents and
authorities formerly quoted, in reference to this subject.

(18.) Letter, Mr Robert Bruce to the King.^

Pleas 3our Maiestie,

Wpon the directione fend to me by jour hienes Consell, I thoucht it meitt be my awin letter to
tefti6e my refolutione to jour M. in that mater of Gowrie. o^wx M. can not be ignorant in quhatt
termes I paffit my refolutioun at Sanct Jonnestoune.'^ That refolutioun is as ^itt extant, fubfcrywitt
be monie honeft vitneffis. To that refolutioun, both in mater and maner, I adheai- ; and fra it I am
nott myndit to pas, be God his grace. This refolutioun gaue jour M. perfytt contentment than, and
I doubt nott bott itt vill do the lyke jitt. So luiking that jour Maiesteis fcruple falbe fullie fatiffied, in that mater, I reft,

3our M. his moft humble and obedient fubiect,

To HIS Maiestie. Robert Bruce.

(19.) Letter, Mr Bohert Bruce to the Privy Council.^

Pleas 3our honoris,

I receawed jour Letteris on Setterday the 13 off this inftant; and for fatisfactiouno thairoff I

haue directed my Letter, conteining my avin* refolutioun in that mater, unto his M. IMy relolutionii

nov is relatiwe to my refolutioun att Sanct Jonstowi, quhilk vas dyttit^ by nis Maiesteis felff, and

fubfcrywet by monie honeft vitneffis (befyd me) quha ar jitt Hewing. This refolutioun gawe his ^L

' From Grig, preserved among the Denvvjlne MSS. Adv. Lib. A. 2. 52. No. 2o. It is undated. ' IVitli,

having been dedicated to St Jotin as Patron Saint, was long known by this name. ' From the same Col).

No. 26 ; also undated. * Own. '^ Enditcd, composed.

VOL. III. 4 I

620 APPENDIX.

perfyt contentment then, and I doubt nott bot itt will do the lyk 5111 ; for vnto thatt refolutioun I adhear both in matter and maner ; and I am readdie to teftifie the fame, fo oft as his M. pleafes, by my
awin hand wreitt. Sa, luiking that 5our honoris fall not be forder trublit in that mater, I reft,

3our honoris to be commandit to his povar, in God,
To HIS M. moft honorable Priuie Consell. Robert Bruce.

(20.) Letter, Mr Robert Bruce to the King.

May it pleis 3our M.
Heiring that my cuming to Aberdeine was interpret to fpring of contempt, I thoclit it my bundin
dewtie to purg my felfe to ])e vttermofl thairof, for I corapt contempt of God and his Lewtennent ])e
heigheft cryme that is ; And thairfoir, for purgation, I fay, that quhatfoever is done with ane warrand
of God and man can nocht incur ])e fufpition of a contempt, lat be ane actuall ; and in deid, gif thair
liad bene ane prefcription or limitation of tyme in any Licience, I had fail5eit in paffing fe boundis
thairof; 5ea nocht onlie that^ but I avaittit upon fe proper tyme quharfoir my Licience wes gevin me,
and tuik ]>e benifeit quhen fe neceflitie of my infirmitie conftranit me ; and being moir refpectiue than
tliat, I tuik it nocht quhill the Bisciiop of Murray brocht me fe adwyfe of ]ie Bischoppis of
Sanct Andros and Glasgow to do fo : And giff I had refauit ])e meinefl fignification that culd be,
that ]ie imbracing of ])e benifit at that tyme wald nocht fland with c;our hieness contentment, I wald
nioll glaidlie haiff abftanit thairfra ; for I haif layed my compt, be Godis grace, never to involue me
in that giltines. So, to end, thair is no thing done be me quhairfoir my former benifeit fuld be retrenchit ; and moft huimlie I creave that 3 our M. cenfure go nocht befoir my procuring, but that my
reparing to Aberdene for my better helth and confort of my wyff and childrin may ftand with50urM,
fauor. So refting ever,

3our M. moft humbill fubiect and orator,
Indernes,^ ye 20 viij of Merche (1606 ?) Robert Bruce.

To the Kingis moft excellent Maiestie.

(21.) Supplication, 31r Hohert Bri/ce to tuy. Privy Council.^

My Lordis of Secreit Counsall, vnto your lordfchipis humblie menis and fchawis I, your
feruitour, Mr Robert Bruce, Minifter, That quhair, the laft day when I wes brocht befoir your 11.,
I wes commandit and ordaneit be 30ur 11. to addrelfe my felft' to the burgh of Innernes, and thair to
remane and within four myllis abute tlie fame, dureing his Maiesteis will and pleafour ; lykeas, the
tyme for my addrefle thair daylie approtchis ; quhairvnto, althoght I acknawledge my felff" bundin in
confcience befoir God and in my alledgeance to the Kingis Maiestie, my Souerane,*to gif all dew
obedience, as by Godis grace I mynd neuir to be diffobedyent to his Maiestie or your 11., in ony
of your 11. directionis, in this kynd ; yitt, the indifpofitioun and inhabilitie of my perfone, conioyned
Avith my grite aige, forceis me humblie to fcliew vnto your 11. how vnable I am to vndertak and to
vnderly fuche a jornay and charge ; ffor I am become lb feible and waik,^ and my aigeit and weyryed*
perfone is fo far worne and waifted with greif, cair, and vtheris vifitationis quhairwith it hes pleafit
THE Lord in his mercye to chaftice me, that hardlie dow^ I travell any quhair, without haifard of my
lyff": And yf it fall pleas God to vifite me with feiknes, outher at Innernes or be the way, it is not
liklie that I fall ouercome*^ the fame. And tuotching the imputatioun layed vpoun me, whilk wes the
caus of his Ma"is offence,"^ and of this hard courfe tane with me, I thank God I wes frie and innocent thairof, and I cleirit my felft' of the fame in your 11. prefence, it being a poynt verrie far fra my
profeflioun to be a movair or fteirair * vp of Seditioun, as his Ma'^'^ wes informed of me ; and fra my
hairt I deteaft fuche Seditious practizes, as being moft impious and wicked, and repugnant to the

' Inverness. ' It is unsigned, and no deliverance indorsed, but it is evidently the original, having the marks

of the ribbon usually passed through Letters and bills, &c., when sealed and sent to a distance. ^ "Weak.

< Weary ; spent. ' Am I able to travel. ' Survive, recover. ' Displeasure. ' Stirrer.

APPENDIX. 621

Holy Ordinancels of God, quhairby we are cotnraandit to gif all dew obedyence to our fuperioris.
And as I fcliew vnto your 11., my comeing to this burgh the tyme of the Parliament wes vpone a meere
neceffitie, and to efchew the danger of horneing, quhairwith I wes threattned, for xxij merkis. And
dureing the fchorte tyme of my aboade heir, whilk wes not xxxvj houris, I fpak not with a Parliament man, except the Lord K'dfayth^ whome I employed to be cautioner for me ; and had no kynd
of raedling with the afFairis of the Parliament, becaus ihay concerneit me not ; bot keipit my felfF
very quyet till my away-going. And dureing the tyme of my Warding in the Cajtell of Ed"", my
cariage wes fo modeft, calme, and peceabill, withoute medling with thir matteris of the Kirk now
in queflioun, as I hoip nothing can be obiectit vnto me. And yf his Ma"^'^ wald be gratiouflie
pleafit to fuflfer me fpend the few remanent of my aigeit and weyryfome dayes at my awne houfe, I
wilbe verrie glaid and willing to be perpetuallie confynned thair, and tua myllis thairaboute; and I fall
neuir tranfcend that boundis, nor medle with ony matter concerneing the pollicie and governement of
THE Kirk. Moft humblie befeiking your 11. to haif confideratioun of this my eflate ; and outher be
your felffis, or be your intercefTioun at his Maiesteis handis, to grant me fome eafe and releiff in this
heavie charge layed vpoune me, whilk wilbe my vtter ouerthrow and wrak. And your 11. aufuer.

(22.) Letter, The Arclibtjhop of St Andrews^ to the Kixg.

Most sacred Soverane,

It may pleafe 30ur moft excellent Matie^ I halve feene 50ur Mamies directioun fent to the
Earle of Dunbar about Mr David Lvndsaye his intemperance in preachinge. I haive tane
baldnes to give anfuer and avyfe, in maift humble and fubmiffe maner. The man vas input ^ be ;our
Matie vpon my rafche and oft repeited fute. He hes oft done veill aganes the feditious, albeit inconftantlie. The vordes he fpak, to my gryt greiff, wer to reprehend 5our Ma^ie for toleratioun and
advancinge off Papistes, quha ever foght 30ur Mat'es ^r^k ; and this was efter fat I had cono-ratulat to the peipill 50ur Ma^es Jait wonderfuU delyverie.^ Efter Sermon, I convened the Builleis,
and Coioi/all,. and fent fame to him to querrell him for his vnreverent ufage; quhilk wrocht this effect
that the daye follovinge he preached ane palinod,'' fa impudentlie flatteringe to 30ur Matins praife,
and vilipendinge all the Princes of Europe be name, in 5our Mamies refpect,*^ that all men efleimed he
vas makand penance for the former dayes infolence, with fupererogatioun.

This his foolie ^ is nocht worthie of 30ur Mamies wrathe ; and as for me, I will nocht give advyfe to
honour fick ane ® with publict cenfure, at fic ane tyme. I halve advyfed with 30ur Ma^'es moft
truftie fervantis of our focietie, quha thinkes meit to tranfport him, but noyce,^ to a landwart '" Kirk •
and to affume to me ane ^^ mor vyfe '- and faft,'-' quhilk 3our INI. fall fee accomplifled, but :;our Ma^es
empefchement.'*

3Ii/ Lord of Dunbar hes employed him felflf fa faythfuUie, eafaldlie,'^ and fortunatlie, in this lait
fervice, that I prefunie to advyfe 30ur Ma^ie to give him credit in :;our IMa^'es fervice, in our gryteft
turne, in this Parliament ; for quhatfumever is glanfed to 30ur Matie in the contraire, is aither panici
terrores, or prevaiicatioun.

Sir, I lacke moyen to do quhat I wald in your Ma''"'E3 fervice. I heir, daylie, foule vanities
quhilkis I think I am called to repreffe. I want formall rycht and rent. Supplie this. Sir, in this
30ur approchinge Court, and than 36 fall nocht neid to wreit hither; but the punifched fall feik thither
toward 50ur Ma^ie for obtcininge pardone. Finallie, 3our Mamies erandis in the credit off the Earle
of Dunbar, or of ane off lyk difpofitioun, is heir poflibiU and eafic. A^on debet J ub tali tantoque

' Sir William Livingston, one of the Ordinary Lords of Session, who succccdod Sir John riosfon, Lord Fentonbarns, Jan. G, 1G09. His son was created Viscount of Kilsyth and Lord Canipsie, by patent, Aug. 17, 166L
^ George Gladstaiies, translated from the See of Caithness ittino ItlOG, but not consecrated till umw 1(510. Died May
2, IGl.'). ^ Inducted, pu< /«. '' I'rom the Earl of CJowrie's Conspiracy. ' Lat. ;)(////i(«//«;«, recantation

after professions of repentance. The term is still used both in the Civil and JOcclesiastical Courts. " In comparison to the King. ' Folly. " Such a one. ■' Translate him without bustle or noise. '" To

a country or landward Parish Church. " One, viz. another Minister. " Wise. '■' Steady sure.

" Without hindrance or trouble to yoin- Majesty. " Sincerely, without duplicity, (q. d. onc-foldly,) in contradistinction to twa-fald, double, deceitful. The word is now nearly obsolete.

622 APPENDIX.

principe precarium ejfe imperium. This,^ I humblie recommend 50ur Mamies perfoun and eflait to
God his merciful! Providence, I remaine,

Your Mat'es maid humble oratour and obedient fervant,
Edixburghe, nynt of Februar, 1606(-7.)

To THE KiNGis moft excellent Ma^^. Sanctandrois.

No. IX.

Bond hy John ffth Eaul of Cassillis, to his Brother Hew Kennedy,
commonly called the Master of Cassillis, to pay him and his accomplices
1200 merhs yearly ^ Sif. to commence from the date of their tahing the Life of
the Laird of Auchindrayne.

{See Vol. III. pp. 124, 581, &c.)

[Ik the preceding Collection, and also in the ' Historical and Genealogical Account of tlie principal Families of
the Name of Kksnedy,' recently published,^ all the incidents then discovered relative to the accumulated acts of
villainy perpetrated by the Laird of Auchindravne and his son have already been disclosed. The public being
likewise in possession of the leading features of this extraordinary case, from the graphic pen of Sib Walter Scott,
who has prefixed an introductory notice to his dramatic poem, ' Auchixdrain, or the Ajrshire Tragedy,' it is altogether unnecessary to attempt even a brief sketch of their lives and crimes in this place.

The Historical Account above referred to, and the present Collection, contain a great variety of Documents
which have been brought forward, alike to illustrate the Trials of the Lairds of Auchindrane, and the extraordinary state of society and manners in the important district of Carrick and the adjoining shires. But no Papers
which have hitherto been discovered appear to tire Editor to afford so striking a picture of the savage state of barbarism into which that country must have been sunk, as the following Bokd by the Eakl of Cassillis to his brother
and heir apparent. Hew Master of Cassillis. The uncle of these young men. Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean,
Tutor of Cassillis, as the reader will recollect, was murdered, May 11th, 1G02, by Auchiadrayne's accomplices.

The Master of Cassillis, for many years previous to that event, was in terms of open personal hostility to his
brother. During all that period, however, the IMa'Ster maintained habits of the closest intimacy with Auchindrayne
and his dissolute associates, and actually joined him in various hostile enterprises against his brother the Earl.^ The
occurrence of the Laird of Culzean's Murder was embraced by their mutual friends as a fitting opportunity to effect
a permanent reconciliation between the brothers ; " bot (as ' the Historic' quaintly informs us) the cuntry thocht
that he wald not be eirnist in that cause, for the auld luiff betuix him and Auchindrayne."^ The unprincipled
Earl, (whose sobriquet, and that of some of his ancestors, was King of Carrick, to denote the boundless sway which
he exercised over his own vassals and the inhabitants of that district,) relying on his brother's necessities, held out
the infamous bribe contained in the following Bond, to induce his brother, the Master of Cassillis, to murder his
former friend, the old Laird of Auchindrayne. Though there be honour among thieves, it would seem that there is none
among assassins ; for the younger brother insisted upon having the price of blood assured to him by a written document, drawn up in the form of a regular Bond !

Judging by the Earl's former and subsequent history, he probably thought that, in either event, his purposes
■would be attained, by " killing two birds with one stone." On the other hand, however, it is but doing justice to
the Master's acuteness, and the experience acquired under his quondam preceptor Auchindrayne, that we should
likewise conjecture that, on his part, he would hold firm possession of his bond, to be used as a checkmate against
his brother, should he think fit afterwards to turn his heel upon him, or attempt to betray him into the hands of
justice.

Tlie following is a correct copy of the Bond granted by the Earl, as transcribed from the original.]

We, Johne Earle of Cassillis, Lord Kennedy, &c., Bindis and Obliffis ws, that howfovne our
broder Hew Kennedy of Brounfloun, with his complices, taikis the Laird of Auchixdraneis
lyf, that we fall mak guid and thankfull payment to him and fame of ]>e fowme of tuelflf hundreth
merkis, 3eirlie, togidder with corne to fex horfis, ay and quhill ^ we refTaw'^ ]iame in houfliold with our
felf : Beginning pe firft payment immediatlie after ])air committing of ]'e faid deid. Attour, " howfovne we reffaw fame in houfliold, we fall pay to ])e twa ferwing gcntillmen fe feis, 3eirlie, as our
awin houfliald ferwandis. And heirto we Obliss ws, vpoun our honour. Subscryvit with our hand,
At Maybole, \>e ferd day of September, 1G02.

JOHNE ERLE OFF CASSILLIS.

> Thus. ' The Quarto Edition, Edin. 18.30. * For the confessed purpose of taking his life, in following

out their deadly Feud. * Historic of the Kennedies, p. 59. ^ Aye and until. " Receive. ' Moreover.

GENERAL INDEX.

VOL. III.

4 K

GENERAL INDEX

TO CRIMINAL TRIALS, &c.

DURING THE REIGNS OF

KINGS JAMES IV AND V, MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS, AND KING JAMES VI.

\* The reader, in consulting the following Index, is requested to remark,
that owing to the Editor's having been under the necessity of sending the
Trials which occurred during the reign of King Jajmes VI. to press, before
the introductory portions of this work were compiled, it became requisite for
him to page the earlier reigns in Vol. I. thus, * 1, * 2, &c. In order to avoid the
annoyance and trouble of consulting separate Indices of persons and matters,
the Editor has bestowed a great deal of time and labour in constructing an
extremely copious General Index, which he may venture to say embraces
every circumstance contained in the work, which is at all likely to be esteemed
interesting and useful to the historian, lawyer, antiquary, or genealogist. The
most prominent of the ancient words and phrases, and the leading historical
facts, superstitions, &c., have also been incorporated, so as to render the work
more acceptable, and also as useful as possible to the public, as a book of
reference.

Abbot of Unreason, I. * 116, * 121, * 123 ;
Insurrection in Edinburgh, * 409 ; in the
Mearns, he, 13, 81. See Robin Hood, &c.

Abbreviator of the King's Houseliold Books, I.
*313.

Abduction, Forcible, I. * 104, * 180, * 182 ;
Kincaid, &c. *421; Oliphant, 24 ; Carnecrocc,
244 ; Gray, 297 ; Aikenliead, 362 ; Fleming,
377 ; Laird of Corhouse, 378 ; Laird of 'I'hornydykes carried off', when 14 years old, and
married against his consent, III. 402. Sec
Rape, Forcing, t^c.

Aberbrothock, Abbot of, I. * 127; David, * 136,
* 185 ; Ambassador to Franco, 281 ; Geo., 16 ;
John, 89 ; Ja., II. 575.

Abercorn, Lord (Earl of), Ja., II. 496,544 ;
III. 138; his activity as to the Laird of Auchindrane's being brought to justice, ib. 168, &c.

Abercromby of (lourdy, Dav., I, * 405 ; — of that
Ilk, Alex., I. *441 ; Tho., II. 60 ; III. 3 18 ;_
of Ley, Alex., slain by Witchcraft, I. 206 ; — of
Murthlie, Tho., II. 49 ; — of I'itmedden, Alex.
Bigamy, Adultery, I. 110; his place burnt,
160; most barbarously Murdered, III. 78; —

626

GENERAL INDEX.

Mr Ro., Jesuite, I. 312, &c. ; — of Straruthie,
And., II. 534 ;— of Westhall, Hector, III. 78.

Aberdeen, General Remission to Inhabitants, I.
* 113; Bailies and community remitted for
abiding from the Armies of Solway and Werk,
&c., * 242 ; Bailies deforced, * 250 ; burgesses
exempted from Assises of Barons, &c., * 377 ;
III. 379 ; absolved for not taking Mr Ja. Gordon, &c. I. 343 ;— Bisliop of, Wm., I. * 162 ;
Elect (Bishop of), I. * 263 ;— Raid of, 1. 183.

Abernethy, Lord, of Saltoun. See Saltoun.

Abertarf, Raid of, I. * 392.

Aberuchill, burnt. III. 232, 250, 566.

' Able and Stowt,' a Witch's nickname. III. 606.

Achallader, Castle of, burnt by the MacGregors,
III. 114,232, 249.

Achannane of INIurdochat, Gilb., III. 118.

Achesoun of Gosford, Alex., I. 2, 156 ; — of Inneresk, Jo., portioner. III. 9, 452.

Achyle, Baron of, III. 552.

Adam, Geo., beheaded, I. 95.

Adamesoun of Scouringburne, Gilb., III. 480.

Adder's-skin, used in Witches' charms, I. 245.

Adiesoun, Dav,, hanged for horse-stealing, &c,,
II. 357.

Adjournal, Books of, I. * 477, et passim.

Administering the Holy Sacraments, in the Popish
manner, &c. See Sacraments, &c. ; — enchanted drink. III. 68.

Admiral, Lord High, his jurisdiction, I. * 129, 93.

Adois, business, II. 185, &c.

Adreiche, III. 265.

Advocate, King's, I. * 315, 101 ; — Faculty of, not
liable to pass on Assises, II. 112; — for the
poor, L* 315.

Adultery, James Davidsone, I. * 27 ; Mr John
Elphinstoune, *356, * 459 ; Lady Elphinstoun
and Druramond of Medope, * 465 ; Pat. Vrquhard, 11 ; Wm.Carnebye, 13 ; Amullekyne,
78; banished, 80; Eliz. Prestoun, 83; and
Poisoning, And. Glencorse, burnt, 84 ; Abercrombie, 110; Ja. Myllar and MaijoryBlaikie,
167 ; Hay of Dalgattie, II. 46 ; curious pleadings recorded in this case, ib. ; Gray banished,
369 ; Norwall banished, 387 ; Heislop and
Gray c«rtoZ through Edinburgh, and banished
the burgh, 401 ; — and Child-Murder, Ryburne

of that Ilk, 415 ; Roise of Dunskellie beheaded, 481 ; Jardine of Birnok, 491 ; — and Incest,
Ja. Stewart, ' wirreit and brunt,' III. 248 ; Jo.
Guthrie, hanged, 428 ; Alex. Thomson and
Jonet Cuthbert, banished, ih.

Afald, sincere, &c.. III. 275, 395, et passim.

Afflek. See Auchinlek.

Agnew, Patrick, Sheriff of Wigtoun, taking bribe
to discharge a Murderer, I. * 63 ; Oppression,
&c., * 89 ; prevents Court being held, * 91 ;
remitted for Slaughter, * 252, 141 ; — of Mureisliaith, Gilb., III. 328 ;— of Trong, Alex. ib.

Aguirre, Mr Fra., Spaniard, I. 329.

Ahannay of Kirkdaill, Pat. Provost of Wigtoun,
slain. III. 119, Pat. ib. 477;— of Sorby, I.

* 95 ; Jo., Provost of Wigtoun, II. 540; Marg.,
stealing a purse. III. 552.

Aiken, Bessie, condemned for Witchcraft, II. 25 ;
pleads pregnancy, and is, after long imprisonment, banished for life, 29, 52.

Airdry, Laird of, HI. 245 ; his lands in Lewis
burnt and wasted, ib.

Airly, Lord. See Ogilvy.

Airth of Smetoun, Geo., I. * 201.

Aitchison of Aitchison's haven, Mark, denounced,
I. 276 ;— of Gosford, Alex., 2, 156 ;— of Inveresk, Jo., portioner. III. 9, 452.

Aitchison's haven, Witch convention there, I. 245.

Akergill, Fortalice of, besieged by E. of Caithness, &c., I. * 394 ; taking, 283.

Albany, Alex., Duke of (brother of K. Ja.
III.), Intercommuning with, I. * 16, * 17, * 18,

* 40, * 71 ; John, Governor of Scotland, *231 ;
fielding against, near Glasgow, * 237, * 238,

* 241, * 264 ; sends a great horse to the King,

* 275 ; — Arthur, Prince, (youngest son of K.
James V,) his birth, I. * 309 ; baptism, death,
ib. ; cups and chalice made at his birth, ib. ;
Albany Herald, III. 86.

Alchymy, I. * 120.

Aldermen (Bailies of burghs), a term formerly in

common use, in Scotland, I.* 10,*418,&c.&c.
Aldobrandine, Cardinal, II. 589.
Ale, price of, I. * 389; enchanted, II. 524;

Witches' mode of taking, III. 605.
Ale-cellar, King's, yeoman of, I. * 313 ; grooms

of, ib. See Yeoman, &c.

GENERAL INDEX.

627

Alexander, Prince of Scotland, I. * 232 ; —
of Di-ummeldrie, Tho., portioner, II. 368 ; —
of Menstrie, Sir Wm. (the poet), III. 590.

AUakayis (lackeys), I. * 289.

Allan of Corsfurd, Ro., I. 35.

Allanedonnand, burning Castle of, I. * 256.

Allerdes of that Ilk, Jo., II. 362 ; Jo., fiar, fined,
363 ;— of Skadowie, III. 453.

Allhallowmass, I. * 391, &c.

Almerie, what. III. 239.

Almosar, Master (Elemosinar or Almonar), I.
*289.

Almous-gowns, the King's public Almous, I.

* 278, * 305,* 312, &c. See Bedesmen.
Allouris (allars), cutting, II. 522 ; III. 221.
Alschunder, Jo., swindler, a curious case, III.

209.
Altar, King's and Queen's, I. * 320.
Altrie, Lord, I. 178; Ro., 283, 284; II. 50.
Ambassadors from Alraane, I. * 283 ; — Emperor,

I. * 304, * 306;— of England, I. * 273, * 276,

* 283;— expenses,* 285, * 284, * 301, * 318 ;
■ — at K.James VI. baptism, * 479 ; — to demand

redress for Kinmont Will being taken by force
from Castle of Carlisle, 364 ; — fromQ. Eliz. as
to Gowrie's Conspiracy, IL 313, 315 ; — of
Flanders, I. * 243 ;— of France, I. * 262,

* 263, * 274, * 281, * 283 ;— at baptism of K.
James VI. * 479 ;— Palsgrave, I. * 301.

Amisfield burnt, I. * 348.

Amullekyne of Dempstartoune, Cuth., Adultery,

I. 78 ; banished, 80 ; Jo., hanged. III. 223.
Amjerk wine, I. * 389.
Ancrum Mure and Moss, Army of, I. * 332,

* 359 ; Raid of, I. * 332.
And, an', if. III. 75, &c.
Andersmes, II. 437.

Andersoune, Jonet, drowned, I. * 162 ; Thomas,
hanged for coining, * 397.

Andesoune, Paul, banged, I, * 400.

Angel-nobillis, III. 178.

Angus, Earl of, Stouthreif of his horses,!.* 23 ;
of his lance, * 25, * 78 ; Raid against Border
Thieves, * 134; raising Siege of Newark,* 139

* 188 ; battle of Kittiecrocehill, * 237, * 238^
&c.; * 266, * 269;— Arch. * 382, 75 ; Treason,
96 ; outlawed, 97 ; Forfeited for Raid of Ruthven, 119, 178; Arch., bewitched to death, 216,

240, note, 243; III. 61 ;— Wm., I. 275 ; Commission of Justiciary, he, to use fire and sword
against tlie Clanchattan, &c., 280 ; act to apprehend him as a Conspirator against ' the trew
Religioun,' 281 ; Ofi'ers presented by him, 301 ;
to abide trial, &c., 303, 306; trial for Conspiring
against the Religion, 310 ; summons of Treason, 314 ; doom, 316 ; the * Spanish Blanks,'
&c., 317 ; II. 67 ; his Raid of Dumfries, 105,
371,423,474,510 ;III.318;— Da. (7th Earl),
390 ; his daughter La. Marg. married to Sir
Walt, Scott of Branxholm, ib. ; Bond by Border Barons to assist, I. * 127 ; — Bell the Cat.

* 187, he. ; Intercommuning with and assisting,

* 160, * 187, * 201 ; John Mathesone, beheaded, * 202, * 209, * 243, * 244, * 246, * 254 ;—
Countess of (Dame Jean Lyoun), charm to
secure her favour, 240 ; accused of Witchcraft,

241, note; 242 ; — Master of, Geo., * 78 ;—
W^m., his liferent forfeited, 258 ; — of Hoprig,
Alex., * 84.

Annan, Viscount, Jo., III. 595.
Annandale, Portuys (Porteous-roll) of, I. ^'321.
Anne of Denmark, Queen, impeded by storms
on her passage to Scotland raised by Witches,

I. 211, 218, 222, 236; taxation of 100,000/. on
account of her approaching accouchement,
306 ; her pearls and jewels abstracted ; curious
trial of Marg. Hartsyde, II. 544.

Ansenje (Royal Standard), I. * 268, * 324;—
bearing one called the ' Haly Gaist,' * 330.

Anstruther of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 141, 60, 72 ;
younger, 255 ; — Magistrates of, assisting E.
of Both well, 310.

Antrim, Marquis of, III. 2 ; Randal, ih.

Anysle, Ralph, Intercommuning with D. of Albany, I. * 17.

Ape, I. * 285.

Apotesyde, Place of, burnt, he, II. 510.

Apparel, curious list of, carried off from Kilbirny,

II. 508; III. 478. (See also under each article of dress.)

Appeal to the Deity, in cases of Murder, III.

184; form of the ceremonial, ib. he.
Apprising, Forgery of, I. * 255.
Aqua vita', flagon of, I. * 308.

628

GENERAL INDEX.

Aquaviva, Claudius, General of the Jesuites, III.
378.

Aqueus, Stephanus, French Ambassador, I. * 281.

Archers of the King's Guard, I. 299 ;— do. of
France, II. 380 ; duel in France, ib.

Archery, I. * 272, * 274, * 278 ; trial of skill between Kinef James V. and 5 English Archers.

* 283, * 285 ; pellok-bows, * 293, * 297 ;
cross-bows, &c , *305; English bows and arrows, * 307 ; gainzies (bolts for cross-bows),

* 309 ; bow, arrows, &c., toQ. Mauy of Guise,
*324.

Archibald of Blackball, Wm., I. * 404.
Armorial bearings embroidered on King's robes,

&c., I.* 301 ;— of Forfeited Traitors, publicly

torn and defaced, * 490 ; II. 241 ; their dead

bodies exhibited in Court at forfeiture, ih., &c.
Armour. See under each separate article ; Stouthreif of Horse and, II. 453.
Arm-pits, a girl tortured by burning under, &c., to

detect Theft, II. 45.
Arms, banners, &c., at Funerals, I. * 288, * 297»

&c. &c.
Arras-werk (Tapestry), I. * 274, * 293, &c. ;

New Tapestry from Flanders, * 298, * 310 ;

' Chalmer of the antique Historie,' * 312,

* 318, * 320.

Arthur, Prince, son of K. James V. See Albany ; — Sir Ja., baptizing, &c., in fashion of
Papistry, I. * 420.

Arrastrang of Hairlaw, Ade, I. * 398 ; Christie
callit the Bull, I. *398 ; Ro. callit Battas, III.
396 ; Wm. callit Bald, ib. ; — of Gilnockie, Jo.
I.* 152,&c. See Johnnie A. ; — of Quhithauch,
Simon, hanged, I. * 251 ; Simon, murdered,

* 137 ; 93; Simon, yr. tried for Raids of Falkland, &c. 293 ; denounced, .306 ; Lancie, III.
396 ; — of Kinmont, Wra., freed from irons in
Castle of Carlisle, and carried off by Buckcleuffh, I. 363 ; Q. Eliz. demands redress by
her Ambassador, 364; Relations of this event,
II. 504; Era., III. 396; Wm. his son, ib. ;
Tho., son to ' Sandeis Ringane,' Murder of the
Warden of the West Marches, II. 363 ; his
right hand struck off and hanged at Cross of
Edr., and his body gibbeted in irons on Burrowmure, 364 ; Da., son to ' Sandeis Niniane,'

hanged, 441 ; Ingrie and 12 others burn Castle
of Langholm, &c. 450 ; 479 ; Ringane, callit
New-maid Bingane, Resisting King's Guard,
hanged, 452 ; Tho., called the mercheand, 567 ;
Niniane's Thome hanged for Intercomniuning
with Lord Maxwell, III. 223 ;— of the Langholme, Johnne, II. 451 ; Burning Castle of
L., &c. ib. ; And., slaughter, 567 ; — of Rowanburne. Will, hanged for Resisting King's
Guard, &c. II. 452 ; Alex., hanged for Murder of Warden of the West Marches, 505 ;
of Flaskholme, Archie, Fire-raising, &c. II.
479 ; — of Arkiltoune, II. 491 ; his wife ravished, ib. ; — of Tweidane, Ninian, Slaughter,
&c. 11.509 ;— of Kirktonehill, Ebbie, Slaughter, 11.567 ; And., III. 396;— of Cannabie, Ja.,
Slaughter, II. 567; — of the Gyngellis, Wm.,
III. 1 1, 43 ; Tho., 396 ;— of the Holme, Jo., his
purse stolen, HI. 441 ; Arcli., Intercommuning with, L * 17, * 101, * 172, *271;
Richard, Resetting, I. * 34, * 36 ; Blak Jok,
hanged, I. * 152 ; John hanged, * 172; Francis, Sec. 93 ; the Lairdis Jok, II. 520 ; Christopher and 16 others, I. * 171 ; Simon hanged, I. * 172 ; gift of his escheat, * 250 ;— Clan
of, respited for a year, I. * 235 ; — Johnnie,
notices relative to, I. * 152; gift of his escheat,
* 245 ; — of Mangertoune, Thomas, I. * 152,
Sec, *171, *245; H. 509.

Armstrang's ' Good night,' II. 505.

Army of Norhame, I. * 35.

Armitage (see Hermitage), Castle of, I. * 284 ;
Captain of, HI. 220.

Arbitration, Judicial, to compromise Feud between Lairds of Playne and Cammismort, I.
*167.

Ardross, Laird of, tears the King's Letters, I.
*271.

Ardendraucht, Place of, burnt, I. * 98,

Ardochbeg, burnt, I. * 225.

Ardwell, burning of, I. * 56.

Argyle, Earl of, Colin, I. * 2 ; Arch., * 78 ;
Remitted for Resetting tho ^Master of Montgomery, Sec. I. * 105 ; a])pointed Justice-General and Master of Household, * 244 ; remission for Fire-raising in Mull, &:c. 247 ; * 263 ;
resigns Mackane's lands in Isles to the Crown,

GENERAL INDEX.

629

*312, *353, *441, * 461, * 478, * 303,

* 505, &c. * 512; Colin, 88, 114, IIG; Arch.,
263, 289 ; Commission of Fire and sword
against Jesuites, &c. 336 ; Lieutenant, 342 ;
liability for the Campbells and Macgregors, II.
62, 63 ; sits as Justice-General, 428, 491 ; his
conduct in reference to the Clan-Gregor, 431 ;
shamefully betrays MacGregor, 434 ; flight to
Spain, III. 3 ; proceedings against those who
opposed him as King's Lieut., 79 ; — Marquis OF, alleged prodigies at Dunune, III.
199; detail of infamous barbarities committed
by his followers, ib.

Arrow-schot, II. 536.

Arran, Office of Justiciary of, I. * 103 ; the Bastard of, (see Hammilton,) * 227, &c.
Arran, James, Earl of, I. * 227 ; respited,

* 232, * 237 ; ' held furthe' at the Netherbow
Port of Edr., * 241 ; arraying Battle against
Duke of Albany, ib. ; Gift of monastery of the
barony of Hamilton, * 255 ; Gift of nonentry
of Finnart, &c. /T*. ;— Regent, * 267, * 268,

* 310 ; « 462, 116 ;— (Stewart,) Ja., slain by
Sir Ja. Douglas of Parkhead, III. 66.

Artillery, breaking King's, at Glasgow, I. * 234 ;
firing against King, &c. * 255 ; dragged by
oxen, * 260, &c. (see Oxen) ; stones formerly
used in place of metal-bullets, ib. *263, *265,

* 267, * 295 ; imported, * 307, * 310 ; sent
to Hermitage, * 324 ;— Master of, I. * 268,
*286; his fees, * 315.

Arrot of that Ilk, Geo., I. * 180.

Arnot of Chapel, Da., III. 9 ;— of Fairny, Ro.,
III. 316 ;— of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 94 ; Jo., Provost of Edr., I. 170 ; Sir Jo. examined as to
Logan's Treason, 11. 288 ; Treas. depute, III.
10; — of Wodmylne, Jo., yr.. Slaughter, Shooting Pistolets, Sec. curious arguments recorded,
II. 53 ; finds caution for 10,000 /., 60, 73 ;—
of Incheok, Da., II. 63,

Arbuthnot of Lyntusk, Jo., I. 119 ;■ — of that Ilk,
Ja., I. * 402, 284 ; Ro., fiar, II. 362 ;— of
Brichtie, Jo., I. * 402 ; — of Fyndowrie, Dav.,
II. 362 ; — of Carnedaw (Carnegaw), Jo., II.
387 ; III. 478.

Ardchattan, Commendator of, Jo., invaded, I.

* 465 ; Prior of. III. 14.

Aroy, Peter, Highland robber, tortured to discover his accomplices, III. 195.

Arroquhar, Burning of, I. * 240.

Assessors to the Justice-depute, II. 3 ; declined
on account of relationship, deadly feud, &:c.
ib., 82.

Assises, Exemption from, pleaded, I. * 418 ;
granted to Inhabitants of Perth, * 418 ; burgesses of Aberdeen exempted from Assises of
Barons, &c., * 577 ; III. 379 ; Ministers
claimed exemption, 24 ; protest for expenses,
94; Advocates exempted from, II. 112; full
exceptions against an Assise, 143 ; three of
King's Guard sit on Assise, 559 ; instance of a
large number (19), III. 57 ; trial of zfact remitted to Assise, * and the Probatioun to be
vfet befoir thame,' 574 ; two ' chirurganes' sit
on Assise, ib. ; Proof led by Assise after they
ivere enclosed in the Assise-house, 575.

Assise declared Infamous and Peijured for Wilful Error, I. * 72 ; Protestation against a Verdict, * 449 ; Assise tried for acquitting a
Witch, 244 ; see Error ; confined till Verdict
returned, * 131 ; imprisoned for year and
day, I. * 203 ; wine brought to, at Sir Jas.
Hamrailton's Trial, * 305 ; Great (^3Iagna
Assisd), * 391 ; often considered as witnesses
in the cause. III. 60, and note, 1 07, 280, Sec.

Assoin5ie (Fr. essoyne^, excuse for absence, &c.
II. 65.

Asound, swooning, II. 525.

Assinloss of that Ilk, Ja., I. * 420.

Aslowne, Laird of, 1. 65 ; — of Garroche, III. 253 ;
Mr Geo. his son, assists in a Mass, ib.

Assurance, judicial, I. * 144.

Assylhnient, for Mutilation, I. *335 ; for Slaughter, * 371 ; for cutting off the ears, * 475 ; II.
74, 403 ; III. 537.

Ashintullie, Place of, besieged, II. 6.3.

Assisting Thieves and Rebels, I. *I44 ; Traitors,
* 160, * 187, * 201, * 202, * 205 ; tiie English, * 332, * 337, * 338 See Intercommuning, <!vc.

Askoraell, in Kyntyre, burnt. III. 5.

Assembly of the Kirk, convoking an unlawful, II.
3 ; ModtMator and Ministers tried, 494 ; banished, 503, (ic.

630

GENERAL INDEX.

Assignation, Forging, Perjury, &:c. III. 208.

Assoil5ie, II. 466, &c.

Athens, Archbishop of, and of the Isles of

Scotland, I. * 387.
Athole, Royal Hunting in, I. * 279.
Atholl, Earl of, John, I. * 78, * 190, * 391,

* 469 ; appointed Justiciar of Atholl, 83,
178, 284, 309; denounced, 310; Commission of fire and sword against Jesuits, &c.,
336; II. 63, 97, 235, 297, note; III. 14,
note, 22.

Atkinson of Sleichhoussis, Henry, Oppression,

&c., I. * 179.
AuBiGNY, Lord, present of horses and hounds

to him and ' Madame Dobin3e ' sent by the

King to France, I. * 277 ; Esme, * 337,
Auchinames, Laird of, waylaid, I. * 204.
Auchincassel burnt, I. * 348.
Auchincraw of East Restoun, Geo., I. 270 ; —

Wm. and Hary, tried for Slaughter of Geo.

Home of Spott, II. 99.
Auchindoune, Mass celebrated, II. 530. See

Gordon,
Aucbindrane, Laird of (John Mure), I. * 130,

* 138, &c. ; — And. Sinclair, his half-brother,
III. 139; — bond betwixt Earl and Master of
Cassillis for Murdering him, 622; — Lady, III.
138, 149. See Mure.

Auchinleck of Balmanno, Geo., I. 57 ; wounded,
98, 100 ; III. 207 ; Sir Geo., IIL 562 ;—
(Afflek) of Curalege, Arch. I 99 ;— of that
Ilk, Gilb., I. * 404, 74;— of Schethin, Wm.

* 454 ; of Tuedy, Ja., * 404.

Auchinloss of that Ilk, Ja., L * 420.

Auchinsoull burnt. III. 176.

Auchmowtie, Ro., surgeon, curious case of trial
for, II. 112; beheaded, 113, 7iote, 124.

Auchnacoy. See Gordon, I, * 150.

Auchterallane, Laird of, II. 453.

Auchterlony of Cairny, Wm., Resetting Johnnie
Faa, III. 307.

Aulderne, remarkable proceedings against Issobell Gowdie, &c., for Witchcraft, III.
602, &c. ; — Kirk of, the Devil initiates
Witches in ' the Readeris dask' there. III.
602, &c.

Auldjoyes, Jonet, Forcible Abduction of, I. * 421.

Aurum potabile, I. * 120.

Auto da fe, I. * 209, &c. (See Heresy.)

Avenger of blood, III. 183.

Avery, King's, Yeoman of, I. * 313.

AvoNDALE, Andro, Lord, I. * 78, * 224; respited, * 237 ; Keeper of Dumbarton Castle,

* 241, * 268.

Ayfald, what, II. 30, et passim.

Ayr, Insurrection between inhabitants and neighbours, I. * 204 ; Justice-aire of, I. * 56, * 73 ;
Doctrines of Reformation preached at, I.

* 407 ; Sheriff of, slays the Earl of Cassillis, I.

* 136 ; Intercoramuning with him, * 137.
See Campbell of Loudon.

Aysoun, ' Baron ' of Tulymet, Jo., slain, I. * 334.

Aytoun, of Dinmure, And., II. 53, 60 ; — (of that
Ilk) laird of, Warden Depute of East
Marches, I. * 323 ;— Raid of, I. * 110, * 112,
*117.

B.

Bachillane naig, what, III. 78.

Bags, for Witch-charms, &c., IIL 609 e< seq. 618.

Bahr-recht, or law of the bier, touching the corpse
of murdered persons to discover the murderer,
III. 183, &c. See Corpse and Touching.

Bailie- Court, drawing knives, and stabbing in, I.
*330.

Bailies of Edinburgh tried for freeing a Homicide, I. * 442 to * 450 ; Jurisdiction of, II.
43 ;— of Leith wounded, I. * 403 ;— of Renfrew wounded, * 458.

Baillie (Bailsie) of Bagbie, Wm,, I. * 127; Feud
with Lord Somervile, * 382 ; — of Carphin,
James, yr., * 385, 35 ; — of Chapelgill, Ja.,

* 81 ; — of Cormestoune, Tho., slain, * 175 ;
Wm., * 404 ; — of Gervestoun (Jerristoun), Ro.

* 167 ; Tutor of, Tho., 36, 87 ; Ro., II. 541 ;
— of'Hillis, Ja., II. 562; — of Lammington,
Wm.,I.36,87;— of Littlegill, Alex., 149; and
Rachaell, his daughter, slain, &c , 184; II.
491 ; Math., ih., 555 ; III. 54, 101, 264,
478, 493 ; Mr Ja., his son, ib. ; Slaughter,

GENERAL INDEX.

631

498 ;— of St John's Kirk, Jo., II. 368;— Wm.
one of King's Guard, slain, II. 559.
Baird of Auchmaddy (Auchmedden), Geo., I.

* 454 ; Gilb., II. 394 ; Hen., beheaded for
Slaughter, III. 499 ;— of Kilquhin^ie (Cullein^ie). III. 119; Jo., his brother. Slaughter,
ib. 172, 475 ;— of Posso, Geo., I. * 81, * 87,

* 133.
Baiser-stanes, what, III. 100.
Balance, Ordeal of the, IIL 184.

Balcasky, Martin, using Heretical books, I. * 219 ;
remitted, * 252.

Balcanquall, Mr Walt., one of the banished Ministers, I. * 137 ; II. 5, &c.

Balcomie, Laird of, III. 245 ; his lands in Lewis
burnt and wasted, &c., ib.

Balfour of Bandone, Peter, I. 27, 255 ;— of Bello,
Da. I. 25a ; — of Burley, David, remitted, I.

* 240 ; Mich. * 345; Sir Mich., 280 ; Da., brother to Laird of, II. 135 ; Mr Wm., brother to,
Housebreaking, &c., 383, III. 9 ; Sir Ja., his
brother, ib. ; Mich., 391. See Burley; —
Geo., Prior of Charterhouse, I. 48 ; Treason, 86 ; — of Kirktoune, Dav., 28 ; — Laird of
(of that Ilk), 74 ; — of Makcormastoune, Geo.,
392 ;— Marg., Witch, 373 ; Alison, 374 ;
tortured with the ' caschielawis,' 375 ; the inhuman torture of her husband, son, and daughter to extort confession, ib. 376 ; her declaration at the place of execution, ib. ; — of
Mountquhanie, III. 82; — of Pitcullocht, Mr
Pat., II. 343, 430 ;— of Pittendreich, Sir Ja.,
Captain of Edr. Castle, I. * 479, *512 ; and
Dep. of ' French Paris,' &c. ; Intercommuning
with, 33 ; — Mr Wm., Rioting to restore Popery, *" 416.

Bale-Fires, ' Balis ' of Fire for raising the country, in case of invasion, I. * 269, * 280, &c.

Balhagartye, Laird of, I. * 454.

Ballagane, Laird of, (Dune. Hunter,) Intercommuning with, I. * 369.

Ballatt against King of England, I. * 295.

Ball-cod, III. 496.

Ballenden of Auchnoull, Sir Louis, Justice Clerk,
I. 142 ; Sir Jo., II. 459, note ; Sir Jo., Justice-Clerk, III. 391 ;— Sir Ja., II. 413. See
Bannatyne and Bellenden.
VOL. III.

Bali-green, III, 214; playing ' the boilspell,' ib.

Ballingall of that Ilk, Wm., I. * 404, * 425 ;
Arch., his brother, slain, ib. ; of Riggis, Ja.,
* 404.

Ballogy, fortalice of, destroyed by King's command, I. 344.

Balmane, Laird of, I. * 284.

Balmanno of that Ilk, Alex,, I. 100.

Balmerinocii, Lord, Ja., Secretary, II. 274,
456 ; — 496, 542, 544 ; tried for treasonable
correspondence with the Pope in King's
name, 568 ; his Declaration and Confession,
575 ; sentenced to be beheaded, 580 ; Documents illustrative of his Trial, ib. ; Narrative
by himself, 588 ; his Speech when convicted,
600 ; Calder wood's account, 601, he. ; — Jo.,
restored in blood, 569.

Balnamoon, Laird of. See Collese.

Balrinnes (or Glenlivet), battle of, I. 361.

Balsonit, sorit, horse, I. * 400.

Band (Bond), General, breaking the King's, I.
* 208, 205 ; liability as to, IL 521 ;— of Association, by the Rebels in Orkney, III. 293 ;
torn by Ro. Stewart, 304, 395.

Bandene, alias Ruthvene of that Ilk, Wm., yr.,

II. 397 ; funeral of, 473.

Bandis (bans), proclamation of. III, 413.
Band-mutus, what, (perhaps Lat. mutus, implying
secrecy, ) IIL 83 ;— of Manrent, I. * 373 ;

III. 83, note, he. ; — betwixt the Scotts, III.
381 ; betwixt them and the Kerrs, 390; the

- Border Barons, &c., 394.

Bannachra, Castle of. Sir Humphrey Colquhoun
Murdered at, by the MacFarlans, II, 431.

Bannatyne of Coig, John, 1. * 405 ; — of Corhous,
Jo., Slaughter, I. * 179 ; respited for Mutilation, * 241, 65, 72 ; Wm., Forcible abduction,
378; IL 108, ]31 ; III. 145 ;— of Gairsey,
Wm., slaughter, I. 393 ; III. 82 ;— John, exempted from Hosts, warding, ^c, I. * 247 ; —
Ja., in Chapell Donald, Murder of tlie Laird
of Cul3eane, II. 461, he. See Muir of Auchindrain and his Trial, III. 127, &c. ; proposal
to murder him when in Ireland, 139; — Tho.,
Lord Newtyle, I, 9 ; Tho., Justice-depute,
41, he. ; Alex., Justice-depute, 58, he. ; —
of Karnes, Hector, Slaughter of Laird of Wes4 L

632

GENERAL INDEX.

ter Karaes, II. 131 ; III. 144 ;— of Newtyle,
Tho , I. 9 ; Mr Ja. II. 460 ; appointed Justice-depute, III. 426. See Bellenden and
Ballanden.

Bane, King and Queen of. See Bene.

Banner, Royal, I. *1 14, *267 ; — to the Trumpets,

I. * 308, &c. See Standard.
Bannerman (Heritable Banner-bearer), I. * 268.
Banishment to county of Aberdeen, I. *203 ; — from

Cranstoun, III. 540 ; — from Edinburgh, I.

* 399 ;— from Scotland, * 157, * 161, * 366,
*375, *388, *394, *396, * 402, * 406 ;
and right liand struck off, * 432, ib. ; for
Adultery, 80 ; shooting in King's palace, 187 ;
— England, Ireland, and the Isles, II. 40 ; III.
541, 542, &c. ; — beyond sea, I. * 160 ; — from
Stratherne, * 346.

Baptising, in the fashion of Papistry, I. * 420 ;
after excommunication, 189; — a cat (by
Witches) 218; a more remarkable instance,
237 ; II. 543.

Baptism of Prince James (eldest son of King
James V.), I. * 302 ; painting his arms, &c.,
it. ; — of Prinxe Arthur, * 309; — King
James VI. at Stirling, * 479 ; — of Prince
Henry, 338 ; preparations for, and expenses
of, 339, &c. ; — renouncing, III. 601 ; — form of
Witches' baptism, &c., ib., 603, 610, 614,
617, &c. See Witchcraft, />a5s/»i.

Bar of Justiciary Court, how kept, I. * 2.

Barbarous slaughter and maiming of sheep, III,
380.

Barbed harnessing for King's lorse, I. * 321.

Barclay of Cullarnye, Dav. I. 60 ; — of Johnstoun,
Jo., III. 268 ;— of Ladylaud, Da., I. * 451 ;
Hew, 281 ;— of Matheris, Dav. * 190, * 199;
— of Rynd, Tho., * 158 ; — of Stercovy, Rob.,

* 88 ;— of Strowy, Jo., 25 ;— of Towie (Tollie), Walt., 65 ; Pat., slaughter of a Messenger-at-arms, 381 ; acquitted, 385 ; Sir Pat.,

II. 348 ; his brother Wm. tried for Perjury,
hearing Mass, &c. ib. ; Walt., III. 486 ; Tho.
Dempster of Muresk beheaded for Forging a
Bond in his name, ib. ; Sir Pat. and Pat. yr.
ib. ; — of Touche, Wm., remitted, I , * 250 ;
—of Vnthank, Andrew, III. 564 ;— of Syde,
Alexander, I. * 404 ; Geo., II. 130; Jo., his

son, tried for Slaughter, ib. 134 ; — of that Ilk,

Walter, *441.
Bardowy, Laird and Lady of, &c. See Hamilton.
Barholme, Laird of, slain, I. 81 ; II. 523.
Bark, King's little, a ship, I. * 298.
Barmkine, (barmekyne), what, III. 13, 17, &c.
Barnehill, burnt, III. 223.
Barras See Tournament, III. 42.
Barrett, Capt., English Pirate, III. 100.
Barroune of Kynnaird, Geo., II. 128 ; — Jo.

alias M^Duff, Officer of Strathbraan, hanged

for Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 153, &c., 246.

See Macduff, and 394, note.
Barsalloch, burning of, I. * 104.
Barskeocht, attempt to restore Popery at the

Place of, I. * 430.
Barry, Tho., forging Regent's signature, right

l)and struck off, I. 19.
Basane (Bison) skins, I. * 321.
Basin of solid gold, weighing 10 lb. 1| oz. I.

* 295. See Gold, &c.
Bass, Laird of. See Lauder.
Bassoned-meir, a soird. III. 265.

Bastie, Sir Anthony D'Arcie de la. Guardian and
Lieutenant of Lothian and the INIerse, &c.,
slain, I. * 235, * 261, * 265, * 267.

Batard, what, III. 293.

' Batounnis and roungis,' striking with, a Minister, II. 416; naked people, 454, &c. See
Hurting and Wounding.

Battery, pendente lite, I. * 73.

Battiesoune, Jo., alias Jok of the Scoir, Prikit
up Archie, and Adie, his brothers, hanged
for Slaughter, Horse and Cattle-stealing,
II. 443.

Battle, Dunkeld, L * 98 ; Stirling, 100 ; Glasgow-Muir, * 114; Corrichie, * 183 ; Kittycrocehiil, near Glasgow, * 237 ; Haddenrig,

* 324; Ancrum-muir, * 332, * 359 ; Pynkie-cleuche, * 360, * 378, 51 ; Langside, I.
1, 5, &c. ; Inreresk or Musselburgh, 51 ; Balrinnes, or Glenlivet, 361 ; Dryffe-Sands, III.
30. See Field ; Fight, &c.

Bauche straikis, what, II. 84 ; III. 485, &c.
Bauld, Bessie, a Witch's nickname. III. 606.
Baver (beaver hat) to K. James V., I. * 305.
Bawbeis (Balbeis), forging, I. * 364, * 365, *392 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

633

Forbes of Monymusk and Pitsligo, * 442.
See Forgery.

Baw-fiel(i, III. 277.

Baxter, King's master, I. * 313.

Bayne of Logie, Alex., II. 98 ; III. 252 ;— of
Wester Logie, Alex., 11.484; — of Tullicli,
Dun., yr., I. 200, 204 ; Alex , 353 ; Dun.,
III. 134.

Beads, golden, for K. James V., I. * 301 ; amethyst, * 307 ; pearl, ib., &c.

Bean-sliaw (boneshave), charm for. III. 609 and
notes.

Bear-leader of England, I. * 118.

Bear-tooth for the Prince, I. * 307.

Beatoun (Betoune, Bethune), Abbot of Abbirbrothok, Ja., II. 575 ; — of Bailiescraigs, Jo.,
I. * 137 ;— of Balf ur, Ja., * 136, 60, 191 ;
Da., II., 60 ;— of Capildra, Arch., * 328 ;—
Cardinal, * 310, *318 ; goes to France,

* 323 ; Murder of, * 337 ;— of Creich, Ro.,

* 345 ; Dav., 00 ; Ja., 308 ; Jo., III. 394,
note; — Mr James, aiding English at Broughty,
I. * 345 ; — Lady Biickcleuch, Janet, III.
394 ; of Falay, Jo., 264 ;— of Melgund, Ja.,
L * 136, * 157 ; David, 79 ;— of VVesthall,
(alias Belouche), Ro., a declared rebel, 74.

Bedford, Earl of, at K. James VI. baptism,

L * 479.
Beds, the King's ' Lettacampt' (^Lit de camp), I.

* 273 ; price of, at Justice-aires, * 390, &c.
Bedesmen, the King's, I. * 263, &c.

Beef, price of, at Justice-aire, I. * 390.

Beggars, ' Strang and idill,' I. 303.

Beheading, capital punishment, see Treason, Murder, &c. passim ; — with a sword, I. * 425.

Beill, House of, to be kept against the English,
L * 280.

Beil-Fyres. (See Bale-Bres), I. * 262.

Beirope of that Ilk, Ro., II. 515.

Bek, Jo., Slaughter, II. 523.

Bell, alarm, II. 31 ;— of Alby, Wm., I. * 431 ;—
the Cat. See Angus ; — for Prince's Chapel,

* 306 ;— Wm., hanged for Rape, II. 475.
Bellarmine, Cardinal, answers K. James

VL, II. 570, &c. See Balmerinoch.
Bellenden of Auchnoull, Mr Tho., Justice-Clerk,
I. * 254 ;— of Ewie (Evie), The, 377 ; Sir

Pat., III. 82 ; — Maister John, translating of
the ' Cronykill,' L * 274, * 276, * 279 ; ' Titus Leuius,' * 279, * 282 ; — To., Slaughter,
III. 497. See Ballenden and Bannatyne.

Belts, I. * 307, &c.

Ben, what. III. 509, note.

Bene, King of, L * 115, * 278 ; Queen of, * 278.

Bernardino, Seignior Don, I. 332.

Berge, Jaques de la, a Fleming, robbed betwixt
Edinburgh and Leith, II. 441.

Bernehill, Burning of, I. * 36.

Bertoun of Over Barntoun, Robert, absence from
the Armies of Arran and Angus, the ' King's
Lieutenants,' I. * 237.

Behuiedale, Master of, Jo., I. 369 ; — Lord,
Wm., 368 ; III. 231 ; Feuds between E. of
Caithness and E. of Sutherland, ib. ; imprisoned, &c., 310. See Caithness and Sinclair.

Berwick, English Herald, I. * 283.

Berwickshire, Inhabitants of, get Remission, I.

* 14 ; Barons fail in their Bond, * 146.
Besieging- house of Summerdaill, I. * 225, (See

Dumbarton, &c.) ; Frendraucht, * 328 ; Coldingham, * 331 ; Lochmaben Castle, * 332 ;
Dundjarton Castle, * 334 ; St Andrews, ib. ;
Langholm, * 338 ; town of Haddington,

* 342 ; Akergill, * 391 ; house of Penkill,

* 403 ; Wauchtoune, &c. Jo., Leyis beheaded,
8 ; Dupplin, 25 ; Edinburgh, 30 ; House of
Strechin, 65 ; Warriston, 81 ; Kirkhill, 174;
Fedderat, 205 ; King, &c., in Tolbooth of

. Edinburgh, II. 29 ; Place of Ashintillie, 63 ;
Auchmedden, and deflowering the Laird of
Vrinoch's daughter, 394 ; Tower of Newbie.
&c., 464.

Besetting the way. See Umbesetting.

Bestiality, Jo. Jak, alias Scott, ' wirreit and
brunt in asches,' II. 491.

Beverage, John, a Dominican Friar, burnt for Heresy, I. * 210, * 211, (Src.

Bewes, Mons., Ambassador, I. * 281, * 283.

Bkwlie, Lord, Ja., II. 581, 604. See Hay.

Bible, in English, persons burnt for using. See
Heresy, Reformation, 8cc.

Bie-skeppis, rol»bing a gard<Mi of, III. .555.

Bier, law of the, Jialtr-rccht, 111. 183, cl scq.

Bigamy, I. 110 ; Jo. Guthrie hanged, III. 428;

634

GENERAL INDEX,

Alex. Thomson and Jonet Cuthbert, banished,

III. 428. See Adultery, Incest, &c.
Biggar of Woolmot, Major Jo,, III. 601, 7iofe.
Bikkertoun of Casch, Wm., sliooting Laird of

Balmanno near King's person, I. 98 ; — Hen.

beheaded, * 162.
Binning, Lord, Tho., Ill, 14, 312, 452, &c.,

passif7i. See Haddingtoun and Hamilton.
Bintoich, Fight of, III. 112. See Clan Gregor.
Birgeame, Raid of, I. * 338.
Birlingis, what, III. 368.
Birnie, of Brovvbrie, Ja., III. 475.
Birsay, Palace of. III. 273, &c. See Trials of

E. of Orkney and his base son, 272, 308, and

illustrative documents.
Birth-pains, Witch-charm to allay, I. 237.
Bischop of Brechin, Alex., I. 392 ;— Captain,

English Pirate, III. 105.
Bischoptoun, Laird of, invades Provost of Glasgow, L * 361.
Bissett, Habakkuk, W. S., assaulted, &c. I. 286 ;

his curious form of process, ib. note, 298.
Biting oft' a finger, 1. 34. See Demembration and

Mutilation.
Black, Henry, hanged. Common Theft, &c., I.

* 413 ; Hen., Captain of the Castle of Kirkwall, and 1 1 others, Slaughter, III. 53 ; Tho.,
chamberlain to E. of Orkney, 273 ; hanged,
283 ; his Deposition, 296 ; John, Dominican
Friar, disputation with Willox the Reformer,
I. * 417 ; Freir, John, wounded, in the Cowgate of Edr., * 475 ; — Saturday, what, I. 56,
7iote.

Blackadder of that Ilk, And. (Laird of), I.

* 42 ; Felony and Slaughter in the King's
Palace, * 100 ;— Hume of, * 413, &c. See
Hume ; — of TuUiallan, John, beheaded, * 15 1 ;

* 271 ; * 275 ; * 347 ;— Castle of, besieged
by the English, * 269 ; — Capt. Wm., invaded
for his slaughter, * 488 ; hanged and quartered for K. Henry (Darnley's) ^Murder, * 489,

* 509 ;— of Taissis, Wm., 59.
Blackball of that Ilk, Alex., L 382.
Black-maill, Scott of Tuschelaw beheaded, I.

* 145 ; Johnnie Armstrang, * 153 ; Messengers taking, hanged, * 356. See Skatt.

Blaiklok, Adam, hanged for Perjury, &c.. III. 358.

Blackness, Castle of, its Dungeon and kitchenTower, I. * 312.

Blair of Adamtoune (Edentoune), Dav., yr. I.
71 ; Da., II. 106 ;— of Ardblair, John, I.

* 371 ; And., 166 ; Pat., II. 63 ;— Athole,
Castle of, man starved to death in the Pit of,
III. 491 ; dead body hanged on a gibbet, ib. ;
— of Bagray, Alex., umbesetting, &c., II. 103 ;
—of Balgillo, Wm., I. * 157 ; II. 49 ; Jo.,
105 ; — of Balthayok, Alex., yr.. Deposition as
to Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 188, 241 ; The,
remitted, I. * 254, * 343 ; Feud with Laird
of Kinfawns, &c. * 424 ; Alex., * 452 ; Alex.,
yr., II. 49, 60, 166 ;— of Freirtoune, Alex., I.

* 452;— of Fynnech, Walt. II. 439 ;— of
Gairdrum, And,, III. 443 ; Peter, his brother,
slays young Laird of Monyvaird, &c., ib. ; —
of that Ilk, John, I. * 331, 50, 71, 87, 282;
II. 390, 433 ; Jo., yr., ib. ;— Ja., bailie of
Ayr, III. 345 ;— of Melgynche, Jo., I. * 452 ;
of Middle Auchindrain, Jo., * 457, 71 ; — of
the Stroud, 56.

Blanerne, Laird of, I. * 413.

Blanks, the Spanish, Trials for conspiring against
the Religion, Sec, I. 310; Tract as to, 317, &c.

Blantyre, Conimendator (Priory of, W^alt., I.
267, 372 ; n. 496, 581 ;— Lord, Walt., II.
3, 273, 274, 327, 496.

Blawin-hornis (for the chase), &c., sent by K.
Henry VI II. to K. James V., L * 270.

Bleeding of Corpses, on the touch of the Murderer, III. 143, 165 ; curious illustrations of
this superstition, 182, &c. See Corpse and
Touching.

Blind Harry, the Minstrel, I. * 116.

Blinkscale, Dav., hanged for Theft, I. * 151.

Blood, opinions of the ancients as to the life residing in, III, 182, &c. See Touching ; — alleged
spring of, at Dunoon, 199 ; — Devil baptizes his
converts with, 602, &c. See Witchcraft ; —
< steming of,' Jasp-stane for, III. 564, &c.,
and note.

Blood-hound, III. 548.

Bludwyte, what, II. 468.

Bluidie-hand, II. 376, vote.

Bluid-stane, used as a charm for ' bleding of the
nese,' III. 564, note.

GENERAL INDEX.

635

BIynschells, Mr Humph., Justice-Depute, I. 179,
et seq. &c.

Bodin in feir of weir, what, I. 49, et passim.

Bodies, dead, of Traitors produced in Judgment
before passing sentence of Forfeiture, II. 241,
277, 405; — man starved to death, and his dead
body afterwards gibbeted, HI. 491.

Boig of Geicht, Mass celebrated, II. 530.

Boird-stane, used in Witchcraft, I. 252.

Boilspell, the. III. 214.

Boitkyn, hett, the tongue pierced with, for Perjury, &c. III. 539.

Bone bleeding on a Murderer's touch, III. 183.
See Touching, &c.

Bonar of Balgirscho, Alex., II. 65 ; — of Kelty,
Walter, remitted, I. * 240 ; Wm., 28 ;— of
Rossy, Wra., I. * 408 ; II. 103 ;— Ja., burnt
for Incest with his sister, I. 22 ; — Wm., Murder, acquitted, II. 531.

Boice, (Boece), Mr Hector, Pension to, I. * 279.

Bonnet-caice, III. 478.

Bonspeill, what, III. 214.

Bonyalla, III. 2.

Bonyngtoun, Laird of, I. * 470, See Wylie,
Wod ; — house of, broken into by the young
Laird ; title-deeds stolen, II. 340 ; is hanged,
347; — .Laird of Latoune remitted, ib. note;
accomplices hanged, ib.

Bonkle, Tho., beheaded, Szc. I, 158 ; — Jos., beheaded, II. 417.

Bontyne of Ardoch, John, I. * 178, * 361 ; II.
439; III. 114, 233, 250.

Bonfii'es, for rejoicing, I. * 262 ; — to alarm the
country, * 269, Sec. See Beil-Fyris.

Books, using heretical, I. * 209, * 216, * 217.

Border Barons, Bond by, to assist Earl of Angus,
I. * 127 ; neglected to be ful611ed, * 146 ;—
Bonds betwixt them. III. 381, 390,394;—
expedition to, I. * 307, 302 ; — by King in person, 303 ; — Thieves, Raid against, I. * 184 ; —
Resetting, * 208.

Borderers, complaint of, against the English, I.

* 279 ; received as Cautioners, * 467.
BoTHWELL, (^Ramsai/,) Lord, John, Treason, I.

* 3, * 4, &c. ;— (Hepburn), Loud, Patrick,

* 188 ; remitted, * 243 ; Gift of nonentry,
*255, * 379;— James, *412;— Eaul of.

James, Conspiracy to seize on person of
Mary Queen of Scots, * 461 ; notices
of his first marriage to Lady Jane Gordon,
ib.; his summons of Treason, * 462 ; challenged by Arran to Judicial combat, * 463 ;
breaks ward from Castle of Edr., * 464 ; Laird
of Quhitsum's protest against outlawry, * ib.;
his servant slain, * 468, * 470 ; tried for K.
Henry's (Darnley) Murder, * 489 ; Narrative written by him after his flight from Scotland, * ib., 95, 145 ;— Francis, High Treason,
171 ; Forfeited, 181 ; uses charms and Witchcraft to take the King's life, 240, note ; acquitted, 258 ; forfeited, 259 ; proclamation
for his pursuit, 260, et seq. ; forfeited for invading King in Holyroodhouse, &c. 272, 274 ;
his posterity forfeited, ib. ; his resetters and
assisters, &c. 287 ; tried for Conspiracy against
the King at Holyroodhouse and Falkland, 293 ;
doom of forfeiture, 297; Act that none backbite him, c^'c. 302 ; again charged with Treason, 303; denounced, ib.; Proclamation, 308 ;
another rehearsing his Treasons, 340 ; taking
Leith, II. 21 ; Resetting one of his adherents,
124 ; — Countess of, Dame Mary Douglas,
convicted for High Treason, I. 218 ; ordered
to be apprehended, 281 ; her Letter recalled
by the King, 350, 362, Sec. ;— Mr Fra., (brother to Jo., L. Haliruidhouse,) II. 92 ; IIL
9, 264, &c. See Lord H.
BouTHWicK, Lord, Wm., I. * 78, * 311 ;
, John, * 336, * 363, * 412, * 425, * 454, 27 ;
Adultery, 83, 84 ; — Ja., feud with Lairds of
Craigmillar and Bass, 352 ; Riot at his apprehension, &c. ; — Jo , III. 482 ; — Tutor of,
Wm., Murder committed by him, II. 423 ; —
of Johnstounburne, Wm., III. 539; — of
Newbyree, Ja., III. 497 ; — Master of,
Thomas, remitted for Intercommuning with
Rebels, I. * 242, * 468 ;— Lady, Incest and
Adultery, I. 84 ; — of Cruikstoun, Wm., I.
*143 ; Assise for, *266 ; — Ro., the celi'brated
founder of Cannons, (artillery), I. * 2(57 ; —
of Adestounc, Da., I. * 425 ; — of Collielaw,
Bern. I. 381 ;— of Pryncado, T., I. * 166,
* 434;— of Glengelt, Mich., I. * 434 ;— of
Raschaw (Rilischaw), Ro., I. * 166; — Jo.,

636

GENERAL INDEX.

27 ; Mr Mark, Justice-depute, I. 349 ; — of

Lochhill, Da., King's Advocate, I. 47; — Ja.,
III. 252 ;— of Gordonishall, Jo., I. 60 ;— of
Middleton, Tho., I. »S4.
Bortliwicksheills, Place of, burnt, I. * 37.
Boswell of Auchinleck, David, I. * 201, * 369,
148 ;— Ja., 46 ;— Jo., 72 ;— Ja., fear of, II.
130 ;— Jo., 355 ;— Ja., 390 ;— of Duntrine3emen, Jo.. II. 130.
Boss-baked, hump-backed, III. 606.
Boun, what, III. 466.

Bourdeaux, Piracy committed there, I. 37.
Bourtrie-buss, what, II. 458.
Bouskat, (Bukkat), Captain Johanna, Commissioner of the ArtiUery, I. * 261, 262.
Bower, Laird, concerned in the foreknowledge of
Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 257, kc. See
Sprott and Logan.
Bows and Arrows, &c. See Archery.
Bowmaker of Cardone, Ja., I. * 166 ;— English,

*278.
Boy, Slaughter by a, of eiffht years, I. * 16 ;

Silver, belonging to K. James V, * 302.
Boyman, Jonet, Witchcraft, burnt, I. 38.
Boyd, And., brother to Kilmarnok, II. 555 ; — of
Banhaithe, Ro., I. 171; — of Boneschaw, Sir
Tho., III. 345 ; — Jo., acquitted of Poisoning,
I. 399 ;— Quintin slain, II. 515 ;— of the
Kyppis, Ja., I. 171 ; wounded, 187 ; — Lord,
Rob., I. *451, *453, * 478, 55, 171; IIL
339;— Master of, Tho., Slaughter, I. 171 ;
— of Penkill, Adam, besieged in his house by
Laird of Bargany, I. * 403, 55 ;— of Petkindy, Rob., I. * 88 ; — of Portincorse, Ro.,
I. 420 ; — Mr Ro., Principal of Glasgow College, III. 338.
Boyes, heavy irons for the legs, III. 3.
— Society of the, II. 532 ; Jo. Forbes beheaded, 535, 581.
Boyle of Kelburne, Jo., II. 430 ; — Ja., scourged
through Edr., and branded on the cheek, for
Suborning witnesses, III. 358.
Braemar, stealing wild horses from, I. * 247.
Braidis, Andro, hanged, III. 382.
Bracelets, L * 295, * 307, * 321, 8ec. See New

Year's gifts.
Brakanhill, supplying the English at, I. * 344.

Branding, punishment of a female, I. * 346 ;
three persons scourged, branded, and banished
for Perjury, &c. III. 358, 445, 595.
Brand, Mr Jo., Minister, I. *500, * 511 ; Jo., student, his son, beheaded for Slaughter, III. 360.

Breach of Trust, pleadings relative to, II. 549, &c.

Brechin, Feud between citizens of, and Tenants
of Balnamoon, I. * 431 ; — BiSHOP OF, And.,
JI. 261, 274.

Bread, selling light, I. * 360.

Breadhead, Janet, Witch, III. 614 ; her Confessions, 616 ^if seq.

Breadhouse, Yeomen of the King's, I. * 313.

Breame, Mons. de, French Ambassador, I. * 479.

Breaking on the Wheel (or roiv^, I. 241.

Bribe, taking a, to discharge a Murderer, I. * 63.

Bridal, Slaughter at a, IIL 471 ; Jo. Swyne, beheaded, ib.

Bridge of Dee, Army at, I. 176.

Bridles, scourging with, I. * 454 ; barbarously
scourging naked people with bridles, &c., 455,
&c. See Scourging.

Brigancy, L * 91, * 469, 145 ; II. 70, &c.; Tho.
Cuninghame, sword-slipper, hanged, 359,458.

Brigantynes, I. * 289.

Bringing in the English, I. * 17, &c. See Englishmen.

Brisbane of Bishoptoun, John, I. * 163, * 382;
—of Raslene, INIath., III. 134;— of Middil
Walkinschaw, Jo., slain, I. 69.

Broadick Castle, burnt, I. * 139 ; Capt. of, 286.

Brocheing, what, III. 526.

Brodestar (Embroiderer), King's, I. * 315,
* 320, cS:c.

Brodie of that Ilk, Alex., Feud with tlie Laird of
Altyre, I. * 356, 68 ;— Dav., II. 71 ;— Chamberlain of Kinloss, Alex., III. 485 ; — of Leathin, Alex., yr., 602 ;— Margt., Witch, 606,
614, &c.

Broke, Ja., Murdered, III. 565.

Broken men, outlaws of no clan, &c., II. 70, 432 ;
IIL 364, 537. See Sorners, &c.

Bronkard, Sir Hen., sent as Ambassador from Q.
Eliz. to James VI., to congratulate him on
his escape from Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 315.

Brood-mares, King's, I. * 316.

Brothersyde, Wm., beheaded, I. * 160.

GENERAL INDEX.

637

Broughton, Regality of, I. 185 ; barbarous treatment of Witches at their execution, III. 598.

Broughty-craig, supplying English at, I. * 344,
* 345, &c. * 361.

Broune, Thomas, beheaded for Slaughter, I. * 15;
Ro., Brigancye, * 469 ; Jo., beheaded for
Slaughter, III. 493 ; Jo. and three others
hanged, 8cc., for Piracy and Murder under
Trust, 569 ; — of Carslatyre, Jo., yr., 477 ; —
Bessie, murdered by her husband, 481 ; Jo.
Moitt beheaded, 482.

BrounfieldCBruntfield), Adam, Slaughter, II. 506;
— of Eastfield, 480 ; Nicol, his son, Slaughter, ib. ; — of Greenlawdene, Steph., yr., slain,
I. * 451 ; Steph., II. 405;— of Hardaikeris,
Adam, I. * 451 ; Alex., Slaughter, 11.480;
— of Quhytehous, Nicoll, 480; — of Todrig,
Ro., fiar, 480; — Geo., beheaded, I. 77 ; Stephen, Captain of Tamtallon, slain, 113, note ;
' Singular combat ' between his brother and
Jo. Carniichael, ib. ; Jo., yr., slain, II. 480.

Brown of Colstoun, Mr Wm., Tutor of, I. * 243 ;
Geo., * 388, * 426 ; Jo., brother to, II. 456 ;— ^
of Cultermannis, Rich., I. * 76, * 175 ;— of
Carsleuch, Jo. Langside, I. 10; Slaughter,
81 ; — of the Land, Jo., II. 492 ; — Jo., bailie
of Musselburgh, II. 555 ; — Geo., hanged and
forfeited for Horse and Cattle-stealing, 98 ; —
Jonet, hanged for Child-Murder, III. 269 ; —
Jo., scourged and branded for stealing a purse,
445 ; — of Coulter, Ro., slain, 54 ; the Laird
of Birnok and his son beheaded, 58 ; — of Mullennis, Jo., 93.

Bruce of Airth, Jo., slain, I. * 98 ; Ro., Stouthreif, * 132, * 167; Sir Alex., 304, 351 ;
Feud with Lord Levingstoun, &c., 352 ; II.
297 ; Sir Jo., 457 ;— of Bofark, And., III.
475;— of Braklamuir, And., I. * 148;— Brakanhill, supplying the English at, * 344 ; —
of Bynning, Ro., * 204 ; slain, * 399 ; Ro.,
27, 155 ;_of Camok, Geo., II. 457; Sir Geo.,
in. 479 ;— of Clackmannan, Sir Dav., I.
*42; Ro., 276; quarrel with Bailies, he, of
Perth, 277, 292 ; Sir Ro., III., 318 ;— Colin,
Intercommuning with MacGregors, II., 456 ;
banished, under pain of 5000 merks, 457 ; banished of new for life, III. 437 ; — of Colpmalindeis, Hector, I. *88 ; Laurence, Feud with
Lord Oliphant, * 488, 375 ; Mr Alex., fiar,
457 ; III. 82 ; Laur., yr., and Alex., his brother. Slaughter, &c., 443, 465; Offers for reconciling Feud with Laird of Monievaird,
480 ;— of Earlshall, Sir Wm , I. * 427 ; Peter, 24; — Mr Edward, Justice-depute, 110;
Capt. And, IL 484 ;— of Fyngask, Jo., I.

* 158 ; Pat., Slaughter, II. 427, 457 ;— Capt.
Harie, Duel while on foreign service, a remarkable case, III. 502 ; illustrative Papers,
504; — History of the Valiant, 448; — of Kinloss, Edw. See Kinloss ; — of Kynnaird, David
I. * 343 ; Mr Ro., Minister, 261, 304 ; reprimands the King, 360; II. 9 ; his conduct
as to Gowrie's Conspiracy, 234, 299, &c. ;
III.619, 8tc. ; — of Mungowellis, Ja., I.* 132;
—of Pitfowlis, Arch., 382 ,— Mr Ro., Seminary Priest, 167, 328, 329, &c. ;— Helen,
burnt for coining, &c., II. 74.

Bruier, Ralph, the English Captain of the Castle

of Roxburgh, I. * 379.
Brunstoun, Laird of, sent with horses to King of

France, I. * 322.
Bruntisland, Pirates' heads affixed there, 111.572.
BuccLEucH, Lord, Walt., II. 581 ; his Regiment, III. 164. See Scott.
BucHAX, Lord Ja., Tresson, I. * 2 ; 3o., * 190 ;

Rob., 88 ;— Earl of, II. 133 ; Jo. IIL 486 ;

— (Bucquhane) of Auchnacoy, Alex., I.

* 454; — Master of, Ja., II. 413; Ja., his
son. Slaughter, ib.

Buchanan of Auchmar, Pat., yr.. III. 564; — of
Balloch, Ro., I. * 451 ;— of Blairlosk, Tho., I.
285 ; — of Buchlyvie, Jo., murdered by Macgregors, II. 432 ; — of Camroune, J., I. * 441 ;
—of Drumnakill, Rob., * 167 ; Jo., yr., ib. ;
Walt., * 441, * 451;— of Drumfoid, Jo.,
285 ; — of Gartiiavertane, James, remitted,

* 253;— Mr George (the Historian), * 290;
dress, &c., to him on Q. Mary of Guise's
entry into Edr., * 294 ; — of Ihert, Jo., II.
438;— of that Ilk, George, I. * 150; besieging Castle of Dumbarton, Ike, * 236, * 344,

* 385 ; Geo., 289, 306 ; Jo., III. 318; Geo.,
yr., 550 ; Offers to submit the case of torture and Murder of one of his Clan, ib. ; —

638

GENERAL INDEX.

of Lany, I. * 441, * 453 ;— of Spittal, Edmund, * 386; Robert, 306 ;— of Stanyflat,
Pat., * 166;— Robert Waltersoune, II. 439 ;—
Jo. (Sir), 544 ; his wife (Margt. Hertsyde)
tried for abstracting Queen's jewels, ih. ; declared ' Infamous,' 556 ; sentence recalled,
557 ; Jo., servant to L. Madertie, III. 250 ;
Marg., her Deposition as to Orkney Rebellion,
304 ; Wra., barbarously tortured, and then
Murdered, in the most savage manner, by
MacFarlanes, 545, &c.

Bucht, what. III. 221.

Buckholme, Keeping House of, I. * 338.

Buist, a box or chest, I. 253 ; — ' to keip hostis
in' for the Prince's Chapel, * 306.

Buitis, boots or bootikins, instruments of torture,
I. 219, 222, 376 ; 57 strokes inflicted, ih.

Bukkat, Capt. (See Bonskat.)

Bullets, M^hi^ poisoned, I. * 90; Lord Maxwell
traitorously murders the Laird of Johnstone
with two, 337.

Buntene. See Bontyne.

Burgundy, Herald, I. * 277.

Burne, Simon, executed, I. * 264.

Burning of Minto, I. * 19; Place of Fastheuch,

* 23 ; a ' Pele' in Bothill, * 25 ; Covantoune,

* 26 ; Hirdmanstoune, * 27 ; Quhitslaide,

* 30 ; Place of Riddale, * 34 ; Town of Selkirk, * 35 ; Borthuikscheillis, * 37 ; Town
of Dumfreis, * 39 ; Drumskey and Ardwell,

* 56; Newby, * 60; Blindhauche, * 61;
Branxholme and Ancrum, * 69 ; Dunskey,

* 95, 103 ; Ardendraucht, * 98 ; Thurestoun,

* 99; Lochfergus, * 100; Kirk of Monyvaird, * 101 ; Lochaber, ib, ; Weyme, * 103 ;
107, 116; Barsalloch, * 104; Innermessane,

* 124; Broadick Castle, * 139; Cousland,

* 141; Lag, * 160; Howpaslot, * 172;
Davy, Dykes, Ardrossir, &c., * 175 ; Cun5ear8toun, * 201 ; Ardochbeg, * 225 ; Grenok, * 232; Town of Bute, * 240; Arroquhire, ib. ; Craigy, ib. ; Peill of Knokschenoch, * 242 ; Roseneath, the Lennox, and
Craiginche, *246 ; Mull, Tyree, and Morvern,
*247 ; Kirkmaquho, *249 ; Castle of Allanedonnand, * 256 ; Balbegys, * 334 ; Town of
Durrisdeer, Amisfield, Sec, * 347 ; Newbottle and Dalkeith, by the English, * 349 ;

corns of Sprowstoune, * 375 ; Kirkmichael,

* 405 ; Dornoch, 68 ; place of Littlegill, 108 ;
place of Pitmedden, 160 ; Moit, Davidshaw,
and Littlegill, 184 ; place of Dunnibirsell, and
Murder of the E. of Murray, 284 ; Babertoun, 290 ; Kirk of Lochmaben, 305 ; Luss,
&c., by the Macgr^gors, II. 432 ; house of
Langholm, &c., 450 ; Littlegill, 491 ; Askomell. 111. 5; Castle of Achallader, 114;
Glenlochie, ib. ; Tolbooth of Lauder, 1 16 ;
Auchinsoull, 176 ; Barnehill, 223 ; Auchallader, Glenlocha, &c., 232 ; Aberuchill, ib.,
250, 566 ; Island of Lewis burnt and wasted,
244 ; Comerie, 537 ; 27 houses belonging to
the Archdean of Ross, 540.

Burning of Corns, I. * 27, * 375, * 405 ; Wm.
Donald, hanged, 45.

— at the stake, punishment of death, for Females,
I. * 190 : husband, for murder of his wife, 14 ;
Jo. Bonar, burnt for Incest with his sister, 22 ;
And. Thomesoun, Burning corns, 70 ; Andro
Glencorse, for Poisoning and Adultery, 84 ;
— Mr Adam Colquhoun, hanged and burat for
Poisoning, &c., * 419. See Murder, Witchcraft, &c.

Burnet of Barns, Wm., L * 422 ; II. 430 ; Ja.,
HI. 565 ;— of Leyis, Alex., I. * 470 ;— Janet, Witch, HI. 614, &c.

Burntisland, Expenses of King's Ships there, I.

* 324.

Burdeous (Bourdeaux?) Wines, I. * 349, *377 ;

price of, * 389.
Burriow, an executioner, III. 474, 548, &c.
BuRLEY, Lord, Mich., H. 274, 587; IIL 9;

Sir Ja.. his brother, ib., 370. See Balfour.
Busche, what, HI. 101.
But the house, what, HI. 509.
Bute, Remission to Inhabitants, I * 113; Town

burnt, * 240 ;— Pursuivant, * 277, * 278,

* 286, * 305.

Butter of Gormok, Pat., I. * 88 ; Jo., Slaughter,

* 367 ; * 371 ; Pat., II. 63; besieging the
place of Assintullie, 67.

Bylis, a game, I. * 117.

Bynnie of that Ilk, Tho., L * 127.

Bynning, Jo., hanged and quartered for the Murder of K. Henry (Darnley), I. 95. See K.
Henry, &c.

GENERAL INDEX.

639

c.

Caball, Geo., hanged and quartered for uttering
forged money, I, * 137.

Caber, ane grit, III. 367.

Cache-puill, (Tennis,) game of, I, *271.

Cachet, (Cashet,) King's, counterfeited, I. 157.

Caddell of Aslowne, Ja,, I. * 172 ; Jo., * 434.

Cadgearis, what, II. 383, 444.

Cadenhead, Wm., hanged for Horse- stealing, I.
*411.

Cage, or Iron-house for felons, III. 293, &c.

Cairns, what, III. 204, note.

Cairns of Barnbauchill, Rich., I. * 85 ; — Wm., of
Orchardtoun, * 131.

Cairletoun, Agnes, wife of the Laird of Bonschaw. Incest with her husband's brother,
JafFray Irvine of Robgill, who was beheaded,
III. 576.

Caimcross of Allanschaw, Ja., I. * 432 ; — Robert, callit Mekill Hob, ' Ravisching' or Forcible abduction of Lady Warreistoun, 244 ; —
of Calf hill, Nic, * 2, 244 ; 11.368 ;— of Birksneip, Cha., III. 453.

Caithness, Bishop of. And., I. * 79, 149; —
Robert Bishop Elect, * 337 ; seizing Teinds,
&c. ib, ; his Bailie imprisoned, * 395 ; — Commissary of, imprisoned, *222 ; — Postulate of,
Alexr., * 337 ;— hawks brought from, * 297,

* 298 ; — Earl of, George, Murder, &c.

* 394 ; Imprisoning his brother David, * 393 ;
Convocation at Water of Elmisdene, * 395,
200, 367 ; III. 12, 31 ; assaults Geo. Lord
Gordon on the streets of Edr., 32 ; betrays
his kinsman Lord Maxwell to the Privy
Council, ib. ; Submission betwixt him and E.
of Sutherland, 231 ; appointed King's Lieutenant for quelling Rebellion in Orkney,
(^q. v.y 273 ; dispatches to the King, dvc.
from Orkney, 286 ; got pension of 1000
Crowns for his services, 309, 7io(e ; sketch of
his career, ib. 310 ; stripped of his ill-gotten
fortune, and dies in obscurity, ib. ; Murder
under trust, 498 ; fugitated, 499 ; — Countess
OF, (L. Jean Gordon,) III. 32; — Master of,
Jo., I. 368.

VOL. in.

Cajetane, Cardinal, II. 576, 589,

Cake, charmed, made of meal got from 9 nxaryit

madynnis.,' &c., II. 537.
Caldcleuch, Mr Jo., Letter from the King to him

as to Gowrie's Consp. II. 317 ; III. 97.
Caldwell, Laird of, Intercommuning with, I.

* 357 ; slain, 17, &c. (See Muir.)
Calder, Wm., scourged and banished, II. 94.
Caley, Oppressing Laird of, (Lennox,) I. * 53.
Callandar of Ballincloiche, Ro., I. * 130.
Calmis, (moulds for casting base money,) II. 75,
Calp paid by Laird of Ardincaple to MacGregor, II. 436, note.

Calumnious speeches against the King, an Englishman hanged, I. 383. See K. Ja. VI.

Cambuskenneth, Adam, Commendator of, I. 88,
119.

Cambusnethane, Laird of, I. * 480.

Cameroune of Glennevas, Allaster, slain, III. 258;
— Jo., alias Bodache, slain, III. 258 ; — of
Locheldy, (Loch5ell or Locheill,) Allan, II.
68; — Allan M'Eandowie, Murder, &c. III.
258. See Clan Cameroun.

Cammiskeyth, attempt to restore Popery at the
Place of, I. * 430,

Campbell of Aberuchill, Colin, XL 438 ; III. 223 ;
Hereschip and burning of Aberuchill, 232,
250, 566 ;— of Ardkindlas, Colin, I. * 224,

* 229, note ;— Ja., * 431, 68, 100 ;— Jo.,
285 ; assaulted, 286 ; acquitted for slaughter
of Laird of Calder, 263 ; tried and diet deserted, 391 ; betrays Laird of MacGregor, II.
433 ; Argyll attempts to get MacGregor to
slay him, 436 ; — of Ardgarthnay, Artli., I.

* 223 ;— of Ardoch, Jo., * 164 ;— of Auldornok, Jo., * 138 ;— of Ardintinny, Don., » 227 ;
Sir Arch., III. 22, 23 ; — of Aucliiiibrek, Sir
Doug., III. 10, 23, 26;— Prior of Ardchattan, 14 ; — of Auchinvelling, io. I. 283 ;
— of Areis, Vthreid, III. 477 ; — of Bothe,
Dun., I. 68;— Colin, II. 328; HI. 238 ;— of
Bargour, Charles, I. * 333 ; — of Blairskaitli,
Alex., respited, * 241 ; — of Blairnerne, Colin,
392 ; — of Breachlie, Mr Wm., his ratth4 31

640

GENERAL INDEX.

houghed, &c. III. 251 ; — of Balnagowne,
Hew, 252; — of Chvnes, Colin, 251 ; his
Place burnt, &c. ib. ; his horses houghed, &c.
257 ; taken prisoner, Sec. 266 ; — of Crwnan,
Geo., II. 63 ;— of Cesnock, Geo., I. * 84,
* 352 ; John, * 136 ; George, II. 106 ;— of
Calder, (Caddell,) Sir John, * 217, * 224;
Archibald, * 359 ; John, 68 ; Sir John, slain by
Laird of Ardkinglas, 363 ; trial, 391 ; Jo.,
II. 517; III. 12, 14, 22; King's Lieutenant
in Yla, 364, 370; Archibald, brother to Laird,
553 ; — Captain of Carrik, Dune, 233 ;
—of Clevvis, Ja., I. * 84 ;— of Dowchall,
Geo., I. 46 ;— of Clovingall, Dav., * 58 ;—
Mr Dougall, Dean of Brechin, 285 ; — of
Easter Denhead, Da., II. 63 ; — of Glenurquhar, (Glenorchy,) Jo., * 223 ; Sir Duncan,
282; Colin, yr., II. 433; Robert, son of Sir
Dun., slays Duncan Abroch MacGregor, and
others of the Clan, at the Chase of Ranefroy
or Fight of Bintoich, III. 112; Colin, yr.,
233; — of Glenlioune, Arch., I. * 223;
Colin, 260, 263, II. 403; Dune, Murder,
&c. III. 481 ;— of Glenco, I. 263 ;— of Horscleuche, Geo., (Cha.?)n. 128 ; Charles, 129,
426 ; III. 54 ;— of Gelt, Geo., II. 406 ;— of
Glenfalloche, Ro., III. 233 ; Hereschip and
burning of his property, ib. ; — of Innerlevene,
John, I. 68; — Conimendator of Halywod,
Tho., II. 507 ; — Hew, (son of Cominendator of Halywod,) Slaughter, II. 507 ;— Mr
Jo., Justice-depute, I. 366 ; — of Garallane,
Hew, III. 54 ; — of Innerlewir, Dune, I. 391 ;
— of Glencarradale, Arch., III. 481 ; — of
Innenaw, Tutor of, II. 62 ; Mr. Jo., Jesuite,
resetting. III. 371 ; Ro., Slaughter, 465; —
of Kin5eancleuche, Ro., I. * 369, * 407,

* 485 ;— of Knoknane, Alex., I. 31 ; — of Kethik, Pat., II. 63 ; slays Laird of Ciourdie's
son, 80 ; — of Kilberrie, Colin, taken at Dunnievaig by Macgillespic, III. 363 ; retaken,
364 ;— of Laweris, Ja., L * 223 ; Sir Jo., III.
22 ; Sir Arch, his brother, ib., 23 ; Colin,
223 ; Ja., 233 ; Sir Ja., 443 ; Mr Ja., his
son, 543 ; — of Lochinyell, I. 263 ; — of Loudoun, Hew, slays Earl of Cassillis, * 136,

* 148 ; respited, * 267 ; remitted, * 242 ;

Mathew, younger of, * 352 ; Sir Hugh, *403,

* 428 ; Sir Math., * 455 ; Hew, feud with
Laird of Calder, &c. 352 ; — of Lundy, Sir
John, * 168, * 185 ; Ambassador to Flanders, * 243, * 276 ; to the Emperor, * 306,

* 307 ; Colin, II. 63 ;_of Muretoun, Jo.,
slain, I. 264 ; — of Persie, (Persar,) Arch., I.
263 ; II. 63 ;— of Shankstoun, John, L * 11 ;
Ro., * 83 ; Jo., * 405 ; Ja., * 491 ; :io., II.
106 ; Geo., yr., Slaughter, 461 ; — of Skeldoune, Geo., I. 20 ; Cha., 31 ; — of Skellingtoun, (Skerrington,) Alex., I. * 82 ; Cha.,

* 352 ; II. 426 ; — of Skipniche, Arch., marries Lady Glammis, I. * 188 ; falls over rocks
of Edr. Castle, and is killed, * 194; Jo.,

* 382, * 386 ;— of Soutarhouse, Wm., slain,
I. 264 ;— of Terrinseane, Sir Hew, IL 109 ;
—of Walwoid, Wm., II. 426 ; slain, III. 54 ;
the Laird of Birnok and his son beheaded, for
that slaughter, 58.

Canongate, daft Queen of, I. * 124.
Canochson, of Dunnevaig and Glynnes, Alex.

John, Fireraising, &c., I. * 246 ; James's

brother, * 305;— Alex., * 278 ;— Jo., * 281.
Cannell, what, III. 100.
Cant of the Grange, Mr Jo., IIL 574;— of Wastmylne, Walt,, 475.
Canna, burnt, I. 228.
Canterbury, Arciib. of, Geo., II. 262; his

Account of Sprott's Trial and Execution, ib.,

&c. ; Bancroft, 586.
Cannane of Killochie, Jo., III. 229.
Captive, Taking, L * 171, * 205, * 437 ; IL 423,

450 ; III. 552 ; — and strangling, 553.
Capons, price at Justice- aires, I. * 389.
Careers, famishing a man in privato, III. 479.
Carbraithe, Mr. W^m., Perjury, &c. See Galbraithe.
Cardinal, The, See Beaton.
Cardines, Lady, oppression of, I. * 52.
Cards, playing, I. * 310, &c.
Carey, Sir Jo., governor of Berwick, III. 316.
Carkannis, I. * 299. See New Year's Gifts.
Carkettill of Fynglenne, John, stealing agold chain,

I. * 336 ;— of Marcle, (Markill,) Jo., I. 10 ;

Pat., Mutilation, &c., II. 456 ; III. 134.
Carlisle, English Herald, I. * 275, * 276, * 278 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

641

— Castle of, broken into by Laird of Buckcleugh, and Kinmont Will freed from irons, I,
363 ; redress demanded by Queen Eliz. 364,
365 ; — Lord, presents a horse to the King, !•
* 300.

Carmichael of Balmadie, Dav,, I. 60 ; — Eliz., mistress of K. James V., L * 311 ;— of that Ilk,
(Laird of,) remitted, Wm., L * 243 ; Jo., *
323, * 386, *426, * 437 ; Jo., yr., 8, 72, 119,
122 ; Sir Jo. resigns Wardenship of the West
March, 275, 350; IL ll,mmdered, 363; Armstrong hanged in irons, 364; — of that Ilk, Alex.
Armstrang of llowanebume, hanged, 504 ; Sir
John, Capt. of Crawford, L * 87, * 311 ; IIL
480 ;— of Meadowflat ; Jo., I. * 229, 48 ; Sir
Jo., IIL 392, 480 ;— of Pityschaw, Ja., II.
105, Jo., yr., 491 ; — of Rowntriecross, Wm.,
L 119; U. 1 ; in. 54; Wm. yr., 139,— of
Spothe, (Spott,) Jo., III. 123 ; Ja., his son,
slain, ih. ; — of Vderine, II. 517 ; Ja., his son,
slain, ih. ; — of Wrightislandis, Gaw., I. 149.

Carstairs, Jo., false weights arid measures, 88 ;
absurd vacillation of Ja. VI. in granting and
recalling precepts, ih., he.

Carmylie, Ro., hanged for Falsing, I. 87.

Cameburgh, (Carnebog,) siege of, I. * 121, *231.

Carnebye, Wra., Adultery, I. 13.

Carnegie of CoUuthie, Mr Dav., I. 242, 304 ;— of
that Ilk, Jo., I. 297, his daughter carried off
by Ja., son of Lord Gray, ih. ; — of Kinnaird,
Ro. I. * 180 ; Sir Jo. 27 ;— of Seatoune, Jo.
L27.

Carpendyis, (Fr. Carpendu?) I. * 310.

Carrick, Bailie Court interrupted, I. * 58 ; — Castle
of, Lochfyne, III. 233.

Carschore (Garthschore) of that Ilk, Jo., III. 345.

Carruthers of Dormont, Jo., slain, III. 472 ; Fra.
his brother, ih. ; — of Holmends, (Howmaynes,) John, Feud with Laird of Closeburn, I. * 430 ; II. 559 ; Jo., Slaughter of
Laird of Raskarrell, III. 115; — of Mousewald, heiress found caution not to marry a
traitor or ' brokkin man,' I. * 434 ; — of
Raramerscaillis, io.. III. 436 ; — of Wadfute,
Jo., III. 477 ; — of Warrambie, Cha., Slaughter, II. 475 ; Wm., hanged for Burning Newby, Slaughter, &c., I. * 60.

Cartels, III. 504, 505. See Duel and Singular
Combat.

Carterhaugh, Hereschip of, I. * 37.

Carting, punishment of, II. 401.

Carvers, the King's, I. * 313.

Camall, Laird of, I. * 457. See Wallace.

Casar, Francis, Italian, 1. * 375,

Caschielawis, (or caspicawis,) an instrument of
torture, I. 375, and note.

Cashett, King's, II. 597 ; III. 425, and note.

Cass, passionate, III. 249.

Cassanjeis, Raphael, Spaniard, I. * 315, * 320, *
123.

Cassillis, Earl of, David, Just. Depute, I. *
87; Gilb., * 191, * 199; Slaughter, * 130;
Slain, * 136; Oppression, * 181 ; Gift of his
moveables escheated for Wilful Error, * 142 ;
Slaughter of, * 242 ; passes in Pilgrimage, *
245 ; Treason, * 271, * 339, * 384 ; Treasurer, * 417, * 453, * 454, * 456 ; Hew, 30, II.
39; Jo., 461; Feuds with the Kennedies, III.
124, &c. 171 ; Bond betwixt him and his brother as to Murdering Laird of Auchindrayne,
622 ; — Tutor of, (Abbot of Crossragwell,) I.

* 245 ; Tho., 472. See Kennedy of Cul^eane ;
— Countess of, Marg., I. 119; Jean besieged by the Muirs, &c., in AuchinsouU,
which they burnt, III. 177; — Master of,
I. 94; Tho., 141 ; Hew made prisoner by Laird
of Drummurquhie, after burning of Auchensoull, III. 178; bond betwixt E. of Cassillis
and his brother to murder Laird of Auchendrayne, 622.

Casting a boy into the fire, I. * 59.

Casting down a Mill, I. * 179.

Castlecary, Laird of, slain, I. ♦ 149.

Cathkyn, Ja., librar., (bookseller,) III. 66.

Catslack, Cap. Ja. Stewart, (E. of Aukax,) slain
there, III. Q>Q.

Cat, baptized by Witches, I. 218 ; a very remarkable instance, 237 ; Witches assume shape
of, II. .524; drawn tliroiigh a * cruik,' 542;
Christened, 54.S ; Witches take form of, III,
605, 607, 611, &c.

Cattle-stealing, I. * 27, * 28 ; M'Clellan of Gilestoun beheaded, I. * 64; Pott, hanged, I. * 87,

* 171, * 218 ; barbarous slaughter of, * 336 ;

642

GENERAL INDEX.

houghing, * 431 ; antl slaying, * 433; cutting the backs of, * 455; SteaHng, Wm.
Donald, hanged, 45 ; and Perjury, Arch. Croser, hanged, 111; Battiesons, hanged, II. 443 ;
Beirope of that Ilk, II. 515.

Cattle, bewitched, how restored, I. 238.

Cattle, houghing of, I. * 103, * 431, * 433 ; cutting their backs, * 455.

Cathcart,Lord, Allan, I. * 333, 88, 178; II.
106, 572;— of Carbeistoune, Allan, 1.72, 101 ;
— of Carleton, Robert, mutilated, I. * 336,

* 343, * 350 ; Jo., * 457 ; II. 106 ; III. 171 ;
Jo., yr., ib. ; — of Clowlynan, Allan, * 74 ; —
Ro., writer, slain, II. 109 ; — of Drummisnoddane, Wm., I.*458 ; — of Drumgowane, (Drumjowan,) Allan, I. * 58, * 458; II. 110; III.
180 ; — Kirk of, attempt to restore Popery at,
I. * 450 ;— Ro., writer, slain, II. 109, 445 ;—
of Waterhead, Wm., I. * 458 ;— of Woodhead, Wm., I. * 458.

Catour, King's, I. * 313.

Caudle at Baptisms, I. 3, * 302, * 309, &c.

Caution found by an heiress not to marry a Traitor or ' broken man,' I. * 434 ; — Borderer's
surety taken, * 467.

Caution of ' Colleraith,' what, I. 23, 186.

Caverhill of Foulage, Jo., I. * 87.

Cecil, Sir Wm., Englishman, I. * 510 ; Sir Ro.,
Secretary of State to Q. Eliz., II. 313 ; his
death, 581, and note.

Cedrons and garnets for the King, I. * 320.

Ceremonial of touching Murdered Corpses by
persons accused or suspected of the crime,
III. 184 ; opinions of ancient and modern
authors, 182, 187.

Ceremonies, Master of. III. 558, 595.

Ceremony, singular, at meeting of Makconeill and
Coll M^Gillespic, III. 20.

Cesfurd, Laird of, Warden of the Marches, I.

* 264. See Kerr.

Chains, gold, of King James V., I. * 292, * 295 ;
great gold, * 301, * 302. See New Year's gifts,

* 321 ; one of xvij ounces, * 322; — stealing
a gold, I. * 336 ; and pearl, he, III. 564.

Chains, hanging in, I. * 137, * 358.
Chalices, Eucharistic, &c., spoliation of, I. * 353.
See Reformation.

Challenge, Judicial, of the Master of Forbes as a
Traitor, I. * 185 ; III. 505, &c. See Duel ;
Singular Combat.

Chalmer of Antique Historie, (Tapestry Work,)
I. * 312 ;— of dace, (dais,) II. 341 ;— Yeomen
of the King's, * 313 ; Grooms of, ib. ; — of
Drumlochie, Wm., * 371 ; II. 63 ;— of Fedderauche, Wm., I. * 470 ; — of Gaitgirth, Ja.,
* 428; — of Seggydene, Wm., * 452 ;— of
Strathie,Dav.,*88;— ofTulykerye,Tho.,*470.

Chalmers, (ordnance,) I. * 306.

Chamberlain, King's, his Jurisdiction, II. 91.

Champanjee, French Herald, I. * 268.

Champion, the King's, (Kemp,) I. * 271.

Champley, Sir Rich., I. * 122.

Chamrone, Jo. Moir M'^Eane Chere, and Dune.
Moir M'Eane, Slaughter, &c., beheaded, III.
537. See Cameron.

Chancellor of Quodquene, Wm., I. * 169 ; acquitted of Slaughter, * 175; — of Scheilhill,
Ro., II. 474.

Chandelaris, for the Prince's Chapel, I. * 306.

Chapel-Royal, Oppressing Sacrist and Sub-dean
of, I. * 96 ; stand of cloth of gold for, * 297 ;
' geir ' for, * 320.

Chapel-graith, * 278 ; reliques, ib., * 308.

Chaplane, Peter, hanged for coining bawbeis, I.
* 364.

Chariot, Queen Magdalene's, I. * 291 ; Queen
Mary of Guise's, * 293, * 320.

Charles IX. K. of France, Embassy from, at
K. James VI. Baptism, I. * 479 ; — Prince
OF Wales, III. 502 ; Duel in Flanders between his Tutor, Capt. Bruce, and Capt. Hamilton, ib.

Charletoun of Emmetishauch, Will., III. 568 ; —
of Hisliesyde, Wm., 569.

Charming, III. 508, &c. See Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c.

Charms for Witchcraft, &c., remarkable, to take
life of K. Ja. VI., I. 218 ; for healing diseases,
230, 237 ; corpses disinterred and ' junted'
to prepare, 233, 237, 239 ; baptizing a cat,
218; another remarkable instance, 237;
charm to allay birth-pains, ib. ; bewitched
cattle, how restored, 238 ; to take away a
man's life, ib. ; by E. Bothwell, to take

GENERAL INDEX.

643

King's life, 240 ; with a toad to take the
King's life, 245 ; shirts, clothes, &c., 250 ;
'boird-stane,'252; wheat, worsted, 8£c., 11.25;
worts, woodbine, &o., 26 ; dipping shirts, slaying a red cock, and baking a 'bannock' with his
blood, lb., and 27 ; South-running water, ib.y
and 422, III. 556 ; firing water, burning
straw, &c., ih. ; garland of woodbine, 27 ;
broom and camomile, ih. ; quicksilver, 28 ;
nettles and ' alschinder,' ib. ; salt water, ib. ;
live coal, ib. ; sheep's dung, ib. ; ' Spainjie'
seed, 29 ; roasting a goose with 4 or 5 kittens
sewed in it, ib.; Ja. Reid, 421 ; grease, ib. ;
raw flesh, 422 ; silk points, ib. ; wax picture,
ib. ; hair belt, with Devil's ' clawis,' 478 ;
* sayneing and croceing,' ib. ; ' tail3ie of raw
inchantit flefche,' 524 ; drinking with the
Witch, 526 ; charmed water, 536 ; charms for
witched cattle, ib. ; ' Rowne-trie,' ib. ; cakes
of 9 ' cumeis' of meal got from 9 * maryit
madynnis,' 537 ; fochsterrie leawis, 538 ; coloured silk and worsted, III. 511 ; drawing 9
times backwards and forwards by the leg,
554 ; hasp of yarn, &c., ih. ; red-hot coulter
of a plough, 557 ; burning a live fowl, ib. ;
unchristened child, 603 ; a remarkable series
of charms and superstitions, ib. to 618.

Charter, Forging, erasing, and falsifying, I. * 387 ;
a Notary and two others hanged, II. 104.

Charteris (Charterhous) of Amisfield, Jo., I.

* 88 ; Ro., * 148 ; Feud with Laird of Kirkmichael, * 132, * 166 ; Jo., 97, 304 ; Sir Jo.,
II. 509 ;— of Astrowane, Ro., I. * 455 ;— of
Cuthilgurdy, Patrick, Fire-raising, &c., * 141,
passes in pilgrimage beyond seas, * 244 ; — of
Kinfawnis, Tho., using a forged Instrument,

* 222 ; Jo., Feud with the Laird of Balthayock, * 424.

Charterhouse of Perth, Prior of, II. 166.
Chattelerault, Duke of, Ja., I. * 439 ; Intercommuning with, * 466, * 478; III. 390.
Chaud-mele, III. 579.
Chekkar-hous door, Usher of, I. * 316.
Chennen of Chennentoune, Ro., III. 9.
Chepman, Walter, printer, I. * 118.
Chere, mouse-coloured. III. 537, &c.
Chess, game of, I. * 263.

Chestanis, III. 570.

Chesting, or coffining, ceremony of, III. 197.
Cheyne, Alex., beheaded for Perjury, Oppression, &c., II. 453 ; — of Arnage, Wm., I. *470;
— of Essilmonthe, Pat., I. * 470, 286, 375,
382 ; II. 394, note ;— of Pennan, Ja., Rapt
and Ravishing, Besieging House of Auchraedden, «Src., II. 394 ; Banished, 400 ;— of Straloch, Ja., I. 286 ; feud with Laird of Barrauch, 3.53, 382 ; II. 41, 423.
Cheys-wayme, I. 173.

Chipre, King of, I. * 277 ;— Prince of, * 278.
Child, unchristened, III. 603 ; — forespoken, 610.
Child-Murder, I. * 412, * 421 ; Meg Dow burnt,
186; Jonet PoUok, t7>. ; Issobell Pratt, hanged, 371 ; Agnes Cowan, hanged, II. 402,
463 ; Issob. Thomson, hanged, 540 ; Jonet
Brown, hanged, III. 269 ; Bessie Duncan,
hanged, 430. See Murder.
Chirnesyde of East Nisbet, Sir Pat., a remarkable case of Forcible Abduction of the Laird
of Thornydykes, (14 years old,) and marrying
him to Jean, his daughter, III. 402 ; Alex.,
yr., 414 ; — of Posso, Da., 250.
ChisholmeofCromlix,(Crumlecks,)Ja.,I.28, 173;
Sir James, II. 569, note; — of Dundonie,
Sir James, I. 267 ; denounced, 283 ; offers
presented by him, 301 ; II. 569, note; — Ja.,
Commendator of Inchaffray, I. 267 ; — of that
Ilk, Geo. * 133 ; III. 391, 396 ;— Mr Jo.,
Jesuit, I. 328, 329, &c. ;— Wm., 331 ;— Wm.,
Bishop of Vaison, II. 569 ; — B. of Durablane,
ib., note, 575, &c.
Christeson, Friar John, Heresy, &c., I. * 407.
Christie, Ro., E. of Cowrie's porter, his Deposition, II. 187 ; And., Forcing (Rape) and
shamefully abusing. III. 439.
Churches, Parish, destroyed, I. * 353. See Reformation ; — Witch-meetings and initiations
held within, and in consecrated ground. III.
603 and note, &c.
Clairscliaw, a kind of harp, I. 282.
Clam-she 1 of silver for the King's hawks' meat,

I. * 305, * 320, * 322.
Clan-Anvericht', 11.432; III. 537; — Buchanan,
barbarous torture, &c.. III. 345; — Cameron,
Captain of, I. * 355, fire and sword sgainst,

644

GENERAL INDEX.

280 ; II. 432. See Chamrone ;— Donald,

111. 1, 19 ; — MacFarlan. murder Sir Hum.
Colquhoun, &c., II. 431 ; two of the Clan
slain, barbarous torture of a Buchanan, III.
545 ; — Gregor, I. * 164 ; Commission of fire
and sword, 282, 289 ; Murder and Reiff on
Laird of Lusse's lands, II. 413 ; Intercommuning with, 414 ; seven score persons murdered in the Lennox, 315 ; 3 persons hanged, ib. ;
Field of the Lennox, or Conflict of Glenfruine,
430, &c. ; Fight of Bintoich, or Chase of
Ranefray, 111. 112 ; Jo. M>^Ewin and 4 MacGregors hanged, 115, &c. See MacGregor;
— Intercommuning with, II. 414, 456 ; III.

112, 232, 254, 437, 537 ;— Gun slay the Laird
of DuflFus, I. * 149 ;— Hamerone, II. 432 ;—
Ian Averiche, (Clan-Anveroche, or Abroche,)
432 ; III. 537 ;— Lawrene, II. 440 ;— Layne,
I. * 106 ; Feud with Clanranald, I. * 169 ;
III. 1 ;— Quhattane, I. * 81 ; * 243 ; fire and
sword against, 280 ; — Ranald, Feud with
M'-Leans, L * 169 ; Captain slain, 33 ; fire
and sword against, 280 ; Captain of, III. 19,
25, 542 ;— Tarlich, 19.

Clans of Armstrang, Tail50ur, and Clans of Liddisdale (then in Debateable Lands and in the
Woods) respited for a year, I. * 235 ; Clans
to keep ' guid reule/ 302 ; Armstrang, II. 504.

Clarencieux, English Herald King at Arms, I.
264, * 270.

Clark, Jonet, Witch, ' wirreit ' and burnt, I. 206.

Clasnessie, Sea of, Assint, III. 489.

Clay figures, made by Witches, to torment or take
away life, III. 605, &e. ; how used, ih.

Clement VIIL, Pope, II. 570.

Cleilland (See Kneilland) of Fermlaw, Ro., III.
429;— of Fessauch, Jo„ I. 71; — of Monkland, Sir Ja., Resetting Jesuits, III. 376.

Clephane of Carslogie, I. 60, 309 ;— of Pitcorphy, And., 60.

Clenge, to pronounce a verdict of innocence ; to
' as8oil5ie' or acquit a pannel, II. 155, &'C.

Cleuche, what. III. 383.

Clipping and cutting coin, I. * 233.

Clifford, Sir Tho,, I. * 189 ; Letter to K. Henry
VIIL, * 198.

Clock. (See Knok.)

Cloaks, velvet, he, stolen. III. 541.

Closebum, Laird of, I. 178. See Kirkpatrick.
Cloth of Gold, presented by King of England, I.

* 266 ; given to English Ambassador, * 273,

* 289 ; Coronation Robes, &c., * 301.
Cloths of State, I. * 320.

Clout, black, a woman burnt for ' casting of
Wichcraft,' with a, I. 400.

Coal-pits, Fire-raising in. III. 361 ; Jo. Henrie
hanged, and his head fixed on a spike, ih.

Coat-armour, to Heralds, I. * 301.

Cochrane of Balbachlaw, Ja., I. 27, 155, 169 ; —
of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 150 ; Wm., 133 ; Alex.,
in. 377 ;— of Pitfour, Jo., I. * 88 ; Da., 279.

Cockburn of Clerkingloun, Tho., I. * 169; Mr.
Rich., yr.. Secretary, 267, 11. 10 ; Sir Rich.,
274, 496, 568; III. 208, 312; Lord PrivySeal, 418 ;— of Choslie, Wra., L * 223 ; IL
441 ; — of the Glenne, Jo., I. *424 ; — of Henderland, Wm., beheaded, I. * 144, * 270;—
of that Ilk, Wm., I. * 147 ; Alex. 107 ;—
John, Piracy, I. 93 ; — of Langtoun, Ja., I.

* 134; John, * 366, * 480 ; Ja., 35 ; Pat., Tutor of, 190, 265 ; II. 98 ;— of Newbigging,
Pat. I. * 143 ;— of Newhall, I. * 143 ;— of
Newholm, Jo., I. 190 ; — of W^ester Newton.
Jo., I. * 473 ; — of Ormistoun, Wm., Oppressed, L * 140 ; John, * 171 ; breaks ward from
Edr. Castle, * 334, * 339 ; John finds caution, * 486, 107 ; Sir Jo., Justice-Clerk, 261,
267; Clerk- Register, IL 3, 367, 442; his
marriage, 459 ; Justice-Clerk, 581 ; III. 87,
208, 312 ; resigns his office, 558 ; Singular
Letter in regard to, 595 ; — Mr. Ro., Justice
depute, II. 521 ; — of Scraling, (Skirling,) Sir
William, Stouthrief, I. * 25 ; Slaughter and
Mutilation during Parliament, 26 ; Wm.,
Stouthrief, he, I. * 174; remitted, * 249,

* 453, * 455, * 473 ; Keeper of Edr. Castle,

* 479, 71, 190 ;— of Templehall, Mr. Sam., I
149 ;— of Trettoune, Dav., I. * 137 ;— Will.,
Hamesucken, I. * 15 ; Stouthrief, Killing
Hares, &c., ib.

Cocleus, sends a book to K. James V., I. * 284.
Cockpen, Poor's-box stolen, II. 387.
Coena Domini, I. * 263. (See Bedesmen.)
Coffer, stealing one with writings, II. 93 ; Grissell

Mathow drowned, and her accomplice scourged

and banished, 94.

GENERAL INDEX.

645

Coffining or chesting, ceremony of, III. 197.

Cokkie, Ja., Treason, hanged, I. 45.

Cokkylseis, Collar of, I. * 265.

Coining. See False Money, Uttering, &c.

Coin, clipping and cutting, I. * 233.

Coinjie-house, Mint, II. 399, &c.

Coiners, false, I. * 324, * 440. See False Money,

Forging, &c.
Colpna, Laird of. Slain, I. * 470.
Colpland of Udauclie, Tho., I. * 150.
CoUese of Balnamoon, Ro., his tenants oppressed
by citizens of Brechin, I. * 431 ; — of Pitforquhie, Tho., a man banished for hurting his ox
in the plough, II. 127.
Colquhoun of Camstrodane, Ro., I. * 451 ; Jo.,
yr., II. 426, 432 ; Adam and Ja. slain by
MacGregors, 432; — of the Glenne, Pat., I.
*42 ;— of Kirktoun, Tho., I. * 150 :— of Luss,
Sir John, I. * 78, * 170, * 178 ; besieging
Dumbarton Castle, * 236, * 344 ; Jo., * 451,
* 453 ; Alex., 289 ; Feud with Lord Levingstoun, &c., 352 ; Laird of, slain by Jo., his
brother, who was beheaded, 359 ; Murder and
Rieff by Laird of Macgregors, II. 414, 418,
419, 430. See Field of Lennox ; Alex. 418 ;
Sir Humphrey Murdered, 431 ; Sir Alex, ib.,
540; in. 318; Alex. 537 ;— of Barnehill,
Walt., slain by MacGregors, II. 432 ; Jo., fiar
also slain, ib. ; — of Traseill, Pat., III. 250.
Colville of Blair, Mr. Alex., Justice-Depute, III.
508, &c. ; — Alex., Commendator of Culrose,
II. 527 ;— Mr. Hary, Parson of Urquhart,
slain, I. 386; Gilb. Pacok beheaded, 388;
Master of Orkney outlawed, 392 ; Sir Pat.
Bannatyne of Stenhouse, &c. 393 ; Wm. Bannatyne of Gairsay, &c., acquitted, 397 ; Mr.
Alex., (of Blair,) Justice-Depute, II. 527 ;
declinature. III. 422 ; remarkable Letter from
him as to appointment of Justice-Clerk, 595 ;
— of Ravinniscraig, Wm., Oppression done
to, I. * 32, * 87 ;— of Strathurdie, Mr. Jo.,
I. 270 ; — of East Wemyss, Treason, &c., I.
*255, *257, 148; Ja., Treason, 278, 320, 409,
note ;— of Uchiltrie, Sir Wm., I. * 32, * 33 .
slain, * 65, * 68 ; Sir Ja., I. * 167, * 172,'
* 185.
Coldinghame, Abbey of, Spuilzieof Teind-sheaves,
I. * 208 ; demanded of the Pope for a natural son of K. J A. v., * 3 1 1 ; ordered to be defended, * 324 ; Prior of, John, natural son of
K. iA. v., L * 311 ; Raid of, L * 331 ; besieging Place of, * ib.
Collerayth, caution of, I. 23, 186.
Collars given to King Jame.s V., ' Cokkiljeis,'
I. * 215; the Empriouris, I. * 277 ; invested
with Order of the Garter, * 283, * 289 ; the
Golden Fleece, ib. ; St. Michael, ib. ; of Steel,
(armour,) I. * 317; to deer-hounds, of purple
velvet, with gilded chains, &c. I. 312.
Collier, King's, I. * 313.
Colour of Evil Spirits' Dresses, &c. III. 606.
Colkitto, (Coll Keitach,; III. 25.
Colstoun, Tho., Englishman, slaiu, II. 539; Alex.

Keith beheaded, 540.
Colbrandispath, House of, taken, I. * 237.
Colping, I. * 230. See Forestalling, &c.
Colt, Mr. Oliver, yr., Justice Depute, II. 562.
Comerie, house of, bvunt, and Ja., the Baron's

brother, slain by the MacGregors, III. 537.
Combat, Judicial, (under a Special Licence,) I.
* 185, note, &c.; Bruntfield and Carraichael,
IL 113, 7iote, III. 164 ;— Singular, II. 112.
See Duel.
Comeray, Isle of Little, I. * 232.
Compter, the King's, I. * 315.
Congiltoun of that Ilk, Henry, L * 85, * 159;
assisting Lord Hume, * 241 ; Robert, * 369;
Robert, yr. of, slain by poison, * ib, ; Pat.,
107 ; Wm. II. 343 ;— Tutor of, I. * 366 ;
Hen. Langside, 5 ; — Mass and Sacraments in
Popish form celebrated at Place of, I. * 428.
Congil of that Ilk, Pat., I. 154.
Con of Auchry, Wm., L * 453 ; Pat., 389, 390 ;

II. 94 ; III. 444.
Conspiracy, Master of Forbes, beheaded, I. * 183 ;
— Lady GLAMMis.beheaded, * 187, &c. See
Forbes and Glammis ; John Earl of GlamMis sentenced to be hanged, * 198 ; acquitted
and restored by Parliament, * 199 ; — to seize
on person of Mary Queen of Scots, * 461 ;
—against the Regent, 32, 40, 70. See Bothwell, Falkland, Witchcraft, &c. ; — against Protestant Religion, 310. SeeGowuiK, &c. ; —
Concealment of, I. * 198, 199 ; John Lyonne
beheaded, * 202 ; Alex. Makke banished,
* 203 ; — Geo. Sprott for Gowrie's Consp., 2oQ ;

64!6

GENERAL INDEX.

hanged and quartered, 259 ; Execution, and
behaviour on the scaffold, 260, &c. ; — against
King's hfe by Witchcraft, I. 209, 230, &c.
See Witchcraft, &c.
Convocation of the Heges, I. * 201, * 203, * 206,

* 207, * 238; in Orkney, and Slaughter of
Earl of Caithness, * 253 ; in CuparFife, * 367 ; at Elmisdene Water, by Earl of
Caithness, * 395, * 409, * 410, * 413; in
Edr., * 436 ; in fenced Sheriff Court of Ayr,

* 456 ; of an unlawful Assembly, II. 3.
Convocation of Witches. See North Berwick, <Src.
Connell, Ja., and 12 others, forfeited for abiding

from Raid of Stirling, II. 85.

Conjuration, Witches', for healing Diseases, 1.230,
237 ; III. 608, et sec/.

Confession extorted by ' waking' Witches, &c., I.
50; Ogilvie, a Jesuite, III. 331, 332.

Consecrated ground, Witch-meetings held there,
and in Churches, III. 603, and note.

Constable, Lord High, his Jurisdiction, I. * 351,
*476, 98; II. 91.

Conspeckell, II. 99.

Corbet of Ardbo, (Arboill,) Jo., II. 555.

Corroche, hasty, precipitate. III. 249.

Coroners, I. * 418, he.

Corn, stealing. III. 564 ; — exporting, I. * 365 ; —
burning, * 127, * 375, * 405 ; And. Thomesoun burnt, 70, 110.

Corrichie, Battle of, I. * 183.

Coronation of King Jas. IV., I. * 114 ; Queen
Magdalene,* 287; of Queen Mary of Guise,
* 299, &c. ; new Crowns, ih. ; Lords and Ladies warned to attend, * 300.

Corpus Christi Play, I. * 121.

Corpses disinterred by Witches, and 'junted' for
charms, &c., I. 233, 237, 239 ; of Traitors
disinterred, and bones produced at Forfeiture?
XL 241, 246, 277, 405; inspected by Surgeons, to report if deceased died by wounds,
III. 62 ; Superstition as to the Murderer's
touch causing the corpse to bleed, III. 143, 165;
curious illustrations of, 182, &c. ; corpse of a
murdered man raised and inspected seven days
after his burial, 574.

Corry of Kellwood, Tho., L* 86, * 127, * 138;
Geo., * 457, 89; Jo., II. 106; IIL 172;—
Laird of, I. * 62.

Cornwall of Bonhard, Nich., I. 268 ;— Arch., Exhibiting King's picture on the gibbet, II. 349 ;
hanged, and his body exposed 24 hours with
a paper on his forehead, 351 ; gibbet taken
down and burnt, ib.
Corstorphin, College of, L * 333.

Cordiner, King's Master, I. * 315.

Covens, Witches', consisted of 13 in each. III. 603,
&c. ; each had a Maiden and an Officer, 605 ;
grand meetings, 606.

Covantoune, Burning and Hereschip of, I. * 26.

Cousland, Burning of, I. * 141.

Courschet, what, II. 392.

Cook, King's Master, I. * 310, * 313 ; Court, ib. ;
Stealing from Queen Dowager's chief Cook,
* 406.

Coulter of a plough. Witch-charm with. III. 557.

Cowper, Justice-aire of, I. * 272 ; — insurrection
against the Bailies, &c., I. * 367 ; — man burnt
for Heresy, I. * 297 ; — Magistrates of, assisting E. of Both well, I. 310 ; — Lord, Ja., II.
600, note.

Cowart, Capt., English Pirate, III. 100.

Cowdene, Sir Ja., false Notary, I. * 459.

Cowie, Army at, I. 175; — Pat., and four others,
starving a man to death inprivato carcere, III.
479.

Cradle, State, Prince James's, I. * 302.

Craftsmen, Insurrection of, against Bailies of Cupar, &c., I. 367.

Craiganis, Laird of, slain, I. * 44.

Craigy, Tutor of, respited, I. * 237 ; — Lady
(Jonet Logan), pension to, * 305,* 312;
Dule dress to, * 320.

Craiginche, Burning and Hereschip of, I. * 246.

Craignethan, Castle of, keeping, I. 316.

Craig of Craigisfintray, Jo., I. * 454 ; his wife's
Incest and adultery, * 459 ; — of Craigistoun,
W^m., II. 64 ; Slaughter of the Laird of Carnehill, 105 ; — fortalice of, ordered to be demolished, 1.348; — Jonet (aged 11), ravished,
II. 566 ; Jo. Errole, hanged, 567 ; — Tho.,
Justice-depute, I. * 477, &c., 1 ; Sir Lewis,
II. 568.

Craig, the throat or neck. III. 573.

Craigingelt of that Ilk, John, I. * 216, * 339 ; he
and his son Robert mutilated of their left arras,
* 383 ; Tho., III. 268 ;— Geo., tried for GowGENERAL INDEX.

647

rie's Conspiracy, II. 151 ; banged, 155 ; his
Deposition, 157, 246.
Craill, Magistrates of, assisting tbe E. of Bothwell,

I. 310.

Crames of Edinburgh, I. * 416.

Cranstoun of Burnecastell, Alex., III. 402 ; remarkable case of Forcible Abduction, &c., ib.,
413 ;— of Corsby, Jasper, I. * 147 ; Pat. III.
69 ; Jo., his brother, slain, 222 ; Tutor of
Tbornydykis beheaded, ib. ; Gilb., uncle to
Laird, hanged for Stouthreif, &c., 252 ; Pat.,
569;;— of Maynis, Cuth., I. * 337 ;— of Doddis,
Cuthb., Assisting tbe English, * 338 ; — of
Doddo, Sir Win., Slaughter, 20 ; — of that
Ilk, (Laird of,) Destroying Woods in Ettrick
Forrest, * 71 ; John, * 147, * 166, * 167 ;
* 336 ; Wm., * 414 ; houghing and slaying
cattle, * 433, * 434 ; Jo., 20 ; Mr Wm.,
yr., feud with Laird of Edmonstoun, 353, ib. ;
Gilb. Lauder slain, 362 ; — Sir Jo., Resetting
a declared Traitor, II. 1 24 ; Mr Tho., his
brother, hanged for Cowrie's Conspiracy, 155 ;
his Deposition, 156 ; behaviour on the scaffold, 155, note, 246, 506 ; Wm., IIL 391 ;
Tho., 396 ;— of Ladyside, Wm., I. 84 ,—
Lord, Wm., III. 226 ; Jo., his brother, 402 ;
proceedings in duel between his son Ja. and
Sir Gideon Murray's son, 505 ; with E. of
Lothian, 507 ; — of Mains, Cuthbert, Assisting
the English, I. * 337 ;— of Monktounhall, Ja.,

II. 467 ; — of Morestoune, (Mureistoune,)
Tho., I. 107, 270, 306 ; Resetting him, when
a declared Traitor, II. 124, 5f7 ; Jo., III.
116 ; Jo., his son, remitted, ib. ; Alexander, 410, 539;— Master of, Jo. 414;—
of Skaittisbuss, Richard, Murder of David
Riccio, I. * 486 ; — of Tliirlestanemains,
Cuthbert, * 451 ; III. 396 ;— of Tbornydykis, Jo., III. 539 ; — Sir Peter, pursued
for his Slaughter, I. * 400 ; Mr Tiio. See
C. of that Ilk, and Gowrie ; — Sir Wm., II.
517.

Craw of Restoune, Geo., I. * 139.

Craudoche, what, II. 437.

Crawford of Auchincross, Geo., 1. 49 ; — of Auchinsoull, Dune, III. 179 ; his house burnt and
Countess of Cassillis, &c., besieged therein,
VOL. III.

ib., Szc. ; — of Auchinvie, Hew, 1. 49 ; — Tho.,
of Auchnames, * 205; * 164 ; — of Baithlem,
(Baidland ?) And. 58 ; of Barqubarrio, Andrew, III. 475; — of Beircrofts, II. 105; —
of Beaux, George, I. * 84 ;— of Birkhead,

* 331 ; — of Camlarg, Jo., invaded in a fenced
Sheriff Court, in Ayr, * 456 ; Assaulting in
the same Court, * 458, 49, 72 ;— of Caverhill, Ro., II. 454 ;— of Clolellane, Robert,
I. * 405, * 457 ;— of Corbishill, Edward,

205 ,— of Crawfordland, John, * 385, * 420,

* 428 ; — Tho., Captain of Crawfordjohn, remitted, * 254 ; — of Craiglynsche, Jo., 19 ; —
Countess of, Mariota, and 18 others. Oppression, Szc, * 178 ; — of Drongane, Jo., * 74,

* 88, * 136, * 137, * 150 ; Insurrection, &c.,

* 204, * 242, * 369;— of Drummiskoy,
Wm., * 458, 71 ;— Earl of, John, I. * 78;
David, * 185, * 198; Alexander, dies, * 266,

* 270; Treason, * 271 ; David, * 408, 75 ;
slays the Lord Chancellor Glammis, 79, 85,
116 ; High Treason, &c., 171 ; feud with
Laird of Guthrie, 352 ; eating flesh in time
of Lent, 369 ; II. 274, 380, 396, 574 ; III.
15 ; Slaughter of Laird of Balgaweis, 248 ;
— of Farme, Gawin, 87 ; — of Fedderett, Geo.,

206 ; — Feud with Kennedies, * 150 ; of

Giffertland, * 331 ;— of Haining, Archibald,

* 132 ; — of Heidmark, Jo., 49; — of Jordanehill, Capt. Tho., 171 ; Hew, III. 345 ;— Ja.,
goldsmith, barbarously torturing a girl to detect a supposed theft, II. 44 ; — of Kerse,
David, I. * 55 ; hindering the Court of the
Bailie of Carrick, * 58, * 86 ; Bartli., * 130,

* 136 ; * 350, * 458 ; feud with Sheriff of
Ayr, he, 352 ;— of Kilbirnie, * 82 ; Laur.,
remitted, * 255 ; Hugh, * 361, * 385,

* 451 ; Jo., II. 508 ;— Place of, broken into,
ib. ; curious list of, carried off, ib. ; — of
Kerehill, Jo., I. * 150 ; — of Lcfnorijs,
(Lochnoreis,) Wm., taking Castle of Lochdoune, Ike, * 73 ; Geo., 130 ; Geo., 349 ;
Ravishing of Lady Lofnorcse, ib., * 369 ;
Slaughter of Laird of Corsintoun, * 82 ; Geo.,

* 413, 49;— Master of, David, * 346;
Wm., * 347 ; Da. kills Mr Walter Lindsay,
III. 62 ; is wounded by young Laird of Ed4 N

648

GENERAL INDEX.

jell and bis friends, but recovers, ih. ; — Nicol
of Oxgangs, Justice Clerk, sworn, I. * 126,
* 168, * 272 ;— of Previck, Jo., slain, * 170 ;
— of tbe Scbaw, Jo., 72 ; — of Sillibole,
Quint., yr., III. 172.

Crawfordjohn, K. Ja. V. visits, I. * 310 ; Tapestry,
&c., removed to, ib., * 311 ; Queen tbere,
ib.

Crawford-Mure, Gold mines at, I. * 298 ;
Queen's Crown made of Scottish gold, ib. ;
present of unwrougbt Scottish gold to Duke
of Guise, * 300, * 322. See Gold.

Creicbtoun of Bellibocbt, Ninian, I. * 199, * 229 ;
remitted, * 244 ; — of Bioinstoun, * 339 ; Ja.,
yr., 169; Jo., 372; — of Blackburne, Jo.,

* 88; — of Benestoune, 27;— Tho., of Auchnames, * 205, * 164 ; — of Bodumcraig, Tho.,
slain, III. 473 ;— of Con3ie, Geo., I. * 329 ;
— of Cranstoun-Riddell, Sir Pat., * 62 ; — of
Crawfordtoun, And., Treason, &c., * 134 ;
Jo., Slaughter, II. 71 ; III. 247 ;— of Camnay,
Pat., I. * 178 ;— of Carco, Ja., 191 ; Mr Ro.,
II. 71 ;— of Cluny, Ro., I. 307 ; Sir Ro.,
Slaughter, II. 76, 433 ;— of Drylaw, Wm., I.
393 ; Alex., 155 ; — of Darnehauche, Wm.,
II. 491 ;— of Elliok, Mr Robert, Queen's Advocate, I. * 408, <S;c., 13,47 ;— of Fedderat,
Geo., * 184 ;— of Forgound, Alex., III. 583 ;
— of Frendraucht, Sir Ja., I. * 126 ; Wm.,
bis house besieged, &c., * 329, * 455, 209 ;
Ja., 284 ; — of Hartwode, Jo., * 55 ; — of the
Hill, Wm., III. 475 ;— of Innernytie, Jo., II.
49, 76 ; < Umbeset' by Laird of Bagray, 103 ;
Sir Jo., 105, 112; Mr And., his brother,
declines jurisdiction of King and Council, III.
87 ; sentenced to be hanged, 89 ; banished
for life, 90 ; Ro., his brother, 363, 453 ;—
of Kilpatrick, Ro., slain at the horn, I. * 77 ;
Jo., * 134; — Lord (of Sanquhar). See
Sanquhar ; — of Lugtoune, Pat., 10, 136,
137; — LadyNewtoun, Jonot, Rape of, * 258;
—of Nauchtane, David, Captain of Edinburgh
Castle, * 258 ;— of Newhall, Alex. * 127,

* 174, * 424 ; hearing Mass, 38, 155 ;— of
Peiltoun, Edw., III. 247 ; — of the Quarter,
Rob., I.* 81 ; Jo., Slaughter, 190;;— of Ryliill,
Jo., * 455 ; Wm., III. 93 ;— of Ruthvennis

Jo., 1.178, * 191 ; Adam, banished for life for
Slaughter, 165; Ja., shooting with pistolets,
&c., 371; IL 60; — of Scottistoun, Wm.,
slain, I. * 172 ;— of Strathurd, Jo. * 367 ;
Sir Pat., II. 343 ; 5o., yr., 430 ;— Sheriff of
Dumfries, Ninian, I. * 165 ; — Tutor of Sanquhar, Jo., * 397, * 398 ;— :\Ir Wm., Jesuite,
311 ; engaged in trafficking against the Religion, Sec, ih., &c. ; Letter as to King's correspondence with the Pope, II. 582.

Creich, Laird of, married to Madame Gi'essmore,
I. * 298, * 297, * 305.

Cressonis of mail3e, I. * 317.

Crearis, a sort of Highland galley, III. 20, 587.

Crechdow, Margaret Montgomery, Lady of, oppressed, I. * 57.

Creation of Earls, Lords, and Barons, Master of
Ceremonies at the. III. 558.

Cristall, King, I. * 274, * 277.

Crimen Falsi, I. * 346.

Crows, Witches take form of. III. 607, 611, et
seq. See Witchcraft, &c.

Crowbache, deformed. III, 249.

Crossar, Andrew, drawn and hanged for Slaughter, Hereschip, &c., I. * 6-1 ; Arch., hanged for
Cattle-stealing, &c. 111.

Crownar of Renfrew, hurt in execution of his office, I. * 106.

Crowns (coins), forged, II. 99.

Crown and King's Jewels stolen, I. * 133; the
Queen's Crown made, * 298 ; the King's
Crown made, * 299 ; Crowns for King and
Queen, * 322.

Crossragwell, Abbot of, Wm., I. * 138 ; passes
in Pilgrimage with Earl of Cassillis, I. * 245.

Crowne-benntt, order of, (Batchelor's degree ?)

Croque, Monsr. de, I. * 504.

Crosses, funereal, of white satin for velvet pall,
I. * 287 ; silver for Prince's Chapel, * 306.

Cross-bows, K. James V., I. * 305. See Archery ;
maker to the King, * 316.

Cross, Ordeal of the, III. 184.

Cross, fyrie, to raise the country, III. 23, &c.

Crowetts, for Prince's Chapel, I. * 306.

Crossned, Ordeal of, III. 184.

Cruicksliank of Durlee, Dav. I. * 150.

Ciucifixes, I. * 320.

GENERAL INDEX.

649

Cruikschank, Ro. III. 371.

Crummy of Canibdin, Pat., I. 270.

CuflSs, dry, III. 544.

Cuik, Alex., False notary hanged, III. 418 ; — of
Vrinoch, Wm., II. 394 ; his daughter Marjorie ravished, Ja. Chene of Pennan Banished,
400.

* Cul5eoiiris,' to be punished, I. * 66.

Cultellar, King's, I. * 315.

Culrose, Abbot of. And., I. * 42 ; Ja., slain,

* 151 ; Alex., 267, 293 ; II. 527 ; his son
appointed Justice-depute, ih.

Cultermanis, Laird of, I. * 426. See Brown.
Culverin, double, engraved with the King's arms,
Vnicornes, Thrissillis, and Fleurdelyces, I,

* 325.

Gumming of Alter, (Altyre,) Alex., Caution for
his sons, I. * 227 ; barbarous Slaughter of
cattle, * 336 ; Feud with the Laird of Brodie, &c., * 356 ; — Ja., fiar, Slaughter, II.
427 ;— Ja., III. 258 ;— of Culter, John, I.

* 184 ; Mr Arch., 87 ;— of Erneside, Alex.,
L * 391;— Jo., IL 41; Wm., fiar, 427;—
Wm., III. 75 ; — the Monk, hanged for false
writts, L 362.

Cummoris, feuds, &c. III. 404.

Cumnock, Kirk of. Slaughter of the Laird of
Corsintoun there, during Mass, I. * 82.

Cumray, Remission to Inhabitants, I. * 113.

Cunache, Laird of, I. * 454.

Cuneistoun of Ettradour, Geo., II. 63.

Cuninghame of Akinbar, Wm., respited, I. *252 ;
— of Auchinamys, Tho., yr., I. * 133 ; — of
Auchipharvie, Edw., slain, I. * 132, * 133 ;
Ro., * 164; Ro., * 420;— of Barnis, Jo.,
yr,, I. 60 ; Ja., uncle to Laird, II. 534 ; —
of Boningtoun, Jo., I. 97 ; Wm., Tutor of,
379; II. 108;— of Birkschaw, And., L

* 456 ;— of Bartaneholm, Dav., I. * 137 ;—
of Craiganis, Wm., slain, I. *44, *87; Gabriel,

* 164; Wm., Tutor of, * 361 ; IL 390;—
of Cuninghamehead, Rob., Oppression, <Src.,
L * 57, * 164 ; Wm., * 382, * 420, * 423,

* 428, * 450 ; II. 390 ;— of Capringtoun,
Jo., L * 137, * 148; Slaughter, * 148,

* 164; Mutilation, * 201, * 428 ; Wm., yr.,

* 457, * 491, 29; Wm., 91, 355 ; IL 107,

367 ; III. 120 ;— of Camlarg, Jo., I. 19 ;_
of Clovinbayth, I. 69 ;— of Chapell, Adam,

III. 268 ;— of Craignestane, I. * 456 ; of

Cochrane, Cuthbert, I. * 385 ;— of Cloncaird,
Wm., I. * 457 ;— of Croy, Jo., I. * 385 ;—
of Clavanis, Adam, I. * 148;— of Dalbeyth,
Daniel, II. 106 ; — of Dolphingtoun, Wm,,
III. 365 ;— of Druraquhassill, And., I. * 170,

* 441, * 451, 71 ; Jo., executed for Raid of
Ruthven, &c., 139 ; — of Enterkin, L * 457 ;
— of Fenyk, (Fenwick,) Wm., I. * 170 ; —
of Forresterhill, And., slain, I. 95 ; — of Glengarnok, Wm., I. * 137, * 148 ; Oppression,

* 148 ; Feud with Sempills, * 164, * 385,

* 428 ; Wm., * 441 ; Jo,, * 451, 69 ; his « oy
and natural son slain, 183; Ja., yr,, feud with
Laird of Houston, 354 ; II. 367 ; Slaughter,
389; Sir Ja., IIL 9 ;— of Racket, (Aikit,)
Rob., L * 137, * 164 ; Wm., * 420, 17 ;
poisoned by his wife, 80 ; Alex., 355 ; — of
Knokdone, And., III. 179 ; — of Kildonnane,
Harie, III. 477 ;— of Lagland, Alex., I. * 148 ;
Adam, Tutor of, * 164; Wm., * 375; Hew,

II. 100 ;— of Mountgreenan, Ro., I. * 358 ;
— of Markinsche, Adam, III. 493|; — of Monktounhall, Alex., I. * 458 ; — Provost of Dunbarton, Cuthbert, III. 264 ; — of Polquhirne,
Da., L * 458 ; Alex., 355 ; Wm., II. ISO ;

III. 475 ;— of Powtoune, Alex., III. 477 ;—
of Rawes, Jo,, III. 345 ; — of Ross, James, I.

* 358 ; Jo. slays Earl of Eglintoun, 355 ; —
of Robertland, David, I. * 148, * 164, * 177,
*385; II. 13;— Tho., hanged for Hamesucken. Foraying, Oppression, Sec, II. 359 ; —
of Tourlands, Wm., I. 265 ; II. 359 ; Treason, (!vc , 366 ; his Confession, 368 ; beheaded, and his estate forfeited, 369 ; — of Waterstoun. Hew, I, * 428.

Cuninghames, Feud between them and the IMures,
L * 57; with the Sempills, * 164, * 282.

Cuninghamehead, Iiouse of, kept against the
King, 11.366; Wm. C. of Towerlands beheaded and forfeited, 369.

Cunynburgh of Skowlag, Wm,, respited for Fiehl
of Linlithgow, I. * 241.

Cupar. Sec Cowper.

Cup-bearers, King's, I. * 312.

650

GENERAL INDEX.

Cupboard of Silver, the little, I. * 307.

Curragh, a liglit boat of the Isles, III. 5.

Currour of Logymegill, And., I. * 88, * 405 ;
one of his sons slain, and another mutilated,
* 408 ; Steph., shooting with pistolets, &c.,
371.

Curses, Witch, II. 326. See Witchcraft, &c.
Cuthbert, Jouet, Adultery, banished, III. 428.
Cut of yarn, what, III. 556.
Cutting growing timber, &c., I. 71 ; II. 522.
Cunjearstoune, Burning of, I. * 201.
Cun5eok wyuis, (Cogniac ?) I. * 349, * 377.

D.

Dacre, Lord, I. * 121, * 122, * 260, * 261,

* 263.

' Daft' person, curator to, I. * 254.

Dalgarno of that Ilk, Gilb., I. * 150.

Daggs, shooting with, I. 371 ; II. 370.

Dalgleish, Mr Nicoll, publicly praying for the
banished Ministers, 1. 136, 369 ; — of Deuchar,
Jo., III. 455 ; Adam, his son, mutilated, ib.

Dalglese, (Dalgliesh,) John, hanged for Burning
Branxholm and Ancrum, &c., I. * 69 ; Geo.,
hanged and quartered for K. Henry (Darnley's) Murder, * 490 ; his Deposition, * 495.

Dalhousie, Earl of, Wra., III. 601 ; Lady
Dalhousie's Funeral, ib.

Dalhoussy, House of, I. * 336.

Dalkeith, Q. Margaret's horses, &e. burnt at,

I. * 118 ; burnt by the English, * 349.
Dallas of Cantrey, Wm., Sh. depute of Nairne,

in. 602, 606.
Dalmahoy, (Laird of,) of that Ilk, Alex., L * 127,

* 159, * 166, * 469, 34 ; Besieges house of
Warriston, 81, 83, 107, 154 ; Sir Jo., III.
497.

Dalrymple of Enoche, Male, III. 501 ;— of
Schalloche, Jo., III. 475 ; — of Stair, Ja., I.

* 352, * 405 ; Jo., II. 106 ; III. 139 ;_of
Wattersyde, Male, III. 387, 475 ;— Wra.,

II. 391 ; Murdered on the sands of Girvan
by the Laird of Auchindrain, ib. note. See
also Trial of Mure of A., III. 129, &c.; his
corpse bleeds on being touched by Mure's
gi'andchild, 196.

Dalsell, ' the Barroune of,' L * 62, * 414. See
Nesbit ;— of Elliok, Sir Ro., III. 501 ;— of
that Ilk, Laird of, William, I. * 53, * 05,

* 82, * 85 ; Ro., * 382 ; Wm., his brother,
slain, * 387 ; Ro., 35, 71 ; Ro., yr., 11.506 ;
— of Kype, Alex., I. 35,

Dames of Honour, I. * 293.

Damiet, Mr Jo., an Enchanter, Sec, II. 27.

Damyostage, I. * 290.

Dances, Witch, III. 603 ; ' Gillatrypes,' 606,

&c. See Witchcraft Tnah, passim.
Dancers. See Morrice- dancers, I, * 114, * 119.
Dand or Dandy, familiarly used for Andrew, I.

65, &c.
Danielstoun of Dalquherne, Jo., III. 538.
Darg, a day's work, &c., II. 451 ; — red-skinned,

III. 231.
Darlochis, II. 432 ; III. 245.
Darnaway, Witches' revels there, III. 604, 617.
Dame, to lie in ambush, hid or concealed, II. 410,

428; III. 124, 128.
Darnley, Henry. See King Henry.
Darleith of that Ilk, Jo., III. 538.
Darsy, Sir Anthony, I. * 261, &c. See Bastie.
Dauphin of France, Hackneys and hawks

sent to, I. * 306, * 307.
Davidson of Carais, Harrie, I. * 432 ; Dav.,

Slaughter, &c., II. 370 ; — Thomas, hanged, I.

* 142 ; John, hanged in chains for Piracy,

* 358 ; Jo., Piracy, hanged within floodmark, III. 244 ; Peter, hanged, 265 ; Alex.,
and his four sons beheaded for Slaughter, &c.,
362.

Davidsoun of Callelie, Walt., banged for horse,
cattle, and sheep stealing, II. 441 ; — of Pennyglene, Jo., II. 106 ; III. 172.

David's Tower, I. * 265, * 306. See Edr. Castle.

Davy, Besieging and Burning house of, I. * 175.

Daw, Tlio. and Alex., breaking into Bonningtoun, and stealing Title-deeds, &c., II. 347 ;
Alex, hanged, ib.

Day-Foray, II. 453.

Dead body of a traitor produced in Court at passing sentence of Forfeiture, II. 241, 277, 405 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

6.51

— Fra. Mowbray's dead body gibbeted, drawn,
and quartered, &c., 407.

Deadly Feud, I. * 138, * 143, kc. See Feud.

Dean, Alex., hanged for breaking Gardens, &c.,
III. 555.

Deanis, Pat., hanged for Murdering a pregnant
woman, II. 517.

Dearth, I. 351.

Deboischet, III. 529.

Decapitation, capital punishment of, in cases of
Murder, Treason, &c., passi7n; with a sword,
I. * 425.

Declinature of jurisdiction, I. * 443, &c. See
Jurisdiction, Assessor, Assise, Privy Council,
&c. ; — Mr And. Creichtoun sentenced to be
hanged, III. 89 ; banished for life, 90 ; — of
King's authority, 330.

Deer, Abbot of, I. * 414 ; — chasing and wounding deer, &c., I. * 139 ; slaying, 48 ; — deerdogs, I. * 312 ; collars of Purple velvet, gilded
chains, &c., to them, ib.

Defloiring a girl of eleven years of age. III. 507.
See Rape and Forcing.

Deforcing a Messenger, &c., I. * 71, * 157,

* 334, * 356, * 437, * 484, 59. See Wand
of peace, Messenger, &c.

Deid-sti-aik, III. 510.

Deidthrawis, what, III. 3S4, 573.

' Deill amang us,' Robert Henry, beheaded, I.

* 368.

Delgatye, Laird of, I. * 454.

Delirium, ad, Witches ' waked' to extort confession, &c. I. 50 ; — Ogilvie, a Jesuite, cruelly
used. III. 331, 332 ; hanged, ib.

Demembration, 1. * 94) ; ' de suis testiculis,' 253 ;
of the ears, * 475 ; II. 509. See Mutilation
of the nose, ib. ; of three fingers. III. 58 ; —
And. Henderson banished for life, 00 ; Forrester, 112; thumb and three fingers, &c.,
491.

Dempster, And., hanged for Theft, I. * 179 ; —
of Auchterless, Jo., I. * 150 ; Ja., * 454 ;
Jo., Slaughter, * 148; Ja., III. 486 ;— of
Balraye, Cha., I. 29 ; — of the Court of Justiciary, * 8 ; form of a Forfeiture pronounced
by him, * ib., * 47, * 184, c-vc. ;— of Muresk,
Tho., beheaded for Forgery and Falset, III.
486 ;— of Murehouse, Jo,, I. * 150.

Denmark, Ambassadors from, I. * 281 ; to. III.
562, 563 ;— gunpowder and cannon brought
from, I. * 295 ;— Herald, * 2G8, * 277,

* 28 ;— King of, Christiern, II. 268 ; Letter from, as to Earl of Little Egypt, III.
592 ; — Queen of, her picture set in gold and
diamonds, III. 563.

Dennistoun of Colgrain, Robert, I. * 361 ; Ja.,

II. 438.
Dennum (Denholm) of Crechane, Peter, I. * 456.
Deserting the diet, on account of Plague, II.

426, &c.
Desserts, King's, grooms of, I. * 313, * 314.
Devil. For various popular superstitions, see

Witchcraft jxissitn; — assumes the shape of

' ane naikit infant bairne,' &c., II. 524 ; his feet

cloven, III. 603 ; his amours with Witches,

ib. et seq. See Witch Trials.
Devil's mark, pricking Witches to discover, III.

599, 602.

Witch-grace before meat. III. 612.

Devoiret, destroyed, applied to difelo de se, III.

576.
Dewar of that Ilk, Wm., L * 143.
Diamonds, target of gold with marmadyne of, I.

* 293 ; golden cross to set, * 294.
Dice, playing at, I. * 264.

Dick, Mr Alex., Provost of Orkney, Convocation,
&c., I. * 413 ; — of Barbesburie, (Barbestoun,)
Jo., III. 172 ; taken prisoner by Laird of
Drummurquhie, 179.

Dickson of Belchester, John, I. * 398 ; Murdered— John, his son and heir, broken on the
wheel for the parricide, 241 ; — Pat., II. 515 ;
— of Bouchrig, (IJuchtrig,) Ro., I. * 398;
II. 442 ; — of Hassingtoune-maynis, Ro., II.
336 ; his son, Mr Alex., slain, ib. ; — ol
Wynkstoune, Jo., slain, I. 34.

Diksoun of Hirdrig, Ja., II. 534.

< Dik the Devillis bairnis,' bringing in, I. * 174.

Dilaschet, fired or shot oft", II, 409, 485; III.
70, 78, 128.

Dingwall, Castle of, kccpership, I. * 232 ; —
Lord, I. 178 ;_Pursuivant, I. * 272, » 273.

Dirige and saul-niess, I. * 293, * 297.

DiiiLKTOUN, L(»ui), Tho., II. 246. See Erskine ;
— Castle of. Witches pricked for Devil's mark,
in the Broad-hall, III. 599.

652

GENERAL INDEX.

Dischingtoun of Ardross, I. * 156 ; Wm., * 402.
Discord, fomenting, between King and Barons,

Wm. Scot hanged, I * 206.
Dittay, (Indictment,) unduly executed, T. * 452.
Divorce, sentence of, on ground of impotency, I.

*460.
Doctor, the French, returns home, I. * 310.
Dog, Devil appears in form of a, I. 235.
Dogs, hunting. See hounds ; — horrid torture and

Murder of a Gentleman, and slaughter of his

four dogs. Sec. III. 548.
Dolace, (Doles, Dallas ?) of Buddet, Wm., yr., I.

201 ;— of Cantra, * 359.
Donald of the Grange, Da., II, 63 ;— Wm., banged, I. 45.
Donaldsoun, Da., hanged for Falset, Perjury, &c.,

III. 208.
Doli capcu; III. 238, &c.
Dollar, Vicar of, burnt for Heresy, I. * 210.
Dorche, (Droiche or Dwarf,) Maister John, I.

* 278 ; dresses to, * 282 ; Jane the French,

* 296 ; the Little Turk, * 308.

Dorloch, (dorlache,) a short sword, dirk or dagger, II. 70, &c.

Dornoch, Town of, burnt, I. 68.

Dor-schot, II. 536.

Dosell, the Lord, Lieut, of K. of France, I. * 375.

Dougal, Robert, beheaded for Slaughter, I, * 15.

Douglas, Mr. Alex., Provost of Elgin, his widow
slain, II. 42, 557 ; Alex., B. of Murray, her
son, ib.; — Mr Alex., Provost of Elgin, I.

* 391 ;— of Annatroche, Wm., Slaughter, &c.;
111. 443 ;— of Bone Jedburgh, Geo., L * 43 ;

* 147 ; Wm., Oppression, &c., * 176, * 181 ;
Mr Robert, Slaughter, Burning, &c., * 201,

* 328 ; — Mr Arch., Parson of Glasgow, I. 95 ;
Darnley's Murder, 142 ; remitted by the King,
147 ; acquitted, 154 ; — of Borg, Fra., mutilated, I. * 465, 154 ;— of Boncle, Wm., I. 119 ;
—of Baitfurd, Wm., III. 90 ; Wm.,his eldest
son, beheaded, 95 ;— of Belliebocht, Hew, III.
93 ; Pat., his son, slain, 442 ; — of Brokhollis,
Mr Rich, his servant slain, III. 271 ;— Bailie
of Dalkeith, Ja., III. 431 ;— of Caveris, Ja.,
(Sh. of Teviotdale, i.e. Roxburghe,) I. * 142,

* 147, * 208, 265, 293 ; IL 125, 375, 442;
Wm., HI. 396, 501 ;— of Cun3eartoun, Wm.,

I. * 181 ; — Castle of, withheld against the
King, I. 97 ; — of Cowthroppill, Ja., III. 569 ;
— Captain of, I. * 263 ; — of Caschogill, Arch.,
I. * 166, 242, 244 ; Ro., 265 ; Sir Ro., III.
270; Wm., 435; Wm., yr., ib.- Ro., 443;
Ro., his son, loses his left ear, 500 ; Sir Ro.
invades Laird of Drumlanrig at Moss of Knockconnie, Slaughter, &c., ib. ; — of Cruick, Wm.,
I. * 456; — of Dalwein, (Dalvene,) Hew, slain,
III. 270 ; his cattle, &c., stolen, ib. ; Hew, ib,y
271, 435 ;— of Drumlanrig, Wm., I. * 39 ; Sir
Wm., * 62 ; Slaughter of the Laird of Kilpatrick at the horn, * 77, * 78 ; Ja., * 187,

* 142, * 151, * 269, * 328, 480 ; his cattle
of Kirkhope stolen, * 348, * 370, * 442 ; Sir
Ja., 259, 265, 304, 572 ; III. 9, 62 ; Sir Wm.,
III. 164 ; Wm., yr., Invasion, taking captive,
&c., 212, 318; Sir Ja., ib.; barbarous maiming and slaughter of his sheep on Howpaslet
by the Scotts, 381 ; three Scotts hanged, 389 ;
illustrative Papers, ib. ; Jok the Sukler hanged,
396 ; Sir Wm., 381 ; Sir Ja., 394 ; Wm.,
Slaughter and Demembration at the Moss of
Caschogill, 500 ;— Eailsmill, David, I. * 391 ;
Wm., II. 72, 80 ; Wm., his son, slain, ib. ; 85,
110, 368 ; IIL 485 ;— Gawiu, Provost of St
Giles, (the Poet,) I. * 79 ;— Ro., Provost of
Lincluden, I. 142 ; Slaughter, 167 ; Theft in
his chambers. III. 92 ; — of Glaspene, Jo., I.
1 19 ; — Geo., slaughter, II. 1 ; Jo., Resetting
a stolen purse, III. 552 ; — Geo., ' wirreit'
(strangled) for Forging base money, 11. 353 ;
Tho., alias Blak, Rebellion in Orkney, III.
273 ; hanged, 283 ; his Deposition, 296 ; —
of Glenbervy, Arch., I. * 328 ; — of Harwood,
Leonard, I. * 424 ; — Jonet, wife of Sir David
Lindsay, I. * 275, * 292, &c. ;— Jane. See
Lady Glammis ; — of Kelheid, Arch., IIL
433 ; — of Killievarrene, Jo., slaugiiter. III.
500, 501 ; — Arch, of Kilspindie, ( Gi-et/steill,)
I. * 195, * 197, * 239, * 256, * 258, * 393,

* 398 ; Wounding him, ib., * 415, * 443, 3 ;
Sir Pat. II. 49 ;— of Langnudrye, Fra., L 27 ;
Geo., yr., 170 ; II. 1 ; — of Lyncluden and
Grenelaw, Wm., IIL 90 ; beheaded, 95 ;— of
Lache, Wm., III. 93 ; — of Lugtoune, Ja.,
portioner, 111.452; — of Lochleven, Sii' Rob,,

GENERAL INDEX.

653

I. * 78, * 198, * 328, * 496, 36 ; Ro., yr.,
119; — of Moirinsche, Dune, (MacGregor,
Tutor of Glenstiay,) III. 250 ;— of Mousewald, (Mousse)],) and 5 others, Ja., Slaughter,
III. 472, 500, 501 ;— of Moirtoun, (portioiier
of Gogar,) Ja., III. 473 ;— of Mania, Alex.,

I. * 130; Math., * 339, * 344; Male,
hanged and quartered for Raid of Ruthven,
&c., 139 ; Alex., III. 546 ;— of Nevay, Jo.,

II. 145 ; — Patrick and two others hanged, 1.
* 151 ;— of Pennyland, Geo., I. * 201, * 226;
— of Punfeith, Arch., I. 87 ; — of Park, Geo.,
I. 119;— of Pin3erie, Wm., III. 90; Treasonable Theft and Stouthreif, &c., ib. ; beheaded, 95 ; — of Preistoun, And., III. 569 ;
— of Parkheid, James, assisting, I. * 205 ; his
son found caution, * 226 ; summoned for
Treason, * 306 ; Geo., outlawed, 97, 122 ;
Sir Ja. slays Capt. Ja. Stewart, (E. of ArRAN,) III. 66 ; — of Pettindreich, David, remitted, I. * 239 ; Lady P.'s servants wounded, * 408, * 454 ; — of Pumfraystoun, (Pompharstoune,) Rob., I. * 166, * 333 ; Jos.,
155 ; bewitched, 251 ; III. 417 ;— of Quhittinghame, Wm., I. * 159 ; respited for Field
of Linlithgow, * 241 ; remitted for assisting
E. of Angus, * 243 ; freed from ward, * 330,
57, 142, 280 ; Sir Ja., II. 496 ; Sir Arth.,
IIL 594 ;— of Reidhouse, Wm., HI. 213 ;—
of Spittall, Fra., I. 11 ; — of Stanypath, Arch.,
I. 155 ; his widow tried for oker (usury), II.
101 ;— of Spott, Ja., I. 270, 347 ; II. 21 ;—
of Tortliorwald, Ja., slays the Laird of Newtoune, II. 1, 107; slays Capt. Ja. Stewart,
(E. of Arran,) III. 66 ; is slain on the High
street of Edr., ib. ; Letter of Privy Council
to the King, 67 ; — of Todhoill, Ja., yr., shot
in the belly, II. 378 ; HI. 227 ; Ja., 268 ;—
Mr Tho., Minister, struck, he, II. 416;
Slaughter, HI, 473 ; Walt. Graham scourged,
and his right hand struck off, 417 ; — of Todhills, James, I. * 382, 36, 119 ;— of Walterstoune, Jo., I. 2] ; — of Wellis, Ja., I. 34.

Douglasses, Intercommuning with, I. * 177.
Douking, &c.. Murder by, HI. 48o ; to give up

500 merks, 490.
Dove, Witch-euperstition as to the, III. 608, note.

Dow, Meg, burnt for Sorcery, Child Murder,

&c. I. 186, 237 ?
Doward, Castle of, delivered to King's Lieut.,

HI. 368. See MacLean.
Downe of Raty, Rob., I. * 150,
DowNE, Lord, Ja., L 116; IH. 72; Jo., his

son beheaded for Murder under trust, 74.
Dragon, enammelled, I. * 304.
Dress. See Apparel, and under each article.
Drink, administering enchanted, HI. (i^.
Drinking pieces of fine gold, 15 lbs. 5 oz. to be
coined, I. 339 ; another of 12 lb. 5 oz. to be
coined, ib. ; with a Witch, to remove enchantment, II. 526.
Drowning, punishment of death, I. * 162, ex speciali gratia, * 394, II. 94, HI. 208,561 ;— a
servant. III. 55 ; under colour of law, 206 ;
murder by, 489.
Drowis, birth or labour pains, throes, I. 252.
Drowgries, HI. 616.
Drugs to K. Jaaies V. and the Lady Margaiet,

L * 32.3.
Drumlanrig, Viscount, Wm., HI. 381.
Drummond of Auchtermuthill, Mr Moreis, II.
555 ; — of Auchterarder, Ja., I. 28 ; — of Abernytie, Wm., I. * 158 ; — of Blair, Geo., I. *
371, 74, 91 ; Harie, IL 433;— of Balloch.
Wm. I. * 441 ; Geo., yr. 15 ; Geo., 76 ;— of
Ballyclone, * And., forging a charter, his
right hand struck off, &c. I. * 387 ;— of Bordland, Male. I. 28, 77 ;— of Culcherie, Mr
Moreis, II. 438 ; — of Cattis-elbok, Geo., HI.
431 ;— of Carnok, Alex., L * 158, * 166 ; remitted for assisting Earl of Angus, «S:c. * 242;
Ro. *453; Pat., yr. 119; Sir Ro., H. 569;
— of Coquhaliie, Jo., slays Laird of Gourdie's
son, II. 80 ; — Da., Chamberlain to Lord Da.,
(Perth,) II. 528, HI. 233, 250 ;— of Drill,
Ro. I. 382 ; Sir Ed., II. 569, 575, 6:c. ;—
Geo., * wirreit and brent in assis,' for uttering
forged money, II. 365 ; Pat., do. do. 383 ; —
Jo., Cliamberlain of Stratherne, III. 233 ; —
* Genealogie' of the family of, I. "* 196; — of
Innermaith, Da., HI. 552; — of Inncrpeffry,
Jo., 1. * 158, * 169, * 189 ;— Lord, Justicedepute, I. * 19; John, * 78, * 387, note;
violence done to a Herald, I. ♦ 268 ; David.

654>

GENERAL INDEX.

* 373 ; Pat. 116 ; Da , III. 22 ;— of Leidcreif,
George and his son Wra. slain, I. * 366 ; papers relative to, * 371 ;— Letcliill, Ja.,II. 187 ;
— of Megour, Alex., I. * 441 ; — of Medope,
Alex., wasting Lord Elphingstoun's goods and
adultery with Lady D., I. * 465, 91, II. 34 ;
Sir Alex., III. 169, 312, 418; declined as an
assessor, 424 ;— of Mon3ie, Pat., I. 77 ;— of
Pitkennectie, Jo., I. 76 ; — of Pitcairns, Ja.,
deposition as to Gowrie's consp. II. 189 ; — of
Ricartoun, * Hary, I. * 388, 91 ;— of Slipperfield, Jo., L 255, ' Ischarto his Mati«,' IL 92.

Druraskey, burning of, I. * 56. (See Dunskaith.)

Dryburgh, David, Comm. of, I. 119.

Dryffe-Sands, battle of, III. 30; 700 of the
Maxwells slain, ib.

Dryhope, house of, to be destroyed, I. 276.

Ducats, Portugal, III. 178, 563.

Duchall, Place of, treasonably detained, 70.j

Dudley, Sir Andrew, English Captain of Droughty,!. * 346.

Duel or ' Singular Conabat,' without Z/icewce. (See
also Judicial Combat); curious case and pleadings on trial for, II. 1 12 ; Auchmovvtie beheaded, 113, 124 ; Bruntfield and Carmichael, 113,
note; between GlufFer and Hepburn, 114,
note; in France, Cap. Jo. Rig, ' Archeour of
the Gaird of France,' 382 ; while in foreign
service in Flanders, Capt. Harie Bruce, III.
502 ; between E. of Lothian and Lord Cranstoun's sons, 507.

Dudingstoune of Sandfurd, Stephen, I. * 404 ; —
of Pitkapil, Arch., I. * 404.

Duff of Glenelwart, Tho., III. 363 ; his wife's
right arm cut off, ib.

DuFFUs, Lord, Alex, and Ja., III. 604, note;
Fairy-cup belonging to, ib.; — King, Murderers of, III. 191 ;— Laird of slain, I. * 149.
Duggeoun Stokkes, I. * 320.

Dule-Dresses, I. * 287, &c., (Mournings).

Dummy Carpitane, I. * 301.

Durabreck, Place of, taken and kept against the

King's Guard, II. 429.
Dumfries, Burning Town of, I. * 39 ; — Convention at, 1. * 360 ;— Justice- Aire of, I. * 39 ;—
Raid of, at Lammas Eve, I. * 75, 155 ; E.
of Angus's Raid, II. 106, 130, 134.

Dumbarton, Castle of, besieged and taken, I. * 232,

* 236, * 238, * 334.

Dumb young man, barbarous Murder of, II. 388.
DuMBLANE, Bishop of, Wm., I. 185, * 275 ;

Ro., 264, 332; Geo., IL 325; Wm., 569,

note.
Dunbar of Blantyre, Jo., invaded, &c., I. * 181 ;

— of Barcurroch, Adam I. * 458 ; — of Barmuir, Jo., I. 36 ; — of Bennagefield, David, I.

* 376 ;— of Baldtone, Gawane, I. * 428 ;—
of Baldork, Da., II. 95, 143 ;— burgh of, Remission to inhabitants, * 243 ; — of Burgye,
Ro., II. 145, 484;— of Blairie, Pat., II. 484;
— IIL 200;— of Bothe, Ja., III. 252; Alex.,
602 ; Ja., yr., ib. ; — of Balnaferrie, Pat., III.
616. See D. of Westfield ;— of Cumnock,
Alex., I. * 357, * 359 ; James, ib. ; Pat., yr.,

* 370, * 374, * 391 ; Sheriff of Elgin, * 392;
— of Con5e, Alex., I. * 376, * 391 ; Pat., XL
71 ; — of Clune, Geo., his house burnt, and
horses and cattle houghed, 8fc., II. 68 ; Roise
of Ballivot tried, 138 ; Wra., III. 602 ;—
Captain of, I. * 311 ; — Castle of, freeing a prisoner from ward, L * 81, * 261, * 263;
Mary Q. of Scots carried to, I. * 480 ; —
of Corsingtoun, Pat., slain, I. * 82 ; — of
Craichlaw, Jo., yr., II. 143 ; — of Durris, Robert, I. * 357, * 391 ;— of Enterkyn, Wm.,
IL 96, 105, 106, 143;— Earl of, Geo.,IL
267, 273 ; L., High Treas., 274, 387, 496,
568; his death, 581, note; III. 92, 621 ;— of
Grangehill, Robert, I. * 359 ; — of Grange,
Tho., III. 602 ;— Mr Gawin, the Archdean of
St Andrew's, I. * 79 ; King James V.
Master, * 265, * 266 ; Treasurer of Ross
wounded, * 328 ; Mr Gawin, Archdean of
Murray, III. 200 ; Ja^, his son, slaughter, 26. ;
— of Hempriggis, Wm., II. 484 ; Ninian, his
son, slaughter. III. 200; — of Knockschinnoch, Geo. III. 57 ; — of Kilbowak, Alex., yr.,
Slaughter, &c.; III. 200; Ro., his brother,
ib., 399 ; — of Leacht, Jo., IL 95 ; his son Pat.
tried for bearing Pistolets, and slaughter, ib. ; —
of Lochieleis, Da., kept prisoner for 12 'oukkis', (weeks,) 11.516 ; two of his servants slain,
ib. ; Alex., ib. ; — of Mochrarae, John, I. 141,
398, * 428, * 491 ; Sir Jo., IIL 477 ; Alex.,

GENERAL INDEX.

655

yr., ib. ;— of Moyness, Jo., I. 285 ; II. 68,
143, 368 ;— of Mynnieweik, Jo., HI. 75 ;—
Pat., SlierifF-dep of Elgin and Forres, II. 143;
— Sherift' of Murray, nobly slain with the
Earl of Moray, I. 358 ; II. 143 ; Alex., 528,
564 ; maltreats a messenger, ib. ; — of Tarbert, (Tarvet,) Ja., I. * 357, « 376, * 391,

* 392 ; Mr Ja., II. 484 ;— Wm., the Poet, I.

* 117;— of WestfieUl, (and Balnaferrie,) Sheriff of Murray, Alex., slain, III. 200 ; Jo., his
brother, ib., 399 ; Ja. and Tho., his brothers,
ib. ; Pat., 616.

Dunavertiche, Castle of, keeping, I. * 316.

Dunbrek of Frefield, Wm., I. * 391 ; — of Urcane,
Wm., I. * 391. See Dumbrek.

Duncane, Geillis, Witch, I. 215, 236; Bessie
hanged for Child- Murder, III. 430 ; Mr And.
Minister, &c., tried, 11. 494 ; banished, 503 ;
Jo., elder, and yr.. Mutilation, &c. 539 ; Jo.,
Slaughter, beheaded. III. 484.

Duncansoun of Standandstanes, Dav., I.*184. See
Robertson.

Dunduff of that Ilk. See Stewart.

Dundas of Arnestoun, Sir Ja., wearing Pistolets,
II. 67 ; — of Breistmiln, Gaw., I. 1 55 ; — of that
Ilk, James, Feud with Wauchopes, I. * 144 ;
keeping Inchgarvy, * 281 : Geo. * 424, 10,
72, 136, 137, 159; Walt., II. 10 ;— of Newliston, Jo., I. 155 ; Striking a person while
King was sitting in judgment, II. 358 ; fined
1750 merks, 359 ; — of Priestinch, Da., Incest
with Countess of Eglinton, I. 100, 345, 346 .
II. 22, 555.

Dundee, Constable of. See Scrymgeour ; — Justice-Aire of, I * 115, * 263 ; Bailies and
community remitted, * 240 ; Reformation
preached, * 406.
Dundervisheid, Fishing of, violently occupied, I,

* 177.

Dundrennan, Abbot of, Oppressing his officer, I.

* 54 ; Theft from him, *75; Oppressed, * 163.
DuNFERMLiNG, Earl OF, Alcx., L. Chan., II.

274,325, 496; III. 312, .579.
Dunfermling, Commendator of, llo , (Pitcairn,)

1. * 436, 88, 101.
Dunkiesoun, Mr Jo., Minister, I. 261, 304.
Dungeon (Donjon) Tower, and kitchen, in Castle

of Blackness, I. * 312.
VOL. III.

DuNKELD, Bishop of, I. * 393 ; Peter, II. 159 ;

Field of, I. * 98, * 106.
Dunnyvaig, Castle of, Arch. Stewart, Captain, I.

* 258, * 305 ; Surrendered, III. 3 ; taken by
Sir Ja. MacConeill, 17 ; detained by Angus
Og, 363 ; Surrendered, 364 ; Angus banged,
365. See MacConeill.

Dunlop of Auchinskeych, Arch., I. 57 ; — Bessie,
remarkable case of Witchcraft, I. 49 ; burnt,
58 ;— of Crawfield, Hew, I. 58 ;— of Hapland, Jo., I. 63 ; — of that Ilk, (Laird of,) I.

* 82; Alex., * 360; slays his son Andrew,

* 402; Ja., * 457, 63, 67, 169 ; III. 122,
264; — of Powmyhie, Jo., Iil. 345; — Ro.,
hanged for Perjury, III. 358.

Dunnyne, Kirk of, I. * 240.

Dunoon, Kirk-yard of, alleged prodigies, a spring

of blood, &c.. III. 199.
Dunrobin, Mass celebrated, II. 530.
Dunskaith, (Dunskey,) Place of, burnt, I. * 95,

* 103 ; Castle of, besieged, I. * 231.
Dunwedy, Robert, Stouthrief, I. * 41 ; Slaughter

of Laird of, I. * 40.
Dupplin, Place of, besieged, &c., I. 25, &c.
Durie of Hielare, Da., III. 57.
Dury of that Ilk, Robert, gift to, I. * 256 ; Dav.,

60.; — Dean John, Convocation, &c. I. * 436 ;

Mr Ro., Minister, tried, II. 494 ; banished,

503.
Durrisdeer, Town of, burnt, I. * 348.
Durhame, Archdean of, Ambassador, I. * 283 ; —

of Duntervie, Mr Ja., III. 264; — of the Grange,

Ro., I. 74.
Durk, slaughter with a, III. 471, 4*^1 ; torture and

barbarous Murderof a CTentlcman, and slaughter of his four hunting dogs, 548.
Dutch Miners, at gold mines, I. * 298.
Dutch horse, I. * 301.
Dutchman to ' l>ley' before the Lords, I. * 307 ;

Shipwrecked, * 308; given to Servants of

Lord of the Fair, * 309.
Dwarf, the King's. See Dorche.
Dwne, Robert, of Rate, unjustly acquitted, I.

* 169 ; — Peter, Slaughters, Fire-raisings, &c.

1. * 362.
Dysart, Kirk of. Slaughter at, I. 24 ; Magistrates,

assisting E. of Bothwell, 310.
Dyvour, a bankrupt, III. 151.

4 o

656

GENERAL INDEX.

E.

Eafald, III. 275, et passim.
Ears, cut off, punishment, I. * 157, * 206 ; Demembration, by cutting off a man's, * 475.
Edgebuckling-brae, abiding from the Host at, I.

* 345.

Edingtoun of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 164.

Edinburgh, Burgh of, besieged, I. 30 ; furnishing
victual to Rebels, ib., &c. ; St Andrew's
Port, * 351 ; ' lang walpynnis' ordered to be
kept in ' buithis,' 8tc., * 362 ; Butter-tron,

* 396 ; Insurrection, Robin Hood, 8fc., * 409,

* 410 ; Cramers, * 415 ; Tumult to restore
Popery, * 416, &c. ; at Holyrood-House,

* 434, * 435 ; Magistrates tried for freeing a
Prisoner, * 442, to * 450 ; Magistrates obstructed in apprehending Lord Borthwick,
354; King, &c., besieged in the Tolbooth, II.
29 ; Ro. Auchmowtie tries to escape from
Tolbooth, beheaded, US, note, 124; Gowrie
Conspiracy proclaimed at the Cross, II. 238 ;
public rejoicings, 244, 245 ; Plague in Edr.,
426 ; young Lairds of Ed5ell and Pittarrow,
and their ' complices,' fight several hours at
the Salt-tron, 61 ; — Castle, Captainship of, I.

* 258; the Lord's Hall in David's Tower,

* 265 ; the Gun-house, ib. ; the Captain's
Tower, ib. ; victualled against the English,

* 270, ib.; sums expended on repairing fortifications, munitions, &c., * 298, * 306 ;
Chalmers taken from head of David's Tower
after Coronation, * 306 ; Register-House,

* 312, * 323 ; munitions, &c., * 317, * 322;
Captain escapes from ward, * 331 ; proceedings against the Rebels, detainers of the
Castle, 33, &c. ; Guns fired for King's delivery from Gowrie's Consp., 238 ; remarkable
escape of Lord Maxwell and Sir Ja. Makconeill from the Castle, III. 37, 28, &c. ;
Servants in Edr. Castle exempt from Assises,
III. 281 ; — Bailies and Sheriff of, Jurisdiction
of, I. * 129 ; Stabbing in their fenced Court,
I. *330;— Justice-aire of, I. * 26, * 38, * 60,

* 72, * 76 ; — Magistrates of, their Jurisdiction, I. * 129, 98 ; tried for freeing a prisoner.

* 442, to* 450 ; mode of delivering over a criminal for execution. III. 98 ; — Ministers of,
conduct as to Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 234,
235, 299, kc. ; III. 618 ;— Provost of, searching him for his slaughter, I. * 393 ; Wounded
with a quhingar, * 399 ; a culprit asks pardon
at the Cross of Ed. in linen clothes, barefooted, &c., ib. ;— Raid of, I. * 356.

Edringtoun, Castle of. Caution to keep, I. * 158,

* 324.

Edmistoune, Lady, Horse-stealing from, I. * 476.

Edmonstoun of Ballintoun, Ja., I. 28 ; Arch., II.
540; — of Burnhoussis, Da., II. 18 ; — of Ednem, Ja., I. * 85 ; — of Duntreithe, Wm., * 88,

* 166, * 167, * 170; James, respited, I.

* 244, * 453 ; executed for Raid of Ruthven, &c., 139 ; Sir Ja., 266, 392 ; Convoking an unlawful Assembly, II. 3; 105, 366 ;
Sir Ja., elder, III. 345 ; — of that Ilk, (Laird of,)
Jo., Feud with Laird of Niddry-Marischall, I.

* 143, * 144, * 190; Assise to, * 286;
young Laird, * 456 ; Jo., 107 ; Sir Jo., 154,
169 ; remarkable consultation of a Witch,
235 ; Sir Jo., I. 265, 266 ; feud with Laird of
Cranstoun, 352, 396 ; — of Newton, Jacob, I.

* 266 ; II. 438 ;— of Wowmett, (Woolmot,)
Da., I. 168 ; Jo., his brother, slain, ib., 265;
the Laird slain, II. 52, 403 ; Mr Pat. III. 260.

Edmonstoun-Edge, Raid of, II. 21.

Ed5are of Blaikschaw, Ro., II. 490 ; — of Creaken,
I. * 95 ;— of Inglistoun, Jo., I. * 456, 107 ?
Slaughter, IL 71;— of Kirkblane, Clem., IL
490 ;— of Weddirlie, Oliver, Tutor of, I. *147 ;
Jo., * 393, * 413, 107? Ro., III. 569.

Ed5earstoun, caution to keep Castle of, I. * 179;
besieged, * 286.

Ed5ell, Castle of, III. 63.

Egg, Island of, burnt, L 228; III. 19.

Eggs ' to bikkir the Castle,' &c., I. * 271 ;—
price of, at Justice-aires, * 390.

Eglintoune, Countess of, Jean, Incest with,
I. 100 ; Helen Kennedy, complaint on her
husband's slaughter, 354 ; — Earl of, Hew,
Spuil5ie, Oppression, &c., * 59 ; Oppression,

GENERAL INDEX.

657

Stouthreif, * 74 ; Slaughter, * 132, * 133,

* 185 ; keeper of Little Cumray, * 232 ;
respited, * 237 ; abiding from Sol way, * 254',

* 381, * 466 ; Langside, 5, 114, 116 ; slain
by the Cuninghames, 355 ; Hew, ib. ; III.
419 ; Feud with Earl of Glencairn, 580 ; —
Master of, Arch., I. * 132 ; Hew, * 199 ;
remitted, * 253, 133; Ro., feud with the
Laird of Houstoun, 352 ; feud with E. of
Glencairn, 354, 355.

Egypt, Earl of Little, III. 591 ; Letter from K.
of Denmark as to, 592 ; from K. James V.,
ih. ; Precept to him to punish all Egyptians
within Scotland, 594.

Egyptians, dance before the King, I. * 273 ;
King Cristall, * 274 ; King of Cipre, * 277 ;
expelled from Scotland, * 310 ; consulted for
poisoning, 196 ; following them punished
with scourging and banishment. III. 99 ;
Moyses, Dav., Ro., and Jo., alias Willie Fa,
hanged, 201 ; Resetting Johnnie Faw, 307 ;
Jo. Faa and 3 others hanged in default of caution, 397 ; Capt. Jo. Faa and 7 others hanged,
559 ; Helen Faa and 10 others, their widows
and daughters, 560; sentenced to be drowned,
561 ; they, along with Alex. Faa and 4
others, their sons, ordered out of the Kingdom, under pain of instant death, 560 ; Documents and notice relative to Gipsies or Egyptians, 590 ; dance before the King at Holyrood, 592; Letter from K. of Denmark to
K. James IV. in favour of the E. of Little
Egypt, &c., ib. ; ditto from K. James V. in
favour of Jo. Faw, ' Lord and Erie of Little
Egypt,' ib., &c.

Eklis of that Ilk, Mungo, I. * 138 ; James,

* 369 ;— of Kildonane, Jo., IIL 171.
Elder, Henry, hanged for Sacrilege, I. * 394.
Eldermen, (Aldermen, or Bailies,) I. * 423, &c.
Eleist, an eye-sore, grudge, &c., I. 349; II. 157.
Elf-Arrows, L 192, 193, 198; how made, III.

607, &c.; how shot, ib., 615; — boys, 607,
615 ; — bulls, 604, 611, et seq. ;— folk, in the
hills consulted, I. 196 ; — grippit, 53 ; — land,
IIL 607 ;— shot, r. 231 ;— charm for, II. 536.

Elfes-howssis, III. 607.

Elgin, Cathedral of, Sacrilege committed there, I.

* 376 ; — and Fores, Justice-aire of, * 389 ;
Proclamation of, ib. ; — SheriflF of, * 392.

Elimosinar, the King's Master, I. * 312, * 313,
&c. See Almous; his Priest, * 313 ; Prince's,

* 314.

Elizabeth, Queen, Embassy from, at Baptism
of K. James VI., I. * 479 ; Letter to, as to
French Paris's execution, * 511, 348; demands redress for Laird of Buckcleugh's carrying off Kinmont Will, by force, out of Carlisle Castle, 364 ; sends an Ambassador to
congratulate K.James VI. on his escape from
Gowrie's Consp., II. 315 ; expostulates with
Ja. VI. as to his correspondence with the
Pope, 571 ; — Princess, married to the Palsgrave, III.',322.

Ellen of Butterdene, Alex., I. * 147.

Ellendounan, Burning of Castle of, I. * 256.

Ellen-na-Muk, Island of Muk burnt, I. 228.

Ellesmere, Lord, (Sir T. Egertoun,) Lord
Chan, of England, II. 591 ; his speech as to
L. Balmerinoch's Treason, ib.

Elliot of Bellelie, Ro., I. * 434 ; — of Burngranes,
Jo., II. 559 ; Wm., his son, Slaughter, and
resisting King's Guard, has his right hand cut
off, and then hanged, 560 ; — of Copschaw,
Jo., 473 ; acquitted of Masterful Theft, &c.,
474 ; Breaking Torwodlee, &c., 520 ; Murdering the Laird, &c., ib. ; Ro., III. 220 ;—
of Dunlabyre, Ro., III. ib. ; — of Fallinesche,
Wm., called Gawenis Willie, I. * 466 ; Ro.,
yr., II. 509 ; Wm., 521 ; Jo., III. 396 ;—
of Fiddeltoune, Gawin, II. 509 ; Demembration, ib. ; Wm., 559 ; Niniane, his son, resists
King's Guard, c^c, ib. ; his right hand struck
off and he hanged, 560 ; — of Ilorsliehill, Wm.,
slays the Laird of Hassindene, 1. * 456 ; sentenced to be beheaded, ib. ; Gawane, same
Slaughter, * 466 ; Wm.'s st-ntence of Banishment recalled, ib. ; — of Laniestone, Wm.,

* 466; — Jo., in Redden, alias of Rynsiegill,
felo de se in Hawick Steeple, III. 219 ; Gilb.,

alias Gib the Gaharf, scourged and banished,
44:3 ;_of Rcidheuche, Ro., II. 522; III.
568;-of Stobbis, Ciilb., III. 5.S9 ;_Will
' callit I rofAAV-zit/.' hanged, I. * 413; David
of the Heuchons hanged, 65.

658

GENERAL INDEX.

Elmere, Slauprhter of the Laird of, I. * 17, 22.

Elmisdene, Water of, Convocation at, against
Queen's Lieutenant, I. * 395.

Elpharae (Faerie), Court of, L 52, 56, 162;
Queen of, 162. See Faerie, Sec.

Elphinfjjstoune of Balnaglak, Jo , IL 507 ; — of
Barntoune, Sir Ja., Secretary, 159 ; — of
Blythiswod, Sir Geo., L 393 ; present to his
wife, II 238; III. 134, 345, 491, 494, 512;
appointed Justice-Clerk and Master of Ceremonies, 596 ; — of Glensakisbarneheid, Geo.,
219 ;— of Glak, Ja., L 48 ; Mr Ro., Tutor of. III. 230, 478 ; — of Henderstone, Jo.,
L * 81, * 87 ; Dionesp, * 424, * 469 ;— Mr
John, Murder, Adultery, &c., *359 ;— Lord,
Alex., * 78, * 167 ; Ro., * 465 ; liis Lady's
Adultery with Laird of Medope, ib. ; II. 63 ;
Alex, 496.; — Master of, Alex., I. 116,
381, 393; II. 62, 63, 131, 159, 496 ;— of
Schank, Jo., III. 243, 539.

Elva, a name given the Devil, I. 235.

Elvandis, (eln-wands,) II. 90 ; III. 529.

Elwald, John, (Jok Unhappy,) hanged, I. * 167;
And., hanged, * 151.

Elwalds, I. * 263.

Elyde, what, III. 409, 535.

Embassy, to the Emperor, I. * 304, * 306 ; —
to England, * 273, * 318, * 320 ;— France,

* 273 ; — Italy, ib.

Embroidery, of Crowns, Scottish Thistles, &c., I.

* 301 ; Armorial bearings, ib. See also
Tapestry, &c.

Emerald, great, in Scottish Crown, I. * 299.
Emperor, the, I. * 271 ; gives a Collar to K.
James V., * 277 ; Ross, Herald, sent to,

* 304 ; Sir John Campbell, Ambassador,

* 306 ; dispatches from, * 308.

Enchanted drink, administering, III. 68.

Enchantments, seeking, &c., I. 70. See Incantation, Witchcraft, &c.

England, Ambassadors to and from. See Ambassador, Henry VIII., &c. ; — Admiral of, I.

* 303 ;— defence of the realm against, * 280 ;
— Commissioners of, * 300 ; — no one to pass
into, without license, * 264 ; — Protector of,
swearing fealty to him, * 378.

English Army, &c., Supplying, I. * 344, * 379 ; —
corresponding and trathcking with, I. * 400 ;
Symone Heryng hanged, ib. ; — taking pay
from the, * 348 ; — Pirates, eight hanged. III.
99; M//-(y hanged, 103; Papers as to Pirates,
108 ; tioo hanged, 244 ; — Thieves, suffering
to escape, I. * 223 ; guiding, * 432 ; — selling
victual, flesh, &c. See victual, &c.

Englishmen, bringing in, I. * 17, * 34, * 61,

* 144, * 181, * 393, * 405 ;— that ' nane be
fey cumand be reffauit, becaufe of the Peftilence,' I. * 294 ; banqueted at Yule, * 300.

Ennoche, Laird of, I. * 62.

Ensen5e, Royal Standard. See Ansen3e.

EN3IE, Earl of, Geo., III. 25.

Epilepsy, charm for II. 29.

Equippage, crew of a vessel. III. 571, 572, 8ec.

Eresche Willie, I, * 310; Marioun, II. 542, &c.

Ermine, spotted, to line King's kirtle, &c. L
*300.

Emside, Tower of, broken into, I. * 223.

Errol, Countess of, Helen, dule weid (mournings) for Prince James, I. * 310; Agnes,
260 ; tried for Intercommuning with Earl
Bothwell after his forfeiture, 366 ; Eliz., 389 ;
Agnes Sinclair, II. 411 ; her dresses, &c.,
stolen, ib. ; banished. Writ of Error against
Assise, 412 ; — Earl of, Wm., I. * 78 ; Justice depute, * 82 ; ' gaddering' between him
and Lord Gordon, * 263 ; George, * 337 ;
Lord High Constable's jurisdiction, * 351,

* 392 ; Francis, 209, 262 ; denounced, 283 ;
Offers presented by him, 301 ; to abide Trial,
303, 306 ; tried for Conspiring against the
Religion, 310; Summons of Treason, 314;
doom, 316 ; Tract regarding ' the Spanish
Blanks,' 317; Trial ordered, 363; And.,
367, 389 ; Fra., II. 133 ; II. 428 ; III. 419,
444 ; — Jo., hanged for Forcing a child of 11
years old, II. 567 ; — the Lady, Marriage
Dresses to, I. * 321.

Error, Wilful, on Assise, punished by imprisonment for year and day, and declared Infamous
and Peijured, I. * 72 ; Laird of Pliillorth,
&c., * 148, * 165, * 166 ; Imprisonment for
year and day, * 203, 219, * 253 ; form of

GENERAL INDEX.

659

Protestation against a verdict, * 449 ; for acquitting a Witcl), 244 ; absolved by King in
person, 247; iMilligan, &c., II. 79.

Errosie, heresy. II. 499 ; III. 533, &c.

Erskine of Auciiterforfar, Arth., Slaugliter, II.
101 ; — of Brechin, Sir Tho., Secretary, I.

* 185 ; — Dav., Adam, Wm. See Dryburgh,
Cambuskenneth, Paisley ; — of Dun, John,
the Reformer, I. * 210, &c., * 347 ; Justice
depute, * 389, * 407, * 431 ; Ro., yr., 74;
Jo., yr., III. 261 ; notice of family, ib. ; his
son tried for Poisoning, &c., ib. ; beheaded,
264 ; Helen, Issobell, and Annas also tried,
266 ; condemned to be beheaded, 269 ; Helen banished for life, ib. ; Da., Jo., and Alex.,
his grandsons, poisoned by their uncle, Ro. E.,
262 ; Jo. dies, 263 ; — of Gogar, Sir Alex.,
I. 120; Sir Tho., II. 152, 166, &c. See
Gowrie Conspiracy ; his deposition, 181 ;
created Lord Dirletoun, 246 ; Viscount Fentoun, 582 ; E. of Kelly, ib., note ; — of Innerteill. Sir Geo., III. 475, 508 ; gets a Commission of Justiciary, 558 ; — of Logy, Jo., (apparent of Dun,) 261 ; Ro., his son, tried for
Witchcraft, Poisoning his two nephews, &'C.,
ib., &c. ; — Lord Robert, Justice depute, I.

* 62, * 78, * 165 ; John, * 168, * 185 ; one
of the Guardians of K. James V. in his infancy, * 259 ; John, * 382 ; Guardian to K.
James VI. * 479 ;— of Little Sauchy, Ro.,
119, 126.

Escape, suffering English Thieves and Captives
to, I. * 223. See Prisoner, Murderer, Thief,
&c.

Escheat, valuable, of Wra. Hume, I. * 307.

Eskdale, Thieves of, I. * 40 ;— Raid of, * 104,

* 181 ;— Porteous Roll of, * 117.
Esplene of Newbigging, The, II. 555.

Esson, Captain, English Pirate, III. 105.

Eton College, III. 589.

Ettrick-Forest, destroying Woods in, I. * 71.

Everis, Sir Wm., sends for Hawks, I. * 274 ;
Dispatches from, * 295 ; writings to, * 304 ;
horse taken from him, * 323, * 324 ; Sir
Ralph, * 359.

Evidence of Witnesses in exculpation of Slaughter
refused, HI. 467.

Evil Spirits, nicknames of. III. 606 ; colour of
their dresses, &c., ib,

Evil-willit Sandy, I. * 173 ; — blast of wind, 53,
233.

Eviot of Balhoussye, Pat., I. * 432, * 452 ; Colin, II. 159 ; Pat., his brother, forfeited in
Pari., ib., 234 ; murdered by his wife, Jonet
Ross, who was hanged and burnt, II. 409,
and note; III. 449; — of Mwretoun, Pat.,
265 ; his servant hanged for stealing Titledeeds, ib.

Examinations, remarkable, for Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c., HI, 596.

Excommunication, receiving Holy Sacrament
while under, I. * 365, * 375 ; Priest baptizing, &c., after, 189.

Execution, curious, of letters against the E. of
Orkney, III. 86, 281.

Exemption from Hosts, warding, &c., I. * 247 ;
from Assises, see Assise.

Expeditions to the Isles, &c. See Isles, &c.

Expenses, Clerk of the King's, I. * 313 ; Assise
protests for, 94.

Eye-leist, what, I. 349 ; H. 157 ; III. 506, and
note .

Ey-schot, II. 536.

Eyes of a Mnrdered corpse, superstition that they
open on the touch of the Murderer, &c.j III.
188; case of Johan Norkott, 193.

F.

Fa (Faw) Moyses, Da., Ro., and Jo., alias
Willie, hanged. III. 201 ; Resetting Jo. Fa,
307 ; Letter from K. James V. in favour of
' Johnne Faw, Lord and Erie of Little Egypt,'
592.

Faerie, Court of, I. 49, 52, 53, 162;— (iueen of,
III. 604; — King of, ib. ; — Faerie-cup, lielonging to Lord Duft'us, ib., note.

Fair-folk, (Fairies,) carried off by, L 57, &c.; II.
25, 537.

660

GENERAL INDEX.

Fair, Lord of, present given to two Dutchmen,
his servants, I. * 309.

Fairbairne of West Gordoun, Ja., III. 539.

Fairley (Farneley) of Braid, Arch., yr., I. * 166 ;
Rob., * 368, * 424, 11; Alex., 235; II.
124, 343, 397, 467 ;— David, of Colmistoun,
waylaid, I. * 178 ; Jo., 72 ; II. 343, 397.

Fairlye of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 420 ;— Mr Ro.,
Justice depute. III. 541.

Falahill, Laird of, slain, I. * 68, * 69.

Falcons, I. * 294. See Hawks.

Falconer of Ballandro, Ro., I. 29 ; IL 363 ; III.
200, 264 ;— Barbara, K. James V. gives her
tocher, I. * 324 ;— of Findowne, Geo., * 347 ;
—of Halkertoune, Alex., II. 430 ; Sir Alex.,
III. 318, 436 ;— of Innerlochtie, Hew, Slaughter, 435 ; Hew, yr., ib. ; Alex. Sandiesoun,
' his servant, slain, 484 ; Ja. Reoche beheaded, ib. ;— of Kilhill, Pat., II. 362.

Falconer, King's Master, I. * 315.

Falconers sent with ' merl3eonnis' and Hawks to
France, I. * 266 ; to K. of England, * 284 ;
to France, * 295, * 317 ; to K. of England,
ih., * 318 ; setting King's hawks, * 323.

Falkland, Palace of, I. * 312; wild-boars sent to,
ib. ; — King assaulted there, 275, 358 ; houses
of assailants to be demolished, 276 ; — -Raid of,
ib.; E. of Bothwell tried, 293; forfeited,
297 ; — Assault between the King's Master
carver, &c., 291 ; a Court of Justiciary held
there, ib., &c. ; Keeper of, 308.

Fallasdaill, Da., with Tho. and Ja., his sons, slain
by MacGregors, II. 432 ; Tho., 433, 439 ;—
Tho. of Ardochbeg, m. 114.

Falsing of evidents, Ja. Sowtare hanged, I. 85.
See Forgery, Notary, &c.

False Notary, hanged, II. 35. See Notary.

Falset, II. 453, &c. See Perjury.

False money. Making or forging, Symontoun of
that Ilk, and others, I. * 76, * 324 ; Henry
Wynd beheaded, ' ex gratia,' * 393, * 396.
(See Loranes, Hardheids, Bawbeis, Testanis,
&c.)— * 440; Lions, * 487; Hardheids,
64, 82 ; half merks, 133 ; Testanis, three
women strangled and burnt, II. 74 ; Walt.
Murray and two others burnt, 100 ; Tho.

M<= Alexander of Druramochreyne and three
others * wirreit' (strangled), and two more
hanged, II. 353 ; Allan Napier ' wirreit and
brint,' 403 ; Dow and M^'CIaren hanged and
forfeited, 418 ; importing, I. Q&.

Famines in Scotland, I. 51, 351.

Famishing a man to death, iii privato carcere, in
pit of Tulliallane, III. 479 ; in Pit of Castle
of Blair, 491.

Famous witness, what. III. 74.

Fameand, foaming, III. 576.

Farny of that Ilk, And. I. * 408.

Farnylaw, Sir Geo. Chaplain, slain, I. * 20.

Farquharson of Innerchald, Jo., &c.. Slaughter,
III. 203 ;— of Newtoune, Jo., I. * 476.

Fastheuch, Burning Place of, I. * 23 ; Hereschip
of, 35.

Fastcastle, Heiresses of, I. * 179; correspondence as to Gowrie's Conspiracy. See Logan
and Sjirott.

Fasternis-evin, I. * 123 ; II. 78 ; III. 468.

Fausyde, Jo., slain, III. 415 ; Ro. Robertsoune
beheaded, 416.

Fawside of that Ilk, I. * 166 ; Geo., remitted,

* 243 ; Tho., 6, 10, 107; Mr Ro., yr., 149;
Mr Ro., III. 9; Ja., yr., 415.

Fawlow of Wallis, Geo. L * 147.

Fayette, Monsr. la, I. * 264.

Feadge, what. III. 605, note.

Fealty, swearing, to Protector of England, I. * 378.

Feane, alias Cunningham, Jo., ' Secretar to the

devill,' conspiring King's death by sorcery,

&c., burnt, I. 209 ; 'newes from Scotland,' &c.

213 ; strangled and burnt, 223, 236.
' Fearie, Thomas a,' an evil spirit. III. 606, 614,

&c.
Febill Hob, Stouthreif, * 182.
Fedderat, place of, besieged and taken, I. 205.
Felony, forethought, James Spottiswood, j"^. I.

* 15 ; Laird of Spottiswode, I. * 16 ; Robert
Kilgour, hanged, I. * 134 ; * 14vS, * 159.

Female, burning, I. * 190; — fool, Queen's. See
Fool and Dwarf ; — female culprits, punishment of death by drowning, I. * 162, * 190.

Fencing a court, what, I. 46.

Fentoun, John, of tliat Ilk, slain, I. * 61, * 106,

GENERAL INDEX.

661

* 121 ;— of Ogill, I. * 404, David, fiar, * 405,
Ja., * 408, Dav., 27 ;— Viscount, II. 582.
See Erskine of Gogar, III. 590.

Feid, feud, III. 543, &c.

Feir of weir, what, II. 70, &c.

Fellis (hills) II. 519.

Fergussone of Auchinsoule, Wm. I., * 457 ; — of
Belnacult, Jo., III. 491 ; — of Ballewchane,
Tho., II. 528 ; — alias Barroune, &:c. See II.
394, note; also Macduff; — of Craigdan-oche,
Jo., I. * 79, Tho., yr. ib., * 140 ; Tho., remitted, * 248 ; Jo., 241 ; — of DirtuUych, alias
Barroune, F., I. 39 ; — of Glenbowar, Dune,
I. * 457 ; — Fergus, * 10, of Kilkerran, Duncan, yr. of, oppressed, I. * 58 ; Bernard, convocation, &c. * 456, II. 106 ; — of Mackilliestoun, Ro., III. 118; — of Stroymuk, Pat., I.
39;— of the Yle, Jo., II. 355, 360, Alex.,
III. 225 ;— of Crochedow, Ja., III. 225 ;— of
Thraif, Geo., 172.

Fernie of Nig, Alex., II. 104 ; Finlay, his son,
hanged for forging his father's signature to
a charter, 105.

Ferrymen ordered, under pain of death, not to
raise their fare to persons passing to the array,
I. * 270 ; tried for persons drowned, 185.

Ferries stopt against deserters from the army, I.

* 273.

Fethye, David, perjured notary, declared infamous, his right hand struck off, I. * 402 ; — of
Incheok, Dav., I. * 137.

Feud, deadly, I. * 138, * 143, * 144, * 150,

* 163 ; betwixt inhabitants of Ayr and neighbourhood, * 204, * 244, * 251 ; Earl of Marischall and Lord Gordon, * 263 ; and Lord
Forbes, * 264 ; Lord Uchiltree, * 352 ; Lairds
of Brodie and Altyre, &c. * 356 ; Gordons
and Stewarts, * 366 ; Lindsay and Somervilles, * 369, * 383 ; Dunbars and Cumyngs,
370; Drummonds and Blairs, * 371 ; Dunbars and Inneses, 376 ; Baillies and Somervilles, 382 ; Lairds of Whiteford and Pollock,

* 384 ; Charteris and Blairs, * 424 ; Citizens
of Brechin and Tenants of Balnamoon, * 431 ;
between Gordons and M'Clellans, 453 ; Stirlings and Kincaids, 458 ; Laird of Colpmalindeis and Lord Oliphant, * 488 ; Rosses and

Oliphants, 25, &c. ; Maconeill and Maclean,
&c., 224 ; Lairds of Pitfour and Kinfawns,
276 ; E. of Menteith and Leckie of that Ilk,
282 ; Colquhouns and Galbraiths, 290 ; Laird
of Closeburn and Lord Maxwell, 298 ; E. of
Montrose and Lairds of Calder and Slamanno,
347 ; list of persons under deadly feud, in
anno 1595, 352 ; Lord Maxwell and Laird
of Johnstone, 360 ; narrative as to history of,
and the subsequent feud. III. 29 ; Lairds of
Gardyn and Guthrie, 373 ; Lairds of Grange
and Phairnyhirst, II. 4 ; Lairds of Auchindrane and Cul5eane, (see Mure and Kennedy)
35, 37 ; Master of Spynie and the Master of
Ogilvie, 130, &c., fined 5000/. each, &c., 146;
Kerrs and Turnbulls at Jedburgh, 370, 421 ;
battle of Dryfe Sands, III. 30 ; Lairds of
Drunilanrig and Johnstone, 31 ; young Lairds
Edjell and Pittarrow, 61 ; Lord Torthorwald
slain by Lord Ochiltree, &c., 65 ; Kennedies
and E. of Cassillis, 124, 170, 172 ; Earls of
Caithness and Sutherland, 231, 235 ; Lairds
of Pitfoddels and Monymusk, 258, 259 ; E. of
Caithness and L. Forbes, 310; Scotts and
Kerrs, agreement of their quarrels, <S:c., 390 ;
Lairds of Orraistoun and Cessford reconciled,
393 ; Lairds of Cultmalundie and Monievaird,
480 ; the Buchanans and MacFarlanes, and
barbarous torture and murder of a Buchanan,
545 to 552 ; Earl of Glencaira and Master of
Wintoun, Papers illustrative of, 579 ; Earls of
Eglintoun & Glencairn and Lord Serapill,580.

Fian. See Feane and ' Newes from Scotland.'

Fidder of lead, what, I. * 310.

Field (see Battle) of Melrose, I. * 133 ; Linlithgow, * 228 ; the Lennox, or Conflict of
Glenfruine, II. 418, 424 ; and notice to Trial
of Laird of Glenstra, 430; III. 223, 537.

Fife, Sheriffof, invaded in a fenced Court, I. * 136.

Fifty-shilling pieces forged, II. 99.

Findoune, Craig of, Hawks' nests preserved there
for the King. IH. 204.

Fingask, Laird of, iiis lands in Lewis wasted and
burat. III. 245.

Finlawson of Killeyth, Jo., I. 10 ; Matho, II.
370, 480.

Fiulaysoue, Mr Jo., Sheriflf- depute of Orkney,

662

GENERAL INDEX.

III. 274 ; taken prisoner, 277 ; hated by the
people, 289 ; complained against, 292.

Fire and sword, Commission of, II. 559, et passim.

Fire-Ordeal, III. 184..

Fire-raising. See Burning ; — a ' Pele' in Botliill,
I. * 25; and Hereschips in Badenoch, * 45,

* 162, * 176 ; Balbegys, * SM ; female
branded and banished, * 346 ; Durrisdeer,
&c., Rich. Latimer of that Ilk hanged, * 348,

* 370 ; Robert Paterson hanged, * 375 ;
Hume, * 405 ; Commendator of Saul-seat,
&c., 12 ; at Auchinleck, 72 ; at Littlegill,
108; at Horstoune, 109, 110; Pitmedden,
160 ; Moit, Littlegill, &c., 184 ; Mull, Tyree,
Coll, Kintyre, &c„ 226 ; Dunnibirsell, 284 ;
Crwvy, II. 41 ; Field of the Lennox, 430,
&c., 441 ; Apotesyde, 511 ; Turnbull of
Wauchope, &€., ih. ; Sir Ja. Makconeill, III.
1 ; D(m. M'^Angus of Glengarie, 540 ; —
in Coal-pits, Jo. Henrie, hanged, and his
head put on a spike, 361.

Firie-Cross, to alarm the country. III. 23,369,&c.

Fishing. See Salmon- fishing ; — Violent occupation of, I. * 177, * 395.

Fishings, how Witches took the fruit of. III. 609,
&-c. See also Witchcraft and Charms.

Fisnowme, what, II. 478.

Five-pund pieces forged, II. 99, 354.

Flaconis, for Prince's Chapel, I. * 306.

Flagranti criniitie, person taken in, III. 421.
See also Red-hand, &c.

Fiaillis, Murder with ' kentis' and, III. 488.

Flanders, Embassy to, I. * 243 ; tapestry brought
from, * 298 ; — exporting wheat and corn to,

* 365 ;— Herald of, * 277.

Fleming of Banochane, Wm., I. * 170 ; Alex.,
Pat., and Ja., his sons. Forcible abduction,
&c., 377 ;— Chronicle MS., extracts from, II.
247, &c. ; — Jo., Rape of Earl of Lennox's
daughter, I. * 60 ; Jo., hanged for < tressonable, blasphemous, and damnable speiches'
against the King, III. 359 ; — of Kilmacolme,
Geo., I. * 170 ; Ja., 69, 70 ;— Lord. John,
slain, * 61, note, * 131, * 141, * 2R6 ;—
Malcolm, * 141, * 149, * 186 ; respited for
Resetting English Traitors, * 239 ; appointed
SheriflF of Tweedale and Peebles, * 246 ; one

of the Guardians of K. Jas. V., in his infancy, * 259 ; Assise between hin, and Lord
Drummel3ar, * 272 ; Tocher given to his sister, * 272, * 310; denounced, 291, 293. See
WiGTouN ; Jo., III. 339, 472 ;— of Moness,
Alex., IL 528; Slaughter, &c.. III. 443,
465 ;— of Persielandis, Wm., III. 270 ;— of
Spittall, Ja., II. 467 ;— of Ttorbe^do, Jo.,
slain, I. * 72.

Flesh, selling to the English, I. * 379 ; in time
of Lent, 369. See Lent.

Fletcher, And., Lord Milton, I. 257.

Fleurie, Mons. Ambass;i(lor, I. * 283.

Flewd, James, Englishman, I. * 282.

Flisk, Parson of, John Waddell, I. * 471 ; Ja.
Balfour, ib.

Flood-mark, eight English Pirates hanged within,
III. 99 ; thirti/ others hanged, 103 ; two more,
244. See Piracy, &c.

Florence, Duke of. Letters to, II. 571.

Foirspoken, what, II. 536 ; a chihl, HI. 610.

Fool of England, I. * 114; the King's, * 115;
Gillemowband, * 271 ; Malcolm the Fule,

* 273 ; John Lowise, * 317, &c. ;— the
Queen's (Mary of Guise) Serat, a female,
costly dresses of satin, &c. to her, * 293,

* S94, * 301 ; dress of green and yellow velvet, * 307, * 322.

Foot-Band, I. * 208.

Foot-ball, game of, II. 364.

Foot-mantles, I. * 288.

Foray, day, II. 453.

Foraying, ' i ynning of ane forrow,' II. 360 ;
Tho. Cuninghame hanged, ib.

Forbes of Ardmurdo, Wm., I. * 186 ; Jo., his
son, murdered, 77 ; — of Blaktoun, Abr., 382;
— Barb., Adultery with the Laird of Dalgettie, (her husband,) II. 64, 104 ; — of
Burnegranes, Jo., III. 258 ; — of Brux, Alex.,
L * 175, * 208 ; Lady Brux slain, ib. ; Jo.,
III. 490 ;— of Bannagask, Mr Dune, 540 ;—
of Corssinday, Wm., I. * 163, * 175, 382 ;
Jo., his brother, one of ' the Societie of the
Boyis,' Slaughter, kc, II. 532; beheaded,
535, 581 ;— of Carnebo, Ja., I. * 186 :— of
Corse, Wm., 284 ;— of Carnehill, Pat., slain,
II. 105 ;— of Craigievar, Mr Wm., III. 490 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

663

— of Dalmanache, Alex., I. * 172 ; — of Drumtoclity, Jo., * 186 ; — Sir David, knt., slain in
ward, * 406 ; — of Fynjeak, Jo., * 454 ; — of
Hauchtoun, Mr Ja., III. 485; — Mr Jo., Moderator of Assembly, II. 494 ; banished, 503 ;
—Lord, Alexander, I. * 3, * 6, &c. ; John,
Slaughter of Laird of Meldrum, * 150, &c. ;
Fire-raising, &c. * 163 ; Feud, * 263, * 274;
Wm., 263 ; Jo., Commission against Jesuites,
&c., 336 ; Lieutenant, 342 ; Arthur, III. 76 ;
— Master of, Jo., Slaughter of Laird of
Meldrum, I. * 149, * 163, * 175; beheaded,

* 183 ; Papers illustrative of his Trial, * 185 ;
remitted, * 246 ; gift of his escheat, * 249,

* 279, 65, 119; Jo,, 28 4;— of Monymusk,
Duncan, coining ' Bawbeis,' * 441, * 454 ;
Wm., 284 ; III. 200 ; Slaughter, &c., 204 ;
Wm., yr., 230 ; Wm., 258 ; Ro., Jo., and
Mr Ja., his sons, ib., 259 ; — of Mylnebowie,
Jo., II. 494 ; his son, Jo., yr., slain, ib. ; Ro.,
his son. Slaughter, III. 227 ; — of New, Jo.,
XL 555 ;— of Pitlethie, Da., III. 76 ;— of
Petslego, John, Mutilation, * 172 ; coining
' Bawbeis,' * 442 ; gift of his escheat, 248 ;
Alex., 40 ;— of Portlethen, Wm., III. 206 ;
— of Reres, Arthur, I. 40 ; — of Sonnahony,
Arth., in. 242 ;— of Tolleise (Toweis),
Alex., L * 208 ; III. 489, 490 ;— of Tolquhone, Wm., I. 284.

Forcing, II. 405. See Rape, &c., 463 ;— Wm.
Bell hanged, 475 ; Jo. Errole hanged, 566 ;
III. 439 ; Ja. M^Nacht and Tho. Weir, 499 ;
And. Wischert of Muretoun, 507.

Fordoun, Kirk of. Minister struck at designation
of Manse and Glebe, II. 362.

Forestalling and Regrating, I. * 227, * 230, 139,
351 ; II. 527, &c.

Forfar, Justice-aire of, I. * 272.

Forfeiture, John, Lord Bothuile, I. * 4 ; John
Ross of Mountgrenane, * 8 ; John, Earl of
Lennox, recalled, * 12; Malhevv, Master
OF Lennox, recalled, id. ; Rol)ert, Lord
Lyle, recalled, ib. ; Torquill Makcloide of
the Lewis, * 45 ; John Lindsay of Wauchope,

* 48, 8cc. &c. (See High Treason) ; — Armorial bearings of forfeited traitors torn and defaced, * 490 ; Corpses of Traitors produced

VOL. III.

in Court, and bones disintened, previous to
sentence, &c., II. 241, 277.

Forgery of the King's Sign-manual, I. * 113;
Regent's, 19 ; of the King's Cashet, 157 ;— of
Apprising, * 255 ; of an Instrument,* 222,45 ;
John Soutare hanged, 85 ; Ro. Carmylie
hanged, 87 ; of a Charter, a Notary, and two
others hanged, II. 104 ; of an Assignation, &c.,
Jo. Donaldsoun hanged, III. 208 ;— of a Discharge, I. * 375 ; Jo. Halyday and five others
hanged, II. 34 ;— of a Bond, &c., Tho. Dempster of Muresk beheaded. III. 486 ; forger
hung in chains, I. * 137. See False money.
Coining, &c.

Forgiveness publicly asked at Cross of Edr. barefooted, in linen clothes, &c. I. * 399.

Fornian of Rutherford, Sir John, I. * 42, * 107 ;
—Mr Ro., Dean of Glasgow, * 79, * 156 ;—
Dean Wm., Heresy, * 330.

Forres, Kirk of. Sacrilege, stealing chalices, &(:.
fiom, I. * 393.

Forrester of Boquhane, Ro., I. * 453 ; — of Corstorphin, (Laird of,) II. 10 ; yr. of, III. 73; — of
Durrisdale, Walt, I. * 404 ; — Dav., burgess
of Stirling, slain, 351 ; Edw., Commissary of
Kirkcudbright, III. 329 ;— of Garden (Carden), Alex., 351 ; feud with E. of Man,
&c., 352, 354 ; Sir Ja., II. 502 ;— of Killemuke, Alex., I. * 216 ; — of Meadowfield, Ja.,

* 176 ;— of Myethill, Alex., 354 ;— of Puldoir. Dune, 354 ; — of Strahenrie, Sir Ro.,
III. 112; Ja., his nephew, tried for Demembration, ib. ; — Rob., burnt for Heresy, I.

* 210, * 211, * 216 ;— of Gammelscheills,
John, * 414 ; — Tho., murdered, * 350 ; —
Wm., escheated, * 253.

Forret of that Ilk, John, I. * 408 ;— Dean Tho.,
burnt for Heresy, * 210, * 214, &c. ; Memoir of, * 213.

Forster of Skipinche, Sir Dune, I. * 62.

Forsyth of Dykes, Dav., I. 3(5.

Fotheringhame of Powrie, Tho., I. * 4, 74.

Fountainhall's MS. Abridgement, I. 257 ; his
Narrative of Auchindraynes Case, III. 181.

Four-haIf-al)out, objected against an Assisor, II.
50. See Assise, <!v:c.

Four-pound-pieces, forging, &c., II. 354, 365.

4 1'

664

GENERAL INDEX.

Four-merk-pieces, 11. 353.

Foulis of Brownyesyde, Tlio., I. 35 ; — of Colintoun, Ja., * 232, 35 ; II. 10 ; — of Ravelstoun,
Geo., ' Maister Cun5eour,' III. 459 ;— Ja.,
Clerk Register, I. * 168 ; Ja., Justice-depute,
372.

Fowlis, Lady. See Roise and Monro.

Fowls (poultry), poisoning, punished by banishment for life, II. 336 ; Witch-charm, burning
a live fowl, III. 557.

Fram, Tho., hanged for Cattle-stealing, II. 541.

France, Ambassadors from, I. * 262, * 263,

* 265, * 274, * 281, * 285, * 321, * 322 ;—
Heralds of, * 268, * 296 ; — Ipotygar returns
to France, * 322 ; — King of, bonfires and rejoicings ' for nouelties of the Triumphe gat in
Lumbardye,' * 262 ; presents of Hawks, &c.,
sent to, 266, * 295 ; hackneys and hawks
sent, * 306 ; present of a horse from, * 306 ;
— Licence to pass to, * 244; — Lord Maxwell's Herald, * 85 ; — miners from, employed
at Scottish gold mines, * 298.

Fraser(Fnsell)of Creichie,Jo., II. 104; — ofDurres, Ro., III.478;— Ja,, c^'C, Rioting, Choosing
a Lord of Inobedience, &c., I. *410 ; — of Kilboig, Hu., III. 365 ;— of Knok, Jo., L * 133 ;
— of Kynnell, I. * 424 ; — Lord Fraser, of
Lovat. See Lovat ; And., II. 600, note ;
Tutor of, Tho., I. 68, 285 ;— of Mukallis, And.,
yr.. III. 539 ; his infant son And. slain, ih. ; —
of Phillorth, Alex., L * 148, * 199, 284 ;— of
Ro., Herald, slain. III. 79 ; — of Staniewoid,
And. III. 478.

Freind, blood-relation. III. 129, 151, &c.

Freland of that Ilk, Ja., I. * 170.

French Army, Stouthrief of part of their pay, I.

* 361 ; — Ladies and Gentlemen in the Suite of
Queen Magdalexe, I. * 287, * 288, * 289,

&c.; Q. Mary of Guise, * 292, &c.;— Soldiers, Slaughter and Wounding of, I. * 377 ;
— Wines, purchasing high-priced, *349, *377.

Frenche of Frencheland, Ro., yr., II. 467 ; — of
Thornydykes, Rob., I. * 147 ; Feud with E.
of Montrose, 332 ; II. 83 ; Jo , Tutor of, III.
69, 72 ; Ro., ib. ; Jo., the Bastard, ih. ; Alex.,
brother to the Tutor, Hurting and W' ounding, ib. ; Remission to, 1 16 ; Alex., Tutor of,
Slaughter, 222 ; beheaded with Ja. Wicht,
his nephew, ih.; Adam (14 years old) carried off and married against his consent, <S:c.,
402 ; remarkable case of Forcible Abduction
argued at length, ih., &c. ; Ro., his father,
404 ; Ja. and Jo., his uncles, ih.

Frendraught, besieging Place of, &c., I. * 328.

Frontellis, I. * 320.

Fullerton of Ardoch, Wm., I. * 158; IL 430;—
of Crosbie, Jo., L * 137; Da., II. 106;— of
Crago, Wm., jr., I. 79 ; — of Dreghorne, Jo.,
I. * 428 ; Wm., 183 ;_of that Ilk, Alex., I.

* 177.

Funeral Ceremonies, I. * 120, * 259, * 287,

* 288 ; ' pow-penny,' * 293 ; Dirige and
Saul-mess, ib. ; Arms, torches, candles, &c.,
used at, * 297; OflFering, * 304, 6cc. \—
of James Duke of Ross, I. * 120 ; Slaughter
at a funeral, III. 439.

Funt-stane, the baptismal font, I. 52.

Furious person. Slaughter by, I. * 363.

Furrier, King's, I. * 315.

Futhie of Futhie's-miln, Pat., I. 268.

Fyet, La., D. of Albany's messenger. See Fayette.

Fyrie-Cross, to alarm the country. III. 23, 24.

Fyvie, Lord, Alex., II. 159 ; Provost of Edr.,
244, 417, 437. See Dunfermling.

G.

Gaberlen3ie, Adam Tumbull called, slain, I. * 61.
Gain5ies, (bolts for cross-bows,) I. * 309. See

Archery.
Gairdin of Bandoch, Tho., slaughter of Laird of

Guthrie, 1. 372 ; feud, 373 ; — of Blairtoune,

Mr Ro., yr., IL 528 ; IIL 80 ;— of that Ilk,
Pat., I. * 157 ; feud with the Laird of Auldbar, 352 ; slain, II. 528 ; III. 77 ;— of Latoune, Geo., II. 103 ; Da., III. 437 ;— of Legatstoun, Tho., Hamesucken and Slaughter,

GENERAL INDEX.

665

II. 103 ;— of Leys, Dav., I. * 138, * 347 ;

II. 135, 235 ;— of Tullois, Ro., slain, II. 528 ;

III. 80.

Gairdner, Marg., inhumanly tortured, II. 44 ;
Grissell ' wirreit' and ' brunt' for Witchcraft,
&c. ; III. 95.

Gaime of Blakfurd, Ja., III. 478.

Gairleis, Lord, Alex., II. 572 ; IIL 475.

Galbraithe of Balquharne, James, 1. * 386 ; —
of Culcreuche, hanged, I. * 13 ; Humphrey,
Tutor of, * 166; Andro, respited, * 240;
James, * 385, * 386 ; Ro., 289, 291 ;— of
Gartscadden, Walt., I. * 150, * 385 ; attempting to restore Popery, * 427 ; — of Polgavie,
Jo., L * 166 ;— Mr Wm., Minister of Pennycuik. Banished for Perjury, II. 476 ; Ja., beheaded for Murder, III. 565.

Galloway, Bishop of, Dav., I.* 79 ; Stouthreif
from, I. * 94, * 99, * 272 ; Alex., * 387 ;
Gawin, II. 261, 274; — Mr Norman, burnt
for Heresy, I. *210, note. See Gourlay ; — Mr
Pat., I. 304 ; Minister to the King, II. 156,
187 ; his Sermon on Gowrie's Conspiracy, in
Edr., 248 ; another in Glasgow, 252.

Gall, James, Fire-raising, &c., I. * 334.

Gait, travelled. III. 232.

Gallayis, Highland vessels. III. 368.

Gallowsheills, Guidwife of, bewitched, I. 236.

Gal5art, (Galliard,) what. III. 441.

Gal3eart, Captain, his Company, *I. 377.

Game, Killing, with culverings and pistolets, I.

* 395.

Gardens, breaking. III. 555 ; two men hanged, ib.
Gareoche of Kilstair, Ja., I. * 184 ; Wm., yr.,

III. 76 ; Ja., 489 ; Wm., his son. Oppression,

&c., ib., 496.
Garscadden, attempt to restore Popery at, I.* 429.
Garnets in Scottish Crown, I. * 299 ; and ' cedronis,' * 320.
Garter, Order of the, I. * 283, * 289.
Garlies, Laird of, I. * 414. See Stewart.
Garthland, Laird of. Burning Ardwell, &c., L

* 56. See Macdowall.
Garytour, or warder, I. 8.
Garroun, what, III. 276.

Gartshore (Carschore) of that Ilk, Jo., III. 345.
Gascony wine, Stouthrief of, I. * 54, 55.

Gawin, Anth., E. of Little Egypt, III. 592 ; Letter to K. James IV. from K. of Denmark
as to, ib.

Gawistoun, (Galstoun,) Laird of, L * 278, * 491.

Geddes of Cuthilhall, Geo., I.* 131 ;— of Rauchane, Cha., I. 353 ; Capt. Cha., III. 229.

Geese, price of, at Justice- Aires, I. * 389.

Geikie, Wm., acquitted of the barbarous Murder
of a Dumb young man, II. 388.

Gemmill of Templehouse, Pat., I. 19.

General Band. See Band.

Gentill John, the English Fool, I. * 115.

Gentillwomene, presents given by K. James V.
to, L * 297, he.

Gib. Ja., Shooting at the Laird of Kyppis in
Holyrood, I. 187, &c. ; King's Warrant to put
him to death, ib. : Banished for life, 189 ; Jo.,
' wirreit and brunt' for uttering base money,
II. 356 ; Jo., Murdered under trust. III. 74 ;
— of Carribber, Ja., yr., II. 502.

Gib the Gal5art, scourged and banished. III. 442,

Gibbet. See Cornwall ; taken down and burnt,
IL 35L

Gibbetting in irons. See Irons.

Giffen of Cardrono, Jo., I. * 133.

Giflford of Sheriffhall, Wm., I. * 384 ; Ja., and
his brother Jo., slain, 168.

Gift, New- Year's, I.* 115.

Gigha, Island of. Gift of lands of, I. * 246 ; burnt,
229.

Gillatrypes, a Witch-dance, III. 606.

Gilbert, Mr Tho., Justice-depute, I. 73.

Gilchrist, Jo., and two others, hanged for falset,

I. 362.

Gilding false money and vending it, Allan Napier
' wirreit and brint,' II. 403.

Gillespy, Thomas, hanged, I. * 87.

Gille-mowband, a Court Fool, I. * 271.

Gilmour, Wm., Witchcraft, &c., I. 101.

Gilnockie, Tower of, I. * 152, Ike. See Johnnie
Armstrang.

Gil;eani of Monachtie, Tho., II. 145.

Girdle of Solid Ciold (roui the mine at Crawfordmure, set with a Sapphire, I. * 299.

Girdill, (girdle,) burning a woman on a red hot,

II. 391 ; Alex. Rowan hanged for this barbarity, &c. 393.

666

GENERAL INDEX.

Girnego, Place of, I. * 394.

Girnalling of Victual, I. * 181.

Girth, (Sanctuary,) Slaughter within, I. * 258.

Girth-Sting, what. III. 259.

Girvan, Sands of, Wm. Dalrymple murdered

there, III. 181, &c. See Mure.
Gissene, (gizzene or jizzen,) child-bed, I. 51.
Gladsmure, Raid of, I. * 331, ♦ 339.
Gladstanes of Coklaw, John, I.* 414; Ja., yr.,

II. 512 ; Ja., III. 396 ;— of that Ilk, Walt.,

I. 166 ; Ja., Slaughter, II. 472 ; Jo., III.
391;— of Quhytelaw, Walt. * 396 ;— of Wynnyngtoun-hauch, Jo , II. 472, 523.

Glaiked, gowked. III. 606.

Glammis, Lord Jo., Justiciar, I. * 19, * 136,

* 158 ; condemned, * 198 ; restored by Pari.,

* 199 ; found caution, 10,000 merks, * 327,

* 346 ; — Jo., Lord Chancellor, slain, 79 ;
Pat., II. 105 ; Slaughter, &c., 386, 496 ; Jo.,

III. 61. See KiNGHoRN ; — Master of, I.
78; Tho., of Baldukie, 117, 119, 174 ; his
' base son,' Ja. Lyoun, III. 323 ; Tho., 409 ;
— Lady Jonet, I. * 157 ; Using Charms,
&c., 158 ; Assisors refuse to pass on her Assise, * 157, * 158 ; Licence to pass beyond
seas, in Pilgrimage, * 244 ; her defence, * 192 ;
case reported to the King, * 193 ; her execution, * 194 ; Burnt, * 187, &c. ; Papers illustrating her Trial, * 191 ; her husband, trying
to escape from Edr. Castle, is dashed to pieces,

* 194, * 197, &c. ; John Lyoune beheaded
for concealing Conspiracy, * 202 ; Alex.
Makke banished for do. * 203 ; Gift of her
escheat, * 246 ; her two daughters, * 291.

Glammis, Castle of, I. * 306 ; — Keeper of, and

Baky, * 290.
Glasgow, Archbishop of-, Rob., Protection to

his Tenants until his return from Rome, I.

*41; Ja., * 79; Gav., Chancellor, * 185;

Ja., 55 ; Ro., * 264 ; Archb. Ja. Spottiswood,

II. 261, 274; Ja., 584, 585; Jo., 596 ; buffets Ogilvy the Jesuite, III. 330 ; Geo., ib.,
note, 339 ; curious notice of his death and funeral, Ja., 406, 508, 620 ;— attempt to restore
Popery at, I. * 430 ; — Castle and Town, taken,
I. * 234 ;— Mure of, * 114; Raid of, * 331 ;

— Provost of, invaded, * 361 ; — Raid of,

* 33 1 ; Riot by Laird of Minto and the Townspeople, III. 580 ;— Regality of, 508, 513, &c.

Glass, Tho., ' wirreit and brunt' for uttering forged

money, II. 355.
Glen of the Bar, James, I. * 382, * 385, * 451 ;

—of Lynthills, Hew, II. 439.
Glenarknay, Hunting of, I. * 278, * 298.
Glencairn, Sir Wm., Master of, I. * 137;

* 184, * 190, * 199 ; his son wounded, * 207 ;

* 238 ; Alex., Governor and Justiciary of
Kintyre,* 258; Assise on, * 264, * 306; Wm.,

* 229, * 456 ; Ja. 69;— Earl of, Cuthb.,

* 62, * 78 ; respited, * 238 ; Raid of Kintyre, * 319 ; Raid of Glasgow-muir, * 331 ;
Alex., * 350, * 386, * 466, * 478 ; Ja., 91,
114, 116, 265 ; feud with Laird of Glengarnock, 352 ; feud between him and the Master
of Eglintoun, 354 ; Earl of Eglintoun slain by
Ja., C. of Ross, 355 ; his servant slain, II.
426; m. 207, 316; Feud with Master of
Wigtoun, Papers illustrative of, 579 ; with E.
of Eglintoun, Lord Sempill, &c., 580.

Glenchamrowne, II. 435. See Clan Cameron.

Glencorse, Andro, burnt for Poisoning and Adultery, I. 84 ; — of that Ilk, Jo,, II. 507.

Glendinning, Laird of, slain, I. * 60 ; — of Partourie, Ninian, * 85 ; — Simon, Messenger-atarms, slain, * 48.

Glendoning of Drumrasche, Jo., Slaughter of
Laird of Dunduff's brother, II. 604 ; III. 121,
538 ; taken captive by Laird of Earlston, 552 ;
— Mr Ro. Minister of Kirkcudbright, 329.

Gleneviot, field of, II. 48, ?wte.

Glenfruine, Conflict of. See Field of Lennox —
II. 430 ; III. 537, &c.

Glengarnock, Laird of. See Cuninghame.

Glengarrie, III. 20. (See Makangus.)

Glengore, (Lnes Venerea,) vid. Grantgore.

Glenfinlas, Hunting of, I. * 295, * 298.

Glenislay, Hereschip of, I. 263.

Glenlivet, (or Balrinnes,) battle of, I. 361.

Glenlocha, burnt. III. 232.

Glenquhome of the Wra, And., I. * 81.

Gloming, (gloaming,) III. 3, 75, 384.

Glorat, Laird of, murdered, I. * 170.

GENERAL INDEX.

667

Gloves of plate, I. * 303, * 317.

Godwene. Dr, Vice Chan, of Oxford, III. 451,

588.
Gold Mines, I. * 298 ; Dutch and French miners,

* 298 ; present of unwrought Scottish gold to
Duke of Guise, * 300 ; a piece purchased by
the King, * 306 ; by Queen, * 311.

Golden Fleece, Order of the, I. * 283,
Goldsmith's work, I. * 284, * 295, &c. ; great
Basin of solid gold, weighing 101b. H oz.,

* 295 ; gold whistles for King, * 304 ; hawksbells, &c.^ * 321 ; drinking pieces, weighing
15 lb. 5 oz., 339 ; another piece, weighing
12 lb. 5 oz., ordered to be coined, ib.

Goose, green, roasted with kittens stuflfed in it, a
Witch-charm, II. 29.

Gorbals, man wounded there, &c., III. 491.

Gordon of Auchnacoy, I. * 150 ; — of Auchannachie, Jo., yr., 284, 393; III. 402 ;— of
Auldtoutdeyis, Jo., I. 284 — Mr Alexander,
(Postulate of Caithness,) departs to France,

* 308, * 337;— of Auchindoune, William,
I. * 150, * 454 ; Sir Patrick denounced,
283, 284 ; Offers presented by him, 301, 307 ;
Trial for Conspiring against the Religion, &c.,
310 ; doom, 316 ; Tract as to the ' Spanish
Blanks,' 3 17; III. 371 ;— of Abir5eldie, Alex.,
I. * 470 ;— of Auchinye, Wm., * 150 ;— of
Airdis, Jo., II. 558 ;— of Blalak, Jo., I. 94 ;
— of Buckie, Jo., 175 ; — of Barskeoche, John,

* 366, * 398 ; attempting to restore Popery,

* 427, 81, 84 ; Geo., III. 477 ;— of Boigis,
Jo., Sh.-dep., of Aberdeen, II. 387 ; — of Bannernie, (Barnerino, Bairnairny,) Ro., III. 121,
173 ; suspected of Murder, &c.,2i. ; slain, 460 ;
— ofBoighoillis, Adam, 401, 488 ; — of Craigmiln, Ja., I. 94 ; — of Culquha, Jo., 159 ; — of
Cluny, Sir Tho., 284 ; III. 79 ? ; Alex., 228,
318, 418 ; Sir Alex., 436, 400 ;— of Craig of
Auchindoir, Wm., I. 284 ; deleted from Summons of Forfeiture, 300 ; — of Caimburrow,
Jo., yr., 284; Wm., fiar. III. 428 ;— of Corrachrie, Pat., I. 284 ; — of Crechye, Ja., 470 ;
— of Culquhodilstane, J. * 150; — of Collindach, II. 558 ;— of Chimes, Mr Gilb., III. 88 ;

Sh.-depute of Aberdeenshire, Murder under
colouroflaw,&c.,399;— ofDalpersye,Wm.,I.
94 ;— of Dawane, Tho., 94 ;— of Dorth, (Dort,)
slain, 361 ; — of Earlstoun, Jo., III. 247; Alex.,
yr.. Usurping King's authority, &c., 552 ;— of
Geycht, Geo,, yr,, I. * 453 ; Wm,, 284 ; slain at
Balrinnes, 361 ; Wm., 11,42 ; Geo., Murder
under colour of law, &c,, III, 399, 402 ; Jo.,
Alex., Ro., and Pat., his brothers, 402, 418 ;

found caution, 5000 merks, 428 ; Jo,, 581 ;

of Garlarg, Roger,I. *75;— ofG]enluce,Laur.,
III. 9;— of Glwne, (Clunie?) Sir Tho., lU.
79 ; — of Golspitour, Jo., wounded, III. 231 ;
Jo., yr., ih. ; Slaughter of the Lairds of Stirko
and Dyn, 235 ;— of Grange, Hew, 328 ;— of
Halheid, Ro., I. 94 ;— of HiUis, Alex., III.
121, 173 ;— of Haddo, Harie, Murder under
trust, 488 ;— Capt. Jo., beheaded, I. 358 ;—
Lady Jane, her marriage to Ja., E. Bothwell,

* 461 ;— of Kandmoir, Geo. 94 ;— of Kilsture,
Harie, III, 247 ;— of Knokaspek, Ja., 258 ;_
Lord, Alex,, Field of Dunkeld, L * 98 ; respited, * 231 ; Feud betwixt him and Earl of
Erroll, * 263 ; John, * 387 ; Geo,, assaulted
on streets of Edr. by the E. of Caithness, IIL
32 ; — of Lesmoir, Jo., yr,, I. 284 ; — of Letterfourie, Pat,, 284 ;— of Lochinvar, John, Oppression, * 53, * 75 ; James, * 199 ; remitted,

* 252, * 274 ; John, * 366, * 384, * 398,
*428, * 453, 114; Sir Jo., 141, 184, 304;
II. 14; Sir Ro., married to Lilias Ruthven,
297, note ; Slaughter of his page, 558, 572 ;
in. 121, 318, 433;_of Leichestoun, Jo., 78^
79 ; his son, Ja., tried for a barbarous Murder,
ih. ; pleads Remission, and finds caution, 80;
—of Little Mondurk, Alex., 328 ;— of Pitlurg, Jo., I. 136, 141 ;— Mr Pat. IH. 446 ;—
of Park, Jo. I. * 453 ; — Sir Ro., (brother of
Jo., 7th E. of Sutherland,) III. 231 ;_of
Rothemay, William, 428; — of Strathdoun,
(Strathowae, or Strathdon,) Alex., I. 260,

367, 418; — of Scheves, Sir Geo. * 453;

of Sydra, (Siddcray,) Jo,, III. 231 ; Jo., jt.,
ib. ; — of Traquhaue, Alex., I. * 453 ;— of
3el8toun, II. 558.

—of Crago, Tho., 118 ;— of Clubisgoule, Jo,, Gorgets, I, * 303. See also Armour, &(

668

GENERAL INDEX.

Gourlay, Mr Norman, burnt for Heresy, I. * 210 ;
—of Kincraig, Wm., * 156, * 253; Alex.,
invaded, &c., * 347.

Gorme of Slaitt, Donald, I. 348; Donald, (SasSEyACH,) III. 19, 25, note ; Sir Don., 541 ; his
sister forcibly carried oft', &c., 542.

Gormock, Laird of, (John Butter,) I. * 367, *371.

Gotterby ford, where the routed ]Maxwells were
drowned, III. 30.

GonzoUes. See Grossolez and Duke of Milan,
I. * 269.

Govane, of Cardrono, Jo. III. 569 ; — Jo., Theft,
I. 15.

Gowdie, Tho., Slaughter, III. 544 ; Issobell, her
four remarkable Confessions of Witchcraft,
&c., 602 to 616.

Gowdis of French Crowns, I. * 307.

GowRiE, Earl of, Wm., I. 107 ; Raid of Ruthven, 111, 116 ; nicknamed Greysteil, II. 287 ;
family left by him, 297, note; Ja.,ib.; Jo.,
Provost of Perth, 293; killed at Perth, II.
148, &c., See Gowrie Conspiracy ; Wm.,
his brother, &:c., forfeited in Pari., 159; was
educated by Mr Ro. Rollock, 215; Jo., his
traffic in Magic, 218, 219, 220; his and his
brother's corpses, 233 ; transported to Edr.,
241, 247; his armorial bearings torn and defaced, 241 ; their quarters affixed at Stirling,
Perth, and Dundee, ib. ; bodies hanged and
quartered in Edinburgh, 246 ; Original Letters by him, 329 ; — Countess of, Dorath.,
L 119; n. 167.

Cowrie's Conspiracy, II. 146 ; trial of Cranstoune Craigingelt and M'Duff", 148 ; hanged
at Perth, 155 ; their Depositions, 156, &c. ;
the Forfeiture of the Earl of Gowrie's brothers in Parliament, 159, &c. See Gowrie.
Abstract of the leading Facts.

A. Henderson of Latoune, Chamberlain of Scone,
and A. Ruthven, sent by E. of Gowrie a
private message to the King at Falkland, at
4 a. m. of the morning of the Conspiracy, II.
165, 168, 175, 221 ; they return in haste to
Perth, 175 ; deliver their message to Gowrie
at 10 a.m., ih.\ — The Master of Ruthven also goes privately to Falkland to the
King, on the same morning, II. 164, 171 ;

his interview with the King, 175, 209;
rides back to E. of Gowrie in haste, 172 ;
— the King invited to go secretly to Perth,
to be accompanied by a few domestics only,
165, 211 ; — story of the man with a hoard of
gold, 164, 171 ; more particular details, 210;
King is lightly dressed in a hunting-suit,
without a dagger or arms of any kind, 185,
passim; — has only a hunting-horn, 215; —
the Noblemen and Courtiers in his suite
clothed in green hunting-dresses, and unarmed, saving their side-arms, 214, 220, 315 ; —
THE King is induced by the Master of Ruthven to go to Perth, 153, 164, 165, 169, 171,
210, &c. ; — is engaged in hunting from Falkland to Perth, 171, 174, 212; — slays a buck,
ih, ; — is met by E. of Gowrie on the Inch of
Perth, 172, 176 ; — the Earl sends out for
dinner, 157, &c. ; had dined previously, 172,
176; the dessert consisted of strawberries,
&c., 157, 172 ; — King's suite dine after the
King, in another apartment, 172, 214; —
Gowrie comes from the King into the
Hall, and drinks his ' scoll,' 172, 214, &c. ;
he leads out the suite, after dinner, to the
gardens, 172; &c. ; — he and his servants report that THE King had ' ridden away,' 150,
151, 153, 156, 165, 169, 173, 183, 185, 187;
— King's servants cry to horse, (' horssis !
horssis 1') 173, 216; — Gowrie's porter, in
spite of his master's threats, denies that the
King had departed, 181, 186 ; — the porter's
Deposition, 187 ; — the King is drawn by
THE Master of Ruthven into the Gallery
Chamber, and turret, 149, 153, 184, &c. ; —
all the doors are locked by the Master of R.,
149, 151, 153, 165, 177, 186, 214;— Andro
Hendersoun, the Chamberlain of Scone, was
* the man in armour,' 149, 151, 153, 165,
169, 177, 214, 222 ; — his dagger is seized
upon by the Master of R., 149, 153, 177,
215, 222 ; — and used against the King,
149, 153, 215, 222 ;— but is at length wrenched from the Master of R. by Hendersoun,
149, &c. ; — Henderson's Depositions, 174,
179 ; his Letter to the King in anno 1608,
321 ;— the Master of R. tries to bind the

GENERAL INDEX.

669

King's hands, 149, 151, 169, 178, 184, 216,
223 ; — grasps the King by the mouth and
beard, 149, 151, 169, 178, 216 ;— threatens
to take THE King's life, 149, 151, 153, 165,
169, 215, 216 ; — the King screams for help
out of a window, 149, 151, 153, 165, 169,
173, 178, 181, 185, 186, 189, 223 ;— his
cries are heard by the Duke of Lennox, E. of
Mar, &c., 152, 165, 168, 173, 217, &c. ;
their Depositions, 171, 174; — King is seen
by his suite struggling at the window, 165,
173 ; — his face red, and a liand seen grappling hira, ib., 216, &c. ; — Sir Jo. Ramsay
hastily enters by a back stair, 150, 151, 153,
165, 169, 178, 217 ; — the door is opened to
him by And. Henderson, 150, 152, 153, 165,
169, 178, 223 ; — Ramsay, after a mortal
struggle, drives the Master of R. out of the
chamber, 150, 152, 165, 169 ;_Death of the
Master of Ruthven, 154, 156, 158, 166,
169, 173, 182, 197,217 ;— the Master had on a
pyne-doublet, and King cried, ' Fy strik him
laich,' &c., 158, 183 ; — Ramsay had the
King's hunting-hawk on his fist, at his first
outcry, 179, 183 ; — King sets his foot on the
hawk ' leische,' 183 ; — King pushes the Master of R. downthe'blakturnpyke,' 183,217; —
The Earl had tivo drawn swords, 150, 152, 154,
156, 159, 166, 169, 179, 181, 182, 190, 191,
197, 198, 199, 217 ; — his company have drawn
swords, 150, 152, 154, 156, 158, 166, 169,
188, 190, 194, 195, 196, 217 ;— Cranstoun
ascends ' the Black turnpike' with the Earl,

150, 169 ; he is wounded, 151 ; run through
the body by Ramsay, 156 ; also by Herries,
ih; 182 ; — Tullibardin's servants resist the
Earl's entrance, 156, 197 ; — Door defended
by Ramsay, Erskine, and Herries, 150, 156,
166 ; — the Earl forces an entrance, 154 ;
— is armed with a steel-bonnet, 156, 158, 179,
182, 190, 191, 200, 217 ;— gets a ' py-doublet
with tail-pieces made, before the King's
visit, 158 ; — the Earl slain in the Chamber,

151, 156, 166, 173, 190, 217 ;— Craigingelt,
&c. keeps the back gate with a two-handed
sword, 152, 158, 197 ; where he got tliat
sword, 158, 159 ; — Erskine, Ramsay, and

Herries, wounded by the Earl's accomplices, 152, 170, 182, 217 ;— Lennox, INIar,
&c., attempt to burst open door of Gallery
chamber, 173, &c. ; they do not succeed until E. OF GovvRiE andhis brother are slain, ih. ;
— threats to hang and kill King's servants,
152, 192, 198, 217 ;— and to blow up the
house with gunpowder, 152, 154, 189, 190,
192, 194, 196, 197, 198, 200, 236 ;— a joist is
brought by Earl's assisters, and gate forced,
152, 154, 174, 181, 188, 195, 196, 197, 198,
199, 200, 236 ;— the Bailies of Perth ring
the alarm bell, and come to King's assistance,
186, 189, 195, 218 ; they demand to see the
King, &c., 187, 197, 198, 200 ;— called to
account for their conduct, 236 ; — King makes
an oration at Cross of Edr., 246, 248 ; — Anniversary ordered to be observed, 237, 243,
246 ; public Thanksgivings, 240 ; public rejoicings, 243, 244, 245, Sec, 247.

Depositions of Witnesses : — D. of Lennox and
E. of Mar, 171, 184 ;— And. Henderson,
174, 179, 221 ; — Abbots of Inchaffray and
Lundores, 180, 181 ; — Sir Tho. Erskine, 181 ;
— Sir Jo. Ramsay, 182 ; — Grahame and MoncriefF, 184 ; — Ray, 186 ; — Gowrie's porter,
187 ;— Blair and 19 others, 188 ;— Wemyss
of Bogie, 218 ;— Mr \Vm. Rynd, 219.

Appendix of original contemporary Documents, viz.

I. Depositions of 329 Witnesses as to Conspiracy, II. 171.

II. Interrogatories put to Witnesses, 191.

III. Report by Bailies of Perth of Examination
of 355 Witnesses, 192.

IV. The Earle of (iowrie's Cons|)iracie, called
' the King's Narrative,' printed in 1600, 208.

V. De Execrabili et nefanda fratrum Rvvenorum, I've, Coiijuratione, printed 1601, 223.

VI. A short Discovrse, &c., printed 1600, 231.

VII. Extracts from the Records of the Privy
Council, 232.

VIII. Extracts from Lord High Treasurer's
Accounts, 237.

IX. Extracts from Records of Burgh and SlicriH"
of Perth, 242.

X. Extracts from Records of City of Edr., 244.

670

GENERAL INDEX.

XI. Extracts from Birrel's MS. ' Diarey,' 245.

XII. Extracts from Fleming's MS. Chronicle,
247.

XIII. Discourses, Sermons, and Orations, 247 ;
1. Mr Pat. Galloway, preached in Edr.,
248 ; 2. Mr Wm. Cowper, do., 251 ; 3. Mr
Pat. Galloway, preached in Glasgow, 252 ;
An Oration delivered in Glasgow, 255.

XIV. Trial of Geo. Sprott, Notary in Eymoutli,
256 ; his Deposition on the scaffold, 260 ;
Archb. of Canterbury's account of, 262 ;
narrative of his execution, 275.

XV. Forfeiture of Logan of Restalrig, 276 ; his
Letters to the E. of Gowrie, 281 ; Depositions of Witnesses, 287 ; Letters, &c., 292.

XVI. Johnston's MS. Narrative of the Conspiracy, 293.

XVII. Another MS. Narrative, 297.

XVIII. Papers as to Conduct of Mr Ro. Bruce
and Ministers of Edinburgh, 299 ; additional
Papers, IIL 618.

XIX. Original Letters, &c., illustrative of the
Conspiracy, 313.

XX. Original Letters of Earl of Gowrie, 329.

XXI. Facsimile of his subscription, 332.

XXII. Additional Documents, IIL 619, &c.
Grace, Witch, before meat. III. 612; after meat, ib.
Graharne of Arduthie, Dav., III. 483 ;— of Balgowan, Jo., in King's Suite at Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 166, 172; his Deposition, 184; —
of Balivie, Wm., I. 282 ;— of Bankell, Ja., I.
* 130 ;— of Calandare, Jo., I. 76 ;— of Claverhouse, Jo., I. * 136 ; Wm., 282 ;— of Craig,
Da., Slaughter of Spens, the E. of Cassillis's
servant, II. 400 ; Gilb., yr., do., 480 ;— Da.,
beheaded for Fintrie's Treason, I. 359 ; Walter scourged, and his right hand struck off,
&c., IL 417; Alex., Slaughter, IIL 483;
Annas, Lady Monyvaird. See Toscheauch,
&c. ; — of Fyntrie, Sir Dav., W' alt. and Ja., his
brothers. Oppression, &c., I. 74, 111 ; Da.,
173 ; beheaded, 257, 258, 311 ; II. 97 ; Ja.,
his brother, tried for slaughter, ib. ; — of Gillesbe, Rob., I. * 85 ; — of Gormok, (Garvock?)
I. * 373 ; — of Hospitalscheillis, Rich., Oppression, &c., III. 496 ; — of Halsairdis, Mr
Jo., Justice-depute, I. 80, &c., 282 ; slain,

359;— of Knokdoliane, Robert, I. * 130,
* 369, 136, 141, 255 ; Jo., 266, 282 ; II. 86,
433, 445 ; — of Langboddome, Ro., Suborning
Witnesses, and Peijury, III. 354; hanged, 358;
his accomplices beheaded, hanged, scourged,
and branded, ib. ; — of Leuchland, Ja., III.
437; — Da., his son, slain, ib.; Ro. Symraer,
beheaded, ib. ; — Master of, Robert, 1. *332;
—of Morphie, Hen. I. 28 ; Sir Ro., III. 437;
—of Panhollis, Wm., I. 282 ;— Richard, Warlock, 1. 235, 241, 243, 244, 245, 249 ; burnt at
the Cross of Edr., 358 ; Christian, Witch, burnt,
309 ;— of Southfield, Alex., yr., I. * 346 ;—
of Thornik, Ro., L 111, 282 ; IL 166 ; Deposition as to Gowrie's Consp., 188 ; — of Urquhill, Jo., in King's suite at Gowrie's Consp.,
IL 166, 172 ; his Deposition, 184, 366 ;— of
Westraw, II. 541 ; Jo., his brother, ib. ; — of
Westhall, Jo., slain, I. * 179 ;— Wm., called
' Singand Willie,' I. * 398.
Grant of Ballindalloch, John, L * 175, * 357 ;
Intercom muuing with Norman Leslie, * 358 ;
Fire-raising, * 370 ; Jo., yr.. III. 491 ;— of
Carroun, John, I. * 370 ; Pat,, III. 554 ;— of
Cardellis, Tho., wounded, III. 435 ; Pat., his
son, slain, ib.; Jo., yr., 436; — of Culcabok,
I. * 175 ; remitted, * 247 ; — of Davachmoir,
Pat., House-breaking, Stouthrief, &c.. III.
490 ; — of Freuchy, James, Slaughter, I.* 175,

* 244 ; respited, * 245, * 247 ; Jo., 285 ;
III. 316; of Gaitmoir, Gregour, IIL 371 ;—
of Glenmoriestoun, Jo., his house of Belraacaene plundered. III. 490 ; taking a man captive and strangling him, 553 ; — of that Ilk,
Jo., III. 14 ; note, 370 ; Jonet, Witch, ' wirreit at ane staik' and burnt, I. 206 ; — of Wester Elcheis, Lauch., Slaughter, &c.. III. 435 ;
Jo., his son, ib.

Grantgore, or ' glengore,' Lues Venerea, I. * 110,

* 117, 252.
Grand Jury, L * 391.

Gratz, Jesuites' College there. III. 336.

Grawie, Jonet, Witchcraft, II. 1.

Gray of Ballegarno, Alex., remitted, I. * 246 ; —
of Baklanan, Gilb., I. 148 ; II. 514 ;— of Ballegernocht, Pat., I. 28 ; — Dav., Adultery, banished Edr. for life, and fined L.40, II. 369 ;—

GENERAL INDEX.

671

of Dunnynald, And., I. 148 ; — of Kinggornie,
And., II. 362;— Lady, (of England,) I.
* 1 18 ;— Lord, (of England,) I. * 378, * 379 ;
— Lord Andrew, Justiciar, I. * 3 ; on the
South of the Forth, I. * 22, * 56, * 67 ; Justice-General, I. * 51, * 61, &c., * 78 ; Pat.,
Oppression, &c, * 177, * 375, * 414 ; Resetting rebels, 41, 266, 348 ; — Jo., hanged for taking Black-raaill, I. * 356 ; — Master of, I,
74 ; Pat., 144, 148, 153 ; Counterfeiting the
King's Stamp or Cashet, 157, 267, 275, 348 ;
—of Schiellhill, Geo., L 74.

Gray-Steill, I. * 116, * 124. See Douglas ;— also
a soubriquet for Wm. E. of Gowrie, II. 287.

Gi'ay-meill, Jockie, (John Gordon,) a Warlock,
I. 235, 236, 239, 240, 246 ; XL 542.

Graves, remarkable Superstition practised by alleged Witches, I. 202 ; opened by Witches,
for charms, 218, 233, 237, 239.

Greave, Tho., burnt for Witchcraft, &c., III. * 555.

Grene webbis, what, III. 528.

Greece, the Friar that ' come furth of,' I. * 308 ;
— the Earl of. III. 592 ; ane Knight of, ih.

Greenside, Rood of. Heretics burnt at, I. * 210.

Greenock, Burning gates and doors of, I. * 232.

Greymslaw of Newtoun, I. * 147 ; — of Little
Newtoun, Jo., II. 442 ; his six sons slain by
Turnbulls, ib.

Greenshelis of that Ilk, Wm., I. 36.

Greis-defendant, what, III. 424.

Greir, (Grierson,) of Barjarg, Tho., 1. 298 ; III. 217 ;
Ja., his brother, ib. ; Tho., 384 ; — of Crawfurdtoun, I. * 132;— of Drum, Gilb., I. 298;
— Gilb., &c., Fire-raising, I. * 160, * 167 ;—
of Isle, L * 132 ;— of Pitfillan, Ja , IIL 271.

Griersoun of Beochane, Gilb., III. 387 ; — of Halydayhill, Jo., scourging naked people, cutting
the backs of cattle, &c. I. * 455 ; — of Inglistoun, Jo., III. 93 ; — Isobel, Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c., a remarkable case, II. 523 ; ' wirreit' and ' brunt in assis,' 526 ;— .-of Lag, John,
I. * 165, * 166 ; remitted, I. * 248 ; Roger,
111, 178; Wm., 304; Sir Wm., III. 217;
Ro., yr., Slaughter, 500.

Grey-Friars of Ediiiburgli, Theft of Plate stolen
from King revealed in confession to, I, * 271,

Gresmore, Madame, marriage presents to, I.
VOL. III.

* 297 ; sewing gold to, * 298 ; Tocher given
with her to the Laird of Creicht, * 305.

Grievances, Articles of, presented for the Kirk.

n. 9.

Griffon, (Grifound,) James, Welshman, 'propynit,' I. * 281 ; sent to Flanders. ^ 284.

Grooms of King's Chamber, Wine-cellar, &c., &c.,
I. * 313.

Grozolez, one of the King's Keepers, I. * 269.
See Gonzolles and Duke of Milan, * 270.

Grote, John, freight of his ship to Orkney, I.

* 305 ; — of Wairis, Don., slain, III. 53.
Grundistoune of Kyngask, Tho., I. * 404, 60.
Gryce, flain. III. 605.

Grynter, ' granitarius,' I. * 382 ; II. 385.

Guards, King's, Resisting, II. 452 ; Ringane and
Will. Armstrang hanged, 453 ; two Elliotts
have their right hands struck off, and then
hanged, 559 ; three of the Guards sit as Assisors, ib. ; — Scots, in France, Capt. Jo. Rig,
tried for a Duel in France, 382.

Gudelaitt of Strabrok, Jo., I. * 424 ; — of Upliall.
Harie, 11. 555.

Gude-wychtis, (good-neighbours, brownies,) I.
52, 162, &.C. See Faerie, &c.

Guidame, what, III. 96.

Guidschir, what, II. 520 ; III. 404.

Guid-nychtbouris, I. 162.

Guild, Ja., Theft by an alleged idiot, I. * 415.

Guise, Duke of, I. * 296 ; present of unwrought
gold from the mine at Crawfurd-mure, * 300 ;
hackneys and halks sent to, * 306.

Gullane, Jo., hanged for taking Black maill, I.

* 356.

Gunner, King's master, I. * 314, &c.

Gunpowder-Plot, II. 572.

Gun-powder, I. * 295, ^c. ; King's Miln fur,

* 325 ; — gun-' stanis,' formerly used for Artillery, * 260, * 363.

Guns, I. * 295. See Artillery ; Iron, * 325 ;

first mention of, in Criminal Records, II. 461.
Guthry of Balnabreich, Jo., respited, I.* 254; — of

Colestoune, lien., 1.74 ; — of Gngye, Ja.,372;

Ja., Capt. of Creiciitoun, * 143 ; — Mr Ja.,

his head fixed on Netherbow Port, III. 196 ;

drops blood on Middleton's coach, ib.\ Jo..

hanged for Bigamy aiul Adultery, 428; — «i|
4 Q

672

GENERAL INDEX.

that Ilk, Alex., Justice depute, I. * 72, 7i ;
slain, 372 ; Isobel Wood, his relict, pursues
the Laird of Bandoch, ib. ; Alex., Slaughter,

II. 101; Ja, son of Alex., senr., slain, ib. ;
Alex., the old Laird, slain, 103; Alex,, fiar,

III. 78, 80 ;_of Kincoldrum, Alex., I. 15 ;
Da., yr., 74, 258 ; Slaughter, II. 101 ;— of
Kinblakmonth, Pat., IIL 437 ; — of Kynbach,
Tho,, I. * 411 ; — of Langlands, Wm., Slaughter, II. 101 ; — of Pituiowes, Pat., Slaugliter,

130 ; discharged, 131 ; — of Ravensbie, Wtn.,
Slaughter of the Lairds of Gairdia and Tullois, II. 528 ; III. 77, 80.

Guvane of Cardrono, Wm., I. * 147.

Gypsies. See Egyptians ; following them punished with scourging and banishment, III. 99.

Gyre-Falcons, I. * 320.

Gysaris, I. * 114, * 118, * 123.

Gyves, heavy irons, called hoyes, III. 3. See
Irons, Torture, &c.

H.

Habirgeouk, (Haberscbounes,) of mail3e, I.

* 289, * 270.
Hackneys, (horses,) sent to King of France,

&c., I. * 300.
Haddenrig, Battle of, L * 324.
Haddington, Raid of, I. * 356 ; — Supplying Englisli in, * 350, * 353.
Haddingtoun, Earl of, (Sir Tho. Hamilton,)

in. 21, 8cc., passim ; — Viscount, (Ramsay,)

Jo., II. 91.
Hagbuts, (Hawkbuttis, hacquebutis,) importation

from Holland, I. * 307, * 310, * 321 ; Act

anent wearing, 299; lang, IL 70, 103, 128;

shooting with, 485. See Pistolets ; III. 213.
Haig of Bemerside, I. * 87 ? * 144 ; Robert,

*242; IL419.
Haitlie, Ja., one of King's Guard, sits on an Assise,

II. 559 ; — of Lambden, * 451 , — of Mellestanes, Jo., I. * 229, 7iote, * 359 ; The, his
brother, ib., 2.

Haill and feir, III. 260, 467.

Hakket of Pitfirrane, Patrick, I. * 351.

Halberts, I. * 289,

Halcro, Pat., engaged in the Rebellion in Orkney,

III. 274, 289, 291 ; is present when Ro.
Stewart tears the Bond of Association, 304 ;
his Deposition, 307 ; his life saved, 311 ; —
Ro. of Cava, III. 296.

Halden, (Haddene,) of Bellysoule, Ro., I. 15 ; —
of Glennageis, Ja., II. 426 ; Tutor of. Da.,
430, 439; Ja., III. 318 ;— of that Ilk, Geo.,
II. 467 ; Jo., III. 391 ;— of Kelour, Sylvester,
I. * 157 ; Wm., * 424.

Haliburtoun of Inchcarne, I. 231 ; Wm. II. 355;
Mr Ja., Provost of Dundee, Intercommuning
with, I. * 467 ; Mr Ja., alias Moffatt, Jesuite,
III. 331, 371, 377 ; banished, 379 ;— Menie,
Witch, pricked for Devil's mark, 599 ; her
Confession, ib. ; — of Moreislaw, II. 425 ; — of
Muirtoun, (Mertoun,) Walt., I. * 147 ; And.,
yr., * 230 ; Ralph, * 432 ; Hen., 107 ; Jo.,
II. 515 ; — and Dirleton, Lord, Pat., II.
283, note;—o{ Petcur, Geo., I. * 180, 74;
Sir Ja., II. 49 ; — of Walstruther, Geo., I.
* 469.

Haliday, Jo., and five others, hanged for Forging
a discharge, 11.34.

Halis, Lord, Pat., Master of the King's Household, I. * 2;— Master of, Patrick, « 160;
remitted, * 243, * 263.

Hall-door, Usher of the King's, I. * 313.

' Halie Lyg,' the, (Spanish Armada,) I. 228.

Halket, attempting to restore Popery at the Place
of, I. * 430.

Halkerstoun, Colonel, I. 334.

Halkryggis, with * head-geir and teslotis,' I. * 317.

Hall, And. and Wm , (Fat-sow and Wantounpyntill,) I. * 181 ; slain, * 201 ; Lyell hanged
for Horse- stealing, &c., * 432 ; Andro of the
Sykis, and Perseis Jok, Slaugliter, 37 ; — of
Foulbar, Adam, I. 66; Ja., Slaughter of the
young Laird of Scottistoun, III. 236.

Hallowmes, III. 568.

Halsclaith, neckcloth, I. 253.

Haly-water-fatt, in Prince's Chapel, I. * 306.

Hamesucken, William Cokburne, I. * 15, * 58,

GENERAL INDEX.

673

* 59, * 172, 176, * 180; during the Plague
in Perth, * 219, * 347, * 366 ; in Monastery
of Paisley, * 382 ; in Provost of Edinburgh's
house, * 399, * 403, * 410, * 412; William Fergusone beheaded, * 423 ; Lord Saltoun, * 476 ; Oliphant, 24 ; Montgomery of
Scottistoun, &c., 60 ; Bonkle beheaded, 158 ;
II. 37, 70; and slaughter of Laird of Guthrie,
103 ; Tho. Cuningharae hanged, 359, 464 ;
Irving of Moncoffer, &c., 493 ; Jo. Henderson banished, 111.58; and Slaughter, 362;
Alex. Davidson beheaded, ib. ; Tho. Meldrum
of Idene, 431 ; and unmerciful Slaughter of
a woman, 485.

Hammiltoun of Auchinhowy, Alex., yr., slain,
L * 150 ;— of Ardrie, Gav., 36 ;— of Auchnaglen, Jo., 378 ; his daughter carried off, ib. ;
— of Bardowy, Alan, Intercommuning with,

* 150 ; Mariota Maxwell, Lady of, ib., * 204,

* 250, * 257 ; Jo., 22 ; Ja., yr., 378 —of
Bordland, Geo., Tutor of, 19 ; — of Bairfurd,
(Bairfute,) Sir Ja., * 431; Arch., IL 405;
his wife ravished, ib. ; — of Bynning, I. * 471 ;
Jo., 155 ;— of Briggs, Ro., * 399 ;— of Bothwellhauche, Da., * 404 ; his widow charged
for Regent Murray's Murder, 23 ; his servant hanged, 31 ; Arthur tried, 87 ; Da., 88 :
Arth., 119; Da., (alias of Monkton-mains,)
266 ;— of Blair, Jo., II. 600, note ;— Castle
of, detaining, I. * 234 ; breaking ward for escape of a Heretic, * 352 ; — of Crawfordjohn,
Sir James, knt., * 414 ; — of Caudor, Mr Ja.,
378 ;— of Corse, Ro., 119 ;— of Crawford, Sir
Ja., Incest with Marion, his natural daughter,
167 ; — Commissary of Lanark, Arch., III.
495 ; — Capt. Jo., slain in a duel in Flanders,
502;— of Cruikwell, Ja., I. * 450 ;— of Cochno, (Colchnoch,) And., * 450, *451, * 480;
Claud, 71 ; — of Cammiskeith, Laird of, * 82 ;
Jo., * 137 ; Wm., Tutor of, * 427 ;— Claud,
(' son to my Lord Duke,') * 450, 69, 89,
331 ; Sir Claud, III. 143 ;— of Cumnok, Jo.,
slain, II. 419; — David hanged for Regent
Murray's Slaughter, I. 31 ; Jo., Parson of
Craufordjohn, Mutilation, &c., IL 474 ; Jo.,
Murdered under trust, III. 123 ; — of Dalserf,
Pat., I. *385 ; Wm., II. 61 ;— of Drumcairn,

Tho., Lord Advocate, I. 366 ; II. 3, &c.,
passim ; his brother, Pat., Under Secretary,
III. 293, &c. See Binning, Haddingtoun, &c. ;
— of Evaiidale, Sir Ja., beheaded, I. * 195 ;
Ja., III. 234 ;— of Finnart, Sir Ja., I. * 152,

* 172, * 227 ; beheaded, 228 ; Respited for
Fielding against D. of Albany, * 237 ; Captain of Dumbarton, * 241 ; Gift of his nonentry to E. Bothwell, * 255 ; Gift of part of
his escheat, * 256 ; keeping Castle of Craignethan, * 316 ;— of Ferguslie, John, * 361,

* 382 ;— of Grange, Thomas, * 424 ; Jo.,
present in King's suite at Gowrie's Conspiracy, H. 172; — of Gairewis, Dav., I. 19; —
of Gartlavoch, Pat., ih. ; — of the Grange of
Kilmarnok, Jo., II. 555 ; — of Garene, Ja.,
ib.;—oi the Hill, Gav., I. 36 ; Wm., 378;
— of Henschaw, John, * 410; — of Haggis,
Ja., 119 ; — of Hairshaw, Jo., Slaughter, III.
119 ; his sous, &c., ib.; — Sir Ja., Sheriflf of
Linlithgow, confiscated for Heresy, I. * 211 ;
present to furnish him furth of the realm,

* 309; his wife, * 311 ; — of Inner wick, Ja.,
respited, * 240, * 413, * 468 ; Alex., * 486 ;
Sir Alex. III. 494 ; — of Incheraauchaue, Ro.,
L * 471, 139 ; II. 3, 13, 390 ;— Jo., scourged
and branded for Perjury, III. 358. (See
Branding, Perjury, &c. ;) — Kath., accused of
Heresy, escapes through the King's iulluence,
I. * 211 ; — of Kincaple, Jo., * 414; — of Kinglass, Mr Alex., 111.453 ; — of Libberton, Ja., I.
191 ; Sir Ja., his servant, killed, II. 45.3, 485;
—Lord, I. 178 ; Jo., 285, 208 ;— of Lettrik.
Sir Jo., III. 495 ; — of Lekprevick, And., I.

* 404 ; — of Samuelstoun, Ja., 27 ; Jo., yr.,
270; Pat., II. 82;— Mahuuis ok, Jo. III.
31 ; Ja., 206, 207, 318, 339, .)90;— of Newhouse, Ro. I. 36; — Patrick, Martyr, * 211,

* 228; — of Phili|)stoune, Math., Langside,
l'v.c., 21, 22;— of Parkhead, Arthur, 36; — of
Portmanno, Wm., 59 ; — of the Peill, (of Levingstoun,) Ja., 345 ; Claud and Alex., his
sons, denounced, ib. ; — of Pedderisburne, Jo..

* 404 ; — of Pedderistonne, Jo., 36 ; — of Pardovane, Wm., his son slain, * 476 ; — of Prestoune, * 477; Geo., yr , 36; Geo., 149,
286 ;— of PriestBeld, Tho., * 486 ;— Mr Pat.,

674

GENERAL INDEX.

Under-Secretary of State, III. 293 ; — of Rotten yards, Wni., I. 19; — of Koploch, Gawin,
II. 195;— of Reidhouse, Sir And., III. 418;
declined as an Assessor, 424 ; — of Staneliouse,
Ja.j Slaughter, I. 179 ; remitted, 247 ; escape
from Castle of Edr., * 331 ; Jo., * 430, 36 ;
— of Sanquhar-Lindesay, Wm., * 149, * 172 ;
Sir Wm., 30;— of Some, Wm., 141 ;— of
Schawtoun, Jo., 69 ; — of Silyertonhill, And.,

* 414 ; II. 540 ;— of Spittelscheill, Ja., yr.,
II. 540 ; Murder under trust, ib. ; beheaded,
561 ; — of Scheirell, Ja., 540 ; — of Woodside,
Ja., I. * 420 ;— of Woodhall, Ja., 36.

Hand, right, struck off, (punishment,) I. * 388,

* 402, * 431, 20, 372 ; II. 363, 417, 421,
560; III. 198,454.

Hanging Image of St Francis, I. * 286 ; — in

chains, punishment of death, * 137, * 358.
Hangitschaw, Hereschip of, I. * 35.
Hannay, Rob., Szc, Choosing Abbot of Unreason,

Insurrection in Edinburgh, cSrc, I. * 409.
Hares, killing in forbidden time, I. * 15; —

Witches take form of. III. 605, 607, &c.
Harehead, Hereschip of, I. * 18.
Harlaw, Wm., Heresy, &c., 1. * 407.
Harden, house of, to be destroyed, I. 276.
Hard-heads, (hardits,) or Lions, coins, forging

them, 1. * 440 ; what, * 487, 64, 82.
Hardie of Bounmylnerig, Ja., II. 441 ; Tho., his

son, hanged for Masterful Stouthreif, ib.
Harnessing, I. * 295. See Tournament, &c.";

* 317, * 320, * 321, * 323.
Harn-pan, skull, II. 384.

Han-ett of the Coittis, Geo., Slaughter, II. 423;
denounced, ib.

Hart of Livielands, Wm., I. 366 ; Lord Advocate, II. 2; Justice depute, 18.

Harvie, Capt., English Pirate, III. 104.

Hasp of yarn, what. III, 556; Witch-charms
with, 555, 556, &c.

Hastiludium, III, 42.

Hathoway, And., and his wife banished for Resetting a Jesuite, III. 541,

Hat-pieces, forging, II. 99 ; uttering, 365.

Hattit kit, what, II, 285.

Hattok, horse and, III. 604, and note, &c.

Haubert, Nicholas, alias French Paris. See Paris.

Haw, Robert, hanged, I. * 70.

Hawick, Raid of, I. 10.

Hawking, Laird of Pitmedden barbarously murdered whilst, III. 78.

Hawks, Stouthreif of, from rock of Ernecraig,
I. * 106 ; sent to France, * 266 ; to England,

* 274, * 284, * 285 ; from the Isles, * 294 ;
sent to France, * 295 ; from Caithness, * 297,

* 298 ; Hawk-hoods, * 305 ; silver clamshell for King's Hawks' tneat,ib., *320, * 322;
sent to K. of France, &c., * 306, * 317 ; K.
of England, * 317, * 318 ;— Hawk-bells of
gold, * 321 ; brought from Norway, * 322 ;
setting (entering) the King's, * 323.

Hay, Mr Andro, Parson of Renfrew, I. * 486 ;
— Sir Alex., Secretary of State, II. 328 ; his
Letter of appointment, 585, note; — of Ardlethame, Geo., III. 400 ; Fra., his son, Murdered, under colour of Law, ib., &c. ; he received six strokes with the axe on the shoulders, head, and neck, before decapitation, 401,
402, 418 ; — of Barro, Mr Wm., Commissary
of Glasgow, III. 339 ; — of Brunthillis, Wm.,
fiar, 418 ; — of Dalgattie, Wm., I. 66 ; Alex.,
Adultery with Eliz. Clark, &c., II. 46 ; with
Barbara Forbes, (his wife,) 64, 104, 112,
I30;~of Easter Kennet, Alex., L 268;—
Father Edmund, I. 333 ; — of Edinvaill, Tho,,
slain, IL 427 ;— of Gourdie, Wm., I. 262 ;
his son Ja. slain, ib. ; his son Wm. slain, II.
80, 85 ; And., ib. ; Geo. Rattray, &c., beheaded, 85 ; — Jo., Slaughter, III. 242 ; acquitted, 243 ; — of Kynmwdie, Mr Alex., II,
528;— of Lynplum, Wm., I. 337; II. 105,
467 ;— of Logyruiff, Wm., III. 400;— of Lochloy. Witch-plot to cut off him and his maleissue, 617, &c. See Hay of Park ;— of Melgynche, Peter, I. 3 ; — of Mukhaldis, John,

* 392 ;— of Mayne, Ja., * 408 ; Wm,, his
nephew, slain, II. 41 ; his left hand mutilated,
42 ; Wm., 557 ; his uncle slain, ib. ; Ja., yr.,
ib. ; Wm., 435 ; Fra. and Alex., his sons.
Slaughter, III. 435 ; Ja., yr.. 436 ;— of Myn5eane, Geo., I. * 143, * 166; — of Monktoune,
Geo., 11.467 ; — of Nethertoun, Geo., Prior of
Charterhouse, 166 ; his Deposition as to Gowrie's Conspiracy, 188 ; — of Nether Liff, Sir

GENERAL INDEX.

675

Geo., his property in Lewis wasted and burnt,
III. 246 ;— of Newtoun, Hew, 616 ;— of
Park, Jo., I. * 391, 68; Witch-plot to take
lives of his male children, III. 603, 612, et
seq. ; — Mr Peter, Deposition as to Cowrie's
Consp., II. 188 ; Bessie, a Witch, III. 606,
&c. ;— of Quhitburgh, Sir Alex., 312 ;— of
Rannes, Mr Ja., False imprisonment, II. 43 ;
—of Smithfield, Jo., I. * 148 ; — of Scroggis,
Tho., II. 368 ;— of Tallo, Wm., remitted, I.

* 243 ; Jo., yr., hanged and quartered for K.
Henry's (Darnley's) Murder, * 490 ; his Deposition, * 496 ; his Confession, * 500 ; Jo.,
27, 145 ;— Lord of 3ester, Jo., * 62, * 78,

* 141, * 147, * 149 ; remitted, * 243 ; Wm.,
146 ; Ja., 262 ; Jo. III. 590, and note.

Head of a Thief sent to Edr., I. * 274.

Hearts of gold, rings, &c. I. * 295.

Heart-shot, II. 536.

Heart-pypes, III. 485.

Heer (hair) of yarn, what. III. 656.

Heiress, caution found by, not to marry ' ane
cheif Tratour' or ' brokkin man,' I. * 434.
See Abduction.

Hempisfield, the Lady, III. 122.

Henchmen, King's, I. * 114.

Henderland, breaking Kirk of, L * 98. See
Cockburn.

Hendersoune of Bengoure, Jo., I. * 471 ; — of
Dryden, Ja., yr., 169; Ja., II. 405 ;— of
Fordell, Ja., I. 60 ; — Geo., cutting growing
timber, &c., II. 522 ; — Mr Hen., Heresy, I.

* 255; Christ., hanged, * 173; Jo., hanged,

* 206 ; — of Latoune, Andro, Chamberlain of
Scone, employed at Gowrie's Conspiracy, II.
149, &c. q. V. ; — his Depositions, 174, 179,
221 ; Letter to the King as to Lord Scone,
321 ;— of North Ilannaldsay, Mr llo.. III.
280.

Henry II., King of England, his dead body
bleeds on tho approach of his son, ivc. III.
192;— VII., L *5, *262;— VIII., *2; Embassy from, * 265 ; present of cloth of gold,

* 266 ; of < blawin hornis, leschis, and dogcollaris,' * 270, * 272 ; Embassy to, * 276,

* 277 ; complaint as to the * brek of the Bordouris,' * 279 ; solemnly confirms peace with

Scotland, *283 ; present of Hawks to, *482 ;
ballatt against, * 295 ; writings from, * 296 ;
advertised of Birth of Prince James, *302;
Ross Herald sent to, * 312 ; hawks sent to,

* 317, * 318 ; Embassy to, * 320, * 321 ;
—IV., King, of France, * 11, note; 11.380;
King (Darnley), L * 466, *478; his
Marriage to Mary Queen of Scots, * 478,
*488 ; Murdered at the Kirk of Field, *479;
Trials for his Murder, * 488 to * 492 ; Documents illustrative of, * 493 to * 513 ; Wm.
Tailjor and Andro M'Caig murdered along
with the King, * 492 ; — Murder of the King
and the two Regents, 35 ; Jo. Bynning
hanged and quartered, 95 ; Geo. Hume of
Spott, 101 ; acquitted, 107; Earl of Morton's Trial, 114; — Mr Arch. Douglas, Parson of Glasgow, 142, &c. See Treason ; —
Prince, (eldest sou of K. Ja. VI.,) born,
360 ; his baptism at Stirling, 338, 361 ; his
death. III. 322, note.

Henrie, Jo., hanged for Fire-raising in Coal-pits,
III. 361 ; his head fixed on a spike, ib.

Henrysoune, Mr Ja., Justice Clerk, I. * 79 ; —
Rich., slain, * 408.

Henslie (Ainslie ?) of Fawlay, Wm., I. 37.

Hepburn of Alderstoune, (Sir) Ro., Lieut, of
King's Guard, II. 453, 559; — Sir Alex., I.

* 62 ; — of Athelstonford, Geo., 9 ;^ — of Beynstoune, Pat., * 73 ;— of Boltoun, Pat., * 359 ;
Jo. hanged and quartered for JNIurder of K.
Henry (Darnley,) * 490 ; his Deposition,

* 498 ; his Confession, * 500, 114, 145 ;— of
Bonhard, Adam, II. 405 ; — of the Craggis,
Sir Adam, I. * 62, * 78 ; III. 72 ; Ro., his
brother, ib. ; — of Fortoune, Hary, I. 9, 107 ;
— of Gilmerton, Wm., * 462, note ; Mr Pat.,
156, 169 ; Mr Jo., III. 271 ;— of Kirklandhill, Pat., I. 9, 155 ;— of Lufnes, Sir Pat., 11.
60, 74 ;— of Markill, Ro., 368 ;— of Quhitsum, suffering EngliMli Thieves to escape, I.

* 223 ; Alex., protests against Bothwell's outlawry, * 464 ; — Richard, alias Red liichie,
slain, * 3()5, * 366 ; .Marion burnt for forging base money, II. 74 ; — of Hicliardtoun
(Riccaitoun), Pat., I. 290; II. 340 ;— of
Smetoun, Adam, I. * 364 ; Mr Pat., 156,

676

GENERAL INDEX.

169 ;— II. 84, 343 ; — of Wauchtoun, Sir Pat.,
I. * 159 ; Waylaying, * 169, * 172 ; gift of
his own escheat, * 249, * 347, * 356, * 395,

* 468, 114; Slaughter, III. 271, 316 ;— of
Whytecastell, Sir Pat., knt., tried for Murder
of K. Henry (Damley), I. * 489.

Heralds, Danish, I. * 268, * 275, * 277 ;— English, * 275, * 283, * 296;— of Flanders,
*277 ; — King's, allowances to, * 114, * 118 ;
their Coats-armorial, * 301 ; — of the Nobility, * 86 ;— striking one, * 268 ;— assaulting,
in execution of their duty, 175; Ro. Fraser
slain, III. 79 ; Ro. Winraharae taken prisoner
in Orkney, his coat of arms torn, &c., 278.

Heres of Cowsland, Sir Hugh, defends the King
at Perth, II. 152, &c. See Cowrie's Conspiracy, 172.

Hereis of Kirktoune of Essie, Geo., II. 355, 430,
559.

Hereschip, of the Place of Spittale, I. * 17 ;
Mynto, * 18 ; Harehead, ib. ; Quhytmure,

* 19 ; Hangitschaw, * 23 ; Covantoune, * 26;
Syntoune, * 31 ; Fastheuche and Hangingschaw, * 35 ; Town of Selkirk, ib. ; Merecleuche, * 36 ; Carterhauch, * 37 ; Badenoch, * 45; Innermeffane, * 51 ; Blindhauche, * 61 ; Cruickstoun, * 70; Davy,
Dyke, Ardroseir, &c., * 175 ; Towghe,

* 240 ; Kildrummy, * 246 ; Lennox, Roseneath, and Craiginche, ib. ; Kenlochow and
Trouternes, * 256 ; DuUady, * 344 ; Durrisdeer, Amis6eld, &c., Ike, * 348 ; Cummergirthe, * 393 ; Wintercleuche, * 398 ; Glenislay, 263 ; II. 453 ; and ' Day-Foray' by
Armstrongs, ib. ; Torwodlie, 5000 merks
worth carried off', and Laird slain, &c., 520 ;
by the MacGregors, III. 232, &c. See
Burning, Stouthreif, &c.

Heresy, prosecutions for, I. * 209 ; Memoirs relative to early Martyrs, * 209 to * 216, &c. ;
Richard PoUok restored, * 252 ; gift of
Cousland and Cant's escheat, ib., * 255 ; man
burnt at Cowper, * 297; Dean Forman, *330;
Paul Methven, * 406 ; Friar John Christeson,
Wm. Harlaw, John Willok, * 407.

Heretical books, using, I. * 209, * 216, * 217,
*252.

Heretics burnt at the Rood of Greensyde, &c.,

* 210, &c. ; to search for, in the Westland,
(Lollards of Kyle, ) * 287 ; Stirling, &c. * 296 ;
escape from Hamilton Castle, * 352.

Heriot, Geo., goldsmith, I. 270 ; II. 159 ; waits
on King to intercede for Mr Ro. Bruce, 310;
— of Ramorny, Walt., I. * 425 ; — of Trabroune, Andro, * 143 ; respited for the Field
of Linlithgow,* 241 ; forfeited, * 261; James,

* 395, * 425, * 451, * 468, 72; his brother
slain, 158, 190.

Hering of Drimmy, Arch., II. 63 ; — of Glasclune, Ja., I. * 367 ; — of Lethindie, Jo.,
(Da. ?) II. 433 ; Laur., brother to the Laird,
III. 437 ; — of Little Blair, And., Slaughter,
I. 262 ; — Capt. Pat., Sorcery and Witchcraft,
IL 23, 355, 368 ; III. 487.

Hermitage, Castle of, I. * 284, * 300 ; artillery
sent to, * 324, * 494 ; Capt. of. III. 220.

Heroun of Chipchese, Wm., III. 568 ; — of Kierochtrie, Pat., Slaughter, 460.

Herries, Lord,- And., I. * 55, * 78 ; Herb.,

* 224; Wm., * 242, * 327, 184, 304; IL
386 ; Jo., 465, 596 ; proposal to many his
daughter to young Laird of Johnstone, III.
51,91, 115, 316 ; — Andro, Fire-raising, &c.,
I. * 242 ; Ro., abiding from Raid of the Isles,
III. 227.

Hertsyde, Margt., (Mrs, afterwards Lady, Buchanan,) remarkable Trial for Abstracting
pearls and jewels from Queen Anne (of
Denmark,) her mistress, II. 544 ; declared
' Infamous,' and doomed to pay 4800/., and
to be Banished to Orkney for life, Aug. 10,
1608, 556 ; recalled by the King, by special
Warrant, Nov. 15, 1619, 557.

Hervie, Alex., Slaughter, III. 444 ;— of Elrig,
Ja., 478 ; And., his brother, ib.

Heryng, Symone, hanged, I. * 401 ; John, his
son, hanged, ib. ; both of them put to tlie torture, ib.y note.

Hett-fever, what. III. 260.

Highlands, Procl. for invasion of, I. 303, 355.

High-school of Edr., Riot at, when a Bailie was
shot by Wm. Sinclair, one of the boys, 1. 195,
vote, 349, 362. See Sinclair of May.

Hill, Tho., and others of the King's Guard, sit on
an Assise, II. 559.

Ilirdmanstoune, burning of, I. * 27.

GENERAL INDEX.

677

Hodge, Ro., Murder, III. 488.

Hog, a year old sheep, III. 56, 396, &c., passim.

Hogingis, (armour,) I. 317.

HoLYROODHOUSE, LoRD, Jo., (Bothwell,) II.

261, 273, 496, 505, 506; III. 9;— Keeper
of, I. * 314; Park of, enlarged, * 321 ;—
Slaughter committed within the Sanctuary, or
Girth, I. * 258; Organs for the Chapel, * 321 ;
David Riccio Murdered, * 478 ; Shooting
within, punished by banishment for life, 187 ;
King invaded, 272, 357 ; E. of Bothwell tried,
293 ; forfeited, 297 ; King's Master Stabler
slain, 357 ; II. 505 ; Gypsies dance before K,
James V. there. III. 592 ; — Abbot of, Robert
Cairncross, I. * 185, I. 254.

Holy wood, Robert, Abbot of. Lord High Treasurer, I. * 287, note, * 288,

Homage done to the Devil by Witches, I. 210,
217, 239 ; III. 609, et seq. See Witchcraft,
passim.

Home, Alex., beheaded, Treason, I. * 201 ; — of
Aytoune, Geo., I. 11, 136 ; Pat., II. 10, 379,
381; Wm., III. 116 ; Ro., his son, remitted,
ih. ; Jo., yr., 414 ; — of Argaties, Pat., I. 119 ;
Da v., 136, 369 ;— Black John, 1 40 ;— of Blackadder, found caution for 20,000/<'., I. * 230 ;
remitted, * 247; expelling him, * 272, *413;
— of Bassendyne, Geo., and And. his brother,
wounded, &c.. III. 69; wounded again, 252; —
of Barro, Cristell, I. * 405 ; — of Broxmouth,
Geo., I. * 413, 154 ; II. 379 ; Sir Geo., 402 ;—
of Ballicass, Wm., Slaughter, II. 336; — of Ballandyne, Wm., II. 336 ; — of Coldaneknowis,
Jo., I. * 180, * 182, * 184, * 190, * 199,

* 229, * 360, * 393 ; Sir John, * 405, * 432,

* 468, * 487; Ja., yr., 11; Jo., yr., 244;
Wm., II. 12 ; Sir Jo., married Beatrix Ruthven, 297, note; — Castle of, recovering, I.

* 237 ; supplying English in, * 360 ; — of Carrolside, Jo., I. * 432, 2 ; Ro., II. 442 ;— of
Cranstane, Jo., I. 37 ; — of Crammiecruik,
Geo., 205; — Cuthb., hanged for uttering
base money, II. 353 ; — of Deans, Alex., 1.
155 ; Geo., II. 502 ;— Elizabeth, Tocher to,
I. * 317;— Earl of, II. 494; Alex., Remission to. III. 116, 318; — Gilb., Wm., and
Tho., Hamesucken, he, I. * 180 ; — of Godscroft, Mr Ja., II. 442 ; — of llardeismylne,

Wm., Forcible Abduction, &c., (a remarkable
ca.se,) III. 402, 539 ;— of Hutounhall, Alex.,
I. * 487, 48; Sir Jo., Remission to. III.
116 ; Mr Sam., his brother, also remitted, ib. ; Sir Jo., 377 ; — of that Ilk, Alex.,
Great Chamberlain, I.* 2; — of thellauch, Ro.,
I. 107, 270 ; II. 368, 474 ; his son tried for
Slaughter of Lord Spynie, 529 ; — of Johnnescleuche, Gawin, II. 502; — Lord, (Earl of,)
Geo., L * 143, * 166 ; Feud with Laird of
Edmonstoun, * 180; Spuiljie, &c., * 208;
Remissions for assisting him, * 233, * 243 ;
Summoned, * 310 ; Alex., beheaded, I. *233;
his head taken down from Tolbooth of Edr.,

* 242 ; his forfeiture, * 259, * 261, * 262 ;
Assise to, * 286, * 351 ; Alex., * 393, * 398,

* 432, 308; IL 394; III. 396 ;— Marg.,
Prioress of North Berwick, I. * 347 ; — of
Manderstoune, Alex., I. * 442, * 487, 5 ;
Slaughter of Lord Methven, dc, 30, 102 ; IL
13 ; Sir Geo., IIL 403, 414 ;— Master of,
I. * 15 ; — of Ninewells, And., escheated for
Wilful Error, I. * 253, * 432 ;— of North
Berwick, Alex., I. 289, 304 ; II. 81 ; Sir Jo.,
502 ; III. 403, 414 ;— of Prendergaist, Wm.,
I. * 365 ; his five sons invaded, (JLc, ib., 269 ;
—of Polwart, Alex., L * 146, 159 ; Pat.,
205 ; II. 402 ; Sir Pat., 572 ; -of Rentoune,
Alex., II. 582 ; — of Redheuche, Rob., I.
*413; Cuthb., his son, hanged for vending
base coin, II. 353 ; — of Rowiestoune, Da., II.
403 ;— of Spott, Geo., I. * 43, * 140, * 272,

* 413 ; tried for Darnley's Murder, 101 ; acquitted, 107, 149; slain, II. 98; Sir Geo.,
218 ;— of St Leonardis, Wm., III. 116 ; three
of his sons remitted, ib. ; — of Slegden, Jo.,
III. 416 ;— of Swanscheill, xMr Jo., III. 529 ;
— of VVedderburn, Geo., I. * 15, * 195 ; treasonably assisting, * 237, * 239, * 265, * 267,
154, 205, 289 ; Da., his brother, II. 397 ;
Da., yr., III. 414 ;— (Tutor of,) Alex., L

* 140;— Mr Wm. beheaded, I. * 233, note;
taking down his head from Edr. tolbooth,

* 243 ; his gold and jewels escheated, * 307.
Homicide set at liberty, 1. ' 442 ; Magistrates of

Edr. tried for so doing, * ib. to * 450 ; Culpable— see Slaughter.
Hood, Robin, I. * 117, * 275; iiis banner.

678

GENERAL INDEX.

dresses, Sec, ih. ; the King's, ib. ; Insurrection in Edr., * 409 ; in the Mearns, &c., 13.

Hope, David, hanged, Treason, I. * 142.

Hopkins, Math,, Witch-finder, III. 598.

Hopper of Bairhoussis, Ja., III. 460.

Hoppringle of Blyndley, Rob., I. * 230 ; Assisting the English, * 338 ; Geo., II. 83 ;— of
Buckholm, Jo., I. 265 ;— the Clan of, * 71 ;
— of Craigleithe, Alex., * 374, * 433, * 434 ;
— of Heriote-mylue, Ja., III. 452 ; — of that
Ilk, Geo., I. * 433 ; Ja., 265 ; Tho., III. 393 ;
— of Muirhouse, Jo., I. * 432 ; — of Newhall, Alex., * 433 ; — of Torwoodlee, Dav.,

* 24 ; George, * 230 ; Assisting the English,

* 337, 265 ; Murdered, II. 520 ; Place of,
spoiled, ih. ; Geo., ih. ; — of Trynlieknovvis,
Alex., I. * 374, * 414; John, yr., * 433;
Alex., * 434 ; — of Tynnes, James, * 166,

* 339 ;— of Smallcraig, Jo., * 230 ;— of
Whitebank, Ja., 84, 265, 349 ; II. 376, 403 ;
— of Woodhouse, Ja., I. 89, 107.

Horn, being at the, Laird of Kilpatrick slain, while
I. * 77 ; Discussion by Lords of Privy Council,
and Act anent Reset of Rebels, &c., I. * 78,

* 80. See Rebel, Treason, &c.
Home-Hunter, Laird of, I. * 38.

Horns, 'blawin,' I. * 270 ; for Prince James,

* 307.

Horse and armour, Stouthrief of, 11. 453.
Horse and hattok 1 a Witch-cry, III. 604 ; and

note, 608, &:c.
Horse-racing, I. * 121 ; III. 447.
Horses, King's, I. * 301. See Stud.
Horse-stealing, I. * 22, » 23, * 41, 96. See

Stouthrie f,&c. ; wild horses and mares, * 247;

Paul Andesoune hanged, * 400 ;• Wm. Cadenhead banged, I. * 411 ; Lyell Hall hanged,

* 432; MoflFat hanged, 386; Moffat and
Adiesoune hanged, II. 357, 359 ; Davidson of
Callelie hanged, 441 ; Beirope of that Ilk,
515 ; Alex, and Ja. hanged. III. 241 ; Peter
Davidson and two others hanged, 265.

Horseburghe of that Ilk, Alex., I. * 133, * 424 ;
—of Harkes, Alex,, II. 128, 355 ;— Tho.,
hanged, and afterwards decapitated, and his
right hand struck off, &c., for Murder and
Robbery, II. 422.

Horslie, John, Englishman, I. * 273.
Houghing of Horses, I. * 103 ;— of Cattle, * 431,

* 433 ; Rose of Kilravok, II. 67 ;—of Oxen,
&c., Jo. Jnhnstoun of Lochhouse, beheaded,
425 ; III. 251 ; three men hanged, ib.

Hounds sent to France, I. * 277 ; expense of the
King's, I. * 282 ; K. James VI. offers a horse,
worth L.lOO, for recovery of two strayed, II.
242 ; proclamations against their detainers, ib.

House-breaking, during Plague in Perth, I. * 219 ;
house of Bonyntoune broken, II. 340 ; young
Laird hanged, 347 ; Alex. Daw hanged, ih. ;
Lord Chancellor's house broken, 352 ; Wm.
Creichtoune hanged for do., 353 ; Moffat and
Adieson hanged, 357; And. Reid, 411 ; And.
Rutherford banished. III. 540.

Household, Master of King's, I. * 244 ; Members of, * 312, * 313; Prince's, *314 ; Expenses of, * 317, * 323 ; his Jurisdiction, II.
91.

Houstoune of that Ilk, (Laird of,) I. * 82 ; Jo.,

* 150, * 167; * 350; Pat., 382; Umbesetting the gait, * 450, 19 ; Rob., his brother, Slaughter, 69; Pat., 141; Sir Pat.,
Slaughter by, 182; Feud with Master of Eglintoun, 352 ; with young Laird of Glengarnock, 354, 378 ; Sir Jo., IL 572 ;— of Lany,
Jo., II. 343.

Howard, Lord Hen., II. 319, 409.

Howiesoune, Mr Jo., Forging an Act of Parliament, &c., II. 14.

Howp, (hope,) what, II. .519.

Howpaslot, Tower of, Stouthrief from, I. * 23 ;
burnt, * 172; Laird of, destroying Woods,
&c., I. * 71 ; barbarous maiming and slaughter of threescore of sheep there. III. 381, &cSee Scott.

Howlattis and Stymeis, III. 588.

Huchesone, Sir David, Provost of Rosling, Heresy, I. * 255.

Hudeskull, I. * 288.

Hume. See Home.

Hunter of Ballagane, Dune, Intercornmuning
with, I. * 369 ; III. 248, 475, 500 ;— of Hagburne, Ja., Stouthrief, &c., 11.567 ; — of Halkburn, T., I. * 432 ;— of HiU-Tarvet, Pat. III.
452 ; — Hunter of Hunterstoun, Ro., I. 71 ; —

GENERAL INDEX.

679

HuNSDON^ Lord, I. * 510.

HuNTLiE, Earl of, Alex., Justiciar, I. * 60,

* 62, * 78, * 107 ; Battle of Conichie, * 183 ;
Geo., * 163, * 175 ; challenges the Master of
Forbes, judicially, * 185 ; Jo., gift of the Master of Forbes's, &c., escheat, * 249, * 300,
*302, *384, *462, note; *469, * 494, * 503,

* 512; Intercommuning with, 33, 75; High
Treason, &c., 17J ; pardoned, 181; Raid
against him deserted, 267 ; denounced, 283 ;
OflPers presented by him, 301 ; to abide trial,
303, 306 ; Trial for Conspiring against the
Religion, 310; Summons of Treason, 314;
doom, 316 ; Tract as to ' the Spanish Blanks,'
317; Slays the Earl of Murray, 358; Trial
ordered, 363 ; wan-ant from Privy Council to
prosecute, ib., &c. ; — Marquis of, Geo., III.
24, 79, 409, 419 ; Warrant from Privy Council to prosecute the ' Societye of the Boyes"
with 6re and sword, 581.

Hunting, barbarous torture and savage Murder of
a Gentleman, c^c, III. 547 ; — King's Master
of, I. * 240 ; corn destroyed, * 272 ;— in Megotland, I. * 272, * 285; in Glenarkney,
* 278 ; in Athole, * 279 ; in Glenfinlas, * 295 ;
the Hunts, * 311, * 323.

Hurcheone, a hedgehog, I. 253.

Hurting Crownar of Renfrew, I. * 106 ; — and
wounding, I. * 200 ; breaking a boy's backbone, III. 477; Jo. Murray hanged, 4"/ 9,
491, &c. See Wounding.

Hussie, what, III. 525.

Huttone, Ro., siaiti with an ' Otter-stalfiF, with aue
tua-granet fork of irne at the end thairof,'
III. 499 ; Hen. Baird beheaded, 500.

Hyde-the-bastard, III. 385.

Idiot, curator to, I. * 254 ; Theft' by one, * 415.

Idolatry, I. 30. See Mass, iSrc.

Hay, Governor and Sheriff of, I. * 258 ; — Herald,
* 272 ; III. 81 ; interesting form of Execution of Summons against E. of Orkney, 86 ; —
Island of, burnt and harried, I. 229.

Images of Our Lady and St John, I. * 320 ;
hanging Image of St Francis, * 286 ; breaking Image of St Magdalene, * 335 ; casting
down, in Kirk of Air, ih.

Importation of Artillery, &c. I. * 307.

Importing and uttering forged money, I. * 137 ;
— Alex. Thomson hanged and forfeited, II.
404. See Forgery, Uttering, &c.

Impotency, Decree of Divorce on the ground of,
L * 460.

Imprecation, awful, of K. J A. VI. as to Sir Tho.
Overbury's murder, II. 600, note.

Imprisoning, I. * 159, * 165, * 171, * 381 ; II.
43 ; III. 212.

Imp-Tree, or Fairie's Trysting- place, I. 52, 58.

Incantation, I. 51, 70, 101, 161, 209, 230, &c.
See Witchcraft, Sorcery, <S:c.

Incarceration, I. * 105. See Imprisoning, &c.

Incest, I. 459 ; and Adultery, Ja. Bonar burnt,
VOL. in.

22 ; Marioune Reid, 41 ; Gilb. Young, 42 ;
Eliz. Prestoun, 83 ; Marg. Scott, 84; Dame
Grizell Scott, ih. ; Da. Dundas with Countess
of Eglinton, 100; Gothray M'CuUoch of
Ardwell, 134 ; Sir Ja. Hamilton, 167 ; Ja.
Stewart ' wirreit" and ' brunt,' III. 248 ; Jo.
Ramsay of Pryour-Lethame, 257 ; Jaffray
Irwing of Robgill beheaded, 576.

Incheaffray, Comraendator of, c^c, I. * 387 ; Ja.,
267; II. 159; present at Gowrie's Conspiracy in King's suite, 172; his Deposition,
180.

Inchegarvy, House of, keeping, I. * 281.

Indictment. See Dittay.

Infamous and Peijured, &c., Assise declared, I.

* 73, * 203 ; forger, * 375, * 387 ; Notary,

* 402; Margt. Ilertsyde declared, for abstracting Queen's jewels, II. 556 ; recalled, 557.

Inglis of Eistscheill, Tho., III. 268 ; — of Inglistarvet, Alex., 1.60; — of Kihnany, Jo., * 160;
Alex., yr,, ib. ; — of Langlandliill, Wu)., False
money, &c., * 76, * 81 ; Jo., * 226;— of
Murdestoune, Tho., 35 ; — of Scheill, Wm.,

* 457 ; — \\'m. hanged for Treason, * 142 ; —
of Wintermure, Mungo, * 226.

4 E

680

GENERAL INDEX.

Ingyret, what, III. 209.

Innerleithen, Stealing out of Kirk of, I. * 25.

Innermessane, Burning of, I. * 124.

Innermeithe, Richard, Lord, * 136 ; John,
*346, *417; Ja., 91, 114; Jo., III. 22.

Innerwick, Laird of, I. * 413. See Hamilton.

Innes, And., alias Coiv the jegat, I. * 376 ; alias
the Scalar, ih. ; Mr Alex., 382 ; Ro., notary,
hanged for falsifying a Charter, II. 104; — of
Auchluncarye, Ja., I. * 411 ; — of Balvany,
Ro., III. 436 ;— of Caibo, Alex., I. * 391 ;—
of Crombye, Alex., * 465, 68 ; — of Coitis,
Ro., 382 ;— of Dranye (Drymye,) Ja., *376,

* 391 ;— of that Ilk, Alex., yr., * 169 ; Wm.
oppressed, * 376 ; Sacrilege, Sec, ih., * 391 ;
— of Innermarkie, Ro., * 391 ; Oppression,
taking ransom, &c., *41I ; invades Commendator of Ardchattan, * 465, 284 ; beheaded
for Murder of E. of Murray, 362 ; — of Knokcorth, Jo., III. 225 ; — of Lewcharis, Ja., I.
*376 ; Jo., 201 ;— of Monbenys, Ja., 376 ;—
of Rothnaken5ie, Ro., * 169 ; — of Touchis,
Walt., * 186.

Inobedience, Lord of, I. * 409. See Abbot of

Unreason, Robin Hood, &c.
Interlining Signet Letters, I. * 346.
Intercommuning with Duke of Albany, I. * 16,

* 17, * 18; with Thieves of Leven, * 17 ;
Sheriff of Ayr, * 137, <Src. ; Rebels of Carrick, Bute, and Arran, * 140, Sec, Englishmen, * 332 ; at Broughty-craig, * 344, *345;
with Laird of Caldwell, *357 ; rebels, *358;
Laird of Baliagane, * 369 ; English, * 406 ;
D. of Chattellarault, &c., against the Queen,

* 466 ; with E. of Mar, 136, &c. ; Countess
of Errol for resetting with E. Both well, 366 ;
with tbe Clan Gregor, II. 414 ; with Lord
Maxwell, III. 91 ; two persons hanged for,
223, (ic. See under parties' names.

Interpreters allowed to Highlanders, earliest recorded instance. III. 246.

Insight plenishing, II. 70, 443.

Insulis, Jo. de, III. 2, Sec. See Isles.

Inscheoch, remarkable Witch-Confessions there,
III. 616, c# seq.

Insurrection against the King, Dunkeld, I. * 106 ;
in Burgh of Air, * 204.

Instrument, using a forged, I. * 222 ; falsing and

forging, 45.
Intoxication, (using potions, drugs, poison, &c.,)

L * 158, * 369, * 419.
Invading, &c., for Slaugliter, I. * 356.
Invasi(m of a Sheriff in his fenced Court, I. * 136 ;

—Judicial Arbitration for, *167, *172,*181,

* 201, * 238 ;— of Master of Sempill, *343 ;
— in a fenced Court, * 456 ; — of a Minister,
&c., II. 416 ; — Walter Grahame scourged, and
his right hand struck off, 417 ; and taken captive, III. 212 ;— by the English, L * 269.

Inveraray, K. James V. at, I. * 278, * 279.

Inveresk, battle of, I. 51.

Ireland, Rebels in, I. * 348.

Iron-house or ' Cage' for felons, III. 293, &c.

Irons, punishment of hanging in, I. * 137, * 358 ;
Armstrong, II 364 ; Stanfield, III. 198.

Irving of Ardtanfurd, Jo., II. 532 ; his servant
slain by * the Societie of tlie Boyis,' ib. ; — of
Bonschaw, Edw., * 431 ; Geo,, III. 576 ;
Agues Cairletoun, his wife, commits Incest,
ib. ;— of Drum, Alex., I. 206, 284 ;— of Kynnok, Jo., II. 99 ; — of Lenturk, Alex., yr., III.
230 ; — of Moncoffer, Ro., Hamesucken, &c.,
II. 494 ; acquitted, ib. ; — of Robgill, Dav., I.

* 431 ; Jaffray beheaded for Incest with his
brother the Laird of Bonschaw's wife, III.
576;— of Saba, (Cava,) Wm., III. 82; his son
Wm. slain, 278 ;— of Wysbie, Gilb., III. 241 ;
Alex., his son, and Wm., his nephew, hanged
for horse and sheep stealing, Peijury, Sec. ib.

Isla (Yla) Herald, taken prisoner in Orkney, his
coat of arms torn, &c., IIL 278, 283, 317, &c.

Island-Lochbroom, Castle of, I. * 305.

Island- Vernak, in Loch-Katrine, detained against
King's Commissioner, III. 235.

Isles, Angus of the, I. * 46 ; — Arch., alias the
Clerk, * 256 ; — Bishop of, Geo., (John,)

* 79, * 105 ; Alex., * 387; and Rapho ;
And., III. 14, 109, 366 ;— Donald of the, I.

* 45, * 231, * 234, * 254 ; besieges Makkane, * 262 ; sustentation of, in Castle of
Edr., * 270 ; — Expe(liti(m to, by K. James
IV., * 120, * 266 ; Cannons which passed
there, * 272, *275; silver plate for the
King's use, * 302 ; new Expedition, * 303 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

681

fitting up Ships, &c., ib. ; victualling, 6cc., ib. ;
Letters from Queen, * 304 ; hostages sent to
Dunbar, Tamtallon, and the Bass, * 305 ;
Sasiue taken of MacKanys lands, * 307 ;
Ships to carry Islesraen to the Borders, for
defence of the kingdom, * 324* ; Proclamation for an expedition against the Islesmen

and Highlanders, 355 ; — Halks brought from,
* 294;— Sir John of, * 116;— Kings of
THE, III. 1 ;— Lord of, Jo., L * 46 ; III.
2;— Raid of, 118,202, 225.

Italian Minstrels, I. * 123, &c. See Minstrels.

Italy, Embassy to, I. * 273.

Jack (piece of armour) covered with velvet, I.

* 312.

Jackis, Robert the, an Evil Spirit, III. 606, 614,
&c.

Jak, Rich., belieaded for Slaughter, I. * 27 ;
Tho., II. 384 ; — alias Scott, Jo., burnt for
Bestiality, 491.

Jakkis that plays vpoun the Veolis, I. * 316.

James III., King, I. * * 6 ; masses for his soul
at Carabuskenneth, * 295 ; Chaplain ' fingand
for his fawle,' * 315.

James IV., King, I. * 1 to * \2^,jmssim; his
Coronation, * 1 1 4 ; Selections from bis private and public Expenditure, from * 114 to

* 124 ; married, * 117 ; his sports, see App.,
passim; skilled in surgery, &c., * 124; his
Funeral Obsequies, * 259 ; Letter from King
OF Denmark, as to the Earl of Little Egypt,
in. 592. See Q. Margaret.

James V., King, I. * 125 to 325, passim;
Stouthreif of his Mangonels and Artillery coming from Stirling Castle, * 132 ; Crown and
Jewels stolen, * 133 ; Raid against Border
Thieves, &c., * 152 ; attempt to take him and
Duke of Ross out of Stirling Castle, * 233,

* 239 ; Palace of Linlithgow held against
him, &c., * 255 ; Selections from his Treasurer's Accounts, * 259 ; Keepers during his
infancy, ib., * 261 ; Rockers and nurses,

* 263 ; Invested with the Collar of < Cokkil5eis,' * 265 ; sent to Craigmillar Castle,

* 266 ; supposed attempt to carry him to England, * 267 ; silver plate stolen from, * 271 ;
spends Pasche at Stirling, * 274 ; Masses said
for his soul's health, * 278 ; his * Almous,"
or charities, * 278 ; at Inveraray, ib., * 279 ;

solemnly ratifies peace with England, * 283 ;
shoots with English Archers, ib. ; invested
with Order of the Garter, ib., * 289 ; Golden
Fleece, ib. ; and St Michael, ib. ; sends Hawks
to K. of England, * 284, * 285 ; returns
from Argyle, * 284 ; his study, ib. ; Englishman employed to make Viols to him, * 285,

* 286 ; Prayers oflFered up for his prosperous
return from France, * 286 ; Barons, &c.,
warned to attend King's reception, ib. ; entry
with Queen Magdalene into Edr., * 287 ;
the Queen's Coronation, death, &c., ib.; at
Tantallon, * 290; married to Q. ISIary of
Guise, * 292 ; costly dresses on that occasion, ib. ; * 293, &c. ; public entry, ib. ; hunting of Glenfinlas, * 295 ; sends falcons to
France, ib. ; his natural sons and daughters.
See Lord James, Lady Jane, &c. ; his ' jurnair * 297 ; his great Matin-book, ib. ; his
writing books, ib.; gifts to ' Gentill-wemene,'
ib. ; his ' pettis' at Falkland, * 299 ; Plays
and festivities at Uphalyday, ib. ; his Queen
Crowned, ib. ; both get new Crowns, ib. ;
his Robe-Royall, kirtle, and hood, * 300 ;
Golden Rosary, * 301 ; birth and Baptism of
Prince James, * 302; dress for Sea expeditions, ib. ; New expedition to the Isles,

* 303, * 309 ; Letter from the Queen, * 304,
' baver* (beaver hat) to him, * 305 ; * skincoat,' (buff jerkin,) ib. ; visits Orkney, ib. ;
his Privy purse, * 305 ; at (jlnmmis, * 306 ;
Embassy to the Emperor, ib. ; Expedition
to the Borders, with the Barons of Lothian,
Sec, * 307 ; goldsmith work and jewels delivered to him, in Ilolyroodhouse, ib. ; at
Crawfurdjohn, * 310 ; demands Abbacies of

682

GENERAL INDEX.

Coldinghame and Melrose for liis natural sons
from THE Pope, * 311 ; Royal Household,

* 312 ; death of Queen Dowager, * 318;
his Dule dresses, ib. ; goes to the Borders,

* 319 ; sends to Norway for Hawks, * 322 ;
sends horses to the K. of France, ib. ; Regalia, Crowns for him and his Queen, ib. ;
in Peebles, * 323 ; drugs to him and Mrs
Margaret, ib. ; Gypsies dance before him, at
Holyrood, III. 592 ; Letter by King, in favour of Johnne Faw, ib. See Prince Arthur
and Prince James.

James VI., King, born in Edr. Castle, I. * 479 ;
his Baptism, ib. ; ' Hiflorie' of, * 490 ; Raid
of Ruthven, &c., 1 1 1 to 139, &c. See Treason ; his life conspired against by Witches,
209 ; the interest taken by him in examining
Witches, 213, 216, 218 ; he and his Queen
assailed by Witches, on their passage from
Denmark, 211, 218, 222, 236; Earl Bothwell uses Witchcraft to take his life, 240, 245 ;
also used by Ewfame Macal5ane of Cliftonhall,
247, &c. ; invaded by Earl of Bothwell, &c. in
Holyroodhouse, 272 ; Oration by him in St
Giles's Kirk, 357 ; assailed at Falkland, 275,
276 ; Presides in person in the Court of Justiciary, 247, 270,294; II. 161, &c.; Bothwell tried for Raids of Falkland and Holyrood,
294 ; forfeited, 297 ; Taxation of L.100,000,
previous to the birth of Prince Henry, 306 ;
Baptism of the Prince, at Stirling, 338 ; preparations for reception of Ambassadors, &c.,
339 ; an Englishman hanged, for slandering
him, 385 ; examines a Witch at Linlithgow,
400 ; is Besieged in the Tolbooth of Edr.,
29 ; Edw. Johnnestoun fined 3500 merks, 34 ;
vacillation of the King in granting and recalling Precepts, &:c., 88, &c. ; Gowrie's Conspiracy, 146, &c. q. V. ; Appendix of Documents
illustrative of, 171 to 332, &c. ; is present in
Pari, at forfeiture of the E. of Gowrie's brother, &c., 161 ; offers a horse, worth L.lOO,
for two strayed hounds, 242 ; Proclamations
against the detainers, ib. ; is made a burgess
of Perth, and signs Guild-Book, 247 ; Embassy from Q. Eliz., congratulating him on
his escape from Gowrie's Consp., 313, 315 ;

circulars written to the Clergy, 317 ; Letter
from Jo., E. of Gowrie to him, 330 ; F. Tennent hanged for writing Pasquils, 332 ; fines
Kincaid of Craighouse 2500 merks, and ' his
broune horse !' 339 ; King's relentless cruelty
in the case of Cornwall, for trivial offences
against the Kingly dignity and office, 349^
' &c. See also under Dicksoun, Tennent, Ross,
Name, &c., for similar instances ; gibbet ordered to be taken down and burnt on which
Cornwall had attempted to show King's portrait! 351 ; singular Letter from him, as to punishment of a Mass-Priest, 530 ; Proceedings
against Lord Balmerinoch, for treasonable correspondence with THE Pope, 568 ; Q. Eliz.
expostulates with him, 571 ; Gunpowder
Plot, 572 ; his Letter to the Lord Advocate,
577 ; listens behind the tapestry to hear his
Courtiers praise him, (they being aware of his
presence,) 590, 592, 593 ; his awful imprecation as to Sir Thomas Overbury's Murder,
600, note; Tuedie scourged and banished for
< vnreverent' speeches as to the King, III.
220 ; Jo. Ogilvy, Jesuite, declines King's authority, 330 ; is kept from sleep ad delirium !
332 ; hanged and quartered, ib. : Relation of
the arbitrary proceedings against him, ib., <S:c. ;
his conduct on the scaffold, 350 ; Jo. Flemyng hanged, for uttering speeches against the
King, 359 ; pi'oceedings against Mr Thomas
Roise for writing a Pasquil against the Scots
nation, 445 ; his right hand struck off, and then
beheaded, <S:c., 454 ; illustrative Papers, 582 ;
at an expense of L.600 he gets Stercovius,
a Pole, put to death, in Poland, for writing
' a Legend of reproaches' against the Scots !
448. See also Trials 7>«m/w.
James, Prince and Steward of Scotland, (Duke
of Rothesay, eldest son of King Jas. V.,)
his birth, I. * 302 ; baptism, ib. ; his state
Cradle, ib. and * 303 ; his Arms, ib. ; silver
work, * 303 ; reward to messenger who
brought ' tithingis' of his birth to the King,
ib. ; messengers sent to K. of France, *305 ;
his nurse, * 306 ; silver Plate, Chapel ' geir,'
&c., * 306 ; bear-tooth for, * 307 ; horn for,
lb. ; his death, * 309 ; ' dule-weidis' (mournGENERAL INDEX.

683

ing) for, * 310 ; his household establishment,

* 314. See Prince Arthur and Albany.
James, Lord, Commendator of Kelso, (natural

son of K. Ja. V.,) I. * 277, * 295, * 296,

* 305 ; — Commendator of St Andrews, (natural sou of K. Ja. V.,) * 295, * 297.

Jane, Lady, (natural daughter of K. Ja. V.,)
I. * 297, * 300, * 314 ; Dule dress to, * 320 ;
Bessy M'^caw, her nurse, * 325.

Jane, the French Dwarf, I. * 296.

Jamesoun, Wm., ( Wantouii Will,) beheaded,

I. * 219.

Jardine of Apilgirth, John, I. * 393, * 398,

* 442 ; Alex, burns Place of Littlegill, 108 ;
warded in Edr. Castle, ib. ; breaks ward, 135 ;
Alexr., yr., Slaughter and Fire-raising, 184,
304 ; Sir Alex., III. 57 ;— of Birnok, Tho.,

II. 465 ; Burning Littlegill, Rape, Adultery,
&c., 491 ; III. 54 ; beheaded, 58 ;— Da.,
Alex., &c., Slaughter, &c., II. 484 ;— of Dyke,
Jo. I. * 142.

Jasp-stane, ' for steming of bluid,' III. 564.

Javelins, I. * 289.

Javellour, what. III. 483.

Jedburgh, Abbot of, John, I. * 334 ; Commendator of, * 45 1 ; And., * 483, ^ 486 ;— Army of.
Conspiring its destruction, * 183 ; — Justiceaire of, * 16 ; Expenses of, * 22, * 27 ; Proclamation, * 64, * 67, * 115, * 309, * 318;
—Kirk of. Plundering, * 37 ;— Raid of, * 256,

* 421, * 422 ; — Rioting in the town of, between the Kerrs and the TurnbuUs, II. 370.

Jedwart-stavis, order to put down, and ' for vsing
of speris, axis, halbertis, bowis, and culueringis,' I. * 262, * 289, * 295, * 320 ; ordered to be kept in ' buithis,' in Edinburgh, *362,
*403. See other weapons under their names.

Jerveswood, Laird of, I. * 82. See Livingstoun.

.Jester, King's. (See Fool ;) I. * 124, &c.

Jesuites, College, at Gratz, III. 336 ; — traflScking
with, 1. 172 ; proclamation against, 281, 336 ;
Commission of fire and sword against, 337 ;
Jo. Ogilvie tried. III. 330 ; hanged and quartered, 332; relations of the proceedings against
him, ib., &c. ; his conduct on tiie scaflbld,
350 ; his Deposition, &c., 352 ; Resetting, 371 ;
three persons banished, 376 ; Sir Ja. Cleilland,

&c., ib. ; Resetting two persons banished,
541.
Jesus, embroidered with crown of thorns, &c.,

I. 308. See the Appendices to the early
reigns for relics, Church ornaments, &c.

Jewels, King's, diamonds, t*v:c., retained for payment of 5900 merks due to a goldsmith, I.
344 ; Queen's Pearls and jewels abstracted,

II. 544 ; stolen from E. Mariscliall, 111.562 ;
one of them 6000 merks value, 563 ; another,
5000 merks, ib. ; a curious enumeration of
other valuable jewels, 564.

John, Lord, natural son of King James V.. I.

* 308.

Johnnestoun of Auchinsbork, Geo., I. * 86 ; —
of Auchrynnie, Jo., Murder, shooting, <i-c., II.
493 ; acquitted, ib ; — of Beirholnie, Tho.,
III. 489, 493 ;— of Brakinsyde, Ja., L 48 ;
III. 501 ;— of Brwme, Ro., II. 465 ;— of
Briggis, Ja., III. 35 ; — of Caskieben, Geo., I.
284 ; III. 488 ; Jo., his servant, Murdered,
ib. ; — of Cleuch-heidis, Da., 439 ; — of Creychtraond, Geo. I. * 454 ; — of Cottis, Ro. * 397,

* 398, * 442 ;— Craigaburne, Jo. * 442 ; Ro.,
11 ; Tho., 34, 48;— of Corry, Adam, * 229,

* 230 ; — Cin-istian, forcibly carried off, 362 ;
Ed., acquitted of Mutilation, &c., II. 461 ; Ja.,
slain, III. 432 ; — of Currielaw, Wm., 436 ; —
of Dunskellie, (viz. of tliat Ilk, q. v.,) Sir Ja.
denounced for breaking Ward from Castle of
Edr., I. 297, 305 ; slays Lord Maxwell, ib.,
346, 362, 452 ; liability as to General Band,
521 ; is slain by Jo., L. Maxwell, III. S6 ; —
of Erschag, Ja., 489 ; — of Elphingstoune,
And., I. * 330, * 336, * 442 ; Pat., yr., 148;
Ja., 255 ; Pat., II. 343 ; — of Esciiescheillis,
Wm., I. * 165 ; Wilkin, III. So ; slain, 49 ;
— Edw., hanged, I. * 87 ; Edw., Treason,
Besieging King, Ac, in Edr. Tolbooth, fined
3500 merks, II. 29 ; Ja. ' wirreit,' (strangled,)
for Forging coin,&c., 353 ; Jo., Wearing Pistolets,&c., 111.76 ; — of Fingland, Tho., yr., 438 ;
Slaughter at iiis funeral, ib., 439 ; Tho., ib. ;
— of Fouleraw, Jok, 439 ; — Cieillis, Witch,
Act of Privy Council, 600 ; — of Gratno, Tho.,
I. * 85 ;— of Ilayhillis, Wm., 431 ;— of Haisliebray, Ja., 355 ; his sons slay the Parson of

684

GENERAL INDEX.

Lochraaben, ih. ; III. 35 ; — of Howgill, slain,
50 ; — of that Ilk, (Laird of,) Adam, I. * 41 ;
Jo., his Offers, * 148 ; found caution of
10,000 merks, * 229, * 274 ; Herescl)ip of
his cattle by the English, &c., * 348, * 387,

* 469, 48; Sir Ja., Slaughter, &c., 184;
King's declaration as to his pledges, 346 ;
slays Lord Maxwell, 360 ; II. 461, 509, 596 ;
III. 29 ; his picture hanged with the head
downwards at the Cross of Edr., 31 : shot
dead by Lord Maxwell, at a conference, ib.,
36 ; with ttvo poisoned bullets, 37 ; — Tutor of Johnnestoun, Jo., 75 ; — Jok the Gal5eart, I. * 397 ; Jo., bailie of Water of
Leith, III. 9; Gilbert, hanged for Cattlestealing, (Src, 270 ; — John, (Commendator of
Saul-seat,) Fire-raising, &c., I. 12; — of Kynnelheid, Wm., slain, III. 489;— of Kirkhill,
Wille, I. * 398 ;— of Kellobank, Ja., * 402 ;
Wm., 48 ; Slaugliter of Laird of Kynnelheid,
III. 489 ; Wm., yr., and Ja., his sons, ib. ; —
of Kirktoun, Ja., slain, 432, 435; And., 439 ;
his son Jo. slain at a Funeral, ib. ; — of Lochhouse, Jo., Slaughter, Houghing Oxen, (Src,
beheaded, II. 425 ; Ja., III. 500 ;— of Lockerbie, (Turmour,) Wm., 37 ; his Deposition
as to the Laird of Johnstone's Slaughter, 46,
271 ; Slaughter, Sec, 432 ; Arch., his brother,
ib.; Wm., Slaughter, 436 ; Fia., his brother,
slain at the young Laird of Fingland's funeral,
438, 439 ; Wm., 539 ;— of Mossope, Ro.,
489 ; — of Myreheid, Fra.,439; — of Mostoune,
Pat., slain by Lord Glammis, &c., II. 386 ; —
of Newtoune, Ro., I. 13 ; — of Newbie, Ro.,
II. 465, 466 ; Tower of, besieged by widow
of Jo., yr., (Src, 465 ; Jo., sen., ib. ; — of Powdene, Simon, remitted, I. * 244 ; The, 48 ;
Ninian, III. 439 ;— of PerisbehiH, Gav., I.

* 431 ; — Parson of Tunnergarth, Jo., slain,
II. 441 ;— Provost of Annan, Edw., III. 431 ;
of the Quawis, Jo., bringing in Englishmen,
Stouthreif, &c., I. * 393 ; — of Raecleuch, Jo.,
(Tutor of .Tohnstoune,) III. 75 ; Ro., 433 ;—
of Ryhill, Edw., 375 ; — of Tunnergarthe, Jo.,
Slaughter of Laird of Lockerbie's brother at a
Funeral, 438 ; Blench Bell, his wife, ib. ; Jo.,
Wm., Fra., and Ja., his sons, ib. ; And., his

son, is slain at the same Funeral, 439 ; — of
Thornik, Capt. Ja., Slaughter of Laird of
Wamphray's brother, 501 ; — of Wamphray,
Jo., I. * 86 : Ro., III. 271 ; Sir Ja., 392 ;
W^m., alias the Galliard, 441, note; Ro.,
452 ; Wm., his brother, slain, 501 ; — of Westraw, Ja., I. * 436 ; vmq'^' Halbert, ib., 439 ;
Ja., 10 ; slain, 38 ; Ja., 184 ; Ro., his brother,
slain, ib.; II. 461, 506 ; Ja., IIL 43.3, 438;
Slaughter at a Funeral, 439 ; — Mr Wm., Minister of Lochmaben, slain, I. 355.

Jollie, Alesoune, Slaughter by Witchcraft, &c.,
L 397 ; acquitted, 399.

Jousting, see Tournament, I. * 118, * 323. See
Barras. For particulars as to tilting and weapons for the tournament, &c., see the Appendices.

Jowp-alane, what, II. 156, note.

Judicial Combat. See Combat and Duel.

Judicium Dei, appeal to heaven — Ordeals for
proof of innocence or guilt of supposed Murderers, III. 184, &c. See Touching, &c.

' Junting' dead bodies by Witches, I. 218, 233,
238, 239 ; II. 477.

Juratory caution. III. 445.

Jurisdiction of Bailies, II. 43; — of Bailies and
Sheriff of Edr., I. * 129 ;— Declinature of,
443 ; II. 4, 81, &c. See Declinature ; — King's
Chamberlain, 91 ; — of King and Privy Council,
declined, 494; IIL 87; Mr And. Creichton
sentenced to be hanged, 89 ; banished for life,
90 ; of Lord High Constable, L * 351, * 476,
98 ; 11. 91 ;— of Magistrates of Edr., L *129,
98 ; — in iNIaritime causes, ib. ; — iMaster of
King's Household, II. 91 ; — Sheriff of Peebles,
L * 350.

Jurnall, the King's, L * 297.

Jury. See Assise, Evidence, Wailful Error,
Proof, &c

Justice, administration of, early Regulations for,
L * 11, * 64, *389, 162, &c.

Justice-Clerk, sworn, L * 126, * 235, * 236,
* 254, * 272, * 315, * 328 ; his jurisdiction
declined, * 443 ; IIL 558 ; and Master of
Ceremonies, ib. 595 ; remarkable Letter as
to the ' ordour' of this appointment, ib. 596.

Justice Courts, anent, I. * 162.

GENERAL INDEX.

685

Justices- General, Earl of Argyle, I. * 244 ; Sir Justiciary of Atholl, I. 83 ; — Coinmissioa of,

Simon Preston, * 477; sits in person, II. III. 558; — Serjeant of, I. * 2 ; — of the West

428, 491, &c. Marches, * 239.

Justice-airs, Signet made for, I. * 256 ; Procla- Justify, to execute or put to death, legally ; II.

mations for regulating, * 64, * 389, &c. 550, et passim.

K.

Keas (rooks). Witches take form of. III 605, &c.

Keiller, John, a Dominican Friar, burnt for
heresy, I. * 210, * 211, &c. ; conveying and
supplying him, * 221.

Keir of Cowclaraquhy, Tho., I. * 454 ; — Mr
Tho., Invading Lord Saltoun, * 476.

Keith of Auchquhirsk, Alex., II. 539 ; W^m., his
son, beheaded for slaying an Englishman, ib. ;
— of Benholme, Ja., Masterful Theft, &c.,
III. 563 ;— of Bodome, Alex., 540 ; Wm., his
son, ib. ; — of Coklaw, Nath., 540 ; — of Craig,
Ja., 478 ;— of Drumtochtie, Sir Geo., 483 ;
his brother Mr Alex, slain on the sands of
Montrose, ib. ; — of Harviestoun, Ja., 437,
483 ;— of Inchegarnok, Pat., I. * 148 ;— of
Innerugy, Sir Wm., * 78 ; — of Littledean,
Mark, * 229 ;— Lord, Wm., IIL 243 ;— of
Ludquhairn, W^m., I. 382, 384 ; his house
besieged, 388 ; the Laird taken prisoner, Sec,
ib.; 11. 128; Alex., III. 419; Sir Wm.,
Scourging, Slaughter, &c., 539 ; — of Northfield, Arch., I. * 148 ;— of Seatoun, Wm., IIL
478 ; — of Troop, Jo., Fire-raising, II. 41.

Kello, Mr Jo., Minister, hanged and burnt, I. 14.

Kelly, Eaiil of, Tho., 11. 582, note. See
Erskine of Gogar.

Kelman, Alex., and W^m. Gardin, hanged for
uttering base money, I. 385.

Kelso and Melrose, James, Abbot of, (natural
son of K. James V.,) I. * 277, * 295 ;— of
Kelsoland, Tho., * 170; — Town of, resetting
E. of Botbvvell, 291 ; fined 1700 merks, 292 ;
remarkable ' Band' subscribed there, III. 394.

Kemp, (Champion,) the King's, 1. * 271.

Kene, Ja., Bailie of Selkirk, III. 457.

Kent, a great staff or bludgeon, II. 519; III,
481, 488, (Src.

Kent, Ro., Oppression, Hamcsucken, i!v:c. I. 60.

Kennedies, Feud betwixt them and the Crawfords,
I. * 150;— Historieof the. III. 125 &c.

Kennedy of Ardmillane, Tho., II. 10, 106; — of
Arei», Hew, III. 477 ; — of Attiquane, Geo.,
I. * 86 ; Geo., yr., slain, ih. ; — of Brunstoun,
W^m., * 427 ;— of Bogend, * 457 ;— of Blairquhan, Ja., * 138, * 150, * 182, * 219; Jo.,
IL 106, 108; 111.119, 140;— of Bardrochat,
Jo., I. * 138; — of Barquhenny, Hew, 84; —
of Baliiarrak, Alex., Slaughter of Spens, a servant of the E. of Cassiliis, II. 400 ; — of Barsalloch, Anth., yr , 111. 172; — of Balscheroche. Da., 180; — of Bargany, Tho., I. *42;
Alex., * 138, * 107 ; oppressed in Air, *204 ;
his officers deforced, * 251, * 336, * 369;
Besieges house of Penkill, * 403 ; Tho., 20,
141 ; II. 35 ; Gilb., 106 ; Laird of, slain, IIL
129; Gilb., 170; slain, 172 ;— of Balmaclennochan, Gilb., I. * 138 ; Geo., * 369, * 427,

* 457;— of Bennane, Jo., * 138, * 403;
Hew, II. 106; III. 171 ;— Blairquhynnequhy,
Hew, I. * 427, * 454 ; — of Culvane, Pat.,

, 20 ;— Tutor of Cassiliis, Tho., 373 ;— of
Corse, Da., Slaughter, IL 480 ;— of CoiflP,
(or Cu^eane, Tutor of Cassiliis,) Sir Tho.,
slain, III. 177; — of Craigneil, David, Oppression, I. * 55 ; — of Cul^eane, (Tutor of
Cassiliis,) Jo., slain, * 334 ; David, 405 ;
Tho., 373 ; Sir Tho., waylaid by Laird of
Auchindrane, II. 35 ; Tho., yr., 36 ; Sir
Tho., 49, 390; murdered, 565; III. 127,
&c See Muir of Auchin<lrain ; Sir Ja., 120,
127;— of Cove, (Coiff,) Tho., I. * 138,

* 405 ; — of Craigiieill, Hew, II. 35 ; — of
Crugiltouu, Ja., HI. 477 ; — of Daljerrok,
Pat., yr., 1. *457 ;— Sir Dav., Capt. of Lochdoun, * 73 ; — of Dunneyne, Tho., * 1.38 ; —
of Drumquharue, Alex., 20 ; — of Drum686

GENERAL INDEX.

murqubie, Tho., III. 128, 129, 133; was the
principal murderer of Sir Tho. Kennedy of
Cul;eane, 134; his forfeiture, 140, 166, 173;
summons of Treason, 177; forfeited, 180; —
Dean Gilbert and Schir James, attempting to
restore Popery, I. * 427 ; — of Dalquharrane,
Dune, *350, *457 ;— of Drumnellane, Pat.,

* 138 ; Jo., yr., * 181 ; Jo., * 453, * 457;—
of Dangar, Jo., III. 172 ;— of Glentig, Alex.,
I. * 138, * 181 ;— of Giletree, Jo., * 150;—
of Garriehorne, Hew, proposal and attempt to
murder. III. 137, 165, 172, 177, 180 ;— Sir
Gavin, oppressed, I. * 55 ; — of Girvanmains,
Hew, respited, * 244, * 457 ; Sir Hew,

* 488, 48; II. 106 ;— of Glenmuk, Geo.,
abiding from Raid of Dumfries, 134 ; — of
Garfar, \Vm., III. 153 ;— of Hallaithes, Jo.,
439 ; Wm., yr., ib. ; — of Kirkniichaell, Gilb.,
I. * 138 ; Mr Lambert, II. 106 ;— of Knokdone, Ja., * 138, * 181 ; Walt., II. 106 ;— of
Knokreoche, Tho., I. * 182 ;— of Knokdaw,
Tho., iMutiiation, * 335 ; Fergus, II. 106 ;—
of Leswalt, Sir David, oppressed, 1. * 89,

* 95, &c, ; — of Lechland, Martin, slain,

* 130;— of Monunsioun, Gilb., III. 180;— of
Maxweltoune, Da., yr.. Slaughter, &c. II.
461; III. 170; — Ninian, burnt for Heresy,

I. *215; — of Penquhirrey, (Banquherrie,)

II. 10; Hew, III. 172, 173 ;— Provost of
Ayr, Hew, 345 ; — of Smetoune, Jo., 172 ; —
Tho., ' Revissing,' I. * 182 ; — of Turueberry,
Wm., III. 172;— of Yet, Alex., I. * 138.

Keris, Laird of, I. * 457. See Schaw.

Kerr of Ancrum, Wm., slaughter, I. 36 ; Wm.,
yr., 149; Ro., II. 380 ;— of Bowdene, Jo.,
460;— of Bothtowr, Ro., III. 390 ;~Bailie
of Lauder, Raulf, 453, 539 ; — of Brounlandis,
And., 569 ;— of Cesfurd, And., I. * 127; slain,

* 133 ; Walt., * 147 ; Geo., Tutor of, ib. ;
Sir Walter, * 230 ; breaking the Band, * 208,

* 351, * 378, * 468, * 512 ; Wm., Warden
of the Middle Marches, 293 ; Sir Ro., yr.,
308, 337, 342; IL 11; (see Lord Roxburghe;) Sir Walt., III. 390; remarkable
penance enjoined to him for the Slaughter of
Sir Walt. Scott of Branxholme, 391 ; Feud
with the Laird of Orraistoun reconciled, 393,

396 ;— of Caveris, Tho., I. 337 ; II, 365 ;
assaulted in Jedburghe, 370, 430 ; — Capt.
Tho., I. 344 ; — of Craling, Tho,, (brother toFairnihirst,) II. 370; slain, 445 ;— of Dolphingtoun, Mark, I. * 29, * 68, * 88, * 127 ;
And., * 208, * 229 ; Walt., * 468 ; 111.396 ;
— of Fawdonsyde, And., I. * 432, * 451,

* 468, 46 ; III. 390, 396 ;— of Fentoune,
And., IL 466 ;— of GrenehilJ, Ja., 519 ;— of
Graden, And., I. * 147 ; admitted to free
ward, * 419 ; Tutor of, IL 429 ; Jo., his son,
ib. ; Ro., in. 391 ;— of Gateshaw, And., I.

* 69 ; Lancelot, * 147 ; Rich. III. 390 ;—
of Greenhead, And., I. * 166 ; Gilb., yr.,

* 201 ; Gilb., * 230 ; And., 149 ;— Mr Geo.
to be warded and tried, 280 ; trafficking with
Papists as to ' the Spanish Blanks,' 3 11, &c. ;
Ro. hanged for Perjury, &c. III. 539 ; — of
Hirsell, Sir Walt., I. *'379 ; Sir Jo., 282 ;
Adultery, &c., 293 ; II. 381, 476, 515 ; Sir
And., in. 391 ;_of the Hoill, Tho., IL 476 ;
—of Kerrisland, Robert, I. * 388, 71;— of
Kippeschaw, Mark, IIL 390 ; — of Linton,
Ja., L * 32 ; Geo,, * 139 ; Ja., * 166 ; Geo.,

* 201 ; III. 390 ; Wm., 538 ;— of Lyntellie,
Ja., II. 378 ;— of Littledene, 380, 476 ;— of
Lochtour, Gilb., IIL 538 ;— of Mylnerig,
And., II. 506 ; INIr Jo., his son, strikes a person in the Tolbooth during the sitting of the
Lords of Session, III. 73 ; — Mark, Commendator of Nevvbottle, {q. v.) III. 390 ; — of
Mersingtoun, Ja., I. * 127, * 166, * 182,

* 190, * 229 ; Tho., * 468 ; IIL 390 ;— of
Newtoun, Ro., I. 337 ; — of Newhall, Geo.,
III. 569 ;— of Pharnihirst, (Fernihirst,) David, (And.,) L * 18, * 28, &-c., * 88, * 127,

* 327 ; Sir John, * 379 ; Sir T., * 468 ; Invaded by Lord Hume, <S:c., * 487 ; And.,
280, 337; II. 11 ; Sir And., Provost of Jedburcht, 370 ; Shooting with hagbuts. Slaughter, Sec, 378; Tho., his brother, slain, 421 ;
Sir Tho., III. 390, 396 ;— of Primsyde-Loche,
Ralph, I. * 30, <!v:c.; Gilb., III. 391, 396 ;—
of Pryoraw, Tho., 1 1. 475 ;— of Steilstokbrayis, Ja., 515; — of the Schaw, Ro., III.
69 ;— of Sunderlandhall, Tho., I. * 139;— of
Spylaw, Sir Jo., II. 405 ; — Surname of,

GENERAL INDEX.

687

agreement of their Feud with the Scotts,
remarkable Contract, &c.. III. 390; — of
Trearne, Ro., I. * 388 ;— of Torbet, Ja., III.
391 ;— of Whiterig, Ja., I. * 69 ;— of Woidheid, Ro., III. 396 ;— of Yair, (3air,) Wm.,
I. * 87 ; Tho., * 177, * 230 ; And., III.
497 ; Mr Thos., his son, 538.

Key, Slaughter committed with a large, I. * 396.

Keyme, Spuil5ie of, I. * 112.

Kids, price of, at Justice-aires, I. * 390.

Kilbaberton, Lady, healed by a Witch-prayer, I.
234.

Kilbirny, Place of, broken into, II. 508.

Kildrummy, besieging Castle of, I. * 246.

Kildrymmie, Alex., Lord of, III. 541 ; his cloaks,
&c., stolen, ib.

Kilgour, Ro., beheaded, I. * 134.

Kilnockie, Laird of. See Johnnie Armstrang.

KiLMAWERis, Lord, Assise on, I. * 263 ; Wm.,
m. 122, 316.

Kilpatrick, Laird of, Ro,, slain while at the horn,

I. * 77. See Crechtoune.
Kilsythe, Lord. See Levingstoun.
Kilwinning, Commendator of, Gawin, freed from

ward, I. * 436 ; Intercommuning with D. of
Chattellerault, * 466, * 478.
Kincaid of Cottis, Dav., (Constable of Edr. Castle,) L * 158, * 230; Ja., 77 ; Clem., 255;

II. 343 ; — of Craighouse, Jo., Forcible Abduction, II. 336 ; extraordinary and avaricious
conduct of K. Ja. VI., 337 ; he fines the Laird
2500 merks and to give him his 'broune horse,'
339 ;_of Crympcramp, Ja., I. * 239 ;— Da.,
Wounding, &c., * 158 ; — of Gogar, Jo., portioner, Hi. 565 ; — of that Ilk, Tho., respited
for Resetting English Traitors, &'c., I. * 239 ;
Ja., yr., wounded, &c., * 458, 73 ; Ja., 98 ;
Male, his son, slain, ib. ; II. 337 ; — Jo.,
Witch-finder, III. 599 ; mode of pricking for
discovering the Devil's mark, &:c., ib., 602 ;
— of Warrestoune, Jo., I. 72 ; Murdered by
his wife, her nurse, and servant, 241, 7iote ;
II. 445 ; his wife be^aded, 446, 502 ; her
Nurse burnt, 446 ; Ro. Weir, broken on the
wheel, &c., 450; Tho., his barns robbed. III.
564 ; — Wm. and John, Forcible Abduction,
L * 421.

VOL. III.

Kindly Tenants, III. 18; what, 366, note; —
lands, 18, &c. ; rowmes, 366.

King's chamber, Wounding in, I. * 85. See
Chalmer ; — Palace, Slaughter and felony committed in, * 100.

King, the, fomenting discord between him and
his Barons, I. * 206 ; — shooting near his person, 98, 100, 187 ; — Conspiring his death by
Witchcraft, 209, 230 ;— slandering, an Englishman hanged, 385. See Treason, K. Ja.
VI., &c.

King of Barrocht, (Barrauch,) Wm., 208; Feud
with Laird of Straloch, 353 ; Ja., Slaughter,
III. 379 ;— of Bourty, Wm., I. * 148 ;— of
Thieves, the, * 155.

KiNGHORN, Earl of, Pat., II. 572 ; IIL 318 :
— attempt to restore Popery at town of, I.

* 430 ; assisting E. of Bothwell, 310.
Kinlochow, Hereschip of, I. * 256.

Kinloss, Abbot of, takes oath of K. Henry VIII.
to ratify the Peace, I. * 283, * 285 ; Edw.,
267, 293 ; II. 139, 159, 319 ;— Lord, Edw.
319; in. 447. See Bruce.

Kinmont, Will of, freed from Carlisle Castle by
Laird of Buckcleugh, I. 363, 364, &c.

Kinnaird of Cowbyn, Walt., II. 484 ; — of that
Ilk, Jo., fiar of, Slaughter of the Laird of
Ruthven's servant, 427 ; Wra., son of, acquitted of Murder under trust, 472 ; Jo., III.
259 ;— of Inchesture, Jo., L * 88, * 424, 28 ;
Ja., II. 427 ; Pantoun, 472 ; Ja., yr., acquitted of Murder under trust, ib.

Kinnear of Henderstoune, Jo., I. *404; — of tiiat
Ilk, Da., II. 397 ; Jo., yr., 430.

Kinninmonth, (Kinmond,) of Callinche, (Kilduncane,) Mr Walt., yr., HI. 429 ;— of Hill,
Wm., I. * 424, * 452 ;— of that Ilk, Da., III.
429 ; his son And. slain, ib.

Kinross of Kippenross, Ja., I. 15, 299.

KiNTAiLL, Lord, Colin, HI. 19, 25.

Kintyre, Governor, Sheriff, and Justiciary of. I.

* 258 ; Earl of Glciirairn's Hnid, * 319 ; horrible barbarities committed tticre, 224, i*tc.

Kirk, see Assembly, &c., grievances, II. 9 ; — Mr
Ja., (servant to E. of Argylc,) HI. 233, 250,
252.

Kirk of Field. See Morton, Damley, &c.

4> s

688

GENERAL INDEX.

Kirkaldy of Grange, Ja., I. * 208 ; remitted,

* 230, * 253, * 337, * 338 ; Sir Wni., Intercoramuning with, * 466, * 478, 33 ; Wm.,
II. 3 ; — Mr Ja., Treason, hanged, I. 45.

Kirkaldy, Town of, assisting the Earl of Bothwell,

I. 310.
Kirkbride, Rector of, slain, I. * 329.
Kirkcudbright, Justice-aire of, I. * 52, * 75 ;

expenses, * 317.
Kirkhill, house of, besieged, I. 174.
Kirkmaqulio, Burning of, I. * 249.
Kirkmichaell, Laird of. Feud between him and

the Laird of Amis6eld, I. * 132 ; Town of,

burnt, * 405.
Kirkoswald, attempt to restore Popery, I. * 427.
Kirkpatrick, Sir Alex., knt., his servant slain, I.

* 86 ;— of Auchinleck, Mr Sam., III. 271 ;—
of Brakoch, (Bracho,) Ro., L *456, 111 ; Jo.,
m. 475 ;— of Closeburn, Sir Tho., L * 41,

* 165 ; remitted, * 248 ; to present two
Thieves, * 287 ; Roger, * 398, * 405, * 431,
78, 80, 178 ; Tho., 259, 264, 289, 298, 304 ;
Sir Tho., III. 123 ; Alex., ib. ; his son tried
for Slaughter of Laird of Spott's son, ib., 212 ;
of EUisland, Jo., yr., I. Ill ; — of Friarscarse,
Tho., * 398 ;— Jo., Slaughter, III. 429 ;— of
Kirkmichaell, Sir Alex., I. * 127 ; Roger,
yr., slain, * 132, * 165 ; Deadly Feud with
the Laird of Amisfield, ^c^, ib. ; the Laird
mutilated, i5. ; Wm., *190; remitted, *248,

* 398, * 405 ; taken prisoner by young Laird
of Drumlanrig, &'C., III. 212 ; Wm., yr., ib. ;
—of Knok, Roger, I. * 87, * 132.

Kirktoun of Stewartfield, Adam, I. * 147 ; — of
the Tower, 349.

Kirkwall, Castle of, I. * 257 ; Convocation at,

* 413 ; seized by E. of Orkney's base son,
III. 272, &c. See Orkney.

Kirkwood, Ja., beheaded, I. * 165.

Kitchen, King's, Grooms of, I. * 313 ; ' Tumebroches' in, ib. ; — door, groom of the, ib. ; —

Court, grooms in, ib.
Kittycrocehill, near Glasgow, Battle of, I. * 237,

* 238, * 247.
Knapska-bonnettis, II. 475.
Knapscall, a steel bonnet, II. 158, 179.
Kneland, (Cleilland,) Mr And., Justice-depute,

II. 426, &c. ;— of Foskane, Jo., III. 134;—
of that Ilk, Wm., L 35, 63 ;— of Knowhobbil •
hill, Arthur, I. 35 ; — of Monkland, Sir Ja.,
resetting Jesuites, III. 376.

Knives, drawing and stabbing with, in a fenced
Court, &c., I. * 330.

Knockschenoch, Burning the Peile of, I. * 242.

Knok, (clock,) K. James V.'s, L * 300, * 305,

* 311 ; the Prince's, * 311, * 316.
Knollis, Sir Wm., Preceptor of Torphechin, Lord

High Treasurer, I. * 2. See Torphechin.
Knowis of that Ilk, Rob., I. *361 ; mutilated,

* 364 ; wounding, * 365.

Knox, And., Parson of Paisley, III. 14. (See B.
of the Isles) ; Mr Ja., III. 21 ; Wm., cruelly
abused and Murdered, 496; — of that Ilk,
(Laird of,) * 150;— of Ramfurly, III. 366;
And., Bishop of the Isles, ib.

Kyle, Alex., Stouthrief of Gold and Silver work,
I. * 395 ;— Lollards of, I. * 287.

Kyndly lands. III. 18, &c., rowmes, 366 ; tenants, III. 18 ; what, 366, and note.

Kynloche, Hen., banished for theft, HI. 542.

Labawtie. See Bastie.

Ladies of rank consult Witches, I. 54.

Lag, Burning Place of, I. * 160; — Laird of, see

Grierson.
Laing, Alex., Rebellion in Orkney, IIL 273 ;

hanged, 283 ; Tho. hanged for same crimes,

ib. ; his Deposition, 296 ; — Hendrie, an Evil

Spirit, m. 606, 615, &c.

Laidlaw of RafBat, Jaquie, Slaughter, &c., II. 370.
Laird, Wm., alias Jo. Guthrie, hanged for Bigamy and Adultery, III. 429.
Lairdis Jok, II. 520. See also Armstrang.
Lalow, Sebastian, &c., Egyptians, III. 593.
Lamb, Witch-superstition as to. III. 608.
Lambes, (Lammas,) III. 243, and note, 614.
' Lammas-Evyn,' Raid of Dumfries at, I. * 75.

GENERAL INDEX.

689

Lanark, Justice-aire of, I. * 115, * 116. slain. III. 116; Wm., bailie of Dunbar, 487;

Land-loupper loun, III. 525. — of Winnoquhe, Alex., I. 74.

Land-ill, what, I. 51. Lauristoune of that Ilk, Tho., &c., (Assisors,)
Lanctoun of Erleshauch, Pat., II. 467. imprisoned for year and day, I. * 203.

Lang-imis, (50 stone weight,) an instrument of Laven, Castle of, I. * 381.

torture, I. 376. Lavendar, (Laundry- woman,) French, I. * 291 ;
Langlandis of that Ilk, Ja., III. 391, 393 ; Geo., King's, * 313.

396. Lavers, two silver, I. * 323.

Langside, Battle of, I. 1, 4, 5, &c.. 41. Law, day of, I. 351.

Language, Treasonable, spoken against the King, Lawburrows, breaking, I. * 94, * 269.

L * 251. See K. James VL Lawmond of Innerynne, (that Ilk,) L * 198 ; Sir
Langholme, Castle of, I. * 284; house of, burnt, John, * 336; Sir Ja., III. 199; 36 of his

&c., by the Armstrangs, II. 450, 479 ; — Raid

of, I. * 338, * 356.
La Plume, French Page, I. * 307.
Lardner, King's, Yeoman of great and petty,

I. * 313 ; Grooms in, ih.
La Touche departs to France, I. * 308.
Latimer of that Ilk, Rich., hanged, High Treason,

receiving English pay. Fire-raising, &c., I.

*348.
Lathries, Tho., surgeon in Perth, beheaded, II.

85, 100.
Lauderdale, Inhabitants get Remission, I. * 14.
Lauderdale, Viscount, III. 419.
Lauder(Lawder)of Balbardie, Gilb., I. *487, 133 ;

Wm., yr., ib. ; — of Bass, Sir Robert, * 78 ;

yr., * 143 ; remitted, * 243 ; respited, * 250,

* 413 ; Mr Ja. slain by his servant, 89 ; Geo.,
304; Feud with Lord Borthwick, 352; II.
10 ; — of Blythe, Sir Alex., Just.-dep., Provost
of Edr., I. * 76, * 79 ;— of Fountainhall, Sir
Jo., I. 257 ; — Gilb., slain by the Cranstouns,
L 362;— of Halltoun, Wm., I. * 159, * 167,

* 333, * 487, 11 ; Sir Wm., 169 ;— Henry,
King's Advocate, I. * 400 ;— of that Ilk,
(Laird of,) Sir Alex., I. * 62 ; Ro., * 147,

* 468 ; Rich., yr., ib. ; Ro., III. 569 ;— Justice-aire of, I. * 14, * 115 ; Tolbooth burnt,
m. 1 16];— Raid of, I.* 335, * 384 ;— Supplying English at, I. * 344, * 360; swearing
fealty to English General, * 378 ; — of Todrik, Cuthbert, hanged and drawn for Theft,
Resetting Thieves, &c., I. * 51 ; — Wni., beheaded, Treason, &c., I.* 344; Walter beheaded, 89 ; Wm., Forgery, banished and declared
infamous, I. * 375 ; Wm., bailie of Lauder,

followers massacred by Marquis of Argyll, ib.
Lawson of Hieriggis, I. * 333 ;— of Ilumbie, Ja.,

265 ; II. 459, note.
Lawvete, Chaplains of, to pray for King's ( Ja. V.)

return, I. * 286.
Lead for Prince Arthur's burial, I. * 309.
Learmonth of Dairsye, Sir Pat., I. 23, 1 14 ; of

the Hill, Wm., I. 270;_MrRo., Justice-de

pute, I. 366.
Leasing- making, Wm. Scott hanged, I. * 206.
Leasing, III. 142.
Leask of Auchinad, Tho., I. 382 ;— of that Ilk,

Wm., I. 382 ;— of Iladdo, Pat., I. 382.
Leaver-diarig, or Red-book of Miggerny, III.

481, note.
Leckprevick of that Ilk, Alex., jr., beheaded, I.

* 62 ;— Robert, banished, I. * 161.
Lefnorys, Laird of, Remission for Slaughter, I.

* 82.

Legatt, Alex., his Deposition as to Orkney Rebellion, III. 299.

Leidcreiff, Laird of, slain, I. * 367, * 371.

Leith of Harthill, Pat., I. * 454; II. 540; III.
560 ; — Raid of, I. 27, he. ; — Ships arrested
there for the use of the Army, I. * 270 ; Court
of Justiciary held there, from Nov.1571, to Aug.
1572, 25; again in 1596-7, II. 3; assisting
Bothwell in taking, II. 21 ; eight English Pirates hanged within flood-mark. III. 99 ; thirt;^
others hanged, 103 ; Papers as to Pirates,
108, (."vc. ; two more hanged, 244.

Leigiiton of LJUishavin, (Usan,) Tho., remitted, I.
* 252, 261.

Lekky of Croy, Walt., I. ♦ 166 ;— of that Ilk,
Rich., . * 166; Walt., 282; Alex., slain by

690

GENERAL INDEX.

Laird of Calderwood, &c., III. 493 ;— of Kypdarroch, Ro., yr., III. 583.
Lennox, County or District of, Burning and Hereschip of, I. * 246 ; Murders and Stouthriefs
by the Macgregors, II. 414, 415; severals
hanged, ib.;— Field of, 418, 424, 430; said
to have been instigated by the Duchess of
Lennox, 434. See MacGregor, 457 ; IIL
223;— of Caly,Wm., oppressed, L *53 ; Wm.,
yr., Killing Salmon, &c., * 54 ; Striking a
Messenger-at-arms, * 75 ; — Duke of, Esrae,
I. 98, 122 ; Lud., King's Lieutenant, 303, 307,
344, 348 ; assists King at Cowrie's Conspiracy, II. 153, 165 ; his Deposition, 171 ; married to Sophia Ruthven, 297, 590 ; III. 12 ;
Great Admiral of Scotland, III. 106 ; heritable
Bailie of Regality of Glasgow, 513 ; his Offices, dvc, 589, tiofe; his death, ii.; — Duchess
OF, said to have instigated the Hereschip of the
Lennox, II. 434 ; — Earl of, Jo., Forfeiture
recalled, I. * 12 ; slain at Field of Linlithgow,

* 228 ; Jo., respited, *231; arraying Battle
against Duke of Albany, * 241, * 269;—
Master of. Math., Forfeiture recalled, I.

* I2 ; Rape of his Daughter, * 60 ;— Math.,
I. * 78 ; Captain of Castle of Dumbarton,

* 246 ; dresses for his sisters, * 296, * 297,

* 305, * 321 ;— Regent slain, 41, &c., 87 ;
—of Woodhead, Jo., I. * 167.

Lent, killing, selling, or eating flesh in time of, I.
369.

Leprosy, charms for, II. 28.

Leslie, Agnes, relict of the Provost of Elgin,
slain, II. 41, 557 ; Alex. B. of Murray, her
son, ib. ; — of Auchorties, alias Bannachy, Jo.,
I. 119 ;— of Auldcraig, Geo., III. 507 ; Bessie, his natural daughter, (11 years old,) forced and dt'floired, ib. ; — of Barres, Wm., I.

* 454 ; — of Buclianistoune, Hen., I. * 148 ;
— of Boquhane, (Balquhan,) Will., I. * 184 ;
Jo., 1 19, 175, 207, 209, 300 ; Jo., fiar, IIL
444 ;— Captain of Blair, Geo,, II. 394 ;— of
Cunlie, Wm., I. 209, 255 ; II. 14;— of Coklarochy, Wra., I. * 184 ; — of Crechie, Wm.,
and his wife, Witchcraft, I. 209 ; — of Camel -
lis, Geo., I. 209 ;— of Conrak, Wm., II. 530 ;
— of Cultis, Jo., slain by Witchcraft, I. 208 ;

Jo., his brother, I. * 298 ; clothes for his marriage, * 318 ; — Geo., Yule-Dress to, I. * 320 ;
— of that Ilk, I. * 454 ; — of Kincraigy, Alex.,
I. *148 ; Geo., III. 401 ;— of Kincragie, Geo.,
fiar, II. 528 ;— of Kynnynrie, Walt., I. * 391 ;
of Largie, Jo., 1. 119; — of NewLeslie, Geo., I.

* 184; Norman, Master OF Rothes, giftto, I.

* 257, *299, * 300, * 3 12 ; supplying him, *358,
&c. ;— of Pitcaple, Alex., I. * 184 ;— Rob.,
Treason, II. 278 ; — of Touche, Geo., I. *454;
— of Warthill, Wm., Burning Place of Pitmedden, 1.161, 209; — of Wardens, (Wardes,)
Alex., yr.. Oppression, &c., I. * 328, * 454 ;
Jo., slain by Witchcraft, 206, 207, 209;— Wm.,
(son of Geo. E. of Rothes,) I. * 357.

Lethingtoun of Saltcoittis, Pat., I. 142.
Lethmont of the Craig, Ja., I. * 469.
Lettacampt beds, the King's, (Lits-du-camp,) I.

* 273, * 283 ; Standards for, * 290.
Lettronis, (desks, Fr. lectrifi,') I. * 320.
Levingstoun of Little Airds, Ro., I. 11 ; — of Belstane, Jo., I. 35, 159 ; Alex., IIL 494, 495 ;
— of Bandone, Tho., II. 76 ; — of Castlecary,
Arch., slain, * 149 ; John, * 404 ; — Christian,

* wirreit and brunt in assis' for Witchcraft,
&c., IL 25 ;— of Donypace, Alex., I. * 167,

* 383 ; Jo., yi-., 119, 351 ; II. 394 ; Jo., 446;
Jean, his daughter, murders her husband, and is
beheaded, i^>.,&c., 502; III. 508; Da., 563;— of
Greenyards, Hen., I. * 453 ; — of Haining, T., I.

* 421 ; Mr Tho., brother to the Laird, II. 405 ;
—of Halhill, Alex., I. * 02 ; Tho., 36 ;—
Jean (Lady Warriestoun), Murders her husband, II. 446 ; her subsequent conduct, confession, and appearance on the scaffold, ib.,
&c. ; her nurse burnt, 447 ; Ro. Weir, her
servant, broken on the wheel, 450 ; — of Jerviswood, (Giriswod,) Ja., I. * 82, * 87, * 167 ;
Wm., * 451, 36 ; Ja., II. 541 ; III. 417, 452 ;
—of Kilsythe, Wm., remitted, I. * 241 ; Sir
Wm., 114, 293 ; II. 496 ; Lord Kilsyth, 597 ;
IIL 73, 312, 418, 621 ;— Lord, Alex., I.

* 167, * 177, * 414 ; Wm., 116; Alex. 293,
304 ; Proclamation that none accompany him
to his ' day of Law,' 351 ; Feud with Lairds
of Airth and Luss, 352. See Linlithgow ; —
Master of, Alex., I. 91, 114 ; — of Pantoun,

GENERAL INDEX.

691

Tho., II. 502 ;— of Pantoskane, (Bantaskan,)
Alex., I. 292;— of Prestoune, Jo., I. * 421 ;
II. 10 ;— of Saltcoittis, Pat., 11. 343 ;— of
Westquarter, Ro., I. 59 ; II. 502 ;— of Warrandhill, Alex., I. * 385.
LcFen, Thieves of, bringing them in, I. * 17, &c.,

* 238.

Lever- Schot, what, II. 536.

Levying War against the King's Lieutenants, I.

* 134.

Lewis, Island of. See Macleod ; Lands of, set,
I. * 102 ; Hereschip and Burning, &c.. III.
244.

Leyis, Jo., besieging Wauchton, &c., belieaded,
L8.

Libbis, magical incantations, I. 77.

Lichtis, lungs, 111. 521.

Liddell of Halkerstoune, Ninian, slain, I. 46.

Liddisdaill, Inhabitants free to frequent markets,
&c., 1. * 245 ; remitted, ib. ; — good rule to
be kept, * 111 ; — Raid against Border
Thieves, * 134, * 152.

Life, opinions of the ancients that it was resident
in the blood, III. 182, &c.

Lindesay, Alex., Captain of Fynnevin, I. * 347 ;
— of Auchinskeach, Jo., II. 490; III. 271 ;
—of Ballingscho, Sir Jo., 1. 280 ; IL 135 ;
— of Blairiefedden, Harie, 135 ; Da., his
uncle, ih. ; Harie, Slaughter, III. 248 ; — of
Brodland, Alex., II. 363 ; Mr Ja., his son.
Slaughter of Lord Spynie, 529 ; — of Barrese,
Jo., 529 ; Mr Jo., his son. Slaughter of Lord
Spynie, ib. ; — of Balcarras, Sir Jo., Lord Menmure, III. 62 ; — of Balgaveis, (Balgavy,) Mr
Walt., I. 282 ; Sir Walt. Murdered, III. 62,
65; by the Master of Crawford, ib., 248;
Da., ih., 307 ;— of Barnyardis, Dav., I. 28 ;
—of Ballul, Mungo, * 166, * 451 ; IL 438,
439 ; — of Carrestoune, Sir Harie, Shooting
Hagbuts and Pistolets, 409, 529 ; — of Canterland, Mr Alex., Slaughter of Lord Spynie,
III. 63 ; — of Covingtoun, (Colbintoune,) Jo.,
Remission, I. * 257, * 369 ; Feud with
Somervilles, ib., * 383, * 437, * 469, 15;
Fire-raising, 109, 166; II. 452; Geo., his
brother. Slaughter of Lord Spynie, 529 ; — of
Corsbasket, Alex., yr., I. * 62 ;— Sir Da.,
yr., fights young Laird of Pittarrotv and their

' complices' at the Salt-tron of Edr., III. 61,
65 ;— Mr Da., Minister, I. 304 ; his conduct
as to Cowrie's Conspiracy, III. 621, &c.,
{q. V.) ; — of Dowhill, Adam, I. * 160 ; remitted, * 239, * 253 ; Ja., II. 416 ; Pat., III.
583 ;— of Dunrod, I. * 62 ; Jo., * 132 ; Ro.,

* 382, 73, 88 ; Ro., 133 ; Alex., Slaughter
of Laird of Lokky, III. 493 ; Jo. his natural
brother, ih. ; — of Ed5ell, Sir Dav., I. 74, 85 ;
Da., fiar, &c., tried for Slaughter of Lord
Spynie, IL 529 ; trial. III. 61 ; notice of the
facts, kc , ib., 64 ; Letters to the King, ib. ; —
of Evelik, Jo., II. 515 ; — of Faisdew, Alex.,
135 ; — of Fairgirthe, Jo., I. 15 ; Ja., III.
115 ; — of the Grange, Bernard, II. 452 ; — of
Glenesk, III. 63 ; — Mr Jo., Parson of Menmuir, I. 101 ; — of Kynfawnes, Harie, I. 267,
279; in. 248, 316;— of Kynnettillis, Da.,
11. 529 ; Harie, his son. Slaughter of Lord
Spynie, ih.; — Lord, of Byris, Jo., I. * 134,

* 166, * 185 ; gift of his escheat given to
Douglas of Kilspindy, *239; Treason, *271;
Pat., * 472, * 473 ; Murder of David Riccio,

* 479, * 500, * 503, 29, 85, 91 ; Ja., 293,
345, 346 ; Jo., III. 248 ;— of the Mount, Sir
David, Lion King of Arms, I. *261 ; Keeper
of K. Ja. V. in his infancy, ib. ; King's Usher,

* 265, * 273 ; his wife Jonet Douglas, * 275,

* 276, * 278, * 292 ; payment for their services, * 304 ; — Master of, summoned for
Treason, * 268 ; — of Pyotstoun, W'm., * 201 ;
—of Quarrelhill, Da., II. 76 ;— of Raskarrell,
And., slain. III. 115; — Holland beheaded, I.

* 159 ;— of Scheillis, Ja., III. 495 ;— of
W^auchope, Jo., forfeited, 1. * 48 ; — of Woodheid. Sir Jo., II. 135, 136; — of Woodwrae,
Sir Jo., 529.

Lingot, of gold, large, I. * 307.

Linlithgow, besieging Palace of, I. * 238, * 242 ;
— Countess OF, Helenor, II. oiti, ?io(e ; —
Earl of, (see Levingstoun,) Alex., 496,
544 ; charged with education of tlie royal
family, 546, note ;— Yield of. I. * 228, * 238,

* 239, * 240 ;— Kecp.Msliip of, * 316;—
Raid of, 19; — withholding, * 255.

Linkhop, Ro., tried for Slaughter, for drowning 60

persons in a fi'rry-l)oat, I. 18.5.
Lion, a coin, (llardits or haidheads,) striking, 1.

692

GENERAL INDEX.

* 440, * 487 ;— King at Arms, * 63. See
Lindsay, Stewart, &c. ; — one of King's Ships,

* 317.

Lisk, what, 11.417; III. 496.

Listoun, Haiie, Murder, &c., III. 572.

Litter, L * 291, &c.

Little, Wm., Provost of Edr., I. 143, 261, 268.

Littlegill, Place of, burnt, I. 108 ; again, 184 ;

II. 482 ; — Laird of, and his daughter, slain,

184 ; III. 34. See Bailie.
Litt-hows, what, III. 605 ; litt-fatt, ib.
Litster, Jo., burnt for Sodomy, II. 491.
Liveries, Royal, for King's Household, &c., I.

*312, *313, &c.
Lochaber, burning of, I. * 101.
Lochbroom, Castle of. Island, I. * 305.
Lochdoun, Treasonably taking Castle of, I. * 73 ;

Sir Dav. Kennedy Capt. of, ih.
Lochfergus, burning of, I. * 100.
Lochinvar. See Gordon.
Lochirmachus, Laird of, I. * 414.
Lochleven, Lady, Mistress of K. James V., I.

* 298.

Lochmaben, Castle of, Besieging, I. * 332 ;—
Parish Kirk of, burnt, 305.

Lochmaben-stane, Raid of, I. * 397, * 398.

Lochmalearies, (or Lochraabalies,) 40 d. pieces,
so called, I. 134.

Lochmalony of that Ilk, James, I. * 404.

Lockerbylick, what, IIL 30.

Lockfast places, breaking up, Wm.Burrell hanged,
L59.

Lofthouse, (Loftus,) Robert, banished for concealing ' Paise-Penneis,' q. v.

Logan of Boningtoun, Geo., II. 10 ; III. 417,
487 ; Ro., fiar, 539 ; — of Brownhill, Geo., I.

* 458 ;— of Cotfield, Ro., * 159 ; Jo., 10,
72 ; And., yr., 148, 265 ; And., III. 255 ;—
ofCowstoune, Jo., 11.355 ; — of Drumchapill,
Jo., fiar, III. 114; — of Grantoune, And., II.
368, 397 ;— of that Ilk, Geo., 130 ; III. 475 ;

Jo., portioner of Restalrig, fined 1000 /. for

hearing Mass, 254 ; — Jonet. See Lady
Craigy ; — of Parsonisknowis, Ja., I. 149 ; — of
Rais, 63;— of Restalrig, Sir Ro., * 176;
Ro., 148 ; denounced for Bothwell's Conspiracy, 283 ; again, 335 ; Gowrie'a Conspiracy,
II. 146 ; Forfeiture of his son, 276 ; Letters to

E. of Gowrie, 257 ; hmjive Letters, with^ocsimile, (from the Original MSS.,) 281 ; Depositions of seven witnesses, 287, (see Sprott;)
his bones produced in Court, 277 ; and forfeited, 291 ;— of Sheriff brayis, Jo., I. 34.

Logie, Ro., bailie of Queensferry, II, 555.

Logy-Meigle, Laird of. See Currour.

Lokkart of Bar, Jo., I. * 137, * 204, * 352 ; effecting the escape of a Heretic, ib. ; Spoliation
of Churches, altars, 8ic., * 353, *491 ; Geo.,
II. 106, 145; Moyses, his brother, Slaughter,
&c., 461; III. 171;— of Braidschaw, Alex.,
565;— of Cieghorn, Steph., I. * 3, * 4;
Mungo, 36, 87 ; Allan, j^, ib. ; II. 357 ;—
Geo., strikes a person during the sitting of the
Lords of Session, III. 73 ; — of Kirkwood,
Gavin, I. 36 ;— of Lee, Ja., I. * 76 ; Allan,
beheaded, * 159 ; Ja., * 232 ; Allan remitted,
* 257 ; Ja., * 404 ; Hamesucken, &c., *410;
Mungo, 35; Ja., 36 ; II. 3, 21, 49 ; Wearing Pistolets, 61 ; Invaded l)y Lord Soraerville, ib., 540 ; III. 101 ; Murder under
colour of law, 205 ; — of Wicketschaw, Steven,

I. 36.

Lokraan, (Hangman,) I. * 274.

Lollards of Kyle, I. * 287. See Heretics.

Lorane of Harwood, Hector, II. 510 ; Wm., his
brother, slain, ib. ; Hector also slain, ib.

Loranes, forging false, I. * 397.

Lords and Ladies warned to come to the Coronation, I. * 300, &c.

Lorimers, spurriers, &c. II. 399, &c.

Lothian, Earl of, IL 273; Ro., 568, 575;
theft from. III. 98, 316, 339; Duel with
Lord Cranstoun's sons, 507.

Loudoun, Lord, Hew, III. 318.

Loupe, Laird of, HI. 5 ; Tutor of, ib.

Louthiane, Mr Wm., Priest, degraded, I. * 275 ;
beheaded for Slaughter, * 151.

Louranstoun of that Ilk, Tho., I. * 85.

LovAT, Lord, I. * 359 ; Alex., to present Rebels, * 390 ; Hew, 33 ; Simon, 285 ; And.,

II. 600, 7iote; Sim., HI. 20, 284.

Love, Capt. Peter, and 7 other English Pirates,
hanged within flood-mark, III. 99.

Lovell of Ballumby, Sir Hen., oppressed, I. * 177 ;
he and Jo., yr., 37 ; are denounced Rebels, 41.

Low, Jo., slain. III. 536.

GENERAL INDEX.

693

Lowis, Jo., hanged within flood-mark for Piracy,

III. 244.
Lowise, Jo., King's Fool, I. * 317 ; Ja., messenger, slain, * 379 ; — of Menner, (Manor,) Tho.,

*87.
Lowrestoune, Laird of, I. 284.
Lowrye of Cairnhill, Math., I. 70 ; — Pat., ' Pait

the ioitch,' Sorcery, Witchcraft, &c., ' wirreit

and brunt,' II. 477,
Lowsoun (Lawson) of Humby, Ro., I. 77.
Ludquhairn, House of, besieged, I. 388. See

Keith.
Lues Venerea, vid, Grantgore.
Lugs, cutting off a man's, I. * 475. See Ears.
Lumfaddis, what, III. 368.
Lumbart-sleeves, I. 51.
Luromisden of Airdry, Wra., I. * 157 ; Ro., II.

60 ;— of Blaneme, Pat., I. * 144 ; Jo., yr.,

* 230;— of Cuschnie, IK. 230; Wm., his
brother, ib.

Lundores, Commendator of, Pat., II. 53 ; his sei*-
vant slain, ib., 73 ; one of the King's suite at
Gowrie's Conspiracy, 172; his Deposition, 181.

Lundy of Balgony, And., I. * 338 ; Rob., * 426 ;
—of Conland, Ro., L 17 ; And., II. 92 ;— of
Gorthie, Geo., II. 112; his son David slain,
ib.;—o{ that Ilk, Jo. I. * 183, note; Wm.,

* 426 ;— of Strathairlie, Jo., I. * 157 ; And.,

* 404.
Lung-Schot, what, II. 536.
Lun3e, the loins, II. 28.
Lunt, what, III. 369, &c.

Luss, Lady, waylaid for her slaughter, I. * 178.
See Colquhoun.

Luterale, (Lutterell,) Sir John, English Captain

at Broughty, I. * 345.
Lute and case to K. James V., I. * 278 ; strings,

* 284 ; wires for, ib., * 285, * 286.
Lutherans, diet for their accusation, I. * 278.
Lyddell of Halkerstoun, Jo., Slaughter, III. 482.
Lyell of Murthill, Wm., I. * 404 ; Tho. III. 88 ;

— of Stanypath, Geo., I. * 85 ; Jo., * 144,

* 147, * 179 ; John, * 384, * 396 ; Geo., II.
343 ; Geo., fiar, 563.

Lying in wait, IT. 61. See Besieging, Umbesetting, &c.

Lyke-walk, III. 549, 551.

Lyle, Robert, Lokd, Great Justiciar of Scotland, I. * 2 ; Forfeiture recalled, I. * 12, * 19 ;
John, Lord, seizing a Messenger's letters, he,
I. * 157 ; denouncing Lord Sempill rebel.

* 170 ; slays a Chaplain, * 178.
Lymmeris, what. III. 398, 547, &c.

Lyoun of Auldbar, Sir Tho., I. 352 ; II. 287,
note; III. 323; of Baldukie, (Master of
Glammis,) I. 117, 119, 174;— of Balgellie,
Wm., I. 1 19 ;— of Colmelegy, Wm., I. * 150 ;
— of Cossynis, Jo., yr., I. 119; — of Easter
Ogill, James, slaughter, I. * 408, 119; II.
62 ; — George, (brother of Jo. L. Glammis,) I.
*328 ; Ja., ' base son' to the Master, III. 323 ;
— Jo., beheaded for concealing Lady Glammis's Conspiracy, &c., I. * 202 ; — Wm., flies
from justice, I. * 194 ; dies in Flanders, ib.,

* 197. See the proceedings against Lady
Glammis for pretented Treason, &c., r.
Glammis.

Lysymachus jun., ' a counter-buffe to,' III. 448.

M.

MacAdam of Craigullane, Wm., III. 118; — of
Smeithistoune, Ro., III. 118; — of Watterheid, Gilb., m. 118.

MacAlexander of Dalreoch, Jo., IL 106 ; III.
171 ; — of Drummochreync, Tho., strangled
(' wirreit') for Forging and uttering base coin,
IL 353.

MacAllane of Castlewirrie, (Castletirrim,) Ran.,
V^'Eane, III. 542 ; his wife carried off, Sec,

ib.; — Don. Darg and two others hanged, III.
251. See also MacAl;eane.
MacAllaster, Donald Mole, hanged for slaughter,
Sec, I. * 51 ; Allaster and Angus hanged for
Treason, III. 364; Don. V'Eane V'llenrie,
murdered by drowning, &c., III. 489 ; — of
Dounskey, Coll, fiar, III. 553 ; — of Largs,
Donald, remitted, I. *258 ; — of Loupe, Alex.,
remitted, I. * 255.

694

GENERAL INDEX.

MacAl5eane of CHftounhall, Mr Tho., I, * 444 ;
— Euphame, (of CHftounhall,) Witch, I. 216 ;
Plots against the life of her father-in-law,
237, 245 ; Conspires against the King's life,
for which she is tried, and for Witchcraft,
Sorcery, &c., 247 ; burnt alive, 257 ; — Mr
Hen., Justice-depute, I. 98, &c., 248 ; — Pat.,
alias Moscrop, Advocate, husband to Eufame,
I. 247, &c.

MacAljerach, Michael Dow, an aged man, banished for Common Theft and Robbery, I. * 53.

MacAngus (MacDonald) of Glengarie, Don.,
and 13 others, slaughter, II. 413 ; III. 19,
20, 25 ; Fire-raising and Slaughter, 540.

MacAphie of Colonsay, III. 27.

MacAiTel of Hillhouse, Wm., III. 345.

MacArliche, Jo., hanged for Treason, III. 365.

MacAulay of Ardincapill, Alex., I. * 361 ; Walt.,
* 453 ; Aulay, 167, 290, 307, 392 ; II. 105 ;
Intercommuning with the Clan Gregor, 414,
430 ; ^lacGregor refuses to take part against
him, 435 ; he pays Calp to MacGregor, 436,
540 ; III. 264.

MacBrair of Almagill, Ro., 166 ; II. 506 ;— of
that Ilk, Arch., beheaded for Slaughter, 158 ;
— Sir Jo., Slaughter of, I. * 39 ; a Canon of
Glenluce (heretic) escapes from Hamilton
Castle, * 352.

MacBrek, Arch., hearing Mass, &c., II. 442.

MacCaig, Andro, Murdered with K. Henry,
(Darnley,) I. * 492.

MacCall of Boighous, Wm., III. 57 ; — of Little
Fawside, Mungo, his Coal-pits set on fire, III.
361.

MacCal5eane. See MacAljeane.

MacClellan of Auchleane, Sir Wm., III. 150 ;—
of Bomby, Wm., * 85 ; Oppressed, * 90 ;
Stouthrief, Forgery, Cattle-stealing, Oppression, I. * 55 ; Sir Ro., III. 120 ;— of Middle
Third, Pat., I. * 55 ;— Patrick of Gilestoune,
Slaughter, I. * 61 ; beheaded for Cattle- stealing, * 64 ; Pat., Slaughter, * 95 ; Thomas,
respited, * 245 ; — Wm. of Nuntoun, Tutor of,

* 190, * 219, * 229, * 384, * 453 ; Tho.,

* 453, 304 ; W^m., II. 355 ; III. 117.
MacClennoquhane, Dug. and Pat. hanged, I. * 88.
MacCloid of Dunvegane, Besieged in his House

of Summerdaill, I. * 225 ; Besieging Castles
of Carnebog and Dunskaith, * 231 ; Resetting
Donald of the Isles, &c., * 254 ; — of the
Lewis, Torquill, Treason, I. * 45, &c. ; — of
Myn5enes, Jo., I. * 225.

MacCondachquhyof Ballemanoch, Allan MacGillespik, respited, I. * 253 ; — Jo. Dow Campbell, Tutor of Innerraw, II. 62 ; Jo. hanged
for Treason, III. 364.

MacConeill of Dunnivaig and Glynnes, Angus,
Treason, Murder, &c., I. 224, 348 ; his and
his wife's Depositions, III. 9 ; Offers to the
King, 365 ; Letter to the King, 366 ; — of
Knokrynsay, Sir Ja., Treasonable Fire-raising, &c.. III. 1 ; his remarkable escape from
Edr. Castle, 3 : barbarities towards his father
and mother, &c., 6 ; burns Askomell, ib. ; removed from Blackness, 7 ; escapes from Edr.
Castle, ib. ; retaken, 8 ; sentenced to be beheaded, 10 ; escapes and gets to Spain, 3, 10;
his deposition, ib. ; illustrative documents, 12,
&c. ; E. of Argyle's Report, 27 ; singular
ceremonies, on his meeting with Coll MacGillespic, 20 ; his Offers made to the King, 370 ;
Angus Gig, his brother. III. 3, 7iote, 4 ; tried
for Treason, &c., 363 ; hanged along with five
others, 365 ; illustrative documents, ib. ; Offers to the King, ib. ; — Rannald Oig, his bastard brother. III. 369 ; — Mary carried off, &c.,
in. 542 ;— of Slaitt, Sir Don., IIL 542 ; his
sister carried off, ib. See Gorme.

MacCoule, Ro., starving a man to death, and then
gibbeting his dead body, &c., III. 491.

MacCulloch of Ardwell, And., I. * 93 ; a rebel,

* 384; Gothray, ib.; Incest, 135 ;— of Barholm, Ja., slain, I. 81 ; II. 523 ; Tho., ib.,
539 ; m. 328; Alex, of Cardernes, L * 218,

* 219, * 229, ?iote ; — of Cardines, Ninian,
Oppression, I. * 52 ; Tearing King's Letters,

* 53 ; Alex., * 253 ; — Jo., merchant, slain,
in. 327; Jo. Maxwell, beheaded, ib. ;— of
Killaissor, (Killaser,) I. * 93, * 95 ;— of
Myreton, (Merton, Mortoune,) Sir Alex., I.

* 91, * 161 ; Wm., 134, 141 ; IL 539 ; III.
121 ;— of Netoun, Alex , yr., IH. 477 ;— of
Torhouse, I. * 398.

MacDonald of ArdnamurchaD,Chiefofthe Clan

GENERAL INDEX.

695

Ian, III. 20 ;— -Coll MacGillespik, Slaughter,
III. 553 ; — of Dunnievaig. See Makconeill ;
— of Glengarie. See Mac Angus ; — Jo. See
Muidertach ; — of Keppoch, Alex., III. 22,
25, 250, note ; — of Largie, III. 26. See
Maclan and MacKane.

MacDonell, Alex., gets gold sword, S:c., from L.
Lieut, of Ireland, III. 2 ; — of Benbecula, Ran.,
III. 542 ; his wife forcibly carried off, &c., ih. ;
Don., Capt. of Clanranald, (in 1725,) ib. ; —
of Scothouse, Don., III. 19.

MacDowell of Barjarg, Alex., Slaughter, II. 515 ;
— of Creoches, Pat., Slaughter, II. 515; III.
478;— of Freuche, Fergus, I. * 139, * 181,

* 218, * 219; Jo., Slaughter, II. 515;
Slaughter of the Laird of Balseir, 477 ; — of
Garthland, And., I. * 88 ; Uthred, yr., Slaughter, 84; Treason, 119, 127; IL 131; Euf.
Dumbar, Lady G., Slaughter, 515 ; — of Knokincroschie, Jo., I. 85 ; — of Machermoir, Peter,
II. 455 ; Ro. and Jo., his sons. Mutilation,
&c., 492 ; in. 328 ;— Tho., of Maccaristoune,
(Mackerstoune,) tried for Hamesuckin, &c., I.

* 176, * 456, * 469, * 479 ; II. 10, 14 ; Sir
Wm., III. 539 ;— of Mondork, Tho., I. * 139 ;
Vchtred, IL 492, 506, 540; III. 88, 134, 552.

MacDowgall of that Ilk, (Dunnollych,) III. 14 ;
Allan, his son, ib.\ — of Raray, Jo., III. 233 ;
—of Steidrig, Alex., I. * 456.

MacDuff, alias Barroune, hanged for Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 155, 246 ; — of Fadouy, alias Barroun, alias Fergusson, Da., IL 394 ; singular
instance of Designation in the names of Highlanders, ib. ; — of Glenelwort, Tho., III. 363 ;
his wife's right arm cut oft", ib.

MacEandowie, alias Camerone of Loch5ell,
Allane, Murder, &c.. III. 258.

MacEwin, Jo., and four MacGregors hanged, III.
112.

MacFaulan of Ardleische, Walt., I. * 224,

* 317 ; — of Arroquhar, And., * 451 ; denounced, 348 ; feud with Earl of Mar, &c., 352 ;
Jo., III. 233, 565 ;— of Auchinvannell, Parlane MacWalter? III. 114 ;— of Blairwak,
Dune. III. 505 ; Wm. MacClane, his servant,
slain, ib,; — Clan, Murder Sir Iluniphrey Colqiihoun at Bannachra, II. 401 ; barbarous torVOL. III.

ture and savage Murder of a Buchanan, III.
546, &c. ;— Geo., taken, I. * 306 ;— of Gortane, And., III. 565 ; Jo. Roy, his son, and 8
others, Slaughter, Fire-raising, &c., ib. ; hanged, 568 ;— of that Ilk, Sir John ? I. * 72,

* 224 ; Dune. * 223, * 224, * 453, 69, 141 ;
Jo., III. 250, 546, 550 ;— Isob., branded and
banished, I. * 346 ; — Jo. MacRobert, hanged
for burning Ardochbeg, Sorning, &c., * 225 ;
— Ro., Christiana, and Dune, find caution,

* 227.

MacFingane. See MacKinnon.

MacGhie, John, of Plomtoune, Oppression, I.

* 54.

Macgill of Cranstoun-Riddell, Mr Da., Lord Advocate, I. 206, &c., passim; Mr Ja., Til.
540 ; his house broken, &c., ib. ; — Dame
Eliz. Lady Cul3eane, II. 36 ; relict of Sir
Tho. Kennedy, 391 ; — of Nisbett, Mr Da.,
1. 261, &c. ; — of Rankeillor-nether, Clerk Register, * 479; Ja., Advocate, IL 112.

MacGilleoun, (MacLean,) Hector, of Doward,
I. * 169, * 241 ;— John Dig, Treason,

* 50 ; — of Lochbuy, Jo., his son slain, * 247,

* 252.

MacGillespie, Coill, III. 19, 20; strange ceremony at meeting with Makconeill, ib., 27 ;
takes Castle of Dunnievaig, 363 ; surrenders
to Argyle, 364.

MacGillibreid, Jo. MacEwin, &c., I. 225.

MacGhilliechallum (Stewart) of Tennandrie, Jo.
Dow, IL 528 ; AUaster, his brother, hanged,
529.

MacGillievoriche, Petrie, hanged for Murder under trust. III. 230.

MacGregor of Glenstray, (Chief,) AUesler, II.
102, 414, 419. See account of Field of Lennox, or Conflict of Cilenfruiiie, 430 ; he and
four others hanged and quartered, 433 ; Documents illustrative of the history of this affair, ib., Sic. ; was infamously betrayed by
Argyll, 434 ; his Dcclaratioit, 135 ; hanged
liis own heigiith above the rest of his Clan,
434 ; III. 223 ; Dun., Tutor of, 250 ; AUaster, 537 ; — Intercoinmuning with. See Clan
Gregor ;— Laird of, I. » 317, * 319 ; II. 62;
Jo. Dow, his son, and others, 03 ; Murder
4 T

696

GENERAL INDEX.

and Reiffon the Laird of Luss's lands, II. 414 ;
Mac-Coule-kere, I. * 164; — of Moirinsche,
Dun., (Dowglas,) Tutor of Glenstray, III.
250 ;— Pat., I. * 170 ; Jo., &c., beheaded, II.
419; Dugall and Neill hanged, 424; Jo,
Dow MacEwin and ten others hanged, 436 ;
Neill hanged, 438; Male, and three others
hanged, 439 ; Dougall, &c., Slaughter, III.
223 ; Gregor Beg and nine others hanged,
232 ; Dune. MacPatrik and five others hanged, 249 ;— Ro. Abroche slain, 223, 337.

MacGrume, Eugenius, hanged, I. * 81.

MacHector, an Evil Spirit, III. 606, 614, &c,

MacIan of Ardnamurchan, Jo., I. * 233, * 229 ;
III. 20;— of Castletirrim, Ran., 542; his
wife forcibly carried off, ib. ; Don. MacAllan, Capt, of Clan Ranald, 19. See MacDonald.

Macllveane of Gremmat, Pat., III. 172 ; Jo., yr.,
lb. ; made prisoner by Laird of Drummurquhie, 179.

Macintosh, (Malcum Tosche,) of Abirairdour,
Dune, III. 266 ; — Captain of Clanquhattane,

I. * 243 ;— of Dunnachtie, Each., 33, 285 ;

II. 97, 102, 307 ;— of Esseiche, (Essy,) Wm.,
Slaughter, II. 102; and taking captive. III. 266;
Hector, ' allya' and kinsman of, I. * 256 —
Intercommuning with, * 175 ; — Laird of,
* 116; respited, * 243, * 286; Will., his
son, and five others, Slaughter, II. 507 ; Sir
Lauch., III. 14.

MacJames, Jo. Macallaster and And., Fireraising, &c., III. 370.

MacKaxe, (See also MacIan,) besieged by Donald of the Isles, I. * 262 ; Sasine taken of
his lands, * 307 ; Earl of Argyle resigns them
in the hands of the Crown, * 312; — of Ardnamurchan, Jo., Slaughter, III. 483 ; — of
Rasa, Alex. MacGilbetoun, Besieging Summerdaill, &c., I. * 225.

MacKe, Alex., banished for selling Poison, &c.,
I. * 203.

MacKenzie of Culcovie, Mr Alex., III. 552 ;—
of Cultellan, Rorie, II. 413 ; — of Fardane,
Alex., yr., I. 200 ; — Mr Jo., Archdean of
Ross, 27 of his houses burnt. III. 541 ; —
of Kintail, Jo., respited, I. * 245 ; Colin,

1.285 ; Kenneth, 337 ;— of Roystoun, Sir Ja.,
(Lord Roystoun,) 237 ; — of Sturdrum, Alex.,
yr., 200.

MacKie of Balseir, Alex., slain, III. 477 ; — Donald, respited, I. * 248 ; Pat. hanged for
Forging money, 134; Harb., slain. III. 544 ; —
of Far, Y, (Odo,) invades Sutherland, &c., I.
68 ; Don. wounded by the E. of Caithness, III.
231 ; Don., fiar of. Slaughter of the Lairds of
Stirkco and Dyn, 235 ; — of Glassak, Jo., Murdered under trust, &c., 473 ; Jo. Maxwell of
Garrarie and Geo., his son, beheaded, 477 ; Niniane, 474 ;— of Larg, Sir Pat., 460, 475 ; —
of Myrtone, Jo., L * 92; Rich., * 384;
Arch.'l34 ;— of Sanday. * 170.

MacKillope, ' the fiddler,' slain, II, 437.

MacKinnon (of that Ilk) of Strathordill, Sir
Lauch. III. 19 ; Forcible Abduction, 542.

MacKippoune, Duncan Dow, hanged, I. * 225.

MacLe AN and Clanranald, Feud between, I. * 169 ;
—of Coll., Lauch. III. 19 ;— of Doward, I.

* 231, * 234 ; respited, * 245, * 246, * 254,

* 258 ; Lauchlan, Treason, Murder, &c%,
224 ; murders threescore persons, 229 ; fourscore men slain, besides women and children,
230; m. 6; Hector, (Eachin Oig,) 19, 25;
delivers his Castle to the King's Lieut., 368 ;
— of that Ilk and Harris, Rorie-more, 19 ; —
of Lochbuy, (see Macgilleoun,) I. * 234,

* 247 ; Hectour Owr, III. 19 ;— Lord,
(Laird,) I. * 281 ; English ship taken by,

* 281 ; sends Hawks to the King, * 294 ; —
Wm., slain, S:c., III. 565.

MacLeod of Assint, (see MacCloid,) I. 68 ;
Neil Angussone burns Dornoch, &c,, ib. ; beheaded, 69 ; — of Dunvegane, remitted, * 234 ;
— of Harris, Neill, III. 102 ; — Tormond,
wastes and burns Lewis, 245 ; Piracy, ib.

See MacCloid of the Lewis, Torquill, High

Treason, I. * 45 ; his lands let to Earl of
Huntlie, &c., * 102, 107 ; Neill takes English Pirates, III. 100; Neill, natural son to
Rorie, Fire-raising, Piracy, Szc, 244 ; hanged, &c , 247.

MacLellane. See MacClellane.

MacMathe of Corsebank, Jo., IIL 247, 493 ;—
of Schaw, Ja., HI. 271.

GENERAL INDEX.

697

MacMillan of Knokingarroch, Don,, III. 118.

MacMorran of Glasspen, Jo., III. 57 ; Ja., yr. ib.
124; Ja., III. 387;— Jo., bailie of Edinburgh,
killed by a boy, at a riot in the High School,
there, 195, note; 349, 362, III. 239.

MacMoylane, Jo. Gair, hanged for Treason, III.
364.

MacNacht of Doungoucht, Jo., III. 118 ; — Ja.,
Forcing, (Rape,) III. 499 ; — of Kilquhannite,
Jo., slaughter, I. * 327 ; slain, III. 229.

MacNachtene of Dundarroch, Alex., I. 68.

MacNeill, Chief of the Clan, Torquill, gift of
Giga's lands, I. * 246 ; — of Gaeya (Gigha)
Gillecallura, I. * 246.

MacOneill of Dunnyvaig and Glennis, Angus,
I. 224, 348; Ja., III. 1. See MacConeill.

MacPhatrick, Allaster, &c., slaughter, III. 554.

MacPhie of Collonsay, Male, &c. slain. III. 553.

MacQuharye of Auchtule, Ja., I. 35.

MacRanald-Bane, Donald, High Treason, I.

* 45.

MacRanald of Easter Leyis, Allan, II. 96 ; his

son AUester slain, ib. ; slaughter, 98 ; — of

Gargowoche, Allaster, III. 250; — of Keppoche, ib., note ; — of Vlladill, Angus, 481 ;

Allan, his brother, murdered by the Laird of

Glenlyoun, ib.
MacRerik, of the Kerne, Ja., III., 93.
MacRinnyll of Barneill, Ja., I. * 138.
MacRone, Janet, Forced, III. 499. *
MacSorle of the Route, Sir Ja., HI. 19,23, Sir

Ronald, 370.
MAcTEYR,Gilbert,beheaded,Stouthreif,(S:c.*361.
MAcWALTERof Auchinvannell, Parlane, 111.114.
Mac William alias Herrach, Angus, wounded and

made prisoner by'E. of Caithness, HI. 231.
Macers, I. * 316.
Machetema, Cornelius de, Dutchman, slain by

the E. of Cassillis, Lo. Sempill, &c., in time

of Parliament, I. * 236, * 238.
Madman, slaughter by an alleged, I. * 363. See

also Idiot, Slaughter, &c.
Magdalene, Queen, (of James V.,) I. * 190 ;

convoy from France, * 251 ; entry into Edr.,

* 287 ; Coronation, interment, and obsequies,
ib. ; Public mourning, ib., note ; ' grathing
and bowelling,' (embalming,) * 292 ; ' saulmess' and ' Dirige,' I. * 293 ; suffrage for,

* 297, * 304, * 310, * 319, * 322.
Magistrates of Edr. tried for freeing a Prisoner,

I. 442 to 450 ; form of delivering up a criminal to be executed, III. 98.

Magna Assisa, I. * 391.

Magnus, Doctor, (Ambassador,) I. *271, * 283.

Maidens of Witch-covens, III. 605, 613, &c.

Maiden, ' grathing' of the, at the Queen's entry
into Edinburgh, I. * 119.

Mail5ie-coittis, II. 432.

Mairtin, And., Secretary to the Earl of Orkney,
Rebellion in Orkney, &c.. III. 273 ; hanged,
283 ; his Confession, 301.

Maistres, the auld, I. * 311 ;— the Lady, * 304.

Maitland of Auchingassill, Ja., I. * 127 ; John,
159 ;— of Clonhie, Jo., III. 475 ;— of Lethingtoun. Rich., I. * 338 ; Sir Wm., Secretary,

* 479 ; at Riccio's murder, ib., * 507, * 512,

* 513 ; — of Thirlestane, Sir Jo., (Lord Chancellor,) 1. 172.

Malcolmetoische, in ward, in Edr. Castle, I. *280.
See Macintosh.

Malcolm the Fule, (Fool,) I. * 273 ;— Mr Jo.,
Minister of Perth, (afterwards Principal of
St Leon. Coll., St Andrews,) II. 330 ; Letter
from Jo., E. of Gowrie, to him, ib.

Malesoune, a father's, II. 479.

Malloch, Da., mutilated. See Toscheauch and
Oliphant.

Maltmen, ordered to have ale and malt ready for
the Army, I. * 270.

Mangertoun, Laird of, (Armstrang,) I. * 153 ;
Tho., * 171.

Mangonels and Artillery, Stouthreif of, I. * 132.

Manrent, Band of, form of one, I. * 373, he. See
Band.

Manwell, Mr Ninian, Englishman, Intercommuning with, I. * 406.

Manswearing, II. 453. See Peijury.

Marches, West, Raid of, I. * 161 ;— Just.of, * 239.

INIaros, King's, (for breeding,) I. * 316, See Royal
Stud, (Src, and under the names of the Kings
and Queens, &c.

Margaret, Queen, (of James IV.,) her marriage, I. * 117, * 188; her horses, <!v:c., burnt
at Dalkeith, * 1 18 ; her faction, * 259 ; at

698

GENERAL INDEX.

the Castle of Blackadder, I. * 261 ; at Harbottill, in England, * 262 ; returns to Edinr.,

* 266 ; recovers her wardrobe, ih. ; interview
with the King, her son, at Craigmiller, ih. ;
supposed attempt to carry him off to England,

* 267 ; her death and funeral, * 318 ; Barons
and Clergy summoned to attend her ' Tyrement,' * 319 ; Embassy to England, * 320.

Mark, the Devil's, searching for, &c., III. 601,

and Witchcraft passim.
Marchmond Herald, I. * 268, *273, *274,*281.
March-stones, demolishingand overthrowing them,

1.66.
Mariones, Geordie, hanged, III. 382.
jNIarischall, Countess of. Dame Marg. Ogilvie, Treasonable and Masterful Stouthreif,

&c.. III. 562;— Earl of, Wm., I. * 78,

* 259 ; Feud with Lord Gordon, * 263 ;
with Lord Forbes, * 264, * 300, * 302 ;
Akergill besieged, &c., * 394 ; Geo., 116,
178, 268, 283, 304; Feud with Laird of
Meldrum, 353 ; II. 41, 572 ; III. 32, 496 ;
his plate, jewels, &c., seized, a little before his
death, by the Countess, &c., 562 ; — Master
of, I. 44 ; n. 494.

Marjoribanks of llatho, Tho., I. 155.

Marr, Countess of, Agnes, I. 119 ; Annabill,
ih., 265 ; — Earl of, Ja., Regent, * 423 ;
Jo., 117; Forfeited for Raid of Ruthven, 119,
178 ; Jo., 267, 304 ; that none accompany
him to his ' day of Law,' 351 ; Feud with
Lairds of Garden and Arrochar, 352 ; Kirk's
grievances, II. 9; assists the King at Gowrie's
Conspiracy, 149, 165, 172; his Deposition,
174, 496 ; III. 22, 205 ; Lord High Treasurer, 438, 458, 597.

Marrabas bonnet, I. * 297.

Marriage of K. James IV., L * 117;— of K.
James V., * 293, &c. See also K. J a. IV., V.,
VI., and Q. Mary.

Marriage-presents, I. * 297. See Tocher ; —
Dress to Lady Errol, * 322, &c.

Married maidens, charmed cake, &c., II. 537.

Married women, arguments as to their liability to
be tried, &c., I. 41, &c.

Marrying ' in the fashion of Papistry,' I. * 420 ;
— after excommunication, 189.

Marshall of Innerpethie, Geo., I. 76 ; — of Pitcairns, Ja., 132.

Martein, Jean, ' Maiden' to a Witches* Coven,
III. 606, &c.

Martyrs, Scottish Notices relative to, I. * 209
to * 216. See Heresy, Reformation, &c.

Mary of Guise, Queen, (of K. James V.,)
her Marriage, I. * 292 ; triumphal entry,

* 293 ; her nurse, midwife, &c., * 295 ; embroidery work done by her, in gold and silver,

* 296 ; her CuowN-matrimonial was made of
Scottish gold, * 298; goldsmith work for,

* 299 ; belt or girdle of gold of * the mynde'
(mine,) with a sapphire, ib. ; her Robe-Royal,
&c., * 300 ; her Coronation, * 299, * 300,

* 301 ; Sceptre, * 302; writes to the King,
in the Isles, * 304 ; at Glammis, * 308 ; at
Crawfurdjohn, *311 ; gets Specimen of Gold
from the royal Mines, ib. ; her dule-dresses
for the Queen Dowager, * 319; gold
chains, &c., from France, ib. ; State bed of
crimson velvet, &c., ib. ; Collar of gold set
with pearls, * 321 ; her Painter, ib., 322;
Dule-gowns for her and her Ladies, * 322,
*323 ; Crown, *322 ; golden belt weighing
19A oz., ih. ; goes to Peebles, *323 ; her materials for Archery, * 324 ; silver dish stolen
from, * 386 ; her chief Cook robbed, * 406.

Mary Queen of Scots, Conspiracy to seize her
person, I. * 461 ; notices relative to Bothwell's first marriage, ib. ; Married to Darnley,

* 478, * 488 ; David Riccio murdered in her
presence, * 479, «S:c. ; she is warded in her
Palace of Holyrood, *482, he. ; E. Bothwell
tried, * 488 ; French Paris, * 489 ; Queen's
person seized at < Foul-brigis,' and carried to
Dunbar Castle, ib. See French Paris's Depositions, * 502, &c. as to her alleged part in
Darnley's Murder.

Masking dresses, &c., I. * 284.

Mason, Capt, English Pirate, III. 109.

Mason, King's Master, I. * 315.

Mass, Celebration of the, I. * 427, * 435. See
Reformation, &c. ; — Lady Seytoune, &c., 14,
30, 31, 35, 38 ; hearing it celebrated, II. 348,
442 ; Mass-priest chained in his Mess-claiihes,
&c., for 2 hours, and then all his ' Popische

GENERAL INDEX.

699

baggadge brunt,* and he Banished for life, II.
531 ; Mr Ro. Pliillope and Ja. Stewart banished, III. 252 ; Jo. Logan, portioner of Restah-ig, fined 1000 /., 254 ; Jo. Ogilvie hanged,
330 ; Moffet, 377.
Mass, ornaments of the, destroyed, I. * 353. See

Reformation.
Massacre of 36 Lamonds, by command of the

Marquis of Argyle, III, 199.
Masses for the soul (see Saul-Mess) of K. Ja,
IV., I. * 259;— trental for K. Ja. V. at
Quithorne, *278 ; before our Lady of Paisley,
ib. ; — trental of, ' for Britonaris saulis, quhilkis
perist at the Port of Aire,' * 279.
Maser (mazer) stolen, III. 99.
Massindew (3Iaison-Z)ieu) in Jedburgh, I. *377.
Master of Artillery, I. * 268 ; — of Ceremonies,

in. 558.
Masterful beggars to be punished, I. * 67 ; —
Reiving by Messengers, * 155 ; — Stouthreif,
Tho. Hardie hanged, IL 441, 473. See
Stouthreif, &c.
Mathow of Balhoussie robbed of his Title-deeds,
&c., III. 265; Pat. Eviot hanged, if).; — Grissell,
stealing a coffer with writings, II. 93 ; Drowned in the North Loch of Edr., 94 ; her accomplice scourged, ib.
Mathesoune, Jo., II. 343 ; — Jo., j""., Oppression,

&c., beheaded, I. * 202.
Matin-book, I. * 296 ; King's great, * 297, &c.
Maule (Mawll) of Pan mure, Rob., I. * 141 ; remitted, * 2.56 ; Tho., taking captive, <S:c., *345.
Mawer of Mawerstoun, Mark, III. 230 ;— of

Staynies, Mark, II. 484.
Maxton of Cultoquhay, Rob., L * 88 ; Pat., 77.
Maxwell of Aikenhead, Jo., I. * 43 ; Walt.,

* 130 ; Jo., Tutor of, 289 ; — of Arenyning,
(Aremein,) Tho., Slaughter, III. 229 ;— of
Auchinlarie, Wm., 327 ; Slaughter by his son
Jo., ib.; — of Barvannok, Ro., 477 ; — of Boisfield, Jo., I. * 402 ;— of Bratoch, Ro., 1 10 ;
— of Calderwood, Ja., 36 ; Ja., yr., ib., 133 ;
Sir Ja., 105 ; Slaughter of the Laird of Lekkie, III. 493 ; his death attested, 495 ; — of
Castlemilk, Ro., I. Ill ; — of Conhaithe, Rob.,

* 151 ; Harb., yr., slain, ib. ; Edw., brother
to, II. 465 ; Jo., III. 229, 544 ;— of Cowestanes, Ro., slain, I. 157. See M. of Kirkhill ; — of Crostoun (Trostoun ?) Edw., slain
by Wm. Douglas of Lyncluden, &c., III. 90,
95 ; — of Craigtoun, Edw., rebel, 91 ; — of
Caveris, Mr Wm., 229 ;— of Cavense, Harbert, II. 259 ; taken prisoner after burning of
Langholme, by the Armstrangs, 450, 479,
490, 492;_of Cowhill, Arch., 485, 492;
Wm., yr., ib. ; acquitted of Slaughter of the
Laird of Kirkhill, 490 ; III. 229, 560 ;— of
the Coittis, Harb., slain, II. 492 ;— of Cowglene, Wm., Resetting Jesuites, III. 376; —
of Dalquhorne, Pat., slain, II. 71 ; — of Duncowtedir, Ro., I. Ill ;_of Dunwiddie, Sir
Ro., 133, 157; slain, 167; n.492; Ro., IIL
11, 35, 41 ;— of Dargavoll, Pat., I. 378; his
daughter Rebecca carried off, ib. ; — of Drumcowtrane, Ge'^., III. 124 ; — of Foulbar, Jo., I.

* 385 ; — of Gariarie, Jo., and Geo., his son,
Murder under trust, III. 473; beheaded, 477;
— of Gribtoune, Wm., Hamesncken, Besieging
Tower of Newhie, 8cc,, II. 464, 485 ; — of the
Hillis, Edw., 485 ; IIL 475 ;— Jo., callit

* Achilles Johnne,' beheaded for Slaughter,
327 ;_of Keltoun, Ro., I. 289 ;— of Kirkconnell, Jo., ib.; Ja., III. 495 ;— of Kirkhill,
(Kirkhous or Crovestancs,) Ro., slain, 1. 157 J
IL 485 ; Wm., //;. ; III. 1 1 ; Clia., 35 ; Wm.,
41 ; — Loud, Feud between him and Lord
Crichton of Sanquhar, I. * 53, * 75, * 85;
Slaughter of the Laird of Kilpatrick while at
the horn, * 77, * 124; Caution to present
felons to trial, * 142 ;— Rob., * 1 f9, * 151 ;
Justice-depute, * 163, * 184, * 190, * 199 ;
Keeper of Treif Castle, and Steward of Kirkcudbright, * 232 ; Keeper of Lochmabcn Castle, * 233 ; Steward of Annandale, * 237 ;
Justiciar of West Marches, * 239; Great Admiral, * 251 ; accompanies Q. Macdalene
from France, ib., * 259, * 264 ; keeping Castle of Hermitage, * 284, * 300 ; poinded for
debts, *307; .lohn, *387, 111, 114 ; created
Eaul of Morton, 275; made Warden of
West March, ib. ; Feud with Laird of Closeburn, 298, 305 ; slain by Sir Ja. Johnstone,
ib., 360, and no/cs ; III, 30 ; — Jo., Treason,
II. 557 ; escapes ironi Edr. Castle, III. 3, 11,

700

GENERAL INDEX.

III. 47 ; Murder8 the Laird of Johnstone, 3 1 ;
summons of Treason, &c., 33 ; the Murder is
committed with ttvo poisoned huWets, 37 ; sentence, 40 ; illustrative Papers, 41, &c. ; Offers
by him, viz. to marry the deceased Laird's
daughter, without tocher — that the young
Laird should marry Lord Herries's daughter with a dowry of 20,000 merks — and to be
banished for 7 years, &c., 51 ; his execution,
&c., 52 ; Ro., his brother, petitions Privy
Council to intercede with the King, 52 ; —
Intercommuuing with, 91, 223 ; — Theft from
Lord M. 92 ;— of Logane,Alex., 93, 229; Jo.,
his son, ib- ; — of Mersyde, Wm., II. 490 ; —
Master of, Ro., III. 229, 475 ; — of Newlandis, Wm., 493 ; Ja., his son. Slaughter of
Laird of Lekkie, ib. ; — of Nether Pollock,
Jo., I. * 42 ; Jo., yr., 19, 133 ;— of Newark,
Pat., * 150; Geo., 19, 69; Pat., 355 ; IL
131 ; Slaughter of the Laird of Skelmourlie
and his son ; III. 122 ; Da., 229 ; Pat., 264 ;
— of Orchard toune. Sir Ro., 31 ; — of Poterak, Ro., 225 ;— of PoUok, Sir Jo., 377 ;— of
Stanelie, Jo., I. * 130, * 170 ; Gabriel, attempting to restore Popery, * 427 ; Pat.,
slain, 133 ;■ — of Southbar, Tho., 69 ; — of the
Schottis, Sir Ro,, II. 485 ; — of Spottis, Sir
Ro., his Deposition as to the Laird of Johnstone's Slaughter, &c., III. 43, 229 ;— of
Teling, Alex., Taking Theftboot, I. * 427,
41 ; Dav., yr., ib. ; Hugh, II. 600, note ; — of
Tinwald, Edw., Fire-raising, I. 110, 289 ; II.
105 ; III. 44 ;— of the Tower, Ro., 45 ; — of
Terriglis, Sir Wm., I. *426 ; Sir Jo., * 428 ;
III. 391 ; — Wm., ' wirreit ' (strangled) for
uttering base money, II. 355.
Maxwell's thorns, III. 30.
May, Mr Dune, Fomenting jealousies between

the King and his Barons, &c., I. * 329.
Maybole, attempt to restore Popery at, I. * 427.
Mayne, Jo., Forging harditts, I. 82.
Measures, false, II. 88.
Megerny (Miggerny) Castle burnt, &c.. III. 481 ;

the leavar-diarig, or Red-book of, ib.
Megotland, Hunting in, I. * 272 ; none to hunt
there till the King's arrival, * 282, * 285 ;
killing deer and roes there, 48.

Meldrum of Achquharteis, And., II. 428 ; oppressed and taken captive, ib. ; — of Drumbrek. And., 49 ; Geo., yr.. Treason, Oppression, &c., 428 ; beheaded and forfeited, 430 ;
Place of, kept against the King's guard, 428 ;
And., 557 ; III. 230, 365 ; Geo., 409 ;— of
Fivy, Geo., L * 187, * 229 ; respited, * 254 ;
Sir Geo., * 370 ;— of Haltoune, Geo., yr., II.
76 ; — Laird of, (Alex. Seytoun,) slain, I.
* 149, * 175, &c.. See Seytoune ;— of Idene
(Edane,) Pat., * 150 ; Tho., Hamesucken,
&c., in. 431 ; Pat., fiar, 432 ; Tho., Usurpation, &c., 460 ; Pat., yr.. 464 ; — of Moncoffer,
Mr Wm., slain, II. 76 ; — of Ordley, Jo., oppressed, &c.. III. 431, 460 ; Slaughter, &c.,
464 ; — of Rothiebirsbane, And., hurt and
robbed, &c., 478 ;— of Segie, Tho., I. * 157;
Da., II. 99.
Mell, what. III. 405, 510, Szc.
Melrose, Abbot of, waylaid, I. *182 ; his sheep
driven to Linlithgow, * 274 ; Abbacy of, solicited of THE Pope for a natural son of K.
James V., * 311, 205 ; Commendator of,
Ja., IL 380 ;— Field of, I. * 133 ;— Lord,
Tho., III. 538, &-c. See Binning and Hadingtoun, &c.
' Melteithe,' a meal, price of, at Jusiice-aires, I.

* 390.
Melville, Mr And., Master of King's Household,
I. 185 ; his wife lost at sea, ib. ; II. 91 ; — of
Bruntisland, Sir Ro., 568, note; III. 208;—
of Carnbee, Jo., yr., I. * 157 ; Jo., * 160 ;
Sir Ja., 306 ; Sir Jo., yr., II. 234 ;— of Halhill, Sir Ja., I. 242 ; — of Murdocairny, Sir
Ro., 267, 293, 350 ; II. 3, 496, 568 ;— of
Raithe, Sir Jo., I. * 172, * 184, * 190, * 199;
remitted, * 250 ; judicially murdered, * 339 ;
— Capt. Ro., 309 ;— of Wester Touche, Jo.,
remitted, * 250.
Menteithe, Earl of, Alex., I., * 164; Jo.,
282 ;— of Eglischaw, Ro., 82, 88, 285 ;—
Master OF,W^m., * 164; — of Pansteid, Harie,
and his sons. Sec, Stealing corn, &c.. III.
564;— of West Kerse, Wm., L * 167; Sir
Jo., II. 600, note.
Men^et, (mein5eit,) what, HI. 384, &c.
Men3ie, train, &c., III. 586.

GENERAL INDEX.

701

Menjeis of Auchinsell, Ro., I. * 456 ; — of Castelhill, Wm., III. 442; Jo. and And., his
sons, Murder, ib. ; — of Combreise, (Conoerie,)
Dune, 233, 264 ; Ja., his brother, slain, 537 ;
his house burnt by the MacGregors, id. ; — of
Culterawis, Mr Alex., I. 467; — of Culrie,
Gilb., Prov. of Aberdeen, III. 204 ; Alex.,
his son, slain, ib. ; — of Enoche, Ja., 501 ; — of
that Ilk, Ro., I. * 76 ; Alex., III. 233, 583 ;
—of Pitfoddellis, Gilb., 205, 206 ; his green
corn cut, &c., 258, 259 ; Marg., his wife, ib. ;
— of Tilliepowreis, Dav., 205 ; — of Weem,
Ja., I. 141 ; Alex., 392, 433 :, III. 264.

Merche, marrow, III. 587.

Merecleiiche, Hereschip of, I. * 36.

Merl5eounis and Hawks sent to France, I. * 266.

Mermadyne, a trinket of diamonds, I. * 293.

Mertene, Jo., Bailjie of Blaikschaw, II. 490.

Mertoune of Cammo, Tho., I. 310.

Mertrik-skins, Avhat, I. * 321.

Merse, Inhabitants of, get Remission, I. * 174;
Raid, * 267 ; charged to defend the country,

* 324.

Merser of Awdy, Laurence, I. * 352, 59 ; — of
Edindowie, Ro., III. 490 ;— of Mekillour,
Laur., II. 63 ; — of Sawling, Gabriel, I. 134 ;
Ro., III. 134.

Messenger at Arms, deforcement of, I. * 71, &c.
See Deforcement ; — maltreated by Sheriff of
Murray, II. 564 ; — deprived for neglect, I.

* 63 ; for ignorance, * 217; — falsifying an
execution, * 155 ; evidents, hanged, 85 ; his
servant hanged, 87 ; — forging and signeting
false Letters, &c., scourged and deprived of
his office, II. 455 ; — hanged for taking blackmaill, I. * 356 ; — imprisoning one and his
witnesses, * 345 ; taking, &c., 205 ; — Oppression and frauds by, * 154 ; — sentence
against fugitive, * 155 ; — Slaughter of, * 48,

* 379, * 381 ; Wm. Wauchope beheaded, II.
402 ; — striking, I. * 75 ; causing one to eat
the whole copies of the Letters to be executed
by him, &c., 346 ; — wounding one, and tearing his Letters, <!i:c. 354.

Methven of Barnfield, Mr Jo , IL 562;— Loud,
Henry, I. * 224, * 355 ; besieges Place of
Dupplin, &c., 25 ; elain, 30 ; III. 449.

Middilmast, (Middlemeist,) Geo., of Grerstoune,
(Greistoune,) slain, I. * 81, * 87; Tho.,

* 133, * 147 ;— of Lilslie-Chapell, Wm., IL
378 ; Jo., his brother, slain, ib. ; Slaughter of
the Laird of Craling, 445 ; Wm., Constable of
Dumbarton, III. 475 ;— of Chapell, Wm., III.
569.

Middletoun, Ja., Slaughter, (a youth of 14,) III.
237 ; sentenced to be beheaded, 241 ; banished for life, after six years imprisonment,
ib., note, 458 ;— of Killhill, Jo., I. 29.

Middle-3erd, (earth,) I. 57, 164 ; man of the,
III. 609. See also Witch Trials.

Milan, Duke of, L * 272. See Grosolez.

Milk, cow's. Witches mode of taking, III. 603 ;
note, 605.

Miller, Sir Constene, banished, and his right hand
struck off, L * 432.

Mines, Gold, in Scotland, I. * 298 ; Dutch miners,
ib. ; Silver, * 302, * 306, &c.

Ministers (Clergy) exemption claimed by them
against passing on Assises, I. 24 ; praying for
the banished, 136, &c.; striking a minister, &c.,
II. 360 ; do. while Privy Council was sitting.
416 ; scourged through Edr., and right hand
struck off, 417 ; the Moderator and several
Members of Assembly tried, 494 ; banished,
503. See Reformation, Assembly, &c.

Minor, Slaughter by, I. * 16, * 396 ; acquitted,
453; mutilation by, I. 160.

Minstrels of England, I. * 118, * 122; French,

* 267, 292 ; Italian, * 314, ,!v:c., Violers, * ib.
-Mint irons, using them in coining, Alex. Reid

hanged, II. 398.
Minto, Hereschip of, I. * 18; Burning of, 19;

Kirk of, ' Pas-pennys' found at, I. * 18.
Mischancie, III. 5, &c. ^

Mischantlie, IIL 549, &c.
Misrule, Lord of. See Robin Hood, &c.
Missiliit, (mussillit,) to go disguised, muffled, or

masked, I. 246 ; Proclamation against riding

' nnssillit,' 266, 306 ; III. 383.
Mitchell, Mr .la., notice of liis Trial for firing at

Archb. Sharpe, III. 195, 196 ; Ja., Murder,

by striking with * kentis and flailHs,' and then

' douking' in a ' myliio-leid or dam,' 488.
Mitclielson of Mortoune, Alex., 155.

y

702

GENERAL INDEX.

Moder-nakit, stark naked, 11. 70 ; III. 539.

MoflFat of Grantoun, Ro., I. * 397, * 398 ;— of
Hell)eth, Ja., his son, hanged for Forging and
vending base money, II. 353 ; — of Hewek,
Edw., I. * 86 ;— of Knock, I. * 397, * 398 ;
— Symone, lianged for horse-stealing, &c., I.
386 ; Nicol, hanged for do., house-breaking,
&c., II. 357 ; Moffat, a Mass-priest, warded,
III. 331 ; Adam, scourged and branded for
Peijury, 358 ; Mr Ja., alias Haliburtoune,
Jesuite, resetting him, 371 ; tried for hearing
Mass, &c., 377 ; banished, 379 ; Wm., Forcible Abduction, &c., (a remarkable case,) 402.

Moitt, Jo., beheaded for the murder of his wife,
III. 481.

Molle (Mow) of that Ilk, Jo., Hamesucken, &c.,

I. * 176, * 230 ;— Slaughter, 256 ; II. 476,
515 ; Tho., his brother, 559 ; Jo., III. 396.

MoncrieflF of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 88 ; Wm., * 343,

* 379, * 466 ; Alex., his son, taking wages to
serve against the Queen, * ih. ; beheaded
and quartered, * 467 ; William yr., 10, 37 ;
Wm., II. 159 ; Hew, his brother, forfeited in
Pari., ib. ; Mr Jo., Advocate, 166 ; Wm.,
234, 513; III. 583 ;— of Easter MoncrieflF,
Mr Jo., Sheriff-dep. of Perthshire, II. 244 ;
III. 583, note ; — of Pitcreif, (PittencriefF,)
Jo., with Gowrie previous to his Conspiracy,

II. 176, 179, 183; his Deposition, 184.
Moncur of Balluny, Jo., Oppression, he, I. * 178,

* 180 ;— of Ciiapeltoun, Jo., I. * 424 ; Pat.,
II. 384, 528 ;— of that Ilk, II. 528 ; Jo., his
son, ih.

Monocords, a musical instrument, I. * 116.

Montrose, Master of, Wm., abiding from Solway, I. * 241 ; Jo., 282, 347 ; married Eliz.
Ruthven, II. 297, note; — Earl of, Wm.,

* 78, * 165, * 167, 74 ; Jo., 114, 275, 282,
304 ; Feud with Laird of Calder, &c., 347 ;
Feud witli Laird of Thornydykes, 352 ; combat with Laird of Calder at the Salt Tron,
Edr., 361; Chancellor, II. 159; his house
broken into and goods stolen, 352, 430, 496,
568, 596; Ja., III. 318 ;— Reformation
preached in town of, I. * 406.

Montfoid, Jo., yr., of that Ilk, Oppression, &c., I.

* 74; Ja., yr., * 133.

Montrule, Madame, I. * 294, * 295.
Monyvaird, Kirk of, burnt, slaught' r of six score
Murrays, vpith their wives and children, I.

* 101 ;— Lady, III. 465, 480, 452.
Mons-Meg, L * 117, Sec.

Montgomery oi Auchinhude, Hew, I. 61 ; III.
119 ;— of Broomland, Ja., L * 388 ;_of
Brunstane, Adam, I. 61 ; — of Giflfen, Pa., I.

* 420; — of Hazlehead, (Heislet, Heislop,)
Hugh, L * 204, * 369, * 388, * 420, 36 ;
and his spouse oppressed, &c., 60, 61, 99 ;
Mr Alex, and Marg., ' brother-bairnes' to
Laird, III, 535 ; — of Lainshaw, Neill, remitted, * 253 ; Sir Neill, * 335, * 360,

* 369, * 388, * 402, 63, 169; IL 376,
390 ;— Lord, Justice, I. * 272 ;— of Makbehill, Robert, L * 339;— Dame Mariota,
(Lady Sempill,) Imprisoning, &c., I. * 381 ; —
Master of. Assise on, I. * 264 ; — Capt.
Ro., 60, 61 ; — of Scottistoun, Jo., Oppression, &c., I. 60, 66 ; III. 236 ; Jo., yr., slain,
ih. ; — of Skelmorlie, Geo., I. * 170 ; he and
Wm., yr., his son, slain, 133 ; Trial of Maxwell of Newark, III. 122 ; Sir Ro., 129, 164;
—of Stair, (or Stane,) Mr Wm., L * 161 ;
Hugh, * 388.

Monorgane (Monorgund) of that Ilk, And., I.

* 88, * 177; Giib., * 424.

Monro of Aldie, Ro., III. 498 ; — of Assint, Ro.,
I. 191 ; Hugh, 194 ;— of Dalcartliy, L * 408;
— of Fowlis, Mr Hector, I. 192 ; remarkable
superstition, 202, &c., 285. See Fovvlis ; —
of Kildrummodyis, Hector, I. 203 ; — of Killry. Hector, I. 198 ; — of Newmore, And., I.
194 ;— of Urquhart, Jo., I. 194.

Monteith of Kerse, Sir Wm., II. 23 ; Wm., yr.,
ib. See Menteith.

Monyest, most, III. 23.

Monypenny of Kynkell, Alex., 1. 60; — Mr Mungo,
wounding, I. * 328 ; — of Pitmilly, yr., I.

* 478 ;— of Pilrig, Pat., L 10; Da., 155;
Pat., 186.

Moore of Powmadie, Geo., III. 541.
Moray, Earl of, <S:c. See Murray.
Morbus caducus, III. 556.
Morrowing-gilt, I. * 1 15.
Morrice- dancers. See Dancer, I. * 124.

GENERAL INDEX.

703

Moryene, Peter the, III. 591.

Morveme burnt, &c., I. * 247.

Moranvelay, Monsr., I. * 296.

More, the, I. * 278 ; III. 391 ;— the More lass,

ib. ; christened, 592.
Morions, what, II. 432.

Morton, Earl of, (Douglas,) I. * 269 ; Ja.,
* 370, * 374, * 384, * 438, * 439, * 469 ;
Riccio's Murder, * 479, * 496, * 503 ; his
servant John Geddes slain, 1, 4, &c. ; Regent, Conspiracy against, 32, 70, 72, 111 ;
Process of Treason, and doom of Forfeiture,
&c., 113 ; executed, 115 ; his head ordered to
be taken down from Tolbooth, 116, (note,)
121, 146, 178 ; Wra., 276, 330, 333 ; Lord
Lieutenant, 342 ; III. 205 ; — Earl of (Maxwell,) Jo., created Warden of the West
Marches, I. 275 ; deprived of Earldom on
restoration of title and estates to heir of the
Regent, III. 28 ;— Master of, IL 494 ; Ro.,
III. 61 ;— of Randerstoune, Alex., I. *404 ;—
of Walkinschaw, Ja., I. * 344.
Mortymer of Craigievar, Ja., yr., I. 94 ; — of Flemingtoune, Jo., yr., II. 385 ; — Geo., JesuitePriest, Resetting him. III. 541.
Moscrop, Mr Jo., plotted against by Witches, I.

237 ; hanged, II. 35. See MacAlseane.
Mosman, Wm., beheaded, I. * 159.
Mourning, Public, the first instance was for Q.
Magdalene, I. * 287, note; for Prince
James, * 310; for Q. Margaret, * 318,
* 320, * 322, * 323, &c. See also under the
names of Kings and Queens, &c.
Mousewald, Slaughter of Laird of, I. * 41.
Mounteagle, Lord, detects the Gunpowder

Treason, II. 590.
Mow, Wm , Parricide, II. 18 ; came in the King's

will, and fined 1000 L, 19.
Mowat of Busby, Charles, I. * 166, * 167 ; remitted, * 254, 29,63 ; slain,79;— of Boquhally,
Pat.,*454 ; Magnus, 11.49 ;—Tlio., Theft, III.
233 ;_of Sewnane, Geo., III. 280 ;— of Gersettair, Ro., III. 299.
Mowbray of Barnbougall, Rob., I. * 333, * 335
* 436, 154 ; Francis, his son, slays Mr Wm.
Schaw, 363 ; Alex., his brother, II. 22 ; Ro.,
320, note, 405 ; — Francis, High Treason, his
VOL. III.

dead body produced in Court ; sentence pronounced, and his corpse gibbeted, drawn, and
quartered, &c., IL 277, note ; details and illustrations of this remarkable case, 405 ; — of
Pitlouer, Ja., I. 60, 78 ;— (Mowtray ?) of
Seyfield, Geo., I. 255 ; II. 99.
Mowtray of Markinche, Geo., I. 59, 64 ;— of

Seyfield, Ro., HI. 453. See Mowbray.
Moydart, John, (Mudyartach, Moderat, &c.) I,
* 323, * 392, &c. See next article.

Muidertach, John, (MacDonald,) I. * 323, * 392.

Muirhead of Bulles, Jo., I. * 55 ;— Kathr. burnt
for Witch craft, L 395; Mr Jo., notary, hanged,
m. 430 ;— of Lacliope, Ja., yr. II. 541 ; Ja.,
HI. 345.

Muirfowl, price of, at Justice- aires, L * 389.

Muk, Island of, burnt, I. 228.

Mule, the King's, foot-mantles, &c., for, I. * 288,

Mull, Island of, burnt, &c., I. * 247.

Mullikine, Agnes, alias Bessie Boswell, banished
for Witchcraft, I. * 432.

Multray of Markinche, Sec. See Mowtray.

Mummyn, (mumming,) Southrief, by way of, I.

* 50, * 51, * 271.

Munitions, see Artillery, I. * 295, * 298, * 306,

* 317 ; expenses of, * 325,

Munroe, Da., murdered, III. 196 ; corpse of one
of the Murderers bleeds, on approaching tlie
place of murder, ib.

MURDER. — Adamsoune, And., beheaded and
quartered, I. * 84 ; Eliz., murdered by her
husband, * 355; — Aitkyne, Ro., beheaded, I.

* 475; — Armstrong, Jo., hanged, I. * 173 ;
And., David Riccio's murder, * 485; Sim,
alias Wantoun Simic, Murder of K. Henry,
(Darnley,) * 489 ; Tho., for murder of Warden of the West Marches, II. 363, has his right
hand struck off, and hanged, and then gibbeted
in irons, 364. See Armstrong; — Bastie, Sir
Anthony D'Arcy de la, murdi-rod, I. * 235;
— Bikertoun, Hen., beheaded, I. * 162;

^ Black, Hen., and 11 others, HI. .53 ;— Blackadder, Capt. Wm., hanged and quartered for
murder of K. Henry, (Darnley,) I. * 489;
— Bonar, Wm., acquitted, H. 531 ; — Bothwell, Eahl of, Ja., murder of K. Henry,
(Darnley,) * 488; — Brown, Jonet, hanged,

4 u

704

GENERAL INDEX.

III. 269 ; Jo. and 3 others hanged for piracy
and murder, under trust, III. 569;— Burn, Jo.,

I. * 426 ; — Bynning, Jo., hanged and quartered
for Darnley's murder, 95 ; — Caithness,
Earl of, Geo., * 394, III. 498 ;— Calder,
Tho., &c., II. 516 ;— Campbell of Arkinglase,
Jo. I. 391 ; of Glenlyoun, Dune. III. 481 ;—
Camerone, Allan, alias MacEandowie of
Loch3ell, &e. III. 258;— Canochsoune, Alex.
John, I. * 170; — Colquhoun, Mr Adam,
Treasonable Slaughter and Poisoning, he, I.

* 419, hanged and burnt, ih. ; Helen, Poisons
lier husband, 80 ;— Cowan, Agnes, hanged,

II. 402;— Craiganis, Murder of Laird of, I.

* 163, * 164, &c.; — Cranstoun of Skaittisbuss,
Rich., Murder of David Riccio, I. * 486 ;—
Cruikschank, Ja., hanged, and his head and
right hand affixed at Dundee, &c., II. 384 ; —
Cuninghame of Aiket, Wm., poisoned by his
wife, I. 80 ; Pat., beheaded, II. 18 ;— DalGLIESH, Geo., hanged and quartered, for K.
Henry, (Damley's,) Murder, I. * 490, his
Deposition, * 495, his Confession, * 500 ; —
Deanis, Pat., hanged, II. 517 ; — Dow, Meg,
burnt, I. 186 ; — Dowglas, Mr Arch., Darnley's Murder, I. 142, acquitted, 154 ; Pat.,
burnt, I. 363 ; — Duncan, Bessie, hanged. III.
430 ; — Elliot of Copschaw, Jo., II. 520 ; —
Elphingstoun, Mr John, Adultery, he, I.

* 356— Erskine, Ro.,III. 260, beheaded, 264;
Helen, Isabel!, and Annas, tried, 266 ; sentenced to be beheaded, 269; Annas banished,
ih. ; — Fergussone, John of Craigdarroch, I.

* 79 ; Wm., decapitated with a sword, I.

* 425; — Fischeare, Jo., beheaded, I. * 174; —
Fotheringhame, James, hanged, I. * 344 ; —
Frude, (Ford ?) Laird of, murdered, I. * 426 ;
— Gaikdxer, Grissell, Witch, ' wirreit' and
' brunt,' II. 195 ; — Galbraith, Ja., beheaded,

III. 565 ; — Geikie, Wm., yr., acquitted, II.
388 ;— Glen, W^m., I. * 426 ;— Glorat, Laird
of, Murdered, I. * 170 ; — Gordon of Auchindoun, Sir Pat., and 26 others, he, I. 284 ; Ja.,
barbarous Murder of Laird of Pitmedden, III.
78; of Clubisgoule, Jo., IIL 399, 402; of
Iladdo, Harie, III. 488 ; — Gracy, Wm., hanged. I. * 344 ;— Haitlie, Alex., I. * 451 ;—

Haitlie, Wm., II. 472 ;— Hamilton, Tho.,
called ' unsanyt,' I. * 126 ; of Benestoun, Jo.,
slain, 85 ; Ja., of Spittelscheill, II. 540, beheaded, 561;— Hanott, Wm., I. * 456;—
Haubert, (Howbert,) Nicholas, alias French
Paris, Murder of K. Henry, (Darnley,) I.

* 489 ; his Deposition, Aug. 9, * 502 ; his Deposition, Aug. 10, * 506 ; — Hay of Tallo, Jo.,
(apparent of,) hanged and quartered for K.
Henry, (Darnlcy's,) Murder, I. * 490 ; hie
Deposition, * 496 ; his Confession, * 500 ; —
Henderson, Christopher, hanged, I. * 473 ;
John, hanged, I. * 206 ; of Boltoune, Jo.,
hanged and quartered for Darnley's Murder;

* 490, his Deposition, * 498 ; his Confession,

* 500 ;— Hepburneof Whytecastell, Sir Pat.,
sent., Murder of K. Henry, (Darnley,) I.
*489 ;—Hincbelwoid,Ja., hanged, II. 540; —
Hodge, Ro., III. 488 ;— Horsburgh, Tho.,
hanged, and his head and right hand struck
off, II. 423 ; — Hume of Spott, Geo., Darnley's
Murder, &c., 1. 101 ; acquitted, 107; — Hunter,
Pat., and John, * 426 ; — Huntlie, Earl
of, Geo., I. 284 ; — Innes of Innermarkie, Ro.,
beheaded for Murder of E. of Murray, 1. 362 ;
— Johnstone, Wm., David Riccio's Murder,

I. * 485 ; Jo. of Auchrynnie, and 3 Forbeses,

II. 493 ; — Kello, Mr Jo., Minister, hanged
and burnt, I. 14 ; — Kinnaird, Ja., and W^m.,
I. 472 ; — Lauder of Bass, Mr Ja., slain, I.
89 ; Walter, beheaded, il>. ; — Leighton of Ullishaven, John, ^Murders his mother and servant, I. * 344 ; — Listoune, Harie, III. 572 ;
Litil-Johne, Thomas, beheaded, I. * 361 ; —
Lockhart of Lee, Ja., III. 206 ; — Louthian,
Sir Wm., beheaded, I. * 151 ; — Maxwell
of Garrarie, Jo., and Geo. his son, beheaded,
HI. 473 ; — Lord, Jo. for treasonable murder
of the Laird of Johnstone, &c. III. 32, &c. ;
— Menzies, Jo. and And., &c., III. 442 ; —
Mitchell, Ja., III. 488 ;— Moitt, Jo., behesded
for Murdering his wife, III. 481 ; — Muir,
(See Muir of Auehindrane) ; — Murray,
Earl of, Ja., murdered, and place of Dynnibirsell burnt, I. 284 ;— Wm., Murder of K.
Henry, (Darnley,) * 489;— MacClarene,
Male, I. * 441 ;— MacCulloch, Arch,, of ArdGENERAL INDEX.

705

well, murdered, I. * 99 ; — MacDonald, Gillespie, Maclnnes, Dow, &c. hanged, II. 415 ;
MacDormoiid, Ja , I. * 441 ; — MacGillievoriche, Petrie, lianp;ed, III. 230 ; — MacGrassyclit, Jo., I. * 441 ; — MacGreg^ors, see MacGregor, and Slaughter ; — MacKie, Allaster,
tried for IteiiF, &c., along with the Laird of
MacGregor, II. 413; hanged, 414; — MacLean of Dowart, Lauchlan, I. 224 ; — MacOneill of Dunnievaig, Angus, I. 224 ; — NeilSOUN of Assint, Donald and Neil, his son,
III. 489 ; — Nicolsoune, (Nukilsoune,) William, II. 363, acquitted, ib. ; — Okmestoune
of that Ilk, Ja., Murder of K. Henry, (Darnley,) I.* 489, his Confession, &c., *511; Hob,
uncle to the Laird, Darnley's Murder, I. *
489 ;— Park, Ja., III. 495 ;— Paterson, Geo.,

I. * 426 ; — Peebles, alias Pardoun, Marioun,
194, murdered corpses bleed on her touch, ih. ;
— Peunycuik, Jo., hanged, and right hand
struck off, 372;— Pollok, (Powok,) Hugh
and Archibald, beheaded, I. * 81 ; Jonet, 186;
— Powrie, VV^m., hanged and quartered for K.
Henry, (Darnley's.) Murder, I. * 490 ; his
Depositions, * 493, &c. ; his Confession,
*500 ; — Pratt, Isab., hanged, 371 ; — Quhite,
Wm., David Riccio's Murder, I. « 483 ;—
Ramsay, Jo., hanged and decapitated, &c.,

II. 404 ; of Pryour Lethame, Jo., Incest and
Murder, IIL 257 ; — Reoclie, Ja., beheaded,

III. 484 ; — Robertsoune, Alex., the Murder
of David Riccio, I. * 486 ; — Roise of Dunekellio, William, beheaded, II. 481 ; — Ross,
Jonet, heiress of Craigie and Kinfavvns, burnt
for the Murder of her husband, brother to the
Laird of Balhou.ssie, II. 409, and note; —
Sawlie, Jonet, and Lady Ullishaven, (in state
of pregnancy,) murdered, I. * 344; — Schaw,
Christian, Murder of Regent Murray, I. 23 ;
— Scott of Cambusmichaell, Tho., hanged,
drawn, and quartered for David Riccio's Murder, 1. * 47« ;— Sinclair, Ja., III. 498;—
Spens, Alex., beheaded, II. 76 ; — Stanlield,
Philip, III. 196; hanged in chains, &c., 197 ;
— Steill, John, called Keiupij, hanged, I.
* 126 ; — Stewart, Pat., beheaded for atrocious
Murder, &c., II. 393 ; Jo. son to Ja., L. Doun,

beheaded for Murder under trust, III. 74 ; —
Stirling, Helen, Lady Ullishaven and her servant murdered by her son, I. * 344 ; — Swan,
Jo., beheaded, II. 542 ; — Sy.mpill (Sempill,)
Lord Jo., I.* 163; Wm., Lord, * 164, * 166;
Sir John, I. * 163 ; — Robert, Master of, I.
*163, * 166;— ToMsouNE,Issob., Child Murder, hanged, II. 540 ; — Tod, William, beheaded, I. * 355 ; Geo., Murder of David
Riccio, * 486 ; — Trumble, Tho. and Walt.,
I. 77 ; And., 85 ;— Tulliallan, Laird of, beheaded, I. * 151 ; — Ulli.siiaven, Lady, &c.,
Murdered, I. * 344 ; — ViLLOUR, Sebastian
de, * Murder of K. Henry, (Darnley,)
escapes, I. * 490 ; — Waldy, Wm., hanged, I.

* 344 ;— Wardlaw, Marion, II. 423 ;— Watson, Ja., Murder under trust, hanged, II.
540 ; -Weir, Beatrix, IIL 68 ; Peter beheaded,
123 ; Bessie beheaded, 472 ; — Wemyis, And.,
beheaded and quartered, I. * 84 ; — Wijsoune,
Pat., Murder of K. Henry, (Darnley,) I.

* 489 ; Cristian, {tdias the Lanthorne,) III.

194 ; a murdered corpse bleeds on her touch,

195 ; — Wright, William, decapitated with a
sword, I. * 424 ; — Yair, Henry, murder of
David Riccio, I. * 481 ; hanged, drawn, and
quartered, * 482 ; — Young, Ja., David Riccio's JNIurder, I. * 484 ; Jo. hanged, 85.

Murder, remarkable Bond betwixt Earl and Master of Cassillis, for the Murder of the Laird of
Auchindniyne, III. 622.

Ordeals for discovery of. III. 183 ; superstitions as to touching the corpses of Murdered
])ersons, 143, 165, 182, I've; Bar-recht or law
of the bier, 183 ; form of the ceremonial, 184 ;
Trials where touching was founded upon, 191.

, treasonable, or under trust. See Murder

passim.

under colour of law, III. 399, 418, &c.

See also under Murder.

Murderer, setting free a, I. * 20S.

Murdoch of Candodden, Pat., mutilated, II. 492;
—of that Ilk, Tho., I. * 138 ; Pat., III. 328;
— alids MacKie, Wm., Mass Priest, chained
at the cross for two hours, and then ail his
' Popischc Ixiggadgc brunt,' and he banished
for life, II. 5i30.

706

GENERAL INDEX.

Mure of Annestoun, John, I. *382, 71 ;— of Arrochill, Jo., I. * 130 ;— (Mure) Adam, hanged
for Stouthreif, by way of ' mummyn,' I. * 51 ;
—of Auchindrayne, Jo., I.* 130, * 138, * 369,

* 457, II. 10 ; shooting at the Laird of Culjean, &c. 35 ; denounced rebel, 37, 106, 390,
460 ; Ja., yr., slaughter of Laird of Culjean,
&c. 538, 560, 565; their Trial, III., 124; his
family, 126 ; created Baillie of Carrick, ib. ;
forfeited and beheaded, 156 ; Documents illustrative of their trial and crimes, ib., Sic. ;
young Laird put to the torture, 170; Tho.,
his son, 175 ; And. Sinclair, his half-brother,
139, 175 ; Daliymple's body bleeds, on being
touched by Mary Mure, John's grandchild,
196 ; Letter from E. of Cassillis to the King,
581 ; young Auchindrayne tortured, 582 ;
Bond betwixt the Earl and Master of Cassillis,
to Murder the Laird of Auchindrayne, 622 ; —
of AuchinsouU, Gib., III. 180 ; — of Balmaguchane, Peter, I. * 54 ; — of Bogend, Martin,

* 130 ;— of Cloncaird, Pat. I. * 150 ; Walt.,
IL 106, 109, in. 128, 135, 171, 173, summons of Treason passed from, 177; — of CraigSkene, John, II. 460, III. 171 ;— of Caldwell, Laird of, I. * 82 ; Sir Jo., &c., * 343 ;
Robert, his son slain, * 350 ; intercom muning
with him and William, his son, rebels, * 357,

* 385, * 388 ; Laird slain, 17 ; Robert, 18,
71, 91 ; Robert, brother of John, slain, 183,
II. 565 ;— of Fleit, Ja., IIL 130, 135, 136,
164 ; — Geo., hanged for slayingtwo Ministers,
I. 361 ; Wm., messenger, slain, 381 ; Ja., beheaded for slaughter, III. 492 , — of Glenheid,
Walt,, III. 135, 164 ;— Ja. brother of Laird
of Auchindrayne, I. * 369; — of Kettiemuir,
Ad., I. 35 ;— of Knokmarloch, Ro., II. 130 ;
Jo., III. 172 ;— of Moneyhagen, 126 ; And.,

//;. ; Ja., ib.; — of Nesbet, John, I. * 404 ; —
Patrick, oppression, I. * 89, 90, 91; — of
Rowallan, * 420, * 428, Jo., feud with the
Cuningharaes, Sec, I. * 56 ; Mungo, * 137 ;
Wm., yr., 171, II. 390; — of Randerstoun,
Wm., II. 565 ; — Mr Ro., Schoolmaster of
Ayr, III. 128; — of Skaithmuir, Alex. I.

* 404 ; — of Tarquyne, (Carquhene,) Jo., III.,
180;— ofWoidland, John, 135, 136, 172.

Mures, deadly Feud between them and the Cuninghames, I. * 57.
Murray of Aberscorse, Hueheoune, I. * 391 ; —

Sir Adam, knt., * 49 ; — of Abercairny, And.,

* 88 ; — of Aiket, (Haykit,) Cha., his son Jo.
slain, II. 53, 73 ;— of Arbeny, Jo., 166 ;
called ' MehillJolmne,' 174; was wounded at
Gowrie's Conspiracy, ib. ; his Deposition,
189 ;— of Balvaird, And., L * 408, 308 ; II.
49, 54; slays Laird of Gorthie's son, 112;
Sir And., Letter to the King, defending himself against Henderson's accusations, 323,
581 ;— of Banheid, Wm., I. * 347;—' Blak
Johnne,' Treason, * 71 ; — of Blackbarony,
And., remitted, * 258, *415; Jo., 141, 185;
Sir Arch., III. 539 ;— of Brouchton, Ja., Wilful error, I. * 219 ; George, II. 430, 521 ;
Slaughter, 539, 540; — Bishop of. And., I.

* 6, * 31, * 42, * 79 ; Alex., * 222 ; Pat.,
ib., * 343, * 358 ; Alex., II. 557 ; Pat. III.
583, 620 ;— of Cowbairdie, I. 175 ;— of Cockpule, Cuth., Treason, * 11, * 398, * 454 ;
Cha., 136, 304 ; IIL 394 ;— Cathedral of.
Sacrilege committed there, I. * 376 ; — and
Argyll, Countess or, the relict of Regent
Murray, 102 ; her daughter, ib. ; — Dean of,
oppressed, * 176; — Earl of, Ja., Lt.-Gen.
of the North for 5 years, * 238 ; respited for
taking the E. of Huntly, he, * 239, * 282;
discharged of his Lieutenandry of the North,

* 290, * 298 ; goes to France, * 303 ; money
sent to him, * 308, * 466, * 478,* 503 ; murdered, 284, 300, 357 ; Ja., IIL 318 ; Alex.,
Witches' revels at Darnaway, 604 ; — of Elibank, Sir Gedion, II. 509 ; III. 312, 337 ;
proceedings as to the duel between his son
and a son of Lord Cranstoun, 505 ; — of Fawlohill, alias Philiphauch, Jo., slain, I. * 69 ; Ja.,

* 127; Pat. * 148, * 332; IIL 394, 396;
— of Galdwall, Da., I. 76 ; Pat., hanged for
House-breaking, Theft, &c., II. 383 ; — of
Gospertie, Sir Da. See Lord Scone ; — of
Gudisburne, Ja., HI. 235 ; — Jo., Leiche, banished for uttering base coin, II. 99 ; Walt.,
his brother, and 2 others, ' wirreit at ane
stalk, and brunt in asses,' 100 ; Wm., Slaughter, HI. 235 ; Arch., Rebellion in Orkney,

GENERAL INDEX.

707

273 ; hanged, 283 ; his Deposition, 296 ; Jo.,
hanged for Stouthreif, &c., 479 ; — of Laichlavv,
Jo., I. * 441 ; — of Letter-Bennettis, Wm.,
89 ; — Lord, of Tulliebaruin, Jo,, II496. Vide Tulliebardin ; — of Lochmaben,
Jo , III. 389, 390 ;— of Newtoun, Sir Wm.,
601, note; — of Pardowis, Ja., I. 119 ; — of
Polmais, Jo., 282 ; II. 54 ; — Ro., Justicedepute, 76 ; — Regent, Conspiring his Murder, I.* 510 ; field of Langside, 6 ; forging his
signature, 19 ; Murdered, 23 ; David Hamilton hanged, 31 ; George Mowtray tried, 59;
Arthur Hamilton in Bothwelhauch tried, 87 ;
Laird of Spott tried, 101 ; acquitted, 107 ; III.
394;— of Romannos, Wm., L * 147, * 166;
Wm., yr., of, * 332, * 424 ;— of Spain5iedaill,
Jo., 349 ;— of Tibbermure, Pat., * 407 ;— of
Tulliebardine, Sir Wm., * 468 ; Sir Jo., 116,
304, 347 ; Wm., yr., II. 49, 54, 74 ; Sheriff
of Perthshire, 243, 387; Sir Jo., 426;—
Tutor of, I. 289 ; — of Touchadam, Jo., * 3 ;
—of Udstoune, Gavin, * 404; II. 474 ; III.
235 ; — Wra., Capt. of Barrow, slain, I. * 395.
Murrays, six score of, with their wives and children, burnt and slain by the Drummonds, at
the burningof the Kirk of Monyvaird, I. * 101.

Murrionis, what, II. 432.

Musthett of that Ilk, III. 377 ;— of Orchardheid,
Da., II. 438 ;— of Tolgarth, Geo., I. 299.

Musgrave, Sir John, (Englishman,) Intercommuning with, I. * 34 ; Burning of Selkirk,
35,* 119, * 121.

Mussilburgh, niilns of, burnt. I. * 363 ; — Raid
of, * 339 ; Battle of, 51, note.

Mustard, .\gnes. Resetting a stolen purse, containing 5U0 1. in gold, and jewels worth 3000 1.,
III. 552.

Mustouris. See Waponschawing.

Mutilation, during Parliament, I. * 26, * 158;
by a Minor, * 160; Judicial Arbitration,

* 167, * 181, * 201 ; Assise imprisoned for
year and day, * 203, * 246 ; of a Bailie of
Aberdeen, * 250, * 254, * 356, * 405, * 437,

* 453 ; by biting off a finger, 34 ; of a left
eye, II. 456; Forrester, III. 112.

Mutton, price of, at .Tiistire-aires, I. * 389.
Mwildis, earth from dead men's graves, 8cc., used
as a charm, I. 251. See Grave, and Charm.

N.

Naig, a bachillane. III. 78 ; a naig, 98 ; a staig,
ib. ; a paissing-naig, 163.

Nairne, Kirk of, Witches initiated there, &c., III.
616, et seq.

Nairnshire Witches, list of. III. 616, ct seq.

Napier, Allan, ' wirreit at ane staik and brint in
assis,' for uttering base money, &c., IF. 403 ;
—of Ballekinrane, Jo., I. * 384 ; Tho., II.
439 ;— Barbara, Witch, L 216; tried, 242;
pleads pregnancy, 243 ; is acquitted ? 244,
note ; the Assise is tried for Wilful Error, 244 ;
—of Blak3airdis, Ro., II. 438 ;— of Edinwillie, (Edinbellie,) Sir Arch., I. 154, 372 ;
II. 339 ;— of Kilmahew, Jo., I. * 178 ; Ro.,
* 361 ; Peter, murdered by the MacGregors, II. 432; Jo., 438, 439; III. ,538;—
Lord, Arch., his bones proposed to be raised,
and sentence of forfeiture to be pronounced,
11.211, note; III. 394; — of Merchinstoue,

Jo., I. * 42 ; Arch., appointed Justice-depute,
* 415, * 419, * 443, * 447, 46, 72; II, 10;
Jo., yr., 339 ; Jo., fiar, 433 ; Sir Anh, appointed to the Offices of ' Clerkschip (if Justiciary-Generall and Maister of the Ceremonies at the Creatioun of all Erles, Lordis,
and Barrones,' t*v.'c,, 1 1 1. 558 ; — of Wowmet,
(Woolmot,) Arch., the ' gudeman' of, slain, II.
339 ;— of Wrychtishoussis, Mr Wm,, I. 20,
46, 159.

Name of Alliefargie, Laur., II, 63 ; — Mr Peter,
murdered, under form of law, 349, 351.

Nasmyth of Inwar, Ja., II. 394 ; — of Posso,
Mich., I. » 429, note, * 450; Ja., III. 417,
431, 569 ; — Wm., banished for forging Testanis, I.* 394.

Nativi tcitPHlcs, III. 366, note; and see Kindly
Tenants.

Neilsoun of Assint, Donald, Murder by drown708

GENERAL INDEX.

ing, III. 489 ; Neill, his son, ib. ; — of Corsok,
Jo., 118;— of Crai-caffy, Jo., I. * 140;
AIpx., fiar of, Slaughter, II. 515 ;— of Graiiiche, Jo. Stewart, III. 250 ; — Jo., alias
Suppit-out, drawn and hanged, I. * 63 ;
Alex., Forgery, II. 17 ; — of Madinpap, Rob.,
I. * 87.

Neilstoun, Kirk of, attempt to restore Popery at,
I. * 430.

Nelson, Thomas, ' Cubicular' to King Henry,
(Darnley,) his Deposition as to the Murder,
I.* 501.

Nesbit of Dal3ell, Jo., Baroun of, I. * 62, * 82;
Geo., * 139, * 230; respited, * 245; ' the
Barrom.e of Dal^ell, * 414 ; Ko., III. 459 ;
Gaw., his son. Slaughter, ih. ; — Sir Dav.,
Assisting the English, I. * 332 ;— of Greneholrne, Alex., II. 507 ;— Hen., Provost of
Edr., 22; Sir Tho., III. 128;— of that Ilk,
Adam, I. * 142 ; Philip, * 144; slain, *244;
Geo., * 393 ; Tho., his son. Slaughter, II.
517; Philip, 563 ;— of Raschill, Hew, I.
119.

Netherbow-Port of Edr., the Earl of Arran ' held
furthe'at, I. * 241.

Nevene of Kirkwode, John, I. * 402.

Newall, Arch., slain, I. 158.

Neville, Sir Hen., his three Letters as to the Earl
of Gowrie, II. 315.

Newark, Laird of, L * 177 ;-Siege of, * 139,

* 270.

Newbottle, Abbay of, I. * 272 ; gilt chalice stolen, ib. ;— Abbot of, (see Kerr,) I. 101, 184,
244; Mark, II. 159; IIL 390 ;— Lord,
Mark, his chambers broken, &c., II. 357,
380, 496 ; — Town of, burnt by the English,
I. * 349 ; Slaughter of French soldiers there,

* 377.

Newby, Place and miln of. Burnt, I. * 60 ; besieged, dv'C, II. 464.

Newcastle, in England, I. * 281.

' Newes from Scotland, declaring the damnable
life of Dr Fian,' Warlock, <S:c., I. 213.

Newtoune, house of, to be cast down, I. 343,
344 ;— of that Ilk, Wm., * 85, * 346 ; pursued for his Slaughter, * 349 ; Treason, Fireraising, &c., ib., * 386, * 469, * 486 ;— Lady

(Jonet Creichtoune,) nape of, * 258 ; — of
Mitchelhill, Dav., * 141, * 144.
New- Year's day festivities, I. * 282 ; — gifts,

* 115, * 271, * 295, * 299, * 307 ;— Mass,

* 284, * 295.

Nicknames, Border, I. * 90, &c., &c., ; of Evil
Spirits and Witches, HI. 606, 614, &c.

Nicoll, Issobell, Witch, HI. 614, &c.

Nicolson, Geo., Ambassador from Q. Eliz., his
Letter as to Gowrie's Conspiracy, II. 313.

Niddry-Marischall, Laird of. Feud with Laird of
Edmonstouii, I. * 143 ; with Laird of Dundas, * 144 ; waylaid, * 169, See Wauchope.

Nik of the Fell, what, IL 519.

Nishie, Elspet, Witch, IIL 606, 614, &c.

NiTHSDALE, Earl of, HI. 28.

' Nobillis of paiss,' coins, I. * 18 ; Angell, III.
^ 178 ; Roise, ib.

Noble of Ferme, Ja., L *450, 71.

JVo7i-sunt, striking coins so called, I. * 440.

Norfolk, Duke of, I. *210, *283,wo^e, *287.

Norhani, Siege of, I. * 117.

Norkott, Jolian, her corpse disinterred, and touched
by persons suspected of her Murder, &c., a
remarkable case. III. 192.

Northampton, Earl of. Hen., his Speech as
to L. Balmerinoch's Treason, II. 593 ; was involved in Sir Tlio. Overbury's murder, ib.

Nortliberwick, Kirk of, the great Convention of
Witches with the Devil there, I. 212, 235 ; a
more detailed account, 239, 243, 245. See
Witchcraft ; — Prioress of. Invasion, &c., *347.

Northland-men, not to return home from Army,
under pain of death, I. * 270, &c.

Northumberland, Earl of, I. * 4, &c.,

* 272, * 273, * 276, * 279, * 280, * 281.
Norwall, Wm., banished for life, for stealing

Poor's-box, Adultery, &c., II. 387 ; hanged

as a False Notary, 389.
Norway, K. James V. sends to, for Hawks, for

Falconry, I. * 322.
Nory of Buchquhopiil, Rob., I. * 88.
Notaries deprived for ignorance, neglect, &c., I.

* 217 ; hanged for falsifying ' evidents,' 85;
his servant hanged, 87 ; Tho. Marjoribanks
hanged, II. 34 ; Jo. Moscrop hanged, 35 ;
Ro. Innes hanged for falsifying a Charter,

GENERAL INDEX.

709

104 ; Norwall hanged for acting without a
Warrant, 389 ; — Peijured, riiilit hand struck
off, Banished and declared Infamous, I. * 402,

* 432 ; Alex- Cuik hanged, III. 418 ; Mr Jo.
Muirheid hanged, 430 ; — Protocol book, I.

* 217. See also Messenger.

Nurse, French, I. * 295, * 310 ;— to K. James
v., * 263, * 271 ; to his eldest son Prince
James, * 306. See P. James ; — to Prince
Arthur, * 309;— Lady Jax\e, * 325.

o.

Oaths taken, by swearing upon swords, III. 275.
Obigny, Lord, horses and hounds sent to France

to him and to ' Madame D'Obinje,' I. * 277.
Obsequies, Funeral, of K. James IV., I. * 259 ;

Q. Magdalene, I. * 287, * 288, S:c. See

under the various names of Kings and Queens,

&c. ;— Offering at, I. * 304, &c.
OcHiLTRiE, Lord, Stewart of, And., I. * 177,

* 199, * 335 ; Feud with, * 352, * 428 ; interconimuning with D. of ChatVllerault, <S:c-

* 466, * 478, 88, 91, 162, 306 ; denounced,
310 ; II. 3; Kirk's grievances, 9, 107 ; 1000 1.
gifted by the King, 238, 380, 445 ; Warden
of West Marches, 453 ; III. 9 ; Slaughter of
Lord Torthorwald, 66 ; Raid of the Isles, 118,
225 ; Letter to the King, 367, 419 ;— Master OF, I. 49.

Octavians, the, II. 568 ; III. 63.

Odoneill, Irish Rebel, L 348.

Officers of Witch-covens, III. 605, &c.

Ogilvy of Balfour, Ja., L 375 ; II. 134 ;— of
Balnagrow, Jo., I. * 157 ; — of Boyne, Walt.,
I. * 217 ; Alex., * 462, note j 111. 560 ;— of
Boigside, Ja., shooting hagbuts, &c., II. 134 ;
—of Cragbone, Walt., I. * 150 ;— of Craig,
Jo., his houses, &c., to be cast down, I. 348 ;
Sir Jo., slaughter, &c., II. 130 ; Mr Da. and
Fra., his brothers, ib., 235 ; — of Cukistoune,
Ja., I. * 138 ;— of Dunlugus, Sir Walt., I.

* 179, * 182; Sir Geo., 284, 382 ;— of
Drumniis, (Drum,) Alex., I. 264 ; Walt., III.
330 ; Jo., his son, a Jesuite, cruelly persecuted and hanged, ib., &c. ; — of Findletter, Sir
Walt., I. 284 ; IL 133 ;— of Gassull, Jo., yr.,
III. 478 ; — of Inchemartin, Pat., remitted, I.

* 240, 28, 141 ;— of that Ilk, Alex., abiding
from Solway, I. * 255 ; David, * 404 ; Gilb.,
74, 91 ;_of Innerquharrity, Jo., I. * 138;

remitted, * 240 ; Sir Jo., 75 ; IL 134 ;— Jo.,
called Feid Johnne, II. 134 ; Alex., called
Blak S'andie, ib. ; — Jo., Jesuite, his Trial, III.
330 ; kept from sleep ad delirium, 331, 332 ;
hanged and quartered, ib. ; Relation of the
proceedings, ib., Szc. ; conduct at his execution, 350 ; his Deposition, &c., 352 ; Resetting him, 371 ;— of Keillour, Arch., IL 430,
— Lord, of Airlie, Ja., L * 136, * 138,

* 244, * 270, * 470, 75, 114, 116, 263 ; IL
297, note ; Hereschip of his lands of Glenylay, &c. III. 233 ;— Master of, Ja., I. 348 ;
375 ; Slaughter of the Laird of Kerse's son,
and Wounding Lord Spynie, II. 130, 133,
135 ; fined L.5000, 146 ; Sir Jo., Pat., and
Fra., his brothers, jb., 235 ; — of Mygvie, And.,
I. 28 ;— of Quheich, Jo., I. 264 ;— of Quhytefield, Dav., I. 348.

Ogill, Mr D., assaulted, I. 337 ;— of Hartreewood, Henry, I. * 386, 27.

Oker, taking usurious interest, &c., II. 101.

Oliphant of Condie, Laur., III. 479 ;— of Gask,
Wm., slaughter. III. 443; Laur., his brother,
ib. ; Demembration, 479 ; Wm., slaughter,
542 ; — of Kelly, Alex., invaded for his slaughter, I. * 347 ; oppressed, ib. ; — of Keltye, I.

* 45:-); — Lord, Laur., Justiciar, I. * 14,
Sic. ; Jo., oppressed, * 108 ; Laur. invaded
for his slaughter, * 488, 25, 27 ; slaughter,
44, 89, 92; slaughter, IL 512; IIL 419,
443 ;— Master of, Laur., I. * 39.), 119;
Jo. slain, II. 514; III. li.J :_of Newtoun,
Sir Wm., King's Advocate, III. 232, «S:c. ;
Walt., 583 ;— of Pittoccer, Peter, I. 24 ; —
Pursuivant. I. * 273 ; — of Rescobie, Peter,
III. 479, 542 ;— of Turingia, Peter, I. 25, 27 ;
III. 5^3; — Wm., Justice-depute, I. 101.

Olivers of G.-igy, I. * 347 ; — in Stryndis, tried at

710

GENERAL INDEX.

Justice-aire of Jedburghe for numerous crimes,
I. * 28, c^-c; four of tliem banged, * 30.
Oneill presents K. James V. witb a liorse, I.

* 303. See Steid, &c.

Oppression done to the Lairds of Ravinniscraig
and Vcliiltrie, I. * 32 :— to Lady Cardines,

* 52 ; Laird of Caly, * 53 ; Abbot of Dundrennan's officer, * 54 ; Sir Gavin Kennedy,

* 55; Laird of Niddry-Mariscball, * 73;
Laird of Bass, ib. ; Laird of Leswiilt, L * 89 ;
Ardwell, * 90 ; Lord Drummoiid, * 108 ;
Mr D. Lindsay, * 141 ; Jobn Petcarne, &c.,

* 159; Laird of Congiltoun, * 158, * 160,

* 1G9; Dean of Murray, * 176; Moncur of
Balluny, * 178, * 180, * 181 ; John IMathesoune, beheaded, * 201 ; Laird of Bargany,

* 204 ; Hepburn, &c., 87 ; ' cietineris' of
Brechin, * 431 ; Tho. Cuningharae lianged,
IL 359 ; and Perjury, &c., three persons hanged, beheaded, and scourged, IL 453 ; — and
Murder, 516 ; by E. of Orkney against Inhabitants of O. and Zetland, III. 81, 312,
489, 491. See Orkney.

Or, James, beheaded for slaughter. III. 358.

Orde of that Ilk, And., I. * 150.

Ordeals, popular, for the Discovery of Murder,

III. 183, &c.
Orders of K. James V., invested with the Collar

of Cokkil5eis,' I. 265 ; the Garter, * 283,

* 289 ; St Michael, * 283 ; the Golden Fleece,
ib. ; mending the King's, * 292, &c.

Organs, I. * 122, * 279, * 290, * 321.

Orkney, Bishop of, I. * 211 ; Adam, 101,
267, 270, 293 ; Trial of Mitchell for firing
a pistol at. III. 195; Rebellion in Orkney,
293, &c.; Ja., 301, 304; Geo. 444; Ja.,
508 ; — Earl of, Ro., to seize and expel the
Spaniards, I. 267 ; Pat. seizing ' the Ark of
Noy,' 336 ; attempt to poison him and cut him
off by Witchcraft, 373 ; Tho. Palpla executed, 374 ; II. 76, 77 ; Ro., 97 ; Pat., tyrannical oppression of Inhabitants of O. and Zetland, III. 81 ; curious form of the execution
of dittay, 86 ; Trial of Ro., natural son of
Pat. E. of O., 272 ; he, along with 5 accomplices, is hanged and forfeited, 283 ; illustrative Papers, ib. ; Trial of Pat. E. of O., 308 ;

notices of, ib. ; beheaded and forfeited, 318;
illustrative Papers, 319 ; conference between
the Secretary, Lord Advocate, and the Earl,
320 ; his Examination, ib., 322 ; — Master
OF, Jo., Witchcraft, attempt to poison his
brother, the Earl, &c., I. 373 ; tried for slaying the Parson of Urquhart, 392, 397.
Orkney and Shetland, withholding the rents, I.

* 182 ; Convocation of lieges in arrayed battle,
andslaughter of Earlof Caithness,* 253;
Lease of Lordship and Isles of, to Oliver Sinclair for 3000 merks yearly, *257, * 258 ; K.
James V. visits, * 305 ; Convocation there,

* 413 ; lleljellion by the Earl and his base
son, III. 272 to 307, and 308 to 327 ; Bond
of Association by the Rebels, 293 ; Depositions of Rebels, 294, &c. ; Bond torn by Ro.
Stewart, 304 ; Deposition of Ro. Stewart,
306 ; Letter from the King, as to the oppressed people of Orkney, 319.

Orme, Da., bailie of Newburgh, III. 97 ; — of
Mugdrum, Da., I. 2^0, 309.

Ormistoun of Brigend, Ro., I. 268 ; — Deer-park
of, chasing and wounding Deer, I. * 140 ; —
of that Ilk, Geo., * 147 ; Ja., deforcing a
Messenger, I. * 334 ; at Darn ley's Murder,
145; Ja. III. 391; Deadly feud with Laird
of Cessfurd, reconciled, 303; — Hob, alias Hob,
I. 145 ; — of Sniailholm, Jo., I. 270.

Ormond, Pursuivant, I. * 273, * 281, * 306,

* 317, 226.

Oronsay, Island of, burnt, I. 229.
Orphies, (orfevrerie,) gold embroidery, I. * 301.
Onok of that ilk, Ro., I. * 186, 60 ;— of Sillibawbe, his wife portioned by K. Ja. V., I.

* 324. See Tocher, &c.

Otterburn of Redhall, Mr Adam, remitted, I.

* 252 ; sent to London to treat a Peace, * 283 ;

* summoned, * 310 ; Tho., 154, 375, H. 528.
Otter-stalff, Ro., Huttone, slain with, III. 499 ;

Hen. Baird beheaded, 500.
Oulk, week. III. 601, et passim.
Outing forged money, II. 74. See Uttering.
OverI»ury, Sir Tho., murdered, II. 593; K. James

VI., awful imprecation, 600, note.
Over the dyke with it, a Witch's nickname, III.

606, See Nicknames.

GENERAL INDEX.

711

Ovens for the King's Ships, I. * 303. quil against the Scotish Nation, affixed on

Oxen employed to drag heavy Artillery, I. * 260, door of, III. 447, &c. See Roise.

* 263, * 267;— Geo. Dempstar banished for Oye, (o, or oe,) a grandchild, I. 183, II. b'iO, III.

hurting an ox in the plough, II. 127. 78.

Oxford, Earl of, I. * 118 ;— St Mary's, Pas- Oylispek, what, III. 599.

P.

Pace, (Pasche,) Easter, III. 603, et passim.
Paddokis, ' plewghe' of, a singular Witch-charm,

III. 603.
Pad5eane of Newtoune, Rodger, III. 93, 387 ;

Jo., yr., 483.
Pages, I. * 289, * 294, * 307, * 321.
Pailjeonis, (Pavilions,) I. * 273, * 283, * 310,

* 323. See Hunting, &c.
Painting, art of, I. * 117, * 119, * 259 ; pictures
brought from Flanders, * 284, * 287, * 310;
Queen's Painter, * 321, ib., * 323.
Paische, Easter, 11. 528, &c.

Paisley, Commendator of. See Claud Hamilton ;

Wm., I. 119; — Monastery of, Hamesucken

at, * 382 ; attempt to restore Popery, * 427 ;

detaining the Abbey, 8ic., 45.

Paistoune, Jonet, Confession of Witchcraft, III.

601 ; Devil's marks found on her, 602.
Palace, shooting within, punished by Banishment

for life, I. 137. See King, Holyrood, Sec.
Palatine, Count, III. 322; the Countess,

I. * 308.
Pall, funeral, I. * 287, * 288, &c.
Palinode, what. III. 621.
Palpla, Tho., poisoning, executed, I. 374.
Palsgrave, the, I. * 301 ; III. 322.
Pamfara ! tantara ! II. 601 and «(7/(?.
Paniter, Patrik, Abbot of Cambuskenneth, Secretary, I. * 79 ; Ambassador, * 273.
Pannel permitted, i)efore conviction, to assign a

Reversion, I. * 374.
Pantoun of Pitmedden, Jo., I. * 184 ; — of Tullemaid, Ja., * 470.
Pantoune, a kind of slipper, III. 512.
Pantry, the King's, I. * 313.
Pansis of mai!:;e, I. * 317.

Panmure, Place of. Imprisoning a messenger in,
I. * 345.
VOL. III.

Papist Lords, proceedings against them. (See
Angus, Huntlie, Erroll,) I. 306, &c.

Papists, Resetting, I. 167; trafficking with, to
alter the Religion, 172, 371.

Parma, Duke of, I. 327, 328, 329.

Parliament, Mutilation during sitting of, I. * 26 ;
— printing false Act of, II. 2, 14.

Park, Queen's, Wounding a Keeper of, I. * 381.

Park of Bagray, Alex., warded, I. * 357, * 451 ;
—of Gilbertfield, Ja., ♦ 170; Rob. * 404;—
Ja. and Wm., Murder, Oppression, &c., III.
495 ;— of that Ilk, Walt., I. * 170.

Pardoune, the, I. * 278.

Paris, French, alias Nicholas Ilaubert, Murder
of K. Henry, (Darnley,) I. * 489 ; his Brst
Deposition, * 502; his second [Deposition,

* 500 ; Execution at St Andrews, * 489,

* 510; Letter from Regent Murray to Q.
Elizabeth as to, * 511 ; his head and a leg
sent to Edr., ib., 152.

Parkins, Capt. Jo., English Pirate, III. 104.

Parricide, Jo. Diksoun, yr. of Belchester, broken
on the ' row* or wheel, I. 241 ; Wm. Mow, II.
18; Philip Stanfield, III. 196; his father's
corpse bleeds on being toitcltcd by him, 197 ;
notices of the trial, ib., 198 ; hanged, his
tongue cut out and burnt, bis riirlit hand struck
off and affixed on the Port of Iladington, and
his body gibbeted in irons, ib.

* Pas-pennys' found, I. * IS ; what they were,
ib. ; — concealing, * 32.

Pastjuills, writing against the King, F. Tennent
hanged, II. 332 ; — f(»rging one against tlie
Scottish Nation, III. 445 ; Mr Tho. Roise's
right band and head stmek olV, \c., 445 ; illustrative Papers, 582.

Pasments of (lold, I. * 302, and Excerpts from
Treasurer's Books, jKissiui,

4. X

712

GENERAL INDEX.

' Patesar,' King's, I. *313.

Paterson of Caverhill, Ninian, I. * 87 ; Bartie,

* wirreit and brunt' for Sorcery, &:c., II. 535 ;
Tho., * 421, * 469 ; — Helen, hanged for coining bawbeis, I. * 365 ; — Jo., Sh.-clerk of Fyfe,
HI. 453 ;— of Leucbrie, And., II. 343.

' Patroune' of the King's Ships, I. * 298 ; silver

' quhissill with ane lang chen3e to him,' ib.
Paul V., Pope, II. 570, note.
Pavier, a French rope-dancer and posture-Master,

II. 238.

Pawtoune, Mr Wm., Minister, Treason, &c., 1.20.
Pax, cover for the, in Prince's Chapel, I. *306.
Peace between England and Scotland solemnly

ratified, I. * 283.
Pearl beads, I. * 307 ; and Jewels abstracted

from the Queen, II. 544 ; from E. Marischall,

III. 563, 564.

Pedder, Alex., scourged ' mother-naikit ' with
' suord-beltis and horse-brydillis,' III. 539.

Peebles, Justice-aire of, I. * 24, * 72.

Peebles-shire, Barons fail in Bond, I. * 146 ; —
Baron of Findowie, Alex., with Gowrie before his Conspiracy, II. 158, 176 ; his Deposition, 191 ; — Justice-aire of, I. * 24, * 172 ;
— Privileges of the Sheriff, * 350 ; — Marioun,
alias Pardoun, corpses of Murdered persons
bled on being touched by her and her husband,
III. 194;— ofChapelhill, Oliver, I. * 132;—
Tho., hanged and quartered for Coining, &c.,

* 440.

Peices, a terra applied to massive plate, II. 520.
Peirsie, Capt., English Pirate, III. 104.
Peirsoun, Alisoun, burnt for Witchcraft, &c., I.

163 ;— of Caimy, Da., II. 103.
Peistis, lead drops or slugs, III. 120.
Pellok-bows, I. * 293.
Pendykillis and frontellis, I. * 320.
Penkill, House of, besieged, I. * 403.
Penman, taken prisoner by Buccleuch, I. * 273.
Penny, Sir Jo., Chaplain, slain, I. * 178.
Pentland, Captain Jo., Slaughter, banished, I. 46.
Pennycuke, of that Ilk, John, I. * 127, * 143,

* 159 ; acquitted of Mutilation, &c., * 203,

* 333, * 424, 11 ; denounced, 276 ; his brother ' spuil5ied; 396 ; Gilb., II. 49, 129, 376,
379.

Peijury, Arch. Croser hanged, I. Ill ; Wm. Barclay, II. 348 ; Alex. Cheyne beheaded, 453 ;
Alex. Wastland hanged, ib. ; Alex. Croy
scourged, ib. ; Mr Jo. Galbraith stands at the
cross, and is Banished for life, 476 ; III. 76 ;
Da. Donaldsoun hanged, 208 ; Ho. Grahame
of LangI)od(lome, &c., hanged, 358 ; Alex.
Cuik, notary, 416, hanged, 418; And. Turnbull and two others hanged, 538 ; Da. Turnbull's tongue pierced with ' ane hett boitkyn,'
and banished, 538.

Perrot, Sir Jo., Deputy of Ireland, III. 2.

Perth, Bailies and community remitted for burning Craigy, I. * 240; exempted from Assises,

* 418 ; — Conflict between E.of Glencairn and
Master of Wintoun, III. 579 ; — Convocation
on the South Inche, I. * 451 ; — Earl of,
Jo., HI. 233, 316, 548 ;— Feud with Laird
of Craigy, I. * 432 ; — Hamesuckin to Keepers
of the Gates of, * 219 ; — Justice-aire of, * 265,

* 272 ; — K. Ja. VI. made a burgess, and subscribes Guild-book, II. 247 ; — Plague in.
Housebreaking during the, I. *219 ; — Quarrel
with Laird of Clackmannan, 276, &c. ; conduct
as to Gowrie's Conspiracy, 186, &c., 192, &c.
See Gowrie ; — Reformation preached at,

* 407 ;— Spey-Tower of, * 177.
Pestilence, (see Plague,) * that nane mak mercate

with Inglis menne,' because of the, I. * 294 ;

the pestilence ' but mercy,' 51, 302 ; diet deserted on account of, II. 426.
' Pets ' kept by K. James V., L * 299.
Pettigrew of Over Cottis, Walter, I. * 388.
Phillope, Mr Ro., banished for saying Mass, &c.,

III. 252 ;— Ro. Sh. Clerk of Dumfries, IIL

452.
Philosopher's stone, I. * 120.
Pickery, an aged man banished for, I. * 53, II.

43.
Pigs, price of, at Justice-aires, I. * 390.
Pikle neirest the wind, a Witch's nickname. III.

606.
Pilgate, L * 291.
Pilgrimages beyond seas. Lady Glammis, &c.,

I. * 244 ; Earl of Cassillis, &c., * 245 ;— to

Qubithirne, L * 117;— to Rome, I. * 240;

— in Scotland, I. * 371 ; — to St James in GalGENERAL INDEX.

713

licia, I. * 101 ;~to St Jolm of Amiens in

France, I * 107 ;— to St Ninians, I. * 106 ;

— to St Thomas of Canterbury, I. * 107.
' Pilniewinkis,' an instrument of torture, I.

215.
Pink, a small ship, III. 100.
Pinkertoun, Alex., beheaded, I. * 164.
Pinkie-cleuche, Battle of, I. * 360, * 378, 51,

and note, &c.
Pipers, English, I. * 115 ; of St Johnstoun, tocher

given to him, * 279.
Piracy, Capt. Ja. Cockburn and 5 others hanged,

I. * 131; Alex. John Canochson, * 170;

* 273 ; hanged in chains, * 358 ; Walt. Cowsland, 37, 93 ;— the English Pirates, HI. 99 ;
eight hanged within flood mark, 101 ; thirty
Pirates tried by Vice-Admiral, 102 ; hanged
at Leith, 107 ; Documents as to Piracies by
the English, 108, &c. ; Jo. Davidson, and Jo.
Lewis, English Pirates, hanged within floodmark, 244 ; — and Murder under trust, Jo.
Brown and three others, 569 ; hanged, and
their heads affixed at Leith and Burntisland,
572. See Pirates.

Pirated goods, Stouthrief of, I. * 87.

Pirates, Expedition against, I. * 298 ; English,

* 379. See Piracy.

Pissane of mailje, I. * 288, * 317.

Pistoletts, Act anent bearing, I. 299 ; shooting
with, 371, II. 22 ; curious legal arguments on
this point, 53, &c. ; Lockhart of Lee, II, 61,
128, 129 ; Turnbull of Mynto, IL 370; Maxwell of Cowhill, 485 ; Wm. Douglas, yr. of
Drumlanrig, III. 212, &c. See Wounding,
Slaughter, &c.

Pistulettis, (coins,) forged, II. 99 ; gilding, 100.

Pit and gallows, L * 396, II. 43 ;— of TuUiallano,
III. 479, of Blair Castle, 491, persons starved
to death there, ib.

Pitblado of that Ilk, Alex., I. » 404.

Pitcairn, Hob., Commendator of Dunfcrmling, I.

* 436, 88, 101 ;— of that Ilk, Men., II. b:i ;—
of Ramsay's Forthar, Hen., II. 10.

Pitcur, Tutor of, I. * 406 ; Sir David Forbes,

knt., slain in ward, under his custody, ib.
Pitmedden, place of, Burnt, I. 160.
Pitscottie of Loncardie, Finlay and David, his

gi-eat grandson, L * 258 ; Jo. Mutilation, HI.

363 ; Colin, yr., ib.
Pittarrow, Laird of. See Wischart.
Pittcncriff, Laird of, I. * 504.
Pittendreich, Lady, &c. See Douglas.
PiTTENWEEM, LoRD, Wm. HI. 245 ; his lauds in

the Island of Lewis burnt and wasted, &c. ib. ;

— Prior of, Violence committed by, I. * 156,

117 ; Wm., 279 ; — Magistrates of, assist Earl

of Bothwell, 319.
Plague, in Perth, Housebreaking during the, I.

* 219 ; in Stirling, ' gude rule anent,* * 262 ;
in Selkirk, * ib.\ on ihe English Borders,

* 294 ; that ' na Inglis men be sey cumand
be ressauit,' * ib. ; in Edr., diet deserted, II.
426, &c.

Planis, Monsr. de, French Ambassador, I. * 261,

* 263.

Plate. See gold, silver, basin, <S:c.
Play-coats, <S.c., I. * 282, * 299.
Players, I. * 114, * 115, * 118, * 299.
Plenishing, insight, what, IL 70, &c.
Plewghe of paddokis, a curious Witch-charm,

HI. 603.
Plumber, King's, I. * 314.
Plume, de la, French Pursuivant, I. * 296.
Pluscardin, Prior of, Alex., supplying Master of

Rothes, I. * 358 ; invaded, in presence of the

Holy Sacrament, * 376.
Poison, Conspiring the King's destruction by, 1.

* 187 ; — selling, * 203 ; purchasing, 11.337 ;
poisoning fowls, ib. ; banishment for life, ib. ;
—Slaughter by, I. * 368 ; Helen Colquhoun,
80; Audio Glencorse burnt, 84; Lady Fowlis, 185, 191, c^c. ; Master of Orkney, 373;
Jo. Boyd acquitted, 399 ; Ro. Erskine, HI.
260; beheaded, 264; Helen, Issobel, and
Annas, 266 ; sentenced to be beheaded, 269;
Helen banished, ib.

Poisoned bullets, I. 90 ; Laird of Johnstone slain

with two, HI. 37.
Poisoning and treasonable Murder, S:c., I. * 419;

Mr Adam Col<{uhoun hanged and burnt, *420;

and Incantation, \c., H. Patersoun ' wirreit'

and burnt, II. 535.
Poison-Ordeal, HI. 184.
Polniude, Laird of, slain, I. * 106.

714

GENERAL INDEX.

Pollok of that Ilk, David, Tbeftboot, I. * 143 ;
Charles, Tutor of, * 384, * 402. See Maxwell.

Polwort of Rottonraw, Wm., denounced for Forcible Abduction, &c., 345.

PoMER, Duke of, I. * 322.

Poor's-box stolen, II. 387.

Pope, the, treasonable correspondence with, II.
368, &c. ; Lord Balmerinoch's Confession,
575 ; King's Letter to Lord Advocate, 577 ;
Documents illustrative of, 580, &c. ; his alleged Supremacy, III. 330, &c.

Popery, attempting toj-estore, I. * 410, * 427 ;
See Reformation, &:c.

Poplicie, (sciatica, or palsy ?) I. * 422.

Porquier, John, Frenchman, murdered, I. * 361.

Portincraig, Raid of, I. * 336.

Portar of Lag, Ja., Hereschip done to, I. * 90,
&c. ; Thomas, beheaded, I. * 92.

Porterfield of that Ilk, Mr Jo., I. * 450,19 ; Wm.,
slaughter, 69.

Porters, King's, I.* 313.

Portingall-doucattis, III. 178, 563.

Portuys, (Porteous-roU,) I. * 321.

Portwise (Porteous) of Gernkirk, (Glenkirk.)
Jo , I. * 81 ; Tho,, 190 ; II. 467 ; III. 453 ;
—of Halkschaw, Pat., I. * 147 ; Wm., * 422,

* 424.

Pott, Richard, hanged, I. * 87.
Poultryman, King's, I. * 313.
Poultry, price of, at Justice-aires, I. * 390.
Power of Silverwood, Jo., I. * 458.
Pow-aixes, II. 432.

Pow-penny, at Funeral obsequies, I. * 293, *297.
Pow, what, III. 605, Sec.

Powrie, Wm., hanged and quartered for Murder
of K. Henry, I. * 490 ; his Depositions,

* 493, &c.

Poynd-faldis, destroying, I. * 163.

Prayer, Witches', virtue of, I. 232 ; form of, 234,
237 ; III. 95.

Praying publicly for the banished Ministers, 1. 136.

Pregnancy, pleaded by a condemned Witch, I.
243 ; II. 29, 52.

Pregnant women. Murder of two, I. * 344 ; striking and producing abortion, * 412, * 421,
456; Murder of, 11.517; Pat. Deans hanged, i J.

Prentado, Laird of, I. 166. See Borthwick.

Prestoun of Craigmillar, I. * 159; Geo., * 333 ; Sir
Simon, Justice -General, * 477 ; Da., 255 ;
Feud with Lord Borthwick, &c., 352 ; Sir
Geo., II. 455 ; — Simon, of that Ilk, Battery
2)endente lite. Oppression, S:c., I. * 73 ; Geo.,

* 159, * 347, *381, * 477 ;— Ja., Provost of
Edr., Justice-depute, I. * 126, * 129 ; — Jo.,
Justice-depute, I. * 143 ; — of Valleyfield, Ja.,
yr., I. 15 ; Sir Jo., II. 456, 555 ; III. 264 ;—
Eliz. acquitted of Incest, &c., I. 83 ; — of Haltrie, Geo., murdered, II. 18 ; — of Fentounbarns, Mr Jo., Collector Gen., II. 274 ; President, III. 78 ; — of Pennycooke, Mr Jo.,
President, II. 328 ; Collector, 496, 568, 598 ;
IIL 312.

'Preyne,' pin. III. 527; used for pricking Witches,

to discover Devil's mark, 602, Sec.
Pricking for Witchcraft, to find Devil's mark. III.

599, 602.
Priests, Jesuite, Resetting, III. 541, &c. See

Jesuite ; — Seminary, Resetting them, 167,

172; proclamation against, 281.
Prince of Scotland, Alex., (brother of King

J A. IV.,) I. * 232. See also James.
Printing a vitiated Act of Pari., II. 2, 14; or

striking coins with Mint-irons, II. 398 ; Alex.

Reid hanged, 399.
Prisoner freeing from ward, I. * 81 ; English,

* 351; Magistrates of Edinr. freeing Paterson, * 442, &c ;■— taking, I. * 171, * 437;
IIL 212, 489, 495, 497, 539.

Privy Council, declining their Jurisdiction, II.
494; III. 87 ; Mr And. Creichtoun sentenced
to be hanged, 89 ; banished for life, 90 ; they
write the King as to the English Pirates, 108 ;
they present Captain of a Dutch Waughter
with a silver cup, for escorting two English
Pirate vessels to Leith, 111.

Privy Purse, King's, I. * 305.

Procession, I. * 116 ; public, for prosperity of the
King, and return of the Regent, * 270.

Proclamation to regulate Justice- Aires, I. * 64,

* 388.

Protection, Special, to Tenants of Archbishopric
of Glasgow, I. * 41 ; — breaking the King's, I.

* 106.

GENERAL INDEX.

715

Prothogoll-buik, (Protocol,) Notary's, I. * 217 ;

III. 416, 417, &c.
Prothonotary, English, at Ratification of Peace

with England, I. * 283 ; at his departing to

France, * 307, * 321.
Protestation against the Verdict of an Assise, I.

*449.
Proof in exculpation on a Trial for Slaughter, by

Witnesses, refused. III, 467 ; Assise ordained

to take proof of a fact, 374 ; Probation led

after the Jury tvas enclosed in the Assisehouse, 375.
Provisions, prices of, at Justice-aires, I. * 389,

<S:c.
Prymrois, Mr Da., Justice-depute, II. 362.

Pudrache, of the country of Balquhidder, 11.424,

432, &c.
Purdie, Jo., Herald, slain, I. 362.
Purgatio Vulgaris, what. III. 184.
Purse, Stealing, III. 441, 445 ; Resetting a stolen,

&c., 553.
Pursuivant, mocked, &c., I. * 367.
Pyker, or petty thief, II. 552, <S:c.
Pyle of the Raw, Jok, slaughter, I. 37.
Pynfalde, what, I. * 58.
Pyne-doublet, definition of, II. 158, 183. See

' Secreit.'
Pynouris, employed to transport Artillery, &c., I.

* 260.
Pyote of Fovertie, Alex., I. * 404.

Q.

Quails, live, I. * 310.

Quarrel-holes, Convocation at, I. 174.

Quartering the bodies of Traitors, Forgers, &c.,
the limbs being placed on Tolbooths, Ports,
&c., I. * 440, &c., * 467, * 481, *484, * 491.
See Treason, he.

QuEENSBERY, Earl OF, Wm., III. 381.

Queen's Chariot, I. * 291, * 293, * 320; Coronation, I. * 287, * 299, * 300, * 301 ; Crown
and Jewels, I, * 298 ; made of Scottish gold,
ih., * 322 ; Household, J. * 314 ; Master of,
goes to France, * 317 ; Master Usher, &c., I.
* 314; Painter, I. * 321, * 322, * 323.

Querrell, young Laird of, slain, I. * 368.

Question. See Torture, Rack, c*tc.

Quhin3eare, (^pugio, a whinyard,) a sort of short
sword or cutlass, I. * 401, he; III. 90,
467, et passim.

Quhippo of Leyhoussis, Tho., slain, II. 455 ; —

Ro., Theft, II. 81 ; hanged, 85.
Quhissill for ' Patroune' of the King's ships, I.

* 298 ;— golden, for the Knig, I. * 304 ; another with 'ane Dragoun anamulit,' * ih.

Quhissillit, exchanged. III. 92.
Quhitefurde of that Ilk, John, I. * 384, 91, 133 ;
Adam, yr., ib. ; — of Mylnetoune, Jo., I. * 404 ;

* Adam, II. 376.

Quhitelaw of that Ilk, Pat., I. * 169, * 364,

* 480 ;— of Newgrange, Pat., 1. 119.
Quhithirne, Pilgrimage to, I. * 117; trental of

Masses for K.J a. V., * 278 ; — Malcolm, Prior
of, attemj)ting to restore Popery, * 427.

Quliilslaide, Burning Place of, I. * 30.

Quinta essentia, I. * 120.

Quhuslaris, (fifers ?) I. * 292.

Qwickens, sowmes of, what, III. 603.

R.

Rachlie, (Rachlin,) Island of, III. 26.

Rack, punishment of the, torture or question, 1.

* 401. See Torture.
Rae, English Pursuivant, I. * 280, * 287 ;—

Habbie, and 21 others, Slaughter, III. 472.
Raeburn of that Ilk, Jo., I. 17. See Ryburn.

Ragment and rhyme, in name of ' Joiinne the

Commoune-wele,' I. * 15.
Raid, abiding from tiie, of Aytoun, I. * 103, he. ;

of Eskdale, * 104; of Aytoun, * 110, * 112,

* 117 ; against the Border Thieves, * 134;

of Tamptallon, * 138; of West Marches,

716

GENERAL INDEX.

* 161 ; of Werk, * 240 ; of Solway, * 241 ;
of Jedburclit, *236 ; of East and Soutli Borders, * 259 ; Border-Raids, * 267 ; of the
Merse, ib.; against the Border Thieves, *271,

* 282 ; of Glasgow, * 331 ; of Coldinghame,
ih. ; of West Marclies, ib. ; of Ancrum, * 832 ;
of Dumfries, ib. ; of Dumbarton, * 334 ; of
St Andrews, ib.; of Lauder, *335 ; of Portincraig, *337 ; of Langholme, *338 ; of Gladismure, * 331, * 339 ; of Musselburgh, * 339 ;
of Edgebucklingbrae, * 345; of the Muir of
Eoslin, ib. ; of Langholn), Iladingtoun, and
Edinburgh, * 356 ; of Abertarf, * 392 ; a
Warden-Raid or ' Day of Trew,' * 397, &c. ;
of Lochmabane-stane, ib., * 398 ; of Dunse and
Langtoune, * 404 ; of Lauder, ib. ; of Jedburghe, *421,<S:c. ; of Stirling, * 467, *470,
<S:c.; of Crawford-Douglas, * 483 ; of Brechin,
6 ; of Hawick, 10 ; of Linlithgow, 19, Sec. ;
of Leith, 27, <S:c. ; of Ruthven, 111, 113,
116, 119, 130, 132, 139, &c. ; of Stirling,
133 ; of Dumfries, 155 ; of Aberdeen, 183 ;
against the E. of Huntley, 267 ; of Falkland,
276 ; of Woolmot, II. 21 ; of Stirling, 85 ;
E. of Angus's, at Dumfries, 105, ISO, 134;
of the Isles, III. 118, 202, 225; of Glenfrwne, {q. v.) 223.

Rait of Halgroiie, Wm., I. 15 ; II. 362 ; Da.,
fiar, ib. ; — of Tibberta, Ro., I. 17.

Rallie, Capt , hanged for counterfeiting the Great
Seal, L361.

Ralstoune of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 43 ; Tho., * 130 ;
Hugh, * 170.

Ramsay of Ardbikie, Ja., II. 63 ; — of Balmain,
Jo., elder, 363 ; — of Balmonthe, yr., fined for
invading . . . Ballendeii, on High Street of
Edr., 234, 240 ;— of Banff, Neische, I. * 88,

* 232 ;— of Clattye, Geo., 28 ;— of Cockpen,
James, remitted, * 241, 10; — of Dalhousie,
Nicholas, * 140, * 159 ; treasonable language
against the King, * 251 ; in ward, * 336 ;
George, deforcing Messenger, * 356, * 422,

* 471, 10, 27 ; Geo.,yr., 244; Sir Geo., IH.
264 ; the Lady of, her Funeral, 601 ;— of the
Forther, Jo., II. 128 ; Mich., III. 257, 487 ;
— of Ilaihouse, Jo., imprisoned, I. * 203 ; — .
of Hawis, (Lawis,) Hen , * 207 ; Jo., * 336;

— Jean, Lady Warreistoune, ' revisched,'
(carried off,) 244 ; — Jo., hanged, and his
head fixed on the Nether-bow of Edr., for
Murder, 5rc., II. 404 ;— Sir Jo., of W^est
Barns, (afterwards Vise. Hadingtoun, &c.)
Assault committed within Falkland Palace,
91 ; saves King's life at Perth, 150, <S:c. See
Gowrie Conspiracy ; gets grant of a sword
and bloody dagger added to his Arms, 298,
Szc. ; — of Jordanstoune, Dav., I. 22 ; — of
Kynmont, escheated, *253; — Lady, (Margt.
Carnegie,) her Funeral, III. 601 ; — of Laweris. Hen., I. * 158 ; — Lord, of Dalhousie,
Jo., II. 91; William, IIL 601, note ;~oi
Murye, Wm., I. 5, 6 ; — of Panbryde, Hen.,

* 345 ;— of Poltoun, Wm., * 423 ; Oliver,
27 ; — of Pryour-Lethame, John, Incest and
Murder, III. 257 ;— of Quhytehill, Jo., II.
124, 454;— of the Rinde, Ja., 128.

Randell, Capt. Wm., and 29 other English Pirates,
hanged within flood-mark. III. 99.

Ranefray, Chase of, HI. 112. See Fight of Bentoich, Clan-Gregor, «S:c.

Randolph, English Ambassador, I. 144.

Ransom, exacting, I. * 18, 31, * 411, &c.

Rape (Rapt) of Earl of Lennox's daughter, I.

* 60. See instances of former misapplication
of this term. III. 402, &c. ; John Steill
(^Kempy) hanged, I. * 126 ; of Jonet Creichtoune, Lady Newtoune, * 258 ; Lady Lefnorese, * 349 ; of Jonet Auldjoye, * 421 ; of
Lady Warreistoune, 244 ; Laird of Vrinoch's
daughter, II. 394 ; Ja. Chene of Pennan banished, 400 ; Hen. Sinclair of Quhytkirk,
405 ; Jo. Broun acquitted, 463 ; Wm. Bell
hanged, 475 ; Jo. Errole hanged, 566 ; Wm.
Wischert of Mwretoun, III. 507. See also
Ravishing, Forcible Abduction, Forcing, &c.

Raphael), a Spaniard. See Cassan3eis.

Raphoe, Bishop of. III. 14.

Rate, Jo., hanged for breaking Gardens, &c., HI.

555.
Rattray of Balnocard, L * 232 ;— of Craighall,

II. 85 ; Geo., his servant, &c., beheaded, ib.;

— of Kinvaid, I. 25.
Ratiiiabition, II. 70, &c. ; of Slaughter, I. * 381.
' Raveisching.' See Forcible Abduction, Rape,

GENERAL INDEX.

717

&c. ; remarkable instance of the former misapplication of the terms ' Raveisching' and
' Rape,' III. 402.

Ray, And., bailie of Perth ; Deposition in Cowrie's Conspiracy, II. 186.

Reavaris, what, III. 100, &c.

Rebellion in Orkney, III. 272 to 327 ; Band of
Association by the Rebels, 293 ; Depositions
of the Rebels, 294, &c.

Rebels, assisting, I. * 144, * 165 ; — slain at the
horn, * 80.

Red-book of Miggerny, III. 481, note.

Red-cross, bearing the English, I. * 360.

Red-hand, what, II. 376 ; III. 420.

Redding-straik, what, III. 73, 367.

Redik, Geo., Sh.-dep. of Kirkcudbright, III. 452.

Redpath of that Ilk, (Laird of,) I. * 147 ; Wm.,

* 414, * 477 ; Wm., yr., 10, 41 ;— of Grinlaw, Wm., 205.

Reformation of Religion, commencement of, I.

* 209, * 339 ; Case of Sir James Melville of
Raith, ib.; Spoliation of Churches, altars,
&c., * 353 ; — preached at Dundee and Montrose, * 406 ; at Perth and Ayr, * 407 ; at
Kirkoswald, Maybole, Paisley, &c., * 427 ; a
great many individuals warded, ib., &c. ; at
Holyroodhouse, * 434 ; tumults, * 435.

Regents of Scotland, Arran, I. * 267 ; returns to Scotland, * 270 ; Ancrum-Muir,

* 360 ; Murray, * 421 ; Marr, * 423 ;
Murray conspiring his death, * 510, 6 ; Forgery of his signature, 19 ; Murder of the
King (Dai-nley) and the two Regents, 35 ;
Lennox, 41 ; Conspiracy against Regent
Morton, 32, 70, 72 ; Murder of Regents
Murray and Lennox, 87. See under their
names, &c.

Register House, in Castle of Edr., L *312, *317,

* 323, * 325 ;— Clerk of, * 315, &c.
Regrating, I. * 227, &c. See Forestalling.
Rehabilitation, form of Letters of, I. * 110.
Reid of Aikenheid, Jo., I. 21 ; — Alex., hanged

for using Mint irons, II. 399 ; — of CoUiestoun. And., I. 382 ; — of Drumfork, Mungo,
III. 57 ;— of Freyndlasheid, Jo., I. 41, 42 ;—
Ja., 'wirreit and brunt' for Sorcery, &c., II.
421; — Marioune, Incest, I. 41, 42; — of

Thirdpart, Da, II. 514; — Thom. See Bessie

Dmdop's Trial, I. 49, &c. ; — of Turnberry,

John, slain, * 220 ; James, beheaded for this

Slaughter, ib.
Reidiche of Airdrie, Geo., II. 490; — of Barnehowrie, Ro., 490.
Reif of an anchor and cable, I. * 106 ; — (hereschip) of Summerdaill, * 225.
Reiver, Sanderis the Read, an Evil Spirit, III.

606, 614, &c.
Reiving, masterful, I. * 155.
Religion, Protestant. See Reformation, Jesuites,

&c. ; — trafficking for alteration of, I. 172 ;

the Sj)anish Blanks, 310.
Reliques, L * 278 ; of St Duthos, * 283 ; of St

Mahago, *306; of St Andrian of May, ib., &c.
Remission, General, to Inhabitants of Berwickshire, the Merse, and Lauderdale, I. * 14.
Renfrew, attempting to restore Popery at, I. *429.
Rentoune of Byllo, David, I. *140; — of the

Scheillis, Jo., acquitted of Masterful Stouthreif, &c., II. 442.
Reoche, Jo., Murder, beheaded. III. 484.
Replegiation to a Regality, I. * 38.2, 16, Sec.
Reres, Lady, I. * 509, &c.
Rescuing a felon, I. '■ 142.
Resetting, the Traitors of Levyn, I. 18, 19, &c. ;

* Hob the King' and ' Dand the man,' 32 ;
Armstrangs, 33, 34 ; Rebels, 36 ; Border
Thieves, * 208 ; Englishmen, * 346 ; Seminary Priests, 167; a declared Traitor, II. 124 ;
a stolen purse. III. 552 ; Rebels, Act anent,
L * 80 ; Jesuites, III. 371. See Jesuites.

Restis for culverins, &c., what, III. 205, and note.
Revels, Witch, III. 603, 604, &c. See \Mtclicraft passim.
' Revissing,' (Forcible Abduction,) I. * 101, * 180,

* 182, * 241.

Rhenish Wine, presented to K. Ja. V., I. * 308,
Rhymes, Witches', III. 607, ct set/. See also

Witch-Trials.
Riccio, David, (vulgarly Riz/io,) Murdered, I.

* 478 ; Scott of Cambusniichacll hanged,
drawn, and quartered, * 480; Henry Yair
hanged, I've, *48l; remarkable Supplications
of persons accused, * 483, * 484, * 485.

Rice Ordeal, of the East, III. 184.

718

GENERAL INDEX.

Richardson of Smetoun, Ja., 156 ; II. 10, 343 ;

Sir Ja., III. 601, note.
Richmond, Duke of, I. * 271, * 272.
Riddale, Burning the Place of, I. * 34.
Riddell of that Ilk, (Laird of,) ' Hereschip' of,

I. * 34, * 166 ; Walt., 71 ; Jo., yr., II. 476 ;
III. 569.

Riding furtli of burgh, in ' Routing,' I. * 95 ; —

with the English, * 359.
Rig of Carberrie, Ja., I. 72, 84.
Riglen's horn, what, III. 603.
Rimbursin, ruptured, I. * 404.
RiNGRAIF, THE CoUNTIE, I. * 401.

Rings, &c. See New-year's gifts.

Rioting within burgh, choosing a Lord of Inobedience, &c., *409 ; to restore Popery, *416;

at High School of Edr., (q. r.) 195, note,

&c. ; at the apprehension of Lord Borthwick,

354, &c.
Rix-dollar, IIL 601.
Robert, Lord, (natural son of K. James V.) I.

* 305, * 308,

Robertoun of Ernok, Ja., I. 36, 88, III. 345.
Robertson of Dulcabene, Pat., Slaughter, I.

* 431 ; — Dune, scourged for taking wages
against Mary Q. of Scots, * 467 ; — of Fascallie, Alex., n. 63, 394 ; Ro. 433 ;— of Glengennet, Dune, II. 394 ; — of Killischawie, Ja.,

II. 394 ; — of Middle Downie, Alex., carrying
timber out of Braemar, &c., III. 458; — ofPitcastell. Dune, II. 394 ; — Ro., beheaded for
Slaughter,III. 415 ; — of Smythstoune, Jo., II.
105 ; — of Straloch, Jo., alias ' Barrone Reid,'

III. 203 ;— of Strowane, Alex., I. * 107 ; Ro.,
II. 394, 433 ; his craudoche harried, 437, IIL
22. See Duncansoun.

Robin Hood. See Hood.

Robsoun of Barvanes, Jo., II. 515; — of Leipieleische. Math., III. 568.

Rocliell wines, I. * 349, * 377.

Roes, killing deer and, I. 48.

Rogersoune, Jo., Hamesucken and Slaugliter,
IIL 485.

Roise, (Ross,) of Ballivot, Jo., burning of Clunie,
Murder, houghing cattle, &c., II. 138 ; put to
the torture, ib. note, and 144 ; olijections
against the Assise, 143 ; — of Dunskielh,

Nich. I. 68 ; Will. Murder, under trust, &c.,
II. 481 ; beheaded and forfeited, 484 ; — of
Glenbeg, Jo., IIL 371 ;— Jo., Provost of
Nairn, IIL 485 ;— Kath., Lady Fowlis, Witchcraft, Poisoning, &c., I. 185 ; — of Kilravock,
Hugh, I. 191 ; Wm., houghing and slaying
liorses and cattle, &c., II. 67, 130 ; —
of Pitcalany, Nicolas, II. 481 ; — of Swaustoune, Jo., I. 72 ; — Mr Tho., writing a Pasquil against the Scots Nation, III. 445 ; his
right hand struck off and then beheaded, 454 ;
Papers illustrating this remarkable case, 582
to 590 ; his Depositions, 588 ; — of Thornetoun, Ro., I. 23. See Ross.

Roise-nobillis,IIL 178.

Rokkeris and Nurses to K.James V., I. * 263 ;
to the Prince, * 314, &c.

Rollok of Duncrub, And., Oppressed by Laird of
Kelty, &c., I. * 240, * 373 ; Sir Walt., Tutor
of, II. 63 ; — Mr Ro., Principal, superintended
the education of E. of Gowrie, and his brother,
II. 215, 329; — portioner of Craigie, Geo., 11.
540.

Rolls, Writers of the, 1. *315 ; Keeper of, * 316.

Rome, messenger sent to, I. * 281; directions sent
to, as to giving benefices to natural sons of K.
James V., * 311 ;— Embassy to, I. * 274.

Rona, Island of. III. 109. '

Ronald, Barbara, Wiicli, IIL. 614, &c.

Rood of Greenside, Heretics burnt at, I. * 210.

Rooks, Witches take form of, III. 611, 613, Sec.

Rope-dancer, French, II. 238.

Rorie, an Evil Spirit, III. 606.

Roring Lyon, the, an Evil Spirit, III. 606.

Rosary, golden, I. * 301.

Rosedow, attempting to restore Popery at, I.
* 429.

Roseneath, Burning and Hereschip of, I. * 246.
See Burning, Hereschip, &c.

Roslin, Provost of. Heresy, I. *255; — Muir, Raid
of, I. * 345.

Ross, (Roiss,) of Auchlossin, Nic, I. * 184; — of

Balnagovvan, Alex., L * 352, 191, 192 ; Sir Da.,

195 ; Geo., 285, II. 483 ;— of Balnamukkie,

Donald, I. 201 ; Hu., IL 484, III. 452 ;—

Bishop of, Ja.,L * 185, * 211 ; Ro.,L * 254 ;

Ambassador to England, * 277 ; to France,
6

GENERAL INDEX.

719

* 278 ; assault on treasurer (Mr Gawin Dunbar), in Cathedral of Ross, I. * 328, * 399 ;
Dav., II. 273, 274 ; — Christian, burnt for
Witchcraft, I. 19-t ;— of Craigie, Jo., * 88,

* 187 ; remitted, I. * 249, * 406, * 432,

* 451, 25 ; Treason, 130 ; iMr Re, II. 394 ;
Jonet burnt for the Murder of her husband,
the Laird of Balhoussie, 409, and note ;
plaids stolen, III. 266, 446, 472, 449 ; Jonet,
ib., notices of the Family, 583 ; — of Drumgrange, Jo., II. 130; — Duke of, I. * 5 ; Ja.,
death and burial, I. * 120, * 233, * 239 ;—
Gilb., Prov. of Maybole, II. 560 ;— of Halkhead. Sir John, I. * 4, &c. ; — of Hanyng,
Geo., I. * 137 ; Jo., 6, 89 ; Mr Math., II. 106,
108 ;— of Holme, Dav., I. 201 ;— Herald sent
to the Empeuor, I. * 304, * 307, to the K.
of England, *312 ; waits on French Ambassador, * 322; — Helen, Tocher to her daughter,
I. * 312 ; — Ja., beheaded and quartered, for
taking wages against Mary Queen of Scots,
&c., I. * 467 ;— Lord, Ninian, L 150, * 344 ;
— Lord, of Halkhead, I. 71 ; — of Maitlandis, Tho.,1. 27,1 II. 583 ; — of Mountgrenane,
Jo., Treason, I. * 8 ; — of Pettheavles, James,
Treason, L 130;— of Prestoune, Tho.; I.* 399.

Rossie of that Ilk, Dav., I. 74.

Rothes, Gt^o., Earl of, Intercommuning with,
L * 110, * 185; remission to him and his
accomplices, I. * 249, * 283 ; dresses to John,
his son, * 299 ; And., * 466, * 478, 91, 114,
S04;IIL444;— Master of, (Norman Leslie,)
I. * 337, supplying him, * 358.

Rothesay, Duke of, James, Prince and Steward
of Scotland. See Prince James.

Rothsay, Remission to Inhabiiants of, I. * 113;
Castle besieged, I. * 240 ; — Provost of, murdered, III. 199; inhuman barbarities of Argyll's followers, ib. ;— Herald, I. * 2S2, * 286,
* 287 ; banquets. Englishmen, * 300, * 304 ;
sent to London, * 304.

Routing, riding furtli of bur^i, in, I. * 95.

Round, to whisper, II. 185, 214, 588.

Row, breaking on (the wheel,) I. 241, II. 450.

Rowan of Sandiedub, Nicoll, II. 391, Alex., his
son hanged for barbarous cruelty — burning a
woman on a red-hot * girdill,' ib., 393.
VOL. IIL

Rowallan, Feud between Laird of, and the Cuuinghams, I. * 56 ; * 428, &c. See Mure.

Rowmais, King of. III. 590.

RowU, John, Prior of Pittenweem, Deforcing, &c.,
L * 157.

Rowne-tree, II. 536. See Charms.

Roxburgh, Barons of, fail in their Bond, I. * 146 ;
— Castle of, supplying tbe English in, * 360,

* 379 ; — Justice-aires, expense of, * 317; —
Lord, Ro. II. 351.

RoxBURGHK, Lord, Ro., II. 548.

Roy, red-haired. III. 251.

Royston's, Lord, MS. Abridgment, I. 257.

Ruid-day, II. 376.

Ruid-weli, III. 618.

Rule, Bessie, a Witch's nickname. III. 606 ;—

Robert the, an Evil Spirit, ib., 615, &c.
Rum, Island, of. III. 20.
Rungis and batounis, striking a Minister with,

II. 416 ; naked people struck with, and

scourged, 454.
Russell, Hieronymus, burnt for Heresy, I. *215;

Mr Jo., Justice- depute, 169.
Rutherford, of Auchingorihe and his son respited

for ' Revising,' I. * 241 ; — of Ed3earstoun,

Jo., I. * 20 ; Rich., III. 396 ;— of Hundolee,

(Hondelye,) Jo., I. *35 ; Geo., * 127, * 147,

* 208, * 440 ; Sir Nich., HI. 393, 396 ;— of
Hunthill, Jo., I. * 208, 280 ; Wm., yr., ib. ;
Jo., and Tho., yr., tried for Raids of Falkland, &c., 293 ; Jo., HI. 396 ;— of that Ilk,
Helen, Herschip of her tenants, I. * 204 ; —
Jo., hanged, I. * 142 ; Mr Nicoll, * 440 ;—
Rich., Provost of Edr., 46 ; of Jedburgh, III.
396, 431 ; Jo. and Wm. tried for cruel Slaughter, II. 519; Wm. beheaded, 520; And.,
Housebreaking, &c., HI. 540; — of Synewallis, Wm., Mutilation, 225.

Rutherglen, attempt to restore Popery at, I.* 430.

Ruthven, Mr Alex. See Master of; — Alex.,
Resetting him, IH. 72, 202 ;— of Ballindene,
(see al^^o Bandene,) Wm., I. * 342, * 347 ;
funeral of Laird of, II. 473 ; Wn)., HI. 437 ;
— of Foreland, (Frieland.) Ale.x., and Harie,
his brother, forfeited in Pari., H. 159 ; Wm.,
241 ; Alex., HI. 203; Intereontmuning with
his sou Alex., 72, 202 ; — Hary, alias Free4 Y

720

GENERAL INDEX.

land, uses treasonable expressions against the
King, II. 325 ; Depositions relative to, ib. to
329 ;— Holy Well of, 538 ;— of that Ilk,
(Laird of,) I. 13 ; Win., yr., alias Bandene,
II. 397 ;— Lord, Wm., L * 141, * 177 ; gift
of Laird of Gortliy's escheat, * 248, * 342 ;
Pat., murder of David Iliccio, * 479, * 503,
&c. ; Wm., besieging Place of Dupplin, <S:c.,
25 ; invaded, 89 ; tried for Slaughter, 90 ;
and DiRLETON, II. 283 ; — Master oF,Wm.,
remitted for Besieging Castle of Rothesay
and Burning Bute, 1. * 240, * 479 ; Alex.,
killed at Cowrie's Conspiracy, II. 148, &c.
See GowRiE ; — pensioner of Ross, Alex., II.
98;— Raid of, L 111, 113, 116, and 119 to
130, Szc. ; Lairds of Mains, Drumquhassill,
and Duntreath, executed, 139, &c. ; — Surname of, not to come within 10 miles of

King's person, 8fc., 11. 239, 240 ;— Wm., brother of Jo., Earl of Gowrie, &c., forfeited in
Parliament, 159.

Ryburn (Raeburn) of that Ilk, Jo., Adultery and
Child-Murder, IL 415.

Rye-bowt, what, III. 605, 618.

Ryellis of aucht, what. III. 100.

Rynd of Kerse, Jo., yr., Slaughter, II. 101 ;
Wm., 130 ; Pat., his son, slain by the Master
of Ogilvie, &c., ib. ; Harie and Gilb., his sons
tried, 1 35 ; — Nicol, wounds Provost of Edr.,
I. * 399 ; makes public confession at Cross,
with bare feet, in linen clothes, &c., ib. ; II.
235 ; — Mr Wm., preceptor to Jo., Earl of
Gowrie, 158, 176 ; his Deposition as to Conspiracy, 219 ; is ' extremely booted,' (put to
torture in the boots,) 220, 238, note, 319.
See Gowrie's Conspiracy.

s.

Sabbali, Dies, Saturday, I. * 115.

Sacrament, Holy, abusing the, after the manner
of Papistry, I. * 428 ; receiving, while under
Excommunication, I. 365, * 375.

Sacrilege, hanging an image of St Francis, I.

* 286 ; breaking an image of St Magdalene,

* 335 ; casting down one in Kirk of Air, ib. ;
spoliation of Churches, Altars, Sec, * 353 ;
striking a Rector in Cathedral of Aberdeen,
&c., * 356 ; invading Prior of Pluscardin, Szc,
376 ; stealing chalices, &c., * 393 ; this crime
punished by drowning and hanging, ih.

Sadler, King's Master, I. * 315 ; — Sir Ralph, I.

* 286, * 301.

Saidler, Christian, burnt for Witchcraft, &c., 11.25.

SaifFer, what. III. 441, 7iote.

Salamander, the, one of the King's ships, I. * 298,

* 316.

Salisbury, Earl of, (Cecil,) Sir Ro,, II. 581 ;
his death, ih., note ; his speech as to L. Balmerinoch's Treason, 592.

Salmon Fishing, in close-time, I. * 40, * 54 ; destroying, I. * 163.

Saltoun, Lady, III. 66; Lord Abernetiiy
OF, I. * 177 ; Wm., besieging Frendraucht,

&c., * 329 ; invaded, * 476 ; Alex., 116 ; Jo.,
II. 273, 572.

Salutation, singular ceremony at the meeting of
Makconeill and Coll MacGillespic, III. 20.

Sampsoun, Agnes, (Annie, the wise wife of Keith,)
Witch, I. 216 ; her Trial, 230 ; her Witchprayer or conjuration, 234 ; another, 237 ;
' wirreit' and ' brunt in assis,' 241.

Samuelstoun, Laird of, taken by Lord Hamilton,
I. 358.

< Sanct,' the, John Scott, the celebrated faster, so
called, L * 311.

Sanctuary. See Holyrood, Torphechin.

Sanday, Piracy and Murder in the Road-stead of,
L * 171.

Sandelandis of Calder, Sir Ja., I. * 159, * 237 ;
goes in Pilgrimage to Rome, * 240 ; remitted,
* 256 ; Jo., yr. of, found caution for L. 10,000,
licence to go to France, * 333 ; escapes from
ward, ih. ; Ja., 70 ; feud with E. of Montrose,
347 ; feud with SheriflF of Ayr, 352, 359 ;
fights a combat with E. of Montrose, 361 ; —
of Cruvy, Ja., I. * 156 ; — of Gilliswallis, Ja.,
III. 72;— of that Ilk, (Laird of,) Jo., * 147 ;
takes two thieves, I. * 273, * 424 ;— of SlaGENERAL INDEX.

721

manno, Sir Ja., I. 248, 282 ; feud with E. of
Montrose, 347, 348 ; feud with Sheriff of
Ayr, &c., 352 ; II. 365, 555.

Sangweleris, (wild boars,) I. * 311, * 312.

Sanquhar, slaughter of inhabitants, 1. 305 ; — Kirk
of, attempt to restore Popery at, I. * 430 ; —
Lord Crichtoun of, Ro., I. 49, * 53 ; Wm.,
*229, *232; Feud with Lord Maxwell, L* 53,

* 78, * 85, * 109, * 124 ; with the Laird of
Drumlanrig,* 269; Wm., slain,!.* 353, *354;
Ro., 372, 375 ; II. 394 ; IIL 115 ; Wm., 339 ;
banged for killing a fencing-master, 447 ; —
Tutor of, I. * 397, * 398 ; Wm. II. 71.

Saphire, for Mary of Guise's golden girdle, 1.

* 299 ; King's ring, * 323.

Satin, for dresses, I. * 292, &c., &c.

Saturday, termed ' dies Sabbati' in ancient writings, I. * 15 ; — Black, what, I. 56, note.

Saul-Mess and Derige, he, I. * 293, * 297 ; II.
530.

Saulseat, (^Sedes animarum,) Coramendator of,
John, Fire-raising, &c., I. 12.

Savoy, Duke of. Letters to, II. 571.

Saw, Witch's salve, 1. 53 ; II. 28, &c. See Witchcraft, passhn.

Sayneing and croceing, a Witch-charm, II. 479,
&c.

Sceptre, King's, L * 117 ;— Queen's, L * 302,
&c. See under their names.

Schafferonis, I. * 299.

Schalmers, (musicians,) I. * 292.

Schaikill-bane, III. 509, &c.

Schankis, (hose,) I. 51. See also App. to the
earlier reigns. III. 265, 478, &c.

Scharge, scharg, wliat. III. 538.

Scharp, Jo., slain, II. 427 ; — Mr Jo., Minister,
tried, II. 494 ; banished, 503.

Scbaw of Barragane, Jolin, I. * 382 ; — of Broiche,
Jo., I. * 450 ; — of Cambusmoir, Alex., III.
233, 250 ; — of Cammysmort, Judicial Arbitration, I. * 167 ; — Elizabeth, (mistress of K.
James V.,) I. * 277 ; — of Glenmure, (Jeo.,
11.128 ; Adam, his brother, tried for shooting
hagbuts, &c., ib. ; — of Greenock, Jo., I. 19,
63, 67, 171 ;— of Grymmet, Jo., L * 457;
Alex., Tutor of, III. 172 ; — of Ilaly, Jo., oppression, &c., I. * 57, * 453, * 457 ;— of

Kerise, Jo., slaughter, I, * 58 ; Quintin, (Tutor of,) * 137, * 150, * 457 ;— of Knokhill,
Geo., I. * 167; Mr Ja., III. 233 ;— of Sauchy,
Alex., I. * 167, * 327 ; Ja., II. 62, 63, 502;
—of Sornbeg, I. * 343 ; Jo., II. 106, 109 ;—
Mr Wm., slain, I, 363 ; — of Welwood, Adara,
L 19.

Schaveill, Sir Harie, III. 589.

Scbeilling, (scheill,) what, 11. 519.

Scherand wine, price of, I. * 389.

Schellopes, small vessels, III. 84.

Scoir, (scoroch,) buck-toothed. III. 223.

Scola, E(iw., sometime Sheriff of Orkney, III. 280.

Scoll, (scoill,) drinking a, what, II. 172.

Scone, Lord, II. 273 ; Andro Henderson complains of liim, 321 ; his exculpation, 322, 457,
496,572 ; III. 208,316;— Kegalityof,I.*424.

Scott, of Abbotsford, Sir Walter, Bart., Letter
from, as to the name and Clan of Scott, III.
381 ;— of Abbotshall, Wm., I. 261, 304 ;
Tho., Justice-Clerk to K. James V., singular
anecdote of his death, &c.. III. 596 ; — of Allanhauche, Ro., L * 127, * 147, * 400 ;— of
Balbertoune, Ro., I. 28 ; — of Balwery, Sir
Wm., L * 62, * 78, * 134 ; Wm., * 425 ;
Sir Ja., 261, 304; subscribes the forfeited
Lords' Band, 346 ; II. 49 ; — of Bonyntoune,
Ro., L * 400, * 414 ; Adam, * 450 ; Jo., II.
339 ; — of Branxholme, Sir Walter, found caution of 500 merks, I. * 152 ; caution of 20,000
merks, * 229; Treason, * 272, * 332; to
depart this realm, 261, 308, 346 ; Band or
Association between him and 50 of his Clan,
III. 381, 390; remarkable penance enjoined

on Laird of Cessford, for his nuirdcr, 391 ;

of Bowliill, Ro., II. 339; his three brothers
slay Napier of Wowmet, ib. ; — of Bukcleuche,
Sir Walt., I. * 127; Treason, * 272; takes
Penman prisoner, * 273, * 456 ; Keeper of
Liddisdale, 342 ; takes Will of Kinmont out
of the Castle of Carlisle, wilii sound of trum
pet, ike, 363 ; Quekx Eliz. dcniaiids redress
364; relations of that remarkal)Ie event, II
504 ; III. 390, 396 ;— of Burnfoot, Adam, I
* 400 ;— of Burthauche, Jo., I. * 147 ;— Capt
of the Airnu'tai,re, Roiivr, III. 220 ; — of Cas
tlesyde, Geo., III. 458 ; — Dav., « callit Z,cm/j/,

722

GENERAL INDEX.

I. 27j 33, &c. ; — of Deloraine, Jo., Resetting
Traitors, &c., I. * 23 ; — of Deringstoun, Geo.,
III. 396 ; — of Dryhope, Adam, his brother,

II. 405 ;— of Edene, Tho., I. * 456 ;— of
Edilstane, Ro., III. 396 ; — of Edschaw, Walt.,
I. * 17, 27, 38 ; Phil., * 69, * 147, * 456 ;—
of Fenwick, Simon, I. * 147 ; — of Goldielands, Walt., I. 276 ; — of Harden, Wm., I.

* 400; Walt., his houses to be demolished,
276 ; denounced, ib. ; — Geo., Walter, and Ingram Scott, hanged for barbarous cruelty,
maiming and killing sheep, &c.,380 ; illustrative
Papers, 389 ; Jok, alias the Sukler, hanged,
396 ; Walt., Mutilation, 455 ; — of Hanyng,
Tho., I. * 400, * 456, * 457 ; Ro., II. 509 ;
Tho., III. 391 ; Sir Ro., 539 ;— of Hartwodrayres, Ro., III. 458 ; — of Hassindene, Wm.,
I. * 147 ; oppressed, I. * 252 ; Dav. slain,

* 456 :— Hob, called of Coli/furd; Mr John
the Clerk hanged, I. * 450 ; Mich, scourged
for cattle-stealing, * 157; Hercules denounced, 305 ; Adie, called the Peck, hanged, II.
365 ;— of Howpaslot, Walt., I. * 18, * 71,

* 88 ; Tutor of, (Rob.,) * 147; Rob., * 173,

* 230, * 400 ; Lady, III. 381 ;— of Horsehill, Ro., I. * 434 ;— Jo., baillie of Mussilburgh, II. 555 ; — John, ' the Sanct,' a celebrated faster, I. * 311 ; — of Langschaw, Patrick, III. 601, note ; — of Linflar, Walt., I.

* 88 ; — Margaret, nurse to Prince Arthur,
I. * 309 ; — Marg., Incest and Adultery with
Lord Borthwick, 84 ;— of Mun5ie, Pat.,i.*88;
— of Newburghtand Gemmilscleuch, Mr Arth.,
11.451 ; Sir Jo., III. 539 ; his purse stolen, 552 ;
— of Pitgorno, Tho., Justice-depute, I. * 163,

* 168 ;— of Quhitchester, Robert, I. * 19,

* 21, * 23, &c. ;— Rob., ' callit Bellit Robin;
I. * 27 ;— of Raebum, Wm., III. 381 ;— Ro.
and Adam, bailies of Hawick, &c., acquitted
of slaughter. III. 218, 396 ; Pa., bailie of Selkirk, 396 ;— of Robertoun, Jo., I. * 147 ;— of
Sintoune, Ro., slain, L * 61 ; Walt., * 127 ;
Walt., yr., * 400 ;— of Satchells, Lady, III.
381 ; Capt. Walt., (Author of Metrical Hist.
of Name of Scot,) 382 ; Wm., 383 ;— of Sundelishope, Jo., III. 442 ; — Surname of, remarkable Contract betwixt, and the Kerrs,

III. 390;— of Thirlestane, Ro., I. * 400,

* 456, 3-9 ; Sir Ro., II. 562 ; III. 301, 393,
539 ; — Tho., Ambassador to England, &c., I.

* 276 ; Justice-Clerk, * 328 ;— of Tuschelaw,
Walt., I. * 22, &c. ; Dav., * 36 ; Adam, called the King of Thieves, * 142, * 144 ; beheaded, * 145, * 270; Wm., * 433, * 434,

* 4.50, * 456; Walt., 84; IIL 396 ;— Sir
Wm. jun.. Felony done to him, I. * 60 ; —
Wm., hanged, I. * 206 ; Dame Grizell, ih.

Scougall of that Ilk. See Skowgall.

Scourging with a bridle, he, I. * 454 ; naked
people, cutting the backs of Cattle, &c. * 455 ;
naked people with ' roungis and batounis,' and
' leisching' them with belts, three persons beheaded, hanged, and scourged, II. 454 ; Messenger scourged and deprived, ib. ; with a belt
and murdering, 531 ; with sword-belts and
horse-bridles. Sec, HI. 539; — punishment of,
L * 157, * 206, * 458, * 467 ; II. 94, 417,
455 ; for following Gypsies, HI. 99 ; for

* vnreverent speiches' against the King, &c.,
220 ; for Theft, 443, 445.

Scrabister, House of, detaining, I. 337.

ScROPE, Lord, W^arden of England, I. 365.

Scrymgeour, Constable of Dundee, (of Dudhope,)
Ja., L * 177, * 268, * 269, * 324, * 347, 41,
178 ; to bear a Cornet Blanche and the King's
Banner and Standard, 342 ; Sir Ja., 392, 413 ;
III. 134 ; Ja., yr., ih. ; — of Balbegys, Alex.,
his houses, Jonet his daughter, &c., burnt, I.

* 334 ;_of Balbouchtie, Ja., I. * 404 ;— of
Ballinscho, Jo., III. 471 ; — of Glaswell, Ja.,
L 27, 75.

Seaeorth, Earl of. III. 19.

Seal, great. Counterfeiting, Captain Rallie hanged,
I. 361.

Seanis, (Sciennes,) near Edinburgh, III. 572.

Seatoun-thorne, a Witch trysting-place, II. 543.

Secreitt, a pyne doublett, or chain mail worn under the dress, II. 84, 149, 158, 183, 185;
III. 204, et passim.

Secret members, cutting oflF, putting hot ashes and
live embers in the scrotum, &c., II. 393 ; Pat.
Stewart beheaded for these crimes, 394; —
stroke upon, with the foot. III. 542.

Secret Council, declining the Jurisdiction of the.

GENERAL INDEX.

723

&c, II. 494; Case of Ministers holding an Sewers, who served up tfie King's meats, I. * 312.

unlawful General Assembly, &-c., ib. Sewing gold, I. * 296; silver ib., 319.

Sedition, in burgh of Ayr, I. * 204 ; in Edin- Sey-Revaris, Pirates, {q. v. and Piracy,) I. * 273.

burgh, bearing a banner called the Haly Gaist, Seytoun of Auchinhuif, Jo., I. * 454 ; of Carald-

&c., * 330.
Selbie of Bittilsdane, Ro., 11.515.
Selkirk, Barons of the shire fail in Bond, I. * 147 ;
Justice-aire of, * 22, * 38, * 71 ;— Pot-Loch
of, * 19 ; — Town of, burnt, * 35 ; ' herreit be
Thevis and Pestilence,' * 262.
Seminary Priests, III. 372. See Papists, Jesuites, &c.
Sempill of Beltrees, Jo., 70 ; convicted of Treason, in Conspiring the Regent's Slaughter,
I. 72 ; Sir Ja., II. 309 ;— of Blenescheillis,
Jo., I. * 476 ;— of Cathcart, Wm., * 388 ; Gabriel, yr., 66 ;— Colonel, Wm., 173, 327 ;_

of Craigbait, Gabriel^ excommunicated, &c.,
* 365 ; Ro., 66 ;-.of Ernok, 67 ;— of Fulwood, John, * 163, * 170, * 382, * 385,
141, 183 ; II. 439 ; Wm., III. 237 ;— Lady,

(Dame Mariota Montgomery,) Imprisoning,

&c., I. * 381 ;— of Ladymure, Gabriel, * 163 ;

—Lord, John, * 163 ; Wm., * 164, * 166 ;

unjustly denounced a rebel, * 170, * 190 ;

remitted, * 256 ; Treason, * 271, * 381 ;

Ro., * 385, * 421, * 426, * 476, 141, 265 ;

Hew, III. 316; Feud with Earls of Eglinston, Jo., * 465 ;— of Gargunnock, Mr Alexander, III. 552; — of Kylesmure, Sir Wm.,
II. 509; — Lady, Dame Mary le Pyeris,
I. 14 ;— of Lathreise, John, yr., * 404, * 465 ;
— Lord Geo., * 78 ; Justice depute, * 85,

* 199 ; Licence to, * 111 ; abiding from Solway, * 243, * 338, * 381, note, * 387 ; mutilation of Laird of Borg, * 465, 114; Ro.,
154, 178 ;— of Luniford, Jo., * 48 ;— Master OF, 94; — of Mcldrum, Alexander, slain,

* 149, * 175, * 183; feud with Earl Marischall, 353 ; Geo., Tutor of, his coffer with
writings stolen, II. 93 ; Alex., fiar, slain. III.
379 ; Jo., ib. ;— of Mony, James, 478 ;— of
Northrig, Tho., I. 169; Geo, IIL 134 ;— of
Parbroath, Da., I. 270 ; Comptroller, 347 ; —
of Pitmedie, (Pitniedden,) Jo , 59 ; — of Pittady, Jo., 64 ; — of Rumgavy, Wm., * 387 ;
Dav., 28;— of Touche, * 421 ; Ja., 64 ;_of
Tulliebody, Sir Ninian, * 147, *^ 167; Ro.,

* 453 ; Walt., * 465, * 466 ; Ja., II. 62.
Sharpe, Archbishop, notice ofthe Trial of Mitchell,

for firing a pistol at him and Bishop of Orkney, III. 195, note, &c.

toun and Glencairn, &c., 580 ; — Master of, Sheep, barbarous cruelty in maiming and killing.

Ro., I. * 163, * 166 ; found caution not to
resort to France or Scotland, * 226, * 256,

* 343 ; invaded, * 343 ; slays Lord Creichtoun of Sanquhar, * 353 ; pardoned, * 354 ;,
found caution for 20,000 merks ; And., 66,
67, 133;— Mathew beheaded, * 165 ;— of
Noblistoun, Ro., * 361 ; — of Thirdpart, Wm.,

* 388, * 429.

Sempills, Feud with the Cunynghames, I. * 164,

* 166, &c., * 282 ; Pareis, Horse-stealing,
*476.

Serat, Q. Mary of Guise's Fool, (a female,) I.

* 293, * 294, * 301, * 307, * 322.
Serjeand of Justiciary, I. * 2.

III. 380 ; George, Ingram, and Walter Scott
hanged, 389 ; illustrative Pa])ers, ib. ; Jok
Scot, alias t/te SiiJder, hanged, 396 ; — selling
sheep to the English, I. * 179, * 181 ; — stealing, (see also Stouthreif, &c.,) * 22, * 87 ;
from Queen's Park, * 388 ; Hob Scott and
four others hanged, * 450 ; Achilles Henderson scourged and banished, &c., 7 ; Adie
Usher hanged. III. 568 ; Will Usber banished, 569 ; — stealing wool from live siieep, I.

* 206.

Sheriff, bribe taken to discliargo a Murderer, I.

* 63 ; Invasion of, in a fenced Court, * 136,

* 456. See Jurisdiction, Sec.

Servitour, domestic, original signification of, II. 67. Ship of gold, c'vc, I. * 295.

Session, Signet made for the Court of, I. * 256. Ships of War, King James V.'s, Salamander, L

Setlingtoun of Auchinskeiche, Jo., I. * 456 ; — of * 298, * 31(5 ; Little Bark, ib. ; Unicorn, «'i.,

Stanehouse, Jo., * 140. 317 ; Expedition against tlie Pirates, * 298 ;

724

GENERAL INDEX.

wood for, * 300 ; victualling for the Isles,

* 303, (see Isles) ; ensigns, standards, &:c., for
ships, ib. ; Ovens for, ib. ; silver plate, <S:c.,

* 304; keeping the Ships, * 316 ; the Lion,

* 317.

Shirts, King's, embroidered with gold and silver
work, * 301, &c.

Shooting near the King's person, 98, 100 ; within King's Palace, punished by Banishment for
life, 187, 8iC. See Holyrood ;— with Pistolets, 371. See Pistolets, &c.

Sib, of kin, <!v:c., 111. 96.

Sibbett, (Sibbald,) of Cair, Dav., I. 16, 17;— of
Lethome, Dav. * 426 ; — of Rankelour-over,
Alex. 60 ; Tho., Tutor of, HI. 9.

Siege of Newark, I. * 139 ; of Makkanes House
by Donald of the Isles, * 262 ; of Blackadder
by the English, * 269 ; of Palace of Glasgow
by Earl of Lennox, * 269, &c. See Battle,
Field, &c.

Signet, three new ones made, I. * 256.

Signet-Letters, interlining, I. * 346 ; — Forging, a
Notary and his servant hanged, 85, 87 ; Messenger scouiged and deprived, II. 455.

Silver ^Nlines, I. * 302 ; — ' pece,' (plate,) stolen,

* 179 ; boy of K. Ja. V., 302 ; 6 gieat and 4
small, * 323 ; two lavers, ib. ; dish stolen,

* 386 ; — Vessels, Master of the King's, * 313 ;
—work. King's, three cases of, taken with him
to the Isles, * 302, * 303 ; cases for, * 323.

Simson of Craighous, Laur., HI. 72; — Sir Duncan, burnt for Heresy, I. * 210, * 211, Sec.

Sinclare, (Sinclair, St Clare,) of Auchinfranko,
William, I. * 85; Slaughter, * 151; slain,

* 327;— of Blause, William, HI. 134 ;— of
Burgh, Hew, 1. 375 ;— Captain Geo., III. 32 ;
—Da., imprisoned by his brother, E. of Caithness, I. * 395 ; — of Drydane, Edward, * 166,

* 336 ; — of Dyn, Ja., slain, HI. 235 ; Geo.,
(his brother,) ib. ; — of Etha, Wm., 82 ; — of
Galdwaldmore, with William, Edward and
George, his sons, slain, I. 299 ; — of Iliefield,
George, * 169; — of Hirdmanstoun, William,
Slaughter, * 468 ; Witch consulted to allay
his lady's birth-pains, 237 ; — of Ley, James,
his son Adam drowned for Sacrilege, * 393 ;
Wm., HI. 303 ;— of Little Blair, Robert, I.

* 347 ; — of Longformacus, Math., * 477 ;

of Loquhoy, Hen., 387; — Lord, Henry, * 78,
60, 310 ;— Margaret, Lady, * 182 ; remitted,

* 249 ; — Master of, servant slain at Dysart,

* 408, 3 ;— of Mey, (May,) Sir Wm., 195 ;
Wm., yr., HI. 9, 291 ;— of Myreside, Wm.,
I. * 347 ;— of Murchill, Ja., HI. 285 ;— of
Pitcairns, Oliver, I. * 252 ; Captain of Tamptallon, * 254 ; Protection to, ib. ; gift, * 256 ;
Lease of Orkney and Shetland, &c., for Rent
of 3000 merks, * 257, * 258 ; gift, ib. ; Keepership of Castle of Kirkwall, ib. ; found caution to answer for all crimes, &c., * 329 ; — of
Ratter, John, (brother to Earl of Caithness,)
HI. 286 ; Justice and Sheriff depute of Orkney, ib., 304 ; — of Ravinsnuk, Oliver, II. 476 ;
— of Rosling, Sir Wm., I. * 159 ; Respited
for Abiding from the Raid of Solway, * 241 ;
remitted, * 242, 33 ; Witch consulted for recovery of his Lady's health, 232 ; II. 10 ;
Wm., 467 ; — of Strone, Henry, &c., pursued
for Slaughter, I. * 413 ; — of Stirkco, Jo., slain,
HI. 235 ;— of Tenquhie, Hen., 82 ;— of Tullope, Wm., 280;— of Whitekirk, Hen., L
155 ; Hamesucken, Rapt and Forcing, II.
405 ; — William, Resetting Jesuites, Sec, HI.
371 ; banished, 376.

Singers, I. * 115. See also Minstrels, &c.
Singular Combat, (see Duel,) trial for Slaughter

in France, II, 382 ; in Flanders, HI. 502 ; illustrative Papers, 504.
Sinton, (Robert Scott,) Laird of, slain, I. * 61.
Skaith, III. 612, Sec.

Skatt, (a sort of black maill,) levying, 11. 528.
Skellingtouo, (Skerringtoun,) Laird of. Remitted

for Slaughter, I. * 82.
Skene of Curriehill, Sir Jo., Justice Clerk, II. 3 ;

Lord Clerk Register, 273, 568 ; Sir James,

HI. 418.
Skin-coats, to K. James V., I. * 305.
Skirling, Elspet, and two others ' wirreitand brunt

in assis,' for forging and uttering base money,

II. 74. See Uttering, &c.
Skirving of that Ilk, Harie, II. 534 ;— of PlewlandhiU, Wm., I. 55.
Skoll, (skoill,) meaning of drinking scoills, II.

172 and note, 312.

GENERAL INDEX.

725

Skowgall of that Ilk, yr., I. * 143; Jo., » 361, 155.

Skrukned, what, III. 612.

Skye, Isle of, I. * 225 ,

Skyir-Thurisday, (Fuiisday,) I. * 40.

Skynner of Bal5ordye, George, I. 27.

Slack, what, II. 519.

Slaines, Letters of, II. 486, 604, note; pannel
made to satisfy private party, notwithstanding
of Remission, &c., III. 234.

Slandering and calumniating the King, Jo. Diksoun, Englishman, hanged, I. 385. See K.
James VI.

Slanes, house of, to be cast down, I. 342.

SLAUGHTER. — Achesoun of Gosford, Alex.,
I. 2 ; — Adam, Geo., beheaded, 95 ; — Agnew,
Sheriff of Wigton, And., remitted, * 252 ; —
Allan, Jok, beheaded, 10 ; — Angus, Geo.,
notary, II. 480 ; — Angussone, (M^Leod,)
Neil), beheaded, I. 69 ; — Armstrang. See under that name ; — Argyle, Earl of, Arch.,
* 247 ;— Arnauld, Mr Gilb., III. 379 ;— Arnot of Woodmylne, Jo., yr., II. 53 ; arguments as to shooting with Pistolets, &c., ti.,
&c. ; — Attiquane, Laird of, slain, I. * 86 ; —
Auchincraw, William and Hary, II. 98 ; —
Auchinfranko, Laird of, slain, I. * 327 ; —
Auchinhervy, Laird of, slain, * 132, * 237; —
Baillie of Howgait, Arch., slain, * 257 ;
Tho., 38 ;— Bail5ie, Mr Ja., III. 498 ;— Baird,
Hen., beheaded, 499 ; — Bairdis, Jo., 119 ; —
Ballindroicht, Laird of, slain, I. * 204, * 257 ;—
Balluny, Lady, (Marg. Douglas,) slain, *343 ;
— Bannatyne of Corehouse, John, * 179 ;
of Stenhouse, Sir Pat., 393 ; of Gairsey,
Wm., ib. ; acquitted, 397 ; of Karnes, Hector, II. 131 ; in Chapell Donald, Ja., 461,
&c. See Muir of Auchindrain ; — Bardowy,
(Perdowy,) Laird of, slain, I. * 204 ; — Barclay, Rob., sentenced to be beheaded, * 396 ;
banished, ib. ; of Towie, slays a Messenger,
381 ; acquitted, 385 ; Ja., slays Laird of
Earlsmyln's son, H. 72, 80 ; — Bastie, Sir
Anthony d'Arcy de la, slain, I. * 235 ; —
Battiesoune, Jok of the Scoir, Prikit up
Archie, and Adie, hanged, II. 442 ; — Bek,
Jo., 523 ; — Bell of Curre, Slaughter of Laird
of Mousewald, I. * 41 ; — Bellenden, Jo., III.

497 ; — Bickerton, John, of Casche, I. * 60 ;
— Bissate, Tho., yr. of Querrell, slain, * 368 ;
— Blacater, Andro, of that Ilk, * 100 ; Jo.,
*379; of Tullyallan, beheaded, *151, *271,

* 275;— Black, Hen., and 11 others, III.53;
—Blair of Balthayok, Tho., I. * 343, * 424 ;
Patrick, beheaded, * 374 ; Peter, IIL 443 ;
Tutor of Balmyill, Alex., L * 424 ;— Blakhall, Wm., of that Ilk, * 100 ;— Bog, Ja.,

* 476 ; — Bonkle, Tho., beheaded, 158 ; Jos.,
beheaded, IL 417 ;— Borthwick of Cruikstoune, Wm., respited, L *235, * 241, * 266;
— Bowman, Christian, Lady of Brux, slain,

* 208 ;— Boyd of Banhaith, Ro., 171 ; Jo.,
399 ; of the Kyppis, Ja., 171 ; Lord, Robert,
ib. ; Master of, Thomas, ib. ; — Brothersyde,
Wm., beheaded, * 160 ; — Brand, John, student, beheaded. III. 360 ; — Broune, Tho., beheaded, I. * 15 ; of Carsleuch, Jo., 81 ; Jo.,
beheaded. III. 493 ; — Bruce of Cultmalundie,
Laur., yr., &c., 443 ; of Fyngask, Pat., II.
427 ; Capt. Harie, IH. 502 ;— Bruntfield,
Geo., alias Cutlug, beheaded, I. 77 ; Alex.,
of Hardaikeris, II. 480 ; Adam, 506 ; —
Bryntschele, Jo., beheaded, I. * 164 ; Pat.,
63 ; — Buchanan, Geo., and 8 others, III. 546;
— Butter of Gormock, John, I. *367, *371 ;
— Cairns, Wm., of Orchardtoun, * 131;
Wm., yr., remitted, * 252 ; — Caithness,
Earl of, John, slain, *253 ; George, *394;
— Campbell of Ardkinlas, acquitted, 363 ; —
of Auchinhowie, Colin, *204 ; hanged, *251
his escheat granted to the Laird of Keir, ib.
of Bargour, Charles, his estate escheated, * 250
Hew, II. 507 ; Robert, III. 466 ; of Kethick,
Pat., II. 80 ; of Lowdoun, slaughter of Earl
of Cassillis, I. * 136 ; of Pofortour, John,
slain, *251; of Skerringtoun, Cha., respited,

* 257 ; — Canochson, Alex. John, * 246 ; —
Carkettill of Marcle, Jo., 10 ; — Carrutheris,
Jo., of Warrambie, II. 475 ; Jo., in Netholme,
III. 115 ; — Cassillis, Gilbert, Earl of, I.

* 130 ; slain, * 136 ; Gilb., respited, * 236 ;
— Castlecary, Laird of, slain, * 149; — Cesfurd. Laird of, slain, * 133 ; — Chalmer of
Seggydeno, David, * S.'M ; of Drumlochy,
Wm., * 374 ; — Chamronc, Jo. and Dune,

726

GENERAL INDEX.

beheaded, III. 537 ; — Chancellor, Wm., of
Quodquene, I. * 175 ; — Chaiteris of Cuthilgurdy, John, slain, * 343 ; of Kinclevin,
John, * 334 ; of Kinfawnis, Tho., and liis
brothfrs, * 334, * 343; of Lochtoun, Robert, remitted,* 254; — Clan Cameron, slaughter by the, * 355 ; — Clark, Jonet, burnt, 206 ;
Cochrane of Pitfour, John, yr., * 334 ; of
tliat Ilk, Wm., 133 ; — Cokbinne, Sir Wm., of
Scraling, * 26 ; — Colquhoun, Pat., and Mr
Adam, * 170 ; Jo., beheaded, 359 ;_Colville. Sir Wm., of Vchiltree, slain, * 65, * 68,
&c., * 112 ; Sir David, Priest, *405 ;— Congiltoun, Hen., Tutor of, 5 ; Jo., II. 401; Hen.,
I.* 368; Patrick, ib.; Oliver, .young Laird of,
poisoned, * 369 ; — Corsintoune, I.aird of,
slain, * 82 ; — Cranstoun of Doddo, Sir Wm.,
20 ; — Craig of Craigistoun, Wm., II. 105 ; —
Craiganis, Laird of, slain, I. * 163, * 164,
&c. ; — Craigtoune, Laird of, slain, * 343 ; —
Crawford, Tho., of Auchnames, * 205 ; —
Earl of, David, slays the Lord Chancellor
Glammis, 79, 85 ; Laird of Balgavveis, III.
248 ; — Creichtoun, Robert, of Kirkpatrick,
slain at the horn, * 77, * 78, &c. ; of Ruthvennis, Adam, banished for life, 165 ; of
Scottistoun, Wm., slain, * 254, * 257 ; of
Craufiirdtoun, John, <S:c., II. 71 ; of Cluny,
Sir Ro., 76; Lord, Wm., slain, I. * 340 ;
of Quarter, Jo., 190; And., ib.\ — Culros,
Abbot of, slain, * 151 ; — Cumyng of Altyre,
Alex., * 374 ; James, II. 427 ; — Cunirighame,
John, of Capringtoun, I. * 148 ; Ja., of Glengarnock, II. 389 ; of Auchinharvy, Edward,
slain, I. * 237 ; of Aiket, William, 17 ;_
Davidson, Alex., beheaded. III. 362; —
' Deill aman? us,' (Robert Henry,) beheaded,
I. * 368 ; — Dekesoune, Jo., beheaded, * 81 ;
W'm., beheaded, * 87 ; — Dempster, Sir Henry,
Chaplain, slain, * 343 ; — Dingvale of Kildun,
slain, * 247 ; — Dischingtoun of Ardross, &c.,
* 156 ; — Dougal, Ro., beheaded, * 15 ; —
Douglas of Annatroche, Wm., III. 443; of
Drunilanrig, Wm., Slaughter, I. * 78 ; Ja.,
slays Rector of Kirkbride, * 329 ; Jo., his
brother, * 387 ; of Garschogill, Arch., *256 ;
Geo., II. 1 ; of INIouswall, Ja., and 5 others,

III. 472 ; of Pinjerie, Wm., beheaded. III.
95 ; Mr Ro., Burning, &c., I. * 201, 167 ;
Mr Tho., Minister, III. 473 ; Wm., &c., 500 ;
— Doune, Ja. Stewart, Captain of, slain, I.

* 332 ; — Drummond of Coquhal3ie, Jo., II.
80;— Duffus, Laird of, slain, L * 149;—
Dunbar of Cumnock, Pat., yr., *370; Alex.,
ib.; of Kilboyak, Alex., and his brother. III.
200, 399 ; of Mochrum, Jo., Slaughter of, I.

* 1 12 ; Pat, II. 95 ; Ro., Ja., &c.. III. 200 ;
— Duncan, Jo., beheaded, IIL 484 ; — Dunlop of that Ilk, Alexander, I. * 402 ;— Dunwedy, Pat., Slaughter of Laird of Glendinning, &c., hanjred, *60; — Edinburgh, Treasurer of, slain, * 126 ; — Edjare of Inglistoune,
Jo., II. 71 ; — Eglintoux, Earl of, Hugh,
L * 132 ;— Eldmere, Laird of, slain, * 17;—
Elisoune, Sir Alex., Chaplain, respited,* 257;
— Elliot of Horslehill, Wm., sentenced to be
beheaded, * 456 ; sentence of Banishment for
life recalled, * 466 ; Ninian and Wm., their
right hands struck oflf, and then hanged, II.
559 ; — Elphingstoun, Geo., respited, I. *249;
— Erskine of Auchterforfare, Arth., II. 101 ;
— Ewmond, Sir Martin, Chaplain, slain, I.

* 332 ; — Falconer of Innerlochtie, Hew,
III. 435 ; Hew, his son, ib. ; — Farquharson
of Inverchald, Jo., &c., 203; — Fentoun of
that Ilk, slain, L * 61, * 106, * 121 ; of
Ogill, Ja., *408; — Fergussone of Bracansyde,
Ro., slain, * 232 ; — Fleming, Lord, John,
slain, * 61, note, * 131, * 141, * 144, * 236 ;
of Moness, Alex., IIL 443, 542 ;— Forbes,
Master of, Jo.,L * 149,*175,*183; Arth.,
40 ; of Monymusk, Wm., IIL 204 ; Ro.,
227 ; of Reres, Arth., 89 ; Jo., beheaded, II.
532 ; — Forrester of Newtoune, John, remission to Alex., his son, I. * 250 ; — Forsythe of
Nyde, Ja., respited, * 251 ; — Fotheringhame
of Powry, Wm., remitted, * 248 ; — Frenche,
Alex., Tutor of Thornydykis, beheaded. III.
222 ; — Fullarton of Crago, Wm., jnn., I. 79 ;
— Galbraith, Mr Ro., * 172 ; — Gardin,
David, slain, * 270 ; John, beheaded, * 404 ;
Tho., of Bandoch, 372 ; of Legatstoun, Tho.,
II. 103; Da., his brother, ib. :, — Gladstanes
of Coklaw, Jo., L * 414; of that Ilk, Ja.,

4

GENERAL INDEX.

727

472 ; Jo., Herald, beheaded, 362 ;— GlamMis, Lord, Pat., II. 386; — Glendoning of
Drumrasclie, Jo., 604 ; — Gordon of Crauchlavv, Wm., remitted, I. * 252 ; of Golspitour,
Jo., yr.. III. 235 ; of Kenmure, Sir Alex., I.
*231 ; of Lochinvar, James, remitted, * 252;
— Gorthy of that Ilk, Geo., I. * 2 ;8, 255 ;—
Gourlay of Kincraig, Wm., respited, * 253 ;
— Gothrasoune, James, publicly flogged for
Slaughter, committed in his eighth year, * 16 ;
— Gowdie, Geo., 111. 544; — Grahame, Alex.,
483 ; of Craig, Da., II. 400, 480 ; of Gillesbe,
Ro., I. * 85 ; Ja., II. 97 ; of Knockdoliane,
Ro., I. * 386 ; of Thornok, Ro., remitted,

* 248 ; of Westhall, John, slain, * 179 ;—
Grant of Ballindalloch, John, * 175; of Culcabok, John, ib. ; of Freuchy, James, ib. ; of
Glenmoristoun, Jo., III. 552 ; Jonet, burnt,
I. 206 ; Tho. and Jo., III. 435 ;— Gray of
Bandirrane, Gilb., &c. II. 514 ; — Grerstoun
(Greiftoun,) Laird of, slain, I. * 81, * 87 ;—
Guthrie, Mr Hugh, slain, * 343 ; Laird of,
slain, 372 ; of Kincaldrum, Alex., &c., II.
101 ; Wm. of Ravensbie, 528 ; III. 77, 80 ;
— Haitlie, Alex., I. * 451 ; — Halkhede of
Petfurane, Jo., remitted, * 237 ;— Hall of
Foulbar, Ja., III. 236 ; — Hamilton of Bardowy, Allan, slain, L * 204, * 250, * 257 ;
of Crawfordjohn, Sir Ja., * 414 ; of Hairshaw, Jo., his sons, &c.. III. 119; of Stanehouse, Ja., I.*179; — Harkness, Malye, Agnes,
and Jo., * 442 ; — Hay, Jo,, III. 241 ; acquitted, 243 ;— Henry, Jo. and Ja., I. * 453-;
Ro., (' D^ill amang us,') beheaded, *368 ; —
Hepburn of Elstanefurd, Geo., and 77 others,

* 1 ; of Kingstoun, Adam, 1,3; of Wachtoune. Sir Pat., III. 271 ; — Hereis, Andro,
respited, * 242 ;— Hering of Little Blair, And.,
262 ;— Heroun of Keerochtrie, Pat., 111.460;
— Hervie, Alex., 444 ; — Holyrood, Slaughter
committed within the Girth, (sanctuary,) I.

* 258 ; — Home, Gavvin, and his mother, HI.
224 ;— Houstoun, Pet., &c., I. * 350 ; Arch.,
beheaded, ib.; Rob., 69; Sir Pat., 182, 183;
— Howdene, Sir Jo., * 365 ; — Hume of Ballicass, Wm., II. 336; of Col(liiit,d<nows, I.

* 377 ; of iManderstoun, Alex., 30 ; of WedVOL. III.

derburne. Da., L * 102; Mark, e^c. 2 ;— Hunter, And., hanged, * 366 ; of Ballagane, *369 ;
of Polmude, Edw., slain, * 106; — Hyviesoune, John, beheaded, * 388 ; — Innes, Sir
Alex., Chaplain, slain, * 332; Mr Alex.,
Minister of Birnay, II. 557 ; Jo., 41 ; — Jak,
Rich., beheaded, I. * 27 ; Tho., beheaded,

* 384 ; Issobel, HI. 224 ; — Jamesoun, Wm..
{Wanton IF«7/,) beheaded, I. * 219 ;— Jardine of Apilgirth, Alex., yr., 184 ; Tho., of
Birnok, II. 491 ; beheaded with Vmphra. his
son. III. 58 ; — .Tarding, .lo., Slaughter of Laird
of Dunwedy, L * 40 ; Cha., * 442 ; Da.,
&c., II. 485; Wm., and 6 others, 492;—
Johnnestoune of Gratno, Tho., * 85 ; of that
Ilk, Ja., 184; of Kellobank, Wm., Wm., yr.,
and Jo., his sons, 489 ; of Loch-house, Jo.,
beheaded, 11.425; of Lockerbie, Wm., &c.,
III. 432; of Thornik, Capt. Ja., 501 ; of Tunnergarthe, <S:c., Slaughter at a Funeral, 438,
439;— Jollie, Alisoun, L397; acquitted, 399;
— Keith, Alex., beheaded, II. 539 ; of Ludquhairn. Sir Wm., III. 539; — Kennedy of
Baliarrak, Alex., II. 400 ; of Bargany, Tho.,
L * 86; Alex, and 74 others, * 138; of
Blairquhan, Jo., HI. 119 ; of Corse, Da., II.
480 ; of Cul5eane, John, slain, I. * 334. See
Kennedy; of Girvanmains, and 250 others,
respited for Slaugliter of a Dutchman, * 236,

* 238 ;— Kere, John, beheaded, * 149;— Kerr
of Ancrum, Wm., 36; of Gateschaw, *68;
Mr Mark, 377 ;— Kincaid, Tho., 355 ;— King
of Barro, Ja., HI. 379 ; Da., in Hoy, ib. ;—
Kinnaird of that Ilk, John, fiar, II. 427 ; —
Kirkpatrick, Alex., III. 123; Jo., 429;—
Kirkwood, Ja., beheaded, I. * 165; — Knowi.x,
Ro., * 399; — Lathkeis, Tho., beheaded,
II. 85;— Lauder, Gilb., * 467; of that Ilk.
Rich., yr., ib. ; Jasper, (alleged madman,) l)eheaded, * 363 ; William, * 487 ;— Leidcreif,
Laird of, slain, * 367, * 371 ;— Leighton of
Ullishavin, Tlio., remitted, ♦ 252, 264 ;— Leslie of Kynmury, Walt., yr., remitted, * 255 ;
— Lettir, Laird of, hiain, " 201; — Levingstoun, Ro., * 399 ; (tf Warranehill, .la.. Hemission to .To., his son, * 257; — Lindesay ol
Barnyards, Dav., * 28; of Blariefadden, Harie,

4 z

728

GENERAL INDEX.

III. 248 ; of Dunrod, Alex., and Jo., his brother-naturall, 493 ; of Colbyntoun, John, respited, I. * 238 ; of Ed5ell, Da., fiar, &c.,
slay Lord Spynie, II. 529 ; tried. III. 61 ;
notice relative to, ib. ; documents, 64 ; Mr
Alex., his son, 63, &c. ; Mr George, slain, I.

* 230 ; Marg., Lady Kersbank, 83 ; Holland,
beheaded, * 159; — Liukhop, Robert, 185; —
Lochland, Laird of, slain, * 130 ; — Lockhart
of Lee, Alan, beheaded, * 159; remitted,

* 257 ; of Wikkitschaw, Alexander, remitted,

* 253 ;— Logan, Sir Ro., of Restahig, * 176 ;
— Lokie, Ja., writer, 393 ; acquitted, 397 ; —
Loudoune, Lady, (Dame Isobell Wallace,)

* 136 ; — Louthian, Sir Wm., beheaded, * 151,

* 275 ;— Lufe, (Love,) And., * 334 ;— Lyle,
Lord John, * 178 ; Master of, William,

* 178 ; — Lyddell oF Haikerstoun, John, III.
482 ;— Lynne, Walter, beheaded, I. * 203 ;
— Lyoun of Eister Ogill, Janjes, * 408 ; II.
62; Alexander, I. * 470; — MacAlestar,
Donald Mole, hanged, * 51 ; Allaster MacPhatrick, &c.. III. 554 ; — MacAllane, Donald Darg, and two others, hanged, 251 ; —
MacAngus of Glengarrie, Donald, and thirteen others, II. 413 ; III. 540 ; — MacArthur,
Gilb., beheaded, I. * 63 ;— MacBrair of Almagill, Ro., 166 ; of that Ilk, Arch., beheaded, 158 ;— MacCaig, David, beheaded, * 396;
MacClellan of Bomby, Tho., slain, * 237,

* 244, * 252 ; of Gilestoun, Pat., * 61, * 95 ;
Tho., * 215; — MacCondachie of Ballemanach, Allan MacGillespik, respited, * 252 ; —
MacCulloch of Kilasere, Henry, * 244; of
Torhouse, Geo., remitted, * 252 ; — MacDonald, Eugenius, Captain of Clan Cameron,

* 355 ; Coill MacGillespik, and five others,
III. 553 ; — MakDovvell of Freuche, Fergus,
L* 218, * 219; Jo., &c., IL515; IIL 477 ;
of Garthland, Vthred, 84 ; — MacEwin, John,
and four MacGregors hanged, 112; — MacFarlane, Jo. Roy, and eight others hanged, 565 ;
— MacGillebreid, Jo. MacEwin, &c., I. * 225;
— MacGregor, Jo., &c., beheaded, II. 419 ;
Allaster of Glenstra, 432 ; beheaded and
quartered, with severals of his Clan, 433 ; Papers relative to him and the Field of the Lennox, &c., ib, ; Jo. Dow MacEwin, and ten
others, hanged, 436 ; Neil), and four others,
hanged, 438 ; Male, and four others, hanged,
439 ; Dougall, &c.. III. 223 ;— MacHischok,
Gilb., and 3 others, hanged, II. 418 ; — MacIntosch, Angus Williamsoune, and five others,
n. 96 ; of Esseich, Wm., &c., 102. 507 ; Wm„
son to Laird of, &c., 507 ; — MacKane, John,
III. 483 ;— MacKie of Far, Don., I. * 352 ;
Don., fiar of. III. 235 ;— MacLean of Doward. Hector, I. * 246 ; Allan, his son, * 247 ;
— MacMurquhe, Donald MacAlex., respited,

* 246; — MacNacht, Matho, of Dungeuche,

* 231 ; of Kilquhannite, John, * 327 ;— MacRannald of Easter Leyis, Allan, II. 98 ; —
Machetema, Cornelius de, Dutchman, slain in
time of Pari., I. * 236, * 238 ;— Marschell,
David, II. 493 ;— Maxwell, yr. of Conhaithe,
slain, * 151 ; of Cowstancs, slain, 157 ; of
Calderwood, Sir Ja., 493 ; of Newark, Geo.,
133; Pat. IIL 122; Arch., I. 157; John,

* callit Achilles Johnnie,' beheaded. III. 327 ;
Ja., 493 ; of Dunvviddie, Sir Rob., slain, I.
167 ; II. 492 ; of Dalquharne, Pat., slain, 71 ;
of Cowhill, Arch, and Wm., yr., 485, 492 ; —
Meldram, Laird of, slain, I. * 149, * 175 ; of
Moncoffer, slain, II. 76 ; of Ordley, Jo., III.
464 ; — Melville of Hervistoune, Ro., remitted,
I. * 250 ; — Merser, Ja., and three others, 39 ;
— Middletoun, Ja., III. 237 ; sentenced to be
beheaded, 241; banished for life, ib., note, 458 ;
— Montgomery, Master of, Jo., Slaughter of Laird of Craiganis, I. * 44 ; of Skelmourlie, Ro., and Wra,, yr., his son, slain, I.
133 ; III. 122 ; Montrose, E. of, Wm., remitted, I. * 239 ; — Mosman, W^m., beheaded,

* 159 ;— Mowe of that Ilk, John, * 256 ;—
Muir, Jo. and Ja., yr. (See Muir of Auchindrain ;) Ja. beheaded. III. 492 ; — Multrare of
Markinche, Tho., slain, I. * 105 ; — Muncur
of Balluny, Jo., * 343 ; Marg. Douglas, Lady
Balluny, slain, ib. ; of Slanis, And., remitted,

* 250 ; Jo., 41 ; — Murray of Balvaird, And.,
slays Laird of Gorthie's son, II. 112; of
Broughton, Geo., 539 ; of Drumdewan, Ro.,
slain, I. * 255 ; of Newhall, Wm., * 26 ; of
Newraw, Ro., slain, * 248 ; of Roraannos, Wm.,

GENERAL INDEX.

720

yr., I. * 332 ;— Myllar, Jo., 167 ;— Nesbet of
that Ilk, Adam, slain, * 244 ; — Nesbit, Ed.
and Tho., II. 517 ; VVm., 562; Gawin, III.
458 ; — Newlands, Walter, of that Ilk, slain,
I. * 236; — Ochiltree, Lord, And., III.
66; — Ogilvie of Airlie, Lord, James,
remitted, I. * 243, * 270 ; Master of, and
his accomplices, II. 130, 146 ; — Oistillare, Sir
Ro., I. * 343 ;— Olipliant of Gask, Wm., III.
443 ; Laur., his brother, ib. ; William, 542 ;
Lord, Laur., 44, 88, 92; IL 512 ;— Or, Ja.,
beheaded, III. 358 ; — Orkney, Master of,
Jo., conspiring death of his brother the Earl,
I. 373 ; slaughter of the Parson of Urquhart,
392;— Pacock, Gilbert, beheaded, 386;—
Park, Ja. and Geo., III. 495 ; — Paterson, Ro.,
I. * 452 ; — Peirsoun, John, cook, a minor,

* 396 ;— Pentland, Captain, Jo., 46 ;— Perdowy, (Bardowy,) Laird of, slain, * 204; —
Pollock, Ro., II. 21 ;— Portar, Tho., beheaded, I. * 92 ; — Porteous of Glenkirk, Thomas,
190;— Porterfield of that Ilk, William, 69 ;—
Purres, Sir Rich., Chaplain, * 257 ; — Pyucartoune, Alex., beheaded, * 164 ; — QuhiteFURD of that Ilk, Jo., 133 ; Adam, yr., ib. ;
— Rae, Habbie, and 21 others. III. 472; —
Raeburn of that Ilk, Jo., I. 17 ; — Ramsay of
Dalhousy, remitted for slaying his brother,

* 239 ;— of Kynmont, Alex., escheated, * 253;
Nicholas, beheaded, * 374 ; Wm., beheaded ; — Rattray, George, belieaded, II. 85 ; of
Kinballoch, Pat., slain, I. * 255 ; — Reid, Ja.,
beheaded, * 220 ; of Turnberry, 'John, slain, -

* 220 ; — Reidpeth of Deringtoun, Andrew,
slain, * 248 ; — RewU, And., beheaded for
slaying his son, II. 21 ; — Robertson of Dulcabene, Pat., I. * 431 ; Robert, beheaded, III.
415 ; of Straloch, Jo., 203 ; — Rogersoun, Jo.,
485 ; — Ross of Craigtoune, James, slain, I.

* 343 ;_Rothuene, Friar William, * 229 ;—
Rutherford, William, beheaded, II. 519; —
Ruthven, Lord, Williaui, I. 90; — Ryland,
Laird of, slain, * 126; — Rynd of Kerse, 3o.,
11. 101 ; — Saltouv, Lord AnERNETiiv of,
I. * 329 ;— Sandelandis of Calder, Sir Ja., respited, * 237 ; slays Sir Alex. Stewart, &c.,
359 ; — Sanquhar, L. Creichtoun of, Ro.,

slain, L* 353 ;— Schaw, David, * 327 ; of Kerise, Jo., * 158; — Schoriswod and 12 others,
* 350 ; — Scott, Adie, called the Pcch, hanged,
II. 365 ; of Branxholm, Sir Walt., 1. * 144 ;
of Cambusmichaell, Tho., hanged, drawn, and
quartered for Murder of David Riccio, * 478 ;
Ro., and 7 others, acquitted, III. 218 ; Walter, &c., II. 339 ; — Scottistoune, Laird of,
slain, I. * 172 ; — Scrymgeour, Ja., * 405 ; —
Se.mpill, Lord, Ro., * 353 ; — Setoun, Alex.,
of Meldrum, slain, * 149, * 173, kc. ;— Sibbett, (Sibbald,) Jo., * 425 ; — Sinclair, And.,
* 441 ; pf Aucliinfranko, Wm., * 151 ; slain,
327 ; George, remitted, * 254 ; Mr Hector,
Parson of Kilbride, slain, * 256, ♦ 329 ; of
Hirdmanstoun, * 468 ; Alex, and Olipher, his
brothers, ib. ; James, * 257 ; of Stron)e, Edw.,
and 30 others, respited for Slaughter of Earl
OF Caithness, he, * 253; Wm., a schoolboy, shoots a Bailie of Edr., 195, note, &c.,
349, 362 ;— Skirving, Geo., Sec, 4 ;— Slose of
that Ilk, Ja., 171 ; — Sloune, Friar Alexander,
slain, * 229 ; — Smyth, Ro., alias Henry, beheaded, * 374 ; — Somerville of Drum, Hew,
III. 259 ; — Spottiswode, James, jr., remitted,
I. * 15 ; Jo., of that Ilk, II. 455 ; — Spynie, L.,
Alex., 135, 146 ; — Stevenson, Sir William,
Chaplain, slain, I. * 256 ; — Stewart, Capt. of
Doune, James, slain, * 332 ; Christian, burnt,
399 ; of Dowellie, Mr Jo., and Tho., his brother, III. 536 ; Dutho, beheaded, I. • 350 ;
Eufame, * 382 ; Harie, III. 248 ; Ja., II. 413 ;
Ja., beheaded, III. 441 ; Ja. and Dune, &c.,
554 ; Jo., beheaded, I. 165 ; of Porterstoun,
Wm., * 16.3, * 175; Robert, brother of Earl
of Orkney, II. 76; hanged. Sec, III. 283;
Mr Thomas, I. * 149; Wm. and Harie, 79 ;
William, brotlier of Lord Ochiltree, Sec, II.
109, 445; — Stirling of Baldorane, Luke, I.
97; of Ballagan, Walt., 97 ; of Bnllindroicht,
Andrew, slain, * 204, * 257 ; of Bankeir,
Andrew, slain, * 250, * 257 ; of Craigbernnt,
Jo., yr., 97 ; of Glorat, Walter, his brother,
slain, * 332 ; Jo., 97 ; Helen, Lady Lllishaven, slain, * 344, * 350, • 411 ; of Keir, Sir
Jo., knt., slain, * 258, * 327 ; of Letter. Uo.,
slain, * 204; — Stoby, Sir William, Chaplain,

730

GENERAL INDEX.

I. * 248 ;— Stonebyres, Laird of, slain, * 126,
note, * 132, * 238 ; — Stratliaucliin of Letliinturk, Jo., yr., * 175, * 200 ; remitted, * 246 ;
The, 79 ; — Sutherland of DuflFus, Wm., slain,

* 149 ;_Swyne, Jo., beheaded. III. 471 ;—
Symmer, Robert, beheaded, 437 ; — Sympill,
of Foulwod, John, I. * 163, * 166, * 333 ;
Math., beheaded, * 165 ; of Nobilstoun, Ro.,

* 333; — Tait, James, II. 475; — Tennant,
Arch., of Leuenax, (Linhouse,) slain, I. * 180 ;
— Thief, Slaughter of a common, * 72 ; —
Thomson, George, Minister, 133 ; — Thrisle,
Wm., and four others, 77 ; — Tnlliallan, Laird
of, beheaded, L * 151, * 271, * 275 ; (see
Blackadder ;) — Tulloch of Tannoquheis, Robert, and Alexander, yr., II. 110 ; Alexander,
and Ja. liis brother, 563 ; and William Cuik,
565 ; — Tullymet, Baron of, slain, I. * 334 ; —
Turnberry, Laird of, slain, * 219 ; — Turnbull,
Tlio. and Walter, 77 ; Thomas, apparent of
Mynto, and 11 others, II. 370; And., beheaded, 377 ; Hector of Stanyledge, and 3 others,
442 ; Hector of Lylslie, 445 ; Hector of
Wauchope, 511 ; acquitted, ib.; — Tvvedy of
Dravay, Adam, I. 190; of Drummeljeare, Jo.,

* 141 ; Ja., his son, remitted, * 249 ; James,
190; Gilb., Slaughter of Laird of Polmude,

* 39 ; Ja., and four others, 34 ; of the Wrae,
Wm., 190; — Twenty men, women, and children, slain, * 175; — Vause of Many, John,
respited, * 250 ; — Veitch, Andrew, 204 ; of
North Syntoune, Ja., yr., 204 ; — Vic Kewyn,
John Dow MacKewyne, and above 30 others,
33 ; — Wallace, Dame Isab., Lady Loudoune, * 136 ; — Wallanche of Pittedy, John,
slain, * 244 ;— Wast, Andrew, III. 467 ; —
Wauchope, Geo., II. 52 ; — of Nudrie, Arch.,
I. 168 ; Ro. ? Wm., his son, 403 ; Banished,
410;— Weir of Blakwod, Tho., * 180; Jo.,
bailie of Lanark, 184 ; of Quhytecleuch, Jo.,
and Mungo, his brother, beheaded. III. 247 ;
Ralph, slain, I. 159 ; of Stonebyres, William,
slain, * 126, note, * 132, * 159, * 238 ;— Williamsoun of Termet, Ang., 11.507 ; — Winrame,
Mr Re, I. 23 ;— Wood of Banblane, II. 72 ;
of Bonyngtoune, James, I. * 343, * 433 ; — .
Young, Alexander, II. 20.

Sled, what, IL 531.

Sleep, Witches ' waked' and prevented from, 1.

50 ; a Jesuite ' waked' ad delirium ! III. 332.
Sleich, Pat., hanged for Assisting the Earl of

Bothwell, &c., II. 21.
Sleuth-hound, III. 548.
Slogan, slughorn, II. 504.
Slose of that Ilk, .Ta., Slaughter, I. 171.
Slowane, (Aslowane,) of Garroche, Jo., L * 55 ;

II. 490.
Small, Sir Tho., Chaplain, slain, I. * 405.
Smaill, Niniane, an Egyptian, Respite for his

Slaughter, III. 594.
Sraeatoun, hanged for breaking Ward, I. 360.
Smith, Donald, hanged. III. 26.5 ; — King's smith

and ' knok' (clock) maker, I. * 305, * 313 ;

— Sir Tho., Clerk of the English Council, II.

590 ; — William, alias Chesman, Fomenting

jealousies between the King and his Barons,

I. * 329.
Smollett, Tobias, murdered by the MacGregors,

IL 432.
Smore, to smother, or suffocate. III. 131, 430.
Snawdoun, Herald, Justice-depute, I. * 366.
Snow-storm, I. 362.
Society and company of the Boyes, II. 532 ; Jo.

Forbes, beheaded, 535 ; III. 581.
Sodomy, John Swan and John Litster burnt, IL

491, note.
Softlaw, Tho., slain, III. 90.
Soir-hewit horse, what, I. 8.
Soir-bassoned raeir, what, HI. 265.
Soirdy-staig, what. III. 98.
Solway, Battle of, I. * 329;— Raid of, * 241,

* 242, * 244, * 254, * 256.
Somer of Baljordie, Geo., I. 74, 90.
Somer-scheill, what, II. 519.

Somerset, Duke of, I.* 117; — Earl of, (Sir

Ro. Carr,) II. 600, and note.
Somervilleof Cambusnethan, Sir Jo., I. *62, * 78 ;

* 167, * 388, * 404, * 451, 35, 63 ; IL 105 ;
— of Drum, Hew, Slaughter, III. 259 ; — of
Garidwoid, Ja., IL 555 ; — of Humby, Ja., I.
4, 23, 255; — Ja., slain, II. 567; — Lord,
Hugh, * 167 ; Oppression, &c., * 169, * 175,

* 185, * 199 ; John, * 369 ; James, invaded,
*382; Feud with the Lindsays, * 383, * 438 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

731

Hugh, I. 94, 114, 116, 178; Gilb., Feud with
Laird of Lee, IL 61 ; — of Plane, Da., ih.\ —
of Pole, Wni., III. 268; — of Smaiiiiolmes,
Re, 436 ;— of Spittal, Ja., 268.

Soothsaying, III. 508. See Sorcery, Witchcraft,
&c. ; curious pleadings, 517, &n.

Sorcery, to be enquired into at Justice-Aires, I.
* 66 ; Sir Wm. Stewart, Lion King of Arms,
executed, * 510; Bessie Dunlop, 49, &c.,
(see Witchcraft,) 101, 161 ; Lady Fowlis,
185, 191, &c. ; Monro of Fowlis, 201 ; Bessie
Roy, 207 ; John Feane, 209, &c. ; Agnes
Sampsoune, 230 ; Commission for examining
Witches, &c., 261 ; Captain Pat. Bering, II.
23 ; Jonet Stewart and three others, ' wirreit
and brunt in assis,' 25 ; Ja. Reid, do., 421 ;
Pat. Lowrie ' wirreit and brunt,' 477 ; Bartie
Patersoun, do., 535 ; Beigis Tod, do., 542 ;
Margaret Wallace, a remarkable case, 508 ;
burnt, 536 ; Tho. Greave, burnt, 555. See
Witchcraft, Incantation, Charming, <S:c.

Sorley-Buy, III. 2.

Sorners, what,I. 264; II. 70, 432. See Egyptians.

Sorning, I. * 225 ; Messengers hanged, * 356 ;
IL 415 ; in. 201, 250, &c.

Souter, Geordie the, hanged. III. 389.

Southampton, E. of, II. 584. (See Howard.)

Souls of persons shot by Witches, III. 604.

Sound, a fainting-fit or swoon, III. 468, &c.

Soutter of Mylnetoun of Fornocht, Ja., HI. 536.

SouTHESK, Earl of, Dav., III. 601, note

Sowmes of qvvickens, what. III. 603.

Sowtare, Jo., lianged for ' falsing of evidents,' L.
85 ; Kath. burnt for W'itchcraft, III. 618.

Spain, King of, protects Argyle, Sir J. MacDonald, &c., on their flight thitiier. III. 3.

Spald, what, II. 525 ; III. 384, 485.

Spalding of EssintuUie, Da., III. 72 ; Resetting
Alex. Iluthven after Cowrie's Consp., ib.,
202 ; cutting timber, &c., 458 ; — of Innerrydray, Jo., III. 203.

Spaniard, Ca8san3ei8, the, I. * 315.

Spaniards, Proclamation anent their airival, 8fC.,
I. 267 ; 30,000 to be enlisted for altering the
Religion, 311, &c. ; anent their ' arryvaill,'
349 ; lieges to be in readiness, 3.').5, 8tc.

Spanish Armada, I. 228, &c. ; — Blanks, Conspiracy, &c., I. 310 ; — merchants, three murdered under trust, III. 569.

Speeches, ' vnreverent,' against the King and
Council, HI. 220 ; Wm. Tweedie, scourged
and banished, 222 ; ' blasphemous,' &c., Jo.
Flemyng hanged, 359. See K. James VI. &c.

* Spelair,' English, (rope-dancer. Sec.,) I. * 1 18.

Spens of Bodom, Wm., 1. * 148 ; — of Condie,
Jo., Queen's Advocate, * 373; III. 391 ;— of
W^ester Karnes, Jo., slain by Laird of Karnes,

II. 131; Ninian, ih. ; — of Kilspindie, Tho., I.
* 88 ;— of Lathalland, Ja., I. * 404 ;— of Maristoun, Jo., I. * 201 ; — Rich., servant to the
E. of Cassillis, slain, II. 400, 461, c^c (See
Mure of Auchindrain.) 480, 493 ;— of Wolmerstoun, David, 1. * 201.

Spey-Tower of Perth, I. * 177.

Spice-house, King's, Yeoman of, I. * 313; Groom
of, * ib.

Spirits, Evil, nick-names of. III. 606.

Spittale, Hereschip of the Place of, I. * 17.

Spittell of Lewchat, Wm., I. * 404.

Spott, Laird of, I. * 413, &c. See Hume and
Douglas.

Spottiswode of that Ilk, (Laird of,) jr., slaughter.
Forethought Felony, I. * 15 ; George, * 15 ;
Felony, &c., * 16; David, * 413; Ninian,
107 ; feud with Sheriff of Ayr, &c., 352
his brother George slain, II. 401 ; Wm., 402
Jo., slaughter of the Laird of Leyhoussis, 455
Da., HI. 393.

Spraclie, (spraiche,) hue and cry, II. 463, 519 ;

III. 3, he.

Sprewle of Cowdoune, Tho., I. * 402 ; Jo.. 169 ;
Ja., fiar, II. 438; Ja., III. 365 ;— of Ladyraure, Jo., I. 60.

Sprott, Geo., Trial for concealment of Gowrie's
Conspiracy, II. 256; hanged and (piartered,
259 ; his Deposition upon the scaffold, 260
Account of Trial and Execution by Arclibisho|) of Canterbury, (Abbot,) 262 ; Sprott's
Examinations, 272; Narrative of his Execution, 275 ; is tortured in ' the boots,' ib.

Spuil3ie, (See Hereschip,) I. * 57, •59; of
Keyme, * 112; E. of Caithness, Sec, * 394 ; of
Laird t)f Pennycuik's brotlior, 391 ; — ofTeind
sheaves, ♦ 104, ♦ 208.

732

GENERAL INDEX.

Spynie, Lord, Alex., warded for Raid of Falkland,
I. 278 ; reponed, 280 ; denounced, 305, 307,
375 ; deadly feud with the Master of Ogilvie ;
is wounded, II. 130; tried for slautrliter,
shooting pistolets, &c., 135; fined L.5000,
&c., 146, 235; slain, 529; Sir Da. Lindsay
of Ed^ell, &c., tried. III. 61 ; notice relative
to, ib, ; Documents illustrating do., 64 ; —
Master of, Alex., II. 529 ; — Lady, Jean,
IL 529.

St Andrew's, Archbishop of, (James Duke
of Ross,) I. * 120; Ja., (Beatoun,) doors of
his lodging forced, * 257 ; Chancellor, * 269,
*353 ; Jo., attempting to restore Popery, *427 ;
Geo., III. 96, 621 ; Letter to King as to
Cowrie's Conspiracy, ib. ; — Castle of, to be
delivered up, I. * 283 ; assisting rebels, * 337,

* 338; — Court of Justiciary held there, II.
568 ; — Magistrates assist E. of Bothwell, I.
310 ;— Prior of, Jo., * 79 ;— Raid of, I. * 334.

St Andrian of May, relique of, I. * 306.

St Barnaby's Day, Battle of, I. * 100.

St Colmis-Inch, Commendator of, (Tutor of Murray,) I. 289, 291 ; Hary, 393 ; III. 72.

St Colme, Lord, Harie, III. 72; Jo., his brother, beheaded for Murder under trust, 74.

St Colmes-Mess, IIL 251.

St Duthos, relict (relique) of, I. * 283.

St Francis' Altar, I. * 252.

St Gele, (Giles of Edinr.,) I. * 252; tumult,
&c., in the city of Edinburgh, * 417.

St James in Gallicia, Pilgrimages to, I. * 101.

St John of Ameas, in France, Pilgrimages to, I.

* 107.

St John, Lord, Geo., L * 151 ; Walt., « 185;

Sir Wm., English Admiral, III. 367.
St Leonard's, Chaplain of, I. * 314 ; Chapel, III.

178.
St Magdalene, breaking image of, I. * 334.
St Mahago, relique of, I. * 306.
St Mary de Foresta, L * 400.
St Mary of the Lowis, Kirk of, sacrilege, I. 400.
St Michael, order of, I. * 283.
St Niniane, Pilgrimages to, I. * 106.
St Thomas of Canterbury, Pilgrimages to, I.* 107.
St Thomas-evin, III, 569.
Stable, King's, Squire of, I. * 313 ; Yeoman of, ib.

Stag-hounds, I. * 312.

Staig and naig, what. III. 98 ; a soirdy staig, ib.

Stake, Witches ' wirreit' (strangled) before being
burnt, I. 186, &c. See Witchcraft, Sorcery
and Burning, &c.

Stalfurde, Captain Hilbert, and 28 other Englisimien, Piracy, I. * 379. See Piracy.

Stalls, choral, demolished, L * 353, &c. See

ReformationStamp, Forging the King's, I. 157.

Standard, Royal, I. * 114.

Standard-bearer, heritable, I. * 268.

Stanfield, Philip, Parricide, III. 196 ; his father's
corpse bleeds on his touch, 197 ; curious notices of this case, ib., 198.

Stanhope of Stanhope-miln, Jo., II. 124, 355.

Starving to death, IIL 479, 491.

Steel of Houstoune, Jo., II. 506 ; — Kempy, banged, I * 126.

Steel-bonnet, the King's, I. * 273, * 283 ; typpet
to, * 283, *320; II. 70.

Steelbow goods, what, I. * 162.

Steelbow tenant, what, I. * 162, * 471.

Steel-saddles, L *290, *295, * 300, * 312, * 321.

Steeples, prisoners confined there, where no tolbooths or prisons. III. 219, and note.

Steming of bluid, Jasp-stane for. III. 564.

Stercovius, a Pole, put to death in Poland^ at
the instance of K. Ja. VI., for writing a ' Legend of reproaches' against the Scots, III. 448.

Steward of the King's Household, I. * 313.

Stevenson of Hirdmanscheillis, Ja., I. * 393,

* 424, * 469, 155 , Jo., 156 , IL 128 ;— of
Hirdmestoun, Male, Tutor of, III. 487 ; — of
that Ilk, Jo., I. 35.

Stewart, Arch., Captain of Dunnyvaig, I. * 258;
— of Appyn, Jo., III. 252 ; — Allane, Capt. of
Dalkeith, III. 248 ; Ja., his son. Adultery and
Incest, ' wirreit' and ' brunt,' 249 ; — of Ardgoware, Ja , I. * 170 ; — of Ardinculye
(Arntullie,) Geo., L 25 ; Jo., yr., II. 80 ;—
Sir Alex., slain, I. 359 ; — of Auchraadies, Sir
Ja., II. 63 ;— of Brig, Ja., I. * 454 ;— of Balquliudder, Allan, I. * 319 ; Commission of fire
and sword against, 282 ; — of Barscube, John, I.

* 163 ;— Mathew, * 382 ;— of Bogtoune, Jo.,
I. * 402; — of Blairgarrie, And., III. 554;

GENERAL INDEX.

733

Ro., his son, Slaughter, ih. ; — of Bonskeid,
Jo., slain, II. 528 ; Jo., his son slain, ib. ; —
of Baithe (Beith,) Pat., III. 134;— of Boningtoune, Josias, II. 461 ; — of Bothwell-Muir,
(Earl of Arran, &c.,) Capt. Ja., I. 91, 94;
slain. III. 66 ; — of Ballieachan, Sir Ja., II.
63 ; Pat., III. 250 ; — of Bodinschawes, Ja.,
II. 63;— of Barclaw, Math., I. 136, 137,
159 ; — of Barskiraming, Haiy, II. 106 ; —
of Carstairs, SirWm., II. 109, 445 ; Wm. his
son, ?6. ; — of Craigyhall, Ja., I. * 143; respited,
* 247 ; Harie,348,II. 37,502 ;— Christian,burnt
for Witchcraft, &c., 399 ; — of Cragyhall, Jo.,
and Geillis Seitoune his spouse, Forcible Abduction, I. * 421 ; — Commissary of Dunkeld,
Mr Ja., III. 478; Ja., Stewart-depute of Menteith, &c. ; Slaughter, 554 ; — of Castelroylk,

I. * 40, (A Tutor of,) I.* 480;— of Cardonald,
Allan, I. * 42 ; Ja., 98 ;— of Cullelony, Alex.,

II. 63 ;— of Daldowy, Adam, I. * 130 ;— of
Dowel lie, Mr Jo. and Tho.his brother. Slaughter, III. 536 ; — Downe-Machreif, George, III.
256 ;— of DundufF,Wm.,I. * 405, II. 10 ; Math.,
35 ; shooting at the Laird of Cul3eane, 37 ;
banished Scotland, England, and Ireland, and
all their Isles, and fined 1000 merks, 40, 106,
461 ; Geo. his brother slain, 604 ; Wm., ih.,

III. 121 ;— of Facastell, Robert, II. 63 ;—
of Fintillache, Arch., III. 328 ; — of Flaswood,
Tho., I. 58;— of Flatt, Alexander, III. 299;
— of Foulage, John, I. 268 ; — of Foulbar,
Jo., I. * 382;— of Force (Forss, Foss,) Ja.,
II. 63 ;— Alex, of Garlies, Wilful Error, I.

* 219 ; Alex, yr., * 366, * 398, * 414, * 455,
304, 467. See Lord Gairlies ; — of Gaustoune,Tho.,L*230,*405, 63, 166;— ofGarnetullie (Grantully,) Sir Tho., I. 141, II. 433,
528; Sir William, III. 318 ;— of Gramsly
(Gramesay,) Ja., (brother to the Earl of
Orkney,) I. 387, III. 84, 88; two of his sons
kill several English Pirates, and take two ships,
111 ;— of Hawrig, (Hallrig,) John, I. * 130,

• 402;— of Heildoune, Walt., III. 465;—
of Hulreid, Jo., III. 492;— Hj-rcules, hanged,
I. 362 ; — of Houstoun, Sir Wm., I. 375, II.
110; — John beheaded, I. * 165 ; — Jo. son of
Ja. L. Doun, beheaded for Murder under trust,

III. 74 ; — Ja., ' of Jerusalem,' banished for
hearing Mass, &c.. III. 252, 352 ; — of Innermeith, Wm., I. 306 ; — Josias, denounced, I.
306, III. 144 ; Jonet and three others ' wirreit and brunt in assis,' for Witchcraft, &c.,
II. 25 ; — of Killeith, Sir Ja., Chanjberlain of
Orkney and Zetland, III. 273, 284, (See
Lord Ochiltrie ;) Sheriff of, 285 ; — of Kilpatrick, Jo., III. 440 ; Ja., his son, beheaded for
Slaughter, ib. ; — of Kynnaird, Wm., II. 528 ;
— of Kirkhill, Sir Lud., his MS. Collections,
I. * 478; — of Kilcliattan, Nin., fiar, II. 131 ;
— of Latheris (Lathrisk,) Rob., I. * 126 ; —
of Lekprevick, Ja., II. 445 ; — of Ladywall,
Mr Ja., III. 485 ;— Lady Marg., Rape of, I.

* 60 ; — Louu James (afterwards Rkgent,)

I. * 421 ;— Loud of Newtoun, Ja., III. 248 ;
Harie his son. Slaughter, ib. ; — of Minto, Ro.,
respited, I. * 239; Math., 98; Sir Walt.,
bailie of Regality of Glasgow, III. 509, 513 ;
— of Newtoun, Ja., slain, II. 1, 107 ; — of
Pitfowrie, Jo., III. 250; — of Porterstoun, I.

* 163, * 175 ; — Pat. beheaded for atrocious
cruelty and murder, 393 ; — Quhytlaw, Hercules, I. 270 ; — Robert, natural son of Pat.
Earl of Orkney, Treason, Rebellion in Orkney, &c.^ III. 272 ; hanged along with five
others, and forfeited, 283 ; illustrative Papers,
ib, to 307. See Trial of his father, 308, &c. ;
tears the ' Band' by the Rebels, 304 ; his Deposition, 300 ; — Ro., bailie of Linlithgow, II.
559 ; — of Rossythe, Hen., I. 135 ;^-of Roisland, Jo., I. 276 ; — Ro., (brother of the E. of
Orkney,) Slaughter of Laird of .MoncoftV-r, II.
76;— of Schawtoun, Adam, I. * 148;— Sheriff
of Bute, Ninian, I. * 170 ; — of Schuittingleis,
Alex., slain, I. 89 ; — of Seytoun, Wm., II.
110 ;— of Todlaw, Wm., remitted, I. * 256 ;
— of Tulliemett, Wm., 1. 306 ; — of Tracjuair,
Wm., I. * 147, * 166, * 177, * 230 ; John,

* 406, * 420 ; Sir Jo., 89 ; Wm., 276, II.
379, III. 394;— of Torboltoun, Jo., I. • 83 ;
— of Tenandrie, Jo., Dow MacGilliechallum,

II. 528; Allaster, his brother, hanged, 529;
— of Tuedy, Ja., I. * 130 ; — of Tynneis, Ja.,
I. 270 ; his house demolished, 27() ; — of
Tullich, Wm,, II. 393 ; — of Vchiltrie, Lord,

734

GENERAL INDEX.

Andrew, I. * 428, &c. See Ochiltrie;—
Walter (brollier of Lord Ochiltrie,) I. * 335 ;
Ja., his son, 19; Wm., (do.,) II. 109, 445;
— Sir Wm., (Lion King at Arms,) executed
for Sorcery, and Conspiring death of Regent
Murray, L * 510; — Wm., brother to Lord
Ochiltiee, Slaughter, IL 109, 445 ;— Wm.,
Capt., of Dumbarton, II. 433.
Stik, to stab, II. 30, S:c.
Stikle, stubble, III, 612.
Stilberry, Tlio., English skipper, Piracy, banged,

L * 381.
Stinkand-style, in Edr., what, II. 416, 462.
Stirling of Auchyle, Ja., I. 15; Wm., III. 233 ;
— of Baldorane, Luke, I. 97, 355 ; — of Ballagane, Luke, I. * 451 ; Walt., 22; Hereschip of Horses and cattle, by MacGregors,
III. 249;— of Bankeir, And., I. * 150 ;— of
Breakky, Dav., I. * 158 ; — Besieging Castle
of, I. * 238, * 242 ;— of Craigbernard, Jo.,
Feud with the Kincaids, I. * 458 ; — Field of,
L * 100, &c. ;— of Glorat, Wm., I. * 150 ;
Geo., * 227 ;— of Keir, Sir John, L * 130,

* 155, * 167, * 177, * 199 ; I. * 251 ; slain,

* 258 ; one of the Guardians of K. James V.,
in his infancy, * 259; sent to relief of Makkane
against Donald of the Isles, * 262, * 477,
71; Sir Ja., 114; Sir Arch., 299, IL 502,
III. 377, 554;— Raid of, L * 467, * 470;
abiding from, Forfeiture, &c., II. 85 ; —
Town and Castle of, withholding against the
King, L 112, 116, 133.

Stodart of Shcilgreen, Jo., II. 35.

Stolps, King's silver, I. * 282 ; to bring in his collation, * 298, &c. See Gold and Silver-plate.

Stomacher, I. * 307.

Stouthrief, William Cockburne, I. * 15 ; — Symon
Furde, //;. ; — remarkable enumeration, I. * 20 ;
— of Earl of Angus's Horses, L* 23 ; his lance,
25 ; — Robert Dunwedy, I. * 41 ; — by way of
' Mummyn,' I. * 50, 51 ; — of Pirated goods,
I. * 88 ;— from Bishop of Galloway, I. * 94;
—of King's Artillery, I. * 132 ;— Capt. Ja.
Guthry, I. * 143 ; — Bikkerton, beheaded, I.

* 162 ;— Hugh, Lord Somerville, L * 169 ;—
Alex. Jo. Canochsoun, &c., L * 170, * 176,

* 203 ; John Henderson, hanged, * 206 ;

4

during Plague, * I. 219 ; from Tower of Emside, * 223 ; Sir Ja., Thrift, <S:c., * 334 ;
Gilb. MacTeyr, beheaded, * 351 ; — of the
pay of the French Troops at Brouchty, * 361 ;
of Horses, &c., 393, II. 385 ;— and Murders
by the Macgregors, 414, 415; severals hanged, i/j. ; — Johnstoune of Lochhouse, beheaded,
425 ; Tho. Hardie, hanged, 441 ; Roise of
Dungkellie, beheaded, 481 ; Allaster Stewart,
hanged, 528 ; Ja. Hunter of Hagburne, II.
567 ; Wm. Douglas of Pin5erie, beheaded,
III. 95, 205, 252 ; Jo. Murray, hanged, 478 ;
Jo. Grant of Davachmoir, 490 ; Countess of
Marischall, and Sir Alex. Strathauchane, her
husband, &c., 562 ; Ja. Keith of Benholme, 563.
Story, And., hanged, I. * 87.
Strabogie, Mass celebrated, II. 530.
Straitoune of Lowriestoun, Sir Alex., II. 495.
Strakned, what. III. 605.

Strang, Capt. Geo., I. 309 ; — of Balcasky, John,
yr., I. * 141, 60 ;— of Kildrymmie, Ro., I. 60.
Strangling at the stake and burning, a capital
punishment, for Witchcraft, &c., q. v. (See
also Burning ; — at the stake, I. * 393. See
Witchcraft ; — a child, 371 ; taking captive and,
IJL 553.
Strathauchin of Balwissie, L * 345 ; — of Brigtoun, Alex., I. * 207 ; — of Claypottis, John,
I. 27 ; — of Letliinturk, Jo., yr.. Slaughter, I.

* 175; Concealing the Master of, Forbes's Conspiracy, warded,* 200 ; Da., * 206; remitted,

* 246 ;— of :Monboddo, Jo., I. 28 ;— of Thorntoun, John, I. 17 ; Sir Alex., and his wife
Dame Marg. Ogilvie,(Countess of Marischall,)
Masterful Stouthrief, &c.. III. 562.

Strathbogie, house of, to be cast down, I. 343, 344.

Strathnaverne, Inhabitants respited, I. * 248.

Stratoun, David, burnt for Heresy, I. * 210, 8cc. ;
—of Craigy, Dav. I. 29.

Strauchane, Wm., Messenger, scourged and deprived, for signeting false Letters, &c., II.
455; Mr Alex., Minister, tried, 494; banished,
503 ; Mr Ro., Masterful Stouthrief, &c., 562.

Straws, Witciies ride on, superstition, III. 604, &c.

Streamers for the King's ship, I. * 303.

Strechin, House of, besieged, I. 65.

Striking a person, whilst the King was sitting in

GENERAL INDEX.

735

judgment, II. 358 ; fined 1750 merks, 359 ;
— a Minister, 41G ; Walt. Graliam scourged,
and his right hand struck off, 417 ; — During
sitting of the Lords of Session, III. 73.
Strudgeoun of Myllerland, Adam, II. 490 ; — of
Towcroce, Harb., II. 490.

Stud, Royal, I. * 301, &c., * 306 ; the King's
Brood-mares, * 316.

Study, K. James V.'s, I. 284.

Stug-taillit, what, III. 265.

Stymeis, bats, III. 588.

Suborning of Witnesses, III. 354 ; several persons beheaded, l)anged, scourged, and branded,
358 ; And. Turnbull and 2 others hanged,
539 ; Da. Turnbull's tongue pierced with
< ane hett boitkyn,' and he banished, ib.

Substancious man, ' quhat is,' I. * 161.

Suckler, Jok the, III. 382, 389 ; hanged, 396.

Suffolk, Earl of, Tho., II. 589.

Suffrages for Q. Magdalene, I. *297, &c. See
Obsequies, Funeral ceremonies, &c.

Summerdaill, House of, besieged, I. * 225.

Sumpterraan, King's, I. * 313.

Superstitions. See Witchcraft, Charms, See, —
touching the Corpse of a Murdered person, as
a test of guilt or innocence, III. 143, 165j
182, &c.

Supplications, remarkable, of persons charged as
Conspirators at David Riccio's Murder, I.

* 483, * 484, * 485.

Supremacy of the Pope, maintaining the, III.
330, (S:c. See Balmerinoch.

Surgeons provided for the Army of the Borders,
I. * 325 ; Report of, in case of Mutilation,
&c., 7 ; — two sit on an Assise, III. 574.

Surrey, Countess of, I. * 18; — Earl of,

* 187, * 270.

Sussex, Earl of, L. Lieut, of Ireland, III. 2.
Sutherland of Clyne, And., yr.. Resetting him, I.

* 395 ; — Countess of. Dame Jean Gordon,
348, 530 ;— of Duftus, Wm., slain, * 149 ;
Oppression, <S:c., * 222 ; Alex., * 391 ; Wm.,
IL 143. See Duffus ;— Earl of, I. * 149,
note; John, * 330, * 370, * 391, * 411 ;
Alex., * 462, note, 94; Hugh, 114; Jo.,

Submission between, and E. of Caithness, III.
231 ;— of Evelik, Wm., I. 68 ;— of Greifschip,
And., *391; — of Kinsterrie, Win., 111.616.
Swan, Jo., burnt for Sodomy, II. 491, note.
Swarff, swooning, I. 251, &c.
Swasche, an alarm drum, (S:c., II. 30.
Swascheris (Swescheouris,) what, II. 245.
Swearing fealty to English Protector, I. * 378.
Swearing upon swords, III. 275.
Sweetmeats brought to K. James V., I. * 308.
Swein, an Evil Spirit, III. 606.
Swesche-talburne, I. * 314, &c. See Swascb.
Swimming, singular dexterity displayed by the

Laird of MacGregor, II. 434.
Swintoun of that Ilk, Jo., I. * 147, * 159; gift
of his escheat for wilful error to his 8 daughters, * 253 ; Warden-depute of the East
Marches, * 323, * 414 ; Ro., 282.
Sword-belt, scourging with, II. 454.
Sword, decapitation with a, I. * 425 ; great,
* 289 ; of Honour, * 260 ; a case to it, * 296 ;
two-handed, * 289 ; II. 70. See Gowrie's
Conspiracy, HI. 245.
Sword-slipper, King's, I. * 315.
Swyne, Jo., beheaded for Slaughter at a bridal,

IH. 471.
Swyngill-trie, Murder of a pregnant woman and
her child with,II.517; Pat. Deanis hanged,//;.
Sydeserf of that Ilk, Pat., I. * 143, * 386; Pat,,
yr.. Slaughter, 4; Jo., 10, 155 ; — ^^of Ruchlaw,
IL 467; Wm., 534; II L 560.
Sydney, Sir Ro., II. 318.

Symbolical mode by which Witches took the
fruits of the ground, dvc, HI. 603, and )iote.
See also Witchcraft, pasxiin, for similar instances.
Symmer of Bal^ordie, III. 437 ; Ro., his son,
Slaughter, i/j. ; beheaded, //;. ; — David, Bailie
of Edinburgh, freeing a Prisoner. I. * 442 to
*450; Protestation against the Verdict, *449.
Symontoune of Hardingtoune, I. *455; — of that
Ilk, Jo., forging and making False money,
* 76 ; Wm., * 382 ; Jo., yr., III. 539.
Symsoune of Bannans, Jo.,I. 200; — Edw., hanged
for Stouthreif by way of * Mummyn,' * 51.

VOL. III.

6 A

736

GENERAL INDEX.

Tablets, I. * 295, * 299, &c. See New-year's
gifts.

Taikin, what, II. 470.

Tailor, King's, in the Wardrobe, I. * 313; Master, * 315 ; Queen's Master, ih.

Tail5eour, Wm., murdered at Kirk of Field with
K. Henry, (Darnley,) I. * 4-79, * 492.

Tail3iefeir of Herklaw, Wm., III. 493.

Tait of Adamehill, Cha., yr., II. 95 ; — of Bairerse,
Geo., 475 ; James, his hrotlier, acquitted of
Slaughter, 476 ; — of Barnbarrache, Tho., I.

* 85 ; — of Cherritreis, Wm., II. 475 ; Ja., his
son, slain, ib. ; — of Pirne, Alex., I. * 147,

* 332 ; Geo., * 424, * 469.

Talbonaris, I. *267,*273,*292; Swische, *314.
Tale-teller, the King's, I. « 116, * 123.
Tamptalloun, Raid of, I. * 138, * 140, * 243,

* 244, * 263, * 274 ; the warks at, * 298 ;
withheld against the King, 96.

Tantara ! pamfara ! II. 601, and tiote.

Tapestry. See Arras werk ; — new Tapesscherye
brocht furth of Flanders, I. * 298, * 300.

Tarbert, Ja., writer, hanged for falsifying a Charter, II. 104.

Target or targe, an ornament generally worn in
the bonnet, I. * 292, * 293, * 321. See also
New-year's gifts.

Tarlasoune of Moin5eis, Jo., yr., II. 394.

Tasker, III. 526, 8cc.

Tax remitted to Town of Selkirk, it being ' liereit
be Tbevis and Pestilence,' I. * 262.

Taylor, Jo., Warlock, III. 614, &c.

Taymoutb, Bulk of. III. 232.

Tearing the King's Letters, I. * 53, * 271, * 334.

Tears, superstition that Witches could shed none,
1.211.

Tedder, a halter. III. 474, &c.

Teiiid sheaves. See Spuiljie.

Teniient, Francis, writing Pasquils against the
King, hanged, II. 332 ; his tongue ordered
to be cut out, before his execution, ib. ; afterwards dispensed with, ib. ; — of Kairnes, Ja.,
II. 430 ; Jo., 467 ; — of Leuenax, (Linbouse,)
Arch., slain, * 180 ; Ja., 155 ; II. 21, 259,

455 ; III. 9, 565 ; — Mungo and Francis, Sedition, &c., * 330 ; — of Wiliiainstoune, Arch.,

I. 27.

Tennis, game of. See Cache-puill.

Ten-shilling pieces forged, II. 99.

Testament, New, persons burnt for using it. See

Heresy.
Testanis, striking false, I. * 394, * 440 ; three

women ' wirreit and brunt in assis,' II. 74.
Testicles, Demembration of, I. * 253 ; putting

hot ashes and live embers in the scrotum, &c.,

II. 393 ; Pat. Stewart beheaded, 394 ; cruelty
in trampling, &c., III. 496.

Tests of guilt or iimocevice of suspected Murderers, populiir. III. 184, &c.

Tithes paid to the Devil, superstition of Witches,
being annually decimated, ' paying kane (or
' teynd") to hell,' I. 164, &c.

Theft, from the Abbot of Dundrennan, I. * 73 ;
— Common, Johnston, Story, and Gillespie,
hanged, I. * 87 ; Douglas, &c., hanged, I.

* 151, * 159 ; Turnbull, {Blak-Soio,) hanged, * 169 ; Armstrong, &c., * 173 ; John
Elwald, (^Jok Unhappy,^ hanged, * 176;
Young Laird of Tulydury, hanged, * 358 ;
John Robsoune, alias Paulis Jok, hanged,

* 384 ; of a silver dish of Queen Regent's,
*386 ; from the Queen Dowager's chief Cook,

* 406; by an alleged Idiot, * 415; Armstrangs and Elliots, 93 ; barbarous torture of
a girl, to detect alleged Theft, 11.44 ; — masterful,&c., 74; treasonable and masterful, Countess
of Marisciiall, &c., III. 562 ; Keith of Benholme, 563, &c. See Stouthrief, Hcreschip,
Reiving, Stealing, &c.

Theftboot, taking, I. * 143, * 427.

Theses publicly defended. III. 447, and note;

Thesis and annexa by Mr Thomas Ross, 451,

586. See Ross.
* Thief of Hell wait wpon hir selfe!' an Evil

Spirit, III. 606, 614.
' Thief !' a Witch call, 607.
Thieves, assisting, I. * 144 ; — letting escape from

justice, I. * 149, * 223 ;— taking Theftboot,

GENERAL INDEX.

737

* 427 ; — Raid against the Border Thieves, I.

* 134, * 152, * 271.

Thirlestane, Lord, Jo., (Lord Chancellor,) 1.
172, 267, 304; dies, IIL 6G.

Thistles, embroidered on the King's Coronation
Robes, Sec, I. * 301.

Thomesone, Agnes, Witch, L 216; Alex., hanged and forfeited for importing and uttering
base coin, II. 404 ; Alex., banished for Adultery, III. 429 ; Gilb., hanged for stealing during the Burning of the Town of Dumfries, I.

* 39 ; Issob., Child-Murder, hanged, II. 540.
Thornetoune, Laird of, I. 284.

Thorns, ancient Witch's and lover's trysting-places,
1.52, 58. See also Imp- Tree, II. 543 ;— Maxwell's, where Lord M. was slain. III. 30.

Thornsyde of East Nesl)it, Ninian, I. * 147.

Thraive of corn, &c., what, I. * 58,

Threads, Witch-charm with. III. 605, Sec.

Thrift, Sir James, Chajjlain, &c., Fire-raising,
Stouthreif, &c., I. * 334.

Throche, a sheet of writing paper, III. 148.

' Throw the Corne-yaird,' a Witch's nickname, III.
606.

Thurestoune, Place of, burnt, I. * 99.

Thurso, Fishings of, violently occupied, I. * 395.

Tibberis, burnt, I. * 348.

Tildar, Sir William, Englishman, L * 4.

Tindall, alias Tinwall, Margt., tried for Oker
(Usury,) II. 101.

Tirring, what. III. 432, 548, &c.

Title-deeds, Theft of, II. 340 ; Ja. Wod, fiar of
Boningtoun, tried, ib. ; hanged, 347 ; III.
265 ; Pat. Eviot hanged, ib.

Toads used in Witcli-charms, I. 218, 245.

Tobacco, pipe of, said to be drimh or quaffed,
IIL II.

Tochers given by the King, L *272, *279,*3I2,
* 3 1 7 ; to Barbara Falconer, * 324.

Tod of Sereschaw, Sir Tiio., I. * 5.

Tok, Wm., scourged and banished for Peijury,
III. 359.

Tomb-stones, stealing, I. 48.

Tongs, red-hot, used for torturing a girl, for the
purpose of detecting alleged Theft, II. 45.

Tongue, cut out by the root before execution, II.
335, and burnt, III. 198 ; — pierced with * ane

hett boitkyn,' 539; — a gentleman's throat cut,
his tongue taken out, the tongue of one of his
dogs put in his mouth, 8cc., a case of extreme
barbarity, 548.
Tooth-powder, silver clam-shell for holding K.
Ja. V.'s, I. * 320, * 322 ; his ' pyke-teithe,'

* 321.

Torches. See Funeral-ceremonies, <S:c. ; — at the
Baptism of Prince James, * 302.

Torphechin, Lord, I. 27 ; Ja., III. 316 ;— Preceptor of, I. * 2 ; — Sanctuary of, * 151.

Torsen5ie, the Lady, goes mad, after a Witch
consultation, I. 236.

ToRTiiORWALD, LoRD, Ja., slain, III. 65 ; notice
of facts, ih. ; Lord Stewart of Ochiltrie tried,
66. See Stewart, he.

Torture, the rack, or question, I. * 401 ; wrenching the head with cords, 215 ; mode of torturing Witches, 217, Sec. See Witches ; —
barbarous, inflicted on Feane, 219, Sec; Alison Balfour and Tho. Palpla, 375, 376 ; the
young Laird of Auchindrane tortured. III.
170, 196 ; Mr Ja. Mitchell, ib.; Peter Aroy,
a Higiiland robber, ib. ; — instruments of, tiie
« Pilniewinkis,' 215, 376, 377; 'boots' or

* bootikins,' 219, 222, 376, 377 ; Mr Wm.
Rynd ' extremely booted,' 220, 238, note;
Sprott booted, 275 ; ' turkas,' (^torquois,^ pincers to tear off the nails, 222 : needles thrust
under the nails, ib. ; ' caschielawis,' or < caspicawis,' 375, 376, 377 ; the < lang irnis,' of 50
stone weight, 376 ; scourging with ' towis,'
(ropes,) ib. ; a ' harrow-bore' used, II. 46 ;
— most barbarous torture and savage Murder,
III. 545; — inhuman, inflicted on a girl, to
detect alleged Tiieft, II. 44; — ' waking,' i.e.
systematically preventing sleep, to extort confession, in the case of Witches, I. hO; a Jesuite
' waked' ad deliritiiu ! III. 3:i2.

Tortus, Math., 11. 570.

Torwoodlee, Place of, harried, and the Laird

Murdered, &c., II. 520.
Titschcanch, And., Lion King at Arms, violence

committed on him Ity Lord Drummond, I.

* 268;— of Monyvainl, And., 28 ; II. 383;
Edw., III. 413; Da., yr., slain, ib., 465;
Annas (Jraliame, Lady M., ib. ; Offers for

738

GENERAL INDEX.

reconciling the Feud betwixt him and the
Laird of Cultmalundie, III. 480, 542.

Touching murdered corpses, a popular mode of
detecting the guilt or innocence of the suspected criminal, III. 143, 165; illustrations
relative to this superstitious practice, 182,
&:c. ; form of the ceremonial, 184 ; remarkable Trials where touching was founded on,
&c., 191 ; K. DuFFUs's murderers, ih. ; K.
Henry II. of England, 192 ; Johan Norkott,
ib.\ Marioun Peebles, alias Pardoun, 194;
Mr Ja. Mitchell, 195 ; Mary Mure, 196 ;
Da. Munroe, ib, ; Mr Ja. Guthrie, ib. ; Philip StanBeld, ib. ; Marquis of Argyll, 199,&c.

Tournament, I. * 118, * 123, * 293, * 300,

* 317, * 320, * 321, * 323, &c.

Toweris of Biisto, Geo., I. *513 ; — of Inverleith,
Sir Ja., * 140, * 159, * 190, * 199, * 421 ;
Jo., 72 ; II. 60, 74 ; Sir Geo., 513.

Towis, (ropes,) scourging with, to extort Confession, I. 376.

Trafficking with Seminary Priests, Jesuites, &c.,
I. 172.

Traill of Blebo, Jo., II. 60, 397.

Traitor, Judicial Challenge of a, I. * 183 ; Armorial bearings of forfeited Traitors publicly
defaced, *490; II. 241 ; their quarters exposed
on the tops of Tolbooths, Ports, Sec, I. * 440,

* 491, &c. See Quartering; — their dead
bodies produced in Court, at forfeiture, II.
241, 277, &c.

Translation of ' the Cronyklis' and 'Titus Livius'
at the expense of K. James V. See Bellenden.
Transporting Cattle to England, I. * 60.
Traquair, Lady, I. * 161, * 177 ; Assise on,

* 280. See Stewart.

Treason, High, (Field of Stirling,) Ja., E. of
BucHAN, I. * 2 ; — Jo., L. Both WELL, * 4 ;
Jo. Ross of Mountgreenan, *8 ; Cuthb. Murray of Cokpule, * 11 ; Don. MacRanald Bane,

* 45 ; Torquill Makcloide of the Lewis, ib. ;
Jo. Lindesay of Wauchope, * 48 ; Jo. Makklane of Lochboy, * 50 ; Ja. Elwald hanged,

* 133 ; Lord Lindsay, ib. ; Crechtoun of
Craufurdtoun, ib. ; Cokburne of Henderland
beheaded, * 144; Jo. Master of Forbes
beheaded, * 183 ; Lady Glammis burnt,

L * 187, &c. ; Alex. Hume beheaded, * 201 ;
E. OF Arran's Treason, * 233, * 246 ; Sir
Ja. Hamilton of Finnart, * 227 ; beheaded,

* 228, &c. ; Sir Ja. Colville of East Wemys,

* 255, * 257 ; Alex. Lord Home, Chamberlain, * 261, *262; And. Heriot of Trabroune, ib.; George Home of Wedderburn,

* 267 ; E. of Crawford, L. Lindsay, kc,

* 271 ; E. OF Cassillis, L. Sempill, ib.;
Laird of Bukcleuche, * 272 ; Jo. Wallace of
Carno, * 274 ; men of the Isles, * 275 ; Ja.
Douglas of Parkhead, * 307 ; Sir Ja. Melville of Raith beheaded, * 3.39 ; Rich. Latymerof that Ilk hanged,* 348; Wm. Newtoune
of that Ilk, * 349 ; Ja. Earl Bothwell
conspiring to seize tlie person of Mary Q. of
Scots, * 460 ; Murderers of King Henry,
(Darnley,) tried, and illustrations, &c., * 488
to *513; Dav. Hammilton hanged, 31 ; Conspiracy against the Regent, 32, 40; Intercommuning with Rebels in Town and Castle
of Edr., 33 ; Mr Ja. Kirkaldye and Ja. Cokkie hanged, 45 ; Conspiring Regent Morton's death, 70 ; Jo. Sempill of Beltreis for
ditto, 72 ; Geo. Balfour, Prior of Charterhouse, 86; Arth. Hamilton, Murder of Regents Murray and Lennox, 87 ; Jo. Byuning hanged and quartered for K. Henry
(Darnley's) Murder, 95; Arch., E. of Angus, 96 ; Geo. Hume of Spott, 101 ; acquitted, 107 ; Ja. Earl of Morton, 114 ; Wm.
E. OF Gowrie, 116; Forfeiture of the Earls
OF Angus and Mar, 119; Raid of RuthVEN, from 1 1 1 to 132, 139 ; Lairds of Mains,
Drumquhassill, and Duiitreath, hanged and
quartered, ib. ; K. Henry (Darnley's) Murder, Mr Arch. Douglas, 142; acquitted, 154;
Pat. Master of Gray, tried for counterfeiting King's stamp, 157 ; Earls of Huntlie,
Crawford, and Bothwell, 171 ; Angus
M'^Coneill of Dinnievaig and L. M'^Lean of
Dowart, 224 ; Countess of Bothwell,
&c., 268 ; convicted, 274; E. of Bothwell,
dire., tried for Raids of Falkland and Holyrood,
293 ; forfeited, 297 ; Earls of Angus,
Huntlie, and Errol, &c., for Conspiring
against the Protestant Religion, &c., 310 ;

GENERAL INDEX.

739

summons, I. 314; doom, 316 ; Tract as to 'the
Spanish Blanks,' 317 ; Convocation of an unlawful Assembly of the Kirk, II. 3; Pat.
Sleich hanged, 21 ; Besieging the King, &c.,
in Edr. Tolbooth, Edward Johnnestoun fined
3300 merks, 29; Gowrik's Conspiracy,
146, &c. See Gowrie ; Mr Tho. Cranstoun,
Geo. Craigingelt, and Jo. M'DuiT, hanged,
148; Forfeiture of Lord Gowrie's brothers,
159; Wm. Cuninghame of Tov/erlands, 366 ?
forfeited and beheaded, 369; Geo. Meldrum,
yr. of Dumbrek, beheaded and forfeited, 428;
Ja., L. Balmerinoch, Corresponding with
THE Pope, &c., in King's name, 567, &:c. ;
Sir Ja. Makconeill, III. I ; Pat., E. of Orkney, 81 ; declining Jurisdiction of the King
and Privy Council, 87 ; I\Ir And. Creichtoun
sentenced to be hanged^ 89; banished for life,
90 ; Ro. Stewart, (natural son of E. of Orkney,) Rebellion in Orkney, &c., 272; hanged
and forfeited along with 5 others, 283 ; illustrative Papers, ib. ; Trial of Pat., E. of Orkney, 308; beheaded and forfeited, 318 ; illustrative Papers, 319; Angus Og M'Coneill
363 ; hanged, 365 ; illustrative Papers, «7».,
<S:c. See also treasonable Fire-raising, Murder, Theft, &c.

Treasonable Murder, Fire-raising, &-c. See under
Murder, Theft, &c.

Treasurer's, Lord High, Accounts of Reign of K.
James IV., I. * 114, * 124 ; Reign of James
v., * 259 to * 325 ; and notices from these
Records, quoted in illustration, passim.

Tred, following the. III. 548.

Treif, Castle of, keepership, I. * 232.

Trew, day of, or Warden Raid, I. * 397, &c.

Trinkets given by Kings of Scotland to favourites
and courtiers, I. * 295, &c. See New-year's
gifts. Gold, and under names of Jewels, &c.

Trotter of Prentonene, Geo., I. * 413.

Troup of Begishill, Alex., I. * 150.

Trouternes, ' Hereschip ' of, I. * 256.

Trows, or trolls, what, III. 607, note.

Trump (Jew's harp) played on at Witches' convocations, I. 217, 246.

Trumpets, Banners to the, I. *3U8; War, *314.

Trust, breach of, pleadings relative to, II. 549,

<S:c. ; — Murder under, III. 74, &c. See

also INIurder.
Tuil3ies and ' cummeris' in the streets of Edr.,

<S:c., I. * 362.
Tulliallane, Pit of, a man famished to death in,

111.479.
TuLLiBARDiN, Earl OF, Jo., II. 572, Wm., III.

14, note, 18 ;— Master of, William, IL 297,

note, (See Murray of T., &c.,) 572, III.

248, 370.
Tullo, (Tulloch,) of xMoncoffer, Tho., L * 150 ;—

ofTannachie, Ro., II. 72, 80; his son Alex.

slays the Laird of Earlsiniyln's son, ib., 110;

Alex, and Ja., tried for Slaughter, 563, 565.
Tumults within burgh, Robin Hood, &e., I. * 409,

* 410; to restore Property, * 416, (S:c. ; at
Holyroodhouse, * 434 ; to alter the Religion,

* 435, &c. See Edr., Holyroodhouse, &c.
Tung-schot, what, II. 536.
Tunnergarthe, Parson of, slain, II. 441.
Turcas-ring, III. 564, and note.

Turing of Foverne, Gilb., remitted for Abiding
from the Raid of Solway, &c., * I. 242.

Turk, the Little, dress to, I, * 308, * 319.

Turkas, (Jiurqnois,') pincers used in torture, for
pulling oft" the nails, I. 222.

Turnbcrry, Laird of, slain, I. * 219.

Turnebroches, in King's Kitchen, I. * 313.

Turnbull of Airdrie, Wm., II. 259, III. 9, 75 ;—
And., beheaded, II. 377 ; And. and two others
hanged for Perjury, &c.. III. 538 ; — of Apotesyde, Lady (Marg.,) II. 510; — Place of, set
on fire, ih. ; — of Barnehills, Hector, Slaughter
of the Grameslaws, II. 441 ; Geo., his brother
and Gavin, his uncle, ib ; — of Bedrule, \\'alt.,
I. 265 ; Tho., III. 396 ;— of Belsis, George,
Slaughter, Unmerciful Oppression, <S:c., II.
419; sentenced to l»e hanged, and his right
hand to be struck off, 421 ; tried for Incest,
Adultery, &c., hanged and furfeited, 425 ;
Hector, 442, 445 ; — of Bewlie, Ko., slain, II.
372, 378;— of Blindbauche, Ro., I. • 88;—
Adam of Chamberlain, Newton, slain, I. • 61 ;
David, tongue pierced with 'ane liett boitkyn,'
and banished, ?7>. ; — of Clarielaw, Ilect., II.
511, III. 39() ;— of the Firth, Hector, SlauL'hter, &c., 11. 370 ;— of llullrule, Geo., I. * ib ;

740

GENERAL INDEX.

—of Hoppisburne, Tho., II. 509, 510 ; — of
Howay, Walter, I. * 144 ; — of Howdene, Jo.,
III. 457 ;— of Huttril-buine, Ro. III. 457 ;—
Jo., one of King's Guard, sits as Assisor, II.
559; — of Lylslie,(Lilliesleaf,) Hector, Slaughter of Laird of Craling, II. 445 ; — of Minto,
Win., I. * 147; Tho. apparent of, &c., Slaughter, wearing dags and pistolets, II. .S70 ; Tho.
445 ; Hect. Tutor of, III. 396 ;— Peter, ' callit
the Monk,' hanged, I. *413 ; — of Philiphauche,
Adam, I. * 43 ; Rob., Tutor of, * 148 ; Wm.,
III. 569 ;— of Quhitehope, I. * 22, &c. ;— of
Ra'vflat, Tho., Oppression, &c., I. * 252 ;
Walt., II. 419, 424 ; Wm., his son, slain,
419 ; Adam, his servant, hung in irons, by the
feet and shoulders over a beam for 12 days I
ih. ; Walt., remitted, III. 116; — of Stanyledge, Hector, Slaughter of Laird of Little
Newton's six sons, II. 441 ; — of Tofts, John
I. * 34 ;— of Wauchope, Hect., II. 473 ; Tho.,
yr., ih., 509, 510; acquitted of Slaughter,
512.

Turner, Jo., Sh. clerk of Wigtoun, III. 328.

Tumour of Ardwell, Jo., II. 490.

Turnppyke, a circular stair-case. III. 129, <Src.

Turnit alo, what, II. 525.

Turquois stone in the Coronation Ring, I. * 300.

Twa-handit-swoirdis, I. * 289 ; II. 70, 432 ; III.
245. (See Gowrie's Conspiracy.)

Twa-mark pieces forged, II. 99.

Tweddale of Bankhead, Ro., I. 35.

Tweedy, of Draway, Adam, Cutting ofi" a man's
ears, I. * 475 ; Slaughter, 190 ; — of Drummel5eare, John, L* 43, * 88, * 141, * 147 ; Ja.,

* 229 ; Oppression, I. * 24, * 76 ; James

* 384 ; Wm., * 475 ; Ja., 135 ; Slaughter,
190 ; — John, Tutor of, slain, 204 ; Ja., feud,
353 ; Geo., slain, 541, 562 ; — of Frude, Ja.,
murdered, I. * 426 ; Ja., * ib. ; — Jo., in Linton, I. *,205 ; — of Southwood, Jo., slain. III.
54 ; the Laird of Birnok and his son beheaded,
58 ; — Wm., scourged and banished for ' vnreverent speeches' against the King and Council, III. 220 ;— of the Wrae, Wm., Slaughter,
190, II. 467.

Tympanes, (timbrels,) I. * 119.

Tynnakillis of Tanny velvet, what, I. * 301.

Tynneis, house of, to be destroyed, I. 276.

Tynto of Crympcramp, Rob. I. 5.

Typpet to Steel bonnet, I. * 283 ; riding, ib.

Tyree, Island of, burnt, Sec, I. * 247.

Tyraimical Oppression of the Inhabitants of Orkney and Zetland, III. 81, 312. See also Orkney, Ro. Stewart, &c.

Tyrement. See Funeral Ceremonies, Obsequies,
Suffrages, Szc.

Tyrie of Drumkilbo slain, I. 165, 325 ; Thomas,
Tutor of, ih., 332; Remission to. III. 116.

Tyrrewne, (Tyrone,) Earl of, Irish rebel,
I. 348 ; in. 2.

Tyrwit, Sir Wm., and 16 Englishmen, go on a Pilgrimage to the Shrine of St Niniane, I. * 106.

u.

UcHiLTRiE, Lord Stewart of. See Ochiltrie.

Udny of Kethik, Jo., III. 437.

UgstoneofFoddercarne,(Fettercairn?)Alex.,I.28.

UUishavin, Murder of Lady, I. * 344, * 350,
*411. See Murder, &c.

Umbesetting the hie-gaitt, I. * 169, * 182, * 200,
* 204, * 356, * 412, * 432, * 450, * 469 ;
to Lord Oliphant, * 488, 58 ; Ewing, 380 ;
Mure of Au( hindrane, IL 35, 37 ; and Theft,
&c., 74, 103; 111. 224, and note, &c. See
also Stouthreif, Hurting, Wounding, &c.

Uncouth, strange, III. 524, 8»c.

Underfute, what, II. 27.

Undergore, what, II. 27.

Unfriend, enemy. III. 588, <X:c.

Unhappy Jok, hanged, I. * 176.

Unicorn, the Great, King's Ship of War, I.

* 298 ; sent to France with the Cardinal,

* 323; — Pursuivant (Robert Eraser) slain,
II. 72.

Unicorns, two, the supporters of the Arms of

Scotland, (temp. Jac. V.,) I. * 308.
Unlaw, what. III. 140.
Unreason, Abbot of, L * 116, * 121, * 123 ; InGENERAL INDEX.

741

surrection in Edr., I. * 409 ; in the Mearns,
&c., 15, 81. See Lord of Inobedience, Misrule,
Robin Hood, &c.

Uphaly-day, what, I. * 115, * 299.

Urie, Re, Resetting Jesuites, III. 376.

Urquhart of Auldeine, Ja., I. * 224 ; — of Burrisjardis, Alex., I. * 336, * 357, * 391 ;— of
Craig- Fintrie, Jo., III. 379 ; — Tutor of Cromartie, Jo., I. 285 ; — Ja., Warrant for him to
deliver up or slay his two brothers, * 391 ; —
Lord, Adam, 293 ; — Parson of, slain, 386 ;
Gilb. Pacok beheaded, 388, (see Colville;)—
Tho., Sheriff of Cromarty, * 169 ; Walt., 193.

Urquhill, Laird of, present at Gowrie's Conspiracy,
in the King's suite, 11. 172. See Grahame.

Usher, Adie, hanged for Sheep and Cattle-stealing, III. 568 ; Will banished, 569.

Usher of the Chekkar-hous door, I. 316 ; — of the

King's Inner Chamber-door, * 313 ; — of Outer do., ih. ; — Prince's Master, * 314 ; — Queen's
Master, ih.

Usurping King's authority, I. * 159, * 208 ; and
Murder under colour of law, III. 399, 418 ;
and Hamesucken, 431, 497, 552.

Usury, (Oker,) II. 101.

Uttering forged money, I. * 137 ; Kelman and
Gardin hanged, 385; Arneill, II. 17; three
women ' wirreit and brunt in assis,' 74 ;
Rauff Wallace burnt, 79 ; Walt. Murray and
two others burnt, 100 ; Macalexander and
three others ' wirreit,' and two more hanged,
II. 353 ; Geo. Drummond, 365, and Pat. D.,
383, ' wirreit and brunt'; Allan Napier, do.,
403 ; Alex. Tiiomson hanged and forfeited,
404 ; Dow and MacClaren, do., 418. See also
under Coining, Forgery, <S:c.

V.

Vagabond, and follower of Gypsies, scourged

and banished, III. 99 ; four Faws lianged,

201. See Egyptianis, Fa, &c.
Vaison, Bishop of, (Wm. Chisholme,) 11.569 ;

account of his Family, <i'C., ib,, note ; attempts

to make him a Cardinal, 570.
Vallem of Woodwrae, Dav. II. 385 ; James and

Geo., his sons, hanged, 386. See Wallein.
Vandyke, Sir Anth., II. 297, note, and 319, note.
Vane-organ, what, 1.4, 7 ; II. 21, 449, 542.
Vause(Vans) of Barnbarroch, I. 373 ; Jo., XL 539 ;

— of Blause, Da., III. 539 ;— of Campfurd, Ro.,

328 ;— of Irsalk, Pat., Stouthrief, &c., I. * 94 ;

— of Lochslin, (Loclislum,) Jasper, * 376 ;

Jo., 204, 284 ;— of Lybrek, Pat. III. 328 ;—

(Waus) of Many, respited, I. * 250 ; remitted,

* 251, * 470;— of Ruthvennis, Alex., 94.
Veadge, III. 572.

Veils, mourning, I. * 287,

Veitch, (Vaiclie or Weclie,) of Dawik, Wm., I.

* 147, * 166, * 469; his son Pat. slain, 190;
Jo., 11. 430 ; — of that Ilk, James, 1. 155 ; — of

Kingside, Jo., I. * 141, * 144 ; Wm., * 424 ;
— of North Syntoune, Ja., yr., 204 ; II. 368 ;
of Syntoun, Walt., III. 391 ; — of Tourhope,
Ja., I. 204.

Velvet, I. * 301, &c. See App. to Reigns of K.
Ja. IV. and K. Ja. V.

Verdict, Protestation against one, for Wilful Error, I. * 449. See Assise, Error, Sec.

Vere of Stonebyres, I. * 126 ; murdered, * 132,
* 159, * 238. See Weir.

Vernour of Auchindiuny, Tho., I. * 143 ; Robert,
II. 21.

Vessels, grooms of the King's, I. * 313; Silver,
ib., &c. See Silver, Gold, Plate, «S:c.

Viaticum, what, HI. 588.

Victual, girnalling, I. * 181 ; — selling to the English, * 379, * 476 ; to Rebels in Edr., 30, 34.

Violers, tho King's, (Minstrels,) 1. * 314, * 316.

Viols fortheKing,(musical instruments,) I. * 285.

Vulgaris pun/dtio, popular ( )r(li'als for the dct(>otion of lyurderers, III. 184, &c. See Touching, iS:c.

742

GENERAL INDEX.

W.

Waddell, .To., Parson of Fllsk, I. * 472.

WaflF, (vaff,) a signal, II. 287.

Waith-naig, what. III. 98, 610.

Waking (Walking) of Witches, what, I. 50; a
Jesuite waked ad delirium ! III. 332.

Walcar, Sir Jo., Umbesetting, &c., I. * 204.

Waldegrave, Ro., Printing a vitiated Act of Parliament, II. 2, 7, 14.

Wales, Prince of, Cha., III. 502.

Walk, to wake or watch, III. 527.

Walker, Hen., Spuiljie, I. 390.

Wallace of Boigheid, Hew, II. 130 ; — James,
III. 57 ;— of Carmyre, Hugh, I. 36 ;— of
Carno, (Carnell,) James, * 137 ; John, Treason, * 273 ; Hew, * 428, * 457, * 486,

* 491, 36; John, II. 106; Sir John, III.
68; — of Cragy, John, I. * 251 ; Pension to
his widow, ib., 244 ; — Tutor of Craigy, Wm.,

* 137 ; Hew respited, * 237 ;— of Ellerslie,
W^m., * 344, * 382, 141 ;— of Holniestoiine,
Ro., II. 130;— Ja., hanged. III. 265 ;— of
Johnstoun, Wm., I. * 344, 35, 159, 169 ; Ja.,
III. 237 ;— -Marg., Witchcraft, Sorcery, &c.,
III. 508, ' wirreit and brunt,' 536 ; proof allowed in tins case, 525, &c. ; — of Maryford,
Hew, I. * 420 ;— of Newtoune, Adam, * 137 ;
— RauflF, Coining and uttering base money,
II. 75, 77 ; ' wirreit and brunt in assis,' 79 ;
— of Seweltoune, Edw,, 106 ; — of Wallacetoun, Wm., III. 57.

Wallein of Wodwra, Alex., I. * 347. See Vallem.
Walpynnis, anent (lang) in buithis, I. * 362.
Wambe, wliat, II. 417.

Wamebrasis, (belly-bands or girths,) I. * 290.
Wame-ill, what, I. 51.

Wand of Peace, ceremony of breaking, on occasion of a Messenger's Deforcement, &c., I.
* 75, * 157, * 437, * 484 ; III. 469.
Wantonness and ' her marrowis,' I. * 124.
Wantoun-Pyntill, I. * 181 ; slain, * 201.
Wantoun Will, beheaded, I. * 219. »
Wajjonschawing, I. * 309, * 311, 349; general,

354.
Warbeck, Perkin, I. * 5, 116.

Ward, breaking, I. * 331, 108, 135, 297, 305,
&c.; — Free, granted to William, Master of
Forbes, * 187.
Warden Raid, or ' Day of Trew,' I. * 397.
Wardens of Marches, hindering them from taking
Rebels, I. * 165; their fees, * 315; Lord
Maxwell slain, 360 ; Sir Jo. Carmichael slain,
II. 363, 504.
WVding Mary Q. of Scots, in her Palace of

Holyrood, &c., I. * 482.
WVdlaw of Curryhill, Alex., I. 1,34, 107;—
Hen., Queen's Chamberlain of Dunfermline,
II. 555 ; — Mr Ja., Justice depute, I. 159, &c.;
— of Kilbabertoun, Hen., * 158 ; imprisoned
for Wilful Error, * 203 ; Alex., * 424 ; Ro.,
yr., 64 ; — of Torry, Jo., * 136.
Wardrobe, Yeomen of King's, I. * 313; Grooms

in, lb. ; Tailor in, ib.
Wark, Raid of, I. * 240, * 242, * 257.
Warristoun, Laird of, I. * 62 ; House of, besieged, 81, 83 ; Lady < raveisched,' (carried
oft" by violence,) 244 ; — Laird of. Murdered
by his wife, &c. See Kincaid and Levingstoun.
War trumpets, I. * 314.
Warwick, Earl of, I. * 379.
Wasche, Strang or stark, (urine,) used in Witches'

charms, I. 245.
W\ast, And., Slaughter, III. 466.
Wastland, Alex., hanged for Perjury, Oppression,

&c., IL453.
Wat, Geo., hanged for Suborning Witnesses, III.

356.
Water-Ordeal, III. 184, 187.
Watsoun, Ja., Murder under trust, hanged, II.
540 ; James, drowned for lamb-stealing. III.
208 ; — Jonot, her Confession of Witchcraft,
601 ; — Patrick, Warlock, pricked for Devil's
mark, 599 ; — of Sauchtonhall, Mr Ja., portioner, II. 105.
Wauch of Hoip, Ro , IIL 396 ;— of Keip, Ro.,
11. 474 ;— (if Schawis, Tho., IIL 387, 485 ;
Tho., his son, ib.
Wauchope of Caikmure, Adam, I. * 468, 27,
6 156; — of Cleghorne, Geo., II. 113; his son

GENERAL INDEX.

743

Ja. slain in a ' singular combat' or duel, ib. ;
his antagonist belieaded, //;., note, 1 ■24- ; — Feud,

I. * 143, * 144 ; — Geo., swearing fealty to
Protector of England, he, * 378 ; Slaughter,

II. 52;— Gill)., slain, 562 ;— of Nudry-Marscheall, Gilb., I. * 143, * 144 ; waylaid, * 169,

* 176 ; Geo., * 388 ; \Vm., yr., killing game,

* 395 ; Gilbert, ib. ; Wm., 72, 107 ; Arch.,
yr., 168, 270, 305, 358; II. 52; Arch.,
(Ro. ?) 29, 403 ; Wm., his son, slays Laird of
Wowmett, ib.; Banished, 410; — of Stottincleuch, Wm., II. 562 ; his brother Gilb. slain,
ib.; — Wm., beheaded for Slaughter, 402.

Wauchtoune, Castle of, besieged, Hereschip, Sec.
1.8.

Waughter, Capt. of a Dutch, brings two English
Pirate vessels to Leitb, and is ' propyned with
a (silver) coup of Ix vnce weiglit,' III. 111.

Waylaying, (see Umbesetting, (Src,) I. * 169 ;
Lady Luss, &c. * 178.

Weath-horse, what. III. 98, 610, 613, et seq.

Weche. See Veitch.

Wedderat, Geo., slain, I. * 467, * 487.

Wedderburn, Castle of, recovering, I. * 237 ; victuals furnished to, * 272 ; — Mr Dav., Forcing
(Rape) and shamefully abusing. III. 439 ; —
Lady, Assise on her and Lady Traquair, I.
*280.

Wedonynpha, (' wyten-on-fa,') what, II. 27.

Weights, false, II. 88.

Weir, (Vere, Were,) of Auchtyefardell, Wm., I.
35 ; II. 376 ; Jo., his brother, 506 ; Da., III.
134; — Beatrix, III. 68 ; — Bessie, beheaded for
Child-Murder, 472 ;— of Blaikwood, Tho.,
Slaughter and Rape, I.* 180; Ja., 36,71;
Geo. III. 227 ;— of Clowburne, Jo., II. 453 ;
of Halcraig, Alex., I. 36 ; — of Howburne,
Henry, I. 72 ; — of Kirktoune, Tho., 36 ; —
of Newtoun, William, * 87 ; — of Quliytecleuch, Jo., and Mungo, his brother, beheaded, III. 247 ; — Ro., broken on the wheel, &c.,
for Murder of Laird of Warristoun, IF. 445 ;
—Tho., Forcing, (Rape,) III. 499 ;— Wm.,
beheaded, 123.

Wells, holy. Superstitions practised at, II.538,8tc.

Welsche of Colliestouno, Da. III. 475 ; — Mr Jo.,
Minister, tried, II. 494 ; banished, 503.
VOL. IIL

Wemyss of Bogie, Ja., Deposition as to Gowrie's
Conspiracy, II. 218 ; Sir Ja., Vice Admiral,
in. 102;— of Craigtoun, Mr Jo., 508 ;— of
that Ilk, Dav., I. 233, 310 ;— of Logie, 280 ;
— of PittencrieflF, Sir John, married Dorothea
Iluthven, II. 297, note ; — of Viithaiik, Tho.,
I. * 157.

Westhall, Laird of, slain, I. * 179.

West Marches, Raid of, I. * 331 ; Commission
to rule, &c., 304.

Westmoreland, Earl of, I. * 271.

Westraw, Laird of, slain, I. 36.

Weyme, Burning Place of, I. * 103, * 107, * 110.

Wharton, Sir Henry, I. * 348 ; burns Durisdeer,
Amisfield, &c., ib.; Lord, * 401 ; treasonable Letter, addressed to him, ib. ; — Tho.,

* 273;— Sir Tho., * 401.
Wheat, exporting to Flanders, I. * 365.
Wheel, breaking on the, I. 241 ; II. 450, and note.
Whirlwind, supcrstiticm relative to, I. 104 ; that

Devil carried off a Witch in a. III. 602 ; that
Witches shoot people who do not ' sain' or

* sanctifie ' themselves, 604.

Whistle, silver, in common use before room-bells,
L * 396. See Quhissill.

Whitefurde of that Ilk, John, I. * 384, 91 ;— of
INIyltoun, Jo. 70; Adam, yr., conspiring Murder of Regent Morton, ib.

WniTEHOKN, Bishop of, (i. e. Galloway,) L

* 163.

Whitelaw of that Ilk, I. * 169 ; Patrick, « 364,

* 480 ;— of Newgrange, Pat., 119.
Whyte, Rowland, II. 318.
Widderschynnes, what, \\\. 557, 605.
Wigtoun, burgh of, op|)ressed, I. * 93 ; — Earl

of, Jo., 11.572, 596 ; III. 542 ; — Justice- Aire
of, L*56,* 74, *88; expenses, * 317 ;— Provost of, IL 540; slain, III. 119;— Sheriff of,
takes I)ribe to discharge a Minderer, I. * 63 :
Oppression and Hereschip, * 89; Prevents a
Court from being held, * 91.

Wild-boars brouizht from France, ('sangweleris ;"
Fr. ,s7/////AV/-.v,) I. *3ll, * 312.

Wild-fowl, killing, I. * 395.

Wild horses and mares, stealing, I. * 247.

Wilful Error on Assise. See Error and Assise.

Wilfurd, (Wolford,) Sir Ja., (English General of
5 B

744

GENERAL INDEX.

Hadin^ton,) I. * 349 ; burns the towns of

Dalkeith and Newhottle, ih., 353.
Wilkie, Ro., banished for Resetting Jesuites, III.

371 ; — of Sauchton, Tho., portioner, II. 128.
Wilkin, nickname for \Vm., I. * 190, &c.
Will, declared by the King, in person, I. 247.
Williamson of Termet, Angus, Slaughter, II. 507 ;

Lach., yr., ib. ; Angus, 528 ; — W^m., Oker,

(Usury,) II. 101.
Willock, Jo., the Reformer, Heresy, &c., I. * 407,

* 417, note. See Reformation.
Willoughby, Sir Hugli, I. * 345; — Lord, 11.320.
Wilman, Capt., English Pirate, III. 110.
Wilson of Cruglin, (Croglene,) Jo., I. * 140 ; III.

501.

Wilsoun, Christian, alias ' the Lanthorne,' a murderi-d corpse bleeds at her touch. III. 195 ;
her Confession of Vritchcraft, 601 ; carried off
by the Devil in a whirlwind, G02 ; — Bessie, a
Witch, 606, &c. ; — Margaret, a Witch, ih.

Wind, blast of evil, I. 233 ; — Witch-charm for
raising. III. 607.

Windows, glazed Church, destroyed, I. * 353.
S e Reformation.

W^ine, Rhenish, presented to K. Ja. V., I. * 303 ;
— jirices of, at Justice-aires, * 64, * 389 ; —
purchasing high-priced, * 349,* 377, * 458.

Wine-cellar, King's, Yeomen of, I. * 313 ; grooms
of, ib. See Yeomen, &c.

Winrahame, Ro., Isla Herald, taken prisoner in
Orkney, his coat of arms torn, he, III. 278>
283, 317.

Wintercleuche, Hereschip of, I. * 398.

WiNTOUNE, Earl of, Geo., III. 316 ; — Master
of, Conflict at St Johnstoun with E. of Glencairn, III. 579 ; — of Strichtmartyne, Tho., I.

* 177.

' W^irreit at ane stake,' Witches strangled before
being burnt, 186, &c.

Wischart of that Ilk, James, I. * 404 ; — of Mwretoun, And., ' Forceing and Defloiring' a girl
of 11 years old. III. 507; — of Pittarrow,
Mr Ja., Gift to his widow and children, I.

* 235, * 496, 178 ; Jo., 284 ; Sir Jo., II. 363 ;
young Laird and his friends fight young Edjell
at the Siilt tron of Edr., III. 61.

Wissillit, exchanged, III. 92.

Witchcraft, to be enquired into at Justice-aires, I.
* 66 ; Agnes Mullikine, alias Bessie Boswell,
banished, * 432 ; Jonet Boyman, burnt, 38 ;
remarkable case of Bessie Dunlop, 49 ; burnt,
58 ; using and seeking Enchantments, &c.,
70 ; Violet Mar, 76 ; Wra., Gilmour, 101 ;
Alesoun Peirsoun, 161 ; Jo. Myllar, 167 ;
Lady Fowlis, 185, 191, &c. ; Mr Hector
Munro of Fowles, 201 ; Meg Dow, burnt,
186 ; Jonet Grant and Jonet Clark, burnt,
206; Bessie Roy, acquitted, 207; William
Leslie of Crechie, and his wife, 209 ; John
Feane, alias Cuninghame, ' Secretar to the
Devill,' &c., burnt, 209 ; Agnes Sampsoune,
230; Barbara Napier, 242; Ewfame MacAl5eane,247; Fra.E. of Both well, 258; forfeited, 259; Nin. Chirneside, his servant, 259;
Commission for examining Witches, &c., 261 ;
Kath. INIuirhead, burnt, 359 ; Jo., Master of
Orkney, 373; Alison Balfour, her husband,
son and daughter suffer unheard of tortures,
375, 376 ; Alison Jollie, 397, acquitted, 399 ;
Christian Stewart, burnt, 399 ; Capt. Pat.
Hering, II. 23 ; Jonet Stewart and three
others ' wirreit' and 'brunt in assis,' 25 ; Bessie
Aikin, banished for life, 52 ; Pat. Lowrie,
'wirreit' and 'lirunt,' 477; Issobel Greirsoune,
523 ; ' wirreit' and ' brunt in assis,' 526 ;
Bartie Paterson, do., 535 ; Issobell Haldane's
Depositions, 537 ; Beigis Tod, ' wirreit' and
' brunt,' 542 ; Ja. Mure, IIL 68 ; Grissell
Gairdner, ' wirreit' and ' brunt,' 95 ; Marioun
Peebles, alias Pardoun, burnt, 194; corpses
of ^.lurdered persons bleed on her touch, ib. ;
Christian Wilson, alias the Lanthorne, ib. ; a
corpse bleeds on her touch, 195 ; and Poisoning, &c. ; Ro. Erskine, beheaded, 260 ; his
sisters Issobell and Annas, beheaded, 267 ;
Helen, banished, ib. ; Margt. Wallace, (a remarkable case, with pleadings,) 508 ; proof allowed, 505 ; ' wirreit,' and ' brunt,' 536 ;
Christian Grahame, 509, &c. ; Tho. Greave,
burnt, 555 ; Remarkable Examinations of
persons accused, 596 ; barbarous treatment of
Witches at their execution at Brouirhton,
598 ; pricking and finding Devil's mark, 599 ;
Confession of Manie Haliburtoun, ib. ; Geillis

GENERAL INDEX.

745

Johnstone, III. 600 ; Confessions of Jonet Watsone, &c., GOl ; remarkable Confessions of
Issobel Gowdie, 602, and of Janet Breadheid,
616 ; — pleading (quilms medijs, modis, et mails
artibus,^ as to how it was accomplished, III.
512, &c.
Witches consulted by ladies of rank, I. 54, 55 ;
by the Arclib. of St An(h-ews, 164 ; \)ay tei/nd
to the Uevi), ih. ; ' wirreit' (strangled at a
stake,) and burnt to death, 186, &c. See
Witchcraft ; Great Sabbath, or Convocation
at Northberwick Kirk, 212, 217, 239, 245;
they ' junt' dead bodies, for making Witchcharms, 218, 233, 237, 239 ; initiation of
Witches, 234, Szc. ; carouse with the Devil in
a ship and then destroy it, 235 ; baptize a cat,
218 ; a singularly curious charm, 237 ; restoring bewitched horses and cattle, 238 ; form
of homage done to the Devil, 210, 217, 239;
III. 609, &c. ; — Witch in a state of pregnancy
respited, 243 ; — Convention at Aitchison'a
haven, 245 ; — Commission for examining,
261 ; — Master of Oikney consults Witches
for the death of the Earl, 373; — burnt quick,
(alive,) who in their despair blasphemed and
renounced their baptism, iS:c., II 1. 598 ; — pricking to find Devil's mark, 599, 602. See Witchcraft, &c. ; — their Covens consisted of 13 each,
603 ; — symbolical mode of taking the fruits of
the ground, dairy, &c., ?7». and note, 614, &c. ;
— their dances, 603 ; — their revels and feasting, 604, &c.; — they set ' beesomes,' (brooms,)
in bed with their husbands in their place, ib.,

608 ; or ' thrie leggit stooles,' ih. ; — clay
figures to take away life, 605 ; — took forms
of ' keas,' hares, cats, &c., ib. ; — grand Meetings, 606, 613 ; — remarkable nicknames of
Witches, ib. ; — how they shot with elf-arrowa,

609 ; — form of homage to the Devil, ib., et seq.
Witches-bridle, a collar for extorting confession,

1.50; modes of torturing, 217.
W^itch-dances, III. 603; — Gillatrypes, (a dance,)

606, &c. See also Witch trials, passim.
Witch-grace to the Devil, before meat, III. 612;

— after meat, ib.
Witch-prayer, charm, or conjuration, for healing

diseases, kc, I. 234, 237, III. 95.

Witness, famous, what. III. 73.

Wellnesses, Suborning, III. 352 ; several persons
belieaded, hanged, scourged, and branded,
354 ; proof in exculpation of slaughter, by,
refused, III. 467 ; And. Turnbull, and two
others, hanged, 539 ; Da. TurnbuU's tongue
pierced with ' ane hett boitkyn,' ib.

W^ooderspvne of Brighous, Ja., found Caution, I.

* 487. 27 ; Umbesetting, &c., 58.

W^ode, ( Woid, Wood,) Mr Alex. Vicar of Northberwick, Invasion, &c., I. * 347 ; — of Balbegnocht, Walt., I. 28, II. 73, 128, 454 ;— of
Bonyngton, Ja., I. * 343, * 347, * 433; Ja.,
yr., ' fear' of, tried for breaking into Bonyngtoun, and stealing title-deeds, II. 340; is
hanged, 347 ; Pat., 340 ; — of Colpna, Jo., slain,
I. * 469; Alex., 382 ;— of Craig,. Dav., I.

* 347, 371 ; Sir Dav., striking Ministers, and
Obstructing the designation of a Manse and
glebe, kc, II. 360; acquitted, 363; Ilf.
134 ; — of Galestoun, Jo., I. * 451 ; — of Lammielcthan, Alex., II. 397 ; — of Latoune, (or
Banblane,) W^m., II. 63, Slays Unicorn Pursuivant, 72 ; tried for breaking into Bonyngtoun, stealing title-deeds, 8tc., 340; condemned
to be hanged, 347 ; is remitted, ib., note ; —
of Largo, Sir Andro, I, * 121 ; remission to,

* 250 ; he redeems lands for the King, * 322,

* 424;— of Stonyside, Jo., I. * 437 ;— of
W^odstoune, Arch., I. 29.

Wolves, mention made of, I. * 116.

Woodbine, used in Witches' charms, II. 26, 27,
28; Woman,burntonared-liot 'girdill.' 11.301.

Woman-house, III. 540.

Women, capital punishment, by drowning and
burning, I. * 162, * 190, &c. (See Burning
Drowning, Females, dc ;) — pregnant. Murder
of, I. * 344 ; striking, * 412, &c. See Pregnant, hurting, * 421 ; — married, liability t(t
punishment for crimes, argued, I. 42, c^c.

Woods, (le>lroying, I. * 71.

Wool, stealing, from live sheep, I. * 206.

Woolmot,- Raid of, II. 21; Laird of, slain, h2 .
' Gudeman' of, slain, 339. See Edmonstoune.

Work", King's, M;ister of, I. * 315.

Wormestdun, Laird ol, III. 245; his lands, &c. in
Lewis, burnt and wasted, ib.

746

GENERAL INDEX.

Worsome, bluid and, what, 11. 478 ; III. 95.

Worsted, clews of, used in Witchcraft, I. 253.

Woulf of Wadelie, Jo., I. 155.

Wounding in the King's Chamber, I. * 85.

Wounding, I. * 159 ; Judicial Arbitration, * 167 ;
—Countess of Craufurd, * 180, * 181, * 201;
Mr Gawin Dunbar, * 328, * 401 ; a Bailie of
Leith, * 403, * 410, * 412; an Officer,
* 437; in Perth, * 451; females, * 454;
Auchincraw, 381 ; Frenche, III. 69, 72.

Woux, a watch, I. 386.

Wraw, Witch's cries, while in the shape of cats ,
III. 611. See also W^itchcraft.

Wright, (carpenter,) King's master, I. * 314.

Writer, of the Casualties, King's, I. * 315 ; hanged for falsifying a Charter, II. 104.

Writing Pasquils against the King, F. Tennent,
hanged, II. * 332.

Wylie of Bonytone, Jo., I. *81, Tho., *87, * 470.

Wynd, Henry, beheaded, ' ex gratia,' I. * 393.

Wyndis, Alex., of that Ilk, I. * 37.

Wyot, Henry, Englishman, I. * 3, 6.

Y.

Yam, hesp of, Witch-charm with, &c., III. 556,
605.

Ycolmkill, Jo., Comraendator of, I. * 105.

Yeai-, fiist day of, regulated, II. 102.

Yeomen of the King's Ale-cellar, Avery, Breadhouse, Great Lardner, Petty Lardner, Spicehouse, Stable, Wardrobe, and Wine-cellar, I.
* 313, &c.

Yester, Jo., Lord Hay of, I. * 149, * 265 ;
his Assise, * 274, * 324.

York, Duke of. See Perkin Warbeck ; —
Council of, I. * 295, * 323, * 324.

Young, Gilb., Incest, 42 ; Ja., hanged for Perjury, &c., III. 539 ; Jo., Warlock, Officer to

a Witch-coven, 614, &c. ; — Nicoll, slain, I.
* 442 ; Magistrates of Edr. tried for setting the
Murderer to liberty, ib. to * 450 ; Protestation
against the Verdict, * 449, * 452 ; — Oliver,
bailie of Perth, II. 187 ; his Dep. as to Gowrie's Consp., 188 ; — Sir Peter, King's Almoner, II. 544.

Youth, slaughter committed by a boy of eight
years old, I. * 16 ; by a lad 14 years old. III.
237 ; sentenced to be beheaded, 241 ; banished for life, ib., note.

Yule of Garmiltoune, Jo., I. 27 ; — Ja., banished
for Intercommuning with the English, I. * 406.
See Treason, Intercommuning, &c.

z.

Zetland, Inhabitants of, barbarously oppressed by 3ule, And., scourged and banished for Theft, III.

the Earl of Orkney, III. 81. 270 ;— Christmas, III. 389, he, passim.

5ow, an ewe. III. 396, &c. See under Letter Y, for all similar words.

THE END.
