The Comedies of Plautus, Vol. I (Riley) (Plautus, 1852)
==========================================================
Volume I of Henry Thomas Riley's complete Bohn prose translation (1852): Trinummus, Miles Gloriosus, Bacchides, Stichus, Pseudolus, Menaechmi, Aulularia, Captivi, Asinaria, Curculio. Together with Vol. II this completes the surviving Plautus corpus in Riley's translation, superseding the two-play Riley selection already in the library. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/comediesplautus03plaugoog).

COMEDIES 


PLAUTUS 


LITERALLY  TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  PROSE, 
WITH  NOTES, 


HENRY  THOMAS  RILEY,  B.A., 

LATE  SCHOLAR  OF  CLARE  HALL,  CAMBRIDGE. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 


TBIKUimUS,   MILEfl  GL0BI08US,  BACCHIDES,  8TICHUS,  PSEUDOLUS, 
MSNfOHMI,  AULULABIA,  GAPTITI,  A8IMARIA, 

AND  CURCULIO.  --*  _ 

,•    -;      ■<  .  -  .     .   • 

LONDON:      ^  ' 

HENRY  6.  BOHN,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 

KDCCCUI- 


y  Google 


y  Google 


PREFACE. 


The  following  pages  contain  a  Hteral  translation  of  all  the 
existing  works  of  Marcus  Accius  Plautus  (or,  as  he  is  called 
by  Eitschel  and  Eleckeisen,  T.  Maccius  Plautus),  the  Eoman 
CkoBoic  writer.  It  is  believed  that  this  version  will  be  found 
strictly  faithful,,  and  to  convey  to  the  English  reader  much  of 
that  spirit  which  rendered  the  Dramas  of  this  rugged  but 
interesting  author  such  especial  favourites  with  a  Eoman 
audience. 

Tlie  text  of  Eitschel  has  been  adopted  in  the  six  plays  to 
which  his  invaluable  labours  have  as  yet  extended* — the 
TrLoummus,  Miles  Gloriosus,  Bacchides,  Stichus,  Fisendoitis, 
and  MenaBchmi.  Hildyard's  Edition  has  been  used  in  the 
Aulularia,  with  the  exception  of  the  Supplement  by  Codrus 
Urceus,  which  has  been  translated  fcom  Eichter's  Edition. 
The  text  of  Lindemann  has  been  adopted  in  the  Captivi ; 
in  the  Asinaria,  that  of  Eichter ;  and  in  the  Curculio,  that 
of  Fleckeisen. 

Some  account  of  the  Translations  of  Plautus  which  have 

previously  appeared  in  the  English  language'  will  be  prefixed 

to  the  Second  Volume. 

H.T.E. 


y  Google 


CONTENTS. 


TUNUHIIUB  ;   THB  ThREB  PiEOES  OF  MoiHST  ....        1 

Miles  Globiosus  ;  the  Braooabt  Captain 67 

Bacchides  ;  or,  the  Twin-Sistbbs              .                .        .        .  145 
SncHUS  ;  OR,  THE  Pabasite  Bbbufvbd 211 

PSEUDOLUS  ;   OB,  THE  ChEAT  ^  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   253 

Mbnjbchmi  ;  ob,  the  Twin*Bbother8 317 

AULULABIA  ;  OB,  THE  CONCEALED  TbBASUBE  ....  373 

Caftiti  ;  THE  Captives 423 

ASINABIA  ;  OR,  THE  AbS-DeALEB 477 

CUBCULIO  ;   OB,  THE  FOBGEBY 525 


y  Google 


TMUMMUS; 
THE  THREE  PIECES  OF  MONEY. 


LVKVKT, 
POVERTT. 


IN  THE  PROLOGUE. 


IN  THE  PLAY. 

Chabmides,  an  Athenian  merchant. 

LESBOsncus,  the  son  of  Charmides. 

Calucles,  a  friend  of  Charmides. 

Heoabohides,  a  fnend  of  Callicles. 

Stasdcus,  the  servant  of  Charmides  and  Lesbonicns. 

Philto,  a  wealth j  Athenian* 

Lthiteles,  the  son  of  Philto,  and  a  friend  of  Lesbonicns. 

A  Sharpeb. 

Scene.^A  Street  in  Athens:  the  honse  of  Charmides  on  one  side,  and  that  of 
Philto  on  the  other. 


y  Google 


THE  SUBJECT. 


Gharmides,  a  wealthy  Atheman,  Ma  pn>pet>iy  having  been  much  diminished 
by  the  reckless  conduct  of  his  son,  goes  abroad.  His  dissolute  son,  Lesbonicus, 
being  left  behind  at  Athens,  consumes  the  little  resources  left  him,  and  then 
puts  up  Ms  &ther*s  house  for  sale.  At  ihis  departure,  Gharmides  has  entrusted 
his  interests  and  the  care  of  his  son  and  daughter  to  his  friend  Callicles,  and 
has  also  informed  him  that  in  his  house  there  is  a  treasure  buried  as  a  re- 
serve against  future  contingencies.  In  order  that  this  may  not  be  lost, 
Callicles  buys  the  house  of  Lesbonicus  for  a  small  sum.  Ignorant  of  his 
reason  for  doing  so,  his  fellow-citizens  censure  him  for  his  conduct,  and 
accuse  him  of  a  breach  of  good  faith  in  ministering  to  the  extravagance  of 
Lesbonicus  by  supplying  him  with  money.  For  this  reason  Megaronides  ex- 
postulates with  his  friend  Callicles,  and  greatly  censures  him;  on  which, 
Callicles,  in  self-defence,  entrusts  him  with  the  secret  of  the  treasure.  Char- 
mides  having  left  behind  him  a  grown-up  daughter  in  the  care  of  Callicles, 
Lysiteles,  a  young  man  of  rank  and  character,  falls  in  love  with  her,  and 
through  his  father,  Philto,  asks  her  in  marriage.  Her  brother,  Lesbonicus,  is 
not  averse  to  the  match,  but  refuses  to  let  her  marry  without  giving  her  a 
portion;  and  he  offers  her  to  Lysiteles,  on  condition  that  he  will  receive  as 
her  marriage-portion  a  piece  of  land  near  the  dty,  the  sole  remnant  of  his  for- 
tune. This,  however,  Lysiteles  refuses  to  accept,  in  the  mean  time,  Callicles,  at 
the  suggestion  of  Megaronides,  determines  to  give  the  young  woman  a  dowry 
out  of  the  treasure  buried  in  the  house  which  he  bas  bought ;  but  that  Les- 
bonicus may  not  suBpect  whence  the  money  reaBy  comes,  a  Shaqper  is  hired, 
with  instructions  to  pretend  that  he  brings  letters  fsim.  CharmideB  with  a 
thousand  gold  pieces  as  a  portion  for  his  daughter  when  she  should  marry. 
It  happens,  that  while  the  Sharper  is  on  his  way  with  his  pretended  errand  to 
the  abode  of  Callicles,  Charmides,  having  unexpectedly  returned  to  Athens, 
is  going  towards  his  house.  He  meets  the  Sharper,  who  discloses  his  errand 
and  attempts  to  impose  upon  Charmides,  iHio  Hhereupon  discovers  bimself. 
Charmides  then  meets  his  servant  Stasinras,  who  tells  him  of  the  purchase 
of  his  house  by  Callicles,  whereon  he  conceives  himself  to  have  been  betrayed 
by  his  friend.  Afterwards,  on  discovering  the  truth,  he  praises  the  fidelity 
of  Callicles,  and  bestows  his  daughter  on  Lysiteles,  with  a  portion  of  a 
thousand  gold  pieces ;  and,  at  the  intercession  of  Lysiteles,  he  forgives  his  son 
Lesbonicus,  and  informs  him  that  he  is  to  be  married  to  the  daughter  of  Cal- 
licles. 


y  Google 


TBINUMMTJS;         VW"-<^^^ 
THE  THREE  PIECES  OF  MONET. 


THE  ACROSTIC  ABGUMENT- 
[Supposed  to  haiFe  been  wiitten  bj  Pusdan  the  Grammarian.] 
C2ABMii>E8,  going  abroad,  entmsts  a  treasure  (^TAeaaurum)  secretly  bidden, 
and  aU  bis  property  (/2em),  to  his  fiiend  Callicles.  He  (Jstoc)  being  absent, 
his  son  wantonly  squanders  his  estate.  For  (iVom)  he  sells  even  the  house : 
and  Callicles  makes  purchase  of  it.  His  sister,  a  maiden  (^Virgo)  without  a 
dowry,  is  asked  tf»  marriage.  That  in  a  less  degree  {Minus),  with  censure, 
dallicles  may  bestow  on  her  a  dowry,  he  commissions  one  {Mandat)  to  say 
that  he  has  brought  the  gold  from  her  father.  When  ^  Ut)  the  ComUerfeit  has 
reached  the  house,  the  old  man  {Senex),  Charmides,  as  he  has  Just  returned, 
disappoints  him ;  his  children  then  are  married. 


THE  PEOLOGUEi. 
JEnter  Ltjxtjbt  cmd  Poveett. 
Lux.  Follow  me  iMa  way,  daughter,  that  you  may  per- 
form your  offiee. 

Pot.  I  am  fdHowing,  but  I  know  not  what  to  say  will 
be  the  end  ef  otur  jotume^. 

Lux.  'Tis  hare.     See,  tiads  k  the  bouse.    Kow  go  you  in. 

(Ua:ii  Potxbtt,  who  eaters  the  house  of  CMASMiBEfA. 
Lux.  (to  the  Aubiewce).  Now,  that  no  one  of  you  may 
be  mistaken,  in  a  few  word*  I  will  conduct  you  into  the  right 
path,  ifi  indeed,  yon  promise  to  listen  to  me.  First,  then,  I 
will  now  tell  you  who  I  aia,  and  who  she  is  who  has  gone  in 
here  (poiaitvng  to  the  hotise),  if  you  give  your  attention.     Li 

1  The  Prologue)  This  Prologue  is  one  of  the  few  figuratiye  ones  to  be  found  in 
the  Comedies  cf  Plautus.  He  appropriately  rqiresents  Luxury  as  introducmg 
her  daughter  Poverty  to  Ihe  abode  of  the  disa^ted  Lesbonioss.  Claudian  has 
a  somewhat  similar  passage  in  his  jpoem  to  Bufinus: 

£t  Lnzus^  populator  opum,  cui,  semper  adhssrens, 
Infefiz  humlK  gressu  oomitatur  Egestas. 
-  And  Luxury,  the  waster  of  wealth,  whom,  ever  attending,  wretched  Poverty  ac- 
companies with  humble  step."    It  has  been  justly  observed,  that  Plautus  here 
avdds  a  fault  which  he  often  falls  into,  of  acquainting  the  audience  with  too 
amch  of  the  plot. 

b2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


4  TEIKUMMUS ;  Act  I. 

the  first  place,  Plautus  has  given  me  the  name  of  Luxury,  and 
then  he  has  willed  that  this  Poverty  should  be  my  daughter. 
But  why,  at  my  suggestion,  she  has  just  entered  here,  listen 
and  give  attentive  ear  while  I  inform  you.  There  is  a  certain 
young  man  who  is  living  in  this  house ;  by  my  assistance  he 
iias  squandered  away  his  paternal  estate.  Since  I  see  that 
there  is  nothing  left  for  him  to  support  me,  I  have  given  him 
my  daughter,  together  with  whom  to  pass  his  life.  But  ex- 
pect nothing  about  the  plot  of  this  play :  the  old  men  who 
will  come  hither  will  disclose  the  matter  to  you.  The  name 
of  this  play  in  the  Greek  is  "  The  Treasure"  [Thesaurus]  ; 
Philemon  wrote  it^ :  Plautus  translated  it  into  Latin^,  and 
gave  it  the  name  of  "  The  Three  Pieces  of  Money"  [Trinum- 
mus].  Now,  he  begs  this  of  you,  that  it  may  be  allowed  the 
play  to  keep  that  name.  Thus  much  have  I  to  say,  Fare- 
weU.    Attend  in  silence.  (Ikit, 

ACT  THE  PIEST. 
Scene  I. 
Unter  Megabonides, 
Meg.  To  reprove  one's  friend  for  a  fault  that  de- 
serves it,  is  a  thankless  task ;  but  sometimes  'tis  useful  and 
'tis  profitable.  Therefore,  this  day  will  I  soundly  reprove 
my  mend  for  a  fault  that  much  deserves  it.  Unwilling  am 
I,  did  not  my  friendship  bid  me  do  it.  Por  this  faultiness 
has  encroached  too  much  upon  good  morals,  so  drooping  now 
are  nearly  all  of  them.  But  while  they  are  in  this  distempered 
^tate,  bad  morals,  in  the  mean  time,  have  sprung  up  most 
plenteously,  like  well-watered  plants ;  nor  is  there  now  any- 
thing abundant  here  but  these  same  bad  morals.  Of  them 
you  may  now  reap  a  most  plenteous  harvest :  and  here  a  set 
of  men  are  making  the  favour  of  a  few  of  much  more  value 
than  that  in  which  they  may  benefit  the  many.  Thus  private 
interests  outdo  that  which  is  to  the puhUc  advantage — interests 
which  in  many  points  are  a  hindrance,  and  a  nuisance,  and 
cause  an  obstruction  both  to  private  and  to  public  welfare. 

1  Philemon  wrote  ay— Yer,  19,  Not  only  Phflemon,  but  Menander  also,  wrote 
a  play,  entitled  the  "  Treasure." 

2  In  Latmy-Yer,  19.  "  Barbare."  We  learn  from  Festus,  and  other  authors, 
that  the  Greeks  were  in  the  habit  of  calling  all  nations,  without  exception,  but 
themselves,  "barbarians."  Hence  the  present  expression,  which  literally  means 
"  into  barbarous  language." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  THE  THBSE  PIECES  OF  MOKET.  5 

SOEKE  II. 

Mnter  CaIiLICLES. 

Call,  {as  Jie  enters).  I  wish  our  household  Q-od^  to  be 
graced  with  a  chaplet.  Wife^  (addressing  her  withm),  pay 
lum  due  respect,  that  this  dwelliug  may  turn  out  for  us 
prosperous,  lucky,  happy,  and  fortunate;  and  (in  a  lower 
voice)  that,  as  soon  as  I  possibly  may,  I  may  see  you  dead 
and  gone. 

Mi&,  This  is  he  who  in  his  old  age  has  become  a  child* 
— ^vrho  has  been  guilty  of  a  fault  that  deserves  correction. 
I  will  accost  the  man. 

Call.  (looMng  around).  Whose  voice  is  it  that  sounds 
near  me  ? 

Meg.  Of  one  who  wishes  you  well,  if  you  are  as  I  desire 
you  to  be ;  but,  if  you  are  otherwise,  of  one  who  is  your 
enemy,  and  is  angry  with  you. 

Call.  Health  to  you,  O  my  friend  and  years'-mate !  How 
are  you,  Megaronides  ? 

MEa.  And,  i'  faith*,  health  to  you,  Callicles !  Are  you 
well  ?    Have  you  been  well  ? 

»  H<mehold  GW>--Ver.39.  Literally,  "Lar."  The  Lares  were  the  house- 
^Id  Gods,  or  tutelary  Deities  of  each  family.  The  figures  of  them  were  kept, 
among  the  Bomans,  near  the  hearth,  in  the  *^  Lararium,"  which  was  a  recess 
facmsA.  for  that  purpose,  and  in  which  prayers  were  offered  up  on  rising  in  the 
morning.  There  were  both  public  and  private  Lares.  The  latter  were  by  some 
thonght  to  have  been  identical  with  the  "  Manes,"  or  "  shades,-*  of  the  ancestors 
of  the  family  occupying  the  house.  The  public  Lares  were  the  "  Urbani,"  pre- 
siding over  the  cities;  "Rustici,"  over  the  country ;  "  Compitales,"  over  cross- 
roads; and  "  Marini,"  over  the  sea.  Varro  tells  us  that  there  were  265  stations 
^nr  the  statues  of  the  Lares  at  the  comer  of  the  streets  of  Borne.  *^  Lar"  was  an 
Etrurian  word,  signifying  "  noble,"  or  "  lord."  The  Greeks  adorned  their  house- 
hold Gods  ^th  the  leaves  of  the  plane-tree,  the  Bomans  with  ears  of  com.  This 
was  especially  done  on  entering  a  new  house,  on  which  the  wish  was  expressed 
that  it  might  turn  out  prosperous,  lucky,  happy,  and  fortunate  to  the  new  occu- 
pants. "  Quod  bonmn,  faustum,  feliz,  fortunatumque  sit."  Oallicles  here  ex- 
presses this  wish  on  taking  possession  of  the  house  which  he  has  just  bought  of 
Lesbonicus. 

*  IFi/e)— Ver.  40.  Being  at  the  door  of  his  house,  before  shutting  it,  he  calls 
to  his  wife  within.  His  kind  wish  as  to  the  duration  of  her  life  he  expresses  jnst 
as  he  shuts  the  door. 

>  E(u  become  a  ckUcTy-^Wer.  43.  He  means  to  say  that  he  has  become  a  boy, 
from  the  fact  of  his  being  in  need  of  correction. 

«  And  r/of^)— Vcr.  49.  "  Hercle,"  »  by  Heroules ;"  "  Ecastor,"  "  by  Castor ; 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


S  raxBnmcuB;  ActL 

Call.  I  am  well,  and  I  have  been  still  better. 

Meg.    And  how  does  your  wife  do  ?    How  is  she  ? 

Call.  Better  than  I  wiabu 

MxQc  'Tis  well,  i'  faith,  for  you,  that  she  is  alive  and 
well. 

Call.  Troth,  I  BeKeve  that  you  are  ^ad  if  I  have  any 
misfortune. 

Meg.  That  which  I  have,  I  wish  for  aQ  my  friends  as 
well. 

Call.  Harkye,  how  does  your  wife  do  ? 

Meg.  She  is  immortal ;  she  lives,  and  is  Kiely  to  live. 

Call.  I'  faith,  you  tell  me  good  news ;  and  I  pray  the 
Gk)ds  that,  surviving  you,  she  may  last  out  your  life. 

Meg.  By  my  troth !  if  indeed  she  were  only  married  to 
yourself,  I  could  wish  it  sincerely. 

Call,  Do  you  wish  that  we  should  exchange? — ^that  I 
should  take  yours,  and  vou  mine  ?  I'd  be  making  you  not 
to  get  a  bit  the  better  of  the  bargain  of  me* 

Meg.  Indeed,  I  fancy^  you  would  not  be  surprising  me 
unawares. 

Call.  Aye,  faith,  I  should  cause  you  not  to  be  knowing^ 
the  thing  you  were  about. 

Meg.  Keep  what  you've  got;  the  evil  that  we  know  is 
the  best.  But  if  I  were  now  to  take  one  that  I  know  not,  I 
should  not  know  what  to  do. 

Call.  In  good  sooth,,  just  as  one  lives^  a  l(mg  life,  one  lives 
a  happy  life. 

Meg.  But  give  your  attention  to  this,  and  hare  done  with 
your  joking,  for  I  am  come  hither  to  you  for  a  given  purpose. 

"Edepol,"  "by  PoUux,"  or  «  by  the  temple  of  PoUnx," and  "Pol,"  "by  Pollax,'' 
were  the  eyery-day  oaths  m  the  mouths  of  the  Somans,  and  were  used  for  th^ 
purpose  of  adding  weight  to  the  asseverations  of  the  i^>eaker.  A  literal  transla- 
tion  of  them  thnmghoat  this  work  would  hardly  be  in  acoordaaee  with  the 
euphony  required  by  the  English  ear.  They  are  thesefore  rendered  throughout 
by  such  ezpresnoBS  as  "  V  feith,"  "  troth,"  "  by  my  troth,.'*  &e. 

1  Indeed  I  fanoyy—Vet,  61.  "  Neqne,"  which  implies  a  negative,  seems  to  het 
more  in  accordance  with  the  sense  of  the  passage  than  the  affirmative  "nempe," 
which  is  the  reading  of  Bitschel ;  it  has  therefore  been  adopted. 

*  Not  to  he  hnovSing)—YvT.  62.  That  is,  "the  risk  yon  would  mnin  taking  \et 
for  your  wife." 

*  Jnst  as  one  lweB)—Yer.  65.  The  meaning  of  this  passage  teems  to  be  somewhat 
obscure,  and  many  of  the  Editions  grrs  this  line  to  Megaraiides.    It  is  probabtey 


y  Google 


Se.  IL  THE  THBII  PIBCICS  QX  MONBT.  7 

CjiXX.  Wky  hare  you  come  ? 

Msa.  That  I  may  rebuke  you  soundly  with  many  hsrsh 
words.    Calx.  Me,  do  ^ou  say  ? 

Mb&.  Is  there  any  one  else  here  besides  you  and  me  ? 

CAii£.  Q&ekma  dbomi).  There  i»  no  oite. 

Me©.  Why,  then,  do  you  ask  if  'tis  you  I  mecm  to  re- 
buke ?  Unless^  indeed,  you  think  that  I  am  about  to  reprove 
my  own  selfl  ior  if  your  former  prineiples  now  fUtg  in  you, 
or  if  the  manners  of  the  a^e  are  working  a  change  in  your 
disposition,  and  if  you  preserve  not  those  of  the  olden  timej 
but  are  catehing  up  these  new  ones,  you  will  strike  all  your 
Mends  with  a  malady  s&  direful,  that  they  will  turn  sick  at 
seeing  and  hearing  you. 

Call.  How  comes  it  into  your  mind  to.  utter  these  ex- 
pressions ? 

*ME€t.  Because  it  beec^nes  aU  good  men  and  all  good 
women,  to  kive  a  care  to  keep  suspicion  and  gnilt  away  from 
themselves. 

Call.  Eotii  cazmot  be  done.    Mx&.  Why  so  ? 

Call.  Do  you  ask  ?  I  am  the  keeper  of  my  own  heart, 
so  as  not  to  admit  guilt  there  ;  siiKspicion  is  centred  in  the 
heart  of  another.  For  if  now  I  should  suspect  that  you 
had  stolen  the  crown  from  the  head  of  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol^ 
the  Htdueyjhii^  stands  on  the  highest  summit  of  the  temple; 
if  you  had  not  done  so,  and  still  it  should  please  me  to  sus- 
pect yoo,  how  could  you  prevent  me  from  suspecting  you  ? 
^it  I  am  amdous  to  know  what  this  matter  is. 

howerer,  that  Cafficles  intends,  as  a  consolation  for  them  botfa,  to  say  that  life 
itself  16  a  blessing,  and  that  they  onght  not  by  tumecessary  anxieties  to  shorten 
%  Imt  nther  to  sik)imt  with  patience  to  their  domestic  grievaneeSk 

1  J«  <fte  CapUoD-^vr,  d4.  Flantns  does  not  much  care  about  anachronism  or 
dxamatu  precision;  though  the  plot  of  the  play  is  derived  from  the  Greek,  and 
the  scene  laid  at  Athens,  he  makes  frequent  reference  to  Boman  localities  and 
nuuaers.  It  ifr  probable  that  the  expression  here  empbyed  was  proverbial  at 
Bomor  to  nffnSj  a  deed  of  daring  and  nnscnipalons  diaraeter.  From  ancient 
irriten  we  learn  that  there  was  a  statue  of  Jupiter  seated  in  a  chariot,  placed  on 
the  roof  of  the  Capitoline  Temple.  Tarquinius  Prisons  employed  Etrurian  artists 
to  make  a  statue  of  pottery  for  this  purpose;  and  the  original  chariot,  with  its 
four  horses,  wa»  made  of  baked  clay.  In  later  and  more  opulent  times,  the  crown 
placed  on  the  statue  was  of  great  value,  so  much  so  as  to  act  as  a  temptation 
to  oae  Petihits,  yrbm  attempted  to  steal  it,  and  being  caught  in  the  &ct,  was  after- 
wards nicknamed  '^  Capttolinus."  Mention  is  again  made  of  this  statue  in.  the 
Menaechmi,  act  v.,  sc.  6, 1.  38. 


y  Google 


8  TBIKUMMUS ;  Act  L 

Meg.  Have  you  any  friend  or  intimate  acquaintance 
whose  judgment  is  correct  ? 

Call.  Troth,  I'll  tell  you  without  reserve.  There  are 
some  whom  I  faiow  to  be  mends ;  there  are  some  whom  I 
suspect  to  he  so,  but  whose  dispositions  and  feelings  I  am 
unable  to  discover,  whether  they  incline  to  the  side  of  a 
friend  or  an  enemv ;  but  of  my  assured  friends,  you  are  the 
most  assured.  If  vou  know  that  I  have  done  anything  un- 
wittingly or  wrongmlly,  cmd  if  you  do  not  accuse  me  of  it, 
then  you  yourself  will  be  to  blame. 

Meg.  I  know  it;  and  if  I  had  come  hither  to  you  for 
any  other  purpose,  you  request  what  is  right. 

Call.  K  you  have  anything  to  say,  I  am  waiting  for  it. 

Meg.  Then,  first  of  aU,  you  are  badly  spoken  of  in  general 
conversation  by  the  public.  Tour  fellow-citizens  are  call; 
ing  you  greedy  of  grovelling  gain^ ;  and  then,  ogam,  thete 
are  others  who  nickname  you  a  vulture^,  (md  say  that  you 
care  but  little  whether  you  devour  enemies  or  fellow-citizens. 
Since  I  have  heard  these  things  said  against  you,  I  have,  to 
my  misery,  been  sadly  agitated. 

Call.  It  is,  and  it  is  not,  in  my  power,  Megaronides :  as 
to  their  saying  this,  that  is  not  in  my  power ;  as  to  their 
saying  this  deservedly,  that  is  m  my  power, 

Meg.  "Was  this  Charmides  a  frigid  of  yours  ?  (Se  points 
to  the  house  <?/'Chaemxdes.) 

Call.  He  both  is  and  he  was.  That  you  may  believe  it 
to  be  so,  I  will  tell  you  a  circumstance  as  a  proof.  Tor 
after  this  son  of  his  had  squandered  away  his  n)rtune,  and 
he  saw  himself  being  reduced  to  poverty,  and  that  his  daugh- 
ter was  grown  up  a  young  woman,  and  that  she  who  was 
both  her  mother  and  his  own  wife  was  dead ;  as  he  himself 
was  about  to  go  hence  to  Seleucia^,  he  committed  to  my 

'  Chreedy  of  groveUing  gain) — ^Ver.  100.  Plautus  makes  this  into  one  word, 
**  tnrpilucricupidum."  Probably  it  was  used  as  a  nickname  for  avaricious  per- 
sons. It  is  here  attempted  to  be  expressed  by  an  alliteration.  Thornton  renders 
it "  GripealL" 

2  A  vtt&ure}— Ver.  101.  Both  on  account  of  the  sor^d  and  greedy  habits  of  that 
bird,  and  because,  as  is  stated  in  the  next  line,  it  cares  not  which  side  supplies  its 
maw  when  it  follows  the  course  of  contending  armies. 

»  flencc  to  <SefeMcia)—Ver.  112.  There  were  several  cities  of  this  name.  The  one 
in  Syria,  a  maritime  city  on  the  Orontes,  near  Antiocb,  is  probably  here  re- 
ferred to. 


y  Google 


L 


8c.  n.  THE  THBSX  FBOSB  07  MOKBT.  9 

cliarge  the  maiden  bis  daughter,  and  all  his  property,  and 
that  profligate  son.  These,  I  think,  he  wonla  not  have  en«* 
trusted  to  me  if  he  had  been  unfriendly  to  me. 

Msa.  TlVTiat  say  you  as  to  the  young  man,  who  you  see  to 
be  thus  profligate,  and  who  has  been  entrusted  to  your  care 
and  confidence  ?  Why  do  you  not  reform*  him  ?  Why  do 
you  not  train  him  to  frugal  habits?  It  would  have  been 
somewhat  more  just  for  you  to  give  attention  to  that  matter, 
if  you  could  have  somehow  made  him  a  better  man,  and  not 
for  you  yourself  to  be  a  party  to  the  same  disreputable  con- 
duet,  and  share  your  dishonour  with  his  disgrace  P 

Call.  What  have  I  done  ? 

Meo.  That  which  a  bad  man  would  do. 

Gall.  That  is  no  name  of  mine. 

Meo.  Have  you  not  bought  this  house  from  that  young 
man  ?  (Apause.)  Why  are  you  silent  ?  This,  where  you 
yourself  are  now  living.     (Se  points  to  the  house  ofCKAn- 

MIDES.) 

Call.  I  did  buy  it,  and  I  gave  the  money  for  it, — ^forty 
minsB^,  to  the  young  man  himself,  into  his  own  hand. 

Msa.  You  gave  the  money,  do  you  say  ? 

Call.  'Twas  done ;  and  I  am  not  sorry  'twas  done. 

Meg.  I'  faith — a  young  man  committed  to  untrusty  keep- 
ing. Have  you  not  by  these  means  given  him  a  sword  with 
wmch  to  slay  himself  r  Eor,  prithee,  what  else  is  it,  your 
giving  ready  money  to  a  young  man  who  loves  women,  and 
weak  in  intellect,  with  which  to  complete  his  edifice  of  folly 
Trtuch  he  had  already  commenced  ? 

Call.  Ought  I  nob  to  have  paid  him  the  money  ? 

Meg.  Tou  ought  not  to  have  paid  him ;  nor  ought  you 
either  to  have  bought  anything  of  or  sold  anything  to  him ; 
nor  should  you  have  provided  him  with  the  means  of  be- 
coming worse.  Have  you  not  taken  in  the  person  wh&  was 
entrusted  to  you  ?  Have  you  not  driven  out  of  his  house 
the  man  who  entrusted  him  to  you  ?    By  my  faith,  a  pretty 

'  For«y  mtBO!)— Vcr.  126.  Unless  he  adds  the  adjective  "aurea,"  "golden,^ 
Pkatns  alwajs  means  silver  **  minse.^*  The  "  mica"  was  the  sixtieth  part  of  the 
Attic  talent,  and  contained  one  hundred  "  drachme,"  of  about  nmepence  three- 
brthings  each. 


y  Google 


10  SBXsineinni  f  Aet  I. 

tmsty  and  a  &i&&il  guardiaa^dp  t    Leave  him  to  take  care 
of  himaelf ;  ke  WGvId  maoage  his  awn  affairs  wmck  better. 

Call.  Tou  overpoww  me,  Megaranide&,  with  your  aeea- 
sations,  ia  a  manner  so  strange,  that  what  waa  prwately  en- 
trusted to  my  secreey,.  fiddlitj,  and  eonstaney,.  wr  me  to  tell 
it  to  no  one,,  nor  make  it  piblk^  the  saoaie  I  am  now  com^ 
palled  to  entrust  to  you. 

Meg.  Whatever  you  shall  entrust  to  me,  you  shall  take 
np  the  same  where  you  have  laid  it  down* 

Gall,  Look  round  you,  then,  that  no  overlooker  may  be 
near  us  (ME&ASOBnDBS  loc^  on  every  side} ;  and  look  around 
every  now  and  then,  I  beg  of  you. 

Meg.  I  am  listening  i£  you  hare  aught  to  say.. 

Call.  If  you  will  be  silent,  I  will  speak.  At  the  time 
when  Ckacnodes  set  out  hence  for  foreign  parts,  he  showed 

me  a  treasure  in  this  house,  here  in  »  certain  closet (Se 

starts  as  if  he  hears  a  noise,}     But  do  look  around. 

Meg.  There  is  no  one. 

Call-  Of  Philippean  pieces^  to  the  number  of  three  thou- 
sand. Alone  with  myself,  in  teaars,  ha  entr^ted  me,  by  our 
friendship  and  by  my  honour,  ncrt  to  euttrust  this  to  his  son, 
nor  yet  to  any  one,  isxask  whc»n  that  might  come  to  his 
knowledge.  ISow^  if  he  conies  back  hiither  safe,  I  wiU  restore 
to  him  his  own.  But  if  anything  should  happen  to  him,  at 
all  events  I  have  <r  st&ek  from  whicb  to  give  a  marriage- 
poa^ion  to  his  daughter,,  who  has  been  entrusted  to  me,  titait 
I  may  settle  her  in  a  condition  of  life  that  b^ts  her. 

Meo.  0  ye  immortal  gods!  how  eK>on,  in  a  few  words, 
you  have  made  another  man  of  me ;  I  came  to  you  quite 
a  different  person.  But,  as  you  have  begun,  proceed  fiirther 
to  inform  me. 

Call.  What  shaJl  I  tell  you?  How  that  this  worthless 
fellow  had  almost  utterly  ruined  his  caution  and  my  own 
trustiness  and  all  the^  secret. 

Meg..  How  so  P 

Call.  Because,  while  I  was  in  the  country  for  only  six 
days,  in  my  absence  and  without  my  knowledge,  without 

1  QfPhS&ppeoM  jMeees)— Ver.  152.  These  were  gold  coixiB  nmch  in  c]rciilfttio& 
throughout  Greece,  stmck  hy  Philip,  King  of  Macedon. 


y  Google 


Se.  n.  THE  THBBIS  PTBCSS  03P  HOKET.  11 

consulting  me,  he  advertised  with  bills^  this  home  for 
sale. 

Me  Or.  The  wolf  kmofered  the  more,  and  opened  his  mouth 
the  wider;  he  watched  till^  the  dog  went  to  sleep;  and 
intended  to  cany  off  the  whole  entire  flock. 

Gall.  I'  fidth,  h^  would  hare  done  it,  if  the  do^  had  not 
perceived  this  in  time.  But  now,  in  my  t«m,  I  wish  to  ask 
you  thia:  let  me  know  what  it  was  my  duty  for  m©  to  do. 
"Whether  was  it  right  for  me  to  discover  the  tFeasure  to  him, 
against  which  very  thvng  his  father  had  cauticmed  me,  or 
BhoQld  I  hare  permitted  another  person  to  hecome  the  owner 
of  this  house  ?  Ought  that  money  to  have  belonged  to  him 
who  bought  the  house  ?  In  preference,  I  myself  bought  the 
house ;  I  gaTe  the  money  for  the  sake  of  the  treasure,  that  1 
iBight  deliver  it  safe  to  my  frigid.  I  have  not,  then,  bought 
tins  hoose  ^her  foip  myself  or  for  my  own  use ;  for  Cha/r^ 
miieg  have  I  bought  it  iJack  again ;  from  my  own  store  have 
I  paid  the  money.  This,  whether  it  has  been  done  right- 
fi]%  or  wrongfully,  I  own,  Megaronides,  that  I  have  done. 
Here,  then,  axe  my  nisdeeda ;  here,  then,  is  my  avarice.  Is 
it  for  these  things  that  they  spread  false  reports  against  me  ? 

Meg.  Stay — you  have  overcome  your  corrector.  You  have 
tied  my  tongue;  there  is  nothing  for  me  to  say  in  answer. 

Gall.  Now  I  entreat  you  to  aid  me  with  your  assistance 
SBd  eounael,  and  to  share  this  duty  of  mine  in  common  with 
me. 

Ms&.  IjmroBuse  you  my  assistance. 

Gall»  Where,  then,  will  you  be  a  short  time  hence  ? 

Heo.  At  home. 

Call.  Do  yon  wish  anything  else  ? 

Meg.  Attend  to  the  trust  reposed  in  you. 

Call.  That  is  being  carefiilly  done. 

Meo.  But  liow  say  you 2 

^AdverHaei  mik  it2b}— Yer.  168.  The  method  among  the  Romans  of  letting, 
or  sdfing  hofases,  was  similAr  to  otirs.  A  bill  was  fixed  apon  the  house,  or 
Mme  coBspicQoas  place  near  it,  inscribed  with  *^  Mdes  locand»,"  **  This  house 
to  be  let,"  or  "^  iBctes  vendnndse,''  *^  This  house  for  sale." 

*  Be  wateked  <iS>— Ver.  170.  He  alludes  to  the  conduct  of  Lesbonicns,  who 
vitdedfor  tin  ahsettce  of  his  guardian,  Gallides,  that  he  might  sell  the  house. 
"Qus  he  woold  attempt  to  do,  probably,  on  the  plea  that  his  £Uiier,  not  having  been 
Wd  of  ibr  aki^  time,  must  be  presumed  to  be  dead,  and  the  house  has  con- 
Bequently  descended  to  ima,  as  hia  heir. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


12  TBuruMMUs ;  Act  I. 

Call.  What  do  you  want  ? 

Meg.  Where  is  the  young  man  living  now  ? 

Gall.  This  back  part^  of  the  buildmg  he  retained  when 
he  sold  the  house. 

Meg.  That  I  wanted  to  know.  Now,  then,  go  at  once. 
But  what  say  you,  where  is  the  damsel  now?  She  is  at 
your  house,  1  suppose  ? 

Call.  She  is  so ;  I  take  care  of  her  almost  as  much  as  of 
my  own  daughter, 

Meg.  You  act  properly. 

Call.  Before  I  go  away,  are  you  going  to  ask  me  any- 
thing else  ? 

Meg.  rarewell.  (Sxit  Calliolbs.)  Eeally,  there  is 
nothing  more  foolish  or  more  stupid,  nothing  more  lying  or 
indeed  more  tattling,  more  self-conceited  or  more  forsworn, 
than  those  men  of  this  city  everlastiogly  gossiping  about,  whom 
they  call  Busybodies^.  And  thus  have  I  enlisted  myself  in 
then*  ranks  together  with  them ;  who  have  been  the  swallower 
of  the  false  tales  of  those  who  pretend  that  they  know  every- 
thing, and  ifet  know  nothing.  They  know,  forsooth,  what  each 
person  either  has  in  his  mind,  or  is  likely  to  have ;  they  know 
what  the  king  whispered  in  the  ear  of  the  queen ;  they  know 
what  Juno  talked  about  in  conversation  with  Jupiter ;  that 
which  neither  is  nor  is  likely  to  be,  do  these  fellows  know. 
Whether  they  praise  or  dispraise  any  one  they  please,  falsely 
or  truly,  they  care  not  a  straw,  so  thejr  know  that  which  they 

*  The  hack  part)— Yer.  194.  "  Posticulum''  probably  means  detached  baildings 
at  the  back  of  the  house,  and  ^'ithin  the  garden  walls,  which  adjom  the  "  pOBti- 
cum"  or  ** posticula,"  the  "back  door'*  or  "  garden-gate." 

>  CaU  Bussfbodiesy-Yer,  202.  The  word  "Scnrra,"  which  is  here  rendered 
"  bnsybody,"  originaUv  meant  "  a  fellow-townsman,"  well  to  do  in  life,  and  a 
pleasant  companion.  In  time,  however,  the  word  came  to  have  a  bad  signification 
attached  to  it,  and  to  mean  an  idle  fellow,  who  did  nothing  bat  go  aboat  cracking 
his  jokes  at  the  expense  of  others,  gossiping,  and  mischief-making,  and  at  last  to 
signify  "  a  clown,"  "bnffoon,"  or  "mimic"  on  the  stage.  These  men  are  most 
probably  termed  here  "  assidoi,"  "  everhisting  gossipers,"  from  a  habit  which  many 
people  have  of  making  frequent  calls  on  their  neighbours,  sitting  down,  and  never 
thinking  of  taking  their  departore  till  they  have  exhausted  all  their  stock  of  evU- 
speaking,  lying,  and  slandering.  Gossiping  was  notoriously  the  propensity  of  the 
Athenians.  Numbers  did  nothing  but  saunter  about  the  city,  and  go  from  spot 
to  spot,  with  the  question  ri  kcuvov,  "Any  news?"  Few  will  ful  to  remem- 
ber  the  censure  of  them  in  the  Seventeenth  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
V.  21 :  "  For  all  the  Athenians  and  strangers  which  were  there  spent  their  time 
in  nothing  else,  but  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new  thing." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  THE  THBEE  PIECES  07  ICOKET.  18 

cboose  to  know.  AH  people  were  in  the  habit  of  saying  that 
this  Callicles  was  unworthy  of  this  state,  and,  himself,  to 
exist,  who  had  despoiled  this  young  man  of  his  property. 
Prom  the  reports  of  these  tale-bearers,  in  my  ignorance  I 
rushed  forward  to  rebuke  my  guiltless  friend.  But  if  the 
authority  was  always  required  from  the  foundation,  upon 
which  they  speak  of  anything  they  have  heard,  unless  that 
clearly  appeared,  the  matter  ought  to  be  to  the  peril  and 
loss  of  the  tale-bearer.  If  this  were  so,  it  would  be  for  the 
public  benefit.  I  would  cause  those  to  be  but  few,  who 
know  that  which  they  do  not  know^,  and  I  would  make  them 
have  their  siQy  chattering  more  restricted.  {Exit 


ACT   THE    SECOND. 

Scene  I. 

Unter  Ltsiteles. 
liTS.  I  am  revolving  many  things  in  my  mind  at  once, 
and  much  tuieasiness  do  I  mid  in  thinking  upon  them.  I 
tease,  and  fret,  and  wear  myself  out ;  a  mind  that  enjoins  a 
hard  task^  is  now  my  master.  But  this  thing  is  not  clear  to 
me,  nor  has  it  been  enough  studied  by  me,  which  pursuit  of 
these  two  I  should  rather  follow  for  myself;  which  of  the 
two  I  should  think  of  the  greater  stability  for  passing  my  life 
therein  :  whether  it  were  preferable  for  me  to  devote  myself 
to  love  or  to  aggrandisement ;  in  which  alternative  there  is 
more  enjoyment  of  life  in  passing  one's  days.  On  this  point 
I  am  not  fully  satisfied.  But  this  I  think  I'll  do,  that  I  may 
weigh  both  the  points  together,  I  must  be  both  judge  and 
culprit  in  this  tnal :  I'll  do  so — I  like  it  much.  First  of  all, 
I  will  enlarge  upon  the  pursuits  of  love,  how  they  conduce 
to  one^s  welfare.  Love  never  expects  any  but  the  willing  man 
to  throw  himself  in  his  toils ;  these  he  seeks  for,  these  he 
follows  up,  and  craftily  counsels  against  their  interests.  He 
is  a  fawning  fiatterer,  a  rapacious  grappler^,  a  deceiver,  a 

»  They  do  notibiow)— Ver.  221.  That  is,  "  who  only  pretend  to  know." 

>  That  enjoint  a  hard  to«jb>— Ver.  226.  **  Exercitor  *'  means  the  "  instrnctor" 
or  **  training  master"  in  the  Gymnastic  exercises.  Of  course,  to  beginners,  the 
**eziercitores"  would  be  hard  task-masters. 

>  A  rapaeiou8grappkr'y-Ytr.2B9»  "  Harpago"  means  either  a  "grappling- 
inm'^  or  a  ^' flesh-book."    It  was  often  made  in  the  form  of  a  hand,  with  the 


y  Google 


14  mftEBTiJiacTJfi;  Aid;  II. 

fiweet-tooth,  a  spoiler,  a  eorrapter  of  men  who  eouri;  reiare- 
jnent,  a  pryer  into  seereifca.  iFor  fee  tJbafc  ie  in  lore,  soon  as 
ev^  he  has  been  smitten  with  the  kisses  of  the  obi<eet  that 
he  loyes,  Dcrthwith  his  substance  vanishes  &a.t  of  doors  €md 
melts  away.  "  Give  me  this  thing^,  my  honey,  if  you  love  me, 
if  you  possibh/  can."  And  iiien  this  f^dge<Hi  says :  "  O  apple 
of  my  eye,  be  it  so:  both  t^at  fihall  be  j^vesi  you,  aaid  BtOl 
more,  if  you  wish  it  to  be  given."  Then  does  fihe  strike  while 
he  is  wavering^ ;  a»d  now  she  begs  for  mtore.  Not  enough 
is  this  evil,  unless  there  is  dall  something  more — ^what  to 
eat,  what  to  drink.  A  thing  that  ^reates^  ufitrther  expense, 
the  favour  of  a  night  is  granted;  a  whole  fcmly  is  then 
introduced  for  her — a  wardrobe-woman*,  a  perfume-keeper^, 
a  cofferer,  fen-bearers^,  sandal-bearers^,  singing-girls,  casket- 
fingers  bent  inwards.  The  grappling-iron  was  used  to  throw  at  the  enemy's  ship, 
where  it  seized  the  rigging  and  dragged  the  vessel  within  reach,  so  that  it  might  be 
easily  boarded  and  destroyed.  Cupid  is  so  eaUed  here,  figuratively,  fix)m  his  in- 
sidious approaches,  and  the  difiiculty  which  his  victims  have  in  shaking  him  off. 

^  Give  me  this  ihmg) — ^Ver.  244.  This  is  supposed  to  be  pronounced  in  a 
mincing  or  afiected  way,  to  imitate  the  wheedling  manners  of  the  frail  tempter. 

2  WhUe  he  is  wcBotring) — ^Ver.  247.  Literally,  **  she  strikes  him  as  he  hangs." 
Lindemann  jmcdus  to  think  that  there  is  a  play  upon  l^e  word  "pendentem," 
which  would  apply  either  to  the  slave,  -mho,  aixxurding  to  the  barbarous  custom  of 
the  Romans,  was  lashed  as  he  hung  from  the  hook  to  which  he  was  fiistened  by 
the  hands,  or  to  the  lover  who  is  hesitating  between  assent  and  refusal;  on 
which  she,  by  her  artfulness — "  ferit" — "  strikes  the  decisive  blow.**  Terence  has 
the  expression  "  ferior  munere,"  "  to  strike  with  a  present." 

3  A  ikinffihat  creates) — ^Ver.  250.  This  passage  is  here  read  with  a  period  after 
"  comest,"  and  not  after  "  sumpti,"  as  BHschel's  edition  !has  it.  This  ^eems  more 
agreeable  to  the  sense  of  the  passage,  wMdi  is,  however,  probably  in  a  corrupt 
state. 

*  Wardrdbe-wonumy-Yer.  252.  The  duty  of  the  "  vesfipHca"  would  be  to  fold 
up  and  try  the  clothes  of  her  mistress.  These  slaves  were  also  called  *''■  vestispicae,** 
and  servants  **  a  vestc." 

B  A  peijwner-leeepery^Yec.  252.  The  ^^imctor  "  was  probably  a  male  slave, 
whose  duty  it  was  io  procure  and  keep  the  perfcunes  and  unguents  for  his 


*  Fan^bearers) — ^Ver.  252.  Both  male  and  female  slaves,  and  eunuchs,  were 
employed  to  £m  their  mistresses.  The  fans  were  of  elegant  form  and  beautiful 
colours,  and  were  frequently  made  of  peacocks*  leathers,  being  of  a  stiff  shape, 
and  not  pliable,  like  imsA,  They  were  used  both  for  tbe  purpose  of  oooUng  the  air 
and  driving  away  ffies  and  gnats. 

7  ScmdMearen) — ^Ver.  252.  The  sandal  was  oflea  one  of  the  most  coetly 
articles  of  the  female  dress,  being  much  adorned  with  embroidery  and  gold. 
Originally  it  was  worn  by  both  sexes,  and  consisted  of  a  wooden  aole,  fastened  with 


y  Google 


Be.  I.  THE  THBBS  FCEOXfl  Ol"  HONEY.  16 

keepers^,  messengers,  news-carriers,  so  mamf  wasters  of  his 
bread  and  substance.  The  lov^  himself,  while  to  them  he 
is  complaisant,  becomes  a  beggar.  When  I  revolve  these 
things  in  my  mind,  and  when  I  refleet  how  little  one  is  valued 
when  he  is  in  need ;  away  with  you,  Love — 1  like  you  not 
— ^no  converse  do  I  hold  with  you.  Although  'tis  sweet  to 
feast  and  to  carouse.  Love  still  gives  bitters  6iioi:ug;h  to  be 
distasteful.  He  avoids  the  Courts^  of  justice,  hie  drives 
away  your  relations,  oind  drives  yourself  away  from  your  own 
contemplation,  ^or  do  men  wish  that  he  should  be  called 
their  Mend.  Ll  a  thaofiimd  ways  is  Love  to  be  held  a  stranger, 
to  be  kept  at  a  distance,  and  to  be  uikolhf  abstained  from. 
Por  he  who  plunges  into  love,  perishes  more  dreadfully  than 
if  he  leapt  feom  a  rock.  Away  with  you,  Love,  if  you  please  ; 
keep  your  own^  property  to  yourself.  Love,  never  be  you 
a  j&iend  of  mine ;  some  there  are,  however,  whom,  in  their 
isdsery,  you  may  keep  miserable  and  wretched — those  whom 
you  have  easily  rendered  submissive  to  yourself.  My  fixed 
deteonninatioiL  is  to  apply  my  mind  to  my  advancement  in  life, 
altbcragh,  in  that,  great  labour  is  undergone  by  the  mind. 
Gh)od  men  wish  these  things  for  themselves,  gain,  credit,  and 
honour,  glory,  and  -esteem ;  these  are  the  rewards  of  the  up- 
right. It  delights  me,  theai,  the  more,  to  live  together  with  the 
npright  rath^  than  with  the  deceitful  promulgators  of  lies. 

tliongs  to  the  foot  In  latter  times,  its  use  was  confined  to  females,  and  a  piece 
of  leather  coivered  the  toes,  while  thongs,  elegantly  decorated,  were  attached  to  it. 
From  the  present  passage  it  appears  that  it  was  the  dttty  of  a  particular  slaye  to 
takB  charge  of  sandals. 

^  CcaikeUee^^tint)^Ym,  2^  The  "  cistellatdz"  probably  had  chai^  of  the 
jewel  casket  df  her  mistress.  The  present  passage  shows  in  what  affluence  and 
splendour  some  of  the  courtesans  lived  in  those  days. 

'  Avoids  ^e  Courts) — ^Ver.  261.  Shakspeare  has  a  somewhat  similar  passage 
in  Borneo  and  Juliet-: 

•^^  Bat  aH  so  som  as  the  fdUaheering  sun 

Should  in  tiie  fhrBieet  East  begin  to  dmw 

The  diady  onitains  from  Aurora^s  bed, 

Away  horn  light  stef^  home  my  heavy  son, 

And  private  in  his  chamber  pens  himself, 

Shuts  up  his  windows,  locks  fair  daylight  out, 

And  makes  himself  an  artificial  night." 
■    »  Keep  your  ovm) — ^Ver.  266.  This  is  as  much  as  .to  say,  "  I  divorce  myself 
from  you,  and  utterly  repudiate  you."    The  words  "  tuas  res  tibi  habeto"  were 
the  formula  solemnly  pronounced  among  the  Eomans  by  the  husband  in  cases 
cf  divorce,  when  he  dehvered  back  to  the  wife  her  own  separate  jaroperty. 


y  Google 


16  TBunTHMus ;  Act  n. 


scEKE  n. 

JSnter  Philto. 

Phil,  (looking  ahout).  Where  has  this  man  betaken 
himself  out  of  doors  from  the  house  ? 

Lys.  (coming  up  to  him),  I  am  here,  &ther;  command 
me  what  you  will,  and  I  shall  cause  no  delay  to  you,  nor 
will  I  hide  myself  in  any  skulking-place  out  of  your  sight. 

Phil.  You  will  be  doing  what  is  consonant  to  the  rest  of 
your  conduct  if  you  reverence  your  father.  By  your  duty  to 
me,  my  son,  I  wish  you,  for  my  sake,  not  to  hold  anjr  con- 
verse with  profligate  men,  either  in  the  street  or  m  the 
Porum.  I  know  this  age — ^what  its  manners  are.  The  bad 
man  wishes  the  good  man  to  be  bad,  that  he  may  be  like 
himself.  The  wicked,  the  rapacious,  the  covetous,  and  the 
envious,  disorder  and  confound  the  morals  of  the  agei  a  crew 
gaping  yjw  gam,  they  hold  the  sacred  thing  as  profane — the 
ublic  advaMage  as  the  private  emolvment.  At  these  things 
.0  I  grieve,  these  are  the  matters  that  torment  me.  These 
things  am  I  constantly  repeating  both  day  and  night,  that 
you  may  use  due  precaution  against  them.  They  only  deem 
it  right  to  keep  their  hands  off  that  which  they  cannot  touch 
with  their  hands ;  as  to  the  rest,  seize  it,  carry  it  off,  keep 
it,  be  off  cmd  go  hide,  that  is  the  word  vjith  them.  These 
things,  when  I  behold  them,  draw  tears  from  me,  because  I 
have  survived  to  see  such  a  race  of  men.  Why  have  I  not 
rather  descended  to  the  dead^  ere  this  ?  Por  these  men  praise 
the  manners  of  our  ancestors,  and  defile  those  same  persons 
whom  they  commend.  With  regard,  then,  to  these  pursuits, 
I  enjoin  you  not  to  taint  your  £sposition  with  them.  Live 
after  my  fashion,  and  according  to  the  ancient  manners ; 
what  I  am  prescribing  to  you,  the  same  do  you  remember 
and  practise.  I  have  no  patience  with  these  £Eishionable  man- 
ners, upsetting  preconceived  notions,  with  which  good  men 
are  now  disgracing  themselves.  If  you  follow  these  my  in- 
junctions to  you,  many  a  good  maxim  will  take  root  in  your 
breast. 

1  To  the  dead)^YeT.  291.  "  Ad  plures,*'  "  to  the  many,"  signifies  "  tlie  dead," 
inasmuch  as  thej  are  more  in  number  than  the  living.  It  was  probably  used  as 
a  euphemism,  as  to  make  mention  of  death  was  considered  ominous  of  ill.  Homer, 
in  the  Odyssey,  uses  rovs  nXeiovas  in  a  similar  sense. 


I 


y  Google 


Sc*  II.  THE  THBEE  TIBOBB  OS*  MONET.  17 

Lts.  From  my  earliest  youth,  even  up  to  this  present 
age,  I  have  ahrays,  father,  paid  all  submission  to  the  injune- 
t^tis  you  have  given.  So  far  as  my  nature  was  concerned,  I 
oonsidered  that  I  was  free ;  so  &r  as  your  injunctions  were 
eGDcemedi,  I  deemed  it  proper  that  my  mind  should  pay  all 
submission  to  you. 

PfiiXi.  The  man  who  is  struggling  with  his  inclination  from 
his  earikst  age,  whethar  he  ought  to  prefer  to  be  so,  as  his 
inclination  thinks  it  proper  that  he  should  be,  or  whether, 
rather  so  as  his  par^its  and  his  relations  wish  him  to  be — if 
his  inclination  conquers  that  man,  it  is  all  over  with  him ;  he 
is  the  sla^e  of  his  melination  and  not  of  himself.  But  if  he 
oonquers  his  inclination,  he  truUf  lives  and  shall  be  famed  as 
a  conqueror  of  conquerors.  If  you  have  conquered  your  in- 
clination rather  lihan  your  inclination  you,  you  have  reason  to 
rejoice.  'Tis  better  by  fia*  that  you  should  be  such  as  you 
ought  to  be,  than  such  as  pleases  your  inclination.  Those 
who  conquer  the  indination  will  ever  be  esteemed  better  men 
ihsji  those  whom  the  inclination  avhdues, 

liTS.  I  have  ever  esteemed  these  maxims  as  the  shield  of 
my  ycmtJifid  age ;  -aever  to  betake  myself  to  any  place  where 
viee  was  the  ouder  of  the  day^,  never  to  go  to  stroll  about 
at  night,  nor  to  take  from  anothw  that  which  is  his.  I 
have  taken  all  precautions,  my  father,  that  I  might  not  cause 
you  uneasiness ;  I  have  ever  kept  your  precepts  in  due  pre- 
servation^  by  my  own  rule  of  conduct. 

PbHi.  And  do  you  reproach  me,  because  you  have  acted 
aright  ?  Poar  yourself  have  you  done  so,  not  for  me :  my  life, 
indeed,  is  nearly  past^;  <Ms  matter  principalljr  conc^^s  your 
own.     £ei^  on  overlaying*  good  deeds  with  other  good 

^  Where  vice  was  the  order  of  the  day) — ^Ver.  314.  "  Damni  concilUbiilQm." 
UteraHj,  "  the  place  of  counscd  for  wickedness.^ 

'  In  due  preservation) — ^Ver.  317.  Buildings  were  said  to  be  "  sarta  tecta,**  "  in 
good  repair,''  wiiea  the  roof  was  proof  against  rain.  The  expression  is  here  nsed 
figBxativelj,  to  mgniiy,  "I  have panotuaHy  obserred  yonr  injunctions." 

'  Is  nearly  past) — ^Ver.  319.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  line  is  quoted  by 
Cicero  in  his  second  Ejnstle  to  Brutus:  **  Sed  de  hoc  tu  yideris.  De  me  possum 
dlcere  idem  quod  Plautinus  pater  ia  Tdsimimo,  *  mihi  quidem  setas  acta  ferme 
est* "  "As  for  that  matter,  it  is  your  concern.  For  my  own  part,  I  may  say  with 
the  fiUiher  in  the  Txinummus  of  Plantus,  '  nouy  life  is  nearly  past.' " 

*  Kem  on  overltapBM) — ^Ver.  820.  Phiho  is  most  probably  aUudine  to  the  meta- 
phoricaT expression,  "sarta  tecta,"  used  just  before  by  his  son;  and  he  tells  him 

C 


y  Google 


18  TBIKTTMMrS ;  Act  II. 

deeds,  that  the  rain  may  not  come  through.  He  is  the  np* 
right  man  who  is  not  content  with  it,  however  upright  and 
however  honest  he  may  chance  to  be.  He  who  readily  givea 
satisfaction  to  himself,  is  not  the  upright  man,  nor  is  he 
really  honest :  he  who  thinks  hut  meanly  of  himself,  in  him 
is  there  a  tendency  to  well-doing. 

Lts.  Por  this  reason,  £a.ther,  I  have  thought  that  since 
there  is  a  certain  thing  that  I  wish  for,  I  would  request  it  of 
you. 

Phil.  What  is  it  ?    I  am  already  longiag  to  give  assent. 

Lys.  a  young  man  here,  of  noble  firaiily,  my  friend  and 
years'  mate,  who  has  managed  his  own  affairs  but  heedlessly 
and  unthinkingly — ^I  wish,  father,  to  do  him  a  service,  if  you 
are  not  unwillmg. 

Phil.  Prom  your  own  means,  I  suppose  ? 

Lts.  Prom  my  own  means — ^for  what  is  yours  is  mine, 
and  aU  mine  is  yours. 

Phil.  What  is  he  doing  ?    Is  he  in  want  ? 

Lys.  He  is  in  want. 

Phil.  Had  he  property  ?    Lys.  He  had. 

Phil.  How  did  he  lose  it  ?  Was  he  connected  with  pub- 
lic business^,  or  with  commercial  matters  ?  Had  he  merchan* 
disc  or  wares  to  sell,  when  he  lost  his  property  ? 

Lys.  None  of  these.    Phil.  What  then? 

Lys.  I'  faith,  my  father,  by  his  good-nature.  Besides,  to 
indulge  his  tastes,  he  wasted  some  part  of  it  in  luxury. 

Phil.  By  my  troth  now !  a  fellow  spoken  of  boldly,  and  as 
on  familiar  terms; — one,  indeed,  who  has  never  dissipated 
his  fortune  by  any  good  means,  and  is  fiow  in  want.  I 
cannot  brook  that,  with  qualities  of  that  description,  he 
should  be  your  friend. 

Lys.  'Tis  because  he  is  without  any  bad  disposition  that 
I  wish  to  relieve  his  wants. 

Phil.  He  deserves  ill  of  a  beggar  who  gives  him  what 
to  eat  or  to  drink ;  for  he  both  loses  that  which  he  gives 

tliat  the  only  way  to  keep  rain  from  conung  in  at  the  roof  (that  is,  to  keep  eril 
thoughts  oat  of  the  mind)  is  to  overlay  one  good  deed  with  another,  just  as  tile  is 
laid  npon  tile. 

1  WithpubiUc  business) — Ver.  831.  He  means  by  this  expresnon,  **  has  he  been 
fanning  the  taxes  or  the  pnblic  lands  ?**  which  of  course  wonld  be  a  pnrsiut  at- 
tended with  ooDsideTable  riisk. 


y  Google 


8e.  IL  THS  THBXX  PIEOES  OE  KOKEY.  19 

and  prolongs  for  the  other  a  life  of  misery.  I  do  not  say 
this  because  I  am  unwilling  and  would  not  readily  do  what 
you  desire ;  but  when  I  apply  these  expressions  to  that 
same  person,  I  am  warning  you  beforehand,  so  to  have  com- 
passion on  others,  that  others  may  not  have  to  pity  you. 

Lys.  I  am  ashamed  to  desert  him,  and  to  deny  him  aid 
in  his  adversity. 

Phil.  I'  troth,  shame  is  preferable  to  repentance  by  just 
as  many  letters^  as  if  consists  of. 

Lys.  In  good  sooth,  fiither,  by  the  care  of  the  Gbds, 
and  of  my  forefathers,  and  your  own,  I  may  say  that  we 
possess  much  property,  honestly  obtained.  If  you  do  a 
sernce  to  a  friend,  it  ought  not  to  make  you  repent  that  you 
have  done  so ;  it  ought  rather  to  cause  you  shame  if  you  do 
not  do  it. 

Phil.  If  from  great  wealth  you  subtract  something,  does 
it  become  more  or  less  ? 

Lys.  Less,  father.  But  do  you  know  what  is  wont  to  be 
repeated  to  the  niggardly  citizen^  ?  "  That  which  thou  hast 
mayst  thou  not  have,  and  mayst  thou  have  that  misfortune 
which  thou  hast  not ;  since  thou  canst  neither  endure  it  to 
be  enjoyed  by  thyself  nor  by  another." 

Phil.  I  know,  indeed,  that  so  it  usually  is :  but,  my  son, 
he  is  the  truly  niggardly  man^  that  has  nought  with  which 
to  pay  his  dues. 

Lys.  By  the  care  of  the  Q-ods,  we  have,  father,  both 
enough  for  us  to  enjoy  ourselves,  and  with  which  to  do  kind 
offices  to  kind-hearted  men. 

^  Byjwt  as  many  letters')— "Ver.  345.  Commentators  differ  as  to  the  meaning  of 
this  passage,  which  is  somewhat  obscure.  Philto  seems  to  say  that  shame  before 
doiog  an  unwise  action  is  every  way  preferable  to  repentance  after  haying  done  it; 
preferable,  indeed,  by  each  individnal  letter  it  is  composed  of,  or,  as  we  should 
Bay  in  common  parlance,  "  every  inch  of  it." 

^  Niggardly  citizen) — ^Ver.  350.  '*  Immonis"  means  one  that  does  not  bear  his 
share  in  the  taxes  and  tribute  of  the  state,  or,  in  other  words,  pay  his  scot  and  lot. 
Hence,  with  an  extended  signification,  it  means  one  that  will  not  out  of  his  abun- 
dance assist  the  distress  of  others,  and  who  is,  consequently,  a  niggardly  and 
covetous  person. 

'  Truly  niggardly  »um)— Ver.  354.  Philto  here  alludes  to  the  primary  meaning 
of  the  word  **  immunis ;"  and  hints  that  it  may  be  more  properly  applied  to  Lesbo- 
nicus,  who  has  reduced  himself  to  poverty  by  his  extravagance,  than  to  himself; 
inasmuch  as  he  is  now  perforce  "  immunis,"  not  having  wherewithal  to  pay  the 
pnblic  does  and  taxes. 

c2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


20  TBiKUKinrs ;  Act  IL 

Phil.  Troth,  I  am  not  aMe  to  refuse  you  any 
you  ask  of  me.    Whose  poverty  do  you  wish  to 
Speak  out  boldly  to  your  father. 

Lts.  That  of  this  young  man  Lesbonicus,  tiie  son  of 
Channides,  who  lives  there.  {Ke  paints  to  the  house  ef 
Chabmedbs.) 

Phil.  Why,  hasn't  he  devoured  both  what  he  had,  and 
what  he  had  not^  ? 

Lys.  Censure  him  not,  my  father :  many  things  happeOL 
to  a  man  which  he  likes,  mtmy^  too,  which  he  does  not  like. 

Phil.  Troth,  you  say  falsely,  son ;  and  you  are  doing  ao 
now  not  according  to  your  usual  wont.  JFor  the  prudent 
man,  i'  faith,  really  frames  his  own  fortunes  for  himself :  many 
things,  therefore,  do  not  happen  which  he  does  not  like,  unless 
he  is  a  bungling  workman. 

Lys.  Much  labour  is  requisite  for  tiliis  workmanship  in  him 
who  seeks  to  be  a  clever  workman  in  fashioning  his  life— 
but  he  is  still  very  young. 

Phil.  Not  by  years  but  by  disposition  is  wisdom  acquired. 
Age  is  the  relish  of  wisdom — ^wisdom  is  the  nutriment  of 
old  age.  However,  come,  say  what  you  wish  now  to  give 
him. 

Lys.  Nothing  at  all,  father.  Do  you  only  not  hind»  me 
from  accepting  it  if  he  should  give  anything  to  me. 

Phil.  And  will  you  be  relieving  his  poverty  by  that,  if  you 
shall  accept  anything  of  him  ? 

Lys.  By  that  very  means,  my  father. 

Phil.  !b^aith,  I  wish  that  you  would  instruct  me  in  Hat 
method. 

Lys.  Certainly.  Do  you  know  of  what  fiwiiily  he  is 
bomP 

Phil.  I  know — of  an  extremely  honourable  one. 

Lys.  He  has  a  sister — &  fine  young  woman  now  grown  up: 
I  wish,  father,  to  take  her  without  a  portion  for  my  wife. 

Phil.  A  wife  without  a  portion  ? 

Lys.  Just  so— your  riches  saved  as  well.  By  these  means 
you  will  be  conferring  an  extreme  favour  on  him,  and  in  no 
way  could  you  help  him  to  greater  advantage. 

Phtl.  Am  I  to  suffer  you  to  take  a  wife  without  a  portion  ? 

1  Whai  he  had  naf>— Ver.  360.  That  is,  by  the  dishonest  expedient  of  nmning 
into  debt  for  it. 


y  Google 


Se.  m.  THE  THB££  FIZ0X8  OF  MONEY.  21 

Lts.  You  must  suffer  it,  father ;  and  by  these  means  you 
will  be  giving  an  estimable  character  to  our  family. 

Phil.  I  could  give  utterance  to  many  a  learned  saying, 
and  very  fluently  too  :  this  old  age  of  mine  retains  stories 
of  old  and  ancient  times.  But,  since  I  see  that  you  axe 
courting  friendship  and  esteem  for  our  family,  although  I 
have  been  opposed  to  you,  I  thus  give  my  decision — ^I  will 
permit  you ;  Bskfor  the  girl,  and  marry  her. 

Lts.  May  the  Gods  preserve  you  to  me.  But,  to  this 
fevour  add  one  thing. 

Phil.  But  what  is  this  one  thing  ? 

Lts.  I  will  tell  you.  Do  you  go  to  him,  do  you  solicit 
him,  and  do  you  ask  for  her  yourself. 

ItaL.  Thmk  of  that  now. 

Lts.  You  will  transact  it  much  more  speedilj :  all  will  be 
made  sure  of  that  you  do.  One  word  of  yours  m  this  matter 
wiH  be  of  more  consequence  than  a  hundred  of  mine. 

Phil.  See,  now,  how,  in  my  kindness,  I  have  undertaken 
this  matter.    My  assistance  shall  be  given. 

Lts.  You  really  are  a  kind  father.  This  is  the  house ; 
here  he  dwells.  {^Re  points  to  the  house  of  Chabmldes.) 
Lesbonicus  is  his  name.  Mind  and  attend  to  the  business ; 
1  will  await  you  at  home.  {Sait. 


scEKE  in. 

Philto,  alone. 

Phil.  These  things  are  not  for  the  best,  nor  as  I  think 
they  ought  to  be ;  but  stilly  they  are  better  than  that  which  is 
downright  bad.  But  this  one  circumstance  consoles  myself 
and  my  thoughts — namely,  that  he  who  counsels  in  respect 
to  a  son  nothing  else  but  that  which  pleases  himself  alone, 
only  plays  the  fool ;  he  becomes  wretched  in  mind,  and  yet  he 
is  no  nearer  bringing  it  about.  He  is  preparing  a  very  incle- 
ment winter  for  his  own  old  age  when  he  arouses  that  unsea- 
sonable storm.  (The  door  of  the  house  o/^Chabmides  opens,) 
But  the  house  is  opened  to  which  I  was  going ;  most  conve- 
niently, Lesbonicus  himself  is  coming  out  of  doors  with  his 
servant.     (Philto  retires  to  a  distance?) 


y  Google 


22  tTBiNFMiius ;  Act  II. 

SCBITE  IV. 

JEnter  Lesbonioijs  and  Stasimtjs. 

Lesb.  'Tis  less  than  fifteen  days  since  you  received  from 
Callicles  forty  minae  for  this  house ;  is  it  not  as  I  say,  Sta- 
simus? 

Stas.  When  I  consider,  I  think  I  remember  that  it 
was  so. 

Lesb.  What  has  been  done  with  it  ? 

Stas.  It  has  been  eaten  and  drunk  up — spent  away  in 
unguents,  washed  away  in  baths^.  The  fishmonger  and  the 
baker  have  carried  it  off:  butchers,  too,  and  cooks,  green- 
grocers, perfumers,  amd  poulterers ;  'twas  quickly  consumed. 
I'  faith !  that  money  was  made  away  with  not  less  speedily 
than  if  you  were  to  throw  a  poppy  among  the  ants. 

Lesb.  By  my  troth,  less  has  been  spent  on  those  items 
than  six  minse  ? 

Stas.  Besides,  what  have  you  given  to  your  mistresses  ? 

Lesb.  That  I  am  including  as  well  in  it. 

Stas.  Besides,  what  have  I  pilfered  of  it  ? 

Lesb.  Aye,  that  item  is  a  very  heavy  one. 

Stas.  That  cannot  so  appear  to  you,  if  you  make  all  due 
deductions^,  unless  you  think  that  your  money  is  everlastijig. 
(Aside.)  Too  late  and  unwisely, — a  caution  that  should  have 
been  used  before, — after  he  has  devoiu:ed  his  substance,  he 
reckons  up  the  account  too  late. 

Lesb.  The  account,  however,  of  this  money  is  by  no  means 
clear. 

Stas.  I'  faith,  the  account  is  very  clear:  the  money's 
gone^.  Did  you  not  receive  forty  min»  from  Callicles,  and 
did  he  not  receive  from  you  the  house  in  possession  ? 

*  Washed  away  in  batkay—Ver.  409.  This  will  probably  refer,  not  to  the  money 
paid  for  mere  bathing  at  the  public  baths,  which  was  a  **  quadrans,"  the  smallest 
Boraan  coin,  but  to  the  expense  of  erecting  private  baths,  which  generally  formed 
a  portion  of  the  Inxuries  df  a  Roman  house.  The  public  baths,  however,  may  have 
possibly  been  the  scene  of  much  profligacy,  and  have  afforded  to  the  reckless  and 
dissipated  ample  opportunities  for  squandering  their  money.  That  this  may  have 
been  the  f^t,  is  rendered  the  more  likely  when  we  consider  the  equivocal  sig- 
nification^bf  the  word  **  bagnio." 
^  Make  all  due  deduciiotu}^yerAl4.  "Sisumas."  Literally,  "if  you  subtract.*' 
'  The  tnon^s  gone) — ^Ver.  419.  Instead  of  a  Latin  word,  the  Greek  otxerai 


y  Google 


Se.  IV.  THE  THMSB  PIEOXS  OF  MONST.  23 

Less.  Very  good. 

PhtTjTO  {aside),  Trotb,  I  think  our  neiglibour  has  sold 
his  hoTise^.  When  his  father  shall  come  from  abroad,  his 
place  is  in  the  leggar's  gate^,  unless,  perchance,  he  should 
creep  into  his  son's  stomach^. 

Stas.  There  were  a  thousand  Olympic  drachmsB*  paid  to 
the  banker^,  which  yoa  were  owing  upon  account. 

is  introdnced,  which  means  "is  gone,"  or  '^has  vanished."  Greek  terms  were 
current  at  Borne,  jnst  as  French  words  and  sentences  are  imported  into  oar  lan- 
guage; mdeed,  the  fashions  of  Borne  were  very  generally  set  by  the  Greeks. 

1  Has  sold  his  Iwuse) — ^Ver.  422.  He  feels  satisfied  now  that  Lysiteles  has  been 
correctly  informed,  and  that  Lesbonicos  really  is  in  difficnlties. 

«  The  heggar's  gcOey-Wet,  423.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  "  Porta  Trigemina" 
ai  Rome,  which  was  upon  the  road  to  Ostia.  It  received  its  name  from  the  three 
twin-boru  brothers,  the  Horatii,  who  passed  beneath  it  when  going  to  fight  the 
Curiatii.  This,  being  one  of  the  largest  and  most  frequented  roads  in  Borne,  was 
especially  the  resort  of  mendicants;  among  whom,  in  the  opinion  of  Philto,  the 
&ther  of  Lesbonicos  will  hare  to  take  his  place.  Some  Commentators  would  read 
"ponte"  instead  of  "  portS,"  and  they  think  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  Sublician 
bridge  at  Borne,  where  we  learn  from  Seneca  and  Juvenal  that  the  beggars  used  to 
sit  and  ask  alms. 

>  His  sofCs  stomach)'— Yer,  424.  He  satirically  alludes  to  the  reckless  conduct 
of  Lesbonicos,  who  has  spent  everything  to  satisfy  his  love  for  eatmg,  drinking, 
and  debauchery. 

*  Olympic  dracJun<B)^'YeT.  425.  As  already  mentioned,  the  '*  drachma"  was 
about  ninepence  three-farthings  m  value.  As  one  hundred  made  a  "  mina,"  one- 
foorth  of  the  price  received  for  the  house  would  go  to  satisfy  the  banker's  claim. 

^  To  the  hanker) — ^Ver.  426.  The  "  Trapezitse"  were  the  same  as  the  "  Argen- 
tarii"  at  Bome,  who  were  bankers  and  money-changers  on  their  own  account,  while 
the  '*  Mensarii"  transacted  business  on  behalf  of  the  state.  Their  shops,  or  offices, 
were  situate  around  the  Forum,  and  were  public  property.  Their  principal  business 
was  the  exchange  of  Boman  for  foreign  coin,  and  the  keeping  of  sums  of  money  for 
other  persons,  which  were  deposited  with  or  without  interest,  according  to  agree- 
ment. They  acted  as  agents  for  tlie  sale  of  estates,  and  a  part  of  their  duty  was 
to  test  the  genuineness  of  com,  and,  in  later  times,  to  circulate  it  from  the  mint 
among  the  people.  Lendmg  money  at  a  profit  was  also  part  of  their  business.  It 
18  supposed  that  among  the  Romans  there  was  a  higher  and  a  lower  class  of  "  ar- 
gentariL"  The  more  respectable  of  them  probably  held  the  position  of  the  banker 
of  modem  times ;  while  those  who  did  business  on  a  paltry  scale,  or  degraded 
themselves  by  usury,  were  not  held  in  any  esteem.  Their  shops,  being  public  pro- 
perty, were  built  under  the  inspection  of  the  Censors,  and  by  them  were  let  to  the 
**argentariL"  "  Trapezitae,"  as  they  are  here  called,  was  properly  the  Greek 
name  for  these  persons,  who  were  so  styled  from  the  rpaire^a,  or  "  table/'  at 
which  they  sat  All  will  remember  the  "  tables  of  the  money-changers'*  men- 
tjonedinthe  New  Testament.  The  "mensarii"  were  employed  to  lend  out  the 
pobllc  money  to  borrowers  at  interest. 


y  Google 


24  TiBXBTuuxvB ;  Act  IL 

Less.  Those,  I  suppose,  that  I  was  security  for^  ? 

Stas.  Say,  rather^,  «  Those  that  I  paid  down"— for  that 
young  man  whom  you  used  to  say^  was  so  rich. 

Less.  It  was  so  done. 

Stas.  Yes,  just  to  be  squandered  away. 

Lesb.  That  was  done  as  well.  But  I  saw  him  in  a  pitiable 
state,  and  I  did  have  pity  on  him. 

Stas.  You  have  pity  on  others,  and  you  have  neither  pity 
nor  shame  for  yourself. 

Phil,  (aside).  'Tis  time  to  accost  him. 

Lesb.  Is  this  Philto  that  is  comiog  here  ?  Troth,  'tia  he 
liimself. 

Stas.  I'  faith,  I  could  wish  he  was  my  slave,  together 
with  his  savings*. 

Phil.  Philto  right  heartily  wishes  health  to  both  master 
and  servant,  Lesbonicus  and  Stasimus. 

Lesb.  "Mb^  the  Gods  give  you,  Philto,  whatever  you  may 
wish  for.     How  is  your  son  ? 

Phil.  He  wishes  well  to  you. 

Lesb.  In  good  sooth,  he  does  for  me  what  I  do  for  him  in 
return! 

Stas.  (aside).  That  phrase,  "He  wishes  well,"  is  worth- 
less, unless  a  person  does  well  too,  I,  too,  "  wish"  to  be  a 
free  man ;  I  wish  in  vain.  He,  perhaps^  might  wish  to  become 
frugal ;  he  would  wish  to  no  purpose. 

Phil.  My  son  has  sent  me  to  you  to  propose  an  alliance 
and  bond  of  friendship  between  himself  and  yom:  family.  He 

*  /  was  security  for) — Ver.  427.  "  Spondeo,"  **  I  promise,"  was  a  term  used 
on  manj  occasions  among  the  Romans,  derived  from  the  Greek  (nrevBofuut  "  to 
ponr  ont  a  libation ;"  the  usual  mode  of  ratifying  a  treaty.  Among  others,  it  was 
pronounced  by  a  person  when  he  became  security  that  another  should  repay 
money,  as  Lesbonicus,  to  his  misfortune,  had  done  m  the  present  instance. 

*  Say,  raiJter) — ^Ver.  427.  Stasimus  will  not  allow  his  master  to  mince  the 
matter  in  the  slightest  degree.  "  Don't  say  '  I  was  security  for  it,'  but  '  I 
paid  it  down.' " 

*  Tou  used  to  say) — ^Ver.  428.  He  probably  alludes  to  some  former  occasion,  on 
which  his  master,  having  been  duped  into  the  belief,  was  telling  him  of  the  extra- 
ordinary wealth  of  his  new  acquaintance. 

*  With  his  savingsy^'VeT,  434.  "  Peculium"  was  the  property  amassed  by  a 
slave  out  of  his  savings,  which  he  was  permitted  to  keep  as  his  own.  According 
to  the  strictness  of  the  law,  the  "  peculium"  was  the  property  of  the  master. 
Sometimes  it  was  agreed  that  the  slave  should  purchase  his  freedom  with  his 
<*  peculium"  when  it  amounted  to  a  certain  sum. 


y  Google 


Sc.  lY.  THE  THBSB  HXCES  OT  MONEY.  25 

wishes  to  take  your  sister  iar  hia  wife ;  and  I  hare  tbe  same 
feelings,  and  I  desire  it. 

IiESB.  I  retdly  don't  tmderstand  your  ways;  amid  your 
prosperity  you  are  laughing  at  my  adyennty. 

Pbxl.  I  am  a  man^ :  you  are  a  man.  So  may  Jupiter  love 
me,  I  have  neither  come  to  laugh  at  you,  nor  do  I  think 
you  deserving  of  it !  But  as  to  what  I  said,  my  son  begged 
me  to  ask  for  your  sister  as  his  wife. 

LsBB.  It  is  right  that  I  should  know  the  state  of  my  own 
drcomstances.  My  position  is  not  on  an  equal  footing  with 
yours ;  seek  some  other  alliance  for  yourselves. 

Stab,  (to  LESBOin[CTJs).  Are  you  reaQy  sound  in  mind  or 
intelleet  to  refuse  this  proposal  ?  !Por  I  perceive  that  he  has 
been  found  for  you  a  very  friend  in  need* 

liSSB.  Get  away  hence,  and  go  hang  yourself^. 

Stas.  Eaith,  if  I  should  commence  to  go,  you  would  be 
forbidding  me*. 

Lesb.  Unless  you  want  me,  Philto,  for  anything  else,  I 
have  given  you  my  answer. 

Phtl.  I  trust,  Lesbonicus,  that  you  will  one  day  be  more 
obliging  to  me  than  I  now  find  you  to  be.  For  both  to  act^ 
unwisely  and  to  talk  unwisely,  Lesbonicus,  are  sometimes 
neither  of  them  profitable. 

I  loiia  a  man)— Yer.  447.  This  is  somewhat  fike  the  celebrated  Hne  in  Terence : 
'*  Homo  sum,  hnmani  nihil  aHennm  a  me  pato,** 
"  I  am  a  man,  nothing  that  is  human  do  I  think  unbecoming  to  me.** 

«  Friatd  in  needy~Yer.  456.  "  Ferentarius."  The  "  ferentarii  "  were  thelight- 
snued  troops,  who,  being  unencumbered  with  heary  armour,  were  readj  to  come 
immefiatelf  and  opportmiely  to  the  assistance  of  those  who  were  in  danger  of 
bong  orerpowered  bj  the  armj.  The  word  is  here  used  figuratiTety,  to  signiiy 
"  a  fnend  in  need." 

*  And  go  hang  yound/y-Yee.  457.  The  word  "  dierecte**  is  supposed  to  come 
finom  an  obsolete  TeH>,  "•  dierigo,"  "  to  extend  out  on  both  sides,"  and  to  allude  to  a 
pumsfament  inflicted  upon  slaTes,  when  they  were  fiustened  to  a  stake  in  the 
gnmnd,  with  the  arms  and  legs  extended.  Applied  to  a  slare,  it  would  be  an 
opprobrious  expresaon,  equiralent  to  **  go  and  be  hanged." 

*  Be/orbiddmg  m«>— Yer.  457.  He  means,  that  if  he  should  take  his  master  at 
his  word  and  go  away,  he  would  be  the  first  to  stop  him. 

>  Bo4h  to  aet)~-yer,  461-2.  The  exact  meaning  of  these  fines  is  somewhat  ob- 
aeare.    Thornton's  translation  is : 

Or  in  word 

Or  deed  to  play  the  tzifler  would  ill  suit 
One  of  my  years. 


y  Google 


2&  TEiinrMMFS ;  Act  !!• 

Stas.  Troth,  he  says  what's  true. 

Less.  I  will  tear  out  your  eye  if  you  add  one  word. 

Stas.  Troth,  but  I  will  talk ;  for  if  I  may  not  ,be  allowed 
f 0  ^  BO  as  I  am,  then  I  will  svibmit  to  be  called  the  one-eyed 
man^. 

Phil.  Do  you  now  say  this,  that  your  position  and  means 
are  not  on  an  equal  footing  with  ours  ? 

Less.  I  do  say  so. 

PhiIi.  Well,  suppose,  now,  you  were  to  come  to  a  building 
to  a  public  banquet,  and  a  wealthy  man  by  chance  were  to 
come  there  as  your  neighbour®.  The  banquet  is  set  on  table, 
one  that  they  style  a  public  one^.  Suppose  that  dainties  were 
heaped  up  before  him  by  his  dependents,  and  suppose  any- 
thing pleased  you  that  was  so  heaped  up  before  him,  would 
you  eat,  or  would  you  keep  your  place  next  to  this  wealthy 
man,  going  without  your  dmner  ? 

Less.  I  should  eat,  unless  he  were  to  forbid  me  doing  so. 

Stas.  But  I,  by  my  faith,  even  if  he  were  to  forbid  me, 
would  eat  and  cram  with  both  cheeks  stuffed  out ;  and  what 
pleased  him,  that,  in  especial,  would  I  lay  hold  of  beforehand ; 
nor  would  I  yield  to  him  one  jot  of  my  very  existence.  At 
table  it  befits  no  one  to  be  bashful ;  for  there  the  decision* 
is  about  things  both  divine  and  human. 

^  The  one-eyed  man) — ^Ver.  465.  He  means  that  he  is  determined  to  speak  out  at 
all  risks,  even  if  his  master  should  be  as  good  as  his  word,  and  tear  his  eye  out. 

2  A»  yottr  netghbour) — Ver.  469.  "  Par"  here  means  a  close  neighbour,  as  re- 
clining next  to  him  on  the  same  "  triclinium,"  or  "  couch/'  at  the  entertainment. 

»  Style  a  pubUc  one) — Ver.  470.  It  is  not  certain  what  kind  of  public  banquets 
are  here  referred  to.  Public  entertainments  were  given  to  the  people  on  the  oc- 
casion ot  any  public  rejoicing:  such,  for  instance,  as  a  triumph,  as  we  learn  from 
Suetonius  in  his  life  of  Julius  Csesar.  They  were  also  given  when  the  tenths  were 
paid  to  Hercules.  The  clients,  also,  of  the  Patricians  were  in  the  habit  of  giving 
entertainments  to  their  patrons  on  festival  days,  when  each  client  contributed  his 
share  in  kmd ;  and  numerous  invitations  were  given,  abundance  and  hospitality 
being  the  order  of  the  day.  Sometimes  these  feasts  were  held  in  a  temple,  and 
perhaps  they  are  here  referred  to.  There  were  also  frequent  entertainments 
in  the  **  Curias,"  or  "  Court-houses"  of  Some,  at  which  the  "  curiales,"  or  men  of 
the  "  curia,"  or  **  ward,"  met  together.  * 

*  There  the  decision) — ^Ver.  479.  Scaliger  supposes  that  Stasimus  is  making  a 
parody  on  the  transaction  of  business  by  the  Senate,  who  were  said  "  to  give  their 
decisions  on  matters  sacred  and  human ;"  and  that  he  means  to  say  that  the  feast 
is  his  Senate-house,  and  the  food  are  the  things  sacred  and  human  which  he  is 
bound  to  discuss,  without  respect  for  anybody. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  THBEB  PIE0B8  Or  MOmBT.  27 

Pnii.  You  say  what  is  the  fact. 

Stas.  I  win  tell  you  without  any  subterfuge:  I  would 
make  place  for  him  on  the  highway,  on  the  footpath,  in  the 
canvass  for  public  honors ;  but  as  to  what  concerns  the 
stomach — by  my  troth,  not  this  much  (shows  the  breadth  of 
hisflnger'4iaiT),  unless  he  should  ^«^  have  thrashed  me  witn 
his  fists.  With  provisions  at  the  present  prices,  a  feast  is 
a  fortune  without  incumbrances^. 

Phil.  Always,  Lesbonicus,  do  you  take  care  and  think 
this,  that  that  is  the  best,  according  as  you  yourself  are  the 
most  deserving :  if  that  you  cannot  attain  to,  at  least  be  as 
near  as  possible  to  the-  most  deserving.  And  now,  Lesboni- 
cus, I  wish  you  to  grant  and  accept  these  terms  which  I 
propose,  and  which  I  ask  of  you.  The  Gods  are  rich ;  wealth 
and  station  befit  the  Gods :  but  we  poor  mortal  beings  are, 
as  it  were,  the  salt-cellar^  for  the  salt  of  life.  The  moment 
that  we  have  breathed  forth  this,  the  beggar  is  held  of 
equal  value  at  Acheron^  with  the  most  wealthy  man  when 
dead. 

Stas.  {aside).  It  will  be  a  wonder  if  you  don't  carry  your 
riches  there  with  you.  When  you  are  dead,  you  maj, perhaps, 
be  as  good  as  your  name  imports^. 

Phil.  Kow,  that  you  may  understand  that  position  and 

I  WiAotd  incumbrances) — ^Ver.  484.  Every  Boman  family  of  consequence  was 
boond  to  perform  particnlar  sacrifices,  which  were  not  only  ordained  by  the  pon- 
tifical laws,  but  the  obligation  was  also  rendered  hereditary  by  the  civil  law,  and 
ordered  to  be  observed  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables :  **  Sacra  privata  perpetua 
manento,**  '*  Let  private  sacrifices  remain  perpetual."  This  law  is  quoted  and 
commented  upon  by  Cicero  in  his  Second  Book  on  the  Laws.  He  there  tells  us 
that  "  heirs  are  obliged  to  continue  their  sacrifices,  be  they  ever  so  expensive;  and 
for  this  reason,  as  by  the  above  law  these  sacrifices  were  to  be  maintained,  no  one 
was  presumed  to  be  better  able  to  supply  the  place  of  the  deceased  person  than 
his  heir."  A  property  exempt  from  this  necessity,  might  be  truly  said  to  be  ond 
without  incumbrances. 

*  The  salt-cellar) — ^Ver.  492.  By  this  expression,  Plautus  seems  to  mean  that  life 
18  to  the  body  as  salt  is  to  flesh ;  it  preserves  it  from  corruption. 

»  At  -4cAm)»}— Ver.  494.  Acheron  was  a  river  of  the  Brutii  in  Campania.  There 
was  another  river  of  this  name  in  Epirus.  The  word  usually  denotes  one  of  the 
rivers  of  Hell;  here  it  means  the  Infernal  regions  themselves. 

♦  As  your  name  imports) — ^Ver.  496.  The  meaning  of  Stasimus  is — ^**  Perhaps 
when  you  are  dead,  in  leaving  your  property  to  another,  you  may  really  prove 
jmurself  the  amiable  man  your  name  would  bespeak  jou  to  be ;"  Philto  being 
derived  from  the  Greek  ^iXco),  "  to  love." 


y  Google 


28  TBnnrMMxra ;  Act  H. 

means  have  no  place  here,  and  that  we  do  not  undervalue 
your  alliance;  I  ask  for  your  sister  without  a  marriage- 
portion.  May  the  matter  turn  out  happily.  Bo  I  under- 
stand her  to  be  promised  ?    Why  are  you  suent  ? 

Stas.  O  immortal  Gk)d8,  what  a  proposal ! 

Phil.  Why  don't  you  say,  "May  the  Gods  proflrper  it. 
I  agreed?" 

Stas.  (aside).  Alas!  when  there  was  no  advantage  in  the 
expression,  he  used  to  say,  "  I  agree ;"  now,  wh^i  there  is  ad- 
vantage m  ity  he  is  not  able  to  say  so. 

Less.  Since  you  thrnk  me,  Philto,  worthy  of  an  alliance 
with  you,  I  return  you  many  thanks.  But  though  this 
fortune  of  mme  has  sadly  diminished  through  my  folly,  I  have, 
Philto,  a  piece  of  land  near  the  city  here ;  that  I  wnl  give  as 
a  portion  to  my  sister:  for,  after  all  my  follies,  that  alone, 
besides  my  existence,  is  left  me. 

Phil.  BeaUy  I  care  nothing  at  all  about  a  poartion. 

LxsB.  I  am  determined  to  give  her  one, 

Stas.  (wTiispers  to  Lesbonious).  And  are  you  ready, 
master,  to  sever  tiiat  nurse  from  us  which  is  supporting  us  ? 
Take  care  how  you  do  it.  What  are  we  ourselves  to  eat  m 
future  ? 

Lesb.  (to  Stasimtjs).  Once  more,  will  you  hold  your 
tongue  ?    Am  I  to  be  rendered  accountable  to  you  ? 

Stas.  (aside).  We  are  evidently  done  for,  unless  I  devise 
something  or  other.  Philto,  I  want  you.  (ILb  removes  to  a 
distance,  and  heckons  to  Philto.) 

Phil.  If  you  wish  aught,  Stasimus. 

Stas.  Step  a  little  this  way. 

Phil.  By  all  means. 

Stas.  I  tell  you  this  in  secrecy,  that  neither  he  nor  any 
one  else  may  learn  it  of  you. 

Phil.  Trust  me  boldly  with  anything  you  please. 

1  /  agree) — Yee,  502.  "  Spondeo'*  was  a  word  in  general  nse  to  denote  that  the 
person  entered  mto  a  promise  or  engagement.  Being  the  nearest  male  relation  of 
the  damsel,  Philto  wishes  Leshonicos  to  close  the  matter  by  saying  **  sptndeo,** 
" I  agree  to  betroth  her,"  which  he  hesitates  to  do;  on  which,  Stasimns,  aUncKng 
to  his  having  been  the  secnrity  fur  the  thousand  drachma,  te^  him  that  he  had 
been  ready  enongh  to  say  "  spondeo"  when  it  was  not  to  his  advantage;  namely, 
at  the  time  when  he  said  '*  spondeo,**  "  I  promise,**  and  became  the  security  to 
the  banker  for  his  friend.   See  Note  1  in  page  24. 


y  Google 


SCL  IV.  THE  THBBB  PIECBB  OF  MONET.  29 

8s!AB.  B7  Gbds  joid  men  I  warn  you,  not  to  allow  that  piece 
of  hood  ever  to  beooiue  yours  or  your  son's.  I'll  tell  you  my 
reasons  for  tliis  matter. 

Phix.  Troth,  I  should  like  to  hear  them. 

Stas.  First  of  all  then,  when  at  any  time  the  ground  is 
being  ploughed,  in  every  AMl  &utow  the  oxen  die. 

Phxl.  Preserve  me  from  it. 

SsAS.  The  gate  of  Acheron  is  in  that  land  of  ours.  Thea 
the  grapes,  be&)re  ibej  are  ripe,  hang  in  a  putrid  state. 

Less,  (m  a  low  txmse).  He  is  persuading  the  man  to  some- 
thing, I  think.  Although  he  is  a  rogue,  still  he  is  not  un- 
fSuthful  to  me. 

Stas.  Hear  the  rest.  Besides  that,  when  elsewhere  the 
harvest  of  wheat  is  most  abundant,  there  it  comes  up  less  by 
one-fourth  than  what  you  have  sowed, 

Phui.  Ah !  bad  habits  ought  to  be  sown  on  that  spot,  if  in 
the  sowing  they  can  be  killed. 

Stas.  And  never  is  there  any  person  to  whom  that  piece 
of  land  belongs,  but  that  his  a&irs  turn  out  most  unfor- 
tunate. Of  those  to  whom  it  has  belonged,  some  have  gone 
away  in  banishment ;  some  are  dead  outright ;  some,  a^am, 
have  hanged  themselves.  See  this  man,  now,  to  whom  it 
bdongs,  how  he  has  been  brought  to  a  regular  backgammoned 
stated. 

Phil.  Preserve  me  from  this  pece  of  land. 

Stas.  "  Preserve  me  from  it,"  you  would  say  still  more,  if 
you  were  to  hear  everything  from  me.  Por  there  eveir  other 
tree  has  been  blasted  with  lightning;  the  hogs  die^  there 
mos§  shockiQgly  of  inflammation  in  the  throat;  the  sheep 
are  scabby,  as  bare  of  all  wool,  see,  as  is  this  hand  of  mine. 
And  then,  besides,  there  is  n0t  one  of  the  Syrian  natives^, 

1  Backgeanmoned  statey—Yer,  837.  "  Ad  indtas  redactns,  "  brought  to  a  stand- 
itin,**  ma  a  term  borrowed  from  the  game  of  "  Duodecim  Scripta,"  or  "  twelve 
pontB,"  and  was  applied  when  one  of  the  parties  got  all  his  men  on  the  twelfth 
point,  and,  being  able  to  move  no  further,  lost  the  game  in  consequence.  Probably 
tiie  game  partook  of  the  nature  of  both  backgammon  and  chess. 

*  The  hogs  die) — ^Ver.  540.  From  Pliny  the  Elder  we  learn  that  "  angina,"  or 
swelling  of  the  throat,  was  a  common  distemper  among  hogs. 

*  The  Syrian  natives) — ^Ver.  542.  He  makes  mention  of  the  Syrians,  because, 
limg  in  a  hot  climate,  they  would  be  most  likely  to  be  able  to  endure  extreme  heat. 


y  Google 


80  TBDorMinTS ;  Act  n. 

a  race  which  is  the  most  hardy  of  men,  who  could  exist  there 
for  six.  months ;  so  surely  do  all  die  there  of  the  solstitial 
fever^. 

Phil.  I  beUeve,  Stasimus^,  that  it  is  so ;  but  the  Campa- 
nian^  race  much  outdoes  that  of  the  Syrians  in  hardiness. 
But,  really,  that  piece  of  land,  as  I  have  heard  you  describe 
it,  is  one  to  which  it  were  proper  for  all  wicked  men  to  be 
sent  for  the  public  good.  Just  as  they  tell  of  the  Islands  of 
the  Blest,  where  all  meet  together  who  have  passed  their  lives 
uprightly :  on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  proper  that  all  evil- 
doers should  be  packed  off  there,  since  it  is  a  place  of  such  a 
character. 

Stas,  'Tis  a  very  receptacle  of  calamity.  "What  need  is 
there  of  mcmy  words  ?  Look  for  any  bad  thing  whatsoever, 
there  you  may  find  it. 

Phil.  But,  i*  faith,  you  may  jmd  it  there  and  elsewhere 
too. 

Stas.  Please,  take  care  not  to  say  that  I  told  you  of  this. 

Phil.  You  have  told  it  me  in  perfect  secrecy. 

Stas.  For  he,  indeed  {pomting  at  Lesbonicus),  wishes  it 
to  be  got  rid  of  from  himself,  if  he  can  find  any  one  to  im- 
pose upon*  dbotet  it, 

Phil.  I'  faith,  this  land  shall  never  become  my  properfrjr. 

Stas.  Aye,  if  you  keep  in  your  senses.  (Astde.)  V  faith, 
I  have  cleverly  frightened  ^  the  old  fellow  away  from  this 
land ;  for,  if  my  master  had  parted  with  it,  there  is  nothing 
for  us  to  live  upon. 

1  The  solstUiid  fever) — ^Ver.  544.  He  seems  to  mean,  that  if  a  person  went  to 
live  there  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  he  conU  not  possibly  live  there  beyond 
six  months,  being  snre  to  die  of  fever  at  the  time  of  the  Solstice,  or  Midsummer. 

2  /  believe,  Stasmtui) — ^Ver.  545.  Philto  only  says  so  for  peace  sake,  as  no  man 
in  his  senses  was  likely  to  believe  a  word  of  it.  As  he  does  hot  want  the  piece 
of  land  for  his  son,  he  wishes  to  make  no  words  about  it 

3  But  the  Campanian) — ^Ver.  545.  He  just  makes  this  remark  casually,  probably 
to  show  Stasimus  that  he  knows  about  things  in  general  as  well  as  he  does.  Some 
think,  however,  that  he  intends  to  correct  Stasimus,  and  to  tell  him  that  even  the 
Oampanians,  who  were  considered  an  effeminate  race,  could  boast  of  more  hardi- 
hood than  the  Syrians. 

*  To  impose  upony-Yer,  558,  "  Os  quoi  sublinat"— literally,  "  can  besmear  Ms 
face."  This  expression  alludes  to  the  practical  joke  of  making  a  fool  of  a  person 
by  painting  his  face  while  he  is  asleep. 

*  /  have  cleverly  frightenedy-Yer,  560.  As  before  remarked,  he  is  probably 
much  mistaken  in  thinking  so. 


y  Google 


Be.  IV.  THB  THBES  PIECES  07  MONEY.  31 

Phil.  Leaboniciis,  I  now  return  to  you. 

Lesb.  Tell  me,  if  you  please,  what  has  he  been  saying  to 
you? 

Phil.  "What  do  you  suppose  ?  He  is  a  man^ ;  he  wishes 
to  become  a  free  Tnan,  but  he  has  not  the  money  to  give. 

Less.  And  I  wish  to  be  rich,  but  all  in  vain. 

Stas.  {aside).  You  might  have  been,  if  you  had  chosen; 
now,  since  you  have  nothing,  you  cannot  be. 

Less.  What  are  you  talking  about  to  yourself,  Stasimus  ? 

Stas.  About  that  which  you  were  saymg  just  now :  if  you 
had  chosen  formerly,  you  might  have  been  rich;  now  you 
are  wishing  too  late. 

Phil.  No  terms  can  be  come  to  with  me  about  the  mar- 
riage-portion ;  whatever  pleases  you,  do  you  transact  it  your- 
self with  my  son.  Now,  I  ask  for  your  sister  for  my  son; 
and  may  the  matter  turn  out  well.  What  now  ?  are  you  still 
considering  P 

Lesb.  What — about  that  matter  ?  Since  you  will  have  it 
80 — may  the  Gods  prosper  it — ^I  promise  her. 

Phil.  Never,  by  my  troth,  was  a  son  bom  so  ardently 
longed  for  by  any  one,  as  was  that  expression  "  I  promise 
her,"  when  bom  for  me. 

Stas.  The  Gods  will  prosper  all  your  plans. 

Phil.  So  I  wish.  Gome  this  way  with  me,  Lesbonicus, 
that  a  day  maybe  agreed  on  for  the  nuptials,  in  the  presence 
ofLysiteles :  this  ayreement  we  will  ratify  on  that  same  day. 

(Hant  Philto. 

Lesb.  Now,  Stasimus,  go  you  there  (points  to  the  house 
which  he  has  sold  to  Gallicles)  to  the  house  of  Gallicles, 
to  my  sister ;  tell  her  how  this  matter  has  been  arranged. 

Stas.  I  will  go.    Lesb.  And  congratulate  my  sister. 

Stas.  Very  well.    Lesb.  Tell  Gaflicles  to  meet  me— 

Stas.  But  rather  do  you  go  now 

Lesb.  That  he  may  see  what  is  necessary  to  be  done  about 
the  portion. 

Stas.  Do  go  now.  Lesb.  For  I  have  determined  not  to 
give  her  without  a  portion. 

Stas.  But  rather  do  you  go  now.  Lesb.  And  I  will  never 
allow  it  to  be  a  detriment  to  her  hy  reason  of— 


Stas.  Do  be  off  now,    Lesb.  My  recklessness 

isaman,  wi 

y  Google 


^  HeUa  many^Ytr.  563.  Wis  meaning  seems  to  be,  "he  isa  man,  with  fsel- 
iogi  like  oanebres,  and  natoiaUj  wishes  for  his  freedom." 


32  TBiHrMMTJS ;  Act  HE- 

Stas.  Do  go  now^.    Lesb.  It  aeems  by  no  means  jusfc, 
but  that,  since  I  have  done  wrong 

Stas.  Do  go  now.    Less.  It  should  be  chiefly  a  detriment; 
to  myself. 

Stas.  Do  go  now.    Lksb.  O  my  fether !  and  shall  I  ever 
see  you  amin  ? 

Stas.  Do  go  now.    Go — go  now. 

Less.  I  am  going.    J^o  you  take  care  of  that  which  I 
have  asked  you.    I  shall  be  here  directly. 

{Madt  Lesboitcotjs. 

SobitbV. 
Stasimtts. 
Stab.  At  length  I  have  prevailed  on  him  to  go.  In  the 
name  of  the  immortal  Gods,  i'  faith,  'tis  a  matter  well  ma- 
naged by  wrongful  means  of  performance,  inasmuch  as  our 
piece  of  land  is  safe ;  although  even  now  'tis  still  a  very 
doubtful  matter  what  may  be  the  result  of  this  affair.  But, 
if  ihe  Icmd  is  parted  with,  'tis  all  over^  with  my  neck ;  I  must 
carry  a  buckler  in  foreign  lands,  a  helmet  t-oo,  imd  m^  bag- 
gage. He  will  be  running  away  from  the  city  when  the 
nuptials  have  been  celebrated;  he  will  be  going  hence  to 
extreme  and  utter  ruin,  somewhere  oar  other,  to  serve  as  a 
soldier,  either  to  Asia  or  to  COicia^,  I  will  go  there  Qooking 
at  the  door  of  the  Tiouse  hote^ht  hy  Caxlicles),  where  he  has 
ordered  me  to  go,  although  I  detest  this  house  ever  siuce  he 
has  driven  us  out  of  our  abode. 

(JEsdt  into  the  house  of  Chabmibes. 


ACT  THE  THIRD. 

SCEITE  I. 

JSnter  Callicles  and  Stasimfb. 

Call.  To  what  effect  were  you  speaking  about  this,  Sta- 
simus? 

'^  Dogo  now)— Ver.  586.  Stasimns  is  conticnally  nr^g  him  to  follow  PhiltO| 
and  bring  the  matter  to  a  condasion,  as  he  fears  that  so  gosd  an  Ofportnnity  ma j 
be  lost  throagfa  his  master^s  habitual  carelessness,  especially  as  Philto  has  agreed 
not  to  receive  the  land  as  a  maniage-portion. 

2  Tis«Z/oMr) — ^Ver.  595.  He  means  that  he  will  no  longer  have  any  support 
from  his  master,  and  that  he  will  have  to  turn  soldier,  and  so  earn  his  livdihood. 

>  Ana  or  to  CtUctay^Yer.  599.  Alhxdmg^  probably,  to  the  wa»  which  were  god. 


y  Google 


SC.  L  THE  THBEE  PIECES  OF  MOKEY.  83 

Stas.  That  Lesbonicus,  the  son  of  my  master,  has  betrothed 
his  sister ;  in  those  terms. 

CaUi.  To  what  person  has  he  betrothed  her  ? 

Stas.  To  Lysiteles,  the  son  of  Philto ;  without  a  portion, 
too, 

CAiiii.  Without  a  portion,  will  he  marry  her  into  a  family 
80  rich^  ?     You  are  telling  me  a  thing  not  to  be  credited. 

Stas.  Why,  faith,  you  would  be  for  never  believing.  If 
you  don't  believe  this,  at  all  events  I  shall  be  believing 

Call.  What  ?  Stas.  That  I  don't  care  a  fig  for  your 
helirf. 

Call.  How  long  since,  or  where,  was  this  matter  agreed 
to? 

Stab.  On  this  very  spot — ^here,  before  his  door  (pointing 
to  Philto' s  house).  This  moment-Hke^,  as  the  man  of  Prsd- 
neste  says. 

Call.  And  hafi  Lesbonicus,  amid  his  ruined  fortunes,  be- 
come so  much  more  frugal  than  in  his  prosperous  circum- 
stances? 

Stas.  Why,  in  fact,  Philto  himself  came  of  his  own  accord 
to  make  the  offer  for  his  son. 

Call,  (aside.)  By  my  troth,  it  really  wiU  be  a  disgrace,  il 
a  portion  is  not  given  to  the  maiden.  In  fine,  I  think,  i* 
faith,  that  that  matter  concerns  myself.  I  will  go  to  my 
corrector,  and  will  ask  advice  of  him.  (Exit, 

Stas.  I  pretty  nearly  guess,  and  I  have  a  strong  suspicion, 
why  he  makes  such  speed  on  this  :  nameh,  that  he  may  turn 
Lesbonicus  out  of  his  bit  of  land,  after  ne  has  turned  him 
out  of  his  house.  O  Charmides,  my  master !  since  your  pro- 
perty here  is  being  torn  to  pieces  in  your  absence,  I  wish  I 

tmnaUj  occnrring  between  the  Greeks  and  the  Persian  monarchs,  or  else  to  the 
enstom  of  hiring  themselves  ont  as  mercenary  soldiers,  as  Xenophon  and  the  ten 
thoosand  did  to  the  younger. Cyms. 

>  Into  a  famUy  to  ricA)— Ver.  606.  "  In  tantas  divitias,"  literally,  "  into  so 
great  wealth.** 

*  Thismoment-Uke) — ^Ver.  609.  "Tammodo."  He  is  joking  upon  the  patois 
of  the  people  of  Praeneste,  who  said  "tammodo,**  instead  of  "modo,"  "this 
instant,**  or  "  jnst  now.**  Festns  also  allndes  to  this  expression,  as  used  by  the 
Prsenestincs.  In  the  Trucnlentns,  act  iii.,  sc  2, 1.  23,  he  agwn  takes  them  off  for 
cutting  '*  Cioonia**  down  to  "  Ck>nia.'*  Prseneste  was  a  town  of  Latinm,  not  far 
from  Borne.    Its  present  name  is  Palestrina. 

D 


y  Google 


34  TBiir&Minrs ;  Act  m. 

eould  see  you  return  safe,  that  you  might  hath  take  vengeaace 
on  your  enemies,  and  give  the  reward  to  me  according  as  I 
have  behaved,  and  do  behave  towards  you.  'Tis  an  ex- 
tremely difficult  thing  for  a  Mend  to  be  found  reaUy  such  as 
the  name  imports,  to  whom,  when  you  have  entrusted  your 
interests,  you  may  sleep  without  *any  care.  But  lo  I  I  per- 
ceive our  son-in-law^  coming,  together  with  his  neighbour. 
Something — ^what,  I  know  not — ^is  wrong  between  them. 
They  are  walking,  eadi  with  a  hasty  step ;  the  one  is  catch- 
ing the  other  tliat  is  before  him  by  the  cloak.  They  have 
come  to  a  stop  in  no  very  courteous  fashion.  I'll  step  aside 
here  a  little  distance.  I  have  a  wish  to  hear  iiia  conversation 
of  these  two  that  are  to  be  connected  by  marriage.  (JBfo 
retires  to  a  distance^ 


Scene  IL 
JEnfer  Ltsiteles  cmd  LBSBomciis. 

Lys.  Stay,  this  moment ;  don't  turn  away,  and  don't  hide 
yourself  from  me.  {He  catches  hold  of  his  cloak.) 

Less,  (shaking  him  off).  Can't  you  allow  me  to  go 
whither  I  waa  proceeding  ? 

Lts.  If,  Lesbonicua,  it  seems  to  be  to  your  interest,  either 
for  your  glory  or  for  your  honour,  I  wiU  let  you  go. 

Less.  You  are  doing  a  thing  that  it  is  very  easy  to  do. 

Lts.  What  is  that?.  Lebb.  An  injury  to  a  frigid. 

Lrs.  It  is  no  way  of  mine,  and  I  have  not  learned  so  to 
do.    , 

Less.  Untaught  as  you  are^  how  cleverly  you  do  it.  What 
would  you  have  done,  if  any  one  had  taught  you  to  be  thus 
annoying  to  me  ?  You^  who,  when  you  pretend  to  be  acting 
kindly  to  me,  use  me  ill,  and  are  intending  eviL 

Lts.  What! — I?    Less.  Yes — you. 

Lts.  How  do  I  use  you  ill  ? 

Lesb.  Inasmuch  as  you  do  that  which  I  do  not  wish. 

Lts.  I  wish  to  consult  your  advantage. 

Lesb.  Are  you  kinder  to  me  than  I  am  to  myself?    I 

1  Own  «on-tn^2Ku;)— >Ver.  622.  He  means  Lycit^les,  the  contemplatod  son-in- 
law  of  his  master  Charmldes,  whom  h»  has  jast  been  apostrophising. 


y  Google 


S&  n.  THE  THBEIS  flSCXB  OT  HOKET.  85 

lunre  sense  enongli ;  I  see  sufficiently  well  those  things  that 
are  for  my  own  adyvntage. 

Lts.  And  is  it  haring  sense  enough  to  refttse  a  kindness 
from  a  well-wisher  ? 

Lb8b.  I  reckon  it  to  be  no  kindness,  when  it  does  not 
please  him  on  whom  you  are  conferring  it.  I  know,  and  I 
miderstand  myself  wntEt  I  am  doing,  and  my  mind  forsakes 
not  its  duty ;  nor  wiH  I  be  driren  by  your  speeches  from 
paying  due  regard  to  my  oum  character. 

JjTS,  What  do  jca  say  ?  Por  now  I  cannot  be  restrained 
from  saying  to  you  the  things  which  you  deserve.  Have 
your  forefathers,  I  praj ,  so  handed  down  this  reputation  to 
you,  that  you,  1^  your  excesses,  might  lose  what  before  was 
gained  by  their  merit,  and  that  you  might  become  a  bar  to 
file  honour  of  your  own  posterity  ?  Your  father  and  your 
grandfrtther  made  an  easy  and  a  level  path  for  you  to  attam  to 
honour ;  tokereaa  you  have  made  it  to  become  a  difficidt  one, 
hj  ycrur  extreme  recklessness  and  sloth,  and  your  besotted 
ways.  Tou  have  made  your  election,  to  prefer  your  passions 
to  virtue.  iWow,  do  you  suppose  that  you  can  cover  over 
your  faults  by  these  means  ?  Alas  \  'tis  impossible.  Wel- 
come virtue  to  your  mind,  if  you  please,  and  expel  slotkful- 
ness  from  your  heart.  GKve  your'  attention  to  your  he- 
friends  in  the  Courts  of  justice^,  and  not  to  the  couch  of 
your  she-friend,  as  you  are  wont  to  do.  And  earnestly  do  I 
now  wish  this  piece  of  land  to  be  left  to  you  for  this  reason, 
that  you  may  have  wherewithal  to  reform  yourself;  so  that 
those  citizens,  whom  you  have  for  enemies,  may  not  be  able 
altogether  to  throw  your  poverty  in  your  teeth. 

Less.  All  these  things  which  you  have  been  saying,  I 
know — could  even  set  my  seal?  to  them  :  how  I  have  spoiled 
my  patrimonial  estate  and  the  fair  fame  of  my  forefathers.  I 
knew  how  it  became  me  to  live ;  to  my  misfortune  I  was  not 
able  to  act  accordingly.  Thus,  overpowered  by  the  force  of 
passion,  inclined  to  ease,  I  fell  into  the  snave;  and  now  to 
you,  quite  as  you  deserve,  I  do  return  most  hearty  thanks. 

^  Jnihe  Comit  o/jmtke)—ya^  65L  it  was  the  ciutom  «f  tiie  yoang  men  of 
the  Patrician  class  anmg  tho  Bomass  to  plead  gratoitoisafy  for  their  friends  and 
^eots,  in  the  Fonun  or  Goort  of  jnstiee. 

*  Set  my  MoO— Ver.  665.  Affixing  tho  seal  to  an  instrnment  was  then^  as  now, 
tiiemoBt  sokmn  way  of  ratiffing  it. 

d2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


86  TBnnTMMirs ;  Act  m. 

Lys.  Still,  I  cannot  suffer  my  labour  to  be  thus  lost,  and 
yourself  to  despise  these  words ;  at  the  same  time,  it  grievea 
me  that  you  have  so  little  shame.  And,  in  fine,  unless  you 
listen  to  me,  and  do  this  that  I  mention,  you  yourself  will 
easily  lie  concealed  behind  your  own  self,  so  that  honour 
cannot  find  you ;  when  you  will  wish  yourself  to  be  especially 
distinguished,  you  will  be  lying  in  obscurity.  I  know  right 
well,  for  my  part,  Lesbonicus,  your  highly  ingenuous  dispo- 
sition ;  I  know  that  of  your  own  accord  you  have  not  done 
wrong,  but  that  it  is  Love  that  has  bUnded  yomr  heart ;  and  I 
myself  comprehend  all  the  ways  of  Love.  As  the  charge  of 
the  balista^  is  hurled,  so  is  Love ;  nothing  is  there  so  swift,  or 
that  so  swiftly  flies;  he,  too,  makes  the  manners  of  men 
both  foolish  and  froward^.  That  which  is  the  most  com- 
mended pleases  him  the  leasts ;  that  from  which  he  is  dissuaded 
pleases  him.  When  there  is  a  scarcity,  then  you  long  for  a 
thing  ;  when  there  is  an  abundance  of  it,  then  you  don't  care 
for  it.  The  person  that  warns  him  off  from  a  thing,  the 
same  invites  him ;  he  that  persuades  him  to  it  interdicts  him. 
'Tis  a  misfortune  of  insanity  for  you  to  fly  to  Cupid  for 
refuge.  But  I  advise  you  again  and  again  to  think  of  this, 
how  you  should  seek  to  act.  If  you  attempt  to  do  ac- 
cording as  you  are  now  showing  signs*,  you  will  cause  the 

1  Charge  of  ihe  balistay-Yer,  668.  The  word  "balista"  here  signifies  the 
charge  of  the  military  engine  known  as  the  "  balista."  It  was  used  by  the  an- 
cients for  the  purpose  of  discharging  stones  against  the  higher  part  of  the  walls 
of  besieged  places,  while  the  "catapulta**  was  directed  against  the  lower.  The 
charge  of  the  *'  balista  "  varied  from  two  pounds  to  three  hundred-weight. 

2  FooUsh  andfrowardy^\et,  669.  "  Moros."  This  word  is  derived  from  the 
Greek  fjumpbs,  "  foolish."  It  seems  to  be  used  in  juxtaposition  with  "  morosos/' 
for  the  sake  of  the  alliteration. 

'  Pleases  him  the  le€uty-Yer,  670.  So  Shakspeare  alludes  to  the  contradictory 
nature  of  love  in  Borneo  and  Juliet: 

"  Love— heavy  lightness  I  serious  vanity ! 
Misshapen  chaos  of  well-seeming  forms." 

*  Are  now  showing  stgns^^Yer.  675.  The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  extremely 
obscure.  Perhaps,  however,  it  is  this,  '*  If  you  persist  in  your  extravagance,  and 
are  resolved  to  part  with  this  land,  the  very  last  of  your  possessions,  you  will 
prove  the  conflagration  and  ruin  of  your  family.  Then  you  will  be  seeking  a 
remedy — ^water  with  which  to  quench  it  When  you  have  got  this  remedy,  as 
you  cleverly  suppose,  in  going  abroad  to  fight  and  earn  glory,  you  will  ply  it  with 
such  z^,  that  you  will  overdo  it,  and,  in  getting  killed  yourself,  will  thereby 
quench Ifae  hist  spark  on  which  the  very  existence  of  your  house  depended."    On 


y  Google 


8e.  n.  THE  THEBB  PIECES  OF  MOKBT.  87 

conflagration  of  your  family ;  and  then,  in  consequence,  you 
will  have  a  desire  for  water  with  which  to  quench  this  con- 
floffration  of  your  family.  And  if  you  should  obtain  it,  just 
as  lovers  are  subtle  in  their  devices,  you  will  not  leave  even 
one  spark  with  which  your  family  may  brighten  up. 

Lesb.  'Tis  easy  to  be  found :  fire  is  granted,  even  though 
you  should  ask  it  of  a  foe.  But  you,  by  your  reproof,  are 
urging  me  from  my  faults  to  a  viler  course.  You  are  per- 
suading me  to  give  you  my  sister  without  a  portion.  But  it 
does  not  become  me,  who  have  misused  so  great  a  patrimony, 
to  be  still  in  affluent  circumstances,  and  to  be  possessing 
land,  but  her  to  be  in  want,  so  as  with  good  reason  to  detest 
me.  Never  will  he  be  respected  by  others  who  makes  him- 
self despised  by  his  own  relatives.  As  I  said,  I  will  do ;  I  do 
not  wish  you  to  be  in  doubt  any  longer. 

Lts.  And  is  it  so  much  preferable  that  for  your  sister's 
sake  you  should  incur  poverty,  and  that  I  should  possess  that 
piece  of  land  rather  than  yourself,  who  ought  to  be  upholding 
your  own  walls  ? 

Lesb.  I  do  not  wish  you  so  much  to  have  regard  to  myself, 
in  order  that  you  may  relieve  my  poverty,  as  that  in  my 
neediness  I  may  not  become  disgraced :  that  people  may  not 
spread  about  this  report  of  me,  that  I  gave  my  own  sister 
without  a  portion  to  you,  rather  in  concubinage^  than  in 
marriage.  Who  would  be  said  to  be  more  dishonorable  than 
I  ?  The  spreading  of  this  report  might  do  credit  to  you,  but 
it  would  defile  me,  if  you  were  to  marry  her  without  a  por- 
tion. For  you  it  would  be  a  gain  of  reputation,  for  me  it 
would  be  something  for  people  to  throw  in  my  teeth. 

Lts.  Why  so  ?  Do  you  suppose^  that  you  will  become 
Dictator  if  I  accept  the  land  of  you  ? 

this  Lesbonicns  says,  though  not  carrying  on  the  metaphor  in  the  same  sense,  "  I 
will  find  means,  even  amid  the  enemy,  to  render  my  name  illastrious,  for  there 
the  fire  may  be  found  which  is  to  keep  my  family  from  becoming  extinguished." 

1  Rather  in  concubmagey-Yer,  690.  His  pride  is  hurt  at  the  idea  of  his  sister 
bang  married  without  a  portion,  and  thereby  losing  one  of  the  distinctive  marks 
between  a  wife  and  a  mistress.  It  was  considered  a  disgraceful  thing  for  a  female 
to  be  given  in  marriage  without  a  portion,  however  small. 

•  Do  you  ««Rpo«e)— Ver.  695.  Lysiteles  says,  satirically,  and  rather  unkmdly,  it 
wotdd  seem,  "  What,  do  you  suppose  that,  if  I  accept  this  piece  of  land  of  you, 
you  will  attiun  the  Dictatorship  as  the  reward  of  your  high  spirit?"  The  Die- 
tatwship  was  the  highest  honour  in  the  Boman  Bepublic. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


88  zBonnonri ;  AsA  HL 

Less.  I  neither  wish,  nor  require,  nor  do  I  tiiink  bo  ;  but 
still,  to  be  mindful  of  his  dutj,  is  true  honour  to  an  npright 
man. 

Lts.  For  my  part,  I  know  yon,  how  you  «pe  disposed  in 
mind ;  I  see  it,  I  discoT^  it,  I  apprehend.  Y(mi  are  d(nng 
this,  that  wh^i  you  have  formed  aa  allisnoe  between  us,  and 
when  you  have  given  up  this  piece  of  land,  and  hare  nothing 
here  with  which  to  support  hie,  in  b^;gary  you  may  fly  frcan 
the  city,  in  exile  you  may  desert  your  country,  your  kin- 
dred, your  connexions,  your  friends,— 4^e  nuptials  onoe  OTer. 
People  would  suppose  that  you  were  frightened  hence  by  my 
means,  and  through  my  cupidity.  Do  not  £incy  in  your  mind 
that  I  will  act  so  as  to  allow  that  to  h^pcu. 

Stxs.  {advancing).  Well,  I  cannot  but  exclaim,  '^  Well 
done,  well  done,  Lysiteles,  encore^."  Easily  do  you  win  the 
victory ;  the  other  is  conquered :  your  performance  is  supe- 
rior. This  one  {painting  to  Lysitsi^iss)  acts  better  in  charao- 
ter,  and  composes  better  lines^.  By  reason  of  your  folly  do 
you  still  dispute  it  ?   Stand  in  awe  of  the  fine. 

Less.  What  means  this  intenruptian  of  yours,  or  your  in- 
trusion here  upon  our  conversation  ? 

&TAB.  The  same  way  that  I  eame  here  I'll  get  me  gone. 

Lesb.  Step  this  way  home  with  me,  Lysiteles ;  there  we 
will  talk  at  length  about  these  matters. 

Lys.  I  am  not  ia  the  habit  of  doing  anything  in  seeret. 
Just  as  my  feelings  are  I  will  speak  out.  If  your  sister,  as  I 
think  it  right,  is  thus  given  to  me  in  marriage  without  a  por- 
tion, and  ^  you  are  not  about  to  go  away  hence,  that  which 
shall  be  mine,  the  same  shall  be  yours.  But  if  you  are  minded 
otherwise,  may  that  which  you  do  turn  out  for  you  for  the 
best.  I  will  never  be  your  friend  on  any  oth«r  terms ;  such 
is  my  determination. 

(IJadt  JjiiSBO^iCTJS,  followed  hy  Lysiteles. 

^  Eneorey-\er,  705.  IlaXiy.  This  Gredc  word  iras  no  doabt  used  by  the 
Bomans  just  u  we  employ  the  French  word  "  encore.**  In  a  rimilar  manner  it  was 
probably  used  in  the  theatres,  the  usage  of  which  is  here  figaratiTely  referred  to. 

«  Compotes  better  Kne$) — ^Ver.  707.  In  the  Kne  before,  he  allndes  to  the  contest 
of  the  Comic  poets  for  the  prize  of  Comedy,  to  be  decided  acoordiog  to  the  merits 
of  their  respective  plays.  As  the  poets  were  often  the  actors  of  their  plays,  he 
addresses  them  in  this  line  in  the  latter  capacity.  Then,  in  the  next  line,  he 
refers  to  the  custom  of  the  Bomans  in  early  times  of  training  slaves  as  actors, 
where,  if  they  did  not  please  the  spectators,  they  were  taken  off  the  stage  and 
fined  or  beaten  for  their  carelessness. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


isc  tv,  the  thbes  xizcbb  of  moket.  99 

sceitb  iii. 
Stabikvb. 
Stab.  Paii^,  he's  off.  D'ye  hear — ^Lysiteles  P  I  want  you. 
He's  off  as  well.  Btasimus,  you  remain  alone.  What  am  I 
now  to  do,  hut  to  huckle  up  my  haggage  and  sling  my  huckler 
on  my  hack-^,  and  order  soles  to  he  fastened^  heneath  my 
shoes  P  There  is  no  staying  now.  I  see  that  no  long  time 
hence  I  shall  he  a  soldier's  drudge.  And  when  my  master 
has  thrown  himself  into  the  pay^  of  some  potentate,  I  gueBB 
tiiat  among  1^  greatest  warriors  he  wiU  proye  a  hrave* — 
hand  at  running  away,  and  that  there  he  will  capture  the 
spoil,  who — shall  come  to  attack  my  master.  I  myself,  the 
moment  that  I  shall  have  assumed  my  bow  and  quiyer  and 
arrows,  and  the  helmet  on  my  head,  shall — go  to  sleep  very 
quietly  in  my  tent.  I'll  he  off  to  the  Forum;  I'll  ask 
that  ^eat^  back  of  the  person  to  whom  I  lent  it  six  days 
since,  that  I  may  haye  some  proyision  for  the  journey  to  carry 
with  me.  (Mnt, 

SoeiteIV. 
JEnfer  Megabonides  and  Caxlicles. 
Meg.  According  as  you  relate  the  matter  to  me,  CaUicles, 

1  On  my  &acJfe)— Ver.  719.  When  marching,  the  "  clypens,"  or  "  shield,"  wis 
ahiogon  the  bade  of  the  soldier.  The  "sarcina,"  or  "baggage,"  probably  re- 
sembled our  knapsack. 

2  Soles  to  he  fastened) — ^Ver.  720.  The  "  soccns"  was  a  slipper  or  low  shoe,  which 
did  not  fit  closely,  and  was  not  fastened  by  a  tie.  These  were  worn  both  by 
men  and  women,  and  especially  by  Comic  actors.  His  meaning  probably  is,  that 
he  will  be  obliged  to  have  high  heels  and  thick  soles  pnt  to  his  shoes,  so  as  to  turn 
tiiem  into  ^*  d^gse,"  the  heavy  kmd  of  shoes  worn  by  the  Koman  soldiexs. 

»/nto«6«j?ay>— Ver.  722.  "In  saginam,"  means  "forliis  food;"  as  what  we 
technically  call  "  the  mess"  was  provided  for  the  soldier  by  those  who  hired  him. 
The  term  "  sa^na"  is  fonnd  especially  applied  to  the  victnals  of  the  gladiators,  who 
were  trained  np  and  dieted  on  all  kinds  of  nourishing  food  for  the  purpose  of  adding 
to  thdr  strength,  and  thereby  heightening  interest  attendant  on  their  combats. 

*  Prove  a  hrtw)—Yer.  723.  In  this  line  and  the  next  he  is  witty  upon  the 
sorry  figure  which  he  fancies  Lesbonicus  will  make  in  the  field  of  battle. 

'  Ask  that  taienf) — ^Ver.  727.  Many  a  truth  is  said  in  jest,  and  perhaps  part  of 
this  talent  is  the  fruit  of  the  theft  which  he  seems  in  joke  only  to  admit  in  L  414 ; 
as  some  Commentators  have  remarked,  where  was  Stasimus,  a  slave,  to  get  so 
much  money  as  a  talent,  more  than  200Z.  ?  As,  however,  in  other  respects,  he 
seems  to  have  been  a  faitiiful  servant,  let  us  in  charity  suppose  that  he  came 
honestly  by  his  talent,  and  that  it  was  his  £urly  acquired  "  pecnlium." 


y  Google 


40  TBiinTMMVs ;  Act  UL 

it  really  can  by  no  means  be  but  that  a  portion  must  be 
given  to  tke  girl. 

Call.  Why,  troth,  it  would  hardly  be  honestly  done 
on  my  part,  if  I  were  to  allow  her  to  contract  a  marriage 
without  a  portion,  when  I  have  her  property  in  my  pos- 
session at  home.  ***** 

Meo.  *  *  *  *      A  portion  is  ready  at 

your  house ;  unless  you  like  to  wait  until  ner  brother  has  dis- 
posed of  her  in  marriage  without  a  portion.  After  that,  you 
might  go  to  Philto  yourself,  and  might  say  that  you  present 
her  with  a  portion,  and  that  you  do  it  on  account  of  your 
intimacy  with  her  father.  But  I  dread  this,  lest  that  offer 
might  bring  you  into  crimination  and  disgrace  with  the  public. 
They  would  say  that  you  were  so  kind  to  the  girl  not  with- 
out some  good  reason ;  that  the  dowry  which  you  presented 
her  was  given  you  by  her  father ;  they  would  think  that  you 
were  portioning  her  out  of  that,  and  that  you  had  not  kept 
it  safe  for  her  just  as  it  was  given,  and  that  you  had  with- 
held some  part,  ISTow,  if  you  wish  to  await  the  return  of 
Charmides,  the  time  is  very  long ;  meanwhile,  the  inclination 
to  marry  her  may  leave  this  Lysiteles ;  this  proposal,  too,  is 
quite  a  first-rate  one  for  her. 

Call.  All  these  very  same  things  suggest  themselves  to 
my  mind. 

Meg.  Consider  if  you  think  this  more  feasible  and  more 
to  the  purpose :  go  to  the  young  man  himself,  and  tell  him 
how  the  matter  really  stands. 

Call.  Should  I  now  discover  the  treasure  to  a  young  man, 
iU-regulated,  and  brimful  of  passion  and  of  wantonness  ?  N'o, 
faith,  most  assuredly,  by  no  means.  !For  I  know,  beyond  a 
doubt,  that  he  would  devour  even  all  that  spot  where  it  is 
buried.  I  fear  to  dig  for  it,  lest  he  should  hear  the  noise ; 
lest,  too,  he  might  trace  out  the  matter  itself,  if  I  should  say 
I  will  give  her  a  portion. 

Meg.  By  what  method,  then,  can  the  portion  be  secretly 
taken  out  ? 

Call.  Until  an  opportunity  can  be  found  for  that  business, 
I  would,  in  the  meanwhile,  ask  for  a  loan  of  the  money  from 
some  friend  or  other. 

Meg.  Can  it  be  obtained  from  some  friend  or  other  P 

Call.  It  can.     Meg.   Nonsense ;  you'll  certainly  meet 


y  Google 


Sc.  IT.  THB  THBBB  PIECES  OF  MOITET.  41 

with  this  answer  at  once :  "  O,  upon  my  faith,  I  really  haye 
not  anything  that  I  can  lend  you." 

Call.  Troth,  I  would  rather  they  would  tell  me  the  truth 
than  lend  me  the  money  mth  a  had  grctce. 

Meg.  But  consider  this  plan,  if  it  pleases  you. 

Call.  "What  is  the  plan  r  Meg.  I  have  found  out  a  clever 
plan,  as  I  think. 

Call.  "What  is  it  ?  Meg.  Let  some  person,  now,  be  hired, 
of  an  appearance  as  much  unknown  as  possible,  such  as  has 
not  been  often  seen.  Let  this  person  be  dressed  up  to 
the  life  after  a  foreign  fashion,  just  as  though  he  were  a 
foreigner. 

Call.  What  is  he  to  understand  that  he  must  do  after 
that? 

Meg.  It  is  necessary  for  him  to  be  some  lying,  de- 
ceiving, impudent  fellow — a  lounger  from  the  Forum. 

Call.  And  what  then,  after  that  ? 

Meg.  Let  him  come  to  the  young  man  as  though  &om 
Seleucia,  from  his  father ;  let  hmi  pronounce  his  salutation 
to  him  in  the  words  of  his  father,  say  that  he  is  prospering 
in  business,  and  is  alive  and  well,  and  that  he  will  be  snortly 
coining  back  again.  Let  him  bring  two  letters ;  let  us  seal 
these,  as  though  they  are  from  his  father.  Let  him  give 
the  one  to  him,  omd  let  him  say  that  he  wishes  to  give  the 
other  to  yourself. 

Call.  Go  on,  and  tell  me  still  further. 

Meg.  Let  him  say  that  he  is  bringing  some  gold  as  a 
marriage-portion  from  her  father  for  the  girl,  and  that  his 
fiither  has  requested  him  to  deliver  it  to  you.  Do  you  un- 
derstand me  now  ? 

Call.  Pretty  nearly ;  and  I  listen  with  great  satisfaction. 

Meg.  Then,  in  consequence,  you  will  finally  give  the  gold 
to  the  young  man  when  the  girl  shall  be  given  in  marriage. 

Call.  Troth,  *tis  very  cleverly  contrived, 

Meg.  By  thia  means,  when  you  have  dug  up  the  trea- 
sure, you  will  have  removed  all  cause  for  suspicion  from  the 
yomig  man.  He  will  think  that  the  gold  has  been  brought 
to  you  from  his  father ;  whereas^  you  will  be  taking  it  from 
the  treasure. 

Call.  Very  cleverly  and  fairly  contrived ;  although  I  am 
ashamed,  at  this  time  of  life,  for  me  to  be  playing  a  double 


y  Google 


42  TKSMVMxim^  ActllL 

psrt.  Bat  when  lie  sliall  bring  the  letters  isealed,  don't  yoa 
suppose  that  the  young  man  will  then  recollect  the  impiefl- 
sion  of  his  father's  signet^  ? 

Meg.  Will  you  he  silent  nowP  Eeascms  inmnnerdble 
may  be  found  ioet  iibat  circumfifcanee«  That  whidh  he  used 
to  haye  he  has  lost,  and  he  has  since  had  another  nerw  one 
made.  Then,  if  he  should  bring  them  not  sealed  at  ail,  this 
might  be  said, — that  they  had  been  unsealed  for  him  by 
the  custom-honse  officers^,  aiid  had  been  examined.  On 
matters  of  this  kind,  however^  'tis  mere  idLeneas  to  spend 
the  day  in  talk ;  although  a  long  discofision  might  be  spun 
out.  Q-o  now,  at  once,  privately  to  the  treasure ;  send  to  a 
distance  the  menHservants  €md  the  maids;  and — do  you 
hear? 

CalIi.  What  is  itP  1£b0.  Take  eore  that  you  ooneeal 
this  matter  &om  that  same  wife  o€  yours  as  well ;  for,  f 
faith,  there  is  never  any  subject  which  they  can  be  silent 
upon.  Why  are  you  standing  now  ?  Why  don't  you  take 
yourself  off  henoe,  and  bestir  yourself  ?  Open  the  treasure, 
take  thence  as  much  gold  as  is  reqinsite  for  this  purpose ;  ai; 
onoe  dose  it  up  again,  but  aecretly,  as  I  have  enjoined  you ; 
turn  all  out  of  the  house. 

Gai«l.  I  will  do  so.    Meg.  Eut,  leaBy,  we  are  eontinu- 

1  His  father's  signet) — ^Ver.  789.  The  custom  of  wearing  rings  among  the  Ro- 
mans was  said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Sabines.  The  stones  set  in  them 
were  generally  engraved  with  some  design,  and  they  were  universally  used  by  both 
Greeks  and  Romans  for  the  purpose  of  a  seal.  So  common  was  the  practice  among 
the  Greeks,  that  Solon  made  a  very  wholesome  law  which  forbade  engravers  to 
keep  the  form  of  a  seal  which  they  had  sold.  In  some  rings  the  seal  was  out  in 
the  metal  itself.  The  designs  engraved  on  rings  were  various ;  sometimes  portnuts 
of  ancestors  or  friends,  and  sometimes  subjects  connected  with  the  mythology  or 
the  worship  of  the  Gods.  The  onyx  was  the  stone  most  frequently  used  in  rings. 
The  genuineness  of  a  letter  was  tested,  not  by  the  signature,  but  by  the  seal  ap- 
pended to  it ;  hence  the  anxiety  of  GalHcles  on  the  present  occasion. 

*  The  custom-house  <>|^8i»r»>—Ver.  794.  The  "  portitores"  were  the  offieers  who 
collected  the  **  portorium,"  or  "  import  duty,"  on  goods  brought  from  foreign 
countries.  These  "portitores,"  to  whom  it  was  frequently  farmed,  greatly 
annoyed  the  merchants  by  their  unfair  conduct  and  arbitrary  proceedings.  At 
Home,  all  commodities,  including  slaves,  which  were  imported  for  the  pur- 
pose of  selling  again,  were  subject  to  the  "  portormm."  The  present  instance 
is  an  illustration  of  the  license  of  their  proceedings,  for  we  can  hardly  suppose 
that  they  were  entitled  as  of  right  to  break  open  the  seals  of  letters  from  foreign 
countries. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  THSSE  ZIX0S8  OF  HOKEY.  43 

big  too  loxig  a  diaeoxETse ;  we  are  wasting  the  day,  whereas 
t^e  ifi  ne^  now  of  all  expedition.  There  is  nothing  for 
you  to  fear  about  the  seal ;  ianut  me  far  thai.  This  is  a 
derar  excuse  to  give,  as  I  mentioned,  that  they  haye  been 
looked  at  by  the  officers.  In  fine,  don't  you  see  the  time 
of  day  P  "What  do  you  think  of  him  being  of  such  a  nature 
and  dispoidiion  ?  He  is  drunk  already ;  anything  you  like 
may  be  proved  for  him.  Besides,  what  is  the  greatest  point 
of  all,  thk  person  will  saj  liiat  he  brings,  ai^  not  that  he 
sppMea  for,  money. 

Caljj.  Now,  that's  einough. 

1£e».  I  am  now  going  to  hire  a  sharper^  £rom  the  Forum, 
and  then  I  will  seal  the  two  letters;  and  I'll  send  him 
thither  {pow^ing  to  the  house  <?/^CHAEM:rDBs),  well  tutored 
in  his  part,  to  tMs  young  man. 

Calii.  I  am  going  in-doors  then  to  my  duty  in  consequence. 
Bo  you  see  about  tlds  matter. 

Ms0.  I'll  take  care  it's  done  in  the  very  cleverest  style. 

{Exeunt. 


ACT    THE   FOITBTH. 

SCEITE  I. 

JEnter  Chasmtdes. 
Chabic.  To  Neptune,  potent  o'er  the  deep   and  most 
powerful,  the  brother  of  aethereal  Jove,  joyously  and  sin- 

1  A  tkmrper) — y«r.  815.  ^  Sjcopbaata.**  At  an  earfy  period  there  was  a  law 
at  AtiieDS  against  the  exportatioa  of  figs.  In  spite,  however,  of  prohibitions  and 
p«mlti^^  the  fig-growers  persisted  in  exporting  the  fruit.  To  inform  the  autho- 
lities  against  the  practice  was  deemed  mean  and  vezatioos,  so  the  statute  came 
in  time  to  be  looked  npon  as  obsolete.  Hence,  the  term  (rvKfXpavrclvi  "  to  in- 
fivm  relative  to  the  exportation  of  figs,"  came  to  be  applied  to  all  mean  and  dis- 
hoDeat  accnsatioiiB.  In  time,  the  word  '*  sycophant"  came  to  be  appEed  to  a  man 
vho  was  a  canning  and  Tillanoos  diaracter,  and  who,  as  it  has  been  justly  ob- 
Kr?ed,  in  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary,  was  "  a  happy  compound  of  the  common  bar- 
retor,  informer,  pettifogger,  busybody,  rogue,  liar,  and  slanderer."  In  fact,  he  was 
sach  a  person  as  we  mean  by  the  epithet  "swindler"  or  "sharper."  Information 
being  encouraged  by  the  policy  of  Athens,  and  the  informer  gaining  half  the  reward, 
itwas  upon  t^  honourable  calling  that  the  "  sycophantsB "  in  general  thrived. 
They  were  ready,  however,  for  any  other  job,  however  dishonorable,  and  perjury 
wodd  not  be  declined  by  them  if  they  could  obtain  their  price.  They  would,  conse- 
qwnfly,  be  much  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Courts  of  justice ;  and  the  "  Forum,'* 
>>  in  tiie  present  instance,  would  not  be  an  unlikely  place  to  meet  with  them. 


y  Google 


44  TBIKUMinTS ;  Act  IV, 

cerely  do  I  proflfer  praise,  and  return  my  grateful  thanks ; 
to  the  salt  waves,  too,  with  whom  lay  supreme  power  over 
myself, — one,  too,  that  existed  over  my  property  and  my  life, 
— ^inasmuch  as  from  their  realms  they  have  returned  me  safe 
and  sound  even  to  my  own  native  city.  And,  Neptune,  be- 
fore the  other  Deities,  do  I  both  give  and  return  to  you  ex- 
treme thanks.  Tor  all  people  talk  of  you  as  being  cruel 
and  severe,  of  voracious  habits,  filthy,  unsightly,  miendurable, 
and  outrageous ;  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  experienced  your 
kindly  aid.  For,  in  good  sooth,  I  have  found  you  mild  and 
merciful  upon  the  deep,  even  to  that  degree  that  I  wished. 
This  commendation,  too,  I  had  already  heard  with  these  ears 
before  of  you  among  men, — ^that  you  were  accustomed  to 
spare  the  poor,  cmd  to  depress  and  overawe  the  rich.  Adieu ! 
I  commend  you ;  you  know  how  to  treat  men  properly, 
according  as  is  just.  This  is  worthy  of  the  G-ods;  they 
should  ever  prove  benignant  to  the  needy ;  to  men  of  high 
station,  quite  otherwise.  Trusty  have  you  proved,  thrugh  they 
are  in  the  habit  of  saying  that  you  cannot  be  trusted.  For, 
without  you,  it  woidd  have  happened,  I  am  very  sure,  that 
on  the  deep  your  attendants  woiild  have  shockingly  torn  in 
pieces  and  rent  asunder  wretched  me,  and,  together  with 
me,  my  property  as  well,  in  every  direction  throughout  the 
azure  surface  of  ocean.  But  just  now,  like  raging  dogs,  and 
no  otherwise,  did  the  winds  in  hurricane  beset  the  ship; 
storms  and  waves,  and  raging  squalls  were  about  to  roar,  to 
break  the  mast,  to  bear  down  the  yards,  to  split  the  sails ;  had 
not  your  favouring  kindness  been  nigh  at  hand.  Have  done 
with  me,  if  you  please ;  henceforth  have  I  now  determined 
to  give  myself  up  to  ease ;  enough  have  I  got.  With  what 
pains  have  I  struggled,  while  I  was  acquiring  riches  for  my 
son.  But  who  is  this^  that  is  coming  up  the  street  with 
his  new-fangled  garb  and  appearance  ?  I'  faith,  though  I 
wish  to  be  at  home,  VVL  M<fBiit  awhile ;  at  the  same  time,  I 
will  give  my  attention  to  see  what  business  t\nB  fellow  is 
about.     (J2<9  retires  aside.) 

1  But  who  is  this) — ^Ver.  840.  It  seems  at  first  sight  rather  absurd  that  Cbar- 
mides,  who  has  just  returned  from  a  voyage,  should  wait  in  -the  street  to  gossip 
with  a  stranger  who  is  coming  towards  him ;  but  we  must  remember  that  he  sees 
that  the  fellow  is  making  straight  for  his  house,  and  his  curiosity  is  excited  by  that 
fact,  combined  with  the  very  extraordinary  dress  which  Megaronides  has  hired  for 
him  from  the  playhouse,  and  has  thereby  probably  much  overdone  the  character 
which  he  is  intended  to  represent. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  THE  THBEB  PIECES  OE  MOKET.  46 

Scene  II. 
3nter  the  Shabfeb. 

Shabp.  To  this  day  I  give  the  name  of  "  The  Festival  of 
the  Three  Pieces  "  (Trinummus)  ;  for,  on  this  day,  have  I  let 
out  my  services  in  a  cheating  scheme  for  three  pieces  of 
money.  I  am  jtut  arrived  from  Seleucia,  Macedonia,  Asia, 
and  Arabia,— -^?a(?tf«  which  I  never  visited  either  with  my  eye 
or  with  my  fcot.  See  now,  what  business  poverty  brings 
upon  the  man  that  is  wretchedly  destitute ;  inasmuch  as  I 
am  now  obliged,  for  the  sake  of  three  pieces  of  money,  to  say 
that  I  received  these  letters  from  a  certain  person,  about  whom 
I  don't  know,  nor  have  I  ever  known,  who  the  man  is,  nor  do 
I  know  this  for  certain,  whether  he  was  ever  born  or  not. 

Chabk.  (behind),  Eaith,  this  fellow's  surely  of  the  mush- 
room genus ;  he  covers  himself  entirely  with  his  top^.  The 
countenance  of  the  fellow  appears  to  be  Ulyrian ;  he  comes, 
Uh>,  in  that  garb. 

Shabp.  He  who  hired  me,  when  he  had  hired  me,  took  me 
to  his  house;  he  told  me  what  he  wanted  to  he  done;  he 
taught  and  showed  me  beforehand  how  I  was  to  do  every- 
thing. If,  then,  I  should  add  anything  more,  my  employer 
will  on  that  account  the  better  forward  his  plan  through  me. 
Ab  he  dressed  me  out,  so  am  I  now  equipped ;  his  money 
did  that.  He  himself  borrowed  my  costume,  at  his  own  risk, 
from  the  theatrical  wardrobe^ ;  if  I  shall  be  able,  now,  to 
impose  on  this  man  through  my  garb,  I  will  give  him  occasion 
clearly  to  find  that  I  am  a  very  trickster. 

Chab.  (hehind).  The  more  1  look  at  him,  the  less  does  the 
appearance  of  the  fellow  please  me.     'Tis  a  wonder  if  that 

»  With  his  top)— yet.  851.  The  Sharper,  as  personating  a  foreigner,  has  on  a 
"  petasQs,"  or  hat  with  very  wide  brims,  extending  straight  out  on  each  side.  For 
this  reason  Charmides  wittily  compares  him  to  a  mushroom — all  head.  The 
^^cansia'*  was  a  similar  hat  worn  by  the  Macedonians,  with  the  brims  turned  up 
at  the  sides. 

«  The  tkeatricdL  foardr6be)—yer,  858.  "Chorego"— literally,  "from  the 
Gboregus.**  It  was  the  duty  of  this  person  at  Athens  to  provide  the  Choruses  for 
tragedies  and  comedies,  the  Lyric  Choruses  of  men  and  boys,  the  dancers  for  the 
Pyrrhic  dance,  the  Cyclic  Choruses,  and  the  Choruses  of  flute-players  for  the  re- 
fig^ons  festivals  of  Athens.  He  also  had  to  provide  the  Chorus  with  the  requisite 
dresses,  wreaths,  and  masks—whence  the  application  to  him  on  the  present  occasion. 


y  Google 


46  TsnnjMicns;  Act  TV. 

fellow  there  is  not  either  a  night-robber^  or  a  cutpurse.  He 
is  viewing  the  locality;  he  is  looking  around  him  and  sur- 
veying the  houses ;  troth,  I  think  he  is  reconnoitring  the  spot 
for  him  to  come  and  rob  bye  and  bye.  I  have  a  still  greater 
desire  to  watdi  what  he  is  about :  I'll  give  attention  to  tliis 
matter. 

Shasp.  This  employer  of  nisne  pointed  out  these  localities 
to  me ;  at  this  house  a3»  my  devices  to  be  put  in  piactiee. 
I'll  knock  at  the  door. 

Chabk.  (hehind).  Surely  this  feUow  is  making  in  a 
straight  line  for  my  house ;  T  faith,  I  think  I  shall  have  ta 
keep  watch  this  night  of  my  arrival. 

Shabp.  (inockf  at  the  door  of  the  house  of  Chakmisbs). 
Open  this  door  !-—apen.  it  I  Hallo,  there  I  who  now  has  the 
care  of  this  door^  ? 

Chabm.  (eommg  up  to  Atm).  Young  man,  what  do  you 
want  ?  What  is  it  you  wish  ?  Why  are  you  knoi^dng  at 
this  door? 

Shabp.  Eh!  old  gentleman;  I  am  inquiring  here  for  « 
younff  man  named  Lesbonicns,  where  in  this  quarter  he  lives 
— and  likewise  for  another  person,  with  such  white  hairs  on 
his  head  as  yowr9 ;  he  that  gave  me  these  letters  said  bis 
name  was  CaUieles. 

Ghabm.  (ande).  In  fact,  this  fellow  is  looking  fi»r  my  own 
son  Lesbonicus  and  my  friend  CaUides,  to  whom  I  ^itrosted 
both  my  children  and  my  property. 

Shabp.  Let  me  know,  respected  sir^,  if  you  axe  acquainted 
with  it,  where  these  persona  live. 

1 A  mffkt-rMery—Ytgr.  S62;  **  Donnitstor*'  seems  to  mean  a  tiiief,  who  dept 
during  the  day  and  porsaed  bis  aTocatJons  bj  iii^t.  *'  Sector  sonarina'*  is  & 
*'  cutter  of  girdles,"  similar  to  our  "  cutpurse."  It  was  the  custom  of  persons  of 
the  middle  and  lower  classes  to  wear  their  purses  suspended  from  the  '*  zona,"  or 
^ girdle,"  round  the  waist;  and  someiimes  tbey  used  the  folds  of  the  girdle  itself 
for  the  purpose  of  depositing  their  money  therein. 

2  Care  of  this  door)— Ver.  870.  It  w«s  not  the  usage  to  enter  a  house  irithout 
^ving  notice  to  those  within.  This  was  done  among  the  Spartans  by  shouting,  while 
the  Athenians,  and  other  nations,  either  used  the  knocker  of  the  door  or  rapped 
with  the  knuckles  or  a  stick.  In  the  houses  of  the  rich  a  porter  was  always  ia 
attendance  to  open  the  door.  He  was  commonly  a  slave  or  eunuch,  and  was^ 
among  the  Romans,  chained  to  his  post  A  dog  was  abo  in  general  chained  near 
the  entrance,  and  the  waining,  "  Cave  canem,"  "Beware  of  Sie  dog,"  was  some- 
times written  near  the  door. 

»i2Mpectodw)-Ver.877.  "Pater,"  Uterally,  "father." 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THE  THBSB  PIXCBS  OT  MONET.  47 

Chaek.  Why  are  you  inquiring  for  them  P  Or  who  are 
jott  ? — Or  whence  are  you  ? — Or  whence  do  you  come  P 

Shasp.  I  gave  the  return  coirectly  to  the  Censor^,  when 
I  was  questioned  hy  him 

Chjlbm.  *  *  •  • 

Shasp.  You  ask  a  numher  of  things  in  the  same  hreath ; 
I  know  not  whi^  in  especial  to  inform  you  upon.  If  you 
will  aak  each  thing  singly,  and  in  a  quiet  manner^  Vll  hoth 
let  you  know  my  name,  and  my  business,  and  my  trayels. 

Ghabm.  I'll  do  as  you  desire.  Come  then ;  in  the  first 
place,  tell  me  your  name. 

Shaep.  You  begin  by  demanding  an  arduous  task. 

Chaem.  How  so  ? 

Shasp.  Because,  respected  sir,  if  yo«  were  to  begin  before 
daylight,  i'  faith^  to  commence  at  the  first  part  of  my 
name  2,  'twould  be  the  dead  of  the  night  before  you  could 
get  to  the  end  of  it 

Chasm.  Aeeording  to  yofcr  story,  a  person  should  hare  a 
long  journey's  provision  crammed  tightly  in  for  your  name. 

SfiABF.  I  hare  another  luime  somewhat  less, — about  the 
size  of  a  wine-cask^. 

Chajul  What  is  this  name  of  yours,  young  man  P 

Shasp.  "Hush,"  that's  my  name*;  that's  my  every-day 
one. 

Chasm.  I'  fsiith,  'tis  a  scampish  name ;  just  aa  though^ 

'  To  the  Censor) — ^Ver.  879.  "  Juratori."  Itwasthedatyof  the  Censor,  among 
the  Roinaos,  to  make  these  inquiries  of  every  person  when  taking  the  Census. 
As  the  Censors  were  bound  by  an  oath  to  the  fidthfol  discharge  of  their  duties, 
thqrwere^m  ooomiMi  witli  all  persons  so  bound,  called  ''jaratores,"  **oaths- 
mn."  The  Sharper  gnnes  Charandes  an  impudent  annver,  aaying  tJiat  he  has 
answered  the  Censor  on  these  points,  and  that  is  enough. 
I  *  Beginmng  of  my  name) — ^Ver.  865.  He  probably  alludes  to  his  varied  calling, 
commensurate  witk  eyerything  in  the  line  of  roguery.    See  the  Note  to  line  815. 

s  Size  of  a  wine  casky-YeiL,  868.  He  aUndes,  probably,  to  the  *'  amphora,*' or 
large  earthen  jar,  in  wtiich  wine  was  kept.  This  was,  perhaps,  aeant  saying,  just 
as  if  we  should  say,  ''Aa  little  aa  a  hogshead." 

«  "  Huth,"  that  i§  w^  «aiM>— Vec  889.  '*  Paz."  Thia  word  was  used  to  enjoin 
nlence,  like  our  word  **  Hush,"  or  **  Whi^"  He  seems  toaUude  te  his  own  thieving 
avocation,  which  ofUn  nquiced  him  to  be  as  mote  as  a  mouse.  Some  of  the  editions 
have  "  tax,"  as  though  from  "  tango,**  "  to  prig,"  or  "  steaL,"  This,  Thornton 
renders  "Touchit." 

^  Just  as  though) — ^Ver.  89L  This  passage  le  of  obseare  signification.  A  note  of 
exclamation  ought  to  be  insested  aftec  "  pax,"  and  then  the  meaning  of  the  old 


y  Google 


48  TEINUMMTTS  ;  Act  IV. 

you  were  to  say,  "  Hush,'*  if  I  were  confiding  anytliing  to 
you,  €md  then  it  is  at  an  end  forthwith.  {Aside,)  Tnis  fellow 
as  evidently  a  sharper.    What  say  you,  young  man ? 

Shaep.  "What  is  it  now?  Chaem.  Speak  out;  what  do 
these  persons  owe  you  whom  you  are  seeking  ? 

Shabp.  The  father  of  this  young  man,  Lesbonicus,  de- 
livered to  me  these  two  letters ;  he  is  a  friend  of  mine. 

Chabm.  (aside),  I  have  now  caught  him  in  the  fact ;  lie 
says  that  I  gave  him  the  letters.  I  will  have  some  fine 
sport  with  the  fellow. 

Shaep.  As  I  have  begun,  if  you  will  give  attention,  I  wiU 
say  on. 

Chaem.  I'll  give  you  my  attention. 

Shaep.  He  bade  me  give  this  letter  to  his  son,  Lesbonicus, 
and  this  other  one,  as  well,  he  bade  me  give  to  his  friend 
Callicles. 

Chaem.  (aside).  Troth,  but  since  he  is  acting  the  impostor, 
I,  on  the  other  hand,  have  an  inclination  to  act  the  cheat  as 
well.   Where  was  he  himself? 

Shaep.  He  was  carrving  on  his  business  prosperously. 

Chaem.  But  where  r    Shaep.  At  Seleucia. 

Chaem.  *****  And  did  you  receive  these  from 
himself  ? 

Shaep.  With  his  own  hands  he  himself  delivered  them 
into  my  hands. 

Chaem.  Of  what  appearance  is  this  person  ? 

Shaep.  He  is  a  person  somewhere  about  half  a  foot 
taller  than  you. 

Chaem.  (aside).  This  is  an  odd  matter,  if  in  fact  I  am 
taller  when  absent  than  when  present.  Do  you  know  this 
person  ? 

man  seems  to  be,  that,  as  in  conversation  a  stop  is  instantij  pat  to  the  disoonne 
on  saying  "  hnsh  I"  so,  if  an3rthing  is  entrusted  to  him,  it  is  as  eaaly  done  for 
(periisse),  and  that  it  vanishes  the  instant  yon  call  him  by  his  name.  This  is 
the  explanation  given  by  Lindemann.  Bitschel  reads  "  pax,"  but  most  of  the  old 
Commentators  have  **taz,"  which  seems  the  more  probable  reading.  The 
passage  is  thus  rendered  in  Thornton's  translation : 

Shabp.  'Tis  Tonchit; — that,  sir,  is  my  name. 

A  commm  one. 
Charm.  A  very  knavish  name: 

As  though  yon  meant  to  say  if  any  tlung 

Was  trusted  to  yon,  touch  ^  and  'tis  gone 


y  Google 


SC.  IL  THE  THBSX  VIXCE8  OF  HOIirEY.  49 

Shasf.  You  are  asking  me  a  ridienlons  qnestion ;  together 
with  him  I  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  my  meals. 

Chabm.  What  is  his  name  ? 

Shabp.  One,  i'  faith,  that  belongs  to  an  honorable  man* 

Chabm.  I  would  like  to  hear  it. 

Shabp.  Troth,  his  name  {hesitaiin^)'-hia — ^his —  (Ande.) 
"Woe  to  unfortunate  me. 

Chabm.  What's  the  matter  ?  Shabp.  Unguardedly,  I  this 
moment  swallowed  the  name. 

Chabm.  I  like  not  the  man  that  has  his  friends  shut  up 
within  his  teeth. 

Shabp.  And  yet  this  moment  'twas  dwelling  on  the  very 
edge  of  my  lips. 

Chabm.  (ande).  I've  come  to-day  in  good  time  before  this 
fellow. 

Shabp.  {aside).  To  my  sorrow  I'm  caught  in  the  iiict. 

Chabm.  Have  you  now  recollected  the  name  ? 

Shabp.  Tore  Gkods  and  men,  i*  faith,  I'm  ashamed  o/^«»y*«Zf. 

Chabm.  See,  now,  how  well  you  know  this  man. 

Shabp.  As  well  as  my  own  self.  This  is  in  the  habit  of  hap- 
pening :  the  thing  you  are  holding  in  your  hand,  and  seeing 
with  your  eyes,  that  same  you  are  looking  for  as  lost.  I'D. 
recollect  it  letter  by  letter.     C  is  the  beginning  of  the  name. 

Chabm.  Is  it  Callias  ?     Shabp.  Ifo :  it  isn't  that. 

Chabm.  Callippus  ?    Shabp.  It  isn't  that. 

Chabm.  Callidemides  ?     Shabp.  It  isn't  that. 

Chabm.  Gallinicus?    Shabp.  Noi  it  isn't  that. 

Chabm.  Or  is  it  CaDimaehus  ? 

Shabp.  'TKs  in  vain  you  suggest ;  and,  i'  faith,  I  really  don't 
care  one  filtip  about  it,  since  I  recollect  enough  myself  for 
my  own  purpose. 

Chabm.  But  there  are  many  people  here  of  the  name  of 
LesbonieuB ;  unless  you  tell  me  the  name  of  his  father,  I  cannot 
show  vou  these  persons  whom  you  are  looking  for.  What 
is  it  like  ?     Perhaps  we  can  find  it  out  by  guessing. 

Shabp.  It  is  something  like  this :  Char 

Chabm.  Chares  ?     Or  Charicles  ?     Or  is  it  Charmides  ? 

Shabp.  Ah !  that's  he ;  may  the  Deities  confound  him. 

Chabm.  I  have  said  to  you  once  before  already  •  *  *  * 
that  it  is  proper  for  you  rather  to  speak  well  of  a  man  that 
is  your  friend,  than  to  curse  him. 


y  Google 


60  TBINTJMMUS ;  Act  IV. 

Shaep.  Isn't  it  the  fact^  that  this  most  worthless  fellow 
has  lain  perdu  between  my  lips  and  my  teeth  ? 

Chaem.  Don't  you  be  cursing  an  absent  friend. 

Shaep.  "Why,  then,  did  this  most  rascally  fellow  hide 
himself  away  from  me  ? 

Chaem.  If  you  had  only  called  him,  he  would  have  an- 
swered to  his  name.     But  where  is  he  himself  now  ? 

Shaep.  Troth,  I  left  him  at  Ehadama^,  in  the  isle  of 
Apeland. 

Chaem.  *****  (aside).  What  person  is  there 
a  greater  simpleton  than  I,  who  myself  am  making  inquiries 
where  I  am  ?  But  it  is  by  no  means  unimportant  to  this 
present  purpose.     What  do  you  say  as ? 

Shaep.  What  now  ? 

Chaem.  I  ask  you  this.    What  places  have  you  visited  ? 

Shaep.  Flaces  exceedingly  wonderful  in  astonishing 
ways. 

Chaem.  I  should  like  to  hear  nibovit  them,  unless  it  is  in- 
convenient. 

Shaep.  Eeally  I  quite  long  to  teU  you.  Pirst  of  all  we 
were  conveyed  to  Pontus,  to  the  land  of  Arabia^. 

1  Im^t  it  ihefacty^Ver,  925.  He  alludes  to  his  having  forgotten  the  confounded 
name,  which  was  on  the  very  tip  of  his  tongue. 

2  At  Rhadamay-Yer.  928.  Ehadama  is  a  fictitious  name— pure  gibberish. 
"  Cercopia"  is  a  preferable  reading  to  "  Cecropia,"  which  was  an  epithet  of  Athens, 
itself  supposed  to  be  the  scene  of  the  Comedy.  The  other  word  would  imply  some 
unknown  region,  called  *^  Apeland,**  as  the  Sharper's  only  aim  is  to  impose  npcm 
the  credulity  of  Charmides,  and  to  hinder  him  from  asking  unseasonable  questions. 
He  coins  the  word  upon  the  spur  of  the  moment,  though  there  really  were  the 
"  Ape  Islands,"  or  the  isles  of  Pithecusae,  off  the  coast  of  Campania.  They  are 
mentioned  by  Ovid,  in  the  14th  book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1. 291 :  "  For  the  father 
of  the  Gods,  once  abhorring  the  frauds  and  perjuries  of  the  Gercropians,  and  the 
crimes  of  the  fraudulent  race,  changed  these  men  into  ugly  animals ;  that  these 
same  beings  might  be  able  to  appear  unlike  men  and  yet  like  them.  He  both 
contracted  their  limbs  and  flattened  their  noses,  bent  back  from  their  foreheads ; 
and  he  furrowed  their  faces  with  the  wrinkles  of  old  age ;  and  he  sent  them  into 
this  spot  with  the  whole  of  their  bodies  covered  with  long  yellow  hair.  Moreover, 
he  first  took  away  from  them  the  use  of  language  and  of  their  tongues,  made  for 
dreadful  perjury ;  he  only  allowed  them  to  be  able  to  complain  with  a  harsh  jab- 
bering" 

»  Lando/Arabiay^Yer,9^.  He  gets  out  of  depth  directly  he  leaves  imaginary 
places  and  touches  on  real  countries.  He  makes  Arabia  to  be  in  Pontus,  while 
they  were  really  about  two  thousand  miles  asunder 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THE  THBES  PIECES  Or  MONEY.  51 

Chabm.  How  now ;  is  Arabia  then  in  Fontus  F 

Shaep.  It  is.  Not  that  Arabia  where  frankincense  is  pro- 
duced, but  where  the  wormwood  grows^,  and  the  wild  mar- 
joram which  the  poultry  love. 

Chaem.  (aside) .  An  extremely  ingenious  knave  this.  But 
the  greater  simpleton  I,  to  be  asking  of  this  fellow  from  what 
place  I  have  come  back,  a  thi/rig  which  I  know,  and  he  does 
not  know ;  except  that  I  have  a  mind  to  try  how  he  will  get 
out  of  it  at  last.  But  what  say  jou  further  ?  "Whither  did 
you  go  next  from  thence  ? 

Shaep.  If  you  give  me  your  attention,  I  will  tell  you.  To 
the  source  of  the  river  which  arises  out  of  the  heavens,  from 
beneath  the  throne  of  Jupiter. 

Chaem.  Bei^th  the  throne  of  Jupiter  ? 

Shaep.  Yes :  I  say  so. 

Chaem.  Out  of  the  heavens  ? 

Shaep.  Aye,  out  of  the  very  middle. 

Chasm.  How  now ;  and  did  you  ascend  even  to  the  hea- 
vens ? 

Shaep.  Yes :  we  were  carried  in  a  little  skifF^  right  on,  up 
the  river,  against  the  tide. 

Chaem.  And  did  you  see  Jupiter  as  well  ? 

Shaep.  The  other  Gods  said  that  he  had  gone  to  his 
country-house,  to  dole  out  the  victuals  for  his  slaves.  Then, 
after  that 

Chaem.  Then  after  that — I  don't  want  you  to  relate  any- 
thing more. 

Shaep.  Troth,  I'm  silent,  if  it's  troublesome. 

Chaem.  Why,  no  decent  person^  ought  to  tell  it,  who  has 
gone  from  the  earth  to  heaven. 

Shaep.  I'll  leave  you,  as  I  see  you  wish  it.  But  point  me 
out  these  persons  whom  I  am  looking  for,  and  to  whom  I 
must  deliver  these  letters. 

1  Wormioood  grows) — ^Ver.  935.  If  he  really  refers  here  to  Pontas,  he  acci- 
dentally hits  upon  the  truth.  Ovid,  when  in  hanishment  there,  says,  in  the 
Tristia,  £1. 13, 1.  21,  *'  Let  the  white  wormwood  first  be  wanting  in  the  freezing 
Pontus."  The  Sharper  tries  to  correct  himself  by  saying  he  means  another 
Arabia,  and  not  the  one  generally  known,  where  the  frankmcense  grows. 

«  InaUtUe  8Jdff)—Ver.  942.  "  Horiola,"  or  **  horia,"  was  a  small  skiff  or  smack 
used  by  fishermen. 

'  No  decent  person) — ^Ver  947.  He  is  supposed  covertly  to  allude  to  the  dis- 
graceful story  of  Ganymede  being  carried  off  by  the  eagle  to  minister  to  the  lust 
of  Jnpiter. 

e2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


S2  TsnnncMUB ;  Act  lY- 

Ghabm.  What  say  you  ?  If  now  perchance  you  were  to 
see  Charmidea  himself,  him,  I  mean^  who  you  say  gave  you 
these  letters,  would  you  know  the  man  ? 

ShJlBP.  By  my  troth  now,  do  you  take  me  to  be  a  brute 
beast,  who  really  am  not  able  to  recognise  the  pertan  with 
whom  I  have  been  spending  my  life  P  And  would  he  have 
been  such  a  fool  as  to  entrust  to  me  a  thousand  Philippean: 
pieces,  which  gold  he  bade  me  carry  to  his  son,  and  to  his 
friend  Gallicles,  to  whom  he  said  that  he  had  entrusted  his 
affairs  P  Would  he  have  entrusted  them  to  me  if  he  had 
not  known  me,  and  I  him,  very  intimately  P 

Ghabm.  (aside).  I  really  have  a  longing  now  to  swindle 
this  swindler,  if  I  can  cozen  him  out  of  these  thousand 
Philippean  pieces  which  he  has  said  that  I  hsuge  given  to  him. 
A  person,  that  I  know  not  who  he  is,  and  have  never  beheld 
him  with  my  eyes  before  this  day,  should  I  be  entrusting  gold 
to  him  ?  A  man,  to  whom,  if  his  life  were  at  stake,  I  would 
not  entrust  a  dump  of  lead.  This  fellow  must  be  adroitly 
dealt  with  by  me.  Hallo !  Mister  Hush,  I  want  three  words 
with  you. 

Shaep.  Even  three  hundred,  if^ou  lihe^ 

Chabm.  Have  you  that  gold  which  you  received  from 
Gharmides  P 

Shaep.  Yes,  and  Piulippeans,  too,  counted  out  on  the 
table  with  his  own  hand,  a  thousand  pieces. 

Ghabm.  You  received  it,  you  mean,  from  Gharmides 
himself  P 

Shaep.  'Twere  a  wonder  if  I  had  received  it  of  his  father, 
or  of  his  grandfather,  who  are  dead. 

Ghabm.  Then,  young  man,  hand  me  over  this  gold. 

Shabp.  {staring  at  him).  What  gold  am  I  to  give  you  ? 

Ghabm.  That  which  you  have  owned  you  received  from  me. 

Shaep.  Received  from  you  P 

Ghabm.  Tes,  I  say  so. 

Shabp.  Who  are  you  P  Ghabm.  I  am  Gharmides,  who 
gave  you  the  thousand  pieces  of  money. 

Shaep.  I'  faith,  you  are  not  he ;  and  this  day,  you  never 
shall  be  he,  for  this  gold,  at  any  rate.  Away  with  you,  if  you 
please,  you  impostor !  {Aside,)  You  are  tiying  to  cheat  the 
cheater. 

Ghabm.  I  am  Gharmides.    Shabp.  V  £suth,  you  axe  so  to 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THE  THBSE  THECXB  OF  MOITEY.  68 

no  puipoBe,  for  I  cany^  no  gold.  Sight  cleverly  were  you 
down  upon  me,  at  ihe  very  nidk  of  time.  After  I  said  tliat 
I  was  bringing  the  gold,  that  instant  you  became  Gharmides. 
Before  I  made  mention  of  ike  gold,  you  were  not  he.  It 
won't  do.  Just,  therefore,  in  such  manner  as  you  Ohar- 
midised  yourself,  do  you  again  un-Oharmidise  yourself. 

Chaiuc.  Who  am  I,  then,  if  in  fact  I  am  not  he  who  I 
realkf  am  ? 

Sha-rp.  Wbafc  matters  thai;  to  me  P  So  long  as  you  are 
not  he  whom  I  do  not  choose  you  to  be,  you  may  be  who  you 
like,  for  what  I  care.  Just  now,  you  were  not  he  who  you 
were,  now  you  are  become  he  who  then  you  were  not. 

Chabm.  Come,  despatch,  if  you  are  going  to  do  it. 

Shabp.  What  am  I  to  do  ? 

Chabm.  Give  me  back  the  gold. 

Shabp.  Toii  are  dreaming,  old  gentleman. 

Chabm.  Did  you  own  that  Charmides  delivered  the  gold 
to  you? 

Shabp.  Yes — ^inwriting^.  Chabm.  Are  you  making  haste 
or  not,  you  night-robber,  to  be  off  with  all  speed  thw  very 
instant  from  this  neighbourhood,  before  I  order  you  to  be 
soundly  cudgelled  on  the  spot  ? 

Shabp.  Yot  what  reason  ?  Chabm.  Because  I  am  that 
self-same  Charmides  about  whom  you  have  been  thus  lying, 
and  who  you  said  gave  the  letters  to  you. 

Shabp.  How  now ;  prithee,  are  you  realli/  he  ? 

Chabm.  I  really  am  he.  Shabp.  Say  you  so,  pray  ?  Are 
you  really  he  himself? 

Chabm.  I  do  say  so.    Shabp.  Are  you  his  own  self? 

Chabm.  His  own  self,  I  sav.    I  am  Charmides. 

Shabp.  And  are  you  then  his  own  self  ? 

Chabm.  His  own  very  self.  Begone  hence  out  of  my  sight. 

^  For  I  cany) — ^Ver.  973.  He  takes  the  other  to  he  as  great  a  rogue  as  himsdf, 
and  means,  that  his  heing  Gharmides  only  depended  on  whether  he  himself  ad- 
mitted that  he  was  in  possession  of  the  gold  of  Charmides. 

^  Tes,  in  writing) — ^Ver.  982.  This,  of  conrse,  was  the  fact,  as  Megaronides  and 
Callicles  would  know  hetter  than  entrust  the  fellow  with  any  money.  It  pro- 
bably means  that  he  was  entrusted  with  a  letter  to  Callicles,  enclosing  a  coun- 
terfeit bill  at  nght,  or  order  on  the  Athenian  bankers  for  payment  of  a  thousand 
Philippeans  to  Callicles.  This,  Callicles  was  to  show  to  Lesbonicus,  to  put  him 
off  the  scent  as  to  the  treasure  whence  the  money  really  was  taken.  The  Sharper 
has  told  Charmides  that  he  has  the  money  with  him,  merely  by  way  of  boasting  of 
bis  trustworthy  character. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


64  TBiKmcMirs ;  Act  IV. 

Shaep.  Since  you  really  have  made  your  appearance  here 
thus  late,  you  shall  be  beaten  both  at  my  own  award^  and 
that  of  the  new  -Sdiles. 

Chaem.  And  are  you  abusing  me  as  well  ? 

Shabf.  Yes;  seemg  that  you  have  arrived  in  safety^, 
may  the  Grods  confound  me,  if  I  care  a  straw  for  you,  had  you 
perished  first.  I  have  received  the  money  for  this  job  ;  you, 
I  devote  to  bad  luck.  But  who  you  are,  or  who  you  are  not, 
I  care  not  one  jot.  I'U  go  omd  carry  word^  to  him  who 
gave  me  the  three  pieces,  that  he  may  know  that  he  has 
thrown  them  away.  I'm  off.  Live  with  a  curse,  and  fare 
you  iU;  may  all  the  Q-ods  confound  you,  Charmides,  for 
coming  jBpom  abroad*.  (JSaii. 


Scene  III. 

Chabmides. 

Chab.  Since  this  fellow  has  gone,  at  last  a  time  and 
opportunity  seem  to  have  arrived  for  speaking  out  with- 
out restraint.  Already  does  this  sting  pierce  my  breast — 
what  business  he  could  have  before  my  house  ?  For  these 
letters  summon  apprehensions  into  my  heart ;  those  thou- 

^  Atmy  own  award) — ^Ver.  990.  He  means  to  tell  Charmides,  tliat  by  delaying 
his  return  thus  late,  he  has  spoilt  his  prospect  of  a  lucrative  job ;  and  he  then  adds, 
that  he  deserves  a  thrashing,  equally  with  the  actor  who  came  on  the  stage  too 
late.  The  actors  in  early  times,  being  often  slaves,  were  liable  to  punishment  if 
they  ofifended  the  audience.  The  ^diles  were  the  officers  under  whose  super- 
intendence the  plays  were  performed;  and  probably  with  them  lay  the  decision 
whether  the  actor  should  be  punished  for  coming  late  on  the  stage,  after  he  had 
been  pronounced  deserving  of  it  in  the  opinion  (arbitratu)  of  the  spectators.  See 
the  Note  to  1.  707. 

*  Have  arrived  in  safeti/}—Yer.  991.  "  Advenis."  After  this  word,  CaDiclcs 
might  suppose  that  the  Sharper  is  going  to  congratulate  in  the  usual  terms  on  bis 
safe  arrival;  but,  instead  of  that,  the  fellow  pauses,  and  then  finishes  with  a 
malediction. 

»  Go  and  carry  word) — ^Ver.  995.  To  tell  him  that  he  has  given  the  three  pieces 
to  no  purpose,  for  the  real  Charmides  has  made  his  appearance,  and  has  completely 
spoiled  the  plot. 

*  From  abroad) — ^Ver.  997.  This  scene  is  replete  with  true  comic  spirit.  It  has 
been  supposed  by  some  that  the  disgrace  of  the  pedant  in  Shakspeare*s  Taming  of 
the  Shrew,  and  his  assummg  the  name  and  character  of  Vincentio,  were  suggested 
by  this  scene.  A  similar  incident  is  met  with  in  the  old  play  of  Albumazar, 
act  iv.,  so.  8,  and  most  probably  it  was  borrowed  from  the  present  passage. 


yC^oogle 


Sc.  IT.  THE  THBBE  PIBOBS  OP  MONET.  55 

sand  pieces,  too — ^what  purpose  they  were  to  serve.  I'  feith, 
a  bell^  is  never  rung  for  no  purpose;  unless  some  one 
handles  it  or  moves  it,  'tis  mute,  'tis  dumb.  But  who  is 
this,  that  is  beginning  to  run  this  way  along  the  street  ?  I 
should  like  to  observe  what  he  is  about.  I'll  step  aside  this 
way.     (JHe  retires  aside,) 


Scene  IV. 
Unter  Stasimtts. 

St  AS.  (to  himself),  Stasimus,  make  you  haste  with  all 
speed ;  away  vjrith  you  to  your  master's  house,  lest  on  a  sud- 
den, through  your  folly,  fears  should  arise  for  your  shoulder- 
blades^.  Quicken  your  pace,  make  haste ;  'tis  now  a  long 
while  since  you  left  the  house.  If  you  shall  be  absent  when 
inquired  after  by  your  master,  take  you  care,  please,  that  the 
smacks  of  the  bull's-hide^  don't  clatter  thick  upon  you.  Don't 
you  cease  running.  See  nowy  Stasimus,  what  a  worthless 
fellow  you  are  ;  and  isn't  it  the  fact  that  you  have  forgotten 
your  ring*  at  the  liquor-shop^,  after  you  have  been  washing 

*  r/mihy  a  heU) — ^Ver.  1004.  He  aptly  compares  the  worthless  fellow  to  a  bell, 
and  then  shrewdly  judges  that  a  bell  cannot  ring  unless  it  is  put  in  motion  by 


*  For  your  8houlder-hlade8)~^Yer,  1009.  The  slaves  among  the  Romans  were 
whipped  most  unmercifully  with  the  "flagellum,"  a  whip,  to  the  handle  of  which 
a  lash  was  fastened,  made  of  cords  or  thongs  of  leather,  especially  from  the  ox's 
bide.  It  was  often  knotted  with  bones,  or  pieces  of  bronze,  or  terminated  by 
hooks,  and  was  then  not  inaptly  termed  "  a  scorpion."  The  infliction  of 
punishment  with  this  on  the  naked  back  was  sometimes  fatal,  and  was  carried 
into  execution  by  a  class  of  slaves  who  were  called  "  lorarii.'* 

»  Smacks  ofthebuir8'hide)—Yer,  1011.  "  Cottabus"  was  a  game  played  by  the 
Sicilians  and  Greeks,  in  which  the  players  had  in  turn  to  throw  wine  out  of  a 
goblet  into  a  metal  basin  at  a  certain  distance,  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  spill  any  of 
the  wine.  The  methods  in  which  the  game  was  played  are  stated  with  precision 
in  an  able  article  in  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary.  As  one  of  the  merits  of  the  game  was 
that  the  wine  thrown  should  in  its  fall  produce  the  strongest  and  most  pat  sound, 
Stasimus  here  calls  the  smacks  of  the  whip  on  his  back  so  many  "  bubuli  cottabi," 
"ox-hide  smacks." 

*  Forgotten  your  ring) — ^Ver.  1014.  We  learn  from  Cselius  Bhodiginus  that 
"oondalium"  was  a  peculiar  kind  of  ring  worn  by  slaves. 

*  At  the  liquor-sJiqp)—Yer.  1013.  The  "  thermopolia"  are  supposed  to  have  been 
the  same  as  the  "  popinse,"  shops  where  drinks  and  ready-dressed  provisions  were 


y  Google 


66  TBiannof  us ;  Act  IV. 

your  throat  with  wami  drink  P  Turn  about,  and  run  bads: 
nowy  to  seek  it,  while  the  thing  has  but  just  happened. 

Chabmibes  (behind).  Whoever  be  is,  his  throat  is  his 
taskmast^^ ;  that  teaches  this  fellow  the  art  of  running. 

Stas.  What,  good-for-nothing  fellow,  are  you  not  ashaiaed 
of  yourself?  having  lost  your  memory  after  imly  three 
cups  ?  And  really,  because  you  were  there  drinking  toge- 
ther with  such  honest  fellows,  who  could  keep  their  hands 
off  2  the  property  of  another  without  difficulty ; — ^is  it  among 
such  men  that  you  expect  you  may  recover  your  ring  ? 
Chiruchus  was  there,  Cerconicus,  Orimnus,  Cricolabus,  Col- 
labus^,  whipped-necks*,  whipped-legs,  iron-rubbers,  whipped- 
knayes.  By  my  faith,  any  one  of  these  could  steal  the  sole 
of  his  shoe  £:om  a  running  footman^. 

Bold.  Thej  were  veiy  numerous  throughout  Italj.  The  keepers  of  them  were 
called  "  popee."  In  the  present  instance  we  learn  what  kind  of  people  visited 
them,  and  Cicero  tells  us  that  thej  were  frequented  hy  the  slaves  and  the  lower 
orders.  They-  sat  on  stools  or  benches,  while  they  drank  "  calda,"  or  '^calida,*' 
"  mulled  wine,"  which  was  always  kept  hot  It  was  probably  misied  with  spices, 
and  was  the  favourite  drink  of  the  lower  cksses.  It  was  measured  out  in  "  po- 
teria,'*  '*  drau|;hts/'  which  are  here  mentioned ;  and  which  formed,  probably, 
about  a  moderate  cupfuL  Claudius  commanded  the  "  thermopolia"  to  be  closed 
at  one  period  of  his  reign. 

^  ffis  throat  is  his  tashmaMer) — Yer.  1016.  He  has  overheard  what  Stanmus 
has  said  about  warming  his  throjit  in  1. 1014;  and,  talking  to  himself,  he  remarks 
that  his  throat  will  be  the  cause  of  his  learning  how  to  run,  as  he  warms  his 
throat,  gets  drunk,  loses  his  ring,  runs  h(Nneward,  and  then  runs  back  to  find  it. 

2  Would  keep  their  hands  qf}—VeT.  1019.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  in- 
tended to  be  said  satirically. 

'  Cricolabus,  CoHaJImsy—Yer,  1021.  These  are  either  nicknames,  or,  possibly, 
names  really  ^ven  to  slaves,  as  in  all  ages  and  countries  masters  have  especially 
tried  to  show  their  wit  in  naming  their  slaves. 

*  IFXtjRped-necite)— Ver.  1022.  "  CoUicrepida''  and  »*  CruricrepidsB"  were  pro- 
bably cant  terms  for  slaves,  who  carried  the  marks  of  punishment  on  their  necks 
and  legs.  "  Crepidse"  is  from  the  verb  "  crepo,"  to  "  crack,"  and  alludes  to  the 
sound  of  the  lashes.  '^  Ferriterius**  was  a  slave  who  bore  the  marks  of  the  chain 
with  which  he  had  been  fastened  for  refractory  conduct,  while  "  mastigia*'  was  a 
name  given  to  a  slave  who  had  passed  the  wdeal  of  flog^g.  A  liquor-shop  was 
a  likely  place  for  the  resort  of  worthless  and  refractory  slaves. 

»  From  a  running  footman)--^fw.  1023,  "  Cursores"  were  slaves  who  ran  before 
the  carriage  of  their  masters  for  the  same  purpose  as  our  outriders.  Perhaps, 
however,  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  word  here,  as  the  name  was  given  to  all 
slaves  whom  their  masters  employed  in  carrying  letters  and  messages.  Stasimus 
hints  by  this  that  his  boon  companions  were  not  only  very  expert  at  thieving,  but 
that  they  would  prey  just  as  readily  on  a  fellow-shive  as  any  other  person. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  THBKE  PIBCBS  OS"  MOKET.  67 

Chabm.  (behind).  So  may  i^  Gfods  love  me,  a  finished 
tliief. 

Stas.  Why  should  I  go  seek  what  is  gone  for  ever? 
Unless  I  would  bestow  my  pains,  too,  hy  way  of  addition 
over  and  above  to  my  loss.  Why,  then,  don't  you  consider 
that  what  is  gone  is  gone?  Tack  about,  then^.  Betake 
yourself  back  to  your  master, 

Ohabh.  (hehvni).  This  fellow  is  no  runaway;  he  remem- 
bers his  home. 

Stas.  I  wish  that  the  old-fashioned  ways  of  old-fashioned 
days,  and  the  old-fashioned  thrifbiness,  were  in  greater 
esteem  here,  rather  than  these  bad  wajrs. 

Chabm.  ihehini).  Immortal  €K>ds !  this  man  really  is  be- 
ginning to  talk  of  noble  doings!  He  longs  for  the  old- 
fashioned  ways ;  know  that  he  loves  the  old-fashioned  ways, 
after  the  fashion  of  our  forefathers. 

Stas.  For,  now-a-days,  men's  manners  reckon  of  no  value 
what  is  proper,  except  what  is  agreable.  Ambition  now  is 
sanctioned  by  usage,  cmd  is  free  from  the  laws.  By  usage, 
people  have  the  license  to  throw  away  their  shields,  and  to 
run  away  from  the  enemy.  To  seek  hinor  thereby  in  place  of 
disgrace  is  the  usage. 

Ohabm.  (behind),  A  shameless  usage. 

Stas.  Kow-a-days,  'tis  the  usage  to  neglect  the  brave. 

Chabm.  Q>ehind),  Aye,  'tis  really  shocking. 

Stas.  The  public  manners  have  now  got  the  laws  in  their 
pow^ ;  to  them  they  are  more  submissive  than  are  parents 
to  their  children^.  In  their  misery,  these  laws  are  even  hung 
up3  against  the  wall  with  iron  nails,  where  it  had  been  much 
more  becoming  for  bad  ways  to  be  fixed  up. 

Chabm.  (behind),  I'd  like  to  go  up  and  accost  this  person ; 
but  I  listen  to  him  with  much  pleasure,  and  I'm  afraid,  if  I 
address  him,  that  he  may  begin  to  talk  on  some  other  subject. 

^  Tack  about,  then) — ^Ver.  1026.  *'  Cape  yorsariam"  was  a  sea-pbrase,  meaniog 
*  turn,"  or  "  tack  abont ;"  as  "  vorsoria'*  was  the  name  of  the  rope  by  which  the 
nail  was  turned  from  one  direction  to  another. 

*  Parents  to  their  children) — ^Ver.  1038.  This  is  said  satirically  in  reference  to 
tiie  eormptness  of  the  age,  in  which  all  the  relations  and  duties  of  life  were  turned 
vpndedown. 

'  Are  evenhunffvp) — ^Ver.  1039.  He  alludes  to  the  custom  among  the  Romans 
of  writing  or  engraving  the  laws  and  ordinances  on  wood  or  brass,  and  han^ng 
them  up  for  public  inspection  upon  pegs  or  rails  in  the  Capitol,  Forum,  and  Curiae, 
or  Coort-houses. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


58  TBDnxMMUS ;  Acfc  IV. 

Stas.  And,  for  these  ways^  there  is  nothing  rendered 
sacred  by  the  law.  The  laws  are  subservient  to  usage ;  but 
these  habits  are  hastening  to  sweep  away  both  what  is  sacred 
and  what  is  public  property. 

CHA.BM.  (behind).  By  my  troth, 'twere  right  for  some  great 
calamity  to  befal  these  bad  customs. 

Stab.  Ought  not  this  state  of  things  to  be  publicly  cen- 
sured? Tor  this  kind  of  men  are  the  enemies  of  alL  per- 
sons, and  do  an  injury  to  the  entire  people.  By  a  non-ob- 
servance of  their  own  honour,  they  likewise  destroy  all  trust 
even  in  those  who  merit  it  not ;  inasmuch  as  people  form  an 
estimate  of  the  disposition  of  these  from  the  disposition  of 
those  j^ZZowa.  If  you  lend^  a  person  any  money,  it  becomes  lost 
for  any  purpose  as  one's  own.  When  you  ask  for  it  back 
again,  you  may  find  a  friend  made  an  enemy  by  your  kindness. 
If  you  begin  to  press  still  further,  the  option  of  two  things 
ensues — either  you  must  part  with  that  which  you  have  en- 
trusted, or  else  you  must  lose  that  friend.  As  to  how  this 
suggests  itself  to  me,  I  have  by  actual  experience  been  lately 
put  in  mind  of  it. 

Chaem.  (behind).  Surely  this  is  my  servant  Stasimus  ? 

Stas.  For  as  to  him  to  whom  I  lent  the  talent,  I  bought 
myself  an  enemy  with  my  talent,  and  sold  my  friend.  But  I 
am  too  great  a  simpleton  to  be  attending  to  public  matters 
rather  than  (what's  my  immediate  interest)  obtain  safety 
for  my  back.     I'll  go  home.     (Moves  as  if  going,) 

Chaem.  Hallo,  you !  Stop,  this  instant !  Ilarkye ;  hallo, 
you! 

Stas.  I'U  not  stop.     Chaem.  I  want  you. 

Stas.  What  if  I  myself  don't  want  you  to  want  me. 

Charm.  Why,  Stasimus,  you  are  behaving  very  rudely. 

Stas.  'Twere  better  for  you  to  buy  some  one  to  give  your 
commands  to. 

Chaem.  I'  faith,  I  have  bought  one,  and  paid  the  money, 
too.  But  if  he  is  not  obedient  to  my  orders,  what  am  I  to 
do? 

1  If  you  lend) — ^Ver.  1050.  Stasimus  has  experienced  this,  and  has  applied  for 
tlie  talent  which  he  lent,  bat  in  vain ;  unless,  indeed,  his  meaning  is  that  he  got 
back  the  talent,  but  lost  his  friend.  Shakspeare  has  a  somewlutt  similar  passage 
in  Hamlet: 

Neither  a  borrower  nor  a  lender  be ; 

For  loan  oft  loseth  both  itself  and  friend. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  THEEB  PIECES  OP  MOITBT,  59 

Stas.  Give  him  a  severe  punishment. 

Ohabm.  Tou  give  good  advice ;  I  am  resolved  to  do  so. 

Stas.  Unless,  indeed,  you  are  under  obligations  to  him. 

Chabm.  K  he  is  a  deserving  person,  I  am  under  obligations 
to  him ;  but  if  he  is  otherwise,  I'll  do  as  you  advise  me. 

Stas.  "What  matters  it  to  me  whether  you  have  good  or 
bad  slaves  ? 

Chabm.  Eecause  you  have,  a  share  in  this  matter  both  of 
the  good  and  of  the  bad. 

Stas.  The  one  share  I  leave  to  yourself;  the  other  share, 
that  in  the  good,  do  you  set  down^  to  my  account. 

Chabm:.  If  you  shall  prove  deserving,  it  shall  be  so.  Look 
back  at  me — 1  am  Charmides. 

Stab.  Ha!  what  person  is  it  that  has  made  mention  of 
that  most  worthy  man  ? 

Chabm.  'Tis  that  most  worthy  man  himself. 

Stas.  O  seas,  earth,  heavens,  by  my  trust  in  you — do 
I  Bee  quite  clearly  with  my  eyes  ?  Is  this  he,  or  is  it  not  ? 
Tis  he !  'Tis  certainly  he ;  *tis  he  beyond  a  doubt !  O  my 
most  earnestly  wished-for  master,  health  to  you ! 

Chabm.  Health  to  you,  too,  Stasimus ! 

Stas.  That  you  are  safe  and  sound,  I 

Chabm.  (interrupting  him),  I  know  it,  and  I  believe  you. 
But  wave  the  rest ;  answer  me  this ;  how  are  my  children, 
my  son  and  daughter,  whom  I  left  here  ? 

Stas.  They  are  alive,  and  well. 

Chabm.  Both  of  them,  say  you  ?     Stas.  Both  of  them. 

Chabm.  The  Gk)ds  willed  me  to  be  safe  and  preserved  ^owj 
dangers.  The  rest  that  I  want  to  know  I  will  inquire  about 
in-doors  at  my  leisure.     Let  us  go  in-doors ;  follow  me. 

Stas.  Where  are  you  going  now  ?  Chabm.  Where  else 
but  to  my  house  ? 

Stab.  Vo  you  suppose  that  we  are  living  here  ? 

'  Loyouaet  downy— Net,  1067.  "  Appone."  This  word  is  used  figuratively,  it 
bdnj;  employed  to  mean,  in  mercantile  matters,  *•''  to  set  down  to  one*s  account." 
So  Horace  says: 

Quern  sors  dierum  cumque  dabit,  lucro 

Appone 

"Whatever lot  each  day  shall  bring,  set  that  down  as  clear  gain."  This,  we  may 
Iwre  observe,  is  a  similar  sentiment  to  that  conveyed  in  the  remark  of  Callicles, 
165. 


y  Google 


60  tTEnnTMMtrs ;  Act  IV. 

Chaem.  Why,  where  else  should  I  suppose  ? 

Stab.  Now Ohabm.  What  ahotft  "now?** 

Stab.  This  house  is  not  our  own. 

Chaem.  What  is  it  I  hear  from  you? 

Stab.  Tout  son  has  sold  this  house. 

Charm.  I'm  ruined.  Stab.  For  silv^  inin» ;  ready  money 
counted  out. 

Chaem.  How  many?    Stab.  Forty. 

Chaem.  I'm  undone.     Who  has  pilrchased  it  ? 

Stas.  Callicles,  to  whom  you  entrusted  your  affairs;  he 
has  removed  here  to  live,  and  has  turned  us  out  of  doors. 

Chaem.  Where  is  my  son  now  living  ? 

Stas.  Here,  in  these  back  buildings.  (^Points  to  the  side 
of  the  house.) 

Chaem.  I'm  utterly  undone. 

Stab.  I  thought  that  this  would  be  distressing  to  you 
when  you  heard  of  it. 

Chaem.  To  my  sorrow,  amid  extreme  dangers  I  have  been 
borne  over  vast  oceans,  with  the  peril  of  my  life  I  have  pre- 
served myself  among  robbers  full  many  in  number,  and  I 
have  returned  safe.  Now,  to  my  misery,  I  am  here  undone 
by  reason  of  those  same  persons  for  whose  sake  I  have  been 
struggling  at  this  time  of  life  Grief  is  depriving  me  of  my 
senses.     Support  me,  Stasimus. 

Stas.  Do  you  wish  me  to  fetch  you  some  water  ? 

Chaem.  When  my  fortunes  were  in  their  mortal  struggle, 
then  was  it  befitting  that  water  should  be  sprinkled^  upon 
them. 


ScEIfE  V. 

Unter  Callicles. 

Call.  What  noise  is  this  that  I  hear  before  my  house  ? 
Chaem.  O  Callicles!  O  CalHcles!  O  Callicles!  to  what 
sort  of  friend  have  I  entrusted  my  property  ? 

Call.  To  one  good,  and  faithful,  and  trusty,  and  of  strict 

1  Should  be  sprinUedy^Yet.  1092.  His  meaning  is,  "  7<m  shonld  hare  been  as 
ready  to  give  jotur  assistance  at  the  time  when  my  fommes  were  in  their  death- 
straggle  through  the  conduct  of  my  son  Lesbonicns." 


y  Google 


8c.  V.  THE  THBBB  PIEOXS  OF  MOKEY.  61 

int^ty,    Healtli  to  you,  and  I  rejoice  that  you  haye  ar- 
rived safe  and  sound^. 


[Chabm.  How,  health  to  me  ?  Troth,  I  have  no  patience 
with  such  health.  This  I  wish  to  know ;  how  have  you  kept 
your  trust,  who,  without  my  knowledge,  have  utterly  de- 
stroyed my  property  and  my  children  that  I  entrusted  to  you 
and  committed  to  your  charge  when  going  hence  abroad  r 

Call.  I  don't  think  that  it  is  fair,  when  you  don't  under- 
stand the  matter,  to  censure  your  old  friend  mth  harsh 
words.  Eor  jou  are  both  mistaken  and  you  are  doing  me  a 
very  great  injustice. 

CsABM.  Have  you  not  bought  this  house  which  you  came 
out  of  just  now,  and  driven  thence  my  son  Lesbonicus  ?  Is 
this  so  as  I  say,  or  is  it  not  ?    Answer  me. 

Call.  I  myself  did  buy  the  house ;  I  bought  it  that  I 
might  keep  it  for  you.  Aid  without  that  it  would  have  hap- 
pened that  your  son  would  have  sold  it  to  another  person ; 
and  then  you  would  have  lost  both  it  and  that  treasure 
together,  which,  concealed  there,  you  had  entrusted  to  my 
charge.  See,  I  restore  it  safe  to  you ;  for  you  did  I  buy  it, 
not  for  myself. 

Chabm.  Prithee,  what  do  you  say  ?  By  my  trust  in  Gods 
and  men,  you  make  me  suddenly  to  be  quite  ashamed  of  my 
error  in  speaking  unkindly  to  my  friend  in  return  for  his 
services. 

Call.  How,  then;  do  you  now  think  that  I  am  trusty 
and  faithful?] 

Cbabk.  I  do  think  80,  if  all  these  matters  are  so  as  you 
relate  them.     But  what  means^  this  garb  of  yours  ? 

Call.  Til  tell  you.  I  was  digging  up  the  treasure  in- 
doors, as  a  marriage-portion  to  be  given  to  your  daughter. 

^Sq/h  and  aotrndy—Yer.  1097.  The  lines  after  this,  enclosed  in  brackets,  are 
soppEed  by  Bitschel  in  Latin  verse,  to  snpplj  the  "  lacuna"  here,  where  it  is  clear 
that  some  part  of  the  play  has  been  lost.  Thej  are  cleverly  composed,  and  do 
peat  credit  to  his  ingainity. 

^  But  what  means)-— Ver.  1099.  As  he  has  been  interrupted  while  digging  up 
the  treasure,  it  is  probable  that  he  has  run  out  with  his  sleeves  tucked  up,  and 
periiaps  with  the  spade  in  his  hand,  which  causes  Charmides  to  make  the  present 


y  Google 


62  TEiNXJMMUs ;  Act  V. 

But  I  will  relate  to  you  both  this  and  the  rest  in  the  house. 
Follow  me. 

Chabm.  Stasimus.      Stas.  Well! 

Chaem.  Eun  with  all  haste  to  the  Piraeus^,  and  make  but 
one  run  of  it.  There  you  will  at  once  see  the  ship,  on  board 
of  which  I  was  carried  hither.  Bid  Sagario  take  care  that 
the  things  are  brought  which  I  enjoined  him,  and  do  you  go 
together  with  thein.  The  duty  has  been  abeady  paid^  to  the 
custom-house  officer. 

Stas.  I  make  no  delay.  Chaem.  Get  you  gone  with  all 
speed ;  and  be  back  directly. 

Stas.  I  am  hoth  there  and  here  in  an  instant. 

Call,  (to  Chaemides.)  Do  you  follow  me  this  way  in- 
doors.    Chaem.  I  follow. 

{Exeunt  Callicles  and  Chaemides  into  the  house, 

Stas.  This  man  alone  has  remained  a  firm  friend  to  my 
master ;  nor  has  he  allowed  his  mind  to  swerve  from  unshaken 
fidelity,  although  I  believe  that  he  has  undergone  many 
troubles,  by  reason  of  the  property  and  the  children  of  my 
master.  StiU,  this  person,  as  I  suspect,  alone  has  main- 
tained his  fidelity.  {Bant, 


ACT    THE    PITTH. 

SCEKE  I. 

Enter  Ltsiteles. 
Lts.  This  individual^  is  the  very  first  of  all  men;  ex- 
celling all  in  pleasures  and  delights.  So  truly  do  the  bless- 
ings which  I  desire  befal  me,  that  whatever  I  undertake  is 
brought  about,  and  constantly  succeeds  :  so  does  one  delight 
succeed  other  delights.  Just  now,  Stasimus,  the  servant 
of  Lesbonicus,  came  to  me  at  home.     He  told  me  that  his 

*  ThePirtBus) — ^^^er.  1103.  The  Piraeus  was  the  main  harbour  of  Athens,  with 
which  it  was  connected  by  long  walls. 

^  Been  already  paid) — ^Ver.  1107.  Among  the  Romans,  merchandise  which  a 
person  brought  with  him  from  abroad  for  his  own  use  was  in  general  exempt  from 
"  poi*torium,"  or  import  duty ;  but  this  was  not  the  case  if  it  belonged  rather  to 
the  luxuries  than  the  necessaries  of  life. 

3  This  individual)— Ver,  1115.  He  is  speaking  of  himself  in  the  third  person, 
and  is  congratulating  himself  on  his  being  about  to  obtain  the  hand  of  the  daughter 
of  Charmides. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THS  THBEE  PIECES  07  MONEY.  68 

master,  Gharmides,  had  arrived  here  from  abroad.  Now 
he  must  be  forthwith  waited  upon  by  me,  that  the  father  may 
prove  a  more  sure  foundation  in  that  matter  on  which  I  have 
treated  with  his  son.  I'll  go.  But  this  door,  with  its  creak- 
ing, inopportunely  causes  me  deky.  {He  retires  to  a  dis- 
tance.) 

Scene  II. 
Enter  Chabhides  and  Callicles. 

Chabm.  There  never  was,  nor  will  there  be,  nor  yet  do  I 
think  that  there  is  a  person  upon  the  earth,  whose  fidelity 
and  constancy  towards  his  friend  equals  yours.  For  without 
you,  it  would  have  been  that  he  would  have  ousted  me  out 
of  this  house. 

Call.  If  I  have  in  anv  way  acted  well  towards  my  friend, 
or  have  faithfully  consulted  his  advantage,  I  seem  not  to  be 
deserving  of  praise,  hut  I  think  I  am  free  from  fault.  For 
a  benefit  which  is  conferred  on  a  man  for  his  own,  at  once  is 
lost^o  the  giver ;  what  is  given  only  as  a  loan,  the  same  there 
is  a  right  to  ask  back,  whenever  you  please. 

Chabm.  'Tis  so  as  you  say.  But  I  cannot  sufficiently 
wonder  at  this,  that  he  has  betrothed  his  sister  into  a  family 
80  influential. 

Call.  Aye ;  to  Lysiteles,  the  son  of  Philto. 

Lts.  (behind).  Why,  he  is  mentioning  my  name. 

Chabm.  He  has  got  into  a  most  worthy  family. 

Lts.  (behind).  Why  do  I  hesitate  to  address  these  per- 
sons ?  But  still,  I  think,  I  may  wait  awhile  ;  for  something 
is  going  to  be  said  to  the  purpose  ahout  this  matter. 

Chabm.  O Call.  What's  the  matter  ? 

Chabm.  I  forgot  just  now  to  tell  you  of  it  in-doors.  As 
I  was  coming  hither,  a  while  ago,  a  certain  swindling  fellow 
met  me — a  very  finished  sharper.  He  told  me  that  he  was 
carrying  a  thousand  gold  pieces,  of  my  giving,  to  you  and  my 
8on  Lesbonicus ;  a  fellow,  that  I  know  not  who  he  was,  nor 
We  I  ever  seen  him  anywhere  before.  But  why  do  you 
laugh? 

Call.  He  came  by  my  directions,  as  though  he  was  one 
bringing  the  gold  from  you  to  me,  to  give  as  a  portion  to  your 


y  Google 


64  TEiiniiacTJS  j  Act  V. 

daughter ;  that  your  scm,  when  I  should  gire  it  to  her  from 
my  own  hands,  might  suppose  that  it  had  been  brought  icom. 
you,  and  that  he  might  not  anyhow  be  enabled  to  discover  the 
fact,  itself — that  your  treasure  was  in  my  possession,  and  de- 
mand it  of  me\  as  haiing  belonged  to  his  father,  by  the  public 
laws. 

Chaem.  Cleverly  contrived,  i'  troth.  Call.  Megaronides, 
a  common  well-wisher  of  yours  and  mine,  planned  this. 

Chabm.  WeU,  I  applaud  his  device,  ana  approve  of  it. 

Lys.  (behind).  Why,  in  my  foolishness,  while  I  fear  to 
iatenrupt  their  discourse,  am  I  standing  here  alone,  and  am 
not  forwarding  the  business  that  I  was  intending  to  trans- 
act ?     I  wiU  accost  these  persons.     (He  advances.) 

Chabm.  Who  is  this  person  that  is  coming  this  way  to- 
wards us  ? 

Lys.  Qfoing  wg  to  Chabmides).  Lysiteles  salutes  his 
father-iu-law  Charmides. 

Chakm.  May  the  Gods  grant  you,  Lysiteles,  whatever 
you  may  desire. 

Call.  Am  I  not  worthy  of  a  salutation  ? 

Lys.  Tes;  health  to  you,  CaUicles.  It  is  right  that  I 
should  give  him  the  preference :  the  tunic  is  nearer*  the  skin 
than  the  cloak.  ' 

Call.  I  trust  that  the  Gods  may  direct  your  plans 
aright. 

Chabm.  I  hear  that  my  daughter  haa  been  betrothed  to 
you? 

Lys,  Unless  you  are  unwilling.  Chabm.  Nay,  I  am  not 
unwilling. 

Lys.  Do  you,  then,  promise  your  daughter  for  my  wife  ? 

Chabm.  I  promise  a  thousand  gold  Fhilippean  pieces^,  as 
well,  for  a  portion. 

Lys.  I  care  nothing  about  a  portion. 

Chabm.  K  she  pleases  you,  the  portion  which  she  presents 
to  you  must  be  pleased  as  well.     Li  fine,  the  object  which 

^  And  denumd  it  of  me) — ^Ver.  1146.  On  the  snppontioa  of  his  father's  death, 
the  laws  would  probably  have  decreed  it  to  him  as  his  father's  heu*. 

2  The  timic  is  nearer) — ^Ver.  1154.  This  was,  perhaps,  a  proverbial  saying,  used 
when  a  preference  was  expressed.  Of  course  he  would  pay  more  respect  to  his 
anticipated  father-in-law  than  to  an  ordinary  firiend.  The  "  tunica"  supplied  the 
place  of  the  shirt  of  modem  times. 


y  Google 


Sc.  m.  THE  THEEE  PIECES  OP  MONET.  66 

jon  desire  you  shall  not  have,  unless  you  shall  take  that 
which  you  do  not  desire. 

Call,  (to  Lysiteles).  He  asks  5ti^  justice. 

Lys.  He  shall  obtain  it,  you  the  advocate  and  the  judge. 
On  these  conditions,  do  you  engage  that  your  daughter  shall 
be  given  to  me  as  my  wife  ? 

Chabm.  I  do  promise  her.  Call.  And  I  promise  her 
likewise. 

Lys.  O  save  you,  my  connexions  by  marriage.  {He  embraces 
them.) 

Chabm.  But,  in  good  sooth,  there  are  some  matters  on 
account  of  which  I  still  am  angry  with  you. 

Lys.  What  have  I  done?  Chabm.  Because  you  have 
allowed  my  son  to  become  dissolute. 

Lys.  Had  that  been  done  by  my  consent,  there  would  have 
been  cause  for  you  to  blame  me.  «  «  *  *  « 
But  allow  me  to  obtain  of  you  this  one  thing  which  I  entreat  ? 

Chabm.  What  is  it  ?  Lys.  You  shall  know.  K  he  has 
done  anything  imprudently,  that  you  will  dismiss  it  dUlfrom 
your  mind.     Why  do  you  shake  your  head  ? 

Chabm.  My  heart  is  tortured,  and  I  fear 

Lys.  What  is  it  now  P  Chabm.  Because  he  is  such  as  I 
would  that  he  was  not, — ^by  that  am  I  tortured.  I  fear  that 
if  I  refuse  you  what  you  ask  of  me,  you  may  suppose  that  I 
am  indifferent  towards  you.  I  won't  make  difficulties,  houD- 
ever;  I  will  do  as  you  wish. 

Lys.  You  are  a  worthy  man.  I  am  going  to  call  him  out. 
{He  goes  to  the  door  of  the  house  of  Chabmides.) 

Chabm.  'Tis  a  shocking  thing  if  one  is  not  allowed  to 
punish  bad  deserts  just  as  they  merit. 

Lys.  {knocking  at  the  door).  Open  the  door,  open  quickly, 
and  call  Lesbomcus  out  of  doors,  if  he  is  at  home.  The 
occasion  is  very  sudden,  therefore  I  wish  him  to  come  to  me 
with  all  haste. 

Scene  III. 

JEnter  Lesbonicus^ow  the  house, 

Lesb.  What  person  has  been  calliug  me  out  of  doors  with 
80  loud  a  knocking  P 
Lys.  'Tis  your  well-wisher  and  friend. 
Lesb.  Is  all  quite  right  P — tell  me. 
p 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


66  ranrxnonre.  A.H.  Y. 

Lts.  All's  well.  I  am  glM  to  Bay  that  your  father  has 
returned  from  abroad. 

Lesb.  Who«ayBBo?    Lts.  L 

Lesb.  Have  you  seem  him  ^  Lts.  Aye,  «&d  ytm  yofixBelf 
may  see  him  too.    {Me  points  to  dHASHiDEs .) 

Lesb.  O  my  father,  my  father,  bLessings  on  yon. 

Oraxvl.  Many  blessangs  on  you,  my  boh. 

Lesb.  If,  father,  any  trouble^ Chabm.  Hsnne  no 

fair,  nothing  has  happened.  My  affiurs  prosperously  maaaaged, 
I  have  returned  safe.  If  you  are  only  wishful  to  be  steady, 
that  daughter  <of  Cidlieles  £as  been  promised  you. 

Lesb.  I  wiU  marry  both  her,  mth^,  amd  any  one  ehie 
besides  that  yaa  shall  bid  me. 

Chabm.  Although  I  have  beea  angry  with  y<m,  one 
Bsasery®,  in  fftct,  is  mare  than  «n0iig3!i  iar  one  man. 

Call.  Nay,  rather,  'twere  too  tattle  for  him ;  ibr  if  he 
wero  to  marry  a  haandred  wiv^ra  for  his  sins,  it  were  -too 
Mttle. 

Less.  Bert  henceforth,  in£iture,  I  wiU  be  steady. 

Chabm.  So  you  say ;  if  you  will  only  do  it. 

Lesb.  Is  th^  any  reason  why  I  shovM  not  brii^  my  wife 
home  to-morrow  ? 

CsAXH.  'Tis  Teiy  good.  And  yon,  Zyn^eles,  be  ready  to 
be  marned  the  day  ai^r  to-morrow. 

A  CoMEDIAJr. 

Give  your  af)plau8e3. 

1  If,  father,  •any  tnM&fe>-V«r.  1161.  Lesboiiicu  seeaoB  to  l>e  mbrnA  Id  i^cde- 
gise  to  -CfaanDides  ibr  any  tnmbk  he  naf  faaye  gbwibim,  ^vA,  as  the  cfld  sum.  has 
ahreadj  agreed  to  forgive  him  at  the  interoessioa  of  LysaitAm,  he  iM  not  aUffir  a 
word  more  to  be  said  about  it 

3  One  miser^— Yer.  1185.  The  old  gentleman  tells  his  son  that  he  ivdll  beqnite 
iroffidently  pnmshed  for  his  faults  hy  having  one  wife.  It  is  either  said  as  a  Joke 
m  a  bantexwg  way,  «r  c3se  ft  means,  that,  what  wiH  he  a  great  pnniEdmiealt  to 
him,  he  mnst  now  reform  his  mode  of  life,  for  common  decency  «ake  and  etui;  of 
respect  to  his  wife. 

»  Give  your  applause)— Yer,  1188.  •**  PJandite."  Literally,  "  clap  yonr  hands." 
Bitschel,  on  a  full  examination  of  the  MSS.,  comes  to  the  condnsion  that  this  was 
said,  not,  as  is  genentUy  thought  diy  one  lof  Hie  •ciMBaateis  ia  iShe  play,  but  by  one 
of  the  actors  or  singers,  probably,  of  the  Chorus,  who  commenced  their  song  the 
moment  the  play  was  finished.  All  the  applause  bestowed  jojl  the  writer  and  the 
aotors  seems  to  have  been  usually  reserved  for  the  end  of  i^  phiy. 


y  Google 


MILES  GLORIOSUS; 
THE  BRAOOA.RT  CAPTAIK. 


Ptbgofounices,  €be  Braggart  Captain. 

Abtotbogus,  a  Parasite. 

Pebifleoomenus,  an  old  gentleman,  the  friend  of  Pleofiides. 

PuEusicuffl,  a  joong  Athenian. 

pAi«aE8TBio,  servant  of  Fjri^gqpofinioes. 

ScasLEDBus,  another  servant  of  Pyrgopolinices. 

LuGRzOj  a  lad,  an  nnder-eervant  of  PyxgQpoImiGes. 

Gabio,  cook  to  Peripleoomenns. 

ABoT. 

PBXLOCX>]tAsiuH,  the  nktreflB  of  PyrgopoIiniceB. 

AcBonsLEuniTM,  a  Conrteaan. 

MiLPBimFPA,  her  maid. 

^M&--^iiflraft:  «  Stteet  bofcn  theiisBMsef  PEBiKLEOOiiBiva  sodPraao- 
TOJMMOBM,  wbidi  wtjom  eaeh  other. 


p2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


THE  SUBJECT. 


Pleusicles,  a  young  Athenian,  is  in  love  with  Philocomasium,  a  Courtesan  of 
Athens,  who  returns  his  affection.  Being  sent  on  public  business  to  Naupactus, 
a  certain  Captain  of  Ephesus,  Pyrgopoliuices  by  name,  comes  to  Athens,  and  in- 
sinuates himself  into  the  good  graces  of  her  mother,  in  order  that  he  may  get 
Philocomasium  into  his  power.  Having  deceived  the  mother,  he  places  the 
daughter  on  board  ship  and  carries  her  off  to  Ephesus.  On  this,  Palsestrioi,  a 
faithful  servant  of  Pleusicles,  hastens  to  embark  for  Naupactus,  with  the  view  of 
telling  his  master  what  has  happened.  The  shi^  being  taken  by  pirates,  he  is 
made  captive,  and  by  chance  is  presented  as  a  gift  to  Pyrgopolinices.  He  re- 
cognises the  mistress  of  Pleusicles  in  the  Captain's  house;  but  he  carefully 
conceals  from  the  Captain  who  he  himself  is.  He  then  privately  writes  to 
Pleusicles,  requesting  him  to  come  to  Ephesus.  On  arriving,  Pleusicles  is 
hospitably  entertained  by  Periplecomenus,  a  fnend  of  his  father,  an  old  gentle- 

'  man  who  lives  next  door  to  the  Captain.  As  Philocomasium  has  a  private 
room  of  her  own  in  the  Captain's  house,  a  hole  is  made  through  the  partition 
wall,  and  by  this  contrivance  she  meets  Pleusicles  in  the  house  of  his  enter- 
tainer, who  gives  his  sanction  to  the  plan. 

At  this  juncture,  the  play  begins.  A  servant  of  the  Captain,  named  Sceledrus, 
has  been  appointed  to  be  the  keeper  of  Philocomasium.  Pursuing  a  monkey 
along  the  roof  of  the  house,  he  looks  down  the  skylight  of  the  house  next  door, 
and  there  sees  Pleusicles  and  Philocomasium  conversing  and  toying  with  each 
other.  When  this  has  been  discovered  to  be  the  case,  a  plan  is  arranged, 
by  which  Sceledrus  shall  not  only  not  divulge  to  the  Captain  what  he 
has  seen,  but  shall  even  be  made  to  believe  that  he  has  not  actually  seen 
it  himself.  Palsesttio,  therefore,  persuades  him  that  the  twin-sister  of  Philoco- 
masium has  arrived  at  Ephesus,  and  with  her  lover  is  staying  at  their  neigh- 
bour's house.  To  forward  their  designs,  Palsestrio  then  invents  another  plan. 
He  persuades  the  Captain  to  believe  that  the  wife  of  his  neighbour,  Peripleco- 
menus, is  in  love  with  him.  Through  his  agency,  a  Courtesan,  named  Acrote- 
leutium,  pretends  that  she  is  the  wife  so  desperately  in  love  with  the  Captain. 
He  believes  this  story,  and,  that  he  may  the  more  conveniently  receive  her  in 
his  house,  by  the  advice  of  Palsstrio,  he  sends  Philocomasium  away,  and  gives 
her  into  the  charge  of  Pleusicles,  who  is  disguised  in  the  dress  of  a  master  of  a 
ship.  They  go  to  the  harbour  and  set  sail,  accompanied  by  Palsestrio,  whom 
the  Captain  has  given  to  Philocomasium  at  her  request.  The  Captain,  then,  at 
the  invitation  of  the  maid  of  Acroteleutium,  goes  to  the  house  next  door,  to  visit 
her  mistress.  On  this,  Periplecomenus,  with  his  servants,  sallies  forth  upon 
him,  and,  having  first  threatened  to  cut  him  in  pieces,  and  then  having  beaten 
and  stripped  him,  they  let  him  go,  after  they  have  exacted  from  him  a  confession 
that  he  has  been  rightly  served,  and  a  promise  that  he  will  molest  no  one  in  re- 
turn for  the  treatment  he  has  received. 


y  Google 


MILES  GLORIOSUS; 
THE    BRAGGART  CAPTAIN. 


THE  ACROSTIC  ARGUMENT. 

[Supposed  to  have  been  written  by  Prbcian,  the  Grammarian.] 

A  Captain  carries  oflf  to  Ephesos  a  Courtesan  (Meretricem)  from  Athens.  WhUe 
his  servant  is  intending  to  tell  this  (Id)  to  his  master,  her  lover,  wJio  is  an  Am- 
bassador (l£gato)  abroad,  he  himself  is  captured  at  sea,  and  {Ef)  is  given  as  a 
present  to  the  same  Captain.  The  servant  sends  for  his  (Stium)  master  from 
Athens,  and  cleverly  makes  a  hole  in  the  party  wall,  common  to  the  t\vo  (Ge- 
ndnis)  honses,  that  it  may  be  possible  (Liceret)  for  the  two  lovers  secretly  to 
meet.  Wandering  about  (Oberrans)^  her  keeper  sees  them  from  the  tiles,  but 
he  is  played  a  trick  (JRidicuUs)  upon,  as  though  it  were  another  person. 
Palsestrio,  too,  as  well  (Item)  persnades  the  Captain  to  have  his  mistress  dis- 
missed (Omiasam),  since  the  wife  of  the  old  man  (Senis)^  his  neighbour,  wishes 
to  marry  him.  He  begs  that  she  will  go  away  of  her  own  accord  (Ultro\  and 
gives  her  many  things.  He,  himself,  caught  in  the  house  of  the  old  man 
(Senii),  receives  punishment  as  an  adulterer. 


ACT   THE   EIEST. 
Scene  I. 
JSnter  Pyrgopolinices^,  Aetotrogtts,  and  Soldiers. 
Pybg.  Take  ye  care  that  the  lustre  of  my  shield  is  more 

>  PyrgopoUnices)  The  literal  meanmg  of  the  name  of  the  swaggering  Captain 
is  *Hhe  much-conquering  tower,"  or  something  similar.  *' Artotrogus"  means 
"  bread-eater."  The  word  "  Parasite"  properly  denotes  "  one  person  who  dines 
with  another."  The  name  was  originally  given  to  persons  who  were  assistants  to 
the  priests  and  high  magistrates,  and,  consequently,  had  a  respectable  signifi- 
catioD.  The  hangers-on,  who  are  called  "  Parasites"  by  the  Comic  writers  of 
Greece  and  Rome,  first  received  that  name  from  Alexis,  the  Greek  Comedian.  It 
has  been  well  remarked,  that  their  chief  characteristics  were  "  importunity,  love 
of  seosoal  pleasures,"  and  "  the  desire  of  getting  a  good  dinner  without  paying  for 
it."  They  may  be  subdivided  into  the  jesting,  the  officious,  and  the  flattering  Pa- 
imsite  (assentator),  of  which  latter  kmd  Artotrogus  is  an  admirable  specimen. 
From  ancient  writers  we  find  that  it  was  their  method  to  frequent  the  Courts  of 
justice,  market-places,  baths,  places  for  exercise,  and  other  objects  of  public  re- 
sort, with  the  view  of  obtaining  a  dinner,  at  the  price  of  being  the  butt  of  their 
entertainer,  and  cheerfully  submitting  to  the  greatest  humiliations. 


y  Google 


70  lilLES  GLOBIOSXrS ;  Act  I. 

briglit  than  the  rays  of  the  sun  are  wont  to  be  at  the  time 
when  the  sky  is  clear ;  that  when  occasion  comes,  the  battle 
bein^  joined,  'mid  the  fierce  ranks  right  opposite  it  may 
dazzle  the  eyesight  of  the  enemy.  But,  I  wish  to  console 
this  sabre  of  mine,  that  it  may  not  lament  nor  be  downcast 
in  spirits,  because  I  have  thus  long  been  wearing  it  keeping 
holiday,  which  so  longs  right  dreadfully  to  nu^e  havoc  of 
the  enemy.    But  where  is  Artotrogus  ? 

Abto.  Here  he  is ;  he  staada  dose  by  the  hero,  valiant 
and  successful,  and  of  princely  form.  Mars  could  not  dare 
to  style  himself  a  wamor  so  great,  nor  compare  his  prowess 
with  yours. 

Ftb6.  Him  ifou  mean  whom  I  spared  on  the  Gorgonido- 
nian^  plains,  where  Bumbomaehides  ClytomestoridysarekLdes, 
the  grandson  of  Neptune,  was  the  diief  ccMomander  i 

Abtc^.  I  remember  him ;  him,  I  suppose,  you  mesa  with 
the  golden  armour,  whose  legions  you  puffed  away  with  your 
breath  just  as  the  wind  ll<yu»  awwf  leaves  or  the  reed-&atched 
roof, 

Prae^.  That,  on  my  troth,  was  really  nothing  at  all. 

Abto.  Faith,  that  really  was  nothing  at  sU  m  compari- 
son with  other  things  I  could  mention — (aside)  which  you 
never  did.  If  any  person  ever  beheld  a  more  perjured  feUow 
than  this,  or  one  more  full  of  vain  boasting,  ^atY^  let  him  have 
me  for  himself,  I'll  resign  myself  for  his  slave ;  if  'tis  not 
the  fact  that^  my  one  mess  of  olive  pottage^  is  eaten  up  by 
me  right  ravenously, 

Ptbg.  Where  are  you  ?    Abto.  Lo  I  here  am  L    F  troth 

1  Gcrgomdomaaiy-Yet.  13.  These  liiree  crackjaw  names  areoointd  bf  Plsatos 
much  in  the  st^e  ^the  names  of  the  charecters  in  Bomhaotes  Farioso.  They 
are  mere  gibberish,  though  the  two  latter  are  derited  firom  Greek  or  Latin  words ; 
the  first  of  which  signifies  *^  a  son  of  a  fighter  at  the  soond  of  the  tnimpat.'* 

2  Tw  not  the  fact  ^Mst^Yet.  24.  This  line  is  read  in  many  difierent  ways^  and 
is  evidently  in  a  most  corrupt  state.  Bitschel  suggests,  ^^Unom  epityrum  apnt 
ilium  estur  insane  bene,'*  which  we  follow  aa  nearly  as  is  consistent  with  the 
English  idiom. 

*  Jfess  of  o&Biw«ftisre)— Ver.  24.  "  Eptyrum"  was  the  name  rf  a  diafa.  mack 
used  by  the  people  of  ^cify,  who  ate  it  together  with  cheese.  We  learn  frora 
Cato  (on-  Bural  Matters),  that  it  was  made  of  various  kinds  of  olives  minced  up,  and 
Toaxadi  with  oO,  vinegar,  coriander,  cummin,  fennel,  me,  and  mint,  and  then  pre- 
served in  jars. 


y  Google 


Sa  L  THE  B8A.€KkilLBT  CAPfMIS.  71 

in  what  a  fasliioiL  it  was  you  broke  tbe  fore-leg^  of  even  aa 
elej^umt,  in  India,  with  jour  fiat.. 

Pise.  How  P — ^the  fore-kg  i  Abto.  I  meaut  to  say  this 
--the  thigh. 

Ptso.  I  struck  tiie  blow  without  an  effort. 

Abto.  Troth,  if,  indeed,  you  had  put  forth  your  strength, 
jour  arm  would  have  passed  right  through  the  hide,  the 
entrails,  and  the  fnmtispiece  of  th^  elephant. 

Ptb&.  I  don't  care  for  these  things  just  now. 

Abto.  I'  faith,  'tis  really  not  worth  the  while  for  you 
to  tell  me  o/ii^  who  know  ri^ki  well  your  prowess.  (Ande.) 
'Tis  my  appetite  creates^  all  these  plagues.  I  must  hear  hiot 
nght  out  with  my  ears,  that  my  teeth  mayn't  have  time^  to 
grow,  and  whaleTer  lie  he  sfiaLItell,  to  it  I  must  agree. 

Ptb€L  What  was  it;  I  was  saying  P 

Ab90.  O,  I  know  what  you  were  going  to  say  just  now. 
r  faith  'twas  hrmely  done ;  I  remember  its  being  done. 

Pt»©.  What  was  that  P  Aaxo.  Whateyer  it  was  ffou  were 
ffoinjitoaa^. 

Pteo.  Have  you  got  your  tablets^  ?  Abto.  Are  you  in- 
tendiBg  to  enlifit^  P    I  hare  tl^tn,  and  a  pen  as  well 

>  Thefor»-ltg>—yet.  26.  "  Brachiom"  is  supposed  by  some  to  mean  "  the  trunk" 
of  the  elephant;  but  it  seems  more  probable  that  it  here  means  "  the  fore-leg." 

*  Jfy  c^ypefite  createt) — ^Ver.  33.  He  now  addresses  the  Spectators,  and  honestly 
coaftsses  why  he  is  a  Parasite. 

>lA9ii.'<Aat»l6M>— Ver.Si.  "Dentes dentin"  is fhnt  which  WBcaU '^teething.'* 
He  says  that  he  acts  the  flatterer  that  his  teeth  may  not  have  time  to  grow 
through  want  of  employment. 

*  Gotjpur  teWe&>-Ver.  38.  The  "  tabuhn,"  or  "  tabellsB,"  used  by  the  andents 
for  the  purpose  of  writing,  were  pieces  of  wood,  mostly  of  an  oblong  shape,  covered 
with  wax,  on  which  an  impression  was  made  with  the  "  stylus,"  or  iron  pen.  They 
i*cre  BomedBaes  made  oC  irory,  but  more  frequently  of  eitron-wood,  beech,  or  fir. 
The  inside  aalj  of  the  tablet  was  covered  with  wax,  the  outer  consisting  of  wood. 
Tfe  kavea  were  fiastened  at  the  back  with  wu*es,  and  opened  and  shut  like  the 
books  of  file  present  day.  There  was  a  raised  margin  to  each  leaf  of  the  tablet, 
fer  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  wax  of  the  one  from  rubbing  against  the  other. 
From  two  to  five,  six,  or  even  more  of  these  leaves  were  joined  together,  which 
were  accordingly  caBbd  "  diptycha,"  "yiptycha,"  and  so  on.  Those  tablets  which 
contamed  legal  documents  were  pie/oed  thi*ough  the  outer  edges  with  holes, 
through  which  a  triple  thread  or  stHng  was  passed,  on  which  a  seal  was  placed, 
in  order  to  prevent  forgery  and  to  show  that  the  deed  was  duly  executed. 

*  Intending  to  «»&«)— Ver.  36.  '*  Rogarc."  Soldiers,  when  enlisted,  were  asked 
(TDgsbantnr)  whether  they  would  take  the  oath.  Hence  the  word  "  rogare"  means 


y  Google 


72  HILES  aLOEIOSUS ;  Act  I. 

Pybg.  How  cleverly  you  do  suit  your  mind  to  my  own  mind. 

Abto.  'Tis  fit  that  I  should  know  your  inclinations  stu- 
diously, so  that  whatever  you  wish  shoidd  first  occur^  to  me. 

PruG.  What  do  you  remember  ?  Arto.  I  do  remember 
this.  In  Cilicia  there  were  a  hundred  and  fifty  men,  a  hundred 
in  Cryphiolathronia^,  thirty  at  Sardis,  sixty  men  of  Macedon, 
whom  you  slaughtered  altogether  in  one  day. 

Prua.  What  is  the  sum  total  of  those  men  ? 

Aeto.  Seven  thousand.  Pyeg.  It  must  be  as  much :  you 
keep  the  reckoning  well. 

Aeto.  Yet  I  have  none  of  them  written  down ;  still,  so  I  re- 
member it  was, 

Pteg.  By  my  troth,  you  have  a  right  good  memory. 

Aeto.  {aside),  'Tis  the  flesh-pots^  give  it  a  fillip. 

PrEG.  So  long  as  you  shall  do  such  as  you  have  done 
hitherto,  you  shall  always  have  something  to  eat:  I  will 
always  m«i:e  you  a  partaker  at  my  table. 

Aeto.  Besides,  in  Cappadocia,  you  would  have  killed  five 
hundred  men  altogether  at  one  blow,  had  not  your  sabre 
been  blunt. 

Pteg.  I  let  them  live,  because  I  was  quite  sick  of  fighting. 

Aeto.  Why  should  I  tell  you  what  all  mortals  know,  that 
you,  Pyrgopolinices,  live  alone  upon  the  earth,  with  valour, 
beauty,  and  achievements  most  unsurpassed  ?  All  the  women 
are  in  love  with  you,  and  that  not  without  reason,  since  you 
are  so  handsome.  Witness  those  girls  that  pulled  me  by  my 
mantle  yesterday. 

PrEG.  What  was  it  they  said  to  you  ? 

Aeto.  They  questioned  me  about  you.  "  Is  Achilles  here  ?" 
says  one  to  me.  "No,"  says  I,  "his  brother  is."  Then 
says  the  other  to  me :  "  By  my  troth,  but  he  is  a  handsome 

something  tantamount  to  our  word  "  enlist,"  or  "  recruit."  The  Pairasiteasks  him 
if  he  is  going  to  enlist,  as  the  tablets  would  be  wanted  in  the  "  Forum,"  or  "  Court 
of  justice,"  for  the  purpose  of  taking  down  the  oaths,  and  entering  the  names  as 
the  parties  were  sworn. 

1  Should Jirst occur)-'Yer.  41.  "Praevolat  mihi."  Literally,  "should  fly  to 
me  beforehand." 

*  Crt/pMolaihronia) — ^Ver.  43.  This  word  is  mere  gibberish:  it  is  compounded 
of  Greek  words,  which  would  make  it  to  mean  "  the  place  of  hidden  secrecy."  The 
part  of  the  flatterer  seems  to  be  a  little  overdone  here. 

»  Tm  the  Jk8h-poU)—\fPc.  49.  "  Offse  monent."  "  Offa"  properly  means  "  a 
lump  of  flesh,"  from  which  it  came  to  signify  "  victuals"  in  general. 


y  Google 


SC.  I.  THE  BBA^GAST  CAPTAIK.  73 

and  a  noble  man.  See  how  his  long  hair  becomes  him. 
Gerfcainly  the  women  are  lucky  who  share  his  favours." 

Ptbo.  And  pray,  did  they  really  say  so  ? 

AsTO.  They  both  entreated  me  to  bring  you  past  to-day 
by  way  of  a  sight^  to  them. 

Ptb&.  'Tis  really  a  very  great  plague  to  be  too  handsome 
a  man. 

Abto.  They  are  quite  a  nuisance  to  me ;  they  are  praying, 
eatreating,  beseeching  me,  to  let  them  see  you ;  bidding  me 
be  fetched  to  them ;  so  that  I  can't  give  my  attention  to  your 


Ptbg.  It  seems  that  it  is  time  for  us  to  go  to  the  Forum, 
that  I  may  count  out  their  pay  to  those  soldiers  whom  I  have 
enlisted  of  late.  For  King  Seleucus^  entreated  me  with 
most  earnest  suit  that  I  would  raise  and  enlist  recruits  for 
bim.  To  that  business  have  I  resolved  to  devote  my  attention 
tbisday. 

Abto.  Come,  let's  be  going  then.  Pteg.  Guards,  follow 
me.  (JSaetmt. 


ACT    THE   SECOND. 

SCEKE  I. 

THE  PROLOGUE. 

Unter  Paljesteio*. 

Pal.  To  tell  the  subject  of  this  our  play,  I  have  all 

willingness,  if  you  wiU  but  have  the  kindness  to  listen  to  it. 

But  he  who  does  not  wish  to  listen,  let  him  arise  and  go 

out,  that  there  may  be  room  where  he  may  sit  who  does  wish 

to  listen.     Now  I  will  disclose  to  you  both  the  subject  and  the 

name  of  the  play  which  we  are  just  now  about  to  act,  and  for 

» By  way  of  a  sight)— \^y.  67.  "  Pompam."  Strictly  speaking,  this  word  means 
*'  tbc  escort  of  a  procession,"  whence  it  came  to  signify  the  "  procession"  itself. 

*  Scfeww*)— Ver.  75.  The  King  of  that  part  of  Asia  Minor  where  Ephesus  was 
dtnate. 

'  Palasbio)  As  the  Prologue  of  the  play  commences  with  the  Second  Act, 
it  may  appear  to  be  misplaced ;  bnt  it  really  is  propeily  placed  here,  as  the  pre- 
ceding  act  is  mtroductory,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  plot,  being  void  of  inci- 
dent Its  purpose  is  to  acquaint  us  with  the  character  of  the  Captain,  who  is  to 
be  duped  and  punished  in  the  piece  according  to  his  deserts. 


y  Google 


74  XILSfl  &LOBIOftVS ;  Act.  II. 

tbe  sake  of  wkich  you  are  now  seated  in  thk  miriMul  place^^ 
"  Alajson"  is  the  name^,  in  Greek^of  this  Comedy ;  the  saaae 
we  call  in  Latin,  ''the  Braggaort"  (Grloriosus).  l^is  etty*  is 
Ephesns ;  then,  the  Captain,  my  master,  who  has  gone  off 
hence  to  the  Eorum,  a  Dragging,  impiident,  stifokiag  fMaWy 
brimfnl  of  lying  and  laseiyioaaness,  says  that  alL  the  women 
are  following  him  of  their  own  accord.  Wherever  he  goes,  he 
is  the  laughmg-stock  of  all  ^  and  so^  the  CourtesaxM  h^e — since 
they  make  wry  mouthft  at  him,  you  may  see  the  greater  part 
of  them  with  lips  all  awry.  I  wish  you  nom  to  ksAW  this, 
how  I  came  to  be  his  slave,  £rom  him  to  whom  I  waai  secva&t 
before  \  for  'tis  not  long,  that  I  have  been  in  slavery  i»  hxin. 
Give  your  attention,  for  now  I  i^  begin  the  argum^it.  A 
very  worthy  young  man  at  Athens  was  iny  master.  He  was 
in  love  with  a  Courtesan,  broasght  up  at  Athens,,  vbl  Attiea, 
and  she  on  the  other  hand  l&oed  him ;  such  affection  is  moat 
worthy  to  be  cherished.  In  the  public  service,  he  was  sent 
to  Naupactus^  as.  Ambassador  on  behalf  of  tJicA  mighty 
republic.  In  the  mean  time,  by  chance,  this  Captain 
came  to  Athens.  He  introduced  himself  to  this  lady  of  my 
master,  began  to  cajole  her  mother  with  presents  of  wine, 
trinkets,  and  costly  treats ;  and  so  the  Captain  made  himself 
on  intimate  terms  with  the  procuress.  As  soon  as  ever  an 
opportunity  was  presented  for  this  Captain,  he  tricked  this 
procuress,  the  mother  of  the  damsel,  whom  my  master  loved. 
For,  unknown  to  her  mother,  he  put  the  daughter  on  board 
ship,  and  carried  this  woman,  against  her  will,  hither  to 
Ephesns.  Soon  as  I  knew  that  the  lady  of  my  master  was 
carried  off  &om  Athens,  as  quickly  as  ever  I  was  able,  I 
procured  for  myself  a  ship :  I  embarked,  that  I  might  carry 
tidmgs  of  this  matter  to  my  master  at  JS^oapaetom.  When 
we  had  got  out  to  sea,  some  pirates,  as  they  Dad  hoped  to  do, 
took  that  ship  on  board  of  which  I  was  ;  thus  1  was  undone 
before  I  reached  my  master,  for  whom  I  had  commenced  to 
proceed  on  my  voyage.    He  that  took  me,  gave  me  as  a  pre- 

'  This  mir^t/ul place) — Ver.  83.  He  allades  to  the  theatres,  where  scenic  re- 
presentations took  place  on  public  festivals. 

2  Akuon  18  the  fiaifw)— «Ver.  86.  *AXm[»v^  ^^  the  boaster,"  he  says,  was  the 
Greek  name  of  the  play.  It  is  not  known  who  was  the  Greek  author  fxom  whom 
Plautus  took  this  play,  which  is  one  of  his  best 

3  NdupcKtus) — ^Ver.  102.  This  was  a  city  situate  on  the  sea-eoast  of  uEtolia. 


y  Google 


Se.  L  THB  BBA6CABS  CUUPTAIK.  75 

SQit  to  this  same  Gaptam.  After  lie  had  taken  me  home  to 
b»  ovm  heuse^  I  saw  there  that  fayoiite  of  mj  master  who 
lived  at  Athens.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  she  pereeiTed  me, 
she  gave  me  a  sign  with  her  eyes  not  to  address  her  by  name. 
Afterwards,  when  there  was  an  opportunity,  the  damsel  com- 
plained to  me  of  her  Jiard  fate.  Slie  said  that  she  wished  to 
escape  to  Athens  from  this  house,  that  she  was  attached  to  him, 
that  master  of  mine  who  lived  at  Athens,  and  that  she  had 
never  hated  my  one  m^re  thoroughly  than  this  same  Caotain. 
Aa  I  discovered  the  feelings  of  the  damsel,  I  took  tablets, 
sealed  them  in  private,  tmd  gave  them  to  a  certain  merchant 
to  cany  to  him  (my  xoaster,  Imean^  who  was  at  Athens,  aud 
who  had  sa  loved  her),  in  order  that  he  might  come  hither. 
He  did  not  slight  the  message,  for  he  both  is  come,  and  is 
lodging  here  next  door,  with  Us  host,  a  friend  of  his  father's, 
a  nice  old  man.  He,  too,  gives  every  assistance  to  his  guest 
in  his  soQoiur,  azvd  encourages  and  seconds  us  with  his  help  and 
Ilia  advice^  Tbierefore,  here  (pomtin^  to  the  Captain's  house) ^ 
iB^oors,  Ikave  found  a  grand  contrivaxieey  by  which  to  cause 
tkese  lovers,  each,  to  meet  the  other.  Por  one  room,  which  the 
Captain  gave  to  his  mistress  for  no  one  but  herself  to  set  foot 
in,  in  ihat  same  room  I  have  dug  a  hole  through  the  party- 
vail,  in  order  that  th^e  m&j  seeretly  be  an  ingress  for  the 
danusel  from  the  one  house  to  the  other.  And  this  I  have 
done  with  the  knowledge  of  the  old  gentleman ;  'twas  he  that 
gave  the  advice.  But  my  fellow-servant,  whom  the  CJaptain  has 
given  as  a  keeper  to  his  mistressy  is  a  person  of  no  great  worth. 
By  dev^  contrivaBcea  and  ingenious  devices,  we  will  throw 
dust^  in  his  eyes,  and  we  will  make  him  so  aa  not  to  see  what 
^reaUy  does  aee.  And  that  you  may  not  hereafter  make 
niistakes,  this  damsel  to-day,  in  this  house  and  in  that,  will 
perfonn  in  turn  a  double  part,  and  wiU  be  the  same,  but  will 
pwtend  to  be  another,  person.  Thus  will  the  keeper  of  the 
^ftottel  be  gulled.    But  there  is  a  noise^  at  the  do&r  here  of 

'  We  wis  Orovj  dus^y-Yer,  148.  "  Glaracomam  objicieimis ;"  literalfy,  "  we 
^  throw  a  malady  in  his  eyes."  "  Glaucoma"  was  a  disease  of  the  crys- 
Wfinc  hxmiours  of  the  eye. 

'  There  is  a  fume)^Yer,  154.  The  street  doors  of  the  ancients  consisted  of 
^fflg-daors,  whence  the  plural  form,  **  fores."  These  opened  outward  into  the 
"^wet,  and  not,  Bke  those  of  modem  times,  withm.  For  this  reason,  when  any 
t^l^son  was  coming  out,  it  was  customary  for  him  to  giye  warning  by  making  a 
^ioise  irith  his  knuckles  or  a  stick  on  the  inside. 


y  Google 


76  KILES  GLOBIOSTTS ;  A.ct.  II. 

the  old  gentleman,  our  neighbour.  'Tis  himself  comings  out; 
'tis  he,  the  nice  old  man  that  I  was  speaking  of.  (He  retires 
to  a  distance.) 


Scene  II. 
Unter  Pebiplecomentjs  Jrom  Us  house. 

Pebip.  (speaking  to  his  servants  within).  Faith,  if  you 
don't  in  future  smash  his  ankle-bones  for  any  stranger  that 
you  see  on  mv  tiles,  I  will  cut  you  so  mth  lashes  as  to 
make  thongs  ot  your  sides.  My  neighbours,  i'  faith,  are  over- 
lookers of  what  is  going  on  in  my  own  house ;  so  often  are 
they  peeping  down  through  the  skylight  i.  And  now,  there- 
fore, I  give  you  aU  notice,  whatever  person  of  this  Captain's 
hotisehold  you  shaU.  see  upon  our  tiles,  except  Palsestrio  only, 
push  him  headlong  here  into  the  street.  Suppose  he  says  that 
he  is  following  some  hen,  or  pigeon,  or  monkey ;  woe  be  to  you, 
if  you  don't  badlj  maul  the  fellow  even  to  death.  And  so,  that 
they  may  commit  no  infringement  against  the  laws  of  dice®, 

»  Through  the  8hylight)^YeT.  159.  The  "  atrium,"  or  middle  hall,  of  the  houses 
of  the  Bomans  was  a  large  apartment,  roofed  over,  with  the  exception  ot  an 
opening  iu  the  centre,  which  was  called  "  impluviura,*'  or  "  compluvium,"  towards 
which  the  roof  sloped,  so  as  to  throw  the  rain-water  down  through  pipes  into  a 
cistern  below.  Vitruvius  says  that  the  "  impluvium"  was  from  a  fourth  to  a 
third  of  the  size  of  the  "  atrium,"  or  hall  below.  It  was  probably  glazed,  and 
thus  would  form  a  sort  of  sloping  skylight.  In  the  present  instance,  it  would 
seem  to  hare  overlooked  the  upper  chamber,  into  which  Philocomasinm  passed 
through  the  wall  of  the  next  house,  to  meet  Pleusicles. 

2  The  laws  ofd%ce)—Yeiv,  164.  Commentators  are  much  divided  as  to  what  is 
the  meaning  here  of  "lex  alearia,"  or,  as  some  editions  have  it  ^'lex  talaria." 
Some  suppose  that  it  simply  means  "  the  rules  of  the  game  with  the  *■  tali/  or 
*  dice  f  "  while  others  think  that  Plautus  alludes  to  some  recent  enactment  at 
Some  against  games  of  chance.  Such  laws  were  repeatedly  promulgated,  but  im- 
mediately became  a  mere  dead  letter.  "  Talus"  means  either  a  person's  " ankle- 
bone,"  or  the  "  knuckle-bone"  of  an  animal,  which  latter  was  marked  with  numbers 
on  four  sides,  and  used  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans  in  sets  of  four  for  the  purpose 
of  dice.  The  old  man  puns  on  the  two  meanings,  and  says,  "  PU  take  care  that 
your  *tali*  (or  ankle-bones)  are  broken,  so  that"  (if  we  adopt  the  first  meaning) 
"  you  shall  not  cheat  at  dice  in  future,"  or  (if  we  take  the  second  interpretation) 
*'•  you  shall  not  have  an  opportunity  of  mfringing  the  public  laws."  "  Simla," 
which  is  translated  "  monkey,"  is,  strictly  speaking,  "  a  she-ape ;"  probably  a  pre- 
sent from  the  Captain  to  Philocomasium. 


y  Google 


Sc.  II.  THE  BBA&GiJtT  CAPTAIIT.  77 

do  you  take  good  care  that  they  keep  holiday  at  home  with- 
out any  ankle-bones  at  all. 

Pal.  (aside).  Something  amiss, — what,  I  know  not,  has  been 
done  him  by  our  family  so  far  as  I  can  hear,  inasmuch  as  the 
old  man  has  ordered  the  ankles  of  my  fellow-servants  to  be 
broken.  But  he  has  excepted  me ;  nothing  care  I  what  he 
does  to  the  rest  of  them.  I'll  accost  the  old  man.  (Advances,) 

Fbeip.  The  person  that  is  coming  this  way,  is  he  coming 
towards  me?     JSe  comes  as  if  he  was  coming  to  me. 

Pal.  How  do  you  do,  Periplecomenus? 

Peeip.  There  are  not  many  men,  if  I  were  to  wish,  whom 
I  would  rather  now  see  and  meet  with  than  yourself 

Pal.  What's  the  matter?  What  disturbance  have  you 
with  our  family? 

Pebip.  We  are  done  for.     Pal.  What's  the  matter? 

Peeip.  The  thing's  discovered.  Pal.  What  thing's  dis- 
covered? 

Pebip.  Some  one  just  now  of  your  household  was  looking 
in  from  the  tiles  through  our  skylight  at  Philocomasium  and 
my  guest  as  they  were  toying  together. 

Pal.  What  person  saw  it  ? 

Pebip.  Tour  fellow-servant.     Pal.  Which  person  was  it? 

Pebip.  I  don't  know ;  he  took  himself  off  so  suddenly — in 
an  instant. 

Pal.  I  suspect  I'm  ruined.  Pebip.  When  he  went  away, 
I  cried:  *'Hdlo!  you  sir!"  said  I,  "what  are  you  doing 
upon  the  tiles  ?"  As  he  went  away  he  replied  to  me  in  these 
terms,  that  he  was  following  a  stray" d  monkey. 

Pal.  Woe  to  wretched  me !  thati  must  be  ruined  for  a  worth- 
less beast.    But  is  Philocomasium  there  with  you  even  still  ? 

Pebip.  When  I  came  out,  she  was  there. 

Pal.  If  she  is,  then  bid  her  return  to  our  house  as  soon  as 
ever  she  can,  that  the  servants  may  see  that  she  is  at  home ; 
unless,  indeed,  she  wishes  that  we,  who  are  slaves,  her  fellow- 
slaves^,  should  all  be  given  up  together  to  tortures  by  the 
cross  on  account  of  her  courting. 

1  Her  fellow-slaves) — ^Ver.  184.  He  seems  to  nse  the  word  "  contubernales," 
**  comradea,'*  or  **  fellow-slaves,'^  as  applying  to  the  relation  between  Pliilocoma- 
sium  and  the  other  slaves  in  the  house ;  since,  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Captain, 
she  had  become  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  slave.  The  cross  was  the  instrument 


y  Google 


78  inxiES  laiLOttsotsiTB ;  Ant,  O. 

Pesif.  I  bade  lier  do  so ;  ainless  jon  -roiild  auglii  elBe. 

Pal.  I  would.  Tell  her  this :  that,  fey  mjr  troth,  fihe  nonri; 
not  hesitate  at  all  to  hring  in  pkj  her  skill  and  ^Wemess. 

Pebip.  In  what  w&j^  Pjll.  That  by  her  words  she  maey 
persuade  him  who  saw  her  here  ai  ymer  hotise,  that  he  did  not 
aee  her.  Should  he  atccitse  her,  on  the  other  hand  lest  lier 
coscvinee  him  with  her  oath.  Even  though  lisce  w^e  Been  jl 
hundred  times  ovct,  fitill  let  her  deny  it.  (AndeJ)  For,  if 
she  is  at  all  indined  to  ill,  a  woman  nerer  goes  begging^  to 
the  gardener^/*  maferud,  j^  has  a  garden  at  home  saad  a 
stock  of  her  own  for  all  mischievous  eontrivaaoes ;  aifc  home 
she  has  impindenoe  ^,  a  hfin^  tongite,  perfidiouiineBs,  malice, 
a^d  boldness,  self-ooaoeit,  assuraaaoe,  tmd  deoestfainesB, — ^at 
home  she  has  wiles, — ^at  home  captivating  oosataiYanceB, — 
stratagems  at  home. 

Pebep.  I'U  teil  her  this,  if  she  ihall  be  £»-ibor«here  i^peint- 
ing  to  his  house).  But  what  is  it,  PalaBstrio,  that  you  aa?e 
coneitlering  with  yourself  in  your  mimd? 

PuL.  Be  silent  a  momeait,  while  I  am  calling  a  covmicii  m-mj 
mind,  and  while  I  am  considering  what  I  am  to  do,  what  plan 
I  must  contrive,  on  the  other  hand,  as  a  match  §sx  my  crafty 
feUow-^ervaoit,  who  has  seen  her  billing  here  in  your  h^tme  ; 
90  thet  what  was  «e^i  may  not  have  been  seen. 

Pebip.  Do  contrive  one ;  in  the  meantime,  I'U  retire  hence 
to  a  distance  &<»n  ymi,  to  ^is  spot.  ^He  retiree  to  a  disianee!) 
Look  at  him,  please  (to  the  AuniiaircE),  revolving  his  cares 
with  brow  aevece,  how  he  stands.  He  strikes  his  bc^stwii^  his 

of  a  pomshment  amoogiiie  BommB,  which  waS'esitedallj  lofficted  tip«B  slaves.  It 
was  Bsnallj  m  6ha]»e  l&e  iihe  lobter  T  or  X,  but  there  were  Tarions  other  forms  of  jL 
The  condemned  carried  his  own  cross,  and,  being  first  stripped,  ims  either  nailed 
or  bound  to  it,  and  in  the  latter  case  was  generally  left  to  die  of  hunger.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  Bepublic  the  laws  did  not  protect 
the  person  orBfe  of  the  slaFcs,  who  were  sometimes  Tciy  barbarously  treated. 

1  Neoer  s^feaheggntg) — ^Ver.  190.  He  use^  a  rather  oat-of-the-way  simile  liere ; 
he  means  to  say,  ^  a  woman  never  noeds  to  go  to  a  garAmer's,  who  has  a 
garden  of  her  own,  with  a  most  plentiful  «to(d:  of  artfalness,"  •&&.  Some  Com- 
mentators fancy  that  he  means  literally  to  say  that  women  have  always  at  hand 
plenty  of  poisonous  plants  fw  t^e  purposes  of  mischief,  and  that  they  need  not  the 
assistance  of  the  gardener  «r  nurseiynian  when  they  wish  te  carry  out  their 
designs.    Such  an  interpretation  seems,  however,  to  be  very  far«^etched. 

s  /fl^MHlsnoe)— Ver.  192.  *'  Os;"  litexmUy,"  "  lace;  simihu:  t«  «  common  e^pvess 
sion  in  use  with  us. 


y  Google 


Se.  n.  TMS  SAiLQOABT  CAfTAIK.  79 

&2gera;  Ifsncyhe's  about  to  call  his  heacfc  Outside.  See,  he 
dafts  bu  postoTO ;  agidn  he  plaees  his  lefb  hand  upon  his  left 
iMgh.  His  right  himd  is  reekomng  down  his  plans  upon  his 
&gerB;  m  detpair  he  strikes  his  thigh.  His  right  hand  is 
nmngaapidly^;  with  diiBeaity  does  it  suggest  what  he  is  to  do. 
fiesBupshis  fingeas  now;  he's  striring  hard;  fall  oft  he  changes 
}q8  poaation.  But  see  how  he  shakes  his  head;  it  pleases 
Vm  not  what  he  has  hit  upon.  Whatev^  it  is,  nothing 
caaoAe  will  be  bring  foriik^Mom^kin^  well-^gested  will  he  pro- 
daoe.  But  see,  he  is  building;  Ke  has  p^eed  his  hand  as  a 
piflar^  b^aeoAh  his  chin.  Hjm  dcKoe  with  it !  in  truth,  this 
Biode  of  buaUing  pleases  xne  not;  for  I  have  heard  say  that  the 
head  c^  a  {fove^n  Poet^  is  wont  to  be  suppcnted  tkut,  over 
¥hom  two  giiarib  are  eier  at  all  hours  keeping  wateh.  Braro 
iew  beeoBoingly  he  stands, — ^i'  faith,  how  Hke  a  very  slave*, 
and  how  faithful  to  his  part.  Never,  this  day,  will  he  rest,  before 
lie  has  completed  that  whieh  he  is  in  fieajpdi  of.  He  has  it,  I 
aupeci.  Come — to  the  buriness  you're  about:  keep  wide 
awake,  think  not  of  sleep ;  unless,  indeed,  you  wish  to  be 
keeping  your  watch  here  all  cheoquered  o'er  with  stripes. 
'Tk  I,  that  am  taJkiiig  to  you ;  sdhemer,  don"t  you  know  that 
I  am  speaking  to  you?  PalsBstrio!  awake,  I  say;  aaxmse 
yoniael^  I  say;  'tia  daylight  now,  I  say. 
PiJi.  I  liear  yon.     Psbip.  Don't  you  see  that  the  enemy 

^  Is  moving  fx^fndfy) — ^Ver.  201.  ^  Mice"  strictly  means,  *'  to  Imre  a  tnnailons 
motian  imparted.'*  '*  Micaie  di^tis"  properly  meant  *^  to  play  at  a  game  called 
*  ouns,'  "  in  which  two  persons  sadde^y  raised  or  compressed  the  fingers,  and  at 
fteamwaBoiMBt'each  gnassedthe  nitmber  of  the  other.  The  ezpression  also 
means, "  to  ifainwmiiB  anything  by  suddenly  xauSag  tiM  fiiigen,"as  who  is  to  do 
or  to  have  anything. 

*  AtapiSar) — ^Ver.  209.  He  means  tliat  PalsBtrio  ioaks  up  in  fhon^;^  while 
las  clenched  hand  is  pboed,  as  thoagk  it  were  a  pillar,  heneath  his  chin. 

*  Cf  a jfbreiffn  Poky— Yer.  ill.  **Barharo."  The  speaker  bemg  supposed  to  be 
aCbvcJk,  and  a  oative  of  Ionia,  he  would  speak  of  a  Soman  as  being  *'  barbanxs." 
it  is  genetafly  supywod  that  Plaatos  here  itifers  to  the  Boman  poet  KsBvius,  who 
^a iuUik  df  atsaqg  tbis  pastoxc,  and  was,  as  is  thoii^t,  at  that  momeiit  in 
prison  for  having  ofiEended,  in  one  of  his  Comedies,  the  family  sf  tin  llcdidlti.  fie 
was  afterwards  liberated  on  having  apologised  in  his  plays  called  Hariolns  (the 
Wizard)  and  Leo  (the  Lion).  Peripleoomenos  thinks  that  this  postare  bodes  bo 
good,  and  is  ominous  of  an  evil  result. 

*  Like  a  vary  siotve) — ¥«r.  213.  He -says  that  the  actor  is  well  representing  the 
ciiaraoter  ef  the  «iEve.  The  aoters  themselves,  as  ahvady  Temarked,  were  gene- 
lafif  slnras  in  the  -tu^au  times  of  the  fiepablie. 


y  Google 


80  MILES  OLOBIOSUS ;  Act.  II. 

is  upon  you,  and  that  siege  is  hei/ng  laid  to  your  back  ?  Take 
counsel,  then ;  obtain  aid  and  assistance  in  this  matter ;  the 
hastily,  not  the  leisurely,  is  befitting  here.  G^et  the  start  of 
them  in  some  way,  and  in  some  direction  this  moment  lead 
around  your  troops.  Close  round  the  enemy  in  siege ;  pre- 
pare the  convoy  for  our  side.  Cut  off  the  enemy's  provision, 
secure  yourself  a  passage,  by  which  supplies  and  provision 
may  be  enabled  in  safe^  to  reach  yourself  and  your  forces. 
Look  to  this  business ;  the  emergencjr  is  sudden.  Invent — 
contrive — ^this  instant  give  us  some  clever  plan ;  so  that  that 
which  has  been  seen  here  within,  may  not  have  been  seen ; 
that  which  has  been  done,  may  not  have  been  done.  There, 
my  man,  you  undertake  a  great  enterprise ;  lofty  the  defences 
which  you  erect.  If  you  yourself  alone  hut  say  you  under- 
take this,  I  have  a  certainty  that  we  are  able  to  rout  our 
foes. 

Pal.  I  do  say  so,  and  I  do  undertake  it. 
Peeip.  And  I  do  pronounce  that  you  shall  obtain  thai; 
which  you  desire. 

Pal.  May  Jupiter  kindly  bless  you  then ! 
Peeip.  But,  friend,  do  you  impart  to  me  the  plan  which 
you  have  devised. 

Pal.  Be  silent,  then,  while  I  am  inducting  you  in  the 
direction  of  my  devices ;  that  you  may  know  as  well  as  my 
own  self  my  plans. 

Peeip.  The  same  you  shall  receive  safe  from  the  same 
spot  where  you  have  deposited  them. 

Pal.  My  master  is  surrounded  with  the  hide  of  an  elephant, 
not  his  own,  and  has  no  more  wisdom  than  a  stone. 
Peeip.  I  myself  know  the  same  thing. 
Pal.  Now,  thus  I  would  begin  upon  my  plan ;  this  con- 
trivance I  shall  act  upon.  I  shall  say  that  her  other  own 
twin-sister  has  come  here  from  Athens,  with  a  certain  per- 
son, her  lover,  to  Philocomasium,  as  like  to  her  as  milk  is  to 
milk.  I  shaU  say  that  they  are  lodged  and  entertained  here 
in  your  house. 

Peeip.  Bravo !  bravo !  cleverly  Hhought  of.  I  approve  of 
your  device. 

Pal.  So  that,  if  my  fellow-servant  should  accuse  her  be- 
fore the  Captain,  am.d  say  that  he  has  seen  her  here  at  yonr 
house,  toying  with  another  man,  I  shall  assert,  on  the  other 


y  Google  I 


Sc.  n.  THS  BBAGGABT  CAPTAIN.  81 

band,  that  my  fellow-servant  has   seen  the  other  one,  the 
sister,  at  your  house,  fondling  and  toying  with  her  own  lover. 
Pebip.  Aye,  most  excellent.     I'll  say  the  same,  if  the 
Captain  shall  inquire  of  me. 

Pai.  But  do  you  say  that  they  are  extremely  alike ;  and 
this  must  be  imparted  in  time  to  Philocomasium,  in  order 
that  she  may  know;  that  she  mayn't  be  tripping  if  the 
Captain  should  question  her. 

Pebip.  A  very  clever  contrivance.  But  if  the  Captain 
should  wish  to  see  them  both  in  company  together,  what 
i^iall  we  do  then  f 

Pal.  That's  easy  enough.  Three  hundred  excuses  may 
be  picked  up — she  is  not  at  home ;  she  has  gone  out  walk- 
ing ;  she  is  asleep ;  she  is  dressing ;  she  is  bathing ;  she  is 
at  breakfast^ ;  she  is  taking  dessert^ ;  she  is  engaged ;  she  is 
enjoying  her  rest* ;  in  fact,  she  can't  come.  There  are  as 
many  of  these  put-offs  as  you  like,  if  I  can  only  persuade  him 
at  the  very  outset  to  believe  that  to  be  true  which  shall  be 
contrived. 

Pebip.  I  like  what  you  say.  Pal.  Go  in-doors  then ;  and 
if  the  damsel's  there,  bid  her  return  home  directly,  and  instruct 
and  tutor  her  thoroughly  in  this  plan,  that  she  may  under- 
stand our  scheme,  as  we  have  begun  it,  about  the  twm-sister. 
Pebip.  I'll  have  her  right  cleverly  tutor'd  for  you.  Is 
there  anything  else  ? 
Pal.  Only,  be  off  in-doors.     Pebip.  I'm  off.         (JEicit. 

*  U  at  breakfast^ — Yer.  252.  Among  the  Bomans  some  began  the  day  with  the 
"  jentacolmn,"  which,  however,  was  in  geoend  confined  to  sick  persons,  the  very 
Inxorions,  or  the  labouring  classes.  From  Martial  we  learn  that  it  was  taken 
aboat  four  in  the  morning,  and  it  can,  therefore,  hardly  have  corresponded  with 
our  breakfast.  Bread,  with  cheese  or  dried  f  mit,  was  used  at  this  meaL  The 
"prandinm,"  which  is  here  tntnslated  '*  breakfast,"  is  supposed  to  have  been  a 
Wjmeal,  and  to  have  been  taken  from  twelve  to  one  o'clock  in  the  day. 
Sometimes  it  was  of  simple  character,  while  occasionally  fish,  fruit,  and  wine  formed 
part  of  the  repast,  in  which  latter  case  it  would  almost  correspond  with  the  lun- 
dwQii  of  xaodem  times. 

*S3iei$  takmg  deswrt)— Ver.  252.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  Bomans,  after  the 
Mcond  courae  of  the  *^  coena"  or  **  dinner"  was  taken  away,  to  have  wine  on  the 
table,  and  to  prolong  the  evening  with  eonversation ;  perhaps  this  period  is  here 
referred  to  as  furnishing  one  of  the  excuses  to  be  made. 

'  h  enjotfing  her  resf) — ^Ver.  252.  *'  Opera  non  est"  usually  signifies  "she  is  not 
It  leisure,"  ue,,  "  she  is  busy ;"  but  here  it  is  thought  to  mean  the  reverse,  "  she  is 
not  at  work,"  "  she  is  taking  her  ease,"  and  consequently  cannot  be  disturbed. 

G 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


82  MILES  OL0EI0SX7S  :  Act.  11. 

scEKu  in. 

PALffiSTBio  ahne. 

Pal.  And  I'll  go  home,  too ;  and  I'll  conceal  the  fact 
that  I  am  giving  her  my  aid  in  seeking  out  the  man,  which 
fellow-servant  of  mine  it  was,  that  to-day  was  following  the 
monkey.  Por  it  cannot  be  but  in  his  conversation  he  must 
have  made  some  one  of  the  household  acquainted  about  the 
lady  of  his  master,  how  that  he  himself  has  seen  her  next 
door  here  toying  with  some  stranger  spark.  I  know  the 
habit  myself;  "  I  can't  hold  my  tongue  on  that  which  I  know 
alone."  If  I  find  out  the  person  who  saw  it,  I'll  plant 
against  him  all  my  mantelets^  and  covered  works.  The 
material  is  prepared;  'tis  a  sure  matter  that  I  must  take 
this  person  by  force,  and  by  fhtis  besieging  him.  If  so  I 
don't  find  the  man,  just  like  a  hound  I'll  go  smelling  about, 
even  until  I  shall  have  traced  out  the  fox  by  his  track. 
But  our  door  makes  a  noise :  I'll  lower  my  voice ;  for  here 
is  the  keeper  of  Philocomasium,  my  fellow-servant,  coming 
out  of  doors.     (Stands  aside.) 

SCEITE  IV. 

Enter  Sceledeus^ow  the  Captain's  hotise. 

ScEL.  Unless,  in  fact,  I  have  been  walking  this  day  in 
my  sleep  upon  the  tiles,  i'  faith,  I  know  for  sure  that  I 
have  seen  here,  at  our  neighbour's  next  door,  Philocoma- 
sium, the  lady  of  my  master,  on  the  high  road^  to  mischief 
to  herself. 

Pal.  (aside).  'Twas  he  that  saw  her  billing,  so  far  as  I 
have  heard  him  say. 

ScEL.  "Who's  that?  Pal.  Your  fellow-servant.  How 
are  you,  Sceledrus  ? 

1  3fy  mantelets) — ^Ver.  266.  "  Vinea"  was  a  contrivance  used  in  warfare,  made  of 
timber  covered  with  raw  liides  to  prevent  its  being  burnt,  under  which  the  assail- 
ants were  sheltered  in  their  attempts  to  scale  the  walls  of  a  fortification.  It 
probably  answered  very  nearly  to  what  is  called  a  **  mantelet,"  in  the  language  of 
fortification.  ^^Pluteus"  was  a  similar  engine,  in  the  form  of  a  turret,  and 
moving  on  wheels. 

2  On  the  high  roadh-Ver.  274.  "  Sibi  malam  rem  queerere."  Literally,  "  is 
seeking  a  bad  job  for  herself.*' 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  BBAaaJLBT  CAPTAIK.  83 

ScEL.  I  am  glad  that  I  have  met  you,  PalsBstrio. 

Pal.  What  now?    Or  what's  the  matter ?    Let  me  know. 

ScEL.  I'm  afraid.     Pal.  "What  are  you  afraid  of? 

ScEL.  By  my  troth,  lest,  this  day,  as  many  domestics  as 
there  are  of  us  here,  we  shall  jump  into  a  most  woful  punish- 
ment hy  way  of  tortiu'e. 

Pal.  Jump  you  slone,  please ;  for  I  don't  at  all  like  this 
jumping  in^  and  jumping  out. 

ScEL.  Perhaps  you  don't  know  what  new  mischance  has 
lappened  at  home  ? 

Pal.  What  mischance  is  this  ?    Scel.  A  disgraceful  one. 

Pal.  Do  you  then  keep  it  to  yourself  alone :  don't  tell  it 
me ;  I  don't  want  to  know  it. 

SoEL.  But  I  won't  let  you  not  know  it.  To-day  I  was  fol- 
lowing our  monkey  upon  the  tiles,  next  door  there.  (^Points 
to  the  house.) 

Pal.  By  my  troth,  Sceledrus,  a  worthless  fellow,  you  were 
following  a  worthless  beast. 

Scel.  The  Q-ods  confound  you !  Pal.  That  befits  your- 
self, since  you  began  the  conversation. 

Scel.  By  chance,  as  it  happened,  I  looked  down  there 
tlirough  the  skylight,  into  the  next  house ;  and  there  I  saw 
Philocomasium  toying  with  some  strange  young  man,  I  know 
not  whom. 

Pal.  What  scandalous  thing  is  this  I  hear  of  you,  Sce- 
ledrus? 

Scel.  I'  faith,  I  did  see  her,  beyond  a  doubt. 

Pal.  What,  yourself?  Scel.  Tes,  I  myself,  with  these 
eyes  of  mine. 

Pal.  Get  away,  it  isn't  likely  what  you  say,  nor  did  you 
see  her. 

Scel.  Do  I,  then,  appear  to  you  as  if  I  were  purblind? 

Pal.  'Twere  better  for  you  to  ask  the  doctor  about  that. 
But,  indeed,  if  the  Gods  onh/  love  you,  don't  you  rashly 
fetber  this^  idle  story.  Now  are  you  breeding  thence  a  fatal 
dilemma  for  your  legs  and  head ;  for,  in  two  ways,  the  came 

*  Tkit  Jumping  t»)— Ver.  280.  Some  critics  think  that  there  is  some  hidden 
meaning  or  siilasioQ  in  the  words  '*  insnltnram"  and  *^  desultoram."  That  hardly 
«eems  to  be  the  case,  for  Palsstrio  might  naturally  say  in  return  to  the  warning 
of  the  other,  "  I  like  neither  your  jumping  in  nor  your  jumping  out." 

«  Rathlff  father  thisy-Yer,  293.  "  Tollas  fabulam."  This  metaphor  is  borrowed 

q2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


84  MILES  GLOBIOSTTS  ;  Act.  H. 

is  contrived  for  you  to  be  mined,  unless  you  put  a  check 
upon  your  foolish  chattering. 

ScEL.  But  how,  two  ways?  Pal.  I'll  tell  you.  First 
then,  if  you  falsely  accuse  Philocomasium,  by  that  you  are 
undone;  in  the  next  place,  if  it  is  true,  having  been  ap- 
pointed her  keeper,  tliere  you  are  undone. 

ScEL.  What  may  happen  to  me,  I  know  not ;  I  know  for 
certain  that  I  did  see  this. 

Pal.  Do  you  persist  in  it^  unfortunate  wretch  ? 

ScEL.  "What  would  you  have  me  say  to  you,  but  that  I 
did  see  her  ?  Moreover,  she  is  in  there,  next  door,  at  this 
very  moment. 

Pal.  What !    Isn't  she  at  home  ? 

ScEL.  Gro  and  see.  Go  in-doors  yourself;  for  I  don't  afik 
now  for  any  confidence  to  be  put  in  me. 

Pal.  I'm  determined  to  do  so.  Scel.  I'll  wait  here  for 
you.     (Pal^steio  goes  into  the  Captaot's  home,) 


SCEITE  V. 

ScELEBEXTS,  alone. 

Scel.  In  this  direction  will  I  be  on  the  watch  for  her,  how 
soon  the  heifer  may  betake  herself  from  the  pasture  this  way 
towards  her  stall.  What  now  shall  I  do?  The  Captain 
gave  me  to  her  as  her  keeper.  Now,  if  I  make  a  discovery, 
I'm  undone ;  if  I  am  silent,  still  I  am  undone,  if  this  should 
be  discovered.  What  is  there  more  abandoned  or  more 
daring  than  a  woman  ?  While  I  was  upon  the  tiles,  this 
wornan  betook  herself  out  of  doors  from  her  dwelling.  By 
my  troth,  'twas  a  brazen  act  she  did.  If,  now,  the  Captain 
were  to  know  of  this,  i'  faith,  I  believe  he  would  puU  down  the 
whole  entire  house  next  door,  and  me  he  would  send  to  the 
gibbet^.  Whatever  comes  of  it,  i'  faith,  I'U  hold  my  tongue 
rather  than  come  to  a  bad  end.  I  cannot  keep  effectttal 
guard  on  a  woman  that  puts  herself  up  for  sale. 

from  the  custom  among  the  Komans  of  laying  the  new-born  child  upon  the  gnnmd, 
upon  which  it  was  taken  up  (tollehatur)  by  the  father,  or  other  person  who  in- 
tended to  stand  in  the  place  of  parent  to  it. 
1  To  theffibb^y-yer.  810.  »*Cnicem."    Literally,  "croB." 


y  Google 


Sc.  VL  THE  BBA€h0ABT  CAPTAIJf .  85 


Scene  YI. 

Bnter  'PaJjJ^btrio  from  the  Captain's  house. 

Pal.  Sceledrus,  Sceledrus,  what  one  man  is  there  on 
earth  more  impudent  than  yourself?  Who  more  than  your- 
self has  been  bom  with  the  Deities  hostile  and  enraged  ? 

ScEL.  What's  the  matter?  Pal.  Do  you  want  those 
eyes  of  yours  gouged  out,  with  which  you  see  what  never 
existed? 

ScEL.  How,  what  never  existed  ?  Pal.  I  would  not  buy 
your  life  at  the  price  of  a  rotten  nut. 

ScEL.  Why,  what's  the  matter?  Pal.  What's  the  mat- 
ter, do  you  ask  ? 

ScEL.  And  why  shouldn't  I  ask  ?  Pal.  Why  don't  you 
beg  for  that  tongue  of  yours  to  be  cut  out,  that  prates  so  at 
random? 

ScEL.  Why  should  I  beg  for  that  ? 

Pal.  Why,  Philocomasium  is  there  at  home,  she  whom 
you  were  saying  that  you  had  seen  next  door  kissing  and 
toying  with  another  man. 

ScEL.  'Tis  a  wonder  that  you  are  in  the  habit  of  feeding 
on  darnel^,  with  wheat  at  so  low  a  price. 

Pal.  Why  so  ?     Soel.  Because  you  are  so  dim  of  sight. 

Pal.  You  gallows-bird,  'tis  you,  indeed,  that  are  blind, 
^h  a  vengeance,  and  not  dim  of  sight ;  for,  sure  enough, 
there  she  is  at  home. 

ScEL.  How  ?  At  home  ?  Pal.  At  home,  i'  faith,  un- 
doubtedly- 

ScEL.  Be  off  with  you;  you  are  playing  with  me,  Patestrio. 

Pal.  My  hands  are  dirty,  then.     Scel.  How  so  ? 

Pal.  Because  I  am  playing  with  dirt. 

Scel.  A  mischief  on  your  head.  Pal.  Nay  rather,  Sce- 
leclrns,  it  shall  be  on  yours,  I  promise  you,  unless  you 

^  Feeding  on  darnel) — ^Ver.  321.  He  means  to  say  that  his  sight  must  have  fiiiled 
him,  and,  bj  waj  of  aocouitiDg  for  it,  that  he  must  have  lived  on  bread  made  of 
^araeL  This  grain  was  supposed  not  only  to  cause  the  person  eatmg  to  appear  as 
'^  intoncated,  but  very  seriously  to  affect  the  eyesight.  Ovid  says  in  the  Fasti, 
B.  1^  L  691, ''  Let  the^fidds,  also,  be  clear  of  darnel  that  weakens  the  eyes.*' 


y  Google 


86  MILES  GLOBIOSXJS ;  Act.  IL 

change  for  fresh  your  eyes  and  your  talk.    But  our  door 
made  a  noise. 

ScEL.  Well,  I  shall  watch  here  out  of  doors ;  for  there  is 
no  way  by  which  she  can  pass  hence  in-doors,  except  through 
the  front  door. 

Pal.  But  there  she  is,  at  home.  I  don't  know,  Sceledrus, 
what  mischief  is  possessing  you  ? 

ScEL.  I  see  for  my  own  self,  I  judge  for  my  own  self,  I 
have  especial  faith  in  my  own  self:  no  man  shall  frighten  me 
out  of  it,  but  that  she  is  in  that  house.  (JPomts  to  the  house  of 
PERiPLECOMENrs.)  Here  I'll  take  my  stand,  that  she  may 
not  steal  out  home  without  my  knowledge. 

Pal.  (aside).  This  fellow  is  in  my  hands ;  now  will  I  drive 
him  from  his  strong  hold.  {To  Sceledetjs.)  Do  you  wish 
me  now  to  make  you  own  that  you  don't  see  correctly  ? 

ScEL.  Come,  do  it  then.  Pal.  And  that  you  neither 
think  aright  in  your  mind,  nor  yet  make  use  of  your  eyes  ? 

ScEL.  I'd  have  you  do  it.  Pal.  Do  you  say,  then,  that 
the  lady  of  your  master  is  there  in  that  house  ? 

SoEL.  I  assert,  as  well,  that  I  saw  her  here  in  this  house 
(joints  to  the  hovse  of  Peeiplecomenus),  toying  with  a 
strange  man. 

Pal.  Don't  you  know  that  there  is  no  communication 
between  our  house  here  and  that  one  ? 

ScEL.  I  know  it.  Pal.  Neither  by  the  terrace^,  nor  by 
the  garden,  only  through  the  skylight  ? 

ScEL.  I  know  it.  Pal.  "What  then,  if  she  is  now  at  home? 
If  I  shall  make  her,  so  as  you  may  see  her,  come  out  hence 
from  our  house,  are  you  not  deserving  of  many  a  lashing  ? 

ScEL.  I  am  so  deserving.  Pal.  Watch  that  door,  then, 
that  she  may  not  privily  betake  herself  out  thence  without 
your  knowledge  and  pass  here  into  owr  house, 

ScEL.  'Tis  my  intention  to  do  so.  Pal.  Upon  her  feet^ 
will  I  place  her  this  moment  here  before  you  in  the  street. 

ScEL.  Come,  then,  a/nd  do  so.  (Pal-2esteio  goes  into  the 
Captain's  home,) 

»  By  the  terrace)— -Ver.  340.  "  Solarium"  was  either  a  balcony  or  terrace  before 
a  bouse,  or  on  the  top  of  it,  which  was  exposed  to  the  sun.  People  walked  there  m 
the  cool  of  the  evening.  It  was  from  a  **  solarium''  that  David  first  saw  Bath- 
sheba. 

»  Upon  her/e€t)^\er,  844.  Lindemann  thinks  that  »*  pede**  here  means  "upon 


y  Google 


Sc  VIJUL.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAPTAJIT,  87 

Scene  VII. 
SCELEDBXTS  ahfie. 

ScEL.  I  wish  to  know,  whether  I  did  see  that  which  I  did 
see,  or  whether  he  can  do  that  which  he  says  he  can  do — 
maJce  her  to  be  at  home.  For,  really,  I  have  eyes  of  my 
own,  and  I  don't  ask  to  borrow  them  out  of  doors.  But 
this  fellow  is  for  ever  fawning  about  her ;  he  is  always  near 
her;  he  is  called  first  to  meat,  his  mess  is  given^  to  him 
first.  For  this  fellow  has  been,  perhaps,  about  three  years 
with  us ;  nor  fares  it  better  with  any  other  servant  in  our 
&mily  than  with  him.  But  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  mind 
what  I  am  about ;  to  keep  my  eye  upon  this  door.  If  I  take 
my  station  here,  this  way,  i'  faith,  I  warrant  they  will  never 
impose  on  me. 

Scene  VIU. 

Ikter  Pal^steio  aw^  Philocomasium  from  the  Captain's 
hotise. 

Pal.  (jspeahivig  to  her  in  a  low  voice  as  he  enters).  Be 
sure  to  remember  my  instructions. 

Phil,  (aside).  It's  strange  you  should  so  often  remind  me. 

Pal.  (aside).  But  I  fear  you  may  not  prove  cunning  enough. 

Phil,  (aside).  Give  me  even  ten  scholars,  though  far  from 
artful,  I  could  instruct  them  so  as  to  prove  artful ;  in  me  alone 
is  there  a  superabundance  of  artfulness :  come,  then,  now  put 
your  plans  in  force ;  I'll  step  aside  here.    (Steps  aside.) 

Pal.  What  have  you  to  say,  Sceledrus  ? 

Scel.  (not  lifting  up  his  eyes).  I'm  about  this  business  of 
mine :  I  have  got  ears,  say  what  you  please. 

her  feet;"  u  mucli  as  to  say,  "  Til  bring  her  to  you  on  her  feet  and  not  standing 
<Bi  her  head.**  The  tme  meaning  of  the  passage  seems  to  be,  <*  FIl  bring  her  to 
joa  standing  upon  '  terra  firma,'  and  not  flying  with  wings,  as  you  seem  to  expect.** 
*  Bit  mess  it  given) — Ver.  349.  The  "  polmentum,"  or  food  of  the  slaves,  usually 
consisted  of  salt,  fish,  oil,  vinegar,  and  the  olives  that  were  windfalls.  This  food 
received  its  name  from  being  eaten  with  a  kind  of  porridge  made  from  meal  or 
pnlae,  which  was  generally  eaten  before  bread  was  used,  and  probably  continued  to 
be  the  food  of  the  slaves. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


88  MiiJEB  OLOBiosirs ;  Act.  n. 

Pal.  I  think  that  in  that  self- same  position^  you  will  have 
to  die  outside  the  gates,  when,  with  hands  outstretched,  you 
will  be  carrying  your  cross. 

ScEL.  Por  what  reason  so  ?  Pal.  Just  look  on  your  left 
hand ;  who  is  that  lady  ? 

ScEL.  (looking).  O  ye  immortal  Gods,  it  really  is  the  lady 
of  my  master ! 

Pal.  I'  faith,  so  she  seems  to  me  as  well.  Do  then,  now, 
since  so  you  would  have  it 

ScEL.  Do  what  ?     Pal.  Die  this  very  instant. 

Phil,  {advancing),  "Where  is  this  faithful  servant,  who 
has  falsely  accused  me  in  my  innocence  of  this  most  heinous 
crime? 

Pal.  See,  here  he  is ;  'tis  he  that  told  it  me, — ^assuredly 
'twas  he. 

Phil.  Villain,  did  you  say  that  you  had  seen  me  next 
door  here  kissing  ? 

Pal.  Besides,  he  said  it  was  with  some  strange  young 
man. 

ScEL.  I'  faith,  I  did  say  so,  undoubtedly. 

Phil.  You,  saw  me  ?  Scel.  Yes,  with  these  self-same  eyes. 

Phil.  I  fancy  you  will  lose  those  eyes,  which  see  more 
than  what  they  really  do  see. 

ScBL.  By  my  faith,  I  shall  never  be  intimidated  from 
having  seen  what  I  really  did  see. 

Phil.  In  my  foolishness  I  am  delaying  too  long  in  parley- 
ing with  this  madman,  whom,  by  the  pow^s,  Pll  punish  with 
death. 

SoEL.  Forbear  to  threaten  me :  I  know  that  the  cross  will 
prove  my  tomb;  there  are  laid  my  forefathers,  my  father, 
grandfather,  great-grandfather,  great-great-grandfather.  'Tis 
not  in  possibility,  however,  for  these  eyes  of  mine  to  be  dug 
out^  by  your  threats.  But  I  want  a  few  words  with  you ; 
prithee,  Palsestrio,  whence  came  she  hUher  ? 

*  In  that  8el/-samepo8Uion)—Yer.  359.  Sceledrus  is  standing  before  the  door  with 
both  arms  stretched  out  that  Philocomasium  may  not  come  out  without  his  know- 
ing. Palaestrio  tells  him,  that  when  he  comes  to  be  fastened  on  the  cross  for  his 
negligence,  he  will  have  to  assume  that  attitude.  The  gate  here  alluded  to  is  sup- 
posed to  have  been  the  Esquiline,  or  Metian  gate  at  Borne,  a  place  near  which 
was  devoted  to  the  punishment  of  slaves.  Athens  and  other  Greek  cities  had 
"  the  gate  of  Charon,"  through  which  malefactors  passed  to  punishment, 

*  To  be  dug  oirf)— Ver.  374.  That  is,  "  you  cannot  make  me  not  to  have  seen 
what  I  really  did  see." 


y  Google 


Sc.  Vni.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAPTAIN.  89 

Pal.  Whence  but  from  our  house?  Sctel.  From  our 
hoiue? 

Pal.  Do  you  credit  me^?  Scbl.  I  do  credit  you:  but 
'tis  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at,  how  she  has  been  able  to  re- 
turn from  that  house  to  ours.  For,  beyond  a  doubt,  we  have 
neither  a  terrace  to  our  house,  nor  any  garden,  nor  any 
™dow  but  what  is  latticed^.  {To  Philocomasiiim.)  But, 
undoubtedly,  I  did  see  you  in  the  house  next  door. 

Pal.  Do  you  persist,  you  rascal,  in  pretending  to  accuse 
her? 

Phil.  In  good  sooth,  then,  the  dream  has  not  turned  out 
untrue,  that  I  dreamed  last  night. 

Pal.  What  did  you  dream  ?  Phil.  I'll  tell  you ;  but,  I 
pray  you,  gire  attention.  Last  night,  in  my  sleep,  my  twin- 
sister  seemed  to  have  come  from  Athens  to  Ephesus  with  a 
certain  person,  her  lover.  Both  of  them  seemed  to  me  to  be 
having  their  lodgings  here  next  door. 

Pal.  (to  the  AxijiiEisc^,  The  dream  that's  being  related 
is  Palaestrio's — -pray^  go  on. 

Phil.  I  seemed  to  be  delighted  because  my  sister  had  come, 
and  on  her  account  I  seemed  to  be  incurring  a  most  grievous 
suspicion.  For,  in  my  sleep,  my  own  servant  seemed  to 
accuse  me,  as  you  are  now  doin^y  of  being  caressed  by  a 
strange  young  man,  whereas  it  was  that  own  twin-sister  of 
mine,  who  had  been  toying  with  her  own  friend.  Thus  did 
I  dream  that  I  was  wrongfully  accused  of  a  crime. 

Pal.  And  isn't  just  the  same  thing  befalling  you  when 
awake,  that  you  speak  of  as  seen  in  your  sleep  ?  Capital; 
i'  fiuth,  the  dream  is  verified:  go  in-doors,  and  pray^.  I 
should  recommend  that  this  be  told  to  the  Captain. 

*  Ihyou  credit  me}— Yet.  364.  "  Viden  ?"  Literally,  "  do  you  look  at  me  ?" 
Tbe  Ronuuis,  when  they  wished  to  impress  any  one  with  the  belief  that  they 
vere  speaking  serionsly  and  in  good  faith,  nsed  this  phrase,  or  "  vide  m^,"  "  look 
at  me  now."  Our  eacpresBion,  **  do  yon  look  me  in  the  face  and  say  so?"  is 
somewhat  similar. 

*  But  what  it  Jatlicedy^Yer,  379.  The  **  chithri**  were  a  kind  of  lattice  or  trellis- 
»ork,  which,  as  well  as  network,  was  sometimes  plaoed  before  windows  to  prevent 
•erpents  and  other  noxioiis  reptiles  from  getting  in. 

'  And  pray) — ^Ver.  894.  After  any  ill-omened  dream,  it  was  the  costom  to  offer 
com  and  frankincense  to  Jupiter  ProdigiaBs,  *^  the  disposer  of  prodijpes,"  and  other 
of  the  Deities,  in  order  that  eyU  might  be  averted. 


y  Google 


90  HILSS  GLOBIOSUS ;  Act  11. 

Phil.  I  ^ni  resolved  to  do  so ;  nor,  in  fact,  will  I  allow 
myself,  with  impunity,  to  be  accused  of  disgraceful  conduct. 
(Goes  into  the  Captain's  Jumse,) 

Scene  IX. 

SCELEDBUS,  PaLJBSTBIO. 

ScEL.  I  fear  for  the  thing  I  have  done ;  my  back  does  so 
tingle  all  over. 

Pal.  Are  you  not  aware  that  you  are  done  for  ? 

ScEL.  Now,  indeed,  I'm  sure  she  is  at  home ;  I  am  now 
resolved  to  watch  our  door,  wheresoever  she  may  be.  {Places 
himself  at  the  door,) 

Pal.  But,  prithee,  Sceledrus,  how  very  like  the  dream  she 
dreamt  to  what  has  happened ;  and  how  you  really  did  believe 
that  you  had  seen  her  kissing.         #        #        #        #         # 

ScEL.  And  do  you  suppose  that  I  didn't  see  her  ? 

Pal.  I'  faith,  1  verily  believe  you'll  come  to  your  senses 
when  'tis  too  late.  If  this  matter  should  only  reach  our 
master,  you  certainly  are  undone. 

ScEL.  Now,  at  length,  I  find  out  that  there  was  a  mist 
placed  before  my  eyes. 

Pal.  I'  faith,  that  reaUy  has  been  plain  for  some  time  now ; 
as  she  was  here  in-doors  all  the  while. 

ScEL.  Not  a  word  of  certainty  have  I  to  utter ;  I  did  not 
see  her,  although  I  did  see  her. 

Pal.  By  my  troth,  through  this  foUy  of  yours  you  certainly 
have  nearly  ruined  us ;  while  you  have  wished  to  prove  yourself 
faithful  to  your  master,  you  have  been  almost  undone.  But 
the  door  of  our  next  neighbour  makes  a  noise ;  I'll  be  silent. 

Scene  X. 

Enter  PHiLOCOMASirM^,  dressed  in  another  habity  from  the 
house  o/'Pebiplecomenx7S. 

Phil,  {to  a  servant  Servant).  Put  fire  on  the  altar,  that 

1  P}uU>c(mMtkim)  Sceledrus  having  been  dulj  prepared,  Philocomasiam  ap* 
pears  as  her  twin-sister,  who  is  supposed  to  have  come  the  day  before  from  Athens 
to  Ephesos,  and  gives  directions  aboat  returning  thanks  for  having  landed  in 
safety.  As  the  circumstance  of  the  communication  between  the  houses  is  known 
to  the  Audience,  and  is  not  suspected  by  Sceledrus,  his  embarrassment  is  highly 
diverting,  and  very  cleverly  depicted. 


y  Google 


Sc.  X.  THE  BRAOaABT  CAPTAIK.  91 

in  my  joy  I  may  return  praises  and  thanks  to  Diana  of 
Ephesns,  and  that  I  may  send  up  for  her  a  grateful  smoke 
witb  odours  of  Arabia:  she  who  has  preserved  me  in  the 
realms  of  Keptune  and  amid  the  boisterous  temples^,  where 
with  raging  billows  I  have  been  so  recently  dismayed. 

ScEL.  {discovering  her),  Palsestrio!  O  PalsBstrio! 

Pal.  Sceledrus !  O  Sceledrus !     What  is  it  you  want  ? 

ScEL.  This  lady  that  has  come  out  of  that  house  just  now 
—is  she  Philocomasium,  our  master's  lady,  or  is  she  not  ? 

Pal.  r  faith,  I  think,  it  seems  to  be  she.  But  'tis  a 
wondrous  thing  how  she  could  pass  from  our  house  to  next 
door ;  if,  indeed,  it  is  she. 

ScEL.  And  have  you  any  doubt  that  this  is  she  ? 

Pal.  It  seems  to  be  she.  Scel.  Let  us  approach  her,  aTid 
accost  her.  Hallo!  how's  this,  Philocomasium?  What  is 
there  owing  to  you  in  that  house  ?  What  is  your  business 
ihre?    "Waj  are  you  silent  now  ?     I  am  speaking  to  you. 

Pal.  No,  faith,  you  a/re  talking  to  yourself;  for  nothing  at 
all  does  she  answer.  . 

Scel.  I  am  addressing  you,  woman,  brimful  of  viciousness 
and  disgrace,  who  are  roaming  about  among  your  neighbours. 

Phil.  To  whom  are  you  talking  ?  Scel.  To  whom  but  to 
yourself? 

Phil.  What  person  are  you  ?  Or  what  business  have  you 
with  me  ? 

Scel.  O,  you  ask  me  who  I  am,  do  you  ? 

Phil.  Why  shouldn't  I  ask  that  which  I  don't  know  ? 

Pal.  Who  am  I,  then,  if  yon  don't  know  him  ? 

Phil.  You  are  an  annoyance  to  me,  whoever  you  are,  both 
you  and  he. 

Scel.  WTuxt?  don't  you  know  us  ?  Phil.  No,  neither  of  you. 

Scel.  I  very  much  fear Pal.  What  do  you  fear  ? 

Scel.  Why,  that  we  have  lost  ourselves  somewhere  or 
other ;  for  she  says  that  she  knows  neither  you  nor  me. 

Pal.  I  wish,  Sceledrus,  to  examine  into  this,  whether  we 
are  ourselves,  or  else  some  other  persons ;  lest  secretly  some- 
fcow  some  one  of  our  neighbours  may  have  transformed  us 
without  our  knowing  it. 

'  <Sotfeeroti«  iemiplu) — ^Ver.  413.  In  the  language  of  the  Poets,  Neptune  and  the 
>B&nor  Sea  DiTinities  are  Buppoeed  to  hare  their  temples  and  abodes  in  the  sea 
andriTen. 


y  Google 


92  KILES  GLOSIOSTJS ;  Aofc  11. 

SoBL.  For  my  part,  beyond  a  doubt,  I  am  my  own  self. 

Pax.  r  faith,  and  so  am  I.  Scel.  My  lady,  you  ore 
seeking  your  destmction.  To  you  I  am  speaking ;  hark  you, 
Philocomasium ! 

Phil.  What  craziness  possesses  you,  to  be  calling  me 
wrongly  by  a  eradcjaw  name^  ? 

Scel.  How  now !    What  are  you  called,  then  ? 

Phil.  My  name  is  GUycera.  Scel.  For  a  bad  purpose, 
Philocomasium,  you  wish  to  have  a  wrong  name.  Away  with 
you,  shocking  woman;  for  most  notably  are  you  doing  a 
wrong  to  my  master. 

Phil.  I  ?     Scel.  Yes,  you. 

Phil.  I,  who  arrived  fr6m  Athens  yesterday  eveimig  at 
Ephesus,  with  my  lover,  a  young  man  of  Athens  ? 

Scel.  Tell  me,  what  busmess  have  you  here  in  Ephesus  ? 

Phil.  I  had  heard  that  my  own  twin-sister  is  here  in 
Ephesus ;  I  came  here  to  look  for  her. 

Scel.  You're  a  good-for-nothing  woman. 

Phil.  Yes,  i'  faith,  I  am  a  very  foolish  one  to  be  parleying 
with  jou  fellows.    I  am  going. 

Scel.  I  won't  let  you  go.     {Catches  hold  of  her.) 

Phil.  Let  me  go.  Scel.  You  are  discovered  in  the  feet. 
I  won't  let  you  go. 

Phil.  But  my  hands  shall  just  now  sound  again  against 
your  cheek,  if  you  don't  let  me  go. 

Scel.  {to  PALiBSTsio).  Why  the  plague  are  you  standing 
idle  ?    Why  don't  you  hold  her  on  the  other  side  ? 

Pal.  I  don't  choose  to  bring  the  business  down  upon  my 
back.  How  do  I  know  but  that  this  is  not  Philocomasium, 
but  is  some  other  female  that  resembles  her  ? 

Phil.  Will  you  let  me  go,  or  will  you  not  let  me  go  ? 

Scel.  No  ;  by  force  and  against  your  will,  in  spite  of  you, 
I'll  drag  you  home,  unless  you'll  go  of  your  own  accord. 

Phil,  {pointing  to  the  Ao^&  o/^PEEiPLECOKSinjB).  This  ifl 
my  lodging  here  abroad^,  at  Athens  is  my  home. 


1  Crackjam  name)— Yer,  484  "  Perplexo  nomine."  The  CommentBtors 
to  think  that  this  means  no  more  than  "  by  my  wrong  name."  The  word  "  per-  i 
plexo"  seems,  however,  to  refer  to  the  extreme  length  of  the  name,  as  well  as  U» . 
fact  that  it  does  not  belong  to  her. 

2  Lodging  here  abroad)— Yer,  460.  "  Hosticnm  domicirram,"  "  my  lodging 
abroad."    "  Hostis"  originally  meant  merely  "  a  foreigner ;"  whereas  its  later  sig*  . 
nification  was  "  an  enemy." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc  Xn.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAPTAIK.  93 

ScEL.  But  your  master  lives  here  (pointing  to  the  Cap- 
iinr's  house), 

Phil.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  house,  nor  do  I 
know  or  understand  yourselves  what  persons  you  are. 

ScEL.  Proceed  against  me^  at  law.  I'll  never  let  you  go, 
until  you  give  me  your  solemn  word  that  you  will  go  in- 
doors here  {pointing  to  the  Captain's  house)  if  I  let  go  of 
you. 

Phtl.  You  are  compelling  me  by  force,  whoever  you  are. 
I  give  you  my  word,  that  if  you  let  go  of  me,  I  will  go  into 
that  house  where  you  bid  me. 

ScEL.  Then,  now  I  let  go  of  you.  Phil.  And,  as  I'm  let 
go,  I'll  go  in  here,  (Ilims  into  the  house  of  Pbeipleco- 
Hsaus.) 

ScEioj  XT. 

ScELEBsrs,  Pal^steio. 

ScEL.  She  has  acted  with  a  woman's  honour. 

Pal.  Sceledrus,  ^  you've  lost  the  prey  through  your 
bands;  as  sure  as  possible  she  is  the  lady  of  our  master. 
Do  you  iutend  to  act  in  this  matter  with  spuit  ? 

ScEL.  How  am  I  to  act  ?  Pal.  Bring  me  a  sword  out  here 
from  in-doors. 

SoEL.  "What  will  you  do  with  it  ? 

Pal.  I'll  break  right  into  the  house^ ;  and  whatever  man 
I  see  iu-doors  there  caressing  Philocomasium,  I'll  behead 
bim  on  the  spot. 

ScEL.  And  do  you  think  that  it  was  she  ? 

Pal.  r  faith,  it  was  she,  sure  enough.  Scel.  But  how 
she  did  dissemble. 

Pal.  Go,  bring  me  a  sword  out  here. 

Scel.  I'll  have  it  here  thismoment.  {Goes  into  the  Cap- 
TADf's  house.) 

scEioj  xn. 

Pal^steio  alone. 
Pal.  Beyond  a  doubt,  neither  any  horse  nor  foot  has  so 

^  Proceed  affainsffne)—Yer,  453.  "  Lege  agito."  "  Lege  agere"  was  a  technical 
^^qpreasioo,  meaning  *'  to  bring  an  action,**  or  ^*  to  sue  a  person  at  law."  It  is  said 
to  have  been  the  formal  expression  in  commencing  an  action  or  suit. 

*  Into  ike  house)-^Yer.  460.  The  mock  rage  of  Palsestrio  here  is  admirably 
drawn. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


04  HiLSS  GLOsiosrs ;  Act  n. 

great  a  degree  of  boldness  in  carrying  out  anytliing  witli 
as  much  confidence  as  some  women.  How  cleverly  and  how 
skilfully  slie  performed  her  part  in  both  her  characters! 
— ^how  her  wary  keeper,  my  fellow-serrant,  is  being  gulled ! 
'Tis  most  fortunate  tnat  the  passage  communicates  through 
the  party-wall. 

ScEira  XIII. 
Enter  ScELEDEUs/row  the  Captain's  house. 

ScEL.  Hallo !  Palaestrio,  there's  no  occasion  for  the  sword. 

Pal.  How  so  ? — or  what's  the  matter  now? 

ScEL.  Our  master's  lady  is  there,  at  home. 

Pal.  What  ?    At  home  ?     Scel.  She's  lying  on  the  sofa. 

Pal.  Paith,  but  you've  certainly  brought  on  yourself  a 
disagreable  affair,  according  to  what  you  report. 

Scel.  How  so?  Pal.  Inasmuch  as  you  have  dared  to 
touch  that  lady  next  door  here. 

Scel.  I'  faith,  I  fear  it  much.  But  no  one  shall  ever  make 
her  to  be  any  other  than  her  own  twin-sister. 

Pal.  'Twas  she,  in  troth,  that  you  saw  toying:  and,  in 
fact,  'tis  plain  that  it  is  she,  as  you  remark. 

Scel.  What  was  there  more  likely  than  that  I  should  have 
been  undone,  if  I  had  spoken  of  it  to  my  master. 

Pal.  Then,  if  you're  wise,  you'll  hold  your  tongue.  It 
befits  a  servant  to  know  of  more  than  he  speaks.  I'm  going 
to  leave  you,  that  I  may  not  at  all  participate  in  your  de- 
signs. -Ajid  I  shall  go  to  our  neighbour  here ;  these  turmoils 
of  yours  don't  please  me.  My  master,  if  he  comes,  should  he 
inquire  for  me,  I  shall  be  there ;  send  for  me  next  door.  (  Goes 
hito  the  house  o/'Periplecomenus.) 

Scene  XIV. 

ScELEDsus,  (done, 

Scel.  Well,  he's  off;  nor  cares  he  any  more  for  his  master's 
business  than  if  he  were  not  in  his  service.  Por  sure  she 
really  is  now  here  in-doors  in  the  house,  for  I  myself  found 
her  just  now  lying  down  in  our  house.  I  am  resolved  now 
to  employ  myself  in  watching.  (Flaces  himself  against  the 
Captain's  door,) 


y  Google 


Sc.  XV.  THE  SBAGGABT  CAPTAIK.  96 

ScBOT  XV. 
Unter  PEBiPLECOMEims  from  his  house. 

PuBip.  Paitli,  but  these  men  here,  these  servants  of  my 
neigliboiir  the  Captain,  take  me  not  to  be  a  man,  but  a  woman, 
80  much  do  they  trifle  with  me.  My  lady  guest,  who  came 
here  yesterday  from  Athens  with  the  gentleman,  my  guest,  is 
she  to  be  mauled  about  and  made  fun  of  here  in  the  street — 
a  lady,  free-bom  and  free  ? 

ScEL.  (aside).  By  my  troth,  I'm  undone.  He's  coming 
in  a  straight  Hne  up  towards  me.  I  fear  that  this  matter 
may  cause  me  great  trouble,  so  far  as  I  have  heard  this  old 
gentleman  speak. 

Pebip.  I'll  up  to  this  fellow.  Was  it  you,  Sceledrus, 
Boiirce  of  mischief,  that  were  just  now  making  fun  of  my  lady 
guest  before  the  house  ? 

ScEL.  Good  neighbour,  listen,  I  beg.  Pebip.  I,  listen 
to  you? 

ScEL.  I  wish  to  clear  myself.  Pebip.  You,  clear  yourself 
tome,  who  have  done  an  action  so  gross  and  so  unbecoming? 
And  because  you  are  soldiers^,  do  you  suppose,  you  gallows- 
bird,  that  you  may  do  what  you  like  with  us  ? 

ScEL,  May  I ?    Pebip.  But  so  may  all  the  Gods  and 

Goddesses  prosper  me,  if  a  punishment  with  the  rod^  is  not 
given  to  you  at  my  request,  a  long  and  lasting  one,  from 
morning  to  evening;  because  you  have  been  breaking  my 
gutters  and  my  tues,  while  you  were  following  there  a 
monkey  like  your  own  self  3;  because,  too,  you  nave  been 
peeping  down  from  there  at  my  guest  in  my;  house,  when 
he  was  caressing  and  fondling  his  mistress ;  besides,  you  have 

^  Beca^fse  you  are  soldiers) — Ver.  499.  He  allndes  to  the  lawless  character  of 
the  mercenary  soldier,  whose  name,  "  latro,"  came  afterwards  to  be  applied  to  rob- 
bers and  cnt-tbroats  of  all  descriptions.  It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  the  word 
"miles,^  which  is  applied  throughout  the  play  to  their  master,  the  Captain,  is  a 
general  term  for  one  following  the  profession  of  arms,  whetlier  officer  or  private. 
Tbe  word  is  translated  **  Captain,"  without  reference  to  his  rank,  any  further  than 
tliat  he  was  a  commanding  officer. 

'  With  the  rod) — ^Ver.  602.  The  slaves  were  more  frequently  beaten  with 
"flagra,"  or  "whips;"  but  they  were  sometimes  scourged  with  "virga;,"  or 
"  rods."    This  was  done  by  the  "  lorarius,"  a  slave  who  was  kept  for  the  purpose. 

» Like  your  own  id/) — Ver.  605.  "  Condignam  te ;"  literally,  «*  worthy,"  or  de- 
sening  of  yourself. 


y  Google 


96  MILES  GLOBiosrs ;  Act  IX. 

dared  to  accuse  the  chaste  lady  of  your  master  of  criminality, 
and  myself  of  a  heinous  offence ;  and  further,  because  you 
have  dared  to  maul  about  my  lady  guest  before  my  house. 
If  the  punishment  of  the  whip  is  not  given  to  you,  I  mil  cause 
your  master  to  be  more  laden  with  disgrace  than  the  sea  is  full 
of  waves  in  a  heavy  storm. 

SoEL.  I  am  driven  to  such  straits,  Periplecomenus,  that  I 
don't  know  whether  it  is  fitter  for  me  rather  to  dispute  this 
matter  vii^  you,  or  whether,  if  she  is  not  our  lady,  and  if  our 
lady  was  not  seen  by  me,  it  seems  more  proper  for  me  to 
excuse  myself  to  you ;  as  even  now  I  don't  know  which  I  saw, 
so  like  is  that  gtteat  of  yours  to  our  lady — ^if,  indeed,  she  is 
not  the  same  person. 

Pbbip.  Go  into  my  house  and  look :  you'll  soon  see. 

SoBL.  May  I  go  ?  Feeip.  Why,  I  command  you ;  go  and 
examine  at  your  leisure. 

ScBL.  I  am  determined  to  do  so.  {Goes  into  the  hottse  of 
Peeiplecomenus.) 

ScEio:  XVL 

Peeiplecomeitus. 

Peeip.  {probably  hohmg  up  to  a  window  in  tJie  Captaejt's 
luyuse).  Ho!  Philocomasium^ !  pass  instantly,  with  all  speed, 
into  my  house ;  'tis  absolutely  necessary.  Afterwards,  when 
Sceledrus  shall  have  come  out  from  my  house,  pass  quickly, 

1  FhXU)C(manvmC) — ^Ver.  522.  Directly  Sceledrus  turns  his  back,  the  old  man  calls 
out  for  Philocomasium,  who  is  supposed  at  that  moment  to  be  in  the  Captain's 
house.  How  he  does  so  is  somewhat  of  a  mystery  to  the  Commentators.  Thornton, 
in  his  translation,  suggests  that  he  calls  through  the  window,  where  it  is  natural  to 
imagine  that  Philocomasium  might  be  stationed  within  hearing  to  observe  all  that 
passed.  He  could  hardly,  however,  call  "through"  the  window  of  the  ground' 
floor,  as  these  were  generally  more  than  six  feet  from  the  ground ;  and,  indeed, 
there  were  rarely  any  windows  at  all  on  the  basement  It  is  most  likely  that 
Philocomasium  is  hidden  behind  the  "  clatri"  or  "  lattice"  of  the  window  in  her 
room  on  the  first-floor,  whence  ^e  observes  all  that  passes.  In  a  iutnre  line  we 
find  Acroteleutium  and  Milphidippa  owning  that  they  had  been  watching  from 
the  window  what  was  going  on  outside.  Schmieder  thinks  that  the  whole  plan 
having  been  prearranged  between  Periplecomenus  and  Philocomasium,  he  merely 
on  this  occasion  makes  a  sign  to  her,  the  meanmg  of  which  is  here  expressed  in 
words,  and  he  supposes,  what  it  does  not  deem  necessary  to  suppose,  that  his  ser- 
vants have  been  ordered  to  delay  Sceledrus,  so  as  to  ^ve  time  to  the  damsel  to 
pass  through  into  his  house. 


y  Google 


Sc.  XVIII.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAIBTAIS,  97 

with  all  haste,  back  agaiu  to  your  own  house.  By  my  troth, 
now,  I*m  afraid  she'll  be  making  some  blunder.  Should  he 
not  see  the  woman        *       #       #       #        -^j  ^^^^  opens. 

Scene  XVII. 

Unfer  Sceledbus^ow  the  house  o/'PEBiPLECOiiEKTrs. 

ScEL.  O  ye  immortal  Qt)ds !  A  woman  more  like,  and  more 
the  same,  who  is  not  the  same^  I  do  not  think  the  Gods  could 
make. 

Pebif.  What  now  ?    Scel.  I  certainly  merit  chastisement. 

Pebip.  What  then  ?  Is  it  she  ?  Scel.  Although  'tis  she, 
'tis  not  she. 

Pebip.  Have  you  seen  this  lady  ?  Scel.  I  have  seen  both 
her  and  the  gentleman,  your  guest,  caressing  and  kissing. 

Pebip.  Is  it  she  ?     Scel.  I  know  not. 

Pebip.  Would  you  know  for  certain?  Scel.  I  should 
like  to. 

Pebip.  Q-o  you  this  instant  into  your  own  house:  see 
whether  your  lady  is  within. 

Scel.  Very  well :  you've  advised  me  rightly.  I'll  be  out 
again  to  you  this  instant.     (Goes  into  the  Captain's  hotiseX^  ■  >~S 

Pebip.  I'  faith,  I  never  saw  any  man  more  cleverly  focj^,K  i'-^^j,  ^ 
and  by  more  singular  devices.    But  here  he  is  coming.  /  ,^'  ^^^*  % 

\-2  ''ilk 
scEifE  xvin.  V  -  "''L'  ='v* 

3nier  ScELEDBUs/rom  the  Captain's  htmse,        V/ r  jT- X^ 

Scel.  Periplecomenus,  by  Gods  and  men,  and  by  my  own 
folly, and  byyour  knees !  I  do  beseech  you 

Pebip.  What  now?  Scel.  Pardon  my  ignorance  and 
my  folly;  now,  at  length,  I  know  that  I  am  half-witted, 
hhnd,  cmd  thoughtless;  for,  behold!  Philocomasium  is  at 
home. 

Pebip.  How,  then,  hang-dog^.  Have  you  seen  them  both  ? 

Scel.  I  have  seen  them.  Pebip.  I  wish  you  to  bring 
your  master  to  me. 

^  iran^-do5r)--Ver.  545.  "  Furcifer."  Literally, "  bearer  of  the  *  furca.* "  Slaves 
an  repeatedly  thus  called  in  these  plays,  as,  by  way  of  punishment  for  their  mis- 
<l«ed8,  they  were  compelled  to  carry  a  *'  furca,"  or  two  pieces  of  wood  shaped  like  the 
letter  V,  round  their  necks,  with  their  hands  tied  to  the  ends  of  the  instrument. 

H 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


98  SOLES  GLOBIOBirS ;  Act  II. 

SosL.  Indeed,  I  confess  that  I  deserve  a  very  gieat 
puniE^ament ;  and  I  own  that  I  have  done  a  wrong  to  your 
lady  guest.  But  I  thought  that  she  was  the  lady  of  my 
master,  to  whom  the  Captain,  my  master,  gave  me  as  a 
keeper ;  for  it  is  not  possible  for  water  ever  to  be  drawn  more 
like  to  water  from  the  same  well,  than  is  she  to  this  lady 
guest  ofyown.  And  I  will  confess,  a%  welly  that  I  did  look 
through  the  skylight  into  your  house. 

Pssip.  Why  shouldn't  you  confess  what  I  saw  myself  ? 

ScEL.  And  there  saw  m  your  house  this  lady  guest  of 
yours,  kissing. 

Febip.  You  saw  her?  Sgel.  I  saw  her.  Why  aihould  I 
deny  what  I  did  see  P  But  I  fancied  that  I  had  seen  Philoco- 
niasium. 

Pebip.  Amd  did  ^rou  suf^se  me  to  be  the  very  vilest 
of  all  men,  in  allowing^,  with  my  own  knowledge,  such  an 
injury  so  glaringly  to  be  done  to  my  neighbour  ? 

Scel.  Now,  at  length,  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  was  done 
foolishly  by  me,  when  I  come  to  understand  the  matter ;  but 
still  I  did  not  do  it  with  any  ill  intent. 

Pebip.  Yes,  but  'twas  improperly  done;  for  it  befits  a 
person  that  is  a  servant  to  keep  lus  eyes,  and  hands,  and 
talk,  asleep. 

Scel.  Now,  if  after  this  day  I  mutter  anything,  even  what 
I  know  for  certain,  give  me  over  to  torture ;  I'U.  give  myself 
up  to  you.     This  time,  prithee,  do  pardon  me  for  this. 

Pebip.  I  shall  subdue  my  feelings,  so  as  to  think  that  it 
was  not  doDB  by  you  with  malicious  intent.  I  will  pardon 
you  in  this  matter. 

Scel.  May  the  Gods  bless  you,  then ! 

Pebip.  Troth  now,  as  the  Grods  may  prosper  you,  really 
do  restrain  your  tongue  henceforth;  even  that  whK^h  you 
do  know,  don't  know,  and  don't  you  see  what  you  do  see. 

Scel.  You  counsel  me  aright ;  so  Fm  resolved  to  do.  Are 
you  quite  appeased  ? 

Pebip.  Away  with  you.  Scel.  la  there  aught  else  you 
now  require  of  me  ? 

Pebip.  That  you  would  know  me  not.  [MakeB  as  if  lie 
is  departing,) 

» In  flOouM^— Yer.  559.  The  oM  gBntknum  nnst  smralj  hun  okaaged  oekm 
when  be  laid  tiue. 


y  Google 


Sc  XIX.  THE  BBAeOABT  CAPTAIN,  99 

ScEL.  (aside).  He  has  been  cajoling* me.  How  kindly  he 
Touchsafed  his  favour  not  to  be  angry.  I  know  what  plan 
he  is  upon :  that  directly  the  Captain  returns  home  from 
the  Forum,  I  may  be  caught  at  home.  He  and  Paleestrio  to- 
gether haye  me  in  their  power :  I  haye  perceived  that,  and 
for  some  time  IVe  known  it.  T  faith,  never  will  I  be  seek- 
ing a  bait  this  day  from  out  of  that  wicker-net-^.  For  now 
somewhither  will  I  betake  myself,  and  for  some  days  will  I 
lie  concealed  until  this  turmoil  is  hushed  and  their  resent- 
ment is  softened.  Enough  punishment  for  my  unlucky  pra- 
ting have  I  already  merited.  But  still,  whatever  befals  me, 
FS  be  off  hence  home.     {Goes  into  the  Captain's  hot*se.) 

SCBKB  XIX. 

PEBiPiiEcoMEiiniB,  alofie. 
Peeip.  So  he  has  departed  hence.  V  faith,  I  know  right 
weD,  that  a  dead  pig  full  oft  has  more  relish^  by  far  than  a 
limng  one :  so  bamboozled  has  he  been,  that  he  did  not  see 
what  he  really  did  see.  For  his  eyes,  and  ears,  and  thoughts 
have  come  over  to  us.  So  far,  'tis  right  cleverly  managed ; 
the  lady  has  played  her  part  most  excellently.  I'll  go  back 
again  to  my  Senate^ ;  for  Palsestrio  is  now  at  home  in  my 
house,  and  now  Sceledrus  is  gone  from  the  door.  A  full 
Senate  can  now  be  held.  I'll  go  in ;  lest  while  I  am  absent, 
there  should  be  a  distribution*  of  their  parts  among  them. 
{Goes  into  his  house?) 

^-Th/oAwidceit'nBC) — Wtr,  581.  The  "naaea"  was  a  contriTance,  by  means  of  joining 
wniow  rods,  for  catching  fish.  It  was  probably  somewhat  in  the  shape  of  a  large 
bottle  with  a  narrow  month,  which  was  placed  with  a  bait  in  it,  facing  the  current 
of  the  stream.    See  the  Halienticon  of  Ovid,  1. 11. 

*  Jffifw  more  reUshy—Ytx,  587.  He  "  puns"  on  the  word  "  sapis;"  and  probably 
tloB  was  a  eommon  saying  of  the  day.  "  Sapio"  means  either  "  to  be  wise,*'  or  ^*  to 
lum  a  lelisfaiBg  favour."  Now,  inasmuch  as  the  flesh  of  the  pig  is  of  a  relishing 
natnre,  it  may  be  very  truly  said,  that  it  has  more  of  th^  ^  sapit"  in  it  when  dead 
tbsa  alire.  In  reference  to  Sceledrus,  he  seems  to  mean  that  he  will  prove  of 
nneh  more  use  to  their  plan  now  he  is  bewildered  and  half  deprived  of  his  senses, 
tbaawben  in  foil  possession  of  his  faculties ;  and  that,  in  fact,  so  far  as  their  object 
is  coooemed,  there  will  be  more  of  the  *^  sapit"  in  him  now  than  there  was  before. 

'  Tomy  Smai$) — Ver.  592.  He  calls  his  fellow-plotters  in  the  mischief,  namdy, 
Palsstrio,  Philocomasiom,  and  Pleusides,  his  Senate,  which  is  now  meeting  in 
CQQSoltatioin.  When  ntting  in  deliberation,  the  Senate  was  said  to  be  *^  frequens," 
vduch  maybe  rendered  ** sitting,"  or  "  full." 

*  Be  a  diaributiony-V&r,  595.  "  Sortitus,"  or  "  aortitio,"  was  the  distribution  by 

n2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


100  MILES  GLOBIOSU8  ;  Act  III. 

ACT   THE  THIED. 
Scene  I. 

!Enter  Va-Lmstislio  from  the  house  o/*Pebiplecomekus. 

Pal.  {on  entering  he  calls  to  Pletjsicles  and  PEEiPiiE- 
comenus,  who  are  in  the  house  of  the  latter).  Keep  yourselves 
within^  doors,  yet  a  moment,  Pleusicles.  Let  me  first 
look  out,  that  there  may  be  no  ambush  anywhere,  against 
that  council  which  we  intend  to  hold.  Por  now  we  hare 
need  of  a  safe  place  from  which  no  enemy  can  win  the  spoils 
of  our  counsels.  Por  a  well-devised  plan  is  very  often  filched 
away,  if  the  place  for  deliberating  has  not  been  chosen  with 
care  or  with  caution ;  and  what  is  well-advised  is  ill-advised 
if  it  proves  of  use  to  the  enemy ;  and  if  it  proves  of  use  to 
the  enemy,  it  cannot  otherwise  than  prove  a  detriment  to 
yourself.  Por  if  the  enemy  learn  your  plans,  by  your  own 
self-same  plans  they  tie  your  tongue  and  bind  your  hands ; 
and  they  do  the  very  same  to  you  that  you  intended  to  do  to 
them.  But  I'll  spy  about,  lest  any  one,  either  in  this  direc- 
tion on  the  left  or  on  the  right,  should  come  like  a  huntsman 
on  our  counsels  with  his  ears  like  toils^.  {Loolcs  about.) 
Quite  vacant  is  the  prospect  hence  right  to  the  bottom  of  the 
street.  PH  call  them  out.  Hallo!  Periplecomenus  and 
Pleusicles,  come  out !  — - 

Scene  II; 

Enter  PEEiPLECOMENrs  and  Pleusicles ^w?i  the  house  of 

the  former. 

Pebip.  Behold  us  here  obedient  to  your  call. 

the  Senate  of  the  Roman  prorinces  among  the  Proconsuls.  He  keeps  up  the  Me- 
taphor of  the  Senate,  and  sajs,  that  he  must  make  haste,  or  all  the  proyinces  will 
be  distributed ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  each  party  will  have  agreed  on  the  part 
he  has  to  plaj,  and  will  leave  him  nothing  to  do. 

^  Keep  yourselves  within) — ^\^er.  696.  There  was  but  one  Scene  throughout  the 
representation  of  each  Soman  Comedy.  In  the  present  instance,  tibe  Scene 
is  in  front  of  the  houses  of  Periplecomenus  and  the  Captain.  Nothing  can  more 
strikingly  show  the  absurdity  of  such  a  plan  than  the  present  instance:  where 
Palsestrio  comes  out  of  the  house  of  Periplecomenus,  for  the  very  purpose,  right  in 
front  of  the  house  of  his  own  master,  of  holding  a  conversation  and  completing  his 
plot  with  Pleusicles  and  Periplecomenus,  for  the  purpose  of  deceiving  his  master 
and  carrying  off  his  mistress.  With  machinery  so  defective,  it  is  only  sarprisiog 
that  the  writer  completed  his  t^k  so  well  as  he  has  done. 

«  Ears  like  toUs^—Yer.  608.  "  Auritis  pkgis ;"  Hterally,  «*  toils  with  ears." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  n.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAPTAIN.  101 

Pal.  The  sway  is  easy  over  the  good.  But  I  wish  to  know, 
if  we  are  to  carry  out  the  matter  on  the  same  plan  that  we 
fonned  within  ? 

Pebip.  Why,  in  fact  there's  nothing  can  he  more  condu- 
cive to  our  purpose.     Well,  what  say  you,  Fleimcles  ? 

Pleus.  Can  that  displease  me  which  pleases  yourselves  ? 
What  person  is  there  more  my  friend  than  your  own  self? 

Pebip.  You  speak  kindly  and  obligingly.  Pal.  Faith, 
and  so  he  ought  to  do. 

Pleus.  But  this  affair  shockingly  distresses  me,  and  tor- 
ments my  very  heart  and  body. 

Pebip.  What  is  it  that  torments  you  ?     Tell  me. 

Pleus.  That  I  should  cause  childish  actions  in  a  person  of 
your  years,  and  that  I  should  require  of  you  deed%  that  neither 
become  yourself  nor  your  virtues ;  and  that,  with  all  your  might, 
for  my  sake  you  are  striving  to  aid  me  in  my  passion,  and 
are  doing  actions  of  such  a  kind,  as,  when  done,  these  years  of 
yours  are  wont  rather  to  avoid  than  follow.  I  am  ashamed 
that  I  cause  you  this  trouble  in  your  old  age. 

Pebip.  Tou  are  a  person  in  love  after  a  new  fashion.  If, 
in  fact,  you  are  ashamed  of  anything  you  do,  you  are  nothing 
of  a  lover.  Tou  are  rather  the  shadow  of  those  who  are  in  love, 
than  a  true  lover,  Pleusicles. 

Pleus.  Ought  J  to  employ  these  years  of  your»  in  second- 
ing my  love  ? 

Pebip.  How  say  you  ?  Do  I  seem  to  you  so  very  much  a 
subject  for  Acheron^  ?  So  much  a  bier's-man^  ?  Do  I  seem 
to  you  to  have  had  so  very  long  a  Hfe  ?  Why,  really,  I  am 
not  more  than  four-and-fifty  years  old ;  I  see  clearly  with  my 
eyes,  I'm  ready  with  my  hands,  I'm  active  with  my  feet. 

Pal.  If  he  is  seen  by  you  to  have  white  hair,  he  is  by  no 
means  an  old  man  in  mind ;  in  him  the  natural  strength  of 
his  mind  is  unimpaired. 

*  Subject /(yr  Acheron)  —  Ver.  627.  "  Achemnticus,"  "  an  inhabitant  of  Ache- 
ron," meaning  "  one  on  tlie  very  rerge  of  the  grave." 

*  A  Uer's-man) — Ver.  628.  The  bodies  of  the  more  respectable  people  were  car- 
ried to  the  grave  on  a  land  of  conch,  which  was  called  **  feretmm,'*  or  "  capnlns  ;'* 
whence  the  present  term  "  capularis,"  "  a  subject  for  the  *  capulus.' "  The  bodies 
of  poor  citizens  and  slaves  were  carried  on  a  kind  of  bier,  called  "  sandapila." 
Ondendorf  and  Becker  think,  however,  that  the  word  **  capnlus"  means  **  a 
coffin"  of  wood  or  of  stone,  and  not  the  same  as  "  feretrum,"  "  a  couch,  or  bier." 
The  old  gentleman  is  very  naturally  somewhat  offended  at  the  remark  of  Pleu- 
sicles^ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


102  MILXft  GLOBIOSTTB ;  Act  HI. 

Pletjs.  By  my  troth,  for  my  part,  I  have  found  it  to  be  so 
as  you  say,  PalsBstrio ;  for,  in  fact,  his  kindness  is  quite  thfat 
of  a  young  man. 

Pemp.  Yes,  my  guest,  the  more  you  make  trial  of  it,  the 
more  you  will  know  my  courtesy  towards  you  in  your  love. 

PliBirs.  What  need  to  know  what's  known  already  ? 

Pebip.  I'll  show  you  more  amiability  on  my  part  than  I'll 
make  mention  of******  * 

that  you  may  have  instances  for  provrug  it  at  home,  and  not 
have  to  seek  it  out  of  doors.  Por  unless  one  has  loved  him- 
self, with  difficulty  he  sees  into  the  feelings  of  one  in  love. 
But  I  have  some  little  love  and  moisture  in  my  body  still, 
and  not  yet  am  I  dried  up  for  the  pursuits  of  merriment  and 
pleasure.  Either  the  merry  banterer  likewise,  or  the  agreable 
boon-companion  will  I  be ;  no  interrupter  of  another  am  I  at 
a  feast.  I  bear  in  mind  how  properly  to  keep  myself  j&om 
proving  disagreable  to  my  feUow-guests ;  and  Jtow  to  take  a 
due  share  with  my  conversation,  and  to  be  silent  as  weU.  in  my 
turn,  when  the  discourse  belongs  to  another.  Far  from  being 
a  spitter  or  hawker  am  I,  far  from  being  a  dirty-nosed  oM 
fellow^  too.  And  nev^  do  I  take  liberties  with  any  person's 
mistress  when  out  in  company ;  I  don't  snatch  up  the  dainfy 
bits  before  another,  nor  take  the  cup  before  my  turn  j  nor, 
through  wine,  do  dissensions  ever  arise  on  my  account  at  the 
convivial  board.  If  there  is  any  one  there  that  is  disagreable,  I 
go  off  home ;  I  cut  the  parley  short.  Stretched  at  my  ease,  I 
devote  myself  to  pleasure,  love,  and  mirth.  In  fine,  at  Ephesus 
was  I  bom,  not  among  the  Apulians,  not  at  Animnla^. 

Pletts.  O  what  a  most  delightful  old  man,  if  he  possesses 
the  qualities  he  mentions !  Why,  troth,  surely  now,  he  was 
brought  up  in  the  very  rearing  of  Venus. 

Pal.  Why,  in  fact,  you  wiU  not  find  another  person  who 
is  of  his  years,  more  accomplished  in  every  respect,  or  who  is 
more  a  fiiend  to  his  friend. 

Pletjs.  By  my  troth,  your  whole  manners  really  do  show 

^At  ^mmuZa) — ^Ver.  654.  The  people  of  Apulia,  in  the  sonth  of  Italy,  were  noted 
for  their  clownish  manners.  Animnla,  as  we  learn  from  Festns,  was  a  little 
town  in  that  country;  probably  its  inhabitants  were  the  most  remarkable  of  all 
for  their  rosticiiy.  Absurdities  and  anachronisms  not  unfreqnently  occur  in  oar 
author.  There  is  something  absurd  in  a  merry  old  gentleman  of  Ephesus  gung  ail 
the  way  to  Animula  for  a  simile. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THX  BBAGOABT  GAPTAllT.  103 

marks  of  first-rate  breeding.  Find  me  three  men  of  Bnch 
manners  against  a  like  weight  in  double-distilled  gold^. 

Pebif.  ril  make  you  confess  that  I  really  am  a  youngster 
in  my  manners;  so  abounding  in  kindnesses  will  I  prore 
myself  to  you  in  eyery  respect.  Should  you  haye  need  of  an 
adyocate^seveiec^f- fierce?  I  am  he.  Have  you  need  of  one  that 
is  gentle  P  You  shall  say  that  I  am  more  gentle  than  the  sea 
is  when  hush'd,  and  something  more  bahny  will  I  proye  than 
is  the  Zephyr  l»eeze^.  In  tins  same  person  will  I  display  to 
you  either  the  most  joyial  boon-companion,  or  the  first-rate 
trencher-man^,  and  the  best  of  caterers.  Then,  as  for  dancing, 
there  is  no  ballet-master  that  is  so  supple  as  I. 

Pal.  (to  PtsvsiGUEs).  What  could  you  wish  added  to  these 
accomplishments,  if  the  option  were  giyen  you  ? 

Pleus.  That  thanks  could  be  returned  ly  me  to  him  in 
degree  equal  to  his  deserts,  and  to  yourself,  to  hoth  of  whom 
I  feel  that  I  am  now  the  cause  of  extreme  anxiety.  But  it  is 
grieyous  to  me  to  be  the  cause  of  so  great  expense  to  you« 

Pbbip.  You  are  a  simpleton.  For,  if  you  lay  anything 
out  on  a  bad  wife  and  upon  an  enemy,  that  is  an  expense ; 
that  which  is  laid  out  on  a  deserving  guest  and  a  fnend  is 
gain ;  as  that,  which  is  expended  upon  sacred  rite^,  is  a 
profit  to  the  wise  man.  By  the  blessing  of  the  Grods,  I  haye 
enough,  with  which  to  receiye  you  with  hospitality  in  my 
house.  Eat,  drink,  indulge  your  tastes  with  me,  and  surfeit 
yourself  with  enjoyments ;  my  house  is  at  your  service,  myself 

'  DoubJe-di$iaied  ^W)--Ver.  660.  "  Aurichalco  "  probably  signifies  here,  as  in 
some  other  passages,  a  fabulous  metal  of  more  valne  than  even  gold.  **  Orichalcum,'' 
Inmevcr,  properly  means  either  one  of  the  ores  of  copper,  or  a  metallic  componnd 
maeh  nsed  by  the  ancients,  which  was  probably  brass,  formed  by  the  combination  of 
zine  ore  and  copper.  Supposing  gold  to  be  one  of  its  constituents,  they  corrupted  its 
original  name,  *^  orichalcum,'*  into  "  aurichalcum."  The  former  word  is  supposed 
by  the  author  of  the  article  '*  orichalcum,"  in  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary,  to  have  been  a 
compound  of  6pos  and  p^oXxdr,  "  mountain  bronze,"  so  called  from  fusing 
copper  with  an  ore  as  found  in  the  mountains.  ^  Contra,"  in  this  sentence,  has 
the  meaning  of  *^  to*' or  "against,"  in  staking  for  a  bet:  "three  men  against 
their  weight  in  gold ;"  "  a  horse  to  a  hen,"  as  the  betting  men  sometimes  say. 

*  The  Zephyr  breeze) — Ver.  666.  Literally,  "  Favonius,'*  one  of  the  names  of 
the  West  wind. 

*  First-rate  trencher-many-yer,  667.  "  Parasitus  "  cannot  be  here  intended  to 
be  used  in  a  bad  sense,  as  he  is  speakuig  of  his  own  merits.  It  must  mean  "  a  boon- 
companion,"  or  "jolly  fellow." 


y  Google 


104  MILES  GLO&IOSUS ;  Act.  III. 

likewise  do  I  -wish  to  be  at  your  service.  Por,  through  the 
blessing  of  the  Gods,  I  may  say  that,  by  reason  of  my  wealth, 
I  could  have  married  a  dowered  wife  of  the  best  family ;  but 
I  don't  choose  to  introduce  an  everlasting  female  barker  at 
me  into  my  house. 

Pleus.  Why  don't  you  choose  ?  For  'tis  a  delightful  thing 
to  be  the  father  of  children  [liberos]. 

Pebip.  Troth,  'tis  very  much  sweeter  by  far  to  be  free^ 
[liberum]  yourself.  For  a  good  wife,  if  it  is  possible  for  her 
to  be  married  anywhere  on  earth,  where  can  I  find  her? 
But  am  I  to  take  one  home  who  is  never  to  say  this  to  me, 
"  Buy  me  some  wx)ol,  my  dear,  with  which  a  soft  and  warm 
cloak  may  be  made,  and  good  ^wjnter  under-clothes^,  that  you 
mayn't  catch,  cold  this  winter-weather ;"  such  an  expression 
as  this  you  can  never  hear  firom  a  wife,  but,  before  the 
cocks  crow,  she  awakes  me  from  my  sleep,  and  says,  "  Give 
me  some  money,  my  dear,  with  which  to  make  my  mother  a 
present  on  the  Csdends^,  give  me  some  money  to  make  pre- 
serves ;  give  me  something  to  give  on  the  Quinquatrus*  to 
the  sorceress^,  to  the  woman  who  interprets  the  dreams,  to 

»  To  be  freey-Ver,  683.  There  is  a  play  on  the  word  "  liber,"  here,  which 
means  either  ^^  a  child,"  or  "  a  free  person."  He  says  that  it  is  mnch  more  {fea- 
sant to  be  "  liberum"  (a  free  person),  than  to  be  the  finther  of  a  "  liberum'* 
(a  child).  The  word  "  liber,"  meaning  "  a  child,"  is  very  rarely  used  in  the  sin- 
gular number.    The  remark  of  Plensicles  is  rather  modified  in  the  translation. 

2  Under-clothesy-Yer,  687.  The  "■  tunica"  was  that  part  of  the  clothing  which 
was  next  to  the  skin. 

*  On  the  Calendsy-Ver,  690.  He  alludes  to  the  Calends  of  March,  which,  as 
the  commencement  of  the  old  Roman  year,  was  particularly  celebrated  by  the 
Roman  matrons,  who  then  gave  presents  to  each  other,  and  received  them  from 
their  husbands.  The  festival  was  called  ^'  Matronalia,"  and  sacrifices  were  offered 
to  Juno  Lucina,  the  guardian  of  pregnant  women.  See  the  Fasti  of  Ovid,  B.  3, 
1.  257. 

*  On  the  Quinquairwi) — ^Ver.  691.  The  first  day  of  the  "  Quinquatrus,"  or 
^*  five-day  feast,"  was  on  the  19th  of  March.  Festns  says,  that  it  had  its  name 
from  its  beginning  on  the  fifth  day  after  the  Ides.  See  the  Fasti  of  Ovid,  B.  3, 
].  810.    This  festival  was  sacred  to  Minerva. 

*  To  the  sorceress) — ^Ver.  692.  The  "  prascantrix"  was  a  woman  who,  by  her 
incantations,  was  powerful  to  avert  evil  "  Conjectrix"  was  a  female  who  inter- 
preted dreams.  "  Ariola"  was  supposed  to  be  an  inspired  prophetess.  "  Arus- 
pica"  was  a  female  who  divined  by  means  of  the  entrails,  lightning,  and  other  phe- 
nomena. "  Piatrix"  was  the  woman  who  purified  the  company,  and  performed 
the  expiations,  on  the  day  on  which  the  child  received  its  name. 


y  Google 


SC.  II.  THE  SBAGaABT  CAPTAIIT.  105 

the  prophetess,  and  to  the  female  diviner ;  besides,  'tis  im- 
possible for  me,  in  civility,  not  to  fee  the  expiating  woman ;  for 
long  has^  the  mattress-maker  ^  been  grumbling,  because  she 
has  received  nothing ;  besides,  the  midwife  found  fault  with 
me,  that  too  little  had  been  sent  for  her.  "What !  am't  you 
going  to  send  something  to  the  nurse  that  brings  up  the  young 
slaves^  ?  It's  a  shame  if  nothing's  sent  her ;  with  what  a 
brow*  she  does  look  at  me."  These  and  many  other  expenses 
of  the  women  like  to  these  frighten  me  from  a  wife,  to  be 
littering  speeches  to  me  like  to  this. 

Pal.  In  good  sooth,  the  Qods  are  propitious  to  you ;  for 
80  soon  as  you  lose  this  liberty,  you  mU.  not  easily  reinstate 
1/ottrselfin  the  same  condition. 

Pleus.  Tou  are  a  person  who  are  able  to  counsel  wisely 
both  for  another  and  for  yourself.  But  'tis  some  merit  for  a 
man  of  noble  fiamily  and  of  ample  wealth  to  rear  children — ^a 
memorial  of  his  race  and  of  himself. 

Peeip.  Since  I  have  many  relations,  what  need  have  I  of 
children  ?  JSTow  I  live  well  and  happily,  and  as  I  like,  and 
as  contents  my  feelings.  For  I  shall  bequeath  my  property 
to  my  relations,  and  divide  it  among  them.  These,  like  chil- 
dren, pay  attentions  to  me ;  they  come  to  see  how  I  do,  or  what 
I  want ;  before  it  is  daybreak  they  are  with  me ;  they  make 
inquiry  how  I  have  enjoyed  my  sleep  in  the  night.  Them  will 
I  bave  for  children  who  are  ever  sencBng  presents  to  me.  Are 
they  sacrificing — they  give  a  greater  part  of  it  to  me  than  to 

*  For  long  has) — ^Ver.  694  A  critic  in  the  St  James's  Magazine  for  January, 
1763,  says,  on  this  point,  that  these  various  importunities,  smce  they  relate  to  a 
state  of  thmgs  now  entirely  passed  away,  lose  all  their  eflfect  on  the  reader ;  "  but 
when  such  insinuating  addresses  tend  to  procure  a  footboy,  or  a  new  year's  giilt,  or 
something  handsome  to  give  to  servants,  or  to  the  wet-nurse,  or  the  Methodist 
preacher,  there  is  no  married  man  whatever  but  would  enter  directly  into  the 
sprit  of  such  requests."  This  sweeping  remark  may  possibly  be  somewhat  less 
remote  from  truth  than  it  is  from  gallantry  to  the  fair  sex. 

*  The  viaUress-maker)— Yet,  694.  "  Toraria"  seems  to  be  "  the  bed,  or  mat- 
tress-maker." Other  editions  have  "  ceraria,"  "  the  woman  who  supplies  wax 
candles  for  sacrifice."  Others,  again,  have  "  gerula,"  "  the  nursemaid  that  carries 
the  children." 

'  The  young  staves)— -Wet.  696.  The  "  vemae"  were  the  slaves  that  were  bom 
wder  the  master's  roof.  They  were  more  indulged  than  the  other  slaves,  and 
were  noted  for  their  extreme  impudence  and  presumption. 

*  WWi  what  a  6row)— Ver.  697.  The  reference  here  may  probably  be  to  the 
^  eye,  which,  of  injurious  effect  at  all  times,  would  be  supposed  to  be  parti- 
cularly 80  in  the  case  of  a  nurse. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


106  iDXBs  GLOBiofiirs ;  Act  in. 

themselves ;  they  take  mehome  with  them  to  Mhare  the  entrsdls^ ; 
they  inyite  me  to  their  houses  to  break£eMst  and  to  dinner.  He 
thinks  himself  most  iinfortunafce,  who  has  sent  hut  yery  little 
to  me.  They  vie  with  one  another  with  their  presents ;  I  say 
in  a  low  voice  to  myself:  "  They  are  gaping  after  my  pro- 
perty ;  while,  in  their  emulation,  they  are  nourishing  me  aod 
loading  me  with  presents." 

Pal.  Upon  right  good  grounds  and  right  well  do  you  fully 
understand  yourself  and  your  own  interests,  and  if  joa  are 
happy,  sons  twofold  and  threefold  have  you. 

rsBip.  Troth,  if  I  had  had  them,  enough  anxiety  should  I 
have  had  from  my  children.  ****** 
I  should  have  been  everlastingly  tormented  in  mind;  but' if 
perchance  one  had  had  a  fever,  I  think  I  should  have  died. 
Or  if  one,  in  liquor,  had  tumbled  anywhere  from  his  horse,  I 
should  have  been  afraid  that  he  had  broken  his  legs  or  neck 
on  that  occasion. 

Pal.  'Tis  right  that  riches  should  come,  and  that  long  life 
should  be  granted  to  this  man,  who  both  husbands  his  pro- 
perty and  ^et  enjoys  himself  and  has  kind  wishes  for  his 
mends. 

Fleus.  O  what  a  delightful  person !  So  may  the  Gk>ds  and 
Gk)ddesses  prosper  me,  'twere  right  the  Deities  should  so 
ordain  that  all  should  not  live  after  one  rule  as  to  the  duration 
of  life.  Just  as  h©  who  is  a  trusty  market-officer^  sets  their 
prices  on  the  wares ;  as  that  which  is  good  or  valuable  is 
sold  according  to  its  excellence,  and  that  which  is  worthless, 
according  to  the  faultiness  of  the  commodity,  deprives  its 
owner  of  its  price ;  so  were  it  right  tliat  the  Gtoia  should 
portion  out  the  life  of  man,  so  as  to  give  to  him  who  is 
kindly  disposed  a  long  life,  and  speedily,  to  deprive  of  exist- 
ence those  who  are  reprobate  and  wicked.  If  they  had  pro- 
vided this,  bad  men  would  both  have  been  fewer,  and  with 

»  To  share  the  entrmUy-yer.  712.  It  was  the  cmtom,  after  their  portioiis  had 
been  sacrificed  to  the  Gods,  to  reserve  a  part  of  the  entrails  for  the  persons  who  sa- 
crificed. These  mvited  then:  dearest  and  most  intimate  fiiends  to  partake  of  them, 
or,  if  they  could  not  attend,  were  in  the  habit  of  sending  their  share  to  then. 
The  old  man  here  flatters  himself  that  he  is  a  general  fiivorite,  althongfa,  bye 
and  bye,  he  hmts  a  snspiden  that,  being  a  rich  old  bachelor,  the  love  of  his  fiiends 
is  not  qnite  disinterested. 

«  Market-officer)— Yer,  727.  "  Agoranomns"  was  the  name  of  a  public  officer 
amoog  the  Greeks,  who,  like  the  **£dilis  plebis"  at  Rome,  had  the  inspeoticm  of 
the  wares  o£fored  for  sale  in  the  public  markets.  • 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


? 


8c  n.  TH£  BHABQAXT  CAXTAIS.  107 

leas  hardihood  would  thej  do  their  wicked  deeds ;  and  then, 
those  who  were  good  men,  of  them  thaw  would  have  been  a 
more  plenteous  harvest. 

Pkstp.  He  who  would  bhune  the  ordinances  of  the  Gods 
must  be  foolish  and  ignorant.  **  *  *  At  present  we  must  at 
once  have  an  end  of  these  matters ;  for  now  I  want  to  go  to 
market,  that,  my  guest,  according  to  your  own  deserts  and 
mine,  I  may  entertain  you  hospitably  at  my  house,  heartily 
and  with  right  hearty  cheer. 

Plsus.  I  am  content  with^  the  expense  that  I  have  been  to 

oa  already.  Eor  no  guest  can  be  thus  hospitably  entertained 
a  Mend,  but  that  when  he  has  been  there  three  days 
nmning,  he  must  now  become  a  bore ;  but  when  he  is  pro- 
longing his  stay  for  ten  successiye  days,  he  is  a  nuisance  to 
the  household.  Although  the  master  willingly  allows  it,  the 
servants  grumble. 

FsBiP.  I  have  trained  up  the  servants  that  are  in  my  ser- 
vice, my  guest,  not  to  rule  over  me,  or  for  me  to  be  obedient 
to  them.  If  that  is  disagreable  to  them  which  is  agreable  to 
me,  I  steer  my  own  course^ ;  that  which  they  don't  Kke  must 
siiU  be  done  at  their  peril,  and  whether  they  like  it  or  no. 
Kow,  as  I  intended,  I  shaU.  go  to  market. 

Plxus.  K  you  are  resolved,  do  cater  somewhat  within 
bounds,  at  no  great  expense ;  anything  is  enough  for  me^. 

Pebip.  "Won't  you  now*  have  done  with  that  old-fashioned 
and  antiquated  talk?  Now  surely,  guest,  you  are  using  the 
cant  of  the  vulgar^.    For  they  are  in  the  habit  of  saying, 

*  lam  canteni  witt)— Ver.  740.  "  Nil  me  poenitet ;"  "  I  am  not  dissatisfied  with." 

*  Steer  my  own  cwirw)— Ver.  747.  "  Meo  rem  remigio  gero ;"  Kterallj,  "  I  carry 
on  my  own  business  with  my  own  staff  of  rowers."  The  rowers  were  frequently 
slaves,  and  of  course  were  kept  in  strict  subordination.  He  alludes  to  the  re- 
gnlariiy  of  his  household,  where  everything  is  done  in  its  proper  time  and  place, 
aod  the  promptness  with  which  he  is  in  the  habit  of  bdng  obeyed.  We  need 
hardly  remark  that  most  of  the  "  servi,"  or  "  servants,"  were  slaves. 

'  Is  movgh  fir  «»«)— Ver.  750.  "  Mihi  quidvis  sat  est"  seem  to  have  been  an 
aatiqiiated  and  hackneyed  expression,  used  by  philosophers  and  dkl-£ashioaed 
people,  to  imply  their  habits  of  self-denial  and  frugality. 

*  Won*t  you  now) — Ver.  751.  He  tells  him  to  have  done  with  such  stale  cant- 
iog  expressions,  which  are  now  worn  threadbare,  and  have  descended  to  the  tables 
of  the  mob.  Indeed,  he  says  right,  for  nothing  can  be  more  annoying  than  pre- 
tmded  refusals,  and  bowings  and  scrapings,  where  they  are  merely  an  affectation 
of  a  modesty,  humility,  or  self-denial  that  is  not  really  felt 

*  Cant  of  ihe  vulgary^Yet.  762.   The  "  proletarii "  were  the  powest  class  of 


y  Google 


108  MILES  GLORiosrs ;  Act  III. 

when  they  liave  taken  their  places,  when  dinner  is  put  on 
table :  "  What  necessity  was  there  for  you  to  ao  to  this  great 
expense  on  our  account  ?  Surely  you' were  mad,  for  this  same 
dinner  was  enough  for  ten  persons.'*  What  has  been  pro- 
vided on  their  account  they  find  fault  with ;  they  eat  it  up, 
however. 

Pal.  Troth,  in  that  self-same  fashion 'tis  generally  Aone* 
How  clever  and  shrewd  is  his  discernment. 

Febip.  But  these  same  persons  never  say,  although  such 
an  abundance  has  been  provided,  "  Do  order  that  to  be  taken 
off;  do  take  away  this  dish ;  remove  this  gammon  of  bacon, 
I'll  have  none  of  it;  put  aside  that  piece  of  pork;  this 
conger's  good^  when  cold ;  remove  it,  take  and  put  it  aside." 
You  hear  none  of  them  saying  this  in  earnest,  but  they 
stretch  themselves  out,  while  with  half  their  bodies^  on  the 
table,  they  are  indulging  their  appetite. 

Pal.  How  cleverly  the  good  soul  has  described  their  bad 
manners. 

Pebip.  I  have  not  said  a  hundredth  part  of  what  I  could 
have  enlarged  upon  had  there  been  leisure  for  the  matter. 

Pal.  The  business,  then,  that  we  are  about — to  that  we 
ought  first  to  turn  our  thoughts.  Do  you  both,  now,  give 
me  your  attention.  I  have  need,  Periplecomenus,  of  your 
assistance;  for  I  have  hit  upon  a  pleasant  trick,  how  this 
Captain  with  his  long  locks  mav  be  fleeced  quite  close*,  and 
how  we  may  efiect  a  means  K)r  PhUocomasium,  and  this 
her  lover,  that  he  may  carry  her  off  hence,  and  have  her  as 
his  own, 

Pebip.  I  wish  this  plan  to  be  imparted  to  me. 

Pal.  And  I,  wish  that  ring  of  yours  to  be  imparted  to  me. 

Pebip.  For  what  purpose  is  it  to  be  used  ? 

the  free  citizens,  who,  accordiDg  to  Livy,  were  possessed  of  less  than  eleven  thou- 
sand ^'  asses,"  and  conld  serve  the  state,  not  with  money,  but  with  their  children 
(proles). 

>  This  conger's  good) — ^Ver.  760.  Lampreys  and  conger  eels  were  very  much 
esteemed  by  the  Bomans.  Probably  the  conger  was  considered  best  when  eaten 
oold. 

*  Half  their  bodies) — Ver.  762.  This  would  be  the  moi-e  easily  done  when  we 
remember  that  the  gaests  were  reclining  on  the  '^  tricliniam,"  or  couch,  wfaidi 
was  above  the  level  of  the  table  on  which  the  viands  were  placed. 

»  Bejkeced  quite  cfo«e)— Ver.  768.  By  his  mention  of  the  Captain's  long  lodB, 
he  seems  to  intend  a  pun  on  the  word  "  admutilo,"  "  to  bamboozle"  or  "  cajde,* 
which,  literally,  signifies  to  "  clip,"  or  "  shave  close." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC  j 


Sc.  n.  THS  BBA&OABT  CAPTAIK.  109 

Pal.  When  I  have  got  it,  T  will  impart  the  plan  of  my 


Pebip.  Take  and  use  it.     (Gives  him  the  ring.) 

Pal.  Take  from  me  in  return  the  plan  of  my  contrivance 
that  I  have  hit  upon. 

Pebip-  We  are  listening  to  you  with  most  attentive  ear. 

Pal.  My  master  is  such  a  shocking  rake  among  the  women, 
tliat  1  think  no  one  ever  was  his  equal,  nor  ever  will  be. 

Pebip.  I  believe  the  same  as  well.  Pal,  He  boasts,  too, 
that  his  beauty  exceeds  that  of  Alexander^ ;  and,  therefore, 
he  says  that  all  the  women^  in  Ephesus  of  their  own  accord 
are  courting  him. 

Pebip.  Aye,  faith,  many  there  are  who  could  wish^  that  you 
were  now  telling  an  untruth  about  him.  But  I  am  convinced 
full  well  that  it  is  as  you  say.  For  that  reason,  FalsBstrio, 
do  compress  your  words  in  as  short  a  compass  as  ever  you 
possibly  can. 

Pal.  Can  you,  then,  find  any  woman  of  agreable  person, 
whose  mind  and  body  are  ftdl  of  merriment  and  subtlety  ? 

Pebip.  Free  by  birth,  or  bondwoman  made  free  ? 

Pal.  I  consider  that  a  matter  of  indifference,  so  that  you 
find  one  who  is  greedy  for  gain,  who  supports  her  body  by 
'  her  charms,  who  has,  too,  her  senses  all  awake  ;  as  for  her 
heart,  that  cannot  be  so,  as  none  of  them  have  one. 

Pebip.  Do  you  want  one  that  has*  taken  her  degrees,  or 
one  as  yet  a  novice  in  the  art  ? 

Pal.  One  sober  but^Ziwwjp^,  a  juicy  bit ;  as  taking  a  one  as 
ever  you  can  find,  and  one  very  young. 

*  Cf  Alexander')— ^er,  777.  "  Alexander,"  from  two  Greek  words,  signifying 
"  the  brave  man,"  was  one  of  the  names  of  Paris,  the  son  of  Priam,  who  was  re- 
markable for  his  beaaty,  which  captivated  Helen. 

*  AUihe  women)— 'Yer.  778.  The  Parasite  quizzes  him  upon  this  weak  point  in 
the  First  Act. 

*  Who  could  vfish) — ^Vcr.  779.  The  meaning  of  Periplecomenus  seems  to  be 
that  the  Captain  has  been  bnt  too  snccessfnl  in  his  intrigues,  and  that  many  a 
husband  could  wish  that  what  Palsstrio  sajs  were  false. 

*  One  that  hasy-Yer,  787.  Some  Commentators  think  that  "  lautam"  here 
means  "one  who  has  borne  children,"  and  who  has  bathed  (lautus  fuerit),  as  was 
the  CQstom  immediately  after  delivery.  As,  however,  Palsestrio  has  said  before  that 
the  female  required  must  be  a  Courtesan,  it  surely  could  not  matter  whether  she 
had  had  children  or  not.  It  probably  means  either  one  of  elegant  manners,  and  who 
has  made  good  use  of  her  experience,  in  contradistinction  to  a  novice,  who  is  a  mere 
nw  country  wench,  or  else  one  in  easy  cu*cumstances,  and  not  a  mere  pauper. 

'  Sober  hut  plump) — ^Ver.  787.  His  answer  is,  he  wants  to  find  a  woman  who 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


110  iciLiifl  GiiOBiosirs ;  Act  III. 

Febzp.  Why,  I  faaye  one,  a  dependant  <^  mine,  a  couiteBaziy 
a  very  young  woman.     But  what  is  the  occasion  for  her  ? 

Pal.  For  you  to  bring  her  home  at  oik»  to  your  house  as 
ifourwife,  and,  for  that  reason,  to  Ining  her  there  dressed  out, 
so  that  she  may  wear  her  locks  with  her  hair  arranged,  and 
fillets  after  the  fashion  of  matrons^,  and  may  pretend  that 
she  is  your  wife ;  so  you  must  instruct  her. 

Febzp.  I  am  at  a  loss  what  road  you  are  taking. 

Pal.  Well,  you  shall  know.  But  what  sort  of  a  maid  has 
she? 

Pbsif.  She  is  a  rare  clerer  one.  Pal.  "We  have  need  of 
her  as  well ;  so  give  your  instructions  to  the  damsel  and  her 
maid,  to  pretend  that  she  is  your  wife  and  is  doting  upon  this 
Captain ;  and  as  though  she  had  given  this  ring  to  her  maid, 
then  she  to  me,  that  I  might  deliver  it  to  the  Captain ;  and  I 
must  be  as  though  it  were  a  go-between  in  this  matter. 

Pebip.  I  hear  you ;  don't  stun  my  ears  as  if  I  were  deaf. 

Pal.  I  myself  will  go  straightway  to  him ;  1*11  say  that 
it  has  been  brought  and  delivered  to  me  from  your  wife,  in 
order  that  I  might  introduce  her  to  him.  He'll  be  distractedly 
longing  for  her  at  home,  a  scoundrel  that  cares  for  nothing 
else  whatever  but  intriguing. 

Pebip.  If  you  had  commissioned  the  Sun  himself  to  search 
them  out,  he  couldn't  have  found,  better  than  myself,  two 
more  cleverly  suited  for  this  business.  Be  of  good  courage 
ahout  it. 

Pal.  Take  you  every  care  then.    There  is  need  of  despatch. 

{Exit  PEBIPLEGOMEFrS. 

is  "  siccft/'  probably  in  the  sense  of  "  sober ;"  but,  as  the  same  word  means  '^dry," 
he  adds,  antitheticallj,  '•'■  at  succidam,"  "but  juicy,"  full  of  the  plompness  and 
briskness  of  youth.  Scalijser  absolutely  thinks  that  ^'  sicca**  means  ^^  one  net 
given  to  the  habit  of  spitting."  I ! 

1  Thefathion  ofmatronsy-YeT.  792.  The  "  vitta"  was  a  band  which  ewar- 
cled  the  head,  and  served  to  confine  the  tresses  of  the  hair.  It  was  won  by 
maidens,  and  by  married  women  also,  among  the  Romans  ;  but  that  assumed  on  the 
day  of  marriage  was  of  a  different  form  fhun  that  used  by  the  virgins.  It  was  not 
worn  by  women  of  light  character,  or  even  by  the  *'  libertine,"  or  liberated  female 
slaves ;  so  that  it  was  not  only  deemed  an  emblem  of  chastity,  but  of  freedom  alssb 
White  and  purple  are  among  the  colours  of  the  *^  vitta"  which  we  find  i 


y  Google 


Se.  IV.  THE  BBAOOAST  CAPTAIN.  Ill 

soxiTE  in. 

Paljesteio,  Pleusicles. 

Pal.  Now,  do  you  listen,  Pkusieles.  Pleus.  I  am  all  at- 
teBtkm  to  you. 

Pal.  Take  care  of  this.  When  the  Captain  comes  home, 
do  jou  T^nember  not  to  call  Philocomasium  by  her  name. 

Flbus.  What  am  I  to  call  her  ? 

Pal.  Glycera.  Pleus.  The  same,  you  mean,  that  was 
agreed  imon  a  litde  time  since. 

Pal,  Hush! — ^Be  off.  Pleus.  I'll  remember;  but  still  I 
dim't  know  what  use  it  is  to  keep  it  in  my  mind. 

Pal.  But  I  will  tell  you,  at  the  time,  when  occasion  shall 
re^jinze.  Mieanwhile,  be  quiet ;  so  that,  bye  uid  bye,  when  he 
too  shall  be  acting  his  part^,  you  may,  on  the  instant,  be 

mlri^Hng  yoUT  CUC. 

Plius.  m  go  in  then.  Pax.  Go,  and  do  take  care  steadily 
to  follow  my  instructions.  (Pleusicles  goes  into  the  house 
o/Pebiplecomenus.) 

Pal.  What  mighty  turmoils  I  create !  What  mighty  en- 
g^es  I  do  set  to  work!  This  yery  day  I  shall  take  his 
mistress  away  from  the  Captain,  if  my  soldiers  are  only  well 
drilled^.  But  I'll  call  him  out.  {Oi>es  to  the  door  (md calls.) 
Halb !  Sceledrus,  if  you  are  not  busy,  come  out  to  the  front 
of  the  house ;  I,  Pak&strk),  call  you. 

Scbke  IV. 

JSnter  Jjuc^JLofrom  the  Captaik's  house. 

LucB.  Sceledrus  is  not  at  leisure.    Pal.  Why  so?  ^ 
LucB.  He's  fiast  asleep,  gulping^.     Pal.  How,  gulping  ? 

'  Actmff  iuparty-Ytr.  811.  He  aUodes  to  Peripleoomeniu,  who  has  Jast  left 
lam, 

*An  unhf  well  cMfed)— Ver.  815.  ^^  Hanipvlans'*  was  a  term  applied  to  the 
canmn  soldiers  of  the  legion,  uxasmnch  as  thej  were  formed  into  small  compa- 
BMB,  narshafied  in  open  order,  called  "'  manipnlL**  Each  maniple  had  two  oen- 
tmioos,  whose  duty  it  was  to  drill  their  men,  inspect  thdr  arms,  clothing,  and 
ibed,  visit  the  sentinels,  and  regulate  the  condact  of  the  privates  hoth  in  the  camp 
•Bdiniht  field.  They  sat  as  judges  in  minor  offences,  and  had  the  power  of 
eidering  corporal  pamshment,  whence  thdr  badge  of  office  was  a  vine  saplmg. 
**BMie  eentoriati"  conseqaentlj  meaais  here  ^^  well  drilled." 

»  Aaleer^  gtO^mgy-Wn.  818.  "  Sorbeo"  means  not  only  "  to  drink  np,"  but  to 
oaks  tiiflt  golping  sense  in  snoring  which  is  prodnced  by  inhafing  the  breath  with 


y  Google 


112  MILES  &LOBIOSUS ;  Act  III. 

Luce.  He's  snoring,  'twas  that  I  meant  to  say :  but,  be- 
cause 'tis  very  like  gulping  when  you  are  snoring *     * 

***** 

Pal.  What !     Is  Sceledrus  asleep  in-doors  ? 

LuGB.  Not  with  his  nose,  in  fact ;  for  with  that  he  is  call- 
ing out  loud  enough. 

Pal.  He  has  taken  a  cup  by  stealth ;  the  butler  has  latehf 
tapped  a  cask  of  nardine^.  Oho !  you  rascal,  you.  are  his 
deputy-butler^.     Oho ! 

LucB.  What  do  you  mean  ?  Pal.  How  has  he  thought  fit 
to  go  to  sleep  ? 

LucB.  With  his  eyes,  I  suppose.  Pal.  I  don't  ask  you 
that,  you  vagabond.  Step  this  way :  you're  undone  now, 
unless  I  know  the  truth.    Did  you  draw  the  wine  for  him  ? 

LiJCB.  I  did  not  draw  it.     Pal.  Do  you  deny  it  P 

Luce.  I'  faith,  I  do  deny  it  undoubtedly ;  K)r  he  charged 
me  not  to  tell.  1  really  didn't  just^  draw  lor  him  eight  half 
pints  into  a  pitcher,  and,  when  drawn,  he  didn't  just  drink  it 
hot*,  at  his  breakfast. 

Pal.  And  vou  didn't  just  drink  as  well?  LucB.  The 
Gods  confound  me  if  I  did  drink — if  I  could  drink. 

Pal.  Why  so?  LueE.  Because,  in  fact,  I  only  sipped} 
for  it  was  too  hot ;  it  burnt  my  throat. 

the  month  open,  and  the  head  thrown  back.    Palsestrio  pnrposelj  mbimderstands 
him,  for  the  purpose  of  getting  a  confession  oat  of  him. 

*  A  cash  ofnardmey-VeT,  824.  According  to  the  reading  here  adopted,  he 
gnesses  that  Sceledms  has  got  drunk  upon  some  nardine  wme,  that  had  been  lately 
tapped.  The  Bomans  used  manj  arudes  for  flavouring  their  wines.  Spikenard, 
an  Eastern  aromatic,  is  here  referred  to.  Horehound,  squills,  wormwood,  and 
myrtle-berries  were  used  for  making  medical  wines.  Cornels,  figs,  medlars,  roses, 
asparagus,  parsley,  radishes,  laurels,  junipers,  cassia,  cinnamon,  and  safiron, 
with  many  other  particulars,  were  also  used  for  flavouring  wines. 

^  His  deptUy-hutler) — ^Ver.  825.  Some  Commentators  take  this  passage  to  mean, 
that  Sceledrus  really  was  the  "promus,"  or  "butler;**  but  it  seems  more  pro- 
bable that  Palffistrio  says,  by  way  of  accusation,  *^  Sceledrus  has  not  onlj  been 
acting  the  butler  on  this  occasion,  but  you  have  been  acting  as  his  deputy,  in 
secretly  helping  him  to  draw  it**  Lucrio  was  the  *^  subcustos**  of  Sceledrus,  the 
**  deputy-keeper**  of  Philocomasium,  and  the  under-butler  as  well. 

3  DidnH  jtuf) — ^Ver.  831.  He  adheres  to  his  promise  by  denying  it  in  words, 
but  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  a  full  confession  of  what  has  happened.  "  Hemina  *' 
was  a  measure  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  of  nearly  half  a  pint. 

*  Drinh  it  hof)—Ver.  832.  It  has  been  aLready  remarked,  that  the  Bomans 
were  much  in  the  habit  of  drinking  wine,  made  warm  and  mixed  with  sjnces.  The 
taking  it  at  "  prandinm,**  about  twelve  in  theda^,  shows  how  Sceledrus  presumed 
on  the  ofiBce  of  trust  which  hnd  been  conferred  upon  him. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc  lY.  THS  BBAaaABT  CAPTAUr.  lid 

Pal.  Some  are  ghriouily  dnmk,  while  ethers  are  dnnking 
rinegar-water^.  The  cellar's  trusted  to  aa  honest  butler,  as 
well  as  under-butler. 

LuoB.  r  faith,  you'd  be  doing  the  same,  if  it  was  en- 
trusted to  you.  Since  you  can't  follow  our  example,  you  are 
envious  now. 

Pax.  Come,  now,  did  he  erer  draw  amf  wme  before  this  ? 
Answer  me,  you  rascal.  And,  that  you  may  imderstand  it,  I 
give  you  this  notice :  if  you  purposely  tefl  me  an  untruth, 
you  shall  be  put  to  the  torture. 

Ltjgb.  Indeed  so  P  That  you  may  inform,  forsooth,  that  I 
told  you ;  and  then  I  shall  be  turned  out  of  my  fattening 
post  in  the  cellar,  that  you  may  find  another  under-butler 
to  draw  for  your  own  self. 

Pal.  On  my  honour,  I  wiU  not ;  come,  speak  out  boldly 
tome. 

Ltjcb.  By  my  troth,  I  never  saw  him  draw  any.  But  thus 
was  it ;  he  requested  me,  and  then  I  drew  it. 

Pal.  Think  of  that  now !  very  frequently,  I  guess,  the 
casks  were  standing  on  their  heads^  there. 

Ltjcb.  No,  faith,  the  casks  would  not^  have  stood  so  very 
badly  there.  But  there  happened  to  be  in  the  cellar  a  bit 
of  a  slippery  spot ;  a  two-pint  pot  was  placed  there,  near  the 
casks,  in  this  fashion  (shows  the  way),    Frequently,  that  was 

'  Ywegar-iDoXer) — ^Ver.  836.  "  Posca"  was  the  name  of  the  mixture  of  vinegar 
«ad  water  which  constituted  the  drink  of  the  Boman  soldiers,  the  lower  classes, 
and  the  slaves.  Palaestrio  gmmbles  on  finding  that  while  he  is  drinking  vinegar 
tod  water  his  iellow-slave  is  enjoying  himself  on  mulled  wine. 

*  Standing  on  their  heads) — Ver.  851.  He  means  to  say  that  the  "  amphorae," 
no  doubt,  were  often  turned  bottom  upwards  for  the  purpose  of  pouring  out  their 
contents. 

*  The  casks  would  «o*)~Ver.  852.  The  whole  of  this  passage  is  of  somewhat 
obscure  signification.  The  two  fines  probably  mean,  "  The  casks  (cadi)  would 
not  have  fallen  down  there  so  very  much,  had  it  not  been  that  one  part  of  the 
oeDar  was  very  sHppery  indeed."  He  then  shows  how  (sic)  the  pot  was  put 
close  by  the  casks,  so  that,  they  slipping  down,  it  was  filled  as  often  as  ten  times  in 
<x»  day ;  and  he  concludes  by  saying,  that  when  the  pot  acted  the  Bacchanal 
(debacchabatur),  the  casks  slipped  down  again.  Probably  by  acting  the  Bac- 
(iaxal  he  means  to  say  that  the  pot  got  filled  and  was  then  emptied,  just  like  the 
Bacchanals,  who,  doubtless,  were  not  particular  at  vomiting  a  part  of  the  enor- 
mous quantities  of  wine  which  they  imbibed ;  and  he  naively  tells  the  truth,  by  say- 
ing that  the  cask  slipping  was  the  result  of  the  pot  being  emptied,  and  so  laying 
the  &ult  more  upon  the  pot  than  the  drinker, 

I  ^ 


y  Google 


•114  MILES  GLOEIOSUS  ;  Act  III. 

Med  ten  times  in  a  day.     When  the  pot  acted  the  reveller, 
the  casks  were  all  tottering. 

Pal.  Gret  you  gone  in-doors.  Both  of  you,  I  find,  are 
acting  the  revellers  in  the  wine-cellar.  I'  faith,  I  shall  fetch 
my  master  home  just  now  from  the  Forum. 

Luce,  (aside).  I'm  ruined.  My  master,  when  he  comes 
home,  will  have  me  tortured,  when  he  knows  of  these  doings. 
I'  faith,  I'll  fly  somewhither,  and  put  off  this  punishment  to 
another  day.  (To  the  Audience.)  Don't  you  tell  him^,  I  do 
entreat  you  most  earnestly.  (He  is  going,) 

Pal.  Whither  are  you  betaking  yourself?  Luce.  I  am 
sent  elsewhere :  I'll  come  back  here  just  now. 

Pal.  Who  has  sent  you  ?     Luce.  Philocomasiura. 

Pal.  G-o;  be  back  directlv.  Luce.  If  it  is  divided, 
prithee  do  you  only  take  my  snare  of  the  punishment  while 
I'm  away.  (Exit  LucRio. 

Scene  V. 
Pal^steio,  alone. 

Pal.  So — I  understand  what  scheme  the  lady  is  upon. 
Because  Sceledrus  is  asleep,  she  has  sent  her  under-keeper 
away  out  of  doors,  whilst  she  may  pass  from  our  house  to 
next  door.  That's  all  right.  (Looks  down  the  street!)  But 
Periplecomenus  is  bringing  here  a  woman  of  very  comely 
appearance,  her,  for  whom  I  commissioned  him.  By  my  faith, 
the  Gods  are  helping  us  in  this  matter.  How  becomingly 
drest  she  struts  along^,  not  like  a  Courtesan.  This  business 
is  prosperuig  charmingly  in  our  hands.  (Stands  aside.) 

Scene  VI. 
Enter  Peeiplecomenus,  with  Aceoteleutium  and 

MiLPHIDIPPA. 

Peeip.  (as  he  advances).  I  have  explained  the  whole 
affair,  Acroteleutium,  to  you,  and,  Milphidippa,  to  you  as  well. 
If  you  don't  well  understand  this  device  and  plan,  I  wish  you 
to  hear  it  all  over  again.  If  you  comprehend  it  aright,  there 
is  something  else  that  we  may  speak  of  in  preference. 

^  Don't  you  tell  him) — ^Ver.  862.  These  occasional  addresses  to  the  Spectators, 
in  the  middle  of  the  dialogue,  were  made  in  the  same  spirit  and  for  the  same 
purpose  for  which  the  clown  on  our  stage  addresses  his  jokes  to  the  audience, 
namely,  to  provoke  a  hearty  laugh. 

2  She  struts  along) — Ver.  872.  By  the  use  of  the  word  "  incedit,"  he  pro- 
bably refei*s  to  the  assumed  stateliness  of  her  gait. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  VI.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAPTAIN.  115 

AcBOT.  I'  faith,  it  would  be  folly,  and  ignorance,  and  fool- 
ishness, for  me  to  engage  in  the  service  of  another,  or  to 
promise  you  my  assistance,  if,  in  its  fabrication,  I  did  not 
know  how  to  be  either  mischievous  or  clever  at  deceiving. 

Pebip.  But,  'tis  better  for  you  to  be  instructed. 

AcBOT.  Eeally  I  don't  understand  of  what  great  use  it 
is  for  a  Courtesan  to  be  instructed.  How  now !  have  I  told 
you  an  in  vain,  after  my  ears  had  drunk  in  the  draughts^  of 
your  discourse,  in  what  fashion  it  was  possible  for  the  Cap- 
tain to  be  cajoled  ? 

Pebip.  But  no  one,  unaided,  is  sufficiently  perfect;  for 
full  oft  have  T  seen  many  a  person  lose  the  road  to  good  ad- 
vice before  they  had  found  it. 

AcBOT.  If  a  woman  has  anything  to  do  mischievously  and 
maliciously,  in  that  case  her  memory  is  inunortal  at  remem- 
bering it  for  everlasting ;  but  if  anything  is  to  be  done  for  a 
good  purpose,  or  honestly,  it  will  fall  out  that  those  same 
women  will  become  oblivious  that  instant,  and  be  unable  to 
remember. 

Pebip.  Therefore  do  I  fear  that  saTne,  because  both  those 
things  happen  to  be  about  to  be  done  by  us ;  for  that  wiU  be  a 
benefit  to  me  in  which  you  both  will  be  acting  mischievously 
towards  the  Captain.. 

AcBOT.  So  long  as  we  do  anything  that's  good,  not  know- 
ing it,  don't  you  fear.  No  woman  is  awkward  *  * 
•         *         *         *  Have  no  apprehensions,  they  are 

ready  for  the  worst. 

Pebip.  So  it  befits  you.     Do  you  follow  me. 

Pal.  {advancing).  Why  do  I  hesitate  to  go  and  accost 
them? 

Pebip.  Well  met,  and  opportunely,  Palaestrio.  See,  here 
they  are  whom  you  commissioned  me  to  bring,  and  in  the 
very  dress. 

Pal.  Well  done :  accept  my  thanks.  I  am  glad  that  you 
have  come  safe.  I'  faith,  you  bring  them  nicely  dressed.  Pa- 
testrio  salutes  Acroteleutium. 

AcBOT.  Prithee,  who's  this,  that  calls  me  so  familiarly  by 
name? 

Pebip.  This  is  our  master-plotter.  Aceot.  Health  to  you, 
master-plotter. 

*  Drunk  in  the  draughts)— Ver.  883.  "  Loream."  The  true  meaning  of  this 
word  seems  to  be  "a  leather  bottle."  If  it  is  the  correct  reading,  it  is  here  used 
l»y  Metonymy  for  the  draught  which  it  contains.     '     .    '  ' '    '  .       '  ^ 

^  ^  '         •    Digitized  by  CjObgle 


116  MiL£s  aiiOBiosus ;  Act  in. 

Pal.  And  health  to  you.  But,  tell  rae,  has  he  any  way 
given  you  full  instructions  ? 

Feeip.  I  bring  them  both  thoroughly  prepared. 

Pal.  I'd  like  to  hear  how.  I'm  afraid  lest  you  should  be 
making  some  mistake. 

Peblp.  I  have  added  to  your  instructions  nothing  new  of 
my  own. 

AcBOT.  I  suppose  you  wish  the  Captain,  your  master,  to 
be  gulled. 

Pal.  You've  said  what's  true. 

AcBOT.  Cleverly  and  skilfully,  adroitly  and  pleasantly,  the 
whole  thing  is  planned. 

Pal.  In  fact,  I  wish  you  to  pretend  to  be  his  wife.    {Points 

to  PEBIPLECOMBNirS.) 

Agbot.  That  shall  be  done.  Pal.  To  pretend  ss  though 
you  had  set  your  affection  on  the  Captain. 

Agbot.  Jjnd  so  it  shall  be. 

Pal.  And  as  though  this  affair  is  managed  through  me,  as 
the  go-between,  and  your  servant-maid. 

AcBOT.  You  might  have  made  a  good  prophet ;  for  you 
tell  what  is  to  be. 

Pal.  As  though  this  maid  of  yours  had  conveyed  from 
you  this  ring  to  me,  which  I  was  then  to  deliver  to  the  Cap- 
tain, in  your  name. 

AcBOT.  You  say  what's  true.  Peeip.  What  need  is  there 
to  mention  these  things  now,  which  they  remember  so  well  F 

AoEOT.  Still,  it  is  better.  Por  think  of  this,  my  patron ; 
when  the  shipwright  is  skilful,  if  he  has  once  laid  down  the 
keel  exact  to  its  lines,  'tis  easy  to  build  the  ship,  when  * 
*  *  *  Now  this  keel  of  ours  has  been  skil- 

fully laid  and  firmly  placed ;  the  workmen  and  the  master- 
builders  are  not  unskilled  in  this  business.  If  he  who  fur- 
nishes the  timber^  does  not  retard  us  in  giving  what  is  needed, 
I  know  the  adroitness  of  our  ingenuity — soon  will  the  ship 
be  got  ready. 

Pal.  You  know  the  Captain,  my  master,  then  ? 

AoBOT.  'Tis  strange  you  should  ask  me.    How  could  I 

1  Who  JwntMhes  the  timber) — ^Ver.  920.  Lambinus  haa  thus  ezplaiRed  this 
Metaphorical  expressioii.1  The  ship  is  the  contrivance  for  deceiving  the  Captain; 
the  keel  is  the  main-plot  and  foundation  of  it;  Periplecomenns,  Acroteleatiam, 
and  her  servant,  are  the  workmen ;  Palestrio  is  the  master-shipwright;  while 
the  Captain  himself  is  the  ^*  materiarius/'  or  *^  person  that  supplies  the  timber." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


SC.  VI.  THE  BBAGGABT  CAPTAIK.  117 

not  know  tliat  scorn  of  the  public,  that  swaggering,  frizzle- 
headed,  perfumed  debauchee  ? 

Pal.  But  does  he  know  you  ?  Acteot.  He  never  saw  me : 
how,  then,  should  he  know  who  I  am  ? 

Pal.  'Tis  most  excellent  what  you  say.  For  that  reason, 
i*  &ith,  the  thing  will  be  able  to  be  managed  all  the  more 
ckveriy. 

AcBOT.  Can  you  only  find  me  the  man,  and  then  be  easy 
38  to  the  rest  ?  If  I  don't  make  a  fool  of  the  fellow,  do  you 
lay  all  the  blame  on  me. 

Pal.  Well,  go  you  in  then;  apply  yourgelyes  to  this 
business  with  all  your  skill. 

AoBOT.  Trust  me  for  that^.  Pal.  Come,  Periplecomenus, 
do  you  conduct  them  at  once  in-doors.  I'm  off  to  the  Forum ; 
rU  meet  him,  and  give  him  this  ring,  and  will  tell  him  that 
it  has  been  delivered  to  me  from  your  wife,  and  that  she  is 
dying  for  him.  As  soon  as  we  shall  have  come  from  the 
Fonun,  do  you  send  her  (points  to  Milphedippa)  to  our  house 
as  though  she  were  privately  sent  to  him. 

Pebip.  We'll  do  so  ;  trust  us  for  that. 

Pal.  Do  you  only  attend  to  the  hminess ;  I'll  now  polish 
him  off  with  a  pretty  burden  on  his  back.  (JEicit, 

Peeip.  Q-o,  with  good  luck  to  you,  manage  the  matter 
cleverly.  \To  Aceotelbutiitm.)  But  now,  if  I  shall  manage 
ttiis  ad[roitly,  that  my  guest  can  this  day  gain  the  mistress  of 
the  Captain,  and  carry  her  off  hence  to  Athens ;  if,  I  *ay, 
this  day  we  shall  succeed  in  this  plan,  what  shall  I  give 
yofu  for  a  present  ? 

AcEOT.  *****  Jj^  now  the  lady  seconds 
our  efforts  <Hi  her  part,  I  think  it  will  be  right  cleverly  and 
adroitly  managed.  When  a  comparison  shall  be  made  of  our 
artifices,  I  have  no  fear  that  I  shall  not  prove  superior  in 
the  cleverness  of  my  contrivances. 

Pebip.  Let's  go  in-doors,  then,  that  we  may  deeply  weigh 
these  plans,  that  carefully  and  cautiously  we  may  carry  out 
what  IS  to  be  done,  so  that,  when  the  Captain  comes,  there 
may  he  no  tripping. 

AcEOT.  Tou  are  delaying  us  toith  your  talk.  {They  go  into 
the  house  (^/Teeiplecomenus.) 

*  Trutime/orihaty^Yer.  929.  "AHacura;"  literally,  "take  care  of  some- 
tlungebe;  meaxuDg,  '*  trust  us  in  the  present  instance,"  or,  as  Thornton  ex* 
prases  it,  "  never  fear  ns.'* 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


118  MILES  GLOBiosrs ;  Act  lY. 

ACT    THE    rOTRTH. 

Scene  I. 

Mnter  Ptegopoldtices  €md  Pal-esteio. 

Pteg.  'Tis  a  pleasure  what  you  do,  if  it  succeeds  agreably 
and  to  your  mind.  For  I  this  day  have  sent  my  Parasite  to 
King  Seleucus,  to  lead  those  soldiers,  that  I  have  levied,  hence 
to  Seleucus ;  in  order  that  they  may  defend  his  kingdom  till 
I  have  leisure  to  attend  m  person. 

Pal.  Why  don't  you  attend  to  your  own  concerns  rather 
than  those  of  Seleucus.  What  a  charming  new  proposal  is 
being  offered  to  you  through  me  as  the  negotiator. 

Pteg.  Well  then,  I  lay  all  other  things  aside,  and  I  give 
my  attention  to  you.  Speak  out :  my  ears,  in  fact,  I  surren- 
der at  your  disposal. 

Pal.  Look  around,  then,  that  no  one  here  may  be  an  eaves- 
dropper for  our  discourse ;  for  this  business  was  entrusted  me 
to  transact  mth  you  in  private. 

Pteg.  (looks  around) .  There's  no  one  near.  Pal.  In  the 
first  place,  receive  from  me  this  pledge  of  affection.  {Oives 
him  the  rina.) 

Pteg.  What's  this  ?     Whence  comes  it  ? 

Pal.  Prom  a  charming  and  a  handsome  lady,  one  who  loves 
you,  and  dotes  upon  your  extreme  beauty.  Her  maid  just 
now  gave  me  the  ring  that  I  might  then  give  it  to  you. 

Pteg.  What  ?  Is  she  free  bom  or  a  freed  woman,  made 
free  from  a  slave  by  the  Praetor's  rod^  ? 

Pal.  Pshaw !  Should  I  presume  to  be  the  bearer  of  a  mes- 
sage to  you  from  a  person  once  a  slave,  who  cannot  sufficiently 
answer  the  demands  of  the  free  women  who  are  longing  for 
you? 

Pteg.  Is  she  wife,  or  is  she  widow  ? 

Pal.  She  is  both  wife  and  widow. 

Pteg.  In  what  way  is  it  possible  for  the  same  woman  to 
be  a  wife  and  a  widow  ? 

Pal.  Because  she  is  a  young  woman  married  to  an  old 
man. 

»  Btf  the  PrcBtor's  rod}— Yer.  9Qh  "Festuca"  Is  the  same  with  "vindicta," 
the  rod,  or  wand,  which  the  Praetor  used  to  Uy  on  the  head  of  the  slave  when  he 
was  made  free. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  I.  THE  BBAGaABT  CAPTAIN.  119 

Pteg.  That's  good.  Pal.  She  is  of  genteel  and  charming 
person. 

Pteg.  Beware  of  misrepresenting.  Pal.  It  is  alone  worthy 
to  he  compared  with  your  own  charms. 

Pteg.  Bj  my  faith,  yon  make  her  out  to  be  a  beauty.  But 
who  is  she  ? 

Pal.  The  wife  of  that  old  gentleman,  Periplecomenus,  next 
door.  She  is  dying  for  you,  and  wishes  to  leave  him ;  she 
hates  the  old  fellow.  Now  she  has  begged  me  to  entreat  and 
beseech  you  that  you  will  give  her  your  support  and  assistance. 

Pteg.  I'  faith,  I*m  ready  for  my  part  if  she  desires  it. 

Pal.  Doesn't  she  long  for  it  ? 

Pteg.  What  shaU  we  do  with  that  mistress  of  mine,  who  is 
at  my  house  ? 

Pal.  Why,  do  you  bid  her  to  be  gone  about  her  business, 
wherever  she  chooses ;  as  her  twin-sister  has  come  here  to 
Ephesus,  and  her  mother,  and  they  are  come  ^;o  fetch  her. 

Pteg.  Ha !  what's  that  you  say  ?  Has  her  mother  come 
to  Ephesus  ? 

Pal.  Those  say  so  who  know  it. 

Pteg.  I'  faith,  a  charming  opportunity  for  me  to  turn  the 
wench  out  of  doors. 

Pal.  Aye,  but  do  you  wish  to  do  the  thing  handsomely  ? 

Pteg.  Speak  out,  and  give  me  your  advice. 

Pal.  Do  you  wish  to  pack  her  off  forthwith,  that  she  may 
qmt  you  with  a  good  grace  ? 

Pteg.  I  do  so  wish.  Pal.  Then  this  is  the  thing  you 
must  do.  Ton  have  a  superabundance  of  wealth ;  bid  the 
woman  to  keep  as  a  present  for  herself  the  gold  and  trinkets 
which  you  have  supplied  her  with,  and  to  take  herself  off  from 
your  house  wherever  she  likes. 

Pteg.  It  pleases  me  what  you  say ;  but  yet,  only  think,  if 
I  should  lose  her,  and  the  other  change  her  mind  ? 

Pal.  Pshaw !  you're  over  nice ;  a  lady,  that  loves  you  as 
her  own  eyes. 

Pteg.  Venus  befriends  me.  Pal.  Hist !  hush !  the  door 
18  openiug ;  come  this  way  a  little  out  of  sight.  (Milphi- 
1>IPPA  conies  out  of  the  hoiise  of  Peeiplecomentjs.)  This  is 
hep  fly-boat — ^her  go-between,  that's  coming  out  there. 

Pteg.  How  so — ^fly-boat  ?  Pal.  This  is  her  maid  that 
is  coming  out  of  the  house,  she  that  brought  that  ring  which 
I  delivered  to  you. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


120^  Mnjas  globiosub  ;  Act.  lY. 

Ftb&.  I'  fiuth,  she  too  ia  a  prettyish  wendi. 

Pal.  This  one  is  a  little  monkey  and  an  owP  in  comparison 
with  the  other.  Do  you  see  how  she  hunts  around  with  her 
eyes,  and  goes  fowling  about  with  her  ears,  {They  stand  aside.) 

ScEinE  n. 
Snter  MrLPHiurppA. 

Mil.  (as  she  enters).  My  Circus,  then^,  is  before  the  house, 
where  my  sports  are  to  take  place.  I'll  make  pretence,  as 
though  I  didn't  see  them,  or  knew  as  yet  that  they  are  here. 

PxEa.  Hush !  let's  quietly  listen,  whether  any  mention  is 
made  of  me. 

Mil.  (aloud) .  Is  there  no  one  near  at  hand  here,  to  attend  to 
another's  business  rather  than  his  own? — to  prowl  afber^  me  to 
see  what  I'm  about  ?  No  erne  who  is  feeding  this  evening*  at 
his  own  expense  ?  I  dread  such  men  as  these,  lest  they  should 
now  come  in  the  way,  or  prove  an  hindrance  somehow,  should 
my  mistress  privately  pass  from  her  house  this  way,  who  is  so 
enamoured  of  his  person,  who  so  dotes  upon  this  very  charming 
man  with  his  exceeding  beauty — the  Captain  Pyrgopolinices. 

Ptbg.  And  doesn't  she  dote  upon  me,  too  ?  She  is  praising 
my  beauty. 

Pal.  I'  faith,  her  language  stands  in  need  of  no  ashes^. 

Ptbg.  Eor  what  reason?  Pal.  Why,  because  her  lan- 
guage is  clean  spoken  and  far  from  slovenly.  Whatever  she 
says  about  yourself,  she  handles  it  in  no  slovenly  way.  And, 
then,  besides,  she  herself  is  a  very  pretty  and  a  very  dainty 
wench* 

1  And  an  owl) — ^Ver.  989.  "  Spintnrniciiim"  was  the  name  of  some  t^ly,  ifl- 
omened  bird ;  of  what  kind  it  is  not  now  known. 

2  Mif  Circus,  then)—YeT.  991.  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  Circus  at  Rome,  where 
the  public  games  were  exhibited. 

3  To  prowl  qfler) — ^Ver.  995.  "  Aucupo"  is  properly  appEed  to  a  birdcatcbcr, 
or  fowler,  who  watches  his  nets. 

*  Feeding  this  evening) — ^Ver.  996.  "  Qui  de  vesperi  vivat  suo."  She  k  sup- 
posed to  mean  those  who  are  not  out  on  the  hunt  for  a  supper,  but  have  got 
one  of  their  own  at  home.  These  latter  persons,  she  thinks,  living  at  their  ease, 
and  not  having  to  satisfy  a  hungry  stomach,  are  likely  to  have  more  leisure  for 
prying  into  the  concerns  of  other  people,  than  those  who  are  put  to  their  shifts 
for  a  meal. 

» In  netd  of  no  «*Ae»)— Ver.  1000.  He  says  that  she  is  A)  Tery  clean  spoken 
(laute  et  minime  sordide)  that  she  needs  no  ashes  with  whuh  to  scour  her  words ;  the 
figure  being  derived  from  the  custom  of  scouring  brass  vessels  with  pounded  ashes. 


y  Google 


Se.  n.  THE  BRLGBAMT  OAPTArN*.  121 

Pybg.  Troi^,  indeed^  she  has  made  an  impression  already, 
FalsBstrio,  at  first  sight. 

FjLir.  What!  before  you  have  seen  the  other  with  your 
eyes? 

Pybg.  "What  I  see,  in  that  I  have  faith  for  myself;  for 
this  mackerel^,  in  the  absence  of  the  mullet,  compels  me  to  be 
in  love  with  her. 

PaIi.  I'  faith,  you  really  mustn't  be  falling  in  love  with 
her,  she's  engaged  to  me.  If  the  other  weds  you  to-day, 
forthwith  I  shall  take  this  one  for  my  wife. 

Pnto.  Why,  then,  do  you  delay  to  accost  her  ? 

Pax.  PoUow  me  this  way,  then. 

PrBfi.  I  am  yonr  laekey  at  your  heels^. 

Mix.  {atoud).  I  wish  that  I  had  an  opportimity  of  meeting 
him  on  account  of  whom  I  came  here  out  of  doors. 

Pal.  {accosting  her).  It  shall  be  so,  and  you  shall  have 
what  you  so  greatly  wishT-bc  of  good  courage,- den' t-leag ;  . 
there  is  a  certain  person  who  knows  where  that  is  which  you 
are  seeking. 

Mtl.  "Who's  that  I  hear  at  hand?  Pal.  The  sharer  of 
your  plans  and  the  partaker  of  your  secrets. 

Mil.  I'  faith,  then,  what  I  do  conceal  I  don't  conceal. 

Pal.  Aye,  but  still  you  don't  conceal  it  this  way. 

Mil.  How  so  ?  Pal.  Prom  the  uninitiated  you  conceal 
them.    I  am  sure  and  trustworthy  to  you. 

MtTi.  Give  me  the  sign,  if  you  are  one  of  these  votaries*. 

Pal.  a  certain  lady  loves  a  certain  gentleman. 

^  TUb  flMcX^reZ)— Ver.  1006.  The  **  lacerta"  was  probablj  a  delicate  fish, 
wliQte  name  is  now  tmknown,  bat  not  so  much  so  as  the  "  mallos,''  the  *'  grey 
mnDet,"  which  was  very  highly  esteemed  by  the  Roman  epicures. 

^Lackey  at  your  heeUy—Yer,  1009.  "  Pedisequus."  The  "  pedisequi"  were  a 
dass  of  slaves  at  Some  whose  duty  it  was  to  walk  behind  their  master  when  he 
went  oat  of  doors.  The  name  does  not  seem  to  have  been  given  to  every  slave 
wlio  followed  his  master,  but  they  belonged  to  a  class  which  was  almost  the  bwest 
in  the  slave  family. 

^  Of  these  votaries)— Yer.  1016.  »' Baccharum."  Literally,  "one  of  the 
**  BftcehjB,"  or  "  votaries  of  Bacchus."  Only  those  were  admitted  to  the  rites  who 
had  been  duly  initiated.  These  had  a  sign  or  password  called  "  symbolum,"  or 
**  memocacalum,*'  by  wliich  they  recognised  each  other,  and  thus  Milphidippa  asks 
Palsstrio  to  give  her  some  proof  that  he  is  the  right  person  for  her  to  address. 
'Qw  pretended  caution  is  only  assumed  in  the  Captain^s  presence,  in  order  the 
better  to  unpose  upon  him,  by  affecting  the  utmost  care  and  secrecy  in  the 
matter. 


y  Google 


122  MILES  GLOEIOSUS ;  Act  IV. 

Mil.  Eaith,  many  ladies  do  that  indeed.  Pal.  But  not 
many  ladies  send  a  present  from  off  their  fingers. 

Mil.  Aye,  I  know  now.  You've  now  made  the  matter 
level  for  me  instead  of  steep.  But  is  there  a  certain  person 
hereP 

Pal.  Either  he  is  or  he  is  not. 

Mil.  Come  aside  with  me  alone,  in  private. 

Pal.  For  a  short  or  for  a  lengthy  conversation  ? 

Mil.  For  three  words  onh/. 

Pal.  (to  Pteoopolinices).  I'll  return  to  you  this  in- 
stant. 

PvEG.  What  ?  Shall  I  be  standing  here  in  the  meanwhile, 
with  such  charms  and  valorotis  deeds,  thus  to  no  purpose  ? 

Pal.  Submit  to  it  and  wait;  for  you  am  I  doing  this 
service.  ' 

Pybg.  Make  haste  ;  I  am  tortured  with  waiting. 

Pal.  You  know  that  commodities  of  this  kind  are  only 
wont  to  be  reached  step  by  step. 

Ptbg.  Well,  well;  as  is  most  agreable  to. yourself. 

Pal.  (aside).  There  is  no  stone  more  stupid  than  this 
fellow.  I  now  return  to  you.  (To  Milphidippa.)  What 
would  you  with  me  ?    (Betires  with  her  to  a  distance!) 

Mil.  In  the  way  in  which  I  received  it  of  you  a  short 
time  since,  I  bring  you  back  yoiu*  clever  plot ;  my  story  is  as 
though  she  were  dying  with  love  for  him. 

Pal.  That  I  understand.  Do  you  commend  his  beauty 
and  his  appearance,  and  make  mention  of  his  prowess. 

Mil.  For  that  purpose  I  am  armed  at  all  points^,  as  I  have 
shown  you  before  already.  On  the  other  hand,  do  you  give 
all  attention,  and  be  on  the  watch,  and  take  your  cue^  firom 
my  words. 

Pyeg.  Prithee  do  now,  in  fine,  give  me  some  share  in  the 
business ;  step  this  way  this  instant,  I  beg. 

Pal.  (jgoes  vf  to  him).  Here  I  am.  If  you  wish  for  aught, 
give  me  your  commands. 

PvEG.  What  is  she  saying  to  you  ? 

Pal.  She  is  saying  that  her  mistress  is  lamenting,  and,  in 

1  Armed  at  oil  points) — ^Ver.  1028.  "  Habeo  omnem  adem.**  Literally,  "  I  hare 
all  mj  troops  in  battle  array.'" 

2  Take  your  cue)— Ver.  1029.  "  Venator."  Literally,  "  hunt  out,"  or  *'  act  the 
hunter's  part,"  probably  with  reference  to  starting  the  game. 


y  Google 


Sc.  II.  THE  BEA&GAET  CAPTAIK.  123 

tears,  is  tonnenting  and  afflicting  herself  because  she  wishes 
for  you,  and  because  she  possesses  you  not ;  for  that  reason 
has  she  been  sent  here  to  you. 

Pnte.  Bid  her  approach.  Pal.  But  do  you  know  how 
you  are  to  act  P  Pretend  that  you  are  full  of  disdain,  as 
though  it  pleased  you  not ;  exclaim  against  me,  because  I 
make  you  so  common  to  the  mob. 

Pyeg.  I  remember,  and  I'll  follow  your  instructions. 

Pax.  I'll  call  her,  then,  who  is  inquiring  after  you. 

Pteg.  If  she  wants  anything,  let  her  come. 

Pai.  Wench,  if  you  want  anything,  step  this  way. 

Mil.  (approaching).  Save  you,  charmer^.  Ptbg.  She  makes 
mention  of  my  surname.  May  the  Gk)ds  grant  you  whatever 
you  may  desire. 

Mil.  To  pasd  life  with  you  is  the  wish  of 

Pteg.  You  are  wishing  too  much.  Mil.  I  am  not  speak- 
ing of  myself,  but  of  my  mistress,  who  is  dying  for  you. 

Pteg.  Many  others  arp  wishing  for  the  same  thing,  who 
have  not  the  opportunity. 

Mil.  By  my  troth,  'tis  not  to  be  wondered  at ;  you  set  a 
high  value  on  yourself— a  person  so  handsome,  and  so  illus- 
trious for  his  prowess,  and  so  valorous  in  his  deeds !  O  !  was 
there  ever  any  one  more  worthy  to  be  a  man  ? 

Pal.  {aside) .  I'  faith,  the  filthy  fello'vc  is  not  a  human  being ; 
indeed,  I  think  there  is  something  more  human  in  a  vulture^. 

Pteg.  (aside) .  Now  I  shall  make  myself  of  importance,  since 
she  so  praises  me  up.     (Struts  about.) 

Pal.  (aside).  Do  you  see  the  blockhead,  how  he  struts  ? 
(To  Ptegopolinices.)  But  will  you  not  answer  her ;  she  is 
the  woman  that's  come  from  the  lady  whom  I  was  mentioning 
juBt  now. 

Pteg.  But  from  which  one  of  them  ?  For  there  are  so 
many  courting  me,  I  cannot  remember  them  all. 

Mil.  From  her  who  strips  her  own  fingers  and  adorns 
your  fingers ;  for  I  delivered  to  him  (pointing  to  Pal-SSTEIO) 
that  ring  from  her  who  is  sighing  for  you,  and  then  he  to  you. 

Pteg.  Tell  me,  wench,  what  is  it  you  want  then  ? 

*  Caarmer)--Vcr.  1088.  "Pnlcher."    "  Handsome  man."   This,  as  a  surname, 
woold  ncytsoimd  so  very  absurd  in  Roman  ears,  as  "  Pulcher"  was  a  surname  (cog- 
im)  of  a  branch  of  the  Claudian  family. 

/no  wiftwre)— Ver.  1043.     He  probably  alludes  to  the  fact  of  the  vulture 
carrying  human  flesh  in  its  maw. 


y  Google 


IM  MiLsa  GLCXBio&VB ;  Act  lY. 

Mill.  That  you  will  not  despise  her  who  is  sighing  for  you ; 
who  lives  now  hut  in  your  life :  whether  she  is  to  exist  or  not, 
her  hope  is  in  you  alone. 

Fra<J.  "What  does  she  want  then  ?  Mil.  To  talk  with 
you,  to  embrace  you,  and  to  be  iniimate  with  you.  Eor  un- 
less you  l»ring  her  suiccour,  she  wiU  soon  be  quite  desponding 
in  her  mind.  Come,  my  Achilles,  let  that  be  done  whidi  I 
entreat ;  save  her,  charmer,  by  your  charming  ways.  Call 
forth  your  kind  disposition,  stormer  of  cities,  slayer  of  kings. 

Pybg.  O  !  by  my  troth,  'tis  a  vexatious  thing !  (To 
Pal^stbio.)  How  often,  whip-scoundrel,  have  I  forbidden 
you  to  make  promises  of  my  attention  thus  common. 

Pax.  Do  you  hear  that,  hussy  ?  I  have  told  you  already, 
and  I  now  tell  you  a^ain,  unless  a  fee  is  given  to  this  boaiv 
pigi,  he  cannot  possibly  throw  away  his  attentions  in  any 

Mil.  a  fee  shall  be  given,  as  large  as  he  shall  demand. 

Pal.  He  reqidres  a  talent  of  ggld,  in  PhiHppean  pieces. 
Less  he  wiQ  take  from  no  one. 

Mil.  O,  by  my  troth,  but  that's  too  little,  surely. 

Pteg.  By  nature  there's  no  avarice  in  me ;  I  have  riches 
enough.  I'  faith !  I've  more  than  a  thousand  measures  ^  full 
of  Philippean  gold  coins. 

Pal.  Besides  your ,  treasures.  Then,  of  silver,  he  has 
mountains,  not  ingots ;  ^tna  is  not  so  high. 

Mil.  (aside).  By  the  stars !     O,  what  a  lie ! 

Pal.  (to  MiLPHiDippA,  aside).    How  rarely  I  am  playing 

tX\m  off  I 

Mil.  (to  Pal^stbio,  aside).  And  I;  how  do  I  do  it? 
Ain't  I  gulling  him  ? 

Pal.  (aside).  Earely.  Mil.  But,  prithee,  do  let  me  go  now. 

Pal.  (to  the  Captain).  But  do  you  give  her  some  answer, 
either  that  you  will  do  it,  or  that  you  won't  do  it.  "Why  cause 
this  poor  lady  so  much  anguish  of  mind,  who  has  never  de- 
served any  iU  of  you  ? 

Ptbg.  Bid  her  come  to  me  herself.  Tell  her  that  I  will  do 
everything  that  she  requires. 

Mil.  You  now  act  as  it  is  proper  for  you  to  act,  since  you 
wish  the  same  yourself  that  she  is  wishing. 

1  Boar-pig)  This  passage  is  somewhat  modified  in  the  translation. 

2  A  thoutand  measttres) — Ver.  1063.  The  ^*  modios"  was  a  Roman  measme, 
one-third  of  the  "  amphora."    It  contained  nearly  two  English  galloos. 


y  Google 


Se.  IL  THZ  BBAGOABT  CAPTAIN.  125 

PiJD.  (to  himself,  aside).  No  poor  faculty  of  inyentioii  has  she. 

Mil.  Since  too  you  have  not  scouted  your  petitioner,  and 
hsTe  suffered  me  to  prevail  upon  you.  {Aside  to  PaXi^s- 
TBio.)    How  now  ?    Haven't  I  played  him  off? 

Pal.  {aside  to  Milphxdipfa).  Paith,  I  couldn't  refrain 
from  laughing. 

Mil.  {adde  to  FAiiiBSTBio).  Yes ;  and  for  the  same  reason 
I  turned  in  this  direction  away  from  you. 

Ptbg.  By  my  troth,  wench,  you  don't  understand  how 
great  an  honor  I  am  now  paying  her. 

Mil.  I  know,  and  I  shall  tell  her  so. 

Pal.  To  another  he  could  have  sold  his  favours  for  his 
weight  in  gold. 

Mil.  I'  faith,  I  believe  you  in  that. 

Pal.  Of  those  that  are  parents  by  him  true  warriors  are 
bom,  and  his  sons  live  eight  hundred  years. 

Mil.  {aside  to  Paljbsteio).  Fie  on  you  for  a  fibber ! 

Pybo.  Why,  straight  on,  from  age  to  age,  they  live  for  a 
thonsand  years. 

Pal.  I  spoke  within  limits,  for  the  reason  that  she  mightn't 
suppose  I  was  telling  lies  to  her. 

Mil.  {aside),  I  Imrst,  I  die!  {Aloud.)  How  many  years 
will  he  live  himself  whose  sons  live  so  long  ? 

Ptbg.  "Wench,  I  was  bom  the  day  after  Jupiter  was  bom 
of  Ops. 

Pal.  If  he  had  only  been  born  the  day  before  the  other 
was,  he  would  have  had  the  realms  of  heaven. 

Mil.  {aside  to  Paljbstbio).  Now,  now,  prithee,  no  more ; 
do  let  me  get  away  from  you,  if  I  can,  alive. 

Pal.  "Why  don't  you  go  then,  as  you  have  your  answer? 

Mil.  m  go,  and  I'U  bring  her  here,  on  whose  behalf  I 
am  employed.     Is  there  aught  else  you  wish  ? 

Ptbg.  May  I  never  be  more  handsome  than  I  am  o^  pre- 
sent; 80  mucn  trouble  do  my  good  looks  cause  me. 

Pal.  Why  do  you  stay  now  ?     "Why  don't  you  go  ? 

Mil.  I'm  going.  Pal.  {aside  to  Milphidippa).  And  tell 
her,  too,  do  you  hear,  cleverly  and  correctly,  what  has  passed. 

Mil.  {to  PALiBSTBio).  So  that  her  very  heart  may  leap 


firjwf. 
Pi 


AL.  {aside  to  Milphidippa).  K  Philoccmiasium  is  there, 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


126  MILES  GLOBIOSUS  ;  Act  IV. 

tell  her  to  pass  through  into  our  house ;  that  the  Captain  is 
here. 

Mil.  (to  Paljestrio).  She  is  there  with  my  mistress; 
for,  on  the  sly,  they  have  been  overhearing^  this  con- 
versation. 

Pal.  {aside  to  Mtlphidippa).  'Twas  cleverly  done;  here- 
after they  will  take  their  cue  the  more  reaoily  from  this 
conversation. 

Mil.  {to  Pal^strio).  You  are  delaying  me.     I'm  off. 

Pal.  {to  Milphidippa).  I'm  not  delaying  you,  nor 
touching  you,  nor^ I'm  mum. 

Pyeg.  Bid  her  make  haste  to  come  out  here ;  we'll  give 
our  first  attention  to  this  matter  especially.  (Milphidippa 
goes  into  the  house  of  PEBiPLBCOMEBrTJS.) 

Scene  III. 

PTBGOPOLrNIOES,   PaLJBSTBIO. 

Pteg.  What  do  you  advise  me  now  to  do,  PaUestrio, 
about  my  mistress  ?  For  this  lady  can  by  no  means  be  re- 
ceived into  my  house  before  I  have  sent  the  other  away. 

Pal.  "Whyconsult  me  what  you  are  to  do  ?  So  far  as 
I  am  concerned,  I  have  told  you  by  what  method  that  caii 
be  effected  in  the  gentlest  manner.  The  gold  trinkets  and 
female  clothing  with  which  you  have  furnished  her,  let  her 
keep  it  all  for  herself:  let  her  take  it,  be  off,  and  carry  it 
away :  tell  her  that  it  is  high  time  for  her  to  go  home ;  say 
that  her  twin-sister  and  her  mother  are  come,  in  company 
with  whom  she  may  go  straight  home. 

Pteg.  How  do  you  know  that  they  are  here  ? 

Pal.  Because,  with  my  own  eyes,  I've  seen  her  sister 
here. 

Pteg.  Have  you  met  her  ?     Pal.  I  have  met  her. 

Pybg.  And  (fid  she  seem  a  brisk  toench  ? 

Pal.  You  are  wishing  to  have  everything. 

Pteg.  Where  did  the  sister  say  her  mother  was  ? 

Pal.  The  captain  that  brought  them  told  me  that  she  was 

1  Overhearing) — ^Ver.  1090.  Probably  at  the  upper  window,  next  door. 

2  Nor  touching  you,  nor) — Ver.  1092.  This  is  an  instance  of  Aposiopesis.  He 
is  abont  to  saj  something  rade,  bnt  checks  himselt 


y  Google 


Sc.  in.  .  THE  BBAaOABT  CAPTAIN.  127 

in  bed,  on  board  the  ship,  with  sore  and  inflamed  eyes. 
This  captain  of  the  ship  is  lodging  with  them  next  door, 

PiEG.  And  he,  too,  is  he  a  very  fine  fellow  ? 

Pal.  Away  with  you,  if  you  please.  What  have  you^  to 
do  with  him  ?  You  have  your  hands  quite  full  enough  with 
the  women.     Attend  to  this  for  the  present. 

Prao.  Ab  to  that  advice  you  were  giving  me,  I  wish  you 
to  have  a  few  words  with  her  upon  that  subject.  For,  really, 
a  conversation  on  that  subject  with  her  is  more  becoming^ 
for  you. 

Pal.  What  is  more  advisable  than  for  you  to  go  yourself, 
and  transact  your  own  concerns  ?  You  must  say  that  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  for  you  to  marry :  that  your  relations 
are  persuading,  your  friends  are,  urging,  you. 

Ptbg.  And  do  you  think  so?  Pal.  Why  shouldn't  I 
think  so  ? 

PotG.  1*11  go  in,  then.  Do  you,  in  the  mean  time,  keep 
watch  here  before  the  house,  that  when  the  other  woman 
conies  out  you  may  call  me  out. 

Pal.  Do  you  only  mind  the  business  that  you  are  upon. 

PrBG.  That,  i]](deed,  is  resolved  upon.  For  if  she  will  not 
go  out  of  her  own  accord,  I'll  turn  her  out  by  force. 

Pal.  Do  you  take  care  how  you  do  that ;  but  rather  let  her 
go  from  your  house  with  a  good  grace^,  and  give  her  those 
things  that  I  mentioned.  The  gold  trinkets  and  apparel,  with 
which  you  furnished  her,  let  her  take  away. 

Ptbo.  By  my  troth,  I  wish  she  would. 

Pal.  I  think  you'll  easily  prevail  upon  her.  But  go  in- 
doors ;  don't  linger  here, 

Pyeg.  I  obey  you.  (^  Goes  into  his  hotise).  Pal.  (to  the 
Aubieitce).  Now,  does  he  really  appear  to  be  anything  dif- 
ferent from  what,  awhile  ago,  I  told  you  he  was,  this  wench- 
ing Captain  ?  Now  it  is  requisite  that  Acroteleutium  should 
come  to  me,  her  maid  too,  and  Pleusicles.  O  Jupiter !  and 
does  not  opportunity  favour  me  in  every  respect  ?  For  those 
whom  I  especially  wished  to  see,  I  perceive  at  this  moment 
coming  out  here  from  our  neighbour's. 

*  What  have  youy-Yer.  1112,  This  passage  is  somewhat  modified  above. 

'  li  more  hecomingy—Yer,  1116.  He  thinks  it  not  suitable  to  his  dignity  to 
speak  on  the  subject  himself,  and  therefore  wishes  to  put  the  task  upon  Palsestrio. 

'  With  a  good  grace) — Ver.  1125,  "  Per  gratiam  bonam.^'  "  BonS  gratia"  was 
A  leg^lterm  used  in  the  case  of  amicable  divorces  with  the  consent  of  both  parties. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


128  MiLSs  GLomiosra ;  Act  IV. 


ScbiteIV. 

Enter  AcROTKLEUTniM:,  Milphidippa,  and  Flettsicles 
from  the  house  qf  PiEiPLEOOMEiars. 

AcBOT.  Fcdlow  me ;  at  the  same  time  look  around,  that 
there  may  be  no  overlooker. 

Mil.  Faith,  I  see  no  one,  only  him  whom  we  want  to 
meet. 

Pax.  Just  as  I  want  you. 

Mil.  How  do  you  do,  our  master-plotter  ? 

Pal.  I,  the  nmster-plotter  ?    iN^onsense. 

Mil.  How  so  ?  Pal.  Because,  in  comparison  with  your- 
self, I  am  not  worthy  to  fix  a  beam  in  a  wall. 

AcEOT.  Aye,  indeed  so.  Pal.  She's  a  very  fluent  and  a 
very  clever  hand  at  mischief.  How  charmingly  she  did 
polish  off  the  Captain. 

Mil.  But  still,  not  enough.  Pal.  Be  of  good  courage ; 
all  the  business  is  now  prospering  under  our  hands.  Only 
do  you,  as  you  have  begun,  still  give  ai  helping  hand ;  for 
the  Captain  himself  has  gone  in-doors,  to  entreat  his  mis- 
tress to  leave  his  house,  with  her  mother  and  sist^,  for 
Athens. 

Plsus.  Very  good — ^well  done.  Pal.  Besides,  all  the 
gold  trinkets  and  apparel  which  he  himself  has  provided  for 
the  damsel,  he  gives  her  to  keep  as  a  present  for  herself— 
so  have  I  recommended  him. 

Pletjs.  Eeally,  it's  easily  done,  if  both  she  wishes  it,  and 
he  desires  it  as  weU. 

Pal.  Don't  you  know  that  when,  from  a  deep  well,  you 
have  ascended  up  to  the  top,  there  is  the  greatest  danger 
lest  you  should  thence  fall  back  again  from  the  top.  This 
affair  is  now  being  carried  on  at  the  top  of  the  weU.  If  the 
Captain  should  have  a  suspicion  of  it,  nothing  whatever  of  his 
will  be  able  to  be  carried  off.  Now,  most  especially,  we 
have  need  of  clever  contrivances. 

Pletts.  I  see  that  there  is  material  enough  at  home  for 
that  purpose — ^three  women,  yourself  the  fourth,  I  am  the 
fifth,  the  old  gentleman  the  sixth. 

Pal.  "What  an  edifice  of  stratagems  has  been  erected  by 
us !    I  know  for  certain,  that  any  town  seems  as  thouga 


yLiOOgle 


I 


Se.  IV.  THE  B1U.QeABT  CAPTAIN.  129 

it  could  be  taken  by  these  plans :  only  do  you  lend  your 
aasistanoe. 

AcKOT.  For  that  purpose  are  we  come  to  you,  to  see  if  you 
wkh  for  anything. 

Pal  You  do  what's  a  propos.  Now  to  you  do  I  assign 
tliis  department^. 

AcBOT.  General,  you  shall  assign  me  whatever  you  please, 
so  £ur  as  I  am  capable. 

Pal.  I  wish  this  Captain  to  be  played  off  cleverly  and 
adroitly, 

AcBOT.  I'  fiaith,  you're  assigning  me  what's  a  pleasure  to 
me. 

Pal.  But  do  you  understand  how  ?  Aoeot.  You  mean 
tiiat  I  must  pretend  that  I  am  distracted  with  love  for  him. 

PaIu  £ight — ^you  have  it.  Aobot.  And  as  though  by 
leason  of  that  love  I  had  foregone^  my  present  marriage, 
longing  for  a  match  with  him. 

Pal.  Everything  exactly  in  its  due  order;  except  only 
tliis  one  point ;  you  must  say  that  this  house  (pointing  to 
the  house  of  Pebiplecomeitub)  was  your  marriage-portion ; 
&di  the  old  man  had  departed  hence  from  you  after  you  had 
aaried  out  the  divorce,  lest  he  should  be  afraid  just  now  to 
come  here  into  the  house  of  another  man, 

Acbot.  You  advise  me  well.     Pal.  But  when  be  comes 

•  oat  from  in-doors,  I  wish  you — sttmdi/ng  at  a  distance  there 

-HK)  to  make  pret^aoe,  as  though  in  comparison  with  his 

betufcy  you  despised  your  own,  and  as  though  you  were 

*  This  dtpartmeat) — ^Ver.  1169.  "  Impero  provinciam."  This  term  w«s  pro- 
po-lj  applied  to  the  S<»uite  when  bestowing  a  province  npon  a  Froconsnl  or  Pro- 
praetor. 

^  Ihadforegoney^Ver,  1164.  To  accoant  for  the  facility  with  which  the  pre- 
todeddiTorce  appears  to  take  place,  we  most  remember  that  among  the  Romans 
aflnr  party  was  at  liberty  to  dissolve  the  lie  of  marriage.  Where  a  husband 
fivweed  his  wife,  the  wife's  *'dos,''or  marriage-portion,  was  in  general  restored 
to  her ;  and  the  same  was  the  case  where  the  divorce  took  place  by  mutual  consent. 
Tlus  win  aoooimt  ibr  Acroteleulium  asserting  that  she  had  been  divorced  from 
Peripkcomemis,  and  l^t  she  had  retained  possession  of  the  house  as  having  formed 
licr  marriage-portion.  As  a  loss  of  affection  on  either  side  was  thought  to  consti- 
^te  a  good  ground  for  divorce,  is  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  the  Captain  should 
l^Beve  the  story  thal^his  neighbour's  wife  had  obt^uned  a  divorce  on  account  of  her 
passion  for  himself. 


y  Google 


130  MILES  OLOBIOSUS  ;  Act  lY. 

struck  with  awe  at  his  opulent  circumstances ;  at  the  same 
time,  too,  praise  the  comeliness  of  his  person,  the  heautj  of 
his  face.     Are  you  tutored  enough  ? 

AcEOT.  I  understand  it  all.  Is  it  enough  that  I  give  you  my 
work  so  nicely  finished  off  that  you  cannot  find  a  fault  with  it. 

Pal.  I'm  content.  Now  (addressing  Pleusioles),  in 
your  turn,  learn  what  charge  I  shall  give  to  you.  So  soon  as 
this  shall  be  done,  when  she  shall  have  gone  in,  then  do  you 
immediately  take  care  to  come  here  dressed  in  the  garb  of  a 
master  of  a  ship.  Have  on  a  broad-brimmed  hat^  of  iron- 
grey,  a  wooUen  shade^  before  your  eyes ;  have  on  an  iron-grey 
cloak*  (for  that  is  the  seaman's  colour)  ;  have  it  fastened  over 
the  left  shoulder,  your  ri^ht  arm  projecting  out*,  *  *  * 
*  *  *  yowr  clothes  some  way  well  girded  up,  pretend  as 
though  you  are  some  master  of  a  ship.  And  all  these  re- 
quisites are  at  the  house  of  this  old  gentleman,  for  he  keeps 
fishermen. 

Pleus.  "Well,  when  I'm  dressed  out,  why  don't  you  tell 
me  what  I'm  to  do  then  ? 

Pal.  Come  here,  and,  in  the  name  of  her  mother,  bring 
word  to  Philocomasium,  that,  if  she  would  return  to  Athens, 
she  must  go  with  you  to  the  harbour  directly,  and  that  she 

1 A  brotMfrimmed  hat)^Yer.  1178.  **  Cansia.'*  See  the  note  to  1.  851  of  the 
**  Trinnmmiis.'* 

«  A  woollen  »A«fe)— Ver.  1178.  *'  Culcitam  laneam."  The  "  cnlcita^  here 
alladed  to  was  a  little  cnshion  padded  with  wool,  which  was  placed  before  weak  or 
diseased  eyes  to  absorb  the  moistare.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  either  bound 
against  the  part  affected,  or  else  to  have  been  held  in  the  hand  and  applied  eveiy 
now  and  then.  Commentators  seem  to  think  that  here  Plensicles  holds  it  np  to 
his  eye  with  his  hand  when  addressing  the  Captain.  Tbej  are  at  a  loss  to  know 
why  PalsBstrio  recommends  this,  as  the  Captain  has  never  seen  Plensicles,  who 
was  at  Nanpactns  when  Philocomasinm  was  carried  off  Still,  though  it  is  not 
mentioned,  it  maj  be,  because  the  Captain  had  seen  Plensicles  before  he  went  to 
Naupactus ;  or,  what  is  more  probable,  that,  affecting  to  have  weak  ejes,  PleusidM 
maj  not  appear  so  comely  as  he  reaUy  is,  and  not  thereby  excite  any  suspicion  in 
the  Captain's  mind  as  to  his  intentions. 

»  An  iron-grey  chak^—Yet.  1179.  Some  think  that  the  "  ferru^eus,"  or  iron 
colour,  here  called  '^colos  thalassinus,''  or  *Hhe  sea-colour,"  was  dark  blue,  but 
dark  grey  seems  more  probable,  as  the  shades  of  blue  were  too  expensive  for 
common  wear. 

*  Right  arm  projecting  out)— Yet.  1180.  This  no  doubt  was  the  way  in  which 
the  "  pallium"  was  usually  worn  by  seafaring  men,  for  the  sake  of  expedition,  and 
in  order  to  give  free  play  to  the  right  arm  when  aboard  ship. 


y  Google 


Sc.  V.  THE  BEAGGABT  CAPTAIir,  131 

must  order  it  to  be  carried  down  to  the  ship  if  she  wishes 
anything  to  be  put  on  board ;  that  if  she  doesn't  go,  you 
must  weigh  anchor,  for  the  wind  is  favourable. 

Pletts.  I  like  your  plan  much :  do  proceed. 

Pal.  The  Captain  will  at  once  advise  her  to  go  speedily, 
that  she  may  not  delay  her  mother. 

Pleus.  Every  way  you  are  clever.  Pal.  I  shall  tell  him 
that  she  asks  for  me  as  a  helper  to  carry  her  baggage  down  to 
the  harbour.  I  shall  go,  and,  understand  you,  I  shall  im- 
mediately be  off  with  you  straight  to  Athens. 

Pleus.  And  when  you  have  reached  there,  I'll  never  let 
you  be  ashore  three  days  before  you're  free. 

Pal.  Be  off  speedily  and  equip  yourself. 

Pleus.  Is  there  anything  besides  ?  Pal.  Only  to  remem- 
her'  all  this. 

Pletts.  I'm  off.  (Exit,)  Pal.  And  do  you  (to  Acbote- 
lEFTiTJM  and  Milphldippa)  be  off  hence  in-doors  this  in- 
stant, for  I'm  quite  sure  that  he'll  just  now  be  coming  out 
hence  from  in-doors. 

AcEOT.  With  us  your  command  is  as  good  as  law. 

Pal.  Come,  then,  begone.  But  see,  the  door  opens  oppor- 
tunely,    (^xhe  women  go  into  the  house  o/*  Peeiplecomentjs.) 

Scene  V. 
Enter  Ptegopolinices^(wi  his  house, 

Pteg.  What  I  wished  I  have  obtained  just  as  I  wished,  on 
kind  and  friendly  terms,  that  she  would  leave  me. 

Pal.  For  what  reason  am  I  to  say  that  you  have  been  so 
long  in-doors  ? 

PiEG.  I  never  was  so  sensible  that  I  was  beloved  by  that 
voman  as  now. 

Pal.  Why  so  ?  Pteg.  How  many  words  she  did  utter ! 
How  the  matter  was  protracted !  But  in  the  end  I  obtained 
what  I  wanted,  and  I  granted  her  what  she  wanted  and  what 
she  asked  of  me.    I  made  a  present  of  you  also  to  her. 

Pal.  What — ^me,  too  ?  In  what  way  shall  I  exist  with- 
out you  ? 

Pyeg.  Come,  be  of  good  heart ;  I'll  make  you  free  from 
her,  too.  But  I  used  all  endeavours,  if  I  could  by  any 
method  persuade  her  to  go  away,  and  not  take  you  witli  her  ; 
she  forced  me,  however. 

k:2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


132  MrtBS  OLOBIOSXrS ;  Act  IV. 

Pal.  In  the  Gods  and  yofurself  I'll  place  my  trust.  Yet, 
at  the  last,  although  it  is  bitter  to  me  that  I  mtust  be  deprived 
of  an  excellent  master,  yourself,  at  least  it  is  a  pleasure  to 
me  that,  through  my  means,  by  reason  of  the  excellence 
of  your  beauty,  this  has  happened  to  you  with  regard  to 
this  lady  neighbour,  whom  I  am  now  introducing  to  you. 

Pyhg.  What  need  of  words  ?  I'll  give  you  liberty  and 
wealth  if  you  obfcain  her  for  me. 

Pal.  I'll  win  her.     Pybg.  But  I'm  impatient. 

Pal.  But  moderation  is  requisite;  curb  your  desires; 
don't  be  over  anxious.  But  see,  here  she  is  herself;  she  is 
coming  out  of  doors. 

SCEIO!  VI. 

Ikiter  AcEOTBLETJTiTJM  ofid  MrLPHEDiPPA^ow  the  hmee  of 

PE&IFLXiCOMENUfl. 

Mil.  (in  a  low  voice).  Mistress,  see!  the  Captain's  near. 

AcBOT.  (in  a  low  voice).  Where  is  he  ?  Mil.  Only  look 
to  the  left.  Eye  him  asliance,  that  he  mayn't  perceive  that 
we  are  looking  at  him. 

AoBOT.  L  see  him.  Troth,  now's  the  time,  in  our  mis- 
chief, for  us  to  become  suprem^y  mischievous. 

Mil.  'Tis  for  you  to  begin.  Aobot.  (aloud).  Prithee,  did 
you  see  him  yourself?  (Aside.)  Don't  spare  your  voice,  so 
that  he  may  near. 

Mil.  (aloud).  By  my  troth,  I  talked  with  his  own  self,  at 
my  ease,  as  long  as  I  pleased,  at  my  leisure,  at  my  own  dis- 
cretion, just  as  I  wished. 

Ptbg.  (to  Paljestbio).  Do  you  hear  what  she  says  ? 

Pal.  (to  PrBGOPOLnsncEs).  I  hear.  How  delighted  she  is 
because  she  had  access  to  you. 

AcBOT.  (tdoud).  O  happy  woman  that  you  are ! 

Ptbg.  How  I  do  seem  to  be  loved  Ip^g^^^g^ 

Pal.  You  are  deserving  of  it.  MiL^Caloud),  By  my  troth, 
'tis  passing  strange  what  you  say,  thu^you  had  access  to  him 
and  prevailed.  They  say  that  he  is  usnally  addressed,  like  a 
Idng,  through  letters  or  messengers. 

Mil.  (ahud).  But,  i'  fidth,  'twas  with  difficulty  I  had  an 
opportunity  of  approaching  and  beseeching  him. 

Pal.  (^oPTBeoPOLiFiOBs).  How  renowned  you  are  among 
the  fair ! 


y  Google 


iSc.  YI.  THIS  BB^eCMLST  OAPTJOK.  138 

Pybq.  (to  FaIlOsstbio).  I  shall  submit,  since  Yenua  wills 
it  so. 

AcROT.  {aloud).  By  heavens !  I  return  to  Venus  grateful 
thanks,  and  her  I  do  beseech  and  entreat,  that  I  may  win 
Hm  whom  I  love  and  whom  I  seek  to  win,  and  that  to  me  he 
mav  prove  gentle,  and  not  make  a  difficulty  about  what  I 


MtTj.  (aktid),  I  hope  it  may  be  so ;  although  many  ladies 
are  seeking  to  win  him  for  themselves,  he  disdains  them  and 
estranges  himself  fix>m  all  but  you  alone. 

AcBOT.  {aloud).  Therefore  this  fear  torments  me,  since  he 
is  to  disdain^,  lest  his  eyes,  when  he  beholds  me,  should 
change  his  sentiments,  and  his  own  graeefulness  should  at 
once  disdain  my  form. 

Mil.  {aloud).  He  will  not  do  so ;  be  of  good  heart. 

PxEa.  {to  Paubstbio).  How  she  does  alight  herself  I 

AcBOT.  {aloud).  I  fear  lest  your  account  may  have  sur- 
passed my  looks. 

Mil.  {aloud)  I've  taken  care  of  this,  that  you  shall  be 
fikirer  than  his  expectations. 

AcBOT.  {aloud).  Troth,  if  he  shall  refuse  to  take  me  as  his 
wife,  hy  heavens  I'll  embrace  his  knees  and  entreat  him ! 
If  I  shall  be  unable  to  prevaQ  on  him,  in  some  way  or  other, 
rU  put  myself  to  death.  Fm  quite  sure  that  without  him  I 
cannot  live. 

Pybg.  {to  PALiBSOPBio).  I  soe  that  I  must  prevent  this 
woman's  death.     Shall  I  accost  her  ? 

Pal.  By  no  means ;  for  you  will  be  making  yourself  cheap 
if  you  lavish  yourself  away  of  your  own  accord.  Let  her  come 
spontaneously,  seek  you,  court  you,  strive  to  win  you.  Un- 
less you  wish  to  lose  that  glory  which  you  have,  please 
Have  a  care  what  you  do.  Por  I  know  that  this  was  never 
the  lot  of  any  mortal,  except  two  persons,  yourself  and  Phaon 
of  Lesbos^,  to  be  loved  so  desperately. 

AoBOT.  {aloud).  Til  go  in-doors^ — or,  my  dear  Milphi- 
dippa,  do  you  call  him  out  of  doors. 

^  Phatm  of  Leabos) — Ver.  1247.  Sappho,  the  poetess,  was  enamoured  of  Phaon 
the  Lesbian.  When  he  deserted  her,  she  threw  herself  from  the  Lencadian  pro- 
montory or  Lover's  Leap,  which  was  supposed  to  provide  a  care  for  unrequited 
love.  Her  death  was  the  consequence.  See  her  Epistle  to  Phaon,  the  twenty-first 
oftheHeroidesofOvid. 

^  I'Ugo  in-door8)-~Yer.  1248.  It  must  be  remembered,  that  all  this  time  they 


y  Google 


134  MILES  GLOJEtlOSVS ;  Act  IV. 

Mil.  (aloud).  Aye ;  let's  wait  until  some  one  comes  out. 

Ac»OT.  (aloud),  I  can't  restrain  myself  from  going  in  to 
him. 

Mil.  (aloud).  The  door's  fastened.  Acbot.  (aloud),  I'll 
break  it  in  then. 

Mil.  (aloud).  You  are  not  in  your  senses. 

AcEOT.  (aloud).  If  he  has  ever  loved,  or  if  he  has  wisdom 
equal  to  his  beauty,  whatever  I  may  do  through  love,  he  will 
pardon  me  by  reason  of  his  compassionate  feelings. 

Pal.  (to  Pyegopolinices).  Prithee,  do  see^hoyj  distracted 
the  poor  thing  is  with  love. 

Pteo.  (to  Pal-ESTeio).  'Tis  mutual  m  us.  P^l.  Hush ! 
Don't  you  let  her  hear. 

Mil.  (aloud).  Why  do  you  stand  stupefied?  Why  don't 
you  knock  ? 

AcEOT.  (aloud).  Because  be  is  not  within  whom  I  want. 

Mil.  (aloud).  How  do  ^ou  know^  P  Acbot.  (aloud).  By 
my  troth,  I  do  know  it  easily ;  for  my  nose  would  scent  him 
if  he  were  within. 

Pteg.  (to  Pal-ZESteio).  She  is  a  diviner.  Because  she  is 
in  love  with  me^  Venus  has  made  her  prophesy. 

Acbot.  (aloud).  He  is  somewhere  or  other  close  at  hand 
whom  I  do  80  long  to  behold.     I'm  sure  I  smeU  him. 

Pteg.  (to  Pal^steio).  Troth,  now,  she  really  sees  better 
with  her  nose  than  with  her  eyes. 

Pal.  (^oPyegopolinioes).  She  is  blind  from  love.  Aobot. 
(aloud).  Prithee,  do  support  me. 

Mil.  (aloud).  Why?  Acbot.  (aloud).  Lest  I  shoidd 
fall. 

Mil.  (aloud).  Why?  Aceot.  (aloud).  Because  I  cannot 
stand ;  my  senses — mi/  senses  are  sinking  so  by  reason  of  my 
eyes. 

Mil.  (aloud).  Heavens!  you've  seen  the  Captain. 

Acbot.  (aloud),  1  have.  Mil.  (aloud),  I  don't  see  him. 
Where  is  he  ? 

have  pretended  not  to  see  Palsestrio  or  his  master.  Milphidippa  cautioned  her 
mistress  only  to  take  a  side-glance  at  him  (timis),  after  which  they  have,  probably, 
turned  their  backs. 

1  How  do  you  know)^Ver.  1255.  In  Eitschel's  edition,  these  words  are  attri- 
bated  to  Palsestrio.  This  is  cleariy  a  mistake,  for  Palsestrio  has  not  yet  joined  in 
their  conversation.    He  and  his  master  are  listening  to  what  they  say. 


y  Google 


Sc;  VI.  THE  BBAGOABT  CAPTAIN.  135 

AcBOT.  (aloud).  Troth,  you  would  see  him  if  you  were  in 
love. 

Mill,  (aloud),  V  faith,  you  don't  love  him  more  than  I  do 
myself,  with  your  good  leave. 

Pal.  (to  Ptegopolikices).  No  doubt  all  of  the  women,  as 
soon  as  each  has  seen  you,  are  in  love  with  you. 

Ptbg.  (^0  Pai^steio).  I  don't  know  whether  you  have 
heard  it  from  me  or  not ;  I'm  the  grandson  of  Venus. 

AcBOT.  (aloud).  My  dea/r  Milphidippa,  prithee  do  ap- 
proach and  accost  him. 

Pybg.  (to  Pal^stbio).  How  she  does  stand  in  awe  of  me ! 

Pal.  (to  Ptbgopollnices).  She  is  coming  towards  us. 

Mill,  (adoa/ncing).  I  wish  to  speak  with  you. 

Ptbg.  And  we  with  you.  Mil.  I  have  brought  my  mis- 
tress out  of  the  house,  as  you  requested  me. 

Ptbg.  8o  I  see.     Mil.  Eeqijest  her,  then,  to  approach. 

Ptbg.  Since  you  have  entreated  it,  I  have  prevailed  upon 
my  mind  not  to  detest  her  just  like  other  women. 

Mil.  I'  faith  she  wouldn't  be  able  to  utter  a  word  if  she 
were  to  come  near  you ;  while  she  was  looking  at  you,  her 
eyes  have  in  the  meantime  tied  her  tongue. 

Ptbg.  I  see  that  this  woman's  disorder  must  be  cured. 

Mil.  See  how  terrified  she  is  since  she  beheld  you. 

Ptbg.  Even  armed  men  are  the  same ;  don't  wonder  at  a 
woman  hei/ng  so.     But  what  does  she  wish  me  to  do  P 

Mil.  You  to  come  to  her  house ;  she  wishes  to  live  and 
to  pass  her  life  with  you. 

Ptbg.  What  1 — I  come  home  to  her,  when  she  is  a  mar- 
ried .woman  ?    Her  husband  is  to  be  stood  in  fear  of. 

Mil.  Why, — ^for  your  sake,  she  has  turned  her  husband 
out  of  her  house. 

Ptbg.  How  ?    How  could  she  do  so  ? 

Mil.  The  house  was  her  marriage-portion. 

Ptbg.  Was  it  so  ?    Mil.  It  was  so,  on  my  word. 

Ptbg.  Bid  her  go  home ;  I'll  be  there  just  now. 

Mil.  Take  care,  and  don't  keep  her  in  expectation ;  don't 
torment  her  feelings. 

Ptbg.  Not  I,  indeed.  Do  you  go  then.  Mil.  We  are 
going.  (AcBOTELBUTiTTM  and  Milphidippa  go  into  the  house 
of  Pbbeplecomentts.) 

Ptbg.  But  what  do  I  see  ?    Pal.  What  do  you  see  ? 


y  Google 


136  MILES  GKOBiosiTs ;  Aet  rV. 

Ptbg.  See  there,  some  one  is  coming,  I  know  not  who, 
but  in  a  sailor's  dress. 

Paii.  He  is  surely  wanting  us,  now;  really,  it  is  the  ship- 
master. 

Ptbo.  He*8  come,  I  suppose,  to  fetch  hwr. 

Pal.  I  fancy  so. 

SoBio:  VII. 
JEnter  Plbitsiolbs,  at  a  distance,  in  a  Saihr^s  drei^ 

Pleus.  (to  himself).  Did  I  not  know  that  another  man  in 
other  ways  has  done  many  a  thing  unbecomingly  on  account 
of  love,  I  should  be  more  ashamed  by  reason  of  love  for  me  to 
be  going  in  this  garb.  But  since  I  have  learned  that  many  per- 
sons by  reason  of  love  have  committed  many  actions,  dis- 
gracefid  and  estranged  from  what  is  good,  *****  for 
I  pass  by  how  Achifies  suffered^  his  comrades  to  be  slain— — 
But  there's  Palastrio,  he's  standing  with  the  Captain. 
My  talk  must  now  be  changed  for  another  kind.  Woman 
is  surely  bom  of  tardiness  itself  For  every  other  delay, 
which  is  a  delay  just  as  much,  seems  a  less  delay  than  that 
which  is  on  account  of  a  woman.  I  really  think  that  this  is 
done  merely  from  habit.  But  I  shall  call  for  this  Philoco- 
masium.  I'll  knock  at  the  door  then.  Hallo !  is  there  any 
one  here  ?     (^EkocJcs  at  the  Captatbt's  door,) 

Pal.  Young  man — ^what  is  it?  What  do  you  want? 
Why  are  you  knocking  ? 

Pleus.  I'm  come  to  inquire  for  Philocomasimn ;  I'm  come 
from  her  mother.  If  she's  for  going,  let  her  set  off.  She  is 
delaying  us  all ;  we  wish  to  weigh  anchor. 

Prse.  Her  things  have  been  some  time  in  readiness. 
Hearkye,  Pal»strio,  take  some  assistants  with  you  to  esrnr 
to  the  ship  her  golden  trinkets,  her  furniture,  apparel,  all 
her  precious  things.  All  the  articles  are  already  packed  up 
which  I  gave  her. 

Pal.  rU  go.  {Goes  into  the  house.)  Plbtjs.  Troth  now, 
prithee,  do  make  haste. 

Pybg.  There  shall  be  no  delay.  Pray,  what  is  it  that  has 
been  done^  with  your  eye  ? 

>  Achilles  suffered)— Ver.  1289,  This  was  when  he  withdrew  from  the  warfare 
on  being  deprived  of  Briseis  by  Agamemnon,  on  which  occasion  Hector  ma^ 
great  havoc  among  the  Grecian  fiorces. 

s  That  has  been  done)— Yer.  1806.  He  asks  "what  has  been  done  with,**  or  "  be- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Se.  ym.  THS  BBA0OAST  OAPTAIK.  187 


Plbxtb.  Troth,  but  I  hare  inj  eye.  {PoinU  to  the  ri^hi  one.) 

Ptbg-.  But  the  left  one  I  mean. 

PiiiFS.  1*11  tell  you.  On  account  of  the  sea,  I  use  this 
eye  less ;  but  if  I  kept  away  from  the  sea\  I  shovld  use 
the  one  like  the'other.    But  they  are  detainiD^  me  too  long, 

PiBa.  See,  here  ttey  are  commg  out. 

SciOT  vin. 

Miter  Paljbsteio  and  'PwiLOCOUA.&iu^from  the  Captain's 
honee. 

Pal.  (to  PHiLOCOMAsnrM:).  Prithee,  when  will  you  this 
day  make  an  end  of  your  weeping  ? 

Phil.  "What  can  I  do  but  weep?  I  am  going  away 
hence  where  I  have  spent  my  days  most  happily. 

Pal.  See,  there's  the  man  that  has  come  from  your 
mother  and  sister  {j^omOng  to  Pletjsiolbs). 

Phil.  I  see  him.    PYBtt.  Palsastrio,  do  you  hear  ? 

Pal.  What  is  your  pleasure  ?  PT»a.  Aren't  you  order- 
ing those  presents  to  be  brought  out  which  I  gave  her  ? 

Pleijs.  Health  to  you,  Philocomasium.  Phil.  And  health 
to  you. 

Plbus.  Tour  mother  and  sister  bade  me  give  their  love 
to  you. 

Phil.  Heaven  prosper  them.  Plbits.  They  beg  you  to 
set  out,  so  that,  while  the  wind  is  fair,  they  may  set  sail. 
Bat  if  your  mother's  eyes  had  been  well,  she  would  have 
come^  together  with  me. 

Phil,  I'll  go ;  although  I  do  it  with  regret — duty  compels 
me. 

Pleus.  Ton  act  wisely.  Ptbg.  If  she  had  not  been  passing 
her  Hfe  with  myself^  this  day  she  would  have  been  a  blockhead. 

<^oiQB  of,"  his  eye  ?  On  which  Pleusicles  tells  him,  by  way  of  a  quibble,  that  he  has 
got  his  eye,  allading  to  the  right  one,  while  the  Captain  refers  to  the  left,  against 
^ch  the  "  lectica"  is  placed. 

^  From  the  seay-Yer,  1309.  There  is  a  pan  here,  which  cannot  be  preserved 
m  the  translation.  "  Si  abstiniiissem  a  mare,"  ^^  If  I  kept  away  from  the  sea," 
Btty  abobe  read,  "  Si  abstinnissem  amare,"  "  If  I  refrained  from  lovmg."  The 
Obtain  nnderstands  him  in  the  former  sense,  thinking  that  he  means  that  he 
has  got  a  disease  in  his  eye,  which  may  be  increased  by  leading  a  seafaring  life. 

^Ske  would  have  comey-Yer.  1318.  Thornton  justly  observes  that  this  excuse 
^  the  pretended  mother  not  making  her  appearance  is  fair  enough,  but  there  is 
BO  reason  alleged  why  the  aster  should  not  come,  exeept  that  we  may  suppose 
thai  she  stays  to  nuxse  and  comfort  her  side  parent. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


138  MILES  GLOBiosrs ;  Act  IT. 

Phil.  I  am  distracted  at  this,  that  I  am  estranged  from 
such  a  man.  For  you  are  able  to  make  any  woman  what- 
ever abound  in  wit;  and  because  I  was  living  with  you, 
for  that  reason  I  was  of  a  very  lofty  spirit.  I  see/that  I 
must  lose  that  loftiness  of  mind.    {Pretends  to  cry,) 

Pteg.  Don't  weep.  Phil.  I  can't  help  it  when  I  look 
upon  you. 

Ptbg.  Be  of  good  courage.  Phil.  I  know  what  pain  it 
is  to  me. 

Pal.  I  really  don't  wonder  now,  Philocomasium,  if  you 
were  here  with  happiness  to  yourself,  when  I,  a  servant — 
as  I  look  at  him,  weep  because  we  are  i^di.Ttmg' {pretends 
to  cry)y  BO  much  have  his  beauty,  his  manners,  his  valour, 
captivated  your  feelings. 

jPhil.  Prithee,  do  let  me  embrace  you  before  I  depart  ? 

Ptbg.  By  aflnneans.  Phil,  {emhracmg  him).  O  my 
eyes !  O  my  life ! 

Pal.  Do  hold  up  the  woman,  I  entreat  you,  lest  she  should 
fall.    (Se  takes  hold  of  her ,  and  she  'pretends  to  faint.) 

Pyeg.  "What  means  this?  Pal.  Because,  after  she  had 
quitted  you,  she  suddenly  became  faint,  poor  thing. 

Pybg.  Bun  in  and  fetch  some  water. 

Pal.  I  want  no  water ;  but  I  had  rather  you  would  keep 
at  a  distance.     Prithee,  don't  you  interfere  till  she  comes  to. 

Ptbg.  (observing  Pletisiolbs,  who  is  holding  Philocoka- 
siTiM  in  his  a/rm).  They  have  their  heads  too  closely  in  con- 
tact between  them  ;  I  don't  like  it ;  he  is  soldering  his  lips^ 
to  hers.     What  the  plague  are  you  about  ? 

Pleus.  I  was  trying  whether  she  was  breathing  or  not. 

Ptbg.  You  ought  to  have  applied  your  ear  then. 

Pleus.  If  you  had  rather,  I'll  let  her  go. 

PtbG;  No,  I  don't  care ;  do  you  support  her. 

Pal.  To  my  misery,  I'm  quite  distracted. 

Pybg.  Go  and  bring  here  from  in-doors  all  the  things 
that  I  have  given  her. 

Pal.  And  even 'now,  household  God,  do  I  salute  thee 
before  I  depart ;  my  fellow-servants,  both  male  and  female, 
all  farewell,  and  happy  may  you  live ;  prithee,  though  absent, 
among  yourselves  bestow  your  blessings  upon  me  as  well. 

1  He  ia  soldering  his  Kpsy-Yer.  1385.  "  Femiminat**  is  a  strong  ezpreBsion 
here ;  it  literally  means  to  weld  iron  mth  iron,  hammering  it  in  a  red-hot  state. 


y  Google 


Sc.  Vm.  THE  BEAOGABT  CAPTAIN.  139 

PrsG.  Come,  Palaestrio,  be  of  good  courage. 

Pal.  Alas !  alas !  I  eannot  but  weep  since  from  you  I  must 
depart. 

rTBG.  Bear  it -witli  patience.  Phil,  (feigning  to  recover) , 
Ha !  how's  this  ?     What  means  it  ?     Hail,  O  light ! 

Pletts.  Are  you  recovered  now?  Phil.  Prithee,  what 
person  am  I  embracing  ?     I'm  undone.     Am  I  myself? 

Plbus.  (m  a  low  voice).  Fear  not,  my  delight. 

Ptbg.  "What  means  all  this  ?  Pal.  Just  now  she  swooned 
away  here.  ##***# 

I  fear  and  dread  that  this  at  last  may  take  place  ^  too  openly. 

Pteg.  What  is  that  you  say  ?  Pal.  I  fear  that  some  one 
may  turn  it  to  your  discredit,  while  all  these  things  are  being 
carried  after  us  through  the  city. 

Ptbg.  I  have  given  away  my  own  property,  o«(?  not  theirs. 
I  care  but  little  for  other  people.  Be  off  then,  go  with  the 
blessing  of  the  Grods. 

Pal.  'Tis  for  your  sake  I  say  it. 

Pteg.  I  believe  you.     Pal.  And  now  farewell ! 

Pteg.  And  heartily  farewell  to  you !  Pal.  {to  Pleitsicles 
o>nd  PHiLOCOMAsnjM  as  thefjj  leave).  Go  you  quickly  on ;  I'll 
overtake  you  directly ;  I  wish  to  speak  a  few  words  with  my 
master.  (To  Ptbgopoliwices.)  Although  you  have  ever 
deemed  others  more  faithful  to  yourself  than  me,  still  do  I 
owe  you  many  thanks  for  all  things ;  and  if  such  were  your 
feelings,  I  would  rather  be  a  slave  to  you  by  far  than  be  the 
&eedman  of  another. 

Pteg.  Be  of  good  courage.  Pal.  Ah  me!  When  it 
comes  in  my  mind,  how  my  manners  must  be  changed,  how 
womanish  manners  must  be  learnt,  and  the  military  ones 
forgotten  ! 

Pteg.  Take  care  and  be  honest. 

Pal.  I  can  be  so  no  longer ;  I  have  lost  all  inclination^. 

*  May  take  place)— Yer,  1347.  Palsstrio  cannot  help  exclsuminf;  against  the 
indiwieefe  eondnct  of  the  loy^rs.    The  Captain  overhears  him,  and  asks  him  what 

is  the  matter.    He  adroitly  tnms  it  off,  by  saying,  "  that  if  thus  openly the 

goods  and  fhrnitore  are  carried  through  the  city,  he  very  much  fears  that  his 
inaster  will  be  censured  for  his  extreme  prodigality." 

'  LostdUincUnaiwn) — ^Ver.  1360.  A  pun  is  thought  to  be  intended  here  on  the 
word  "  kbidinem,"  but  of  so  wretched  a  nature  that  it  is  not  worth  any  further 
sIIiiBKntoit. 


y  Google 


140  MiLBs  GLOBiosira ;  Act  IT. 

Pteo.  G^o,  follow  them ;  don't  linger. 

Pal.  Pare  you  ligbt  well.  Pys&.  And  heartily  five  you 
well. 

PaIi.  Prithee,  do  remember  me ;  if  perchance  I  should 
happen  to  be  made  free,  I'll  send  the  news  to  you ;  don't 
you  forsake  me^, 

Ptbo.  That  is  not  my  habit. 

Pal.  Consider  every  now  and  then  how  fidthful  I  have 
been  to  yon.  If  you  do  that,  then  at  last,  you'll  know  who 
is  honest  towards  you  emd  who  dishonest. 

Pybg.  I  know  it ;  I  have  often  found  that  true,  as  well 
before  as  to-day  in  especial. 

Paii.  Do  you  know  it  ?  Aye,  and  this  day  I'll  make  you 
hereafter  say  still  more  how  true  it  is. 

Ptbo.  I  can  hardly  refrain  from  bidding  you  to  stay. 

Pax.  Take  you  care  how^  you  do  that.  They  may  say  that 
you  are  a  liar  and  not  truthM,  that  you  have  no  honor;  they 
may  say  that  no  one  of  your  tdaves  is  trustworthy  except  my- 
self. If,  indeed,  I  thought  you  could  do  it  with  haoat,  I 
should  advise  you.  But  it  cannot  be;  take  care  how  you 
do  so. 

Ptbo.  Be  off;  I'H  be  content  then,  whatever  happens. 

Pai«.  13ien,  fare  you  well.  Pyb©.  'Twere  better  you  should 
go  with  a  good  heart 

Pal.  StUl,  once  more,  farewell.  (JSxit)  PrK&.  Before  this 
affftir,  I  had  always  thought  that  he  was  a  most  rascally  ser- 
vant; still,  I  find  that  he  is  faithful  to  me.  When  X  con- 
sider with  myself,  I  have  done  unwisely  in  parting  with  him. 
I'U  go  hence  at  once  now  to  my  love  here:  the  door,  too,  I 
perceive,  makes  a  noise  there. 

Scene  IX. 
Snfer  a  3oy  from  the  house  q/*PEEiPLECOMEinJS. 
BoT.  (ta  some  one  within).  Don't  you  be  advising  me;  I 
remember  my  duty ;  this  moment  I'll-  find  him.    Wherever 

1  DonH  you  forsake  me)— Yer.  1363.  He  hypocriticallj  entreats  his  nuflter 
not  to  desert  him  in  need,  should  he  be  made  free,  and  be  thereby  thrown  entire^ 
upon  his  own  resources. 

2  Take  you  care  Aow)— Ver.  1368.  There  is  coDsiderable  drollery  in  his  amuety 
lest  his  master  should  suddenly  change  his  mind  and  refhse  to  let  him  go.  His  sita- 
ation  would,  indeed,  under  such  circumstances,  haye  proved  an  unfortunate  one. 


y  Google 


Se.  IX.  THS  BSAOOAST  CAPTATfT.  141 

on  earth  he  maj  dianoe  to  be,  I'll  search  him  out ;  I'll  not 
be  sparing  of  i:^  pains. 

PiBG.  'Tis  I  he  is  looking  for ;  I'll  go  and  meet  this 
boy. 

BoT.  O,  I'm  looking  for  you ;  save  yoii,  dearest  sir,  one 
loaded  by  opportunity  with  her  gifts,  and  whom  before  all 
others  two  DiTinities  do  favour. 

Ptbg.  What  two  ?    Boy.  Mars  and  Venus. 

Pteg.  a  sprightly  bov.  Boy.  She  entreats  that  you  will 
go  in;  she  wishes — ehe  longs  for  you,  and  while  expecting 
ymi,  she's  dying  for  you.  Do  succour  one  in  love.  Wliy 
do  you  stay  r    Why  don't  you  go  in  ? 

Ptsg.  Well,  I'll  go.  {Enters  the  house  of  PESiFiasco- 
MBinrs.) 

Box.  There  has  he  entangled  himself  at  once  in  the  toils. 
The  snare  is  prepared :  the  old  gentleman  is  standing  at  his 
post^  to  attack  the  letcher,  who  is  so  boastful  of  his  good 
looks ;  who  thinks  that,  whatever  woman  sees  him,  all  are  in 
love  with  him ;  whom  all,  both  men  and  women,  detest.  Now 
I  win  on  to  the  uproar;  I  hear  a  tumult  within. 


ACT   THE   FIFTH. 

Scene  P. 

JEnifer  PESiPLECOMEinrsyrow  his  house,  with  Cabio  aAd 
other  Sebvants,  dragging  Pyegopolinices. 

Peeip.  Brin^  that  fellow  along.  If  he  doesn't  follow,  drag 
him,  lifted  on  high^,  out  of  doors.  Make  him  to  be  between 
heaven  and  earth;  cut  him  in  pieces.     {They  heat  him,) 

^Atkiiposty^Vvc.  1S89L  He  aHudes  to  the  attitude  in  which  the  old  gentle- 
man, Peripfeoomenns,  is  standing  in-doors,  xeady  to  sally  forth  on  the  Cf4»tain  the 
moment  he  is  entrapped. 

*Scme  /.)  Thornton  here  remarks,  that  "  there  cannot  he  a  stronger  proof 
of  the  absurdities  into  which  the  ancients  were  forced  by  a  preservation  of  the 
nnitj  of  phice  than  the  present  passage.  The  Captain  is  surprised  in  Periple- 
oomemis^s  own  honse,  carrying  on  an  intrigue  with  the  old  gentleman's  pretended 
wife,  in  ooDsaqnence  of  which  they  proceed  to  frighten  him  with  the  cook's 
threatening  to  go  to  work  upon  him  with  his  knife.  Can  anything  be  more  nn- 
oatnral  or  improbable  than  that  for  this  purpose  they  should  drag  him  oui  of 
the  house  and  tnto  the  public  street? 

>  Lifted  OH  A*^A)— Ver.  1394.  He  means,  "  take  him  in  your  arms,"  or  "  hoist 
him  oo  your  sfaoniders.'' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


142  MILES  0L0BI0SU8 ;  Act  Y. 

Pybg.  By  my  troth,  I  do  entreat  you^  Feriplecomeniis. 

Peeip.  By  my  troth,  you  do  entreat  in  vain.  Take  care, 
Carlo,  that  that  knife  of  yours  is  very  sharp. 

Cabio.  Why,  it's  already  longing  to  np  up  the  stomach 
of  this  letcher.  I'll  make  his  entraUs  hcmg  just  b&  a  bauhle 
hangs  from  a  baby's  neck. 

PTBa.  I'm  a  dead  man.  Peeip.  Not  yet ;  you  say  so  too 
soon. 

Cabio.  Shall  I  have  at  this  fellovr  now  ? 

Pebip.  Aye, — but  first  let  him  be  thrashed  with  cudgels. 

Cabio.  True,  right  lustily.  Pebip.  Why  have  you  dared, 
you  disgraceful  fellow,  to  seauce  another  man's  wife  ? 

Pybg.  So  may  the  Gods  bless  me,  she  came  to  me  of  her 
own  accord. 

Pebip.  It's  a  lie.     Lay  on.     {They  are  about  to  strike,) 

Pybg.  Stay,  while  I  tell Pebip.  Why  are  you  hesi- 
tating ? 

Pybo.  Will  you  not  let  me  speak  ? 

Pebip.  Speak,  then,    Pybg.  I  was  entreated  to  come  here. 

Pebip.  How  did  you  dare  ?  There's  for  you,  take  that. 
{Strikes  him.) 

Pybg.  O  !  0 !  I've  had  enough.     Prithee,  now, 

Cabio.  Am  I  to  begin  cutting  him  up  at  once  ? 

Pebip.  As  soon  as  you  like.  Stretch  the  fellow  out,  and 
spread  out  his  pinions^  in  opposite  ways. 

Pybg.  By  heavens,  prithee,  do  hear  my  words  before  he 
cuts  me. 

Pebip.  Speak  before  you're  made  of  no  sex. 

Pybg.  I  supposed  that  she  was  a  widow ;  and  so  her  maid, 
who  was  her  go-between,  informed  me. 

Pebip.  I^ow  take  an  oath  that  you  won't  injure  any 
person  for  this  affair,  because  you  have  been  beaten  here  to- 
day, or  shall  be  beaten  hereafter,  if  we  let  you  go  safe  hence, 
you  dear  little  grandson  of  Venus^. 

Pybg.  I  swear  by  Dione^  and  Mars  that  I  will  hurt  no  one 

1  spread  out  his  pthioiw)— Ver.  1407.  "  Dbpennite.**  He  means,  "  stretch  him 
oat  as  you  would  spread  oat  to  their  utmost  Icugth  the  wings  of  a  bird.* 

2  Grandson  of  Venus) — ^Ver.  1413.  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  Captain's  own. 
boast  in  Act  IV.  s.  4,  thai  he  was  the  grandson  of  Venus. 

3  By  Dione) — ^Ver.  1414.  Dione,  according  to  Homer,  was  the  name  of  the 
mother  of  Venus;  but  the  name  is  much  more  frequently  used,  as  in  the  preseDt. 
instance,  to  signify  Venus  herself.  He  appropriately  swears  by  these  guanUaa 
Deities  of  intrigue.   The  translation  of  L  1416  is  somewhat  modified. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


8c.  IL  THS  BBAOGABT  OAPTAIK.  143 

because  I  have  been  beaten  here  this  day ;  and  I  think  that  it 
was  rightfully  done ;  and  if  I  don't  go  hence  further  injured, 
I  am  rightly  punished  for  the  offence. 

Peeip.  But  what  if  you  don't  do  so  ? 

PiBO.  Then,  may  I  always  have  my  word  not  to  be  trusted^. 

Casio.  Let  him  be  beaten  once  more ;  after  that  I  think 
he  may  be  dismissed. 

Ptbg.  May  the  Gods  ever  bless  you,  since  you  so  kindly 
come  as  my  advocate. 

Cabio.  Give  us  a  golden  mina^,  then. 

Praa.  For  what  reason  ?  Cabio.  That  we  may  now  let  you 
go  hence  unmaimed,  yo»  little  grandson  of  Venus ;  otherwise 
you  shall  not  escape  from  here ;  don't  you  deceive  yourself. 

Pteg.  It  shall  DC  given  you.  Cabio.  You're  very  wise. 
As  for  yoiur  tunic,  and  your  scarf*,  and  sword,  don't  at  all 
hope^  them;  you  shan't  have  them. 

A  Sebvaot.  Shall  I  beat  him  again,  or  do  you  let  him  go  ? 

PrBa.  I'm  tamed  by  your  cudgels.     I  do  entreat  you. 

Pebep.  Loose  him.     rxBG.  I  return  jrou  thanks. 

Pebip.  If  I  ever  catch  you  here  agam,  I'll  insert  a  dis- 
qualifying clause. 

Pybg.  Well :  I  make  no  objection. 

Peeip.  Let's  go  in,  Cario.  (Pebiplecomenus,  Cabio,  and 
Seetabts,  ffo  into  his  house.) 

ScEKE  n. 
Enter  Sceledbus  and  other  Sebvants  of  the  Captain. 
Pybg.  Here  are  some  of  my  servants,  I  see.     Tell  me,  is 
Philocomasium  oflyet, 
Scel.  Aye,  some  time  since.     Pybg.  Ah  me ! 
ScEL.  "You  would  say  that*  still  more  if  you  were  to  know 

^  Not  to  he  irtittedy—Yer.  1417.  *^  Intestabilis.**  A  gross  pun  is  here  in- 
tended, and  in  L  1420  as  well.  The  word  here  signifies  "forsworn,"  or  "per- 
jured," so  infamous,  that  his  testimony  will  never  be  reoeiyed  m  a  Court  of  justice. 

•A  gaidm  mmay-'Yer,  1420.  The  golden  **  mina"  was  worth  ten  silver  ones, 
or  one  thousand  "  drachmae,"  of  about  ninepence  three-farthings  each. 

'  And  yow  scarf  y-Yet,  1423.  The  "  chlamys**  was  an  outer  garment  worn 
among  the  Greeks  and  Oriental  nations,  somewhat  resembling  our  scarfs.  That 
worn  by  the  Captain  would  probably  be  of  great  value,  which  of  course  would  tempt 
the  cupidity  of  his  persecutors.    The  translation  of  1. 1426  is  somewhat  modified. 

*  FoM  tpouJd  say  thaf^—Yer,  1428.  Sceledrus,  probably,  only  enters  at  this  mo- 
ment with  the  other  servants  of  the  Captain ;  the  editions,  in  general,  somewhat 
absurdly  represent  him  as  present  from  the  beginning  of  the  Fifth  Act. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


144  aiiLSs  aju)BiosiJB.  Act  Y. 

wliat  I  know,  for  that  fellow  who  had  the  wool  before  his 
eye  was  no  sailor. 

Pyeo.  Who  was  he,  th^i?  Soil.  A  lover  of  Philo- 
comasium's. 

Fteg.  How  do  you  know  ?  Scel.  I  do  know :  for  after 
they  had  got  out  of  the  city  gate,  they  didnt  wait  a  moment 
hef ore  falling  to  kissing  and  embracing  each  other  at  once. 

Pyeo.  0  wretched  yboZ  that  I  ami  I  see  that  I  have 
been  gulled.  That  scoundrel  of  a  fellow,  Pal^BStrio,  it  was  he 
that  contrived  this  plot  against  me. 

ScEii.  I  think  it  was  properly  done.  If  it  were  so  done  to 
other  letchers,  th^?e  would  be  fewer  letchers  here;  they 
would  stand  more  in  awe,  and  give  their  attention  less  to  these 
pursuits. 

Pye&.  Let's  go  into  my  house. 

An  AcTOE  (to  the  Audhence).  Give  tt8  your  applause. 


y  Google 


BACCHIDES; 
OR,  THE  TWIN-SISTERS. 


Sramatts  ^Ptrsonae. 

SiLENUS,  the  "Dvnmty,  who  speaks  the  Prologue. 

NiGOBULUS,  an  aged  citizen  of  Athens. 

Mhesiloghus,  his  son. 

Philozekus,  another  aged  dtizen  of  Athens. 

PiSTOCLEBUS,  his  son. 

Ltdds,  servant  of  Philoxenns,  and  tutor  of  Pistoclems. 

Chrysalus,  servant  of  Nicobulus. 

Cleomachus,  a  Captain  of  Samos. 

A  Parasttb  of  Gleomachns. 

Boy,  servant  of  Gleomachns. 

Servant  of  Pistoclerns  (in  the  introductory  fragment). 

Abiaho,  servant  of  l^cobulus. 

&S1S^  }   Twin-^sterB.  Courtesans. 

^i»i«.— Athens:  before  the  houses  of  the  Fibst  BACCHisand  of  Philoxenus, 
which  are  in  the  same  street-. 


y  Google 


THE  SUBJECT. 


Mnesilochus,  when  absent  at  Ephesns,  writes  and  requests  his  friend,  Pisto- 
clems,  to  search  for  his  mistress,  Bacchis,  who  has  left  Athens  with  a  military 
Captain.  Having  discovered  her  on  her  retnm  to  Athens,  Pistoclerus  fells  in 
love  with  her  twin-sister,  whose  name  is  also  Baachii^  and  is  severely  reproved 
by  his  tutor,  Lydus,  for  so  doing.  Mnesilochns  returns  to  Athens,  and  discovers 
from  Lydus  that  his  friend  Pistoclerus  is  in  love  with  «  finnalaof  tihe  name  of 
Bacchis.  He  thereupon  imagines  that  he  haft  supplanted  him  witb  his  owd 
mistress,  and  m  his  anger  resolves  to  restore  to  his  fetber  some  money  of  his 
which  he  had  gone  to  Ephesus  to  recover,  and  a  part  of  which  be  had  contrived, 
through  a  scheme  of  the  serrant  Ghrysalus,  to  retain,  in  order  that  he  might 
redeem  his  mistress  from  the  Captaiff.  Having  afterwards  discovered  the  truth, 
he  greatly  repents  that  he  has  done  so,  as  the  officer  threatens  to  cany  Bacchis 
off  instantly,  if  the  money  is  not  paid.  On  this,  Ghrysalus  contrives  another 
stratagem  against  Nicobulus,  his  aged  master,  and  makes  him,  through  fear  of 
the  Captain's  threats,  pay  the  required  sum.  Having  gained  not  only  this  but  a 
still  further  sum  of  money,  the  young  men  rsgak  themselves  afe  the  house  of 
Bacchis.  Nicobulus  afterwards  discovers  from  the  Captam  the  trick  that  has 
been  played  upon  him,  and  he  and  Mnesilochus  repair  to  the  house  of  Bacchis  to 
demand  their  sons.  The  damsels,  hereupon,  apply  themselves  to  coaxing  the 
old  men,  who  are  at  last  persuaded  to  forgive  their  sons  and  Chiysalns, 
and  to  go  into  the  house  and  join  the  entertainment 


y  Google 


BACCHIDES; 
OR,  THE  TWIN- SISTERS. 


THE  ACBOSTIC  ABGUMENT. 

[SnppoBed  to  have  been  written  by  Priacian  the  Grammarian.] 
MimiLOGHUS  is  inflamed  with  love  for  Bacchis  (Baechidii),  But,  first  of  all, 
he  goes  to  Ephesns,  to  bring  back  some  gold  {Aunan),  Bacchis  sails  for 
Crete  (Cretatn),  and  meets  with  (^Convenit)  the  other  Bacchis ;  thence  she  re- 
tons  to  Athens;  upon  this  (ITmic),  MnesOochns  sends  a  letter  to  Pistoclems, 
that  he  maj  sedc  for  her  (/ZZom).  He  returns ;  he  makes  a  qnarrel  while 
(JDkon)  he  supposes  that  his  own  mistress  is  beloved  by  Pigtodenu;  when  they 
htvB  discovered  the  mistake  as  to  the  twin-sisters,  Jf«ien2pcAtM  pays  the  gold 
to  that  QEt)  Captain;  equally  are  the  tufo  in  love. v  The  old  men  (/Senes),  while 
they  are  looking  after  their  sons,  join  the  women,  and  carouse. 


THE  PEOLOGTOEi. 
Spoken  hy  Silenus,  moimted  on  his  Ass. 
'Tia  a  wonder  if  the  spectators  on  the  benches  this 
day  don't  hiss,  and  cough,  and  make  a  snorting  noise  at 
ms  ridiculous  sight,  furrow  their  brows,  and,  with  cries 
with  one  consent^,  shout  all  aloud,  and  mutter  impreca- 
tionB.  Hardly  in  their  youth  can  beardless  actors,  or  mimics 
with  their  beards  plucked  out,  find  room  upon  the  st(we. 
Why  comes  forth  this  aged  cmd  lethargic  go-between,  who 
ia  borne  upon  the  ass's  back  ?  Listen,  I  pray,  and  give  me 
yoitt  attention,  while  I  tell  you  the  name  of  this  quiet 
Comedy*.    'Tis  proper  for  you  to  make  silence  for  a  Divinity. 

*  Prologue)  There  is  little  doubt  that  this  Prologue  is  spurious,  but  as  it  is  pre- 
fixed to  many  of  the  editions,  and  to  Thornton's  and  the  French  transhtions,  it  is 
here  inserted.  Lascaris,  the  Greek  grammarian,  says,  in  a  letter  to  Bembo,  that  it 
WM  discovered  by  him  in  Sicily.  Some  writers  have  supposed  it  to  have  been 
written  by  the  Poet  Petrarch. 

*  Wiih  cries  with  one  consent)— Ver,  3.  "  Concrepario"  is  a  barbarous  word, 
formed  from  "  crepo,"  to  make  a  noise. 

*  Quiet  Com«?y)— -Ver.  10.  "  Statarise."  There  were  two  kinds  of  Comedy  repre- 

l2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


148  BACCHIDES ; 

It  befits  not  those  to  use  the  resources  of  the  voice,  who  come 
here  not  to  exclaim,  but  to  be  spectators.  Grive  me  attentive 
ears ;  hut  not  into  my  hands  I  mean;  I  wish  my  voice*,  as  it 
flies,  to  strike  these  vacant  ears.  What  do  you  fear  ?  Are 
those  blows  more  hurtful  which  open  what  is  shut',  or  which 
close  what  is  open  ?  You're  very  kind ;  the  inhabitants  of 
heaven  do  love  you  deservedly.  There  is  profound  silence 
— even  the  children  are  still — and  now,  attend  to  a  new-come 
messenger,  on  a  new  errand.  Who  I  am — why  I  am  come 
to  you — I'll  tell  you  in  a  few  words ;  at  the  same  time,  I'll 
disclose  to  you  the  name  of  this  Comedy.  Now,  behold,  I 
shall  tell  you  what  you  wish  to  know ;  do  you  then  give  me 
your  attention.  I  am  a  G-od  of  Nature*,  the  foster-father  of 
most  mighty  Bromius*,  Mm  who,  with  a  female  army^,  gained 
a  kingdom.  Whatever  about  him  renowned  nations  relate, 
some  part,  at  least,  has  been  accomplished  by  mjr  advice. 
That  which  pleases  me  is  never  displeasing  to  him.  'Tis 
right  if  one  rather*  another  father  does  obey.  Ass-borne  do 
the  Ionian  multitudes?  style  me,  because  I  am  borne  on  an 

sented  on  the  ancient  stage,  one  of  which  was  called  **  stataria,"  while  the  other 
was  **  motoria."  In  the  first,  the  actors  stood  still,  or  moved  about  qnietly,  and 
with  little  gesture ;  while  in  the  other,  dancing,  gesture,  and  grimace  were  exten- 
sively employed. 

^  /  toish  my  voice)— Yer,  15.  There  is  a  poor  attempt  at  alliteration  here,  in  the 
words  "  volo  volans  vox  vacuas." 

2  What  is  shuty^Yer.  17.  This  passage  is  obscure,  but  the  meaning  seems  to 
be,  **  Is  it  anything  more  disagreable  to  open  your  ears  and  listen,  than  to  keep 
them  shut  and  be  stunned  by  my  noise?  for  talk  I  will'* 

*  A  God  of  Nature) — ^Ver.  25.  The  ancients  considered  Pan,  Silenus,  Sylvanus, 
the  Fauns,  the  Dryades,  the  Hyades,  and  the  Oreades,  as  Gods  of  Nature,  pre- 
siding over  it  in  its  various  aspects. 

*  Bromius) — ^Ver.  25.  Bromius  was  one  of  the  names  of  Bacchus,  probably  de- 
rived from  fipcfica,  "  t«  make  a  noise ;"  the  Bacchanalian  orgies  being  attended  with 
riot  and  drunkenness. 

^  With  a  female  army) — ^Ver.  26.  He  alludes  to  the  Indian  expedition  of  Bac- 
chus, who  was  fiibled  to  have  marched  thither  at  the  head  of  an  amy  of  Bacchantes, 
or  "  Bacchse,*'  females  who  were  his  votaries. 

«  Jfonefather)-^Yer,  30.  The  ancients  gave  the  Gods  the  title  of  "pater," 
"  father,"  by  way  of  honorable  distinction.  Bacchus  would  especially  be  so  ho- 
nored, as  wine  was  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  chief  supports  of  life. 

^  Ionian  miultifytde8)—YeT.  31.  The  Lydians  were  adjacent  to  the  people  of 
Ionia.  Etruria,  which  supplied  the  earliest  actors  to  Rome,  was  supposed  to  have 
been  colonised  by  the  Lydians. 


y  Google 


OBy  THE  TWiN-SISTEBS.  149 

ass^  for  my  conveyance.  Who  I  am,  you  understand :  if  you 
understand,  allow  me  now  to  tell  the  name  of  this  quiet  play; 
at  the  same  time,  you  may  learn  why  I  have  come  to  vou. 
Philemon^  formerly  produced  a  play  in  Greek;  this,  tkose 
who  speak  the  Greek  language  call  "  Evantides^ ;"  Plautus, 
who  speaks  the  Latin,  calls  it  "  Bacchides."  'Tis  not  to  be 
wondered,  then,  if  hither  I  have  come.  Bacchus  sends  to  you 
the  Bacchides-^—the  Bacchanalian  Bacchanals.  I  am  bringing 
them  unto  you.  What !  Have  I  told  a  lie  ?  It  don't  become 
a  Gk)d  to  tell  a  lie ;  but  the  truth  I  tell — ^I  bring  not  them ; 
but  the  salacious  ass,  wearied  with  its  journey,  is  bringing 
to  you  three,  if  I  remember  right.  One  you  behold;  see 
aowy  what  on  my  lips  I  bring — ^to  wit,  two  Samian  sisters*, 
Bacchanalians,  merry  Courtesans,  bom  of  the  same  parents, 
at  one  time,  at  a  twin-birth ;  not  less  alike  than  milk  to  milk, 
if  you  compare  it,  or  water  to  water ;  were  you  to  see  them 
you  would  think  them  halved^ ;  so  much  would  you  confuse 
your  sight,  that  you  would  not  be  able  to  distinguish  which 
was  which.  What  remains  you  long  to  hear.  Now  give  at- 
tention :  the  story  of  this  Play  I  will  disclose.  What  country 
Samos  is,  is  known  to  all;  for  seas,  lands,  mountains,  and 
islands,  have  your  legions*  made  easy  of  access.  There,  Sostrata 
bore  to  her  husband,  Pyrgoteles  Pyrocles^,  twin-daughters  at 
one  birth ;  and  it  pleased  them,  being  initiated  at  the  tri- 

*  Borne  on  an  flw»)— Ver.  31.  "  Asibidam."  This  is  a  spurious  word,  probably 
invented  hj  the  author. 

*  PitZ^non)— Ver.  36.  Philemon 'vras  a  Greek  Comic  poet,  of  considerable  merits 
tboQgh  inferior  to  Menander,  of  whom  he  was  a  contemporary.  This  play  is  more 
generally  supposed  to  have  been  borrowed  from  a  Comedy  of  Menander,  which  was 
called  Ah  EfoTTorcay,  "  the  Twice  Deceived." 

» Evaniidesy^yer.  37.  "  Evantides"  corresponds  with  the  Latin  word  "  Bac- 
Ghsntes,"  **  followers,"  or  "  namesakes"  of  Bacchus,"  as  "  Evan"  was  one  of  the 
names  by  which  that  God  was  addressed  during  the  celebration  of  the  orgies. 

*  Samian  wrtsr*)— Ver.  46.  Samos  was  an  island  off  the  coast  of  Ionia,  near 
Ephestts.    It  was  the  birthplace  of  the  philosopher  Pythagoras. 

»  Think  them  hahfed)^Y&r.  60.  "  Dimidiatas"— "  one  split  into  two." 

*  Have  yaw  legion8)—VeT.  57.  He  is  supposed  to  be  flattering  the  Romans  in 
fheir  love  for  foreign  conquest 

'  Pyrgotdes  PyrocleaJh^Yer,  68.  It  was  quite  unusual  for  the  Greeks  to  have 
two  names.  They  have  here  been  introduced  either  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,  or, 
as  the  Delphin  ^itor  suggests,  as  meaning  "  her  husband  Pyrocles,  who  was  a 
Kgolar  Pyrgoteles,"  that  is,  a  most  skilful  engraver;  a  celebrated  artist  of  that 
name  having  flourished  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great. 


y  Google 


150  BJkCOUS^M&i 

emiial  festival^  of  Bacchus,  to  call  after  his  name  the  damsels 
of  which  they  were  the  parestts.  The  parents,  as  often,  hap- 
pens, gave  a  turn  to^  their  future  fortunes.  A  Captain  car- 
ried one  of  them  with  him  to  Crete.  The  :other  of  'tiaa  twins 
sailed  for  Athens^.  As  soon  as  MnesHochus,  the  son  of  Ni- 
cobulus,  beheld  her,  he  began  to  love  her,  and  frequently 
paid  her  visits.  Meantime,  his  father  sent  the  youth  to 
Ephesus,  to  bring  back  thence  some  gold,  which  he  himself, 
some  time  before,  had  deposited  with  Archidemides,  an  an- 
cient friend  of  his,  an  aged  FhoBuician.  When,  for  two  years 
he  had  stayed  at  Ephesus,  he  received  the  sad  news  that 
Bacchis  was  gone  from  Athens^  for  some  sailors  of  his  ac- 
quaintance sent  him  word  that  she  had  set  «ail.  0»  tMs,  he 
writes  a  letter  to  Pistoclerus,  his  only  friend,  the  son  of  Phi- 
laxenus,  entreating  him  to  seek  the  fugitive  with  care  and  ear- 
nestness. While  Pistoclerus  ia  devoting  his  services  to  his 
friend,  the  twin-sisters,  who  have  just  returned  to  Atheiia;^ 
arouse  a  passion  in  the  seeker.  The  one  wins  Pistoclerus  for 
herself;  the  other  longs  for  the  comiag  of  Mnesilochus.  What 
wonder  if  two  bewitching,  merry,  pretty  Bacchantes^  should 
attract  to  themselves  two  unfledged  Bacchanalians,  and  if 
they  should  ensnare  their  decrepit,  most  aged  fathers,  fit 
subjects  for  the  undertaker*,  bowed  down  by  the  weight  of 

^  TrienmalfeslxoaX) — ^Yer.  60.  Anumg  the  festivals  of  Bacchus,  there  was  one 
wfaicfa  occurred  every  three  years,  and  was  called  t^  ^*  Trieterica."  On  that  occa> 
sion  the  Bacchantes  carried  the  figure  of  the  God  on  a  chariot,  drawn  bj  two  t%ers 
orpBBthers,  and  crowned  with  vine  leaves  ^  holding  thyrsi  in  thdr  hands,  they 
ran  in  a  frantic  manner  around  the  chariot,  filling  tl)e  air  with  the  sound  of  tam- 
hoorines  and  brazen  instruments,  shouting  **  Evoe  Bacche/*  and  callii^  the  God 
by  his  several  names  of  Bromius,  Lyaeus,  £vBn,  Lensaas,  aoid  Sabacins.  To  tins 
oepemonial,  which  was  derived  from  the  Egyptians,  Uie  Greeks  added  other 
rites,  replete  with  licentiousness  and  repulsive  to  decency.  The  author  says 
that  the  parents  of  the  Bacchides  were  initiated  at  this  festival,  and  that  in  oom- 
pliment  to  the  God  they  named  each  of  the  newly-bom  twins  "  Baochis.** 

2  Gave  a  turn  to)->-Ver.  62.  ^^  Fata  occupant.'*  ^  Consider  the  fact  of  their 
being  bom  at  that  period  as  ominous  of  thdr  future  destiny,  and  detote  tiism  to 
the  service  of  the  Deity." 

3  Sailed  for  Aiken8)^Yer,  64.  Literally,  "  CecropiaB."  Cecrops  wias  the  founder 
of  Athens, 

-*  Subfects  for  e4e  mdertahery—Ver.  84.  "  Libttinanos."    This  word  pn^eriy  ' 
corresponds  to  our  word  "  undertakers."    They  were  bo  called  because  their  iueBS 
and  other  requisites  were  kept  in  the  temple  of  the  Goddess  "  Libttioa."  The  woni 
here  has  the  forced  meaning  of  "  peivoDs  with  one  foot  m  the  grave:** 


y  Google 


OB,  THX  TWOF-SI8TEBS.  151 

their  years  ?  But,  see,  here's  Fistodems,  who  is  returning 
to  the  Bacchides  so  lately  found,  and  in  his  simplicity^  is 
blowing  in  himself  the  sparhs  of  passion  so  lately  kindled. 
Now  rjD.  off — do  you  attend.  (Sxit 


ACT    THE   PIEST. 

SCEITE  I«. 

JEnter  Pistocxebus. 

PiBTOO.  *#*»'»* 

tliose  who  are^  of  a  thrifty  turn  of  mind,  modest,  and  with- 
out servility.         ****** 

•  *  ****** 

Chains,  rods,  cmd  mills;  their  shocking  brutality  becomes 
woise.      ******* 

•  ******* 

She  who  keeps  my  friend  and  me  engaged. 

•  •  *  *  *  *  (^lEaii. 

1  In  his  nmpUcUy) — ^Ver.  87.  "  Insolens."  Mnesilochiis  is  already  in  love  with 
the  Second  Bacchis  before  the  plaj  commences;  bnt  Pistoclerns  is  entrapped 
dnring  the  first  Act. 

>  Scene  /.)  The  portion  from  the  commencement  of  this  scene  down  to  the  begin- 
ning  of  the  tfairtj-fifth  line,  is  tnmslated  tram  the  fragments  of  liie  beginning  of  the 
play  which  have  been  lately  discovered  by  the  research  of  Bitschel.  It  was  gene- 
nily  supposed  by  Commentators  that  the  beginning  of  the  play  had  been  lost,  and 
titat  the  author  of  the  Prologae,  or  some  other  writer,  had  supplied  the  hiatus  by 
adding  a  first  scene  of  his  own  composition ;  in  which  he  represents,  somewhat  in- 
ooDsistently,  PistocleroB  as  having  been  in  love  with  the  First  Bacchis  before  the 
play  began,  whereas  it  is  obviously  the  intention  of  Plautus  to  represent  him  as 
drawn  into  the  amour  by  her  attnrements  during  the  First  Act  It  is  worthy  of 
lomaik,  that  ^  learned  and  ingenious  Best  was  of  opinion  that  the  beginning  of 
this  play  had  not  been  lost,  and  that  it  properly  commenced  at  line  35,  "  Quod  si 
lux;  potis  est"  This  opinion,  however,  is  thoroughly  controverted  by  the  result  of 
die  rosaarohes  of  lUtscbeL  Although,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  these  fragments  are 
hoe  groi|Bd  into  ane  Soene,  to  supply  the  pkoe  of  the  spurious  Scene  which  f or- 
marij  occupied  their  place,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  really  the  remnants  of  several 
BDOoas,  mtroductory  to  the  attempt  of  the  First  Bacchis  to  entrap  Pistoclerns.' 

*  2%09e  10&O  are) — Ver.  1.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  this  and  the  next  three  lines 
ase  ft^g^nents  of  a  Prologne,  spoken  by  Pistockrus,  in  which  he  is  complimenting 
tihe  iDfeuiuty  shown  by  the  slave  Ghrysalus  throughout  the  piece,  as  he  is  making 
itfu,imciQ  to  the  punishment  .of  skves  when  speakmg  of  "  chains,  rods,  and  the 
mill  i"  to  which  latter  pkce  refractory  skves  were  sent  for  hard  iabour. 


y  Google 


152  BACCHIDSS ;  Act  L 

I!nter  Piest  Bacchis. 

1st  Bagch.  I  have  heard^  that  Ulysses  underwent  toils 
innumerable,  who,  in  wanderings,  was  twenty  years  away 
from  his  native  land.  But  this  young  man  by  far  outdoes 
Ulysses ;  who  here  in  this  spot  is  wandering  within  the  walls 
of  the  city. 
«  *  ****** 

1st  Bacch.      *      She  was  of  the  same  name  with  myself. 

*  *  ****** 

1st  Baoch.  Sweep  out  the  house^  with  brooms,  work  briskly. 
******  Will  some  one 
call  that  most  dirty  fellow  with  the  water-pail^  and  the 
water. 

Cleomaghtjs,  Secobtd  Bacchis. 

Cleom.  *  *  *  *  But  if  a  life*  of 

wantonness  is  perchance  preferred  by  you,  consider  the  price 
that  I  agreed  to  give  you  that  at  that  age  you  might  not  be 
following  me  for  nought  *  *  *  j.]^ 

from  no  one  else  you  might  be  receiving  a  yearly  pay,  except 
from  oneself,  nor  be  toying  with  any  man  *  ♦ 

*  *  ****** 

*  *  *  *        like  slugs  upon  a  man. 

PiSTOCLEBUS,  Sbooio)  Bacghis,  Seevant. 

*  *  ****** 

1  /  have  heard) — ^Ver.  5.  This  is  probably  the  commencement  of  a  Scene.  The 
First  Bacchis  is  revolving  her  plans  against  Pistoclems,  who  is  wandering  through 
the  citj  in  search  of  the  mistress  of  his  friend  Mnesilochns. 

2  Sweep  out  the  house) — Ver.  10.  She  is  evidently  ordering  the  servants  to  pat 
the  house  in  readiness  against  the  arrival  of  her  sister  from  abroad. 

«  The  toater-pail) — Ver.  12.  "  Nassitema"  was  a  pail,  or  water-pot,  having 
three  sponts  or  months. 

*  But  if  a  life) — ^Ver.  13.  Here  is  another  Scene.  It  wonld  appear  probable  that 
the  Second  Bacchis,  having  heard,  on  her  arrival,  that  Mnesilochns,  by  his  friend,  is 
in  search  of  her,  signifies  to  the  Captain  her  intention  to  remain  at  Athens,  ioA. 
not  to  accompany  him  to  Elatia  in  Phocis,  on  which  he  reminds  her  of  the  snm  of 
money  he  has  ^ven  her,  and  the  original  terms  of  the  agreement  It  would 
appear  that  he  proceeds  to  threaten  with  his  wrath  any  more  fortunate  rival ;  and 
then  concludes  by  inveighing  agunst  harlots  in  general,  as  "limaces,"  "SDails," 
or  "  slugs,"  in  tie  same  way  as  a  Comic  writer  of  our  day  might  style  them 
**  leeches,"  or  **  bloodsuckers."  It  may  be  remarked,  that  with  the  ancients,  the 
snail  was  the  emblem  of  salacity. 


y  Google 


8c  n.  OB,  TH£  TVriK-SISTEBS.  168 

PiSTOC.  As  like  as  milk^  is  to  milk ;  whatever  is  her  name 

«*  ****** 

Sket.  The  soldier  who  sells  his  life  for  gold        *  * 

*  *  *  *  I  know  that  his  breath  is 
much  stronger  than  when  the  bellows  of  bull's  hide  are 
blowing,  when  the  rocks  melt  where  the  iron  is  made. 

PiSTOC.  Of  what  country  did  he  seem  to  you  ? 
Seet.  I  think  he  is  of  Praeneste^ ;  he  was  such  a  boaster. 
PiSTOC.  *  *  The  city  *  *  * 

and  I  don't  think  it  is  in  spurious  boastfulness. 

#*  *««##:|| 

Scene  II. 

Miter  PiEST  and  Seconj)  Bacchis. 

1st  Bacgh.  *  *  *  My  heart,  my 

hope*,  my  honey,  my  sweetness,  my  nutriment,  my  delight. 

*  *  #  I^et  me  bestow  on  you  my  love 

*  *  *        the  Arabian  *  *  * 

*  *  *  Has  Cupid  or  has  love  overpowered 
you?        ******* 

Perhaps  to  suspect  that  you  are  in  love.  *  * 

*****         Otet  money  from  that 
quarter  *  *  *  *  for  I  really  do 

believe  that  with  ease  you  can  enchant  the  heart  of  any  man^. 

1  As  KkecunUlk) — ^Ver.  19.  Here  again  is  another  Scene.  Pistoclems  has 
caogbt  sight  of  the  Second  Bacchis,  bnt  being  nnaware  that  she  really  is  the 
posoD  whom  he  is  in  search  of,  he  remarks  upon  her  strong  resemblance  to  the 
First  Bacchis,  with  whom,  by  this  time,  he  has  probably  had  an  interview  on  the 
subject.  His  servant  then  comes  and  informs  him  that  she  is  the  person  whom 
he  18  looking  for,  but  that  she  is  under  the  protection  of  a  mighty  Captain,  whose 
breast  heaves  like  a  pair  of  blacksmith*s  bellows. 

*  Is  of  PrcenetUy—N&c,  24.  He  has  a  hit  here  at  the  people  of  Prseneste,  whom 
he  has  in  a  former  play  censured  for  their  bad  grammar,  and  whom  he  here  repre- 
sents as  occupying  the  same  place  in  Boman  estimation,  as  the  Gascons  do,  whe- 
ther deservedly  or  not,  in  ours. 

*  My  heart,  my  hope) — ^Ver.  27.  The  First  Bacchis  seems  here  to  be  repeating 
her  first  lessons  in  the  attack  which  she  is  about  to  make  on  the  heart  of  the 
novice  Pistoclems;  she  is  evidently  conning  over  the  flattering  things  that  she 
intends  to  say  to  him. 

*  The  heart  of  any  man) — ^Ver.  84.  With  this  line  conclude  the  fragments 
which  have  been  brought  to  light  by  Bitschel ;  in  the  previous  editions  the  next  line 
oemmences  the  second  Scene,  the  spurious  Scene  preceding  it. 


y  Google 


ISt  BA.0CHIDB8;  Act  I. 

2ndBAC(M.  *  #  #  #  # 

1st  Bacoh.  And  suppose  it  is  much  better  that  jou  shouM 
hold  your  peace,  and  I  shovild  speak  ? 

2nd  Baooh.  With  pleasure ;  you  majproeeed. 

1st  Baoch.  When  mj  memory  shall  ftul  me,  tiien  do  yoa 
take  care  to  aid  me,  sister. 

2nd  Baooh.  I'  £aat^,  I'm  more  afimd  that  I  shaa't  have 
the  ehoice  of  prompting  yon. 

1st  Baooh.  Troth,  I'm  a&aid  the  little  nightingale  may 
lose  her  powers-^  of  song.    Follow  iAda  way,     (I%«y  move.) 

Enter  Pistoolebtts. 

PiSTOC.  What  are  these  two  Courtesans,  the  namesake- 
sisters,  about  ? 

1st  Bacoh.  Nothing  is  there  more  wretched  than  a  woman. 

PiSTOO.  What,  say  you,  is  there  more  worthy  of  it  P  What 
have  you  been  planning  in  your  consultation? 

1st  Baoch.  What's  proper  ?  Pistoc.  I'  faith,  that  doesn't 
belong  to  the  Courtesan. 

1st  Baooh.  l^is  sister  ofmme  entreats  me  so  to  find  some 
person  to  protect  her  against  this  Captain ;  that  when  she 
nas  served  her  time^  he  may  bring  her  back  h(mie.  Do  you, 
I  entreat  you,  be  her  protector. 

PiSTOO.  Why  should  I  protect  her?  1st  Bacch.  I^t 
she  may  be  brought  home  agam,  when  she  has  fulfilled  her 
engagement  to  him,  so  that  he  may  not  take  her  as  a  servant^ 
Skxc  himself.  But,  if  she  had  the  gold  to  pay  him  back  again, 
gladly  would  she  do  so. 

PiSTOO.  Where  now  is  this  person  ?     1st  Bagch.  I  expect 

^  May  lote  her  powersy-Yet.  38.  The  nightiogale  ms  sttpposed  to  amg  cob- 
liniiallj;  so  that  *^  lusciniae  deest  cantio,'*'  *Hhe  nightingale  has  lost  her  soig," 
faMame  a  proverb  which  expressed  the  happening  of  anything  extraordinaiy. 

2  Hat  terved  her  Ixme) — Ver.  48.  "  Emeritns**  was  theterm  applied  to  aokBen 
who  had  "serred  oat  their  tisie/'  or  *'  got  their  discharge."  PlavtiiB  pvobahfy 
nses  the  term  satirically,  as  applied  to  the  engagement  which  the  Seaand  BacehiB 
had  made  with  the  Captain. 

*  JLsa  aertxmt) — ^Ver.  45.  She  pretends  that  her  sister  is  afraid,  tisat  wben  her 
time  has  ejcpired,  the  Captam — ^faaving  carried  her  to  a  foreigii  coontiT-HDaaj  make 
a  slave  of  her,  and  that  she  is,  consequently,  desirous  to  be  kft  at  Athens,  aad  tc 
lepay  him  the  money  which  he  had  given  her  upon  the  mabjng  of  the  engagement. 
She  ieignB  that  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  protect  her  si^r  on  behalf  of  his  absent 
friend  Mnesilochus,  that  she  herself  may  cbtain  an  opportmiity  of  ensnaring  him. 


y  Google 


9c.  n.  OB,  THE  SWIK-«ISTEBS.  155 

Ant  he'll  be  here  just  now.     But  tbis  you'll  be  able  to  ar- 
range  better  among  ourselves ;  and  sitting  there,  you  «hall 
wait  until  he  comes.     So  you  will  drink  some  wine,  mnd  so, 
I'll  give  you  a  kiss  when  you  have  drunk  it. 
PiSTOC.  Tour  coaxing  is  m^fe  birdlime.    1st  Baoch.  How 

Pi83X)C.  Because,  in  fact,  1  understand  how  you  two  are 
aiming  at  ojiq poor  pigeon,  myself;  (aside)  very  tumoAj  is  the 
Umed  f  eed^  breaking  my  leathers.  Madam,  I  judge  that  such 
deeds  befit  me  not. 

Ist  Baogh.  Why  so,  I  pray  ? 

PiSTOC.  Baochis,  it  is,  because  I  dread  you  Bacdiantes,  and 
your  Bacchanalian  den^. 

ist  Baooh.  What  is  it  that  you  dread  ?  Surely,  not  that 
the  couch  in  my  house  may  lead  you  into  mischief? 

PiSTOC.  Tour  allurements^,  more  than  your  couch,  do  I 
dread.  You're  a  mischievous  serpent^.  But,  madam,  a 
krking-place  does  not  befit  this  yoiUkJkd  age. 

Ist  Bacch.  Should  you  wish  at  my  house  to  do  anything 
that's  unwise,  I  myself  should  hinder  it.  But,  when  the 
Captain  comes,  I  wish  you  to  be  at  my  house  for  this  reason ; 
because,  whenyou  are  present,  no  one  will  do  her  and  me 
vaj  injury.  You  will  prevent  that,  and  by  the  same  means 
you  will  be  aiding  your  friend ;  this  Captain,  too,  on  arriving, 
will  suspect  that  I  am  your  mistress.  Why  are  you  silent, 
prav? 

risTOC.  Because  these  things  are  pleasant  in  the  talking 
of;  but  in  the  practice,  and  when  you  make  trial,  the  same 
are  armed  with  stings.  They  pierce  the  feelings,  goad  one's 
fortune,  a^d  woimd  one's  merits  and  character. 

dud  Baooh.  What  do  you  dread  from  her  ? 

PlsTOC.  What  do  I  dread,  do  you  ask  ?   Am  I  a  person  in 

*  The  Umed  reed) — Ver.  51.  A  reed  dipped  in  birdlime  was  employed  for  the 
purpose  of  catching  birds.  Pistocleros  says  to  himself  that  be  feels  how  nearly 
lieiseotnipped. 

'  Tour  BacchanaUan  den) — ^Ver.  53.  "Bacchanal"  was  properly  the  place 
where  the  Bacchanalia,  or  orgies,  were  celebrated.  He  styles  them  **  Bacchantes," 
tad.  their  house  a  "  Bacchanal,"  in  allusion  both  to  their  names  and  their  habits. 

*  Tour  aUurements) — ^Ver.  55.  There  is  a  play  here  upon  the  resembknce  of 
the  words  "  illectos,"  "  allurement,"  and  "lectus,"  a  "  bed." 

*  Mw^hiBOOfM  Krpenty-^ec,  55.  "  Mala  tu^s  bestia."  Literally,  "  yon  are  an 
erilbeiBt;"  which  soonds  harsh  to  an  En^ish  ear,  even  when  applied  to  such  an 
aohnal  as  Bacchis. 


y  Google 


156  BACCHIDES ;  Act  I, 

my  youth  to  enter  a  place  of  exercise^  of  such  a  nature,  where 
people  sweat  to  their  undoing  ? — ^where  for  the  quoit  I  re- 
reive  a  loss,  disgrace,  too,  for  my  running  ? 

2ndBACCH.  How  charmingly  you  do  talk.  Pistoc.  "Where 
I'm  to  take  a  turtle-dove^  instead  of  a  sword,  and  where 
anofcher  puts  into  my  hand  the  goblet^  instead  of  the  cestiis ; 
the  drinking-cup*  is  in  place  of  the  helmet,  the  wreathed  gar- 
land instead  of  the  crest  s,  the  dice  in  place  of  the  lance.  For 
the  coat  of  mail  I  should  have  to  assume  a  soft  cloak  ^ ;  where, 
too,  in  place  of  a  horse  a  couch  must  be  given  me, — ^for  shield, 
a  strumpet^  may  be  lying  by  me.  Avaunt  from  me — avaunt ! 

2nd  Bacch.  0,  you're  too  fierce.  Pistoc.  I  am  attend- 
ing to  my  own  interests. 

2nd  Bacoh.  Tou  must  be  softened  down ;  and,  in  feet,  I 
offer  you  my  aid  ia  this. 

Pistoc.  But  you  are  too  expensive  an  assistant. 

1st  Bacch.  Do  pretend  that  you  are  in  love  with  me. 

Pistoc.  Whether  should  I  be  pretending  that  in  jest,  or 
seriously  ? 

1st  Bacch.  "Well  said !  better  to  do  the  last.  "When  the 
Captain  comes  here,  I  want  you^  to  embrace  me. 

»  A  place  of  exercise) — ^Ver.  66.  He  draws  a  parallel  between  the  life  of  a  per- 
son who  for  health  and  rational  recreation  frequents  the  **  palsstra,^  or  school 
for  exercise,  and  of  those  who  frequent  the  haunts  of  Courtesans.  He  alludes  in 
the  following  lines  to  the  exercises  of  throwing  the  quoit,  running,  boxings 
fencing,  hurling  the  lance,  and  riding. 

2  A  ^rtle-dove)--yer.  68.  The  turtle-dove,  as  bemg  sacred  to  Venus,  would 
be  an  appropriate  inmate  of  a  Courtesan's  house. 

'  The  gobkty^Yer,  69.  "  Cantharus  "  was  a  kind  of  drinking-cnp,  with  two 
handles.  It  was  considered  as  peculiarly  sacred  to  Bacchus,  the  tutelary  Divinity 
of  Bacchis,  whom  Pistoclerus  is  addressing. 

*  The  drmking-ctq)) — ^Ver.  70.  **  Scaphiura  "  here  probably  means  a  "  drinking- 
vessel  with  a  swelling  belly.'*  Some  Commentators,  however,  think  that  it  has  here 
the  same  meaning  as  "  matula." 

*  Instead  of  the  crc««)— Ver.  70.  The  "  insigne "  was  the  crest,  or  waving 
plume  of  the  helmet. 

*  A  soft  cloak}— Yer.  71.  It  was  the  custom  at  entertamments  for  the  re- 
vellers to  exchange  their  ordinary  clothes  for  fine  vestments,  elaborately  embroi- 
dered. 

'  For  shield,  a  strumpet)— 'Yev,  72.  "  Scortum  pro  scuto."  There  is  a  play 
here  upon  the  resemblance  of  the  words. 

"  /  want  you)— Yer.  76.  He  is  only  to  pretend  to  be  her  admker  when  the  Cap- 
tain comes,  by  way  of  accounting  for  his  presence  and  interference  on  behalf  of 
her  sister.  This  is  afterwards  rendered  unnecessary  by  his  own  pliancy,  and  the 
arrival  of  Mnesilochus  himself. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THE  TWIir-SISTEBS.  157 

PiSTOC.  What  need  is  there  of  my  doing  that  ? 

1st  Bacch.  I  want  him  to  see  you.  I  know  what  I'm 
about? 

PiSTOc.  And  I,  i'  faith,  I  know  not  what  I'm  in  fear  of. 
But  what  say  you ? 

Ist  Bacch.  What's  the  matter  now? 

FiSTOC.  Well,  suppose  perchance  on  a  sudden  a  breakfast 
or  a  drinking  bout,  or  else  a  dinner,  should  take  place  at  your 
house,  just  as  is  the  wont  in  such  places  of  resort ;  wnere, 
then,  should  I  take  my  place  ? 

1st  Bacch.  Near  myself,  my  life,  that  with  a  she  wit  a  he 
wit  may  be  reclining  at  the  repast,  A  place  here,  at  our  house, 
should  you  come  late,  is  always  at  your  service.  When  you 
wish  right  merrily  to  disport  yourself,  my  rosebud,  you  say 
to  me,  "  Do  let  me  enjoy  myself  to-day, ^^  I'll  provide  you  a 
delightful  place  where  it  may  be  so, 

PiSToc.  Here  is  a  rapid  stream ;  not  without  hazard  can 
this  way  be  passed. 

Ist  Bacch.  (aside).  And,  by  my  troth,  something  must  you 
lose  amid  this  stream.  {Aloud,)  Give  me  your  hand  and 
follow  me. 

PisTOC.  O,  by  no  means.    1st  Bacch.  Why  so  ? 

PisToc.  Because  to  a  man  in  his  youth  nothing  can  be 
more  alluring  than  these — ^night,  women,  wine. 

Ist  Bacch.  Away,  then,  with  you ;  for  my  part,  I  don't  at 
all  care  for  it,  but  for  your  own  sake.  The  Captain,  then,  shall 
take  her  off;  don't  you  be  present  at  all  if  you  don't  choose. 

PiSTOC.  (to  himself).  And  am  I  a  thing  of  nothing,  who 
cannot  moderate  my  own  passions  ? 

Ist  Bacch.  What's  there  for  you  to  fear  ? 

PiSTOC.  Tikere's  nothing ;  all  nonsense.  Madam,  I  resign 
myself  to  you.     I'm  yours ;  to  you  do  I  devote  my  services. 

Ist  Bacch.  You  are  a  dear  man.  Now  I  wish  you  to  do 
this.  To-day  I  want  to  give  a  welcome  entertainment^  to  my 
sister.  For  that  piu^ose  I  shall  at  once  order  the  money^  to 
be  brought  you  from  in-doors.  Do  you  take  care  and  cater 
for  us  a  splendid  entertainment. 

^  A  wkome  entertainment') — ^Ver.  94.  "  Csena  viatica  **  was  an  entertainment 
offered  to  a  person  by  his  friends  immediately  on  his  arrival  from  a  voyage  or 
journey. 

'  Order  the  monei/) — ^Ver.  95.  This  she  says  artfully,  well  knowing  that  he  will 
at  once  offer  to  bear  the  expense  of  the  entertainment 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


158  BAOCHtDBS ;  Act  I. 

FiSTOC.  No,  ril  stand  treat ;  for  it  would  be  a»shame^  that 
on  my  account  jou  botli  should  take  trouble  for  me,  and  by 
reason  of  that  trouble  should  pay  the  expense  from  your  own 
means. 

1st  Bacch.  But  I  can't  allow  you  to  give  anything. 

PiSTOc.  Do  let  me.  1st  Ba.cgh.  WeU,  I'll  let  you,  if  you 
choose.     Prithee,  do  make  haste. 

PiSTOC.  I  shall  be  here  again,  before  I  cease  to  love  you. 

{Eijeit  PiSTOGiiBSVS. 

2nd  Bacch.  You  entertain  me  pleasantly  upon  my  return, 
my  sister. 

1st  Bacch.  How  so,  prithee  ? 

2nd  Bacch,  Because,  in  my  way  of  thinking,  this  day  a 
lucky  haul  has  fallen  to  your  lot, 

1st  Bacch,  He's  mine,  assuredly.  Now,  sister,  with 
respect  to  Mnesilochus,  I'll  give  you  my  aid^,  that  here  at 
home  you  may  be  receiving  gold,  rather  than  be  going  hence 
together  with  the  Captain. 

2nd  Bacch.  That's  my  desire,  1st  Bacch.  My  aid  shall 
be  given  you.  The  water's  warm ;  let's  go  in,  that  you  may 
bathe.  For,  as  you  have  travelled  on  board  ship,  you  are 
faint,  I  think. 

2nd  Bacoh.  A  little  so,  sister.  (Pistooleetts  is  seen  at 
a  distance.)  Besides,  he's  beginning  to  cause  I  don't  know 
what  bustle.     Let's  begone  hence. 

1st  Bacch.  Follow  me  this  way  in-doors  to  bathe,  that 
you  may  relieve  your  weariness. 

Scene  HI. 

Miter  PiSTOGLEBTJS,  accompanied  hy  ^People  -with  Provimns 
for  the  ErUertaimnentyfolhwed  hy  Ltdtts. 
Ltd.  For  some    time,   Pistoderus,  I've  been  following 
you  in  silence^,  watching    what    you  were  doing  in  this 

'  Gwe  you  my  aid) — ^Ver.  103.  They  will  try  to  get  Mnesiloclius  to  adranoe 
the  money  to  redeem  her  from  the  Captam. 

2  FoUotoing  you  in  silence) — Ver.  109.  We  must  not  he  sorpriaed  to  find 
"  Lydos  "  a  Lydian  slave,  as  his  name  imports,  acting  as  the  ^*  pffidagogos,"  or 
"  tator,"  of  Pistocleros.  Among  the  wealthy,  the  sons  of  the  iionily  were  com- 
mitted to  the  '*  pasdagogi  ^  at  their  sixth  or  seventh  year,  and  of  course  that 
officer  was  selected  from  the  most  trustworthy  and  most  learned  among  the  ahffW. 
The  yonths  remained  under  the  tutor  till  they  reached  the  years  of  puberty.  Ss 
duty  was  rather  to  watch  and  protect  them,  and  accompany  them  to  their  soiioolt 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Se.  m.  OB,  THE  TWnr-SIBTEBS.  159 

dresB^.  For,  so  may  the  Oods  faToar  me,  eyen  Lycurgns  Mm- 
9elf^  seems  to  me  as  if  he  could  be  led  into  debanchery  heie. 
Whither  now  are  you  betaking  yourself  hence  in  an  opposite 
direction  with  snch  a  train? 

PiSTOO.  To  this  place  (pointina  to  the  house),  Ltd.  Why 
to  this  place  ?    Who  lives  there  ? 

PiSToc.  LoTB,  Pleasure,  Venns,  Beauty,  Joy,  Jesting, 
DaOiance,  Converse,  and  Sweet-kissing. 

Lro.  What  intercourse  have  you  with  these  most  destruc- 
tive Deities  ? 

PiSTOC.  Bad  are  those  men  who  speak  evil  of  the  good. 
You  speak  not  well  of  even  the  Gods  themselves;  you  do 
what  is  not  right. 

Ltd.  Is  Sweet-kissing,  then,  some  God  P 

PiSTOO.  And  do  you  not  think  she  is  ?  0  Lydus,  why, 
what  a  barbarian^  you  are,  you,  whom  I  had  deemed  to  be  far 
more  wise  than  Thales  himself  \  Go  to>  you  ore  more  fooiish 
than  Potitius,  the  foreigner^,  who,  at  an  age  so  advanced, 
knew  not  the  names  of  the  Divinities. 

Ltd*  This  dress  of  yaws  pleases  me  not. 

aai  the  **  gymnasinm  "  or  "  palsestra,"  the  place  of  exercise,  than  to  mstruct  them 
hiiwtf;  mdeed,  the  "  prsBceptores,"  or  "  teachers/*  are  expressly  distiDgoished 
bj  QtiTfidatian  from  the  "  paadagogi,**  or  "  condnctors  '*  of  the  yoaths.  Eonachs 
were  sometimes  appointed  to  this  office.  Among  the  Romans,  a  tntor  attended  on 
both  boys  and  girls  verj  frequently,  as  they  were  not  confined  at  home  according 
to  the  Grecian  custom.  Daring  the  Empire,  mnch  care  was  taken  in  the  training 
of  the  "  pasdagogL^' 

1  In  this  dressy^Yer.  110.  He  has  put  on  the  '^malacnm  pallinm,"  "•  the  soft 
garment,*  mentioned  in  1. 71,  as  being  abont  to  join  the  entertainment  which  he  is 
praviding. 

*  lAfcwrgua  hunsdf) — ^Ver.  111.  He  says  that  snch  company  is  enoagh  to  cor- 
rapt  Lycnrgns  himself,  a  man  of  the  most  moral  and  strict  habits.  He  was  the 
lawgiver  of  Sparta. 

*  What  a  harhariaiiy-'yer.  121.  He  allndes  to  Lydia,  the  country  of  Lydus, 
wUch  was  **  barbara." 

*  Than  TKaks  himtdfy^Vve,  122.  Thales  of  Miletus  was  one  of  the  seven 
win  men  of  Greece.    He  was  the  founder  of  the  Ionic  sect  of  philosophers. 

*  Po^Hiu^  theJbrmffHery-Yer,  128.  '*  Barbaro"  signifies  ''  Roman,"  the  scene 
bcmg  in  Attiea.  We  leism  from  St.  Augustine  that  the  Potitii  received  the 
epilket  of  *'  stohi,"  '*  unwise,**  from  the  following  chnumstance.  They  were  tilie 
hereditary  priests  of  Hercules,  at  Rome.  T^hing  to  lighten  then*  duties,  they 
nnlmcted  some  slaves  in  their  office,  for  which,  by  the  wrath  of  the  Divmity, 
twelve  fiunilies  of  them  were  destroyed  m  one  night. 


y  Google 


160  BACCHIDBa ;  Act  L 

PiSTOO.  But  no  one  prepared  it  for  you ;  it  was  prepared 
for  myself,  whom  it  pleases  well. 

Ltd.  And  do  you  commence  upon  your  repartees  against 
myself  even  ?  You,  who,  if  you  had  even  ten  tongues,  ought 
to  be  silent. 

PiSTOO.  Not  every  age,  Lydus,  is  suited  for  school^.  One 
thing  especially  is  just  now  on  my  mind,  how  the  cook  may 
with  due  care  attend  to  these  things  as  befits  the  elegance  of 
the  entertainment. 

Ltd.  Now  have  you  undone  yourself  and  me  and  all  my 
labours,  me  who  so  ofb  have  shown  you  what  is  right,  all  to 
no  purpose. 

PiSTOO.  In  the  same  place  have  I  lost  my  labour  where 
you've  lost  yours :  your  instructions  profit  neither  me  nor 
yourself. 

Ltd.  0  obdurate  heart !  Pistoc.  Tou  are  troublesome 
to  me.     Hold  your  tongue,  Lydus,  and  follow  me. 

Ltd.  -ZVbw,  see  that,  please ;  he  no  longer  calls*  me  "  tutor," 
but  mere  "  Lydus." 

PiSTOO.  It  seems  not  proper,  nor  can  it  be  fit,  that,  when  a 
person  is  in  a  house,  and  is  reclining  at  the  feast  together 
with  his  mistress,  and  is  kissing  her,  and  the  other  guests  are 
reclining  too,  the  tutor  should  be  there  too  in  their  presence. 

Ltd.  Are  these  provisions  purchased  for  such  a  purpose, 

PiSTOC.  My  intentions,  indeed,  expect  so ;  how  it  falls  out, 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  Gods. 

Ltd.  Will  you  be  having  a  mistress  ? 

PiSTOO.  When  you  see,  then  you'll  know. 

Ltd.  Aye,  but  you  shall  not  have  one,  and  I  won't  allow 
it.     Go  back  again  home. 

PiSTOC.  Do  leave  me  alone,  Lydus,  and  beware  of  mischief. 

Ltd.  What  ?  Beware  of  mischief  ?  0  yawnim  gulf,  where 
art  thou  now?  How  gladly  would  I  avail  myself  of 
thee !     Already  have  I  lived  far  longer  than  I  could  have 

I  Suited  for  icAoo?)— Ver.  129.  There  is  here  a  "  Paronomasia,'*  or  jingle  upon 
the  resemblance  of  the  words  "  Lyde,"  "  Lydus,"  and  "  ludo,"  "  a  school** 

^  Heno  longer  caZ&)— Ver.  138.  He  is  shocked  at  the  want  of  respect  shown  to 
him  by  his  papil. 

'  Beware  ofmischieP-^Yer,  147.  This  is  a  threat  of  vengeance,  if  Lydos  pre- 
sumes to  interfere  any  farther. 


y  Google 


Sc.  in.  OB,  THI  TWIir-SIBTEBB.  161 

wished.  'Twere  much  better  now  to  have  onee  existed  than  to 
be  living  still.  That  any  pupil  should  thus  threaten  his 
tutor! 

PiSTOC.  My  years  are  nov  advanced  beyond  your  tutor- 
ship. 

Ltd.  I  want  no  pupils  for  me  with  heated  blood  i.  An  up- 
grown  one  may  harass  me  thtis  devoid  of  strength. 

PiSTOC.  As  I  guess,  I  shall  become  a  Hercules,  and  you 
a  Linus^. 

Ltd.  I'  faith,  I  fear  more  that  through  your  goings-on  I 
sbail  become  a  Phoenix^,  and  have  to  tell  the  news  to  your 
father  that  jaii  are  dead. 

PiSTOC.  Enough  of  these  stories.  Ltd.  This  youth  is  lost 
to  shame* ;  the  man's  ruined.  And  does  it  then  recur  to  you 
that  you  have  a  father  ? 

PiSTOC.  Am  I  your  servant,  or  you  mine  ? 

Ltd.  By  my  troth,  you  made  an  exchange  not  desirable 
for  that  age  of  yours,  when  you  gained  these  impudent  w^s. 
Some  bad  master  has  been  teachmg  you  all  this,  not  I.  You 
are  a  scholar  far  more  apt  at  these  pursuits  than  at  those 
lesions  which  I  taught  you  when  I  was  losing  my  labour. 
Troth,  'twas  a  bad  piece  of  deceit  you  were  guilty  of  at  your 
age,  when  you  concealed  these  vicious  tendencies  from  myself 
and  from  your  father. 

PiSTOC.  Lydus,  you  have  thus  far  had  liberty  of  speech ; 
that  is  enough.  So  now  do  you  follow  this  way,  and  hold 
your  tongue^.     {Theif  go  into  the  house  ofBACCHis.) 

»  With  heated  hloody-Yer,  168.  "Plcmis  sangninis."  Literally,  "foil  of 
bkod." 

'  7oH  a  Limtt) — ^Ver.  155.  Linns  instructed  Hercules  in  music,  and  was  skin 
by  lus  scholar  with  his  musical  instrument. 

*  Become  a  Phosnix) — Ver.  166.  Phoenix  was  the  preceptor  who  attended 
Achilles  to  the  Siege  of  Troy,  and  bronght  the  account  of  his  death  to  his  father 
Pelens. 

*  Is  lost  to  shame}— Yer,  15S.  "  Hie  vereri  perdidit."  Literally,  "  He  has  lost 
bow  to  be  ashamed." 

*  Hold  your  tongue) — ^Ver.  169.  The  interval  between  this  Act  and  the  next  is 
fined  up  with  the  time  necessary  for  preparing  the  entertainment  which  Pisto- 
deros  is  giving  to  Bacchis  and  her  sister. 


M 


y  Google 


ACT    THE    SECOITD. 

SCEKE  I. 

Mifer  Chetsalfs. 

Chbys.  All  bail,  land  of  my  master !  which  I  joyfdlly  he- 
hold  after  the  two  years  that  I  have  been  absent  hence  at 
Ephesus.  I  salute  thee,  neighbour  ApoUo^,  who  dost  have 
thy  shrine  close  by  our  house,  and  to  thee  do  I  make  my 
prayer,  that  thou  wilt  not  let  me  meet  our  old  gentleman, 
Nicobulus,  before  I  have  seen  Fistoclerus,  the  friend  of 
Mnesilochus,  him  to  whom  Mnesilochus  has  sent  the  letter 
about  his  mistress,.  Bacchia. 

ScBioi  II. 
JSnter  Pistocleeits^ow  the  house  of  Baoohis. 

PisTOO.  (to  the  PiBST  Bacchis  wUihin^*  'Tia  strange  that 
you  are  so  earnestly  begging  me  to  return,  who  am  able  by  no 
possible  means  ta  depart  hence,  if  I  were  willing,  so  bound 
down^,  and  so  enchaxned  with  lore  do  you  hold  zoe. 

Chbys.  O,  ye  immortal  Gbds,  I  espy  Pistoderual  O, 
Pistoclerus,  hail  I 

PisTOC.  Hail,  Chrysalus,  to  you  !  Chbts.  I  will  at  present 
compress  many  speedies  for  you  in  a  small  space,  xou  are 
glad  that  I  am  come ;  I  giro  you  credit  for  it.  You  {ffomise  me 
lodging  and  an  entertainment  coming  from  my  jouniej,  as  it 
is  befitting,  and  I  agree  to  come.  I  bring  you  the  sincere 
greetings  of  your  friend.  Would  you  ask  me  where  he  is  ? 
He*s  come. 

PiSTOC.  Is  he  alive  and  well?  Chets.  That  I  was  wish- 
ful to  enquire  of  yourself. 

PisToc.  How  can  I  know  ?    Chets.  No  one  better. 

PiSTOO.  Why,  iQ  what  way  ?  Chets.  Because  if  she  has 
been  found  whom  he  so  loves,  he  is  alive  and  welL  If  she  is 
not  found,  he  is  not  well,  and  is  like  to  die.    His  mistress  is 

1  Neighbour  ApoUo}—Yer,  172.  He  is  sapposed  to  refer  to  Apollo  "Proflti- 
terns,"  whose  statae  was  placed  in  the  yestibnie  of  the  honses,  and  to  whom  the 
Athenians  paid  veneration  as  the  tntekr  God  of  their  habitations. 

2  So  botmd  down}— Yer,  180.  "  Vadatns"  was  a  term  properly  applied  to  a 
person  bonnd  nnder  a  penalty  as  surety  for  another. 


y  Google 


8c  n.  OB,  THX  TWEir-SISTEBS.  163 

tihe  f>ery  life  of  a  lover.  If  she  is  awaj,  he  is  non-existeiit ; 
if  she  is  with  him,  his  property  is  non-existent,  and  himself 
worthless  and  wretched.  But  what  have  you  done  in  respect 
of  his  commission  P 

PiSTOC.  And  ought  I  not  to  have  his  request  complied  with 
agSEDBt  his  arrival,  which  his  messenger  brought  to  me  from 
kbn  F  I'd  sooner  be  dwelling  in  the  realms  of  Acheron  thm 
not. 

Chbts.  How  now,  have  you  found  out  tMa  Bacdiis  ? 

PiSTOC.  Yes,  and  a  Samian  one  too.  Chbts.  Prithee,  do 
take  care  that  no  one  handles  her  carelessly :  you  know  how 
soon  a  Samian  vessel^  is  wont  to  break. 

PiSTOo.  What  now,  your  old  habit  ?  Chbts.  Prithee,  do 
tell  me  where  she  now  is. 

PiSTOc.  Here,  where  you  just  now  klw  me  coming  out. 

Chbys.  How  capital  that  is!  She's  Hving  almost  next 
door.     Does  she  at  all  remember  Mnesilochus  ? 

PiSTOc.  Do  you  ask  me  thai  ?  Aye,  him  alone  does  she 
esteem  at  the  very  highest  value, 

Chbts.  Indeed !  Pistoo.  Yes,  and  were  you  to  believe 
her,  distractedly  in  love — she  quite  longs  for  him. 

Chbts.  That's  good.  Pistoc.  Yes,  Chrysalus ;  see,  now ; 
not  even  so  small  a  space  of  time  ever  passes  by  as  this^, 
mit  that  she  is  uttering  his  name. 

Chbts.  I'  &ith,  so  much  the  better.  (Mavinff,  as  if  about 
io  ffo^ 

PisTOO.'Yes;  huft (Holds  him?}     Chbts,  Yes,faith3, 

I'd  rather  be  off. 

Pistoc.  And  do  you  so  unwillin^y  hear  how  your  mas- 
ter's interests  have  prospered  ? 

Chbts.  No,  not  the  subject*,  but  the  actor  offends  my 
fieelings  with  his  tediousness.     Even   "  Epidicus,"  a  play 

»  A  Samian  vessdy-Yer.  202.  He  pkys  upon  the  word  "  Sniman,"  as  the  isle 
of  Samoa  was  ce&brated  for  the  i^fity  of  its  earthenware,  which,  aa  he  here  says, 
was  Tery  brittle. 

*  Passes  hy  as  ihisy—Yer.  209.  This  is  domg  what  the  Greeks  call  Bciktik&s* 
Suiting  the  action  to  the  word,  he  points  at  the  time  of  speaking  to  something 
ycej  small,  perhaps  the  breadth  of  his  finger-nail. 

»  Yes,  Jhithy—Yer.  211.  It  has  been  strggested  that  Ohtysalus  is  put  out 
of  patience  here  by  the  frequent  repetition  by  Pistoclerus  of  the  word  "  immo," 
*«ayc,"  or  "yes;"^  on  which  he  rejcrins,  "immo,  &c.,"  "yes,  and  111  be  off." 

♦  JVo,  fiot  the  subject)— Yer,  213.  He  seems  to  mean  that  he  is  not  displeased 
with  the  subject,  but  at  the  tedious  way  in  which  Pistoeterna  relates  it  to  him. 

m2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


16^  BACCHiDSS ;  Act  n. 

that  I  love  quite  as  much  as  my  own  self,  were  PoUio  to  act 
it^,  no  play  would  I  see  so  reluctantly.  But,  does  BaccHis 
seem  handsome,  as  well,  to  you  ? 

PiSTOC.  Do  you  ask  the  question?  Had  I  not  got  a 
Venus,  I  should  pronounce  her  a  Juno. 

Ghsts.  I'  faith,  Mnesilochus,  as  I  find  these  matters  pro* 
ceeding,  there's  something  ready  for  you  to  love ;  'tis  needful 
that  you  find  something  to  give  her.  But,  perhaps  you 
have  need  of  gold  for  that  other  one  ? 

PiSTOO.  Yes,  some  Philippeahs.  Chets.  And  you  have 
need  of  it  directly,  perhaps  r 

PiSTOC.  Aye,  and  even  sooner  than  directly,  Por  there's 
a  Captain  coming  here  just  now 

Chets.  A  Captain,  indeed !  Pistoc.  Who  is  demanding 
some  gold  here  for  relinquishing  Bacchis. 

Chets.  Let  him  come  when  he  pleases,  and  so  there  be 
no  delay.  The  money*^  at  home ;  I  fear  not  for  myself,  nor  do 
I  go  begging  to  any  man ;  so  long,  at  least,  as  this  heart 
of  mine  shall  be  armed  with  its  inventiveness.  G-o  in ;  I'll 
manage  here.  Do  you  tell  them  in-doors,  that  Mnesilochus  is 
coming  to  Bacchis. 

PiSTOC.  I'll  do  as  you  request.  {Ooes  into  the  house  of 
Bacchis.) 

Chets.  The  money  business  belongs  to  me.  From 
Ephesus  we  have  brought  twelve  hundred  golden  Philippeans, 
which  our  entertainer  owed  to  our  old  gentleman.  Hence, 
some  contrivance^  will  I  this  day  contrive,  to  procure  gold 
for  this  son  of  my  master  thus  in  love.  But  there's  a 
noise  at  our  door — ^who's  coming  out  of  doors,  I  wonder  ? 
(Stands  aside,) 

>  PoUio  to  act  it) — ^Ver.  216.  It  is  clear  from  this  that  the  Epidicns  of  Plantos 
was  written  before  the  Bacchides.  With  a  rather  unasual  degree  of  license  he  seems 
to  rafer  to  an  event  that  has  recently  happened,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  the 
"  Epidicns,**  good  play  as  it  was,  had  suffered  from  the  demerits  of  some  contempt!- 
ble  actor  of  the  day,  known  as  Poliio.  Plantns  thus  excuses  his  play,  and  excites  a 
langh  by  the  qnaintness  of  the  remark.  There  is  a  passage  in  the  Nigrinos  of 
Lucian  that  throws  light  on  this:  "  Friend,  have  you  never  seen  a  bad  Tragic 
or  Comic  actor?  some  of  those  I  mean  who  are  hissed  because  they  spoil  a  good 
play  with  their  acting,  and  are  at  last  driven  off  the  stage ;  though  the  play  itself 
be  at  other  times  apjjauded,  and  bear  away  the  prize.** 

2  Some  contrivance) — ^Ver.  239.  "Machinabor  machinam**  is  an  Attidsm  bor- 
rowed by  PUutus,  probably  from  the  original  With  us  it  would  be,  literally,  "  I 
will  machinate  a  machine.** 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Be.  in.  OE,  THE  TWnr-SISTEES.  frr^  ^iT^V^     \dP86 

SCEKB  in.  ^C:"'-  f/C'?'^ 

Miter  NicoBVLVS  Jrom  his  house.  "^^ 

Nico.  (^o  himself).  To  the  Piraeus  will  I  go ;  Til  go  see 
whether  any  merchant-ship  has  come  into  harbour  from 
Ephesus.  For  my  mind  misgives  me ;  my  son  lingers  there 
80  long,  and  does  not  return. 

Chets.  {aside).  Now,  I'll  finely  imravel  him,  if  the  Oods 
are  propitious.  There  must  be  no  sleeping ;  gold  is  requi- 
site^  for  Chrysalus.  I'll  accost  him,  whom  for  sure  this  day 
ril  make  a  ram  of  Phryxus^  of;  so,  even  to  the  quick*,  will  1 
shear  him  of  his  gold.  (Accosting  him.)  His  servant  Chry- 
salus  salutes  Nicobulus. 

Nico.  O,  immortal  Gods !  where  is  my  son  ? 

Chets.  Why  don't  you  return  the  salutation  first,  which 
I  gave  you  ? 

Nico.  Well^  save  you.  But  where  on  earth  is  Mnesilochus  ? 

Chets.  He  is  alive  and  well.     Nice.  Is  he  not  come  ? 

Chets.  He  is  come.  Nico.  Hurra !  you've  brought  me 
to*  my  senses.    And  has  he  all  along  been  well  ? 

Chets.  Aye,  well  as  a  boxer^  and  an  athlete. 

Nico.  But  what  as  to  this — the  business  on  account  of 
'which  I  sent  him  hence  to  Ephesus  ?  Has  he  not  received 
the  gold  from  his  entertainer,  Archidemides  ? 

Chets.  Alas !  my  heart  and  wy  brain  are  cleft,  Nicobulus, 

'  CM  U  regwMt^c)— Ver.  240.  "  Opus  est  chryso  Chrysalo."  He  borrows  the 
Greek  word  "  XP^^^^"  "gold,"  and  plays  on  his  own  name,  which  has  that  word 
for  its  origin. 

*  Ham  ofPhryxuf)^yer.  241.  The  Ram  with  the  golden  fleece  carried  Phryxus 
in  safety  over  the  Hdlespont;  bnt  his  sister  Helle  fell  off  its  back  on  the  passage, 
from  which  that  arm  of  the  sea  derived  its  name.  Jason  recovered  the  golden 
^Boce  by  the  aid  of  Medea.  The  story  of  Helle  and  Phryxos  is  related  at  length 
in  the  Fasti  and  the  Metamorphoses  of  Ovid. 

'  Even  to  the  quicky-Yet,  242.  "  Ad  vivam  cutem"— literally,  "  to  the  living 
skin." 

*  You've  brought  me  to) — ^Ver.  247.  "  Aspersisti  aquan" — literally,  "  you  have 
>pnnkled  water  on  me,"  in  allnsion  to  the  reireshing  effects  of  water  in  cases  of 
fiuotness. 

^Wdltua  hoxery-Yet.  248.  "  Pancratice  atque  athletice"— literally,  "boxer- 
fik«»ndwr«stler-like." 


y  Google 


166  SACOHIDEB ;  Act  H. 

whenever  mention  is  made  of  that  fellow.  Why  don't  you 
call  that  entertainer  of  his  your  enemy  ? 

Nice.  Troth  now,  prithee,  why  so  ? 

Chbys.  Beeause,  i'  faith,  I  know  for  sure,  that  Vulcan,  the 
Moon,  tiie  Sun,  the  Day,  tkase  four  Divinities,  never  shone 
upon  another  more  wicked. 

Nico.  What,  than  Archidemides  ?    Dear  me  I 

Chets.  Than  Archidemides,  I  say.  Nice.  What  has  he 
done? 

Chets,  What  has  he  not  done?  Why  don't  you  ask  me 
that  P  In  the  first  place,  then,  he  began  to  make  denials 
to  your  son,  and  to  assert  that  he  didn't  owe  three  obols^  to 
you,  Porthwith,  Mnesilochus  summoned  to  himself  there 
our  ancient  host,  the  old  gentleman,  Pelago ;  in  his  presence, 
he  at  once  showed  the  fellow  the  token^,  which  you  yourself 
had  given  to  your  son  to  deliver  to  him, 

Nico.  Well — when  he  showed  him  the  token? 

Chets.  He  began  to  say  that  it  was  coimterf^,  and  that 
it  was  not  a  true  token ;  and  how  many  reproaches  he  did  utter 
against  him  so  undeserving  of  th^tn !  andlie  said  that  in  other 
matters  he  had  committed  forgery. 

Nice.  Have  you  not  the  gold  r  In  the  first  place,  I  want 
that  to  be  told  me, 

Chets,  Yes,  after  the  PrsBtor  had  appointed  delegates^; 
being  cast,  at  length  compelled  by  force  he  paid  down  twelve 
hundred  Philippeans. 

Nico.  He  owed  that  much.  Chets.  Besides,  listen  to 
another  struggle  of  Ms,  as  well,  whk^  he  was  desirtnu  to 
eirter  on, 

Nico.  What,  besides,  as  well  ?  Oho !  this  wiU  turn  out  now 


» Three  ©Jofo)— Ver.  26a  The  <*oboli»"  ^was  a  yerj  nnall  Greek  silver  \ 
Its  Talne  was  something  more  than  three-faalfpenoe  of  onr  money. 

'»  The  fo*e»)— Ver.  268.  "  Symholnm"  -was  some  object  which  a  peraon  dc^eredl 
to  another,  in  order  to  serve  as  a  murk,  sign,  or  token  to  a  t^d  person,  t^Mli  he 
was  to  do  something  which  had  beea  previously  agreed  nptm. 

'  Appointed  dekgatesy-Yer,  270.  "  Recuperatores"  were  certain  commissienen 
or  judges-delegate,  who  were  usually  named  by  the  Prsetor,  at  Borne  and  in  tae  pro- 
Tinces,  to  decide  matters  in  dispute,  such  as  disagreements  about  money  and  pro- 
perty; also  to  assess  the  damages  where  a  wrong  had  been  done;  to  enqnife 
whether  a  man  was ireebom  or  not;  or,  to  which  of  two  daimants«ivic  liCDonrs 
properly  belonged. 


y  Google 


Se.  m.  OB,  THE  TWISr-SISTEBS.  167 

a  regular  hawk's  iieBt^.  IVe  been  doceired :  IVe  entrusted 
vs^  gold  to  an  Autolycus^  for  my  iKwt ! 

Chbts.  Nay,  but  do  you  listen JiTsjOOL  Well,  I  wasn't 

aware  of  the  disposition  of  my  aTariciouB  entortaaner. 

CsBTS.  A&erwarcb,  at  last  we  had  got  the  gold,  emi  em^ 
barked  on  board  ship,  desirous  ixx  home.  By  dtuace,  as  I 
WM  sitting  on  the  de(^  while  I  was  looking  about  m<e,  at  that 
mom^it  I  beheld  a  long  back  being  fitted  out  by  this  cheating 
knave. 

Kicjo.  Troth,  I'm  undone;  that  bark  breaks  my  heart*. 

CssYS.  This  was  held  in  partnership  by  your  host  and 
some  pirates. 

Nico.  And  that  I  should  be  sueh  a  blockhead  as  to  trust 
him,  when  his  very  name  of  Arehidemides*  cried  aloud  to  me 
tiiat  be  would  deprive  me  of  it,  if  I  should  entrust  anything 
to  faim. 

Chets.  This  bark  was  lying  in  wait  for  our  ship.  I 
began  to  watdi  them,  io  see  what  business  they  were  about. 
Meanwhile,  fipom  harbour  our  ship  set  sail.  When  we  had 
ywBy  left  the  harbour,  these  feUows  began  to  follow  with 
their  oars ;  nor  birds,  nor  winds  more  swiftly.  As  I  dis- 
covered what  scheme  was  being  carried  out,  at  once  we 
dropped  anchor.  As  they  beheld  us  stopping,  they  began  to 
keep  their  vessel  back  in  harbour. 

Nice.  Wicked  wretches,  by  my  troth.  What  did  you  do 
at  last? 

Chbts.  We  returned  again  into  harbour.  Nico.  'Twas 
cleverly  4oiie  by  you.    What  arfter  tiiat  f 

'  Beffidar  hatolfft  «aO— Ver.  274.  "  Accipitrina."  This  'wrord  is  given  by 
Bitsciiel,  in  pSace  of  tlie  dd  reading  "  aodrpe  trina,*'  'wMcli  made  nonsense.  The 
word  does  not  seem  to  occur  elsewhere. 

"*  An  AuUMiyeia) — ^Ver.  276.  Antolycns  was  the  son  of  Merctiry  and  the  grand- 
ftther  of  Ulysses.  He  was  noted  for  his  thievish  propfflisities,  and  was  in  the  habit 
of  puntii^  the  caNlle  which  he  had  stolen  of  another  colour,  in  order  that  they 
m^ht  not  be  reoogmsed. 

•  Breaks  wy  hearey^ec  281.  "  Leedit  hitirs"— literally,  "  hurts  my  sides,"  or 
in  other  words,  "  gives  me  « twitch." 

*  Sfmite  cfArr^ideimdes) — ^Ver.1884.  He  pans  trpon  the  name  of  Archidemides, 
which  was  really  derived  from  the  Greek  "  Spxofiat"  "  to  govern,"  and  "  Siy/ior," 
"the  people."  To  adapt  his  pnn,  however,  to  the  taste  of  a  Eoman  audience,  he 
wodd  make  out  that  H  -was  m  part  a  compound  of  the  Latin  word  **  demo,"  "  to 
filch"  or  "take  away." 


y  Google 


168  BACCHIDB8  ;  Act  II. 

Ohbts.  At  nightfall  they  returned  ashore. 

Nico.  Troth  now,  they  intended  to  carry  off  the  gold; 
th^  were  attempting  that  plan,  no  doubt. 

Chbts.  It  didn't  escape  me ;  I  discovered  it :  I  was  almost 
terrified  to  death  by  it.  As  I  saw  that  a  scheme  was  being 
laid  against  the  gold,  forthwith  on  this  we  came  to  this  de- 
termination ;  the  next  day  we  carried  away  all  the  gold  thence 
in  their  presence,  openly  and  publicly,  that  they  might  know 
it  was  done. 

Nico.  Skilfully  managed,  i'  faith.  Tell  me,  what  did  they  ? 

Chets.  Chopfallen  at  once, — soon  as  ever  they  saw  us 
leaving  the  harbour  with  the  gold,  shaking  their  heads,  they 
hauled  their  bark  ashore.  We  deposited  all  the  gold  with 
Theotimus,  who  is  a  priest  there^  of  Ephesian  Diana. 

Nice.  Who  is  this  Theotimus  ?  Chbts.  The  son  of  Me- 
galobvzus^,  who  is  now  living  at  Ephesus,  a  man  most  dear  to 
the  Ephesians. 

Nice.  By  my  troth,  he'll  surely  turn  out  very  much  more 
dear  to  me^  if  he  shall  chouse  me  out  of  all  that  gold. 

Chbts.  But  it  is  stowed  away  in  the  very  temple  itself  of 
the  Groddess  Diana;  there  they  keep  guard  at  the  public 
expense*. 

J^ico.  You  kill  me  outright ;  much  more  safely  would  it 
have  been  kept  in  private  hands.  But  haven't  you  brought 
any  of  the  gold  home  here  ? 

Chbts.  0  yes ;  but  how  much  he  has  brought,  I  don't  know. 

Nico.  How's  that? — ^notknow?  Chbts.  Because  Mnesi- 
lochus  went  privately  by  night  to  Theotimus;  and  didn't 

1  A  priest  there) — ^Ver.  307.  St.  Paul,  when  he  visited  Ephesus,  found  Diana 
still  enthroned  there  m  the  full  blaze  of  her  glory.  Her  temple  was  esteemed  one 
of  the  wonders  of  the  world. 

«  Son  o/Megdlobyssusy—Yer.  808.  The  priests  of  Diana  at  Ephesus  are  supposed 
to  have  been  eunuchs,  and  the  priestesses  virgins.  Taubmann  thinks  that 
"  Megabjzus,**  which  ought  to  be  read  here,  was  a  general  name  of  the  priests  of 
Diana;  and  that  the  words  ^^Megabyzi  filins,"  "  a  son  of  Megabjzus,**  have  the 
same  import  as  the  word  "  Megabjzus"  itself.  It  may,  however,  mean  that  Theo- 
timus was  a  priest,  and  not  of  necessity  that  his  father  was  so. 

'  JUore  dear  to  me) — Ver.  809.  The  pun  here  perpetrated  answers  equally  weQ 
in  English. 

*  At  thepttbUc  expense)-— Ver.  813.  The  ancients  used  to  place  a  goard,  at  the 
public  expense,  at  the  gates  of  then:  temples,  as  great  quantities  of  property  of 
value  were  there  deposited  as  m  places  of  safety. 


y  Google 


Sc  m.  OB,  THE  TWIK-SISTEBS.  169 

wish  to  entrust  it  to  me,  nor  to  any  one  in  the  sMp.  For 
that  reason  I  don't  know  how  much  he  has  brought,  but  he 
hasn't  brought  very  much. 

Nice.  Do  you  think  it  was  even  a  half? 

Chbts.  By  my  troth,  I  know  not ;  but  I  don't  think  it. 

Nice.  Does  he  bring  a  third  part  ? 

Chets.  Troth,  I  think  not ;  but  I  do  not  know  the  truth. 
Indeed,  I  know  nothing  at  all  about  the  gold,  except  that  I 
do  know  nothing  about  it.  Now,  you  yourself  must  take  a 
Toyage  there  on  board  ship,  to  carry  home  this  gold  from 
Theotimus ;  and,  hearkye {Takes  him  hy  the  arm.) 

Nice.  What  do  you  want  ?  Chbts.  Take  care  and  re- 
member to  carry  your  son's  ring. 

Nico.  What  need  is  there  of  the  ring  ? 

Chbts.  Because  that  is  the  token  agreed  on  with  Theotimus, 
that  the  person  who  brings  it  to  him,  to  him  he  is  to  give  up 
the  gold. 

Nice.  I'll  remember  it,  and  you  advise  me  well.  But  is 
this  Theotimus  rich  ? 

Chbts.  What,  do  you  ask  that?  Why,  hasn't  he  the 
soles  fastened  to  his  shoes  with  gold  ? 

JSTico.  Why  does  he  thus  despise  it  ? 

Chbts.  He  has  such  immense  riches;  he  doesn't  know 
what  to  do  with  his  gold. 

Nice.  I  wish  he'd  give  it  me.  But  in  whose  presence  was 
.  this  gold  delivered  to  Theotimus  ? 

Chbts.  In  presence  of  the  people ;  there's  not  a  person  in 
Ephesus  but  what  knows  it. 

Nice.  My  son  at  least  did  wisely  there,  in  entrusting  that 
gold  to  a  rich  man  to  keep.  Erom  him  it  may  be  recovered 
even  at  a  moment's  notice. 

Chbts.  Aye,  and  look  here,  he'll  never  keep  you  waiting 
even  thus  much  (shows  his  finger-nail)  from  receiving  it  on 
the  very  day  you  arrive  there. 

Nice.  I  thought  that  I  had  escaped  a  seafaring  life,  and 
that,  at  length,  an  old  man  of  my  years,  I  shouldn't  be 
sailing  about.  But  now  I  find  that  I'm  not  allowed  to  have 
the  choice  whether  I  would  or  no  ;  'tis  my  fine  host  Axchi- 
denudes  has  done  me  this.  Where,  then,  is  my  son,  Mnesi- 
lochus,  at  present  ? 

Chbts.  He  has  ^one  to  the  market-place  to  pay  his  respects 
to  the  Deities  and  nis  friends. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


170  BACOHIDXfl ;  Act  HL 

ITioo«  Then  I'll  go  henee  to  meet  him  as  emxhol  as  I  eaa. 

{HxU  NiooBiriiirs. 

Chbys.  He's  right  well  loaded,  and  cames  more  than  1m 
proper  burden.  Not  bo  very  badlj  has  this  wA  been  com- 
menced by  me,  that  I  maj  find  means  for  the  son  of  my 
master  in  his  amour.  Tve  managed  it  so,  that  he  may  take 
as  mneh  of  the  gold  as  he  chooses,  mtui  give  up  to  his  Either 
as  ninch  as  he  may  like  to  give  up.  The  old  gentleman  wiH 
be  going  hence  to  Ephesus  to  fetdi  his  gold;  here  our* life 
will  he  ej^eaat  in  a  adieious  manner,  since  the  old  man  will 
leave  job  and  Mnesilochus  here,  and  not  be  taking  us  along 
with  him.  Of  what  a  kick-up  I  shall  be  malung  here. 
But  what's  to  be  done,  when  the  old  gentleman  shall  haye 
discovered  this  P  When  he  shall  have  found  out  that  he  has 
made  his  journey  thither  to  no  purpose,  and  that  we  have  nais- 
f^ent  his  gold,  what  will  become  of  me  after  that  ?  T  futh, 
i  think  upon  his  arrival  he'll  be  changing  my  name,  and  ^ 
CDDB  be  TTnuhiTig  me  Orudsalus^  instead  of  Ch^salus*  Troth, 
I'll  run  away,  if  there  shall  be  a  greater  necessity  for  it.  If 
I'm  caught,  I'll  plague  him  for  a  punishment^ ;  if  his  rods  are 
in  the  fields,  still  my  back's  at  home.  iKTow  I'll  be  off,  ami 
tell  mv  master's  son  this  contrivance  about  the  gold,  and  about 
his  mistress  Baochis  who  has  beeaoi  found.  (JExit, 


ACT    THE   THIED. 

Unter  liTDVBjrom  the  louse  of  Bacchis. 

Ltd.  Open  and  throw  back  straightway  this  gate  of 
hell^,  I  do  entreat.  Por,  reaUy,  I  do  deem  it  nothing  else ;  in- 

1  Crucisdhu) — ^Ver.  362.  Anticipating  the  pnnishment  of  the  cross,  which  was 
often  inflicted  on  slaves,  he  coins  an  epithet,  "  crncisahis,"  "  croas-strnggler,'' 
fac  himself,  and  then  compares  it  with  his  own  name. 

3  For  a  pamsh$nenf)—'yer,  364.  He  means  to  say,  l^at  his  master  will  net  be 
dble  to  chastise  him  inthout  punishing  himself,  in  some  measnn,  bj  die  Iobb  ef 
the  rods  that  will  be  wasted  on  his  back. 

»  This  gate  of  JUHy^Yer.  368.  The  words  of  Lydus  strongly  resemble  thwe  of 
Solomon,  in  the  Eighth  Chapter  of  Proverbs,  verse  27 :  "  Her  house  is  the  way  to 
hell,  gomg  down  to  the  chambers  of  deaA.** 


y  Google 


&.  n.  OB,  THfi  rWISr-ffDITEBS.  171 

nmndi  as  no  one  comes  here  but  he  whom  all  hopes  ha,ye 
deserted,  that  lie  may  ^et  be  a  deeent  person.  Baocbis — iw, 
not  Bacebis  is  their  name,  but  they  are  most  determined 
BaocbasalB.  Avaimt  from  me,  you  sisters,  who  suck  the 
Uood  of  men.  Baddy  and  elegantly  furnished  is  this  bouse 
—lor  destmetion.  8oon  as  I  beheld  ill  this,  at  onee  I  stndght- 
lay  betook  myself  to  my  heels.  And  ought  I  to  cany  these 
^waga  concealed  in  secrecy  ?  Ought  I,  Fistoclerus,  to  con- 
ceal frtmi  yoar  fai^r  your  exoesses,  or  your  misdeeds,  or  your 
{daces  of  resort?  by  whicli  you  are  aiming  to  drive  your 
&th6r  and  myself^  and  your  own  self  and  all  your  friends,  to 
di^iace,  and  shazne,  and  rum  altogether,  and  to  destroy  us 
«B.  Within  yourself  you  entertain  no  awe  of  either  me  or 
yoor  own  self  on  account  of  the  deeds  which  you  are  doing ; 
by  which  you  haye  made  your  own  father  and  myself  as  well, 
yinr  friends  and  your  connexions,  to  be  abettors^  in  the 
disgrace  of  your  excesses.  Now,  before  you  add  this  mischief 
to  the  rest,  I  am  resolved  at  once  to  tell  your  parent.  This 
instant  from  myself  will  I  remove  this  blame,  and  shall  dis- 
close the  matter  to  the  old  gentleman,  that  he  may  forthwith 
draw  forth  his  son  out  from  this  loathsome  pollution. 

(Ikit. 

SCEITB  IL 

Miter  Mjtbsilochfs. 
MiiTES.  In  many  ways  have  I  thought  it  over  with  myself, 
and  thus  I  think  it  is ;  a  man  your  friend,  who  is  a  mend 
such  as  the  name  imports — except  the  Gods — nothing  does 
excel  him.  By  fact  have  I  experienced  it  so  to  be.  Eor 
'when  I  departed  bence  to  Ephesus  (*tis  now  almost  two  years 
«goit  happened),  from  Ephesus  I  sent  letters  hither  to  my 
friend  Pistoclerus,  requesting  that  he  would  find  out  my 
niistress  Bacchis  for  me.  I  hear  that  he  has  found  her,  as 
Diy  servant  Chrysalus  has  brought  me  word.  How  aptly,  too, 
kas  he  framed  a  device  against  my  father  about  the  gold,  that 

^  Tole  oteflora)— Ver.  381.  "  Gerulifignlos"— literally,  " carriers"  or  "  hawk- 
«[8  about  of  pottery.*  He  probably  alludes  to  tlie  low  esteem  ia  which  these 
^lers  were  held;  and  it  is  not  impossible,  that  by  his  reference  to  the  earthen- 
""le,  he  aUndes  to  the  frail  companions  of  Pistoclerus  (whom  he  has  just  found 
toliaye  come  from  Samos,  where  earthenware  was  made),  in  carrying  out  whose 
Bcbemes  the  young  man  was,  in  a  degree,  making  hotfa  Lydus  himself,  and  his 
&te,  Philoxenus,  his  abettors. 


y  Google 


172  BA0CHIDE8 ;  iuCt  KL 

I  may  have  abundance  in  mj  amour.  I  see  'tis  right^  tliat 
I  should  make  a  due  return.  'Tis  better  for  you  to  be 
Btvled  extravagant  than  ungrateful ;  but,  i'  faith,  in  my  way 
of  thinking  at  least,  there's  nothing  more  extravagant  than 
the  ungrateful  man.  The  former  the  good  will  praise,  the 
latter  even  the  bad  will  censure.  'Twere  better  for  an  ill-doer 
to  escape  than  for  a  benefactor  to  be  deserted.  !Por  this  reason, 
then,  it  behoves  me  to  take  the  greater  care ;  I  needs  mufjt  be 
on  the  watch.  Now,  Mnesilochus,  the  sample  is  on  view,  now 
the  contest  is  being  decided,  whether  you  are  or  are  not 
such  as  you  ought  to  be;  good  or  bad,  of  whichever  kind; 
just  or  unjust,  penurious  or  liberal,  fretful  or  complying. 
Take  you  care,  if  you  please,  lest  you  let  your  servant  excel 
you  in  doing  well.  Whatever  you  shall  prove,  I  warn  you, 
you  shall  not  be  concealed.  But  see,  I  perceive  my  friend's 
father  and  his  tutor  coming  this  way.  I'll  listen  what  matter 
'tis  they  are  upon.     (He  retires  aside.) 

Scene  III^. 
Unter  Ltdtjs  and  PHiLOXEirrs. 

Ltd.  I'll  now  make  trial,  whether  your  heart  is  sharpened 
by  wisdom  in  your  breast.     Pollow  me. 

Philo.  Whither  shall  I  follow  ?  Whither  are  you  now 
leading  me  ? 

Ltd.  To  her  who  has  undone,  utterly  destroyed  your 
single,  only  son. 

Philo.  How  now,  Lydus ;  those  are  the  wiser  who  mode- 
rate their  passion.  'Tis  less  to  be^  wondered  at  if  this  age 
does  some  of  these  things  than  if  it  does  not  do  so ;  I,  as 
well,  did  the  same  in  my  youth. 

^  I  see  ^tis  right) — Ver.  393.  The  whole  of  the  passage,  from  the  word 
"  sequom,"  in  this  line,  to  "  celabis,"  in  1.  403,  is  supposed  by  Ritschel  not  to  have 
been  the  composition  of  Plantus,  but  of  some  other  ancient  poet.  The  passage  is 
In  a  most  confused  state,  and  the  reading  suggested  by  Bost  has  been  here  adopted, 
the  lines  being  read  in  the  following  order:  393,  396,  394,  397,  395,  398. 

^  Scene  III.')  Thornton  suggests  that  Moli^re  had  in  his  eye  this  Scene  when 
he  wrote  "  Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin,"  which  Otway  translated  mider  the  title 
of  "  The  Cheats  of  Scapin." 

3  Tw  less  to  6e)— Ver.  409.  After  reading  this,  we  shall  be  the  less  surprised  at 
the  conduct  of  Philoxenus  in  the  last  Scene. 


y  Google 


r 


Sc.  in.  OB,  THE  TWIlf.SISTBRS.  173 

Ltd.  Ah  me!  ah  roe!  this  over-indulgence  has  proved 
his  ruin.  For  had  he  been  without  you,  I  should  have  had 
him  trained  up  to  moral  rectitude ;  now,  by  reason  of  you  and 
four  trusting  disposition,  Fistoclerus  has  become  abandoned* 

Mnes.  (aside).  Immortal  Gods!  he  names  my  friend. 
What  means  this,  that  Lydus  is  thus  exciting  his  master,  Fis- 
toderusp 

PpiLO.  'Tis  but  a  little  time,  Lydus,  that  a  man  has  a 
desire  to  indulge  his  inclinations ;  the  time  will  soon  come, 
when  he  will  hate  himself  even.  Humour  him ;  so  that  care 
is  taken  that  he  offends  not  beyond  the  line  of  honor,  e^en 
suffer  him. 

Ltd.  I'll  suffer  him  not,  nor,  for  my  part,  while  I'm  alive, 
will  I  allow  him  to  be  corrupted.  But  you,  who  are  plead- 
ing his  cause  for  a  son  so  profligate,  was  this  same  your  own 
training,  when  you  were  a  young  man  ?  I  declare  that  for 
your  first  twenty  years  you  had  not  even  this  much  liberty,  to 
move  your  foot  out  of  the  house  even  a  finger's  length  away 
from  your  tutor.  When  it  did  happen  *o,  this  evil,  too,  was 
added  to  the  evil ;  both  pupil  and  preceptor  were  esteemed 
disgraced.  Before  the  rising  of  the  sun  had  you  not  come 
to  the  school  for  exercise^,  no  slight  punishment  would  you 
have  had  at  the  hands  of  the  master  of  the  school.  There 
did  they  exercise  themselves  rather  with  running,  wrestling, 
the  quoit,  the  javelin,  boxing,  the  ball,  and  leaping,  rather 
than  with  harlots  or  with  kissing;  there  did  they  prolong 
their  lives  ^,  and  not  in  secret-lurking  holes.  Then,  when 
from  the  hippodrome^  and  school  of  exercise  you  had  returned 
home,  clad  in  your  belted  frock*,  upon  a  stool  by  your  master^ 
would  you  sit ;  ami  there,  when  you  were  readSng  your  book, 

»  The  school  for  exercise)— Yer,  426.  "  Palaestram.**  This  was  the  school  for 
athktic  exercise,  probably  for  both  youths  and  men ;  though  it  has  been  contended 
that  the  ^* palaestra **  was  devoted  to  the  youths,  and  the  "gymnasium"  to 
the  men. 

*  Prolong  thfir  lives)— Yer,  480.  "  Extendere  setatem  **  probably  means  here, 
not  only  "  to  live/'  but  "  to  prolong  life  "  by  healthy  exercise. 

*  The  hippodrome) — Ver.  431.  The  "  hippodromus "  answered  the  same  pur- 
pose as  our  riding-schools. 

*  Tour  heUed frock) — ^Ver.  482.  "  Cincticulum  "  was  a  finock  worn  by  children^ 
with  a  girdle  or  belt  round  the  waist. 

*  By  your  master) — Ver.  482.  This  "master"  would  be  what  the  Greeks 
called  the  dtdaa-KoXof,  or  "  preceptor,"  whose  duty  it  was  to  instruct  the  chil- 
diyn  in  grammar,  music,  and  other  accomplishments. 


y  Google 


174  BAGCETDBS ;  Act  UL 


if  j€m  made  a  miabake  in  a  single  syllable,  ycmr  skin  would 
be  made  as  spotted  as  your  nurse's  gown^. 

Mhtss.  (atiidt).  I'm  sorely  yexed,  to  my  sorrow,  that  on  my 
account  these  things  should  be  said  about  my  M^d.  In  his 
innocence  he  incurs  this  suspicion  for  my  saKe. 

PHUiO.  The  manners,  Lydus,  now  are  altered. 

Ltd.  That,  for  my  part,  I  know  full  well.  For  formerly,  a 
man  used  to  recesre  public  honors  by  the  votes  of  the  people, 
before  he  ceased  to  be  obedient  to  one  appointed  his  tujto. 
But  now-a-days,  before  he  is  seven  years  old,  if  you  toudi  a 
boy  with  your  hand,  at  once  the  child  breaks  his  tutor's  head 
with  his  tablet.  When  you  go  to  complain  to  the  father, 
tiius  says  the  father  to  the  child :  "  Be  you  my  own  dear  hotfy 
since  you  can  defend  yourself  from  an  injury."  The  tutor  then 
is  called  for;  "Hallo!  you  old  good-for-nothing^,  don't  you 
be  touching  the  child  for  this  reason,  that  he  has  behaved 
80  boldly;"  and  thus  the  despised  tutor  becomes  just  like  a 
lantern^  with  his  oiled  linen  rags.  Judgment  pronounced, 
they  go  away  thence.  Can  this  preceptor  then,  on  these  terms, 
keep  up  his  authority,  if  he  himself  is  to  be  beaten  the  first  ? 

Mnss.  (aside).  This  is  a  severe  accusation.  So  far  aa  I 
onderstand.  his  words,  'tis  strange  if  Pistoderus.  has  never 
thumped  Lydiks  with  his  fists. 

Ltd.  (seeing  Mjetesiloghtts).  But  who  is  it  that  I  see  stand- 
ing here  before  the  door  ?  O  Philoxenus,  I  would  not  pre&r 
tor  myself  to  behold  even  the  propitious  Gods  rather  than  him. 

Philo.  Who's  this  ?  Ltd.  Why,  he's  Mnesilochus,  the 
£riend  of  your  scm.  He  is  not  of  a  like  turn  of  mind  with 
him  who  reclines  and  takes  his  meals  in  brothels.  Portu- 
nate  Mcobulufi  I  who  begot  him  for  himself. 

1  Tour  nurse^s  gotoay—Yer.  434.  It  is  not  known  whether  the  words  "  macu- 
hsnm  pallium  "  refer  here  to  a  kind  of  spotted  gown,  perhaps  of  dark  pattern, 
pecoliar  to  nnrses,  or  to  the  dirty,  soiled  appearance  which,  not  improbablj,  their 
gowns  nsnallj  presented.  Some  Commentators  take  a  wider  range,  and  think 
that  the  passage  refers  to  the  robe  of  Cybele,  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  which  was 
made  of  the  skin  of  a  panther. 

3  Tou  old  good-for-nothing) — ^Ver.  444.  That  is,  in  his  capadty  as  a  sbve,  a 
pmrchaseable  commodity.  * 

'  Jwt  like  a  lantern) — ^Ver.  446.  This  passage  has  been  mnch  discnsaed  bj 
Tarioas  Commentators.  It  is,  howeTer,  most  probable  that  the  Komans  used 
lanterns  made  of  oiled  linen  cloth ;  and  that  he  is  comparing  his  head,  wfaea  fk 
has  been  broken  by  the  tablets,  and  plaistered  over  with  oiled  Cnen,  to  one  of 
these  lanterns.  In  his  Epistles  to  Atticns,  B.  4,  Ep.  3,  Cicero  makes  mentiaa  of 
'*  linen  huitems.*' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Se^  HE.  OB,  THE  Twnr-siBTEES.  ITS 

Fhtlo.  (advancinff).  My  greetings  to  jou,  Mneailocitnis ; 
I'm  glad  that  yon  have  arrived  safe. 

IMStes.  May  the  Gods  favour  yon,  PhiloxenuB. 

Ltd.  He,  now,  was  bom  at  a  hicky  moment  for  his  &ther ; 
lie  goes  to  sea,  attends  to  the  interests  of  his  fiuDiiy^  takes 
care  of  the  house,  is  obedient  and  attentive  to  the  vnA.  and 
eommands  of  his  father.  He,  when  but  a  boy,  was  the  com- 
panion of  Pistoclerus  in  his  boyhood ;  'tis  not  by  three  days 
ihat  he  is  the  older  in  age,  but  his  disposition  is  more  imh 
proved  by  thirty  years  than  that  of  the  other. 

Phtlo.  Beware  of  a  mischief^,  and  forbear  to  speak  of  him 
imjustly. 

Ltd.  Hold  your  peace.  You're  a  foolish  man,  who  cannot 
bear  to  have  him  badly  ^oken  of  who  does  hadl^.  But  I 
wimld  rather  have  him.  dnw  upon  my  mishaps  than  upon 
»y  savings^. 

Fhilo.  "Why  8o?  Ltit,  Because,  if  he  were  to  draw  upon 
my  mishaps,  he  would  each  day  be  making  them  less. 

Mhbs,  Why,  Lydus,  aife  you  censuring  your  pupil,  my 
fiiend? 

Ltd.  Tout  feiend  is  mined.  Mines.  May  the  Gods  for- 
bid it, 

Ltd.  'Tb  so  as  I  say.  And  further,  I  myself  saw  it  when 
he  was  undone ;  I  am  not  censuring  him  from  hearsay. 

Mmss.  What  has  been  done  hy  him  ? 

Ltd.  He  is  disgracefcdly  doting  upon  a  harlot. 

Mnes.  Won't  you  be  silent  now  ?  Ltd.  She,  too,  like  a 
tide,  most  voraciously  swallows  all  up,  whenever  she  has 
touched  anyone. 

Mites.  Where  does  this  woman  live  ?  Ltd.  Here.  (JPomis 
to  the  hou9e,) 

Mnes.  Whence  do  they  say  she  comes? 

Ltd.  Prom  Samos.     Mites.  "What's  her  name  ? 

Ltd.  Bacchis-  Mjojs.  You  are  wrong,  Lydus  j  I  know 
the  whole  affair,  just  as  it  is.  You  are  blaming  Pistoclerus 
without  reason,  and  in  his  innocence.    !For  he  id  carefully 

^  OfcLwuckief) — ^Ver.  46d»  "  Malo  *'  seems  here  to  be  a  preferable  readbg  to 
"  malnin."    He  alludes  to  the  punishment,  to  which  Lydus,  as  a  slaye,  is  liable. 

*  Upon  my  savings) — ^Ver.  466.  He  seems  to  mean,  that  he  had  rather  put  up 
iviih  insult,  or  violence  even,  from  his  pupil,  than  be  responsible  for  his  misdeeds ; 
in  which  latter  case,  probably,  some  part  of  his  "  peculium,"  or  "  sayings,*' 
niMid  be  tilBeir  tmvj  fimafaim,in  the  diape  of  jEbecu 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


176  BAOCHIDES;  Act  III 

performing  the  business  enjoined  on  Urn  by  bis  friend  and 
companion,  bis  sincere  well-wisber.  Neitber  is  be  bimself 
in  love,  nor  do  you  suppose  bim  so. 

Ltd.  Is  it  necessary  for  bim  carefully  to  perform  tbe  busi- 
ness enjoined  upon  bim  by  bis  friend  in  tbis  fasbion — ^for  bim- 
self, sitting  down,  to  bold  a  damsel  in  bis  lap  wbo  is  kissing 
bim  ?  Can  tbe  business  ^Us  entrusted  be  in  no  way  trans- 
acted unless  ever  and  anon  be  is  placing  bis  band  upon  the 
bosom  of  BacchiSy  or  never  withdraws  bis  lips  from  hers  ? 
But  I'm  ashamed  to  make  mention  of  other  things  which  I 
have  seen  him  do ;  when,  in  my  presence,  I  saw  him  take 
most  unbecoming  liberties  with  the  person  of  Bacchis,  and 
yet  not  be  at  all  ashamed.  What  need  of  words  is  there  ? 
My  pupil,  your  friend,  his  son  {pointing  to  Philoxenfs),  is 
rumed.  Por  I  say  that  he  is  ruined,  wnose  modesty  in  feet 
is  lost.  "What  need  of  words  is  there  ?  Had  I  been  willing 
to  wait  onljr  a  little  time,  that  I  might  have  had  a  better  oppor- 
tunity of  viewing  him,  I  then  should,  I  think,  have  seen  more 
than  would  have  been  proper  for  me  to  see,  and  for  bim  to  do. 

Mnes.  (aside) .  Priend,  you  have  undone  me.  And  ought  I 
not  to  punish  this  woman  with  death  ?  I  should  prefer  that 
I  should  perish  after  some  dreadfiil  fasbion.  Isn't  it  the 
fact,  you  know  not  whom  to  deem  faithful  to  yourself,  or  in 
whom  to  put  your  trust  ? 

Lts.  Don't  you  see  how  much  he  grieves  that  your  son, 
his  friend,  has  been  corrupted?  and  how  be  is  afficting 
bimself  with  sorrow  ? 

Philo.  Mnesilochus,  I  beg  this  of  you,  that  you  will  in- 
fluence his  feelings  and  his  disposition.  Preserve  for  yourself  a 
friend  as  well  as  a  son  for  me. 

Mn^Es.  I  fain  would  do  so.  Ltd.  (to  PHiLOXBinrs).  Much 
better,  too,  would  you  leave  me  here  together  with  bim. 

Philo.  Mnesilochus  has  cares,  more  than  enough. 

Ltd.  Eate  the  man  soundly,  who  disgraces  me,  yourself 
his  friend,  and  others,  by  his  excesses. 

Philo.  (to  Mnesilochus).  Upon  you  do  I  impose  aD 
this  responsibility.  Lydus,  follow  me  tbis  way.  Ltd.  I 
follow  you.  (JExeunt  PniLOXEiirTTS  and  Ltdus. 

scEmB  rv. 

MkesiiiOCHUS,  ahne. 
Mkss.  Which  of  the  two  now  I  should  think  to  be  my 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  Y,  OB,  THE  TWHr-BIBTEBS.  177 

ereater  enemj,  mj  companion  or  Bacchis,  is  extremely 
doubtful.  Has  she  chosen  him  in  preference  P  Let  her  keep 
him,  that's  the  hest.  Surely,  by  my  troth,  she  has  done  this 
to  her  own  loss.  'For  nevet  let^  any  one  entrust  to  me  aught 
that  is  sacred,  if  I  don't  by  an  abundant  example^,  and as- 
suredly love  her.  I'll  make  her  not  to  say  that  she  has  got  hold 
of  a  person  to  make  a  fool  of.  ButTU  go  home  now  and  pilfer 
Bomething  from  my  father.    Even  to  such  straits  will  I  force 

her,  that  beggary  shall  be  the  lot  of  ^ my  father.    But  do  I 

redly  now  possess  my  wits  with  a  mind  unimpaired,  who  am 
in  tms  fefihion  prating  here  of  these  things  that  are  to  come 
to  pass  ?  I'  faith,  I'm  of  opinion  that  I'm  in  loye,  inasmuch  as 
I  know  for  sure  I  am.  But  still,  than  that  i^e,  firom  my 
abundance,  should,  by  the  scraping  of  a  single  feather,  grow 
the  richer,  I'd  rather  outvie  a  beggar  in  begging.  Never, 
hy  Heaven,  while  I  live,  shall  she  make  a  laughing-stock  of 
me.  For  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  pay  down  all  the  gold 
at  once  to  mv  father.  TJpon  me,  therefore,  needy  and  pen- 
niless, shall  sne  fawn,  at  the  time,  when  it  shall  be  for  her  ad- 
vantage not  a  whit  the  more  than  if  she  were  saying  her  pretty 
things  to  a  dead  man  at  his  tomb.  Beyond  a  doubt,  'tis  my 
fixed  determination  to  give  the  gold  up  to  my  father.  Like- 
wise, ril  entreat  that,  for  my  sake,  my  father  won't  hurt 
Chrysalus,  nor  censure  him  at  all  on  my  account  with  respect 
to  the  gold  which  he  has  deceived  him  about.  For  'tis  right 
that  I  should  have  a  care  for  him,  who,  for  my  sake,  has  told 
this  falsehoo  d.  (To  some  Attendait ts^  .  Do  you  follow  me. 
{Ghes  into  his  father*  s  house,) 

ScEms  V. 

Enter  Pistoolebusj/^(m»  the  house  of  Bacohis. 

PiSTOO.  (speahvng  to  Bacchis  as  he  comes  out).   Before 

otiher  matters,  Bacchis,  will  I  give  place  to  what  you  enjoin 

me,  that  I  find  out  Mnesilochus,  and  bring  him,  together 

vii^  myself,  to  you.    But  at  this  my  mind  is  surprised,  if  my 

^  For  neper  Idy-Nvt,  604  This  passage  b  a  drcnmlocDtioQ  for  "  May  I  be 
prepared  to  conmut  a  sacrilege,  if,  &c." 

'  BxoanpU) — ^Ver.  505.  This  is  an  instance  of  Aposiopesis.  He  stops  short  in  his 
indignati(»i,  and  owns  that,  despite  of  her  supposed  inconstancy,  he  loves  her  still. 

'  Shcitt  heUteht  of)^-Yer.  508.  This  is  another  instance  of  Aposiopesis.  He 
threatens  his  vengeance  on  her,  even  to  making  his  &ther  a  beggar  for  her 


y  Google  — 


178  BACCHIDES ;  Act  III. 

messenger  has  readied  him,  what  it  is  that  delays  him.    rU 
go  into  his  house  here,  and  see  if  perchance  he's  at  home. 

Scene  VI. 

Unter  Mkesilgchtts^ow  his  father's  house. 

Mn^ES.  {as  he  enters).  IVe  given  up  to  my  father  all  the 
gold.  Now  could  I  wish  that  ^e  should  meet  me,  after  I  am 
penniless,  this  fair  one  so  scomfiil  of  me.    Yet  with  what 

feat  difficulty  did  he  grant  me  a  pardon  for  Chrysalus.  But 
prevailed  on  him  at  last  that  he  wouldn't  be  at  all  angry 
with  him. 

PiSTOO.  {apart).  Isn't  this  my  friend P 

Mites,  {apart).  Isn't  this  my  foe  that  I  see  ? 

PiSTOC.  Por  sure  'tis  he.    Mites.  'Tis  he. 

PisTOO.  {apart),  I'll  go  to  meet  him,  and  I'll  mend  my  pace. 
{Aloud!)  Health  to  you,  Mnesilochus ! 

Mnbs.  Hail !  Pistoc.  As  you  are  arrived  safe  from 
abroad,  a  dinner  must  be  given. 

Mites.  A  dinner  pleases  me  not,  which  excites  my  choler. 

Pistoc.  Has  any  vexation  befallen  you  on  your  arrival  ? 

Mnes.  Aye,  and  a  very  grievous  one. 

Pistoc.  !From  what  quarter?  Mnes.  From  a  person 
whom  heretofore  I  had  supposed  to  be  my  friend. 

Pistoc.  Many  live  after  that  manner  and  method,  who, 
when  you  think  them  to  be  friends,  are  found  false  with  their 
deceitfulness,  strong  in  their  talking,  slothful  in  their  doin^, 
of  faith  infirm.  Not  one  is  there  whom  they  don't  envy  on  their 
enjoying  prosperity ;  through  their  own  indolence  do  they 
themselves  take  right  good  care  that  no  envy  is  directed 
against  them. 

Mnes.  By  my  troth,  you  surely  understand  their  ways  most 
thoroughly.  But  still  this  one  misfortune  do  they  find  from 
their  bad  disposition ;  they  are  the  friends  of  no  one,  while 
they  themselves  are  all  at  enmity  against  themselves ;  and 
these,  while  they  are  deceiving  themselves,  in  their  foolishness 
imagine  that  others  are  deceived.  Just  so  is  he  whom  I  sup- 
posed to  be  as  much  a  friend  to  me  as  I  am  to  my  own  self.  He, 
so  far  as  in  him  lay,  has  taken  all  care  to  do  whatever  injury 
he  could  towards  me,  to  turn  all  my  own  resources  against  me. 

Pistoc  This  same  must  me  a  bad  man. 

Mnes.  I  judge  that  so  he  is. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


JSc.  TI.  OE,  THE  TWHr-SISTEES.  179 

PiSTOC.  Troth  now,  prithee,  do  tell  me  who  it  is. 

Mnbs.  He  lives  on  good  terms  with  yourself.  But  were 
he  not  so,  I  would  entreat  you  to  do  him  whatever  harm  you 
could  do. 

PiSTOO.  Only  tell  me  the  person,  who  he  is ;  if  I  don't  do 
him  an  injury,  some  way  or  other,  do  you  say  that  I'm  the 
greatest  of  cowards. 

Mnes.  The  person's  a  bad  one,  but  he's  your  fnend,  i'  faith. 

PiSTOO.  So  much  the  rather,  then,  tell  me  who  he  is.  In 
good  sooth,  I  set  no  value  on  the  esteem  of  a  worthless  per- 
son. 

Mnes.  I  appear,  then,  not  to  be  able  to  avoid  disclosing  to 
you  his  name.  Pistoclerus,  you  have  utterly  undone  7ne, 
your  friend. 

PisTOO.  How's  that?  Mines.  How's  that?  Did  I  not 
send  you  a  letter  from  Ephesus  about  my  mistress,  that  you 
should  find  her  out  for  me  ? 

PiSTOC.  I  own  you  did  ;  and  I  have  discovered  her. 

M5ES.  How  now  ?  Was  there  not  a  choice  for  you  of  other 
Courtesans  in  Athens,  for  you  to  form  engagements  with, 
instead  of  with  her  whom'  I  had  recommended  to  your  care  ? 
Could  you  yourself  begin  to  love,  and  to  contrive  an  injury 
against  myself? 

PisToc.  Are  you  in  your  senses  ?  Mistes.  I  have  found 
out  the  whole  affair  from  your  tutor ;  don't  deny  it.  You've 
ruined  me. 

PiSTOO.  What,  still  upbraiding  me  without  reason  witli 
these  rebukes  of  yours  ? 

Mmtjs.  Why  ?    You're  in  love  with  Bacchis. 

PiSTOO.  But  look  you,  two  persons  of  the  name  of  Bacchis 
are  living  here  in  this  house. 

Mites.  How,  two  ?    Pistoc.  Aye,  and  the  two  are  sisters. 

Mkes.  You  are  now  designedly  telling  idle  stories. 

Pistoo.  In  fine,  if  you  persist  in  thinlang  there's  but  little 
confidence  in  me,  I'll  take  you  upon  my  shoulders,  and  carry 
you  hence  into  their  house. 

Mkes.  Well,  I'll  go ;  hit  stay  a  moment. 

Pistoc  I  will  not  stay,  and  you  shall  not  be  holding  me 
under  a  Mse  suspicion. 

Mkes.  I  follow  you  then.  (They  go  into  the  hotise  of 
Bacchis.) 

n2 


y  Google 


180  XJLOCHIDBS ;  Act  IVi. 

ACT   THE   POUETH. 

SOEITB  I. 

MUer  a  Pasasitb  and  a  Boy. 

Tab.  Of  a  debauched  and  imscrupulous  fellow  am  I  the 
Parasite — a  Captam,  who  has  brought  his  mistress  with  him 
from  Samos.  Now  he  has  ordered  me  to  go  to  her,  and 
make  enqpiry  whether  she  will  pay  back  the  gold,  or  whether 
she  will  depart  together  with  mm.  You,  boy,  who  have  for 
some  time  been  with  her,  whichever  of  these  is  the  house, 
do  you  knock.  Go  to  the  door  forthwith.  (2%«  Box  ^oes  to 
knock,)  Are  you  coming  back  from  there,  you  hangdog^  ? 
How  the  graceless  scouncbel  does  knock  I  You  can  gobble  up 
a  loaf  three  feet  wide,  tmdyet  you  don't  know  how  to  knock 
at  a  dopr.  {He  calls  out  and  knocks  molently,)  Is  there 
any  one  in-doors  ?  Hallo !  is  there  any  one  here  ?  Does 
any  one  open  this  door  ?    "Who's  coming  out  P 

Soiso:  H. 
MUer  FiSTOCLEBUS  from  the  house. 

PiSTOO.  What's  the  matter?  What's  this  knocking? 
Why,  what  the  confounded  torment  possesses  you,  to  be 
exerting  your  strength  in  this  fi9»hion  on  another  person's 
door  ?  You've  almost  broken  the  door  down.  What  do  you 
want  now  ? 

Pab.  Young  gentleman,  my  respects.  Pibtoo.  And  my 
respects.    But  whom  are  you  looking  for  ? 

Pab.  Por  Bacchis.    Pi01?oo.  But  which  of  them? 

Pab.  Of  that  I  know  nothing,  only  it's  Bacchis.  In  a  few 
words,  the  Captain,  Cleomachus,  has  sent  me  to  her,  either 
for  her  to  pay  back  the  two  hundred  golden  Philippeans,  or 
to  go  hence  this  day,  together  with  him,  to  Elatia^. 

PiSTOC.  She  doesn't  go :  she  says  she  shan't  go.  Begone, 
and  take  back  this  message— she  loves  another  person,  and 
not  him.    Take  yourself  off  from  the  house. 

>  Toti  hangdog)— Yer,  579.  "  Dierecte."  The  meaning  of  this  word  has  been 
explained  in  the  Notes  to  the  Trinnmmns. 

s  To  Elaiia)-'\er.  591.  Elatia  was  a  dtj  of  Phocia,  a  district  in  the  Northeis 
part  of  Greece. 


y  Google 


SS.  m.  OB,  THX  TWIK-8ISTEBS.  181 

PjlB.  YouWe  too  hasty.  Pistoc.  And  would  you  know 
how  hasty  I  am  ?  By  my  faith,  your  phiz  isn't  fai  off  from 
a  mishap;  so  much  are  these  teeth-crackers  {looking  at  hu 
fitii)  longing  in  my  fists. 

Pab.  (aside).  So  fisir  as  I  understand  his  words,  'tis  a  warn- 
ing to  me,  lest  he  should  knock  my  nut-craters  out  of  Iny 
jaws.  (lb  PiSTOCiiEBUS.)  At  your  own  peril,  I'll  tell  him 
this. 

PiSTOG.  What  do  you  say  P  Pab.  I'll  tell  him  that  wkieh 
you  hade  me. 

PiSTOC.  Who  are  you  ?    Tell  me. 

Pab.  I'm  the  skin  of  his  body^.  Pistoc.  He  needs  must 
be  a  scampish  fellow,  who  has  got  so  worthless  a  skin. 

Pab.  He'll  be  coming  here,  swoUen  up  ivith  wrath. 

PiSTOC.  I  wish  he  may  burst.  Pab.  (about  to  go).  Is 
there  anything'  you  want? 

PiSToa  Be  off;  you  must  do  so  this  instant. 

Pab.  Gk)od-bye,  teeth-cracker.  (JEri^.)  Pistoc.  And  you, 
skin  of  Jiis  hody^  good-l^e !  This  matter  has  come  to  such  a 
point,  that  what  advice  to  give  my  friend  about  his  mistress, 
I  know  not ;  who,  in  his  pet,  has  given  up  aU  the  gold  to  his 
&fcher,  and  not  a  coin  is  there  that  may  be  paid  to  the 
Captain.  But  I'll  step  aside,  for  the  door  makes  a  noise. 
0,  here's  Mneailodius  coming  out,  and  pensive,  too.  (JSe 
stands  apart,) 

ScEKB  in. 

Enter  Mjs^silocrvb  from  the  home  o/'Bacohis. 
Mnbs.  Insolent,  of  a  froward,  passionate,  ungovernable, 
inconsiderate  disposition,  without  reason  and  moderation, 
am  I ;  without  fine  principles  of  rectitude  and  honor,  hard 
of  belief,  powerless  to  control  my  passions,  bom  of  a  temper 
ill-dispoBed,  unamiable  and  ungracious  is  my  life^.  In  ^me, 
I  am  that  which  I  could  wish  others  to  be.  There's  not  a 
person  more  worthless,  or  more  unworthy  for  the  Gk)ds  to 
bless,  or  for  men  to  love  or  to  associate  with.  'Tis  more 
just  that  I  should  have  enemies  than  friends — 'tis  more 

^  Skm  of  las  hody) — Yet.  601.  "Integumentnm  corporis."  Literally,  "the 
skin,"  or  **  covermg  of  the  body."  This  was  probably  a  nickname  for  a  tody- 
gnsid,  or  hanger-on. 

«  Ji  my  Ufey-yer.  614.  "  Vivo."    LiteraUy,  "  I  Kw,"  « lexist.* 


y  Google 


182  BACCHIDES ;  Act  IV. 

reasonable  that  the  bad  should  give  me  their  assistance  than 
the  good.  There's  not  a  person  more  deserving  of  all  the  re- 
proaches that  are  befitting  worthless  men,  than  J,  who  have 
given  up  to  my  father  the  money  that  was  in  my  power. 
Could  this  be  believed  by  any  one  whatever  ?  Am  I  not  a 
madman,  who  have  miserably  undone  myself  and  the  device 
of  Chrysalus? 

PiSTOC.  (aside).  He  must  now  be  consoled  by  me;  I'll 
accost  him.  (Alotid.)  Hallo,  Mnesilochus !  what's  the  matter  ? 

Mnes.  I'm  ruined.  Pistoo.  May  the  Gods  grant  better 
things ! 

IV&ES.  I'm  ruined.  Pistoo.  "Won't  you  hold  your  tongue, 
simpleton  ? 

Mnes.  Hold  my  tongue?  Pistoo.  You  are  not  now 
quite  right  in  your  senses. 

Mnes.  I'm  uindone.  Many  sharp  and  poignant  woes  are 
now  arising  in  my  breast.  Did  I  not  put  faith  in  that  accu- 
sation ?  Without  any  cause  was  I  angry  with  you. 

Pistoo.  Come,  come,  do  have  a  good  heart. 

Mnes.  Whence  have  it  ?  A  dead  man  is  of  more  value 
than  I  am. 

Pistoo.  The  Captain's  Parasite  came  here,  just  now,  to 
fetch  the  gold  hence.  I  drove  the  fellow  away  from  this  door 
and  from  this  fair  one,  and  packed  him  off  tnrough  my  harsh 
language. 

Mnes.  But  of  what  service  is  that  to  me  ?  Wretch  that 
I  am,  what  shall  I  do  ?  I  have  nothing ;  and  he  certainly  will 
carry  her  off. 

Pistoo.  By  my  faith,  if  I  had  the  means,  I'd  engage  not. 

Mnes.  I  know  you'd  give  it  me ;  I  know  your  ways ;  and 
were  you  not  in  love,  I  should  now  have  the  very  greatest  pos- 
sible confidence  in  your  assistance.  At  present,  you  yourself 
have  more  than  enough  of  your  own  business,  for  me  to 
suppose  that  you,  who  are  in  want  yourself,  are  able  to 
give  me  any  assistance. 

Pistoo.  Do  but  hold  your  tongue:  some  Divinity  will 
favour  us. 

Mnes.  Nonsense.  (Moves  as  if  going.)  Pistoo.  Do  stay. 
(Takes  hold  of  him) 

Mnes.  What's  the  matter  ?  Pistoo.  Why,  I  see  Chry- 
salus here,  your  main  resource. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  OE,  THE  TWTN-SISTEES.  183 

Scene  IY. 

Enter  Chetsaltts,  at  a  distance, 

Chets.  {to  himself).  It's  right  this  man  {^oiaitin^  to  him- 
self) should  be  worth  his  weight^  in  gold:  it's  fair  that  a 
statue  of  gold  should  be  erected  for  him.  !Por,  this  day,  two 
exploits  have  I  achieved ;  with  twofold  spoils  have  I  been 
graced.  So  cleverly  have  I  gulled  my  elder  master  this  day, 
that  he  has  been  made  a  fool  of.  The  craftj^  old  blade,  by  my 
crafty  tricks,  have  I  compelled  and  constrained  to  believe  me 
in  everything.  Then,  for  the  son  of  the  old  gentleman,  my 
master  here  in  love,  together  with  whom  I  drink,  with  whom  I 
eat  and  go  a-courting,  I  have  procured  regal  and  golden  trea- 
sures, that  he  may  take  from  thence  at  home,  and  not  go 
seeking  abroad.  Those  Parmenos^,  and  those  Syruses,  please 
me  not,  who  filch  some  two  or  three  minse  from  their  masters. 
There's  nothing  more  worthless  than  a  servant  without  skill — 
vxyrthless,  if  he  has  not  a  breast  mightily  well-stocked,  so  that, 
whenever  there  is  necessity,  he  may  draw  his  supph^  from  his 
own  breast.  No  one  can  be  a  person  well  to  do  *  *  * 
unless  he  understands  both  how  to  do  good  and  how  to  do  evil. 
With  rogues  he  must  be  a  rogue ;  with  thieves  let  him  filch 
whatever  he  can.  It  befits  him  who  is  truly  wise,  to  be  a  person 
that  can  shift  his  very  skin^.  Good  with  the  good  let  him  be, 
bad  with  the  bad :  just  as  things  are,  so  let  him  ever  frame 
his  humour.  But  I  should  like  to  know  how  much  gold  my 
master  has  taken  for  himself,  and  what  he  has  given  up  to  his 
father.  If  he  is  a  prudent  person,  he  has  made  a  Hercules*  of 
his  parent :  he  has  given  him  the  tenth  part,  amd  has  kept  back 
nine  for  himself.  But,  see !  the  person  whom  I  was  looking 
fop;  he  meets  me  most  opportunely.  (JTo  Mnesilochus.) 

*  Be  worth  Ms  we^Af)— Ver.  640.  "  Atiro  expendi.**  literally,  "  to  be  weighed 
agunst  gold." 

'  Those  Parmenos) — Ver.  649.  Syrus  and  Parmeno  were  the  names  of  certain 
cnfiy  intrigning  slaves  introduced  in  Comedy.  The  first  occurs  as  the  name  of 
a  Blave  in  the  Adelphi  of  Terence ;  the  second  in  his  Eunuchus. 

*  Shift  his  very  skin)— Ver.  668.  "  Vorsipellis."  Literally,  "  a  turner  of  his 
skin;"  similar  in  meaning  to  our  expression,  a  **  turncoat." 

*  Has  made  a  Hercules) — Ver.  665.  A  tenth  part  of  the  spoil  taken  in  warfare 
was  deroted  to  Hercules ;  and  it  was  believed  to  ensure  prosperity,  if  persons  de- 
voted a  tenth  of  their  possessions  to  the  same  Divinity. 


y  Google 


184  BAGCHIDBa ;  Act  IV. 

Has  any  of  your  money  fallen  down,  my  master,  tliat  thus, 
in  silence,  you  are  looking  down  upon  the  ground  ?  Why  do 
I  see  you  two  sad  and  sorrowful  ?  I  like  it  not ;  and  'tis  not 
without  some  reason.  Are  you  going  now  to  give  me  any 
answer? 

Mkes.  I'm  undone,  Chrysalus.  Chbts.  Pterhaps  you  tocA 
too  little  of  the  gold. 

Mnes.  How,  a  plague,  too  little  ?  Why,  yes,  indeed,  a  yeiy 
great  deal  less  than  too  little. 

Chbtb.  Why  the  mischief  then,  simpleton,  since  by  my  skill 
an  opportunity  was  procured  for  that  very  purpose,  that  yoa 
might  take  as  much  as  you  pleased,  did  you  thus  take  it  up 
with  the  tips  of  two  fingers*  ?  Or,  didn't  you  know  how 
rarely  an  opportunity  of  that  kind  presents  itself  to  a  person  ? 

MitES.  Ton  are  mistaken.  Ckbts.  Why,  surely,  'tis  you 
yourself  that  were  mistak^i,  when  you  dip't  your  fm^en  in 
not  deep  enough. 

Miojs.  r  faith,  you*d  upbraid  me  more  than  now  you  d5>,  if 
you  knew  the  matter  better.     I'm  undone. 

Chbts.  My  mind  is  now  foreboding  further  mischief  from 
those  words. 

Mites.  I'm  mined.     Chbts.  How  so  ? 

MwBS.  Because  I've  given  all  up  to  my  father,  with  every 
particle  2  of  it. 

Chbts.  Given  it  up?    Mnes.  Given  it  up. 

Chbts.  What,  aU?    Mnbs.  Every  jot. 

Chbts.  We  are  done  for.  How  eame  it  into  your  mind  to 
do  this  deed  so  foul  P 

MmES.  I  had  a  suspicion,  Chrysalus,  by  reason  of  a  charge,, 
that  Baechis  and  he  {jpomUng  to  Pibtoclbbxts)  had  been 
playing  me  false ;  for  that  reason,  in  my  anger,  I  gave  up  aQ 
the  gold  to  my  father. 

Chbts.  What  did  you  say  to  your  &ther  when  you  gave 
up  the  gold  ? 

^  Two  Jmgeny^Yet,  675.  He  says  that  when  he  had  the  o^artanilT'  of 
gathering  np  the  money  by  handfols,  he  contented  himseilf  with  takii^  it  oniy 
wfth  the  tips  of  his  fingers,  that  is,  piece  hy  piece;  some  weoikl  take  '^dlg^dno 
primores"  to  mean  *'  the  two  first  fingers  of  the  hand;"  that  is^  the fisrefbger 
and  thimri).    The  meaning,  either  way,  will  be  jnst  the  same. 

2  IFtft  evefy  pto'tkUy^yer.  %8Xk  ^  Bamentinn"  pcopeiiy  means  ibe  fifii^  «r 
scrapings—"  dust  and  all,"  "  atery  partBde^" 


y  Google 


8e.  IT.  OB,  THE  TWIH-fllBTEBS.  185 

MiTES.  That  I  had  at  onee  received  tlus  gold  firomliia  host, 
Archidemides. 

Chbys.  £3i  !  by  that  apeedi  you  have  this  day  consigned 
Chrysalus  to  the  torture;  for,  wh^i  he  ahall  set  eyea  on 
me,  the  old  gentleman  will  cany  me  off  that  instant  to  the 
execntiaDer. 

Mnss.  Tre  besought  my  father.  Chbts.  I  suppose,  to 
do,  in  fact,  the  liiing  that  I  was  speaking  of  ? 

Mras.  Nay,  not  to  pinaish  yon^  or  to  blame  you  at  all  cm 
account  of  this  business.  Ana  with  some  difficulty  I've  pr^ 
Tailed.    Now,  Chrysalus,  this  must  be  your  care. 

Chbts.  "What  do  you  wish  should  be  my  care  ? 

Mnes.  That  once  again  you  should  make  a  second  inroad 
i^n  the  old  gentleman.  Contrive,  devise,  invent  whatever 
you  please ;  frame  your  plans^,  so  that  this  day  you  may 
dererly  deceive  the  old  man  unawares,  and  carry  off  the 
gold. 

Chbts.  It  scarcely  seems  possible  to  be  done. 

Mkes.  Set  about  it,  and  you'll  easily  effect  it. 

Chbys.  How  the  plague  "  easily,"  for  «^,  whom  he  has 
Hm  moment  caught  out  in  a  lie?  Should  I  entreat  him  not 
to  believe  zoe  at  all,  he  would  not  venture  eve/k  to  believe 
ne  in  that. 

Mnes.  Aye,  tmd  if  you  were  to  hear  what  things  he  said 
about  yon  in  my  presence. 

Chbts.  What  did  he  say  ? 

Mnes.  That  if  you  were  to  say  that  this  sun  was  the  son, 
he  would  believe  it  was  the  moon,  and  that  that  is  the  night 
which  is  now  the  day, 

Chbts.  By  my  troth,  I'll  bamboozle  the  old  chap  right  well 
this  very  day,  so  that  he  shan't  have  said  that  for  nc^hing. 

PiSTOC.  Now,  what  would  you  have  us  do  ? 

Chbts.  "Why,  nothing,  except  that  I  beg  you'll  gtill  love 
on.  As  for  the  rest,  ask  of  me  as  much  gola  as  you  please ; 
ril  find  it  you.  Of  what  use  is  it  for  me  to  have  the  name 
of  Chrysalua^  ludess  I  give  proofs  by  fact  p  Eut  now,  tell 
me,  Mnesilochus,  how  much  gold  is  requisite  for  you. 

*  Frame  your  jjJwm)— Ver.  693.  "  Conglufina."  LiteraBy,  "^e  i^e  pieces 
togetber." 

^  Niame  of  ChrysaJusy^Yer,  704.  His  aSndes  to  bis  name  as  derived  from  the 
CSnek  xgioorosf  **  gfMJ* 


y  Google 


186  BACCHIDBS  ;  Act  IV# 

Mites.  There's  occasion  for  two  hundred  pieces  at  once, 
to  pay  the  Captain  for  Bacchis. 

Chets.  I'll  find  it  you.  Mites.  Then  we  have  need  of 
some  for  current  expenses. 

Chets.  Aye,  aye,  I  wish  us  to  do  each  thing  deliberately  * 
when  I've  accomplished  the  one,  then  I'll  set  about  the 
other.  First,  for  the  two  hundred  pieces,  I  shall  direct  my 
engine  of  war  against  the  old  gentleman.  If  with  that  en- 
gine I  batter  down  the  tower  and  the  outworks,  straight 
at  the  gate  that  instant  I'll  attack  the  old  town  and  the  new 
one ;  if  I  take  it,  then  carry  to  your  friends  the  gold  in 
baskets,  just  as  your  heart  wishes. 

PiSTOC.  Our  hearts  are  with  you,  Chrysalus. 

Chets.  Now,  do  you  go  in-doors  to  Bacchis,  FistocleruSi 
and  quickly  bring  out 

PisToc.  "What?  Chets.  A  pen,  some  wax^,  tablets,  and 
some  cord. 

PiSToc.  I'll  have  them  here  this  instant.  (Goes  into  the 
house!) 

Mnes.  What  now  are  you  about  to  do  ?    Do  tell  me  that. 

Chets.  Let  a  breakfast  be  prepared ;  there  will  be  you 
two,  and  your  mistress  will  make  a  third  with  you. 

Mnes.  Just  as  you  say.  Chets.  Pistoclerus  has  no 
mistress  ? 

Mnes.  O  yes,  she's  here ;  he's  in  love  with  the  one  sister,  I 
with  the  other,  both  of  the  name  of  Bacchis. 

Chets.  What  were  you  going  to  say  ?  Mkes.  This ;  how 
we  are  to  manage^. 

Chets.  Where  are  your  couches^  laid  out  ?  Mkes.  Why 
do  you  ask  that  ? 

Chets.  So  the  matter  stands ;  I  wish  to  be  informed.  You 

*  Some  toaxy^Yer.  715.  This  wax  was  to  be  used— not  to  be  placed  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  tablets,  but  in  the  manner  of  our  sealing-wax,  upon  the  strings  with 
which  the  tablets  were  fastened. 

'  Are  to  manage) — ^Ver.  720.  Mnesilochus  is  probably  going  to  ask  how  they 
are  about  to  arrange,  when  he  is  interrupted  bj  Chrysalus,  who  then  asks  him 
what  he  was  going  to  say,  on  which  he  answers  that  he  was  going  to  obseire  how 
many  there  would  be  at  the  entertainment. 

»  Your  coucke8)~~Yer.  720.  "  Biclinium "  is  supposed  to  mean  either  a  snug 
room  fitted  up  with  only  two  "  lecti,"  or  couches  for  reclining  at  meals,  or  else, 
perhaps  with  more  probability,  a  couch  formed  for  holding  two  guests,  instead  of 
three,  as  the  common  "  triclinium  "  did.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  use  of  these 
was  especially  adopted  in  houses  of  the  character  of  that  kept  by  Baochis. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  IV.  OE,  THE  TWnr-BISTEES.  187 

know  not  what  I  am  about  to  do,  nor  what  a  great  exploit  I 
shall  attempt. 

M5ES.  Give  me  your  hand,  and  follow  me  close,  to  the 
door.  Peep  in.  (Chetsalus  looks  in  at  the  door  of  the  house 
o/Bacchis.) 

Chets.  Hurra !  'Tis  a  very  pretty  place,  this,  and  exactly 
as  I  could  wish  it  to  be. 

Me-enter  Fistocleeus,  with  pen  and  tablets, 

PiSTOc.  The  things  that  you  ordered — ^what's  ordered  for 
a  good  purpose  is  forthwith  done  by  the  obedient. 

Chrts.  What  have  you  brought?  PiSTOO.  Everything 
that  you  bade  me  bring. 

Chbts.  (to  MioisiLOCHUs).  Do  you  taJce  the  pen  at  once, 
and  these  tablets. 

Mites,  (taking  them).  What  then?  Chets.  Write  there 
what  I  shall  bid  you ;  for  I  wish  you  to  write  for  this  reason, 
that  your  father  may  know  the  hand  when  he  reads  it.  Write 
now, 

Mkes.  What  shall  I  write?  Chets.  Health  to  your 
&fcher,  in  your  own  language.     (Mitesiloohtjs  writes.) 

PiSToc.  Suppose  he  were  to  write  "  disease  and  death,"  in 
preference,  that  would  be  much  better. 

Chets.  Don't  you  interrupt  us.  Mkes.  What  you  have 
ordered  is  now  written  on  the  wax. 

Chets.  Tell  me  in  what  terms. 

Minss.  "Mnesilochus  sends  health  to  his  father." 
.  Chets.  Write  this,  too,  quickly :  "  My  father,  Chrysalus 
18  always  and  everywhere  talking  at  me,  and  in  no  measured 
*®nn8,  because  I  gave  you  up  the  gold,  and  because  I  did 
liot  cheat  you  of  it."     (Mnesilochus  writes.) 

PiSToc.  Stop  till  he  has  written  it.  Chets.  It  befits  the 
hand  of  a  lover  to  be  active. 

PiSToc.  I'  faith,  that  hand  is  more  active  by  far  at  lavishing 
^^  at  writing. 

^fes.  Say  on ;  that's  written  down. 

Chets.  "  Now,  my  dear  father,  do  you  henceforth  be  on 
your  guard  against  him,  for  he  is  forming  knavish  plans  to 
jeprive  you  of  the  gold,  and  has  declared  that  he  will  have  it 
t^evond  a  doubt."    Write  legibly. 

jfees.  You  only,  dictate.  (^Writes.)  Chets.  "And  he 
promises  that  he  will  give  this  gold  to  me,  for  me  to  give 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


188  BACCHIDSB ;  Act  lY. 

away  to  naughly  women^  and  to  consume  it  and  live  like  a 
Greek^  in  dens  of  infamy.  But,  father,  do  you  take  care  that 
he  does  not  impose  on  you  this  day ;  I  enlareat  yoo,  do  beware." 

Mites.  Bo  say  on.     Chbts.  Just  write  on,  then. 

Mbtes.  Only  say  what  I  am  to  write. 

Chbys.  (IVbTESHiOCHXis  writing),  "But,  Dsither,  what  you 

E remised  me  I  beg  that  you  will  remember,  that  you  will  no* 
eat  him,  but  keep  him  in  chains  at  your  house  at  bome." 
Do  you  give  me  the  wax  and  cord  forthwith.  Come,  fasten  it. 
Off <?  seal  it  in  an  instant. 

Mne^.  (sealing  the  tablets).  Prithee,  what  use  is  there  in 
this  writing  after  such  a  fashion,  that  he  is  to  give  m>  cre- 
dence to  you,  and  to  keep  you  in  chains  at  home  r 

Chbts.  Because  it  pleases  me  so.  Can't  you  possibly  take 
care  of  your  own  self,  and  have  no  thought  about  me  P  In 
confidence  in  myself  I  undertook  the  task,  and  at  my  own 
peril  do  I  carry  on  the  matter. 

Mjtes.  You  say  what's  true.    Chbys.  Give  me  the  tablets. 

Mnbs.  (giving  them).  Take  them.  Chbts.  Give  atten- 
tion now ;  Mnesilochus,  and  you,  FistoderuSy  do  you  take 
care  that  each  of  you  goes  at  once  and  reclines  on  his  eoueh 
with  his  mistress ;  so  'tis  requisite ;  and  on  l^t  saoie  i^ot 
where  the  couches  are  now  laid,  do  you  forthwiih  eownmenee 
to  carouse. 

PiSTOC.  Anything  else  ?  Chbts.  This>  and  this  especially : 
when  you  shall  have  once  taken  your  places  togethi^^  don't 
you  arise  anyhow,  until  the  signal  shall  be  given  by  me. 

Pistoo.  0  skilful  commander  I  Chbts.  Yoiu  ought  by  this 
time  to  have  taken  your  second  draught. 

Mites.  Capital;  let's  go,  Chbts.  Do  you  take  care  of 
your  ^fy,  and  I'll  do  mine»  (Mkssiloghits  and  PiSTO€£BBirs 
go  into  the  house,) 

Scene  Y. 

Chbtsalxts,  alone, 

Chbts.  A  tremendously  great  business  am  I  undertaking, 

and  I  have  my  fears  how  in  this  one  day  I  may  accomplish  it. 

But  now  I  have  occasion  for  the  old  blade  to  be  fierce  and 

savage  at  me.    For  it  suits  not  this  plan  of  mine  that  the  old 

I  Lwe  like  a  Greek) — Ver,  743.  It  has  beea  before  remarked,  that  the  Greek 
mode  of  free  living  had  passed  into  &  proverb  with  the  Bomans,  among  whom  a 
person  of  a  licentions  mode  of  life  was  sud  "  congrsecare,"  ^'  to  lire  like  a  Greek.** 
Fhixtos  forgets  that  th&  scene  is  at  Athenai 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Se.  71  OB,  THE  TWIV-SISTESS.  189 

Mofw  should  be  ealin  when  he  has  beheld  me  in  his  pre- 
sence. I'll  turn  him  about^  this  day,  finely,  if  I  Kve,  I'll 
have  him  parched  as  well  as  ever  pea  was  parched^.  I'U  walk 
befine  the  door,  ihat  when  he  comes  out,  at  once  as  he  eomes 
up,  I  may  put  the  letter^  in  his  hand.     (Stands  near  tie  door 

^BJlGCHIS.) 

ScekbYL 
Enier  Nioobttlus,  ai  a  distance. 

Nico.  This  is  a  matter  of  great  vexation  to  me,  that 
CbrysaluB  has  thus  escaped  me  this  day. 

Chbts.  {aside),  I'm  aH  right:  the  old  fellow  is  in  a  pas- 
sion.    Now's  my  time  for  me  to  accost  my  man. 

Nice.  "Who  speaks  hard  by?  {Looking  rotmd.)  Why 
surely  this  is  Chrysalus,  I  think. 

Chbts.  (aside).  I'll  accost  him.  Nico.  My  honest  ser- 
vant, hail  to  you.  What's  doing  now  ?  How  soon  do  I  set  sail 
for  Ephesus,  to  bring  back  the  gold  home  from  Theotimus  ? 
WhOr — ^silent  ?  I  swear  by  all  the  Gods,  if  I  didn't  love  my 
8on  BO  much  as  to  wish  everything  done  for  him  that  he 
desires  #*****  that  your  sides  should  be 
wealed  now  right  well  with  rods,  and  that  in  irons  at  the 
mill  you  should  be  lingering  out  your  life,  I've  learnt  of 
Mnesilochus  all  your  wicked  pranks. 

Chbys.  Has  he  accused  me  ?  'Tis  very  good;  I  am  a  bad 
one,  I  am  a  cursed  one — ^a  wicked  one.  Only  reflect  upon  the 
matter.    I'll  utter  not  one  word 

Nico.  What  ?    Hangdog,  do  you  even  threaten  me^  P 

Chbts.  Tou'U  find  out  before  long  what  sort  of  man  he  is. 
He  ordered  me  just  now  to  carry  this  letter  to  you.  He  re- 
quested thtft  tiiat  which  is  there  written  may  be  done. 

^  Tvm  Mm  oiottO— Yer.  766.  It  !s  not  improbable  that  tliis  figare  is  borrowed 
frnn  ftjmg  fish  in  the  kitchen — "^  ¥^en  lie  is  done  aa.  one  side,  I'll  torn  him  on 
theoOttc*' 

*  iW  ttw*  jwrcfted)— Ver.  767.  "  IVicfcum  deer,"  "  puthed  yetches."  Horace 
mentions  these  dainties.  Thej  were  mostlj  purchased  by  the  iower  orders,  and 
byslttves. 

*  Ptrf  ihe  JeUery—^er,  769.  His  object  is  to  entrap  old  Nlcobtdus  in  such  a 
vaj  that  he  must  of  necessity  see  his  son  in  the  company  of  the  damsels,  on  which 
Ite  will  be  inclined  the  more  readily  to  believe  the  story  that  he  has  formed  an  in- 
trigue with  the  wife  of  the  Captain. 

*  Even  threaten  me) — ^Ver.  785.  Kicobnlns  takes  it  for  a  threat,  when  he  tells 
Imn  **  specta  rem  modo,**  "  only  reflect  upon  the  matter." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


190  BACCHIDES ;  Act  IV. 

Nioo.  Give  it  me.  Chbts.  Take  notice  of  the  seal.  {Oives 
him  the  tablets.) 

Nice.  I  know  it.    Where  is  he  himself? 

Chbts.  I  don't  know.  I  ought  to  know  nothing  now; 
iVe  forgotten  everything.  I  know  that  I'm  a  slave;  I 
know  not  even  that  which  I  do  know.  (Aside,)  Nowfiromthe 
springe  this  thrush  is  catching  at  the  worm ;  he'll  be  finely 
noosed  this  day,  so  well  I've  set  the  snare. 

Nice.  Stay  here  but  a  moment;  I'll  return  to  you 
directly,  Chjysalus,     {Goes  into  his  house,) 

Chbts.  How  he  does  dissemble  with  me ;  how  ignorant  I 
am  of  the  business  he's  about.  He  has  gone  to  fetch  slaves 
from  in-doors  to  bind  me.  The  ship  speeds  prosperously  on ; 
finely,  too,  is  this  craft  boarding  it^.  But  I'llhold  my  tongue, 
for  I  hear  the  door  opening. 

Scene  TII. 
Me^nter  Nicobtiltis,  with  Slaves  avnrying  fetters. 

Nice.  Artamo,  do  you  fasten  the  hands  of  that  fellow, 
this  very  instant.     (The  Slaves  hind  him,) 

Chbts.  "What  have  I  done  P  Nico.  Pitch  your  fist  into 
him  if  he  mutters  a  word.  (To  Ckbysajuub,  jpointin^  at  the 
tablets.)  "What  does  this  letter  say  ? 

Chbts.  Why  do  you  ask  me  ?  As  I  received  it  from  him, 
so  I've  brought  it  sealed  to  you. 

Nico.  Come  now,  you  rascal,  have  you  not  shamefully 
abused  my  son  in  your  talk,  because  he  gave  me  up  that  gold, 
and  said  that  you  would  still  take  that  gold  away  from  me  by 
some  knavish  trick  ? 

Chbts.  Have  I  said  so?    Nico.  Touhave. 

Chbts.  What  person  is  there,  who  says  that  I've  said  so  P 

Nico.  Hold  your  tongue.  No  person  says  so ;  this  letter 
which  you  have  brought  me  accuses  you.  See,  'tis  this  that 
requests  you  to  be  chained.     (Foints  to  the  open  tablets.) 

Chbts.  Ah !  your  son  has  been  making  a  Bellerophon^  of 

1  Crqfl  hoarding  it)— Yer.  797.  "  Pulcre  hsec  confertur  ratis."  This  is  a 
figure  taken  from  naval  affairs.  Ships  were  said  "  conferri"  when  thej  closed 
together  on  commencing  the  engagement. 

2  A  BeUerophon) — ^Ver.  810.  He  alludes  to  the  hero  Bellerophon,  who,  being 
accused  by  Sthenobcea  of  having  made  an  attempt  on  her  chastity,  was  sent  by 
Proetos,  King  of  Argos,  with  a  letter  to  lobates,  in  which  he  was  desired  to  pat 
the  bearer  to  death. 


y  Google 


^ 


Sc.  Vn.  OB,  THE  TWnr-SISTBES.  191 

me;  I  myself  brougBt  this  letter,  for  the  purpose  that  I 
might  be  bound.    Be  it  so. 

Nice.  This  I  am  doing  for  this  reason,  because  you  per- 
suade my  son  to  live  like  a  Greek  with  you,  you  thrice-dotted 
Tillain. 

Chets.  (aside).  O  fool,  fool,  you  know  not  that  you  are 
at  this  moment  on  sale ;  and  tnat  you  are  standing  on  the 
Yen  stone  1  as  the  auctioneer  puts  you  up. 

mco.  (overhearing  him),  Jjiswer  me ;  who  is  selling  me  ? 

Chbts.  He  whom  the  Gods  fevour^  dies  in  youth,  while 
he  is  in  his  health,  has  his  senses  and  judgment  sound.  This 
person  (pointing  to  Nicobttlus),  if  any  God  had  favoured 
nim,  ought  to  have  been  dead  more  than  ten  years — oy^, 
more  than  twenty  years  ago.  'Tis  for  long,  he  has  walkecf,  a 
nuisance,  on  the  e£a*th ;  so  devoid  is  he  of  either  judgment  or 
sense.    He  is  of  as  much  value  as  a  rotten  mushroom  is. 

Nico.  Do  you  think  that  I  am  a  nuisance  to  the  earth  ? 
Away  with  lum  in-doors,  and  tie  him  tightly  to  the  post. 
Tou  shall  never  take  away  any  gold  from  here. 

Chets.  No,  but  you'll  soon  be  giving  it  me. 

Nico.  I,  give  it  you  ?  Cheys.  You'll  be  entreating  me, 
too,  of  your  own  accord  to  receive  it,  when  you  shall  come  to 
know  this  accuser  of  mine,  iu  how  great  danger  and  in  what 
a  dreadful  situation  he  is.  Then  will  you  be  offering  his  liberty 
to  Chrysalus ;  but  I  certainly  shan't  accept  it. 

Nice.  Tell  me,  source  of  mischief,  tell  me,  in  what  danger 
is  my  son  Mnesilochus. 

Chets.  Follow  me  this  way ;  I'll  soon  let  you  know. 

Nico.  Where  on  earth  shall  I  follow  you  ? 

Chets.  Only  three  steps.    Nioo.  Aye,  ten  even. 

Chets.  Come,  then,  Artamo,  do  you  open  you  this  door 
but  a  very  little  way ;  softly,  don't  make  it  creak.  (The  door 
cfthe  house  o/^Bacchis  is  opened,)  That's  enough.  Now, 
step  you  hither.  (To  Nicobttlus,  who  looks  in.)  Do  you  see 
the  entertainment  P 

^  On  the  wry  done) — ^Ver.  815.  He  alludes  to  the  stone  npon  which  the 
"pneco,"  or  "auctioneer,"  stood  with  the  slaves,  when  he  sold  them  by  auction. 
Oolj  the  cheapest  and  the  least  desirable  of  them  were  sold  in  this  war. 

*  Whom  &e  Godsfavowy-^Yer.  817.  Menander  has  a  sentence  to  the  effect — 
"He  whom  the  Gods  love,  dies  young."  Chrysalus  tells  Kicobulus  that  he  is 
clearly  no  favorite  of  the  Gods,  or  he  would  have  died  long  since. 


y  Google 


192  BAC0HID£8;  Acfe  IT. 

Nioo.  {Hill  looking  in)*  I  see  Pistod^ms  and  Baocbk 
right  opposite. 

Chbt8.  Who  are  upon  that  other  oonch  i 

Nico.  (looking  on  the  other  tide).  Wretch  thai  I  am,  I'm 
undone.     Chetb.  Do  you  recognize  that  person  ? 

I^ioo.  I  do  recognize  him.  Chbts.  How  tell  me,  if  you 
please,  does  that  woman  seem  of  handsome  appearance  ? 

Nice.  Very  much  so.  Chsys.  Well,  do  you  take  her  to 
be  a  courtesan? 

Nice.  Why  not?    Ghbys.  You  are  mistakeD^ 

Nioo.  Who  is  she  then,  pritiiee  ?  Ghbys.  You'll  find  out ; 
from  me,  indeed,  you'll  get  no  more  information  to-day. 

soEinE  vm. 

JEnter  CusoKACHrs,  at  a  didance. 

Cleom.  (a^otM^.  Is  this  Mnesilochus,  the  son  of  Nicobu- 
lufi,  by  force  to  detain  my  own  mistress  ?  What  proceeding 
is  this  ? 

Nico.  Who's  this  ?  Chets.  (<mde) .  This  Captain's  oppor- 
tunely come  for  me. 

Gleom.  He  doesn't  consider  that  I  am  a  soldier,  but  a 
woman,  who  camiot  defend  myself  and  mine.  But  may 
neither  Bellona  nor  Mars  oyer  put  confidence  in  me,  if  I  don't 
put  him  out  of  life,  if  I  meet  him,  or  if  I  don't  make  him 
lose  possession  of  his  existence. 

Nico.  Ghrysalus,  who's  this  that's  threatening  my  son  ? 

Ghbys.  Tms  is  the  husband  of  that  woman  w%h  whom  he 
is  now  reclining. 

Nico.  What  1    The  husband  ? 

Ghbys.  The  husband,  I  say.  Nice.  Prithee,  is  she  mar^ 
riedthenP 

Ghbys.  You'll  know  before  Tsyry  long. 

Nico.  Wretch  thst  lam;  I'm  utterly  undone. 

Ghbys.  How  now  P  Does  Ghrysalus  seem  9ueh  STillainto 
you?  Come,  chain  me  now\fl»£?  do  listento  your  son.  Didn't 
I  teH  you  that  you  would  discover  what  sort  of  person  he  is  ? 

Nico.  What  shall  I  do  now?  Ghbys.  Order  me  at  once 
to  be  released,  if  you  please;  for,  if  I'm  not  released,  he'll 
just  now  be  oyerpowermg  the  youmg  man  in  our  presence. 

1  Chain  me  nowy-Yer,  855.  He  sajs  this  satirically,  p(untiDg  to  liis  fetters. 


y  Google 


Sc.  Vm.  OE,  THE  TWIK-BISTEBS,  193 

Gleom.  There's  no  gain  that  I  should  this  day  take  so 
much  delight  in  making,  as  J«^ouZ(f  in  falliag  upon  him  as 
he  reclines  with  her,  so  that  I  might  kill  them  both. 

Chets.  {to  NicoBTJLrs).  Don't  you  hear  what  he  says? 
Why  don*t  you  order  me  to  be  released  ? 

Nice,  (fo  ^Atf  Slaves).  Unbind  him.  I'm  ruined;  wretch 
that  lam!     I'm  in  a  dreadful  fright. 

Cleom.  Then  I'd  make  her,  who  publicly  puts  up  her 
person  for  sale,  not  to  say  that  she  has  got  a  person  for  her 
to  laugh  at. 

Chets.  (to  Nicobttlus).  You  may  make  terms  with  him 
for  a  little  money. 

Nico.  Make  terms,  then,  I  beg,  for  what  you  like;  so 
that  he  mayn't,  in  our  presence,  fall  upon  the  young  man,  or 
kill  him  outright. 

Cleom.  Unless  the  two  hundred  Philippeans  are  repaid 
to  me  at  once,  I'll  this  instant  swallow  the  lives  of  them 
both  outright. 

Nico.  {to  Chetbalus).  Make  terms  with  him,  if  you  can ; 
prithee,  do  make  haste ;  agree  for  any  sum  you  lie. 

Chets.  I'll  go,  and  do  it  carefully.  {Ghea  v^  to  Cleo- 
MACHTJS.)  Why  are  you  exclaiming  so  ? 

Cleom.  "Where's  your  master?  Chets.  Nowhere;  I 
don't  know.     Do  you  wish  the  two  hundred  pieces  to  be 

Cmised  you  at  once,  so  as  to  make  no  riot  or  disturbance 
e? 

Cleom.  There's  nothing  that  I  would  desire  more. 

Chets.  And  that  I  may  heap  many  a  curse  upon  you  ? 

Cleom.  Just  as  you  please.  Chets.  {asiik).  How  the 
villain  does  cringe.  {To  Cleomachus.)  This  is  the  father  of 
Mnesilochus :  follow  me ;  he  shall  promise  it  you.  Do  you 
ask  for  the  gold.  As  to  the  rest,  a  word's  enough^.  {They 
go  up  to  NicoBULUs.) 

Nico.  What  has  been  done?  Chets.  I've  struck  the 
bargain  for  two  hundred  Philippeans. 

Nice.  Well  done!  Goddess  Salvation^,  thou  hast  saved 
me.    Well,  how  soon  am  I  to  say  I'll  pay  it  ? 

^  A  word^B  enough) — ^Ver.  878.  He  says  this,  as  be  is  afraid  that  if  the  con- 
venation  proceeds  to  any  length,  the  old  man  will  discover  that  she  is  not  the 
Captain's  wife. 

*  SdhatUm) — ^Ver.  879.  It  was  a  proverbial  expression  with  the  Eomans  to  say 
tiiat the  Goddess  «Salu8,"  "health,"  or  "salvation,"  "had  saved,"  or  "could 
not  save  "  a  person,  as  the  case  might  be. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


194  BAOCHLDES ;  Ajst  lY. 

Ghbys.  (to  CLEOMACHrs).  Bo  you  ask  it  of  him;  and  (to 
NicoBiTLTJs)  do  jrou  promise  it  him. 

Nice.  I  promise  it.     (To  Cleomachtts.)  Come^  ask  me. 

CiiEOM.  Will  you  give  me  two  hundred  golden  Philip- 
pean  pieces,  lawful  money  ? 

Chets.  "  They  shall  be  given,"  say :  do  answer  him. 

Nice.  I'll  give  them.  Chets.  "Well,  now,  filthy  fellow, 
is  there  anything  owing  to  you  ?  Why  are  you  plaguing 
him  ?  Why  are  you  frightening  him  about  death  ?  Both  1 
and  he  wish  you  every  ffl.  luck.  If  you  have  a  sword,  still 
we  have  a  spit  at  home ;  with  which,  in  fact,  if  you  provoke 
me,  I'll  make  you  more  full  of  holes  than  a  rat's  skm^  when 
catiffht  in  a  tra^.  I'  faith,  for  my  part,  some  time  since  I 
foimd  out  what  suspicion  it  was  that  tormented  you ;  namely, 
that  he  was  with  that  wife  ofyowrs, 

Cleom.  Yes;  and  so  he  is.  Ghbta.  So  may  Jupiter, 
Juno,  Ceres,  Minerva,  Hope,  Latona,  Ops,  Virtue,  Yenus, 
Castor,  Pollux,  Mars,  Mercury,  Hercules,  Summanus^,  tiie 
Sun,  Saturn,  and  all  the  Deities,  prosper  me,  he  neither  re- 
clines with  her,  nor  walks,  nor  kisses,  nor  does  that  which  is 
wont  to  be  reported. 

Nice,  (aside).  How  he  does  swear!  He's  saving  me, 
however,  by  his  perjury. 

Cleom.  Where  then,  at  this  moment,  is  Mnesilochus  P 

Cheys.  His  &ther  has  sent  him  into  the  country.     Atmj 

*she  has  gone  hence  to  the  citadel,  to  see  the  temple  of 

Minerva.     The  door's  open  now ;  go  in,  and  see  if  he's  there. 

Cleom.  I'll  be  off  to  the  Porum  next. 

Chets.  Or  rather,  by  my  troth,  to  very  perdition. 

Cleom.  Am  I  to  demand  this  gold  to-day  P 

Chbys.  Demand  it,  and  go  hang  yourself;  don't  you  sup- 
pose, you  worthless  fellow,  that  we  shall  be  entreating  of  you. 
(JSant  Cleomachtts.)     He's  taken  himself  off.    Permit  me, 

»  A  rat's  shiny-Yer,  889.  " Soricinfi n»nia,"  "than  a  rat's  ditty,"  litecally. 
This  was,  no  doubt,  a  proverbial  saying,  and  speaking  elllptically,  was,  perhaps, 
intended  to  apply  to  the  sqneaking  of  a  rat  when  his  body  was  pierced  with  holes 
while  held  fiist  in  the  trap.  There  is,  however,  great  obscurity  in  the  passage,  and 
Commentators  are  very  much  divided  as  to  its  meamng. 

<  SummanMs) — ^Ver.  895.  It  is  not  accurately  known  who  the  Deity  Summaniu 
was.  Ovid,  in  his  Fasti,  B.  6, 1.  731,  speaks  in  uncertainty  of  him.  He  is,  how- 
ever, generally  thought  to  have  been  the  same  with  Pluto,  who  was  ao  called  as 
being  **  Summus  Maniun,"  "  the  Chief  of  the  Spirits."  Yano  j^ya  that  his  ^ 
ship  was  introduced  by  Tatius  the  Sabine. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  IX.  OB,  tbj:  orvnar-sisTEBS.  195 

master,  I  entreat  you  by  the  immortal  Gt)dfi,  to  go  in-doors 
here  to  yoTJT  son.     (Fomting  to  the  house  of  Bacohis.) 

Nico.  But  why  go  in  there  ?  Chetb.  That  with  many 
words  I  may  rebuke  him,  since  after  this  fashion  he  has 
been  going  on  this  way. 

Nice.  Well,  I  beg  you  will  do  so,  Chrysalus;  and  I  entreat 
jou  not  to  spare  hirn  in  your  talking  to  him. 

Chets.  And  do  you  instruct  even  myself?  Isn't  it  sufli- 
ci^t,  if  this  day  he  shall  hear  &om  me  more  harsh  things 
thaa  ever  Clinias  heard^  from  Demetrius?  (Goes  into  the 
fottwof  Bacchis.) 

!Nico.  This  servant  of  mine  is  very  like  a  running  eye ;  if 
you  have  it  not,  you  don't  wish  for  it  or  desire  it ;  if  you  have 
it,  you  can't  keep  off  from  rubbing  it.  But  if  he  hadn't,  by 
lu(iy  chance,  been  here  to-day,  the  Captain  would  have 
surprised  Mnesilochus  with  his  wife,  and  have  killed  him 
«  an  adult^er  detected  in  the  fact.  Now,  in  a  manner  have 
I  ransomed  my  son  with  the  two  hundred  Philippeans  which 
I  have  promised  to  give  to  the  Captain ;  which,  however,  I 
shall  not  rashly  pay  him  down,  before  I  have  met  with  my  son. 
By  my  troth,  I'll  never  rashly  give  credence  in  anything  to 
Chry  wus-  But  I  have  a  mind  even  once  again  to  read  over 
this  letter ;  'tis  right  that  when  a  letter  is  sealed  we  should 
give  credence  to  it.     {Goes  into  his  house.) 

SOBITE  IX. 

Unter  Cwbybalvb  from  the  house  of  Bacchis. 

Chbts.  The  two  brothers,  the  sons  of  Atreus,  are  said  to 
have  done  a  most  famous  deed,  when,  with  arms,  and  horses, 
and  an  army,  and  with  chosen  warriors,  and  with  ships  a 
^^lousand  in  number,  after  the  tenth  year,  they  subdued 
Pergamus,  the  native  land  of  Priam,  founded  by  hands 
dime.  Not  more  decidedly  did  it  fall  by  the  engine  of  war, 
than  I  shall  storm  my  master  here,  without  a  £eet,  and  with- 
out an  army  and  so  great  array  of  soldiers.  I  have  won,  I 
have  taken  Dy  storm  this  gold  from  his  father  for  my  master's 
son,  in  his  amour.  Now,  before  the  old  man  comes  here, 
I^h  to  lament  until  he  does  come  out.     O  Troy!  O  my 

*  (XiUat  Aeord)— Vcr.  912.  He  is  alluding  to  a  scene  in  some  play,  then  well 
kaowD,  which  is  now  lost.  In  it,  Demetrias  was  probably  severe  upon  Gallias. 
Tile  Delpbin  editor  thinks  that  this  most  haye  been  a  proverb. 

o2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


196  BACCHIDES ;  Act  IV. 

coTintry!  0  Pergamus!  O  Priam!  old  man,  you  are  tm* 
done,  you^  who'll  be  wretchedly  and  shockingly  choused  out  of 
four  hundred  golden  Philippeans.  Por  those  tablets,  sealed 
on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other,  they  are  not  tablets,  but 
the  horse  which  the  Grreeks  sent,  of  wood.  Pistoclerus  is 
the  Epeus^ ;  from  him  were  these  received.  Mnesilochus  is 
the  Simon  left  behind.  Behold  him !  not  in  Achilles'  tomb, 
but  on  a  couch  he  reclines :  he  has  Bacchis  with  him ;  just 
as  the  other  formerly  had  the  fire  with  which  to  give  the 
signal ;  so  now  does  she  inflame  himself.  I  am  Ulysses,  by 
whose  advice  they  do  these  things.  Then,  the  characters 
which  there  are  written,  are  the  soldiers  in  this  horse,  armed 
and  of  high  courage.  So  even  thus  far  has  the  matter  pros- 
pered with  me.  This  horse,  too,  will  be  making  his  attack, 
not  on  a  citadel,  but  on  a  coffer^.  A  ruin,  a  destruction,  a 
cleaner-out  of  the  old  man's  gold,  will  this  horse  prove  this 
day.  To  this  siUy  old  man  of  ours,  in  fact,  I  give  the  name  of 
Hium ;  the  Captain  is  Menelaiis ;  I,  Agamemnon ;  I,  too,  am 
Ulysses,  the  son  of  Laertes ;  Mnesilochus  is  Alexand^r^,  who 
will  be  the  destruction  of  his  father's  fortunes ;  he  has  borne 
off  the  Helen,  on  whose  account  I  am  now  carrying  on  the 
siege  of  Ilium.  Por  there  I  have  heard  say  that  Ulysses 
was  both  bold  and  full  of  mischief,  just  as  I  am,  I  have 
been  detected  in  my  tricks — ^he,  discovered  in  a  beggar's 
guise,  had  almost  perished,  while  he  was  spying  out  there 
the  doings  of  the  Trojans.  Similarly  has  it  happened  to  my- 
self to-day.  I  have  been  bound,  but  by  my  devices  I  have 
redeemed  myself ;  he,  too,  preserved  himself  by  artifice.  I 
have  heard  that  there  were  three  destinies^  attending  Troy, 
which  were  fatal  to  it ;  if  the  statue  should  be  lost  from  tne 

1  Is  the  Epeus^—Ver,  937.  Epeus  was  the  bnilder  of  the  wooden  horse.  When 
the  treacherous  Sinon  was  left  behind,  he  larked  in  the  tomb  of  Achilles,  or,  ac- 
cording to  some,  in  that  of  Palamedes. 

^  Not  on  a  citadel,  but  on  a  coffer) — Ver.  943.  He  pnns  on  the  resemblanee  of 
the  words  "  arcem,"  a  "  citadel,"  and  "  arcara,*'  a  "  chest"  or  "  cofler." 

»  Alexander)— Ver.  947.  Alexander  was  one  of  the  names  of  Paris,  the  son  of 
Priam. 

*  There  were  three  destinies) — Ver.  953.  He  has  omitted  three  of  the  coremB- 
stances  hj  which  the  downfall  of  Troy  was  to  be  precipitated — ^namelj:  if  tbe 
horses  of  Bhesns  should  be  captured  before  they  had  tasted  of  the  pastures  of  Tnqr 
and  the  waters  of  Xanthus ;  if  the  bow  and  arrow  of  Hercules  should  be  employed 
in  the  siege ;  and  if  one  of  the  posterity  of  Achilles  should  be  present ;  in  aD  wMeh 
circumstances  the  Greeks  were  eventually  favoured. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


8c.  IX.  OE,  THE  TWIN-SI8TEHS,  197 

citadel ;  whereas  the  second  was  the  death  of  Troilus ;  the 
third  W€t8  when  the  upper  lintel  of  the  Phrygian  gate^  should 
be  demolished.  Just  so  are  there  three  fatalities  for  this 
Troy  of  ours,  corresponding  with  those  three ;  for,  first  of 
all,  when,  a  short  time  since,  as  I  told  our  old  gentleman 
the  lying  story  about  his  host,  and  the  gold,  and  the  bark, 
then,  that  instant,  did  I  steal  the  statue^  from  the  citadel. 
And  even  then  two  fatalities  were  remaining,  and  no  further 
had  I  taken  this  city.  Afterwards,  when  I  carried  the  letter 
to  th^  old  man,  then  I  killed  my  Troilus.  When  he  sup- 
posed, just  now,  that  Mnesilochus  was  with  the  Captain's 
wife,  from  that,  with  difficulty,  did  I  disengage  myself.  And 
that  danger  do  I  compare  to  what  they  say,  how  that  Ulysses, 
recognized  by  Helen^,  was  betrayed  to  Hecuba.  But  as,  in 
olden  time,  oy  his  coaxing  arts,  he  liberated  himself  from 
her,  and  persimded  her  to  let  him  go,  so  I,  by  my  devices, 
have  rescued  myself  from  the  danger,  and  have  deceived  the 
old  man.  Afterwards,  I  engaged  with  the  blustering  Cap- 
tain, who,  unarmed,  takes  cities  with  his  words,  and  there  I 
repulsed  my  man.  Then  I  engaged  in  fight  with  the  old  gen- 
tleman ;  straightway  by  one  lying  device  did  I  vanquish  him ; 
by  one  blow,  in  a  moment,  did  I  take  the  spoils  away  from 
Mm.  He  now  will  give  the  two  hundred  Philippean  pieces 
to  the -Captain,  which  he  has  promised  that  he  will  give. 
*  *  *  *  !N'ow,  I  have  occasion  for  another  two 
hundred,  to  be  distributed  when  Ilium  is  taken,  that  there  may 
be  the  ustial  draught  of  honeyed  wine*  with  which  the  soldiers 
may  celebrate  their  triumph.  But  this  Priam  is  far  superior 
to  him  of  old.  Not  fifty  sons  only  has  he,  hut  four  hundred, 
and  all  choice  ones,  without  a  blemish;  all  these  this  day 
will  I  cut  off  at  two  single  blows.  Now,  if  there  were  any 
purchaser  for  thU  Priam  of  ours,  I  would  sell  the  old  fellow 

*  The  Phrygian  gate)^-Yer,  955.  This  was  the  Scaean  gate,  near  the  tomb  of 
King  Laomedon 

^  Steal  the  «totee)— Ver.  958.  The  Palladium  was  stealthily  carried  off  from  Troy 
I7  Ulysses  and  Diomedes. 

^ '  Recognized  by  iTcfcw)— Ver.  963.  He  alludes  here,  and  in  1.  951,  to  the  occa- 
won  when  Ulysses  entered  Troy  as  a  spy,  in  the  disguise  of  a  beggar,  on  which 
oecasion  he  was  recognized  by  Helen. 

*  Draught  of  honeyed  wine) — Ver.  972.  "  Mulsum."  This  was  a  mixture  of  wine 
and  honey,  flavofored  with  myrrh,  cassia,  nard,  costum,  or  pepper.  On  the  occasion 
of  a  triumph,  the  soldiers  were  treated  to  copious  draughts  of  this  mixture. 


y  Google 


198  BAOOHIDXft;  AiCtlT. 

in  the  lump^,  whom  I  have  on  sale  the  moment  that  I  shall 
have  taken  the  city.  Bat,  lo!  I  i^e  our  Priam  standing 
before  the  door ;  I'U  go  and  speak  to  him. 

Scene  X. 
Enter  Nicobitlus^ow  Am  houte, 

Nico.  Pray,  whose  voice  is  it  that  sounds  near  me  ? 

Chbts.  O  Nicobulus!    Nice.  What's  the  matter? 

Chbts.  O,  capital !  Nice.  Well,  have  you  done  aught  of 
what  I  sent  you  upon  ? 

Chets.  What — ask  you  that  ?     Step  closer  this  way. 

Nico.  (coming  nea/rer).  Well,  I  do  come  closer.  Chets.  I 
am  an  excellent  pleader.  By  rebuking  him,  and  by  whatever 
hard  language  i  really  was  able  to  think  of,  I  forced  the 
fellow  to  tears. 

Nice.  What  did  he  say  ?  Chbts.  He  uttered  not  a  word: 
crying,  he  listened  in  silence  to  what  I  was  saying ;  in  silence 
he  wrote  down  on  his  tablets ;  these  sealed  he  gave  to  me ; 
he  bade  me  deliver  them  to  you.  {Gfives  him  the  tablets.) 
But  I  am  afraid  that  they  sing  to  the  same  tune  that  the 
former  ones  did.     Observe  the  seal,  is  it  his  ? 

Nico.  I  recognize  it.  I'd  like  to  read  them  over.  {Goes 
to  a  distance.) 

Chbts.  Bead  them  through.  (Aside.)  Now  is  the  upper 
lintel^  being  cut  down,  now  is  the  destruction  of  Troy  near 
at  hand.     The  wooden  horse  is  shaking  it  right  cleverly. 

Nico.  Chrysalus,  just  step  here  wlule  I  am  reading  these 
through. 

Chbts.  Prithee,  what  need  is  there  for  me  to  be  near  you  ? 

Nico.  That  you  may  know  what's  written  here. 

Chbts.  I  don't  care,  and  I  don't  wish  to  know. 

Nice.  Still,  do  come  here.     Chbts.  What  need  is  there? 

Nico.  Hold  your  tongue.     Chbts.  I  won't,  I  say. 

Nioo.  But  I  win,  I  say.     Chbts.  What  need  ia  there  ? 

1  In  ike  hmpy^Yer,  976.  *<  Coemptionalem  senem."  Those  slaves  were  eaXkd 
^^  coemptioiiales  "  who,  by  reason  of  age  or  bad  character,  were  so  ntlerlj  wortiir 
less  that  they  would  fetch  no  price,  and  were  consequently  thrown  into  a  lot  whk 
other  slaves  or  property  of  real  value. 

2  The  tapper  Z«n^eZ>-Ver.  988.  He  alludes  to  the  Huygiaa  gate,  whieh  be 
has  before  mentioned  in  1.  955. 


y  Google 


%.  X.  OB,  TKB  TWnSToSISTEBS.  199 

Nico.  Stall  do  you  only  do  that  which  I  bid  you. 

CiEBTB.  I'll  come.  'Tis  right  ^  do  so;  your  own  scr- 
yant  dught  to  be  obedient  at  your  command.  (  Ghes  wp  to  him,) 

Nioo.  (looking  of  the  tablets).  Heyday!  he  hasn't  been 
sparing^  of  his  wax  or  pen.  But  whatever  it  is,  I'm  re- 
sobred  to  read  it  through.  Attend  to  me,  please,  this  very 
instant. 

Ghsts.  "When  you  choose,  read  on ;  I  derote  to  you  the 
attention  of  my  ears. 

Ifico.  (looking  close).  Bless  me!  the  letters  are  smaU. 

Chbts.  To  one,  indeed,  who  cannot  see  weU  with  his  eyes ! 
bnt  they  are  quite  large  enough  for  one  who  can  see  well. 

Nice.  Give  your  attention  then.  (He  reads.)  "  Eather, 
I  beseech  you,  do  give  two  hundred  Philippeans  to  Chrysalus, 
if  you  wish  me  to  be  safe  or  alive  for  you " 

Chbts.  By  my  troth,  really  a  very  great  mistake,  I  tell 
you. 

Nice.  "What's  the  matter?  Chbts.  He  hasn't  first 
written  the  salutation  to  you. 

Nice,  (looking).  I  don't  see  it  anywhere. 

Chbts.  Even  from  its  very  commencement  the  letter  is  an 
impertinent  one.  If  you  are  wise,  you'H  not  give  it ;  but  at 
the  best,  if  you  give  it  him,  why,  let  him  find  out  some  other 
porter  for  himself,  if  he  is  wise ;  for  I  won't  carry  it  if  you 
Older  me  ever  so  much.  I've  been  quite  enough  suspected 
as  it  is,  when  I  was  guiltless  of  a  fault. 

Nico.  Listen  on  now,  while  I  read  through  what's  written. 
(Beading.)  "  I  am  ashamed,  father,  to  appear  before  you  in 
your  presence;  such  disgraceful  conduct  of  mine  have  I 
beard  that  you  are  aware  of,  that  I  have  formed  an  inter- 
course vrith  the  wife  of  a  strange  Captain."  By  my  troth, 
you  are  not  joking  there ;  for  I  have  saved  your  life  from 
the  consequences  of  this  foul  deed  with  two  hundred  golden 
Philippeans. 

Qhbts.  There's  not  a  particle  of  these  things  but  what 
I've  told  him. 

ISTico.  (reading),  '*!  confess  that  I  have  acted  foolishly. 
But  I  beseech  you,  father,  do  not  forsake  me,  if,  in  my  folly,  I 
have  transgressed.     Of  fierce  desires,  and  eyes  uncontrolled, 

*  BctanH  been  sparing) — ^Ver.  993.  By  this  expression  he  means  that  his  son 
has  written  a  Yfrj  bDg  letter,  as  he  has  been  neither  sparing  of  the  wax  for  the 
tablets,  nor  of  the  use  of  the  "  stylus"  or  pen. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


200  BACCHIDES ;  Act  lY. 

have  I  been ;  I  have  been  urged  on  to  do  a  deed  of  which  I 
am  now  ashamed."  It  were  proper,  then,  that  you  should 
have  taken  heed  before  you  were  ashamed. 

Chets.  All  these  very  same  words  did  I  say  to  him  only 
just  now. 

Nico.  (reading),  "  I  beseech  you,  father,  to  consider  that 
it  is  enough  that  Chrysalus  has  reproached  me  with  many 
cutting  words,  and  by  his  advice  has  made  me  a  better  man, 
so  that  'tis  right  that  you  should  return  him  sincere  thanks." 

Chbts.  Is  that  written  there?  Nice.  Look  and  see, 
then  you'll  know.     {Shows  him  the  letter.) 

Chbts.  He  that  has  so  offended,  how  humble  to  all  he  is, 
md  of  his  own  accord. 

Nioo.  (reading),  "  Now,  father,  it*  even  yet  I  may  be 
allowed  to  ask  anything  of  you,  do  give  me  two  hundred  Phi- 
lippean  pieces,  I  do  entreat  you." 

Chets.  By  my  troth,  now,  not  one  even,  if  you  are 
wise. 

Nice.  Let  me  read  on.  (Beading.)  "  In  set  form^  I  have 
taken  an  oath  that  I  would  give  this  to  the  woman  this  day 
before  nightfall,  ere  she  leaves  me.  Now,  father,  have  a  care 
that  I  be  not  forsworn,  and  take  me  hence  away  from  her  as 
soon  as  you  can,  on  whose  account  1  have  incurred  so  much 
loss  and  guilt.  Take  care  and  let  not  the  two  hundred  pieces 
be  a  cause  of  annoyance  to  you;  I  will  repay  you  innu- 
merable times  as  much,  if  I  live,  farewell,  and  do  attend 
to  these  matters."     Now,  Chrysalus,  what  do  you  think  ? 

Chets.  I  won't  give  you  one  bit  of  advice  this  day,  and  I 
won't  run  the  risk,  that  if  any  mistake  is  made,  you  should 
say  that  you  had  done  it  by  my  counsel.  But,  as  I  conceive, 
if  I  were  in  your  place,  I  would  rather  give  the  gold  than 
suffer  him  to  be  corrupted.  There  is  a  twofold  choice ;  con- 
sider which  you  would  adopt;  either  to  lose  the  gold,  or 
for  a  lover  to  be  forsworn.  I  neither  order  you,  nor  forbid 
you,  nor  do  I  persuade  you. 

Nice.  I'm  sorry  for  him.  Chets.  You  don't  do  amfthin^ 
surprising — he  is  your  son.  If  stiU  more  must  be  lost,  'tas 
better  for  it  to  go,  than  for  this  disgrace  to  be  everywhere 
proclaimed. 

Nico.  By  my  troth,  I  certainly  had  much  rather  he  had 

*  In  8etform)—Yer.  1028.  Of  course  the  oath  woald  be  the  more  solemn  in 
sach  case. 


y  Google 


Sc.  X.  OB,  THE  TWDT-SISTEBS.  201 

been  at  Ephesus,  so  long  as  he  was  well,  than  that  he  had 
zetamed  home.  But  why  don't  I  hasten  to  get  rid  of  that 
which  is  doomed  to  be  squandered  away  ?  I'U  bring  you  just 
now  from  in-doors  twice  two  hundred  rhiUppeans,  both  those 
which,  a  little  time  since,  to  my  sorrow,  I  promised  to  the 
Captain,  and  these  others.  "Wait  there ;  1*11  be  out  to  you, 
Ohrysalus,  this  instant.     {Ghes  into  his  hotise.) 

Chbts.  Troy  is  laid  waste,  the  chiefs  have  razed  Pergamus. 
I  knew  some  time  ago  that  I  should  be  the  ruin  of  Pergamus. 
r  faith  I  wouldn't  dare  make  a  bet  with  him  who  should  say 
that  I  was  deserving  of  severe  torture ;  so  great  confusion 
am  I  making.  But  the  door  makes  a  noise ;  the  plunder's 
being  brought  forth  from  Troy.  For  the  present  I'll  hold  my 
tongue. 

Be-enter  ^Nicobxtltts  with  the  money  in  two  hags, 

Nico.  Take  you  this  gold,  Chrysalus ;  go,  carry  it  to  my 
son.  But  I'U  go  hence  to  the  market-place  to  pay  this  to 
the  Captain. 

Chets.  Por  my  part,  I'U  not  receive  it ;  do  you  seek 
somebody  at  once  to  take  it.  I  won't  have  it  entrusted 
tome. 

Nico.  But  do  take  it ;  you're  worrying  me  now,  {Holds  it 
to  him.) 

Chets.  Por  my  part,  I'll  not  take  it. 

Nioo.  But,  pnthee  do,  Chets.  I  am  telling  you  what 
is  the  fact. 

Nico.  You  are  delaying  me.  Chets.  I  don't  want,  I 
say,  the  gold  to  be  entrusted  to  me.  At  all  events,  find  some 
person  to  keep  a  watch  upon  me. 

Nioo.  You're  plaguing  me.  Chets.  Well,  give  it  me,  if  it 
must  be  so.     (Soldi  out  his  hand.) 

Nico.  (gives  him  the  money).  Take  care  of  it.  I'll  be  back 
here  just  now.  (Uadt. 

Chets.    I've  taken  care that  you  shall  be  a  most 

wretched  old  feUow ;  this  is  bringing  an  undertaking  to  a  fair 
ending ;  even  as  it  has  proved  my  lot  to  go  rejoicing,  laden 
with  the  spoil.  With  safety  to  myself,  and  the  city  taken 
by  stratagem,  I  now  bring  home  my  whole  army  unhurt.  But, 
Spectators,  don't  you  now  be  surprised  that  I  don't  go  in  tri- 
umph ;  'tis  such  a  common  thing,  I  don't  care  for  it.     Still, 


y  Google 


260  BAGCKLDES;  Aet  ¥. 

however^  the  soldiers  shall  be  received  with  the  laual  hoaiejed 
wine.  Now  I'll  carry  off  all  this  booty  at  once  to  Idie 
(^offistor^.     {Goea  into  the  house  q^BAOCHis.) 

SCEiETB  XI. 

Unter  PHrLOXEiorB. 

Phil.  The  more  I  revolve  it  in  my  breast,  what  disturb- 
ances mv  son  has  raised,  into  what  a  course  of  life,  and  into 
what  habits  he  unwittingly  has  headlong  plunged  himself,  the 
greater  is  my  concern,  and  the  more  do  I  dread  lest  he  may  be 
ruined  or  corrupted.  I  know  it ;  I  once  was  of  the  same  age, 
and  I  did  all  these  things ;  but  in  a  quiet  way.  I  was  gay,  I 
had  my  mistress,  I  drank,  I  feasted,  I  made  presents,  but  still 
it  was  seldom  I  did  so.  The  methods,  too,  please  me  not  which 
I  see  parents  in  general  employ  towards  their  sons.  I  have  de- 
termined to  give  some  latitude  to  my  son,  that  he  may  have 
some  scope  for  his  inclinations.  I  think  that's  right ;  but 
still,  I  don't  wish  him  to  give  way  too  much  to  sloth  and 
wantonness.  Now  I'm  going  to  Mnesilochus,  to  see  whether, 
as  I  requested,  by  his  endeavours  he  has  turned  him  for 
me  to  virtue  and  to  sobriety ;  as,  indeed,  I  am  sure  he  has 
done  if  he  has  met  him,  of  such  a  disposition  is  he  by  nature. 


ACT   THE   PIPTH. 

SOEWB  I. 

Enter  Nicobulus,  vynngvnc^  his  hands, 

Nioo.  Whoever  there  are  in  any  place  whatsoever,  who- 
ever have  been,  and  whoever  shall  be,  in  time  to  come,  foote, 
blockheads,  idiots,  dolts,  sots,  oafe,  lubbers^,  I  singly  by  far 
exceed  them  all  in  folly  and  absurd  ways.  I'm  imdone. 
I'm  ashamed  of  myself;  that  I  at  this  tune  of  life  should 

^  To  the  QucBttor)—Yer.  1075.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  Bomans  to  deliTorto 
the  Citj  Qosestor  the  plunder  taken  in  war,  to  be  employed  in  the  public  serriee. 
Here  he  means  his  young  master,  Mnesilochus. 

*  Oafs,  ft«66er«)— Ver.  1088.  "  Blennus"  means,  properly,  "  dirty-nosed,'  and 
thence  "  a  driveller,"  "  an  idiot."  **  Bucco"  was  "  one  who  had  large  pofiM-w* 
cheeki,"  which  was  considered  to  be  the  mark  of  a  blockhead  or  fboL 


y  Google 


Se.  L  OB,  TKB  TTror-siflXEBs.  2dB 

disgraeefolly  lia;?e  been  twice  made  a  fool  of!  The  moie  I 
think  of  this  confusion  which  my  son  has  made,  the  more  am 
I  incensed.  I'm  ruined,  and  I'm  utterly  destroyed ;  I'm  dis- 
tracted in  every  possible  way.  All  plagues  harass  me,  by  aU 
modes  of  death  do  I  perish.  This  day  has  Chrysalus  rent  me  in 
pieces ;  Chrysalus  has  plundered  wretehed  me ;  he,  the  yilladn, 
by  his  clever  tricks,  has  shaved,  to  the  very  quick,  simple  me, 
just  as  he  has  pleased.  For  the  Captain  says  that  she  is  a 
Courtezan^  whom  th&t  fellow  said  was  his  wife ;  and  he  has  in- 
formed me  of  everything,  as  each  pm^imlar  happened ;  how 
that  she  had  been  hired  by  him  for  this  year;  how  that  that 
much  gold  was  left  to  he  repaid^y  which  I,  most  simple  man,  had 
promised  him.  'Tis  this,  this,  I  say,  through  which  my  breast 
boils  with  indignation^ ;  'tis  this,  in  fine,  by  which  I  am  dis- 
tracted ;  that  I,  at  my  time  of  life,  shoiild  be  made  a  fool  of, 
^y^>  %  Heaven,  so  made  a  very  sport  of,  cmd  with  my  hoary 
head  and  white  beard,  that  wretched  I  should  be  bamboozled 
out  of  my  gold.  Undone  am  I,  inasmuch  as  this  slave  of 
mine  has  dared  in  this  way  to  set  not  the  value  of  a  nutshell 
upon  me.  And  I — ^if  any  other  way  I  had  lost  a  greater  sum 
—I  should  have  taken  it  less  amiss,  and  have  deemed  it  less 
of  a  loss  to  me. 

Enter  Philoxenus. 

Philo.  (as  he  enters).  Por  sure,  some  person,  I  know  not 
who,  seems  to  be  talking  near  to  me.  But  who's  this  I  see  ? 
Beally,  'tis  the  father  of  Mnesilochus. 

Nice.  Hah !  I  see  a  partner  in  affiction.  Save  you,  Phi- 
loxeoiis! 

Philo.  And  you;  whence  are  you  betaking  yourself? 

Nice.  Erom  a  place  whence  comes  a  wretched  and  a  lu^ek- 
less  mortal. 

Prtlo.  Why,  troth,  I'm  surely  on  <A<5  cari^A,  the  spot  where 
it  befits  a  wretched  and  a  luckless  mortal  to  be. 

1  Left  to  he  repaid}— -Yet,  1098.  This  passage  is  rather  obflcure;  but  it  seems 
to  mean  that  Bacchia  had  been  engaged  for  a  year  by  the  Captain,  and  that  having 
raodved  the  whole  sum  when  the  original  agreement  was  made,  she  had  ar- 
nnged  to  repay  the  Captain  a  sum  proportionate  to  the  time  that  was  want- 
iag  to  complete  the  year  engaged  for. 

*  BoSk  wiih  wdiffnationy-Yer,  1099.  "  Peraceacit."  Literally,  "  turns  sour." 


y  Google 


204  BiLCOHiDES ;  Act  V. 

Nico.  We  now,  as  we  are  of  like  age,  are  meeting  with 
similar  fortunes. 

Philo.  So  it  is.  But  as  to  yourself,  what's  the  matter 
with  you  ? 

Nice,  r  faith,  mine's  the  same  mishap  as  your  own. 

Philo.  Does  this  misfortune  in  any  way  relate  to  your  son  ? 

Nice.  Such  is  the  fact.  Philo.' The  same  disease  exists 
in  my  own  breast. 

Nico.  Aye,  and  that  very  worthy  fellow,  Chrysalus,  has 
been  ruining  my  son,  myself,  and  all  my  fortunes. 

Philo.  Pray  now,  what  is  this  mishap  of  yours  about  your 
son? 

Nice.  You  shall  know :  together  with  your  own  son  he's 
undone ;  both  of  them  are  keeping  mistresses  alike. 

Philo.  How  do  you  know  ?     Nico.  I  have  seen  them. 

Philo.  Ah !  wretch  that  I  am !  I'm  ruined  outright. 

Nico.  Why  do  we  hesitate  a  moment  to  knock  and  to  call 
them  both  hither  out  of  doors. 

Philo.  I  don't  object.  Nice,  (knocks  at  the  door  of  ike 
house  of  Bacchis).  Hallo  there !  Bacchis !  Bid  the  door  to 
be  opened  this  instant,  if  you  please,  unless  you  had  rather 
the  door  and  the  posts  be  knocked  to  bits  with  hatchets. 

Scene  II. 
Enter  Piest  Bacchis  and  Second  Bacchis /r(w»  the  house, 

1st  Bacch.  "Who  is  it  that  calls  out  my  name  with  such  a 
noise  and  tumult,  and  is  knocking  so  hard  at  the  door  ? 

Nico.  I  and  this  person  here,   (Pointing  to  Philoxektts.) 

1st  Bacch.  Pray,  what's  the  matter  now  ?  Who  has  been 
driving  these  sheep  ^  to  us  ? 

Nico.  These  most  shocldng  hussies  call  us  sheep. 

2nd  Bacch.  Their  shepherd's  asleep,  as  they  come  stray- 
ing thus  from  the  flock.' 

^  Driving  these  sheep} — ^Ver.  1121,  She  calls  them  sheep,  probablj,  becanse 
of  their  venerable  appearance;  though  she  afterwards  remarks  that  thejare 
bat  dirty  sheep.  Perhaps,  too,  it  was  the  custom  among  ladies  of  this  class,  in 
cant  phrase  to  call  those  **  sheep"  who  could  stand  fleecing;  a  point  on  which  it 
will  be  found  in  the  dialogue  that  thej  exchange  remarks.  *^  Goats  "  would  baye 
been  a  more  appropriate  name,  under  the  circumstances,  for  the  old  sinners. 


y  Google 


Sc.  11.  OB,  THE  TWIN-SIBTEB8.  205 

Ist  Bacoh.  But,  i'  faith,  they  are  not  white ;  they  both 
look  dirty. 

2nd  Bacch.  Because  they  have  both  been  shorn  just  now. 

Philo.  How  they  seem  to  be  laughing  at  us. 

Nico.  Let  them,  just  as  long  as  they  please. 

Ist  Bacch.  Don't  you  think  that  these  sheep  are  shorn 
three  times  a  year  ? 

2nd  Bacch.  I'  faith,  to-day  one  of  them  has  been  already 
shorn  twice,  that's  sure. 

1st  Bacch.  They  are  old  and  fleeceless^,  both  of  them. 

2nd  Bacch.  But  I  think  they  have  been  in  good  plight  once. 

Ist  Bacch.  Prithee,  do  you  see  how  they  are  looking  with 
a  sheep's  eye  at  us  ? 

2nd  Bacch.  By  my  troth,  I  realh/  do  believe  they  are  with- 
out any  ill  design. 

Philo.  This  happens  to  us  deservedly,  for  having  come 
here. 

1st  Bacch.  Well,  let  them  be  driven  in-doors  to  fold^. 

2nd  Bacch.  I  don't  know  what  occasion  there  is  for  that, 
as  they  have  neither  milk  nor  wool.  Let  them  stand  as  they 
are.  Of  whatever  value  they  have  been,  they  are  now  out  of 
date ;  all  their  fruit  has  fallen  off  them  by  this'.  Don't  you  see, 
how,  straying  unattended,  they  are  ranging  about  at  liberty  ? 
Why,  I  fancy  that  they  must  be  dumb  with  age ;  they  don't 
hleat  even,  though  they  are  absent  from  the  rest  of  the 
flock.    They  seem  both  silly  and  worthless. 

Ist  Bacch.  Let's  return  in-doors,  sister. 

Nice.  Stay  where  you  are,  both  of  you ;  these  sheep  want 
you. 

2nd  Bacch.  Why,  surely  this  is  a  prodigy ;  sheep  are  ad- 
dressing us  with  a  human  voice. 

Philo.  These  sheep  vrill  return  you  the  heavy  and  great 
injury  which  they  owe  to  you. 

1st  Bacch.  K  you  owe  me  aught,  I  forgive  it  you ;  keep  it 

I  Oldandfleecdessy-Ver,  1129.  "Mina  ovis*  was  a  sheep  that  had  no  wool 
on  its  belly.  It  is  hard  to  saj  why  this  name  was  given  to  it.  If  the  word 
"  mina"  had  signified  a  certain  coin,  and  not  a  snm  of  money  merely,  we  might 
have  supposed  it  aUaded  to  the  smoothness  of  the  coin* 

«  Be  drwen  m-^oors  iofoldy^Yer*  1134  "  Cogantnr."  Literally,  "  let  them 
be  driven  within."    "  Cogor  "  was  the  term  applied  to  penning  or  folding  sheep  or 


y  Google 


BACCHTDSS ;  Act  Y. 

to  fonreelf ;  I'll  nerer  demand  it  of  70U.  But  what  is  the 
reason  that  you  are  threatening  mischief  to  us  ? 

PhuiO.  Because  they  say  that  our  two  lambs  are  Aut 
up  here.     {Fomtma  to  the  house,) 

Nice.  And  besides  those  liunbs,  my  dog  is  there  concealed 
that  bites^.  If  they  are  not  now  produced  to  us  and  sent  out 
of  the  house,  we  shall  be  fiirious  rams;  we  shall  attack 
you  forthwith. 

1st  Bacch.  Sister,  I  have  something  to  «oy  to  you  in 
private. 

2nd  Bacch.  How  now,  prithee  ?     {They  go  apart.) 

Nioo.  Whither  are  they  going?  1st  Bacch.  Sister,  I 
give  to  you  that  old  fellow  that's  farthest  off,  that  you  may 
have  hun  cleverly  smoothed  down;  I'll  now  attack  this 
other  one  that's  angry ;  if  we  can  only  entice  them  here  in- 


2nd  Bacch.  I'll  manage  my  task  with  cleverness,  althoogh 
'tis  to  caress  an  old  skeleton. 

1st  Bacch.  Take  care  and  do  tfour  best. 

2nd  Bacch.  Be  quiet ;  do  you  do  yours ;  I'll  manage  what 
I  have  said. 

Nice.  Why  are  these  two  women  holding  a  council  here 
in  private  ? 

Philo.  What  say  you,  my  ffood  feUow ? 

Nico.  What  would  yon  with  me  ?  Philo.  I  reallif  am 
ashamed  to  tell  you  a  certain  thing. 

Nico.  What  is  it  that  you're  ashamed  about  ? 

Philo.  Still,  as  you  are  a  person,  a  friend  of  mine,  I'm  de- 
termined to  entrust  you  with  what  I  could  wish.  (Whispers,) 
I'm  good  for  nought. 

Nico.  I've  known  that  this  long  time ;  bnt  tell  me  why 
you're  good  for  nought  ? 

Philo.  I've  been  terribly  touched  with  birdlime:  troth, 
my  heart  is  pierced  by  the  goad. 

Nico.  r  faith,  'twere  much  better  if  your  flanks  were 
goaded,  you  worthless  felloy.  But  what  is  it  ?  Although  I 
suspect  that  I  myself  pretty  well  know  already  what  it  is ; 
still,  I  should  even  like  to  hear  it  from  yourself. 

Philo.  Do  you  see  that  woman  ?  {Fomtinff  to  the  Seoofj) 
Bagohis.)     Nico.  I  see  her. 

»  That  bites)— Yer,  1146.  He  alludes  to  his  haying  been  bitten  by  ChryBalnfl. 


y  Google 


Sc.  II.  OB,  THE  TWnr-BISTEES.  2W 

Philo.  She's  not  an  imcomelv  person. 

Nico.  Troth,  but  she  is  dedaeSlj  uncomely ;  and  jou  are 
a  good-for-nothing  fellow. 

PffiOiO.  Why  more  ?    I'm  in  love.     Nioo.  You,  in  lore  ? 

PhiiiO.  'Pon  honor^.  Nico.  And  do  you,  you  rotten 
creature,  presume  to  become  a  lover  at  your  time  of  life  P 

Phelo.  Why  not  ?    Nioo.  Because  it's  a  disgrace. 

Philo.  What  need  of  words  ?  I  am  not  vexed  with  my 
aon,  nor  yet  is  it  right  you  should  be  vexed  with  yours :  if 
they  are  in  love,  they  do  wisely. 

Ist  Bacch.  *  *  *  PoUow  me  this  way.  (I%iy 
approach  the  old  men.) 

Kico.  See,  they  are  moving  at  last,  these  allurers  and 
enticers  to  disgrace.  {To  the  women.)  How  now  ?  Do  you 
tkis  instant  restore  us  our  sons  and  my  servant,  or  am  I 
to  try  rougher  means  with  you  ? 

ImLO.  Won't  you  away  with  you?  You  surely  are 
not  a  man,  to  address  a  pretty  woman  so  rudely  in  that 
fiuhion. 

Ist  Bajdgh.  Most  worthy  old  gentleman,  by  whatsoever  is 
opon  the  earth,  let  me  entreat  this  of  you,  that  you  will  cease 
to  attack  this  error  with  such  great  vehemence. 

Nico.  If  you  don't  away  with  you,  although  you  are  so 
handsome,  I'll  be  doing  you  some  great  mischief  just  now. 

Ist  Bacch.  I  shall  endure  it ;  I  don't  apprehend  that  any 
blow  that  you  can  give,  will  cause  me  any  pain. 

Nioo.  How  smooth  of  speech  she  is.  O  me !  I  am  in 
alarm. 

Ist  Bacgh.  {aside).  He's  more  calm  already.  {Aloud.)  Step 
this  way  with  me  in-doors ;  and  there,  if  you  choose,  correct 
yoor  son.     {Takes  his  arm.) 

Nice.  Avaunt  from  me,  abomination !    {Shakes  her  qfl) 

Iflt  Baoch.  Do,  my  love,  let  me  prevail  upon  you. 

Nice.  You,  prevail  upon  me  ?  2nd  Bacch.  Por  sure,  I 
I  riiall  prevail,  at  all  events,  upon  this  gentleman,    {Pointing 

to  PHrLOXENTTS.) 

PfiHK).  Yes,  I  beg  of  you  to  show  me  in-doors. 

^  *Pm  honor) --Ver.  1162.  Nal  yap.  This  Greek  phrase  was,  no  doubt, 
iMed  as  a  cant  or  off-haad  mode  of  expressbn,  jus  as  on  simUar  eecanoos  we 
•dopt  the  French  "  oui"  or  "Tiaiement,"  "  yes,"  "  decidedly.** 


y  Google 


208  BACCHIDES ;  Act  V* 

2nd  Bacch.  What  a  dear  man  you  are. 

Philo.  Biit  do  you  know  on  what  condition  you  are 
to  show  me  in-doors  ? 

2nd  Bacch.  That  you  are  to  be  with  me.  Philo.  You 
mention  all  that  I  desire. 

2nd  Bacch.  ***** 

Nice.  I  have  seen  wicked  men ;  but  not  one  worse  than 
yourself. 

Philo.  I  am  as  I  am.  1st  Bacch.  (to  Nicobitltjs).  Step 
this  way  in-doors  with  me,  where  you  may  be  elegantly  re* 
ceived  with  viands,  wine,  and  unguents. 

Nice.  Enough,  enough  now  of  your  banquets ;  it  matters 
not  to  me  how  I'm  received.  My  son  and  Chrysalus  have 
choused  me  out  of  four  hundred  Philippeans.  If  I  don't 
surely  this  day  put  him  to  the  torture,  may  I  never  receive 
as  large  a  sum  again. 

Ist  Bacch.  What,  pray,  if  half  the  gold  is  paid  you  back  ? 
Will  you  go  in-doors  here  with  me,  and  so  control  your 
feelings  <zs  to  forgive  them  their  faults  ? 

Philo.  He'll  do  it.  (Takes  his  arm.)  Nioo.  Certainly  not 
— I  won't — I  don't  care — ^let  me  alone,  now.  (Shakes  him  of!) 
I  had  rather  punish  them  both. 

Philo.  Take  you  care,  you  good-for-nothing  man,  that 
through  your  own  fault  you  don't  lose  even  that  which  the 
favouring  Gods  offer  you.  One  half  of  the  gold  is  offered ; 
take  it,  and  carouse,  and  enjoy  yourself  with  your  partner. 

Nice.  What,  am  I  to  carouse  in  that  very  place  where  my 
son  is  being  corrupted  ? 

Philo.  You  must  carouse  there,  Nice.  Am  I  to  be  the 
witness  of  it  when  she  is  reclining  with  him  at  table  ? 

1st  Bacch.  Nay,  so  far  as  I'm  concerned,  i'  faith,  I'll  re- 
cline at  table  with  your  own  self. 

Nico.  My  head  does  itch  so^,  (Aside,)  I'm  a  ruined  man-— 
I  can  scarce  deny  her. 

Philo.  And  has  it  not  before  this  come  into  your  mind, 
that  if,  while  you  live,  you  enjoy  yourself,  that,  i*  faith,  is  for 
no  very  long  time ;  and  that,  if  you  lose  the  present  day,  it 
can  never  return  to  you  after  you  are  dead  ? 

>  Ihes  iteA  <o)— Ver.  1192.  Being  in  donbt  what  to  do,  he  scratxdies  bis  head, 
and  then  tries  to  turn  it  off  by  saying,  **  Bless  me,  how  mj  head  does  itch." 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THE  TWOr-SISTSBS.  209 

Nico.  Wliat  am  I  to  do  ?  Philo.  What  are  you  to  do  ? 
Do  yon  eren  ask  it  ? 

Nice.  I  should  like,  and  yet  Tm  a£raid. 

1st  Bacoh.  What  are  you  o&aid  of? 

Nioo.  Lest  I  should  be  exposed  before  my  son  and  my 
serrant. 

Ist  BA.OGH.  Pray  now,  my  honey ;  such  things  do  happen. 
He's  your  own  son;  whence  do  you  suppose  that  he  is  to 
have  money,  except  that  only  which  you  give  him  yourself? 
Let  me  obtain  pardon  of  you  for  them  both. 

Nice,  {aside).  How  she  does  work  her  way.  She's  now  pre- 
vaihng  on  me  agarast  that  which  I  was  quite  resolved  upon. 

1st  Baoch.  I  will  love  you,  and  embrace  you. 

Nico.  Through  your  doing,  and  for  your  sake  am  I  cor- 
rupted. 

Ist  Bacch.  I  certainly  had  rather  'twere  for  your  own  than 
for  mine. 

Nice.  Come  then,  however  that  may  be,  although  it  is 
to  my  disgrace,  I'll  submit ;  I'll  iaduce  my  feelings  to  do  so. 

Ist  BA.CCH.  Have  I  that  solemnly  promised  ?  #  * 

Nico.  What  I  have  once  said,  I  will  not  alter. 

Ist  Bacoh.  The  day  wears  apace.  Come  into  the  house, 
to  take  your  places  at  table:  your  sons  are  expecting 
within 

Nico.  How  soon,  in.  fact,  we  may  be  dead,  d'ye  mean  ? 

1st  Bacoh.  'Tis  evening,  already ;  come,  follow  us. 

Philo.  Lead  us  in  like  bondsmen^.  (  They  go  into  the  house.) 

Ist  Bacch.  {to  the  Speotatobs).  Right  cleverly  are  these 
persons  entrapped^  themselves,  who  for  their  sons  had  laid  a 
snare.     (Goes  in.) 

The  Company^  q/*  CoMEDiAif s. 
Had  not  these  old  men  been  worthless  from  their  youth 

1  lAhe  bonebmen) — ^Ver.  1206.  '*  Addicti "  were  those  who  were  made  the  slaves 
of  their  creditors ;  heing  thus  hy  law  deprived  of  their  liberty  until  they  had  paid 
their  debts. 

'  Thetepertoru  entrapped) — Ver.  1206.  The  two  old  men,  at  this  moment,  would 
form  a  good  c<»npanion  picture  to  the  Elders,  who  solicited  the  chastity  of 


*  The  con^pam/)  The  whole  company  of  actors  (Caterva)  now  comes  forward, 
and  chant  or  repeat  the  moral  of  the  Play  which  has  just  been  acted. 

P 


y  Google 


210  BACOHLDES.  Act  Y. 

upwards,  they  would  not,  with  their  hoary  heads,  have  this 
day  done  an  action  so  disgraceful ;  nor,  indeed,  should  we  have 
represented  this,  if  we  had  not^  before  this,  seen  it  happen  that 
fathers  became  the  riyals  of  their  sons  in  the  houses  of  pro- 
curers. Spectators,  we  wish  you  Farewell!  and  that  you 
will  grant  us  loud  applause. 


y  Google 


STICHUS; 
OR,  THE  PARASITE  REBUFFED. 


I     Two  Brothers. 


^Dramatis  ^crsonff. 

Amtipho,  an  old  gentleman  of  Athens. 
Epignomus 

PAMPinLUS* 

Gelasimus,  a  Pai-asite. 
SncHUS,  the  seirant  of  Epignomus. 
SAOAKiNaSi  the  servant  of  Pamphilas. 
PiNAciUM*,  a  boy. 

APlPEB. 

Philumbna^,  the  wife  of  Epignomns. 
Pamphila^,  the  wife  of  Pamphilns,  and  sister  of  Philumena. 
Gbocotium,  a  female  servant  of  Philumena. 
Stefhanium,  a  female  kitchen  servant  of  Pamphila. 

&«i«.~Athens:  a  Street  before  the  house  of  Antipho  and  those  of  Epignomus 
and  Pamphilus  ;  the  two  latter  being  next  door  to  each  other. 

^  la  the  former  Editions  he  is  called  Pamphilippus.    Bitschel  clearly  shows 
that  this  is  incorrect. 
'  In  the  former  Editions  he  is  called  Dinacium. 
'  In  the  former  Editions  she  is  called  Panegyris. 
*  In  the  former  Editions  she  is  called  Pinaciam. 


p2 


y  Google 


THE    SUBJECT. 


Thb  plot  of  this  Play  (which  is  snpposed  by  some  Commentators  not  to  have  been 
written  by  Plautos)  is  extremely  meagre.  Antipho,  a  wealthy  and  jovial  old 
gentleman  of  Athens,  has  two  daughters,  PhUmnena  and  Pamjphila.  They  are 
married  to  two  brothers,  Epignomns  and  Pamphilos,  who,  having  ran  throogh 
their  property  in  the  company  of  idlers  and  Parasites,  have,  with  the  view  of 
retrieving  their  fortunes,  taken  to  merchandize.  Having  been  absent  three  yean 
from  home,  and  no  tidings  being  heard  of  them  whether  they  are  alive  or  not, 
Antipho  assumes  the  prerogative  of  a  father,  and  requests  his  daughters  to 
marry  again ;  who  resolve,  however,  to  maintain  their  fidelity  to  their  absent 
husbands.  Philumena  sends  the  Parasite,  Gelasimus,  to  the  harbour  to  see  if 
any  ships  have  arrived.  In  the  meantime,  the  boy,  Pinacium,  brings  her  word 
that  her  husband  has  returned  to  Athens.  He  and  his  brother  meet  the 
Parasite,  and  resist  all  his  attempts  to  fasten  himself  upon  them ;  they  then  go 
h<nne,  and  became  reconciled  to  Antipho,  from  whom,  in  their  poverty,  thqrbad 
become  estranged;  and  who  now  requests  them  to  make  him  a  present  of  a 
female  slave.  Stichus,  the  servant,  obtains  a  day's  holiday,  together  with  a 
present  from  his  master  of  a  cask  of  wine.  He  makes  an  entertainment  for 
himself,  his  friend  Sagarinus,  and  their  mistress  Stephanium.  The  Flayooo- 
cludes  with  a  dance,  to  the  music  of  the  Piper. 


y  Google 


I 


STICHUS^; 
Ofi,  THE  PARASrrE  REBUFFED. 


THE  ACROSTIC  ARGUMENT. 

[Supposed  to  haye  been  written  hy  Priscian  the  Grammarian.] 
An  dd  man  (Senex)  rebukes  bis  daughters  because  they  are  so  (Tom)  persevering 
in  thus  (/to)  adhering  to  their  husbands,  brothers,  poor  and  abroad,  and  in 
not  deserting  them.  And,  on  the  other  hand  {Contra),  he  is  softened  down  by 
pradent  words  to  allow  them  to  retain  (ffabere)  those  whom  they  have  akeady 
got  Enriched  with  wealth,  thdr  husbiuids  (  Viri)  come  back  from  beyond  the 
sea;  each  one  retains  his  own  (Svam)  mfe^  and  to  Stichus  a  holiday  is  given. 


ACT    THE    FIEST. 

Scene  I. 
Enter  Philttmbna  cmd  Pamphila. 

Phil.  Sister,  I  thiiik  that  Penelope  was  wretched  from 
her  very  soul,  who  was  so  long  deprived  of  her  husband ;  for 
from  our  own  fortunes,  whose  husbands  are  absent  from  us,  we 
judge  of  her  feelings ;  for  whose  affairs,  still,  in  their  absence, 
both  night  and  day,  sister,  as  is  becoming,  we  are  ever  anxious. 

Pam.  'Tis  right  that  we  should  do  our  duty ;  and  we  do 
not  that  any  further  than  affection  bids  us. 

Phil.  But,  sister,  step  this  way  a  moment ;  I  want  to  speak 
about  the  affairs  of  my  husband. 

Pam.  Ain't  they  prospering,  pray  ? 

Phil.  I  hope  and  wish  so,  indeed.  Eut,  sister,  at  this  am 
I  vexed,  that  your  and  my  father,  one  who  is  esteemed  as  espe- 

'  Sti(^wu))  Plautus  has  named  this  Play  "  Stichus,^  from  the  servant,  who  is  one 
<rf  the  characters  in  it,  though  not  the  principal  one,  as  Gelasimus,  the  Parasite, 
certainly  oocnpes  that  pUce. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


214  8TICHUS ;  Act.  T. 

cially  honorable  among  all  his  fellow-citizens,  should  be 
now  acting  the  part  of  a  dishonorable  man;  who  is  unde- 
servedly doing  so  great  an  injustice  to  our  absent  husbands, 
and  is  wishing  to  separate  us  from  them.  These  things, 
sister,  render  me  tired  of  existence ;  these  things  are  a  care 
and  a  vexation  to  me.     (She  sheds  tears.) 

Pam.  Weep  not,  sister,  nor  do  that  to  your  feelings  which 
your  father  is  threatening  to  do.  'Tis  to  be  hoped^  that  he  will 
act  more  righteously.  I  know  him  well ;  he  says  these  things 
in  jest ;  and  he  would  not  earn  for  himself  the  mountains  of  the 
Persians,  which  are  said  to  be  of  gold^,  to  do  that  of  which 
you  are  in  dread.  Still,  if  he  does  do  it,  it  befits  you  by  no 
means  to  be  angry ;  nor  will  it  happen  without  some  reason. 
For  this  is  the  third  year  since  our  husbands  have  been  away 
from  home.  ^  ^ 

Phil.  'Tis  as  you  say;  while,  in  the  meantime,  they 
may  be  living,  and  may  be  well^,  they  do  not  make  us  ac- 
quainted where  they  are,  what  they  are  doing,  whether  they 
are  doing  well,  neither  do  they  return. 

Pam.  And  do  you,  sister,  regret  this,  that  they  do  not 
observe  their  duty,  whereas  you  do  yours  ? 

Phil.  Troth,  I  do.  Pam.  Hold  your  peace,  if  you  please ; 
take  care,  please,  that  I  hear  not  that  same  thing  from  you  in 
future. 

Phil.  And  why,  pray?  Pam.  Because,  i'  faith,  in  my 
opinion,  'tis  proper  for  all  prudent  people  to  observe  and  to 
do  their  duty.  For  that  reason,  sister,  although  you  are  the 
older,  I  advise  you  to  remember  your  duty ;  and  if  they  are 
unjust  and  act  otherwise  to  us  than  is  right,  then,  i'  faith,  in 
exactly  the  same  degree,  that  there  may  be  no  further  mis- 
chief, it  befits  us  studiously  to  remember  our  duty  by  all 
means  in  our  power. 

Phil.  'Tis  good;  I'm  silenced.  Pam.  But  do  take  care 
and  remember  it. 

Phil.  I  do  not  wish,  sister,  to  be  thought  to  be  unmindful 
of  my  husband ;  nor  has  he  thrown  away  the  distinction  that 

1  'Tis  to  he  hoped)— Yer,  22.  "  Spes  est."    Literally,  "  there  is  a  hope." 

2  Said  to  be  of  gold) — Ver.  25.  No  doubt,  as  the  Persians  were  from  an  earlj 
period  noted  for  their  wealth  and  grandeur,  it  was  a  common  notion  with  the 
people  of  Europe  that  they  had  "  mountains  of  gold." 

»  May  he  weU) — ^Ver.  31.  After  "  valeant"  in  this  line,  a  comma,  and  not  a 
colon,  seems  more  reconcileable  to  the  meaning  of  the  passage. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  II.  .        OB,  THE  PAKASITE  BBBrFFED.  215 

he  conferred  upon  me.  Eor,  by  my  trotli,  his  kindness  is 
pleasing  and  delightful  to  me ;  and,  really,  this  choice  of  mine 
is  not  now  irksome  to  me,  nor  is  there  any  reason  why  I  should 
wish  to  abandon  this  match.  But,  in  fine,  'tis  placed  in  our 
father's  power^ ;  that  must  be  done  by  us  which  our  rela- 
tiyes  enjoin. 

Pam.  I  know  it,  and  in  thinking  of  it  I  am  overwhelmed  with 
grief;  for  already  has  he  almost  disclosed  his  sentiments. 

Phil.  Let  us  consider,  then,  what  is  necessary  for  us 
to  do. 

Scene  II. 

JSnter  AsTTPno  from  his  house ^  speaking  at  the  door  to  his 
Sebvants. 

AiTT.  The  man  in  condition  of  a  servant  who  always  waits 
to  be  told  his  duty,  and  doesn't  remember  to  do  it  of  his 
own  accord,  that  servant,  I  say,  is  not  of  a  deserving  character. 
Tou  remember  well  on  each  returning  Calends  to  ask  for 
your  allotment  of  provisions^ ;  why,  then,  do  you  less  remem- 
ber to  do  what  is  necessary  to  do  about  the  house  ?  Now, 
therefore,  if,  when  I  return,  the  furniture  shall  not  be  set  for 
me,  each^i^cc  in  its  proper  place,  I'll  be  putting  you  in  mind 
with  a  bull's  hide  remembrancer^.  Not  human  beings  seem 
to  be  living  with  me,  but  pigs.  Take  care,  if  you  please,  that 
my  house  is"  clean,  when  I  return  home.  I  shall  soon  be  back 
home ;  I'm  going  to  her  house,  to  see  my  eldest  daughter, 
if  any  one  should  enquire  for  me,  call  me  thence,  some  of 
you ;  or 1  shall  be  here  soon  myself. 

Phil,  (aside).  What  are  we  to  do,  sister,  if  our  father  shall 
resolve  against  us  ? 

»  In  owrfalher^s  power) — Ver.  63.  By  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  at  Borne, 
females  were  never  "sui  juris,"  bnt  nnder  a  perpetual  guardianship;  and  even 
nutrriage  did  not  entirely  exempt  them  from  parental  authority,  unless  they  had 
been  emancipated  from  it  before.  Among  the  Greeks  also,  parents  exercised  great 
aathority  in  disposing  of  their  daughters  in  marriage. 

'  AUotmeat  ofpromdcms) — ^Ver.  60.  The  Greeks,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind, 
bad  no  Calends  (whence  the  proverb  "  ad  Grsecas  Calendas,"  *^  to-morrow  come 
nerer^);  the  Poet  is  here  alluding  to  the  Roman  custom  of  distributing  to  the 
daves  their  allowance  of  food  on  the  Calends,  or  first  day  of  every  month. 

*  BuWs  hide  remembrancer) — ^Ver.  63.  "  Monumentis  bubulis."  Literally, 
"  with  memorials  of  oxen."  The  thongs  of  the  "  scutica"  and  of  the  "  flagellum" 
were  generally  made  of  bulUs  hide. 


y  Google 


216  sncHirs ;  Aet  I. 

Pam.  It  befits  us  to  submit  to  what  he  does  whose  power 
is  the  stronger.  B j  entreating,  not  by  opposing,  I  think  we 
must  use  our  endeavours.  If  with  mildness  we  ask  for 
fayour,  I  trust  to  obtain  it  of  him.  Oppose  him  we  cannot^ 
without  disgrace  and  extreme  criminalily ;  I  will  neither  do 
that  myself ^  nor  will  I  give  you  the  advice  to  do  it,  but  raHker 
that  we  should  entreat  him.  I  know  our  family^ ;  he  will 
yield  to  entreaty. 

Akt.  (speaking  to  himself).  In  the  first  place,  in  what 
manner  I  should  make  a  beginning  with  them,  about  that  I 
am  in  doubt;  whether  I  should  accost  them  in  language 
couched  in  ambiguous  terms,  afber  this  fashion,  as  though  I 
had  never  pretended^  anything  at  all  agaimst  them^  or  whellier 
as  though  I  had  heard  that  they  were  deserving  of  some  cen- 
siire  against  them ;  whether  I  should  rather  try  them  gently 
or  with  threats.  I  know  that  there  will  be  opposition ;  I  know 
my  daughters  right  well.  K  they  should  prefer  to  remain 
here  rather  than  to  marry  afresh,  why,  let  them  do  so.  What 
need  is  there  for  me,  the  term  of  my  life  run  out,  to  be  waging 
war  with  my  children,  when  I  think  that  they  don't  at  all  de- 
serve that  I  should  do  so  ?  By  no  means ;  I'll  have  no  dis- 
turbances. But  I  think  that  this  is  the  best  thing  to  be 
done  by  me ;  I'll  do  thus ;  I'll  pretend  as  though  they  had 
themselves  been  guilty  of  some  fault ;  I'll  terribly  terrify 
their  minds  this  day  by  some  ambiguous  expressions;  and 
then,  after  that,  as  I  shall  feel  disposed,  I'll  disclose  my- 
self. I  know  that  many  words  will  be  spoken ;  I'll  go  in. 
(Goes  to  the  door  of  PniLUMSiriL's  house,)  But  the  door's 
open. 

Phil.  Why,  surely  the  sound  of  my  father's  voice  reached 
my  ears. 

Pam.  r  troth,  'tis  he ;  let's  hasten  to  meet  him  with  a 
kiss.     {They  loth  run  to  kiss  him.) 

Phil.  My  father,  my  respects.  Ant.  And  to  you  the  same. 
Away  this  instant,  and  be  off  from  me.     {Bemoves  her,) 

Phil.  One  kiss.    Aitt.  I've  had  enough  of  your  kissing. 

Phil.  Prithee,  father,  why  so  ? 

1  /  httoto  ourfamSsD^Yet,  74.  "  Nostros."  Literally,  "  ours,"  meamiig  "  oar 
people,"  "  onr  family." 

s  As  thovgh  IhadneoerprtUnded^Yer,  77.  Despite  the  ingenuity  of  Bitsehel, 
this  line  seems  to  be  in  a  corrapt  state. 


y  Google 


Se.  n.  OB,  THE  PABiLSITS  BEBVFFED.  217 

Ant.  Because,  as  it  ii,  tbe  seasoning  of  yowr  affectum  has 
leudied  my  soul^. 

Pak.  Sit  down  here,  father.  {Fovnts  to  a  ehavr,)  Ajxt.  I'll 
Qotsit there;  do  you  sit  down;  Til  sit  on  the  hench^.  (8U8 
<m  a  bench,) 

Pam.  Wait  ^iZZ  7/»M  a  cushion. 

Ant.  You  take  kind  care  of  me ;  I'm  nicely  seated  now 
aslam^. 

Pam.  Do  let  me,  father.  {Ghes  into  the  house.)  Ant.  What 
need  is  there  ? 

Pam.  There  is  need.  (Goming  out,  and  hri/nffi/ng  a  cushion.) 

Ant.  I'll  submit  to  you.  {Arranging  the  cushion.)  Yes, 
this  does  very  well. 

Pam.  Why,  daughters  can  never  take  too  much  care  of 
their  parent.  Whom  is  it  proper  that  we  should  esteem  more 
dear  than  yourself?  And  then,  in  the  next  place,  father,  our 
husbands,  for  whom  you  have  chosen  that  we  should  be  the 
mothers  of  fJEunilies. 

Ant.  You  do  as  it  is  proper  for  good  toives  to  do,  in  esteem- 
ing your  husbands,  though  absent,  just  as  though  they  w€Hre 
present. 

Pam.  'Tis  propriety,  father,  for  us  to  highly  honor  those 
who  have  chosen  us  as  companions  for  themselves. 

Ant.  Is  there  any  other  person  here  to  listen  with  his 
ears*  to  our  conversation? 

*  Eos  reached  my  «o«Z) — ^Ver.  92.  "  Mese  amm»  salsnra  evenit."  Literally, 
**tihe  salting  has  come  forth  to  mj  soul.'*  This  phrase  is  rendered  in  Leverett's 
Lencon,  *^I  am  dejected"  <nr  '^  I  am  in  an  ill  bamonr."  That,  however,  does 
not  appear  to  be  the  meaning.  The  father  has  had  kissing  enough  from  bis 
daoi^ters,  bat  be  intends,  as  it  ironld  seem,  to  compliment  them  bj  ccxnparing 
their  kisses  to  salt,  .with  its  refreshing  and  vivifying  powers ;  and  whenPhilamena 
asks  for  one  kiss  more,  he  sajs,  "  No,  as  it  is  (ita)  their  refreshing  power  has 
reached  my  soul."  Bost  seems  to  be  of  this  opinion,  bnt  he  suggests  that  *'  aninue 
mes"  are  vocatives  phural;  in  that  case  the  passage  would  mean,  "  as  it  is,  my 
loves,"  or  "  my  delights,  the  refireshing  salt  of  your  afiectbn  has  readied  me." 

^  On  the  dencA)~-Ver.  93.  **  Subsellium"  generally  means  '^  a  footstool,"  used 
by  persons  when  sitting  on  a  high  seat  Here,  however,  it  probably  signifies  "^a 
beadi,"  perhaps  placed  against  the  wall  m  the  front  of  PfaHumena's  house,  where 
be  was  abont  to  make  a  call. 

*  Nieeiy  seated  turn  a»  I  aro>-Ver.  94.  "  Sat  sic  fultum  est"  Literally, 
'^CDongh  b  it  thus  supported."  She  has  brought  out  the  cushion,  and  has 
pboed  it  upon  or  at  the  back  of  the  hard  bench,  which  was  perhaps  something 
fike  oar  garden  chair. 

^  To  Uiten  wUh  Us  ear«)— Ver.  102.  "  Nostris  dictis  anoeps  auribus."  Literal^, 


y  Google 


218  STiCHUS ;  Act  I. 

Phil.  There's  no  one  except  us  and  yourself. 

Akt.  I  wish  your  attention  to  be  given ;  for,  unacquainted 
witli  female  matters  and  ways,  I  come  now  as  a  pupil  to 
you,  my  instructresses ;  in  order  that  each  of  you  may  tell 
me  what  endowments  matrons  ought  to  have,  who  are  the  best 
esteemed. 

Pam.  What's  the  reason  that  you  come  hither  to  enquire 
about  the  ways  of  females  ? 

Ant.  Troth,  I'm  looking  for  a  wife,  as  your  mother's 
dead  and  gone, 

Pam.  You'll  easily  find,  father,  one  both  worse  and  of 
worse  morals  than  she  was;  one  better  you'll  neither  find 
nor  does  the  sun  behold. 

Ant.  But  I'm  making  the  enquiry  of  you,  and  of  this 
sister  of  yours. 

Pam.  I'  faith,  father,  I  know  how  they  should  be,  if  they 
are  to  be  such  as  I  think  right. 

Ant.  I  wish,  then,  to  know  what  you  do  think  right. 

Pam.  That  when  they  walk  through  the  city,  they  should 
shut  the  mouths  of  all,  so  that  none  can  speak  iU  of  them 
with  good  reason. 

Ant.  (to  Philumena).  And  now  speak  you  in  your 
turn. 

Phil.  What  do  you  wish  that  I  should  speak  to  you 
about,  father? 

Ant.  How  is  the  woman  most  easily  distinguished,  who  is 
of  a  good  disposition  ? 

Phil.  When  she,  who  lias  the  power  of  doing  ill,  refiraiiifl 
&om  doing  so. 

Ant.  Not  bad  that.  {To  Pamphila.)  Come,  say  you, 
which  choice  is  the  preferable,  to  marry  a  maiden  or  a 
widow? 

Pam.  So  far  as  my  skill  extends,  of  many  evils^,  that  which 
is  the  least  evil,  the  same  is  the  least  an  evil.  He  that  csn 
avoid  the  women,  let  him  avoid  them,  so  that  each  day  he 

^^  a  fowler  for  our  words  ;'*  in  allusion  to  the  stealthy  manner  in  which  the  fbwkr 
lies  in  wait  for  his  prey. 

1  Of  many  evtZv)— Ver.  120.  Pamphila  is  embarrassed  here ;  and  as  she  prdnU; 
does  not  wish  her  fitther  to  marry  either  widow  or  maiden,  bat  stiU  does  not  Iik»  to 
tell  him  so,  she  takes  refhge  in  a  tmism,  rather  than  give  a  direct  answer  to  his 
qnestion.  Aristotle  tells  ns  that  Epicharmns  was  much  in  the  habit  of  giviog  «t- 
terance  to  remarks  of  this  nature. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THE  FABABITE  BEBUFTEI).  219 

takes  care,  the  day  before,  not  to  do  that  which,  the  day  after, 
lie  may  regret. 

AiTT.  What  sort  of  woman,  pray,  seems  to  you  by  far  the 
wisest  ? 

Pniii.  She  who,  when  affairs  are  prosperous,  shall  still  be 
able  to  know  herself,  and  who  with  equanimity  can  en- 
dure it  to  be  worse  with  her  than  it  has  been. 

Ajtt.  By  my  troth,  in  merry  mood  have  I  been  trying  the 
bent  of  your  dispositions.  But  'tis  this  for  which  I  am  come 
to  you,  and  for  which  I  wished  to  meet  you  both.  My 
friends  are  advising  me  to  the  effect  that  I  should  remove  you 
hence  to  my  own  house. 

Pam.  But  still,  we,  whose  interests  are  concerned,  are  ad- 
vising you  quite  otherwise.  For  either,  father,  we  ought  not 
formerly  to  have  been  bestowed  in  marriage,  unless  our  hm- 
lands  pleased  you,  or,  it  is  not  right  for  us  now  to  be  taken 
away  when  they  are  absent. 

ijTT.  And  shall  I  suffer  you  while  I  am  alive  to  remain 
married  to  men  who  are  beggars  ? 

Pam.  This  beggar  of  mine  is  agreable  to  me ;  her  own 
king  is  agreable^  to  the  queen.  In  poverty  have  I  the  same 
feeungs  that  once  I  had  in  riches. 

AiTT.  And  do  you  set  such  high  value  on  thieves  and 
beggars? 

Phiii.  You  did  not,  as  I  think,  give  me  in  marriage  to  the 
money,  but  to  the  man. 

AiTT.  Why  are  you  still  in  expectation  of  those  who  have 
been  absent  for  now  three  years  ?  Why  don't  you  accept  an 
eligible  match*  in  place  of  a  very  bad  one  ? 

Pam.  'Tis  folly,  father,  to  lead  unwilling  dogs  to  hunt. 
That  wife  is  an  enemy,  who  is  given  to  a  man  in  marriage 
against  her  will. 

Ant.  Are  you  then  determined  that  neither  of  you  wiU 
obey  the  command  of  your  father  ? 

Phil.  We  do  obey ;  for  where  you  gave  us  in  marriage, 
thence  are  we  unwilling  to  depart. 

*  Her  oumlangis  agreabUy-\er,  133.  She  speaks  here  of  the  husband  in  the 
cbanicter  of  the  "rex,"  or  '* king/^  m  his  own  establishment,  which  to  him  is  his 
kingdom.   Of  conrse,  then,  the  wife  would  be  the  "  regina,"  or  "  queen." 

»  EligiNe  wkifcA)— Ver.  138.  "Conditio,"  in  the  sense  of  "oflfer"  or  "pro- 
posal," especially  applies  to  one  of  marriage.  As  their  husbands  had  spent  almost 
an  their  substance,  the  ladies  are  probably  living  on  the  fortune  which  he  has 
shen  them,  and  he  anticipates  that  it  may  be  soon  exhausted. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


230  BTiCHVS ;  Act  II. 

Akt.  Kindly  good  b'ye ;  I'll  go  and  tell  my  friends  your 
resolutions. 

Pam.  They  will,  I  doubt  not,  think  us  the  more  honor- 
able, if  you  tell  them  to  honorable  men. 

Ajrr.  Take  you  care,  then,  of  their  domestic  conceras,  the 
best  way  that  you  can.  {£ant. 

Phil.  Now  you  gratify  us,  when  you  direct  us  aright: 
now  we  wiU  hearken  to  you.  Now,  sister,  let's  go  in- 
doors. 

Pam.  "Well,  iirst  I'll  take  a  look  at  home.  K,  perchance, 
an^  news  should  come  to  you  from  your  husband,  take  you 
care  that  I  know  it. 

Phil.  Neither  will  I  conceal  it  from  you,  nor  do  you  con- 
ceal from  me  what  you  may  know.  (^Galh  at  the  door  qf  her 
house.)  Ho  there,  Crocotium^,  go,  fetch  hither  Gelasimus, 
the  Parasite ;  bring  him  here  with  you.  For,  i'  &ith,  I  wish 
to  send  him  to  the  harbour,  to  see  ii,  perchance,  any  ship  from 
Asia^  has  arrived  there  yesterday  or  to-day.  But,  one  serrant 
has  been  sitting  at  the  harbour  whole  ^j^i/n  waiting;  still, 
however,  I  wish  it  to  be  visited  every  now  and  then.  Make 
haste,  and  return  immediately.  {Etxch  goes  into  her  own 
house.) 


ACT    THE    SECOND. 

SCESTB   I. 

JEn^ter  Gelasimus. 

QrEh.  I  do  suspect  that  Famine  was  my  mother ;  fOT  since 
I  was  bom  I  have  never  been  fiUed  with  victuals.  And  no 
man  could  better  return  the  favour  to  his  mother,  thau  do 
I  right  unwillingly  return  it  to  my  mother.  Famine.  For 
in  her  womb,  for  ten  months  she  bore  me,  whereas  I  have 
been  carrying  her  for  more  than  ten  years  in  my  stomach. 
She,  too,  carried  me  hut  a  little  child,  wherefore  I  judge  that 
she  endured  the  less  labour ;  iu  my  stomach  no  little  Famine 

1  Crocotkmy-yesr.  160.  This  name  is  derived  from  "  Crocus,"  which  means 
the  plant  of  that  name,  or  saffron. 

s  Ship  from  Asia) — ^Ver.  152.  Asia  Minor  was  the  place  of  resort,  in  those  isjs, 
for  persons  who  wish  to  make  maaey  speedily. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Se.  I.  OB,  THE  PABA8ITB  BEBVF7ED.  221 

do  I  bear,  but  of  full  growth,  i'  faith,  and  extremely  heavy. 
The  labour-pains  arise  with  me  each  day,  but  I'm  unable  to 
bring  forth  my  mother,  nor  know  I  what  to  do.  I've 
often  heard  it  so  said  that  the  elephant  is  wont^  to  be 
pregnant  ten  whole  years ;  for  sure  this  hunger  of  mine  is  of 
its  breed.  Eor  now  for  many  a  year  has  it  been  clinging  to 
mj  inside.  Now,  if  any  person  wants  a  droll  fellow,  I  am  on 
sale,  with  all  my  equipage :  of  a  fiUing-up  for  these  chasms 
am  I  in  search.  "Wnen  little,  my  father  gave  me  the  name  of 
Gklasimus^,  because,  even  from  a  tiny  child,  I  was  a  droll  chap. 
Bj  reason  of  poverty,  in  fact,  did  I  acquire  this  name,  because 
it  was  poverty  that  made  me  to  be  a  droll ;  for  whenever  she 
reaches  a  person,  she  instructs  him  thoroughly  in  every  art. 
My  &ther  used  to  say  that  I  was  bom  when  provisions  were 
dear ;  for  that  reason,  I  do  believe,  I  am  now  the  more  sharply 
set.  But  on  our  familv  such  complacence  has  been  bestowed 
—I  am  in  the  habit  of  refusing  no  person,  if  any  one  asks  me 
ont  to  eat.  One  form  of  expression  has  most  unfortunately 
died  away  with  people,  and  one,  i'  faith,  most  beseeming  and 
most  elegant  to  my  thinking,  which  formerly  they  employed : 
"Come  here  to  dinner — do  so — ^really, do  promise-— don't  make 
any  difficulties — ^is  it  convenient  ? — I  wish  it  to  be  so,  I  say ; 
Ffl  not  part  with  you  unless  you  come."  But  now,  in  the 
present  day,  they  have  found  a  substitute  for  these  expres- 
sions— 9,  saying,  by  my  faith,  truly  right  worthless  and 
most  vile :  "  I'd  invite  you  to  dinner,  were  I  not  dining 
out  myself."  I'  faith,  I  wish  the  very  loins  of  that 
phrase  broken,  that  it  mayn't  repeat  its  perjury  if  he 
does  dine  at  his  own  house.  These  phrases  reduce  me 
to  learn  foreign  habits^,  and  to  spare  the  necessity  for  an 
auctioneer,  and  so  proclaim  the  auction,  and  put  myself  up 
fcnrsalo. 

^  The  dephaid  is  wont) — ^Ver.  168.  Plinj  the  Elder  informs  us  that  thb  hbs 
On  Tfa\px  notion  with  regard  to  the  elephant.  He  also  says  that  Aristotle  tells 
as  that  two  years  is  the  duration  of  its  pregnancy. 

*  Nmne  of  Gdarimus)—Yer,  174.  «* Gehisimos**  signifieB  "oomical,*'  "laugh- 
ahle,"  «  fiumy,"  from  the  Greek  Terb  ycXoa,  "  to  langh." 

>  Fonigu  AoMfe)— Ver.  198.  By  "  barbaros  mores,"  he  probably  allades  to 
the  Boman  custom  of  selling  by  auction,  which  was  one  of  the  duties  of  the 
"p»co,"  or  "herald,**  here  rendered  "auctioneer.**  PlautuB  frequently  speaks 
at  one  moment  as  though  addressing  a  Greek,  and  at  the  next,  a  Boman,  au- 
daeaoe. 


y  Google 


222  8TICHV8 ;  Act  n. 

Enter  Gbocotium  from  tlie  house  of  Philvm£Ka,  unseen  hy 

GrELASIMUS. 

Cboc.  (aside) »  This  is  the  Parasite,  whom  I've  been  sent 
to  fetch.  1*11  listen  to  what  he's  saying,  before  I  accost 
him. 

G-Eii.  Now  there  are  a  good  many  curious  mischief-makers 
here,  who,  with  extreme  zeal,  busy  themselves  with  the  affairs  of 
other  people,  and  who  have  themselves  no  affairs  of  their  own  to 
busy  themselves  with.  They,  when  they  know  that  any  one  is 
about  to  have  an  auction,  go  forthwith  and  sift  out  what's 
the  reason ;  whether  a  debt  compels  it,  or  whether  he  has 
purchased  a  farm ;  or  whether,  on  a  divorce,  her  marriage- 
portion  is  to  be  repaid  to  his  wife^.  AU  these,  although, 
i'  faith,  I  don't  judge  them  undeserving,  in  their  moat 
wretched  state,  to  go  toiling  on,  I  don't  care  about.  Til 
proclaim  the  reason  of  my  auction,  that  they  may  rejoice  in 
my  mishaps,  for  there's  no  person  a  busybody  but  what 
he's  ill-natured  too.  Very  great  mishaps,  alas !  liave  befallen 
wretched  me.  So  dreadfully  afflicted  has  my  property^  ren- 
dered me:  my  many  drinking-bouts  are  dead  and  gone; 
how  many  dinners,  too,  that  I've  bewailed,  are  dead!  how 
many  a  draught  of  honeyed  wine ;  how  many  breakfasts,  too, 
that  I  have  lost  within  these  last  three  years!  In  my 
wretchedness,  for  very  grief  and  vexation  have  I  quite  grown 
old.     I'm  almost  dead  with  hunger. 

Cboo.  {aside).  There's  no  one  such  a  droll,  d^heis  when 
he  is  hungry. 

Gel.  Now  am  I  resolved  that  I'll  make  a  sale :  out  of 
doors^  am  I  obliged  to  sell  whatever  I  possess.  Attend,  if 
you  please ;  the  bargains  will  be  for  those  who  are  present. 

"  To  he  repaid  to  his  wife) — ^Ver.  204.  If  the  divorce  took  place  by  mntnal 
consent,  then  the  "  dos,"  or  "  marriage-portion,"  of  the  wife  was  returned.  Sach 
a  circamstance  occarring  on  a  sadden,  might  very  easily  cause  a  necessity  for 
recourse  to  the  services  of  the  auctioneer. 

.  ^  Has  mp  property) — Ver.  210.  "  Mancupium,"  or  "mancipium,"  was  anr 
species  of  property  possessed  by  right  of  purchase.  He  here  considers  the  din- 
ners and  the  drinJdng-bouta,  which  he  so  misses,  in  the  light  of  property  to  him- 
self; the  more  especially  as  they  had  been  purchased  at  the  price  df  his  **  kgi," 
bis  **  puns,"  or  "  bon  mots." 

.  »  Out  ofdooray-YeT,  219.  "  Foras ;"  "  abroad,"  "  out  of  doors."  The  sales  by 
auction  took  place  in  the  open  street. 


y  Google 


Be.  I.  OS,  THE  PABABITE  BXBUFFED.  223 

I've  funny  hon  mot^  to  sell.  Come,  bid  your  price.  Who 
bids  a  dinner  ?  Does  any  one  bid  a  breakfast  ?  They'll  cost 
70U  an  Herctdean  breakfast*  or  dinner.  Ho,  there !  (to  one 
of  the  Spectatoes)  did  you  nod  to  me  ?  No  one  will  offer 
you  better — I  won't  allow  that  any  Parasite  has  better 
quibbles,  cajoleries,  and  parasitical  white  lies*.  I'm  selling  a 
rusty  flesh-scraper*,  too ;  a  rusty-coloured  brown  bottle^  for  the 

1  Fwmy  hon  mo^)— Ver.  221.  *'  Logos.*'  This  word  is  the  Greek  \oy6s, 
signlfyiog  **  a  word,"  or  "  a  witty  saying,"  in  a  Latin  clothing.  It  exactly  cor- 
RspQods  with  the  expression  "^  bon  mots,"  which  we  have  similarly  borrowed  from 
tbeFreoch. 

'  An  Herculean  breakfast) — Ver.  223.  It  is  hard  to  say  what  he  means  by 
''  Herculeum  prandiam :"  bnt,  as  Hercules  was  supposed  to  send  good  luck  to  those 
who  gave  him  the  tenths  of  their  property,  whether  that  property  consisted  of  a 
bouse  or  a  meal,  bis  meaning  probably  is,  *'  Whoever  invites  me  to  a  meal,  tliat 
ineal  shall  be  as  lucky  to  him  as  though  he  had  sent  the  tenth  part  of  it  as  an 
ofieriDg  to  Hercules." 

*  Paraniical  white  lies) — ^Ver.  227.  "  Perjerationcuks  parasiticas."  Literally, 
"psrasitical  little  perjuries."  This  is  probably  meant  in  reftrence  to  the  adjnra- 
tioDs  so  common  among  the  ancients  on  the  most  trivial  occasions,  and  of  which 
the  Parasite  promises  to  be  lavish  in  speaking  in  praise  of  his  entertainer.  The 
dimiDutive  **unciik"  suits  the  measure,  and  also  shows  the  air  of  self-satisfaction 
with  which  he  mentions  that  which  he  takes  to  be  of  the  same  harmless  nature 
which  some  easy  casuists  among  ourselves  attribute  to  what  they  choose  to  call  white 
^.  Indeed,  the  ancients  esteemed  perjury  very  much  according  to  the  subject  on 
which  it  was  employed.  Ovid  mentions  Mercury  as  laughing  at  the  perjuries  of 
cheaiing  tradesmen,  and  Jupiter  as  smiling  at  those  of  lovers ;  surely,  then, "  a  little 
bit  of  a  perjury"  (the  true  meaning  of  **  perjeratiuncuk")  could  not  be  amiss  on 
IQ  occasion  so  trivial,  and  yet,  to  the  Parasite,  so  all-important,  as  the  acquisition 
of  a  good  dinner. 

*  A  nukf  f/eah-tcrapery-yec,  228.  The  "  strigil"  was  an  instrument  used  by 
ibe  Greeks  and  Bomans  ui  the  phice  of  the  flesh-brush  of  modem  times.  It  was 
ottde  of  bone,  iron,  copper,  and  sometimes  of  silver.  It  was  used  af^er  taking 
the  ^^  sudatorium,"  or  sweatmg-bath,  for  the  purpose  of  scraping  the  perspiration 
from  the  body.  These  instruments  were  of  curved  form,  and  in  shape  somewhat  re- 
Mnbled  our  tongue-scrapers  on  a  large  scale.  Rich  persons  took  slaves  with  them 
to  the  baths  for  the  purpose  of  scrainng  them.  From  Hesychius,  Athenseus,  and 
Theophrastos,  we  learn  that  Parasites  were  much  in  the  habit  of  spungmg  for 
entertainers  at  the  public  baths ;  and,  no  doubt,  they  generally  had  ready,  for  an 
<n>ergeDcy,  both  a  **  strigil**  and  a  bottle  of  pexfumed  omtment,  as  a  handy 
medium  of  uitroduction  to  strangers. 

»  A  rusfy-cohured  brawn  6o«fo)— Ver.  228.  The  "  ampulla,"  or  "bottle,"  was 
pn^ly  a  "  lorea,"  or  leather  one,  and  had  turned  of  a  rusty-brown  colour  from 


y  Google 


22A  STIOHITB ;  AjQt  n. 

Greek  ungaentB^  at  the  sweating-baths^ ;  delicate  after-diimer 
powders';  an  empty  Parasite  as  weU  (pointtM  to  himself), 
in  whom  to  lay  bj  your  scraps.  'Tis  neecfcrai  that  these 
should  be  sold  at  once  for  as  mnch  as  they  can ;  that,  if  I  offer 
the  tenth  part  to  Hercales^,  on  that  account  it  man  ^  greato 
•  ••••« 

Osoo.  (aside).  An  auction  of  no  great  vabie,  by  my  troth. 
Hunger  has  taken  hold  of  the  very  deepest  recess  of  the  fel- 
low's stomach.     Til  accost  the  man.    (Moves  towards  Ami.) 

Q-BL.  Who's  this  that's  coming  towams  me  P  Why,  sardy 
this  is  Croootium,  the  maid-servant  of  Epignomns. 

Cboo.  My  respects,  G^elasimus.  Gel.  That's  not  my  name. 

Cboo.  I'  Mth,  for  sure  that  used  to  be  your  name. 

6sL.  Distinctly  ib  was  so,  but  I've  lost  it  by  use.  Now 
I'm  called  Miccotrogus^  from  what  is  fact. 


^  Greek  unffuents) — ^Ver.  229.  By  mentioning  ^*  Greek  nngaents,'* 
liere  reodUects  that  he  is  addiesnng  a  Latin  audience.  The  Gnek  OMNBetics  and 
perfnmes  were  xnncti  esteemed  at  Bome.  Ovid,  in  the  Art  of  Lore,  mentions  tiie 
Athenian  "  oesypnm,**  which  was  much  used  bj  the  Boman  ladies  for  makingti» 
complexion  dear.  It  was  made  from  the  sweat  and  grease  of  the  fleeces  of  the 
sheep  of  Attica. 

*  Thetweaimg'balh8y-VeT,229.  The  "spdatorinm,**  or  **Tapoar"  or  "sweaiii^ 
bath,**  was  also  called  bj  the  Bomans  **  Laoonicam  ;**  beeanse  itwas  the  habit  of  tiie 
Lacedsmonians  to  strip  and  anoint  themselves,  without  using  warm  water,  after 
the  perspiration  caused  hj  athletic  exercises.  Cicero  stjks  it  "  assa,**  becaose 
it  prodnoed  perspiration  by  means  of  a  dry  hot  atmos]^ere.  After  it  had  bets 
used,  and  the  "  strigil'*  applied  to  the  skin,  the  bather  was  dried  with  towels,  nd 
then  anointed,  when  the  *'  nnotiooes  Gnacss"  of  the  Parasite  woold  be  in  deBQud. 
These  were  used  either  to  close  the  pores  of  the  skin  and  to  prement  the  persen 
from  catching  cold,  or  to  keep  the  skin  from  being  to«gh  when  dried  with  the 
towel  Probably  the  Parasites  were  ready  to  give  a  hand  en  an  emergeocy  in 
assisting  to  rub  down  and  anoint  the  bather,  especially  if  he  was  known  to  bqp 
a  good  **  cuisme." 

s  After'di$merpoufdeny~Ver.2aO,  '*  Crapukxiofi.''  These  were  probshly  soft 
and  tasteless  (nudacos)  powders,  used,  like  our  dinner-piBs,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
bad  effects  of  heating  the  stomach  with  rich  food  and  exeess  ef  wine.  A  dever 
Paraate  would,  of  course,  always  have  these  in  rewfiness  on  an  laneigency. 

*  TenAparitoHerctdesy—ytr,  283.  He  seems  to  be  aboot  to  give  a  ^ 
titions  reason  for  his  anxie^  to  get  a  dinner — that,  fonooth,  like  a  poos  bmb,  he 
may  have  the  greater  amount  of  tithes  to  present  to  Hercules.  The  hi8tu4praGloto 
us  from  forming  any  very  determinate  opmion  on  the  meaning  of  the  | 

>  Miccotrogtui) — ^Ver.  242.     This  is  a  Gredc  compound  word,  which  i 
"  crumb-eater;**  in  it  he  alludes  to  his  short  commons. 


y  Google 


Sc  L  OB,  TfLE  PABASITE  BEBUTFED.  225 

Cboc.  O  dear !  IVe  laughed  a  good  deal  at  you  to-day. 

Gel.  When  ?  or  in  what  place  ?  Cboc.  Here,  when  you 
were  carrying  on  a  most  wortnless  auction. 

Gel.  How  now ;  did  you  realhf  hear  it  ? 

Cboc.  Ai/e,  and  one  really  right  worthy  of  yourself. 

Gel.  Where  are  you  bound  for  now  ?    Cboc.  Por  yourself. 

Gel.  Why  have  you  come  ?  Cboc.  Fhilumena  bade  me 
ask  you  by  all  means  to  come  to  visit  her  at  her  house  this 
instant,  together  with  me. 

Gel.  I'  faith,  but  I'll  surely  come  there  as  fast  as  I  can. 
Are  the  entrails  cooked^  by  this  ?  With  how  many  lambs  has 
she  been  sacrificing  P 

Cboc  Indeed,  she  hasn't  been  sacrificing  at  all. 

Gel.  How  ?    What  does  she  want  with  me,  then  ? 

Cboc.  I  think  that  she's  going  to  ask  you  for  ten  mea- 
sures of  wheat. 

Gel.  Or  me  rather  ask  it  of  her  ? 

Cboc  No  ;  that  you  yourself  should  lend  them  to  us. 

Gel.  TeU  her  that  I've  nothing  to  give  myself,  or  that  she 
could  wish  to  borrow,  nor  anything  whatever,  except  this 
cloak  that  I  have  on.  Even  my  very  tongue  that  so  freely 
used  to  offer  itself  ^  I've  sold  as  well. 

Cboc  How  ?    Have  you  got  no  tongue  ? 

Gel.  Why,  the  former  one,  that  used  to  say  "  here,  take 
me^,"  I've  lost:  see,  here's  one  now  that  says  "give  me." 
C^uis  out  his  tongue.) 

Cboc.  A  curse  may  the  Gods  give  you      •      •      *      • 

*  Art  the  entrails  coofterf)— Ver.  251.  It  has  been  already  remarked,  that  after 
tlie  sacrifice,  the  Gods  having  received  their  portion,  the  devotee  took  home  the 
nmamder,'and  invited  his  friends  to  come  to  his  honse  and  partake  of  it.  The 
Parasite  was  not,  perhaps,  mnch  in  the  wrong  when  he  deemed  a  lamb's  fry  no 
bad  dish.  St.  Paol  alludes  to  this  custom  when  he  tells  the  converts  to  keep 
themselves  from  "things  offered  to  idols." — ^Acts,  ch.  rv.,  v.  20;  and  ch.  xxi., 
▼.25. 

*  That  so  fredy  used  to  offer  itself)— Ver.  268.  It  is  very  difficult  to  say 
QttcUy  what  the  Parasite  means  by  "  lingua  dataria."  Perhaps  he  means  to 
tell  the  girl  that  he  is  in  a  bad  humour — that  he  now  "  gives"  nothing  at  all,  not 
wen  his  tongue,  which  has  been  hitherto  "  dataria,'*  or  "  at  the  service"  of  every.. 
Wj.  Now,  however,  he  will  put  it  up  to  sale  by  auction,  and  in  future,  before 
he  says  "  dabo,"  "  I'll  give  you  my  tongue"  or,  in  other  words,  "  my  company," 
he  will  say,  "  cedo,**  "  give  me,"  or  "  tell  me  what  is  your  oflfer"  or  "  bidding." 

» Here  take  me>-Ver.  260.  "  Dabo."    lateraUy,  "  I  will  ©ve." 


y  Google 


226  STiOHUS;  AetH. 

Gel.  Aye,  if  a  curse  you  want,  this  same  tongue  will 
give  you  that. 

Ckoc.  Well  now,  are  you  coining  or  not  ? 

GrEL.  Well,  be  off  home ;  tell  her  I'll  be  there  this  mo- 
ment ;  make  haste  and  be  off.  (CBOGonmu:  goes  into  the 
house.)  I  wonder  why  she  has  requested  me  to  be  fetched  to 
her,  who  ha»  never,  before  this  day,  requested  that  I  should 
be  fetched  to  her,  ever  since  her  husband  lefb.  I  woiidjer  whafe 
it  can  be ;  except  it  is  for  some  experiment  to  be  made  f^pon 
me;  m  go  see  what  she  wants.  But  see,  here's  her  boy,  Pinar 
eium.  Look  at  that  now;  how  very  ^ELcetiously  and  just  like 
a  picture^  does  he  stand  ?  Full  many  a  time,  for  sure,,  in  good 
troth,  has  he  poured  out  for  me  the  wine,  almost  unmixed, 
right  cleverly  into  a  very  tiny  cup^  indeed.     (Stands  ande.) 

Scene  11. 

Snter  Pustacium  at  a  distance,  with  a  fishmg-rod^  hoo'ks^  and 
a  dasket  in  his  hand, 
PrN".  (to  himself).  Mercury,  who  is  said  to  be  the  messenger 
of  Jove,  never  bore  such  pleasiug  tidings  to  his  father,  as  I  shaD 
e'en  now  be  telling  to  my  mistress.  So  loaded  do  Xbear  my 
breast  with  joy  and  with  delight ;  and  realty  I  don't  care  to 
speak  a  syllable  but  iu  a  highflown  style.  The  charms  of  all 
the  loves  and  graces  do  I  bring ;  my  heart,  too,  is  ov^Ieaping 
its  banks,  and  overflowing  with  joyousness.  Now  have  you  the 
means  of  acquiring  glory,  fame,  andhonoT ;  make  haste,  Pina- 
cium,  exhort  your  feet  to  smftness,  grace  your  message  by 
your  deeds,  and  come  to  the  rescue  of  your  mistress  iu  her  need 
*####*  ^]io  is  80  wretched  in  awaitiog  the  ar- 
rival of  her  husband,  Epignomus ;  just  as  becomes  her  does 
she  dote  upon  her  husband,  and  anxiously  hmgfor  him.  Kow, 
Pinacium,  do  as  pleases  you,  run  on,  just  as  you  Eke ;  take 
care  and  regard  no  person  at  the  value  of  a  straw ;  thrust 

>  Ju8tUkeapicture)'^Yer.  271.  "  Ex  pictura.*  Literalff,  •*OQt  of  a  pictnre." 
Be  means,  tbafc  he  has  assnmed  some  attitade  at  that  moment  like  that  of  a 
person  in  a  picture  or  K»  a  model  in  statuarj,  to  which  the  word  ^^pictura"  also 


«  /n  a  very  tmy  cf^y— Ver.  272.  «  Panxillulo.*'  Moat  probably  this  is  said  in 
an  iroolcal  way.  He  perhaps  refers  to  some  injnnction  which,  in  his  former  and 
more  palmy  days,  he  had  given  to  the  hoy  when  waiting  at  table,  to  be  soro  and 
provide  him  with  a  large  cup,  and  not  to  mix  too  mnch  water  with  the  wine. 


y  Google 


Se.  n.  OB,  THE  PABASOPEB  EEBUFFED.  J27 

them  from  the  path  with  your  elbows ;  make  right  smooth 
roar  waj.  If  a  king  shall  come  m  jour  way^  upset  the  king 
himself  forthwith. 

G^EL.  (apart}.  Why,  I  woaader*,  is  Pinaeiuxa  nuoiing  so 
crerladen  with  baggie*  ?  He's  earrying  a  rod,  and  a  basket, 
and  a  fish-hook. 

Pnr.  (to  himself) .  But  yet,  I  think  'tis  pr<^)er  that  my 
mistress  should  eome  with  eittreaty  to  it^,  and  that  she  should 
send  envoys  to  me,  and  gifts  of  gold,  and  chariots  in  which  for 
me  to  be  borne,  icr  I  can't  go  on  foot.  Therefore  I  shall  now 
go  back.  (Tum»  haek.)  I  think  it  is  only  proper  that  I  should 
be  approached  and  addressed  with  entreaties.  And  do  you 
teally  think  that  it's  mere  nonsense  or  nothing  at  all  that  I 
am  now  acquainted  with  ?  Blessings  so  great  am  I  carrying 
&om  the  harbour,  joys  so  eztensiTe  am  I  bringing,  that  hiordly 
could  my  mistress  herself  presume  to  wish  this  of  the  Gods, 
if  she  were  to  know  it.  And  am  I  to  carrjr  it,  then,  of  my  oWn 
aecord  ?  It  pleases  me  not,  nor  do  I  thmk  that  the  duty  of 
a  man.  This  way  does  it  seem  to  be  better  suited  to  this 
news  of  mine  J  let  her  come  to  meet  me,  let  her  entreat  me 
to  communicate  to  her  this  news.  Haughtiness  and  pride 
befit  prosperous  fortunes.  But,  at  last,  when  I  reconsider  it, 
bow  could  she  know  that  I  know  this  ?  (Turning  round,) 
Well,  I  can't  do  otherwise  than  return,  than  speak,  than 
relate  it  at  length,  and  relieve  my  mistress  of  her  grief, 
and  hoth  mightHy  iacrease  the  good  deeds  of  my  ancestors, 
and  present  her  with  a  comfort  unhoped  for  and  oppor- 
tune. I'll  outdo  the  deeds  of  Talthybius^,  and  I'll  set 
all  messengers  at  nought,  and  at  the  same  time  I'll  think 
about  the  running  at  the  Olympic  games.   But  this  distance^ 

*  W%/fwi«fer)— Ver.  288.  «QDida»m  clic«»."  LitiaraUy,  "what  sbftll  I" 
or  ^Toaai  I  say ;"  exactly  correspondkig  to  our  phrase  ^^  I  wonder  why." 

*  Overladen  wUh  haggagey—Ver,  288.  "  Lixabundum."  The  "  Uxse"  were 
the  free  suttlers  or  dealers,  who  followed  the  Roman  armies.  Their  name  is  said 
to  have  been  derived  from  the  old  Latin  word  *  *  lixa,** "  water,"  probably  beeanse 
^ey  orijj^nally  supplied  the  army  with  water.  "  LixabuDdns^  here  means 
^^  laden  with  baggage,"  in  allusion  to  the  fishing-tackle  which  the  lad  is  carryiag. 

«  Ta2%&MM>-Ver.  305.  Taltbybius  was  the  Grecian  herald,  who,  with  Eury- 
hites,  was  seat  by  Agamemnon  to  Achilles,  to  fetch  away  Hippodamia  or 


*  BtU  ikia  distance)— Yer,  307.  He  here  alludes  to  the  comparative  narrowness 
of  the  stage,  which  wonld  not  allow  him  room  to  practise  Cnr  the  '^  emrsura,"  or 
**  miming"  at  the  Olympic  games.  The  '*  stadium,"  or  place  for  ntmnng  at  thefls 
gimes,  was  about  a  ftirfeng  in  length. 

q2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


228  STiCHTJS ;  Act  n. 

is  far  too  short  for  the  course ;  how  sorry  for  it  I  am.  How's 
this  ?  I  see  the  door's  closed.  I'll  go  and  knock  at  the  door. 
(Knocks  at  the  door  of  PHiLTJMEi5ri.'s  house.)  Open,  and 
make  haste,  cause  the  door  to  be  thrown  open ;  away  with  aU 
delay.  This  matter  is  attended  to  too  carelessly ;  see  how 
long  I've  been  standing  here  and  knocking.  Are  you  in-r 
dulging  yourselves  with  a  nap  ?  I'll  try  whether  the  door  or 
my  arms  and  feet  are  the  stronger.  (Knocks  and  kicks.)  I 
wish  much  that  this  door  would  run  away  from  its  master, 
that  for  that  reason  it  might  meet  with  a  heavy  punishment^i 
I'm  tired  of  knocking.  Well,  be  this  the  last  for  you.  {Knocks 
again.) 

Gel.  (apart).  I'll  go  and  accost  him.  (Accosts  "PTSiLCiTm.) 
Good  day  to  you. 

Pin.  And  good  day  to  you.  Gel.  Are  you  turned  fisher- 
man, then  ? 

Pin.  How  long  is  it  since  you  ate  ? 

Gel.  Whence  come  you  ?  "What  are  you  carrying  ?  Why 
are  you  in  a  hurry  ? 

Pin.  About  that  which  is  no  business  of  yours,  don't  you 
trouble  yourself. 

Gel.  What's  there  in  that  ?  (Taking  up  the  lid  of  the 
basket)     Pin.  Snakes,  for  you  to  eat. 

Gel.  Why  are  you  so  pettish?  Pin.  If  you  had  any 
shame,  you  wouldn't  address  me. 

Gel.  May  I  learn  the  truth  from  you  ? 

Pin.  You  may  ;  this  day  you'll  get  no  dinner. 

Scene  III. 
Unter  Philtjmena^ow  her  house. 

Phil.  Who  now,  pray,  is  breaking  this  door  down  ?  {To 
Gelasimus.)  Are  you  doing  this  ?  Do  you  come  to  me  like 
an  enemy  ? 

Gel.  My  respects  to  you ;  I  come  at  your  bidding. 

Phil,  ^d  is  it  for  that  reason  you  are  breaking  down 
my  door? 

Gel.  Scold  your  own  people  ^  the  offenders  are  your  own. 
I  came  to  see  what  you  wanted  me  for.  Why,  for  my  own 
part,  I  pitied  this  door. 

1  A  heavy  ptimskmeiU)—Yer.  312.  He  wishes  that  the  door  was  in  the  condi- 
tion of  a  slave,  and  that  it  had  ran  away  from  its  master,  and  then  it  woold 
receiye  a  severe  punishment  for  its  obduracy — ^*  malum  magnum.** 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


SC.  in.  OE,  THE  FASASITE  BEBUTFED.  229 

Pur.  For  that  reason  your  assistaace  was  given  so  very 
readily. 

Phil.  Pray,  who's  that,  talking  here  so  near  to  us  ? 

Gel.  Pinacium.  Phil.  Where  is  he?  (Looks  on  each 
tide.) 

Pin.  (coming  forward).  Attend  to  me,  and  leave  alone  that 
needy  Parasite,  Philumena. 

Phil.  Pinacium.     Pin.  That  name  my  elders  gave  me. 

Phil.  What's  your  business  ?  Pur.  what's  my  business, 
do  you  ask  P 

Phil*  Why  shouldn't  I  ask  it  ?    Pin.  What's  yours  with 

Phil.  Do  you  insult  me,  impudent  fellow  ?  Answer  me, 
this  very  instant,  Pinacium. 

PiF.  Bid  those,  then,  to  let  me  alone,  who  are  detaining  me. 

Phil.  Who  are  detaining  you?  Pin.  Do  you  ask  me 
that?    A  lassitude  is  in  possession  of  all  my  limos. 

Phil.  Well,  I  know  right  well  that  it's  not  in  posses- 
sion of  your  tongue. 

Pin.  With  such  rapid  speed  have  I  been  hastening  from 
the  harbour,  for  the  sake  of  your  own  well-doing. 

Phil.  WTiy,  do  you  bring  any  good  news  ? 

Pin.  I  bring  more,  by  very  much,  than  you  expect. 

Phil.  I'm  saved,  t^en.  Pin.  And  I'm  done  for;  lassi- 
tude is  drinking  up  my  marrow  apace. 

Gel.  What,  then,  am  I,  the  marrow  of  whose  stomach, 
to  my  sorrow,  famine  has  seized  upon  ? 

Phil.  Did  you  meet  any  one  ?     Pin.  Many. 

Phil.  But  any  man  ?  Pin.  Very  many ;  but,  of  the  many, 
not  one  a  greater  rascal  than  he  is.   {Points  at  Gtelasimtts.) 

Phil.  How  so  ?  G-el.  I  have  been  affronted  already  at 
his  saying  uncivil  things  to  me.  If  you  irritate  me  any 
further {JEEolds  v/p  his  fist  to  Pinacium.) 

Pin.  I'  faith,  you'll  be  plaguy  hungry  to  eat  me. 

Gel.  I'll  cause  you  to  know  that  assuredly  you've  said 
that  with  reason. 

Pin,  I  wish  everything  to  be  made  clean.  {Qalls  to  the 
Seevants^cmw  the  door.)  Bring  out  here  your  brooms,  and  a 
reed  as  weU,^  that  I  may  destroy  all  the  labours  of  the  spiders 

^A  reed  cu  weU) — ^Ver.  347.  *' Arnndinem,"  a  long  reed,  probably  like  a 
fishiDg-rod,  which  would  be  able  to  sweep  away  the  spider-webs  otherwise  out  of 
leach. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


290  8TTCIH  VB ;  Aidi  IL 

and  their  plaguy  webs,  and  rout  out  all  their  looms.  {The 
Sebtants  hrin^  some  brooms.) 

Gel.  The  pocnr  things  will  be  cold  in  future. 

Fin.  What?  Do  you  think  that  they  are  just  like  yooiself, 
with  only  one  coat  ?     Take  this  broom.  {Gives  him  a  hroom^ 

Gel.  m  take  it.  Pdt.  This  Fll  take  myself.  Bo  you 
sweep  away  there. 

GrKL.  rll  do  so.  {Sweeps  away,)  Pur.  {caUkig  ahui)» 
Win  some  one  bring  here  a  pail  and  water^  ? 

Gel.  Eeally,  this  fellow's  playing  the  -Sldile^  without  the 
Tote  of  the  public  eyen.     (2%e  water  is  hroupht.) 

PiK.  Come,  do  you  quickly  sweep  the  ground,  and  sprinkle 
before  the  house. 

Gel.  I'll  do  so.  Pin.  It  needs  be  done.  I'll  knock  down 
ihe  spider-webs  there  fpom  the  door  and  from  the  wall. 

Gel.  I'  faith,  a  tamublesome  business,  this, 

Phil.  Still,  I  don't  at  all  understand  what  it  means ;  un- 
less, perchance,  some  guests  are  about  to  come  ? 

Pin.  {ordering  the  Seetants).  Do  you  spread  the  coudbes. 
Gel.  {aside).  The  beginning  pleases  me,  about  the  couches. 

Pin.  Others,  you  chop  the  billets ;  others,  you  clean  the 
fish  which  the  fisherman  has  brought ;  take  you  down  the 
gammon  of  bacon  and  "die  collar  of  brawn^ 

Gel.  {astdey  V  &ith,  this  is  a  vexy  sensible  fellow. 

Phil.  By  my  troth,  as  I  imagine,  you  haven't  quite 
minded  the  directions  of  your  mistress. 

Pin.  Why,  I've  left  ail  matters  unattended  to  by  reascn 
of  what  you  wished. 

Phil,  l^n  do  you  inform  me  upon  that,  on  account  of 
which  you  were  sent  to  the  harbour  ? 

Pin.  I'll  tell  you.  After,  with  the  daybreak,  you  had  sent 
me  to  the  haiiour,  the  sun  with  its  beams  opportunely 
arose  from  out  of  the  sea.     While  I  was  enquiring  of  the 

>  A  pail  and  water)— Yer.  852.  "  Nassiternam."  A  water-vessel  with  three 
spouts,  which  received  its  name  from  "  nasum,**  "  a  spont,"  compomided  with 
"tres,"  "three." 

2  Playing  Ihe  ^dUey^Yer,  868.  The  writer  here  again  refers,  in  «  phty 
the  scene  of  which  is  at  Athens,  to  Boman  customs.  The  JEdile  was  a  pnfalie 
officer  at  Borne,  whose  hnsiness  it  was  to  see  that  the  streets,  houses,  and 
temples,  were  kept  clean.  They  were  chosen  by  the  votes  (suffi-aginm)  of  the 
common  people,  to  which  fact  GelasimtiB  alludes  in  the  next  hne. 

3  Collar  of  brawn)— Yer.  860.  ''Olandhim."  This  leaUy  was  the  neck  of 
the  hqg,  which  received  its  name  from  the  kernels  (glandes)  which  it  contained. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc  in.  OB,  THE  PASASXTB  SEBTnTFED.  281 

wrenue  officers  whether  any  ship  had  arrived  £rom  Asia,  and 
^  were  flaying  none  had  come,  I  beheld,  in  the  meantime, 
a  bark,  than  which  I  tldnk  I  never  saw  a  greater  one.  With 
a&vouring  breeze,  and  in  full  sail,  it  came  into  harbour.  We 
were  enqairiog  one  of  another  whose  ship  it  was,  one^  what  it 
carried  ?  In  the  meantime  I  espied  your  husband  and  his 
aerrant  Stichus. 

Phil.  Ha !  what  ?  Bid  you  mention  Epignomus  ? 

Gel.  Tour  husband  and  my  own  life. 

Pw.  He  has  arrived,  I  say.  Phil.  Did  you  see  him 
yomaelf? 

Fur.  Yes^  and-mih.  pleasure  too,  Gel.  I'  faith,  I'll  surely 
take  the  broom,  and  sweep  this  place  with  pleasure. 

PiK.  He  has  brought  a  great  amount  of  silver  and  gold. 

GxL.  'Tis  right  cleverly  done.  Pur.  Wool  and  purple 
in  plenty. 

Gil.  Aye,  for  me  to  clothe  my  carcase  with. 

Pur.  Couches,  adorned  with  ivory  and  gold. 

Gil.  m  recline  at  table  right  regally. 

Pdt.  Besides — ^Babylonian  coverings  for  conches^,  and 
carpets  dyed  in  purple,  has  he  brought. 

Gel.  Abundaiioe  of  £ne  things.  I'  faith,  his  business  has 
been  successful. 

Pin.  Then,  as  I  began  to  say,  female  players  on  the  harp, 
on  the  pipe,  sackbuts  toc^^  has  he  brought  with  him,  of  sur- 
prising beauty. 

Gil.  Capital!  When  I'm  at  my  wine,  I'll  be  quite 
sportive ;  then  am  I  in  merriest  pin. 

Put.  Besides  many  unguents  of  numerous  kinds. 

'  Coverings^  co«c*e»)— Ver.  878.  "  Peristromatia,"  "blankets"  or  "coimter- 
pnat"  were  need  among  the  Romans  to  cover  eonches ;  they  were  sometimes  of  the 
Ottt  oostlj  desoriptioD,  and  were  mostlj  of  purple  colonr,  and  freqaently  richly 
embroidered  with  gold.  Pliny  speaks  of  Babylonian  cloths  of  divers  colours, 
ud  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Joshua,  ver.  24,  we  read,  ^'  When  I  saw  among 
the  spoik  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment." 

*  SackbtUs  tooh-Yer.  861.  ^*  Scmbucas."  "  Sambnca"  is  supposed  to  be  ths 
ameinstrnment  whidi  is  mentioned  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  Prophet  David,  and 
■  rendered  in  our  version  of  the  Old  Testament  by  the  word  **  sackbut.'*  This  in- 
Btnunent  was  probably  introduced  into  Greece  and  Borne  from  Syria  or  Phoenicia. 
It  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  kind  (^  triangular  harp.  The  word  '^  sambucas^* 
is  substituted  in  Bitschel's  edition  for  "  sambucinas/'  in  the  former  editions. 
U  is  probably  intended  here  to  have  the  same  meaning—"  female  players  on  the 
^tunbuca,*"  who  were  also  called  "  sambudstrise,"  and  whose  performances 
van  highly  priaed  by  the  Bomans  as  Asiatic  luxuries. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


282  STiCHrs ;  Act  TI.,  Sc.  III. 

Gbi.  I'll  not  sell  my  bon  mots ;  I'U  not  have  an  auction 
now ;  I've  got  an  estate  in  fee^.  Let  the  mischievous  hunters 
of  auctions  go  te  perdition.  Hercules,  I  congratulate  thee 
that  the  tenths  which  I  vowed  to  thee  are  increased.  'Tis 
my  hope  that  at  length,  by  some  means  or  other,  I  may  expel 
this  plaguy  famine  from  my  stomach. 

Pin.  And  then,  besides,  he  has  brought  some  Parasites^ 
with  him. 

Gel.  Alas !  to  my  confusion,  I'm  undone. 

Pur.  Eight  funny  fellows.  Gel.  I'  faith,  I'll  sweep  this 
dust  back,  which  I  just  now  swept  together.  (Sweeps  it 
hack).  Those  bon  mots  are  now  on  sale,  which  I  was  saying 
I  wouldn't  sell.  I'm  done  for:  now  there  is  occasion  for 
spiteftd  persons  to  rejoice  at  my  misfortune.  Hercules, 
thou  who  art  a  God,  thou  really  hast  departed  not  oppor- 
tunely. 

Phil.  Did  you  see  Pamphilus,  the  husband  of  my  sister  ? 

Pin.  No.      Phil.  Isn't  he  there  ? 

PiH".  Yes,  they  said  that  he  had  come  as  well.  I  ran 
hither  before  them,  with  all  speed,  that  I  might  bring  the 
welcome  tidings. 

Phil.  Go  in-doors,  Pinacium;  bid  the  servants  prepare 
the  sacred  things*"^  for  me.    (To  GELASiMrs.)  Tare  you  well! 

Gel.  Do  you  want  me  to  assist  ? 

Phil.  I  have  servants  enough  in  the  house.  (PHiLUMEiriL 
and  Pinacium  ^o  into  the  housed 

Gel.  (to  Mmaelf).  In  good  sooth,  Gelasimus,  I  doubt  you 
have  come  to  but  little  purpose,  if  neither  he  that  is  here 
gives  you  any  aid,  nor  yet  he  that's  coming.  I'll  off  in- 
doors to  my  books^,  and  take  my  instructions  from  the 
cleverest  sayings ;  for  if  I  don't  drive  away  those  fellows,  tJie 
JParasites  that  are  coming^  most  surely  I'm  undone.    (IkiU 

1  An  estate  infee^—Yer,  384.  "  Haereditas."  *'  A  fortune,"  or  "  an  heirdom," 
jnst  as  we  say,  *'  I  have  come  in  to  a  fortnne."  He  alludes  to  the  pleasant  life  he 
anticipates,  by  spungmg  on  the  wealthy  Epignomus  and  his  brother. 

*  Brought  some  ParatUesy-Yer,  388.  The  arch  boy  only  adds  this  to  put 
Gelasimus  in  a  fright,  in  which  he  fully  succeeds.  There  was  no  necessity  to 
import  Parasites  from  Asia  to  Athens. 

«  The  sacred  Ihmgi^—^er,  396.  To  perform  a  sacrifice  on  the  safe  return  of  her 
husband. 

*Tomy  hooks) — Ver.  400.  These  were  probably  pamphlets,  filled  with  jokes 
and  funny  stories,  which  Parasites  would  study  for  the  entertdnment  of  the  patrons 
whom  they  were  to  amuse  by  way  of  return  for  theur  dinner.     These  books  perhaps 


yC^oogle 


J 


Act  in.,  Sc.  I.      OE,  THE  PAEASITE  BEBTJTrED.  283 

ACT   THE   THIED. 

SOEKE  I. 

JEnter  Epigkomub  and  Sticmjib,  followed  hy  some  Slates. 

Epig.  Inasmucli  as,  my  business  prosperously  carried  on, 
I  am  returned  safe  home,  thanks  do  I  return  to  Neptune 
and  to  his  tempests ;  to  Mercury  as  well^,  who  in  my  traffic 
has  aided  me,  and  by  my  profits  has  rendered  my  property 
fourfold.  Those  whom  formerly  I  affected  with  sorrow  at 
my  departure,  the  same  shall  I  now  make  joyous  at  my  ar- 
rival. But  already  have  I  met  mv  connexion  Antipho,  and 
from  bad  terms  have  I  returned  to  niendship  with  him.  See, 
prithee,  what  money  can  effect.  Since,  my  affairs  pros- 
pering, he  sees  that  I've  returned,  and  brought  home 
great  wealth,  without  any  mediators,  there  on  board  the 
ship,  upon  the  deck,  we  have  returned  to  firiendship  and  good 
feeling.  Both  he  and  my  brother  dine  with  me  this  day ; 
for  yesterday  we  were  both  in  the  same  harbour^  together ; 
but  to-day  my  ship  weighed  anchor  a  little  the  soonest. 
Take  these  people  in-doors,  Stichus,  whom*  I've  brought 
with  me. 

Stich.  Master,  whether  I'm  silent  or  speak,  I'm  sure 

oocnpied  the  same  position  as  the  *'  Joe  Millers'*  did  m  this  conntry  dnring  the  kst 
century,  and  the  "  Academies  of  Compliments"  in  the  century  before.  Indeed, 
the  latter,  in  all  their  amplitude,  wonld  have  been  invaluable  to  a  Parasite,  as  they 
contain  directions  how  to  court  a  lady,  ask  a  riddle,  sing  a  funny  song,  put  a  posy 
on  a  ring,  direct  a  letter,  and  a  hundred  other  things. 

^  To  Merctary  tu  weU) — ^Ver.  404.  Mercury  was  the  God  of  traffic  and  gain, 
and  the  guardian  of  tradesmen.  He  was  said  to  receive  his  name  from  "  merx," 
^  traffic*'  or  "  merchandbe."  See  the  comical  prayer  of  the  cheating  tradesman  to 
his  tutelar  Divinity,  in  the  Fasti  of  Ovid,  B.  5,  L  675  et  seq, 

*  /» the  same  Aarb(ntry--Yer.  416.  He  here  alludes  to  the  custom  in  those 
times  of  lying  at  anchor  during  the  night,  and  sailing  in  the  day-time  only, 
as  it  is  dear  that  reference  cannot  here  be  made  to  the  harbour  from  which  they 
originally  set  out,  as  that  was  in  Asia,  and  they  could  not  have  reached  Athens 
from  Asia  within  twenty-four  hours.  Epignomus  and  his  brother  appear  to  have 
fipoghted  two  ships  with  the  valuable  property  which  they  had  acquired  in  part- 
nership. 

*  These  people  whom) — Ver.  418.  He  alludes  to  the  female  slaves  which  have 
been  already  mentioned,  consisting  of  harpers  and  music-girls,  one  of  whom 
we  shall  shortly  find  to  have  attracted  the  admu*ation  of  Antipho. 


y  Google 


2M  BCEOHirs ;  Act  III. 

you  know  how  many  hardslups  I've  endured  in  your  ser- 
vice ;  now,  on  my  arrival  home,  I  wish  to  spend  in  freedom^ 
this  one  daj  after  these  many  hardships. 

Epig.  Tou  ask  what's  just  and  right.  Stichus,  you  may 
take  this  day  for  yourself;  I  don't  object  to  it.  Go  whore 
you  like.     A  cask,  too,  of  old  wine,  I  give  you  to  drink. 

Stioh.  O,  grand !    I'll  have  my  miBtress  this  day. 

Epig.  Even  ten,  so  long  as  it  is  at  your  own  expense. 

Sti€H.  What  #  *  #  •  ? 

Efi«.  W^at  *  •  •  ♦  ? 

SncH.  I'll  go  and  dine  *  *  'Tisthusifc 

pleases  me        *  *  *  ♦  * 

Epi«.  Where  do  you  dine  to-day  ? 

Stich.  This  plan  have  I  thus  resolved  upon.  I  have  a 
mistress  here  in  the  neighbourhood,  Stephamum,  the  servant- 
maid  of  your  brother.  I'm  going  to  invite  her ;  I'll  take  her 
to  a  pic-nic  entertainment^  at  her  fellow-servant's,  Sagarinus. 
We  both  have  ihe  same  mistress ;  we  are  rivals. 

Bpig.  Come  then,  conduct  them  in.  I  grant  you  this 
day. 

Stich.  Hold  me  to  blame  if  I  don't  make  the  most  of  ft^. 
Troth  now,  I'll  pass  through  the  garden  to  my  mistress,  to 
engage  her  beforehand  for  me  this  evening ;  at  the  same  time 
rU  give  my  contribution,  and  bid  the  dinner  to  be  cooked  at 
Sagarinus' s,  or  else  I'll  go  myself  and  make  my  marketing 
as  caterer.    Sagarinus,      ***** 

*  *  a  servant  *  *  *  iwrmy 

*  *  *  *  *  with  stripes     *  * 

*  *  to  take  him  home  well  thrashed,  I'U  make  all 
things  to  l)e  in  readiness  here ;   but  I'm  delaying  myself. 

1  To  spend  mfreedomy—Yer.  422.  "  Eleutiheria."  This  is,  origmaDy,  a  Greek 
word.    It  was  also  the  name  of  the  Goddess  of  Liberty. 

»  A  pio^mc  mtortowmewQ— Ver.  433.  "  Symbola'*  was  the  name  f^en  to  in 
entertainment  to  wfaieh  each  of  the  gaests  eontribtited  in  money  or  kind ;  similar, 
in  principle,  to  what  we  call  a  **  pic-nic"  entertainment. 

•  Make  ike  most  o/*t^)— Ver.  486.  "  Excruciavero."  Literally,  "  torment  it" 
He  seems  to  alhide  to  the  word  **  dedo,"  nsed  by  bis  master  in  the  preceding  fine, 
"  I  surrender  to  you  this  day ;"  that  word  being  especially  applied  to  the  sur- 
render or  giying-up  of  prisoners ;  on  which  Stichus  rejoins,  **  As  "the  day  is 
surrendered  to  me,  Til  torment  it  like  a  real  prisonei^ — ^meaning  "  I  won't  let  it 
pass  in  quietness."    He  fally  keeps  his  word. 


y  Google 


Sc  n.  OB,  THJB  FABASITX  BEBITFFSP.  285 

ind  doai't  you  be  surpmed^  (to  the  Aubieifgb)  that  men,  who 
«e  slaves,  dzmk,  court,  and  give  rayitatioiis  to  dinner  P  This 
is  allowed  us  at  Athena.  But  when  I  tliink  of  it,  rath^ 
tibaa  meet  with  oensore,  i^ere's  h«ne,  too,  another  door  to  the 
back  hiiiLdisgs  c^  ovar  house.  I'll  go  that  way  to  market ;  by 
that  way  I'll  bring  badt  the  provifiionB — ^through  the  garden 
there's  a  passage  that  commimicates  with  both  houses.  (To 
^  SLA.TE8.)  Do  you  follow  me  this  way.  I  surely  will  pull 
this  day  to  bits^.     (Ghes  into  the  hxmse  />/*I^lft5F0MXJS.) 

SCEKE  II. 

Enter  Gi5iiA.siKirs. 

Gel.  (to  himself).  I've  consulted  my  books;  I'm  as  sure 
as  possible,  that  by  my  funny  l)on  mots  I  shall  recover  my 
patfon^.  Now  I'm  going  to  see  whether  he  has  arrived  by 
this  from  the  harbour,  that  when  he  comes  I  may  smooth 
him  down  with  my  speeches. 

Epig.  Surely,  this  is  Gfelasimus,  the  Parasite,  that's 
coming. 

G-sii.  (to  himself).  With  lucky  auspices,  by  my  troth,  this 
day  did  I  come  out  of  doors ;  since  an  omen  auspiciously  befel 
me*.  This  was  beheld  by  me;  how  a  weasel  carried  off  a  mouse 
cbse  at  my  feet.     Eor  as  she  found  sustenance  for  herself 

» JknH  you  he  «wymed)— Ver.  446.  He  apologises  for  introducing  slaves  carons- 
iDg  on  Ae  Boman  stage,  bj  reminding  the  Spectators  that  the  scene  k  at  Athens, 
liiere  gpeaiter  freedom  and  indulgence  was  allowed  to  slayes  than  at  Bmne. 

'  Ptdl  this  day  to  bits) — ^Ver.  463.  "  Hunc  lacero  dienh"  He  seems  here  to 
omtinae  the  metaphor  used  in  ver.  436:  **I11  torture  this  day  finely" — ^I'U  get 
aU  I  can  out  of  it» 

*  Becover  my  jpcetron) — Ver.  456.  "  Regem."  In  common  parlance,  rich  men 
were  often  styled  by  their  dependents  and  flatterers,  "  rex,*'  "my  king.*' 

*  Auepicioudy  he/el  me) — ^Ver.  460.  "  Quum  strena  mi  obscssvavit."  This 
pusage  is  very  obscure,  and  has  pnzzled  the  Commentators,  who  have  generally 
taken  refuge  in  a  various  reading,  "  Eum  strenue  obcsenavit,"  which  seems  to 
make  but  very  poor  sense.  The  research,  however,  of  the  indefiEitigable  Ritschd 
has  set  that  mode  of  escape  enturely  at  rest.  "  Strena"  was  the  name  of  a  New 
Tetr'a  ^ft,  which  was  given  and  received  on  the  CSalends  of  January,  that  the 
year  might  be  commenced  under  good  auspices.  Probably  from  that  drcum- 
Btance,  it  became  synonymous  with  a  good  or  "  auspicious  omen."  "  Obscsevo" 
is  lendered  in  the  IMctionaries,  '*  to  give  a  bad  omen."  Such,  however,  is  not 
necessarily  its  meaming,  m  all  instances.  "  Scseva"  is  an  "  omen"  or  "  augury," 
whether  fortunate  or  not.  Consequently,  "  obscsevo"  may  very  reasonably  mean, 
''to  £»n  in  one's  way  as  an  omen;"  if  so,  the  expression,  as  here  used,  will  mean, 
**  A  iK(%  omen  fell  in  my  way." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


236  STiCHUS ;  Act  HI. 

this  day,  so  do  I  hope  that  I  shall  do,  as  the  augoiy  predicts. 
{Sees  EpiaKOMrs.)  Surely  this  is  Epignomus  tba>t's  standing 
here;  I'll  go  and  address  him.  My  dear  Epignomus,  how 
pleased  I  am  to  see  you  now ;  how  mj  tears  are  starting  forth 
for  verif  joy.    Have  jrou  all  along  enjoyed  your  health  ? 

Epig.  With  care  it  has  been  preserved. 

Gel.  Eight  heartily  I  wish  you  health^. 

Epio.  You  speak  kindly,  and  like  a  Mend.  May  the  Gtoia 
grant  what  you  wish. 

Gel.        #         *         *        Epio.  I,  sup  there  with  you? 

Gel.  Since  you  are  returned  safe. 

Epia.  Beally,  an  engagement  has  been  made  already ;  but 
I  give  you  thanks. 

Gel.  Do  promise  me.    Epig.  It's  settled. 

Gel.  But  do,  I  say.     Epio.  The  thing's  agreed  on. 

Gel.  By  my  troth,  you'd  do  it  with  much  pleasure  to  me. 

Epio.  I  know  that  well.  When  an  opportunity  shall  come, 
it  shall  be  so. 

Gel.  Now,  then,  is  the  opportunity. 

Epio.  I'  faith,  I  cannot.  Gel.  why  make  difficulties  ? 
Do  consider ;  I  have  I  know  not  what  luxuries  at  hand^. 

Epio.  Do  be  off,  now ;  seek  for  yourself  another  guest  for 
to-day. 

Gel.  Tou  promise,  then  ?  Epio.  I  would  make  no  diffi- 
culty if  I  could. 

Gel.  BeaUy,  on  my  word,  one  thing,  for  sure,  I  promise 
you,  I'd  entertain  you  with  pleasure,  beyond  a  doubt,  if 
you  would  promise. 

Epig.  Adieu!   (Moving,)      Gel.  Have  you  resolved ? 

Epig.  I  have  resolved.     I  shall  dine  at  home. 

Gel.  (aside).  Since  nothing  has  been  effected  this  way,  I'll 
therefore  approach  him  by  a  more  open  path,  and  I'll  speak 
plainly  out.  (To  Epigkomits.)  Since  you,  yourself,  are  not 
willing  to  promise  to  come  to  me,  should  you  like  that  I 
should  come  to  dine  with  you  ? 

Epig.  If  it  were  possible,  I  should  like  it ;  but  here  are 
nine  other  people^  coming  to  dine  at  my  house. 

^  /  vnah  you  heaUhy—Yer,  468.  ^*  Propino  tibi  salutera  plenis  fancibus."  lite- 
rallj,  "  I  drink  your  health  with  my  jaws  crammed  full,**  a  very  apt  mode  of  ex- 
pression for  a  Parasite. 
»  Luxuries  at  AanJ)— Vcr.  478.  "  In  mundo."    Literally,  *'  in  the  world.*' 
»  Nine  other  peapley-Yer.  487.  Aulas  Gellius  and  Macrobius  tell  as  that  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THE  FABASITE  BEBtJFrEP.  287 

GbIi.  Fop  my  part,  I  don't  ask  that  I  should  recline  on 
the  couch ;  you  Imow  that  I'm  a  man  for  the  lower  seats. 

Epig.  But  these  are  deputies  of  a  people,  tip-top  men; 
tW  come  here  as  puhHc  ambassadors  from  Ambracia^. 

GeIj.  Let  then  tne  deputies  of  a  people,  your  tip-top  men, 
reeline  at  the  tip-top  place ;  I,  the  lowest,  in  the  lowest 
quarter. 

Epig.  It  isn't  proper  for  you  to  be  entertained  among 
deputies. 

Gel.  I  'fiEiith,  and  I — I'm  a  deputy,  too^,  but  little  it  does 
ayail  me. 
_     Ejpia.  I  intend  that  to-morrow  we  shall  dine  upon  the 
8Cj«ps.     Sincerely,  farewell.     {Ooes  into  his  house,) 

Gel.  By  my  troth,  'tis  clear  that  I'm  undone,  and  by  no 
&iilt  of  my  own^.  O^e  number  is  less  than  it  was  before  by 
one  Gelasunus.  I'm  resolved,  hereafter,  never  to  believe  in 
a  weasel,  for  I  know  of  no  beast  more  uncertain  than  her. 
She  who  herself  is  ten  times  a  day  shifting  4ier  place,  from 
her  have  I  taken  my  omens  in  matters  of  life  and  death  to  me ! 
I'm  determined  to  call  my  friends  together,  to  take  counsel 
how  by  rule  I  must  starve  henceforth,  (Exit, 

ancients  never  admitted  to  a  feast  more  than  nine,  the  nmnber'of  the  Muses,  or 
less  than  three,  the  number  of  the  Graces.  The  true  reason,  however,  was  that 
the  three  *^  triclinia,"  or  coaches,  made  three  parts  of  the  square  around  the  table ; 
and  each  contiuning  bat  three,  nine  was  as  great  a  number  as  could  be  accommo- 
dated. Epignomns  mentions  that  number  here,  by  way  of  assuring  Gelasimus  that 
there  is  really  no  room  for  him.  On  this,  the  Parasite  says  that  he  is  **  imi 
robsellii  vir,"  "  a  man  for  the  lowest  stool"  or  "  bench,"  which  he  can  very  well 
manage  with.  *'  Snbsellia"  was  the  name  of  the  seats  of  the  Tribunes,  Triumvirs, 
and  Qasstors,  who  were  not  honoured  with  Curule  chau^. 

'  From  Ambracid) — ^Ver.  491.  Ambracia  was  a  city  of  Epims,  on  the  Western 
coast  of  Greece. 

*  i'w  a  deputy^  too) — ^Ver.  495.  He  puns  on  the  word  '*  orator,"  which  signi- 
fies "  a  pleader"  or  "  orator,"  as  well  as  an  "  ambassador"  or  "  deputy."  He  says 
that  he  is  a  pleader  too  (for  the  cause  of  his  own  stomach),  but  all  to  no  purpose. 

»  By  nofctttU  of  my  otw)— Ver.  497.  "  Nihil  obnoxie,"  "  by  reason  of  no  fault 
or  offisnce  of  my  own ;"  thus  consoling  himself  for  his  rebuff.  It  has  been  ob- 
served by  various  Critics,  that  this  passage  is  very  obscure ;  but  the  above  trans- 
lation, which  is  sanctioned  by  the  learned  Rost,  is  most  probably  the  correct  one. 
W»ruer  renders  it  "  out  of  doubt,"  which,  out  of  doubt,  is  not  the  meaning. 


y  Google 


STICHV8 ;  Ad  r?. 


ACT   THE   FOrETH. 

Scene  I. 

UtUer  AiTTiPHO  and  FAKPHiiiirs. 

AiTT.  So  may  the  Gods  favour  me,  and  preserve  for  me  my 
daughters,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  me,  FamphiJus,  that  I  see  you 
both  return  home  to  your  native  land,  your  business  prosper- 
ously managed,  yourself  and  your  brother. 

Pam.  I  should  have  heard  enough  from  you,  Antipho,  did 
I  not  see  that  you  are  friendly  to  me ;  now,  since  I've  found 
that  you  are  my  friend,  1*11  give  you  credence. 

Ant.  I  would  invite  you  to  my  house  to  dinner,  had  not 
your  brother  told  me  that  you  were  going  to  dine  at  his 
house  to-day,  when  he  invited  myself  to  his  house  to  dinner. 
And  it  womd  have  been  more  proper  for  me  to  g^e  you  an 
entertainment  on  your  arrival,  than  to  engage  myself  to  him, 
were  it  not  that*  I  didn't  wish  to  disoblige  hun.  !Now  I  don't 
wish  with  words  alone  to  insinuate  myself  into  your  ftvour; 
to-morrow  you  shall  be  at  my  house,  both  you  and  he,  witi 
your  wives. 

Fam.  Then,  the  day  after,  at  my  house ;  for  it  was  yester- 
day he  invited  me  for  to-day.  But  am  I  quite  reooaacikd  to 
you,  Antipho  ? 

Ant.  Smce  you  have  thus  thrived  in  your  afFairs,  as  it 
behoves  yourselves  and  persons  friendly  disposed  to  wish,  let 
there  be  good-will  and  intercourse  between  us.  Take  you  care 
to  think  of  this ;  according  as  wealth  is  obtained  by  each  man, 
so  does  he  experience  his  friends.  If  his  fortunes  are  flooritb- 
ing,  so  are  his  friends  true ;  if  his  prospects  decline,  so,  too, 
do  his  friends  decline.    Fortune  finds  friends. 

JEnter  EpiGNOMTsyroflw  his  house. 
Epie.  (to  himself).  Tm  now  returned.  'Tis  a  great  deHght, 
if  you  have  been  long  from  home,  when  you  return  home 
again,  if  no  anxieties  come  in  contact  with  your  feelings. 
But,  in  my  absence,  so  well  has  my  wife  taken  care  of  iny 
private  affairs,  that  she  has  made  me  free  and  unembarrassed 
by  anxieties.  But,  see,  here's  my  brother  Famphilus,  walk- 
ing with  his  father-in-law. 


y  Google 


Se.  L  OB,  THE  PASAJSITB  BEBTJFFED. 

Pam.  How  &rea  it,  EpignomuB  ?  Ejpig.  How  with  you  ? 
How  lomg  since  jon  came  into  bArbour  ? 

Pam.  Not  very  long  ago.  Epig.  (aside).  And  is  it  since 
then  that  he  has  beeome  on  smooth  terms  with  yon  P 

Ajxt,  (overhearing).  More  smooth  than  the  sea,  on  which 
yon  have  both  been  borne. 

Epio.  You  do  aa  yon  ate  wcmt  to  do  other  things^  Do  we 
mkde  the  ship  to-day,  brother  ? 

Pam.  I  would  rather  ao  quietly  to  work.  Let's  rather 
kde  ourselves  with  delights  in  their  turn.  How  soon  will 
the  dinner  be  cooked  ?    I  haven't  breakfasted  Uhday. 

£rio.  Go  in-doors  to  my  house  and  bathe. 

Pak.  I'E  only  step  home  to  my  own  house,  to  salute  the 
Gods^  and  my  wife.  If  I  do  that  as  I  wish,  I'll  forthwith 
letim  to  your  house. 

Erie.  But  your  wife  is  hastening  to  come  here  with  her 


PjlM.  'Tis  very  good ;  there  will  then  be  the  less  delay  on 
that  account.     I  shall  be  at  your  house^  this  instant. 

Aht.  (^  Paicphilits).  Beftnre  you  go  away,  in  your  pre- 
tence I  wish  to  relate  a  single  stoiy  to  him. 

Efio.  By  all  means*  Ajst.  There  was  once  an  old  gentle- 
Bum,.  juflt  as  I  now  am ;  he  had  two  daughters,  such  as  mine 
lunr  are ;  they  were  msnded  to  two  brothers,  just  as  mine  now 
are  to  yourselves.. 

PalM.  I  wonder  how  the  story  is  to  turn  out  ? 

ksT.  One  of  these  young  men  had,  as  you  (to  FAMFSiXTrs) 
now  have,  a  damsel,  a  musie^girl ;  he  had  brought  her  firom 
abroad,  as  you  have  now  done.  Now,  this  old  gentleman  was 
a  vidower,  just  as  I  now  am. 

Pam.  Do  proceed ;  this  story  is  really  k  propos. 

Akt.  Then  said  this  old  gentleman  to  him  to  whom  the 
nnsi&-girl  belonged,  juat  as  I  now  say  to  you 

Pak..  I'm  listemng^,  and  carefolly  giving  heed. 

^  To  tahOe  Ute  GodBy—Ya^  534.  To  thank  his  boosehidd  Qods  for  his  esci^ 
from  the  perils  of  the  sea,  and  his  success  in  his  speculations. 

*IikaB  be  (Uffmrhoutey^Ytr.  i»37.  These  wordftare  ghren,  in  KtocheFs  edition, 
toEpignomns,  bat  clearly  erroneottslj,  as  it  is  PampbHas  who  is  promising  that, 
after  he  baa  nn  home,  be  will  be  at  the  boose  of  his  brother  immediately. 

*  Pm  UKimmgy~y9r.  54&  Pamphflns  says  this,  as  the  obi  man  has  probaUy 
toached  him,  to  bespeak  his  attention.    . 


y  Google 


240  STiOHUS ;  Act  IT. 

Ant.  "  I  gave  you  my  daughter,  to  be  a  comfortable  bed- 
fellow for  you ;  now,  I  think  it  fair  that  one  should  be  given 
me  in  retium  by  you,  to  be  my  bed-fellow." 

Pam.  Who  says  that  ?  Does  he  say  it^  just  as  though  you 
ivere  to  sew  it  ? 

Ant.  Just  as  I  now  say  it  to  you.  "  Aye,  I'll  give  you 
two  of  them,"  says  this  young  man,  "  if  one's  too  little ;  and 
if  you  are  not  satisfied  with  two,"  says  he,  "  two  more  shall 
be  added." 

Pam.  Prithee,  who  says  that  ?  Does  he  say  it  just  as 
though  I  were  to  say  it  ? 

Akt.  He  says  it  just  as  though  you  were  to  say  it.  Then 
says  this  old  gentleman,  just  as  though  I  were  to  say  it, 
**  well,  give  me  four,  if  you  like,  so  long  only  as,  i'  foith, 
you  find  them  something  to  eat  as  well,  that  they  mayn't 
consume  my  victuals." 

Pam.  "Wiiy  surely  it  must  have  been  a  stingy  old  chap  to 
say  that,  in  asking  food  as  well  of  him  who  promised  them 
to  him. 

Ant.  Why  surely,  this  young  man  must  have  been  a 
good-for-nothing  fellow,  who  forthwith,  when  the  other 
asked  him,  refused  to  give  him  a  grain  of  wheat.  But,  i* 
troth,  the  old  gentleman  asked  what  was  fair,  inasmuch  as 
the  dowry  which  he  had  given  to  his  daughter,  he  wished 
him  to  have  as  an  equivalent  for  the  music-girl. 

Pam.  I'  faith,  for  sure  I  really  do  think  that  the  young 
man  was  weU  advised,  who  woulon't  give  a  mistress  to  that 
old  feUow  in  return  for  the  dower. 

Ant.  The  old  gentleman  wished,  indeed,  if  he  could,  to 
bargain  for  their  maintenance ;  because  he  couldn't,  he  said 
he  wished  it  to  be  done  on  what  terms  it  might.  "  Done," 
said  this  young  man.  "  You  do  me  a  kindness,"  said  the  old 
gentleman.  "Have  I  the  thing  agreed  upon?"  said  he. 
"  I'll  do  even  as  you  wish  it  to  be  done,"  said  the  other.  But 
I'll  be]  off  in-doors,  and  congratulate  my  daughters  on  your 
arrivaL    Then  I'll  go  wash  me  at  the  bath^ ;  there  will  I 

^  Does  he  say  it) — ^Ver.  549.  He  imitates  the  old  man*s  manner  of  adapdng  bis 
story  to  the  present  company,  and  here  jokes  him  upon  it. 

^  At  the  batky—Yec.  568.  "  Pyelum."  "  Pyelus"  is  a  Greek  word  Latinised; 
it  signifies  a  vessel  nsed  m  batlung,  which  was  sufficiently  large  to  hold  the  bather 
in  a  sitting  posture. 


y  Google 


Sc  IL  OB,  THE  FASIAADCIE  BESrEPED.  241 

ixke  all  eare  of  mj  old  age ;  after  that,  when  IVe  bathed, 
lyiDg  down,  I'll  await  yon  at  my  Idsuie.  (JSait, 

Pam.  a  ftinny  mortal,  Antipho ;  how  cleverly  he  did  make 
ip  his  story*  Even  yet  the  rogue  considers  himself  a  young 
man.  A  mistress  shall  be  given  to  the  feUow,  to  sing  to  the 
old  chap  at  slight  in  bed ;  for,  i'  faith,  indeed,  I  know  not 
of  what  other  use  a  mistress  ean  be  to  him.  Eat  how 
feres  our  Parasite,  G-elasimns  ?    Is  he  well,  too  ? 

Epie.  I'  faith,  I  saw  the  fellow  not  so  very  long  ago. 

Pam .  How  fares  he  ?    Epi&.  Like  one  haJf-starved. 

Pam.  "Why  didn't  you  invite  the  fellow  to  your  house  to 
dinner? 

Ehg.  That  oa  my  arrival  I  mightn't  be  wasting  anything. 
But  see,  here's  the  wolf  in  the  Eable^ ;  here  he  is  in  person 
with  his  ravenotis  £t. 

Pam.  We^R  hatSFB-'  some  sport  with  the  fellow. 

Epio.  Tou  put  me  in  mind  of  a  plan  I  had  already  re- 
Boivedon. 

ScEKE  n. 
JEnter  Gelasimtjs. 

•  #•**#*## 

Gel.  (to  the  ArniENCE).  But  as  I  had  begun  to  tell  von ; 
while  I  have  been  absent  hence,  I've  now  been  consulting 
with  my  Mends  and  with  my  relatives.  They  have  been  my 
advisers  to  the  effect  that  I  should  this  Tery  day  kill  myself 
with  Btarvatioii.  B«t  don't  I  see  Pamphilus  with  his  brother 
%ignomtLS?  Yes,  'tis  he.  I'll  accost  the  man.  (Goes  up 
fa  PAJCPHUitm.)  O  longed-for  Famphilus  t  O  my  salvation ! 
0  my  life!  O  my  delight!  right  welcome.  I  rejoice  that  you've 
ivtonied  safe  from  abroad  to  your  native  land.  Welcome. 
Pam.  "Welcome,  Gelasimus.     Gel.  Have  you  been  quite 

Pam.  I  have  taken  good  care  of  m^  health, 

^  *  Wolf  m  t&tf  jFaWe)— Ver.  577.  "  Lupus  in  Fabul&"  was  a  common  expres- 
man.  among  the  Bomans,  answering  exactly  to  our  very  elegant  Froyerb,  ^  Talk  of 
liie  devil,  Le  is  sure  to  appear."  It  either  alludes  to  the  Fable  where  the  nurse 
tfazeateos  that  the  wolf  shall  take  the  naughty  child,  on  which  he  makes  his  ap- 
pearance, hut  is  dlsaj^inted  in  his  ezpectations ;  or  else  to  the  well-known  one 
of  the  Shepherd-boy  and  the  WolL 

B 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


242  8TIGHT7S;  AotlY. 

Gel.  r  troth,  I'm  glad  of  it.  rfidth,  I  confoundedly 
wish  I  bad  now  a  thousand  measures  of  silver. 

Efio.  What  need  have  70U  of  it  ? 

Gel.  I'  faith,  that  I  might  invite  him  to  dinner,  and  not 
invite  you. 

Efio.  You  are  talking  against  your  own  interest. 

Gel.  This,  then,  that  I  might  invite  you  both        *        ^ 

*  *        *        *        for  my  part         #         #         •        * 

*  I  should  not  avoid^       #        #        #         #         #        ♦ 
there  is  nothing  so        *        as  tins        #         *         #        ♦ 

Epig.  Troth,  now,  I'd  ask  you  with  pleasure,  if  there 
were  room  left. 

Gel.  "Well,  standing,  then,  1*11  gobble  down  a  bit  in  the 
scramble. 

Efig.  No,  only  this  one  thing  can  be  done. 

Gel.  What?  Epig.  When  the  guests  have  gone,  that 
then  you  may  come 

Gel.  Hurra!  capital!  Epig.  To  wash  the  pots,  I  mean; 
not  to  dinner. 

Gel.  The  Gods  confound  you !   What  say  you,  Pamphilus  ? 

Pam.  I'  troth,  this  day  I'm  engaged  to  dine  elsewhere 
abroad. 

Gel.  How,  abroad  ?     Pam.  Eeally  abroad,  on  my  word. 

Gel.  How  the  plague  do  you  like,  thus  wearied,  to  be 
supping  abroad  ? 

Pam.  Which  do  you  advise  me  ?  Gel.  Order  a  dinner  to  be 
cooked  at  home,  and  word  to  be  sent  to  him  who  invUedyou. 

Pam.  Shall  I  dine  at  home,  alone  ? 

Gel.  Why,  not  alone ;  invite  me.  Pam.  But  I^m  ajraidle^ 
he  should  scold  me,  who  has  been  to  this  expense  for  my  sake. 

Gel.  It  may  easily  be  excused — only  listen  to  me ;  do 
order  a  dinner  to  be  cooked  at  home. 

Epig.  Not  by  my  advice,  indeed,  will  he  act  so  as  to  dis- 
appoint that  person  this  day. 

Gel.  Will  you  not  be  off  firom  here  ?  Perhaps  you  sup- 
pose that  I  don't  see  what  you're  about.  Do  you  look  to 
yourself,  please.  (To  Pamphilus.)  How  that  fellow  is 
gaping  after  your  property  just  like  a  hungry  wolf.  Don't 
you  kiow  how  men  are  set  upon  here  in  the  street  at  night  ? 

1  /  should  not  avoid) — Yer.  590.  The  meaning  of  this  fragment  seenus  to  be, 
"  I  really  would  invite  you  both,  if  it  were  in  my  power ;  but  as  I  have  nothing  to 
offer  you,  you  might  as  well  give  me  an  invitation.*' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  11.  OB,  THE  PABASITB  BSBTTriTED.  243 

Pah.  So  many  the  more  servants  will  I  bid  to  come  and 
fetch  me,  that  they  may  protect  me. 

Epig.  He  won't  stir — ^he  won't  stir ;  hecause  you  persuade 
him  so  earnestly  not  to  go  out. 

Gel.  Do  order  a  dinner  to  be  cooked  at  home  with  all 
speed  for  me  and  for  yourself  and  your  wife.  Troth,  if  you 
do  80, 1  don't  think  you'll  say  that  you  are  deceived. 

Pam.  So  far  as  that  dinner  is  concerned,  Gelasimus,  you 
may  be  dinnerless  to-day. 

&EL.  Are  you  going  abroad  to  dine  ? 

Pam.  I'm  going  to  dine  at  my  brother's,  hard  by. 

Gel.  Is  that  fixed?    Pam.  Fixed. 

Gel.  By  my  troth,  I  hope  you  may  be  struck  with  a  stone 
this  day. 

Pam.  I'm  not  afraid ;  I  shall  go  through  the  garden ;  I'll 
not  go  abroad. 

Epig.  What  say  you  to  that,  Grelasimus  ? 

Gel.  You're  entertaining  tfour  deputies;  keep  them  to 
yourself. 

Epig.  Why,  faith,  'tis  your  own  business. 

Gel.  If,  indeed,  'tis  my  own  business,  avail  yourself  of 
my  assistance ;  invite  me. 

Epig.  By  my  faith,  I  see,  as  I  fancy,  one  place  still  for 
yomself  ordy,  where  you  may  recline. 

Pam.  IteaUy,  I  do  think  it  may  be  managed. 

Gel.  Olightof  the  city !  Epig.  If  you  can  manage  to  re- 
cline in  a  small  compass. 

Gel.  Ai/e,  even  between  two  wedges^  of  iron.  As  little 
space  as  a  puppy  can  lie  in,  the  same  will  be  enough  for  me. 

Epig.  I'U  beg  for  it  some  way  or  other;  come  along. 
{Fulls  him  along,) 

Gbi..  What^  This  way?  Epig.  Yes,  to  prison.  For 
here,  indeed,  you'll  not  find  any  further  entertainment^. 
Let's  be  off,  you  Fam^hilus, 

^  Between  two  wedges) — Ver.  619.  He  will  take  so  little  space,  that  he  will  be 
able  to  sit  in  the  compass  that  lies  between  two  wedges,  when  driven  into  a  tree 
for  the  purpose  of  forcing  oat  a  portion  of  the  wood. 

«  fktrther  entertainmenty-'Wer.  622,  "  Genium."  The  Genii  were  tutelary  Di- 
Tbities,  each  supposed  to  haye  charge  of  an  indi?idaal  from  his  birth  to  his 
death.  Thej  were  propitiated  with  wine  and  sacrifice,  and  hence  the  notion 
arose  that  they  took  pleasure  in  revelry  and  feasting.  From  this  circnm- 
ttance,  the  word  *'  genitis  "  came  to  signify  a  person's  "  capacity  for  "  or  "  love 
of  enjoyment" 

b2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


SM  STioHtrs ;  Act  T. 

Pa3C.  I'll  but  salute  tlie  Gods :  then  Til  paas  through  to 
your  house  forthwith. 

Gbl.  What  then  ?  Epig,  Why,  I  said  tiiat  you  ii^ght 
go  to  prison. 

Gel,  Well,  if  you  order  it,  I'll  go  there  even. 

Epig.  Immortal  Gods !  really,  by  my  troth,  this  fellow 
might  be  induced  by  a  dinner  or  a  breahJSiBt  to  bear  extEeme 
torture. 

Gel.  Such  is  my  nature ;  with  anything  can  I  struma 
much  more  easily  than  with  hunger. 

Epig.  I  know  it :  at  my  house  fuU  loaig  enough  has  this 
facility  of  yours  been  experienced  by  me  *  *  * 
*  *  *  while  you  were  the  Parasite  of  myself 

and  my  brother,  we  ruined  our  fortunes,  Now  I  don't  wiak 
you  to  be  made  by  me  £rom  a  Gelasimua  into  a  Gatagdasi- 
mus^.     (Epignomus  and  Pampkilus  yo  into  thekr  homes.) 

Gel.  And  are  you  gone  now  ?  Surely  he  ia  gone.  IS^ow 
have  I  need  of  a  wise  resolution.  Both  txe  gone ;  consider, 
Gelasimus,  what  plan  you  must  adopt.  *  *  #  ♦ 
What,  I?  Yes, you.  What,  for  myself  P  Yes, for  youwelf . 
Don't  you  see  how  dear  proToaiona  are  P  Don't  you  see  how 
the  kindness  and  the  heartiuess  of  men  have  Tnzoahed? 
Don't  you  aee  how  droUa  are  set  at  nought,  and  how  they 
themselves  are  sponged  upon  ?  3y  my  troth,  not  a  person 
shall  ever  behola  me  alive  on  the  moirow ;  for,  this  instant, 
in-doors  wiU  I  load  my  throat  with  a  bulrush  dose^.  And  by  | 
this  I  shall  not  give  cause  for  men  to  aay  that  I  £ed  oi 
hunger.  (JExii. 

ACT    THE    EIETH. 
Scene  I. 

Unfer  Stichtts,  €md  places  provisions,  a  table,  and  eoueies        i 

on  the  staff  e.  I 

Stich.  Poolishly  and  unwisely  is  it  done  in  my  opmjon,      ; 

1  Caiagdasiimuy-Yer,  631.  He  makes  a  poor  joke  on  the  name  of  Gelasmmi^ 
by  way  of  an  excuse  for  not  mvitang  him.  "  When  helping  me  to  spend  mj  for- 
tune, you  were  *  Gelasimus,'  one  that  amused  us  by  your  wit  and  drollery,  m 
not  now  be  instrumental  in  making  you  henceforth  a  butt  and  a  subject  of  ndi-  | 
cule  to  others:**  the  word  being  the  name  of  Gelasimus,  compounded  with  the 
Greek  preposition  Kara. 

^  A  bidnuh  datey-Yer,  689.  He  means  th{it  he  will  go  and  hnghiaiself  wiA 
a  rope  made  of  bulrushes,  which  he  calls  a  '*  buhnsh  dose"  or  *<  dno^"  ! 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC  ' 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THE  FiJU.8ITE  BEBUFFED.  245 

if  people  mm  im  tiie  habit,  if  thej-  are  expecting  a  pereon, 
of  looking  out  for  him;  faith,  he  doesn't  on  that  acoount 
come  a  bit  the  faster.  I'm  now  doing  that  same  thiag,  in 
looifadng  out  for  8agacinuB ;  who,  still,  for  that  reason  won't 
oome  a  jot  the  faster.  Troth,  I  shall  just  now  be  taking  my 
place  alone,  if  he  doesn't  come  here.  I'U  now  fetch  that 
cask  of  wine  hither  from  home,  and  then  I'll  take  my  place. 
The  d&j,  like  aaefw,  is  meLtiog  sway  apace«  {Ghee  into  the 
house  ^Efiosoicua.) 

SCEISTE  II. 

Mnier  Saoabhtus. 
SiG.  Hail !  Athens,  thou  nurse  of  Greece ;  country  of  my 
master,  hail!  How  joyously  do  I  behold  thee.  But  I  have 
a  Irish  to  see  how  my  mistress  and  feUow-servant,  Stephanium, 
is  faring.  For  I  bade  Stichus  to  give  her  my  regards,  aud 
to  tell  her  that  I  should  come  to-day,  so  that  she  might  cook 
a  diuner  in  good  time.    But,  surely,  here's  Stichus. 

Be-eniter  SxidEHirs,  with  a  ecuh  of  wine* 

Stioh:.  (to  hirnself).  A  clever  thing  you  did,  master,  when 
jm.  presented  your  servant,  Stichus,  with  this  gift.  O  ye 
immortal  Gtods !  how  many  deKghts  do  I  carry,  how  many 
smiles,  how  many  jokes,  how  many  a  kiss,  dancing,  daUiance, 
and  good-fellowship. 

Si.ft,  Stichus,  how  fare  you?  Stioh.  Right  well,  Saga- 
rinus,  most  deHghtMly;  I'm  bringing  Dionysus^,  as  my 
guest  and  yours.  For,  i'  Mth,  the  dniner's  cooked ;  free 
range  has  been  given  me  and  you  at  your  house.  Eor  at 
our  house  there's  an  entertainment;  your  master's  dining 
tiiere  with  his  wife,  and  Antipho  as  well ;  there,  too,  is  my 
master.  This  was  given  me  as  a  present.  (Fovnts  to  the 
cask.) 

SxG.  How?  Are  you  dreaming?  Stich.  T faith,  I'm 
idling  you  the  truth, 

SAa.  "Who  then  gave  you  this  ?  Stich.  "What  matters 
that  to  you  ?  I  wish  us  this  day  to  wash  away  everything 
q£  foreign  cUmea.  Leave  them  alone;  let's  now  attend  to 
A&eomB ;  follow  me.    Bo  you  at  once  make  haste,  and  bathe. 

*  Bringmg  Dwnffeusy-Yer.  661.  Dionysus  was  the  Grreek  name  of  Bacchns, 
fSie  Ood  of  wim.  He  aBndes  to  the  *'  cadns,"  or  earthenware  cask  of  wine  which 
he  is  carrying. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


246  8TICHUS ;  Act  TV. 

Sag.  I  have  bathed.  Stich.  Very  good ;  follow  me,  then, 
this  way  in-doors,  Sagarinus. 

Sag.  Of  course,  I  follow.  By  my  troth,  this  begiimiiig  pleases 
me  as  I  return  home ;  a  happy  omen  and  augury^  has  met 
me  in  my  path.     (Theff  go  into  the  house  of  Pamphelus.) 

scsKE  in. 

Unter  STBPHANirM^twi  the  house  ^EpicoroKus. 

Steph.  (^0  the  Audience).  I  wish  that  it  msgr  ap- 
pear wondrous  to  no  one  of  you,  Spectators,  why  1  who 
five  there  (pointing  to  the  house  of  Pamphilus)  am  come 
out  hither  from  this  other  house :  1*11  inform  you  thereon. 
Just  now  was  I  sent  for  to  this  house  hy  the  hack  waif, 
Por  as  soon  as  news  was  brought  that  the  husbands  of  these 
ladies  were  about  to  come,  we  all  hurried  thither.  We 
attended  to  laying  the  couches,  and  setting  all  in  order. 
Still,  amid  these  duties,  I  had  a  care  for  my  friends,  Stichus 
and  my  fellow-servant  Sagarinus,  that  their  dinner  should  be 
cooked.  Stichus  has  been  caterer ;  but  for  cooking  it,  I've 
appointed  one  my  deputy.  Now,  I'll  be  off  hence,  and 
attiend  to  my  friends,  who,  /  see^  are  coming  here.  (Ooes 
into  the  house  o/"  Pamphilus.) 

Scene  IV. 

Enter  Stichus  and  Sagaeikus  from  the  house  of  Pamphi- 
lus with  provisions,  a  Vi£^B,follovmg, 
Sag.  Come,  out  of  doors  with  you ;  lead  on  the  proces- 
sion^. Stichus,  I  appoint  you  commander  of  the  cask.  I'm 
resolved  to  prove  our  banquet  in  every  fashion  this  day. 
So  may  the  G-ods  love  me,  we  are  well  entertained  in  being 
feasted  in  this  place.  I  will  that  each  person  that  passes 
by  shall  be  invited  to  join  the  banquet. 

Stich.  Agreed,  so  long  only  as,  i'  faith,  each  man  comes 
with  his  own  wine^ ;  for  of  this,  a  mouthful  shall  be  given  to 

»  A  happy  otnen  and  aiigun/y-Yer,  673.  "  Bona  8c»va  strenaque.**  See  the 
Note  to  1. 460. 

2  Lead  on  ike  procession^'^yer,  683.  They  are  about  to  have  their  carousal  in 
front  of  the  house.  Sagarinus  puts  on  an  air  of  importance,  as  if  mustering  all  of 
a  large  company;  whereas  the  only  guests,  besides  himself,  are  Stichus  and  the 
Piper.    St«phaninm  has  gone  to  dress  herself  for  the  occasion. 

>  With  his  own  wine)  ^Yer,  687.  It  has  been  before  remarked,  that  the 
<*  symbohi,"  or  **  pic-nic,'*  was  made  on  these  terms. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


8c.  IV.        OE,  THE  PABASITB  EEBUITBD.  247 

no  person  but  ourselves,  this  day.  Eating  alone^,  let's  wait 
upon  ourselves. 

Sag.  This  banquet,  for  our  means,  is  quite  sufficient,  with 
its  nuts,  beans,  %8^,  a  dish  of  olives,  pounded  lupines,  and  a 
cake. 

Stich.  It  better  becomes  a  man  who  is  a  slave  to  bring 
his  expenses  within  moderation  than  beyond.  Each  one  to 
his  own  station ;  they,  who  have  wealth  at  home,  drink  from 
cups,  goblets,  and  bowls ;  we,  if  we  are  now  drinking  from 
our  Samian  jug^,  still  build  our  walls  according  to  our 
means. 

Sao.  But  while  she  who  is  your  mistress  and  mine  is 
arranging  her  hair,  and  bedecking  herself,  I  wish  us  to  have 
some  diversion  among  ourselves.  I  appoint  you  the  com- 
mander* of  this  feast. 

Stioh.  Very  aptly  does  it  suggest  itself  to  your  mind. 

Sag.  Wouldn't  we  be  more  suitably  entertained  like 
Cynics^  on  benches  here,  than  upon  couches  ? 

Stich.  Aye,  but  this  is  far  the  most  pleasant. 

Sag.  On  which  side  is  each  of  us  to  recline  by  our  mis- 
tress ? 

Stich.  Of  course  you  go  to  the  upper  place.  And,  so 
that  you  may  understand  it,  I  make  a  division  with  you  on 
these  terms :  consider,  and  take  which  province  you  would 
even  like  now  to  take.    (They  tahe  their  places,) 

*  Hating  alone) — ^Ver.  689.  Monotrophi.  From  the  Greek  word  fiovoTpo<l>o\^ 
"  eaters  alone." 

2  NtOs,  beans,  fgsy^Ver,  690.  These  articles  formed  the  usual  food  of  the  Ro- 
man slaves. 

'  Samumjugy-^Yer.  694.  A  plain  earthenware  goblet,  or  cup.  Reference  has 
been  already  made  to  the  Samian  pottery.  The  Proverb  in  this  line  is  similar  to 
ours,  of  each  "  cutting  his  cloth  according  to  his  measure." 

*  The  commander) — ^Ver.  697.  "  Strategum."  This  is  a  Greek  word,  signi- 
fying the  commander  of  an  army.  It  was  usual  with  the  Greeks,  Romans, 
and  Jews,  to  appoint  a  master  of  the  feast,  who  probably  gave  the  toasts,  looked  to 
the  comforts  of  the  guests,  and  took  care  that  the  quality  of  the  wine  was  satis- 
fiujtory.    See  the  second  Chapter  of  St.  John,  v.  8. 

*  Entertained  like  Cynics)— Yer.  699.  The  absurdities  consequent  on  the  unity 
of  place  in  the  Roman  Comedy  could  not  possibly  be  better  illustrated  than  in  the 
present  Instance.  The  servants  not  only  carouse  in  front  of  their  master's  house, 
but  absolutely  bring  out  couches  to  recline  upon.  Persons  of  rigid  manners, 
and  especially  the  Cynic  philosophers,  persisted  in  retaining  the  old  posture  of 
^tting  at  meals ;  to  that  circumstance  reference  is  here  made. 


y  Google 


848  BTfCHITB;  AcfcT. 

Sa&.  Sub  what's  joax  meaoiing  about  tiiifi  "proviikeeF' 

Stich.  Whether  you  would  choose  to  hold  the  eammaaid 
over  the  wa*er  or  over  Bacchus. 

BilQ.  Over  Bacchus,  most  distiuetlj.  Bat,  in  the  loeaaEi- 
time,  general  of  ours,  why  stands  this  goblet  here?  See 
how  many  eups^  we  have  dnmk. 

Stxoh.  As  many  as  there  are  fingers  (m  your  hand.  The 
G-reek  song  is,  "  Drink  either  your  five  oups  ^  or  youp  three, 
but  not  your  four." 

Sac^.  (t^fotd  to  drmk).  I  pledge  you.  Do  you  take  ftr 
yourself  the  tenth  part  from  the  fountain^,  if  you  are  wke. 
Here's  luck  to  you,  luck  to  us.;  here's  luck  to  thee,  luck 
to  me ;  luck  to  our  Btephanium  as  welL 

Stioe.  'Tis  bravely  done.  I  pledge  you  in  a  gd^et.  {DrM».) 

Sag.  Keep  your  wiae ;  I'd  very  much  like  aoinethdng  by 
way  of  a  relish*. 

Stich.  If  you  are  not  satisfied  with  what's  here,  there's 
nothrag  else.     Take  some  water^. 

1  How  mem/y  cups) — ^V«r.706.  "CyathoB."  The  "cyathua"  was  a  ciiyp  which 
contained  a  fixed  and  definite  measure.  It  contained  but  a  small  quantity,  one- 
twelfth  part  of  a  "  sextarins,"  which  was  not  quite  an  English  pint.  It  scans 
most  probable  that  the  "  cyathns"  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  ladling  the  wine 
out  of  the  bowl,  or  **  oratera,'*  in  which  it  was  mixed  with  water,  into  the 
goblets  or  cups.  The  question  of  Sagarinus  here  seems  to  apply  i»  the  number 
of  *'  cyathi "  of  the  ,pare  wine  which  they  had  been  drinking  at  .each  goiblet-fiifl 
that  they  took,  as  otherwise  they  would  be  making  but  slow  inroads  on  the 
"  cadus,"  five  "  cyathi "  holdmg,  perhaps,  about  as  much  as  three  of  our  ordi- 
nary wine-glasses.    It  is  not  improbable  that  a  portion  of  the  Play  is  ket  here. 

2  Either  yowrjme  cupt,  ^0— Ver.  707.  These  words  are  in  Greek.  Eustathhis 
and  Athenseus  say  that  this  Greek  song  bears  reference  to  the  proportions  of 
water  that  should  be  mixed  with  the  wine,  it  seems,  howerer,  here  to  mean 
that  there's  "  luck  in  odd  numbers"  when  you  are  drinking. 

3  From  ihefoufOainy^Yeir,  708.  The  "  fons"  in  this  case  was  probably  a 
pitcher  of  water  which  they  had  on  tiie  table.  Sagarinus  seems  to  recommend 
him,  in  mixing,  only  to  take  one-tenth  part  of  water.  Sober  people  generally 
mixed  in  the  proportion  of  three^fifths  water  and  two-fifbhs  wine. 

*  jBy  way  of  a  rduh) — ^Ver.  711.  By  "  pulpamentum**  Sagarinus  seems  to 
mean  some  dainty,  by  way  of  a  relish ;  at  least,  Stichus  so  understands  him,  as 
he  points  to  the  nuts,  beans,  figs,  lupines,  and  olives  on  the  table,  and  tells  him 
that  he  will  get  nothing  else. 

^  Take  some  water) — Ver.  712.  He  probably  tells  him  to  take  some  water  if 
he  feels  queer,  or,  in  our  vernacular,  *^  seedy,"  from  taking  too  much  wine;  whicih 
he  has  fiome  reason  to  suppose,  from  the  other  calling  for  a  "  pulpameotnoL" 
Anchovy  toast  is  an  item  of  our  favorite  ^  pulpamenta." 


y  Google 


J 


Se.  ly.  OB,  THE  PIJKUOXE  BEBTJErED.  2i9 

Sa&  You  wf  ligbt ;  T  eare  for  bo  dainties.  Dfiak  away, 
Pipepi ;  drink,  if  you  do  driiit.  I'  faith,  this  xmuBb  be 
drunk — don't  shirk  it.  (Holds  the  gMet  to  ihe  Pepkr.) 
Why  jBinch  at  what  you  see  must  be  done  by  yom  ?  "Why 
don't  you  drink  ?  Do  it,  if  you  are  to  do  it.  Take  it,  I 
tefl  you,  for  the  puldie  pays  for  this.  Timt's  not  your  way 
to  shizk  jnmr  inrwk.  Take  your  pipea^  oist  of  your  mouyi. 
{The  FiPEB  irm^b.) 

Shcb:.  When  he  has  drank,  either  do  you  mind  w 
I'oies^,  or  else  I'll  give  up.  I  ^don't  wish  us  to  drink 
this  straight  out;  we  shall  soon  be  about  nothing^;  for, 
by  my  &iith,  almost  all  in  a  momesit,  i^  cask  might  be 
turned  head  downwards^. 

Sao.  (to  the  Pepeb).  TSjow  now  ?  Although  you  did  make 
a  fuss  about  it,  still  it  didn't  hurt  you.  Gome,  Piper,  when 
you've  done  drinking^  put  back  your  pipes  to  your  Ups; 
quickly  poff  out  your  cheeks,  just  like  a  reptile  serpents 
C(aiie  now,  Btichns,  whieherer  cif  the  two  breaks  ordec,  shall 
be  fined  a  cup. 

Stich.  You  propose  a  good  regulafbion.  You  ought  to 
bare  your  way,  who  fmly  s^  what's  fair. 

*  Dru^  away,  Piper)— Yer,  713.  He  thinks  that  the  Piper  is  inclined  to  shirk 
liis  goblet,  and  to  show  that  he  himself  is  uot  flagging  in  spirit,  tries  to  keep  him 
np  to  the  mark. 

*  Take  your  jripesy-Ver.  716.  The  "Tibicines,"  "Pipers"  or  "flute-pUyers," 
among  the  Greels  and  Romans,  -were  in  the  habit  of  pUyxog  upon  two  pipes  at  the 
same  time.  These  were  perfisctly  distinct,  and  were  not  even,  as  has  been  supposed 
by  some,  connected  by  a  common  month-piece.  The  Bomans  were  particularly  fond 
of  this  music,  and  it  was  introduced  both  at  sacrifices,  funerals,  and  entertam- 
ments.  See  a  comical  story  about  the  Roman  "  Tibicines"  in  the  Fasti  of  Ovid, 
B.  6, 1. 670  a  seq.  From  the  present  specimen  they  appear  to  have  been  merry 
souls,  bccupying  much  the  same  place  as  the  country  fiddlers  of  modem  times. 

*  Mmd  my  ndesy-Yac,  717.  It  is  pretty  clear,  that  in  his  zeal,  and  to  show 
that  there  is  no  flagging  in  him,  Sagarmus  has  been  overdoing  it,  perhaps  helpmg 
himself  out  of  his  turn ;  on  this,  the  other  threatens  to  resign  his  office  of  master 
df  the  ceremonies. 

*  Soon  be  cAota  noihiitg)—Yer,  718.  "  NuHi  rd  erimus  posted.*  This  is  the 
proper  reading,  which  has  been  restored  by  the  research  of  Bitschel.  It  is  diffi- 
cnh  to  say  prodsely  what  he  alludes  to,  but  most  probably  he  means,  "  at  this 
xste  onr  supply  will  soon  be  exhausted.'* 

»  Turned  head  doumwardsy—Y&r.  719.  He  says  that  the  "  cadus,**  or  earthen- 
ware cask,  will  soon  at  this  rate  be  capable  of  being  turned  upside  down  vrithout 
taxy  risk  of  spilling  the  wine. 

'  A  rtptUe  serpenty-Yer.  722.  The  head  of  the  serpent  is  said  to  sweD,  or  pnff 
out,  when  it  is  infoxmted. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


260  BTIOHDTS ;  Act  V. 

Sag.  Mind  it  then ;  if  yon  offend,  I'll  forthwith  take  the 
forfeit  on  the  spot. 

Stick.  Ton  ask  what's  qnite  right  and  just. 

Sag.  {pUdgvng  Stiohtts).  Here's  to  you  first  of  all. 

Stioh.  'Tis  a  droll  thing  this,  for  two  persons,  rivals  of 
each  other,  to  be  courting,  to  be  drinking  from  one  goblet, 
and  to  be  kissing  one  wench.  'Tis  worthy  of  remark  this : 
I  am  you,  you  are  I ;  of  one  accord  are  we.  With  one 
mistress  are  we  both  in  love ;  when  she's  with  me,  stiU  she's 
with  you ;  and  when  she's  with  you,  she's  with  me  as  well ; 
neither  of  us  envies  the  other. 

Sag.  Come,  come,  there's  enough  of  it ;  I  don't  want  it 
overdone  to  weariness.     I'd  now  l&e  some  other  sport. 

Stick.  Drink  on,  if  you  are  drinking. 

Sag.  There  shall  be  no  skulking  in  me.  But,  troth,  I've 
had  enough  of  the  feast;  would  but  our  mistress  come 
here.    If  she  were  here,  nothing  else  would  be  away. 

Stick.  Should  you  like  us  to  invite  our  mistress  out? 
She  shall  give  us  a  dance. 

Sag.  I  agree.  Stick,  (calling  ahud).  My  sweet  one,  mj 
lovely  one,  my  pleasing  one,  Stephanium, .  do  come  out  of 
doors  to  your  sweethearts ;  to  me  you  are  quite  charming. 

Sag.  But  to  me,  indeed,  most  charming. 

Stick.  Make  us  jovial  fellows  more  jovial  by  your  assist- 
ance and  your  company.  Eetuming  from  abroad,  we  want 
you,  dear  Httle  Stephanium,  my  honey,  that  w,  if  our  loving- 
ness  is  pleasing  to  you,  if  we  are  acceptable  to  you. 

SOBNB  V. 

JEnter  Stephanium,  ^ow  the  house  (jf  Pamphiltjs. 

Stepk.  I'll  indulge  you,  my  dears;  but,  so  may  pretty 
Venus  favour  me,  I  should  have  already  come  out  of  doors 
here  together  with  jon,  had  I  not  been  sprucing  myself  up 
for  you.  Por  such  is  the  way  of  woman,  when  she  is  well 
washed,  made  clean,  dressed  and  tricked  out,  still  is  she 
incomplete ;  and  a  female  who  is  a  courtesan  much  more 
quickly  acquires  dislike  for  herself  by  sluttishness  than 
always  keeps  in  &vour  through  neatness. 

Stick.  That's  very  cleverly  said.  Sag.  'Tis  the  genuine 
language  of  Venus. 

Stick.  Sagarinus.    Sag.  What's  the  matter  ? 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


8c.  y.  OB,  THE  FABABITE  SEBTirFED.  251 

SncH.  Vm  in  pain  all  over.  Sao.  All  over  ?  So  much 
the  more  unfortunate  yo«. 

Stbph.  Where  do  1  take  my  place  ? 

Si.G.  Wherever  you  please.  Stbph.  I'd  like  with  both  of 
you,  for  I  love  you  both. 

Stioh.  Whack  go  my  savings^.  I'm  done  for ;  freedom  has 
abandoned  this  person  of  mine, 

Steph.  Prithee,  do  give  me  room,  where  I  may  take  my 
place,  if,  indeed,  I  am  agreable.  (She  takes  her  place.)  Now 
I  do  long  to  be  cozy  with  you  both. 

Stioh.  I'm  ruined  utterly.     What  were  you  saying.? 

Sao.  Heyday !  What's  the  matter  ?  Stich.  So  may  the 
Qods  favour  me,  it  never  shall  be  otherwise  this  day  but  that 
this  girl  shall  have  a  dance  somehow.  Gome,  my  love,  my 
sweet,  do  dance ;  111  dance  too.     {Thei/  rise  and  donee.) 

Sag.  I'  faith,  you  shan't  that  way  get  the  better  of  me, 
but  what  I'll  have  a  bit  of  enjoyment,  too,  that  way. 

Steph.  Well,  if  I  must  dajice,  do  you  then  give  the  Piper 
something  to  dnnk. 

SncH.  Aye,  and  to  me.  Sag.  (holds  the  gollet  to  the 
Pipbb).  Piper,  you  take  first:  and  after  that,  if  you  tipple 
this  off,  just  as  has  been  your  wont  before  to-day,  straight- 
way strike  up  some  merry  and  amorous  tune  to  dance  to, 
by  which  we  may  tingle  all  over  fipom  our  very  finger  nails. 
Pour  some  water  here.  Take  this,  you ;  toss  it  off.  The  drink 
didn't  please  him  just  now ;  now  at  last  he  takes  it  with  less 
difficulty.  Take  it,  you.  (To  Stephanium.)  In  the  mean- 
thne,  apple  of  my  eye,  give  me  a  kiss  while  he's  drinking. 

Steph.  Why,  it  s  the  way  of  a  common  strumpet,  for  a 
damsel  to  give  a  kiss  standing  to  her  sweetheart  as  he 
stands.     (She  turns  away,  while  he  tries  to  hiss  her,) 

Stioh.  Bravo !  bravo !  that's  the  way  it's  given  to  a  thief  2. 

Sao.  Come,  blow  out  your  cheeks  now ;  something  in  the 

*  Whack  go  my  aavinffs) — Ver.  761.  It  would  appear  at  first  sight,  that  he  has 
some  companctions,  and  intends  to  say,  '^  this  feast  will  prove  so  expensive  that  all 
my  Bavings  (pecaliom)  will  he  wasted,  and  I  shall  never  he  ahle  to  hay  my  free- 
dom.** There  can  he  little  douht,  however,  that  an  indelicate  x)un  is  intended  to 
be  concealed  under  the  expression,  **  vapnlat  pecnlium." 

»  Given  to  a  tkUf) — ^Ver.  766.  She  turns  away  with  affected  modesty  from  Saga- 
rinQs,  who  only  manages  "  to  steal"  a  kiss.  His  rival  is  pleased  at  this,  and  cries 
out  that  die  only  ^ves  it  to  him  as  if  he  was  stealing  it. 


y  Google 


262  BTUMra.  Act  Y .,  Se.  Y. 

aoQiOTOiis  way ^  at  once.  Give  ub  a  new  time  in  letiira  far  £he 
old  wine.  What  person  in  the  loniaa^  op  the  ballet  line  10 
there  that  can  do  anything  like  thait  P   {Bje  capen  ofeue.) 

Stiobl  If  yongetthebeiliBrof  methistuni^/w^ehaJkDge 
me  to  another. 

BASk,  Just  joa  do  it  in  this  fashion.    {Qg^ers^ 

Stioh.  And  70U  in  this  fashion.  (G^mbt*  ioa)  Sa0.  0 
grand^! 

Sfios.  Ofinel    Sm.  O  wondesfnl! 

Stick.  Quiet^ !  Sao.  Now,  then,  both  in  Hxe  fiame  stop. 
(Theif  dance  quietlf,  in  the  same  meamare,)  I  challenge  all 
the  dandng-maaterB  to  danoe  againat  me.  'Tiano  more  pos- 
sible for  there  to  be  enough  of  thia  for  ms  than  for  ikate  to 
he  too  wmeh  rain  for  a  mnahrooiB. 

Stioh.  (ceoeinff  to  donee),  Let'a  awaj  hence  in-doonat 
once  now;  we've  daiiced  long  enough  fi)rthewine^  Ton, 
Spectators,  give  ua  joar  appla^«  and  then  go  home  to  enjqjr 
youraelvea. 

^  In  ihe  amorous  way) — ^Ver.  767.  It  is  difficnlt  to  saj  what  was  iSie  exact  de- 
ference between  the  **  lepida**  and  the  *'  snayis  cantio."  The  first  was,  peihsps,  a 
^  merry,'*  and  the  other  an  *^  amorous  "  time. 

^Inibe  lonumy^Yer.  769.  The  Ionian  mode  of  dandng-was  graoefid  and  vbh^ 
tnons.  The  Sicilians  had  a  dance  of  this  nature  in  hoaar  of  Diana,  whash  fbDj 
called  "  the  Ionic  dance." 

'  7^  <irB>— Ver.  770.  It  is  difficnlt  to  saj  what  is  the  exact  meaning  d 
"  Tttrens**  or  "  versus"  here.  Possiblj,  it  was  the  name  of  some  particnlar  dance, 
or  it  may  have  merely  meant  a  **  tm-n"  or  *'  roond,"  or  as  we  say,  "a  set,*  is 
dancing.  Agam,  it  may  possiUy  mean  some  cnrioos  postore,  in  which  Sagaifaas 
was  skilled,  and  in  assuming  which  Stichos  coold  not  cope  with  him.  Gsrian 
and  grimace  formed  the  nuun  features  of  the  dance  with  the  Bomaos. 

*  0  grand  r)'-Yer.  770. "  Babaa,"  "  Tatse,"  and  "  Papse,"  arc  meidy  exdama- 
tions  of  the  dancers,  while  inspired  with  the  spirit  of  the  dance;  not  unlike  the 
shrieks  and  noises  which  are  frequently  made  by  the  dancers  of  our  times,  st^rs 
and  other  places  of  public  resort,  where  uproarious  enjoyment  takes  the  plaee  of 
sobriety,  and,  not  unfirequently,  of  ctnomon  decency. 

*  Quietly— Yer,  771.  "  Pax."  This  was  the  ordinary  expression  used  to  sig- 
nify a  pause—"  Stop." 

«  Long  enough  for  the  wine') — ^Ver.  774.  They  have  fiurly  danced  the  wine 
out. 


y  Google 


PSEUDOLUS;  OR,  THE  CHEAT. 


Bromstts  Peomrai. 

SsMOr  an  cU  gmUemaa  of  Athens. 

Caldosus,  his  son,  in  love  with  FhoBniBiiim. 

Chabiviis,  the  friend  of  GafidaEta. 

CUzxiFBQ^  tbefriBOdofSDno. 

FsBtuxttXTB,  the  savKot  of  Shno. 

Baixio,  aprocoi^,  iheownerof  Phcenidian. 

HiBPAX,  the  servant  of  TdTmachaeiophigidea. 

Sdoiia,  the  Cheat,  a  aenrant  of  fibarinnfl. 

A  Cook. 

A  BoT,  servant  ef  Ballio. 

PaxEEacnzx  [mate]),  belorcd  by  Gafidarns. 

Sucm  of  Balfit. 

^fldM.— AthenflL    The  house  of  Baluo  is  on  one  ode  of  the  Street,  that  of 
Smo^va  the  other. 


y  Google 


THE  SUBJECT. 


Caudobus,  a  young  Athenian,  the  son  of  l^mo,  is  in  lore  with  Phoenidnmt  a 
young  woman  who  belongs  to  Ballio,  a  procnrer.  A  bargam  has  been  made  by 
the  procnrer,  to  sell  her  to  a  military  officer  for  twenty  mine ;  fifteen  of  these  bare 
been  paid  down,  and  it  has  been  agreed  that  when  the  remaining  five  and  a 
certain  token,  with  a  letter,  shall  have  been  sent  by  the  Captain,  the  damsel  shall 
be  sent  to  him  in  retnm.  Psendolns,  the  servant  of  Simo,  promises  his  master's 
son,  that,  if  possible,  he  will  prevent  this.  They  first  address  Ballio  on  the 
subject ;  but  then:  attempts  to  influence  him  are  all  In  vain.  PseodolBS  then 
devises  a  plan  to  get  some  money  out  of  Simo,  by  whom,  hovrever,  it  is  dis- 
covered ;  but,  after  having  acknowledged  his.  &iUt,  he  prevails  upon  the  old 
gentleman  to  promise  him  twenty  mins  if  he  shall  contrive  to  get  the  ga:I 
out  of  the  procurer's  hands.  Harpaz,  the  messenger  from  the  Captuo,  in 
the  meantime  makes  his  appearance.  Being  a  stranger  to  the  pkce,  he  on- 
wittmgly  delivers  the  Captain's  letter  and  the  token  to  Pseudolus,  who  pretends 
that  he  is  the  head-servant  of  the  procurer.  Channns,  the  friend  of  Calidoros, 
lends  him  five  mime ;  and,  provided  with  this,  Pseudolus  equips  Simmia,  a  servant 
of  Charinus,  so  as  to  represent  the  messenger  firom  the  Captain.  He  finds  the 
procurer,  delivers  the  letter,  pays  the  five  minsB,  and  carries  off  the  dansd. 
Ballio  then  makes  a  bet  of  twenty  minn  with  Simo,  that  Pseudolus  shall  not 
outwit  him  that  day.  The  real  Harpax  now  applies  to  Ballio  for  the  girl,  and 
the  trick  being  discovered,  the  procurer  has  to  pay  back  the  fifteen  minae  to  the 
Captain,  and  the  twenty  for  the  bet  which  he  has  made  with  Simo.  Simo  then 
pays  the  twenty  min»,  which  he  has  promised  to  Pseudolus  if  he  should  sno- 
ceed  in  outwitting  the  procurer.  Pseudolus  is  handsomely  entertained  by 
Calidorus,  and  engages  to  return  to  Simo  one-half  of  the  money,  if  he  will 
join  the  entertainment. 


y  Google 


PSEUDOIUS;  OR,  THE  CHEAT. 


THE  ACBOSTIC  ABGUMENT. 
[Snpposed  to  have  been  written  by  Priscian  the  Grammai-ian.] 

Ak  officer  pays  down  fifteen  min»,  ready  money  {Prassentes) ;  as  a  token  he 
also  (Smvl)  pvea  an  impression  of  his  seal,  that  the  procnrer  may  deliver 
PhoeDicinm  to  him  {Et),  who  brings  it  with  the  rest  of  ike  money.  Psendolns 
intercepts  his  camp-servant  coming  {VerUentem)  with  the  token,  saying 
(Dioerui),  that  he  is  Syms,  the  seroant  of  Balllo,  and  thns  he  ^ves  his  aid 
iPpem)  to  his  master;  for  the  procorer  (Leno)  delivers  np  the  damsel  to 
Simmia,  whom  he  has  snbstitnted.  The  real  Harpaz  comes  (FentV);  the 
matter  is  all  discovered,  and  the  old  man  {Senex)  pays  the  money  whidi  he 
has  agreed  to  gwe. 


THE   PEOLOGFEi. 

Attekd  to  me  this  day ;  good  things  I  bring  upon  the 
stage ;  for  I  think  'tis  very  just  that  to  the  good  good  things 
should  be  brought ;  as  likewise  bad  things  to  the  bad ;  that 
those  who  are  bad  may  have  what's  bad,  those  who  are  good 
what's  good ;  bad  men  are  bad  because  they  hate  the  good ; 
because  the  good  contemn  the  bad,  needs  must  be  that  they 
are  good ;  and  therefore,  you  are  good  since  you  have  ever 
abhorred  the  bad ;  and  both  by  your  laws,  Quirites,  and  by 
your  legions,  have  you  routed  them  with  good  success.  In 
like  manner  now  do  you  give  your  goodly  attention  to  this 
goodly  company,  which  is  a  good  one,  and  to  good  people 

^  The  Prologue)  It  is  generally  supposed  that  this  Prologue,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  hist  two  lines,  was  not  written  by  Plantus ;  it  is,  however,  of  great  an- 
tiquity, and  is  found  in  most  of  the  MSS. 


y  Google 


256  PSEUDOLUS ;  Act  I. 

brings  this  day  good  things.  Ears,  eyes,  and  understanding, 
shall  be  amply  filled.  He  that  comes  hungry  or  thirsty  to 
the  theatre,  the  same  shall  careftdly  give  his  attention  both 
through  laughter  and  a  sharpened  stomach;  while  those  who 
are  fidl  will  laugh,  the  hungry  will  be  carping.  Now,  if  you 
are  wise,  you  hungry  ones,  give  place,  and  go  away ;  you  who 
are  fuU,  stand — aye,  sit  you  down,  and  give  attention.  I 
shall  not  now  divulge  the  plot,  nor  yet  the  name  of  this 
play — Pfteudolua  will  fdfly  do  tiiat.  I  magin«  then  and  I 
think  that  this  is  enough  which  I  have  said  to  you.  Where 
mirth,  jokes,  laughter,  wine,  and  joUity,  are  the  order  of  the 
day,  the  Graces,  too^  and  propriefy,  joyousness,  and  delight; 
he  who  seeks  for  other  things,  tha*  person  appears  to  seek 
for  evil.  Away,  then,  witii  evil  earesy  aa  being  men  at  your 
ease  this  day.  'Tis  better  for  your  loins  to  be  stretched', 
and  for  you  to  arise.  A  long  play  of  Hautus  is  coming  upon 
the  stage. 

Act  I. — fiteiBJFE  I. 

IJnter  GjLLina&xrs  and  'BnmnKfiXsfrom  Suko's  hotm, 

PsETJD.  If,  master,  by  your  being  silent,  I  could  be  in- 
formed what  miseries  are  afflicting  you  so  sadly,  I  would 
willingly  have  spared  the  trouble  of  two  persons — of  myself  in 
asking  you,  and  of  yourself  in  answering  me.  Since,  however, 
that  cannot  be,  necessity  compels  me  t(»  enquim  of  too. 
Answer  me :  What's  the  reason  that,^  out  oi  sjorlta  &r  these 
many  days  past,  youVe  been  eaaxying  a  letter  about  wtl. 
youy  washing  it  witk  your  teacs,  an^i  mairing  no  penon 
the  ahaarer  of  your  ptirpoae  P  Speak  out,  that  i«]»t  I  bm 
ignorant  of,  I  may  k^ow  together  with  jowoeM. 

Cai/.  I  am  wretdiedly  miserable,.  Paeuddna. 

PsEirn.  Mar  Jupiter  fi>rbid  it !  Cal.  This  beloi»  i^ 
at  all  to  the  arbitration,  of  Jupiter;  under  the  ^m«fi£\&aaf 
am  I  harassed,  not  uzkder  tlo^  of  Jove. 

1  Loms  to  he  stretched) — ^Ver.  14.  In  the  sitting  position,  the  mnsdes  of  tlx 
loins  are  contracted ;  hence  the  present  expression. 

3  Undo*  the  mooss  of  Venmy^v,  15.  The  yonfli  ofhoth  sezH,  from  the  tenth 
to  the  eighteenth  Tear,  weve  Bopposed  to  be  under  the  dominian  afYoras,  to  wboa 
thej  o£fered  their  clothes,  dolls,  and  toys,  on  arriving  at  puberty. 


y  Google 


Sc.  I.  OB,  THB  CHEAT.  267 

PsEFD.  Is  it  allowable  for  me  to  know  what  it  is  ?  Por 
hitherto  you  have  had  me  as  chief  confidant  in  your  plans. 

Cal.  The  same  is  now  my  intention. 

Pseud.  Let  me  know  then  what's  the  matter  with  you. 
rH  aid  you  either  with  resources,  or  with  my  efforts,  or 
with  good  counsel. 

Cal.  Do  you  take  this  letter:  do  you  thence  inform 
yom*self  what  misery  and  toTtat  care  are  wasting  me  away. 

PsETJD.  (taking  the  letter).  Compliance  shall  be  given  you. 
But,  prithee,  how's  this  ? 

Cal.  What's  the  matter?  Psettd.  As  I  think,  these  letters 
are  veiy  loving ;  they  are  climbing  on  each  other's  backs. 

Cal.  Are  you  making  sport  of  me  with  your  foolery  ? 

Pssiri).  I'  feith,  I  really  do  believe  that  unless  the  Sibyl^ 
can  read  them,  nobody  else  can  possibly  interpret  them. 

Cal.  Why  speak  you  unkindly  of  those  sweet  letters — 
sweet  tablets  too,  written  upon  by  a  hand  as  sweet. 

Pseud.  Troth  now,  have  hens,  prithee,  such  hands  ?  Por 
certainly  a  hen  has  written  these  letters. . 

Cal.  You  are  annoying  me.  Either  read  it  or  return 
the  letter. 

Pseud.  Yery  well  then,  I'U  read  it  through.  Give  me 
your  attention. 

Cal.  ThaCs  not  here.     Pseud.  Do  you  summon  it  then. 

Cal.  Well,  I'll  be  silent;  do  you  summon  it  from  that 
wai  there  ^ ;  for  there  my  attention  is  at  present,  not  in  my 
breast. 

Pseud.  I  see  your  mistress,  Calidorus.  Cal.  Where  is 
she,  prithee  ? 

Pseud.  See,  here  she  is  at  full  length  in  the  letter;  she's 
lying  upon  the  wax. 

Cal.  Now,  may  the  Gods  and  Goddesses,  inasmuch ^ 

Pseud.  Preserve  me  from  harm,  to  wit. 

'  XJiJkM  the  Sihtfiy-Ytr.  26.  The  Sibyl,  being  gifted  with  prophecy,  might 
blow  the  meaning  of  that  which  could  not  be  read.  The  23rd  line  has  been 
somewbat  modified  in  the  translation. 

*  From  that  wax  t&ere>— Ver.  83.  Allnmon  is  here  made  to  the  wax  with  which 
the  surface  of  the  tablet  was  covered,  and  on  which  the  writing  was  traced  with 
the  iron  "  stylus." 

•  /}MUfiittc&)— Ver.  37.  He  is  gomg  to  say,  "  may  the  Divinities  confonnd  you ;" 
whkh  anathema  Pseudolus  adroitly  turns  aside,  and  refrains  from  farther  provok- 
ing  his  master. 

8 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


256  PSKUDOLVS ;  Act  I. 

Gal.  For  a  short  season  have  I  been  Uke  a  summer  plant^ ; 
suddenly  have  I  sprung  up,  suddenly  have  I  withered. 

Pseud.  Be  silent,  while  I  read  the  letter  through. 

Cal.  Why  don't  you  read  it  then  ? 

PsETTi).  {readvng).  "  Phoenicium  to  her  lover,  GaUdorus,  by 
means  of  wax  and  string  and  letters,  her  exponents,  sends 
health,  and  safety  does  she  beg^  of  jou,  weeping,  and  with 
palpitating  feelings,  heart,  and  breast." 

Gal.  I'm  undone ;  I  nowhere  find,  Pseudolus,  this  safety 
for  me  to  send  her  back. 

PsEUi).  What  safety  ?    Cax.  A  silver  one. 

PsEim.  And  do  you  wish  to  send  her  back  a  silver  safe^ 
for  one  on  wood^  P     Gonsider  what  you're  about. 

Gal.  Bead  on  now ;  I'll  soon  cause  you  to  know  fisom 
the  letter  how  suddenly  there's  need  for  me  for  one  of  silver 
to  be  found. 

PsEFD.  {reading  on).  "  The  procurer  has  sold  me,  my  love, 
for  twenty  min»,  to  a  Macedonian  officer  fr(»n  abroad.  Be- 
fore he  departed  hence,  the  Gaptain  paid  him  fifteen  miiuB^ 
only  five  minsa  now  are  remaining  unpaid.  On  that  accoiint 
the  Gaptain  left  here  a  token — his  own  likeness  impressed 
on  wax  by  his  ring — ^that  he  who  should  bring  hither  a  tdken 
like  to  that,  together  with  him  the  procurer  might  s^id  ma 
The  next  day  ^ce,  on  the  FestivaTof  Bacchus^,  is  the  one 
fixed  for  this  matter." 

Gal.  Well,  that's  to-morrow ;  my  ruin  is  near  at  hand, 
imless  I  have  some  help  in  you. 

PsEXTD.  Let  me  read  it  through.  Gal.  I  permit  jou;  for 
I  seem  to  myself  to  be  talkmg  to  her.    Eead  on;  the 

1  lAke  a  summer  plant) — ^Ver.  38.  Some  Gommentatoro  thiok  that  Flantas 
refers  to  some  imagmarj  plant,  which  wae  SQppoBed  to  ^gmw  up  and  wnAxa  oo 
the  day  of  the  summer  Solstice.  It  seems,  however,  man  probable  that  he  onlj 
refers  to  the  short  existence  of  smnmer  flowers  in  general. 

•  Safety  does  she  hegy^Yer,  43.  The  writer  plays  upon  tiie  difierent  nesiuDgs 
of  the  word  <*  sains."  She  sends  yon  *'  sains,** "  meeting**  or  ^  8ahitation,'  tsd 
requests  you  to  find  her  "  salus,**  "  safety**  or  "  rescue,'*  in  retniiL 

»  For  one  on  tpood)— Yer.  47.  Meaning,  in  return  for  her  "  salus,'*  or  "  sidnto- 
taon/'  upon  the  wooden  tablet,  is  it  your  wish  to  send;her  '^salna,**  *<  safety," 
procured  through  the  medium  of  money,  by  effecting  her  liberatioii. 

^  Festival  of  Ba4xhusy'yer.  59.  "Dionysia.**  There  were  several  festhab  of 
Bacchus  at  Athens.  They  were  called  ^^Dionysia**  from  Dionysus,  the  Greek 
name  of  that  God. 


y  Google 


I 


8c.  I  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  259 

sweet  and  the  bitter  are  you  now  mingling  together  for 
me. 

Pseud,  (reading  on).  "  Now  our  loves,  our  tenderness,  our 
intimacy,  our  mirth,  our  dailiance,  our  talking,  our  sweet 
kisses,  the  close  embrace  of  us  lovers  equally  fond,  the  soft, 
dear  kisses  impressed  on  our  tender  lips,  the  delicious  pressing 
of  the  swelling  bosom ;  of  all  these  delights,  I  say,  for  me  and 
for  you  as  well,  the  severance,  the  destruction,  and  the  downftl 
is  at  hand,  unless  there  is  some  rescue  for  me  in  you  or  for  you 
in  me.  I  have  taken  eare  that  you  should  know  all  these 
things  that  I  have  written ;  now  shall  I  make  trial  how  far 
you  love  me,  and  how  far  you  pretend  to  do  so" 

Cal.  'Tis  written,  Pseudolus,  in  wretchedness. 

PsETO.  Alas!  very  wretchedly^.  Cal.  Why  don't  you 
weep,  then  ? 

Pseud.  I've  eyes  of  pumice  stone^ ;  I  can't  prevail  upon 
them  to  squeeze  out  one  tear  even. 

Cal.  why  so?  Pseud.  My  family  waa  always  a  dry- 
eyed  one. 

Cal.  Won't  you  attempt  to  assist  me  at  all  ? 

Pseud.  What  shall  I  do  for  you  ? 

Cal.  Alas !  Pseud.  Alas !  do  ffou  say  ?  Well,  don't  be 
sparing  of  them,  i'  faith ;  I'll  give  you  plenty. 

Cal.  I'm  distracted.  I  nowhere  can  find  any  money  to 
borrow. 

Pseud.  Alas!    Cal.  Nor  is  there  a  single  coin  in  the 


PssTTD.  Alas !  Cal.  He's  going  to  cany  the  damsel  away 
to-morrow. 

Pseud.  Alas !  Cal.  Is  it  in  that  fashion  that  you  help 
me? 

Pseud.  I  give  you  that  which  I  have;  for  Fve  a  per- 
petual supply  of  those  treasures*  in  my  house. 

Cal.  It's  all  over  with  me  this  very  day.  But  can  you  now 

^  Very  wretchedfyy-Ym.  7^  Paendtdos  probably  krtends  to  allude  to  the  bad 
band  in  which  the  letter  seems  to  have  been  written,  ivhiie  his  master  refers  to  the 
flORWufiil  tone  of  the  epistle. 
*  Cfpmmee  Kfume) — ^Ver.  75.  That  is,  "  as  dry  as  pnmice  atone." 
^^spphf  of  those  ^reoMiref)— Ver.  84  Of  **£henr  '"Alas!"  or  **0h  dear 
ne !"  This  he  repeats  so  frequently,  because  his  master  has  reproached  hhn  for 
not  weeping  in  sympathy  with  him  for  the  calamities  of  Phsnidnm. 
s2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


260  FSEVD0LV8;  Act  I. 

lend  me  one  drachma,  which  I'll  pay  you  back  to-mor- 
row? 

PsEFD.  I*  faith,  I  hardly  think  I  could,  even  though  I 
should  pawn  myself  for  it  But  what  do  you  want  to  do 
with  this  drachma  ? 

Cal.  I  want  to  purchase  a  halter  for  myself. 

PsEFD.  For  what  reason  ?  Cal.  With  which  to  hang  my- 
self. I*m  determined,  ere  'tis  dark,  to  take^  a  leap  in  the 
dark. 

Pseud.  Who  then  shall  pay  me  back  my  drachma  *  * 
*  *  ?  Do  you  wish  purposely  to  hang  yourself  for 
the  very  reason,  that  you  may  cheat  me  out  of  my  drachma 
if  I  lend  it  you? 

Cal.  At  all  events,  I  can  in  nowise  survive  if  she's  re- 
moved and  carried  off  from  me. 

PsEim.  Why  do  you  weep,  you  cuckoo^  ?  You  shall  survive. 

Cal.  Why  should  I  not  weep,  who  have  neither  a  coin  of 
silver  in  ready  money,  nor  have  the  hope  of  a  groat?  any- 
where in  the  world  ? 

Fsetjd.  As  I  understand  the  tenor  of  this  letter,  unless 
you  weep  for  her  with  tears  of  silver,  the  affection  which  you 
wish  yourself  by  those  tears  to  prove  is  of  no  more  value  than 
if  you  were  to  pour  water  into  a  sieve.  But  have  no  fear, 
I'll  not  forsake  you  in  your  love.  In  troth,  I  do  trust  that 
this  day,  from  some  qiiarter  or  other,  by  my  good  aid  I 
shall  find  you  help  in  the  money  line.    But  whence  that  iB 

1  Ere ^tis  dark,  to  taJte) — ^Ver.  90.  "Ante  tenebras  tenebras  peneqnl"  lite- 
rally, "  before  the  shades  to  reach  the  shades."    A  wretched  pan  is  attempted. 

2  You  cuckoo}— Yer.  96.  "Cncnlos.*'  "Cuckoo"  seems  to  baTe  been  in  all 
ages  a  term  of  reproach.  Horace  mentions  it  as  bdng  appUed  bj  the  commoo 
people  to  the  vintagers  in  the  antamu.  Shakspeare,  in  the  beautifol  soog  in  the 
Fifth  Act  of  Love's  Labour  Lost,  has  these  Imes : 

The  cuckoo  then  on  every  tree, 

Mocks  married  men,  for  thus  sings  he, 
Cuckoo ! 

Cuckoo!  cuckoo  I  0  word  of  fear, 

Unpleasing  to  a  married  ear  I 
Perhaps  the  reason  of  this  epithet  being  deemed  opprobrious,  was  the  sinople&et 
that  the  cuckoo  is  the  laaest  of  birds,  inasmuch  as  it  is  too  idle  to  build  its  own 
nest.    The  subject  is  further  referred  to  in  a  future  note. 

s  Hope  of  a  groat}— Yer.  98.  "  Libella"  was  the  smallest  silver  eoin  among  the 
Bomans,  the  tenth  part  of  a  "  denarius." 


y  Google 


8c.  I.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  261 

to  come, — that  whence  I  know  not  bow  to  pronounce ;  ex- 
cept only  that  so  it  shall  be ;  my  eyebrow  twitches^  to  that 
effect. 

Cal.  As  to  what  you  say,  I  trust  that  your  deeds  may  be 
as  good  as  your  words. 

PsEin).  I'  faith,  you  surely  know,  if  I  set  my  plans 
a-going^,  after  what  u^hion  and  how  great  is  the  bustle  that 
I  am  in  the  habit  of  causing. 

Cal.  In  you  are  now  centred  all  the  hopes  of  my  ex- 
istence. 

PsEXTD.  Is  it  enough,  if  I  this  day  make  this  damsel  to  be 
yomB,  or  if  I  find  you  twenty  min»  ? 

Cal.  'Tis  enough,  if  so  it  is  to  be. 

PsETTD.  Ask  of  me  twenty  mins^,  that  you  may  be  assured 
that  rU  procure  for  you  that  which  I  have  promised.  Ask 
them  of  me,  by  my  troth,  prithee  do ;  I  long  to  make  the 


Cai*.  Will  you  this  day  find  me  twenty  minse  of  silver  ? 

PsEim.  I  will  find  them ;  be  no  more  troublesome  to  me 
then.  And  this  I  tell  you  first,  that  you  mayn't  deny  that 
it  was  told  you;  if  I  can  no  one  else,  I'll  diddle  your 
&ther  out  of  the  money, 

Cal.  So  far  nsjilial  affection  is  concerned,  even  my  mother 
as  welL  May  the  Gods  always  preserve  you  for  me.  But 
what  if  you  are  not  able  ? 

PsETTD.  Upon  that  matter  do  you  go  to  sleep  with  either 
eye. 

Cal.  With  the  eye  or  with  the  ear^  ? 

Pseud.  The  latter  is  too  common  an  expression.  Now, 
that  no  one  may  affirm  that  it  wasn't  told  him,  I  tell  you 
all  (to  the  Audience),  in  the  presence  of  the  youths  in  this 
audience,  and  of  all  the  people,  to  all  my  Mends  and  aU  my 

*  My  eyebrow  ttoitchesy—Yer.  107.  The  itchiog  of  the  eye,  or  the  twitching  of 
tbe  eyebrows,  has  been  supposed  by  snperstitiotis  persons  in  all  ages  to  pre> 
sage  some  impending  event. 

*  Sei  mypkma  a-gomgy^Yer.  109.  "  Mea  si  commovi  sacra.**  Literally, "  if  I 
more  my  sacred  things."  Lambinus  thinks  that  this  may  refer  to  the  sacred  thuigs 
dedicated  to  Bacchus,  which  no  one  touched  without  being  punished  for  it;  and 
e?en  if  Bacchus  himself  attempted  to  do,  confusion  and  disorder  was  the  conse> 
quence. 

»  Or  vfUh  the  eor)--Ver.  124.  "  To  sleep  on  the  ear"  was  a  proverbial  saying, 
borrowed  by  the  Romans  from  the  Greeks,  to  denote  a  sense  of  complete  security. 
Pseudolns  says  that  the  proverb  is  too  vulgar  for  his  refined  taste. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


262  mutdoiits  ;  Ajct  I. 

acquaintuices  I  give  notice,  that  for  tiiis  day  they  most 
guard  against  me,  and  not  trust  me. 

Cal.  Hist !  be  silent,  prithee,  by  all  the  powers ! 

PsBiTD.  What's  the  matter  ?  Cal.  There  was  a  noise  ak 
the  procurer's  door. 

FsxiTD.  I  could  only  wish  it  were  his  legs  in  jn^eference. 

Cal.  Yes,  and  he  Imnself  is  coming  out  from  in-doors,  the 
perjured  scoundrel.     (They  stand  at  a  disianee,) 

SoEiiTE  II. — Mnter  Ballio,  with  several  Male^  and  Female 
Slates,  j^om  his  house, 

Bal.  Gkt  out,  come,  out  with  you,  you  rascals,  kept  at; 
a  loss  and  bought  at  a  loss,  in  the  minds  of  not  one  of 
whom  aught  ever  comes  to  do  aright,  of  whom  I  can't  make 
a  bit  of  use,  unless  I  try  it  after  this  fashion.  {He  fiogsiku 
men  ail  rotsnd.)  At  no  time  did  I  ever  see  human  beii^  more 
like  asses ;  so  hardened  are  your  ribs  with  stripes ;  when  you 
flog  them,  you  hurt  yourself  the  most.  Of  such  a  disposition 
are  these  whipping-posts  who  follow  this  line  of  conduct; 
when  the  opportuni^  is  given,  pilfer,  purloin^,  prig,  plunder, 
drink,  eat,  and  run  away's  the  word.  This  is  thdr  method, 
so  that  you  would  choose  rather  to  leave  wolves  among  edieep, 
than  these  fellows  on  guard  in  your  house.  Yet,  when  you 
look  at  their  appearance,  they  don't  seem  amiss ;  by  taeir 
doings  they  deceive  you.  Now,  therefore,  unless  you  all  of 
you  give  your  attention  to  this  charge,  unless  you  remove 
drowsiness  and  sloth  from  your  breasts  and  eyes,  I'll  make 
your  sides  to  be  right  thoroughly  marked  with  thongs,  so 
much  so  that  not  even  Campanian  coverlets  are  coloimd  as 
well,  nor  yet  Alexandrian  tapestrv*  of  purple  embrwdewd 
with  beasts  all  over.  Even  yester&ay  I  already  gave  you  all 
notice,  and  assigned  to  each  his  own  respective  employmexit; 

^  Male)  These  male  slayes  in  the  text  are  called  *'  loraru.'*.  It  was  tiieir  pn^- 
vince  to  lay  the  "  loram,"  or  whip,  about  their  feilow-slaves,  at  the  Indding  of 
their  master. 

a  Purioiny-YeT.  138.  "  Clepo,"  to  "  purldn"  or  "  prig,"  comes  ficom  the  Greek 
Kk€WTe»,  "to  steal."  "Harpago,"  to  '*«*"  or  "phinder,"i8fromtiieGpBAfHb 
'cipTrayo,  of  a  similar  meaning. 

>  Alexandrian  tapestryy-Yer.  147.  We  learn  from  Pliny  the  Elder  that  the 
people  of  Alexandria  excelled  in  weaving  tapestry  of  numy  threads,  which  vis 
called  "  polymita."  They  excelled  both  the  Babylonians  and  Phiygiaos  in  de- 
picting birds,  beasts,  and  hnman  bemgs,  upon  their  prodactioos;  Campania  seems, 
from  the  present  passage,  to  have  been  fiunoos  for  its  oocmterpneB. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


9e.  n.  OB,  THS  OHXAT.  26d 

bat  so  utterly  worthless  are  7011,  90  neglectful,  of  such  stub- 
bora  dispositions,  that  you  compel  me  to  put  you  in  mind  of 
joor  duty  with  a  basting.  You  are  so  minded,  I  suppose,  to 
get  the  1)etter  of  this  Bcowrge  and.  myself  through  the  hard- 
ness of  your  hides.  Never,  i'  faith,  will  your  hides  prove 
barder,  than  is  this  cow-hide  of  mine.  {Me  demglea  it  before 
ikem,)  Do  look  at  that,  please;  they  are  minding  other 
matters.  Attend  to  this,  and  give  heed  to  this.  {Keflom 
one  of  them.)  How  now  ?  Does  it  pain  ?  Ah,  that's  the 
way  it's  laid  on  when  any  slave  slights  his  master.  Stand 
all  of  you  before  me,  you  race  of  mortals  bom  to  be  thrashed ; 
torn  your  ears  this  way ;  give  attention  all  of  you  to  what  I 
say.  Tou  fellow  who  are  holding  the  pitcher,  do  you  fetch 
the  water;  do  you  take  care  that  the  cauldron's  full  this 
instant.  You,  with  the  axe,  I  appoint  over  the  wood-cutting 
department. 

Slatib.  Eut  this  one  is  blunted  on  the  edge. 

Baii.  Let  it  be  so,  then.  And  so  are  you  yourselves  with 
strips ;  yet  am  I  for  that  reason  any  the  less  to  enjoy  your 
services  ?  My  orders  I  give  to  you,  that  the  house  be  made 
dean.  You  have  what  you  are  to  do ;  make  haste,  and  go 
ia-doors.  (JEJant  Eiest  SulVB.)  Be  vou  the  one  that  makes 
the  eouches  smooth^.  Do  you  wash  the  plate  clean,  and  ar- 
raoge  it  in  order  as  well.  Take  care  that  when  I  return 
from  the  Porum,  I  find  things  done;  that  all  be  swept, 
sprinkled,  scoured,  made  smooth,  cleaned,  and  arranged  in 
order.  For  this  day  is  my  birthday;  it  befits  you  all  to 
celebrate  it.  Take  care  to  lay  the  gammon  of  bacon,  the 
brawn,  the  collared  neck,  and  the  udder,  in  water ;  do  you 
hear  me  ?  I  wish  to  entertain  tip-top  men  in  first-rate  slyle, 
that  they  may  fancj  that  I  have  property.  Q-o  you  in-doors, 
and  get  these  thiugs  ready  quickly,  that  there  may  be 
no  delay  when  the  cook  comes.  I'm  going  to  market,  that  I 
m^  make  purchase  of  whatever  fish  is  there.  Boy,  go  you 
before  me ;  I  must  have  a  care  that  no  one  cuts  away  my 
purse.  Or  wait  there;  there's  something  that  I  had  almost 
lorgotten  to  say  at  home.  Do  you  hear  me,  you  women  ?  I 
have  this  charge  for  you — you,  misses  of  distinction,  who 
spend  your  time  with  illustrious  men  in  refinements,  luxury, 

^  Maket  the  couches  smooth^ — Ver.  162.  It  was  to  be  his  duty  to  prepare  the 
conehes  required  for  the  entertaimneDt. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


264  P8XUJ>OLXTS ;  Aet  I. 

and  delights;  now  shall  I  know  and  make  trial  this  day, 
which  one  has  regard  for  her  liberty  i,  which  for  her  appetite, 
which  thinks  on  her  business,  which  on  sleeping  only :  this  day 
I'll  make  trial  which  I  must  think  of  as  a  freed-woman,  and 
which  as  one  to  be  sold.  Take  you  care  that  many  a  present 
from  your  lovers  comes  in  for  me  this  day ;  for  if  your  year's 
board  isn't  picked  up  for  me,  to-morrow  I'U  turn  you  adrift 
on  the  public.  You  know  that  this  is  my  birthday ;  where 
are  those  youths,  the  apples  of  whose  eyes  you  are,  whose 
very  existence,  whose  delight  you  are?  Where  are  your 
kisses,  where  your  bosoms  sweet  as  honey  ?  Make  the  bearers 
of  presents  to  come  here  then,  for  my  sake,  before  this  house, 
in  whole  regiments^.  Why  am  I  to  find  clothes  for  you, 
gold  trinkets,  and  those  things  which  you  need?  What 
have  I,  you  jades,  through  your  means,  except  vexation,  you 
women,  eager  for  nothing  but  the  wine  ?  You  are  a -soaking 
away  yourselves  and  your  paunches  too,  at  the  very  time  that 
I'm*  here  a-dry.  Now,  therefore,  this  is  the  best  thing  to 
do ;  for  me  to  call  you  each  by  her  name,  that  no  one  of 
you  may  be  declaring  to  me  by-and-by  that  her  husineis 
hasn't  been  told  her.  G^ive  attention,  all  of  you.  In  the 
first  place,  Hedylium,  my  business  is  with  you — ^you,  who 
are  the  favorite  of  the  corn-merchants,  men  who  have,  all  of 
them,  immense  mountains  of  wheat  piled  up  at  home ;  take 
you  care  that  wheat  is  brought  here  for  me,  to  suffice  this 
year  to  come  for  myself  and  all  my  household,  and  that  I 
may  so  abound  in  com  that  the  ci^  may  change  my  name 
for  me,  and  instead  of  the  procurer  Ballio  proclaim  me  King 
lasion^. 

»  Regard  for  her  liberty)— Yer.  175.  By  "caput"  he  means  "liberty  of  the 
head"  or  "  person."  He  will  try  to  find  out  which  of  the  women  attends  to 
gaining  as  much  money  as  will  one  day  procure  her  liberation,  and  who,  conse- 
qnentiiy,  is  studying  the  interests  of  her  master. 

*  In  whole  regiments)— Yer.  181.  "  Manipulatim."  Literally,  "  in  whole  ma- 
niples." There  were  120  men  in  each  maniple  of  the  "  velites,"  "  hastati,"  and 
"  principes"  of  the  Roman  army,  and  60  in  each  maniple  of  the  "  triariL"  Foar 
maniples  made  a  cohort. 

*  King  lasion) — ^Ver.  193.  lasins,  or  lasion,  was  a  king  of  Arcadia,  the  father 
of  Atalanta,  who  attended  the  hunt  of  the  Calydonian  boar,  and  was  beloved  by 
Meleager.  There  was  another  person  of  the  same  name,  who  was  the  lorff  of 
Ceres,  and  was  slain  by  the  thunderbolts  of  Jove.  As  he  was  said  to  have  been 
the  father,  by  Ceres,  of  Plutus,  the  God  of  Riches,  he  is  probably  the  pcBon 
here  referred  to. 


y  Google 


8c.  n.  OB,  THX  OHEiLT.  265 

Cal.  (apart).  Do  you  hear  what  the  gallows-bird  is 
saying?  #  #  #  Doesn't  he  seem 

a  regular  boaster  to  you  ? 

PsxuD.  (ty^art).  V  troth  the  fellow  does,  and  a  wicked 
one^  as  well.    But  hush  now,  and  give  attention  to  this. 

Bal.  JSschrodora,  you  who  have  for  your  patrons  the 
butchers,  those  rivals  of  the  procurers,  who,  just  like  our- 
selves, by  false  oaths  seek  their  gains,  do  you  listen ;  unless 
the  three  larders  shall  be  crammed  for  me  this  day  with  car- 
cases of  ample  weight,  to-morrow,  just  as  they  say  that  for- 
merly the  two  sons  of  Jupiter  fastened  Dirce^  to  the  buU, 
aye,  this  day  as  well,  wiU  I  tie  you  up  to,  the  larder ;  that, 
in  &ct,  shall  be  your  buU. 

Cal.  (apart).  I'm  quite  enraged  by  the  talk  of  this  fellow ; 
tliat  we  should  suffer  the  youth  of  Attica  to  encourage  here^ 
this  fellow!  Where  are  they — where  are  they  skulking, 
they  of  mature  age,  who  have  their  amorous  dealings  with 
this  procurer  ?  Why  don't  they  meet  ?  Why  don't  they 
one  and  all  deliver  the  pubhc  from  this  pestilence  ?  But  1 
am  very  simple,  and  very  ignorant ;  they  would  venture,  of 
course,  to  do  that  to  those,  to  whom  their  passions  compel 
them,  to  their  misfortune,  to  be  subservient,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  prevent  them  from  doing  that  against  them  which 
th^^  would  rather  wish  to  do. 

rsEUD.  (apart).  Hush !    CaIi.  (apart).  What's  the  matter  ? 

Pseud,  (apart).  Pshaw!  you  are  not  very  obliging.  Why 
are  you  drowning  his  talk*  by  your  noise  ? 

Cal.  (apart).  Til  be  silent.  PsEtrn.  (apart).  But  I'd 
much  rather  you  would  be  silent,  than  that  you  should  say 
you  wiU  be  silent. 

Bal.  And  you,  Xystilis,  take  you  care  and  give  me  your 
attention — you  whose  fanpiers  have  large  quantities  of  oil  at 
home.  If  oil  shall  not  be  brought  me  here  forthwith  in  leathern 

'  And  a  wicJsed  one}— Year.  195.  Psendolus  plays  on  the  resemblance  of  the 
two  words  "  HiagDificns,"  a  boaster,  and  **  maleficns,"  "  wicked." 

*  Fastened  Dircey— Yes.  199.  Dirce  was  married  to  Lycus,  the  King  of  Thebes, 
after  he  bad  divorced  Antiope.  On  this,  Zethns  and  Amphion,  the  sons  of  the 
latter  by  Jupiter,  caused  the  supplanter  of  their  mother  to  be  fastened  to  the  tail  of 
a  wild  boll,  and  pnt  Lycns  to  death. 

*  To  encourage  Aere)— Ver.  202.  As  being  the  minister  of  their  pleasures. 

*  Drowning  hU  tcUk) — ^Ver.  208.  Calidorus  will  keep  whispering  to  him,  while 
he  is  wishful  to  listen  to  what  the  procurer  is  saying. 


y  Google 


206  pgBin>oi»irs ;  Act  L 

bags,  m  to-morrow  cause  yourself  to  be  carried  oif  in  a 
leathern  bag  to  the  prostitutes'  shambles^.  There  a  bed 
shall  be  given  you,  I  warrant,  where  you  eaa  have  no  rest, 

but  where,  even  to  downright  Minting You  understand 

what's  the  tendency  of  that  which  I'm  saying  ?  Will  you 
tell  me,  you  viper  you,  you  who  have  so  many  of  yoizr  fanciers 
so  right  well  laden  with  their  oil,  is  now  the  head  of  aay 
one  of  your  fellow-slaves  a  bit  the  better  anointed  by  your 
means,  or  do  I,  myself,  get  my  dainty  morsels  a  bit  the 
better  seasoned  with  oil^  for  it  P  But  I  understand — ^you 
don't  care  much  about  oil ;  with  wine  you  anoint  yourself. 
Only  wait  a  hit;  by  my  troth  I'll  punish  you  for  all  at  one 
spell,  unless  indeed  this  day  you  contrive  to  manage  all  these 
things  that  I've  been  speaking  of.  But  as  for  you,  Phce- 
nicium,  I  teU  you  this,  you  pet  of  the  mighty  men — you  who 
have  been  for  so  long  a  time  always  paying  down  to  me  your 
money  for  your  liberty — you  who  only  kaow  how  to  promise, 
but  don't  know  how  to  pay  what  you  have  promised ;  unless 
this  day  all  your  keep  is  brought  me  h^e  out  of  the  stores 
of  your  customers,  to-morrow,  Phoenicium,  with  a  true  Phceni- 
cian  hide*,  you'll  pay  a  visit  to  the  strumpets'  shambles. 
{The  Slavus  ffo  into  the  house  of  Ballio.) 

SoEiTB  m. — Calidoetts  and  PsBunoLUS  comeforwaird. 
Bai<lio  stands  nea/r  his  door, 

Cal.  Pseudolus,  don't  you  hear  what  he  says  ? 
PsETTD.  I  hear  it,  master,  and  I  give  good  heed. 
Cal.  What  do  you  advise  me  to  send  him,  that  he  mayn't 
devote  my  mistress  to  dishonor  ? 
PsETTD.  Don't  you  trouble  yourself  about  that ;  be  of  cheer- 

^  ProstUute^  dumibUt) — ^Ver.  214.  It  is  not  exactly  known  what  the  "  per« 
gok"  was,  but  it  is  supposed  that  it  was  a  "  booth  "  or  "  shed  ^  adjoining  to  a 
house,  which  was  let  out  for  persons  who  wished  to  expose  their  wares  to  the 
public  view.  It  is  not  improbable  that  in  these  sheds  the  lower  class  of  cour- 
tesans "  ptostabant  venales,"  or  courted  the  public  favour.  No  doubt  the  "  leno" 
had  one  of  these  in  his  establishment,  and  he  threatens  the  refiactoty  female? 
with  it  as  a  punishment,  as  it  was  probably  tenanted  by  the  refractoiy  ones,  and 
those  whose  charms  had  ceased  to  attract  more  wealthy  custtmiers. 

2  Seasoned  with  oUy—Ver.  221.  "  XJnctiusculo."  The  Eomans  used  a  great 
deal  of  oil  in  the  seasoning  of  their  dishes. 

»  Trve  PhcBmdan  A«cfe>-Ver.  228.  He  puns  upon  her  name ;  as  "  phoemeium," 
or  "  puniceum,"  was  the  name  of  the  purple  colour  for  which  Tyre  and  Sidgo,  in 
Phoenicia,  were  so  famous. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  in.  OB,  THB  CHEAT.  267 

M  mind.  I'll  xoaiiage  &r  myself  and  for  joa.  Yor  some 
time  past  I've  been  on  terms  of  goodwill  with  him,  and 
lie  with  me ;  and  our  friendship  is  of  old  standing.  I'll 
lend  him  tixia  day,  on  his  birthday,  a  mischief  heavy  and 
veil-matured. 

Cai.  Whafs  ike  planp  Psettd.  Can't  you  attend  to 
something  else  ? 

Cal.  But PBEin>.  Tut. 

Cal.  I'm  distracted.     Pseud.  Harden  your  heart. 

Cal.  I  cannot.     PsEvn.  Make  yourself  to  can. 

Cal.  By  what  means,  pray,  can  I  prevail  upon  my  feel- 
ings? 

Pseud.  Carry  you  out  that  which  is  to  your  advantage, 
raider  than  give  heed  with  your  feelings  to  the  thing  that's 
disadvantageous. 

Cal.  That's  nonsense ;  there  is  no  pleasure,  unless  a  lover 
acts  like  a  fool. 

Pseud.  Do  you  persist  ?  Cal.  O  my  dear  Pseudolus, 
let  me  be  undone — do  let  me,  please. 

P^eud.  rU  let  you;  only  let  me  go.   {Ghing,) 

Cal.  Stay,  stay.  As  you  shall,  then,  wish  me  to  be,  so 
will  I  be. 

Pseud.  Now,  at  last,  you  are  in  your  senses. 

Bal.  (coming  forwofrd  from  ike  door  of  his  house  to  the 
other  side  of  the  stage).  The  day  is  passing ;  I'm  causing 
delay  to  myself.  Boy,  do  you  go  before  me.  {Moves  as  %f 
going.) 

Caii.  Hallo  there !  he's  going ;  why  don't  you  call  him 
back? 

Pseud.  Why  in  such  a  hurry  ?    Gently. 

CaIi.  But  before  he's  gone. 

Bal.  Whjr  the  plague  do  you  go  so  slowly,  boy  ? 

Pseud.  You  bom  on  this  day,  hallo !  you  born  on  this 
day ;  I'm  calling  to  you ;  hallo !  you  bom  on  this  day,  come 
you  back  and  look  at  us.  Although  you  are  busy,  we  want 
you ;  stop—it's  hec<mse  some  persons  want  to  speak  to  you. 

Bal.  What's  this  ?  Who  is  it,  when  I'm  busy,  causes  me 
unseasonable  delay  P 

Pseud.  He  that  has  been  your  supporter. 

Bal.  He's  dead  that  has  been ;  ordg  he  that  is,  is  now 
alive. 


y  Google 


268  FSEITDOLUS;  Act  I. 

Pseud.  You  are  too  saucj.  BaIi,  You  are  too  trouble- 
some.    {Turns  away  to  go  on,) 

Cal.  Seize  the  fellow ;  follow  him  up. 

Bal.  G-o  on,  boy.  Psbttd.  Let's  go  and  meet  him  this 
way.     {They  run  and  stand  before  him.) 

Bal.  May  Jupiter  confound  you,  whoever  you  are. 

Pseud.  That  for  yourself  I  wish.  Bal.  And  for  both  of  you 
do  I.     Turn  you  this  way,  boy.    (Takes  another  direction.) 

Pseud.  May  we  not  speak  with  you  ? 

Bal.  Why,  it  doesn't  please  me. 

Pseud.  But  if  it's  something  to  your  advantage  ? 

Bal.  Am  I  allowed  to  go  away,  pray,  or  am  I  not  ? 

Pseud.  Pshaw!  Stop.  (Catches  hold  of  him.)  Bal.  Let 
me  go. 

Cal.  Ballio,  listen.    Bal.  I'm  deaf. 

Cal.  Eeally,  you  are  uncivil.  Bal.  You  are  a  chatterer 
of  nonsense. 

Cal.  I  gave  you  money  so  long  as  I  had  it. 

Bal.  I'm  not  asking  what  you  gave. 

Cal.  I'll  give  you  some  when  I  have  it. 

Bal.  When  you  have  it,  bring  it  to  me^. 

Cal.  Alas,  alas !  In  what  a  foolish  fashion  have  I  lavished 
what  I  brought  to  you,  and  what  I  gave  you. 

Bal.  Your  wealth  defunct,  you  now  are  talking  about  it ; 
you  are  a  simpleton,  a  cause  that  has  been  tried  you  are 
trying  over  again. 

Pseud.  At  least  consider  him,  who  he  is. 

Bal.  I've  known  for  a  long  time  now  who  he  was;  who 
he  now  is,  let  him  know  himself.  Do  you  walk  on  (to 
the  Boy). 

Pseud.  And  can't  you,  Ballio,  only  once  give  a  look  this 
way  for  your  ovon  profit  ? 

Bal.  At  that  price  I'U  give  a  look ;  for  if  I  were  sacri- 
ficing to  supreme  Jupiter,  and  were  presenting®  the  entrails  in 
my  hands  to  lay  them  on  the  altar ,  if  in  the  meanwhile  any- 

>  Bring  U  to «»«)— Ver.  258.  "  Ducito."  This  word  may  dther  mean  "  bring" 
the  money  when  yon  have  got  it,  or  ".take  away*'  Phoenidum  when  you  bring  the 
money.    The  former  seems  the  most  probable  meaning. 

*  And  were  presefOmg) — ^Ver.  266.  "  Porricio"  was  the  word  especially  em- 
ployed to  signify  the  act  of  kying  the  entrails  on  the  altar,  for  the  purpose  of 
boming  them. 


y  Google 


8c.  m.  OB,  THX  CHXAT.  269 

thing  in  the  way  of  profit  were  offered,  I  sbould  in  preference 
forsake  the  sacrifice.  There's  no  being  able  to  resist  that 
tori  of  jfiety,  however  other  things  go. 

PsETTD.  (aside).  The  very  Gods,  whom  it  is  especially  our 
duty  to  reverence — ^them  he  esteems  of  little  value. 

Bal.  rU  speak  to  him.  Hail  to  you,  right  heartily,  the 
Tenr  vilest  slave  in  Athens. 

f  SBTJi).  May  the  Gods  and  Goddesses  favour  you,  Ballio, 
both  at  his  wish  and  at  mv  own ;  or,  if  you  are  deserving  of 
other  terms,  let  them  neither  favour  nor  bless  you. 

Bal.  What's  the  matter,  Calidorus  P 

Cal.  Love  and  pinching  want^  are  the  matter. 

Bal.  I  would  pity  you,  if,  upon  pity  I  could  support  my 
establishment. 

PsEvn.  Aye,  aye,  we  know  you  ^uite  well,  what  sort  of 
character  you  are ;  don't  be  proclaiming  it.  But  do  you 
know  what  we  want  P 

Bal.  I'  faith,  I  know  it  pretty  nearly ;  that  there  may  be 
something  unfortunate  for  me. 

PsEim.  Both  to  that  and  this  for  which  we  called  you  back, 
prithee  do  give  your  attention. 

Bal.  I  am  attending ;  but  compress  into  a  few  words  what 
you  want,  as  I'm  busy  now. 

Pssun.  He  (pointing  to  Calidoeus)  is  quite  ashamed 
about  what  he  promised  you,  and  the  day  for  which  he  pro- 
mised it,  that  he  hasn't  even  yet  paid  you  those  twenty  min® 
for  his  mistress. 

Bal.  That  which  we  are  ashamed  at  is  much  more  easily 
endured  than  that  which  we  are  vexed  at.  At  not  having 
paid  the  money,  he  is  ashamed ;  I,  because  I  have  not  received 
it,  am  vexed. 

PsExiD.  Still,  he'll  pay  it,  he'U  procure  it;  do  you  ouly 
wait  some  days  to  come.  But  he  has  been  afraid  of  this,  that 
you'll  sell  her  on  account  of  his  embarrassment. 

Bal.  He  had  an  opportunity,  had  he  wished,  of  paying  the 
money  long  ago. 

Cal.  What  if  I  had  it  notP  Bal.  If  you  had  been  in 
love,  you  would  have  found  it  on  loan,     xou  would  have 

^  Love  and  pinchmg  ioan<)  — Ver.  278.  "  Amatnr  atqne  egetnr  acriter." 
Literally,  **  it  iB  lored,  and  is  wanted  sharply." 


y  Google 


270  pfBUDOiiiTS ;  Aet  L 

gone  to  the  usorei^ ;  jcm  wotild  hsere  paid  ^e  interest ;  or 
else  70U  would  have  pilfered  it  from  your  father. 

Pseud.  Ought  he  to  have  pilfered  it  from  his  father,  yov 
most  shameless  mllam  ?  There  is  no  fear  that  you'll  p<nnt 
out  to  him  anything  that's  right. 

Bal.  That's  not  like  a  procurer.  Gal.  And  eould  I  pos- 
sibly pilfer  anything  from  my  father,  an  old  man  so  much  on 
his  guard?  And  besides,  u  I  could  do  so,  filial  affeedon 
forbids. 

Bal.  I  understand  you;  do  you  then  at  night  embrace 
filial  affection  in  place  of  Phcenicium.  But  since  I  see  you 
prefer  your  filial  affection  to  your  lovo-— are  all  men  your 
fathers  ?  Is  there  no  one  for  you  to  ask  to  lend  you  some 
money  ? 

Gal.  Why,  the  very  name  of  lending's  dead  aud  g^me  by 
this. 

PsEUi).  Look  you  now ;  since,  i'  faith*,  those  fellows  arose 
&om  the  htmhert  table,  with  a  filled  slon,  who,  when  they 
called  in  their  own,  paid  what  they  had  borrowed  to  no  bom 
creature,  since  then,  I^ay^  all  people  haTe  been  more  cautious 
not  to  trust  another. 

Gal.  Most  wretched  un  I ;  nowhere  am  I  able  to  find  a 
coin  of  silver ;  so  distractedly  am  I  perishing  both  through 
love  and  want  of  money. 

Bal.  Buy  oil  on  creait^,  oiu^sell  it  for  ready  money ;  i^i^n, 
i'  fisdth,  even  two  hundred  minse  ready  money  might  be  raised. 

Gal.  There  I'm  done;  the  twenty-five  year  old  kw* 
founders  me.    All  are  afraid  to  trust  me. 

*  To  the  usurer)— Yer,  287.  "Danista,"  from  the  Greek  dovtW^r,  "an 
usurer." 

3  Sincej  t*  fatthy^Ver,  296.  He  aUudes  probably  to  the  recent  firandnleot 
fiuliiie  of  some  well-known  bankers. 

s  Buy  ail  on  crvcKf)— Ver.  801.  **  Emito  die  cflBcdr-id  vendito  ocolatft  die.** 
B7  buying  a  commodity  *'  on  a  blind  day,"  and  selling  it  "  on  one  with  eyes,"  is 
meant  the  system  of  credit  for  the  purposes  of  business ;  where  they  who  purchase 
on  that  prmciple  hare  an  eye  only  to  the  present  time,  but  are  bfind  as  to  the 
fulure  consequences  of  their  speculation.  The  inteution  of  the  procurer  is  to  ad- 
yise  the  young  man  to  get  oil  on  credit,  and  then  sell  it  fixr  anything  it  will  fetch. 

*  Thetumt^'fife  year  old  law}— Yer.  808.  The  Quna^ioenanan,  which  wn 
also  called  the  Lsstorian  Law,  forbade  credit  to  be  giyen  to  persons  under  the  age 
of  twenty-five  years,  and  deprived  the  creditor  of  all  right  to  recover  his  money 
or  goods.  As  usual,  Flantus  does  not  scruple  to  refer  to  Koman  customs,  13ioagfa 
the  scene  is  at  Athens. 


y  Google 


Sc.  in.  OB,  THE  CHBAT.  271 

Bal.  The  same  law^  have  I.     I'm  afiraid  to  trust  you. 

PsETiD.  To  trust  him,  indeed !  How  now,  do  you  repent 
of  the  great  profit  he  has  been  to  you  P 

Bal.  No  lover  is  a  profitable  one,  except  him  who  keeps 
coatinually  making  prelaents.  Either  let  him  be  always  giving, 
or  when  he  has  nothing,  let  him  at  the  same  time  cease  to  be 
in  love. 

Ca£.  And  don't  you  pity  me  at  all  ? 

BaIu  Tou  come  empty-handed ;  words  don't  chink.  But 
I  wish  you  life  and  health. 

Pseud.  Heyday !    Is  he  dead  already  ? 

Bal.  However  he  is,  to  me  indeed,  at  all  events,  with 
these  speeches,  he  is  dead.  Then,  does  a  lover  really  live, 
niiea  he  oomes  begging  to  a  procurer  ?  Do  you  always  come 
to  me  with  a  complffint  that  brings^  its  money.  As  lor  that, 
vhich  you  are  now  lamenting  about,  that  you  have  got  no 
money,  complain  of  it  to  your  stepmother*. 

PsEui).  "Why,  have  you  ever  been  married  to  his  &ther, 

Bal.  i&xj  the  Gods  grant  better  things. 

PsBTTD.  l5o  what^  we  ask  you,  Ballio,  on  my  credit,  if  you 
are  afraid  to  trust  him.  "Within  the  next  three  days,  from 
some  quarter,  in  some  way,  either  by  land  or  sea,  I'll  rout  up 
this  money  for  you. 

Bal.  I,  trust  you  ?      PsBun.  "Why  not  ? 

Bal.  Because,  i'  faith,  on  the  same  principle  that  I  trust 
TOU,  on  that  principle  I  should  tie  a  run-away  dog  to  a 
lamb's  fry. 

Cal,  Is  the  obligation  thus  ungratefully  returned  by  you 
to  me,  who  have  deserved  so  well  of  you  ? 

Bal.  Wh«t  do  you  want  now?  Cajq.  That  you  will  only 
wait  these  six  days  of  the  Teast,  and  wiU  not  sell  her  or  prove 
the  death  of  the  person  who  loves  her. 

>  The  jonw  2av>— Yer.  804.  BjriiBing  the  word  "  lez,*'  he  probably  means  that 
the  law  ake  apg^es  to  hiai,  as  it  fiirbids  him  to  gife  credit;  or  he  nay  simplj 
OMttitiiat  it  18  his  mle  and  custom  not  to  give  credit. 

*  CicMiq^Mrt  that  Iritigsyffet.  812.  '*  Onm  argentatft  qi]erimoiu&."  Lite- 
n%,  "  with  a  ailYery  eomplaiBt*'   He  probably  alludes  to  the  chinking  of  silrer. 

*  To  your  jfqHBOfAer)— Ver.  314.  Stepmothers,  in  ancient  times,  were  pro- 
wbnlly  notorieiiB  for  their  imfiBeling  conduct  to  their  step-children.  BaHio 
inoicaUy  tells  him  to  go  and  look  for  sympathy  from  his  stepmother,  on  which 
Pseodolns  retorts  by  implying  that  BaUio  is  as  unfeeling  as  any  stepmother  can  be. 


y  Google 


272  PBSUPOLXTB ;  Act  I. 

Bal.  Be  of  good  courage ;  I'll  wait  fiix  manths  eyen. 

Gal.  Ci^ital — most  delightful  man ! 

Bal.  Aye;  and  do  you  wish,  too,  that  from  joyful  I 
should  make  you  even  more  joyous  P 

Cal.  How  bo?  Bal.  Why,  because  I've  got  no  Phoe- 
nicium  to  sell. 

Cal.  Not  got  her  ?    Bal.  I'  fidth,  not  I,  indeed. 

Cal.  Pseudolus,  go  fetch  the  sacrifice,  the  victims,  the 
sacrificers^,  that  I  may  make  ojSenng  to  this  supreme  Jove. 
Tor  this  Jupiter  is  now  much  more  mighty  to  me  than  is 
Jupiter  himself, 

Bal.  I  want  no  victims;  with  the  entrails  of  min»^  I 
wish  to  be  appeased. 

Cal.  (to  rsEunoLVs).  Make  haste.  Why  do  you  hesitate? 
Go  fetch  the  lambs ;  do  you  hear  what  Jupiter  says  ? 

PsETTD.  I'll  be  here  this  moment ;  but  first  I  must  run 
as  far  as  beyond  the  gate^. 

Cal.  Why  thither?  Psbtjd.  I'll  fetch  two  sacrificers 
thence,  with  their  bells ;  at  the  same  time  I'll  fetch  thence 
two  bundles  of  elm  twigs,  that  this  day  a  sufficiency  may  be 
provided  for  the  sacrifice  to  this  Jove. 

Bal.  Awaj  to  utter  perdition*. 

PsETJD.  Thither  shall  the  pimping  Jupiter  go. 

Bal.  It  isn't  for  your  interest  that  I  should  die. 

Pseud.  How  so  ?    Bal.  This  way ;  because,  if  I'm  dead, 

1  TAe  «icr£^oer«)— Ver.  327.  "  LanioB."  LiteraHy,  "butchers."  These  were 
the  "  pops,"  or  servants  of  the  priests,  who  shughtered  the  cattle  which  were 
o£kred  in  sacrifice. 

*EtUfxdi8  of  mtrwc)— Ver.  329.  "Mminis  extis."  He  intends  a  pun  by  the 
use  of  the  word  "minmis."  "Mina,"  as  has  been  ahreadjr  observed,  meant  a 
kind  of  sheep  withoat  wod  on  its  be%,  and  also  the  sum  of  money  composed  of 
a  hundred  drachms.  He  does  not  want  victima,  he  wants  the  entrails  of  the 
money  for  his  propitiation. 

*  Beyond  the  ffotey—Yer.  331.  The  Metian  Gate  at  Bome  is  supposed  to  be 
here  referred  to,  where  the  butchers  kept  their  skughter-honses,  and  where  the 
"  lanii"  were  likely  to  be  found.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  priests  and  sacri- 
ficers wore  bells  on  their  dress,  to  which  reference  is  probably  made  in  the  next 
line.  Perhaps  they  were  employed  for  the  purpose  of  drowning  the  cries  of  the 
victims.    The  ephod  of  the  Jewish  high  priest  was  adorned  with  bells. 

♦  To  fitter  perdiihn)—Wer,  385.  "In  nudam  crucem."  Literally,  "go  to 
the  dreadful  cross,"  which  answers  to  our  expression,  "go  toperditieD;"or,in 
nnpolite  parlance,  "  go  to  the  devil"  It  aHUdes  to  the  crass,  as  the  instroment 
of  punishment  for  sUves  and  malefactors  of  the  lower  order. 


y  Google 


&.  in.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  273 

there  will  be  no  one  worse  than  yourself  in  Athens.  Por 
your  interest  (to  Calidoeus)  it  is  that  I  should  die. 

Cal.  How  so  ?  Baii.  1*11  tell  you ;  because,  i'  faith,  so 
long  as  I  shall  be  alive,  you'll  never  be  a  man  well  to  do. 

Cal.  Troth  now,  prithee,  in  serious  truth,  tell  me  this  that 
I  ask  you — have  you  not  got  my  mistress,  Phoenicium,  on  sale? 

Bal.  By  my  faith,  I  really  have  not ;  for  I've  now  sold 
her  already. 

Cal.  In  what  way  ?  Bal.  Without  her  trappings,  with 
all  her  inwards^. 

Cal.  WTiat  ?    Have  you  sold  my  mistress  ? 

Bal.  Decidedly ;  for  twenty  minse.    Cal.  For  twenty  minae  ? 

Bal.  Or,  in  other  words,  for  four  times  five  minse,  which- 
eyeryou  please,  to  a  Macedonian  Captain ;  and  I've  already 
got  fifteen  of  the  minsB  at  home. 

Cal.  What  is  it  that  I  hear  of  you  ? 

Bal.  That  your  mistress  has  been  turned  into  money. 

Cal.  Why  did  you  dare  to  do  so  P 

Bal.  'Twas  my  pleasure ;  she  was  my  own. 

Cal.  HaUo !  Pseudolus.    Run,  fetch  me  a  sword. 

Pseud.  What  need  is  there  of  a  sword  ? 

Cal.  With  which  to  kill  this  feUow  this  instant,  and  tli^en 
myself. 

PsETTD.  But  why  not  kill  yourself  only  rather  ?  Por  famine 
^nll  soon  be  killing  him. 

Cal.  What  do  you  say,  most  perjured  of  men  as  many  as 
are  hving  upon  the  earth  ?  Did  you  not  take  an  oath  that 
you  would  sell  her  to  no  person  besides  myself? 

Bal.  I  confess  it.     Cal.  In  solemn  form^,  to  wit. 

Bal.  Aye,  and  well  considered  too.  Cal.  Tou  have  proved 
perjured,  you  villain. 

Bal.  I  sacked  the  money  at  home,  however.  Villain  ob 
Jam,  I  am  now  able  to  draw  upon  a  stock  of  silver  in  my 

^  Wi£k  aU  her  tmoarday-Yer,  343.  "  Oom  intestinis  omnibus."  By  this 
imfeeling  expressioD,  the  fellow  means,  **  stark  naked/'  jast  as  she  stands. 
Howeyer,  we  will  do  him  the  justice  to  suppose  that  when,  in  the  sequel, 
she  ia  led  away  by  Simmia,  a  "toga"  is  thrown  over  her  for  decency's 
sake. 

*  In  solemn  form) — Ver.  353.  To  take  an  oath  in  solemn  form,  or,  "  conceptis 
verbis,'' was  when  the  oath  was  repeated  by  another  person,  and  the  party  swear- 
ing him  followed  in  his  words.  The  Boman  formula  for  swearing  was,  "  £x 
animi  mei  sententi&  jure." 

T 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


274  PSEiTDOLTrs;  Act  I. 

house ;  whereas  you  who  are  so  dutiful,  and  bom  of  that 
grand  family,  haven't  a  single  coin. 

Gal.  Pseudolus,  stand  by  him  on  the  otber  side  and  load 
this  fellow  with  imprecations. 

PsBim.  Very  well.  Never  would  I  run  to  the  PraBtor^ 
with  equal  speed  that  I  might  be  made  free.  {Stands  on  the 
other  Me  of  Baxlio.) 

Cal.  Heap  on  him  a  multitude  of  curses. 

Pseud.  Now  will  I  publish  you  with  my  rebukes.  Thou 
lackshame ! 

Bal.  'Tis  the  fact.     Pseud.  Villain ! 

Bal.  You  say  the  truth.     Psbud.  Whipping-post ! 

Bal.  Why  not  ?     Pseud.  Eobber  of  tombs ! 

Bal.  No  doubt.    Pseud.  Q-allows-bird! 

Bal.  Very  well  done.     Pseud.  Cheater  of  your  Mends! 

Bal.  That's  in  my  way.     Pseud.  Parricide ! 

Bal.  Proceed,  you.     Cal.  Committer  of  sacrilege ! 

Bal.  I  own  it.     Cal.  Perjurer ! 

Bal.  You're  telling  nothing  new^.     Cal.  Lawbreaker! 

Bal.  Very  much  so.     Pseud.  Pest  of  vouth ! 

Bal.  Most  severely  said.     Cal.  Thief! 

Bal.  Oh!  wonderM!    Pseud.  Vagabond! 

Bal.  Pooh !  pooh^ !     Cal.  Defrauder  of  the  public ! 

Bal.  Most  decidedly  so.     Pseud.  Cheating  scoundrel! 

Cal.  Filthy  pander !     Pseud.  Lump  of  filth ! 

Bal.  a  capital  chorus.  Cal.  You  beat  your  father  and 
mother. 

BaT!/.  Aye,  and  killed  them,  too,  ratber  than  find  them 
food ;  did  I  do  wrong  at  aU  ? 

Pseud.  We  are  pouring  our  words  into  a  pierced  cask* : 
we  are  losing  our  pains. 

>  Run  to  the  Prastory-Yer,  368.  The  "  PrsBtor"  was  the  public  officer  at  Borne 
who  liberated  slaves  at  the  request  of  their  owners.  The  ceremonj  was  per- 
formed  by  his  lictor  layiog  a  rod  called  ""  yiadicta"  on  the  head  of  the  penoc 
jnanmnitted. 

s  TeUmg  nothing  neio)— Ver.  868.  He  means  that  Calidonis  has  called  biin 
that  already;  which  he  has  done  in  the  851th  line. 

»  Pooh  !  pooh .')— Ver.  864.  "  Bombax."  This  is  a  Greek  word,  an  exprMMB 
of  contempt. 

«  JfOo  a  pierced  cask)— -Ver.  369.  This  notion  is  probaUy  taken  from  the 
punishment  of  the  daughters  of  Danaiis,  who,  for  the  murder  of  their  hosbtods, 
the  sons  of  ^gyptus,  were  doomed  by  Jnpiter  to  pass  their  time  in  the  Infensl 
re^ons  m  gathering  up  water  in  perforated  vessels. 


y  Google 


Sc.  m.  OB,  THB  CHEAT.  275 

Bal.  "Would  you  like  to  call  me  anything  else  besides  ? 

Cal.  Is  there  anything  that  shames  you  ? 

Bal.  Yes;  that  you  have  been  found  to  be  a  lover  as  empty 
aB  a  rotten  nut.  But  although  you  have  used  towards  me 
expressions  many  and  harsh,  unless  the  Captain  shall  bring 
me  this  day  the  nve  minse  that  he  owes  me,  as  this  was  the 
last  day  appointed  for  the  payment  ©/"that  money,  if  he  doesn't 
bring  it,  I  think  that  I  am  able  to  do  my  duty. 

Cal.  What  is  that  duty  ?  Bal.  If  you  bring  the  money, 
m  break  faith  with  him ;  that's  my  duty.  If  it  were  more 
worth  my  while,  I  would  talk  further  with  you.  But,  with- 
out a  coin  of  money,  'tis  in  vain  that  you  request  me  to 
have  pity  upon  you.  Such  is  my  determination ;  but  do 
jou,  from  this,  consider  what  you  have  henceforth  to  do  P 
{Moves.) 

Cal.  Are  you  going  then  ?  Bax.  At  present  I  am  full  of 
business.  (Exit, 

PsBTrn.  Before  long  you'll  he  more  so.  That  man  is  my 
own,  unless  all  Gods  and  men  forsake  me.  I'll  bone  him  just 
in  the  same  fashion  that  a  cook  does  a  lamprey^.  !lfow, 
Calidorus,  I  wish  you  to  give  me  your  attention. 

Cal.  What  do  you  bid  me  do  ? 

Pbexjd.  I  wish  to  lay  siege  to  this  town,  that  this  day  it 
may  be  taken.  For  that  purpose,  I  have  need  of  an  artful, 
clever,  knowing,  and  crafty  fellow,  who  may  despatch  out  of 
hand  what  he  is  ordered,  not  one  to  go  to  sleep  upon  his  watch. 

Cal.  TeU  me,  then,  what  you  are  going  to  do  ? 

PsETH).  In  good  time  I'U  let  you  know.  I  don't  care  for  it 
to  be  repeated  twice ;  stories  are  made  too  long  that  way. 

Cal.  Tou  plead  what's  very  fair  and  very  just. 

PsETJi).  Make  haste ;  bring  the  fellow  hither  quickly. 

Cal.  Out  of  many,  there  are  hut  few  friends  that  are  to  be 
depended  upon  by  a  person. 

rsBTTD.  I  know  that ;  therefore,  get  for  yourself  now  a 
choice  of  both,  and  seek  out  of  these  many  one  that  can  be 
depended  upon. 

Cal.  I'll  have  him  here  this  instant. 

Pseud.  Can't  you  be  off  then?  Tou  create  delay  for 
yourself  by  your  talking.  (Exit  Calidorus. 

'  Cock  does  a  lamprey) — ^Ver.  382.  The  **  morasna,"  or  **lamprej,"  was  a  dish 
highlj  valaed  by  the  Romana. 

t2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


276  PSETJDOLTJB ;  Act  I. 

SCEKB  IV. — PSEXJDOLTTS,  alotte. 

PsETTD.  Since  he  has  gone  hence,  you  are  now  standing 
alone,  Pseudolus.  What  are  you  to  do  now,  after  you  have  so 
hurgely  promised  costly  delights  to  your  master's  son  by  your 
speeches  ?  You,  for  whom  not  even  ofie  drop  of  sure  counsel  is 
ready,  nor  yet  of  silver  #  #  *  #  nor  have 
you  where  first  you  must  begin  your  undertaking,  nor  ^et  fixed 
limits  for  finisbing  off  your  web.  But  just  as  the  poet,  when 
he  has  taken  up  his  tablets,  seeks  what  nowhere  in  the  world 
exists,  and  still  finds  it,  and  makes  that  like  truth  which  realhj 
is  a  fiction ;  now  I'll  become  a  poet ;  twenty  mina&,  which  no- 
where in  the  world  are  now  existing,  still  will  I  find.  And 
some  time  since  had  I  said  that  I  woiild  find  them  for  him,  and 
I  had  attempted  to  throw  a  net  over  our  old  gentleman ;  how- 
ever, by  what  means  I  know  not,  he  perceived  it  beforehand. 
But  my  voice  and  my  talking  must  be  stopped ;  for,  see !  I 
perceive  my  master,  Simo,  coming  this  way,  together  with 
his  neighbour,  Callipho.  Out  of  this  old  sepulchre  will  I  dig 
twenty  minae  this  day,  to  give  them  to  my  master's  son. 
Now  I'll  step  aside  here,  that  I  may  pick  up  their  conver- 
sation.    {He  stands  apart.) 

Scene  V. — Miter  Simo  and  Callipho. 

Simo.  If  now  a  Dictator^  were  to  be  appointed  at  Athens 
of  Attica  out  of  the  spendthrifts  or  out  of  the  gallants, 
I  do  think  that  no  one  would  surpass  my  son.  For  now  the 
only  talk  of  all  throughout  the  city  is  to  the  effect  that  he 
is  trying  to  set  his  mistress  free,  and  is  seeking  after  money 
for  that  purpose.  Some  people  bring  me  word  of  this ;  and, 
in  fact,  I  had  long  ago  perceived  it,  and  had  suspected  it, 
but  I  dissembled  on  it. 

Pseud,  (ajyart).  Already  is  his  son  suspected  by  him;  this, 
affair  is  nipt  in  the  bud,  tliis  business  is  at  a  stand-stni.  The; 
way  is  now  entirely  blocked  up  against  me,  by  which  I  had, 
intended  to  go  a-foraging  for  the  money.  He  has  perceived  it 
beforehand.     There's  no  booty  for  the  marauders. 

» If  now  a  Dictatory-Yer,  416.  Though  the  scene  is  at  Athens,  Plautns  hciw 
makes  reference  to  Soman  cnstoms.  The  Dictator  was  the  highest  oflScer  in  the^ 
Roman  Bepnh^c,  and  was  only  elected  upon  emergencies. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  V.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  277 

Call.  Those  men  wlio  cany  about  and  who  listen  to  accu- 
sations, should  all  be  hanged,  if  so  it  could  be  at  my  decision, 
the  carriers  by  their  tongues,  the  listeners  by  their  ears. 
For  these  things  that  are  told  you,  that  your  son  in  his 
amour  is  desirous  to  chouse  you  out  of  money,  the  chance  is 
tliat  these  things  so  told  you  are  all  lies.  But  suppose  they 
are  true,  as  habits  are,  now-a-days  especially,  what  has  he 
done  so  surprising  ?  What  new  thing,  if  a  young  man  does 
love,  and  if  be  does  liberate  his  mistress  ? 

PsETJi).  (apart).  A  delightful  old  gentleman. 

SiMO.  I  don't  wish  him  to  foBow  the  old-fashioned 
hahits^. 

Call.  But  still,  in  vain  do  you  object ;  or  you  yourself 
shouldn't  have  done  the  like  in  your  youthiul  days.  It 
befits  the  father  to  be  immaculate,  who  wishes  his  son  to  be 
more  immaculate  than  he  has  been  himself.  But  the  mis- 
chief and  the  profligacy  you  were  guilty  of  might  have  been 
distributed  throughout  the  whole  population,  a  share  for  each 
man.  Are  you  surprised  at  it,  if  the  son  does  take  after  the 
father? 

PsETTD.  (apart),  O  Zeus,  Zeus^!  how  few  in  number  are 
you  considerate  men.  See,  that's  being  a  father  to  a  son, 
just  as  is  proper. 

SiMO.  Who  is  it  that's  speaking  here  ?  (Looking  round.) 
Why,  surely  'tis  my  servant  Pseudolus.  'Tis  he  corrupts  my 
8on,  the  wicked  scoundrel ;  he  is  his  leader,  he  his  tutor.  I 
long  for  him  to  be  put  to  extreme  torture. 

Call.  This  is  folly  now,  thus  to  keep  your  anger  in 
readiness.  How  mucn  better  were  it  to  accost  him  with  kind 
words  and  to  make  all  enquiries,  whether  these  things  are 
true  or  not  that  they  tell  you  of  ? 

Slice.  I'll  take  your  advice.  Pseud,  (apart).  They  are 
making  towards  you,  Pseudolus;  prepare  your  speech  to 
meet  the  old  fellow.     Gbod  courage  in  a  bad  case  is  half 

>  The  old-faskioned  habitsy-Yer,  436.  "  Vetus  nolo  fecial."  Literally,  "  I 
do  not  wish  him  to  do  what  is  old-feshioned."  He  alludes  to  the  old-fesbioned 
trick  of  felling  into  love,  and  running  into  extravagance. 

^OZeus,  Zeua!) — ^Ver.  443.  *Q  Zcv,  Zcv.   ,Zeus  was  the  Greek  name  of 
Jnpiter,  whose  Latin  title  was  formed  from  **  Zeus  pater,"  "  Father  Zeus."    The 
^  use  of  it  in  Latin  colloquy  exactly  corresponds  with  the  irreverent  French  phrase 
too  much  in  use  with  us,  **  0  mon  Dieu  I" 


y  Google 


278  psBUDOiiirs ;  Act  I. 

the  evil  gat  over.  (Alaudy  as  he  advances  to  meet  tlem) 
First,  I  salute  my  master,  as  is  proper ;  and  afber  that,  if  any- 
thing is  left,  that  I  bestow  upon  his  neighbour. 

SiMO.  Good  day  to  you.     What  are  you  about  ? 

FsBiTD.  About  standing  here  in  this  fashion  (assuming  m 
attitude), 

SiMO.  See  the  attitude  of  the  fellow,  Callipho ;  how  like 
that  of  a  man  of  rank. 

Call.  I  consider  that  he  is  standing  properly  and  with 
boldness. 

FsxuD.  It  befits  a  servant  innocent  and  guileless^  as  he 
is,  to  be  bold,  most  especially  before  his  master. 

Call.  There  are  some  things  about  which  we  wish  to 
inquire  of  you,  which  we  ourselves  know  and  have  heard  of 
as  though  through  a  cloud  of  mist. 

SiMO.  He'll  manage  you  now  with  his  speeches,  so  that 
you  shall  think  it  isn't  Fseudolus  but  Socrates^  that's  talking 
to  you.     What  do  you  say  ? 

rsETJD.  For  a  long  time  you  have  held  me  in  contempt, 
I  know.  I  see  that  you  have  but  little  confidence  in  me. 
You  wish  me  to  be  a  villain ;  still,  I  will  be  of  strict  honesty. 

SiMo.  Take  care,  please,  and  make  the  recesses  of  your 
ears  free,  Fseudolus,  that  my  words  may  be  enabled  to  enter 
where  I  desire. 

FsBUD.  Come,  say  anything  you  please,  although  I  am 
angry  at  you. 

SiMO.  What,  you,  a  slave,  angry  at  me  your  master  ? 

FsEUD.  And  does  that  seem  wonderful  to  you  ? 

SiMO.  Why,  by  my  troth,  according  to  what  you  say,  I 
must  be  on  my  guard  against  you  in  your  anger,  and  you 
are  thinking  of  beating  me  in  no  other  way  than  I  am  wcmt 
to  heat  yourself.    What  do  you  think  ?     {To  Calmpho.) 

Call,  I'  faith,  I  think  that  he's  angry  with  good  reason, 
since  you  haye  so  little  confidence  in  him. 

SiMO.  I'll  leave  him  alone  then.  Let  him  be  angry :  FU 
take  care  that  he  shall  do  me  no  harm.  But  what  do  you 
say  ?   What  as  to  that  which  I  was  asking  you  ? 

FsBTJD.  If  you  want  anything,  ask  me.  What  I  know, 
do  you  consider  given  you  as  a  response  at  Delphi. 

»  But  Socratesy-Yex.  466.  The  most  learned  and  y irtuoos  of  all  the  phaoso- 
phers  of  ancient  times. 


y  Google 


8c.  y.  OB,  THB  OHBJlT.  279 

Sb£0.  Give  your  attention  then,  and  take  care  and  please 
mind  your  promise.  What  do  you  say  ?  Do  you  know  that 
my  son  is  in  love  with  a  certain  music-girl  ? 

PssuD.  Tea,  verily^.  Simo.  "Whom?  he  is  trying  to  make 
free? 

PsBim.  Yea,  verily  and  indeed.  Siho.  And  you  are 
scheming  by  cajolery  and  by  cunning  tricks  to  get  twenty 
min»  in  ready  money  out  of  me  ? 

PsBUD.  I,  get  them  out  of  you  ? 

SiMO.  Just  so ;  to  give  them  to  my  son,  with  which  to 
liberate  his  misia^ss.     Do  you  confess  it  ?     Speak  out. 

Pseud.  Yea,  verily ;  yea,  verily.  Simo.  He  confesses  it. 
Didn't  I  tell  you  so  just  now,  CaUipho  ? 

Call.  So  I  remember.  Simo.  Why,  directly  you  knew  of 
these  things,  were  they  kept  concealed  from  me?  Why 
wasn't  I  made  acquainted  with  them  ? 

PsEiri).  I'll  tell  you :  because  I  was  unwilling  that  a  bad 
custom  should  originate  in  me,  for  a  servant  to  accuse  his 
master  before  his  master. 

Simo.  Wouldn't  you  order  this  fellow  to  be  dragged 
head  first  to  the  treadmiU^  ? 

Call.  Has  he  done  anything  amiss,  Simo  ? 

Simo.  Yes,  very  much  so.  Pseud,  (to  Callipho).  Be 
qiuet,  I  quite  well  understand  my  own  affairs,  Callipho.  Is 
this  a  fault  ?  Now  then,  give  your  attention  to  the  reason 
why  I  you  kept  ignorant  of  this  amour.  I  knew  that  the 
treadmiU  was  close  at  hand,  if  I  told  you. 

SiMO.  And  didn't  you  know,  as  well,  that  the  treadmill 
would  be  close  at  hand  when  you  kept  silent  on  it  ? 

Pseud.  I  did  know  it.  Simo.  Why  wasn't  it  told 
me? 

*  7(80,  »er%)— Ver.  483.  Nat  yap.  This  and  the  two  following  remarks  of 
Psendolns  are  in  Greek.  The  KomaDs  affected  cnrtness  of  repartee  in  Greek,  in 
much  the  same  manner  as  we  do  in  French.  A  cant  tone  has  been  attempted  in 
the  translation  to  be  given  to  the  remarks  so  made  by  Psendolns. 

*  To  the  treadmiiry—yer.  494.  "  Pistrmnm."  The  establishment  of  each 
wealthy  person  had  its  "  pistrinum,"  or  "  handmill,"  where  the  mill  for  grinding 
com  was  worked  by  the  hand  of  slares.  The  most  worthless  and  refractory 
▼ere  employed  at  this  labonr,  and  as  the  task  was  deemed  a  degradation,  the 
'*  pistrinnm"  was  the  nsnal  place  of  punishment  for  the  slaves  of  the  household. 
Throughout  this  translation,  the  liberty  has  been  in  general  taken  of  conveying 
the  meaning  of  the  term  by  the  use  of  the  word  **  treadmill.** 


y  Google 


280  PBEUDOLrs;  Act! 

Pseud.  The  one  evil  was  close  at  hand,  the  other  at  a 
greater  distance ;  the  one  was  at  the  moment,  the  other  was 
a  few  days  off. 

SiMO.  What  will  you  be  doing  now  ?  Por  assuredly  the 
money  cannot  be  got  in  this  quarter  out  of  me,  who  have 
especially  detected  it.  I  shall  forthwith  give  notice  to  all 
that  no  one  is  to  trust  him  the  money. 

PsETJD.  I'  faith,  1*11  never  go  begging  to  any  person,  so 
long,  at  all  events,  as  you  shall  be  alive ;  troth,  you  shall  find 
me  the  money ;  and  as  for  me,  I  shall  take  it  from  you. 

SiMO.  You,  take  it  from  me  ?     Pseud.  Undoubtedly. 

SiMO.  Troth,  now,  knock  out  my  eye,  if  I  do  find  it. 

Pseud.  Tou  shall  provide  it.  I  walii  you  then  to  be  on 
your  guard  against  me. 

SiMO.  By  my  troth,  I  know  this  for  sure ;  if  you  do  take  it 
away,  you  wiU  have  done  a  wonderful  and  a  great  exploit. 

Pseud.  I  will  do  it,  however,  Simo.  But  if  you  don't 
carry  it  off? 

Pseud.  Then  flog  me  with  rods.  But  what  if  I  do  carry 
it  off? 

Simo.  I  give  you  Jupiter  as  your  witness,  that  you  shall 
pass  your  life  free  from  punishment. 

Pseud.  Take  care  and  remember  that.  Simo.  Could  I 
possibly  be  unable  to  be  on  my  guard,  who  am  forewarned? 

Pseud.  I  forewarn  you  to  be  on  your  guard.  I  say  you 
must  be  on  your  guard,  I  tell  you.  Keep  watch.  Look,  mWy 
with  those  same  hands  will  you  this  day  give  me  the  money. 

Simo.  By  my  troth,  'tis  a  clever  mortal  if  he  keeps  nis 
word. 

Pseud.  Carry  me  away  to  be  your  slave  if  I  don't  do  it. 

Simo.  Tou  speak  kindly  and  obligingly ;  for  at  present  you 
are  not  mine,  I  suppose. 

Pseud.  "Would  you  like  me  to  tell  you,  too,  what  you  will 
still  more  wonder  at  ? 

Simo.  Come,  then ;  i'  faith,  I  long  to  hear  it ;  I  listen  to 
you  with  pleasure. 

Pseud.  Before  I  fight  that  battle,  I  shall  first  fight  another 
battle,  famous  and  memorable. 

Simo.  "What  battle?  Pseud.  Why,  with  the  procurer, 
your  neighbour ;  by  means  of  stratagem  and  artful  tricks,  I'll 
cleverly  bamboozle  the  procurer  out  of  this  music-girl,  with 


y  Google 


Sc.  V,  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  281 

whom  your  son  is  so  desperately  in  love ;  and  I  surely  will 
have  both  of  these  things  effected  this  very  day,  before  the 
evening. 

SiMO.  "Well,  if  you  accomplish  these  tasks  as  you  say,  you 
will  surpass  in  might  King  Agathocles^.  But  if  you  don't  do 
it,  is  there  any  reason  why  I  shouldn't  forthwith  put  you  in 
the  treadmill  ? 

PsEiTD.  Not  for  one  day,  but,  i'  faith,  for  all,  whatever  the 
time.  But  if  I  effect  it,  will  you  not  at  once  give  me  the 
money  of  your  own  free  will  for  me  to  pay  to  the  procurer  ? 

Call,  irseudolus  is  making  a  fair  claim ;  say  "  I'll  give  it." 

SiMo.  But  still,  do  you  kiaow  what  comes  into  my  mind  ? 
Suppose  they  have  made  an  arrangement,  CaUipho,  among 
themselves,  or  are  acting  in  concert,  and  on  a  preconcerted 
plan^  to  bamboozle  me  out  of  the  money  ? 

Pseud.  "Who  would  be  more  audacious  than  myself,  if  I 
dared  to  do  such  an  action  ?  Well,  Simo,  if  we  are  thus  in 
collusion,  or  have  ever  arranged  any  plan,  do  you  mark  me 
quite  aU  over  with  elm-tree  stripes^,  just  as  when  letters  are 
written  in  a  book  with  a  reed. 

Simo.   Now  then,  proclaim  the  games  as  soon  as  you 


PsETJD.  Give  me  your  attention,  Callipho,  I  beg  you,  for 
this  day,  so  that  you  may  not  any  way  employ  yourself  upon 
other  business. 

Call.  Why,  now,  I  had  made  up  my  mind  yesterday  to  go 
into  the  country. 

PsETO.  Still,  do  you  now  change  the  plan  which  you  had 
resolved  imon. 

Call.  I  am  now  resolved  not  to  go  away  on  account  of 
this ;  I  have  an  inclination  to  be  a  spectator  of  your  games, 
Pseudolus ;  and  if  I  shall  find  that  he  doesn't  give  you  the 
money  which  he  has  promised,  rather  than  it  shouldn't  be 
done,  I'll  give  it. 

*  King  Agathodes) — ^Ver.  632.  Agathocles  was  famous  for  having  risen,  by 
liis  valour  and  merit,  from  being  the  son  of  a  potter  to  be  the  King  of  Sicilj. 

'  With  dm-tree  stripes)— Yev.  545.  "  Stylis  ulmeis,"  "  with  ehn-tree  styli." 
He  alludes  to  the  weals  produced  by  flogging  with  elm-tree  rods,  which,  being 
long  and  fine,  would  resemble  the  iron  **  sty W  used  for  writbg  upon  wax 
tablets. 


y  Google 


282  psEtrBOLTTB ;  Acfc  IT. 

SiMO.  I  shall  not  change  my  purpose. 

PsEiTD.  Because,  by  my  faith,  if  you  don't  give  it,  you  shidl 
be  dunned  for  it  with  clamour  great  and  plenteous.  Come, 
now,  move  yourselves  off  hence  into  the  house  this  instant, 
and  in  turn  give  room  for  my  tricks. 

SiMO.  Be  it  so.     Call.  You  may  have  your  way. 

PsEim.  But  I  want  you  to  keep  close  at  home. 

SiMO.  Well,  that  assistance  I  promise  you. 

Call.  But  I  shall  be  off  to  the  Forum.  I'll  be  back  here 
presently.     (JExit  Callipho.     Simo  goes  into  his  house.) 

PsBUD.  Be  back  directly.  (To  the  Audiekce.)  I  have  a 
suspicion,  now,  that  you  are  suspecting  that  I  have  been  pro- 
mising these  so  great  exploits  to  these  persons  for  the  pur- 
pose of  amusing  you,  while  I  am  acting  this  play,  and  that  I 
shall  not  do  that  which  I  said  I  will  do.  I  wiU  not  change 
my  design  ;  so  far  as  that  then  I  know  for  certain ;  by  what 
means  I'm  to  cany  it  out  not  at  all  do  I  know  as  yet ;  only 
this,  that  so  it  shall  be.  For  he  that  appears  upon  the  stage 
in  a  new  character,  him  it  befits  to  bring  something  that  is 
new.  If  he  cannot  do  that,  let  him  give  place  to  him  who  can. 
I  am  inclined  to  go  hence  into  the  house  for  some  little  time, 
while  I  summon  together^  all  my  stratagems  in  my  mind. 
Meanwhile  this  piper  shall  entertain  you.  (Ghes  into  the 
house  of  Simo,  and  the  Piper  strikes  up  a  time,) 

Act  II. — Sceite  I. 

Enter  Pseudolits,  j^ow*  the  house  of  Simo. 

Pseud.  O  Jupiter,  whatever  I  undertake,  how  cleverly 
and  how  fortunately  does  it  befal  me.  Not  any  plan  is  there 
stored  up  in  my  breast  that  I  can  hesitate  upon  or  be  afraid 
of.  But  it  is  folly  to  entrust  a  bold  exploit  to  a  timorous 
heart ;  for  all  things  are  just  as  you  make  them,  so  as  you 
make  them  of  importance.  Now  in  my  breast  have  I  already 
so  prepared  my  forces — double,  aye,  threefold  stratagems,  that 
when  I  engage  with  the  enemy,  relying  upon  the  merits,  I 

1  WMU  I  summon  together)— Yer.  672.  "  Dum  concentnrio."  Tbis  word 
literallj  means,  "to  collect  together  the  centuries,"  or  "  companies  of  a  hundred 
men."  for  the  purpose  of  giving  their  votes. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THS  OHXiiT,  283 

Bay,  of  my  forefathers,  and  on  my  own  industry  and  tricking 
propensity  for  mischief,  I  may  easily  conquer,  and  easily  spoil 
my  antagonists  by  my  contrivances.  Now  will  I  adroitly  batter 
down  this  BaUio^,  the  common  foe  of  me  and  all  of  you ;  only 
lend  fne  your  attention.  Now  will  I  forthwith  draw  out  my 
legions  against  this  old  town.  If  I  take  it,  I  shall  make  it  a 
pleasant  matter  for  the  citizens :  I'll  load  and  fill  myself,  and 
mjr  allies  as  well,  with  booty  from  it.  I  shall  strike  terror  and 
fright  into  my  enemies,  so  that  they  may  know  of  what  race 
I  was  bom.  Great  exploits  it  befits  me  to  perform,  which 
long  after  may  bespeak  fame  for  me.  But  whom  do  I  see 
here?  Who's  this  low  fellow  that's  presented  before  my 
eyes  ?  I  should  like  to  know  why  he's  come  here  with  his 
sword :  I'  troth,  now  then  I'll  lie  here  in  ambush  for  him, 
to  see  the  business  that  he's  about.     {Betvrea  to  a  distance.) 

SoEFE  II. — Miter  Haepax,  with  a  hag  vn  his  hand, 

Hae.  This  is  the  place,  and  this  the  spot,  which  was 
pointed  out  to  me  by  my  master,  according  as  I  form  a 
judgment  from  my  eyesight.  Eor  my  master,  the  Captain, 
told  me  to  this  effect,  that  the  house  was  the  seventh  from 
the  gate,  in  which  lives  the  person  to  whom  he  requested  me 
to  carry  the  token  and  this  silver  ***** 
I  could  vastly  wish  that  some  one  would  inform  me  where 
this  Ballio,  the  procurer,  lives.     {Looks  from  side  to  side,) 

PsETiD.  (apar^).  Hist!  Silence!  This  man  is  mine,  unless 
all  Gk)ds  and  men  forsake  me.  Now  have  I  need  of  a 
new  plan ;  this  new  scheme  is  suddenly  presented  to  me. 
This  I  prefer  to  my  former  one ;  that  I  shall  dismiss,  which, 
before,  I  had  commenced  to  carry  into  effect.  By  my  troth, 
I'll  then  work  this  military  messenger  that's^'f^^  arrived. 

Bjlb.  I'll  knock  at  the  door,  and  call  some  one  out  of 
doors  from  within.     {Goes  towards  the  door  of  Ballio' s 


PsETiD.  {earning  v/p  to  him).  Whoever  you  are,  I  wish  you 
to  spare  your  knocking ;  for  I've  jtist  come  out  of  doors, 
I,  the  spokesman  and  the  defender  of  the  door. 

*  BaUer  down  this  BdUioy-Ver,  685.  "  BaUionem  exbalistabo."  He  plays 
upon  the  resemblance  of  the  name  of  Ballio  to  the  "  balista,"  or  "  engine  of  war." 


y  Google 


284  psEVDOiiUs ;  Ajc^  U. 

Hab.  Are  you  Ballio  ?  Psbxtd.  Why,  no ;  but  I*m  the 
deputy-Ballio^. 

Hab.  What  means  that  expression?  Pseud.  I'm  liis 
butler-steward^  ;  the  caterer  for  his  larder. 

Hab.  As  though  you  were  to  say,  you  are  his  chamber- 
lain^. 

Pseud.  No  ;  I'm  above  his  chamberlain. 

Hab.  What  are  you,  slave  or  free  man  ? 

Pseud.  Why,  at  present,  I'm  still  a  slave. 

Hab.  So  you  seem  to  be ;  and  you  don't  look  to  be  one 
worthy  to  be  free. 

Pseud.  Ain't  you  in  the  habit  of  looking  at  yourself  when 
you  abuse  another  person  ? 

Hab.  (aside).  This  must  be  a  roguish  fellow. 

Pseud,  {aside).  The  Gods  protect  and  favour  me!  for  this 
is  my  anvil :  this  day  will  I  hammer  out  thence  full  many  a 
device. 

Hab.  Why  is  he  talking  to  himself  alone  ? 

Pseud.  How  say  you,  young  man ? 

Hab.  What  is  it?  Pseud.  Are  you,  or  are  you  not, 
from  that  Captain  of  Macedonia  ?  The  servant  of  him,  I 
mean,  who  bought  a  damsel  of  us  here,  who  gave  fifteen 
silver  minge  to  the  procurer,  my  master,  and  is  still  owing 
five? 

Hab.  I  am.  But  where  in  the  world  have  you  ever 
known  me,  or  have  ever  seen  or  spoken  to  me?  Por  in 
fact,  before  this  day,  I  never  was  at  Athens,  nor  did  I  ever 
before  this  day  behold  you  with  my  eyes         *  #        # 

Pseud.  Because  you  seem  likely  to  be  from  him ;  for  at 
the  time  when  he  went  away,  this  was  the  day  appointed 
for  the  money,  on  which  he  was  to  pay  it  to  us,  and  Tie  has 
not  brought  it  as  yet. 

»  The  deputy-BaUioy-Yw.  607.    In  the  Latin  "  subballio." 
2  His  huUer- steward) — ^Ver.  608.  "  Condus-promus"  was  the  title  given  to  the 
slave  who  had  charge  of  the  "  storerooms,"  or  "  cellse,"  in  the  Roman  establish- 
ments.   The  office  answered  to  those  of  onr  honsekeeper  and  bntler  combined. 

'  His  chainberlam)—Yer.  609.  "  Atriensis"  was  the  title  of  the  slave  in 
whose  charge  was  the  "  atriam,"  or  large  hall,  or  central  room  on  the  ground- 
floor. 


y  Google  I 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  286 

Hae.  Yes,  here  it  is.     (Holding  up  the  lag,) 

Pseud.  What  ? — have  you  brought  it  ? 

Hae.  I,  myself.  Psetjd.  Do  you  at  all  hesitate  to  give 
it  me? 

Hae.  I,  give  it  you  ? 

PsETJD.  Aye,  faith,  to  me,  who  manage  the  business  and 
the  accounts  of  my  master  Ballio,  receive  his  money,  and  pay 
it  to  him  to  whom  he  owes  it. 

Hae.  By  my  troth,  if  you  were  even  the  keeper  of  the 
treasures  of  supreme  Jove,  I  would  never  entrust  a  groat 
of  silver  to  you. 

PsEiTD.  (pointing).  While  you've  been  making  yourself  so 
hig,  the  money  has  become  loose^. 

Hae.  I'll  keep  it  the  rather  tied  up  —  this  way.  (Ties 
the  mouth  of  the  hag.) 

Psetjd.  Woe  to  you!  Ton  indeed  have  been  found  to 
doubt  my  honor.  As  though  innumerable  times  as  much 
are  not  in  the  habit  of  being  entrusted  to  me  alone. 

Hae.  It's  possible  that  others  may  think  so,  and  that  I 
mayn't  trust  you. 

PsEiTD.  As  though  you  meant  to  say  that  I  -v^dshed  to 
chouse  you  out  of  the  money. 

Hae.  "Why,  yes ;  as  though  you  meant  to  say  so ;  and  a« 
though  I,  on  the  other  hand,  meant  to  suspect  it.  But  what's 
your  name  ? 

Pseud,  (aside).  This  procurer  has  a  servant  of  the  name 
of  Syrus ;  I'U  say  that  I  am  he.     I  am  Syrus. 

Hae.  Syrus  ?      Pseud.  That's  my  name. 

Hae.  We  are  making  many  words.  If  your  master's  at 
home,  why  don't  you  call  him  out,  that  I  may  transact  that 
for  which  I  was  sent  here,  whatever  be  your  name  ? 

Pseud.  If  he  were  within  I  would  call  him  out.  But  if 
you  choose  to  give  it  me,  it  wiU  be  more  truly  paid  than  if 
you  were  to  give  it  to  himself 

Hae.  But  now  do  you  know  how  it  is  ?  My  master  has 
sent  me  to  pay  this,  not  to  lose  it.  But  I  know,  to  a  cer- 
tainty, that  you  are  in  a  fever  now,  because  you  caimot  lay 

*  Bat  become  loose) — ^Ver.  629.  This  passage  is  of  obscure  meaning ;  very  pos- 
sibly, however,  while  Harpaz  has  been  vapouring,  the  month  of  the  bag  containing 
the  money  has  become  loose,  to  which  Psendolos  draws  his  attention. 


y  Google 


286  PflBUDOLUS ;  Acfc  IL 

your  claws  upon  it.    I  shall  entrust  the  money  to  no  person 
except  to  Ballio  himself. 

PsBUD.  But  at  present  he's  full  of  business :  a  cause  of 
his  is  being  tried  before  the  judge. 

Hae.  May  the  Grods  prosper  it!  And  I,  when  I  shall 
think  that  he's  at  home,  will  come  again.  Do  you  take  this 
letter  from  me,  and  give  it  him:  for  in  it  is  the  token 
aareed  upon  between  your  master  and  mine  about  the 
damsel. 

PsETO.  For  my  part,  I  understand  it;  the  person  who 
should  bring  the  money  and  the  impress  of  hia  likeness 
hither  to  us,  with  him  he  said  he  wished  the  damsel  to  be 
sent ;  for  he  left  a  specimen  of  it  here  as  well. 

Hab.  You  imderstand  the  whole  affair  ? 

PsEXJD.  Why  should  I  not  understand  it  ? 

Har.  Give  him  this  token  then.  (  Owes  the  letter  and  token,) 

Pseud.  Very  well.    But  what's  your  name  ? 

Hab.  Harpax.  Psetjd.  Get  along  with  you,  Harpax,  I 
like  you  not.  By  my  troth,  you  really  shan't  enter  this 
house,  lest  you  should  be  doing  something  iii  the  harpy  line^. 

Hab.  I  am  wont  to  carry  off  my  enemies  alive  &om  the 
battle-field ;  from  that  circumstance  is  my  name. 

Psetjd.  T  faith,  I  think  that  you  are  much  more  likely  to 
carry  off  the  brass  pots  from  a  house. 

Hab.  Such  is  not  the  fact.  But,  Syrus,  do  you  knaw 
what  I  request  of  you  ? 

Psetjd.  I  shall  know,  if  you  tell  me. 

Hab.  I  shall  put  up  outside  of  the  gate  here,  at  the  third 
shop,  at  the  house  of  that  tun-belHed,  limping,  fat  old  woman, 
Chrysis. 

Pseud.  What  do  you  wish  then  ?  Hab.  That  you'll  fetch 
me  thence  when  your  master  comes. 

Psetjd.  At  your  pleasure ;  by  all  means, 

Hab.  Por,  as  I've  come  wearied  off  my  journey,  I  wish  to 
refresh  myself. 

Pseud.  You  are  very  wise,  and  your  plan  is  agreable 
to  me.  But  take  care,  please,  that  you  are  not  out  of  the 
way  when  I  send  for  you. 

^  In  the  harpy  line) — Ver.  654.  He  alludes  to  his  luune,  as  having  the  Greek 
yerb  apwdC^,  **  to  plunder,"  or  **  to  carry  off  by  force,"  for  its  origin. 


y  Google 


Se.  in.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  287 

Hjlb.  Why,  when  I've  dined,  I  shall  indulge  myself  with 
a  nap. 

Pseud.  I  quite  agree  with  you.  Hae.  Do  you  wish  aught 
else? 

Pseud.  That  you'll  be  off  to  take  your  nap. 

Hab.  I'm  off.  Pseud.  And,  do  you  hear,  Harpax  ?  Order 
yourself  to  be  covered  up,  please ;  you'll  receive  the  benefit 
if  you  take  a  good  sweat.  (Dadt  Habpax. 

ScEKE  m. — PsEUDOLUS,  alone. 

Pseud.  Immortal  Gk)ds !  this  man  has  preserved  me  by  his 
coining.  By  his  supply  for  my  journey  he  has  brought  me  from 
my  wanderings  quite  into  the  ri^ht  way.  For  the  Goddess 
Opportunity  herself  could  not  come  to  me  more  opportunely, 
than  has  this  letter  in  this  opportune  manner  been  brought  to 
me.  For  this  has  been  brought  as  a  horn  of  plenty  i,  in  which 
there  is  whatever  I  wish  for :  here  are  my  wiles,  here  all 
my  tricks,  h^re  my  stratagems,  here  my  money,  here  his  mis- 
tress for  my  master's  son  so  much  in  love.  And  now  how 
vaunting  shall  I  show  myself ;  how,  with  a  breast  so  fertile 
in  expefients,  I  was  to  do  each  thing,  how,  to  steal  away  the 
damsel  from  the  procurer,  I  had  aS  my  plans  arranged  in 
order  in  my  mind  as  I  desired,  fixed,  planned  out.  But, 
no  doubt,  thus  will  it  come  to  pass :  this  Goddess  Fortune, 
unaided,  prevails  over  the  designs  of  a  hundred  armed  men. 
And  this  is  the  fact,  just  as  each  person  uses  his  fortune,  so 
does  he  surpass  others,  and  forthwith  we  all  pronounce  him 
wise.  When  we  learn  that  the  counsels  of  any  person  have 
turned  out  well,  we  declare  that  he  is  a  prudent  man ;  but 
that  he  is  a  fool  who  is  unsuccessful.  In  our  foUy  we  know 
not  how  much  we  are  mistaken,  when  we  eagerly  wish  any- 

*  A  horn  of  plenty) — ^Ver.  671.  He  alludes  to  the  "  Cornucopi»,"  or  "  horn  of 
plenty,"  of  the  heathen  Mythology,  respectuig  which  we  find  varying  accounts  in 
the  ancient  writers.  Some  say  that  by  it  was  meant  the  horn  of  the  goat'Amal- 
then,  which  snckled  Jnpiter,  and  that  the  Nymphs  gave  it  to  Acheloiis,  who  after- 
wards exchanged  it  for  the  horn  of  which  Hercnles  afterwards  deprived  him  in  the 
contest  for  the  hand  of  Deiaaira.  Ovid,  in  the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses, 
represents  it  as  being  the  same  horn  which  was  broken  off  by  Hercnles.  "  And  that 
was  not  enough :  while  his  relentless  right  hand  was  holding  my  stubborn  horn, 
he  broke  it,  and  tore  it  away  from  my  mutilated  forehead.  This,  heaped  with 
froit  and  odoriferous  flowers,  the  Nymphs  have  consecrated,  and  the  bounteous 
Goddess  Plenty  is  enriched  by  my  horn." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


288  PSBTTDOLUS ;  Act  II. 

thing  to  be  given  to  us ;  as  though  we  ourselves  could  possibly 
know  what  is  for  our  advantage.  We  lose  what  is  certain,  while 
we  are  seeking  what  is  uncertain.  And  this  comes  to  pass, 
amid  labours  and  amid  sorrow,  that  death  meanwhile  comes 
creeping  on.  But  there's  enough  now  of  philosophizing;  I 
have  been  talking  too  long,  and  at  too  great  length.  Immortal 
Gods!  my  lie  was  not  dear  at  its  weight  in  double-distilled  gold, 
which  I  just  now  trumped  up  here  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
when  I  said  that  I  belonged  to  the  procurer.  Now,  through 
this  letter  shall  I  deceive  three  persons — my  master,  and  the 
procurer,  and  him  who  gave  me  this  letter.  Excellent! 
another  thing  as  well  has  happened,  that  I  wished  for :  see, 
Calidorus  is  coming ;  he  is  bringing  some  one  with  him,  I 
know  not  whom.     (Stands  apart.) 

Scene  IV. — Unter  Calidoeus  and  CHAEnrirs. 

Cal.  The  sweets  and  the  bitters,  all  have  I  disclosed  to 
you.  Tou  know  my  love,  you  know  my  difficulty,  you  know 
my  poverty. 

Chab.  I  well  remember  all ;  do  you  only  let  me  know  what 
you  want  me  to  do. 

Cal.  Pseudolus  has  directed  me  thus,  that  I  should  bring 
to  him  some  bold  and  zealous  jjerson. 

Chab.  Tou  observe  your  directions  well;  for  you  bring 
him  one  both  friendly  and  zealous.  But  this  Pseudolus  is 
a  stranger  to  me. 

Cal.  He  is  a  very  clever  fellow — ^he  is  my  contriver.  He 
said  that  he  would  effect  those  things  for  me  that  I  have 
told  you  of. 

Pseud,  (apart),  I'U  address  this  person  in  a  very  lofty 
strain. 

Cal.  Whose  voice  is  it  that's  heard  here  ? 

PsETJD.  Oh !  thee,  sovereign  lord,  thee,  oh !  thee  do  I 
address  who  dost  rule  over  Pseudolus :  thee  do  I  seek,  to 
impart  to  thee  delights  thrice  three,  threefold,  acquired  by 
three  contrivances,  obtained  over  three  persons  through 
craftiness  and  through  subtlety,  which  in  this  very  little 
sealed  packet  I  have  brought  unto  you^.  (Holds  v/p  the  letter.) 

1  /  have  brought  wUo  you) — ^Ver.  706.  The  note  of  interrogation  at  the  end  of 
this  passage,  as  found  in  Bitschers  Edition,  seems  to  be  ont  of  place. 


y  Google 


8c.  IV.  OB,  THB  CHJBAT.  289 

Cal.  That's  tlie  fellow ;  how  the  hang-dog  does  bluster 
just  like  a  tragedian. 

Pseud.  Advance  a  step  on  thy  side  towards  me.  Boldly 
stretch  forth  thine  arm  for  greeting. 

Cal.  (taking  his  hand).  Tell  me,  Pseudolus,  whether,  as 
Hope  or  as  Safety,  must  I  greet  you  ? 

PsETJD.  Why  both.  Cal.  As  both  I  greet  you.  But 
what  has  been  done  ?  "Why  are  you  silent  ?  I  have  carried 
tliis  person  here.     (Fomtim^  to  Chaeinus.) 

Pseud.  How  ?  Carried  hmi  here  ?  Cal.  Brought,  I  meant 
to  say. 

Pseud.  Wlio's  this  person  ?     Cal.  Charinus. 

Pseud.  Well  done ;  I  return  him  thanks^  then. 

Chab.  Will  you  then  boldly  enjoin  me  what  it  is  neces- 
sary to  do  ? 

r  SEUD.  My  thanks,  so  far.  May  it  be  well  with  you,  Cha- 
rinus ;  I  don't  like  that  we  should  be  troublesome  to  you. 

Chab.  You,  troublesome  to  me?  Now,  really,  that's 
troublesome. 

Pseud.  Well,  then,  wait  a  moment.  (Takes  the  letter  out 
from  under  his  dress,) 

Cal.  What's  that  ?  Pseud.  This  letter  have  I  just  now 
intercepted,  and  the  token. 

Cal.  Token  ?  What  token  ?  Pseud.  The  one  that  was 
brought  just  now  from  the  Captain.  His  servant,  who  was 
bringing  it,  with  five  min»  of  silver,  who  came  to  fetch  your 
mistress  hence,  him  I  have  just  now  bamboozled. 

Cal.  How  so  ?  Pseud.  Por  the  sake  of  these  Spectators 
the  play  is  being  performed ;  they  know,  who  were  present 
here ;  you  I'U  tell  at  another  time. 

Cal.  What  are  we  to  do  then  ? 

Pseud.  You  shall  this  day  embrace  your  mistress  at 
hberty. 

Cal.  What,  I  ?    Pseud.  You  yourself. 

Cal.  I?  Pseud.  Your  own  self,  I  say,  if  indeed  this 
head  shall  exist  so  long;  if  you'll  ojAj  quickly  find  me  out 
a  man. 

Chab.  Of  what  description  ?  Pseud.  A  cunning,  crafty, 
and  clever  one,  who,  when  he  has  once  taken  hold  of  the 

^  Retwm  him  thanks) — ^Ver.  712.  x°P^^  rovr^  woi^.  He  speaks  in  Greek,  for 
the  purpose  of  panning  on  the  name  of  Ckarinos  in  the  word  x^P^^i  "  thanks.** 


y  Google 


290  pfixUDOiiirs ;  Aeii  11. 

begiiming,  may  hj  his  own  ingenuity  still  hold  fast  upon 
what  it  behoves  him  to  do ;  one,  too,  who  has  not  often  been 
seen  here. 

Chab.  If  he  is  a  slave,  does  that  matter  at  all  P 

PsBTJD.  Why,  I'd  much  rather  have  him  than  a  firee 
man. 

Chab.  I  think  that  I'm  able  to  procure  for  you  a  cunning 
and  clever  fellow,  that  has  lately  come  to  my  father  from 
Garystus^,  and  hasn't  as  yet  gone  anywhere  out  the  house, 
and  who  never  visited  Athens  before  yesterday. 

PsEtri).  You  assist  in  right  earnest.  But  1  have  need  to 
borrow  five  minsB  of  silver,  which  I  shall  repay  this  day,  for 
hL|  father  (jmntvng  to  Caudoetts)  owes  it  me. 

Chab.  I'll  lend  it ;  don't  seek  it  anywhere  else. 

PsEtri).  O,  how  convenient  a  person  for  me.  I  have  need 
of  a  scarf  as  well,  a  sword,  and  a  broad-brimmed  hat. 

Chab.  I  can  provide  them  from  my  house.  Psbttd.  Im- 
mortal G-ods !  surely  this  is  not  Charinus  for  me,  but  Abun- 
dance. But  this  servant,  who  is  come  here  from  Caiystus, 
is  there  anvthing  in  him  ? 

Chab.  Plenty  of  the  stinking  goat^  in  him. 

PsEiTD.  It  befits  the  fellow,  then,  to  have  a  tunic  with 
long  sleeves^.     Has  the  chap  anything  sharp*  in  his  breast  ? 

Chab.  Aye,  of  the  very  sharpest.  PsEim  But  if  it  is 
necessary  for  him  to  draw  forth  what  is  sweet  fi^m  the 
same  place,  has  he  aught  of  that? 

Chab.  Do  you  ask  that  ?    He  has  wine  of  myrrh,  sweet 

^  From  Carysiusy-Yer,  730.  This  was  a  city  of  Euboea,  opposite  the  Isk  df 
Andres. 

2  The  stinking  goat)—yer,  738.  He  cannot  resist  the  temptation  of  a  pnn, 
though  a  somewhat  nnsavonry  one.  Pseudolns  asks  if  this  servant  of  Charinus 
is  at  all  sharp.  "  Quid  sapit  ?"  The  same  words  also  admit  of  the  meaning,  ^  does 
he  smell  of  anything?''  On  which  Charinus  gives  him  answer,  as  thoogbthe 
question  had  heen  put  in  the  latter  sense,  ^^  Yes,  of  the  goat  under  the  armipits." 
The  Bomans,  who  were  fond  of  giving  a  name  to  eveiything,  whether  it  was  worth 
it  or  not,  caUed  the  strong  Hnell  produced  by  the  glands  of  the  arm-pits  bj  the 
name  of  *'  bircus/'  "  the  goav  ^7  reason  of  the  rai^  smell  of  that  animaL . 

'  Ttmic  with  Jmg  sleeves)— Yer,  738.  On  this  dirty  answer  being  given  hmii 
Pesudolus  says,  "  Well,  then,  he  must  have  an  xmder-garmeiit  with  long  sleeves," 
"  manuleata  tunica,"  in  order  to  suppress  the  offensive  smelL  The  use  of  the 
long-sleeved  tunic  was  considered  to  denote  great  effeminacy. 

*  AngOing  sharpy-Yer,  789.  "Ecquid  aceti."  literally,  "  any  vinegar."  This 
word  sometunes  signifies  "  caustic  wit"  or  "  raillery."  Here  it  denotes  "  uttastl 
shrewdness.'* 


y  Google 


Sc.  IT.  OBy  THB  OHXAT.  291 

raisin  wine,  spice  wine^,  honey  wine,  sweets  of  every  sort. 
Why,  he  once  began  to  set  up  a  hot  liquoivshop  in  his  oreast. 

Pseud.  Bravissimo !  Why,  Channus^  you  beat  me  deverly^ 
at  my  own  game.  But  what  am  I  to  say  is  the  name  of  this 
senrant? 

Chab.  Simmia.  FsBvn.  In  a  difficulty,  does  he  under- 
stand how  to  twirl  about  ? 

Chab.  A  whirlwind^  is  not  so  ready  as  he. 

Pbeitd.  Is  he  shrewd  at  all?  Chab.  In  mischievous 
tricks*  VCTy  often. 

Pseud.  Hxm,  wh^i  he's  caught  in  the  fiict  P 

Chab.  He's  a  very  eel ;  he  fi£ps  out. 

PsEXTD.  Is  this  feUow  an  experienced  one  P 

Chab.  Apublic  ordinance^  is  not  more  experienced. 

PsEiTD.  He  is  a  8uitsd>le  person,  according  to  what  I  hear 
you  say. 

Chab.  Aye,  and  from  this  you  may  know  it.  When  he 
looks  at  you  he'll  teU,  of  his  own  accord,  what  it  is  you 
want  with  him.     But  what  are  you  about  to  do  ? 

Pseud.  I'U  tell  you.  When  I've  dressed  up  Tny  man,  I 
intend  to  make  him  become  the  pretended  servant  of  the 
Captain ;  let  him  take  this  token  to  the  procurer,  with  five 
minsB  of  silver.  There's  the  whole  plot  for  you.  As  for 
the  rest,  in  what  way  he  is  to  do  each  thing,  I'll  instruct 
himself. 

^Baiam  tome^  ^ptcetoine)— Ver.  741.  **  Passum^'  was  wine  loade  from  grapes 
dried  in  the  sun.  "  Defratum"  was  new  wine  boiled  down  to  one-half  with  herbs 
and  spices  to  make  it  keep. 

^Tou  heat  me  dwerlyy-Y&t.  743.  "Lamberas."  The  verb  "lambero** 
generally  signifies  "  to  tear  in  pieoes.** 

» A  whtrhrindy^Yer.  745.  "  Turbo"  may  mean  either  a  "  spinning-"  or  "  whip- 
ping-top," or  a  **  whirlwind,"  here. 

*In  muduevoua  inck8)^Yer,746.  *' Argatos,"  m  an  adjectiTe,  signifies  "clever," 
"shrewd,"  As  the  past  participle  of  the  verb  "arguo,"  it  means  "accused." 
Pscudolns  asks  if  he  is  "  shrewd,"  "  argutns;"  to  which  the  other  answers  eva- 
8i?elj,  "  0  yes  (he  has  been  accused,"  "  argutus  "),  "  of  mischievous  tricks  very 
often." 

^  A  public  ordwkwwe)— Ver.  748.  The  "plebisdta"  among  the  Romans  were 
the  public  ordinances,  which  were  proposed  by  the  Tribunes  at  the  "  Comitia 
Tribiata"  of  the  people.  He  pons  upon  the  resembhmce  of  the  word  "  acitus," 
which  means  "  knowing,"  and  "  scitum"  signifying  "  an  ordinance."  Is  he 
"  scitus^"  **  knowing?"  "  0  yes,  a  public  ordinance,"  "  scitum,"  "  is  notmore 
knowmg,"  "  sdtus,"  "  than  he  is." 

u2 


y  Google 


292  PBBtTDOLTTS ;  Act  III. 

Cal.  "Why,  therefore,  do  we  stand  here  then  ? 

PsEin).  Bring  the  fellow  to  me  just  now,  dressed  out  with 
all  his  accoutrements,  to  .Sschinus,  the  banker's.  But  make 
all  haste. 

Cal.  We'll  be  there  before  you. 

PsEXJD.  Gbt  you  gone  there  quickly.  (Calipobus  and 
Chabintjs  qo  into  Simo's  house.)  Whatever  before  was  un- 
certain or  doubtful  in  my  mind,  is  now  clear — now  fined  to 
the  dregs ;  my  heart  has  now  an  open  path.  All  my  legions 
will  I  lead  forth  under  their  standards  with  happy  omen^, 
with  favorable  auspices,  and  to  my  heart's  content.  I  have 
a  certainty  that  I  can  rout  my  enemies.  Now  will  I  go  to 
the  !Forum,  and  load  Simmia  with  my  instructions  what  he 
is  to  do/  that  he  may  not  be  tripping  at  aU,  and  that  he 
may  cleverly  lay  the  train  for  this  plot.  Soon  now  shall  I 
cause  the  town  of  this  procurer  to  be  carried  by  storm. 

(Mvit 

Act  in. — SoEiTE  I. 

JEnter  a  Boy  from  the  house  o/Baj/lio. 

BoT.  On  that  Boy  on  whom  the  Q-ods  bestow  servitude 
under  a  procurer,  when  they  add  a  base  occupation  as  well, 
assuredly  do  they,  so  far  as  I  now  understand  in  my  mind, 
bestow  upon  him  a  great  misfortune  and  miseries  manifold. 
Just  as  this  servitude  has  turned  out  to  me,  where  I  am  set 
over  duties  great  and  small;  nor  am  I  able  to  find  any 
admirer  to  love  me,  so  that  at  length  I  might  be  fitted  out 
in  a  little  better  guise.  Now  this  &y  is  the  birthday  of  this 
procurer.  The  procurer  has  made  a  determination,  fix)in 
the  lowest  to  the  highest,  that  if  each  one  does  not  this  day 
send  him  a  present,  he  shall  perish  to-morrow  with  the 
greatest  torments.  Now,  faith,  I  know  not  what  to  do  in 
iny  line,  for,  unless  I  shall  send  a  present  to  the  procurer 
this  day,  to-morrow  must  I  swallow  dovm  fullers'  produce^. 
And  yet  I  cannot  do  that  which  they  who  can  are  wont  to  do. 

1  With  happy  omen)— Net,  762.  "  Ave  sinistra."  Literally,  "  with  a  Wrcl  <m 
the  left  hand.**    This  was  considered  to  be  a  favorable  omen. 

2  Fullers'  producey-VeT.  781.  As  fullers  used  hands,  feet,  and  stieks  in 
beating  the  cloth,  " fructus  fullonius"  would  mean  "kicks  and  bruises." 


y  Google 


Sc.  II.  OB,  THE  CHSAT. 

Alas !  how  little  am  I,  even  still  for  this  vocation.  And  by 
my  troth,  now,  to  my  misfortune  how  fearfully  do  I  dread 
pimishment.  K  any  one  lays  on^  whose  hand  is  too  heavy, 
although  they  say  that  it  generally  is  done  amid  great  weep- 
ing, I  think  that  I  am  able  in  some  measure  to  keep  my 
teeth  closed.  But  I  must  keep  close  my  lips  and  my  talking, 
for  see,  my  master  is  betaking  himseu  home,  and  bringing 
a  Cook  with  Mm.     {Stands  at  a  distance.) 

Scene  II. — Enter  Ballio  md  a  Cook. 

Bal.  Those  who  call  it  the  cook's  market,  call  it  so 
foolishly;  for  'tis  not  a  cook's  market,  but  a  thieves'  market. 
For  if,  upon  oath,  I  were  to  seek  out  the  worst  of  men,  I 
couldn't  have  brought  a  worse  one  than  this  feUow  that  I'm 
bringing,  one,  chattering,  bragging,  silly,  a?w?  worthless.  Why, 
for  this  very  reason  Orcus  has  declined^  to  take  him  to  him- 
self, that  he  might  be  here  to  cook  a  banquet  for  the  dead ; 
for  here  he  is  able  to  cook  a  thing  to  please  them  alone. 

Cook.  If  you  thought  of  me  in  this  manner  that  you  are 
mentioning,  why  did  you  hire  me  ? 

Bal.  Prom  scarcity ;  there  wasn't  another.  But  why,  if 
you  were  a  cook,  were  you  sitting  in  the  market-place,  you 
alone  behind  the  rest  ? 

Cook.  I'll  tell  you.  By  reason  of  the  avarice  of  men  have 
I  become  an  inferior  cook,  not  through  my  own  inclina- 
tion. 

Bal.  Tor  what  reason  is  that?  Cook.  I'U  teU  you. 
Because,  in  fact,  directly  people  come  to  hire  a  cook,  no 
one  enquires  for  him  that's  the  best  and  the  highest  priced : 
rather  do  they  hire  him  that's  the  lowest  priced.  Through 
this  have  I  to-day  been  the  only  sitter  in  the  market.  Those 
wretched  fellows  are  for  a  drachma  a-piece ;  not  any  person  is 
able  to  prevail  on  me  to  rise  for  less  than  a  didrachm^.     I 

^  ijT  atiff  one  Jays  an)— Yer.  785.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  aa  indecent 
allnsion  is  obscnrelj  made  in  this  line ;  it  is,  however,  doubtful  if  such  really  is  the 
&ct. 

*  OrcuB  has  decKned)—Ver.  795.  "  Orcus"  is  an  epithet  of  Pluto,  the  king 
of  the  Infernal  regions,  and,  sometimes,  of  the  place  itself. 

*  Adidrachmy^Yer.  809.    Literally,  "nummus,"  "a  coin"  or  "piece  of 


y  Google 


294i  PSBUD0XU8 ;  Acfc  TTT, 

don't  cook  *  dinner  too,  like  othCT  cooks,  who  bring  mo  up 
seasoned  meadows  of  grass  upon  their  dishes ;  who  turii  the 
guests  into  oxen,  and  supply  the  grass.  This  herbage,  ix>o, 
do  they  further  season  with  other  herbs :  put  in  comxider, 
fennel,  garHok,  orage ;  they  add,  too,  sorrel,  cabbage,  beet, 
and i^inaeh.  In  this  they  dissolve  a  pound  weight  of  a^oetida. 
The  roguish  mustard  is  pounded,  which  makes  the  eyes  c(£ 
those  that  pound  it  drop  tears  before  they  have  pounded  it. 
These  fellows,  when  they  cook  dinners,  when  they  do  seaaon 
them,  season  them,  not  with  seasonings,  but  with  vampyre 
owls^,  which  eat  out  the  bowels  of  the  guests  while  still  sdive. 
Through  this,  in  fact,  it  is,  that  people  here  live  such  sliort 
lives,  inasmuch  as  they  heap  up  these  herbs  of  thi^  sort  in 
their  stomachs,  dreadful  to  be  mentioned,  not  only  to  be 
eaten.    Herbage  which  the  cattle  eat  not,  men  eat  themselves. 

Bal.  What  do  you  say  ?  Do  you  use  divine  seasonings,  by 
which  you  can  prolong  the  life  of  mao,  ifou,  who  find  fault 
with  these  other  seasonings  ? 

Cook.  I  proclaim  it  boldly ;  for  those  who  shall  eat  of  my 
victuals  which  I  have  seasoned  will  be  able  to  exist  two  bun- 
dred  years  even.  For  when  I've  put  into  the  saucepan 
either  cicilendrum,  or  cepohndrum,  or  mace^,  or  saucaptis,  the 
very  dishes  become  warmed  forthwith.  These  Are  sauces 
^orfish,  the  cattle  of  Neptune ;  the^c«A  qfthe  earthly  cattle 
I  season  with  eicimandrum,  hapalopsis,  or  cataractria. 

money,"  which  meaas  a  didracbmor  piece  of  two  drachmae  in  valne,  or  about  one 
shilling  and  sevenpence  of  onr  money. 

1  With  vampyre  owls) — ^Ver.  820.  "  Starigibus.**  By  this  expression  he 
probably  alludes  to  the  drastic  effect  of  these  herbs  on  those  who  partook  of 
them.  Qyid,  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  has  these  words:  '^  There  are  raven> 
Ofos  fowls;  not  those  which  nsed  to  rob  the  month  of  Phineus  at  tl^e  board,  but 
thence  do  they  derive  their  origin.  Large  are  their  heads,  fixed  is  their  gaze, 
forplnnder  are  their  beaks  adapted;  on  their  wings  is  a  greyish  colonr,  crooked 
talons  are  on  their  claws.  By  night  they  fly,  and  they  seek  the  children  xinpro- 
tected  by  the  nnrse,  and  pollute  their  *bodies  dragged  from  their  cradles.  With 
their  beaks  they  are  said  to  tear  the  entrails  of  the  sucklings,  and  they  have  their 
maws  distended  with  the  blood  which  they  haye  swallowed.  '  Striges'  are  thej 
called ;  and  the  ori^  of  this  name  is  the  fact,  that  they  are  wont  to  screech  m 
the  dismal  night."  It  is  supposed  by  some  persons  that,  under  this  name,  the 
yampyre  bat  is  alluded  to. 

2  C^pciindrumj  or  mace) — ^Ver.  832.  With  the  exception  of  mace,  all  these 
names  are  gibberJsh,  mvented  by  the  Cook  for  the  purpose  of  imposing  npon 
Ballio. 


y  Google 


SC.  n.  OS,  TBS  CSEAT,  295 

Bal.  ^ow  may  Jupiter  and  all  the  Diyinities  confoimd 
yoa  with  yaur  sauees,  and  with  all  those  lies  qfy&ttrs  I 

CooE.  Do  allow  me  to  speak,  please.  Bax.  Speak,  and 
go  to  reacy  perdition. 

Cook,  when  all  the  saucepans  are  hot,  I  open  them  all ; 
then  does  the  odour  %  towards  heaven  with  its  hands 
hanging  down^. 

Bal.  llie  odour  ynih  its  hands  hanging  down  ? 

Co0£.  i  made  a  mistake  without  thinking. 

Bal.  How  so?  Cook.  "With  its  feet  hanging  down,  I 
meant  to  say.     Jupiter  dines  on  that  odour  every  day. 

Bal.  If  you  happen  not  to  go  out  to  cook,  pray  what  does 
Jupiter  dine  upon  ? 

Cook.  He  goes  to  sleep  without  his  dinner. 

Bal.  Gto  to  very  perdition.  Is  it  for  this  reason  that  I'm 
to  give  you  a  didrachm  to-day  ? 

Cook.  Well,  I  confess  that  I  am  a  very  high-priced  cook ; 
but  I  make  the  results  of  my  labour  to  be  seen  tor  the  price, 
hired  at  which  I  go  out. 

Bal.  In  thieving,  to  wit.  Cook.  And  do  you  expect  to 
meet  with  any  cook  except  with  the  claws  of  a  kite  or  of 
an  eagle  P 

Bal.  And  do  you  expect  to  go  anywhere  to  cook,  and  not 
to  cook  the  dinner  there  with  your  claws  tied  up  ?  Now, 
therefore,  you  hoy  (to  the  Box),  who  are  my  servant,  1  now 
give  you  notice  to  make  haste  to  remove  hence  all  my 
property;  and  to  keep  his  eyes  as  weU  in  your  sight. 
Whichever  way  he  shall  look,  do  you  look  the  same  way  as 
well.  If  he  fiiall  move  in  any  direction,  do  you  move  as 
well.  J£  he  shall  put  forth  his  hand,  put  jou  forth  your 
hand  as  well.  If  he  shaU  take  anything  of  his  own,  do  you 
suffer  him  to  take  it ;  if  he  shall  take  what's  mine,  do  you  on 
the  other  side  hold  him  fast.  If  he  shall  stoop  to  the 
ground,  do  you  stoop  there  as  well.  Likewise  over  your 
understrappers  I  shall  appoint  a  single  guard  apiece, 

*  With  Ua  hands  hanging  <?©«»)— -Ver.  841,  He  means  to  personify  the  odonr, 
nd  to  represent  it  as  flying  up  to  heaven;  bat,  by  mistake,  he  says  it  flies  np, 
^  demissis  manibns,"  with  its  hands  hanging  down,  which  wonld  rather  be  the 
■ttitade  of  a  person  thrown  ont  of,  and  falling  from,  the  heavens.  Ballio  repeats 
the  ezpressioa  in  a  tone  of  surprise,  on  which  the  Cook  corrects  himself,  and  says 
he  meant  to  say,  "  with  its  feet  hanging  down,"  "  demissis  pedibus." 


y  Google 


296  PSBTJJDOLtrs ;  Act  IIL,  Sb.  11. 

Cook.  Only  have  good  courage.  Bal.  Prithee,  tell  me 
how  I  possibly  can  have  good  courage,  who  am  taking  you 
home  to  my  house  ? 

Cook.  Because,  by  my  broth,  this  day  will  I  do  just  in  the 
way  that  Medea  cooked  up  the  old  man  Pelias^,  whom  she 
is  said  by  a  draught  and  by  her  potions  from  an  aged  man  to 
have  made  young  again ;  so  will  I  make  you  likewise. 

Bal.  How  now ;  are  you  an  enchanter  as  well  ? 

Cook.  "Why  no,  by  my  troth,  I  am  rather  a  preserver^  of 
mankind. 

Bax.  Well  now ;  for  how  much  would  you  teach  me  that 
one  point  in  cooking  ? 

Cook.  What  point?  Bal.  That  I  may  preserve  you  from 
pilfering  anything  from  me. 

Cook.  For  a  didrachm,  if  you  believe  me ;  if  not,  not  for 
a  mina  eVen.  But  whether  are  you  about  to-day  to  give  a 
dinner,  to  your  friends  or  to  your  enemies  ? 

Bal.   Why,  faith,  to  my  friends  surely. 

Cook.  But  why  don't  you  invite  your  enemies  to  it  rather 
than  your  friends  ?  Eor  this  day  will  I  present  to  the 
guests  a  banquet  so  savoury,  and  I'll  season  it  with  such  a 
dulcet  sweetness,  that  whoever  shall  taste  each  thing  that's 
seasoned,  I'U  ma^e  that  same  person  to  gnaw  off  the  ends 
of  his  own  fingers. 

Bal.  Troth  now,  prithee,  before  you  shall  present  augbt 
to  the  guests  do  you  yourself  first  taste,  and  give  some 

»  The  old  man  Pelias)-'\&[,  869.  The  Cook  could  not  be  expected  to  be  Tcrjr 
learned  in  the  heathen  M7tholog7;  and  we  acoorduiglj  find  bim  making  a 
blunder.  Msxm^  the  father  of  Jason,  was  restored  to  youth  by  the  charms  of 
Medea;  but  Pelias  being  the  enemy  of  Jason,  Medea  persuaded  his  daughters  to 
cut  him  in  pieces,  that  he  might  in  similar  manner  restore  him  to  youth;  which 
was  accordingly  done,  on  which,  having  thus  contrived  his  death,  she  refused  ber 
assistance.  It  is  much  more  probable  that  the  Cook  should  be  intended  to  be 
represented  as  ignorant,  than  as  attempting  here  to  impose  on  the  ignorance  of 
Ballio.  Warner,  in  his  translation,  however,  thinks  otherwise.  He  says,  "The 
humour  plainly  lies  in  the  Cook^s  promises  to  restore  Ballio  to  his  juvenility  bj 
a  cookery — one  that  would  kill  him.  Qallio's  ignorance  is,  indeed,  here  meant  to 
be  exposed  to  ridicule  by  the  Cook,  that  is  by  Plantns,  as  it  likewise  is  in  the 
names  of  the  spices,  which  are  probably  fictitious." 

2  Rather  a  preserver) — ^Ver.  874.  The  "  enchanters,"  who  were  called  "  veae- 
fici,"  "  poisoners,"  were  supposed  to  destroy  men  by  their  potions,  whence  the 
present  reply  of  the  Cook. 


y  Google 


Act  IV.,  SC.  L  OB,  THE  CHBAT.  297 

ft 

to  your  imderstrappers,  that  you  may  gnaw  off  the  ends 
of  your  own  pilfering  bands. 

Cook.  Perhaps  then  you  don't  believe  me  in  the  things 
that  I  say. 

Bai.  Don't  yon  be  troublesome ;  you  din  me  too  much ; 
you  don't  please  me  by  it.  See,  there  I  live.  (JPoints  to  his 
house.)    Do  you  go  in-doors  and  cook  the  dinner,  with  all 


Boy.  Why  don't  you  go,  and  take  your  place  ?  Go  and 
find  the  guests ;  the  dinner's  spoiling  already.  (Cook  and 
BoT^o  into  the  house,) 

Bax.  Now,  just  look,  please,  at  that  young  offshoot;  for  he, 
too,  is  a  good-for-nothing  deputy-scuUion  for  the  cook.  Truly 
I  don't  know  what  now  first  to  be  on  my  guard  against ; 
such  thieves  there  are  in  my  house,  and  there's  a  robber 
close  at  hand.  For  my  neighbour  here,  the  father  of  Cali- 
dorus,  a  short  time  since,  in  the  market-place,  asked  me 
by  all  means  to  be  on  my  guard  against  his  servant  Pseu- 
dolus,  not  to  put  any  trust  in  him ;  for  that  he  is  on  the 
hunt  this  day,  if  possible  to  dupe  me  out  of  the  Woman.  He 
said  that  he  had  stoutly  promised  to  him  that  he  would  get 
away  Phcenicium  from  me  by  stratagem.  I'll  now  go  in- 
doors and  give  notice  to  my  household,  that  no  one  must 
put  any  trust  whatever  in  this  Pseudolus.  (Goes  info  his 
0 


Act  IV. — Scene  I. 
JEnter  Pseudolus. 
PsEun.  If  the  immortal  Gods  ever  did  determine  that  any 
person  should  be  assisted  by  their  aid,  now  do  they  intend 
that  Calidorus  shall  be  preserved  for  me,  and  the  procurer 
destroyed,  inasmuch  as  they  produced  you  for  my  assistant, 
80  clever  and  so  knowing  a  fellow.  (Looking  lack.)  But 
where  is  he  ?  am  I  not  a  silly  fellow  to  be  thus  talking  to 
myself  alone  ?  I'  faith,  he  has  put  a  trick  upon  myself,  as  I 
fancy ;  myself  one  knave,  I  have  been  poorly  on  my  guard 
against  another  knave.  By  my  troth  I'm  undone,  if  this 
fellow's  off,  and  I  shall  not  carry  into  effect  this  day  what  I 
intended.  But  see,  there  he  is,  a  statue  that  deserves  a  whip- 
pmg ;  how  stately  he  does  stalk  along ! 


y  Google 


298  paEXJDOLTJfi ;  Afit  IV. 


3nter  Simmia,  ut  a  diatcmce,  dressed  like  HabpjO:. 

PsEXJD.  How  now !    By  my  faith  I  was  looking  about  for 
you ;  I  was  very  greatly  afraid  that  you  were  off. 
Sim.  It  was  my  character  to  do  so,  I  confess. 
Pseud.   "Where   were   you    loitering?     Sim.    Where  I 


Pseud.  That  I  know  weU  enough  already. 

Sim.  Why  then  do  you  ask  me  what  you  know  ? 

Pseud.  Why  this  I  want,  to  put  you  in  mind. 

Sim.  Needing  to  be  put  in  mind  yourself,  don't  you  be 
putting  me  in  mind. 

Pseud.  EeaUy  I  am  treated  by  you  quite  with  contempt. 

Sim.  And  why  shouldn't  I  treat  you  with  contempt,  I, 
who  have  the  repute  of  being  a  military  gentleman  ? 

Pseud.  I  want  this  then,  which  has  been  commenced,  to 
be  completed. 

Sim.  Do  you  see  me  ardoing  anything  else  ? 

Pseud.  Therefore  walk  on  briskly.  Sim.  No,  I  choose  to 
go  slowly. 

Pseud.  This  is  the  opportunity ;  while  this  Marpax  is 
asleep,  I  want  you  to  be  the  first  to  accost  him. 

Sim.  Why  are  you  hurrying  ?  Softly ;  don't  you  fear.  I 
wish  Jupiter  would  so  make  it,  that  he  were  openly  in  the 
same  place  vnth  me,  whoever  he  is,  that  has  arrived  from  the 
Captain.  Never  a  jot,  by  my  troth,  should  he  be  a  bit  the 
better  JEEarpax  than  I.  Have  good  courage,  I'll  have  this 
business  nicely  accounted  for  to  you.  So  by  my  tricks  and 
lies  would  I  put  this  military  stranger  in  a  fright  that  he 
himself  would  deny  that  he  is  the  person  that  he  is,  and  would 
believe  me  to  be  the  person  that  he  himself  is. 

PsEUB.  How  can  that  be  ?  Sim.  You  are  murdering  me 
when  you  ask  me  that. 

Pseud.  A  clever  fellow.  Sim.  And  so  are  yon  too,  who 
are  quite  my  equal  with  your  mischievous  tricks  and  Hes 
•  *****• 

PsBUD.  May  Jupiter  preserve  you  for  me. 
Sim.  Aye,  and  for  myself.     But  look,  does  this  dress  he- 
come  me  quite  well  ? 


y  Google 


Sc.  I.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  299 

Pseud.  It  Buits  very  well.  Sim.  Be  it  so. 
PfiEUD.  May  the  Deities  grant  you  as  many  blessings  as 
you  may  wish  for  yourself.  For  if  I  were  to  wish  for  as 
many  as  you  are  deserving  of,  they  would  be  less  than 
nothing ;  (aside)  nor  have  I  ever  seen  any  one  more  of  a  rogue 
than  tMs  fellow, 
Sm.  {overhearing  him).  Do  you  say  that  to  me  ? 

Pbeijd.  This  man's  an  honest  j^ZZom?. 

Sim.  It  is  neither  this  person,  then  (pointing  to  Pseitdo- 
irs),  nor  myself. 

PsEim.  But  take  care  that  you  don^t  be  tripping. 

Sim.  Can't  you  hold  your  tongue  ?  He  that  puts  a  man 
in  mind  of  that  which,  remembering  it,  he  does  keep  in  mind, 
causes  him  to  forget  it.  I  recollect  everything ;  they  are 
stored  up  in  my  breast ;  my  plans  are  cleverly  laid. 

Pseud.  I'm  silent.  But  what  good  turn  shall  I  do  you 
if  you  carry  through  this  matter  with  management  ?  So 
may  the  Gods  love  me 

Sim.  They  won't  do  so;  you'U  be  uttering  sheer  jGedse- 
hoods  then. 

Pseud.  How  I  do  love  you,  Simmia,  for  your  roguery,  and 
hth  fear  and  laud  you. 

Sim.  That  I  have  learned  to  make  a  present  of  to  others ; 
you  can't  put  your  flatteries  on  me. 

Pseud.  In  how  delightful  a  manner  I  shall  receive  you  this 
day,  when  you  have  completed  this  matter. 

Sim.  Ha,  ha,  ha !     (Laughing.) 

Pseud.  "With  nice  viands,  wine,  perfumes,  and  titbits 
between  our  cups.  There,  too,  shall  be  a  charming  damsel, 
who  shall  give  you  kiss  upon  kiss. 

Sim.  You  wfil  be  receiving  me  in  a  delightful  manner. 

PsETTD.  Aye,  a/ndi^jOM  effect  it,  then  I'U  make  you  say  so 
still  more. 

Sim.  If  I  don't  effect  it,  do  you,  the  executioner,  take  me 
off  to  torture.  But  make  haste  and  point  out  to  me  where 
is  the  door  of  the  procurer's  house. 

Pseud.  'Tis  the  third  hence.  Sim.  Hist !  hush !  the  door's 
opening. 

Pseud.  In  my  mind,  I  believe  that  the  house  is  poorljr. 

Sim.  Why  so  ?  Pseud.  Because,  i'  faith,  it  is  vomiting 
forth  the  procurer.     (Ballio  w  coming  out  of  his  house?) 


y  Google 


300  PSSUDOLirs ;  Act  IV. 

Sim.  Is  this  he  ?    Pseud.  This  is  his  own  self. 

Sim.  'Tis  a  worthless  commodity.  Psbtjd.  Do  see  that: 
he  doesn't  go  straight,  hut  sideways,  just  as  a  crab  is  wont. 
{They  conceal  themselves  from  BaIiLIO.) 

Scene  n. — Enter  'Bajaho  from  his  house, 

£al.  I  do  believe  that  this  fellow  is  not  so  bad  a  cook  as 
I  thought  he  was ;  for  he  has  clawed  off  nothing  as  yet  ex- 
cept a  cup  and  a  tankard. 

PsETJD.  (apart  to  Simmia).  Hallo  you!  now's  your  oppor- 
tunity and  your  time. 

Sim.  I  agree  with  you.  Psetjd.  Step  slily  out  into  the 
street ;  I'll  be  here  in  ambush.  (Simmia  steps  forward^  and 
then  walks  along  the  middle  of  the  street  to  meet  Ballio.) 

Sim.  (talking  aloud  to  himself),  I  took  the  number  care- 
fully ;  this  is  the  sixth  lane  from  the  eitg  gate ;  down  that 
lane  he  bade  me  turn ;  how  many  houses  down  he  told  me, 
that  I  don't  quite  know  for  certain. 

Bal.  (eyeing  Simmia).  "Who's  this  fellow  in  the  scarf,  or 
whence  does  he  come,  or  whom  is  he  looking  for?  The 
appearance  of  the  fellow  seems  outlandish  and  shabby. 

Sim.  But  see,  here's  a  person,  who,  from  uncertainty,  will 
make  the  thing  more  certain  for  me  that  I  wish  to  know. 

Bal.  He's  coming  straight  towards  me.  "Where  in  the 
world  am  I  to  say  this  fellow  comes  from  ? 

Sim.  Harkye !  you  who  are  standing  there  with  a  goat's 
beard,  answer  me  this  that  I  ask  you. 

Bal.  How  now !    Don't  you  salute  me  first  ? 

Sim.  (toith  a  surly  voice).  I  have  no  salutations  to  give  away. 

Bal.  "Well,  troth,  you  shall  get  just  as  much  from  here 
then, 

PsEUi).  (from  behind).  Well  done,  at  the  very  beginning. 

Sim.  Do  you  know  any  person  in  this  lane,  I  ask  you  ? 

Bal.  I  know  myself.  Sim.  Pew  persons  do  that  which 
you  mention ;  for  in  the  Porum  there  is  hardly  every  tenth 
person  that  knows  his  own  self. 

PsEun.  (from  behind),  I'm  all  right;  he  is  philosophizing 
now. 

Sim.  I'm  looking  for  a  fellow  here,  a  bad  one,  a  law- 
breaker, an  impious,  perjured,  and  dishonest  rogue. 

Bal.  (aside).  He's  looking  for  me,  for  those  are  my  i 


y  Google  I 


Se.  n.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  301 

K  he  would  only  mention  the  name.     (To  Sihmia.)  What's 
the  name  of  this  person  ? 

Sim.  Ballio,  the  procurer.     Bal.  Do  I  know  him  ?    I  am 
the  yery  person,  young  man,  that  you  are  looking  for. 
.^  Sim.  What,  are  you  Ballio  ?     Bal.  I  really  am  he. 

Sim.  How  you  are  clothed,  a  housebreaker  *  * 

**  ****** 

{Ee  takes  hold  of  Ballio's  cloak.) 

Bal.  I  think  if  you  were  to  see  me  in  the  dark,  you'd 
be  keeping  your  hand  off. 

Sm.  My  master  bade  me  present  you  many  greetings. 
Beceive  this  letter  from  me ;  he  bade  me  give  you  it. 

Bal.  Who's  the  person  that  bade  you  ? 

PsEtTD.  (from  behind),  I'm  undone,  now  the  fellow's  in 
the  middle  of  the  mud.  He  doesn't  know  the  name — 
this  business  is  at  a  dead  lock. 

Bal.  Who  do  you  say  sent  me  this  ? 

Sim.  Observe  the  seal ;  do  you  yourself  tell  me  his  name, 
that  I  may  know  that  you  are  Ballio  himself. 

Bal.  Give  me  the  letter.  Sim.  Take  it,  and  look  at  the 
seal.    (Oives  Mm  the  letter,) 

Bal.  (looking  at  it).  Oho!  'Tis  nothing  more  nor  less 
than  PolymachaBroplagides^,  his  own  ver^  self ;  I  recognize 
it.    Hallo  1/ou,  Polymachseroplagides  is  his  name ! 

Sim.  I  know  now  that  I  have  rightly  given  you  the  letter, 
since  you  have  mentioned  the  name  of  Polymachaeroplagides. 

Bal.  How  flares  he  ?  Sim.  By  my  troth,  just  as  a  brave 
sian  and  a  good  soldier  should.  But  make  haste,  I  beg,  to 
read  this  letter  through,  for  it  is  requisite  to  do  so,  and  to 
take  this  money  at  once  and  send  out  the  damsel.  Por  it's 
necessary  for  me  this  day  to  be  at  Sicyon^,  or  else  to  suffer 
death  to-morrow ;  so  peremptory  is  my  master. 

Bal.  I  know  it :  you  are  telling  those  who  know  it  already. 

Sim.  Make  haste  then  to  read  the  letter  through. 

Bal.  I'll  do  so,  if  you'll  only  hold  jowc  tongue.  (JECe 
T€ads  the  letter.)    "  The  Captain  Polymachaeroplagides  sends 

^  P<>fyniach€Brcplaffide8y-yeT,  988.  This  high-sounding  name  is  compounded 
of  three  Greek  words,  and  signifies  "  the  son  of  many  blows  with  the  sword,"  or 
something  akin  to  it. 

^  To  he  at  5tcyo»)— Ver.  995.  This  was  a  very  ancient  city  of  the  Pebpon- 
nesos  on  the  Gulf  of  Corinth. 


y  Google 


302  PSETJDOLUS ;  Act  IV. 

tbifl  letter,  written  to  the  procurer  Ballio,  sealed  with  the 
impression  which  was  formerly  agreed  upon  between  us 
two." 

Sim.  The  token's  in  the  letter. 

Bal.  I  see  the  token  and  I  recognize  it.  But  is  he  in  the 
habit  of  sending  no  greeting  written  in  his  letter  ? 

Sim.  Such  is  the  military  etiquette,  Ballio ;  with  theit 
hand  they  send  health  to  their  well-wishers,  cmd  with  the- 
same  do  they  send  destruction  to  their  evil-wishers.  But 
as  you  have  commenced,  go  on  to  ascertain  of  yourself  what 
this  letter  says. 

Bal.  Listen  then.  (Beading  on.)  "  Harpax  is  my  cmip- 
servant,  who  has  come  to  you."     Are  you  tms  Harpax  ? 

Sim.  I  am,  and  the  real  Harpax  too^. 

Bai.  (reading  on),  "Who  brings  this  letter;  I  wish  the 
money  to  be  received  from  him,  and  the  woman  to  be  sent 
together  with  him.  *Tis  becomiug  to  send  greeting  to  the 
woridiy ;  had  I  deemed  you  wort%,  I  should  have  sent  it  to 
you." 

Sim.  What  then  ?  Bai.  Pay  me  the  money,  take  away 
the  woman. 

Sim.  Which  of  us  is  delayiQg  the  matter  ? 

Bal.  Foftow  me  iu-doors  then. 

Sim.  I'm  followiug.     {They  go  into  Baxiio's  hottse,) 

SoMNB  m, — PsBUDOLTTS  comes  forward. 

PsETJD.  I'  troth,  a  more  artful  fellow,  and  one  more  sldl- 
fully  cunning,  I  never  did  see  than  is  this  same  Simmia. 
Very  much  do  I  dread  this  man,  and  sadly  do  I  fear  that  he 
may  prove  mischievous  against  myself  just  as  he  has  been 
against  him ;  lest  in  his  prosperity  he  may  now  turn  his 
horns  against  me,  if  he  &ids  an  opportunity.  Should  he 
prove  mischievous  towards  me  *  *  *        .  * 

But,  i'  faith,  for  my  part  I  hope  not,  for  I  wish  well  to  him. 
Now  in  three  ways  am  I  in  the  greatest  dread.  First  of  all 
then,  I  dread  this  comrade  of  miae,  lest  he  should  forsake  me 
and  go  over  from  me  to  the  enemy.  Next  do  I  dread  that 
my  master  should  in  the  meantime  return  from  the  Pomm; 

1  The  real  Hcarpax  to<>)— Ver.  10X0.  He  lays  a  stress  on  the  name,  to  eatch  t 
langh  from  the  audience  by  implyiog  that  he  is  a  regular  Harpax  or  **  jjiwuknTy* 
bot£  in  name  and  reality. 


y  Google 


9&  V.  OB,  THX  GHSAT.  303 

lest,  the  booiy  takes,  the  plunderers  ahould  be  taken.  To- 
geUier  with  these  things  do  I  fear,  lest  that  other  Harpax 
^uld  arnve  here  before  this  Harpax  has  departed  hence 
witk  the  woman.  By  my  faith,  Tm  undone;  they  are 
reiy  alow  in  coming  out  of  doors.  With  baggage  packed^ 
19,  my  heart  is  waiting,  ready,  if  he  doesn't  bring  out  the 
damsel  together  with  himseli,  to  fly  away  in  exile  out  from 
ofmybre^.  ***•## 
(The  door  of  Balmo's  house  opens.)  I'm  the  conqueror — 
I've  got  tbe  better  of  my  wary  guards. 

Scene  IV. — Unter  SimmiAjJ^owBallig's  house,  leading 

PH(EKICIXrM. 

Sim.  (fo  PnoBinGitrM).  Don't  weep :  you  know  not  how  the 
matter  is,  Phoenicium ;  but  before  long  I'll  let  you  know  it 
wbffa  you  are  resting.  I'm  not  leading  you  to  that  Mace- 
donian long-teethed  fellow,  who  now  causes  you  to  be  weep- 
ing. To  hum  win  I  lead  you,  whose  you  espeoally  long  to  be. 
ril  cause  you  before  very  long  to  be  embracing  Calidorus. 

PsBTTi).  Prithee,  why  did  you  stay  so  long  in-doors  P  For 
how  long  a  time  was  my  heart  throbbing  with  beating 
agaiiist  wf  breast. 

Sim.  "x  ou  have  found  reason,  you  whipping-post,  toith  a 

vengeance  to  be  making  enquires  of  me       *  *  * 

*  *  *  ♦  amid  the  ambush 

of  the  enemy.    Why  don't  we  go  home  vdth  all  speed  with 

military  strides^. 

PsBFJ).  Now,  by  my  troth,  although  you  are  a  worthless 
Sallow,  you  advise  aright.  March  in  triumphal  procession, 
this  way,  straight  in  the  path  to  ^efestwe  goblet.  {They 
march  off  m  triumphal  procession,) 

SoBiTE  V. — Miter  BjiLLiOyfrom  his  house. 
Bax.  Ha,  ha,  ha !   (hmghvng,)    Now,  at  last,  my  i^ind  is 
in  a  state  of  ease,  since  that  fellow  has  departed  hence, 

»  WWi  baggage  packed)— Yfx,  103S.  "  Conligatia  vasis."  This  is  a  figare  de- 
rived from  militaiy  affairs.  In  modem  as  in  ancient  times,  the  cnstom  is  for  the 
soldiers,  when  they  break  np  the  encampment,  to  collect  all  their  vessels  and 
^laggage  and  tie  them  np  in  bundles. 

»  WWi  mBary  8tride$y-Vet,  1049.  Having  often  to  march  qtdcUy,  soldiers 
would  naturally  acquire  the  habit  of  walldsg  with  large  strides. 


y  Google 


304  PSBUDOLUS ;  Act  IV, 

and  taken  away  the  woman.  I  should  like  Fseudolus  now 
to  come,  that  wicked  rascal,  to  carry  the  woman  off  from  me 
by  his  stratagems.  I  know  for  sure,  right  well,  that  I  had 
rather  in  solemn  form  perjure  myself  a  thousand  times,  than 
that  he  should  cheat  me  by  makiug  a  laughing-stock  of  me. 
By  my  troth  now,  1*11  laugh  at  the  fellow  if  I  meet  him. 
But  I  guess  that  he'll  soon  be  on  the  treadmill,  ^fM^  as  befits 
him.  Now  I  wish  for  Simo  that  he  would  come  in  my  way, 
in  order  that  he  might  be  joyful  in  common  with  my  joy. 

ScEKB  VI. — JEnter  Simo. 

Simo  (to  himself),  I'm  going  to  see  what  business  my 
Ulysses  has  transacted ;  whether  he  now  has  the  statue^  from 
the  BaUionian  citadel. 

Bal.  O,  lucky  man !  give  me  your  lucky  hand.  {Takes 
his  hand,) 

Simo.  What's  the  matter  ?    Bal.  Now. 

Simo.  "What  now  ?  Bal.  There's  nothing  at  all  for  you 
to  fear. 

Simo.  What's  the  matter?  Has  that  fellow  Fseudolus 
come  to  you  ? 

Bal.  No.    Simo.  What  good  fortune  is  there,  then? 

Bal.  Tout  twenty  min©  are  safe  and  sound  which  Pseu- 
dolus  stipulated  for  from  you  this  day. 

Simo.  I'  faith,  I  really  do  wish  they  were. 

Bal.  Ask  of  me  twenty  minsB  if  he  this  day  gets  hold  of 
that  woman,  or  gives  her  to  your  son  this  day,  as  he  has  pro- 
mised. On  my  word,  prithee,  do  demand  them  of  me ;  I 
quite  long  to  promise  them.  And,  besides  this,  keep  the 
woman  as  a  present  for  yourself,  that  in  every  way  you 
may  know  that  your  money's  safe. 

Simo.  There's  no  danger  that  I  know  of  in  making  this 
bargain.  According  as  you  have  solemnly  pledged  your 
word,  will  you  give  me  twenty  minsD  ? 

Bal.  They  shall  be  given.  Simo.  This,  indeed,  is  not  so 
badly  done.    But  have  you  met  the  fellow  ? 

Bal.  Aye,  both  of  them  together. 

^  Now  has  the  statue) — ^Ver.  1064.  He  alludes  to  Ulysses  carrying  away  tbe 
Palladium  or  statue  of  Minenra  from  the  citadel  of  Troy. 


y  Google 


Sc.  Vn.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  305 

SiMO.  "What  did  he  say?  What  did  he  talk  about? 
Prithee,  what  did  he  mention  to  you  ? 

Bal.  Theatrical  nonsense ;  expressions  which,  in  comedies, 
are  wont  to  be  used  to  a  procurer,  which  boys  are  ac- 
^inted  with.  He  said  that  I  was  worthless,  and  wicked, 
and  forsworn. 

SiKO.  I'  foith,  he  told  no  lie. 

Bai.  'Twas  for  that  reason  I  wasn't  angry.  For  what 
matters  it  for  you  to  speak  imcivilly  to  him  who  cares  not 
for  it,  and  who  don't  deny  the  truth  ofwhtxt  you  say  ? 

SiMO.  "Why  is  it  that  you  are  in  no  fear  of  him  ?  That 
I'm  longing  to  hear. 

Bal.  Because  he  never  will  carry  the  woman  off  now,  nor 
is  he  able.  Don't  you  yourself  remember  that  I  told  you,  some 
time  since,  that  she  had  been  sold  to  a  Macedonian  officer  ? 

SiHO.  I  remember.  Bal.  Well,  his  servant  just  now 
brought  me  the  money,  and  the  token  with  the  impression, 
which  had  been  arranged  between  himself  and  me. 

Snco.  What  then?  Bal.  He  took  away  with  him  the 
woman,  not  long  since. 

SiMO.  Do  you  say  this  in  real  truth  ? 

Bal.  Whence  could  I  possibly  have  that  quality  ? 

Slice.  Do  you  only  take  care  that  he  hasn't  been  playing 
some  trick  there. 

Bal.  The  letter  and  the  impress  on  the  seal  make  me  sure. 
Indeed,  'twas  but  just  now  he  took  her  off  for  Sicyon. 

Snco.  Troth  now,  'twas  weU  done.  Why  do  I  delay  to 
make  Pseudolus  give  a  name^  to  a  colony  at  the  mill-stoiies  ? 
But  who's  this  feUow  in  the  scarf? 

Bal.  I  don't  know,  i'  faith ;  however,  let's  observe  whither 
he's  going,  and  what  business  he's  upon.  {They  stand  on 
me  side,) 

Scene  VII. — Enter  Habpax. 
Has,  (to  himself).  That  slave's  a  base  and  worthless  fellow^ 
who  values  his  master's  commands  at  nought ;  and  he,  too, 
is  good  for  nothing  who  is  forgetful  to  do  his  duty  unless 
he's  put  in  mind.  But  those  who  forthwith  deem  them- 
selves to  be  at  liberty,  when  they  have  hidden  themselves  from 

>  Give  a  name) — ^Ver.  1100.  He  allndes  to  the  custom  of  the  first  colonists 
giving  the  name  to  a  colony.  He  says  that  he  thinks  that  he  most  gire  Psendolns 
a  settlement  at  the  hand-mill,  and  so  make  hun  colonize  the  place  of  ponbhment. 

X 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


30S  FfiUEBiiDOiiim;  HatJSf, 

the  sight  of  their  maeter,  who  not,  wench,  devoar  what  they 
have, — ai/e,  what  they  hme  not, — long  do  those  same  endnie 
the  name  of  servitude.  !N^of  is  there  any  good  dispositioa  in 
them,  except  only  that  they  may  uphold  themselves  by  their 
dishonest  contrivances.  With  these,  neither  their  company 
nor  their  conversation  suits  me,  nor  by  these  persons  nave 
I  been  ever  known.  Although  he  is  away,  I  consider  my 
master  as  being  here ;  I  fear  him  when  he  isn't  here,  that  I 
may  not  have  to  fear  him  when  he  is  heie.  Therefbre,  as  I 
have  been  ordered,  to  this  business  will  I  give  my  attention. 
But  that  Syrus,  to  whom  I  gave  the  token,  would  ha^  been 
letting  me  stay  even  yet  in  the  shop.  As  he  bade  me,  I  stayed 
there ;  he  said  that  he  would  send  for  me  when  the  procurer 
was  at  home.  But  since  he  hasn't  come,  or  called  me  vMe 
staying  there,  I'm  come  hither  of  my  own  aceord,  that  I  may 
know  what  is  the  fact,  that  that  fellow  mayn't  be  playing 
tricks  with  me.  And  th^re  is  notiiing  better  than^  that  I 
should  knock  at  this  door,  and  call  some  out  here  firom  in- 
doors. I  want  this  procurer  to  take  this  money  of  me,  and  to 
send  off  this  woman  with  me.   {Goes  towards  Balmo's  do9r) 

Bal.  {from  behind,  to  BiMo).  Hark  you!  Biica  (aparty 
What  do  you  want  ? 

Bal.  (apart).  This  fellow's  my  own.  Snco.  {apart).  How 
so? 

Bal.  {apart,  pointing  to  the  purse  in  the  hamd  ofBLASSMl), 
Because  that  booty's  mine.  He's  in  search  of  a  mistress; 
he  has  got  money.    I  already  long  to  fix  my  teeth  in  him. 

SiMO.  {apart).    Are  you  going  to  devour  him  already  ? 

Bal.  {apart).  While  he's  £resh,  while  he's  in  the  habit 
of  giving  away,  while  he's  warm  upon  it,  'tis  proper  for  Urn 
to  be  gobbled  up.  The  good  men  keep  me  poor,  tiie  M 
ones  support  me ;  the  virtuous  are  a  benefit  to  the  puiUie, 
the  debauched  to  myself. 

SiMO.  {aside),  A  mischief  may  the  Gk)ds  send  you;  such 
a  villain  are  you. 

Bal.  {apart).  Yenus  bestows  upon  me  these  blessings, 
when  she  drives  hither  these  haters  of  money,  these  wbo 
quite  long  for  losses,  who  carefully  pamper  themselves  and 
their  youthfiil  age,  eat,  drink,  and  wench.     Of  quite  dif-  . 
ferent  dispositions  are  they  and  jpu. 

Hab.  {to  himself).  I'm  uqw  delaying  myself^  in  not 
kno<^ing  at  this  door,  thal^  I  may  know  whetluBr  sr  no 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Se.  WL  osy  rsm  chb&t.  MP 

Ballio  is  at  home  now.  (CaUs  out^  gaimg  vf  to  the  door.) 
Hallo !  where  are  you  ?    Hallo !  where  are  you  ? 

Bix.  (apart),  Whj^  he's  going  straight  up  towards  my 
house,  i  shall  come  off  finely  loaded  with  plunder  from  this 
^ow ;  I  know  it's  a  lucky  omen  for  me. 

Has.  (knocking  violently  at  the  door).  Does  aay^one  come 
to  open  this  door  ? 

Bai^.  {caGmng  out  to  him).  Hallo !  you  in  the  scarf,  what's 
owing  you'^at  that  house  ? 

HIb.  I'm  engoiring  for  Ballio,  the  procurer,  the  mastev  of 
tiie  house. 

Bax.  Whoever  you  are,  young  man,  mafee  short,  wodb  of 
your  enquiries. 

Hae.  Why  so  ?  Bal.  Because  he  himself  in  person  sees 
you  in  his  presence  hefore  him. 

Hab.  What,  are  you  he  ?  Snco.  You  in  the  scarf,  take 
you  care,  please,  of  some  crooked  misfortune,  and  point  your 
finger^  at  him ;  this  fellow  is  a  procurer. 

Bax.  (pointififf  to  Snco).  And  this  is  an  hcmest  man. 
(To  SiMO.)  But  you,  worthy  fellow,  are  many  a  time  heing 
hunted  sSter  in  the  Eorum  with  noise  enough,  when  you 
haven't  a  groat  in  the  woiid,  unless  this  procurer  here  comes 
to  help  you  a  bit. 

Hab.  But  why  don't  you  address  ;^ourself  to  me  P 

Bai..  I  do  address  you.     What  is  it  you  want  ? 

Hab.  You  to  take  this  money.  (Me  holds  out  the  five 
miiuB.) 

Bax.  (holding  out  Imhand).  Already  have  I  extended  my 
hand,  if  you  are  going  to  give  it. 

Hab.  Take  it ;  here  are  five  picked  minse  of  silver  counted 
out.  (Owes  him  the  moneg.)  This  did  my  master,  Polyma- 
chsBroplagides,  order  me  to  delivirar  to  you,  the  sum  which  he 
was  owing,  and  that  you  were  to  send  Phosniciuin  with  me. 

Bax.  Yoiur  master  ?    Hae.  I  say  to  that  effect. 

Bax.  Th&  Captain  ?    Hab.  I  speak  to  that  effeet. 

Bax.  The  Macedonian  p    Hab.  Such  is  the  faet,  I  say. 

Bax.  Polymacheeroplagides  sent  you  to  me  P 

Bjlb.  You  say  what's  &ct.    Bax.  To  give  me  this  money  ? 

*  Point  ycfwfsnger) — ^Ver.  1144.  Simo  thinks  that  Harpax  has  come  to  be  a 
customer  of  the  procurer,  and  tells  him  to  beware  of  misfortune,  and  rather  to 
piBiiit  tbe  finger  of  scorn  at  saeh  a  worthless  character.  The  middle  finger  was 
iiB«d  finr  that  purpose. 

x2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


808  PBEUDOLITS ;  Act  IV. 

Hab.  If  you  really  are  the  procurer  Ballio. 

Bal.  And  for  you  to  take  away  the  woman  from  me  ? 

Hab.  Even  so.    Bal.  Bid  he  say  that  it  was  Phoenidum? 

Hab.  You  remember  it  exactly.  Bal.  W&it  there;  I'll 
return  to  you  this  instant. 

Hab.  Make  haste,  then,  with  aU  speed,  for  I'm  in  a  hurry. 
'Tis  now  late  in  the  day,  d'ye  see  ? 

Bal.  I  see ;  still  I  wish  to  call  this  person  aside.  Do  you 
only  wait  there ;  I'll  return  to  you  this  instant.  •(JSi?  iakes 
SiMO  on  one  side.)  What's  to  be  done  now,  Simo  ?  "What 
are  we  to  do  P  I'ye  detected  this  feUow  that  has  brought  the 
money  in  the  fact. 

Simo.  How  so  ?  Bal.  And  don't  you  understand  what 
this  plan  is  ? 

Simo.  About  as  much  as  the  most  ignorant  do. 

Bal.  Your  servant,  Pseudolus,  has  sent  this  fellow  on  the 
message,  as  though  he  was  from  the  Macedonian  Captain. 

Simo.  Have  you  got  the  money  from  the  fellow  ? 

Bal.  Do  you  ask  about  that  which  you  see  ?  (^Shotos  the 
jptirse  in  his  hand.) 

Simo.  Harkye,  remember  to  give  me  one  half  of  that 
plunder.     It's  right  that  that  should  be  in  common. 

Bal.  Why,  plague  on't,  'tis  all  your  own^. 

Hab.  {coming  forward  a  step) .  How  soon  are  you  going  to 
attend  to  me  P 

Bal.  I'll  attend  to  jrou,  indeed.  {Aside.)  What  now  do 
you  advise  me  to  do,  Simo  P 

Simo.  (aside).  Let's  make  some  frin  of  this  counterfeit 
spy,  even  until  he  himself  shall  be  sensible  that  he  is  being 
made  a  fool  of. 

Bal.  Follow  me.  {To  Habfax.)  What  have  you  to  say  ? 
You  are  his  servant,  I  suppose  P 

Hab.  Most  certainly.  Bal.  At  what  price  did  he  piu> 
chase  youp 

Hab.  With  the  victory  of  his  prowess  in  battle ;  for  I  waa 
a  very  great  general  at  home  in  my  own  country. 

Bal.  Why,  did  he  ever  capture  a  gaol  in  your  country  ? 

Hab.  If  you  utter  affironting  speeches,  you'll  be  heanng 
them. 

»  FofiroiOTi)— Ver.  1165.  Meaning  that,  no  doubt,  Pseadolas  had  stoteiH 
from  Dim. 


y  Google 


Sc.  yil.  OB,  THE  CHEAT.  809 

Bai.  In  what  time  did  you  come  firom  Sicyon  hither  ? 
Hab.  In  one  day,  by  noon.     Bimo.  Bravo !   By  my  troth, 
you  did  come  quickly ;  how  very  swift  of  foot  this  man  is. 

Bal.  When  you  look  at  his  calves,  you  might  know  that 
he  can  wear  heavy  fetters.  How  say  you — ^were  you  also, 
when  a  child,  in  the  habit  of  sleeping  in  a  cradle  ? 

SiMO.  Of  course.  Bal.  And  were  you,  too,  in  the  habit 
of  doing^ — ^you  know  what  I  mean  ? 

SiMO.  Of  course  he  was  in  the  habit  of  dcmg  <m  other 
children  did? 

Hab.  Are  you  men  in  your  senses?  Bal.  What,  be- 
cause I  asked  you  that  ?  At  night,  when  the  Captain  was 
going  on  guard,  and  when  you  were  going  with  him,  did  the 
sword  of  the  officer  fit  your  scabbard  ? 

Hab.  Go  to  utter  perdition.  Bal.  Tou,  indeed,  shall 
have  the  opportunity  of  going  there  in  good  time  to-day. 

Hab.  But  do  you  bring  out  the  woman  to  me,  or  else  give 
me  back  the  money. 

Bal.  Wait  a  hit.    Hab.  Why  should  I  wait  ? 

Bal.  That  scarf,  tell  me  for  how  much  it  has  been  lent. 

Hab.  What  matters  it  ?  Smo.  How  much  is  the  sword 
hired  for? 

Hab.  These  fellows  surely  stand  in  need  of  hellebore^. 

Bal.  How  now — {Takes  hold  of  him,)  Hab.  (repulsing 
him).  Leave  me  alone. 

Bal.  What  wages  does  that  broad-brimmed  hat  hire  to- 
day for  its  owner  ? 

Hab.  What  owner  ?  Simo.  What  do  the  shoes  ?  *  * 
•        *        #        *        * 

Hab.  What  are  you  dreaming  about?  Why,  I'm  the 
owner  of  all  these  things,  bought  with  my  own  savings. 

Bal.  Those,  you  mean,  which  the  upper  part  of  your 
thighs  supports^. 

'  Tlte  habit  of  doing)— Vbt.  1178.  An  indecent  allusion  is  most  probably  here 
intended.  An  attempt  has  been  made  in  the  translation  to  tarn  it  into  another 
channeL 

*  Bave  need  of  Ae?fo6ore)— Ver.  1184.  Black  hellebore  was  much  esteemed  in 
caws  of  madness.  Harpax  has  really,  from  then:  way  of  proceeding,  some  reason 
to  think  that  the  persons  in  conversation  with  him  are  not  in  their  right  senses. 

»  Tour  thighs  supports) — ^Ver.  1189.  Unless  a  more  gross  allusion  is  in- 
tended, he  means  that  his  "  peculium"  is  not  his  "  savings"  (which  is  the  strict 
meaning  of  the  word),  but  his  back  and  flanks,  which  often  receive  on  them 
the  punishment  of  servitude,  and  which  alone  he  can  call  his  own. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


aiO  ssmamsam.  AiA  W. 


Hab.  (tuide).  These  old  fellows  bttre  beenastoixited;  fliey 
want  themselves  rubbed  down^,  aflber  the  old-£uAiioned  ousbom. 

Bax.  r  faith,  prithee,  aaswer  me  this  truly  and  serioud^, 
which  I  ask  of  jou:  What  are  you  to  earn  ?  f^or  how  trifling 
a  sum  has  Pseudolus  hired  jou  ? 

Hab.  Who  is  this  Pseudolus?  Bal.  Your  tutor,  wiio 
has  instructed  you  in  this  knaveij,  to  take  away  the  woman 
hence  £rom  me  by  stratagem. 

Hab.  What  Pseudolus,  and  what  stratagem  are  you  talk- 
ing to  me  about  P  A  person  that  I  know  of  no  colour,  blaek 
or  white, 

BaIi.  Will  you  not  be  off  from  here?  There's  no  profit  bere 
for  swindlers  to-day.  Therefore  you  may  tell  Pseudolus  that 
another  person  has  earned  off  the  prize — ^the  fijst  Harpax 
that  came. 

Kab.  On  my  word,  I  really  am  that  Harpax. 

BaIi.  Aye,  on  my  word,  you  want  to  be.  This  is  nothing 
more  nor  less  than  a  downright  impostor. 

Hab.  I  have  given  yomrself  the  money,  and  a  while  ago,  im- 
mediafceljr  on  my  arrival,  the  token  to  your  servant ;  a  letter 
sealed  with  the  likeness  of  my  master,  here  before  the  door. 

Bal.  You  gave  a  letter  to  my  servant  ?  What  servant  ? 

Hab.  To  Syrus.  Bal.  (to  Simo).  The  wicked  rogue  has 
assurauoe  enough^.  He  hasn't  contrived  his  knavish  adieme 
amiss.  By  my  faith,  that  whipping-post  of  a  fellow,  Pseud^doB, 
how  cleverly  he  has  managed  his  plans ;  just  as  much  money 
as  the  Captain  owed,  he  has  given  this  man,  and  has  dresaod 
out  the  fellow  that  he  might  take  away  the  woman  *  * 
******  (^^Habpax.)  But  the 
real  Harpax  himself  brought  that  letter  hither  to  me. 

Hab.  My  name  is  Harpax ;  I  am  the  servant  of  the  Haoe- 
donian  Captain.  I'm  doing  nothing  roguishly  or  cheating^, 
nor  do  I  know  or  understand  this  Pseudolus,  what  m(HW 
being  he  is. 

SiMO.  Unless  it's  something  wonderful,  procurer,  you've 
clearly  lost  the  woman. 

1  ThenudoesnObed  (foim>- Ver.  1190.  After  bathing,  the  Greeks  and BiiBins 
vere  in  the  habit  of  being  anointed,  and  then  mbbed  down  with  a  flesh-teflib. 
Probably  the  latter  custom  had  gone  ont  of  fioshion  in  the  time  of  PhntM- 
Harpax  says  that  the  old  men  want  to  be  nibbed  down ;  bat  he  means,  as  uaole 
Bowling  expresses  it  in  Boderick  Bandom,  "  with  an  oaken  towd." 

2  Has  auurance  enoughy^Yet,  1204.  The  note  of  inten^Jgatioo,  in  BitaciHl's 
edition,  after  "  neqaam,"  aeems  to  be  oat  of  place. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


fle.  ¥11.  osy  iKi  «nKiT.  811 


B4]>.  AaemeSfy,  hj  my  tixifch,  I'm  in  dread  of  that  more 
and  mcffe,  wiifiii  I  ooioe  to  hear  his  words.  I'  faith,  that 
SfTOB,  too,  has  already  set  my  heart  a»freeziBg,  that  received 
l£e  token  &om  him. 

Siico.  "Kb  a  wonder  if  it  isn't  Psendolus.  (To  Haxpax.) 
How  now,  you !  of  what  appearance  was  the  person  to  whom 
yim  delivered  the  token  P 

Hab.  a  certain  red-hah«d  fellow^,  pot-bellied,  with  thidc 
caLyes,  swarthy,  with  a  big  head,  sharp  eyes,  red  fisice,  and 
very  large  feet. 

Baij.  Yon  prove  onr  xindoiDg,  when  you  mention  the  feet. 
It  was  Psendolus  himself.  It*s  all  up  with  me.  I'm  dying 
now,  Simo. 

Hab.  By  my  troth,  I  shan't  let  you  die,  unless  the  money's 
returned  me — ^twenty  minae. 

SzBCO.  And  another  twenty  min»  to  me  as  well. 
.  BAii.  (^0  BiMo).  And  is  the  sum  to  be  taken  of  me  that 
I  promised  by  way  of  a  joke  ? 

Siaco.  From  unprincipled  men  it's  proper  for  both  their 
money  and  their  pilunder  to  be  taken. 

BaIt.  At  least  you  might  give  up  Psendolus  to  me. 

SiKO.  I,  give  up  Psendolus  to  you  P  What  has  he  done 
amiss  P  Bid  I  not  tell  you  a  hundred  times  that  you  were 
to  beware  of  him  P 

Bal.  He  has  mined  me.  Simo.  And  on  me  he  has  laid  a 
fine  of  twenty  fair  minse. 

Bax..  What  am  I  to  do  then  P  Hab.  When  you  have  given 
me  the  money — go  hang  yourself. 

BaIi.  The  Gods  confound  you.  (To  Haepax.)  PoUow  me, 
then,  this  way,  please,  to  the  Porum,  that  I  may  pay  you. 

Bab.  I  follow  you.    Simo.  What  am  I  to  do  P 

Baii.  Strangers  I'll  pay  at  once;  to-morrow  I'll  settle 
with  fellow-Qitizens.  Pseudolus  has  been  holding  a  council- 
general^  4s^^-*  ^y  ^^®'  ^  sending  that  fellow  to  me  to-day 

1  Red'haireafeU(ni))--Yer.  121S.  Some  Commentators  fancy  that  in  these  lines 
FkatnB  intends  to  give  a  description  of  himself.  If  so,  he  certainly  was  not  so 
handsome  as  he  was  ingenious. 

2  A  emmeH-^mesnd  >- Ver.  1282.'^ "  Centnriata  habnit  comitia."  Literally,*'  has 
hdd  l&e  c<miitia  eentnriata.''  These  were  the  largest  and  most  important  meetings 
of  the  centuries  or  classes  of  all  the  Boman  citizens,  who  there  met  togetherfor 
the  parpose  of  electrng  the  superior  ma^rates  by  their  votes,  ma£ing  laws, 
ded^g  upon  war,  and  in  kter  times,  of  concluding  peace  with  foreign  nations. 


y  Google 


312  psBUDOLirs;  Act'V'. 

to  carry  off  the  woman.  (lb  Habpax.)  Do  you  follow  me. 
{To  the  Audience.)  Now  don't  you  be  expecting  that  I  shall 
be  returning  home  this  way.  As  matters  stand,  I've  deter- 
mined to  go  through  the  alleys. 

Hab.  If  you  had  walked  at. the  rate  you  talk,  you'd  by 
this  have  been  at  the  Forum. 

Bal.  I'm  determined  to  make  this,  instead  of  my  birthday, 
my  dying  day.  {Ecdt  Ballio,  'Slj^jbj^IlS.  following. 

Scene  YIII. — Simo,  alone, 

SiMO.  I've  touched  this  fellow  handsomely,  and  cleverly 
has  my  servant  mcmaged  his  adversary.  Wow  am  I  resolved 
to  Ke  in  ambush  for  Pseudolus  in  a  different  manner  to  what's 
done  in  other  plays,  where  people  lie  in  wait  with  goads  or 
whips.  Without  revenge  wfll  I  at  once  pay  down  the  twenty 
minsB  which  I  promised  if  he  should  effect  it.  I'll  carry 
them  to  him  of  my  own  accord.  This  creature  is  very  clever, 
very  cunning,  very  artful.  Pseudolus  has  surpassed  the 
Trojan  stratagem^  and  Ulysses  too.  iN'ow  I'll  be  off  in-doors. 
I'll  take  out  the  money ;  I'U  lie  in  ambush  for  Pseudolus. 
{Ooes  into  his  house.) 

Act  V. — Scene  I. 
Mnter  Psetjdoltjs,  drtmh,  with  a  chaplet  on  his  head. 

PsETJD.  {staggering).  How's  this?  And  is  it  the  fact? 
Peet — are  you  standmg  or  not  ?  Or  is  it  this  you  want,  some 
one  to  pick  me  up  here  as  I  lie  ?  But,  by  my  faith,  if  I  do  fall 
down,  yours  wiU  be  the  fault.  Are  you  going  to  go  ?  Heigho  I 
I  must  wait  upon  myself.  This  is  the  great  fault  in 
wine  ;  it  first  lays  hold  of  the  feet ;  'tis  a  cunning  wrestler. 
By  my  faith,  assuredly  am  I  now  come  off  right  well  drenched ; 
with  such  exquisite  viands,  with  such  becoming  elegance, 
in  such  a  delightful  place,  have  we  been  delightftdly  enter- 
tained. "What's  the  need  for  me  to  make  much  prosing? 
This  is  the  thing  for  a  man,  an  object  for  him  to  pass  his 
life  for  ;  here  are  all  pleasures  and  all  delights.  I  think  that 
the  ecstasy  is  equal  to  that  of  the  Deities,  when  the  lover 

As  these  important  things  were  done  with  dae  deliberation,  Ballio  barrows  a 
figure  thence^  and  means  that  Pseudolus  has  been  giving  all  attention  to  tke 
promotion  of  the  success  of  the  plot  which  he  has  laid  against  him. 

1  The  Trojan  stratagem) — ^Ver.  1244.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  contnTaaee 
of  the  Wooden  Horse,  which  was  first  suggested  bj  Ulysses. 


y  Google 


f 


Sc.  I .  OS^  THE  CHEAT.  313 

embraces  Ills  mistress,  when  he  places  lip  to  lip,  when  melting 
kisses  are  exchanged,  when  breast  is  pressed  to  breast,  or 
else,  if  they  please,  they  are  locked  in  strict  embrace ;  then 
for  your  most  loving  mistress,  with  her  white  hand,  to  be 
pledging  you  in  the  luscious  goblet,  for  no  one  there  to  be 
disagreable  to  another,  for  no  one  to  be  indulging  in  silly 
conversation ;  for  unguents  and  perfumes,  ribbons^  and  fes- 
tive wreaths,  to  be  provided  in  profusion ;  and  for  the  rest 
of  the  entertainment,  too,  to  be  provided  in  no  niggardly  style. 
That  no  one  may  have  to  question  me  then,  in  this  manner 
bave  myself  and  my  yoimg  master  been  spending  this  day  in 
jollity.  After  I  had  fulfilled  all  my  task  just  as  I  intended,  the 
enemy  put  to  flight,  I  was  leaving  them  reclining  and  drinking, 
each  lover  with  his  mistress,  and  my  own  mistress  there  as  wefl, 
indulging  heart  and  soul.  But  after  I  had  risen,  they  begged 
me  to  dance.  After  this  fashion  (he  dances)  did  I  show  my- 
self off  there  quite  charmingly,  in  a  master-like  style,  to  wit ; 
for  I  am  thoroughly  acquainted  withrthe  Ionian  step.  Thus, 
clad  in  my  little  mantle,  full  of  fun,  I  was  stepping  about, 
this  way.  Some  of  them  clapped  me,  others  cried  out  for 
me  to  OBxice  again.  In  that  same  lonicm  fashion  once  again 
did  I  begin  to  take  a  twm ;  I  presented  myself  to  my  mis- 
tress, that  she  might  caress  me ;  o«  I  was  pirouetting,  down 
I  tumbled :  that  was  the  funeral  dirge^  for  my  sport.     And 

80,  while  I  was  a-struggling  to  get  up,  near ,  almost,  I 

mean,  1  soiled  my  mantle.  Then,  by  my  troth,  I  was  the 
cause  of  plenteous  mirth.  A  goblet  was  presented  me  on 
account  of  my  fall.  Forthwith  I  changed  my  mantle,  and 
put  on  this ;  thence  have  I  come  hither,  that  I  might  get 
rid  of  my  surfeit.  Now  I'm  going  to  my  old  master,  to 
put  him  in  mind  of  our  bargain.  Open— open  the  door. 
Hallo,  there !  Tell  Simo,  somebody,  that  I'm  here.  (^Knocks 
at  the  door  qfSiMo's  house.) 

» mbbonsy—Ver,  1265.  "  Lemniscos."  According  to  Festus,  "  lemnisci"  were 
(mrple  ribbons  wrapped  round  one  another,  and  han^ng  down  from  the  wreaths 
which  the  aneieuts  wore  on  their  heads  at  their  entertainments.  From  a  passage 
in  Pliny  it  would  appear  that  these  ribbons  were  in  general  only  worn  by  persons 
of  distinction.   Tbe  translation  of  1. 1260  has  necessarily  been  somewhat  modified. 

«  Thefimend  dirge)— Yw.  1278.  The  word  "  Naenia,"  or  "  nenia,"  has  several 
meanings,  among  others,  that  of  "  a  funeral  dirge,"  which  is  probably  its  meaning 
here.  Pseodolus  intends  to  say  that  his  fall,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  put  an 
end  to  bis  enjoying  the  amusement  of  dancing  any  further. 


y  Google 


8U  flBOHraMnm;  AetT. 


Snco.  The  voice  of  a  rascally  fellow  is  caliixig  me  cftffc  of 
doors.  (Se  stares  at  PssiTBOiiTrs.)  But  what's  this  ?  How^s 
this  ?    What  is  it  I  see  in  this  guise  P 

PsEin).  {stagaervng  towards  kim).  Tour  own  Faeudohn, 
dnmk,  with  a  chaplet  on^. 

Snco.  (to  himself).  By  my  troth,  this  is  free  and  easy 
infeed.  But  see  his  attitude ;  is  he  on  my  account  a  bit 
the  more  afraid  P  I'm  thinking  whether  I  shall  address 
him  harshly  or  kindly.  But  this  (pointing  to  a  purse  in  Ms 
hand)  that  I'm  carrying  forbids  me  to  use  rough  measures 
towards  him  just  now ;  if  there's  any  hope  for  me,  centred 
in  this. 

PsBtrn.  {staggeritM  wp  to  Simo).  A  worthless  fellow  is 
coming  to  meet  the  best  of  men. 

SiHO.  May  the  Gods  bless  you,  Pseudolus.  (PsBunoiirs 
eructates^    !Poh !  go  to  utter  perdition.    {Twihes  him  away.) 

PsErn.  But  why  should  I  have  that  mischance  befal  me? 

Simo.  Why,  the  plague,  in  your  drunkenness,  are  you 
eructating  in  my  face  P 

PsEiTD.  Hold  me  up,  steadily ;  take  care  that  I  donH  M. 
Don't  you  see  me,  how  drenched  and  soaking  I  am  P 

Simo.  What  impudence  is  this,  for  you  to  be  goinj;  about 
this  way  in  broad  daylight,  drunk,  with  a  chaplet  on  r 

PsEXTD.  Such  is  my  pleasure.  (Eructates  offom.)  Simo.  Why 
your  pleasure  ?  Do  you  persist  in  eructating  in  my  very  &ce? 

PsBTJi).  An  eructation  is  comforting  to  me ;  do  indulge  me 
in  it ;  do  but  stand  off. 

Simo.  Por  my  part  I  really  do  believe,  you  villain,  tha*  yau 
are  able  in  a  single  hour  to  drink  up  four  right  plentaful 
vintages  of  the  Massic  hills^. 

1  Enter  Simo) — ^AIl  the  former  editions  introduced  Ballio  in  this  scene,  and  jot 
in  his  month  much  of  what  really  belongs  to  Simo.  The  astnte  Bitschel  saw  tfae 
absurdity  of  this,  and  has  rectified  the  text  accordingly. 

2  W^  a  chaplei  on) — ^Ver.  1287.  Pseudolus  lays  some  stress  on  this,  as  slaw 
were  not  permitted  to  wear  chaplets.  He,  however,  {Mnesnmes  on  the  &at  of 
Simo  being  in  his  debt. 

>  The  Mamc  AiZ&)— Ver.  1303.  The  Massic  hills  were  situate  in  the  Faknim 
district,  in  the  territory  of  Ki^les.  The  Massic  or  Falemian  wine  held  the  seoond 
rank  among  the  choice  wines  of  the  Romans.  It  was  considered  fit  for  dnsiaag 
when  ten  yean  old,  and  might  be  used  up  to  the  twentieth  year,  bat  when  lof^ 
longer  was  considered  to  beiiyurious  to  thenenrous  system. 


y  Google 


Sc.  H,  OM,  «B»  tomuT.  aX5 


FsBVP.  ▲  winter  liou]4,  add.  Sooio.  Y<m  don't  xemind 
me  amias.  Bat  tell  me,  however,  whence  I  am  to  say  that 
j&a  are  brii^ging  jma  deepty-Jaden  bark  P 

PsEXTD.  I've  just  been  having  a  thorongh  boot  with  your 
scm.  Xhat  damsel  is  the  cause  of  this ;  along  with  your  son 
she  is  carousing,  a  £ree  woman. 

SiMO.  Xou  are  a  most  worthless  feUow. 

PsEun.  But,  Simo,  wasn't  Ballio  nicely  diddled?  How 
well  I  carried  what  I  told  you  into  effect. 

SiHO.  I  know  everything  in  its  order,  just  as  you  managed 
each  particular. 

PssjTi).  Why,  then,  do  you  hesitate  to  pay  me  the  money? 

SiMO.  You  ask  what's  just,  I  coniGass;  take  it.  (Gwes 
Mm  Hhe  money.) 

P^vi).  3\it  you  declared  that  you  wouldn't  give  it  me ; 
md  stiU  do  you  give  it. 

SiMQ.  Are  you  laughing  at  me  ?  What  ?  Are  you  going 
to  take  this  &am  your  master,  PseudolusP 

PsExri).  With  most  willing  heart  asid  soul. 

81MO.  Prithee,  can't  you  venture  to  make  me  an  abate- 
ment of  some  portion  of  this  money  ? 

Pssim.  No :  you  shall  say  thai;  I  recdh/  am  a  jsreedy  fellow ; 
for  yon  shall  never  be  richer  by  a  single  coin  of  this  money. 

SiHO.  Well,  I  really  didn't  suppose  that  it  would  ever 
eome  to  pass  with  me  that  I  should  be  bo^in^  of  you. 

PsBiJD.  Load  your  shoulder  with  it,  and  follow  me  this 
wray.     {Fomtiuff.) 

Simo.  I— load  myself  with  that  ?  PsEun.  You  wiU  load 
yourself,  I'm  sure. 

Simo.  What  am  I  to  do  to  this  fellow  ?  Doesn't  he,  con- 
trary to  my  expectation,  take  my  money,  and  then  laugh  at  me  ? 

PsBun.  Woe  to  the  conquered^ :  turn  your  back,  then. 
{Tumg  him  round.) 

1  A  wittier  Aow*)— Ver.  1304.  The  Romans  divided  the  light  part  of  the  day 
nto  twelve  hours;  conseqaently,  the  hours  of  the  -winter  days  were  mudi 
shorter  than  the  sununer  ones. 

2  Woe  to  the  conquered) — ^Ver.  1322.  The  following  was  the  ori^n  of  this 
expression.  When  the  Romans  capitulated  to  the  Gauls  under  Brennus,  a  thou- 
sand pounds  weight  of  gold  were  to  be  their  ransom.  When  it  was  about  to  be 
weighed  out,  the  Gauls  brought  false  weights.  On  this  the  Roman  officer  refused 
to  us*  them,  whereupon  Brennus  threw  his  sword  into  the  scale,  and  exclaimed 
"  Vae  victis  I"  "  Woe  to  the  conquered  I"  The  expression  afterwards  became  pro- 
verbial, as  signifying  that  no  mercy  was  to  be  expected. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


316  MEUBOLTIS.  Act  Y. 

SiMO.  Oil !  oil !  desist.    Let  me  fdone — I'm  in  pain. 

Pseud.  Were  you  not  in  pain,  I  should  be  in  pain ;  and 
no  compassion  would  you  have  had  for  my  back,  if  I  hadn't 
this  day  managed  this. 

SiMO.  There  will  be  an  opportunity  for  me  to  be  revenged 
on  you,  if  I  live. 

rsETJD.  Why  do  you  threaten  ?  I've  got  a  back  of  my  own. 

SiMO.  Very  well,  then.  {Moves  as  if  going,)  PsEun.  Come 
you  back  then. 

SiMO.  Why  come  back?  Psettd.  Only  come  you  back; 
you  shall  not  be  deceived. 

SiMO.  (twrns  roimd),  1  am  come  back.  Pseud.  Come  and 
have  a  dnnk  with  me. 

SiMO.  What — I,  come?  Pseud.  Do  as  I  ask  you.  Kyou 
do  come,  I'll  let  you  take  half  of  this,  or  even  more.  {Points 
to  the  purse  m  his  hcmd,) 

SiMO.  I'll  come  ;  take  me  where  you  like,  Pseudolus. 

Pseud.  How  now  then  ?  Are  you  at  all  angry  with  me  or 
with  your  son,  Simo,  on  account  of  these  matters  ? 

SiMO.  Certainly,  not  at  all.  Pseud,  {jgomg).  Step  this 
way  now. 

SiMO.  I  follow  you.  But  why  don't  you  invite  the  Spec- 
tators as  well  ?  i 

Pseud,  {tv/rni/ng  roimd),  I'  faith,  they  are  not  in  the  habit 
of  inviting  me ;  and,  therefore,  I  don't  invite  them.  But  if 
you  (addressing  the  Audience)  are  willing  to  applaud  and 
approve  of  this  company  of  players,  and  this  Comedy,  I 
invite  you  for  to-morrow^ 

*  Invite  you  for  to-morrow)— Ver,  1336.  At  the  Megalensian  games  the  third 
day  was  especially  set  apart  for  scenic  representations.  Probably,  as  the  present 
Play  w{»  acted  there,  it  was  on  that  occasion  annonnced  for  repetition  on  the  snc- 
ceeding  day.  It  may  not  be  inapposite  here  to  remark  that  Cicero,  in  his  Treatise 
on  Old  Age,  informs  ns  that  Plantns  entertained  a  very  high  opinion  of  this 
Pky ;  while  Anlus  Gellins  styles  it  *''  Gomoedia  festissima,"  "  a  most  entertaining 
Comedy."  Many  of  the  modem  Commentators  haye  pronounced  it  to  be  the  most 
meritorions  of  the  Plays  of  Plantns. 


y  Google 


OR,  THE  TWIN-BROTHERS. 


Bramatis  ^nsonar. 

Menaohhub  of  Epdamnns. 

Menjbgbhus  Sosicles,  his  twin-brother. 

Peniculus,  a  Parasite. 

MessbniOi  the  serrant  of  Meniechmas  Sosicles. 

Ctundbus,  a  Cook. 

An  Old  Man,  £[ither-in-law  of  Mensechmiis  Sosicles. 

ADOCTOB. 

The  Wife  of  Kenjeobmus  of  Epidanmus. 
EBonuM,  a  Gonrtesan. 
Kaid-Sebvant  of  Erotiam. 

^Mie.— Epdamnns,  a  city  of  Illyricum.    The  house  of  MENiBCHMUS  of  Epidam- 
QQS  is  on  one  nde  of  the  street,  and  that  of  Ebotxum  on  the  other. 


y  Google 


THE   SUBJECT. 


MoscHDS,  a  merchant  of  STracuse^  had  two  twin-cfons  who  exactly  resembled 
each  other.  One  of  these,  whose  name  was  MensBchmns,  when  a  chHdi  accom- 
panied his  father  to  Tarentum,  at  which  jdaoe  he  was  stolen  and  carried  away  to 
Epidamnns,  where  in  course  of  time  he  has  married  a  wealthy  wife.  Disagree- 
ments, however,  arising  with  her,  he  forms  anac^pxaintance  with  the  Courtesan 
Erotium,  and  is  in  the  habit  of  presenting  her  with  clothes  and  jewels  which  he 
pilfers  from  his  wife.  The  original  name  of  the  other  twin-brother  was 
Sosicles,  bat  on  the  loss  of  MenaehnniS)  the  latter  name  has  been  anbstitated  by 
their  grandfather  for  Sosicles,  in  remembrance  of  the  lost  child.  Menaechmns 
Sosicles,  on  growing  to  mflohocNi,  determines  to  seek  his  lost  brother.  Hariog 
wandered  for  six  years,  he  arrives  at  Epidanmos^  attended  hy  his  servant, 
Messenio.  In  oonseqnenoe  of  his  resemblance  to  his  brother,  many  carious  and 
laughable  mistakes  happen  between  him  and  the  CourtesanErotium,  the  wife  of 
Menaechmus  of  Epidamnus,  the  Cook  Cylindrus,  the  Parasite  Peniculus,  the 
father-in-law  of  MensechmiBi  of  Epidamnus,  and  lastiy  Messenie  himself.  At 
length,  through  the  agency  of  the  latter,  the  brothefs  reeogmsse  each  other;  on 
which  Messenio  receives  his  liberty,  and  MMiacfamus  of  Bpiihwanai  resolves  to 
make  sale  of  his  possessions  and  to  return  to  Syracuse,  his  native  place. 


y  Google 


MENiECHMI; 
OR,  THE  TWIN -BROTHERS. 


THE  ACROSTIC  ARGUMENT. 
[Supposed  to  have  been  written  bj  Priscian  the  QnunmarUn.] 
A  Sicilian  merchant  {MerccUor)  who  had  two  sons,  on  one  being  stolen  inm 
him  {E%),  ended  his  life.  As  a  name  {Nomen)  for  him  who  is  at  home,  hia 
Internal  grandfather  (^Avua)  gives  him  that  of  Mentechmas  instead  of  Sosicles. 
And  (Et)  he,  as  soon  as  he  is  grown  np,  goes  to  seek  his  brother  abont  (Circwny 
allcooBtries.  At  last  he  comes  to  Epidamnns ;  hither  {Hue)  the  one  that  was 
stolen  has  been  carried.  AH  think  that  the  stranger,  Mensechmas  (Mmank- 
iRum),  is  their  fellow-citizen,  and  address  him  (JEtatt)  at  sack;  Coortenm^ 
wife,  and  father-in-law.  There  (Jhi)  at  last  the  brothers  mntaally  recognise 
each  other. 


THE   PEOLOaUE. 

Ik  the  first^  place  now,  Spectators,  at  the  eommeiicement, 
do  I  wish  health  and  happiness^  to  myself  and  to  you.  I 
bring  you  Plautus,  with  my  tongue,  not  with  my  hand :  I  beg 
that  you  will  receive  him  with  favouring  ears.  Now  learn  the 
argument,  and  give  your  attention ;  in  as  few  words  as  pos* 
sible  wiU  I  be  brief.  And,  in  fact,  this  subject  is  a  Greek 
(me ;  still,  it  is  not  an  Attic^,  but  a  Sicilian  one.  But  in 
i^eir  Comedies  the  poets  do  this;  they  feign  that  all  the 
business  takes  place  at  Athens*,  in  order  that  it  may  appear 

1  in  ihefimy^Ver,  1.  This  Play  was  the  fonndation  of  Sfaakspeare*8  Comedy 
of  Errors.    See  the  Note  at  the  end  of  the  Play. 

'HecMandluiippme$$y-\et.  1.  "  Satetem  propitiam."  litenOly,  "propi- 
tiBos  health/ 

^Itis  not  an  AtHey^Vet,  7.  *'  Gracissat— Atticissat--Sicdis8at."  Perhaps 
these  words  might  be  mora  Uterally  tCBOslated,  ^*  Grsecize,''  ^  Attidse,**  and 
"Sidlicize." 

^  At  ^ti&ens)— Ver.  10.  As  the  majority  of  the  Greek  Oomic  Poets  were  either 
natrres  of,  or  residents  at,  Athens,  they  wonld  naturally  take  that  eztensire, 
opulent,  and  bustling  dty  as  the  scene  of  many  of  their  Comedies.  In  the  time 
of  Plantns,  Greek  was  yet  the  kngoage  of  the  Sicilians.  In  €ioero*8  time  the 
laogoage  of  the  Sicilians  was  &  miztnre,  partly  Greek  and  partly  Latin.  Apnleins 
informs  us  that  in  his  day  they  spoke  Gre^  Latin,  and  a  language  peculiar  to 
themselyes,  called  the  Sicilian. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


320  MSNJECHMI ; 

the  more  Grrecian  to  you.  I  will  not  tell  you  that  this  matier 
happened  anywhere  except  where  it  is  said  to  have  happened. 
This  has  heen  my  preface  to  the  suhject  of  this  play.  Now 
will  I  give  the  subject,  meted  out  to  you,  not  in  a  measure, 
nor  yet  in  a  threefold  measure^,  but  in  the  granary  itself; 
so  great  is  my  heartiness  in  telling  you  the  plot. 

There  was  a  certain  aged  man,  a  merchant  at  Syracuse^ ;  to 
him  two  sons  were  bom,  twins,  children  so  like  in  appearance 
that  their  own  foster-mother^,  who  gave  the  breaat,  was 
not  able  to  distinguish  them,  nor  even  the  mother  herself  who 
had  given  them  birth ;  as  a  person,  indeed,  informed  me  who 
had  seen  the  children ;  I  never  saw  them,  let  no  one  of  you 
fancy  so.  After  the  children  were  now  seven  years  old,  the 
father  freighted  a  large  ship  with  much  merchandize.  The 
father  put  one  of  the  twins  on  board  the  ship,  and  took  him 
away,  together  with  himself,  to  traffic  at  Tarentum* ;  the  other 
one  he  left  with  his  mother  at  home.  By  accidenl,  there  were 
games  at  Tarentum  when  he  came  there :  many  persons,  as 
generally  hxppens  at  the  games,  had  met  together ;  the  child 
strayed  away  there  from  his  father  among  the  people.  A  cer- 
tain merchant  of  Epidamnus  was  there;  he  picked  up  the 
child,  and  carried  it  away  to  Epidamnus^.  But  its  father,  afiber 
he  had  lost  the  child,  took  it  heavily  to  heart,  and  through 
grief  at  it  he  died  a  few  days  after  at  Tarentum.  Now,  after 
news  reached  the  grandfather  of  the  children  at  home  about 
this  matter,  how  that  one  of  the  children  had  been  stolen,  the 
grandfather  changed  the  name  of  that  other  twin.  So  much 
aid  he  love  that  one  which  had  been  stolen,  that  he  gave  his 

>  A  threefold  measure) — ^Ver.  15.  "  Trimodiua."  This  was  a  measnre  for 
corn,  consisting  of  three  "  modii,"  which  last  contained  abont  a  peck  of  En^ish 
measure. 

^  At  Syracuse) — ^Ver.  17.  Syracuse  was  the  principal  citj  of  Sicily,  &med  for 
its  commerce  and  opnlenoe. 

»  Foster'tnoOiery-Ver,  19.    "  Mater."   Literally,  "  mother." 

*  At  Tarentum)— Ver,  27.  Tarentum  was  a  city  of  Calabria,  in  the  south  of 
Italy.    It  was  said  to  have  been  founded  by  the  LacedsBmoniaos. 

^  To  Ejndamnm) — ^Ver.  33.  Epidamnus,  or  Epidamnum,  was  a  town  of  Maee> 
donia,  situate  on  the  Adriatic  Sea.  It  was  much  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of 
transit  to  the  opposite  shores  of  Italy.  It  received  its  ori^al  name  from  Epidaminifi, 
one  of  its  kings ;  but  on  falling  into  the  possession  of  the  Romans,  they  changed  its 
name,  as  we  are  informed  by  Pliny  the  Elder,  into  Dyrrachium,  from  a  superstitioos 
notion  that  when  they  were  going  to  "  Epidamnum,"  they  were  gomg  **to  tiwr 
loss,"  as  "  danmum"  is  the  Latin  for  "  loss"  or  "  destruction,"  and  Wi,  or  "qsi," 
is  the  Greek  preposition  signifying  "  to."    Cicero  was  banished  to  this  place. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


OB,  THE  TWnr-BBOTHEBS.  321 

name  to  the  one  that  was  at  home.  That  you  may  not  mis- 
take hereafter,  I  tell  you  then  this  beforehand ;  the  name  of 
both  the  twin-brothers  is  the  same.  He  gave  the  same 
name  of  MensBchmus  to  thU  one  as  the  other  had ;  and  by  the 
same  name  the  grandfather  himself  was  called.  I  remember 
bis  name  the  more  easily  for  the  reason  that  I  saw  him  cried 
wifh  much  noise^.  Now  must  I  speed  back  on  foot  to  Epi- 
damnus,  that  I  maj  exactly  disclose  this  matter  to  you.  K 
any  one  of  you^  wishes  anjrthing  to  be  transacted  for  him  at 
Epidamnus,  command  me  boldly  and  speak  out ;  but  on  these 
terms,  that  he  give  me  the  means  by  which  it  may  be  transacted 
for  him.  For  unless  a  person  gives  the  money,  he  will  be  mis- 
taken ;  (in  a  htver  tone)  except  that  he  who  does  give  it  will  be 
very  much  more  mistaken^.  But  I  have  returned  to  that  place 
whence  I  set  forth,  and  yet  I  am  standing  in  the  self-same  spot. 
This  person  of  Epidamnus,  whom  I  mentioned  just  now,  that 
stole  that  other  twin  child,  had  no  children,  except  his  wealth. 
He  adopted  as  his  son  the  child  so  carried  off,  and  gave  him 
a  well-portioned  wife,  and  made  him  his  heir  when  he  himself 
died.  For  as,  by  chance,  he  was  going  into  the  country,  when 
it  had  rained  heavily,  entering,  not  far  from  the  city,  a  rapid 
stream,  in  its  rapidity*  it  threw  the  ravisher  of  the  child  off 
bis  legs,  and  hurried  the  man  away  to  great  and  grievous 
destruction.  And  so  a  very  large  fortune  fell  to  that  youth. 
Here  (pointing  to  the  house)  does  the  stolen  twin  now  dwell. 
Now  that  twin,  who  dwells  at  Syracuse,  has  come  this  day  to 
Epidamnus  with  his  servant  to  make  enquiry  for  this  own 
twin-brother  of  his.  This  is  the  city  of  Epidamnus  while 
this  play  is  acting;  when  another  shall  be  acted,  it  wiU 
become  another  town ;  just  as  our  companies,  too,  are  wont 
to  be  shifted  about.  The  same  person  now  acts  the  procurer, 
now  the  youth,  now  the  old  man,  the  pauper,  the  beggar,  the 
king,  the  parasite,  the  soothsayer    *  *  *  * 

•  •  •*###* 

*  Cried  tmth  much  noUey—Yw,  48.  Probablj  the  word  ^  flagitarier'*  means 
that  the  lost  chfld  was  cried  pubficly  by  the  "pwBCO,"  or  "crier." 

"^JfoHffOM  ofyouy-Y^T,  51.  This  is  said  facetiotislj  to  the  Audience  for 
the  purpose  of  catching  a  Uingh. 

'  Venf  muck  ntore  misto2»»>— Ver.  56.  Because  he  will  keep  the  money  and 
not  eiecute  the  commission. 

*  In  its  rapUHtyy^Ytr,  65.  He  means  to  pun  upon  the  words  "  rapidns,** 
"rapid"  or  "carrying  away,"  and  "raptor,"  the  "carrier  away"  or  "ravisher." 
"  The  stream  carried,  away  the  carrier  away." 

Y 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


822  VXSMCfBMl ;  Act  I. 

I 

Act  I.  —  SoBira  I. 

IkUer  Penioitlits. 

Pbk.  The  young  men  have  given  me  the  name  of  Peni- 
culus^,  for  this  reason,  because  when  I  eat,  I  wipe  the  tables 
dean.  •**•***•# 
The  persons  who  bind  captives  with  chains,  and  who  put 
fetters  upon  runaway  slaves,  act  very  foolishly,  in  my  opimon 
at  least.  For  if  bad  usage  is  added  to  his  misfortune  for  a 
wretched  man,  the  greater  is  his  inclination  to  run  away  and 
to  do  amiss.  For  by  some  means  or  other  do  they  release  them- 
selves from  the  chains ;  while  thus  fettered,  they  either  wear 
away  a  link  with  a  file,  or  else  with  a  stone  they  knock  out 
the  nail ;  'tis  a  mere  tnfle  this.  He  whom  you  wish  to  keep 
securely  that  he  may  not  run  away,  with  meat  and  with  drmk 
ought  he  to  be  chained ;  do  you  bind  down  the  mouth  of  a 
man  to  a  ftdl  table.  So  long  as  you  give  him  what  to  eat  and 
what  to  drink  at  his  own  pleasure  m  abundance  every  day, 
i*  faith  he'll  never  run  away,  even  if  he  has  committed  an 
offence  that's  capital ;  easily  will  you  secure  him  so  long  as 
you  shall  bind  him  with  such  chains.  So  very  supple  are 
these  chains  of  food,  the  more  you  stretch  them  so  much 
the  more  tightly  do  they  bind.  But  now  I'm  going  directly 
to  Mensechmus ;  whither  for  this  long  time  I  have  been  sen- 
tenced, thither  of  my  own  accord  I  am  going,  that  he  mav 
enchain  me.  For,  by  my  troth,  this  man  does  not  nourish 
persons,  but  he  quite  rears  and  reinvigorates  them ;  no  one 
administers  medicine  more  agreably.  Such  is  thie  young 
man ;  himself  with  a  very  well-stocked  larder,  }\e  gives  dmners 
fit  for  Ceres* ;  so  does  he  heap  the  tables  up,  and  piles  so  vast 
of  dishes  does  he  arrange,  you  must  stand  on  your  couch  if  you 
wish  for  anything  at  the  top.  But  I  have  now  had  an  interval 
these  many  days,  while  I've  been  lording  it  at  home  all  along 

^  Name  of  PmiculMy^yer,  77.  This  word  meaas  '^a  sponga*'  which  wis 
fastened  to  a  stick,  and  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing  tables.  Ho  mp 
that  the  jonths  so  called  him  from  his  own  propensity  for  clearing  the  tables  cf 
their  provisions.  The  tails  of  foxes  and  of  oxen  were  also  used  aa  "penienlL* 
dolman  and  Warner,  in  their  translations  of  Terence  and  Flantos,  render  the  word 
"  dishclont." 

2  Fit  for  Cere*)— Ver.  101.  As  Ceres  was  the  Goddess  of  com  wd  «» 
^▼er  of  j^lentj,  the  entertainmentff  in  honor  of  her  wonld  of  course  bo  ntf 
bounteoos. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THX  TWIK-SBOTHEBS.  828 

together  with  my  dear  ones^ ; — {or  nothing  do  I  eat  or  pnr- 
chase  but  what  it  is  most  dear.  But  inasmuch  as  dear  ones, 
when  they  are  provided,  are  in  the  habit  of  forsaking  us,  I  am 
now  paying  him  a  yisit.  But  his  door  is  opening ;  and  see,  I 
perceive  Mensachmus  himself;  he  is  coming  out  of  doors. 

ScBKB  il. — JStUer  Mek^ghmtjs  of]Epidamnu8,Jrom  his  house. 

Mbk.  (speaking  at  the  door  to  his  Wipe  within).  Unless 
you  were  worthless,  unless  you  were  foolish,  unless  you  were 
stark  wild  and  an  idiot,  that  which  you  see  is  disagreable  to 
yom*  husband,  you  would  deem  to  be  so  to  yoursen  as  well. 
Moreover,  if  after  this  day  you  do  any  such  thing  to  me,  1*11 
force  you,  a  divorced  woman,  turned  out  of  my  doors  to  go  visit 
your  father.  Eor  as  often  as  I  wish  to  go  out  of  the  house, 
you  are  detaining  me,  calling  me  back,  asking  me  questions ; 
whither  I  am  going,  what  matter  I  am  about,  what  business 
I  am  transacting,  what  I  am  wanting,  what  I  am  bringing, 
what  I  have  been  doing  out  of  doors  ?  I've  sv/rely  brought 
home  a  custom-house  officer^  as  my  wife;  so  much  am  I 
obliged  to  disclose  all  my  business,  whatever  I  have  done  and 
am  doiQg.  I*ve  had  you  hitherto  indulged  too  much.  Now, 
therefore,  I'll  tell  you  how  I  am  about  to  act.  Since  I  find 
you  handsomely  in  maids,  provisions,  wool,  gold  trinkets, 
garments,  and  purple,  and  you  are  wanting  in  nought,  you'll 
beware  of  a  mischief  if  you're  wise ;  you'll  leave  off  watching 
your  husband.  (In  a  lower  voice.)  And  therefore,  that  you 
mayn't  be  watching  me  in  vain,  for  your  pains  I  shall  find  me  a 
mistress  to-day,  and  invite  her  to  dinner  somewhere  out  of  doors. 

Pen.  (apart).  This  fellow  pretends  that  he's  upbraiding 
his  wife,  hut  he's  addressing  myself;  for  if  he  does  dme  out  of 
doors,  he  really  is  punishing  me,  not  his  wife. 

Men.  (to  himself).  Hurra!  I'  troth,  by  my  taunts  I've 
driven  my  wife  from  the  door  at  last.    Where  now  are  your 

1  With  my  dear  ofMff)— -Ver.  105.  **  Onm  cans  meis."  When  ho  says  thk,  it 
might  he  supposed  that  he  is  meaning  his  fkaaij  bj  these  words  of  endearment. 
The  next  line  shows  that  such  is  not  the  case,  fle  has  had  a  snpplj  of  victuals, 
parchased  at  his  own  cost ;  he  has  been  consnming  these  victuals,  and  right  dear 
(carianmum)  has  he  found  them.  He  is  now  coming  out  to  look  for  Menaeehmus, 
and  to  make  up  for  lost  time. 

*  A  custom-house  officer) — ^Ver.  117.  The  "  portitores"  examined  those  who 
landed  or  embarked  at  any  port,  to  see  that  they  had  no  merehandize  about  them 
which  had  not  paid  duty.  They  also  made  the  necessary  enquiries  who  the  par- 
ties were,  and  what  was  their  destination.  He  compares  his  wife  to  one  of  these 
inqoistrre  pearsoDfl. 

t2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


324  HSlTiBOHMI;  Act  I. 

intriguing  husbands  ?  Why  do  they  hesitate,  all  returning 
thanks,  to  bring  presents  to  me  who  have  fought  so  gallantly  ? 
This  mantle^  of  my  wife's  (taking  it  from  under  his  cloak) 
I've  just  now  stolen  from  in-doors,  and  I'm  taking  it  to  my 
mistress.  This  woy^  it's  proper  for  a  clever  trick  to  be  played 
this  knowing  husoand-w&tcher.  This  is  a  becoming  action, 
this  is  right,  this  is  skilful,  this  is  done  in  workman-like  style ; 
inasmuch  as  at  my  own  risk  I've  taken  this  from  my  plague, 
this  same  shall  be  carried  off  to  destruction^.  "With  the  safety 
of  my  allies^  I've  gained  a  booty  firom  the  foe. 

Pen.  (aloud,  at  a  distance),  Harkye!  young  man;  pray 
what  share  have  I^  in  that  hooti/  ? 

Men.  I'm  undone  ;  I've  fallen  into  an  ambuscade. 

Pen.  Say  a  safeguard  rather.    Don't  be  afraid. 

Men.  "Wliat  person's  this  ?    Pen.  'Tis  I.     (Coming  up  to 
Jmri,) 

Mjs^is,  O  my  convenient  friend — O  my  ready  occasion, 
save  you. 

Pen.  -4«(?  save  you.  {They  shake  hands.)     Men.  What  are 
you  about  ? 

Pen.  Holding  my  good  Genius  in  my  right  hand. 

Men.  You  couldbi't  have  come  to  me  more  a  propos  than 
you  have  come. 

Men.  I'm  in  the  habit  of  doing  so ;  I  understand  all  the 
points  of  ready  occasion. 

Men.  Womd  you  like  to  be  witness  of  a  brilliant  exploit  ? 

Pen.  What  cook  has  cooked  it  ?  I  shall  know  at  once  if 
he  has  made  any  mistake,  when  I  see  the  remnants^. 

1  TAm  «iantfo)— Ver.  130.  The"palla,"  a  kind  of  "mantle"  or  "cloak,"  was 
worn  indifferentlj  bj  both  sexes  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  This  will 
acconnt  for  the  circnmstance  of  Mentechmus  Sosicles  wearing,  as  we  shall  see 
in  the  sequel,  the  "paUa**  of  a  female,  without  expecting  to  attract  the  notice  of 
passers-bj.  The  "palla,"  which  bj  tiie  prose  writers  is  also  called  "palliom," 
was  used  for  many  other  purposes  than  that  of  a  garment.  See  Dr.  Smith's 
IMctionary  of  Greek  and  Boman  Antiquities. 

2  To  deatrucHony-Yer,  183.  "Ad  damnum."  He  calls  the  Courtesan  "dam- 
num," "  sheer  loss"  or  "  wastefulnass"  jxir  Mnence, 

'  0/my  aiUesy—Yer.  134.  By  these  he  means  the  Courtesan  Erotium  and  the 
Parasite  Peniculus,  who  have  run  no  risk  by  helping  him  to  filch  away  the 
mantle. 

*  What  share  have  i>- Ver.  185.  Thinking  himself  alluded  to  as  one  of  the 
^socii"  or  "allies,"  the  Parasite  immediately  appears  before  him,  and  asks  what 
share,  then,  he  is  to  have  of  the  booty. 

»  TF%en /M6(Ae  remnant)— Ver.  142.  He  thinks  that  Menecbmus  is  alluding 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  11.  OE,  THE  TWIN-BHOTHEES.  326 

Mek.  Tell  me— did  you  ever  see  a  picture  painted  on  a 
wall,  where  the  eagle  is  carrying  off  Q-anymede^,  or  Venus 
Adonis? 

Pen.  Many  a  time.     But  what  are  these  pictures  to  me  ? 

Mek.  Come,  look  at  me^.  Do  I  at  all  bear  any  resem- 
blance to  them  ? 

Pen.  What's  this  garb  of  yours  ? 

Men.  Pronounce  me  to  be  a  very  clever  fellow. 

Pen.  "Where  are  we  to  feed  ?  Men.  Only  do  you  say 
that  which  I  requested  you. 

Pen.  Well,  I  do  say  so  ;  very  clever  fellow. 

Men.  And  don't  you  venture  to  add  anything  of  your 
own  to  it  ? 

Pen.  —  And  very  pleasant  j^ZZow.    Men.  Qo  on. 

Pen.  I'  faith,  I  really  can't  go  on,  unless  I  know  for  what 
reason.  You've  had  a  fall-out  with  your  wife ;  on  that 
gromid  am  I  the  more  strongly  on  my  guard^  against  you. 

Men.  While  you  are  interrupting  me,  you  are  delaying 
yourself. 

Pen.  Knock  out  my  only  eye*,  Menaechmus,  if  I  speak 
one  word  but  what  you  bid  me. 

Men.  #  #  #  #  where,  un- 

known to  my  wife,  we  will  erect  the  funeral  pile      *  * 

to  someihing  in  the  eating  way,  and  says  that  he  can  tell  whether  the  cook  has 
done  his  duty  well  or  not,  by  only  looking  at  the  scraps  of  the  entertainment. 

*  GoMfmede) — ^Ver.  144.  He  is  mentioned  in  the  text  under  another  name  of 
a  gross  nature.  Ganymede  was  the  son  of  Tros,  King  of  Troy.  Jupiter  was  said, 
in  the  form  of  an  eagle,  to  have  carried  him  off,  and  made  him  cupbearer  to  the 
Gods,  in  the  place  of  Hebe,  the  Goddess  of  youth. 

*  Come,  hok  at  me) — Ver.  146.  Saying  this,  he  probably  takes  the  "  palla" 
from  behind  him,  and  putting  it  on,  stalks  about  with  it  upon  him.  This  he  could 
do  without  the  risk  of  being  seen  by  his  wife,  as  on  the  Roman  stage  a  number 
of  streets  and  lanes  were  seen  to  termmate,  up  which  the  actor  would  go  a  little 
way  to  escape  observation  from  a  house  situate  just  at  the  end  of  another  street. 
He  means  to  ask  the  Parasite  if  he  does  not  quite  equal  Ganymede  or  Adonis, 
as  represented  in  the  pictures,  by  reason  of  his  tasteiul  attire. 

*  Onmy  ffuard) — ^Ver.  151.  As  MensBchmus  has  fallen  out  with  his  wife,  the 
Parasite  thinks  there  is  no  chance  of  a  "  coena"  at  his  house.  He  is  the  more 
careful  then  to  make  enquuies,  lest  Mensechmus  should  contrive  to  baulk  him  of 
his  banquet  altogether. 

*  My  only  eye) — Ver.  152.  By  this  it  appears  that  Peniculus  has  but 
one  eye.  In  the  Gurculio,  the  Parasite  of  that  name  is  also  represented  as  having 
but  one  eye« 


y  Google 


326  ussMoma ;  Act  I. 

*****  and  let  ua  consume 

this  daj^  upon  it. 

Pen.  Well,  come  then,  since  you  request  what's  fair,  how 
soon  am  I  to  set  fire  to  the  pile  ?  Why  really,  the  day's  half 
dead  already  down  to  its  nayeP. 

Men.  Come  this  way  from  the  door. 

Pek.  Be  it  so.  {Moves  from  the  door.)  Mxir.  Come  still 
more  this  way. 

Pbk.  Very  well.  (Moves.)  Men.  Even  still,  step  aside 
boldly  from  the  lioness's  den. 

Pen.  (still  moving).  Well  done;  by  my  troth,  as  I  fancy, 
you  really  would  be  an  exceWeDt  charioteer*.  • 

Men.  Why  so  ?  Pen.  That  your  wife  mayn't  follow  you, 
you  are  looking  back  ever  and  anon. 

Men.  But  what  say  you  ?  Pen.  What,  I?  Why,  whatever 
you  choose,  that  same  do  I  say,  and  that  same  do  I  deny. 

Men.  Could  you  make  any  conjecture  at  all  from  ike 
smell,  if  perchance  you  were  to  take  a  smell  at  something? 

Pen.  Were  the  college  of  Augurs  summoned       *  * 

«  *  *  *  * 

Men.  {holds  out  the  shirt  of  ike  mofntle).  Come  then,  take 
a  sniff  at  this  mantle  that  I'm  holding.  What  does  it  smell 
of  ?     Do  you  decline  ? 

Pen.  It's  as  well  to  smell  the  top  of  a  woman's  garment ; 
for  at  this  other  place  the  nose  is  offended  with  an  odour 
that  can't  be  washed  out. 

Men.  (holding  (mother  part).  Take  a  smell  here  then, 
Peniculus,  as  you  are  so  daintily  nice. 

Pen.  Very  weU.  (He  smells  it,)  Men.  How  now? 
What  does  it  smell  of?    Answer  me, 

1  Leifa  consume  this  day) — ^Ver.  155.  He  supposes  the  daj  to  be  dead  so  &r 
as  business  is  concerned  ^  the  "  coraa,"  which  generalty  commenced  about  three 
o*clock  in  the  afternoon  (and  sometimes,  perhaps,  the  "prandium"  as  well),  wis 
Mowed  by  "  potatio**  or  "  drinking,"  which  by  such  characters  as  Men«chmiB 
and  the  Parasite  would  be  prolonged  to  midnight,  when  they  would  see  the  day 
dead,  and  celebrate  it«  funeral  in  their  orgies. 

«  7V>  ite  na»eO— Ver.  167.  **  Umbilicus,"  the  "  navel,"  was  a  term  much  used 
to  signify  the  middle  part  of  anything.  Thus  Delphi  was  called  the  "  umbilicas," 
or  *' navel,"  of  the  world. 

»  An  exceUeni  charioteer) — ^Ver.  160.  The  drivers  of  the  chariots  at  the  Cireen- 
sian  games  were  called  "  agitatores."  Of  course  they  would  look  back  every  mwr 
and  then  to  see  how  near  their  opponents  were,  that  they  might  keep  the  lead. 


y  Google 


Sc.  m.  OS,  THS  TWnr-BBOTHBBS.  327 

Pet.  Theft,  a  mistress,  and  a  breakfast.    To  you  * 

Mkk.  You  have  spoken  out       *  •  •  # 

*  *  now  it  shall  be  taken  to  this  mistress  of  mine, 

the  Courtesan  Erotium.  I'll  order  a  breakfast  at  once  to  be 
got  ready,  for  me,  you,  and  her ;  then  will  we  booze  away 
even  to  the  morrow  s  morning  star. 

Pen.  Capital.     You've  spoken  out  distinctly.    Am  I  to 
knock  at  the  door  then  ? 

Mew.  Knock — or  hold,  rather.     Pew.  You've  removed^ 
the  goblet  &yuU  mile  by  that, 

Ito.  Knock  gently.     Pen.  You're  afraid,  I  think,  that 
the  doors  are  made  of  Samian  crockery,    {Goes  to  knock.) 

Men.  Hold,  prithee,  hold,  i'  faith ;  see,  she's  coming  out 
httself.     {The  door  <?/*  Ebotiitm's  house  is  (^ened,)     HftU^,..,^^ 
you  behold  the  sun,  is  it  not  quite  darkened  in  comna™on  si*^ 
with  the  blight  rays  of  her  person.  /^' '  f^.  ""^ .  %fi 

ScBioj  in. — JSnter  Ebotium, /^ow  her  houses  r\   V- 1-^^  /':: 

Eeo.  My  life,  Mensechmus,  save  you.  ^  C'^"/'^- .  •-  <^  0^ 

Pbh.  And  what  for  me?      Eeo.    You  are  out  of<.i^£^^J>^ 
number. 

Pek.  •  *  •  *  *  that 

same  thing  is  wont  to  be  done  for  the  other  supernumeraries^ 
of  the  legion. 

Men.  I  would  order  a  skirmish  to  be  got  ready  there  at 
your  house  for  me  to-day. 

Eeo.  To-day  it  shall  be  done. 
•  Men.  In  that  skirmish  we  two  shall  drink.  Him  shall 
you  choose  that  shall  be  found  there  the  better  warrior  with 
the  goblet ;  do  you  make  up  your  mind  with  which  of  the 
two  you'U  pass  this  night.  How  much,  my  love,  when  I  look 
upon  you,  do  I  hate  my  wife. 

'  Toufve  removed) — Ver.  178.  Penicnlns  now  loses  patience,  and  reflects 
tbtt  there  is  many  a  slip  between  the  cap  and  the  lip. 

'  Swpernumerariea) — ^Ver.  184.  The  "  adscriptiyi,"  who  were  also  called  "  ac- 
wwi,"  were  a  body  of  reserve  troops  who  fo^Jowed  the  Boman  army  without  any 
nulitary  duties  to  perform,  and  who  were  drafted  off  to  supply  the  deficiencies 
in  the  legicns.  In  battle  they  were  placed  in  the  rear  of  the  army.  Of  course 
they  could  not  claim  the  same  advantages  as  the  regular  soldier ;  and  his  own 
position  is  likened  by  the  Parasite  to  theirs. 


y  Google 


328  MSKiBOHMI ;  Act  I. 

Ebo.  Meantime,  however, you  cannot  help  being  wrapped  in 
something  of  hers.   What's  this?    {Takes  hold  of  the  maiUU) 

Men.  {tahmg  it  off),  'Tis  a  new  dress  for  you,  and  a  spoU 
from^  my  wife,  my  rosebud. 

Eeo.  xou  have  a  ready  way  of  prevailing,  so  as  to  be 
superior  in  my  eyes  to  any  one  of  those  that  pay  me  suit. 
{Embraces  him,) 

Pek.  {aside).  The  harlot's  coaxing  in  the  meantime,  while 
she's  looking  out  what  to  plunder  #  *         *         # 

*  *  *  (<o  Eeotitjm)  for  if  you  really  loved  him,  bv 
this  his  nose  ought  to  have  been  off  with  your  teething  hun*. 

Men.  Take  hold  of  this,  Peniculus :  I  wish  to  dedicate  the 
spoil  that  I've  vowed. 

Pen.  Give  it  me.  {Holds  it  while  Menjeohmus  puts  it  on) 
But,  i'  faith,  prithee,  do  dance  afterwards  with  the  mantle  on 
in  this  way. 

Men.  I — dance  ?   I'  faith,  you're  not  in  your  senses. 

Pen.  Are  you  or  I  the  most  ?  If  you  won't  dance,  then 
take  it  off. 

Men.  {to  Eeotium).  At  a  great  risk  have  I  stolen  this  to- 
day. In  my  opinion,  indeed,  Hercules  didn't  ever  carry  off 
the  belt  from  Hippolyta*  with  danger  as  great.  Take  this  for 
yourself  (he  takes  it  off,  and  gives  her  the  mantle),  since  you 
are  the  only  one  alive  that's  compliant  with  my  humours. 

Ero.  "With  such  feelings  'tis  proper  that  real  lovers  should 
be  animated. 

Pen.  {aside).  Those,  indeed,  who  are  making  haste  to  bring 
themselves  down  to  beggary. 

Men.  I  purchased  that  for  my  wife  a  year  since  at  the 
price  of  four  minae. 

Pen.  {aside).  The  four  minsB  are  clearly  gone  for  ever,  as 
the  account  now  stands. 

^  A  spoil Jrom)—yer,  191.  "  Eznvise"  means  either  the  slough  or  cast  skin  of 
a  snake,  or  the  spoil  taken  from  the  enem}r.  Perhaps  the  latter  is  the  sense  in 
which  it  b  here  meant,  as  he  has  described  his  operations  as  a  perfect  campaign. 

2  With  your  teething  him) — ^Ver.  195.  Judging  from  this  remark,  perhaps  she 
has  accidentaUy  forgotten  to  kiss  her  dupe,  Mensechmns. 

*  From  Hippolyid) — ^Ver.  200.  Hercnles  was  commanded  by  Eurysthcns  to 
obtain  the  belt  or  girdle  of  HippolyU,  or  Antiope,  the  Queen  of  tlie  Amaxoos. 
This  he  effected,  and  gave  her  in  marriage  to  his  companion  Theseus,  by  whoin« 
after  giving  birth  to  Hippolytus,  she  was  put  to  death.  Some  accounts,  however, 
state  that  she  was  slain  by  Hercules. 


y  Google 


Sc.  rV.  OB,  THE  TWnr-BBOTHEBS.  329 

Mxs.  Do  you  know  what  I  wish  you  to  attend  to  ? 

Ero.  I  don't  know ;  but  I'll  attend  to  whatever  you  do  wish. 

Mes.  Order  a  breakfast,  then,  to  be  provided  for  us  three 
at  your  house,  and  some  dainties  to  be  purchased  at  the 
market ;  kernels  of  boars'  neck,  or  bacon  off  the  gammon^,  or 
pig's  head,  or  something  in  that  way,  which,  when  cooked 
and  placed  on  table  before  me,  may  promote  an  appetite  like 
a  kite's:  and— forthwith 

Ebo.  I'  feith,  I  will.  Men.  "We're  going  to  the  Porum : 
we  shall  be  here  just  now.  While  it's  cooking,  we'll  take  a 
whet  in  the  meantime. 

Ebo.  Come  when  you  like,  the  things  shall  be  ready. 

Mbk.  Only  make  haste,  then.    Do  you  follow  me  (to  Peni- 

CULTJS). 

Pbh".  By  my  troth,  I  certainly  shall  keep  an  eye  on  you,  and 
follow  you.  I  wouldn't  take  the  wealth  of  the  Gt>ds  to  lose 
you  this  day.  {Exeunt  Men jbchmus  and  Penioulus. 

Ebo.  (speaJcvng  at  the  door  of  her  house).  Call  Cylindrus, 
the  cook,  out  of  doors  this  moment  from  within. 

SoEKE  IV. — Enter  Ctlikdbus,  from  the  house, 

Ebo.  Take  a  hand-basket  and  some  money.  See,  you  have 
three  didrachms  here.    {Qivvng  him  money,) 

CyIi.  I  have  90,  Ebo.  G-o  and  brin^  some  provisions; 
Bee  that  there's  enough  for  three ;  let  it  be  neither  deficient 
nor  overmuch. 

Cyx.  What  sort  of  persons  are  these  to  be  ? 

Ebo.  Myself,  MensBchmus,  and  his  Parasite. 

Cyl.  Then  these  make  ten,  for  the  Parasite  easily  performs 
the  duty  of  eight  persons*. 

Ebo.  I've  now  told  you  the  guests ;  do  you  take  care  of 
the  rest. 

Cyl.  Very  weU.  It's  cooked  already ;  bid  them  go  and 
take  their  places. 

Ebo.  Make  haste  back.     Cyl.  I'll  be  here  directly. 
{JEwit  Cylindbus,  and  Ebotium  goes  into  her  house, 

*  Bacon  off&i^  gammon) — Ver.  210.  He  facetiously  calls  bacon  "  pemonides ;" 
IHerallj,  ^*  the  son  of  the  gammon." 

'  Ihtty  of  eight  personsy-Ver,  223.  Athensens,  Book  L,  quotes  a  passage  from 
Enbnlos,  the  Comic  writer,  where  he  represents  a  Parasite  as  being  counted  or 
two  or  eren  three  at  table. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


880  MsirjicHMi;  Actn. 

Act  n. — Scene  I. 
Unier  Msnjschmtts  Sosicles  (md  Mebsxhio. 

Men.  Sos.  There's  no  greater  pleasure  to  voyagers,  in  my 
notion,  Messenio,  than  at  the  moment  when  from  sea  thejs 
espy  the  land  afar. 

Mess.  There  is  a  greater,  I'll  say  it  without  subterfuge,—* 
if  on  your  arrival  you  see  the  land  that  is  yonr  own.  But, 
prithee,  why  are  we  now  come  to  !Ek>idamnus  ?  Why,  like 
tilie  sea,  are  we  going  round  all  the  isknds  ? 

MEif .  Sos.  To  seek  for  my  own  twin-brother  bom  ? 

Mess.  Why,  what  end  is  there  to  be  of  searching  for  him  ? 
This  is  the  sixth  year  that  we've  devoted  our  attention  to  this 
business.  We  have  been  already  carried  round  the  Istrians^, 
the  Hispanians,  the  Massilians,  the  Illyrians,  all  the  Upper 
Adriatic  Sea,  and  foreign  Greece*,  and  all  the  shores  of 
Italy,  wherever  the  sea  reaches  them.  If  you  had  been 
searching  for  a  needle,  I  do  believe  you  would,  long  ere  this, 
have  found  the  needle,  if  it  were  visible.  Among  the  living 
are  we  seeking  a  person  that's  dead ;  for  long  ago  should  we 
have  found  him  if  he  had  been  alive. 

Mek.  Sos.  Por  that  reason  I  am  looking  for  a  person  to 
give  me  that  information  for  certain,  who  can  say  that  he 
knows  that  he  realh/  is  dead ;  after  that  I  shall  never  take 
any  trouble  in  aeekiag  further.  But  otherwise  I  shall  never, 
while  I'm  aUve,  desist ;  I  know  how  dear  he  is  to  my  heart. 

Mess.  You  are  seeking  a  knot  in  a  bulrush*.  Why  don't 
we  return  homeward  hence,  unless  we  are  to  write  a  history^? 

1  The  Istarianay-Yer,  235.  The  Istrians  were  a  people  of  the  north  of  Italy, 
near  the  Adriatic  Sea,  and  adjoining  to  niyricum.  The  Illyrians  inhabited  the 
countries  now  called  Dalmatia  and  Sclavonia.  The  Massilians  were  the  natives 
of  the  city  of  Massilia,  now  called  Marseilles,  in  the  south  of  France,  where 
Pontius  niate  ended  his  days  in  banishment.  The  Hispani  were  the  inhabitants 
of  Hispania,  now  Spain. 

2  And  foreign  Greecey-Yer.  236.  The  "  Graecia  exotica,**  or  "  foreign  Greece," 
here  mentioned,  was  the  southern  part  of  Italy,  which  was  abK>  caMed  "  Magna 
Graecia,"  in  consequence  of  the  great  number  of  Grecian  settlements  there.  The 
Greeks  were  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  Sicilians  and  Calabrians  *'£XXipw 
cffiorticour,  "  barbarian"  or  "  foreign  Greeks." 

»  7»  o  JttfrttfA)— Ver.  247.  Those  who  made  difficulties  when  there  really^ 
no  difficulty  at  all,  were  said  "  in  scirpo  nodum  qusBrere,**  ^  to  seek  a  knot  in  ^ 
bulrush,"  the  stem  of  which  is  perfectly  smooth. 

*  To  write  a  Atatory)— Ver.  248.  A  narrative  or  histoiy  of  thdr  tniTBb. 
Bozhorn  thinks  that  the  remark  alludes  to  the  voyage  of  Ulysses,  a  cotuteipart 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Se.  I.  OB,  THE  TWIK-BEOTHBBS.  831 

MsK.  Sos.  Have  done  with  your  witty  sayings,  and  be  on 
your  guard  against  a  mischief.  Don't  jrou  be  troublesome ; 
this  matter  shan't  be  done  at  your  bidding. 

Mess,  (aside).  Aye,  aye ;  by  that  same  expression  do  I  rest 
assured  that  I'm  a  slave ;  he  couldn't  in  a  few  words  have  said 
more  in  a  plain-spoken  way.  But  still  I  can't  restrain  myself 
fromspeaMng.  {Aloud!)  Do  ^ou  hear,  Mens^chmus  ?  When 
I  look  in  the  purse,  I  find,  i'  faith,  we're  only  equipped  for  our 
journey  like  summer  travellers^.  By  my  troth,  I  guess,  if  you 
don't  be  returning  home,  while  you're  seeking  your  twin- 
hrother,  you'U  surely  be  groaning^,  when  you  have  nothing 
left,  Por  such  is  this  race  of  people;  among  the  men  of 
^idamnus  there  are  debauchees  and  very  great  drinkers; 
swindlers  besides,  and  many  wheedlers  are  fiving  in  this  city ; 
then  the  women  in  the  harlot  line  are  said  nowhere  in  the 
world  to  be  more  captivating.  The  name  of  Epidamnus  was 
given  to  this  dty  for  the  very  reason,  because  hardly  any 
person  sojourns  here  without  some  damnable  mishap^. 

Men.  Sos.  I'll  guard  against  that.  Just  give  me  the  purse 
this  way. 

Mess.  What  do  you  want  with  it  ? 

Mxs.  Sos.  I'm  apprehensive  then  about  yourself,  from 
your  expressions. 

Mess.  Why  are  you  apprehensive?  Mek.  Sos.  Lest  you 
should  cause  me  some,  damnable  mishap  in  !E]pidamnus.  x  ou 
are  a  great  admirer  of  the  women,  Messenio,  and  I'm  a  pas- 
sionate man,  of  an  unmanageable  disposition ;  of  both  these 
things  will  I  have  a  care,  when  I've  got  the  money,  that  you 
shall  not  commit  a  fault,  and  that  I  shall  not  be  in  a  passion 
with  you. 

Mess,  {giving  him  the  purse).  Take  and  keep  it ;  with  all 
my  heart  you  may  do  so. 

of  which  voyage  conld  not  be  written  without  great  personal  observation,  and  an 
extenaiye  knowledge  of  gec^raphj. 

^  IjUte  summer  travellers)— Ver.  255.  Of  course  lighter  garments  and  a  less 
ireigfat  of  Inggage  would  be  carried  by  travellers  in  the  heat  of  summer. 

,*  YovfU  tHreiy  be  groommg) — ^Ver.  257.  He  intends  a  puerile  play  upon  the 
resemblance  of  the  words  **  gemes,'*  *'  will  be  groaning,"  and  **  geminnm,"  **  twin- 
l«oflicr." 

'  Some  damnable  mishap)^Yer,  264.  "  Sine  damno."  Literally,  "  without 
mischief''  or  *'  mishap.'*  He  puns -on  the  resembhmce  of  '*  damnum"  to  "  Epi- 
daxDnum."  An  attempt  has  been  made  in  the  transition  to  preserve  the  resem- 
blance in  some  degree. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


332  HSKJECHMI ;  A^t  XL 

Scene  II. — JSnter  CxLiirDBirs,  with  a  hashet  ofpravinow. 

Ctl.  I've  catered  well,  and  to  my  mind.  I'll  set  a  good 
breakfast  before  the  breakfasters.  But  see,  I  perceive  Me- 
naechmus.  "Woe  to  my  back;  tbe  guests  are  now  already 
walking  before  the  door,  before  I've  returned  with  the  pro- 
visions.    I'll  go  and  accost  him.     Save  you,  Menaechmus. 

Men.  Sos.  The  Q-ods  bless  you,  whoever  you  are.  • 

Ctl.  *  *  *  #  Tj^rho  I  am  ? 

Mess.  I'  faith,  not  I,  indeed.  Cxl.  Where  are  the  other 
guests  ? 

Men.  Sos.  What  guests  are  you  enquiring  about  ? 

Cxl.  Your  Parasite.  Men.  Sos.  My  Parasite?  Surelj 
this  fellow's  deranged. 

Mess.  Didn't  I  tell  you  that  there  were  many  swindlers 
here? 

Men.  Sos.  What  Parasite  of  mine,  young  man,  are  you 
enquiring  about  ? 

Ctl.  Peniculus.    Men.  Sos.     *  »  «  * 

Where  is  my        #####? 

Mess.  See,  I've  got  your  sponge^  [Peniculus]  all  safe  in 
the  wallet. 

Ctl.  Menaechmus,  you've  come  here  too  soon  for  breakfast ; 
I'm  but  now  returning  with  the  provisions. 

Men.  Sos.  Answer  me  this,  young  man :  at  what  price  do 
pigs  sell  here^,  unblemished  ones,  for  sacrifice  ? 

Ctl.  At  a  didrachm  a-piece. 

Men.  Sos.  (holding out  his  hand),  Eeceive,  then, 2k  didrachm  of 
me ;  bid  a  sacrifice  be  made  for  you  at  my  expense ;  for,  by  my 
faith,  I  really  am  sure  in  very  truth  that  you  are  deranged,  who 
are  annoying  me,  a  person  that's  a  stranger,  whoever  you  are. 

Ctl.  I  am  Cylindrus ;  don't  you  know  my  name  ? 

Men.  Sos.  Whether  you  are   Cylindrus  or  Caliendrus^, 

»  7'f>e  got  your  *pow^e)— Ver.  286.  Mensechmus  takes  Cylindrus  to  mean  as 
thoagh  he  were  really  taUdng  aboat  a  **  penicnlus,"  or  "  sponge,"  nsed  for  the 
purposes  of  a  napkin.  He  tnms  to  Messenio,  and  probably  says  (in  the  mutilated 
passage),  "  Where  is  my  penicolos  ?"  on  which  the  servant,  taking  it  oat  of  tbe 
"  vidalus,"  or  travelling-bag,  says,  "  Here  it  is,  quite  safe." 

^  Do  pigs  sell  Aere)— Ver.  289.  Pigs  without  blemish  were  sacrificed  to  theLaws, 
or  household  Gods,  m  behalf  of  those  who  were  afflicted  with  insanily.  lleDneb- 
mus  Sosicles  adopts  this  as  a  quiet  way  of  telUng  Cylindrus  that  he  must  be  muL 

»  CffUndrus  or  CaUendrusy-Yer.  296.  Probably  Cylindrus  Use  called  from  the 
words  "  cylindrus,"  *•  a  cylinder,"  in  the  sense  of  a  "  rolling-pin."    Soeicks  ptaya ' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  n*  OB,  THE  TWIN-BEOl'HBBS.  833 

confound  you.    1  don't  know  you,  and,  in  fact,  I  don't  want 
to  know  YOU. 

Ctl.  w  ell,  your  name,  however,  is  MensBchmus,  that  I  do 
know. 

Meist.  Sos.  You  speak  like  a  sane  person  when  you  call  me 
bj  my  name.     But  where  have  you  known  me  ? 

Ctl.  Where  have  I  known  you,  you  who  have  Erotium, 
this  mistress  of  mine  {pointing  to  the  home),  for  your  lady  ? 

Men.  Sos.  By  my  troth,  I  have  not,  nor  do  I  know  your- 
self what  person  you  are. 

Cti.  iNot  know  who  I  am,  who  have  many  a  time  filled 
tlie  cups  for  your  own  self  at  our  house,  when  you've  been 
drinking  ? 

Mess.  "Woe  to  me,  that  I've  got  nothing  with  which  to 
break  this  fellow's  head. 

Mek.  Sos.  Are  you  in  the  habit  of  filling  the  cups  for  me, 
who,  before  this  day,  have  never  beheld  Epidamnus,  nor  been 
there?   ■ 

Ctl.  Do  you  deny  it?  Men.  Sos.  Upon  my  honor,  I 
decidedly  do  deny  it. 

Ctl.  Don't  you  live  in  that  house  ?  (Fainting  to  the 
huse  of  Mek^chmus  of  Epidamnus,) 

Men.  Sos.  May  the  Gods  send  to  perdition  those  that  live 
there. 

Ctl.  Surely,  this  fellow's  mad,  who  is  thtis  uttering  curses 
against  his  own  self.     Do  you  hear,  Menaechmus  ? 

Men.  Sos.  What  do  vou  want  ?  Ctl.  If  you  take  my 
advice,  that  didrachm,  which  you  just  now  promised  to  give 
Dae— you  would  order,  if  you  were  wise,  a  pig  to  be  procured 
vM  it  for  yourself.  Eor,  i'  faith,  you  redly  for  sure  are 
not  in  your  senses,  Menaechmus,  who  are  now  uttering  curses 
agamst  your  own  self. 

Men.  Sos.  Alas !  By  my  faith,  a  very  silly  fellow,  and  an 
annoyance  to  me. 

Ctl.  {to  Messenio).  He's  in  the  habit  of  often  joking 
with  me  in  this  fashion.  How  very  droll  he  is,  when  his 
wife  isn't  present.     How  say  you ? 

Men.  Sos.  What  do  you  mean,  you  rascal  ? 

Ctl.  (pointing  to  the  basket).  Has  this  that  you  see  been 
provided  in  sufficient  quantity  for  three  persons,  or  am 
«pwi  ite  resemblance  to  "  caliendrus,"  which  perhaps  meant  a  "  peruke'*  or 
"  wig,"  as  the  Latin  word  ^*  caliendram'*  had  that  signification. 


y  Google 


8M  MXir.BOHHi ;  Act  II. 

I  to  proYide  still  more  for  jounielf  and  tiie  Parasite  aad  the 
la^? 

Mbk.  Sob.  What  ladies— what  Parasites  are  you  talkmg 
about  ? 

Mess.  What,  you  villain,  urges  you  to  be  an  annoyance  to 
him? 

Ctl.  Pray  what  business  have  you  with  me?  I  don't 
know  you ;  I'm  talking  to  this  person,  whom  I  do  know. 

Men.  Sos.  By  my  troth,  you  are  not  a  person  in  his  right 
senses,  that  I  know  for  sure. 

Ctii.  I'll  haye  these  things  cooked  directly ;  there  shall  be 
no  delay.  Don't  you  be  going  after  this  anywhere  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  house.    Do  you  want  anything  ? 

Mek.  Sos.  You  to  go  to  utter  and  ezbreme  perdition. 

Ctl.  I'  faith,  'twere  better  for  you  to  go  in-doors  at 
once  and  take  your  place,  while  I'm  subjecting  these  things 
to  the  strength  of  the  ^a^,  I'll  go  in-doors  now,  and  tdl 
Erotium  that  you  are  standing  here,  that  she  may  fetch  you 
away  hence,  rather  than  you  be  standing  here  out  of  doors. 
{He  goes  into  the  house?) 

Scene  III. — MsNiBCHMtrs  Sosioles,  Messekio. 

Men.  Sos.  Is  he  gone  then  P  He  is  gone.  By  my  £utb,  I 
find  by  experience  that  your  words  are  not  untrue. 

Mess.  Do  you  only  be  on  your  guard;  for  I  do  believe 
that  some  woman  in  the  harlot  line  is  living  here,  as,  in  feet, 
this  madman  said,  who  has  just  gone  away  from  here. 

Men.  Sos.  But  I  wonder  how  he  came  to  know  my  name. 

Mess.  I'  faith,  'tis  far  &om  surprisiQg :  courtesans  hsTe 
this  custom ;  they  send  servant-boys  cmd  servant-girls  down 
to  the  harbour ;  if  any  foreign  smp  comes  into  port,  thej^ 
enquire  of  what  coimtry  it  is,  a/na  what  its  name  is ;  after 
that,  at  once  they  set  themselves  to  work,  amd  fasten  them- 
selves upon  him ;  if  they  inveigle  him,  they  send  him  homes 
ruined  man.  Now  in  this  harbour  there  stands  a  piratical 
craft,  against  which  I  really  think  that  we  must  be  on  our 
guard. 

Men.  Sos.  I'  troth,  you  really  counsel  aright. 

Mess.  Then,  in  fine,  shall  I  be  sure  that  I've  counselled 
aright,  if  you  are  rightly  on  your  guard. 

Sbrmgih  of  iht  finy-Yw.  330.  Vnlcam  ad  Tiolentiam.  Literal^,  '*  to  tbe 
Tidenoe  of  Vnlcan,**  the  God  of  fire. 


y  Google 


Be.  17.  OB,  THE  TinK-BBOTHEBS.         *  835 

Mbst.  So8.  Be  silent  for  a  moment,  then;  for  the  door 
makes  a  noise.    Let's  see  who's  coming  out  fiom  there. 

MsBS.  Meanwhile,  I'll  lay  this  down.  (Seputs  down  the 
wallet,)  Do  you  keep  watch  upon  these  things,  if  you  please, 
70a  sailors^. 

Scene  IV. — JSnter  'Eno'rTim,from  her  house. 

Eeo.  (speakmg  to  her  Sebvants  within).  Leave  the  door 
fl;ar*  thus ;  begone.  I  don't  want  it  shut :  prepare,  attend, 
ind  provide  within ;  what  is  requisite,  let  it  be  done.  Lay  down 
the  couches,  bum  the  perfumes ;  neatness,  that  is  the  charm 
for  the  minds  of  lovers.  Our  agreableness  is  for  the  lover's  loss, 
for  our  own  gain.  {To  herself?)  But  where  is  he  whom  the 
Cook  said  was  in  front  of  the  house  P  O,  I  see  him  there — 
one  who  is  of  service  to  me,  and  who  profits  me  very  much. 
And  right  willingly  is  such  usage  shown  to  him,  as  he  de- 
serves to  be  of  especial  importance  in  my  house.  Now  I'll 
accost  him ;  I'll  address  him  of  my  own  accord.  {To  Mb- 
iTiBGHMTrs.)  My  dear  life,  it  seems  wonderful  to  me  that  you 
are  standing  here  out  of  doors,  for  whom  the  door  is  wide 
open,  more  so  than  your  own  house,  ioasmuch  as  this  house 
is  at  your  service.  Everything's  ready  as  you  requested  and 
as  you  desired ;  nor  have  you  now  any  delay  in-doors.  The 
breakfast,  as  you  ordered,  is  prepared  here ;  when  you  please, 
you  may  go  and  take  your  place. 

Mek.  Sos.  To  whom  is  tnis  woman  addressing  herself? 

Beg.  Why,  Vm  talhing  to  yourself. 

Mek.  Sos.  What  business  liave  I  ever  had  with  you,  or  have 
I  now? 

>  You  stsSors) — Ver.  350.  Some  Commentators  think  that  by  the  words  "  navales 
pedes"  he  meaiis  '*  oars,"  as  being  the  feet,  or  source  of  motion  to  the  ship,  and 
tiiat  Messenio  pnts  his  Inggage  npon  some  oars  on  the  ground  close  bj,  telling 
them  to  be  good  enough  to  keep  it  all  safe.  It  is  more  probable,  however, 
that  he  ia  addressing  some  of  the  crew,  perhaps  the  rowers  who  faaye  carried  the 
hggsgeirom  the  ship.  Others  suggest  that  the  luggage-porters,  who  awaited 
the  aniyal  of  ships  with  passengers  and  merchandize,  are  here  referred  to.  This 
line,  in  Cotter's  translation,  is  rendered,  ''Observe  these  things  now,  if  you 
please.  Behold  the  ship !"  with  this  note,  "  Navales  pedes,  the  oars  of  a  ship,  put 
fsg  the  ship  itself." !  De  TCEuvre  ingeniously  suggests  that  '*  pasdes"  is  the 
correct  reading,  and  the  word  is  the  Greek  iratdcf  Latinized,  and  signifying, 
m  the  present  instance,  the  "  ship-boys"  or  **  servants." 

Ijeave  the  door  q/ar)— Ver.  351.  Ladies  of  Erotium's  character  would  find  it 
more  c&nvenient  to  have  their  doors  ajar,  that  persons  might  step  in  unperceived; 
berides,  in  the  present  instance,  she  wishes  the  "janitor"  not  to  shut  the  door,  as 
she  ezpeets  to  return  directly  with  Mennchmus. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


336  *  HEKiEOHMi;  Ajetn. 

Ebo.  Troth,  inasmuch  as  Venus  has  willed  that  you  singly 
above  all  I  should  exalt ;  and  that  not  without  your  deserving 
it.  For,  by  my  faith,  you  alone  make  me,  by  your  kindnesses, 
to  be  thriving. 

Men.  Sob.  For  sure  this  woman  is  either  mad  or  drank, 
Messenio,  that  addresses  me,  a  person  whom  she  knows  not, 
in  so  familiar  a  way. 

Mess.  Didn't  I  say  that  these  things  are  in  the  habit  of 
occurring  here  ?  The  leaves  are  falling  now ;  in  comparison 
with  this,  if  we  shall  be  here  for  three  days,  the  trees  will  be 
tumbling  upon  you.  For  to  such  a  degree  are  all  theae 
Courtesans  wheedlers  out  of  one's  money.  But  only  let  me 
address  her.     Harkye,  woman,  I'm  speaking  to  you. 

Eeo.  What's  the  matter  ?  Mess.  Where  have  you  your- 
self known  this  person  ? 

Ebo.  In  that  same  place  where  he  has  known  me  for  this 
long  time,  in  Epidamnus. 

Mess.  In  Epidamnus  ?  A  mem  who,  until  this  day,  has 
never  put  a  foot  here  inside  of  this  city. 

Ebo.  Heyday !  Tou  are  making  fun,  my  dear  Mensch- 
mus.  But,  prithee,  why  not  go  in  ?  There,  it  will  be  more 
suitable  for  you. 

Mek.  Sos.  I'  fiaith,  this  woman  really  does  address  me 
rightly  by  my  name.  I  wonder  veiy  much  what's  the  meaning 
of  this  business. 

Mess,  (aside).  That  purse  that  you  are  carrying  has  been 
smelt  out  by  her. 

Men.  Sos.  {aside),  V  faith,  and  rightly  have  you  put  me 
in  mind.  Take  it,  then ;  I'll  know  now  whether  she  loves 
myself  or  the  purse  most.     (GHves  him  the  purse,) 

Ebo.  Let's  go  in  the  house  to  breakfast. 

Men.  Sos.  You  invite  me  kindly ;  so  far,  my  thanks. 

Ebo.  Why  then  did  you  bid  me  a  while  smce  prepare  a 
breakfast  for  you  ? 

Men.  Sos.  I,  bid  you  prepare  ? 

Ebo.  Certainly  you  d%d^  for  yourself  and  your  Parasite. 

Men.  Sos.  A  plague,  what  Parasite  ?  Surely  this  womin 
isn't  quite  right  m  her  senses. 

Ebo.  Peniculus.  Mejt.  Sos.  Who  is  this  Peniculnfl? 
The  one  with  which  the  shoes  are  wiped  clean^  ? 

» Are  teiped  cfeon)— Ver.  391.  "  Bazie**  or  "  baxe«"  were  sandab  nwie  of 
twigs  or  fibres.  They  were  often  worn  on  the  stage  by  Comic  actors,  and  pnbab^t 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  IV.  OB,  THE  TWISr-BEOTHBES.  337 

Ebo.  Him,  I  mean,  who  came  witb  you  a  while  ago,  when 
you  brought  me  the  mantle  which  you  purloined  from  your 
wife. 

Mek.  Sos.  "What  do  you  mean  ?  I,  gave  you  a  mantle, 
which  I  purloined  from  my  wife  ?  Are  you  in  your  senses  ? 
Surely  this  woman  dreams  standing,  after  the  manner  of  a 
gelding^. 

Eeo.  "Why  does  it  please  you  to  hold  me  in  ridicule,  and 
to  deny  to  me  things  that  have  been  done  by  you  ? 

Mek.  Sos.  Tell  me  what  it  is  that  I  deny  after  having 
done  it  ? 

Eeo.  That  you  to-day  gave  me  your  wife's  mantle. 

Mbit.  Sos.  Even  still  do  I  deny  it.  Indeed,  I  never  had 
a  wife,  nor  have  I  one ;  nor  have  I  ever  set  my  foot  here 
within  the  city  gate  since  I  was  bom.  I  breakfasted  on  board 
ship ;  thence  did  I  come  this  way,  and  here  I  met  you. 

Eeo.  See  that  now ;  I'm  undone,  wretched  creature  that 
I  am !    What  ship  are  you  now  telling  me  about  ? 

Men.  Sos.  A  wooden  one,  weather-beaten  ftdl  oft,  cracked 
foil  oft,  many  a  time  thumped  with  mallets.  Just  as  the 
implements  of  the  furrier^ ;  so  peg  is  close  to  peg. 

Eeo.  iNTow,  prithee,  do  leave  off  making  fun  of  me,  and 
step  this  way  with  me. 

Men.  Sos.  #*#*** 
for,  madam,  you  are  looking  for  some  other  person,  I  know 
not  whom,  not  me. 

Eeo.  Don't  I  know  you,  Mensechmus,  the  son  of  your 
father  Moschus,  who  are  said  to  have  been  bom  in  Sicily, 
at  Syracuse,  where  King  Agathocles  reigned,  and  after 
him  Pintia^,  the  third  Liparo,  who  at  his  death  left  th& 
kingdom  to  Hiero — which  Hiero  is  now  king  ? 

m  saying  this,  MensBchmns  Sosicles  points  to  his  own.  The  Egyptians  made  them 
of  pahn-leayes  and  papyms.  They  were  much  worn  hy  the  philosophers  of 
ancient  times.  Probably  the  "  penicnli,"  made  of  the  tuls  of  oxen,  were  mnch 
nsed  for  the  purpose  of  dusting  shoes. 

>  Manner  of  a  geHding^—Yer.  395.  He  compares  her  to  a  horse,  which  sleeps 
and  dreams  (if  it  dreams  at  all)  in  a  standing  posture. 

2  Cfihefirriery-Yer,  404.  The  "pellio,"  "farrier'*  or  "skinner,"  would 
require  a  great  many  pegs  in  fastening  down  the  skins  for  the  purpose  of  stretch- 
mg  them.  Meursins  thinks  that  Plautus  intends  a  sly  hit  here  at  Pellio,  the  bad 
actor,  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Second  Scene  of  the  Second  Act  in  the  Bacchides.. 
If  so,  the  joke  is  quite  lost  on  us. 

*  Ajier  him  PitUidy-Yer,  410.  She  is  supposed,  by  the  Commentators,  to  be 

Z 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


938  lOK J3CHMI ;  Act  II. 

MsK.  Sob.  You  saj,  madam,  what  is  not  untrue. 
Mbss.  Bj  Jupiter,  hasn't  this  woman  come  from  tiiere, 
who  knows  you  so  readily  ?  *  *  •  * 

.  Mbk.  Sos.  (apart).  Troth,  I  think  she  must  not  be  denied. 

Mess,  (apart).  Don't  you  do  it.  You  are  undone,  if  you 
enter  inside  her  threshold. 

Men.  Sos.  (apart).  But  you  only  liold  your  tongue  * 
•••••*  The  matter 

goes  on  well.  I  shall  assent  to  the  woman,  whatever  she  shall 
say,  if  I  can  get  some  entertainment.  Just  now,  madam 
to  her  in  a  law  voice),  I  contradicted  you  not  un- 
ie£y ;  I  was  afraid  of  that  fellow,  lest  he  might  cany 
word  to  my  wife  about  the  mantle  and  the  breakfast.  !MiOw, 
when  you  please,  let's  go  in-doors. 

Ebo.  Are  you  going  to  wait  for  the  Parasite  as  weHP 

Mek.  Sos.  I'm  neither  going  to  wait  for  him,  nor  do  I 
care  a  straw  for  him,  nor,  if  he  should  come,  do  I  want  him 
to  be  admitted  in-doors. 

Ebo.  By  my  faith,  I  shall  do  that  not  at  all  reluctantly. 
But  do  you  know  what  I  beg  you  to  do  P 

Mssr.  Sos.  Only  command  me  what  you  will. 

Ebo.  Eor  you  to  take  that  mantle  which  you  gave  me 
just  now  to  the  embroiderer's^,  that  it  may  be  trimmed 
again,  and  that  some  work  may  be  added  which  I  want. 

purposely  represented  here  as  qoite  mistaken  in  her  historical  fiusts,  and  as  making 
nothing  but  a  ooofosed  jxunble  of  them.  Some  think  that  the  words  "  Pintia"  and 
"  liparo"  are  ablative  cases ;  bat  it  is  much  more  probable  that  they  are  nominar 
tives.  Gronovius  thinks  that  one  Phintias  is  alluded  to,  who,  as  we  are  told  bf 
Diodorus  ^culus,  assnmed  the  government  at  Agrigentum  after  the  death  of  Agft- 
thocles.  He  did  not,  however,  reign  at  Syracuse.  We  do  not  leam  from  history 
that  Hiero  received  the  government  from  liparo,  bat,  on  the  oantrary,  tfaatbb 
virtuous  character  was  the  sole  ground  for  his  election  to  the  sovereignty.  L^m 
was  the  name  of  one  of  the  JSolian  islands  (now  called  the  Isles  ef  LipariX  i^  ^ 
from  the  coast  of  Sicily.  Some  think  that  she  means  to  call  Agathoeks  \rf  the 
additional  names  of  Plmthui  (and  not  Pintia)  from  frXirr&»,  ^'pottaiyy^asbe 
had  exercised  the  trade  of  a  potter,  and  of  "  lipaio^**  from  tfaa  Qreek  Xvin|^ 
"savage,**  by  reason  of  the  cruelty  of  which  he  was  guilty  in  the  hitter  part  a  ^ 
lile.    This  notion  seems,  however,  to  be  more  fimcifbl  than  well-fbunded. 

»  To  iht  embroiderer'ay-VBr,  425.  "  Phiygionem."  As  the  nativesof  Phiygi* 
w«re  very  dexterous  at  embraidermg,  and  their  servieeB  wen  much  sought  fir^ 
puxposes  of  luxury,  all  embroiderers  in  time  came  to  be  called  "  phiygioa».' 


y  Google 


So.  lY.  OB,  THS  TirUIF-BBOTHSBS.  d89 

Mek.  Sos.  I'  fSnth,  jou  saj  what's  right ;  in  snch  a  way 
shall  it  be  disguised  that  Jby  wife  shan't  know  that  jou  are 
wearing  it,  if  she  should  see  you  in  the  street. 

Eeo.  Then  take  it  away  with  you  just  now,  when  you  go 
away. 

Mek.  Sos.  By  all  means.  Ebo.  Let's  go  in-doors.  (Ghes 
into  her  hmse,) 

Mew.  Sos.  I'll  follow  you  this  instant ;  I  only  wish  to 
speak  to  this  person.  So,  there !  Messenio,  step  to  me  this 
way. 

Mess.  What's  the  matter  ?    Men.  Sos.  Listen. 

Mess.  "What  need  for  it  ?  Meit.  Sos.  There  is  need.  I 
know  what  you'll  say  to  me 

Mess.  So  much  the  worse.    Mek.  Sos.  Hold  your  tongue 

I've  got  some  spoil ;  thuis  much  of  the  business  have  I  begun 
upon.  Go,  and,  as  quick  as  you  can,  take  away  those  people^ 
at  once  to  an  inn^.  Then  do  you  take  care  to  come  and 
meet  me^  before  sunset. 

Mess.  Don't  you  know  that  these  people  are  harlots, 
master? 

Mek.  Sos.  Hold  your  tongue,  I  say,  and  go  you  away  firom 
here.  It  wiU  cost  me  pain,  not  you,  if  I  do  anything  here 
that's  foolish.  This  woman  is  sifiy  and  inexperienced.  So 
fer  as  I've  perceived  just  now,  there's  some  spoil  for  us  here. 
{JEe  goes  into  the  house  ofEnoTivu.} 

Mess.  I'm  undone.  Are  you  going  away  then  ?  He  is 
certainly  ruined ;  the  piratici  critft  is  now  leadiag  the  boat 
straight  to  desiruction.  But  I'm  an  unreasonable  fellow 
to  wish  to  rule  my  master ;  he  bought  me  to  obey  his  orders. 

Cotter  renden  ^ad  phzygiooiem*'  here  "to  Phry^**  and  so  throoghoot  the 
irholeplayl 

>  Those  peopUy^Yw,  486.  By  '*  istos**  he  probably  memra  the  sulors  or  porters 
who  were  carrying  the  higgage. 

'  To  <Hi  tnn)— Ver.  486.  The  aceommodatkn  of  the  "tabema  diyenwria,"  or 
*'  diTersorinm,"  was  generallj  of  a  hnmble  kmd,  and  these  ph^es  were  mostly 
adapted  for  the  poorer  classes  only. 

*  Come  and  meet  me)— Ver.  437.  That  is,  as  his  "  adyersiter,**  which  wis  tiie 
title  g^yen  to  the  seryant  whose  dnty  it  was  to  fetch  his  master  home  m  the  eyen- 
ing. 

z2 


y  Google 


840  HIK.BOHKI;  Act  III. 

not  to  be  his  commander.  {To  the  Attbitdaitts.)  Pollow 
me,  that,  as  I'm  ordered,  I  maj  come  in  good  time  to  meet 
m J  master. 

Act  in.— Sceke  I. 
jElnter  Peihctjlijs. 
Pen.  More  than  thirty  years  have  I  been  bom,  yet  during 
that  time  I  never  did  any  more  mischievous  or  more  evil  trick 
than  this  day,  when,  to  my  misfortune,  I  thrust  myself  into 
the  midst  of  the  assembly^ ;  while  I  was  gaping  about  there, 
MensBchmus  stole  away  &om  me,  and  went,  I  suppose,  to 
his  mistress,  and  didn't  want  to  take  me.  May  all  the 
Divinities  confound  that  man  who  first  mischievously  devised 
the  holding  of  an  assembly,  which  keeps  men  thus  engaged. 
By  my  troth,  is  it  not  fitting  that  men  who  are  disengaged 
should  be  chosen  for  that  purpose  ?  These,  when  they  are 
cited,  if  they  are  not  present,  let  the  officers  exact  the  fine^ 
forthwith  •        *  •  *  the  senate  * 

*  *  •  *  •  Abimdance  of  men 

are  there  who  every  dav  eat  their  victuals  alone,  who  have  no 
business,  who  are  neither  invited  nor  invite  to  feast ;  these 
ought  to  give  their  attendance  at  the  assembly  and  the 
law-courts*.  If  so  it  had  been,  this  say  I  shouldn't  have 
lost  my  breakfast ;  to  which  I  deemed  myself  as  much  ac- 
customed, as  to  see  myself  alive.  I'll  go ;  even  yet  the  hope 
of  the  scraps  comforts  my  mind.  But  why  do  I  see  Menaecli- 
mus  here  ?  He's  coming  out  of  doors  with  a  chaplet  on  ?  The 
banquet  is  removed ;  i'  faith,  I  come  just  in  time  to  meet  liira. 
I'll  watch  the  fellow,  what  he's  about,  then  I'll  go  and  accost 
him.     {He  steps  aside.) 

1  Midst  of  ike  assembh/y-Yer.  448.  This  "  ooncio**  was  the  sitting  of  the  court 
for  the  trial  of  canses,  to  which  we  shall  find  farther  refeitence  in  the  seqnelr 
when  it  is  explained  how  he  happened  to  lose  sight  of  Mensochmas, 

'  JExtxcl  the  fine) — ^Ver.  464.  He  snggests  that  MensBchmns  has  possibly  been 
summoned,  in  his  capacity  as  a  citizen,  to  the  "concio,"  for  the  purpose  of  being 
present  at  the  trials  going  on.  The  Parasite  curses  this  custom,  and  wishes  that 
thej  would  summon  only  the  idle  men,  and  not  those  engaged  in  the  important 
busmess  of  feasting  their  friends.  There  is  some  douht  as  to  the  meaning  of 
*'  census  capant,''  but  it  probahlj  signifies  "  let  them  exact  the  fine." 

»  And  the  Zaia-cottrto>--Ver.  469.  The  "  comitia"  of  the  Bomans  have  been  re- 
ferred to  in  a  prerious  Note. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THS  TWIK-BBOTHSBS.  841 


ScEKB  II. — Enter  MEir^CHMirs  Sosicles,  from  the  house  of 
Ebotium,  toith  the  mantle  on. 

Men.  Sos.  (speaking  to  Ebotittm  within).  Can't  you  rest 
content,  if  this  day  I  bring  it  you  back  in  good  time,  nicely 
and  properly  trimmed  ?  I'll  cause  you  to  say  it  isn't  itself, 
so  much  shdl  it  be  disguised. 

Peit.  (apart).  He's  carrying  the  mantle  to  the  embroi- 
derer's, the  breakfest  finished  and  the  wine  drunk  up,  and 
the  Parasite  shut  out  of  doors.  By  my  troth,  I'm  not  the 
person  that  I  am,  if  I  don't  handsomely  avenge  this  injury 
and  myself.   'Tis  requisite  I  should  watch  •  •  • 

I'll  give  something. 

Mek.  Sos.  (to  himself).  O  ye  immortal  Gods!  on  what 
man  ever  have  you  conferred  more  blessings  in  one  day,  who 
hoped  for  less  ?  I've  been  breakjGEisting,  drinking,  feasting 
with  a  mistress ;  and  I've  carried  off  this  mantle^  of  which 
she  shall  no  more  be  owner  after  this  day. 

Pek.  Isn't  he  now  talking  about  me,  and  my  share  of  the 
repast  ?    I  can't  well  hear  what  he  says. 

Men.  Sos.  (to  himself).  She  says  that  I  secretly  gave  her 
this,  and  that  I  stole  it  away  from  my  wife.  When  I  per- 
ceived that  she  was  mistaken,  at  once  I  began  to  assent,  as 
though  I  really  had  had  acquaintanceship  with  her.  "Wliat- 
«ver  the  woman  said,  the  same  said  I.  What  need  of  many 
words  ?    I  was  never  entertained  at  less  expense. 

Pen.  (apan^.  I'll  accost  the  fellow;  for  I  quite  long  to 
have  a  row. 

Men.  Sos.  Who's  this  that's  coming  up  towards  me? 
i^alcea  off  the  mantle^  and  hides  it.) 

Pen.  What  say  you,  you  fellow  lighter  than  a  feather,  most 
rascally  and  most  abandoned — ^you  disgraceful  man — ^you 
cheat,  and  most  worthless  fellow  ?  Why  have  I  deserved 
this  of  you  ?  For  what  reason  should  you  ruin  me  ?  How 
you  stole  yourself  away  from  me  just  now  at  the  Forum. 
You've  been  perfonmng  the  funeral  of  the  breakfast  in  my 
absence.  Why  did  you  dare  to  do  so,  when  I  was  entitled  to 
it  in  an  equal  degree  ? 

Men.  Sos.  Young  man,  prithee,  what  business  with  me 
have  you,  who  are  thus  purposely  insulting  a  person  whom 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


34(2  xur JDOHm ;  Aist  m. 

you  know  not  ?  Do  you  wish  a  punisliment  to  be  given  you 
for  your  abuse  ? 

^nf.  Do  be  quiet ;  by  my  Mtb,  I  discover  that  you've  done 
that  ah*eady  indeed. 

Mmr.'SoB.  Answer  me,  young  man,  I  beg;  what  is  your 
name? 

Fsif .  Are  you  laughing  at  me,  as  well,  as  though  you  didn't 
know  my  name  ? 

Mett.  Sos.  By  my  troth,  I  never  saw  or  knew  you,  that 
I'm  aware  of,  before  this  day ;  but  at  all  events,  whoever  you 
are,  if  you  do  what's  right,  you  won't  be  an  annoyance  to  me. 

Pbk.  Don't  you  know  me  ?  MEN.  Sos.  I  shouldn't  deny 
it  if  I  did  know  you. 

Peit.  Menaechmus,  awake.  Mek.  Sos.  I'  troth,  I  really  am 
awake,  so  far  as  I  know. 

Peit.  Don't  you  know  your  own  Parasite  ? 

Mek.  Sob.  Young  man,  I  find  that  your  headpiece  isn't 
sound. 

Pen.  Answer  me ;  have  you  not  purloined  that  mantle 
from  your  wife  to-day,  and  given  it  to  Erotium  P 

Mek.  Sos.  I'  faith  I  have  no  wife,  nor  have  I  given  the 
mantle  to  Erotium,  nor  have  I  purloined  it. 

Pek.  Are  you  really  in  your  senses  P      #  #  * 

*  •  *        .    *  *       This  matter's  settled^. 

Did  I  not  see  you  coming  out  of  doors  clad  in  a  mantle  ? 

Men.  Sos.  Woe  to  vour  head.  Do  you  think  t'hat  all  people 
are  effeminate  rogues^ because  you  (tre  one?  Do  you  dedare 
that  I  was  clothed  in  a  mantle  P 

Peit.  Troth,  I  really  do.  Men.  Sos.  Why  don*t  you  go 
where  you  are  deserving  to  go,  or  else  request  yourself  to  be 
atoned  for,  you  downright  madman  ? 

Pen.  By  m^  troth,  never  shall  any  one  prevail  upon  me  not 
to  tell  your  mfe  the  whole  matter  now,  just  as  it  happened. 
All  these  insults  shall  be  retorted  upon  yourself-  I'll  take 
care  that  you  shan't  have  devoured  the  break&st  unpunished. 
{He  goes  into  the  Jwuse  of  Menjbchmus  of  JEpidamntis.) 

Men.  Sos.  What's  the  meaning  of  this  business  ?    Why, 

1  This  mattei^s  setSedy-Yer.  512.  "  Ocdsa  est  hm  res."  UtenOj,  ^'tliii 
matter  is  killed ;''  somewhat  similar  to  our  expression, "  the  murder  is  oat" 

2  Ilfemiruae  roffueay-Yer,  614.  "  Cinados."  Literally,  "  dancers" or  "danc- 
ing-masters," who,  bemg  eflfeminate  persons,  would  be  more  likely  to  wear  a 
"  palla"  of  gay  colours. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Se.  m.  OB,  TKB  TWCr-BSOTHZBB.  343 

jmt  as  I  see  each  perBoOy   do  thej  all  make  fiin  of  me 
in  this  way  P    But  the  door  makes  a  noise. 

ScEiTE  HI. — Enter  a  Maid-Sebvastt,  from  the  house  of 
Ebotittm. 

Maid.  MensBchmus,  Erotium  says  that  she  entreats  yon 
much,  that  at  the  same  opportonily  you'll  take  this  to  the 
goldsmith's,  and  add  to  it  an  oimce  in  weight  of  gold,  and  order 
the  bracelet^  to  be  fashioned  anew.     {Gives  him  a  bracelet.) 

Meit.  Sos.  Tell  her  that  I'll  attend  both  to  this  and  any- 
thing else  that  she  shall  wish,  if  she  wishes  anything  else 
attended  to. 

Maid.  Do  you  know  what  this  bracelet  is  ? 

Meit.  Sos.  I  don't  know,  unless  it's  of  gold. 

Maid.  This  is  the  same  one  that  you  once  said  that  you 
had  secretly  stolen  out  of  the  closet  from  your  wife. 

Mek.  Sos.  By  mv  troth,  'twas  never  done. 

Maid.  Prithee,  don't  you  remember  it  ? 

Men.  Sos.  "Not  in  the  least.  Maid.  &ive  it  me  back 
then,  if  you  don't  remember  it.     {Tries  to  take  it) 

Mbk.  Sos.  Stop.  {Pretends  to  examine  the  bracelet,)  O 
yes,  I  really  do  remember  it ;  it's  the  same,  I  believe,  that  I 
presented  to  her. 

Maid.  I'  faith,  it  is  the  same.  Men.  Sos.  "Where  are  the 
clasps  which  I  gave  her  together  with  them  ? 

Maid.  You  never  gave  her  any.  Men.  Sos.  Why,  faith,  I 
gave  them  together  with  this  *        *        #        #        * 

Maid.  Shall  I  say  that  you'll  attend  to  it  ? 

Men.  Sos.  Dosavso;  it  shall  be  attended  to.  I'll  take  care 
that  the  mantle  and  the  bracelet  are  brought  back  together. 

Mjjcd.  My  dewr  Mensechmus,  do,  pray,  give  me  some  ear- 
rings^, the  pendants  to  be  made  two  didrachms  in  weight ; 

*  Order  the  hracdet) — ^Vcr.  627.  "Spinter"  or  "spinther"  is  another  name, 
derived  from  the  Greek  o^iyin-^p,  for  the  Latin  **  armilla"  or  bracelet.  It  received 
its  Greek  name,  from  its  keeping  in  its  place  by  compressing  the  aim  of  the  wearer. 
Festoa  tells  us  that  the  bracelet  called  **  spmter*'  was  worn  bj  the  Boman  ladies 
on  the  left  arm,  while  the  **  armilla'^  was  worn  on  either. 

2  Give  me  some  earrkigty-Yer,  541.  The  drops  of  the  earrings  were  probably 
to  be  of  the  weight  of  two  didrachms.  The  earring  was  called  among  the 
Romans  **  inanris,"  and  hj  the  Greeks  cVoriov.  The  Greeks  also  called  it 
iXkSfiioUi  from  its  bemg  inserted  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.    These  ornaments  were 


y  Google 


344  MSKJBcma ;  Act  IT. 

that  I  may  look  on  you  witb  deliglit  srhen  you  come  to  oar 
house. 

Mbk.  So8.  Be  it  so.  Give  me  the  gold^ ;  I'll  find  the 
price  of  the  workmanship. 

Maid.  GKyc  it  yourself,  please ;  at  a  future  time  I'll  give 
it  you  back. 

iRlBif.  Sog.  No,  give  it  yourself;  at  a  future  time  I'll  give 
it  you  twofold. 

Maid.  I  haven't  any.  Men,  Sos.  But  when  you  have  it, 
do  you  give  it  tne,  then. 

Maid.  Do  you  wish  for  aught  ?  Mbk.  Sos.  Say  that  I'll 
attend  to  these  thins^s,  (aside)  to  be  sold  as  soon  as  they  can, 
and  for  what  they'fl  fetch.  (OUhe  MArD-SEBVAKT  ^oes  into 
the  house.)  Has  she  now  gone  off  in-doors  ?  She's  gone, 
and  has  shut  the  door.  Surely  all  the  Gods  are  favouring, 
amplifying,  and  prospering  me.  But  why  do  I  delay  while 
opportunity  and  time  are  granted  me  to  get  away  firom  these 
procurers'  dens  ?  Make  haste,  Men»clmius ;  pull  foot  and 
quicken  your  pace.  I'U  take  off  this  chaplet^,  and  throw  it 
away  on  the  left  hand  side  (throws  the  chaplet  cfoim),  that, 
if  they  follow  me,  they  may  think  I've  gone  in  that  direction. 
I'll  go  and  meet  my  servant,  if  I  can,  that  he  may  learn  from 
me  these  blessings  which  the  Gods  confer  upon  me. 

Act  IV. — Scene  I. 
UnteTy  from  her  house,  the  "Wife  of  Meilsohiius  of  Bpy- 
danmus/followed  hy  Yesictsimb. 
"Wife.  And  shall  I  allow  myself  to  remain  in  wedlo(i' 

worn  bj  both  sexes  amoDg  the  Lydians,  Persians,  Libyans,  Carthaginians,  and 
other  nations.  Among  the  Greeks  and  Bomans,  the  females  alone  were  in  the 
habit  of  wearing  them.  As  with  ns,  the  earring  consisted  of  a  ring,  and  a  drop, 
called  "  stalagminm,"  the  ring  being  generally  of  gold,  though  bronze  was  some- 
times used  by  the  common  people.  Pearls,  especially  those  of  elongated  form, 
called  "  elenchi,"  were  very  much  valued  for  pendants. 

1  Give  me  the  goldy^Yer.  644.  He  asks  for  the  gold  with  the  intention  of  steal- 
ing it ;  for,  in  spite  of  their  wealth,  it  is  evident,  from  this,  and  what  appears  in  the 
sequel,  that  both  he  and  his  brother  are  by  nature  arrant  thieves. 

«  Take  off  this  chaplet)'-'Ver.  655.  This  he  had  been  wearing  at  the  "  pwn- 
dium,"  or  "breakfast,"  at  Erotium's  house.  The  latter  appears  to  be  a  more 
fittmg  name  for  a  meal  that  was  taken  generaUy  about  twelve  o'clock;  while 
*^  the  coena,"  which  commenced  in  general  at  about  three,  cannot  with  propriety  be 
termed  anything  else  than  a  "  dinner." 

»  To  remain  in  wedhchy-Yer.  659.  As  ahrcady  observed  in  the  Notes  to  the 


y  Google 


SCe  n.  OB,  THX  TWBf-BBOTHIBS.  345 

liere,  when  mj  husband  secretlj  pilfers  whateyer's  in  the 
house,  and  carries  it  thence  off  to  his  mistress  ? 

Pkn".  Why  don't  you  hold  your  peace  ?  I'll  let  vou  now 
catch  him  in  the  fact;  do  you  only  follow  me  this  way. 
{fhev  go  to  the  opponte  tide  of  the  stage!)  In  a  state  of 
drunkenness,  with  a  cha^let  on,  he  was  carrying  the  mantle 
to  the  embroiderer's,  which  he  purloined  from  you  at  home 
to-day.  But  see,  here  is  the  chaplet  which  he  had  on.  {Seeing 
the  chaplet  on  the  ground.)  Wow  am  I  saying  false  ?  Aha, 
this  way  has  he  gone,  if  you  wish  to  trace  his  footsteps. 
And,  by  my  faith,  see,  here  he  comes  on  his  way  back  most 
opportunely,  but  he  isn't  wearing  the  mantle. 

WiTB.   what  now  shall  I  do  to  him  ? 

Pkn.  The  same  as  usual ;  abuse  him. 

'Wife,  So  I  am  resolved.  Pbk.  Let's  step  aside  this  way ; 
watch  him  from  ambush.   {Theg  retire  on  one  side.) 

ScBKB  n. — Enter  Menjechmtts  of  JSpidamnus. 

Men.  (to  himself) .  How  we  do  practise  a  custom  here  that  is 
veryfoolish  and  extremely  troublesome,  and  how^t?^^  those  who 
are  the  most  worthy  ana  great^  do  follow  this  habit :  all  wish 
their  dependants  to  be  many  in  number ;  whether  they  are  de- 
serving or  undeserving,  about  that  they  don't  enquire.  Their 
property  is  more  enquired  about,  than  what  the  reputation  of 
their  cbents  is  for  honor.  If  any  person  is  poor  and  not 
dishonest,  he  is  considered  worthless ;  but  if  a  rich  man  is 
dishonest,  he  is  considered  a  good  client.  Those  who  neither 
regard  laws  nor  any  good  or  justice  at  all,  the  same  have 
zealous  patrons.  "What  has  been  entrusted  to  them,  they  deny 
to  have  been  so  entrusted ;  men  fall  of  litigation,  rapacious, 
<ind  fraudulent ;  who  have  acquired  their  property  either  by 
usury  or  by  perjury ;  their  whole  pleasure  is  in  litigation. 
When  the  day  ?or  trial  is  appointed,  at  the  same  time  it  is 
mentioned  to  their  patrons,  m  order  that  they  may  plead  for 

Stiefaiu  and  the  Miles  GloriostuB,  the  facilities  for  divorce,  by  reason  of  inoompati- 
i>ilit7  and  other  circumstances,  were  verj  great  among  the  Bomans. 

^  Moa  worthy  and  grea£y-^er.  572.  "  Optomi  mazimi."  This  was  properly 
An  epithet  of  Japiter,  and  is,  perhaps,  satirically  applied  to  the  '*  little  Gods,"  the 
gi^t  men  of  Borne.  In  the  previous  line  he  uses  *'  morus,"  the  Greek  word 
^fdfiit^^  rignifying  **  foolish,"  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  the  word  **more," 
"manner"  or  "custom." 


y  Google 


346  lOBiriiOHXi;  Act  17. 

them,  about  wlist  tliey  lia^e  done  amiss.  Before  the  people^ 
or  at  law  hefbre  the  JBrator,  or  before  the  ^dile,  is  the  cwue 
tried.  Just  so,  this  daj,  a  certam  dependant  has  kept  me 
very  much  engaged,nor  wasit  allowedme  to  do  whati  unshed, 
or  in  oompany  with  whom  I  wished;  so  fast  did  he  sti^  to  me, 
so  much  did  he  detain  me.  Before  the  ^dile,  in  behalf  of 
his  doings,  Tery  many  and  very  disgraceful,  did  I  plead  bis 
cause;  a  compromise  I  obtained,  obscure  and  perpl^Led-- 
more  than  enough  I  said,  and  than  I  needed  to  say,  tbat 
surety^  him^  might  end  this  litigation.  "What  did  he  do  ? 
Well,  what  ?  He  gave  bail.  And  never  did  I  at  any  time 
see  any  person  more  clearly  detected ;  three  very  adverse  wiir 
nesses  against  all  his  misdeeds  were  there.  May  all  the  Gods 
confound  him,  he  has  so  spo^  this  day  for  me ;  and  myself 
as  well,  who  ever  this  day  beheld  the  Jb^orum  with  my  ^ea. 
I  ordered  a  break£Bist  to  be  prepared ;  my  mistress  is  expectibog 
me,  I'm  sure ;  as  soon  as  ever  I  had  the  opportunity,  I  made 
haste  immediately  to  leave  the  Porum.  iN'ow,  I  suppose, 
she's  angry  with  me ;  the  mantle,  however,  will  appease  her 
that  I  gave  her,  the  one  I  took  away  to-day  from  my  wife 
and  carried  to  Erothun  here. 

Pbh.  {apart  to  the  Wrra).  What  say  you. now? 

Wdtb  {apart).  That  I'm  unfortunately  macried  to  aworth- 
»s  fellow. 

Pen.  {apart).  Do  you  perfectly  hear  what  he  says  ? 

Wife  {apart).  Quite  well.  Mbs.  If  I  am  wise,  I  shall 
be  going  hence  in-doors,  where  it  may  be  comfortable  for  me. 

Pebt.  {oommg  forward).  Stop ;  on  the  contrary,  it  shall  be 
uncomfortable. 

Mbk,  *  •  •  #  *  sbe 

is  very  sorrowful;  this  doesn't  quite  please  me,  but  111 
speak  to  her.    TeU  me,  my  wife,  what  is  it  amiss  with  you  ? 

>  Before  the  people)— Y&r,  687.  It  is  thought  that  he  here  refers  to  the  three 
modes  of  trial  in  civil  cases  among  the  Romans — "  apnd  popnlnm,**  before  the 
people  in  the  Comitia  oentoriata,  or  frill  assemblj ;  "  injure,"  before  the  **  Pnetor," 
or  his  delegates,  the  '*Bectiperatores"or  **  Jndices  select!,**  "commissumed  judges;" 
and  before  the  MdSie,  or  city  officer.  He  says,  that  on  being  sumiiHined  to  the 
^^condo,"  a  "dieoB**  or  dependant  snddeidj  accosted  him,  and  insisted  oa  Ids 
defending  him,  which  greatly  detained  him,  but  that  in  jipita  of  the  mrtfalflBsnees 
of  his  client^s  cause,  he  was  at  last  snooessfhl  in  eflfooting  a  oampromiae. 

^  That  mrely  fir  hmy-Ver.  692.  He  proUbly  means  that  he  gained  time  for 
his  client  to  pay  the  debt,  on  condition  of  his  giving  bail  or  security  that  he  would 
do  so  within  a  certain  time. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THS  arWTBr-BBOTHXBS.  347 

Pmr.  (to  the  Wipe).  The  pretty  fellow's  soothing  jrou. 

Men.  Can't  jou  cea^e  being  aimojing  to  me  P  I>id  I  ad- 
dress you  P 

Wife,  (twrning  away  from  Mekjbohmxts).  Take  yourself 
off— away  with  your  caresses  jfrom  me.  Do  you  persist  in  it  ? 

Mbk.  Why  are  you  offended  with  me  ? 

Wepb.  You  ought  to  know.  Pen.  The  rascal  knows,  but 
he  pretends  not  to  know. 

Mezt.  Has  any  one  of  the  servants  done  amiss  P  Do  either 
the  maid  or  the  men-servants  give  you  saucy  answers  P  Speak 
out ;  it  shan't  be  done  with  impunity. 

Wrra.  You  are  trifiiag.  Mek.  Surely  you  are  angry  at 
some  one  of  the  domestics  P 

WrPB.  You  are  trifling.  Men.  Are  you  angry  with  me 
at  all  events  P 

Wipe.  Wow  you  are  not  trifling.  Men.  I'  faith,  I  haven't 
done  wron^  in  anytlung. 

Wife.  Ah !  now  you  are  trifling  again. 

Mbk.  "Wife,  what's  the  matter  P  Wiee.  Do  you  ask  me 
thxt? 

Meit.  Do  you  wish  me  to  ask  him  P  {To  Pesiculus.) 
Vhat's  the  matter? 

WtPB.  The  mantle.    Men.  The  mantle? 

Wife.  A  certain  person  hjt%  taken  a  mantle.  (MEiriBGS* 
Mrs  starts!) 

Pek.  (to  Mbst^ghhfs).  Why  are  you  alarmed  P 

Meet.  For  my  part,  I'm  not  alarmed  at  aU — (aside)  except 
about  one  thing ;  the  mantle  makes^  my  face  mantle. 

Pbk.  (aside  to  MEiiriBOHMUs).  But  as  for  me,  you  shouldn't 
have  slily  devoured  the  breakfast.  (To  the  Wife.)  Gk)  on 
agaiQst  your  husband. 

Mest.  (mahing  signs  to  Penicultts).  Won't  you  hold  your 
tongue  P 

rss.  !Faith,  I  really  will  not  hold  my  tongue.  (To  the 
Wife.)  He's  nodding  to  me  not  to  speak. 

Mek.  On  my  word,  I  really  never  did  nod  to  you,  or  wink 
in  any  way. 

>  Tkt  man&e  mdbe»>— Ver.  616.  "  PaUa  paUorem  incatit."  In  his  aiann  he 
cannot  avoid  a  pun  on  the  resemblance  between  **  paUa,''  the  '<  mantle,"  and 
"  pftllor/^  paleness.  The  meaning  is,  literally,  ^*  the  mantle  strikes  paleness  into 
ne  f^  bat  an  attempt  is  made  in  the  Translation  to  unitate  the  pUy  npon  the  words. 


y  Google 


848  HEK^CHHi;  AeHIV. 

Pei)*.  Nothing  is  more  audacious  than  this  man,  ^o  reso- 
lutely denies  those  things  which  you  see. 

Mbk.  By  Jupiter  and  all  the  Gods,  I  swear,  wife,  that  I 
did  not  nod  to  him ;  isn't  that  enough  for  you  ? 

Pen.  She  now  believes  you  ahout  that  matter ;  go  back 
again  there. 

Mbn.  Go  back  where  P  Pek.  Why,  to  the  embroiderer, 
as  I  suppose.     Go  and  bring  the  mantle  back. 

Men.  What  mantle  is  it?  Pen.  Now  I  hold  my  tongue, 
since  he  doesn't  remember  his  own  business. 

Wife.  Did  you  suppose  that  you  could  possibly  commit 
these  viUanies  unknown  to  me  ?  By  heavens,  you  have  as- 
suredly taken  that  away  from  me  at  a  heavy  usury ;  such  is 
the  return^.     (Shaking  her  fist.) 

Pen.  Such  is  the  return.  Do  you  make  haste  to  eat  up 
the  breakfast  in  my  absence ;  and  then  in  your  drunken- 
ness make  fun  of  me,  with  your  chaplet  on,  before  the  house* 

Men.  By  all  the  powers,  I  have  neither  breakfasted,  nor 
have  I  this  day  set  foot  inside  of  that  house. 

Pen.  Do  you  deny  it  ?  Men.  By  my  troth,  I  really  do 
deny  it. 

Pen.  Nothing  is  there  more  audacious  than  this  fellow. 
Did  I  not  just  now  see  you  standing  here  before  the  house, 
with  a  chaplet  of  flowers  on,  when  you  were  declaring  that 
my  headpiece  wasn't  sound,  and  declaring  that  you  didn't 
know  me,  and  saying  that  you  were  a  foreigner  ? 

Men.  On  the  contrary,  as  some  time  since  I  parted  witk 
you,  80  I'm  now  returning  home  at  last. 

Pen.  I  understand  you.  Tou  didn't  think  it  was  in  vq 
power  to  take  vengeance  upon  you ;  i'  faith,  I've  told  it  all 
to  your  wife. 

Men.  Told  her  what  ?  Pen.  I  don't  know ;  ask  her  own 
self. 

Men.  (turning  to  Aw  Wife)  .  What's  this,  wife  ?  Pray,vliat 

1  Such  is  the  retumy^Yer,  626.  "Sicdatur."  Literally,  "thus  itisffwa," 
or  "  on  these  terms  it  is  lent"  Some  Commentators  -will  have  it,  that  these 
words  are  accompanied  with  a  slap  on  the  face,  in  which  case  thej  will  be  eqnin- 
ient  to  "  there,  take  that.'*  They  may,  however,  simply  mean,  "such  are  the  tcscms" 
on  which  you  had  my  mantle,  "  such  are  the  results  of  your  lending;"  her 
abuse  and  indignation,  accompanied,  perhaps,  with  a  threat,  being  the  "fiefios," 
or  "  mterest"  for  the  loan. 


y  Google 


8e.  n.  OBy  THE  TWIN-BBOTHEBS.  849 

bas  he  been  telling  you  P  What  is  it?  Why  are  you  silent  ? 
Why  don't  you  say  what  it  is  ? 

ViFB.  As  though  you  didn't  know.  I'  faith,  I  certainly 
am  a  miserable  woman. 

Mbk.  Why  are  you  a  miserable  woman  ?  tell  me. 

Vefb.  Do  you  ask  me  ?  Men.  Faith,  I  shouldn't  ask  you 
if  I  knew. 

Pew.  O  the  wicked  fellow ;  how  he  does  dissemble.  You 
camiot  conceal  it ;  she  knows  the  matter  thoroughly ;  by  my 
&ith,  I've  disclosed  everything. 

Mxv,  What  is  it  ?  wite.  Inasmuch  as  you  are  not  at 
all  ashamed,  and  don't  wish  to  confess  of  your  own  accord, 
liflten,  and  attend  to  this ;  I'll  both  let  you  know  why  I'm 
sorrowful,  and  what  he  has  told  me.  My  mantle  has  been 
purl(»ned  from  me  at  home. 

Mest.  Mantle  purloined  from  me?  Pest,  (to  the  Wiee). 
D'you  see  how  the  rogue  is  catching  you  up  ?  {To  Me- 
TjBGHMvs.)  It  was  pudoincd  from  her,  not  from  you ;  for 
certainly  if  it  had  been  purloined  from  you,  it  would  now 
he  safe. 

Men.  (to  PEiacuLTTs).  I've  nothing  to  do  with  you.  But 
(to  his  Wife)  what  is  it  you  say  ? 

Wife.  A  mantle,  I  say,  has  been  lost  from  home. 

Men.  Who  has  stolen  it  ?  Wife.  I  faith,  he  knows  that, 
who  took  it  away. 

Men.  What  person  was  it?  Wife.  A  certain  Me- 
naBchmus. 

Men.  By  my  troth,  'twas  vOlanously  done.  Who  is  this 
MenaechmuB  ? 

Wife.  You  are  he,  I  say.    Men.  I? 

Wife.  You.    Men.  Wno  accuses  me? 

Wife.  I,  myself.  Pen.  I,  too ;  and  you  carried  it  off  to 
Erotium  here,  your  mistress. 

Men.  I,  gave  it  her  ?  Pen.  You,  you,  I  say.  Do  you 
wish  for  an  owl^  to  be  brought  here,  to  saj  "  you,  you,"  con- 
tinually to  you  ?    For  we  are  now  quite  tired  of  it. 

Men.  By  Jupiter  and  all  the  Gods,  I  swear,  wife  (and 
isn't  that  enough  for  you  ?),  that  I  did  not  give  it. 

Pen.  Aye,  and  I,  by  all  the  powers,  that  we  are  telling  no 
imtnith. 

>  Wish  for  an  owZ)— Ver.  654.  "  Tu,  tu.'*  He  alludes  to  the  note  of  the  owl, 
which  to  the  Romans  would  seem  to  say  **  tu,  tn,'*  **  you,  you." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


350  WBKMCKWL ;  AjA  IV. 

Mek.  But  I  haven't  given  it  away,  but  just  onlj  lent  it 
to  be  made  use  of. 

WnrB.  But,  i'  faith,  for  mj  part,  I  don't  kad  eithear  your 
scarf  or  your  cloak  out  of  the  house,  to  any  one,  to  be  made 
use  of.  'Tis  &ir  that  the  woman  should  lend  out  of  the 
house  the  woman's  apparel,  the  man  the  man's.  But  irhj 
don't  you  bring  the  mantle  home  again  P 

Men.  m  Imve  it  brought  back.  Wife.  "For  your  own 
interest  you'll  do  so,  as  I  think ;  for  you  shall  ncyer  enter  the 
house  to-day  unless  you  bring  the  mantle  with  you.  I'm 
going  home. 

Pebt.  {to  the  Wife).  What's  there  to  be  for  me,  who  hate 
given  you  this  assistance  P 

Wife.  Your  assistance  shfdl  be  repaid,  when  anything 
shall  be  purloined  from  your  house.  {The  Wum  ffoeg  nio 
the  housed 

Pen.  Then,  by  my  troth,  that  reaUy  will  never  be ;  for 
nothing  have  I  at  home  to  lose.  May  the  Gk)ds  confound 
you,  both  husband  and  wife.  I'll  make  haste  to  the  P<»nuD, 
for  I  see  clearly  that  I've  quite  fallen  out  with  this  family. 

Men^.  My  wife  thinks  that  she  does  me  an  injury  when  she 
shuts  me  out  of  doors ;  as  though  I  hadn't  another  better 
place  to  be  admitted  into.  K I  displease  you,  I  must  endure 
it ;  I  shall  please  Erotium  here,  who  won't  be  shiuttmg  me 
out  of  her  house,  but  will  be  shutting  me  up  in  her  house 
rather,  Now  I'll  go ;  I'U  beg  her  to  give  me  back  the  mantle 
that  I  gave  her  a  while  since.  I'll  purchase  another  for  h«^ 
a  better  one.  Hallo !  is  any  one  the  porter  here  ?  (JSjM»db 
at  Ebotium's  door,)  Open  here^  and  some  one  of  yon  eall 
Erotium  before  the  door. 


SoEBTB  in. — Mnter  'EsxynxnE^from  her  hauee. 

Ebo.  Who's  enquiring  for  me  here  P 

Men.  One  that's  more  of  an  enemy  to  his  own  self  ilum 
to  yourself  1. 

Eeo.  My  dear  Mensechmus?  Why  are  you  stan£sg 
before  the  house  ?    Do  follow  me  in-doors. 

I  Than  to  yowae^y-yet,  676.  "  -ffitati  tu«."  LiteraUy,  «  to  yoor  age,**  »dr- 
cumlocutioii  for  "  yoonelf.*' 


y  Google 


J 


Se.  nL  OB,  THX  TWmr-BBOTHEBS.  351 

Mek.  stop.  Do  you  know  why  it  is  that  I'm  come  to 
you? 

Ebo.  I  know  well;  that  you  may  amnse  yourself  with 
me. 

Men.  Why  no,  troth,  that  mantle  which  I  gave  you  a 
while  since,  give  it  me  back,  I  entreat  you ;  my  wife  has  be- 
come acquainted  with  all  the  transaction,  in  its  order,  just 
as- it  happened.  Til  procure  for  you  a  mantle  of  twofold 
greater  vine  than  you  shall  wish. 

Ebo.  "Why,  I  gave  it  your  own  self  a  little  while  since, 
that  you  might  take  it  to  the  embroiderer's,  and  that  bracelet, 
too,  that  you  might  take  it  to  the  goldsmith's  that  it  might 
be  made  anew. 

Men.  Tou,  gave  me  the  mantle  and  the  bracelet  ?  You'll 
find  'twas  never  done.  For,  indeed,  after  I  gave  it  you 
awhile  ago,  and  went  away  to  the  Forum,  I'm  but  just  re- 
taming,  and  now  see  you  for  the  first  time  since. 

Ebo.  I  see  what  plan  you  are  upon ;  that  you  may  de- 
fraud me  of  what  I  entrusted  ta  ^ou,  at  that  thing  you  are 

aiming 

•  Mbn.  On  my  word,  I  do  not  ask  it  for  the  sake  of  defraud- 
ing you.  But  I  tell  you  that  my  wife  has  discovered  the 
matter, 

Ebo.  Nor  did  I  of  my  own  accord  beg  you  to  give  it 
me ;  of  your  own  accord  you  yourself  brought  it  me.  Tou 
gave  it  me  as  a  present;  now  you're  askmg  for  the  same 
thiogback  again.  I'll  put  up  with  it;  keep  it  to  yourself; 
take  it  away ;  make  use  of  it,  either  yourself  or  your  wife,  or 
squeeze  it  into  your  money-box^  even.  After  this  day^  that 
you  ma]pi't  be  deceived,  jrou  shan't  set  your  foot  in  this 
house,  since  you  hold  me  in  contempt,  who  deserve  so  well 
of  you.  Unless  you  bring  money,  you'll  be  disappointed ; 
you  can't  cajole  me.  Find  some  other  woman,  hencefortii, 
for  you  to  be  disappointing. 

Mbh.  By  my  troth,  very  angry  at  last.  Hallo!  you; 
stey,  I  bid  you.  Come  you  back.  Will  you  stay  now? 
Wm  you  even  for  my  sake  come  back  ?  (Ebotium:  goes  into 
Tier  house,  and  shuts  the  door,)  She  has  gone  in-doors,  and 
shut  the  house.    Now  I'm  regularly  baoJred  out;  I  have 

^  Into  your  fnone^os)— Vnr.  691.  ''  As  70a  make  so  much  ftuu  about  it, 
and  it  18  so  yaluable,  squeeze  it  up  into  your  money-boz.'' 


y  Google 


852  M23^JECHMI ;  Act  T. 

neither  any  credit  at  home  now,  nor  with  my  mistress.  Til 
go  and  consult  my  friends  on  this  matter,  as  to  what  they 
think  should  be  done.  {Haii. 

Act  v.— Sobnb  I. 
EfUer  MENiBCHMUS  Sosicles,  with  the  mantle  on. 
Meit.  Sos.  I  did  very  foolishly  a  while  since,  in  entrusting 
my  purse  to  Messenio  with  the  money.    I  suspect  he  has  got 
himself  into  some  bad  house  ^  or  other. 

Enter  theWiTE  ofMsiXMCBMva  ofJS^ndamnuSjJrom  the  house. 

Wife.  I'll  look  out  to  see  how  soon  my  husband  is  going 
to  return  home.  But  here  he  is ;  I  see  him ;  I'm  all  right, 
he's  bringing  back  the  mantle. 

Mek.  Sos.  (to  himself),  I  wonder  where  Messenio  can  be 
walkmg  now. 

WiTB.  I'll  go  and  receive  the  fellow  with  such  language  as 
he  deserves.  {Accosting  him.)  Are  you  not  ashamed  to  come 
forward  in  my  presence,  you  disgraceful  man,  in  that  garb  ? 

Mbtt.  Sos.  what's  the  matter  ?  What  thing  is  troubling 
you,  woman  ? 

"WiEB.  Do  you  dare,  you  shameless  fellow,  to  utter  even 
a  single  word,  or  to  speak  to  me  ? 

Mek.  Sos.  Pray,  what  wrong  have  I  eommitted,  that  I 
shouldn't  dare  to  speak  to  you  ? 

Wife.  Do  you  ask  me  ?  O  dear,  the  impudent  audacity 
of  the  fellow ! 

Men.  Sos.  Don't  you  know,  madam,  for  what  reason  the 
Greeks  used  to  say  tl!at  Hecuba  was  a  bitch^  ? 

>  Into  some  had  house) — ^Ver.  704.  The  "  ganese**  or  "  ganea**  were,  probaU/t 
verj  similar  to  the  **  popinsB,"  the  loose  character  of  which,  and  the  '*  thenno- 
polia,"  has  been  alluded  to  in  a  preceding  Note. 

2  Hecuba  toas  a  biichy~Yer.  714.  Hecnba  was  the  daughter  of  Cissens  or  of 
Dymas,  and  the  wife  of  Priam,  Emg  of  Troy.  In  the  distribution  of  the  spoil, 
after  the  siege  of  Troy,  she  fell  to  the  share  of  Ulysses,  and  became  hb  slaTc^  bttt 
died  soon  after  in  Thrace.  Servius  alleges,  with  Plantns,  that  the  Greeks  drcn- 
lated  the  story  of  her  transformation  into  a  bitch,  because  she  was  perpetually 
railing  at  them  to  provoke  them  to  put  her  to  death,  rather  than  condemn  her  to 
the  life  of  a  sUve.  According  to  Strabo  and  Pompomus  Mek,  in  their  time  the 
place  of  her  burial  was  still  to  be  seen  in  Thrace.  It  was  canedicvpos  ainui, 
"  the  Tomb  of  the  bitch.'*  Eurifttdes,  in  his  *<  Hecuba,"  has  not  Mowed  this  tia- 
dition,  but  represents  her  as  complaining  that  the  Greeks  had  chuned  her  to  the 
door  of  Agamemnon  like  a  dog. 


y  Google 


I 


Sc,  I.  OB,  THE  TWIN-BEOTHEBS.  363 

"Wipe.  I  don't  know,  indeed.  Men.  Sos.  Because  Hecuba 
used  to  do  the  same  thing  that  you  are  now  doing.  She 
used  to  heap  all  kinds  of  imprecations  on  every  one  she  saw ; 
aad,  therefore,  for  that  reason  she  was  properly  begun  to  be 
called  a  bitch. 

Wipe.  I  can't  put  up  with  this  disgraceful  conduct  of 
yours ;  for  I  had  rather  see  my  life  that  of  a  widow,  than 
endure  this  vile  conduct  of  yours  that  you  are  guilty  of. 

Meb".  Sos.  What  is  it  to  me,  whether  you  are  able  to 
endure  to  live  in  the  married  state,  or  whether  you  will 
separate  £rom  your  husband  P  Is  it  thus  the  fashion  here  to 
tell  these  stories  to  a  stranger  on  his  arrival  P 

"WrPB.  "What  stories  P  I  say,  I'll  not  endure  it  hence- 
forth, but  live  separate  rather  than  put  up  with  these  ways. 

Mxs.  Sos.  Troth,  so  far  indeed  as  I'm  concerned,  do  live 
separate,  even  so  long  as  Jupiter  shall  hold  his  sway. 

WiEB.  -By  heavens,  I'U  certainly  now  send  for  my  father, 
and  I'll  teU  him  your  disgraceful  conduct  that  you  are 
guDty  of.  Go,  Decio  (calling  to  a  Servant),  seek  for  my 
fiither,  that  he  may  come  along  with  you  to  me ;  tell  him  that 
occasion  has  arisen  for  it.  I'll  now  disclose  to  him  this  dis- 
graceful  conduct  of  yours. 

Mek.  Sos.  Are  you  in  your  senses  P  What  disgraceful 
ODuduct  of  mine  P 

Wife.  When  you  filch  from  home  my  mantle  and  gold 
trinhets,  without  the  knowledge  of  your  wife,  and  carry 
them,  off  to  your  mistress.     Don't  I  state  this  correctly  ? 

Men.  Sos.  O  dear !  madam,  by  my  faith,  you  are  both  very 
bold  and  very  perverse,  Po  vou  dare  to  say  (pointing  at  the- 
mtmtle)  that  this  was  stolen  n'om  you  which  another  woman 
gave  me,  for  me  to  get  it  trimmed  P 

WiEE.  A  little  while  since  you  didn't  deny  that  you  had 
purloined  it  from  me ;  do  you  now  hold  up  that  same  before 
my  eyes  P  Are  you  not  ashamed  ? 

Mbv.  Sos.  By  my  faith,  madam,  I  entreat  you,  if  you 
know,  show  me  what  I'm  to  drink^,  by  means  of  which  I 
may  put  up  with  your  impertinence.    What  person  you  are 

1  What  Fm  to  drink) — ^Ver.  742.  Some  Commentators  think  that  he  is  asking 
far  a  medical  potion,  to  help  him  to  swallow  down  the  "  petulantia,"  or  insulting 
oonduet.  This  supposition  does  not  seem  necessary,  for  even  a  draught  of  water 
would  have  the  same  effect  in  tteh  a  case. 

2a 


y  Google 


354  iaiir.SGHMi ;  Aet  I?. 

taking  me  to  be,  I  don't  know ;  I  know  you  just  aa  well 
as  Fartbaon^. 

WiTB.  K  you  laugh  at  me,  still,  i'  troth,  you  can't  di> 
so  at  him ;  my  father,  I  mean^  who's  coming  heie.  Why 
don't  you  look  back  ?    Do  you  know  that  person  ? 

Mbk.  Sos.  Just  as  well  as  Calchas^  do  I  know  him;  I 
have  seen  him  on  that  same  day  on  which  I  have  «««»  your- 
self before  this  present  day. 

Wife.  Do  you  deny  that  you  know  me  ?  Do  you  deny 
tkatmu  know  my  father  ? 

Mj:k.  Sos.  Troth,  I  shall  say  the  same  thing,  if  you  choose 
to  bring  your  grandfather. 

Wif  E.  I'  faith,  you  do  this  and  other  things  just  in  a  like 
fashion. 

Scene  II. — MfOer  an  Old  Mjjx,  hohbling  mlJt  a  stkk, 

Olb  Man.  According  as  my  b^q  permits,  and  as  there  is 
occasion  to  do  so,  I'll  push  on  my  steps  arid  make  haste  to 
get  along.  But  how  fer  from  easy  *tis  for  me,  I'm  not  nas- 
taken  as  to  that.  For  my  agilitjr  forsakes  me,  and  I  am  beset 
with  age ;  I  carry  my  body  weighed  down ;  my  strength  has 
deserted  me.  How  ^evous  a  pack  upon  one's  badk  is  age, 
For  when  it  comes,  it  brings  very  many  and  very  g^evous 
particulars,  were  I  now  to  recount  all  of  which,  my  speech 
would  be  too  long.  But  this  matter  is  a  trouble  to  my 
mind  and  heart,  what  this  business  can  possibly  be  on 
account  of  which  my  daughter  suddenly  requires  me  to  come 
to  her,  and  doesn't  first  let  me  know  what's  the  matter, 
what  she  wants,  or  why  she  sends  for  me.  But  prel»^ 
nearly  do  I  know  now  what's  the  matter ;  I  sospeet  tin* 
some  quarrel  has  arisen  with  her  husband.  So  are  these 
women  wont  to  do,  who,  presuming  on  their  portions,  (unA 
haughty,  require  their  husbands  to  be  obedient  to  them ;  and 
they  as  well  Ml  oft  are  not  without  fault.  But  stfll  there  ate 
bounds,  within  which  a  wife  ought  to  be  put  up  with.  By  my 
troth,  my  daughter  never  sends  for  her  father  to  come  to  h^r 

» As  wdl  as  Partha(m)—Yer.  746.  Parthaon  was  the  father  of  (Eneus,  Kng  of 
JStolia,  the  father  of  Deianira,  the  wife  of  Hercules.  The  name  is  used  to  tag- 
mfy  a  person  who  lived  so  long  ago  that  it  was  impossible  to  know  him. 

<  As  well  as  CalcJuu)^Yer,  748.  Calchas,  the  son  of  Thesier,  was  afiunott 
soothsayer,  who  accompanied  the  Grecian  army  in  the  ezpecUtiom  against  Trsj. 


y  Google 


Se.  n.  OB,  THE  TWnf-BBOTHlSBS.  3S5 

accept  when  either  sometbing  has  been  done  wrong,  or  i^ere 
is  ft  cause  for  quarrelling.  But  whatever  it  is,  I  shall  nov 
know.  And  see,  I  perceive  her  herself  before  the  house,  and 
Iter  husband  in  a  pensive  mood.  'Tis  the  same  as  I 
mspected.     I'll  accost  her. 

w  iFE.  I'll  go  and  meet  him.  Maj  eveiy  happiness  attend 
you,  my  father. 

Old  Mak.  Happiness  attend  jou.  Do  I  find  jou  in  good 
^arits  ?  Do  you  bid  me  be  fetched  in  happy  mood  ?  "Why 
are  you  sorrowful  ?  And  why  does  he  {pointing  at  Mxk jich- 
mrs)  in  anger  stand  apart  ^m  you  ?  Something,  I  know  not 
wiiat,  are  you  two  wrangling  about^  between  you.  Say,  in  few 
words,  which  of  the  two  is  in  fault :  no  long  speeches,  though. 

WilE.  For  my  part,  I've  done  nothing  wrong ;  as  to  that 
point  do  I  at  once  make  you  easy,  father.  But  I  cannot  Kve 
«  remain  here  on  any  account ;  you  nnist  take  me  away 
hence  immediately. 

Old  Mak.  Why,  what's  the  matter  ?  "Wiris,  I  am  made 
a  laughing'-stoek  o^  £&ther. 

Old  Majt.  By  whom?  Wite.  By  him  to  whom  you 
gave  me,  my  husband. 

Old  Mak.  Look  at  that — a  quarrel  now.  How  often,  I 
wonder,  have  I  told  you  to  be  cautious,  that  neither  ^ould  be 
coming  to  me  with  your  complaintB. 

Wife.  How,  my  father,  can  I  possibly  guard  against  that  ? 

Old  Mait.  Do  you  ask  me  ?       *  *  •  * 

*  *  *  •  unless  you  don't  wish. 

How  often  have  I  told  you  to  be  compliant  to  your  hus- 
band. Don't  be  watching  what  he  does,  where  lie  goes,  or 
what  matter  he's  about. 

WrpB.  Why,  but  he's  in  love  with  a  courtesan  here  close 
Ijy. 

Old  Mjjf.  He  is  exceedingly  wise :  and  for  this  |mins- 
taking  cf  yours,  I  would  even  have  him  love  her  the  more. 

Wife.  He  drinks  there,  too.  Old  Mait.  And  will  he 
really  driok  the  less  for  you,  whether  it  shall  please  him  to  do 

1  WrangUng  aJoirf)— Ver.  778.  "  VdiUti  estw;"  literally,  "have  been  skir- 
mishing." The  flgare  is  derived  from  the  "  velites,"  the  light-armed  soldiers  e€  the 
Boman  army,  who  were  not  drawn  np  in  rank  and  file,  bat  commonly  skuimahed 
in  front  of  the  main  body,  attacking  the  enemy  here  and  therei,  and  when  hard 
pressed,  retiring  into  the  vacant  spaces  of  the  legion. 

2  a2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


856  MEy-ffiCHMi;  ActlTr 

90  there  or  anywhere  eke  ?  Plague  on  it,  what  assurance  i» 
this  ?  On  the  same  principle,  you  would  wish  to  hinder  him 
from  engaging  to  dine  out,  or  from  receiving  any  other  per- 
son at  his  own  house.  Do  you  want  husbands  to  be  your 
servants  ?  You  might  as  well  expect,  on  the  same  prin- 
ciple, to  be  giving  him  out  his  task,  and  bidding  him  sit 
among  the  female  servants  and  card  wool. 

"Wife.  Why,  surely,  father,  I've  sent  for  you  not  to  he 
my  advocate,  but  my  husband's  :  on  this  side  you  stand^,  on 
the  other  you  plead  the  cause. 

Old  Man.  If  he  has  done  wrong  in  anything,  so  much 
the  more  shall  I  censure  him  than  I've  censured  you. 
Since  he  keeps  you  provided  for  and  well  clothed,  and  £nds 
you  amply  in  female  servants  and  provisions,  'tis  better, 
madam,  to  entertain  kindly  feelings. 

"Wife.  But  he  purloins  from  me  gold  trinkets  and  mantles 
from  out  of  the  chests  at  home ;  he  plunders  me,  and  secretly 
carries  off  my  ornaments  to  harlots. 

Old  Matt.  He  does  wrong,  if  he  does  that ;  if  he  does 
not  do  it,  you  do  wrong  in  accusing  him  when  innocent. 

"Wipe.  Why  at  this  moment,  even,  he  has  got  a  mantle, 
father,  and  a  bracelet,  which  he  had  carried  off  to  her  j  now, 
because  I  came  to  know  of  it,  he  brings  them  back. 

Old  Man.  I'll  know  from  himself,  then,  how  it  happened. 
I'U  go  up  to  this  man  and  accost  him.  (Goes  tip  to  Me- 
NiECHMTJS.)  Tell  me  this,  Men»chmus,  what  you  two  are 
disputing  about,  that  I  may  know.  Why  are  you  pensive  ? 
And  why  does  she  in  anger  stand  apart  from  you  ? 

Men.  Sos.  Whoever  you  are,  whatever  is  your  name,  old 
gentleman,  I  call  to  witness  supreme  Jove  and  the  Dei- 
ties  

Old  Man.  For  what  reason,  or  what  matter  of  all  matters  ? 

Men.  Sos.  That  I  have  neither  done  wrong  to  that  woman, 
who  is  accusing  me  of  having  purloined  this  (pointing  to 
the  mantle)  away  from  her  at  home  #  #  # 

and  which  she  solemnly  swears  that  I  did  take  away.    If 

^  Of»  ihii  aide  you  stand) — ^Ver.  799.  It  was  the  castom  for  the  patron,  when 
acting  as  the  counsel,  to  have  hb  client  standmg  by  him  while  pleading.  The  wife 
complains  that  her  father  has  been  sent  for  hy  her  to  act  as  her  own  advocate,  lat 
that,  instead  of  so  doing,  he  is  encouraging  her  supposed  husband  in  his  pervert* 
ness. 


y  Google 


Sc.  U-  OB,  THE  TWIK-BBOTHBBS.  857 

^ver  I  set  foot  inside  of  her  house  where  she  lives,  I  wish 
that  I  may  become  the  most  wretched  of  all  wretched 
men. 

Old  Mai^.  Are  you  in  your  senses  to  wish  this,  or  to  deny 
that  you  ever  set  foot  in  that  house  where  you  live,  you 
downright  madman  ? 

Mek.  Sos.  Do  you  say,  old  gentleman,  that  I  live  in  this 
house  ?     (JPointmg  at  ike  house!) 

Old  MA]<r.  Do  you  deny  it  ?  Meit.  Sos,  By  my  faith,  I 
certainly  do  deny  it. 

Old  Man.  In  your  fun  you  are  going  too  far  in  denying 
it;  unless  you  flitted  elsewhere  this  last  night.  Step  this 
way,  please,  daughter.  (To  the  Wife.)  What  do  you  say  ? 
Have  you  removed  from  this  house  ? 

Wife.  To  what  place,  or  for  what  reason,  prithee  ? 

Old  Man.  I'  faith,  I  don't  know.  Wife.  He's  surely 
making  fun  of  you. 

Old  Mak.  Can't  you  keep  yourself  quiet  ?  Now,  Me- 
nsBchmus,  you  really  have  joked  long  enough;  now  do 
^eriousl^  attend  to  tms  matter. 

Men.  Sos.  Prithee,  what  have  I  to  do  with  you  ?  Whence 
or  what  ]person  are  you  ?  Is  your  mind  right,  or  hers,  in 
fact,  who  is  an  annoyance  to  me  in  every  way  ? 

Wife.  Don't  you  see  how  his  eyes  sparkle?  How  a 
green  colour^  is  arising  on  his  temples  and  his  forehead ;  look 
how  his  eyes  do  glisten      *  •  •  •  * 

♦  #  #  #     . 

Men.  Sos.  O  me!  They  say  I'm  mad,  whereas  they  of 
themselves  are  mad. 

Wife.  How  he  yawns,  as  he  stretches  himself.  What  am 
I  to  do  now,  my  father  ? 

Old  Man.  Step  this  way,  my  daughter,  as  far  as  ever  you 
can  from  him. 

Men.  Sos.  (aside).  What  is  there  better  for  me  than, 
since  they  say  I'm  mad,  to  pretend  that  I  am  mad,  that  I 
may  frighten  them  away  from  me?      (Se  dances  about.) 

*  A  green  colour) — ^Ver.  829.  It  was  supposed  that  in  madness,  or  extreme 
anger,  the  countenance  assnmed  a  greenish  hue.  Ben  Jonson  has  probably  imi- 
tated this  passage  in  the  Silent  Woman,  Act  IV.,  sc.  4. :  "  Lord  I  how  idly  he  talks, 
and  how  his  eyes  sparkle !  he  looks  green  about  the  temples !  Do  you  see  what 
bfaie  spots  he  has?" 


y  Google 


V6S  uMmmoEXL;  A:etI7. 


E^oe,  BaoehuBy  ho!  BromiiiB^,  in  what  forest  dost  thou  TBOt- 
▼ite  me  to  the  chase  P  I  hear  theCy  but  I  cannot  get  away 
from  this  spot,  so  much  does  this  raving  mad  female  cur 
watch  me  on  the  left  side.  And  behind  there  is  that  other 
old  he-goat,  who  man  j  a  time  in  his  life  has  proved  the  de- 
struction of  an  innocent  feUow-citizen  by  his  &lae  testi- 
mony. 

Old  Mak  (shaking  his  stick  ai  him).  Woe  to  your  head! 

MsK.  Sos.  Lo !  by  his  oracle,  Apollo  bids  me  bum  out  her 
eyes  with  blazing  torches.    (^He  points  with  his  fingers  at  hsr) 

Wife.  I'm  undone,  my  father ;  he's  threatening  to  bum 
my  eyes  out. 

Qu)  MjlN.  Hark  you,  daughter.  Wife.  What's  the 
matter  ?    What  are  we  to  do  ? 

Old  Mak.  What  if  I  call  the  servants  out  here  P  I'll  go 
bring  somo  to  take  him  awaj  hence,  and  bind  him  at  home, 
before  he  makes  any  further  disturbance. 

MsK.  Sos.  (aside).  So  now;  I  think  now  if  I  don't  adopt 
flome  plan  for  myself,  these  people  will  be  carrying  me  off 
home  to  their  house.  {Ahud.)  Dost  thou  forbid  me  to  spure 
my  fists  at  all  upon  her  face,  unless  she  does  at  once  get  out 
of  my  sight  to  utter  and  extreme  perdition  P  I  wiU  do  what 
thou  dost  bid  me,  Apollo.     (JBuns  after  her.) 

Old  Majt  (to  the  Wife).  Away  with  you  home  as  sood 
as  possible,  lest  he  should  knock  you  down. 

Wife.  I'm  off.  Watch  him,  my  father,  I  entreat  you, 
that  he  mayn't  go  anywhere  hence.  Am  I  not  a  wretched 
woman  to  hear  these  things  P     (She  aoes  into  her  house.) 

Mek.  Sos.  (aside).  I've  got  rid  of  her  not  so  badly. 
(Aloud).  Now  as  for  this  most  filthy,  Ions-bearded,  palsied 
Tithonus,  who  is  said  to  have  had  Cygnus  lor  hisfathCT^,yoii 

1  Ho !  Bromvua) — ^Ver.  836.  Evius  and  Bromins  were  two  of  the  names  by 
which  the  Bacchanals  addressed  Bacchus  in  their  frenzy. 

2  Cygnimfor  hisjather) — ^Ver.  864.  Plantus  designedly  makes  Menschmiis 
Sondes  he  gniltj  of  the  mistake  of  styling  Tithonus  the  son  of  Cjgnns,  as  hdpiag 
to  promote  the  belief  of  his  madness.  Titfaonns  was  the  son  of  liuimedon,  and  the 
brother  of  Priam.  He  was  beloved  by  Aorora,  and  the  poets  fdgned  that  he  was 
her  husband.  Having  received  the  gift  of  immortality,  he  foi^ot  to  have  perpetual 
yoathiuhiess  miited  with  the  gift ;  and  at  length,  in  his  extreme  old  age,  he  was 
changed  into  a  grasshopper.  There  were  several  persons  of  the  name  of  (^gnos, 
or  Cycnus ;  one  was  the  son  of  Apollo  and  Hyrie,  another  of  Man  and  Pelopea, 
or  Pyrene,  another  of  Neptune  and  Calyx,  and  a  fourth  of  Odtos  and  Araqpiufe. 


y  Google 


flc.  n.  OB,  THX  ifwnr-BBcn^HSBS.  888 

bid  me  break  in  pieces  his  limbs,  and  bones,  and  members 
V1&  thai;  wiAang-stiek  winch  be  himself  is  holding. 

Ou)  BIak.  Punishm^it  Bhall  be  inflicted  if  you  touch  me 
indeed,  or  if  you  come  nearer  to  me. 

Mek.  Sos.  {shouimg  (doud).  I  will  do  what  thou  dost  bid 
me ;  I  will  take  a  two-edged  axe,  and  I  wiU  hew  this  old  fellow 
to  his  very  bones,  and  I  will  chop  his  entndls  into  mince- 
meat. 

Old  Hak  (retreating  as  far  as  Tie  can).  Why  really 
i^ainst  that  must  I  take  care  and  precaution.  As  he 
tbeatens,  I'm  quite  in  dread  of  him,  lest  he  should  do  me 
some  mischief. 

Men.  Sos.  (Jwmmng  and  raising  his  arms).  Many  things 
dost  thou  bid  me  do,  ApoUo.  Now  thou  dost  order  me  to 
take  the  yoked  horses,  unbroke  and  fierce,  and  to  mount  the 
chariot,  that  I  may  crush  to  pieces  this  aged,  stinking,  tooth- 
less lion.  Now  have  I  mounted  the  chanot ;  now  do  I  hold 
the  reins ;  now  is  the  whip  in  my  hand.  Speed  onward,  ^e 
8tee^,  let  the  sound  of  your  hoofs  be  heard ;  in  your  swift 
eoorse  let  the  rapid  pace  of  your  feet^  be  redoubled.  (JPovnts 
ftt  the  OiiB  MIajn^  as  he  pretends  to  gallop.) 

Old  "IVfAisr.  Are  you  threatening  me  with  your  yoked 
steeds? 

Mek.  Sos.  Lo !  again,  Apollo,  thou  dost  bid  me  to  make 
m  onset  against  him  who  is  standing  here,  and  to  murder 
him.  But  what  perscm  is  this  that  is  tearing  me  hence  by 
fte  hair  down  from  the  chariot  ?  He  revokes  thy  commands 
and  the  decree  of  Apollo. 

Old  Majt.  Alas !  a  severe  and  obstinate  malady,  i'  faith. 
By  our  trust  in  you,  ye  Gods         #  •  #  * 

•  •  *  *  even  this  person  who  is 

iow  mad,  how  weU  he  was  a  little  time  since.  All  on  a 
sudden  has  so  great  a  distemper  attacked  him.  I'll  go  now 
and  fetch  a  physician  as  fast  as  I  can.  {Exit. 

VLss.  Sos.  Prithee,  are  these  persons  gone  now  out  of  my 
sight,  who  are  compelling  me  by  force,  while  in  my  wits,  to 
be  mad?    Why  do  I  d^y  to  be  off  to  the  ship,  while  I  can 

*  T%empidpaee  of  your  feet) — ^Ver.  867.  "  Cnrsn  oeleri  fiicite  inflexa  sit  pedum 
peroicitas.**  Literallj,  "  in  the  swift  coarse,  make  the  swiftness  of  yonr  feet  to 
ke  iMot  inwards."  The  legs  of  good  hones,  when  trotting  fast,  bend  inwards  be- 
fine  they  throw  them  out. 


y  Google 


860  MssMOBMX',  Acty, 

in  safety?  *  *  *  *  ♦  ♦ 

•  •  *  And  all  of  you  (to  ^A^Spbctatoes), 

if  the  old  gentleman  should  return,  I  beg  not  to  tell  him, 
now,  by  what  street  I  fled  away  hence.  (Esnt 

Act  V. — ScEmB  I. 

JSfUer  the  Old  Man,  very  slowly. 

Old  Man.  My  bones  ache  with  sitting,  my  eyes  with 
watching,  while  waiting  for  the  Doctor,  till  he  returned  from 
his  business.  At  last  the  troublesome  feUow  has  with  diffi- 
culty got  away  from  his  patients.  He  says  that  he  has  set 
a  broken  leg  for  ^sculapius^,  and  an  arm  for  Apollo.  I'm 
now  thinking  whether  I'm  to  say  that  I'm  bringing  a  doctor 
or  a  carpenter*.  But,  see,  here  he  comes.— Do  get  on  with 
your  ant's  pace. 

ScBiTES  II. — JEnter  a  Doctob. 

DocT.  "What  did  you  say  was  his  disorder  ?  Tell  me, 
respected  sir.  Is  he  harassed  by  sprites^,  or  is  he  frenzied  ? 
Let  me  know.  Is  it  lethargy,  or  is  it  dropsy,  that  possesses 
him? 

Old  Man.  Why,  I'm  briaging  you  for  that  reason,  that 
you  may  tell  me  that,  and  make  him  convalescent. 

DocT.  That  indeed  is  a  very  easy  matter.  Why,  I  shall 
heal  ionumerable  times  as  many*  in  the  day. 

Old  Man.  I  wish  him  to  be  treated  with  great  attention. 

DocT.  That  he  shaU  be  healed,  I  promise  that  on  my 
word ;  so  with  great  attention  will  I  treat  him  for  you. 

1  For  jEsculapiw) — ^Ver.  885.  Apollo  and  iEscnlapius  were  the  two  guarduui 
Divinities  of  the  medical  art.  The  old  man,  perhaps,  mentions  their  names  in- 
stead of  those  of  some  persons  of  whose  wonderfol  cores  the  Doctor  has  been 
bragging. 

^Or  a  cflTyenfer)— Ver.  887.  He  says  that,  talking  of  mending  legp,  the 
Doctor  may,  for  an^t  he  knows,  be  some  carpenter,  who  has  been  pateUng  19 
the  legs  of  statues. 

»  Harassed  hy  spritesy^Yer.  890.  "  Larvatus  aut  cerritus."  The  "larvati" 
were  mad  persons,  supposed  to  be  afflicted  with  ghosts  or  spectres;  while  tbe 
*'cerriti"  were  persons  who  were  thought  to  be  visited  with  madness  bf  the 
Groddess  Ceres. 

*  InnmnerabU  times  as  many) — ^V^r.  894.  The  Doctor  is  bragging  of  his  « 
sive  practice. 


y  Google 


8c.  m.  OB,  THIS  IWOr-BBOTHEBS.  361 

Old  Man.  "Why,  see !  here's  the  man  himself. 
DocT.  Let's  watch  what  matter  he's  about.      (They  stand 
aside.) 

.    ScEiirB  III. — JEnter  MEN-aiCHMirs  of  Upidamnus. 

Mek.  (to  himself).  By  my  faith,  this  day  has  certainly 
fallen  out  perverse  and  adverse  for  me,  since  the  Parasite, 
who  has  filled  me  full  of  disgrace  and  terror,  has  made  that 
all  known,  which  I  supposed  I  was  doing  secretly ;  my  own 
TJlysses^,  who  has  brought  so  great  evil  on  his  king — a  fellow 
that,  by  my  troth,  if  I  only  live,  I'll  soon  finish  his  life^. 
But  I'm  a  fool,  who  call  that  his,  which  is  my  own.  "With 
my  own  victuals  and  at  my  own  expense  has  he  been  sup- 
ported; of  existence  will  I  deprive  the  fellow.  But  the 
Courtesan  has  done  this  in  a  way  worthy  of  her,  just  as  the 
harlot's  habit  is  :  because  I  ask  for  the  mantle,  that  it  may 
he  returned  again  to  my  wife,  she  declares  that  she  has  given 
it  me.     O  dear !    By  my  faith,  I  do  live  a  wretched  man. 

Old  Man  {a^art).  Do  you  hear  what  he  says  ? 

DocT.  {wpa/r£).  He  declares  that  he  is  wretched. 

Old  Man  (apa/rt).  I  wish  you  to  accost  him. 

DocT.  (govngv{ptohim).  Save  you,  MensBchmus.  Prithee, 
why  do  you  bare  your  arm  ?  Don't  you  know  how  much 
mischief  you  are  now  doing  to  that  disease  of  yours  ? 

Men.  Why  don't  you  go  hang  yourself? 

Old  Man.  "What  think  you  now  ?  Doct.  "What  shouldn't 
I  think  ?  This  case  can't  be  treated  with  even  ointment  of 
hellebore.     But  what  have  you  to  say,  MensBchmus  ? 

Men.  What  do  you  want  ?  Doct.  TeU  me  this  that  I 
ask  of  you ;  do  you  drink  white  wine  or  dark-coloured  ? 

Men.  "What  need  have  you  to  enquire  ? 

I3ocT    #***** 

Men.  "Why  don't  you  go  to  utter  perdition  ? 

^  My  man  Ulysses)— YeT.  902.  He  compbdns  that  the  Parasite,  who 'used  to 
be  his  adviser,  and  as  good  as  a  Ulysses  to  him,  his  king,  or  patron,  has  been  the 
cause  of  all  his  mishaps. 

2  Finish  his  life)—Yer.  903.  "  Vit&  evokam  su&.'*  Literally,  "  I  will  wind 
him  off  of  his  life."  He  probably  alludes  to  the  "  Parcse,"  the  "  Fates"  or 
**  Destiniiis,"  who  were  fabled  to  be  the  daughters  of  Noxand  Erebus,  and  of  whom, 
one,  named  Clotho,  held  the  distaff,  and  spun  the  thread  of  life ;  another,  named 
Lachesis;  wound  it  off;  and  the  third,  called  Atropos,  cut  it  off  when  of  the  re- 
quisite length. 


y  Google 


an  MXirAOSMi;  AetT. 

Old  Mak.  TroUi,  be's  now  begimiing  to  be  attadLed  wiiji 
the  fit. 

Men.  Why  don't  yon  ask  whether  I'm  wont  to  eat  dirk 
bread,  or  purple,  or  yellow  ?  Or  whether  I'm  wont  to  eat 
birds  with  scales,  or  fish  with  wings  P  * 

OldMak.  Dear, dear!  {TotheJ>o<yiO'BL?)'DoD!tjouhGas\i<cm 
deliriously  he  talks  ?  "Why  do  yon  delay  to  give  him  some- 
thing by  way  of  a  potion,  before  his  raving  overtakes  him? 

DocT.  Stop  a  little  J  I'll  question  him  on  some  other 
matters  as  well. 

Old  Mait.  You  are  killing  me^  by  your  prating. 

DooT.  {to  Mekjechmus).  Tell  me  this ;  are  your  eyes  ever 
in  the  habit  of  becoming  hard^  ? 

MEif.  What  ?  Do  you  take  me  to  be  a  locust*,  you  moat 
worthless  fellow  ? 

DoCT.  Tell  me,  now,  do  your  bowels  ever  rumble  that  you 
know  of? 

Mbk.  When  I'm  fuU,  they  don't  rumble  at  all ;  when  I'm 
hungry,  then  they  do  rumble. 

DocT.  I'  faith,  he  really  gave  me  that  answer  not  like  an 
insane  person.  Do  you  always  sleep  soundly  until  daylight  ? 
Do  you  easily  go  to  sleep  when  ia  bed  ? 

Men.  I  sleep  throughout  if  ♦  *  #  * 

•  *  •        I  go  to  sleep  if  I  have  paid  my  money 

to  him  to  whom  I  owe  it. 

DooT.  »•##*•* 

Mek.  {to  the  Doctoe).  May  Jupiter  and  all  the  Divinities 
confound  you,  you  questioner. 

DocT.  {aside).  Now  tJiis  person  begiQS  to  rave.  (lb  the 
Old  Mak.)  From  those  expressions  do  you  take  care  of 
yourself. 

Old  Mak.  Why,  he's  now  really  quite  favourable  in  his 
language,  in  comparison  with  what  he  was  a  short  time  since ; 


» You  are  hiUvng  me)— Ver.  922.  "  Occidis  fabnlans."  This  remark  i 
rather  to  apply  to  the  effect  of  his  chattering,  upon  the  oM  man  himself,  who  is 
growing  impatient,  than  upon  the  supposed  madman ;  though,  firora  the  elfiptieil 
nature  of  the  expression,  the  latter  may  possibly  be  tiie  meaning. 

*  Of  hecoming  ^rrf)— Ver.  928.  This  was  supposed  to  be  one  of  the  synq^- 
toms  of  madness. 

»  To  he  a  locutt)—Yer.  924.  The  eyes  of  locusts  were  considered  to  be  of  peen- 
liar  hardness.  They  are  very  large  and  prominent.  It  has  been  suggested  ihit 
«<  locusta"  here  means  a  ^'  lobster.** 


y  Google 


Se.  m.  OBy  THx  smar-BBOTHEBB.  868 

for,  a  little  while  ago,  he  was  saying  tliat  his  wife  wbs  a 
ranng  ear. 
Mmr,  What  did  I  say  ?     Oed  Mak.  You  were  raring,  I 

Mek.  What,  I  ?  Old  Mait.  You  there ;  who  threatened 
as  well  to  ride  me  down  with  your  yoked  steeds. 

Mkf.  #•#*#* 

Old  Matt,  I  myself  saw  you  do  this ;  I  myself  accuse  you 
of  this. 

Mef.  And  I  know  that  you  stole  ^  the  sacred  crown  of 
Jupiter ;  and  that  on  that  account  you  were  confined  in  pri- 
am ;  and  after  you  were  let  out,  I  know  that  you  were  beaten 
with  rods  in  the  bilboes ;  I  know,  too,  that  you  murdered 
your  fiather  and  sold  your  mother.  Don't  I  give  this  abuse 
in  answer  for  your  abuse,  like  a  sane  person  ? 

Old  Man.  I'  faith.  Doctor,  whatever  you  are  about  to  do, 
prithee,  do  it  quickly.    Don't  you  see  that  the  man  is  raving  ? 

DocT..  Do  you  know  what's  the  best  for  you  to  do? 
Have  him  taken  to  my  house. 

Old  Man.  Do  you  think  so  ?  Door.  Why  should  I  not  ? 
There  at  my  own  discretion  I  shall  be  able  to  treat  the  man. 

Old  Mak.  Do  just  as  you  please.  Doct.  (to  Mekjech- 
Kus).  I'll  make  you  drink  hellebore  some  twenty  days. 

MxK.  But,  hanging  up^,  I'll  flog  you  with  a  whip  for  thirty 
days. 

Doct.  (to  the  Old  Man).  Go  fetch  some  men  to  take  him 
off  to  my  house. 

Old  Man.  How  many  are  sufficient  ? 

Doct.  Since  I  see  him  thus  raving,  four,  no  less. 

Old  Man.  They  shall  be  here  this  instant.  Do  you  keep 
an  eye  on  him,  Doctor. 

Doct.  Why,  no,  I  shall  go  home  that  the  things  may  be 
got  ready,  which  are  necessary  to  be  prepared.  Bid  your  ser- 
vants cany  him  to  my  house. 

Old  Man.  I'll  make  him  be  there  just  now. 

'  That  you  stoley-Yer,  941.  This  expression  has  been  ah-eadj-  remarked  upon 
in  the  Notes  to  the  Trinnmmus. 

«Birt,  ftoiigwgrf^)— Ver.  961.."Pendentem."  When  they  w«re  flogged,  the 
slaves  were  tied  np  with  their  hands  extended  oyer  their  heads.  Probablj,  the 
Doctor  is  intended  to  be  represented  as  being  a  slave ;  as  many  of  the  liberal  pnr- 
soHs  wen  followed  hj  slaves,  and  sometimes  to  the  very  great  profit  of  their 
MBten.  The  '*fbrca"  (for  want  of  a  better  word,  called  "bilboes"  in  the 
translation)  ia  referred  to  in  another  Note. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


36^  ^assMCWMX ;  Act  Y* 

DocT.  rmoff.    OldMak.  Farewell 

(^Exeunt  Old  Mak  and  Doctob,  separately. 

'M.isss.  My  father-in-law  is  gone,  the  Doctor  is  gone ;  Tm 
alone.  O  Jupiter !  Why  is  it  that  these  people  say  I*m 
mad  ?  Why,  in  fact,  since  I  was  bom,  I  have  never  for  a 
single  day  been  ill.  I'm  neither  mad,  nor  do  I  commence 
strifes  or  quarrels.  In  health  myself,  I  see  others  well;  I 
know  people,  I  address  them.  Is  it  that  they  who  falsely  say 
I'm  mad,  are  mad  themselves  ?  What  shall  I  do  now  ?  1 
wish  to  go  home ;  but  my  wife  doesn't  allow  me ;  and  here 
(^pointing  to  Ebotium's  house)  no  one  admits  me.  Most 
unfortunately  has  this  fallen  out.  Here  will  I  still  remain; 
at  night,  at  least,  I  shall  be  let  into  the  house,  I  trust. 
{Stands  near  his  door.) 

SoEKE  IV. — JSnter  Messenig. 
Mess,  (to  himself).  This  is  the  proof  of  a  good  servant, 
who  takes  care  of  his  master's  business,  looks  after  it,  arranges 
it,  thinks  about  it,  in  the  absence  of  ids  master  diligently  to 
attend  to  the  affairs  of  his  master,  as  much  so  as  if  he  himself 
were  present,  or  even  better.  It  is  proper  that  his  back^ 
should  be  of  more  consequence  than  his  appetite,  his  legs 
than  his  stomach,  whose  heart  is  rightly  placed.  Let  him 
bear  in  mind,  those  who  are  good  for  nothing,  wbat  reward 
is  given  them  by  their  masters — ^lazy,  worthless  fellows. 
Stripes,  fetters,  the  mill,  weariness,  hunger,  sharp  cold ;  these 
are  the  rewards  of  idleness.  This  evil  do  I  terribly  stand  in 
awe  of.  Wherefore  'tis  sure  that  to  be  good  is  better  than 
to  be  bad.  Much  more  readily  do  I  submit  to  words, 
stripes  I  do  detest ;  and  I  eat  what  is  ground  much  m(ffe 
readily  than  supply  it  ground  by  myself*.  Therefore  do  I 
obey  the  command  of  my  master,  carefully  and  diligently  do 
I  observe  it ;  and  in  such  manner  do  I  pay  obedience,  as  I 
think  is  for  the  interest  of  my  back.  And  that  course  does 
profit  me.  Let  others  be  just  as  they  take  it  to  be  their 
interest;  I  shall  be  just  as  I  ought  to  be.  If  I  adhere  to 
that,  I  shall  avoid  faultiness ;  so  that  I  am  in  readiness  for  my 

L  That  his  6acib)— Ver.  970.  For  the  purpose  of  keeping  his  back  intact  from 
the  whip,  and  his  feet  from  the  fetters. 

*  Ground  by  myself)— Yer.  979.  He  alludes  to  the  castom  of  sending  refiracfeaiy 
slaves  to  the  "pistrinam,"  where  the  corn  was  ground  bj  a  handmill,  which  en- 
tailed extreme  labour  on  those  grinding.  He  says  that  he  would  rather  that 
others  should  grind  the  corn  for  him,  than  that  he  should  grind  it  for  othen. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  T-  OB,  THE  TWIir-BEOTHBBS.  365 

master  on  all  occasions,  I  shall  not  be  mucli  afraid.  The  time 
is  near,  when,  for  these  deeds  of  mine,  my  master  will  give  his 
reward.  After  I  had  deposited  the  goods  and  the  servants  in 
tlie  inn,  as  he  ordered  me,  thus  am  I  come  to  meet  him. 
(Goinq  to  the  door  o/^Ebotium's  house,)  Now  I'll  knock  at  the 
door,  that  he  may  know  that  I'm  here,  and  that  out  of  this  thick 
vood^  of  peril  I  may  get  my  master  safe  out  of  doors.  But  I'm 
afraid  that  I'm  come  too  late,  after  the  battle  has  been  fought. 
Scene  V. — Enter  the  Old  Man,  with  Seevakts. 

Old  Mak  {to  the  Sebvants).  By  Gods  and  men,  I  tell 
you  prudently  to  pay  regard  to  my  commands,  as  to  what  I 
nave  commanded  and  do  command.  Take  care  that  this 
person  is  carried  at  once  upon  your  shoulders  to  the  surgery, 
unless,  indeed,  you  set  no  value  upon  your  legs  or  your  sides. 
Take  care  each  of  you  to  regard  at  a  straw  whatever  threats 
lie  shall  utter.  "W*hat  are  you  standing  for  ?  Why  are  you 
hesitating?  By  this  you  ought  to  have  had  him  carried 
off  on  your  shoulders.  I'll  go  to  the  Doctor ;  I'll  be  there 
ready  when  you  shall  come. 

{Eait.     The  Sebvants  gather  around  Men^chmus. 

Men.  I'm  undone.  What  business  is  this?  Why  are 
these  men  running  towards  me,  pray  ?  What  do  you  want  ? 
What  do  you  seek  ?  Why  do  you  stand  around  me  ?  {They 
ieke  and  drag  him,)  Whither  are  you  dragging  me  ?  Whi- 
ther are  you  carrying  me  ?  I'm  undone.  X  entreat  your 
assistance,  citizens,  men  of  Epidamnus,  come  and  help  me. 
{To  the  men,)  Why  don't  you  let  me  go  ? 

Mess,  (running  towards  them).  O  ye  immortal  Gods,  I  be- 
seech you,  what  do  I  behold  with  my  eyes  ?  Some  fellows,  1 
know  not  who,  are  most  disgracefally  carrying  off  my  master 
upon  their  shoulders. 

Mek.  Who  is  it  that  ventures  to  bring  me  aid  ? 

Mess.  I,  master,  and  right  boldly.  (Aloud.)  O  shameful 
and  scandalous  deed,  citizens  of  Epidamnus,  for  my  master, 
here  in  a  town  enjoying  peace,  to  be  carried  off,  in  daylight, 
in  the  street,  who  came  to  you  a  free  man.    Let  him  eo. 

MEiiT.  Prithee,  whoever  you  are,  do  lend  me  your  aid,  and 
don't  suffer  so  great  an  outrage  to  be  signaUy  committed 
agamstme. 

'  This  thick  tffood)-^'Vet,  988.  He  compares  the  house  of  the  Courtesan  to  a 
forest  or  thicket.  These  latter  places,  as  being  freqnentlj  the  lurking-places 
of  thieves  and  robbers,  would  be  especially  dangerous  to  trayeDers. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


MlOfJBGHKI;  ActY. 

Mb«9.  Aye,  I'll  give  you  my  aid,  and  I'll  defend  you,  sad 
zealously  succour  you.  I'll  never  let  you  eome  to  hann; 
'tis  fitter  that  I  myself  shovld  come  to  harm.  I'll  now  mate 
a  sowing  on  the  faces  of  these  fellows,  and  there  I'll  plant  my 
fists.  I'  faith,  you're  carrying  this  person  off  this  day  at 
your  own  extreme  hazard.    Let  him  go.  (Me  la^s  alaui  him,) 

Mek.  {fyhtki^  with  them),  I've  got  hold  of  this  fellow's  eye. 

Mess.  Make  the  socket  of  his  eye  be  seen  in  his  head.  Yea 
rascals !  you  villains !  you  robbers ! 

The  Seevants  {severally).  We  are  undone.  Troth,  now, 
prithee,  do 

Mess.  Let  him  go  then.  Men.  What  business  have  yoa 
to  touch  me  ?     Thump  them  with  your  fists. 

Mess.  Come,  begone,  fly  hence  to  utter  perdition  with  jtml 
{Three  run  away,)  Here's  for  you,  too  {giving  the  fourth  one 
a  ^tmch)  ;  because  you  are  the  last  to  yield,  you  shall  haw 
this  for  a  reward.  {They  all  disappear.)  E>ight  well  have  I 
marked  his  fe^e,  and  quite  to  mjr  liking.  Troth,  now,  master, 
I  really  did  come  to  your  help  just  now  in  the  nick  of  time. 

Men.  And  may  the  Gods,  young  man,  whoever  you  are, 
ever  bless  you.  For,  had  it  not  been  for  you,  I  should  never 
have  survived  this  day  until  sunset. 

Mess.  By  my  troth,  then,  master,  if  you  do  right,  you  will 
give  me  my  freedom. 

Men.  I,  give  you  your  freedom?  Mess.  Doubtieas: 
since,  master,  I  have  saved  you. 

Men.  How's  this  ?     Young  man,  you  are  mistaken. 

Mess.  How,  mistaken  ?  Men.  By  £ather  Jove,  I  solemnly 
swear  that  I  am  not  your  master. 

Mess.  Will  you  not  hold  your  peace  ?  Men.  I'm  telling 
no  lie ;  nor  did  any  servant  of  mine  ever  do  such  a  thing 
as  you  have  done  for  me. 

Mess.  In  that  case,  then,  let  me  go  free,  if  you  d^iy  that 
I  am  your  servant. 

Men.  By  my  faith,  so  far,  indeed,  as  I'm  concerned,  be 
free,  and  go  where  you  like. 

Mess.  That  is,  you  order  me  to  do  so? 

Men.  r  faith,  1  do  order  you,  if  I  have  aught  of  anthori^ 
over  you. 

Mess.  Save  you,  my  patron.  Since  you  seriously  give  m© 
my  freedom,  I  rejoice. 

Men.  r  fidth,  I  really  do  believe  you. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Se.  YL  OB,  THE  irvroi-BBOTHEBs.  309^ 

Mess.  But,  my  patron,  I  do  entreat  ytni  that  you  won't 
oommand  me  any  the  less  now  than  when  I  was  your  ser- 
?ant  "With  you  will  I  dwell,  and  when  you  go  I'll  go  home 
together  with  you.  Wait  for  me  here;  I'll  now  go  to  the 
inn,  cmd  bring  back  the  luggage  and  the  money  for  you.  The 
purse,  with  the  money  for  our  journey,  is  fast  sealed  up  in  the 
wallet ;  I'll  bring  it  just  now  here  to  you. 

Meb".  Ering  it  carefully.    Mess.  I'll  give  it  back  safe  to 
you  just  as  you  gave  it  to  me.    Do  you  wait  for  me  here. 
*  {JSxit  MEssEmco. 

Men.  Very  wonderful  things  have  reaUy  happened  this 
day  to  me  in  wonderful  ways.  Some  deny  that  I  am  he  who 
I  am,  and  shut  me  out  of  doors ;  others  say  that  I  am  he 
who  I  am  not,  and  will  have  it  that  they  are  my  servants.  He 
for  instance,  who  said  that  he  was  going  for  the  money,  to 
whom  I  gave  his  freedom  just  now.  Since  he  says  that  he  will 
bing  me  a  purse  with  money,  if  he  does  bring  it^,  I'U 
say  that  he  may  go  free  from  me  where  he  pleases,  lest  at  a 
time  when  he  shall  have  come  to  his  senses  he  should  ask  the 
money  of  me-  My  father-in-law  and  the  Doctor  were  saying 
that  I  am  mad.  "Whatever  it  is,  it  is  a  wonderful  affair. 
These  things  appear  to  me  not  at  aU  otherwise  than  dreams. 
Now  I'll  go  in  the  house  to  this  Courtesan,  although  she  is 
angry  vdth  me ;  if  I  can  prevail  upon  her  to  restore  the  mantle 
for  me  to  take  back  home.    (He  goes  into  Ebotiijm's  hotise.) 

Scene  VI. — Unter  Menjbohmtts  Sosicles  and  Messenio. 

Men.  Sos.  Do  you  dare  aflSrm,  audacious  fellow,  that  I 
have  ever  met  you  this  day  since  tJte  time  when  I  ordered 
you  to  come  here  to  meet  me  ? 

Mess.  Why,  I  just  now  rescued  you  before  this  house, 
when  four  men  were  carrying  you  off  upon  their  shoulders. 
You  invoked  the  aid  of  all  Gods  ana  men,  when  I  ran 
up  and  delivered  you  by  main  force,  fighting,  and  in  spite  of 
them.  For  this  reason,  because  I  rescued  you,  you  set  me 
at  liberty.  When  I  said  that  I  was  going  for  the  money  and 
the  luggage,  you  ran  before  to  meet  me  as  quickly  as  you 
could,  in  order  that  you  might  deny  what  you  did. 

'  If  he  does  bring  it)— Yer.  1044.  He  contemplates  robbing  even  the  man  who 
has  jnst  rescued  him.  The  disnonesty  of  his  brother,  in  carrying  off  the  mantle 
and  bracelet,  and  wishmg  to  rob  the  servant-maid  of  the  gold  fbr  her  earrings,  has 
Veen  previooslj  remarked. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Men.  Sos.  I,  bade  you  go  away  a  free  man  ? 

Mess.  Certainly.  Men.  Sos.  "Why,  on  the  contrary,  'ti» 
most  certain  that  I  myself  would  rather  become  a  slave  than 
ever  give  you  your  freedom. 

Scene  VII. — Unfer  MENiECHMus  ofUjpidamnm^from 
Eeotitjm's  house. 

Men.  (at  the  door,  to  Eeotiijm  vnthm).  If  you  are  ready 
to  swear  by  your  eyes,  by  my  troth,  not  a  bit  the  more  for 
that  reason,  most  vile  woman,  will  you  make  it  that  I  took 
away  the  mantle  and  the  bracelet  to-day. 

Mess.  Immortal  Gods,  what  do  I  see  ? 

Men.  Sos.  What  do  you  see  ?  Mess.  Tour  resemblance 
in  a  mirror. 

Men.  Sos.  "What's  the  matter  ?  Mess.  'Tis  your  image ; 
'tis  as  like  as  possible. 

Men.  Sos.  \catching  sight  of  the  other).  Troth,  it  really  is 
not  unlike,  so  far  as  1  know  my  own  form. 

Men.  (to  Messenio).  O  young  man,  save  you,  you  who 
preserved  me,  whoever  you  are. 

Mess.  By  my  troth,^  young  man,  prithee,  tell  me  your 
name,  unless  it's  disagreable. 

Men.  I'  faith,  you've  not  so  deserved  of  me,  that  it  should 
be  disagreable  for  me  to  tell  what  you  wish.  My  name  is 
Mensechmus. 

Men.  Sos.  "Why,  by  my  troth,  so  is  mine. 

Men.  I  am  a  Sicilian,  of  Syracuse. 

Men.  Sos.  Troth,  the  same  is  my  native  country. 

Men.  What  is  it  that  I  hear  of  you  ? 

Men.  Sos.  That  which  is  the  fact. 

Mess.  (To  Men-echmtts  Sosicles,  hj  mistake),  I  know 
this  person  myself  (pointing  to  the  other  Men^ghicus)  ;  he 
is  my  master,  I  reaUy  am  his  servant ;  but  I  did  think  I  be- 
longed to  this  other.  (To  MENiEOHMUS  of  JEpidamnus,  h/ 
mistake.)  I  took  him  to  be  you;  to  him,  too,  did  I  give 
some  trouble.  (To  his  master.)  Pray,  pardon  me  if  I  have 
said  aught  foolishly  or  unadvisedly  to  you. 

Men.  Sos.  Tou  seem  to  me  to  be  mad.  Don't  you  re- 
member that  together  with  me  you  disembarked  from  board 
ship  to-day? 

Mess.  Why,  reaUy,  you  say  what's  right — ^you  are  my 
master ;  (to  Menjbchmus  of  JEpidamnus)  do  you  look  out 
for  a  servant.     (To  his  master.)    To  you  my  greetings;  (to 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  Vn.  OB,  THE  TWIK-BBOTHEBS.  369 

MsiTjEOHMrs  of  JSpidamims)  to  jou,  farewell.    This,  I  say, 
is  MensBclunus. 

Men.  But  I  say  I  am.  Mbn.  Sos.  What  story's  this  ? 
Are  you  Men»chinus  ? 

IMuBN.  I  say  that  I'm  the  son  of  Moschus,  who  was  my  father. 

Mek.  Sos.  Are  you  the  son  of  my  father  ? 

Men.  Aye,  I  really  am,  young  man,  of  my  own  father,  I 
don't  want  to  claim  your  father,  nor  to  take  possession  of 
him  from  you.  ^^\ 

Mess.  Immortal  Gods,  what  imhoped-for  hope  do  you  be- 
stow on  me,  as  I  suspect.  For  unless  my  mindl^misleaas  me, 
these  are  the  two  twin-brothers;  for  they  mention  alike 
their  native  country  and  their  father.  I'll  call  my  master 
aside — Mensechmus. 

Both  op  the  Mek^chmi.  What  do  you  want  ? 

Mess.  I  don't  want  you  both.  But  which  of  you  was 
brought  here  in  the  ship  with  me  ? 

Mek.  Not  I.    Men.  Sos.  But  'twas  I. 

Mess.  Tou,  then,  I  want.   Step  this  way.  (They  go  aside.} 

Men.  Sos.  I've  stepped  aside  tiow.    What's  the  matter  ? 

Mess.  This  man  is  either  an  impostor,  or  he  is  your  twin- 
brother.  But  I  never  beheld  one  person  more  like  another 
person.  Neither  water,  believe  me,  is  ever  more  like  to  water 
nor  milk  to  milk,  than  he  is  to  you,  and  you  likewise  to  him ; 
besides,  he  speaks  of  the  same  native  country  and  father.  'Tis 
better  for  us  to  accost  him  and  make  further  enquiries  of  him. 

Men.  Sos.  I'  faith,  but  you've  given  me  good  advice,  and  I 
return  you  thanks.  Troth,  now,  prithee,  do  continue  to  lend 
me  your  assistance.  If  you  discover  thkt  this  is  my  brother, 
be  you  a  free  man. 

iSisss.  I  hope  I  shall.  Men.  Sos.  I  too  hope  that  it  will 
be  so. 

Mess,  (to  MEN-ascHMUS  of  Mndamnus),  How  say  you? 
I  think  you  said  that  you  are  called  Menaechmus  ? 

Men.  I  did  so  indeed.  Me  ss  .  (pointing  to  his  master).  His 
name,  too,  is  Menaechmus.  You  said  that  you  were  bom  at 
Syracuse,  in  Sicily;  he  was  bom  there.  Tou  said  that  Moschus 
was  your  father ;  he  was  his  as  well.  Now  both  of  you  can 
be  giving  help  to  me  and  to  yourselves  at  the  same  time. 

Men.  Tou  have  deserved  that  you  should  beg  nothing  but 
what  you  should  obtain  that  which  you  desire.  Free  as  lam, 
I'll  serve  you  as  though  you  had  bought  me  for  money. 

2b 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


870  KWAOHxi ;  Ae^  Y. 

Mbss.  I  have  a  hope  that  I  shall  find  that  70a  two  are 
twin-bom  brothers,  bom  of  one  mother  and  of  one  &4lier  on 
the  same  day. 

Mek.  You  mention  wondrous  things.  I  wic^  thatt  jou 
eould  effect  what  you've  promised. 

Mess.  I  can.  But  attend  now,  both  of  you,  and  tdl  me 
that  which  I  shall  aak. 

Mbit.  Ask  as  you  please,  I'll  answer  you.  I'fl  not  otm- 
ceal  anything  that  I  know. 

Mess.  Isn't  your  name  MensBchmus  ?    MsK.  I  own  it. 

Mess.  Isn't  it  yours  b&  well  ?    Mbw.  Sos,  It  is. 

Mess.  Do  you  say  that  Moschus  was  your  father  ? 

Mj&s,  Tmly,  I  do  say  so.    Mev.  Sos.  And  mine  as  well. 

Mess.  Are  you  of  Syracuse  ?    Meist.  Oertaanly. 

Mess.  And  you  ?    Mew.  Sos-  Why  not  the  eame  f 

Mess.  Hitherto  the  marks  agree  perfectly  well.  StOl 
lend  me  your  attention.  {To  Mek-ECHMTTS.)  Tell  me,  what 
do  you  remember  at  the  greatest  distance  of  time  in  your 
native  country  ? 

Mek.  When  I  went  with  my  fietther  to  Tarentum  to  traffic; 
and  afterwards  how  I  strayed  away  &om  my  &ther  among 
the  people,  and  was  carried  away  thence. 

Meit.  Sos.  Supreme  Jupiter,  preserve  me ! 

Mess.  (^{^Mekjbchmits  Sosioles).  Why  do  you  exclaim? 
Why  don't  you  hold  your  peace  ?  (lb  MEiriBOHKTrB.)  How 
many  years  old  were  you  when  your  father  took  you  from 
your  native  country  ? 

Mef.  Seven  years  old;  for  just  then  my  teeth  were 
changing  for  the  first  time.  And  never  since  then  have  I 
seen  my  father. 

Mess.  Well,  how  many  sons  of  you  had  your  &th^  then  ? 

Men.  As  far  as  I  now  remember,  two. 

.Mess.  Which  of  the  two  was  the  older — ^you  or  the  other? 

Men.  Both  were  just  alike  wi  age. 

Mess.  How  can  that  be  ?    Mek.  We  two  were  twins. 

Men.  Sos.  The  Gods  wish  to  bless  me. 

Mess,  {to  MEK^CHMrs  Sobicles).  Kyou  inteimpt,  I  dall 
hold  my  tongue. 

Men.  Sos.  Eather  thm  tliat,  I'll  hold  my  tongue. 

Mess.  TeU  me,  were  you  both  of  the  same  name  P 

Men.  By  no  means ;  for  my  name  was  what  it  is  noVf 
Menaedimus ;  the  other  they  then  used  to  caiQ  Sosides. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


8e.  yn.  OB,  THX  TWnr-BSOTHBltS.  S71 

Mjdt.  80s.  {embraeing  Atv  hrofhef),  I  recognize  tiie  proofs ; 

I  cannot  refiram  from  embracing  liim.    My  own  twin-brother, 
blessings  on  70U ;  I  am  Sosieles. 

ULss.  How  then  was  the  name  of  Menachmus  afterwards 
gr^en  to  you  ? 

Mbf.  S08.  After  word  was  brought  to  us  that  you  • 

•  •  ♦  •  and  that  my  father  was 

dead,  my  grandfiither  changed  it;  the  name  that  was  yours 
be  gave  to  me. 

Mbit.  I  beHeTe  that  it  did  so  happen  as  you  say.  But 
aoswer  me  this. 

Mek.  S08.  Ask  it  qf  me.  Mxir.  "What  was  the  name  of 
our  mol^er  P 

MsF.  Sos.  Teuximarcha.  Mek.  That  ot^tto  agrees.  (Se 
again  embraces  hioi,)  O  welcome,  unhopeffor  brother,  whom 
after  many  years  I  now  behold. 
I  Mjbf.  Sos.  And  you,  whom  with  manj^  and  anxious  labours 
I  faaye  ever  been  seeking  up  to  this  time,  and  whom  I  re- 
joioe  at  being  found. 

Mbss.  (to  his  master).  It  was  for  this  reason  that  this 
Courtesan  called  you  by  his  name ;  she  thought  that  you 
vere  he,  I  suppose,  when  she  inrited  you  to  break&st. 

Meit.  Why,  fidth,  to-day  I  ordered  a  breakfast  to  be  got 
ready  here  (pointing  to  Ebotium's  house)  for  me,  unknown 
to  my  wife ;  a  mantle  which  a  short  time  since  I  filched  from 
borne,  to  her  I  gave  it. 

Meit.  Sos.  Do  you  say,  brother,  that  this  is  the  mantle 
which  I*m  wearing  ? 

Mmt.  How  did  this  come  to  you  ?  Mbit.  Sos.  The  Courte- 
san who  took  me  here  (pointing  to  Ebotivm's  house)  to 
breakbst,  said  that  I  had  given  it  to  her.  I  breakfasted 
very  pleasantly;  I  drank  and  entertained  myself  with  my 
mistress ;  she  gave  me  the  mantle  and  .this  golden  trinket. 
{Showing  the  bracelet.)  #  •  #  • 

*  ^  #  #  *  # 

'  Mek.  I'  faith,  I'm  glad  if  any  luck  has  be&Uen  you  on  my 
aceoant ;  for  when  she  invited  you  to  her  house,  she  supposed 
it  to  be  me. 

Mess.  Do  you  make  any  objection  that  I  should  be  £ree  as 
70U  commanded? 

Mxs.  He  asks,  brother,  what's  very  fair  and  yery  just. 
Do  it  for  my  sake. 

2b2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


872  KSKiBCHMi.  Acty. 

Mjes,  Sos.  (touching  MESSEmo's  shotdder).  Be  thou  a 
freeman. 

IMQbk.  I  am  glad,  Messenio,  that  you  are  free. 

Mess.  Why,  better  auspices^  were  required  that  I  should 
be  free  for  life.  •  •  •  t 

•  •  *  • 

Mek.  Sos.  Since  these  matters,  brother,  have  turned  out 
to  our  wishes,  let  us  both  return  to  our  native  land. 

Men.  Brother,  I'll  do  as  you  wish.  I'll  have  an  auction 
here,  and  sell  whatever  I  have.  In  the  meantime,  brother, 
let's  now  go  in-doors. 

Men.  Sos.  Be  it  so.   Mess.  Do  you  know  what  I  aak  of  you? 

Mek.  What  ?    Mess.  To  give  roe  the  place  of  auctioneer. 

Mek.  It  shall  be  given  you.  Mess.  Would  you  like  the 
auction,  then,  to  be  proclauned  at  once  ?    Por  what  day? 

Mek.  On  the  seventh  day  hence. 

Mess,  (coming  forwcMrd,  and  speaking  in  a  hud  voice).  An 
auction  of  the  property  of  Memechmus  will  certainly  take 
place  on  the  morning  of  the  seventh  day  hence.  Sis  slaves, 
fiimiture,  house,  and  farms,  will  be  sold.  All  will  go  for 
whatever  they'll  fetch  at  ready  money  prices.  His  wire,  too, 
will  be  sold  as  well,  if  any  purchaser  shil  come.  I  think  that 
by  the  entire  sale  Mencdchmus  will  hardly  get  fifty  hundred 
thousand*  sesterces.  {To  the  Spectatobs.)  Now,  Spectators, 
fare  you  well,  and  give  us  loud  applause^. 

1  JBetter  oiMpicef)— Ver.  1149.  He  aUades  to  the  pretended  irMminniawinn  wUch 
he  has  already  received  from  Mensschmos  of  Epidamnus,  when  he  took  him  to  be 
his  master. 

s  Fifty  hundred  tJumandy-Yer,  1161.  The  sestertias,  before  the  time  of  Aa- 
gostus,  was  a  silver  coin  of  the  valne  of  twopence  and  one-half  of  a  ftrtfaing; 
while  aft«r  that  period,  its  value  was  one  penny  three-farthings  and  a  half.  The 
large  sum  here  mentioned,  at  the  former  valne,  amounts  to  4i,37(M.  166. 8d.  He 
sajs  "  vix,"  it  will "  hardly**  amonnt,  by  way  of  a  piece  of  boasting. 

>  Give  U8  loud  applause)— -Yer,  1162.  This  Comedy,  which  is  considered  tobe  ooe 
of  the  best,  if  not  the  very  best,  of  all  the  plays  of  Plantus,  is  thought  by  some  to 
have  been  derived  from  one  of  Menander^s,  as  there  are  some  fragments  of  a  plqr 
by  that  Poet,  called  Atdv/uioi,  '*  the  Twins."  It  is,  however,  very  donbtfiil  liwA 
is  the  fact  It  is  rendered  doubly  famous  from  the  £»ct  that  Shakspeare  bonoM^ 
the  pbt  of  his  Comedy  of  Errors  from  it,  through  the  medium  of  the  old  tiui- 
lation  of  the  Play,  published  in  the  year  1595,  which  is  in  some  parts  a  strict 
translation,  though  in  others  only  an  abridgment  of  the  original  worL  It  ii 
thought  to  have  been  made  by  WiUiam  Warner,  who  wrote  a  poem  called  ^  ASmS 
England,"  which  he  dedicated  to  Henry  Caiy,  Lord  Hunsdon,  who  mt  Uti 
Chamberlain  to  Queen  Ann,  the  wife  of  James  the  First 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


AULULARIA ;  OR,  THE  CONCEALED  TREASURE. 


Bramatto  )Pnsonff. 
Ths  Household  God,  who  speaks  the  Prologae. 

EtJCLio,  an  aged  Athenian. 

Meoadobus,  nncle  of  Lyconides. 

Ltgonidbs,  a  young  Athenian. 

Stbobdlus,  serrant  of  Megadorns  and  Ljconidefl. 

Ptthodicus,  servant  of  Megadonu. 

^f™^   i  Cooks. 

CONOBIO      j 

EuNOMiA,  the  sister  of  Megadorns.  • 

Phjsdra,  the  daughter  of  Eudio. 
Staphtla,  an  old  woman,  servant  of  EucUo. 

&»!&— Athens,  before  the  hooses  of  Eucuo  and  Mboadobus,  and  the  Temple 
of  Faith. 


y  Google 


THE  SUBJECT. 


V 
Eucuo,  a  miserly  old  Athehian,  has  a  daughter  named  Phiedra,  who  has  been 
ravished  by  a  young  man  named  Lyconides,  but  is  ignorant  firom  whom  she 
has  received  that  injury.  Lyconides  has  an  uncle  named  Megadorus,  who, 
being  ignorant  of  these  circumstances,  determines  to  ask  Phaedra  of  her  fiitber, 
in  marriage  for  himself.  Euclio  has  discovered  a  pot  of  gold  in  his  house, 
which  he  watches  with  the  greatest  anxiety.  In  the  meantime,  Megadonu 
asks  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and  his  proposal  is  accepted;  and  while  pre- 
parations are  makmg  for  the  nuptials,  Euclio  conceals  his  treasure,  first  in  one 
place  and  then  in  another.  Strobilus,  the  servant  of  Lyconides,  watches  his 
movements,  and,  having  discovered  it,  carries  off  the  treasure.  While  Euclio  is 
lamenting  his  loss,  Lyconides  accosts  him,  with  the  view  of  confessing  the 
outrage  he  has  committed  on  his  daughter,  and  of  announcing  to  him  that  his 
uncle,  Megadorus,  has  cancelled  his  agreement  to  marry  her,  in  favour  of  him- 
self. Euclio  at  first  thinks  that  he  is  come  to  confess  the  robbery  of  the  treasure. 
After  much  parleymg,  his  mistake  is  rectified,  and  the  matter  is  explained;  « 
which  Lyconides  forces  Strobilus  to  confess  the  theft;  and  (although  the  rest 
of  the  Play  in  its  original  form  is  lost)  we  learn  from  the  acrostic  Argament 
that  Strobilus  gives  up  the  treasure,  and  Lyconides  marries  the  daoghter  of 
Euclio,  and  receives  the  gold  for  a  marriage-portion.  The  Supj^ement  writtao 
by  Oodrus  Urcens  to  supply  the  place  of  what  is  lost,  has  been  added. 


y  Google 


ATJLULABIA^; 
OR,  THE  CONCEALED  TREASURE. 


THE  ACBOSTIC  ABGUMENT  OF  PBISCIAN. 

A  POT  (^tilnii)  that  lie  has  found  fiiU  of  gold,  Euclio  watches  with  the  greatest 
atrietnesB  (  Ft),  being  distracted  in  a  dreadfnl  manner.  Ljoonides  (IfMNndei) 
debanches  his  daoghter.  Megadorns  wishes  (  VnU)  to  many  her  without  a  por- 
tioD,  and  to  do  it  in  a  cheerfnl  way  (Lubau)^  he  provides  cooks  with  prori- 
sioos.  Enclio  is  afraid  on  account  of  the  gold  (^luro);  he  drives  them  oat  of 
thehonse;  and  the  whole  matter  {Re)  having  been  seen,  the  servant  of  the 
nmsher  steals  it  {Id),  He  discloses  the  matter  to  Endio ;  bj  {AV)  him  he  is 
pRsented  with  the  gold,  a  wifis,  and  a  son. 


THE  PEOLOGUE, 
Spoken  hf  the  HoufiEHOiO)  Gk)D. 
Lest  any  one  should  wonder  who  I  am,  I  will  teU  you  in  a 
few  words.  I  am  the  household  Gk)d  of  this  family,  fix>m  whose 
house  you  have  seen  me  coming  forth.  It  is  now  many  years 
that  I  have  been  occupying  this  house,  and  I  inhabited  it  for 
the  father  and  the  grandfather  of  this  person  who  now  dwells 
here.  But  beseeching  me,  his  grandfather  entrusted  to  me  a 
treasure  of  gold,  unknown  to  all.  He  deposited  it  in  the  midst 
of  the  hearth^,  praying  me  that  I  would  watch  it  for  him.  He, 
when  he  died,  was  of  such  an  avaricious  disposition,  that  he 

*  Avbilaria)  This  word  is  derived  from  the  old  Latin  word  "  aula,"  the  same 
vith  the  more  recent  form  "olla,'*  signifying  "a  pot,"  and  whose  duninntive 
was  "  anlula,'*  wMch  had  the  same  signiiGication.  It  will  be  seen  how  conspicnons 
a  part  the  "  aula"  performs  in  the  Play.  Warner  says,  in  a  Note  to  his  Transla- 
tion, that  Moli^re  took  a  great  part  of  his  Comedy,  called  UAvare,  from  this  play 
oi  Flantns;  and  that  there  are  two  English  Comedies  on  the  same  plan,  one  by 
Shadwell,  the  other  by  Fielding,  called  the  Miser. 

*'Midst  of  the  hearth) — ^Ver.  7.  The  Lares,  or  household  Gods,  were  kept  in  the 
"Luaxinm,"  which  was  a  recess  near  the  "focus,"  or  **  hearth,"  and  in  which 
players  were  offered  up  by  the  Bomans  on  rising  in  the  morning.  The  hearth  or 
fireplace  was  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  and  was  sacred  to  the  Lares. , 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


876  AVLITLABIA ;  JLct  I. 

would  never  disclose  it  to  Us  own  son,  and  preferred  rath^  to 
leave  him  in  want  tlian  to  show  that  treasure  to  that  son.  He 
left  him  no  large  quantity  of  land,  on  which  to  live  with  great 
laboriousness  and  in  wretchedness.  When  he  died  who  had 
entrusted  that  gold  to  me,  I  began  to  take  notice  whether  his 
son  would  any  how  pay  greater  honor  to  me  than  his  father 
had  paid  me.  But  he  was  in  the  hahit  of  venerating  me  still 
less  and  less  by  very  much,  and  gave  me  a  still  less  share  of 
devotion.  So  in  return  was  it  done  by  me ;  and  he  likewise 
ended  his  life.  He  left  this  person  who  now  dwells  here,  his 
son,  of  the  same  disposition  as  his  father  and  grandfather 
were.  He  has  an  only  daughter;  she  is  always  every  day 
making  offerings  to  me,  either  with  incense,  or  wine,  or  some- 
thing or  other ;  she  presents  me,  toOy  with  chaplets.  Out  of 
regard  for  her,  I  have  caused  this  Euclio  to  find  this  treasme, 
in  order  that  he  might  more  readily  give  her  in  marriage  if  he 
should  wish ;  for  a  young  man  of  very  high  rank  has  ravished 
her;  this  young  man  knows  who  it  is  that  he  has  ravished; 
she  knows  him  not,  nor  yet  does  her  father  know  that  she  has 
been  ravished.  This  day  I  shall  cause  the  old  gentleman  here, 
our  neighbour,  to  ask  her  as  his  wife ;  that  will  I  do  for  this 
reason,  that  he  may  the  more  easily  marry  her  who  has  ravished 
her.  And  this  old  gentleman  who  shjdl  ask  her  as  his  wife, 
the  same  is  the  uncle  of  that  young  man  who  debauched  ber 
in  the  night  time  at  the  festival  of  Ceres^.  But  this  old  fel- 
low is  now  making  an  uproar  in  the  house,  as  usual ;  he  is 
thrusting  the  old  woman  out  of  doors,  that  she  may  not  be 
privy  to  the  secret,  I  suppose  he  wants  to  look  at  the  gold, 
if  it  be  not  stolen. 

Act  I. — ScBiTB  I. 
JEJnter  Eijclio,  driving  out  Staphtla. 
Bttc.  G^et  out,  I  say,  be  off,  get  out ;  by  my  troth,  you 

1  FetHffal  of  Ceres)— Ver.  36.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  Thesmophoria,  t 
festival  which  was  celebrated  in  honor  of  the  Goddess  Ceres,  and  a  large  partuo 
of  the  rites  whereof  were  solemnized  in  the  night  time.  In  general  it  was  oeb- 
brated  only  bj  the  married  women,  though,  as  we  find  in  the  present  insbuMi 
the  maidens  took  some  part  in  a  portion  of  the  ceremonial.  It  was  said  to  haw 
been  celebrated  in  the  night  time  in  commemoration  of  the  search  by  Ceres,  'wA 
a  torch  in  her  hand,  for  her  daughter  Proserpine,  when  ravished  by  P]ut&  No 
lights  were  used  on  the  occasion,  which  will  account,  in  a  great  measure,  for  tlie 
mishap  of  Phaedra  in  the  present  instance,  without  her  knowing  who  was  the 
party  that  had  insulted  her.  See  an  able  article  on  the  Thesmophoria  in  Or. 
Smith's  Dictionary  of  Antiquities. 


y  Google  1 


f 


&l.n.  OB,  THI  OOKCEALXD  nUBJLSUBB.  877 

must  budge  out  of  this  house  here,  you  pryabout  woman^ 

withyoupinqaiative  eyes. 
Staph.  Fray  why  are  you  beating  me,  wretched  creature 

MIm? 

^c.  That  you  may  be  wretched,  and  that,  curst  as  you 
arSf  you  mar  pass  a  curst  life,  well  befitting  you. 

Staph.  Bat  for  what  reason  have  you  now  pushed  me  out 
of  tlie  house? 

Efo.  Am  I  to  be  eiving  you  a  reason,  you  whole  harvest  of 
whips^.  Gret  away  there  from  the  door  f  There,  do  look,  if 
fou  please,  how  she  does  creep  along.  But  do  you  know  how 
natters  stand  with  you?  If  I  just  now  take  a  stick  or  a 
rhip  in  my  hand,  rfi  quicken  that  tortoise  pace  for  you. 
SItaph.  0  that  the  Gods  would  drive  me  to  hang  myself, 
\iher  indeed  than  that  I  should  be  a  slave  in  your  house 
1  these  terms ! 

Euc,  Hark  how  the  hag  is  grumbling  to  herself!  By  my 
»tfa,  you  wretch,  I'll  knock  out  those  eyes  of  yours,  that  you 
yn't  be  able  to  watch  me,  what  business  I'm  about.  Qet 
;  (jmshes  her  with  his  hands) — fiirther  yet !  still  further! 
!;her  \  There  now,  stand  you  there !  By  my  fJEtith,  if  you 
ge  a  finger's  breadth,  or  a  nail's  width  from  that  spot,  or 
)u  look  back  until  I  shall  order  you,  i'  faith,  I'U  give  you 
\t  once  as  a  trainer  for  the  gibbet.  {Aside!)  I  know  for 
that  I  did  never  see  one  more  accursed  than  this  hag, 
I'm  sadly  in  fear  of  her,  lest  she  should  be  cheating  me 
rares,  or  be  scenting  it  out  where  the  gold  is  concealed,  a 
vile  wretch,  who  has  eyes  in  the  back  of  her  head  as  well. 
Til  go  and  see  whether  the  gold  is  just  as  I  concealed  it, 
io  troubles  wretched  me  in  very  many  ways.  (He  goes 
is  hou9e.') 

ScBiTB  II. — StAlPHTla,  olone. 

PBT.  By  Heavens,  I  cannot  now  conceive  what  mis- 
e,  or  what  insanity,  I  am  to  say  has  befallen  my 
• ;  in  such  a  way  does  he  often,  ten  times  in  one  day, 
&shioii  push  wretched  me  out  of  the  house.  I'  faith,  I 
Lot  'what  craziness  does  possess  this  man ;  whole  nights 
1  the  watch ;  then,  too,  all  the  day  long  does  he  sit  for 

38i  qftohijps) — Ver.  6.  **  Stimulorum  b^ecs."  Literally, "  you  corn-field  of 
He  means,  that  he  w31  make  her  body  as  fall  of  weals  from  whipping 
field  18  of  ears  of  com. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


ST8  AtFIiULAllXA.;  ixil. 

whole  days  together  at  home  like  a  lame  eobUerK  Nor  can 
I  imagine  now  by  what  means  to  conceal  the  disgrace  of  mj 
master's  daughter^  whose  lying-in  approaches  near;  and 
there  isn't  anything  better  for  me,  as  I  fancy,  than  to  make 
one  long  capital  letter^  of  myself,  when  I've  ti^ed  up  my  oeck 
in  a  halter. 

ScBiTE  in. — JSnter  Eitclio,^<w»  his  house. 

Euc.  (to  himself).  Now,  with  my  mind  at  ease,  at  length 
I  go  out  of  my  house,  after  I've  seen  that  eveiything  is  safe 
indoors.  Now  do  yon  retom  at  once  into  the  house  (ta 
SriLf  HTi^),  and  keep  watch  in-doors. 

Staph.  Keep  watch  in-doors  upon  nothing  at  all,  forsooth ! 
or  is  U,  that  no  one  may  carry  the  house  away.  For  here  in 
our  house  there's  nothing  else  for  thieves  to  gain,  so  filled  is 
it  with  emptiness^  and  cobwebs. 

EiTO.  'Tis  a  wonder  that,  for  your  sake,  Jupiter  doesn't 
now  make  me  a  King  Philip,  or  a  Darius*,  you  hag  of  bags. 
I  choose  those  cobwebs  to  be  watched  for  me.  I  am  poor,- 1 
confess  it — ^I  put  up  with  it.  What  the  &ods  send,  I  endure. 
Go  in-doors,  shut  to  the  door,  I  shall  be  there  directly.  Take 
you  care  not  to  let  any  strange  person  into  the  house. 

Staph.  What  if  any  person  asks  for  fire  ? 

Eire.  I  wish  it  to  be  put  out,  that  there  may  be  no  cause 
for  any  one  asking  it  of  you.  But  if  the  fire  shall  be  kept 
in,  you  yourself  shall  be  forthwith  extinguished.  Then  do  you 
say  that  the  water  has  run  out^,  if  any  one  asks^/or  it. 

1  A  lame  cddbhr) — ^Ver.  34.  Of  coarse,  lame  people  would  be  the  most  Hkely  to 
take  to  each  a  sedentary  employment  as  that  of  a  cobbler. 

'  Long  capital  letter) — ^Ver.  38.  She  means  to  say,  that  she  shall  be  fereed  to 
make  a  letter  I  of  herself,  by  han^g  herself.  In  so  saying,  she  not  only  alludes 
to  the  straight  and  perpoidicnlar  form  of  that  letter,  but  to  its  being  espedally 
long  in  the  Boman  mode  of  writing.  They  wrote  words  with  the  letter  I  tbiiB: 
adIlis,  pIso,  lyilvs,  for  ^dilis,  Piso,  and  Julius. 

^  FUied  U  U  wWi  emplmesa) — ^Ver.  45.  The  expression,  **^fun  of  emptmess,"  is 
intended  as  a  piece  of  wit  on  the  part  of  the  old  woman.  Perhaps  EucSo  would 
not  have  the  spdeira  molested,  because  they  we^  considered  to  bring  good  lode 

«  Fhiktp,  oraDarktsy-Yer,  47.  The  names  of  Philip,  King  of  Maoedon,  and 
Darius,  King  of  Persia,  as  powerful  and  wealthy  mouarchs,  would  be  likely  to  be 
well  known  to  the  writers  of  the  new  Gre^  Comedy,  from  whom  Plantos 
borrowed  most,  if  not  all,  of  his  plays. 

^fftu  rtm  oitf)— Ver.  55.  It  is  Yiot  improbable  that  allnnHi  is  hoe  made  to  l&ar 
supply  of  water  by  pipes  from  the  aqueducts. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


8c  in.  OB,  THS  QONCnAIiKD  TSEASTTBE.  89V 

Staph.  The  knife,  the  hatehet,  the  pestle  and  mortar, 
utensils  that  neighbours  are  alwajs  asking  the  loan  of 

Eve.  Say  that  thieves  have  come  and  carried  them  off. 
Li  fact,  in  my  absence,  I  wish  no  one  to  be  admitted  into  my 
house ;  and  this,  too,  do  I  tell  you  beforehand,  if  Q-ood  Luck 
should  come,  don't  you  admit  her. 

Staph.  I'  faith,  she  takes  good  care,  I  think,  not  to  be  ad- 
mitted ;  for  though  close  at  hand^,  she  has  never  come  to  our 
house. 

Etjc.  Hold  your  tongue,  and  go  in-doors. 

Staph.  I'll  hold  my  tongue,  and  be  off. 

Euc.  Shut  the  door,  please,  with  both  bolts.  I  shall  be 
there  directly.  (Staphtla  goes  into  the  house.)  I'm  tor- 
mented in  my  mind,  because  I  must  go  away  from  my  house ! 
I'  faith,  I  go  but  very  unwillingly;  but  I  know  JuU  well  what 
I'm  about ;  for  the  person  that  is  our  master  of  our  ward^  has 
given  notice  that  he  will  distribute  a  didrachm  of  silver  to  each 
man ;  if  I  relinquish  that,  and  don't  ask  for  it,  at  once  I  £uiey 
that  all  will  be  suspecting  that  I've  got  gold  at  home ;  for  it 
isn't  very  likely  that  a  poor  man  would  despise  ever  such  a 
trifle,  so  as  not  to  ask  for  his  piece  of  money.  For  as  it  is, 
while  I  am  carefully  concealing  it  from  all,  lest  they  should 
know,  all  seem  to  know  it,  and  all  salute  me  more  chnUy  than 
they  formerly  used  to  salute  me ;  they  come  up  to  me,  they 
stop,  they  shake  hands'"^ ;  they  ask  me  how  I  am,  what  I'm 

1  Close  at  hand)— Yer,  63.  She  seems  to  allude  to  the  fact  of  the  temple  of 
Bona  Forttma,  or  Good  Luck,  being  in  the  vicinitj  of  Eudio's  house. 

*  Master  of  our  ward) — ^Ver.  68.  The  '*  cuns"  at  Borne  were  sub-diTisions  of 
the  tribes  origmallj  made  by  Bomulns,  who  divided  the  Bamnes,  Titienses,  and 
Luceres  into  thu^y  ^* curiae."  Each  ''curia"  had  its  place  for  meeting  and 
worship,  which  was  also  called  "  curia;"  and  was  presided  oyer  by  the  "  Curio," 
who  is  here  called  the  "  Magistcr  curiae,*'  or  **  master  of  the  ward."  At  first  the 
Patricians  and  Equites  had  the  sole  influence  in  the  "  curiae,"  and  alone  elected 
the  "  Curiones ;"  but  afterthe  year  A.u.a  644,  the  "  Curio"  was  elected  from  the 
Patricians,  after  which  period  the  political  importance  of  the  "  curiae"  gradually 
declmed,  until  they  became  mere  bodies  meeting  for  the  performance  of  religioiis 
observances.  Plautus  probably  alludes,  in  the  present  instance,  to  a  dole,  or  dis- 
tribution of  money,  made  by  the  Greek  Trittuarch  among  the  poorer  brethren  of 
his  TpiTTVs,  or  "  tribus ;"  as  in  adapting  a  Greek  play  to  the  taste  of  a  Boman 
audience,  he  very  often  mingles  the  customs  of  the  one  oountiy  with  those  of  the 
other. 

»  Thetf  shake  Aan<fe)— Vcr.  77.  "  CopuUntur  dextras."  Literally, "  they  couple 
right  hands." 


y  Google 


380  ATJLTTLABIA ;  Act  11. 

doing,  what  business  I'm  about.  Now  I'll  go  there  whither 
I  had  set  out^ ;  afterwards,  I'll  betake  myself  back  again 
home  as  fast  as  ever  I  can. 

Act  II. — Scene  I. 
iEnter  Eunomia  and  Megai)Obus,^oi»  their  house. 

EuK.  I  could  wish  you,  brother,  to  think  that  I  utter  these 
words  by  reason  of  my  own  regard  and  your  welfare,  as  is  be- 
fitting your  own  sister  to  do.  Although  I'm  not  unaware  that 
we  women  are  accoimted  troublesome ;  for  we  are  all  of  us 
deservedly  considered  very  talkative,  and,  in  fiact,  they  say 
at  the  j^resent  day  that  not  a  single  woman  has  been  found 
dumb^  m  any  age.  Still,  brother,  do  you  consider  this  one 
circumstance,  that  I  am  your  nearest  relation,  and  you  in  like 
manner  are  mine.  How  proper  it  is  that  I  should  counsel  and 
advise  you,  and  you  me,  as  to  what  we  may  judge  for  the  in- 
terest of  each  of  us ;  and  for  it  not  to  be  kept  concealed  or 
kept  silence  upon  through  apprehension,  but  rather  that  I 
should  make  you  my  coiiSidant,  and  you  me  in  like  manner. 
Por  that  reason,  now,  have  I  brought  you  here  apart  out  of 
doors,  that  I  might  here  discourse  with  you  upon  your  private 
concerns. 

Meg.  Best  of  women,  give  me  your  hand.  (Takes  her  hand.) 

EuN.  (looking  about).  Where  is  she?  Who,  pray,  is  this 
best  of  women  ? 

Meg.  Yourself.    Emr.  Do  you  say  so  ? 

Meg.  If  you  say  no,  I  say  no. 

EuK.  Indeed,  it's  right  that  the  truth  should  be  spoken ; 
for  the  best  of  women  can  nowhere  be  found ;  one  is  (w/y 
worse  than  another,  brother. 

Meg.  I  think  the  same,  and  I'm  determined  never  to  con- 
tradict you  on  that  point,  sister.    What  do  you  wish  ? 

Eun.  Give  me  your  attention,  I  beg  of  you. 

Meg.  'Tis  at  your  service ;  use  and  command  me,  please, 
if  you  wish  for  aught. 

1  Whither  I  had  set  out)— Yer.  79.  "  Nunc  quo  profectus  sumito."  This  is 
rendered,  in  Cotter's  Translation,  **  now  I  will  go  where  I  am  profited  I" 

2  Has  heenfotmddtmby-Yer.  86.  Not  seeing  the  sarcasm  intended  against  the 
female  sex  in  this  passage,  Lambinns  seriously  takes  the  trouble  to  contradict 
Eunomia;  his  words  are,  "  I  myself,  who  am  at  present  in  my  fifty-sixth  year, 
have  seen  no  less  than  two  dumb  women." 


y  Google 


J 


8a  I.  OB,  THE  COirCEALED  TBEABTTBE.  381 

Etjk.  a  thing  tliat  I  consider  very  greatly  for  yoxir  advan- 
tage I'm  come  to  recommend  you. 

Meo.  Sister,  you  are  doing  after  your  iisual  manner. 

Etjw.  I  wish  it  were  done.    Meo.  What  is  it,  sister  ? 

Euir.  That  you  may  enjoy^  everlasting  blessings  in  being 
the  father  of  children. 

Meg.  May  the  Gods  so  grant  it. 

Etjn.  I  wish  you  to  bring  home  a  wife. 

Meo.  Ha !  I'm  undone.    Euir.  How  so  P 

Meo.  Because,  sister,  your  words  are  knocking  out  the 
brains  of  unfortunate  me ;  you  are  speaking  stones  2. 

'Eurs,  Well,  well,  do  this  that  your  sister  requests  you. 

Meo.  If  she  requests  me,  I  will  do  it. 

EtTN.  'Tis  for  your  own  interest.  Meo.  Tes,  for  me  to 
die  before  I  marry.  Let  her  who  comes  here  to-morrow,  be 
carried  out^  of  the  house  the  day  after,  sister ;  on  that  con- 
dition, give  me  her  whom  you  wish  to  give ;  get  ready  the 
nuptials. 

EuN.  I  am  able,  brother,  to  provide  you  mth  a  wife  with  a 
very  large  marriage-portion.  But  she's  somewhat  aged ;  she's 
of  the  middle-age  of  woman.  If  you  request  me,  brother,  to 
ask  her  for  you,  I'll  ask  her. 

Meo.  Would  you  like  me  to  ask  you  a  question  ? 

Enr.  Tes,  if  you  like,  ask  it. 

Meg.  Suppose  any  old  man,  past  mid-age,  brings  home  a 
middle-aged  wife,  if  by  chance  he  should  have  a  cHld  by  this 
old  woman,  do  you  doubt  at  all  but  that  the  name  of  that 
child  is  Posthumus*,  all  prepared  ?  Now,  sister,  I'U  remove 
and  lessen  this  labour  for  you.     I,  by  the  merits  of  the  Gods 

*  Thai  you  may  en/oy)— Vcr.  105.  "  Quod  tibi  sempiternatn  salutare  sit." 
This  was  a  formula  frequently  introduced  in  announcing  intelligence,  or  in  making 
a  proposition,  and  was  considered  to  be  significant  of  a  good  omen. 

'  You  are  apeakmg  stones)— Yet.  110.  So  Shakspeare  says,  in  Hamlet,  Act  III., 
sc  7,  "I  will  speak  daggers  to  her,  but  use  none."  Aristophanes  says,  in  one 
of  lus  plays,  *'  You  have  spoken  roses  to  me." 

*Be  carried  ofrf)— Ver.  113.  "Feratur,"  "may  be  carried  out  to  burial." 
"  Fero"  and  "  effero"  have  that  especial  signification.  The  body  was  carried  out 
to  burial  on  a  bier,  which  resembled  a  bed  or  couch. 

*  Is  Posffhtmus)—Yer,  121.  Children,  who  were  bom  after  their  father's  decease, 
were  called  "posthumi,"  a  term  which  is  still  retained.  By  speaking  of  an  old 
woman,  **  anus,"  as  the  mother,  he  seems  also  to  allude  to  the  chance  of  the  child 
losmg  its  mother  as  well,  at  the  moment  of  its  birth. 


y  Google 


XTTLVIAMIA ;  Act  U. 

aad  of  my  for^falliers,  am  ridi  enougli ;  these  high  families, 
haughty  pride^,  bountifiil  portions,  acclamations,  imperions- 
ness,  vehicles  inlaid  with  ivory,  superb  mantles  tmd  ptuple, 
I  can't  abide,  things  that  by  their  extravagance  reduce  men 
todavery. 

EuN.  Tell  me,  pray,  who  is  she  whom  you  would  like  to 
take  for  a  wife  P 

Meg.  rU  tell  you.  Do  you  know  that  Euclio,  the  poop 
old -man  dose  by  ? 

EuK.  I  know  him ;  not  a  bad  sort  of  man,  i'  faith. 

Meg.  I'd  like  his  maiden  daughter  to  be  promised  me 
in  marriage.  Don't  make  any  words^  about  it,  sister ;  I  know 
what  you  are  going  to  say ;  that  she's  poor.  This  poor  i^iW 
pleases  me. 

EuK.  May  the  Gods  prosper  it.    Meg.  I  hope  the  same. 

Euir.  "Wliat  do  you  want  me  now  j^  ?  Do  you  wish  for 
anything  ? 

Meg.  FarewelL  Extbt.  KvAjom  the  same,  hvo^ev.  {Goes 
into  the  house,) 

Meg.  I'll  go  meet  Euclio,  if  he's  at  home.  But,  see !  the 
vertf  person  is  betaking  himself  home,  whence,  I  know  not. 

SoEio;  n. — JEnter  Etjolio. 

Exjc.  (to  himself) .  My  mind  had  a  presentiment  that  I  was 
going  to  no  purpose  when  I  left  my  nouse ;  and  therefore  I 
went  unwillingly ;  for  neither  did  any  one  of  the  wardsmea 
come,  nor  yet  the  master  of  the  ward,  who  ought  to  have  dis- 
tributed the  money.  Now  I'm  making  all  haste  to  hasten 
home ;  for  I  myself  am  here,  my  mind's  at  home. 

Meg.  {accosting  him).  May  you  be  well,  and  ever  for- 
tunate, Euclio ! 

Eijo.  May  the  G-ods  bless  you,  Megadorus ! 

Meg.  How  are  you?    Are  you  quite  well,  and  as  you  wish  ? 

Euc.  (aside).  It  isn't  for  nothing  when  a  rich  man  accosts 

^  Hcutghby  pride) — ^Ver.  124.  He  means  to  say,  that  these  evils  are  attendant 
upon  marr3riDg  a  woman  with  a  large  dowry. 

*  JknH  make  any  wordB)^Yes,  130.  Ben  Jonson  has  imitated  this  passage  in 
his  Silent  Woman,  Act  I.,  sc.  5 : 

I  know  what  thon  wonldst  say : 

She*8  poor,  and  her  friends  deceased. 

She  has  brought  a  wealthy  dowry  in  her  silence. 


y  Google 


J 


8e.  n.  OB,  THE  OOVCSlIiKD  TSSASUSE.  888 

t  poor  maa  oouiteously ;  now  this  fellow  knows  that  Fye 
got  some  gold;  for  thafc  reaaon  he  salutes  me  more  ooiir- 


Meg,  Do  you  say  that  you  are  well  ? 

Euo.  Troth,  I'm  not  very  well  in  the  money  line. 

Meg.  I'  Mth,  if  you've  a  contented  mind,  you  have  enough 
to  passing  a  good  life  with. 

Euo.  (aside).  By  my  jGedth,  the  old  woman  has  made  a  dis- 
covery to  him  about  the  gold ;  'tis  dear  it's  all  out.  Ill 
cut  off  her  tongue,  and  tear  out  her  eyes,  when  I  get  home. 

Meg.  Why  are  you  talking  to  yourself? 

Etc.  I'm  lamenting  my  poverty;  I've  a  ^own-up  gbl 
without  a  portion,  and  one  that  can't  be  disposed  of  in 
mamage ;  nor  have  I  the  ability  to  marry  her  to  anybody. 

Meg.  Hold  your  peace ;  be  of  good  courage,  Euclio :  she 
Bhall  be  given  in  ma/rriage;  you  shall  be  assisted  by  myself. 
*%»  if  yo^  have  need  of  augnt ;  command  me. 

Euo.  {aside).  !N'ow  is  he  aiming  at  my  property,  while  he's 
making  promises ;  he's  gaping  for  m^  gold,  that  he  may  de- 
vour it ;  in  the  one  hand  ne  is  carrying  a  stone^,  while  he 
shows  the  bread  in  the  other.  I  trust  no  person,  who,  rich 
himself,  is  exceedingly  courteous  to  a  poor  man ;  when  he 
extends  his  hand  witii  a  kind  air,  then  is  he  loading  you 
with  some  damage.  I  know  these  polypi^  who,  when  they've 
touched  a  thing,  hold  it  fast. 

»  Carrying  a  stone)— Yet.  152.  "  To  ask  for  bread,  and  to  receive  a  stone,'* 
vas  a  proverbial  ezpresrion  with  the  ancients.  Erasmus  says  that  it  was  ap- 
pHed  to  those  who  pretended  to  be  friendly  to  a  person,  and  at  the  same 
time  were  doing  him  mischief;  and  that  it  was  bonowed  from  persons  enticing  a 
dog  with  a  piece  of  bread,  and,  when  it  had  come  sufficiently  near,  pelting  it 
with  a  stone.  The  expression  is  used  in  the  New  Testament.  "  If  a  son  shall 
ask  bread  of  any  of  yon  that  is  a  father,  will  he  give  him  a  stone  ?"  St.  Luke,  c  xL, 
T.  11.  The  bread,  as  we  leam  from  specimens  found  at  Pompeii,  was  often  made 
into  cakes,  which  somewhat  resembled  krge  stones. 

'  The$epok/piy-'YeT.  165.  Ovid  says  in  his  HalieutioaD,  or  Treatise  an  Fishes: 
**  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sluggish  polypus  sticks  to  the  rocks  with  its  body 
provided  with  feelers,  and  by  this  stratagem  it  escapes  the  nets ;  and,  accorduig  to 
the  nature  of  the  spot,  it  assumes  and  changes  its  colour,  always  resembling  that 
place  which  it  has  lighted  upon ;  and  when  it  has  greedily  seized  the  prey  hanging 
from  the  fishing-line,  it  likewise  deceives  the  angler  on  his  raising  the  rod,  when, 
on  emerging  into  the  air,  it  loosens  its  feelers,  and  spits  forth  the  hook  that  it  has 
doB^takd  of  the  bait" 


y  Google 


BMt  AULTTLABLA. ;  Act  11. 

Meg.  Oive  me  your  attention,  Euclio,  for  a  little  time:  I 
wish  to  address  you  in  a  few  words,  about  a  common  concern 
of  yours  and  mine. 

Etjc.  (aside).  Alas !  woe  is  me !  my  gold  has  been  grabbed 
from  in-doors :  now  he's  wishing  for  this  thing,  I'm  sure, 
to  come  to  a  compromise  with  me ;  but  I'll  go  look  in  my 
house.     {He  goes  towa/rds  his  door,) 

Meg.  "Where  are  you  going?  Ettc.  I'll  return  to  you 
directly,  for  there's  something  I  must  go  and  see  to  at  home. 
(JHe  goes  into  his  house!) 

Mkg.  By  my  troth,  I  do  believe  that  when  I  make  men- 
tion of  his  daughter,  for  him  to  promise  her  to  me,  he'll 
suppose  that  he's  being  laughed  at  by  me ;  nor  is  there 
out  of  the  whole  class  of  paupers  one  more  beggarly  than 
he.  (Etjclio  retu/msfrom  his  home?) 

Etto.  {aside).  The  Gods  do  favour  me;  my  property's  aU 
safe.  If  nothing's  lost,  it's  safe.  I  was  very  dreadfullv 
afraid,  before  I  went  in-doors !  I  was  almost  dead !  {Aloud^ 
I'm  come  back  to  you,  Megadorus,  if  you  wish  to  say  amf- 
thing  to  me. 

Meg.  I  return  you  thanks ;  I  beg  that  as  to  what  I  shall 
enquire  of  you,  ypu'U  not  hesitate  to  speak  out  boldly. 

Euc.  So  long,  indeed,  as  you  enquire  nothing  that  I  mayn't 
choose  to  speak  out  upon. 

Meg.  Tell  me,  of  what  sort  of  family  do  you  consider  me 
to  be  sprung  P 

Etjc.  Of  a  good  one.  Meg.  What  think  you  as  to  my 
character  ? 

Euc.  'Tis  a  good  one.    Meg.  WTiat  of  my  conduct? 

Euc.  Neither  bad  nor  dishonest.  Meg.  Do  you  hnow 
my  years  ? 

Euc.  I  know  that  they  are  plentiful,  just  like  your 
money. 

Meg.  I'  faith,  for  sure  I  really  did  always  take  you  to 
be  a  citizen  without  any  evil  guile,  and  now  I  think  you 
so. 

Ere.  (aside).  He  smells  the  gold.  (Aloud.)  What  do 
you  want  with  me  now  ? 

Meg.  Since  you  know  me,  and  I  know  you,  what  sort  of 
person  you  are — a  thing,  that  may  it  bring  a  blessing  on  my- 


y  Google 


8c.  n.  OE,  THE  CONCEALED  TBEASTJEE.  885 

self,  and  you  and  your  daughter,  I  ask  your  daughter  as  my 
"wife.    Promise  me  that  it  shall  be  so. 

Etjc.  Heyday !  Megadorus,  you  are  doing  a  deed  that's 
not  becoming  to  your  ustuil  actions,  in  laughing  at  me,  a  poor 
man,  and  guiltless  towards  yourself  and  towards  your  family. 
For  neither  in  suet,  nor  in  words,  have  I  ever  deserved  it  of 
you,  that  you  should  do  what  you  are  now  doing. 

Mbo.  By  my  troth,  I  neither  am  come  to  laugh  at  you, 
nor  am  I  laughing  at  you,  nor  do  I  think  you  deserving 
ofit 

Euc.  Why  then  do  you  ask  for  my  daughter  for  your- 
sell  r 

Meo.  That  through  me  it  may  be  better  for  you,  and 
through  you  and  yours  for  me. 

Euc.  This  suggests  itself  to  my  mind,  Megadorus,  that  you 
are  a  wealthy  man,  a  mem  of  rank ;  that  I  likewise  am  a  person, 
the  poorest  of  the  poor ;  now,  if  I  should  give  my  daughter  in 
marriage  to  you,  it  suggests  itself  to  my  mind  that  you  are  the 
ox,  and  that  I  am  the  ass;  when  I'm  yoked  to  you,  and 'wheji 
Vm.  not  able  to  bear  the  burden  equally  with  yourself,  I,  the 
ass,  must  lie  down  in  the  mire ;  you,  the  ox,  would  regard  me 
no  more  than  if  I  had  never  been  born;  and  I  should  both  find 
youimjust,  and  my  own  class  would  laugh  at  me  ;  in  neither 
direction  should  I  have  a  fixed  stall,  if  there  should  be  any 
separation^;  the  asses  would  tear  me  with  their  teeth,  the 
oxen  would  butt  at  me  with  their  horns.  This  is  the  great 
hazard,  in  my  passing  over  from  the  asses  to  the  oxen. 

Meo.  The  nearer  you  can  unite  yourself  in  alliance  with 
the  virtuous,  so  much  the  better.  Do  you  receive  this  pro- 
posal, listen  to  me,  and  promise  her  to  me. 

Etjc.  But  indeed  there  is  no  marriage-portion. 

Meo.  Tou  are  to  give  none ;  so  long  as  she  comes  with 
good  principles,  she  is  suflGlciently  portioned. 

Euc.  I  say  so  for  this  reason,  that  you  mayn't  be  sup- 
posing that  I  have  found  anif  treasures. 

*  Be  any  8eparaii(m)—Yet.  190.  "  Si  quid  divortii  faat."  By  the  use  of  the 
word  "  divortinm/'  he  means  either  an  estrangement  of  himself  from  Mejj^doms, 
or  a  separation  or  divorce  of  the  latter  from  his  intended  wife,  which  of  coarse 
wonld  lead  to  the  same  consequences.  The  facilities  for  divorce  among  the  Romans 
have  been  remarked  upon  in  a  previous  Note. 

2c 


y  Google 


886  ArLtriiLEiA;    ^  Act  II. 

Meg.  I  know  that ;  don't  enlarge  upon  it.  Promise  her 
to  me. 

EiJO.  So  be  it.  {Starts  and  looks  about.)  But,  0  Jupi- 
ter, am  I  not  utterly  undone  P 

Meg.  "What's  the  matter  with  you  P 

Euc.  What  was  it  sounded  just  now  as  though  it  were  iron? 

Meg.  Here  at  my  place,  I  ordered  them  to  dig  up  the 
garden.  (Eirciiio  runs  opinio  his  house.)  But  where  is  this 
man  P  He's  off,  and  he  hasn't  ftJly  answered  me ;  he  treats 
me  with  contempt.  Because  he  sees  that  I  wish  for  his  friend- 
ship, he  acts  after  the  manner  of  mankind.  For  if  a  wealthy 
person  goes  to  ask  a  favour  of  a  poorer  one,  the  poor  man  K 
afraid  to  treat  with  him ;  through  his  apprehension  he  hurts 
hip  own  interest.  The  same  person,  when  this  opportunity  is 
lost,  too  late,  then  wishes  for  it. 

Eire,  (coming  out  of  the  house,  addressing  StaphtiA 
within).  "Bj  the  powers,  if  I  don't  give  you  up  to  have  yonr 
tongue  cut  out  by  the  roots,  I  omer  and  I  authoruKe  you 
to  hand  me  over  to  any  one  jrou  please  to  be  incapacitated. 

Meg.  By  my  troth,  Eucho,  Iperceive  that  you  consider 
me  a  fit  man  for  you  to  make  sport  of  in  my  old  age,  for  no 
deserts  of  my  own. 

Euo.  I'  faith,  Megadorus,  I  am  not  doing  so,  nor,  should  I 
desire  it,  had  I  the  meoos^. 

Meg.  How  now  ?  Do  you  then  betroth  your  daughter  to 
meP 

Ere.  On  those  terms,  and  with  that  portion  which  I  men- 
tioned to  you. 

Meg.  Do  you  promise  her  thenP  Ere.  I  do  promise 
her. 

Meg.  May  the  Gods  bestow  their  blessings  on  it. 

Etrc.  May  the  Gods  so  do.  Take  you  care  of  this,  and 
remember  that  we've  agreed,  that  my  daughter  is  not  to 
bring  you  any  portion. 

1  Had  I  the  meow)— Ver.  210.  "  Neque,  si  cupiam,  copia  eat"  In  sajing  tlri>, 
Enclio  intends  to  play  upon  the  words  of  Megadmms,  "  ludos  ftdas,"  winch  ntj 
either  signify  **  yon  make  sport  of  me,**  or  "  yon  ^ve  a  public  show"  or  ^  ip»- 
tacle,"  which  the  wealthy  Patricians  of  Borne  were  m  the  habit  of  doing.  Endis 
pretends  to  take  his  words  in  the  latter  sense,  and  replies,  **  I  conldn^  eren  if  I 
wonld,"  by  reason  of  his  poverty,  as  he  pretends.  It  was  nanal  for  the  .fidila  to 
provide  the  spectacles  from  their  private  resources,  from  which  circnmstanee  one 
who  lived  a  life  of  extravagance  was  said  "  JEdilitatem  petere,"  "  to  be 
to  the^dileship." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


SC.  m.  OB,  THE  COirCEALBD  TBBASUBB.  387 

Meg.  I  remember  it.  Etjc.  But  I  understand  in  what 
fashion  you,  of  your  class,  are  wont  to  equivocate ;  an  agree* 
ment  is  no  agreement,  no  agreement  is  an  agreement,  just 
as  it  pleases  you. 

Meg.^  I'll  have  no  misunderstanding  with  you.  But  what 
reason  is  there  why  we  shouldn't  have  the  nuptials  this 
day? 

Etjo.  Why,  by  my  troth,  there  is  very  good  reason  for  them, 

Mbo.  I'll  go,  then,  and  prepare  matters.  Do  you  want 
me  in  any  way  ? 

Errc.  That  shall  be  done.    Pare  you  well, 

Ms  a.  {gomg  to  the  door  of  his  house  and  calling  out). 
Hallo  !  Strobilus,  follow  me  quickly,  in  all  haste,  to  the  flesh- 
market.  (JEaeit  Meoadgbits.  • 

Etic-  He  has  gone  hence.  Immortal  Gods,  I  do  beseech 
you !  How  powerful  is  gold !  I  do  believe,  now,  that  he  has 
had  some  intimation  that  I've  got  a  treasure  at  home ;  he's 
gaping  for  that ;  for  the  sake  of  that  has  he  persisted  in  this 
alUance. 

Scene  III. — ^Eticlio,  alone. 

EfC.  (going  to  the  door  of  his  housCy  he  opens  it,  and  calls 
to  StaphtIiA  within).  Where  are  you  who  have  now  been 
blabbing  to  all  my  neighbours  that  I'm  going  to  give  a  por- 
tion to  my  daughter  ?  Hallo !  Staphyla,  I'm  calling  you ! 
Don't  you  hear  P  Make  haste  in-doors  there,  and  wash  the 
vessels  clean.  I've  promised  my  daughter  in  marriage ;  to- 
day I  shall  give  her  to  be  married  to  Megadorus  here. 

Enter  Staphtla,^o«»  the  house. 

StapA.  {as  she  enters).  May  the  Gods  bestow  their  bless- 
ings on  it !    But,  i'  faith,  it  cannot  be ;  'tis  too  sudden. 

EuG.  Hold  your  tongue,  and  be  off.  Take  care  that  things 
are  ready  when  I  return  home  from  the  Forum,  and  shut  the 
house  up.     I  shall  be  here  directhr.  (Exit, 

Staph.  What  now  am  I  to  do  r  Now  is  ruin  near  at  hand 
for  us,  both  for  myself  and  my  master's  daughter ;  for  her 
disgrace  and  her  delivery  are  upon  the  very  point  of  becoming 
known ;  that  which  even  unm  now  has  been  concealed  and 
kept  secret,  cannot  he  so  now.  I'll  go  in-doors,  that  what  my 
2c2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


388  AULULABTA;  Act  IIL 

master  ordered  may  be  done  when  he  comes.  But,  by  my 
faith,  I  do  fear  that  1  shall  have  to  drink  of  a  mixture  of 
bitterness^ !  (Mxdt 

Act  III. — Scene  I. 

Unier  STEOBiLrs,  Antheax,  and  CoNaEio,  with  Music- 
GiBLS,  and  Pebsoits  carrying  provisions. 

Stbo.  After  my  master  had  bought  the  provisions,  and 
hired  the  cooks^  and  these  music-girfi  in  the  market-place,  he 
ordered  me  to  divide  these  provisions  into  two  parts. 

Con.  By  my  troth,  but  you  really  shan't  be  dividing  me^,  I 
tell  you  plainly.  If  you  wish  me  to  go  anywhere  whole,  1*11 
do  my  best. 

Anth.  a  very  pretty  and  modest  fellow,  indeed*.  As  if, 
wJien  you  are  a  conger  by  name,  you  wouldn't  like  to  be  cut 
into  pieces. 

Con.  But,  Anthrax,  I  said  that  in  another  sense,  and  not 
in  the  one  which  you  are  pretending. 

Stbo.  Now  my  master's  going  to  be  married  to-day. 

Anth.  Whose  daughter  is  he  to  marry?  Stbo.  The 
daughter  of  this  Euclio,  his  near  neighbour  here.  Por  that 
reason  he  has  ordered  half  of  these  provisions  here  to  be  pre- 
sented to  him — one  cook,  and  one  music-girl  likewise. 

Anth.  That  is,  you  take  one  half  to  him,  the  other  half 
home? 

>  A  mixture  qfbUteme88)'~'Yer,  235.  Uildyard  suggests  that  Staphyla  is  food 
of  a  drop,  and  likes  her  liquors  neat  ("  merum  "),  wherefore  it  is  a  double  misfbr- 
tune  to  her,  not  only  to  endure  misfortunes,  but  those  of  a  "  mixed*  nAtan* 
**  Mixtum**  was  the  term  applied  to  the  wine,  when  mixed  with  its  due  proportaoD 
of  water  for  drinking. 

<  Hired  the  cooks) — ^Ver.  286.  Allusion  has  been  made,  in  the  Notes  to  the 
Psendolns,  to  the  custom  of  hiring  cooks  in  the  markets  on  any  special  occasion. 
These  were  frequently  skves ;  and  in  such  case,  the  greater  portbn  of  their 
earnings  would  go  into  the  pockets  of  their  masters.  From  the  remark  made 
in  1. 265,  we  find  that  Gongrio  and  Anthrax  are  slaves. 

>  Tou  redly  shan't  be  dividing/  ffM)— Vcr.  239.  He  alludes  to  his  own  name, 
*^  Gongrio,**  **  a  conger  eel,*'  which  was  cut  up  before  it  was  cooked ;  and  he  means 
to  say,  that  spite  of  his  name,  he  will  not  stand  being  divided  by  Strobilns. 

*  Modest  feUoWy  indeed)— Yer.  241.  Anthrax  gives  a  very  indelicate  torn  to 
the  remark  of  Gongrio;  and  the  liberty  has  been  taken  of  ^ving  a  more  harm- 
less form  to  the  gross  witticism  of  Anthrax.  It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  he 
takes  his  name  from  the  Greek  word,  signifying  **  a  coal,"  a  commoditgr,  of 
course,  much  in  request  with  cooks. 


y  Google 


So.  L       OB^  THE  COKCEALSD  TBEASUBE.  389 

Stbo.  'Tis  just  as  you  say.  Aitth.  How's  that  ?  Couldn't 
this  old  fellow  provide  from  his  own  resources  for  the  wedding 
of  his  daughter. 

Stbo.  Pshaw!    Anth.  What's  the  matter? 

Stbo.  What's  the  matter,  do  you  ask  ?  A  pumice  stone 
isn't  so  dry  as  is  this  old  fellow. 

Anth.  Do  you  reaUy  say  that  it  is  as  you  affirm  ? 

Stbo.  Do  be  judge  yourself.  Why,  he's  for  ever  crying 
out  for  aid  from  Grods  and  men,  that  his  property  has  gone, 
and  that  he  is  ruined  root  and  branch,  if  the  smoke  by  chance 
escapes  out  of  doors  through  the  rafters  of  his  house.  Why, 
when  he  goes  to  sleep,  he  ties  a  bag^  beneath  his  gullet. 

Anth.  Why  so  ?  Stbo.  That  when  he  sleeps,  he  may  lose 
no  breath. 

Aitth.  And  does  he  stop  up  the  low^er  part  of  his  wind- 
pipe^ as  well,  lest,  perchance,  he  should  lose  any  breath  as  he 
sleeps  ? 

Stbo.  In  that  'tis  as  fair  that  you  should  credit  me,  as  it  is 
for  me  to  credit  you. 

Anth.  Why  really,  I  do  believe  you. 

Stbo.  But,  further,  do  you  know  how  it  is  ?  I'  faith,  he 
grieves  to  throw  away  the  water  when  he  washes. 

Anth.  Do  you  think  a  great  talent^  might  be  begjged  of 
this  old  fellow  for  him  to  give  us,  through  which  we  might  be- 
come free? 

Stbo.  By  my  troth,  if  you  were  to  ask  it,  he  would  never 
let  vou  have  the  loan  of  hunger.  Why,  the  other  day,  the 
barber  had  cut  his  nails^ ;  he  collected  all  the  parings,  and 
carried  them  off. 

^  HeUesa  6a^)— Ver.  257.  He  probably  intends  to  hint  here  that  Enclio  sleeps 
with  his  parse  (which  consisted  of  a  **  foUis,**  or  **  leathern  bag  ")  tied  ronnd  his 
throat,  but  implies  that  he  not  onlj  wishes  thereby  to  save  his  money,  bat  his 
breath  as  well,  by  having  the  month  of  the  baj|  so  near  to  his  own.  Although 
Thornton  thinks  that  the  snggestion  of  Lambinus  that  '*  foUem  obstringit"  means, 
"  he  ties  ap  the  nozzle  of  the  bellows,"  is  forced  and  far-fetched,  it  is  far  from  im- 
probable that  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  It  may  possibly  mean  that  he 
ties  the  bellows  to  his  throat. 

*  Part  of  his  tomdpipe) — Ver.  260.  An  indelicate  remark  is  here  made,  which 
has  been  obviated  in  the  translation. 

*  A  great  taknt) — ^Ver.  264.  As  the  ancients  weighed  silver  on  paying  a  talent, 
the  word  **  talentum"  denoted  both  a  sum  of  money  and  a  weight.  The  great 
talent  here  mentioned,  was  the  Attic  talent  of  sixty  mm®,  or  six  thousand 
dracbmsB. 

*  Had  cut  his  naUay^Yer,  267.  From  this  passage  we  lean  that  barbers  were 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


890  AULVULBii. ;  Act  III. 

Akth.  I'  &itb,  you  do  describe  a  miserably  stingy  wietch. 

CoK.  But  do  you  think  that  he  does  live  so  very  stingily 
and  wretchedly  r 

Stbo.  a  kite,  the  other  day,  carried  off  his  morsel  of  food ; 
the  fellow  went  crying  to  the  Pr»tor^ ;  there,  weeping  and 
lamenting,  he  began  to  request  that  he  might  be  allowed  to 
compel  the  kite  to  give  bail.  There  are  innumerable  other 
things  that  I  could  mention,  if  I  had  the  leisure.  But  which 
of  you  two  is  the  sharper  P     Tell  me. 

CoK .  I — as  being  much  the  better  one.  Stbo.  A  cook  I 
ask  for,  not  a  thief 2. 

Con.  As  a  cook,  I  mean.  Stbo.  (^0  Akthbax).  What  do 
you  say  ? 

Anth.  I'm  just  as  you  see  me. 


in  the  habit  of  paring  the  nails  of  their  customers ;  in  the  Epistles  of  Horace, 
B.  1,  Ep.  7, 1.  50,  we  are  informed  that  idlers  pared  their  nails  in  the  barber's 
shops  of  Some. 

J  To  the  PrcBtor)—Yer,  272.  The  "  Praetor"  was  a  magistrate  at  Borne,  lAo 
administered  justice,  and  ranked  next  to  the  Consuls.  There  ware  eight  Prcton 
in  the  time  of  Cicero.  Two  of  them  were  employed  in  adjudicating  "moansis 
priratis,"  "disputes  concerning  private  property."  One  of  these  was  called 
'■ '  Praetor  urbanus,"  or  "  the  city  Prsetor,"  who  administered  justice  when  the  parties 
were  "  cires,"  or  possessed  the  rights  of  Boman  citazensbip.  The  other  was  called 
**  Praetor  peregrinus,"  or  "  the  foreigners'  Praetor,"  who  administered  justice  wben 
both  the  litigating  parties,  or  only  one  of  them,  were  "  peregrini,"  or  ♦♦  fewignen," 
and  had  not  the  right  of  Boman  citizenship.  The  other  sis  Praetors  had  Juis- 
diction  in  criminal  cases,  such  as  murder,  adultery,  and  violence.  The  Pneton 
committed  the  examination  of  causes  to  subordinate  judges,  who  were  called 
*' judices  selecti,"  and  they  published  the  sentences  of  the  judges  so  appointed  hj 
them.  The  Praetors  wore  the  "  toga  praetexta,"  or  "  magisterial  robe,"  sat  eo  tlw 
"  sella  curulis,"  and  were  preceded  by  six  Uctors.  Their  duties  lasted  for  a  yWt 
after  which  they  went  as  governors  to  such  provinces  as  had  no  army,  which  were 
assigned  to  them  by  lot.  There  they  administered  justice  in  the  same  way  as 
they  had  done  as  Praetors  at  Rome,  and  were  called  by  the  name  of  **  Propnetores;" 
though,  as  such  governors,  they  were  also  sometimes  called  "  Prsetores."  Die 
office  of  Prastor  was  first  instituted  at  Borne  a.u.c.  388,  partly  because  the  CoDsnls, 
on  account  of  the  many  wars  in  which  the  Romans  were  engaged,  ooold  no  kncpBr 
administer  justice ;  partly  that  the  Patricians  might  thereby  have  a  compensatioD 
for  admitting  the  Plebeians  to  a  share  in  the  Consulate.  At  first  there  was  eoty 
one  Praetor;  Sylla  made  their  number  six;  Julius  Caesar  eight;  and  AaffO^ 
Increased  them  to  sixteen.  It  will  not  escape  observation,  that  PlautQS,  as  osnal, 
mentions  a  Boman  officer  in  a  Play,  the  scene  of  which  is  sppposed  to  be 
Athens. 

2  Notathie/y-Yer,  277.    Because  "celer,"  "sharp"  or  "nimble," 
especially  apply  to  the  requiaite  qualification  for  an  ej|«rt  thief. 


yLiOOgle 


So.  I.  OB,  THE  OOKOXAIiEJ)  TBEASUBE.  391 

Oosr.  He's  a  nine^day  cook^ ;  eveiy  ninth  day  he's  in  the 
habit  of  going  out  to  cook. 

Anth.  You,  you  three-lettered  fellow  ^ ;  do  you  abuse  me, 
you  thief  ? 

Con.  To  be  sure  I  do,  you  trebly-distilled  thief  of  thieves^. 

Stbo.  Now  do  you  hold  your  tongue  for  the  present, 
and,  that  lamb,  whichever  is  the  fatter  of  the  two 

Coir.  Very  well*.  Stbo.  Do  you,  Congrio,  take  that,  and 
go  in-doors  there  (pointing  to  tluoLio's  home) ;  and  (to  a 
Mt78IO«Gibl  and  some  of  the  People  with  promsiond)  do  you 
follow  him ;  the  rest  of  you  this  way,  to  our  house. 

Cow.  By  my  troth,  you've  made  an  imfair  division ;  they've 
got  the  fattest  lamb. 

Stbo.  But  the  fattest  music-girl  shall  be  given  you  then. 
Do  you,  therefore,  ^  along  with  him,  Phrygia^.  And  do 
you,  Heusium,  step  m-doors  here,  to  our  house, 

*  A  nm/e^ay  cook) — ^Ver.  279.  Congrio  probably-  means  to  say  that  Anthrax  is  a 
cook  who  only  gets  employment  on  the  **  NnndinsB,"  when.tbe  inflnx  of  eonntry- 
people  into  the  dtj  called  the  services  of  eveo  the  worst  cooks  into  requisition, 
and  the  eaters  were  not  of  the  most  fastidious  description.  The  **  Nandin»'*  (so 
called  from  "nonae,"  "ninth,**  and  "dies,"  " day")  returned  every  eighth  day, 
according  to  our  mode  of  reckoning ;  but  according  to  the  Bomans,  who,  in  count- 
ing, reckoned  both  extremes,  every  ninth  day,  whence  the  name.  On  this  day  the 
country-people  came  into  the  city  to  sell  their  wares,  make  their  purchases,  hear 
the  new  laws  read,  and  learn  the  news.  By  the  Hortensian  Uw,  the  "  NundmaB," 
-which  before  were  only  " feri»,"  or  "  holidays,"  vrere  made  **  &sti,**  or  " court- 
days,"  that  the  oountiy-people  then  in  town  might  have  theur  lawsuits  detet- 
9ined.  Lipsius  thinks  that  referenoe  is  here  made  to  the  feast  called  "neven- 
diale,**  which  was  sometimes  given  to  the  poorer  classes  on  the  ninth  day  after  tbt 
funeral  of  a  person  of  affluence.  Probably,  the  cooking  of  these  banquets  was  not 
ef  the  highest  order ;'  but  the  former  seems  the  more  probable  explanation  of  the 
passage. 

•  T%ree-leUeredfdl(noy-yer.2S0.  "  Trium  literarum  homo;"  literally,  "iqan 
of  three  letters"— "F  U  B,"  "  thief." 

»  Th^f  of  thieves)— Yer.  281.  "  Fur  trifurcifer."  Strictiy  speaking,  the  Utter 
word  affd&ea  "  thief  three  times  over." 

«  Very  icefl)— Ver.  288.  Congrio  answers  "  licet,"  by  way  of  assent  to  Stro- 
failus,  thmking  that  he  is  askmg  him  to  take  the  fattest  lamb,  on  which  Stro- 
bflus  gives  him  the  leanest  one.  Hildyard  suggests  that  Congrio  fancies  that 
Strobilus  is  askbg  which  is  the  fattest  cook,  and  not  the  fattest  lamb,  and  ac- 
cordingly says,  "  Very  well,"  thereby  admittmg  that  he  is  the  fattest  of  the  two. 
If  there  is  any  such  wit  intended  in  the  passage,  it  is  very  recondite. 

»  Phrygia}—yer,  287.  "  Phrygia"  was  an  appropriate  girl  for  a  "  tibicins," 
"music-girl,"  or  female  player  on  the  flute,  as  that  instrument  was  origmally 
introduced  from  Phrygia,  or  Lydis,  which  adjoined  it.    Eleusium  would  probably 


y  Google 


392  AULITLABIA ;  Act  III. 

Con.  O  you  crafty  Strobilus,  have  yoa  pushed  me  off  here 
upon  this  most  miserly  old  fellow,  where  if  I  ask  for  anything, 
I  may  ask  even  to  hoarseness  before  anything's  found  me  ? 

Stbo.  'Tis  very  foolish,  and  'tis  thanklessly  done,  to  do  a 
service  to  you,  when  what  you  do  goes  for  nothing. 

CoK.  But  how  so?    Stbo.  Do  you  ask?    In  the  first 

Elace  then,  there  will  be  no  confusion  for  you  there  in  the 
ouse ;  if  you  want  anything  to  use,  bring  it  from  your  own 
home,  don't  lose  your  trouble  in  asking  for  it.  But  here, 
at  our  house,  there's  great  confusion,  and  a  la/rge  establish- 
ment— ^furniture,  gold,  garments,  silver  vessels.  If  any- 
thing's  lost  here  (as  I  know  that  you  can  easily^  keep 
hands  off— if  nothing's  in  your  way),  they  may  say,  "The 
cooks  have  stolen  it;  seize  them,  bind  them,  beat  them, 
thrust  them  in  the  dungeon"  2.  Nothing  of  that  sort  will 
happen  to  you,  inasmuch  as  there  will  be  nothing  for  you  to 
steal    Follow  me  this  way. 

Con.  I  follow. 

Stbo.  {hnochmg  at  the  door  o/'Efclio's  hotise).  Ho,  there! 
Staphyla,  come  out  and  open  the  door. 

Staph.  (Jromtdthin),  Who  caSls  there?   Stbo.  Strobilus. 

Scene  II. — Miter  Staphyla, 
Staph.  "What  do  you  want  ?     Stbo.  Por  you  to  take  in 
these  cooks,  and  this  music-girl,  and  these  provisions  for  the 
wedding.     Megadorus  bade  me  take  these  things  to  Euclio. 

Staph.  Are  you  about  to  make  this  wedding,  Strobilus,  in 
honor  of  Ceres^  ? 

derive  her  name  from  Elensis  in  Attica,  where  the  mysteries  of  Ceres  were  cele- 
brated. Players  on  the  "  tibias"  were  much  in  request  on  festive  occasions,  espe- 
cially at  weddings,  as  in  the  present  instance.  The  *^  tibidnae''  were  probably 
hired  in  the  market-place,  the  same  way  as  the  cooks. 

*  You  can  easUyy—Yer.  299.  "  Facile,"  **  easily,"  seems  a  preferable  reading  to 
**  facere."  If  the  latter  reading  is  adopted,  there  are  three  consecutive  verbs  in  the 
infinitive  mood,  which,  even  in  the  (occasionally)  uncouth  language  of  Plautus, 
sounds  very  uneuphoniously,  "  Facere  abstinere  posse." 

« In  the  dungeon)— Yer.  301.  **  Puteus"  here  signifies  the  black  hole  or  dnn- 
geon  underground  (called  also  "  ergastulum"),  where  the  refractory  slaves  were 
put  in  confinement. 

'  In  honor  of  Ceres) — ^Ver.  309.  The  old  woman  probably  alludes  to  the 
Thesmophoria,  where  abstinence  from  wine  was  especially  practised,  and  which 
were  celebrated  in  a  state  of  fasting  and  purification.  Her  question  here  tends  to 
confirm  the  suspicion  that  she  was  more  fond  of  the  "  merum"  than  the  "  mixtoiD,** 
reference  to  which  has  already  been  made. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.       OB,  THE  COKCBALBD  TBEASUBB.  393 

Stbo.  Why  ?  Staph.  Because  I  don't  see  any  wine  brought. 

Stbo.  Why,  that  will  be  brought  just  now,  when  he  himself 
comes  back  from  the  market. 

Staph.  There's  no  firewood  here  in  our  house. 

Coif.  There  are  the  beams.     Staph.  I'  foith,  there  are. 

Con.  There  is  wood,  then ;  don't  you  be  seeking  it  out  of 
doors. 

Staph.  What,  you  unpurifiedyeZZot(?\  although  your  busi- 
ness is  with  the  fire,  for  the  sake  of  a  dinner,  or  of  your  own 
hire,  do  you  request  us  to  set  our  house  on  lire  ? 

CoK.  I  don't  ask  you.     Stbo.  Take  them  in-doors. 

Staph.  Follow  me.  {They  follow  her  in-doors^  emd  Stbo- 
BiLUS  goes  with  the  others  mto  the  house  <?;^MEaAD0Brs.) 

SoEKE  m. — Unter  Pythodicus,^ow  the  house  of 
Megadobvs. 
Ptth.  Mind  you  your  business ;  I'll  step  in  and  see  what 
the  cooks  are  doing,  to  observe  whom,  i'  faith,  to-day  it  is  a 
most  laborious  task.  Unless  I  manage  this  one  thing,  for  them 
to  cook  the  dinner  down  in  the  dungeon^;  thence,  when  cooked, 
we  might  bring  it  up  again  in  small  baskets.  But  if  they 
should  eat  below^  whatever  they  should  cook,  those  above  would 
go  without  their  dinner,  and  those  below  have  dined.  But 
here  am  I  chattering,  as  though  I  had  no  business,  when  there's 
such  a  pack  of  thieves  in  the  house.     {Ooes  mto  the  house,) 

ScEiTE  IV. — Enter  Etjclio,  with  some  chaplets  of  flowers  in 

his  hand. 
'   Etjc.  I  wished  at  length  to  screw  up  my  courage  to-day, 
bo  as  to  enjoy  myself  at  the  wedding  of  my  daughter.     I 
come  to  the  market,  I  enquire  about  fish ;  they  tell  me  that 
it  is  dear,  that  lamb  is  dear,  beef  is  dear,  veal,  large  fish*, 

>  You  tmpurifiedfdlowy--Y&[.  313.  "  Impurate."  "  You  that  are  unpurified, 
in  spite  of  yonr  eyerlastingly  stewing  over  the  fire."  She  alludes,  figuratiyely,  to 
the  process  of  smelting  and  purifying  metals  by  the  action  of  fire. 

« In  the  dungeon) — Ver.  319.  By  the  use  of  the  word  "  puteus"  he  may  possibly 
mean  the  black  hole  or  dungeon  alluded  to  in  1.  301,  whence  there  was  no 
means  of  egress  but  by  being  drawn  up.  He  means  to  say  that  such  a  place  will  be 
the  only  one  for  preventing  the  cooks  from  thieving  whatever  comes  in  their  way. 
The  thievish  propensities  of  the  hired  cooks  are  also  referred  to  in  the  Paeudolus. 

»  Should  eat  below)— Yer,  321.  He  reflects  that  if  they  are  put  in  the  "  puteus'* 
to  prevent  their  thieving,  they  may  possibly  revenge  themselves  by  eating  up  the 
victuals  as  fast  as  they  cook  it 

*  Largely— 'Yer,  829.  "Cetus"  or  "cete"  properly  signifies  fish  of  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


d94  xujajjjlAU.  ;  Act  III. 

and  porky  all  of  them  are  dear.  And  for  this  reason  were  tkey 
still  dearer ;  I  hadn't  the  money.  I  came  away  thenoe  in 
a  rage,  since  I  had  nothing  wherewithal  to  make  a  purchase; 
and  thus  did  I  baulk^  all  those  rascals.  Then  I  began  to 
think  with  myself  upon  the  road,  "  If  you  are  guilty  of  aay 
extravagaace  on  a  festive  day,  you  may  be  wanting  on  a 
common  day,  unless  you  are  saving."  After  I  disclosed  thi« 
reasoning  to  my  heart  and  appetite,  my  mind  came  over  to 
my  opinion,  that  I  ought  to  give  my  daughter  in  marriage  at 
as  little  expense  as  possible.  Now  I've  bought  a  bit  of 
frankincense,  and  these  chaplets  of  flowers ;  these  shall  l)e 
placed  upon  the  hearth  for  our  household  God,  that  he  may 


grant  a  propitious  marriage  to  my  daughter.    But  what 

do  I ?     Do  I  behold  my  house  open  ?     There's  a  noise, 

too,  within ;  is  it  that  I'm  robbed,  wretch  that  T  am  ? 

Con.  (speahing  vnthm  the  howe).  Seek  of  the  neighbours  a 
bigger  pot^  if  you  can ;  this  one's  too  little,  it  can't  hold  it. 

Euo.  Woe  to  me !  By  my  faith,  I'm  a  dead  man ;  the  gold's 
being  carried  off — ^my  pot's  being  looked  for.  I  am  cerfcwnly 
murdered,  unless  I  make  haste  to  run  with  all  haste  in- 
doors here !  Apollo,  prithee  do  assist  and  help  me,  whom 
thou  hast  already,  before  this,  helped  in  such  drcumstanoef- 
Kerce  with  thine  arrows  the  plunderers  of  my  treasures.  But 
am  I  delaying  to  run,  before  I  perish  outnght,  (M$  fiw 
into  hU  heme,) 

ScEifE  V. — Unter  Ajsttheax,  j^(W»  the  house  of  Mbgadoeits. 

Ant-el.  (speaking  to  some  within),  Dromo,  do  you  scale  tlie 
fish.  Do  you,  Machssrio,  have  the  conger  and  the  lamprey 
boned.     I'm  going  to  ask  the  loan  of  a  baJdng-pan  of 

whale  or  dolphin  kmd;  it  perhaps  means  here  simply  the  larger  and  ooarser  ilsh 
in  use  among  the  Bomans,  like  plaice  or  codfish  with  ns.  He  probably  wooldnfli 
ask  the  price  of  "  piscicnli/'  or  "  small  fish,"  as  their  deamess  would  terrify  Um 
out  of  his  wits. 

•  ^Didl  hauUey-Yet.  382.  "  Manum  adire"  probably  signified  «» to  ki«  the 
hand"  to  a  person  when  ezpectmg  something  more  than  that,  and  thereby  "  to  make 
a  fool  of  him."  He  asked  the  prices  of  all  the  commodities,  and  probably  chsftnd 
about  them,  then  kissed  his  hand  to  the  dealers,  and  left  the  market  withoot  pQ^ 
chasing.    Some  think  it  alludes  to  a  fisint  or  baulk  made  in  wrestling. 

•  A  hiffffer  pot)— Yer.  344.  Congrio  is  bawling  out  iwthin  doon  for  a  Hgff^ 
"  auk,"  "  pot"  or  "  jar,"  to  be  brought  for  his  cooking,  on  which  the  old  hram 
thinks  that  some  thieves  have  discoyered  his  0¥m  dear  "  aula." 


y  Google  J 


8c.  yn.     OB,  THX  OOKOBAIiBP  TBEASUBE.  396 

OUT  neighbour  Congrio,  Tou,  if  you  are  wise,  will  have  that 
capon  more  smoothly  picked  for  me  than  is  a  plucked  play- 
actor^. But  what's  this  clamour  that's  arising  here  hard 
by  ?  By  my  faith,  the  cooks,  I  do  believe,  are  at  their  usual 
pranks^.  1*11  run  in-doors,  lest  there  may  be  any  disturbance 
here  for  me  as  well.    {BeireaU  into  the  house  of  Meoadobxts.) 

Scene  VI. — JEnter  Congrio,  in  haste,  from  the  house  of 
ErcLio. 

CoK.  (roaring  out).  Beloved  fellow-citizens,  fellow-country- 
men, inhabitants,  neighbours,  and  all  strangers,  do  make  way 
for  me  to  escape !  Make  all  the  streets  clear !  Never  have  1 
at  any  time,  until  this  day,  come  to  Bacchants^,  in  a  Baccha- 
nalian den,  to  cook ;  so  sadly  have  they  mauled  wretched  me 
and  my  sQullions  with  their  sticks.  I'm  aching  all  over,  and 
am  utterly  done  for ;  that  old  fellow  has  so  made  a  bruising 
school*  of  me ;  and  ia  such  a  fashion  has  he  turned  us  all  out 
of  the  house,  myself  and  them,  laden  with  sticks.  Nowhere, 
in  all  the  world,  have  I  ever  seen  wood  dealt  out  more  plen- 
tifully. Alackaday !  by  my  faith,  to  my  misery,  I'm  done 
for ;  the  Bacchanalian  den  is  opening,  here  he  comes,  He's 
foUowiug  us,  I  know  the  thing  I'll  do:  that  the  master 
himself^  has  taught  me. 

ScsNS  YIL-^JEnter  'EvomOyfrom  his  house,  driving  the 

Cooks  and  the  Musig-Gibl  before  him. 
Euc.  (pallmg  out,  while  Gonobio  and  the  others  are  run^ 

>  A  plucked  play-actor)— Yer.  366.  The  actors,  having  to  perform  the  parts  of 
wom^n  and  beardless  jonths,  were  obliged  to  remove  superfluous  hair  from  the 
face,  which  was  effected  "vellendo,"  "by  plucking  it  out,"  whence  the  term 
•*  volsus." 

«  At  their  usual  pranksy^Ver,  368.  "  Faciunt  offidnm  suum."  Literally, 
"  are  doing  their  duty.'!  He  says  this  ironically ;  on  hearing  the  row  going  on  in 
Kuclio*s  house,  he  supposes  that  the  cooks  are  up  to  their  old  tricks  of  thieving 
and  wrangling. 

s  To  JBacchantsy-Yer.  362.  The  Bacchants,  or  frantic  female  worshippers  of 
Bacchus,  with  their  rites,  have  been  alladed  to  in  a  Note  at  the  commencement  of 
the  Bacchides* 

*  A  bruising  schooiy—Yer.  364.  Literally,  "  a- Gymnasium."  The  Gynanafiium 
was  the  place  where  vigorous  exercise  was  taken;  so  Congrio  means  to  say  that 
Euclio  has  been  taking  exercise  in  basting  his  back. 

*  The  master  himself  ^—Yet.  368.  By  "magister"  he  probably  means  Euclio, 
whom  he  styles  the  master  of  the  Gymnasium,  whose  duty  it  was  to  train  the 
pupils  in  the  various  exercises.  He  says  that  his  master  has  taught  him  a  trick, 
namely,  how  to  defend  himself,  which  in  the  next  Scene  he  threatens  to  do. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


896  AULULABIA  ;  Act  III. 

ning  off).  Come  back !  Where  are  you  running  to,  now  ? 
Hold  you ! 

Con.  Why  are  you  crying  out,  you  stupid  ? 

Etjc.  Because  this  instant  I  shall  give  your  name  to  the 
Triumvirs*. 

Con.  Why  ?    Euc.  Because  you've  got  a  knife. 

Con.  'Tis  the  proper  thing  for  a  cook.  Euc.  Why  did 
you  threaten  me  ? 

Con.  I  think  that  it  was  badly  managed,  that  I  didn't 
pierce  your  side  with  it, 

Euc.  There's  not  a  person  that's  living  this  day  a  greater 
rascal  than  you,  nor  one  to  whom  designedly  I  would  with 
greater  'plecbsv/re  cause  a  mischief. 

Con.  I'  faith,  though^  you  should  hold  your  noise,  really 
that's  quite  clear ;  the  thing  itself  is  its  own  witness.  As 
it  is,  I'm  made  softer  by  far  with  your  sticks  than  any  haUet- 
dancer.  But  what  right  have  you  to  touch  us,  you  beggar- 
man  ?     What's  the  matter  ? 

Euc.  Do  you  even  ask  me  ?    Is  it  that  I've  done  less  than 

I  ought  to  have  done  ?      Onhj  let  me {Ib  going  to 

strike  him,) 

Con.  Now,  by  my  faith,  at  your  great  peril,  if  this  head 
should  feel  it ! 

Euc.  Troth,  I  don't  know  what  may  happen^  hereafter; 
your  head  feels  it  just  now !  But  what  busmess,  pray,  had 
you  in  my  house,  in  my  absence,  unless  I  had  ordered  you? 
I  want  to  know  that. 

»  To  the  Trimrnrsy—Yer,  369.  "  Trisviros."  Though  the  scene  is  in  Greece 
he  refers  to  the  "  Triumyiri  capitales,"  who  were  Boman  magistrates.  They  took 
cognizance  of  capital  crimes,  and  thej  apprehended  criminals.  In  conjunction 
with  the  ^diles,  they  had  to  preserve  the  public  peace,  to  prevent  unlawful  as- 
semblies, and  to  enforce  the  payment  of  fines  due  to  the  state.  They  had  also 
the  care  of  the  public  prisons,  and  to  them  was  entrusted  the  punishment  of  oi- 
minals.  They  had  authority  to  inflict  summary  punishment  upon  the  slaves  and 
the  lower  orders,  though,  probably,  not  upon  those  who  enjoyed  the  rights  of 
Boman  citizens. 

2  r  faith,  though)— 'Ver.  375.  In  Hildyard's  edition  this  and  the  next  line  are 
given  to  Euclio ;  but  they  seem  much  more  likely  to  belong  to  Congrio,  aa  we  do 
not  find  that  any  person  has  beat  Euclio  with  sticks,  whereas  Congrio  has  already 
complained  of  the  rough  usage  he  has  experienced. 

'  What  may  happen)— Yer.  380.  Euclio  is  laughing  at  his  "  ift,"  which  c«m- 
meuce  the  saving-clause  of  all  cowards.  He  does  not  care  what  Congrio  w>?/do, 
but  he  knows  that  he  has  already  made  his  head  to  feel  it. 


y  Google 


Se.  yn.  OB,  THE  OOKCSALED  TBEABXTBE.  397 

CoK.  Hold  your  noise,  tlien ;  because  we  came  to  cook 
for  the  wedding. 

Euo.  Why  the  plague  do  you  trouble  yourself  whether  I 
eat  meai  raw  or  cooked,  unless  you  are  my  tutor^. 

Con.  I  want  to  know  if  you  will  allow  or  not  allow  us  to 
cook  the  diimep  here  ? 

Euc.  I,  too,  want  to  know  whether  my  property  will  be 
safe  in  my  house. 

Goif.  I  only  wish  to  carry  the  things  away  safe  that  I 
brought  here !  I  don't  care  lor  yours ;  should  I  be  coveting 
jour  things  ? 
Euo.  I  understand ;  don't  teach  me ;  I  know. 
CoK.  What  is  it,  on  account  of  which  you  now  hinder  us 
from  cooking  the  dinner  here  ?  What  have  we  done  ?  What 
have  we  said  to  you  otherwise  than  you  could  wish  ? 

Euc.  Do  you  even  ask  me,  you  rascally  fellow  ?  Tou  who've 
been  making  a  thoroughfare  of  eve^  comer  of  my  house,  and 
the  places  under  lock  and  key  ?  if  you  had  stopped  by  the 
fireside,  where  it  was  your  business,  you  wouldn't  have  had 
four  head  broken.  It  has  been  done  for  you  deservedly ! 
Therefore  that  you  may  now  know  my  determination ;  if  you 
jome  nearer  to  the  door  here,  unless  I  order  you,  I'll  make 
rou  to  be  the  most  wretched  of  creatures.  Do  you  now  know 
Qy  determination  ?     (He  goes  into  his  Jiouse,) 

Con.  Where  are  you  going  ?  Come  you  back  again !  So 
lay  Lavema^  love  me  well,  I'll  expose  you  at  once  with  loud 
buse  here  before  the  house,  if  you  don  t  order  my  utensils  to 
e  restored  to  me !  What  shall  I  do  now  ?  Verily,  by  my 
flth,  I  came  here  with  unlucky  auspices  ;  I  was  hired  for  a 
[drachm^ ;  I  stand  in  more  need  now  of  a  surgeon  than  of 
ages. 

*  You  are  my  tvJtor) — Ver.  384.  One  of  the  duties  of  the  "  piedagogns,**  or 
;ntor  of  boys,^*  would  be  to  see  that  they  did  not  eat  unwholesome  food. 

8  So  may  Lavema) — Ver.  391).  Lavema  was  a  Goddess  worshipped  by  the 
evish  fraternity  at  Rome,  as  their  tutelar  Divinity.    Horace  makes  mention  of 

•  in  his  Epistles,  B.  1,  Ep.  16. 

'  I*or  a  didrachm) — Ver.  402.  "  Nummo."  It  has  been  remarked,  in  the  Notes 
the  Pseudolus,  that  a  "  nummus,"  or  didrachm,  of  nearly  twenty-pence  of  our 
aey,  was  the  wages  of  a  good  cook  for  a  day's  employment.  See  the  Pseudolus, 
00—810. 


y  Google 


398  JLVJiVJjjax;  Actm. 


Soiaos  Vni, — Unter  Buclio,  from  Jus  house,  with  the  pot  of 
monetf  under  his  cloak. 

Etro.  (to  himself,  as  he  enters).  This,  by  my  fidth,  wherever 
I  shall  go,  really  shall  be  with  me,  and  with  myself  will  I 
carry  it,  nor  will  I  ever  again  entrust  it  to  that  place,  for  it  to 
be  in  such  great  peril.  (Speaking  to  CoiiraEio  and  his  Sctrii- 
LiONS.)  Now,  then,  go  you  all  of  you  in  the  house,  cooks  and 
music-girls ;  introduce  even,  if  you  like,  a  whole  company  of 
hirelings^ ;  cook,  bustle,  and  hurry  now  at  once  just  as  much 
as  you  please. 

Coir.  O  dear,  I'm  a  ruined  man.  Euc.  Be  off!  your  labour 
was  hired  here,  not  your  talk. 

Con.  Harkye,  old  gentleman,  for  the  beating,  by  my  faiti, 
I  shall  demand  of  you  a  recompense.  I  was  hired  a  while  ago 
to  cook,  and  not  to  be  basted. 

Euc.  Proceed  against  me  at  law!  Don't  be  troublesome! 
Either  cook  the  dinner,  or  away  vrith  you  from  the  house  to 
downright  perdition! 

Coir.  Gro  there  yourself  then.  (Congrio  and  the  CootA 
and  MiTSic-QiBL  yo  hack  into  the  house.) 

ScEKE  IX. — Euclid,  atone. 

Ettc.  He's  gone.  Immortal  Gods !  A  poor  man,  who  begins 
to  have  dealings  or  business  with  an  opulent  one,  commences 
upon  a  rash  undertaking !  Thus,  for  instance,  Megadorui, 
wno  has  pretended  that,  for  the  sake  of  honoring  me,  he  sends 
these  cooks  hither,  is  plaguing  unfortunate  me  in  everyway; 
for  this  reason  has  he  sent  them,  that  they  might  purloin 
this  (putting  his  hand  on  the  pot)  from  unfortunate  me.  Just 
as  I  might  expect,  even  my  dunghiU-cock  in-doors,  that  was 
bought  with  the  old  woman's  savings^,  had  well  nigh  been  the 
ruin  of  me ;  where  this  was  buried,  he  began  to  scratch  there 
all  round  about  with  his  claws.  "WTiat  need  of  more  words  ? 
So  exasperated  were  my  feelings,  I  took  a  stick,  and  knocked 

>  Company  of  hireUngs) — ^Ver.  406.  "  Venalium"  may  mean  either  "8laTe8"« 
"  hirelings ;''  it  does  not  much  signify  which,  as  the  cooks,  in  this  instance  at 
least,  were  both.  Having  secnred  his  money,  Euclio  does  not  care  if  a  wiioli 
gang  of  thieres  is  admitted  into  his  house,  as  there  is  nothing  for  them  to  steal 

*  With  the  old  tooman's  savings) — ^Ver.  420.  "  Ani  pecnliaris.*'  Bought  out  of 
the  "  peculium,"  or  *'  savings,"  of  the  old  woman. 


y  Google 


Sc.  X.  OB,  THE  COKCISlIiXO  TBEASITBE. '  399 

off  the  head  of  the  cock — a  thief  caught  in  the  act.  I*  faith, 
I  do  beliere  that  the  cooks  had  promised  a  reward  to  the  cock, 
if  he  should  discover  it ;  I  took  the  opportunityi  out  of  their 
haads,  however.  What  need  of  many  words  ?  I  had  a  r<y«- 
^battle^  with  the  dunghill-cock.  But  see,  my  neighbour 
Megadorus  is  coming  from  the  Porum.  I  can't,  then,  venture 
to  pass  by  him,  but  I  must  stop  and  speak  to  him.  (He 
retires  close  to  his  door,) 

ScEKE  X. — Enter  MEaADOSXTS,  at  a  distance. 
Meg.  (to  himself),  IVe  communicated  to  many  friends  my 
design  about  this  proposal;  they  speak  in  high  terms  of  the 
daughter  of  Euclio.    They  say  that  it  was  discreetly  done,  and 
with  great  prudence.    But,  in  my  opinion,  indeed,  if  the  other 
richer  men  were  to  do  the  same,  so  as  to  take  home  as  their 
wives,  without  dower,  the  daughters  of  the  poorer  persons, 
both  the  state  would  become  much  more  united,  and  we  should 
meet  with  less  ill  feeling  than  we  now  meet  with ;  both,  they, 
thewiveSfWOvli  stand  in  fear  of  punishment  more  than  they 
do  stand  in  fear  qf  it,  and  we  husbands  should  be  at  less 
expense  than  we  now  are.    In  the  greater  part  of  the  people 
tins  is  a  most  just  wa^f  of  thinking;  in  the  smaller  portion 
there  is  an  objection  among  the  avaricious,  whose  avaricious 
minds  and  insatiate  dispositions  there  is  neither  law  nor  ma- 
gistrate to  be  able  to  put  a  check  upon.    But  a  person  may 
say  this ;  "  How  are  these  rich  women  with  portions  to  marry, 
if  thid  law  is  laid  down  for  the  poorP**    Let  them  marry 
whom  they  please,  so  long  as  the  dowiv  isn't  their  companion. 
If  this  were  so  done,  the  women  would  acquire  for  themselves 
better  manners  for  them  to  bring,  in  place  of  dowry,  than  they 
now  bring.    I'd  make  mules,  which  exceed  horses  ia  price, 
to  become  cheaper  than  Gallic  geldings^. 

1  Took  tke  oppartimitff)^Yer.  425.  "  Eximere  ex  manu  mannbrinm,*'  literaUy 
ineaxMf  "  to  take  the  handle  oat  of  the  hand,"  and  its  figuratiTe  application  is 
deriTed  from  the  act  of  taking  a  iword  out  of  the  hand  of  a  person  who  is  about 
to  use  it. 

<  A  reffular  hat^y-Ver.  426.  Mdyard  snggests  that,  in  these  words,  there 
is  probably  a  reference  to  some  current  saying  or  proverb.  If  snch  is  the  case, 
ibe  saying  so  refored  to  has  not  come  down  to  ns. 

s  Than  OailUc  goings) — ^Ver.  449.  Males  were  mnch  coveted  by  the  haughty 
dames  of  Rome  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  their  carriages.  He  says  that  i  he 
had  his  way,  such  extravagance  should  not  be  encouraged,  and  mules  should  not 
be  a  bit  more  valuable  than  humble  Gallic  geldings. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


400  '  auxvlabia;  Act  in. 

Euc.  (aside).  So  may  the  Gk)ds  favour  me,  I  listen  to  him 
with  delight ;  very  shrewdly  has  he  discoursed  on  the  side 
of  economy. 

Meg.  (to himself),  No  mife  should  then  be  saying:  "In- 
deed, I  brought  you  a  marriage-portion  far  greater  than  was 
your  own  wealth ;  why,  it  really  is  fair  that  purple  and  gold 
should  be  found  for  me,  maid-servants,  mules,  muleteers,  and 
lacqueys^,  pages  to  carry^  compliments,  vehicles  in  which  I 
may  be  carried.'* 

Euc.  (aside).  How  thoroughly  he  does  understand  the 
doings  of  the  wives !  I  wish  he  were  made  Prefect  of  the 
manners  of  the  women. 

Meg.  (tohimself) ,  Now,  go  where  you  will,  you  may  see  more 
carriages*  among  the  houses  than  in  the  countay  whenyou  go  to 
a  farm-house.  But  this  is  even  light,  in  comparison  with  when 
they  ask  for  their  allowance ;  there  stands  the  scourer*,  the 
embroiderer,  the  goldsmith,  the  wooUen-manu&^turer,  retail 
dealers  in  figured  skirts^,  dealers  in  women's  under-clothing*, 

*  AndlcLcqueys) — ^Ver.  466.  "  PedissequoB."  The  "  pedisseqni"  wereaparticnlar 
class  of  slaves  whose  duty  it  was  to  follow  their  master  when  he  went  oat  of  doors. 
They  were  of  the  lowest  rank  in  the  slave  lamily. 

*  Pages  to  carry) — ^Vcr.  466.  The  ^^salntigeruti  pneri**  were  bojs  whose  bnsi- 
ness  it  was  to  run  on  errands,  and  carry  messages  and  compliments  from  one  hoofle 
to  another.  Hildyard  suggests  the  rather  refined  translation  of  **  boys  to  cany 
visiting-cards." 

'  More  carriages) — ^Ver.  459.  "  Planstra"  generally  mean  "  carts**  or  "mg- 
gons,"  and  perhaps,  from  his  reference  to  the  country,  may  have  that  signifiestioD 
here ;  though  he  has  Just  been  speaking  of  the  luxury  of  the  ladies,  with  their 
"  vehicla,"  or  "  carriages." 

*  The  scourer) — ^Ver.  462.  The  "  fullo"  was  a  washer  and  cleaner  of  linen  and 
woollen  clothing  with  fuller's  earth.  As  woollen  dresses  were  chiefly  worn  by  the 
Bomans,  they  would,  by  reason  of  the  persjHration  produced  by  so  hot  a  diniate, 
require  frequent  purification.  As  the  ancients,  probably,  were  not  acquainted 
with  the  use  of  ordinary  washing  soap,  various  alkalis  were  used  in  its  place  for 
the  purpose  of  cleanidng  garments.  It  is  not  known  whether  the  iuller's  earth  of 
the  Bomans  resembled  that  used  at  the  present  day. 

'^  Dealers  infgured  skirts)— Ver,  468.  "Pataparii."  These  were  psrajna  who 
sold  the  "  patagium,"  which  was  a  broadband  or  hem  on  the  tunics  of  the  women, 
answering  to  the  "  clavus,"  or  "  broad  stripe,"  on  the  clothes  of  the  men.  It  may 
possibly  have  been  the  same  as  the  "  instita,"  or  broad  flounce,  which  distingnlshed 
the  Boman  matrons  of  reputable  character. 

*  Dealers  in  toomen^s  under-dothinff) — ^Ver.  468.  "  Indnsiatii,"  "makeni"* 
<*  sellers"  of  the  **  indusium,"  which  is  by  some  thought  to  have  been  the  upper 
tunic  worn  by  the  Boman  women;  while  others  suppose  the  under  tnmc,wofn 
next  the  skin,  to  have  been  so  called,  from  "  intus,"  "  innermost." 


y  Google 


Sa  X.  OB,  THE  COlfTCSAIiED  TBEASITBE.  401 

dvers  in  flame-colour,  dyers  in  violet,  dyers  in  wax-colour^,  or 
else  sleeve-makers^,  or  perfumers^;  wholesale  linendrapers, 
shoemakers,  squatting  cobblers,  slipper-makers ;  sandal- 
makers  stand  there ;  stainers  in  mallow  colour  stand  there ; 
hairdressers^  make  their  demands,  botchers  their  demands ; 
boddice-makers^  stand  there ;  makers  of  kirtles^  take  their 
stand.  Now  you  would  think  them  got  rid  of;  these  make 
way,   others    make  their  demands;  three  hundred  duns^ 

*  Dyers  in  wax-colour)—Yer.  464.  "  Carinarii."  Ovid,  in  the  Art  of  Loye, 
B.  3, 1. 184,  has  the  line,  "  Sua  velleribns  nomina  cera  dedit."  "  The  wax  has 
pren  its  own  name  to  the  wool.'*  The  yellow  colour  resembling  that  of  wax  was 
nmch  esteemed  by  the  Bomans. 

^ Skeoe-makersy-Yer,  466.  " Manulearii,"  "makers  of  the  manulea."  This 
was  a  long  sleeve  fitted  on  to  the  tnnics  of  the  Roman  ladies,  and  was  probably 
made  to  take  on  and  off,  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  arms  and  hands  warm. 

*  Per/wnersy-yer.  465.  "  Murobrecharii."  One  reading  here  is  "  mnrroba- 
tlmrii,'*  "  persons  who  give  an  agreable  smell  to  women's  shoes,  by  scenting 
them  with  myrrh."  "  Murobrecbarii,"  which  is  adopted  above,  means  "  perfumers," 
or  "persons  who  scented  the  clothes,"  from  the  Greek  fivpop,  "  ointment,"  and 
iSpexo,  "  to  moisten."  Myrrh  or  nard  was  much  used  for  this  purpose.  The 
mguento  or  ointments  used  by  the  ancients  were  very  numerous.  Among  those 
used  for  the  skin  or  the  hair  were  "mendesium,"  "  megalesium,"  "meto- 
jHum,"  "  amaracinum,"  "Cyprinum,"  "susinum,"  "nardinum,"  "spicatum," 
"jasminum,"  "  rosaceum,"  and  crocus  oil,  which  last  was  considered  the  most 
costly.  Powders  were  also  used  as  perfumes ;  they  were  called  "  diapasmata.'* 
The  Greeks  used  expensive  perfumes  from  early  times,  and  both  Greeks  and 
Romans  were  in  the  habit  of  carrying  them  about  in  small  boxes  of  elegant  work- 
manship. In  the  luxurious  city  of  Capua,  there  was  one  great  street,  called 
the  "  Seplasia,"  which  consisted  entirely  of  shops  in  which  ointments  and  per- 
fiunes  were  sold. 

*  Hairdressers) — ^Ver.  469.  "  Ciniflones."  The  "  ciniflones"  were  those  per- 
sons whose  duty  it  was  to  heat  the  "  calamistrum,"  or  "curling-iron,"  m  wood- 
ashes  (cinis),  iirom  which  they  took  their  name.  In  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  youths 
of  Home  generally  had  their  hair  curled,  whence  they  were  termed  "  calamis- 
trati." 

>  Boddice-mitkers) — ^Ver.  471.  "  Strophiarii."  These  were  makers  of  the  band 
or  stomacher  which  was  worn  by  the  women,  to  correct  excessive  protuberance  of 
the  breast  and  stomach. 

«  Makers  of  hirtles) — ^Ver.  470.  "  Semizonarii."  These  were  makers  or  sellers 
of  "  semicinctia,"  which  were  little  "  aprons"  or  "  kirtles"  extending  half  way 
down  the  body. 

'  Three  hundred  duns) — Ver,  472.  "  Phylacistae,"  from  the  Greek  6vKaKi(rrrjs, 
" a  keeper  of  a  prison."  He  calls  "duns"  or  importunate  creditors  by  this 
name,  from  their  keeping  as  close  a  watch  on  the  front  of  a  debtor's  house  as 
If  they  were  gaolers. 

2j> 


y  Google 


4Q2  AVLUIiiLBIA ;  Act  m: 

ftre  standing  in  your  hall;  weavers,  lace-makers^,  cabinet- 
makers^  are  introduced;  the  money's  paid  them.  You 
would  think  them  got  rid  of  by  this  ;  when  dyers  in  safion- 
colours  come  anea^ng  along ;  or  else  theie's  always  some 
horrid  plague  or  other  which  is  demanding  something. 

Etjo.  (aside).  I  would  accost  him,  if  I  didn't  fear  that  he 
would  cease  to  descant  upon  the  ways  of  wom^i ;  iar  the 
present  I'll  leave  him  as  he  is. 

Msa.  When  the  money  has  been  paid  to  all  the  nicknaek- 
mongers,  for  these  saffiron-coloured  garments  <md  stomachers^ 
your  wife's  expenses,  then  at  the  last  comes  the  tax-gatherei^ 
and  asks  for  money.  Tou  go,  your  account  is  being  made  up 
with  your  banker* ;  the  tax-gatherer  waits,  half-starred,  am 
thinks  the  money  will  be  paid.  When  the  account  has  been 
made  up  with  the  banker,  even  already  is  the  husband  himself 
in  debt  to  the  banker,  and  the  hopes  of  the  tax-gatiierer  are 
postponed  to  another  day.  These,  and  many  others,  are  the 
niconveniences  and  intolerable  expenses  of  great  portions; 
but  she  who  is  without  portion  is  in  the  power  of  her  hus- 
band; the  portioned  ones  overwhelm  thenr  husbands  with 
loss  and  ruin.  But  see;  here's  my  connexion  by  marriage 
before  the  house !     How  do  you  do,  Euclio  ? 

Euo.  With  very  great  pleasure  have  I  listened  to  your 
discourse. 

Meg.  Did  you  hear  me?  Euo.  Everything  from  the 
very  beginning. 

Meg.  {eyeing  him  from  head  to  foof).  Still,  in  my  way  of 
thinking  indeed,  you  would  be  acting  a  Httle  more  becomingly 
if  you  were  more  tidy  at  the  wedding  of  your  daughter. 

Euo.  Those  who  have  display  according  to  their  circum- 

»  Lace-mdkersy—'Yer.  473.  "  Limbuaril"  The  makers  of  "  Ijmbus,"  "  lace"  or 
*^  fringes"  for  women's  dresses. 

2  Cahmet-makersy--yer.  473.  "  Arcularii,"  makers  of  "  aicnte,"  "  caskets"  or 
(( cabinets"  for  jewels  and  nicknacks. 

»  The  tax-gaHterery-Yer,  481.  "MUes."  Literally,  "the  soldier."  This  is 
ezphdned  as  meaning  that  the  soldier  OHnes  to  receive  tiie  military  tribaie  levied 
hj  the  Tribunes,  which  was  called  "  ses  militare."  The  word  may,  homem, 
possibly  mean  simply  the  ofBoer  of  the  magistrate  by  whom  the  tribute  was  leried, 
as  "  miles"  has  sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  that  significatian. 

*  With  your  6a«Aer)— Ver.  482.  The  **  argentarii"  acted  as  banksrs  of  depoit, 
upon  whom  the  depositors  drew  checks  as  with  us. 


y  Google 


Be.  X  OB,  THE  C09CJ&ALED  TBEASTJBE.         '  408 

itances  and  splendour  according  to  tHeir  means^,  remember 
themselves,  from  whence  they  are  sprung ;  neither  by  myself, 
Megadoras,  nor  by  any  poor  man,  are  better  cbrcumstances 
ei^oyed  than  appearances  warrant. 

MsG.  Surely  they  are ;  and  may  the  Grods,  I  hope,  make 
them  BO  to  be,  and  more  and  more  may  they  prosper  that 
which  you  now  possess. 

Euc.  (aside).  That  expression  don't  please  me, "  which  you 
sow  possess."  He  knows  that  I've  got  this,  as  well  Bsldo 
myBelf :  the  old  woman  has  discovered  it  to  him, 

Meo.  Why  do  you  separate  yourself  thtts  alone,  apart 
fiom  the  Senate^  P 

Euc.  Troth,  I  was  considering  whether  I  should  accuse 
you  deservedly. 

Meg-.  What's  the  matter  ?  Ero.  Do  you  ask  me  whafs 
the  matter  ?  You  who  have  filled  every  comer  in  my  house, 
for  wretched  me,  with  thieves  ?  Tou  who  have  introduced 
into  m  J  dwelling  five  hundred  cooks,  with  six  hands  a-pieee, 
of  the  race  of  Greryon^,  whom  were  Ai^us  to  watch,  who  wafi 
eyes  all  over,  that  Juno  once  set  as  a  spy  upon  Jupiter,  he 
never  could  watch  them ;  a  music-girl  besides,  who  could 
alone  drink  up  for  me  the  Corinthian  fountain  of  Firene^,  if 
it  were  flowing  with  wine  P    And  then  as  to  provisions 

M£&.  Troth,  there's  enough  for  a  procure?  even.  I  sent 
as  much  as  a  lamb. 

1  According  to  ibeir  meoHM)— Ver.  496.  Shakspeare  expresses  the  same  idea  m 
fiaailBt,  ActlL,  Sg.8: 

GoBtlj  thy  habit  as  thy  ptmse  can  buy, 
But  not  expressed  in  fancy. 

3  Apart  from  the  Senatey-Yix.  504.  As  the  Senate  coDBaltB  about  the  com- 
man  interests,  so  are  they  discussing  th^  common  sentiments.  Megadorus  there- 
fatt,  on  hearing  him  talking  to  himself,  asks  him  why  he  is  withdrawing  himself 
fimm  the  disGussions  of  the  Senate. 

>  Cfihe  race  of  Geryony-Yer,  d09.  Geryon  was  a  King  of  Spam,  slain  by 
flercules.  He  was  &bled  to  haye  had  three  heads  and  three  bodies,  consequently 
ffix  bands. 

4  FmaUam  of  Pireaey^Yer,  514  Pirene,  the  daughter  of  Aohdoiis,  on  Con- 
chreas  her  son  by  Neptone  being  shun  by  Diana,  pined  away,  and  was  changed 
ihto  a  fountain,  which  was  in  the  Arx  Oorinthiacns,  or  Citadel  of  Corkth,  and 
retained  her  name. 

»  ^or  oiwocurcr)— Ver.  515.  Who  might  be  presumed  to  have  a  voracious  and 
ungovernable  appetite,  and  probably  a  large  honsehold  to  satisfy.  Some  editions, 
however,  have  "leg^oni^"  which  would  almost  appear  to  be  a  preferable  reading: 
«  almost  enough  for  a  whole  legion." 

2n2 


y  Google 


40i  AULULABIA. ;  Act  IH 

Eire.  Than  wliich  lamb,  I,  indeed,  know  right  well  that 
there  is  nowhere  a  more  curious^  beast  existing. 

Meg.  I  wish  to  know  of  jrou  why  is  this  lamb  curious? 

Euo.  Because  it's  all  skm  and  bone,  so  lean  is  it  with 
care ;  why,  even  when  alive,  by  the  light  of  the  sun  you 
may  look  at  its  entrails ;  it's  just  as  transparent  as  a  Punic 
lantern^. 

Meg.  I  bought  it  to  be  killed. 

Etjo.  Then  it's  best  that  you  likewise  should  bargain  foi* 
it  to  be  carried  out  for  burial ;  for  I  believe  it's  dead  by  this 
time. 

Meg.  Buclio,  I  wish  this  day  to  have  a  drinking  with  you, 

Euc.  1^  my  troth,  I  really  «itist  not  drink. 

Meg.  But  I'll  order  one  cask  of  old  wine  to  be  brought 
jfrom  my  house. 

Euc.  r  faith,  I  won't  have  it;  for  I've  determined  to 
drink  water. 

Meg.  I'll  have  you  well  drenched  this  day,  if  I  live,  you 
who  have  determined  to  drink  water. 

Evo.  (aside),  I  know  what  plan  he's  upon;  he's  aiming 
at  this  method,  to  overcome  me  with  wine,  and  after  that,  to 
change  the  settlement^  of  what  I  possess :  I'll  take  care  of 

1  A  more  curiousy-Yer.  517.  **  Magis  cnriosam.**  It  is  suggested  in  Schmie- 
der*s  Notes  to  Plantns,  that  £uclio  intends  to  call  the  lamb  **  inqnisitiTe"  or 
«( canons,**  "  cnriosam,"  because  he  had  found  it,  when  he  entered  his  houtt 
to  drive  out  Congrio  and  his  scullions,  scraping  and  smelling  about  in  efoj 
direction,  as  in  a  strange  place  it  was  natural  for  it  to  do,  but  which  the  old  man 
thought  to  be  done  in  quest  of  his  treasure.  On  this,  MegadoruB,  who  has  not 
heard,  or  eke  has  misunderstood,  the  last  syllable  for  *^  nem,"  instead  of  ^^saoi,*' 
asks  him  what  sort  of  a  Iamb  a  "  curb**  (the  nominative  of  "  curionem**)  hunb  is; 
on  which  Euclio  catches  him  up,  and  says  he  calls  a  *'  curio**  lamb  such  a  one  as 
he  has  sent  him,  all  skin. and  bone,  and  lean  with  *'  cura,'*  "  care.'*  *'  CuxioDem" 
is  by  many  preferred  as  the  reading  in  the  517th  line  to  "  curiosam,**  and  perhs^ 
it  is  the  best.  Be  it  as  it  may,  the  wit  seems  far-fetched ;  and  not  improbali^ 
the  word  *^  curio**  may  have  had  some  meanmg  which  is  now  lost,  other  than  its 
usual  signification  of  the  master  or  head  of  a  **  curia,**  or  **  ward.** 

s  A  Punk  kmierny^VeT,  521.  The  horn  exported  from  Carthage,  for  the  puw 
pose  of  making  lanterns,  was  more  pellucid  than  any  other. 

s  SluMildbargamfory'yQT.  523.  ''  Loces.**  ''  Should  hure**  the  *'  oonductar«B|'* 
or  *'  Hbitinarii,**  who  contracted  to  perform  funerals.  He  seems  to  hmt  that  tbi 
lamb  is  so  meagre  that  it  is  not  worth  eating.  If  that  is  not  his  meaning,  the  wit 
intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  passage  is  imperceptible. 

*  Change  the  tetUementy^Yer.  531.  "  Commutet  ooloniam.**  Literally,  "mi^ 
ehange  its  colony.** 


y  Google 


Sc.  X.  OB,  THB  COirCSALED  TBEASTTBE.  405 

that,  for  Fll  liide  it  somewhere  out  of  doors.    I'll  mako 
lum  lose  his  wine  and  his  trouble  together. 

Meo.  Unless  you  want  me  for  anything,  I'm  going  to 
bathe,  that  I  may  sacrifice.     (^Se  goes  into  his  house.) 

Euc.  By  my  flEdth,  you  pot  {taking  it  from  under  hit 
ehak),  you  surely  have  many  enemies,  and  that  gold  as  well 
which  is  entrusted  to  you !  Now  this  is  the  best  thing  to  be 
done  by  me,  to  take  you  away,  mg  pot,  to  the  Temple  of  FaitW , 
where  I'll  hide  you  carefully.  Faith,  thou  dost  know  me,  and 
I  thee ;  please,  do  have  a  care  not  to  change  thy  name  against 
me,  if  I  entrust  this  to  thee.  Faith,  FU  come  to  thee,  relyii 
on  thy  fidelity.    (Se  goes  info  the  Temple  of  Faith.) 

Act  rv. — SoBins  L 

Enter  Stbobiitts*. 

Stbo.  This  is  the  duty  of  a  good  servant,  to  do 
mtending,  not  to  consider  the  commands  of  his 
bore  or  trouble  to  him.  For  that  servant  who  resolves 
serve  his  master  with  hearty  goodwill,  him  it  behoves  to 
act  expeditiously  for  his  master,  slowly  for  himself ;  but  if  he 
sleeps,  let  him  so  sleep  as  to  bethink  himself  that  he  is  a 
servant.  But  he  who  lives  in  servitude  to  one  in  love,  as  I 
am  serving,  if  he  sees  love  overcoming  his  master,  this  I 
think  to  be  the  duty  of  the  servant ;  to  restrain  him  for  his 
safety,  not  to  impel  him  onwiurds  towards  his  own  inclina- 

>  TemfU  ofFaithy^yer.  538.  "  Udes,"  "  Faith,"  was  a  Goddess  worshipped 
by  the  Bomans.  Probably,  in  the  present  instance,  her  Temple  was  represented 
at  one  side  of  the  stage,  and  the  door  just  beyond  the  side-scene. 

*  StrobSus)  It  is  a  cnrions  fact  that  all  of  the  editions  make  this  to  be  a  dif- 
ferent person  from  the  StrolMlns,  the  servant  of  Megadoms,  whom  we  haya  ahready 
seen  hiring  Gongrio,  Anthrax,  and  the  **  tibicmse.*'  In  the  "  dramatis  persoDn** 
they  style  this  one,  Strobilns,  **  the  servant  of  Lyeonides,"  and  the  other  Strobilns, 
in  some  instances,  as  "  the  servant  of  Megadonis,**  and  in  others  (evidently  by  mis- 
take) as  "  the  servant  of  Euclio.**  On  examination  we  shall  find  there  is  no  ground 
for  this.  Eunomia  (most  probably  a  widow)  is  living,  together  with  her  son  Lyco- 
nides,  in  the  house  of  her  brother  Megadonis.  This  is  clear  from  what  LyoonideB 
says  in  L  684^  whera,  speaking  of  the  honse  of  his  uncle,  he  calls  it  **  »des  nostras," 
"  our  house,"  which  he  would  not  have  said  had  he  not  been  residing  there.  By 
the  indulgence  of  his  unde,  who  has  no  children,  we  may  presume  that  Strobilus 
has  been  permitted  to  consider  him  as  "  his  young  master."  After  hiring  the  cooks, 
be  has  communicated  the  bad  news  toLyconides,  who  tells  him  to  keep  a  good 
look-out,  and  inform  him  of  any  chance  that  may  pos^bly  happen  for  broking  off 
the  marriage. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


406  AxniTJULBiA;  Act  IV. 

tion.  Jiist  as  a  float  of  bnlrashes  is  placed  beneath  boya 
who  are  learning  to  swim,  by  means  of  which  they  m&j 
labour  less,  so  as  to  swim  more  eaaQy  and  moye  their 
hands ;  in  the  same  way  do  I  consider  that  it  is  proper  for 
the  servant  to  be  a  buoy  to  his  master  thus  in  love,  so  as  to 
bear  him  np  lest  he  should  go  to  the  bottom ;  and  so  * 

*  *  *  should  he  learn  the  wHl  of 

his  master,  that  his  eyes  should  know  what  his  moutii 
diooses  not  to  speak.  What  he  orders^  he  should  hasten  to 
perform  more  swiftly  than  the  swift  steeds.  He  who  shall 
have  a  care  for  these  things,  wiU  escape  the  cairt^tion  of  the 
ox's  hide,  nor  by  his  own  means  will  he  ever  bring  the  fetters 
to  brightness.  Now,  my  master's  in  love  with  the  daugh- 
ter of  this  poor  man,  Euclio ;  word  has  just  now  been  brought 
to  my  master  that  ^he  ia  given  to  Megadorus  here :  he  has 
sent  me  here  to  spy  out,  that  he  may  be  made  acquainted 
with  the  things  that  are  going  on.  Now,  without  any  sus- 
picion, m  sit  here  by  the  sacred  altar^.  !From  this  spot  I 
shall  be  able,  in  this  direction  and  that,  to  witness  what 
they  are  about.  {Hie  sits  h/  the  alta/r^  and  on  seeing  Euclid, 
%ides  behind  it,} 

Scene  IL-^IhUer  ^uomo^  Jrom  the  Temple. 

Etjc.  O  Ooddess  Faith,  do  thou  but  take  care  not  to  dis- 
cover to  any  person  that  my  gold  is  thero.  I  have  no  feaor 
that  any  one  will  find  it,  so  well  is  it  concealed  in  its  hidings 
place.  By  my  troth,  he  will  surely  have  a  charming  boo^ 
there,  if  any  one  shall  meet  with  that  pot  loaded  with  gold. 
But  I  entreat  thee,  Paith,  to  hinder  that.  Now  I  shall  go 
wash  me,  that  I  may  perform  the  sacrifice ;  so  that  I  may  not 
delay  my  new  connexion  by  marriage,  but  that,  when  he  sends 
to  me,  he  may  forthwith  take  my  daughter  home.  Over 
end  over  again  now,  Ooddess  Faith,  do  thou  take  care  that  I 
shall  carry  away  the  pot  safe  from  thy  Temple.  To  thy 
fidelity^  have  I  entrusted  the  gold ;  in  thy  grove  and  Temple 
is  it  placed.     (Goes  into  his  house,) 

^  By  the  soared  dUar) — ^Ver.  560.  The  Athenians  often  ndsed  altars  to  Apolb 
or  Baochns  at  their  doors.  Hie  Romans  also  had  altars  in  thor  paUio  stnBets. 
On  the  stage  of  Comedy  there  was  generally  an  altar  erected  in  honor  of  ApoOs^ 
irpooTorrjpioSi  •*  that  presides." 

2  To  ihyfddityy-Yer,  669  "  Tuae  fidei."  He  plays  upon  the  word  "fides,* 
and  flatters  himself  that  his  treasare  cannot  be  more  secure  than  when  enUustrt 
"tothefiuthofFaith." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  nL  OB,  THE  COirOXAXEJ)  TBEABTTBE.  407 

Btbo.  {comvnafrom  heJnnd  the  altar).  Immortal  Oods,  what 
a  deed  did  I  near  this  person  speaking  of,  how  that  he 
had  hidden  here,  in  the  Temple  ot  Eaith,  a  pot  filled  with 
gold ;  prithee,  beware  you,  how  yon  are  more  faithful  to  him 
than  to  myself!  And  he,  as  I  fancy,  is  the  father  of  her  whom 
my  master's  in  love  with.  I'll  go  hence  into  it ;  I'll  tho- 
roughly ransack  the  Temple,  to  see  if  I  can  anywhere  find  the 
gold^  while  he's  engaged.  But  if  I  do  find  it,  O  Chddess  Faith, 
ru  offer  to  thee  a  gallon  jug^  fiill  of  honeyed  wine,  that  I'll 
surely  offer  to  thee ;  but  I'll  drink  it  up  myself,  when  I  have 
offered  it.     {BetreaiM  hehind  the  altar,) 

ScEiTE  m. — Enter  ISiUCLLOyfrom  his  house, 
Etjc.  (to  himself).  It  wasn't  for  nothing  that  the  raven  was 
just  now  croaking  on  my  left  hand^  ;  he  was  both  scratching 
the  ground  with  his  feet  and  croaking  with  his  voice.  At  once 
my  heart  began  to  jump  about*,  and  to  leap  within  my 
breast.  But  wh^  do  I  delay  to  run  P  (Se  discovers  Steo- 
BrLTis,  and  drags  him  from  hehind  the  altar?)  Out,  out,  you 
earthworm'*,  who  have  this  instant  crept  out  of  the  earth ; 
who  just  now  were  nowhere  seen,  and  now  that  you  are  seen 
shall  ^efor  it.  By  my  faith,  you  juggler,  I'll  receive  you  now 
after  a  disagreable  fashion.  (Begins  to  shake  and  heat  him.) 
Stbo.  "What  the  curst  plague  does  ail  you  ?  What  busi- 
ness have  you  with  me,  old  fellow  ?  Why  do  you  torment 
me  ?  Why  are  you  dragging  me  ?  For  what  reason  are  you 
beating  me  ? 

^  A gaBon  jftgy-Yer.  576.  " Oongialem."    Literally,  "holding  a  congins." 
This  contained  abont  nine  pints  of  English  measure.    By  the  nse  of  the  word 
"  fidelia,"  "  a  jngy**  he  plays  on  its  resemblance  to  the  name  of  "  Fides.'* 
.    ^  Onmff  left  hand) — ^Ver.  578.  We  cannot  fail  to  rememher  here  the  exactly 
similar  expression  of  Gay,  in  the  fable  of  the  Farmer's  Wife  and  the  Raven: 

That  rayen  on  yon  left-hand  oak 

(Corse  on  his  ill-betiding  croak  I) 

Bodes  me  no  good. 

*  Began  to  Jump  about) — ^Ver.  680.  "  Ars  ludicra"  here  means  "  the  art  of  a 
*  Indius,'  or  stage-player,"  who  moves  to  and  fro  and  gesticulates — hence  "  cor 
coepit  artem  facere  ludicram"  would  strictly  mean  "  my  heart  begins  to  move 
to  and  fro  like  a  play-actor," 

*  EaHhworm) — ^Ver.  582.  He  thinks,  that  in  the  short  space  of  time  during 
which  he  has  been  absent  in  the  Temple,  he  can  only  have  sprang  out  of  the  earth, 
as  he  had  not  seen  him  a  few  minutes  before;  and  taking  him  to  be  a  sort  of 
"  prsestigiator,"  or  "jnggler,"  he  fancies  that  he  has  followed  him  into  the 
Temple,  and  purloined  the  treasnre. 


y  Google 


406  JLJJhVJJLBlA, ;  Act  IT. 

Euc.  You  out-and-out  whipping-post,  do  you  even  ask 
that,  you,  not  thief,  but  thrice-dotted  thief. 

Stbo.  What  have  I  stolen  from  you  ? 

Etjc.  Give  me  that  back  here,  if  you  please. 

Stbo.  What  do  you  want  me  to  give  you  back  ? 

Etjc.  Do  you  ask  me  that  P  Stbo.  As  forme,  I've  taken 
nothing  away  from  you. 

Etjc.  But  give  up  that  which  vou  have  taken  away  for 
yourself.    Are  you  going  to  do  so  r 

Stbo.  Do  what  P    Euc.  Tou  can't  carry  it  off. 

Stbo.  What  do  you  want  P    Euc.  Lay  it  down. 

Stbo.  Troth,  for  my  part,  I  think  that  you  are  in  the 
habit^  of  quizzing,  old  gentleman. 

Etjc.  Put  that  down,  please;  cease  your  quibbling ;  I'm 
not  trifling  now. 

Stbo.  What  am  I  to  put  down  P  Why  don't  you  men- 
tion  it,  whatever  it  is,  by  its  own  name  P  By  my  frith,  I 
really  have  neither  taken  nor  touched  anything. 

Etjc.  Show  me  your  hands,  here.  Stbo.  Well,  I  do  show 
them ;  see,  here  they  are.     {Holding  out  his  hands.) 

Ere.  I  see  them.     Come,  show  me  the  third*,  as  well. 

Stbo.  (aside).  Sprites,  and  frenzy,  and'  madness,  possess 
this  old  fellow.    Are  you  doing  me  an  injustice,  or  not  P 

Euc.  A  very  great  one,  I  confess,  inasmuch  as  you  are 

1  In  the  habit) — ^Ver.  591.  The  real  meaning  of  the  author  in  this  line  is  so 
indelicate,  that  it  requires  another  tarn  to  be  given  to  the  passage. 

*Skow  me  the  e^neQ— Ver.  595.  This  passage  has  been  considered  as  eztraT»- 
gant ;  bnt  it  really  does  not  appear  inconsistent  with  the  ridieoloos  conduct  oC 
the  wretched  Euclio  throughout.  Thornton  supposes  that  the  following  passags 
in  the  old  play  of  Albumazar,  Act  IIL,  Sc.  8  (where  Trmctdo  questions  JRonea 
about  the  purse,  which  the  latter  has  stolen  from  him),  is  an  imitation  of  this 
passage: 
7Vm.  Show  me  your  hand. 

Ron.  Here 'tis. 

Trin.  But  where's  the  other  ? 
Ron.  Why,  here. 

TWn.  But  I  mean,  whereas  your  other  hand? 
Ron.  Think  you  me  the  giant  with  an  hundred  hands? 
Trin,  Give  me  your  right. 

Ron.  My  right? 

Trin.  Tour  left 

J2CMI.  Mr  left? 
Trin.  Now  both. 

Ron,  There^s  both,  my  dear  Antonio. 


y  Google 


Scni.  OB^  THE  OOKOISAU])  TEEASTTBE.  409 

not  stnms  up ;  and  that  too  shall  be  done  this  moment,  un- 
less you  do  confess. 

Steo.  "What  am  I  to  confess  to  you  ?  Buo.  What  it  was 
you  took  away  hence. 

Steo.  May  the  Qoda  confound  me,  if  I've  taken  away 
anything  of  yours,  {tuide)  and  if  I  don't  wish  I  had  taken 
it  away. 

EuG.  Gome  then,  shake  out  your  cloak. 

Steo.  At  your  pleasure.    {Shakes  it) 

Eve.  You  haven't  it  among  your  under-clothing  ? 

Steo.  Search  where  you  please.  Euo.  Pshaw !  how  civilly 
the  rascal  speaks,  that  I  mayn't  suppose  he  has  taken  it 
away !  I  know  your  tricks.  Come,  show  me  here  again  that 
nght  hand. 

I       Steo.  Here  it  is.    {Extending  it,)    "Etc.  Now  show  me 
i    your  left. 

Steo.  Well,  then,  I  show  you  both,  in  fiwt.  {Extending 
them.) 

Eire.  Now  I  leave  off  searching.     Give  back  that  here. 

Steo.  Give  back  what  ?  Euc.  Are  you  trifling  with  me  ? 
You  certainly  have  got  it. 

Steo.  I,  got  it?  Qot  what?  Euo.  I  shan't  say;  you 
want  to  hear.    WTiatever  you  have  of  mine,  give  it  back. 

Steo.  You  are  mad ;  you've  searched  me  all  over  at  your 
own  pleasure,  and  yet  you've  found  nothing  of  yours  in  my 
possession. 

Euc.  {starting).  Stop,  stop;  who  was  that?  Who  was 
the  other^  that  was  within  here,  together  with  yourself? 
Troth,  I'm  undone ;  he's  now  rummaging  about  within.  K 
I  let  this  one  go,  he'll  escape.  At  last,  I've  now  searched 
this  one  all  over ;  he  has  got  nothing.  Be  off  where  you 
please ;  Jupiter  and  the  Gods  confound  you ! 

Steo.  He  returns  his  thanks  not  amiss^. 

Etrc.  I'll  go  in  here  now,  and  I'll  at  once  throttle  this 
accomplice  of  yours.  Will  you  not  fly  hence  firom  my  sight  ? 
WiU  you  away  from  here,  or  no  ? 

>  Who  wu  the  othery-Yer,  609.  This  suspicion  in  Enolio  is  yery  natural; 
and  he  asks  the  question  very  artfully,  for  the  purpose  of  catching  a  confession 
from  him  by  inadrertence. 

*  T^hankt  not  amiss) — ^Ver.  612.  He  says  this  sarcastically.  If  he  gets  such 
thanks  when  he  has  not  stolen  the  treasure,  what  would  he  have  got  supposing 
that  he  had? 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


410  ▲TJLUiiASiA ;  Ajoi;  IV. 

Stbo.  I'm  ofL  Etto.  Take  you  care,  please,  how  I  see  you. 
{He  goes  into  the  Temple,) 

Scene  IV. — Stbobiltjs,  alone. 

Stbo.  I  would  rather  tliat  I  were  dead  outrigM,  by  a 
shocking  death,  than  not  lay  an  ambush  this  da^  for  that  old 
fellow.  But  he'll  not  venture  now  to  hide  his  gold  here ; 
he'll  now  be  carrying  it  with  him,  I  guess,  and  be  changing  the 
spot.  But  hark !  there's  a  noise  at  the  door.  {Loohing  in 
the  direction  of  the  Temple.)  See,  the  old  fellow's  bringing 
out  the  gold  with  him !  Meanwhile,  I'll  step  aside  here  to 
the  door.     {Conceals  himself  near  the  door,) 

ScEioJ  V. — Unter  Euclid,  from  the  Temple^  wUh  the  pot  of 
money. 

Euc.  (to  himself).  I  had  thought  that  there  was  the  very 
greatest  dependence  upon  Faith ;  very  nearly  had  she  played 
me  a  pretty  trick^.  If  the  raven  hadn't  come  to  my  assist- 
ance, to  my  sorrow  I  should  have  been  undone.  Troth,  I  very 
much  wish  that  raven  would  cime  to  me  which  gave  me 
the  warning,  that  I  might  say  something  kind  to  him ;  for  I 
would  as  soon  give^  him  something  to  eat  as  lose  it.  Now 
I'm  thinking  of  a  lonely  spot  where  I  shall  hide  this.  The 
grove  of  Sylvanus,  outside  of  the  wall,  is  unfrequented,  aand 
planted  with  many  a  willow ;  there  will  I  choose  a  spot.  I'm 
determined  to  trust  Sylvanus^,  rather  tham  Faith.     {Exit. 

Stbo.  {re-appecm/ag from  his  hiding-place).  Capital !  coi- 
tal! the  Gods  will  me  to  be  safe  and  preserved!  Now 
will  I  run  before  to  that  place,  and  climb  up  into  some  tree, 
and  thence  will  I  watch  where  the  old  feUow  hides  the  gold. 
Although  my  master  bade  me  remain  here,  I'm  readved 
rather  to  risk  a  mishap  along  with  emolument.  (JBlef^. 


1  Phyed  me  a  pretty  tncky-Yer.  623.  "  Sublevit  os."    "  Sublinere  oe"  i 
''  to  paint  the  face  secretly/*  in  allnsion  to  the  practical  joke  of  so  doing  when  a 
person  is  asleep,  and  thereby  making  a  fool  of  him. 

3  Would  as  80on  givey-Ver.  626.  That  is,  "not  at  aQ.**  He  says  «<t2mk 
yon"  to  the  raven,  bnt  he  woold  be  as  likely  to  give  it  a  scrap  of  vietoab  as  Is 
throw  it  away,  which  was  quite  repugnant  to  his  ^^  jos  et  norma  vivvndi,''  his  mods 
of  life. 

s  SyhfOttusy—Yer.  630.  Sylvanus  was  the  tutelary  Divinity  of  tha  woodliiids, 
fields,  and  cattle.    Pigs  were  usualfy  offisred  in  sacrifioe  to  him. 


yC^oogle 


Sc.  YI.  OB;  THB  COK0£AXXB  TBEASXTBE.  411 

ScxKE  VI. — ^t^  LTcoiraDBS  and  EinTOMiJi,yr<w»  tJie 

house  ofMMGtADOBVS, 

Ltc.  Fve  told  you  all,  mother ;  as  well  as  I  do  myself 
yott  nnderstaiid  all  about  the  daughter  of  Euclio.  Now,  I 
do  entreat  you,  my  mother,  make  mention  of  it  to  my  unde, 
and  I  now  unask  of  you,  mother,  that  which  before  I  en- 
treated of  you,  to  conceal  this  from  Megadorus, 

Emr.  You  know,  yourself,  that  what  you  desire  to  be  done, 
I  desire,  and  I  trust  that  I  shall  obtain  this  of  my  brother ; 
and  the  reason  is  good,  if  *tis  so  as  you  say,  that  in  a  drunken 
fit  you  debauched  this  damsel. 

Ltc.  Could  I,  my  mother,  tell  a  falsehood  in  your  presence  ? 

(Phjedea  cries  out  in  labour ,  in  EirCLio's  house.')  I  die, 
my  nurse ;  my  pangs  are  coming  on !  I  entreat  thee  for  thy 
protection,  Juno  Lucina^ ! 

Ltc.  Ah !  my  mother,  I  see  a  more  convincing  proof  for 
you ;  she's  crying  aloud — she's  in  the  pangs  of  labour. 

Exjir.  Come  in-doors  here,  with  me,  my  son,  to  my  brother, 
that  I  may  obtain  a  grant  from  him  of  that  which  you  beg 
of  me* 

Lto.  Go  ;  I'll  foUow  youfthis  instant,  mother.  (Bitnomia 
goes  into  the  house.)  But  my  servant,  Strobilus,  I  wonder 
where  he  is,  whom  I  ordered  to  wait  here  for  me.  Now  I 
reflect  with  myself,  if  he's  lending  me  his  assistance,  it  isn't 
fair  that  I  should  be  angry  with  him.  I'U  go  in-doors,  where 
they  are  sitting  in  jud^ent^  upon  my  life.  {Goes  into  the 
house  o^MEOADOBrs.) 

Act  V. — ScEinB  I. 

Unter  Stbobiltjs,  with  the  pot  offnoney. 

Stbo.  I,  by  myself,  exceed  the  riches  of  the  GrrflGns*,  who 

.  >  Juno  Luemay^Yer.  646.  Juno  Lndna  ma  the  Goddess  who  presided  oyer 
ehildbirth.  Some  suppose  that  the  Goddess  Diana  was  called  by  that  lume ;  bat 
(altboagh  Diana  was  also  addressed  by  partnrient  females)  it  is  more  likely  that 
Juno  was  addressed  onder  the  title.  A  similar  dronmstance  to  thm  takes  phice 
in  the  Andiia  and  the  Adelphi  of  Terence. 

«  7%eff  are  sitting  vnjudffment^^Yer.  654.  *'  Ubi  de  capite  meo  stmt  Comitia." 
literally,  "  where,  then,  are  the  Comitia  about  my  life."  Trials  were  held  before 
the  "  Comitia  centuriata,"  or  assemblies  of  the  people,  at  Rome,  to  which  reference 
k  here  made.  He  alludes  to  the  discussion  between  Eunomia  and  Megadorus,  on 
the  marriage  of  the  latter  with  Phsedra. 

»  Eiehes  o/^  Crr^&w)— Ver.  666.  Pici. "  Picis*'  would  be  a  better  reading  here, 
and  ought  to  be  adopted,  unlflss  we  agree  witii  some  of  the  Commentators,  who 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


412  ATTLITLiJttlA;  Act  V. 

inhabit  the  golden  mountains.  For  I'm  unwilling  to  make 
mention  of  those  other  kings,  beggarly  fellows — ^I  am  the 
king  Philip.  O  charming  day !  for  when  I  went  from  here, 
just  now,  1  arrived  there  much  the  first,  and,  long  before,  I 
placed  myself  in  a  tree,  and  thence  observed  where  the  old 
fellow  hid  the  gold.  "When  he  departed  thence,  I  let  myself 
down  from  the  tree,  and  dug  up  the  pot  fiill  of  gold.  Thence, 
from  that  spot,  I  saw  the  old  fellow  betaking  himself  back 
again ;  he  didn't  see  me,  for  I  turned  a  little  on  one  side,  out 
of  the  path.  Heyday !  here  he  comes  himself.  I'll  go  and 
hide  this  away,  at  home.  (  Ghes  into  the  house  <)^MBaAi>OBi7S.) 

BcxKE  n. — JEwter  Euclid,  tearing  his  hair  and  wrvngi^  hu 

hcmds. 
Eire.  I'm  ruined!  I'm  done  for!  I'm  murdered!  "Whither 
shall  I  run  ?  Whither  not  run?  Sto^  hirrf — stop  Aim.  Whom? 
who  ?  I  don't  know.  I  see  nothing !  I'm  going  blindfold ; 
and,  in  fact,  whither  I  am  going,  or  where  I  am,  or  who  I  am, 
I  can't  in  my  mind  find  out  for  certain.  {To  the  Axtdjxsce.) 
I  beseech  you,  give  me  your  aid  (I  beg  one?  entreat  ofyou),  and 
point  me  out  the  person  that  ha»  taken  it  away.  What's  the 
matter  ?  Why  do  you  laugh  ?  I'm  acquainted  with  you  aQ ; 
I  know  that  there  are  many  thieves  here,  who  conceal  them- 
selves with  white  clothes  and  chalk^,  and  sit  as  though  they 
were  honest !  (To  one  of  the  Spectatoes.)  What  say  youP 
Tou  I'm  resolved  to  believe ;  for  I  perceive,  even  bv  your 
looks,  that  you  are  honest.  Well  then,  none  of  these  has  gofe 
it?  You've  been  the  death  of  me!  Tell  me,  then,  who  has  got 
it?  Tou  don't  know?  Oh,  wretched,  wretched  me !  I'm  done 
for!  wofully  undone!  In  most  sorry  plightlgo;  so  much  groan- 
ing, and  misfortune,  and  sorrow,  has  this  day  brought  upon  me, 

think  that  Strobilns  be^ns  a  sentence,  and  then,  in  the  exuberance  of  his  J07, 
breaks  out  into  an  expression  of  a  different  construction  from  that  origiiUL^y  in- 
tended.  It  may,  however,  possiblj  be,  as  Hildyard  suggests,  the  **  nominatinis 
pendens,*'  which  is  not  unifrequently  used  by  Plautus.  The  Pid  here  alliidfld  to 
were  Griffins,  or  fabulous  monsters,  who  were  said  to  watch  the  treasures  of  the 
Arimaspi,  a  people  of  the  north  of  Scythia,  mentioned  by  Herodotus,  who  ««n 
said  to  possess  mountains  of  gold;  in  which  story,  no  doubt,  the  Uralian ama- 
tians  were  aUuded  to. 

1  White  clothes  and  chalky-Ver.  673.  The  Bomfkns  were  much  in  the  ImkA  of 
havmg  then:  woollen  "  togas'*  made  extremely  white  by  chalk,  pipeday,  ttd  i3b» 
fuller's  art.  He  alludes  to  white  garments  covering  bad  manners,  mneii  as  In 
Scripture  whited  sepulchres  are  mentioned  as  being  fall  of  undeanness. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  m.  OB^  THB  GOKOSAIiEJ)  TBEASUBB.  413 

hunger  and  poyerty,  too.  I'm  the  most  utterly  rained  of  all 
men  upon  the  earth !  For  what  need  of  life  have  I,  who  have 
lost  so  much  gold  that  I  so  carefully  watched  P  I  pinched 
myself,  and  my  inclinations,  and  my  very  heart^ !  Now  others 
are  rejoicing  at  this,  my  loss  and  my  misfortune !  I  cannot 
endure  it.     (Se  runs  aoout^  crying  and  stamping.) 

ScEiTB  m. — UnterTuncoTSTLD^sJrom  the  house  o/'Mbgadoetts. 

Lyc.  What  person,  I  wonder,  is  this  before  our  house 
lamenting,  and  that  utters  complaints  with  his  moaning? 
Why,surely,  this  is  EucUo,  as  I  imagine.  I'm  utterly  undone  1 
The  thing's  all  out ;  he  knows  now,  as  I  suppose,  that  Us 
daughter  is  brought  to  bed.  I'm  in  a  state  of  uncertainty 
now  what  I  shall  do,  whether  go  or  remain,  accost  him  or  fly. 

ExJC.  What  person  is  it  that  speaks  there  ? 

Lyc.  'Tis  I,  wretch  that  I  am. 

Euc.  Yes,  and  so  am  I,  and  wretchedly  ruined,  whose  lot 
is  misfortune  so  great  and  sorrow. 

Lyc.  Be'of  good  courage.  Etjc.  How,  prithee,  can  I  be  so  P 

Lyc.  Because  that  deed  which  is  afflicting  your  mind,  I 
did  it,  and  I  confess  it. 

Euc.  What  is  it  I  hear  from  you  ? 

Lyc.  That  which  is  the  truth.  Euc.  What  evil,  young 
man,  have  I  deserved,  by  reason  of  which  vou  should  do  thus, 
and  go  to  ruin  both  me  and  my  children  r 

Lyc.  a  Divinity  was  my  prompter;  he  prompted  me  to 
do  itK 

Euc.  How  ?  Lyc.  I  confess  that  I  have  done  wrong,  and 
I  know  that  I  deserve  censure ;  for  that  reason  I'm  come  to 
beseech  you,  that,  with  feelings  assuaged,  you  will  pardon  me. 

Euc.  Why  did  you  dare  do  so,  to  touch  that  which  was  not 
your  own  ? 

1  And  my  very  Aeort)— Ver.  682.  "  Geninmque  meum."  Literally,  "  and  my 
Genius,**  i  «.  "  my  social  disposition"  or  "  capacity  for  enjoyment." 

*  Prompted  me  to  do  ft)— Ver.  694.  "  Ad  illam  illexit."  Literally,  "  enticed  me 
to  her."  The  homoor  of  the  whole  scene  tarns  npon  Euclio  and  Lyconides 
mistaking  the  meaning  of  each  other— the  former  thinking  that  the  latter  is 
speaking  about  the  '^  anla,"  or  "  pot,"  while  the  latter  fancies  that  EncHo  is 
lamenting  the  mishap  of  his  daughter.  In  the  Latin  language,  the  word  '*  aula" 
is  of  the  feminine  gender,  by  reason  of  which  the  misunderstanding  is  much  more 
natoral  than  it  would  be  in  the  English  language.  In  consequence,  some  little 
latitude  in  the  translation  is  absolutely  necessary  to  sustain  the  equivoque  of  the 
orifoxiaL 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


414  AUXVXiABIA;  Acty. 

Ltc.  What  do  you  wish  to  be  done  P  The  thing  has  been 
done ;  it  can't  be  iindone.  I  believe  that  the  Ghoda  willed 
it,  for  if  they  hadn't  willed  it,  I  know  it  wouldn't  have 
happened. 

JSuc.  Eut  I  believe  that  the  Gods  have  willed  that  I  should 
be  the  death  of  you  in  fetters. 

Ltc.  Don't  say  that!  Euc.  What  business  then  have 
you  to  touch  what  is  my  own  s^ainst  my  will  P 

Lxc.  Because  I  did  it  under  the  evil  mfluence  of  wine  and 
love. 

Euc.  Most  audacious  man,  that  you  should  dare  to  come 
here  to  me  with  that  speech,  you  iinpudent  fellow  !  For  if 
this  is  lawful,  so  that  you  may  be  able  to  excuse  it — ^let  us 
openly,  ia  broad  daylight,  plunder  their  golden  trinkets  from 
ladies — after  that,  if  we  are  caught,  let  us  excuse  ourselves, 
that  we  did  it  when  intoxicated,  by  reason  of  being  in  love. 
Too  cheap  are  wine  and  love,  if  one  in  liquor  and  in  love  is 
allowed  to  do  with  impunity  whatever  he  pleases. 

Ltc.  But  I  come  to  you  of  my  own  accord  to  supplicate 
you  on  account  of  my  folly. 

Euc.  Persons  don't  please  me,  who,  when  they've  dcHie 
wrong,  excuse  themselves.  Ton  ^ew  that  you  had  no 
right  there ;  you  oughtn't  to  have  touched^. 

Lyc.  Therefore,  inasmuch  as  I  did  daie  to  touch,  I  make 
no  objection  to  keep  by  all  means. 

Ero.  ToUj  keep  what  is  d^  own  against  my  will? 

liTO.  Against  your  wiQ,  1  do  not  ask ;  but  I  think  that 
thxt  which  was  yowirs  ought  to  be  mine^.  Moreover,  Eudio, 
you'll  find,  I  say,  that  mine  it  ought  to  be. 

Euc.  Now  really,  on  my  word,  I'll  drag  you  to  the 
Praetor  and  take  proceedings*  against  you,  u^ess  you  make 
restitution. 

>  Ton  oughfyCt  to  have  focicAedl)— Ver.  711.  '*  In  illam  sdbas  non  toam  esse: 
noD  attactam  aportnit.**  This  Hterallj,  speakmg  of  the  pot  (aula)  as  of  the 
feminine  gendeTi  would  mean  "'  70a  knew  that  she  was  not  yoor  own;  it  was  not 
fitting  for  her  to  he  touched.*'  This  of  course  helps  to  confirm  Lycanides  in  ti» 
impression  that  EucUo  is  spe^ng  of  his  daughter. 

2  OugU  to  he  mtipie)— Ver.  714.  Lyconides  here  alludes  to  a  law  which  pn» 
vuled  at  Borne,  whereby,  when  a  person  had  seduced  a  freebom  female,  he  wu 
obliged  either  to  marry  her  himself  without  a  portion,  or  else  to  give  her  anx&  a 
portion  as  was  suitable  to  her  station.  Lyconides  means  to  say  that  he  shall 
eserdse  the  former  right. 

8  And  take  proceedrngay^Vet,  716.  "  Scribam  dicam,"    "  Dica"  was  a  i 


yLiOOgle 


Se.  HL  OB,  THE  COKCEAXEI)  TBEA8UBE.  415 

Ltc.  Make  restitution  of  what  to  you  ? 

Euc.  What  you've  stolen  of  mine. 

Ltc.  I,  stolen  of  yours  ?    "Whence,  or  what  is  it  ? 

Euc.  So  shall  Jupiter  love  you,  how  ignorant  you  are 

Ltc.  Unless,  indeed,  you  tell  me  what  you  are  enquiring 
for. 

Etjo.  The  pot  of  gold,  I  say,  I'm  asking  back  of  you,  which 
yon  confessed  to  me  that  you  had  taken  away. 

Ltc*  By  my  &ith,  I've  neither  said  so,  nor  have  I  done  it. 

Euc.  Do  you  deny  it  ?  Ltc.  Yes,  I  do  utterly  deny  it ; 
for  neither  the  gold  nor  yet  this  pot,  what  it  means,  do  I 
know  or  understand. 

Biro.  Give  me  up  that  pat  which  you  took  away  from  the 
wood  of  Sylvanus.  Come,  give  it  me  hack!  I  would 
n^her  give  you  the  one-half  of  it.  Although  you  are  a  thief 
to  me,  I'll  not  be  hard  upon  the  thief.  Gf^ive  it  me 
back. 

Ltc  You  aro  not  in  your  senses,  to  call  me  a  thief;  I 
thought,  Euclio,  that  you  had  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
anothesr  matter;  as  concerns  myself,  it  is  a  great  matter 
which  I  wish  to  speak  with  you  upon  at  your  leisure,  if  you 
are  at  Msure. 

Eua  Tell  me,  in  good  faith,  have  you  not  stolen  that 
gold? 

Ltc.  In  good  faxthy  No.  Eire.  Nor  know  who  has  taken 
it  awayp 

Ltc-  In  good  faith,  JVb,  to  that  as  well. 

Euc.  But  if  you  should  know  who  has  taken  it  away,  will 
yon  discover  it  to  me  f 

Ltc  I  wiU  do  9a,  Etro.  Nor  accept  of  a  share  from  him, 
whoever  he  is,  for  yourself,  nor  harbour  the  thief? 

Ltc  Even  so.    Eire.  What  if  you  deceive  me  ? 

Ltc.  Gl^n  may  great  Jupiter  do  unto  me  what  he 
pleases. 

Euc  I'm  satisfied.     Come,  then,  say  what  you  wish. 

Ltc  If  you  know  me  hut  imperfectly,  of  what  family  I'm 
bom:  Megadorus  here  is  my  uncle;  Antunachus  was  my 
fether ;  my  name  is  Lyconides ;  Eunomia  is  my  mother. 

derived  firom  jthe  Gteek,  fat  aa  **  indictment,"  "  writ,"  or  "  procesfl,"  by  which 
an  action  was  commenced. 


y  Google 


416  ATJLTTLABIA ;  Act  T. 

Euo.  I  know  the  family ;  now,  what  do  you  want  ? 

Ltc.  I  want  to  know  this.  Ton  have  a  daughter  of 
yours? 

Euc.  Why,  yes,  she's  there  at  home. 

Lyo.  Tou  have,  I  think,  recently  betrothed  her  to  niy 
uncle? 

Etto.  You  have  the  whole  matter.  Ltc.  He  has  now  bade 
me  announce  to  you  his  refusal  ofher^, 

Euc.  A  refusal,  when  the  things  are  got  ready,  and  the 
wedding's  prepared  P  May  all  the  immortal  Gk)ds  and  God- 
desses coniound  him,  so  far  aa  is  possible,  by  reason  of  whom 
this  day,  unhappy  wretch  that  lam,  I  have  lost  so  much  gold ! 

Lto.  Be  or  good  heart,  and  speak  in  kindly  terms ;  now, 
a  thing — ^may  it  turn  out  well  and  prosperously  to  you  and 
your  daughter. — ^May  the  GFods  so  grant — say. 

Euo.  May  the  Gods  so  grant.  Lxc.  And  for  me,  too, 
may  the  GK)ds  so  grant  it.  Now,  then,  do  you  listen.  The 
man  that  admits  a  fault  is  not  so  much  to  be  despised,  if 
he  feels  a  sense  of  shame  when  he  excuses  himself.  Now, 
Euclio,  I  do  beseech  you,  that  what  unawares  I  have  done 
vrrong  towards  yourself  or  jo\a  daughter,  you  will  grant  me 

Eardon  for  the  same,  and  give  her  for  a  vrife  to  me,  as  the 
kws  demand.  I  confess  that  I  did  violence  to  your  daught^ 
on  the  festival  of  Ceres,  by  reason  of  wine  and  the  impulse 
of  youth. 

Euo.  Woe  is  me !   What  shocking  deed  do  I  hear  of  you  ? 

Lto.  Why  do  you  exclaim  ?  You  whom  I've  made  to  be 
a  grandfather  now  at  the  very  wedding  of  your  daughter. 
Eor  your  daughter  has^'tw^  been  brought  to  bed  in  the  ninth 
month  afiber^--calculate  the  number^ ;  for  that  reason,  in  my 
behalf,  has  my  uncle  sent  his  refusal.  Go  in-doors ;  enquire 
whether  it  is  so  or  not  as  I  say. 

Euc.  I'm  undone  utterly ;  so  very  many  misfortunes  unite 
themselves  for  my  undoing.  I'll  go  in-doors,  that  I  may 
know  what  of  this  is  true.     {He  goes  into  Ms  house.) 


^Hi$  refiaal  ofher^—yer,  740.  "  Repadiam."    The  rejection  of  a 
after  being  betrothed  was  called  "  repndiam  ;**  while  the  pntting^way  of  a  i 
ried  woman  by  her  husband  was  called  "  divortinm." 

2  CcUcukOe  the  ntim6er)— Ver.  755.  ^'  Numeram  cape."  He  probably  means 
by  this,  "  calculate  the  tune"  since  the  festival  of  Ceras,  when  this  misfortaiie 
happened. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  OB,  THE  CONCEALED  TEEASTTEE.  417 

Ltc.  I'll  follow  you  this  instant.  This  matter  seems  now 
to  be  pretty  nearljr  in  the  haven  of  safety.  Now,  where  to  sa^ 
my  servant  Strobilus  is,  I  don't  know,  but  yet  I'll  wait 
here  still  a  little  while ;  after  that  I'll  follow  this  man  in- 
doors ;  now,  in  the  meantime,  I'U  give  him  leisure  to  enquire 
of  the  nurse  about  my  doings,  the  attendant  of  his  daugh- 
ter, whether  she  knows  the  truth.     {Moves  as  if  going,) 

Scene  IV. — Enter  Steobilus,  at  a  distance. 

Steo.  (to  himself).  Immortal  Gods,  with  what  and  how 
great  delights  do  you  present  me !  I've  got  a  four  pound  pot 
filled  with  gold ;  who  there  is  richer  than  I  ?  What  man  is 
there  greater  than  I  at  Athens  now ;  any  one,  I  meofiy  to 
whom  the  Gods  are  propitious  ? 

Lrc.  (to  himself).  Why,  surely,  I  seemed  just  now  to 
hear  the  voice  of  some  one  speaking  here. 

SxBO.  (to  himself).  Ha!  do  I  not  see  my  master? 

Itc.  (to  himsey^.  Do  I  see  Strobilus  now,  my  servant  ? 

Stbo.  (to  himself).  'Tis  he  himself.  Ltc.  (to  himself). 
'Tis  no  other. 

Stbo.  (to  himself).  I'U  accost  him.  Ltc.  (to  himself), 
I'll  step  out^  towards  him,  I  do  think  that  he  has  been,  as 
I  requested  him,  to  the  old  woman,  the  nurse  herself  of  this 
damsel. 

Stbo.  (to  himself).  Why  don't  I  tell  him  that  I've  found 
this  prize,  and  speak  out  ?  For  that  reason,  I'll  beg  of  him 
to  make  me  free.  I'U  go  and  speak  to  him.  (Addressing 
k)  I've  found- 


Lye.  What  have  you  found  ?  Stbo.  Not  that  which  the 
boys  cry  out  that  they've  found  in  the  bean  2. 

I4TC.  And  are  you  trifling  with  me  then,  as  you  are  in  the 
habit  of  doing  ?    (Se  twms  asifto  go  awag,) 

Stbo.  Master,  stop ;  I'U  speak  out  then ;  do  Usten. 

1  rU  stqf  out) — ^Ver.  770.'  It  must  be  supposed  that  Strobilns  is  a  good 
way  down  a  street,  which  emerges  on  the  stage  right  opposite  the  Spectators ; 
while  Lyconides  is  in  the  front  of  the  stage,  and  consequently  bejoDd  the  nearer 
end  of  the  street. 

«  Found  in  the  6ea»)— Ver.  776.  This  is  explained  as  meaning  a  little  worm 
or  weevil,  which  boys  used  to  seek  for  in  beans  and  other  pulse,  and  which  they 
called  "Midas." 

2e 


y  Google 


418  ATjxrujKiA;  ActT. 


Ltc.  Come  then,  tell  me.  Stbo.  I'ye  fotuid  to-day^  ] 
V&ry  great  riches. 

Lto.  Where,  pray  ?  Stbo.  A  four  pound  pot^,  I  say,  fUl 
of  gold! 

Ltc.  What  crime  is  this  that  I  hear  of  from  you  ? 

Stbo.  I've  stolen  it  &om  this  old  fellow,  Eucuo. 

Ltc.  Where  is  this  gold?  Stbo.  in  my  box  afe  home; 
I  now  wish  to  be  made  free. 

Lyc.  I,  make  you  free,  you  fellow,  brimfbl  of  wickedness? 

Stbo.  Out  upon  you,  master,  I  know  what  you  would  he 
at.  Troth,  I've  cleverly  tried  your  inclination;  you  were 
just  getting  ready  to  take  it  away  from  me ;  what  would  you 
do,  if  I  had  found  it? 

Ltd.  You  can't  make  good  your  pretences.  Come,  gire 
up  the  gold! 

Stbo.  I,  give  up  the  gold  ?  Ltc.  Give  it  up,  I  say,  tluit 
it  may  be  given  back  to  him. 

Stbo.  Where  am  I  to  get  it  from  ?  Lto.  That  whidi  you 
confessed  just  now  to  be  in  your  box. 

Stbo.  I'  faith,  I'm  in  the  habit  of  talking  nonsense ;  'twas 
in  that  way  I  was  speaking. 

Ltc.  {seizmg  Aw»).  But  do  you  know  what? 

Stbo.  Even  kill  me  outright,  i'  faith,  you  never  diall  set 
it  hence  of  me  #  ♦  •  •» 

▲  STIPFIiBHEKT  to  THB  ATTLITLABIA  BT  CODBUS  TJB0E17S. 

Stbo. the  pot  leUmging  to  the  oUfeUoWj  nMck  Fvt 

not  pot. 

Ltc.  I  will  have  it,  whether  you  wiU  or  no ;  when  1*16 
tied  you  up  all  fours,  and  torn  asundeor  your  body  for  you 
tied  ujp  to  the  beam.  But  wh^  do  I  delay  to  rudi  upon  the 
jaws  of  this  rascal,  and  why  tms  instant  do  I  not  compd  bis 

»  A  four  pound  poty-Yer.  777.  "  QnadriEbris*  probaWy  aUndea  to  the  cspidly 
of  the  pot,  and  not  its  wei^t.  It  was  probably  a  jar  made  to  ccntnn  fonr  poonds 
weight  of  liquid. 

2*  ««  The  lestofthisPlayia  unfortunately  lost  From  the  AaastieAisniMBft 
which  is  pcefized  to  the  Plaj,  we  kam  that  Lycomdes  obtained  the  gold,  aalgpit 
it  up  to  Euelio^  whopreaented  it  to  him  as  a  marriage-portioii  with  hb  daqg^ 
In  some  of  the  Editions  there  is  a  Supplement  to  the  last  Scene,  wiittea  in  a  my 
meagre  style  by  some  unknown  author,  which  is  not  worth  iiiwwiiiifing  te  Ikt 
reader  The  Supplementby  Antooma  Codrus  Uroeus,  a  learned  seholar  and  fr»* 
fbssor  at  Bologna,  is  certainly  somewhat  superior,  and,  such  as  it  n,  a  I 


y  Google 


Sc.  V.  OB,  THE  OOirCJBALBD  TEBASTTBE.  419 

flool  to  take  its  journey  before  its  time^  ?  Are  you  going 
to  give  it  me  or  not  ? 

Stbo.  I  will  give  it  you.  Lyc.  I  want  you  to  give  it  me 
now,  and  not  at  a  future  time. 

Stbo.  1*11  give  it  now ;  but  I  entreat  you  to  allow  me  to 
recover  breath.  (Ltconxdes  let%  him  go.)  Aha !  What  is 
it  you  want  me  to  give  you,  master  ? 

Lto.  Don't  you  know,  you  rascal  ?  And  do  you  dare  to  re- 
fuse me  the  four  pound  pot  full  of  gold  which  you  just  now 
said  you  had  stolen?  {Calling  at t%e  door.)  HaUo  there! 
Where  now  are  the  flogging  men  ? 

Stbo.  Master,  do  hear  a  few  words.  Lto.  I  won't  hear ; 
floggers,  hallo  there — ^hallo ! 

Scene  V. — Mnter  two  elogging  Slaves- 
Slave.  What's  the  matter  ?     Lyc.  I  want  the  ctahoB  to 
be  got  ready. 

Stbo.  Listen  to  me,  I  beg  of  you ;  afterwards  order  them 
to  bind  me  as  much  as  you  please. 

Lyc.  I  will  hear  you ;  but  hasten  the  matter  very  quickly. 
Stbo.  If  you  order  me  to  be  tortured  to  death,  see  what 
you  obtain ;  in  the  first  place,  you  have  the  death  of  your  slave. 
Then,  what  you  wish  for  you  cannot  get.  But  if  you  had 
only  allured  me  by  the  reward  of  dear  liberty,  you  would 
already  have  obtained  your  wish.  iN'ature  produces  all  men 
free,  and  by  nature  all  desire  freedom.  Slavery  is  worse  than 
every  evil,  than  every  calamity ;  and  he  whom  Jupiter  hates, 
him  he  first  makes  a  slave. 

Lyo.  You  speak  not  unwisely.  Stbo.  Now  then  hear  the 
rest.  Our  age  has  produced  masters  too  grasping,  whom 
I'm  in  the  habit  of  calling  Harpagos,  Harpies,  and  Tantali, 
poor  amid  great  wealth,  and  thirsty  in  th^  midst  of  the  waters 
of  Ocean ;  no  riches  are  enough  for  them,  not  those  of  Midas, 
not  of  Croesus ;  not  all  the  wealth  of  the  Persians  can  satisfy 

of  it  is  here  presented  to  the  reader.  Its  chief  fault  is,  that  it  indicates  a  greater 
change  in  the  nature  of  the  miser  than  is  consistent  with  probability.  Though 
Plantns  doubtless  depicted  him  as  giving  up  the  gold  to  his  new  son-in-law,  it 
was  probably  on  some  other  ground  than  a  change  of  disposition. 

1  J5§/ore  its  tmt) — The  expression  used  here  by  Urceus  is  capable  of  two 
modes  of  translation ;  the  most  delicate  one  has  been  preferred. 

2e2 


y  Google 


420  aulttlabia;  Act  T. 

their  Tartarean  maw.  Masters  use  their  slaves  rigorously, 
and  slaves  now  ohey  their  masters  hut  tardilv ;  so  on  neither 
side  is  that  done  which  would  be  fair  to  oe  done.  Their 
provisions,  kitchens,  and  store-cellars,  avaricious  old  fellows 
shut  up  with  a  thousand  keys.  Slaves,  thievish,  double- 
dealers,  and  art^l,  open  for  themselves  things  shut  up 
with  a  thousand  keys,  which  the  ovmers  hardly  like  to  be 
granted  to  their  lawful  children,  and  stealthily  do  they  carry 
off,  consume,  am,d  lick  them  w^— fellows  that  will  never  dis- 
close their  hundred  thefts  even  at  the  gibbet ;  thus  in  laughter 
and  joking  do  bad  slaves  take  revenge  upon  their  slavery.  So 
then,  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  liberality  renders  slaves 
faithful 

Ltc.  Eightly,  indeed,  have  you  spoken,  but  not  in  a  few 
words,  as  you  promised  me.  But  if  I  do  make  you  jfree,  will 
you  give  me  back  what  I'm  asking  for  ? 

Stbo.  I  will  give  it  back ;  but  I  wish  for  witnesses  to  be 
present ;  you'll  pardon  me,  master,  I  trust  you  but  little. 

Lto.  Just  as  you  please ;  let  there  be  present  even  a  hun- 
dred ;  then  I  shouldn't  care  about  it. 

Steo.  {going  to  the  door  of  the  house  of  MEaADOEUs). 
Megadorus,  and  you,  Eunomia,  please  come  here,  I  beg  of 
you ;  the  business  finished,  you  shall  return  directly. 

ScEKE  yi. — Enter  Megadoeus  and  Eunomia. 

Meg.  Who's  calling  us?  Ha!  Lyconides!  EuK.  Ha! 
Strobilus,  what  is  the  matter  ?     Say. 

Ltc.  'Tis  a  short  matter.     Meg.  What  is  it  ? 

Steo.  I'm  calling  you  as  witnesses.  If  I  bring  here  a 
four  pound  pot  fiill  of  gold  and  give  it  up  to  Lyconides,  Lyco- 
nides makes  me  a  free  man,  and  orders  me  to  be  my  own 
master.     {To  LTCOionES.)   Do  you  not  promise  me  so  ? 

Ltc.  I  do  promise  so,  Steo.  Have  you  heard  now  what 
he  has  said  ? 

Meg.  We  have  heard.     Steo.  Swear,  then,  by  Jupiter. 

Ltc.  Alas !  to  what  I  am  reduced  by  the  misfortunes  of 
others !  You  are  too  insulting ;  still,  I'll  do  what  he  bids 
me. 

Steo.  Hark  you,  our  generation  hasn't  much  confidence 
in  people :  the  documents  are  signed ;  the  twelve  witnesses 


y  Google 


Sc.  Vin.     OB,  THE  CONCBALED  TEBASUEB.  421 

are  present;  the  registrar  writes  down  the  time  and  the 
place ;  and  still,  the  pleader  is  found  to  deny  that  it  has  been 
done. 

liTC.  But  release  me  speedily,  please. 

Steo.  Here,  take  this  stone.     {Qiving  him  a  stone.) 

Lyc.  If  I  knowingly  deceive  you,  so  may  Jupiter  reject 
from  me  his  blessings,  the  city  and  citadel  safe,  as  I  do  this 
stone.     {He  throws  it.)     Have  I  now  satisfied  you  ? 

Stro.  I  am  satisfied ;  and  I'm  going  to  bring  the  gold. 

liTO.  G-o  with  the  speed  of  Pegasus,  and  return  devouring 
the  road  with  your  rapid  steps.  (Exit  Steobilits.)  Any 
impertinent  slave,  that  wishes  to  be  more  wise  than  his  master, 
is  a  nuisance  to  a  decent  man.  Let  this  Strobilus  be  oif  ^  a 
free  man  to  utter  perdition,  if  he  only  brings  me  the  pot  full 
of  pure  gold,  so  that  I  may  restore  Euclio,  my  father-in-law, 
from  his  grief  to  joy,  and  obtain  the  favour  of  his  daughter, 
who  is  just  brought  to  bed  by  reason  of  my  debauching  her. 
But  see!  Strobilus  is  returning,  loaded;  as  I  guess,  he's 
bringing  the  pot ;  and,  for  sure,  it  is  the  pot  that  he's  car- 
rying. 

Scene  VII. — Enter  Steobilits,  carrying  the  pot  of  gold. 

Steo.  Lyconides,  I  bring  you  ray  findings  that  I  pro- 
mised— ^the  four  pound  pot  of  gold ;  have  I  been  long  ? 

Ltc .  Why,  yes.  {He  takes  some  of  the  gold  out  of  the  pot.) 
O  immortal  Grods,  what  do  I  behold  ?  Or  what  is  it  I  hold  ? 
More  than  six  himdred  Philippean  pieces,  three  or  four  times 
over.     But  let's  call  out  Euclio  forthwith. 

Scene  VIII. 

Lto.  {going  to  the  door  of  Euclio's  house).  Ho,  fiuclio, 
Euclio ! 

Meg.  Euclio,  Euclio  I  Euc.  {opening  his  window).  What's 
the  matter  ? 

Lto.  Come  down  to  us,  for  the  G-ods  wiU  you  to  be 
saved ;  we've  got  the  pot. 

Euc.  Have  you  got  it,  or  are  you  trifliug  with  me  ? 

Lto.  We've  got  it,  I  say.  Now,  if  you  can,  fly  down 
Mther. 

Euc.  {having  come  out  of  the  house  to  them).  0  great  Ju- 
piter !   O  household  Divinity  and  Queen  Juno !  and  Alcides, 


y  Google 


422  ATTLITLASIA.  Act  Y . 

my  treasurer!  that  at  length  you  do  show  pity  upon  a 
wretched  old  man.    {Taking  the  pot  in  his  arm*.)    O  «jy  pot ! 

0  how  aged  T,  your  friend,  do  clasp  you  with  joyful  arms, 
and  receive  you  with  kisses ;  with  a  thousand  embraces  even 

1  cannot  be  satisfied.    O  my  hope!  my  heart!  that  dissi- 
pates my  grief. 

Lyc.  (ande,  to  MegjlDOBUs).  I  always  thought  that  to  be 
in  want  of  gold  was  the  worst  thing  for  both  boys  and  men,  and 
all  old  people.  Indigence  compels  bojB  to  be  guilty  of  mis- 
deeds, men  to  thieve,  and  old  men  themselves  to  become  beg- 
gars. But  'tis  much  worse,  as  I  now  see,  to  abound  in  gold 
beyond  what's  necessary  for  us.  Alas !  what  miseries  has 
Euclio  endured  on  account  of  the  pot,  that  a  little  while 
•  since  was  lost  by  him ! 

Etjc.  To  whom  shall  I  give  deserved  thanks  ?  "Whether  to 
the  Grodfl,  who  show  regard  for  good  men,  or  to  my  friends, 
upright  men,  or  to  them  both?  Bather  to  both,  I  think; 
and  first  to  you,  Lyconides,  the  origin  and  author  of  so  great 
a  good;  you  do  I  present  with  this  pot  of  gold;  accept  it 
with  pleasure.  I  wish  it  to  be  your  own,  and  my  daughter 
as  well,  in  the  presence  of  Megadorus,  and  his  good  sister, 
Eunomia. 

Lyc.  (receiving  the  pot  of  gold).  The  favour  is  received,  and 
is  returned,  w  thanks,  as  you  deserve,  Euclio,  a  father-in-law 
most  acceptable  to  me. 

Eve.  I  shall  think  the  favour  sufficiently  returned  to  me, 
if  you  now  receive  with  pleasure  my  gift,  and  myself  as  toeU 
for  gottrfather-dn-law, 

Lyc.  I  do  receive  it ;  and  I  wish  my  house  to  be  that  of 
Euclio. 

Steo.  "What  still  remains,  master, — ^remember  now  that 
I'm  to  be  free. 

Lyc.  You've  well  put  me  in  mind.  Be  you  a  free  man, 
O  Strobilus,  for  your  deserts ;  and  now  prepare  in-doors 
the  dinner  that  has  been  so  disturbed. 

Steo.  {comvng  forward).  Spectators,  the  avaricious  Euclio 
has  changed  his  nature ;  he  has  suddenly  become  liberal ;  so, 
too,  do  you  practise  liberality ;  and  if  the  play  has  pleased 
you  well,  loudly  clap  your  hands. 


y  Google 


r 


CAPTIYI;  THE  CAPTIVES. 


Bramaiis  ^trsonar. 

Hbgio,  an  ^tolian,  fiither  of  Phflc^olenniB. 
Philogbaixs,  an  Elean,  captive  in  ^tolia. 
Xthdabus,  liis  servant 
Abibiofhoiitbb,  an  Elean,  captive  in  .£tolia. 
Philopoi^ekus,  an  JEtdian,  captive  in  Elis. . 
ER&4«n.T78,  aTaiaaite. 
Stalaohus,  the  servant  of  Heg^o. 
A  Slave  of  He^o. 
A  Lad,  the  same. 

Soone.—- A  plaee  in  iEtidia,  before  the  house  of  Hbgio. 


y  Google 


THE   SUBJECT. 


Hboio,  a  wealthy  native  of  Jltolia,  bad  two  sons,  one  of  which  was  stolen  bj  a  slave 
when  four  years  old,  and  being  carried  away  to  Elis,  was  sold  there ;  tbe  &ther 
being  unable  for  many  years  to  learn  what  has  become  of  him.  A  war  having 
commenced  between  tbe  Eleans  and  the  ^tolians,  Philopolemus,  tbe  other  son 
of  Hegio,  is  taken  prisoner  by  the  Eleans.  The  Jltolians  having  taken  many 
Elean  prisoners,  Hegio  commences  to  traffic  in  captives,  with  the  view  of  thereby 
redeeming  bis  son  from  tbe  Eleans,  in  exchange  for  some  prisoner  of  rank.  At 
this  conjuncture  the  Play  commences.  Among  the  captives  whom  Hegio  has  por- 
chased,  Philocrates  is  one,  having  been  taken  prisoner,  together  with  his  ser- 
vant, Tyndarus.  Witb  the  object  of  deceiving  Hegio,  Philocrates  and  Tyndaros 
change  their  clothes,  and  having  exchanged  names  as  well,  Philocrates  pretends 
to  be  the  servant  of  Tyndarus.  Hegio  being  desirous  to  procure  the  ex- 
change of  his  son,  Philocrates  (in  the  character  of  the  servant  of  his  fellow- 
captive)  b  sent  to  Elis  for  that  purpose.  After  his  departure,  AristophoataB, 
another  captive,  accidentally  puts  Hegio  in  the  way  of  discovering  the  nuuunr 
in  which  be  has  been  deceived.  On  this,  the  old  man,  losing  all  bope  of  obtuniqg 
tbe  liberation  of  bis  son,  sends  Tyndarus  in  chidns  to  tbe  stone-quanieB. 
Shortly  after,  Philocrates  returns,  and  brings  with  him  Philopolemus,  the  son 
of  Hegio,  and  Stalagmus,  the  runaway  slave,  that  bad  stolen  his  other  soo. 
It  is  then  discovered  that  Stahigmus  bad  sold  tbe  child  to  the  fiither  of  Phi- 
locrates, }ind  that  he  is  no  other  than  Tyndarus,  the  slave ;  on  which,  Tjmdanis 
is  sent  for,  and  is  informed  that  he  is  the  lost  son  of  Hegio.  Stalagmus  is  then 
condemned  to  the  chains  from  which  Tyndarus  is  liberated. 


y  Google 


CAPTIVI ;  THE  CAPTIVES. 


THE  ACBOSTIO  ABGUMENT*. 
[Sappoeed  to  have  been  written  by  Priscian  the  Grammarian.] 
One  son  of  Hegio  has  been  made  prisoner  (^Captus)  in  battle.  A  runaway  slave 
has  sold  the  other  (^AUuni)  when  four  years  old.  The  father  {Pater)  traffics  in 
Elean  captives,  only  (^TarUum)  desirous  that  he  may  recover  his  son,  and  (^Ef) 
among  these  he  buys  his  son  that  was  formerly  lost.  He  (/»),  his  clothes 
and  his  name  changed  with  his  master,  causes  that  (£/it)  he  is  lost  to  Hegio  ; 
and  he  iiimself  is  punished.  And  (Et)  he  brings  back  the  captive  and  the 
runaway  together,  through  whose  information  (^Indtcio)  he  discovers  his  other 


THE   PEOLOGUE. 

These  two  captives  (pointing  to  Philocbates  and  Tyn- 
DABTJs),  whom  you  see  standing  here,  are  standing  here  be- 
cause  ^they  are  both^  standing,  and  axe  not  sitting.     That 

I  am  saying  this  truly,  you  are  my  witnesses.  The  old  man, 
who  lives  here  {pomting  to  Hegio' s  house),  is  Hegio — ^his 
j&ther  (^pointing  to  Ttndaeus).  But  imder  what  circum- 
stances he  is  the  slave  of  his  own  father,  that  I  will  here 
explain  to  you,  if  you  give  attention.  This  old  man  had 
two  sons;  a  slave  stole  one  child  when  four  years  old, 
and  flying  hence,  he  sold  him  in  Elis^,  to  the  father  of  this 

1  In  this  Acrostic  it  will  be  found  that  the  old  form  of  "  Gapteivei*'  is  preserved. 

'  Because — ihey  are  hoik) — ^Ver.  2.  This  is  apparently  intended  as  a  piece  of 
hnmour,  in  catching  or  baulking  the  audience.  He  begins  as  though  he  was 
going  to  explain  why  the  captives  are  standing  there,  and  ends  his  explanation 
with  saying  that  they  are  standing  because  they  are  not  sitting.  A  similar 
truism  is  uttered  by  Pamphila,  in  tbe  Sticlius,  L  120. 

» In  EHs) — ^Ver.  9.  Elb,  or,  as  it  is  called  by  Plautus,  "  Alls,"  was  a  city  of 
Achaia,  in  the  north-western  part  of  the  Peloponnesus.  Near  it  the  Olympic 
games  were  celebrated. 


y  Google 


426  CAPTin; 

captive  (pointing  to  Philoceates).  Now,  do  you  under- 
stand this  ?  Very  good.  I'  faith,  that  man  at  a  distance^ 
there  (pointing)  says,  no.  Come  nearer  then.  If  there  isn't 
room  for  you  to  sit  down,  there  is  for  you  to  walk ;  since 
you'd  be  compelling  an  actor  to  bawl  like  a  beggar*.  I'm 
not  going  to  burst  myself  for  yoiur  sake,  so  don't  you  be  mis- 
taken. Tou  who  are  enaUed  by  your  means  to  pay  your 
taxes'^,  listen  to  the  rest* ;  I  care  not  to  be  in  debt  to  another. 
This  runaway  slave,  as  I  said  before,  sold  his  ^otrng  master, 
whom,  when  he  fled,  he  had  carried  off,  to  this  one's  Mher. 
He,  after  he  bought  him,  gave  him  as  his  own  private  slave*^ 

1  Thai  man  cU  a  distance) — ^Ver.  11.  One  of  the  audience,  probablj  a  plebdan 
who  has  no  seat,  bnt  is  standing  in  a  remote  part  of  the  theatre,  is  supposed  to 
exclaim  in  a  rode  manner  that  he  cannot  hear  what  the  actor  says.  On  this  tin 
speaker  tdls  him  that  he  had  better  come  nearer;  and  if  he  cannot  find  a  seat, 
there  is  room  for  him  to  walk  away.  Possibly  the  verb  ^ambnb*'  may  be  in- 
tended to  signify  in  this  case  either  "  to  walk"  or  '^  to  stand,**  in  cantradistiQctioa 
to  sitting.  Best,  with  some  reason,  snggests  *^  abscedito,**  **  walk  oat,*'  in  place  of 
"  acoedito,"  "  come  nearer." 

^  To  bawl  like  a  beggar) — ^Ver.  13.  Commentators  have  differed  as  to  the 
meaning  of  this  passage.  Some  think  that  he  means  that  with  the  view  of 
pleasing  the  plebeian  part  of  the  andienoe,  he  shall  not  bawl  oat  like  a  beggu 
asking  ahns;  while  others  sa^ose  that  the  meaning  is,  that  he  will  not  ran  the 
risk  of  cracking  his  voice,  after  which  he  will  be  hissed  off  the  stage,  and  so  be 
reduced  to  be^^aiy. 

s  To  pay  your  taxes) — Ver.  15.  By  this  he  shows  that  the  party  whom  be 
is  addressing,  is  dther  one  of  the  lowest  plebeians  or  a  slave.  In  the  assess- 
xnent  or  oensos,  which  was  made  by  the  Censors,  the  slaves  w«re  not  raunbered 
mt  all,  being  snpposed  to  have  no  **  capat,"  or  ^  dvil  oondidon."  The  lowest  oen- 
tary  were  the  "  praletarii,"  whose  only  qoalificatioa  was  the  being  beads  of  fami- 
lies, or  futhers  of  children.  In  addressing  those  who  are  reckoned  in  the  censas 
«  ope  vestrfi,"  "  by  your  means"  or  "  circumstances,"  he  seems  to  be  rebuking  the 
**  proletara,"  who  had  no  such  standing,  and  ^o  probably  formed  the  most  noisy 
part  of  the  audience.  As  these  paid  no  part  of  the  taxes  with  which  the  theatrtf 
were  in  part  sapported,  of  course  they  would  be  placed  at  a  greater  distance  firaia 
the  stage,  and  probably  were  not  accommodated  with  seats.  It  was  just  about 
this  period  that  the  elder  Sdpio  assigned  di£ferent  placet  in  the  theatres  tfr  the 
Tarious  classes  of  the  people. 

^  lAsten  to  the  resty-Ver,  16.  **  fieliquum"  was  a  term  which  either  signified 
generally,  "what  is  left,"  or  money  borrowed  and  still  unpaid.  He  plays  upon 
these  diffisrent  meanings—"  Aodptte  reEquum,"  which  may  either  signify  "  hear 
the  rest"  or  "  take  what  is  due  imd  owing,"  and  he  then  makes  the  obsormtiQOf 
parentheticaOy,  "  aUeno  uti  nil  moror,"  "  I  don't  care  to  be  in  debt." 

*  His  own  private  »Zaw)— Ver.  20.  **  Peculiaris"  means  "ftr  his  own  private 
use,"  or  "  attached  to  his  person ;"  bemg  considered  as  thonj^  boofj^t  idth  hii 


y  Google 


THE  CAPTIVES.  427 

to  this  son  of  his,  because  they  were  of  about  the  same  age. 
He  is  now  the  slave  at  home  of  his  own  fiithep,  nor  does  his 
£Bkther  fcaow  it.  Verily,  the  Gods  do  treat  us  men  just  like 
footballs^.  You  hear  the  manner  now  how  he  lost  one  son. 
Afterwards,  the  -^tolians^  are  waging  war  with  the  people  of 
Elis,  andj  as  happens  in  war&re,  the  other  son  is  taken  pri- 
soner. The  physician  Menarchus  buys  him  there  in  Elis. 
On  this,  this  Segio  begins  to  traffic  in  Elean  captives,  if,^&r« 
chance,  he  may  be  able  to  find  one  to  change  for  that  captive 
son  of  his.  He  knows  not  that  this  one  who  is  in  his  house 
is  his  own  son.  And  as  he  heard  yesterday  that  an  Elean 
knight  of  very  high  rank  and  very  high  family  was  taken 
prisoner,  he  has  spared  no  expense  to  rescue  his  son^.  In 
order  that  he  may  more  easily  oring  him  back  home,  he  buys 
both  of  these  of  the  Qu»stois*  out  of  the  spoil. 

I^ow  they,  between  themselv^,  have  contrived  this  plan, 
that,  by  means  of  it,  the  servant  may  send  away  hence  his 
master  home.  And  therefore  among  themselves  they  change 
their  garments  and  their  names.  He,  there  (^pointing),  is 
called  Fhilocrates;  this  one  {pointing^  Tyndaius;  he  this 
day  assumes  the  character  of  this  one,  this  one  of  him.  And 
this  one  to-day  will  clevCTly  carry  out  this  plot,  and  cause 
his  master  to  gain  his  liberty ;  and  by  the  same  means  he  will 

son's  '*  pecnUnm/'  or  out  of  his  own  priTate  parse.  The  ^*  pecolinm'*  was  the  sam 
of  monej  which  a  son  in  his  minoritjr  was  allowed  hy  his  &ther  to  be  in  possession 
of.    The  word  also  signified  the  savings  of  the  slave. 

»  Just  like  footballs)— Ver.  22.  **  Mas."  Among  the  ancients,  games  with 
the  "  pila"  were  those  played  with  the  "  pila  trigonalis,"  so  called,  probably,  from 
the  players  standing  in  a  triangle,  and  those  with  the  <*  follis,"  which  was  a  larger 
ball,  inflated  with  air  and  stmck  with  the  hands,  or  used  for  a  football  *'  Paga- 
•nica"  was  a  similar  ball,  bat  harder,  being  stnfied  with  feathers,  and  was  used  by 
the  ootmtry-people.  "  Harpastom^'  was  a  small  ball  used  by  the  Greeks,  which 
was  scrambled  for  as  soon  as  it  came  to  the  gronnd,  whence  it  received  its  name. 
The  Greeks  had  a  proverb  similar  to  this  expression,  Semv  iraiyvia  av6pwiro\ 
'*  men  are  the  pkythmgs  of  the  Gods."  So  Pkto  called  manldnd  Bimv  oBvp" 
fjuara,  "  the  sport  of  the  Gods." 

2  TheJStoHana^—Yfx,  24.  iEtolia  was  a  country  of  Greece,  the  southern  por- 
tion of  whidi  was  bounded  by  the  Corinthian  Gulf;  it  was  oppofflte  to  the  Elean 
territory,  from  which  it  was  divided  by  the  gult 

»  To  rescue  hia  *o»)— Ver.  32.  "Filio  dum  parceret."  LiteraDy,  "so  long  as 
he  might  spare  his  son." 

*  C§'the  QuoBStorsy-Yer.  34.  In  spealdng  of  these  officers,  Plautus,  as  usual, 
introduces  Boman  customs  into  a  Play  the  scene  of  which  is  in  Greece.  It  has  been 
previously  remarked  that  the  Qusestors  had  the  selling  of  the  spoils  taken  in  war. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


428  CAPTivi ;  Act  L 

saye  his  own  brother,  and  without  knowing  it,  will  cause  him 
to  return  back  a  £*ee  man  to  his  own  country  to  his  father : 
just  as  often  now,  on  many  occasions,  a  person  has  d6ne  more 
good  unknowingly  than  knowingly.  But  unconsciously,  by 
their  deyices,  they  haye  so  planned  and  devised  their  plot, 
and  haye  so  contriyed  it  by  their  design,  that  this  one 
is  liying  in  servitude  with  his  own  father.  And  thus  now, 
in  ignorance,  he  is  the  slave  of  his  own  father.  What  poor 
creatures  are  men,  when  I  reflect  upon  it !  This  plot  will  be 
performed  by  us — a  play  for  your  entertainment.  But  there 
IS,  besides,  a  thing  which,  in  a  few  words,  I  would  wish  to 
inform  you  of.  I^ly,  it  will  be  worth  your  while  to  give 
your  attention  to  this  play.  'Tis  not  composed  in  the  hack- 
neyed style,  nor  yet  like  other  j?Zfly*,  nor  are  there  in  it  any 
ribald  lines^  unfit  for  utterance :  here  is  neither  the  perjured 
procurer,  nor  the  artM  courtesan,  nor  yet  the  braggart  cap- 
tain. Don't  you  be  afraid  because  I've  said  that  there's  war 
between  the  -Altolians  and  the  Eleans.  There  {pointing),  at 
a  distance,  beyond  the  scenes,  the  battles  will  be  fought.  For 
this  were  almost  impossible  for  a  Comic  establishment^,  that 
we  should  at  a  moment  attempt  to  be  acting;  Tragedy.  If, 
therefore,  any  one  is  looking  for  a  battle,  let  him  commence 
the  quarrel ;  if  he  shall  find  an  adversary  more  powerful,  I'll 
cause  him  to  be  the  spectator  of  a  battle  that  isn't  pleasant 
to  him,  so  that  hereaiter  he  shall  hate  to  be  a  spectator  of 
them  all.  Tnow  retire.  Fare  ye  well,  at  home,  most  uprigbt 
judges,  and  in  warfare  most  valiant  combatants. 

Act  I.  —  ScBio:  I. 

JEnter  Ekgasilus. 

Eeg.  The  youn^  men  have  given  me  the  name  of  "  the 
mistress,"  for  this  reason,  because  invocated^  I  am  wont 

1  Ant/  ribald  Imesy—Yer.  56.  See  the  address  of  the  Company  of  actors  to 
the  Spectators  at  the  end  of  the  Play. 

2  A  Comic  estdblishtneiUy^Yer,  61.  " Comico  choragio."  Literally,  "for tiie 
choragiam  of  Comedy."  The  "choragiam''  was  the  dress  and  fomiture,  or  *' pro- 
perties" for  the  stage,  supplied  hy  the  "  choragos,"  or  keeper  of  the  theatrical 
wardrobe. 

'  Because  invocated) — ^Ver.  70.  "  InTOcatns."  The  following  Note  is  extracted 
from  Thornton's  Translation  of  this  Play : — "  The  reader's  indnlgence  for  the  coin- 
age of  a  new  term  (and  perhaps  not  qoite  so  much  out  of  character  from  the  month 
of  a  Parasite)  is  here  requested  m  the  use  of  the  word  *  invocated*  in  a  sense,  whkfa 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


8c.  I.  THE  CAPTIVES.  429 

to  attend  at  the  banquet.  I  know  that  buffoons^  say  that  this 
is  absurdly  said,  but  I  affirm  that  it  is  rightly  said.  For  at 
the  banquet  the  lover,  when  he  throws  the  dice,  invokes  his 
mist^ess^  Is  she  then  invocated,  or  is  she  not?  She  is, 
most  clearly.  But,  i'  faith,  we  Parasites  with  better  reason 
are  so  called,  whom  no  person  ever  either  invites  or  in- 
vokes, and  who,  like  mice,  are  always  eating  the  victuals  of  an- 
other person.  When  business  is  laid  aside^,  when  people 
repair  to  the  country,  at  that  same  moment  is  business  laid 
aside  for  our  teeth.  Just  as,  when  it  is  hot  weather,  snails 
he  hidden  in  secret,  and  live  upon  their  own  juices,  if  the 
dew  doesn't  fall ;  so,  when  business  is  laid  aside,  do  Parasites 
lie  hidden  in  retirement,  and  miserably  live  upon  their 
own  juices,  while  in  the  country  the  persons  are  rusticating 
whom  they  sponge  upon.  When  busmess  is  laid  aside,  we 
Parasites  are  greyhounds  ;  when  business  recommences,  like 
mastiffs*,  we  are  annoying-like  and  very  troublesome-like^. 

M  is  owned,  there  is  no  aathority  for,  but  witlioat  it  no  way  occurs  to  explain  the 
poet^s  meaning-^which,  such  as  it  is,  and  involved  in  snch  a  pun,  is  all  that  can 
be  aimed  at.  The  word  '  invocatns'  means  both  *■  called  upon*  and  *■  not  called 
upon.'  Ergasilus  here  quibbles  upon  it;  for,  though  at  entertainments  he  at- 
tends, as  it  is  the  common  character  of  Parasites  to  do,  without  invitation,  that 
is  'not  called  upon;'  and  as  mistresses  are  *  called  upon*  that  their  names  so  in- 
voked may  make  their  lovers  throw  the  dice  with  success ;  still,  according  to 
the  double  sense  of  the  word,  they  may  be  compared  to  each  other,  as  they  are 
both,  according  to  the  Latin  idiom,  ^  invocati.' " 

»  T%at  buffoons) — ^Ver.  71.  "  Derisores,"  "  buffoons.**  By  this  word  he  means, 
that  particular  class  of  Parasites  who  earned  their  dinners  by  their  repartees  and 
bon-mots. 

<  Invokes  his  mistress') — ^Ver.  73.  It  was  the  Grecian  custom,  when  they  threw 
dice  at  an  entertainment,  for  the  thrower  to  call  his  mistress  by  name,  which  in- 
Tocation  was  considered  to  bring  good  luck. 

*  When  business  is  laid  aside) — Ver.  78.  "  Ubi  res  prolatse  sunt"  Meaning 
tiiereby  "  in  vacation-time.'*  In  the  heat  of  summer  the  courts  of  justice  were 
closed,  and  the  more  wealthy  portion  of  the  Romans  retired  into  the  country  or  to 
the  seaside.  Cicero  mentions  this  vacation  as  "  rerum  prolatio.'*  The  allusion  in 
the  previous  line  is  probably  derived  from  a  saying  of  the  Cynic  Diogenes:  when 
he  saw  mice  creeping  under  the  table,  he  used  to  say,  "  See  the  Parasites  of  Dio- 


*  Like  mastiffs)— Yer,  86.  "  Molossici."  Literally,  "  dogs  of  Molossus,**  a 
country  of  Epirus. 

*  Annoying-like  and  very  trotiblesome'Uke)—YeT.  87.  "  Odiosici—incommo- 
desticL**.  These  are  two  extravagant  forms  of  the  words  "  odiosi"  and  "incom- 
modi,**  coined  by  the  author  for  the  occasion. 


y  Google 


430  CAPnvi ;  Act  I. 

And  here,  indeed,  unless,  i*  faith,  any  Parasite  is  able  to  en- 
dare  cuffs  with  the  fist,  and  pots  to  be  broken^  about  his 
head,  why  he  may  e'en  go  with  his  wallet  outside  the  Trige- 
minian  Gate^.  That  this  may  prove  my  lot,  there  is  some 
danger.  !For  since  my  patron^  nas  falLen  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy — (such  wanare  are  the  ^tolians  now  waging  with 
the  Means ;  for  this  is  .^tolia ;  this  Fhilopolemus  has  been 
made  captive  in  Elis,  the  son  of  this  old  man  Hegio  who  Hves 
here  {pointing  to  the  house) — ^a  house  which  to  me  is  a  house 
of  woe,  and  which  so  oft  as  I  look  upon,  I  weep).  Now,  for 
the  sake  of  his  son,  has  he  commenced  this  dishonorable 
traffic,  very  much  agamst  his  own  inclination.  He  buys  up 
men  that  have  been  made  captives,  if  jperchance  he  may  be 
able  to  find  some  one  for  whom  to  gain  his  son  in  exchange. 
An  object  which  I  really  do  much  desire  that  he  may  gain; 
for  imiess  he  finds  him,  there's  nowhere  for  me  to  find  myself 
I  have  no  hopes  in  the  young  men ;  they  are  all  too  fond  of 
themselves.  He,  in  fine,  is  a  youth  with  the  old-fiaflhioned 
manners,  whose  countenance  I  never  i^ndered  cheerful  with- 
out a  return.  His  father  is  worthily  matched,  as  endowed 
with  like  manners.  Now  1*11  go  to  him ; — ^but  his  door  ia 
opening,  the  door  fi'om  which  full  oft  I've  sallied  forth  drunk 
with  excess  of  cheer.     {JECe  sicmds  aside,) 

Scene  IL — JEnter,from  his  hottse,  Hegio  and  a  Siatb. 

Heg.  ^otv,  give  attention  you,  if  you  please.  Those  two 
captives  whom  I  purchased  yesterdav  of  the  QusBstors  out  of 
the  spoil,  put  upon  them  chains  of  light  weight* ;  take  off 

^  Pots  to  be  brokeny^Yeir.  89.  By  Menrstns  we  are  informed  that  these  prac- 
tical jokes  were  played  npon  the  imfortTuuite  Parasites  with  pots  filled  widi  on- 
ders,  which  were  sometimes  scattered  over  their  dothes,  to  the  great  amnsemait 
of  their  Mow-gaests. 

2  T%e  Trigemittian  Gaiey—Vet.  90.  The  OstiaE  Gate  was  so  called  because  the 
Horatii  left  the  city  by  that  gate  to  fight  the  CuriatlL  The  brothers  being  b(xs 
at  one  bkth  were  "  trigemini,"  whence  the  gate  received  iics  name.  The  beggus 
with  their  wallets  were  seated  there.  See  the  Trinummns,  1.  428,  and  the  Note 
to  the  passage. 

3  Since  my  patron)— Yer,  92.  Rex ;  literally,  "  king.'*  The  Parasites  were  ia 
the  habit  of  so  calling  their  entertainers. 

*  Chains  of  light  weight) — ^Ver.  112.  "  Smgularias."  This  word  may  admit  of 
tiiree  interpretations,  and  it  is  impossible  to  decide  which  Is  the  right  one.  It 
may  mean  chains  weighing  a  single  "Kbraj^or  poond;  it  may  ta^oSSj  chjrins 
for  the  captiyes  smgly,  m  contradistinction  to  those  by  which  they  were  fiBtened 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THE  CAPTIVES.  431 

tiiose  greater  ones  with  which  they  are  bound.  Permit  them 
to  walk,  if  they  wish,  out  of  doors,  or  if  in-doors,  but  so  that 
they  are  watched  with  the  greatest  care.  A  captive  at  liberty 
is  like  a  bird  thafs  wild ;  if  opportunity  is  once  given  for 
escaping,  'tis  enough ;  after  that,  you  can  never  catch  him. 

Slate.  Doubtless  we  aU  are  free  men  more  wilUngly  than 
we  live  the  life  of  slaves. 

Heg.  Tou,  iodeed,  don't  seem  to  tMnk  so^. 

SjlalVE.  If  I  have  nothing  to  give,  should  you  like  me  to 
give  myself  to  flight*  ? 

Heg.  If  you  do  so  g^e  yourself,  I  shall  ^t  once  have  some- 
thing to  be  giving  to  you. 

Slave.  I'U  make  myself  just  like  the  wild  bird  you  were 
teUing  o£ 

Heg.  'Tis  just  as  you  say ;  for  if  you  do  so,  I'll  be  giving 
you  to  the  cage^  But  enough  of  prating ;  take  you  care  of 
what  I've  ordered,  and  be  off.  {The  Slave  ^es  into  the 
house.)  I'll  away  to  my  brother*s,  to  my  other  captives ;  I'll 
go  see  whether  they've  been  making  any  disturbance  last 
night.  !Prom  there  I  shall  forthwith  betake  myself  home  again. 

Ebg.  (apart).  It  grieves  me  that  this  unhappy  old  man  is 
foUowing  the  trade  of  a  slave-dealer,  by  reason  of  the  mis- 
fortune of  his  son.  But,  if  by  any  means  he  can  be  brought 
back  here,  I  could  even  endure  for  him  to  become  an  eze- 
cutioner. 

Heg.  {overhearing  him).  Who  is  it  that's  speaking  P 

to  each  other ;  or  it  may  mean  single  chuns,  in  oppoeition  to  double  ones.  In  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  ch.  12,  ▼.  6,  ^e  read  that  St.  Peter  was  boond  with  two 
chains;  and  in  ch.  13,  v.  33,  the  chief  captain  orders  St.  Paul  to  be  bound  with 
twocfaiuns. 

1  DanH  teem  to  tkmk  so)— Ver.  120.  Hegio  means  to  say  that  the  slave  does 
not  seem  to  think  liberty  so  very  desirable,  or  he  would  try  more  to  please 
his  master  and  do  his  duty,  which  might  probably  be  the  right  method  for 
gaining  his  liberty.  As  the  slave  could  generally  ransom  himself  out  of  his 
*'peculium,"  or  **  savings,^  if  they  were  sufficient,  the  shive  here  either  thmks,  or 
pretends  to  think,  that  Hegb  is  censuring  him  for  not  takmg  those  means,  and 
answers,  accordingly,  that  he  has  nothing  to  offer. 

2  Give  myself  to  jUghty-Ver.  121.  "  Dem  m  pedes."  Literally,  "give  myself 
to  my  feet,^  meanmg  thereby  "  to  run  away."  He  puns  upon  this  meaning  of 
^  dare,"  and  its  common  signification  of  "  to  give"  or  "  to  o£kr  to  give." 

*  Ginttffffou  to  the  cagey— Wet.  124.  "In  caveam."  He  plays  on  the  word 
"  cavea,"  which  m^ftning  »•  a  cage"  for  a  bird,  mi^t  also  mean  confinement  for  a 
prisonen 


y  Google 


432  CAPTivi ;  Act  I. 

EEa.  'Tis  I,  who  am  pining  at  your  affiction,  growing 
tliin,  waxing  old,  and  shockingly  wasting  away.  "Watched 
man  that  I  am,  I'm  hut  skin  and  bone  through  leanness ;  nor 
does  anything  ever  do  me  good  that  I  eat  at  home;  evCTi 
that  ever  so  little  which  I  taste  out  of  doors,  the  same  re- 
jfreshes  me. 

Heg.  Ergasilus,  save  you!  Eeg.  {crying).  May  the  Gtods 
kindly  bless  you,  Hegio ! 

Heg.  Don't  weep.  Ebg.  Must  I  not  weep  for  him? 
Must  I  not  weep  for  such  a  young  man  ? 

He  a.  I've  always  known  you  to  be  a  Mend  to  my  son, 
and  I  have  understood  him  to  he  so  to  you. 

Ebg.  Then  at  last  do  we  men  know  our  blessings,  when 
we  have  lost  those  things  which  we  once  had  in  our  power. 
I,  since  your  son  fell  into  the  power  of  the  enemy,  knowing 
by  experience  of  what  value  he  was,  now  .feel  his  loss. 

Heg.  Since  you,  who  are  no  relation,  bear  his  misfortune 
so  much  amiss,  what  is  it  likely  that  I,  a  father,  should  Ao^ 
whose  only  son  he  is  ? 

Ebg.  I,  no  relation  to  Mm  ?  He,  no  relation  tome?  Oh, 
Hegio!  never  do  say  that,*nor  come  to  such  a  belief.  To 
you  he  is  an  only  diild,  but  to  me  he  is  even  more  only  than 
an  only  one. 

Heg.  I  commend  you,  in  that  you  consider  the  affliction 
of  your  friend  your  own  affliction.     Now  be  of  good  heart. 

Eeg.  {crying),  O  dear!  Heg.  {half-aside),  'Esthis  afflicts 
him,  that  the  army  for  guttling  is  now  disbanded.  Mean- 
while, have  you  found  no  one  to  command  for  you  the  army 
that  you  mentioned  as  disbanded  ? 

Ebg.  What  do  you  think  ?  All  to  whom  it  used  to  fiill 
are  in  the  habit  of  declining  that  province  sincef  your  son 
Philopolemus  was  taken  prisoner. 

Heg.  I'  faith,  'tisn't  to  be  wondered  at,  that  they  aie 
in  the  habit  of  declining  that  province.  Ton  have  necessi^ 
for  numerous  troops,  and  those  of  numerous  kinds.  "Well, 
first  you  have  need  of  the  Bakerians^.     Of  these  Bakerians 

1  The  Bakenans) — ^Ver.  162.  This  and  the  followiog  appellatiaDS  are  ex- 
pressive both  of  the  several  trades  that  confcribnted  to  fhruishing  entertainments, 
and,  in  the  Latin,  also  denoted  the  names  of  inhabitants  of  several  places  in  Italj 
or  elsewhere.  As  this  meaning  cotdd  not  be  expressed  in  a  literal  translatum  of 
them,  the  original  words  are  here  subjoined.    In  the  word  **  Pistorienaes,**  be 


y  Google 


Sc.  11.  TH£  CAPTITES.  483 

there  are  several  kinds.  Tou  have  need  of  Eoll-makerians, 
you  have  need  too  of  Confectionerians,  you  have  need  of 
JPoultererians,  you  have  need  of  Beccaficorians ;  hesides,  all 
the  maritime  forces  are  necessary  for  you. 

Eeg.  How  the  greatest  geniuses  do  frequently  lie  con- 
cealed !     How  great  a  general  now  is  this  private  individual! 

Heg.  Only  have  good  courage ;  for  I  trust  that  in  a  few 
days  I  shall  hring  him  back  home.  Por  see  now  ;  there's  a  cap- 
tive here,  a  young  man  of  Elis,  bom  of  a  very  high  family, 
and  of  very  great  wealth ;  I  trust  that  it  "v^tU  come  to  pass 
that  I  shall  get  my  son  in  exchange  for  him. 

Erg.  May  the  Q-ods  and  Goddesses  grant  it  so ! 

Heg.  But  are  you  invited  out  anywhere  to  dinner  ? 

Erg;  Nowhere  that  I  know  of.  But,  pray,  why  do  you 
ask  me  ? 

Heg.  Because  this  is  my  birthday ;  for  that  reason  I'd 
like  you  to  be  invited  to  dinner  at  my  house. 

Erg.  'Tis  kindly  said.  Heg.  But  if  you  can  be  content 
to  eat  a  very  little 

Erg.  Aye,  even  ever  so  little ;  for  on  such  fare  as  that  do 
I  egoy  myself  every  day  at  home. 

[ECeg.  Come,  then,  please,  set  yourself  up  for  sale. 

Erg.  I'll  put  myself  up  for  purchase,  just  like  a  landed 
estate,  unless  any  one  shall  priua^cZy  make  a  better  offer  that 
pleases  myself  and  my  frienas  more,  and  to  my  own  conditions 
will  I  bind  myself. 

Heg.  Tou  are  surely  selling  me  a  bottomless  pit^,  and  not 
a  landed  estate.    But  if  you  are  coming,  do  so  in  time. 

Erg.  Why,  for  that  matter,  I'm  at  leisure  even  now. 

alludes  to  the  bakers,  and  the  natives  of  IMstorium,  a  town  of  Etruria;  in  the 
"Panicei,"  to  the  bread  or  roll  bakers,  and  the  natives  of  Pana,  aKttle  town 
of  the  Sammtes,  mentioned  by  Strabo;  in  the  "  Placentini,"  to  the  "confec- 
tioners'* or  "cake-makers,"  and  the  people  of  Placentia,  a  city  in  the  North  of 
Italy ;  in  the  "  Turdetani,"  to  the  "  poulterers"  or  "  sellers  of  thrushes,"  and  the 
people  of  Turdetania,  a  district  of  Spain ;  and  in  the  "  Ficedulae,"  to  the  "  sellers 
of  beccaficos,"  a  delicate  burd,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Ficedulse,  a  town  near 
Borne.  Of  course,  these  appellations,  as  relating  to  the  trades,  are  only  co- 
mical words  coined  for  the  occasion. 

1  A  bottomless  pit)— Yer.  183.  He  plays  upon  the  resemblance  in  sound  of  the 
word  "  fundum,"  "  landed  property,"  to  "  profundum,"  "  a  deep  cavity,"  to  which 
he  compares  the  Parasite's  stomach.  "  You  sell  me  kinded  property,  indeed ;  say 
rather  a  bottomless  pit." 

2i> 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


4M  OAJenvi;  Act  II. 

Hb0.  Gk>  tlien,  and  himt  for  a  hare ;  at  present,  in  me  jou 
have  but  a  ferret^,  for  mj  fare  is  in  the  waj  of  frequentiii^  a 
ro^edroad. 

Ebg.  You'll  neyer  repulse  me  by  that,  Hegio,  so  don't 
attempt  it.    Til  come,  in  spite  of  it,  with  teeth  well  shod. 

Heg.  Beally,  my  viands  are  ^  of  a  rough  sort^.  Esa. 
Are  you  in  the  habit  of  eating  brambles  P 

Hse.  Mine  is  an  eartiiy  dinner.  Ebg.  A  pig  is  an  earthy 
animal. 

Hs0.  Earthy  from  its  plenty  of  yegetables. 

Ebg.  Treat  your  sick  peopl^  at  home  with  Uuitfare?  Do 
you  wish  anything  else  ? 

Heg.  Come  in  good  time.  Ebg.  You  are  putting  in  mind 
one  who  remembers  quite  well.  {Mxit. 

Heg.  I'll  go  in-doors,  and  in  the  house  I'll  make  the  cal- 
culation how  little  money  I  have  at  my  hanky's ;  afterwards 
I'll  go  to  my  brother's,  whither  I  was  saying  I  would  go. 
(0069  into  his  house,) 

Act  II. — Scene  I. 

Enter,  from  the  house,  FHiiiOOBATss,  Ttbtdabus,  and  Slates 
and  Captitbs  oflSj^QHO. 

Slatb.  If  the  immortal  Gods  have  so  willed  it  that  you 
should  undergo  this  affliction,  it  becomes  you  to  endure  it 
with  equanimity ;  if  you  do  so,  your  trouble  will  be  lighter*. 

1  Have  bid  a  ferret) — ^Ver.  185.  This  passage  has  mnch  puzzled  the  Gommen- 
tators;  but  allowing  for  some  very  far-fetched  wit,  which  is  not  nncommon  with 
Plaatns,  it  may  admit  of  some  ezplaiuition.  He  teUs  the  Parasite  that  he  had 
better  look  for  a  nicer  dinner,  a  hare,  in  fact ;  for  that  in  dining  with  him,  he  will 
only  get  the  ferret  (with  which  the  hare  was  hnnted)  for  his  dinner.  Then,  Inas- 
mnch  as  the  ferret  was  nsed  for  following  the  hare  or  rabbit  into  **scnipoBS  vis,*^ 
'* knperyions*'  cr  "  rocky  places^  where  thej  had  burrowed,  he  adds:  ''For  my 
dhmer,  ferret-fike,  fifeqnents  rugged  places;**  by  which  he  probably  BMans  that 
it  is  nothing  but  a  meagre  repast  of  vegetables,  of  which  possibly  capers  fonaed  a 
part,  which  grow  plentifully  in  Italy,  in  old  ruins  and  craggy  spots.  Some  suggest 
that  it  was  s  custom  with  the  huntsmen,  if  they  failed  to  catch  the  hare,  to  kS 
and  eat  the  ferret 

*  Are  hd  of  a  rouffhaorty-Yer,  18d.  The  word  *<aiper^  mean  either  *««■. 
savoury*'  or  "  prickly,"  according  to  the  context  Hegio  means  to  use  it  in  thefoimer 
sense,  but  the  Parasite,  for  the  sake  of  repartee,  diooses  to  take  it  in  the  latter. 

>  Treat  your  gick  pecpky-Ver,  191.  He  means  that  such  a  dinner  may  suit 
sick  people,  but  will  not  be  to  his  taste. 

«  WiUbeUghiery-Ver,  197.  The  English  proverb  correapoods  with  this: 
What  can*t  be  cuied,  must  be  endured. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


So.  I.  THB  OAPTIYES.  485 

At  borne  you  were  free  men,  I  suppose ;  now  if  elavery  has 
befallen  you,  'tis  a  becoming  way  for  you  to  put  up  witb  it, 
and  by  your  dispositions  to  render  it  light,  under  a  master's 
rale.  TJnworthy  actions  which  a  master  does  must  be  deemed 
worthy  ones. 

Phil,  and  Ttkb.  Alas !  alas !  alas !  Slaye.  There's  no 
need  for  wailing ;  you  cause  much  injury  to  your  eyes.  In 
adversity,  if  you  use  fortitude  of  mind,  it  is  of  service. 

PhiIi.  and  Ttnd.  But  we  are  ashamed,  because  we  are  in 
bonds. 

Slate.  But  in  the  result  it  might  cause  vexation  to  our 
master,  if  he  were  to  release  you  from  chains,  or  allow  you  to 
be  loose,  whom  he  haspurchased  with  his  money. 

PhiIi.  and  Ttsh.  What  does  he  fear  from  us  ?  We  know 
oar  duty,  what  it  is,  if  he  allows  us  to  be  loose. 

Slatb.  Why,  you  are  meditating  escape.  I  know  what 
it  is  you  are  devising. 

Phil,  and  Ttnd.  We,  make  our  escape  ?  Whither  should 
we  escape  ? 

Slave.  To  your  own  country.  Phil,  and  Ttstd,  Out 
upon  you ;  it  would  ill  befit  us  to  be  following  the  example  of 
runaways. 

Slate.  Why,  faith,  should  there  be  an  opportunity,  I  don't 
advise  you  not. 

Phil,  and  Ttkd.  Do  you  allow  us  to  make  one  request. 

Slate.  What  is  it,  pray?  Phil,  and  Ttfd.  That  you 
win  give  us  an  opportunity  of  conversing,  without  these  and 
yourselves  for  overlookers. 

Slate.  Be  it  so;  go  jon  aw&j  fromhere^  you  people.  Let's 
step  here,  on  one  side.  (To  the  other  Gaptites  and  Slates.) 
But  commence  upon  a  short  conversation  ofdy, 

Phil.  O  yes,  it  was  my  intention  so  to  do.  Step  aside  this 
way  (to  Ttndabus). 

Slate  (to  the  other  Gaptites).  Stand  apart  from  them. 

Ttsj).  (to  the  Slate).  We  are  both  greatly  obliged  to  you, 
by  reason  of  your  doing  so,  smce  you  aUow  us  to  obtain  what 
we  are  desirous  of 

Phil.  Step  here  then,  at  a  distance  now,  if  you  think  fit, 
that  no  listeners  may  be  enabled  to  overhear  our  discourse, 
and  that  this  plan  of  ours  mayn't  be  divulged  before  them ; 
for  a  stratagem  is  no  stratagem,  if  you  don't  plan  it  with  art ; 

2f2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


436  CAPnn ;  Act  n. 

but  it  is  a  very  great  misfortune  if  it  becomes  disclosed. 
!For  if  you  are  my  master,  and  I  represent  myself  as  your 
servant,  still  there's  need  of  foresight,  and  need  of  caution, 
that  this  may  be  carried  out  discreetly  and  without  over^ 
lookers,  with  carefulness  and  with  cautious  prudence  and 
diligence.  So  great  is  the  matter  that  has  been  commenced 
upon ;  this  must  not  be  carried  out  in  any  drowsy  fashion. 

Ttnd.  Just  as  you  shall  desire  me  to  be,  I  will  be. 

Phil.  I  trust  so.  Tyitd.  For  now  you  see  that  for  your 
precious  life  I'm  setting  at  stake  my  own,  as  dear  to  me,  ' 

Phil.  I  know  it.  Tyitd.  But  remember  to  know  it  when 
you  shall  be  enjoying  that  which  you  wish  for ;  for  mostly,  the 
greatest  part  of  mankind  follow  this  fashion ;  what  they  wish 
lor,  until  they  obtain  it,  they  are  rightminded ;  but  when 
they  have  now  got  it  in  their  power,  from  being  rightminded 
they  become  most  deceitful,  and  most  dishonest ;  now  I  ^o 
consider  that  you  are  towards  me  as  I  wish.  What  I  advise 
you,  I  would  advise  my  own  father. 

Phil.  I*  faith,  if  I  could  venture,  I  would  call  you  father; 
for  next  to  my  own  father,  you  are  my  nearest  father. 

Ttnd.  I  understand.  i?HiL.  And  therefore  I  remind  you 
the  more  frequently,  that  you  may  remember  it.  I  am  not 
your  master,  but  your  servant ;  now  this  one  thing  I  do  beseech 
you.  Inasmuch  as  the  immortal  Gk)ds  have  disclosed  to  us 
their  wishes,  that  they  desire  me  to  have  oTice  been  your 
master,  and  now  to  be  your  fellow-captive ;  what  formerly  of 
iny  right  I  used  to  command  you,  now  with  entreaties  do  I  beg 
of  you,  by  our  uncertain  fortunes,  and  by  the  kindness  of  my 
father  towards  you,  and  by  our  common  captivity,  which  has 
befallen  us  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  don't  you  pay  me  any 
greater  respect  than  I  did  you  when  you  were  my  slave ;  and  • 
don't  you  forget  to  remember  who  you  were,  and  who  you 
now  are. 

Tynd.  I  know,  indeed,  that  I  now  am  you,  and  that  you 
are  I. 

Phil.  Well,  if  you  are  able  carefiiUy  to  remember  that,  I 
have  some  hope  in  this  scheme  of  ours, 

Sc£irE  II. — Unter  Hegio,^ow  his  house,  speaking  to  those 
ioithm. 
Hbg.  I  shall  return  in-doors  just  now,  when  I  shall  hare 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  IL  THX  OAPTITES.  437 

discovered  from  these  people,  what  I  want  to  know,  (To  the 
SiATBS.)  Where  are  those  persons  whom  I  ordered  to  be 
brought  out  of  doors  here,  before  the  house  ? 

PhUi.  By  my  faith,  I  find  that  you  have  taken  due  pre- 
caution that  we  shouldn't  be  missed  by  you,  so  walled  in 
are  we  with  chains  and  keepers. 

H£G.  He  that  takes  precaution  that  he  mayn't  be  deceivedj 
is  hardly  on  his  guart^  even  while  he's  taking  precaution 
even  when  he  has  supposed  that  he  has  taken  every  precau' 
tion,  full  often  is  this  wary  man  outwitted.  "Was  there  not 
good  reason,  indeed,  for  me  to  watch  you  carefully,  whom  I 
purchased  with  so  large  a  sum  of  readv  money  ? 

Phil.  Troth,  it  isn't  fair  for  us  to  hold  you  to  blame,  be- 
cause you  watch  us  closely  ;  nor  yet  for  you  us,  if  we  go  away 
hence,  should  there  be  an  opportunity. 

Hsa.  As  you  are  here,  so  is  my  son  a  captive  there  among 
your  people. 

Phil.  He,  a  captive  ?  Hbg.  Even  so. 
Phil.  We,  then,  have  not  proved  the  only  cowards^. 
Heg.  (to  Philocbates,  supposing  him  to  he  the  Sebvaj^t 
of  the  other).  Step  you  aside  this  way,  for  there  are  some 
things  that  I  wish  to  enquire  of  you  in  private,  on  which 
subjects  I  would  have  you  not  to  be  untruthful  to  me. 
(They  step  aside,) 

Phil.  I  will  not  be,  as  to  that  which  I  shall  know ;  if  I 
shall  not  know  anything,  that  which  I  don't  know  I'll  tell 
you  of. 

Tynd.  (aside).   Now  is  the  old  fellow  in  the  barberj 
sbop;  now,   at  this  very  instant,  is  Fhilocrates  wieldin 
the  razor®.     He  hasn't  cared,  indeed,  to  put  on  the  barber' 
doth^,  so  as  not  to  soil  his  dress.     But  whether  to  say 
that  he's  going  to  shave  him  close,  or  trim  hvm/^  through  the 

1  The  onltf  cmoardiy—Yw.  267.  He  alludes  to  the  notion  in  the  heroic  times, 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  a  warrior  to  conquer  or  to  die,  and  that  it  was  dis- 
graceful to  he  made  prisoner. 

«  Widdmg  th€  raz(yry-Yer.  271.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  by  the  word  **  cul- 
tro6,"  in  this  passage,  razors  or  scissors  are  meant. 

^  To  put  on  the  barber's  cloth)— Yer.  272.  He  probably  means  by  this  ex- 
pression that  Philocrates  has  made  no  preamble,  and  shown  no  hesitation,  in  com- 
mencing at  once  to  dupe  the  old  man. 

*  Or  trim  him)'-Yet.  273.  He  alludes  here  to  the  two  kinds  of  shaving  and 
trimming  the  beard  used  by  the  baibers  among  the  ancients.    The  one  was  close, 


y  Google 


m 


teU 


488  CAJPnn ;  Aci  II. 

oomb^,  I  don't  know ;  but  if  he's  wise,  he'll  wrsspe  bim  xigbt 
well  to  the  Yery  quick. 

Hbg.  (/<>  Philocbates).  Whicb  would  you?  Would  you 
prefer  to  be  a  slaye,  or  a  free  man  ? — ^Tell  me. 

Phil.  That  which  is  the  nearest  to  good,  and  the  farthest 
off  from  eyil,  do  I  prefer ;  although  my  servitude  hasn't  proied 
ery  grievous  to  me,  nor  has  it  been  otherwise  to  me  ihaa 
'  1  had  been  a  son  in  the  family. 

Tyitd.  (aside).  Capital !  I  wouldn't  purchase,  at  a  talenf  s 
price  even,  Thales  the  Milenan';  for  compared  with  this 
man's  wisdom,  he  was  a  veiy  twaddler.  How  eleyerly  has  he 
suited  his  language  to  the  slaye's  condition. 

BJRG.  Of  what  family  is  this  Pfailocrates  bom  P 

PhUi.  The  Polyplusian* ;  which  one  family  is  flourishing 
there,  and  held  in  highest  esteem. 

Hso.  What  is  he  himself?  In  what  esteem  is  he  held 
there? 

Phil.  In  the  highest,  and  that  by  the  very  highest  men. 

Heo.  Since,  then,  he  is  held  in  such  great  respect  among 
the  Eleans,  as  you  teU  of,  what  substance  has  he  f—Of  large 
amount  ? 

Phil.  JSkouqhfor  Mm,  even,  when  an  cAd  man,  to  be  meUr 
ing  dut  the  tallow^. 

*'  stricdm,**  when  they  shaved  to  the  skin;  the  other  mu,  whea  with  a  pur  of 
sdssors  they  clipped  the  hair,  with  the  interposition  of  s  oomb.  The  former  fashioB 
was  called  by  the  Greeks  trKQihiov ;  the  latter  method,  which  was  borrowed 
from  the  Persians,  icfpro^.  "  Esse  in  tonstrinl,"  **  to  be  in  the  barber's  shop," 
was  a  proTerbial  expression  to  denote  "  being  imposed  npon.**  Tyndaros  is  wonder- 
ing to  what  extent  Philocrates  is  going  to  impose  npon  Hegio. 

I  Through  ike  comby-Ver.  278.  The  Greeks  and  Bomans  made  thdr  eanbs 
of  boxwood,  mnch  of  which  was  imported  from  Paphhigonia.  The  Egyptiais 
used  them  made  of  wood  and  of  ivory,  and  toothed  on  one  side  only ;  while  tbeie 
of  the  Greeks  had  teeth  on  both  sides. 

'  Thales  the  MUenany^Yer,  279.  A  talent  wonld  be  a  low  price  for  soch  a 
learned  slave  as  Thales  the  Milesian,  who  was  one  of  the  seven  wise  men  «f 
Greece.  He  says,  however,  that  Thales  at  such  a  low  price  wonld  be  aothing  in 
comparison  with  Philocrates  for  the  same  money. 

3  The  Polyphmmy—Ytv.  282.  This  word  is  coined  by  Philocrates  for  the  occa- 
sion, as  being  the  name  of  his  family,  from  the  Greek  word  iroXwrXowyiAs^ 
*■''  very  wealthy  ;'*  probably  with  the  idea  of  raising  the  expectations  of  H^pi^ 
and  making  him  the  more  ready  to  promote  an  exchange  of  his  own  son  ftr« 
member  of  so  opulent  a  family. 

*  Mtbmg  out  ike  taSowy^Ver,  286.  He^^o  asks  him  if  his  xiches  $»  voy 


y  Google 


Se.  H,  THB  OArrPTEB.  489 

Hia.  What  is  his  father  ?  Is  he  Kring  ?  Phil.  When  we 
departed  thence,  we  left  him  alive ;  whether  he's  liying  now 
or  not,  Oreus,  forsooth,  must  know  that. 

Ttsj}.  (aside).  The  matter's  all  right;  he's  not  only 
lying,  hut  he's  even  philosophizing  now. 

SGe&.  What's  his  name  r  Phil.  Thesaurochrysonicocrce- 
aidea^. 

Hbg.  That  name  has  been  given,  I  suppose,  by  reason  of 
his  wealth,  as  it  w^re. 

Phil.  Troth,  not  so,  hut  rather  by  reason  of  his  avarice 
and  grasping  disposition ;  for,  indeed,  he  was  Theodoromedes 
origmaLLy  by  name. 

Hsa.  How  say  you  ?    Is  his  &ther  covetous  ? 

Phil.  Aye,  by  my  faith,  he  is  covetous.  Why,  that  you 
may  even  understand  it  the  better, — ^when  he's  sacrificing  at 
anytime  to  his  own  Genius  2,  the  vessels  that  are  needed  for 
the  sacrifice  he  uses  of  Samian  ware,  lest  the  Genius  himself 
should  steal  th^n ;  from  this,  consider  how  much  he  would 
imst  other  people. 

Heg.  (addressing  Ttsdaxub  as  though  PniLOCBiLTSs).  Do 
you  then  follow  me  this  way,  (Aside.)  The  things  that  I 
desire  to  know,  I'll  enquire  of  him.  (Addressing  Ttk- 
BABxrs.)  Philocrates,  this  person  has  done  as  it  becqmei|  an 
honest  man  to  do.  Por  from  him  I've  learnt  of  what 
finmil^r  ;^ou  are  sprung ;  he  has  confessed  it  to  me.  If  you 
are  willing  to  own  these  same  things  (which,  however,  un- 
derstand that  I  alread^lsnGw  from  him),  you  will  be  doing 
it  for  your  own  advantage. 

abundant,  and  in  doing  so  uses  the  word  "opimaB/'  of  which  the  primary  mean- 
ing was  *^  fat  ;**  the  other  answers,  ^*  Yes,  so  fat  that  he  can  be  melting  the  tallow 
oat  of  them  even  when  he  is  an  dd  man;"  meaning  thereby  that  he  is  amply 
provided  with  means. 

>  TTiesaurotJirysonicocrcBsides) — Yer.  290.  This  is  a  name  made  up  of  several 
Greek  words,  and  seems  to  mean  "  a  son  of  Crodsns,  abounding  in  treasures  of 
gold,**  in  allusian  to  Croesus,  the  wealthy  king  of  Lydia.  The  author  indulges  m 
similar  pleasantry  in  the  Miles  Gloriosus. 

2  To  Am  own  Geiwiw)— Ver.  296.  As  the  Genius  of  a  man  was  pot  only  his 
guardian  Deity  through  life,  but  the  word  was  also  used  to  signify  his  capacity  for 
enjoyment;  the  term  "to  sacrifice  to  his  Genius,"  is  supposed  by  s^me  Commen- 
tators to  mean,  "  to  indulge  the  appetite  in  feasting  and  good /cheer."  This, 
however,  seems  not  to  be  the  meaning  in  this  instance;  and  he  probably  intends 
to  be  understood  as  alluding,  literally,  to  the  domestic  sacrifice  to  the  Genius. 


y  Google 


440  OAPTIVI;  :  Aftll. 

Tynd.  He  did  his  duty  when  he  confessed  the  truih  to 
you,  although,  Hegio,  I  wished  cafefuUy  to  conceal  both  my 
rank  and  my  wealth ;  now,  inasmuch  as  IVe  lost  my  coxuxtiy 
and  my  liberty,  I  don't  think  it  right  for  him  to  be  dreading 
me  rather  than  you.  The  mi^ht  of  warfare  has  made  my 
fortunes  on  a  level  with  himself.  I  remember  the  time  when 
he  didn't  dare  to  do  it  in  word ;  now,  in  deed,  he  is  at  liberty 
to  offend  me.  But  don't  you  see  ?  Human  fortune  moul& 
and  fashions  just  as  she  wills.  Myself,  who  was  a  free  man 
she  has  made  a  slave,  from  the  very  highest  the  very  lowest. 
I,  who  was  accustomed  to  command,  now  obey  the  mandates 
of  another.  And  indeed,  if  I  meet  wiih  a  master  just  such 
as  I  proved  the  ruler  in  my  own  household,  I  shall  not  fear 
that  he  will  rule  me  harshly  or  severely.  With  this,  Hegio, 
I  wished  jrou  to  be  acquainted,  unless  perchance  you  your- 
self wish  it  not. 

Heo.  Speak  boldly  out,  Tynd.  As  free  a  man  was  I  till 
lately  as  your  son.  As  much  did  a  hostile  hand  deprive  me 
of  my  liberty  as  him  of  his.  As  much  is  he  a  slave  among 
my  people,  as  I  am  now  a  slave  here  with  yourself.  There  is 
undoubtedly  a  G^od,  who  both  hears  and  sees  the  things 
which  we  do.  Just  as  you  shall  treat  me  here,  in  the  same 
degree  will  he  have  a  care  for  him.  To  the  well-deserving 
will  he  show  favour,  to  the  ill-deserving  will  he  give  a  like 
return.  As  much  as  you  lament  yout*  son,  so  much  does  my 
father  lament  me.  »       ^ 

Heg.  That  I  am  aware  of.  But  do  you  admit  the  same 
that  he  has  disclosed  to  me  P 

Tyni).  I  confess  that  my  father  has  very  great  wealth  at 
home,  and  that  I  am  bom  of  a  very  noble  family ;  but  I 
entreat  you,  Hegio,  let  not  my  riches  make  your  mind  too 

?rone  to  avarice,  lest  it  should  seem  to  my  father,  although 
am  his  only  sofiy  more  suitable  that  I  should  be  a  slave 
in  your  house,  bountifully  supplied  at  your  expense  and  with 
your  clothing,  rather  than  be  living  the  life  of  a  beggar  where 
'twould  be  far  from  honorable. 

Hbg.  By  the  favour  of  the  Gods  and  of  my  forefathers,  I 
am  rich  enough.  I  don't  quite  believe  that  every  kind  of 
gain  is  serviceable  to  mankind.  I  know  that  gain  has  already 
made  many  a  man  famous;  and  yet  there  are  occasions 
when  it  is  undoubtedly  better  to  incur  loss  than  to  ^nake  gain. 


y  Google 


Sc.  n.  THE  GAPTIY1S8.  441 

Ck>ld  I  detest :  many  a  one  has  it  persuaded  to  many  an  evil 
course.  Now  give  your  attention  to  this,  that  you  may 
know  as  well  what  my  wishes  are.  My  son,  taken  prisoner, 
is  in  servitude  at  ]Edis  there  among  your  people;  if  you 
restore  him  to  me,  don't  you  give  me  a  single  coin  besides ; 
both  you  and  him,  your  servant,  I'll  send  ba<;k  from  here ;  on 
no  other  terms  can  you  depart  hence, 

Tykd.  You  ask  what's  very  right  and  very  just,  and  you 
are  the  very  kindest  person  of  all  mankind.  But  whether  is 
he  in  servitude  to  a  private  person  or  to  the  public^  ? 

HsG.  In  private  servitude  to  Menarchus,  a  physician. 
^-£5»r  By  my  faith,  that  person's  surely  his  father's  de- 
pendant.    Why  really,  that's  down  as  pat  for  you,  as  the 
shower  is  when  it  rains. 

Heo.  Do  you  then  cause  this  person,  my  son,  to  be  redeemed. 

Ttnd.  I'll  do  so :  but  this  Ibeg  of  you,  Hegio 

ll£0.  Whatever  you  wish,  so  that  you  request  nothing 
against  my  interest,  I'll  do. 

Tttnd.  Listen  then,  and  you'll  know.  I  don't  ask  for  my- 
self to  be  released,  until  he  has  returned.  But  I  beg  of  you 
to  give  me  him  {j^ointvng  to  Philoceates)  with  a  price  set* 
upon  him,  that  I  may  send  him  to  my  father,  that  this  per- 
son, your  son,  may  be  redeemed  there. 

IIeg.  Why  no;  I'd  rather  send  another  person  hence, 
rhen  there  shall  be  a  truce,  to  confer  with  your  father  there, 
and  to  carry  your  injunctions  which  you  shall  entrust  him 
with,  just  as  you  wish. 

Ttnd.  But  it's  of  no  use  to  send  to  him  one  that  he  doesn't 
know ;  you'd  be  losing  your  labour.  Send  this  person ;  he'U 
have  it  all  completed,  if  he  gets  there.  And  you  cannot 
send  any  person  to  him  more  faithful,  nor  one  in  whom  he 
places  more  confidence,  nor  who  is  more  a  servant  after  his 
own  mind ;  nor,  in  fact,  one  to  whom  he  would  more  readily 
entrust  your  son.  Have  no  fears ;  at  my  own  peril  I'll  make 
proof  of  his  fidelity,  relying  upon  his  disposition ;  because  he 
18  sensible  thai?  I'm  kindly  disposed  towards  him. 

"^  Or  to  the  publ%c)--Yer,  339.  Some  captiyes  were  employed  in  the  publie 
service,  while  others  fell  mto  the  hands  of  private  individuals. 

s  Witk  a  price  set") — ^Ver.  345.  ^^iEstimatns"  here  means  "entrosted  to  a 
person  at  a  fixed  valne,  and  at  his  risk  for  the  due  return  of  it.** 


y  Google 


442  GATTITI ;  Act  U. 

Hsft.  Well  tiien,  I'll  send  him  with  a  price  set  upon  Imn; 
on  the  surety  of  your  promise,  if  you  wish  it. 

Tthd,  I  do  wish  it ;  so  soon  as  ever  it  can,  I  want  this 
matter  to  he  hrought  to  an^letion. 

Hbo.  What  reason  is  there,  then,  that  if  he  doesn't 
return,  you  should  not  pay  me  twenty  minas  for  him  ? 

Tutd.  Yes — ^very  good.  Hbg.  (to  the  SiiATSS,  who  chey). 
Eelease  him  now  forthwith ;  and,  indeed,  both  of  them.  {On 
hei/ng  relettsed,  FniLOOSiLTES  goes  into  the  houte.) 

Tykd.  May  all  the  Gods  grant  you  all  your  desires,  sioee 
you  have  deigned  me  honor  so  great,  and  sinoe  you  release 
me  fnnn  my  chains.  Easily,  this  is  not  so  irksome  now, 
since  my  neck  is  &ee  from  the  collar-chain. 

Heo.  The  kindnesses  that  are  done  to  the  good,  thanks  for 
the  same  are  pregnant  with  blessings.  Now,  if  you  are  about 
to  send  him  thither,  direct,  instruct  him,  give  him  the  orders 
which  you  wish  to  be  carried  to  your  &ther.  Should  you 
like  me  to  call  him  to  you  ? 

Tno).  Do  call  him.     (Hboio  goes  to  the  door^  and  ealh 

PHILOC1U.TES.) 

ScBTTE  m. — Unter  PhiIiOCBATESj^ow  the  house. 

Heg.  May  this  affair  turn  out  happily  for  myself  and  for 
my  son,  and  for  yourselves.  (To  Phxlocka.tes.)  Your  new 
master  wishes  you  to  pay  faithful  obedience  to  your  foimex 
owner  in  what  he  wishes.  Por  I  have  presented  you  to  him, 
with  the  price  of  twenty  min»  set  upon  you :  and  he  says 
that  he  is  desirous  to  send  you  away  hence  to  his  fisither,  that 
he  may  there  redeem  my  son,  and  that  an  exchange  may  be 
made  between  me  and  Mm  for  our  respective  sons. 

Phil.  My  disposition  takes  its  course  straight  in  eiihesc 
direction,  both  to  yourself  and  to  him ;  as  a  wheeP  you  may 

» As  a  iohedy-Yer.  374.  This  may  either  mean  the  wheel  of  a  vehicle  or  a 
potter^s  wheel  The  wheels  nsed  by  the  ancients  revolved  on  the  axle,  as  in  tiie 
carriages  of  modem  times,  and  were  prevented,  by  pins  inserted,  firom  filling  c^ 
They  consisted  of  naves,  spokes,  which  varied  much  in  number,  the  felly,  or 
wooden  circnmference,  made  of  elastic  wood,  such  as  the  poplar  and  wild  fig,  and 
composed  of  several  segments  united,  and  the  tire,  which  was  of  metal  Some  of 
their  carts  and  waggons  had  wheels  made  of  a  solid  circle  of  wood,  in  shape  like 
a  millstone,  with  the  axle  mnning  throngh  the  middle.  Similar  wheels  are  used 
in  the  south  of  Europe  at  the  present  day. 


y  Google 


make  Hie  of  me ;  either  Htda  way  or  that  can  I  be  turned, 

whichever  way  you  shall  command  me. 

Hso.  You  yourself  profit  the  most  from  your  own  dis- 
position, when  yon  endure  slay^y  just  as  it  ought  to  be 
endured.  EoUowme.  (2b  TrNDAsra.)  See  here's yo»r  man. 

Tthd.  I  return  you  thanks,  since  you  give  me  this  oppor- 
tunity and  pennisBion  to  send  this  messenger  to  my  parents, 
who  may  relate  all  the  matter  in  its  order  to  my  iather, 
what  I'm  doing  here,  and  what  I  wish  to  be  done.  (To' 
PHiLOOBiLTSS.)  Now,  Tyndanis,  thus  is  it  arranged  between 
,  myself  and  him,  that  I'm  to  send  you,  Tsdued  at  a  fixed  price, 
to  my  father  in  Elis ;  so  that,  if  you  don't  return  hither,  I'm 
to  gire  twenty  miojB  for  you. 

Phil.  I  think  that  you're  come  to  a  right  understand- 
ing. Por  your  father  expects  either  myself  or  some  mes- 
senger to  come  from  here  to  him. 

Tnn).  I  wish  you,  then,  to  mind  what  message  it  is  I  want 
you  to  canr  hence  to  my  country  to  my  father. 

Phil.  FhiLocrates,  as  up  to  this  moment  I  have  done,  I 
wiU  take  all  due  care  to  endeavour  that  which  may  espe- 
cially conduce  to  your  interest,  and  to  pursue  the  same  with 
heart  and  soul,  and  with  my  ears. 

Tnn).  You  act  just  as  you  ought  to  act ;  now  I  wish  you 
to  give  attention.  In  the  first  place  of  all,  carry  my  re- 
opects  to  my  mother  and  my  father,  and  to  my  relations,  and 
if  any  one  else  you  see  well-disposed  towards  me:  say  that  I 
am  in  health  here,  and  that  I  am  a  slave,  in  servitude  to  this 
most  worthy  man,  who  has  ever  honored  me  more  and  more 
with  his  respect,  and  does  so  stiU. 

PhUi.  Don't  you  be  instructing  me  as  to  that ;  I  can,  still, 
easily  bear  that  in  mind. 

Ttkd.  For,  indeed,  except  that  I  have  a  keeper,  I  deem 
myself  to  be  a  free  man.  Tell  my  father  on  what  terms  I 
have  agreed  with  this  party  about  his  son. 

Phil.  What  I  remember,  it  is  sheer  delay  to  be  putting  me 
in  mind  of. 

Ttni).  To  redeem  him,  and  to  send  him  back  here  in  ex- 
change for  both  of  us. 

PmL.  rU  remember  it.  Heg.  But  as  soon  as  he  can; 
that  is  especially  to  the  interest  of  us  both. 


y  Google 


444  CAPTnn ;  .  Act  II. 

PhUi.  Ton  are  not  more  anxious  to  see  your  sob,  than  he 
is  to  see  his. 

Heo.  My  son  is  dear  to  myself,  and  his  own  to  eveiy  man. 

Phil,  (to  TYTsroAXVi).  Do  you  wishnny  other  message  to 
be  carried  to  your  father  ? 

Ttnd.  Sa^  that  I  am  well  here ;  and  do  you  boldly  tell 
him,  Tyndarus,  that  we  have  been  of  dispositions  for  unin- 
terrupted harmony  between  ourselves,  and  that  you  haye 
neither  been  deserving  of  censure,  nor  that  I  have  proved 
your  enemy ;  and  that  still,  amid  miseries  so  great,  you  have 
shown  implicit  obedience  to  your  master,  and  that  you  have 
never  abandoned  me,  either  in  deed  or  in  fidelity,  amid  my 
wavering,  unprosperous  fortunes.  When  my  &ther  shall  know 
this,  Tyndarus,  how  well-disposed  you  have  proved  towards 
his  son  and  himself,  he  will  never  be  so  avaricious  but  that 
he'll  give  you  your  liberty  for  nothing.  And  by  my  own 
endeavours,  if  I  return  hence,  I'll  make  him  do  so  the  more 
readily.  For  by  your  aid  and  kindness,  and  good  disposition 
and  prudence,  you  have  caused  me  to  be  allowed  to  return 
to  my  parents  once  again,  inasmuch  as  to  He^fio  you  have 
confessed  both  my  rank  and  my  wealth ;  by  means  of  which, 
through  your  wisdom,  you  have  liberated  your  master  from 
his  chains. 

Phil.  The  things  which  you  mention  I  have  done,  and  I 
am  pleased  that  you  remember  this.  Deservedly  have  th^ 
been  done  for  you  by  me ;  for  now,  Philocrates,  if  I,  too,  were 
to  mention  the  things  that  you  have  kindly  done  for  me,  the 
night  would  cut  short  the  day.  For,  had  you  been  my  slave 
even,  no  otherwise  were  you  always  obliging  to  me. 

Bjbg.  Ye  Gods,  by  our  trust  in  you !  heh)ld  the  kindly  dis- 
position of  these  persons !  How  they  draw  the  very  tears 
trom  me !  See  how  cordially  they  love  each  other,  and  with 
what  praises  the  servant  has  commended  his  master. 

Phil.  I'  troth,  he  hasn't  commended  me  the  one  hun- 
dredth part  of  what  he  himself  deserves  to  be  commended  ia 
mypraises. 

BLeg.  {to  Philoceates)  .  Since,  then,  you  have  acted  most 
becomingly,  now  there's  an  opportunity  to  add  to  your  good 
deeds  in  managing  this  matter  with  fidelity  towards  him. 

Phil.  I  am  not  able  more  to  wish  it  done,  than  by  my  en- 


y  Google 


Sc  in.  THE  CAPTIYES.  445 

deayours  to  try  to  bring  it  about.  That  you  may  know  this, 
Hegio,  with  praises  do  I  call  supreme  Jove  to  witness  that  I 
will  not  OTOve  unfaithful  to  Philocrates^ 

Hso.  xou  are  a  worthy  fellow.  Phil.  And  that  I  will 
never  in  anvthing  act  otherwise  towards  him  than  towards 
my  own  self. 

Ttnd.  I  wish  you  to  put  these  speeches  to  the  test,  both 
by  your  deeds  and  your  actions ;  and  inasmuch  as  I  have  said 
the  less  about  you  than  I  had  wished,  I  wish  you  the  more 
to  give  me  your  attention,  and  take  you  care  not  to  be  angry 
with  me  by  reason  of  these  words.  But,  I  beseech  you,  re- 
flect that  you  are  sent  hence  home  with  a  price  set  upon 
you  at  my  risk,  and  that  my  life  is  here  left  as  a  pledge  for 
you.  Do  not  you  forget  me  the  very  moment  that  you 
have  left  my  presence,  since  you  will  have  left  me  here 
behind  a  captive  in  captivity  for  yourself,  and  donH  consider 
yourself  as  free,  and  forsake  your  pledge^,  and  not  use  your 
endeavours  for  you  to  bring  his  son  home  again,  in  return 
for  me.  Understand  that  you  are  sent  hence  valued  at 
twenty  min».  Take  care  to  prove  scrupulously  faithful ;  take 
care  that  you  show  not  a  wavering  fidelity.  For  my  father, 
I  am  sure,  will  do  everything  that  he  ought  to  do.  Preserve 
me  as  a  constant  friend  to  you,  and  find  out^  this  person  so 
lately  discovered.  These  things,  by  your  right  hana,  holding 
you  with  my  ovm  right  hand,  do  I  beg  of  you ;  do  not  prove 
less  true  to  me  than  I  have  proved  to  you.  This  matter  do  you 
attend  to ;  you  are  now  my  master,  you  my  patron,  you  my 
&ther ;  toyou  do  I  commend  my  hopes  and  my  fortunes. 

Phil,  xou  have  given  injunctions  enough.  Are  you  satis- 
fied if  I  bring  back  accomplished  what  you  have  enjoined  ? 

Tynb.  Satisfied.  Phil,  (to  Hegio).  According  to  your 
wishes,  and  (to  Ttndaeus)  according  to  yours,  will  I  return 
hither  provided.     Is  there  anything  else  ? 

'  UnfaUhfid  to  Philocratesy—Ver,  432.  Philocrates  might  very  safely  take  an 
oath  to  Hegio,  that  he  woald  not  prove  unfaitfafalto  himself. 

^Forsake  your  pledge)— Yer,  4^1.  Alluding  to  himself  being  left  behind,  and  a 
surety  for  his  speedy  return. 

^Andfiid  o«<)— Ver.  446.  "Atque  hunc  inventum  inveni."  Some  would 
render  this,  "  And  find  this  person  still  as  you  have  found  him,"  making  it  allude 
to  Hegio ;  it  seems,  however,  rather  to  apply  to  the  son  of  Hegio,  and  to  mean,  "  Do 
you  seek  out  this  person  whom  we  have  found  out  to  be  in  the  possession  of  the 
physician,  Menarchns." 


y  Google 


4M  OAFTivi;  Actm. 

Tnn).  For  jou  to  retam  back  as  soon  as  ever  joxt  eaxL 
Phii.  The  business  t^«!{^  reminds  me  of  that, 
Heg.  (to  Philoceatbs).  Follow  me,  that  I  may  gire  yon 
your  expenses  for  the  journey  at  my  banker's ;  on  the  same 
occasion  I'll  get  a  passport;  from  the  Pr8Bt<Mr. 

Ttnd.  "What  passport^  ?  Heg.  For  him  to  take  with  fan 
hcmee  to  the  army,  that  he  may  be  allowed  to  go  home  itom. 
here.     {To  TrimiLBrs.)  You  go  in^doois. 

Ttbtd.  Speed  you  welL  Phil.  Eight  heartily,  fiurewdL 
(TrHDiiETis  goes  into  the  home,) 

Hbg.  (aside).  T  faith,  I  compassed  my  design,  when  I 
purchased  these  men  of  the  Qusstors  out  of  the  spoiL  I 
n&ve, released  my  son  from  slavery,  if  so  it  pl^ises  the  QoiB ; 
and  yet  I  hesitated  a  long  time  whether  I  should  purchase 
or  should  not  purchase  these  persons.  Watch  that  man  in- 
doors, if  you  please,  you  servants,  that  he  may  nowhere  mofe 
a  foot  without  a  guard.  I  shaU  soon  make  my  appearanee 
at  home ;  now  I'm  going  to  my  brother's,  to  see  my  dAa 
captives;  at  the  same  time  I'U  enquire  whether  any  one 
knows  this  young  man.  (To  Phii.ocea.tss.)  Do  you  follow, 
that  I  may  despatch  you.  I  wish  attention  first  to  be  paid 
to  that  matter.  (JBtPeuitt. 

Act  III.  —  ScEiTE  I. 
Miter  EseABiLrs. 

Eeg.  Wretched  is  that  man  who  is  in  search  of  some- 
thing to  eat,  and  finds  that  with  difficulty ;  but  more  wretched 
is  he  who  both  seeks  with  difficulty,  and  finds  nothing  at  all; 
most  wretched  is  he,  who,  when  he  desires  to  eat,  has  not 
that  which  he  may  eat.  But,  by  my  faith,  if  I  only  could,  I'd 
willingly  tear  out  the  eyes  of  this  day ; — with  such  enmiiT 
has  it  fiUed  all  people  towards  me.     One  more  starved  out  I 

1  What  passport  fy—yer,  454.  Being  consdous  of  Uie  trick  wbidi  tlMjan 
playing  on  the  worthy  old  mun,  TyndaruB  shows  some  alann  on  beanng  a  ptsf- 
port,  or  **  syngraphus,"  mentioncKl.  Commentators  are  at  a  loee  to  know  w^ 
he  shoald  express  such  alarm.  It  is  dlfficnlt  to  say,  bat,  probably,  as  then  «w  in 
the  passport  a  description  of  the  bearer,  who  would  be  PbUocrates  under  the  Moe 
of  Tyndams,  it  suddenly  comes  to  the  recollection  of  Tyndamt  that  they  *■* 
originally  made  prisoners  under  thehr  proper  names,  and  that  ponibly  1 
may  be  recognized  as  attempting  to  pass  under  an  assumed  i 


y  Google 


JSc.  I.  THB  CAPTITES.  44(7 

never  did  see,  not  one  more  filled  with  hunger^,  nor  one  who 
prospers  less  ia  whateyer  he  begins  to  do.  So  much  do  mj 
stomach  and  my  throat  take  rest  on  these  fasting  holidays*. 
Away  with  the  profession  of  a  Parasite  to  yery  utter  and 
extreme  perdition !  so  much  in  these  days  do  the  young  men 
driye  away  from  them**the  needy  drolls.  They  care  nothing 
now-a-days  for  iJ^ete  Laconiak  men^  of  j;he  lowest  benches — 
these  whipping-posts,  who  have  their  clever  sayings  without 
provision  and  without  money.  They  nqw-a-days  seek  those 
who,  when  they've  eaten  at  their  pleasure,  may  give  them  a 
return  at  their  own  houses.  They  go  themselves  to  market, 
which  formerly  waaJbh»  j^rovince  of  the  Parasites.  They  go 
themselves  from  the  Porum  to  the  procurers  with  face  as  ex- 
posed^ as  the  magistrates  in  court^,  with  face  exposed,  condemn 
those  who  are  found  guilty;  nor  do  they  now  value  buffoons  at 
one  farthing® ;  all  are  so  much  in  love  vdth  themselves.  For, 
when,  just  now,  I  went  away  from  here,  I  came  to  some  young 
moi  in  the  Porum :  "  Good  morrow,"  said  I ;  "  whither  are 
we  going  together  to  breakfast  ?"    On  this,  they  were  silent. 

*  FUkdwith  hunger) — ^Ver.  471.  This  paradoxical  expression  is  similar  to  the 
one  used  in  the  Anlnlaria,  L  46,  "  inaniis  oppletae,"  "filled  with  emptiness.*' 

■  Fotlng  hokdeufsy^Ver,  473.  He  means  to  saj,  that  as  on  feast  dajs  and 
boUdays  people  abstain  from  work,  so  at  present  his  teeth  and  stomach  have  no 
emplojmait. 

'  These  Lacoman  men) — ^Ver.  476.  The  Parasites,  when  there  was  not  room 
fer  them  on  the  "  tricIinia,'*or  "conches"  at  table,  were  forced  to  sit  on  "  snbsellia," 
or  "  benches,**  at  the  hottom  of  the  table.  This  was  Kke  the  custom  of  the 
Spartans,  or  Lacomans,  who,  eschewing  the  Inznrj  of  reclining,  always  persisted 
in  sitting  at  meals.  The  Spartans,  also,  endnred  pain  with  the  greatest  firmness ; 
avirtne  mnch  required  by  Parasites,  in  order  to  put  np  with  the  indignities  which 
thi^  had  to  endure  from  the  guests,  who  daubed  then:  faces,  broliB  pots  abefut 
their  heads,  and  boxed  their  ears. 

*  WUhfiuM  as  eaeposed)^Yer.  480.  People,  with  any  sense  of  decency,  would 
resort  to  these  places  either  in  masks,  or  with  a  hood  thrown  over  the  face. 

s  /»  ooiir<>— Ver.  481.  "  In  tribn.**  He  allndes  to  the  trials  which  took  place 
before  the  Boman  people  in  the  "  Comitia  Tributa,'*  or  "assemblies  of  the  tribes,** 
where  the  Tribunes  and  ^Sdiles  acted  as  the  accusers.  The  offences  for  whidi 
persons  were  summoned  before  the  tribes,  were,  bad  conduct  of  a  magistrate  in  per- 
formance of  his  duties,  neglect  of  duty,  mismanagement  of  a  war,  embezzlement  «f 
the  public  money,  breaches  of  the  peace,  usury,  adultery,  and  some  other  crime8> 
The  "  Comitia  Tribnta*'  were  nsed  as  courts  of  appeal,  when  a  person  protested 
against  a  fine  imposed  by  a  magistrate. 

*  At  anejbrthing) — ^Ver.  482.  literally,  "  at  a  teruncius,**  which  was  a  small 
cdin  among  the  Romans,  containing  three  "uncise,**  "twelfth  parts,**  or  cos 
quarter  of  5ie  "  as,**  which  we  gener^y  take  as  equivalent  to  a  penny. 


y  Google 


M8  CAPTiTi;  Actni. 

"  Who  Bays,  ^  bere,  tU  my  house,^  or  wbo  makes  an  offer  P"  said 
I.  Just  like  dumb  men,  tbey  were  silent,  and  didn't  smile  at 
me.  "  Where  do  we  dine  ?"  said  I.  On  this  they  declined.  I 
said  one  funny  saying  out  of  my  best  bon  mots,  by  which  I 
formerly  used  to  get  lasting  for  a  month ;  not  an  individual 
smiled ;  at  once  I  knew  that  the  matter  was  arranged  by  eon- 
cert.  ]S^ot  even  one  was  willing  to  imitate  a  dog  when  pro- 
yoked ;  if  they  didn't  laugh,  they  might,  at  least,  have  grinned 
with  their  teety .  From  them  I  went  away,  after  I  saw  that 
I  was  thus  made  sport  of.  I  went  to  some  others ;  then  to 
some  others  I  came ;  then  to  some  others — the  same  the  result. 
All  treat  the  matter  in  confederacy,  just  like  the  oil-mer- 
chants in  the  Velabrum^.  Now,  I've  returned  thence,  since 
I  see  myself  made  sport  of  there.  In  like  maoner  do  other 
Parasites  walk  to  and  fro,  to  no  purpose,  in  the  Forum. 
Now,  after  the  foreign  fashion^,  I'm  determined  to  enforce 
all  my  rights.  Those  who  have  entered  into  a  confederacy,  by 
which  to  deprive  us  of  food  and  life, — ^for  them  I'U  name  a  day. 
I'll  demand,  as  the  damages,  that  they  shall  give  me  ten  dki- 
ners  at  my  own  option,  when  provisions  are  dear :  thus  will  I 

1  Grinned  with  their  teeth) — ^Ver.  491.  T6at  is,  hj  showing  their  teeth  and  grin- 
ning. This  is  not  nnlike  the  expression  used  in  the  Psalms  (according  to  the 
transktion  m  our  Liturgy) — Ps.  lix.,  ver.  6 — "  They  grin  like  a  dog  and  run 
about  through  the  city." 

« In  the  Vehbrumy-Ver,  494.  The  "Via  Nova,"  or  "New  Street,"  at  Borne, 
led  from  the  interior  of  the  city  to  the  '*  VeUbra."  The  greater  and  tbe-lesi 
"  Velabrum"  lay  between  the  Palatine  and  the  Capitoline  Hills,  where  fruita  and 
other  commodities  were  sold  in  booths,  or  under  awnmgs,  from  which  ("  vela")  the 
streets  probably  derived  their  name.  Varro,  however,  says  that  they  were  so  called 
from  the  verb  "  veho,"  "  to  carry ;"  because  in  early  times  those  spots  were  tra- 
Tersed  m  boats,  whidi  mode  of  carriage  was  called  "  velatura."  From  the  present 
passage,  it  appears  that  the  oil-merchants  in  the  "  Velabra"  acted  in  confederacy 
not  to  sell  their  oils  under  a  certain  price. 

«  4fier  the  /oreiffn  fashion) — ^Ver.  497.  Some  suppose  that  "  barbaric^  lege** 
here  means  "  the  foreign"  or  "  Boman  law,"  and  that  he  refers  to  the  "  Lex 
Vinnia,  introduced  at  Rome  by  Quintus  Vinnius,  which  was  sud  to  have  been 
passed 'agamst  those  persons  who  confederated  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  the 
high  prices  of  provirioos.  It  is,  however,  somewhat  doubtful  if  there  really  was 
such  a  law;  and  the  better  opinion  seems  to  be  that  the  word  "lege"  means 
"  fashion'*  or  "  custom ;"  and  that  he  refers  to  the  Boman  method  of  trial.  He  wiU 
accuse  his  former  entertainers  of  a  conspiracy  to  starve  him.  He  will  name  a  day 
for  trial,  "  diem  dicet ;"  he  will  demand  damages  or  a  penalty,  "  irrqgabit  raulc- 
tam;"  and  thus  will  he  proceed  at  law  against  them,  "sic  egerit."  Boat  has 
written  at  great  length  on  the  meaning  of  this  passage. 


y  Google 


Sc.  m.  THE  CAPTITES.  449 

do.  IN'ow  rn  go  hence  to  the  harbour.  There,  is  my  only- 
hope  of  a  dinner ;  if  that  shall  fail  me,  I'll  return  here  to  the 
old  gentleman,  to  his  unsavoury  dinner. 

SoBiTB  II. — JSnter  Heoio  and  Aeistophontes. 

Hsa.  (to  himself).  What  is  there  more  delightful  than  to 
mimage  one's  own  interests  well  for  the  public  good^,  just 
as  I  did  yesterday,  when  I  purchased  these  men.  Every 
person,  as  they  see  me,  comes  to  meet  me,  and  congratulates 
mo  on  this  matter.  By  thus  stopping  and  detaining  un- 
lucky me,  they've  ma^e  me  quite  tired.  With  much  ado 
have  I  survived^  from  being  congratulated,  to  my  misfortune. 
At  last,  to  the  Praetor  did  I  get.  There,  scarcely  did  I  rest 
myself.  I  asked  for  a  passport ;  it  was  given  me :  at  once  I 
delivered  it  to  Tyndarus.  He  started  for  home.  Thence, 
straightway,  after  that  was  done,  I  passed  by  my  house ;  and 
1  went  at  once  to  my  brother's,  where  my  other  captives  are. 
I  asked  about  Philocrates  from  Elis,  whether  any  one  of 
them  all  knew  the  person.  This  man  (pointing  to  Aeisto- 
PHONTKs)  called  out  that  he  had  been  his  intimate  friend  ;  I 
told  him  that  he  was  at  my  house.  At  once  he  besought 
and  entreated  me  that  I  would  permit  him  to  see  him. 
Eorthwith  I  ordered  him  to  be  released  ^row  chains.  Thence 
have  I  come.  (To  Aeistophontes.)  Now,  do  you  follow 
me,  that  you  may  obtain  what  you  have  besought  of  me,  the 
opportunity  of  meeting  with  this  person.  (They  go  into  the 
house.) 

ScBKB  III. — Ihiter  Ttndaetjs,j^ow  the  house, 

TtOT).  Wow  stands  the  matter  so,  that  I  would  much  rather 
that  I  had  once  existed,  than  that  I  still  exist ;  now  do  my 
hopes,  my  resources,  and  my  succour,  desert  me  and  spurn 
themselves.  This  is  that  day,  when,  for  my  life,  no  safety 
can  be  hoped ;  nor  get  is  death  my  end ;  nor  hope  is  there, 

1  For  the  pubHic  good) — ^Ver.  504.  It  is  possible  that  he  may  here  refer  to  his 
purchase  of  Philocrates,  whose  high  position  among  the  Eleans  would  probably 
tend,  on  his  return  to  his  native  country,  to  promote  peace  between  it  and  the 
people  of  ^tolia. 

2  WilhmuchadolMvelsurvioed) — ^Ver.610.  "  Vix— cminebam.'*  Literally, 
**  I  hardly  kept  myself  above**  water.  He  means  that  he  was  almost  overpowered 
by  the  crowds  of  people  congratulating  him. 

2  a 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


460  CAPTin ;  Act  HI, 

in  &cty  to  dispel  this  fear  for  me ;  nor  cloak  haive  I  anywhere 
for  my  deceittul  stratagems ;  nor  for  my  devices  or  my  sob- 
terfuges  is  there  anywhere  a  screen  presented  to  me.  No  de- 
precating is  tliere  for  my  perfidy ;  no  means  of  flight  for  my 
offences.  No  refuge  is  there  anywhere  for  my  trasting ;  and 
no  escape  for  my  cunning  schemes.  What  was  concealed  is  now 
exposed;  my  plans  are  now  divulged.  The  whole  matter 
is  now  laid  open ;  nor  is  there  any  ado  about  this  matter, 
but  that  I  must  perish  outright,  and  meet  with  deatructioii, 
both  on  behalf  of  my  mast^  and  myself.  This  AristophonteB 
has  proved  my  ruin,  who  has  just  now  come  into  the  housa 
He  knows  me.  He  is  the  intimate  fiiend  and  kinsman  of 
Philociates.  Not  Salvation  herself^  can  save  me  now,  evm^ 
if  she  wishes ;  nor  have  I  any  means  qf  escape^  unless,  per^ 
chance,  I  devise  some  artifice  in  my  mind.  {He  medUatet^ 
Plague  on  it  \ — how  ?  What  can  I  contrive  ? — what  can  I 
thi^  of?  Some  very  great  folly  and  trifling  I  shallliaye  to 
begin  vdth.    I'm  quite  at  a  loss.     (Se  retires  aside.} 

Scene  IV. — JSnter  Hegio,  AEisTOPHOira?Bs,  tmd  Slates, 
from  the  hotise. 

Heg.  Whither  am  I  to  say,  now,  that  this  man  has  be- 
taken himself  from  the  house  out  of  doors  ? 

TlTSD.  (apart).  Now,  for  a  very  certainty,  I'm  done  for; 
the  enemies  are  coming  to  you,  Tyndarus  I  What  shall  I 
say? — what  shall  I  talk  of?  What  shall  I  deny,  or  what 
confess  ?  All  matters  are  reduced  to  uncertaLaiy.  How 
shall  I  place  confidence  in  my  resources  ?  I  wish  the  Qods 
had  destroyed  you,  before  you  were  lost  to  your  own  country, 
Aristophontes,  who,  from  a  plot  well  concerted,  are  making 
it  disconcerted.  This  plan  is  ruined  outright,  unless  I  find 
out  for  myself  some  extremely  bold  device. 

Heg.  (to  Abistophontes).  PoUow  me.  See,  there  is  the 
man ;  go  to  him  and  address  him. 

1  Not  Salvation  herself) — ^Ver.  535.  This  was  a  prorerbial  ezpressioii  asuag 
the  BoDums.  "  Sains,"  ''  Safety"  or  "  Salyatkm,"  was  worshiped  as  «  OoddM 
at  Borne.  It  is  well  obseryed, in  Thornton's  translation,  that  the  wocd  "SbIm" 
may,  withoat  inreverence,  be  translated  "  Salvatioo,"  on  no  Im  antfaority  thaa 
that  of  Archbishop  Tillotson.  "  If,"  says  he,  "  men  will  continDe  in  thmr  am, 
the  redemption  brought  by  Christ  will  be  of  no  advantage  to  them ;  laeh  as  obsti- 
nately persist  in  an  unpenitent  course,"  "  ipsa  si  yelit  Sains,  aerrare  nan  poMi'* 
**  Salvation  itself  cannot  save  them.** 


y  Google 


SC.  IV,  THE  OAPTITES.  451 

Ttitd.  (aside,  and  turnim  awm/).  What  mortal  among  mor- 
tals is  there  more  wretched  thaai  myself? 

Abtst.  (coming  «p  to  Mm).  "Why's  this,  that  I'm  to  say 
that  you  are  avoidrng  my  gaze,  Tyndarus  ?  And  why  that 
you  are  slighting  me  as  a  stranger,  as  though  you  had  never 
known  me  ?  "Wliy,  I'm  as  much  a  slave  as  yourself ;  although 
at  home  I  was  a  free  man,  you,  even  from  your  childhood, 
have  always  served  in  slavery  in  Elis. 

HsG.  I'  Mth,  I'm  very  little  surprised,  if  either  he  does 
avoid  your  gaze,  or  if  he  does  shun  you,  who  are  calling  him 
!I>pdarus,  instead  of  Philocrates. 

Trsfj).  Hegio,  this  person  was  accounted  a  madman  in 
Elis.  Don't  you  give  ear  to  what  he  prates  ahout ;  for  at 
home  he  has  pursued  his  father  and  mother  with  spears,  and 
that  malady  sometimes  comes  upon  him  which  is  spit  out^. 
Do  you  this  instant  stand  away  at  a  distance  from  him. 

Heq.  (to  the  Slaves).  Away  with  him  further  off  from  me. 

Aeist.  Do  you  say,  you  whipp'd  knave,  that  I  am  mad, 
and  do  you  declare  that  I  have  followed  my  own  father  with 
spears  ?  And  that  I  have  that  malady,  that  it's  necessary  for 
me  to  he  spit  upon^  ? 

1  Which  is  spit  otif) — ^Ver.  666.  Some  would  render  the  words  "  qni  sputatur," 
"  which  is  spit  upon,"  and  fancy  that  they  find  authorities  in  the  ancient  writers  for 
thinking  that  epilepsy  was  treated  by  spitting  upon  the  patient.  However,  it  seems 
much  more  probable,  that  the  notion  was  that  epilepsy  was  cored  by  the  patient 
himself  spitting  out  the  noxious  saliTB ;  and  that  the  word  **  sputatur"  means,  '^  is 
spit  out,"  i.  e.  *'  is  cured  by  spitting."  Celsus  thus  describes  the  *'  comitialis  mor- 
bus," "  epilepsy,"  or  "  falling  sickness :"  "  The  person  seized,  suddenly  falls  down ; 
foam  drops  irom*  the  mouth;  then,  after  a  little  time,  he  comes  to  himself,  and 
gets  up  again  without  any  assistance."  Pliny,  in  his  Natural  History,  B.  38, 
c.  4,  says:  "Despuimus  comitiales  morbos,  hoc  est,  contagia  regerimus,'*  "We 
spit  out  the  epilepsy,  that  is,  we  avert  the  contagion."  This  is  said,  probably,  in 
reference  to  a  belief,  that  on  seeing  an  epileptic  person,  if  we  spit,  we  shall  avoid 
the  contagion ;  but  it  by  no  means  foUows  that  the  person  so  doing  must  spit  upon 
the  epileptic  person.  We  read  in  the  first  Book  of  Samuel,  eh.  zxl,  ver.  12: 
*^  And  C^vid  laid  up  these  words  in  his  heart,  and  was  sore  afraid  of  Achish,  the 
King  of  Gath«  And  he  changed  his  behaviour  before  them,  and  tieigned  hunself 
mad  in  their  hands,  and  scrabbled  on  the  doors  of  the  gate,  and  let  his  spittle  &U 
down  on  his  beard."  He  probably  pretended  to  be  attacked  with  epileptic  fits. 
In  fact,  after  due  examination,  there  seems  little  doubt  that  it  was  a  common 
notion  with  the  ancients  that  the  distemper  was  discharged  with  the  saliva. 

2  To  be  ^  ttpon)— Ver.  569.  Aristophontes  has  understood  the  words,  "qui 
sputatur,"  in  the  sense  of  "  which  is  spit  upon,"  and  asks  Tyndarus  if  he  affirms 
that  he  is  afflicted  with  a  disease  which  reqmres  such  treatment  H^o,  to  pacify 

2a2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


452  OAPTIVI ;  Act  m. 

H£a.  Don't  be  dismayed;  that  malady  afflicts  many  a 
person  to  whom  it  has  proved  wholesome  to  be  spit  upon,  and 
has  been  of  service  to  them. 

Abist.  Why,  what  do  you  say  ?    Do  you,  too,  credit  him  ? 

Heg.  Credit  him  in  what  P    Abist.  That  I  am  mad  P 

Tynd.  Do  you  see  him,  with  what  a  ftirious  aspect  he*8 
looking  at  you  ?    'Twere  best  to  retire,  Hegio ;  it  is  as  I  said, 
his  frenzy  grows  apace ;  have  a  care  for  yourself. 
'  Heo.  I  thought  that  he  was  mad,  the  moment  that  he 
called  you  Tyndarus. 

Ttsd,  Why,  he's  sometimes  ignorant  of  his  own  name, 
and  doesn't  know  what  it  is. 

Heg.  But  he  even  said  that  you  were  his  intimate  friend. 

TyiTD.  So  far  from  that,  I  never  saw  him.  Why,  really, 
AlcmsBon,  and  Orestes,  and  Lycurgus^  besides,  are  my  friends 
on  the  same  principle  that  he  is. 

Abist.  Villain,  and  do  you  dare  speak  ill  of  me,  as  well  ? 
Do  I  not  know  you  P 

Heg.  I'  faith,  it  really  is  very  clear  that  you  don't  know 
him,  who  are  calling  him  Tyndarus,  instead  of  Philocrates. 
Him  whom  you  see,  you  don't  know ;  you  are  addressing  himt 
as  the  person  whom  you  don't  see. 

him,  and  to  sbow  off  his  medical  knowledge,  tells  him  that  it  has  proved  benefidal 
in  some  diseases  to  be  so  treated ;  bat  he  does  not  go  so  fiir  as  to  saj  what  those 
diseases  were.  One  maladj,  called  "  herpes,"  or  '*  spreading  nicer/'  was  said  to 
be  highly  contagions,  bnt  capable  of  being  cnred  hj  applications  of  saliva.  Some 
Commentators  here  quote  the  method  which  onr  Saviour  adopted  in  curing  the 
blind  man  at  Bethsaida:  **  And  he  took  the  blind  man  bj  the  hand,  and  led  him 
out  of  the  town:  and  when  he  had  spat  on  his  eyes  and  put  his  hands  upon  him, 
he  asked  him  if  he  saw  aught."  St.  Mark,  ch.  viii.,  ver.  23.  And  again,  the  ao« 
count  given  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  St.  John,  ver.  6 :  "  When  he  had  thus  spoken, 
he  spat  on  the  ground,  and  made  clay  of  the  spittle,  and  he  anointed  the  eyes  of 
the  blind  man  with  the  clay."  It  may  be  possible  that  our  Saviour  thonght  fit  to 
adopt  these  forms,  in  imitation  of  some  of  the  methods  of  treating  diseases  ii\  those 
tunes ;  though,  of  course,  his  transcendant  power  did  not  require  their  agen^. 
Bost,  in  his  Conmientaries  on  Plautus,  has  a  very  learned  disquisition  on  the 
•meaning  of  the  present  passage. 

>  Alcmceon,  and  Orestes,  and  Lycurgus) — ^Ver.  568.  He  alludes  to  these  throe 
persons  as  being  three  of  the  most  celebrated  men  dT  antiquity  that  were  at- 
tacked with  frenzy.  Orestes  slew  his  mother,  Cljrtemnestra ;  Alcmseon  kiQed 
bis  mother,  Eriphyle;  and  Lycurgus,  King  of  Thrace,  on  slighting  the  worship  of 
Bacchus,  was  afi^cted  with  madness,  in  a  fit  of  which  he  hewed  off  his  own  Itgk 
with  a  hatchet. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  CiLPTITBB.  455 

Aeist.  On  the  contrary,  this  fellow's  saying  that  he  is  the 
person  who  he  is  not ;  and  he  says  that  he  is  not  the  person 
who  he  really  is. 

Ttnd.  You've  been  found,  of  course,  to  excel  Philocrates 
in  truthfulness. 

Abist.  By  mv  troth,  as  I  understand  the  matter,  you've 
been  found  to  brazen  out  the  truth  by  lying.  But  i'  faith, 
prithee,  come  then,  look  at  me. 

Ttot).  (looJcing  at  him).  Well]  Abist.  Say,  now;  do  you 
deny  that  you  are  Tyndarus  P 

Ttsj>.  I  do  deny  it,  I  say. 

Abist.  Do  you  say  that  you  are  Philocrates  ? 

Ttnd.  I  do  say  so,  I  say. 

Abist.  (to  Hegho).  And  do  you  believe  him  ? 

Hsa.  More,  indeed,  than  either  you  or  invself.  For  he, 
in  fact,  who  you  say  that  he  is  {pointing  to  Tyisdabtjs),  has 
set  out  hence  to-day  for  EUs,  to  this  person's  father. 

Abist,  "What  father,  when  he's  a  slave^. 

Tykd,  And  BO  are  you  a  slave,  and  ye^  you  were  a  free 
man ;  and  I  trust  that  so  I  shall  be,  if  1  restore  his  son  here 
to  liberty. 

Abist.  How  say  you,  villain  ?  Do  you  say  that  you  were 
bom  a  free  man  [fiber]  ? 

Tno).  I  really  do  not  say  that  I  am  Liber*,  but  that  I  am 
Philocrates. 

Abist.  How's  this  ?  How  this  scoundrel,  Hegio,  is  making 
sport  of  you  now.  For  he's  a  slave  himself,  and  never,  except 
his  own  self,  had  he  a  slave. 

Tynd.  Because  you  yourself  are  destitute  in  your  own 
country,  and  haven't  whereon  to  live  at  home,  you  wish  all  to 
be  found  like  to  yourself;  you  don't  do  anythmg  surprising. 
'Tifl  the  nature  of  the  distressed  to  be  ill-disposed,  and  to 
envy  the  fortunate. 

1  When  he^8  a  slave) — Ver.  580.  Slaves  were  not  considered  to  have  any  legal 
existence ;  and,  therefore,  to  have  neither  parents  or  relations. 

2  TkcBt  I  am  Libery—Ver.  684.  Aristophontes  asks  him  if  he  means  to  assert 
that  he  was  bom  a  free  man,  "  liber."  As  "  liber"  was  also  a  name  of  Baochns, 
lyndams  quibbles,  and  says,  "  I  did  not  assert  that  I  am  Liber,  bnt  that  I  am  Phi- 
locrates.** In  consequence  of  the  idiom  of  the  Latin  hmgoage,  his  answer  (non 
eqnidem  me  Libemm,  sed  Philocratem  esse  aio)  will  admit  of  another  quibble, 
and  may  be  read  as  meaning,  "  I  did  not  say  that  I  am  a  free  man,  but  that 
Philocrates  is."  This  may  be  readily  seen  by  tiie  Latin  scholar,  but  is  not  so  easily 
explained  to  the  English  reader. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


454r  CAPTIVI ;  Act  m. 

Abist.  Hegio,  take  you  care,  please,  that  you  don't  persist 
in  rashly  placing  confidence  in  this  man ;  for  so  far  as  I  see, 
he  is  certainly  now  putting  some  device  in  execution,  in 
saying  that  he  is  redeeming  your  ^otl  from  captivity;  that 
is  by  no  means  satisfactory  to  me. 

Ttnd.  I  know  that  you  don't  wish  that  to  be  done ;  still  I 
shall  effect  it,  if  the  Grods  assist  me.  I  shall  bring  him  back 
here,  and  he  will  rest&re  me  to  my  father,  in  EUs.  For  that 
purpose  have  I  sent  Tyndarus  hence  to  my  father. 

Abist.  "Why,  you  yourself  are  he ;  nor  is  there  any  slare 
in  EUs  of  that  name,  except  yourself. 

Ttio).  Do  you  persist  in  reproaching  me  with  being  a  alave 
— ^a  thing  that  has  befallen  me  through  the  fortune  of  war  ? 

Abist.  Beally,  now,  I  cannot  contain  myself. 

Ttnd.  {to  HEaio).  Ha !  don't  you  hear  him  ?  Why  don't 
you  take  to  flight?  He'll  be  pelting  us  just  now  with 
stones  there,  unless  you  order  him  to  be  seized. 

Abist.  I'm  distracted.  Ttnd.  His  eyes  strike  fire;  there's 
need  of  a  rope,  Hegio.  Don't  you  see  how  his  body  is 
spotted  all  over  with  livid  spots  ?  Black  bile^  is  disordering 
the  man. 

Abist.  And,  by  my  faith,  if  this  old  gentleman  is  wise, 
black  pitch^  will  be  disordering  you  with  the  executioner^ 
and  giving  a  light  to  your  head. 

Ttkd.  He's  now  tdking  in  his  fit  of  delirium ;  sprites  are 
in  possession  of  the  man. 

HJsa.  By  my  troth,  suppose  I  order  him  to  be  seized  ? 

Ttnd.  Tou  would  be  acting  more  wisely. 

Abist.  I'm  vexed  that  I  haven't  a  stone,  to  knock  out  the 

1  Black  hUe) — ^Ver.  602.  A  saperabandance  of  the  bile  was  supposed  to  be  pro- 
dactive  of  melancholy  madness.  The  word  "melancholy'*  is  from  the  Gnek, 
fteXayxoXia,  "  black  bile." 

2  Black  pitch) — ^Ver.  603.  He  alludes  to  a  frightfal  punishment  inflicted  upan 
male&ctors  by  the  Bomans.  They  were  either  smeared  over  with  burning  pitch, 
or  were  first  covered  with  pitch,  wl^ich  was  then  set  fire  to.  This  pcmish- 
ment  is  supposed  to  have  been  often  inflicted  upon  the  early  ChristiaQs.  JuTeual 
alludes  to  it  in  his  first  Satire,  L  155 : 

Pone  Tigellinum,  tsda  Incebis  in  ill^ 

Qn&  stantes  ardent,  qui  fixo  gutture  fumant 

"  Describe  Hgellums  [an  infamous  minister  of  Nero],  and  you  shall  ^ve  %  Ifglit 
by  those  torches,  in  which  those  stand  and  bum,  who  send  ftrth  smoke  with  ft 
stake  driven  into  their  throat.*' 


y  Google 


Se.  lY.  THE  CAPTITIBS.  456 

l»aiiis  of  that  whip-scoundrel,  who's  driving  me  to  madness 
bj  his  taunts. 

TxHD.  Don't  you  hear  that  he's  looking  for  a  stone  ? 

Abist.  I  wish  to  apeak  with  you  alone,  separately^ 
Hegio. 

Hs«.  Speak  from  where  you  are,  if  you  want  anything; 
though  at  a  distance,  I  shall  hear  you. 

Ttitd.  Yesy  for,  by  my  faith,  if  you  approach  nearer,  he'll 
be,  taking  your  nose  off  with  his  teeth. 

AsiST.  By  heayens,  Hegio,  don't  you  believe  that  I  am 
mad,  or  that  I  ever  was  so,  or  that  I  have  the  malady  which 
that  fellow  avers.  But  if  you  fear  anything  from  me,  order 
me  to  be  bound ;  I  wish  it,  so  long  as  that  fellow  is  bound 
as  well. 

Tnsm.  "Why  really,  Hegio,  rather  let  him  be  bound  that 
wishes  it. 

Abist.  Now  hold  your  tongue !  I'll  make  you,  vow  false 
Plulocrates,  to  be  found  out  this  day  tohes,  real  Ijndarus. 
Why  are  you  making  signs^  at  me  ? 

TTPrn.  I,  makiag  signs  at  you  ?  (To  Heoio.)  What  would 
he  do,  if  you  were  at  a  greater  distance  off? 

Hbg.  What  do  you  say  ?  What  if  I  approach  this  mad- 
man? 

TnrD.  JNTonsense ;  you'll  be  made  a  fool  of;  he'll  be  pra- 
ting g^uff!,  to  you,  neither  the  feet  nor  the  head  of  which  will 
ever  be  visible.  The  dress  onh/'^  is  wanting;  in  seeing  this 
man,  you  behold  Ajax  himself. 

Heg.  I  don't  care ;  still  I'll  approach  him.  {Advcmces  to 
AsiSTOFHOifrrES.) 

Tyitd.  (aside).  Now  am  I  utterly  undone;  now  between 

1  Whs/  ore  you  makmg  aignsy^Ver,  617.  "  Abnutas."  The  verb  "abnuto" 
means,  "  to  nod  to  a  person  that  he  m&j  desist."  Tjndams  thinks  that  bj  this 
time  Aristophontes  mnst  surelj  understand  the  plan  that  has  been  devised  for 
the  escape  of  FhSocrates ;  and,  as  he  is  about  to  step  aside  to  speak  with  Hegio, 
he  makes  a  sign,  requesting  him  to  stop  short  in  his  contradiction  of  what  he  has 
asserted. 

2  The  dress  only) — ^Ver.  620.  Bj  "  omamenta**  he  means  the  dress  oE  Tragedy, 
The  dresses  of  Comedj  were  essentially  different  from  those  of  Tragedj.  He  means 
to  say,  "  the  man  is  mad ;  if  he  had  only  the  Tragic  garb  on,  you  might  take  him 
fin:  Ajax  Telamon  in  his  frenzy.**  On  bdng  r^sed  the  arms  of  Achilles,  Ajax 
became  mad,  and  slaughtered  a  flock  of  sheep,  fimcying  that  they  were  IJlyBses 
and  the  sons  of  Atreus. 


y  Google 


456  CAPTin ;  Act  HI, 

the  sacrifice  and  the  stone^  do  I  stand,  nor  know  I  what 
to  do. 

He&.  I  lend  you  my  attention,  Aristophontes,  if  there  is 
anything  that  you  would  wish  with  me. 

Abist.  Prom  me  you  shall  hear  that  truth,  which  now  you 
think  to  be  false,  Kegio.  But  I  wish,  in  the  first  place,  to 
clear  myself  from  this  with  you — ^that  madness  does  not  poe* 
sess  me,  and  that  I  have  no  malady,  except  that  I  am  in 
captivity ;  and,  so  may  the  King  of  G^ods  and  of  men  stake 
me  to  regain  my  native  land,  that  fellow  there  is  no  more 
Philocrates  than  either  I  or  you. 

Heg.  Come,  then,  tell  me  who  he  is  ? 

Abist.  He  whom  I've  told  you  all  along  jBrom  the  begin- 
ning. If  you  shall  find  him  any  other  than  that  person,  I 
show  no  cause  why  I  shouldn't  suffer  the  loss  with  you 
both  of  my  parents  and  of  my  liberty  ^br  ever, 

Heg.  {to  Ttndaeus).  "What  say  you  to  this? 

Ttetd.  That  I  am  yom*  slave,  and  you  my  master. 

Heg.  I  didn't  ask  that — ^were  you  a  firee  man  ? 

Tynp.  I  was.  Abist.  But  he  really  wasn't ;  he  is  de- 
ceiving you. 

Ttnb.  How  do  you  know  ?  "Were  you,  perchance,  the  mid- 
wife of  my  mother,  since  you  dare  to  affirm  this  so  boldly  ? 

Abist.  When  a  boy,  I  saw  yourself,  a  boy. 

Ttnd.  But,  grown  up,  I  now  see  you  grown,  up;  so, 
there's  for  you,  in  return.  If  you  did  right,  you  wouldn't 
be  troubling  yourself  about  my  concerns ;  do  I  trouble  my- 
self aboutyoiuB  ? 

Heg.  Was  his  father  called  ThesaurochrysonicocrcBsides  i 

Abist.  He  was  not ;  and  I  never  heard  that  name  before 
this  day.    Theodoromedes  was  the  father  of  Philocrates. 

Ttkd.  (aside),  I'm  downright  undone.  Why  don't  you 
be  quiet,  heart  of  mine  ?  Go  and  be  stretched,  and  hang  your- 
self;  you  are  throbbing  so,  that  unfortimate  I  can  hardly 
stand  up  for  m^  fear. 

Heg.  Is  a  full  assurance  given  me  that  this  was  a  sLave  in 
His,  and  that  he  is  not  Philocrates  ? 

1  The  sacrifice  and  the  stone)— Yer,  624.  Wetleam  from  Lity,  that  in  the  moit 
ancient  times  the  animal  for  sacrifice  was  killed  bj  being  stmck  vith  a  stene;  t» 
stand  between  the  victim  and  the  stone,  would  consequentlj  impljr,  to  be  in  a  pen- 
tion  of  extreme  danger. 


y  Google 


Sa.  rV.  THE  CAPTIVBS.  457 

Abibt.  So  fully,  that  you  will  never  find  this  to  be  other- 
wise ;  but  where  is  he^  now  ? 

He&.  Where  I  the  least,  and  he  the  most  could  wish  him- 
self. In  consequence,  then,  I'm  cut  asunder^,  disjointed,  to 
my  sorrow,  by  the  devices  of  this  scoundrel,  who  has  bam- 
boozled me  by  his  tricks  just  as  he  has  thought  fit.  But  do, 
please,  have  a  care  that  you  are  right, 

Abist.  Why,  I  assure  you  of  this,  as  an  ascertained  and 
established  fact. 

Heg.  For  certain?  Abist.  Why,  nothing,  I  sav,  will  you 
find  more  certain  than  this  certainty.  Philocrates,  from  when 
a  Im*,  has  ever  since  that  time  been  my  friend. 

Btee.  But  of  what  appearance  is  your  friend  Philocrates  ? 

Abist.  I'll  tell  you :  with  a  thin  face,  sharp  nose,  light  hair, 
dark  eyes,  somewhat  ruddy,  with  hair  rather  crisp  and  curling. 

Heg.  The  description  is  like.  Ttsd,  (aside).  Aye,  so  much 
so,  indeed,  that  I've  this  day,  much  to  my  sorrow,  got  into 
the  midst  of  this,  i'  faith.  Woe  to  those  unfortunate  rods 
which  this  day  will  be  meeting  their  end  upon  my  back. 

Heg.  I  see  that  I've  been  imposed  upon. 

Tnrj).  (aside).  Why,  fetters,  do  you  delay  to  run  towards 
me  and  to  embrace  my  legs,  that  I  may  have  you  in  custody  ? 

Heg.  And  have  these  two  rascally  captives  really  deceived 
me  this  day  with  their  tricks?  The  other  one  pretended 
that  he  was  the  servant,  and  this  one  that  he  himself  was  the 
master.  I've  lost  the  kernel;  for  a  security,  I've  lefb  the 
shell.  To  such  a  degree  have  they  imposed  ujjon  me^,  both 
on  this  side  and  that,  with  their  trickeries.  Still,  this  fellow 
shall  never  have  the  laugh  against  me.  Colaphus,  CordaKo, 
Corax*  (to  the  Slates),  go  you  away  and  bring  out  the  thongs. 

1  Stit  tohere  is  he) — ^Ver.  645.  Tyndarns  has  probably  betaken  himself  to  some 
comer  of  the  stage,  and  Aristophontes  misses  him  from  his  former  position. 

«  Cvt  cuundery-Yer,  646.  "  Dertmcinatns"  means,  literally,  cut  asunder  with 
a  "  ruudna,*'  or  "  saw." 

»  Have  they  imposed  upon  me) — Ver.  661.  "  Os  sublevere  offuciis."  Literally, 
"  painted  my  face  with  varnish."  This  expression  is  probably  derived  from  the 
practice  of  persons  concealing  their  defects,  by  painting  over  spots  or  freckles  in 
the  face  for  the  purpose  of  hiding  them. 

*•  Colaphus,  CordaUoj  Corax) — ^Ver.  662.  These  are  the  names  of  slaves. 
*'  Colaphus"  means,  also,  **  a  blow  with  the  fist.^'  "  Coraz"  was  the  Greek  name 
for  a  "  crow,"  and  was  probably  given  to  a  black  slave. 


y  Google 


458  GAiTin ;  Act  HL 

Slaye.  Are  we  to  be  sent  to  gather  faggots^  ?  (I%«Sla.tbs 
go  cmd  bring  the  thongs  from  the  houae.) 

ScBKE  V. — Hegio,  TinsfDAEus,  Aeistophontes,  and 
Slates. 

Heg.  (to  the  Slates).  Put  the  manacles  on  tliis  whipped 
Tillain. 

Ttitd.  {whilst  the  Slates  cvre  fastening  him).  What's  the 
matter  ?     What  have  I  done  wrong  ? 

Heg.  Do  you  ask  the  question  ?  Ton  weeder  and  sower 
of  villanies,  and  in  especial  their  reaper. 

Ttnd.  Ought  you  not  to  have  Tentured  to  say  the  harrower 
first  ?    Por  countrymen  always  harrow  before  they  weed. 

Heg.  Why,  with  what  assurance  he  stands  before  me. 

TnfD.  It's  proper  for  a  servant,  innocent  and  guiltless,  to 
be  full  of  confidence,  most  especially  before  his  master. 

Heg.  (ta  the  Slates).  Bind  this  fellow's  hands  tightly, 
wiUyou. 

TrND.  I  am  your  own— do  you  command  them  to  be  cut 
off  even.  But  what  is  the  matter  on  account  of  which  you 
blame  me? 

Heg.  Because  me  and  my  fortunes,  so  far  as  in  you  smgly 
lay,  by  jowe  rascally  and  knavish  stratagems  you  have  rent 
in  pieces,  and  have  distracted  my  affairs  and  spoiled  all  my 
resources  and  my  plans,  in  that  you've  thus  robbed  me  of 
Philocrates  by  your  devices.  I  thought  that  he  was  the  tAsve, 
you  the  firee  man.  So  did  you  say  yourselves,  and  in  this  way 
did  you  change  names  between  you. 

Tyistd.  I  confess  that  all  was  done  so,  as  you  say,  and  that 
by  a  stratagem  he  has  got  away  from  you,  through  my  aid 
and  cleverness ;  and  prithee,  now,  do  you  blame  me  for  that, 
i' faith? 

Heg.  Why,  it  has  been  done  with  your  extreme  torture 
for  the  conseqtience, 

Ttnt).  So  I  don't  die  by  reason  of  my  misdeeds,  I  care  but 
little.  If  I  do  die  here,  then  he  returns  not,  as  he  said 
he  would;  but  when  I'm  dead,  this  act  will  be  remembered 
to  my  honor,  that  I  caused  my  captive  master  to  return 
from  slavery  and  the  foe,  a  &ee  man,  to  his  father  in  his  natiTe 

1  To  gather  faggotsy-Ver,  663.  He  asks  this  question,  becaose  cords,  **  ko," 
were  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  binding  up  faggots. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


8c.  Y*  THE  CAITTTES.  459 

kzid ;  and  that  I  preferred  rather  to  expose  mj  own  life  to 
peril,  than  that  he  should  be  undone. 

Bj:g.  Take  care,  then,  to  enjoy  that  fame  at  Acheron. 

Ttnd.  He  who  dies  for  virtue's  sake,  still  does  not  perish. 

Heo.  When  I've  tortured  you  in  the  most  severe  man* 
ner,  and  for  your  schemes  put  you  to  death,  let  them  say 
either  that  you  have  perished  or  that  you  have  died ;  so  long 
as  you  do  die,  I  don't  think  it  matters  if  they  say  you  live. 

Tykd.  I'  faith,  if  you  do  do  so,  you'll  do  it  not  without  retri- 
bution, if  he  shall  return  here,  as  I  trust  that  he  will  return. 

Abist.  (aside).  O  ye  immortal  Grods!  I  understand  it 
now;  now  I  know  what  the  case  really  is.  My  friend 
Philoerates  is  at  liberty  with  his  father,  in  his  native  land. 
'Tis  well;  nor  have  I  any  ;^erson  to  whom  I  could  so 
readily  wish  well.  But  this  thing  grieves  me,  that  I've  done 
this  person  a  bad  turn,  who  now  on  account  of  me  and  my 
talking  is  in  chains. 

Hbg.  (to  TTiTDAErs).  Did  I  not  forbid  you  this  day  to 
utter  anything  false  to  me  ? 

Tykd.  You  did  forbid  me.  Heo.  Why  did  you  dare  to 
tell  me  lies  P 

Ttetd.  Because  the  truth  would  have  prejudiced  him  whom 
I  was  serving ;  now  falsehood  has  advantaged  him. 

Heo.  But  it  will  prejudice  yourself. 

Tno).  'Tis  very  good.  Still,  I  have  saved  my  master,  whom 
I  rejoice  at  being  saved,  to  whom  my  elder  master  had  as- 
signed me  as  a  protector.  But  do  you  think  that  this  was 
wrongly  done  ? 

Heo.  Most  wrongfully.  Tnm.  But  I,  who  disagree  with 
you,  8^,  rightly.  !For  consider,  if  any  slave  of  yours  had 
done  this  for  your  son,  what  thanks  you  would  have  given 
him.  Would  you  have  given  that  slave  his  freedom  or  not  ? 
Would  not  that  slave  have  been  in  highest  esteem  with  you  P 
Answer  me  that. 

BQbo.  I  think  so.  Ttnd.  Why,  then,  are  you  angry  with  me  ? 

Heo.  Because  you  have  proved  more  mithftil  to  him  than 
to  mysel£ 

Ttkd.  How  now  P  Did  you  expect,  in  a  single  night  and 
day,  for  yourself  to  teach  me — a  person  just  made  captive,  a 
recent  slave,  and  in  his  noviciate— that  I  should  rather  con- 
sult your  interest  than  his,  with  whom  &om  childhood  I 
have  passed  my  life  P 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


460  CAPTIYI;  Actni. 

He0.  Seek,  then,  thanks  &om  him  for  that.  {To  the 
Slaves.)  Take  him  where  he  may  receive  weighty  and  thick 
fetters,  thence,  after  that,  you  snail  go  to  the  quarries  for 
cutting  stone.  There,  while  the  others  are  digging  out 
eight  stones,  unless  you  daily  do  half  as  much  work  again, 
you  shall  have  the  name  of  the  six-hundred-stripe  man^. 

Aeist.  By  Gods  and  v^ol,  I  do  entreat  you,  Hegio,  not  to 
destroy  this  man.  ^ 

Heg.  He  shall  be  taken  all  care  of  ^.  Por  at  night,  fsistened 
with  chains,  he  shall  be  watched;  in  the  daytime,  beneath 
the  ground,  he  shall  be  getting  out  stone.  Tor  many  a  day 
will  I  torture  him ;  I'll  not  respite  him  for  a  single  day. 

Aeist.  Is  that  settled  by  you  P  Hza.  Not  more  settled 
that  I  shall  die.  (To  the  Slaves.)  Take  him  away  this  instaat 
to  Hippolytus,  the  blacksmith ;  bid  thick  fetters  to  be  ri- 
vetted  on  him.  From  there  let  him  be  led  outside  the  gate 
to  my  freedman,  Cordalus,  at  the  stone-quarries.  And  tell 
him  that  I  desire  this  man  so  to  be  treated,  that  he  mayn't 
be  in  any  respect  worse  off  than  he  who  is  the  most  severely 
treated. 

Tno).  Why,  since  you  are  unwilling,  do  I  desire  myself  to 
survive  ?  At  your  own  hazard  is  the  risk  of  my  life.  After 
death,  no  evil  have  I  to  apprehend  in  death.  Though  I 
should  live  even  to  extreme  age,  stiH,  short  is  the  space  for 
enduring  what  you  threaten  me  with.  Farewell  and  prosper ; 
although  you  are  deserving  for  me  to  say  otherwise,  xoa, 
Aristophontes,  as  you  have  deserved  of  me,  so  fare  you ;  for 
on  your  account  has  this  befallen  me. 

Heo.  {to  the  Slaves).  Carry  him  off. 

Ttni).  But  this  one  thing  I  beg,  that,  if  Philocrates  should 
come  back  here,  you  will  give  me  an  opportunity  of  meeting 
him. 

Hjea.  {to  the  Slaves).  At  your  peril,  if  you  don't  this  in- 
stant remove  him  from  my  sight.  {The  Slaves  lay  hold  of 
TnrnAitus,  and  push  him  alonff.) 

^Six-hfmdred'Stripernany---Yer,7Bi,  **  Sezoentoplago.**  This  is  a  compoood 
word,  coined  by  the  author. 

>  He  skoB  be  taken  dU  care  o/*)— Ver.  733.  Struck  with  admiration  at  Us 
fidelity,  Aristophontes  begs  Hegio  not  to  destroy  Tyndams.  As  the  verb  ^'perdiPi" 
might  also  mean  '*  lose"  him,  Hegio  ironically  tskes  it  in  the  latter  sense,  and  mJ* 
that  there  is  no  fear  of  that,  for  he  shall  be  well  taken  care  of;  or,  taotiMf 
words,  strictly  watched. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  TI.  THE  CAPTITES.  461 

TrtTD.  I*  troth,  this  really  is  violence^,  to  be  both  dragged 
And  pushed  at  the  same  time.  {He  is  home  off  hy  the 
Slates.) 

Scene  VI. — Hegio  and  Aeistophoittes. 

Heg.  He  has  been  led  off  strwght  to  prison*,  as  he  de- 
serves. Let  no  one  presume  to  «Kmpt  such  an  enterprise. 
Had  it  not  been  for  you  who  disco^ed  this  to  me,  still  would 
they  have  been  leading  me  by  the  bridle  with  their  tricks. 
Now  am  I  resolved  henceforth  never  to  trust  any  person  in 
anything.  This  once  I  have  been  deceived  enough ;  I  did 
hope,  to  my  sorrow,  that  I  had  rescued  my  son  from  slaverv. 
That  hope  has  forsaken  me.  I  lost  one  son,  whom,  a  child 
in  his  fourth  year,  a  slave  stole  from  me ;  and,  indeed,  never 
since  have  I  found  either  slave  or  son ;  the  elder  one  has 
fallen  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  "What  guilt  is  this  of  mine  ? 
As  though  I  had  become  the  father  of  children  for  the  purpose 
of  being  childless.  {To  Aeistophontes.)  FoUow  this  way. 
ril  conduct  you  back  where  you  were.  I'm  determined  to 
have  pity  upon  no  one,  since  no  one  has  pity  upon  me. 

Abist.  Forth  from  my  chains  with  evil  omen  did  I  come ; 
now  I  perceive  that  with  like  ill  omen  to  my  bonds  I  must 
return.  {Exeunt. 

Act  IV. — Scene  I. 
JEmter  Eeoasilijs^. 

Eeg.  Supreme  Jove!  thou  dost  preserve  me,  and  dost 
augment  my  means.     Plenty,  extreme  and  sumptuous,  dost 

1  7%w  rea%  %s  violence) — ^Ver.  755.  According  to  SaetoniuB,  Jalins  Caesar 
nsed  an  ezactlj  similar  expression  when  first  attacked  bj  his  murderers  in  the 
senate-hoose.  On  Tnllins  Cimber  seizing  hold  of  his  garments  he  exclaimed, 
*»  Ita  qnidem  vis  est !"  "  Why,  really,  this  is  violence  I" 

*  To  prison) — ^Vcr.  756.  "  Phylacam:**  This  is  a  Greek  word  Latinized,  mean- 
ing "  prison"  or  "  confinement." 

.  >  Ergasihu)  He  has  just  come  from  the  harbour,  where  he  has  seen  the  ton 
of  He^o,  together  with  PhQocrates  and  Stalagmns,  landing  from  the  packet-boat. 
Now,  as  he  speaks  still  of  his  intended  dinner  with  Hegio,  to  which  he  had  been 
invited  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  Play,  we  most  conclude,  that  since  then,  Philo- 
ciates  has  taken  ship  from  the  coast  of  ^tolia,  arrived  in  Elis,  procured  the  libe- 
ration  of  Pbilopolemus,  and  returned  with  him,  all  in  the  space  of  a  few  hours. 
This,  however,  although  the  coast  of  Elis  was  only  about  fifteen  miles  from  that  of 
jEtolia,  is  not  at  all  consistent  with  probability ;  and  the  author  has  been  much  cen- 
sored by  some  Commentators,  especially  by  Lessing,  on  account  of  his  negligence. 


y  Google 


462  OAPTivi ;  Act  IV. 

tliou  present  to  me ;  celebrity,  profit,  enjoyment,  mirth,  fes- 
tiyity,  holidays,  sights,  provisions,  caronsings,  abundance,  joy- 
onsness.  And  to  no  man  have  I  now  determined  with  myself 
to  go  a-begging ;  for  I'm  able  either  to  profit  mj  Mend  or 
to  destroy  my  enemy,  to  such  extent  has  this  dehghtful  day 
heaped  delights  upon  me  in  its  delightfiilness.  I  have  lighted 
upon  a  most  rich  inheritance  without  incumbrances^.  Now 
will  I  wend  my  way  to  this  old  gentleman  Hegio,  to  whom  I 
am  carrying  blessings  as  great  as  he  himself  prays  for  from 
the  Qods,  and  even  greater.  Now,  this  is  my  determination^ 
in  the  same  fashion  that  the.  slaves  of  Comedy^  are  wonty  so 
will  I  throw  my  cloak  around  my  neck,  that  from  me,  the 
first  of  ally  he  may  learn  this  matter.  And  I  trust  that  1, 
by  reason  of  this  news,  shall  find  provision  up  to  the  end. 

ScEiTE  n. — Mater  Hegio,  at  a  distance. 

Heg.  (to  himself).  The  more  that  I  revolve  this  matter  in 
my  breast,  the  more  is  my  uneasiness  of  mind  increased.  That 
I  should  have  been  duped  in  this  fashion  to-day !  and  that  I 
wasn't  able  to  see  through  it !  When  this  sliall  be  known, 
then  I  shall  be  laughed  at  aU  over  the  city.  The  very  mo- 
ment that  I  shall  have  reached  the  Forum,  all  will  be  saying, 
"  This  is  that  clever  old  gentleman,  who  had  the  trick  played 
him."  But  is  this  Ergasilus,  that  I  see  coming  at  a  distance  P 
Surely  he  has  got  his  cloak  gathered  up ;  what,  I  wonder,  is 
he  going  to  do  ? 

Ebo.  (advancing y  and  talking  to  himself).  Throw  aside 

It  must,  however,  be  remembered,  that  Plautas  was  writing  for  a  Boman  audience^ 
the  greater  part  of  whom  did  not  know  whether  Elis  was  one  mOe  or  one  bandied 
from  the  coast  of  ^tolia.  We  may  snppose,  too,  that  PhiiopoIemQS  bad  already 
caused  Stalagmas,  the  runaway  slave,  to  be  apprehended  before  the  axrival  of  Phi. 
locrates  in  £lb. 

1  An  inherUance  toithotU  mcumbranoes) — Ver.  780.  **  Sine  saczis  heiedita&'' 
The  meaning  of  this  expression  has  been  explained  in  the  Notes  to  the  Tiinnmmns, 
L484. 

2  Slaves  of  Comedy)— Ver.  783.  This  was  done  that,  when  expedition  was  le- 
qiured,  the  cloak  might  not  prove  an  obstmction  to  the  wearer  as  he  walked.  The 
slaves  in  Comedies  nsnally  wore  the  "  palliom,"  and  as  they  were  mostly  active^ 
bustling  fellows,  would  b^ve  it  tucked  tightly  around  them.  The  "paniam* 
was  usually  worn  passed  over  the  left  shoulder,  then  drawn  behind  the  back,  and 
under  the  left  arm,  leaving  it  bare,  and  then  thrown  again  over  the  kft  ahosidar. 


y  Google 


SC.  n.  THE  CAPTIYXS*  468 

from  you  all  tardiness,  Ergasilus,  and  speed  on  this  business. 
I  threaten,  and  I  strictiy  charge  no  person  to  stand  in  my  way, 
unless  any  one  shall  be  of  opinion  that  he  has  lived  long 
enough.  "For  whoever  does  come  in  my  way,  shall  stop  me 
upon  his  &ce.  (Me  runs  alon^,  flourishing  Ms  arms  about,) 

Hsa.  (to  himself).  This  fellow's  beginning  to  box. 

Ebg.  (to  himself),  I'm  determined  to  do  it ;  so  that  every 
one  may  pursue  ms  own  path,  let  no  one  be  bringing  any  of 
his  business  in  this  street ;  for  my  fist  is  a  balista,  my  arm  is 
my  catapulta,  my  shoulder  a  battering-ram;  then  against 
whomsoever  I  dart  my  knee,  I  shall  bring  him  to  the  ground. 
I'll  make  all  persons  to  be  picking  up  their  teeth^,  whom- 
soever I  shall  meet  with. 

Hsa.  (to  himself).  What  threatening  is  this  ?  Eor  I  can- 
not wonder  enough. 

EB€h.  I'll  make  him  always  to  remember  this  day  and  place, 
and  mvself  as  well.  Whoever  stops  me  upon  my  road,  I'll 
make  n  jn  put  a  stop  to  his  own  existence. 

Hbg.  (to  himself).  What  great  thing  is  this  fellow  pre- 
paring to  do,  with  such  mighty  threats  ? 

Bbg.  I  first  give  notice,  that  no  one,  by  reason  of  his  own 
fault,  may  be  caught — ^keep  yourselves  in-doors  at  home,  a/nd 
guard  yourselves  from  my  attack. 

Heg.  (to  himself).  By  my  faith,  'tis  strange  if  he  hasn't 
got  this  boldness  by  means  of  his  stomach.  Woe  to  that 
wretched  man,  through  whose  cheer  this  fellow  has  become 
quite  swaggering. 

Beg.  Then  the  bakers,  that  feed  swine,  that  fatten  their 
pigs  upon  refuse  bran,  through  the  stench  of  which  no  one 
can  pass  by  a  baker's  shop ;  if  I  see  the  pig  of  any  one  of 
them  in  the  public  way,  I'U  beat  the  bran  out  of  the  masters' 
themselves  with  my  fists. 

He0.  (to  himself).  Eoyal  and  imperial  edicts  does  he  give 
out.  The  fellow  is  full ;  he  certainly  has  his  boldness  from 
bis  stomach. 

Eeg.  Then  the  fishmongers,  who  supply  stinking  fish  to 
the  public — ^who  are  carried  about  on  a  gelding,  with  his 

1  To  he  picking  up  their  teeth)— "Vw.  803.  **  Dentflegos."  He  says  that  he  will 
knock  their  teeth  out,  and  so  make  them  pick  them  np  from  the  gronnd.  We  mnst 
snppose  that  while  he  is  thns  hnrrying  on,  he  is  walking  np  one  of  the  long 
streets  wMch  were,  represented  as  emerging  on  the  Roman  stage,  opposite  to  the 
audience. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


464i  OAPTin ;  Act  IV. 

galloping  gaUing  pace^ — ^the  stench  of  whom  driyes  all  the 
loungers  in  the  Basilica^  into  the  Porum,  I'll  bang  their 
heads  with'  their  bulrush  fish-baskets,  that  they  may  under- 
stand what  annoyance  they  cause  to  the  noses  of  otha* 
people.  And  then  the  butchers,  as  well,  who  render  the  sheep 
destitute  of  their  young — ^who  agree  with  you  about  killing 
lamb'^,  and  then  offer  you  lamb  at  double  the  price — ^who 
give  the  name  of  wether  mtUton  to  a  ram — ^if  I  should 
onhf  see  that  ram  in  the  public  way,  I'll  make  both  ram  and 
owner  most  miserable  bemgs. 

.  Heg.  (to  himself).  Well  done!  He  really  does  give  ont 
edicts  fit  for  an  ^cule,  and  'tis  indeed  a  surprising  thing  if  the 
wStolians  haven't  made  him  inspector  of  markets*. 

Ebg.  !No  Parasite  now  am  I,  but  a  right  royal  Inng  of 
kings ;  so  large  a  stock  of  provision  for  my  stomach  is  there 
at  hand  in  the  harbour.  But  why  delay  to  overwhelm  this 
old  gentleman  Hegio  with  gladness  p  With  him,  not  a  person 
among  mankind  eidsts  equally  fortunate. 

»  GaUmg  pace)— Yer.  819.  "  Crucianti"  may  mean  cither  "tormentini;**  tiie 
spectator  by  reason  of  the  slowness  of  its  pace,  or  galliag  to  the  rider.  **  Qoadm- 
pedanti  cracianti  canterio "  is  a  phrase,  both  in  sound  and  meaning,  much  xe- 
sembling  what  onr  song-books  call  the  "  gallopmg  dreary  dan." 

*  In  the  JBanUcd)—yer.  820.  The  "  Basilica  *'  was  a  boilding  which  served  as  a 
court  of  law,  and  a  place  of  meetmg  for  merchants  and  men  of  business.  The 
name  was  perhaps  derived  from  the  Greek  word  fiaatXtifs,  as  the  title  ef  the 
second  Athenian  Archon,  who  had  his  tribunal  or  court  of  justice.  The  boiUiiig 
was  probably,  in  its  original  form,  an  insulated  portico.  The  first  edifice  of  tUi 
kind  at  Rome  was  erected  b.c.  184 ;  probably  about  the  period  when  this  Play  wis 
composed.  It  was  situate  in  the  Forum,  and  was  built  by  Porcius  Gato,  from  wham 
it  was  called  the  **  Porcian  Basilica."  Twenty  others  were  afterwards  erected  at 
difierent  periods  in  tlie  dty.  The  loungers  here  mentioned,  in  the  present  in- 
stance, were  probably  sauntering  about  under  the  porticos  of  the  Ba^Iica,  wfaa 
their  olfactory  nerves  were  offended  by  the  unsavoury  smell  of  the  fishamen^s 
baskets. 

>  Abofd  MUing  lamb') — ^Ver.  824.  In  these  lines  he  seems  to  accuse  the 
butchers  of  three  faults— cruelty,  knavery,  and  extortion.  The  general  reading  is 
"  duplam,"  but  Host  suggests  "  dupla,"  "  at  double  the  price."  If  "  dnphun  *  is 
retained,  might  it  not  possibly  mean  that  the  butchers  agree  to  kiU  Iamb  for  yon, 
and  bring  to  you  "  duplam  agninam,"  "  double  lamb,**  or,  in  other  wordSi  lunl* 
twice  as  old  as  it  ought  to  be  ?  No  doubt  there  was  some  partkular  age  at  iHndi 
hmib,  in  the  estimation  of  £i*gasilus  and  his  brother-epicures,  was  considered  to  be 
in  its  greatest  perfection. 

*  Inspector  of  marketsy-Vet.  BQ^,  "  Agoranomum."  The  iEdUes  wen  the 
inspectors  of  nuukets  at  Borne,  while  the  "  Agoranomi "  had  a  simihr  office  in  tha 
Grecian  cities. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  II.  THE  OAPTIYES.  465 

Heg.  (apart).  What  joy  is  this,  that  he,  thtta  joyous,  is 
going  to  impart  to  me  ? 

Ebg.  (hnochmg  at  Hegio's  door).  Hallo,  hfillo ! — ^where 
ore  you  P    Is  any  one  coming  to  open  this  door  P 

Heg.  {apart).  ThiB  fellow's  betaking  himself  to  my  house 
to  dine. 

Eeg.  Open  you  both  these  doors^,  before  I  shall  with 
knocking  cause  the  destruction,  piecemeal,  of  the  doors. 

Heo.  {apart) .  I'd  like  much  to  address  the  fellow.  {Aloud^ 
Ergasilus ! 

E&G.  Who's  calling  Ergasilus  P  Heg.  Turn  rovrnd^  and 
look  at  me. 

Ebg.  {not  seei/ng  who  it  is)-  A  thing  that  Portune  does  not 
do  for  you,  nor  ever  will  do,  you  bid  me  to  do.   But  who  is  it  P 

Heg.  Look  round  at  me.     'Tis  Hegio. 

Ebg.  {turning  round).  O  me  1  Best  of  the  very  best  of 
men,  as  many  as  exist,  j^ou  have  arrived  opportunely. 

Heg.  You've  met  with  some  one  at  the  harboiu*  to  dine 
with  ;   through  that  you  are  elevated. 

Ebg.  Give  me  your  hand.    Heg.  My  hand  P 

Ebg.  Give  me  your  hand,  I  say,  this  instant. 

Heg.  Take  it.     {GUvim  Mm  his  hand.) 

Ebg.  Eejoice.    Heg.   why  should  I  rejoice  P 

Ebg.  Because  I  bid  you ;  come  now,  rejoice. 

Heg.  r  faith,  my  sorrows  exceed  my  rejoicings. 

Ebg.  'Tis  not  so,  as  you  shall  find ;  I'll  at  once  drive  away 
every  spot  of  sorrow^  from  your  body.  Eejoice  without  re- 
straint. 

Heg.  I  do  rejoice,  although  I  don't  at  all  know  why  I 
should  rejoice. 

Ebg.  Tou  do  rightly ;  now  order- Heg.  Order  what  P 

Ebg.  a  large  fire  to  be  made. 

Heg.  a  large  fire  ?  Ebg.  So  I  say,  that  a  huge  one  it 
must  be. 

Heg.  What,  you  vulture,  do  you  suppose  that  for  your 
sake  I'm  going  to  set  my  house  on  fire  P 

Ebg.  Don't  be  angry.  Will  you  order,  or  will  you  not 
order,  the  pots  to  be  put  on,  and  the  saucepans  to  be  washed 

^  Both  these  doors) — ^Ver.  836.  The  street-doors  of  the  ancients  were  generally 
"bivalye,"  or  "  folding-doors." 

*  Evenf  spot  (^torrow  )— Ver.  846.  He  alludes,  figuratively,  to  the  art  of  the 
fuller  or  scourer,  in  taking  the  spots  out  of  soiled  garments. 

2  H 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


466  CAPTTfi ;  Act  IV, 

oat,  the  bacon  and  the  dainties  to  be  made  warm  in  the  heated 
cooking-stoves,  another  one,  too,  to  go  purchase  the  fish  ? 

Bjso.  This  fellow's  dreaming  while  awake. 

Ebo.  Another  to  buy  pork,  and  lamb,  and  pullets. 

H£G.  Ton  understand  how  to  feed  well,  if  you  had  the 
means. 

Ebo.  Gkimmons  of  bacon,  too^  and  lampr^s,  spring  pickled 
tunny-fish,  mackerel,  and  sting-ray ;  large  nsh,  too,  and  soft 
cheese. 

Heo.  Tou  will  have  more  opportunity,  Ergasilus,  here  at 
my  house,  of  talking  about  these  things  than  of  eating  them. 

Ebg.  Do  you  suppose  that  I'm  saying  this  on  my  own 
account  ? 

Hbo.  Tou  will  neither  be  eating  nothing  here  to-day,  nor 
yet  much  more  than  usual,  so  don't  you  be  mistaken.  Do  you 
then  bring  an  appetite  to  my  house  for  your  every-day  fare. 

Ebo.  Why,  rU  so  manage  it,  that  you  yourself  shall  wish 
to  be  profuse,  though  I  myself  should  desire  you  not. 

Heo.  What,  I  ?    Ebo.  Tes,  you. 

Heg.  Then  you  are  mjr  master.  Ebo.  Tes,  and  a  kindl}' 
disposed  one.     Do  you  wish  me  to  make  you  happy  ? 

Heg.  Certainly  I  would,  rather  than  miserable. 

Ebg.  Grive  me  your  hand.  Heg.  {extending  his  hmS), 
Here  is  my  hand. 

Ebg.  All  the  Gods  are  blessing  you. 

Heg.  I  don't  feel  it  so.  Ebg.  Why,  you  are  not  in  a 
quickset  hedge^,  therefore  you  don't  feel  it ;  but  order  the 
vessels,  in  a  clean  state,  to  be  got  for  you  forthwith  in 
readiness  for  the  sacrifice,  and  one  lamb  to  be  brought  here 
with  all  haste,  a  fat  one. 

Heg.  Why  ?    Ebg.  That  you  may  oflfer  saciifice. 

Heg.  To  which  one  of  the  Gods  ? 

Ebg.  To  myself,  i'  faith,  for  now  am  I  your  supreme 
Jupiter.  I  likewise  am  your  salvation,  your  fortune,  your 
Hfe,  your  delight,  your  joy.  Do  you  at  once,  then,  make 
this  Divinity  propitious  to  you  by  cramming  him. 

1  In  a  quickset  hedffey^Yer.  BG$,  Here  is  a  most  wretched  attempt  at  nit, 
which  cannot  be  expressed  in  a  literal  translation.  Hegio  says,  "  Nihil  sentio,'* 
"  I  don^t  feel  if  Ergasilns  plays  npon  the  resemblance  of  the  verb  "  sentio^  to 
"sentis"  and  " senticetum," a  "bramble-bush'*  or  quickset  hedge;"  and  eMj&, 
"  Yon  don't  feel  it  so,"  "  non  sentis,** "  because  you  are  not  in  a  qmdkset  hedge,** 
"  in  senticeto." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  THE  OAPTTTES.  467 

He  a.  You  seem  to  me  to  be  Iningry. 

Esa.  For  myself  am  I  himgry,  and  not  for  you. 

He&.  I  readily  allow  of  it  at  your  own  good  will. 

Ebo.  I  believe  you ;  from  a  boy^  you  were  in  the  habit — 

Hsa.  May  Jupiter  and  the  Gods  confound  you. 

Ene.  I'  troth,  'tis  Mr  that  for  my  news  you  should  return 
me  thanks ;  such  great  happiness  do  I  now  bring  you  from 
the  harbomr. 

HJEe.  Now  you  are  flattering  me.  Begone,  you  simpleton ; 
you  have  arrived  behind  time,  too  late. 

Ebg.  If  I  had  come  sooner,  then  for  that  reason  you  might 
rather  have  said  that.  Now,  receive  this  joyous  netiTS  of  me 
which  I  bring  you  ;  for  at  the  harbour  I  just  now  saw  your 
son  Philopolemus  in  the  common  fly-boat,  alive,  safe  and 
sound,  and  likewise  there  that  other  young  man  together  with 
him,  and  Stalagmus  your  slave,  woo  fled  from  your  house, 
who  stole  from  you  your  little  son,  the  child  of  four  years  old. 

Heo.  Away  with  you  to  utter  perdition !  You  are  trifling 
with  me.  • 

Eaa.  So  may  holy  Gluttony^  love  me,  Hegio,  and  so  may 
she  ever  dignify  me  with  her  name,  I  did  see 

Heo.  My  son  ?    Eeo.  Your  son,  and  my  good  Genius. 

HsG.  That  Elean  captive,  too  ? 

Bbo.  Yes,  by  Apollo^.  Hbg.  The  slave,  too  ?  My  slave 
Stalagmus,  he  that  stole  my  son ? 

^  From  a  hoy) — ^Ver.  872.  An  indelicate  allusion  is  covertly  intended  in  this  line. 

2  So  may  holy  GliOtonyy—Yer.  882.  The  Parasite  very  appropriately  deifies 
Gluttony :  as  the  Goddess  of  Bellyful  would,. of  course,  merit  his  constant  worship. 

«  TeSj  hyApolki) — ^Ver.  885.  In  the  exuberance  of  his  joy  at  his  prospects  of 
good  eating,  the  Parasite  gives  this,  and  his  next  five  replies,  in  the  Greek  lan- 
guage; just  as  the  diner-out,  and  the  man  of  bour-mots  and  repartee,  might  in 
our  day  couch  his  replies  in  French,  with  the  shrug  of  the  shoulder  and  the 
becoming  grimace.  He  first  swears  by  Apollo,  and  then  by  Cora,  which  may  mean 
either  a  city  of  Campania  so  called,  or  the  Goddess  Proserpine,  who  was  called  by 
the  Greeks,  Kopiyi  "  the  maiden."  He  then  swears  by  four  places  in  Campania — 
Ftasneste,  Sigma,  Phrynnone,  and  Alatrium.  As  the  scene  is  in  Greece,  Hegio 
asks  bim  why  he  swears  by  these  forngn  places ;  to  which  he  gives  answer, 
merely  because  they  are  as  disagreable  as  the  unsavoury  dinner  of  vegetables 
which  he  had  some  time  since  promised  him.  This  is,  probably,  merely  an  excuse 
for  obtruding  a  slitting  remari:  upon  these  places,  which  would  meet  with  a  ready 
response  from  a  Boman  audience,  as  the  Campanians  had  sided  with  Hannibal 
against  Borne  in  the  second  Punic  war.  They  were  probably  miserable  places 
besides,  on  which  the  more  refined  Bomans  looked  with  supreme  contempt. 

2h2 


y  Google 


468  CAPTTVi ;  Act  IV. 

Ebo.  Yes,  by  Cora.    Hso.  So  long  a  time  ago  P 

Eeg.  Tea,  by  Pweneste !    Hbg.  Ib  he  aniinwl  P 

Ebo.  Yes,  by  Signia !    Heg.  For  sure  ? 

Ebg.  Yes,  by  Phrysinone!  Hbo.  Have  a  care,  if  you 
please. 

Bbg.  Yes,  by  Alatrium !  Heg.  Why  are  you  swearing 
by  foreign  cities  P 

Ebg.  Why,  because  they  are  just  as  disagreable  as  you 
were  declaring  your  fere  to  be. 

Heg.  Woe  be  to  you!  Ebg.  Because  that  you  don't 
believe  me  at  all  in  what  I  say  in  sober  earnestness.  But 
of  what  country  was  Stalagmus,  at  the  time  when  he  de- 
parted hence  ? 

Heg.  a  Sicilian.  Ebg.  But  now  he  is  not  a  Sicilian — 
he  is  a  Boian ;  he  has  got  a  Boian  woman^.  A  wife,  I 
suppose,  has  been  given  to  him  for  the  sake  of  obtaining 
children. 

Heg.  Tell  me,  have  you  said  these  words  to  me  in  good 
earnest  P 

Ebg.  In  good  earnest  Heg.  Immortal  Gods,  I  seem  to 
be  bom  again,  if  you  are  telling  the  truth. 

Ebg.  Do  you  say  so  P  Will  you  still  entertain  doubts, 
when  I  have  solemnly  sworn  to  you  P  In  fine,  Hegio,  if  you 
have  little  confidence  in  my  oath,  go  yourself  to  the  harbour 
and  see. 

Heg.  I'm  determined  to  do  so.  Do  you  arrange  in-doors 
what's  requisite.  Use,  ask  for,  take  p'om  my  hrder  what 
you  like ;  I  appoint  you  cellarman. 

Ebg^.  Now,  by  my  troth,"  if  I  have  not  prophesied  truly 
to  you,  do  you  comb  me  out  with  a  cudgel. 

Heg.  I'U  find  you  in  victuals  to  the  end,  if  you  are  telling 
me  the  truth. 

Ebg.  Whence  shall  it  he?  Heg.  Erom  myself  and  firom 
my  son. 

1  Got  a  Boian  tooman)— Ver.  893.  There  is  an  indeficate  meaoing  in  the  ex- 
pression ^^  Boiam  terere/*  The  whole  line  is  intended  as  a  plaj  upon  words. 
"  Boia  "  means  either  "  a  collar/'  which  was  placed  ronnd  a  prisoner's  neck,  or  a 
female  of  the  nation  of  the  Boii  in  GauL  "  Boiam  terere  "  maj  mean  either  ^  to 
have  the  prisoner's  collar  on,"  or,  paraphrasticallj,  "  to  he  conpled  with  a  BofatB 
woman."  Ergasilos  having  seen  Stalagmus  in  the  packet-boat  with  this  ooDsr 
on,  dechires  that  Stalagmus  is  a  Sicilian  no  longer,  for  he  has  tnmed  BoisD, 
havmg  a  Boian  helpmate. 


y  Google 


Sc,  ni.  THE  CAPTIVES.  469 

Eeg.  Do  you  promise  that  ?    Heg.  I  do  promise  it. 
Eae.  But  I,  in  return,  promise^  you  that  your  son  has 
arrived. 
Heg.  Manage  as  well  as  ever  you  can. 
Ebo.  a  happy  walk  there  to  you,  and  a  happy  walk  back. 

{Exit  Heqio. 

SoEBTE  III. — Eegasilus,  olofie, 

Ebg.  He  has  gone  away  from  here,  amd  has  entrusted  to  me 
the  most  important  concern  of  catering.  Immortal  Gods  ! 
how  I  shall  now  be  slicing  necks  off  of  sides ;  how  vast  a 
downfall  will  befaU  the  gammon^  ;  how  vast  a  belabouring  the 
bacon !  How  great  a  using-up  of  udders,  how  vast  a  bewail- 
ing for  the  brawn !  How  great  a  bestirring  for  the  butchers, 
how  great  a  preparation  for  the  porksellers !  But  if  I  were 
to  enumerate  the  rest  of  the  thmgs  which  minister  to  the 
suppljr  of  the  stomach,  'twould  be  sheer  delay.  Now  will  I 
go  off  to  my  government,  to  give  laws  to  the  bacon,  and, 
those  gammons  that  are  hanging  uncondemned,^  to  give  aid 
to  them.    {Chea  into  the  home,) 

Act  V. — Scene  I. 
Enter  a  Lad,  a  servant  o/*Hegio. 

Lad.  May  Jupiter  and  the  Deities  confound  you,  Erga- 
silus,  and  your  stomach,  and  aU  Parasites,  and  every  one 
who  henceforth  shall  give  a  dinner  to  Parasites.     Destruc- 

1  /,  m  retumj  premise) — ^Ver.  904.  Ergasilns  sajs,  "  Do  you  really  promise  me 
this  fine  entertainment?"  To  which,  He|^o  answers,  "  Spondeo,"  "  I  do  promise." 
On  this,  Ergasilns  replies, ''  that  yonr  son  reaUy  has  returned,  I  answer  yon," 
"  respondeo,"  or,  as  he  intends  it  to  be  meant,  **  I  promise  yon  once  again,"  or 
"  in  retnm  for  your  promise." 

'  BefixU  the  gammon) — ^Ver.  908.  An  alliteration  is  employed  in  these  two  lines, 
which  cannot  be  well  kept  up  in  a  literal  translation.  As,  however,  in  the  trans- 
lation an  attempt  is  made  to  give  the  spirit  of  the  passage,  the  literal  meaning  may 
be  here  stated.  "  Pemis  pestis,"  "  a  plague  to  the  gammons ;"  "  labes  larid(^*  "  a 
fall  for  the  bacon;"  "sumini  absumedo,"  "a  consumption  of  udder;"  "callo 
calamitas,"  " destruction  to  the  brawn;"  and  "laniis  lassitudo,"  '*  weariness  to 
the  butchers."  Sows'  udder,  with  the  milk  in  it,  first  dried,  and  then  cooked  in 
some  peculiar  manner,  was  considered  a  great  delicacy  by  the  Roman  epicures. 

^  Hanging  uncondemned) — ^Ver.  913.  Hell  commute  the  punishment  of  the 
gammons  and  hams,  for  they  shall  hang  no  longer. 


y  Google 


470  CAMivi;  AcfcV. 

tion  and  devastation  and  ruin  have  just  now  entered  our 
house.  I  was  afiraid  that  he  would  be  making  an  attack  on 
me,  as  though  he  had  been  an  hungry  wolf.  Aixd  very  dread- 
fully, upon  my  faith,  was  I  inght^ited  at  him ;  he  made  sach 
a  gnashmg  with  his  teeth.  On  his  arrival,  the  whole  kxder, 
with  the  meat,  he  turned  upside  down.  He  seized  a  knife, 
and  first  cut  off  the  kernels  of  the  neck^  from  three  sides- 
All  the  pots  and  cups  he'  broke,  except  i^ose  that  held  a 
couple  of  gallons^ ;  of  the  cook  he  made  enquiry  whether  the 
salting  pans  could  he  set  on  the  fire  to  be  made  hot.  All 
the  cellars  in  the  house  he  has  broken  into,  and  has  laid  tlie 
store-closet^  open.  {At  the  door.)  Watch  him,  servants,  if 
you  please ;  I'll  go  to  meet  the  old  gentleman.  I'll  tell  him 
to  get  ready  some  provisions  for  his  own  self,  i^  indeed,  he 
wishes  himself  to  make  use  of  any.  For  in  this  place,  as  this 
man,  indeed,  is  managing,  either  there's  nothing  already,  or 
very  soon  there  will  be  nothing.  (Exit. 

Scene  II. — Enter  Hegio,  Phtlopolemub,  Pheloobates, 
and  behind  them,  STALA.aMTTS. 
Heg.  To  Jove  and  to  the  Deities  I  return  with  reason  hearty 
thanks,  inasmuch  as  thev  have  restored  you  to  your  father, 
and  inasmuch  as  they  nave  delivered  me  from  very  many 
afflictions,  which,  while  I  was  obliged  to  be  here  without  you,  I 
was  enduring,  and  inasmuch  as  I  see  that  t\iQ.i  fellow  (pointiiig 
to  Stalagmus)  is  in  my  power,  and  inasmuch  as  his  word 
(pointing  to  Philocbates)  has  been  found  true  to  me. 

1  The  kernels  of  the  wcc*>— Ver.  920.  The  "  glandia"  were  the  kernels  or 
tonsils  of  the  throat,  situate  just  below  the  root  of  the  tragae.  These  portions 
of  the  dead  pig  seem  to  have  been  mach  prized  as  delicate  eating.  Judging  from 
the  present  passage,  the  whole  side  of  the  pig,  indading  the  half-head,  was  salted 
and  dried  in  one  piece.  The  first  thing  that  the  Parasite  does,  is  to  cat  the  ker- 
nels from  off  of  three  sides,  which  he  has  relieved  from  the  punishment  of 
hanging. 

2  A  oouph  qfgdlhnsy-Yer,  921.  "  Modiaks."  Literally,  contaming  «  "mo- 
dius,"  which  contained  sixteen  sextarii,  something  more  than  a  peck  of  diy- 
measure  English. 

»  The  etore-doseiy^Yer,  923.  "Armarium"  was  so  called  because  it  was 
originally  a  place  for  keeping  arms.  It  j^terwards  came  to  signify  a  cupbosrd  in 
a  wall,  in  which  clothes,  books,  money,  and  other  articles  of  value,  were  plaoed. 
It  was  generally  in  the  "  atrium,"  or  principal  room  of  the  house.  In  this  in- 
stance it  evidently  means  the  store-closet,  distingnished  from  the  laxder  and  the 
.  cellars. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IL  THE  CAPTIYES.  471 

PhiiiOP.  Enough  now  have  I  grieved  from  my  very  soul, 
and  enough  with  care  and  tears  have  I  disquieted  myself. 
Enough  now  have  I  heard  of  your  woes,  which  at  the  harbour 
you  told  me  of.     Let  us  now  to  this  business. 

Pbil.  What  now,  since  I've  kept  my  word  with  you,  and 
have  caused  him  to  be  restored  back  again  to  freedom  ? 

Heg.  Philocrates,  you  have  ac^ed  so  that  I  can  never  re- 
turn you  thanks  enough,  in  the  degree  that  you  merit  from 
myself  and  my  son. 

Philop.  Nay,  but  you  can,  father,  and  you  will  be  able, 
and  I  shall  be  able ;  and  the  Divinities  wHl  give  the  means 
for  you  to  return  the  kindness  he  merits  to  one  who  deserves 
so  highly  of  us ;  as,  my  father,  you  are  able  to  do  to  this . 
person  who  so  especially  deserves  it. 

Heg.  What  need  is  there  of  words  ?  I  have  no  tongue 
with  which  to  deny  whatever  you  may  ask  of  me, 

Phil.  I  ask  of  you  to  restore  to  me  that  servant  whom 
I  left  here  as  a  surety  for  myself;  who  has  always  proved 
more  faithful  to  me  than  to  himself;  in  order  that  for  his 
services  I  may  be  enabled  to  give  him  a  reward. 

Heg.  Because  you  have  acted  thus  kindly,  the  fevour 
shall  be  returned,  the  thing  that  you  ask;  both  that  and 
anything  else  that  you  shall  ask  of  me,  you  shall  obtain.  And 
I  would  not  have  you  blame  me,  because  in  my  anger  I  have 
treated  him  harshly. 

Phil.  What  have  you  done  ?  Heg.  I  confined  him  in 
fetters  at  the  stone-quarries,  when  I  found  out  that  I  had 
been  imposed  upon. 

Phil.  Ah  wretched  me !  That  for  my  safety  misfortunes 
should  have  happened  to  that  best  of  men. 

Heg.  Now,  on  this  account,  you  need  not  give  me  even 
one  groat  of  silver^  for  him.  Eeceive  him  of  me  without 
cost  that  he  may  be  free. 

Phil.  On  my  word,  Hegio,  you  act  with  kindness ;  but  I 
entreat  that  you  will  order  tlm  man  to  be  sent  for. 

*  Ont  groat  of  silver) — ^Ver.  952.  "  Libella"  was  the  name  oi  the  smallest 
silver  coin  with  the  Romans,  being  the  tenth  part  of  a  denarios.  Hegio  seems  to 
make  something  of  a  favoor  of  this,  and  to  give  his  liberty  to  Tyndams  in 
consideration  of  his  punishment ;  whereas  he  had  originally  agreed  with  Philocrates 
that,  if  Philopolemns  was  liberated,  botl^  he  and  Tyndams  should  be  set  at 
liberty. 


y  Google 


472  CAPTin ;  Act  V. 

Heg.  Certainlj.  {To  the  attendants,  who  immediately 
obey.)  Where  are  you  P  Gh)  this  instant,  and  bring  ^IVn- 
diuruB  here.  (2b  IPhilofolxmfs  and  Phelocsates.)  Do 
you  go  in-doors ;  in  the  meantime,  I  wish  to  enquire  of  this 
statue  for  whipping^,  what  was  done  with  my  younger  son. 
Do  you  go  bathe  in  the  meantime. 

Philop.  Philocrates,  follow  me  this  way  in-doors. 

Phil.  I  follow  you.     (2%«y  yo  into  the  house.) 

Scsirs  III. — HxGio  and  SxAiiAGMUs. 

Hxa.  Come  you,  step  this  way,  you  worthy  fellow,  my 
fine  slave. 

-  Stal.  What  is  fitting  for  me  to  do,  when  you,  such  a  man 
as  you  are,  are  speaking  false  ?  I  was  never  a  handsome,  or  a 
fine,  or  a  good  person,  or  an  honest  one,  nor  shall  I  ever 
be ;  assuredly,  don't  you  be  forming  any  hopes  that  I  shall 
be  honest. 

Heo.  You  easily  understand  pretty  well  in  what  situation 
your  fortunes  are.  If  you  shall  prove  truth-telling,  you'll 
make  your  lot  from  bad  somewhat  better.  Speak  out,  then, 
correctly  and  truthfully ;  but  never  yet  truthfidly  or  correctly 
have  you  acted. 

Stal.  Do  you  think  that  I'm  ashamed  to  own  it,  when 
you  affirm  it  ? 

Heg.  But  I'll  make  you  to  be  ashamed ;  for  I'll  cause  you 
to  be  blushes  all  over*. 

Stal.  Heyday — you're  threatening  stripes,  I  suppose,  to 
me,  quite  unaccustomed  to  them !  Away  with  them,  I  beg. 
TeU  me  what  you  bring,  that  you  may  carry  off  hence  what 
you  are  in  want  of. 

Heg.  Very  fluent  indeed.  But  now  I  wish  this  prating 
to  be  cut  short. 

Stal.  As  you  desire,  so  be  it  done. 

Heg.  (to  the  Attdiencb).  As  a  boy  he  was  very  obedient^ ; 
now  that  suits  him  not.    Let's  to  this  business ;  now  give 

1  This  statue  fir  toAt/iptn^)— Ver.  956.  The  same  ezpressioii  oecnrs  in  the 
Pseudolus,  1.  911. 

^  Bt  hhuike»  aU  over)— Ver.  967.  He  means  that  be  will  have  him  flogged  until 
he  is  red  all  over. 

*  Was  very  obecUenty-Yer.  971.  An  indelicate  remark  is  covertly  intended  in 
this  passage. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IV.  THE  CAPTIVES.  473 

your  attention,  and  inform  me  upon  what  I  ask.  If  you  tell 
the  truth,  you'll  make  your  fortunes  somewhat  better. 

Staii.  That's  mere  trifling.  Don't  you  think  that  I  know 
what  I'm  deserving  of? 

Heo.  Still,  it  is  in  your  power  to  escape  a  small  portion  of 
it,  if  not  the  whole. 

Stai..  a  small  portion  I  shall  escape,  I  know ;  but  much 
will  befall  me,  and  with  my  deserving  it,  because  I  both  ran 
away,  and  stole  your  son  and  sold  him. 

Hb&.  To  what  person?  Stal.  To  Theodoromedes  the 
Polyplusian,  in  Elis,  for  six  minse. 

Heg.  O  ye  immortal  Gods !  He  surely  is  the  father  of  this 
person,  Philocrates. 

Stal.  Why,  I  know  him  better  than  yoiurself,  and  have 
seen  him  more  times. 

Heg.  Supreme  Jove,  preserve  both  myself  and  my  son  for 
me.  {He  goes  to  the  door,  and  calls  aloud.)  Philocrates,  by 
your  good  &eniu8, 1  do  entreat  you,  come  out,  I  want  you. 

Scene  IV. — Unter  Philoceates,^ow  the  house, 

Phil.  Hegio,  here  am  I ;  if  you  want  anything  of  me, 
command  me. 

Heg.  He  (pointing  to  Stalagmtjs)  declares  that  he  sold 
my  son  to  your  father,  in  Elis,  for  six  min». 

Phil,  (to  Stalagmus).  How  long  since  did  that  happen  ? 

Stal.  This  is  the  twentieth  year,  commencing  ^<wi  it. 

Phil.  He  is  speaking  falsely.  Stal.  Either  I  or  you  do. 
Why,  your  father  gave  you  the  little  child,  of  four  years  old, 
to  be  your  own  slave. 

Phil.  What  was  his  name?  If  you  are  speaking  the 
truth,  teU  me  that,  then. 

Stal.  Paegnium,  he  used  to  be  called ;  afterwards,  you  gave 
him  the  name  of  Tyndarus. 

Phil.  Why  don't  I  recollect  you  ?  Stal.  Because  it's 
the  fashion  for  persons  to  forget,  and  not  to  know  him  whose 
favour  is  esteemed  as  worth  nothing. 

Phil.  Tell  me,  was  he  the  person  whom  you  sold  to  my 
fiather,  who  was  given  me  for  my  private  service  ? 

Stal.  It  was  his  son  (^pointing  to  Hegio). 

Heg.  Is  this  person  now  living?  Stal.  I  received  the 
money ;  I  cared  nothing  about  the  rest. 


y  Google 


474  CAPTivi ;  Act  T. 

Hbg.  (to  Fhilogbates).  What  do  you  say  ? 

Phil.  Why,  this  very  Tyndams  is  your  son,  aocoTding, 
indeed,  to  the  proofs  that  he  mentioiis.  For,  a  boy  kimsey^, 
together  with  me  from  boyhood  was  he  brought  up,  virtuously 
and  modestly,  even  to  manhood. 

Heg.  I  am  both  unhappy  and  happy,  if  you  aie  telling  the 
truth.  Unhappy  for  thw  reason,  because,  if  he  is  my  son,  I 
have  badly  treated  him.  Alas !  why  have  I  done  both  more 
and  less  than  was  his  due.  That  I  have  ill  treated  him  I  am 
grieved ;  would  that  it  only  could  be  undone.  But  see,  he's 
coming  here,  in  a  guise  not  according  to  his  deserts. 

ScEiO!  V. — Enter  Ttndabits,  in  chains,  led  in  by  the 
Sebvakts. 

Tyistd.  (to  himself) .  I  have  seen  many  of  the  torments  viiiich 
take  place  at  Acheron^  often  represented  in  paintings^  ;  but 
most  certainly  there  is  no  Acheron  equal  to  where  I  have  been 
in  the  stone-quarries.  There,  in  fine,  is  the  place  where  real 
lassitude  must  be  undergone  by  the  body  in  laboriousness. 
Por  when  I  came  there,  just  as  either  jackdaws,  or  ducks,  or 
quails,  are  given  to  Patrician  children^,  for  them  to  play  with, 
so  in  like  fashion,  when  I  arrived,  a  crow  was  given^  me  with 
which  to  amuse  myself.  But  see,  my  master's  before  the  door ; 
and  lo !  my  other  master  has  returned  from  Elis. 

Heg.  Hail  to  you,  my  much  wished-for  son. 

Ttm).  Ha !  how — ^my  son  ?  Aye,  aye,  I  know  why  you 
pretend  yourself  to  be  the  father,  and  me  to  be  the  son ;  it  is 

>  At  Acheron) — ^Ver.  1003.  He  here  speaks  of  Acheron,  not  as  one  of  the  riyers 
of  hell,  bnt  as  the  infernal  regions  themselves. 

2  Represented  inpcmtinga) — Ver.  1003.  Meursios  thinks  that  the  torments  of 
the  infernal  regions  were  frequently  represented  in  pictures,  for  the  purpose  of 
deterring  men  from  evil  actions,  by  keeping  in  view  the  certain  consequeooes  of 
their  bad  conduct. 

'  To  Patrician  children) — Ver.  1007.  This  passage  is  confirmed  by  what  Plioy 
the  Younger  tells  us  in  his  Second  Epistle.  He  says,  that  on  the  death  of  the 
son  of  Regulus,  his  father,  in  his  grief,  caused  his  fitvourite  ponies  and  dogs,  with 
his  nightingales,  parrots,  and  jackdaws,  to  be  consumed  <hi  the  funeral  pile.  It 
would  certainly  have  been  a  greater  compUment  to  his  son's  memory  had  he  pre- 
served them,  and  treated  them  kindly^  but  probably  he  intended  to  despatch  them 
as  playthings  for  the  child  in  the  other  world. 

*  A  crow  was  given) — Ver.  1009.  "  Upupa.*  He  puns  upon  the  CwofSold  mean- 
ing of  this  word,  which  signified  either  "*a  mattock  "  or  a  bird  called  a  *•  hoopoe," 
according  to  the  context.  To  preserve  the  spirit  of  the  pun,  a  somewhat  different 
translation  has  been  given. 


y  Google 


Sc.  T.  THE  CAfTITBfl.  476 

because,  just  as  parents  do,  you  give  me  the  means  of  seeing 
the  light* 

Phu.  Hail  to  you,  Tyndarus.  Treo).  And  to  you,  for 
whose  sake  I  am  enduring  these  miseries. 

Phii..  But  now  I'll  m^e  you  in  freedom  come  to  wealth. 
For  {^pcintmg  to  Hjaoio)  this  is  your  Mher;  {pointing  to 
Stalagmtjs)  that  is  the  slave  who  stole  you  away  from  here 
when  four  years  old,  and  sold  you  to  my  father  for  six  miuse. 
He  gave  you,  when  a  little  child,  to  me  a  little  child  for  my 
own  service.  He  {pointing  to  Stalagmits)  has  made  a  con- 
fession, for  we  have  brought  him  back  from  Elis. 

Tyi^ J).  How,  where's  Megio'f  son  ?  Phil.  Look  fiow;  in- 
doors is  your  own  brother. 

Tyni>.  How  do  you  say  ?  Have  you  brought  that  captive 
son  of  his  ? 

Phil.  Why,  he's  iu-doors,  I  say. 

Tyot).  By  iny  Mth,  you've  done  both  well  and  happily. 

Phil,  (^pointing  to  Hegio).  Now  this  is  your  own  father; 
(pointing  to  Stalagmus)  this  is  the  thief  who  stole  you 
when  a  little  cbild. 

Tytstd.  But  now,  grown  up,  I  shaU  give  him  grown  up  to 
the  executioner  for  his  thieving. 

Phil.  He  deserves  it.  Ttnd.  I'  faith,  I'll  deservedly  give 
him  the  reward  that  he  deserves.  {To  He  gig.)  But  tell  me, 
I  pray  you,  are  you  my  father  ? 

Heg.  I  am  he,  my  son.  Ttnd.  Now,  at  length,  I  bring  it 
to  my  recollection,  when  I  reconsider  with  myself:  troth,  I  do 
now  at  last  recall  to  memory  that  I  had  heard,  as  though 
through  a  mist,  that  my  father  was  called  Hegio. 

Heg.  I  am  he.  Phil.  I  pray  that  your  son  may  be  light- 
ened of  these  fetters,  and  this  slave  be  loaded  with  them. 

Heg.  I'm  resolved  that  that  shall  be  the  first  thing  at- 
tended to.  Let's  go  in-doors,  that  the  blacksmith  may  be 
sent  for,  in  order  that  I  may  remove  those  fetters  from  you, 
imd  give  them  to  him.     {They  go  into  the  house,) 

Stal.  To  one  who  has  no  savings  of  his  own,  you'll  be 
rightly  doing  so^. 

»  Ofse^theUgUy—Yer.  1013.  He  says,  "  You  can  only  resemble  a  parent 
in  the  fact  that  you  have  given  me  the  op|!ortunity  of  seeing  the  light  of  day,  by 
taking  me  out  of  the  dark  stone-quarries." 

2  Be  rightly  doing  so — Ver.  1033.  Stalagmus  chooses  to  take  the  word  "  dem," 


y  Google 


476  CAPTITI ;  THE  CAPTIVES.  Act  V. 

The  CoMPAJsrr  of  Playebs  coming  forward. 
Spectators,  this  play  is  founded  on  cHaste  manners.  No 
wenching  is  there  in  this,  and  no  intriguing,  no  exposure  of  a 
child,  no  cheating  out  of  money ;  and  no  young  man  in 
love  here  make  his  mistress  free  without  his  father's  know- 
ledge. The  Poets  find  but  few  Comedies^  of  this  kind,  where 
good  men  might  become  better.  Now,  if  it  pleases  you,  and 
if  we  have  pleased  you,  and  have  not  been  tedious,  do  you 

S've  this  sign  of  it :  you  who  wish  that  chaste  manners  should 
ive  their  reward,  give  us  your  applause. 

**  may  give/*  used  by  Hegio  in  its  literal  sense,  and  sorlilj  replies,  '*  I  hare  no- 
thing of  my  own  by  way  of  savings,  *  peculiom,*  so  I  am  the  very  person  to  whom 
yon  onght  te  give.** 

^  Find  hut  few  Comedies)— ^ec,  1038.  He  here  confesses  that  he  does  not 
pretend  to  frame  the  plots  of  his  Plays  himself,  but  that  he  goes  to  Greek  sources 
for  them;  and  forgetting  that '* beggars  must  not  be  choosers,**  he  oompUins 
that  so  very  few  of  the  Greek  Comedies  are  founded  upon  chaste  manners.  In- 
deed, this  Play  is  justly  deemed  the  most  pure  and  innocent  of  all  the  Plays  of 
Plautns;  and  the  Company  are  quite  justified  in  the  commendations  whidi,  in 
their  Epilogue,  they  bestow  on  it,  as  the  author  has  carried  out  the  promise  which 
he  made  in  the  Prologue  (with  only  four  slight  exceptions),  of  presenting  them 
with  an  immaculate  Play. 


y  Google 


ASINARU ;  OR,  THE  ASS-DEALER. 


Bramatis  ^^trsonar. 

DsMMSBTVS,  an  aged  Athenian. 
Abotrippus,  hia  son,  in  love  with  Phileninm. 

Senrants  of  Demaenetus. 


LiBANUS,      1 

Leokida,    i 


Thb  Ass-Dealer. 

DiABOLUs,  an  Athenian  Captain,  the  riyal  of  Argjrrippus. 

A  Parasite,  a  dependant  of  Diabolns. 

A  Boy. 

Artemona,  wife  of  DemsBnetos. 
CLBiERBTA,  a  procuress. 
Philenium,  daughter  of  Clesereta. 

^— Athens,  before  the  house  of  Cle^reta  ;  the  house  of  Demjbnetvs  is  a 
little  way  down  another  street,  and  in  view  of  the  Audience. 


y  Google 


THE  SUBJECT. 


Arotbippus,  the  son  of  Demsenetns,  is  violently  in  love  with  Phileninm,  a 
joxvag  woman,  who  is  living  with  her  mother,  Clesereta,  a  procuress.  The  latter 
has  made  an  agreement  with  a  Captain,  of  the  name  of  Diabolns,  to  transfer 
Phileninm  to  him  tor  twenty  nmise,  on  condition,  however,  that  if  Argyrippos 
shall  first  pay  that  sum,  he  shall  have  her.  Argyrippns,  having  exhausted  all 
his  own  resources,  applies  to  his  father,  Denuenetos,  an  over-indulgent  and 
immoral  old  man,  and  requests  him  to  furnish  him  with  twenty  minse.  Denue- 
netus  is  married  to  Artemona,  a  rich  woman,  and  is  totally  dependant  on  the 
wiU  of  herself  and  her  favourite  slave,  the  chamberlain  Saurea.  Being  desti- 
tute of  money,  Demsenetus  orders  his  servant,  Libanus,  by  some  means  or 
other  to  cheat  his  mistress  or  the  chamberlain  out  of  that  sum.  Just  then  an 
ass-dealer  arrives,  to  pay  to  Saurea  twenty  minee,  the  price  of  some  asses  which 
he  has  previously  purchased.  Libanus  then  arranges  with  his  fellow-servant, 
Leonida,  that  the  latter  shall  persooata  Samea,  and  so  receive  the  money  firom 
the  ass-dealer.  This  is  done,  and  the  money  is  paid  to  Leonida,  in  the  presence  of 
Demsenetus,  who  assures  the  dealer  that  Leonids  really  la  the  person  to  whom 
the  money  is  payable.  This  sum  is  then  given  to  Argyrippus,  but  with  the 
disgraceful  stipulation  that  for  one  day  his  father  shall  enjoy  the  company  of 
Philenium.  This  he  submits  to,  and  the  three  sit  down  to  a  banquet  The 
Captain  discovers  this,  and  sends  his  Parasite  to  inform  Artemona  of  her 
husband's  conduct.  She  accordingly  accompanies  the  Parasite,  and  disooveis 
her  husband  in  the  company  of  his  son  and  the  young  woman ;  after  soondlf 
rating  him,  she  leads  him  off;  while  Argyrippus  remains  in  possession  of  Piii- 
lenium. 


y  Google 


ASINARIA ; 
OR,  THE  ASS-DEALER. 


THE  ACROSTIC  ARGUMENT. 

[Supposed  to  have  been  written  by  Priscian  the  Grammarian.] 

The  son  in  love  (^Amanti)^  the  old  man,  who  lives  under  (Sub)  Ms  wife's  control, 
wishes  to  help  him  with  money;  therefore  (^Itaque),  some  money  that  has  been 
brought  inpayment  for  the  asses  for  Saurea  he  orders  to  be  paid  {Numerari) 
to  his  servant  Leonida.  This  is  carried  to  (Ad)  his  mistress,  and  the  son 
yields  her  hrouia  to  kis  father.  His  rival  (Rmmts)  is  furious  on  account 
of  the  w(»nan  thus  taken  from  him:  he  (Is)  tells  all  the  matter,  through  the 
Parasite,  to  the  wife.  The  wife  rushes  (Adcurrit)  to  the  place,  and  drags  her 
husband  from  the  den. 


THE   PEOLOaUE. 

Attenb  now,  Spectators,  if  you  please,  forthwith  to  this, 
and  may  this  matter  turn  out  fortunately  for  me  and  for  your- 
selves, and  for  this  company,  and  for  our  employers^,  and  for 
our  managers^.  Now,  crier,  do  you  at  once  make  aU  the  people 
give  attentwe  ear.  Come,  be  seated  now,  only  be  careful 
that  'tis  not  for  nought.  Now  I  wiU  teU  you  why  I  have 
come  forward  here,  and  what  my  intention  is,  that  you  may 
know  the  name  of  this  play.  Eor,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  plot, 
it  really  is  a  short  one.  Now  I  will  teU  you  what  I  said  I  was 
wishful  to  inform  you  upon.  The  name  of  this  play  in  Greek 

^  For  cur  employers) — ^Ver.3.  By  "  dominis"  he  probably  means  the^diles, 
by  whom  the  actors  were  engaged  for  the  public  entertainment. 

2  And  for  our  managers) — ^Ver,  3.  The  "  conductores  "  were  probably  the  leaders 
or  managers  of  the  company,  who  made  the  contract  with  the  Jidiles. 


y  Google 


480  ASIKABIA ;  Act  L 

is  Ona^os^ — Demophflua*  composed  it — Marcus'  Plautus 
turned  it  into  Latin.  He  wishes  it  to  be  called  Asinaria^  if 
by  your  leaves  it  may  be  so.  In  this  play  there  is  both  plesr 
santry  and  fun.  'lis  a  droll  story ;  kindly  lend  me  your 
attention ;  may  Mars,  too,  as,  full  oft  at  other  times  he  ha9 
donCy  so  give  you  now  his  aid. 

Act  I. — ScBKB  I. 

^ter  DEM-asNETUS  and  IjIBASV b,  from  the  house  of  the 
former. 

Lib.  As  you  desire  your  own  only  son  to  survive  your  own 
existence,  prosperous,  and  living  on ;  so  by  your  lengthened 
years,  and  oy  that  wife  of  yours  of  whom  you  stand  in  awe, 
do  I  conjure  you,  that  if  this  day  you  have  said  anything 
that's  false  against  myself,  your  wiie  may  then  survive  your 
own  existence,  and  that,  she  living,  you,  still  alive,  may  come 
to  utter  destruction^. 

Dem.  By  the  Gods  above^,  as  to  what  you  seek  to  know,  I 
see  that  I  must,  perforce,  speak  out,  whatever  you  question 
me  upon,  being;  thus  conjured;  so  determine<Uy  have  you 
accosted  me,  that  I  reaUy  do  not  dare  otherwise  than  to 
disclose  eveiything  to  you  making  all  these  enquiries.  Say 
then  at  once  what  it  is  that  you  desire  so  much  to  know ;  as 
I  myself  shall  know,  so  will  I  let  you  know. 

» la  Onago8)—Yer,  10.  "  Onagos."    The  Greek  name  for  an  "  afia-driver." 

'  DemophUua) — ^Ver.  11.  Ko  particulars  are  known  of  Demophilns  the  Comic 
Writer.  Some  wonid  suggest  Diphilus  as  the  reading  here :  he  is  mentioned  in  the 
Adelphi  of  Terence,  and  was  a  Gomic  Poet,  contemporary  with  Menander. 

*  Marcus) — ^Ver.  11.  Marcns  is  the  word  nsed  here.  It  is  supposed  to  be  a 
cormption  of,  or  an  abbreviation  for,  Maccius  or  M.  Accios,  whichever  was  the 
prsenomen  of  the  poet 

.  *  Asinaria) — Ver.  12.  "  Asinaria"  seems  to  be  the  nominatiye  feminuM  singnlar 
or  neater  plnral  of  the  adjective  "  asinarins,**  of  or  "  rekting  to  asses.** 

s  Come  to  vtter  deitmctiony-Yer.  22.  "Pestem  obpetas.*'  Literally,  "meet 
with  a  plagne."  This  expression  held  a  somewhat  similar  rank  with  oar  oo- 
coorteoas  invitation,  "  Go  to  the  devil" 

•By  the  Gods  oftwe)— Ver.  23.  "Per  Denm  Fidiam.**  Literally,  "by  the 
God  Fidins."  This  God  had  a  Temple  in  the  Capitol  at  Borne.  He  was  repe- 
sented  as  havmg  Honor  on  bis  right  hand,  and  Trath  on  the  left.  He  is  men- 
tioned by  Ovid,  in  the  Sixth  Book  c^  the  Fasti,  as  having  the  names  also  of  Saneos 
and  Semo.  He  was  also  called  Sangns  and  Sanctns,  and  b  generally  mippoeedto 
have  been  the  Sabine  Hercnles.  Saint  Angostine  saya  that  he  was  «  kii^  of  t)M 
%abines,  whom  they  had  deified. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  I.  OB,  THE  ASS-DEALEB.  481 

Lib.  Troth  now,  prithee  answer  me  seriously  what  I  ask 
you ;  take  care  that  you  tell  me  no  falsehood. 

Dem.  "Why,  then,  don't  you  ask  ? 

Lib.  Will  you,  then,  he  sending  me  there,  where  stone 
grinds  stone^  ? 

Dem.  What  place  is  that  ?  Or  where  in  the  world  is  that 
place? 

Lib.  Where  worthless  men  are  weeping,  who  breakfast 
upon  pearled  barley^. 

Dem.  What  Wisk  place  is,  or  where  it  is,  I  cannot  under- 
stand, where  worthless  men  are  .weeping,  who  breakfast  upon 
pearled  barley. 

Lib.  Why,  iu  the  islands  of  club-land  and  rattle-chain^, 
where  dead  oxen  attack  living  men. 

Dem.  I'  faith,  I  now  understand,  Libanus,  what  place  it  is ; 
that  perhaps  you  mean,  where  the  pearled  barley  is  prepared: 

Lib.  O  dear :  I'm  not  speaking  of  that,  i'  faith,  nor  do 
I  wish  to  speak  of  it.  Troth  now,  prithee,  do  spit  out*  the 
words  that  you  have  spoken. 

Dem.  Be  it  SO;  you  shall  be  indulged.  (JRe  coughs  and  spits.) 

Lib.  Come,  come— hawk  away.  Dem.  What,  still  more  ? 
{8mts  on.) 

liiB.  Troth  now  ;  prithee,  do  go  on — still  more. 

Dem.  What — ^from  the  very  bottom  of  my  throat  ?  {Spits.) 

Lib.  Even  more  stiU.    Dem.  Why,  how  long  ?    {Spits!) 

Lib.  I  want  you,  even  to  the  death 

Dem.  Take  you  care  of  a  woful  mishap,  if  you  please. 

Lib.  Of  your  wife,  I  mean,  not  of  yourself. 

Dem.  Por  that  speech,  I  give  you  leave  to  be  free  from 
apprehension. 

1  Stone  grinds  stone)— Yer.  31.  He  alludes  to  the  "  pistrintun,"  or  hand-mill, 
where  refractory  slaves  were  oflen  sent  and  set  to  grind  the  com,  which  was  a 
verj  laborious  employment. 

*  Pearled  6ar%)— Ver.  33.  "Polenta,"  This  was  barley-meal,  dried  before 
the  fire,  soaked  in  water  for  a  night,  and  then  baked. 

»  Clufhland  and  ratde-cTiain) — ^Ver.  36.  "  Fustitudinas,  ferricrepinas."  These 
are  words  craned  by  the  anthor  for  the  occasion.  In  the  next  line  he  alludes  to 
flogi^g  with  thongs  of  hide. 

*  Do  spit  out) — Ver.  41.  The  ancients  signified  extreme  disgust  by  spitting. 
Libanus  is  so  frightened  at  the  bare  "  idea  "  of  the  "  pistrinum,"  or  "  mill,"  that 
he  deems  the  attempt  to  mention  it  as  of  bad  omen,  and  begs  that  his  master  will 
apt  away  from  him  the  very  notion  of  it. 

2  I 


y  Google 


i82  JLfliBbuuA;  AeiL 

Lib.  Maj  the  G:Qd8  grant  jcm  wkaJtej^xjuxL  deabe. 

Deh.  In  return,  give  ma  yova  attaatioBu  Whj  i^uld  I 
ask  tMs  of  you  ?  Or  why  sluould  I  tfaresteta  you»  beeauas  you 
htve  not  made  me  acquaintetil  nitli  it  p  CNf  way,  in  fine,  akinild 
I  censure  my  son  as  other  fathers  do  P 

Lib.  What  new  a&br  is  this  ?  (Ande^  I  wonder  miKh 
what  it  is,  and  I'm  in  dread  what  the  upshot  of  it  may  lie.. 

BsH.  Li  fact,  I'm  now  aware  tiiat  my  soa'a  in  love  with 
that  Courtesan  Fhilenium,  that  lives  dose  hf.  Is  not  thk  as 
I  aay,  libanns  ? 

Lib.  You  are  upon  the  ;r^t  tracks  anchi  ia  the  &«!.. 
But  a  dreadful  malady  has  overtaken  him. 

Bex.  Whatis  themalad|y  P  Lib.  Why,  that  hia  pi^tents 
don't  equal  his  promises. 

DxM.  Are  you^  then,,  oske  who  aanslia  myr  son  in  his 
amours  P 

Lib.  I  really  am^  and  our  Leoadda  is  another. 

Dem.  r  Mth,  you  do  kindly,  sad  you  gain  tkaidEa  fcomme. 
But  this  wife  of  mine,  Libanus,  don't  you  kzEOir  what  sect  of 
a  peraoigk  she  is  P 

Lib.  You  ace  the  first  to  experieooeit,  hoti  we  give  a  guess 
beforehand. 

Dem.  I  confesa  that  she  i&  troulalesome^  and  mat  ta  be 
pleaaed. 

Ltb*.  You  say  that  later  than  I  beliered  you  m  iL. 

Dem.  All  parents^  Libanus^  who  listem  to  nije,  will  siiow 
indulgence,  to  their  children,  inasmuch  a»  they  wil  find  tiieir 
sons  more  kindly  disposed  and  m&re  affectionate ;  and  that 
do  I  demre  to  do  myself..  I  wish  to  be  loved  by  mine ;  I  wish 
myself  to  be  like  my  father,  who,  for  my  sake,  himadf  in  ii» 
disguise  of  a  ship-master,  carried  off  from  a  procurer  a 
female  with  whom  I  was  in  love;  nor  was  he  ashamed,  at 
that  time  of  life,  to  devise  stratagems,  and  to  purchase  wiiJi 
good  turns  me,  his  so%  for  himself .  These,  ways  of  my 
father  have  I  resolved  ta  imitate.  IPor  tcif-day  my  son  Aigy- 
sippus  haai  entreated  me  to  gi?e.  him  a  vw^fky  e£  money  far 
his  amours ;  and  I  very  muc£  wish  in  that  to  oblige  my  sun. 
I  wish  to  forward  his  amours ;  I  wish  him  to  be  fimd  of  myse^ 
his  father.  Although  his  mother  ke^  him  strictly,  and  witii 
a  tight  reiuy,  as  fathers  have  been  in  the  habit  of  domg,.  all  that 
I  dismiss .  Especially  as  he  has .  deemed,  me  des^mg,  for  hiBL 


y  Google 


Se.  I.  OB,  THS  A«9-B£AL£B.  48B 

to  entrust;  it  to  me^  I  ougbt  to  pfay  all  due  regard  to  Mb  feel- 
ings. Inasmuch  as  he  has  applied  to  me,  as  it  is  right  that 
a  resped^  son  should  do,  I  wish  him  to  have  some  money 
for  him  to  gi^e  to  his'  mistress  *  *  •  ♦  • 
•  I^ra.  You  are  desiring  that  which  I  find  you  are  de- 
aaaring  to  no  purpose.  Your  wife  brought  her  servant 
SsHTea  with  her  on  her  marriage^,  who  has  more  in  his  con- 
trol than  you  haire* 

DsM.  i  received  money  tvUh  her,  cmd  for  the  portion  I  sold 
my  authoiity.  !^fow  I'll  compress'  into  a  few  words  whair  I 
want  of  you ;  my  son  is  now  in  need'  oi  twenty  silver  minse : 
do- you  manage  that  it  may  be  forthwith  foundyw-  him. 

Lib.  Erom  what  place  in  the  world  ?  Dem.  Cheat  me  of 
ihem. 

Lib.  You  are  talking  downright  Bonsense.  You  are  bid^ 
ding^  me  take  the  clothes  from  off  a  naked  mam.  I,  cheat  you  ? 
— eome  novj\  fty  you  without  wings,  please.  What,  am  I  to 
cheat  you  who  have  nothing  in  your  power  for  vour  own  self? 
Unless  you  ha™«e  first  cheartad  your  wife  out  of  something. 

Dem.  Impose  upon  or  rob  myself  in  any  way  you  can,  my 
wife  in  any  way,  my  servant  Saurea  in  any  way.  I  promise 
yaw  that  it  shall  not  prove  to  your  detriment,  if  you  effect  it 


Lib.  On  the  same  principle  you  might  bid  me  to  fish  in  the 
air,  and  to  hunt  with  a  javelin  in  the  midst  of  the  sea. 

i)E]E.  Take  Leonida  as  your  coadjutor^ ;  devise  some  plan 
or  other,  think  of  some  expedient :  bring  it  about  that  my  son 
this  day  gets  some  money  to  give  his  mistress. 

Lib.  What  say  you,  Demsenetus  #  #  # 

♦  *  if  the  foe  should  intercept  me,  will  you 

Tsamom  me  P 

l>ms:.  I  will  ransom  you.  !I^ib,  Then  do  you  attend  to 
something  else,  whatever  you  please. 

1  Tf%S  her  on  her  marridgey-^Yer,  87.  "  Dotalem."  The  husband  was  master 
of  the  other  slaves  in  the  household;  but  the  ^*  dotalis  "  was  under  the  sole  con- 
trol'of  the  mistress.  Aulns  CTellius,  in  his  Serenteenth  Book,  calls  him  "servus 
reeepticinsy'^probablj,  either  because  it  was  his  Business  to  receive  whatever  was 
due  to  his  mistress,  or  fh)m  his  being  received  into  the  house  in  preference  to  all 
other  slaves. 

«  Four  co<«5^rfor)— Ver.  r03.  "  Optio"  was  originaily  the  name  of  the  lieu- 
tenant, or  adjutant,  who  was  chosen  by  the  centurion  in  th«  Eoman  armies,  to 
assist  hnn  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 

2i2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


484  ASINABIA ;  Act  I. 

Dek.  I'm  off  to  the  Forum,  unless  you  msh  for  anything. 

Lib.  Be  off — why  are  you  not  walking^  ? 

Dem.  And  do  you  hear,  too ?    Lib.  Well  now. 

Dem.  If  I  want  you  for  anything,  where  will  you  be  ? 

Lib.  Wherever  it  shall  be  agreable  to  my  feelings.  Bealljr, 
there's  not  a  person  that  I  shall  stand  in  dread  of  from  this 
time  forward,  for  fear  he  might  be  able  to  do  me  an  injury, 
since  in  your  discourse  you  have  disclosed  to  me  all  your 
sentiments.  Why,  your  own  self  even  I  don't  stand  much  in 
awe  of,  if  I  carry  this  out.  I'll  go  where  I  intended,  and 
there  I'll  commune  upon  my  plans. 

Dem.  Do  you  hear  me  ?  I  shall  be  with  Archibulus,  the 
banker. 

Lib.  In  the  Forum,  you  mean  ?  Dem.  There,  if  there 
shall  be  any  occasion  for  me^. 

Lib.  I'll  remember  it.  {Exit, 

Dem.  {to  himself).  Not  any  servant  can  there  be  more 
artful  than  this  fellow,  nor  yet  more  crafty,  nor  one  that  it 
is  more  difficult  for  you  to  be  on  your  guard  against.  If  you 
want  anything  well  managed,  entrust  it  to  this  same  fellow ; 
he'd  rather  he  should  die  in  wretchedness,  than  not  have  that 
quite  completed  which  he  has  promised.  For  I  know  that 
this  money  is  as  surely  forthcoming  for  my  son,  as  that  I  look 
upon  this  «flwwc  walking-stick.  But  why  am  I  delaying  to  go 
to  the  Forum  where  I  had  intended  *  #  • 

*  *  *  {Exit, 

Sceis^e  n. — Enter  AB,&Tnii?i?VB,fr(m  the  house  of  Cle^beta, 
addressing  her  within. 
Aeq.  Is't  thus  it  is, — ^me  to  be  shut  out  of  doors  P  Is  this 
the  reward  that's  given  to  me  who  deserve  so  highly  of  you? 
To  him  who  deserves  well  you  are  unkind,  to  him  who  deserves 
iU  you  are  indulgent.     But%o  your  own  misfortune,  for  now 

1  Why  areyou  not  walking)— Ver.  ItO.  '^  Etiamne  ambulas."  Thornton,  quoting 
from  Limiers,  says,  in  reference  to  this  passage,  "  This  is  a  banter  of  the  slave's, 
who  is  rallying  his  master  on  the  pain  he  is  in,  in  walking  supported  by  his  cratch- 
stick.  There  is  a  distinction  made  between '  ire/  which,  the  grammarians  tell  us, 
is  used  to  express  walking  fast,  and  *ambulare,'  'to  walk  slowly,'  or  *step  by 

step.'  " 

^  Any  occavUm for  me)— Yer.  119.  "Si  quid  opus  fuerit."  This  expresskm, 
equivalent  to  ours, "  if  I  am  wanted,"  was  made  use  of  by  the  Bomans  when  they 
had  the  intention  of  engaging  in  some  occupation  of  importance. 


y  Google 


Sc.  II.  OB,  THE  ABS-DEALEB.  485 

jBrom  this  spot  will  I  go  to  the  Triumvirs^,  and  there  I'll 
take  care  your  names  shall  be.  I'll  punish  capitally  your- 
self and  your  daughter,  you  enticers,  pests,  and  destruction 
of  young  men !  For,  compa/red  with  you^  the  sea  is  not  the 
sea ;  you  are  a  most  dangerous  sea.  For  on  the  sea  did  I 
find  it,  here  have  I  been  cleaned  out  of  my  wealth.  What 
I  have  given,  and  what  kindnesses  I  have  done,  I  find  them 
all  valueless  for  good,  and  thrown  away.  But  from  hence- 
forth, whatever  harm  I  shall  be  able  to  do  you,  I  will  do 
it,  and  do  it  at  your  deserts.  I*  faith,  I'll  reduce  you  to  the 
verge  of  poverty,  that  state  from  which  you  have  risen.  By 
my  troth,  I'll  make  you  to  know  what  you  now  are,  and  what 
you  once  w*ere ;  w^hat  you  were  before  I  visited  that  datiykter 
of  yov/ra,  and,  in  my  passion,  bestowed  upon  her  my  affec- 
tion ;  on  coarse  bread^  you  were  enjoying  your  life,  in  rags, 
a/nd  in  want.  And  if  these  you  had,  especial  thanks  did 
you  return  to  all  the  Divinities.  Now,  bad  woman,  you  the 
same  person,  when  'tis  better  with  you,  don't  know  me 
through  whose  means  it  is  so.  From  a  wild  beast,  I'll  make 
you  tame  through  hunger,  only  trust  me  for  that^.  But  I 
have  no  reason  to  blame  your  daughter  herself;  she  does  not 
deserve  it  in  the  least.  She  acts  by  your  command ;  she  obeys 
your  bidding ;  you  are  her  mother,  you  too  her  mistress.  I'll 
revenge  myself  on  you ;  I'll  ruin  you ;  as  you  are  deserving, 
and  as  you  merit  at  my  hands.  But  look  now,  the  hag,  how 
she  really  doesn't  think  me  worthy  for  her  to  come  to  and 
address  and  deprecate  my  resentment.  But,  see,  the 
enticer's  coming  out  at  last,  I  think.  Here,  before  the 
door,  I'U  address  her  in  my  own  fashion,  as  I  please,  since 
I'm  not  allowed  to  do  so  within. 

»  To  the  Triumvirs)— 'Yer,  134.  The  "  Tresviri,"  or  "  Triumviri,"  were  in  duty 
bound  to  receive  informations  relative  to  public  morals,  and  were  empowered 
to  inflict  summary  punishment  on  persons  of  the  rank  and  occupation  of 
Cleferet^.  They  have  been  more  fully  referred  to  in  a  previous  Note.  It  will  not 
be  forgotten  that,  though  the  scene  is  in  Athens,  Plautus  is  making  reference  to 
Boman  customs. 

*  On  coarse  bread) — Ver.  145.  "  Sordido— pane."  According  to  the  Com- 
mentators, this  means  brown  bread  with  the  bran  in  it.  Terence,  in  his  £a- 
nuchus,  calls  it  "  panis  ater,"  ''  black  bread."    Juvenal  calls  it  **  dog's  bread." 

»  Trust  me  for  that)— Wer.  148.  "  Me  specta  mode."  Literally,  "  only  look  to 
me." 


y  Google 


466  AnnfAHTA ;  Aet  £. 

ScEiTB  in. — lifUer  OlJ^MKETA,,Jrom  her  ketcse, 

Cle.  If  any  purchaser  should  come,  he  could  not  caany 
him  away  from  me  each  single  word  of  those  for  gold  Phi- 
lippean  pieces.  What  you  say  wrongfully  against  us  is 
good  gold  and  silver.  Your  heart  is  locked  up  here  witli 
us,  at  the  helm  of  Cupid.  With  oars  and  with  sails  make 
haste  and  fly  as  fast  as  you  can;  the  further  you  betake 
yourself  to  sea,  the  more  the  tide  will  bring  you  back  to 
harbour. 

Aeg.  I'  faith,  I'll  be  depriving  this  custom-house  officer*  of 
his  dues.  Prom  henceforth  I'U  persist  in  treating  you  as  jou 
have  deserved  of  me  and  mine,  since  you  have  treated  nae 
not  as  I  deserve,  in  excluding  me  from  your  house. 

Cle.  I  know  that  that  is  rather  said  with  the  tongue, 
than  that  it  wiU  happen  in  deed. 

Aeg.  I  alone  have  brought  you  from  obscurity  and  from 
want ;  if  I  alone  patronize  you,  you  can  never  return  suff!' 
dent  thanks. 

Cle.  Do  you  still  be  the  only  one  to  patronize  me,  if  you 
alone  will  always  give  me  what  I  ask.  Do  you  always  keep 
what  has  been  promised  you,  on  this  condition,  that  you 
surpass  others  in  your  presents. 

Aeg.  What  limit  is  there  to  he  to  giving  ?  Eor  really  you 
can  never  be  satisfied;  the  moment  that  you've  received 
something,  not  very  long  after,  you  are  devising  somethiiyg 
for  you  to  be  asking  for. 

Cle.  What  limit  is  there  to  he  to  your  enjoying  yourself, 
and  to  your  indulging  your  amour  ?  Can  you  never  be  satis- 
fied? The  moment  that  you  have  sent  her  Tiome,  tbafc 
instant,  you  are  directly  asking  me  to  send  her  back  to  you. 

Abg.  In  ^t,  I  have  given  whatever  you  have  demanded 
of  me. 

Cle.  And  I  have  sent  the  damsel  to  you.  A  requital  has 
been  given,  like  for  like  ;  a  return  for  the  money. 

1  This  custom-house  officer)— Yer.  163.  "  Istnm  portitorem  privabo  portiliorio.^ 
Glenreta  has  just  mentioned  ^'  portas,"  **  the  harbour,'*  meaning  her  ewn  heose, 
to  which,  despite  of  himself,  Argyrippas  will,  by  his  own  passion,  be  broni^  kttek 
at  last.  He  takes  up  the  metaphor,  and  says  that  she,  the  Umding-waster  (por- 
titor),  or  eofitom-hoose  officer,  shall  not,  however,  get  her  dmes ;  msamiig,  that  he 
is  determined  not  to  let  her  have  any  more  of  his  money. 


y  Google 


Se.  in.  OB,  THIS  JlOI^BXALEB.  4W 

As0.  YcMi^xeajfcine  btdly.  Gx^x.  WI17  do  you  blame  me  if 
I  do  my  duty  ?  For  isowhere  is  it  either  feigned  *»  ttory  or 
repres^Qited  in  pictures  or  written  in  poems,  where  a  pro- 
caxteBs,  who  wiahes  to  thriTe,  treabs  any  lover  well. 

JL&e.  Still,  *twere  right  for  you  to  show  faTOur  to  me  at 
least,  that  I  might  last  the  longer  for  you. 

CxE.  Don't  you  know,  the  woman  that  diows  fayour  to  a 
lover,  that  same  woman  shows  litde  favour  to  herself?  Just 
liJ&e  a  £sh,  so  is  a  lover  to  a  procuress ;  he's  good  for  nothing  if 
he  isn't  &edi.  Then  it  has  juice,  then  it  has  sweetness ;  in  any 
faiAion  you  like  you  may  season  it,  either  stewed  or  roasted ; 
in  any  waj  you  will,  you  may  turn  it.  So  the  lomer  ;  he*s 
ready  to  give,  he  longs  far  something  to  be  asked  of  him,  for 
there  it'a  taken  from  a  foil  stock,  nor  does  he  know  what 
he's  giving,  or  what  mischi^  he's  doing.  Of  this  matter 
lioes  the  new  lo^er  think ;  he  wishes  himself  to  please  his 
BUstroBS,  he  wishes  to  j^leage  we,  he  wishes  to  please  her 
lady's  maid^,  he  wishes  to  pleate  the  men-servants,  he  wishes 
iopleeuethe  maid-servants  as  well,  and  even  my  dog  does  he 
caxesfl,  that  when  ifc  sees  him,  it  may  be  delighted.  I  tell 
the  truth;  it  shows  cleverness  for  every  person  to  be  fair- 
dealing  for  his  own  advantage. 

Ajlo.  I've  thoroughly  learned  that  this  is  true,  to  my  own 
^^eat  misfortune. 

Cias.  I'  &.ith,  if  you  now  had  anything  to  give,  you'd  be 
uttering  different  remarks ;  now,  since  you've  got  nothing, 
you  expect  to  be  having  her  by  means  of  harsh  language. 

A&0.  'Tis  not  my  way.  Cle.  Nor  yet  mine,  indeed,  i' 
faith,  to  be  sending  her  to  you  for  nothing ;  but  this  shall 
be  done  out  of  regard  for  your  youthful  age  and  your  own 
tsake,  since  you  have  rather  been  the  cause  of  profit  to  us 
than  of  reputation  to  yourself.  If  two  talents  of  sUver^  are 
paid  me  down,  reckoned  in  my  hand,  this  night  will  I  grant 
you  for  nothing,  as  a  present,  by  reason  of  my  respect  for  you. 

*■  Set  hd^s  fncdd) — ^V«r.  187.  "  PedisBCfaa"  seems  to  hare  been  the  name  of 
the  female-servsnt,  iviiose  dcrty  it  was  to  be  eonstantlj  in  attendance  on  her 
HBstiiess ;  and  idio  probablf  followed  her  in  the  street,  whence  her  name. 

*  Twot(dmt8  ofg&very-'Yer.  197.  The  Attic  silver,  or  Selonian  talent,  con- 
tamed  78-lOOth  parts  of  the  old  Attic  talent.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  hag 
IsliereiiddiagjnstoaehaBdTed  "min«*'to  her  demand;  bnt  it  is  clear  that 
^e  is  only  doing  so  to  provoke  Aigyxippus,  and  to  anrase  herself  with  bis 
distress. 


y  Google 


488  ASHTABiA ;  Act  L 

Abo.  What  if  I  haven't  it  ?  Cle.  I'll  beliere  that  you 
haven't  it — still,  she  shall  go  to  another. 

Aeg.  Where  is  that  which  I  have  given  you  aiieadj  ? 

Cls.  Spent ;  for  if  it  was  remaining  to  me,  the  dcanB^ 
should  be  sent  to  you,  and  I  should  never  ask  for  anything. 
Daylight,  water,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  night,  these  things  I 
purchase  not  with  money ;  the  rest,  whatever  we  wish  to 
enjoy,  we  purchase  on  Grecian  tnist^.  When  we  ask  bread 
of  the  baker,  wine  from  the  wineshop — ^if  they  receive  the 
money,  they  give  their  wares ;  the  same  principle  do  I  go  upon. 
My  hands  always  have  eyes  in  them ;  they  believe  what  they 
see.  There's  an  old  saying,  "  trusting  is  good  for  nought^  ;" 
you  know  whose  it  is — I  say  no  more. 

Aeo.  Now  I'm  clean  stripped,  you  teU  me  another  tale  ;  a 
very  different  one,  I  say,  you  give  me  now  from  formerly, 
when  I  was  making  presents ;  a  different  one  from  formerly, 
when  with  kindness  and  good  words  you  used  to  entice  me  to 
your  house.  Then  did  your  house  even  smile  upon  me,  when  I 
used  to  come  to  you.  You  used  to  say  that  I  alone  of  all  loved 
you  and  her.  When  I  had  given  anything,  just  like  the  young 
ones  of  a  pigeon  were  you  both  upon  my  lips ;  and  all  your 
likings  were  according  to  my  own  liking.  Tou  always  kept 
close  to  me  ;  whatever  I  requested,  whatever  I  wished,  you 
used  to  do ;  what  I  didn't  wish  and  forbade,  that,  with  care- 
fulness, you  used  to  avoid,  nor  did  you  first  venture  to  attempt 
to  do  it.  Now,  you  jades,  you  don't  much  care  either  what  I 
do  wish  or  what  I  don't  wish. 

Cle.  Don't  you  know  ?     This  calling  of  ours  is  very  like 

1  On  Grecian  frws^)— Ver.  203.  The  Greeks  were  so  noted  for  their  want  of 
punctoalitj  in  their  payments^  that  it  became  the  general  rule  among  them  not 
to  give  credit.  Consequently,  "  Grecian  trust "  became  a  proverbial  saying  for 
"  ready  money." 

2  Trusting  is  good  for  novghf) — ^Ver.  207.  "  Nihili  cocio  est."  The  meaning 
of  this  passage  is  obvious,  that  "  trusting  is  bad ;"  but  the  signification  of  the  word 
**  cocio "  has  puzzled  the  Commentators.  Gronovius,  with  some  probability, 
suggests  that  it  is  the  old  form  of  the  word  " cautio;"  meaning  "one  who gots 
upon  trust."  It  may  either  mean  that,  or  "  trusting,"  or  "  giving  tick,"  as  we 
familiarly  term  it;  indeed,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  word  "  cocio"  may  have 
been  a  cant  name  for  *'  credit."  From  the  remark  of  Clesereta,  we  may  condode 
that  this  was  a  proverbial  expression,  which  had  ori^nated  in  being  used  by  some 
famous  person,  or  in  some  celebrated  play  of  that  day,  all  remembrance  of  whidi 
has  now  perished. 


y  Google 


Sc.  in.  OB,  THE  ASS-BSAIiEB.  489 

that  of  the  fowler.  The  fowler,  when  he  has  prepared  the  spot, 
sprmkles  the  food  about.  The  birds  are  accustomed  to  the 
gpot.  'Tis  necessary  for  him^  to  make  an  outlay,  who  seeks 
for  gain.  They  eat  often ;  if  they  are  caught  once,  they  re- 
imburse the  fowler.  So  in  like  manner  here  with  us.  Our 
house  is  the  spot,  I  am  the  fowler,  the  coiurtesan  is  the 
food,  the  couch  is  the  decoy,  the  lovers  the  birds.  By  kindly 
welcoming  them,  by  addressing  them  courteously,  by  dallying, 
and  by  chattering  over  the  wine,  cmd  amusing  conversation, 
they  are  won.  If  oneofthem  has  touched  her  bosom,  that  is 
not  without  advantage  to  the  fowler.  If  he  has  taken  a  kiss, 
him  you  may  take  without  a  net.  That  you  should  be 
forgetful  of  these  things,  you  who  have  been  schooled  so 
long! 

Asa.  That's  your  own  fault,  in  turning  away  from  you  a 
scholar  half  instructed. 

Clb.  Come  back  again  without  hesitation,  if  you've  got 
the  pay ;  for  the  present,  be  off.     {Pretends  to  go.) 

Abo.  Stay,  stay;  don't  you  hear  me?  Say  what  you 
think  it  fair  that  I  should  give  you  for  her,  that  for  this  year 
she  may  be  with  no  one  else. 

Cle.  What,  you  ?  Twenty  minsB.  And  on  this  condition : 
if  any  other  person  shall  bring  them  first  to  me,  to  you — 
good-bye. 

Abo.  But  I There's  still  something  that  I  wish  to 

say  to  you  before  you  go. 

Cle.  Say  what  you  please.  Abo.  I'm  not  entirely  ruined 
yet;  there's  still  something  more  left  for  me  to  come  to 
rum.  I  have  wherewithal  to  gi\re  you  what  you  ask ;  but  I'll 
give  it  you  on  my  own  terms,  that  you  may  be  enabled  to 
understand  that  throughout  all  this  year  she  is  to  be  at  my 
service,  and  that,  in  the  meantime,  she  is  to  admit  no  other 
man  whatever  to  her,  besides  myself. 

Clb.  Why,  if  you  choose,  the  male-servants  that  are  at 
home,  I'U  make  eunuchs  of.  In  fine,  take  you  care  and 
bring  articles  of  agreement  that  we  wiU  be  as  you  wish. 
Impose  conditions  upon  us  as  you  wish,  and  as  you  shall 
choose.     Do  you  only  bring  the  money  with  you,  I'll  readily 

I  Tw  necessary  for  him) — ^Ver.  221.  "  Necesee  est  facere  sumptum,  qui  qiuBrit 
Incnun."  Louis  the  Twelfth,  the  King  of  France,  was  always  quoting  this  pro- 
verb ;  but  it  has  been  remarked,  that  he  failed  to  make  it  his  role  of  conduct. 


y  Google 


4tQ  AWEKAMSiL;  Att  IL 

put  up  vidi  tke  reet.  ThuB  doors  of  procuiws  are  very  like 
ikoae  of  a  custom-liouBe  officer;  if  you  bring  jcoHfthimg^  43i« 
tibey  ace  opened ;  if  there  ia  nothing  for  jou  to  gire,  then 
the  doors  aro  not  opened.     (Oo0«  ittto  her  Amm.) 

Abg.  (^  hiimelf).  I'm  imdoDe,  if  I  don't  procose  ti^ae 
twenty  mins.  And  really,  unless  I  make  swi^  -witk  tins 
mudi  money,  I  must  come  to  deatructkm.  J^'vw  I'll  go  to 
the  Porum,  and  make  tnal  with  mj  resources,  mbh  all  ngr 
endeaTOunu  I'll  beg,  I'll  eamestij  entreat  eadi  £iend  aa  I 
aee  him ;  iUh  good  and  bad  aai  I  detecmined  to  appiLj  to, 
and  make  trial  of.  But  if  I  can't  boRiow  it,  I'll  take  it  ii^ 
at  interest,  I'm  reeolyed.      (^Ghet  into  ike  hmue  4/f  I>x- 

UJESSTBTVB.) 

Act  II. — SoEing  I. 

Unter  LiBXSVB,Jrom  the  Jiouse  of  DEMiEifETUS. 

Lib.  irp<»i  my  faitili,  Libanus,  it  really  ware  befttor  ibr  you 
now  to  be  waking,  and  to  be  devising  some  plan  for  pro- 
curing  the  money.  A  long  time  has  now  elapsed,  ednoe  you 
parted  with  your  master  and  went  to  the  ronim.  For  timt 
cakd  that  you  might  devise  si^me  plan  for  procuring  the 
money,  there  till  this  time  of  day  haye  you  been  ide^ing  at 
your  ease.  Why  don't  you  away  with  all  slothfulneaa  from. 
yourself,  and  remove  all  sluggishness,  and  betake  yooieelf 
again  to  your  former  dexterous  iogenuity.  PresCTve  your 
mafitea^ ;  take  you  care,  too,  how  you  do  the  same  that  ^tfaer 
serrants  are  wont,  who  emjdoy  a  clever  ingenuity  in  dieating 
their  master  ?  Whence  shidl  I  get  it  ?  Whom  shall  I  diddle 
out  of  it  ?  Whither  shall  I  steer  this  flv-boat  ?  'GQs  settled, 
'tis  eon£rmed  by  auspices ;  on  each  side  do  the  birds  give  good 
omens.  The  woodpecker  and  the  crow  are  on  my  right,  the 
raven,  as  well,  upon  my  left.  They  are  persuading  me  to  it: 
i'  £uth,  I'm  resolved  to  foUow  your  advice.  (Siat^  and 
Ugtens!)  But  what  means  this,  that  the  woodpecker  is  tapping 
the  elm-tree  P  That's  not  for  nothing.  Troth,  for  certain, 
BO  far  as  I  can  gather  omens  from  augury,  the  rods  are  in 
peadinesB  for  my  own  back,  or  for  Saurea  the  chambeiiain. 
But  what  means  this  that  Leonida  is  running  this  way  out  of 
breath  ?  I  fear  that  this  bodes  ill  for  my  trumped-up  schemes. 
{SiMfids  apart!) 


y  Google 


Sa  n.  OB,  TflX  Afifl-BEALEB.  i01 

Scene  II. — 3nter  Leoitlda.,  running. 

Leok.  (to  himself),  Wbeve  now  ahall  I  find  Libaniu,  or 
mj  master's  son,  that  I  may  make  tliem  mcnre  mirthful  than 
is  Mirth  herself^  ?  Great  booty  and  a  triumph  do  I  bring 
them  on  my  arrival.  Inasmuch  a«  together  witih  me  iiiejr 
drink,  together  with  me  they  are  wont  to  wench,  why,  this 
booty  that  I've  got,  together  with  them  will  I  share  it. 

Lib.  (^art).  Tliis  £ellow  has  been  robbing  a  bouse,  if  he 
has  be^^L  acting  after  his  usual  manner*  Woe  to  the  person 
that  has  so  carelessly  kept  the  door ! 

Leon,  {to  himself).  I  could  be  ready  to  be  a  slave  for  j<n 
age,  if  I  could  only  meet  with  Libanus. 

Lib.  (apart),  V  &ith,  with  my  assistance,  indeed,  you 
shall  never  be  free  a  bit  the  sooner. 

Leok.  (to  himself),  I'd  give  two  bundled  teeming  laahes^ 
on  my  back  as  well. 

Lib.  (tq^art).  He's  giving  away  all  his  substance,  fir  he 
cames  his  treasures  on  his  back^. 

LEoir.  (to  himself).  But  if  time  should  intervene  npon, 
this  opportunity,  never,  upon  my  faith,  wiU  he  hereafter  obtain 
it  again,  even  with  white  horses^.  He'U  be  deserting  his 
master  in  the  siege ;  he'll  be  increasing  the  courage  of  the  foe. 
But  if  with  me  he  is  desirous  to  seize  hold  upon  this  oppor- 
tunity which  has  presented  itself,  very  great  bounties  bnmful 
of  joyousness,  will  he,  together  with  myself,  be  producing  for 
his  masters,  both  for  the  son  and  the  father.  So  that,  for 
life,  they  wiU  be  indebted  to  us  both,  bound  by  our  serviees. 

Lib.  (apairt).  He's  talking  of  persons  being  bound^,  I  don't 

»  Mir&  itersd/y-Ver.  271.  "Lnbentia,"  or  "Venns  lubentina,"  was  the 
Goddess  of  pleasure,  mirth,  and  delight. 

^  Teeming lashesy-Yer,  280.  "Plagas  praegnantes."  Literally,  "pregnant 
stripes" — "  blovrs  that  generate  other  blows." 

»  Treasures  on  his  6ac*)— Ver.  281.  "  Talk  of  giving,'*— he  says,  "  stripes  on 
his  hack  are  all  that  be  has  to  ^ve." 

«  With  wkUe  horsesy^Yer.  28a.  White  horses  were  most  esteemed  by  t^ 
ancients,  and  were  snpposed  to  exeel  others  'm  swiftness. 

«  Talking  of  persons  being  boimdy-Yet,  289.  Hecatehes,  or  pretends  tocabd, 
the  two  last  syUables  of  the  word  "  derincti,^  "  oUigated,"  and  then  says  that 
Leonida  is  speaking  of  people  bemg  "  vincti,"  "  chained  "  or  "  boond."  This  lie 
deems,  or  pretends  to  deem,  to  be  ominous  «f  ill. 


y  Google 


482  ASiKABiA ;  Act  U. 

know  who.  I  don't  like  it ;  I  (eaxfor  us  in  common,  lest  he 
may  have  been  cheating  in  some  cheatery. 

Leon,  (to  himself),  I'm  utterly  undone,  unless  I  find  Li- 
banus  at  once,  wherever  in  the  world  he  is. 

Lib.  (apart).  This  fellow's  looking  out  for  an  accomplice, 
to  unite  with  himself  in  a  bad  design.  I  don't  like  it :  'tis 
a  portentous  sign  that  instant,  when  a  person  trembles  that 
sweats^. 

Leon,  (to  himself).  But  why,  as  I  hasten,  do  I  loiter  here 
with  mv  feet,  and  make  myself «)  bounteous  with  m^  tongue  ? 
"Why  don't  I  bid  it  be  quiet,  that  in  its  talkativeness  is 
wearing  out  the  day  ? 

Lib.  (apart).  Upon  mv  faith,  an  imfortunate  man,  to 
check  his  patroness ;  for  if  he  has  done  anything  roguishly, 
his  tongue  perjures  itself  in  his  behalf. 

Leon,  (to  himself),  I'U  make  haste,  lest  I  should  be  pro- 
viding a  safe  keeping  for  my  spoil  too  late. 

Lib.  (apart).  What  spoil  is  this  ?  I'll  go  meet  him, 
and  enquure  what  it  is.  (He  accosts  him.)  I  wish  you 
health  in  as  loud  a  voice  as  my  strength  admits  of. 

Leon.  Exerciser  of  the  whip,  health  to  you. 

Lib.  Keeper  of  the  gaol,  how  do  you  do  ? 

Leon.  Ha !  colonizer  of  the  chains.  Lib.  Ha !  delight  of 
the  scourges. 

Leon.  When  naked,  how  many  pounds  do  you  say  you 
are  in  weight  ? 

Lib.  Upon  my  faith,  I  don't  know.  Leon.  I  know  that 
you  don't  know ;  but,  i'  faith,  I  who  have  weighed  you  do 
know.  Tied  up  naked,  you  were  a  hundred  pounds  in  weight, 
when  you  were  hanging  with  your  feet  downwards. 

Lib.  On  what  evidence  is  that  ?  Leon.  I'U  tell  you  on 
what  evidence,  and  in  what  way.  When  you  are  tied  up 
with  a  full  hundred  pounds  to  your  feet^,  when  the  manacles 

*  Person  trembles  that  sweats)— Ver.  293.  Probably  Leonida  is  out  of  breath 
and  in  a  perspiration ;  Libanns  considers  this  as  a  bad  omen.  Bj  his  remark  he 
is  supposed  to  allude  to  the  ^*  sadicnlam,'*  a  kind  of  scoorge,  which  received  its 
name  from  making  those  sweat  who  were  punished  with  it. 

2  Hundred  pounds  to  your  feet) — ^Ver.  807.  When  slaves  were  hung  up  by  the 
arms  to  be  scourged,  it  was  usual  to  fasten  heavy  weights  to  thdr  feet,  to  prevent 
them  from  kicking  those  who  scourged  them.    The  poor  wit  of  Leonida  seems  to 


y  Google 


So.  11.  OB,  THE  ASS-DEALEB.  493 

are  fastened  to  your  hands,  and  tied  to  the  beam,  you  are 
weighing  neither  more  nor  less,  than  as  being  a  worthless 
and  good-for-nothing  fellow. 

Lib.  "Woe  be  to  you !  Leoi?".  That,  Servitude  bequeaths 
to  you  by  her  will. 

Lib.  I  wish  this  skirmishing  of  words  to  be  cut  short. 
What  matter  is  this  ? 

Leow.  Am  I  sure  in  trusting  you  ? 

Lib.  You  may,  without  hesitation.  Leoi^.  If  you  wish  to 
assist  our  master's  son  in  his  amour,  there  is  so  much  of  a 
good  opportunity  on  a  sudden,  but  still  mingled  with  evil — all 
the  hangman's  days  will  be  rendered  famous  by  ourselves. 
Libanus,  now  have  we  occasion  to  find  some  boldness  and 
inventiveness.  An  exploit  so  great  have  I  thought  of  just 
now,  that  we  two  may  be  pronounced  the  most  deserving  of 
all  for  torture  to  befall  us. 

Lib.  'Twas  on  that  account  I  was  wondering  why  my 
shoulder-blades  were  aching  just  now,  which  were  beginning 
to  prognosticate  that  there  was  some  danger  for  them  at 
home.     "Whatever  it  is,  speak  out. 

Leon.  "Tis  great  booty  with  great  risk. 

Lib.  If  indeed  all  persons  by  compact  were  to  collect  all 
the  tortures,  I  have,  I  fancy,  a  back  at  home,  so  that  I  need 
not  seek  it  out  of  doors. 

Leon.  K  you  maintain  such  firmness  of  resolve,  then  we 
are  all  right. 

Lib.  "Why,  if  the  matter  were  to  be  atoned  for  by  my  back, 
I  could  wish  to  seize  the  public  money :  I'U  persist  in  my 
denial,  and  I'll  endure  all;  in  fine,  I'U  forswear  myself 

Leok.  Ah !  that's  true  valour,  when  occasion  is,  for  one  to 
endure  misfortune  with  boldness.  He  that  endures  misfor- 
tune with  boldness,  that  man  afterwards  enjoys  good  for- 
tune. 

Lib.  Why  don't  you  tell  the  matter  at  once  ?  I'm  longing 
to  tempt  the  scourge. 

Leon,  (breathing  hard).  Ask  deliberately  each  particular 
then,  that  I  may  rest  me.  Don't  you  see  that  I'm  still  out 
of  breath  with  running  ? 

have  this  meaning:  punning  npon  the  word  "  pendeo,"  which  signifies  either  "  to 
hang  from"  or  "  to  weigh,"  he  says,  that  when  Libanns  is  tied  up  with  the  weight 
at  his  feet,  he  weighs  just  as  much  as  the  weight  and  no  more;  for,  being  a 
worthless  fellow,  he  has  no  weight  whatever  as  h  good  man. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Lm.  Weli,  weQ,  I'll  wait  your  pleasure,  e^en,  m  fact,  till 
you.  die.   

Leok.  Where's  our  master,  pray  ? 

Lib.  The  old  one  »  aib  the  f  omin,  the  jofsng  one  ia  here 
m-doors. 

Lbof.  That's  enoagh  for  me  then.  Lm.  Is  it  then  tiiat 
you've  become  a  rich  man  ? 

Leok.  Leave  off  your  raillery.  Lib.  I'll  hare  d0BB;fir 
my  ears  are  in  expectation  of  whkfc  you  are  brcaging^me. 

Leost.  Give  your  attention,  that  equally  with  myself  jm. 
may  leam  this. 

Lib.  I'm  silent^  ^iUit.  Lboit.  You  oblige  me.  Bun'tyen 
rmnember  that  our  chamberlain  adkd  some  Arcadan  assea  to 
&  dealer  of  PeUa^P 

Lib.  I  remember  it;  after  that,  whait  then  ? 

Legit.  Well,  he  has  sent  some  money  hei^  tb^i  to  be 
paid  to  Saurea,  for  the  asses ;,  a  young  man  has  juat  now 
come  who  has  brought  thia  money. 

Lib.  Where  is  this  person  ? 

Leon.  You  think  he  ought  to  be  devouied  this  instant^  if 
you  could  see  him. 

Lib.  Aye,,  to  be  sure.  But,  hcrwrmr,.  you  are  speakiBg,  I 
suppose,  of  those  asses,  aged  and  lame,  whose  hoo&  were 
qiute  worn  away  to  their  very  thighs  ? 

Lseir.  Those  same  ones,,  that^  eanied  the  dm  twigsr  hidier 
from  the  country,  for  your  use. 

Lib.  I  understaud  you;  and  the  aame  ones  carried  yon 
firom  here,  bound,  into  the  country^, 

Leoit.  You  say  what's  quite  coixeet.  But  aa  I  was  sitting 
in  the  barber's  shop,  he  begasn  to  make  enquiriea  of  me, 
whether  I  knew  a  certaan  DeraiBSfietua,  the  son  of  StiniOi  Afe 
onee  I  said  that  I  knew  him,  and  that  I  was  his  servaaat;  and 
I  pointed  out  our  house. 

Lib.  After  that,  what  then  ?  Leon.  He  said  that  he  was 
bringing  the  money  for  the  asses  to  the  dnunbedain  Saarea, 
twenty  mina  in  amount  ;^  but  that  he  himarif  £dn't  know 

>  Deakr  ofPeOay-Yet,  337.  Fella  was  a  weaUhjcity  of  MHefldoma,  find 
for  the  opulence  of  its  merchants.  It  was  the  birthplace  of  jUezandsr  tbs 
Gfeat. 

^Bomd^  vUo  «Ae  comOryy^Yv.  34&  Kanulj,  to  the  ^^erguttaloB,"  v 
"  patens,"  the  plaoe  to  which  nftMtoi7  slaves  wen  stnt  £»  haid  hdboor,  vA 
which  was  generally  at  the  ommtiy'koiise  of  tiier  niMtee. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc  IL  OB,  THS  ▲89-IHriJiEB.  4K 

the  indt^dnid)  tHio  be  was,  but  tbat  be  knew  Demmietusi 
quite  well.     Since  he  spoke  thus  to  this  e^bet 

Lib.  What  tben  P  Leoik.  Listeii  then,  and  jou'll  know. 
Ak  once  I  made  myself  cofurteoiu,  and  a  person  of  con- 
sequence. I  said  that  I  was  the  chamberlain.  Thva,  in 
these  terms  dtd  lie  answer  me :  ^^  Upoa  my  Sutk,  I  don't  know 
Saurea,  nor  jet  of  what  appearaace  he  is.  It  isn't  fair  £(»*  jou 
to  blame  me ;  but  if  you  like,  bring  here  DemsBsietus,  yonr  mas- 
ter, whom  I  do  know ;  I'll  not  preTent  yon  taking  the  mtmey 
then.*^  1  said  that  I  would  bring  him,  and  that  I  should 
be  at  home  immediately.  He's  ab^ot  to  go  to  the  baths^, 
ham  tiiere  he'll  allberwards  come  here.  What  plan  do  you 
tfasok,  now,  I  onght  to  adopt  ?     Tell  me. 

Lib.  Why,  I'm  thinlmig  of  tliisv  ^^  to  get  between  the 
money,  and  the  stranger,  and  Saurea.  At  present  this  matter 
is  rough-hewn ;  but  if  this  stranger  brings  here  the  money 
first,  then  are  we  both  at  once  shut  out  from  it.  But  the 
old  man  to-day  took  me  apart  at  a  distance  from  the 
house,  and  threatened  me  and  yourself  that  we  should  be 
tasters  oi  the  eLn  twigs,  if  Argyrippus  didn't  this  very  day 
get  twenty  minse  of  Bilker.  He  commanded  that  we  should 
cheat  either  the  chambedain  os  his  own  wife,  and  said  that  he 
would  giye  the  aid  he  promised.  Now,  do  you  go  to  ike 
Porum  to  our  master,  and  t^  him  this,  how  we  are  going  to 
manage ;,  that  you,  from  Leonida,  are  going  to  be  the  clmm- 
berlam  Sain«a,  until  the  dealer  has  brought  the  money  for 
the  asses. 

LEGir .  I'll  do  as  you  request  me. 

Lib.  In.  the  meantime,  I'E  amuse  him  here,  if  by  chance 
he  should  come  first. 

LsQJT,  JBut  what  say  you ?    Lib.  What  do  you  want  ? 

Lecot.  If  I  give  you  a  blow  on  the  cheek  with  my  fist, 
by-and-by,  while  I'm  personating  Saurea^,  don't  you  be 
offended. 

Lib*  I'  faith,  Imt  you'll  have  ar  eare  not  to  be  touching  me, 

^  To  goto  the  baths) — ^Ver.  868.  It  "was  very  natural  that  after  a  long  journey 
fas  shonld  first  go  to  the  barber's  shop,  and  then  repair  to  the  pabfic  baths  to  re- 
fiesh  himself. 

2  Penonat&ig  Saurea) — ^Ver.  375.  Sanresj  as  the  '*  atriensis,^  '*  chamberiain  " 
or  ^'geirtiemaii-ttsher,"  was  the  head  of  the  slave  fiumly;  and  it  was  his  privilege 
to  beat  the  other  slaves,  if  they  aflTeoded  him  arsei^ected  their  daties. 


y  Google 


496  ashtabia;  Act  II. 

if  you  are  wise ;  you'll  surely  have  clianged  your  name  to- 
day with  a  had  omen^. 

lisoitr.  Prithee,  do  endure  it  with  resolution. 

Lib.  Do  you  endure  the  cuff  that  I,  too,  shaU  he  giving 
you  in  return. 

Leon.  I  speak  as  it's  in  the  hahit  of  being  done. 

Lib.  I'  faith,  and  I  speak,  too,  of  how  I'm  likely  to  act. 

Leon.  Don't  refuse  me. 

Lib.  Why  I  promise,  I  tell  you,  to  give  you  a  like  return, 
just  as  you  deserve. 

Leon.  I'm  off;  I  know  that  you'll  put  up  with  it  by- 
and-by.  But  who's  this  ?  'Tis  he — 'tis  the  very  man  him- 
self. I'll  return  here  just  now ;  in  the  meantune  do  you 
detain  him  here ;  I  want  to  inform  the  old  gentleman. 

Lib.  Well,  do  your  duty,  then,  and  fly. 

Scene  III. — HtUer  the  Ass-Dealee  mth  a  Boy. 

Ass-D.  (to  himself) .  According  as  it  was  pointed  out  to  mo, 
this  must  be  the  house  where  Demsenetus  is  said  to  live.  {To 
the  BoT.)  Go,  boy,  and  knock,  and  call  Saurea  the  chamber- 
lain out  here,  if  he's  in-doors.  (5%e  Box  ^oes  to  knock.) 

Lib.  Who's  breaking  in  our  door  in  this  fashion  ?  Ihiough 
there,  I  say,  if  you  hear  me  at  all. 

Ass-D.  No  one  has  touched  it  as  yet :  are  you  out  of 
your  senses  ? 

Lib.  Why  I  thought  that  you  had  touched  it,  because  you 
were  steering  your  course  in  that  direction.  I  don't  want 
the  door,  my  feUow-slave^,  to  be  thumped  by  you ;  I  really 
am  attached  to  our  house. 

Ass-D.  I'  faith,  there's  no  fear  of  the  hinges  being  broken 
off  the  doors,  if  you  answer  all  who  make  enquiries  in  this 
fashion. 

1  Your  name  to-day  mth  a  bad  omen)^Yer,  377.  Limiers  says  that  this  ia  said 
in  allasion  to  his  having  assnmed  the  name  of  **  Saurea,'*  which  meant  "  a  lash  ** 
or  "  scourge." 

2  MyfeUow-klave^-^YeT.  390.  He  so  calls  the  door,  from  the  fact  of  ite  being 
under  the  control  of  the  "janitor,"  or  "  doorkeeper,"  who  was  also  a  slave.  Ovid 
has  a  similar  passage  in  his  Amores,  B.  1,  £1.  6, 1.  74.  In  his  address  to  tiie 
"janitor,*'  he  says,  "  Duraque  conserve,  ligna,  valete,  fores,**  "  And  yoo,  ye  doors, 
equally  slaves,  hard-hearted  blocks  of  wood,  farewell" 


y  Google 


Se.  IV.  OB,  TH3B  ABS-PXALIB.  497 

Lib.  This  door  is  of  this  habit ;  it  cries  out  at  once  for  the 
porter,  if  it  sees  any  door-kicker  at  a  distance  coming  towards 
it.  But  what  are  you  come  for  ?  "What  are  you  enquiring 
about  ? 

Ass-D.  I  wanted  Demaenetus.  Lib.  If  he  were  at  home, 
I  would  teUyou  so. 

Ass-D.  Well,  his  chamberlain  then?  Lib.  No  more  is 
he  at  home. 

Ass-D.  Where  is  he  ?  Lib.  He  said  he  was  going  to  the 
barber's. 

Ass-D.  Hasn't  he  returned,  since  he  went  there  ? 

Lib.  I'  faith,  he  hasn't.  Wbat  did  you  want  ? 

Ass-D.  He  was  to  have  received  twenty  minse  of  silver,  if 
he  had  been  in. 

Lib.  What  was  it  for  ?  Ass-D.  He  sold  some  asses  at 
market  to  a  dealer  from  Fella. 

Lib.  I  understand ;  you  are  bringing  it  now.  I  think  that 
he'll  be  here  just  now. 

Ass-D.  Of  what  appearance  is  your  chamberlain  Saurea  ? 
If  it's  he,  I  shaU  be  able  to  know  at  once. 

Lib.  Lantern-jawed,  with  reddish  hair,  a  little  pot-bellied, 
with  glaring  eyes,  middling  stature,  sour  aspect. 

Ass-D.  A  painter  coul£i't  have  more  correctly  described 

his  appearance And,  i'  faith,  I  see  the  very  man ;  he's 

coming  this  wai/,  wagging  his  head. 

Lib.  Whoever  gets  in  his  way  when  he's  in  a  passion,  he'll 
be  for  striking  him. 

Ass-D.  By  my  faith,  if,  indeed,  he  were  coming  filled  with 
the  threats  and  the  courage  of  the  grandson  of  -^lacus^,  if 
he  were  to  touch  me  in  his  wrath,  in  his  wrath  he  would  be 
getting  a  thrashing. 

Scene  IV. — JEnter  LEOirrDA,  countetfeitrng  Saubea. 

Leon,  {to  himself).  What's  this  to  do  here  ?  Not  a  person 
cares  a  bit  about  my  orders !  How  did  I  order  Libanus  to 
come  to  the  barber's  shop,  tmd  he  didn't  come  at  all.  I' 
faith,  for  sure  he  hasn't  consulted  well  for  his  back  and 
bis  legs. 

>  OfthegrantUonofjEacusy^'Ver,  409.  He  allades  to  the  wrath  of  Achilles, 
the  son  of  Pelens,  and  grandson  of  .Sacns,  '*the  direfnl  spring"  of  the  Grecian 
woes,  with  which  the  Iliad  commences. 

2  k 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


498  asotabia;  Acfc  IL 

As8-D.  {to  himself.  This  is  a  yeiy  oyerbearing  fellow. 

Lib.  (to  the  Ass-Deales).  Woe  to  me  this  day! 

LsoK.  I  bid  welcome  to  Libanus,  the  feeed-man !  Are  jaa 
set  at  liberty  now  ? 

Lib.  I  do  implore  you.  Lbok.  In  good  sootb,  to  yotur 
great  misfortune  surely  haye  you  fallen  in  my  way.  Why 
didn't  you  come  to  the  barber's  shop,  as  I  ordered  you? 

Lib.  (pointing  to  the  Ass-Dealeb).  This  person  d^ 
tained  me. 

Leon.  I'  faith,  if  in  fact  you  were  now  to  say  that  aupreme 
Jove  had  detained  you,  and  he  were  present  to  sue  for  you, 
you  shouldn't  escape  the  evil  consequences.  Whip^ksjaye, 
did  you  disobey  my  orders  ?     (Offers  to  strike  him.) 

Lib.  (to  the  Ass-Dealeb).  Stranger,  I'm  done  for. 

Ass-D.  Prithee,  Saurea,  for  my  s&e,  don't  beat  him. 

Leon.  I  wish,  now,  I  had  a  whip  in  my  hand 

Ass-D.  Prithee,  do  be  appeased.  Leof.  — ^With  which  to 
lash  your  sides,  which  haye  grown  callous  with  blows.  (2b  the 
Asb-Dbaleb,  who  interposes,)  Stand  off  this  way ;  let  me  be 
the  death  of  this  fellow  who  is  contuaually  inflaming  me  with 
anger — a  thief  to  whom  I  can  neyer  once  enjoin  a  single  thing, 
but  that  I  must  command  the  same  things  a  himdi^  times, 
and  din  them  in  his  ears^.  Por  that  reason,  now,  by  my  troth, 
what  with  bawling  and  passion,  I  cannot  endure  the  labour. 
Haye  you,  you  rascal,  (pointing)  ordered  this  dirt  to  be  re- 
moyed  hence  from  the  door  ?  Haye  you  ordered  the  labours 
of  the  spiders  to  be  swept  down  from  the  pillars  ?  Hare 
you  ordered  those  bosses  on  our  door^  to  be  brought  to 
brightness  ?  It's  of  no  use ;  I  must  walk  about  with  a  stick, 
as  though  I  were  a  lame  man.  Because  only  for  these  single 
three  days  I  have  been  giving  my  constant  attendance  at 
the  Porum,  in  order  to  find  some  one  who  requires  money 
upon  interest,  here,  in  the  meantime,  are  you  sleeping  ik 
home,  and  my  master  is  living  in  a  pigstye,  not  in  a  house. 
(He  strikes  Libanus.)  There  now,  take  you  that. 

Lib.  (to  the  Ass-Dealeb).  Prithee,  stranger,  do  take  my 
part* 

1  Din  them  in  his  ear<)— Ver.  427.  "  Obganniam.**  This  word  literaUy  sbrnfies 
'*  to  bark  like  a  fox." 

«  Bosses  OH  our  door)— Ver.  431.  The  "  bulla,'*  or  **  boB»B8,'*  liere  mcntianed, 
were  large  heads  of  brass  or  gilt  nails  with  which  the  doois  of  the  Bomaaa  were 
ornamented. 


y  Google 


Sc.  IT.  OB,  THE  A8S-BXALEB.  499 

As»*D.  Saur^,  for  my  sake,  I  entreat  you,  do  let  him  go. 

Leok.  Hark  you !  has  any  one  paid  for  the  carriage  of 
that  olive  oil  ? 

Lib.  He  has  paid.     Lioir.  To  whom  was  it  given  ? 

Lib.  To  Stichus  himself,  your  deputy.  Leok.  Tut !  you're 
trying  to  mollify  me^.  I  know  that  he  is  my  deputy,  and  that 
there  isn't  a  servant  in  the  house  who  is  more  valuable  to 
his  master  than  he  is.  But  the  wines  that  I  sold  yesterday 
to  ExsBrambus,  the  wine  merchant,  has  he  yet  paid  Stichus 
for  them  ? 

Lib.  I  think  he  has,  in  full ;  for  I  saw  Exasrambus  himself 
bringing  hither  his  banker. 

Leon.  On  such  terms  would  I  always  deal^ ;  before,  what 
I've  trusted,  I've  hardly  been  paid  within  a  year  after. 
Now  he's  quite  in  a  hurry ;  even  of  his  own  accord  he  brings 
him  to  the  house,  and  writes  a  transfer  of  the  money^. 

Leow.  Has  Dromo  paid  down  the  wages  agreed  wpon  ? 

Lib.  Less  than  half,  I  think.  Lbow.  What  about  the  re- 
mainder ? 

Lib.  He  said  that  he  would  pay  it  directly  it  was  paid^  to 
him  ;  for  it  was  retained  until  he  had  finished  the  work  that 
was  agreed  on  to  be  done  by  him. 

Leok.  The  cups  that  I  lent  to  Philodamus,  has  he  brought 
them  back  ? 

Lib.  Not  yet.  Lbok.  What,  not  yet  ?  If  you  wish  to 
make  a  present*',  lend  to  a  person  that  is  a  iHend-- 

*  Trying  to  moUify  me) — ^Ver.  439.  Inasmtich  as  he  pretends  to  be  jealous  of 
Stichns  enjoying  the  favour  of  the  pretended  Saurea,  and  being  appointed  ^is 
"  vicarins,"  or  "  depaty,"  in  preference  to  himself. 

2  Would  I  ahoays  deal ) — Ver.  444.  '^  Sic  dedero."  Camerarius  and  Lam- 
binus  give  these  words  a  rather  far-fetched  meaning,  and  think  that  they  signify, 
^  I  had  rather  give  away  my  commodities,  than  sell  them  and  be  so  ill-paid." 

»  Writes  a  tramfir  of  the  money) — ^Ver.  445.  "  Scribere  nummos  "  seems  here 
to  have  the  usual  meaning  of  "  rescribore  nummos,'*  to  "  transfer  "  or  "  set  down 
money  to  the  account  of  another  perstm  in  one's  banker's  boolm." 

*  Directly  it  toaspaid^Yer.  448.  It  was  the  costom  with  the  ownens  of  slaves 
to  let  out  their  services  for  a  specified  sumu  He  pretends  that  Dromo  is  a  slave 
that  has  been  let  out  by  him  for  a  job,  and  enquires  whether  the  money  is  paid; 
on  which  he  is  told,  that  he  has  only  been  paid  half,  inasmuch  as  the  job  is  not 
yet  finished,  and  that  the  other  half  is  retained  until  he  has  completed  it 

^  Wish  to  make  a  present) — 'Ver.  450.  At  the  suggestion  of  Gronovius,  \^  dare  " 
is  read,  in  this  line,  with  a  comma  after  it,  instead  of  "  da,"  the  usual  reading. 
In  the  latter  case  the  passage  would  read,  '*—  if  you  choose,  do  a  service  for  a 
fnend,"  which  certain^  has  not  the  point  of  the  other  version. 

2k2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


500  abhtabia;  ActH. 

Ass-D.  (aside).  V  feith,  I'm  quite  undone;  he'll  be  just 
now  driving  me  away  with  his  ill-temper. 

Lib.  (in  a  low  voice  to  ImoTHDA.).  Hallo!  jou,  enough 
now.     Do  you  hear  what  he's  saying  ? 

Leok.  (in  the  same  way  to  Libaktjs).  I  hear,  and  I'll  bavc 
done. 

Ass-D.  (aside).  At  last,  I  think,  he  has  done :  now  it's  best 
to  accost  him  before  he  commences  a^ain  to  prate.  (To 
Leonida.)  How  soon,  sir,  will  you  give  me  your  attention  ? 

Leok.  Oh,  by  all  means — ^have  you  been  here  any  time  ? 
Troth,  I  didn't  observe  you ;  pray,  don't  lay  it  to  my  charge ; 
anger  has  so  blinded  my  eyesight. 

Ass-D.  'Tisn't  to  be  wondered  at.  But  if  he's  at  home, 
I  was  wanting  Demsenetus. 

Leok.  Inhawas  says  that  he  isn't  withm.  But  still,  if 
you  like  to  pay  that  money  over  to  me,  I'll  give  you  an 
acquittance  that  the  account  is  dischai^ed  as  to  that  item. 

Ass-D.  This  way  rather,  for  me  to  pay  you  in  the  presence 
of  your  master,  Demsenetus. 

Lib.  My  master  knows  him,  and  he  my  master. 

Ass-D.  In  his  master's  presence,  I'll  pay  him. 

Lib.  At  my  peril,  so  you  only  pay  him,  I'll  engage  the 
matter's  safe.  Eor  if  our  old  gentleman  were  to  tSow  that 
confidence  wasn't  placed  in  him,  to  whom  he  himself  always 
entrusts  the  management  of  all  matters,  he  would  be  angry. 

Leok.  I  don't  much  care ;  don't  let  him  not  pay  it,  if  he 
don't  like ;  so  let  him  stand  here. 

Lib.  Give  it  him,  I  say.  Oh  dear,  I'm  sadly  a&aid  that 
he'll  be  thinking  that  I've  persuaded  jou  not  to  trust  him ; 
prithee,  do  give  it  and  don't  be  afraid.  Upon  my  word,  it 
will  be  safe. 

Ass-D.  rthink  it  will  be — so  long,  indeed,  as  I  myself  keep 
it  in  my  hand.    I'm  a  stranger ;  I  don't  know  Saurea. 

Lib.  Well,  know  him  now  then. 

Ass-D.  It  may  be  he,  it  may  not  be  he;  i'  faitii,  I 
know  not ;  if  it's  he,  wlty  then  it  must  be  he.  I  know  for 
sure  that  I  shall  give  this  up  to  no  person  that  I  don't 
know. 

Leok.  (aside).  Troth  now,  may  all  the  Gk>ds  confound  the 
fellow.  (Aloud  toJjiBAyvs.)  Take  care  you  don't  entreat  him 
with  a  word.  He's  arrogant,  because  he's  fingering  my  twenty 


y  Google 


Sc.  ly.  OB,  THB  A8S-DSALEB.  501 

iniiue.  No  one  will  take  it.  (lb  the  Ass-Dsaleb.)  Take 
yourself  off  home,  be  off  from  here,  and  don't  be  troublesome. 

rA.ss-D.  Tau  are  in  too  angry  mood :  it  isn't  right  for  a 
person  who  is  a  slave  to  give  himself  airs. 

Lib.  By  my  faith,  to  your  own  great  mis&rtune  now  are 
you  talking  uncivilly  to  him.  Dirty,  worthless  fellow,  don*t 
you  see  he's  angry  ? 

Leon,  {to  the  Ass-Dealeb).  Be  off  then. 

Lib.  {to  the  Ass-Dealeb).  Scoundrelly  fellow.  {Aside  to 
him,)  Fnthee,  do  give  him  the  money  lest  he  should  abuse 
you. 

Ass-D.  On  my  word,  you  are  seeking  evil  for  yourselves. 

Leon,  {to  Libanus).  By  the  powers,  your  legs  shall  be 
broken^,  if  you  don't  proclaim  this  shameless  fellow. 

Lib.  Troth,  I'm  undone.    Be  off,  you  shameless  fellow. 

Leok.  Tou  rascal.  Lib.  {to  the  Ass-Dealeb).  "Won't 
you  venture  to  assist  me,  jou  rascal  ? 

Leok.  Do  you  persist  m  soliciting  the  scamp  ? 

Ass-D.  How's  this  ?  {To  Leonida.)  Do  you,  rascal,  who 
are  a  slave,  speak  abusively  to  a  free  man  ? 

Leon.  Give  him  a  beating.  Ass-D.  By  my  faith,  that 
surely  shall  befall  yourself  to  get  a  beating  as  soon  as  ever  I 
shall  see  Demaenetus  this  day.    I  summon  you  to  judgment^. 

Leon.  I  shan't  go.  Ass-D.  Tou  won't  go?  Eemem- 
ber 

Leon.  I  do  remember.  Ass-D.  I'  faith,  I'll  have  satis- 
faction out  of  your  back. 

Leon.  "Woe  unto  you  ?  What,  villain — ^satisfaction  to  be 
given  by  us  to  you  indeed  ? 

Ass-D.  Aye,  and  even  this  very  day  satisfaction  shall  be 
given  me  for  your  abusive  language. 

Leon.  How  now,  whip-knave  ?  How  say  you,  hang-dog  P 
Do  you  suppose  that  we  shall  run  away  from  our  master  ?   Qo 

>  Your  legs  shaU  he  hrokeny-Ver.  479.  One  of  the  most  cmel  punisliments 
inflicted  on  refractory  or  runaway  slaves  was  that  of  breaking  their  legs.  To 
efibct  this,  their  legs  were  extended  upon  an  anvil,  and  then  struck  with  a  bar  of 
iron  or  a  hammer. 

«  Summon  you  to  judgmemt)-^Ytr,  485.  **  In  jus  vocare,"  "  to  summon  into 
court,**  was  the  term  applied  when  one  party  lodged  a  criminal  information  against 
another. 


y  Google 


SOS  AiinriBTA ;  Act  JL 

this  instaat  then  to  our  master,  where  you  were  citing  us 
just  now,  and  wliere  you  were  wishing  to  go, 

Ass-D.  Whaiy  now  at  kstp  Still,  you  shall  never  ge^a 
coin  of  money  away  &)m  me,  unless  iJemaenetus  shall  order 
me  to  give  it. 

Leon.  Do  so.  Come,  move  on  then.  Are  you  to  offer 
insults  to  another  person,  and  are  they  not  to  be  repeated  to 
yourself  P    I'm  a  man  as  much  as  you  mre, 

Ass-D.  No  doubt  such  is  the  &ct. 

Lboist.  Follow  fM  this  way,  then.  With  your  good  Icasre^ 
I  would  now  say  this :  not  a  person  has  ever  accused  me  by 
reason  of  my  deserving  it,  nor  is  there  in  Athens  one  otiier 
individual,  this  day,  whom  they  would  think  they  oould  as 
safely  trust. 

Ass-D.  Perhaps  so:  but  still, you  shall  neyer  tiiis  day  per^ 
suade  me  to  entrust  to  you,  whom  I  don't  know,  this  money. 
A  man  to  a  man  is  a  wolf  ^,  not  a  man,  when  the  other  doesn't 
know  of  what  character  he  is. 

Leok.  JN'ow  at  last  you  are  appeasing  me^ :  I  was  sore 
that  this  day  you  would  give  satismction  to  this  poor  head  ^ 
wme;  although  I'm  in  mean  garb,  still,  I'm  well  to  do,  nor 
can  an  estimate  of  my  means  be  formed  ^om  it. 

Ass-D.  Perhaps  so.  Leoit.  Still  more  then  I  tell  you: 
Periphanes,  a  merchant  of  Shodes,  a  rich  man,  in  the  ab* 
sence  of  my  master,  himself  alone  paid  over  to  me,  in 
private,  a  talent  of  silver,  and  tru^ied  me,  nor  was  he  de- 
ceived in  it. 

>  WUh  your  good  2gat;6)— Ver.  495.  *^  Prsefiscinl."  It  was  a  commao  notkD 
among  the  ancients,  that  if  a  person  spoke  in  commendation  of  himself,  he  stood 
in  danger  of  fascination — the  effect  of  envy  or  enchantment  on  the  part  of  another 
person.  For  this  reason,  on  snch  occaMons  thej  pre&ced  with  the  word  **pnB- 
fisdni,*'  tmderstanding  *<dizerim,'*  "  I  would  saj."  This  meant  *' without  im- 
peachment of  malice,"  "  be  it  spt^can  in  a  good  hour,"  or,  as  we  say,  ^^by  Y^ 
leave." 

*  Man  to  a  man  is  a  tootfy—Ver,  499.  There  was  an  ancient  proveib,  "  Homo 
homini  lupus,"  "  Man  is  to  man  a  wolf."  It  probably  implied  mnch  the  same  as 
the  more  celebrated  words  of  a  modem  Poet: 

Man's  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless  thousands  mourn. 

«  You  are  appeasing  me)— Ver.  500.  This  he  seems  to  say  in  a  spirit  of  irony. 
''  Huic  capitulo  "  is  literally  "  to  this  little  head ;"  meaning,  "  to  this  humUs 
individual,  myself." 


y  Google 


Sd.  lY,  OB,  THE  ASS-BBALEB.  S08 

Asft-D.  Perhaps  so.  Lsok.  And  you,  too,  yourself,  as 
well,  if  you  had  enquired  about  me  of  other  people,  would, 
i' Aith,  I'm  quite  sure,  have  entrusted  to  me  what  you  now 
haye  with  you. 

Abs-D.  I  don't  deny  it.  (Uxeunt. 

Act  in. — SoEiTE  I. 

Miter  G11E.SBETA  and  VuiiiEmv^^from  the  house  of  the 
former. 

CiiE.  And  am  I  unable  to  render  you  obedient  to  my  in- 
junctions  ?  Or  are  you  so  disposed  as  to  be  &ee  &om  the 
ooatrol  of  your  mother  P 

Phil.  How  could  I  propitiate  Piety^,  if  I  could  desire  to 
please  you,  being  endowed  with  these  manners,  after  the 
fishion,  mother,  that  you  enjoin  upon  me  ? 

Cue.  Is  it  consistent  with  propriety  for  you  to  oppose  my 
precepts  P 

Phil.  How  so  ?  Cle.  Is  this  worshipping  Piety,  to  lessen 
the  authority  of  a  mother  P 

Ee£l.  Those  who  act  right  I  blame  not,  nor  do  I  love 
those  who  do  wrong. 

Cle.  Tou  are  a  very  prating,  lovesick  girl. 

Phil.  Mother,  that  is  my  living*.  His  tongue  woos 
me,  his  person  seeks  me,  his  passion  pleads,  opportunity 
prompts. 

Cle.  I  was  purposing  to  convince  you.  Are  you  come  as 
my  accuser? 

Phil.  By  my  troth,  I  neither  do  accuse  you,  nor  do  I 
think  it  right  I  should  do  so ;  but  I  do  complain  of  my  lot, 
when  I  am  separated  from  him  whom  I  love. 

Cle.  WiU  then  one  bit  of  the  whole  day's  talk  be  left  for 
myself? 

Phil.  Both  my  share  of  the  speaking  and  your  own  do  I 
give  up  to  you.    Do  you  yourself  keep  the  signal^  both  for 

1  Could  I  propitiate  Piety)— Yer.  510.  She  thinks  that  the  Goddess  "  Pietas  " 
will  be  shocked  at  her  want  of  kind  and  grateftil  feeling,  if  she  consents  to  turn 
Argjrrippns  out  of  doors- 

2  That  is  my  Uvingy-'VeT.  516.  It  is  hard  to  say  which  she  means  as  the 
sonrce  of  her  profit — ^whether  her  loving  propensities,  or  her  fund  of  talkative- 
ness, for  which  her  mother  is  censuring  her.  The  next  line  is  spoken  with  re- 
ference to  her  pasgion  for  Argjrrippus. 

»  Keep  (he  ngnaiy—Yer,  523.  "  Portisculum."  According  to  some  writers, 
"portisculus  "  was  a  name  of  the  "pausanrius  "  or  ♦*  hortotor,"  called  by  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


804  ASiKABiA.;  Ad  XQ* 

speaking  and  for  being  ailent.  But,  i'  faith,  if  I  only  put  up 
my  oars  in  the  boat-house^,  while  I'm  resting,  all  the  welfi^e 
of  the  household  is  at  a  standstill  for  you.  • 

Cle.  How  say  you,  the  out  and  out  most  insolent  woman 
that  ever  I  saw  r  How  often  have  I  forbidden  you  to  speak  to 
Argyrippus,  the  son  of  Dem»netus,  or  to  touch  him,  or  to  hold 
discourse  with  him,  or  to  look  at  him  P  What  has  he  ever 
given  ?  What  has  he  ordered  to  be  brought  to  our  house  ?  Op 
do  you  &ncy  to  yourself  that  smooth  words  are  gold  ? — that 
clever  speeches  are  as  good  as  presents?  Of  your  own 
accord  you  fell  in  love  with  him ;  of  your  own  accord  you  go 
after  him ;  of  your  own  accord  you  request  him  to  be  sent 
for  to  you.  Those  who  are  givers,  those  same  you  laugh 
.  at ;  those  who  are  cheating  us,  you  are  dying  for,  T£  any 
one  promises  you  that  he'U  make  you  rich  when  his  mother 
dies,  ought  you  to  be  waiting  for  that  ?  I'  faith,  a  great  risk 
impends  over  ourselves  and  the  household,  that  we  may  die 
of  hunger  while  we  are  awaiting  her  death.  Now  therefore, 
unless  he  brings  me  here  twenty  minse  of  silver,  up<m  my 
word,  though  profuse  of  his  tears,  he  shall  certainly  be  turned 
from  here  out  of  doors.  This  day's  the  end  of  ^  excuses  t(xt 
poverty  at  my  house. 

Phil.  If,  my  mother,  you  were  to  order  me  to  go  without 
victuals,  I  would  submit. 

Cle.  I  don't  forbid  you  to  love  those  who  give  that  for  the 
sake  of  which  they  ought  to  be  loved. 

Phil.  What,  mother,  if  this  inclination  of  mine  ia  fixed? 
What  am  I  to  do  ?    Tell  me. 

Cle.  Oh  dear — ^look  at  my  head^,  if,  indeed,  you  consider 
your  own  interest. 

Phil.  Even  the  shepherd,  mother,  that  feeds  the  sheep 

Greeks  KeXevar^s,  an  oflScer  whose  duty  it  was  to  order  the  rowers  to  keep 
time.  In  the  present  passage,  it  seems  rather  to  signify  the  hammer,  or  otha" 
instrument,  which  that  officer  held  in  his  hand,  for  the  purpose  of  beadng  time, 
to  regulate  the  motion  of  the  rowers ;  not  unlike  the  baton  of  the  eoodaetor  of  » 
band. 

1  In  the  hoat-h(m8e)—Yer.  624.  "  In  casteria.'*  Nonius  Maroellus  Informs  us 
that  "casteria**  was  a  house,  in  which  the  oars^  rudders,  sails,  and  tackle,  were 
kept,  wlien  the  ship  was  laid  up  in  dock. 

2  The  end  o/*)— Ver.  531.  "  Summa  "  seems  a  preferable  rea^uag  to  "  finrasys." 
'  Ixxtk  at  my  head) — Ver.  543.  She  tells  her  daughter  to  look  at  her  grefy  hairs ; 

meaning  that  she  must  make  a  provision  against  old  age,  when  her  admireis  will 
forsake  her,  and  she  will  have  no  means  of  gaining  a  liyelihood. 


y  Google 


Sc.  H.  OB,  th;e  ass-dsaleb.  505 

of  another,  has  a  certain  one  of  his  own  to  be  the  consoler  of 
his  hopes,  Eor  the  sake  of  mj  affection,  do  allow  me  to 
love  Argyrippus  only,  who  is  my  choice. 

CiiB.  Go  in*doors,  for,  upon  my  word,  there  is  really 
nothing  more  impudent  than  yourself. 

Phil.  Mother,  you  have  giyen  birth  to  a  daughter  obe- 
dient to  your  commands.     (,Theif  go  into  the  houseJ) 

SoEiTB  n. — Unter  Lsoioda  and  LiBAiars. 

Lbok.  Great  praise  and  thanks  we  give  deservedly  to  per- 
fidy, when  relying  upon  our  tricks,  our  stratagems,  and  our 
devices,  upon  our  confidence  in  our  shoulder-blades  and  the 
hardihood  resulting  &om  the  elm-twigs  so  oft  applied,  against 
the  whips,  the  searing-irons,  the  crosses,  and  the  fetters,  the 
cords,  the  chains,  the  prisons,  the  stocks,  the  shackles,  the 
collars,  and  taskmasters  most  cruel  and  well  acquainted  with 
our  backs,  who  many  a  time  before  have  imprinted^  scars 
upon  our  shoulder-blades ;  by  conquering,  now,  these  legions, 
troops  and  armies  of  thieves,  by  our  prowess,  through  our 
perjuries,  0  brave,  have  we  gained  the  victory.  This,  through 
the  valour  of  this  comrade  of  mine,  and  through  my  own 
courtesy,  has  been  brought  about. 

Lib.  What  man  is  there  more  firm  than  myself  at  enduring 
stripes? 

Lbok.  By  the  powers,  you  who  can  extol  your  exploits 
now,  as  I  can  do  ea^hita,  which  in  peace  and  in  warfare 

you  have  90 villanously  performed;  verily,  in  troth, 

many  in  nimiber  may  they  be  now  recounted  according  to 
your  deserts ;  where  you  have  defrauded  him  that  trusted 
you,  where  you  have  proved  faithless  to  your  master,  where 
knowingly  cmd  wUfully  you  have  on  solemn  oath  been  per- 
jured, where  you  have  bored  through  party  Walls,  where  you 
have  been  detected  in  theft,  where  you  have  full  oft  pleaded 
your  cause,  as  you  hung  up,  against  eight  clever,  hardened 
fellows^  sturdy  stripers. 

Lib.  Certainly  I  do  admit,  Leonida,  that  it  is  true  as  you 
say.     But  verily,  in  troth,  your  many  misdeeds,  too,  may  be 

» Have  imprinted)— Yet,  666.  The  sense  of  the  passage  seems  to  require  a 
comma  after  **  mdiderunt,"  and  not  a  period,  as  Bichter*s  edition  has  it 

>  Eight  clever,  hardened feUotDsy—Yer,  668.  These  were  probably  the  eight 
licton  who  attended  the  "  Tresviri"  or  "  Triumviri,"  which  magistrates  had  espe- 
cial jurisdiction  over  skTes,  with  the  power  of  ordering  summary  punishment 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


506  AsajJOA,;  Ad?  TTT 

recounted  as  well  and  truly ;  where  wilfully  you  have  pnyred 
faithless  to  the  trusting,  where  you  have  been  detected  in 
theft  and  scourged  in  public,  where  you  hare  proved  f«r* 
swom,  where  you  have  laid  hands  on  sacred  things,  where  to 
your  masters  you  have  full  offe  proved  a  loss,  a  trouble,  and  a 
disgrace,  where  you  have  stoutly  denied  that  that  was  given 
to  you  which  had  been  entrusted  to  you,  where  you  have 
proved  more  faithful  to  your  wench  than  to  your  firiend,  where 
through  your  hardihood  you  have  l&e^nently  reduced  to  wea- 
riness ei£;ht  sturdy  lictors,  armed  with  pliant  twigs  of  elnu 
(lb  the  AuniSNCB.)  Is  the  compliment  ill  repaid  in  the  way 
that  I've  praised  my  comrade  P 

Lbok.  Just  as  befits  both  me  and  yourself,  and  our  dis- 
positions. 

Lib.  Now  drop  this,  and  answer  me  this  that  I  ask. 

Lbost.  Enquire  of  me  what  you  f>lease. 

Lib.  Have  you  got  the  twenty  silver  mine? 

LsoK.  Guess Upon  m^  word,  the  old  gentleman, 

Demienetus,  has  been  very  obligmg  to  us.  How  devedy  he 
pretended  that  I  was  Saurea.  w  ith  the  greatest  difficultj 
did  I  withhold  my  laughter,  when  he  rebuked  the  stranger, 
because  in  his  absence  he  had  been  unwilling  to  put  c<nifi- 
dence  in  me ;  and  with  what  readiness  did  he  call  me  Saurea 
the  chamberlain. 

Lib.  Stop  a  moment.    Lbok.  What's  the  matter  p 

Lib.  Isn't  this  Fhilenium  that's  coming  &om  in-doors,  and 
Argyrippus  with  her. 

£^0K.  Keep  silence,  'tis  he ;  let's  listen  quietly  to  them* 
In  tears,  she  holds  him,  weeping,  by  the  lappet  of  his  gar> 
ment;  what,  I  wonder,  am  I  to  say  is  the  matterp 

Lib.  Let's  listen  in  silence.  Lbon.  Dear  me,  is  thmgJU^ 
V  faith,  has  just  come  into  my  mind ;  I  very  much  wish  I  had 
a  long  stick  here. 

Lib.  For  what  reason  ?  Leon.  "With  which  to  beat  these 
asses^,  if  perchance  they  should  begin  to  bray  out  here,  from 
within  the  bag.     {They  stand  c^art.) 

Scene  III. — ^ter  Abgteippus  from  the  house  of  Ci<£iE- 
VXT A,  followed  hy  Phujinium, 

Abo.  Why  are  you  holding  me  back  ? 

1  To  heat  these  anes)^Ver.  593.  He  means  the  money  iviiieh  was  to  hare  been 
pud  for  the  asses. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  in.  OB,  THI  ABS-DBALEB.  507 

Phil.  Because,  as  I  love  you,  I  caxmot  bear  yoiir  de» 
parting. 

Abo.  Farewell.  Phil.  I  should  fare  somewhat  better,  if 
you  were  to  remain  here. 

Abg.  Blessings  on  you.  Phil.  Do  you  wish  for  blessings 
on  me,  to  whom  you  are  bringing  disease  by  your  departure  ? 

Abo.  Your  moth^  has  bid  me  the  hst  farewell^ ;  she  has 
requested  me  to  go  home. 

Phil.  A  Mtter  death  will  she  cause  hei^  daughter,  if  1  must 
part  from  you. 

Lib.  (apart,  to  Lsoniba).  Troth  now,  the  man  has  been 
turned  out  of  doors  there. 

Lbok.  (aparty  Such  is  the  fact.  Abo.  Prithee,  do  let 
me  go. 

Phil.  Whither  are  you  going  now  ?  Why  don't  you  stay 
here? 

Abo.  This  night,  if  you  choose,  I'll  st^. 

Lib.  {aupart).  Don't  you  hear  him  P  How  pro&se  he  is  of 
his  attentions  by  night.  But  now,  in  the  ^^daytime,  he's  en- 
gaged ;  surely  he's  a  Solon*  to  write  laws  whereby  the  public 
may  regulate  itself.  Psha !  those  who  would  be  in  readiness 
for  themselyes  to  pay  obedience  to  his  laws,  would  decidedly 
never  do  any  good;  they  would  be  drinking  night  and  day. 

Leoit.  {apart).  Troth  now,  for  sure,  he  woiddn't  budge  a 
foot  from  her  if  she  would  let  him,  who  is  now  in  such  haste, 
and  is  threatening  that  he's  going  away  from  her. 

Lib.  (apart).  Now  make  an  end  of  your  talk,  that  I  may 
catch  his  discourse. 

Abo.  Farewell !     Phil.  Whither  are  you  hastening  ? 

Abo.  Kindly  fare  you  well !  I  shall  see  you  in  the  other 
world^.  For  indeed  now,  so  soon  as  I  can,  I  shall  sever  my* 
self  from  life. 

^  Bid  me  the  lastfareweUy-Visr,  698.  The  word  "  vale,'*  "  farewell,"  is  here  un- 
derstood, and  reference  is  made,  fignratively,  to  the  usage  of  exclaiming  **  vale  " 
when  fire  was  set  to  the  funeral  pile.  In  saying  that  she  bade  him  go  home, 
he  refers  to  the  expression  with  which  the  ceremony  concluded,  "  ilicet,**  "  you 
may  go  away,"  or  "  you  may  go  home." 

«  Be^s  a  Solon) — ^Ver.  603.  Solon  was  one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  and  the 
great  lawgiver  of  the  Athenians.  He  was  remarkable  for  the  severity  of  his 
morals. 

*  In  the  other  worliy^Yer,  610.  "  Apud  Orcum."  Orcus  was  a  name  of  the 
Shades  below,  and  was  also  an  epithet  of  the  God  Pluto. 


y  Google 


606  asikabia;  Actm. 

Phil.  Prithee,  why,  while  I  do  not  deserve  it,  do  you  wish 
to  consign  me  to  death  P 

ABe.  I — ^you  ?  whom,  if  I  were  to  hear  that  you  were  in 
want  of  life,  at  once  would  I  present  you  my  own  life,  and 
from  my  own  would  add  to  yours. 

Phil.  Why,  then,  do  you  threaten  that  you  will  quit 
life  ?  Eor  what  do  you  suppose  that  I  shall  do,  if  you  do 
that  which  you  are^  talking  of?  Tm  determined  to  do 
everything  exacthf  the  same  to  myself  that  you  do  to  your- 
self.   Ab6.  O  !  sweeter  than  honey  are  you  to  me. 

Phil.  And  surely  you  are  my  life.    Embrace  me. 

Abo.  I  do  so  with  pleasure.     (Tkey  embrace,) 

l^TL.  Would  that  thus  we  might  be  carried  to  the  tomb. 

Leok.  {apart),  O  Libanus,  how  wretched  is  the  man  that 
loves. 

Lib.  {apart).  Aye,  but  surely,  faith,  the  man  that's  hang- 
ing up^  is  much  more  wretched. 

liEOK.  {apart),  I  know  that,  who  have  had  experience  of 
it.  Let's  go  round  them:  let's  accost  them,  one  on  the 
one  side,  one  on  the  other.  {One  wcUkt  towarch  them  from 
each  side,) 

Lib.  Health  to  you,  master.  But  is  this  female,  smoke, 
that  you  are  embracing  ? 

Abg.  Why  so  ?  Lib.  Because  your  eyes  are  filled  with 
tears ;  'twas  for  that  reason  I  asked. 

Abo.  One  who  would  have  been  a  protector  to  you,  you 
have  lost. 

Lib.  I'  faith,  I  surely  haven't  lost  one ;  for  this  reason,  he- 
cause  I  never  had  one. 

Leon.  Health  to  you,  Philenium. 

Phil.  What  you  desire,  the  Gods  will  give  you. 

Lib.  I  could  desire  your  favours,  and  a  cask  of  wine,  if 
wishes  were  to  come  to  pass. 

Abg.  Whip-knave,  beware  how  you  speak  a  word. 

Lib.  Why,  'tis  for  you,  not  for  myseu,  I  wish  it. 

Abo.  For  that  reason,  then,  say  on  what  you  please. 

Lib.  {pointing  to  Leonida).  Troth,  Pd  like  to  give  him 
a  beating. 

Leon.  Who,  pray,  would  allow  you  to  do  «o,  you  frizzle- 

*  The  man  thafs  hanging  wp)— Ver.  621.  He  alludes  to  the  punishment  of  the 
sUves,  which  has  been  before  referred  to. 


y  Google 


SC.  in.  OB,  THX  ABS-DSALEB.  609 

pated^  moantebank  P  Could  you  thrash  me,  yau^  who  reckon 
as  your  daily  food  your  own  thrashings  ? 

Abo.  How  far  superior,  Libanus,  are  your  lots  to  my  own, 
who  never  will  live  this  day  until  the  evening. 

Lib.  Eor  what  reason,  prithee  ?  Abo.  (^pomti/ng  to 'Bja.- 
lbniuh).  Because  I'm  in  love  with  her,  and  she's  in  love 
with  me,  and  nowhere  have  I  anything  to  bestow  upon  her ; 
for  that  reason  has  her  mother  expelled  me  with  aU  my 
affection  from  her  house.  The  twenty  minsB  of  silver  have 
brought  me  to  my  end,  which  the  young  man,  Diabolus,  de* 
clared  that  he  would  give  her  this  day,  in  order  that  she 
mightn't  send  her  anywhere,  for  this  whole  year,  except  to 
himself.  Don't  you  see  of  what  force  are  twenty  min»  of 
silver,  or  what  they  can  effect  ?  The  man  who  parts  with 
them  is  happy ;  I,  who  part  not  with  them,  am  undone. 

Lib.  Has  ne  already  paid^  the  money  P 

Abg.  He  hasn't  paid  it.  Lib.  Be  of  good  courage  ;  don't 
be  afraid. 

Leok.  (to  LiBAiojs).  Step  this  way,  Libanus,  I  want  you. 

Lib.  Certainly,  if  you  want  anything.  (Steps  aside^ 
putting  his  hand  on  the  shoulder  oflmoisiDA..) 

Abg.  I  entreat  of  you,  is  it  more  pleasant  in  this  same 
matter  for  you  to  discourse  hugging  one  another  ? 

Lib.  Understand,  master,  that  all  things  are  not  equally 
sweet  to  all  persons.  'Tis  pleasant  for  you  lovers  to  converse, 
hugging  one  another ;  I  care  nothing  for  his  hugging  (point- 
ing  to  Leonida),  and  (pointing  to  Philekittm)  she  despises 
mine.  Do  you  then  yourself  do  that  which  you  would  be 
suggesting  to  us  to  do. 

Abg.  Ijideed  I  will,  and  really  with  pleasure,  i'  faith. 
(Flacing  his  arm  round  Phiiekium's  neck.)  In  the  mean* 
time,  ii*  it  seems  good  to  wm,  do  you  step  aside  there. 

Leon,  {to  LiBAKUs).  Should  you  like  our  master  to  be 
bantered  a  bit  ? 

^  You  friezk-pated)  —  Ver.  631.  "  Calamistrate  "  means  dressed  with  the 
"  calamUtrum,"  "  a  crisping-pin,"  or  iron  tube  with  which  the  hair  was  curled. 

«  Has  he  aiready  paid) — Ver.  642.  "  Jam  dedit  argentum  ?"  This  is  curi- 
ou.sIy  rrnJered  by  Gaendeville,  **  Ce  Monsieur  le  Diable  a-t-il  d^j^  donnd  son 
ar;;enl  ?"  which,  literally  translated,  is,  "  Has  this  Mister  Devil  already  paid 
his  money  ?"  He  appears  to  have  taken  a  rather  unwarranted  liberty  in  trans  • 
lating  the  name  **  Diabolus  "  by  the  term  "  le  Diable" — ^neither  more  nor  less  than 
the  French  name  of  his  Satanic  Majesty. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


510  AsnTABiA;  Actm. 

Lib.  He  really  is  deserving  of  it. 

Leok.  Should  you  like  me,  in  his  presence,  to  make  Phi- 
lenium  embrace  me  P 

Lib.  I'  faith,  I  should  like  it.  Lxoir.  Follow  me  this  way. 
{They  join  AneTBiPBUS.) 

Abo.  Is  there  any  escape  at  all  P  Ha^e  you  conversed 
enough  P 

Lsoir.  Listen,  and  give  attention,  and  devour  my  words. 
Eirst  of  all,  that  we  are  your  alayes,  we  don't  drair ;  but  if 
twenty  silver  min»  are  forthcoming  for  you,  by  what  name 
will  you  call  us  P 

Ab&.  Ereed-men.    Lson.  And  not  patrons  ? 

Asa.  That  in  prefi»ence.  Lbok.  (pradueeg  the  hag). 
Here  are  twenty  min»  in  this  bag.  These,  if  you  like,  1*11 
give  you. 

Aaa.  May  the  Deities  ever  preserve  you,  proteetor  of  your 
master,  honor  to  the  people,  tareasury  of  resources,  preserver 
of  my  inner  man^,  and  commander  of  love ;  place  it  here,  put 
down  that  bag,  here  on  the  spot,  at  once^. 

Jjzoisf.  I  don't  like  you,  who  are  my  master,  to  carry  this 
load. 

Abg.  Still,  do  you  rid  yourself  of  the  trouble,  and  fasten 
that  boff  to  myself. 

Leok.  I'll  carry  it,  porter^like ;  you,  as  befits  my  master, 
go,  without  any  burden,  before  me. 

Abg.  How  now  P  Why's  this  P  Why  don't  you  give  up 
the  bag3  here,  for  your  master  to  feel  its  weight  ? 

liEOiS,  Bid  her  to  whom  I'm  about  to  give  it,  to  beg  and 
entreat  it  of  me.  Eor  that's  a  dangerous  spot  wh^e  you  bid 
me  put  it  down  at  once. 

Phil,  (to  Leoitida).  Apple  of  my  eye,  my  rose,  my  life, 
my  delight,  Leonida,  do  give  me  the  money,  and  don't  sever 
us  lovers  asunder. 

Leok.  {to  Philenium).  Call  me,  then,  your  little  spar- 

1  Of  my  inner  num) — ^Ver.  660.  "  Interioris  corporis.**  Literallj,  "  of  my  inner 
body."  This  is  a  periphrasis  signifying  life,  the  seat  of  which,  ^e  vital  parts, 
are  within  the  body. 

^  On  the  spotj  at  <mce)~''Ver,  661.  **  In  loco  plana"  These  words  seem  to 
imply  not  m  a  hanging  position,  but  clean  or  pat  npon  the  ground.  Warner, 
however,  renders  the  passage,  «  Tye  the  bag  around  my  neck."  It  was  probably 
the  intention  of  Argyrippns  to  take  it  after  Leonida  had  fairly  put  it  down. 

^Give  «p  the  2w^)— Ver.  666.  "Cmmenam"  seems  a  better  leadmg  tbia 
(( crunena,"  which  Bichter  adopts. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


SC.  HL  OB,  THX  ASS-DBALXB.  611 

row,  joxxr  cbicken,  your  quail,  your  pet  lamb :  say  that  I'm 
your  peli  kid  or  your  pet  calf;  take  me  by  the  ears,  press 
your  Hps  to  my  lips. 

Abo.  She,  kiss  you,  you  whip-scoundrel  P  Leok.  Beally, 
how  unbecoming  it  does  seem !  But,  by  the  powers,  you 
shan't  get  it  this  day,  if  my  knees  are  not  embraced. 

Abg.  (aside).  Necessity  compels  to  anything.  (To  Leo- 
KLDA.)  Let  them  be  embraced  (Jeneeh  down  and  embraces  his 
knees)  :  now  give  what  I'm  asking  for. 

Phil.  Gome,  my  Leonida,  prithee  do  bring  safety  to  your 
master  thtss  in  love.  Eedeem  yourself  from  him  by  this  ser- 
vice, and  purchase  him  for  yourself  with  this  money. 

Leon,  x  ou  are  very  pretty  and  amiable ;  and  if  this  were 
mine,  you  should  never  this  day  ask  me  for  it,  but  I  would 
give  it  you :  'tis  better  for  you  to  ask  it  of  him  (^povntmg  to 
LiBAKUs),  for  'twas  he  gave  it  me  to  keep  for  him.  Ap- 
proach him  then  prettily,  my  pretty  one.  (Delivers  the  hag 
to  LiBAinJs.)   Take  this,  please,  Lioanus. 

Abg.  Scoundrel,  are  you  still  trifling  with  me  P 

Leon.  I'  faith,  I  should  never  have  done  so,  if  you  hadn't 
embraced  my  knees  so  roughly.  (Aside  to  Libaitus.)  Come, 
please,  in  your  turn,  do  you  at  once  have  some  sport  with 
him,  and  give  her  an  embrace. 

Lib.  (aside  to  Lbokida).  Hold  your  tongue ;  trust  me  for 
that. 

Abo.  Why  don't  we  accost  him,  Philenium  ?  (pointing  to 
LiBABms) — ^really,  a  very  worthy  fellow,  upon  my  £edth,  and 
not  like  this  thief  (pointing  to  Leonida). 

Lib.  {aside  to  Lkohii)a).  We  must  walk  up  and  down ; 
now,  in  my  turn,  they'll  be  entreating  me. 

Ajlg.  By  heaven,  labaiius,  I  do  entreat  you,  be  pleased  by 
your  deeds  to  come  to  your  master's  rescue;  do  give  me 
those  twenty  minae :  you  see  that  thus  in  love  I  stand  in 
need  of  them. 

Lib.  It  shall  be  seen  to ;  I  wish  it  done ;  return  here  at 
nightfalL  Now  bid  her,  ever  so  little,  to  beg  and  entreat  them 
of  me. 

Phil,  (to  LiBAinrs).  Do  you  wish  me  to  begin  with  ca- 
ressing, or  with  kissing  you  r 

Lib.  Why,  really,  with  them  both.  Phil.  And  do  you 
then,  I  do  entreat  you,  prove  the  saving  of  us  both. 


y  Google 


512  AsnfTABiA;  Act  HE. 

Abb.  O  LibanuB,  my  patron,  do  give  me  that ;  'tis  more 
becoming  for  the  fireed-man^,  than  for  the  patron,  to  be 
carrying  a  burden  in  the  street. 

FkiL.  My  Libanus,  golden  apple  of  my  eye,  the  grfb  and 
the  verif  grace  of  love ;  there's  a  dear,  whatever  you  wish, 
rU  do ;  prithee,  do  give  us  that  money. 

Lib.  Call  me,  then,  your  little  duck,  dove,  or  i/our  pup- 
pet ;  yotw  swallow,  jackdaw,  little  sparrow,  your  mannikin : 
make  of  me  the  reptile  that  crawls,  so  that  I  may  have 
a  double  tongue^ ;  enfold  me  in  your  arms,  and  embrace  my 
neck. 

Abo.  She,  embrace  you,  villain?  Lib.  Seally,  howtm- 
deserving  I  do  seem.  Tou  shan't  for  no  purpose  have 
uttered  a  speech  so  unseemly  against  me.  By  my  troth,  if 
indeed  you  expect  to  get  this  money,  this  day  you  shall  cany 
myself  on  your  shoulders. 

Aeo.  What  ?  I,  carry  you  ?  Lib.  Otherwise,  you  shan't 
get  this  money  from  me. 

Abg.  Heavens,  I'm  undone!  Still,  if  indeed  it  is  de- 
corous for  the  master  to  carry  the  servant,  mount. 

Lib.  Li  this  way  are  proud  people  wont  to  be  tamed. 
Stand  still  then,  just  as  you  were  wont  to  do  when  formerly 
a  boy*.  Do  you  understand  what  I  say  ?  {JELe  prepares  to 
get  ti^on  the  shoulders  ofAjSiGtYBiSTVB.)  Aye — so — ^move  on : 
1  praise  you  much  ;  not  any  horse  is  there  more  clever  than 
yourself  as  a  horse. 

Abo.  {while  stooping).  Get  on,  directly.  Lib.  I'll  do  so. 
{He  gets  on.)  Hallo  ! — ^what's  the  matter  ?  How  are  you 
^oing  ?  By  my  troth,  I'll  deprive  you  of  your  barley  then, 
if  you  don't  amble*,  lifting  up  your  feet. 

Abg.  Prithee,  Libanus,  there's  enough  now. 

Lib.  Never  this  day,  by  my  troth,  shiU  you  get  anything 

*  For  (hefreed-many-^er.  694.  By  "  libertus,"  or  "  freed-man,**  he  xnetns 
himself,  while  Libanus  is  his  *'  patroims,**  or  "  patxon.** 

2  A  dofAHe  tongue) — ^Ver.  699.  An  unseemly  allusion  is  intended  in  this  ex- 
pression. 

»  When  formerly  a  6<>y)— Ver.  707. "  Hani  soit  qtu  mal  y  pense"  shoold  be  said 
to  Lambinus  and  the  other  Commentators,  who  have  imaged  an  indelicate  allnsioa 
to  be  coached  under  these  words.  He  clearly  alludes  to  the  boyish  game  of  leap- 
frog, at  which  they  had  in  childhood  been  accustomed  '*  to  make  a  back.*' 

« Ifyim  dorCt  am&fe)— Ver.  710.  "  Badizas.**  This  is  an  adaptotioD  of  the 
Greek  verb  /3ad<(ai,  <*  to  go." 


y  Google 


Sc.  lU.  OBy  TH£  A8S-BEAXEB.  513 

by  entreaty.  For  now  up  hill  with  the  gpur  will  I  push  on  my 
steed.  After  that,  I'll  deliver  you  to  the  millers,  that  there 
you  may  be  tortured  as  you  run^.  Stand  still,  that  I  may 
now  at  once  get  down  for  the  hill,  although  you  are  but  a  bad 
one.     (Gets  off  his  shoulders.) 

Abg.  Well  now — since  you've  both  made  fun  of  me  just  as 
you  liked,  are  you  going  to  give  the  money  ? 

Lib.  Why ^  yes,  if,  indeed,  you  erect  to  me  a  statue  and  an 
altar,  and  then  sacrifice  an  ox  to  me  here  as  though  to  a  Grod ; 
for  I  am  the  Divinity  Salvation  to  you. 

Leon.  Nay,  but,  master,  do  you  betake  yourself  away  from 
him,  and  do  you  come  to  me.  And,  what  he  has  demanded  for 
himself,  will  you  erect  a  statue  for  me,  and  offer  prayers  to  fiie? 

Abg.  But  what  Divinity  am  I  to  call  you  ? 

Leok.  Fortune,  and  that  the  Propitious  one^.  Abg.  You 
are  better  than  he  then. 

Lib.  Why,  is  there  ever  anything  better  for  a  man  than 
Salvation  ? 

Abo.  Though  I  praise  Fortune,  still,  not  to  speak  in  dis- 
praise of  the  Divinity  Salvation 

Phil.  By  the  powers,  but  thev  are  good,  both  of  them. 

Abg.  I  shall  know  it,  when  they  have  conferred  anything 
that's  good. 

Leos^.  Wish  for  that  which  you  desire  to  befall  you. 

Abg.  What  if  I  do  wish  it  ?     Leon.  It  shall  come  to  pass. 

Abg.  I  wish  for  her  to  be  devoted  to  me  alone  this  whole 
year  round. 

Leon.  Tou  have  obtained  it.    Abg.  Do  you  reaUy  say  so  ? 

Leon.  I  do  say  so  for  certain.  Lib.  Come  to  me,  in  my 
turn,  and  make  trial;  wish  ardently  for  that  which  you 
especially  desire  to  happen  to  you ;  it  shall  be  done.    . 

•  Abg.  What  other  thing  could  I  ardently  wish  for  rather 
than  that  of  which  I  am  in  want  ?  Oblige  me  with  twenty 
silver  minse  to  give  to  her  mother. 

Lib.  They  shall  be  given :  take  care  and  be  of  good  courage, 
your  wishes  shall  be  fulfilled. 

Abg.  Just  as  they  are  wont,  Salvation  and  Fortune  are 
deceiving  mortals. 

1  Tortured  as  you  run)— Ver.  715.  He  allades  to  the  occapatioii  of  asses  and 
worn-out  horses  in  grinding  at  the  oom-mill. 

2  And  that  the  Prcpitious  one)— Ver.  720.  "  Fortima  Obsequens,"  or  "  Pro- 
pitious Fortune,"  had  a  Temple  at  Borne. 

2l 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC  ^ 


514  ASSSAMLL ;  Act  rV. 

Leoit.  I  this  daj  haTe  been  the  head  in  finding  this  momej 
for  you. 

Lib.  I  have  been  the  foot.  Abg.  Why,  neith^  head  nor 
foot  of  jour  talking  is  yisible ;  I  can  nndexstand  ndt^iier  what 
you  mean,  nor  why  you  are  trifling  with  me. 

Lib.  I  think  that  now  you're  been  teased  enough;  now 
let's  disclose  the  matter  as  it  realk/  stands.  Qive  your  attenr 
tion,  Argyrippus,  if  you  please.  Your  ^Either  has  ordered  us 
to  bring  this  money  to  you. 

Abo.  How  very  a  propos  and  opportunely  you  have 
brought  it. 

Lib.  (^ivUig  him  the  hctg).  Here,  in  this,  there  will  be  twenty 
good  minsB,  obtained  by  bad  means :  these,  on  certain  condi- 
tions, he  bade  us  give  you. 

Abg.  Prithee,  what  are  they  ?  Lib.  That  you  would  grant 
him  her  favours  and  an  entertainment. 

Asa.  Bid  him  come,  I  beg.  Por  him  who  deserves  it  right 
well,  we'll  do  what  he  wishes,  him  who  has  brought  these 
scattered  loves  of  ours  to  a  happy  result. 

Leon.  You'll  permit  your  father  then,  Argyrippus,  to  caress 
her? 

Abg:  She,  hy  hemg  restored  to  me,  will  easily  cause  me  to 
permit  it.  Prithee,  Leonida,  run,  and  beg  my  father  to  come 
here.     Lib.  He  has  been  in  the  house  some  time. 

Aeg.  He  hasn't  come  this  way,  at  all  events. 

Lib.  {^pointing  to  the  hack  way).  He  came  round  that  way^ 
by  the  lane,  through  the  garden,  lest  any  one  of  his  fri^ids 
should  see  him  coming  here ;  he's  afraid  that  his  wife  may 
came  to  know  of  it.  K  your  mother  knew  about  the  money, 
how  it  was  obtained 

Abg.  Well,  well — do  use  words  of  good  omen^;  goin-doors 
quickly,  fiirewell. 

JjEOiSi.  And  you  two,  love  on.  {He  and  Lzbajtus  go  kUa 
the  house  of  Dem^netus  ;  AEeTBiPPUS  and  PHiLEimrM  into 
that  of  Clejbbeta.) 

Act  IV. — Scene  I. 
3nter  Diabolus  and  a  Pabasite,  with  a  scroll  in  Ms  hand. 
DiAB.  Come  now,  show  me  this  agreement  that  you've 

1  Came  round  that  way) — ^Ver.  746.  Well  he  might  I 

2  Use  words  of  good  owm)— Ter.  749.  "  Benedicite."  This  was  a  form  nude 
use  of  for  the  purpose  of  averting  bad  omens. 


y  Google 


Se.  I.  OB,  THE  A88-]1£AI<£B.  515 

writfcefn  out  between  myself  and  the  procuress.  Bead  over 
the  conditions ;  for  you  are  a  quite  unique  composer^  in  such 
matters. 

Pab.  I'll  make  the  procuress  be  terrified  when  she  hears 
the  conditions. 

DiAB.  Troth  now,  prithee,  proceed  cmd  read  them  over 
to  me. 

Pab.  Are  you  attending  ?     Diab.  I'm  all  attention. 

Pab.  {reads  the  agreement).  "  Diabolus,  the  son  of  Glaucus, 
has  made  a  present  to  Clesereta,  the  procuress,  of  twenty 
silver  minse,  that  Phileniiun  may  be  witn  him  night  and  day 
for  this  whole  year." 

Diab.  Yes,  and  not  with  any  other  person. 

Pab.  Am  I  to  add  that  ?  Diab.  Add  it,  and  take  care 
and  write  it  plainly  and  distinctly. 

Pab.  {writes  it  chum,  and  then  reads),  "  And  not  admit  any 
other  man  whatever,  because  either  her  friend  or  her  patron, 
she  may  choose  to  call  him " 

Diab.  Not  any  one !  Pab.  "  Or  because  she  may  say  that 
he  is  the  lover  of  a  female  friend  of  hers.  The  door  must  be 
closed  to  all  men  except  to  yourself  On  the  door  she  must 
write  that  she  is  engaged.  Or,  because  she  may  affirm  that  the 
letter  has  been  brought  from  abroad,  there  is  not  to  be  even 
any  letter  in  the  house,  nor  so  much  as  a  waxed  tablet ;  and  if 
there  is  any  useless  picture^,  let  her  sell  it ;  if  she  does  not  part 
with  it,  within  four  days  from  the  time  when  she  has  received 
the  money  of  you,  let  it  be  considered  as  your  own ;  you  to  bum 
it  if  you  like ;  so  that  she  may  have  no  wax,  with  which  she 
may  be  able  to  make  a  letter.  She  is  to  invite  no  guest ;  you 
are  to  invite  them.    On  no  one  of  them  is  she  to  cast  her  eyes : 

'  A  quite  uniqve  contpoaer) — ^Ver.  762.  "  Poeta"  is  here  xiaed  in  the  primary 
sense  of  the  word,  from  the  Greek  vovtfrriv,  "  a  maker,"  "  artist,"  or  "  con- 


^  Any  useless  picture) — Ver.  768.  Some  of  the  CommeDtators  have  sup- 
posed that  indecent  or  immodest  pictures  are  here  meant.  Such  is  not  the 
fact.  Portraits  were  taken  among  the  Bomans  in  profile,  in  wax,  which  was 
laid  on  a  plane  sur&ce;  and  probably  other  pictures  were  similarly  con- 
structed. In  his  jealousy,  Diabolus  will  not  allow  Philenium  to  keep  any  useless 
or  valueless  picture,  for  fear  lest  she  may  melt  it,  to  use  the  wax  for  tablets,  as 
a  medium  of  correspondence  with  a  paramour.  To  a  portrait  of  this  kind,  Lao- 
damia  probably  refers  in  her  Epistle  to  Protesilaiis,  in  the  Heroides  of  Ovid,  1. 133 : 
'*  But  while  as  a  warrior  thou  shalt  be  wielding  arms  in  a  distant  re^on,  I  have 
a  waxen  figure  which  represents  thy  features." 

'>l2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


616  ABIKABIA ;  Act  rV- 

if  she  looks  upon  any  other  person,  she  must  be  blind  forth- 
with^. Then  she  is  to  drink  cup  by.  cup  equally  with  yourself. 
She  is  to  receive  it  firom  you ;  sne  is  to  hand  it  to  you  for  you 
to  drink.  She  is  not  to  have  a  relish  for  less  or  for  more 
than  yourself." 

DiAB.  That's  quite  to  my  taste. 

Par.  (reading),  "  She  is  to  remove  all  causes  of  suspicion 
from  her,  nor  is  she  to  tread  on  any  man's  foot^  with  her  foot ; 
when  she  rises  she  is  neither  to  step  upon  the  next  couch,  nor 
when  she  gets  down  j^ow  the  couch  is  she  thence  to  extend  her 
hand  to  any  one ;  she  is  not  to  give  to  nor  ask  of  any  one  a 
ring  for  her  to  look  at ;  she  is  not  to  present  dice  to  any  man 
whatever  except  to  yourself;  when  she  throws^  them,  she  is 
not  to  say,  'Tou  I  call  upon,^  she  is  to  mention  your  name. 
She  may  call  on  any  Goddess  that  she  pleases  as  propitious  to 
her,  hut  on  no  God :  if  she  should  chance  to  be  very  fuU  of 
devotion,  she  is  to  tell  you,  and  you  are  to  pray  to  him  that  he 
may  be  propitious.  She  is  neither  to  nod  at  any  man,  wink, 
or  make  a  sign.  In  fine,  if  the  lamp  goes  out,  she  is  not  to 
move  a  single  joint  of  herself  in  the  dark." 

DiAB.  iSiat's  very  good ;  so,  in  fact,  she  must  do :  but  ex- 
punge that  about  the  chamber ;  for  my  part,  I  prefer  that  she 
should  move.  I  don't  wish  her  to  have  an  excuse,  and  to  say 
that  it  is  forbidden  her  In/  her  vow. 

Pab.  I  understand,  you  fear  sonie  quibble.    Diab.  Just  so. 

Pab.  Then  as  you  bid  me,  I'll  strike  it  out.     {Erases  it.) 

Diab.  And  why  not  ?     Pab.  Hear  the  rest. 

Diab.  Say  on,  I'm  listening. 

Pab.  (ffoes  on  reading).  "And  she  is  not  to  use  any  shuffling 
words,  nor  is  she  to  tnow  how  to  speak  in  any  tongue  but 
the  Attic.  If  perchance  she  should  begin  to  cough,  she  is 
not  to  cough  so  as  to  expose  her  tongue  to  any  one  in  cough- 
ing.    But  if  she  should  pretend  as  though  she  had  a  running 

1  Must  be  hlindforthmth)—Yer.  775.  This  is  probably  a  polite  way  of  saying, 
"  Let  her  leave  the  room  forthwith." 

2  Tread  on  any  man^sfoot) — ^Ver.  780.  From  passages  in  Ovid's  Amours  and 
Art  of  Love,  we  learn  that  this  was  a  favourite  method  of  commanication  by  in- 
triguing parties. 

'  When  she  throws}— Yer.  785.  When  throwing  the  dice,  It  was  the  custom  to 
invoke  some  favourite  object,  which  was  thought  to  bring  good  luck  to  thi* 
thrower.  See  the  Notes  to  the  Captivi,  Act  I.,  Sc.  1.  She  is  not  to  say,  "  You  I 
invoke,"  lest,  by  the  ambiguity,  it  should  be  intended  to  apply  to  anotJier  man, 
and  not  to  her  protector. 


y  Google 


Sc.  I.  OB,  THE  ASS-BEALBB.  517 

at  the  nose^,  even  then  she  is  not  to  do  so ;  you  yourself  must 
wipe  her  lips,  rather  than  that  she  should  open  her  mouth 
before  anotner  person.  And  her  mother,  the  procuress,  is 
not  to  come  in  m  the  middle  of  the  wine,  nor  is  she  to  utter 
a  word  of  abuse  to  any  one ;  if  she  does  so  speak,  let  this  be 
her  fine,  to  go  for  twenty  days  without  wine." 

DiAB.  You  have  written  it  nicely ;  a  clever  agreement. 

Pab.  "  Then,  if  she  bids  her  maid-servant  carry  chapleta, 
garlands,  or  unguents,  to  Venus  or  to  Cupid,  your  servant  is 
to  watch  whether  she  gives  them  to  Yenus  or  to  a  man. 
If  perchance  she  should  say  she  wishes  to  keep  herself  in 
punty^,  let  her  account  for  as  many  nights  as  she  has  kept 
herself  in  purity.  These  are  no  trifles;  for  they  are  no 
funeral  dirge*.'* 

DiAB.  The  conditions  please  me  entirely ;  follow  me  in- 
doors.    Pab.  I  follow.  (jtheygointotheJioriseofQjJ^mKEJSk. 

Act  Y*. — Scene  L 
Enter  Diabolus  and  the  Pabasite. 
DiAB.  Follow  this  way.  Am  I  to  put  up  with  this,  or 
shall  I  hold  my  tongue  ?  I  would  rather  die  than  not  dis- 
cover this  to  his  wife.  And  say  you  so,  old  man  ?  With  a 
mistress  would  you  be  acting  the  part  of  a  youngster? 
"Would  you  be  excusing  yourself  to  your  wife,  and  calling 
yourself  an  aged  man  ?  Would  you  be  taking  the  mistress 
from  her  lover  ?  And  would  you  be  presenting  the  money  to 
the  procuress,  and  be  secretly  pilfering  it  from  your  wife  at 
home  ?  You  should  hang  me,  rather  than  you  should  carry 
off  these  matters  undiscovered.     On  my  honor,  I'll  teally 

*  A  running  at  ike  nose)— Yer.  801.  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  if  her 
nose  rtins  by  reason  of  a  catarrh,  she  is  not  to  open  her  month  to  put  her  tongue 
out,  but  that  Diabolns  is,  in  common  parlance,  to  wipe  her  nose  for  her. 

^  Keep  herself  in  purity) — Ver.  811.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  festival  of 
Isis  or  Ceres,  on  which  occasion  it  was  usual  for  the  female  votaries  rigidly  to 
separate  themselves  from  the  society  of  men.  The  translation  of  the  next  line  is 
.somewhat  modified. 

*  No  funeral  dirge)— Net.  813.  "  Mortualiji '*  were  the  songs  which  hired 
female  mourners  sang  at  funerals ;  and  which,  as  being  especially  worthless,  were 
pre-eminently  called  "  nugae,"  or  "  trifles." 

*  Act  F.)  One  scene,  at  least,  is  clearly  lost  here,  as  we  are  not  informed  how 
Diabolus  has  become  acquainted  with  the  manoeuvres  to  obtain  the  money, 
and  the  disgraceful  compact  made  by  Demsnetus ;  although,  not  improbably,  he 
has  caught  sight  of  him  in  the  house  of  the  procuress. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


518  ASiKABiA ;  j^t  y. 

go  this  instant  hence  to  her  whom  I'm  sure  that  you'll  rery 
soon  be  destroying,  in  order  that  you  may  be  able  to  supply 
your  extravagance,  unless,  indeed,  she  shful  first  prevent  you. 

Pab.  I'm  of  opinion  that  thus  you  must  act.  'Tis  more 
becoming  that  I  should  disclose  this  matter,  rather  than 
yourself,  lest  she  may  think  that  you,  excited  by  reason  of 
love,  rather  than  for  her  own  sake,  have  acted  thus. 

DiAB.  Why,  faith,  you  say  what's  right.  Do  you  then 
contrive  to  raise  a  storm  a»d  strife  against  him,  that  he,  to- 
gether with  his  own  son,  is  carousing  with  one  mistress  the 
livelong  day,  and  that  he's  secretly  pilfering  &om  her. 

Pab.  Don't  suggest  to  me.    I'll  take  care  of  that. 

DiAB.  But  I'll  wait  for  you  at  home.  (Uadt  DiABOiiUS ; 
the  Pabasitb  ffoes  into  the  hotise  o/*Demleketus.) 

Scene  IT. — A  Table,  and  everything  requisite  for  an  JEnter- 

tainment,  heing  placed  before   the   house  of  Clejgbeta, 

enter  AsGYBiPPrs,  Dem^itetus,  and  Phileniitm,  from 

the  home  of  Cle^beta. 

Ab&.  Come  then,  father,  let's  take  our  places,  please. 

Dem.  As  you  bid  me,  my  son,  so  it  shall  be. 

Abg.  (totheATTiiisiy±Tf(Ts),  Lads,  spread  the  table. 

DxM.  Is  it  at  all  displeasing  to  you,  son,  if  she  takes  her 
place  by  me  ?     (They  take  their  places.) 

Abg.  Duty,  father,  keeps  sorrow  &om  my  eyes ;  although 
I  love  her,  still  I  can  control  my  feelings,  not  to  take  it  to 
heart  because  she  takes  her  place  by  you. 

Dem.  It  becomes  a  young  man  to  be  respectful,  Argyrippus. 

Ab&.  Gl^roth,  father,  through  proper  regard  for  you,  I  can 
be  so. 

Dem.  Come,  then,  let's  enjoy  this  banquet  with  wine  and 
pleasant  discourse.  I  don't  wish  to  be  feared,  I  prefer  my- 
self to  be  loved  by  you,  my  son. 

Asa.  In  truth,  I  do  them  both,  as  is  proper  for  a  son. 

XhsM.  I'd  believe  it,  if  I  saw  you  were  cheerful. 

Abg.  Why,  do  you  think  that  I'm  sorrowful? 

Dbm.  Do  I  think  so  ?  You,  whom  I  see  aa  melancholy  as 
if  the  day^  ofl/rial  had  been  named  for  you. 

Abq.  Don't  you  say  that.  Dem.  Don't  you  be  so,  then 
I'll  not  say  so. 

^A»  tftheda^y— yer.Si6.  He  probably  meanB the daj  for esmiiH; in fiirjttdlg- 
ment,  or  else  for  trial. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


.Sc.  m.  OB,  THE  A8fl-I>EA.LEB.  519 

Aeg.  Wdl  then,  look  at  me ;  I'm  laughing.  (Jffi?  ejects 
to  laugh.) 

Dbm.  I'd  like  that  those  who  wish  me  ill  would  laugh  thus. 

Abg.  I  know,  indeed,  father,  why  you  now  suppose  to 
yoorself  that  I'm  sad ;  it  is  because  she  is  by  you.  And  really, 
father,  by  my  faith,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  that  matter  does 
Kurt  me ;  and  not  for  this  reason,  that  I  don't  desire  for  you 
tbat  which  you  wish,  but  hecauae  I  love  her ;  another  woman, 
indeed,  I  could  easily  endure  to  be  by  you. 

DsM.  But  I  haye  a  &ncy  for  this  one. 

Abo.  Then  you  have  what  you  desire ;  for  myself,  I  wish 
for  what  I  could  desire. 

Dem.  Submit  to  it  this  one  day,  since  I've  given  you  the 
power  to  be  with  her  for  a  year,  and  have  procured  for  you 
the  command  of  money  in  your  amour. 

Abo.  Well,  by  doing  that,  you  have  laid  me  under  an 
obligation  to  you. 

Dem.  "Why  then  don't  you  show  yourself  cheerful  to  me  ? 
(The^  commence  the  banquet,  PHlLEimriii:  reclining  below  De- 
iLaiio:TTrs.) 

ScEWE  HP. — ^JE^er  Abtemona  amd  the  VASiA&iTE,Jrom  the 
house  (?/'Dem^]o:tus,  at  the  further  side  of  the  stage. 

Abt.  Prithee,  do  you  say  that  my  husband  is  carousing 
here,  together  with  my  son  ? — -and  that  he  has  carried  to  his 
mistress  twenty  minae  of  silver  ? — and  that,  with  the  know- 
ledge of  my  son,  his  father  is  perpetrating  this  wickedness  ? 

Pab.  Trust  me  in  nothing  henceforth,  either  divine  or 
human,  Artemona,  if  you  find  me  untruthftd  in  this  matter. 

Abt.  Wretched  then  am  I,  who  have  supposed  that,  be- 
yond Others,  my  husband  was  sober,  decent,  chaste,  a^d  espe- 
cially fond  of  his  wife. 

Pab.  But  now,  henceforth,  understand  that  he,  before  all 
men,  is  a  person  of  the  smallest  worth — a  drunkard,  ^a  good- 
for-nothing  fellow,  unchaste,  and  a  contemner  of  his  own  wife. 

^  Scene  IIL) — In  the  early  part  of  this  Scene,  the  wife  and  the  Parasite  do  not 
see  Demsenetns,  who  is  carousing  in  the  front  of  Clesereta's  house,  at  the  other 
side  of  the  stage.  We  must  remember  that  the  Boman  stage  was  of  vast  extent 
— as  much,  according  to  some  writers,  as  180  feet  in  width.  Perhaps  a  wall 
extended  a  little  forward  by  the  side  of  the  house,  which  would  preclude  the  view 
of  what  was  (j^ing  on  behind  it  and  near  to  the  door,  until  Artemona  and  the 
Fniasite  ha4  tmTersed  the  stage. 


y  Google 


520  ^  asikaeia;  ActV. 

Abt.  I'  faith,  if  this  wasn't  true,  he  would  never  be  doing 
the  things  that  he  is  now  doing. 

Pae.  Upon  my  word,  I  too  always  hitherto  took  him  to  be 
a  decent  person ;  but  by  this  action  he  declares  himself, — ^to 
be  carousing,  indeed,  together  with  his  son,  and,  a  decrepit 
old  man,  toying  with  a  mistress  in  his  company. 

Aet.  For  this  it  is,  i'  faith,  that  he's  going  out  to  dinner 
every  day.  He  says  that  he's  going  to  Archidemus,  Chereas, 
Chserestratus,  Clinius,  Chremes,  Cratinus,  Dinias,  Demos- 
thenes :  while  he's  thinking  of  debauchery,  and  public  dens 
of  infamy  with  his  harlot. 

Pae.  Why  don't  you  bid  your  maid-servants  carry  him  off 
home  upon  their  shoulders  ? 

Aet.  Do  you  only  be  quiet.  By  my  troth,  I'll  surely  give 
him  some  trouble. 

Pae.  I'm  sure  of  it,  that  so  it  will  befall  him,  so  long, 
indeed,  as  you  shall  continue  married  to  him. 

Aet.  I  was  fancying  that  this  fellow  was  still  giving  at- 
tendance either  in  the  senate  or  to  liis  dependants  :  that  for 
that  reason  it  was,  that,  worn  out  with  fatigue,  he  snored  the 
whole  night  through.  Wearied  with  his  labours  out  of  doors 
he  comes  home  at  night.  Another's  farm  he  ploughs,  his  own 
he  leaves  untilled.  Both  he  himself  is  corrupted,  and  he  cor- 
rupts his  son  as  well. 

Pae.  Do  you  only  follow  me  this  way,  I'll  make  you  just 
now  to  fall  upon  the  man  himself  in  the  very  fact. 

Aet.  By  heaven,  there's  nothing  that  I  coidd  more  wish  for. 

Pae.  Just  stop  there,  {lie  moves  stealthily  forward,  and 
examines  the  other  side  of  the  stage.) 

Aet.  What's  the  matter?  Pae.  {returning  to  her).  If 
perchance  you  were  to  see  your  husband  reclinnag,  if  you  be- 
held him  with  a  garland  on,  caressing  a  mistress,  could  you 
recognize  him  ? 

Aet.  I'  troth,  I  could.  Pae.  {points  to  the  other  end  of 
the  stage).  Then  there's  your  man. 

Aet.  {moving  stealthily  forward  with  the  Pabasite).  I'm 
undone. 

Pae.  Stay  a  little.  Let's  observe  in  private,  from  ambush, 
what  business  they  are  about. 

Aeg.  What  end  will  you  put  to  your  caresses,  father  ? 

Dbm.  I  confess,  my  son Aeg.  What  do  you  confess  ? 


y  Google 


Sc.  ni.  OB,  THE  ASB-BEALEB.  o21 

Dem.  That  I'm  utterly  undone  with  love  for  her. 

Pab.   {to  Abtemona).  Do  you  hear  what  he  says  ? 

Abt.  I  hear. 

Dem.  (to  Philenium).  Ought  I  not  to  filch  the  mantle 
from  my  wife  at  home,  which  she  is  so  fond  of,  and  bring  it  to 
you  ?  Though  my  wife's  life  should  last  a  whole  year  in  con-^ 
sequence,  by  my  troth  I  could  not  be  dissuaded ^(wi  doin^  so, 

Pab.  (to  Abtemona).  Do  you  suppose  that  he  has  been 
accustomed  to  frequent  a  brothel  to-day  for  the  first  time  ? 

Abt.  Upon  my  faith,  it  was  he  that  was  pilfering  me ; 
whereas  I  was  suspecting  my  maid-servants,  and  was  torment- 
ing the  wretched  creatures  who  were  innocent  all  the  while, 

Ab&.  Father,  bid  him  pour  out  some  wine ;  'tis  a  long 
time  since  1  drank  first^. 

Dem.  (to  the  Sebvant).  Begin,  boy,  from  the  top^.  (To 
Philekium).  Come,  do  you  meanwhile  from  below  give  me 
a  kiss.     (Kisses  her.) 

Abt.  (to  the  Pabasite).  Wretch  that  I  am,  I'm  undone ! 
How  the  villain,  the  garnishing  of  a  bier^,  is  kissing  away. 

Dem.  a  breath,  by  my  faith,  somewhat  sweeter  than  that 
of  my  wife. 

Phil.  Tell  me,  there's  a  dear,  does  the  breath  of  your  wife 
smell  bad  ? 

Dem.  I'd  prefer  to  drink  bilge-water,  if  it  were  necessary, 
rather  than  kiss  her. 

Art,  (apart).  By  heavens,  you  are  a  wretch.  Pab.  (apart), 
I'  faith,  he's  deserving  so  to  be. 

Abo.  How  say  you,  father  ?  (Takes  a  draught  in  the  mean" 
while.) 

Abt.  (apart).  Aye,  pray,  how  say  you  ?  By  my  troth,  to 
your  own  great  detriment,  you've  surely  said  that  against 
me.    Never  mind ;  only  do  you  come  home,  I'll  let  you  know 

*  Sinct  I  drank  frsf) — Ver.  896.  They  probably  took  the  first  draught  each  in 
his  torn.  Argyrippns  tells  his  father  that  he  is  dry,  and  that  it  is  a  long  time 
smce  be  had  the  first  draught. 

2  From  the  top) — ^Ver.  897.  We  are  to  suppose  that  the  three  are  reclining  on 
one  **  tricliniam,"  or  couch.  Argyrippus  lies  at  the  top,  his  father  below  him, 
and  Philenium  the  lowest,  with  her  head  reclining  on  the  old  man's  breast. 

^  Of  a  bier) — ^Ver.  898.  "Capulus"  was  another  name  of  the  "Icctica**  or 
"  feretrum,"  on  which  the  corpse  was  carried  to  the  funeral  pile.  In  the  case  of 
rich  people,  the  "  capuli"  were  sometimes  made  of  ivory,  and  covered  with  gold 
and  purple. 


y  Google 


622  abotabia;  Act  Y. 

what  danger  there  is  in  speaking  abusively  againBt  a  wife 
with  a  dowry. 

Aeg.  Don't  you  love  my  mother  ? 

DsM.  Who — ^I  ?  I  love  her  just  now,  because  she  isn't 
present. 

Abg.  How,  when  she  is  present  ? 

Dem.  Then,  I  wish  she  was  dead.  Pab.  (apaH  to  Abti- 
moi^a)  .  This  fellow  is  fond  of  you,  according  to  what  he  says. 

Abt.  On  my  word,  he's  surely  laying  out  M  tiu  at 
interest;  for  if,  this  day,  he  returns  home,  I'll  especially 
have  my  revenge  in  kissing  him. 

Aeg.  (handing  the  dice-boa:).  Eather,  throw  tibe  dice ;  that 
afberwards  I  may  have  a  throw. 

Dem.  By  all  means.  You,  Phileniinn,  for  myself,  anddealb 
for  my  wife.  {He  throws.)  'Tis  Venus's  cast^.  Lads,  dap 
your  hands,  and  give  me  some  honeyed  wine  in  my  cup,  in 
honor  of  my  throw. 

Abt.  (apart),  I  can  hold  out  no  longer. 

Pab.  (apart).  If  you  haven't  learned  the  fulling  trade^,  it's 
not  to  be  wondered  at ;  now  ifs  quite  fitting  for  you  to  beset 
his  eyes.     (They  make  their  appearance  before  the  revellers,) 

Abt.  By  heavens,  I  will  live,  and  you  this  day  have  made 
that  invocation  to  your  own  great  misfortune. 

Pab.  Will  some  one  nm  to  fetch  the  undertaker*  ? 

1  Venus's  co^)— Ver.  911.  "  Venereas  jacttis  "  was  the  best  throw  on  the  set  of 
four  "  tali,"  or  kuuckle-bone  dice,  used  hy  the  ancients.  It  is  supposed  to  have 
been  a  combination  of  the  numbers,  the  sum  of  which  was  fourteen.  When 
trying  to  throw  the  *'  Venereus  jactus,**  it  was  usual  to  mention  the  name  of  the 
mistress  of  the  thrower ;  and  Demsenetus  throws  in  *^  death  to  his  wife,"  bj  wi^  of 
aopplement.  From  the  next  line,  he  i^pears  to  have  been  suoeasfal  in  his 
throw. 

2  HavenH  learned  ike  ftiUmg  trade) — Ver.  913.  He  intends  a  pun  here  upon  the 
word  " durare,"  which  meant  either  "to  endure,"  "bear,"  or  *^hdld  out;"  is 
also  **  to  full,"  "  harden,"  or  "  thicken  doth,"  by  the  fuller's  art.  Arteraona  says 
that  she  cannot "  durare  "  in  the  first  sense ;  on  which  the  Parasite  quibbles,  aod 
says,  "  Because  you  have  not  learnt  the  f  ulHug  art."  In  the  next  fine  also  a  piqr 
upon  words  is  intended,  as  ".mvadi  in  oculos  "  may  mean  either  "  prwent  yoondf 
before  his  eyes "  <»:  "  attack  his  eyes,"  and  claw  them  out.  Ko  doubt  tht 
Parasite  woidd  have  relished  the  fun,  if  she  had  taken  his  advice  in  the  latter 
sense. 

3  Theundertalcery'Vtx,^!^,  The  "  poliinctores "  were  slaves,  who  bekq^ 
to  the  "  libitinarii,"  or  "  undertakers,"  and  whose  dutj  it  was  to  anoint  the  body 
with  oil  and  perfumes  before  it  was  burnt. 


y  Google 


Sc.  HI.  OB,  TH£  A8S-DEA.LEB.  €23 

Abg.  Health  to  you,  mother.  Abt.  Health  indeed  after 
this  fashion ! 

Pab.  (aside).  Demaenetus  is  dead.  'Tis  time  to  betake 
myself  hence :  this  battle  bravely  waxes  hot.  I'll  be  off  to 
Diabolus.  I'll  tell  him  his  orders  are  performed  as  he  de- 
sired them ;  and  in  the  meantime  I'll  persuade  him  that  we 
should  take  a  meal,  while  these  people  are  squabbling. 
Afterwards,  in  fine,  I'll  bring  him  here  to-morrow,  to  the 
procuress,  that  he  may  give  her  the  twenty  minse,  that,  in  his 
turn,  he  in  his  passion  may  be  enabled  to  obtain  this  damsel. 
I  hope  that  Argyrippus  will  be  able  to  be  prevailed  upon  to 
allow  him  to  pass  each  alternate  night  with  him  in  her  com- 
pany; for,  unless  I  obtain  that,  I've  lost  my  patron^;  so 
great  is  the  passion  of  the  man  by  reason  of  his  love.  (JELe 
quietly  withdraws.) 

Art.  (addressing  Philenittm).  What  business  have  you 
to  give  a  retreat  here  in  your  house  to  my  husband  ? 

Phil.  Troth,  he  realty  will  this  day  be  the  death  of 
wretched  me,  through  sheer  disgust. 

Abt.  (to  Dem-eketxts).  Eise,  wencher,  be  off  home. 

Dem.  I'm  undone.  Abt.  Yes,  you  are^ ;  don't,  i'  faith, 
gainsay  it,  you  most  vile  of  all  men.  Why,  the  cuckoo's 
still  on  his  nest^.     Bise,  wencher,  be  off  home. 

Dem.  Woe  to  me !  Abt.  Tou  prophesy  correctly.  Eise, 
wencher,  be  off  home. 

Dem.  Step  a  little  this  way  then. 

Abt.  Eise,  wencher,  be  off  home.  Dem.  'Now,  prithee, 
wife 

Abt.  Do  you  remember  now  that  I'm  your  wife  ?  It  was 
but  just  now,  when  you  were  heaping  abuse  upon  me,  that 
I  wasn't  your  wife. 

Dem.  I'm  utterly  nuned.  Abt.  Why,  pray?  Does 
the  breath  of  your  wife  smell  strong  ? 

Dem.  It  smells  of  myrrh.  Abt.  Have  you  filched  my 
mantle  then  to  be  giving  to  your  harlot  ? 

*  Jfyjpafron)— Ver.  925.  ** Begem."  Literally,  "my  king;"  the  name  which 
Parasites  bestowed  upon  their  patrons. 

*  Je»,  ffou  arc)— Ver.  928.  He  says,  "  nnllns  smn,"  in  the  sense  of  "  I'm  tm- 
done ;"  but  she  chooses  to  take  it  as  thoagh  he  had  meant  "  I  am  a  worthless 
fellow,"  which  meaning  these  words  are  capable  of  bearing. 

*  Cuckoo's  ttUl  OH  his  nesf)— Ver.  929.  The  enckoo  takes  possession  of  the 
nests  of  other  birds,  and  kys  its  eggs  there.  Artemona  probably  allades  to  that 
fact,  on  seeing  her  husband  under  such  disgraceful  circumstances. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


524  ASTNAEIA.  ActV. 

Aeg.  By  the  powers — what,  did  he  promise  that  he  would 
filch  your  mantle  ? 

Abt.  Won't  you  hold  your  tongue  ? 

Abo.  I  was  going  to  dissuade  him,  mother.  Abt.  {to 
Abgtbippus).  a  pretty  son!  (To  Dem^netus.)  Is  it 
proper  for  a  father  to  teach  these  morals  to  his  children  ? 
Are  you  ashamed  of  nothing  ? 

Dem.  I'  faith,  if  there's  nothing  else,  I'm  ashamed  of 
you,  wife. 

Abt.  "With  your  hoary  head,  your  wife  is  dragging  you, 
1/ou  cuckoo,  from  dens  of  infamy. 

Dem.  The  dinner's  cooking ;  mayn't  I  stop,  only  to  take 
my  dinner  ? 

Abt.  Eaith,  you'll  dine  to-day  on  a  heavy  mishap,  as  you 
deserve. 

Dem.  (rising),  I  shall  repose  hut  uncomfortably ;  my  wife 
is  taking  me  home  condemned. 

Aeg.  I  told  you,  father,  not  to  devise  ill  against  my 
mother. 

Phil,  (^o  Demjenettjs).  Do  remember  about  the  mantle^ 
there's  a  dear. 

Dem.  (calls  out  to  CLE-aEBETA).  Won't  you  order  her  to 
go  away  from  here? 

Phil.  No,  I'll  go  in,  in  preference.  (To  AEGTBiPPrs.) 
Follow  meHhis  way,  my  life. 

Abo.  Yes,  I  follow.    Abt.  (to  DBM-asuETUs).  Be  off  home. 

Phil,  (to  Dem-snetus).  Do  give  me  a  kiss,  at  least,  be- 
fore you  go. 

Dem.  (to  Philenium).  Go  hang  yourself.        (Exeunt, 

The  Company  of  the  Comedians. 
If  this  old  fellow,  unknown  to  his  wife,  has  been  in  any 
way  indulging  his  own  inclinations,  he  has  been  doing  nothing 
new  or  wonderful,  or  otherwise  than  others  are  in  the  habit 
of  doing,  No  one  is  there  of  a  disposition  so  severe,  or  of  » 
temper  so  firm,  but  that  he  will  enjoy  himself  when  he  ba« 
any  opportunity.  Now  if  you  wish  to  interpose  in  behalf 
of  this  old  man,  so  that  he  be  not  punished,  we  think  that 
it  can  be  brought  about  if  you  give  ««  loud  applause. 

»  AhoutihtmafUU)—\et,  946.  This  she  says  by  way  of  a  farewell  bMiter  to 
the  old  fellow,  whom  she  is  too  happy  to  get  rid  of. 


y  Google 


CURCULIO;  OR,  THE  FORGERY, 


Bramatis  ^nsun^r. 

OuKCULio,  the  Parasite  of  Phaedromus. 
Thsrapomtigonus,  a  Captain  of  Caria. 
pHiEDROMUs,  a  young  man  in  lore  with  Planesiam. 

p      ,         '        >  Servants  of  PhsBdromns. 

Lyco,  a  Banker. 

Cappadoz,  a  Procurer. 

The  Chobegus  (or,  Director  of  the  Choms). 

An  Actor. 

Planesium,  a  jonng  woman  belon^ng  to  Cappadox. 
I  An  Old  Woman,  a  Procuress. 

! 

Scene, — ^Epidaurus,  in  Peloponnesus ;  before  the  houses  of  Pii^dromub  and 
Cappadox,  and  the  Temple  of  ^sculapius. 


y  Google  -^ 


THE    SUBJECT. 


PiLSDROMVS  is  desperately  in  love  with  Planesium,  who  is  in  the  possession  of 
Cappadoz,  an  avaricious  Procurer.  Not  having  the  means  of  obtaining  her 
freedom,  Phsedromus  sends  Oorcuiiioi,  his  Parasite,  to  Caria,  to  borxx>w  the 
money  from  a  friend.  The  friend  being  unable  to  lead  it,  Curculio  by  accident 
meets  a  military  o£5cer,  named  Therapontigonus,  and  is  invited  by  him  to  dinner. 
The  Captain  accidentally  mentions  to  him  that  he  has  agreed  to  purchase  Plane- 
sium  of  the  Procurer,  and  that  the  moaoiey  is  deponted  with  Lyco,  the  banker,  who 
has  been  ordered,  on  receiving  a  letter  signed  with  the  Captain's  signet,  to  have 
the  young  woman  delivered  to  the  bearer.  While  the  Captun  is  overpowered 
with  wine,  Curculio  steals  his  signet,  and  hastens  back  to  Epidaunis,  where  he 
forges  a  letter  by  means  of  it,  which  he  ddiv«n  to  Lyoo,  as  though  from  the 
Captain.  The  money  is  paid  to  the  Procurer,  and  Planesiam  is  handed  over  to 
Curculio ;  a  condition  having  been  previously  made,  that  if  she  should  turn  out  to 
be  a  free  woman  by  birth,  the  money  shall  be  repaid  to  the  purchaser.  Gareulio 
then  delivers  Planesium  to  PhsBdromus.  The  same  day,  the  Captain  arrives  at 
Epidaums,  and  is  soon  after  recognized  by  Planesium  as  her  brother,  through 
the  medium  of  the  ring,  which  had  belonged  to  her  father.  To  corroborate  her 
assertion,  Planesium  produces  another  ring,  wfairii  Therapontigonus  bad  pre- 
sented to  her  when  a  child  as  a  Inrthday  present.  On  this,  she  is  given  by  her 
brother  in  marriage  to  Phsedromus ;  and  Cappadoz,  much  against  his  will,  is 
forced  to  refund  the  money  to  the  Captain, 


y  Google 


CURCULIO;  OR,  THE  FORGERY. 


THE  ACBOSTIC  ARGUMENT. 
[Supposed  to  have  been  written  by  Prisdan  the  Grammarian.] 
On  an  errand  of  Phsedtomos,  Curcnlio  {Cvrcidio)  goes  to  Caria,  that  (Uf)  he 
may  obtain  some  money;  there  he  despoils  the  rival  (Rivalem)  of  Phcddro- 
OTfw  of  his  ring.  He  writes  a  letter,  and  seals  it  with  that  seal.  Lyco,  when 
he  sees  it,  recognizes  (^Coffnoacii)  the  seal  of  the  Captam ;  that  (^Ut)  he  may 
send  him  his  mistress,  he  pays  the  money  to  the  Procnrer.  The  Captam 
threatens  to  summon  Lyco  (^Lyconern)  and  the  Procurer  to  justice:  he  himself 
QIpsw)  discovers  his  sister  that  was  lost,  at  whose  request  (Oratu)  he  gives 
her  m  marriage  to  Phsedromus. 


Act  I. — Scene  I.     (Before  deN/break.) 

Enter  at  one  side  of  the  stage  pH^DBOMrs,  with  a  lighted 
torch,  and  followed  hy  Slaves  vnth  wine  and  'promsions  for 
an  entertainment,  a/nd  PALiNUErs  on  the  opposite  side. 

Pal.  Whither  away  must  I  say  that  you  are  going  out  of 
doors  at  this  time  o'  night,  Phaedromus,  with  that  dress  and 
with  this  traini  ? 

Phjed.  Whither  Yenus  and  Cupid  summon  me,  and  Love 
persuades  me;  whether  'tis  the  midnight  or  whether  the 
earliest  twilight,  if  the  day  is  fixed^  for  pleading  yowr  cause 
with  your  antagonist,  still  must  you  go  where  they  com- 
mand you,  whether  you  will  or  no. 

Pal.  But  pray,  pray Ph^d.  Pray you  are  an- 
noying to  me. 

Pal.  Eeally  that  is  neither  pretty  nor  befitting  you  to 

^  Avd  toith  this  train) — ^Ver.  2.  As  it  is  supposed  to  be  before  daybreak,  he  is 
holding  a  lighted  torch,  and  is  attended  by  a  train  of  slaves,  who  are  carrymg 
wine  and  other  provisions  for  the  entertainment,  or  early  breakfast,  which  he  is 
about  to  give.    He  has  also  a  gay  dress  on  for  the  occasion. 

^  If  the  day  is  Jixed) — ^Ver.  6.  "  Status  condictus  dies."  This  term  properly 
applies  to  a  day  appointed  for  pleading  a  cause. 


y  Google 


628  CITBCULIO ;  Act  I. 

say.  You  are  your  own  servant^ ;  in  your  fine  garb  you  are 
showing  the  light  with  your  waxen  torch^. 

Phjed.  And  ought  I  not  to  carry  that  wliich  is  gathered 
by  the  labour  of  the  little  bees — which  has  its  birth  in  sweets 
— to  my  own  sweet  one,  my  little  honey  ? 

Pal.  But  whither  must  I  say  that  you  are  going  ? 

Ph^d.  If  you  ask  me  that,  I'll  tell,  so  that  you  may  Igiow. 

Pal.  If  I  make  the  enquiry,  what  would  you  answer  me  ? 

Phjsd.  This  is  the  Temple  {pointing  to  it)  of  ^sculapius. 

Pal.  That  I  have  known  for  more  than  a  twelvemonth  2>a«^. 

Ph^d.  Close  to  it  is  that  door,  dear  as  my  very  eyes. 
(Foints  to  the  door  of  Cappadox.)  Hail  to  you !  door,  dear 
as  my  very  eyes ;  have  you  been  quite  well  of  late  ? 

Pal.  Did  a  fever  leave  you^  but  yesterday,  or  the  day 
before*  and  did  you  take  your  dinner  yesterday  ? 

Ph-ed.  Are  you  laughing  at  me  ?  Pal.  Why  then,  mad- 
man, are  you  enquiring  whether  the  door  is  well  or  not  ? 

Ph-SD.  I'  faith,  I've  known  it  as  a  door  most  comely  and 
most  discreet :  never  one  word  does  it  whisper ;  when  it  is 
opened,  it  is  silent ;  and  when,  by  night,  she  secretly  comes 
out  to  me,  it  holds  its  peace. 

Pal.  And  are  you  not,  Phaedromus,  doing,  or  contemplating 
the  doing  of,  some  deed  which  is  unworthy  of  yourself  or  of 
your  family  ?  Are  you  not  laying  a  snare  for  some  modest 
fair  one,  or  for  one  that  should  be  modest  ? 

Ph^d.  For  no  one ;  and  may  Jupiter  not  permit  me  to 
do  so. 

Pal.  I  wish  the  same.  Ever,  if  you  are  wise,  so  bestow 
your  love,  that  if  the  public  should  know  the  object  which 
you  love,  it  may  be  no  disgrace  to  you.  Ever  do  you  take 
care  that  you  be  not  disgraced*. 

1  Your  own  servant) — ^Ver.  9.  "  Puer"  may  signify  either  "  servanr  or  **  boy"  in 
this  passage.  In  the  former  case,  Palinums  would  mean,  "  yoa  are  acting  as  yonr 
own  servant,  in  carrying  the  torch ;"  in  the  latter,  the  allusion  would  probably  be 
to  the  fact  that  boys,  handsomely  drest,  used,  at  the  nuptial  ceremony,  to  cany 
lighted  torches  before  the  bride  and  bridegroom. 

2  Your  waxen  torc7i)—Yer.  10.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  flambeaus,  or 
torches,  used  by  the  higher  classes,  were  of  wax ;  while  those  in  more  common  use 
were  made  of  pine-wood,  tow,  and  other  inflammable  substances, 

'  A  fever  leave  yoii) — ^Ver.  18.  He  asks  his  master  this,  as  he  is  in  doubt  whether 
he  is  in  his  senses  or  rot.  It  was  a  notion  among  the  ancients  that  fiisting  was 
very  apt  to  produce  delirium. 

*  Be  not  disffracedy-Yer.  30.  "  Intcstabihs."    One  who  is  infamous,  and 


y  Google 


Sc.  I^  OUy  THE  FOBOEBT.  529 

PHiBD.  "What  means  that  expression  ?  Pal.  Por  you  to 
proceed  with  caution  on  your  path;  the  object  that  you 
love,  love  in  the  presence  of  witnesses. 

Ph-SD.  Why,  'tis  a  Procurer  that  lives  here.    (HepomU,) 

PaIi.  No  one  drives  you  away  from  there,  nor  yet  forbids 
you,  if  you  have  the  money,  to  buy  what's  openly  on  sale. 
No  one  forbids  any  person  from  going  along  the  public  road, 
so  long  as  he  doesn't  make  a  path  throu^  the  field  that's 
fenced  around ;  so  long  as  you  keep  yourself  away  from  the 
wife,  the  widow,  the  maiden,  youthftd  age,  and  free-bom 
children,  love  what  you  please. 

Phjbd.  This  is  the  house  of  a  Procurer. 

PaIi.  a  curse  befall  it.     Ph^d.  Why  so  ? 

Pal.  Because  it  serves  in  an  infamous  service. 

Ph^d.  You  speak  out.     Pal.  Be  it  so,  most  especially. 

Phjsd.  Once  more,  will  you  hold  your  tongue  ? 

Pal.  Tou  bade  me  speak  out^,  I  thought. 

Phjbd.  Then,  now  I  forbid  you.  But,  as  I  had  begun  to 
say,  he  has  a  young  female  slave 

Pal.  This  Procurer,  you  mean,  who's  living  here  ? 

Ph^d.  Tou  have  hold  of  it  exactly. 

Pal.  The  less  shall  I  be  in  dread  of  its  falling. 

Yhjbs),  You  are  impertinent.  He  wishes  to  make  her 
a  courtesan,  while  she  is  desperately  in  love  with  me; 
whereas  I  don't  wish  to  have  her  upon  loan. 

Pal.  Why  so  ?  Phjed.  Because  I'm  for  having  her  as  my 
own ;  I  love  her  equally  as  well. 

Pal.  Clandestine  courtship  is  bad ;  'tis  utter  ruin. 

Ph^d.  I'  troth,  'tis  so  as  you  say. 

Pal.  Has  she  as  yet  submitted  to  the  yoke  of  Venus  ? 

PH-asD.  Por  me  she  is  as  chaste  as  though  she  were  my 
own  sister,  unless,  indeed^  she  is  any  the  more  unchaste  for 
some  kissing. 

whose  evidence  cannot  be  taken  as  a  witness  in  the  courts  of  law.  Lambinns  sug- 
gests that  here,  as  in  other  instances  where  the  word  is  used  by  Plantos,  an  inde- 
licate pnn  is  intended. 

1  Bade  me  speak  <yu£) — ^Ver.  42.  Phsedromos  had  said  to  Falinums,  "  Oblo- 
quere,'*  which  may  either  mean  "you  are  abusive"  or  "do  you  speak  out." 
Phsdromus  intends  it  in  the  former  sense,  but  Palinurus  pretends  to  understand 
it  in  the  latter;  and  when  his  master  tells  him  to  be  quiet,  he  says,  "  Why,  I 
thought  you  told  me  to  speak  out*' 

2k 


y  Google 


5tO  cuBfiULio ;  Aft  L 

Pal.  Always,  do  you  underhand,  flame  ^^Amot  veary  dbse 
on  Bmoke ;  with  smoke,  nothing  can  be  buint,  witii  flAme,  it 
can.  He  who  wishes  to  eat  the  kernel^  of  the  nut,  fini 
bleaks  the  nut ;  he  who  wishes  to  seduce,  opens  the  dance^ 
with  kisses. 

Fblsp.  But  she  is  chaste,  and  ncTW  yet  has  bestowed  her 
&vours  upon  man. 

Pal.  ThMt  I  could  believe^,  if  any  Procurer  had  any 
shame. 

Ph^b.  Well,  but  what  think  you  of  her  ?  When  ahe  has 
any  opportunity,  she  steals  away  to  me ;  when  she  has  jgiTen 
me  a  kiss,  she  s  off  agtm.  This  happens  by  reason  of  this, 
because  this  Procurer  is  lying  a-bed  ill  in  the  Temple*  of 
^sculapius ;  that  fellow  is  my  torturer. 

Pal.  How  so?  PHifin.  At  one  time  heasksme  &r  thirty 
minffi  for  her,  at  another  for  a  great  talent ;  and  from  him  1 
cannot  obtain  any  fSeur  and  just  dealing. 

Pal.  You  are  too  exacting,  in  requking  that  of  him  which 
no  Procurer  possesses. 

Ph^d.  Now,  I've  sent  my  Parasite  heoee.  to  Caria^,  to 
ask  for  money  on  loan  from  my  friend;  if  he  doesn't  being 
me  this,  which  way  to  turn  myself  I  know  not. 

Pal.  If  you  salute  the  Deities,  towards  the  rigfat^  I  think ; 
now  this  is  this  altar  of  Yenus  before  thdbr  door. 

'^ToeailSke  iberneZ) — ^Ver.  55.  This  is  exactlj  oar  proverb,  which  impKes  thit 
labour  attends  eF«ry  poisait — **  T«  exteact  the  kernel,  yoa  niMt  cnek  the 
shell." 

*  Oj^eM  iJa  dancey^Vee,  56.  There  is  an  iadeoent  allnsioa  mtended  ia  this 
line,  which  is  somewhat  modified  in  the  translation. 

s  /  could  beUevey-Ver,  58.  Palinnms  thinks  it  impossible  that  such  a  wretch 
as  Cappadox  wonld  leave  her  nntoached. 

*  In  the  Tempky-yer.  62.  It  was  the  custom  of  those  who  wished  to  ask  anj- 
ibing  of  the  Gods,  to  lie  ia  their  Temples,  in  order  th«t  thqr  might  Moeive  thrir 
answers  and  instructions  in  their  sleep. 

^  To  Carid) — ^Ver.  67.  Caria  was  in  Asia  Minor.  Schmieder  justij  observeB, 
that  the  Parante  must  havB  used  the  wings  of  DsBdahts,  to  go  finnn  E^pAdanmsin 
the  PelopoDnesus,  to  Garia,  and  discharge  his  commiSBioii  and  return  in  fear  dajs 
only.  A  Roman  audience  would  not,  however,  be  likely  to  know  mndi  tbmd  tbe 
relative  distance  of  places  so  far  off. 

*  Towards  the  righC) — ^Ver.  70.  Deztrovorsum.  A  quibble  seems  to  be  intended 
in  the  use  of  this  word;  Falinurus,  in  saying  ^*  turn  to  the  ri^t  hand,"  pR>- 
bablj  means,  sarcasticaHj,  "  tun  to  a  right  course  of  fife." 


y  Google 


Sc.  L  OB,  iSX  70U«EBY.  531 

Ph.sD.  I  have  alr^kdj  vowed  to  bring  me^  ml  enrlj  break- 
fast for  my  Venus^.  Pal.  What  ?  W3l  you  then  he  giving 
up  jourself  aa  a  break^Eist  to  Yenus  ? 

Phjss.  Myself,  and  you,  and  all  of  these.  {Fainting  to 
the  Slaves.) 

PaIi.  Then  you  would  have  Venus  to  be  sick  outrkit. 

TnMD.  (to  «»  Attbkdakt).  Here,  boy,  give  me  dhie  bowl.. 

Pal.  What  are  you  going  to  do  ? 

Ph^d.  You'll  mow  directly.  An  old  hag  is  in  the  habit 
of  sleeping  here,  as  the  keeper  of  the  door ;  the  name  of  the 
ProcQPess  is  «  Much-bibb«r"  and  *'  Neat-bibber." 

Pal.  Just  as  you  would  speak  of  a  jEbgon,  in  which  Chian 
wine*  is  wont  to  be. 

Phjbd.  What  need  is  there  of  words  P  3he  is  a  most  vinous 
soul;  and  the  very  moment  that  I've  sprinkled  this  door 
with  the  wine,  she  knows  by  the  smell  that  I'm  here,  and 
opens  it  forthwith. 

Pal.  Is  it  for  her  the  bowl  is  brought  with  the  wine  ? 

Phjed.  Unless  you  object.  Pal.  V  faith,  I  do  object ; 
for  Pd  rather  have  it  broken  about  him  who  has  brought  it. 
I  fimcied  it  was  brought  for  ourselves. 

Ph^d.  Why  don't  you  hold  your  tongue  ?  If  any's  left 
after  her,  it  wfil  be  enough  for  ourselves. 

Pal.  What  river  is  it,  pray,  that  the  sea  does  not  receive  ? 

Phjbd.  Follow  me  this  way,  Palinurus,  to  the  door ;  do  you 
be  obedient  to  me.  Pal.  Fil  do  so.  {Theif  advance  to  the 
door  of  the  PBOOtTBEB's  house.) 

VnxD.  (j^primMmg  the  door  with  wine).  Come,  drink, 
you  joyous  door,  quaff  on,  readily  prove  propitious  unto  me. 

*  To  bring  me) — ^Ver.  72.  "  Me  inferre.'*  These  words  may  meau,  according  to 
the  context,  either  "myself  to  bring"  or  "  to  bring  myself.**  Pfasedromos  means 
t9  use  them  in  the  former  deose ;  bnt,  in  kis  qnibbling  mood,  Pa&mms  chooses  to 
udeRtaiid  them  in  the  latter. 

s  For  wjf  Vemay-^\et.  72.  By  h»  "  Venus**  he  metx»  PlanesiiaB,  with  whom 
he  is  deiqperately  in  bve,  and  for  whom  and  the  Proenress  he  is  carrying  the 
**  jentacnlnm.**  This  was  a  meal  which,  we  learn  from  llartial,  was  generally  taken 
aboat  three  or  fonr  o'clock  in  the  morning.  It  was,  however,  taken  by  few  but 
inyalids  and  children.  The  reason  of  Phaedromus  providing  a  "  jentaculnm"  for 
bii  mistress  is  probiUy  the  circmnstance  of  the  Procurer  not  being  Mfedy  to  in- 
teriere,  as.he  has  detemuned  to  pass  the  mght  in  the  Temple  of  Jlscalapius. 

»  Chian  wmey-Yer.  79.  Chios,  now  Scio,  in  the  MigSaA  Sea,  pwAiced  the 
choiottt  wine,  winch  wis  the  only  wine  of  Qreece  that  did  not  i«|tiif«  to  tie  mixed 
with  sea-water,  to  correct  acidity  «ad  incrame  its  duability . 

2k2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


632  CT7B0ULIO;  AjctL 

Pal.  (in  an  qfected  tone).  Door,  would  you  like  some 
olives  or  a  tit-bit,  or  some  capers  ? 

Phjed.  Arouse  and  send  out  here  to  me  your  portress. 

Pal.  You're  spiUing  the  wine ;  what  matter  is  it  that  pos- 
sesses you  ?   {Takes  hold  of  Ms  arm,) 

Ph-ZED.  Let  me  alone.  Don't  you  see  ?  This  most  joyous 
door  is  opening ;  does  the  hinge  make  a  bit  of  creaking  ?  'Tis 
a  charming  one. 

Pal.  "Wl^  don't  you  then  give  it  a  kiss  ? 

Ph-ZBD.  Hold  your  tongue ;  let's  keep  back  the  light  and 
our  noise.  Pal.  Be  it  so.  {They  stoma  apart,  leaving  the 
lowl  near  the  door.) 

Scene  II.— Miter  the  Peocueess,  from  the  house  of 
Cappadox. 

Peoc.  The  savour  of  aged  wine  has  reached  my  nostrils ; 
the  love  of  it  has  brought  me  in  my  eagerness  hither  in  the 
dark ;  wherever  it  is,  it's  near  me.  0  capital,  I've  found  it. 
{Stooping,  and  smelling  at  the  howL)  Hail  to  you,  my  soul, 
joy  01  dear  Bacchus ;  how  enamoured  am  I  of  your  old  age. 
Por  in  comparison  with  yours,  the  odour  of  all  unguents 
were  i»«rc  bilge- water ;  you  are  my  myrrh,  you  my  cinnamon, 
you  my  rose,  you  my  saffi*on  unguent  and  my  cassia,  you  are 
my  ^ine-palm^  scent.  But,  where  you  have  been  poured, 
there  would  I  most  earnestly  hope  to  be  buried. 

Pal.  {a/par{).  This  old  lady's  thirsty;  how  limited  is  her 
thirst?  PHiBD.  {apart).  She's  a  moderate  person ;  sheswal* 
lows  eight  gallons^  onl^. 

Pal.  {apart),  I'  faith,  according  to  your  account,  this 
year's  vintage  is  not  enough  for  this  old  woman  alone. 

Peoc.  But  since  as  yet  you,  fragrance,  alone  have  penetrated 
to  my  nostrils,  so  in  its  turn  afford  some  delight  to  my  throat 
{Feds  for  the  howl  on  the  grotmd,  which  PALiiruEiTS  draws 
away!)  I  find  you  not ;  where  is  your  own  dear  self?  I'm 
longing  to  touch  you ;  do  let  me  pour  your  liquids  into  me  by 

1  F«ne-pa&»)— Ver.  101.  "  Bdellium"  was  a  gnm  of  fragrant  smell  and  bittor 
taste,  which  exaded  from  a  tree  that  grew  in  AnJ)ia.  It  is  described  bjr  the  Eklar 
Pliny,  in  his  Twelfth  Book. 

«  Eight  gaOotuy-Yer.  103.  "  Quadrantal."  This  was  a  measure  whidi  fadd 
forty-eight  *<  sextarii,*'  of  aboat  a  pint  and  a  half  each. 


y  Google 


SC.  n.  OB,  THS  X'OB&XBT.  53B 

riprripping.  But  in  this  direction  it  has  gone,  this  way  I'll 
follow  it.  (Goes  in  the  direction  ^ Paxinxtbtts,  who  has  the 
howl.) 

Pal.  (apart).  It  reaUy  had  been  more  proper  for  her  to  be 
a  dog ;  she  has  a  good  nose. 

Pboo.  Prithee,  whose  voice  is  it  that  I  hear  at  a  distance. 

Phjsd.  (apart).  I  think  that  this  old  hag  should  be  ac- 
costed. I'U  approach  her.  (Aloud.)  Come  back,  Procuress, 
and  look  back  towards  me. 

Pboo.  Who  is  it  that  gives  his  commands  ? 

PHiBD.  The  all-powerml  in  wine,  jolly  Bacchus ;  he  who, 
when  you're  hawkmg,  parched,  and  half  asleep,  brings  you  a 
draught  and  comes  to  quench  your  thirst. 

Pboc.  How  far  is  he  away  from  me  ? 

PHiBD.  (holding  up  the  torch).  See  this  light. 

Pboo.  Then,  prithee,  do  quicken  your  pace  towards  me. 

Phjbd.  Health  to  you.  Pboo.  How  can  I  have  health, 
who  am  parched  with  thirst  ? 

PHiBD.  But  you  shaU  drink  in  a  moment. 

Pboc.  'Tis  long  a-coming. 

Ph-DD.  (extending  the  howT).  Here's  for  yoii,  jolly  old  dame. 

Pboc.  Health  to  you,  gentleman  dear  as  my  very  eyes. 

Pal.  Come,  toss  this  off  quickly  into  your  abyss ;  scour 
out  your  sink  right  speedily. 

Phjbd.  Hold  your  tongue ;  I  won't  have  her  ill  spoken  to. 

Pal.  (aside).  In  preference,  then,  I'll  do  her  ill. 

Pboc.  (pouring  some  of  the  residue  on  the  altar).  Venus, 
of  this  little,  this  very  little  will  I  give  to  thee^ — sore  against 
my  will ;  for  all  the  lovers,  in  their  cups,  to  propitiate  thee, 
expend  their  wine  upon  thee :  not  such  windfalls  often  fall  to 
me.     (Drinks  again?) 

Pal.  Do  look  at  that,  please,  how  greedily  the  filthy  hag 
swills  down  the  pure  wine  into  herself  with  distended  gullet. 

Pboc.  (patting  her  stomach  and  chuckling).  Ha,  ha,  ha. 

Pal.  How  is  it  ?    Do  you  like  it  ?    Pbog.  I  do  like  it. 

Pal.  And  I,  too,  should  like  to  goad  with  a  spur  as  well. 

Ph^d.  (aside  to  PALrenTBirs).  Don't  you — dfo  hold  your 

*  Will  I  give  to  thee) — Ver.  123.  As  a  Kbation.  It  was  the  custom  to  pour  out 
wine  or  other  liquors,  as  libations  in  honor  of  the  Gods,  either  upon  an  altar,  on 
the  ground,  into  the  sea,  or  on  a,  table,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the 
case. 


y  Google 


S84  eoBOviiio;  ActL 

tongve.  Pal.  TU  hc^  my  tongiie ;  (ila  oU  vomaii  driiiiftt) 
hat  Me^  ike  runbew's  ^Wnkiag^ ;  F  faifefay  I  cb  bdieiP&  it  wffl 
rain  to-day. 

Pblbid.  Troth  xMyw^  I'm  qiiute  unchme;  what  firrt  to  saj  to 
her  I  know  not. 

Pal.  Wkj,  tlie  same  thing  tluKt  you  Bttd  to  me. 

P&£D.  what's  that  ?    Pal.  Say  liiat  you're  ^mite  jmAane. 

Phju».  Hay  the  Gods  oonfoimd  yon.    Pal.  Say  so  to  her. 

PHiED.  Am  I  to  say  then  to  her ? 

Pal.  Say  what?    rHJUB.  That  I'm  quite  undone. 

Pal.  Weil  thai,  say  so.  Phjbb.  Cud  kdy,  do  listen.  I 
wish  yon  to  know  this ;  to  my  sorrow,  I'm  qnite  wadomo, 

Pboc.  But,  i'  faii^  fer  my  part,  I'm  altogether  brought 
to  life.  But  why  is  ^  that  you  are  pkased  to  say  yom  are 
quite  undone  ?  Phjbd.  Because  I'm  deprxfed  of  the  oliject 
which  I  lore.     (JPretemi*  to  wap.y 

Pboc.  My  dear  PhsBdromns,  prithee,  do  not  weep ;  do  you 
take  care  that  I'm  not  thirsty,  I'll  at  once  bring  out  heie 
for  you  the  object  whieh  you  loTe.     (Oae^  into  Wte  AoMSdc.) 

Phjbd.  Assuredly,  if  you  keep  &iA  with  me,  in  plaee  of 
a  gOild^x  statue,  I'll  erect  for  you  one  of  wine^,  whidi  shall 
be  a  meanmal  of  your  gullet.  Patinurus,  who  on  earth  will 
he  80  Uest  as  myself^  if  she  comes  to  me  P 

Pal.  By  my  faith,  he  who  is  in  love,  if  he  is  in  want  m 
welly  is  afflicted  with  a  dreadful  malady. 

Phjed.  Soch  k  not  the  case  with  me;  for  I  fed  sure  tiiat 
this  very  day  my  Parasii;e  will  come  hither  to  me  with  the 
Aoney.  Pal.  You  al;tempt  somethmg  mighty,  if  you  ex- 
pect that  which  nowhere  exists. 

Phje^.  What  if  I  approach  the  door^  and  trill  a  caroPP 

Pal.  If  you  choose ;  I  neither  bid  nor  request  yoo,  sinee, 
my  master,  I  see  that  you  are  of  manners  ttod  disposition 
tJms  daaa&ged. 

Ph^b.  (nn^sy  Bolts,  O  ye  bolts,  with  pleasure  do  I  salute 

1  The  mmdxyw's  drmkmg) — ^Ver.  12(>.  This  is  said  ia  aUnsioD  to  an  absurd 
belief  whieh  prwailed  among  the  aodents,  that  the  noohofr  drank  v^  water  tram 
th«  surface  of  the  earth. 

2  One  of  wine) — ^Ver.  140.  "  Vineam."  There  is  more  himioor  in  taking  this  to 
mean  **a  statne  of  wine,"  than  merely  "a  vine-treci**  as  Warner  has  tranft- 
kted  it. 

3  Trmaearoiy-\ec,  145.  "■  Oocentem."  This  word  baa  probiMj  nnsk  tin 
same  meaning  here  as  our  word  "  serenade.'* 


y  Google 


SSe.  HI.  OB,  TBB  FOBOBBY.  5SS 

yoB.  I  lov6  joo,  I  cotirt  you,  I  seek  joa,  and  you  eniveat ; 
moBt  kindfy  lend  jour  idd  to  me  in  loTe ;  become,  for  mj  sake, 
ess  though  play-actors^  from  foreign  climes;  leap  upwards, 
pray,  and  send  out  of  doors  tMs  fair  one,  who  drams  my 
blood  for  me  distractedly  in  love.  {Addr&uimg  PALnnmirB.) 
XiOok  at  that,  how  I^Kwe  most  accursed  bolts  sleep  on,  and 
none  the  quicker  for  my  sake  do  they  bestir  themselyes. 
(Addressmg  the  dwr?)  1  see  quite  ci^Eirly  that  you  don't 
Tahie  my  esteem  at  all.  EOLst !  hush,  hush ! 
Pal.  r  troth,  for  my  part  I'm  silent  enomk, 
PflLBD.  I  hear  a  noise ;  at  last,  i'  Mth,  tiiese  bolts  have 
beecxme  comphusaiit  to  me. 

SoJQO  in. — Ee-enter  the  Pbocttbess,  with  PLAjrasiUM, 
from  the  house  of  CAPPAnox. 

Pboo.  {to  Planesiiim,  while  opening  the  door).  Come  softly 
oat,  and  prevent  the  noise  of  the  doors  and  ^e  crei^ing  of 
the  hinges,  my  dear  Planesium,  that  our  master  mayn't  per- 
eeiTO  that  that  is  going  on  which  we  are  doing  here.  Stay, 
VU  pour  a  little  water*  on  it.     (Pow*  water  on  the  hinaes.) 

Pal.  (to  Phjkbbomtjs).  Do  you  see  how  the  palsied  na^  is 
giving  her  dose  ?  She  herself  has  learnt  right  well  to  dnnk 
up  the  wine ;  to  the  door  she's  grnng  water  for  it  to  drink. 

Plait,  (looking  arotmd).  "Where  are  you — ^ou  who  have 
summoned  me  on  the  recognizances  of  V  enus*  ?  To  you  do 
I  ^esent  myself,  and,  in  the  same  way  do  I  call  on  yen,  on 
t^  other  hand,  to  present  yourself  to  me. 

Fhjbi).  (ste^^ping  forward).  Here  I  am;  for  could  I  be 

^  Play-actors) — ^Ver.  150.  The  Lydians,  or  rather  their  descendants,  the  £tm- 
rians,  were  the  earliest  actors  at  Rome ;  hence  the  term  used  here,  *^  beorbari/' 
«  forajgnersw"  The  metaphor  is  borrowed  from  the  fact  that  dancing,  leapingr  and 
geatnies,  were  the  especial  featiures  of  then-  performances. 

<  P<mr  a  Utile  wester) — ^Ver.  160.  To  prevent  .their  creaking,  so  that  Cappadoz 
may  not  hear  them. 

»  Recognizances  of  Venm) — ^Ver.  162.  "  Veneriis  vadimonus."  She  borrows  a 
1^1  phxiise  here.  "  Vadimoninm  legere"  was,  "  to  call  a  person  on  his  bail"  or 
"  recegnuanees.**  When  the  Pra»tor  had  granted  an  actioD,  the  pUdntiff  required 
the  defendant  to  give  secnrity  for  his  appearance  on  the  day  named.  The  de- 
fendaz^  on  finding  a  surety,  was  said  "  vadem  dare,"  w  ^*  Tadimonimn  facere ;" 
and  the  "  vas,"  or  "  surety,"  was  said  "  spondere."  The  plaintiff,  if  satisfied  with 
the  surety,  was  said  **vadari  rerum,"  ''to  let  the  defendant  go  on  his  sureties." 
PlBMiiora  probaUy  means  that  she  considers  herself  summoned  on  pain  of  for- 
feiting the  love  of  PhsBdroana. 


y  Google 


686  ovBOULio ;  .  Act. I. 

absent,  I  wouldn't  repine  for  anj  misforhme  to  befiiU  me, 
my  honey.  Plait.  My  life,  it  is  not  becoming  for  one  thus 
in  love  to  be  at  a  distance. 

PHiEO).  Falinurus,  Falinuras!  Fax.  Say  on;  why  is  it 
that  you  caU  upon  Falinurus  P 

PsLsn.  (aside).  She  is  a  charming  one. 

Fal.  (aside).  Aye^  too  charming.     Fhjbi).  I  am  a  Ghod. 

Pal.  Why,  no — a  mortal,  of  no  great  value. 

FHiBD.  What  have  you  seen,  or  what  will  you  see,  more 
nearly  to  be  compared  with  the  Gods  ? 

Fal.  You  are  not  in  your  senses,  master ;  a  thing  that's 
grievous  to  me.  Fn-ffiD.  You  are  not  sufficiently  respeet- 
M  to  me :  hold  your  tongue. 

Fal.  The  person  that  sees^  the  object  which  he  loves,  and 
enjoys  not  the  opporttmityMf\aie  he  may,  is  one  who  torments 
his  own  self. 

Fhjed.  Bightly  does  he  rebuke  me ;  really  there's  nothing 
which  for  this  long  time  past  I  have  more  eagerly  desired. 

Plait.  Clasp  me,  embrace  me  then.  Fh^d.  (emhracing 
her).  This,  too, is  a  reason  for  which  I  could  wish  to  live ;  be- 
cause your  master  restrains  you,  in  secret  do  I  court  you. 

Flait.  Eestrain  mep  B!e  neither  can  restrain  me,  nor 
will  he  restrain  me,  unless  death  should  separate  my  soul 
from  you. 

Fhjsd.  Let  monarchs  keep  their  kingdoms  to  themselves, 
the  rich  their  riches  to  themselves,  to  themselves  their 
honors,  to  themselves  their  prowess,  to  themselves  their 
combats,  to  themselves  their  battles ;  so  long  as  they  abstain 
from  envying  me,  let  each  one  of  them  keep  what  is  his  own. 

Fal.  (aside).  Of  a  truth,  I  cannot  refrain  from  giving  a 
lecture  to  my  master ;  for,  really,  it  is  good  to  love  in  a  mode- 
rate degree ;  to  distraction,  it  is  not  good ;  but  to  love  to  en- 
tire distraction,  is  the  thing  that  my  master's  doing.  (Moud,) 
What  say  vou,  sir  ?  Have  you  made  a  vow,  Fhsedromus, 
you'd  watch  the  night  through  for  Venus  P  For  really,  upon 
my  faith,  before  very  long  hence  the  dawn  will  be  breaking. 

Fh^d.  Do  hold  your  tongue. 

Fal.  Why  hold  my  tongue  ?  What,  are  you  going  to  sleep? 

1  Person  that  seesy—Ver.  170.  He  is  censuring  his  master  for  his  backwiPdnesB 
in  not  embradng  Planeunm  instantlj  on  her  appearance. 


y  Google- 


Sc.  m.  OB,  THE  TOBOXBT.  S37 

Phjsd.  I  am  asleep ;  don't  you  make  a  noise. 

Pal.  Why,  but  you're  broad  awake.  Ph^d.  Aye,  but 
after  my  own  fitshion  I'm  asleep ;  this  is  my  slumber. 

Pal.  (to  PiAioisnrM).  A  word  with  you,  madam;  'tis 
thoughtlessness  to  treat  amiss  one  who  deserves  it  not. 

Plan.  You  would  be  angry,  if,  when  you  are  eating,  he 
were  to  drive  you  away^  from  your  food. 

Pal.  (aside).  It's  fH  over  with  him.  I  see  that  these  two 
are  equally  in  love  to  distraction ;  and  both  of  them  are 
mad.  D'ye  see  how  intensely  they  hug  each  other  ?  They 
cannot  embrace  enough.  (Addressing  them.)  Are  you  going 
to  part  yet? 

Plan.  No  human  being  has  blessings  that  last^  for  ever. 
To  this  pleasure,  then,  is  that  plague  added. 

Pal.  What  say  you,  you  shocking  hussjr*  ?  What,  you 
little  tipsy  ninny^,  are  even  jou  with  your  owlish  eyes^  to  be 
calling  me  a  plague,  you  whipper-snapper  ? 

PHiBD.  What,  you  abusing  my  own  Venus  ?  And  really, 
is  a  slave  well  trounced  with  the  rod  to  be  commencing  a 
discussion  with  myself  ?  But,  by  the  powers,  you've  surely 
said  that  to  your  own  misfortune.  (Strikes  him.)  There, 
take  that,  by  way  of  punishment  for  this  abusive  language, 
that  you  my  be  able  to  put  a  check  upon  your  speech. 

Pal.  (to  Plakesium)  .  l  our  aid,  I  pray,  you  night-watching 

^  To  drive  you  away) — ^Ver.  186.  As  Palinanu  wishes  his  master  to  withdraw 
against  the  wish  of  Planesinm,  she  asks  him  how  he  woald  like  his  Tictoals  to  he 
taken  away  from  him— implying  that  Phsedromas  is  as  dear  to  herself  as  her  very 
sustenance. 

^  Blessings  that  last) — Ver.  189.  This  is  like  thesentunent  in  Horace,  Book  iii., 
Ode  16: 

Nihil  est  ab  omni 
Parte  beatnm. 

«  Shocking  hussy)— Ver.  190.  "  Propudium."  This  was  a  very  harsh  term  of 
reproach ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  Phsedromns  is  angry  with  Palinnnis 
for  nsing  it. 

*  T^psy  nmny)— Ver.  192.  "  Ebriola,"  and  not  "  ebriolee,"  seems  to  be  the  cor- 
rect r^ing  here.  She  has  perhaps  been  taking  her  share  of  the  wine,  to  which 
iact  he  allndes.  "Persolla"  means  either  "a  little  mask"  or  a  "diminutive 
person;"  much  as  we  call  a  little  mterfering  body  a  "  whipper-snapper." 

^  OwUsh  ^es) — ^Ver.  191.  Though  grey  eyes  were  admired  among  the  Greeks, 
Paliaoms  does  not  intend  this  as  a  compliment  to  Phinesimn.  He  perhaps  alludes 
to  her  intended  vocation,  as  having  eyes  peculiarly  adapted  for  the  night-time. 


y  Google 


cvaoviiBO ;  Act  I. 

Venus.  Fhjkd.  What,  do  joa  stiQ  persist,  whip-acoimdlrel  ? 
{SHriket  ifoi.) 

Plait*  Don't^  there's  a  dear,  be  beating  a  stcme,  lest  jou 
shenld  hurt  your  hand. 

Pal.  Yon  perpetrate,  PhaMbromns,  a  flagitious  and  a  eluone- 
fbl  deed  of  great  enormity ;  one  who  direets  you  aright,  you 
pummel  with  your  fists;  her  you  are  in  love  with,  a  mere 
nonentity.  Is  it  right  that  you  should  behave  yourself  in 
this  unreasonable  manner  ? 

PHJBn.  Find  me  a  reasonable  lover  agamst  his  w^ght  in 
gold ;  here,  take  the  gold  of  me.     {Soldi  otU  JagjmrseS) 

Pal.  Do  you  find  me  a  person  for  me  to  serve  m  his  sound 
senses  against  his  weight  ^l  double-distilled  gold. 

PLAif .  Kindly  fare  you  well,  apple  of  my  eye,  for  I  hear 
the  sound  and  creaking  of  do(»rs ;  I  think  the  keeper^  is 
opening  the  temple.  But,  prithee,  in  this  same  manner  shall 
we  always  enjoy  our  love  by  stealth? 

Phjsb.  Par  firom  it;  for  I  sent  my  Parasite  four  days 
since  to  Caria  to  fetch  some  money ;  he'll  be  here  to-day. 

Plan.  You  are  very  long  in  your  contriving. 

PttffiD.  So  may  Venus  love  me,  I'll  never  allow  you  to 
be  three  days  in  this  house  here,  before  I  procure  your 
liberty. 

Flajt.  Take  care  to  remember  it.  Once  mwe,  before  I 
go  hence,  take  this  kiss.    (Kisses  him.) 

Phjbi>.  By  heavens,  really  if  a  kingdom  now  were  ofS^red 
me,  I  should  not  obtain  it  with  greater  pleasure.  "When  shall 
I  see  you  a^am  ? 

IhJjsf.  Why  now,  for  that  expression  get  ready  the 
Praetor's  rod^ ;  if  you  love  me,  purchase  mi/ freedom  ;  don't 
make  any  haggling.  Take  care  to  prevail  with  your  offer. 
Kindly  adieu !     {Goes  into  the  house  of  the  PEOCtrEEE.) 

Phjbd.  And  am  I  then  left  behind  P  Paiinurus,  I'm 
killed  outright. 

>  The  deeper)— Ver.  204.  iBditnom.  The  ^editni"  were  persons  who  took 
owe  of  tke  Temples,  and  attended  to  the  cleaning  of  them.  They,  however,  par- 
took in  some  measure  of  the  priestly  eharacter,  and  are  sometimes  calfed  priesto 
by  the  Greek  Grammarians.  They  lived  in  or  near  to  the  Temples,  and  showed 
tlieas  to  those  persons  who  wished  to  see  thera. 

2  Tka  Ptato^s  rocT)— Ver.  212.  Vindicta.  Thk  was  therod  whidi  was  kid 
on  the  head  of  the  person  who  received  Ms  freedom. 


y  Google 


Se.  III.  OB,  TBB  YOBCOSBT.  6S9 

Pjll.  And  I M  ivdly  who  am  dying  witiii  thumps  and  aleepi- 
ness.  PHin>.  Do  you  follow  me.  {The^f  go  into  the  house 
of  Fh^bbomtts.) 

Act.  II. — Scebtb  I. 

JSnter  CiiPPADOX,  j^ow  the  Temple  of  iEsciTLAPius. 
Cap.  (to  himself.  I  am  resolved  to  depart  from  this  Temple 
out  of  doors  forthwith,  since  thus  I  find^  the  determination  of 
.£sculapius,  who  sets  me  at  nought,  and  chooses  not  that  I 
ahould  he  healed.  My  health  is  declining,  my  weakness  in- 
creases. For  now  I  walk,  girded  with  my  spleen  as  though 
with  a  bdt ;  in  my  stomach  do  I  seem  to  be  holding  a  twm 
offspring.  I'm  afraid  of  nothing,  but  that,  in  my  misery,  I 
should  burst  asunder  in  the  middle. 

Unter  VAJATNxrauB^from  the  house  of  Ph^spbomtts. 

Pal.  (speaking  to  Ph-edbomits  withm  as  he  enters).  If 
you  do  right,  Phiedromus,  you'll  listen  to  me,  and  banish 
this  sorrow  from  your  feelings.  You  are  anxious  because 
your  Parasite  ha&n't  returned  from  Caria.  I  think  he'll 
bring  the  money ;  but  if  he  doesn't  bring  it,  by  a  chain 
of  iron  he  couldn't  be  withheld  from  betaking  himiself  to  eat 
at  his  manger^. 

Cap.  (turning  round).  What  person  is  it  that  speaks  ? 

Pal.  (to  himself).  Whose  voice  is  it  that  I  hear  ? 

Cap.  Isn't  this  PaUnurus,  the  servant  of  Phiedromus  p 

Pal.  (aside).  Who  is  this  feUow  with  extended  paunch, 
and  eyes  as  green  as  grass  ?  Prom  his  figure  I  know  him ; 
fi^om  his  complexion  I  cannot  recognize  him.  O,  now  I  do 
know  him :  it's  the  Procurer  Cappadox.     I'll  accost  him. 

Cap.  Save  you,  Palinurus.  JPal.  O  source  of  villanies, 
save  you ;  how  are  you  ? 

Cap.  I'm  just  afive.  Pal.  Just  as  you  deserve,  I  sup- 
pose ?    But  what's  the  matter  with  you  r 

Cap.  My  spleen  is  killing  me,  my  reins  are  in  torment,  my 
lungs  are  being  torn  asunder,  my  liver  is  being  tortured,  my 
heart-strings  are  giving  way,  aU  my  intestines  are  in  pain. 

1  Since  tkita  IJind)—\er,  217.  It  being  near  daybreak,  Cappadas  oomeB  fimn 
the  Temple,  oomplainiDg  that  he  has  experieneed  so  re^ef  from  his  yisit. 

«  At  hu  mmKfwy-Yer.  228.  •*  Prssepem,"  a  "  manger"  or  "  stall,"  in  aBa- 
sion  to  the  sensnal  propensities  of  Parasites. 


y  Google 


640  ointciTLio ;  Acl;  11. 

Fax.  The  liver  complaint  is  afflicting  you,  then. 

Cap.  My  spleen  is  expanded.  Pal.  Take  walking  exer- 
cise^ ;  that's  the  best  thing  for  the  spleen. 

Cap.  'Tis  an  easy  matter  to  laugh  at  the  afflicted. 

Pal.  Well,  then,  do  you  hold  out^  for  some  days  until 
your  intestines  become  putrid.  Now,  while  the  humours  are 
pretty  sound,  if  you  do  that,  you  yourself  might  sell  for  a 
worse  price  than  those  intestines  of  yours. 

Gaj^,  Prithee,  have  done  with  this,  and  answer  me  this 
which  I  ask ;  can  you  possibly  form  a  conjecture  onU^  lil 
relate  to  you  what  1  dreamt  last  night  in  my  sleep  ? 

Pal.  Psha,  this — {pointing  to  himself) — this  is  the  sole 
person  that  is  really  skilled  in  divination ;  why,  the  inter* 
preters  of  dreams  ask  advice  of  myself;  the  answer  that  I 
have  given  them,  by  that  opinion  they  all  stand. 

Scene  II. — Enter  a  CooE^from  the  house  of  PhjEdbomus. 

Cook.  Palinurus,  why  do  you  delay  ?  Why  are  not  the 
things  served  out  for  me  which  are  needed  for  the  breakfast 
to  be  prepared  for  the  Parasite  when  he  comes. 

Pae.  Wait,  please,  until  I  interpret  his  dream.  {Feinting 
to  Cappadox.) 

Cook.  Why,  you  your  own  self,  if  you've  had  any  dream^ 
always  apply  to  me.     Pal.  I  confess  it. 

Cook.  Be  off,  then,  and  serve  out  the  things. 

Pal.  {to  Cappadox).  Come  novo,  do  you  in  the  meantime 
relate  your  dream  to  him.  I  give  you  a  substitute  better 
than  I  am  myself;  for  what  I  do  know,  all  of  it  I  know  from 
him.   {Pointing  to  the  Cook.) 

1  TaJce  foalking  exercise)— Yer,  240.  There  Is  little  doubt  that  he  meavs 
seriously  to  tell  Cappadox  that  exercise  is  the  best  core  for  disease  of  the  spleen. 
The  Procnrer,  however,  thinks  that  be  is  laughing  at  him. 

^Do  ifou  hold  outy-Yer.  242.  This  passage  has  much  perplexed  Commen- 
tators. If  a  period  is  placed  after  "  tibi,**  and  "  exputescant"  is  read  for  "  ex- 
pntescnnt,**  much  of  the  difficulty  is  removed.  None  of  the  Commentators  seem 
to  have  observed  that,  in  all  probability,  "  si  id  feceris,"  "  if  you  do  that,**  reftn 
to  the  advice  previously  given  as  to  taldng  exercise.  If  so,  the  meaning  is  clear: 
*'  If  you  don't  take  exercise,  in  a  few  days  your  inside  will  be  putrefying.  If,  how- 
ever, you  do  so  now,  while  the  humours  of  the  body  are  not  corrupted,  yopr  Inside 
will  fetch  a  higher  price  than  your  whole  carcase  put  together**— aflndln|;  to  the 
worthless  character  of  the  Procurer. 


y  Google 


So.  III.  OB,  THE  FOBaSBT.  641 

Gap.  Let  him  give  his  attention  then. 

Pal.  He'U  give  it.  Cap.  He  does  what  few  do,  in  being 
attentive  to  their  masters  even,  (To  the  Cook.)  Do  you 
give  me  TOUT  attention  then.  (PALnruBUS  ^oes  into  the 
house  of  Yhjedbouvs,) 

Cook.  Although  I  don't  know  you,  I'll  give  it  you. 

Cap.  Last  night  I  seemed  in  my  sleep  to  behold  -Sscu- 
lapius,  seated  at  a  distance  far  away  &om  me ;  and  it  seemed 
that  he  didn't  come  near  me,  or  set  any  value  upon  me. 

Cook.  The  other  Gods  will  do  the  same,  you  must  know ; 
in  fact,  among  themselves  they  agree  with  perfect  unanimity. 
It  isn't  to  be  wondered  at,  if  it  fares  no  better  with  you. 
But  it  had  been  better  for  you  to  pass  the  night  in  Jove's 
Temple,  who  has  given  you  his  assistance^  in  your  oaths. 

Cap.  If,  indeed,  those  should  wish  to  sleep  there  who 
have  been  guilty  of  peijury,  it  were  not  possiole  for  room 
to  be  found  them  in  the  CapitoP. 

Cook.  Give  vour  attention  to  this ;  ask  neace  of  -^scu- 
lapius,  lest  perchance  some  great  mishap  befall  you,  which  has 
been  portended  to  you  in  your  rest. 

Cap.  You  do  well  in  advising  me;  I'll  go  and  pray  to  him, 
{Goes  into  the  Temple.) 

Cook.  And  iU  speed  you  with  it  *  *  • 

♦  •  *     (Goes  info  the  house  ofPiLEDnoMUS.) 

SoEKB  III. — Unter  'PxLiNViivs,Jrom  the  house. 

Pal.  (looking  in  the  distance,  as  he  enters).  O  immortal 
€k>d8,  whom  do  I  behold  ?  Who's  that  yonder  ?  (Pointing.) 
Isn't  that  the  Parasite,  who  was  sent  to  Caria?  (Goes  to 
the  door.)  Hallo,  come  out,  Phaedromus,  come  out,  come 
out,  come  out  this  instant,  I  say. 

Unter  YKMDnouvQ,Jrom  the  house. 
Ph^d.  Why  are  you  making  this  noise  here  ? 

1  Gwen  y<m  his  a«8utonce>— Ver.  267.  He  may  either  mean  that  Japiter  has 
fiivoared  him  when  he  has  been  gniltj  of  peijary,  or  that  the  Procurer  must  be 
greatly  indebted  to  that  God  for  having  so  often  lent  him  hia  name  on  hia  making 
solemn  adjurations  to  further  his  base  purposes. 

^  In  the  Capkoiy-Yer.  269.  Though  the  Scene  is  in  the  Peloponnesus,  Plautus 
makes  mention  of  the  Capitol,  a  part  of  Borne.  Some  others  of  the  Italian  towns 
had  theur  **  Capitols*"  in  later  times. 


y  Google 


84&  C9BC1TUO ;  Act  IL 

FaIi.  I  see  your  Parasite  zunmng ;  see,  there  lie  is  {potnt- 
i$uf),  down  at  tlie  end  of  the  sti^eet^.  Let's  listen  from  bere 
what  he's  about. 

Phjbd.  I  think  it's  as  well.     (Tketf  ttamd  itside,^ 

Enter  CxmcTTLio,  at  a  distance,  walking  fiut. 
Cue.  (^0  hifmelf),  KJiown  or  unknown,  make  wfy  for  me, 
while  here  I  execute  mj  commission ;  flf  all  of  you,  be  oS, 
and  get  out  of  the  way,  lest  I  should  hurt  any  person  in 
my  speed  with  my  head,  or  elbow,  or  breast,  or  with  mjr  knee. 
So  suddenly  now  am  I  charged  with  a  business  of  quickness 
and  despatch.  And  be  there  no  person  ever  so  opulent 
to  stop  me  in  my  way,  neither  general^,  nor  any  tyrant?,  it&r 
market-officer*,  nor  demarche  nor  comarch*,  with  t&eir  lionois 
so  great,  but  that  down  he  goes,  and  tumbles  head  first  from 
the  footpath  into  the  carriage-road.  And  then  those  Grecians 
with  their  cloaks,  who  walk  about  with  covered  heads,  who 
go  loaded  beneath  their  cloaks  with  books,  and  with  baskets^, 

1  The  end  of  the  sireety~yer.  278.  This  passage,  combined  with  the  kmg  8q& 
loquy  of  the  Parasite  while  still  walking  along,  gives  an  apt  illostratioa  of  the  great 
widtii  and  depth  of  the  Roman  stage. 

2  General) — Ver.  285.  Though  the  Scene  is  at  Epidannu,  he  no  doabtafindes 
to  the  ten  ^  Strategi"  of  Athens,  whe,  afler  the  remodellmg  of  the  canstitation 
by  Gleisthenes,  discbacged  the  duties  which  had  been  formerly  perfermed  dther 
by  the  King  or  the  Archon  Polemarchos.  They  were  elected  by  the  snffirages  of 
the  people,  and  exercised  the  supreme  power  in  peace  and  war.  See  aa  aide  article 
on  this  subject  in  Dr.  Smith's  '^Dictionary  of  Antiquities." 

3  T^aniy-Yer.  285.  By  the  use  of  the  word  '^  tyrannus'*  he  peihaps  refers  to 
the  "  Basilens  Aichon,"  or  "  King  Archon,"  of  Athens,  who  was  the  representa- 
tive  of  the  a&cient  Mngs,  in  thnr  capacity  of  high  priest.  It  was  his  doty  to  pre- 
aideat  the  Lenaea,  or  older  Dionysia,  to  auperintend  mysteries  and  oertam  games, 
and  to  offer  prayers  and  sacrifices  in  the  Elensiiuam,  both  at  Athens  and  Eleaas. 
The  word  may,  however,  be  only  mtended  as  a  general  name,  like  our  fcenn  ^  po- 
tentate." 

*  MarkeUofficery-Ver.  285.  '' AgocanomuB,**  tiw  '^maxicet-officer^  of  the 
Greeks,  has  been  referred  to  in  a  Note  to  the  Miles  Gloriosos. 

«  Dermrchy-Yer.  286.  The  "  Demarchi"  were  the  chief  oflfcers  of  the  "  demi," 
"  townships"  or ''  hundreds,"  in  Attica.  It  was  their  doty  to  oooTeno  the  ^^demns," 
and  take  the  votes ;  to  register  the  landed  estates,  to  ooBect  the  pid>]ie  renls, 
and  to  famish  to  the  aathoritias  a  list  of  the  membars  of  Ae  teiwndiqn  who  wcr 
fit  to  serve  in  war. 

•  Comorci)— Ver.  286.  The '' Comarchi"  were  the  prefects,  or  bond  offioen  of 
each  village  or  hamlet  in  Attica. 

'  irt^6a**rf#)— Ver.  289.  In  the  "sportiil»,"or««baak«ti,'*tt»poor,aadtki 


y  Google 


Se.  in.  OB,  THS  90B0BBT.  SM 

tiaej  loiter  together,  and  engage  in  goBeipping  among  them- 
selves, the  gad-abouts^;  you  may  always  see  them  enjoy- 
ing themselres  in  the  hot  liquor-shops^;  when  they  haye 
scraped  up  some  trifle,  with  their  covered  pates  they  ure 
drinMng  mulled  wine,  sad  and  maudlin  they  depart :  if  I 
stumble  upon  them  here,  from  every  single  one  of  them  I'll 
squeeze  out  a  belch  from  their  pearled-barley  diet^.  And  then 
those  servants  of  your  dainty  townsmen^  who  are  playing  at 
catch-baU  in  the  road,  both  throwers  and  catchers,  all  of 
them  I'll  pitch  under  foot.  Would  they  avoid  a  mishap,  why 
th^i,  let  them  keep  dt  home. 

Ph^b.  (apart).  He  points  out  aright,  he  onl^  requires  that 
he  should  speak  with  authority;  for  such  manners  are  in 
vogue  in  the  present  day,  such  at  present  are  the  slaves; 
really,  control  cannot  be  held  over  them. 

Cue.  (to  Jdmself).  Is  there  any  one,  I  wonder^  who  can 
point  out  to  me  jriieedromus,  my  good  Genius  ?  The  matter 
18  of  such  pressing  nature,  I  really  must  meet  with  the  man 
this  instant. 

Pal.  (apart).  He's  looking  for  you.  Ph^d.  (apart).  What 
if  we  accost  him  ?     (AUmd.)  Hallo !  CurcuHo,  I  want  you. 

GiTB.  (looking  round).  Who's  calling  me?  Who's  men- 
tioning my  name  ? 

Ph^d.  One  who  wishes  to  meet  with  you. 

Cub.  (seeing  him),  Tou  don't  wish  more  for  me  than  I 
wish  for  you. 

parasitical  dependants  on  the  rich,  carried  awaj  the  scraps  that  were  giren  to  them 
after  an  entertainment  was  concluded. 

1  Tfie  gad-abovtsy^Ver,  290.  Drapetse.  From  the  Greek  bpififa^  "to  run." 
fie  probably  aUades  to  the  prc^enslties  of  the  Athenians  for  gossippiag  and 
running  abont  from  place  to  plaee.  Probably,  at  the  time  of  Plautos,  they  had 
began  in  considerable  numbers  to  resort  to  Borne.  By  his  reference  to  the  books, 
he  is,  perhaps,  more  partkuhriy  alltidinig  to  thdr  Philosophers.  The  Bomans 
considered  it  effeminate  in  ciril  life  to  go  with  the  head  coyered. 

2  Hot  liqwr-skopa^Yet,  292.  The  *'  thennopdia*'  have  been  ailaded  to  in  a 
Note  to  l^e  Trinmnmns,  L  1018. 

»  Their  pearkd-barleg  diet)— Ver.  296.  This  passage  is  necessarily  somewhat 
modiiied  in  the  translation.  The  Philosophers,  especially  the  Stoics,  who  prided 
themsdyes  on  iheir  abstinenee,  Hyed  principally  upon  pearled  barley. 

*  Ofyovr  doAnig  ftnmumen) — ^Ver.  296.  He  idlades  to  those  opulent  towns- 
men who,  to  make  a  show,  are  keeping  more  seryants  than  they  want ;  in  conse- 
qpenoe  whereof,  these  seryants  have  nothing  to  do  but  play  at  ball  in  the  streets, 
mach  to  the  aoooyaooe  of  the  pMsen-by. 


y  Google 


544  CTTJUUxnuo ;  ix^  IL 

Pblsd.  O  mj  own  ready  oceaaion,  Ciirctilio,  much  longed- 
for,  greetings  to  you. 

Cmt.  Greetings  to  you.  Ph-bd.  I'm  glad  that  you  have 
amved  safe;  give  me  your  right  hand.  How  stand  my 
hopes  ?    Troth  now,  prithee,  do  speak  out. 

Cub.  To  you,  troth  now,  prithee,  do  speak  out,  how  stand 
my  own-     (Makes  curious  gestures.) 

FsuED.  What's  the  matter  with  you  ?  Cue.  A  dimness  is 
begioning  to  come,  my  knees  are  failing  through  fasting. 

Fh^d.  I'  faith,  through  lassitude,  I  think. 

Cue.  {staggering).  Support  me,  prithee,  do  support  me, 

Phjbd.  See  how  pale  he  has  turned ;  will  you  give  him  a 
seat,  for  him  to  be  seated  at  once,  and  an  ewer  with  some 
water  ?  Will  you  make  haste,  this  very  instant  ? 

Cue.  I'm  faint.    Phjbd.  Would  you  like  some  water  ? 

Cite.  If  it's  full  of  bits^  of  meat,  prithee,  give  it  me  to 
swallow  down,  i'  faith.   Phlsd.  Woe  be  to  that  head  of  yours. 

Cue.  Troth  now,  prithee  do  give  me  cause  to  rejoice  at 
my  arrival^.     Ph-ED.  (begins  to  fan  him).  By  all  means. 

Cue.  Prithee,  what's  this  you're  about,    rn^n.  Some  air. 

Cue.  Eeally,  for  my  part,  I  don't  want  a  breath  to  be  raised. 

Phjed.  -What  then  ?  Cue.  To  eat,  that  I  may  rejoice  on 
my  arrival. 

Pbled.  May  Jupiter  and  the  Deities  confound  you. 

Cue.  I'm  quite  undone ;  I  can  hardly  see ;  my  mouth  is 
bitter ;  my  teeth,  I  find,  are  blunted^ ;  my  jaws  are  clammy 
through  nisting ;  with  my  entrails  thus  lank  with  abstinence 
from  food  am  I  come. 

Phjbp.  You  shall  eat  something  just  now. 

Cue.  I'  faith,  I  don't  want  "  something ;"  I'd  rather  have 
what's  fixed  for  certain,  than  ^om*  "  something." 

>  FuU  of  bits) — ^Ver.  312.  He  will  like  the  water  vezy  well,  if  it  is  in  the  shape 
of  a  rich  soup,  with  plenty  of  meat  in  it 

^  At  my  atrwal) — ^Ver.  313.  Ventnm.  This  word  gives  occasbn  to  a  pon 
here,  as,  according  to  the 'context,  it  may  either  mean  "that  I  am  arriyed,*'  or 
'^  wind."  The  Parasite  says,  "  Give  me  reason  (by  providing  some  victuals)  to 
rejoice  that  I  have  arrived."  Phsedromns  chooses  to  understand  him  as  saying, 
*^  Give  me  some  wind,  that  I  may  rejdce,"  and  says  "  By  all  means,"  and  b^^ 
to  fan  him.  The  other  asks  what  he  is  doing,  or  maldng;  to  which  he  replies, 
**  Makmg  some  air." 

3  Are  hkmted) — ^Ver.  318.  It  is  hard  to  say  what  "  plenos"  means  iHien  <]► 
plied  to  the  teeth— if,  indeed,  that  word  is  the  correct  reftdisg  here. 


y  Google 


Be.  ni.  OB,  THE  rOBGEBT.  545 

Phjbd.  Aye,  but  if  you  only  knew  what  Las  been  put  by 
foryou. 

Otie.  I*d  very  mueli  like  to  know  where  it  is;  for  really  it's 
necessary  for  it  and  my  teeth  to  make  acquaintance. 

Fhjbd.  a  gammon  of  bacon,  a  sow's  stomach,  some  udder, 
and  kernels  of  the  throat. 

Cite.  What,  all  this  do  you  say  ?  Perhaps  you  mean  that 
ther  are  in  the  flesh-market  ? 

Phjbd.  In  the  dishes,  I  mean ;  they've  been  got  ready  for 
you,  since  we  knew  that  you  were  about  to  arrive. 

Ctte.  Take  care  you  don't  be  fooling  me. 

"Pkmd.  So  may  the  fair  one'love  me  whom  I  love,  I  don't 
say  what's  false.  But  as  to  what  I  sent  you  upon  I'm  none 
the  wiser  yet. 

Cue.  I've  brought  back  nothing.  Phjbd.  You've  undone  me. 

Cue.  I  can  find  something,  if  you'll  give  me  your  atten- 
tion. After,  at  your  request,  I  had  set  out,  I  arrived  in 
Caria ;  I  saw  your  Mend ;  I  asked  him  to  make  me  a  loan 
of  some  money.  In  answer,  you  were  to  know  that  he  was 
willing  to  oblige  you ;  he  didn't  wish  to  disappoint  you,  as  it 
is  only  proper  that  a  person  who  is  a  friend  should  be  ready,  and 
should  assist  his  friend.  In  a  few  words  he  answered  me, 
and  quite  in  confidence,  that  he  also  was  in  the  same  extreme 
want  of  money  as  yourself. 

Phjsd.  By  your  words  you  ensure  my  undoing. 

Cite.  "Why  no ;  I'm  saving  you,  and  wish  you  to  be  saved. 
After  this  answer  was  given  me,  I  went  away  from  him  to 
the  Ponim,  in  sorrow  that  I  had  applied  to  him  in  vain.  By 
accident  I  espied  a  military  officer ;  this  person  I  accosted, 
and  as  I  approached  I  saluted  him.  ''  Save  you,"  said  he  to 
me,  took  my  right  hand,  drew  me  aside,  and  asked  me  why  I 
had  come  to  Caria.  I  said  that  I  had  come  there  for  the  sake 
of  amusement.  Upon  this  he  asked  me  whether  I  knew 
a  certain  Lyco,  a  banker  of  Epidaurus.  I  said  I  knew 
him.  "Wefl,  and  the  Procurer  Cappadox  ?"  I  answered 
yes,  that  I  had  seen  him.  "  But  what  do  you  want  of  him  ?" 
said  I.  "  Because,"  said  he,  "  I  bought  of  him  a  girl  for 
thirty  min»,  her  clothes  and  golden  jewels  too  ;  and  for  these 
last  ten  mime  more  are  added.' *  "  Have  you  paid  the  money  ?" 
said  I.  "No,"  said  he;  "it  is  lodged  with  this  Lyco  the 
banker,  whom  I  was  mentioning,  and  I've  instructed  mm  that 

2n 


y  Google 


546  coBoiTxio;  AetU. 

the  person  who  Bhould  bring  a  letter  sealed  with  my  own 
ring,  to  him  he  was  to  give  his  services,  that  he  nu^t 
leceive  the  damsel,  with  her  jewels  of  gold  and  her  doraies, 
from  the  Procurer."  After  he  told  me  this,  I  was  going  away 
from  him.  At  once  he  called  me  back,  invited  me  to  dumer ; 
it  was  a  point  of  conscience,  I  was  unwilling  to  refbae  him* 
"What  if  we  go  off  home^  and  take  our  places  at  tabled* 
said  he.  The  suggestion  pleased  me ;  it  is  neither  proper  to 
lengthen  out  the  day,  nor  to  curtail  the  night.  Everything 
was  prepared,  and  we,  for  whom  it  was  prepared,  were  at  our 
places.  After  we  had  dined  and  weU  drunk,  he  asked  for 
the  dice  to  be  fetched  him.  He  challenged  me  to  play  with 
him  a  game  of  hazard.  I  staked  my  doak,  he  sfcaked  his 
ring  against  it ;  he  called  on  the  name^  of  Planesium. 

Phjbb.  What,  my  mistress  P  Cub.  Be  silent  a  while. 
He  threw  a  most  losing  cast^.  I  took  up  the  dice,  and 
invoked  Hercules  as  my  genial  patron* ;  I  flurew  a  first-rate 
cast^,  and  pledged  him  in  a  bumping  cup ;  in  return  he  drank 
it  off,  reclined  his  head,  and  fell  fiaat  asleep.  I  sHly  took  away 
from  him  the  ring,  and  took  my  legs  quietly  from  off  the  coueh, 
so  that  the  Captain  mightn't  perceive  it.  The  servants  en- 
quired whither  I  was  going ;  I  said  that  I  was  going  whither 
persons  when  fuU  are  wont  toao.  When  I  bebeld  the  door, 
at  once  on  the  instant  I  betook  myself  away  from  the  place. 

Phjbd.  I  commend  you.      Citil  Commend  me  when  I've 

*  CaUed  on  ike  name)— Ver.  356.  On  the  custom  of  iuTokiiig  thdr  mistresaeB, 
when  playing  at  dice,  see  a  Note  to  the  Gaptiyi,  Act  I.,  Sc.  1.  V^e  are,  per- 
haps, to  suppose  that  the  Captain  takes  off  his  rbg  for  the  purpose  of  stakiiig  it, 
which  would  enable  Curcolb  to  steal  it  the  more  easily. 

s  Most  htmg  cast)— Ver.  357.  When  playing  with  the  '*  tali,**  or  ^  knuckfe- 
bone  dice/'  with  only  four  marked  sides,  they  used  sets  of  finir.  "Vbltoifi 
quatuor"  (literally,  "  the  four  vultures")  was  the  most  unlucky  throw  of  all,  and 
is  supposed  to  haye  been  four  aces. 

»  My  genial patrony-Yet.  368.  "  Nutricem ;"  literally,  "  nurse."  It  has  been 
suggested  that  the  Parasite  intended  to  compliment  his  entertainer,  the  Captein, 
under  the  name  of  Hercules,  whom  he  inyokes  for  luck.  The  Delphin  Gonuneo- 
tator  says  that  Parasites  invoked  Hercules  because  the  tenths  of  entertainmsDts 
were  offered  to  him,  and  these  were  distributed  among  the  needy,  in  the  number 
of  whom  they  ranked. 

«  A  first-rate  casty-Ver.  259.  The  best  throw  with  the  ''tali"  was  caDed 
"  Venus"  or  ^  Venereus  jactus,"  when  the  dice  tamed  up  2, 8, 4^  and  5w  Aa  a 
was  by  this  throw  that  the  Bomans  chose  the  King  of  the  Feast,  it  received  tht 
name  of  ^'Basilwin,'' "thftkmg'B  throw."    See  the  last  Soade  in  the  Asniaria. 


y  Google 


8e.  ni.  OB,  THE  ]^om0EBT.  549 

broof^t  this  tlimg  aboat  which  you  desire.  Now  let*  s  go  in* 
doon,  that  we  may  seal  the  letter. 

Phjei).  Do  I  delay  youP  Citb.  But  let's  cram  down 
something  first,  the  gammon,  the  udder,  and  the  kernels ; 
these  are  the  foundatums  for  the  stomach,  with  bread  and 
roast  beef,  a  good-sized  cup  and  a  capacious  pot,  that  counsel 
enough  may  be  fortiicoming.  Do  you,  yourseff,  seal  the  letter ; 
he'll  do  the  honors  (painting  <  to  Paxhtubus)  while  I  am 
eating.  I'll  dictate  after  what  fashion  you're  to  write.  Follow 
me  this  way,  in-doors. 

PHiBD.  I  follow.    {Tkey  go  into  the  house  o/*Fh^dbomvs.) 

Act  in. — Scene  I. 
Snter  Ltoo. 
Ltc.  I  seem  to  be  in  opulence ;  I've  struck  my  balance, 
how  much  money  I  have,  and  how  much  I  owe.  l/m  rich,  if 
I  don't  pay^  those  to  whom  I'm  in  debt.  If'  I  do  pay 
those  to  whom  I'm  in  debt,  my  debts  are  the  greatest.  But 
really,  upon  my  faith,  when  I  carefully  consider,  if  they  press 
me  hard,  I'll  resort  to  the  PwBtor^.  Most  bankers  have  this 
habit,  for  one  to  borrow  of  the  other,  and  to  pay  nobody,  and  to 
discharge  the  debt  with  their  fists,  if  any  one  duns  in  a  loudish 
tone.  The  person  that  has*  in  a  short  time  acquired  wealth, 
unless  in  good  time  he  saves  it,  in  good  time  comes  to  starva- 
tion. I'd  Hke  to  buy  a  servant  for  myself,  who  now,  however, 
must  be  sought  by  me  on  hire* :  there's  occasion  for  my  ready 
money. 

Unter  C\rECVijio,Jrom  the  house,  speaking  to  Ph^dbomus, 

within. 
Cub.  Don't  you  be  reminding  me  now  Tm  full ;  I  recollect 

1  IfldonHpay) — ^Ver.  373.  He  probably  allndes  to  some  shnffling  and  cheating 
methods  by  whkh  the  bankers  of  the  day  had  recently  distingoisheid  themselves. 
See  the  Pseadolas,  1.  296  (Act  I.,  Sc.  3). 

«  Reiort  to  the  Prastory—yer,  876.  This  was  probably  a  method  with  bankers 
and  traders,  by  which,  for  the  porpose  of  defrauding  thdr- creditors,  they  sur- 
rendered their  effects  to  the  Prstor,  and  by  doing  so,  contrived  to  midce  a  parse, 
as  is  too  often  done  by  bankrupts  and  msolvents  at  the  present  day.  In  L  6S4 
(Aet  v.,  Sc  8),  we  find  Cappadox  expressing  himself  as  apprehensive  that  Lyco 
wiU  be  '*  taking  the  benefit  of  the  Act*' 

>  The  person  that  has)~-Yer.  380.  Gueudeville,  m  his  translation,  informs  us 
that  this  aazun  was  much  repeated  by  Louis  XII.  of  France,  who  was  a  great 
admirer  of  Plantns. 

*  Saught  ^m$<m  iMre)— Ver.  882.  This  passage  has  been  much  commented    ■■  ■ 
2n2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


548  cuBOTTLio.  Act  m. 

and  understand.  I'll  render  up  to  jou  all  this  cleyerlj  car- 
ried out ;  do  hold  your  peace.  T  faith,  I've  surely  filled 
myself  in-doors  right  well,  and  still  in  my  stomach  I've 
leit  room  for  one  corner,  in  which  to  stow  away  the  rem- 
nants of  thege  Temmoitfi.  {Seeing  Ltgo.)  Who's  this  that 
with  covered  head  is  saluting  ^sculapius  ?  Heyday,  the  very 
man  I  wanted.   (To  an  Attendant.)   Follow  me.   I'll  make 

fretence  as  though  I  didn't  know  him.  {Aloud.)  Hark  you ; 
want  you. 

Lto.  (turtimg  round).  One-eyed  man^,  save  you. 

Cub.  Prithee,  do  you  jeer  me  ?  Ltc.  I  suppose  that  you 
are  of  the  family  of  the  Coclites^ ;  for  they  are  one-eyed. 

CvB.  This  was  knocked  out  for  me  by  a  catapulta,  at 
Siijron. 

Lyc.  What  matters  it  to  me,  pray,  if  it  had  been  knocked 
out  by  a  broken  pot  with  cinders  initf 

Ctjb.  (oiide.)  This  fellow's  a  wizard,  surely^ ;  he  tells  the 
truth,  for  such  catapultas  are  often  directed  at  me.  (Aloud.) 
Young  man,  as  I  bear  this  mark  on  my  face^  in  the  service 
of  the  public,  prithee  don't  be  uncivil^  to  me. 

Ltc.  May  I  then  inforize^  you,  if  I  may  not  incomi- 
tiatize  P 

Cub.  You  shan't  be  inforizing  me,  indeed ;  and  really  I 

on,  as  containiDg  some  indelicate  meaning.  After  al),  it  seems  clearly  to  mean 
that  he  has  occasion  for  all  his  ready  cash ;  and,  though  he  would  like  to  bajr  a 
slave,  he  must  content  himself  with  hiring  one. 

^  One-eyed  man) — ^Ver.  392.  It  appears  from  this  that  Carcnlio  has  bat  one 
eye.    The  occasion  of  his  losing  it  is  hinted  at  in  1. 396. 

*  Family  of  the  CocUtes)--Ver.  393.  "  Coclitum  prosapia^no  doubt  here  means 
a  general  term,  "  the  family  of  one-eyed  men."  Horatius,  who,  single-banded, 
opposed  the  army  of  Porsenna,  was  called  **  Cocles,''  from  having  but  one  eye. 
Pliny  the  Elder  speaks  of  the  Cyclops  and  the  Arimasjuans,  a  natitm  of  Sarmatia, 
as  having  but  one  eye. 

3  A  wizard,  surely) — ^Yer.  397.  He  is  surprised  at  Lyco  having  so  exactly  hit 
upon  the  truth.  It  has  been  already  remarked  that  Paraates  were  the  especial 
butts  for  practical  jokes.  On  one  of  these  occasions  the  unfortunate  fellow  pro- 
bably lost  his  eye.    . 

*  Bear  this  mark  on  my  face)^Yer,  399.  "  Hoc  intus  mihl**  This  passage  is 
most  probably  corrupt. 

*  Don^t  be  tmcivil) — ^Ver.  400.  *'  Incomitio"  probably  means,  "  to  treat  rudely," 
or  ^*  be  uncivil  to."  Lyco  puns  upon  it,  as  though  meaning,  ^*  to  bring  befiire  the 
*  comitia,'  "  or  public  assemblies  of  the  people. 

« Inforize) — ^Ver.  401.  In  the  word  "  inforare,"  which  is  coined  for  the  occasion, 
and  signifies  <<  to  summon  to  the  Forum,"  it  is  not  unprobable  that  an  indecent  pun 
is  intended.  The  liberty  has  been  taken  of  adopting  these  two  words  for^tfas  occasion. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  I.  OB,  THE  FOBGEBT.  549 

don't  care  at  all  about  your  Forum  or  your  Comitia.  But 
if  you  can  point  me  out  this  person  that  I'm  seeking,  you 
will  be  doing  me  a  real  and  a  great  service.  I'm  looking  for 
Lyco  the  banker. 

Lto.  Tell  me  why  you  are  now  seeking  for  him,  or,  of  what 
country  are  you  ?  Cttb.  I'U  tell  you :  JTm  come  from  Thera- 
pontigonus  Platagidorus,  the  Captain. 

Lto.  I'  faith,  I  know  the  name:  (aside)  for  with  that 
same  name,  when  I  wrote,  I  filled  four  whole  sides^.  (To 
CuBorLio.)  But  why  are  you  seeking  for  Lyco  ? 

Cite,  (shotmng  the  letter),  I've  been  oraered  to  deliver 
this  letter  to  him.     Lto.  What  person  are  you  ? 

Cub.  His  freed-man,  whom  all  call  Summanus^.  Lto.  Sum- 
manus,  my  greetings.     But  why  Summanus  ?   Let  me  know. 

CtTB.  Because,  when  in  my  drunken  fit  I've  gone  to  sleep, 
I  "  simmiane^"  the  garments ;  for  that  reason  do  all  people 
call  me  Summanus. 

Lto.  'Twere  better  for  you  to  look  out  for  entertainment  for 
you  somewhere  else ;  really  in  my  own  house  I  have  no  room 
for  a  Summanus.  But  I  am  the  person  that  you  are  looking  for. 

Cttb.  Prithee,  are  you  he,  Lyco  the  banker  ? 

Lto.  I  am.  Cfb.  Therapontigonus  requested  me  to  give 
you  a  hearty  greeting,  and  to  deliver  this  letter. 

Lto.  What,  to  me  ?  Ctjb.  Just  so.  Take  it,  recognize 
the  seal.     Do  you  know  it  ?     (Ltco  takes  the  letter,) 

Lto.  Why  should  I  not  know  it  ?  On  which,  a  man,  holding 
a  shield,  is  cleaving  an  elephant  asunder  with  a  sword. 

Cub.  What's  written  there  he  bade  me  request  you  to  do 
immediately,  if  you  wished  for  his  esteem. 

Lto.  Step  aside ;  I'll  look  what's  written  in  it. 

CtTB.  (stepping  aside).  By  all  means,  at  your  pleasure,  so 
long  as  I  receive  of  you  that  which  I'm  come  for. 

Lto.  (reads).  "  Therapontigonus  Platagidorus,  the  Captain, 
his  guest,  sends  to  his  host  Lyco,  at  Epidaurus,  right  hearty 
greeting." 

>  Fow  whole  side8)'^Ver.  410.  "  Ceras."    Waxed  sides  of  a  tablet 

2  Summanus) — ^Ver.  413.  There  was  a  Divinity  of  this  name.    See  the  Bac- 

chides,  1.  895  (Act  IV.,  Sc.  8).    The  name,  as  here  coined  hj  Gurcnlio,  would, 

perhaps,  answer  to  the  English  **  Mr.  Eeep-tight-in-hand." 
»  /  mmmane) — ^Ver,  416.  "  Summano."    Literally,  "  I  keep  my  hands  npon." 

For  the  purpose  of  keeping  np  the  spirit  of  the  passage,  the  liberty  has  been  taken 

of  coining  a  word.  The  Parasite  seems  to  allude,  somewhat  obscurely,  to  the  trick 

he  has  played  the  Captain  Therapontigonus. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


5S0  cirxciriiio ;  Act  HI. 

Cub.  (aside).  This  fellow'smy  own;  he's  swaJlowingthehook. 

Ltc.  Xgoing  on),  "  I  beg  and  request  of  you  that,  the  p^*soii 
who  ddliyers  this  letter  to  you,  to  him  be  given  up  the  girl 
whom  I  purchased  there  (which  I  did  there  in  your  presence, 
and  you  being  the  negotiator),  and  the  golden  trinkets  and 
clothes  M  weU.  You  know  already  how  it  was  agreed  upon. 
You  give  the  money  to  the  Procurer,  and  give  the  young 
woman  to  this  person."  (To  Cttbgitlio.)  Where  is  be  him- 
self?   Why  doesn't  he  come  ? 

Cttb.  I'll  tell  you ;  because  it  is  hut  four  days  since  we 
arrived  in  Caria,  from  India ;  there  he  now  intends  to  order 
a  solid  golden  statue  to  be  made  of  FhiUppean  gold,  which 
is  to  be  seven  feet  high — ^a  memorial  of  his  exploits. 

Ltc.  For  what  reason  this?  Cub.  Til  tell  you;  why, 
because  within  twenty  days  he  singly  has  subdued  the  Per- 
sians, Paphlagonianfi,  Sinopians,  .Arabians,  Cretans,  Syrians, 
Shodia  and  Lycia,  Peredia  and  Bibesia^,  Centauromachia  and 
Classia  Fnomammia^,  and  ail  Libya,  and  all  Oonterebiomia ; 
one  half  even  of  all  nations  has  he  conquered  unaided  in 
twenty  days. 

Ltc.  Dear  me !     Cub.  Why  are  you  surprised  ? 

Ltc.  Why,  because  if  all  these  people  were  penned  np  in 
a  cage  as  close  as  chickens,  even  so  they  couldn't  be  encom- 
passed in  a  year.  Upon  my  faith,  I  do  believe  that  you  are' 
come  from  him ;  for  you  do  jabber  such  nonsense. 

Cub.  Aye,  and  I  can  tell  you  still  more,  if  you  like. 

Ltc.  No;  1  don't  want  it.  Follow  me  this  way.  I'll 
pay  you  that,  on  account  of  which  you  came ;  and  lo,  I  see  * 
*  *  *  *  *  #*« 

^  Peredia  and  Bibesia) — Ver.  444.  Most  of  these  names  are  real,  while  some 
are  fictitious-^as,  for  instance,  "  Peredia,"  '*  Hungry-land,"  and  "  Bibesia," 
'^  Thirsty-land."  By  Centauromachia  he  perhaps  means  Thessaly,  the  ooontry 
of  the  Centaurs ;  though,  possibly,  this  region  may  hare  been  too  near  for  faim  to 
hope  to  impose  upon  Lyeo. 

2  Classia  Unomammia) — ^Ver,  446.  "  Classia"  is  supposed  by  Schmieder  to  be 
used  for  "  classis,"  "  an  army."  "  Unomammia,"  "  the  land  of  the  one-breasted 
people,"  may  perhaps  be  an  allusion  to  the  Amazons,  who  were  feigned  to  be  in  ihe 
habit  of  cutting  off  one  breast,  for  the  purpose  of  unng  the  bow  with  greater 
adroitness.  "  Conterebromia"  is  a  name  coined  for  the  occasion,  signifying  **  the 
land  of  piercing." 

»  That  you  ore)— Ver.  452.  "  Esse,"  "  to  be"  or  "  to  eat,"  accordhig  to  the  con- 
text, limiers  suggests  that  a  pun  is  here  mtended.  If  so,  it  will  admit  of  other 
of  these  meanings,  **  that  you  are  his  serraat"  or  ^'  that  you  eat  at  his  < 


y  Google 


Sa  I.  OB,  TSB  TOS0EBY.  SSL 

MUer  Cappajk>x,  from  his  house, 

liTC.  Save  you,  Procurer.    Cap.  May  the  Gkxis  prosper  you. 

liTC.  Do  you  }cnov)^fihs,t  tliis  is  about  whicn  I'm  come 
to  you  ?    Cap.  Say  on  what  you  please. 

liTO.  Tou  are  to  receive  the  money,  and  to  send  away 
the  young  woman  with  him.     {Fointmg  to  Cimcinio.) 

Cap.  But  what  if  I'm  bound  on  oath  to  another  ? 

liTC.  "What  matters  that  to  you,  so  long  as  you  get  the 
money  ?  Cap.  He  who  advises  is  as  good  as  an  accomplice. 
Do  you  follow. 

Cub.  Procurer,  take  care  that  you  don't  cause  me  any 
delay.  {They  go  mto  the  house  of  Cappadox.) 

Act  IV.— ScEiraj  I. 
Enter  the  Chobeotts^,  as  Chobus. 
Chob.  By  my  &ith,  Phsedromus  has  cleverly  met  with  this 
clever  rogue ;  hut  whether  a  salt-water  rogue^  or  a  dry-land  one 
I'm  the  rather  to  say  he  is,  I  reallu  don't  know.  The  costume 
thAt  I've  lent  I  fear  I  shan't  get  back.  Although  I  have  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  him  (I  trusted  Phsedromus  himself),  still 
I'll  keep  an  eye  upon  him.  But  until  he  comes  out  of  doors, 
1*11  point  out  in  what  place  you  may  easily  meet  with  each 
person,  that  he  mayn't  lose  his  labour  tnrough  too  much 
trouble,  if  any  one  wishes  to  meet  either  a  rascal  or  one 
without  rascality,  or  an  honest  man  or  a  dishonest  one.  He 
who  desires  to  meet  with  a  perjured  fellow,  let  him  go  into 
the  courts  of  law^ ;  he  who  wants  a  liar  and  a  braggart,  near 
the  rites  of  Cloacina*.  The  rich  and  erring  husbands  seek 
you  at  the  magisterial  halls  o/*the  Basilica.     There,  too,  will 

1  The  Choregits)  The  "  Ghoregas"  was  the  person  who  had  the  care  of  the 
dresses  and  decorations  for  the  actors,  and  provided  the  Choruses.  See  the  Tri- 
nnmmos,  1. 858  (Act  IV.,  Sc.  2). 

«  SaU-wcOer  rogw)— Ver.  463.  "  Halophantam."  The  "  halophanta"  were 
those  who  informed  against  the  exporters  of  salt  contrarj  to  law,  as  the  "  syco- 
phants'* did  against  the  exporters  of  figs.  The  Choregas  is  nsing  a  choice  of 
names  for  the  same  thing,  as  he  means  to  saj,  "  call  him  bj  what  name  joa  will, 
Gnrcnlio  is  a  deyer  rogue."  It  is  not  possible  to  transkte  the  passage  literally  and 
preserve  the  spirit  of  it  at  the  same  time. 

>  Into  the  courts  of  law) — ^Ver.  470.  The  ''  Comitium"  was  a  pUce  in  the 
Boman  Fonun,  near  the  "  Curia,"  where  trials  were  carried  on  before  the  Pr»tor. 
It  was  near  the  "  Puteal  Libonis,"  or  "  Scribonianum,"  where  witnesses  were 
sworn,  and  perjured  people  were  to  be  found,  ready  to  give  £ilse  testimony. 

« RUea  of  Cloacmay^Ver,  471.  Venus  is  supposed  to  have  been  called  by  this 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


552  cvBcrLio ;  Act  17. 

be  the  worn-out  harlots,  and  those  who  are  wont  to  haggle,^ 
them.  Contributors  to  pic-nic  ^jsmidx^yov^lljmd  in  ttie  fish- 
market.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  I'orum  good  men*  and 
opulent  do  walk ;  in  the  middle,  near  the  canal^,  there  are 
the  mere  puffers-off.  Beyond  the  lake*  of  Gurtius  are  impu- 
dent, talkative,  and  malevolent  fellows,  who  boldly,  without 
reason,  utter  calumnies  about  another,  and  who,  themselves, 
have  sufficient  that  might  with  truth  be  said  against  them. 
There,  at  the  old  s7iops%  are  those  who  lend  and  those  who 
borrow  at  interest.  Behind  the  Temple  of  Castor  there 
are  those  to  whom  unguardedly  you  may  be  lending  to  your 
cost.  There,  in  the  Etrurian  street,  are  those  men  who  hold 
themselves^  on  sale.  In  the  Velabrum^  you^ll  find  either 
baker,  or  butcher,  or  soothsayer;  either  those  who  sell 
retail  themselves,  or  supply  to  others  things  to  be  sold  by 
retail.  Eich  sinning  husbands  you'll  find  at  the  house  of 
Oppian  Leucadia®.  But,  meantime,  the  door  makes  a  noise ; 
I  must  curb  my  tongue.  (Exit. 

name,  from  her  statue  having  been  once  found  in  the  "  Cloaca,"  or  sewer  of  Rome. 
He  alludes  to  the  neighbourhood  of  her  Temple,  in  which  Plautus  Mnuelf  is  said 
to  have  dwelt.    The  "  Basilica"  has  been  mentioned  in  a  previous  Note. 

^  Pic-mc  dmnera) — ^Ver.  474.  The  "symbolae,"  or  "pic-nic  entertainments," 
have  been  referred  to  m  the  Notes  to  the  Stichus.  They  were  probably  got  np  en 
a  cheap  scale. 

2  Good  men) — Ver,  475.  "  Boni"  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  "  opulent,"  "  voesi 
of  substance." 

'  Near  ike  canaT) — ^Ver.  476.  The  banks  of  this  canal  were  much  resorted  to 
by  walkers.    It  is  not  accurately  known  in  what  part  of  Borne  it  was  situate. 

*  Beyond  the  lake) — ^Ver.  477.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  former  site  of  the 
Gurtian  Lake,  which,  in  his  time,  was  dried  up.  Ovid  says,  in  the  Fasti,  B.  iL, 
1.  401,  "  This  place,  where  now  are  the  markets,  formerly  fenny  marshes  covered ; 
a  ditch  was  here  swimming  with  water  from  the  overflowing  of  the  river.  That 
spot  formed  the  Curtian  Lake,  which  now  supports  the  altars  on  dry  ground:  ^ 
now  dry  ground,  but  once  it  was  a  lake."  It  is  not  a  little  amunng,  that  tfaoo^ 
the  Scene  is  in  Epidaurus,  Plautus  is  here  discussing  Boman  scenes  and  mamierB. 

^  The  old  skopsy^Yer.  481.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  old  shops  in  the  Fonm, 
which  were  the  property  of  the  state,  and  were  let  out  to  the  bankers  and  mooay- 
lenders. 

«  Who  hold  themselvesy-Yer.  482.  Horace  alludes  to  the  ^'tnrba  impb," 
the  *'  impious  throng,"  of  the  Etrurian  street. 

'  FefodrttOT)— Ver.  484  See  the  Captivi,  1.  494  (Act  IH.,  So.  1). 

«  Oppian  Leucadiay-Ver,  485.  The  best  solution  of  the  meaning  of  this 
passage  seems  to  be,  that  he  is  alluding  to  a  woman  named  Leacadia,  a  freed- 
woman  of  the  Oppian  family,  whose  house  was  a  rendezvous  for  riotoas  and  de- 
bauched husbands. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  II.  OB,  THE  FOEGEBT.  668 

Scene  II. — Enter ^  from  the  house  of  Cappadox,  CxrECTTLio, 
leading  VijAJSTebiuu,  followed  h/  Ltco  and  Cappadox. 

Ctte.  Maiden,  do' you  go  before;  what  is  behind  me  I 
cannot  keep  my  eye  upon.  Both  the  trinkets  of  gold,  and  all 
the  clothing  that  she  had,  were  his  own,  he  said. 

Cap.  No  one  is  going  to  deny  it.  Cub.  Still,  however,  it's 
somewhat  better  for  me  to  remind  you. 

Ltc.  Eemember  that  you've  undertaken,  that,  if  any  one 
should  assert  in  course  of  law  that  &he' a  properly  free,  all  the 
money  is  to  be  returned  to  me — ^thirty  minse. 

Cap.  I  shall  remember ;  be  easy  about  that ;  and  now  I  say 
the  same.     Ctjb.  But  I  wish  you  to  remember  this  well. 

Cap.  I  remember,  and  I  shall  deliver  her  to  you  on  war- 
rantyi. 

Cue.  And  am  I  to  take  anything  on  warranty  from  a  "Pto- 
cureTy  people  who  have  nothing  of  their  own  except  a  tongue 
only ;  who,  if  anything' s  entrusted  them,  deny  it  upon  oath? 
Tou  JProcnrers  dispose  of  what  belongs  to  others,  you  give 
liberty  to  what  belongs  to  others,  and  what  belongs  to  others 
your  give  your  commands  to ;  no  guarantee  of  ownership  is 
there  in  the  transfer  to  yourselves,  nor  are  you  yourselves 
guarantees  to  another  person.  The  race  of  Procurers,  among 
mortals,  in  mv  way  of  thinking  at  least,  are  just  like  flies, 
gnats,  bugs,  lice,  and  fleas — a  plague,  a  mischief,  and  a  nui- 
sance ;  you  are  of  no  serviceable  use,  and  no  respectable  per- 
son dares  to  stand  with  you  in  the  Eorum ;  he  that  does 
associate  with  you,  they  censure  him,  he's  spat  upon  and 
abused;  they  say  that  he  has  lost  his  property  and  his 
honor,  although  he  has  done  nothing  at  all. 

Ltc.  Upon  my  faith,  my  clever  one-eyed  friend,  in  my.  way 
of  thinking,  you  are  well  acquainted  with  the  Procurers. 

Cub.  Tou  hankers,  i'  faith,  I  put  and  place  in  the  same 
rank;  you  are  the  very  counterparts  of  them.  They,  at 
least,  are  on  sale  in  dark  comers,  you  in  the  very  Porum^. 
Tou  tear  men  to  pieces  with  usury,  they  by  persuading  them 
amiss  and  by  means  of  their  dens.    Pull  many  a  proposed  sta- 

1  On  vjarrtmty) — ^Ver.  495.  "  Dare  mancapio"  meant,  "  to  sell  a  thing  upon 
warranty,"  which,  when  formally  done,  was  efiected  "  per  ses  et  libram,"  by 
striking  the  balance  with  an  "  as,"  in  the  presence  of  six  witnesses,  when  the 
seller  goaranteed  the  possession  of  it  to  the  purchaser. 

^  In  the  very  Forum) — ^Ver.  507.  In  allusion  to  the  place  where  most  of  the 
bankers'  shops  were  situate. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


564  CTTBCXTLIO ;  Acfe  IV. 

tute^  has  the  public  confirmed  on  your  account,  which  when 
con&med  you  break ;  some  loophole  you  find  out ;  just  as 
boiling  water  becomes  cold,  so  do  you  deem  the  laws. 

Ltc.  {aside).  I'd  rather  I'd  held  my  tongue.  Cap.  Not 
wrongfully,  and  with  good  reason,  are  you  abusive  against  them. 

Cub.  li  abuse  is  uttered  against  those  who  deserve  it  not, 
that  I  do  hold  to  be  abuse ;  but  if  it  is  uttered  against 
those  who  are  deserving,  it  is  fair  censure,  in  my  way  of 
thinking,  at  least.  I  care  nothing  about  your  warranty, 
nor  about  any  other  Procurer  whatever.  Lyco,  do  you  want 
anything  with  me  ? 

liTC.  Heartily  fare  you  well.     Cfb.  Farewell.    {Going.) 

Cap.  Hark  you !  I  say  to  you 

Cite.  Say  on ;  what  do  you  want  ? 

Cap.  Prithee  do  you  take  care  that  all's  well  with  her 
(pointing  to  Planesittm)  ;  I've  brought  her  up  in  my  house 
carefully  and  in  chastity. 

Cub.  If  jrou  have  such  compassion  for  her,  pray,  what 
would  you  give  for  it  to  be  all  wdil  with  her  ? 

Cap.  A-phgajtmshafforgourself. 

Cub.  You  need  take  due  care  on  that  score  about  yourself. 

Cap.  {to  Plaitesium,  who  is  weeping).  Why,  simpleton, 
do  you  cry  ?  Don't  be  afraid ;  upon  my  faith,  I've  sdd  you 
fiskvourably.  Take  care,  will  you,  and  be  a  good  girl ;  now 
prettily  accompany  him,  pretty  one. 

Ltc.  Summanus,  do  you  want  anything  with  me  at  pre- 
sent ?  Cub.  Fare  you  well,  and  health  attend  you.  {Aside.) 
For  you've  kindly  given  me  your  services  and  your  money. 

Ltc.  Grive  abundant  greetings  to  my  patron. 

Cub.  I'll  give  them.  {Uadt  with  TjiAJsn^aiuu. 

Ltc.  Procurer,  do  you  wish  for  anything  ? 

Cap.  Give  me  those  ten  minsB  for  me  to  manage  for  myself 
with,  until  things  are  better  with  me.  Ltc.  l3iey  shall  be 
paid  ;  order  them  to  be  fetched  to-morrow.  {Exit. 

Cap.  Since  I've  successfully  finished  the  matter,  I  wish 
to  return  thanks  here  in  the  Temple.  For  long  since,  when  a 
little  girl,  I  bought  her  for  ten  minae ;  but  him  who  sold  her 
to  me,  never  since  then  have  I  set  eyes  upon.  I  think  he's 
dead.  What  matters  that  to  me  ?  I've  got  the  money.  The 
man  to  whom  the  Grods  are  propitious,  for  him,  no  doubt,  they 

^  Proposed  gtatutey-Yet.  609.  "  Rogitatio,**  or,  more  commonly, «  rogatio,"  wis 
the  term  applied  to  a  proposed  law,  or  decree  of  the  people,  or  **  pkbis^om." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


19- 


Sc.  III.  OB,  THE  FOBGEBT. 

throw  gain  in  his  waj.  Now  will  I  give  my  attention  to 
my  devotions ;  it's  clear  that  he  has  a  kind  regard  for  me. 
{Goes  into  the  Temple,) 

Scene  III. — Unter  TnEEAPOKTiooinrs^  and  Ltoo. 

Thee.  I'm  come  now,  inflamed  with  wrath  in  no  moderate 
degree,  but  with  that  same  with  which  I've  learned  to  deal 
destruction  upon  cities.  At  once  now,  unless  this  moment 
you  make  haste  instantly  to  pay  me  the  thirty  min»  whidi  I 
left  with  you,  make  haste  to  lay  down  your  life, 

Ltc.  By  my  troth,  to  no  little  mischief  do  I  now  derote 
you,  but  to  that  same  to  which  I  am  wont  to  devote  tiiat 
man  to  whom  I  owe  nothing  at  all. 

Theb.  Don't  you  be  miiing  yourself  bold  with  me,  or 
suppose  that  I  shall  be  entreating  you. 

Ltc.  And  you,  indeed,  shall  never  force  me  to  pay  you 
what  has  been  paid,  nor  shall  I  give  it  you. 

Theb.  I  thought  this,  when  I  entrusted  you  with  it,  that 
you  would  repay  nothing  at  all. 

Lyc.  Why  then  are  you  now  asking  it  back  of  me  ? 

Theb.  I  wish  to  know  to  whom  you  have  paid  it. 

Ltc.  To  your  one-eyed  freed-man;  he  said  that  he  was 
called  Summanus ;  I  paid  it  to  him,  who  brought  me  this 
sealed  letter.     {Gives  him  the  letter.) 

Theb.  What  letter  of  mine,  what  one-eyed  freed-man, 
what  people  caUed  Summanus  are  you  dreamiog  about  P  I 
really  nave  no  freed-man  at  all. 

Lyc.  You  act  more  wisely  than  a  portion  of  the  military 
men  who  have  freed-men,  and  then  forsake  them. 

Theb.  What  have  you  done  ?  Ltc.  What  you  requested 
me,  I've  done  for  your  sake,  that  I  mightn't  alight  the 
messenger  who  had  brought  your  seal's  impression. 

Theb.  More  fool  than  fool  were  you  to  give  credit  to  this 
letter. 

Ltc.  To  that  bv  which  matters  both  public  and  private 
are  carried  on  ougnt  I  not  to  have  given  credit  ?  I'll  be  off; 
the  money  has  been  properly  paid  you.    Warrior,  farewell. 

Theb.  How — farewell  ?  Ltc.  Fare  you  iU  then,  if  you 
choose, — aye,  all  your  life,  so  far  as  I'm  concerned.   (Meit. 

Theb.  What  shall  I  do  now  ?    Of  what  use  is  it  that  I 

^  Thercqxmtigonua) — He  seems  to  be  a  milder  member  of  tba  class  of  bracprts, 
of  which  Pjn^poliiiioes,  in  the  Miles  Gloriosaa,  is  so  admirable  a  i 


yLiOOgle 


566  ctmcuLio ;  Act  IV. 

have  caused  kings  to  obey  me,  if  this  obscure  fellow^  is  this 
day  to  laugh  at  me  P 

Scene  IV. — JEnter  CA:BTADOX,Jrom  the  Temple, 

Cap.  (to  himself).  The  man  to  whom  the  Gods  are  pro- 
pitious,  they  cannot,  I  think,  be  angered  with  him.     After  I 
had  finished  my  devotions,  it  then  came  into  my  mind,  lest 
the  banker  should  abscond,  to  go  fetch  the  money,  that  I  . 
m&j  make  good  cheer  rather  than  he. 

Theb.  I  had  left  my  compliments  for  you  at  your  house. 

Cap.  Theraponti^onus  Platagidorus,  save  you ;  since  you 
are  come  safe  to  Epidaurus  this  day,  at  my  house — ^you  won't 
lick  up  onearain  q/*salt*. 

Theb.  Tou  give  me  a  kind  invitation ;  things,  however, 
are  in  a  train  for  it  to  go  badly  with  yourself.  But  how 
&re&  my  purchase  at  your  house  ? 

Cap.  Why,  not  at  my  house  at  all.  Don't  be  bringing 
your  witnesses — assuremy,  I  don't  owe  you  anything. 

Theb.  How's  that? 

Cap.  What  I  was  bound  on  oath  to  do,  I've  done. 

Theb.  Will  you  give  me  up  the  girl  or  not,  before  I  spit 
you  with  this  sabre  of  mine,  you  whi^-scoundrel  ? 

Cap.  I  bid  you  go  to  perdition  with  all  my  heart ;  don't 
you  be  terrifying  me.  Sne  has  been  carried  off;  you  shall 
be  carried  off  hence  away  from  me,  beyond  a  doubt,  if  you 
persist  in  abusing  me,  to  whom  I  owe  nothing  but  a  punishing. 

Theb.  What,  threaten  me  with  a  punishing  ? 

Cap.  Aye,  and  by  my  troth,  I'll  not  be  threatening,  but 
I'll  give  it,  if  you  persist  in  being  impertinent  to  me. 

Theb.  A  Procurer,  j^^oo^A,  threatening  me ;  and  are  my 
combats  in  battle,  so  many  in  number,  lying  trodden  under 
foot  ?   But  so  may  my  sabre  and  my  shield  *  * 

*  *  *  trustily  aid  me  when  fighting  in  the 

field ;  unless  the  girl  is  restored  to  me,  I'll  at  once  cause  the 
ants  to  carry  you  away  piecemeal  from  this  spot. 

Cap.  And  so  may  my  tweezers*,  my  comb,  my  looking- 

>  ObtcurefeBowy-Yer,  556.  "  UmbraticiiB,*'  a  lowfenow,  ahanntttof  obsenra 
places. 

2  Lick  up  one  groin  of  saW)  —  Ver.  562.  He  pretends  that  be  ib  gotng  to 
invite  him;  bnt,  stopping  short,  ends  by  saying  that  he  shall  not  «Tea 
taste  salt  with  him.  "aXoXcxciv,  "  to  lick  salt,**  Erasmns,  m  his  Ada^  tdb 
us  was  a  proverbial  expression,  denoting  "to  live  sparingly." 

^Somaymif  «ioees6r«>-Ver.  576.  We  might  almoet  fimey  that  ^  wasabaiher 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Sc.  lY.  OB,  THE  rOSQEBT.  557 

glass,  my  crisping-iron,  and  my  hair-scissors  and  scrubbing- 
towel  love  me  weD,  I  don't  value  vour  high-sounding  words, 
nor  these  big  threats  of  yours,  a  bit  the  more  than  my  ser- 
vant-girl that  washes  out  my  sink.  I've  given  her  up  to 
him  who  brought  the  money  Epom  you. 

Theb.  What  person  was  that?  Cap.  He  said  that  he 
was  Summanus,  your  fi«ed-man. 

Theb.  Mine  ?  You  don't  say  so ;  i'  faith,  it's  that  CurcuUo 
that  has  put  a  trick  upon  me,  when  I  think  upon  it ;  he  stole 
my  ring  n*om  me. 

Cap.  (aside).  The  Captain  has  been  finely  appointed  to  a 
cashiered  company^. 

Thee.  Where  now  shall  I  find  Curculio^  ? 

Cap.  In  some  wheat  with  the  greatest  ease  I'll  make  you 
find  even  five  hundred  Curculios  instead  of  one.  Therefore 
I'm  off;  fare  you  well,  and  my  service  to  you.  {Uadt. 

Theb.  Fare  you  ill,  a  plague  attend  you.  What  shall  I 
do  ?  Shall  I  stop  or  go  away  ?  That  I  should  have  been 
imposed  upon  in  this  way !  I'd  like  to  give  a  reward  to  him 
who  would  point  out  that  fellow  to  me.  (Uadt. 

Act  V. — Scene  I. 
Unter  Cttbcflio,  mth  a  rmg^from  the  homeofPB^MBnouvs, 
Cub.  I've  heard  that  an  ancient  Poet^  wrote  in  a  Tragedy, 
that  two  women  are  worse  than  one ;  such  is  the  fact.  But 
a  more  crafty  woman  than  is  this  mistress  of  Phsedromus,  I 
never  saw  or  heard  of,  nor,  i'  faith,  can  one  be  spoken  of  or 
imagined ;  she,  as  soon  as  ever  she  saw  that  I  had  got  this 
ring,  asked  me  whence  I  got  it.  "  Why  do  you  ask  that  ?' '  said 
L  "Because  I've  need  to  know,"  mtf«A<9.  I  said  I  wouldn't 
tell  her.  To  get  it  away,  she  seized  hold  of  my  hand  with  her 
teeth.  With  much  ado  I  betook  me  out  of  doors,  and  made 
my  escape.    Away  with  this  slut*. 

speaking,  from  this  mention  of  the  implements  of  his  trade.  Probably  Cappadox 
employed  these  articles  himself,  in  pattmg  the  best  appearance  npon  his  com- 
modities, that  they  might  the  more  readily  attract  the  public. 

1  Appointed  to  a  cashiered  compamf) — ^Ver.  585.  He  remarks  that  the  Captain 
has  been  made  a  fool  of,  jost  in  the  same  way  as  if  he  had  recdyed  a  commission 
in  a  disbanded  maniple,  or  company. 

2  Find  CurcuUo) — ^Ver.  586.  He  asks  where  he  can  find  Corcnlio.  That  word 
ugnifying  not  only  the  Farasite^s  name,  but  "  a  weevil*'  as  well,  Cappadox  tells  him 
that  he  may  find  hmidreds  of  them  in  wheat. 

»  An  ancient  Poet)^YeT.  591.  Who  this  ancient  Poet  was,  is  not  known. 
*  This  skay-Yer,  598.  "  Canicnlam."    "  Littie  bitch." 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


MB  cmKCifxio;  ActY. 

from  his  house. 

Plan.  My  Phsadromus,  make  haste. 

Ykmd,  Make  haste  for  what?  Plait.  That  you  mayn't 
let  the  Parasite  escape ;  the  affair's  of  consequence. 

PH-2E3>.  Nothing  have  P  of  consequence;  for  what  I  did 
have  I  quickly  made  away  with  ?  (Seizes  Ctjuculio.)  I've 
got  him ;  what's  the  matter  ? 

Plak.  Ask  him  whence  he  got  that  ring :  my  father  used 
to  wear  it.     Cite.  Why,  troth,  and  so  did  my  aunt. 

Plan.  My  mother  gave  it  him  to  wear. 

Cttb.  And  your  father,  in  his  turn,  to  me. 

Plak.  You  are  talking  nonsense. 

CxTB.  I'm  in  the  habit ;  for  by  reason  of  it  I  make  a  live- 
lihood the  more  easily.    What  is  the  matter  now  ? 

Plan.  I  entreat  you,  don't  be  keeping  me  from  finding  my 
parents. 

GxTB.  How  can  I P  Have  I  got  your  father  and  mother 
hidden  beneath  the  stone  P     (^Holding  vf  the  ring,) 

Plan.  I  was  bom  a  free  woman. 

CiTB.  And  so  were  many  others,  who  are  now  in  servitude. 

Plan.  Eeally  now,  I'm  vexed.  Cttb.  Por  my  part,  I've 
told  you  how  this  came  into  my  possession.  How  often 
must  you  be  told  P  I  cheated  the  Captain  at  dice,  I  tell  you. 

JEnter  Thebapontigonts. 

Theb.  {eyeing  Ctjbcitlio).  I'm  all  risht;  see,  here  he  is 
whom  I  was  looking  for.    How  do  you  do,  good  sir  ? 

Cub.  I  hear  you ;  three  casts  of  the  dice,  if  you  like,  even 
for  that  scarf  of  yours. 

Theb.  Why  don't  you  go  to  very  perdition,  with  your 
casts  and  catch-pennies^  P  Either  give  me  back  the  money 
or  the  young  woman  ? 

CtTB.  (with  anai/r  of  surprise).  What  money  ?  what  rub- 
bish are  you  talking  about  to  me  P    What  young  woman  are 

»  Nothing  have  /)— Ver.  600.  Planesium  says,  "res,"  "  the  affidr,"  is  iii|^. 
Fhedromns,  understanding  the  word  as  meaning  **  property,"  says,  "Fve  got 
none ;  what  I  had,  I  soon  sqnandered.^^ 

'  Ctutt  and  catch-penmesy-Yer,  612.  **  Gmn  bolis,  cum  hnlbis.''  LiteraUy, 
"  with  yonr  casts  of  dke  and  yoor  onions.**  He  probably  nses  the  word  **  baSMB" 
solely  for  its  similarity  to  ''bolis,*'  by  way  of  aDlteratian.  A  little  Tariatioo  is 
made  in  the  translation,  to  keep  the  spirit  of  the  passage,  which  it  is  in 
to  do  by  adhering  to  the  letter. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


Sc.  n.  OB,  THX  rOBCHSBY.  5S9 

you  demanding  back  of  me  ?  Theb.  The  one  that  you  took 
away  this  day  from  the  Procurer,  you  scoundrelly  fellow. 

Ctjb.  I  took  none  away.  Theb.  Why,  surely,  I  see  her. 
There  she  is.     {Pointing  to  PiJLNBsnrM.) 

Phjbid.  This  young  woman  is  free.  Thee.  What,  my 
female  slave  free,  to  whom  I  have  never  given  her  liberty  ? 

Phjeb.  Who  gave  you  possession  of  her,  or  of  whom  did 
you  buy  her  ?  Let  me  know  that  ?  Thee.  Why,  I  paid  the 
money  for  her  through  my  banker — ^a  sum  which  I'll  have  re- 
fimded  to  me  fourfold  by  you  and  the  Procurer. 

Phjbd.  Tou,  who  understand  how  to  traffic  in  young 
women,  kidnapped  and  of  free  birth,  come  you  before  the 
judge.    Theb.  I  shan't  come. 

Ph^d.  I  may  call  my  witness^  to  the  summons, 

Theb.  No,  you  mayn't.  Ph  jbd.  May  Jupiter  then  utterly 
confound  you :  live  without  witnesses^  then, 

CxTB.  But  I'm  a  person  that  he  may  summon, 

PHiBD.  (to  CxTBCTTLio).  Do  you  stcp  this  Way. 

Theb.  What  ?  A  slave  summoned  as  a  witness  ?  Take  you 
care.     Cub.  Well,  that  you  may  know  it,  I'm  free. 

Thee.  Then  come  before  the  judge.  There's  for  you: 
teke  that,     {GHves  him  a  blow.) 

Cttr,  O  townsmen,  townsmen,  help, 

Theb.  Why  do  you  bawl  so  ? 

Ph^d.  What  right  have  you  to  strike  him  ? 

Thee.  Because  I  choose.  Ph^d.  {to  Ctjeoxtlio).  Step 
this  way  you  (pushes  him  totoards  the  Captain)  ;  there,  I'll 
give  him  up  to  you.     Hold  your  noise. 

Ctjb.  Phsedromus,  prithee  do  save  me. 

PniBD.  AAlwotddmjse]fandmjowaffoodQemuB,  Cap- 
tain, prithee,  do  tell  me  whence  you  got  that  ring,  which 
this  Parasite  purloined  from  you. 

Plak.  (kneeling  before  the  Captain)  .  By  your  knees,  I 

>  CaU  my  foitmesa) — ^Ver.  621.  It  was  a  custom  with  the  Romans,  when  a  man 
was  snmmoned  by  another  to  go  with  him  at  once  before  the  Prator,  for  the  plain- 
tiJBT,  if  the  defendant  wonld  not  go  quietly,  to  call  any  bystander  to  be  witness  (an- 
testari)  that  he  had  been  duly  summoned;  and,  having  touched  the  ear  of  the 
witness,  the  latter  was  boimd  to  aid  in  dra^pog  the  defendant  to  court  Only  free 
persons  could  be  witnesses.  For  this  reason  the  Captain  tells  Phsedromus  that  he 
cannot  summcm  a  witness  on  this  occasion,  as  he  knows  that  Planesium  is  not  free, 
and  supposes  that  Gurculio  is  also  a  skve. 

*  lFtlA<iitfi0dneMes)--Ver.  622.  **  Intestatns."  An  indelicate  aQumon  is  in- 
tended in  this  Kne. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


580  ouBcrLio;  ActV. 

do  entreat  you  to  give  us  that  information.  Theb.  Wliat 
matters  tliat  to  you  P  You  might  as  well  ask  after  this  sabre 
and  this  scarf,  how  each  came  into  my  possession. 

(5x7B.  What  airs  the  swaggerer  does  give  himself! 

Theb.  Send  that  fellow  away  (painting  to  CrBCtTLio)  ; 
then  I'll  tell  you  all.     Cub.  It's  nonsense  what  he  says. . 

Fhjbd.  Pnthee,  do  let  me  know.  Thxb.  I'll  tell  you :  (to 
Plakesium)  get  up.  Listen  to  this  matter,  and  give  atten- 
tion.   My  &ther  Periphanes  used  to  wear  it. 

Plak.  Ha!  Periphanes?  Theb.  He,  before  he  died,  gave 
it  to  me  as  bein^  his  son,  as  it  was  right  he  should. 

Plait.  O  Jupiter ! 

Theb.  And  on  that  occasion  he  made  me  his  heir. 

Plait.  O  filial  affection,  do  thou  preserve  me,  since  I  hare 
carefully  preserved  thee.    Welcome,  my  brother. 

Theb.  How  am  I  to  believe  that  ?  Tell  me,  if  you  are 
speaking  the  truth,  who  was  your  mother  ? 

Plak.  Cleobula.    Theb.  AVTio  was  your  nurse  ? 

Plait.  Archestrata.  Amid  the  sacred  rites  of  Bacchus 
she  had  carried  me  to  see  the  sights  *  *  « 

*  *  *  *    after  we  had  come  thither,  when 

now  she  had  found  me  a  place,  a  whirlwind  arose^ ;  the  scaf- 
folding^ of  the  stage  there  tumbled  down;  I  was  greatly 
alarmed,  and  then  some  one,  I  know  not  who,  seized  hold 
of  me  trembling  and  frightened,  neither  alive  nor  dead ;  and 
in  what  manner  he  carried  me  off  I  cannot  say. 

Theb.  I  recoUect  that  disturbance  happening ;  but,  do  you 
tell  me,  where  is  this  person,  who  carried  you  away  ? 

Plait.  I  know  not ;  but  {showing  a  ring)  this  rmg  I  have 
all  along  preserved  by  me,  with  it  long  since  was  I  lost. 

Theb.  Give  it  me  to  look  at. 

Cub.  {to  Plaitesium).  Are  you  in  your  senses  to  be 
trusting  it  to  that  fellow  ?    {Holds  her  arm,) 

Plan.  Do  you  only  leave  me  alone.  {8he  gives  it  to  the 
Captaht.)  Theb.  (examining  it),  O  Jupiter!  This  is  the 
same  that  I  presented  you  upon  your  birthday ;  I  recognize 
it  as  easily  as  my  0¥m  self.    Welcome  to  you,  my  sister. 

1  A  whirlwind  aro«e)~Ver.  646.  Many  mishaps  appear  to  have  happened  to 
families  through  the  lawlessness  and  violence  of  which  the  Ftftivals  of  the  Divi« 
nities  were  the  occasion. 

«  The  scaffoldms/y^Yer,  647.  Suetonius  tells  us  that  the  raign  of  Tiberius  was 
rendered  memorable  by  the  fall  of  the  scaffolding  in  the  theatre  of  Fldenc. 


y  Google 


J 


St.  in.  OB,  THE  FOB€h£BY.  561 

TuLH.  My  1:^oiiher,  wdeome  to  you. 

Ph^^p.  I  trust  the  Oods  will  prospeir  this  matter  for  you. 

Cub.  Aukd  I,  for  all  of  us.     (To  the  Captain.)  Do  you,  as 
kawig  this  day  arrived,  give  a  dinner  ia  honor  d[  your  sister ; 
he  (pointing  io  Phjspbomus),  to-morrow,  will  give  one  in 
honor  of  his  marriage ;  we  promise  that. 
.    fiUB».  (to  CuBcriJo).  Do  you  hold  your  tongue. 

Cub.  I  shan't  hold  my  tongue,  as  thmgs  are  turning  out 
ao  welL  Captain^  do  you  promiae  her  to  him ;  I'll  give  the 
mamag^oition.    Theb.  W hat  is  the  marriage-portion  ?     ' 

Cue.  What,  that  I  give  ?  Why,  that  always  m  long  as 
he  lives  he's  to  feed  me. 

Theb.  I'  troth,  he  says  what's  fair ;  with  my  consent  you 
shall  do  so.     But  this  Pl'ocurer  owes  me  the  thirty  min». 

Ph^d.  For  what  reason  so  ? 

Thbb*  Because  he  agreed  with  me  on  these  terma  to 
give  it  back :  that  if  any  one  should  assert  her  to  be  free  bom 
in  due  eoiurae  of  law,  he  would,  without  dispute,  pay  back  all 
the  money. 

Cub.  Then  let's  go  to  the  Procxirer.    Theb.  I  agree. 

Phjqb.  This  first  I  wish ;  to  despatch  my  matter. 

Theb.  What's  that  ?  Phjsd.  That  you  will  betroth  her  to 
me.     (The  Captaik  c&naidersS) 

Cub.  Why  do  you  hesitate.  Captain,  to  give  her  as  a  wife 
to  him  P     Theb.  If  she  is  agreable. 

Plan.  My  brother,  it  is  my  wish. 

Theb.  So  be  it  then.     Cub.  You  do'  rightly. 

Phjbd.  Captain,  do  you  betroth  me  to  her  for  my  wife  ? 

Theb.  I  do  betroth  her.  Ph;rt).  (^omtmg  to  Cubculio). 
And  to  him  do  I  promise  support  at  my  expense. 

Cub.  You  do  kindly.    But         *  *  *  * 

•  *  *  * 

Thbb.  *  #  «  *  *       But 

see,  here's  the  Rocurer  coming ;  my  treasurer^,  I  mean. 

ScEio:  in. — Mnter  Cappadox,  in  haste. 
Cap.  (to  himself).  Those  who  say^  it's  bad  for  bankers  to 

^  Mif  ireaiurw)-'Vn,  677.  Ia  allusion  to  the  money  which  he  intends  to 
JMire  hack  from  the  Procurer.  "  Thesaurom"  seems  here  to  have  the  significatbn 
of  "  treasurer"  or  "  treasnry." 

«  Tk0te  vho  aoffy-Nv.  679.  This  and  the  following  line  are  jdearly  in  a  very 
eormpt  state.    Indeed,  it  is  hard  to  gather  any  sense  whatever  from  them. 

2o  — 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


662  ciTBCiTiiio;  ActT. 

be  trusted,  utter  nonsense ;  I  say  it's  neither  good  nor  bad 
for  them  to  be  trusted,  and  that,  I've  Mlj  expmenced  this 
day.  They  are  not^  badly  trusted,  who  never  repay,  but  with 
whom  it  is  lost  outright.  As  for  example,  before  this  Lyco 
paid  me  the  ten  min»,  he  had  to  go  to  every  banker's 
counter.  After  there  were  no  proceeds,  I  summoned  the 
fellow  with  much  noise ;  he  appealed  against  me  to  the  court. 
I  was  most  confoundedly  afraid  that  this  day  he'd  be  settling 
accounts  with  me  before  the  Pra&tor^ ;  but  my  friends  forced 
him,  so  he  paid  the  money  at  home.  Now  I'm  resolved  to 
make  haste  to  my  house.     (Buns  towards  Ids  door.) 

Theb.  HaUo !  you  Procurer ;  I  want  you. 

Ph^i).  And  I  want  you. 

Cap.  But  I  don't  want  either  of  you. 

Thee.  Stay  this  instant,  will  yoij. 

PHiED.  And  make  you  haste  to  disgorge  the  money  with 
all  despatch. 

Cap.  {to  Phjedeomus).  What  have  you  to  do  with  me? 
{To  the  CAPTAiif.)  Or  what  have  you  ? 

Thee.  Because  this  day  I  shall  be  making  a  javelin  of  you, 
discharged  from  a  catapulta,  and  twist  you  with  the  string*, 
just  as  the  catapultas  are  in  the  habit  of  doing. 

Phjsi).  I'll  this  day  make  a  coxcomb  of  you,  to  be  sleeping 
with  a  puppy*  m  your  bed — ^an  iron  one,  I  mean. 

Cap.  But  I'll  make  you  both  to  be  rotting  in  a  strong-barred 
prison.  Thee.  Seize  him  by  the  throat,  and  away  with  him 
to  extreme  torture. 

Phjed.  However  that  is,  he'll  be  going  there  of  his  own 
accord.     {I%e  Oaptain  seizes  him.) 

Cap.  O  Gods  and  men,  your  aid !  that  I,  uncondemned, 

>  Tkey  are  not) — ^Ver.  681.  He  seems  to  mean,  that,  where  there  is  bo  possibility- 
of  the  debtor  pajmg  back  the  money,  the  case  is  more  fortunate  than  where 
you  are  tormented  by  hopes  of  getting  it  back,  which,  however,  are  doomed  to  dis- 
appointment. 

^  Before  ike  Praetor) — Ver.  684.  He  was  afraid  that  Lyoo  would  cheat  him,  by 
filing  his  schedule,  or  taking  the  benefit,  in  the  Roman  style.  See  the  Note  to 
1.  373  (Act  in.,  Sc.  1). 

»  With  the  8trmg)—Yer.  690.  "  Nervus,"  **  a  cord,"  was  also  the  name  of  the 
iron  chain  fastened  round  the  neck  and  legs  of  the  prisoner.  If  the  debtor  did 
not  pay  within  thirty  days  after  judgment,  he  was  liable  to  be  thrown  into  prison 
by  the  creditor. 

*  WUh  a  pupptfy-Yer.  691.  He  jokes  on  the  double  meaning  of  the  wnrd 
"  catellus,"  which  signified  "an  u-on  chain,"  and  also  "  a  little  dog." 


y  Google 


Sc.  m.  OB,  THIS  EOBGEBT.  563 

aii&  without  eyidence  a&;amst  me,  should  thus  be  dragged 
along  1  Prithee,  Planesium,  and  you,  Phsedromus,  do  give 
me  assistance. 

Plan.  Brother,  I  do  beseech  you,  don't  ruin  him  unoon- 
demned ;  he  treated  me  kindly  and  modestly  at  his  house. 

Thbb.  That  was  through  no  inclination  of  his  own ;  give 
you  thanks  to  this  ^sculapius^  {pointmg  to  the  Temple) 
that  you've  preserved  your  chastity ;  for  if  he  had  been  weU, 
he'd  long  ago  have  packed  you  off  wherever  he  could. 

Phjbd.  Now  attend  to  me,  both  of  you^  if  I  can  arrange 
between  you.  {To  the  Captain.)  You  let  him  go.  Pro- 
curer, come  you  this  way.  I'll  pronounce  my  opinion,  if 
indeed  you  are  ready  to  abide  by  what  I  shall  decide  you 
should  do, 

Thbb.  "We  leave  it  to  you.     {Re  lets  go  of  the  Pboottbeb.) 

Cap.  So  long,  i'  faith,  as  you  give  a  decision  to  the  effect 
that  no  one  is  to  take  the  money  away  from  me. 

Theb.  What,  not  that  which  you  promised  ? 

Cap.  I,  promised  ?  How  ?     Theb.  With  your  tongue. 

Cap.  With  that  same  tongue  I  now  gainsay  it ;  that  was 
given  me  by  Nature  for  the  purpose  of  speaking,  not  of 
losing  my  property. 

Theb.  He's  trifling;  seize  the  fellow  by  the  throat. 
{Seizes  him.)     Cap.  I'H  at  once  then  do  as  you  bid  me. 

Theb.  Since  you  are  an  honest  man,  answer  me  this  that 
I  ask  you.     Cap.  Ask  me  what  you  please. 

Theb.  Did  you  not  promise,  that  if  any  one  should  show 
that  she  {pointing  to  Planesittm)  was  fpeebom,  you  would 
pay  back  all  the  money  ?     Cap.  I  don't  remember  saying  so. 

Theb.  What,  do  you  deny  it  ?  Cap.  I'  faith,  I  really  do 
deny  it.     In  whose  presence  r   In  what  place  was  it  ? 

Thbb.  In  my  own  presence,  and  that  of  Lyco  the  banker. 

Cap.  Why  don't  you  hold  your  tongue  ? 

Theb.  I  shan't  hold  my  tongue. 

Cap.  I  don't  care  a  rush  for  you ;  don't  be  bullying  me. 

Theb.  In  my  own  presence  and  that  of  Lyco  it  took  place. 

Ph^d.  {to  the  Captain).  I  quite  believe  you.  Now, 
therefore,  Procurer,  that  you  may  know  my  judgment, 
{pointing  to  Planesittm)  she  is  a  free  woman ;  he  {pointing 
to  the  Captain)  is  her  brother,  and  she  is  his  sister ;  she  is 

*  To  this  jEsculapiuay-yeT,  699.  Who  had  not  granted  him  convalescence  so 
soon  as  he  desired. 


y  Google 


664  caaamMO.  AqtY. 

fing^iged  to  me;  do  you  restore  Ima  the  BMney ;  that's  hj 
docisian. 

Cap.  Upon  my  faith,  PhsBdromus,  you  have  giTeai  this  de- 
einaD.  camiptly.  It  shall  both  be  baa  for  you,  aad  yoo^  Ob- 
tain,— ^may  the  Gods  sad  GkiddeflfleB  confound  you. 

Tkbb.  And  as  for  you,  you  shall  be  clapt  in  pnscn  at 
omoe,.  unless  the  money's  returned  me. 

Gap.  Then  follow  me.     Thkb.  Follow  you  where  ? 

Cap.  To  my  banker — ^to  the  Pnetsor^ ;  for  it's  there  that 
I  My  my  money  to  all  persons  to  whom  I'm  indebted. 

Thes.  I'll  be  carrying  you  hence  to  prison,  (tnd  not  to  the 
FrsBitor,  if  you  don't  pay  back  the  money. 

Cap.  I  do  niost  eaxnestly  wish  you  may  eome  to  a  bad  aoA, 
so  don't  misunderstand  me^. 

TsTBB.  Do  you  really  so  ?     Cap.  I'  faith,  I  realty  do  so. 

Thbb.  I  don't  misunderstand  these  fists  of  mane.  {SjbM- 
mg  them  ttp.) 

Cap.  What  then  ?  Tma.  What  then,  do  you  ask  ?  With 
these  samej6«^  if  you  provoke  me,  I'll  be  making  you  goiet 
immediately. 

Cap.  {taking  the  money  fi^om  hi»^rdle).  Well  ijien,  take 
this  back  at  once. 

Th£b.  {taking  the  moneif).  By  all  m^ims. 

PHJm.  Captain,  you'U  dine  with  me;  the  nupiaak  shall 
take  place  to-day. 

Theb.  May  this  matter  turii  out  well  for  me  and  for 
yomrselveB. 

An  AcTOB. 

Spectators,  give  us  your  applause. 

1  To  the  2V«ft)r)— Ver.  722.  See  the  Note  to  1.  684. 

^  JOtmY  fmatmdergtcmd  tmy^Vimi  724^  "  Ne  me  nanm,"  BqaiTiimt  to  our 
phrase,  **  I  fully  give  you  to  xmAetstanAJ* 


WHITING,  BEAUFORT  HOUSE    STRAND. 


y  Google 


y  Google 


y  Google 


y  Google 


y  Google 


y  Google 


y  Google
