Towards a Semen Proteome of the Dengue Vector Mosquito: Protein Identification and Potential Functions
Laura K Sirot, Melissa C Hardstone, Michelle E H Helinski, José M C Ribeiro, Mari Kimura, Prasit Deewatthanawong, Mariana F Wolfner, Laura C Harrington et al.
PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 2011. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0000989. PMCID: PMC3057948.
Dedicated to the public domain under Creative Commons CC0 by the authors. Source: PLOS (journals.plos.org) (https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0000989).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ABSTRACT

No commercially licensed vaccine or treatment is available for dengue fever,
a potentially lethal infection that impacts millions of lives annually. New
tools that target mosquito control may reduce vector populations and break
the cycle of dengue transmission. Male mosquito seminal fluid proteins
(Sfps) are one such target since these proteins, in aggregate, modulate the
reproduction and feeding patterns of the dengue vector, Aedes
aegypti. As an initial step in identifying new targets for
dengue vector control, we sought to identify the suite of proteins that
comprise the Ae. aegypti ejaculate and determine which are
transferred to females during mating.

Using a stable-isotope labeling method coupled with proteomics to distinguish
male- and female-derived proteins, we identified Sfps and sperm proteins
transferred from males to females. Sfps were distinguished from sperm
proteins by comparing the transferred proteins to sperm-enriched samples
derived from testes and seminal vesicles. We identified 93 male-derived Sfps
and 52 predicted sperm proteins that are transferred to females during
mating. The Sfp protein classes we detected suggest roles in protein
activation/inactivation, sperm utilization, and ecdysteroidogenesis. We also
discovered that several predicted membrane-bound and intracellular proteins
are transferred to females in the seminal fluids, supporting the hypothesis
that Ae. aegypti Sfps are released from the accessory gland
cells through apocrine secretion, as occurs in mammals. Many of the
Ae. aegypti predicted sperm proteins were homologous to
Drosophila melanogaster sperm proteins, suggesting
conservation of their sperm-related function across Diptera.

This is the first study to directly identify Sfps transferred from male
Ae. aegypti to females. Our data lay the groundwork for
future functional analyses to identify individual seminal proteins that may
trigger female post-mating changes (e.g., in feeding patterns and egg
production). Therefore, identification of these proteins may lead to new
approaches for manipulating the reproductive output and vectorial capacity
of Ae. aegypti.

Introduction

Male seminal fluid proteins (Sfps) influence female reproductive and feeding
behaviors in a range of insects studied to date (reviewed in [1],[2]). Therefore, these proteins may
provide targets or pathways that can be manipulated to reduce pathogen transmission
by blood-feeding arthropods. The Aedes aegypti mosquito transmits
several pathogens of concern to human health, including the viruses that cause
dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) ([3]). Dengue, the most important
mosquito-borne virus impacting human health, is a re-emerging disease in the
tropical regions of the world. There is currently no vaccine against, or cure for,
dengue, although research in this area is ongoing ([4]–[6]). Therefore, prevention of
dengue infection depends heavily on control of its mosquito vector.

Understanding mosquito reproductive biology is critical to developing effective
vector control methods. Previous research on Ae. aegypti suggests
that mating and, specifically, male-derived proteins may play an important role in
modulating female reproduction and feeding behavior. Upon mating, female Ae.
aegypti undergo a series of time-dependent behavioral and physiological
changes. Relative to virgin females, mated females have increased egg development
and oviposition rates ([7],[8]), blood digestion rates ([9],[10]), and blood meal size ([10]). Mated
females also have a lower likelihood of being inseminated by another male ([11]), of flying
([12],[13]), and of
responding to host cues ([14]–[17]), and they have a reduced
daily blood-feeding frequency ([18]). These changes in mated females appear to be induced by
molecules produced in males' accessory glands (AG) and transferred to the
female during mating ([9],[19]–[28]). In two other Dipteran species, individual AG-derived
Sfps have been associated with functions in mated females. In Drosophila
melanogaster, experimental studies have demonstrated that specific
AG-derived Sfps influence a wide range of female post-mating behaviors including
oogenesis (sex peptide), ovulation (ovulin), sperm storage and release from storage
(Acp36DE, Acp29AB, CG1652/CG1656, CG17575, CG9997), propensity to re-mate (sex
peptide), activity level (sex peptide), and feeding (sex peptide; reviewed in [2],[29]–[32]). In
Anopheles gambiae, transglutaminase derived from male
reproductive glands is necessary for the formation of the mating plug which is
required for proper sperm storage ([33]). In both Ae. aegypti and D.
melanogaster, secretions from the male AGs are necessary for fertility
([19],[34]). Identification
of individual bioactive Sfps causing post-mating changes in female Ae.
aegypti has not yet been accomplished and is a long-term goal of our
research.

Previously, we identified over 250 proteins from male Ae. aegypti
reproductive glands (AGs and seminal vesicles; [35]; L. Sirot, M. Wolfner, L.
Harrington, unpubl. data). Fifty-three of those proteins were considered to be
putative Sfps based on the criteria that they contained predicted secretion signal
sequences and were not known to be housekeeping or structural proteins ([35]). However, we
did not have direct evidence that those proteins were transferred to females during
mating. In the current study, we identify a suite of proteins that are transferred
from males to females during mating, and are thus candidate regulators of female
behavior and physiology. Male- and female-derived proteins in the female
reproductive tract were distinguished using an approach adapted from a study in
D. melanogaster ([36]) that combined proteomics with
a stable-isotope labeling technique (using 15N). We adapted this method
to blood-feeding mosquitoes and discovered a set of proteins transferred from male
to female Ae. aegypti. Among the Sfps we identified are potential
modulators of protein activation/inactivation, sperm utilization, and
ecdysteroidogenesis. Few of the Ae. aegypti Sfps we detected are
homologs of known or predicted Sfps in other insect species, although many are in
protein classes that are conserved across seminal fluid of a wide range of taxa
([37],[38]). Furthermore,
our finding of intracellular and membrane-bound proteins in the transferred Sfps
supports the hypothesis that Ae. aegypti Sfps are secreted, at
least in part, through apocrine processes (pinching off of the apical portion of the
cells into vesicles containing Sfps; [39]) in the accessory glands.

In the process of identifying the Sfps, we also identified a subset of 52 putative
Ae. aegypti sperm proteins. The D.
melanogaster homologs of many of the predicted Ae.
aegypti sperm proteins are also sperm proteins ([40]), suggesting conservation of
sperm-related function across Diptera. Some of the proteins we have identified may
be useful targets for control of Ae. aegypti and may be applicable
to other mosquito vectors.

Methods

15N-Labeling of female Ae. aegypti
proteins

Overview

In order to distinguish male- and female-derived proteins in the mated female
reproductive tract, we adapted a stable-isotope labeling technique that had
been developed for D. melanogaster ([36]). Stable-isotope
labeling of proteins makes their peptides unidentifiable by standard mass
spectrometry analysis. Therefore, we mated labeled females to unlabeled
males in order to identify male-derived proteins in the female reproductive
tract. The steps involved in this process (described in detail below) are:
stable-isotope labeling of yeast as food for mosquito larvae, rearing of
mosquitoes on labeled yeast, mating of labeled females to unlabeled males,
extraction of proteins from mated female reproductive tracts, and mass
spectrometric analysis of the extracted proteins.

Yeast labeling

Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain D273-10B was used for all
experiments. Two batches of yeast were prepared: one labeled with
15N and one unlabeled. Isotopic labeling was performed
following the methods of Findlay et al. [36] with adjustments for
incorporating the label into mosquitoes. Briefly, yeast was grown to
saturation (∼16 h at 30°C) in 200 mL of minimal medium consisting of
20 g of glucose, 1.7 g of yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and either
5 g of 15N labeled ammonium sulfate (>99%
15N-enrichment; Cambridge Stable Isotopes, Andover MA, USA) or 5
g of unlabeled ammonium sulfate, in sterile water. The following day, 800 mL
of additional medium was added and the yeast was grown for another 24 h.
Yeast was harvested by centrifugation at 5,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min,
and the pellet was re-suspended in 30 mL of sterile water and centrifuged
such that 15 mL of excess water was removed to yield a final volume of 15 mL
of yeast slurry. The yeast slurry was stored at 4°C for less than two
weeks before use.

Mosquito rearing

The Liverpool strain of Aedes aegypti L. was used for all
experiments. Initially, eggs were hatched under vacuum and 200 first instar
larvae were transferred to shallow pans containing 1 L of sterile water.
Approximately 1 mL of the yeast slurry was added to each larval rearing pan
every 1–2 days until pupation occurred. Preliminary data showed that
females from the 15N-labeled treatment required additional
nutrition beyond the yeast slurry (as assessed by their inability to fly
and, thus, mate). Therefore, we supplemented the rearing pans with 200 mL of
inoculum of rearing-water from a previous cohort of larvae grown under the
same treatment (i.e., unlabeled or 15N-labeled
yeast). The resulting larvae produced females that were able to fly and
mated readily. Unlabeled males from the same mosquito strain were reared in
pans of 200 larvae/1 L water and fed a 1∶1 mixture of Brewer's
yeast and lactalbumin until pupation. All pupae were placed individually
into vials and held for emergence. All adult mosquitoes were maintained on
20% sucrose solution on soaked cotton wicks. Reproductive tract
samples were dissected from unlabeled and 15N-labeled virgin
females to test the effectiveness of the labeling technique.

Mating

15N-labeled virgin females (3–5 days after emergence) were
individually introduced into a 5 L bucket container that contained
20–40 unlabeled males (4–6 days after emergence). If a
successful mating event was observed, both the female and male were removed
from the bucket at the termination of mating as the pair began to separate.
After mating, each female was placed individually in a test-tube and stored
on ice for dissection. Females that did not mate within approximately 5 min
were removed from the male cage and discarded; a new female was introduced
into the male cage for mating. Dissections of the 15N-labeled
females mated to unlabeled males were conducted within 30 min of mating.

Dissections

Female lower reproductive tracts (i.e., spermathecae, bursa, common oviduct)
were dissected in MOPS buffer (80 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2,
0.2 mM MgCl2,10 mM MOPS) on ice and homogenized in 20 µl
Dulbecco's PBS (DPBS) with protease inhibitors (Roche Complete Protease
Inhibitor Tablets, Indianapolis, IN). Reproductive tracts from 20 females
were pooled for each biological replicate. Samples were centrifuged at
12,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a
separate tube, the pellet was resuspended in 20 µl DPBS with protease
inhibitors, and 20 µl of 2× SDS sample buffer (125 mM
Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 20% glycerol, 4% SDS, 10%
β-mercaptoethanol, 0.001% bromophenol blue) was added to each
sample. The samples were boiled for 4 min and stored at −80°C.

Identification of proteins in sperm derived from seminal vesicle and
testes

In order to distinguish Sfps from sperm proteins, we conducted proteomic
analyses of sperm-enriched samples derived from the seminal vesicles or the
testes. Seminal vesicles or testes from 40 males were dissected in DPBS with
protease inhibitors, on ice. The tissues were then placed in a fresh droplet
of DPBS, teased apart with a needle, swirled in the buffer to release sperm,
and then removed from the droplet. The buffer droplet containing the sperm
was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube containing 500 µl DPBST
(DPBS with 0.1% Tween-20). The samples were spun at 20,800×g
for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was
washed twice in DPBST. After the final wash, the pellet was resuspended in
2× SDS sample buffer. We considered the resulting samples as
“sperm-enriched” as they contained not only sperm, but likely
also some tissue, tissue secretions, and Sfps.

Protein separation and identification

Both the supernatant and the pellet samples were analyzed using two
independent biological replicates of each sample type, except for the virgin
females for which only one sample each was used for verification of our
techniques. Protein separation and identification was conducted as
previously described [35]. Briefly, proteins from each sample were
separated by electrophoresis on a one-dimensional 5–15%
gradient SDS polyacrylamide gel and visualized using Simply-Blue SafeStain
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The Cornell University Life Sciences Core
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry facility conducted in-gel digestion,
tryptic peptide extractions, and Nano-LC-MS/MS. The nanoLC was carried out
using an LC Packings Ultimate integrated capillary HPLC system equipped with
a Switchos valve switching unit (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA), which was connected
in-line to a hybrid triple quadropole linear ion trap mass spectrometer,
4000 Q Trap (ABI/MDS Sciex, Framingham, MA) equipped with Micro Ion Spray
Head ion source. The resulting MS and MS/MS data were submitted for database
searching using the MASCOT search engine version 2.3 (Matrix Science, Inc.,
Boston, MA) or ProteinPilot software 1.0 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA) against three databases (see “Databases” section below): the
Ae. aegypti predicted peptide (AaegL1.2 Gene Build;
hereafter “Vectorbase”) database (including supplemental
peptides from AaegL 1.1 Gene Build, http://aaegypti.vectorbase.org/index.php; MASCOT program,
Matrix Science, Boston, MA), a 6-frame translation of the
Aedes genome (versionAaegL1.2; MASCOT program;
hereafter “6-frame translation”), and a database of small
(<150 amino acid) predicted peptides (ProteinPilot; hereafter
“small peptides”). The default search settings used for protein
identification were: one mis-cleavage for full trypsin with variable
carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, and a methionine oxidation. For
the searches using MASCOT, the false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated for
a measure of random identification from the same database. To estimate the
FDR, an automatic decoy database search was performed in which a database of
random sequences was generated and tested for raw spectra along with the
real database.

Protein identifications were based on a significance threshold of <0.05.
Additionally, we only considered proteins to be high confidence hits if
either two different peptides from the same sample exceeded the significance
threshold or if one peptide hit exceeded the significance threshold in two
independent biological replicates (single or multiple peptide hits are
reported in Tables S1 and S2). Hits from the 6-frame translation
and the small peptides database were compared to the Vectorbase database
using BLASTP, and queries with a significant match were removed. Any
remaining hits from the 6-frame translation were searched for a predicted
gene using the GeneID 1.2 prediction program (http://genome.crg.es/geneid.html) and only these hits were
used in further analyses. We tested for predicted secretion signal sequences
using SignalP 3.0 (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/, [41]) and for predicted
protein domains using SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/, [42]) and Pfam (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/, [43]). The relative
quantitation of identified proteins in each biological sample was estimated
using the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI, [44]) and
are reported in Tables S1 and S2.

Databases

All of the databases are derived from sequencing of the Liverpool strain. The
Vectorbase database is based on 8× coverage and includes 4,758
supercontigs, 1.3 gigabases, 15,988 genes, and 17, 402 predicted peptides
(http://www.vectorbase.org/Aedes_aegypti/Info/Index). To
obtain the 6-frame translation database, the Ae. aegypti
contigs were downloaded from Vectorbase (version AaegL1.2, September 2009).
A program written in Visual Basic 6.0 by one of the authors (JMCR) obtained
the 6-frame translation using the eukaryotic codon table. Sequences between
stop codons were written to a fasta file retaining the frame and contig
coordinates. This database includes 81,550,487 sequences. The small peptides
database was generated by one of the authors (JMCR) through ab
initio gene prediction based on the AaegL1.1 release using the
GeneID prediction program (http://genome.crg.es/software/geneid/, [45]) and includes 24,092
sequences.

Identification of homologs to Ae. aegypti Sfp and sperm
protein-encoding genes

By using BLASTP, we identified homologs of the Ae. aegypti
proteins in the genomes of three other Diptera (Culex
quinquefasciatus, Anopheles gambiae, and
D. melanogaster) based on amino acid similarity. The
divergence time between Aedes and
Drosophila is predicted to be 250 million years ago
([46]). The Anopheles and
Aedes genera are predicted to have diverged
approximately 226 million years ago ([47]). Divergence time
for Aedes and Culex is more recent than
the divergence between Aedes and Anopheles
([47]). For the proteins identified from the
Ae. aegypti Gene Build database, we defined homologs as
reciprocal best BLASTP hits with ≥30% identity and E
values≤10−3. For proteins identified from the
Supplemental predicted peptides, the 6-frame translation and the small
peptides databases, we used unidirectional BLASTP searches of the
Ae. aegypti hits against the databases from the other
three species.

Results and Discussion

Isotope labeling technique

In order to identify male-derived proteins that are transferred to females during
mating, we used a whole-organism isotope labeling method. The principle of this
method is to mate males to females whose proteins are labeled with the stable
isotopes so as to exclude the female proteins from proteomic identification.
Specifically, female proteins are labeled with 15N, which shifts
their masses upward such that the masses of female-derived peptides do not match
those expected in a standard search (uncorrected for 15N) of a
predicted protein database. The method was developed by Krijgsveld et al. [48] and
first used to identify Sfps by Findlay et al. [36] in D.
melanogaster. We adapted this method to label female-derived
proteins in Ae. aegypti. As with D.
melanogaster, we reared larvae on yeast whose only nitrogen source
was 15N. However, in order to generate females that could fly and
mate, we had to supplement the larvae with an inoculum of rearing-water from
larvae previously reared on 15N-labeled yeast (see Methods for more detail). To verify that the
15N-labeling technique sufficiently labeled female-derived
proteins, we conducted nanoLC-MS/MS on protein samples from the reproductive
tracts of labeled and unlabeled virgin females. We initially analyzed protein
samples from two arbitrarily-chosen molecular weight ranges (∼30 kD to 50 kD
and ∼98 kD to 120 kD) of both types of females. Using the Vectorbase
database, we identified 115 proteins from the unlabeled female samples (Table S3)
and no proteins from the labeled female samples. To further verify the labeling
technique, we conducted nanoLC-MS/MS on the remaining gel sections from the
labeled virgin female sample. We did not identify proteins from any of these
samples. These results demonstrate that any proteins we identify in the
reproductive tracts of labeled females mated to unlabeled males are highly
likely to be male-derived. Furthermore, the technique we developed for
in vivo stable-isotope labeling of Ae.
aegypti proteins could be applied to other studies (e.g., to
quantify proteomic changes in females in response to mating and/or blood-feeding
or to distinguish mosquito-derived proteins from those of their pathogens,
parasites, and/or endosymbionts; [49]).

Proteins transferred to females during mating

In our search against the Vectorbase database, we identified 128 proteins in the
reproductive tracts of labeled females after mating with unlabeled males (Tables 1 and 2). Since the Ae.
aegypti genome sequence is relatively new and thus the current
annotation might still be missing actual genes, we also searched our mass
spectrometry results against a 6- frame translation database of the Ae.
aegypti contigs (Version AaegL1.2) and against a database of
predicted small peptides (<150 amino acids). In our search against the
6-frame translation, we identified 12 novel predicted semen proteins (Tables 1 and 2). We identified 5 novel
predicted small peptides from the small peptides database (Tables 1 and 2). The sequences of the
unannotated predicted proteins and peptides are provided in Table S4.
Thus, in total, we identified 145 male-derived predicted proteins that are
transferred during mating to females. These proteins include Sfps and sperm
proteins. For all searches, the FDR was ≤1%.

[Table: Predicted seminal fluid proteins transferred in Aedes
aegypti ejaculate.]

[Table: Predicted sperm proteins transferred in Aedes
aegypti ejaculate.]

Nine of the identified proteins share identical amino acid sequence with other
Ae. aegypti predicted proteins in the regions that were
identified by our mass spectrometry analysis. As a result, we cannot distinguish
amongst these proteins in our samples. For simplicity, we have listed just one
protein from each of these pairs or groups of indistinguishable proteins in
Tables 1 and 2. However, we list the
identities of all proteins in these pairs or groups in Table
S5.

Comparison to previously identified Ae. aegypti reproductive
gland proteins

Of the 145 transferred proteins we identified using the whole-organism isotope
labeling method, 123 are newly-recognized components of Ae.
aegypti semen. The remaining 22 were previously identified as
putative Sfps ([35]), and we demonstrate here that they are transferred
to females during mating. Thirty-one additional proteins were identified as
putative Sfps in our previous study ([35]), but we did not detect them
as transferred in our current study. Those proteins may not be transferred to
females, or may be transferred at quantities below our detection threshold or
with post-translational modifications that render them unidentifiable by
standard mass spectrometry. Of the 123 newly-recognized seminal proteins, 84
were previously identified from the reproductive glands of Ae.
aegypti, however they were not designated as putative Sfps because
they lacked predicted secretion signal sequences ([35]; L. Sirot, M. Wolfner, L.
Harrington, unpubl. data).

Distinguishing seminal fluid proteins from sperm proteins

In order to distinguish Sfps from sperm proteins among those transferred to
females, we conducted a proteomics analysis of sperm-enriched samples from the
seminal vesicles (SVs) and testes of virgin males. Sperm-enriched samples were
obtained by releasing sperm from these organs, pelleting the sperm by
centrifugation, and washing them repeatedly, as in Dorus et al.
[40] (see Methods for details). We found 101 proteins
that overlapped between our sperm-enriched samples from seminal vesicles and our
sperm-enriched samples from testes. Of these 101 putative sperm proteins, 52
were detected as transferred to females during mating, providing a
high-confidence subset of putative Ae. aegypti sperm proteins
(Table 2).

Of the 145 total transferred proteins (see section “Proteins transferred to
females during mating”), 16 were isolated from only one of the
sperm-enriched tissues (SV: 5; testes: 11) and therefore were considered SV- or
testes-derived Sfps, respectively, although we recognize that these could be
sperm proteins. Additionally, 77 of the transferred proteins did not overlap
with either sperm-enriched sample. Together, the 5 SV-derived Sfps, 11
testes-derived Sfps, and 77 of the 145 total transferred proteins that did not
overlap with the sperm-enriched samples comprise a total of 93 proteins assigned
with high-confidence as Ae. aegypti Sfps (Table 1).

Seminal fluid proteins

The Ae. aegypti Sfps identified represent a wide-range of
predicted protein classes including proteolysis regulators, lectins, lipases,
oxidoreductases, a cysteine-rich secretory protein (CRISP) and a venom allergen,
and fall into a variety of Gene Ontology predicted molecular function classes
(Table 1; Fig. 1A). Unlike Sfps in
Drosophila ([31],[36],[50]) and An.
gambiae ([33],[51]), in which some groups of Sfps tend to be spatially
clustered, we found little evidence for spatial clustering of the 93 Sfp genes
in the Ae. aegypti genome, with one exception. Four Sfp genes
(AAEL006403; AAEL006414; AAEL006421; AAEL006429) clustered within a 23 kB region
on supercontig 1.204. One gene in this region (AAEL006430) encodes a protein
that was not detected in the present study and may either not be transferred or
may be transferred at a level that was undetectable by our methods. The proteins
encoded by all five of the genes in this region have predicted trypsin domains
and their shared amino acid sequence identities range from 36 to 64%.

[Figure: Gene Ontology molecular function categories of Aedes
aegypti seminal fluid and putative sperm proteins.A. Seminal fluid proteins; B. Putative sperm proteins.]

As might be expected, the genes encoding the Sfps identified in this study tend
to have highly male-biased expression when gene expression of whole males is
compared to gene expression of whole females ([52]). Half (26 of 51) of
the genes for which microarray data are available have significantly higher
expression (at P≤0.001) in males than in non-blood-fed females (O. Marinotti,
pers. comm.), as compared to a genome average of 16% (Chi-square test;
X21 = 47.7;
P<0.001; [52]). By comparison, 63% of the D.
melanogaster Sfps identified by [36] have significantly higher
expression (at P≤0.01) in males than in females as compared to a genome
average of 12%
(X21 = 345.9;
P<0.001; [53]). Surprisingly, transcript levels of two Ae.
aegypti Sfp-encoding genes (encoding a predicted kinase,
AAEL012359, and a predicted zinc metalloprotease, AAEL012217) are significantly
higher in non-blood-fed females than in males.

Sequence comparisons to other Diptera

Table
S1 shows the extent to which homologs of the 93 putative Sfps can
be detected in three other Dipteran genomes (Cx.
quinquefasciatus, An. gambiae, and D.
melanogaster). In comparison to known or predicted Sfp- or male
AG-encoding genes from An. gambiae or D.
melanogaster, Ae. aegypti Sfp genes generally
had little sequence similarity. None of the An. gambiae
homologs to Ae. aegypti Sfps is among the
previously-identified An. gambiae AG genes ([33],[51]) or
mating plug protein-encoding genes ([33]). Only two D.
melanogaster (CG31704, and CG5162) homologs to Ae.
aegypti Sfps (AaegSfp3 and AAEL005815, respectively; range of
percent identity: 41–59%) are among the known D.
melanogaster Sfps or AG genes (Table
S1; [31],[31], [36],[54]). Additionally, three
Ae. aegypti Sfps (AAEL005815; AAEL004112; AAEL000718)
share sequence similarity (range: 30–84% identity) with four of
the 13 AG genes identified from the Mediterranean fruit fly,
Ceratitis capitata (clones 11c, 18a, 30c, 33a; [55]).

Below, we discuss (i) the unannotated, newly-identified predicted proteins
from the 6-frame translation and small peptides database, (ii) new insights
into the mode of Ae. aegypti Sfp secretion from Vectorbase
identified proteins, and (iii) the potential biological functions of a
subset of Sfps in modulating reproductive and physiological processes within
the mated female. In our previous report on Ae. aegypti
Sfps ([35]), we discussed the potential roles of these proteins
in a number of processes including protein folding, antimicrobial activity,
and sperm utilization by females. Although the proteins we have identified
in the current report include many in the same classes and predicted
functions as our previous report (and include 22 of the same proteins), we
have specifically chosen to highlight proteins that suggest functions in the
mated female that were not discussed in our previous report ([35]). These
protein classes are not necessarily the most highly represented of the
predicted Sfps.

Unannotated seminal fluid proteins

Based on comparisons to the 6-frame translation and small peptides databases,
we discovered 14 previously unannotated predicted Sfps (Table 1). Of the 9
predicted proteins from the 6-frame translation, only one (AaegSfp2) had a
significant hit to the SMART or PFAM database. This protein includes a
predicted secretion signal sequence and a Kazal-type serine protease
inhibitor domain. Interestingly, another predicted secreted protein of the 9
hits (AaegSfp8) shared a high degree of sequence similarity (70%
identity; E value = 2e−74) with one of
the Vectorbase predicted proteins, AAEL010824. AAEL010824 and AaegSfp8 are
located on the same contig within 34 Kb of each other. Two of the other hits
from the 6-frame database also had predicted secretion signal sequences. Of
the 5 hits to the small peptides database, we found one predicted secreted
Kazal-type serine protease inhibitor (AaegSfp3), one predicted secreted
odorant-binding protein (AaegSfp1), and three hits with no predicted
secretion signal sequence and no predicted protein domains.

Mode of secretion

Sixty-two of the Sfps that we identified are predicted intracellular or
membrane-bound proteins (e.g., ATPases, dipeptidyl peptidase, gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase, glutathione S-transferase, angiotensin converting enzyme).
Predicted intracellular proteins also have been reported in the seminal
fluid of other organisms including bed bugs ([56]), honey bees ([57]), and
humans ([58], [59]), and in the AGs and seminal fluids of D.
melanogaster ([60]; G. Findlay & W. Swanson, pers. comm.). In
bed bugs, Sfps of predicted intracellular origin have been considered
potential cell contaminants ([56]); whereas, in
honeybees, it has been suggested that these proteins may be secreted through
non-standard secretion routes ([57]). In Ae.
aegypti, our finding of intracellular and membrane-bound Sfps
is consistent with the hypothesized modes of secretion in the AGs of this
species: based on cytological studies using light and electron microscopy,
cells in the anterior portion of the glands are thought to secrete proteins
by pinching off apically (“apocrine secretion”; [39],[61]),
whereas cells in the posterior portion of the glands are thought to secrete
proteins through granules and/or via rupture of the cell membrane
(“holocrine secretion”; [61],[62]; but see
[39]). Inside the female reproductive tract, the ejaculate
contains “vacuoles” that grow over time after mating and then
disappear by 24 h post-mating ([62]). Four of the Sfps we
identified are subunits of the membrane-bound vacuolar-type proton ATPase
and thus may be part of these vacuoles. Future studies could investigate
whether the male-derived vacuolar ATPase is functional in the ejaculate
vacuole membrane in the female reproductive tract and therefore may play a
role in regulating the release of the contents of the vacuoles.

Importantly, our results emphasize that studies of Sfps in other species
should not exclude proteins whose sequence (alone) suggest that they are
intracellular and membrane-bound proteins. For species in which
intracellular and/or membrane-bound proteins are found in the seminal fluid
(e.g., bed bugs and honey bees), further research should be conducted on the
mode of secretion of the male reproductive gland cells. Furthermore,
secretion by Ae. aegypti accessory glands could serve as a
model for secretion in systems such as the male reproductive glands of
mammals, since mammalian prostasomes, exosomes, and epididymisomes contain
many of the same classes as found among Ae. aegypti Sfps
([63]).

Proteolysis

Across a wide range of organisms, seminal fluid is rich in proteolysis
regulators (e.g., [37],[38],[64]–[67]). Ae.
aegypti is no exception. Thirteen of the 93 Sfps we identified
in Ae.aegypti are predicted regulators of proteolysis.
These include predicted trypsins, a zinc carboxypeptidase, a
metalloprotease, a serine protease inhibitor (serpin), an angiotensin
converting enzyme, and a proprotein convertase in the subtilisin/kexin type
4 (PCSK4) family (Tables
1 and S1). The predicted or known functions of
seminal fluid proteolysis regulators include regulating the liquefaction of
semen and/or mucus in the female reproductive tract ([68],[69]); protection of sperm
from premature acrosome reactions ([67]); and activation
and/or degradation of other reproductive proteins ([70]). We have previously
discussed the potential role of predicted proteolysis regulators in
Ae. aegypti seminal fluid ([35]). Here, we highlight the
novel finding of a predicted proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 4
(PCSK4) protein in insect seminal fluid.

PCSK4s can activate precursors of membrane receptors, peptide hormones,
antibacterial peptides and neuropeptides through proteolytic processing
([71],[72]). Interestingly, the predicted PCSK4 (AAEL010725)
found in this study shares close sequence similarity (56% identity;
E-value: 2e-158) with the Ae. aegypti protein that
processes vitellogenin (AAEL003652; [72]). To our knowledge,
proprotein convertases have not been reported previously in insect seminal
fluid. Transcripts of the D. melanogaster gene encoding one
protein in this class (CG10702) are enriched (relative to whole body) in the
AGs ([73]). The protein they encode contains a predicted
secretion signal sequence (SignalP; [41]), but it has not
yet been detected in the seminal fluid in this species ([36]).

Steroidogenesis

One of the Sfps we identified (AAEL009760) is a predicted sterol carrier in
the Niemann-Pick type C-2 (NPC2) family. In insects, sterol carriers are
essential for the production of ecdysteroids (ECDs) (e.g., [74]). ECDs
are hormones that influence molting, gametogenesis, vitellogenesis, and
other reproductive processes (reviewed in [75],[76]). In Ae.
aegypti, ECDs are essential components of a signaling cascade
linking blood meal intake with vitellogenesis (e.g., [77]; reviewed in [78], [79]).
Although a role for the male-derived NCP2-like protein has not yet been
determined in Ae. aegypti, findings in other Dipteran
species suggest that male AGs can not only synthesize ECD (An.
gambiae, [80]) but also stimulate ECD production in females
(D. melanogaster, [81]). We suggest that
AAEL009760 could potentially contribute to the regulation of ECD
biosynthesis in Ae. aegypti male reproductive tracts and/or
in mated females.

Sperm and sperm-associated proteins

From Ae. aegypti sperm-enriched tissue samples, we identified
101 sperm or sperm-associated proteins. Fifty-two were found among proteins
transferred to females during mating (Table 2); the remaining 49 proteins were not
detected as transferred (Table S6). These latter 49 proteins included
7 that have homologs found in the D. melanogaster sperm
proteome ([40]). It is possible that some of these 49 Ae.
aegypti proteins are components of somatic cells of the testis
and/or SV tissues and play a role in spermatogenesis or sperm maintenance,
whereas others could be sperm proteins whose abundance was too low for us to
detect in the transferred samples or whose post-translational modifications
rendered them unidentifiable by standard mass spectrometry. In the remainder of
this section, we will only discuss the 52 proteins detected as transferred
(hereafter referred to as “putative sperm proteins”).

Sequence comparisons to other Diptera

Table
S2 shows the extent to which homologs of the 52 putative sperm
proteins can be detected in three other Dipteran genomes (Cx.
quinquefasciatus, An. gambiae, and D.
melanogaster). Of the 30 proteins with D.
melanogaster homologs, 17 (57%) of the homologs were
found among the identified sperm proteins of D.
melanogaster ([40]). This level of homology between Ae.
aegypti putative sperm proteins and D.
melanogaster sperm proteins suggests that the sperm-related
functions of these proteins are conserved between the two species. Non-sperm
D. melanogaster homologs of Ae.
aegypti putative sperm proteins may also serve reproductive
functions, as suggested by gene expression patterns. Of the 13 D.
melanogaster homologs not found in the D.
melanogaster sperm proteome (Table
S2), transcripts of 5 are enriched in male and female
reproductive tissues, transcripts of 1 are enriched only in male
reproductive tissues, and transcripts of 6 are enriched only in female
reproductive tissues ([73]).

Unnannotated sperm proteins

We discovered three previously unannotated predicted sperm proteins from the
6-frame translation database (Table 2). One predicted protein from the 6-frame translation,
AaegSp1, contained a predicted secretion signal sequence and a Kazal serine
protease inhibitor domain. The other two hits contained no predicted
secretion signal sequence and no conserved protein domains.

Potential functions

The likely biological functions of putative Ae. aegypti
sperm proteins include spermatogenesis, serving as structural components of
mature sperm, and sperm locomotion (Fig. 1B). Spermatogenesis-related
proteins that we found among Ae. aegypti putative sperm
proteins include the heat shock protein 70, actin, and tubulin (α- and
β-chains). Ae. aegypti putative sperm proteins that
might contribute to sperm structure or motility include actin, tubulins,
dyneins, ATP synthases, protein kinases and kinesin motor proteins ([82]–[86]). Ae.
aegypti putative sperm proteins that are predicted
mitochondrial enzymes include malate dehydrogenase, aconitase, cytochrome c
oxidase, and ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase. In other animals, these
proteins generate the energy necessary for sperm locomotion via oxidative
phosphorylation and the citric acid cycle ([87]–[92]).

Summary and conclusion

Secretions of the reproductive glands of male Ae. aegypti have
previously been shown to induce post-mating changes in female reproductive and
feeding behavior ([22],[23],[26]). In order to lay the groundwork for identifying
specific proteins causing these effects, we report here 145 male-derived
proteins that are transferred to females during mating in Ae.
aegypti. We distinguished 93 seminal fluid proteins from 52
predicted sperm proteins, thus contributing to the growing understanding of
insect ejaculate proteomes ([33],[35],[36],[40],[57],[88],[93]–[95]). Twenty-two of these
proteins were previously identified as male reproductive gland proteins ([35]), and we
demonstrate here that they are transferred to the female.

The Sfps identified in this study suggest roles in protein
activation/inactivation, ecdysteroidogenesis, and sperm utilization.
Furthermore, our discovery that many predicted intracellular and membrane-bound
proteins are transferred to females in the seminal fluid indicates that findings
of such proteins in the seminal fluid of other species (e.g., [56],[57]) may also
result from apocrine and/or holocrine secretion from the male reproductive
glands ([39],[61]). The putative sperm proteins of Ae.
aegypti show sequence conservation within Diptera and 17 of their
D. melanogaster homologs are sperm proteins in that species
([40])
indicating potential conservation of sperm-related functions.

Genes encoding Sfps showed higher male-biased expression than the genome average.
On the one hand, this is not unexpected because Sfps are made in the male
reproductive tract and are then transferred to females. On the other hand, it is
not necessarily predicted a priori that Sfp-encoding genes will
be male-biased in their expression, and the way we identified the proteins was
without bias regarding their genes' expression. That 49% of the
Ae. aegypti Sfp-encoding genes for which there are
microarray data are not male-biased in expression will be important to bear in
mind in designing future screens for Sfps.

Together, our results provide a foundation for functional analyses to associate
individual Sfps with their function in the mated female. Once functions are
identified for individual proteins, investigations of the pathways by which they
induce effects on male and female reproductive biology could identify novel
targets for control of Ae. aegypti and dengue transmission. Of
particular interest is to determine how specific Sfps modulate female behavior
and physiology (e.g., egg production and blood feeding) and to investigate
candidate genes which increase the reproductive success of male Ae.
aegypti that are to be used in genetic control strategies.

Supporting Information

Acknowledgments

We thank D. Severson, University of Notre Dame, for providing us with material to
start the Liverpool colony. We thank O. Marinotti for providing insights and sharing
data regarding gene expression patterns of the predicted proteins we report. We
thank G. Findlay and W. Swanson for helpful discussions regarding experimental
design and data interpretation. L. Cator, G. Findlay, E. Kelleher, M. Sirot, and
three anonymous reviewers provided insightful feedback on an earlier draft of this
manuscript. We thank S. Zhang, S. Baumgart, R. Sherwood, W. Chen, and A. Ptak of the
Cornell University Life Sciences Core Laboratories Center, and S. Pitcher for
technical help.

Footnotes

References

Associated Data

Supplementary Materials
