the general gonna experience there is some very strange water experiments you can do with frequencies and You can set it down on Plates and make some really cool stuff too. It all shapes look at that. So the electricity running into the water makes it That's fine really Sound vibration It gets this is because the spout is connected to a speaker the speaker is being controlled by a A lot of things but if you do all the hurts you can see oh my god. This is incredible. What is the? And there are this is just one experiment for this there's a lot of other really really cool ones There's a ones that are on through all the frequencies and you have these The balanced frequencies which is a mess enough to frequencies right now. I can't remember TBI. I just believe in on TBI Let me smoke another joint the Yeah, it changes shapes so it goes into like this Hexagram and all these different shapes yeah So if you change a frequency the patterns change right and so if it can do that and then also I was talking about Prayer and churches and singing there was a time when a lot of humanity would get together at least once a week I know it's thing together and they're pretty gather and it no matter who you're praying to God or Yahweh or the Creator or the Maker Whoever you want to pray to if everybody's on the same frequency everybody's on the same Energy and given you all this energy. How could that be bad? Look at this thing. Yeah, this is some weird shit So the ultrasonic waves are causing these objects to levitate so they're letter levitating in the ultrasonic waves Is that ice? I don't know it because I don't even think it says exactly what they're floating there It's probably just this piece of maybe like rice or piece of paper or something holy shit But I've people speculate this is maybe how the pyramids might have been made because of the frequencies that people think they make Or could have made you know back when they existed in the way they did in their original form And if you think about all of I don't know how that this is part of like Stuff and Eddie Griffin said outside the commish store once highs fucking Cigarettes going on There's a frequency I remember one of someone's talked about there's a home in there There's a specific frequency in one of the pyramids. I don't remember. Yeah, well, there's something certainly to like the shape of the stone and the fact that It's all gonna echo like crazy and there's that one pyramid in South America You can yell at it and it gives you a bird sound back. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah That's weird. I wonder if you made culture that sound if you've ever seen that Jamie with the guy stands down to the bottom of It thinks it's in Chichen Itza and he makes some noise. What did he do to you? I think you make clap you can make any noise loud noise that it comes back. There's a bird It sounds weird. It's pretty cool and that's like the temple of quetzalcoatl. I think too I might have made that up, but that's like their bird sound a good. They're crazy bird God Is it in Chichen Itza? Chichen Itza echo clap, but if you do they look at this Isn't that if you saw how big this pyramid is and how far away this guy is from it You would realize how crazy that is if you're listening to this Just listen to this. This is a simple thing actually. It's very simple to explain when you clap in front of Pyramid I mean of a slope the sound will go to the top in this case a permit and if it's there a cavity or Campo in this case Echo we come last year if you clap in front of it you've shimp early nothing happens So here sound is that on purpose? Imagine they figure that out on purpose. Imagine they designed that if they designed that we need to figure out what the fuck went wrong Like what happened something happened there? What is it to try us? Yeah younger driving areas. Yeah, nobody talks about that Why don't we ever talk about the fact that we were very advanced? Human beings doing amazing things the pyramid and doing this and floating rocks and doing space stuff maybe back in those days And it always destroyed now we're rebuilding. Why can't we accept that fact? Well, you know, I think it's civilization has these Rises and falls and we always want to believe that we're in the middle of rising and we're at the highest level the people have ever been Because we're way higher than anybody that we know of and when we look back a thousand years from now Yeah, we're way more advanced than them But when you take into account the younger dryest impact theory you got to get it gets real confusing because you start going well Okay, if that did happen like how smart people were people 12,000 years ago if if the US was really covered half of it was covered in a myahai sheet of ice and People were creating these insane structures like insane whether it's the pyramids of Egypt or I mean I don't know what year matcha peachy was made, but a lot of people dated back a long time ago as well I mean in that is matcha peachy from that era like when do they think matcha peachy was constructed But it's another one of those fires. It just doesn't make doesn't make any sense It's so amazing Like how did you get these stones here? They're so big and it's so perfect and beautiful in the way they contoured the stone Stook and to fit into these slots. It's incredible 14 we still can 14 50 really that seems wrong That might be just one of those things there's this is one of those things where like archaeologists they'll date a thing and You know you can't really date stone so they date whether it's a biological material They have to find like a piece of wood or something something they can do carbon dating something on it can't date stones So they're probably just kind of guessing they might be off That becomes doctrine with a lot of people like you know they found that thing Go backly tapping and that threw a monkey wrench into everything because for sure that's 12,000 years old For sure so that means somebody covered it up intentionally 12,000 years ago that means they could build this stuff 12,000 years ago like how How did they how were they being able to make these immense stone commas when we think that these people are supposed to be Thanks Thank you. I was 1450 That's what it's just giving me the answer for that makes sense