Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Well, let's say, ah, it's good to see you, brother. What's crackin'? He's seen, man. It's stoked to be here. It's stoked to have you, man. Yeah, we're a fucking cute kid you have, dude. Thank you. Thank you. He's the best. So he loves you. When we trying to put him down, he's like, no. I think it's because I just spent. We just went to Utah and I had three or five days with him. Just a lot of time with him. And he has separation anxiety for me. As I do with him, I'm like, that's the best, man. I know people that don't have kids. It's like you don't understand the level of love that you have for them. Yeah, it's really crazy. Or people who have kids and don't hang out with their kids like that. I just, I don't get it. I don't get it either. I'll spend every second that came with my kids. Yeah, it's weird. It's weird that people, I don't mean be something that happened in them when they were young or something. I don't know. Yeah. So what's cracking? What's the latest? I mean, my doc came out today. Today. So yeah. Yep. Long time coming. What was that experience like? Well, the beginning of it was shortly after my book came out. So I kind of understood why people wanted to doc from me at that point. And I was honored and I was flattered. And I was going down the journey of filming this doc. But it didn't really have an ending. I guess the light at the end of the tunnel during that time around 2017 was that I was sober and I survived a plane crash. But really I was struggling with ever flying again. Struggling with survivors go. Struggling with a lot of stuff. And at the time the directors had mentioned to me, like, can you just look at a plane or act like you're going to go flying a plane or walk towards a plane? It's like, fuck no, I can't even consider it. I can't even do it for you for fantasy purposes for the end of this doc. And I think that's said in after a while where I had to acknowledge and just understand I was afraid to ever fly again. And this thing had huge power over me to the point where it dictated how I got on tour, how many days I'd travel on bus to New York, how many days I'd be on the Queen Mary too, going to England. How long would that take? Oh, do it so long. The England one's crazy. Comfortable on the bus from here to New York, probably six or seven days if you want to stop at hotels. And I toured with my kids their whole life. So stopping and doing some cool stuff for them, six, seven days, and then a 10 day boat ride from New York to the Hamptons. Fuck, crazy. Yeah. So yeah, my band would leave. They'd be in England in 10 hours, whatever it would take me three weeks. That sucked. And then sometimes I'd be on the Queen Mary too and we'd have wild weather, 30 foot waves, 170 mile per hour winds. And I was like, is this any better than being on a plane? But the ocean freaks me out. Yeah, it started too. They freaked me out. Yeah, we got into a couple storms on one of the transatlantic crossings that, yeah, believe me. Like something was festering inside where I had this urge to try to figure out what had this power over me, which was flying. And yeah, well, it's totally understandable. Yeah, I think about it every day after a certain point. And then plus my kids, you know, they grew up not flying. They grew up associating a plane to a metal container where people die, I think, you know, unfortunately, because that's what happened to my two best friends and the two pilots who were on my plane. So yeah, it was hard. And then I knew the day I did it. I could show them that they could also do it. And it would probably break the trauma and the spell that my accident caused however many years ago. And yeah, I think after my accident in that whole process, I just, everything people said I couldn't do after that, I would just check them off one by one. Are you not gonna run again? Are you not gonna play drums again? Are you not gonna do this again? And the one that I gave myself, the restriction I gave myself is I'd never fly again, you know? And I broke it and I fly again. And how many years did it take you before you got on the plane again? 20. And I even think back to that, I'm like 20 years, I lost 20 years with this thing having power over me. But it was like a monster I kept getting bigger and bigger. And I was like, I got it. Well, you gotta look at it like, in terms of the odds. You survived a plane crash, which is the odds of that are astronomical. The odds of you getting in another plane crash are super low. Yeah, I know nobody thinks about it like that because it's the opposite because you've actually experienced it. So you know what it is. Like, oh my God, this is a real possibility. Yeah. I can see that now. Because my son who's 22, he doesn't love to fly. And I always say like, we just were in Utah. And I took a flight, you know, he ended up driving. And I was like, son, that's way more dangerous. Like, fly with me. I'm never gonna put you on a plane that I think is unsafe. I'm so adamant about making sure the pilot's great, the planes had maintenance, whatever else. How do you check all that stuff? Well, just if we're flying private, you're able to like, you know, really make sure it's a great plane. Sometimes even we'll fly on like someone's plane that we know. So that makes me feel better. But yeah, he just drove 16 hours around trip. So I guess, son, that's way more dangerous. It is. But yeah, that's what they tell myself. And I just gotta have faith and yeah. What was the first plane trip like after 20 years? It was nothing like I'd imagined it. I made a deal with my wife and I just said, hey, if there's ever somewhere we can't go. Cause she was a champ, man. She was on tour buses with me. She was on whatever, just, you know, going kind of close by for trips that we'd go on. And I said, if there's ever a trip that you want us to go on that I'd need to fly. Just don't tell me and tell me the night before and let's leave in the morning and I'm gonna do it. So that's what it was. And the flight was awesome. Had contained none of the awful nightmares that I had fabricated in my head that it would be like over the years. And yeah, I think I just needed a positive experience to cancel out the last bad one that I had. Yeah. Yeah, that helped a lot. And I think also coming to terms with being so close to my god son, who was my assistant son who passed away in my plane crash and his mom and chase mom. And just knowing that there was no, there was no hard feelings. And the survivors' guilt I was feeling was my own. And to just think about them and if the roles were reversed, what they want me to really just sit around not flying again or have this thing have power over me. Or if I was in their shoes, what I want that for them? Like of course not. Yeah, so it's an experience that so few people ever have. I mean, I can't imagine what it's like, especially losing your friends. And just the trauma of the actual impact, the whole thing just stuck in your head. It's yeah, I mean, to this day, I always like my wife's a great flyer. My band, they're all good flying, you know? I think my wife can probably envision a trip, plan a trip, envision how rad it's gonna be, how cool it's gonna be doing rock climbing or whatever we're gonna do. All I can think about until I get there is like, am I gonna make it? Is this gonna, you know, I did this once and I almost died. So, you know, I did just stop that pattern of thinking to the best of my ability. It still happens a little bit, but I still can't, I have trouble booking planes, I have trouble booking flights without thinking of those things. Yeah, I can only imagine. Well, it's awesome that you got through it and got over it and did it publicly so that other people can get inspiration from that. Yeah. And just realize like, hey, maybe for them, it was a car accident or a bus accident, whatever it is, like, you can keep moving. Yeah, for sure. And I, at the time, you know, AM, AM survived with me. And then he lived for another year and passed away the drug overdose. But during that time, where after I'd gotten out of the Burns Center and did most of my recovery, it was hard to find anyone who had been in a plane crash. That was severely burnt, like, you know, and lost people. There was a lot of groups and a lot of people that like support systems for people who were grieving and lost someone in a plane crash, you know? So I was kind of just lonely trying to navigate, figure it out just recently, just like a few days ago before my doc came out, someone kept tagging me and I saw it and it's just this young lady named Riva. She had a similar experience where she was in a plane crash, 50% of her body was burnt, and she lost her mom in the plane crash. So I was like, this is really similar to me and I've never met anyone that had even remotely kind of the same experience. So I flew her out and she was at my premiere and it was just cool. And I said, you know, it's just just cool for me to meet you is for you to meet me. Like this is, I don't see anyone or meet anyone like you, you know? Yeah. So yeah, it's cool. That's a very cool human experience. Yeah. I don't just share it with somebody and realize like you both been through something pretty horrible, but you came out on the other side and play comfort in each other. I think the closest thing that I came to that was right after my accident and I was out to dinner. The guy who flew the plane and landed in the river. Oh, remember that? Yeah, I came up and shook my hand at dinner. Didn't say word to me, but I was like, Oh, wow, that's awesome. You know? Yeah, that's, that's so much fucking crazy. Crazy birds. Yeah, birds took the plane down. Yeah, you would think they would have figured that out by now. Yeah, the smallest error, you know? Insane. Yeah, um, finds weird, but I prefer it over the boat. The boat thing in the middle of the boat. You gotta do the boat, watch. Fuck you. Queen Mary twos of wild. There's some morgue on there too. Yeah, most people that are on there are 80 years old and they're doing their one transatlantic crossing. That's what some of them die. A lot of them. But there's a lot of, I think every transatlantic crossing because I'm on there with my crew and my assistant, my tour manager. It's like, yep, someone passed, you know? Wow. So a morgue on the boat. A morgue on the boat. It's a morgue. It's a morgue. A jail. A jail. Yeah, there's a jail. How many people who are on the Queen Mary too? Thousands. Wow. I mean, if someone pops off on the boat, they got it. You know, there's police. It's legit. It's legit. Wow. And the whole experience, they almost celebrate when you crossing the Titanic where the Titanic sits. They're like playing the movie on the ship. They're down to you. It's like, this is just different. Yeah. Fuck that. Yeah. Oh my God. But it was honestly, I would practice all day. I would run miles across the ship, just on the outside of the ship. There's a lot of cool times on the boat as well. Wow. You know, usually fly to tour. You land. That's what I do now. And it's like, go where I would just train every day, play drums four hours a day, run two hours a day. By the time I got ready to where I was going, I'm like, I'm so ready for tour. It's like whatever life throws at me, I'm good. It's just crazy that even the Queen Mary too, getting across in 10 days, that's got to be like way faster than the old boats used to do it, right? I don't know. Do you go in so slow? Does anyone think like your movie sometimes? You're like, are you serious? You don't see shit for 10 days. Just water. Once in a while, you'll start seeing birds. When you know you're getting close to land, but other than that, nothing. How many times have you done that trip? Seven? Seven? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I think I'd rather fly for sure. It's just the idea of something going wrong in the middle of the ocean. Yeah. I started to think about it. You fucked. Yeah, you're fucked. There's no place to land a helicopter on there. I just don't even get to you. It's a middle. It's thousands of miles out to sea. Yeah. Both suck to me, right? Falling out of the sky in a plane, crashing into the ocean sucks, also being sinking in a huge ship with thousands of people offending for their lives sucks. I've just watched too many boat videos of them navigating insane waves that look like a building coming at them. Dude, I was in it. Yeah. We were in it. I think we lost a couple windows in the ship. And you're basically confined to your room. But huge where you just see the boat go up and then you go crashing down. And you're, you know, you're four or five days into the trips. He's still got you're in the middle of your crossing. What does that feel like? Sounds giant boat with thousands of people sucks. The internet goes out usually on the boat and you're just watching something in your room. Just waiting for everything to get more calm. How big are these waves? I think we were in 35 foot waves. Oh. Oh. Oh. Yes. Exactly. Exactly like that. Yeah. This freaks me out, man. Yeah. It's like something when they, this isn't not that bad. Oh, we come push the boats moving. Yeah. This hurricane force winds. It says, yeah, that's like choppy weather. I mean, there's positives too. We saw the northern lights from our cruise one time. And it was like, I've never seen it anywhere else, but it was beautiful. It's cool. Yeah. I want to make a trip to somewhere like Norway or wherever you can see it. It's not this. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I almost did that one time. I almost went on a, not a passenger ship, but a cargo ship because I was trying to find ways to get to Australia. You were going to go to Australia. You told me about it. You know, it doesn't fly and was on the Queen Mary twice with me. It was KRS one. Really? Yeah. He was like, I'm right there with you, Travis. I was like, did something happen to you? Why you just couldn't find it being on ships? He's like, not just don't like flying. So him and his family actually, he had told me about the cargo ship for some of the other places that didn't have actual cruises. How long is a boat ride to Australia? You know, a month. I think it's a month. I mean, I never went. I never went. The plane flight is hard enough when he's something ours or whatever it is. Yeah. Fuck that. Fuck a month. It just makes you really think about the insane adventure spirit of the people that just took off on canoes and made it across the ocean. Yeah. It was wild. That's people that do it by themselves. Oh, you're the whole Y. Yeah, there's a lot of those people. Yeah. Yeah. I know I do it. I just did that. But that's, I mean, the people back when there was no internet back when there was no newspapers or no nothing, like the Polynesian people that just got it. got on boats made it to Hawaii. Insane. Yeah. Like, did you have what was plan B? Yeah. What's, you know, what do you do if you're out? Where are you getting water? How are you staying alive? Yeah, I think plan B is making plan A work. Yeah, that's it. There is no plan. But how bad is life suck that you're willing to get in a boat and just hope there's some food when you land? And then in a big boat, it's either. So what, but the fuck were the waves like for them? Also, no, no weather app on the iPhone. Yeah. You have no idea what's coming true. Zero idea what's waiting for you. And you know, you're with your family and you're paddling out there. Yeah. It's the unknown, absolute unknown. And then how do you get back or do you or do you just say, well, this is where we are. I mean, it must have taken months and months and months to get out there. How do they stay alive? Human ingenuity, people's ability to thrive and survive is pretty insane when pushed to the limits. Yeah. Like people, I have a friend who, who fast half of the year, he's just drinking juice and water for six months, 160 days a year. He does it every year. How? He's chef Edo. He's a chef. He's actually a chef that took a vowel silence 30 years ago, plant based raw chef. And for half of the year, he doesn't eat. He just fast. And it's more for like health reasons, like cleansing and, and to prevent disease, whatever else. But he gets really thin and then just goes back to his normal weight the second half of the year. I don't know if that's good. I don't know either. But who told us he does it every year? He might not even, he might not even be good or so he just does these things. Yeah, I don't think it is half of the year fasting. I don't think it's good. This episode is brought to you by visible. Why does it feel like summer ends as soon as it begins? One day the sun is finally shining bright. And the next thing, you know, there's football on the TV again. It's time to soak up the last days of summer. That means staying connected to what you love. Visible wireless can help you do just that with visible, you get unlimited 5G data and unlimited hotspot powered by Verizon for just $25 a month. Visible is more than just a wireless plan. It's unlimited wireless designed to keep you connected. And there's no contract to tie you down. Switch today at visible.com. And start at $25 a month or get the premium visible plus pro plan and save $10 on your first month when you use the promo code, Rogan. Terms apply, see visible.com for plan features and network management details. But I can't imagine that just eating nothing but juice for six months is good for you. Yeah, I have a hard enough time fasting a day before surgery or something. Well, it's all dependent upon whether or not your body is eating a lot of carbohydrates or not. Yeah, if you're on ketogenic diet, it's a lot easier. Your body just immediately goes to burning fat and your appetite is not as strong. It's not as insane a poll, the gravity of it. But I can't even imagine why you would do that fast for six months. Like, I think there's a lot of data that shows that fasting for three days and five days and things along those lines is good. Causes of top of G makes your body clean out bad cells. It's very good for people that are recovering from cancer or going through cancer. It's one of the first things a lot of doctors tell you, get on a ketogenic diet and fast because cancer cells want glucose. That's what they want to survive and you starve them. And when your body's like on a carb, you're still on a plant based diet. So your body's eating mostly carbohydrates all the time. So you have to kind of refuel all the time. It gets used to it. So when someone like you takes a day off of food, it's like the pole of the carbohydrates, like the insulin dump. It's a lot. Yeah. I mean, I eat so much protein though. I get so much protein from lentils, like an insane amount of protein. Lentils, beans, all the natural stuff, not like mock meats. So like all my blood work that I do, my protein is top notch. Well, that was awesome. Yeah. I've just kind of figured it out though too. There's a lot of junk food, meat eaters, a lot of junk food, vegans. It's about dialing your shit in. You know what I mean in figuring it out. But even you when you were recovering from your burns, you started eating meat. Well because I had doctors that were super old school in the hospital with me. that figured out I wasn't eating because they were trying to feed me a bunch of meat and they stuck a hose down my throat. And that just sucked. So they stuck a hose down your throat to like feed you like that because I was like secretly just eating kind of like what I wanted but not eating a bunch of the meat because I told them, I don't really eat meat. So there was like a miscommunication where they just put a hose down my throat and we're feeding me like that. And then during that time my one of my nurses was super cool and he started making me bags of beef jerky. So I would eat beef jerky in the hospital to get whatever protein that they wanted me to have. And then down peanut butter blast smoothie from what is that? Is it row bucks or something like that? Like one of those and it's 3,000 calories. So I was averaging. I basically had a 6 to 7,000 calorie diet. I needed to hit every day. Wow. In order to heal because I just had 30 surgeries in 6 months. So it was just trying to get enough. Just 30 times being anesthetize for 6 months is fucking hard on your body. Yeah. It was, I was so out of it. I didn't really know until towards the end. But yeah. Jeez man. Did you ever try using a hyperbaric chamber? I couldn't do it. You know my, my, my, my best friend that was in the accident with me am. He was, he was a, I think 6% of his body was burnt. And he went in the hyperbaric and I think he had a small graft on the back of his head. He was out of the hospital a week and a half. But I had 70% of my body burnt. So there was no way I was getting out of the hospital. No matter how much I did it or didn't do it. I tried doing it. And I was just in such an awful place after my, my accident where I was, I had so much trauma with like losing my, my best friends. And I was, I was definitely, my reaction was much different than, than, uh, atoms. And I couldn't, I couldn't go on the small tube. There's, there was no way. I think at the time it reminded me too much of the inside of the plane. Really? Yeah. I just felt really claustrophobic. And I was also having a hell of a times, uh, am with sober. sober for 15 years. What happened? I was, I was a drug addict, you know, before my plane crash. And you take a, a person who's self medicating, put him through 30 surgeries, give him him a bunch of pain meds and they're not working. That was me. So I was waking up every surgery, screaming, swinging on doctors, complete madman, you know, until, until they weaned me off. And by the, by the time I got out of there, I was, I never wanted to put anything in my body again. And, uh, had a great relationship with all my doctors and Dr. Grossman, who owns the burn center, the Grossman burn center. It was, uh, yeah. Full circle. But that's a crazy trial by a fire to get off drugs. Yeah, that was my, that was my, that was my, that was my rehab. Wow. Hmm. Fuck dude. That has to be, it means you're confined to a bed, you're stuck, they're giving you pain medications, you're going through 30 surgeries, you have 70% of your body burned. Your friends just died and you're in this hospital by yourself. Huge wake up call. Wow. What a wild ride your mind must have been going through. Yeah. It's, uh, you know, I was coming home from a show. I was coming home from a gig and yeah, who would think you'd get in, get in a plane, coming home from a show and you're going to end up in a burn center for six months. You know, four people are gone and 70% of your body's burnt. Take some minute to process. You know, why did they think you were never going to be able to play the drums again? Well, it was a point where they were going to amputate my foot. They didn't think they could, they could, uh, they, they had enough skin left to, to heal my foot or save it. And then because of the amount of burns I had over my body, they weren't, they weren't positive. I was even going to make it. So it was like once they knew I was out of critical condition and I was going to make it there. You know, all my nerves were messed up in my hands. Like my own nerve was shot in both hands. My hands were numb. There was a lot of, it's just unknown. You know, I can't really imagine. I think it was sucks that you couldn't use the hyperbaric as it definitely accelerates healing. Yeah. Even now I go in, I go in sometimes now there's a hyperbaric in Los Angeles that seats two people. And that's perfect for me. It's just like I could stay in there for two hours and I'm fine. You know, it's just a confined space thing for you. Yeah, I just don't love being in confined spaces. Yeah, I don't love it, but I do it. Yeah, but it's, I've never been through what you know what the mind fuck is is the, the time it takes to depressurize it. So even if you're like, okay, I'm done the seven minutes, eight minutes, whatever. Well, we can pressurize it. I think that's, that's why I just feel better in the two cedar. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. Fuck, dude. What now when you're doing this documentary, are you, does it relive all this stuff for you? Every time. Yeah, I was so excited to come on on this with you. Cause I'm like, I'm going to talk fights with Joe. I'm going to talk whatever cars, whatever. We could do that. But some of some of them have been, I mean, they've all been great. But I mean, to tell the truth, I think since I'm not sure why, but maybe since I was a kid, you know, I lost my mom at a young age. Like 13, like I could, a stranger could come up to me outside this place and be like, dude, I just lost my dad and that price start bawling. Cause it's sensitive to me. It like triggers something to me. So yeah, it's like talking about certain parts of the doc is like, gutting me with the knife, you know, well, you conflicted as to whether or not you wanted to go through with this and relive all that stuff. Um, I think I was already far past it. It was, it was, it was to the point where my doc was done in 2017. But I'm like, there's no ending, the ending sucks. I won't look at a plane and I won't do anything. And then fast forward, you know, that was their dream ending. Just stare at a fucking plane for me, right? And I'm like, no, you know, um, so and then fast forward to now 2024, whatever it was when I flew or 2025, it was like, yo, I fly. I fly again. My kids fly. Uh, I'm married. Um, there are like so many things have changed and that kind of triggered me to finish it because there was a huge light at the end of the tunnel now, right? It was like, yeah, I had this thing that had power for me for 20 years, but I fly again. And, uh, and, and I think the other parts of the doc, like, uh, an amazing, like, we roughly ship with my dad when, when I was younger, turned into something like beautiful ways, like my best friend. Um, that's awesome. I wasn't, I wasn't born with the silver spoon of my mouth. I grew up, you know, not, we didn't even have like running hot water in my house. Uh, so I wasn't like my dad was in the music industry and my mom. I grew up not... We didn't even have like running hot water in my house. So I wasn't like my dad was in the music industry and my mom was an agent. It was like, nah, I fucking didn't know how I was gonna get out of where I grew up and I just played every day and I was relentless and I joined every band and I played with everyone and I practiced two to five hours a day. You know? So just even giving some kid hope knowing that he can do the same thing was like a big part of my documentary that I felt like could help a lot of people. For sure. And then just to see me getting knocked down and just have to fight, you know, over and over again when fucked up things happen to me and just watching me have these things just make me stronger and stronger and unbreakable. I think that's the resilience. I think that that is something for people to see. Funny. Yeah. There's two great messages in there. The big one is that you can overcome that no matter how fucked up things are, if you keep going and if you stay positive, if you do the right thing, you trust the process, at the end of it, you'll come out better. Yeah. And then the formula for success is the same formula. Almost everyone has that is really awesome at something. Become obsessed, become driven, and just throw everything you have in that thing. And you come out better and you eventually get to where you want to be or get to where you are. It's an undeniable formula. And kids need to hear that. Especially kids in this world where everybody thinks everything comes quick. And everybody wants a, you know, it's a TikTok mindset and everybody wants a pill, the lose weight and everyone wants, it's all. The process is the most important thing and just become, becoming obsessed and in love with the process. Yeah. And so many people, I don't know, there's not a lot of balance, right? Like I've found more balance now, but it's like, no, you've got to be fucking obsessed. And you've got to be relentless and you've got to, well, all your homies are out, doing whatever you should be practicing. You know what I mean? You've got to be disciplined. So, you know, my parents were, they were, they were really strict with me. Like, you know, if you want to go skateboarding, you want to go ride BMX bikes, go whatever fuck off with your friends, you got to go play drums for three hours. Wow. So thankful they did that. Can you imagine if they didn't, you know, because the one thing also in my doc is like, every time like my mom dies, what do I do? I just throw myself in the music and drumming, like obsessed with drumming, you know, join marching band orchestra, jazz band, you know, like just literally eat sleeping breathe. That same thing after my accident, what did I do? Dad got home. I'm outside with scabs all over my body and I'm playing the fucking drums because it's like what I know. And also I think for kids, even that don't have to hopefully endure anything I encountered, it's like, it gives you confidence when you're good at something. Like when I don't know anything, I think when kids bully you and whatever else, if you're good at something, you're like, fuck you. Like I know I'm really good at football. I'm really good at jujitsu. I'm really good at guitar. I feel like it just gives you confidence and it helps you just kind of navigate through life better. Yeah. You know, it's a vehicle for developing you as a human being. Totally. Whatever it is, whether it's art, whether it's music, whether it's literature, whatever you're doing, writing, whatever you're doing, whatever carpentry, whatever it is, just become obsessed with a thing, get better at it. And you realize that, okay, there's a process. I can get better things. I'm valuable. I can do something. Yeah. I'm not just the lazy sack of shit. The problem is the masses aren't like that, right? So like, sometimes you feel lonely being like that. Yeah. I feel like, have you ever read Riddlet List by Tim Grover? No. Fuck. I just had my premiere in LA and he introduced my doc. What is it? It's a book and he basically talks about being a cooler, closer or cleaner. And like cleaners are like people like you and I that are obsessed with shit. And you know, if we want to grammy today, we're not going to like party for the next week. We're like, what's next? You know, what's next? We're not, we're on vacation and we're practicing and we're not feeling bad about it. Or it's just, it's a mindset that not a lot of people have. And that must make you feel like you're doing something wrong because you're so obsessed with something. Yeah. Well, people will make you feel like there's something wrong with you. Oh, yeah. Like, and it took me a while. Honestly, after I read his book, I'm like, oh, I'm not alone. There's a bunch of fucking psychopaths like me that just, I love the fucking drums. I love to make music. I could stay in the studio for 25 hours. You know? And I don't feel burnt out and it makes me feel alive and it's therapeutic and I always, I'm never content with where I'm at. I always know I have room to grow. I know there's things I can get better at. Yeah, there's, and then there's like, you know, there's people that are very content just being like, I'm not going to get any better. I'm just, I'm cool with where I'm at. I know this is kind of peak level for me. I can never think like that. Yeah. I mean, I guess that's just how it has to be in order for there to be outliers. There's always going to be people that just whatever, for whatever reason, never follow through, never do what they really want to do. You know, what is that, uh, throw comment? The, the row quote, most men live lives of quiet desperation. Mm. There's a lot of that. There's a lot of people that wish, they wish they have the energy or the inspiration or the discipline or whatever it is to do the thing that they want to do, to get up and just, to do something that really brings them joy, really brings them excitement, really it makes them feel fulfilled, really like ignites that creative fire inside of them. Where he do something and it's done like fuck, yeah. Yeah. But never experience fuck, yeah. Oh, yeah. It's a rough life. I feel like that's the journey. Find that, you know, like, or like that quote, uh, find something you love and figure out a way to get paid for it. Yeah. Like that's the, that's great. But I think yeah, things like that have just, especially after my accident, I'm like, oh, life is short. Um, there's, and it can go at any time. I can go anytime. Yeah. I've, I've learned, I've been smacked in the face over and over again, you know. Yeah. And just always feeling like, remember, uh, there's this guy named Harry Shannon that was like very instrumental in helping me get sober or me trying to get sober before my accident when I got sober. And he's like, you know, I have to ask men like if you died right now, would you be the man you'd want people to remember you by? And I'm like, I need to get to that place, you know, that's just where I want to sit. That's where I want to live. Yeah. I was telling, tell people, live your life as if there's a documentary crew following you around and you're doing something awesome. Like if you wanted to be inspired by somebody and watch a documentary on somebody, doing something just someone who's like, wow, that fucking dude's getting after it. Yeah. Be that person in real life. The other thing I always tell people become the person you pretend to be when you're trying to get laid. So funny. I thought you were pretending to be on the internet or social media. Yeah. That person is so much easier. Yeah. Pretending because there's obviously someone that's like that. That's why we understand the archetype. That's why we understand like this very exceptional person. So become that person. Yeah. You can do it. And but he can do it. We all change and grow. And that's what I think really important about people like you telling your story is that there's a lot of young people out there that don't have anybody like you in their life. And they can see it and relate to you. And it gives them fuel. It can your story and just you talking about things passionately can change a young person's life. There's a young girl or a young guy out there that can hear you. And that just your story makes them take a step, makes them go in the right direction, makes them make a move to something. We all need something from other people. We feed off of other people's energy. Yeah. I feel that like it's like when people see David Goggins for the first time and you're like, oh, I'm going to get after it. I'm going to get out of here. Like that's important. Yeah. And I didn't know. I said, you know, I've watched my doc like 15, 20 times now. And I just I even watched it the other day at the premiere and I'm like holding back tears and I'm like, fuck, it's so heavy. You know. But just the reaction from everyone is like, yo, that changed my life. Like I can't look at life the same. And I'm like, if anything, that's I love that. Yeah. We all need that. I hate to put out. So it's not like I made my own documentary. But I was honored and flattered. Someone wanted to do this documentary with me, but like hate to put out something that doesn't help people. Right. You know, right. Is this water right here? Yeah. Yeah. There's a glass right in front of you. Is it a Lego? I ran. What is it called? Lake Austin. Uh huh. I ran it today. It's dope. So nice. Isn't it beautiful? So beautiful. This is such a great place. If I lived here, I would be out there every day and tons of people running. So healthy people in this town. And I didn't. My goal was to just wake up and walk. I went to like this good espresso spot that has like, quartatos had a coffee. And then I have like long shorts on like sweat shorts cut off sweats, suicide of tendency sweats and high socks and just regular shoes. And where I come from where I grew up was called the inland empire. Like, and I'm like, oh my God, I look so inland empire right here. Totally. No shirt. So it's out of tendency. It's like he's not from here, you know. But I don't know. And I'm here with you guys. Yeah, but you blend right in. Everybody blends in here. This is a very blend in town. I love Austin. It's great. It's cool. But that lake is a really fun spot. And again, very inspirational too because there's a lot of people getting after it. Yeah. A lot of people look good. They look healthy. Yeah, it was like, I don't know. Honestly, I was surprised. Really? From the moment I touched down yesterday, just walking my wife and. Rocky, we just went walking and everyone was running even yesterday. And then today, it was like similar to when that feeling where you're in LA where you have like those boot camps or whatever. But there's no organized boot camp. There's just people out there getting after it. Yeah. I love being around that. Well, this is a very fit town. I mean, it's become the jujitsu hub of the country. Really? Yeah. It's kind of crazy. And it all happened during the pandemic. You know, there's a lot of things that changed about this place. Because people got sick of whatever the restrictions were for where they lived, whether it was New York or LA. And they came here. And a lot. Well, it started out with Gordon Ryan, Gordon Ryan and John Donner, who were the like Gordon's the greatest jujitsu athlete of all time. And he moved here and John Donner, who's the greatest coach of all time. And he moved here and they set up shop. And then all the guys they trained with came here and then a ton of other people just moved here and started up schools too. So there's a ton of jujitsu going on here, a ton of MMA going on here. There's gyms everywhere. All these functional fitness gyms is like, it is like a feeling here. There's an energy of people that want to do something that really want, they want to be active. They want to be excited about something. They want to make something happen. And I think a lot of that was accentuated by the fact that this town became like a symbol of change for them. Like wherever the fuck I used to live before, now I'm going to move to this new thing. And I'm going to really take advantage of the fact that this is different. That this place is different. This is my new place. This is my new feeling of my life. It's a new environment. And then all these other people that moved here have this similar desire to like Excel and make their life more exciting and just it's an awesome place. Yeah. I feel that. I think you usually see it in New York or LA, but you see it here. Yeah. It's like everyone's in shape or it's like, feels like it's a head. You know, there's energy here. Yeah. And there's energy here because of the people that moved here. You know, when we opened up the comedy club, I mean, we we all came here because there was nowhere we could perform in LA. LA was locked down for comedy. And just like you playing the drums and doing music, comedians are addicted. They're addicted to performing. They're addicted to writing. They're addicted to like and a lot of these guys were young people where their career just was shut off. And you know, they're in their 20s and they're pursuing their dream and they're barely getting by. They're making no fucking money. But they're in Hollywood. They're at the comedy store and then also in the comedy store is closed for a year and a half. It was fucking nuts. And so when we came out here, you know, it started off. It was Ron White and then me and Tony Hinchliffe. And then it was like, we lit the fire and good, good, good. Come on. And then next thing you know what, there's like 20 world class comedians, moved to Austin. And we set up the club and then now there's five clubs on my street, on the street where my club is. There's five other clubs there. It's crazy. There's so many comics here. And just exploding with creativity and enthusiasm and momentum. There's like so much momentum. Cam Patterson who came out of here just got SNL, you know, Shane Gillis, obviously just became like the biggest comic in the world. And it's all kill Tony's the biggest live comedy show in the world. That's out of my club. So why are you guys? Oh, that's out of your club. Yeah. And one of my clubs. I get all the clippings from it all the time. And I'm like, he's so funny. Also, I saw I saw Ron White and Shane Gillis at the Netflix sucks. Oh, right. Hollywood bull. Yeah. So good. Yeah. I worked with Ron last night. And he's great. He's the best. Yeah. Shane Gillis, my favorite, obviously, so funny. He's the best. He doesn't even have to say anything just in space. Well, he's just a great guy. Like, you just love you when you're around him, you're having fun. Yeah. He's just a big, he's a big smile. Yeah. You know, I could imagine. Yeah. So I never like, did you want to go meet him before the thing? I'm like, no, no, no, I'm okay. I just want to watch this show. Like, yeah. I'm sure he'd love to meet you. Yeah. It's just having a place where a bunch of like-minded people are trying to do the same thing is so important. And if you don't have that in your life, that's what I was talking about. Like your story and your documentary. And just hearing you talk about stuff is so important for people because we all need other people that are doing a similar thing or at least doing a thing that we wish we were doing that gives us- Yeah. And it might not be for them. It might not be playing the drums. It might be painting. It might be something else. But it's like, oh, that guy has that feeling about drums the way I have this feeling about playing guitar or I have this feeling about drawing pictures, whatever the fuck it is. Yeah. Like you need to know that this feeling that you have inside of you and wanting to do something special is not unique. There's other people that have it. You just have to find them. Yeah. To find those people. And if they're not around you, at least now we have this amazing ability to connect with these people through the internet. It's incredible. Yeah. It's like they say like you are who you're the closest five people that's thinner around you. Yep. It's like the same thing. Completely true. Completely true. Yeah. I feel that too. And they don't have to be doing exactly what you're doing. Yeah. I'm like in our old neighborhood, where, because were you on Khalifa? Yes. Okay. So I'm on Khalifa. You know, I moved my studio. You literally left. Yeah. Like COVID hit. You left. And I moved in over there. Yeah. I know. I heard so. I wonder how close we were to. I think we were real close. Really? I think we were real close. Tree from each other. So even just being in that neighborhood, like I run a lot in there, right? And one day I was running. So it was so weird. I think I saw your pod. And Jean Jacques was on it. Right? John Jacques, John Jacques Machado. And then the maybe two days later, I'm at Blue Bottle grabbing a coffee and him and all his boys from his, his Jim co up to like, hey, come train, come train. And I'm like, okay. And then the next day I'm running. And I don't even know where his spot is. And I'm running. And then there's his, his dojo. Like, you know, his gym. And, and I just walked in and started training, but being around him and like his story, like being around people who have inspiring stories and are motivating and are productive and are hungry and, you know, it's the biggest, the biggest difference in the world. John Jacques is an awesome soul. He's an awesome guy. What a great guy. Yeah. I started training with him in 1998. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. I was training. A lot. And then, uh, was also running a bunch. And I tweaked my, my leg. Uh, and I kind of learned, I think like me running all the time, uh, it wasn't the best for a jujitsu. No. You need some strength training for me. Yeah. So now, now it's a good balance. But, um, what do you do for strength training? It's tricky. I used to just work out if I, if I was here, I'd find someone to work out with them or have, have friends that work out with or trainers back home. But a lot of people see me and they're like, probably let's get, let's get you jacked. Well, that, that's not, that's not functional for me. Not functional for me. I need to be fucking fast. Yes. And I need to be, um, fluid. And right. Yeah. So a lot of people, I figured out after years and years and years of, of working out with different people, what's best for me is, is fast twitch and lots of reps, lots of sprints, quick explosive energy. I love boxing. Love jump roping. Um, and then a few days is more like slow strength training. But only followed by like I have to finish with something fast, whether it's 10 rounds on the bag or whatever else or I literally, I remember there was a tour and I was working out with someone and, um, we hadn't yet figured it out. We work out still together and we do, we do something called temple training. So whatever music is on, you're doing it to the tempo. You're doing it for the length of the song. So it's much longer than you would normally do something. And it's much quicker than you normally do something. But that's how I play the drums. And that's going to, that's going to help me once I go back to what I do and it's functional for what I do. I like that. But when I wasn't doing that and I was just throwing around heavy weights and I was putting on muscle. I was, I got behind a kit and I remember I hadn't really tested it out. And it was the worst feeling in the world. I was so tight. I was so slow. I didn't look like this, but I felt like this. You know, it was terrible. I was like, oh my gosh, this isn't me. I need to be bad, you know, right? Right. And my goal, my only goal is to be able to think something and do it, execute, uh, stamina wise and endurance wise and skill wise. So I'm always practicing and my stamina is always on point. So drumming is like sprinting with your arms. Yeah. I mean, you're just like long term fast running with your arms. Yeah. It's like volume punches. Like all drummers have a similar build. They're all like wiry and strong and have like crazy endurance with their arms. Like what you could do with your arms is probably bananas. I bet you could hit a fucking speed bag all day long. I could do battle ropes. I love speed bags. Oh, yeah. I have one at the gym at my gym. And it's all that fucking battle. Yeah. And it's all it's all tempo. You have to find the rhythm. If the rhythm's not right, you can't keep the bag going. You know, um, battle ropes. Oh, yeah. For 30, 40 minutes without stopping. It's like, yeah. Just finds like different ways. For drumming, I would imagine it's such a similar motion. Yeah. You know, but it's so different than like the average person that wants to work out. Like I don't get to do that. You know, even though it's cool or you look cool, you put on certain amount of muscle, whatever. And just I can't do it. Well, I could get your way for sure. I mean, I think a drummer wants to be built like a welterweight boxer. You know, you want to be like lean and wiry and just have crazy endurance. And if you just get an intelligent trainer, they understand what you're trying to achieve. They could achieve both goals. Like you can strengthen things so that you don't get injured in Jiu Jitsu. If you want to do Jiu Jitsu, but not overwhelmed you with mass. Yeah. Yeah. Figured out like there's, yeah, there's definitely certain exercises I could do once I start training Jiu Jitsu again to make sure my legs are cool. Well, a lot of like, I really elite Jiu Jitsu guys are not bulky at all. There's a lot of like really thin guys that are like very, very high level, especially because there's weight classes. And you know, what's really important is technique. You know, it's tricky is the hands to like not, not crushing my hand and making sure I'm always like gripping properly and not leaving my fingers out or oh, yeah. This episode is sponsored by BetterHelp. You've probably heard about BetterHelp before, but maybe you haven't heard from those who have actually used BetterHelp that feedback can tell you everything you need to know. Go to betterhelp.com slash reviews and check out the feedback from hundreds of people saying how much they love this service. It's easy to see why to get started. All you have to do is answer a few questions. You'll get matched up with the therapist based on your needs. And if it's not the right fit, you can switch therapists at any time. See the reviews. See what stands out and see if BetterHelp is right for you. Visit betterhelp.com slash JRE. That's better H E L P dot com slash JRE. If you break a finger, that's fucked. Yeah. He's always so good about that. It's like, well, you just have, if you're rolling and stuff, you just have to make sure you're not rolling with anybody that's spastic and anybody that's just like that doesn't have control energy. You know, yeah, that's the great thing about rolling with black belts. Like if I'm rolling with a black belt, it's very controlled. Like we both know what we're doing. So everyone's like moving in a very controlled pace. Very rarely get injured. When you get injured is when you're rolling with like some young blue belt who's on steroids, who's fucking jacked out of his mind. Trying to choke you out. You just am. Yeah. What's a tune of chocolate chocolate chocolate chocolate. Yeah. Totally. Dude, I've been that. I was at a UFC gym. I forget where I was. I was somewhere on tour. And he's like, OK, let's spar a little bit. We're supposed to be doing lights barring whatever. Just kickboxing, boxing. And he does a spinning back fist. And I'm like, oh my gosh, I have a show in 45 minutes, man. I'm like, you know, it's going to get in concussed 45 minutes before. But I do love it. Very hard to control too. Yeah. Once you start that rotation and that spin that arm going around, I was almost done. So yeah, my son was there. He's like, Oh, that's like, yeah, it probably wasn't. That wasn't good. But yeah, but training is yeah, it's so awesome. It's great for getting rid of aggression too. It cleans your mind up and makes you relaxed for sure. And it humbles you. I think, oh, yeah. I feel like everyone should train or at least do it at some point of their life. Because it humbles you and yeah, I feel like there'll be a lot less like hotheads or stocks are on their own. You know what I mean? 100%. Jujitsu people are some of the most laid back and chill people that can kill you that you'll ever meet. Yeah. Totally. The most of them are like very easy going, really kind and very relaxed. And I feel like it's something you can do even as you age. Oh, 100%. Yeah. As long as you're training with good, smart people, yeah, you know, that's the thing. You got to pick your training partners wisely because that's what gets you injured is spastics people that freak out. And you know, I used to be a spastic. I get it. You know, when I was young, when I was first starting out, I was very aggressive and trying to just just force everything. You do everything fat. And then, but then one day you'll train with something like John, and John, John, just he never explodes. He's never had a balance. He's never had a position. Everything's just smooth and effortless. And he's talking to you. Like, why is road jogging? Look out for your own, Joe Hogan. He's like, he's having fun. Good. Yeah. And it's an art. It really is. Especially when it's done well, like the way John, John can do it. It's like, it is an art. It's beautiful to watch. You watch someone with a beautiful guard pass and the nail triangle. And it's like, oh my God, it's beautiful. Yeah. And I think I'd done it in the past and it was, it was a, it was a lot of fun. And it was almost like chess up here. But I didn't feel like it was a much of a workout. Whereas with him, it's like two hours. He's making it like a show. There's no, there's no stopping for long periods of time. And we're just dripping sweat. And I wave a buck 50 and he's whatever, 200, you know? Yeah. And he's just, yeah. It is a workout and it's just challenging and you're engaged the whole time. Yeah. It just feels good. And when you then, if you watch fights, you really appreciate what's going on. Because you've tried to do that and you know. Yeah. Because a lot of people get very delusional when they watch fights. Oh, well, I've got a pretty narrow fucking, I'd fuck these guys up. Yeah. Most men have a very delusional understanding or belief in their ability to fight. So doing it gives you like, Oh, this is really hard. And then you watch people at an elite level, you know, you watch Chugashano Mallor or someone like that. And you're like, Oh, fuck that's hard to do. What he just did. That's crazy. Yeah. It gives you a real true appreciation of the amount of effort and the amount of discipline and intensity that this guy has put in over years and years and years to achieve this level where you're watching something spectacular in front of 15,000 people and millions of people on television. Did I couldn't imagine? Yeah. I was with Dom one time and me and Dom Cruise. He was just like, try to sleep me. And I'm like, OK. And you know how fast he is and how like, I swing and he's over here. You know, it was like, Oh, I was so humiliating. But, um, and then he just was just grappling me and not letting me move. And he's like, he's like, don't ever, don't ever when you're in a fight, be like, do something. Do something. This is what it feels like, you know, he was just keeping me there. And I'm like, Oh, I have much more respect for just, yeah, when someone's even just holding someone against the fence, that that feels awful. Yeah. It drained me. Yeah. And then to start a fresh round where I'm trying to sleep him was it was impossible to begin with, but it was even more impossible. His footwork is ridiculous. His ridiculous. And he really invented a lot of his footwork. Like his footwork is very dumb, dominant cruise when he was the champion when he was a band to my champion had some of the most elusive footwork that anybody had ever seen before. It was so unique and so different. And you couldn't get anybody to emulate it in training because dumb system, he pretty much developed on his own. And there's a lot of videos of him training it, a lot of videos of him moving. And it's so unusual that you see guys in front of him and they're just mesmerized because it's step step here, step step there, pop step step here, kick step step here elbow and you're like, fuck, where is he? Yeah. And that was such a smart because he's such an intelligent guy, which is why he's such a great like MMA analyst. Yeah, he's so good. He's so smart and he just really figured out like, OK, I don't have the most power. I'm not the strongest guy. I'm not the biggest guy. What what can I have? What can I develop that gives me an advantage over everybody? Well, I can be like the most elusive, the most slick moving guy that's ever existed. And I feel like a lot of people in his division adopted it from him. Well, for sure. Figured it out, you know, well, they had to adapt. Yeah. And you know, when that guy's, you know, dominating people and you can't do anything about it, he humiliated a lot of people. Yeah. He was in front of them and they they they developed this style that was fine. If someone's standing right in front of you and engaging with you, like something right in front of you and there to be hit and taking a shot and then given one back, Donald's doing none of that. He's like, whoop, here I'm over here, but he was like, you know, very much like Loma Chanko did in boxing. You're just doing weird shit that people hadn't seen before. And really kind of again, developed it on his own. If you look at like his, the camp that he came out of in San Diego, there was another guy's doing it like that. It was really just him. Yeah. Very, very unique guy. But I love that. There's styles that sort of rise, that that exist that someone just sort of creates. They just realize like what do I have physically? There's styles that sort of rise, that exist, that someone just sort of creates. They just realize like, what do I have physically as my tools, and how can I implement these tools in a way that's different than anything that these guys have seen before? Yeah, because there was nothing like him. No, that was nothing. But then you see guys that came up after him, guys like TJ Dilyshaw, who was also awesome with footwork. And a lot of his footwork, guarantee, was inspired by watching Dominic and a lot of these other guys that are these Corey Sanhagen guys that are constantly switching stances. Yeah, the style developed out of that. Because before Dominic Cruz, there really was no one who had footwork like that, not even close. Mm-hmm. And so when you see TJ, you know, like who, in my opinion, was one of the greatest band of weights of all time. Like when he beat Hennen Barrow, which was Hennen Barrow at the time, was thought to be, if not the best pound for pound fighter in the world. At least number two behind Jose Aldo, and he was undefeated. And TJ just styled on him. I mean, it was, and he went out there like he was sparring. It wasn't even like he was fighting for the world title. He went out there like super loose and focused and relaxed and just switch and stances and cut and angles and hitting them with shots and move to the left and hitting them with a head kick to the right. And he was like, fuck, yeah, he put on a show that way. Ooh, that's great. One of the greatest title winning performances in the history of this sport, for sure. I wish, I wish he didn't, you know, struggle with so many injuries. Yeah. And everything, because he was... It's a tragedy. It's phenomenal. It is a tragedy. I mean, he has significant shoulder injuries. Like, to the point where I think he's going to have to get artificial shoulders. Because he had no super spinatus on both arms. It was just completely ripped off. And he would just like strengthen all the other muscles and just deal with it. And then it would just pop out. You know, when he fought Algimain Sterling, he told the referee in the green room. He said, my shoulder's going to pop out. But it's okay. I'll put it back. Let me keep fighting. Imagine that. You're going to fight Algimain Sterling for the world title who's a beast and one of the best grapplers ever. And you're thinking, I have to deal with the fact that my shoulder is going to definitely get dislocated in this fight. Because it just doesn't stay. It's just this loose fucking thing that just pops out all the time. And he's trying to fight. And just just all will and discipline and intensity. Like, that was Dom's shoulder too, right, towards the end? Dom had a bunch. I mean, he had ACLs. Yeah, ACLs. Yeah, the shoulder was the last one. That was the last straw. His last shoulder surgery. Yeah, I mean, look, the human body is not designed to be punched in kicked and to be grappled and strangled and twisted and armed barred. It's like at a certain point in time, it just gives out. Yeah. That's just how it is. Yeah. And it sucks because, you know, some of these guys have so much more to give in their mind. And their body just fails them after a certain point in time. And you see that with some of these older guys. It's like they've just had a bunch of knee surgeries and maybe a back surgery and this and that. And then they're a shadow of themselves inside the octagon. Yeah. It's sad to watch, you know, but I also understand the feeling of that's all you know. And you just want to keep fighting. Well, it's also they have this insane belief in themselves. And they always think that it's what got in there also. You know, that's how they became a champion in the first place. Like, people telling you you never play the drums, you never going to run. And you're like, I'll show you. And that's how they all are. They're all like, I'll show, you know, it's over. You got to hang it up. It's over. Your time has gone like, no, no, no, I got one more in me. Yeah. I got three or four more fights in me. I'm going to fight until I'm 41 or whatever it is. That would be so hard. I think a Dustin and I think of like even his fight against Islam and his fight against, what's the French fighter? Then while signed the knee. Yeah. Yeah. I couldn't tell myself I need to hang up the gloves if I fought like that. I know. And the whites, he's a fucking beast. Yeah, he's beast. Like Dustin to me is in, he doesn't look like he's at the end of his career. He's still very competitive. And I think that was the best fight against Islam in anyone's fight. You know? It was a very good fight. That was a good fight. I mean, Dustin's in a elite fighter. So I could see being Dustin and struggling with like, this is hard for me to stop fighting. Because you're that fucking good. Well, Dustin, the physical issues aren't even really like joints and neck. And it's his head. He's had too many brain injuries. And that's, he's got some sort of a separation between the two halves of his brain. There's like some issue with the center of his brain. I don't even know about that. Yeah. He's talked about it pretty openly. But I mean, you know, he had that incident where he got drunk and got crazy. But that's a lot of that is CTE, a guarantee. And, you know, he's doing a lot of things to try to mitigate that. And he's seeking help and really there are some ways that you can recover, at least in some way and improve on what you're doing. But I think for him it's best to not be fighting anymore. You know, it's just at a certain point in time, you're only going to accumulate more damage. And then whatever you're dealing with now is just going to get worse. And then maybe you can't recover from it. Sure. And, you know, he's got a family and he's in this situation where it's like, I want to be there for my family. I don't want to be this guy that's like completely compromised when I'm 50, 60 years old, where I can't walk anymore. And someone's got to take me around and hold my hand. Yeah. Because there are guys like that, you know, especially like older boxers. You run into some old boxers. And it's like, it's really sad, man. Yeah. You know, you see guys like Tommy Hearns talking. Like not much older than me. And you see him talking and moving around. And you're like, fuck, like he paid a price. Yeah. He's got his pay a price. It's a rough way to make a living. Yeah. The fight game is crazy. It's the easiest. I'm happy my drums don't hit me back. Straight up, you know. I'm like, yeah. It's also you can do what you do for a long time. I mean, you can play drums for a long time. When you're fighting, your peak is such a small window of life. And it's just, there's so much that you have to pour into it. And then eventually you have to realize that that window's closed. And you have to move on. Even though you're still young and you still have all this life and look at a guy like Tosten, he looks fucking great. You know, he looks great. He sounds great. When he talks, he seems like he's all there. Physically he looks like he's never been better. But the window is closed. You know, there's, yeah, there's these young guys coming up and they don't have the injuries that you have. They don't have the problems that you have. They don't have the wear and tear and they're going to get to you before you get to them. And maybe they wouldn't have gotten to you five years ago or six years ago, but again now, and it's just not there anymore. And it's hard for guys to accept because their entire identity is based on this one thing. It's very fleeting. So that's, that would be the most difficult thing in the world. Yeah. But the glory that they experience is above and beyond anything we're ever going to know. I heard someone talking about it. And they, they were saying, imagine being a cage fighter and it's all you prepared for for the last 20 years to be locked in a cage and you're underwear to scrap with someone and have the most grueling fight camps. And then you're just, we're just going to take you out of it and you can't do that anymore. Yeah. It's like, that's all you've known. You know, it's a, they experience that different life than, than us. You know, they're hysered way higher. Yeah. And highest of highs, lowest to lows. The rest of the life is kind of gray and dull in comparison to the bright lights. I mean, this is where Connor keeps trying to come back. It's like all these guys. It's like that thing. Like Connor's worth like half a billion dollars or you doesn't have to do anything anymore if he doesn't want to. Yeah. But he still has this thing inside of him where he wants to reclaim that lost glory. Whatever the discipline that could be bad, where he could just, he completely walked out on top. Right. Yeah. That's beautiful. And if everyone could have the, the discipline to do it like that, that, you know, that's, that's rare. That guy's got Mount Everest discipline. It's like a different kind of discipline. And he's wise one of the greatest. Yeah. And that's why, you know, what's interesting is he stayed training. He's been training ever since he retired. And he says he's much better now than when he retired. Wow. Could you imagine? Isn't it crazy? He says he watches his old fights and he sees mistakes that he made and how he would do it differently now. Wow. And how he does things differently in training now. And I know guys who train with him and they say he's fucking malls people. He's mauling these like, you know, top 10 UFC contenders. And he gets in with them. They can't hold onto them. He's fucking, he's an animal. I believe it. And he's not, not even training about thinking about fighting again. But he's an awesome coach now too. And having a guy like that in your corner, imagine the inspiration that a young fighter gets, having a Kebib Nirmigamadov coach them. Like you're being coached by one of the most ruthless discipline guy that's ever competed in the sport, retired undefeated, one of the rare ones. And he's your coach and you want to make him happy. You want to make him proud? Yeah. Having his guidance. Yeah. Well, he's going to be in Islam's corner this weekend. I'm leaving tomorrow. I can't wait. He's going to be sick. I can't wait. That's a good fight. Very, very interesting fight. Because Ian Machano Gary is a very difficult guy to get a hold of. Very tall and long. Yeah. Fast as fuck. Good striker. Very smart. Knows how to win. Knows how to adapt and change. Islam's striking is fierce to them. Oh yeah. Yeah. It's a lot better than it used to be. And at like the same level as all the other guys in the sport, which is really crazy because his grappling is above and beyond. So it's like you're dealing with a guy who there's no picnic on the feet. He'll fuck you up on the feet. I mean, he knocked out Vulcan Oskie with a headkick. He's elite on the feet. And then when it comes to the ground, there's no one like him. There's no one like him in the division, any division. He's a crusher. And he just crushes people. Yeah. He's nasty. I mean, you think about how good Charles Oliver is. One of the greatest submission artists of all time is I'm got him down to the ground and just smushed him. Just crushed him quickly. Just made him tap quick. It was not that tight. It was going to be more competitive. Everybody did. Yeah. But that's how good Islam is. You know? And he's also a guy that like you cannot train harder than him. It's not humanly possible. So he goes into every event knowing it is impossible for someone to train harder than him. It's impossible for someone to have tougher people in camp than he has. I mean, those guys out of Dagestan are on a completely different level. I mean, there is an entire room filled with absolute savages. And they're just getting after it every day, full discipline. No one drinks, no one parties, no one does everything. They pray five times a day. They're super religious. And they're just driven. Yeah. And, you know, he comes into that fight with that kind of confidence because of that. It's going to be a fun weekend. Yeah. That main event is very tricky because Ian can move, man. He's a really slick guy, really tall. And he's also very fast and long. So he's going to have a significant height and reach advantage. He's going to be moving all over the place, landing. And if Islam is not careful in how he engages, he could get caught. And you can only get caught by a guy like Ian a couple of times. If at all, you know, before you travel. So it should be very interesting. Those are the kind of fights I love that are a puzzle. Yeah. It's like styles make fights. Oh, yeah. That's like a great example. Like, yes. And it's also Ian has this insane confidence. He has this insane belief that he's special that, you know, this is his destiny. And, you know, I mean, it looks like that at every way in. It looks like that at every stare down. It looks like that at every press conference. Like, this is his destiny. He really believes that. Which is another huge thing that a fighter has to have. Like, almost a delusional belief in themselves. Yeah. I saw an interview where he was, he actually said he believes in the balance with his family, with every part of his life where most fighters will only focus on fighting during the eight to ten weeks they're fighting or they're training. And he's like, no, I actually need everything to be in order to make this one thing go great. So I believe in more balance than in balance. I think it's interesting. Depends entirely on the person and also depends entirely on what does your family look like. What is the relationship with your wife and your children like? Is it harmonious? And is it, do you get love from it and strength and inspiration? Is there chaos? Is there like arguing all the time and bickering and pettiness? Bullshit and like the Mark the movie. Mark her, yeah. Mark her machine. Oh my God. She's fighting when she squabbing with them right before he goes out to fight. I was like, I was like, I could feel for him. Oh, dude. I've seen that before. I've seen that with multiple fighters. I know one guy who during the night before the fight, his girlfriend at the time would always start fights with them. Like huge fights. Like because she didn't like that this one thing fighting was more important to him than her. She wanted to be the entire focus of his attention and whether it was this thing that was taking away, she was a complete narcissist, this thing that was taking away from his attention to her, she would sabotage it. So she would start fights. She would storm out of the hotel room, slam the door and just be gone and shut her phone off. And here he is. Freaking out. He's got a fight for the world title in whatever 20 hours. And he's dealing with this nonsense. It's the worst. So that's what I can't imagine. Well I think that's why some guys, they'd rather take that isolated approach. They would rather just do the Spartan thing and just be alone in camp and sleep on a cot and wake up in the morning and run and just live this like very hard six to eight week life. I feel that part. Like I can't even even leading up the shows. I can't be too comfortable. Really? Oh no. Like I can't get a massage before I go play or be chilling in my hotel room. I need to be uncomfortable. Really? Yeah. Why is that? I don't know. It's all I've known too. It's like that, I don't know. I came up like lugging my own gear around, setting up my drums and then waiting for the show to start. And I don't, I can't just watch a movie before I play or wake up from a nap. It's just, it's just not in me. I'm up, jump rope being. I'm up like watching fights. I'm up, going for a run, practicing, learning something new. That's the best head space for me to be in. Well, I would imagine with the difference between drumming and I think any other kind of musical instrument is that it's so physical. It's so physical that it's like a workout. Like you have to be in shape to drum. You have to. Yeah. You can't just sluggish. Right. I don't know. I'm a fucking weirder though. Worried about like what I eat. Like do I have enough energy? Have I, you know what I mean? Yeah. And just jump roping. Well, it's also before I play, dialing it in. Right. And knowing what you need because of the experiences that you've had. You know, it's so many experiences, so many performances that you can just dial it in. I think that in that way it's very similar to fighting is that every fighter has to have their own approach and Ian's approach is to have his family with him all the time. Islam with Cachos approach is very different. It's like Spartan, all those guys together. You eat and train with the guys. Just separate yourself from everything. Yeah. It's super personal. Yeah. It's got to be personal because everybody's got a different, everyone has a different personality. Different mindset, different triggers, different things that fuck with them, different things that calm them down. You know? Yeah. Also, I have all these weird, whatever where I'm jump roping, running, practicing for hours before going on stage. And then there's the times where everything I get thrown a curve ball and I get to the venue five minutes before and I can go up and do it like, like, no problem. Because I think I've done all this other preparation. Right. It's like, I also know it works without it. Yeah. Right. You're always ready. Stay ready. So you're always ready. Yes. Yeah. I live by that. Yeah. Stay ready. See? Yeah. Well, fighters have that too because the fighters that get like really out of shape in between fights, they're the ones that really struggle. Like Patty. Yeah. Where you see him blow up like a week later. It's like, it's like, it's like, it's like the same person. Patty, it's a little deceptive. Really? Patty gets fat, but he doesn't get out of shape. Hmm. Patty's got incredible endurance and insane work ethic. But he also really loves to live and live life. You know, so have few beers, eat some pizza, get fat, but he still could go to the gym and probably outwork everybody. Wow. Like, it's, there's no way you're in the kind of shape that that guy's in if you're not training all the time. So even when he gets fat, it's just eating. Yeah. He just eating piles of food. I'm sure if you, if I'm sure when you see him with his big moon face, if he got to the gym and worked out, you'd be like, fuck, yeah, still it'd be. Yeah. He'd be exhausted and lying on his back after one round on the bag. Not like that. It's only fat. Yeah. And then he's got the, and then there's also this part of the discipline of the weight cut is like this locking in and focusing where you're measuring all your food. And like there's, there's a certain like shift in the mindset that takes place when he goes from being fat to ripped. And he goes from being fat to ripped. Yeah. That doesn't better than anybody because everyone looks at him like, oh, guys, no, we're going to make weight. And then he shows up at the weigh ins shredded chiseled. Yeah. I don't think I see anyone with a, as big of a transformation. No. No. This is beyond any people love him for it too. That's also part of the craziness of it. They celebrate it because I mean, so silly. Yeah, he's so likable. Yeah. He's he's yeah, he's great. So fucking skillful too, what he did to Ben was underneath was nuts that any kid he was like, oh, yeah. That was one of the best fights I've seen in person. It wasn't or I was like, what the fuck just happened? You know, you see what gate you just did to Iliad to pour you and now you realize how fucking tough patty is. Yeah, Patty's tough. He's silly and he's playful and he's a lot of fun and everybody loves him and he's all likable and he's dancing around. But when it gets down to it, that motherfucker is tough as nails. Yeah. Scary how, how quick that was. Yeah. And she's just thank God for him. Yeah. So I was so happy. Me too. It was incredible. And seeing him do that in the White House on the lawn of the White House and win the world title when everybody thought he was like a six to one underdog on some sports books, which is nuts. I thought that was very disrespectful. I love the interview was crazy. Yeah. And when he was like, I couldn't I couldn't let him fucking win just based on what I how bad he was going to disrespect me after he beat me. Mm. The shit he was going to say on the mic. Yeah. I was like, no, I wasn't going to happen. I love that. I love that. Sometimes you fuck with the guys head so much that you give him fuel to recover and survive when he might not be able to ordinarily. But the thing about Gachi is that he has zero quit in him. You can't get him to quit. He's never going to quit. It's like you could break his body down like Max Hawley did and knock him unconscious. And there's nothing you do about that. You get knocked unconscious. You're knocked unconscious. It's just physical. Yeah. I've never seen I've never seen Gachi like that. You know, in the max fight that was no. And I love Max and I just yeah, that was like shocking. Yeah. It was pretty crazy. It was pretty crazy. It was that was and then to have him go from that to become the world champion just a year and a half, two years later, whatever it was. It's a big amazing six story. Yeah. It's a great sport man. I mean, there's nothing like it in terms of like the true intensity and the emotions and the excitement. There's nothing like it. I think the last time I saw you was at a UFC at the apex. I think that's the last time we went into each other. And gone one. Steve, I thought was that what it was? Wow. Wouldn't that crazy? Oh, being in that small venue when that happened was like small venue. No audience. Why it? Like maybe 50 people in the whole room, maybe a hundred in the whole room. You could hear a needle drop. Yeah. It would happen. I think that's the first fight I took my wife to and she was like, what? Like yeah. Oh, that was a devastating fight too. And that was also you have a heavyweight fight in the small octagon. So the apex for people that don't know has an octagon that I think is 30 or 40% smaller. Damn, is it that much smaller? Yeah, how much smaller is let's put that into perplexity, ask it. How much smaller is the UFC apex octagon versus the regular octagon that they use in arenas? And you're trapped into a Francis exactly exactly. And also Francis looking for revenge. Yeah. Because this is a steep A beat Francis in his first loss. Okay, 30%. 30% last base. That's a lot, man. 30% is crazy. So you could see the images there. The when you see the apex next to the big one, the paper view one, like that is a lot of space. And you're just stuffed in there with a guy who is one of the absolute scariest fucking guys that's ever lived. And you can't move. You know, it's not a lot of movement. A lot of people like that because it's kind of, you know, forces action. I think the space provides more of a canvas, you know, no pun intended for them to paint their masterpiece. You've got to be able to have angles to get out. And if you're just constrained by an object, which is a fence, when maybe if that object wasn't there, you could move to the side, move in and counter. You know, I think like when Sugar Charlemali knocked out Algomaine Sterling, an algemaine is pressing forward. Now, if the cage was closer, he wouldn't have been able to move back as far. Like it cuts off a lot of the possibilities. Yeah. That's off a lot of things. That was another shocker, right? Oh, it was amazing. Yeah. When Sean did that at the White House and saluted, when he knocked out that guy and then and the walk off and it's hard. So hard. And he said he envisioned it, which is even cooler. Like he saw it in his mind. Mm-hmm. Yeah, that was great. He had actually, we were texted back and forth. He's like, I need to knock him out. And I was like, when it happened, I was like, oh, that's, that's just like right off into the sunset, you know? Well, in his position, he really needed something special because Marab versus Pio D'Ion wasn't formula, wasn't formally announced yet. And it was thought like maybe if Sean had a spectacular event, he could get the next shot of the title because he has a victor over Pio D'Ion. That didn't come to be. So now Pio D'Ion and Marab are having a rematch. And after that rematch, if I had a guess, it's most likely going to be Sean fighting for the title again. And he has that win over Peter. So that's exciting, right? But he doesn't have a win over Marab. So Marab wins the title again. He's going to be like, fuck! Yeah, it's like he said, style make fights. Yeah. I mean, it doesn't mean that he can't beat Marab. I mean, I think Sean could beat anybody. It's just he's got to figure out whatever it is that he needs to figure out to solve that puzzle that is that little Georgian Tasmanian devil that never gets tired. Yeah. Just he's like the energizer rabbit, like just keeps going. Did you ever see what Marab's face looks like when they did like an X-ray of his face and MRI? No. That just broke a nose? No. It might be the most insane broken nose of every scene of my life. And he says, not going to get it fixed. He's not going to get it fixed. Because then he'll have to take a year off of fighting. Not only a year off of fighting, I don't think you can even spar for a long time. So that's what his nose looks like. Wow. You know what looks like? Do you know who Puss Head is? No. Okay. Puss Head is the illest artist ever. He did like misfits. He did like Metallica stuff. He did these skulls. Tell me that doesn't look like that. That looks like Marab's face. Right. Right. Right there. So he's the hell he really did like Zorlax skateboarding. He did a bunch of thrash stuff. Wow. Yeah. Dude. Exactly. When we got it. Yeah. Marab's got to do a skull t-shirt or some kind of merch with that. And look at this. He's totally should. That should be his leg logo. Look at that nose, man. Look at the break of the bone. How hard it's turned towards his right eye. I mean, it's really insane. I mean, he must not have any ability to get oxygen out of that nose. Yeah. His cardio must be all mouth breathing. Which is even more insane when you think about how much endurance that guy has. Yeah. Look at his nose. I mean, it's crazy. The twist in that thing is fucking insane. I mean, it's like it covers part of his vision. Yeah. I feel like he's been out what? Six, seven months now. It's been a while. Yeah. I was in a while since he fought again. I mean, but it was because he lost the title to Pjodor and now they're going to have a rematch. And what he had defended the belt three times in that year, right? I think it was three times. Yeah. Well, it was definitely a strength of schedule was tough because you're going through these camps. You have these brutal weight cuts. It's like your body gets worn out. But then there's also Pjodor Jan who had fought Mora before and lost to him and realized what was necessary to beat the guy and fought a perfect fight. Yeah. That performance was amazing. Jan is a fucking assassin too, man. He's a scary guy. He's a ruthless, mean, technical, vicious guy. And now you know, he knows that he can beat Moraab. So it's going to be interesting to see like who makes the adjustments in the rematch. When is that happening? Is that scheduled? The Moraab fight? I think it is. I don't know what it is, but I'm 90% sure that they've scheduled that fight. That might be Salt Lake City. Is that the Salt Lake City fight? I don't know. But it's exciting. Yeah. It's a great time for the sport. I mean, the sport is on fire right now. That's as TBD. TBD. But it is announced? No, I mean, no, the Salt Lake City has a TBD for the vote. But does if you look up Moraab versus Kewter Jan too, does it say where it's happening? Usually it says his next fight on the thing I'm looking at it. It doesn't have anything popping up. I'm pretty sure they've announced that that's happening. LA card, it looks crazy. You going? Yeah. It's pretty fun. Yeah. Are you touring right now at all? What's going on? No, I'm just in the studio this year. I finished writing and producing a few albums and then was finished in this doc. So what is the LA card right now? It's Pantosia versus Joshua Vann. I'm seeing a post that says it's reported to happen in Abu Dhabi in October. Oh, the rematch with Kewter Jan and Moraab? Yeah. Okay. That's the same. That would be a good one for Abu Dhabi. Yeah. Yeah. The LA card's going to be sick. That's good to be sick. It's Armand Sarukian versus Mauricio Hufi. That's going to be insane. Like Conno versus Ortega? That's this weekend. Oh, sorry. Which one did you want? On the LA card. Oh, my bad. No worries. That's it. So the rematch between Joshua Vann and I'm going to see what happens. Yeah. Man, that Pantosia arm break was such a bummer. Yeah. To have them fall back like that. Yeah. Moraab Khan over versus Brian Ortega. Yeah. It should be fun. Gable Steve is in this again. Cheetah. Yeah. Against Charles Jordan. Yeah. Conoverse is Brian Ortega. Yeah, it should be fun. Gable Stevenson's can Cheeto. Yeah Against Charles Jordan. Yeah, should be fun Ellie crowds are always fun too because UFC doesn't get to LA very often. It's always pretty hyped up Yeah, I'm excited when it comes to LA I love Vegas, but something about LA, you know you still like living there Los Angeles. Yeah, yeah, I love it I mean do you feel any difference over the last five years six years since the pandemic? Yeah, I mean for me my goal is to not drive past Dessoto That's that's the goal. That's like my living is is wake up with you know my wife and my kids Go to the studio come back. Why I actually I just bought a Garage where I keep all my cars so someday I'll leave my house It's a it's a three-mile run. I'll run To my garage pick up one of my old school cars drive to the studio then drive back home. That's the perfect day Oh, that's nice. Yeah. Yeah, if you could do that and avoid the the real chaos that's the the center of the hive of LA yeah once in a while I'll get out if it's like You know someone's a show or something that you know me and the wife want to do or Me and the kids but other than that at studio home studio home train smart. Yeah. Yeah, that's definitely a better life Yeah, I have friends that live in the heart of it like in West Hollywood and like what is it like like it's not the same Yeah, it's not the same. It's just yeah, I couldn't do it the days I'm in this city. I have a bunch of stuff. I'll hit, you know like I'll go to crossroads. I'll go do whatever but It's rare Yeah, I can only imagine yeah. Did you ever think about getting out? I don't know if I could do it yet. I think like For what I do You know besides like playing in blink or touring when I'm home I'll get a call and they'll say hey, hey, can we come out of the studio? I want to make this with you I want you to play drums on this I'll see Game walking in my neighborhood. I need you on this record. I'll I just there's so much that happens right there for me Um, I think they'll come a time where I don't need to be there, but right now I feel like I Mean demanded I'm playing on a bunch of stuff and I'm recording a bunch of stuff. Mm. So it makes sense for me Do you ever have some thought about like living in the country and retiring somewhere or just like laying back? Yeah, we we were on tour and there was a huge storm in Nashville area so We were in Franklin for a few days Franklin Tennessee and we immediately started looking at houses like that We got to go here, but we kind of do that everywhere. We go You know, we you know, you travel you go on vacation. You're like we want to live here. We want to get a spot here But I do I do love Southern California We have a spot up north. I can Santa Barbara. I love Santa Barbara as well Um, I love the desert. It's not a bar resolve. I feel like moving around in Southern California keeps things Fresh like going to the desert for a week or a few days going to Santa Barbara And then during the week staying in Calabasas or like Los Angeles and you know working over there The Montecito areas and saying yeah, Montecito so gorgeous And I also feel like the desert like Coachella out there is You feel like you're in a different world. You feel much further away from LA and all the chaos that then you are Yeah, it's cool. Yeah, no doubt. I mean how many people have gone out to the desert Just trying to find themselves. Yeah, true. It's it's a very unique environment out there. Yeah Just kind of weird that they decided to put music festivals out there. I know Wild, you know, one of my best friends I When I when I left home at a Around like 16 17 my dad had given me a couple options to uh He said join the military like me Start paying rent or take off so I took off right Was a trashman on the Gonna Beach for a while then I moved to Riverside and I lived with my friend Bill fold He had this this promoting company called 98 Posse and he would do everything from raves to punk rock shows hardcore shows Anything and he ended up starting Coachella and oh wow Just been he was obsessed like what we talked about earlier He was one of those people that were obsessed and uh and I watched him build this amazing Festival and yeah, he's just pretty pretty awesome But the city of Coachella Is it's crickets though all the rest of the year. There's nothing it gets so hot It's 115 most businesses close down halfway You know through the day they're open for the morning and then when Coachella happens they're the city thrives and it's just You know chaos Are they happy with that that seems like there's probably a lot of conflicted people I Don't know I don't own a business out there, but I bet for everyone That's struggling when it's 115 120 and no one's coming out of the house right I feel like they're almost Like Coachella saves them like the festival saves everybody. Oh definitely just the volume of people in the town Volume of people that comes through. I think saves all the businesses for sure Yeah, but business when we're out there and it's not like the season or whatever they call it and it's considered too hot most businesses are open from Nine to one p.m. That drive out to the desert though. It's like Better make sure your air conditioning works. Yep, and no old school cars Don't be taken none of your old school cars on that trip. Well, don't the only thing I've driven from LA to Lakita out there is Have you ever heard of velocity? Yeah, um, I got a K5 from them. Oh nice you could drive that out there, but nothing There has one of those. Yeah, they're sick. Yeah, he got one of their blazers. They make such a great K5 mm-hmm. Yeah, he loves his I think I see his yeah, it's not black. Oh, it's brown. It's brown. I'm colorblind. Are you really? I'm fucking severely colorblind I have to ask my two and a half year old son what color things are sometimes So bad it is like I'll be like what what colors your favorite and then he'll tell me what colors times Does that look black to you? Kind of yeah That really looks black to me. Yeah, well, that's pretty okay. That's in the shadows. That's like I have all all looks like I have a all black one What a sick look and truck So a lot of people build these K5s and they do restomods, but they They're either overbuilt and they don't drive great or it's like a It's it's over it's either overbuilt or it doesn't run great or they do too much like This isn't overdone. It's they make the perfect rest of it's reliable. Yeah, it's reliable. Oh, yeah, there's mine. Oh Nice. Oh, you got a very old school looking. I love it. Yeah, I wanted it to look almost like bone stock You know, I have a couple K5s, but this is the velocity when I have a I have an OG orange one with platinum terrier That's 72 that still has the the old school engine and everything. Oh really? Mm-hmm, and it just stays in Palm Springs, and that's where we tried that one. This is it have the old school breaks too No, yeah, fuck that that's it right there. Oh, no. See how it looks like it shouldn't leave Pumpsprings is you know my wife drives that a lot. Oh, that's cool. Yeah, K5's are dope I have a 72 Bronco from icon sick. I call him as great. Yeah, they made a blazer. Yeah, they did I almost bought it It was so good, and he's so cool. Isn't John. Yeah. Yeah, I feel like he he kind of set it all off Jonathan Ward. Yeah, that's the one. Okay, so I built I built that with Delmo and a couple people around LA. I just took it from shop to shop This was my version of a velocity But it didn't drive as good as a velocity restaurant. Well, it's also you're so lifted. Yeah, like the handling on the thing must be rough Going around corners and shit. It was really cool. I was really proud of it. It's beautiful. Thank you That's very cool looking. There's something about that iconic this design There's something with the way those things look like we do that kind of looks awesome I just remember as a kid seeing topless Chevy trucks like no, I'm like what this is it doesn't get any better than this Yeah, it is a there's a weird thing about old school cars. They just they spark something in you Yeah, they're more excited like I like new cars. I love new cars. They're cool But they don't have the same feeling. There's something about those old schools that just like it's mechanical like you're connected to it You know, yeah, I mean, I'm a sucker for old Chevy's and Cadillac's and I have a bunch That's like how many cars do you have? No, I think I have 12 I have a lot of old school in Paulus. Really? School in Paulus 65's I have a 59. Oh, whoa. Really? Yeah. Yeah, I have a 62 wagon in Paula 63 convertible in Paula 60 Cadillac G&X 60 Cadillac or wow, oh, it's it's so do you have a picture of that thing? I think it might it might be on the interweb somewhere 1960 Cadillac's were crazy. Oh, that's my old that's my old 1960. Caddy. I used to have that Look at that thing That is wild good luck parking that and nothing feels like that when you drive those cars Oh, I imagine it's a boat that feels like you're in the middle of the Queen Mary. Yeah Look out. That was my 53. That's yours the far right. These are all my my cars in my collection from at some point in my life Yeah, so you're an old soul, dude. I am there must be there's something about you that connects with these things Yeah, old cars move. I don't know. I like the smell of them. I like everything They're just hard to maintain. You got a really good man kak mechanic It's hard. You know what kind of feels old school that I got recently that um But that's new is the Chevy Fox truck. What is that things a fucking beast? See if you could pull it up. It's the Fox The Fox Chevy Silverado Is this a new part of it's recently it's Chevy's answer to the the Raptor or the the TRX that's mine right there So it's usually they usually have orange accents, but I did all mine matte black Um, so it's just I think it has six or 700 horsepower It has like Baja suspension. You could drive it anywhere. So it's just like a Raptor. Yeah. Why do I not know about this? That's crazy The Fox factory Silverado. That's my daily Fox shocks. Yeah, so Fox shocks that are collaboration with them Yeah, the guts like you could literally jump this truck wherever the fuck you want, you know So that's your daily driver. Yeah. Yeah. I have a Raptor. I love the Raptors too. I have a Hennessy Raptor R. Oh, those are hard It's fun That's beautiful truck. Yeah There's something about those kind of trucks too. That's exciting Thousand horsepower trucks are ridiculous. It's like how do they look at that thing? Yeah That's so crazy Do you ever take it on the dunes? I haven't yet when they when I bought it they came out to They came out to the desert and brought a couple and we just whipped them around the desert and We're supposed to plan a day where we go out and jump and do everything and they're like we'll even let you use one of your Art trucks so we don't fuck up yours. I was like, oh, that's nice. I appreciate that. Yeah, because it is all carbon fiber Fenders it's pretty cool. Yeah, so they stretched it out and widen the wheelbase and everything. Yeah, and you can't even buy them in the States Like you have to I mean in California you have to I had to ship it from Vegas because of all of the Extras because it's supercharged Well, so California won't let you buy it. Oh, I had to go through this process of pretending I bought it somewhere else Yeah What a goofy fucking sta- Yes, super happy with it. We are doing another studio and we're gonna do a studio at the circuit of the America's race track And so like this. Uh-huh. Cool. Yeah exactly at that place that race track Yeah, so which is in Austin and so what we're gonna do is have it set up where you're gonna be able to go around the track Well, we'll you know do some laps and then pull in and then have a podcast cool I love that which would be great because you'll I feel like for your mind your mind will be so jazzed up After you do a bunch of laps on a race track, but you'll come in you'll be like ah Oh ready to go sure it'll be really fun because I bet some people route themselves up like to come up in here and get really nervous or like I don't know yeah some people do it's crazy. Yeah, well you've done it a bunch You you you and I've talked and hung out before so it's like it's easy Yeah, for some people it's like doing anything that's got a lot of views get some weird out It's hard. Yeah. Yeah, I think you were honestly one of like the first podcast idea besides like Rich Roll Back in the day, but how's Rich doing he's great. Okay. Yeah, he was he had some health issues, right? I think I think he just had like a Back surgery or something. Yeah, but he's all and he's so cool He reached out. I mean he just reached out a couple days ago saying I love I love your doc and I'd really love to talk to you again So I'll definitely visit him But when I was when I started my running journey he had reached out. It was like anything you need. Oh, that's cool Yeah, he was super nice guy. So cool. Yeah, very very nice guy But yeah, I've read something about him having back problems And I always get sad when I hear about people that have back problems and I hear they had surgery ago. Oh, it looks fucking great Looks like he's Yeah, fucking shredded I feel like if you're running all the time or training all the time you're bound to have some type of injury to The back thing scares me though when people get surgery because there's a lot of options other than surgery that are probably going to be better for most people Yeah, depending upon the situation of course. I broke my back in four places in my accident Oh Jesus, and I didn't know about it because I was laid out in a burn center for six months and I never Got any surgeries like my doctor exactly said what you to said. It's like you healed perfect like it's me doing surgery I can't guarantee you'd be any better place than you are now Yeah, so I have friends that have had back surgery and they have gotten better because of the back surgery But I also have a lot of friends that got back surgery and they never were the same again And they had to get another back surgery and then another one and they have nerve damage and their arms go numb and then they have atrophy in their limbs and Surgery sketch well it can be but there's other ways around it when it comes to like disc issues And this is one of the things that I try to highlight to people there's PRP. There's there's a place in LA and Santa Monica called Life cycle is that it They but they do something called regenicine and regenicine is a type of I've gone to them a bunch of times How can I not remember the name of it? Isn't it life cycle life cycle Santa Monica? What's life span life span sorry life span Santa Monica life span medicine phenomenal place Shout out to Moshe my friend there, but they Do PRP, but it's a different kind of it's called Regenicine and what they do is they take your blood They pull it out of your body They spin it in the center fugence and do some sort of process to it and then they Re-injected into you the next day into the discs and it's an insanely potent anti-inflammatory agent and it was the first thing that I did that ever Fix my bulging discs where I had bulging discs in my neck to the point where I was getting numbness in my fingers Yeah, all from jujitsu damn and it was really getting me to the point where I was like I don't think I could train anymore like every time I train them in agony like I it keeps getting worse and I would go Know chiropractor and he was full of shit and they they weren't helping me at all and then This regenicine thing and like within a week I started feeling better two weeks later no more numbness no more tingling in my fingers and then within a couple of months after that I was fully healed. I got another MRI my disc had come completely gone back in place Wow, it's game too. Yeah, because it was pulling it was pushing out and pressing against the nerve It was causing pain like nerve pain in my elbow and in my it was the ulnar nerve same nerve that you were talking about scary Right? Yeah, getting like tingly feelings in your fingers. You can't feel them. Yeah It was also one of these things where I was like, okay, I think I might be done with jujitsu Like this is a real problem, but I got back into it because of this so the regenicine fixed that and then I've also had stem cells now like stem cells especially if you go to a place that really is on top of everything and Then they're using state of the art stem cell technology like there's a lot of places you have to go out of the country Like CPI down in Mexico. It's gonna ask you is there places in the states now ways to well ways to well right here in Austin is the best place I've ever been to I haven't been to the places overseas, but I've had phenomenal results with ways to well And I brought a bunch of people in that have had fun. I look we just brought John Jones in recently He's a hip problem. Says hip feels much better. He said We brought a bunch of MMA fighters in aljimene Sterling who was just here a couple days ago He was there ways to well in Monday and so ways to well as like my friend Brigham who runs it is it's literally like state of the art Whatever the fucking science is at the moment. He's on top of it. They've got hyperbaric chambers They've got red light therapy. They've got every every single method of treating injuries and recovery They they're always on top of everything. They have a full gym down there. It's really sick. It's an awesome place But for you being you know either when you're out here if you ever want to get treated if there's something wrong If you have an injury you could definitely go to here to ways to well You could also go to Tijuana like Tijuana where the CPI is that's the place that has the they have a partnership with the UFC The cellular performance Institute in Tijuana amazing place Wow, I know the guys who run it and that's another very similar state of the art place, but they aren't restricted with the type of there's different restrictions in America in terms of what you can and can't do down there It's the Wild West you can kind of do anything and so I know a lot of people that have had pretty phenomenal results going there Yeah, I'm wondering I have this I Have this gene factor five Where I claught really easy. I wonder if I could do it What's find out what why would that? Like for example, I can't do IVs Really mm-hmm. Okay, because I have really thick blood. I have a blood disorder Wow, really easy and that's a genetic variant. Yeah. Well, I didn't really know about it when when my accident happened I had a bunch of clots and just so I put a filter that lives in my body forever It's like a permanent filter that kind of like funnels the blood. So it doesn't get stuck. Where's the filter? It's like between my back and my stomach Wow, yeah to stop Anything coming up like big clots from my leg. Holy shit my heart on my head. So a filter. Mm-hmm. What's it made out of? It's Plastic unfortunately because I've read a bunch of out of I went on this whole journey because when I found out about it And they said we had to put this in you or you could have died because she had huge clots But you can't remove it and They have a life expectancy of about 20 years and then sometimes the filter breaks inside of you or oh You cause whatever but uh Yeah, just have PMA positive mental attitude. It's not gonna happen. Um, how long ago did you get it put in? It was like my accident Whatever year that was 2008 so it was almost 20 years ago. So you might have to get it taken out You can't take it out. Oh It's cemented to the wall. Oh, yeah, so like you can't you can't do anything with it now now About 10 years later. They started making ones that are removable Yeah, mine's not removable. IBC filter. Yeah, that's exactly they can't take it out and put a new one in that's removable Is your positive That seems crazy. They say the the surgery to take it out would be more life-threatening than leaving it in Wow, yeah, and so what happens if this thing breaks and fails? so Ironically it could do the same thing a clock would do It would go up to your heart or your head Kill you. Oh fuck man That's it, huh? I V C filter devices to blood clots and prevent them from traveling to the heart and lungs Wow, do you have to take any kind of medication for this? Just Blood thinner when I when I fly just because I know I know I clot or if I'm if I'm on a tour bus for long long periods of time I got to take a blood thinner But then I don't take them every day because it's also a risk to be on blood thinners and if you get a car Yeah, whatever any kind of cut yeah, but I honestly I forget about it. I forget it's even in there just but yeah Just like but you know how some people will go on they'll do a marathon and they'll get an An IV can't do that or I just have to really be cautious about getting poked Yeah, I had a I had a an incident that happened years ago where someone was just trying to find my vein and she had poked me tons of times this nurse and I had 30 clots just in one of my arms Holy fuck dude, so yeah, I've also learned the The lesson of not being really cautious and what happens, you know, yeah So I can't believe you still spar when you have that that seems nuts because like You get leg kicked and develop a clot in your legs Yeah, I could My doctor's pretty cool and he doesn't Over worry about too much or anything. He said I'd rather you not have a Blood thinner in your system if you're playing drums and you cut yourself open or if you're boxing or light sparring So yeah, I mean knock on wood so it's called factor five factor five Yeah, and it's just a rare genetic condition. Yeah Wow, I think a lot of people have it. I think there's I don't know how rare it is but Yeah, the people do you can have half a gene or a full gene and I have the full one So I'm really prone to clotting where my kids like my one daughter Alabama. She has half of it So it's not as concerning but she has to be cautious Huh? Whoa, yeah, and is there anything you can do with the supplements or anything like that that aids that uh Like a natural blood thinner is beat beat juice or like beat shots So I pretty much have one every day Baby aspirin beat juice is supposed to aid also in like oxygen utilization, right? Yeah, I mean it was Literally actually the guy who told me about that. It was the pre-workout before pre-workouts real. Yeah Yeah, people would just slam beat juice or a shot at beat juice. I do it every show Beat juice Beat shoot beat juice like an hour before you go on stage drink you about one cup 250 milliliters of beat root juice daily can help lower systolic blood pressure The top number by a few points the natural dietary nitrates in beats convert Into nitric oxide in your body which relaxes and widens your blood vessels to improve blood flow Oh, so it's like nature's Viagra Yeah, it is basically. Yeah. No, that Intention might go to ginseng. I love ginseng. Oh ginseng is awesome for energy. So good Yeah, it's kind of amazing how many different natural remedies there are that really work And we were all sort of brainwashed when we were younger to think that the only thing that's good for you Are drugs from the pharmaceutical company that if you have anything wrong with you the medicine is all medicine that's Petroleum-based pharmaceutical drug medicine and that's what's good for you and all that other herbal stuff is all for retards It's all for nonsense and hippies and people that don't read books. Well because they brainwash us. All right. Yeah I don't take any medicine. I don't take Advil, Tylenol good for you anything That stuff that the thing about Tylenol or Advil I should say for People that take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory is like ibuprofen. That stuff is terrible for your gut Is it Tylenol super bad for you now? Well, Tylenol Well, there's a really sad story that I read during the pandemic of this lady who had COVID and she was in so much pain That she kept pounding Tylenol and she died from liver toxicity Because Tylenol which has acetaminophen in it kills people every year. How many people we've I know We've looked this up before, but I don't remember the number, but it's not a small number of people die from acetaminophen poisoning From things like Tylenol every year. It's quite a few. Yeah. Yeah, it's like you think oh Tylenol's not gonna kill. Yeah, it's just like a pill and it won't if you just take one or if you take two or whatever You're supposed to take but if you take a lot you're fucked 500 death per year Largely through overdose related acute liver failure Some estimates put it roughly full. What does that mean? 458 about 500 reasonably shorthand. Yeah, I see the benefit is fucking poisoning It can get you You know if you take a lot of it and yeah, the I don't think that's the same with ibuprofen I don't think there's a lot of ibuprofen deaths, but I do know that my friend Cam Haynes who runs I love can if you're madam. Yeah, yeah, we run together. Oh really? Yeah. No shit He actually did one of my you know how saying I'm like really into temple training where like you'll temple train You'll do like a vigorous like Resistance weights and then you'll sprint. You know he came and did what we mean. He was like Fuck drive. He was like that was that was a lot. You know And we went on the we we run anytime he's in LA. I love cam like people get self-pissed that were friends Why because they're like how do you like someone that hunts? I'm like cuz that's my guy. I love him I don't care if he hunts. I don't care Who he votes for I don't care what he eats like that's my dog I Gave me a bow it was so cool. We shot it up my studio Um It was so he's so cool and I think likewise probably a bunch of people are like Why you homies with a vegan cam? Whatever whatever whatever people think, you know like we uh I love cam. I think there's way more Accepting people on the other side than the vegan side the vegan side is very hardcore Those people get very adamant about like not being around other people that don't share their values or I don't care what anyone does That's good, you know, I love everyone the same. I don't care what president you vote for I don't care if you're gay straight. I don't I don't care about anything, you know, I just Judge people if they're a good person. I agree. Um, and that's how we all should be But yeah, I met I met cam. I showed up to uh, I actually showed up to Tom and um Burt's like 5k was the first time I ever ran and um I just showed up my my homie Toby invited me and I said fuck I'll go run a 5k with our new ran a 5k I always run by myself just because I like running and I show up there and uh Right when I get to the starting line cam greets me and I don't know who he is He's like what are you gonna pace today? What what's your number? And I'm like fuck if I know He's like uh what about you and he gave me some number and he's like what are you gonna do? I said I'm gonna try to keep up and I just ran my ass off like I I just like tried to keep up with cam And then uh and then we just stayed friends after that. Oh, that's awesome And I did pretty pretty good in that 5k actually Um did way better than I thought I would have you know That's awesome. That's awesome. Yeah, and then we became friends and he's one of my best friends. Yeah, he's a lot of the death Um, what I was getting at was that he um was taking ibuprofen who's taking 800 milligrams a day And I didn't know he was taking that lunch and I was talking on the phone once and he was telling me Yeah, I take 800 milligrams day. I was like whoa wait a minute How much I go you do that every day and I go why is I mean pain? I mean pain all the time and I want to keep running And so then I sent him some information that Rhonda Patrick Dr. Rhonda Patrick put out about the problem with ibuprofen the problem with taking large doses of it on a regular basis and what it does to your gut biome Dr. Ronda Patrick put out about the problem with ibuprofen. The problem with taking large doses of it on a regular basis and what it does to your gut biome. So he stopped taking and he said, well, fuck, I don't want to ruin my body. Let me just stop taking it. The pain that he was experiencing went away after he stopped taking 800 milligrams of ibuprofen a day. And he realized that the pain that he was experiencing was accentuated by the fact that he was causing an inflammation in his body by taking anti-inflammatory that we're destroying his gut biome. So he's taking us his gut was exactly. Exactly. So he's taking all this 800 milligrams of ibuprofen every day. It's torching his gut biome that's causing this cascade of inflammatory responses in his body. And he's in pain all the time. He gets off of the ibuprofen, the pain goes away. Damn. That wild. Yeah. And he's being washed and thinking, I need all these things. Meanwhile, turmeric and curcumin and there's a bunch of different anti-inflammatory that don't cause any sort of gut disturbance. And they're much better for you and healthy. And you can get it from food. Yeah. All the natural stuff. And then I feel like contrast therapy is so helpful to you know, like doing sauna colplunge, sauna colplunge. Oh, yeah. Anytime I'm injured, that's what I go to. I hit up cam actually one time and I was like, cam, I just did a half marathon. I'm about to do another one. What do you suggest? He's like, try to get yourself an ilk. I was like, can't remember who you're talking to, you know? So for you as the vegan thing, just all animals, it's an animal love thing. No, it wasn't even it is it is that like I am kind of under the thought process of if I love one if I have a dog and I love a dog, I love kind of love all animals, right? Like I love all animals the same. I'm not like I'm going to eat that one. I'm going to shoot that one, but I love my dog. Right. It's a little contradicting to me, you know, but but I didn't even know any of these things at a young age. I remember food will be put in front of me and they would be ham whatever and I would just naturally put the hand in my ham in my pocket and eat like the mac and cheese or whatever else the spinach. Because my dad had this rule. He's like, you eat everything you don't get up from the fucking table straight up. I don't care for you there for three hours that that's what it was because your mom spent time making the food. You got to eat the food. You don't leave the table. So I pocket it and then my mom would find it when she'd go wash clothes. So it started like that and then next was, oh, ham is actually this hot dog is actually this hamburger is this and I'm like, whoa, I just thought hamburger was a hamburger. I didn't really know. I just naturally didn't like I was already like not liking the taste or the texture, right? So I was like, okay, whatever. And so vegetarian from the time I was a kid all the way up until my accident and then after my accident vegan. So it wasn't really about animals. It was just at that time it was like I just I wasn't drawn to eat that stuff. It's not what I was into. I loved being in cheese burritos. I grew up on bean and cheese burritos from the other good beans. From where I grew up, you know, I mean in cheese burrito with hot sauce? Yeah, you can't beat it. So that's kind of like what I was raised on. But there's cheese and bean and cheese burritos. Yeah, so I wasn't vegan until 20 years ago. But you would have dairy. But do you ever eat eggs? Never. No, you know, if you have your own chickens, it's a pretty karma-free food. It's like I have chickens of 19 chickens and their pets. So they wander around the yard. Have a good time. Like, hey ladies, like there's they have no cruelty. No one's doing anything bad to them. They go into nest boxes and they lay eggs. And then you just gather the eggs. The eggs will never be a chicken because they're not fertilized. It's just food. Yeah. It's just free food. Me's not free. You pay for chicken food and you take care of them and all that stuff. But I mean in terms of like, it's karma free. Yeah. No one's getting hurt. Like literally no one is getting hurt. The chickens will lay an egg almost every day. Yeah. And so we have like baskets of eggs in my house. We always have eggs. I think for whatever reason now it's like anything and there's this amazing. It's actually, I think they marketed as a protein, a vegan protein, but you make egg whites out of it. And it's phenomenal. What's it mean? And it has the same amount of protein as egg whites do. Does it have the same amino acid profile? I think so. Maybe if it, see if it comes up. What is it called? I have it in my phone somewhere, but on my phone. Jimmy would probably find it. Yeah. And it's like, and it's not just egg or one of the basic ones. It's one that my daughter had sent me. And it's bananas. You make, you make all of them out of it. And it's just incredible. And you get tons of protein. But I think after I beef jerking in a hospital for six months, I was like, please, I'm going to be vegan. Watch this. And then I stopped. I stopped having anything that came from animals period just to see what it would be. Like, I don't have honey eggs. Yeah, no honey. And I just feel fucking good. I have tons of energy. I have no lack of energy. I feel great. I feel like I operate. I don't know. Just feel the best I've ever felt like how I am right now. Well, I mean, I think everyone's different. Yeah. And that's one of the cool things about having a bunch of different diets out there is a bunch of different options for people to try and find whatever works for you. Yeah. Even within my family, like my one daughter is vegetarian. My son eats me. My wife eats me. My youngest son has meat sometimes. It's like whatever everyone decides is what I'm cool with. That's awesome. And that's just what works for me. That's a great attitude. But I think you also have it dialed in. Like you have whatever diet you're on dialed in where you know you're getting the right amount of protein. And there's quite a few different plant sources of protein that have a complete amino acid profile. Yeah. Or the no hemp is more. Those perfect aminos that Gary makes. Yeah. Those are a game changer. You take five in the morning, five at night, game changer. Yeah. No, it's totally. But it was. I won't say it's like not hard to dial it in. It is difficult to dial it in. You got to navigate just like anything else. Right. There's so many people that they go vegan, but then they just eat like vegan pizza and they don't. Yeah. Crossroads, you're a restaurant. I still have never been. But everybody that I know that once is it's fucking phenomenal. Like even Dana who does not like Dana White who does not like vegan food. He's like, dude, it's fucking incredible. He goes, it's incredible. Yeah. I think when you probably don't know what to expect, right, when you go to a plant-based restaurant. Right. And the chef on from Crossroads is just, he's incredible. And the food, it's an afterthought that you ate something that was vegan. It's not even on the menu that it's plant-based. That's awesome. There's a place in the valley that I used to go to all the time. God, I can't remember the name of it. No, it was escaping me. Was it follow your heart? Yes. I close every day. Yes. That's so good. That place is great. Yeah. That's another completely plant-based restaurant. We used to go there all the time. Yeah. So lived in LA. Yeah. Follow your heart was pretty close. Yeah. They have a little cafe where you can eat in a grocery store. Yep. A supplement stuff. Yeah. It's great. They're nut burger. Oh, so good. It's like, really, I would crave it. Yeah. That's cool. I love just everyone being open-minded. And you know what I mean? Oh, yeah. I'll try anything. For me personally, what I've tried, I eat more meat than anything. I eat mostly meat. It's a mostly wild game. I put a lot of rib eyes and steak. And that just makes me feel the best. You know, I don't love animal cruelty. I don't like it. I don't think it's good in any way, shape or form. But I also realize that animals eat animals, life eats life. Yeah. And the thing about hunting is I'm in complete contact with where my food's coming from. I know the source of it. I'm there when the animal dies. I'm there. I do it. I participate in the whole thing. I carry it out of the woods, you know, I cut it up, bring it to a butcher shop and have it, you know, packaged in the steaks. I'm thinking of Cam right now because when he was in my neighborhood, you know we have deer in Calabassus. He was eyeballing him. Oh yeah. He was eyeballing him. I'm like, don't even fuck it, think about it. Of course he was. Yeah, he was like, oh look at that, look at that. Right behind the shoulder. I'm looking at him, like, oh look at the cool family of deer. He's like, oh shit, that's like food, you know? It's food. It's so funny. Well, especially him. But yeah, I totally, like I said, I get it, you know? It's cool that you're so reminded about that, that you do, and you're not judgmental. I think that's a great attitude to have that more people should adopt with everything, with political ideologies, religion, whatever it is. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just don't fuck like me. I won't fuck with you. I'd like to hear your opinions on things because I'd like to know where people, where they form their thoughts from, what's your perspective? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I hate when anyone from either side of things are so aggressive that we're at like, you just bum everybody out, you know? They do, and I also think that a lot of times it's not coming from a healthy place to begin with. I think a lot of people find a thing that they can use as an excuse to be an asshole. And whether that thing is their political beliefs, or their religion, or whatever, their social ideology, whatever it is, they find a thing that they can call you out because you fucking, you're the fucking reason man. You fuck you man. And it's just what's really going on is they're just looking for a reason to be an asshole. And they're not a balanced person, or a happy, healthy person. It's one thing, if someone is confronting you personally and yelling at you, and you're yelling back at them, and you're in an argument. But if you're starting that, initiating that, because someone doesn't, does someone disagrees with you, or doesn't see things the way they're doing? First of all, you're a shitty communicator, until you're probably a shitty person, because that's why you're behaving the way you're behaving. And you're using this point, whatever it is, whether it's being a vegan, or being a Republican, or being a Democrat, or being a Muslim, or being a Christian, or whatever the fuck it is that you've decided is more important than being civil and kind and courteous. What you really are is just a shitty version of a person. Whether you realize it or not, you probably don't even, probably think you're justified, and that's why you're doing it, and you probably think, I'm doing the right thing. And everyone's like, I love it that you have no chill. He's got no chill. He's a cunt. This guy's a cunt, and he's a miserable and sufferable person to be around. Regardless of what his belief system is, versus the other person's belief system. And if he had a perspective that was, I don't know why you think the way you think, but I think differently, let's have a conversation, you might find common ground. And you might be able to realize, oh, you can have friends that don't think the way you think. I have friends that are Muslims, I have friends that are atheists, I have all, I have gay friends. I have a ton of friends that are completely different than me. And that's fine. There's nothing wrong with it. I love them. It's great. Everyone doesn't have to be you. Everyone doesn't have to be the same as you. In order to have to agree with you. But there's too many people that what they're looking for is some reason why they're right and some reason to be an asshole to other people that don't think the same way they think. And they think that they're justified by it. And I think it's a real problem. It's also a real problem with social media, because those people, their voices get amplified and people pile in, yeah, you go boy, or you go girl. I feel like anyone who can look at, I mean, social media is it's corny to begin with, right? But you're going to go on Instagram, then you're going to say something extreme or fucked up to someone. It's like, yeah, you're so lame. Like that you actually took the time to think about writing something bad, then wrote it, then pressed send, like you fucked up. You don't even like straight up. Like anyone that's going to say or spew negativity. I'm like, yep. Yeah, I just had no place for it. Yeah. It's just weakness. And I guarantee you you're not doing the maximum amount you should be doing with your life with whatever you're pursuing. You're not, they're lacking something. Optimized, for sure. You know what I'm like? That's why they choose the time to just lash out at people or mischaracterize people or have the least charitable take on people. Yeah. It's usually they're lacking. They usually at least somewhat mediocre. There's always usually some flaw in their game and what they're doing and they're lashing out at other people. Which is fun. But it's also like other people can learn from that too. Like, God, it seems like a cunt. And then don't be a cunt. You know, yeah. Realize that and go, okay. Yeah, I kind of see that myself sometimes. Maybe I should be a little self correction. Yeah, you're like, I don't ever want to be like that. Exactly. It's great. Exactly. Or the opposite. When someone's like, has like a really objective, charitable take on someone. Like, hey, man, maybe he thinks this way and maybe the right way to approach it is to approach someone civilly. And we can find common ground. Like, someone you read someone saying something like that and you go, oh, I want to be more like that guy. Like that guy, like I like the way that guy thinks. Like that, that's inspiring to me. Like that to me, like that's probably a cool person to have a conversation with. They're not going to be, they're not going to use it as an excuse to be aggressive and excuse to be shitty and insulting and mean. Because you're not changing anybody's opinion when you do that. You're just not. You know, and will you, will you get the peanut gallery to pile in? Great. So you've got team cunt. You've got a little cunt farm behind you. And you're all attacking all these other people. And you think somehow that you're justified because there's some other flawed people that agree with you. That you're allowed to be shitty to people because they don't think the way you think or because they only plants or because they worship this God or come on. Yeah. The world like David Goggins has it figured out how he like, how he just listened to all his haters or whatever and he like runs or exercises. Like that's the, that's the shit. Like use it as a tool. You know, I think you're better off not even listening to the haters. He's saying every time I talk to him, like you're so insane. Yeah. I mean, like I said, yeah, anyone that's going to say anything is so, so lame right off the jump. Yeah. But there's a lot of lame people in this world. Unfortunately, because there's a lot of people that don't have a, you know, it's hard to be a person complicated. Yeah. People don't have a guide book on how to be a person and be happy. And I think you have to like, I'm disciplined. Like sometimes I'll read something and I'll be like, you motherfucker. Like, I'm like, oh, no, I can't do, I can't do what they do. Right. Like I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't stoop to that. Especially your Travis Barker. Yeah. You're a famous guy. Like if you do what they do, it's a different thing. Like if you go back at them, it's, that is one of the lameest things. When you see celebrities going at like fans in the comments, like what are you? Take your phone away. Take his phone away. Yeah. Who's letting we don't want to see you do that. The people who love your music or whatever. No, no, no, no, no, no. How many people have like ruined other people's opinions of them because of doing something like that or going on some lame fucking rant against someone because of the way they voted or the way they view this or the way they, you know, whatever it is. Luckily, like the hate, the hate, like I get the weird, I get the weirdest hate. It's not even really hate, but it's just something like they know they're like throwing darts from across the room at me is like, oh, bro, he's like a Kardashian now or he married a Kardashian. I'm like, motherfucker, that's the most punk thing I could do is marry a Kardashian and just say fuck you. You know what I mean? It's about like the like that even shows you I clearly don't give a fuck. You know what I mean? Like and my wife isn't like, I can't label her like that. She's my wife. She's my my soulmate, right? I love her to death. But to think like, have you seen me change? Well, that's what you've seen. Have you seen me like dressed it dog? I dress so different. Obviously than my wife or her family, like I've continued to be my own person. I'd look the same of where the same Dickies pants, the same band shoes. I've had the same tattoos that stopped me from getting a real job since I was 16 years old. Fuck you. You know what I mean? Straight up fuck you. And, uh, and that's why I mean punk rock is not about music either. It's about like you don't, you don't care when anyone thinks, right? As long as you're going through the world you're doing. Yeah, you are who you are and you're not hurting anybody. That's punk rock. I knew a lot of people thought it was cool that you guys got together. Like look at those two people from totally different worlds that love each other. That's cool. Oh, it's the best. It's the best. It's just only a hater would think that other way though, right? You know, um, but if you started getting on your tattoos, like you're not doing that. You started wearing designer clothes. Yeah, I started dressing like a lame and I started, yeah, of course, like to come for me, you know, right? Please, please. But yeah, that's like that's one that's always like fun needed me. I'm like, well, there's a problem with like, you know, whenever there's anything that's happening publicly, you're living your life publicly. There's always going to be hate. Oh, yeah. And Wayne said it. Lil Wayne said it a long time ago. I remember he told me he's like, dog you, you, you haven't made it until you have haters. You know, you're successful. The minute motherfuckers start hating on you. You ever seen cat Williams sit on haters? Oh, we'll pull that up. Oh, I bet it's great. He's got a fantastic bit on haters about people complaining about haters. It's a safe guy that they found it anywhere. Is he gets a cat Williams on haters? Come, I guess it does say haters on. Yeah, he's got a whole, I think the bits title haters. Okay, give me some volume. You got to get your motherfucking hustle. Understand that niggas is going to hate you regardless. Get that out of your head, that fantasy world where niggas ain't hating on you. You got to be grateful. You need haters. What the fuck is you complaining about? What the fuck do you think a haters job is to fucking hate? So let them motherfuckers do a goddamn job. What the fuck is you complaining about? Ladies, if you got 14 women hating on you, you need to figure out how to fuck to get the 16 before the summer get here. You mad about it. Amen. You got 20 haters, right? 40 of them motherfuckers. What is you complaining about? If there's any haters in here right now that don't have nobody to hate on, feel free to hate on me. Sit back there and say my hair ain't luxurious when you know it is bitch. That's so good. So true. So true. It comes with the territory. Yeah. This is the job we chose. This is the life we chose. You're going to get haters. Totally. But it's your, you know, it's your obligation to manage the waters. And you don't have to dive in and fucking never swing in their own shit and waddle around with them like pigs. Totally. It's not necessary. No, but it's a comfort world. Never would I. No. No. A lot of people do unfortunately, but it's also this is a new thing. Like this new thing where people have direct access to everybody. Like that on the line. If, you know, people choose to be on social media, like you have direct access to all kinds of people and they're going to read your comments and people know that. Yeah. If you're a person who reads comments and so they go and attack you and it's a weird world that a lot of famous people don't know how to navigate and a lot of people they get like severe anxiety because they do read that shit. And then they'll like hold up their home by themselves staring at their phone. You're in a fucking giant mansion living like a ball or you got a Ferrari. Meanwhile, you're in hell. Like I said, yeah, if you're not hurting anybody and it's like, you know what I mean? Like life's good. Yeah. Yeah. But also you'll feel better if you're not doing that. Totally. Or they say like if you do read it and you find any truth in it, like it's your chance to fix it, right? It's your chance to whatever or use it as like motivation, you know? Like God knows. Yeah. Even if the shit they're they're spewing is so false and fairy tale, it's like still, you know what I mean? Go, go lift or go box or go play drums or go do whatever you do, you know, use it that always feels good because yeah, none of it none of it really like sits with you. You know, well, it's supposed to. And I understand haters too. Yeah. I've always said this that if I was a 15 year old kid and someone who gave me a Twitter account, I could get a hold of someone like me and talk shit to them. I 100% would. Oh, yeah. Fuck yeah. As a kid. Yeah. I don't even know what it would be like because we didn't have it. But I also know like from where, you know, punk rock has always been very finicky, very, very sensitive, right? You know, the band gets popular. Everyone's like, I fucking hate them. They're on the radio. Fuck that band. Yeah, bands now they can they can eat. They can fucking you know what I mean? Pay a rant. Fuck them. You know, that's like that, you know, skateboarding, which I like changed my, my life and raised me. Skateboarding is also they're very strict, you know, about, about who can call them self-asscader or, you know, there's just all the, all these things. There's like, when, when all these things should just be celebrated, like skateboarding is fucking cool. It's like some of the coolest people in the world, you know, skateboard and, and skateboarding is taught most of the world, like how to dress properly and serious. Like, I mean, a lot of rappers basically nowadays just dress like skateboarders, skateboarders like set it off. Like they had the best taste from the jump. How do you think that happened? Well, how did skateboarders develop such a great sense of style in your opinion? I don't, I don't know. It's just, it's just one of those things. Like even from back in the day, like why that particular activity would have like a whole, like style associated with it. I mean, I grew up with like huge pants and like t-shirts and, and just bands, you know, skateboarding and beanies, you know, that's like, I don't know. But everything from the time skate videos were released, they were secretly, maybe they didn't know about it, but they were teaching everyone what the coolest music was. And at the time, music was so categorized like you're either a punk rocker, you like country, you like rap, you like that. Skate videos were everything. The illest best music of every genre. So a bunch of skate kids were going up, listening to Operation Ivy and loving the far side, you know. So it was like happily confused. They just knew the best of every world. It was different, you know. It's just interesting that a style of clothing is associated with a physical activity. Well, then you had Lil Wayne who learned how to skateboard halfway through his career and I feel like everyone around him looked to him for also style and started dressing like him. Oh, wow. So and some people don't even know. I feel like punk rock and skateboarding. I mean, play with Cardi where it's punk rock clothes. Is his whole aesthetic is punk rock, you know. Where did he get it from? Got it from punk rock, you know, like it was born there. And I hate gatekeepers, right? I love what he's done with it. And I love that all these new groups of kids that love Cardi and love can Carson are they're dressing like punkers. They might not even know it. They just think they're dressing like, you know, their favorite rapper, but it stems and it's rooted from punk rock and skateboarding. Wow. I can't think of another activity that has a style associated with it like that. Yeah. There really isn't like BMX people, you know, well, they have riders. Yeah. There were pads and stuffs. Maybe a mix was really cool. I love BMX, but yeah. But there's not like a like skateboard style that's associated with. Yeah. And skateboarding and punk rock were like this. Right. Well, it's rebellion, right? Yeah. Being an outcast. It's doing something that's either frowned upon or only other people. They're like you understand it. But it could have been right. Like skateboarding could have been, well, couldn't have, I can't even say this. Like, but like, it's a skateboard. It could have been athletic. It could have been sporty. Yeah. It was from the gekko. It was really and it was gritty and it was, it's also one of the hardest things as far as like that amount of falls and injuries you take. It would be a tough motherfucker to skateboard. Yeah. A lot of concussions. Yeah. A lot of guys when they're doing tricks falling their fucking head. The board hitting your shins over and over again, breaking arms, breaking legs. Yeah. It's a gnarly sport. Especially if you're doing it in these urban environments where people are trying to go down railings and street skating. It's like, it's just whatever you find while you're skateboarding down the street. You know, pretty cool. It is interesting that it has a style of clothing and dress associated with it. Yeah. And that it kind of mirrors like punk rock aesthetics. Yeah. And both the genres are pretty, very protective. You know, weird. It's cool. It is cool. But maybe it should be protected. Maybe that's why it's still so cool. You know, well, for them, for the people that are protecting it, like, it's, it means something to them. It's probably their haven from the standard society, the pressures of fitting in and conforming that they don't want. And so like this thing is like a church to them. Yeah. It's like sacri, it's like religious. I mean, when I was 13, I felt like an outcast. And it was skaters against jocks where I grew up. It was like jocks and you played football or you were a skateboarder, which basically he listened to punk rock music. He listened to faction and you listened to DRI, you listened to whatever. And we looked really different. So we were, we were outcast. Yeah. Yeah. All right. True wrap this up. Yeah. It was amazing. Brother, always good to see you, man. So good to see you. You can see it. Um, this documentary, when can people watch it? It's out on Hulu right now. Right here. And we're looking at this. The crash. And when I think about it, I have the worst flashbacks. I got people in the ground. I'm going to hear you. You're the f***ing enemy. Well, that's me. My mom said to me, it's just play drums. The drums are literally the heartbeat of the musical body. A lot of people came just to watch him. He just had this, oh, you're going to get picked up by a band. And you will be a star attraction. But don't even get yourself a job, boy. And he said, no, dad. I'm going to play in a punk rock band and I won't have a plan being. Rob. Yeah. Mark Aton come up to me and we said, our drummer just left. Would you consider playing? The show starts in an hour. They're all effortless. Things were just exploding. That was quite a wild ride. I was torn with blink and on stock. I was taking so many pills that I had to secure to guard whose only job was to watch me sleep and make sure I was breathing. It was all a blur. And then came the crash. Just fire and chaos everywhere. 65% of my body was bright. 27 surgeries. Falling from the sky like Icarus pride us to your head. I walk in the room and I don't cry, ever. We cried, bro. Cheyah Chris were like brothers to me. And then I am passing away in here later. Why am I here and everyone else's in? I had to ask myself who I was going to be after this accident. I could never truly understand what he went through. I had this burning desire to become the greatest person and father I could be. I'm going to change for a whole family and I feel like the broadest closer together. We loved him trying to cook her as going on bike rides. One more time. Knowing how close I got to not being here for my appreciation for life was something I can't even explain to you. Every hit is him communicating. He's storage in the world. Dude, he has got a crazy story. Oh, it's awesome. Thank you. Fuck. Thanks, brother. That's me. Wow, that looks awesome. Thank you. Thanks, brother. That's me. Thank you. Thank you. Bye, buddy