Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night, all day. Yep. Yeah. Well, it started out as a plain, clean table. This is a new studio. And then along the line, people give you a bunch of shit, and then it just starts piling up. And you have to figure out when, like, when do I empty this ashtray, when do I throw out some of these objects, when do I move them into storage? And then when I move them into storage, there always seems to be new ones that show up. So these are things, these are all things people have both. Bro, yes. Everything is something someone's given me. Except that they're all in the middle of our head. Oh, please don't give me anything. We're good. Thank you. Just, just your turn. Pretty self. It's fine. So thanks for doing this, man. Appreciate it. No worries. Thanks for having me. It's a very fascinating subject, because I've always wondered. Let's just explain. Tell everybody what you do and who you are. My name's Philip Gough. I'm a philosophy professor from Durham University in the north of England. And I spend most of my time thinking about consciousness. And specifically, I guess I defend this view, panpsychism, which is roughly the view that consciousness is a fundamental and ubiquitous feature of the physical world. So it doesn't literally mean that everything is conscious necessarily. The basic commitment is that the fundamental building blocks of reality may be fundamental particles, like electrons and quarks, have incredibly simple forms of experience. And then the very complex experience of the human or animal brain is somehow rooted in or derived from this very simple experience at the level of fundamental physics. So sounds kind of wacky, but I think more and more philosophers and even some neuroscientists are thinking, this might be our best hope for addressing the hard problem of consciousness and the scientific and philosophical challenges consciousness raises. Well, we are starting to challenge whether or not other things have something akin to consciousness, like plants. There's real evidence that plants both feel something when they're being eaten and react to it. The real evidence that they react to it they actually change their profile, the chemical profile, to make themselves taste disgusting so that animals will not eat them. And that could actually be replicated with noises of the leaves being chewed on, which is really fascinating. They've played tape recordings of caterpillars eating leaves next to trees. And those trees have triggered that response, this chemical response of whatever it is inside of them that makes them taste disgusting. Yeah. Yeah. The extent to which we've discovered how intelligent the kind of mental sophistication of plants is incredible. So the Monica Gagliano, for example, has done experiments subjecting pea plants to conditioned learning. So they all have lost dog idea that you run the bell every time. The dog gets food and then eventually the dog is so sort-salivating when the bell rings. But she's actually done this with pea plants. So she's taught them to associate the ultraviolet light with the hum of a computer fan. And eventually they started growing towards the hum of the computer fan. So there's been some kind of conditioned association there. And also the sophistication of trees and the life of trees to the extent that they're hooked up under the ground, what some people have called the wood-wide web. That even across species, there's kind of a sort of quid pro quo that the evergreen, the deciduous trees giving nutrients to the other way around, isn't it? The evergreen tree is giving nutrients to the deciduous trees when they've lost their leaves and then this being reciprocated. And so there's much more sophistication in the plant kingdom we previously realized. Now, but whether that is consciousness is another question. I mean, there's a core difficulty at the heart of the science of consciousness, which is that consciousness is not publicly observable. I can't look inside your head and see your feelings and experiences. We know about consciousness not from observation experiment, but just from our immediate awareness of our own feelings and experiences. So science is used to dealing with unobservables, fundamental particles, quantum wave functions, maybe even other universes, what none of these things are directly observable. But there's a really important difference in the case of consciousness because in all these other cases, we're postulating things that are unobservable in order to explain what we can observe. That's ultimately what we're in, you know, the standard model of particle physics. It's all about explaining what is publicly observable. But in the unique case of consciousness, the thing we are trying to explain is not publicly observable. And that is utterly unique and really constraints our capacity to investigate it experimentally. So it is, I mean, in the case of human beings, I can't directly observe your feelings, but I can ask you. Right. And I can scan your brain at the same time or maybe stimulate bits of your brain and ask you what you're feeling, what you're experiencing. And in this way, neuroscientists try to match up what kinds of brain activity are correlated with what kind of experience. And we can hopefully make some progress on that in the human case. But the further we get away from the human case, the harder it is to establish what things are or not conscious. I mean, some people are now starting to think there might just be real limits to our knowledge here because consciousness is not publicly observable. So there's a real challenge there, I think. It is a fascinating thing in that it's agreed upon, right? Like everybody knows that we have it. But then trying to figure out what else has it, we must rely on their reactions and motion. Like that's one of the things about plants, right? Like the motion is so slow, like the motion of their growth or of the expanding of the pedals of a flower. The motion is so small that we think of it as not being in motion at all. Yeah. I mean, actually, if you watch things of the plants sped up, it starts to look a lot more like something you'd want to describe mentality, even consciousness too. So maybe there's just something going on in a different frame of reference here. But yeah, I mean, actually, so the neuroscientist, Christoph Koch, had a bet with David Cha, the philosopher, David Chalmers. In the 1990s, that in 25 years, we would have completely established the neural, what is called the neural correlates of consciousness. You know, exactly what kinds of physical activity go along with consciousness. He bet him a case of wine, a case of fine wine. Did he pay up? Well, I think he's probably about to lose that bet because, you know, it's pretty much 25 years later. Yeah. There's just no consensus. There are different theories and there's just no consensus. And actually, I mean, it's exactly what you said. But because we can't observe it, we have to establish to do the science. We're not, you know, not even talking about the philosophy, the hard problem of consciousness yet. Just this scientific project of trying to map up, map which kinds of brain activity go with experience to do that. We have to set up what we can call detection procedures, kind of rules for mapping behavior to experience. So one of these might be if someone is having an experience, they can report it. Right. So some neuroscientists adopt that rule. If someone's having an experience, you can report it. So if you adopt that rule, then you can start to test whether someone's having an experience. But they're controversial. So other people doubt those rules. So some people who accept what's sometimes called the overflow thesis think that there's more experience than we can actually think or attend to. So if you think about your experience of your clothes on your body right now. So now I've said it, you might be attending to it and aware of it. But before I mentioned it, you weren't thinking about it, you weren't attending to it. It's an open debated question whether you're actually experiencing that, whether you can have an experience that you're not aware of that you're not attending to. And what stands you take on that philosophical question leads to different scientific predictions. So people who think there's a close connection between attention consciousness tend to think consciousness is in the pre-frontal cortex because that's where things like cognition, like working memory is. But people who think there can be more experience than we can attend to, they tend to think it's in the back of the brain. And it's just wildly different predictions. And then there's so much. So it's a real mess. The concept of your unconscious and subconscious thoughts, which are really just consciousness in different layers, it's not really unconscious or subconscious. Yeah, that's controversial. So I mean, the extreme version of, so some people think if you're not aware of it, you're not really experiencing it. So I mean, you know, to take all of your experience right now, all of these beautiful, slightly odd objects and you know, you experience the clothes on your body and the sound of my voice. So we know what we know experimentally is that you can't attend to all of that, right? The real limits to what you can attend to. So the question is those things you're not attending to, are they part of your experience that you're just not aware of? Some people think that makes no sense. If you're not aware of it, you're not experiencing it. Or the case where you're kind of driving along and you've, you know, you're lost in thought, you just on autopilot, were you actually experiencing the road or were you just on total unconscious autopilot? So there's a real debate just there. But I suppose for those people who think a whirness and consciousness can come apart, some people think there could be all kinds of really vivid experiences that were just totally unaware of. And then, you know, I mean, I think we're just in a way we're not at first base with that we're not even at that kind of hard problem of consciousness yet just in these scientific questions. We're really not in a first base in how to think about them properly. Well, the way we interface with the world as a, as a life form is based essentially on instincts and on genetics that have all been hammered into our system in order to keep us alive, right? I mean, that's, you can only concentrate on so many things. It's so many like you have to have a certain amount of concentration on your environment and the world around you. If you didn't have it, you didn't survive that passed on to where we are today. The concept of unconscious thoughts and of memories and things that this is also supposed to be like things you could rely upon for certain instincts that you have to avoid certain areas because this is this is problematic. This could cause you to lose your life. This could keep you from passing on your genes. Like there's a reason for all this stuff, right? When you get down to objects, though, like a thing having consciousness or some kind of consciousness, that's where we have to like, do we have to parse what it means to be a human being and why do we have all these hammered in instincts and thoughts? And there's certain instincts that animals have, like I have a golden retriever. He has not been around a lot of dogs to learn certain behavior, but there's certain things that he does that are baked into his DNA. Like one of them, unfortunately, he likes to roll around and fox shit. Nice. And it's got a friend. Does that as well? Let's just let it go. A human? Yeah. No, I was just joking. If you talk to anybody that has dog, they'll tell you that they're dog. If they find wild animal shit, sometimes in the woods, they will roll around for whatever reason. I don't know what that is, but it's clearly baked into what it means to be a dog, right? There's certain things that are baked into what it means to be a person. Now are those, what are those? Is that your DNA? Is that a part of your memories? Is that your consciousness? And is that the only thing that encompasses consciousness? Like does this table have a certain amount of consciousness? I've always felt like these tables, there's one of them that I have an LA that's like this and I've redid this one and why we're doing a new studio. It's like we need to get some memories into this table because the old table was rich with memories and it was kind of a joke, but kind of not. Yeah. Like there's certain places like the comedy store, for example. The comedy store in Los Angeles is a very old building that used to be seros nightclub. So used to be owned by Bugsy Segal and Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis used to play there. I'm just a classic old mob run nightclub that apparently a lot of people got murdered in. It was a mob owned place. And the people that worked there would all, I'm not all, a good number of them, an unusual number would have stories about like seeing an apparition or hearing someone talk who wasn't there. These ghost stories. Like what is that? Is that nonsense? Or is there a certain amount of memory in that building that echoes sometimes? A certain amount of the right moment with the right frequency, you tune into it and you catch a glimpse, you catch a whisper of the memories that are baked into a building. I mean, no one wants to have a house where someone was murdered in fact when you, in many states, they have laws. So they have to let you know if someone was murdered in that house or if someone committed suicide in that house because we have this feeling. like, oh, whatever that is, a still in there. What is that? Yeah. I mean, I know what you're talking about. I mean, I think these are difficult questions. Is this just associations we have or is this something we can't explain here? And I mean, these are ultimately kind of empirical questions that it's hard to settle. I mean, I suppose, fortunate for me in a way, I think the case for Ponce-Likers is based on much, you know, in a sense, much more solid data, just the reality of consciousness, the reality of feelings and experiences, you know, this inner world of colors and smells and tastes that, you know, each of us enjoy every second awakening life. And that's real. That is real. I'm not sure. I'm not sure where to turn those with senses, right? So if you have something that you say has consciousness like this coffee pot, what's the magic in this coffee pot? Yeah. That's some sort of a consciousness. What is it? What is it based on? So I think, yeah, there's a tendency to, so whenever people hear about Ponce-Likers and there's a tendency to think, oh, it's the kind of consciousness a human being has. So we're thinking like particles are feeling existential angst or wonder if it's Tuesday or something. Yeah. But, you know, well, I mean, it's maybe it's good to get clear on what we mean by consciousness because it is a bit of an ambiguous word and often people use it to mean something quite sophisticated like a wherness of one's own existence or something. And, you know, that's something I'm not sure a sheep has never mind a particle is consciousness and sentient thoughts or they went. I think I would just say consciousness is the way it's standardly used in the science and philosophy consciousness is just subjective experience. pleasure, pain, seeing color, hearing sound. Consciousness is what it's like to be you, right? And, you know, in this comes in all shapes and sizes, you know, in human beings, it's incredibly rich and complex. A sheep's consciousness is a bit simpler. Consciousness of a mouse, simpler again. And as we move to simpler and simpler forms of life, we find simpler and simpler forms of experience. So for the pan-psychist, this just continues right down to the basic building blocks of matter which have incredibly simple forms of experience to reflect their incredibly simple nature. So that's, I mean, that's one clarification that this is, we're talking about just very simple kinds of experience. But also, I mean, you say is the coffee pot conscious. I think most pan-psychists would not think the coffee pot is conscious. The idea is that the fundamental particles, perhaps a conscious, but maybe not every random aggregation of them is conscious in its own right. Although, although some pan-psychists do think literally everything is conscious. Luke Rolofz is very good, very rigorous pan-psychist philosopher. And he does think literally everything, including the coffee pot is conscious. But even then, you know, it's not going to be like sitting there wanting us to drink it. You know, that's the kind of consciousness you get after millions of years of evolution. Its consciousness is going to be just some kind of meaningless mess. Like the difference between the consciousness of a dog and a human, even though a dog is clearly a conscious animal, it's not having in-depth conversations about it's past and talking about what it wants for the future. So the pan-psychist is kind of like a Copernican revolution where you stop thinking about consciousness rooted in the idea of human consciousness. When did this start? Where did this line of thinking? When did this become a serious point of discussion? I mean, pan-psychism goes back to the start of philosophy and, you know, both East and West and Major Enlightenment thinkers were pan-psychists like Leibniz Bonoza. And in the 19th century, it was kind of a heyday for pan-psychism. But I suppose- How was it proposed? I mean, I suppose for the latter half of the 20th century this view fell out of favor and it's, you know, up until 10 years ago it's sort of hardly anybody took it seriously at least in Western science and philosophy. It's really just, I'd say the last five or 10 years it's really come back on the table as people are taking it as a serious option. One reason for this is in academic philosophy is the rediscovery of a really interesting approach to consciousness by Bertrand Russell in the 1920s, which was also developed by Arthur Eddington, who was incidentally the first scientist to experimentally confirm Einstein's general theory of relativity, which made Einstein an overnight celebrity. So I sometimes- Sorry, come. So what was Bertrand Russell's take on it? So, to Russell's starting point was to focus on how the mathematical nature of physics, that the story, the description of reality, we're getting from physics is just pure math, right? And this was the choice of Galileo, right? Back in the 1620s, he made the express choice right from now on. The language of science is going to be mathematics, right? And the maths has changed a lot. It's- you know, we have now imaginary numbers and non-uklydian geometry, but still right physics, trades and equations. So I mean, what Russell realized, right? So there's a couple of ways a philosopher can respond to the fact that physics is just purely mathematical, right? One approach is to follow someone like the physicist Max Teggmark and say, well, maybe it base reality just is pure math, right? Maybe we live in a mathematical universe. The other approach, and this is close to Russell's approach was to think, well, maybe there's something underlying those mathematical structures. Maybe there's something that those mathematical structures are the mathematical structure of- Right. So for the panpsychist in this kind of birch and Russell style panpsychism, at the fundamental level of reality, what we have are networks of very simple conscious entities. And these very simple conscious entities behave because they have incredibly simple kinds of experience. They behave in very simple ways, predictable, predictable ways. And through their interactions, they realize certain mathematical structures. And then the idea is those mathematical structures are the mathematical structures identified by physicists. So when we think about these conscious entities, in terms of the mathematical structures, they realize we call them particles, we call them fields, we call their properties mass spin and charge. But all there is there really are these conscious entities. So essentially what Russell realized is we can take the traditional hard problem of consciousness and turn it on its head, right? So the typical way people think about the problem of consciousness is you think you start with matter and you think, how do we get consciousness out of matter? I think that problem is unsolvable when we could talk about why. But what Russell did is is turn it on its head, right? Instead, start with consciousness and get matter out of consciousness in the way I've just described because physics is purely mathematical. If we can have facts about these conscious entities that realize those mathematical structures, then we can essentially get physics out of consciousness and that's much easier than getting consciousness out of physics. That's the basic idea. So I mean that sounds kind of weird because you think it means that when you're studying physics, you're learning about fundamental consciousness and you know that doesn't feel like what you're doing. But that's just because as a physicist you're just interested in the mathematical structures. You're not interested in what if anything underlies that's more of a philosophical question. And then the concept of the mathematical structures below the mathematical structures, the mathematical structures of the mathematical structures and that would be consciousness. Kind of. I mean I would say actually I would say that the mathematical structures identified by physics are the bottom level, right? In terms of mathematical structures. But there's something that fills out those mathematical structures. So I disagree with Max Tegmark that it's just pure math. It's there's something. So I mean the final page of the brief history of time Stephen Hawking famously said, even the final complete theory of physics will be just a set of equations. It won't tell us what breeds fire into the equations and makes a universe for them to describe. So for the pan-psychist, it's consciousness that breeds fire into the equations. So the concept of the consciousness, if you go back to the beginning of life, we basically had a bunch of amino acids and chemicals and eventually somehow some way through some process, it became a single cell organism. When did consciousness emerge? Does it emerge then? When you have this organism that's single cell to emerge where there's multi-cell organisms where it starts to split, it's to emerge when it starts to move and did it emerge when it starts to change environments? Like if you really stopped and thought about what consciousness is, just from a traditional perspective, like if a light bulb went off when it existed, like Bing, there's one, there it is. Now we have one. Like there conceivably was a point in time where there was none. And then all of a sudden it came out of these chemical processes. Did it come out of it just because there's predators and prey and had the need to survive? It had a recognized environment, view its threats and then form communities in order to have more protection because of numbers. What is it? Yeah. Actually, I mean the consciousness, there are difficulties apart from the hard problem of consciousness giving an evolutionary explanation of why consciousness emerged because it seems like what's important for survival is just behavior. So if you could have, there's notion of a philosophical zombie, right? Which David Charm is popular, popularized that a behavioral duplicate of a human being that has no inner experience, so there's nothing that it's like to be a zombie. So we need to distinguish these kind of philosophical zombies from Hollywood zombies, right? These are creatures that behave just like us in every way. They stick a knife in it, it screams and runs away. It's navigating the world in all the ways we do, but there's no visual or auditory experience, there's no feeling of pain. And there are a couple of different reasons we might think about these creatures, but one of them is when we're thinking about the evolutionary emergence of consciousness, a zombie would survive just as well as us, right? All that's important for survival is behavior. So if a creature without consciousness, a complicated mechanism that behaves just like us, but doesn't have consciousness would survive just as well, why did consciousness evolve at all? So that is a deep mystery. But for the pan-psychist, consciousness was always there at the fundamental level of reality. The question is, when did it arrive higher up? I mean, so I said pan-psychist had something of a heyday in the 19th century. Pretty early after Darwin, many philosophers and scientists saw the connection between Darwinism and pan-psychism. So William James, for example, thought on a pan-psychist view what natural selection design does is take very simple forms of consciousness and molds them into more complex forms of consciousness, right? Whereas if you're not a pan-psychist, you've got to have this story of, you know, you're getting more and more complex matter. And suddenly at some point, a miracle happens in consciousness emerges. And you've got this mystery of, you know, why is that emerge? If it, if behavior is all that's important to survive, well, we could do without it. So I think the pan-psychist has a better story to tell on the heart problem of consciousness, but also on the evolution of consciousness. There's an also, there's a very interesting kind of consciousness amongst animals, amongst living creatures, and that's insect consciousness, right? Like, insects have very bizarre and complex worlds, like leaf cutter ants. Have you ever seen when they've done those cement composers of leaf that like they fill a leaf cutter ant colony up with cement and then they dig it out to try to find how it's constructed, have you ever seen that? I don't think I have it seen it. Oh my God, you got it. Just a little. Well, how Jamie pulls something up? Yeah. It's insanely complex to the point where they have parts in their colonies in this village that they've established that are there, the ferment leaves. So they have vents that go up through the ceiling and then below that, they have this like compost pile of leaves. This is good, but I'd like to see it. There's some images of ones that they've taken. That's it. So that is amazing. Look at that. Subterranean portion of a giant leaf cutter ant nest in Brazil. So what they did is they took this leaf cutter ant nest and this is, we're looking at something that's enormous. It's like a small house in terms of the amount of coverage that this colony has. And the scientists filled it with cement. So I don't know how they did it. I don't know how long it took. amount of coverage that this colony has. And the scientists filled it with cement. So I don't know how they did it. I don't know how long it took, but essentially when they dig it out slowly and excavate the site, you get to see the actual structure of the leaf-cutter ant colony and where they lived. And it is unbelievably complex and amazing. And somehow or another, they know how to do this. And it's not just that they know how to do this, but that all leaf-cutter ants know how to do this. This is not unique to this one individual colony that's figured something out that other ones haven't. And there's a series of complex little pods and holes and tunnels. And again, they actually have vents. They have like an area where the leaves they bring in are fermenting and they go through this process. And when you're looking at this and for the folks that are just listening, these folks are, you know, 8, 9, 10 feet down in the ground digging out these incredibly complex. It looks like tunnels that lead into these large pods. And it's just wild. It's wild to see like what causes this incredibly complex construction? Like what is it? How are they communicating? If they're just communicating through pheromones and odd signals that they're giving off, like how do they know how to do this? Like what is this? What causes bees to make beehives all over the world? Why are they doing that? Like why is it such an immense structure? Why do they have, why have they figured out the correct way of making these geometric patterns that form the hive itself? It's wild. Yeah. I mean, so look, these are really difficult scientific questions. So I mean, I guess the orthodox view would be in some sense this is just reducible to underlying chemistry, underlying physics. But I mean, there are experimental scientists who deviate from that norm. And friends with Daniel Picard at Columbia University who's got the the psychobiology mitochondrial lab at Columbia University. And he's experimentally exploring the hypothesis that mitochondria in the brain, their activity should be understood as irreducible social networks rather than reducible to underlying chemistry, underlying physics. So I think, I mean, I think there's, this is an ongoing argument I'm having with the physicist Sean Carroll at the moment. I think he was on my podcast last week. We had a three hour debate on what does he think? He's just so confident that, you know, we know so much, we know enough about physics to think that everything in the brain, everything in the biological world is ultimately reducible to underlying physics. I used to I used to hold out myself and I don't necessarily did deny it now. I'm just more agnostic. I used to hold out myself because a panpsychist can totally accept that, right? A panpsychist can just hold yeah, everything's reducible, the causal dynamics of the world are reducible to physics. All that the panpsychist adds is that the causal dynamics of physics are sort of filled out with consciousness. But they can agree with Sean Carroll that in terms of like the causal dynamics of what those ants are doing or might a congruent in the brain, a panpsychist can accept that the causal dynamics are all bottom out at physics. For many people, that's an attraction of panpsychism that you don't need to deny that. But actually the more, so you know, my first academic book, consciousness and fundamental reality, and actually in my popular book Galileo's era, I supported that view. But actually, the more I talked to neuroscientists and we've got an interdisciplinary consciousness group at my university in Durham. And I just don't think we know enough about the brain to know whether that's true or not. I think we know a fair bit about the basic chemistry in the brain, like how neurons fire calcium chambers, neurotransmitters and so on. We know a fair bit about large scale functions in the brain, what large bits of the brain do. So we know kind of the top and the bottom. But what we're almost totally ignorant about is the middle bit is how large scale brain functions are realized at the cellular level, how the brain works. People get very excited with brain scans. But they're very low resolution. Every pixel on a brain scan corresponds to, I think, 5.5 million neurons. We're only 70% of the way, getting way through getting a connectome of the maggot brain with its, is it 10,000 or 100,000 neurons? Whereas the human brain has 86 billion neurons. So I think we'd have to know a lot more about how the functions of the brain are realized before we can say, oh, yeah, it's all explicable in terms of underlying chemistry and physics. So maybe, you know, maybe Daniel Picard is right that it's not, that there are these irreducible social networks at the level of mitochondria. I think that's just an open question. And I think physicists, I think I saw Brian Green making a similar comment on your podcast. I think physicists are too quick to have the assumption that I think an assumption that goes beyond physics itself, which is that all causal dynamics ultimately bottom out of physics. I don't think that's a, that's a claim of physics. I think that's a philosophical claim that goes beyond physics. And we just don't know. Yeah. I mean, this has implications for free world as well, I think. But anyway, I'm talking. We know for a fact that the human mind, at least, has reactions to chemicals. Like, so there's some sort of a chemical composition that's making it react certain ways. And when the chemical composition is imbalanced, it causes consciousness to go awry. We know there's so much going on, but to reduce it down to just those chemicals seem silly as well. Yeah. So I, the way I think about consciousness is there's a division of labor here. There's an experimental aspect to the science of consciousness. And there's a philosophical aspect. Right. I'm going to come back to your, to your point in a roundabout way. So the, I mean, the experimental task is to try and work out what kinds of electrochemical activity go along with what kinds of experience. And you do that by asking people how they're feeling, while you're scanning the brain. That's a really important project, although there are challenges as we've discussed already. But that's, that's important data, but that's not going to get you a false theory of consciousness. Because what we ultimately want from a theory of consciousness is an explanation of why, why do certain kinds of brain activity go along with experience? And because consciousness is not publicly observable, that's not a question you can answer with an experiment. At that point, you have to turn to philosophy and you just have to look at the various proposals philosophers have offered for explaining why brain activity goes along with conscious experience. So I mean, at least it's, at least it's philosophy at the moment. You know, philosophy is what you get when the rules of the game are not set. I mean, the subtitle of my book is foundations for a new science of consciousness. I hope that this will, what is now philosophy will one day be established science, you know, once the rules of the game are set, it becomes science. But coming back to your point, you know, it's, I guess many people have the intuition if it's just chemicals, that's not, that's not quite feelings, feelings and electrochemical activity as somehow not the same thing. The panpsychist has, has a nice way of accommodating that intuition whilst also disagreeing a bit. So the panpsychist will say, look, all there is in the brain is physical activity. Nothing spooky, nothing supernatural, just physical activity. But there's more to the physical than what physical science tells you about. Physical science just tells you what, what matter does, right? You know, physics talks, talks about mass and charge and these properties are completely defined in terms of behavior, you know, attraction, repulsion, resistance to acceleration. It's all about what stuff does. It's all about mathematically capturing the causal dynamics of the physical world, what Russell called the causal skeleton of the world. The idea of the panpsychist is so, so physics doesn't tell you what matter is, it just tells you what it does. And so there's a kind of whole in our standard scientific the universe and the idea is, well, maybe we can put consciousness in that whole. So we can, we can sort of accommodate your intuition because you're thinking when you say, or if you have the intuition, consciousness is more than just chemicals. That's because you're thinking physical science tells us what chemicals are. But the panpsychist says, no, physical science tells you what chemicals do. One, the question what chemicals are is ultimately answered by the past, by the end of the line. The consciousness is manipulated by chemicals. And chemicals are a gigantic part of consciousness. And you can change how consciousness interfaces with the world. So if we think about what you are, we think about what it means to be a person like, who are you Philip? If you think of who you are, you are very different if you change your chemical makeup. The way you interact with people would be different. Your path in life will be different. Maybe even your desires and needs to be different. If we radically shift the way the chemical composition of your brain is set up. Yeah. But so, but on panpsychist and that's not a mystery because matter is, it's nature is consciousness for that. So when people hear about panpsychists and they always interpret it dualistically like we're saying, particles have physical properties and then they have consciousness. But that's not the idea. The idea is that physical properties like mass, bin and charge are forms of consciousness. All there is is consciousness. So that you're saying, well, you know, your brain activity changes your consciousness. For the panpsychist, the brain activity just is consciousness. Consciousness is all there is. So it's not surprising that changing your brain activity changes your consciousness because brain activity just is consciousness. Matter is what consciousness does. And when Sean Carroll's pushing back against us, what is he saying? Well, he's a very smart guy. Does anybody say make you? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, imagine this is all giant waste of time. I've got a huge respect for Sean Carl and I hope it's I think it's I think it's reciprocated because I mean, a lot of physicists, I'm not going to mention names. Don't have a lot of time for philosophy and think, oh, this is all out of bullshit. Why we waste a lot of time with this. But he's, you know, really clued up philosophically and takes the time to look at the arguments. And so yeah, I've got a lot out of a lot out of our discussions. But I suppose, I mean, one issue is, so he wants to say I'm saying consciousness is not just what matter does. Physics just tells us what matter does. Consciousness is something more than that. Consciousness is what underlies what matter does. What fills out the mathematical structure. So the way he is that is he thinks, oh, so consciousness doesn't do anything because if you if you took it out and you still had the mathematical structures, everything will behave the same. So that just sounds like consciousness doesn't do anything. But I think that's he's just making a philosophical mistake there. You know, because for the for the panpsychist, you know, the relationship between physics and consciousness is like the relationship between software and hardware. So physics is like the software and consciousness is the hardware on which physics runs. So maybe you know, in another possible universe, you could have physics run on different hardware. And then you wouldn't have consciousness. But that doesn't mean consciousness is not doing anything. You know, just because Microsoft Word can run on different computers. It doesn't mean the computer's not doing anything. Anyway, that's the that's the debate we've been having for about three months now. But and so you when you and Sean Carroll have this debate, these these last for hours and you I was assuming you're essentially doing the same shape you're doing right now in your head. Right. It's for a lot of people. It's like, God, this is it seems almost pointless or impossible to solve or and then the idea is like, well, why do you think consciousness is in everything? Like, why even assume that? Yeah. Yeah. So like this is why the hell should we take this seriously? Yeah. So I mean, the starting point is I don't think we can explain consciousness in terms of matter. I don't think we can explain consciousness in terms of physical science. Right. How do I know that? It's a huge debate. But I think that the core of it is that physical science works with a purely quantitative vocabulary. Whereas consciousness essentially involves qualities. If you think about the smell of coffee, the taste of mint, that deep red you experience as you watch a sunset. Right. These kinds of qualities can't be captured in the in the purely quantitative vocabulary of physical science. And so as long as your your description of the brain is framed in this purely in the purely quantitative language of neuroscience, you essentially just leaving out these qualities and really leaving out consciousness itself. And you know, I think we shouldn't be surprised that physical science has this difficulty of consciousness because the scientific paradigm we've been operating in for the last 500 years was designed by Galileo to exclude consciousness. Should I talk a bit about that? Yes. So yeah, so this is why I defended my book Galileo's era. So really, the most important, well, I shouldn't say that, a key moment in the scientific revolution. Right is 1623 Galileo's decision that mathematics was going to be the language of science. This was the start of mathematical physics. What is not discussed much is the philosophical work Galileo had to do to get there. Right. Because the problem was before Galileo, people thought the world, the physical world was filled with qualities. Right. So you have colors on the surfaces of objects, smells floating through the tastes inside food. And this was a problem for Galileo because you can't capture these qualities in the purely quantitative language of mathematics, you know, an equation can't capture the redness of a red experience. So Galileo got around this. So Galileo, you know, you wanted to describe it all in math. So Galileo got around this problem by proposing a radically new philosophical theory of reality. So we think of Galileo as a great experimental scientist, which he was, but he was also a great philosopher. So he proposed this new philosophical theory of reality. And according to this theory, the qualities aren't really out there in the physical world. Right. They're in the consciousness of the observer. Right. So if you're looking at this, is that black? You're looking at that, you know, the blackness isn't really on the surface of the pen. It's in the consciousness of the person looking at it. Or if you're eating a spicy curry, the spiciness isn't really in the curry. It's in the consciousness of the person eating it. So Galileo strips the physical world of its qualities. And after he's done that, all that's left of the purely quantitative properties size, shape, location, motion, properties that you can capture in mathematical geometry. So in Galileo, Galileo's worldview, there's this radical division in nature between two domains. The quantitative domain of science, science, you know, the physical world with its mathematical quantitative properties and the qualitative domain of consciousness, you know, consciousness with its colors, sounds, smells, tastes, which he took to be outside of the domain of science. So this is the start of mathematical physics, which has gone incredibly well. But I think what we've forgotten is that it's gone so well because Galileo gave science this narrow, specific focus. Galileo essentially said, you know, just put consciousness on one side, just focus on what you can capture in mathematics. So this is so important. So I think people were now living in a strange period of history where people like Sean Carroll, for example, think our materialism has to be true because, you know, look how well physical science has done. You know, it's explained so much. Surely it's going to explain consciousness. The irony is it's done so well precisely because it was designed to exclude consciousness. So I think if we want to bring consciousness, it fully into science, we need a new worldview. We need to find a way to bring together what Galileo separated, to bring together the quantitative domain of science and the qualitative domain of human consciousness. And that's what panpsychism does. It gives us a way of bringing this together. I'm not getting how Galileo excluded consciousness. It doesn't make any sense. I do understand that mathematics are what he felt was the underlying building blocks of all things. But even if you're talking about how like spicy curry, for example, spicy curry doesn't exist in the curry. It exists in the consciousness of someone who is the curry. But it's not really true because there's a chemical reaction. We know what the ingredients are in the curry that causes it to have a spicy reaction to the human being that's taking it in. It's a very distinct, very definable, chemical reaction that we know that these plants have excreted these chemicals to discourage predation. That's why they're so spicy in the first place. We know we know all these things. Like this is in a way, mathematics. It's mathematics engaging with consciousness. Yeah. So look, there's definitely a lot we can do mathematically with the tools of mathematical science. Yeah, you can capture the chemical composition of the curry. You can capture the changes it makes in your brain. But then at some point, the resulting brain activity goes along with the sensation of spiciness. Well, that's where the miracle happens. But how is it? Well, you recognize it gives your pain sensors and your tongue and the sensations of taste. They're all, this is mathematics, right? Like there's certain compounds that cause certain reactions. We even attribute genes to those compounds like the genes for some people cilantro tastes like soap and some people taste delicious. Those are, there's a genetic, we know for sure that there's a genetic component to that. We can actually isolate the very specific genes that cause people to have that reaction. So I think I think that the chemical story can, the physical story can explain how people react to the taste, how people store information about it, how that impacts on their later behavior. But all of that story could in principle go on in what we call a zombie without any kind of inner life, any kind of experience of spiciness. It's conceivable that you could have a mechanism that had all those reactions and all those responses, but there was no feeling of spiciness. I mean, it's sometimes a bit more vivid with color if you think about it. So I mean, here's another way of putting it right. Suppose I wanted to explain in a neuroscientific the redness of a red experience, right? Why red experiences have that red quality? So the first issue is I don't think you can, and this is essentially Galileo's insight, you can't capture the redness of a red experience in the language of neuroscience. And the way to see that, you know, you couldn't convey to a blind neuroscientist what it's like to see red by, you know, getting him to read your theory and braille, right? You couldn't convey that to him. So that's a descriptive limitation, right? That the language of neuroscience is purely quantitative language can't express the redness of a red experience. So that's just a descriptive limitation. But I think it entails an explanatory limitation because if I wanted to present my neuro my brilliant neuroscientific theory that explained the redness of a red experience, my theory would first have to describe that quality and then explain it in terms of underlying physical processes. But if the theory can't even describe it, then it can't explain it. So I think in principle, a neuroscientific theory cannot explain the qualities of our experience. Galileo 500 years ago realized that and he said, if we want science to be mathematical, we have to take consciousness out of the story. And that was a good move, but we've sort of forgotten that that's what we did. So now we're in a weird period of history where people think, all right, it's gone so well. But yeah, it's gone so well because we took consciousness out of the story because you can't capture those qualities in a purely quantitative language. But what if it's both? What if it's both conscious and chemical? That seems more likely, right? Yeah, but that I mean, that's essentially the panpsychist view, right? But look, the question is what comes first? So both the panpsychists like myself and the materialists like Sean Carroll, for example, you know, many, many people are materialists. We both think, you know, in some sense consciousness and chemicals go together, the question is which is more fundamental? I think that we get physics and chemistry out of consciousness. We don't do it the other way around. It's very easy to explain. You're still understand why you think that because I think. So we've got a choice. Well, we've got the three options really, right? Here, here, the three options on consciousness either matter is a consciousness is explained in terms of matter. That's the materialist view. Or matter is explained into terms of consciousness. That's the panpsychist view. Or we've got a third option. Hold on, bring that down again too. So either consciousness can be explained in terms of the brain. Okay. That's the materialist view of say Sean Carroll. Second option. Now the brain is explained in terms of consciousness. That's my view. Right. That's the panpsychist view. Third option is they're just two separate things. That's the dualist view. But it's also every soul is separate from the brain. Everything has some sort of component of consciousness. Yeah. But that's what I understand. How do you make that leap? Because I don't you've got you've got these three choices. I don't think, I think, look, I basically think the materialist view is incoherent. You just you can't you can't account for the qualities of experience in the purely quantitative language of physical science. Why that's Galileo's insight. Aren't the qualities of experience quantitative in and of itself? So you I mean, yeah, it's good. So you can to an extent capture the structure in quantitative terms. So like color experience has a mathematical structure. We can analyze it. Yeah. We can analyze it in terms of hue, saturation, lightness. And we can map out a color space in terms of those three dimensions spectrum. So that's yeah, it's not that they obviously have that quantitative structure. But you can't fully pin down, I would argue, maybe you disagree. The redness of a red experience in that language is I mean, I talk in my book about the the color scientist, not Norby, who's a color scientist who's got some cones missing from his eyes. And so he's only ever seen black and white and shades of gray, but he's a color expert. And he talks about this and he says, when he tries to think about color, he he compares it to sound. So he thinks of brightness, maybe like a like loudness. And he says he can get some grip on the the structure. But he says, you know, I'll never fully understand, you know, the redness that that underlies that structure because he's colorblind because he's colorblind. So so I'm saying the qualities of experience can can't be totally pinned down in that language. But the libertarian example, the qualities of his experience can be pinned down to a problem in the structure of his eyes. It's chemicals. Yeah, we're that's we all agree. Yeah. So so look, we all agree that the kind of experience you have is dependent on the structure of your brain, right? We all agree on that. Right. That's but then there's a question is what explains that is that because we the experience is explained in terms of the brain or is it the other way around? That's the philosophical question. The materialist says the experience is explained in terms of the brain activity. Right. I think that's doesn't work out. I do it the other way around. I think it's it's much more straightforward at least to explain the brain activity in terms of the consciousness. But the quality of the experience can be explained based on the way the brain works. So I know if you add things to the brain, it changes the quality of the experience. If you add certain chemicals, certain dopamine, serotonin, you add things to the experience, it literally changes the way you view an interface. So yeah, I agree with what you've just said, which is basically a claim about correlation that certain kinds of brain activity go along with certain kinds of experience. Right. And certain chemicals are responsible for certain types of experiences being different. Well, I would just say that they go together. I would put it more neutrally. They always go together. That's a sign to the question. So if you go to a concert and you take acid, you're going to have a very different experience. And if you didn't take that acid. Absolutely. Absolutely. So definitely certain kinds of chemical activity go along with certain kinds and that's the scientific question. The hard problem of consciousness is why? Why do certain kinds of experience go together with certain kinds of brain activity go together with certain kinds of experience? And there's two ways explaining that. You explain the experience in terms of the activity, the brain activity, or you explain the brain activity in terms of the experience. Or both. How would that go? Well, if you're experiencing something and you're explaining the experience based on the brain activity or you're explaining or explaining the brain activity based on the experience, are they both mutually the the the brain. on the brain activity or you're experiencing or explaining the brain activity based on the experience, are they both mutually they're both they're happening at the same time like both things. They're interacting. It's not as simple as one versus the other. Well, I mean, let me put it another way. What is the fundamental level of reality? Right. For the materialist, what there is at the fundamental level of reality is just the mathematical structures we find in physics. That's what there is. I think if that was what our world was like, there would be no consciousness. There would be complicated mechanisms. The would of consciousness is an essential aspect of the fundamental structure. Yeah, what that's the panpsych is view. Right. But if it's like mathematics, like the reason why this structure exists is because it enhances the ability for these creatures to procreate and innovate and move things forward. It's an element of life because life propagates better when it has this consciousness. So just like sight is an element of life because you can pick out your prey and your food and what the dangers are, just like sounds or an element and the ability to receive those sounds enhances this being's ability to survive. Consciousness is a more complex version of all of these senses that it's an all encompassing thing that allows this creature to innovate, to create structures like the leaf cutter ants have built this insanely complex colony, like bees create beehives, like humans create computers. But why couldn't you have all of that without experience? Why couldn't we just have, as long as you have complicated enough physical structure to behave in the right ways, like those ants are doing, you'd survive as well. Why do you need an experience? What is experience coming to the mix? I think if you started with just physics, there'd be no need for experience. Experience wouldn't pop up. Experience. Why would there be no need for experience? Can you make sense of the idea of, you know, that, I mean, I don't mean, can you, I mean, does this make sense to you? Command the data, you know, command the data from the next generation. You know, let's say, you know, he's made of silicon and let's say for the sake of discussion, silicon things aren't conscious, right? There's no inner life. There's nothing that it's like to be command the data. But if he's complicated enough, he could behave just like us, right? So if, if silicon creatures somehow evolved, then they would survive just as well as they would behave in all the same ways, even though there was no inner experience. Does that make sense? Yes, but the curiosity of the human being and the thought process of the human being is what causes it to try to invent things and innovate and survive and do calculations based on past experiences. So the past experiences are all correlated. They're all added up and this, this animal goes based on its experience and tries to figure out what to do with the current moment, what decisions to make. So you could think of it as being a form of mathematics that consciousness itself is a complex way to ensure that these very sophisticated life forms continue to innovate and procreate. Yeah, I wonder whether, I mean, I wonder whether there's a kind of ambiguity in the word experience. I mean, I think sometimes we do use experience in a sort of mechanistic or functional way to mean, you know, responding to the environment or, you know, storing information, using that information in some sense, planning for the future. We just use it in a kind of, the kind of thing a computer could in principle do, just a kind of totally mechanistic way, mechanistic thing. Whereas, but I think we also use experience in a different way to mean having in a life, having, they're being something that it's like to be this physical system. And in principle, it seems you could have all the mechanistic responding to the environment, processing information, all that good stuff for survival without any kind of inner experience. Or maybe you think that just doesn't make sense. I mean, I guess some people think that just doesn't make sense. The animal needs motivation, right? Without that inner experience, what gives an animal a cause to action. I think all the things are connected, whether it's the desire to breathe, the desire for acceptance among the social group and social hierarchies, all these things motivate action and innovation. They motivate this human creature to continue to do what it does, which is make things like the human animal. If you looked at it objectively, if you were standing outside of our life form, if you were visiting from somewhere else, you say, what does this human thing do? What makes things, it makes better things constantly. It's never quite satisfied, except on maybe an individual basis. It's never quite satisfied with whatever it's got, whether it's a cell phone or an automobile or a television set or a computer, it's always making a newer and better thing. What motivates it to do this? Well, there's a series of complex interactions that go on this thing's mind. It has to do with sexuality, it has to do with sociality, it has to do with the way it interfaces with its neighbors and its peers and how it wants to be judged by strangers. And all these things move this animal in this very certain and specific direction, which fuels the innovation, which fuels the construction of these new things. Yeah. I think if aliens came and very different kind of aliens came and looked at us, they might make all the kinds of observations you're saying. It's a very interesting take on it that they're doing these things, they're making this technology, they're constructing it, they might describe the mechanisms in our brains that are making us do that. But then you can imagine a conversation, another alien says so, are they conscious? Do they have inner experience? I think they'd say, they might say, I don't know. I can tell you what they do. I can tell you the mechanisms that give rise to it. But that, you know, in principle, you could have all of that stuff in a complicated enough mechanism. But no, there's evidence of consciousness. Like if someone that you love dies, you weep. Like there's, if you get excited about something, you jump up. If your football team scores, you throw your arms in the air and you cheer. Like there's evidence of this consciousness. Very easily discernible evidence of it. I mean, look, in a sense I agree with you, right? Obviously, I think it's, I do think it is in a sense obvious that other people are conscious. But I mean, there is a deep mystery how we know that. I mean, we were evolved to, we've, can I have some coffee, but I don't think so. There's a heavy conversation lately jet liked. But, so, you know, we've come in here across the pond, by the way. Oh, thanks for having me. No words. Good. We've planned in this for a couple of years. Actually, it was going to come just at the start of the pandemic and just hit the fan. I thought, I will do it in a month or so. So we've evolved to what's what cognitive scientists sometimes call theory of mind to make these intuitive judgments about other people's experience. Right. You know, a baby sees its parents smile. It naturally attributes happiness to the mother. You know, you see someone crying, you naturally. Actually, an argument I've, I think, another long argument also with Donald Hoffman, right? Who kind of has a similar view to me in some ways different in other ways that there's consciousness at the fundamental level. But he has this argument. He calls the, what is he called it? Fitness beats truth argument. Right? He has this argument that we should expect that our senses are radically deceiving us about reality. Why? Because our senses have evolved for truth. It's nice. The opposite. Our senses have evolved for survival, not for truth. Right? So our senses will make us think, what is good for survival, not what not, what is true. So my argument against him is I worry this over generalizes because coming back to theory of mind are instinctive judgments about the mental states of others. If we've evolved to survive, if this kind of argument can make us doubt our senses, then it should make us doubt our instinctive attributions of conscious experience to other people as well. Can you pause you there? What does he mean? What does he mean by the senses of evolved to for survival and not for truth? And what examples? Well, he just thinks, you know, if, I mean, I guess he thinks he thinks in a sense of experiences, kind of like an interface between the world. And if like, I mean, like when you're playing a computer game, you get a kind of, I'm trying to remember his details as you know, you kind of get an icon, but that's not what's going on in the physical mechanism, the machine, but that allows you to interface with the computer. So he thinks the physical world out there is there. Right? And it's real, but it's very different to how we experience it. What we've evolved to experience is a useful way of representing it, but one that doesn't necessarily correspond to the, to the actual reality doesn't mirror the reality. Well, if we take things down to the quantum level, that has to be accurate. Yeah. Yeah. I suppose, I mean, that's another way of defending this view is, you know, that the fundamental structure reality looks wildly esoteric. Like, what are the fundamental level is just a kind of vector in high dimensional hill but spacing. That's like, what? Yeah. Where are the tables and chairs? It's very exactly. Yeah. Okay. So that's another, that's another push. But I mean, the point I was trying to make is there is, I look, I agree with you that I know you're conscious, but there's a deep philosophical mystery about how I know that and how I can trust my, why, how, why it's rational for me to trust my instinctive sense, the consciousness, you're conscious when all I have really access to is just your behavior. That is a deep mystery. And we're looking at consciousness as a thing that assumes that it is conscious. I mean, we all are under the agreement that we're conscious. We're all just debating and discussing consciousness. But what if that is just a fundamental aspect of what it means to be this creature that needs to innovate and create things? Like, what if that's all it is? Yeah. What if it really is just sort of a mathematical component of the biological systems of these animals that have this, this imperative and this this biological imperative is to innovate and create new things. Like the same way again that a beehive is created by these bees with this imperative to create this thing. Well, I mean, it has in recent times in philosophy as people are taking panpsychas and much more seriously, but people are also taking a view that's become known as illusionism quite seriously, which is basically the idea that consciousness is an illusion, right? You know, the brain tricks us into thinking we have conscious experience, but we don't really. What's the replacement? If we don't have conscious experiences, what what does happen? So I mean, so I I I run a podcast with a guy who has this view, right? So the gimmick is, you know, I think consciousness is everywhere and he thinks it's nowhere. Yeah, exactly. So we're, uh, mind chat, we're sort of, you know, the in the age of polarization, you know, we're trying to bridge divide. But I guess I guess we we start from a common starting point, which is that we both think that convention the conventional scientific approach can't deal with consciousness, at least consciousness as philosophers normally conceive of it. And I think that's because Galileo designed science to ignore it, but we both agree with that. So then Keith Frankish, this this illusionist guy, his response to it to say, well, it doesn't really exist. You know, it's like magic fairy dust, you know, it's, and then, you know, it's a nice elegant solution because you don't have to explain something that's not there. So he thinks, I mean, he compares it to like telekinesis. He thinks, you know, when there seems to be telekinesis, there's two responses you can make. You can either say it's there and radically rethink your science to accommodate it, or you can say it's not there. And then a challenge remains, which is to explain why it seems to be there, you know, explain away a parent cases of telekinesis. And he wants to apply that to consciousness as well, you know, that what we should say is it's not there. And then the problem that remains is not the hard problem, but the the illusion problem. Why does it, why does it, why why is it so hard to deny the reality of consciousness? Because I mean, there are a lot of these troubling philosophical phenomena that philosophers worry about like free will, you know, just free will, how does free will fit into our conventional scientific story or morality, you know, facts about right and wrong. But in all these other cases, it always seems like an option to deny the data, you know, maybe, maybe we're not really free in the way we think we are. Maybe there aren't really facts about good and bad, right and wrong. Maybe that's just our kind of project in our feelings onto the world. But with consciousness, it's, you know, it's so hard to deny, you know, nobody's ever really felt pain. Nobody's ever really seen. You just think you feel pain. Actually, so I mean, Keith is who would do this podcast, he's slightly ambiguous on he wants to say when it's sensibly in pain, a sense of don't, but there's another illusionist Francois Camour who says, he just says, there's no one's ever felt pain. And he's got a really interesting article exploring how we should think about morality. What does that mean? No one's ever felt. What if somebody kicks his ass? What if someone holds that guy down and punches him in the nose until he screams to stop? Do you know what? I think he's in pain when I was a first year, this is an intellectual masturbation exercise. Do you understand that? I think it took good too far. A first year philosopher. I wrote, when I was 18, I wrote an essay expressing these sentiments saying, you know, if I kind of stuck a rusty blade in one of these people, and I got a really bad mark. I got rid of it. They said it was like violent. Oh, because you're explaining something that would be physically painful. Well, like this, I got a bad mark for that kind of thinking. Yeah, I think my cheetah didn't lie. I think he thought I was a bit of an obnoxious, but I probably was when I was 18. Well, you're probably challenging ideas. You know, like you should encourage all young minds I think it teaches a piece of shit. I showed him, I took pictures of him. I don't know. My band, we took our group photos of us, pretend on the toilet. We took photos. Anyway, it was, he got mad. He got mad too. He got really, I mean, it wasn't pornographic. You know, it was from an angle, but it was getting silly. We thought it was artistic and a bit silly. And he wrote a letter to me saying how inappropriate it was that he sounded boring. I don't want to listen to him, but anything. Anyway, but look, no, I want to disagree. My fellow Puns psychists get annoyed with me taking this illusionist view seriously, but you know, consciousness is difficult. And so this guy thinks, yeah, you know, if you punched him repeatedly in the face, he'd, he wouldn't like it. And he'd feel like he was in pain, but he wouldn't really be in pain. I mean, it's a cool hearing. No, no, no, light his feet on fire. Hold him down, light his feet on fire. He's going to scream in pain. And he'll tell me it hurts and I'll stop. And it'll look it hurts. Okay. There's a, yeah, I have to get an illusionist into the fantasy, but it's, I mean, nonsense perspective. Water is wet. But in a way, I tell you, like, I got, I, in a way, I've got more respect because I think it's coherent. I think the conventional materialist position, which is that consciousness exists, but we can totally explain it in terms of electrochemical signaling. I think that's just incoherent. The idea that we really believe in these qualities, the colors, the sounds, the smells, the tastes, but at the same time, that's nothing more than the purely quantitative story of electrochemical signaling. I think that's just incoherent. Whereas at least these guys are coherent, they say, look, all there is in your head is the purely quantitative story of electrochemical signaling. And so these qualities, you seem to experience the, the colors, the sounds, the smells, the tastes, they don't really exist. So at least they're coherent. But they do exist, but they are also a part of this interaction that we have with the electrochemical environment that we live in. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you don't have to persuade me that that the consciousness exists. But uh, colors exist or that sounds exist. But I don't, I don't facing with these things. I don't think you can explain, I don't think you can reductively exfully account for the, that the taste of coffee and other, the, the blueness of a blue experience in, in, in terms of a purely quantitative story of electrochemical signaling. Because you just can't, you can't convey those qualities in that language. Well, you can't using a language, but you could recognize the concept of these things, these components, these compounds interacting with each other. And the way that's going to cause a reaction, we know that certain chemicals have various reactions in the human mind. As we said, Derek, dopamine and serotonin and adrenaline and all these different things that do different things to the way people perceive reality around them, different colors, different sounds, different feelings, different reactions from the very nerves of your body themselves, the hormones that you have fight or flight, all the different things that are going on inside the body at these chemicals interact and that ultimately the, the end goal of all these experiences is to encourage survival, to encourage reproduction, to encourage advancement in the social structure of these tribes and groups that we're in and that this will also encourage survival Eugene's. Yeah, I mean, I think I can, I can, I think I can agree with, with pretty much everything you've just said there, but I mean, well, it depends. I think there's a bit of an ambiguity if it depends if we're just, it's a question of correlation or explanation. Yeah, I totally agree. It's just a fact that certain kinds of chemical structures in the brain correlated with certain kinds of experience. But why? That's the big mystery. That's the hard problem of consciousness. Why should they go together? Why should the chemical structures go along with an inner world of of these subjective qualities rather than just a mechanism doing all the same stuff and well, it's maybe perhaps that's what has led us to where we are today and that all these interactions have proved to be successful in this quest for innovation and breeding and social structure that this, all these chemicals in this, this has led us into this point now where it allows you to be successful with what it means to be a person today in 2021 and that all these hundreds of thousands, if not millions of years of evolution have led us into these chemical pathways that will allow this thing that the human animal does so well, which is innovate, breed, procreate, form social structures, try to climb the social hierarchy. There's clearly a lot of motivation to do those things. There's clearly a lot of motivation to innovate, climb the social structure, make friends, form communities, be loved. Well, why is that? Well, clearly, all those things help you procreate and establish your genes and allow them to carry on. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, what is so attractive about PUNC like is, you know, when I studied philosophy, we were taught that you know, you had two choices on consciousness, right? Either you say it's something magical and mysterious, something supernatural, something that it's hard to fit into that the kind of scientific evolutionary story you've just described, all you think it's just totally reducible to electrochemical signaling. Whatever's right. What if it's everything? What it's all those things? Yeah. Well, so I think the attraction to PUNC is, is you get the best of both, right? You get to say, there's nothing supernatural. There's nothing, there's just, you know, in a sense, in a sense, there's just particles and fields at the fundamental level, right? There's nothing. Yeah. I mean, the physicists are being host and felt a, you know, wrote a blog post, criticizing PUNC psychism that got a little bit of traction saying, you know, well, like this PUNC psychism stuff must be bullshit because if particles had these funny consciousness properties, it would have showed up in our physics, right? You know, because the standard model of particle physics predicts the behavior of particles just on the basis of, you know, their physical properties, mass, binge, or if there were these extra consciousness properties, that would presumably have different predictions. They would behave differently, right? But that's, that's not the view. That's dualism. That's the view that consciousness is separate from the physical. The PUNC is says, no, no, there's just, just particles and fields, just mass been in charge, but mass been in charge, our forms of consciousness. All of that mathematical structure you get from physics is, is realized by consciousness. So you don't, you don't, you don't change anything. And this is why some people say, well, what's the point of but in a sense, you know, if we're just thinking about observable physical science, the evolutionary story, what stuff does, you know, basically, I basically, I think what, what physical science is all about is what stuff does. And that's really useful information. If you know what stuff does, you can manipulate the natural world and you can create technology and, you know, and I think that's why we're going through a period of history where people think, oh my God, that's, it's so exciting. It's working. We've got stuff in the works because you look at technology and, you know, people talk about religion as a crutch, but I think a certain kind of scientism can really get into people's identity. You think, oh, no, we've got something that works. But it works because from Galileo onwards, it's just focused on this narrow task of what stuff does. I sometimes say, doing physics is like playing chess when you don't care what the pieces are made of. You're just interested in the moves you can make, right? And the puns like this can just say, yeah, that's all right. That's all, that's fine. But there's this other thing we know to be real, not from observation experiments, consciousness isn't something we discovered in a particle collider. It's something we know about just from our immediate awareness of if you're in pain, you just directly were of your pain. And that needs, that that needs to be fitted into reality. So I mean, like what I'm most passionate about and more, much more than pan-psychism is just getting people to see that the reality of consciousness is a hard scientific data in its own right. I think most people have this conception of science, you know, what's the task of science to account for the data of observation and experiments. Once you've done that, that's job done, you can go home. I want to say no, no, no, no, no, no. That's important, but there's this other thing not known about in that way, the reality of conscious experience. So the task of we need to expand the task of science, not about saying science can't explain consciousness. It's about saying we need a more expansive conception of science. We need a theory that can accommodate both the quantitative data of physical science, what stuff does, but also the reality of conscious experience. We need a theory that can accommodate both of those that can bring together what Galileo separated. And I think that's that's what pan-psychism does that know the theory can really do. Is there also a problem just with the term consciousness? I mean, is that that term not complicated enough for what it means to be conscious? It's because it seems like it has so many other meanings, still consciousness is connected to being unconscious or being like knocked unconscious, like being awake, being not awake. But it's more than that. It's the interaction that this sentient, this aware thing, this life form has with everything around it. And then this idea that all these other things around it have some whatever the quality is, however you can measure it, some quality of their own that allows them to experience their surroundings and that everything is experiencing itself subjectively and constantly. All things are moving together. So to call just the word consciousness, it's almost like you're it's a two narrow box for this thought. Yeah, I kind of simply I know you're coming from that. I think I have a problem with students, I think I've explained. I think people always associated it with with something different. Some people think of it as self consciousness. More as you say, you know, if in a medical context, someone's conscious, if they're awake, right? Whereas that's not consciousness in the way philosophers or scientists of consciousness use it because you can, you know, you can have experiences with a couple of years. It's I guess it's something we're stuck with. But I mean, I would like to swap it for just experience, although that's a bit ambiguous as well because sometimes by experience you mean your perceptual relationship with the environment around you, rather than just something kind of inner. So I don't know what to do. I think we're just kind of stuck with the word now. One of the things that I love about science and the study of quantum mechanics and quantum physics is that we find things out that defy all understanding like spooky action at a distance, like particles being in superposition where they're moving and still at the same time. Like there's certain things that happen under observation that throw all of our assumptions of what reality is out the window. And then you have to wonder like how much of what we're experiencing is because this is the easiest way for you to interface with the environment and stay alive. How much of what our senses are are just limited to what do we need in order to be effective as a human being and procreate and keep ourselves going and then innovate and then keep this this whole process that we're involved in moving in the same general direction. And how much of it is out there that we're not tuned into. Like you could wave your hand above an ant colony and they have no idea that you're there. Why? Because it's not really that important for them. They're busy. They have a limited amount of senses. Right? We have more senses, but we don't have all of them. There's clearly some things that we can't detect whether it's because they're too small or in the sense of the universe because they're too big. We don't have the senses that are available to detect supermassive black holes that are in the center of the very galaxy that we live in. Like we don't have we can't we can't see it, but we know it's out there. Right? We don't have that sense or we don't have the ability. Like there, whatever we are as a physical structure, the physical structure of a human animal on earth dealing with gravity and the environment and going through life. We only have so much of a capacity to understand all the things that are around us all the time. Yeah. dealing with gravity and environment going through life. We only have so much of a capacity to understand all the things that are around us all the time. Yeah, look, I mean, I think we've all got to accept that reality is weird. It's very different to our intuitive sense of how it should be. And I mean, so sometimes people when I'm talking about, oh, you know, science, normal science, can't explain consciousness, people say, oh, you're just thinking it needs to be intuitive for something. But I mean, that's the motivation for pan-psychism is not capturing our common sense in Jewish and something. The motivation is there's something real here, pain, seeing, you know, experience that needs to be accommodated. But, you know, I mean, what I've been thinking about recently is how whether the need to explain this fundamental data of experience could interact with how we think about fundamental physics and certain theory choices there. I mean, like, if you think consciousness is just in the domain of neuroscience, then, you know, physics is completely irrelevant. But if you think consciousness is exists at the fundamental level of reality, you know, this might interact with certain questions in fundamental physics. So I've been thinking, for example, about, so I've got a paper coming out and there's going to be a volume with Oxford University Press on quantum mechanics and consciousness. And my paper for that volume is, you know, thinking about we've got these different interpretations in quantum mechanics. And as far as we can tell, you know, there's no way to distinguish between them or, you know, there's various arguments we can have. But it's really in the realm of philosophy, and this is why it annoys a lot of physicists, right? They just get on with the experiments. And, but it could be that certain interpretations of quantum mechanics fit better, say, with a panpsychist theory at the fundamental level. Because I mean, so some interpretations of quantum mechanics, you've just got the wave function at the fundamental level, which is this really weird esoteric entity, just kind of vector in high dimensional space. Now, I think that view is maybe difficult to square with a panpsychist theory. Because on a panpsychist theory, you've got to be able to get from the fundamental level of reality to our consciousness through some kind of process of combination or decarbonation. If you're just starting with a vector, it's hard to see how you can do it. I mean, maybe it can be done. But whereas there are other interpretations of quantum mechanics like the bomium interpretation, sometimes called hidden variables. I don't think that names that appropriate. But where you've got the wave function and you've got particles. So, you know, one of the puzzles about quantum mechanics is things are sort of wave like some kind of particle like what bones thought was, well, maybe there's waves and particles. And then on his interpretation, the wave function kind of pulls the particles around. So, I'm inclined to think that kind of view fits better with a panpsychist view. And so, you know, I mean, I'm not a physicist. I'm not even a fully trained philosopher's physics. You know, what I'd love to see is a new generation of physicists who take consciousness seriously, who see it as this data that doesn't come from public observation experiment, but is real needs to be accounted for and reflect on that in terms of choices in fundamental physics. If someone who's doing this, actually, Lee Smolin, a friend of mine who's, so there's recently this issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies with 19 essays on my book Galileo's era by scientists and philosophers theologians, and Lee Smolin has this idea that the kind of radical rethinking we're going to have to do to bring general relativity together with quantum mechanics can come together with a role for consciousness at the fundamental level of reality. Now, I don't have some concerns with this view and a number of ways on this agreement, but that kind of thinking about physics taking consciousness as a serious data. You know, I think that that could be a real important pathway to theoretical progress. You know, we haven't really done made many huge discoveries in physics since the 70s, you know, I think it's possible possible way forward. Now, how does one go from trying to understand consciousness in the human being, trying to understand consciousness and living organisms, consciousness exists in water, or consciousness exists in the environment, consciousness exists in other things like what evidence or what, what even motivation do you have to make those leaps? Yeah. So, I mean, I guess there could be two questions there is one, how the hell do you know, it's there, you know, what's your justification for this belief? Right. Another question is, what's it, what's it, if it is conscious, what the hell is it like, you know, what it like to be a quark or what it like to be a water molecule, if there is such a thing, something that's like to be a water molecule. I mean, on the first question, I would just say that what panpsychism offers us is a, so I mean, it's not something you can demonstrate experimentally because just because we're consciousness is not publicly observable, just as I can't look in your brain and see your feelings, so you can't look in a particle to see whether it has feelings, right? You wouldn't, you can't confirm or disconfirm it. That's not the motivation of panpsychism is the beautiful elegant solution it gives to the heart by my consciousness. I think, you know, I think we've been hitting our head against a brick wall for decades now, trying to give a kind of materialist answer to that problem. We've got precisely nowhere. I think the motivation for trying to do that is rooted in a sort of misunderstanding of the history of science and why it's been as successful as it is. This is an alternative research program. Rather than trying to explain consciousness in terms of utterly non-conscious processes in the brain, we try to explain complicated human consciousness in terms of simple forms of consciousness, simple forms of consciousness that are then postulated to exist as basic aspects of matter. So this is an ongoing research program. Nobody has a complete theory of consciousness. But what's the motivation? What's the motivation of the consciousness? How do you even make the leap to try to attribute consciousness to rocks? Right. So whether, like, the panpsychist position is that consciousness is at the fundamental level, right? So it might be particles or it might be, you know, many theoretical physicists prefer to think of fields as the fundamental building blocks of reality sort of universe-wide fields and then particles are just sort of local excitations. So if you combine that view with panpsychism, the fundamental forms of consciousness are the ultimate nature of these universe-wide fields. And the thing that has those forms of consciousness is the universe itself. So this is sometimes called cosmocychism, the universe itself. But you know, you needn't think of it as guard or something. It could be just, you know, a mess so the universe has experience. But it's just, so you know, you might think it's not guard, it's a mess. You know, it's either guard or it's a mess. Yeah, that's the truth. You know, we've, we are experiences, there's all the millions of years of evolution. But if the universe has experience, it hasn't evolved. It could be just, you know, you know, you needn't think of it as intelligent or an agent, it could be. But just a mess. But back to rocks. Yeah, so panpsychists needn't think rocks are conscious. But look, it's, you know, I see this is a collaboration between science and philosophy. This is partly an empirical question of what kind, at higher levels, what kinds of physical activity go along with experience. You know, so the philosopher, head of Hassel Merc, who's also a panpsychist, has spent a year in the lab of Giulio Ternoni, who's the originator of the integrated information theory of consciousness, a proposal about the neural correlates, the physical correlates of consciousness, spelling that theory out in a panpsychist way. So on that theory, we get consciousness at the level at which you have most integrated information. And that is a notion they try to give a mathematically precise definition of. So, so on that view, probably, probably the cup of water is not conscious because there's probably more integration in the molecules than there is in the the liquid as a whole. And in a rock likewise, probably there's more integration in the components of the rock than in the rock as a whole. What's distinctive about the human brain, or at least certain parts of the human brain is that there's massively more integrated information in the whole than than there is in any individual neuron. The way the brain stores information is heavily dependent on its connectivity. So, so if you combine panpsychism with that view, then rocks wouldn't be conscious. So it's a collaboration between science and philosophy. Panpsychism offers us a broad brushstrokes account of the kind of approach to solving the hard problem. Materialism is a dead end, here's a more promising approach. But spelling it out is going to require collaboration with neuroscience, physics as well. What's exciting to me at the moment? I get contacted by a lot of scientists now seeing a connection with their work. And I wanted some point to get together a kind of interdisciplinary network. Which disciplines are content using a connection with their work? I had a guy from Jonathan Delafield-Button, an experimental psychologist. So he's one of the contributors to this volume of essays on my book Galileo's era. So he's done it. He's career working on experimental study of autism. And he's reached the conclusion that understanding autism in a panpsychist framework gives us a much deeper explanatory insight than understanding it in a materialist framework. So Daniel Picard, the example I already gave you of the guy who's experimentally exploring the idea that mitochondria might be under sort of social networks. There's obviously a connection to science like isn't there rather than reducible to underlying chemistry and physics. Lee Smolin, who's as these ideas of speculative theoretical physics allowing consciousness to play a fundamental role. So yeah, so there are some examples. So you know what I'm really excited about. I just, you know, I think you start to get taken seriously when you most of time panpsychism has just been trying to justify its existence. And we've been very successful at that I think. But I think it's now time to just get on with getting this research program going. What research could be done to prove the existence of consciousness in things other than human beings that speak a language that could explain the consciousness to you? Like what can be done to try to quantify this idea and make it like make it so that not always it take it seriously, but it's it's doctrine. There's something I'm there's something we've got to face up to which is that I mean, I've said this already that consciousness is not publicly observable. So you're not people I mean, often the first question when you say about panpsychism, how'd you test it? You know, what's the I don't think any theory of any philosophical answer to the hard problem can be tested in that sense because consciousness is just not publicly observable. And that's uncomfortable, right? And that's I think why people who like science, you know, think of themselves, pro science might resist this because they think, you know, look, this works, you know, public observation experiment. It's got us technology. It's done so well. And you know, for a lot of the 20th century, because of that enthusiasm for observation experiment, people basically just pretended consciousness didn't exist for a long period of time till kind of the 1980s, 90s. But it does exist. And because it's not publicly observable, we're not going to be able to get a theory, a solution to the hard problem that we can kind of test in that way. But what more broadly, what you do is what you always do in science is you just try and find the simplest theory that can accommodate the data. That's what you do in science. And it's just that for a theory of consciousness, the data is not just public observation experiment, but also the reality of consciousness. We just try it. We need to find the simplest theory that can accommodate both of those things. And I think the, you know, the pan-psychist direction of that looks more promising than the alternatives that have kind of got nowhere out of the people that are critiquing this and the people that disagree with it, whether it's Sean Carroll, whoever, what is it about their, is there ever some arguments that they give you that make you have pause to make you stop and think about whether or not you're wasting your time with all this? Yeah, no, I've definitely learned a lot. You know, I'm still, I'm going to discussion about what follows from what we know in physics about this discussion that I'm more agnostic on of whether all causal dynamics are reducible to underlying chemistry in physics. You know, I'm really open minded on that. Upon psychists can be open minded on that. And so, you know, it's something I used to think everything was reducible to physics. I'm more agnostic. I'm open to going back to that. But yeah, I mean, sometimes I would be more open minded to actually the illusionist position that consciousness doesn't exist. You know, I think that I think the regular material's position just doesn't make sense. So the illusionist position that consciousness doesn't exist is that it's all just down to chemical reactions. And that yeah, no, no one's ever had experience. We think and look, it sounds crazy and I don't really believe it. But but then in some mindsets, I think, you know, people can be brainwashed to think kind of crazy things like you think in 1984, there's the characters brainwashed into thinking two plus two is five. Maybe evolution is just totally brainwashed or is into thinking we have experience. And we just, you know, you said to me, that's just total bullshit. I mean, maybe it's just so ingrained in us. We can't get not believe it. But maybe it's false. So that where we're headed, if we continue down this virtual reality road, I mean, this is the concept of the matrix that you will have experiences that are not real. But what are experiences, if your consciousness is taking these experiences in, are they real? Yeah. Well, you mean the experience itself? Yes. I mean, if you get to, if we really do get to a point where technology is sufficient sufficiently advanced to the point where they can make a virtual reality that's indissernible, you cannot tell the difference between this artificially created reality of pixels and ones and zeros through this amazing graphic engine that you're witnessing through whatever equipment they design that it's so good that it hits all of the various aspects of your sensory perceptions. Is that a real experience? Yeah. Well, I mean, I think that they certainly are our relationship as conscious beings to the world around us. It is going to dramatically change. And, you know, we're already increasingly living in a virtual world. And that that is in some ways as real an environment as the external physical world. Right. I don't think that I don't think that questions. I mean, the reality of experience itself but one thing that could do is, you know, I mean, the question of could you upload your consciousness? I mean, that's if you got to the point not just of you being in your brain interacting with the virtual world, but your your consciousness being sort of uploaded into the virtual world. That's another question. I mean, I'm inclined to think that that would be suicide that you're, you know, because I think of as a punch like is I think of consciousness as the stuff of the brain. Yeah. It's not software. It's the hardware. So just if you upload the information in my brain, I'm inclined to think the consciousness would be lost. And so we might get to a situation where we think, oh my God, we've discovered immortality and we're all uploading our minds, but it we're actually killing ourselves and replacing consciousness with non consciousness. I do worry about that too. Well, also consciousness as it exists as a human being, like as in you and I experiencing this conversation, we are, there's so many components to what we are, right? You have muscles and inside those muscles, there's tissue inside the tissue cells inside those cells, as atoms inside those atoms, as subatomic particles, as you go deeper and deeper into the structure of what it means to be just a human being. Where does the experience start? Like it does it start a cellular level? Does it start a structural level? Does it start at a level of language and culture? Like where does the experience start? Like where can you say, here's where it is? Because if you are looking at the fact, and we know for a fact that we are created out of atoms, right? We are created these particles that are, they exist in everything and all things all around us all the time. Well, where is the experience? Like so if we're thinking in the concept of that there is no real pain and there is no real vision, there's no real love, there's no real experience, it's not real. Like it's not, if you get down to the lowest observable structure that we know exists, there's seemingly no change in those structures between the experience and no experience. So where is it? Yeah, I mean, I think actually you're really making an argument for Punsilikus and Meije. Because I think you think that about everything though. No, no, no, actually, right. I mean, it's been Punsilikus, just a slight digression that Punsilikus has gone from being a of you that kind of nobody took seriously to being, you know, still a minority view but pretty well respected. And this is kind of a noi, it's certain people in the field. But anyway, but one kind of interesting recent development is Michael Ty, who's a guy who you won't know maybe if you're not an academic philosophy, but is huge figure in academic philosophy and a huge and influential proponent of materialism for the last 30, 40 years. And in his recent book, he's converted to a kind of Punsilikus, which is, I mean, I can't convey this, but that's like, oh my god, it's like, you know, it's like, I don't know, Richard Dawkins becoming a Christian or something. Really. But, but his motivation actually is difficult to do with evolution and difficulties making sense of where, I mean, we could ask in the process of evolution, you know, the slow development over time or just in like a fetus, an embryo becoming a fetus, word as the consciousness switch on. Now with most properties, it's going to be a fuzzy boundary, right? So like you think, I don't know, word is life emerge, maybe there's a fuzzy boundary, you know, where it's like, I think most concepts admit of these fuzzy boundaries like, you know, whether someone is bald or not. Some people are definitely bald. Some people are definitely not bald. I'm a kind of borderline case. I'm kind of thin and you know, life, maybe there could be, maybe there was a time in evolutionary issue. Is it life? Is it not life with consciousness? That's hard to make sense of. It's hard to make sense. Could there be something where there was no fact of the matter as to whether it had experience or not? Well, isn't, is that what you think? There's levels of that consciousness. Like maybe, maybe it's quantifiable, just like everything else. Like like there's weight. There's a difference in the weight of this glass of water versus the weight of, you know, a giant basin filled with water. There's more water in it. Maybe there's a different stream that consciousness is just lost. Yeah. And the consciousness of a wolf, which is highly intelligent animal that operates in packs and has some sort of nonverbal communication. It would require some sort of a more complex consciousness. Yeah. Something that's slow and seemingly dumb. Yeah. I think I agree with that. So I mean, yeah, there's, there's something that's greatable here. You know, you can have more complicated consciousness. Yeah. You can have more sophisticated consciousness. If you're kind of waking up, groggy, you can have kind of tuned out consciousness or so there's things that are gradation. But this still seems to be the case. And I don't know. I'd like to know if you agree this, you know, something either has experience or it doesn't desire for it. There's either something that it's like to be it or that I can't make sense. They had it. So let's say, I mean, let's say snake takes nails, right? Let's say there's no fact of the matter about whether they have experience or not. I just can't make sense that either, either there's something that it's like to be a snail. All there's nothing that it's like to be a, to be a, to be a snail. But maybe it's just the amount of information that's coming to it, the amount of experience it's having. Like here's a difference. If you are at a warehouse and you're inside the warehouse, the warehouse explodes and you manage to survive, that is a very different experience than if you're watching an explosion from a mile away. You still have an experience. It's a very distant experience. It's not quite as potent. Yeah. So we're talking about grade like levels and gradations within the category of experience. Yes. But could there be a creature, maybe a snail? Some people want to say this about snails were it doesn't have any experience. No, no, no, no, no. That can make sense of that. I can make sense that a snail is just a mechanism. Does not, I can make sense that a snail has consciousness. What I can't make sense of is that there's, there's no fact of the matter. But just like I'm kind of neither bald, no, I'm a middle fuzzy line, borderline case. I can't make sense of that in the case of consciousness that it's that it's sort of neither definitely has no definite lack experience. I have a hard experience or it doesn't. And so maybe it's experience just lacks the ability to process it. Like what is experience and your ability to process it? Are they mutual exclusive rather the same thing? Like what is what if just because you're having experience? I'd say that different things. I think, you know, I think a, you know, like a newborn baby, actually, you know, it's only recently people said, you know, people, a lot of people used to think babies didn't have consciousness till very recently. A guy called Peter Carothers, he's a really good philosopher, a totally disagree with. He thinks babies don't have consciousness. What? Uh, yeah, babies. Uh, I don't know. Uh, I think he thinks babies that I've consciousness. Um, a better wife's mad at him if he has a kid. I think he thinks they don't have consciousness, but he sort of thinks consciousness doesn't matter anyway. So what? Um, it doesn't matter anymore. He's interesting. I love, I love, I really like engaging with people like just like this guy. I do the podcast. I've just like a totally disagree with and I, you know, I love to try and get in their mindset, try and look out of their eyes and, um, you know, I really enjoyed doing that. And, you know, it's just great when you can, again, coming back to Sean, you know, engage of someone's worldview and a respectful way and, yeah. Um, but what were we talking about? Uh, yeah. I think that's been a move to like, think more things are conscious. People used to think, most people used to think fish weren't conscious and babies weren't conscious. I think the dominant view now would be both fish and babies are conscious. So that people are still a bit skeptical of particles, but, uh, people think that babies are conscious. That's someone who doesn't have any experience with babies. Look at you and they react to things. They laugh. They get them to get go mechanism. And maybe you're just a mechanism. Well, why why do you just? I assume that as you get more complex than it's a nice. I suppose if you're if you're wrapped up in a kind of theory of consciousness, you know, you ask the question, does the, uh, the experience and the ability to process it go together? Well, one theory says they do the higher order thought theory of consciousness that says that to have an experience essentially involves reflecting upon it and being aware of it. And if you can't reflect upon it, you don't really have experience. So if you just get wrapped up in that view, then maybe bite the bullet and you say, you know, the baby can't reflectively attend, you know, reflect on its consciousness. So maybe it doesn't really have consciousness. Um, well, it's developing just like a baby has motion, but it can't run. Right? It's developing. It's a part of the, the reason why they're born immature. Right? Their heads are so big. Yeah. So the ceiling way you can really viable have a woman carry a child, baby has to come out when it's not quite cooked. Yeah. Yeah. And they're just, they can't do anything. Yeah, they're done. They're being young children. I've this is a, yeah, they can't do anything. Come here. It's a bloody nightmare. Lots of fun though. But it's fascinating. It's fascinating. And you learn so much about just human life in general when you watch them develop and grows like, wow, it's just fascinating to see all these little pieces fall on the place. Yeah, so look, but there's the question, you know, we're on this gradual train of complexity and development evolution does experience suddenly switch on. I think if you're not a panpsychist, you just got to say, does this moment when it suddenly switches on? And it's, it's going to look really arbitrary. It's going to look, you know, if it suddenly switches on it, that's going to look right. Why was it just there? Whereas if you're a panpsychist, I mean, it's a much more elegant view that look, its consciousness is there all along, but, but simple forms of consciousness and cognitive development and evolution in the broader scream of things mold that simple forms of consciousness into more complex forms. So it's, you know, it's a beautiful elegant, naturalistic view of the world. Last, not trying to thought there, but yeah, do you think that when it goes along lines, what we were talking about earlier about how people don't want to buy a home or someone was murdered in it? Do you think that it's possible that things do retain some kind of memory? I believe it was a Rupert Sheldrick had this idea that everything has some kind of memory, a form of memory. Yeah, I thought I'm friends with Rupert actually. We had a long, discussion recently walking through London. Look, I, who's got very strange ideas, like the morphic resonance. Yeah, he's an interesting guy and he makes his case of view. And look, I suppose these, these are scientific empirical questions. And, you know, I, I don't, I guess he's going wildly against the dominant view, right? And, but, you know, I suppose his cases will look this just, you know, an establishment view that people aren't taking my work seriously because there's an establishment view that could be true. I, you know, I just don't know. you know, an establishment view that people aren't taking my work seriously because there's an establishment view. That could be true. I just don't know. I don't, I don't, it's not my area of expertise to evaluate that sort of data. I mean, maybe I should put in the time to work out the data. I mean, you know, there's a spectrum here. Like people like some people are told about like modern Picard or something. Where there's, it's not that radical as children. But still, it's like things are not, perhaps not, not reducible to underlying chemistry or physics. That's fairly radical in itself. I'm much more open-minded about that possibility. But I mean, I just, I just don't know what, you know, I think I'm confident about pan-psychism, not for those kind of empirical scientific reasons. But just it's the only viable solution to the heart of consciousness. So that's, as a philosopher, I feel confident about saying that. But the reality of, you know, these unorthodox phenomena, I just, I just don't know. It's a fascinating way. I'm fascinated by it. I am as well. But there's certain people that I respect that have, they have experiences like in places. Like here's an example, my father was in Gettysburg. He went to Gettysburg. They were just sightseeing. They went to on this tour. And he said, you could feel the sadness and the loss in the area. You know, there's, it's a place where there was a great war. And so this, on this battlefield, he said it was this strangest thing that you could feel the loss. Like you could feel something horrible had happened there. Like, and this is hundreds of years ago, right? So this is embedded into or 200 years ago, almost embedded into the ground itself. Like the actual area where it happened had retained in experience. Yeah. Or a memory of that experience. Like maybe the area had consciousness. If you murder enough people on a specific plot of land, maybe that the sadness, the loss, the pain, the suffering just gets soaked into the land itself. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, then there are experiences. I mean, at a gig or something that, you know, the experience of the excitement, it sort of feels like it's not just, yeah. But I mean, it's difficult to exactly pin that. I mean, I suppose that, I mean, the closest I've had to these kind of very strange experience, I suppose, I friend of mine who I hadn't seen for a long time sadly passed away and, you know, I had that experience of thinking about them before I found that out, you know, that I've ruined the next day. And you thought about them were something special. For the first time in a long time, I thought about this person. I found out the next day that they died on that on that day. I was thinking, but you know, I mean, look, let me, let me be totally clear. Let me be totally clear. I don't, I'm not saying that proves anything. You know, I guess the opposing explanation is, you know, maybe I did think about him a lot. And I didn't notice that's the standard explanation. I didn't say. And then Rupert Sheldrake says, well, he's tested that and he's controlled that, you know, and I don't know. You know, so here's what I think actually is what I, I think people focus too much on the dichotomy of do you believe or do you not believe, do you take the seriously or do you not say so? I mean, we've kind of spiritual experiences of whatever kind. I mean, you're talking about more concrete stuff, but you know, certain kinds of spiritual experiences. I think people either think you believe those experiences or you think, no, it's bullshit. It's just something in my brain. But look, there are possibilities in between that you can engage with an experience you can take seriously the possibility that it corresponds to something real. I suppose I would say, you know, in terms of certain fleeting spiritual experiences, I have certain, you know, in certain deep moral experiences, in certain engage, deep engagements with nature. I feel I have a kind of fleeting sense of some greater reality or point to it all. Now, I wouldn't say I feel confident. You have to say, you know, I believe those experiences are corresponding to something real, but I would just say I engage those experiences and I take seriously the possibility that they correspond to something real. So, you know, you can have that kind of engaged, diagnostic position rather than just what's your decision? Is it bullshit or is it real? You know, it's a possibility. You can work with, you can engage with your, you know, certain spiritual. Because if you think that things have consciousness, that consciousness is an underlying property of matter of life itself, of everything, then something about consciousness must be the retaining of experiences that take place within that consciousness. Unless consciousness is always completely in the moment with no knowledge about the past and no thought about the future. And that's not consciousness, consciousness is, we recognize it. Consciousness is a certain amount of awareness, right? So if everything is consciousness, including environments, why wouldn't something retain a memory? Yeah, I was into a podcast of a really interesting guy. What's it called? Is it the waking cosmos podcast? So he's got, you know, he, I think he takes seriously the possibility of telepathy on empirical grounds. But he's, you know, he's a really like group of children, he can make his case and, and he had me on and, you know, he wanted to say, you know, pun psychism fits better with telepathy or something. But I think maybe I disappointed in that. I'm not sure actually. I think, I think you could be a materialist and think there's some non-local connection between brains that passes information. I mean, it's an empirical question. I don't, I'm not saying I, I believe that, but it's, it's not obvious to me. You'd have to be a pun psych. I mean, some people say then, okay, what about in quantum entanglement, you know, isn't that like, you know, we can have particles that are correlated even though they're so far apart, no signal can pass between them. Problem with that is, you can't pass a signal with quantum entanglement. So you know, that, that doesn't show that the possibility of something like telepathy. But you know, look, even if you're a total materialist, it seems to me that it could turn out that there's some non-local connection with brains. It could turn out that there's, you know, all the kind of, yeah, this is maybe it is a game to have a Rupert Sheldrake actually. I don't, I don't see why a materialist couldn't necessarily accommodate these phenomena. So one thing Rupert Sheldrake believes in is you can tell when someone's looking at you, and he thinks he's, you know, he's demonstrated this. But there's all I had to do. And then, and then he think, yeah, like I don't know, I just, I just, I'm a philosopher. I don't, I haven't looked at the data. I'm not, that's not my skill set. But then he explains that by saying, you know, the consciousness reaches out, but, you know, outside of your head and touches the person or something, I mean, not literally. But why couldn't, if you're a materialist and you actually thought there was overwhelming evidence for this phenomenon, you could just think there's some kind of non-local connection between brains, you know, I don't. So yeah, I actually think, you know, these are just the scientific questions and this philosophical questions. The philosophical question, how do we solve the help on the consciousness? Scientific questions, you know, we just have to look at the data and, you know, and I mean, I mean, a lot of pan-psychists are just total secularist atheists, you know, like David Chalmers, like Luke Rolloff's, they don't believe in any kind of transcendent reality. They just believe in feelings, pain, seeing red, you know, that's obviously real, and they don't think a conventional scientific approach can account for it. So, you know, pan-psychism, I don't think has to be wrapped up in any spiritual or psychic phenomena or so on. Although having said that, I suppose, if for independent reasons, you were motivated to adopt some kind of spiritual conception of reality, I suppose a pan-psychist worldview is a little bit more consonant with that. So suppose you have a mystical experience, and you think in that mystical experience, it seems to you that there's this higher form of consciousness at the root of all things. Right? If you're a materialist, you've got to think that's a delusion, right? Because what's at the fundamental level is just physics and that's inconsistent, that doesn't have this higher form of consciousness. If you're a pan-psychist and you already think there's consciousness at the fundamental level of reality, you know, it's not so much of a leap to think what you're experiencing in the mystical experience. It's part of that fundamental story of consciousness at the fundamental level. But, you know, that doesn't mean you should trust mystical experiences. There's a difficult question. It just removes the reason to doubt the might suppose. Here's my last question to you. Okay. If this is a real thing, how will it be proven and what will change once it is proven? Pan-psychism. Oh, I think you're talking about the cup. No. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm just swirling it around. If you can prove that things do have consciousness, what will change and how will you prove it? So yeah, this isn't just just an abstract theoretical question. You know, consciousness is it the root of human identity? You know, fundamentally we relate to each other as beings, with feelings and experiences. You know, consciousness is arguably the source of everything that matters in life. And yet I would argue that our official scientific worldview is inconsistent with the reality of consciousness. And so we're at a very strange period of history where our official worldview denies the existence of the thing that's most evident and the thing that gives value and meaning. And I think this can lead to a deep sense of alienation. You know, a sense we don't fit into the world. We lack a framework for making sense of the meaning and purpose of our lives. And I think in the absence of that, people turn to other ways and making sense of the meaning of their lives. You know, consumerism, nationalism, fundamentalist religion. So I think what panpsychism offers us is a worldview that can accommodate both the quantitative data of physical science and the qualitative reality of human consciousness. So I think, you know, I think it's deeply important. How will we prove it? We won't prove it with experiments because consciousness is not publicly observable. And so you can't answer all the questions you want to answer with consciousness just by doing experiments. People used to respond to that in the 20th century by saying it doesn't exist. It's weird spooky. It doesn't exist. Since the 90s, people now say, no consciousness obviously exists. We've got this hard problem. But I think people are still in the mindset of thinking, oh, we just need to do more neuroscience and we'll solve it. I think people need to grasp the philosophical underpinnings, the problems that arise from the fact that there's something we know to be real that's not publicly observable. And we just have to accept that and we move to a position where as a scientific community, we think the job of science is not just to account for the data of public observation experiment, but also the reality of human experience. I think once we're at that point, I think consciousness is just sort of the, sorry, panpsychism is just sort of the obvious choice. So it's more getting, I think people are at this moment in this confused position where they think the only job of science is to account for public observation experiments. But if you religiously follow that through, you wouldn't believe in consciousness because consciousness is not known about in that way. You can't, we didn't discover it looking for a microscope. We know about it in a very different way, just through our awareness of our feelings and experiences. So we're in a confused state. Humans always think that at the end of history, but at the moment we're in a confused state, we need to move to a position where we we take the data of consciousness as a fundamental explanatory obligation. I think when we get there, I think panpsychism will just seem the obvious answer. All right. Well, thank you very much. It's been very interesting in the brain-bending conversation. Thank you very much. Yeah. You got me thinking, actually. I will think some more. That's kind of my job. So that's inevitable. That is your job. Thank you very much. Thanks. I appreciate you. Thank you. Bye, everybody.