The Joe Rogan experience Joe Rogan podcast by night I'm great man. I'm psyched to be here cheers. Her cheers brother. It's hard to finish now. How do you know how to question? Great to see you Always that's good My friend It's just strange times and we're both departing this land. Oh now for greener for us. I keep thinking back to when we first became friends and the strange path since from there to here and all our predictions and all the things that we we never would have imagined this You know specifically like that there would be this fucking global pandemic that we would suddenly be like some kind of like refugee is way too dramatic a word for it, but suddenly just part of this diaspora of comedians pouring out a LA like and not just comedians, but just people leave leave in man I talked to Joey today from New Jersey Called you know called him these in New Jersey, you know, it was just such a so strange Make your injuries. He's like that's right motherfucker. Yeah, you know, he's all happy in Jersey You know, he was the last like you even was intense But I was still like, you know, maybe we'll stick around and see what happens and then Like I'd been getting all these you know the problem with me is like I get weird vibes all the time and Not like the last I was on here. I legitimately thought a meteor was gonna hit the earth. I Really thought that's I work very hard on not listening to that part of me most of the time But I was getting this real weird vibe from LA and I'm like come on man. You're just like superstitious It's it's probably nothing and then Then my wife would say like I'm getting a really weird vibe like we maybe maybe I don't know if we should stay here renting Which is the place and I didn't want to tell her oh, I've been getting a weird vibe too Because I didn't want to amplify whatever that was and then I got on the phone Diaz he's like yeah, I'm leaving getting the fuck out of here and that was it I tell you this was telling me Burbank was sketchy where he lives in Burbings my neighborhood during the shit Against him, dude, it's like yeah, it's it's not and it's not just any one thing You know, it's like not just like some of the stuff I get stuff had to get shut down and because stuff was shut down It got a little more weathered than usual And it's like the you know the homeless in Cament. I was an echo park man and like I really feel like you know like the Red state people one of the things they love to tweet is like don't bring your liberal bullshit here, right? And right well this that's where I'm eating shit a little bit because you know I am I do still believe that we need to Decriminalize drugs that the drug policies bullshit the way we're handling. It's all wrong but They they used to be a way that they could get people who are like camping out on the streets and a lot of the times That was possession of like illegal drugs and because that that stuff got removed Suddenly you were witnessing like holy shit, man. There's people who are making like real like rational decision from the perspective of a heroin addict, which is They love heroin so much. You know that duck stand up jokes some things are better than life like they love heroin So much they're addicted to it. They love it and the shelters that are apparently available Won't let them do drugs and the shelters. They want you to kick it. Yeah, and so that's ridiculous But now I could be wrong about that But that is what I've heard is one of the reasons these people are staying out in the street is not because they don't want to be in a shelter It's because they don't want to be prevented from getting hot. Yeah, and so this is produced this like situation in a lot of the big cities, which is we're seeing like massive 10 cities and by the way the 10 city thing aesthetically It's not a it's not the best look but the Stuff that I began to experience in Echo apartment. I took I took my kid to the playground, right? And there's like a dude that looks like he emerged from a Time portal from an apocalypse. You know what? I mean, I'm not talking about like You know run of the mill like somebody who's a junkie who's like I'm talking like Scovered in like soot like Pure dilated eyes not wearing like you know The decheveled clothes you might expect from someone who's been addicted to heroin for a long time But like wearing like like he broke into wherever the costumes for Mad Max were like some kind of weird leather vest thing and like like creepy fucking cut-off shorts and he had a Machete oh jeez and he's throwing it into the ground of the playground and pulling it out like he's practicing throwing a Machete I'm with my fucking toddler man, and you know It's like it's so obviously we didn't go to the playground But that was you know my you know it was not uncommon in that area to see completely naked people Just not that that's bad, but not naked like the way covered in dirt wandering aimlessly Yeah, even worse than wandering aimlessly wandering with what seems to be a purpose in their eyes Some of them seeming like they're late where the fuck are you going naked that you're late for? Like are you being summoned like that was that was off But that wasn't just it man, you know, it's a lot of other things too And I'll just start it piling on top of it. Dude. I don't think this is sustainable living in giant groups of people I think it's when it works great It was wonderful yeah, and when LA was was working well It was fantastic when the commie store was packed and restaurants were doing well in the economy was doing well And they what the crime wasn't high it's great But when things go bad there's no sense of community So then there's a sense of like people capitalizing on other people who either own stores or who aren't home or whatever People who are desperate. There's too many people. Yeah, if you're in a community That's a small town and something goes wrong You can kind of bunch up together and help each other. Yeah, because you feel like you need each other and you feel like you're a part of something Yeah, people don't feel like they're a part of something here. They're all transient Everybody's moved here from someone else from somewhere else everybody thinks they can go somewhere else and they can and they probably will I mean I you know we all came from different you were North Carolina. I came from New York at the time We all Everybody who comes to LA in show business God what is the percentage of like how many do we know that are just straight LA like Christina posits gee she straight LA? Yeah Sebastian came from Chicago Theo came from Nashville Nashville's already came from no Louisiana. That's right. I mean Joey obviously Jersey. Yeah Chips and see town which is something I've always loved about it I've loved that element of like just this wild vortex and artists and narcissists and people who've just gone insane and like It's a lot of the sparks fly in That kind of insane cauldron of identity all that stuff is super cool. It's beautiful That's one of the things I loved about it is like the place we all know this is an The place is the place where you make illusion. Yeah, that was the idea you make things that aren't real Seem real and people like to watch that that's the whole TV movie industry the whole place is based on it Creating an identity that you like somehow monetize or studio makes monetize as your identity or something it was something magical and beautiful and all of that but Not it seems like there's a real emperor wears no close thing Happening right now not just in LA and but I feel bad talking shit about LA cuz man I love it. He's been so good to both of us. Yeah. I mean that city is like I will always love this place It's not the problem is not the city. This is the there's I've been thinking about this a lot lately, and here's an issue I am Progressive on just about every issue across the board. Yeah gay rights civil rights women's rights Whatever women's right to choose fill in the blank pro Medicaid pro universal basic and Pro so many things but there's a thing that happens in large cities where large cities are always blue And I'm trying to figure this out cuz like New York So I used to think it's always because they're educated You know and educated people are more likely to be compassionate and compassionate people more likely to be Democrats but there's a balance that has to be achieved and When the shit hits the fan you need law and order and I think that some people who are Democrats who are Progressive people they don't understand That aspect of human nature or they want to deny that aspect of human nature like when the mayor of Seattle was dealing with that whole Six area locked down a little small little country that they had put up barriers and shit and they're like literally We're had armed guards there that uh, what's it called again? Chop chop our chas right the mayor said maybe this is our summer of love Well, like no, it's not summer of love some people took over other people's businesses with force Like just because they think the way you think or they subscribe to liberal ideas like you like you're a liberal too So these this is like your gang of thugs you have to support when they take over other people's businesses No, we have to be able to call out everybody and just because somebody is on your side You can't let them take over city blocks and just Institute their own government and then say it's the summer of love. This is crazy talk And this is how this is gets get cities destroyed and this is it would get the police defund it and this would It would get people saying crazy things like we need to disband the release everyone from prison and no more prisons and no more laws and no more police I'm like no the way things go well is you have to be safe The only way you're safe is if you have a strong military and a strong police force and There's something about liberals that don't want to believe that they see the bad cops They see these videos and we all agree we got to get rid of bad cops They got to reform the police they have to but those are not all the cops. That's crazy You're just only see the bad no one's no one's filming excellent interactions with friendly cops and compliant People that's not what you're filming you're gonna get a lot of it You know what I've been doing with this whole fucking thing man Because if I get because you know me the way my mind goes is not gonna be like Red state consciousness when it comes to that shit cuz when I saw that autonomous zone pop up. I'm like, let's do it baby Spread it out, but what did you think would be good? What could good could have had come of that? Well, I mean the history of America is this beautiful yet somewhat like There's a there's a mania a utopian mania in the heart of I think the American spirit which is like Americans Identify with this it's you know in George car with a great job of desicating it by saying it's called the American dream Because you got to be asleep to believe I love that joke But I love the American dream and they're what's so beautiful about it is it's this idea of like I think together We can do something new It's going to be better than anything that happened before and from that spirit you get all great innovation that cuts goes across all political ideologies So to me, you know, and they always call it. I've always loved they call it the American experiment Fuck and love that man because it's an experiment. It's like what's see what we could do here together and for an experiment to work We need to be able to look at what didn't work in the experiment and improve upon it now that being said It's like for me. I've been trying to like pull myself out of the even though I identify as a progressive I'm gonna vote Democrat. I'm just what I'm gonna do But that being said I try to pull myself out of that because I don't want to be cubby old man and I have a lot of Friends who are like hardcore conservatives and I know that there is this idea and I think a lot of the the idea gets perpetrated by People who are under tribalism blue rat and so the blue people they propagate Conceptualization of the red people which is kind of what you said to well, they're not compassionate Yeah, it's like shut the fuck up. We're there. Do us get the fuck out of here These are some of the most compassionate people I've ever met my fucking life They would die for people that they've never met they wouldn't think a big problem is the figure head right now The Republican Party is Trump. Yes, Trump is such a polarizer figure and he doesn't seem to have much empathy if any They seem you know, I mean that's it's you don't know who he is really because you don't talk to him privately But his public persona is that of a winner who doesn't give a fuck and you're fired I mean that's that's a non-epathetic perspective and we associate people who support him with also lacking empathy Then you add into it children in cages at the border and you see those videos You know what bothered me more than anything about the kids in cages? There was one video that really bothered me where Mike Pence went to visit Like he's on the ground like next to the cages. See if you can find that Mike Pence visiting the border cages now Apparently these cages had been put up through Obama and that's what's interesting about this whole border wall and border discussion and immigration discussion because Obama particularly when he was running for president He was very tough on illegal immigration I mean he He said a lot of the same things at Trump said if you listen to the speeches that Obama said people believed him and agreed with him because it wasn't a Republican talking point It was just a safety talking point and he was also a way that he could get people that were more like more concerned about the problem with illegal immigration or more You know he could he could tie that up with just saying listen We have to follow the rule of law and you know they had these talks and they built these these cages They did that during the Obama administration, right? Yeah, so here's this so sir these these are the guys that fled from Mexico and Who knows where else and came through the Mexican border and then Pence is standing there in front of these guys so like imagine you're a dude You live in you know Ecuador and you make your way up through Mexico because you have a fucking dream like America is the land where people can make it because this guy fights in the UFC his name is Marlon Vera and He's a bad motherfucker and he just won this weekend and he's I believe he's from Ecuador, right? That's Marlon's Yes, and he Talked about it in his victory speech He was talking about you know how man. Hey man, you know you can you can actually do it He came over here who's talking about in the countdown show too He came over here. He lived a year without his family just building up money and fighting to try to get money to bring his family over And then he brought his family over and then as time has gone on yeah He keeps winning's on like a seven-fight win streak and now he's like a top 10 contender in the UFC and He could have been one of those dudes. That's right. See this this this is not these are just people that Are in a fucking terrible place and they're trying to get out putting him in cages like it just it's a bad look And it's an even worse imagine you're that guy who comes over from Ecuador and you're in this cage And you see pants he could touch him you could touch him if that cage wasn't there You could reach over and touch him on the shoulders. Yeah, right there right the fucking guy who's second in line to the the most Powerful army. Yeah, the world is ever known the Trump's the commander-achieve That's number two. Yeah, and he's right there in front of a cage and he doesn't seem to care like play this It's weird. I don't know how I want him to look But he's not like looking at the people he's kind of like looking away He's kind of like ignoring the people. I mean, I don't know what you're supposed to do You're supposed to look at them with that would that fill you with sorrow and despair? Would you not be able to Rationalize and disconnect yourself from the humans that are suffering when you think about all of us We're basically the products of a fucking enormous chain of events not one thing but look at they have foil blankets man I mean this is crazy shit. They're stacked in there Stacked on top of each other wearing foil blankets. Yeah, it's terrible that it and it's look at that guys They could rise kids. Yes, and it's got a family back home No, no, no, it's kids got separated from them. Yeah, that's what he's thinking about and you know the in a game man it's like I keep trying to Get out of a like I keep trying to get out because I this is what I've realized because I love flipping through I go from I will jump back and forth from like Fox news to CNN MSNBC I'll check out some Tucker Carlson blast over to Rachel Maddow find these like Polar opposite and well I feel like what's happening just as a result of the entertainment that is news is that we're getting a very Non-new-on-st We're being told what we are basically do you listen to the or watch the Hill No, you should watch rising the Hill It's a crystal and saga and saga is a Republican and crystal is a Democrat and But both of them super smart and really rational and they're honest They're honest and they're non-partisan they break things down based on their honest interpretation of what's going on Yeah, and it's so refreshing these two right here crystal ball and saga and Getty They are fucking fantastic and they I love the fact that their friends yet she's left. He's right It's not bullshit. They're not frauds. You think you're really crystal ball If I my last name is ball, I'd name my daughter crystal. Let's dope Come on, you would not name your magic crystal ball Well because then every because you do that and you're gonna like I didn't even notice it until now because I'm not name a phobic I'm not name of it's crap. Why name is Duncan. I am Yeah, I do think I just am sensitive in names like that because if they're real name is crystal ball Be a third-grader named crystal ball With third grader you might be able to get right with it, but 10th grade you're gonna get tortured by time girls reach 15 crystal balls Yeah, yeah, it's like a never ending you know anyway that what I'm that to me. It's like the the propaganda it's propaganda and The reality of it is like I'm trying to figure out what do we all have in common? It sounds like a cheesy thing and what we all have in common is we want to be happy Yeah, when I talked to my my my liberal friends They want to be happy when I talked to my conservative friends They want to be happy and then you add to it now. This is where shit gets weird a lot of people want to be a hero and Why wouldn't you a lot of people want to help other people? They have a service mentality they would they want to die for something good a lot of people Really do want to help and then that's to me or the problem start is because that's being subverted and The way it's being subverted is you know it sucks man when you're out somebody who's telling you how you feel Yeah, if you ever had that happen when you're out someone they're like Why are you unhappy today and you're not unhappy? Oh, but if you're not careful You'll be like maybe I'm unhappy. Yes, and then you then you become the unhappy thing and they've like sucked you into a thing You're not yeah, and so for me. This is the danger of the news is they kind of tell us how we are how we feel they first of all this ridiculous red blue bullshit It's like stop. I mean every single person. I've ever met would I don't think I've ever met anybody Who wouldn't try to help someone who is drowning? I think most people I meet would or like that and I think that transcends politics But somehow they've got us thinking we're all different and separate and then on top of the thing that really bothers me and annoys me Obviously, man. I'm no fucking Trump fan that guy's a lunatic and he's driving people crazy, but what bothers me Yes, it's like to pass it later. You're right. No, you're for sure. He's driving people nuts and it's just the way you said it and What bothers me is that there response from like really intelligent people who consider themselves Liberals is they're shaming these people they're shaming them. They're saying oh their idiots They're red next they're dumb. They're peasants stupid peasants. How could you like him? It's like how they liked this guy because they thought that he was gonna help their families They were fucking they were not doing great economically He they bought into a thing and they invested themselves in it and if they are starting to like it's dawning on them that they succumb to another American tradition Mm-hmm, which is the con artist is an American Tradition it's American to be a con artist and it's American to get sucked in by one Happens to the best of us. It's happened to me at a grateful dead concert We wanted to buy a hundred hits of fucking acid This son of a bitch got us a sheet of acid Convince this to try to sell it to make more money to get more acid We left there with one mushroom stem on the way back to Hendersonville I've been conned. I know what it's like. It's a very American thing, but it's like so there was no acid at all dude He snow he got we took our money to buy acid and then he's like we could sell this acid and buy more acid and then You know, we're like yeah, let's do it and then he sold the acid I guess and then we were gonna buy more The point is like you started a business What he my friend almost gave him his fucking car like this was a very great Asmatic hippie he was like looked exactly the way he'd expect him of fucking hippie bandana big hippie beer Some people are good at that and it's weird. Yeah, they do weird things like they talk a little too close to you to make him comfortable Yeah, they use out what just in their own linguistic programming They like they like they just get you and they know how to talk you we know when I always to work at Newport Creamery some I'd work the register sometimes and we had lessons on how to deal with flim flam artists That's what they call them flim flam artists so they would teach you so we had to sit there and be taught like how Someone will fuck you up like sell something across three bucks and they'll give you a 20 and they'll say hey Can you give me a 10 and a five and then the rest in quarters? And you're like what yeah how much is that and then before you know it? He's saying something else and talking over you and you think you owe him $40 yeah Like you're giving him more money's like I gave you a 50 so you give me the 20 that 20 and then what is it? It was three bucks so you got me 47 so like before you know it you're giving money away And you know understand what's happening. It's right especially when you're a kid. I was like I think I was 16 I was working there was a monkey basically a monkey right and you know these people travel all over the place And they do this to folks they just trick them they pick pocket up like watching David Blaine do car tricks Okay from as close as you are to me I don't get it. I don't know what he's doing. He could get me every time. He's gonna trick me every time He's so good at it. Yeah, and there's guys that are I don't know if they're at that level But there's guys at a level that you or I can't perceive and they'll steal your watch Yeah, there's guys who can get your watch off. Yeah, like they can get your watch off I don't know how they do it, but it's a known thing So known thing that guys know how to get your watch off fucking guys I mean how many videos on YouTube? There's awesome videos of like children doing this to people you could see like kids like get trained to do this It's like they it's hacking our operating system essentially he stuffed a card into my friend Jeff's watch band And Jeff didn't even know he was in there. He's like look it's there and he's like what he looks at his watch But he like pull it out. That's the card he was looking for folded up tucked into his watch band You're like what did what did you just do? So if that guy's a thief if he was like some look I was just someone stealing something. Yeah, there's a whole genre of you kids. Oh boy Look at that Wow little tiny kids. Yeah They're trained their train is delicious. Yeah, they practice to do it I mean this is just look we see this on the human realm and we're like oh my god They're children you see a coral reef and a little fish come and take food from another fish It's like just totally normal. I mean it's not even this is just part of being in a hive You know that just feel like I watch is that which has happened? Pro back that up. That was crazy. Look watch how this guy bumps into this guy. He takes his watch Watch this Is that what he did? No, no, the guy's still at a watch. I wouldn't he steal? You'll never know I'm I'm too high for this. I'm too high for this But I've never seen anybody take someone's watch off But I know it's a real thing like guys can actually take your watch off. Yeah I mean like one with a strap where they do the buckle it's annoying for you to do yeah, dude I like to me this is a natural part of the environment We're in how many things camouflage themselves as other things take energy out of a system using the camouflage It's completely fucking normal nature nature. Yeah So you you get this Trump and you get people who fell for it and now those people are deeply invested in that Like magic trick which he did and by the way, this is another thing It's like look you don't have to like somebody like I don't like Charles Manson Yeah, but man I do recognize like how fucking entertaining he is you know what I mean like that's a very entertaining Cold leader Similarly with Trump not a fan. I you know the moment he said he implied you should shoot looters all the look We can go on and on with the anti-bull. I'm not I'm not talking about that I'm saying the problem is That our tactic is Americans is not supposed to be we listen to the state and get our cues about how to Be good people from the state our as Americans what we do is we have like basic fundamental ideas that are really fucking beautiful one of them being that we like believe that people have a right to be free and seek their own personal happiness That's beautiful man. That's that we shouldn't have the state telling us different versions of what that is We we have to be intelligent and autonomous enough to do that for ourselves And then from that like really be a you you know United States and and like what's happening now is these motherfuckers Are not unifying us? This is supposed to be the United States of America That's what it's supposed to be so if you're in a government official here and you're doing a thing that's making it all divided and Fucked up and you're telling lies and you're shaming people for telling the truth It doesn't matter if you're a Republican or a Democrat whatever you are as far as I'm concerned anti-American which is like man Americans and in fuck anybody gets mad at me for saying this Americans are beautiful people We we both tour we get to meet people all over the fucking place and talk to them and they're always generally wonderful Yes, some of them will take your fucking watch But still still you know in general in general that you you encounter very things we're going well See this is the thing that shifts everything is COVID the reason why everybody's ramped up I mean it's not no small feat. It's not just about getting sick It's about everybody being scared that they're gonna lose loved ones whether they're gonna die or they lose lung function You can't work so you're worried about your income. There's so many people whose businesses are Roting right before they eyes their eyes I mean imagine if you own commercial real estate now Jesus Christ and you you start thinking of the prospect of leasing a building that you invested all your money in Out to some folks. They're not gonna have offices like that anymore people are gonna do shit from home There's a lot of people that are actually more productive working from home. I know it's a fucked up time So everybody's on eight everybody's walking around on that you're trying to keep it together. That's right And so a guy like Trump Exacerbates it yeah, because he doesn't ever come out with a unity speech. Yeah, it's always like a stroke He's always the strong boss you're fired on the man Yeah, I mean this is the message and it works with a lot of people. It's a good look It's like comedy or music Not not everything works on everybody, but there's a lot of people that vibe with his fucking real cartoonish version of being the boss, right? but It's not a bring everybody together Thing and that's this is what we need. We need the guy in the movie that stands on top of the hill the guy that says we Have more in similarity than we do That we disagree with man. We're together. We're friends Most people most of our issues we could work out Emically we can talk most of our issues The vast majority and we need to not just dwell on those but embrace those like embrace all the things We like we want safe schools for our kids. We want safe streets. Yeah, we want a Fucking bridge maintenance so the bridges don't collapse. We want everybody to be okay. Yeah, man We want no crime. We want we we don't want unjust prison. We don't want people being Unjustly accused and then sentenced to life in jail. Yeah, other people to work forever to get them We don't want any of that we know he prosecutors that unjust prison. We don't want people being unjustly accused in the sentence to life in jail. You know the people to work for everybody get them. We don't want any of that. We only prosecutors that hide evidence that shows that a person was innocent. That's real today in 2020. Yeah. They don't even get in trouble for it. Yeah, man. It's right. It's true. And I think that the only, maybe this is naive. I think we got to get over our addiction to the person on the hill. We got to get over our addiction to the idea that the way we govern is the only way to govern. That's it. And that's why when I see that, what was it called again? A chas? You know, again, like, yeah, to me, it's not, to me what I'm seeing there is at the very least a radical experiment in a potential now. It's a temper tantrum by some 20 year old kids who hate capitalism. I hold where the founding fathers. It's good question, but you know, it didn't have YouTube. And I think they would have formed a much better opinion. Well, the whole, and this is the other part of it. Like, so I keep thinking about, and again, man, this is where my case is going to start falling apart. But I don't care. I don't mind if my case falls apart. For me, it's, I keep thinking like, okay, so what are they telling us now? How to feel? They're saying, well, either you're a socialist or capitalist or a communist and tell me what kind of is diameter, what is the moment to. And I keep thinking like, man, can't there, isn't it possible with all the technology we have that there's a newism that no one's that doesn't have the first part of the world to attack you at good point? So it's like, and so it's a very least, if you meet someone, who's like passionate in a real way, not a bullshit way, by the way, man, because like, there's a big difference between like you were, you know, right away when you run into somebody who's trying to tell you how to be. It's horrible. It's a brave, even if it's in a light way. It's such a, it's so drone some like, uh, uh, some people want you sick. Some people want you to stabilize them like, unbow some one, one things for sure people don't want you to know you are, because if you know you are, they can't tell you who you are. But, but you know, if you run into someone who's legitimately, you, you're, you, you're, you're, you're ready to lose fucking viewers right now, baby. This is where people press stop on Spotify, go on to like, listen to like my favorite murder or whatever, but I was at Burning Man and stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, man, I am sure Burning Man is like everything else in the world. There's a lot of profound conversations and few of them that want to make you just bury your head in the sand. Definitely. Right. And, and, but one, this guy came up that you're just getting these great chats and this guy came up to me. Where does he happen? And he said, do you think world peace is possible? He wasn't being a missionary or anything. Just ask. Just ask. It's a real question, but it's so cliche that it seems like a joke question that a moron would ask you. Yeah, because you're funny. Yeah, what would you want more than that? World equality, world, financially, quality, world peace, it's like four or five things you would ever say like, look, that might cure up a lot of shit. Yeah, that's right. And, but to ask it is so cliche, like everyone's like, Burning Man, what? Well, that's a, that's a piece. Well, you know, and that's the other thing. If like, let's say you're at the Venice boardwalk and some son of a bitch dressed like Uncle Sam comes and asks you that you're going to like go the other direction like fuck you. Like you're just going to leave, right? Maybe if you get out of Nicaragua, man. Yeah, yeah, but, but yeah, he was actually somebody who's really into Buckminster Fuller. And I think that was something Buckminster Fuller put out there, which is like this, this question is very important. And you should you ask yourself, this is an individual, because if you think world peace is possible, right, even if you acknowledge that maybe right now, it's not possible, but if you can invent your mind some technology, some, or even if you can invent your mind like an ex, like an algebra for a thing, you don't have the space for yet, but it could be. Right. If there's any sense in you at all that world peace is possible, then from that point forward, you should be part of whatever it is that's going to make us have that great utopian idea that transcends American borders. And because that's other problem is American dream thing. It's confined. It's not the American dream. It's the human dream. The human dream is the intuition we all have that there's a way for us to be on the planet that doesn't involve blowing each other up. Right. And that's, I think it's possible. I think it's possible. I just don't know how it would be, how to get there necessarily, but I think it's possible. And one thing's for sure, whenever you get a Trump or any fucking pundit, blowing out divisive shit into people's brains, they are not draw, if there's like a scale one-size-world peace one-size chaos, they're dropping, they're dropping their, their pebbles on the chaos part of the scale. And it's like, why do you think they're doing that? Because man, let me tell you, there's a lot of money to be made in fucking chaos, man. There's a lot of money. I mean, isn't that what an engine is? An engine is kind of like controlled explosions. Do you remember when Trump talked openly once about the military industrial complex? Yeah. And they said they want to go to war. Yeah. And you're like, what? The problem is he says so many other things that are ridiculous. I know. If only he just said that. If only he just said that, the problem with him saying that is you can go, yeah, yeah, yeah, but he also called this chickie fuck to horse face. Like, you know, and you go, oh, yeah, that's not that nice. But he, he had, he had a, he had a thing there, like a moment, like an Eisenhower moment, not quite as eloquent. But when Eisenhower was on television, he warned people about the military industrial complex as he was leaving office, that's to this day, one of the most profound speeches I've ever seen because it gives me a chill because I think, well, this is black and white from how many fucking years ago? Yeah. If this shit was going on then, it's not like it's stopped going on and stop. We see one of the reasons why we're in such a fucked up space politically is because this is the first time where politics have been really exposed to the general public by the internet. Like you, you have a different access to politics. You never had before. You have real time things breaking. You find out, like if someone like Gavin Newsome said he was going to take a pay cut, he didn't Fox News, Princess, it goes, why? And he'd get all these stores like, oh, what you have known that before cell phones and the internet, you have never known that he didn't do that. You would have to be a person who's really into politics. Yeah. And there's not that many of them. Most people are busy. So now, politics relies on scandals and scandals are what we asls people through. That's it. The thing about scandals is not everybody's a good person. And if you do a lot of fucked up shit, but you own it the way Trump did, people didn't count on the asshole vote because there's a lot of assholes out there. And finally, they had a king. Like, this is a king, fuck you, magga, and where the fucking sunglasses and they talk shit to get Ted Cruz at rallies, those guys finally had a king. And that's like, we didn't, there was no king on the other side. There was no king, the compassionate, intelligent king who actually made sense. Well, that's the sense we don't have. Think out, how depressing your very astute observation is. And this is the idea was we weren't going to have a fucking monarchy here. That was the whole point. And now we elect a monarchy. Yeah, yeah, that's the whole point, man. And it's like, and again, it's like, look, if, like, if you start playing the game that you're the smart person in the room and that it's people disagree with you, they must be dumb. If people have different ideas in you, they must be stupid. And then you start shaming them. What can you, what all you're doing is creating this like, you're going to create a reaction to that. And the reaction is going to be a celebration of every single thing you're, with your great vast elite intelligence deriding, you know. And so I think, you know, that's the problem is it's like, I, it's just there's nothing worse than when like people who are legitimately smart have read a bunch of fucking books, have got masters degrees, have not developed enough compassion to understand that just about every single person on the planet wants to be happy, wants to have a full stomach, doesn't want to hurt anybody and would run into a building on fire to save somebody. Most everybody I would say, I would say at least 90%. A large percentage. And these motherfuckers are shaming them and telling them them they're idiots or they're stupid or this and that. It's like, fuck you man, you don't know what these people came up through. You don't know, these people were born in their like, houses filled with fucking methamphetamine smoke. Whose parents were like, you know, absolutely fucking insane and they still managed to get out and get a job and have a fucking life and pay taxes. And now you're fucking ass is going to tell these people who didn't have the fucking trust fund that you had that got you into the fucking Ivy League university. Yeah. They're fucking idiots. Shut the fuck up stop. They're not. And then I'm shaming those people. That's the problem. The idea is like every shame. I mean, then you're just honestly illuminating their their their current situation. Let's just let's say it's shaping them. Yeah, it's time to like let go with a whole like snooty thing. It's time to also on the other side. It's time to let go of like every single one of these people must be like burning candles to Malick in their backyard thing too. Like let's like go of all those stories for a second. I'm not saying there aren't people burning candles to Malick. I never I've never met them Bohemian Grove video. Is that Malick? Yes, that's Malick the Al God when Alex Jones is an interesting John Ronson's no it's Molec they were talking about is it Molec is open out the Al God according to Alex John Ronson and Alex Jones is snucking at Bohemian Grove. This wasn't everybody was saying it was all bullshit. And I say this many times and I'll say it's more. Give me that later. You got it friend. Alex Jones. He's he's made some mistakes and some big ones. But he's also actually exposed some real shit in the owns up to the mistakes he's made. They're not good. He doesn't think they're good. There's a thing about finding conspiracies everywhere that's not good for your brain. I really believe this. I think that if you go looking for those things and that's all you look for and you look from all time you can get real paranormal and real crazy. And then there's also a bunch of people that are trying to stop you from doing that because you do expose some crazy shit. You know he was talking about Epstein a long time ago. I had a long time ago. He was saying there was a fucking island and they take all these rich politicians and some celebrities and they bang these kids and I was like, come on. He was telling me this a long time ago. So he's also the one who told me about Bohemian Grove. Well I actually watched different. That's like I think this tape was actually made before I met him. So he went and snuck in to this place where like former presidents go. There's a photograph of it's Ronald Reagan with Herbert Walker Bush and a couple other people all standing around. And it's like these are the people that used to hang out at this place and they would put on robes and they would worship an hour ago. An owl god and they would burn an effigy and they're playing an Alex snuck in and made video footage of this shit. And they're no one's denying that it's real. This is really did happen. So they're in with these bankers and former presidents and they're dressed like druids. And some guy brings over something that's an effigy that's supposed to be a body, a wrapped up effigy. It's also a bunch of sticks in a blanket. But it's like shaped like a body. And they drop on the fire and they're all worshiping an owl god. Why is that bad? Imagine if you saw those, if that's what your business says, just finding those things. How crazy you think you get. First of all, wait. Then you add in vodka and head wounds. Wait, wait, wait, hold on. Wait, go to the vodka and head wounds part. What's up, Jones? Okay, I got you. A lot of vodka and you had a bit of head injury. Goddamn it, man. When I was in liberal arts school, man, there is this great teacher who changed my life, Sam Scoville. And one of the things he taught was so beautiful. He still teaches there. Whether things he taught was figure out a way to take in all information and then filter out the shit that's not real and keep the real stuff. And like, you know, Alex Jones is like, let's yeah, some of the stuff is real. Take what's real. There's a good chunk of it that's real. Like I remember he was telling me that the governments using chemicals that turn frogs gay, I was like, what? What are you talking about? He was, yes, he was pesticides. They're turning frogs gay. And I'm like, that can't be real. No, there really is that true. Yes, there's pesticides that change frogs genders. What? Yes. Yes. But some pesticide fucks with frogs genders. That sucks. Maybe it doesn't. I mean, depends on the frog. Maybe it's awesome for the frog. Maybe frog's not talking of fuck because they've never been taught homophobia. Why would they care who they but there's a real thing that does. So you find that it's it's a pesticide that has some sort of an effect, an unintended effect on frogs genders. Dude, that's another thing that people don't talk about. Past designs that have been used in like golf courses and like, there's people live around those. That's a chemical dump. Yeah, golf courses are pesticide atrazine can turn male frogs in the females. Cool. So this is fucking pesticide. Perfect. It changes the gender or should I say the sex. Is it the same thing? What? Sex and gender. Hey, I'm not getting sucked into that fucking black hole, Rogan. You can keep that shit to yourself. Hey, I'll get sucked into another black hole. Isn't that crazy though? Well, yeah. Before we get into that stuff, I want to say this real quick. Is that cameraman me? Friends at the Bohemian Grove. Future friends, I should say. I just want you I don't know much about you. I know Alex Jones, you know, probably on vodka drinks. I don't think he was done. I think he was sober. You started drinking after all these. He's so fucked this up. Sorry. So get you out of an infiltrator. Look, I went to a summer camp. We have bonfires. We wore robes. I mean, not like maybe what you do. I just want to say, hey, come on. Invite me. Please. I don't want to tell anybody anything. I've heard you guys are pretty awesome. Actually what I've heard is the idea was to get a bunch of hardcore neocons together and then mix some artisan in the hopes that like having like brushing shoulders with artists would in some way shape or form loosen some people up a little bit. And I've also already have a tram that connects campsites there to other campsites. Meaning you just get in the tram and suddenly you're hanging out with Dick Cheney. Listen, I won't tell anybody. I got a podcast. I want you to tell Joe let me in. I worship Malick. I won't worship Malick if it means hurting people, but I don't understand why people are upset about fucking by the way there. And that's like that you have fucking video. Why is what's wrong with worship? We're speaking nothing. This is the thing. This is the thing that I get confused about here. Okay. It's like in our country, we've got people who are Christian. Yes. And that's a beautiful thing. And I do love Jesus. I was reading the book of Mark today regarding the parable of the but that being said, I don't think it's fair necessarily to tell people they can't worship an owl or burn an effigy in front of an owl and some kind of symbolic magical ritual that represents the disintegration of your negative energy or whatever it may be. I really don't know. But that be, you know, to me, that's the other problem that's happening right now is like superstition is running rampant. I'm friends with lots of witches. I know a few Satanists. I know a few people are under the occult. And I don't know a single one of them that would tolerate child abuse. I don't know a single one that wouldn't kill somebody. Some of them would kill people if they thought they were hurting kids and make it so that nobody found the body. Some of the Satanists I know, they would kill some. They would kill someone probably. I don't know for sure. I'm not trying to throw any Satanists out of the box. But I'm just saying like this idea that we can't have alternate pagan religions in our country without immediately being associated with human sacrifice or child abuse. I think that goes against the American spirit. It's like, look, because people don't want to subscribe to your particular like very popular global religion doesn't necessarily implicate them in like something that is truly a horror, which is human trafficking. So to me, these are the problem is like, man, we got to be a little bit more nuanced in our and in our conceptualization of these people. Again, I don't know what's going on with the fucking bohemian grove. But from what I've heard, it's basically a summer camp for billionaires where they try to get artists in there to like loosen them up a little bit. That's what I've heard. I could be wrong. Who told you this? I honestly can't fucking say. Interesting. Look, man, I don't know. And I know I know I know you've seen the video. Have you seen the video? Have you seen the video? Have you seen it? The ritual in front of the Al guy. You've seen it. Yeah. Dude, go come with me to burning man and you will see that every 50 feet. Look, I don't think it's that big of a deal. I really don't. If it involves hurting kids, it's a big deal. And if these motherfuckers are doing anything that involves human sacrifice, hurting human beings in any application of that, of course, then it's the worst thing on earth. And I'm so sorry that I said anything about it. But I don't think that's what this is. I mean, obviously what we're seeing is not that. We don't know what else happens. What you're seeing is them burning sticks in front of this Al God. And it's like this crazy, crazy speech they're giving while it's going on. It's really weird. Hey, can we hear some of it the speech? I found another video where they stabilized the footage. Oh, it's like, but I mean, before before this, nobody really believed it. Listen to me. They turn away once again, it's on earth. That's either the lighting, the effigy on fire and everybody's cheering. It looks fine. Stanley Kubrick had this quote once to Nicole Kidman. I think it was. They're working on eyes wide shut. See if you can find what she said about the elites that he that he had said saying, I know I saved you that I can find it if I have a chance to look at my laptop, but it was something about him, you know, talking about the powers that run the world and that they all have something on each other. And that's how they all can stay together. They all compromise each other. That's what's going bones is a ballet. That's all that stuff's about. So he had a much more concise quote on that. But when you see something like that, you go, well, I mean, it's like fun that they do it that nobody knows they do it. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Like maybe it's like one of those rituals where you get together, you have things it's hilarious and you both put your hoods on. You go out there and you burn the owl or you burn the sticks in front of the owl. And what's fun is that you're not supposed to be doing it and it's a secret, but nothing really is happening. That's also on the table. Yeah, it's possible, but it's fucking weird man. That was weird. Imagine if there was no Catholic church. Imagine if you are a billionaire. That's what you're doing with you weekend. But imagine if there was no Catholic church and there was one video of a mass. Right. We would be like, what the fuck? That's fucked up. Imagine any religious ceremony. If there was only one version of it. Cause I'm not trying to reduce it to summer camp fun or even like fraternity games. There's a who knows what it is, right? We just know you can know what it is. Yeah. We did have to tell us. Well, we just see something crazy, but it's not evil. I mean, what is it? Well, it's it for me. It's a question mark. I don't really know. I know that my stress weird. My tendency whenever I have a question mark is to assign malevolence to it just out of a basic kind of weakness in my own bias. Like if I don't know what a thing is, like, you know, when you're waiting for the doctor to call regarding some scan, they just did on you. You know, if you if you have the slightest fear of death or any kind of bias in you, then that space in between when you when maybe we're overlooking this, maybe it's like their version of Renaissance fair. And people just want to escape reality and pretend that they live with mole like the owl god and throw a fucking hood over your head. Yes, please and peace be with you. Yeah. I mean, it could be some kind of like pagan celebration. You know, and if you look back at like the history of paganism or hedonism or parents, McKenna does such a great job talking about that. Oh, you city and mysteries and then, you know, all these like things that aren't really quite as accessible as the main main religions of the world. All the religions, religions, the world, they have this beautiful quality in them, depending on the religion. And generally, one of the qualities is so beautiful is a mechanism of self forgiveness and a mechanism of purification that a general assessment of the human condition is being somewhat depraved. I know how many like the puking in ayahuasca, you're purging yourself from your darkness, the confession booth and Catholicism, maybe you could say in Gnosticism, like true gnosis or in Buddhism, like connecting with the actual reality versus your overlays of reality or, you know, it goes on and on. This is all within each one is this idea of like there's a way for us to ritualistically create if you want to be a pure scientific materialist, a beautiful placebo effect that gets you to drop some of your neurotic qualities or the very least reset your intention to make the world a better place. And anything, whatever that, I don't care what the f*** it is, whatever it may be, if that's what it's all about is a recognition like, man, you beat yourself up every day. You're so hard on yourself, you beat yourself up for all the shit you did in the past. And we live in a world right now where there's not much tolerance, there's not much forgiveness. And anything that allows a kind of like steam valve from which all that sh** can get released. So from this day forward, you're born again, you're brand new. I don't care if it's an owl, man, go, if you think that's crazy, look at like Main Street Disneyland any night. That's some crazy s*** to watch too. And some people's entire lives, I'm not being like changed from like having a great night anywhere. So, you know, to me it's like ritual is not scary to me. What's scary to me though, it is anything that objectifies humans, enslaves humans, hurts kids. And so, yeah, human sacrifice, any of that stuff. And if that's what's really happening there, I truly don't know, then I completely apologize. It's just sticks. It's just sticks. The question is, was it always just sticks? Did it used to be people? Did they used to sacrifice a person? Did they stopped doing it at one point in time? One widely cited Nicole Kidman interview was made up by the fake news site, news punch, your sons are pictures. God damn it, they got me. They got you. But again, I say what the quote is. Yeah, he said the Hollywood's run by pedophiles or something. I found the red a page where it was put up. God damn, they got me. Oh, no, it's a glad I asked you. Hey, you want to see something real creepy? Can Jamie do may ask you to look something up? Look up the, that there's a video of a van that was actually used for human trafficking. That shit is chilling, chilling. And it's like to me, it's like, man, if we're going to be, it is there anybody who is at the helm of the ship that's fighting those motherfuckers right now, deserves medals. And I hope that they never stop what they're doing. I just want them to be very precise in their attacks. That's all. Don't dilute your position by getting caught up in something. And again, I am not, I'm already going to get attacked for this saying like, Doug, it works for the web. But I don't. I don't. I'm a Buddhist. And I go to Ramdas retreats in Burning Man. But and if they invited me to the Bohemian Grove, I go. And if I went there and I saw that. I was going to say Stanley Cuber can keep a secret. We can too. Are you saying you would go to the Grove with me? Yes. But you know, if you and I were invited there and we saw anything happening that was anything to do with like what people would think it would be a trap. And they would be setting us up. They would put on like some sort of fake thing to make us look like fools that we talk about it on our podcast. Do you know, man, if we ever do a movie together, that's the movie, like it should be all of your friends going in the boat. He didn't buy good than what he was in. Exactly. Right. Like I become friends with some guy who's like a banker who really likes comedy. Yeah. Right. And then this guy tells you you get drunk one night. Like I know the Illuminati. They're real. The Build a Bird Group. It's real. Like what? Yeah, man. Jackal Island. It's that they made the federal institute. It's not even from America, man. And you're like, what? What? And then this guy starts on unraveling the tale of America. Can I tell you something crazy? Federal Reserve. Yeah. People in my family used to own parts of Jackal Island. Okay. Tell the story of Jackal Island. Because that's what I'm talking about. People don't know it. Well, here's the problem. I don't know the story. Like I remember hearing some, like two paragraphs I remember hearing people in my family had some claim on land there and that they sold it. And I, since then, I was just kind of resentful because it's like they sold it for nothing. And like if they'd held onto it, like, you know, I would be at the fucking bohemian grove. It's a Jackal Island supposed to be the place where they invented the federal reserve, right? I went there. There's a great hotel. I didn't. I didn't. This is what does it say? Listen, this all disclaimer. I got rid of luck. We're all three of us are more Yes. Okay. This is not either. That's one thing that drives me crazy. There's one of the things about silencing people that are crazy online. I can tell when someone's crazy. And part of someone being crazy is you see these crazy people and you go, oh, I think they might be crazy. And then you look into it and you go, yeah, another, none of what they're saying makes sense. They actually are crazy, but damn, that was pretty close. Yeah, I do. You got to be the thing about people saying things that other people disagree with when they want to silence those people is you don't think that other people are smart as you. You're thinking that's going to work on other people. Someone's saying that the earth is flat and there's lizard people that control the sunrise. If that was, you'd go, okay, you know what I'm saying? Yeah. It wouldn't work. Yeah. So why not let someone say it? So someone says it doesn't work on you. Yeah. Well, what are you worried about? You're worried it's going to work on somebody else. Yes. That's what you're worried about. You're worried it's going to, and that's the weird thing about COVID because it's the one thing where you're not allowed to do that anymore. Because if you do anything that goes against the government bylines, anything that goes against what the world health organization thinks you should do or CDC thinks you should do, you get kicked off of YouTube, you get silenced. Everybody gets removed. Whether you're right or wrong, it's the one thing where you can't talk crazy. You can talk crazy about the earth being hollow. You could talk about beings that are made out of light that fly in and out of our consciousness. Yeah. That's responsible for all of our ideas. Yes. And you could talk about how there's an application that's coming in 2023. It's right now being vetted by the NSA to make sure that we can use it so we can communicate with the aliens. You can have all these wacko videos where you're making shit up and no one cares. But if you say that masks don't help and what we need to do is get healthier, they'll remove you from YouTube. Well, that's the fire in a crowded theater thing. Yeah. You can't yell fire in a crowded theater. So like the problem with it is to me is I like have gone through every single stage of grief over YouTube. That's a bad analogy. Maybe a better analogy is you can open up businesses as long as you do it carefully. I used to love YouTube, man. I used to love it. I used to love it. Well, what I loved about it in the old day. That's the love. I still go on every day. But what I love about the old days is what you're saying. No one's putting a cork in the champagne bottle. It was wild. It was it was a museum of madness. You would and what was even better is the algorithm was working in your favor. So it's like punching hollow earth. Yes. That's going to take you all the way to like some crazy deep shit. And that never once in all my explorations on the early days of YouTube was I like this could be real. It was more like wow, look at all the different versions of reality that people are processing. And it was a joy. But I think what happened probably is like people realize like God, like what we've got like you talk about this sometimes, man. The nightmare when it will happen when primates figure out it like use friction to make fire. You talk about this. Yes. And that's a nightmare for the planet. Like you think the fucking shit's bad now. Wait till the champs figure out guns. Yeah. Just fire just fire just how make their own fire. Think of like the beginning. When like if the proto hominid shift into like figure out a really good point, you know, this is trouble. I'm not a good point. Think of how many people died in the beginning of like discovering fire. Oh my God. How many experiments we're done with fire? How many things we're just set on fire? How many people just burnt? I'll get it. I bet you can eat it. Let me eat it. I'll get it's energy in my body. Holy fuck. He melted his face off. You know, so similarly like with the internet we have this fight. We have this new fire and like people who are like in the conduits of the fire or I think they're having this really rotten come to Jesus moment where they're like because I think a lot of these, especially if you look in the Silicon Valley, these people are freaks the early date. Like the people making technology. They're nuts. I've seen you that Steve Jobs thing with him in a comm. You know, whatever. These people are fucking crazy. But I think they're recognizing that like it's like, okay. The internet is the new fire. Yeah. And so and they're starting to understand that like because of them, because of their intentional manipulative coding, because of their deep study of B.F. Skinner in behaviorism, they've produced this hyper seductive semi-sentient information to spur. Because of their deep study of BF Skinner in behaviorism, they produce this hyper seductive semi-sentient information dispersal device that is driving people who don't have the immune system to data that you're supposed to naturally get from school crazy. That's what's happening and so people are going nuts because it's like, well, I had that with a addictive quality of technology. Those two things together, the addictive quality of just looking at your phone and getting information off your phone and then add it to all this stuff that you're saying. Yeah, man. And it's a crazy combination. And I think Google and YouTube and as much as like, you know, and I do think censorship's far. I would hate to be in anybody's position there because on one hand, you're looking at like a very liberal, very beautiful idea, which is like everyone should be allowed to say whatever they want to say. And then it's meeting like, well, but what about these hyper-crysmatic, seductive people who like Hitler? You know what I mean? So now you run into this terrible place of like, and also we know that there's people who don't quite have the ability to discern what's real from what's not. But we allow, this is my beef. We allow some of that because we allow evangelists. Hmm. I heard Robert Tilden on one of his shows. Yeah. It's time you write a check to me, Satan gets a black eye. I have good. Dude, who's in my act for a while? Dude. That was like, where's my checkbook? You say, and you son of a bitch. Dude, it's a badge and you could steal money that way. It's, look man, I don't know what you know what I'm saying? Yeah, I do know exactly what you're saying and it's like this type of con artistry. I also cigarettes. Oh, you know, it's like this type of con artistry. Generally, it seems like there's some kind of grandfather clause on specific styles of, of, of, of, of, of, a feverie and murder. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because like, they know they're killing people. Imagine if you had bubble gum that killed a half a million people a year. Just bubble. It's like bubble gum, but it just people are just dying. Stop selling that shit. What the fuck are you doing? What are you doing? You're seeing people have a right to chew their bubble gum. Like bubbles. Yeah. That's right. That's all was. It's like you chew and bubbles makes you happy and everybody's dying to cancer. And this company's making $500 billion. I was here or something like how much do they make at cigarettes? Yeah. How much, let's, let's guess, let's guess. What do, how much would you think the end? By the way, I want to say that before this is a box of cigars. Okay. Mike binder gave me that and he gave me that one over there. Another box of cigars. I'm not anti tobacco in any way, shape or form. I'm a pro free choice person. You absolutely should be able to smoke cigarettes. And I think he absolutely should be able to sell them because I don't want to roll my own. And if I want to cigarette as a grown fucking man, you can sit. I want to be able to have cigarette. Cigarettes do kill a half a million people in this country every year. Yeah. Or they're going to die anyway, right? Cigarettes kill them early or they died directly because of diseases that you can get from smoking cigarettes. And their kids get sick. Dude, the worst man, kids that live in, Greg Fitzsimmons, yes, lung problems this day because his parents changed smoke. They lived in Massachusetts. My mom did, but she quit when I was real young. Did you ever? Did you ever get sick? Were you in the car with her when she smoked? I must have been with the windows up. I don't, well, we lived in New Jersey. So cold in the winter. I'm sure I was. I don't think she smoked in the car with her kids though. Dude, do you mind if I have a little more of this? Fuckin' hand, look at the drink at all, man. It's so good. It's fine. I remember Fletcher North Carolina, middle of the winter. You'd go down and wait for the bus. My friend, Jimmy Fink, I think it's Jimmy Fink. His mom would let us get in her car to wait for the bus. It's wonderful, very sweet. Also, I think, and I'm sorry, Jimmy, if you're out there, I know we haven't talked a long time. I still love you though. But I'm sorry if it's not you and I'm getting confused here. I just remember she smoked and there was smoke in the car. My dad smoked. I would ride in the car with him on trips and he would smoke and you'd breathe in the smoke. To me, where, and again, this is always the problem, which is clearly we need there has to be some regulatory principle in the world. If there are people who still watches, that means there's going to be groups of people to get together and talk about better ways to still watch this. If there's groups of people who get together and talk about better ways to still watch this, and then we create a way for them to form a thing called a corporation. You know what I mean? You need to regulate that. That's what we need regulation. But then the problem is who does the regulating? What's the incentive for you to regulate? Is there a financial incentive? Yeah. Do the regulators get paid an exorbitant amount of money? Let's say you and I start a vape pen company that is like a nicotine vape pen. I like what you think. Start pouring money into people who are against tobacco knowing if we can make tobacco or we will keep the vape pens legal or come to the new tobacco. But here's the thing about vape pens. This is the real thing about vape pens. Some of them are not good for you at all. They're real bad for you. And there's a connection they're saying now between COVID and kids at vape. Kids at vape dying of COVID getting serious COVID. But it makes sense. I have a friend who's got a kid that sucks on one of them things all day long. Just just vapes constantly. Kids vape and these kids at vape all the time like the oils that you're taking into your lungs. That's not healthy. The idea that it's not cigarettes. So it's healthy. No. There's a lot of evidence that points to some of those companies that make those oils. They don't do it in a way where there's like different kinds of oils. And they have different reactions to the heat. And some of them are like, am I saying this right? Let's check on this. What is the problem with the different types of vapes? Because I think there was one type of oil that they're using because they have to somehow another mix. The same with the marijuana ones. You have to mix this stuff with the THC and some sort of chemical. But it's different. You can do it organically. I know they've done it with coconut oil. I know they've done it with things like that. It's the same way with hash, man. I think it's like the way people make hash varies. And some people there's a healthy way to make it. Yeah. And obviously the way using the most chemicals is the cheapest. And so there's certain types of hash that you, I think, or derive. And again, my friends out there, look, I don't know. But it's something like butane. Someone told me they said, at a marijuana store, I can't remember what. But yeah, man, it's like the cheaper. It's the oil. Like what kind of oil? I know there's one guy that was selling them with MCT oil. OK, here it is. Authorities in the Food and Drug Administration and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still aren't sure what's causing the dangerous trend. But theories range from issues with vegetable oil and vapes juice. So the idea that doctors are just now taking note of a problem that's been percolating for a long time. So OK, so that was the speculation that people were using, like, if you try to cook, OK, and you try to sear a steak and you do it with olive oil, you're going to fuck it up. Because olive oil is not like something that you really sear something with. Like you put olive oil and you don't want to get it that hot. Yeah. Olive oil is more something that you'd like to saute with. But other oils like avocado oil or beef fat, like that stuff is amazing because you can get it really fucking hot. And it has a very, very high temperature where it turns to smoke. Right. So it's like healthier for you. The idea. So if you're misting this stuff into your lungs, you don't want it burnt. Right. You want something that's more. Right. So I would imagine if you're using these cheap, this is again. I'm a moron in a rhiniscine test, but we're doing science. If you're using a vape pen with some really shitty canola oil and you're getting that burnt spray inside your lungs, like that could be terrible for you. You got some fucking GMO corn syrup bullshit in your lungs. Yeah. You know the haunting thing, man. You go to a pharmacy, right? And you watch as the pharmacist dispenses the drugs. How carefully it's right. Like they're like so careful in there, administration of these pills because they know if for one second, you give someone Xanax when they were supposed to get pen and sewing. You killed somebody. Right. So you have to be very careful. But like, meanwhile, look at us right now, Joe, did you do a test on that bottle of booze? Are these, I didn't even, honestly, it was embarrassing. I'm like, I don't know how to light this blunt. But then like smoke is something called dad grass. I don't know what's in this shit. I don't do any studies here. I just for people who love Steely Dan. I do love Steely Dan. There's some pretty fucking songs. You know what I mean? I'm saying like the general like in in America and anywhere, the general sense is I'm going to eat it. If you give it to me, especially if it's in a colorful box. And then you're like, it must be okay. And the problem is is like sometimes it's not okay. Look at that one. Like, you know, look at like the big moments in history when it was shown like actually sometimes the stuff we sell you. You have to live in mind. Fill it in mind. The latest stuff that gave kids birth to the fact. Yeah. Or what was that radioactive shit they painted on watches? Oh my God, dude. We did a whole show where we talked about all the diseases that people got from, or ritium. Was that what it was, Jamie? What was the radium? Radium or ritium? They were using it for all kinds of things and people's faces were rotting off. Yeah. Literally, they have holes in their face. They were painting it on watches because it would be, it would glow. It's cool. Looky, but so similarly, it's like they were using it for makeup, I think. Yeah. And here we have the internet. Here we have the fucking internet. Suddenly we have a hyper, a way to like super connect with every single person on the planet, but not just connect with every person on the planet. We have an artificial intelligence based on a neural network. I don't understand how it works. Suggesting who you should connect with. You know what I mean? It's like, is the internet, the litomide, technological, the litomide? Are we looking at a thing? I think so. Is that what we were dealing with right now? I think we're on a spaceship and we haven't quite figured out how to slow it down or where the brakes are or how do you go left or right? Yeah. But the spaceship is being propelled by thoughts and ideas and social media and world events and drugs and sex and politics and power and control. And it's all just hurling through space. And while it's all happening, we haven't quite figured out where the brakes are or what's the best way to be harmonious with each other. So we're all in this constant battle for control thinking and once we get in control, we're going to set this fucking ship straight and everybody's going to be cool. We're going to be finally, we're going to get along because you're side one. But yeah, you're still going to have half the fucking country that hates you, half the country that doesn't agree with you, half the country that has to like be really tolerant in order to engage you in any of your ideas and admit that you're right. Right? And this is what we're doing and it's not real. It's not real. I don't think it's real. A lot of the people that have ideas in one way. If they could just talk to people in the realm of the area where they have disagreement, I bet they could work it out. I think the problem is more people not talking than anything. Joe, tell me about the spaceship ideas. Because I don't think you're saying something like knowing you like I know you. I wonder if you're saying that metaphorically or like if there's it is metaphorically, but it's also actual. We are on a spaceship whether we like it or not. We're spinning a thousand miles an hour and we're driving through infinity at a pace that if you if it was small and it passed by you, you would go holy fuck. What was if it was if the earth was the size of a baseball and it whipped by you in real time the way it's moving through the universe. You'd be like fuck. That's what the earth's doing. But the earth is huge. And yet it's tiny and it's surrounded by things that are enormous. It's got a son. It's a million times bigger than us. Just a fireball in the sky that all life on earth depends on a very clear space between earth and the sun, a perfect balance, perfect balance in this unstoppable heat. Just keep the water melted. Don't boil it man. We're hurling through infinity. And while we're doing that, we're trying to pick who gets to be the leader to steal your tax money. There you go. We're trying to tell you, you can't go to a beauty shop. Because I don't want you getting a cough. That's right. We're trying to tell people stay home, stay home, Trump's trying to kill America. It's the wrong approach. Like the approach they're making, the approach they should make is should be all about positivity. Do you know everybody who's voting knows who Trump is? Everybody knows about the riots. Everybody knows about everybody knows all those things. Talk about what you want to do. Talk about what you want to do. Don't talk about how bad the orange guy is. Tell me what you want to do. Don't use woke lingo. Don't you fucking do it. Don't you do it. Tell me. Tell me. For real, don't bullshit me. Tell me what you can do to fix this. That. Tell me you want to bring everybody together. Just that everybody right wing left. We got to meet concessions. We got to figure out where we meet in the middle. There's much more that we agree with than we don't agree much more. Let's concentrate on that stuff. Let's be nice about this other shit. That's right. That's it. That's a look. It's out. What you're saying, it's beautiful. One of the qualities is beautiful is simple. What I saw, I got to see the Dalai Lama's sequence. It's like, wow, you in person? No. It was at an event. But you were in the audience. Yeah, it was in the audience. He was there with this translator. It was beautiful, man. I wrote the vibe in the room was so sweet. To go back to what you were talking about earlier, some people will tell you a stupid thing, like a thing on the side of a cereal box. Do I apologize for that? Be kinder for, I'm so sorry. But I could tell you, Joe, you know what the world leads. Love. And it's like, I do like cliches though sometimes. Sometimes they're accurate. Depends on who it's coming from. Who the cliches coming from. Right. If they're sincere. So the Dalai Lama is on stage and he says, you can always be kinder. And it was like, you could feel this wave rushing out of him. And it was like the essence of Buddhism, just rushing out everyone simultaneously thinking like, yeah, he's right. And it transcends politics, it transcends geopolitics. And that is what you're saying. It's so beautiful because it's the same thing, which is like, you know, like this planet, it was so lucky to be out of a planet going that fast and like we're so lucky to get a chance, the little people in the time. We're not here that well. I think this COVID thing gives us an opportunity to realize how lucky we really are. I do too. For the people that are struggling right now financially or struggling with their health, it doesn't, you know, doesn't register with you. And I'm sorry about that. But I think for the people that aren't fucked by this, there is a moment where we get to realize like, oh, okay, we were taking this for granted. We thought we had all this thing wired in. Yeah. You didn't have it wired. I mean, they kind of read the Senate. What was the pandemic? There was a pen, the White House decided like a year before Corona decided to get rid of the pandemic. What was the response? What was the actual? No, like he got rid of the pandemic. It's based on it. They dissolved it just imagine. Imagine if like this is a asteroid like what ones are coming? 40 years fire everybody fire everyone. We're fucked. We're fucked just fire everybody more tests. The more sick people we have stopped the tests just funny. They did that. I know. I know. So from that, what did they teach us? They taught us that we have to depend on each other right now. Not the state. Well, I think they should give people the opportunity to do what they want to do. I really I've say this too much. I say it almost every show, but you can't tell people they can't work. It doesn't make any sense. You're not smart enough for you to say that you that the only thing that matters is whether or not these people expose themselves to the virus. At this point, I think that's ridiculous. But can I tell you something else? You're mad. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Which is something else matters. They have to acknowledge that the financial problems that people are going through are almost insurmountable. They have to acknowledge that. And that destroys a lot of people. They creates a lot of depression, creates a lot of suicide, creates a lot of drug abuse, creates a lot of turmoil and a lot of mental health issues. That's a fact. It's true. So we're taking away people's sovereignty. Look man, if you want to, that was another great American tradition. If you want to kill yourself, well, you can do it with so many other ways. And you're welcome to kill yourself. You know BMX flipping knows you stop you from doing flips with your motorbike. That was the whole point. I mean, that's like, remember when everything got safe? Like the whole point, there was a time when everything was like, oh, Gonzo and the problem is you're spreading it. Right. So it's not just you and your motorbike. It's you crashing your motorbike into a crowd of people. That's what it's like. That's one of the problems. That's a good way of looking at it honestly. Yeah, but the bigger to me, the bigger, that is a problem. And it's fucked. The bigger problem is, okay, so you own an Applebee's or whatever. And suddenly the government's like, okay, everyone can go back to work, but no one solved the problem. You the owner of the Applebee's caused the general manager like, hey, dude, get the waiter's weight staff back. We're open it up. You're not going to be there. You're going to have the general manager come in and you're going to have the weight staff come in. Now the weight staff have been living off of unemployment benefits supplied by the federal government that sometimes are more than like what they were making at the place. That's not a bad thing. But all of a sudden what happened is prior to a true reduction of this pandemic that can kill you most of the time it doesn't, but you might be the one who steps on the landmine, all of a sudden they just decided, well, we got the economies to work. So now you're unemployment benefits get cut off and you have to go back to work, but they haven't solved the problem yet. So you become the person who has to bear the weight of the failed approach to the disease. And that's why it's fucked up to sit. Yes, you're right. Man, my friend runs a new California barbershop in Echo Park. Brian, he started off as my barber. He became my best friend. He's one of the coolest people I know. And like one of the reasons I want to leave LA is because that shop can't open. That's where I used to go to get my beer churn in my head, but it wasn't just that. It's a real barbershop. You have these great conversations, you beat people. He's like, he's like, got me it. He's gotten me into a sublet that I once when I needed to be in that life for a little bit. One of the sad things about being bald, I never really developed a relationship with the barbershop. My time I shaved it hit my head. It was too late. No, it's a good thing to do. You can get like a nice straight razor shave. Yeah. You know, there's you don't get a lot of talking about that, right? It's like for girls with girls, it's acknowledged that a lot of ladies like beauty salons, they like to get their nails done. They like to get their pedicures. They enjoy it. Yeah, I really like that. It's all been shut down here, right? Right. And like it sucks because that I loved going there and it's like, but you know, the thing is like a lot of people, it's not time to go back to work because if there is a true risk that for making minimum wage, you're going to get a disease that probably won't kill you because you're a waiter, Applebee's, you're probably going to be okay. You're taking your vitamins, but you might be living with your aunt who has Alzheimer's disease. And you're going to fucking kill her because you picked up a little bit of it. And the reason you're going to kill her is because you had to go back to work because your benefits got cut off. So it's like, this is why it's a very complex, fucked up problem that really we, it's like, yes, for me, a person who I'm doing great, do I want everything open. I want to go to guitar, I want to guitar center is open, but I want to stand in line. I want to go into good. I want everything to be the way it was. I'm probably going to be okay. But this is again, it's like, this is a complex problem. I don't buy into the idea that the whole thing is a scam. I think we've got exactly what that asshole, not quite as a asshole too much booze. That is a die who's actually the opposite of an asshole on your show. I'm like calling it Dr. Hanassel. Remember the Joe Rogan questions everything that for all ages to told us there's going to be another great pandemic six years ago. Well, we should, I've talked about this before, but we should tell people Duncan and I were in Galveston, Texas. And we went to the Center for Disease Control. He went to the very place where they experiment on Ebola and all these hair crazy diseases that kill you instantly and Duncan and I were in this building and we were watching. We watched through a window that takes you, there's another window behind that. It's like this Plexiglas sealed room and they have spacesuits on and tubes. And I'm like, hold on, hold on. So there's some shit in there that can kill everybody, like 100%. It's right there and they were doing tests on it. So these people are wearing spacesuits and they're walking around with these horrific world-killing diseases. Yeah, man. And remember we missed the flight. Yeah, we did. We missed the flight. We had to get there. We were just highest fuck at the airport talking and the flight took off. Duncan and I lost total track of time. We were barbecued. Did we take edibles? Dude, I remember. We did something. We were so high. We might have took edibles. We might have took my customers to take an edible in the car. My customers. That's because it takes time to get to the airport. By the time you get to the airport, the absurdity of it all just kicks in and full steam. Because I have no control at the airport. The airport is a place where you just want to give up complete control. Yes. When you super duper duper high, that's a fun ride. That's nice. So you and I were just sitting down talking about life and that plane went, shoo. And we're like, where's the plane? Like the plane left? Like what? We didn't just miss the plane by like 10 minutes. Like 40 minutes. It was the ultimate dumb-stoner moment. Like if we were not our way to film a television show, we would have looked like the biggest losers. We looked like losers anyway. But we had fun and we took one in the morning and we got there with very little weight. We made it. But being in like the Galveston Texas Centers for Disease Control with like very little different. This is the, this is Duncan. This is Duncan went to some preppers. This was one that I really love because I didn't get a chance to be with you. So I got to watch it, you know, like from the clips and see what it was like when you watch it. Why didn't you get to be that one? You know what, man? I was really like not annoyed by like I was like, I love doing the show. But I'm like, of course he doesn't show up to this motherfucker. Because like suddenly I end up deep in a, I'm deep in a cage. I totally done it. But I think it was when like there was a bunch of things that were trying to film when we were short on time. So we couldn't do things together. But when we did the skin walker ranch one together, he was so pissed. It was so fake. Oh, there was the problem was when we got there, right. We got that we heard this preposterous story from this person who threw a cigarette on the ground after he said you out. 100%. Yeah. Because I'm like, this is a moron. It's through a cigarette on the ground in the forest. This is a moron. Like we drove here for any line where we're here with the moron who's lying. I'm like, oh great. Great. I actually asked him to pick it up. Come on, man. I remember that moment, dude. But that just like you can't, it's beautiful Utah forest. He's smoking cigarette and you throw it down and you step on it. You're not my kind of person. Joe, here's the reason you're so American. You really do believe in the utopian ideal and Joe Rogan questions everything for real. Both of us. This is what I realized years after. We both had a sense in our heart that we might really find proof of something big. And we went into it with attitude. We did. But we were so high. We believe what we were saying. Dude. That's the funniest thing about it. It's like, you know, most people when they do these shows, they're not going into it thinking, like, I'm actually gonna uncover something. You know, some of them. Yeah, of course. They don't go into it thinking they're gonna cover something. They go into it thinking, this is all a bunch of bullshit. And I'm gonna do so. I'm gonna be like, or maybe they think maybe it's real or whatever. But the main thing is they don't, they taught, they, they pretend it's real. That's the thing. They pretend it's real. We didn't pretend it's real. And we also went into it like two guys who were more high during a show. You will not find. Yes, true. You will not find. You tell me, it's me. Barbecue. Look at me, big boy. I was barbecued. We were so high, dude. And this guy, we don't need to blow this guy spot up. He's poor. Look at me, my hipster face. Oh, boy. He's a people love. He believes when he's saying, maybe, maybe all that stuff that they were telling us. They really truly believe. But they were talking about like bulletproof wolves that appear out of mist and all this stuff. To me, that moment was when the show went south. And what was really funny was like, this is the last thing the sci-fi network wanted was for you to like actually like begin to like realize that maybe we're not gonna find UFOs and they started getting unhappy, I think, with the situation. Oh, they did get unhappy. There was actually a conversation where they're like, is he trying to debunk these things? Because they have all these shows on like UFOs and all these showing ghosts. And then they have this comedian asshole with his asshole buddy and they're both high as fuck. And like this is so fake. Like this is so, but we wanted to know. We wanted to know. We wanted to know if it was real or if it was me. Remember the alien artifacts part? Do you remember that part? I wanted to collect all these alien little bits of dust and metal. You don't remember it probably. I remember it. Remember that because I was already giving up on that point. I noticed a pat, unfortunately. And I feel real bad, but it was, it was really a personal thing because I was dealing with my own nonsense. My own inclivity, my own inclination to believe ridiculous stories, even today, like with the Pentagon story about them having recovered a craft not made from this world. I don't want to, I don't want to read the misquote, man. I don't. So I know that there's a real pull to believing in bullshit. There's a real pull to like manipulating the actual facts of Roswell so that it appears that government absolutely 100% colluded to keep the alien crash from the general public. There's no way it could be a weather balloon. I don't know if that's right, man. Because I know it in myself. Because I see it in myself. I see that dirty little asshole that wants to believe in Bigfoot, that stupid fuck. They're like, hey, hey, maybe it's a bear. Maybe it's on a lost monkey species, but I want to believe so bad. So I don't think that this is your asshole. But this is me. This is me. I've worked on this. This is something that I've spent a lot of time thinking about. There's a lot of people out there that just lie thinking about anything, but they, the same way they want to believe too. They want to believe in UFOs. They want to believe in Bigfoot. They want to believe in all these things. They want to believe. Yeah. And it's not their fault. This is, they grew up in a fucked up town and the friends were probably all drunk by the time they were four and the whole thing's a mess. And here they are stuck in this situation where they're just making shit up. And here you and I are standing there going, I don't think this guy ever really was kidnapped by Bigfoot. And we get to hear these ridiculous stories. Even there was too many of them, man. Everybody we talked to had this, I look real obvious, psychological like Ben to them. There was so he's like, right, everyone. And no one had a steady chassis. No one who you were talking to, right? Yes. Remember the fucking Bigfoot guy that said he would chop his pinky off to find out of Bigfoot was real? He was a professor. He was a professor. I forget. I forget. We had him on the podcast. We had the foot print. See me? Dr. Melcher, right? Melchrum. Yes. Thank you, James the wizard. Dr. Melchrum. Dr. Melchrum, he said he would cut his finger off to find out Bigfoot was real. Would you cut your finger off to find out? No, I don't care. Listen, I hope it's not real. I hope it's real. I don't care. What would you call it? What would be awesome? What data set would you cut your finger off? I would cut my finger off to know if there was an intelligent design to creation on there. That would give them the very tip of my pinky for that. But then what happens? You want to round with this information. Can't share with anybody and you're freaked out all day? Well, no, then I try to contact that thing in a more intense way. I mean, like the tip of the pinky is not a bad thing to get rid of. Yeah, for like knowing whether there's like, again, you have to like, so weak. First of all, what kind of computer are you working with that you're going to have to take your pinky and like drop it in to get truth out of it. It's a stupid computer. You shouldn't trust it. If you ever want to feel what it's like to be like three again, make your thumb wrestle your pinky. Your pinky's like shit. You have no power in your pinky. Your pinky's so weak. That's like to be like a three year old straining against your older brother. That's right. Could off me asshole. Yeah. You got a pinky. That's right. What a bullshit little digit. What does that thing get used for? It's so, what is it used for? Yeah. Just okay. Both of them. You just located your pinky. They don't match up. What does that thing get used for? What is it used for? So yeah, dislocated both of them. You dislocated your pinky Oh, dude. Oh Damn, oh, that's weird. So one go. Oh bad. Oh, that makes sense. I'm an all sorts of you use it for holding wine You need it to like exist in when you're drinking to yes Look man. I think that don't eat like I hurt my pinky doing that Wrestling with my thumb like legitimately it hurts now It's so weak so weak. I do but I do so much with my hands I'm sure there's some chin ups. There's some reason for it so many kettlebell grips And it's mostly these other fingers even when you draw back a bow my bow my my release doesn't even have a pinky thing I draw back with these fingers this bitch ass just hangs on for the rod. You're so manier pinky Why do you do that? I love my pinkies. Yeah, I love them. They're great. I don't want to mess them Think of the name itself is like weird how weak it is compared to all the other digits They named it a pinky like the whole thing is like messed up the whole thing does sound like it's it is a very like we at The name pinky itself is like you know will fuck you up with this finger this finger right here is strong as fuck This finger gets a whole of shit. This is a strong finger. This is a bullshit finger. It's not hurting anybody We got all in the same hand listen everyone belongs in the hand like imagine the pinky if you Where is strong physically as your small toe? That's great. That's life just Everything can fuck you up every pebble is murderous Jumping off stairs the Broadway you stub your toe you want to die if you're that's who you are you are it's strong as your Little baby toe your little baby toe has zero power grab your little baby toe and like wrestle with it Oh, yeah, it's not a mess. It's a baby. Yeah, they call it a baby toe because it's like up Baby's stronger than your baby toe. Yeah. Yeah. Well, look bitch. I ask a little limb And that's yeah that would that's a funny thing about the human sentient projection in the time is like we're probably like the Little toe of the universe, you know like we have just enough realization to know that we're something where this hilarious intersection of like you know meat and what appear like a real feeling of like a You know I do feel like By a side if there isn't a part of you that hasn't like really come to the conclusion there seems to be party that doesn't get touched by reality there some eternal part of you that has met time and space I I think I feel like most people get that sense kids have feel that they know that they just actually know it But you know to me I think maybe what we are in this little temporary Whatever it may be whether it's an aquarium Whether it's a training facility. I think it's probably a training facility You know like I don't think it's that I think it's a process And I think the process has to be tumultuous because if it's not nothing gets done I think the struggles have to exist because if there's only harmony in peace everybody gets stagnant And that's right. There's there's a steady push towards Ultimate technological innovation. That's the steadiest push if you look at the human race in terms of like what it makes Like what does it do at the end of the day if you have these bees and they have all this different thing All these different social things they do and all these different things They do for covering territory and ground and all these different aspects of being a bee and laying the larva inside the honeycomb But what do they do make honeybitch? That's what they do. They make honey. What do we do? We make robots Yeah, we make computers we make technology and we make it better every fucking year We don't make better laws every year like no, no, we don't revise that shit We got stuff written with fucking ink from charcoal, you know That's right. It's like in yeah, the archive somewhere. Yeah What we do is we make better shit every year we make better shit and our goal is just keep making better shit And I'm obsessed with better shit. I'm obsessed with like Cell phones and I'm obsessed. I love like unbox therapy or Any any of those shows Marcus Brownlee when they doing these unbox videos and talking about the newest latest and greatest Technology and they're showing these 120 hertz screens and these fucking cameras with a hundred X. I'm a zoom like Amazing, but what are we doing? We're moving ourselves closer and closer to some kind of technological superiority and along the way We're losing our humanity and that's the weirdest most ironic part of it along the way of We've never been in a greater technological era if you look in terms of the things that are a consumer Electronics to get released right now whether it's laptops or iPhones or you know Samsung Note 20s or whatever the fuck they are these things are insane right never been in a time like this before This is like this is peaked also When we ever had a time with his riots in every city Every city all across the country and it's a lot of it is things that most people agree with Right, yeah, you say especially you say something like black lives matter I want to let's have a vote how many people don't agree with that statement Just forget about what that this everybody with all the Marxist thing and these people they want to do to destroy the nuclear family I don't know if they do or they don't but most people I bet who are a part of that movement don't even know what that means They don't know all that shit. They just don't want people to get killed by cops. That's it And it's not like Michael Che has a great bit about it where it says like that's not even asking a lot like matters Like black lives matter just matters like and people like me. I don't know Yeah, it's this is The strangest time for a socially because of COVID There's a strangest time because of the economy the strangest time because Trump is president Yeah, this chaos and the guy who's running against him It's older than him and you're like this is madness. Yeah, but what it's what is happening here And no one knows when the fuck people are gonna be able to go back to work and there's all this chaos and all this anxiety It's all happening together at once. I know man. I know and that's what this is You know this is what I love like I work my I work with a meditation teacher David Nick, and he's brilliant and One of the things he tells me and I really This is an example of how cool he is This is when all the New York Times shit came out about the aliens. I call him. I'm like David New York Times aliens and he's like wow, wow, and then his response was Duncan Where do you think thoughts come from? Do you think they are born from something? That was his response to me telling my aliens was a question. What do you think thoughts come from or thoughts? Like born like the way well, it's a good question. It's a great question. I still haven't figured it out I've asked if ideas were aliens. I've I think that if you think about a cell phone, right? I mean obviously there's a collaborative effort involving a lot of people that understand all sorts of different aspects of technology But ultimately it has to be an idea So I'm asked to have the idea to come up the original Motorola phone the fucking brick and then they had the idea to Invite and keep getting better and better and these ideas eventually lead to this thing That can open your car door turned your lights on your house. You can FaceTime your kids. Yeah, it's a crazy crazy crazy thing And it's all coming out of ideas. Where does it come from? That's the question the question is is it an inherent part of being a human being because like all other aspects of human beings We are not a single organism. We are a Biosphere the human organism is essentially an ecosystem the human organism has Untold trillions of of of bacteria in our gut right? We have it on our skin We have all sorts of weird life forms that we live synergistically in this space as a person Why wouldn't we think ideas be a part of that? Yeah, right? They might very well be a part of that and the health of your mind is The more you're able to live with ideas the more you're able to bounce ideas around like ideas as a life form Just like to health like if you use antibacterial soap all over your body all the time you get sick Yeah, right you get fucking rashes and shit because your body it kills all the good bacteria too Yeah, it's like man I I love the question because like one of my favorite Acetrips was I was like listening to Beethoven. Oh wow. Oh man, and I like I'd like some I don't know how it happened But like I was like I'd like had a little like a fit this beautiful girl. She's so beautiful and like I was at her house We're listening to Beethoven. I was tripping and I started thinking and it was just like romantic and cool and that But then I started thinking like somebody thought of this and then I started thinking But where did it where did it come from like if they thought of it? What was it before they thought of it like this didn't exist? Before Beethoven. Yeah, so where was it and and I remember it that as I was like thinking that on on the best I still to this day the best acid I ever had What's the difference I'm not much of an acid connoisseur what's a difference chain really good acid and mediocre acid? Apparently it has something to do with a mechanism of production right ways. Yeah, you know Which is like listen to like kid Charlemagne by Steely Dan. It's all about It's all about one of the great Ozzly one of the great LSD chemists of our time Who I and I met his wife and I asked her this question like why is some Why is acid not as good as it used to be in the 60s in her response was people are perfectionists anymore honey That was literally there's no wine before it's time. Yeah, it was like I don't know But well, that's but mean that's a thing that we want with whiskey Like that's one of the things about Buffalo Trace who bottles this stuff. Yeah, they they taste everything They taste it and if it's not good. They don't they're connoisseurs. Yeah, we want so I Understand that you would want that with acid the problem is that acids illegal. That's the real problem The problem is you have some fucking space daddy Some dude who's at the top of the fucking helm of this spaceship as it hurls through infinity They they they don't want you So they have to be space daddy if it's the president of the United States daddy right yeah The president of the United States is space daddy He is the fucking leader of the the greatest army the world's ever known is at the helm of the global empire He that's space daddy and he's we're going through space So if we are a spaceship the president of the United States of space. Captain Kirk. He has to be right. Yeah Yeah, yeah, well, it's not a space daddy. That's made LSD illegal. What's made LSD illegal was an earlier space daddy 1970 space daddy tried to disband the civil rights movement. Yeah, they're making drugs like all schedule one drugs That's space daddy did it but but good. The good news is like They're at least at the very least they're they're letting people like look at how what it is and like how it affects the brain and they're beginning to understand that They're like everything we all knew There's no point getting resentful about it, but we all knew this we all knew this and but we're all like it's being validated Thank God and it's very sweet because it's a healing drug especially when used in and with therapy, you know and It's healing. It's a very powerful Beautiful wonderful thing that exists on the planet that anyone could have access to especially if they like Stop this ridiculous prohibition And and lifted the prohibition. I'm not saying like don't prohibit heroin prohibit heroin prohibit methamphetamine but even even Regulation the problem is I don't want anybody doing it But I should be able to tell you not to that's the problem that really is the problem The problem is I shouldn't be able to tell you not to that's right and certainly like To slippery but you shouldn't be able to like there shouldn't be a five-year mandatory minimum for us Damn, and that's mad. No, that's madness and it really does heal people. It's a healing set look You do your own like do your research look into it. They read chaos now the Tom O'Neill book now Oh my god, dude One of my favorite podcasts over the last year I did was with Tom O'Neill and he's Greg for Simmons neighbor He was great for Simmons neighbor for like 20 years ago. I mean the whole time who's Greg's neighbor He was working on this book now Greg never bring someone to me never never says dude You got to have this guy on a as a guest ever so at all these years Greg's like dude This guy you need to have on this guy research Charles Manson for 20 fucking years He was originally just writing an article who's writing an article But as he's writing this article he starts uncovering more and more crazy shit and he goes deeper and deeper into this where 20 fucking years later he finally puts out this book and this book is basically detailing a CIA LSD operation where Charles Manson was getting dosed in prison Allegedly and there was he was being treated at this free clinic in hate ashbury that ran for more than 50 years and closed three months after the book was released They ran this fucking free clinic where they were dosing hippies. Yeah, and they were testing them They ran operation midnight climax. It was all part of MK ultra He's detailing step by step all these people that were directly involved in not just Charles Manson But in fucking Jack Ruby and all these other political figures in history And it's like what in the fuck all these mind control CIA LSD experience that were real and Charles Manson was a part of that Yeah, allegedly and Charles Manson was dosing up these hippies and not taking it himself He was using the techniques that they allegedly used on him for like seven years He was in federal penitentiary. What a mess. These are the problem with like any time power read this book man I look I've read a lot about that but this one's crazy. This one's different It's just specifically what they did to allow Manson to run free and build these murderous hippies and get them high on LSD This was all a part of this thing to sort of demonize the anti war movement. There was all these different strategies They were doing Time-run movement. Yeah, because you take L. S. D. and war seems ridiculous You take LSD and money seems ridiculous. You take LSD and anything that doesn't have to do with love seems insane It and though the problem is is like you know, and this is you know all the psychedelic bullshit aside if you just look at like basic Buddhism 101 I wasn't it not some of the best prior to this pandemic my favorite conversations were an uber's man And I'm writing this uber and this uber driver who's clearly a Buddhist. He's got a Buddhist a Buddhist statue art is like Dashboard and like so we start talking about Buddhism and We're talking about it and he said the coolest thing of ever heard of recording Buddhism, which is he's like Do you know how you look at letters and they you think that they're a language? What are you before that? It's so cool Thank God there's people like that in the world. I know well, that's a true Buddhist that's a true missionary But yeah, but in that in LSD will return you to that state So it will drop you under all of your apps that are running on the operating system of your consciousness for a little bit Some people hate that because they've like so identify with the apps They're the moment they can't like cling to the app that they become this like you know thing before the language Which is why some people on a lot of asset can't even they can't talk they talk at babies. Yeah, but but what what's happening is you're encountering like original sentience prior to conditioning and that's dangerous to Any kind of power structure like if I'm trying to implement a hierarchy I depend on your consciousness flowing into these rivulets that are language morality ethics the entire structure of Whatever I'm like trying to like tell you as the way things are And if I can do that then I can own you because suddenly your morality isn't real morality your ethics aren't real ethics Your idea of what's right isn't necessarily what's right. It's what's right for capitalism What's right for communism? What's right for this or that if I can tell you if I can make your moral compass point away from Service in any way shape or form I can control you forever And so anything that gets in the way of that is really like generally like delegitimized by power structures I mean it makes sense like the problem is you're dealing with a we've there's a combination of morality and a game and the game is trying to make money Like when you have numbers, you know, I'm reading this book right now. I'm listening to it on tape It's called Irresistible and I keep forgetting this dude's name who wrote the book, but I'm listening to it on audio book It's Adam alter and it's all about addictions. It's all about particularly how addictive games are Insanely addictive like games like Tetris and Candy Crush insanely addictive where they've made billions in billions of dollars on candy crush People can't put it down like farmland made fucking unbelievable amounts of money crazy there's something about numbers Like you see you look your bank account. You go. I've got $15,000 in the bank I can't believe this. That's pretty fucking good. I remember when I was broke and then you go You know what? It would be great if I had 50 me. I just like to get 20 this year I'm just gonna cut back on going out to eat. I'm gonna do that I'm gonna put five away and then you like you know what I need to make more That's what I need you to do. I need to make more money. I want to put in some overtime. I'm gonna talk to the boss I'm gonna look I'm dedicated. I don't give a fuck a lot of people get tired I don't get tired dude. I am dedicated to this fucking job And I want to move up in this company in the boss like yes, come on aboard slave man You're gonna work for the corporation 18 hours a day. You're getting paid well Don't get me wrong. You're not really a slave But what you are is a slave to your own idea of what success is you've got you're a slave to these the idea that numbers equate success. Yeah, you don't notice man You don't notice you don't notice you get used to everywhere you live It's nice if you live in a place that's safe after that. I'm telling you you don't notice You know what you notice you notice when your friends are around you and you're enjoying each other's company and your laugh And it having fun you notice those things yeah You notice if you do something and people enjoy it you notice if you have a good interaction with someone at a store Like they go no you and then you go no you and then you both smile and laugh and everybody's you're you haven't I that's those are nice moments man We have those we still have those like you let somebody in front of you and they give you the peace on you give them the thumbs up And these moments are still here man. They're more than they're not it's not like everybody is stabbing everybody Everywhere you look most of the interactions that people have with each other all over the place are positive That's right. It's a very small amount the problem is these small amounts making on fucking YouTube and then that's all I can watch There you go. I just watch these fucking people in Portland beat the shit out of each other and kick some guy in the ad when he's sitting on his He's sitting down when he apparently drove too close to his antique for guys And they made up get out of the car and searching his belongings this guy runs up behind him and kicks him in the head and knocks him on conscious Oh my god damn it What is not most people most of the time the problem is that's what everybody's gonna pay attention to that's what everybody's gonna Share on Facebook and Instagram. I saw that fucking video in my timeline like 30 times But this is what I love about humanity is like if you strip away the story and You see a person getting kicked in the head Honestly, man like I don't care like in general like I don't care what that guy is Don't keep him in the head. Here's the problem dude It's a natural inclination to want to fight the opposite of your tribe Yeah, and when you're 16 years old or however old that kid with a kid who kicked that guy in the head He looked young to me. I could have easily done that when I was 16 easily Yeah, I was so dumb if I was in the streets at 16 He was dumb and we pulled some guy out of his car that someone said tried to run us over and the guy sitting there Easily me or any of the people I have with would have punched that guy or kick that guy that's become that's normal It's normal. Yeah, the problem is the tribal War that we have going on. That's the problem. That's but what you just said That's the truth that's the truth and it's compassionate This this is a stupid kid. He was a fucking the I think he worked at the airport Whatever the fuck he was this is a stupid kid and and what he did is wrong I caught up in the wave of violence and the modern mentality. It's normal. We have to figure out listen man Here's a thing we must discover you're not first of all you're not gonna find this on the map I like going off the map, but there's not a map for this so that's Deliberating to me we gotta get off the map number one We gotta get off the map like first everyone. This is what's so crazy People are really legitimately tuning into like the like human trafficking in the United States It's a big business. It's one of the biggest businesses actually human trafficking. Yeah I was reading a post today and somebody sent me and I don't know if it's verified or really whatever where girl was saying that she was headed to a bathroom at a gas station somewhere and Someone she noticed that someone was had their camera turned around so they like had the selfie camera on with her face time and They pointed to this lady and they said what about her? She heard her say what about her you like her and the girl looked at them and the lady turned and looked at her She ran back to her car got in the car and the guy who was with them went and ran up to the side of the car like She thinks they were trying to kidnap 100% they were and that That happens that happens that's a real business. This is not like this is not a fucking story It's not a magazine article where people are you know someone wrote some fiction this is right and the funny thing not funny But what's ironic about these sudden Horror at human trafficking. There's a lot of the very same people who are Fighting against this thing that they're realizing is happening in the country simultaneously Don't want to look back into the history of the United States Which was a hundred percent based on human trafficking? 100% our country's foundation is human trafficking they fucking kidnapped black people and made them work for free and Somewhere in between that horror and now people have gotten this delusion that that stopped it didn't stop our country is Literally founded George Washington. Did you know this was the number one slaveholder in? Virginia wherever the fuck he was he was the number one slave supposedly his wooden teeth thing it was slave teeth Yeah, he was the number one slaveholder. Yeah. Did he have wooden Gums is that what it was. I don't know the whole wooden teeth thing was a replacement of the truth Which is this motherfucker was a human trafficker so people try to like they try to revive so the idea is like You know look at this look at this Washington's dentures were likely sourced from the teeth of slaves sourced there you go They're gonna say sourced that wasn't sourced. They were ripped out of the fucking mouth of human hostages Don't say sourced I source avocados to my fucking Mexican restaurant. I don't source teeth motherfucker Why would you use that language? Why would you use that language? Yeah, it's not source go back to that Jamie Can I read the rest of it? Records at Mount Vernon show that he bought teeth from slaves bought them, but that's records Who knows that the slaves actually got the money the poor and slave to had been selling teeth as a means of making money since the middle ages Which were sold as dentures or implants to those of financial means either way, man You know Jeffrey Epstein Jeffrey Epstein source teeth from some of the young girls he was fucking and it was actually common for the young girls They know their teeth for money. Like it's that that right there that right there is the root of the fucking problem Which is like this cunt George Washington was a human Trafficker who had in his mouth the teeth of people that were kidnapped. It was making work for free This makes Domer look like a fucking poor scout. Can you imagine if like at this quote? According to George Washington's ledger on May 8th 1784 he paid six pounds two shillings to Negroes for 9 teeth on account of Dr. LeMoyne so he paid six pounds Two shillings. I don't know how much that is who cares before nine teeth So this says This is a say he's paying it to the slaves Actually said they don't know if there were slaves or not probably painted the doctor to extract it Jesus Christ But it wasn't what so there were free black men that lived in America But what was the percentage versus slaves and free men who cares the main thing is this asshole is in statues everywhere Was a kidnapper who like took teeth out of people's mouths and put it in his own mouth That's fucked up and so like everybody's fucked up in our all of our all of our holidays Like Columbus was one of the worst people of all time. Yeah, so this is a little like when people are defending the statues It's like shut the fuck up. But here's the thing man. Should you allow people to just pull down the statues really? Yep, what do you think because do you think here's what I think what if there were Jeffrey Domer statues all over LA? You make a good point but what maybe we should Educate people on why you feel so strongly about like to George watch in statue or even the Thomas Jefferson statue a lot of people are arguing that Thomas Jefferson That you know he is a piece shit. We shouldn't respect him either How do you do you think that all those statues should come down or do you think it's more of an imperative for us to understand that in the world of 1736 or in the world of whenever when did Washington get here? Well, it was George Washington's first years in America. I'm not in any way shape or form Giving anyone a free pass on owning slaves. I don't think anybody Think that about what what I am saying is I think human beings up until he was born in Virginia Oh, it was born in America George Washington one of the first real Americans 16. Every Domer. I'm getting George Washington to two Joe, man. What's wrong? He's American No, look can I get the statue question. This is what I think okay? Either take the statue down or or put around it the number of slaves yet build statues for all the slaves yet to a George Washington had four thousand slaves there needs to be a field of slave statues Around the George Washington statue that you have to walk through to get to the George Washington statue or just pull it down Does he know what do you pull it down? No, no, no, no, you're right though I have the slaves and have some of them missing teeth because they sold it to him because they don't we'd have to find out If you really bought teeth from slaves or just regular folks needed money just have the whole story there like that's all Just have those stories of nobody else Yeah, you're saying it's perfect like if you're gonna have a guy who victimized I Mean everybody did it back then everybody of wealth did it it was a normal thing to do to have people that you owned It's crazies that sounds to us dude I think that the world before mass communication before the post office and certainly before any kind of boat travel when when everyone was just either on foot or on horses was undeniably Possible for us to understand because they were so savage there was very few rules People were just dinacephillis and every other fucking disease that came around the bend whether it was the flu or the plague There was no sanitation everyone was a rapist. It was just a Wild Barely human thing that would occasionally paint cool things and write things down and compose music But lived in a savage environment that's almost unrecognizable for us today. I don't you look I and again man Like I'm presenting a counterpoint to you that I don't want people to pray upon me for the counterpoint saying oh woke duck it had a baby got a woke But like but I do want to present a counterpoint in the in with the intention of like let's look at like that that maybe that Is actually part of the conditioning which is like if like so if your country is Based on human trafficking which to this day is happening well this country is based on human trafficking This country's based on him and it's also based on human sacrifice And this is also based on us killing the people that were here first That's right, and we've been at war for 92% of our history and many of those wars are based on nothing So you know people are up in arms about the Bohemian Grove But it's like give me a fucking break look at War for 92% of our history and many of those wars are based on nothing so you know people are up in arms about the Bohemian Grove But it's like give me a fucking break look at Vietnam. That's human sacrifice There was money to make from killing people and they made money right so we have a country that's based on human trafficking and human Sacrifice nobody wants to talk about it the idea is the exact same thing that all abusers do to people they've abused They want you to number one forget it and if you start remembering it They tell you you're crazy or that you're fucked up So the idea is that like the world prior to the United States was a savage world savage Africa was not savage these were very advanced people but Because like the Europeans were worse at it were brutal people they went in there and fucking just started chopping people up These are people who had a natural innate trust for other humans and they were like put your hand out Snap go get some gold or I'll cut your other one off. That's what they did when they came here to North America It was hills have eyes level so the hills have eyes roll into all indigenous cultures They're in tune with the earth when she gets weird. They move Look, I'm not sick. Here's the thing. I've been spending the last six months deeply engrossed in Native American books And they weren't that nice not at all dude. They ate each other The Nez purse were like Practicing cannibals they know the purse. Yeah, the Nez person deans were practicing cannibals. Okay, the ocholus and man The command she's killed every bear brutal they killed everybody so you killed each other right they killed Native Americans They would their main thing was raiding they'd raid tribes and steel and kill and murder and rape the idea I've heard and this may not be I didn't look into it I apologize to the people who told me about this idea because I wish I'd researched it more But I'm gonna put it out there is the Africa Was a was a really ancient culture that was Africa's where Egypt is yes, wrap your head around Exactly how many people don't regret and people were sending people there to get educated before slavery even started Right before they burned the library of Alexandria that was the place where everybody would go to learn yes And so we fucking went in there and just Not us was enough We can't say we I'm sorry North Carolina that I burped right with you in New Jersey. We can't say we we made it. You made a very profound point and I burped no We didn't do it no, I don't I don't mean we I don't mean we I'm not saying like I'm directly connected I'm just saying like for me. It's like the any time I get around any situation where someone is making it So I can't say the truth right I get really annoyed. Yes, yes, and why are comic it freaks me out? Yes And it freaks me out and so the reason that the whole like Whatever the particular movement is like when Trump is it like The Mount Rushmore yeah, and that's Dakota right that's like sacred land That's like sacred land But like they went in there and they chopped up a mountain with a bunch of ass like slave owners faces And Trump's like there's the best bound on earth. It's like it looked better before you put the human trafficking The fuck in hilarity of him suggesting that his face should be on it just to rile people up Some part of you as a comic that has to appreciate that. I'm sorry Joe. I'm gonna admit that's true What I when I saw that he was suggesting that his name should be on Mount Everest I or not at Mount Everest Mount Rushmore. I was I was thinking immediately like oh my god He's he's moving them into checkmate dude look at my fucking Twitter I've been like seven different personalities is on your rile people up over the last month. That's all you do with this cute Nothing Jamie was hoping you would come in as you're cute and odd. She's not character It's fine look no, but like does that should that person be president? No, but with listen But that's hilarious when in this madness with all this crazy There's no such thing as gender world for a guy to come around and say I want to put my face on Mount Rushmore Like this part of that that I like won't listen. I'm gonna be honest I'm not what a fan of his lack of empathy. That's what beautiful. That's what's beautiful about you is you're not afraid to admit something I think is really important to admit which is like dude there are like There are there's a continuum of reality and there's swaths of that continuum That are amazing like I don't know if you've ever been in a situation where like maybe you're in a kind of like Relationship it's not great But there's a piece of that relationship There's so fucking hot and so sexy and so beautiful in the midst of all the madness that it almost like makes the madness make sense right that's a that's a or or Certainly like there's certain like substance as I am Bob That if you look at what they do to my body It's like terrible, but like that sliver of whatever it is is great. Yeah, so anyway what I love that you're not afraid of doing is Like putting out there like look man It's not like people are one thing But here's a thing too. I'm not a willing Victim of gaslighting you can't you can't do that to me right. I'm not interested You know, I don't need anything from you. I'm not interested in you gaslighting me I know when someone's putting on a show. I had an email from a guy who I like Who told me to stop talking about Joe Biden because all the problems are because he has a stutter? I'm like listen man when you're 74 or However old he is he's older than that right the wheels come off man on everybody right I don't feel as sharp at 53 as I did at 33. How about that? Yeah reality is there's days if I'm not on top of my fucking game. I get real spacey Yeah, what happens in 25 years Come on man, are we pretending that we live forever? You we need young vibrant robust people with a lot of energy Who are also advanced thinkers and right now they don't have any one of those people to raise we got craziness in the world Now you know man like the thing with Biden is like Forget about bot like the problem like I'm voting for fucking Biden. You know suck my dick I'm voting for Biden. Do we have to do that? Are you gonna do it anyway? I'll tell you not suck your dick and why can't I get a blowjob on top of my Greet it would be nice So look I'm sorry to be aggressive man. This this liquor like it's bringing out something bad. That's what I love about whiskey Whiskey's been responsible for some of my favorite conversations. Look man shout out to Buffalo trees I like that the reality of the situation is like Biden I don't like his policy regarding drugs and I'm very resentful of a lot of things he's done and I'm also very resentful of the fact that That's what I'm like being that's the binary that I'm being forced to like deep contend with here That's the resentment right is that we only have these two Sanction choices and if you're a good person who doesn't want people to die in the streets you you have to vote blue That's it period that's it and the initial phases of it when I was trying to like I was hoping Bernie would be the fucking front runner and I'm like I fuck Bernie up dude Bernie got attached to some jokes What do you mean Bernie came on my podcast me? I? Did a very lukewarm endorsement of Bernie like I can't do stand-up right now So I'll just tell you this Bernie did this very lukewarm I did a lukewarm. I said I'll probably vote. I had my friend Barry Weiss on from the New York Times And he said who you can vote for I said I'll probably vote for Bernie I said he makes sense. I like what he stands for the guys been a rock solid his whole life He's always believed like we'd be good to have a change where someone gets an office Because this guy really believes in justice. He's not greedy. He's not beholden the corporation He's well they ran with that and then all these people that were in Competition with Bernie started pulling shit instead of the podcast yeah drunk high as fuck yeah that stand-up comedy put it in content put it in in quotes. I remember that and there was one of them. I read this article It was like on a real real newspaper Where in quotes it said he believes that Lesbians lacked the lower back muscles to fuck a woman correctly. What? This is a piece of my act. It was a bit It was a bit about a conversation that I had at a bar I was with a friend of mine at a bar And this is this lady who's really aggressive who's making out with a girlfriend and she yells over it She goes sorry boys She only likes girls and I got my own dick. She says this to us. Yeah, so I go where is it? And she goes it's a strap on and I said having a strap on and thinking it's a dick It's like having a lighter and thinking you're a dragon Plus everyone knows that lesbians lacked the proper lower back muscles to fuck a woman correctly It was like I was in this sparring match this verbal sparring match this crazy lady That's what I said you can't just take that part out and put it in quotes and say that's what he I really believe that lesbians lacked the proper lower back muscles to be in a loving relationship with another woman So it's also a lesbian that's not what I said bitch. I can't trust you on anything How am I gonna trust you with Russia or climate change or anything when you worry about jokes? Right because you they didn't want a guy who wasn't beholden to the system So there was two people that I was interested in Tulsi Gabbard who's a she's been a Congresswoman for six years I love her she's she served overseas twice Rock solid. She's a real leader and they didn't want to have nothing to do with her You know Tulsi is a plant the Harry Christian is good to good. I hope they get in Let's give it a chance. What do they write they seem those Harry Christians. I don't look I mean, I'm like really eat my ass here because like there was a peer to her. I'm like, you know what? Fuck this. I'm not gonna let the fucking Democratic party shove this motherfucker who's like Who's like pro all these What happens if he does come all it becomes president and then does she have to get a new vice president? Who does she have to get advice? President a OC because you know I love a certain you don't have to be a certain age to be vice president dude I love a OC. I don't give a fuck what anybody says about it. She's wonderful. I love her. She's awesome Eat me alive. I don't care. Look at me. Who cares? I like I think she's awesome. I love her so my then and I'm gonna get shit for it too But I think the errors that she makes she makes because she has this idea that she's trying to do good I really believe that she is also 30. Yeah, how fucking dumb were you when you were 30 Right. No one of the things about Bridget Fettuce Bridget Fettuce is amazing. What happened here? It'd be a 35 to be vice president. Oh, sorry. It'll see hanging there in the wings Up and term I think she's trying to do good. Yes, a Bridget Fettuce is one of my favorite people to talk to She said that when she read a diary that she wrote her journal she wrote when she was 24. She's like Jesus Christ I was a OC and now she's like much more of a centrist infactually She's like always mocking woke shit, right? You know, she's like, but I was like full on woke and I was 24 I get it. It's a thing of a person being a good person who's compassionate who wants to do good for people who thinks they're moving in the right direction But the problem is it's not in a line with the understanding that we have currently of psychology and of how people behave and of Laws and the the idea of punishment and crime like you have to have some of that stuff You have to have incentives for people to do well, but you also have to have disincentives for them They have to be punished if they commit crimes you have to have law in order, but you have to have compassion You have to have goodwill, but you have to have you have to have law You have to model it on good parenting man. It's like that's where it's that's where that's where that's where that's and and also Good community. I think parenting is one aspect of your your ability to Develop growing up you like neighbors are important to man friends Absolutely uncles all those people are important in your life these Onts, you know everybody your grandparents. There's their important. There's a lot of shit going on It's input coming into a person. I just love like take it like what's outside of propaganda parenting It isn't outside of propaganda, but you can look like as a parent. I can see like look It doesn't matter what my ideals are regarding regulation So rest is not gonna be allowed to go into the pool Unless I'm there with him He'll die so there's like real like there's like a true like to me There's an eternal sort of path in in like looking at what good parenting is across culture cultures and you realize like you know You're an idiot if you think that people in the vast number of humans on earth If you think people in that vast number aren't insane like what percentage are insane like well you're insane Everybody's well, I know but I'm saying that's the problem like what by what is that metric? You know a fucking yard is three feet I know I'm saying I'm talking like like people who are like Registered sex offenders or you know what I mean like that let that like pathos like true narcissist true sociopaths Like we live in a world where up from time to time Let's still expect them right because like what if someone's saying but they're Gambling addict and they keep losing all their families. I'm gonna be here on poker games Right we got to figure out a way to help them without simultaneously creating tyranny. Have you fuck with Ibogaine? No, I don't want that man. I'm terrified of that shadow fuck with ayahuasca I spoke DMT from time to time, but I'm scared of a six hour DMT trip much less Ibogaine freak if you don't know Ibogaine. No, I don't have any like physical addictions that I'm trying to kick or Real personal addictions. I've kind of got those things dialed in in terms of my workout and you know work schedule and family schedule It's pretty good right now. I got a good harmony. I got a good rhythm and I'm gonna keep that up. Yeah But people that I know that have really needed it or people that got hurt and then they got prescribed pain pills and the pain pills is what got them I know quite a few people that have turned to the Ibogaine Too good friends that have turned to the Ibogaine and it knocked them right off of the addiction and right back on path and it's really disturbing to me because it's it doesn't seem to be killing people and it's not legal and I think going forward in this country We're gonna have to come to grips with a bunch of shit. Yeah, one of the things we're gonna have to come to grips with is We've got and this is not a bad thing, okay? If any company should is allowed to donate to a political candidate any company fucking you know any company chocolate company a company that makes cars if it then a drug company probably should too If they're allowed us to sell drugs, maybe they should be allowed to To give money to corporations or give money rather to politicians that are running for government Why not why everybody can do it? Who's to say they can't and the fucking guys make cars cam when they're polluting the air, okay? Who knows But at the end of the day we have to go yo There's a lot of people getting hooked on these pills. Yeah, man There's a lot of people ruining their lives in these pills and we're turning a blind eye because there's a lot of money involved in these pills Yeah, and it's weird it's weird. It's weird like a cigarette thing It's what if we're so worried about 170,000 people dying of COVID Why aren't we worried about half a million dying from cigarettes? Yeah, why aren't we worried about all the people that not just dying but losing their fucking Their sanity on opioids how many people in this country are hooked on fucking pain pills? Is it I mean do we even know the real number because how many people are functional? Were there hooked on it? But they're just like taking one or two a day and they're just going to work every day Yeah, and they just stay in the steady haze of fucking working for fucking the you know Hertz rent a car and they just deal and they've got a prescription so it's all good Doctor says here. It's great. We're all baby. Do you believe in you all? This is all this these are all the things that I think of and this is it gives me This is the perspective that I have in this day and age right now as I'm talking to you a place of humility because I am more aware Now than any other time in my life that no one is in control this thing and that we all have to just Stop thinking that daddy's gonna rescue us. That's right because there is no daddy Yeah, our city's not your daddy Gavin Newsom's not your daddy. No, Donald Trump's not your daddy Nancy Pelosi is not your mama now none of these things these are just people and we have to look at this in an objective First of all anyone who's famous anyone. I don't care if you're Donald Trump or Nancy Pelosi Those are famous people everybody knows their name everybody knows what they look like. That's a wild way to live That's a wild yeah crazy way to live. Yeah, that's a crazy way to live and then you're out there Also dictating what people can and can't do and you're saying you're hiding where the taxes go your autumn You're not the idea is like by becoming famous you become Annetheical to the very thing that you're representing so how can you represent it anymore if you have you? I'm not saying you can't but I'm saying that's a that's a different ride. That's a different ride than a regular person Yeah, if you're if you're a famous person and you're all the sudden at the helm of an empire that's drop in drone bombs on People fuck you who shouldn't the greatest government via government that has an idea of eventually They'll be no more government. There should be but then you have shit like 9-11 You know what happened we get attacked if we know what did we I don't know I don't know what happened What happened? I don't know who trained those people who designed that a lot of things happen afterwards that people will say Did those things that happen afterwards happen because and this is my belief my belief is that all the things that happen after 9-11 In terms of like the Patriot Act and all these other things they happened because people were taking advantage of an opening where they Recognize a lot of people are scared and then they started implementing these ideas that they would love to do during peacetime Yeah, but they would never be accepted. That's my the dogs of war But this is my interpretation some people are under the impression that they actually orchestrated the event and then Afterwards implement these new rules and everybody went along with it because the event they orchestrated now I'm not saying I know that that's not the case and this is what's the scariest fucking thing to admit when you know about Operation Northwoods you know that the government in 1963 was literally planning on blowing up a jet airline I'm blaming it on Cuba. They were gonna arm a Cuban friendlies and attack Guantanamo Bay They're gonna do whatever they could. Yeah, listen to a war with Cuba. This was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff They're like I like it. I like deception. Yeah, I like what you're gonna do You're gonna kill people whoa, let's go to war baby Go to war if they did that in what it was at 62 or 63 Who who knows how that's evolved right? What why wouldn't that evolve? Everything evolves? Okay technology evolves or understanding of Biology evolves and evolves Everything else you know what evolved what evolved is not the technique What evolved with the story the technique seems to be the same you look at the news that Putin opponent He fucking kills over in an airplane Moning how to play screaming how to drink was tea the Kremlin apparently says we wish him a speedy recovery Yeah, and everyone's like what the fuck and it's like wait actually the use of poison and imperialism is a pretty classic basic technique like not just in game of thrones, but like in general if you're an imperialist and your interest is like power You use whatever technique you have to use doesn't that technique in using it in that way? Point to this thing that we're really worried about what we're really worried about as there is there's this underlying Narrative that's going on where these elites are battling it out and these warlords Yeah, these evil sociopaths around the world are battling it out all this well They don't think they don't but they don't do it They don't just have a guy just fucking blows brains out on the airplane and then just jump right off on the tarmac And then he gets rescued by the Russian police and then nobody says anything about it ever no They do it in a weird sneaky way. Yeah, where it's like there's some plausible deniability involved Right well, they fruit in the number one. They don't think they're evil Putin doesn't wake up in the morning and look in the mirror and go I'm an evil Jackle, what are the hinge from the apocalypse? Putin probably wakes up in the morning. I'm imagining stretches He looks at his phone. He's got text from his friends. He's like that motherfucker fuck that bitch and then he like and then more than likely He prior exercises and then he go and he put in I bet a lot of times Putin wakes up in the morning. He's like I don't want to go to work. I bet a lot of times He's like God damn it. I just want to fuck off all day Then he has to go to work. He's stuck being Putin Trump wakes up in the morning same problem. He's like this sucks He's drinking die Coke watching Fox. I'm promise you we now crazy shit. He wakes up in the morning Like takes whatever the fucking drug. He's on what do you think he's taking dude? I don't know We had a guess of it if you had a guess he's on some kind of edge. He's on a fatterman Diopel yeah, whatever confirmed that that whole thing where they said they found the very Dwayne Reed pharmacy in New York City Well, he had been taking I mean somebody for no one to listen to me man. He's 74 he wins Okay, if you can make that much money while you're on an amphetamines and Don't die then they're right the doctors are right the doctor's like it's safe He's like sure I want to make money. Yeah, I want to keep going. I don't want to sleep like just take this shit You know, I have to sleep and he just keeps going he rattles off fucking campaign speeches and hops at a helicopter of flies a thousand miles away Find me a 70-year-old not on drugs and I will give you a hundred dollars Give me a fuck break your 70 you're gonna die like 20 That's so true you're gonna die like if when I'm 70 oh my mouth is gonna be like a baby bird underneath any drugs They've been once a put in of course. We're both hard now. Yeah drugs are fine Like I don't care if Trump is on drugs or Putin's on drugs or whoever's on drugs It's like the point is like these the problem is that like we like to imagine like Trump wakes up in the morning It is like that bit is joy this country Trump wakes up in the morning in a haze. He takes some weird drugs. He tries to remember what he's doing. I promise you Every morning he thinks to himself Why the fuck did I listen to my kid? I guarantee it was his kid. He's like dad. He got around for president No, no, no, no, no you know that you think you why I don't think he wants to be president. No. No, no It was Obama talking shit about him 100% when Obama was doing that dinner You know that that's that uh That thing that they do every year with him. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. What's it all again, Jamie? The press roast White House correspondence Yeah, White House correspondence dinner and don't Donald Trump's in the audience and and Barack Obama's going deep, and he's hitting with Obama. It was good to me. It was good. And one of the things he hits him with, here's one thing, I am that you'll never be president of the United States. And everybody goes, oh, it's like, you know that meme with the kid, the hoodie, the glasses, and he's standing there, and all the other kids are running around and going, oh, he's so good at demon! Can we hear some of this? Or are we getting trouble? No. It was a brutal roto. Is that like a public domain or anything? I don't know. Do you think he wrote it? Do you think he wrote it? I don't think he wrote it. Oh sure, he would write that because Trump was a part of the birther moment. But here's the thing, honestly, legitimately. I hope he was born in Kenya. I hope they pulled it off. Because I don't care. Because my grandparents were born in Italy. I don't give a fuck. I don't need you to be born on this patch of dirt. You know why? Because I'm not a fucking idiot. I don't think you should have to be born on a patch of dirt. Look, should you be have to be born in fucking Calabassus in order to be the president of Nobu or whatever. That's a bad example. Yeah, no, no. To live, it's a restaurant. It's a sushi restaurant, Malibu. Do you have to live in the town? Like what are you saying? The old patch of dirt is significant. Where was you expelled out of the vagina? I moved here when I was 13 minutes old. Is that okay? What if I, what if I, my mom, shot me out in the middle of a plane on the way across the Pacific? In my American? Who cares? It's stupid. It's dumb. It's fucking dumb. Well, that's like geospatial centrism. I hope he's born in Kenya. I hope he admits it. I hope he says, oh, and by the way, I was born in Kenya. Oh shit. If Obama wanted to, you know, everybody has one friend. Like please come out. Come out of the closet, please. Yeah. Please don't want to go to the theater. Don't want to go. This is, there's never been a better time. If I'm not saying Obama was born in Kenya, I believe everything he says. I believe he's born in Hawaii. But part of me wishes he was actually born in Kenya. And he waits until after the election. And if Biden wins, he just gets to the moment. By the way, I was born in Kenya. Oh, and the whole audience just goes, bah, that earth turns into a sun. Everything went erupt. Man, I got a pee. I got a pee. Go pee. But what are you going to do when I go pee? Jamie has the editing equipment. Oh, right. He's the wizard. Don't take headphones off. Headphones don't run away. You're right behind the back. That was close. We don't have to end. There was one thing that I wanted to make sure when we decided to go to Spotify. One of the first things I thought of is Duncan Trussle has to be episode number one. That was like a legitimate thing I thought because there's something about my relationship with Duncan. It's very unique. He brings things out of me. He puts me in, when you're around certain friends, they put you in a state of mind that you don't go into when you're not with them. When I'm with Joey Diaz, one of the things that I love about Joey Diaz, when I'm always smiling, when I'm with Joey Diaz. First of all, because he knows I love him. I've loved him forever. We've been friends forever. Every time I see him, I hug him. So because he knows I love him, when we're around, he just starts talking shit. He gets loose because he knows that I'm his number one fan. And another person like that is Duncan. When I'm around Duncan, there's something like, we do to each other. Like, we're like some sort of weird epoxy, where you mix it together, where he puts my mind in a place that it doesn't ordinarily go to. I genuinely believe there's ideas that I form when I'm talking to Duncan, like ideas popping in my head, when I'm talking to him that they don't get there anywhere else. And it kind of goes in with what we're talking about about that other guy's idea of thoughts and my concept of ideas that maybe they're a life form. Maybe they're just like E. coli that lives in your gut or the flora that's on your skin, and that they, different people have different combinations of those things. Just like some people, you just don't vibe with them. You talk to them, you just want to get away from them as quick as possible. And you're like, oh, this person's so annoying. And you can't help it for whatever reason. It's like they say that women, fermal and wise, like women can smell a man's clothes. And they can sort of, I don't know if this is true, but I read that they can accurately depict if they smell a man's clothes, whether or not they should be attracted to that man, whether or not they're genetically, they match up well with that man. But that gets fucked up when they're on birth control. Yeah, that's when they're on birth control. It's confused, yeah. Well, it's insects at dawn, but it was a real study. And there's a real concern about that, that people are, you know, we're losing some of our senses. Dude, I was in a relationship with a woman who got off birth control and stopped wanting to fuck me. And I remember hearing that and like being able to refer to the moment that she seems to be really into me, but then she got off birth control. And suddenly, her like real intuition was like, you don't want my baby so sky, this guy's fucked up. If she stopped, it was real. Like I remember the moment I happened, it was so bizarre. It was like, it was great. I'm glad, by the way, I'm glad. Cause like the baby that we made is so beautiful. And like, have you heard the shit about the egg picks the sperm? Have you heard about this? The egg does. This is the new research. It's just like, you know, it's dudes. We're always like, well, we make the come. And there's a sperm that makes it to the end of the race. And that's the one that makes the baby. So in our minds, we're like, it's like a sperm that won a marathon gets into the egg as a reward for winning the marathon. But now the idea is the egg actually is like the sperm or running to the finish line. And the egg sends out chemicals to destabilize certain sperm and picks the one that fits best with the, whatever the plan of the egg is. Look at that. Human eggs use chemical signals to attract sperm. Humans spend a lot of time in energy choosing their partner new study by researchers from Stockholm University and Manchester University and H.S. Foundation Trust shows that choosing your partner continues. their partner new study by researchers from Stockholm University and Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust shows that choosing your partner continues even after sex human eggs can choose sperm. It's the goddess baby. Dude, it's like the last fucking bash that we had was this idea that we had this athletic little bit of our come that made it really the mother egg. The pics that come come to me come to me in the rest of my back. Back to mama. It's in doubt signals to destroy certain sperm trying to make that made it all that way. Cheesy eggs may pick sperm for their genes, defying man who's law. We're done. But then again, the sperm that get there, those are still at the front of the pack. Yeah, like in prices right. Everyone's likely the eggs can look like look. I want the best sperm, but the best one's going to be the ones there first. Dude, it's very it's both things. It's good. It's sweet. It's kind of both things. Right. Yeah, but the final decision is the egg. Bitch ass lazy sperm that just bounces off the head of the rugged sperm and like winds up plop. Wow, can't believe you chose me. It's like I didn't shit. No, I haven't nerd. And the egg gets really pissed because it's not a precise mechanism. There's a lot of chaos going on to encourage, you know, entropy and to encourage innovation that they figure out how to better the better version of the species to get into the egg. But sometimes there's a headbutt and then the dumb dumb goes right in. Yeah, first and bang. You got a kid that's not that bright. You don't want that kid, but then that being said. So on one. It's supposed to get eaten by coyotes on one level. It's great because it says actually the goddess chooses everything. but then on another level, you've got Hitler exactly. So that Hitler's mom's egg had a bunch of other sperm that were like, we're not doing it genocide. And what we can actually what we talked about before with Hitler and Fatimins. Yeah, Hitler was all about if they would inject coconut him and testosterone in him. There's a legendary story about how Mussolini wanted to talk to Hitler pulling out of the war. And Hitler showed up shot up with cocaine and testosterone and just just, yeah, I don't even Mussolini know what the fuck he was saying. But he sweated on him until Mussolini relented. Dude, I don't know. That's true. McKinney used to talk about alcohol in this way. Like we survived alcohol. Just like the guy talked about alcohol being the differentiation between the ancient psychedelic cultures. They're like, John. Paul, he looked at worship, the cattle, which like shot on the ground. The mushrooms grow from and they held his mushroom iconography to when they started preserving things and preserving things and honey, which meant fermented honey, which meant meat, which meant alcohol. And then they switched to an alcohol-based society when they couldn't grow the mushrooms anymore because of climate change or because they were moving and moving in different directions. This is what I think happened. This is where I I disagree with McKinney. What I think happened. How comfortable. How confident are you? Not that confidence. In fact, you say, I disagree with me. I was about to apologize to Dennis McKinney and say, I acknowledge I'm a complete dope. Well, he disagrees with his brother sometimes. Yeah, but he disagrees in the way. And if no botanist disagrees, the science is not in the way some fucking somebody literally goes at night goes to reticants. Who's literally on a show called Joro and questions everything. We investigated UFO materials. I was you're like, Stephen Hawking disagreed with Albert Einstein. He's leading to a bunker. And it's actually going to start a cult. And you're like, hey, you guys grow tomatoes? No. I remember I come back and I'm like, look, I like you. He was a really nice guy. I'm like, we're getting nice guy. Dings a hole inside of a fucking mountain and parks is SUV. This guy is crazy. Bro, it's so stupid to say I disagree with it with like one of the great minds that I acknowledge that. But, uh, you know, to me, like this is where this is what I picture happening. It's okay. We're storing our mushrooms in jars of alcohol, right? We're storing our mushrooms in jars of alcohol. In the rich people, the elites eat the mushrooms. They all trip out in that little orgy, as they fucking awesome thing. And then who's left? The people whose job it is to put the mushrooms in the alcohol. And once left these jars to have a little bit of booze in them and some mushroom residue, they drink it. And then they start, you know, like that would be the beginning of like getting fucked up on alcohol. I guess what I'm saying is like, I imagine that like really like if you look at like, okay, mushrooms or LSD or any psychedelic, it teaches you you're a we, not an uh, you're a we, not a me. And booze, what does it teach you? You're a me. When you're all pissed off on booze, 100% of the time, you're not angry because you're like worried about the conditions of the world. You're usually angry because someone like what's funnier than when you like insult an alcoholic. How many times you've been around like a, if you ever heard of alcohol experience, we say to them, hey, you're an alcoholic and you see that look in their face where they recognize that you're telling the truth. Yeah. That it really hurts. Yeah. They get mad at you. Yeah. Yeah. Dude, like the alcoholic outrage is one of the most like desperately sad things to witness. There's nothing worse than a drunk whose feelings are hurt because usually their feelings are hurt because because you told the truth. Yeah. Yeah. They don't want the truth. And so because they're their condition depends on lies. So well, it's a weird, um, like one of the things about alcohol, it's like it sort of narrows reality. Yeah. You know, like if you think of one of the things that I really, really enjoy about edibles, there's a thing that I enjoy when I get so paranoid and so freaked out that I don't think I'm going to make it. And then I come down from that and I get to this place of humility. And that's one of my favorite places to be as a person when I'm coming down from like a horrendous edible high. And then also that I'm like real thankful that it's over. I just want to be friends with people. Yeah. Like there's that space. And it sort of broad like the world broadens your danger broadens your humility, your humanity, your vulnerability broadens. And then it comes back to a manageable level and you recognize that it can be so far worse than what you're experiencing currently. And it's just your perspective that's fucking things up. Because right now with you and me right here, no people have ever been more comfortable in the history of humanity. No, we're both in love. We both have children. Yeah. We both drunk and high. We both love each other. We're both making each other laugh. Yeah. Anybody in this position that looks at things incorrectly, but like our problem is always perspective. Our problem is always not recognizing how good we have it when we have it. That's right. Dude, this is like there's a Buddhist teacher Jack Corfield who says 10 to the part of the garden you can touch and also a chugging chug perimpah. When one of his books, one of the things he said was, look, it could be any minute. It could be there's an ism that's good. There's an ism that's the right way to be like it could be socialism. Carmen is you know, he didn't say that, but there could be an ism that works. Right. Because we can't we can't accept the fact the isms of the past are the only ones that are ever going to be available. That's crazy. There might be a utopian ideal that is applicable to the now, but just better. But what he said, what I love about what he said is it doesn't matter if you can't find peace in your own home. Yes. If when you're in your own home, yes, disharmony, if you're in your own home, people are unhappy in your own home, people are freaked out. Then why would you even think about socialism, capitalism, communism, when the when the when the pixel of of society is the house, the householder. And if within that pixel, there's division, then of course, in the world that division would be like made into some monstrous things. So I even add down to the core to the singular you as a human. Who are you okay? Yeah. Do you have your shit together or no? Sometimes. Yes. Sometimes. Sometimes. Yes. Sometimes. No. And everybody wants to point at people who don't. Yeah. Look at you. You don't have your shit together, Duncan. I know. I know. You can tweet orders of your shit together. That's not helping me get my shit together. That with your white privilege. But I'm trying to be better. I believe you, but you must be punished. I'm not sure for how long. Well, that's aggression. Silence. I want silence from you for a extended period of time. I give it to you. Outside. I'll give it to you. The further the silence, the more you're going to peace people, you can wait 10 years and no one goes, like four people will be upset. Look, man, 10 months. All like to me, like it's like the whole that whole bollowax man is like, dude, like after once I started, like the thing is like when all this shit happened, and as a comedian, I was like really afraid to get into like even like a little bit of studying the shit people are upset about because like no, like comedian, their right mind wants to be identified with like some woke ass comedian because it's embarrassing. But then when I started looking into it, and then I found out about the George Washington shit. And George Washington is super creepy. There's no way if those teeth were valuable, the people weren't murdered for their teeth. That's it. Like there's no way people weren't like just held down and they got their teeth stolen or they were told that they were going to get money and they weren't. And there were many of them were it been rape. But here's the thing is the real value in getting outraged at shit that happened hundreds of years ago, or is it, is it an acknowledgement of first of all, the fact that we all agree we can do better. That's what the turmoil, the turmoil exists. All of it, social economic, the turmoil exists because we haven't really come to grips with whether or not we can all get together and be cool with each other all the time. Yeah. So there's always some sort of turmoil. And when you look at turmoil in terms of like whether it's financial turmoil or social turmoil, we're always trying to figure out like who's being the asshole, right? Don't you feel like that? Like when you, what do you mean? When you see anything that's happening, like when you see when you see a government getting overthrown, when you see war, you always like who is being the asshole? Any kind of turmoil. You mean you try to find the perpetrator of the difficulty. What's causing it? And is it possible that most of this shit could be avoided? And what's stopping most of it from being avoided? When you look at any kind of any time a government, like any kind of country, any time a country invades another country, any time bombs are being drawn from drones, like what can be done to avoid this? That's right. What can be done? Dude, man, I started this fucking pandemic philosophy club is what we call it with like my friends Marcus and Brandon. What's we don't even do a podcast every Friday. We just get together and talk. And they like men that gospel. That's how I got lucky enough to meet them. Midnight Gospels is an amazing show. Thank you, brother. Can I just say before we get going? I'm really proud of you. Thank you, really. I really proud of you because it represents you as an artist more than it. Like almost anything, any of my friends who've ever done has done because you're so weird and it's so weird, but it's so funny and amazing. It's amazing. They let us make it. I can't believe it is. Praise Odin for Netflix. Praise Odin. I praise Odin. But what they've done is amazing. But what you've done is somehow another encapsulate what some of the things I love about you, how weird you are, how you're not like anybody else. When you came here today, one of the things I said to you, I go, dude, I go, you're the only guy that like I like listening to your ads. That's sweet. Yeah, I do. Thanks, man. You're fucking express VPN ad is a hilarious ad. It took so long. I didn't even know if it was an ad. Thank you, so crazy. But you're the best. I want to say the one who was one of the best that I've ever seen at reading ads. Out of all the people that I've ever heard who read ads, you're ads are the most entertaining. You're very sweet, Joe. And I'm not going to get that a cock sucking competition with you, but I wouldn't be here if not for you. And that's the truth. And I'll never stop saying it. And I will never stop being grateful to you. But I wouldn't, I wouldn't be me if it wasn't for my friendship with you. That's true. I appreciate that. We all benefit each other from, I don't mean to cut you off. I'm so sorry. By the way, I had a little bit of boost. So forgive my like, impetuousness that I would like suddenly interrupt you. But you do have a history of finding like young comedians who are like, and you do like help us a lot. And we are eternally grateful to you. And I don't care if you don't acknowledge it. You won't acknowledge it because if you did, you're afraid you'll go crazy. It's not that I will. I'll tell you from my perspective, it's not that I'll go crazy. It said I have to do it. There's no if ands or buts. It's a path. It's like if you're going down, if you're on a fucking one of those water slides and you're going flying down, you're just going that way. If you're a good person and you love comedy and you love comedians and you have friends and you want to see them happy and you want to see them successful. Yeah. And you know they're good. And you know it benefits not just them, but you to elevate them. Right. I'm like, hey, check out any Letterman. Hey, check out everybody. Whoever it is. Like, I want them to know that my relationship with them, anybody who's listening this podcast or anybody listens to my stand-up or watches it, it's genuine. That's who I am. So if I find someone who's awesome, I want you to know about it. I don't want to get paid for it. If I find a great band, I start talking about it on Instagram. I find a great application. I tell people. It's cool. I have the obligation. I didn't know if I did. But I didn't. I don't think I'm in a position that everybody's in. It's a weird spot. And might I say, I'm so glad that any Letterman is someone that you're attending. She is so funny. She's so funny. Her podcast is so fucking funny. I'm sure it is, but dude, her and Whitney, this is what happened. We were at the comms, so I did a night. Mike Binder. Mike Pinder is doing his whole Showtime documentary thing. So we're all in the roof. It was fun, man. I got to chat with Paul Rodriguez. Very cool, dude. I really never got a lot of time spending talking to Paul Rodriguez before. He's really cool, man. He's really good at some good, good stories about South America and Latin America and Mexico, where comedians who actually got jailed. Really interesting shit. And Bill Burr was hilarious. And Annie Letterman was on fire. And then there was Whitney Cummings and Jay Leno. And we had a good fucking time, man. It was a real and Mike Binder. It was a really good fucking time. It really was. It was, it was, first of all, it reminded me how much I loved that place. I walked in there. I was like, God damn. I got so emotional when I walked in. But when I had Whitney and Annie together and they're talking shit to each other. Like these girls are so funny. And they love each other. They're really good friends. And I said, Whitney was scheduled to be on the podcast. And then I said to her, I said, do you care for Annie Cummings? I want Annie come, but it's up to you. She's like, fuck yeah. So I brought Annie in two and the two of them together do their savages. That's, that's the future of female comedy. Truly. And the future of podcasting, because there's all these like, like that's a popular thing now. Like guys we fucked. They're killing it. And then there's the call her daddy that shows killing it. Like they're on a different vibration than you dunking trombone. But it's a really popular sort of second. Yeah. And these two girls together to hilarious stand up comics talking shit together on a podcast. I mean, you guys have to do it. But they're also like, you got to admit like they're Gonzot like the 100. That's the thing. Like they're full Gonzot. Both of them are like terrifying and their own way. Like you know what I mean? Like when you encounter either of them. I have to help them, right? You have to help them do a podcast. What it has to be Annie and Whitney because the A's make you find it quicker. The world deserves it. But like, I remember going to do it. When I was with Annie and Whitney, when I went to do Annie Letterman's podcast, I won't give anything away. I mean, I'm not, I can't say it on, it's not legal. But like I remember like leaving there being like, wow, like I remember leaving there just thinking like whole not just that not whatever I'm saying right now. I'm saying like realizing like I've always loved chatting with Annie Letterman. We have great conversations. But I remember like getting into where she lived and looking around and realizing like, well, she's formed some kind of cult. I don't know what it is. She's really funny man. She's so funny. And like that like just that moment of like, wow, like you're like both of them. Well, that it's the thing is, it's like this acknowledgement. First of all, your podcast has a cult following and you've hit this like weird place. And I think you feel very similar to the way I do that when you find someone who's is extraordinary. You want to let everybody else know. Exactly. We both have that in. We all of us have that. Joey has that. Ari has that. Ari is one of the best. If you're a Ari's friend and you have a special coming out, Ari will promote the fuck out of you. He's amazing at that. He did it for Joe List. He's done it for Mark Norman. He's helped get guys on my podcast. And I blow them up because if your friends with Ari, your friends with me, but we're all like that. Diaz, red bands like that. Tony Hinch clips like that. Everybody will tell you all the people around them that are killing it. And I think that's real important, man. I think it's an important thing to get out there. There's a there's a frequency that we're all sending out and it's a frequency of camaraderie. It doesn't matter if you're wrong sometimes or it's just like sometimes you fuck up. Like we're all like trying to go the right direction. But you know, when we're talking about that dumb sperm that clashes heads with the alpha sperm, it's just accidentally slides in. That shit is going to happen. That's right. All these things are going to, but we have to move forward in the spirit of camaraderie. And this is like the big test. Let's, can we for a second just draw? I don't care. It's so cheesy. And everyone, everyone's ready to talk about the comedy store. Let's just spit a second with the comedy store, man. Because like for me, and this is the truth, and like, you know, I was talking to Ari's like, you never would. I'm like, I was going up like twice a week, but even if I wasn't, he said he never went. No, for a second, because he did, you worked there. Dude, that's how we became friends from Ari saw me in a really dark period where I was like not showing up for spots. And he rightfully judges me for that. But like, it's okay. Was that when you were living with me? That was after I was living with you. I went through a dark period. I didn't take it. I took it for granted and I deserve. But I whatever it's don't. Can you just always been complicated? That's not, it's not, it's not your complicated. You know, yeah, I was having a conversation with someone and they were saying like, uh, it's okay to have a loose chassis, but you got to stay on the road. I tried to stand the road. Me. But I love the comedy store. I love it with all my heart. When you and I became friends, we should tell people, you and I became friends because I would call into the comedy store and I say, Hey, I'm here Thursday, Friday and Saturday. Would you be like, cool, man. Hey, did you you fucking see this thing? But they're saying is happening in Nepal where all these people are getting together. They're all seeing these like crazy conversations. The glove for hours. You put me in hold. You would take another call and then we would talk about fucking Terrence McKenna, Graham Hancock. The fast dude, we had, we would get baked on the phone where Duncan Tresser was a comedy store employee. And I was, I was at home and we would get high. and we just start talking about Aali and the best. It was the best man. That places a temple for real dude, but you and I became pent like phone pals. We bet that's how we got to be friends. And like we are right now. The funny thing is the conversation we're having is no different than the conversation we had when I was working there. But I was saying to Jamie when you left, went to pee, the people bring things out of people. And it's something that I don't think people like to admit. But sometimes people bring bad things out of people. And sometimes people bring good things out of people. And when I'm with you, I'm different than when I'm not with you. Yeah, man. I like, I really don't want this conversation to end. Like, I'm not going to get out of sappies in the middle. You have a lot of Austin occasionally. Anytime you want, man. I'll come anytime you want. But like, it won't do me. It's like, this is my solution to all this. I'm just going to fly people out and put them up and pay for their food and get them sausages. It'll be great, man. But like all that being said, like we just, I just don't, I don't think anyone can understand what it's like. And let's say been there to get off stage at the comedy store. And you have a good set, maybe, but you're working on a joke and you get off stage and suddenly Whitney Cummings, who was like a very rightfully successful, brilliantly funny person, stops you and says, Hey, what do you think about this addition to your punchline? You know what I mean? Like those moments are so, so like, so like, because in that moment, there isn't like a hierarchy, like in that moment, there isn't like, look, I made like a shows for network TV. One of my proudest moments as a comic, I was at the improv. And this was like two thousand fucking three or something like that. And Louis CK sits in the back of the room and takes notes and then we get off stage. And he actually asked me before, he goes, Do you mind if I watch and like give you some, like like give you some notes? Like, dude, I fucking love that. And then after I was hit about a bunch of really funny suggestions. I don't remember if I wind up using any of them, but it was just so fun, so fun to hear him and I talk about like bits and the fact that he would like sit down and watch these bits. That's it. That's the, that's the, so to me, like, you know, and I like, I would always tell Aaron my wife, I'd always say like, you know, there's no comedy store anywhere else. Like I want to go, I want to be here. I don't think it's impossible to make that somewhere else. This is the whole reason why I'm interested in moving in Texas. I don't believe that we have to be tethered to this machine that makes things that we don't do. Right. This machine makes music, this machine makes movies, and it makes TV shows. And we don't do any of those things. We're in a totally different business. And I don't think we have to be connected to any sort of legacy entertainment structure. It doesn't make any sense. It's like if you're trying to siphon money off of you. Right. It's just like they're not they're missing the point. Like I want to tell the truth. I don't want to just sell things. Right. I want to say what I'm thinking right now, whether it's good or bad or angry or sad or remorseful. I want to be able to say it anytime I want to say it. And this is not acceptable in the regular old school legacy medium that people are thinking of as mainstream media. And it was mainstream media like 20 years ago or 30 years ago. But what you and I are doing right now is writing on a fucking cave wall compared to what's coming. What you're doing right now compared to what the fuck is going to happen when Elon Musk starts producing this whole neural link. Yeah. And then they they develop some sort of fucking satellite network where everyone's connected and reading each other's mind all over the globe. Dude, this is cave wall scratch tickets. Bullshit. I know. And to me. And TikTok, told by the fire. But this is what's this is to me. Like the poignant thing about like Neolithic structures is like you see the Neolithic structure. And you know like fuck man, people spent a long time building that. And in the process of building that they begin friends and they shared stories. And it was really beautiful. But now all we see is some old eroded shit that we don't know anything about right. Yeah. So to me, what's beautiful is like you are absolutely right. This thing we're doing right now. It's it doesn't matter if we're doing this like Morse code. It's going to be God. It doesn't matter for some million years. It won't be a billion years. It won't be that long before our conversation is dated. But you know what we're doing also? We're doing the same thing that Beethoven was doing. Whether we're making music at a time where you couldn't record it. So you had to write it down. Yeah. We're doing this some clunky. Look, if you you can listen. Imagine if you could listen to the actual orchestra that was playing like Beethoven's fifth symphony. That's crazy. Imagine. Also being in context. Crazy. Never having heard the doors. Never having heard Hendrix. People cough. Yeah. I never having heard any of that. Only being in that era. I'm sitting in the audit. Beethoven's fifth. Did I make that up? Jamie. No. No. I don't. It was terrible impression. It was like, who am I? But think about how much of that be there in the moment when it was first released. Yeah. And no one could record anything. And now you had to go. You had to write it down in some weird. They had to develop a language for music. Hey, what it was. Yeah. I mean, you could be a bad ask guitarist in 2020 and not have any idea how to read music. Yeah. That's right. Right? That's right. You could like watch videos and just decide I'm just going to go full Stevie Ray Vaughn. Some people don't want to know how to read it. And yeah, they want to be able to just free. Oh, what's the earliest recording of that? Is this hook time play that? Or we were getting trouble to a camp play it. That is it. That's it. Right. That's Beethoven's fifth. I didn't do it. I may. I may. I imagine being alive back then when you never heard any shit like that. Dude, I was sitting in the audience. Do you remember when no tourist big IG? Bey-g. Big IG. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie came out with hypnotized. No. Do you remember? How old were you? I don't know. The year. I don't know. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Biggie. Can't you say sometimes you were? It's a hypnotized me. Great song. Oh, my god. But it was just there was something about it where I was like, oh, somebody figured out a new level of the video game. Yeah. Of course you did. You don't understand what it was like back then. No internet. You would see him on MTV with piles of cash. Yeah. There's no accountability. That's so cool. Like this is the like one like there's a concept in Buddhism which is like if you want to really that's all. How many? How many? How many? How many? Look at me. Look at me. Man. Do you know how many fucking amazing songs we missed out on because Biggie and Tupac didn't get together in a pop? How fucked up? Just have a couple of drinks. Like somebody had them tricked that they were enemies. Imagine a biggie in Tupac, which is like me in Stanhope or like comics. Yeah. Like comics are just like like what the fuck are we we should love each other with the only ones that are like how many goddamn MCs are there? How many rappers are there? How many standups are there? There's so few. There you go. We should be so happy. We run it. We can't. That's that kind of talk. We get you killed because that's the last bastion of the thing that wants to keep us limited man. It's like that's the idea. But even them man. I'm telling you for them they need to listen up. I know you want to have control but sometimes not having controls better. Like here's the thing in archery. Let me tell you something about archery. There's a thing about archery where it's very few people can what they call command shoot. What that means is when you draw back the bow and you have your finger on the trigger you just decide when the arrow's going to go. Okay sure. Most people don't do it that way. And most people who do these big tournaments like even the Olympics they teach them to have a surprise release. It's a psychological trick where you're using a certain type of release where either you have your finger on a trigger and you don't push your finger you just let your back muscles pull it because they're crude muscles or you use what's called a hinge. We slowly pull in the hinge and the real the arrow goes but you don't know when it's going to go. Whereas a trigger you know exactly. back muscles pull it because they're crude muscles or you use what's called a hinge we slowly pull in the hinge and the real the arrow goes we don't know when it's going to go whereas a trigger you know exactly where it's going to go with it's something about no one exactly where it's going to go we just fucking it tense up it's rich and it's hard it's hard to keep in mind in order we just go especially if you shoot your tournament you're in the Olympics gold medal round so very few people in the Olympics allow their brain to decide when the shot goes isn't that interesting yeah yeah that's beautiful yeah what you're saying too this there's a the mind of no mind the the ability to get out of your own way and for archers the best way to do this is either in the hinge release or a release with a thumb will you pull through with your back muscles and it makes the thumb trigger so cool this thing is dangerous this thing's dangerous because you could be developed what's called target panic and there's people that never like my friend Cam Haynes he's a freak of nature he's never developed target panic and he shoots like this he sees things he shoots out on his paper he shoot a hundred forty yards boop pop blue and chit but he also runs a marathon a day he's like a freak of nature he's a very rare human but you can't bank it on those people you got to think about the rest of the folks for the rest of the folks the whole idea is like getting rid of anxiety and what's anxiety anxiety is pulling it you're in a gold medal round let's hit that bullseye this is it America wins and you just flinch this just a little a little thing that happens to you that you don't want to happen and your arrow just goes four inches shot got it got it love it yeah that's the so that is the so like and i'm sorry every every podcast i do the i talk about Buddhism but i don't care i want you to talk about thank you so like what i love about it is like so everybody gets caught up in the first two ideas and Buddhism the first being life is unsatisfactory the second being the reason life is unsatisfactory is because you think it's a way that it's not now this gets translated in the life let's break that down life is unsatisfactory and the reason you think life is unsatisfactory is because well life so the best way to put it would be have you ever been with someone in traffic in LA in their angry me okay but me when have you ever been myself right but that's literally the way traffic is in LA yes yet somehow like because you drove that day in a traffic you got in your head this would be the one day in LA where they would be traffic no honestly i came in together but i do i do i recognize that it's knocking on the door so come on be a bitch freak out yeah i really do keep it together but that this is also the real argument for microdosing because if you could just microdose there would be so much less negative interactions with people whether it's on the highway or sure anywhere no one's gonna know one who's microdosing on sila siben is gonna yell at you from across the street push your fucking mask on no they're not gonna do you gonna let them be themselves but do you know i want to be i want to be the person that makes people smile i don't want to be the person that makes people a bad i don't either and and this is something i'm like consciously thinking about more and more as i get older i want i want us to do better i like really do this is one of the reasons why i have this idea of like starting over in Texas i have this idea of like disconnecting from all these old hubs and this idea of what we're doing we're putting out content into the world i don't believe it i don't believe it has to be from a media center i don't believe it has to be from New Yorker LA i don't believe it and i think i want to prove to myself that it doesn't have to i want to go one of the reasons why i wanted to go to to Texas because it's like almost like there's a certain mockery to live in in Texas you know listen to me for something like me i wouldn't want to be you like you everything you do is to study didn't and like i like i like being free of that magnifying lens but you know to me like whenever i'm thinking about uh like you know it's fun to think about what's a root problem here the root problem seems to be centralization it's like wherever centralization rears its head problems emerge the root problems compassion what do you mean the root problems compassion that we don't make our decisions based on compassion we make them based on beneficial markers of improvement whether it's financial improvement or land great jobs or that's the problem the problem is that we we we have these things in our head where this is what's the most important and this is what's not as important like love is important but if you see two people that are you know they're in love but you don't like either one of them you do you feel like that's the same kind of love as two people you admire they're together yeah right the comedy people who do you know like all right i'll give you one i do layered Hamilton and Gabriella race i'm friends with those two people they're the super athletes she was a super athlete in volleyball and he's like one of the the greatest big wave surfers the world's ever now i'm friends with them and when i talk to them if i talk to them either on like we do a little fate we do a little face time the other day and i get out of it i go that i want to be somebody who makes me feel or i want to be somebody who makes somebody feel the way i feel when i talk to them that's cool when i talk to those people like these are superior people like layered Hamilton the weird dude but he's also like a superior human who does these crazy pool workouts like 70 pound dumbbells he gets in the fucking sauna 250 degrees and rides an airdined bike with oven mitzvah on jesus yeah they're freaks he wears the oven mitzvah that burns his hand yes two fifty two five zero you eat it so point he was like i got to put out oven mitzvah but he doesn't get out of sauna and i said to myself when i got off the phone with them the other day i'm the really nice people they're really really their genuine people and this is one of things that happens and it's a weird thing that happens when you become more and more famous you get more and more comfortable talking to other famous people you know see talk to talk to famous people and you realize oh they have a hard time talking to people because other people think they're weird yeah so they have to find famous people that are also nice right and so that's how i feel about them so i get off the phone with them and i'm like like you can be you can be gabrieleries and you can be layered hand-led in and still come out and be a really cool friendly inspirational genuine person yeah i'm like i want to make somebody else feel the way those people make me feel yeah and that's what i felt like i love that that's the best thing we can do for each other that's the answer and that's the if there's anything has ever come out of this podcast has been good it's that it's given people a perspective where there's a potential where that maybe they're limited ideas of what they're capable of in terms of their own personal happiness or their own success and whatever they're chosen and devour is maybe it's not really limited maybe they can just shift their consciousness and through effort and focus they can change their destiny yeah maybe it's true well you know the reason i say centralization is because like the first a very natural reaction to being associated with a body would be that you would centralize on the identity that you're in that you know if i step on your if i stomp on your foot you're going to feel pain yeah so i wouldn't you centralize on this identity that you're in so and again like right now with the science we have it it can't show us what i think it will eventually show that our sentience is a limited to the body that we're a field of consciousness that's kind of getting associated with like particular like quantum clouds of meat that we found they interface with other sentient bodies in a way that makes them unique to the relationship between that person like you're different with your wife than you are with anybody you've ever met that that is true yes but that's also like one of the great like right now one of the big ideas such a cool idea too is like on stage off stage so uh how are you acting when you think you're on stage in other words like when you're in front of like this is the best part about covid there's no on stage in exactly that's it but it's the only good thing about covid for me it will there there's a actually it i'll tell you some other great things about covid it's hot as that that we can tell the commute and businesses still work and that shan't transforms the landscape but like the the on stage off stage idea or the way like chugging from a phagee but that is some people at the end of the day they go home and they sit on the couch and they go and but they only let themselves do that at the very end of the day of work because they've produced in their mind a situation where this is me relaxing and this is me working right here i am with my family here i am with my co-workers so this differentiation produces a kind of neurotic kind of uh like split personality uh way of being which is like really all those you don't need the way to get home to sit on the couch to go that's where you're at now like that's actually every single thing but the story you're telling yourself produces moments where this is a relaxing time and this is a non-relaxing time but it's just a story show that that's the idea and like compassion is like i think the beginning of recognizing like you know how many people have you met i'm sure and i know my life changed when i went to the doctor with my swollen fucking testicle that by the way before i went to the doctor i would look at myself in the air and think man if there was some magical i would feel awesome like it felt good to have a big ball there was like i literally was like god damn it if there were you were happy with the one big ball it looked powerful i'm not gonna lie man i've ever seen joey dia's balls yeah like that like the way he's a postress he feels like that every day they don't even make sense so like for a few months i see him you seen joey's balls see if you can pull out the picture joey on stage where he's naked with uh with uh he had uh um i know no but just for me he had a uh a safety pin and a towel around his neck like a cape and this was for my 1999 Warner Brothers CD called i'm gonna be dead someday we took these crazy pictures in the main room of the comedy store i was there you were there for those the matter door outfit i was like there was some drama you guys snuck in and take the pictures well you working you wasn't talent coordinator you guys snuck in took the pictures you know we didn't snuck in we had a we talked to whoever the fuck it was with it was me was this got there tommy sorry i feel like i was there when i have i could be wrong but i remember the matter door pictures no Warner Brothers did it maybe i'm made calls dude i remember the door picture was real i'm sorry but i remember a moment that i was i think i was a talent coordinator where suddenly joey there's pictures are joey das and i'm out of the world fit with there's a funny thing i've ever seen but mid-teacott win of it that's what i remember is there was some drama around the situation like the pictures themselves were like not just funny they were like kind of artistic they look cool there's a picture of joey and he uh please someone find this it's in i think i have the cd so i have it if it's on the c it's on the cd so i have it because i you know when i'm moving i'm going through my shit and one of the things i found is those old uh i'm gonna be dead some day cds that's 99 i became joey das uh associate and best friend around 96 that's when i mad at him so like i could be 99 when i was there i just remember there's some drama now you might have been there if you were there in 99 i i i i i i i i did you start working i don't remember i don't remember the exact day and again like i don't remember i just remember there was some drama i think it was before your time and i want to feel like it's before your time dude it could easily be that mid-teacott win of the pictures late or something you know it like it could easily i just remember there was some drama attached to the lady was so nice to me she loved you man she loved joey too she loved all of us she had the the the the the funnest thing with like her idea of us together she loved that we were together they were friends she was a wild to the wild lady she was wild dude that was a real guru like mitzi sure was the actual guru yeah this is it i tell everybody if there's one human being that's the most important human being in comedy ever that wasn't a comedian it's mitzi sure that's why she's on the wall of this room she was a girl i'm taking her with me man not only that the movers don't take her i take her mitzi's come with me on the plane yeah man she was real listen that's coming with me on the plane no bullshit yeah like the reason why that's up in the wall after the movers have gone is that's coming with me yeah that's mitzi yeah she gave me my my future no she was wild she was a wild man she was a crazy lady she's a perfect person to run the comedy store well no she had to be that way you know you could you can't make you can't if you go through this photos in the album where you can see joey with his uh with a cape he had this uh oh god damn i know i can i know i have it i know i have it somewhere i'll find it someone my folders you know it was in her when you walk into her house joey dia's cape balls you know what you know it was in her house i know heany when you walk in her house no that so on her house when you walk in the first thing you see is what do you call it when people sew and they make art with so crochet a crocheted picture it on it it said dying is easy comedy is hard yeah it's like it is true and like that was what beautiful about her as she understood how hard comedy was i told you the story of her getting robbed right i told you that story which story is uh tell me like here's how cool she was and i can't remember the name of the comic but she was giving him spots i can't remember the name of the comic this is in the early one i know you don't touch so yeah it's better i don't say so this motherfucker needed money and he robbed the van she was in the van like apparently she he like at gunpoint took the cash earnings of the of the club at gunpoint like took the money from her and she knew it was somehow she could tell somehow from the mask he didn't do good she is new and i remember saying like yeah he uh he robbed me at gunpoint but he's funny that was her but that was her like can you a mac like if you really think about it you get robbed a gunpoint by a comedian and you still give him stage time what the fuck is that well that's a that's a good that's not a good that's not a normal person anymore that becomes like that i've never had that sort of a relationship with any human ever you know i i sought her out when i was living in boston really yeah you knew about her dude when i was an open miker okay i had gotten obsessed with comedy for six months before i could ever do it open mike night because i erroneously assumed that you had to be 21 to be able to get on stage turns out you can be younger we just can't drink to watch you but you can be a 19 year old you stand up i didn't know so august 27th 1988 when i turned 21 i went on stage and when i went on stage i remember thinking i remember like really clearly thinking like how weird is this job there's a there's a bunch of people out there that can just talk and they can make a living yeah how weird is this job what did you think the first time you ever went on stage and you talked into a miker phone hello hi my name is yeah don't get trussle so weird like when you look back at those times like how do you feel you feel like it's not even you i met that lady when i met mitzi shore when mitzi shore passed me at the comedy store i remember thinking when i was in 1988 in boston there was this meka there was this place you had to go a richer prior filmed live at the sunset strip and sam kennison you used to stand up yeah and fucking how he meant delwing up and Rodney change your field and david letterman yeah god damn i got to get to the commie store yeah that's all he wanted to do i didn't want to get anywhere else there was one part of me they wanted to go to houston because i had heard that like sam kennison did these wild shows in houston and i want to go to houston but the big thing for me was i got to get to the store and when i got passed by that lady dude you know it's one of the reasons why i feel so compelled to help people in this podcast because i feel like when that lady passed me i was like holy shit like i'm a real comedian now yeah man i don't have to be scared i just have to keep working yeah i got passed yeah by the godmother the real godmother you like you work for that lady that's right you were there all the time man i know okay she made she made us she she created an environment that accelerated comedy yeah man she pushed comedy because she kept it together but like at the fucking highest rp like at nine thousand rpms of the engines going parer she kept it together you remember these comics be wild you remember when r he slapped obviously of course remember i know that it's when he started getting spots is that true yeah you know i know because i was jealous i was a town kennie ry like i like i remember ry's gradually unraveling into his comedic self and like i remember like ry's max probably i don't remember there's a fight between r and bobby lee and i remember as the town kennie that was when mitzi started his time he's now a comment somewhere in that like in that like throwing off of rationality in that i don't know what it was man like and you know you though here's the most important part of mitzi she was a woman she was a woman and she encouraged chaos she wasn't in remotely concerned with safety she wanted wild people no she wanted did she wanted me to be wild that's what she wanted she wanted wild comedy she wanted kennison she wanted prior she wanted everyone that came in between damin wans man she wanted she wanted wild she wanted martin larnse she wanted wild she wanted yeah she wasn't the master mitzi was a farryl lady mitzi was a human i mean that in fair what we call human now people think of his farryl or what people you know i mean i mean but when i say farryl i mean i know he exceptional she was wild she didn't have anybody else's rules holding her back now she didn't and she didn't fucking care she didn't care about money she didn't care about money fuck you that's the most important thing about her is like having a club on the sunset strip and not making decisions based on money yeah does let me tell you man as a talent coordinator there are plenty of times where people wanted to film some shit in the main room where they wanted to pay a lot of money and she'd be like now get it now tell me what we should talk about that because that was like one of the things about that club was that like you could never film anything no that was one of the most amazing things about ri filming his special there it was a really cool thing he did it was also like an acknowledgement that the world had changed and that was one of the reasons why i was willing to come back it's because ri filmed his shit yeah in the o r well she would have i i really do believe she would have approved that eventually but somebody would have gotten involved they would have fucked it up she would have made him jump through some hoops it wouldn't have been that easy like she would have made him do some crazy and she's right here's the thing she's right you know i didn't i didn't cash any my checks you probably know that oh i remember i don't like when i was working on the store i just wouldn't cash my checks and then at the they would go hey we have like all this money that you i just like kind of donate it to the sound system you bought the sound system that that too but that was that was extra that was on top of that what was your system was fucking up and then you bought it and all honestly mitzi didn't want you to do that because like that was the thing like she wreck she was smart enough to know if i let a comedian by the sound system i can't like honestly give them spots like so she i knew that was the case but i was like at this point she's giving me spots every fucking weekend i just want to help out let's stop stop playing games like come on you know what i'm doing i'm out here doing my best hand if i can just we got to fucked up speakers let's fix it let's put a dad put a dad system in there i put a minnisk and i want to have it set up so anybody could like if you had a mini disc remember the mini disc days of course did it was so important before smart phones to be able to record your shows yeah it's so big and you don't record and listen to all of them but the option to be able to do that is so huge even if you're not diligent you still gain like ten twenty percent of like a tightening of your act dude the comedy store at that time for lack of a better word was an art cult yeah that's what it was it was a cult and like it was a cult that was like for sure bay like all cult systems are based on like a strong karismatics central leah there's mitzi people what as a man i was happy to relent to mitzi well he had a thing but there was a thing for me as like this macho man it was important it was important to relent to mitzi you had to but it wasn't just that i had to i wanted to to show respect the show that i i got it to show that i know what you did yeah man like that lady man when i was in fucking Boston and 88 i would hear about her she loved how much one lady did this like yeah she was married to a comedian but it didn't work out and she's polyshores mom and i would hear these stories and i'd be like well that's crazy this one lady just figured it out she was wild and she liked the party and she liked man and she was just a wild lady but she was brutal with you she didn't like your comedy she was just tell you you were done she was just tell you if you thought you weren't funny you were done dude she put her hand on my wrist and she goes you're really funny i'll never forget that oh it was like in 1994 i was like oh my god well she wouldn't hand that out lightly man that was the thing he's like she was like that i've been around it man like so it's so we i'm so lucky because i got to be around like romdas of mitzi sure and like they're similar in a way yeah they're similar yeah there's a lot of different you know like this idea of what we think of as respect uh for realisation yeah dude and that's he was in 1994 when i was six years in the comedy her putting her hand on her wrist and telling me i'm really funny changed my life look that to me the thing that like will never be captured is that it's not just that here you have this like tiny woman who is tiny tiny but it's not just that you have this being be so careful without hug her right remember hug him mitzi yeah yeah well she was a gangster i mean that was all like the thing about mitzi was like no like imagine like the the best thing to think of is like think of your most like outlaw comedian then imagine a person who built a saloon within which those comedians could be grown to be more of an outlaw there was no kennison without mitzi sure that's right but then the most to me like with mitzi if you were to get in she would never allow this she'd already if she heard me saying any of this shit if i can't find her but like if you were going to write a mitzi bible and you wanted to like base the whole bible on one thing it was something she told me so many times as a talent coordinator and i like to it fantasize she thought i was funny but as a talent coordinator something she told me over and over and over again regarding comedians was you don't need them they need you that was her like core thing which is like the moment that a comedian starts thinking that they need the system then they degrade themselves they have to understand that their comedic ability and who they are as that persona which she would say is like their iconic class she meant like you're not going to find anyone like this ever again and that's who she was trying to find you it's a therefore you it's supply and a man which is like there is nothing like you but there's a lot of things like them so if you think that you need them you will degrade yourself as an artist that was her main core truth which is don't get caught up in the thing you're going to try to teach you which is you need them you don't need the manager you don't need agent you don't need the studio you don't need anything because you're funny you're the fucking nuclear isotope generating energy and if you get lost in this insanity that you require the system to be great not only degrade yourself you degrade an art but you know this is one of the things about recognizing what mitzvah sure did and a lot of bud freedmen a lot of people own clubs rottie danger field yeah is it's not just about the ideas and getting the ideas out in a way the audience can digest it's setting up a club it's bringing people in it's setting a standard for people know hey man david letterman came out of here robin williams came out of here yeah okay bill hicks came out bill hicks was a fucking door man here sam kennison came out of here okay yeah this is the motherfucking comedy store yeah there's a standard yeah that's a factor two men you can't let the artists completely being controlled because one charismatic artist with a lot of fucking song and dance moves can trick people and to think of things that aren't necessarily accurate because of charisma that's true man like that she figured that out though yeah and we need another one of her man i mean like the thing never gonna get another mitzvah but we we can carry on her legacy we we all learn from her you know and i think she was uniquely qualified to run the comedy store because she wasn't a comic she had no desire to be a comic but she was married to a comic and she knew exactly what comics were her son was a comic yeah she knew exactly comics were and she wasn't stupid she was smart and she was she but she also didn't give a fuck like there's a this a rare group of people that legitimately don't give a fuck you didn't give a fuck if mitzvah sure was alive today if we get somehow or another like go back in time and grab mitzvah from 1974 and bring her 2020 she was she was being run in shit she was being run in shit first of all she would have a hundred girls under contract for like only fans accounts she would just run people i'll tell you the one time that's part that's part's not true the only fans they've only fans they get it's conjecture but i'll tell you the one time problem with only fans the porn site it's not a porn site though it's like girls can do whatever they want i don't have a problem with sex like i like i have a problem with my own inability to regulate my desire to come but i'm like i can't get mad in the world for that like that's my conversation with someone with someone and they were saying well also she has an only fan site like hmm five big tits i'd be like getting paid for those big tits i'm so tired of these sex negative fox man right they're ramped up really locked down though because it'd be Like mmm five big tits. I'd be like getting paid for those big tits. I'm so tired of these sex negative Fox man Right it ramped up really locked on though because it became of course. It should easy job Yes, for all the people if I was 22 and I had big tits And I like to do squats and I was sitting around thinking do I Do I want to work in Burger King or do I want to shake my ass For ten bucks a month for 35,000 guns. Yeah, it doesn't have to just be that though either It's not just a porn cell. You can do it ever you it's patreon for right. You know this is madness So only fans is good out of me. You can just do yoga But Joe and like a dimension where like being funny is getting people to come you be like Poor and star that's a bitch. It's just that's a weird one, right? Like getting people to come it's so specific. It's what's the big deal It doesn't matter it shouldn't be a big deal, but yet it is like if you find out that somebody came It's not a big deal. It shouldn't be but it is it is right now because we're lunatics like we hate life like we're in a Exactly. Yeah, we're so death-centric that like Anything that's the source of life which is a hand job a blow job fucking we look at that as like being depraved You know well, it's it's really just some sort of weird Canyon ladder in between two fucking cliffs Between this and what is gonna be available for people in just a few years. There's gonna be virtual sex You got to have Riley read on man. She's so great like I don't know if I can have a rod and I'll take my pants off What I'm gonna do is I'm gonna do is she's so funny just goes on this this is the future goggles put goggles on You'll lay back you're in another world Well, yeah, I mean that's heaven, but like but is it Yes, no, what's wrong with coming because there's one percent of your brain that knows its bullshit Wow, there's no real girl and they don't really like you and your joke suck and you kind of smell and you didn't brush your teeth that good Yeah, yeah, but she's like I love that part of me No, the girl no, no, no, no, no, no, no if the girl really did love that part of you that would be Extraordinary yeah, that's the beauty of alcohol alcohol is you're hanging out with a girl who's got a like hello kitty tattoo In between your thumb and forefinger and you guys are drinking you have a good time and you like I love you And she's like I love you too, and you just give each other hug it doesn't even have to be sexual That's where alcohol comes in Where where? What do you mean? What do you mean? I'm following you in the I the hello kitty the where does alcohol come in? That's where alcohol comes in and like it allows you to take chances and hope that the other person doesn't have Altair your motive all right We have both release your ambitions and run let's go to Vegas and get married. I don't even know you. Let's go crazy How crazy than we think fucking bad it's not that we think it's fucking bad Is that we worry you fuck too many people? Why you got a worry trick too many times you like one of those people one of those David Blaine streets shows And you're like it's gonna be the queen of hearts trust me isn't that why other like it's the great It's one of the great things. It really is one of the great things like think of like Anytime like you know why why? because we're concentrated More on innovation and progress in terms of numbers like so weird but earning money and Getting new projects pass through They take precedent over everything else so sick. It's weird, but it's just it's a weird game This is what I'm getting out of this book irresistible. It's like there's things that we have in our head where we're well we have these They're wrong. We have these ideas of what we need right in order to be sufficient like here's we're operating from the wrong principles I'm sorry Joe. I got a p. I've been holding for like 10 minutes. I'm sorry. I don't want it to end man We don't have to end go pay. This is the first show ever on Spotify. I can't believe I get I looked on your your Go pee bro go pee. Jesus go pee No voting. There's no voting That isn't funny. I wasn't even in the voting Dr. Tressil I wanted you To be guest number one. It's important guest number two My lease Iris That's right Number two That's what I said I said guest number two You don't even listen. We're like an old married couple Jamie I said guest number two. I'm drunk. I'm high. Guest number two is Miley Cyrus guest number three Mike motherfucking Tyson. How about that? Jamie are you concerned at all about moving to Texas? No That's what I like about you. It's one of many things But you're ready to roll like I just tell the people at home. I brought it up with Jamie. I'm like I'm thinking about moving to Texas Jamie goes Okay, is that accurate? It's gonna happen Change what did you think was gonna happen? What was worst case scenario like Montana? No, I didn't think that was gonna happen. I just didn't want you to not want to do it. I wasn't worried about it Good happy This uh, you know It's hard. I feel like I'm for a long time. I said I'm in a row. I'm not pretty long. I'm in a row. This is fun Jamie and I just had a love fest That's great. I was like I was asking Jamie. It was ever a time where I was telling him we're moving to Texas where he was like Oh, like I want to do that There's like no, but when I brought it up, I'm like do you think he's like, okay Like that's cool. I do feel like I'm stretching it out. It's like man. I mean man. This is the first episode on Spotify It's supposed to be you. I love it. It's beautiful, but also there's a piece of meat. Duncan. I think we can work things out together I really do. I think you and me together have a unique perspective, and I'm not bullshit I agree and I don't think it's I'm not taking ownership and you shouldn't either. It's the two of us together Now there's a weird thing that happens. I feel it man Like look it's my favorite thing which is why I don't want it to end which is why I'm like I'd like to like look man I'm a Buddhist. I know I'm gonna die. What does that mean though when you say you're a beautist? Shouldn't we have a new thing? He said like communism Social love it. Yeah, we have a new one. I think we can't but I do want to like the reason I'm gonna speak up for Buddhism in general And I agree with you and what I love about Buddhism so much is that man What's great about it is it invites you to reject it. It says to you the first part of it is like reject this if you can like if you can find a flaw in the thing Reject it and and also if you can find a like legitimate rejection Then we will add that to the like what Buddha is a Buddhism. Yeah, so that's why I love about it because it's more of a process That's that's perfect. Yeah, it's perfect. It has to be that way. It has to be that way But if you're thinking about how to progress with ideas Yeah, man, you have to be able to say hey bring me a counter idea that makes more sense And I'll reconsider it, but it's what we were talking about earlier people are married to their goddamn ideas It's sad. It's it's it's not just sad. It is sad for sure But it's also it's bad for all of us and it's it's one of those things that we should recognize just like you know like Negative feedback like oh, I'm so fat. Oh, I'm such a fucking loser Everybody admits that that is not good for you. Right? It actually hinders process. Yeah, and I progress I think that it hinders progress as well. I think we have to look at things in a more positive way That's so weird dude. I like it was there's this teacher Jack cornfield He's so smart. He's a Buddhist teacher and I remember it's like in the early days of the rom-das retreat I would do these podcasts of them and I remember being like I want to get in shape I feel like I'm fat and what he said to me was Getting shape because you love yourself not because you hate yourself don't get in shape because because you are Angry and who you are right now getting shape because you think you deserve to be in shape That's cute. That sounds like that's a good tap listen to me Us saying hey competition's real motherfucker Sometimes you just got to get in shape because you don't they're looking fat shaming works This is people don't like to admit that that shame makes you fucking lose weight because you don't want to feel bad But then you feel good because you lost all the weight I have to stick up for Jack cornfield because he is one of the great teachers Take up for him too, and you would love him and you would love him if he's friends with you I love him. Thank you Joe, but I do have to stick up for him But just just like an example of how badass this person is do you want to move to Texas? No, I can't I'm going I can I'm not saying sure I don't want to be low. I have an idea I think you and I together can fix a lot of shit What's the plan man you and me do like a weekly podcast? One a week Joe and Duncan I love it live from Austin. I love it, but it's not gonna happen in Austin. Why not? Well zoom for a while to come to your senses man. We'll do it off camera this conversation I love this conversation though. This isn't man. Do not bullshit. I would do just about anything for you I would do dust just about anything for you I know you would I would now look I got to stick up for this teacher though, and I'm sorry we can zoom it Hold on what teacher Jack cornfield Joe, and I live yeah I love you man. I love you. You got to say this is like a person is deeply impacted me and and Like he was a monk and I know him as a friend and like he's a monk. Okay, and the sense that he went here's what's cool that him he went to He became a monastic terra bod and Buddhist and he like took a vow of silence for like Two years so for two years. He didn't talk is it possible he didn't have anything good to say. Oh no Jack cornfield Look, I really like he really like I'm sorry. I don't mean to be sentimental about joking. I know you're joking What you die? He's alive. Joe. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. You said sentimental. I panicked Mean sentimental only in that like I wouldn't want to do anything that would like negatively impact like a real we get him on a show first come on your show you me and Jack cornfield you would love it. You love that our first episode that convinced you to move to Austin, Texas I would I would come to Austin, Texas. Did you move Jack corn now? What about your house? Would you live in it? Joe I love that you would buy me a house, but I wouldn't move It's cool like one of the cool things about us is you could say I will buy you a house That's not why I would want to be with you for the house I know I know man, and I understand but like for me It's like I was off camera. I will talk to you about it the reason we made the decision Oh, this is we made an amazing decision. Yeah, your decisions way better than mine, but I don't I'm jealous I don't want to be local like to me like get it that we do a zoom show Let's do a zoom show or let you and I have no idea for so long. We could do both or either exactly We could do zoom shows. That's what I think you do live shows. I just think like the right now The best thing for the world is not to imagine that you have to be in any given GPS coordinate I think that yeah the best thing for the world is to begin to realize like we don't need to be tethered to a particular locality like this is the problem. It's like it's it's a bit of the problem But it's also in recognizing that it is an actual like it's a thing that you factor into the world that you see But how relevant is it today today operations right? That's what I'm talking about right? That's that to me like the gift of cove it has been like People have begun to realize like hey there's circle small Google is doing fine and No one's going to Google to go to work Twitter is doing fine knowing it's going to the Twitter building to work Netflix They have jobs dude people are all working remotely. No one's going to Netflix. Oh, what you're saying is that The businesses are doing well, but no one's going to the the actual business What do they have to exactly right that? That to me that is the if you want to like start really like Restructuring society. Hmm. Let's start with a superstition that you need to be in and Like like proximity even other versus body. God damn that kills New York City. Yeah, it kills LA to it kills LA It kills that way it kills that way. I want you to come to Austin dude. I will be it when everyone I'll come to Austin talk No, I'm breaking He would look I can't wait for you to meet a little forest. He's so brilliant But but my point is look man my point is like we can't be centralized like look you're gonna be in Austin I'm gonna be in a certain place. I don't want to say it yet. It's a bunker outside of Nevada We're the bats takeover We're gonna fight against centralization so that we don't have to get chained to shitty cities like that's a little point It's like look if anything happens after COVID that's beautiful It will be that all the commuters say that their boss is wait a minute for the last six months I've been zooming in for these fucking conferences and your business is doing just as well as the day when I was driving an Hour to get there an hour back and then the moment that happens We break the back of addiction to being in a metropolis now. We have a global society now It's not just that you have to have some person who's like living in an angelino It's like you could have someone from any part of the planet Centralization seems to be the fundamental problem in the sense that it was it worked We needed to centralize prior to the internet, but now we don't need to centralize No one's better for everybody if we take into account every idea It's better for everybody if we take into account all the dumb ideas and smarter ideas and let them battle it out Yeah, let's find out who's right. Yeah, and you got to be real careful people who think that they're right Now that people are wrong. It's what we were talking about earlier That bums me out the most about the democratic convention is it? How would just like forget about whatever you don't like about Trump tell me what you're gonna do Don't tell me how bad the orange man is tell me what you're gonna do Yeah, how are you gonna fix it? How are you gonna fix it? Yeah, what are you gonna do? We can do about Flint, Michigan's water. What are you gonna do? About the fucking earth is heating up What are you gonna do about there's no fish? Where's the fish? All right, what are you gonna do? Yeah? Nobody has an idea They just want to talk shit make sure everybody's trans I Would rather them talk shit and make sure everyone's trans Then be like what's happening now. I don't mean that trans people. I'm with you Know you're here's what's funny to me about your whole like pushback against the trans community It's not it's only pushback about trans people competing as females and fighting That's it but other athletics a little bit but fighting in a big way to me the part of it That's like interesting is I know you well enough to know they if and they prove me wrong here But if there was a technology That turn a guy into a woman no they could not just turn a guy into woman which is very funny because right now That's what we're doing good and it makes sense because it's like right now What we know is men and women right so that's where we're at so right now as far as our understanding of what can a human be If you want to break it into a binary we've got men and women right but that's pretty limited to me You know to be and I get wanting to be a woman and I think that you Joe Rogan If there was a technology they could instantly turn you into a woman. Yeah, you wouldn't hesitate to turn A dick inside me. Yeah exactly that's what I'm saying as a woman. Yeah, and I don't think it made me gay No exactly Doesn't make you a trust me. It's someone who's felt many dicks inside of them. It doesn't make you You could be a woman and actually be attracted to a male for 18 hours yeah, you're in love you imagine it in a second imagine if you have an Oculus Rift and Yeah, they make you go through a bunch of waivers and they say Duncan if you do Take the next sign what happens is you become a woman who actually feels the way a woman feels when she's attracted to a man and a guy With a dick like a battering ram Let me try just gonna send it home see what happens and you can't wait you want to fill him come inside your upper rib cavity like when I feel it Sign me up. Yeah, who cares? The point is like we see the men the weakest among us would be scared of the experience Right, we'll be scared that that experience weakens them and turns them into something that they they they dismiss But how will they really do that? They just sign up sorry, Joe No, it's it's their own issue no It's that the experience that literally made them exist on the planet They feel like if they were to feel it It would be something against who they are which is insanity and it's into the very seat the very feeling of a cock Blowing come inside your body. You switch spots. That's a little woman Imagine if the only way a woman was willing to marry you is if you become the wife and she becomes the husband All right, and you switch consciousness. Yeah, I feel it Duncan. I love you. I love you too. Priscilla I want to know what it feels like to be you. Yeah, I want to be with you. Yeah, but I want I want to be you for four years Yeah, let's watch your contract. Yeah We're all Your secrets get downloaded into your wife's brain. Let's wow He likes feet That's not a secret Imagine though That no, that's the idea is like the point is like right now. We're like to rest realize like Like the reason we're hanging out on planet earth is not because we decided to be here We're hanging out on planet earth because there's not other planets that we could fly to do But yeah, if we could we haven't figured this one out yet, right? But it's slow down If there were other planets and we could get there Trust me. This is what's funny to me about like Lindsey Graham. I love Lindsey Graham He's such a fucking asshole, but I feel for I feel weird connection him. He's such a fucking asshole Well like Lindsey Graham I have the feeling that if suddenly there was like the ability to travel through space He would leave the planet within seconds. He would just be gone the Lindsey Graham is like he's like Religious scar no, he's a politician Lindsey Graham is just like like Paces religion No, he's like poor Lindsey Graham, man. He's like he like is a weak chin. I have a weak fucking chin Yeah, yeah Shave my beard no listen bro. That card. No Lindsey Graham. Look. I know Lindsey Graham You like that sucked into a dark vortex He's a sweetheart underneath at all and also he's like he's like a gay dude, you know He's like a gay beauty like has but what I'm saying is like this and what is gay do that has like a man? Lindsey Graham causes problems because he's like a dude that what? He like is a he's a he's a suppress of being that like it's like a lines with Now another closeted thing. It's not the gay dude is in the part the It doesn't matter if Lindsey Graham's gay Some say you brought it up some must matter Know what I'm saying is like as shit came out about him being gay and like then he had to fight it or like there was like some Thing I felt bad for it and that regarded feel bad about it. Don't you think for him even like it would be if he just said Yeah, I'm not like that's that's the argument against these two Ideas if you could turn into a woman and get fucked like you just said would you be gay? No, you would you be a woman who got fucked Well like somehow if like you're if you've decided to centralize on your masculine identity and someone fucks you Now you're gay the whole like conceptualization of gayness and straightness is just monkey talk is the problem the word itself The problem is the binary. It's like the definition Like it's a straight it's a binary dude. It's like look. I don't know. I like Whatever the fuck it is that you think is like limiting your ability to experience pleasure on the earth is Satan and it's like if that thing is telling you that you're a dude and this is the only way you can feel joy But on like simultaneously you're like hanging out with a guy who's like the same gender as you and you're playing with them and then you're you're pretending you're not because because like some devil voice in your mind is telling you That's Satan man. That's evil. That's fucking evil. It's dark. It's dark And I'm not like deriding Lindsey Graham sexual pro-clivities. I'm just saying he's not actively gay I don't know that home saying is like when I'm shaming him. I'm not shaming Lindsey Graham You are no, I'm saying it's feeling it'd be nice to you admit your privilege. I hope Lindsey Graham is listening to this I'm not insulting you my friend you can hear from my voice That I'm not insulting you. I'm just a Joe I'm done you have Lindsey Graham could fly off the planet he would that's what I think I didn't fly off the planet with a man's mouth on his penis who wouldn't I don't care I don't care if it was what fuel this spaceship or ding that would be amazing How awesome would that be if it was the mountain from Game of Thrones That guy's blowing you as you fly through space How your orgasm extends to eternity? Yeah, the whole like gay straight thing really The big flight of wish we were here on the silence is trying to work it in there But you the gay straight thing falls apart if we stop being terrestrial like the moment you're not on the planet anymore It's all planetary based memes man. It's like the woman were like released from the gravity well all the stuff That seems so important to dumb asses. Yeah, which is like what you you thought you would put your mouths on a penis You must be crazy Magic felt amazing imagine like no no blow fucking go Take in your mouth in the moment that sperm is your tongue. It's like pop rocks. Yeah, pop pop pop pop pop and your brain goes You and I man we will suckle on a we will suckle on a mucus Thing that's like it like this We'll do that all we try to we pride ourselves on it. We partner love water parks slide. That's what I love so much about Christina Paziski's Instagram. She does these like fucking hilarious TikTok clips that she recovers from TikTok and there's a whole genre of TikTok of these creepy fucking purves Who are like showing how they lick pussy and like the whole TikTok is based on them like going It's so fucked up, but it's like a guy will In the masculine sense will go down on a girl yet the concept of having a dick in your mouth It's considered to be like fucked up like you must be like a complete Like you something about you is weak. You know, and I think we're gonna have to contend with that as this That's the dude He does like how like he'd like watch you gotta watch it. What did you do? This guy does like like eating pussy TikToks. That's what you're doing. Yeah, watch watch She's watch this one doesn't do like he like he's is into it Her by the way her Instagram the TikTok she does like She should do a whole show based on her like she she like curates the most fucked up TikToks You've ever seen that important like TikTok whether it's TikTok or Instagram or any of these things is that important I do that it kind of is right? Yeah lowering the boundaries like dropping down the boundaries for people to be able to enter into the world of Expressing whatever weirdo idea they have or video of them going back flips onto a fucking whale whatever they're doing. Yeah It's a bad I don't like TikTok in the sense that like I'm gonna be open to she's in the TikTok and I don't like it because I was looking at TikTok And then I'll be like really you're looking at TikTok and should be like you're on Twitter all day long You should get off Twitter. You should read this book. I hate Twitter this book. It resistable It's a mind-blower man. It really is because it lets you realize that as much as we're at each other's throats look right now I don't know how much of it is our fault And I think we could have been a lot better off if someone Decided instead of trying to make money that they would recognize that this strategy of Whether it's social media likes or Twitter, you know Twitter Twitter Facebook or Whether it's showing you the things you get angry about in your comment on Facebook or YouTube Like whatever they were doing like ultimately we're changing the path of the way people think They're way more malleable than we like to think we all right way more right and I think People that have a voice whether it's you or I or are your bird or Tom or anybody who has a podcast in particular because If you have a podcast at the very least No one's telling you what you can't talk about right no one's put Duncan I love that segment, but when you're talking about people Like not conforming and trying to figure themselves out people are thinking you're non binary Somehow or another year like you like you're not woke Sorry, I was repeat what I said I'm sorry. I'll revise we're in the middle of a storm Duncan. Yeah Well, we with the main thing the most important thing I think in the storm and it's easy to forget is Is that like you and I and everybody we run across? I've yet to meet somebody who's a real monster man. This is a few but even them They just need hugs They're also very unique when you run across. It's very unique and like the anytime I feel like this is where I'm like I'm a tune to this anytime I get the sense someone's wanting me not to Express myself That's why I get really locked in and really like and I get the whole like anti-woke thing because nobody wants some fucking Liberal Baptist piece of shit to tell them how to be but you know man like the moment on my Instagram I did a black lives matter thing That's the only time anybody told me to shut up No one told me to shut up before that but the moment I did a thing that was an alignment with like black lives matter There was all of a sudden like this weird Similarity of people hitting me up being like you you fucking woke me There was a lot of of blowback from that and and also when you when you say a lot like how many? Enough that like I noticed it right, but if you tune in at not a huge person part like 30 messages how many messages? No not 30 just enough where I read and I'm gonna say like 5 15 15 enough where like I realized how many Instagram followers do you have I don't remember dude I can look it up right now like not 200,000 or something I don't a lot of people know but it but How many Instagram followers do you have? I don't remember, dude. I can look it up right now. Like not 200,000 or something. I don't know a lot of people, man. No, but I know you're saying, but it was like, I realized that like my thinking regarding being like, even remotely and a political activist was being shaped by my fear that a tiny percentage of my audience would reject me. And that's what I'm saying is like, I was letting my ship get steered, not about my own intuition or not by my own sense of like, fuck man, like that fucking George Floyd video. That's unforgivable. Actually, it is. But you know, it's both. It's unforgivable. Any man that would do that to another man, like that man needs help. I bet he didn't think he was gonna kill that guy. But he tortured that guy for eight minutes or forty six seconds. It's like that guy needs a DMT trap. He needs something. He needs to recognize who he is. Yes, killer. It's also Duncan, I think, I think we're asking people to do things that are not really qualified to do. They don't have the tools to handle it. They don't have the infrastructure to handle the load of pressure that comes in. I just feel like all these people that were in it. And then right now we're so anti-cop. It's like, it's over the top. Well, look man, what I love about you is that you're like, not afraid to say a thing like that. And like, I think if we're gonna go, if we're gonna move forward right now, we need cops. But if we're gonna move forward, what we need is not just cops. We need compassion. Like that, if we're gonna move forward, what we need is it's like, look man, you're right. This country was completely founded on human trafficking. You're right. That your idea that like the way, like if you have a particular complexion in this country, shit is immediately against you, you're completely right about that. You're right, like the thing is is like, this is the problem is like, and I think this is an important question for everybody to ask themselves, is how do you act when you're right? That's how you can really tell a person. Like, do you know what I think? Honestly, I think we are looking for change the way we see change in ourselves. Like we see a potential for changing ourselves, we see something wrong, I gotta correct that. And then we think that society can do that too. But society is like a battleship. It's like a 500 meter long steel structure that has to be done. Yeah. Plains land on it. That's it. Yeah, that's it. That's a good description. It's got a turn. Yeah, that's it. And then people are like, fuck you. We don't like people from fucking Muslim countries. Yeah, right. Fuck you trans women are real women. Yeah, right. And it's just battle to try to like navigate this enormous metal structure to the fucking ocean. Right. And that's where we're at. That's where you gotta do a podcast with me, Duncan. Anytime I'll do anything for you. You gotta work this out. We can work it out. I mean, the answer is... Jamie, I'm not wrong, right? The answer's compassion, Joe. No, this is what I'm thinking. You and I have a very unique frequency. Yeah. Let's do it. This is why it's important. Because when you and I get together and I firmly believe you and I can do this every goddamn week. I love this. Especially if you don't only saw each other once a week. It's the best. I'll fly you in. I'll fly you. You come to Austin once a Zoom. We can Zoom. We can do whatever. I'll fly to North Carolina. Shh. I'm not going there. I'm going to call a lot of it. I'm Matt Chuba. Yeah, man. Like I love it, Joe. I mean, to me, like, you know, that's what I think so great about the fact that you got to be the person that you are, that you got to be the spot. Like I have to be on you as it is. And the reason it's on you and the reason I take such... I really like not much offends me, man. But when people start attacking you, I do... Like I have to fight against my offense because I know you. And so when people are fucking at arms against you, I feel really depressed because I know you. And I knew like you were one of the most progressive people I've ever met. And so when people start falling upon you, because you have like fucking nerds, like Ben Shapiro. Which finally should have the guy anymore. He's a door. Come on. Those conversations are important. I think what's beautiful about what you're doing is you're open. I would not open up the... By the way, Ben Shapiro, underneath it all, I know that you and I would probably have fun. But I know that you're right now where you're at and you're incarnation, you're a fucking dork. You know, you don't want to be like he's a door. He's a door. But what's so confusing? He's a nice guy. But that's what's confusing about him is because you like him. You look at his, like, you look at him. And you're like, he's all like beating up what's your face about the thing and that embarrassing thing? What? The music video he's like in there or dealing with more vacation. Can you see me in the alley with cops? Can you talk about what else for a second? Oh God. Like that thing Shapiro is so embarrassing, Joe. And like that dude is like an embarrassment. But I don't think what people admit when they look at Ben Shapiro. It's like there's a piece of you that's like, I've had that phone with him. Like it'd be fun to drink with him. He's probably cool. But he's like right now. I don't think he drinks, but he's a nice guy. He's a, whatever it is. He's a good person. I'm not bullshit. I look, again, I think our job right now is not the alienate. We have to like involve it. That's why I have him on. That's why I know you're doing it Joe. He's an, I'm telling you right now, Ben Shapiro is a nice man. He's a nice man. I see him. I hug him every time I see him. And I don't hug him to be fake. I hug him because I genuinely love that guy. I think he's a nice guy. Look, I think some of this stuff he's propagating in his like philosophies is like legitimately deranged. Bro, he's wearing an outfit. He's a costume. It's not, I mean, he, Ben Shapiro could never take off the Yomica, shave his head, tattoo his chest with an eagle. Right. We're a bikini. He's got an outfit. I just want, but it's not his fault. I'm telling you, we all come from a different spot. If life is a race, it's not like everybody's on the same starting line. Like people on starting lines are like a mile behind you. They're so far away. They're all different. And they, here's the thing, even if people are wrong about many things or even, I'll explain this better. Even if you disagree with the way people feel about so many different things, it doesn't mean you can't be their friend. It doesn't. I'm telling you, we got it wrong. That's so sweet. Here's what's important. What's important is whoever that person is, they gotta be sincere. Now, as soon as you feel like someone's a grifter, you gotta cast them out. Right. You gotta cast them out. Cause they gotta figure that out in their own. And they gotta apologize. That's cool, man. You gotta listen, you can be wrong, but you have to be honest. And if you're just bullshitting, then I can't hang out with you. Dude, let me ask you, Ben. Ben Shapiro's not bullshitting. I don't think he's bullshitting. I just think he's like a little like antiquated in his eye. Look, man, I'm not, like the whole Ben Shapiro thing, of all your gasses, the one. This is a great guy, man. If you met him, if you and I and him went to a steak dinner, we'd have a great conversation. I hung out with him at the, what's that steak house, the Boa, Boa, and Holly led down the store from the store on Sunset. I had a great time with him. He's a good man. I like genuinely like him a lot. When he texted me, Ben Shapiro texted me, and I look at my phone, my bench, I like that guy. I like him. I look, as far as I'm concerned, if you're gonna create what I think could be created by humanity, we have to create the engine, not a rejection, but of acceptance, which meaning that like, if you got a charismatic, Ben Shapiro avatar in the video game, in the simulation that we're in, there's a way to re-absorb him into reality that isn't like the way people currently see him. He's willing to relinquish his ideology. Yeah. And he has a very strict religious ideology. Yeah, he's stuck in this little thing. But I think that's helped him. That little thing, look, if you figure out a way to do something that helps you pass most of the people that you're competing against. But ultimately, hinders you against the people that people who learned your lessons plus other lessons and aren't hampered by ideology, and they pass you. Like, you have to, there's a moment we have to figure out when you're gonna let go. He seems to have a very clear mind. That's what's cool about him. He's like, I'm a very insightful mind. I like that. I just feel like something about him in like, max of like the Nazi and electoral. Yes, it does, but he's Jewish. And here's the thing I love, when people get mad at me that I talk to him. I'm like, listen, just listen to what we're saying. Listen, he's not a bad guy. He might not agree with him, but me and him are having really good conversations about why I feel like you can't tell an 18 year old kid, just pull your pants up and don't shoot anybody. Yeah. We're having these like really nuanced conversations and he's allowing me because he knows I like him. So you're like the Bohemian graph. But it's, no, he knows I like him. Like Ben Shapiro and I don't agree on many things, but he knows if I see him, I go, what's up man? How you doing? I hug him and I'm genuine. That's a really care about it. That's the whole point. That's the whole point. So if we care, if he and I are sitting like right here and we talk about stuff, he knows that if I don't agree with him, I doesn't change my feelings about whether I know I'll hug him or I love him. That's it. That's it. Yes, that's the problem we're all facing. We're all facing this problem where we identify with ideas, whereas I think we can just do our best to make good with where we stand right now as a human and when we encounter other humans, let's take ideas and put them in front of us. And let's cross our arms and let's go over these ideas without any attachment. That's where it gets hard because most of us don't have enough personal satisfaction in our own accomplishments to relinquish this idea that our ideas are not ours. Our ideas are just a mathematical problem. It's a fucking Rubik's Cube. It's a fucking game of clue. Like who knows who did it? Is it Charlotte and the fucking library with a rope? We don't know. So this thing that we're doing as people today is we're scared. And one of the things that have them when people are scared is they pull back. You pull back, you put up fences, you wall off, you protect your time. You try, you decide what you can say, what you can't say. And decide who's the enemy and who's good and who's bad and everybody walls off. And my thoughts are that's a trap. And that is just something that we've been involved with forever from the beginning of time from single-celled organisms to small mammals, to human beings. We've been involved in this weird trap of competing against each other in the wrong way. Competing against each other in a way where ultimately somebody gets victimized. I think the best competition is keeping the other competition alive, competing against each other while helping each other. And everybody gets bought. Everybody gets better. And even people who are not doing well, you tell them why they're not doing well, that will force you to do better. All of the people that try to take your position if there's a ladder, you say this is why you fucked up. And then you'll do better because they'll do better. Everybody does better. There's no stagnation. I get it. You're in a brutal position. You're in a really brutal position. No matter what, I don't see how you can resist it. The problem with your position is you have this powerful voice. That's the problem. It's like you're a signal booster. And I also got a NASA suit and I can hold my piss for four hours, son. How do you not pissed? But to me, like the bizarre, like the difficult situation you're in is like, you get Ben Shapiro odd. You signal boost that, whatever that is. I don't know what he is. By the way, Ben Shapiro. Ben Shapiro, I'm not trying to attack you. You're fucking like whatever the thing you did with like attacking the music video. Wasn't that spicy? That was an embarrassing. That was a mess. That was a mess. That was a mess. I get it. It was really sex negative. It was so stupid. They seem like such a nerd at the door. And also anybody who's going to like do that, you feel like they negate whatever their philosophical idea is by attacking the thing. He gives it for, however, he's doing the exact same thing that Trump does when he gets attention. He's saying something about somebody who's culturally relevant, and he's taking a contrary position, and he's generating likes. He's generating interest. Right. He's a sales person for negative ideas. What is his best friend? And Ben and I were sitting around. He's like, you're just supposed to. I'm going to say, yeah. OK. OK. Yeah. You probably should. Because ultimately, people going to fuck with you. But my position is it's better if you have vulnerabilities. If there's something you've done that's really stupid, it's probably better for you when you shit on things. And I think that's a good argument for coming out against wet ass pussy. What's wrong with wet ass pussy by the way? Nothing. But a guy like Ben Shapiro, he shouldn't be right too many times. Party, part of his charm. He's his failure. Party, his charm. He's intentionally, he's got a saleship shit that only a fucking do with the yama kiss sets. He's not that he's a bad person. What do you mean, you know what I mean? There's a lot of Jewish Jews. Listen, I love Ari, but he doesn't wear yama-ka. OK. I don't have to wear the metalism. You don't have to wear it. So now you're in space where flying. You've gone from rejecting his band. Here's us as a golf ball flying to the universe. Got to wait. Impossible. Look, man, I don't want to get, I don't care about fucking bitch of beer. I don't think I'd do the first episode on Spotify. I don't care about that guy. Where do we? 4 hours in? Who cares? Plus. I don't care. I don't care about Ben Shapiro. I don't care. He's a nice guy. Who cares? No, he cares. Listen, if I hug Ben Shapiro, I really hug him. I love that guy. He's a sweetie. I'm sure he's a sweetie. But I don't need him. He's a nice guy. Look, man, it doesn't matter. Like, here's a deeper point, man. And I don't mean to do this every time I'm on. But you have such a crazy power that if you're not careful, folks from deep, dark wells of perspective are going to infiltrate your shit. Dude, if you watch that great documentary on a white, airy, and folks, man, it's fucked up like this too. Why do you go there? Give me that lighter. Here you go. Like, yeah, you look at like, these people are very organized, man. It's like they're organized, what I'm saying. And like, again, I'm not saying Ben Shapiro's his person. He wears a yama, he's Jewish. I don't know what you're bad, I don't care. I don't care. Listen to me. All those people that are organized, they come hang out with us. Give me a hug. You don't want to give them a hug. Relax. Why? Just relax. All those people are just people, man. Like a white supremacist. They're lost. They imagine if you gave a white supremacist, five MEO DMT, and let them sit on a couch. Let one of them brown suede couches. They take three big hits. And then as the first one, as their exhale, yeah, yeah. And then get sucked into the center of the universe. And they realize there is no center, because there is no boundaries. It's all connected. That's great. You're in a soup. You're in an infinite soup of ideas and biology and thoughts and prayers and love and hope and happiness and jealousy and anal sex. And it's all together. Yeah. With cartoons and pop music and cheeseburgers. Just a bunch of different experiences, all fucking stitched together. You're saying there's a addictive possibility. And then the aliens land. Yeah. Look, man, this is the way I see it. I don't know. Man, who gives a fuck? Really, it's like the reality of it is, is we are in a very bizarre period in time, which is that you and I became friends on the phone, having these same conversations. And now you say a thing that flies in the face of the particular default reality of our time. And you start trending on Twitter. You know, like that's like some of our community, like the way I know you right now is like you're trending on Twitter. Where I'm like, what the fuck happened? The jokes on them because I don't read Twitter. You don't go on Twitter at all. I don't read it. I post things. Like today I posted Ali Letterman, made some masks. It's just a week. It's just a week. It's just weird because it's like you're like a... But it's not me. It's what they think I am. It's who they decide I am. Yeah, but you have to watch out because people are going to like try to exploit you. That's the main thing is like people recognizing what you are, who have political agendas, will infiltrate your shit and then start blowing out their radio activity into the world. Right? That's a video. Like face-round shit. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Like that was get in there and then like I always said like you accidentally start exhaling shit that's like that you don't agree. I know you don't agree with like Ben Shapiro. Listen, it's not that I don't agree with Ben Shapiro and I definitely don't on many things and you know I talked about it. It's that I don't want to abandon him. Ah, that's cool. I don't think he's worthy of abandonment because I think he's a good person. Right. And I think many of the things he says, he says because he's rewarded for saying controversial things on the internet and many times make sense. And you know, a logical way if you don't take into account all the different situations that lead to a person becoming who they are in 2020. Right. Slavery and Jim Crow laws and all these different things we all have to deal with. But I think he's a good person. I really do. And I think many of the times like the things we say we're half defensive and half promotional, you're saying things because you think that people are going to react in a certain way. Yeah. You don't necessarily mean it. And you also say things because you've seen the contrary to that poorly worded and you decide you don't agree with that and you want to counter it. But I think the problem is in ideal ideologies more than anything. As if I'm really being objective, I always feel like our problem is purely in ideologies because we just committed to one side or the other and ideas to one side. So you're right or you're wrong. And I think if we could just divorce ourselves from ideas and divorce ourselves from all ideologies and just look at something like honest, like you come to me and I come to you and I go, hey man, what's up? I go, what are your intentions? My intentions is to live a harmonious life with my neighbors and I said mine as well. Okay, beautiful. And you hug each other and you go, what do we have to do about taxes? But look at, man, if we lived in a community where I felt like, hey, if I pay more in taxes, people will have their kids in a better school and the water will be pure and, you know, the BLS crime, I would fucking 100% sign up for that. Of course. But I don't think the people that are taking that fucking thing and running with it know what they're doing. That's right. That's the problem. I live in the idea of democracy. You just don't believe in the organizational facility that's like administering democracy. Been to the red line of human beings. I know where people fall apart. I know the red line. Yeah. I know when the RPMs hit, I know when people bitch out and I know I'm not going to bitch out. And if you're going to bitch out, I know you're if you're bitchin out and you're also making, you're making laws. Right. What, what are you saying? What, what are you doing? What's going on? Who are you? Why are you deciding what people do? We shouldn't have any figure heads. That's right. It's dangerous. Alpha champs are dangerous. Take it from me. A person with a big platform. Yeah. You shouldn't listen to me. You shouldn't listen to you. You shouldn't listen to Burke Kreischer. Now, shouldn't listen to Tom Segura or he's a fear, our fear of joy Diaz or name all the people you love to listen to. Sam Harris. Listen to them, meaning listen to their show, but apply to whatever they say, your own objective opinion. But how weird is it that people will focus that you have been Binge Pier on podcast, but they don't they don't focus that you have Bernie Sanders on. How weird is it? They do. But what I'm saying is like people in the left will say you're a monster that you would have been Shapiro on and they completely forget that you gave one of the good things of great potential socialist presidents of our time, a platform that you supported. They forget that. And Andrea and Tulsi Gama. To me, that's the part that my favorite people are the drugs. We're not. Listen, why do they forget that? Who asked I'm a savage? That's why. What do you mean? A savage. I'm a fucking cage fighting commentator. All right. A commentary for UFC. I do stand up comedy. I do wild comedy. I'm a wild person. It's a different thing. I understand. It's just that we have to stop trying to push people down in order to push ourselves ahead. If we just all look at it, like, look, if there's things about all sorts of aspects of society that I don't agree with that smart people disagree with. Right. I don't know if they're right. I don't know if I'm right. I don't know. I would like to talk forever to people that are vegans. Like my friend John Joseph, he's the singer, the pro-mags. It's a fucking interesting dude, man. He's a vegan forever. He's like a super fucking strong guy, mentally, physically, just try out the ones. I want people to think different than me. I want them to. Right. They're bad motherfuckers to have completely separate ideas of how the world should or shouldn't work. What is wrong or isn't wrong? What's right or isn't what's privileged? What's bullshit? I want everybody to come to the table clean. Right. I want everybody to come to the table warm. I want everybody to hug. I really do. And I think we're all scared. And I think it fucks up everybody. And if everybody who wants progress doesn't want people to feel good about running into each other and talking things through, we're going into this thing with the wrong energy. Right. The right energy is going into this thing. Go and listen. I didn't ask to be born. You didn't either. Right. Here we are, 2020. Yeah. Trying to figure the world out. But let's just admit the idea of wrestling between gay and straight, black and white, male and female. These are so dumb. I don't want to do that. I don't want to do that. I want to be, I want to talk to honest and dishonest. I want to talk to secure and insecure. I want to talk to loving and hateful. I want to hug people that needed. I want to figure out a way where we can get through this in a better state than we were five years ago, ten years ago. Let's get through this with food and water and realize we did need a fucking Amex. Clap them cars. I don't want to fucking, I don't want to Google Home. You're going to be president. No, I don't want to be president. No, it doesn't. I don't want any president. That's what I want. I want no president. They're going to run this in your anti campaign, but you're going to, I could see a happening man. We should postpone the election and try to find a better way to do this. No, do the fucking election. Get Biden in there. Get a non lunatic. Biden is a romantic tension between a 24 year old, like super, super liberal, super attractive woman, like a 32 year old Navy SEAL who's also married. No one cheats on anybody, but they have the sexual tension and they keep it together. They work their way through veganism. And I'm trying to fucking fix the world, Duncan. I'm trying to tell you that all the things that we see pros and cons, plus and minus is is. Yeah, man. I'm just trying to figure out like we got the election and suddenly it's this erotic romance between this 24 year old so much better than a fucking guy with fake hair and some of dead man. We can have her. I agree with a cop. Why? Shoving her hand up his ass and walking them to the aisle. Here's the thing that I don't understand and sports somebody in any fucking sport. If they're not doing great that night, the coach pulls them off and puts them on better end. Here's the thing, Duncan, trust. No one wants that spot. Their replacement? No one. Why? Who wants to be president? I would love to be president. Fuck you. Fuck you. You fucking look at your face. Fuck you. Fuck you. Fuck you. You fucking look at your face. Oh my God, Jamie. I don't want to go through an election, but like I would like that. Jordan, elections are so archaic. That's fucking wood stoves. Yeah. But I would love to be president. Being president would be so fun. Would it be, here's the best part. You could exonerate all your friends. I'm the most ridiculous thing about being president. You can, you can just decide you're out. I'm going to party. By the way, he's a bad guy, but he's a good guy. And here's a really important thing. The Trump administration just let out one of the great LSD chemists of our time. Who's that? I can't remember his name. It's so sad. You could also say it. Don't say it. No, you should say it. You're a good, bad guy. You should say it. You should say it. You're a good, bad guy. He's named deserve to be spoken. Do you contact me recently? Who? Do you remember the neuro soup story in Leonard Picard? Do you remember, I'm so drunk. Me too. Do you remember neuro soup? Yeah. Yeah. She was a girl who was on YouTube and her and I went back with her. This is an interesting thing. She had a detailed account of how she put DMT up her asshole. He dated William Leonard Picard. Yeah. That's the guy that had the LSD lab in the middle of the bunker. And the DMT accelerator pedal. He contacted me. Okay. And from prison? I don't know. I just got an email. And it's not my main account, but I was like, hmm, maybe that's real. But that lady, she had a whole YouTube series about different ways she took drugs. Yeah. And one of them was she took DMT upper asshole. A per asshole. Who? It was a bad trip. She had a bad trip. Yeah. Part of me was like that girl. Bad trip. She had a bad trip. Yeah, but part of me was like that girl. DM-Tamp, yeah, that's a rare human. That's a great night. A rare human looks at that DMT nugget, that little cocoa pup, whatever it is. How you going materials? I want to I want that in my life. I want to be around someone who's like, I'm so free. Put it up your asshole. Would you even consider it? Yes. Really. I would put DM-Tamp in my ass. I've thought about it after I heard about it. That's a good way to let the universe know you give up. It's a video game. It's a part of the video game where you're like, time, come move to Texas. Please. I'm going to tear a line of caution. Why do we have to be localized? Why do we have to be localized? You want to live in Tennessee? I want to. No, I look, we don't have to be locked into any place. I bought you a house. We don't have to be locked into a place. I appreciate you. And by the way, I know you. I want to fix things. I know that you buy houses of your friends. I want to fix things. So sweetly, we would say that, but look, we don't have to be spatially disconnected. I think we can fix things. Don't get it. We can, you're already, look, man, you're already fixing things. You think you can help me. I will help you and I better with you. I'm better with you and then without you. Listen, man, I'm better with you than without you. But that's real. That's real. It's true. You and I both talk about this. Not just on podcasts, I think, but even on friends, phone calls. But when we do podcasts, I feel like you bring me to a place that I don't really get without you. Yeah, we're friends. I really feel like that because I've known you so long. I remember when you had this breakup and we lived together and you called me up, I don't know what to do. I'm like, fuck, no, come with me. Yeah. I was so happy. I was one of the comics that you evolved. And also, like in that moment where I was living with you, it wasn't like some kind of like national ampoum vacation thing. You were like really serious with me and you were not serious all the time. We had a few like really serious talks. And then those serious talks, you like helped me realize that like I had to stop being so flippant with my life. And it was really good. And you weren't fucking around. It was cool and it was very sweet. And I'll never forget it, man. And I want to say to you, this will, when you see someone who is at a bump in the road, many things can happen. Right? Yeah. And for you, I wanted you to know that like you can most certainly get upset along the way at different or you can be almost, almost immune to all the bumps in the road. Yeah. It's really how you decide. And if you decide you're this fucking Peter Pan character, and just like float through this, like there's ways that you're lucky and ways that other people that live in Afghanistan and the Congo will never understand. You'll never understand. You won't let him stand. No, man, you won't let him be do that. But you and I when we were hanging out together, I was like, I remember the moment you called me, there wasn't even a half a second between you. I was like, yay, Duncan's gonna live with me. Yeah. Sweet man. And I wanted you to get in the tank. And I got, yeah, all that's great, man. I love it. And like I'm not trying to like your perception of me may even be different from mine, but like one, one thing that happened, I have a few memories of that incredible gift that you gave me. One of the memories is riding up to your house, I don't even know how you got into my car, that you would be in my mini Cooper, which was red at the time. I remember that. We're driving up to your house. I have to have a visit. We're listening to Elliot Smith. I'm playing Elliot Smith. Yeah, so he's talking about fucking morose things. And you are, this, so I remember like, I've been listening to that nonstop. So we're riding up this hell to your mansion and listening to Elliot Smith in my mini, so this is like, yeah, this is before your podcast, but before you become like what you are now, just imagine folks listening, riding in a mini Cooper with Joe Rogan and our cherry red mini Cooper, trying to play Elliot Smith for him because it's really been moving you. I'm not playing it for you because like, any other reason, this is what I've been too ninty for like a long time. And so we're riding up this hill to your mansion. And I remember you look at me in this way, the only like real friends can do this. And you look at me and you go, you have to stop listening to this. You were like, you can't listen to this anymore. Like this is terrible. This is like hurting you. And it wasn't from a judge. Mental place or a place of musical brilliance. It was a friend being like, dude, you were depressed. That guy gives that a vibration. Yeah. He was incredibly depressed. And incredibly talented. Terrible nexus. So good. So good. And he was a trap. But like, it's a trap. But it is a trap. It's like you can squeeze out some really super positive juice. And then to the left of your body or fill with cancer. Like that's the problem. That's the problem with people that there's so many different things where people are depressed and morose and they're talking about really dark things. But dude, it wasn't as you. Like, so I get to your house. I'm in this mansion opposite. You had a, that was this one. You had a fucking piranha tank. Do you remember that? You got piranha. So I was said I'm in a mansion where there's a piranha tank. And Eddie Bravo. I remember because I was going up to fake to hide smoking. Because I was addicted at the time. So you're right. Yeah. And I remember like I was sneaking up to smoke. And at some point Eddie Bravo, I'd gone up this hill to hide smoking. And Eddie Bravo walks up the hill to me and is like, imitating smoking to me. Make fun of me for making things in this cigarette. But like, but like, you know, you know what happened. But Joe, you know what happened. Like, if I lit, this is where I really go back and I think Eddie Bravo in that moment, I'm like, what a prick. Don't tell me not to fucking smoke. Cut to me sitting in front of a doctor, being like, well, you have cancer in your balls. And I remember like, referring back to that moment where he's like, stop smoking. You know what I mean? Which was cool. It was like, like there's so many like in those moments. This is a thing where you can do where you can protect people temporarily from their emotions, but you won't protect them from the consequences of their actions. That you see that maybe they don't. And I think we're all responsible for our friends blind spots. And we see blind spots where hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey. It's only so much you can do that. It's only so much you can do. Eddie Bravo could have like turned into a dragon. And then like, so creepy, right? nicotine's a very addictive dragon. That's you. It gives you a weird way. But he was legitimately trying to get me to stop smoking. Eddie Bravo's a good man. That was a sweet moment. Like when I look back, I always like when I look back, pre-cancer. I always think of that moment as like, man, you thought that guy was such a cunt. Like you thought he was such a cunt. Because you didn't want to quit that habit. Yes. Yeah. But like if I always like, but you look back, like he wanted me to do better. He didn't want me to get one of my balls. I got lucky because like it didn't spread through my whole body. And I didn't die. Two choices right now. I can pee my pants or I could run to the bathroom. Go to the bathroom. And then we come back. No, don't stop it. I've never had it where you go to the bathroom. Talk to Jamie. We're four, five hours in. How many hours? It doesn't matter. I've got a picture of time. It's amazing. I've been dying for this moment. Jamie, just you know, like through the years of us doing Oregon, I usually in the one who has to go to pee. But in this moment, here I am with the thing happening. And you know, what does he do with this spot? With the guest, please? What does he say pulls up the yard? You're doing it. I feel it. He just yaps. Well, okay. You're going to go to that. Subscribe to my Patreon, 4th slash DTFH. We have a Tuesday. We have a meditation. Wednesdays, we're doing a Doom book club. It's amazing. The book, Doom by Frank Herbert, is incredible. Friday's we have a family gathering. It's just us hanging out. But join us there. You know, the truth is it is a simulation. You know, and we told you that before you linked into the thing. And how we told you it would wipe your memory and that you would feel like you were helpless in the sense that the thing you are right now, you don't know what the power that you wield. So you chose that. Just you know, when we said that in this moment, we would do a thing where we alerted you of the fact that you had intentionally decided to dive into a simulation, making you limited. Very powerful. Your Thor in the human world that you're in right now. You're actually Thor. You're a powerful Norse god that has gotten sucked into a very temporary like magic spell. There isn't even that powerful compared to the powers in the world we come from. But right now you have become convinced that you are a limited identity in the mortal realm. What you requested, by the way, you said, I want to be an insurance agent, real estate agent, school teacher, psychologist, fireman, cop. I wanted to be a pilot. Somebody who was a flight attendant. Someone who worked in a museum teacher. Somebody who was a historian, a failed writer, a failed comedian. And you became this temporary thing. But the truth is you're a god. And you're confused. Joe, welcome back. Oh, my God. Pete's so hard. It's amazing. I don't want to do it. I just want to everyone to know. If you're like, if you're like, no one should have this amount of influence. No one should be able to say things that affect politics and no social ideas. You're right. I agree with you. Right. I didn't want to do this. This is a weird thing. Yeah. But I'm doing my best. Thank you. Do you stop? I'm not stopping. You're going to retire because like no matter what you do, it's like you get to. You can't go for a choke just right away. You can't just dive on the choke. Yeah. You got to slowly cook the person, slowly work through positions. What's the choke here? And you're naked. And naked. You get the mounts. You let them buck you off. You get half car. You hold on. You escape side control. You try to mount again. They turn over. You get their back. Cooks in. Squeeze. She takes time. Taste time. All things take time. Don't you worry though, like that. Like what if like, and again, like we've been going on so many hours now. So now this plan just pulling how long time has this podcast gone on? Four minutes and 40 seconds. But don't you worry. Four hours and 40 minutes. Joe, don't you worry though. This was the first episode we were right. I was right. I knew it. You knew it. I'm my Duncan. I didn't want to be number one. You know you had to be number one. When you invited me on, I didn't even, I tried not to think about it because I was so flattered but I have to be. I felt darkly flattered. And then I went on your like subreddit. I saw the votes for who would be. I saw the votes for who would be on the number one thing. I wasn't even listed. Joe, there are people who are fooled. No, they're not. I actually want to listen to me. They're fools. I know what I'm doing. Look at this fucking knife dude. Tuck the more custom knives shot out. But like not to like, I do feel like a guy. That does people are fools. They're wrong. I feel like you have helped me in many steps the way because you and I as friends, you know, we came from different backgrounds. But we're both very compassionate and very interested in exploring alternative ideas. Both of us. And you and I have had so many conversations where you said something to me that I've went, hmm, damn, maybe, huh? And I've had a reconsider the way I was focusing in on something. And because I respect you, and this is something I've said of Ari as well and Joey and even Eddie Bravo and Jamie and all the people that I'm around, if you say something to me, I consider it like I'm thinking of it in a different way. Like if you say, I don't think that's a good idea because of this. I go, huh, okay, tell me why? Right. And I'll let it go. I don't want to be, I don't want to cling on to that early idea, man. And I think that's half our problem. That's half our problem. You know, I've always felt like a weird sense of guilt about Eddie Bravo, man, because like Eddie Bravo, mommy, do you know that? Yeah, thanks, dude. I always felt like a weird sense of guilt about you. I thought it was a kind of finger off last time I did. Yeah, I felt like a weird sense of guilt about Eddie Bravo. Because like, and I don't agree with all of this because pure toy ideas. No, I don't either, but I do this. But dude, this is an important thing. Like, this is an important thing. Like, not only did he tell me to quit smoking and then I got one of my fucking balls and I got one of my balls chopped off. Well, he was right about that. But I mean, that's what he said. He said another cheers, brother. He said another thing to buy. I do feel like it's worth mentioning. I always felt a weird sense of guilt because I think I judged him harshly and it makes me feel like a dumb, dumb. Like, like, because he's like a jiu-jitsu master. You know, so like I always, you know, he's my master. Yeah. So I give someone said who's your master? I'd say first John Johnc muchado, second Eddie Bravo. Yeah. One of my best friends is my master. So I always felt, I always had this trick at the very least, a trickling sense of like, man, I think you're a rog of your judgment there. But like dangerous danger. Yeah, danger. Kill you. Yeah. Well, that also talked to me. That's the problem. Any time I've been talking to him, I'm always a little bit like nervous. Any moment I could die. It's like a pet snake. Yeah. Like what if some moment you do like go insane decide to kill me? I won't. No, I feel like that around. Yeah. Joey. Joey Diaz? Yes. What do you think you would kill you? No, no, no, no. But he's so wild. Yeah, he's so crazy. He's like a bear. I want to keep feeding. Joey Diaz is like, you know, he's the goat. You know that, right? Well, I do. You know, he has a- He's the greatest of all time. There's no one who's ever been funnier. I've seen Joey Diaz hit like frequencies. I've never seen anybody else hit. Yeah, he was hanging out in Colorado with like a round chambalo, which is like the place. Like my meditation teacher's teacher was teacher. The boulder. Yeah, man. So he encountered some like beings there that were like really advanced and like he actually he like digested some of that stuff. Like he's what? Joey Diaz is wild. Remember like to me like the thing that like, you know, one of the aspects of this particular moment, the colleague, you could have so fucked up. This is Call of You go, right? Yeah, it has to be. Well, Call of You go like a lot of people get explained. So Call of You go, it's the age we're in right now. Explain to you guys. So the you guys are like vast spans of time and we're considered to be in the call of you go. Now the other, this is like something that was actually actually predicted several years ago. Yeah, we'll hunt like thousands of years ago. But in terms of like people recognizing this right now is Call of You. There's like, you know, differences in what part of the colleague you were in, but there's no difference in that we're in the call of you. Explain to you this. I'm sorry. The you guys are a period of time that one of the ways to like, do they get represented? It's like imagine a dove flying through the sky with a silk scarf and the beak and the tip of the scarf brushes against the peak of the homologous. So the amount of time it takes for one of those peaks to get pushed down to a valley, that could be considered a Yuga. It's like, it's a, it's actually a, in Hinduism, it's a, it's a period of time and people argue about that length of time. It's negotiable. It's negotiable. But there's certain symptoms for each Yuga. And so the call of Yuga, the symptoms are, you can't remember very well. Your, your memories all fucked up. Your, your, your, your fast in your decisions. You're easily addicted. You know, if you look back at the, uh, history of Hinduism, the Vedas were originally sung. So they were memorized and people would sing them. They would, they would, they would sing them and they weren't written down. Writing is considered a degradation. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. It was written down because they heard it. And then they, they like, it was written down later down the line. and the idea was you didn't need to write anything down because you would memorize. I remember when I was a kid in high school, my friend Brian Catro, going through all the numbers he'd memorized. And it was so many yet so many phone numbers memorized because we did have phones. So you had to memorize numbers or write them down in a little path. So what we consider to be technology is really a crutch to make up for our idiocy in the age of the call of Yuga, which is what we're in right now. A lot of people get confused because they think Kali means Kali that God is a destruction. How many of you this? I'm not, I think four, four year four. What, what, do you know? I don't know the, I don't know the answer. I only know the, James was like, this is an eight hour podcast. You know, look this up right now. You have to give him over time. Hey, I've been trying to figure out to the, I don't know if I want to end this at all. But this being our first Spotify podcast. It kind of has to be too. We have other things. I don't know how they're going to deal with this file and whatnot. Well, we're right now at five hours in the podcast. Right? How many hours did it? Yeah, five hours. We just make it to two and a half hour podcasts. I feel like I've been stopping it. Certainly. I don't want to. I don't want to. Spotify, I know what I'm doing. This is why I brought up. I'm going to miss you man. That's the main thing. I'm going to miss me. I'm going to be around you. Come on, dude. I'm sorry. I forgot. I didn't want to stop the code of my sweet home. You know what? Fuck Arizona. Sorry. I'm going to stop the code and I can't wait. But dude, it's rough to come in here and see people. Because look, man, here's the main thing. It's like one of pack. I'm going to stop. Yeah, dude. But this is not where I'm not packing ourselves up because of some like like tonerist hobs and things. We're packing ourselves up because the country we're born into is falling into the throes of a really dark period induced by a once in a hundred year pandemic. That's what I'm saying. But why do you want to live in a place where none of us are living? Why not think about that? I know why. I don't want to live in Austin. I know that. Why? Why? Why? Well, because I'll tell you why, Joe. If you really want another real dark reason, because you announced it. You know what I mean? How'd you not announce it? Might be a different story. But you and Elon Musk, you want to get out anyway. Yeah, but Elon's coming to Austin. Yeah, we're talking about it. I know. So welcome like Austin is a girl. That's Silicon Valley. So yeah, yeah, dude. Yeah, I'm sorry, but that is what you have created by your. I know Matthew with Kanye has a great idea. What? I'm a primer for people moving to Austin. Where you say, hey, don't turn what you escaped from into the place you're going to. Oh, shit. That's brilliant. Yeah. Don't turn the place you're escaping to exactly like where you fled. Yeah, man. Yeah, I get it. Brilliant. And that's right. And then we were talking about earlier. We were talking about defunding the police and defunding ICE and defunding all this nonsense of people. Like, let's just like figure out a way to be nice to each other. Yeah, man. I agree. And I don't think that's based on the locality. No, the Austin thing. Like offline, I'll tell you my decision because I did fine. I did think about it Joe. I thought about it. What turned you off to it? Well, you know, my feeling is it's I'm stammering because it's like telling you why would reveal where I'm headed. And I don't mean to be like, like, all magical about that. Listen, let me say where you are headed is a great choice. Thank you, brother. I've been and you fit in there like a pee in the pie. I might wind up being there. You might make it. I'm going to take moving because that's not the thing. I think about the spot if I deal and and just the idea of what a podcast is moving forward. I want you to be involved. It's why I wanted you to be number one. And thank you. You and I have some of my favorite conversations. My love, you man. I love you too. We've been friends for a long fucking time. Yeah, man. I'll be involved with anything you're involved in. Let's do with it. I meant that. And by the way, not fun. Not not to go back to Eddie Bravo apologetics, but I didn't think it's not going back then. And I think it's an important point to make. He said to me something that was so fucking weird when he said, and this was on top of him taking on a missionary stance with my inhalation to tobacco smoke. So by then I was already over. Little defensive. I was defensive. And I didn't I was like, I was too dumb at that time to like recognize like shit, man. This guy's got a fucking like he said, you're jits, you master. So what he's saying is not coming from like a place of someone who like hasn't like worked really hard at a particular. Right. He's saying just don't kill your body. Yeah. But one thing he said to me, which is I always think back to it because I really remember when he said I was like, you sick of a fan. What he said to me was exactly what's happening to you right now. But he said he said you have no idea what's going to happen to him. He's going to be like, like he's going to be so huge. And I remember him saying it. This was this was fear factor. It was not like a safe assessment, man. It was like when he said it to me, it felt coldy. It felt fucked up. It felt like it felt crazy. And I remember him saying it to me and like being like, man, I didn't say it because I was afraid of him. I'm thinking like you're fucking crazy that you would think that. But you know, it's weird that he's right. You know, that's what's weird about it is like this is your first episode on Spotify. And it's crazy, man, because like I get and I'm on our deeply on it that you invited me was no second choice. Do you know that? Thank you, brother. You were a first choice. People are across the board. When they said who do you want to have first on Spotify before they said Spotify is a dung trussle. That's so cool. I really believe that what I said that I think you and I have different shows. There's something about you and I together. That it's different than just me by myself. Yeah, man. That's why we're friends. We're not just friends, man. Like, we've known each other for so long. And there's no doubt. We've tested each other back and forth, up and down and left and right. We know we love each other. Like, you know, if you call me up at three in the morning, Joe, I need your help. Like, I am talking there, dude. I'm a commando. And I'm ready to drop in from a helicopter. I'm going to save you. Yeah. And because of our long relationship, we've been friends for so long, dude. I mean, how long, when do we, like, 90s? When did you start working on the storm? 90s, dude. We've been friends since the 90s. 90s. So more than 20 years. Yeah. We've gone, you have seen me go from being the town court of the comedy store to being someone supporting themselves off of their comedy man. Like, you've seen me go from like, you, you were friends with me when I was like, when I was, when I was like, no one would have like ever gambled on anything happening with me other than that. No, not no one. Just no one stupid. I saw it right away when at the moment at first, how you do little hobo. Yeah. I saw you do a little hobo in the OR and I'm like, oh, my God. Yeah, man. But you keep doing that to me. Like, that's the thing is like, you keep doing that. That's the reason that you deserve what you have. You really do like all the haters, all the people we were like, I get the hands. So it's like, it doesn't work. The trick is, it's like, I get it. If you're not like someone explained it to me, they're like, when you look at people that are doing really well, especially if they all socialize with each other, it becomes like a walled garden. And it feels like it's alienated. It feels like you're isolated, you're locked out. And it makes you feel bad. It makes you feel shitty. Yeah. That's the problem. But you didn't do that. Dude, you hated me. You just see you know like when we first met, you didn't hate me, but you were irritating it by me. Because like, you don't remember when you first met was in the baller room. I was with Princess Corey, Corey Koma. And like, I was trying to, at the time I was really into like, it wasn't even called trolling them. It was like saying a thing opposite to what you should say. And I remember like something about... You were contrary. I was being a contrary. And it's something I came up with Maruana. You mentioned marijuana. I'm sitting with Corey Koma. I'm always, I was already nervous around you. Because at the time you were like, you were still like, at that time you were still like, in this incredible trajectory. And like, I made a stupid joke about how weed was like bad. You know, I'd come from like, I was like, you know, there's never been a time that I haven't been high for years. And you know what I mean, especially then. But I made this dumb joke about how weed was bad. And I remember you looked at me with such, such like a scathing look of like, because you had just started like understanding how wonderful Maruana was. And you really thought I meant weed was bad. And I remember Corey gave me this look of like, no, Duncan, no, don't do the joke. It was a terrible moment. But you weren't in a place where you could even like, you weren't tolerating that because you were getting high and starting to realize that it wasn't probably what I think when I first started smoking pot, I became a zealot like real quick. Yeah. Because I realized that it had been lied to. That's it. And I had misunderstood the idea, the idea what Maruana was, I became a zealot. That's what it was. You were a zealot. And the look you gave me. I remember the way you looked at me, I realized like, God damn, I bet he hates me for an hour. No, never. But today, in the same situation, I'd be like, yeah, right. But they think it was funny. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was a zealot. But it was certainly a zealot. Once I first experienced Maruana, I became a zealot. But you and I had such awesome conversations. We had most of our conversations when we first became friends on the phone. That's what I call you up. I go, yo, dude, I'm here Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday. What's up? What are you doing, man? I do that right. This is how this hot, clean book. And you just are telling me about some crazy shit. Yeah. And you and I would just go, I mean, it would be like a significant chunk of my day, unlike Mondays, when I would call in. You and I would have these cool conversations. So you take me on the road with you. We go to the Irvine improv. We're driving back from the Irvine improv in your car. I'm so stone. You're playing Terrence McKenna. Terrence McKenna is talking about the singularity. You're talking about this idea that we're accelerating towards this point in the future. Novelty. Yeah. And I'll never forget that. Ride back from the Irvine improv. I'll never forget it because like... towards this point in the future. Not all of you. Novelty. Yeah. And I'll never forget that ride back from the Irvine improv. I'll never forget it because I'd never heard that Terrence became a speech. I knew about Terrence making it roughly from like, you know, I encountered him in my earlier years as a psychin' opera. Like something about that particular lecture that you're playing, something about leaving something as weird as the comedy show. And this idea that he was saying, and this is the part that still sticks with me to this day, which is, you know, look, we are heading towards a point of concurrence of events that is known as the singularity. And that the closer we get to it, the more we're going to experience these think-tackian particles being blown backwards through time that will produce his events in history that we call novelty. And something about that ride back, and just that moment me listening to it, I started to think it wasn't like I even thought this isn't real. I thought that is real. And so here we are now 2020. In the middle of a pandemic, you've become what has been described as the Oprah for men. Bro, bro, bro, bro. And you are like, you are someone who like great leaders and principalities are trying to get into this podcast. Do you remember when you lived with me? And I started buying a booty shit? Yeah, man. You already had to do this shit. But I started buying all this. I like bought a Shiva, I bought this giant bronze Shiva. Yeah. They're like, and you go, hey, you know why you're attracted to this, right? Yeah. Well, that's the thing that weirds me out about you, man. That's the part where I'm like, oh, I get it. It's like, well, there was some realization that happened. And you're picking up on that. And so because you're picking up on that, you have Ganesha out here, and you have all these like, Eastern symbols, but it's simply look cool. No, no, I don't know. That's what I think. Well, yeah, you think they look cool. Also, you happen to have this massive audience. Regardless of whatever that is, I just remember that, that rock. I remember that ride back. And I remember it's like, I remember like thinking like, you know, I think there's something real in here. Like I think what McKenna is saying is probably true. You know, I think this pandemic represents something he predicted, which is we're in a novelty way right now. This has been it's been a century since the last pandemic. No one here knows how to deal with this. So now we're in a novelty way. It may be. We got lazy. We didn't take into account all of the possible variables. And a big one with this administration was pandemics. Yeah, man. But not just that. It's like the problem is like where you're kind of in a bit of a bind is that all this human attention has been placed upon you. And you have to wrestle with your identity because it's why you need you to move to Austin. Like you don't need me and Austin. It might help me come on. You don't need that. I can't do this to go. I'll help you. I'm always there for you, man. But the problem is is like you have this burden of attention. And it's like it's a real like for whatever reason, like some people have decided you're one of the magnifying glasses focusing this beam of attention into the world. And so within that is all this room for a disaster. It's like you gotta be like this. You're a disaster. It's the perfect way to put it. Oh my god. Yeah, someone pays attention to every aspect of your life. There's so much room for disaster. Yeah, man. But I think at a certain point in time, it's like there's a sacrificial lamb, a person who lays himself down on the cross. Is that you? No. All of us. It's all of us. But you know, it's really you are in a bit of a bind because it's like, look, man, here's what I love about not being George Washington. I didn't have to make the decisions he made. I'm reading this book, dude. And it's so beautiful. Like if someone says Duncan, I know you only have 14 teeth. I don't have to make the decision, but I can sell you all the rest of them. I don't have to. I don't be 14 shillings. I don't be Jesus. I don't have two pens. I don't have to be 13 pounds. I don't have to be any of these people, man. I don't want to be them. I would not assign myself to that incarnation. But like in Dune, I'm reading this great, but Dune by Frank Herbert is so good. And in this desert world, there's these beings called the Fremen. They're like, they like have become, they represent complete, complete attunement with nature. And so this wonderful point in the book, this imperial like a lacked representative of this imperialism, is like sitting in a canyon with all his wounded men. They're almost done. And the Fremen, one of these tribal beings is saying to to them, you have to make a water decision. And what they mean by that is your wounded men, you have to pick one of them to die. And we'll render their body into water. Because in this world, there's no water. So you have to make a water decision. And the Fremen is interacting with the being in this pure way, which is the only way you can act if you're truly into a nature, you're innocent. And it isn't like dark or anything. It's like you have to make a water decision. And the being is saying to him, like hesitating. And the Fremen is saying to him, do you want me to make the water decision for you? And they don't mean it in the aggressive way that being like, would you love these people? Would you give up the decision to us? Wouldn't you be enough to make the decision yourself? Fortunately, in the book, one of them dies. And they're able to like, rent their body into water. But what I'm saying is like, these being the position of power and the whole series of doing this based on this problem, which is like, if you get saddled with any kind of power, even if you want to pretend it's a kind of clownish power, you are still in a very difficult situation because you have to make a water decision. Like you will have to like, if you're a Trump and you're a clown president or if you're Obama or you're some advanced president or what you're lost. There's only 20 of you. Yeah, man. Someone's got to become water. You have to make a water decision. If you're, if you're the president, it's 335 million people. Everything you decide is a water decision. That's a little easier. But if you're on lost, yeah, this 13 people left. Yeah, man. It's brutal. It's brutal. And like, no matter what trick you try to use to deal with it, no matter what trick you use, you're still forced to do this. Terrible. It's a predicament, man. It's a Chinese handcuffs situation. It's like Chinese handcuffs are bullshit. There's not a Chinese handcuffs. It's never been invented. It's going to hold me down. It's a creepy place. Chinese handcuffs are like this. Yeah. Well, yeah, I know, I know, man, but it's ultimately it's like damn. I always feel bad. It's like, I never want you to trend on Twitter. Whenever I see you trending on Twitter, it really sucks for me because I'm like, fuck, is he okay? That's what I hate about Twitter is like people will trend on Twitter. You know what I'm saying? It's like, dude, I hate it. Because I'm like, shit, was in the car accident? It's just to have Twitter. Yeah, you're right. I got to say Twitter. I don't think it's good for you. The problem is you're interacting with people that don't, they're not communicating, first of all, and foremost, maybe. They're not communicating with people that are right in front of them so they don't feel social cues. They don't feel empathy. You're right, man. And so they're they're talking in this weird way that's only existed for like fucking your 10 years. It's that Duncan. It's weird. Twitter, follow me Duncan, trust all on Twitter. Now you're right. You're an accuracy to us. To us as well. Now, Jeremy, you know, like the idea is like, get the fuck off social media. I agree. I don't think that's right either. Is it weird for this? I think I think it's inevitable. I think it's too big. Too much of a part of everything. I think there's no, I don't think there's a future and telling people to stay off it. I think there's more of a future of telling people to understand what it is and manage it to look at social media, to look at Twitter and Instagram and all those things and understand what they are. I don't think you have to get off, but you should spend a lot of time outside of that. You gotta get out there, man. It's not good to read comments. It's not good to Google your name. You think that's good? And that's how when you see me and you see I'm okay, that's why, because I don't do that, those things. You get crazy. Should we cut ourselves for a Spotify? Should we like do like a little blood brother ritual or we cut our fingers and like we're in a separate blood? That's how you get your fucking COVID test or what? Let's do it. We're like COVID, we don't have COVID anymore. Should we like do a slice? No. Come on. It's good. We're not. I do. Oh great. All great rituals are based in like some kind of blood bond. Do you think there's this honestly, if you didn't know me, if I wasn't your friend, would you think there's a responsibility that I have that I'm not meeting? No, I think you're meeting it. I think the problem is like no matter how, it's like the it's hilarious and the in Star Trek, you know, Captain Kirk, they if you're going to be like someone who like gets to be a man or of a starship, you're given a problem that is unsolvable. So no matter what you do, it's that you can't win. No matter what you like when you get to a certain level of power, any decision you make on some levels wrong and right simultaneously, this is quantum computing my friend. So I do not, you know, in my analysis of your podcast and all my deep judgmental qualities, I do not see what you're doing as being wrong at all. I see sometimes you make naive decisions that I would make to. I think sometimes you have people on you later found out to be like at least in the moment they were on the show a little like fucked up like for sure in the early days. I had an issue in the early days where I didn't want to admit that I was getting as many views as there was. And I would do a show and I was just like no one's watching this and I would have some crazy person on. Yeah, maybe there was a few there was like, I shouldn't talk that dude, that dude was fucked up. Yeah. But that was a learning process, you know, that was there's a thing about doing a podcast where there's no school for it. Right. There's no way to figure out how to do it perfectly. It's not like learning how to play piano. It's real linear. There's all these weird ways to do it. And no one knows. So unfortunately, I was like, I guess like second generation, first generation is for sure Adam Curry. He's the part father. And then there's like Adam Corolla. There's a few other people. But I came right after that. Yeah. 2009. So no one knew what the fuck we were doing. And I think there was a there's certainly been some times where I didn't want to admit that it was reaching as many people as it was. Yeah. You can't think about that because it makes you feel crazy. Well, that's why I want to have you on because I knew we were going to get drunk and get high. Yeah. First episode would be as preposterous as an episode could be. Yeah. And then from this, you can like have people on you or like real pundits or whatever. I mean, but man, anyone ever I've ever talked to any time I've ever been in a situation when people are talking shit about you or like questioning my friendship with you because I think because I because you had this person to that person God, if I'm friends with you, something's weird with you or me or whatever, I always and will forever stand up for you, man, because I know you. And I and to me, it's like, look what like you got into this ridiculous predicament. Like you're in a you're in a bind man. You are you're in a bind and it's a beautiful it's a beautiful bind, but it's a real it's a real problem. And but like because of your heart, which is very open and very sweet, you allow this like you allow everyone to have you allow a lot of people under your podcast that don't make sense according to the zeitgeist. And so if you get mad at you and they pounds and I always feel so rotten about that because it's like, man, you don't understand. This is a real progressive. Like you're looking at someone who is exactly the being that you would hope would be the like result of like great government and great education. And you're fucking attacking an ally. That's the part that gets me up that where I get really bummed is it's like, man, you have to understand that person. But you should if you ask me, I feel like Duncan, I've been should be wrong. I feel like no. No, there's so many better people to have on in that guy. But it doesn't mean you can't have those other people on to what you listen to me. But I would say to you, I go listen, man, I know what you're saying. But if I just took you to dinner, you, me and Ben Shapiro went some fucking kosher. I love, I love hanging out with him. I guarantee you'd like him. No, I know that's a good guy. No, the problem is not him. The problem is all the people's reactions to him and him. Right. There's two things. There's two things. The things that he said and the reactions. And the fact that he's kind of weaponized the reactions. Yeah, he's a good guy. Look, I don't, to me, it's like, I would, I would be so bored. If you only have people on the show that I agreed with, it would be such a shitty show. I do have a rule where I won't have anybody on any more. Unless I feel that they enter into those arguments with good faith. Yeah, man. I know that. And I feel like Ben Shapiro, he enters into all discussions with good faith. He's not an insulting guy. He and I have an interesting conversations about gay marriage, interesting conversations about all sorts of aspects of society, racial relations, black lives matters. And he and I have talked about it in a very respectful way, even though we disagree. There's been no, there's been no insults. There's been no shittiness. And I think that's the problem with putting a guy like that on some sort of a standard traditional talk show. You have him on and some social justice warrior and they argue with each other and you got a host and you break every seven minutes to go to commercial. Yeah. You don't find out what he's about. He's not a bad guy, man. And he gets shaped as much by those seven minute segments where you're battling it. Yeah. I get you. Trying to get sound bites. Yeah. As you and I do by three minutes spots to come to sort of trying to pass open Mike night based on this podcast, you would imagine that I have a chip in my shoulder about Ben Shapiro, which I really don't. I don't think you do. I don't think you do. The reason I brought up Eddie Bravo is only because like, uh, I think like what you're doing is really sweet and good. And I think your heart is in the same place. It wasn't. I met you a while ago, which is pretty bizarre. Like they would somehow maintain a thing that's an integral. You know, I've met, you know, you meet people out here who go through rough patches and they're not who they portrayed themselves as initially. They're actually like con artists or fuckups or like bad temporarily. I think people get better, but sometimes they're bad temporarily. But you you really like have like maintains. I think a really beautiful kind of north star regarding your ethics and your consideration and things. So yeah, man, I'm like, I'll do anything for you. Really, I'm one of your great devotees. How I kill for you. Joe, when you started a goal, I want to your great devotees. Yeah. I really am too, man. I feel like like legitimately honestly, I feel like I have been tested. Where I've been given an opportunity to have other people. And I feel like it's, uh, there's no controversy in my mind. My mind knows the right choice. Yeah, man. And so I've always tried to promote all these different comics. And I think that that's what we should all do with each other. I think I don't think we need to make all the money. I think you need to make some money. I need to make some money. What do we need, man? We need barbecues and fucking margaritas. But I never see, I've never seen you be self- All right. It's bad for you. It's dangerous. It's sloppy. It's weak. It's some bitches shit. So I never, I'm never selfish because I'm selfish. Because I don't want to mess up to be a bitch. You discovered a like thing. I figured it out when I was a jealous. I figured out when I was younger. I remember watching comics who were better than me when I was like 21. And I was thinking like, God, fuck these guys. How did he come up with that joke? And then I don't remember when it happened, but it was early. Like 21, 22. I remember catching it and going, Oh, I caught a bad pattern. Like I got this pattern when I'm jealous. Yeah. I said it like, or I could be the way I was before I ever got into comedy, which is inspired instead. I was jealous. Right. So it made me realize like, Oh, I've got a bad pattern that I'm chasing this bad pattern. Do you remember that time, Joe, that we drank a bowl of blood in front of that maul extension? It was chicken blood. It was touching anyway. Whatever. Look, I feel like he's like, I do. Is this the longest podcast ever? Look, it doesn't matter. What do we have? We're done. I got to be again. Let's watch it. I grabbed it up. But what do we have? Five and a half. It's over. We did it. Kevin Smith was five hours. Oh, my Joe, thank you. You did. Did you do this in two podcasts? I think we should. Whatever you want to do. Okay. Right. Listen, Spotify, don't get greedy. They give you a six hour, opening podcast. Five. Five. Thanks, my friends. It gets better. There's going to be actual scientists on the show. You keep listening. I will talk. Dunkin' Trustful into doing regular podcasts. No problem. Either through Zoom or Skype. I have thoughts. I have ideas. I want to help. I would have this conversation if we were recording. That's the funny thing. I've only been I feel like I've been extending it. Yeah. It's just because I want to keep talking. I know. Me too, man. We'll see. All right. How did Kishten my family? I'm sorry. Big kiss. We should have done the blood ritual. I would have caught myself. We fucked up.